A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/dictionarygreek14smitgoog>. Public domain.

Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful. Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


I


byGooglc


5S08-0


8  ^•\2  5MI


Oxford  University

ENGLISH  FACULTY  LIBRARY

Mmor  Road,

Oxford.

Xd.:  Oifotd  49631  Fottcode:  0X13U0

OpMl>(  Bom:

McMdir  M  PiMar:  ft30a.m.  to  7  p.m.  In  Fnll  Tana.

(9.30  ajL  ts  1  p.m..  ud  2  p.m.  la  4  p.m.  In  Vaatkoi.)
SM«d*T:%M*-m- to  11.10p.m. in  Full  TanocDlyCdoHd  la  Vmcatlotit).
Ifea  Lilnn  k  daMd  for  Ma  iIiti  at  Chiliuiui  and  al  Baitat,  oo
Bawwl*  Mr,  ud  lot  fix  mria  In  AnfaM  and  SaplamlMt.

TU  tod*  •hotiU  fc«  Tttarmd  on  or  b^or*  tU  iat—t  daU


msM


Htadan  ov  tukfd  to  proUet  Library  booiti  from  ram,  ote.
A»y  vohoMt  HAicA  art  kit,  ^aeod  irith  mtttt,  «r  othtrmM
jfiiwinwf  *Mg»  Aa(w  to  ho  ro^aeod  by  thi  Rtodtr  rmpoiuibU,


lUpilil

30007  inmr


Gooi^lc


byGooglc


byGooglc


byGooglc


DICTIONARY
GREEK  AND  ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES.

SDITKD BT

WILLIAM SMITH, LL.D,


XLLDffTEATBD EY NUMBROUa KMGRAVINOa ON  WOOD,


LONDON:
WALTON AND  MABEKLY,  UPPEK  GOWER  STREET,

IHD  tVT  L^HB,  PATZ8R08TEB  BOW  I

john  hditeaj:>albemable  street.

.^^^^'"-  ,.,:,,..GooqIc


Uirn


:?


D,g,l,7.cbyGOOgIC


LIST OF WRITERS.


mitULS.  NAXBB.

A.  A.  Ai-EXANDER  Allbh,  Fb.  D.

W.  F.  D.  WlLLIAH  FiSHBCRN  DoNKIN,  ILA.

Fellow  of  TJniTendty  College,  Oxford.
V.  A.  G. WiLLUH  Alezamdeb  Grsekhiix,  U.D.
Trinitf  CoU^e,  Oxford.

B.  J.  BzirJAHlH  JOWBTT,  M.A.

Pellow  of  Baliol  College,  Oxford.
C  R.  K.  CHABLza  Rum  Kehhbdt,  M.  A.

Late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
T.H.K. ThohasHewitt  £et,  M.A.

Frofeosor  of  Compantive  Grammar  in  University  C<fl-
l^e,  London.
H.  G.  L.  Hehxt  Geoboe  Liddbix,  ALA.

Head  Master  of  Westmuuter  SchooL
G.  L.  Gbobqe  Long,  M.A.

Late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.

C.  P.  H.  Chakleb  Petsb  Mabon,  B.A.

Fellow  of  Univeraily  College,  London.
J.  S.  H.  JoBH  Smith  Mahstield,  ALA.

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.
W,  R.  William  Eamsat,  M.A.

Frofeaaor  of  Hnmani^  in  the  University  of  Glasgow
A  S.  Amthoni  Rich,  Jud.  B.  A.

Late  of  Cuna  College,  Cambridge.
L  &  Le(»habd  Sohkit^  Fh.D.,  F.B.S.E.

Rector  of  the  High  School  of  EdinbniglL
?.  S.  Fhilif  Smith,  B.A.

Of  the  University  of  London.
R.  W.  BoBEBT  Whibtom,  M.  a.

Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge-
R.  N.  V- Salth  Nicholson  Wokitcm,  Esq.
J.  T.  James  Tates,  M.  A.,  F.  R.  S.

lie  Artidea  which  have  no  initials  attached  to  them  are  written  by  the  Editor.


byGooglc


PREFACE


THE 8IC0HD IDITION.


It  *h  ineriteble  that  ^laaj  defects  Bhoiild  be  fonnd  in  the  first  Edition  of  a
work  Uke  the  DictionuT'  of  Glreek.  and  Koman  Antiquitiee^  embra^ng  a  great
mietf  of  iniiiectt^  written  by  different  persons,  and  publiabed  periodicallj.
Of  these  no  one  wu  more  follj  aware  than  the  Editor;  and  accordingly,
vha  the  sale  of  a  Tory  large  iiopression  rendered  the  preparation  of  a  second
Editim  oeceBsary,  he  resolved  to  spare  no  pains  and  exertions  to  render  the
work  tSR  more  worthy  of  the  approbation  with  which  it  had  been  already
tecdved.  The  following  will  be  found  to  be  the  principal  improvements  in
tbe  presoit  Edition.

1.  Miny  of  the  most  important  articles  are  rewritten.  Tiiis  is  especially
tbe  case  in  the  earlier  portion  of  the  work,  since  it  was  originally  intended  to
eomplete  it  in  a  mach  smaller  compass  than  was  afWwards  fotuid  advisable ;
udacGordingljinany  snbjectfiin  the  earlier  letters  of  the  alphabet  were  treated
in  the  first  Editit^  with  a  brevity  which  prevented  the  writers  from  giving  a
fan  ud  aattsfactory  explanation  of  several  important  points.

2.  Haay  snbjects  which  were  entirely  omitted  in  the  first  Edition  are  here
nppfied. .  Anj  one  who  has  bad  experience  in  the  ammgement  of  a  work  in
■Iphabetical  order  will  not  be  snrprised  that  there  should  be  many  omissions
in  tbe  fir«t  EditioQ  of  inch  a  worit.  Some  idea  may  be  formed  of  the  ezten-
flve  idditions  made  to  the  work,  when  it  is  stated  that,  including  the  articles
vhich  have  been  rewritten,  the  present  Edition  contains  upwards  of  three
hutdred  pages  of  entirely  new  matter.

X  Tboae  ardcles  which  have  not  been  rewritten  have  been  carefolly  revised,
ud  in  manj  ol  them  errors  have  been  corrected,  extraneous  matter  omitted,
ud  mneh  additional  information  given.  In  this  part  of  his  labours  the  Editor
hu  received  the  most  valoable  assistance  &om  1/ir.  George  Lcmg,  Dr.  Schmitz,
ud  Hr.  Philip  Smith.

4.  Additional  iUastratioiis  have  been  given  by  means  of  new  woodcuts,
■ksenr  die  solQects  iqipeared  to  require  them. Man;  of  these  new  wood-


VUl  PREFACE  TO THE SECOND EDITION.

cuts  are  of  considerable  importance,  as  the  reader  maj  see  hj  referring  to
the  articles  AmphMeatruni,  Aguaedttcttu,  Columna,  Templum,  and  many
others.

S.  An  alteration  has  been  made  in  the  arrangement  of  the  work,  which  will
tend  to  fadlitate  its  use.  In  the  former  Edition  there  was  some  inconsistency
in  the  Qse  of  Greek,  Latin,  and  English  words  for  the  names  of  articleB.  In
the  present  Edition  the  Latin  language  has  heen  always  employed  for  the
heading  of  the  articles,  except  in  those  subjects  connected  with  Greek  Anti-
quitiea  where  no  corresponding  words  existed  in  Latin  i  as,  for  instance,  in  legal
terms,  and  in  the  names  of  magistrates.  In  these  cases  the  Greek  language  has
been  necessarily  employed ;  bnt^  incompliance  with  a  wish  expressed  by  many
persons,  the  Greek  words  are  given  in  Latin  letters,  with  the  Greek  characters
subjoined.

In  conclnuon,  the  Editor  has  to  express  his  r^ret  that  he  is  unable  in  any
way  to  make  the  additions  and  alterations  in  the  present  Edition  available  to
the  purchasers  of  the  former  one.  He  had  at  one  time  thought  of  publishing
them  in  a  separate  form;  but  he  fonnd,  as  the  work  proceeded,  that  this  was  quite
impossible,  on  account  of  their  great  number  and  length.  In  fact,  the  present
Edition  must  be  regarded,  to  a  considerable  extent,  as  a  new  work.

WILLIAM  SMITH.

London,  Angnit  1st,  IB4B.


byGooglc


PREFACE


THE PIRSI EDITIOH.


Tn  rtndj  ot  Gre^  uid  Bonuui  Antdqnitiea  hat,  in  common  with  all  other
{AiUo^cml  >tDdi«,  nude  great  progress  in  Europe  within  the  last  fi%  jeara.
The  enVcr  writers  on  the  snlrject,  whose  worki  are  contained  in  the  collectionB
of  GroDonna  and  GmriiiB^  diaplay  little  historical  criticiam,  and  give  no  com-
[■dttnaiTe  view  or  living  idea  of  the  public  and  private  life  of  the  ancients.
Thejucn  ecotented,  for  the  most  part,  with  merely  collecting  fact^  and  arrang-
ing tboDa  in  Kone  i^steniatic  form,  and  seemed  not  to  have  felt  the  want  of  any
thii^  more :  th^  wrote  about  antiquity  as  if  the  people  had  never  existed ;
Utej  did  not  attempt  to  realise  to  their  ovni  minds,  or  to  represent  to  those  of
ctbera,  the  living  spirit  of  Greek  and  Boman  dvilisation.  But  bj  the  labours
of  modern  scholars  Hfe  has  been  breathed  into  the  study:  men  are  no  longer
MtiaSed  with  iaolated  facta  on  separate  departments  of  the  subject^  but  endea-
vour to  tana  acaae  conception  of  antiqui^  aa  an  oi^anic  whole,  and  to  trace
the  idation  of  cae  part  to  another.

There  is  scarcely  a  single  sut^ect  inclnded  under  the  general  name  of  Greek
and  Booiaii  Antiquities,  which  has  not  received  elnddation  from  the  writings
at  the  modem  scholars  of  Germany.  The  history  and  political  relstions  of  the
Dationa  of  antiquity  have  been  placed  in  an  entirely  difierent  light  since  the
pobbcation  cf  Niebuhr'a  Bmnan  History,  which  gave  a  new  impulse  to  the
stady,  and  has  been  succeeded  by  the  works  <^  BSckh,  E.  0.  U^ler,  Wachs-
BHlfa,  K.  F.  Hermann,  and  other  distinguished  scholars.  The  study  of  the
B<mian  law,  which  has  been  unaccountably  neglected  in  this  country,  has  been
pnaecoted  with  ezbaordinaiy  success  t^  the  great  joriats  of  Germany,  among
whoB  Savigny  stands  preeminent,  and  claims  our  profoundest  admiration.
1^  anl^flct  cf  Attic  law,  though  in  a  scientific  pouit  of  view  one  of  much
less  mterest  and  importance  than  the  Roman  law,  but  without  a  competent
kovwledge  rf  whid  it  is  impossible  to  understand  the  Greek  orators,  has  also
reeeiTed  mnch  elucidation  from  the  writings  of  Meier,  Schomann,  Bonsen,
rislaii,  Hodtwalcker,  and  others.  Nor  has  the  private  life  of  the  ancients
beea  n^leeted. The  discorery  of  Hercnlaneum  and  Pompeii  has  supplied


X  raSPACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDmON.

US  with  important  iDformadon  on  the  subject,  which  has  also  been  di»-
onaged  with  abili^  bj  sBTenil  modem  writers,  among  whom  W.  A.  Becker,  of
Leipzig,  deBerres  to  be  porticularl;  mentioned.  The  study  of  ancient  art  like-
wise, to  which  onr  scholars  have  paid  little  attention,  h&s  been  diligently  col-
tivated  in  Germany  from  the  time  of  Winckelmann  and  Lessing,  who  founded
the  modem  school  of  cridciam  in  art^  to  which  we  are  indebted  for  so  many
valuable  works.

While,  however,  so  much  has  been  done  la  every  department  of  the  subject^
no  attempt  has  hitherto  been  mad^  dther  in  Germany  or  in  this  country,  to
make  the  results  of  modem  researches  available  for  the  purposes  of  instmctioii,
by  giving  them  in  a  single  work,  adapted  for  the  use  of  students.  At  presenl^
correct  information  on  many  matters  of  antiquity  can  only  be  obtained  b^
consulting  a  large  number  of  costly  works,  which  few  students  can  have  access
to.  It  was  therefore  thought  that  a  woric  <m  Greek  and  Boman  Antiquities,
which  should  be  founded  on  a  careful  examination  of  the  original  sources,  with
such  aids  as  could  be  derived  from  the  best  modem  writers,  and  which  should
bring  up  the  subject,  so  to  speak,  to  the  present  state  of  philological  learning,
would  form  a  useful  acqniulion  to  all  persons  engaged  in  the  study  of  antiquity.

It  was  supposed  that  this  wi»'k  might  fall  into  the  hands  of  two  different  classea
of  readers,  and  it  was  therefore  eonsidered  proper  to  provide  for  the  probable
wants  of  eacl^BS  for  as  was  possible.  It  has  been  intended  not  only  fw  schools,
but  also  for  the  use  of  students  at  universities,  and  of  other  persons,  who  may
wish  to  obtain  more  extensive  information  on  the  subject  than  an  elementary
work  can  supply.  Accordingly  numerouB  references  have  been  given,  not  only
to  the  filawri'^nl  antbors,  but  also  to  the  best  modem  writers,  which  vrill  point
oat  the  sources  of  information  on  each  sutyect,  and  enable  the  reader  to  extend
his  inquiries  further  if  he  wishes.  At  the  same  time  it  must  be  observed,
that  it  has  been  impos^ble  to  give  at  the  end  of  each  article  the  whole  of  the
literature  which  belongs  to  it.  Such  a  list  of  vorics  as  a  full  account  of
tite  literature  would  require,  would  have  swelled  the  work  much  beyond  the
limits  of  a  single  volume,  and  it  has  therefore  only  been  poesihle  ta  refer  to  the
principal  modem  authorities.  This  has  been  more  particularly  the  oase  with
such  articles  as  treat  of  the  Botnan  constitutiou  and  law,  on  which  the  modem
writers  are  almost  innumerable.

A  weak  like  &&  present  might  have  been  arranged  either  in  a  systogiatiG  or
an  alphabetical  fomi.  Each  plan  has  its  advantages  and  disadvantages,  but  maaj
reasons  induced  the  Editor  to  adi^t  the  latter.  Besides  the  obvious  advantage
of  an  alphabetical  arnmgement  in  a  work  of  refbrence  ll^e  the  present,  it
enabled  the  Editor  to  avail  himself  of  the  assistance  of  several  scholars  who  bad
made  c^taio  departments  of  antiquity  their  particular  study.  It  is  quite  in-
possible  that  a  work  which  comprehends  all  the  sulgects  included  uqder  Gi>eek
and  Boman  Antiquities  can  be  written  satisfactorily  by  any  one  individual  Ab
it  was  therefore  absolutely  necessary  to  divide  the  labour,  no  other  arrangement
offered  so  many  facilities  for  the  purpose  as  that  which  has  been  adopted ;  in
addition  to  which,  the  form  of  a  Dif^ionary  has  the  additional  advantage  of
enabling  the  writer  to  give  a  complete  account  of  a  sul^ect  under  one  head,
which  cannot  so  well  be  done  in  a  systematic  work.  An  exam^  will  illustrate
what  is  meant. A  history  of  the  patridan  and  plebeian  orders  at  Bome  cad


FftBFACE TO TEE FIBST EDITION.  XI

tmif  Im  giiiwd  from  a  ■ysteinatio  work  by  patting  toget]ier  the  statements  con-
taiaed  in  manj  differeot  parts  of  the  woik,  while,  in  a  Dictionaiy,  a  connected
Tisv  of  their  hlsttn^  is  gireo  fhxa  the  earliest  to  the  latest  times  nnder  the
re<peg*i¥e  vords. The  same  remark  will  appl^  to  namarooa  other  snbjeots.

SoBie  Bobjects  have  been  included  in  the  present  work  which  have  not  uiaally
been  treated  of  in  works  <hi  Greek  and  Boman  Antiquities.  I^ese  Bnbjects
harg  beoi  inserted  on  aocoont  of  the  iinp(»rt>nt  infloence  which  they  exercised
iipi»  the  pabUo  and  private  life  of  the  ancients.  Thus,  considraable  space  has
been  given  to  the  articles  en  Painting  and.StatDary,  and  also  to  those  on  the
diSfer^tt  departments  of  the  Drama.  There  may  seem  to  be  some  inconsistency
md  a^arent  c^>ricio«aiesB  in  the  admission  andrqectionofsntgects,  bnt  it  is
vaj  difficolt  to  determine  at  what  point  to  stop  in  a  work  of  this  kind.  A
TVtinaarj  of  Greek  and  Boman  Antiquities,  if  understood  in  its  most  extensiTe
tignificstioo,  woold  comprehend  an  account  of  every  thing  relating  to  antiquity.
In  its  nantnrer  sense,  however,  the  term  is  confined  to  an  account  of  the  pabhc
and  prirate  life  of  the  Greeks  and  Bomans,  and  it  is  convenient  to  adhere  to
this  signification  of  the  word,  however  arbitrary  it  may  be.  For  this  reason
■ereral  articUe  have  been  inserted  in  the  work  which  some  persons  may  r^ard
as  oat  ot  plwM,  and  others  have  been  omitted  wtiich  have  sometimes  been  im-
properly  indnded  in  writings  on  Gre^  and  Boman  AntiquiUee.  Keitber  the
nsmrs  of  peraoos  and  divinities,  nor  those  of  places,  have  been  inserted  in  the
[III sunt  work,  as  the  former  will  be  treated  of  in  the  "  Dictionary  of  Greek  and
Bonaa  Biogr^thy  and  Mytholi^,''  and  the  latter  in  the  "  Diotionary  of  Greek
sod  "f— "*  Geof^apby."

Tbe  snlgects  of  the  woodcuts  have  beffii  chosen  by  the  writers  of  the  articles
rtddi  tbey  iUustrate,  and  the  drawings  have  been  made  nnder  their  snperinten-
Aeaea.  *  Many  <tf  these  have  been  taken  &om  originals  in  tbe  British  Uusenm,
sad  otfasrs  from  tbe  different  wo^  which  contain  representatioaa  of  w(»ks  of
aadent  art,  as  tbe  Uoseo  B<»'bonico,  Mnsao  Capitoliao,  Hillin'a  Peintures  de
Taaes  Antiqaea,  l^schbein's  and  D'Hanoarville's  engravings  from  Sir  William
Hamilton's  Tases,  and  other  similar  works.  Hitherto  little  use  has  been  made  in
dus  euuBtry  of  existing  works  of  art,  for  the  purpose  of  iUostrating  antiquity.  In
goany  eases,  however,  iba  representation  of  on  object  gives  a  far  better  idea  of
the  porpoaea  for  whidt  it  was  intended,  and  the  way  in  which  it  was  used,  than
lay  eca|danation  in  words  only  can  convey.  Besides  which,  some  acqutuntance
with  the  remains  of  anraent  art  is  almost  essential  to  a  proper  perception  of  the
iprit  of  antiquity,  and  would  tend  to  refine  and  elevate  the  taste,  and  lead  to  a
jaat  ^preciation  of  works  of  art  in  general.

Ur.  Gecffge  Long,  who  has  contributed  to  this  work  the  articles  relating  to
P^ft■a"  Law,  has  sent  tbe  Editor  the  following  remsrks,  which  he  wishes  to
g  the  articles  be  has  written,  and  which  are  accordingly  sulyoined


"  Xlie  writer  of  the  articles  marked  with  the  letters  G.  L.  condders  some
"  apidogy  neceasary  in  respect  of  what  he  has  contributed  to  this  work.  He  has
"  sever  had  tbe  advantage  of  attending  a  course  of  lectures  on  Roman  Law,  and
"he  has  written  these  articles  in  the  midst  of  nnmerous  engagements,  which  left

■  Tbe  voodeut*  Iut«  been  eirauted  bj  Mr.  Joho  Jutnn.

.  ,Goo^^Ic


XU  PBBFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.

"  little  time  for  other  labour.  The  want  of  proper  materials  also  was  often  fel^
"  and  it  would  have  been  sufficient  to  prevent  the  writer  from  venturing  on
"  Buch  an  undertaking,  if  he  had  not  been  able  to  avwl  himself  of  the  library
"  of  his  friend,  Mr.  William  Wright,  of  Lincoln's  Inn.  These  circumstaseeB
"  will,  periiapS)  be  some  excuse  for  the  errors  and  imperfections  which  will  be
"  q>paTent  enough  to  those  who  are  competent  judges.  Itis  only  those  who
"  have  formed  an  adequate  conception  of  the  extent  and  varie^  of  the  matter
"  of  law  in  general,  and  of  the  Boman  Law  in  partJcolar,  who  can  estimate  the
"  difficult  of  writing  on  such  a  subject  in  Englaod,  and  they  will  allow  to  him
"  who  has  attempted  it  a  just  measure  of  indulgence.  The  writer  claims  such
"  indulgence  from  thoseliving  writers  of  whose  labours  he  has  availed  himself
"  if  any  of  these  articles  should  ever  fall  in  their  way.  It  will  be  apparent
"  that  these  articles  have  been  written  mainly  with  the  vicrr  of  illustrating
"  the  classical  writers ;  and  that  a  consideration  of  the  persons  for  whose  use
"  they  are  intended,  and  the  present  state  of  knowledge  of  the  Roman  Law  in
"  this  country,  have  been  sufficient  reas(»iB  for  the  omission  of  many  important
"  matters  which  would  have  been  useless  to  most  readers  and  sometimes  onin-
"  telligible.

"  Though  few  modem  writers  have  been  used,  compared  with  the  whole
"  number  who  might  have  been  used,  they  are  not  absolutely  few,  and  many  of
"  them  to  Englishmen  are  new.  Many  of  them  also  are  the  best,  and  among
"  the  best,  of  the  kind.  The  difficult  of  writing  these  articles  was  increased  by
"  the  want  ot  books  in  the  English  language ;  for,  though  we  have  many  writers
"  on  various  departments  of  the  Roman  Law,  of  whom  two  or  three  have  been
"  referred  t(^  they  have  been  seldom  used,  and  vith  very  littie  profit"

It  would  be  improper  to  close  these  remarks  without  stating  the  obligations
tills  work  is  under  to  Mr.  Long.  It  was  chiefly  throngh  his  advice  and  en-
couragement that  the  Editor  was  induced  to  undertake  it,  and  during  ita
progress  he  has  always  been  ready  to  give  his  counsel  whenever  it  was
needed.  It  is  therefore  as  much  a  matter  of  duty  as  it  is  of  pleasure,  to  make
this  public  acknowledgment  to  him.

WILUAH  SMITH.

London,  A^  Sod,  1848.


byGooglc


DICTIONARY


GREEK AND ROMAN ANTIQUITIES.


nvKv  The  asnexed  6gan  u  dnwD  fniB  thM  in
lit  Britiik  llamm,  which  una  nkm  Erom  the
PsikcMa  at  Athoii,  inA  it  a  pcriect  •pedmen  of
iW  npiul  of  a  Done  cofanmL


Id  Ike  avn  onuneDted  orden  of  arcbilectiire,
h  ■■  the  Conolhian,  the  nd«  of  tho  abacni
v  cnrTfd  invmrdi,  and  a  me  or  Hiine  othn
u  frKjoentlj  placed  ID  the  middle  of
le  Abacni  wu  giien  to  the
nd  enriched,  M  well  u  in
HI  inpni  Inn. (Vitrar.  ilL  3,  it.  1.  g  7.)

2.  A  painted  pmel,  eoBer,  or  tqnara  comput-
Boit  Ml  the  wan  or  ccQiiig  of  a  dumber.  (Plin.
H.  .V.  moL  66,  nxr.  1,  13  j  VittnT.  Tii.  3.
I  10  ;  Letnnne,  Ptatar.  mir.  p.  476.)

].  A  woodai  tnj,  nied  for  a  Taiietf  of  pui-
ymt  in  dmenic  ecoDomj-.  It  wu,  for  inglaiice,
i^  taUK  iriTcn  to  the  aacfra  (>uEjiTpa),  or  tray  for
V»*«dyf  dn^h.  (Ciatio.  Prog.  p.  37,  ed.  Rankd ;
PalEX,  Ti.  90,  t  JOS  i  Cato,  R.  R.  10  ;  Hf>jch.
nc  O^rrp-  ;  ScboL  «  7%>»rr.  ii.  61.)

4.  A  batfd,  coTered  with  Huid  or  diut,  med  bj
*w[^HTnntirTiPt  fiv  drawing  dingTaou  {EiiaUith.  m
'M.  L  107),  and  bj  aiithmeticiaiu  for  the  puipoiea
■(  olcnlntion.  (Pen.  &)£  L  131.)  For  (he  tetter
■arpgae  papsidicDlBr  lina  or  cbumelt  Mem  to
Bte  heen  djawn  in  the  nnd  npon  tb;  board  \  but
*■  1 1  iiw  ■  tike  board  had  popendicolar  wooden  di-
Tjiva,  (be  ifiaee  bd  the  right  hand  being  intended
t  apace  for  tcni,  the  nc
m. Thna  — ■ — ■


ABACUS,

ieiiuei,  i^'  oE  i^ifaviriv,  "  ilie  nbacnt  on  which
ther  calculate,"  i.  e.  reckon  by  iho  uie  of  tUiuet
(1)4^1,  a^aiU').  (Comp.  PoL  T.  26.)  The  figure
following  represent*  the  probable  Ibrm  and  appear-
aoca  of  luch  an  abacut.  The  reader  will  obaerve,
that  Btone  after  tUme  migbt  be  put  into  the  right-
hand  partition  until  the;  amounted  to  10,  when  it
woold  be  ueceamy  to  take  them  oil  out  oa  repro-
lenled  in  the  figure,  and  inilead  of  them  to  put
one  itone  into  the  aeit  partition. The  Btonei  in

thiu  repcPKnting  10  m  10— 100,  when  it  would  be
neceuar;  to  take  out  the  10,  and  imtead  of  them
to  pot  one  atone  into  the  third  partition,  and  ao  on.
On  thia  principle  the  atonea  in  the  abncua,  oi  de-


359,310,


1  the figure,  would be cquivalcc


fi.  A  board  adapted  for  plajing  with  dice  or
conntera,  reaembling  a  dianghl-board  or  back-
nnUDOD-board.  (Car; it  op.  ASi.  x.  p.  135,  d  ;
SueLJVer.29;  Macrob.  &(.  1.  S.)  TheOreekibad
a  tradition  aiciibing  Ihia  contriTance  to  Palamedea,
bence  they  called  it  '*  the  abocna  of  Palamedea."
(Ti  UaXa^i)Stiay  ieixior,  Euatoth.  n  fU.  L  107.)


[L*i


:l]


6.  A  table  or  aideboard,  chiefly  med  for  the
diiptay  {etpoHm)  of  gold  and  lilver  cupa.  The
topa  of  luch  tablea  were  BOmctimea  made  of  ailver,
but  more  uauall;  of  marble,  and  appear  in  aome
cosea  to  haxe  hod  numeroua  celli  or  partitiem  be-
neath, in  which  the  plate  wai  likewiie  placed.  The
nae  of  abaci  wai  lint  introduced  at  Home  from  Aiia
Minor  after  the  victoria  of  Cn.  Monliui  Vulao,
B.  c  187,  and  their  introdnrtion  waa  regarded  n*
one  of  the  mnrka  of  the  growing  luuiy  of  the  age.


(Cie.  r*r


ABORTIO.
ii.  IS, 7b«.  T.  21  ; Li*,  mix.  6 ;


Plin.  H.  N.  niiii.  6 ;  Petron.  73 ;  Sid.  ApolL
7,  i.)  These  abaci  are  Hmctimet  cstlEd  maaae
Ddpkkat.  <Cia  Fsrr.  it.  fi9  i  Mart.  lii.  67  i
Becker,  Gallvi,  toL  i.  p.  140.)

7.  A  put  of  the  theatre  on  or  near  the  ilage.
6.  Tbe  diminutiye  Abaculus  {itaxlaKat)  de-
noted a  tile  of  marble,  glau,  or  any  other  nibttance
tiled  for  making  omaoiental  paTementi.  The^weie
of  Tarioui  coloan.  (Plin.  H.  N.  zuri.  67  ;  Mm-
chioD,  ap.  Alh.  T.  207,  d.)  [J.  Y.J

ABACTUS  VENTER. [Abobko.]
ABALIENATIO; [Manch-iuk.]
ADDICA'TIO. [Madistratus.]
ABOLLA, tbe  La^  form of  i^frfAAo,  i.  «.
kiiiiSoXi\,  a  loose  woollen  cto«k. Ni
pauage  of  Vam  to  ihow  that  it  w
worn  by  aoldien  (eeiftj  niliiarit),
poied  to  the  toga. Ilj  form and the mode of
wearijig  \i  ore  aeen  in  tbe  fignrei  annexed,  taken
from  &a  baa-ieliefi  on  tbe  triumphal  aich  of  Sep-
timiui  Se*enu  at  Rome.


It  waa,  howcTer,  not  coniined  to  militarf
uoni,  bnt  WM  also  vom  in  the  citj. (Suet.  Cid.
35.) It  WM  eipeciallj  used  by  the  Stoic  phili

phera  at  Rome  ni ..

the  Greek  pbilt

tinguiah  tfaemselTea  by  a  particular

iv.  75i  Mart  iy.  S3,  viii.  JB.) Hen

lion  of  Juvenal  (iv.  75)  /Ucinut  myorit  aboiitig

merely  ligntliei,  "  n  crime  commilted  by  a  rery

deep  phi  loeiqiher."  (Hdnncb,ajyiic.  f.c  ;  Becker,

GaUiu,  ToL  li.  p.  99.)

ADO'RTIO.  Tbie  woid  and  the  ccgnate  word
aAoriivus,  oAortut,  were  applied  to  a  child  pre-
maturely bom,  whence  it  appean  that  they  were
b]»  applied  to  lignify  a  prematnre  birth  brought
about  designedly.  "^^ '  """"'  "' '  '
Paului  "■  -  "
mature  I

of  the  wonl  was  practised  among  the  Ronuuu,
appears  from  Tarioue  pauagps  and  from  there  being
an  enactment  agninit  iL  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  e.  3H.)
It  is  not  slated  at  what  time  apenolty  against  pro-
curing abortion  wu  established.  It  is  maintained
by  some  modem  writen  that  the  practice  of  abor-
tion became  so  common  among  the  Romoni,  that
combined  with  celibacy  and  other  cauaea  it  mate-


ACCEPTILATIO.

rially  diminiabcd  the  population  of  Rome.  But  tUi
general  assertion  is  not  sufficiently  proTed.  The
practice  of  abortion  appears  not  to  have  been  viewed
in  the  tame  light  by  tbe  Greeks  and  Romans  a*
by  the  Christian  nationa  of  modem  times.  Aris-
totle m  his  PoUlik  (viL  U),  recommends  it  on  ih«
condition  that  the  child  has  not  yet  got  aeiiHatioa
tuid  life,  as  he  eipresaes  it.  In  Plato's  BepMia
(t.  p.  25),  it  ia  also  permitted.  At  Athens,  s  pei^
aon  who  had  caused  the  abortion  of  a  child  by
meana  of  a  potion  (i^AuBpfSiov),  was  liable  to  an
action  (if>§Mi<rwi  ypa^),  but  we  do  not  know
what  was  the  penally  in  oue  of  conTiction ;  it  was
certainly  not  death.  There  waa  a  apeech  of  Lyilaa
on  this  subject,  which  ia  lost.  {Frag.  p.8.  ed.
Reiske.)  [G.L.]

ABROOA'TIO. ILiic.]

ABSOLU'TIO. IJudkl]

ABSTINENDIBENEFl'CIUM.  [Herbs.]

ABU'SUS. [Usus  FaucTUS,]

ACAENA  CAKalrti,  kaira,  or  in  later  Greek
bti^in  one  place  Svoiror)  ia  aveijandentGreek
word,  for  it  is  sud  to  have  been  derived  60m  the
Thessaliana  or  from  the  Felasgians.  It  teems  ori-
ginally to  hare  meant  a  pointed  stick ;  thus  it  waa
applied  both  to  >  goad  and  to  a  shepherd's  BtaAL
Afterwords  it  came  (tike  our  pote  and  perxA,  and
the  German  ilaiigt)  to  mean  s  mcasnnng  rod  o(  tho
length  of  ten  Greek  feet,  or,  according  to  Hesjchiua,
H  riixfit,  which  is  the  tame  thing.  It  was  used
in  measuring  land,  and  thus  it  resembles  the  Ro-
man dccempeda. It  is  doubtful 1


ling  squa


(Schol.


Apatl.  mod.  HI  \326  ;  Suid.  ».o.  ;  Hejjch.  ..  I.  ;
Schow,  IlttyeA.  Utatii.  p.  618  j  Oljmpiodor.  ad
Aiiitot  Melearoliig.  p.  25  ;  Heron,  op,  Salmai.  ad.
SoliH.  p.  481 J  Wurm,  ii«  Fond.  p.  93.) Compare

ACNA.  fP.  S.]

ACA'TIUM. [Navi*.]

ACCENSI.  I.  Public  oflicen  who  attended  Da
several  of  tbe  Roman  magisttatea.  They  *um-
moned  the  people  to  the  aseembUcs,  and  those  who
had  lawtuita  to  court  1  they  preaerved  orier  in  tha
assemblies  and  the  courts,  arid  proclaimed  the  timo
of  the  day  when  it  was  the  third  hour,  the  liith
hour,  and  the  ninth  hour.  An  aocensus  anciently
preceded  the  consul  who  had  not  the  fsscea,  and
lictors  without  liucea  walked  bcbiod  him,  which
custom  after  being  disused  was  restand  by  Julius
Caesar  in  hil  first  consulship.  (Vorr.  L.  L.  ill  58,
cd.  Mililer  j  Plin.  H.  N.  vii,  60  ;  Suet  Jul.  20  ,
Liv.  iii  33.)  Accenu  also  attended  on  the  govemoTB
of  provinces  (Cic  ad  Fralr.  L  1.  g4),  and  were
commonly  freedmen  of  the  mogistiatc  on  whom  thej-
attended.

2.  A  body  of  reserve  troops,  who  followed  tho
Roman  army  without  having  any  mllitaiy  duties  ta
perform,  and  who  were  taken  one  by  one  to  supply-
any  vacancies  that  might  occur  in  the  legiuna.
They  were  according  to  the  census  of  Sen-ioB
TuUiuilaken&omtheffthdowofcltiiena.  They
were  placed  in  battle  in  the  nar  of  the  army,  be~
hind  the  triarii,  and  seem  to  have  acted  sometimes
aa  orderlies  to  the  officers.  They  were  also  cnlled.
Adacriplicii  and  in  later  times  SupfTTmmerurii..
(Post.  s.  V.  Acomii,  Adscripticii ;  Liv.  L  43,  viii,
8,  10;  Veget.  iL  19;  Niebuhr,  Rom.  Hia.  vol.i.
p.  ii%  &c.)

ACCEPTILA'TIO  udefined  to  bo  a  release  by-
mutual  interrogation  between  debtor  and  creditor,
by  which  each  party  in  exondstcd  froq  .tb*  Mmo


ACCESSia

mtaKt  I>  Mbf  imdi  acccptiktiD  i*  the  fann
tl  midi  br  vUch  >  oeditor  idesKi  hi*  debtor
frn  (  debt  or  oblJntiati,  and  xinoiricdgn  be  has
ttairtA  ikw  wliich  in  bet  be  hu  not  receiTed
(idnti  imgiiBritMbda}. Tbii  relcaK  of  debt  bf


a  lawycn  foiuui  m  mods  of  complyiDf;
nliAtral^nd  M  tbe  ume  tuns  eiteDdiu;  the
■tRf(ibti>  I*  lU  Uodi  and  to  m;  muabcr  of  con-
noii  TU<  wM  the  isnotim  of  QoUni  Aquilim,
tIb  drtacd  a  favmla  for  reducing  all  and  ereiy
tial  rf  antiaeti  to  Ibe  itipilatio.  Thii  being
diae.  the  accntilatx)  irould  inuDediotelj  apply,
iiiMaik  ai  the  mattrr  wsi  bj  Mch  formala
knrtt  ndiin  the  jRuenl  role  of  law  abore  men-
tiw^  The  KapCiUtio  miut  be  abaolate  and  not
fiHiriiiiiit  A  part  of  a  debt  cr  obligation  might
trrdoMl  H  wtQ  ai  the  vhole,  prorided  the
ItoK  *ai  is  iu  nature  o^ble  cJ  diiiaion.  A
^pw  mid  not  rdme  a  debt  by  noccptilatio,
riiaa  the  Bieloitaa  of  hit  tnlor,  bnt  he  could  be
Rl««d  froB  a  debt  A  woman  also  could  not
niait  \  idn  by  atipulatio  withmt  the  anctorilai
<i  t  ttttr. The  phimae  bf  vhieh  a  cxediloi  ia  aid


<n^»,iitataflo  /atm  or  Jem,  or  ooa^'Aui
'«-  Whcaniytlung  which waidooeoDthebebalf
tf  •  br  the  HHe,  rach  at  a  buiUing  for  initanc^
■M  ^fnnd  b;  the  anqntoit  aadiaritiei,  it  wai
■<■  tatflmmjwn,  or  njftrrt.  (Dig.  46.  lit.
t :  4&  lit  11.  a.  7  :  Oaini,  iL  84,  &e.  iiL  169,
tt)  [O.L.]

iCCE'SSIO  M  a  legal  tena  whkh  nmifiei  that

oBBJaiJ  tohauMe  amapoDentpait  of  tha  other  ;
w  ihiag  it  eooaidcKd  the  principal,  and  the  other

'^■WBiLi  H  maj  be  doabtfbl  which  ii  to  be  con-
•i'md  the  pnncnsl  thii^  and  which  the  aeceaBion.
hi  the  owDCf  of  the  (imicip^  lUiw,  whicherer  it
«  howc  the  owner  ef  A»  tmttaaa  alioi  The
Mt  miSufnUA  kind  <rf  aoeoMO  ii  that  which
w^  frna  the  union  <^  a  thing  with  the  gnand  \
b4  wbta  tW  nnuo  hetweoi  the  gtODnd  and  the
t^  i>  cmplete,  tlie  thing  bdimgi  to  him  who  ii
>ht  ona  cf  the  ground.  Thni  if  a  man  buildi
■a  the  pomid  of  aiiHher  man,  the  building  belongi
!•  tbt  enwT  of  the  ground,  nnleta  it  u  a  building
^  >  annUe  natart,  u  ■  test ;  far  the  role  of  law
■  ^iqiofidea  aoto  cediL**  A  tree  belonging  to
<"  Baa,  if  planted  in  the  gnnnd  of  anoiha  man,
^Atmt  lo  the  owner  of  the  grsond  aa  aoon  aa  it
bi  taktn  raoL The  nme  mis  appUei  to  aeedi


DM,  If  a  laanpainted  a  pictunon  anDthernuui't
■od  (labala)  or  whalera  the  nuteriali  might  be,
■jf  piiatii^  waa  cenaidcred  to  be  the  prindpal
•aiait  piemrae  c«dit).  The  principle  which  de-
lifiEBBed  the  acqixistioa  of  a  new  pn^wrty  b;  ac-
nw  vaa  thia — the  intimate  and  inaepanble  onion
't'  ihe  atmeuij  with  the  principaL  Accordingly,
lioi  BDgfal  be  acceaso  bj  pnie  accident  withoDt
t>  latBTeBtiisi  of  aoj  rsUraal  agent.  If  a  piece
V  iod  waa  tom  awa;  by  a  ilnam  ttma  ma  manli


ACERRA.  8

land  and  attached  lo  the  land  of  another,  it  became
the  prnpertj  of  the  nun  to  whoae  land  it  waa  at-
tached after  it  wai  firmly  attached  to  it,  bat  not
before.  Tbii  mnit  not  be  confoimded  with  the  csaa
of  Alluvio.

The  penon  vho  lost  bii  property  by  aeceado
had  at  a  general  rule  a  right  lo  be  indemnJGed
for  hit  loaa  bf  the  penra  vho  acquired  the  new
property. The  eiceptioos  ^cre  casa  of  mala  fideA.

The  term  accenio  it  altoa|qilied  lo  thingi  which
ore  the  productt  of  other  thingt,  ai^d  not  added  to
them  externally  ai  in  the  (ate  juit  mentioned,
Erery  aceeiaio  of  Ihii  kind  belong!  to  the  owner
of  the  [nndpo]  thing ;  the  pcodnce  of  a  bentt,  the
pndoce  of  a  tAi,  and  of  a  tree  belonge  to  the
owner.  In  tome  catea  one  man  may  haTe  a  right
to  the  prodoce  (frnctiu)  of  a  thing,  thimgh  the
thing  belong!  to  another.  [Uaui  pauctus.]

The  term  acceaiiDaea  waa  alas  ^)plied  to  thooe
who  were  turetiea  or  boimd  for  olhen,  aa  Gdejuworet,
(Dig,  4i,  tit  1.  B.  91.  i  Puehta,  Obih  da-  Imtitif-
lioaoi,  a.  p.  661 :  Kg.  41.  tit  1 )  Oahu,  iL  73,

&.C CONFUBIO.)  [G.  L.]

ACCLAMA'TIO  wot  the  public  eiptewon  of
approbation  or  diuqiprobation,  pltaauro  or  dii-
pleatore,  Ac;  by  load  acclamo^oa.  On  many  oc-
catifflu,  there  appear  to  have  been  certain  Utrmt  of
oukmatiomi  alwayi  oted  by  the  Romant ;  aa,  for
inatanoe,  at  maniaget,  lo  Hymm,  Hymaiaet,  or
Talattio  (eiplaJDed  by  Lir.  L  9.)  ;  at  triumpht,  lo
Iriumpit,  lo  trnenpkt ;  at  the  condoaion  of  pLayt
the  laat  actor  called  oat  Flaadile  to  the  ipcelaton ;
oratoti  were  uooally  piaited  by  loch  erprettionB  ai
Bau  ti  prtuelart,  B^  ^  foaia,Nai  polt^  tnclint,
&e.  (Cic  Dt  Oral.  iiL  26.)  Under  the  empire
the  naroe  of  acdajnatknia  was  giien  to  the  proitet
and  fiatteriet  which  the  lenate  beetoved  upon  the
emperor  and  hia  jamily,  Thete  acclamadone^
which  are  frequently  quoted  by  the  S£ripton$  Hit-
ttyrim  AugialaA,  were  often  of  contiderablo  length,
and  teem  to  haie  been  chanted  by  the  whole  body
of  tenatort.  There  were  regular  aedamatiima
ihonted  by  the  people,  of  which  one  of  Ibe  meat
common  waa  Z>u  <■  mrvatL  (C^iitoi  Matm.  rfno,
16,  26,  Oontiam.  tni,  11 ;  Lampiid.  Aim.  Sum.
6—12;  Vopiac.  Toe.  i,  B,  7,  Pnb.  II.)  Otha
inttsncea  of  acdamatiana  sis  given  b^  Ferrariua,

Tknaar.  Son.  AMiq.  toL  ii.

ACCUBA'TIO,  the  act  of  iwlining  at  meali.
[Co<N*.]

ACCU'BITA,  the  name  of  coachei  which  weia
uaed  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperon,  iuitead
of  the  triclinium,  for  reclining  apon  at  meali.  The
mattreue*  and  feather-beda  were  aofter  and  higher,
and  the  tn^qjmtt  (Jvkray  t£  them  lower  in  pro-
portion, than  in  the  bricliniom.  The  dothea  and
pillowi  umad  over  them  were  called  oaidniaiia.
(Lamprii  H^iag.  19,  25  ;  Schol  ad  J<ai.  Sat.  t.
17.)  [J,  Y.]

ACCUSA'TIO. [Jtjnsx.]

ACERRA  (kitararpSt),  the  incenie  boi  naed
in  iBcrifictt.  (Hot.  Gma.  iiL  8.  2  ;  Viig.  Am.  i.
745.)  Tho  incenae  wat  taken  out  of  tiie  acem
and  let  bll  upon  the  homing  altar :  hence,  we  haTo
the  exptsation  <U  acerra  tiiari.  (Or.  ac  PomL  It.
S.  39  ;  Pert.  iL  B.)  [TtnuBULnn,]  The  acerra
reprcaented  below  it  taken  &om  a  ba>«elief  in  the
muteum  of  the  Capitol.

The  aceiTB  waa  alto,  accsiding  to  Featna  ((.  fi.\
a  iroall  altar,  placed  before  the  dead,  en  which


ACHAICUM  FOEDHS.

^3


ACHAICUM  POEDUS.


mwi^i


i


pufumea  w<3«  Immt.  Tbtn  wai  ■  lnw  in  tlie
Twel>e  Tablo,  which  reitricled  tlM  me  of  tame
mt  funemli. (Cic  dd  Z^.  iL  31.)  [J.  Y.]

ACETA'DULUM  (iili,  j(Maf»,  tivti^r),
a  -nn^ar-cop,  whicb,  from  tlie  fondiWM  of  l)U
Orecki  and  Bamaiu  for  vioegar,  vu  probably
alwBfi  placed  on  the  table  at  nuak  to  dip  Uwfood
in  before  eating  it.  The  Tewel  waa  wido  and
open  above,  a«  we  aeo  in  the  aaneied  rat,  taken
from  Panof  ka^  work  on  Oreek  Tsaei ;  and  Ihe
name  waa  alio  fpvea  to  all  cupa  refiemblma  it  in
aiie  and  fbnn,  to  wbaterer  iu«  the;  migbt  be  ap-
plied. They  vert  cranmonly  of  earthenware,  bnt
lometima  of  (iItb,  bronze,  or  gold.  (Arutoph.
Jv.  B61  ;  Atben.  ti.  p.  330,  li.  p.  494  ;  Qnintil.
viiL  6.)  The  cupa  uaed  by  jugglen  in  their  per-
formancei  were  alaa  called  by  thii  name. (Sen.


ACETA'BULUM,aRonitui  meaanre  ofcapa-
lit)-,  fluid  and  diy,eqDiTiiIent  to  the  Greek  i^ita^y.
It  mu  one-fourth  of  (he  bemina;  and  ther^ore
one.eighth  of  (he  MXtarias.  It  eontaincd  the
weight  in  water  of  Cfleen  Attic  dnehmae.  (Plin.
H.N.xa.  34.  tlOS.)  [P.S.]

ACHAICUM  FOEDUS,  the  Achaean  lesgae.
In  treating  of  the  Achaean  leafue  we  nnut  dis-
linguijh  between  two  paioda,  tfie  eaiiier  and  the
later }  the  chaiacter  of  the  (bimec  waa  pre-aminently
reli^ooi,  and  that  of  the  latter  pre.eiiiinaitly  po-

1.  Tit  tariitr  period. — Wlien  the  Heracleidac
took  poneHim  of  Petoponnem,  which  htul  until
then  been  chiefly  inhabited  byALcbaouia,  a  partioti
of  Ibc  latter,  under  Tivmemif,  torDed  northwardi
and  occupied  the  north  eoaatof  Pelopnuiemii,  which
waa  called  aSyoMt,  and  from  which  the  loniana,
iti  (onner  inhabitSDti,  were  expelled  and  aought
rehtge  in  Attics  The  connCfy  which  waa  Uiiu
occupied  by  the  Achaeani  and  deriTed  from  them
ita  name  of  Adiaia,  contained  twdre  confcdente
towu,  which  were  goremed  by  the  dcacendaata  of


of  HendotoB  (L  14j  ;
ccmp.  ctnto.  nu.  p.  383,  &c.)  the  twelve  towna  of
which  the  league  consiated  were:  PcUene,  AegeinL,
Aegae,  Bora,  Helice,  Aegium,  Rhj^xa  (Rhjpae),
Pntreii  (ae),  Phareii  (ae),  Olenna,  Djjne,  and
TriBeeit  fTritaes).  After  the  time  of  Herodotoa,
Rhypes  and  Aegac  dlaappear  from  the  nnmbcr  of
the  confedeiBted  towna,  a«  they  had  becsnie  de-
serted (Pan*.  Tii.  23.  25 1  Sinib.  TiiL  p.  387),  and
Cerjneia  and  LeontiDin  ateppcd  into  their  placb
<Polyb.  iL  41 ;  comp.  Pani.  tIL  S.)  The  copunon
place  of  meeting  wai  Helice,  which  town,  together
with  Bnra,  wai  awallowed  up  by  the  aea  during
an  earthquake  in  &  c  373,  whereupon  Aegium  waa
choien  a>  the  place  of  meeting  for  the  confedctntna.
(Strab.  TiiL  p.  384  ;  Diod.  it.  48  ;  Pans.  viL  24.)
The  bond  which  united  the  town)  of  the  league
waa  not  ao  touch  a  political  as  a  religiona  one,  aa  la
■hown  by  the  common  aacrifice  offered  at  Helice  to
Poeeidon.  Thi<  tolemn  tacrilice  waa  perfectly
analf^oua  to  that  oBered  by  the  loniani  at  the
Poniania,  and  it  is  eren  intimated  by  Herodotin
that  it  wBi  an  imitatian  of  the  Ionian  solemnity.
Af^  the  destruction  of  Helice,  and  when  Aegiua
had  become  the  central  point  of  the  league,  the  com-
mon ■acriiice  was  offered  np  to  the  principal  dirini-
tica  of  the  latter  town  ;  that  ia,  to  Zeua,  Bureamed
HomagyTint,  and  to  Demeter  Ponachaea.  (Pnos.
tIL  24.)  In  a  political  point  of  view  the  connec-
tion between  the  (ereial  tcwna  appean  to  hBTo
been  Tery  loose,  for  we  find  thai  some  of  them
acted  quite  independently  of  the  rest.  (Thuc.  ii.
9.)  The  confederation  exercised  no  great  influence
in  the  aflain  of  Greece  down  to  the  Ume  when  it
was  broken  up  by  the  Macedonians.  The  Achaeaaa
kept  aloof  from  ^e  rcatleas  commotions  in  the  other
part)  of  Greece,  and  their  honesty  and  sincerity
were  recognised  by  the  drcumstance  of  their  being
appointed,  after  the  battle  of  Leuctia,  to  arbitiaie
between  the  Thebani  and  Lacedaemonians.  (Pit-
lyb.  ii.  39.)  Demetrint,  Casaander  and  Antigonne
Oonatai  placed  gorrisona  in  some  of  their  towna,
and  in  others  tyrants  rose  supported  by  MacedaniaQ
influence.  The  towns  were  thus  t«n  Anm  ona
another,  and  the  whole  confederacy  destroyed.

2.  7?ie  later pariod.  —  When  Antigonus  m  B.  c
281  made  the  nnsnccesafal  attempt  to  deprive
Ptolemaens  Ceraunus  of  the  Macedonian  thnnc,
the  Achaeans  availed  themselTca  of  the  opportunity
of  shaking  off  the  Macedonian  yoke,  and  renewing
thcirancient  confedera^on.  The  grand  object  hoiF-
cvcr  now  was  no  longtr  a  common  worship,  hot  &
real  political  union  among  the  confedentei;  Tha
towns  which  tint  shook  off  the  yoke  of  the  op-
preoors,  were  Byrne  and  Palise,  and  the  nllianca
concluded  between  them  was  speedily  joined  by  tha
towns  of  Tritaea  and  Pharac.  <Poljb.iL  41.)  One
town  after  another  now  expelled  the  Macedoniaa
ganiaona  and  tyiantt ;  and  when,  in  S.  c  277,
A^um,  the  head  of  die  earlier  league,  fblloweil
the  eiample  of  the  other  towns,  the  ftmndation  of
the  new  confederacy  was  laid,  and  the  mun  prin-.
ciplea  of  its  conatitotion  were  settled,  though  after.
wards  many  chongea  and  modifications  were  intra-
duccd.  The  fundamental  laws  wen,  that  henee~
forth  the  confbdeiacy  ahotdd  fonn  ono  inaqiatsbla
slate,  that  each  town,  which  ehotdd  join  it,  ihonlil
have  equal  rights  with  the  others,  and  that  all,
members,  in  regard  to  foreiga  conntrioi,  should  ba


ACHAICUM  FOEDUB.
isniilcd  ai  d«CDdcnt,tilid  boond  to  obej  id  CTCiy
rapRt  th*  ftdei»l  goTemmmt,  and  thue  ofliccn
wko  were  cntnutfll  with  tbe  ereoiliTe.  (PiJjb.
iL  17,  Ac)  No  lowD  thasfora  wu  aJlowcd  to
mat  wiih  mnj  tforof^  power  wHhimt  tho  EancUorx
rf  the  othai.  AcEiam,  for  KliRinu  louoni,  wu
n  bit  Bppnnled  Ue  central  point  at  the  league,
BidRtBued  ihii  dutiDctiaa  until  the  tinuotPlu-
bnonBai,  vbo  tmied  a  decree  that  the  meelingi
Dwhl  be  beld  in  my  of  the  town*  oC  the  can-
Mener.  (lir.  ixxriii.  30.)  Aiginm  therefine
vai  tlic  «eat  of  the  goronment,  snd  it  w>i  there
thitlbe  eiCiiauDf  thBTBiinutowDimetalregiilu
and  (tatal  tiDH,  lo  delibente  upon  the  common
t^ia  of  the  league,  and  if  it  wu  thought  necea-
orr,  BpoD  tkdM  of  aejiaiate  towns,  and  CTsa  npon
adiridinli,  aod  to  deet  the  oSeen  of  the  leagoe.
After  baring  tboi  ettabliahfd  ■  (am  imiaa  among
thfitlTii,  they  nlooaly  exerted  themKlvea  in
ddiFaing  other  towna  alao  from  their  tjiante  and
op|ii  aiw  I.  The  leajne,  howeTtr,  acqsiied  ita
cnal  anvinth  in  B.  C  2£1,  when  Antua  united
itire  place,  with  it,  ood


farm  of  Pdopcnnetat  to  join  the  mnfederBcy,  and
Una  HegiOoiKJi*,  Argoa,  Hecmione,  Phlioi,  and
■than  were  added  to  rL  In  a  ahort  peiiod  the
hsgae  icaebcd  the  height  of  iti  power,  for  it  em-
WmhI  Atbem,  Megan,  Aeeina,  SaUmia,  and  the
«bik  of  Pelopiionesna,  wilh  the  eiceptiou  of
Syana,  Elia,  T^ea,  Oidlameioa,  and  Hantineia.
Orcese  aetncd  lo  rerire,  and  promited  to  1>«ome
iWTuBBM  and  DHR  united  than  erer,  hut  it  kuq
waa  dear  tbat  ita  bah  power  waa  only  employed
■  •rif-dcatraction  and  annihilation.  Bnt  it  would
be  tengn  to  the  object  of  thia  woik  to  eater  fur-
ther into  the  hatory  of  the  omfcdeiacy :  we  muit
canfine  ounetrea  to  an  onlline  of  itt  conatiCotinn,
ai  it  cxialed  at  the  time  of  ita  higheit  prnaperity.

Poljbiu  (iL  38)  remaika  that  there  waa  no
Mber  edantitotion  in  the  wcsld,  in  which  all  the
■f»bti».  of  the  eommnnity  had  mch  a  perfect
einaGly  of  righti,  and  ao  ranch  liberty,  and,  in
■iioct,  wbicb  TO  •»  perfectly  democratical  and  lo
£t«  ban  an  aelGih  and  eiclnaiTe  r^nlationa,  aa
The  Achaean  league  ;  for  all  memben  had  equal
nabta,  wltethef  they  had  hdonged  to  it  fr^  many
Teaea,  or  wbethv  they  had  only  joat  joined  it,  and
wbeaber  tfai7  wen  laige  «  amall  towna.  The
"— TT™*  aboa  of  the  confederate  towni  were  legu-
bad  at  gentfal  meetingi  attended  by  the  d  *
tf  afl  tbe  towna,  and  held  regnlar^y  twice
yeai,  in  the  qiring  and  in  the  autumn.
meetisfta  which  la^ed  three  daya,
^trrre  vf  Ziaa  Hooiagytiaa  m  the  Qc  „
AooBMi,  and  ncai  a  nnctoarv  of  DeineCci  Panachaea.
(PoItK  iL54,iT.37,T.I,'iTii.Si  U
xxxniLK;  Stnh. Tiii.  (l  385 ;  Paua.TiLSt.)  In
ca^B  of  UTgmt  neccaatty,  howerer,  eitiurdinary

ia  any  oOib  of  the  cmfederata  plae<a.  (Lir.  zuL
S5  ;  Polyb.  nr.  I,  nix.  8  ;  Plat  AraL  41.)
Cnrr  fitixen,  both  rich  and  poor,  who  had  at-
aiaed  tbe  ag«  of  thirty,  might  attend  the  auem-
Uiia,  apeak  and  pnqwae  any  meaanre,  to  which
iVy  mat  inrited  by  a  pablic  hetald.  (Polyh.
TTJr  9  ;  Ut.  iiiiL  20.)  Under  iheae  circum-
eiBCKa  tbe  aHEmhliea  were  loiaetunea  of  the  moit
laiMillamia  kind,  and  a  wiac


ACHAICUM  FOEDUa  »

light  find  it  diffienll  to  gain  a  hearing  among  ths
rowda  of  ignorant  and  fodiih  people.  (Polyh.
xxriiL  4.)  It  ia,  howe»er,  natural  to  luppoae  Oiat
the  ordinary  meeting!,  unlcaa  matten  of  apodal
ipOTtanca  were  to  be  diacuaaed,  were  attended
chiefly  by  tbe  wealthier  claaaea,  who  had  the  meaaa
of  Faying  the  eipenaei  of  their  jotnncy,  fiir  great
numbcn  liTed  at  a  conaiderahla  diataztce  fnm  tbe
place  of  meeting.

'"-e  anbjecta  which  were  to  be  brought  before
laemhly  were  prepared  by  a  conncjl  ^mkii),
L  aeema  to  have  been  pemuDenL  (Polyb.
7,  iiTiiL  3,  nit  9  J  Pint  Arvi.  68.)  The
pal  auhjecla  on  which  the  great  aaembly  had
cide  worn  —  peace  and  war  (Polyb.  it.  IB,
&c) ;  the  reception  of  new  towna  into  the  con-
federacy (Polyb.  XXT.  1}  ;  the  election  of  the  nu.
■  -  lea  of  the  confederacy  (Polyb.  it.  37.  82  j
Arat,  41) }  the  pnnithinent  of  crimes  com-
i  by  theae  magiitntea,  though  aometimea
1  jndgea  were  appointed  foi  that  purpoae,  aa
well  aa  the  honoura  or  diatinctiona  to  be  conferred
L|ionthenL  (Polyb.iT.  14,  viiL  14,  il.  £.  8;  Pauh
'lL  9.)  The  amhaaBodfin  of  fiTeign  nations  had
to  appear  bafbie  the  uaemhly,  and  to  d^rer  the
meaiagei  of  theic  itotea,  which  were  then  diacuaaed
by  the  awenihled  Achaeana.  (Polyb.  iv.  7,  iiiii.
"  ■  .,  nriiL  7 1  Lit.  xnii,  9.)  The  aasembly
iae  had  it  in  ita  power  to  decree,  aa  to  whe-
ther n^tintiona  were  to  be  carried  on  with  any
n  power  or  not,  and  no  aingle  town  waa  al-


merely  local


a  fore  _
m  reaponiibility  cTBn  on  matten  o
iportnnce,  although  olherwiae  ererj  ^
managed  iti  own  internal  uSun  al  ita  own  dis-
cretion, 10  long  a>  it  did  not  interfere  with  the
intereita  of  the  lengne.  No  town  further  was  al-
lowed to  accept  pmenta  from  a  foreign  power.
(Polyb.  xiiii.  8  :  Paua.  Til  9.)  The  yotea  in  the
aasembly  ireie  given  according  lo  towna,  each  hsT-
ing  one  vote,  whether  the  town  wai  laiga  or  amall.
(Liy.  niiL  22,  &t)

The  principal  officers  of  the  confedemcy  were :
I.  at  fint  two  Btrategi  (rrfwrinoOi  but  after  the
year  b.  c.  256,  there  wai  only  one  (Strab.  viii.
p.  385),  who  in  conjunaion  with  an  hipparchua
(Irrapx")  OP  commander  of  the  ravalry  (Poljb.
T.  9S,  jxTiiL  6)  and  an  nnder-strategni  (iioirTpa.
TTD^i,  Polyb.  It,  89)  commanded  the  anny  fur-
niahed  by  ^e  confederacy,  and  was  entmated  wilh
the  whole  condiut  of  war ;  2.  a  public  secretsiy
(ypofifuiTtut},  and  3.  ten  demiurgi  (iijttiitvpyvlf
Sttab.  L  c  ;  LiT.  nxii.  23,  xiiyiiL  30 ;  Polyb.  t.
1,  niii.  10,  who  calls  the  demiurgi  Spx""")-
Theae  officers  acem  to  haTo  presided  in  the  great
aaaembly,  where  they  probably  formed  the  body  of
men  which  Polybina  (nniiL  6)  calls  the  yipavirla;
the  demiuni  or  the  tttat^ns  might  cunvcne  the
Bsaembly,  though  the  Utter  only  when  the  people
were  convened  in  arms  and  for  military  pnrpoeea.
(Polyb,  iT,  7;  LiT.  HIT.  26.)  All  the  officen  of
the  lesgne  were  elected  in  the  assembly  held  in
tbe  firing,  at  ^le  riung  of  the  Pleiades  (Polyb.  iL
43,  It.  6.  37,  v.  1),  and  l^ly  they  were  iuTeated
with  their  iCTeial  ofEcea  cmly  for  one  year,  thongh
it  frequently  happened  that  men  of  gr^  merit  and
distinction  were  re.«lected  for  several  aacceauTa
years.  (Pint  ^rs/.  24.  30,  Cisoni.  15.)  ICcoieof
the  officers  died  dating  the  period  of  his  office,  hia
place  wai  filled  by  hia  predecestor,  until  the  tima
for  the  new  electioniairiTed.  (Polyb.  d.X) Tba


cIdu  imiDi]  eiUtiiig  among  the  confedoBte  towni
■wag,  socordinn  to  Poljbim  (ii.  37),  ttrengthjiicd
by  tboir  tuiDpting  common  Tcighti,  meoaDics,  tmd

Bat  the  peipetDB]  diicord  of  tbe  membcn  of  the
league,  the  hoitiJity  of  Sparta,  the  inlrigues  of  the
RomBni,  and  the  foil;  ajid  ttuhoeH  of  the  later
(tiati^  brought  aboat  not  onl;  the  deitraclioo  and
dinolutioD  of  the  confederac;,  but  of  the  fi«dom
of  al[  Oreece,  which  with  the  fell  of  Corinth,  in
B.  c  146,  becanw  a  Roman  proTinco  nnder  the
DBOie  of  Achaia.  (Comf.  Scboro,  OeacLOriecien-
landi  «■>  dar  Ent^daag  da  AeloL  v,  Aciliitei.
Baada,  eipecially  pp.  49,  &c  60,  Sec. ;  A.  Matlhiae,
Verwitckle  Sdriflen,  p.  239,  Ac  ;  Dnmiann,  Idem
iiH-  CwA  da  Vafjla  da-  Grach.  Soorm,  p.  Ml ;
Tittmann,  Crisei.  SftHrtrewjfejj.  p.  673,&c,  ;K.F.
Hermann,  Cruet.  Stai^s^UrOi.  %  185.) [L.  S.]

ACHANE  CAk<J^),  a  Penian  and  Boeotian
meanire,  equiialent  to  iS  At^c  medinmi.  (Arii-
toL  c^  SdaL  ad  AriHaph.  Adum.  lOB,  109 ;  Said,
a  p.)  Accordijig  to  He»jehiu»  a  Boeotian  ix"*"!
wa«  equal  to  one  Attic  medimnua.  [P.  S.]

A'ClEa [Eiaacrrua]

ACI'NACES  {iKirixTiS),  a  Penian  iword,
whence  Honco  (Cam.  L  S7.  5)  Iprakg  of  the
Mtdat  aeaaca.  It  wag  a  ihort  and  gQaight  wcs-
pon,  and  thus  diiTeied  from  the  Roman  lica,  which
wa«  carved.  (Pollui,  L  138 ;  Joseph.  AaL  Jad.
«.  7.  §  10.  [Sioi.]  It  wa.  worn  00  the  right
■ide  of  the  bod;  (iniignii  adiaa  diiim,  VaL  Place.
Ar^on,  ri.  701),  whcreai  the  Greeks  and  Romana
uiuallybad  their  iworde  augpenilcd  an  the  left  tide.

The  form  of  the  acinstce,  with  the  method  of
aiing  it,  ii  illuitraled  by  the  fullowing  Penepolitan
figures.  In  all  the  ba«-reliefi  found  at  Pereepolii,
the  acicacea  ia  innriahly  atrsight,  and  ii  com-
monly auapended  otcc  Ibe  right  thigh,  never  orer
lhelefi,bnlH)metim«in&aDtofthebady. The


A  golden  adnacet  wai  fiwjumdy  worn  by  the
Fenian  nobility,  and  it  waa  oftim  giren  to  indi-
vidual! by  the  kinga  of  Peraiaai  a  mark  of  honour.
(Herod.  Tiil  120 ;  Xen.  Aaat.  i  a  §  27,  B.  g  29.)

The  acinace*  waa  aln  nacd  by  Iha  CaapiL
(Herod.  Yii.  67.)  It  waa  an  object  of  nligioua
wonhip  among  the  Scythiau  and  many  of  the
northein  nationa  of  Enrope.  (Hemd.  it.  62  ;  Comp.
M^  iL  1  j  Amm.  Man:.  mL  2.) [J.  Y.]


ACROTERIOM.
Ari'SCDLCS. [Aaoi.]
ACLIS. [Habta.]

ACNA  orACNUA  (also  apelt  <^in  and  ^nu)
wag,  aecording  to  Varro,  the  Italian  name,  and
according  to  Cotumells,  the  common  Boctican  nama
of  the  actUB  quadratna.  [Actus.)  An  old  writer,
quoted  by  Salmaaina,  aaya  ^ognna  habet  pedet
xiiit  cccc,"i:e.  U,  400  Bquara  feet.  The  name  ig
olmoat  certainly  connected  with  the  Greek  Kirajvo,
though  the  meomre  ii  different.  (Vam,  A.  A.
L  10.  $2  1  Colura.  A.  n.  y.  2.  9  5 ;  Schneider,
Chnmesl.  ad  IL  a!. ;  Salmoaiua,  ad  SoIhl  p.
481.)  [P.  S.]

ACO'NTION  (iuiirriBf).  [HiST*.]
ACRATISMA  (ij,piri„^).  [Comna.]
ACROA'MA  (ixpiofxa),  any  thing  heard,  and
eipeeially  any  thing  heard  with  pleaanre,  signified
a  play  or  muaieal  piece ;  hence  a  concert  of  plnyera
on  di£crent  moiical  inatnimenta,  and  alio  on  inter-
lude, Qltled  embolia  by  Cicero  (pro  Ssct.  54),  which
was  performed  during  the  cihibilion  of  the  public
games.  The  word  ia  also  applied  to  the  acloia  and
muiiclani  who  were  emploved  to  amuse  gueata
during  an  entertainment  (Cic  r<^.  iv.  22  ;  pn.
Arch.  9  i  SueL  Odam.  74  ;  Macroh.  SK.  iL  4) ;  and


[An*


.".]


ACROLITHI  (iji|iAia<ii)t'tataea,  of  which  the
eitremitiea  (face,  feet,  and  bauds,  or  loea  and
fingcra)  only  were  of  marble,  and  the  remaining
port  of  ihe  body  of  wood  either  gilt,  or,  what  seema
to  haye  been  more  nanal,  covered  with  drapery.  The
word  occurs  only  in  the  Greek  Anthology  (Brunck,
Amd.  Tol.  iii  p.  1£5,  No.  20  ;  Anlk  PaL  lil
40),  and  in  Vitruviua  (iL  &  g  11);  bat  statnea  of
the  kind  are  frequently  mentioned  by  Pausaniaa
<iL  4.  %  1,  xl  25.  %  4,  viL  21.  gg  4  or  10,  riL  23.
g  S,  yiiL  25.  3  4  or  6,  TiiL  31.  S  1  or  2,  and  g  3
or  6,  ii.  4.  g  1.)  It  IB  s  migtske  to  anppoM  that
all  the  alolnes  of  Ihii  kind  belonged  to  an  esriier
period.  They  eondnued  to  be  made  at  least  down
to  the  time  of  Praiileles.  (Comp.  Jscoba,  Om-
mal.  »  Ai&.  Grate.,  yol.  iii.  PL  1.  p.  298  ;  and
Winckelmann,  Gtahidat  dtr  Kioul,  B.  i.  c  2.
813.)  [P.S.]

ACRO'POLIS  (iiipira\i!).  In  almoet  all
Qreek  citica,  which  were  usually  built  npon  a  bill,
rock,  or  aome  natuni  elevation,  then  wag  a  kind  of
tower,  a  cattle,  or  a  citadel,  built  upon  the  highcie
pert  of  Ihe  rock  or  hill,  to  which  the  name  of
acntpola  was  given.  Thus  we  read  of  an  acropolis
at  Athena,  Corinth,  Argoa,  Mesaene,  and  numy
other  placea.  The  Capitolium  at  Rome  answered
the  samo  purpoee  as  the  Acropolis  in  the  Greek
cltiei ;  and  of  the  tame  kind  were  the  lower  of
Agathocles  at  Ulica  (App.  Pm.  14),  and  that  of
Antonia  at  Jenuatem.  (Joseph.  B.  J.  t.  g  8,
Art.  Apmtii.  ixl  S4.)  At  Athena,  the  Acropolis
served  as  the  treasury,  and  aa  the  names  of  nil
public  debtor*  were  registered  there,  the  cipressian
of  "  regiatered  upon  the  Acropolis "  (iyyrypat^
fUvat  iv  'KKpowi\fi}  always  means  a  public  debtor
(if  inftiiiXn  ff/pafifUrtii,  Dem.  c  Itaocr.  p.
1337.24;  BiKkh.^aU.  Earn.  <jf  Aliau,  p.  38«,
2nd  edit.).

ACROSTO'LIUM  (i*pwT<lAH»). [Nivis.]

ACROTE'RIUM  (inpuffV"")  ngnifica  an  ex-
tremity of  any  thing. It  ii  generally  used  in  tha

1.  In  Architectura  it  gccmi  to  have  been  jo^^
origiuiUy  m  the  nine  scaic  as  the  Latinyiisft^'an,


ACTA.
J,  fa  tlw  •lopng  not  of  ■  IraildiBg,  *nd  more
■hilj  ior  (he  anuDCDld  front  or  gable  ornich
,  OmX  i^dn  ftdi^mt. (Plot  Oaa.  63,  aaa-
4  «ittaCic7>iU^  iL  43,uid  SocL  Gh.  81.)

enU]  figure!. Th«e

ji  tbU  life  orer  iHe  oater

t.  OKfularia)  ituToId  be  ai  high  u  the

■pec  of  ika  tyvfaiiiim,  and  tlM  01


ACTA.  J

Forvmli;  v.  §  1 13.)  Thej  were  talten  bj  clerk*
(ai  aeiia  firi},  whose  tidei  Bod  duties  occur  in
hjdoM  (de  Magi^.  ii.  20,  &c)  and  the  tJMilia


Ht  aagle  eac  rigbth  net  higher. (Vitrur.  iil  3,

,...-. .  Scnoeidcr,) Some  writeri  in-

a  u  veil  u  the  hua


J.  ^  1  12,  ed.  SchD


ndtr  (he  auBe  ;  hot  the  oolj  Biilhorit;  fv  thi
wma  b>  be  aa  emt  of  Sahmuui.  (/■  AeL  Spart.
rttarm.  X^  12.)  2.  The  exlTcmilie*  of  the  prow
if  A  Ttf^aet,  vhicfa  *frr«  uioiallf  tahen  from  a  con-
|iBvd  null  ■■  a  maA  of  Tictoiy ;  the  act  of  doing
B  na  ailed  i>pvn|f>«(C«r.  (Xen.  HiO.  iL  S.  %  H,
Fi.2.  336:  HanLiil59,TiiLI21.)  3.  The  ei-
Trwiitin  nf  i  ititnr,  irinffi,  fri-t.  hnnili,  ftr  (Dem.
LTlnKT.  p.7Mi  Ath«i.T.p.l99,c)  [P.  3.]


ef  U*  (Ace

prenl  ar  rqection.  (SncL  Caa.  19,  23  j  Cic
^■M.  L  T,  &e.)  After  the  death  of  Juliiu  Caeaar
iW  triniBTiEa  swore,  and  compelled  all  tho  other

hiiarta  (nai*ijamr*,enapkTiic.  Aim.i  12;  Suet
7%  ST)  ;  and  hence  it  became  the  ciutam  on  the

avear  ta  ^M«nre  and  reapect  all  the  acta  of  hia
pn^Kcuon  from  Juiina  Caeaar  downwardi,  with
the  rxfcptioa  of  thcae  who  had  been  branded  with
tmhaij  afic  death,  iDeh  oa  Nero  and  Domitian.
Evcrr  j^ir  all  the  mafcialralea  Dpoii  etiteting  npon
(hrir  ofEa  m  the  lit  ^  Jauoarj  iwnre  approi^  of
the  acU  of  the  rc^iog  cnpemr ;  thia  oath  waa  oti-
finallj  taken  bir  one  mi^crate  in  each  dnonment
K  behalf  at  hi*  nllagiu*,  but  aobaequeDtlj  it  wai
the  aanal  faactice  for  faeh  magietnUe  to  take  (he
Mh  penaaUy.  (Dion  Caaa.  ilvii  IB,  liii.  28 ;
Tat  JUL  ztL  22,  with  the  Excnima  of  liipaiut ;
Dion  Cam.  IriiL  17,  li.  25.)

S,  Acta  Fokwssul  were  of  two  kiodi :  Snt,
tbata  nlatin^  to  the  goienunent,  at  l^tea,  jie-
U«na,  edicta,  ibe  nunc*  of  all  the  magiitratea,  &c.,
wUek  lixned  part  of  the  la6*liu  puilieae ;  and
trtmiij,  these  enuiected  with  the  Nmrta  of  law.
Tk  acta  of  the  lattei  kind  contained  an  account
t£  the  di&rent  aoita,  with  the  aigmnente  of  the
■liimlja  and  the  daciiiooa  of  the  coort  In  the
liae  of  tk  republic  tha  namca  of  those  who  were


nmdi  of  the  court  (ii
rHt^H,  (5c  ad  Fam.  viii.  8.  |.  3),  and  It  appean
fa*  the  qnitftioiu  of  Aaa«mu  from  theac  Acta,
ilaa  tbef  most  hare  contained  abilneta  of  the
■Cfocha  at  the  adnotea  aa  earij  aa  the  time  of
CwOdL  (/■  Saurian,  p.  19,  in  MOimait.  pp.  32,
M.  47,  ed.  OkUl)  Under  the  em^ure  tlu  pro-
ctedincaof  the  bightr  aorta  aeem  to  hare  been  si -
nji  |anaTed,aDd  tbeif  are  frsqoently  referred  to
a  the  Digeat  Hier  are  aometbaea  tailed  Qala  ;
aed  the;  conmoKed  ■'iih  the  namea  of  iho  coniuli
iir  ibc  jear,  and  the  daj  of  the  month.  (Amm.
Mac  TTii.  3  ;  Angan.  Acta  e.  /VnYiia.  Mamth,
«>  rw^  i.  16  ;  Csd.  Theod.  2.  tiL  29.  i.  3.)  Spe-
(i=<M<if  theaaActaanf' ■ -■ ■


3.  Acta  Mh-ftaua,  contained  an  sccount  af
the  dutiea,  numbcn,  and  eipencea  of  each  Iwioo
(Veget  ii.  19),  and  were  probably  prejerred  in
the  military  tnaaory  fbonded  by  Augoatna  (SueL
Avg.  is  ;  Tac  Am.  i  78  ;  Dion  Caai.  It.  3jl)
The  Mildien,  who  drew  up  these  acta,  aie  fte-
quently  men^ooed  in  inacriptioni  and  aociait  wr!-
ten  under  faiioui  tittet,  u,  ISirarnt  Uguma  ;  ae-


L.  Acra  Sbnaths,  ailed  alio  CouuarTAHn
BiNaTDB  (Tac.  AtBi.  it.  Ti)  and  Acta  Vt.-n.vit
{Aim.  1.  4),  contiuned  an  account  of  the  Taiioua
matter)  broiight  before  the  lenate,  the  opinioni  of
the  chief  Bpeakera,  and  Che  decision  of  the  hmiab
It  has  been  uiuaLy  inferred  fivm  a  poavge  of
Soetonini  (^  Initfl  honore  primus  omnium  instituit,
ut  tam  senatua  quam  populi  djunia  acta  confioeren-
lur  et  pablicarentur,"  Caa.  20),  that  the  pro-
ceeding! of  the  senate  were  not  published  till  tha
Srit  conaulihip  of  Julini  Caesar,  s.  c  59  ;  but  Ihia
wu  not  ttricUy  the  ease  \  lot  not  only  had  the  de-
crees of  the  aenato  been  written  down  and  pub-
lished long  previously,  but  the  debates  on  the
Calilinarian  coupiracj  had  been  widely  circulated
by  Cicero  (p.  SidL  H,  15.)  All  that  Suetanin*
means  to  aay  ia,  that  the  [vnceeding)  of  the  senate,
which  bad  been  only  occsaionally  published  befora
and  by  private  indiriduals,  wore  for  the  first  time,
by  the  command  of  Caeaar,  published  reguIaHy
erery  day  (ssmftffarfa  diunv)  under  the  authori^
ofgoTerrmientaspaTtofthedailygnEettc.  Angustni
forbade  the  pabbcalion  of  the  proceedings  of  the
senate,  but  they  still  continued  to  be  pnserred,
and  one  of  the  Eiost  diitinguished  eenatora,  who  re-
eeired  the  title  ab  aetii  atnnju,  was  chosen  by  tha
emperw  to  compile  the  account  {Tac.  Amu.  t.  4  j
Spart  Hadr.  3;  Orelli,  Inicr.  No.  2274,  3166.)
The  persons  entrusted  with  this  ofGce  must  not  be
confonnded  with  tha  laiiotia  clctks  (acbarii,  asm'
paUid,  teniae,  eauaaia),  who  were  preaeat  in  the
senate  to  take  uMea  of  it*  prooeedingi,  and  who
w«e  only  excluded  when  the  senate  peaaed  a
KnaiwtconniUvni  tudium^  that  is,  when  they  de-
liberated on  a  subject  of  the  greatest  importance,
reapocting  which  secresy  was  necessary  or  adxisa-
Wb.  (Capit  Oont  12.)  It  wa*  doubtleai  from
note*  and  mpen  of  theaa  clerks  that  the  Acta  were
compiled  by  the  senator,  who  was  entrusted  with
this  (.tSce^  The  Acta  were  deposited  in  some  of
the  record  oflicea  in  particular  departments  of  the
public  libmrics,  to  which  access  conld  only  be  ob-
tained by  the  expieis  permission  of  the  piaefeclus
orbL  They  were  consulted  and  an  frequently  re-
fetied  to  1^  the  laUr  historians  (Voplst  Prob.  2 ;
Lamprid.  Saner.  56;  Capitol.  OpO.  Maer.  6),  and
many  extracts  from  them  were  published  in  the
Acta  Diuma.  Tacitus  and  Suetonius  neier  refer
to  the  Acta  Senatui  aa  aothoriiies,  but  eoJy  to  the
Ada  Diuma.

5.  Acta  DnnHA,  a  gazette  published  daily  at
Rome  by  the  anthori^  of  the  gorcmment  durirut
the  later  timea  of  the  republic,  and  under  de  el
pire.


papers  (Tac  .4m..  ill
addition  to  the  title  A
refened  to  under  the  n


3,  xliL  31,  xn.  22.)  In
•a  Ditiraa,  we  find  them
net  of  i>t'unu.  Acta  PJi-


8  ACTA.

liea,Acla  ITriiBia,  Ada  JUnm  UriaiiaTiim,  Jela
Pojvdi,  and  thej  are  freqnoitly  callad  liniplT
Ada.  Tfa«  Oreclc  writers  on  Ri^oan  Ustorr  csll
them  rJt  iwotw^^tarn^  t&  iv^trai  ^ofuf^/iara,
ri  Sq/xJo'ia  ypdfiftMTa  and  t^  kooA  ivofir^fiora
The  nature  of  their  cemlenta  will  be  befl  leen  fror
the  foUoviag  pauage  of  Pebmiiu  (c  53)  whei


ig  pa*«aB«  .01  .


n  bjtl


Trimalchio;  — "  Actoaritu — tamqc
re^taiit:  riL  KaL  Scitilii  in  piaedio  CnmBaa,  quod,
tit  Trimalchiaoia,  nati  Bunt  pneii  xxx.,  puelke
^L.  i  gablata  in  harreuiD  ex  area  tritici  tnilna  me-
dium qningenta ;  bovet  domiti  qniagsiitL  Eodeni
die  Mithridit*«  eeiTTu  in  crucem  actu  Mt,  quia
Gaii  nmlii  genio  malediiecBt.  Endem  die  in  aicsm
rdatum  at,  qnod  collocaii  Don  potuit,  KileitiDni
centiea.  Eodem  ^e  incendiiua  (actum  cat  in  hortii
n  ex  a^dibni  Naitoe  TillicL  Jam
a  aedilinm  reciCahantur,  et  vltaariantm
teitamenlH,  qnibna  Tiimalchio  cum  elogio  exhu^
nMlabalnr  ;  jam  nomina  villicorum  et  repudiala  a
drcnmiEoro  liberta  inhalnealoriiciHitDberniodepre-
henia  ;  alriecils  Baiu  lekgatua  ;  jam  reui  fectui
dtipeiualor;  et  judicimn  inter  cvbicularioi  actum."
From  thii  |iiuBiigt,BDd  Iram  the  muneroua'pawagei
in  oocient  writen,  in  which  the  Acta  Diuma  are
quotfHl  (referenca  tc  vhich  an  giren  in  the  vorht
of  L«  Cleie  and  LibetkUhn  cited  below),  it  would  ap-
pear thai  thej  uiually  contaiaed  the  &illowinR  mat-
teta;  —  1.  The  nombei  of  birtha  and  deatha  m  the
city,  BO  aecoaDt  of  tlia  money  pud  into  tlie  tttaiurj
from  tho  provincea,  and  cTety  thing  relating  to  the
aupply  of  com,  Theae  particnlars  would  bo  ex-
ttncled  from  the  tabulae  publicae.  By  an  ancient
lEgulation,  aanibed  lo  SEnliu  Tullina  (Dionjl.  ir.
lA),aU  birtbi  were  regiitered  in  the  temple  of
Vf  niu,  and  all  deatha  in  that  of  Libitina ;  and  wc
know  that  thlt  practiee  wai  continued  under  the
empire,  only  that  at  a  later  time  the  temple  of
Salam  waa  auhttitutad  ioc  that  of  Venua  for  the
regiittation  of  birtha.  (JuL  Cap.  M,  AanL  B.)
2.  EitcBcti  iiom  ths  Acta  Forenna,  containina  the
edicts  of  magiattatca,  the  teatamenli  of  diatingnuhed
men,  reporti  of  trials,  with  the  namei  of  (hoia  who
were  acquitted  and  condemned,  and  likeviae  a  liit
of  the  magiaCmtcfl  who  were  elected.  3.  Exlnicta
from  the  acta  acnatua,  eapecially  all  tho  decreea  and
BccUmationni  [Acclauatio]  in  hcnonr  of  the
reigning  emperor,  i  A  court  circular,  containing
an  account  of  the  birtha,  deatha,  festiTaU,  and
moTemeuta  of  the  imperial  £unily. 5.  An  account


and  mtereaCing  occnrrences,  iueb  ai  prodigiei
miraclea,  the  erection  of  new  cdificea,  the  conlln-
Rtuion  of  buildingi,  funcmla,  aacrifices,  a  liat  ot
vthe  Tariooa  gamca,  and  especially  amatory  tales  and
adrantnrea,  with  the  namea  of  the  partiea.  (Comp.
Cic  ad  Fan.  iL  IS.)  Thn  fnigmenta  of  aome
Acta  Dinnia  ban  been  publiibed  by  Pighius  and
Dodwell,  but  their  genmneneaa  i>  too  doubtfiil  to
aJlow  na  to  make  u>«  of  them  as  authoritiea.

It  is  certain  that  these  acta  wera  pubtiihed
under  the  authority  of  the  government,  but  it  ia
not  itatod  tmdec  whoae  mpermtendance  they  were
drawn  up.  It  is  pr
daTolTedupon  the

of  the  tabulae  pubticae,  namely,  Iha  eer
the  republic  (Liv.  ir.  a,  liiiL  16),  and
the  quaeatora,  sometdmet  the  praelecti  at
theempink (Tac  Jm.xiiL  36.)  Bya


ACTIA.
of  Alexander  Sererua,  Kren  of  the  fourteen  n


Stv.  33.)  The  actual  taak  of  compiling  then  wu
committed  to  subordinata  officer!,  tailed  achtarii  or
ac^oni,  who  were  aasiated  by  various  clerics,  and
by  reporters  (nofivii),  who  took  down  in  tbort-hand
the  pn)c«ding)  in  tho  courts,  &c  After  tbe  acta
had  been  drawn  up,  they  were  exposed  for  a  lime
in  some  public  place  in  the  city,  where  person
could  md  them  and  take  copies  of  them.  Muiy
scribes,  whom  Cicero  spealca  of  under  the  name
of  Dpemrij,  made  it  tbeir  business  to  ci^y  them
or  make  eitracls  from  them  for  the  use  of  the
wealthy  in  Rome,  and  especially  in  the  proiriDcea,
where  they  were  eagerly  sought  after  and  aVsi-
sirely  read.  (Cic  ad  Fam.  viiL  1,  liiL  S ;  Tac
Ami.  zri.  22.)  After  the  acta  had  been  ex-
posed in  public  for  a  certain  time,  they  were  de-
posited, like  the  Acta  Senatuxr  in  soma  of  the  re-
cord officei,  or  the  public  lihiariea.

The  style  of  the  acta,  aa  appean  from  the  pai-
sagB  in  Pctroniiu,  waa  very  simple  and  concise.
They  contuned  a  bare  CTumieratiDn  of  beta  without

Ai  to  tbe  time  at  which  these  acta  were  lint
composed,  there  ia  a  considerable  variety  of  o[Mnion
among  modem  writera.  It  ia  maintained  tlut  tha
paaaage  of  Suetoniua  (,Caa.  20},  quoted  above,
does  not  imply  that  the  acta  wen  £rat  publiahcd
in  tlie  first  consulship  of  Julius  Caesar,  and  that
the  meaning  of  it  ia,  "  that  he  firtt  ordained  that
tha  acta  diuma  of  the  senate  should  be  compiled
and  published  just  aa  (ton  71111m)  those  of  the
people  hod  been."  But  although  tbii  inlopreta-
--—  ^a  probably  tha  correct  one,  atiD  there  ia  do
JB  in  the  ancient  writera  in  which  the  Ada
Diuma  are  decisively  mentioned,  preriooab)  Coesar'i
Brit  consulship ;  for  the  diariim  referred  to  by
Sempronin*  Asellio  (Oell.  v,  IB),  which  is  tnt-
qnently  brought  forward  as  a  proof  of  this  early  pub-
lication, li  the  jommal  of  a  pnvate  person.  There  is
likewise  no  evidence  to  lupport  an  opinion  adopted
by  many  modem  writers  that  the  publication  of
the  acta  first  commenced  in  b.  c.  1 33  to  supply  the
place  of  tho  Annales  Moiimi,  which  were  discon-
tinued in  that  year  {Cit  di  Orat.  iL  12),  while
on  tho  contrary  the  gresit  diScrcnce  of  their  con-
tents rendeta  it  improbable  that  such  was  tho  raae.
The  Acta  Diuma  condnued  in  use  to  the  downfiJl
if  the  weatcm  empire,  or  at  least  till  the  removal
if  the  scat  of  government  to  Conatandni^e,  bat
they  were  never  published  at  the  latter  air.

(Lipsius,  £icarnu  ad  Ihe,  Atai.  v.  4 ;  Emesti,
Smmu  ad  SaeL  J.  Caa.  20 ;  Schloaser,  Urbrr
die  QiteUen  der  wpiUent  latea.  GeKH^tidamber,
bioadvtSirr  Ziihmgai,  <tc.  in  ihe AtcUb/Hf G«-
soiuUc,  pp.  80^11)6;  Pnitie,  Ar  FooM^,  ?uo<  na
aaueniaidil  rttui  indt  a  Tlierio  uxpia  ad  nortens
JVeroini  tfegtU  tatdont  vdent  tecuH  videaithtr,
HaUe,  ikO  ;  ZeU,  Ueier  die  ZaOmgat  der  a^lAn.
Fribnrg,  1831 ;  bnt  the  two  best  irorke  oa  the
subject  are,  Lo  Oerc,  Da  Journaia  tiia  la  fta-
HHuu,  Paria,  1838,  and  Liebcrktihu,  De  Diantit
Romimonm  Atiit,  Weimar,  1810.)

A'CTIA  ("AxTia),  a  ieatival  of  Apollo,  ccle-
brated  at  NicopoUa  in  Epeirus,  with  wrcstlinfr.
musical  contests,  horse-racing,  and  sea  fights- 1 1

of  his  victory  over  Antony  off  Actium,  and  Hsa
probably  the revival  of  an  ancient  festival ; Ibr


ACTia

l&m  vai  s  odcUhtcd  tnople  of  ApoQa  at  Acthim,


ACTIO.


wU(b  ■  moitHwd  by  T^Dcrdido  (L  29),  md

"— ■- '  ii.  p.  325),  *nd  which  ma  enlarged  by

The  gasua  j ■ ■ ■

»)7^


B  gasua  iiMtiCnted  by

yefln  (rfirrarnjftli,
xived  iha  tiHe  of  a
i  Afso,  uid  wen  »1bi>  called  OlyTDpia.  (Stiab.
Lt.;  Kaa  Cm>.  1L  L;  Suet.  Aug.  16;  BSckh,
Ctrp.  Itmr.  Ha.  1720,11045;  Kraoie,  Olgmpia,

A'CnO  u  defined  by  Celnu  (I%U.  liL  7.
1.  51)  to  be  the  right  of  pammg  by  judicial  mcaiu


and  that  of  hit  fnenda :

ipied  by  hie  acribe  Cn.  Fbrina,  who  mada  it
pablic  r  and  thiu,  according  to  tha  itory,  iho  pie-
'  eimu  becamo  acquainled  with  ihoss  l^;al  finma
'bich  hitherto  had  been  the  ocliuiTe  pnpeity  (^
the  patrieiaiii. (Cic.  Dt  Oral.  L  41,  pro  Mimaa,

11;  Dig.  1.  tit  2.  i.  S.  g  7.)

Upon  the  old  legal  actioni  being  abdiihed,  it

camo  the  pmcCice  to  proaecute  nziti  accoidii^  to
eeitaiii  pieKribcd  fbrmi  or  foisnilae,  aa  they  wen
t«11ed, which  vill be  explained  after  we hare
noticed  TariaDidiriaioDiofactionaiUtheyBieinade .
by  the  Bomon  writeri.

The  diiiuon  of  odwitsf  in  the  Roman  lawia


Dt  of  a  thing,  (


The  ■■  ns  otfuwaa  called  mdicatio ,-  the  n  per-
m^  aitio  ma  nlled  in  Iha  later  law  crmdiciio,
btnue  afigioally  tlw  plaintiff  gare  the  defendant
naoce  M  i^peM  od  a  giToi  day  fa  the  purpoae  of
iliiiiiiH  a  judex. (Oaba,  h.  6.)

The  eld  acliooa  of  the  RomaD  laar  were  called
Itfii  arfiaw,  cr  I^^iaiM^  either  beeuiae  they  were
njnnly  prarided  lor  by  lawa  {Ugn),  or  beeaue
t^er  wscitiKtlT^aptad  tothawocdaofthelawa,
Id  Dot  be  varied.  In  like  manner,
eoDtaiDed  the  matter  or


conadersd  rather  aa  emanatSng  from  the
ichoala  of  the  rhetorieiang  than  from  any  other
tbifl  dirinon,  though  complicated,
rhat  limplified,  or  at  least  rendered
mora  intelligible,  if  wa  comider  that  an  aetion  ia  a
claim  or  demand  made  by  raie  peraon  agunit
■nothei,  and  that  in  order  to  be  a  nlid  legal  elahn
mnBt  be  founded  on  a  legal  riiht.  The  main
diriiioo  of  actioni  mnit  therebra  haTe  a  n&renco
diriiion  of  lights ;  fbr  in
erery  ayttem  of  law  the  form  of  the  action  mnet
be  the  expreuian  of  the  1<^  right  Now  the
general  diTiaion  of  rigbte  in  Bha  Koman  latr  ia  into
tight!  of  dommion  or  ownoihip,  which  an  righta
agajost  the  whole  world,  and  into  lighta  ariong
ftrmi  contract,  and  ijnaii  contract,  and  delict. The


tkeaUvrila  in  Eqdand


l>«alral&'

The  fire  modea  tit  [ncecdiiv  by  l^al  action  aa
BHBcd  and deacribed by Oania (it.  IS), were,
-  :,  Pa  i»dici<  poatulationem.  Per  con-
"  '  ijectioDeni,  Per  pigooria

o  grodiuilly  fell  into  dii-
X  of  the  eico«i?e  nicety  required,
■id  iba  SaHan  coueqiienc  on  the  alighteit  error
10  the  pleadinga  ;  of  which  there  a  a  notable  ex-
anpte  sinn  by  C^nu  himiclf  (ir.  1 1),  in  the  sue
(rf  ■  r^'"'i<r  who  cflmplained  of  hit  tinea  (eifn)
boBf  srt  down,  and  waa  tohl  that  hia  action  wai
bad,  inaaaiicb  aa  he  onghl  to  baTe  uicd  the  term
Deca  (urAonv)  and  not  Tzoei  i  became  the  law  of  the
Tweire  TaUea,  which  gare  him  the  action  for  damage
to  bia  liaci,  codlaiDed  only  the  general  cxpm
'■ma-  <art<n). The Lex  Aebntia  and
LcRTB  JoliM  aboiiahed  the  old  le^itiaaa  aeti
ucrpt  IB  tbo  ^ufl  of  dammiai  imfictum  [Dak.
nrmcTtnt],  and  in  matten  which  fell  under
'■■;""—"•  of  the  CencniDTiri. [CiNTcaviiu

la  the  lid  Raaaa  conatiUition,  the  knowledge
■f  the  law  wai  dooaJy  coimectad  with  the  iruti'
tatea  and  eercmofiial  of  relitiion,  and  wai  accotd-
ia|ly  in  the  hauda  of  the  patrkiaoa  alone,  whoaa
aid  their  di^iti  were  obliged  to  aak  in  all  their
k)^  duaiea.  Appini  Clandiiia  Caecna,  pahapi
^H  af  the  ealiieal  writeta  on  law,  drew  op  the

*  "  Brtb  qoidem  cmn  nt  fonnatom  ad  aimili-
iH'"*—  ngnlae  jnrii,  quia  bteritttsl  paocii  Tobii
i^mtttmBm  prefaentia  expouit  et  aiplanat,  aicut
nvida  jaria,RnqDaeertbl«riteTenaiiM.''  (BractoD,
£413.)


ant,  who  d


certain  right  againit  erery  paraon  who  Dkay  di^
pute  it,  and  the  object  and  end  of  the  action  are  to
comjKl  an  acknowledgment  of  the  right  by  the
partictilac  perton  who  diiputee  il:  By  thii  action
the  pluntiff  maintains  hit  property  in  or  to  a  thing,
or  hia  righta  to  a  benefit  from  a  thing  (tervittiiet\
Thua  the  aelia  n  ran  ia  cot  ao  called  on  account
of  the  rabject-matter  of  the  action,  but  the  term  ia  a
technical  pbraae  to  eipreu  an  action  which  ii  in  no
way  fonaded  on  contract,  and  therefore  haa  no  de-
tcrminata  individual  ai  the  othei  neceaaaiy  party
to  the  action  ;  bat  eiery  indiTidnal  who  dlaputei
the  right  become*,  by  luch  act  of  ditputing,  a  party
liable  to  Buch  action.  The  aeUo  m  rem  doca  not
aecertain  the  complainant'a  right,  and  from  the
nature  of  the  action  the  complainant'^  right  cannot
be  aacertained  by  it,  fbr  it  ia  a  right  againit  all  the
vi^d  ;  bnt  the  action  detetminca  that  uie  dofendant
haa  or  haa  not  a  clum  which  ia  valid  againit  the
)daintiS''t  claim.  The  atiio  w  fwrxmm  impliei  a
determinate  penon  oc  perwma  againat  whom  the
action  liea,  the  right  of  the  plaintiff  being  founded
on  the  acta  of  the  defendant  or  dafendanta :  it  ii^
therefore,  in  reaped  of  aomething  which  baa  been
a^eed  to  be  done,  or  ill  reapect  of  aome  injury  for
i^ich  the  plaintiff  claima  compcDBitioii.  Theodfo
Dturta  of  Juatinian'a  l^ialation  (Inat.  if.  tit  6,  >.  20)
wat  BO  called  from  iti  being  mppoaed  to  periake  i^
the  nature  of  the  iic<>d  n  rem  and  the  actio  In  ptr-
(OKom.  Such  wat  the  action  among  co-heira  oa  to
the  diiiuoD  of  the  inheritance,  and  the  action  fbr
the  purpoae  of  aettling  booiidariei  which  wera
confnaed.

Righta,  and  the  modea  of  enfndng  them,  maj
alio  be  Tiewed  with  rafereore  to  the  aourcea  from
which  they  flow.  Thua,  the  righta  of  Roman
citiieni  flowed  in  part  Irom  the  aoyereign  power,
in  put  from  thoae  to  whom  power  waa  delated.


10  ACTia

That  body  of  Uw  which  wu  fonndcd  on,  and  fl
from  the  edict!  of  the  pTseton,  snd  ciirule  mediles,
was  cAlled  jta  htmornrium^  ai  oppoBed  to  the  jmt
dviis,  in  ita  paxTVtia  iduCf  which  comprehended
tlie  ligu,  pUbtKila,  tamtiu  amnlla,  Ac  The  jut
innDrunui  mlndiiced  nev  ri^ht*  (ud  moiled
eiiidng  right!  ;  it  alio  prori^cd  rcmedie*  tuitable
td  !uch  new  right!  and  madificatJona  of  old  righu,
and  thia  wa!  effected  by  the  actiou  which  the
praeton  and  aedila  allowed.  On  thii  juriadiction
of  the  praeton  Bad  aadilei  ia  founded  the  diatinc-


they  are  Knaetimea  OLlled,  praetorioA,  from  the
greater  impottaoce  of  the  pneut'i  juriadiction.

iThere  were  aerertd  other  diTiaioni  of  actiona,  all
of  which  had  reterence  to  the  fairru  of  procedure.

A  diiition  of  action)  wu  aometime*  mode  with
reference  to  the  object  which  the  plaintiFF  had  in
Tiew.  If  the  ohject  waa  to  ohtain  a  thuig,  the
action  WB!  called  penecutoria.  If  the  chject  waa
ID  obtain  damaga  (poaia)  lac  u  injury,  u  in  the
caac  of  a  thinji  atolan,  the  action  waa  voandii  l  for
the  thmg  itaelf  could  be  claimed  both  fay  the  cib-
dioaiu)  and  the  eondidio.  If  th«  object  waa  to
obtain  both  the  thing  and  damagea,  it  waa  probably
•nmetimea  called  adio  nuto,  a  term  wbich  hud
howcTO'  soother  aignification  slao,  at  already  ob-

and  idi!£«mn!t  be  tiBced  hifltorically  to  theoetujiej
fictitiae  or  fictions  by  which  the  right!  of  action
were  enlarged  and  extended.  The  origm  of  Ifaia
divjgion  WB!  in  the  power  aatmned  by  the  praetor
to  arant  an  action  in  tpecial  cuca  where  no  action
andd  1<^lly  be  lironght,  and  in  which  an  action,  if
brought,  would  hflTe  been  moaia  or  inxtilii.  After
the  decline  of  the  praetor^a  power,  the  aetunea
Kliht  were  still  extended  by  the  contriiBnces  of  the
^wu  pmdenUt  and  the  reaeripts  of  the  cjnpciora.
arlio  utila wat  ({ranted,  it  was


,  '.  34),  he  who  obtained  the  tHntorum  ^
KMtio  by  the  praetor's  edict,  mcceedcd  to  the  de.
eeOBcd  by  the  ptaetorian  and  not  the  civil  hlw ;  he
had,  therefore,  no  direct  action  [dirada  acta)  in
respect  of  the  right!  of  the  deceoaed,  and  could  only
bring  his  action  on  the  fiction  of  hii  being  what  he

Actiona  wero  also  dindcd  into  otdinariia  and
extnardimifHie.  The  ordinanat  were  thoao  which
were  proaecuted  in  the  uaual  way,  tint  before  the
praetor,  in  jura,  and  then  hefbrc  the  judex,  in
jtdido.  When  the  whole  matter  waa  settled  be-
fore or  by  the  piaetor  in  a  summary  way,  the  name
titraimliitaria was applicable to auch aetioiL

The  term  omrfiedoiKj  only  applies  to  personal  ae-


»  called


n  the  I


t  apprsn  that  the  fnnnula  of  the
praetor  eipMsed  in  precise  and  strict  Icnns  the
matter  aabmitied  to  the  judex,  whose  authority
was  thus  confined  vitiiin  limits.  In  the  actiatitt
h/mat  fida,  or  a  fidt  bomi  (Cic.  Top.  17),  mors
latitude  waa  given,  either  by  the  formula  of  the
pntetor,  or  was  implied  in  the  kind  of  action,  snch
aa  the  action  si  impto,  vejulito,  locato,  jtc,  nnd  the
special  circamalances  of  the  cnac  were  to  be  taken
into  coiuideiatira]  b;  ths  judex. The  ortiowi


ACTIO.
aiUlraTiae  were  as  called  final  'the  judex  in  inch
oie  being  called  an  aibiler,  [lobably,  aa  Fealua
■aya,  becaoaa  the  whole  matter  in  dinmto  wsi
aubmitted  to  hia  judgment ;  and  he  could  decide
aeeording  to  the  justice  and  eqnity  of  the  case,
wjtbont  being  fettered  by  the  pnietor^  formula.
It  ihonld  be  obaerted  alio,  that  the  judex  property
could  only  condemn  in  a  sum  of  money ;  hut  the
arbiter  might  declare  that  any  particular  act  ahould
be  done  by  either  of  the  mniet,  which  waa  called
hia  ariilniim,  and  waa  followed  b;  lh»  omtrfa—ato

pomitt  had  reference  to  the  time  withm  which  an
action  might  be  brought,  alter  the  right  of  action
had  aocrued.  Onginallj  thoee  action!  which  wero
giren  by  a  &s,  lauOut  eaumltum,  or  an  imperial
constitution,  might  be  brought  without  any  limi-
tation OB  to  time  {  but  thoae  which  were  granted
by  the  pisetar'i  authori^  were  gmoaUy  limited
to  the  year  of  bit  office.  A  time  of  limitation  was,
however,  fixed  for  all  aetioni  by  the  lata  imperml

I'a  faitan  ia  properly  no  division  of  actiona,  but
has  merely  reference  to  the  nature  of  the  fbiinula.
In  the  formula  n  Joftmn  ooiHapta,  the  praetor
might  direct  the  judex  barely  to  inquire  aa  to  the
&ict  which  was  the  only  matter  in  iaaue  ;  and  aa

--  'a  the  au«  of  a  freedman  bnnging  an  action

nst hia patronna (Oaina,  iv,  46.) In  the

inla  us  ju  the  fact  was  not  in  iuue,  but  the

legal  consequences  of  the  fitct  were  nibmitted  to

the  discretion  of  the  judex. The  formula  la/uAnn

commenced  with  the  technical  expression,  .^i  paret,

,  '^If  it  should  appear,"  &e.;  the  formula  tajuv

imcticed.  Quod  J.  A.,  Ac,  "  Wheieos  A.  A  did

ind  10, " (Oaioa,  iv.  47.)

which ba4 for  their object  the


nn  claimed  a
1  therefore


nlledpi


The  ft


gmpecly  called  jadida  pabiiea  ;  and  the  latter,  aa
contrasted  with  them,  were  called  judtda  prmta^

a  actions  called  nonjei  aroae  when  afibia
iu  (a  son  in  the  power  of  hie  Either),  or  a

slave,  cnmmitled  a  theft,  or  did  any  injury  to
mother.  In  either  case  the  father  or  owner  might
pve  up  the  wrong-doer  to  the  pcmon  injured,  at
^Ise  he  must  pay  competent  damages.  These  nc-.
ion!,  it  appcnn,  take  their  name  cither  from  the
njury  committed,  or  because  the  wrong-doer  waa

liable  to  be  given  op  to  pnniahment  (inaae)  to  tho

peraon  injured.  Some  of  these  actions  were  of  le^iil
iiigin,  as  that  of  theft,  which  was  given  by  tho
Twelve  Table! ;  that  of  (Jammniitjwue,  which  wiu
pYcn  by  the  Aquilia  Lex  ;  and  tiiat  of  utni"''"*>»
i  ri  bonomm  rapfomm,  which  was  given  by  the
!dict,and  therefore  was  of  prsctnrian  origin.  This
ngmnce  will  scrte  to  show  that  the  Roman  diviiion
md  clasiificntion  of  actions  vaiicd  according  as.iho
ttoman  writers  contemplated  the  sources  r>f  rights
>f  action,  or  the  remediea  and  the  mods  of  ob-
aining  them.

An  action  was  commenced  by  the  plaintiff  aum-
noning  the  defendant  to  appear  bcftin  the  praetor
ir  olhef  nvigintrate  who  had  jmriidiaio ;  tht!  pro-

cesa  waa  c^ed  ia  jw  tooaCu ,-  and,  according  to


Acna

At  km  of  the  Twdre  TkUd,  ma  ia  rttrcl  >
Jnmiag  of  the  deCaidant  bdora  the  pnelor  if  be
n^ati  te  go  qaiedy. Thii  nide  piocecding  wu


L aDder  pain  of  a peDaltf.
' '  "' '  a  could  not  Iw  dngnd  froi

m  k«pt  hi»  ncHUA  (


The  object  of

nafce  tie defendant appear  befbre  the

It  jnriailietiiiii ;  the  device  of  entrain^  an


bBTCi^gHteditaeirtatbeRainiinkvjen.  (Dig.  3.
izL  4.)  If  the  defendant  mold  not  ^  qmet]^,
1^  fUaaS  oiled  «i  anj  bjatander  to  witnea)
i^Mntari)  ihtc  he  hid  been  duly  ninunaned,
uaAtA  tha  car  of  the  witneaa,  and  dngged  the
dpfaubst  inlD  nan.  (H<a.  Stna.  1 9.  76—78  ;
PLnma,  Cwai.  t.3.)  Tbe  artiea  might  aettle
thnr  di^le  m  ibejr  mj  tn  the  conn,  or  the  de-
feadaBi  might  be  bailed  bj  a  lindex.  (Cic  Tbp,
!;  (niaa,  it.  46;  OeUioa,  iii  10.)  The  Tiodez
Maat  DM  he  cmfDonded  with  the  Tadei.  This
emlmoit  of  diaputa  on  the  m;  ma  (ailed  Inau-
•Ait  III  tia,  and  aorea  to  ei^un  a  paMage  in  St
llalthew(t.23).>

Vhm  htSm  the  pnetor,  the  partiM  wen  aaid
JBt  a^vc The  ^u>tiff  then  prajed  for  an  ae-

~^  —''-'-'- V  allovcd  it  {dotot  adiowm},

'  «  he  intended  to  bring
lieh  wu  caUed  tder*
might  be  done  in  writinf.  or
«%,  ■-  hy  the  pblDtiff  Ukiiu  the
the  aflw.  and  ihinniig  him  which
tended  to  iel7  en.  (D%.  2.  til.  13.)  Aa  the
Jirm^n  coBpeheoded,  at  were  luppoaed  to  sm-
pihmt,  ercrj  paantale  fiinn  of  action  that  could
d  1^  B  plaintifi^  it  wiu  preanmed  that  he
I  aH  the  fumulae  some  one  which
hia  caae,  and  he  waa  accordingly
without  eicnae  if  he  did  not  talte
ct  tbe  proper  fnrmnla.  (Cie.  Pro  Aol
iim.  e.  B.)  If  he  look  tbe  wrong  one,  or  if  he
uKHied  mac  than  hia  dne,  he  tut  hia  caoae  (eatita
mHitt,  Ck.  DeOrA  lie)  i  bnt  the  praetor  ume-
TIM  pre  him  kaTe  to  amend  bii  claim  or  ntoifia.
(GaiH,  ir.  53,  Ac.) I^  fo


and  the  plaintiff  daimed  aomething
li^  hk  aetiaa :  thai  the  contract  might  be,  that
t^  dfdnidaat  nndertook  10  acU  the  plaintiff  a
4ua>iiij  of  ij^tad  or  a  ilaTc ;  if  the  plaintiff
tlanned  Tjima  pmple, «  a  particnlar  ilaic,  hU
ertiiD  waa  tad ;  thenfrae,  Bja  Gaina,  occoidjng
i>  the  ttnm  of  the  eontiact  lo  ought  the  claim  of
the  m^atlio  to  be.  Aa  the  fbtmnlae  were  ao  nimiH'-
•■I  and  canpchfoatTe,  the  plaintiff  had  onlj

Mhia

^cd  of  the  thing  daimed,  or  the  aubjr
tK  Kiit,  with  the  amoont  of  damagea,  &c^  01  the
aae  m^ht  be.  When  tlie  fnaeloi  had  grmnted  on
irriaa,  tbe  plaintiff  teqniied  the  defendant  to  giro


ACTIO.  II

aecuritr  for  hia  appearance  befote  the  piutw  (m
jan)  on  a  daj  nami^,  commonly  the  day  bat  one
after  die  wjih  Hwidw,  imleaa  the  matter  in  diqinte
was  leKled  at  mice.  The  defendanl,  on  finding  a
aurety,  waa  said  tada  dan  {Hat.  Sim.  i.  L  1 1 ),
Bodimmnm  pronititre,  cr  facen;  the  anrety,  vat,
waa  aoid  rpoadm;  the  plaintiiT  when  aattafied
with  the  lurely  waa  laid,  vadari  rmnt,  to  let  him
ffo  on  hia  aoretica,  or  to  have  ioretiea  &can  him*
When  the  defendant  promiaed  to  ^ipear  n  jicra  on
the  day  named,  witfaoat  giring  any  auiety,  thia  wM
called  vadimcmium  pamm.  In  loine  caaea  nca-
pemtom  were  named,  who,  in  cue  of  the  d«-

anm  of  money  named  in  tbe  vadiautmim.

If  the  defendant  appeared  on  the  day  appointed,
he  waa  aoid  ea^tmofiian  aatan  s  if  he  did  not  i^
pear,  he  waa  aoid  tadinumiHm  deKnUK,  and  the
praetor  gaie  lo  the  plaintiff  the  lioxonim  jxKitatio.
(Hot.  SenK.  L  9.  36—^1 ;  Cic.  Prv  P.  Qaatio,
c  6.)  Both  portiet,  on  the  day  appointed,  were
anmmoned  by  a  crier  (jroMo),  when  the  plainlilF
made  hia  daun  or  demand,  which  waa  Teiy  briefly
expreated,  and  may  be  coniidered  aa  cocreaponding
to  our  declaration  at  taw.

The  defendant  might  either  deny  the  plaintifTl
claim,  or  he  might  reply  to  it  by  a  pica,  ercrptio-
If  he  aimply  denied  the  plaintiffs  claim,  the  cauae
waa  at  iianc,  and  a  jndei:  might  be  demanded.
The  foima  ci  tha  svMjitn)  alaa  were  contained  in
the  ptaetu^  edict,  or  upon  bearing  the  GKta  the
pTsetoc  ai'apted  tbe  plea  to  the  oue.  The  ezcapfto
waa  the  defendants  defence,  and  waa  often  merely
an  equitable  anawei  ox  pics  to  the  plaintilTl  It^
dennmd.  The  plaintiff  might  claim  a  thing  upon
hia  contract  with  the  defendant,  and  the  defendant
might  not  deny  the  contract,  but  might  pat  in  a
plea  of  &aud  {dotta  mal»t\  or  that  he  had  been
cooatiaincd  to  come  to  auch  agreement.  The
ixapHo  waa  in  effect  aomething  which  negatired
the  plaintiff^a  demand,  and  it  waa  expieaaed  by  a
negatire  danie :  ihua,  if  the  defendant  aaaeited  that
the  plaintiff  fraudulently  claimed  a  aum  of  money
which  he  had  not  giien  to  the  defendant,  die  a-
eeptio  would  lan  thna  :  A'  n  aa  n  nikii  dola  maio
JiJi  AgOTi  JtiOian  n't  nspa  fat.  Though  the
eaioeptio  proceeded  from  the  defendant,  it  waa  ex-
preaaed  in  thit  fbnn,  in  order  to  be  adapted  for
ineertion  in  the  fbnnula,  and  to  render  the  eott^

Exceptiona  were  jitFenpienaB  or  dilahnae.
Peremptory  eiceptiana  were  a  complete  and  per^
petnal  aniwer  to  the  plaintiff's  demand,  auch  aa
on  except  of  dtJu  malui,  or  of  ra  jadicala.
Dilatory  eieeptioni  were,  aa  the  name  import*,
merely  calcnlatod  to  delay  the  plaintiffs  deuiand  ;
aa,  for  inatance,  by  ahowing  that  the  debt  or  duty
daimed  wai  not  yet  due.  Oaiua  coniiden  the  el-
ceptio  lUit  drndnat  and  m'  raidaae  (It.  1^2)  aa
belonging  to  thia  claat.  If  a  plaintiff  proaecuted
hia  action  after  a  dilatoiy  eiccption,  he  loat  alto-
gether hia  right  of  action.  There  might  be  dilatory
oiceptiona  alto  to  the  peraon  of  the  plaintiff,  of
whicn  daaa  ia  the  taajitio  oagniiaia,  by  which  the
defendant  objecta  either  that  the  pluntiff  ij  not
intitled  to  nio  by  a  cognitor,  or  that  the  cc^itor
whom  he  had  named  waa  not  qnahflcd  to  act  aa  a
cognitor.  If  theexceptionvai^owed,  the  plaintiff
could  either  tuc  himacl^  or  name  a  proper  cognitor,
aa  the  caae  might  be.  If  a  dcfenduit  neglected  to
take  adTBatngeofaperemptoiyeicepfM,  tbe  praetor


12  ACTIO.

iDi^ht  BflerwHrdA  give  bim  ptrroiB^on  to  avail  hii
Klf  of  it ;  vhethei  he  coiUd  do  thu  game  in  the  ca
of  a  dilUoiT  wu  a  doobtfiU  quegUoD. (Gaini,  iv.
1-2J.)

The  plaintilf  CDight  reply  to  the  defcndanfi  ez-
oep^iff,  for  the  ddendimt  by  jmttiiig  in  bia  plea  be-
carne  an  actor.  [Actor.]  The  defendaiit'i  plea
might  be  good,  and  acompletaaniwertothe  plain-
tiff^ demand,  and  yet  the  plaintiff  might  allege
KKncthinji  thaC  iroald  be  an  aiuwer  to  the  flea.
Thui,  in  tie  example  given  by  Guns  (ir.  126),  if
an  a^entarina  daimed  the  price  of  a  thing  c<Jd  by
auction,  the  defendant  might  put  in  a  plea,  which,
when  inKrted  in  the  formula,  Tonld  be  of  thi>
■h^je:  —  Ut  iia  demujn  emptor  damnehtTf  n  a  ra
gaam  tmirit,  Imdila  tit ;  aiid  thii  vould  be  in  fcim
a  good  plea.  But  if  the  conditiDna  of  tale  were  that
the  article  abould  not  be  handed  (o  the  pnichaier
before  the  money  wn«  paid,  the  aigcntariiu  might
put  in  a  nplicalio  in  thia  ibape ;  — .  JVtn  praedictum
at  ne  tdiier  emptori  ret  trruUntitr  qitam  ri  prttimtn
Bmptor  mlceril.  If  the  defendant  anivend  the
r^jlicalio,  hii  aaiwet  wai  called  daplicatio  ;  and  the
portiea  might  goon  to  i^etripUoatio  and  ^aadmpli-
eaUa,  and  eren  furtber,  if  the  matten  in  qncalion
were  aucb  that  they  oould  not  otherwiie  be  brought

Thepraetcriptio^  which  waa  lo  called  from  b«ng
written  at  the  head  or  bc^miing  of  the  fomiula,
wu  ad^ted  for  the  pntection  of  die  plaintiff  in
certain  cssea.  (Oaini,  it.  130,  Su. ;  Cic.  De  Orai.
i.  37.)  Fot  initance,  if  the  defendant  wa«  iwtmd
to  moke  to  the  plaintiff  a  certun  fired  payment
yearly  or  monthly,  the  ptainliff  had  a  good  cauae
of  action  for  all  the  innu  of  money  ^ready  due ;
bat  in  order  to  avcnd  making  bia  demand  for  the
future  payments  not  yet  due,  it  wai  ncccsiary  to
■lis  a  ptaeicription  of  the  foUowing  form:  —  Ea
m  agatar  cujai  rti  diti/uiL

A  penon  might  maintain  or  defend  an  actien  by
hii  coffmior  or  proatfotor,  or,  u  wc  ahould  say,  by
hii  attorney.  The  plaintiff  and  defendant  nied  a
certain  form  of  words  in  appointing  a  cognilor,  and
it  wnuld  appeal  that  the  i^palntment  waa  made  in
the  presence  of  both  parties.  The  cognitor  needed
not  to  be  preient,  and  hit  appointment  was  com-
plete when  by  hia  acta  he  had  aigniRed  hit  aucnt-
(Cic.  Pro  Q.  HoKio,  e.2;  Hot.  Sena.  i.  5.  35.)
No  form  of  worda  waa  neceaaary  for  appointing  a
prtKurator,  and  he  might  be  ^ipointcd  without  the


might  be  required
instance


aecurlty  {ntudart)  ;  lo
in  aelui  in  rem,  the  de-
who  waa  in  poaseaiion  waa  required  to
nily,  in  oidci  ttint  if  he  ioat  bit  cauae  and
aia  not  reatore  the  thing,  nor  pay  ita  eatimated
Talne,  the  plaintiff  might  have  an  action  againat
him  or  hia  anreliea.  When  the  aetia  in  fwn  waa
[«<i«ecuted  by  ibe/onmila  pdiloria,  that  iHpidalw
waa  made  which  waa  called  ^laiAnii  tolri,  Aa  to
ita  protecution  by  the  aposno,  tee  Spoksio  and
CiNTtrairmi.  If  the  plaintiff  aued  tn  hia  own
name,  he  ^ve  no  aecurity  ;  nra  waa  any  aeeurity
required,  S  a  CMnitor  aued  for  him,  either  from
the  cogniUx  or  the  plaintiff  hinuelf.  Cat  the  eog-
nltcr  waa  penonally  liable.  Bnt  if  a  piocnrator
acted  for  him,  he  wna  obliged  to  give  eecurity  that
the  plaintiif  would  adopt  hia  acta  ;  for  the  plaintiff
waa  net  prevented  ttom  bringing  another  action
when  B  procuraloc  acted  be  him. Tuton  and


ACTIO.

GiiiBtora  geneially  gave  aecurity  like  ptocnraton.
In  the  caae  of  an  actio  inperaomtm,  the  aame  rules
applied  to  the  plaintiff  aa  in  the  actio  m  rem.  If
the  defendant  appeared  bjacognilor,  the  defendant
had  to  give  aecurity ;  if  bf  a  prociustor,  the  pro-
cniator  bad  to  give  aecurity.

When  the  ouiae  waa  bronght  to  an  iiaue,  a
judex  or  judicea  might  be  demanded  of  the  praetor
who  named  or  appointed  a  judex  and  delirsed  lo
him  the  formula  which  contained  hia  inatrnctiona.
The  judicea  were  aatd  dari  or  addicL  So  fiir  the
~  w  jure  1  the  praaecu-
befbre  the  judex  req nirea  a  aepanUa


[Jul


«.]


The  following  ia  an  example  of  a  formula  taken
&Dm  Qaiui (iv. 47) : — Judaxeilo.  Sipant  Milium
Aperiun  opw/  Minteniiin  Negidium  msuats
arffenteam  d/powiSH  eamque  doio  nuUo  Nmnerii
Neffidii  Atdo  Agerio  redditam  nan  enr  qmaati  ea
m>  erillaiitampeaaiamjiidttffimeHiimNegidium
Aldo  Ageria  aaidenuato :  ti  mm  parrl,  aiacit>ilo.

The  nature  of  the  fotmnla,  however,  will  be
belter  nndentood  from  the  following  aaalyiit  of  it
by  Sum  :  —  It  eonalated  of  four  parts,  the  deaum-

demautnOio ia  that  part of  the  feimula  which
eiplaina  what  the  aubject-matter  of  the  action  ia-
For  matsnce,  if  the  anbject-matter  be  a  alave  aold,
the  demonstratio  would  run  thua; — Quod  Aidua
Agerin  Namerio  Ni^io  homaem  vendidO. Tho
inlailiB contauu  the claim or demand  of the
f]aiotiS:~~Si  parvthi>mBie7nerjaTiQairitiia»JiiIi
Agerii  eaaa. The  a^udicotio  ia  that  part  of  tho
formula  which  gives  the  judex  authority  to  adju-
dicate the  thing  which  ii  the  aubject  of  diapute  to
:  or  other  of  the  litigant  parties. If  the  action
among  partnera  for  dividing  that  which  belonga
them  all,  the  adjudication  wonld  ran  thai:  —
Qaaaliim  a^adicari  oporUt  judex  TStio  aifptdiralo.
The  amdentnatio  ia  that  jnrt  of  the  formulB  which
givea  the  judex  authority  to condemn the  de-
fendant in  a  mm  of  mono}',  or  to  acquit  hinit
xample,  Jttdtjt  Nan^um  Negidivm  AtUo
o  taterlimn  miiia  eoadenma :  n  non  pofvt,
ai«^. Sometimee  the  ialBitio  alone  woi  requiaite,
in  the  formulae  called  ^nnf/wficid&a  (which  aome
sdem  writera  make  a  claae  of  actiona),  in  which
e  matter  for  inqtury  waa,  whelhec  a  certain  person
la  a  freednum,  wbat  waa  the  amount  of  a  doi,  and
ha  umilnr  queationi,  when  a  Gicl  aolely  waa  tlia
ing  (o  be  aacertained.

Whenever  the  formula  contained  the  aindmt'
Ho,  it  waa  framed  with  the  view  to  pecuniary
damagei ;  and  accordingly,  even  when  the  plamtitf
claimed  a  particnlar  tlung,  the  judex  did  not
adjudge  the  defendant  to  give  the  thing,  aa  waa
icient  practice  at  Borne,  but  cendemned  hinx
um  of  money  equivalenl  to  the  value  of  tha
thing.  The  formula  might  either  came  a  fixed
anm,  or  leave  the  eatimalion  of  the  value  of  tho
thing  to  the  judex,  who  in  all  caaca,  however,  waa
bound  to  name  a  definite  aum  in  thecondemuatioa.
The formula  then  contained the  pleodiugB,  ar

plaintiff  and  the  defendant ;  for  the  intaiio,  aa  vn
haie  leen,  waa  the  plaintiff^  declaiation ;  end  if
nu  met  by  a  plea,  it  waa  neceiaary  that  th  i»
olao  ahould  be  inecrted  in  the  formula.  The
formula  alto  contained  the  directiona  for  the  judex,
and  gave  him  the  power  to  act.  The  Engliah  Bn<t
Itonran  pn>cedun  ore  levenilly  atated in Mr.


ACTOR.
ifoat  wmt  OD  the  Ei/tHaUt  JtitdUttom  of  Oa  {  18),  the


ACUS.


r^>iri  y  domoTf,  pp.  21)6— 236.  The
ttfBt  at  fnccdoR  luidenrest  TBiioui  cbuig«  in
ihe  tfHDV  of  timCf  vhiefa  it  n  not  Teiy  easy  to
iimbt ;  bat  it  bu  been  nsnuked  by  UoUweg

[ffMfllllt  ifll  Pflljl  I llll.ll l")ttllllll IJllllll

•f  prndun  -^in»-;— H  iodf  in  all  aimtial  pu~
taeun  mallatd  £ir  muir  cetitimea,  and  what
«e  Ibid  bnan  CkETo  (b.  c  70)  i*  almoit  ths  bbihc
■ivbatnlfua&nmOaiiuU.D.  160).  Modem
■rinn,  howerer,  &Ba  on  TorioHB  poinli ;  uid  the
■atject  itqnira  a  complete  eiamination  tram  one
win  it  fbUy  acquainted  with  the  Homoa  law,  and
re  of  legal  proceeding*


The  fiJtawing  are  the  piiDcipil  actions  which
wc  mad  of  in  the  Rsman  wriloi,  and  which  are
farir^  deacnbed  imder  their  leTctal  heeds :  —
Actio  —  Aqne  plaiiaa  areendu  ;  Bonomm  t1
B^lUroa  ;  Cctti  et  iDcati ;  Cammodati;  Com-
Boai  diiidnDdo ;  Coifenoria ;  Danini  injuria  dntt ;
Dr^ecti  Tel  effosi ;  Depemi ;  Depoiiti ;  De  dolo
Bak ;  Enti  ct  Ttndiu ;  Eienitoria ;  Ad  Eihi-
baMfaDB  ; T^mQiae  ercismndae;  Fidodaiia  ; Fi-

fr^  ;  Inatitana  ;  Jodiati  ^  Qaod  jnsia ;  Legis
Aqa^iae  ;  Loetti  et  condncti ;  Maudati  ;  Matoi ;
Ntgaiin  ;  Ncgolionmi  gcttonun  ;  Nozalis  ;  Dc
pwpnie  ;  De  pccnliD ;  Pignoiatida,  or  Pignont-
tam  :  PnbUciaaa  ;  Quanti  minoni ;  Rationibui
dinzikoidi*  1  De  leopto  ;  Redhibitoiia  ;  lUi
aidri^  cc  Dotis  ;  KeAitntoria  and  Reacissoria ;
HstilBBB  ;  SenisoB  ;  Pn  socio  ;  Tribnloria  ;
Tnrlae.  [Q.  L.]

ACTOR  ngoified  generally  a  plaintifi'.  In  a
€rr3  ST  prime  actioit,  the  plaintiff  was  often  called
in  a  public  actioa  (aiua  ptdUta),  he  was
<Cit  ad  AH.  I  IG.)  The  dc-
h  in  priTBte  and  public
r,  according  to  Cicero
{I>t  £Ma£.  ii  43),  might  sonify  either  fflrty,  as  in-
deed we  might  coDclDde  from  the  word  itsd£  In
~  ''  a,  the  defiaidint  was  often  called
It  dther  party  might  be  called  ad-
'"it  other. Originally,  no


allowed  toifilaa/amiUiu
bii  parent  or  his  procnntor,  and
■las  in  case  the  parent  was  mcompeteni
fm  nadiMM  m  other  like  ouue.  <Dig.t7.
S.17.)  Wards  {pspJ/i')  hraoghl  their  acti
ihrir  tnoi  (drior)  ;  and  in  case  they  wished  to
tang  aa  action  against  their  tntor,  the  praetor
asaiFil  a  tatcr  for  the  pmpoae.  (Oaiua,  i.  ISi.)
Pmgrim.  er  alkna,  Drigimily  bRnghi  their  action
ibnmgh  their  patranns  ;  but  afterwards  in  their
Dww  oune,  by  a  fietioo  of  law,  Ihsl  they  were
Bimma  eitiaeiia.  A  Roman  citiien  migjit  also
gcaoall;  bring  his  action  by  mcuu  of  a  eognitor

paaie  body,  sued  and  wi
^aUaa. (Dig.  1  tiL  *.;

Acta  baa  also  the  senac  of  an  agent  or  manager
sf  aaotber^  bonnaa  generally.  TbeactorpMi
■M  ■■  offor  win  had  the  nipenutaidenca  or  d
al  darea  bdonging  to  tbe  atatc^  Lipuns  says  ll
ikeaito'^adfiaa  was  adaTevfreedmaiL  Aslare
amid  acquin  pnperty  for  olhen,  though  not
hiauell In  the  case  mentioned  by  Pliny  (Ep.


tr  jnJiiait  was  the  repieientatiic  of

ily  (mpMioa)  of  Commn. (TaciL

H.  11.  ou,  iii  67;  Lipa.  Emimt.ad Taat.  Atiii.a

'■)  rcL.-

ACTUA'RIAE  NAVES.  [Nivis,]
ACTUA'HIl,  or  ACTA'RII,  clerlu  who  com-
piled the  Acta  Publica.  [Aci^  p  B,  b.]  The
name  ig  alto  aometimei  giren  to  the  Nolarii,  or
short-hand  writcn,  who  tool:  down  the  speechei
in  the  senate  and  ths  courts  (Snet  Jul  £5  ;  Sen.
Ep.  33)  ;  respecting  whom  and  the  use  of  abort-
hand  among  the  Rimuini,  see  Notahil

2.  Military  officer!  whose  duty  it  was  to  keep
the  accoonlB  of  the  array,  to  see  thai  the  con-
tractors supplied  the  BoldiJen  with  proTisions  ac-
cording to  agreement,  Ac  (Amm.  Marc.  iz.  5  i
Cod.  12.  tlL  37.  a.  S.  16  :  12.  tit  4^)

3.  The  title  of  cerlaui  physicians  at  the  court
of  Constantinople.  [Medicus.]

ACTUS,  a  Roman  measure  of  land,  which
formed  the  basis  of  the  whole  system  of  bud
measuiemenL  IntbatByatem  the  name  octes  (from
ago),  which  originally  meant  a  way  between  Gelds
for  beasts  of  burthen  to  ^vas  (or,  as  some  sar,
the  length  of  a  fonow),  was  given  to  sticb  a  vaj
when  oiF  a  definite  widlb  and  length,  and  alio  to
a  square  piece  of  land  of  the  same  length.  The
former  was  called  ocAii  nu'iiniu  or  si'ntpfer,  and
was  120  feel  (Roman)  Icing  by  4  feet  wide.  (Vano,
L.  L.  IT,  4,  or  T.  34,  Mlillei ;  Colura.  f.  1.  §  6,
ed.  Schneider ;  Festui,  i.e.  iter  inter  vicma  IV.
palam  /atum).  The  acCtu  qvadratut.  which  was
the  square  unit  in  the  system  of  Roman  land-
moisarement,  wa>  of  the  same  length  as  the  ocfiit
Buiumai,  and  of  a  width  equal  to  it*  length :  it
was  thus  120  feet  square,  and  wntained  1 4,400
square  feet  It  was  die  half  of  ajoger.  (Cotum.
/.  c ;  Vatro,  L  c,  and  fl.  fl.  L  1 0.  ^  2,  ed.  Schneider).
The  following  are  the  etymological  eiphuialions  of
tho  word :  Adui  vocabalur,  w  quo  6rm$  ogertTiitir
cam  arotro,  tow  impeiu  jialo  (Plin.  xvtiL  3)  ;  Ut
ago- gvoagipalerai,iicQuaagi actio.  (yairo,L.  L.
L  c.)  The  adtu  fimiishei  an  example  of  the  nse  of
the  nombec  twelve  among  the  Romans,  its  length
being  twelve  limes  the  itandard  naciMPEUA.
Columella  (JL  c.  §  G)  says  that  the  Gaols  called  the
ocfHS  quadratut,  or^imfut ;  but  this  could  only  be
an  approximate  identiScalian,  for  the  ckAh  fuo-
dratai  is  somewhat  smaller  than  the  great  French
arpail  and  much  larger  than  the  imall  arpait.
((^nnpare  AcNA  ;  NiebntiT,  Silt,  cfSone,  toL  ii.
Appendix  I.)  [P.  S.]

ACTUS. [Sanvrrnrig.]

ACUS  (0tAiJn),  Bi^fvit,  ^o^t),  aneedle,a  pin.
Tho  anneied  figures  of  needles  and  pins,  chiefly


,  Google


ADLECTI.

en  from  nriffmalj  in  bnmie,  TUy  in  length
Inch  uid  a  tialf  to  sboDt  eight  inchea.
■ins  iiere  mode  not  only  of  meUl,  bat  al
>d,  bone,  and  iTory.  They  were  uied  foi
le  purpotei  u  with  nt,  and  also  in  drcuin)
:,  (Mart.  ii».  24.)  The  mode  of  pUtliiij
r,  and  then  &itening  it  with  a  pin  or  need
wn  in  the  anneifid  figure  of  b  female  \
en  frma  a  marble  gnmp  which  wu  fbim


Ktp.  Sigipl.  iii.  3.) Thit  fiuhion  haa  been  a


tinned  lo  ont  own  timet  by  the  femalea  of  Italy,
and  of  aome  pana  of  Germany,  ai  for  inilance,  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Coblenz.

ADDICTI. [Nbxl]

ADDI'CTIO. [Aerial

AUDIX  (m-i,  iStiiu),  aQreek  wottau  of
capacity,  equal  to  four  x^^^*^''  (Keayeh.  r.v. ;
Schol.  ad  Horn.  Od.  19.)  [P.  S.]

ADEIA  (iifin),  teedom  from  fear,  or  lecuritjr,
in  any  pnblic  action.  When  any  one  in  Athena,
who  had  not  the  full  privilege  of  an  Athenian


I  of  ni


it.i'mct


which  permiBBJon  wai  called  t,
31.)  An  Athenian  aliieii  wno  nan  mcuiTea
aiimia,  woa  alao  obliged  to  obtain  adaa  before  he
could  lake  port  in  public  a&in  (Pint  Pkoc  26)  ;
and  it  waa  not  law^  for  any  one  to  pmpoae  to  the
people,  that  an  aihjua  ahould  be  reitored  to  bii
rjghta  aa  a  citiEen,  or  that  a  public  debtor  ahould
be  leleaaed  from  hit  debt,  till  adeia  had  been
granted  for  thii  purpose  by  a  decree  fiuaed  in  an
OMembl  J  of  6000  citizma  voting  secretly  by  ballot.
{Dem.  t  Timocr.  p.  71S  j  Andoe.  dt  JWyrf.  p.  36  ;
'B6ck\  Piiila  Eaimmy  ^  Athau,  p.  393,  3d  ed.)

ADE'MPTIO. [Lmatuh.]

ADONATI. [CooNATL]

ADQNA'TIO. [Hereh  i  Tistamintuh.]

ADITIO  HEREDITATIS. [Hmbs.]

ADJUDICA'TIO. [Actio.]

ADLECTI  or  ALLECTI.  1.  Thoie  who  were
ehosen  to  fill  up  a  Tacincy  in  any  office  or  colle-
gium, and  eipecially  thoae  who  were  choaen  to  fill
up  the  pnper  nnmber  of  the  aenate.  Aa  theee
would  be  generally  equilca,  Featni  (i.  d.)  definea
the  adlecti  to  be  eqoitea  added  to  the  senate  :  and
he  appears  in  this  [xuaagc  to  make  a  di^reuce  bo-


eilbe  uune  definition  of  the  co


1)1

2.  Tboie  persona  under  the  empire  who  wera
admitted  to  the  pnTilegea  and  honoura  of  the  fane-
tonhip,  quaestotihip,  aedileahif^  and  other  public
ollicea,  without  haring  any  dutiea  to  perfonu.
(Capitolin.  PcrfiK.  6.)  In  iiudiptiona  we  con-
itantly  find,  adUdui  atfr  Irilwui,  infer  gwieilorv*,
latter  praetor«a,  &c

ADLECTOH,  a  coUeetor  of  taiet  is  the  pn>-
Tincea  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  empecora.  (Cod.
Theod.  12.  tit.  6.  a.  12.)

ASMISSIONA'LES  were  eharaberlaiu  at  the
imperial  court,  who  iatroduccd  peiaona  to  tha
prraence  of  the  emperor.  (Lamprid.  Seeer.  4  j
o^icBm  admiiBimit,  Suet  Vtap.  14.)  They  were
divided  into  four  claaua  ;  the  chief  officer  of  roch
clou  was  called  pnainuii  admiaiioitam  (Amm.
Haic  ixiL  7)  {  and  the  proxini  were  under  the
magiiUr  admiaUmvni.  (Amm.  Marc.  it.  S  ;  Voo.
AmL  12.)  Tha  admisiionitles  wen  uiuallj
freedmen.  (Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit  2.  a.  12 ;  tit  9.
t  2  ;  tit  35.  a.  3.)

Fricnda  appear  to  have  been  called  amiei  admii~
timii  primat,  Kcaadat,  at  taiiaa.  According  la
aome  writers,  th^  were  ao  called  in  comequenea
of  the  order  in  which  they  wen  admitted  ;  occord-
izig  to  Dthen,  because  the  ofrntni  was  dirided  into
diSerent  porta,  aejerated  from  cue  another  bj
hangmga,  into  which  persona  were  admitted  ac-
cording to  the  different  degreea  of  &Tour  in  which
they  wen  held.  (Sen.  di  Burnt/.  tI  33,  34,  atm.
i.10,)

ADOLESCENS. [Intahb.]

ADO'NIA  CASi£»a),  B  ieatiTal  celebrated  in
honour  of  Aphrodit«  and  Adonia  in  moat  of  the
Grecian  citiea,  as  well  ai  in  numerous  places  in
the  Eaat It  laated  two  daya,  and  was  celebrated


by  y


rely. On  the  f  ral


itatuea  of  Adonia,  which
Hes  ;  and  they  observed  all
funerals,  beating  themaelvca
and  uttering  laitcntaliona The  aecoud  day  waa
t  in  merriment  and  feaiting  ;  because  Adonia
allowed  to  return  to  life,  and  apend  half  of
the  ytst  with  Aphrodite. (Aristoph.  Fax,iV2,
"  '  iL ad  lac;  Plut  Atfih. 18,  Nic  13.) For
fuller  partjculaii  respecting  the  worship  and  festi-
Tall  of  Adonia,  see  Did.  o/Biagr.i.  v.  Adoaii.
ADO'PTIO,  adoption. 1.  OniKK,  was  called
'  the  Atheniana  tunroftftfir,  or  sometimes  simply
IjjiTii  or  a^ffii. The  Greek  writers  use  Siffii
alio  oa  equiTalent  to  the  Roman  adijitio,  and  drraC
aa  etJuiTulenttoadofiirt.  (App-fl,  C.iil  13, 14.)
The  odopliTe  bther  woa  said  -romfSax,  ttgToit£.
•rffai,  or  aomctimea  mtiy :  and  the  &ther  or  mother
(for  B mother  after  Che  death of  her  husband
could  consent  to  her  son  being  adopted)  was  said
-aa  stud  iitTOMoieu,  with  re-
ference to  the  &mily  which  he  lefl ;  and  flirTo«r.
ith  reference  lathe  fiunily  into  which  be wbs
receired. The  aon,  when  adopted,  waa  called
iroij|T(ft,  fioTOiipTii,  orirriT:  in  oppotition  to  lbs
legitimate  sou  bom  of  the  body  of  Ihe  bther,  who
was  called  yr^auts.

A  num  might  adopt  a  son  either  in  his  lifetime
or  by  his  testament,  pioTided  he  had  no  male  ofF-
spring  and  WBl  of  sound  mind.  He  might  also,  by
Icatament,  name  a  person  to  tike  his  properly,  in
case  hia  ton  ot  aoiu  di(iuld  di«_iu)d<ir  am  _  (Dcm.


ADOPTIO.
Kvi  SnfibM  TtvS.  13.) If bs had  D
d  not

;  for  if  he  cmld  hsTS  idopted
■  «■  •ben  Be  had  male  childroi,  mcb  son  woold
kan  ikared  Ua  propot;  wjtli  the  reM  of  hi*  male
cUUren,  and  to  that  extent  the  father  would  have
n  which  the  law  de-

1$  Dontd  be  adopted  ;  bat
,ted(bTle.lBmwtatl«>t}u
.  (itutat,Tl*fi  Tav'Ayrim  KX-ipai.)
The  adofWed  child  ■«*  tmufond  from  hii  own
teulj  wid  demu  into  thcte  of  the  adoptive
fathO' ;  be  inberited  his  pioperty  and  mainUined
the  mam  of  hii  adoptiTe  hther.  It  wu  not
trcnmij  (at  him  to  lake  hii  new  fatbcT'i  name,
hot  be  ma  nfftUrrA  u  hit  hhl  The  adopted
•a  nuEhi  reoim  to  hn  fbnner  bmiW,  in  case  he
]ttL  a  child  ts  nnrewnt  the  fiunil;  of'^hii  adoplire
{atba:  mica  he  lo  retumed,  he  lut  all  right
whiA  he  migfat  h>Te  had  on  hu  bther't  lide  if  he
bad  >at  btsi  adopted  ;  bat  he  retuned  all  right!
which  be  might  have  on hii mother^  lide,  for

»  e&Gt  ■»  b  u  coneemed


It  of  adintiaa  hi
Dtbcr  of  the  ai


taord  hta  mMher  ttler  the  act  of  adoption.

The  next  of  kin  of  an  Athenian  dtizen
hmikd  to  hia  inipefty  if  he  made  no  diiporition
■f  it  bj  win,  iw  made  no  Talid  adopcian  during  his
Efciimi ;  tbn  wen,  thsefiKE,  intererted  in  pn
1 1  ■!  iag  fhadulcnt  adoptioni.  The  whole  con
■■riiy  wm  alio  interoted  in  {serenting  the  ii
twdnetien  into  their  bodjr  of  a  pcnon  who  wai  ni
B  AlhfwiaB  atom.  To  [(oteet  the  righta  of  the
aezi  of  km  againit  mjnit  daimi  bf  penon*  who
alleged  thfiwaelTea  to  be  adopted  KiD(,  it  WM  n-
qoind  that  the  &tbcr  ibonld  enter  hit  aon,  whether
baa  of  hia  bodj  or  adopted,  in  the  regiats  of  hia
pfaatna  {fparfiilr  ypoftiarOn')  at  a  ceRsin
ine,  the  Tbaisdis  (Ineu^  Ht^  rti  'AroUoItip.
EX^pm,  3,  5X  with  the  prrit;  of  bk  kinamen  and
*~  ~ I [ymiirmi, ^fimpa). Subteqoently

.  it wai  neceeaaiT  to  enter  him in  the
oftheadoptiTe&thei^  iaraa{Ki^>afxiiAr

Ttiw), withoot  which  legiitrBlion  it  ip-


WW*  alio  nqund,  which  we  ma^  ptemme
poHB  hhnarif  migfat  procure  to  be  done,  if  he
•f  age,  (c,  if  not,  hii  guudian  or  next  friend,
a  diifiate  arsac  at  lo  the  pnpertj  of  the  deed
{mKiipm  lattMrnaU)  between  the  aon  adopted  bj
Wfaimt  and  the  next  of  kin,  then  could  pniperl;
be  BB  iigwtiariiiii  of  the  adopted  ion  until  the  l«-
liwii  lit  wai  otabliihed. If  b  mui  died  chUdlcM
^■t  iaieitate,  hii  imt  of  tin,  accordina  to
Atbouaa  mlea  of  inei— ion  (Dem.  TifSt  Ae«%.
c  C), took hii  pcopertr  by  the  tight  of  blooil
(tryirTM  aari  yim), Tbongh  rqiitratiar

Bi^ii  thiicaae  d«i  be  reqniied, '''"

■dnpdin  pfapeii J  n  called,  a>  iODM  n

— pitwr ;  fat  the  next  of  kin  necemrilj  bekmged

ti  iW  bmSj  i^lbe  intcatate.

Thenileaai  to  adoptiuo  amoog  tbo

to  aroid  ^  ecToc  in  ttatins  (hem.  T
daiiiiiaii  n^  be  mainljr  dedooed  from  t
at ti  M  III. Bid  Ihoae of.  Demoathenei  againil


ADOPTIO.  IS

2.  Rohan.  The  Roman  term  waa  adi^o  at
'aptalio.  (OelL  T.  IS.)  The  Roman  relation  of
parent  and  child  aniBa  either  &om  a  lawM  mar-
riage or  from  adoption.  Adt^jtio  vai  the  general
neme  which  comprehended  the  two  apecio,  adtjjtio
and  admgaim  ;  and  aa  the  adopted  penon  paaied
from  hia  own  &milia  into  that  gf  the  penon  adopt-
in);,  odopth  caoaed  a  tapitit  di-mimtu),  and  the
loweat  of  the  three  kindi.  Adoption,  in  iti  ipeci£t
lenae,  waa  the  ceremony  hy  which  a  person  wha
WBi  in  the  power  of  hii  parent  (  m  pcteMtaie  partita
/an),  whether  child  or  grandchild,  male  or  female,
waa  lianafeiTed  to  tbe  power  of  the  penon  adopting
him.  It  waa  e^cted  nnder  the  anthonty  of  a
magittrste  (mttgutmliu),  tbo  praetor,  for  inatunce,
at  Rome,  or  a  goremor  (pratKt)  in  the  provincea.
The  penon  to  be  adopted  wai  mancipated  [Man-
ciPAtio]  by  hia  natural  fiither  before  the  com-
petent authority,  md  anrrendered  to  the  adoptiTO
bther  by  the  Ic^  form  called  njore  amia.  (QeU.
T.  19  i  SneL  Aag.  61.)

When  a  penoii  wai  not  in  tbe  powv  of  hia
parent  (no  Jt/rU),  tbe  ceremony  of  adopdon  wad
called  adngatio.  Originillf,  it  could  oulv  be
effected  at  Rome^  and  only  by  a  Tote  of  the
popnlnt  (  poptli  muloritalis)  in  the  comitia  cariata
lltge  cariata) ;  the  naaon  of  Ihia  being  that  the
caput  or  BlAtua  of  a  Roman  citixen  could  not,
according  to  the  lawa  of  the  Twelre  TabUi,  be
aSectad  except  by  a  TOte  of  the  popului  in  tfaa
comitia  cvriata.  Clodlui,  the  enemy  of  Cieef^
woi  adrogated  into  a  plebeian  bmily  fay  a  lei
curiata,  in  order  to  qmility  himaelf  lo  he  elected  a
tribunni  plebii.  (Cic  ad  Aa.  jL  7,  p.  Zten.)
Pemalea  could  not  be  adopted  by  the  adrogatio.
Under  the  empeion  it  became  tbe  practice  to  efeet
the  sdiDgatio  by  an  imperial  leiccipt  {praeifit
awioritaU,  a  raacripfo  praapit)  ;  but  thii  practice
had  not  become  eatabliihed  in  the  time  of  Qaiu,
or,  w  it  appeui,  of  Ulpian.  (Compare  Oaina,  i.
98,  with  Qaina  aa  cited  in  Dig.  L  lit.  7.  i.  2  ;  and
Ulpian,  Frag.  lit.  8.)  It  w<mld  aeem,  howerer,
from  a  paaioge  in  Taeitui  {HUL  L  15),  that  Oolba
adopted  a  ntcceaior  witbovt  tbe  ceremony  of  the
adrogatio.  By  a  reicript  of  the  Emperor  Anto-
ninui  Piua,  addreaaed  to  the  pontificei,  tboee  who
were  under  age  (iin^wiiref),  or  wardi  {pupW^
coold,  with  certain  reiuictioui,  be  adopted  by  lbs
adrogatio.  If  a  father  who  had  children  in  hii
power  contented  to  be  adopted  by  another  penon,
both  bimtelf  and  hit  children  became  in  the  power
of  tbe  adoptiTe  lather.  All  tbe  property  of  tbe
adopted  aon  became  at  once  the  property  of  tbe
adiwtire  &Ihec.  (Gaini,  IL  SB.)  A  penon  could
not  legally  be  adopted  bj  the  adrogatio  till  he  had
made  out  a  tatit&ctory  cste  C^mCo,  Amo,  eaata)
lo  tbe  pia^cei,  who  had  tbe  right  of  inaiating  on
certain  preliminary  conditiona.  Tbii  power  of  tbe
pontificei  wai  probably  founded  on  tneir  rivht  to
preiene  the  due  obaervanco  of  the  nicra  of  each
gena.  (Cic^.  i>on.  13,  &c.)  It  would  accord-
mgly  hare  been  a  good  ground  of  refuting  their
eooaeat  lo  an  adrogatio,  if  the  penon  to  be  adopted
wu  the  only  moie  of  hia  gena,  for  tbe  aacia  would
in  mch  coae  be  loat.  It  wai  required  that  the
adoptive  father  alao  had  do  ohUdren,  and  no  rea-
Bonable  bopea  of  any  j  and  that  he  ihould  he  older
thnn  the  pciion  lo  be  adopted.  It  ia  generally
Biiumed  that  all  adrogation!  were  made  betiire  the
curiae. Oaiua,  however,  and  Ulplor


16  ADORATIO.

of  Tdty  daubtliil  import  witli  idiecence  to  their
periDd.  After  the  eomida  cnriata  fell  into  dimie,
It  i)  lUMt  prolabls  that  there  ms  no  tanail  a>-
■emblf  of  the  mriu,  uid  tb«t  thef  wen  lepn-
»enlfd  by  the  thirty  licton,

A  mnnan  mold  not  adopt  &  fxmm,  fix  eien  her
own  children  wen  not  in  hor  power.

The  ru]«  ei  to  adoptian  which  iho  legiilalion
of  Jnniniui  eatabliihed,  an  cuntained  in  the  In-


■  (H


,11).


The  s^ct  of  idoptiaii,  >•  alrcad;  itatcd,  wai  to
CTcate  the  legal  lelMim  td  &ther  and  Km,  juit  u
if  the  odcfited  urn  were  Iwm  of  the  blood  of  the
kdoptiTO  father  in  lawful  marriage.  The  adopted
child  woi  intilled  to  the  name  and  •ocn  printa
of  the  adopting  pannt,  and  it  appvan  that  the
preaeiration  of  the  noa  privala,  which  by  the
lawi  of  the  Twelie  Tabid  were  made  perpetnal,
wai  fi-cqasntl;  one  of  the  naoiHii  for  a  childlc»
pcnon  adopting  a  •on.  In  oue  of  inCeitacf,  ihs
adopted  child  wonld  be  the  hani  of  hit  adopUre
&ther.  He  became  the  brother  of  hi*  adoptire
father^  daagbto',  and  therefore  conld  not  loartj
her ;  bat  bo  did  not  become  the  iod  of  the  adoptive
father^  wife,  for  adoption  only  gave  to  Che  adopted
ion  the  jmaagnalianiL  (Quiu,i.  97 — 107;Dig.
1.  tit.  7;  Cicf.  Domo.)

The  phnus  of  "  adoptian  by  t«itaiaeat "  (Cic
JlmL  SH)  beemt  to  be  lather  a  muapplicalioa  of
the  term  ;  fix  though  a  man  or  woman  might  by
teitameat  naroe  a  nerea,  and  inlpoee  the  amdition
of  the  herefl  tokinv  the  name  of  the  teetotor  or
toalotrix,  thij  ao-colJed  odop^on  could  not  pmlnce
the  eSecti  of  a  proper  adoption.  It  could  gice  to
the  penon  H  laid  to  be  adopted,  the  namo  or  ptv-
peity  of  the  tenalor  or  tolatriz,  but  nothing  more.
Nicbohr  (£«<vm,  toI.  iL  p.  100)  tpeakt  of  the
leatamentory  adoption  of  C.  Octaiiua  by  C.  Jnlim
Caenr,  u  the  Grit  Itiat  he  knew  of ;  but  the  pu-
•oge  of  Cicero  in  the  Brabu  and  aoolher  pooBge
{Ad  HiH.  viiL  8),  abow  that  other  iniloncea  had
occurred  bef»«.  A  jwiion  on  pooling  from  ono
gem  into  another,  and  talcing  the  name  of  hii  new
bmilia,  generally  retained  the  name  of  bit  old  gou
alio,  with  the  addition  to  it  of  the  taraunation
OHU.  (Cic  ad  AU.  ill.  SO,  and  the  note  of  VJc-
toriua.)  Thni,  C.  Octavini,Bfterwaidi  the  Emperor
AogoRtufl,  upon  being  adopted  by  the  teitamat  of
hia  uncle  the  dictator,  awnmcd  the  name  of  Gains
Julina  Caeaar  Octananiu ;  but  he  earned  the
adoption  to  bo  confirmed  by  the  curiBi!.  At  to  the
teitamenlaiy  adoption  of  C.  Octaviui,  tee  Dnunann,
OaeUiHt  RotM,  toL  l  p.  S37,  and  the  refcrenceg
there  gireiL  Livia  wai  adopted  into  the  Jnlta
gent  by  the  teatament  of  Aoguitoi  (Tac  Aim.
i.  8)  ;  and  it  wai  not  itated  that  thii  required  any
confirmation.  But  thinge  wen  changed  then.  The
Lex  Jnlia  et  Papia  Poppeea  gaTO  certain  priiilegei
who  had  children,  among  which  pririlega


practiee  of  adcntion  ;  for  childleH  penoni  adopted
children  in  order  to  qnalify  themielTee  fee  inch
ofliceo,  and  then  emanciimted  their  adopted  chil-
dren. Thi*  abu»  wai  choiled  by  a  letiatai
eoniollma  m  the  time  of  Nero.  (Tac.  Ann.  it.  1 9  ;
Cic<l*Q^iii  IB,  od  >«.  lii.  B ;  SncL  J'al.  Ota.
i>3,  TO.  2,  &c ;  Heineci  Sytdagna  ;  Dig.  3G.  tic
1.  ».fi3.)  [0.  L.]

ADORATIO  (irfMoiE^ini)  wai  paid  to  the
godi in  the  fcdlowing  roaoncc :  —  The penon


ADULTERIUM.
itretched  ont  bli  right  hind  to  the  Uatne  of  the
god  whom  he  viihed  to  hononr,  then  liiiied  hia
hand  uid  wared  it  to  the  italne.  While  douia
thii  he  mored  lonnd  hii  whole  body,  for  whicn
cuitom  Plutarch  (Nvrn.  14)  givei  lome  cuiioiu
reawHB ;  hat  the  trne  reaion  probibly  wai,  tint
the  penoA  might  be  the  mne  surely  put  into  com-
mnnication  with  the  deity,  aa  it  wat  uncertain
where  he  would  rereal  himielf  ai  the  dtm
prutaa.  It  irai  olu  the  practice  to  have  the
head  and  ean  coiercd,  lo  that  only  the  forepart  of
the  bet  remained  tmcovered.  (Plin.  N.  M.  nriii.
S;  Minndnj  Pelii,  2  ;  Lueret.  T.  1197.)  The
adoratiB  differed  &om  the  oratio  or  prayen,  which
wen  offend  with  the  hand)  folded  together  and
•tretched  out  to  the  godi,  the  natural  attitude  pri^
■cribed  by  nature  to  the  luppliant,  and  which  we
find  menUoned  by  Homer.  (//.  to.  177  ;  irrUl-
ff)uera  Xfpui',  Math.  /Von.  11)04 ;  eaelo  lupimit
fan  namu.  Km.  Cant.  iiL  23. 1.)  The  adoration
paid  to  the  Roman  emperon  wna  borrowed  from
the  eaitem  mode  of  adoration,  and  oimiiited  in
proatiBtion  on  the  ground,  and  kiuuig  the  feel  and
kneea  of  the  empenir.

ADROQA'TIO. [Adoptio  (Roican).]

ADSCRIPTI'YI. [AcciHsi.]

ADSKRTOR. [ABsnTOB.]

AD3ESS0H. [AssuBOH.]

ADSIGNA'TIO. [Agbihub Lbou and

ADSTIPULATIO. [OBLiaATiQHiit.]

ADSTIPULA'TOR. [Ihtbbcessio.]

ADULTUS. [INFANS.]

ADULTER'IUM,  adultery.  1.  Greek.
Among  the  Atbeninni,  if  a  man  caught  another
man  in  the  act  of  criminal  intercourae  (/i«x«a)
with  hia  wif^  he  might  kill  him  with  imjmnity  ;
and  the  law  waa  alio  the  lame  with  respect  to  a
ctmcubuw  (woUiw^).  He  might  b1»  infiict  other
punithment  on  the  leader.  It  appcon  that  among
the  Athenian!  then  wai  no  adultery,  onleii  a
married  woman  wa*  ctaicemed.  (Lyuas,  Trip  reS
'EpcrrofrO^Ritif  Myoo.) But  it  woe  no  adultery  for

who  proetitnted  henel^  or  who  wai  engaged  in

gelling  any  thing  in  the  agor&. (Demoilh.  KoTJk

Ntalpat,  c  16.) The  Roman  law  appean  lo  have

been  pretty  iiMrly  the  lame.  (Pau1u>,Sait.J{ii^.

' ' .  26.) The  husband  might,  if  be  plraicd,

1  turn  of  mooey  from  the  adulterer  by  way  of

conipenntien,  and  detain  him  till  he  fonnd  luntiea

'"  the  payment. If  the  all«ed  adulterer  had

m  nnjuitly  detained,  he  might  bring  on  action

dnit  the  bniband ;  and,  if  he  gained  hii  canip,

and  hii  intetiei  were  released. If  he  fiuled,

lav  required  the  auretie*  to  deliver  np  the

adulterer  to  the  huiband  bdbre  the  nmrt,  to  do

what  he  plenied  with  him,  except  that  he  wai  not

to  un  a  knife  le  dagger.  (Demoith.  Kari  Ntalp,

18.)

The  hniband  might  alio  ]70Mcuto  the  adulterer
in  the  action  called  lunxilaffpn^.  If  the  act  of
adultery  wai  proved,  the  husband  conld  no  longrt
cohabit  with  hii  wife  under  piin  of  loatng  hia
privilcgei  ofadtLzon  {^rtftia).  The  adulteren  waa
excluded  even  from  thoic  templci  which  fonign
women  and  slaves  were  allowed  to  enter ;  and  if
ibe  wni  leen  there,  any  one  might  treat  her  ai  he
plensed,  provided  he  did  not  kill  her  or  mutilate
her.  (Dem.  Kbtb  Ntnlp.  c.22;  Acachin.  Kitrtk
Tifulwc  c 36.)  ^., ,


ASDLTBBIUU.
1  Buux  Adohariam  pi^mly  ugnifiei,  in
Ik  Bma  kv,  the  oSenoe  committed  bf  >  man,
■UDid  or  mnMiriad,  hkviiis  terati  intereoone
ni  oMtko:  atn't  wih.  Sbxpnm  (mlled  bj
tke  Qncki  fl^)  nniifia  tli«  caDuncne  with  ■
wiior  or  a  viisiiL  It  wm  tbe  cmdilini  of  the
fcadc  vhkb  deteimiiKd  iba  1^  chanct«  of

-'-'-  - -'  '  '- ' 1  the  fcmlJe

r  (Dig.  48.
LK  9.  &  iBj,  taai  m.  wtmaa  nugm  camnut  adultery
■ktW  lit  WN  "  jutK  nicr  uie  iDJuCa,"  tfae
iiwil  tl  which  ii  not  loile  cotain ;  bnt  pco-
\Mj  k  wau  Esther  ibe  wa>  liring  in  a  mu-
ni|t  tacaputed  M  &  mairiaga  bj  th«  Bamau  law
«  BEt^  I17  ibe  ju  geDdom.  The  male  who
^Hkkd  adalUiy  wai  oAibr,  ths  Eemala  wai
•Um.  TW  I^tm  writen  v«(c  punled  about
tb  iljaiulnj  (f  tha  word  adnllcriiim  1  but  if  wa
Ink  ••  ita  nrion  nssifialioDi  beaidea  that  of
11>#1  ■!■]  laaamaot,  wa  may  n&ljr  refer  it  to
iht  ana  not  aa  that  which  appcan  in  adoltut.
Ha  atdaa  it  that  af  "  growing  to,"  "  fixJng,"  or
'hwiif  tg^"  oBB  tbiiig  00  aDodia  and  extra-

Baaa  wed  adullmBm  and  adolttratia  at  we


ijliif  itf  a  ding  by  mixiog  aonwthing  with  it  of
kanlai.

Ii  the  tiaw  «f  Asgiutia  a  lex  wai  onacted
(pakUj  AC  17),  iatitled  £st  JaJu  <J(  Jifitf-
■nr  wfifJu,  the  fint  chaiptei  of  wbieb  rqiealed
•Me  fdar  taaetmoiti  en  the  maaa  mbject,  with
>ii  fntwau  aC  vbicb  prim  enactmeDU  we  aie,
kwno,  Bsacqaainted.  Harmix  (CanL  ii.  S.  21)
•ibda  to  the  Julian  law. In  thii  law,  the  leinu


<«lMKd  bam  Ibe  D«iat  (IS.  tit.  G>,  frem  PbdIui
1*^1*  Jto^.  ii.  tJL  26.  ed.  SehnlUng),  and  Una-
iniUdLigrmJaliamDeAaidlcriiM,hih.Siog.).
ii  aUBi  DM  aulikd;  that  tba  eoBctmentt  n-
Taiti  bj  tb*  Julian  law  cmUiiifd  ipeciBl  penal
F>ni>cu  aoiiut  adnlteiT ;  and  it  ia  alio  not
BftgfaaUe  "••'.  by  the  old  law  or  nulom,  if  the
*hhcm  waa  asght  in  the  fact,  he  wai  at  the
tnj  of  the  injond  hubaad,  and  that  the  bui-
iBad  MVgbl  pmiiah  with  dfAth  hia  adulteroui  wife.
(OiMj^  iL  2S  I  Snet.  TB.  35.)  It  aeenu,  alao,
4a  mipr^ttj  tb«  act  of  adultery  might  be  piu-
•■ncd  by  any  peiaoo,  aa  bein^  a  public  oSeuce  ;
ha  nads  tfae  empenm  tbe  right  of  pnaecDiion
■M  limited  Id  itie  biuband,  hiher,  hmtber,  po-
fmt,  aad  anmcnlu  of  the  adultereaa.

%  tbe  Jnliaa  law,  if  a  hmband  kept  hii  wife
■Ad  a  act  of  adnlteiy  waa  known  U>  him,  and  let
t^  adahOB-  off,  he  waa  guilty  of  the  oSence  of
'""-Hmi  The  bntband  or  bther  in  whme
pna  the  adultcreia  waa,  had  liity  dayi  allowed
if  frmmrni^-jf^n^  proc«#dingi  Bgiuiut  tho  wife,  after
■kich  iiBe  any  olha  pcnon  might  proiecule.
(Tacit.  Aim.  iL  OS.)  A  woman  caoTicicd  of
•diJiay  waa  mnlcted  in  half  of  ba  doa  and  the
thii4  |Art  of  her  property  [l)tma\  and  banished
InlipMB)  to  aame  miaeiable  iiland,  luch  aa  Seri-
■ifl,  tr  iuatance.  The  adulterer  hbi  mulcted  in
W  hii  [m^ierij,  and  taniihed  in  like  manner,
W  sat  ta  tbe  nmc  iiland  aa  the  woman.  The
•■^hiiij  and  adnltenaa  were  mbjeeted  sIm  to
■nil  mofttitir*  ;  bat  tbia  lav  did  not  inflict  tbe
f  ■ibfBl  of  death  OD  dther  paitT  i  and  in  thoie


ADVOCATUa  17

inalaneei  under  tbe  empeton  in  which  dealb  ma<
inflicted,  it  muM  be  coniidend  aa  an  ennordinary
jKUuihnKnt,  and  bejimd  the  pmriiiona  of  the
'  '■  ■  (Tacit  Ami.  ii.  SO,  iiL  2*  j  J,  Upt,
Tool.  Aim.  IT.  42 ;  Noodt,  Op.  Obib.  i.
286,  &c)  Bnt  by  a  onuliention  of  Conitantine
(Cod.  ii.  30,  if  it  ii  genuine),  tbe  offenee  in  the
adulterer  waa  made  capital  By  the  legisUtion  of
Juatinian  {1/ov.  134.  e  10),  the  bw  of  Con-
itantine waa  [lebably  only  confirmed  i  bnt  the
adaltereai  waa  put  bto  a  caorent,  after  being  fint

~  ipped.  If  her  huiJjand  did  not  take  her  ont  ia
I  yean,  the  wat  compelled  to  ainmie  the  habit,
and  to  ipend  the  ie*t  of  her  Ule  in  the  craiTCnt.

The  Julian  law  permitted  the  bther  (both
adoptiire  and  natuial)  to  kill  the  adulterer  and
adidtareeB  in  certain  caiei,  aa  la  which  there  wen
•eieral  oice  diitinctiout  ealabliihrd  by  the  law.
If  tbe  father  killed  only  one  of  the


brought  himaelf  within  tke  penellie*


'  P"n«»i
of  the  C


Cor-


perarau  of  a  certain  dan,  deaciibed  i
whom  he  saugbt  in  the  act  itf  adnlleiy  with  bia
wife  I  but  he  could  not  kill  hii  wife.  The  hna-
band,  trf  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  Julian  law,  conld
detain  Uir  twen^  houn  the  adulterer  whi^n  he
had  caught  in  the  &ct,  for  the  purpoae  of  calling
in  witneaaea  to  prore  (he  adtdtery.  If  the  wife
waa  diTorced  for  adultery,  the  huiband  waa  in-
titled  (o  retam  part  of  tbe  dot.  (Ulfuan,  Fr.  n.
12.)  Tbe  authcoitiet  for  the  Lex  Julia  de  Adul-
tCTUi,  both  ancient  and  modem,  aie  collected  by
Heim  Dia  OriKtimilnda  <UrSiimer,  1B44.  [O.  L.]

ADVERSA'RIA,  note-book,  meiooraudum-
book,  pobting-boak,  in  which  the  Romana  entered
memoranda  of  any  importance,  etprclally  of  money
received  and  expended,  which  were  afterwacdi
nanichbed,  aiDdliy  eTcry  mtnlh,  into  a  kind  of
ledger.  {Tabulat  jmlae,  eodct  aaiqili  tl  apmti.)
They  were  ^Utbly  c^ed  Adveriaria,  becsuae
they  lay  alwaytopGnbef«e  theeyc&  (Cic^j^Aoac^
Com.  S  t  Prop,  iit  23.  20.)

ADVEBSA'RIUS. [AcToa.]

ADU'NATI  (iiwoToi),  perwiDa  aupportcd  by
the  Athenian  itatc,  who,  on  account  of  infinnity  or
bodily  defecti,  were  unable  to  obtain  a  liTelihood.
Tbe  lum  which  they  lecraied  &om  the  (lata  as-
pean  to  ha>e  Tsried  at  diSerent  timet.  In  Uis
time  of  Lyaioa  and  Ariitotle,  one  obohu  a  day
waa  given  ;  but  it  appean  to  bate  been  afterwarda
iocnsaaed  to  \vo  oboli.  Tbe  bonn^  waa  rettiicted
to  petaoni  whoae  property  wai  under  three  minae.
It  wai  awarded  by  a  decree  of  the  people ;  but
tbe  examination  of  the  indiTidnala  belonged  to  the
■enate  of  the  Fire  Hundred :  the  paymenU  were
[nade  by  piytaneiaa.  PeiiiaHatiu  it  laid  to  have
been  the  fint  to  introduce  a  law  ioT  the  mainte-
nance of  thoie  penont  wbo  bad  been  mutilated  in
war ;  but,  acccfding  to  othen,  thia  proriiioo  de-
nied it)  origin  {ram  a  law  of  Solon.  (Plut.  SoUm.
31  )  Schol.  ad  Aach.  Tol.  iiL  p.  736,  ed.  Reiake  ;
Acach,  0.  Tim.  p.  123  ;  Ilarpocint.  Suid.  Heiycb.
(.  c.  i  Lyiiaa,  Tittp  rtu  AlunirDi',  a  ipeech
written  for  an  individual  in  order  te  prove  tut  ha
waa  uititled  to  be  aupperted  by  tbe  itate  ;  BSckli,
FiJMc  Earn.  •/AOaa,  p.  242,  Ac  2nd  edit.)

ADVOCA'TUS  aeema  originally  to  have  ligni-
fied  any  peraon  who  gave ''' ' ' ''  '


a  (Van


gf  jHOpsi^.  <Cfo;  pro  Owen,  c  B.)  It  WM
(1»  lued  to  enna  ft  penon  who  pm  hit  kdnut
Bod  lid  to  BBDlW  in  the  muugement  of  a  eania,
>•  &  jsiia-coniDltu  did  ;  but  the  woid  did  not
■uni^  the  oiMiot  or  puraniu  who  mada  ths  ipeMh
(CicdaOnA  iL  74)  in  the  timeof  Cicero.  Under
tha  empson,  it  nguiiUd  a  yenoD  who  in  uj  mj
■niited  in  the  coodoct  Bfacsiue  (Dig.  AO.  tit.  IS.
I.  1),  and  mi  umetinia  eqninlent  to  ontoi.
(Tncit  Ann.  X.  6.)  The  adTooUe  liad  Uien  ■  lee,
which  mi  oiled  bonomiiDn.  [Ok*i«r,  Pa-
THONDS,  Liz  Cikcia.]

The  kdiocatui  ia  defined  bj  Ulpiu  (Dig.  BO,
tit.  13)  to  be  any  perBon  who  aids  another  in  tlie
cODdnct  of  a  nut  or  action  ;  hut  under  the  empiie
the  jnnKonanlti  no  loiter  acted  at  adtocalet,  id
the  old  MDW  of  that  term.  The;  had  atlaiaed  a
bigba  pautiim  than  that  which  the;  held  imder
the  republic

The  adTocatu  fiaci  wai  an  Impoctaot  offlooc
Mtabliahed  try  Hadiiaaua.  (SparL  Haibim.  60.)
It  wat  hit  burincM  to  look  aftw  the  intcnati  gf
the  fiaeni  ic  the  imperial  tRaaniy,  and,  animg
other  thingi,  to  maintain  ita  title  to  &na  taduca.
The  Tarioiu  meamngt  of  adTMStni  bi  tiie  Htddle
Agei  an  giren  b;  Da  Cwige,  Oion.  (Dig.  S3,
tit.  4.  ■.  S;  Hellweg,  Hamilmtk  in  C^ii^inaiaa,
p.  196.)  [G.L.]

A'DYTUM. [Tbmplcm.]

AEACEIA  (oUitfia),  a  feetiral  of  the  Aegi-
netant  in  honovr  of  Acacoi,  the  details  of  which
an  not  knawa  The  Tictnr  ia  the  gamet  which
were  ulemniied  on  the  occation,  eoiuacnted  hii
ehaplet  in  the  magnificent  temple  of  Aeaena.
(BchoL  ad  Fad.  Ol.  tiL  166,  xiii.  lU  ;  UUUer,
AegmeHait,  p.  140.)  [L.  &]

AEDE3. [DOMUB)  TlMFLUM.]

AEDES  VITIO'SAE,  RUINCfSAR  [Dam-

AEDI'CULAE,»ignifif«ialhe  pnguliir,  a  room,
but  in  the  plural,  a  Bmall  house.  It  it,  towerer,
more  frequently  uted  in  the  aenae  of  a  ahrine,  at-
tached to  the  walla  of  templet  or  honiea,  in  which
the  itatae  of  a  deity  vat  placed.  The  aediculae
attached  to  hontea,  •ometimea  eontuned  the  pe-
uatcB  of  the  honae^  but  men  fieqaently  the
guardian  godt  of  the  itreet  in  which  they  were
placed. (Lir.  iht.  41  ;  Pelron,  39.)

AEDI'LES  (trroforiiun).  The  nuM  of  theae
fnnctionuief  ii  laid  to  be  derived^  from  their
bATing  the  care  of  the  temple  (aeifet)  of  Gerea.
The  aedilei  were  originally  two  in  number,  and
called  aedilea  plebeii ;  they  were  elected  from  the
plebea,  and  the  initituldoa  of  the  office  datet  &am
the  tame  time  at  that  of  the  tribuni  plebia,  B.  c
494.  Their  dutiea  at  fint  leem  to  hiTe  been
merely  minitterial ;  they  were  the  auiitonn  of
the  tribune*  in  tuch  matten  at  the  tribune*  en-
tnvted  to  them,  among  which  are  enumerated  the
brszing  of  anvfg  of  tmalier  impoRance.  At  an
early  peiiod  after  their  inilitn^on  (b.  c  446),  we
find  Uem  appouited  the  keepen  of  the  tenatui
eoninlta,  which  the  conioli  had  hitherto  aibitraiily
foppreaaed  a  altered.  (LiT.  iJL  55.)  They  were
•1*0  tbe  keapei*  of  the  plehiadta. Other  fbnctioaa

were  gradually  entmited  to  them,  and  it  i

alw^  can  to  dittingniah  theii  dutiei  from
of  theae  wtueh  beleog  to  the  eenion  ;  nor  to  diii-
tinniiih  all  the  dutiea  of  the  pidwian  and  cnrule
Mdilea,  alter  the  eitabliahpieDt  of  the  cumle
•rdikritip, Thijbad  tbeEaneral  ■npcrinl«ndciKe


of  bnSdingi,  both  Moed  asd  |rint«;  mdet  thii
powv  they  imnided  6ir  the  toppi^t  and  repair  of
templet,  cnns,  fte.,  and  todi  on  that  prints
buQdingi  which  were  m  a  niinoui  alata  (eurfci
viteMoe,  niJWMsa)  wen  repaired  1^  the  owno^  or
palled  down.  The  aperinlandaKe  over  the  waj^j
sod  distribution  of  wita  at  Some  was,  at  an  earljr
period,  a  matter  of  public  adminiitmtian.  Ae-
cordiig  to  FroDtiDDi,  thii  wai  tiie  duty  of  the
;  bvt  when  there  wen  no  cenaon,  it  waa
the  proTince  of  the  aedilea.  The  can  of
fticular  tonne  or  (upply  was  &rmed  to  un-
rt  (ndai^*orf),  and  all  that  they  did  waa
mbject  to  the  approbstioD  of  the  censors  or  die
aedilci.  (fia,4;iiiiai&i*.  Aon.  lih.iL)  The  can  of
the  ttmelt  and  paToneati,  with  the  cleansing  snd
diaming  of  the  city,  behHtged  to  the  aedilea,  and
tbe  care  of  the  ckaeae.  They  had  the  office  of
distributinf  con  among  the  plebea,  which  waa
iometimea  giioi  antmtonriy,  aometimea  aold  at  a
cheap  nta  ;  bW  thia  diatribution  of  com  at  Horns


not  be  omloDnded  with  the  di^  of  puchaamg
or  procuring  it  from  ftnign  parti,  which  wna  per-
fonned  by  uw  coniula,  qnaeaton^  and  pnatora,  and


inlinaiy  magiatnte,  u  ths
The  aedilea  bad  to  tae  tbnt
the  public  landt  wcte  not  improperly  used,  and
that  tbe  pBfltnre.groniida  of  the  slate  were  not
on  ;  and  they  had  power  to  poniih  by
ilawM  act  in  thii  mpect  The  Gnea
iployed  in  paiins  roads,  and  in  other
public  puipoaes.  They  had  a  gesaal  superin-
tendence over  bnying  and  telling,  and,  at  a  con-
sequence, the  inpemsiaQ  of  the  maAals,  of  tliinga
eipotcd  to  sale,  auch  aa  alarea,  and  of  weight!  and.
thia  part  of  their  dnty  ia  derired
whid  the  aedilea  an  -■  •
by  the  Oraek  writen  (Ayoparjfui).
bnrineaa  to  tee  that  no  new  deities  or  reugnoa
ritea  woe  introduced  into  tbe  dly,  to  lode  after
tbe  obterranco  of  religioni  ceremoniet,  snd  tiia
celcbiationi  of  the  andent  foutt  and  ftatinls.
Tbe  general  snperintoidence  of  police  comprv-
'  nded  the  duly  of  pceaecring  ordei,  decency,  and
le  mspectum  of  the  baths,  and  houses  of  enter-
inment,  of  bItltheh^  and  of  prottitatca.  Tfao
tdilea  had  varioui  (^cers  under  them,  ai  piae-
nea,  terilwe,  and  viatcna.
The  Aedilea  CSirule^  who  wei«  alao  two  in
imber,  were  orisiiudly  chosen  coly  from  the  pn-
triciani,  af^erwnrda  alternately  from  the  patricisna
and  tbe  plebea,  and  at  laat  indifferently  from
both.  (LiT.  Tii.  I.)  The  office  of  cnrule  aedilea
ited  B.  C.  9GA,  and,  according  to  IJT7-,
ision  of  the  plebeian  aediles  rafhain);  to
celebrate  the  ludi  maiimi  for  the  i[
of  four  days  instead  of  ~
aenatua  coniultum  wat  paiied,  by  wnicn  nro
aedilea  were  to  be  cboaen  from  the  patriciana.
From  thia  time  tour  aedilea,  two  plebeian  and
two  cumle,  were  annually  elected.  (Li».  vi.  42.)
The  distinctive  honomi  of  the  aedilea  cniulca
were,  the  sella  curulia,  from  whence  their  title  ia
deiiTed,the  toga  prseteita,  precedence  in  apcaking
in  the  teuate,  and  the  jua  imaginom.  (Cic.
VtTT.  T.  14.)  Only  tbe  aadilei  cnrulM  bad  the
joi  edioendi,  or  the  power  of  promulgating  edictn
(Ouua,  L  6) ;  but  the  ralea  comprued  m  their
edict*  aerred  bt  tim  midance  ef  al]  the  aedilea.
The  edicta  of  the  eniwe  aedilea  were  ftanded  on
thrir  anthcri^  « inperiBteBJnl* V  J^maActi^


or  the  awes


mitthtjmgmiiwMBgmgiayail,  Juaaih^j,


M  Ik*  nlw  tm  U  lnijBiiiiiil  nAisg,  aod  centiacti
U  bKpm  sad  id*.  n»j  wen  tha  femuUtioa
■f  Ik  •Mkaa  acdilidae,  laaig  whidi  ■■»  included

A 1.  J.  ^Wawn  jSMitfc .-  OeD.  It.  1)  A  gietf
|M  if  tl«  ^nidotia  of  tlw  «e<Uhi' (diet  tdita  to
iW  bnM^  md  (ding  of  ihifM.  Tbe  peiMn
hA  ^  tka  pieboan  and  cotnle  ladilM  mn  M-

h  mtam  ttat  alter  tlM  in^lmmt  of  tlie
carie  ■eiiWie  tka  fmctioiH  mmalj'  aieRiMd
tr  te  idMu  aedilM  wtfe  euRHBd,  wilb  Haw
tpv  ■■■■[»■—■,  bj  >U  tke  aedilee  iadiStnntlj,
WiAa  •*•  d^je  illOT  kulg  dected  or  eoteridg
■  <Ce^  tkej  won  nquind  lo  detcnuDe  bj  lo^


iW  cilr  mek  AooM  take  Bidcr  Ui  RpannlaBd-
as  i  lad  each  aedila  aloie  hid  tlw  cm  of
bikag  ^te  Ika  ^raig  aid  cbieiiiiiig  of  the

within  hudiitricl.  (TbWL


Hlmiima  of  lbs  pnU
I,  O^n  WM  ■  fnrtker


lUiB  k


u  e(  aeditei.  Hut  cf  then
Mnk.aueb  M  UHMC  of  Flon  (Cic  Verr.'/.U;
Ond.  AiA  T.  378,  &&)  md  Cat*,  were  n]periit>
Haded  bj  otber  eet  of  ■odilce  indiffiercDtlj' ;  but
W  jdihi  Tea  gnnea  (p/idim  Imii)  vac  nndn  tbe


K  encaw  Mis'  paMie  pnpoHa.  (Lit.  i.  2S  ;
xnn.  «  ;  Orid.  /U.  t.  978,  tu.)  Tbs  cdabn-
lu  tt  tiM  Lsdi  mttni  or  Romeni,  of  tbc  Lodi
■aid,  H>d  tbe  Lndi  Hcgaleni  tt  Meplauei,
'  'mil  epeciiilf  to  tbe  omde  aedike  (Ut.
mi  M;  end  tbe  IMdut^ke  to  tbe  iiby*  of
Tooor),  Mtd  it  wee  on  each  oecuiiHU  tW  tbe;
iAn  iaiJiiiad  a  jrodi^ou  expenee,  witb  tbo  mw
•f  plang  tbe  ptople  and  Kiairiiig  their  Tolei  in
taan  deoiaaa.  Thii  ertnTiinnt  expenditore  of
tbc  Bc^nca  anae  after  the  eloae  of  the  Kcond
twoK  «ar,  and  inaeaafld  irith  the  oppcrtiuutiea
whi^  adiTidaali  had  of  sirichiDg  thomaelTet
rfts  ^  Bonan  anna  was  calried  into  Greece,
AfriiB,  and  Spain.  Eren  the  prsdigalitj  of  the  ent-
pcnea  bndl;  mpaMed  that  of  htdindnal  ennile
nHArm  MidcT  the  npablbc ;  anch  ai  G.  Jnlina
C^ar  {Plot.  Cfaoar,  6)  afls«ard«  the  dielalar,
r.  CiiB^a*  Leatthe  Spinther ;  ud,  abon  all,
ik.  JumSmm  Staanu,  wboae  expenditore  wee  not
iadead  M  ba^a  ebow,  bat  oonpiBbeDded  oUeeti
tf  pdGc  stiliqr,  m  tbe  npantioo  «l  wnllj,  dock-
jnede,  par^  aad  afMedoeti.  (Cic  if*  QfiL  17  ;
F1a./f.^.  zziiiL3,izzTi.  li.)  An  iiutwue  u
lii  i1  by  Dies  Camsi  (xliiL  48}  of  the  Lndi
Mnkai  In  big  aipcnntBided  by  tbe  ;debeian
aaMa ;  bat  it  WM  done  pimDBot  to  a  wnatui
o^BbinB,  aad  Ana  tbe  partiodar  exception  eon-
fanatke  geooil  nU.

la  B.  c  4A,  Jnlina  CaeHr  caued  two  eurala
ae^^  Bd  lav  fkbeiaa  aadika  to  be  deeted ;
^  thmafa  aai'd,  at  Itart  eo  lany  ai  the  eCce  of
■eSe  waa  *f  any  itaportiaee,  ta  aedilea  were
^H^  ehded.  Tbe  two  imr  plebein  aedile*
*ae  cabd  Gaaka,  aad  (bar  do^waata  look
tABtkim)7<f  on. Tboafb  tMr  flOee  mi7


AEDILE&  19

not  baTS  been  of  any  gnat  imparUnoo  after  tbe
initituticai  of  a  piBefactDi  uinonao  hj  AugQitua,
there  u  no  donbt  that  it  existed  ibr  ■erezw  eoK
tnriee,  and  at  lean  u  late  tt  the  time  of  Owdiau,
The  aedilea  belonged  lo  the  claaa  of  the
BuDcne  magiimttu.  Dioayiiiu  tlatei  that  the
•adilca  were  originaUi'  ehoiea  at  the  comitia
ooiata  <ix.  43)  ;  but  thii  >•  not  probable.  Tho
ld<i>eim  aedilea  were  originallr  cboasa  at  tbe
conitia  (antaiiata,  bnt  aAerwaidi  at  the  comitia
tiibnta  (DioDji.  ii  90.  iz.  iS.  49  j  Lit.  iL  AS,
57),  in  which  comida  the  eorule  aedilee  alio  veia
ehoaen,  at  the  eama  time  (Pint  itariu,  S) ;  but
it  appean  that  then  waa  a  aenuata  TOtii^  fat
tka  euola  and  the  plebeian  aadilea,  and  that  tha
cnmle  aedilee  were  deeted  Gnt  It  appean  that
ontil  the  lex  atmalia  wu  paned,  a  Rangaa  dtiKD
mi^  be  a  candidate  for  ain' idea  after  oMipleting
bit  tweo^-ieraitb  year.  Thie  lei  annalia,  vhieb
waa  paaaed  at  tbe  inatanee  of  the  ttibnna  L.
Villini  T^fiolDL  B.  0.  ISO,  fixed  the  age  at  which
-  *  office  migtit  bo  enjoyed.  (lir.  xL  44.)
'  liny  doea  not  menttan  what  were
by  thii  law ;  bnt  it  ia  collected
bom  Tarionj  paabgee  of  Roman  writoa,  that  the
age  fixed  for  the  ai^eahip  waa  thirty-dz.  Thii,
at  leeit,  wai  the  age  at  which  a  man  could  be  a
candidate  for  the  curok  aedileahip,  and  It  dace  not
appear  that  there  wai  a  difierent  .nle  for  the
plebeian  aedileahip.  In  Cioero'a  time,  the  aedilea
wen  elected  Kane  time  in  Jul]',  tha  uiual  [Jace  of
election  wu  the  Field  of  Man  (Ctuapni  AUctiua),
end  the  preeiding  msgietiBte  waa  a  consul

The  aedilea  axiated  under  the  naperon  ;  bnt
their  powon  were  gndniilly  diminiahed,  end  tbeir
fnnctioaa  exoidsed  by  new  ofitcera  crc^ed  by  the
cBiperon.  Alter  the  battle  of  Actiiun,  Auguilui
appointed  a  praefectna  uibi,  who  eieniacd  the
gencnl  police,  which  bad  feimeriy  been  one  of  the
dntiee  of  (he  aedilea,  Anautiu  alao  toi^  from
hwimtf^  the  officB  of


and  tbna  may  be  aaid  to  faaTa  dettroyed  tbe  aedile-
ahip by  dejniTing  it  of  ita  old  and  criginal  Auk*
tion.  Thia  will  lerre  to  explain  the  fact  meiK
tiotwd  by  Dion  Caaaios  (It.  24),  that  no  one
wai  willing  to  hold  lo  contemptible  an  office,  and
Anguitti*  wu  tfaenfon  reduced  to  the  aeceaai^
of  compellinv  penons  to  take  it :  penona  ven  ao-
eordingly  choeen  by  lot,  oat  of  tboae  who  had
lined  the  office  of  qnaeator  and  ttibone  t  and  (hie
waa  doDe  more  than  onca.  The  lait  lecctded  in-
■Mnea  «f  (he  ^ilaidoiui  of  (be  aedileibqi  ii  (ha
adniniMtatiao  of  Agrippo,  wbo  Tiriimteered  to  take
the  oAce,  and  rnaind  all  the  pnUic  building*  and
all  the  nads  at  hie  own  expeue,  without  diawing
anything  fnnn  the  tnaaury.  (THon  Ceia.  ilii.  43 ;
Plin.  H.  N.  ixiTL  16.)  The  aedileah^  had,
howBTer,  loat  ile  true  character  before  thii  time.
Agiip{Bbad  already  been  counlbdbn  he  accepted
the  offloe  ui  aedile,  aikd  bii  nmn^cent  expenditun
hi  due  nominal  cAeawn  tbe  doea  of  de  aplendomr
of  the  aedileahip.  AngutDi  moiiiled  the  cnmle
aadilet  ipeoally  to  the  rfSoe  IM  putting  out  Area,
■nd  placed  a  body  c€  600  akretat  their  eanmand;

dn^. iT^rniBDna  t
mwntad  by  him  to
(Be  d^,  and  tita  qoM


20  AEOINETARUM  PERLAE.

vrilMo  RiKiiB. The  cmralortt  opcmm  pmUiconm
and  thi  airaiora  altxi  Ttlirnt,  also  sppoiated  by
Auguatiu,  itripped  the  Bedilu  of  the  remnuiing
few  dntie*  that  miglit  be  cmll«d  bmmimble. The;
iMt  bIki  ths  laperinlendence  of  velli,  M  ipringi,
tni  of  the  KqiuAductl. (Fimtiniu  ii.  De  Jl  jwo-
(fiKfthu.) The;  letftined,  nDdet  ths  eailj  em-
penm,  a  kind  of  police,  for  the  pnipote  of  rtpnm-
iog  open  licenliouineu  and  duorder : Ihni  the
bathi,  eating-honae*,  and  hiothela  wen  atiU  (ab-
ject to their  inipection,  and  the  nwutratiD
proitititei  waa  itill  within  their  dntiet. (1
AmaL  ii.  BS.) We md  of  Iha  aedilea  onda
Augnitnt  making  leanb  after  libellooi  boot
older  that  the;  might  be  bant  g  and  alio  i
Tiberim  (Tadt  Jo.  it.  Si.)

Ths  coloniae,  and  the  mDiiiei[te  of  the
period,  had  alu  their  aedilea,  whote  nmnbci*  and
tunctiatu  TUied  in  diSerent  pUee*.  Ther  aeem,
howBTer,  aa  to  their  poweia  tiii  dutiei,  to  haye  le-
Kinbled  the  aedilea  of  Rome.  The;  nme  choaen
annniUj-.  {De  AtdO.  a)L,tLc  Otto.  Lin.  1732.)

The  hiita;,  powen,  and  dutiei  of  the  aedilea
■la  aUted  with  great  minDleneu  b;  Bchidiert,  De
Romanomm  AtdSSmt,  lib.  It.  Regimoutii,  1828.
See  aUo  Wunder,  De  Rumamonim  CamiHit  Aedi-
Ibm  CmliiHit,  in  hii  edition  of  Cicero'i  Oration
Pm  Cn.  Planoo,  Leipiifr,  1830.  [O.  L.}

AEDI'TUI,  AEDI'TUMl,  AEDI'TIMI
{rtuKipti,  (ixBpoi),  peraoni  who  took  care  of  the
tenplea,  and  attended  to  the  cleaning  of  them.
Notwithatanding  Ihia  menial  lerrice,  liie7  paTtaoh
of  the  prieatl;  character,  and  an  lometimea  even
called  prieatl  h;  the  Or«ek  gTanunariana.  (Snid.
Heajeb.  Etynu  M.  t.v.  (cEjc^mi  ;  Pollai,  i.  U.)
Id  nuuiy  eatea  they  were  women,  aa  Timo  in
Herodotua  (ii.  134),  who  abo  ipeaki  of  her  aa
ftrofiicepiit,  from  which  it  ii  dear  that  m  to
pboea  aeieral  of  theae  prieati  mnit  hare  been
^.i.i ..  ._ ...  '■,  and  that  tJ

Snbaeqoent^
e>  connected  with  the  office  of  the
JVacmri  were  left  to  (lavea,  and  the  latter  beianie  a
title  giTentoprieitlyofflccn  of  high  rank,Df  wbcmao
account  ia  giTm  in  a  aepaiate  article.  [Nbocohl]
The  aeditni  lired  in  the  temnlea,  or  near  them,
and  acted  ai  cicenmi  to  thsae  peiaona  who
wiahed  to  tee  AenL  <Plin.  H.  f^.  mri.  *.  1 10  ;
CSe.  Virr.  It.  U  ;  Lit.  hi.  17 ;  SdioL  ad  Mor.
Ep.  iL  1. 230.)  In  andcnt  limei  the  aeditoi  were
eitiiena,  hot  under  the  emperon  fieedmen.  (Serr.
ad  Vif^.  Am.  ix.  6*0.)

AEGINETA'RUM  FE'RUE  (/dyunrrAr
Jopr^),  a  featiTal  in  bononr  of  Poaei^on,  which
taated  lixteen  daya,  daring  which  time  maj
bmily  took  iti  meala  quietly  and  alone,  no  ilara'
being  allowed  to  wait,  and  no  itranger  inritsd  to
partake  of  than.  From  the  circnmalanee  of  each
fiunilir  being  cloaeJy  conSoed  to  ittel^  Ihme  who
•oleomiaed  Ihii  fstiyal  were  called  /uH^d^i.
Plutarch  (QmieW.  Oraee.  il)  tracea  ila  origin  to  the
Trojan  war,and  aayi  that,  ai  many  irf  the  Aeginetana
had  toat  their  liiea,  partlr  in  the  liege  of  Tcoj  and
partly  on  their  return  home,  ihoae  who  leached
their  natiTs  Iiland  mn  roceiTed  indeed  with  joy
by  their  kinamen  ;  hot  in  ordv  to  avoid  hurting
the  feeling)  of  thoae  bmiliea  who  had  to  laatoit
the  loB  of  their  frienda,  they  thought  it  fnfa
uatlliar  to  thaw  their  jc^  nor  to  ofier  any  ncrificet
in  poblie;  Ejttj  bmHj,  thenfors,  enlotained
frintdjr  their  Bieadt  who  had  retoned,  lod


ABQnt

acted  thonaeln*  ai  attatdanti,  thongli  not  wiOk
oot  rejoicinga.  [L.  S.]

AE0I3  (oirlt),  the  ahield  of  Zetu,  aignifiea
literally  a  gott^^n,  and  ii  fonied  on  the  aaoa
analogy  with  M»pii,  a  fawn^kin,  (Hraod-ir.  189,)
Acccrding  to  ancient  mythology,  the  awia  worn  inr
Zeoi  wai  the  hide  of  the  goat  Amallheia,  whici
had  auckled  him  in  hit  in&ncy. Hyginna  relatM


pRtentt  it  a>  [art  of  the  annonr  of  Zeua,  whom  on
thia  account  ho  diitingulihea  by  ths  epithet  aegit-
iiari^  {niyuxoi).  He,  however,  MKiti,  that  it
waa  borrowed  on  diSerenC  occaaioni  both  by  Apidio
<«.  IT.  239,  S07— 318,  360,  idt.  30),  and  by-
Athena  (It.  il  W — 14S,  iriil  204,  ziL  400).

Ths  ^ina  of  Tnrioaa  quadmpedi  haTing  bsen
naed  by  the  mat  ancient  iuhabitanta  of  Gieeca
for  clothing  and  defence,  ve  cannot  wonder  that
the  goat-akin  waa  enplojed  in  the  lanie  manner.
It  muat  alio  be  boine  m  mind  that  the  heaij
ihieldi  of  ths  aocienl  Oreekt  wen  in  part  anp.
ported  by  a  belt  or  itnp  (rtAo^i^,  balUKi)  jaaunv
orer  the  ri^ht  ihouldei,  and,  when  not  elerateS
with  the  ihield,  deaeendnig  tnnaTenely  tu  ths  left
hip.  In  order  that  a  goal-dcin  might  terTo  thia
pucpote,  two  of  it*  legs  would  [vobahly  be  tied
OTBT  the  right  ahoulder  of  the  wcanr,  the  other
eitnmity  being  laalened  to  the  iniide  of  the  shield.
la  combat  the  left  arm  would  he  poMed  under  tho
hide,  and  would  raiM  it  together  with  the  thield,
ai  la  shown  in  a  marble  statue  of  Athena,  prtt-
lerred  in  the  mutsiun  at  Naplea,  which,  frtra  ita
style  of  art,  may  be  reckoned  among  the  moit  an-


other statue*  of  Athena  reprsasnt  hei  in  a  itata
of  repote,  and  with  the  goat-skin  blling  obliquely-
ban  itt  looM  bttening  orer  her  lightihoulder,  wi
—  ■-  -jaainiond  the  body  under  ths  left  arm. The

ed  GBuro  ia  taken  bom  a  ndoial  itatae  of

laat  Onades.


mg  thii  gumoit,  alxi  of
en  in  m  itatoe  of  Athena
■  Dniiiii,'«f  itill  higba  asttqnitj  tlua  tbU  lut
nfanri  la,  and  in  the  Toy  aadait  image  of  (lie
■■c  iiaddaa  fraa  tba  tenuis  of  Zena  at  At^ina.
!■  tatt  of  thtt  tlu  aegii  coTcn  the  rigbt  aa  veil
■•  tki  Itft  aboDldar,  tfaa  InaMt,  and  the  back,  fall-
B|  bekiad  aa  aa  afauat  to  lauh  tin  feet.  Sdiom
Tb  Btttiger^  jlaajfiao,  ii.  216)  oonndan  thii  u
t^  vigiaaj  foRn  of  dw  aegi^

Bf  a  figan  of  q»c!i,  Homs  Dan  the  term
aifB  to  dtnoto  Dot  oolj  the  giat-ikin,  vhieh  it
pBftrij  rignified,  but  together  with  it  the  shield
k  aUch  it  behmged.  B;  tha*  midcnlaiidiiiB  the
■■4,  k  ia  eaa;  to  minprehcnd  both  why  AUiena
ii  iBd  to  tknv  her  SUbec'i  aegii  aivood  her
•kaddoi  (A  T.  73S,  iriiL  304),  and  why  on  one
CBaaai  Apdla  ia  aaid  to  hold  it  in  hia  bud  and
ta  4aka  it  av  ai  to  terify  and  nrnfoiuid  the
Cncki  {IL  ST.  229.  307—331),  and  on  another
■rcawa  to  c0T«r  with  it  tbo  dead  bod;  of  Hector


lt(zi


.30).


tfaa  fya  we  loaat  aamoie

tbc  dadd,  Inaather  with  the  large  expanded  tkin

«  bdt  hj  inai^  it  wai  aBpeoded  from  dw  rigbt


•t  aegia  to  ba  adoaed  in  a  itrli
•■piBdiog  to  the  might  and  nnjea^  of  the  &ther
•f  ihe  goda.  In  the  middle  of  it  waa  fixed  the
^falbig  QoiSoBl  head  (IL  r.  7i1),  and  iti
hrwdcr  waa  BKreimded  with  golden  towel*
{HtmMm),  each  of  which  vai  vonli  a  hecatomb
(a.  446 — 449).  In  the  Ggarci  abore  exliibited,
■ha  Mtpiali  of  the  Oagan^  head  an  trautfeiRd
tathabodcrofthe^in.
I^  iW  bur  foela  and  aitirii,  the  original  eon-

, The;  repie^Dt  it  w  a
a  onind  with  mat^  in  tho  form  of


Whk  Am  uptaiamce  the  daacr^tisai  of  lbs
an  by  tba  IJKin  poeti  gesBillT  aanenxmd.
{tag,  Atm.  liiL  43S~4S8  ;  VaL  FluB.  -n.  174  ;
aU.  AHL  Ont.  15  i  KL  ItaL  ix.  443.)


It  ii  remarkable  that,  although  the  aegia  pro-
perly belonged  to  Zeoa,  yet  we  »eldom  find  it  ai
an  attribnte  of  Zen*  in  worki  of  art.  Thera  ii,
however,  in  the  moieum  at  Leyden,  a  marblo  atatDs
of  Zeoi,  found  at  Utica,  in  which  the  aegia  hanga

hii  left  ihoulder. The  anneiod  figure  ia  taken

ZeUB  ii  here  re|ae*ented


e  ihield  ii  placed  nndeiiteath  i^  at


with  the  u
leftai


The  RmmD  empanm  a1>o  annnad  the  aegit
■tending  thereby  to  eikibil  thenueiTea  in  the
cbajacler  of  Jnpiter,  Of  thia  the  armed  atatoe  of
Hadrian  in  the  Britiih  Muenm  preaenti  an  ex-
iple.  In  IbeM  caaea  the  more  recent  Rmnan
conception  of  the  acgii  ia  of  conne  fiiUowed,  co-
i~Hdnig  with  the  lemaik  of  Serriiu  (Am.  ym.
>),  that  thii  breait.armo<iT  wu  caUed  aegia
when  worn  hyagod;  fanlaa,  whaa  won  h;  a  man,
(Comp.  Mart  yu.  l.>  [j.  Y.J


S3  ABNUM.

AEINAUTAE (iiiniDrBi), ma^iitntci
Miletu,  coniuting  of  the  chief  neo  in  the  Ml
vlio  DblBined  the  ■□iveme  pawei  oo  the  deponl
of  llie  Risnti,  Thou  lud  Dsmuenor. WlieDe
thfljr  wuhed  to  delibeiate  oa  important  mMb
the;  embuked  on  board  ih^  (heoce  their  nan
put  out  at  &  diMance  from  land,  snd  did  not  ret
to  ihore  tiU  they  had  tmmded  their  buna
(Plut.  Q»aai.  Grate.  SO.)
AEIPRU'OIA  (itupvyU). [ExsiMUK.]
AEISITI  (itiarroi). [PuTTAtoiDii.]
AENEATO'RES (shenatore.,  Amm, M«re.
xiiv.  4),  were  thoH  wbo  blew  upon  wind  inftiu-
mentfl  ia the Romui  annj, uunelj, the  Ime-
eiMJonn,  conidntt,  and  laikiiut,  and  thej
•a  caUed  becanae  all  thae  inttmmenti  wets  i
of  an  or  bioDio.  (Suet.  Out.  5Z) AencaloRi
»ete  alao  employed  in  the  public  gunM.  (Sen.  A^
84.) Aa" ■


to  tare  been  a  Tety  a
Oredcif  upeciallj  at  their  aynipDiia,  to  amuse
themielTei  bj  Hopoaing  liddlei  to  be  volTed.
Their  partiBlity  for  thii  »rt  of  amniemenl  ii  B^
teited  by  the  &ct  that  vune  penoni.  inch  ai
Tbeodeclei  of  PhaKlia  and  Ariitoaymu,  acqoinid
caniiderable  repalation  u  inrenton  ood  wrtten  of
tidd](a.(Athen.i.D^4£l,  4£2,iiLp.£3a)  Thoie
«ho  were  mcceeam  m  aolTing  the  nddle  pmpoied
to  them  Ttceired  a  price,  vbich  had  been  pre-
TJooi];  agreed  upon  by  the  coinpany,  and  unuJIy
CDiuiited  of  vreadu^  taeniae,  cakei,  and  other
iveetmeata,  or  hiwei,  vhcrou  a  pecvui  nnahle  to
iolre  s  riddle  wat  ccndemned  to  drink  in  one

InlhuJtwatar.  (Athen.i.p.457  ;  PDl1ui,Ti.l07  i
Heaych.  i.  r.  ypipsi.)  ThoH  riddlea  vUch  hare
eome  doim  to  ni  an  moatly  in  liezatnelcr  tcik,
and  the  tragic  ai  well  ai  comic  writen  not  unfre-
quentlf  introduced  them  into  their  pUya  Pollux
(L  e.)  diitingniifaca  tvo  hindi  of  riddlei,  the
o&ry/aa  and  Tjiu^i,  and,  according  to  him,  the
former  ma  of  a  joccee  and  the  latter  of  a  Hrioni
nature ;  bnt  in  the  writen  whoae  vorki  hare  come
down  to  HI,  no  mch  diitiuctian  it  obaerred  ;  and
there  a»  paingea  where  the  mine  yci^  ii
girai  In  the  moet  Indicroui  joket  of  thii  kind.
(Ariitoph.  Fe^.  20  ;  conp.  Beekov  CAoricbi,
ToLi  p.  473.)  The  Romani  leem  to  hRTe  been  too
•etioui  to  lind  any  great  amnumenC  in  riddlei ;
and  when  OelliTU  (iriil  2)  intrndDoa  tome  Ro-
mana  at  a  banquet  engaged  in  ulTing  riddlea,  ve
mutt  rEmember  that  the  acena  it  laid  at  Athcni ;
and  ve  do  not  hear  of  any  Romani  who  invented
or  wrote  riddlea  nntit  a  very  lata  period.  Appn-
leiu)  wrote  a  woik  entitled  lAtr  Lndiaroimm  li
Gripllonim,  which  ii  loaL  After  the  time  of  Ap-
pnleini,  leieial  eollectiom  of  riddle*  were  made,
■ome  of  which  are  atiU  extant  in  Ma  in  Tarioni
libnriea.  [L.  S.]

AE'NUM,  at  AHEIfUH  (ac  «at),  a  brann
Taaial,  mad  tx  bi^Sing,  ia  defined  by  Padlhu  to
be  a  mad  haacin*  orcf  Iba  Sre,  in  which  water
waa  boiled  for  drinking,  whocaa  food  wat  boflad
!n  the  coca&ak  (Kg.  3S.  tit  7.  a.  1 B.  g  3.)  Thii
diitinction  ii  not,  hoverer,  alwaya  obanred  (  for
ve  read  of  food  faamg  cooked  in  the  aijam.  (Jot.
zv.  81  ;  Or.  Mtt  n.  G4i.>  The  word  it  alao
frequently  vied  in  the  aauH  of  a  dyer'i  copp« ;
an^  at  purple  wai  the  moat  nistaatad  dye  vi


andqoi^,  we  find  the  eiptmianiSUaiiAMiii&inti,
T^nm  (u'wBi,  &c  (Ot.  Fatl.  iiL  823;  Hait.
lir.  133.)

AEO'RA,  or  EO'RA  (oUpo,  Upa),  a  fotiTal
at  Atheni,  accompanied  with  aaai£eei  and  ban-
qoeti,  whence  it  ii  lometimo  called  clSfnnvi^
The  cranmon  acconnt  of  iti  tvigin  ia  at  fcdlowt ;  ^^
louiui  wat  killed  by  the  ■hepherd*  to  whom  ho
had  iJiiTen  wine,  and  who,  being  imac^nabited
with  the  effectt  of  thii  berenge,  iancied  m  their
intoxication  that  he  had  giren  then  poiaon.
Erigone,  hit  daughter,  guided  bj  a  bithfld  dog,
diKoreiied  the  corpse  of  her  &ther,  whcm  shs
had  longht  a  long  time  in  Taia  j  and,  praying  to
the  godt  that  all  Athenian  maideni  might  periih
in  the  same  manner,  hung  henel£  After  this  oc.<
cnmnce,  many  Adienian  womsi  actnally  hung
themtelvei,  apparently  withcat  any  motiTs  wbst-
erer  ;  and  when  Che  oncte  wat  CMitulted  tnpect-
Ing  it,  the  antwer  vat,  that  Icaiiua  and  Erigmo
mutt  he  propitiated  by  a  fettiTKL  (Hygin.  Potf.
^•^roit.  ii  4.)  According  to  the  E^/Bwlagiaiat
Magmm,  the  feitiTBl  vat  eelelxated  in  hoDoir  of
Erigme,  danghtar  of  Aegitthni  and  Clytaemneatra,
who  came  to  Athens  to  bing  the  cha^  of  matri-
cide againit  Onatea  bafbni  the  Areiongua  ;  and,
when he  waa  acquitted,  hnng  henelf^  wiUi  tho

'  h  aa  the  daoghtar  «  Icarini,  and  with

canasqnencea,  AcCDnling  to  Heaychins,
the  hetiial  waa  oslebnled  in  commemoration  of
the  tynnt  Temolnu,  bnt  no  raiOD  it  aiaigned.
EuBtalhiut  (ad  film.  pp.  389,  15Si)  callt  tha
I  hnng  henelf  Aiora.  But  as  the  festiial
ed  'AA^if  (apparently  &om  the  van-
deringi  of  Erigone,  the  danghter  of  Icarini),  th«
legend  which  was  first  mentioned  teemi  to  be  tiia
moit  entiUed  to  belief  PoUoi  (ir.  7.  §  SS)  ma-
aoi^  made  by  ThaDdoma  «t  Colc^on,

ttben-

jnbablo

Erigone  and  the  othtr  Alhaiiui  women  vho  faal
hung  themselTes,  ivnng  themselTcs  during  thia
fettiTa!,  at  the  same  time  singing  the  aboro-
lentiooed  long  of  Theodoma.  (9a  alBo  Athcn.
St.  p.  618.)  [Ua]

AERA.  [CHnoNOLoau.]
AERA'RII,  a  daai  of  Ronun  citiuni,  whs
are  said  not  to  haie  been  contained  in  the  thir^
tribes  initiRted  by  Serriui  TiUliua.  It  it,  how-
>f  the  most  dJSenlt  paints  in  the  Roman
II  to  determine  vho  they  vere  ;  tinoe  all
the  luaage*  in  which  they  am  mentioned  refer  only
>wer  of  the  censors  to  dqiads  a  citiaeo,
xmdnet,  by  remoring  him  from  hit  Iribn
and  making  him  an  aeiarian ;  bnt  ve  nowhem
Snd  any  definition  of  what  on  acnuian  vai.  The
Pseudo-Asoonins  {ad  Oa.  (Kvia.  w  CateU.  p.  103,
ed.  Orelli),  sayl  that  a  plebejaa  might  be  di^raded

*-'  -"  -■ '  —  '  •>  thetaMos  Cam^am  and

The  ami  in  this  stete-
■  plabaiaa,  but  a  aoialBr
and  an  eqnea  alio  mi^t  become  an  aoarian,  vhila
for  a  plebeian  then  vaa  no  other  psnithmcnt  «c-
eept  that  of  becmning  an  aaaiian. Fran  the


tnnafened  to  the  tables  of  the  Casitaa  v*s
aqniialent  to  bscoming  an  aeiarian ;  secondly,  that
an  acniian  no  longer  belonged  to  a  onlnry ;  and,
thirdly,  that  he  had  to  nay  the  tribute  in  a  dif-
ferent mannn  from  the  other  eiliaent.  TlusaMalfr-


AERABIUIL

]  tr  A*  Scbdiuta  Cmqmi


m  BMW*  l^M.  L  S.G2)  tad  bjr  Q<aiiiu  (i

"~ '  U  «e  tboe  Ifun,

hat  tlra  Mnciani
9i<Niebiihi,/rHt.


13).  IT  wt  tUidh  kMp  U  vbat  «e  the
w*  OBMt  adopl  tM  opmim  Ibat  tlra  r
OMMd  rf  ntnm  ud  frvedinai  (Niebo


id  A*  mmbci  of  thia  du*  of  penoiu
■»  w  ON*  aaa  u^lragie)  may  tuTs  been
rar  nt  Tbtaa  peo^  we  amceire  to  hsTs
ka  the  tumiii,  wA,  indeed,  m  ■ocannt  of  their
*— fi-".  Int  baeuM  tbajr  voa  dtiiaii  trho
U  Ht  f^n  Ibe  nCng«  HcDce  tbe  Cierilei
mo  pebab^  1^  fin*  bod;  tf  Hnrim* ;  uid
n;  BiBBi  dtnen  pul^  of  k  crime  pnnuhable
kf  Ac  emam,  nisbt  be  degraded  to  tbe  mnlc  of

pade4.  It  iort  &c  the  lime  that  he  wu  an
•BBioL  Bm  n  cnmot  nqipon  tlwt  the  (k*  of
*  Baan  oIbbi  — g'gi"g  in  ttade  hnnight  Bhtmt
Mit  >  dtgndetieo  ;  bt  t£en  cu  be  li^  doabt
»h»ta»[Wi  eaaninning  tbe  eitf  trite*  (tribiu
■faMt)  ana  Ban  sr  lea  an  aigi^  in  Inde  ud

it  b«™  been  eqainlc


to  n  ■  tribotmn  ne  cafHta  i  and  that  thii  tu
■M  WBaiimblj  bigba  tban  Ibat  paid  b;  the
>ha  f itiii  ■>.  nat  be  inferred  from  LItj  (it.


Mde  B  atcarian  vtwpBelo  etmtm.  Thej  wen
atalaved  tOBCTT*  in  tbe  kgioiii;  but  ai  they
amithiua  njajwA  tke  protectko  of  tbe  itate,
■A  a  Ugb  itf*  if  laiatiin  CBmol  be  couidend

Il  hat  been  aaoted  tbat  the  Bttrtimi,  ai  mch,
bdnged  le  the  clan  of  the  aeiaiian* ;  but  tbit
einiiai  it  fbimded  anon  a  wiong  etntement  of
FhtaA  (ApKe.  7),  tAat  fieedmen  did  not  obtain
<^  •das*  tiQ  tbe  twe  of  Appini  Claudini ;  for
Kkjbib  (it.  22}  infiinna  Be  that  Servini  Tnlliiu
■laynaied  tlHsB  with  tbe  at}  tribcft (Cemp.


^.  f.  360,  Ac  J  Becks,  Hamdhmek  dtr  Ham.
^ikrtL  TiL  D.  p(L  183— 1S&)  [L.  S.]

AEKA'RJI  TRIBU'NL [An  Equrarxi ;

AERA'BIUH  (rt  tw^ur),  tbe  pnblie  tns-
mjA  B^K,  nd  hsiea  the  piiblie  aoaej  ittit
Aits^  baai^nart  of  the  kinp  the  temple  of
Srara  «aa  ODplojed,  npoo  tbe  papoii^ao  of
Viltam  Psfdicela,  ai  the  phta  tm  keeping  the
laUic  BOHT,  and  it  eontiDned  to  be  ao  need  tiD
the  lakf  timcB  of  the  empini. (Pint.  PcjiL  12,


*  Of  thia  knpk  thme  Ctrinthian  pllan  wilb


le  tieaiiuT  J
—  1. The


AKKARIUM.  29

ttdea  tbe  pablie  Dumef  and  the  accoimli  eannecled
with  iti  receipti,  expendiCoie,  and  debton^  i
rioiu  other  thingi  were  pReerred  in  the  ti
at  thne  tbe  mott  imivrtant  i
itandardi  af  tbe  legicni  (Lit.  iii.  D»,  it.  n,  tu.
23).  2.  The  Tarioni  Uw*  poned  from  time  to
time,  mgraTen  on  braien  t&blea  (SneL  Gmo,  28^
3.  liie  decrea  of  the  aenite,  whic^  were  altered
there  in  booki  kept  for  the  potpoae,  tbosgh  tlM
original  docnmenta  were  prcaerTed  in  the  temple  of
Cilea  under  the  eiutodj  of  the  aedilee.  (Joleph.
AA  lir.  10.  9  10  ;  Plat  Cat.  Mm.  17  ;  Cic
deLtg-uL  i  ;  Tae.  ^bil  iii.  fil.)  [Aidiles.]
i.  Varimu  other  pnblio  documenli,  the  reporta
and  deapstchee  of  aQ  graierala  and  govemon  of
proTinoea,  tbe  namea  ef  all  foreign  ambaaiadon
that  came  to  Rome  [LsoATUa],  tu.

The  lurunim  wai  the  common  treamr;  of  the
atate,  and  mint  be  diitingoiahed  from  the  pitituiBKj
which  waa  the  tRamcj  oE  the  popolna  or  the  pb-
tridaju.  It  ii  mentiimed  ai  one  of  the  grieiancei
of  the  plebeiaaa  that  the  booW  gainM  in  wai
waa  &eqneall;  paid  into  the  pabiicnm  (niigHtir  m
jmljiemit\  inMead  of  being  paid  into  tbe  aerarinni,
or  diatribated  among  the  aoldiera  (Lit.  ii.42);
but  iBhie  we  no  longer  read,  after  the  time  of  the
decemTimle,  of  tbe  booty  being  paid  into  the  pnb-

by  Nicbobi  that  tkii  waa  a  coniequenee  of  uie  de-
cemTiral  legialution.  (Niebolir,  IfiM,  Ram.  tdL  tL
nolea  336,  9G4.)  Under  tbe  republic  tbe  aemrium
waa  diTided  into  two  paxta :  the  osmnoa  treaanry,
in  which  were  depoiiled  the  regnlar  taxes  [Tki-
BDTUii ;  VacnUALu],  and  fitim  which  were
taken  the  aaau  of  money  needed  for  tbe  ordinary
eiponditDta  of  tbe  Mate  ;  and  the  ■Krai  tieaiary

IT.  S  1  Caea.  S.  C  L  U  j  Cic  <U  All.  viL  21^
which  wai  uerer  tonched  ciccpt  m  caiee  of  ex-
treme peril.  Both  of  tbeH  treanria  were  in  tbe
tranple  of  Satum,  bat  in  diitinct  parti  of  the  templa
The  (acred  treanuy  Kcmi  la  Iato  been  fint  ea-
tabtiihed  aoon  after  tlie  capCare  of  Rome  by  the
(3aula,  in  order  that  tbe  itate  might  alwaya  baie
money  in  tbe  treaanry  to  meet  the  danger  which
dreaded by  tbe Romana,  —


e  akoiild


ttti  of  Bto  .
TOlne  of  every  manomitted  alavi
into  thia  treaaoiy,  Aa  thia  money  waa  to  be  pre-
lerred,  and  thodbra  qiaca  waa  some  object,  it  bad,
at  Icaat  at  a  later  time,  eitber  to  be  paid  in  gold
or  waa  kept  in  the  tieaaniy  in  gold,  lince  LiTy
■peaka  of  aunm  ewuuMFUM  (Lit.  til  1 6,  znii.
10  ;  ima-p.  Cic.  ad.  AtL  iL  IB).  A  portion  of  the
itwTiMM*  wealth  obtained  by  the  Rotoani  in  their
coajBeala  m  the  Eaat  waa  likewiae  depoailed  in  the
acred  beaanry ;  and  though  ve  cannot  anppoee


Planciia  in  the  time  of  Angnatin  (Snet  Aig.  29 ;
Orelli,  /lutr.  No.  £90),  and  igun  tcatoied  by  Sep-
timiw  Serema.  (Backer,  Btmittldi  dtr  R6mi»-
du»  AUtrtkamtr,  tdL  i.  p.  ZIS.)


21  ABRARIUH.

th&t  [t  TU ■P'red in  the  dvil f


niDiu niDu of mone^l  (Pl[n. 'ff.  AT.  miiL  3.i.  17;
Dion  Cou.  ili.  17 ;  Oi«.  li.  1£  ;  Lucan.  iiL  1£G.)
Upon  the  atsbliitunent  of  the  imperial  pQwer
under  AugniDu,  there  wu  an  important  ebuigs
made  in  the  puhlic  income  and  expenditure.  He
diiidod  the  prorinm  and  the  adminiitration  of  the
goTemment  beCvccn  the  lenate.  Ha  the  repreaenta-
tiTS  of  the  old  Roman  people,  and  die  Caeaar :  all
the  prapert;  of  the  formei  contmaed  to  be  called
aeniniHn,  and  that  of  the  latter  receired  the  name
nCfiteui.  [Fiscus.]  The  nerariwa  coueqaendy
receired  alt  tbfl  taree  from  the  provincei  belonging
tn  the  KDate,  and  likewiK  raoal  of  the  tain  which
had  fbrmeilj  been  levied  in  Italf  itiel^  nich  ai
the  revenuea  of  all  public  iandg  atill  remaining  in
Ilalj,  the  tax  on  msnnraiuiona,  the  cnatsm-dutiea,
the  water-rat™  for  the  tue  of  the  -water  brought
into  the  citj  bj  the  aqoaedncta,  the  ■ewcr-ntee,

Beflidf*  the  aattriam  and  tjie  j(*cur,  AiiguitoB
eatablished  a  third  treaaurj,  to  provide  for  the  pay
and  support  of  the  army,  and  Ibit  received  the
name  of  acranan  mifiding.  Itwaa  founded  in  the
coDialahip  of  H.  AemilinB  Lqiidni  and  L.  Arrun-
tiufl,  A.  n.  6,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulty  which
waj  experienced  in  obtaining  Eufficient  fiuidB  from
the  ordinary  revenues  of  the  stale  to  give  the  sol-
diera  their  rewards  upon  disminian  from  service.
Angusnu  paid  a  very  Isigs  sum  into  the  treaiury
upon  its  foundation,  and  promised  to  do  lo  every
year.  In  the  Monomentum  Ancyranum,  Augustus
ii  said  lo  have  paid  into  the  treamrj  in  the  con-
sulihipafAemillusand  Arruntiui  nOmiUions  of
•estenes  ;  but  this  sum  ii  probably  the  entire
amoimt  which  he  contributed  to  il  during  his  whole
reign.  As  he  reigned  eight  yean  and  a  half  after
ths  eatabluhment  of  the  treasury,  and  would  pro-
bably have  inade  the  payments  half  jesrly,  he
would  in  that  case  have  contributed  ten  millionaDf
■caterca  every  half  year.  He  hIm  impaled  several
new  taiei  to  be  paid  into  thii  aerannm.  (SoeL
A-ff.  49  :  Dion  Cast.  Iv.  23,  24,  2S,  32  ;  Mims-
MM/iBn  AtuyraiHBa,  pp.  3%  S&,  ed.  Franius  and
Ziunptiui,  BetoL  lB4fi.)  Of  these  the  most  im-
portant was  the  rAxtima  iertdUaian  et  kgatomnt,
a  tar  of  five  per  een^  which  bad  to  he  paid  by
every  Roman  citizen  upon  any  inherilance  or  legacy
being  Icfi  to  him,  with  the  exception  of  such  as
were  left  to  a  citisen  by  hii  neamt  relaliTcs,  or  soch
as  were  below  a  certalu  amount.  (Dion  Cast.  Iv.
2i.  ItL  38  1  Piin.  Paneg.  87—40  ;  CapitoL  M.
Anbrn.  11.)  This  tax  was  raised  by  Caracnlla  to
ten  per  cent,  but  subaeqnently  reduced  by  Maoi-
nos  to  Bve  (Qion  Casa.  liiviL  9,  liiviiL  IS),  and
eventually  abolished  allo^ther.  (Cod.  S.  tit  33.
a.  3.)  There  was  alio  paid  into  the  oerarium  miii-
tare  a  tai  of  one  per  cent,  upon  every  thing  sold  at


»(».


i  by


u  to  half  per  cent.  (iJuisatssiiwi),  and  after-
wards abolished  by  Caligula  altogedier  for  Italy
<Tac  Ann.  L  78,  ii  42  ;  BuM.  CbL  16)  ; '


e  that  w


chased,  at  5r»t  of  two  per
and  afterwards  of  fbnr  per  cent,  (ficnta  el  naarima]
of  its  value.  (Dion  Casa.  If.  SI  ;  Tac.  Ami.  xiii.
3)  ;  Orelli,/iiicr.  No.S33fi.)  Baidca  the«  taxed,
DO  doubt  tilt  booty  obtained  in  war  and  not  dii-


jCERARIUM.
tribuled  amang  the  soldiers  waa  also  deposited  ia
the  mtlilBiy  beasury.

The  distinction  between  the  aerarinm  and  tha
fiscus  continusd  lo  exist  at  least  as  late  u  tha
reign  of  M.  Anrelini  (rh  SmriAucbt'  ical  t1  SiifuJiruu',
Dion  Casa.  ted.  33  ;  VnlcaL  Gallic  Avid.  Cat*.
7)  ;  but  as  the  emperor  gradually  concentrated
the  administiation  of  the  whole  empire  into  hii
hands,  the  aeraiium  likewise  became  eiclnsively
under  his  control,  and  tiiis  wc  find  to  have  been
the  ease  eren  in  the  reign  of  M.  Auiclius,  when
the  diatmction  between  die  aenrinm  and  the  Gscua
"■" ilained, (Dion  Cass.  Uxi.  33.) When


the  I


o  bdoni


;  this


diitinction  between  [he  i
rally  ceased  also,  as  both  of  them  were  now  tho
treasury  of  the  Caesar ;  and  accordingly  later
juiiats  used  the  words  aerarium  and  fiscni  india-
criminalely,  though  properly  speaking  there  was  no
treasury  but  that  of  the  Caesar.  The  senate,  hoir-
ever,  still  con^ued  to  possess  the  management  of
the  municipal  chest  {ana  jniMKa)  of  tho  ci^.
(Vopisc.  AiHtHaii.  20.)

In  the  time  of  the  republic,  thee
of  the  revenues  of  the  state  belonged  Id  the  se
and  under  tho  superintendence  and  control  of  tha
senate  the  quaestors  had  the  charge  of  the  acm-
rium.  [Sknatus;  QUAUTOR-]  With  the  excep-
tion of  the  eeuBuls,  who  had  the  right  of  drawing
from  the  treasury  whatever  nuni  they  plowed,  the
quaestors  had  not  the  power  to  make  payments  to
any  one,  even  to  a  dictator,  without  a  special  order
from  the  senate.  (Polyb.  vi.  1 2, 1 3 ;  Liv.invUL
55;  Zonar.  vii.  13,)  In  B,  c  45,  when  no  quae»-
tors  were  chosen,  two  praefbcts  of  the  city  had
the  custody  of  the  aerarium  (Dion.  Cass,  iliii.  4S)  ;
but  it  donbtlesi  paased  agnin  into  the  hands  of  the
quaeston,  when  they  were  elected  again  in  tha
following  yoir.  In  their  handa  it  seeou  to  hara
remained  (ill  B.  c  26,  when  Auguittu  deprived
them  of  it  and  gave  it  to  two  praefeets,  whom  ha
allowed  the  senate  to  choose  from  among  the  pna-
ton  at  the  end  of  their  year  of  office  ;  but  as  ha
suspected  that  this  gave  rise  to  canvaning,  he  eir-
acted,  in  R  c  23,  that  two  of  the  praetors  in  offico
should  have  the  charge  of  the  aerarioDi  by  Int.
(SueL  0*K.  36;  Dion  Cass.  liiL  2,  32  ;  Tac.
^Bo.  xiii.  29.)  They  were  called  praetorwaeror?*
(Tac  jf«.  L  7S;  7Taa\m.dcA^i-a,Dud.  100)  or
orf  MnmHa(Orelli,/Mor.  n.723).  This  arrange-
ment continued  till  the  reign  of  CUadius,  who
restored  to  the  quacalon  the  care  of  the  aerarium,
depriving  them  of  certam  other  offices  which  they
had  received  from  Aiigustua  (Tsc.  Aim.  xiii.  29  j
Suet.  aaud.  24  ;  Dion.  Caas.  li.  24) ;  bntas  their
ago  seemed  too  yoimg  for  so  grave  a  trust,  Nero
took  it  &nm  them  and  gave  it  to  those  who  had
been  praetors,  and  who  received  the  title  of  prae~
fecU  otToHi.  (Tac  Ann.  liiL  SB,  39.)  During
the  latter  part  of  the  reign  of  Tmjan,  or  the  begin,
ning  of  that  of  Vopaslan,  a  tnab  change  teems  tn
have  been  made,  6Jr  we  read  of  pratlorei  aenrii
in  the  time  ofthe  latter  (Tae.  Wat.  iv.  9)  1  bntin
the  leign  of  Trajan,  if  net  before^  it  was  again  en-
tniMed  to  praefeets,  who  appear  to  have  held  their
office  for  tiro  yenn ;  and  henceforth  do  farther
change  teemt  to  hara  been  made.  (Plin.  Pomiff.
91,  912,  .^  E.  30  ;  Suet  Ctaad.  34.) Th^  am


towNfaifi  jbtevim  iaaci^itidDi  nada  Hadrini
sriSntn.  (Oadnii,^iil./iuErji.  125.11.6.  p.  181.
■.I;Clril^p.l027,iL4.)  TheM  pndecK  bod
ait  la  (he  temda


IfiitJ  daa  to  tlM  ifminm  aiid  Gkiu.  (Plin.
A^3t;I>ig.M.tit.U. ■.13,1£.)

Tfa  miaimm  wiililan  mi  rnkda-  tlia  ttze  ot
jinct  [mfert^  wbs  nn  fint  ippouiled  bj  lot
ha  tMB^  tfaoH  vbo  kad  Uled  the  office  of
pM*r,  bil  «tn  tftomrdi  Dominaud  b;  the
avow.  (Dioo.  C*M.  It.  35  ;  oomp.  Tac  ^m.
t.  i)  Tb^  frequDll;  occur  in  iuoiptiani  onder
At  tide  rf  frofWi  «nim  ■uZiloru.  (Walter,
6«<MfcAiM«Mni«ftak.,pp.201,&e.,  S97,
kSlediliHi ;  L^WB,  oil  r«>.  ^H.  ziiL  S9.)

AES  (x»«fc)-  ThMS  wordi  ligmtjr  both
pn  oypv  ■ad  ■  ii«ijii«iliiii  of  metali,  in  which
offB  u  the  iivdaniiBnt  iogndioit. In  tlu


iBtBBl  called
And  ^BB  kmIjiu  tg  contuu  no  linc  ;  but,  wilb
>b;  liBiHd  aiwytiiM^  In  be  compoied  eutitelf  of
i^rrmi  Ob,  which  Bixtnra  i)  pn^Mrl;  adled
timm.  Oar  chief  infioniMtiKi  abont  the  ooj^ier
■d  Innt  <{  the  ancient*  ia  dcriTed  tnna  PUny
IH.K.  mn.).  CWr,  being  one  of  the  moK
>tnbl«ad  g«B(fsUr  dirtribnled  of  the  mets:!,
m  Htamllj  nwd  at  b  Tsy  larly  period  b;  die
Gndu  ad  RoDua.  Plin?  (H.  y.  xxiit.  I)
Baliai  three  of  ila  ot«a  {b^iida  atrati),  naioely,
itiait,  ■*-Hf''.  and  tmririalaiM  la  tridiaiaim,
Bk  Ai  Bnet  natsra  of  which  thi*  ii  sot  the  place

!■  the  aiBt  andait  timea  wa  am  aacend  to,  the
tW  ^fflj  aam  from  Cjjm,  whoxc  the  modem
Merfai^pcr  Biaidlobe  dcnred.  (Comp.  Horn.
(^  I IH,  and  NitcKh*!  JVob ;  Plis.  H.  y.  rii
'M-  L  ST)  :  hot  actording  bi  an  old  tiaditiaD  it
nitefMBdin  Eidmea,  and  the  town  of  (%i^iH
Ink  in  aaiae  fniB  a  eapper'mitie.  (PUn. /f.  JV.
ii.  11,  L  21.)  It  ma  alao  found  in  Aaia  and  the
aMk  <f  Italj,  ia  Ganl,  ia  the  monntaina  of  Spain
(onL  Paaa.  tl  19.  g  2),  and  in  the  Alpa.  The
w  [■alMiig  the  ote  waa  peHectlf  bmiliar  to  the
fmAM  of  Honur^  time. (Comp.  Henod.  TiB^.

The  ihailaiiin  tt  copper  raffidenti j  occonnta  for
i*  IBoal  aae  ameag  the  aodenta  ;  joaaBj,  vaaea,
Bi  rtiarila  of  all  irala,  whether  for  domatic  or


I,  md  liidml  ereijr  object  to  which  it
nlied,  being  made  of  it. (Heeiod,  Op.
<«  O.  ISO,  151  t  Laciet.  *.  1286.) We  have  a
It  of  lhia£>ctin  theueofxoAi '


(H-m.Oi.ix.  391 ;  Aiiatot.  >ocL  25.)  For  aU
tkoe  pMpiMj  the  pore  metal  wmld  be  com-
TMiliidj  IIB  li  w.  tone  aDoj  being  neceaaarj  both
M  h«dcB  k  aad  to  make  it  more  foaible.  Ao-
M^kglj,  iIm  ocigio  of  the  Bit  of  aiizing  copper


he*  mmIj  ikojr  igtca  ia  all  the  qieciiBeDi  th
^  bee*  MaliBiT  Soae  btone  Dtila  from  tl
iM*  af  tha Tnany  of  AtKoa  M  Mjana)


ondent  coin*  of  Corinth  ;  a  Tery  aocioDt
Greek  helmet,  on  which  ia  a  bonatrophedoa  in-
Bcription,  now  in  the  British  MiiMum  ;  portiona  of
the  broutplates  of  a  piece  cf  armour  mlled  the
Bnnaea  of  Siria,  alao  preterred  in  our  national  col-
lection ;  and  an  antique  Bword  tbnnd  in  Fianc^
[CDduced  in  100  parti,

87'43  and  88  coppei
12-53  and  12  tin


At  a  Uter  poiod  than  that  to  which  Kim«  of  the
aboTe  woiki  may  be  leCeiied,  the  addition  ef  a
Tarietj-  of  metala  ieema  to  have  been  made  to  the
original  comhinatiog  of  copper  and  tin.  Tbewriten
-  ait  make  outiciilBi  mention  of  certam  of  theae
which,  notwilhatandjpg  the  chauga  they
oit  bjr  the  intndoctiou  of  noTel  elementi,


were  itiU  deaciibed  bf  the  wordj  xoXkJt  and  at

That  which  appean  to  hate  held  ^e  Gnt  idaee  in
the  eatimation  of  the  andenta  waa  the  aaa  QxMMt-
aaan,  which  ■omepretnldedwM  an  alloymade  ac-
cidentally, in  the  eminatance,  1^  the  mdting  and
naming  together  of  miona  met^  (MuccialljsDU
and  irnaa),  at  the  bnming  of  Cormth  h;  Ludna
MnnuniDB,iBB.c.  U6.  (.PhB.H.X.xxMXY.%t.i;
FlDma,iL  16.)  Thii  account  ia  obTioualy  incor-
rect, oa  aome  of  the  artiita  whoae  prodocttana
ate  mentioned  ai  composed  of  this  highly  valued
metal,  lived  long  befere  the  event  alluded  to,
Plin?  (f.  e.)  paiticolariaea  thiee  clatKs  of  the  Co-
rinthian broiuB.  The  first,  he  uyt,  waa  white
(amdavm),  the  greater  proportion  of  lilver  that
waa  employed  in  ila  compoaition  giving  it  a  light
colour.  In  the  lecond  eort  oi  quality,  ffold  iraa  in-
troduced, in  aufBdent  quantity  to  impart  to  the
niiitoie  a  atmng  yellow  or  gold  tint.  The  (hinl
waa  compoaed  of  equal  poitiona  of  the  diSerent
metala.  Some,  faowerer,  contend  that  the  sat
CbrmiUaeim  waa  no  compoiition  of  piedoua  met^i
at  all,  but  meiely  a  Teiy  pnra  and  highly  refined
bioiiie.  (Fiorillo,  in  the  KwuOlM,  1832,  No.
97.)  The  next  bionie  of  note  among  the  andent
Greek  aculptora  is  distinguiafaed  by  the  title  of
itpa&im,  which  it  seems  it  acquired  &oin  i(a
colour,  which  bore  aome  lesemblance  to  that  of  the
liocr  {litap).  PUny  aayi  that  it  waa  inferior  lo
the  Corinthian  bmnze,  hut  waa  greatly  preferred
to  the  mixtures  ef  Deloa  and  A^ina,  which,  for  a
long  period,  had  the  highest  reputation.  The  colour
of  the  bronae  callodl^pafiEan  rr '  ^


Bunilai  to  that  of  the  aW


loflheai


adaU


the  island  of  Delos  becamo  the  mart  to
who  required  wcrka  of  art  in  metal  crowded,  and
led,  m  lime,  to  the  establishment  there  of  lome  of
the  greatat  artiata  of  antiquity.  (Plin.  j:  e;  2,  a.  4.)
Next  to  the  Delian,  vt  rather  m  competition
with  it,  the  aa  Aegiitetiixn  wsa  cateemed.  No
metal  waa  produced  uatuially  in  Aegina ;  but  tiia
foundera and  aituta  there  weie  moat  skilfnl  in


another  in  producing  the  fineat  worka  of
art,  but  alio  in  the  choice  of  the  bionte  they  used.
Myron  [deferred  the  Delian,  while  Polycleitna
adopted  the  Aeginctaa  mixture.  (Pliiu  H.  N.
xxaiv.  3.  s.  5.)  From  a  paaaage  m  Plutarch  it
b»  been  rat^Med that  this  for-bmad  Delian


S<  AES  EQUESTS&

bmm  mi  of  >  light  and  •omewhat  dcklj  tint
(Set  Qfautaim  de  Qiuuer,  JwfUtr  O/jm^sn .
Plut.  Dt  PyO.  Orac  2.)  Plutarch  mjt,  that  in
hti  tima  it!  comiMtition  vu  nnknoim.  For  fur-
tho'  infonoatim  od  the  campotitian  of  brmie,  •»
L.  S»TBt  (Nma.  At.  p.  ii.  c.  17),  Falbroiu  <in  Ihe
Jtti  dtlC  Aatd.  ItaL  lai  I  pp.  203— 2t£,  ud  Oil-
tiitg.  GtL  Aattig.  ISll,  No.  87),  and  Windiel-
Iiiaim(m!rie,ToLT,).

No  iradent  work*  in  hiul,  pToperl;  M  mlled,
haye  fct  been  diuoiered,  thoagh  It  hai  been  af-
fiimed  thai  tine  wu  found  in  an  analyn*  made  of
an  antique  ntord  (lee  Monga,  Miet.  d*  t-Imtiiat.) ;
hat  it  uqiearad  in  m  extnmel;  nnall  ■  qiantitj,
that  it  tiudly  dcHrved  notioe  i  if  it
preient,  it  naj  rather  be  attribnted  tc
dent  of  nature  than  to  deiign.  On  tht
meali  and  nieEid]Drgy  in  general,  lee  A
and  far  the  BM  of  bmue  in  vnrlu  oi  an  ■
STimiKU.  [P-  S.]

AES  (mene}-,  itwwai  oSih  dt  atrii).  Sin
the  moat  ancient  coin*  in  Rome  and  IliB  eld
llalnn  ilatea,  irere  made  of  aei,  tbie  name  wai
giTEB  to  money  in  geaen],  mo  that  UlpiHD  (Dig-
«0.  tiL  16.  a  159)  Hji,  Etiam  Mrvn  mumot  of
diamu.  {Compare  Hot.  An  PoU.  W,  Sp.  L  7.
S3.>  For  the  Hme  teoion  wa  Laie  at*  atioMn,
neaaing  debt,  and  am  in  the  plural,  pay  to  the
■oldien.  <Liy.T.4;  Plin.  tf.iV.  iniT.  ].)  The
Hamaoi  had  no  other  coinaoe  except  bnnie  at
copper  (ott),  till  B.  c  2G9,  fire  jrart  befcae  the
finl  Piuuc  war,  when  lilTer  waa  tint  coined ;
gold  iraa  not  coined  till  eixty-two  yefln  after  lilyer.
<PIin.  H.N.  nTiil  13.)  For  thu  teaua  Aigan-
tinoi,  in  the  Italian  mythalogy,  wai  made  the  Km
of  Aracaknni.  (Qua  priuM  nana  pteunia  m  an
'  argniea. AogtuL  Dt  Oh,  Dti,


y.21.)  E


g  (he  F


As,  and  reipectiiig  the  Greek  copper  moaef  lee
Chalcous.  [P.  9.]

ABS  CIRCUMFORA'NEUM,  money  boi^
rowed  from  the  Roman  hanken  (nijmUarH),  who
had  ihopi  in  poitjcoea  round  Ihe  fomm.  (Cit  Ad
AUK.  ii.  1.)

AES  EQUESTBE,  AES  HOBDEA'RIUM,
■nd  ABS  MILITA'RE,  were  the  ancient  tenna
for  the  pay  of  the  Roman  loldien,  befbie  the  tegU'
lar  it^MnJana  wai  intndoced.  The  att  eqatttn
wai  the  mm  of  money  giren  for  the  pnrchaae  of


mm  of  money  paid  yearly  fbr  the  keep  of  the
faono  of  an  eqiiet,  in  other  wordi  the  pay  of  an
equea  ;  and  the  am  mSUan,  the  pay  of  a  foot
■oldier.  (aaiu>,iT.  27.)  None  of  thiamoney  (eema
to  hsTe  been  taken  from  the  public  Ireamry,  but
to  hare  been  paid  by  certain  private  peiaani,  to
vhom  thii  duty  wu  uiigned  by  the  itala.

The  aa  honUanrnm,  *hich  amounted  to  2000
auea,  had  lo  be  paid  bj  tingle  women  (nrfiiiM,  L  t.
t>otb  maideni  and  widowi)  and  orphans  (orli),  pro-
vided they  poBoetBed  a  certain  amonnl  of  proper^,


>n  the  prineiplB,  ai  Niebuhr  remaiki,  that  m  a  mili-

e.l£e  - -■ ■ ■

10  fiabt  in
[invealth  ;  it  bring  boms


tribute  for  thote  who  fight

iind,that
they  were  not  included  in  the
Cie.  d*  Btp.  ii.  20.)  The  Rinitea  had'a  right  la
dittrain  (puiaori)  o^Ho)  if  Ihe  aa  jiantenni  wai
not  paid.  (Oaiat,  L  e.)

The  oet  emeiln,  which amounted  ta  10,000
UMi^  was  to  be  givoi,  acesiding  to  the  statemeot


AES  uxoaioiL

of  Lirf  (£  cl),  ont  of  the  public  tna(aiT(w;i«tUw)l
bnl  ai  Oaiua  eayi  {l.c\  that  tiie  eqoitet  had  a
right  to  distrain  for  thii  money  likawiie,  it  tean*
impoisible  that  this  aeoomit  can  be  etatsct ;  for  ws
can  hardly  crmceiYe  that  a  ptiTata  penon  had  a
right  of  diitren  against  a  magistrate,  that  ia,
against  the  itale,  or  that  he  conld  distrain  any  of
the  pablic  |Hoper^  of  the  state.  It  is  mon  jan-
bable  that  Ihii  money  was  also  paid  by  the  single
women  and  orphans,  and  that  it  was  against  theaa
that  the  equilea  had  the  sime  right  to  ditlnin,
as  diey  had  in  the  ase  of  the  oei  hordtarinm.

The  as>  mHitan,  tite  amount  of  which  is  not
eipreuly  mentioned,  had  to  be  paid  by  the  trSmmi
aararu,  and  if  not  paid,  the  foot  toldien  had  a
right  of  distress  against  them.  (Cato,  op.  GtIL
TiL  10  ;VaiT.i.£.T.  iei,«iHiiller;Festiu,i.ib
aerarii  tri^mi /  Oains,  Le,)  It  is  generally  aa-
■nmed  from  a  passage  of  Ihe  Pseodo-Asoonios  (as
rsrr.  p.  1 67,  ed.  Orelli),  that  tbete  Mw  atrarii
were  magistrates  eonneeled  with  the  tnosmy,  lad
that  they  were  the  aaiislaDla  of  the  qnaBtoi*  ;
bnt  HadTig  (Dt  TWfxsris  Atnriii  Di^^aHa,  in
Opiuaiia,  Tid.  li.  pp.  2A8— 361),  has  braoghl  for-
waid  good  reasons  for  beliering  that  the  triit— '
aenwu  vers  pnnte  pecsonif  who  wen  liable  ta  tfaa
payment  of  the  oat  wiilitan,  and  upon  whose  |n>-
perty  a  distress  night  be  lelied,  if  the  Dxney  wei»
not  paid.  He  inpposes  that  they  were  panona
whose  pmper^  was  rated  at  a  certain  sum  in  the
censtis,  and  that  they  obtained  the  name  of  triliu
BanirH,eitherbecaasethey>TDeiTed  money  bran  tlia
treasury  fbr  the  punuiii  of  paying  the  loldien,  or
beeaiue,  which  is  tae  mora  prabable,  they  leriod
the  Mhtfam,  which  was  imposed  for  the  putpaaa
oF  paying  the  ansy,  and  then  paid  it  to  the  soldien.
The  stale  thos  amidod  the  tnnble  of  udleeting  tho
ttihntniB  and  of  keying  minute  aecoimis,  fin  which
reason  the  vectigalia  were  aflerwuds  farmed,  and
the  faot-aoldiers  woe  thus  paid  in  a  way  similar
to  the  horsMoldiers.  These  trOiMi  asmru  wMe  no
longer  needed  when  the  state  took  into  its  own
hands  ifaa  payment  of  the  tiwft  [EzaBCtrns],
but  they  were  reriTed  in  8.  C.  70,  as  a  distinct
clau  in  the  commonwaallh  by  the  Lex  Anrelia,
which  gave  Ihe  judicia  to  the  saaatois,  eqnitas  and
tribnni  amarii.  [Tubuni  Airarq.]  The  opinion
of  Ntebnhr  (HitL  o/Romt,  ToL  L  p.  474.1,  that  the
oat  mtfiUrs  was  paid  b j  the  aenrians  [Ahubd]
is,  it  must  be  recollected,  nerely  a  conjecture,
which,  howerer  ingmioiu,  is  snpported  by  m  an-
cient authority.

It  has  been  well  remariced  l^  Niebuhr  {But,
of  Rome,  toL  JL  p.  449),  that  the  SOOO  asses,  which
was  the  yeariy  pay  of  a  honoman,  gira  200  asaea
a  month,  if  divided  by  10,  and  that  Ihe  monthly
pay  of  a  foot  nldia'  was  100  aoei  a  month.  It
must  be  lecollectsd  that  a  year  of  ten,  and  not  of
twelve  months,  was  used  in  all  calculations  of  pay.
mmts  at  Rone  in  tery  remote  times.

A£3  MANUA'RIUM  was  the  money  won  in

playing  with  dice,  laaailWt  toBtetmn. Mania  was

Ihe  throw  in  the  game. All  who  threw  eertaiu

mbers,  were  obliged to  put  down  a  pie« of

iDsy ;  and  whoever  threw  the  Voins  (the  highest

thnw)  won  the  whole  snm,  which  was  called  Iha

I  mamarium. (OelL  iviL  IS  ;  Suet  Aug.  71.)

AES  UXtXRIUH,  a  tax  paid  by  men  wba

reached  old  age  without  having  married. It  waa

' ' '  aoa,  U.  Fniius  Camillas

c409,  but  we  do  not


first  impoBod  by
and  M.PestmnnM


AETOUCUM  FOKDUS.

nsd  to  be  Inied  tR^wudi.
x.u.S.Bl|Plol.Cb»U.2.>

[LlX  JmU  KT  PlPU  POTPAU.1

ABSTIHATIO  LITIS.  [Jddxz.]
AfiSTMNETGS  {abvpirtnii, &cm  «iIiFa,<'a
]■!  ■atiDO,'*  koKB  "  a  ftnoD  who  gina  eroj
M(  ka  JHt  pvtim  "),  arignally  lignified  Body  a
'»  hrniir  |»MM.  hut  rflfirimrfli  inilirntrrl
'  ~  M  iiiimjumIIj  iiiiiiliiil  iiiliiii
■n^  vj  ■>  awFw-cttiM9i  with  mlimited  power
■«  <hiA  Ifcte,  Hit  power,  BceordiDg  to  Aiiilotlc^
|B«nk  a  w«e  dcpMof  du  nUara  belli  of  kinglr
■4  ^o^Bkal  ratMri^  ;  raiea  be  wh  mj^inted
l«dr  and  IBM  «nr  willii«  Bibj«t>,  bat  at  die
i^B  baa  waa  not  booid  b;  any  kwi  in  hii  pub-
Ik  ai»mk<iilii«i  <Aii*tol.  PtHL  iiL  S.  g  fi,
n-a-ISiHear^i^a.)  Hon TfanphnMoi calli
tka  lAce  TifBvli  ajprnl,  and  Dimq'naa  (t.  73)
a  it  with  the  dietatonhip  at  Rome. It

■  col;  tiU  Kme  object
I  the  teconaliiig  of  the
in  the  aute,  and  4be  like.  We
aaw  ^1^  ma  tJCjwaa  "■«'"'"  in  «4iieh  a  penon
nnnied  te  tida  af  Aenauutca,  lanulr*  tl»t  of
rilai  aa.  b  UjtikB^  wfce  wh  upointed  to  thia
£(Birf,  bacaaaa  tba  Mate  bad  Moi  kmg  toni
■aadabyOa  nrioafaMuni,  and  who  nuxeeded
■  nMangHica  and  sdabj'hii  wneiegnhtiana
■dlBWB.  a)i«Ta.T.7S;Stnb.iiiip.S17,Phit.
a^^  4  ;  Dag.  laAt.  i.  7i  ;  Plebn,  ZoMko,  pp.
4<,4&}  Tkoa  wae,  bowerer,  00  donbt  many  olber
paaiaa  who  nled  mdiT  tliii  title  Ibi  a  wfaile  in
ike  iBfin*  aMea  of  Onrca,  and  tboae  legiilaton


'ittAa^


la  ^ipemlad  with  iiinemg  power
a  DiKco,  Solon,  Zaleaou  and
baBOBOab ID  ama  atatea,  nch  aa  Cjme  and
Chakadw,  itwa*  tba  title  bme  by  tbe  ngnlar

■■BJit (Wachmitb, HfUs. AHerOaM.

yA.\.  ff.  423,  441,  2d  «d. ;  Tittmaiin,  OrieA.
^•^m.  p.  76,  &b  ;  SeWmanu,  An&i.  Jar.  Pvti.
Or^  ^M  ;  Bomand,  SbattaUtHk.  %  63.)
AETAS.  [lnwixt ;  Imtubu.]
AKTOXICUU  POBDUS.  (ECooir  twAM-
Jt«v.)  TbenhaUUnttoflbeunlbenicaaMofthe
a  aS\tA  Aetelia,  appear  to  baTe
anfedcnrj  ai  eari^  aa  tbe  time
(71  iL  «38,  Ac  nil  217  At)  In
tk  Hmm  t£  Tbnejdidd  (iiL  111),  tbe  eerer^
A^iativB  tribA  betiveoi  tbe  riven  Acbelone  and
Ek^i^  appiiar  to  haTe  been  iiiiite  indepradat  o
mg  ^laAa,  atahowh  tbej  were  deaignatad  b;  thi
o^^i^  aaaa  ef  AdatiBDat  bat  we  nerailielfai
in  occauoaa,  thej  acted  in  conceit,
bco  Ibey  aeat  enbaaaieita  ftacii
f\  m.  ac  wbea  ibef  bad  tn  wanl  off  the  atta^
•f  >  ea^Hoa  aMny.  (Tfau&  l.e.,iii  US,  Ac)
It  maj  thodaca  be  admitted  that  tbire  did  not
aotAeto-


AETOLICUH  TOBDUSL  27

AetolianconatilotiMi.  (SHah.  n'L  p^821.)  Bvtit
waa  oertainlj  wanting  in  internal  lolidi^,  and  not
baaed  npon  any  flim  principlea.  In  &  c  204,  two
of  the  heada  <^  the  coniedeia^,  Dorimachu  and
Scopaa,  were  commiMioned  to  icgolale  iti  eonatitn-
tion,  ud  it  waa  pecbapi  in  cuueqnenoe  of  their
Jl^blioD,  that  a  genentl  cancelling  of  debli  waa


ihe  AetolioQ  and  Achaoui  leagiua,  wai  that  the
fotmer  origiiially  eonaiated  of  a  confedency  of
nation*  or  tribca,  wbile  tba  Utter  was  a  confederacy
of  towna.  Henea  tbe  ancient  and  great  towna  of
the  Actoliaai,  tbnn^ont  the  peiiod  of  tbe  Vugne,
are  of  no  imporlaDce  and  exerriae  ao  inflnence
wfaatenr.  £Ten  Thennon,  although  it  wai  the
heed  of  the  leagne,  and  the  piacs  wheie  the  ardi-
nary  meetinn  of  the  eontiBderatea  were  held  (Polyb.
T.  a,  ivtiL  SI,  zxriiL  4  ;  Stiab.  x.  p.  463),  did  not
•eire  ai  a  Ibrtieaa  in  timet  of  war,  and  wbenenr
the  Aeloliani  were  threBtened  by  any  danger,  they
preferred  withdrawing  to  their  impregnable  mann-

The  aoTereign  power  of  the  ccofedency  waa
Tested  in  the  genent  aiaembtica  of  all  the  confede-
tatee  (mirii'  Twr  AJriXw,  cOMoliiim  AtiUonm),
and  tbia  aaaemblj  nnqneetionahly  had  the  right  to


to  elect  tbe  great  civil  or  military  officcn  of  the
leagnc  It  ii  howeva  clear,  that  tboie  aoemhlica
coidd  not  be  attended  by  ail  the  Aetoliani,  for
many  of  them  were  poor,  and  lived  at  a  great  dit-
taace,  in  addition  to  which  the  roadi  were  mnch
more  impaaaable  than  in  other  parts  of  Oreece.
The  conatitDtion  of  the  Icagne  wu  thna  in  thronr
a  democrat,  hot  under  the  cover  of  that  name  i(
WBi  in  reality  an  ariatocreey,  and  the  name  P<ma»-
(ofioMt,  which  Livy  (ixri  29)  applies  to  the  Aeto-
lian  assembly,  mutt  be  nndentood  accordingly,  aa
an  lasembty  of  the  vealthieat  and  moat  influential
pcnons,  who  oecasionally  psssed  the  moat  arbitrary
molntions,  and  screened  the  ciaddeM  and  most
unlawful  acta  of  ^e  leading  men  under  tbe  fine
name  of  a  decree  of  all  the  Aetoliani.

We  have  already  mentioned  that  the  ordinary
place  of  meeting  was  Thermon,  but  on  extraordinBry
oceaaiona  aaeemblies  wera  also  held  in  other  towni
belonging  to  the  league,  though  they  we
aitOBted  in  the  country  of  Aetolia  Piopn,  ■  ^
Heracleia  (Liv-iiiiii.  3),  Naupactus  (mv.  12),
HyiBta  (mvl  2,  8),  and  Lamia  (inv.  43,  44).
The  questions  which  wcTe  to  bo  brought  before  the


a  comtnittc^  aeleded  from  the  great  mast,  and
called  Apocleti  ItritXirroi,  Said.  t.  e. ;  Lit.  zzxvi.
38.)  Seme  writera  beliere  that  the  Apocleti  formed
a  permanent  colmcil,  and  that  the  thirty  men
ODt  to  neflotiate  widi  AnCioehna  were  imly  a  i
mitWe  of  the  ApocletL  (Polyb.  iv,  9,  a.
xzL  3  ;  llttmBim,  Gritch.  Slaatiwrf.  p.  727.)

Tbe  geneial  assembly  usuall;  met  in  the  antnmn,
when  the  officen  of  the  league  were  elected.  (Polyb.
iv.  37.)  The  highest  among  than,  at  among  Ihoaa
of  the  Achaean  league,  bore  the  title  of  arpanr/ii,
whose  office  lasted  only  for  one  year.  The  first
whose  name  is  known,  wot  Enrydamua,  who  com-
manded the  Aelolians  in  the  war  aguntt  the  Oala-
liuit.  (Paua.x.  16.  f  2.)  The  ttial^^  had  the
right  to  convoke  the  assembly  ;  he  pmeided  in  it
introduced  the  anhjccts  foe  deliberation,  and  levied
the  troopa. (Liv.  iixviil  4.) He  had  hit  ahaia


as  AFFINEa,  AFFINITAS.

of  the  boon'  made  in  mr,  but  tu  not  alloved  to
-Yote  in  decuieiu  upon  peue  and  nr.  (Lif.  xny.
2G.)  Tbii  wu  a  wit  ptccaatuRi,  ai  a  (acguine
(tnt^oa  might  only  h>Ta  inxilTtd  the  leegue  in
mn  wbkh  woold  hsTe  been  nunam  to  the  nation.
Hit  nvne  ww  ligned  to  all  pnhlic  donimonte,
trsitiea,  and  decreea  of  the  gensa]  aiieinbly.  An
exception  occnn  in  the  peace  with  the  Rtmuuu,
becauie  thej  thamielye*  mctated  it  and  abandcmed
the  nnud  foim.  (Poljrb.  no.  IS.)  Beapecting
the  mode  of  election,  we  an  inibmied  by  Heiychiiu
{i.  o.  laiJifiv  wrrptf),  that  it  w«  decided  by  white
and  black  beana,  and  not  by  Totin^  but  by  dnw-
ing  lota,  u  that  we  must  inppoie  the  anembly
nominated  a  nnmber  of  candidate*,  who  then  had
to  dnw  lota,  and  the  one  who  diew  ■  white  bean

The  officen  Bert  in  nnk  to  the  itmlegni  were
the  hippaichiu  and  llie  public  acribe.  (Polyb.  liJi
IS  ;  comp.  Lit.  iziTiiL  11.)  We  fiuther  hear  of
o'^nipoi,  who  act  tu  arbiten  (BOckh,  Cbrp.  later.
ToL  ii.  p.  633),  and  m/ioTpd^oi,  who  howcTermay
haTo  had  no  more  to  do  with  the  writing  down  of
lawi,  than  the  Atheniui  ncmotlietae.  (Bifd^
to.  pp.857,eBe.)

Wilh  the  exception  oF  tlie  pointi  aboTe  men-
tioned, the  cooititation  of  the  Aetolian  league  ii
iniolTed  in  great  obacuiity.  Tbere  are,  hoveirer,
two  tliingi  which  appear  to  bare  had  an  injurieni
effect  upon  the  confederacy,  fint  the  ciitnmilanee
that  ita  memben  were  Hsttcnd  orei  a  lalga  Inct
of  country,  and  that  beiidea  Aetolia  Proper  and
lome  neighbouring  countries,  nich  M  Locrie  and
Thoaaol}',  it  embraced  towni  in  tbe  heart  of  Pelo-
ponneaut,  the  iiUnd  of  Cenbalenia  in  the  weet,  and
in  tho  east  the  town  of  Cm*  on  the  Propontie  j  in
the  second  place,  many  of  the  confedoratei  had
been  forced  to  join  the  league,  and  were  ready  to
abandon  it  agam  ai  loan  at  an  oj^rtuniiy  offcrsd.
(Polyb.  if.  33  ;  cam|LZzli.  IS,  IG  ;  Lit.  cariiL
9, 1 1.)  The  lowni  which  belonged  to  the  league
of  oauree  enjoyed  ieopolity  \  but  ae  it  endeBToured
to  incnaae  ita  strength  m  all  poaiible  ways,  the
Aetoliaai  also  formed  couDCCtioni  of  friendship  and
alliance  with  other  italcs,  which  did  not  join  the
league.  (Polyb.  il  16.)  Tbe  political  existence
of  the  IfBgue  was  destroyed  in  B.C  18S  by  the
treaty  with  Rome,  and  the  treachery  of  the  Roman
party  among  the  Aetoliant  thenuelvei  caused  in
B.  c  167  fiTe  hundred  and  fifty  of  the  Icaduig
petriatt  to  be  put  to  death,  and  thaee  who  lurriTed
the  massacre,  were  carried  to  Kome  as  pcisooen.
(Lit.  xIt.  SI  ■,  Justin,  niiii.  2  j  oomp.  Tittmann,
DanitUwiff  der  GHai.  SUiatmrf.  p.  721,  &Cj
Luca^  Viber  Pol^.  DanUUtag  da  AtloL  Bmda,
KSnigiberg,  1627,  «lo. ;  K.  F.  Hermans,  Orisd.
Staataitertk.  %  163  ;  Schom,  Gaciiiidi  GrieAoi.
p.  26,&c. ;  Bnndstlter,  Dia  GoA.  daAtbi.  LaiKta,
KbOes  uJ  diMtiis,  p.  298,  &c)  [L-S.]

AETO'MA  (i^K^u). [FisnoiUH.]

AFFI'NES,  AFFI'NITAS,  or  ADFI'NES,
ADFI'NITAS.  Affinitsj  is  that  reUtion  into
which  one  &mily  comes  with  respect  to  another  by
a  marriage  between  the  members  of  tbe  reapectiTe
&miliea  ;  but  it  is  uaed  more  particnlaily  to  exprcH
the  relation  of  husband  and  wife  to  the  cognati  of
wife  and  hnsband  retpectiTelj.  The  husband  and
wife  were  also  afflnea  with  respect  to  their  being
memben  of  different  Gunilie*  ;  and  the  betrothed
liusband  and  wife  (sponsoa,  sponaa)  with  reference
to  tlie&  mteoded  marriage. Afflnilai  can  only  be


the  nmH  af


AOGLA.
I  lawfbl  maniaga. There  an  m
I  eomqiimding  to  thoae  of  tof-


natio,  thoo^  thoa .
kinds  of  afflnitaa.  Tba  &dwr  of  a  hnihand  It  the
locer  of  the  huband*!  wife,  and  the  &that  of  a
wife  Li  the  aocer  of  the  wife's  husbaod  ;  the  torn
■ocms  exprcHea  tiw  same  affinity  with  rasped  ta
the  hnsband'a  and  wife^  mothera.  A  eon's  wife
is  Durus  or  danghler>in-lav  to  the  ton^  pannta  ;
a  wife^  husband  is  gener  or  aoa-in-law  to  tiie  wi&^

Thus  the  stub,  aTia  —  patuv  mater — rf  tba
wife  become  by  the  marriage  reapectiralj  the  loccr
raagnna,  proeocruB,  or  socms  magna — wccr,  team
— of  the  lni*band,inbo  become*  with  leqieet  to  than
seTerally  pogener  and  gentf.  In  lihe  mamm  the
comapniding  anceetm  of  the  husband  nqiei^iTelj

wife,  who  become*  with  reapect  to  them  pi


I  pnnnru

or  wife  bcni  of  a  prior  marriage,  ate  ailed  piTigms
and  {aiTigna,  with  riapaet  to  their  step-fiuhfr  or
atep-mother  ;  and,  irith  raoect  to  aneh  chiMrent
the  atep-Eathei  and  atep^aouier  are  seTaally  called
Titricna  and  norerca.  The  hnsband^  brother  he-
camea  lerir  with  reqiect  to  tbe  wifc^  and  hia  sister
becomes  Oloa  (the  Grerk  TiUati).  Hainage  waa
unlawfiil  omtuig  pcnons  .who  had  become  such
affines  as  aboTe-mentioned  ;  and  the  incapaci^
continued  eren  after  the  dissolution  of  the  marriaga
in  which  the  affinitas  originated.  (Oaius,  i,  63.)
A  personwho  hod  nutained  such  a  capitia  dimimitio
as  to  Icae  both  hit  freedom  and  the  rJTitas,  Ion
also  all  his  affines.  (Dig.  »&  tit,  10.  s.  4  ;  BOcking,
ItutitatioM»,  ToL  i  p.  267.)  [6.  L.]

AQALMA  (*T"Xfui). [Si-ATDABii.]
AQAMIOU GRAFHE {irtafiitn ipo^}.

£M*TniMONICH.]

AGA'SO,  a  groom,  a  slave  wiiosa  bniineaa  it
was  to  take  care  of  the  honea.  The  weed  i*  also
used  iat  a  driver  of  bcaali  of  burthen,  and  ii  seou-
times  qiplied  to  a  sbve  wbo  had  to  peiftna  tha
lowest  menial  duties.  (Liv.  xliii.  &  ;  Plin.  H.  ff.
XXXV.  11  ;  Curt  viii  6 ;  Her.  StnK.  iL  8-  73  j  Pen.

T.76.)

AGATHOERQI  (^TiAifpreO. IntimeofwM-

the  king*  of  Sparta  had  a  body-gnard  of  300  kni^ta
((«*•«),  of  whom  the  Bto  eldest  retired  eTery  year,
and  were  employed  for  one  year,  unda  the  nuns
of  a^adtoerffi  in  missions  to  fereign  states^  (Barod*
i  67.)  It  has  been  naintained  by  some  wiiten
that  the  agatJuiergi  did  not  attun  that  rank  mexriy
by  senicrily,  bat  were  selected  from  the  hmU  by
the  ephors  without  lefererice  to  age.  (Ruhnken,
Ad  TimaaLeaM.  Plat.  t.v.  I  Biujc]i.  I.  v,;BiiikM,
AmaL  vol  L  p.  209.)

A'QELA  (ftT^^),  an  aatembly  of  young  men
in  Crete,  who  Urcd  together  bmn  their  ejgluacotli.
year  till  the  time  of  Uieb  mairi^;e.  Up  ta  the
end  of  their  seventeenth  year  they  rcinainesl  in
their  father's  house  i  and  from  the  arcumatanec  of
their  belonging  to  no  wefo,  they  woe  tslleil
iriytfjit. They  were  then  enroUed in  qM&i*,


conilated  oi

who  wen  ns^ly  nnder  the  jurisdiction

fether  of  the  youth  who  had  been  the  m


,0  superintei
1  of  the  joot


(be  a^  It  tha  public  cipesH.  All  thi
at  ^  ■■<«  mn  obliged  ta  nuny  U  the  maa
laab  Wko  iker  cwnd  la  b«iuig  to  u  >g>la,
ih^  laiMak  <rf  tbe  poUic  ncali  for  men  ((bfptia)
(SnUTU].  Hmw  inrtilDtiaii  Ten  ifterwudt
iwwTTta  ■  lahr  ft  few  lUlc*  of  Cnt^  in^  fir
■WMiiwLrctB*.  (E^>inu,<y.Slnii.  I.P.4S0,
4ciHs>d.raitc3.:  HSck,  CMo,  iiL  p.  KM,
Ac  ;  nailer,  £kr.  ir.  &  )  3  ;  Mcnuim,  OruoL
ffi^iJiriir S  22; Wacbnratli, fifbi.

Hi  fi  II  ill  ii'i.  ii  i  |i  *rr,  "ii  1.  rill  II .  r-\

t^BHiBT  a.  Afemda  <L  HtOtam,  f.  690,  &c)
At  Sfvta  tha  ToDlba  kft  their  jaitaU'  bHuea  at
wfCB  ;«Bn  of  ap  and  nilmd  ths  5»iu.

AGE'liA  <kvwui  frcm  Sr>),  the  nune  of  a
<b*^  bodj  it  troop*  in  ths  Macodouiau  aim  j,
MOMdng  d'  hsw-iiddiert  and  foot-ioldien,  but
■ivdif  W  tbe  tonneE. It  Kemi  ta  baie  raried  in

athCT  iBca  of  300,  and  m  later  timea  it  contuned
m  ^^  H  1000  a  aOOO  men.  (Dind.  lii:  27,
SS:  lir.  xnyii.  40  ■.  xliii.  £1.  SB  ;  Cim.  ir.  13  ;
Pdjb.  •.  25.  65,  xzxL  8  ;  Hesych.  and  Buid.  i.  c ;
KaatatL  arf  Od  I  p.  1399,  62.)

ACER  ii  tbe  g«wn]  term  fbra  ^itiict  oi  tract
W  Maitiy,  sbicli  faai  Kane  definite  Umiti,  and  be-
laigi  to  aoBie  poliliial  aodetj.  Aga  RinnBOtti  i>
tha  Ji  Unitocy  of  tha  Homaiia.  Agii,  in  the
fbaalftbMt  Btant  had*  in  the  coonti;  w  oppoied  to


iaf  «f  tW*gia[iBiilain,inauu  tauugn  poitioiu  of
At  Apr  PaUkM  to  indifidinli.  (lir.  vL  17,
x.2l.>

Ttm  M  an  indefinite  ton :  it  ia  ■  whale  eona-
Vy  wiihnai  n^raioe  to  politial  limita,  ai  Tern

IaG>-

Aga  Poblioa  wai  tha  pmperi;  of  the  Roman
MMe,  pan  <f  tbe  Publicnnu  Agei  PriiBttu  wu
Ihc  faiipulj  (f  indindnali.  Some  nmarici  oa  the
yaoal  diTwm  if  imd  iitDPnbliciuandPrivatiii,
aad  IB  the  ataie  of  land  that  wai  Sacer  and  Bell-
pmtm,  aiE  antamad  in  the  aiticla  on  the  Agrarian
X«w«.  Agci  Oecmatariui  ia  land  occnpied  by  a
■idaaooa  people  wbeo  the  cooqnerad  people  had
kc^  dmiD  oHt  (As  Agrariat  Ametartt,  p.  45,
•4.  Gm&)  :  Hu  poaaestoDa  [Aobabui  Laou]
■—  ■rWnit  in  the  Azer  Occnpaloriiu.  gach
iaad  aa  waa  teatoted  to  thoee  wlia  liad  loot  it  by
•aafsal,  wu  called  Redditua  The  Agei  Occa-
pMsaaavaa  aba  called  AgtrAicifiniu  or  Arcifinalii,
■•  d^MBSMted  "  ah  ancendie  boattbai "  (p.  38.  ed.
CaM-V  Bat  the  lemu  Ager  ArciEniui  and  Ocea-
paaaria*  da  Dot  npeai  to  be  exactly  eqairalcnt,
Ihi^  aaaa  «f  the  wrhctt  on  the  Rea  Agraria
■akc  tfatB  n.  Aga  AiciGniiu  appean  to  eipieia
A*  wble  of  a  leiritoiy,  which  had  only  aome
■Knol  (T  arUtniy  boondaiy,  and  wu  not  defined

riMliiiH )  Sach  wtra  tha  acattered  portioai  c^
tiat  Hiaa  Ayr  Pnblicaa.  TheA^Oocapaioriui
H^|kt  'it^'tT  ■>  lanch  of  the  public  land  iadnded
^  ihi  rtiiilliiiiH  aa  wai  held  b;  pogaeaaon  (occn-
panaX  a,  aa  Nielohi  ezpUni  it,  the  lenn  Occa-


AOEB.  2»

'  Mu)  t  Agei  DJYinU  et  Anignatiu  ;  Ager  mennm
'  comprehtneoa  ;  Ager  Arcifinini.  Ha  define*  tha
Anifiniua,  aa  above  itiUed.  The  Agei  menfora
cofoprebennu  appcon  to  lignifj  a  tiact,  of  which
the  hmili  were  defined  by  mouuianent,  which
wu  giien  in  the  hum  ta  >ome  community  (oyiu
B«b<  mmermt  ewUaii  at  attigmitiii),  d  which
he  nwntioni  two  eumplei.

Ager  Diviana  et  Auignatua  wat  pablic  land
that  wu  aaaigned  or  granted  to  private  pengoa.
The  verbdit«ia,or  lomeformof  it,iaiiv^byLif7
(iv.  61,  V.  SO)  to  eipceB  the  diatributi  of  the
iand.  The  word  emgno  indiatea  the  fixing  of
the  aigna  a  bancdariea.  Agar  Qnaeatoriiu  wM
public  Imd,  which  waa  aold  by  the  qnoealon  ({^
2, 1 4,  ed.  Ooea.),  in  iqaare  patcbea,  oich  tide  af
which  wu  tbe  length  of  ten  linfBT  Bctoa ',  the  aqoan
coniequently  contained  100  qnadiali  acta*  or  fif^

Ager  Lbnitatui  wu  public  land  marked  out  bj
limitea  Ibr  the  pnrpoae  of  aaaignment  to  ctJooi  or
othera.  Tbe  Umitea  were  drawn  with  leferenco
to  tlie  beaiena  (p.  ISO,  ed.  Ooea.)  ;  and  thii  mode
ofdividingtbeluid  WW  founded  on  the  old  Etnufan
doctrine,  iiaT  the  Etmacana  divided  the  earth  into
parla,  frjlowing  the  comie  of  the  aun  by  drawing
a  line  &t>m  eoat  to  Wat,  and  another  from  aouth  to
north.  Thii  wu  the  foundation  of  the  limitei  of  a
temptam,  a  term  which  meana  the  ccleatial  vaolt,
and  ako  to  much  of  tbe  urth'a  aurfiice  aa  the  augut
could  comprehend  in  hi>  view.  Thia  waa  the
fanndation  of  tbe  Roman  Limitolio  of  land.  A
line  (limea)  wu  drawn  through  a  given  point  from
east  to  weat,  which  waa  called  the  Decnmanuj,
originally  Dnocimanua  *  (according  to  Hyginua),  be-
caoie  it  divides  the  earth  into  two  paru  :  another
line  wudiawnfinmaoitthto  north, which  waa  called
Cardo,  **  a  mundi  cardine."  The  length  of  tbeie
two  chief  limitca  would  be  determined  by  the  limita
of  the  hmd  which  wu  to  be  divided.  Tha  pointa
from  which  the  two  chief  limilea  were  drawn  varied
according  to  drcumitancea  Thoae  which  were  pa-
rallel to  tha  Decumannt  wcie  Piorn,  direct ;  thoie
which  were  poiallel  to  the  Cardo  were  Tisnaveni,
tnnarene.  The  lunea  waa  therefore  a  term  applied
to  a  boundarv  belonging  to  a  tract  of  land,  and  the
centnriae  iocluded  in  it,  and  ia  different  from  finia,
which  ia  the  limit  of  any  patticukr  property.  The
Decumani,  Cordinea,  and  other  IJmitei  of  a  diatrict
fbim  an  unchangeable  hind  of  network  in  the  midat
of  thecbangablepropertiea  which  have  tbeii  leveral
£nca(Rudorff).  The  distance  at  which  the  Hniitet
were  to  be  drawn,  would  depend  oa  the  magnitude
of  the  iquaroa  or  centnriae,  u  they  were  called,  into
which  it  wu  |ffoposed  to  divide  tha  tract  The
whole  tract  might  not  be  aqnare :  tometimea  (he
Decnmoni  Limilei  would  be  oidy  half  u  long  aa  the
Cardinei  (p.  154.  ed.  Goea.).  Every  lixtb  limea,
reckoning  from  the  Decumanua  and  indnding  it,
wu  wider  than  tha  intormediato  limitea,  andtheaa
wider  limilei  icrved  aa  tnadi,  but  they  were  not
included  under  the  term  of  Viae  Pnblicae,  though  a
limea  and  a  via  pofalica  might  aonKtimea  coincide.
(Hyginu,  ed.  Ooea.  p.  1  GSt)  The  narrower  limitea
were  called  LineaiU  in  the  province*,  bat  in  Italy


*  DiiDcimanna,  according  to  Hyginua,  waa
changed  into  Decinuuiu  ;  "  Decumanua,"  aaya
Niebuhr,  "  inbBbly  fiom  making  the  figure  of  a
doaa,  which  reaemblca  tha  Dumer^  X,  like  decni-
■atu." Neither  explanation  ii  aatiifiutoij.


AOBB.
r«  oiled  Sabmncin. The  linutei  paiaHoI


ndiawi


Dlhea


Ibeyi


The  Raman  mcatore  of  lenph  lued  for  land
mi  tfae  actui  of  120  feel ;  the  iqaBn  acbu  nt
11,400  ■qnare  feet ;  Bud  B  jiger  or  jogenmi  mi
two  acta*  quadnti.  The  word  cnnturia  pnperiy
neaiu  a  hnndnd  of  tmj  thing.  The  letaaa  of
the  lerm  centuTU  being  i^iad  to  theee  diii-
■ioni  ma;  be,  that  the  plebeian  centoriei  coulaiaed
100  actui,  which  ii  £0  jogeia,  the  amoiint  con-
tained in  the  pertiDni  put  up  to  lale  by  ttie  qnae*-
ton :  bal  Sicuitu  Flacciu  (p.  I S,  ed.  Ooei.}  giTee
a  difletent  accoont.  The  oentuiia  wraetimea  con-
tuned  200  jngera,  and  in  Uler  periedi  240  and
400.  Thii  diTigign  into  caitnriae  only  compre-
hended  the  cnltiTmhle  land.  When  a  colony  wu
founded  or  a  tisct  of  land  -wom  divided,  that  part
which  did  not  coniiit  of  arable  land  vai  the  com-
mon property  of  the  colony  or  settlement ;  and  wai
nied  at  paitote.  Such  tnicti  appear  to  be  the
CompaKUDi  Ager  of  the  Lei  Thoiia  (c  4,  &c.).
The  land  that  vai  thui  limilcd,  would  often  hare
an  iiregnlar  boundary,  and  thni  nuny  centurieB
wonld  be  incomplets.  Such  piecea  were  calied
SnbKdTa,  and  wen  BUnetimea  gnnted  to  the
colony  or  commimity,  and  •ometimn  reaetred  to  the
Hale.  That  each  pcMiani  ejdglcd  in  gome  quantity
in  Italy  iiihown  bj  the&ctof  VMruianaiid  Titoi
making  mIo  of  them,  and  Ikmutian  ii  Mid  to
hare  rettoRd  them  to  the  poneiion.

A  phu  of  each  tiact  of  limited  land  wna  engisied
on  metal  (aei),  and  deporited  in  the  tabnlarinm.
Thia  plan  (fonna)  ihowed  all  the  timilei  oi  ceo-
tnriae,  and  wu  a  permanent  record  of  the  coiginal
limitation.  Dcfcriptioni  ilio  accompanied  the  plan,
which  mentioned  the  portioni  that  belonged  to  dif-
ferent individoil*,  and  other  pBrUcolan.  (Kenlni
FUceni,  D*  Dttai.  el  Auig.  ed.  Ooea.,  p.  16  i  and
the  natagei  collected  by  Briuoniui,  Sdtd.  a  Jur.
Citru,  ill.  c  5.)  Some  of  these  recorda,  which  be-
long to  an  early  period  of  Roman  hifltory,are  men-
tioned by  Sicnlua  Flacciii,  aa  existing  wfaeoi  he
wrote  (p.  24.  ed.  Ooea.).  Theee  rcgiitered  plans
were  the  heat  eridenca  of  the  original  diriiion
of  the  landi,  and  if  diapntea  could  not  be  lettled
Dthcrwiie,  it  waa  necoBry  to  reler  to  them.

Aa  to  the  mark!  by  which  bomidariea  were  dig-
^Qguialied,  they  were  difierent  in  the  caie  of  Ager
Aicifiniui  and  Ager  Limitatua.  In  the  caae  of
Ager  ArdfiniuB,  the  bouodanei  were  either  natural
or  attificial,  aa  moimtain  ridgei,  loada,  water  ahcda,
locka,  billa,  tamparti  of  earui,  walla  of  rabble,  and
go  foiih :  riven,  biooki,  ditehei  and  watcteDnddti
wen  alao  nied  aa  bonndanca.  Haitu  woe  alao
made  on  rocka,  and  treea  was  planted  for  thia
putpoae,  or  were  left  atanding  (aiborea  intaelae,
anlemiuae).  Treei  wen  often  maiked :  thote
which  were  the  common  property  of  two  htnd-
ownen  were  marked  on  both  ndei ;  and  those
wLich  belonged  to  a  aingle  propiictar  were  marked
on  the  aide  which  wai  turned  from  the  proprietM'a


which  would  anawH  aa  a  iignunL  In  anglea,  euch
ai  a  trifinium  «  quadiiSnium,  more  tpeeial  boundaty
m»AM  were  uaed,  for  inilance,  al  a  tiiGniimi  thiee
ticea  would  be  idanlad.  Tapi,  la  piecea  of  wood,
lead  and  iron,  wore  alao  int»ted  bi  treea  to  point
1o  lome  piece  of  water  aa  the  nsaitft  bonadary.

The  Ager  LimilBtna  wni  mufced  in  a  lUfforent
waf  by  boondary  itoui  and  potta,  not  bynUmml


under  the  aapit  from  tha  anpens  who  gave  the
commiaaioQ  forpartiticningtheWd.  Aocoriinriy,
we  find  the  eipnauima  l^dei  Aogcatalea,  Tibe-
riani,  and  ao  forth,  meatiooad  aa  the  l«mim  fixed
by  theta  empema  let  tha  booDdariet  of  the  ""t~""-f
wUch  they  foondad.  The  Termini  Teifitcaialcs
marked  the  limita  of  the  diatrict,  the  Pleotici
ran  paialld  to  the  Decnmani  and  Caidiuea,  tha
ActOHiii  Centurialei  were  at  tha  anglea  of  th«
the  E^>edomei  in  tha  centre  of  tha


end  of  the  jngeia. The  boundariea  ol
were  alio  marked  by  termini ;  and  the  owner  ol
a  pnxperty  might  plase  termini  within  it  to  mark
the  piecea  into  wluch  he  divided  it  for  bii  chil-

Tha  tramini  were  either  poati  of  wood  <r  atmiea.
In  the  colooiet  of  Angnataa,  the  boandarie*  of  the
centoriae  were  ma^ed  by  atmea ;  thoae  of  tbo
levoal  allotmcola  by  cak  poata  (temini  nbaati,
pali  roborei.)  Scmetimca  pali  actnarii  are  utm-
tinned,  fiom  which  it  appnn  that  the  bonudaiiea  Of
tiie  eenturiae  were  Kmetime*  detennined  by  wooden
poatiL  The  itonei  mod  in  a  fttticain  limitatio
were  of  the  nme  kind  and  coloor  in  order  to  malta
tbem  more  nteful  aa  banndarj'  itonea.  The  itoaeB
were  either  poliahed  (politi,  dolati)  or  rough  hewn
(taialJafem>),ivintbeicentDennighitBle.  Tha
aiie  varied  from  half  a  foot  to  two  md  a  half  feet,
and  the  larger  might  aometimea  be  mialakBi  bj-
Ignorant  pei^e  for  mile  itimei.  The  form  of  the
rtonea  alio  varied,  aa  we  aee  ftam  the  repreaentatioM
oontained  of  them  inlba  M88.  of  the  Agrimeaaora*.
The  immbtc  at  ai^le*  varied  in  Ikcaa  whkik  wetn
Mgolar:  iomawereq4indrieal,aame  pointed,  othera
of  a  pyramidal  form.  The  hnd  ttmm  at  the  be~
ginning  and  end  af  a  boundary  weia  more  coai-
ipicuoD)  than  thote  which  Uy  between  them.  Ih'
■criptioni  and  marki  were  i^  put  on  the  termini.
The  termini  on  the  boundariea  of  the  lunited  ]mi
have  often  contidenble  inacriptiona  ;  the  csatarial
and  pleurite  termini  give  the  nmjibw  of  the  ceuLurjr
and  the  name  of  the  limea.  Variooi  kinds  of
marki  were  alio  deviled  to  &cilitBte  the  aaccrtain-
ing  of  boundariea  without  the  trouble  of  nfeniag
to  the  plan.

These  preantioni  were  not  alL  A  ttone  night  be
removed  and  a  boondary  might  thus  become  nn-
certain.  It  waa  accordingly  the  piactice  to  bury
lomething  under  the  atone  that  waa  not  periahabl^
aa  bonea,  emben  and  aahea  (ram  tha  efming  made


detn!


pottery,  and  the  like,  whioh  would  aerra  to
mine  the  jdaoe  of  the  stone.  The  aama  pmnm  is
enjoined  by  the  lawi  of  Mann  (viii.  249,250, 2SI ),
a  lad  noticed  by  Dnreau  de  la  Halle.  On  the  intro-
duction of  Chnitianity,  the  practice  of  making  ntch
ofieringB  waa  diacontinned,  and  thia  kind  of  evidence
waa  1«1.  Under  the  old  religion  it  was  alio  tba
practice  to  tiaversetheboundaneaattheterminalia,
in  the  month  of  February.  In  the  case  of  the
territorial  boundariea,  this  wu  done  by  the  whaln
community  ;  and  panuant  to  thia  old  custom,  tha
boDndatios  of  the  original  territory  of  Rome,  inx
milea  from  the  city,  were  traiened  at  the  leiminalim.
Private  penona  abo  axamined  their  boundariea  mX
the  lemunalia,  and  the  ninal  ofloiogi  wtn  nkadd.
The  pariA  penmbohti«w  and  ttw  If^wqlinl^


tiMiir  MateB  ttoca  bar  ■oDe  nwtnblttMe  to  thii

It  ha  Men  ulTirf  tint  fiiui,  m  tenn  wbieh
<iftT*tW  tke  txmdarf  oT  tefuMe  pnipertisa,  mnit
■M  be  cvimdad  with  lima ;  mr  muit  fimdiii  be
~  id  with  locoB. A  hndiu  hat  detamhiate


wtili,  tW  Haiti  of  wUeb  could  uM  be  chu^"
BM  he  add),  "TUa  did  not  ptectada  the  dWinon
W  leWHi,  DOT  eren  the  ale  of  dnodeciDil  |BM>  of
. "  isd  hrtkcf ,  "  Tbe  ale  or  tianefer  of  them,
«d,  ma  in  nniti

," BoltotUiit

n  do  k  Helle,  thot  whoD  then

_, !  nine  bocdea,  thai  muM  be  ■

■1  drridoB.  A  fmidu  genenlly  had  &  pai-
tKBkB-  lane  which  wu  not  changed,  and  it  u
iMMd  ibl  heth  in  IMly  lod  Francs  many  oF  thcH
rnfittMM  Mill  hsTe  Boaan  namea.  But  the  &ct
rfs  iodn  ynenl^  hatiof  a  name,  and  the  &et
rfA*  MBe  bang  oAca  pccMrred,  doe*  not  ptvie
Aa>  ^  fandi  ii  lalimil  their  original  limit*  accord-
iag  ■  Renan  nage  ;  nor  deu  the  fitet,  that  there
wacHHeliaM  two,  ametinwi  three  ownen  of  one
^^M  (tN^  Ilk  tit  L  i.  4.),  ptore  that  a  fundiu
BOfcr  bad  Ha  limit*  danmd,  wbUe  it  dii)8TiTa
KiAahrt  aaaatka  aa  to  dDodedmal  parte,  nnleu
An  faaifea  Mkd  thirde  wcte  made  ap  of  duodedmel
paM,  vUd  cnuM  be  inTad.  It  leenu  [solable
^MCk,  that  an  otigiml  fundiu  wonld  often  retain


It  may  by  pi
lation,  be  poll


chBge,  and  otlier  alienation,  be  poihed  further,
Md  br  (HTiad  ha^"  The  localitiet  of  the  grtat
raiiliiiia.  Decnaani,and  otho  liimitai,  aa  tha  wme
wBtt* haa  been  ibcady  quoted  to  ibow,  an  nn-

The  fificoky  of  haodliiw  thii  aabject  it  Tcry
pcBf,  wwinf  to  the  compted  text  of  the  writen  oa
tW  Ba  Aparia.  The  bleat  edition  of  theae
■iita>  ii  1^  Ooeain^  Amatodam,  1 671.  A  new
ad  —  —  *  edition  oT  iheaa  wrilen  with  a  init-
sUc  ea^DBeDlan  wonld  bo  a  nlialila  conttibntion


Jti  f-miiM  ffrifldii  Ueber die OiVnBcheidong*-
Umb,  nd.  z.  i  Niebahi,  ml.  ii.  af^ndii  1 ;  Dnrao
i- tk  Mallii.  miwiMJI  nfffi'ijaiifiii  ffimiii'iii.  ml  ii

^l•«,*t)  [G.L.]

AOER  SAIfCTUS  (rJ/umt).  For  an  accoa
•f  the  laadi  in  Oieeee  deleted  to  the  ierrice  of
hImj^,  ne  TsBDTOs;  for  m  accoant  of  thoM
■  JMir,  iee  8ac—do>.
AOEItySIA  (*rr^>  [CiBHSU.]
AOOBS  <Xi^)>  ^"^  ^  lod  0m>t  wii  need
^  gniOBl  to  a  hcqi  ir  raomd  of  any  kind  which
■ighc  b*  Bade  of  rianea,  wood,  euth  or  any  other
^tataaem.  It  waa  mor*  jarticiJariy  ip^i^f  —
BMsd.  BBaiDy  tompeaed  of  earth,  wbieh  waa  i
fa^rf  •  iiaigiiil  town,  nod  which  waa  gndnally

i II  it  fa  breadlh  and  beigfat,  till  it  eqoalled  or

BiiiWpjM  i  tl0  walli. Hence  «a  find  the  eipiea-


AOONALIA.  81

titgen;  and  the  making  of  tlie  aoger  ia  eipreiaed
by  the  TCibi  eafrwn,  a>iiitmre,jai»r»,facm,hc
Some  of  thete  offgerea  were  gigantic  worka,  Hanked
with  towen  to  defend  the  workmen  and  soldien,
and  anrmonnted  by  paiapeta,  behind  which  the
■aldien  could  diKhuge  niluilea  upon  the  beaieged
towna.  At  the  aicge  of  ATaricum,  Cbobt  miied  in
twenty-fiTe  dayi  an  agger  330  feet  brood,  and  BO
feet  high.  (fi.  a.  Til  24.)  Aa  the  agger  WM
BometinieB  mads  of  wood,  burdlei,  and  iimilai
materiali,  we  aometimei  read  of  ha  being  aet  to
Art  (Lit.  ihtL  23  j  Ceei.  RO.-nLSi,  B.  C.  iL
14,  IS.)  The  word  a^ger  waa  alao  ^Iied  to  the
eanhen  wall  aurromuimg  a  Roman  eucampment,
oompoaed  of  the  earth  diw  &«n  the  dildi  (fiaa),
iriiieb  waa  saaally  nine  feet  Imiad  and  acTen  leet
deep  ;  bU  if  any  sttadc  waa  ^i|aeheiided,  the
defu  waa  inaeaaed  to  twelTO  feet,  and  the  breadth
to  thirteen  teet. Sharp  itakea,  Ac,  were  uaually


m  i^at


iharp  atakea  (vaSi),


of  earth  ;  nnd  tl

which  were  fiio^  .  _„._.

At  Rome,  the  fonnidable  rampart  erected  Vf
SerriuaTiillinB  to  protect  the  wciteni  aide  of  Rome
waa  called  ajner.  It  extended  from  the  farther
eitiemit;  of  ue  Quiiinal  to  that  of  the  Eaqnilina.
It  wBi  fihy  feel  broad,  having  a  wall  on  die  lop,
defended  by  toven,  and  beneath  it  wu  a  ditch  a
hoDdred  feet  wide  and  thirty  feet  deep.  (Cic.  dt
Rtp.iL  6;  Diooya.  ii.  68.)  Pliny  (H.  M  iil  i.
a.  9)  attributea  the  erection  of  tbii  nmpait  to  Tar-
qniniua  Supeibua,  but  tbia  ia  in  oppodtion  to  ali
the  other  ancient  writen  who  apeak  of  the  matter.

AGITATO'RES. [Ciacui.]

AQMEN. [ExnctTDB.]

AONA'TI. [Coon**!,]

AGNfyMEN. rNouKN.]

AQONA'LIA,  or  AGO'NIA  (Ot.  Pm.  t.
721),  one  of  the  mori  ancient  feitiTBli  at  Rome,
colebtaled  leTeial  timea  in  the  year.  Ila  initiln-
lion,  like  that  of  other  religiooa  rilea  and  cere-
monie*,'waa  attribute^  to  Noma  Pompiliu.  (M>-
crob.  iSaAm.  i.  i.)  We  Ian  from  the  ancient
calendan  that  it  waa  celehiated  <m  the  three  fol-
lowing daya,  the  9th  ot  January,  the  21»t  of  May,
and  the  1 1th  of  December  (a.  d.  V.  Id.  Jam.:  XII.
K^  J,m.;  in.  Id,  Dec)  ;  to  which  we  ahould
probably  add  the  I7lh  of  March  (a.  J.  XVI.  A'ol.
.dfr.),  the  day  on  which  the  Libenlia  waa  cele-
bnited,  ainca  thla  fettiral  ia  alio  called  ^jiDRia  or
Aginmm  MartiaU.  (VaiT.  £.  £.  tL  14,  ed.  MUl-
ler ;  Macrob.  L  e.  |  Kalm>dariim  VaUtaiam.)  The
object  of  thu  featiTal  waa  a  diaputed  point  among
the  ancieuU  thenuelTs  ;  but  a*  Hartung  haa  ot^
aerred  (,Die  Ratigim  dtr  Rmmr,  tdL  ii.  p.  S3),  what
it  i*  recollected  that  the  (ictim  which  waa  ofiered
Wai  a  ram,  that  the  pa»n  who  oflered  it  waa  the
rii  Bcrificulo*,  and  that  the  place  where  it  waa
offered  WBJ  the  regia  (Var.  £.£.  Ti  1 2 ;  Or. /bA
L  333 ;  Feet  i.  v.  Apomm),  wi  ihall  not  hare
much  dilBcultj  in  nndentanding  the  aignifiance
of  thia  fcatiToL  The  lam  waa  the  nanal  TicUm
preaentcd  to  the  guardian  godi  of  the  itata,  and
the  rex  aurificulua  and  the  regia  eonld  be  em-
ployed onljT  for  aoch  csmnoniei  aa  were  connected
with  the  lugheat  gnda  and  affected  the  weal  of  the


laimfH  ita


S2


AOOBA,


Tbe  etyiDDlogj  of  the  Dams  mi  ■!»  ■  aabjecl

rioUB  etymolDgict  that  were  propoicd  are  giveD  at
length  V  OTld.  (Fail.  L  319—333.)  None  of
these,  hoveyer,  ale  at  nil  tatilbcCorjr ;  and  vg
mold  therefore  nigfieit  anothei.  It  ii  well  known
that  the  Quirmol  iiill  wu  oHginally  cBlled^<fD«u^
and  the  ColHne  geto  Jgemauit.  (Pert.  *.  m.  Apo'
■■■m,  QiirMO^;  camp.  Dionji.  iL  ST.)  What  ii
then  man  iikel;  then  that  Ihii  lacnfice  ihould
luTe  been  originallj  oflered  on  thii  hill,  and  ihonld
thence  hare  received  the  name  of  AgmaJia  ?  It
ii  eipreul;  ttated  that  the  ncrifice  wu  offered  in
the  rtgiOj  or  the  cfooMit  ftgitf  which  in  the  hialorical
timoa  waa  litoated  at  the  top  of  the  jocra  no,  near
the  arch  of  Titne  (Bcekei,  HamSmti  d.  Rim.  Al-
ttrlk.  vol  L  pp.  S37,  236)  ;  bat  in  the  earliatt  limei
the  tegia  ii  itated  by  an  ancient  writei  to  hare
been  upon  the  Quirinal  (Sulin.  I  21),  and  thii
ttatement  teems  to  render  our  luppoiition  alnuwt
certain.  (Ctataad  Jlfumn,  toL  iv.  pp.  154- —
187.)

The  dreat  JgimtmiU,  ai  it  ia  called,  ii  lap-
poied  by  man;  modetu  wiileti  to  han  eccnpied
the  place  of  the  pment  Plana  Navona,  and  lo
hare  been  baill  bf  the  emperor  Alexander  Severui
on  the  ipiiC  where  the  Tictinu  were  lacrificed  at
the  Agonalia.  Bccher  (Ihid.  pp.  688—670)  hai
hcverer  brought  forward  good  reuom  for  qoeitioD-
ing  whether  liiii  wai  a  circni  at  all,  and  hu  ahown
that  there  ii  no  aathorit;  whatevei  fi>r  giiing  it
the  name  of  circui  Agontnat.

AGO'NES  (iy&ris),  the  general  term  amoDg
the  Oreeka  for  the  contesta  at  their  great  na^on^
goraea.  [Cuitaiiini.]  The  word  wai  bIw  lucd
to  aignil;  law-auita,  and  waa  eapeciallj  employed
in  the  phraie  i.ySrti  ti^ijtoI  and  irf/iflrof. [Ti-

AOONOTHETAE  (iyavoeirai),  wen  per-
unit,  in  the  Orecian  gamei,  who  decided  diiputei
and  adjudged  the  priica  to  the  lictort.  Originallj,
the  penon  who  inatituted  the  contett  and  offered
the  f^vDt  waa  the  agtm£tl&eU$t  and  thii  continued
to  be  the  praedce  in  tboac  gamei  which  were  in-
atituted by  kingi  or  private  penoni.  Bnt  in  the
great  public  gamea,  nth  a>  the  lathmian,  Pythian,
Ac,  the  agonolirtat  were  either  the  repieeentnlivea
of  dilfercnt  itatea,  aa  the  Amphictyoni  at  the
Prthian  gamea,  or  were  choaen  fram  the  people  in
whoae  country  the  gamea  were  celebmted.  During
the  aouriabing  timei  of  the  Orecian  republic!,  the
Eleiani  were  the  offonotittae  in  the  Olympic  gamei,
the  Corinthiana  in  the  lithmian  gamca,  the  Am-
pbictycRi  in  the  Pythian  gamei,  and  the  Corin-
thiana, Argivea,  and  inhabitant!  of  Cleonoe  in  the
Nemaean  game).  The  iiwyrf^iu  were  alio  called
airufW^raif  kyurd^at,  iytanttbcat,  hB\afi^n^
^bSSovxci  or  f<Mov6iiBt  (from  the  ilaff  they
carried ai  on emblem of authority), fipaStit,

AGORA  {irfop^i,  properly  meani  an  aaaembly
of  any  naCun,  and  ii  uiually  employed  by  Homer
for  the  general  aaaembly  of  the  people. The  qjnn

the  Gonatitation  of  the  eariy  Orecian  itnlci,  lincn
the  barbarity  and  undvillicd  condition  of  the  Cy-
clop! ii  cfaaracleriaed  by  their  wanting  auch  an
aaaembly.  (Horn.  tM.  ix.  113.)  The  o^ora,  though
nmally  conToked  by  tho  king,  appeart  to  have  been
alao  inminoncd  at  tlmca  by  aome  diitingniahed
efaiaftain,  ai  for  cnniplcv  by  Achillea  belbn  Tray.


AOORA.
(Horn.  n.  i.  54.)  The  kmg  ocaipicil  iha  moat
important  aeat  in  tbeae  aaaembliei,  and  near  biai
oA  %ha  noble!,  while  the  people  aat  in  a  circle
aronnd  them.  The  power  and  righta  of  the  people
in  theie  oaaentliliei  have  been  the  aubjeet  of  mnck
diipnte.  Plainer,  Tittmau,  and  mora  reoentlj
Mitaicb  in  hie  commentary  on  the  Odyuey,  muD'^
taui  that  the  people  waa  allowed  to  apeak  and  rote  ;
whilo  MUUer  {£ior.  iii.  1.  |  3),  who  ia  followed
by  Orote  (Hid.  cf  Gneee,  toL  ii.  p.  91 ),  maintaina
that  the  noblei  were  the  only  penona  who  pnpoaed
meaiurca,  deliberated,  and  Toted,  and  that  the
people  waa  only  present  to  hear  the  debate,  and  Ut
expceaa  iti  feefing  at  a  body ;  which  eipreiuanB
might  then  be  noticed  by  a  fcincs  of  a  mild  dia-
poiition.  The  latter  riew  of  the  queition  is  csn-
fiimed  b^  the  lact,  that  in  no  patsage  in  the
Odyuey  it  any  of  the  people  npretented  ai  taking
part  in  the  ditcnuion  i  while,  in  the  Tiad,  Ulyawa
inflict!  penonil  chastisement  upon  Thenitei,  for
presuming  to  attack  the  nobles  in  the  offora.  (jL
li.  211— 277.)  The  people  ^pear  to  have  beea
only  caUed  together  to  heBT  what  had  beenalmdr
— ned  upon  in  the  council  of  the  nobles,  which.
-  called  0ov\4  (IL  iL  53,  vi  114,  yfyomt
SovXtirraO,  and  biaMcn  (fid.  il  36),  and  som»-
time*  even  irfopi  (fld.  ix.  112  ;  ^forii  OmKn-
fHlpoi).  Justice  was  adminiitered  in  the  agwa  bj
the  king  «  chieb  (He*.  Tite^.  Zi  ;  Uom.  lU
iviiL  497,  ftc  Orf.  aiL  439),  bnt  the  people  had  do
■bare  in  its  adnuniitiation,  and  the  Bgeia  served
merely  the  porpose  of  pablidty.  The  commoD
phrases  nsed  in  reference  to  the  agon  an  ilf  iejt^
KaKUui ;  iyvfiir  roittaiai,  rlBtvAu  g  ill  r^r  iyt.
p^i"  (liri/wu,  i-j»£pi(rfl(u,  Ac.  (Wschnmtth, /faitoi.
AUaUuBoA.  vol  L  p.  346,  2d  ed. ;  Hermann,
lAhlmdu  d.  OriKk.  StaatMoH.  g  55  ;  Onte,  AM
o/Gn>««,<ol.ii.  pp.  91—101.)

Among  the  Atheniaai,  the  praps-  atae  for  tb«
aiaemhly  of  the  people  wai  JmcXiiiria,  and  amooff
the  Dorians  lifda.  The  tena  agom  was  confined
at  Atbeni  to  the  aiscniblie*  of  the  phyba  and
demL  (AcKh.  c  Oa.  g  27.  p.  SO,  37 1  ScbOinBDn,
Dt  Oomiliit  Affiat.  p.  37,  Antu/.  Jut.  PM,  Grata.


applied  to  the  popular  aasemblies  till  a  late  period.
(Bekker,  Aaacdot.  tdL  L  p.  310.)

A'QORA  {lefipi),  wai  the  place  of  public  aa-
lembly  in  a  Greek  city,  both  for  traffic,  and  for
the  tranuction  of  oU  public  bniinesa.  It  aoiwen
to  the  Roman  jWwi;  and,  in  fail,  it  is  impoisible
to  keep  these  two  aubjectt  entirely  le^auau.

In  the  earlieit  times,  the  Agora  wet  merely  an
open  piece  of  ground,  which  waa  generally  in  front
of  the  ntyal  palace,  and,  in  tea-port  towns,  dose  tA
the  harbour.  The  Ag«a  of  Tray  was  !n  the  cita-
del. Here,  the  ebie&  met  in  council,  and  sat  in
judgment,  and  the  people  asaembled  to  witneia
atmetic  gamea  It  wat  evidently  alao  the  place  of
traffic  and  cf  general  Intercourafl  :  in  one  passage
of  Homer,  we  have  a  lively  pictun  of  the  idloi
who  frequented  it.  It  wat  endoaed  with  larse
itonoa  lunk  into  the  earth,  and  scats  of  marUo
wera  placed  in  it  for  the  chieb  to  sit  in  judgment,
and  ft  was  hallowed  by  the  shrine  of  one  or  more
divinitiei.  In  the  Agna  which  Homer  [orticularif
deicribci,  —  that  of  the  Phaeaciani,  —  then  waa
a  temple  of  Poseidon.  (Horn,  tl  iL  TBS,  tIL  S4S,
346,  zviii.  497-^506,  Od.  -A.  263—285,  liiL  IS,
109,  XTL  S61.)


AGORA.
Oat  el  Hut  linpla  unngtment  arow  the  mag:-
oificcTt  iryafal  of  latfT  timr*,  which  consigird  of
ui  BfifB  qacF,  MiclDBed  by  ponjcoa  or  eolommdei,
dirided  inu  uparalt  psiU  ]i>T  the  Taiiaus  occupa-
tjou  which  wen  punued  in  it,  adomcd  with
mift,  tlOm,  and  Iciopln,  and  bulll  sbout
with  tdi&oc*  leg  the  transactiaD  of  public  and
pinie  bin  LOW,  and for  the


d  Vitr


The  .


jsung  n


xeiy  little  help.
We  haie,  fint  o(  all,  in  ihii,  ai  in  other  de-
iiaiiita  al  anhilccton,  to  diitingoiih  the  an-
al ctjle  ban  that  mtTodDccd  b;  the  Oieeka  of
linia  after  the  Penian  war,  and  more  eapecially
bj  niffndaiiH  of  Miletm  {gee  Diet  of  Biog.  >.«.],
whitfe  «Bn«cti<Bi  with  the  building  of  iyopal  of  a
Brv  tam  ia  ntaiked  br  the  name  'lrro9^fia^
whrk  waa  andied  to  the  Agora  in  the  Feiraeua.
iHMifoa.  LV.  IraoMfHio.)  The  geneial  chaiacler
wiihe  Gn^  ^rV^  '"  tllns  dnciibed  by  VitruTiiu
(t.  ]  ) :  —  "  The  Oneki  BiiBDge  their  Soa  in  a
■i|aiii  fans,  with  lery  wide  doable  colotmadei,
nd  adorn  tbem  with  ealnnuu  *et  near  cos  another
aad  Willi  MOW  er  marble  entahlaturei,  and  the;
■aju  walk*  in  the  npper  aUriei."

Amimf  tbe  i-r>fml  deHiibed  b;  Pauaniaa,  tha
tf  At  Bekm  b  mentioied  bj  him  (ri.  34)  ai
WBf  '^  mt  to  the  Bute  plan  a*  thoee  of  the  In-
nam*  aad  the  Greek  dties  adjoining  Ionia,  bat  it
■  baik  ID  the  mere  iDdenl  fiuhion,  with  porticoea
■Hiaratid  from  one  aiuither,  and  itreeti  between
iblB.  Bat  the  name  of  the  Agora  in  onr  daya  ii
Uiff\eJrwmtm,  and  the  people  of  the  connuj  «-
iiiiai  llieir  honea  there.  But  of  the  poclicoea,
the  ^  toward!  the  tooth  it  of  the  Dorian  tXyle  of
wwk,  and  llie  pillart  diiida  it  into  three  patti  (in


AGORA.  3»

Ihit  the  Hellanodicae  generally  peu  the  day) ;  bnt
agonal  thcK  (pillart)  they  place  altars  to  Zciia . . .
To  one  going  along  thit  portico,  into  tlie  Agora,
there  liei  on  the  lef^  nloog  the  further  aide  of
Ihia  portico,  the  dwelling  of  the  Hellanodicao
(i  'EAAoroSucKir)  ;  and  there  it  a  street  which
dividci  it  from  the  Agura  . . .  And  near  the  por-
tico where  the  Uellanodlaie  pots  the  day,  ia
another  portico,  there  being  one  atteet  between
ihem :  this  the  Eleiana  call  the  Corcyiaenn  por-
tico" (becauae  it  vaa  hnill  from  the  lithe  of  spoil
taken  from  the  Corcymeana  in  war).  ^  But  the
style  of  the  portico  is  Dorian  and  double,  having
colomiLS  on  the  one  side  towards  the  Agora,  and
on  the  other  side  towards  the  porta  beyond  the
Agora :  and  along  the  middle  of  It  is  a  wall,
which  thus  support!  the  roof:  and  images  are
placed  on  both  aidea  against  the  wall."  He  then
proceed!  to  mention  the  ornament!  ot  the  Agora,
namely,  the  atatue  of  the  philosopher  Pyrrhon  ;
the  temple  and  statae  of  Apollo  Accsius  ;  the
alatuea  of  the  San  and  Mood  ;  the  temple  of  tho
Graces,  with  their  woodea  stataes,  of  which  (he
dress  was  gilt,  and  the  handi  and  feet  were  of
while  marble  i  ihe  temple  of  Seilenut,  dedicated
to  him  ^iie,  and  not  in  common  with  Dionjina ;
and  a  monomentaJ  shrine,  of  peculiar  fbnn,  with-
out walla,  but  with  oak  pillara  aupporting  the  roof,
which  was  reported  to  be  the  monament  of  Oxylus.
The  Agora  also  contained  the  dwelling  of  the  six-
teen femalei,  who  wore  in  it  the  sacred  robe  for
Hera.  It  ia  worthy  of  remark  that  several  ot
these  detail!  confirm  the  high  antiquity  which
pauianiat  assigns  to  thi!  AgoTU.

Hirt  ha!  diswn  oat  the  following  plan  frvm  the
description  af  Pauaaniaa.  (Gachichle  der  Bau-
haul  id  dm  Altai,  Tat  iiL  fig.  5.)  We  giye  it,
not  as  feeling  iBlislied  of  its  complete  accuracy,  but
at  a  tuefiil  commentary  oa  Pautaniai.


ii' V

c J>


i 1

■ ■

'.  H  '.

■w

A.

•s:

■  o/a '

1 r

« » 0

■M-

.

■ .


D


jL.  ibe  chief  open  space  of  tlw  agon,  tailed,  i


ed  by  !lReta,6:  B,  the  Stea  in  which  the
■dicae  mt,  dirided  from  the  Agora  by  a
I :  c,  the  hooao  of  the  MeUanodicae :  r,  the
:  n,  the  CoRyneaa  Stoo,  composed  of  two
looking  into  the  Agora,  and  d  looking  away
:  t,  jff  t,  tmall  t^ipla :  /,  slatoei  of  the
i  Mni ;  t,  monnmoit  of  Oxylas  :  k,  hoote


Greek  iTopof.  With  rcipcct  to  the  other  parU,  it
ja  pretty  eiident  that  the  chief  open  space,  a,  which
Panuniai  calla  ri  thnuApor  rni  iyopas,  wot  de-
Toled  to  public  aasembliei  aud  exercise,  and  the
oToai  (o),  with  their  intervening  strecla  (6),  to

Erirate  business  and  traffic.  Hirt  traces  a  re>em-
[ancc  of  form  between  the  Eleion  agora  and  tha
Forum  of  Trajan.  It  is  cyidenl  that  the  worda  of
Vitruvias,  above  quoted,  refer  to  the  more  modem,
or  Ionian  form  of  the  Agora,  aa  represented  in  the
following  plan,  which  is  also  taken  fiom  Hirt
(OstaiinU;  An- AmtHM^  KiL  Gg..U:— .  .


AQORA.

Jed  ai  a  tnunrr  :  d,  the  Builia,  or  court  of

jiutice:  K,  the  Tholui,  in  connectiaa  with  the  other
of  the  Prftaneiuin,  e,  d,
9  cut  below,  which  i>  olio  &om  Hirt,  to-
preKnti  a  KCtion  of  the  Agcxa  mada  along  the
dotted  line  on  the  plan.

We  gain  furtlier  iofDimation  reapectlngtbe  build-
ingt  cotmedcd  with  the  Agora,  and  the  woiki  of
art  with  which  it  waa  adorned,  chiefly  fram  tha
■tatanent*  of  panwiiu  retpecting  lh«e  of  por-
icnlar  cilie^  fuch  ai  Athena  (i.  5.  §2),  Thebea
,ix.  17.  g  1),  Sicyon  (iL  7.  I  7,  9.  g  6),  AiRoi  (ii
21),  Sparta  (iii.  II),  Teg™  {™i.«.  g  3),  Mem-
lopolii  (liiL  30.  g  2),  to  which  panagH  the  Teader
i>  refetred  fbr  the  delaiU.  The  buildingi  men-
tioned in  cennectioa  with  the  Agttra  are  :  —  I.
Temple*  of  the  godi  and  ihriuea  of  heroes  [Tkm-
flumJ,  beudea  altw*  and  itatneg  of  diTinitisa.
The  epithet  Irftpaiai  ii  often  applied  to  a  dirinitj
who  wu  thua  wonhipped  in  the  Agon  (Paoa.
IL  CD.  1  Aesth.  ISumtn.  976 ;  Soph.  OaL  l}/r,
161,  when  mention  is  made  o!  the  drculai  throne
of  Anemia  in  the  Agoia),  and  Aeachyliu  ex-
picaaly  icfsa  to  the  dial  iiyopas  ^mnsi  (Stjit.
e.  Tkii.  271,  273).  2.  The  Senate-honae  (^eiAcu-
T^fHov),  and  other  placei  for  the  meeting  of  Ihs
goTersing  bodiea,  according  to  the  eoaatitutwn  of  the


porticiilar  atatc  :  in  the  Agora  at  Sperta,  for  «-
ample,  there  were  the  aenate-honae  of  the  Gcrontea
and  the  pkces  of  meeting  of  the  Ephori,  the  No-
niophylacea,  and  the  Bidinei.  3.  Theraaidence  of
the  magiatmlei  for  the  time  being  [PnyTANSiVH]
4.  Couiti  of  juitice  [DjiaiLic«J.  G.  The  publii
treaauiy  [ThMalruh].  6.  The  priaon  [Cabcir].
7-  The  poli«  itation,  if  anch  a  tenn  may  bo  ap-
plied to  an  ancient  Agnm.  At  Athena,  for  ciample,
tho  alatioD  of  the  thonaand  SCTthian  bowmen,  wh
formed  the  police  force  of  the  alale,  waa  in  th
middle  of  the  Agota  :  thia  doea  not,  howcTcr,  acci
to  hare  been  a  permanent  building,  but  only
nombcr  of  tcnta.  8.  Buildinga  oied  for  the  n
guktion  of  the  atandarda  of  meaiure,  and  ao  forth  ;
Buch  aa  the  building  Tulgarly  called  the  Temple
the  Winda  at  Athena  [HoaoLooioii],  and  the


Millioi


mitated  from  a  aimiloi  atandaid
[Mu-LUfllllll].  To  theae  Tariona  boildinga  muat
be  added  the  worki  of  art,  with  which  tht
area  and  the  poilicoei  of  the  Agora  were  ado
vhjch  were  chiefly  in  celebration  of  god
heroea  who  figured  in  the  mythology,  of  men  who
had  deaerred  well  of  the  atate,  of  victoria  and
other  memorable  eyenta,  beaidc*  thoae  which  ob-
'  L  place  there  porely  by theil


Ai  I


take  the  Agora  at  Athena,  a  portico  of  which,
thence  cnlled  the  irrai  mulXi),  waa  adorned  with
the  paintinga  of  Polj^gnotoa,  Micon,  and  othen.


1i  taken  in  gnat  wnra,
re  the  Corcyraean  por-
Elia,  mentioned  above,  and  the  Peraian  por-
UcD  at  Sputa.

The  open  aitti  of  the  Agora  wna  odginalty  tho
plnce  of  public  aaacmbly  for  all  purpoaea,  and  of
general reaort.  Tta  oae  for  politic  purpoaea  ia  d^,
tcribed  in  the  preceding  article.  Here  nlae  were
celebrated  the  public  feitivals.  At  S^aitn,  the
part  of  the  Agota  m  which  atood  the  atatuea  of
ApoUo,  Artemia,  and  Lcto,  waa  called  x<tp<",  he-
cauae  the  chonuea  of  the  Ephebt  perfbnned  their
doncee  thefc  at  the  feetival  of  the  Oymnopacdia,
(Pana.  iii.  9.)  Idally,  it  waa  the  place  of  aocial
and  fiiahionable  reaort.  At  Athena,  fiuhionable
loungen  wej«  called  Ayd^/zaroi  oyopor.

Originally  the  Aacm  waa  aiae  the  market,  and
waa  aujTounded  with  ahopa,  aa  ahnwn  in  the  above
plan.  Aa  commerce  increased,  it  was  found  con-
reuicnt  to  acporate  the  ttaJRc  from  the  oth«  kinda
of  boainna  carried  on  in  the  Agora,  and  to  aasign
to  each  ita  diitincl  pta«,  though  thia  was  by  no
mtana  nnivenally  the  caae.  The  niaritet,  whether
identiral  with,  or  Beparate  from  the  Agon  for  po-
litical and  other  saaemblies,  was  dirided  '  "
for  the  diflerent  aorta  of  menhandiae,


enhandiae^  each of


AOORA.

I,  which  the  dimtite
1  am— rj,  add  {nrtljr  with  thoft  and
Milli,  paitly  *itli  ttmpcnr;  baodu  of  irickei^
«r)c  {nqpol,  UarpocT.  i:  a.  incqn'nii ;  Demosth.
^Or.f.  8»4).  Eub  otthew  mrti  wu  csllcd  &
■K^kH.  It  ■  gmaallf  n>ted  thst  thii  teim  wu
■pfUcd  ^7  to  that  dirkuD  of  iIm  muket  where
■liil,  fii^  md  iBeh  thingi  wen  ndd  ;  bat  Beck»
ba  ifewn  that  it  wai  ued  al»  for  other  pant  of
Ibe  auket  iOariUet,  toL  I  pp.  268,  269).  The
Mncal  ditiuoaa  of  the  market  wen  aimed  ac-
wriiag  la  tbe  utido  erpceed  for  nle  in  them.
<PiiH.ii.47,i:  19.)  Of  thM  diTiiioni,  Ifafl  fbl-
lowiag  vac  tli«  moat  iaipcvtaiit.

TIk  |Brl  in  which  fi>h  and  other  delicanei  fa-
iW  taUa  wtR  eipoaed  to  laie  ma  called  lx^>i
iifar,  at l^*'^'"*''  arya^  and  wu  the  eUef


T.-p.6Se.) The

the  aWfipU  al  |iiiiihaaiiii  to  beat  them  down,  sie
tpjatntly  iDoded  lo  brthe  eomic  poetL  (Amphii,
<^AU.-n.f.22i,*.;Mtxi»,ibid.;  Xenanh.  t6ul.
^ni,c.;  Alexia,  Mi.  p.22fi,a,b.;  comp.  Plat,
i^  lip. 917.)  Itianotquitei^iar  whsthaBeat,
piiihiy.  ami  ao  liMh,  wen  aidd  in  tbe  wtae  pbea
aa  tka  Stk,  (■  had  a  aepanta  diTinca  of  the  nariiet
■■i|iiiil  lo  them.  Bnad  wia  parth  add  id  the
aiai^aed  phw  in  the  mlAet,  which  waa  ps-
haya  tW  aaiaB  aa  tba  meal-mufcet  (ri  Slu^a),
md  paitlj  wried  nnmd  {tr  nJe :  the  ■flllen
WKB  gi  III  I  illj  wtaaen,  and  ware  fmrerbiallf
aliB^K.  (Anrtoph.  Sam.  857,  Ftip.  1389.)  In
^BtkB  part  of  the  naiket,  called  luififiirai,  were
tba  wimiem  who  aold  garlaodi  af  myrtle  uid
^wta  kr  fatinla  and  paitiea.  (Pint  AraL  6 ;
AfibMpL  na~.  448,  457.)  Near  thaae,  pro-
IMj,  wm  the  aelkn  of  ribaudi  and  filleti  for
Ae  iKaA.  (Denoath.  m  BabmL  p.  1S08.)  The
wfealoak  tnffic  in  win^  aa  Satinet  from  the
bBMBBS  af  the  a^^Aoi  [CAtTM],  was  carried  eo
B  (ba  nnke«,tbe  win*  beiiw  1
Aa  eaaaby  in  cwta,  ban  wUeb  il


|i.fila»PaBpBi(Al™«,<y.  ^t*.a.p.431,a.;
Jtak  Airfaii.  nd.  IT.  Rdaa.  d.  Sot.  A.,  and  ToL  T.
|k4t.)  [AKFBomA.]  ThaoBiketfarpolteij  wai
^led  itirfm  ;  and  nnM  not  be  coufbonded  with
^  pbee  vhete  ooeka  >at  and  oSered  themacWe*
tr  hiR,  with  theic  cooking  ntouUj:  tlui  latter
pine  wna  tailed  tmrofo.  (Poll  ii.  43  ;  Aleiii,
9L.^ti-  IT.  piI64,£.)  Inihon,eTBt7kindofne-
(cavBT  ec  laxmy  waa  eipeaed  fix  ide  ia  Iti  aa-
agaod  pboe.  lluia,  wa  find,  beaidea  ihoM  ahead;
■aaaoaad,  tfae  mnliet  for  oniaaa  (rik  tfiiioa),  hi
^At  (tA  miM,  fa  Data  (ri  «i>>iH),  for
.fffa.(*^  !<»•),«.  £iri>ehee«>(ix''-f>iiTup.l>),.
W  ad  (nbaaar),  far  tn  I  fill  a  and  ungnenn  (ri
^^L  fia-  IrMfcJMWB  (i  AiiovrJi).  <<«  V><m
i-ri  ^^Haral  h»  teaahca  (ataAJw),  fa  new  and
^i  riatWa  (*v^  ^utrOnXit,  «  imi^itnAtf ,
Pd.  *S.  711)^  far  boolu  l^iOuaM«t|),  and  fa
Jaaaa  (tA  iy^faala,Pon.  r.  18).  LaMlf.apart
rf  Ab  ■■fcet  wia  dCTMed  to  the  moiieT-changen
i'fart^rai).  [AxenrTiiBn.]  Hentivi  ia  lome-
Uma  mada  W  tbo  wmiai'l  raa^et,  yaraaiia
^ttfi,»  <■■  4idi  haa  ana  liae  to  mucli  doaht


AOOKA  3fi

(Tbeophr.  Onr.  2  ;  Poa  i.  IB.)  The  common
explanation  ii,  that  it  was  the  fart  of  the  marliet
to  which  women  reaorted  to  purchaae  what  they
wanted  for  haoiehold  luei.  ^t  it  appeara  cleariy
that  porchaiei  were  leldom  made  in  the  market
by*  women,  and  nerer  hj  free  women.  The  only
planeible  explanatian  ii,  either  that  a  diatinet  part
of  the  market  wag  aaiigned  to  thoK  commoditiei,
the  aelkn  of  which  wcie  women,  inch  ai  Ibe
ipTovi?LtSiSj  \»jri0oa^\iA«r,  ^irxa&riridXiSrT,  o^rt-
^oroniAiSii,  and  others,  or  elie  that  the  term
wH(  applied  to  that  pan  of  the  market  when
attidei  for  the  ue  of  women  were  lold.  But  the
matter  ii  altogether  doubtfbl.  The  aboTe  liM  of
conuDoditiBi,  lold  in  the  re^tectiie  diiiiimu  ot  the
marlcet,  might  be  itiU  farther  extended.  Indeed,
with  nlerence  to  the  Athenian  market,  to  whicb
the  deacriptjan  ebiefiy  ^ipliea,  then  can  be  no
doabt  that  every  article  of  home  produce  or  of
fiiffeign  commene  irrAi  the  known  worid  wae  there
eipoaed  fa  lala.  (See  Thuc  iL  18  ;  Xen.  OeeoH.
AOi.  iL  7  i  iHcr.  Faiug.  G4  ;  Ath.  xir.  p.  640,
b,c)

It  i<  not  to  be  nippaeed,  howeTOr,  that  the  nle
of  theae  Tarioiu  artictes  wa>  confined  to  the  maiket.
Frequent  mention  ia  made  of  ahopa  in  other  parla
of  the  city  {«.  g.  Thuo.  Tiii.  95),  and  iomo  article^
auch  ai  tail  fiih,  leem  to  have  been  aoU  outeide
».  (Arilt^  EqmiL  1246.)
time  during  iraleh  the  market  wa*  fie-
1  wai  the  foRDOon  (  but  it  ii  dlfficoll  to  de-
tecmine  nedaely  how  maeb  of  the  forenomi  ia
denoted  by  the  mnmum  phiaaea  rtJitiiiMra  irofMl,

"  173,  Tii.  223.)  Suidaa  (a  V.)  explains  TX^AnxTB
.  >pd  aa  Spa  t^i'ttp,  hot  eliewliErB  (».«,  xtpl  TXifi.
dy.)  he  Byi  that  it  waa  either  the  fonrth,  or  fifth,
' hour. We  might  infer  that  the  whole


'  sixth  h


I'dock  (eqnmoetni  time)  ;  bat  MeiodDtns,  in  two
poHsgei  (iii.  104,  IT.  181)  makes  a  dittmctioD  be-
tween rMfiovoa  trfopd  and  fMrjitiSpia,  (Comp.
Liban.  Bp.  1034.)  The  time  of  the  condnsion  of
the  nuAst  was  called  ijafos  JuUno'u  (Herod.  iiL
104,  eomp.  XenopL  Oenoa.  12, 1  ;  and  for  a  fai>
tber  difcnation  rtapectii^  the  time  of  the  foil  mar-
lut,  see  Bnker,  ad  nam.  riii.  92  ;  WeaHling,  ad
Diod.  Sio.  liiL  48  I  Periun.  ad  AtUaiL  V.  H.  lii.
30 }  Oeaner  and  Reis,  ad  Ludem.  PkSopi.  11,  toL
iiLp-SB;  BUii,arf««iMf.ii.I73.)  During  these
hours  the  maikeE  waa  a  place  not  onlj  of  trafEe
bat  of  geneml  lenrt  Thus  Socrates  habiloally
fieqnented  it  at  one  of  the  placea  when  he  had  the
offiartuiity  of  conTeraing  with  the  greatest  nnmber

'  was.  (Xen.  JtfaiK.  I  1.  §  10  ;  Plat.  ApaL  p.
Il  waa  also  bvqnented  in  other  parts  of  the
day,  especiBlly  in  the  evening,  whoi  many  persona
might  be  seen  walking  about  or  retting  open  seats
[daced  imder  the  colonnades.  (DemoalL  ta  Cba.
p.  l!2fiS;  Psendo-PluL  F^.  X  Or.  p.  849,  d. ;
Lucian.  Jap.  Trag.  16,  tdL  iL  f.  660.)  Even  the
ahops  themteiTet,  not  only  those  of  the  barben,  tha
peifomaai  and  (he  doctmt,  but  even  theae  of  the
leatheistelleis  and  the  humess-makert,  were  com-


esteemed  discreditalile  to  aroid  them  alto,
gether.  (AriitopL  PbU.  337,  Av.  1439;  Xen.
Mm.  It.  2.  §  1  ;  Lysias,  «  Paiui.  pp.  730,  732,
ia  Imtal  p.  754  ;  Demosth.  at  Ariihig.  p.  786.)

The  pnwma  who  carried  on  traffic  in  the  market
wen  the  connliy  peofds  (tjapcwi),  who  hnmght


36  AGOBA.

in  their  comniodi^  inki  the  atj,  and  the  retail
dealen  (ffctnrAof)  who  oxpoied  tha  goodt  pur-
chaaed  of  the  fonaei,  or  of  prodacen  of  any  kind
(afrrmraAu),  or  of  forcij^  meictiuiti  (f>iiropoi),  for
Bla  in  the  markets  (FIbI  da  Bepub.  H.  p.  371  ;
Xen.  Mm.  iiL  7.  g  6i  Plat  AraL  8  j  Caupo.)
A  certain  duree  of  di^nce  wu  attached  to  the
occupation  of  a  retail  dealer,  thangh  at  Atbeni
there  were  po«itife  enaitmente  to  the  contraij.
(AndoG  de  MgA.  p.  68  j  Arietot.  di  Hepab.  L  10,
iiL  S  ;  Plat  Ltg.  li.  pp.  916,  919  ;  Diog.  Laert.  L
I0i,a.€e ;  Anstoph.  EqA8\  i  DcmaBl)i. c  Eidml
30,  p.  1303.}  There  ig  an  intereiting  but  Tcrj
diliicult  quotion  as  to  the  cSeci  which  the  occn-
patioa  of  Hlling  in  the  market  had  upon  the  locial
poeition  of  women  who  engaged  in  it  (Damoith.
in  Neaa:  p.  1367  i  Ly«.  in  Jisonw.  p.  361  ;  Pint
SoL  23 ;  Harpocr.  and  Suid.  1.0.  HmXAri ;  Becker,
aariUa,  vol.  i.  k>.  260—266.)  The  wboiefiile
dcalen  alu  told  Chcir  goodg  b;  meana  of  a  nmple
(ttiffai,),  either  in  the  market,  or  in  the  place
called  Siry/io,  attached  to  the  port.  (Haipocr.
I.  V.  SfO'/u  ;  Poll-  ix  34  ;  PluL  DtmoHh.  23  ;
PUt.Z*.  vii,  p.  788 1  Dipliil.  op.  A&.  iL  p.  499,  e. ;
Bbclih,  Eeim.  of  Ath.  p.  S8,  2d  ed.)  The  retail
doilen  either  eipoied  their  goodi  for  lale  in  theJr
■hopi,  or  hawked  them  abouL  (AriBtaph.  Adorn,
S3;  Plat.  ApopUh.  Laaon.  6%  p.  236.)  The  t"-
TJlege  of  fteeiy  relliuK  in  the  maritot  belonged  to
the  ciiiieni :  fbreignere  had  to  pay  ■  toll.  (De-
moath.  w  EuiuL  p.  130S  ;  Biickh,  £000.  s/  AA.
p.  313.)

Moat  citiiena  cither  made  their  own  purchaiei
in  the  market  (Aeichin.  c  Timardk.  p.  67  1
Arialoph.  Lgtiitr.  6&S — $69),  or  employed  a  liare,
who  waa  caLed,  from  hii  office,  irfipBartii  (Xen.
Mm.  I  B.%2;  camp.  Ath.  ir.  p.  171  1  Poll.  iii.
126  ;  Terent.  Andr.  \\.  %  31.)  Somctimei  female
alo-TCB  performed  thiA  office  (Lyiiaa,  da  Caad.
Erat&ith,  p.  18,  comp.  p.  11),  but  aoch  an  oppcAT'


1  (Hachon,  .
p.  S60.)  The  pbiloiopber  Lyneeut,  cf  Samoa,
wrote  a  book  for  the  guidance  of  puichsien  in  the
market.  (Ath.  li  p.  233.)  It  wu  esteemed  dia-
repntable  for  people  to  carry  home  their  purchaiei
from  the  marlceti,  and  there  were  therefore  porten
in  attendance  for  that  parpoee,  who  wera  called
rpotiniKot,  rtuBofilmvtt^  and  TiuVvnr.  (Theo-
phratt  CAor.  iril. — ziii. ;  Heiych.i.D.  tjuKmuidi.)
The  preKmtiDii  of  order  in  the  market  waa  the
office  of  the  AooRiNOKL

Both  the  architectural  details  of  the  Agora  and
the  lue*  of  ita  lercral  parts  might  be  further  illui-
trated  by  tlie  remaitu  of  the  i-)«pd  or  iyopal  (for
it  ii  even  douhtfal  whether  there  were  two  or  only
one)  St  Athens  ;  but  thii  would  lead  ui  too  br  into
topographicaJ  details.  Thit  part  of  the  mbject  ii
tuily  diicuiaed  in  the  following  woiki :  Leake,
Topograpiji  0/  A  Atia  j  Kmoie,  //cttu,  vol.  iL  ;
MiUler,  in  Ench  and  Oniber'i  EMfdopadie,  art.
Attiat;  Hirt,  Ldm  d.  GMiiida,  ch.  T.  nipp.  I  ;
Wachamuth,  HeSeK.  AUarilumui.  ToL  L  inpp.  6,  h,
Sded.

For  the  whole  anbject  the  chief  modem  an-
thoritiea  a»  the  following  ;  —  Hirt,  Zain  d.  Gt-
iniuja  d.  Oriechm  mad  Hojatm,  ch.  T.  ;  StieglitI,
AnA'dBl.  d.  Batdamtt:  Wachamuth,  HtOmutAe
Alter&am^mtde  .■  Blkkh,  PuUie  OansoMr  0/
J&au  I  and  eipecially  Becker,  OariUM,  4th
■ceae,ToLLpp.33S— 296,iatheDiigiDaL [P.S.]


AOBAPHIOU  GRAPIIE.

AOORA'NOUI  {irfOfiaipa^  were  pnblic
fiTnctionariea  in  moat  of  the  Orecian  statei,  wboae
dutiei  cDireiponded  m  roany  leapecta  to  thoee  of
tho  Roman  aedilei ;  whence  Greek  writer*  on
Roman  B&ira  mil  the  aediiea  by  thia  name.  Under
the  Roman  empire,  the  agotanomi  wero  called
KrjiiFTi^  {^o\.adATiitoph.AdiaT*.^bi):  they
enjoyed  in  later  timei  great  honour  and  reapect,
and  their  office  leemi  to  have  been  r^arded  as
one  of  the  moat  hononiable  in  the  Greek  ilatcs.
We  frequently  read  in  inacriptiDTU  of  their  being
rewarded  wiOi  crowns,  of  which  many  initancea
arc  given  by  Mtiller.  (^(stintfoi,  p.  13B)  They
were  called  by  the  Hmnana  cinitorBi  refpnA/toiu.
(Cod.  I.  til.  64.  a  3.)

Agoraoomi  eiialed  both  at  Sparta  and  Athena.
Our  knowledge  of  the  Spartan  agoiaiumi  i>  Teiy
limited,  and  derif ed  ahnoat  entirely  from  iii*cri]>-
tiona.  They  iteppcd  into  the  phice  of  the  ancient
Emp^ori  (  /^WAvpoi]  in  the  time  of  the  Romana.
They  fbimcd  a  colli>gium  (nvopx^)  with  one  at
their  tend,  called  rpirtvt  (Bijckh,  Corp.  lairr.
vol  i.  p.  610)  and  Sauppe  in  BiaauKAaM  Muam,
vol  iv.  p.  159,  New  Seriea.)  The  Athenian  ngo-
lanomi  were  regular  magiatiatea  during  the  flDUriah-
ing  ttmei  of  the  republic  They  wera  ten  in
number,  liTs  for  Che  city  and  five  for  the  Peineetia,
and  were  choaen  by  lot,  one  from  each  tribe.
(Dem.  e.  Tiauxr,  p.  735  ;  Ariataph.  Adam.  689.)
The  reading  in  HarpocraUon  (i.  v.  iytfo^iiai),
which  mentiona  twentv  aiprajiomi,  iilieen  for  ths
city,  and  £re  for  the  Pciraoeiu,  ii  falae.  (BBckh,
Oaji.  Imcr.  vol,  L  p  337.)

The  principal  duty  of  the  agoranomi  w»,  aa
their  name  import!,  to  injpect  tha  market,  and  to
ace  that  all  the  hkwi  reapec^g  ill  regulation  wera
properly  obterved.  They  had  the  inapection  of  all
thing*  which  were  aold  in  the  market,  with  the
exception  of  com,  which  waa  auhject  to  the  juria-

Tha  agoranomi  had  in  fact  chieHy  to  attend  to
retail-trade  (unrqXtEa}:  wholeaale-trade  waa  not
much  ouried  on  in  the  market-place,  and  waa
imder  the  iuriadiction  of  the  irtf/t\yrTai  Toi*  'Eftm
repiov.  They  regulated  the  price  and  quantity  of
all  thing!  which  wero  brought  into  the  maiket,
and  puniahed  all  pcnons  conTicIed  of  cheatioK,
eapccially  by  foltc  Heighta  and  meantre*.  Thcj
had  in  gi?o«al  th?  power  of  pnniahing  all  infraction
of  the  lawi  and  regulationi  relating  to  the  maritet,
by  indicting  a  Gno  upon  the  citiKM,  and  peraonal
chaatiKmcnl  upon  foreignera  and  slave*,  for  which
purpoae  they  usually  oirried  a  whip.  They  had
the  care  of  all  the  temple*  and  fbnnlains  in  tho
market-place,  and  received  the  tu  {(tyutir  ri^os)
which  fbreignen  and  aliena  were  obliged  to  pay  for
tho  privilege  of  exposing  their  goods  for  sale  in  tha
mariiet.  (SchoL  uI  ..^rufo^.^ofam.  689)  Plat.
I^.  vi  p.763,TiiL  5.849,  3L  pp.91 7, 916  ;  Libm.
Dtdam.  46  i  iycpai  rifjii,  Arirtoph.  Adam,
■BSl,  and  Schol;  Phot  *. ».  mri  tV  *1«P«''.)
The  public  proititutes  were  nlw  subject  to  their
'  '  ini,  aa  waa  the  case  at  Corinth  (Jnalin.  xxi.
they  fixed  the  price  which  lacn  proit)tul«
waa  u  uke.  (gnid.  and  Zonal,  a.  v.  Si^nM^ifis.)
The  duties  of  the  agomnomi  rcsonblod  thooe  of  tha
astynnmL  [Astvnokl]  (Meier,  Alt.  Proetm,
pp.  S9—92iBSek}i,PM.E<ai.t^Atlmt,j^*\
333,  2nd  ed.)

Aa[lA'PHIOUORAPHE'(lTf»^'nM^).
Tha  namoi  of  all  pcnona  at  Atheni  who  owed  anj


AGtURIAE  LGOES.
OB  id  mmrj  ta  Iha  itale  (ol  rf  Sq^urfti  ^t-
JuvTff)  mn  R^itHnl  bj  ths  pmcUra  (ir|>ii«-
nftt),  Bpoa  tahleu  k«pt  fijr  that  purpOM  m  the
inaplcof  AilienK,oiilhe  Acnpolig  (I>em.  c,<ru^.
i.  p.  791;  Hupocr.  ud  Snidu,  i.  tt.  TivJfyrpo^) ;
mil  Imn  ths  ciprMaun  of  beiog  r^ialcnd  nn  the
Aenpilk  (iyiHTiiiafi^rej  it  'AnpawiKn)  ilwaji
Bm  beii^  indebted  to  the  itHt^  (Dem,  r.
1imier.p.i^.)  WhotiTErpudhu&IMlfterRgu-
lBt«a  wu  oued,  chber  vhoilj  or  in  pott,  ac-
afimf  tn  the  uvHDt  paid  ;  bnt  if  a  penaaV  nanw
■M  iapnpeilf  ouid,  he  «u  aubiect  to  the  sctirat
-  -■  lir/patiixi  ypafi),  nhieh  ™>
o  of  die  thtamothetaa.  If  an
■ot  regiitend,  he  eonld  ool^  be
rnncded  lOBBl  hj  Hii{ti,  ud  mi  not  liable
uAeiifafiiuyfa^  (Dem-n  T&bbt.  p.  1S3S.)
HfCTckina,  wkoM  ■cconnt  hai  been  fdtoved  by
Uriailiitiiiii  and  Weiadiii^,  appeui  to  hare  been
wrttilrfn  ti  aajing  that  the  iypa^lov  ypa^  could
be  inatinited  aguul  deblan,  who  hod  not  been
nciMned.  (Heicr,  Att.  Pnaa,  pp.  353,  3S4 ;
Bnkb.  /'■U.  Emm.  ofAUtau,  pp.  3SS,  38S,  3nd  ed.)
40RAPH0U  METALLOU  GRAPHE'
I  «)B^c  /irTdftXau  Tpaf^)  waa  u  actiaa  bmnght


diiidnl,  bIm  wcnfcHl  a  mina  withoat  hnnDg  pre-
liariT  ugamud  it.  The  itate  leqnind  tbti  all
SBO  abaald  be  legittend,  became  the  tmnty-
^Sth  pait  of  tbeir  produce  >a(  payable  to  the
paUie  nauonr.  (BSdth,  PaU.  fiona.  0/ .^tlou,
p.  6«t.  2Bd  e£ ;  Wan,  JH.  i'mw,  p.  3£4.)

ACRA'RIAE  LEGES.  "  It  ia  not  ciadly
tnc  ikat  the  agmian  law  of  Caieiiu  wu  the

"■ ■  " 1-.  ereryUwby  whieh  the

of  it*  pnblic  land,  bore

i,  that  by  whieh  the


tailed


DWDcnhip  in  it~
i  paaaeagon  from  a  {art  of  ita
'——■-,  am  makii^  over  itt  right  of  propeny
tbenia,  laeh  a  law  exJMed  among  thoie  of  Senrioa
TaDiH.-  (Kiriinhr,  Bam.  BuL  toL  iL  p.  139.
ttuL)

The  (so^Me  Vtlarj  of  the  eaaetnu
aewiaB  tawii  cither  in  the  taijer  and  mora  cdf-
fact  Mttn,  <r  in  the  namwer  loue  of  the  term,
at  I  i|i)ainiil  in  thia  eittaet,  would  be  oat  of  place
koc  Tbe  J— "J"!"  objeeta  of  taeh  agnuian  law
■ ■  *  Bnt  all


a  bigi  pan  of  ueh  oDloiuit*,  their  iharea
■I  moA  landi.  Tbe  true  ineaiung  of  r11  or  any  of
t!Hic  oiaitBaiU  <SD  only  be  undcntood  when  we
'  o  of  property  tn  land^

_.  t  notiiai,  to  aacend  to

tbe  etixia  it  the  Raman  itale,  though  if  a  com-
plete batiay  of  Rome  coold  be  written,  our  con-
miliiai  of  the  nal  character  of  propoty  in  '  '
a>  iiiinaiaiill  by  Roma  law,  would  be  moi
lM|ILd  tmd  nan  ^fteatt.  Bat  the  lyitem  of
Roaa^  law,  aa  it  oxiated  nnder  the  cmperon,

bda^ted  to  ihoae  early  agea,  of  which  they  arc


AORARIAE  LEGES.  ST

inqniry  of  the  preient  kind,  we  may  begin  at  any
point  in  the  hiitorical  leriei  which  ia  definite,  and
we  may  aicend  from  known  and  intelligible  no-
tionfl  which  belong  to  a  later  age,  towardj  their
hiatorical  origin,  thonjli  we  may  nerer  be  able  to

iue  (ii.  2,  ftc.l,  who  probacy  wrolB  nnder
the  Antanina,  made  two  chief  diviiianB  of  Roman
land  }  that  which  was  diviai  jtirii,  and  that  which

tmimi  jmii.  I^nd  which  wu  diTini  jtirii
WBi  dtber  mxt  or  T^igiotai.  (Compare  Frontmni,
Dt  He  Agraria,  xiii.  or  p.  12.  ed.  Goei.)  Land
which  was  ucer  wai  contecrated  to  the  Dii  Sn-
wi ;  had  which  wai  rellgioani  belonged  to  Iho
Dii  Macea. Land  waa  made  Bocer  by  a  lei  or

11  ranBoltom ; and,  aa  the  context  ahowi,

bmd  wai  hold  which  bad  belonged  to  tha
■late  {ptjmlui  Remanij.  An  individual  could
make  a  portion  of  hit  own  load  religiosni  by  the
inunnent  in  it  of  one  of  hia  &inily ;  bnt  itn-ostbe
better  opinion  that  land  in  tbe  prorinceg  conid  not
thai  be  made  religionu  ;  and  the  reowm  giren  ia
tbia,  that  the  ownenhip  or  pmperty  in  prorincial
landa  ia  either  in  the  alate  (pop.  Rom.)  or  in  tbe
Coenr,  and  that  indiiidnali  hsTe  only  the  paua-

and  enjoyment  of  it  (pouettio  eJ  unw  five-
ProTincial  landi  were  either  iHpcndiana  or
biinilana:  the  ettpendiaria  were  in  thoae  pmvincea
which  were  coniidered  to  belong  to  the  Roman
atate ;  the  tribalaria  were  in  those  prDTincea  whieh
were  coniidered  as  the  property  of  ths  Caeaar.
Idnd  which  waa  homani  jnris,  waa  divided  into
public  and  private :  public  land  belonged  to  the
slate  ;  privale  land,  to  individuala.

It  would  ieem  to  ibllow  from  the  legal  fcnn  ob-
rved  in  miking  land  suer,  that  it  thereby  ceased
to  be  pnblicui ;  for  if  it  ttiU  continued  publicus,  it
had  not  cban^  its  eesential  qnslity.  Nichuhr
(.Appenda  L  voL  IL)  has  atated  that  **  oil  Roman
land  was  either  the  property  of  tbe  state  (common
land,  domain),  or  private  property,  ~  aat  pailiaa
oaf  pTwatut;"  and  he  adds  that  "the  landed
property  of  the  state  was  either  consecrated  to  tbe
gods  (socer),  or  allotted  to  men  to  reap  its  fruiti
\profiaHa,hHmaidjiiru)."  Niebnhr  then  refers  to
the  liew  of  Oaiaa,  who  makes  tbe  diviaion  into
diaM  j*Hi  and  tiiKiam  jarii,  the  primary  divi-
sion ;  bnt  he  retiei  on  the  auUmrity  of  Frontinus,
supported  by  Livy  (viiL  U),  aa  evidence  of  the

Though  the origin of  that  kind  of  property


*  It  is  obviona,  on  comparing  two  passages  in
FrraUnns  (De  Re  Agraria  li.  liii),  that  Niebnhr
has  mistaken  the  meaning  of  the  writer,  who
clearly  intends  it  to  be  inferred  that  the  aacred
land  waa  not  pnblic  land.  Besides,  if  the  meaning
of  Frontinus  waa  what  Niebuhr  baa  supposed  it  to
be,  his  anthority  ia  not  equal  to  that  of  Gains  on  a
matter  which  ipedallr  belongs  to  the  prorince  of
the  jurist,  and  is  foreign  to  that  of  the  ^rimensor.
The  passage  of  Livy  does  not  prore  Niebnhr^
sasertJorL  Livy  merely  states  that  the  temple  and
grove  of  Soipita  Jono  ahonld  be  commoa  to  Iho
Lannvini  mtuiieipes  and  the  Romsn  people ;  and
Hi  what  other  terms  eould  he  express  the  het
that  tbe  temple  ahonld  bo  aaed  by  both  people  F
That  does  not  pnve  that  a  temple  waa  considMed
the  same  kind  of  public  property  aa  a  tiact  of
unconsecraled  land  was.  The  form  of  dadition  in
Livy  (L  36}  mar  eaaily  be  ext^aim4.

»  8  t^


38  AGRARIAE  LEGES.

called  public  Imnd  miut  be  nfsmd  to  tbs  «aiUett
Bga  of  tbfl  RomBu  atote,  it  appemn  {naa  GoJuB  that
uoder  the  emperon  than  «aa  ittll  lud  within  the
iimiti  of  the  empjie,  the  ownenbip  of  -wbich  wu
not  in  the  mdiridnala  wba  pottuMd  nnd  enjoyed  it,
but  in  the  populoi  nomaniii,  or  the  CseiBr.  Tbii
pomeMahn  aad  enjoymeut  Bn  diidngoiabed  by  him

fivqueiitly  occun  la  thoM  juciiti  fretn  whom  the
DigHt  wa>  compiled ;  but  in  these  writen,  u  thej
aie  known  to  tu,  it  ^ipliee  onlj  to  {siTBte  land,
and  the  Ager  Publicoa  a  haidlj,  if  nt  all,  ever
noticed  by  them.  Now  thii  tens  Pohmuo,  ai  Died
in  the  Digeit,  meaiu  the  poueHion  otprmUe  land
by  one  who  hai  no  kind  of  right  to  it ;  and  thii
poHenia  wai  protected  by  the  praetor'i  int^dict,
eien  when  it  wu  withont  bona  fidtt  or  juMa
eauta  --  but  the  term  Pnmraiio  in  the  Roman
bi^binani,  Livy  for  inatonce,  ngoifie*  the  occupa-
tion (Dccupatio)  and  enjoyment  Apublie  land  ;  and
the  tnie  notion  of  thit,  ue  originDl  PoueuiD,  con.
taiiu  the  whole  nlutioa  of  the  qnettioa  of  the
Agiarioa  Law!.  For  tiiii  nlution  we  are  mainly
indebted  to  Niebuhr  and  Saiigny.

Thi>  Utter  hind  of  PoHenio,  that  which  hai
priTBte  land  for  its  object,  ii  demonstrated  by
Savigny  (the  tetm  hero  med  am  haidly  be  uid
to  be  too  itrong)  to  hsre  ariaen  &om  the  Grtt
kind  of  poatcsaio :  and  thua  it  might  readily  be
anppoaed  that  the  Roman  doctiine  of  poneuio,  u
applied  to  the  occapation  of  prirate  land,  would
thiDw  Kime  light  on  the  nature  of  that  original
poBieuio  out  M  which  it  grew.  In  the  imperial
period,  public  land  bad  aliuDat  ceoied  to  eiiat  b
the  Italian  pcniiunk,  but  the  aobjut  of  poveuion
in  private  landa  bad  become  a  well  undentood
branch  of  Boman  law.  The  temurki  in  the  three
fdllowing  panurraphi  are  from  SaTtgny^i  valuable
work,  Dai  RaeU  da  Bailat  (£th  ed.  p.  172) :  —

1.  There  wen  two  kiiid4  of  lend  in  the  Roman
atate,  ager  putSau  end  ager  priixthu .'  in  the
latter  alone  priTate  property  eiiated.  Bol  cen-
fermably  to  Uie  old  coiutitation,  the  greater  part
of  the  ager  publicni  wai  occupied  and  enjoyed  by
private  pemiu,  and  apparency  by  the  patiiciBni
only,  or  at  leait  by  them  chiefly  till  the  enact-
ment of  the  Liciniao  Rogationa  j  yet  the  itate
coold  leaome  the  land  at  pleasure.  Now  we  iod
no  mention  of  any  legal  foim  for  the  protection  of
the  occupier,  or  Pooeaaar  aa  he  was  c^ed,  of  aneh
public  land  againat  any  other  individual,  thouifh
it  cannot  be  donbtod  that  auch  a  form  actoally
eiiated.  But  if  we  aanuoe  that  the  interdict
which  protected  the  poneaaion  of  an  individual  in
private  hud,  wu  the  form  which  protaeted  the
poaaeMOT  of  the  public  land,  two  problems  are
aolved  ai  tJio  aome  time, — an  hiatorical  origin  ii
diaoiTErcd  for  poucMiea  in  private  laud,  and  a
legal  fbim  fbc  the  prolectioD  of  poiieiuop  in  public
land.

An  hypotheua,  which  to  cleari^  conneeti  into
one  nmsutent  whole,  6u:U  otherwiae  incapable  of
auch  connection,  mnat  be  conaidcr^  rather  aa
evolving  a  latent  fact,  by  placing  other  known
SacU  in  their  tiae  relative  poaition,  than  aa  in-
volving an  independent  aiaumption.  But  there
ia  hUtorical  evideoM  in  ■otfNirt  of  the  hypo-

a.  The  iratdi  pa—mio,  pemtnr,  and  ptmiden
uu  the  technical  termp  uaed  by  wiileia  of  very
diffinvnt  iget,  b>  tiptm  the  ccn^tion  and  the


AORARIAB  LEGES.
enjoyment  of  the  pnblie  landa  ;  that  ia,  the  nottcm
of  occupying  and  enjoying  pnblie  land  wu  in  ths
eoriy  agea  of  the  republic  dislingniahed  frnn  tb«
right  of  property  in  it.  Nothii^  waa  lo  OBturqJ  ■■
to  apply  thia  notion,  when  once  fixed,  to  the  po«-
aeasion  cf  private  land  aa  diadnct  Enm  the  owner-
ahip  ;  and  accordingly  the  aame  technical  tenna
wen  applied  to  the  potaeation  of  pnvate  land.
Varioui  apidicstiona  of  the  word  potaeado,  with
reference  to  privoM  land,  wppen  m  tha  Roman
law,  in  the  boiKinim  paaaeaaio  of  tha  pcaetmian
huH  and  otheia  But  all  the  aae*  rf  the  word
poaieano,  ai  anilied  to  ag(T  pnvatn^  hovrevo'
they  may  diDer  m other  teapeeti, agreed  in  thii: —
thcj  denoted  on  actual  poeaeasion  and  cojoyment
of  a  thing,  without  the  ibrict  Roman  (Qoiritoriai])

3.  The  word  poaaeado,  which  originally  ligniGed
the  right  of  the  poaaeiaoi,  waa  in  time  aaed  to
aigni^  the  object  of  the  right.  Thna  agrr
oigniiied  a  piece  of  land,  viewed  ai  an  object  of
Quiritarian  ownetahip  ;  poaauato,  a  pax  li  land,
in  which  a  man  bad  only  a  botutaiian  or  beneficiAi
intereat,  oa,  for  instance,  Italic  land  not  tnnateTTed
by  mancipotio,  or  land  which  from  ita  oaturo  could
not  be  the  subject  of  Quiritaiian  ownerBfaijK  aa
proTindal  lands  and  the  old  a^  publictu.  Poa-
dingly  implies  MW ;  ager  implie*  pro-
ownenhip.  This  eifJanatien  of  the
terms  ager  and  poi^eeaio  ia  &om  a  jurist  of  the
impstial  times,  quoted  by  Savigny  {Javolenna,
Dig.  SO.  Ht.  IS.  a.  116)  ;  but  iu  value  for  ths
purpoae  of  the  prcaent  inquiry  ja  not  rai  that  ac-
connt  the  leet.  The  ager  pubLicns,  and  all  the  old
notions  attached  to  it,  aa  already  obaerved,  hardly
occur  in  the  extant  Roman  jurists  )  bat  the  name
poaaeasio,  as  ^iplied  to  private  land,  and  the  legal
notiona  attached  to  it,  are  of  &eqnent  occiutaice.
The  form  of  the  interdict,— vti  poiabidftt,  —  aa  it
^peara  in  the  Digest,  ia  thia: — Uti  ou  aa£Bs...pa».
Bidetii._vim  fieri  veto.  But  the  <»iginal  fotm  of
the  interdict  was ;  Uti  nunc  possidetia  enm/iiadKna,
At,  (Featoa  in  PetKoio)  ;  the  word  fuodoa,  fbt
which  aedea  waa  afterwardi  anbstituted,  ai^aara  t«
indicate  an  original  oomtectirai  between  the  inter-
dict and  the  ager  publicna.

We  know  aothmg  of  the  origin  of  the  Rmnaii
public  land,  except  that  it  was  acquired  by  con-
qneat,  and  when  ao  acquired  it  belonged  to  On
Btate,  that  ia,  lo  the  populus,  as  the  name  publicna
(populicni)  imparts  ;  and  the  origmai  populns  waa
the  patridans  only.  We  may  suppose  that  in  the
early  psioda  of  the  Roman  stale,  the  eooqnend
lands  being  the  property  of  the  popnlns,  might  be
enjoyed  by  the  members  of  that  body,  in  any  way
that  the  body  might  determine.  But  it  is  not  quite
clear  how  these  conquered  lands  were  originally  oo-
cnpied.  The  fbUowlng  passago  bom  Appian  {Onil
Wart,  i,  7)  Bweara  to  give  a  probable  aeeovnt  at
the  matter,  and  me  which  ia  not  incwuiatent  with
snch&cts  as  an  otherwise  known:  —  "The  Ro-
mana,"  he  ayo,  "  when  they  conqoeted  any  part
of  Italy,  seised  a  pvtian  of  the  lands,  and  either
bnill  cities  m  them,  or  sent  Romnn  colonists  to
settle  in  the  citiet  which  already  emitad.  Soch
cities  Ihey  designed  to  be  ganison  placea.  As  to
the  land  thus  acquired  frnn  tune  to  time,  they
either  divided  the  cultivated  part  among  ^ha
colonists,  or  sold  it,  or  let  it  to  fitim.  As  to  the
land  which  had  bllen  ont  of  oullivBdon  in  eonae-
qnence  of  war,  and  which,  indeed,  was  ths  laigw


AORARIAE  LEGES.
fH,  inlig  u  timB  to  lUot  il,  thsT  givs  public
Hit)  tttt  uj  ODS  wbo  duM  might  in  the  mcan-
IBC  ollmu  lliii  kad,  oa  pajmait  of  part  of  i
sth  of  the  [soduM
the  prodnea  of  ulin

ful  bj  IhoH  Vbo  pvtBRd  cUtle  (on  this  u
nicd  Ind)  both  f«  tlw  laiser  Biiil  mu
bIl lad  thu  thtj  did  wiUi  a  nev  to
lb  labai  of  the  lalin  pe^e,  whom  thej


tta  ihr  Bight  tare
nmJ  itt  joK  the  aat
F«  ika  lick  oeauiad  the  gieater  put  of  thii  nn-
MM  luid,  iDd  (t  la«th,  ftdiiu  ooifidait  thrt
^  Aoidd  iWTtf  be  dcpriTed  of  it,  and  getting
Ud  tt  nch  patioiM  u  becdoed  <n  thcb  ludi,
■4dn  if  the  snUer  nntni*  in  tha  poHonon
•f  ^  pHi^  ana  bf  ponihue  ud  olhoi  b^  fons,
<in  taou  the  coltintai  of  eitouiTe  dinrictt
wtEid  of  tuna.  And  in  iwia  that  theii  colti-
nxn  nd  ihetiberdi  might  be  fa&  bom  militarj
■nn,  Ikcjr  anptojed  oton*  instead  of  fraemea  ;
ad  ihcj  doired  gnM  piofit  tnaa  thor  rogrid  in-
oiMt,  which  vu  hTeioBd  h;  the  immnnit;  of
lie  ilmo  fan  miliury  etrriee.  In  tbi*  mj  thi
rna  htane  toj  rich,  *nd  ilaTca  wen  muneroni
•i  ihlMgh  the  aoncrj.  B«t  tbil  07>tem  Rdocei:
lit  BDba  of  the  iB^aoi,  who  were  gnnnd  dowi
b*  pnmj^  tma,  and  militatj  Knioe ;  and  when
na  Oij  had  a  naftla  from  theee  eril*,  thej  had
Mthag  to  ^  the  laDd  being  oceniued  b;  the
nd^  uia  alto  em|Jt7ed  ilaiee  uubnd  of  &ee-
■B.''  Tlui  {aaage,  tboogh  it  wean  to  contain
■aA  hinskal  tenth,  doei  not  dutinetl  j  explain
Ik  erignl  iBDd«  of  occnpMian
•nndj  mffeat  that  tbrre  were
jwioitud  Bi  to  tha  ocmpatian  of  this  nnditidad
W  Iii7  alao  giTca  no  dear  aconnt  of  the
"it  IB  which  tlwaa  piionooiim  ws«  acquind  ;
■hiagh  ha  itatea  in  noe  pawagee  that  the  cod-
feoed  iaidi  wsc  aecmped  bj  the  noblte,  and
•ofatiM  (eeenpatio)  in  ila  pn^et  Mmaa  ngnifes
^  f^m  liwr^inii  of  ncant  land.  Am  the
■Mhtr  af  Ikaa  noblaa  wm


»  iMxmg  tbenudiea
la  comfdaint  ^ainat
■he  MUea  (pMca)  ihwtir  befgre  the  (noctnust  of
■he  litia^  Re^Ama  ma,  that  ther  we»  cot
valert  nik  kntiae  the  land  which  ther  iUe-
nAr  piwiati  (pgaeEMo  pn  in jniiam  agni),  but
■kt  thn  tcfdaed  to  diatribole  amaw  the  pleba  the
laaai  bad  (Tacnmn  agtum)  which  had  then  re-


-  (M  -  a  N«th  A»«ric».  ph«a),  by  any  «1.

■  It  ia  Rated  in  tha  Amerion  AJmanac  ia

ins,  that  though  the  new  tsritoiy  of  Iowa  coD-

»-ad  Mtmaun.' The  land  aUuded  to  i.  all

paUicIa^ ne  a^oatter  often  make,  coiuider-

opicd,  Bd  eroi  a^  hia  Dlenat  in  it,  bef«a  an?

rnhM  ia  ■■daoftlNland. Tha  pdTJl^  of

r^^mftka  vhich  >>  allowed  to  the  aqoUtar,  oi

h<ha  foon  who  h»  pmJiwad  hi.  ioteiart,  u

AQRARIAE  LEGES.  89

Bot  whaterer  mu  the  mode  in  which  tbeae  Undo
were  oecapied,  the  panessor,  when  once  in  pooaee-
>ion,wu,uwa  haTsaeen,  protected  by  the  pTaedr'a
interdict  Tbs  patron  who  permitted  bii  client  to
oocapy  any  part  of  bia  poaaHtion  ai  tenant  at  will
(fTBOono),  conld  eject  him  at  pleaJUfe  by  the  m-
Ivdwtmn  de  preeario  ;  tar  the  dient  did  not  obtain
a  poeteeaion  by  nich  pemistiaD  of  bit  patniu.  The
patjon  would,  of  coutie,  hare  the  nme  remedy
againit  a  treepaaaer.  Bat  any  individual,  how-
ever humble,  whs  had  a  posHnaioD,  waa  alao  pn>-
tected  in  it  i^ainit  the  aggreuion  of  Che  rich  ;  and
ie  of  the  grieiasoeo  bitterly  complained
of  by  the  Omtchi,  and  all  the  pstriota  of  their
age,  that  while  a  foldier  waa  ierving  againit  the
enemy,  hia  poworful  neighbaur,  who  coTcted  hii
te,qocl«dhiawiiBBnaeiildran."  (Nieb.)
could  not  only  grant  the  occupation  or
of  ita  public  laiu],  bnt  conld  iell  it,  and
'art  pDbtic  into  private  land.  A  icmark-
able  pauage  in  Onaina  (Saiigny.  p.  1 76,  noM),
■hawi  that  public  landi,  whidi  had  been  given
W  certain  religioua  corporationa  to  jumttt,  were
aold  in  order  to  laiaa  money  for  the  eiigenciea  of
the  state.  The  mBoff  of  that  land  which  waa
ponaKd,  and  the  drcumatance  of  the  poaaeanan
haring  been  a  ffraU  or  public  act,  are  both  con-
tuned  in  this  paaiage.

Tha  public  tendi  which  ware  ooc<i|aed  by  poa-
•enoti,  were  iometiniei  tailed,  with  reference  to
(Dch  poaaonon,  ceeupatarii ;  and;  with  lupeet  to
the  atote,  eoaaaL  PnbUc  land  wliieh  becsine  pri-
TBta  by  aale  waa  called  quautoriia:  that  which  ia
often  ipokfn  of  aa  aaugned  (<utigiialin),mt  marked
ooC  and  divided  (limilaliu)  among  the  plebeian*
in  equal  lota,  and  given  to  them  in  abaolute  owne^-
ahip,  or  it  waa  aaiigned  to  the  pertana  who  were
tent  out  aa  a  colony.  Whether  ^e  land  to  gnnted
to  the  colony  ahot^d  become  Roman  or  not,  de-
paided  on  the  nature  of  the  colony.  The  nana
ager  publicui  was  given  to  the  public  londa  which
were  acquired  even  after  the  plebe  had  become  one
of  tha  eatatea  in  the  Roman  conttitution,  though
the  name  pnblicua,  in  ita  original  ieuae,  could  no
longer  be  q^ilkable  to  auch  public  landt.  Afin
the  eatabliihment  of  the  pleba  as  an  Male,  the
poaaaaaion  of  public  land  waa  still  claimed  as  tha
peculiar  privilege  of  the  patticiana,  aa  befi>re  (he
establiahment  a!  the  pleba  it  aeema  to  have  been
the  only  way  in  which  public  lands  were  enjoyed
by  the  pepului :  the  aadgnmeut,  that  is  the  grant
by  the  Btau  of  the  ownership  of  public  land  in
fixed  aharea,  wai  the  privilege  of  the  pleba.  In
the  early  agei,  when  tha  popdui  was  the  state,  it
doee  not  i^pear  that  there  was  any  aasignuient  of
putdic  lands  ammg  the  popnlus,  though  it  may  be
aaanmed  that  public  lands  would  occasiaiiallly  be
aold  i  the  mode  of  enjoyment  of  public  land  was
that  of  poaaeaaio,  aubject  to  an  annual  payment  to
the  atata.  It  may  be  cocjectutDl  that  thii  ancient
positeaio,  which  we  cannot  conaider  as  having  ita
origin  mauythii^elaethantheeoneent  of  the  state,
waa  a  good  title  to  the  nae  of  the  land  so  long  aa
the  annual  wmenta  ware  made.  At  any  rate,
the  pleba  had  no  claim  upon  auch  ancient  powea^
sioDS.  Bat  with  tha  introdnetdon  of  the  plebs  aa  ■
aeparata  aatate,  and  the  acquiaition  of  nev  lands

ihe  only  security  which  either  the  squatter  or  tha
person  who  puichaaea  ftoia  him,  bai  ior  the  im-
,  proranaala  made  on  the  land. — -  (V-~


renuiin  inch,  at  I


*0  AORARIAE  LEGES,

b;  conqneM,  it  vauld  leem  that  tlie  pleba  bud  u
good  B  title  to  >  ihue  of  tbc  newly  conqoeicd
Wdi,  M  tho  pstricioiia  to  the  eiclouTO  enjoymeT
of  thaw  landi  which  bid  been  acquired  by  cooquei
Mura  (he  pleba  had  become  as  eitatc ;  uut  ai
cordiiig  to  Liry  (it,  49),  the  p1eb>  fbnndcd  the
daim  to  Che  captnied  laodt  on  their  terricee  in  th
war.  The  detenninatiDn  of  what  pan  of  newl
conquered  landa  (Drable  and  vineyardA)  ihoold  n
main  public,  and  what  part  ahould  be  aaiigned  1
the  pleba,  whieh,  Niebuhr  Bays,  "  it  need  acaicely
be  obeerred  wBa  done  after  the  completion  of  every
conqueit,"  ought  to  haie  been  an  ellectoal  way  of
aetlliog  all  duputei  between  the  patridani  and
plebB  aa  to  the  pnueationi  of  the  former  ;  for  luch
an  appropriation,  if  it  were  actually  made,  conld
have  no  other  meaning  than  that  the  pBtricitina
were  to  have  aa  ffood  title  to  pouesa  their  ahare
aa  the  pleba  to  the  ownenhip  of  their  aiiigned
The  pleba  at  leaat  could  ncTcr  hirly
>f  public  land,  appropriated
B  time  when  they  Received
ihare  of  the  conquered  landa  to  which  they
&ct  is,  that  we  have  no
:k  'Jviainn  between  landa
appropriated  to  remain  public  and  landa  auigncd
ill  ownership,  ai  Niebuhi  aaanmei.  All  that  ve
know  i>,  that  the  patricinna  poaeaed  iaige  tnicli
of  public  land,  and  that  the  pleba  from  tune  to
time  claimed  ajid  enforced  a  diviaion  of  part  of
tbem.  In  Buch  'a  condition  of  oSuii,  many  diffi-
cult qucatiooa  might  arise  ;  and  it  ia  quite  aa  poa-
aible  ta  conceive  that  the  clainu  of  tho  plebs  might
in  some  caBca  be  as  ill  (bunded  as  the  conduct  of
the  patricians  was  alleged  to  be  rapacious  in  ex-
tending their  poRscBsions.  In  the  CDurae  of  time,
ow-jig  lo  BolcB  of  poBseisioni,  femily  aettlcmenu,
permonCDt  impnTementi  made  on  the  land,  the
cliimBOn  the  land  of  creditors  who  had  lent  money
OD  the  leeurity  of  it,  and  other  causea,  the  equitable
adjustment  of  rights  under  an  agrarian  law  waa
impoaaible  ]  and  this  ia  a  difficulty  which  Appian
(i.  10.  18)  particularly  mentions  aa  resulting  from
the  law  of  Tib.  Giocchoi.

Pubhc  paalore  lands,  it  appean,  were  not  the
■ubject  of  asaignmenL

The  piopcrl;  (paliUmm)  of  the  Roman  people
oonutted  of  many  Ihinga  besidea  land.  The  con-
queat  of  a  territory,  unleta  apecial  tcimi  were
granted  to  the  conquered,  aeema  to  have  implied
the  acqniiiCion  by  the  Roman  state  of  the  conqoervd
tsrrito^  and  all  that  it  contained.  Thna  not  only
wonld  land  be  acqnired,  which  was  available  for
corn,  Tineyorda,  and  posture  ;  but  mines,  roads,
livers,  harbours,  and,  as  a  consequence,  tolls  and
4Dtici.  If  a  Roman  colony  wu  sent  out  to  occupy
a  conquered  teiritcry  or  town,  a  part  of  the  con-
qoeted  lands  was  assigned  to  the  colonists  in  com-
plete ownenhip.  [CoLoNE*.]  The  remainder,  it
nppoara,  wae  left  or  reatored  to  the  inhabitants.
Not  that  we  aio  to  trnderstand  that  they  had  the
property  in  the  hmd  as  they  bad  befaro  ;  but  it
^jpears  that  they  were  subject  to  a  payment,  the
moduce  of  which  belonged  to  the  Koman  peojde.
In  the  case  of  the  cobny  sent  to  Antium,  Dionysius
I'lX.  60)  states,  "  that  oil  the  Antiatea  who  had
houaee  and  Innda  remained  in  the  country,  and
cnllivatcd  both  the  portiona  that  weis  aet  aside  for
them  and  the  portions  appropriated  to  the  colonists,


AOBARIAE  LEGES.

I  tne,  all  the  auma  paid  by  the  originsl

were  qipropriated  to  the  eoloniati:
Niebuhr  aeema  to  auppose,  that  the  Roman  stato
might  at  Buy  time  reaume  such  restored  lands  ;
and,  no  doubt,  the  notion  of  a  possibility  of  re-
aumption  under  some  circumatancea  at  least  wa«
invdved  in  the  tenure  by  which  these  lands  were
held  ;  but  it  may  be  doubted  if  the  renunption  of
tuch  landa  was  ever  resorted  to  except  in  eibaor-
dinan-  lases,  and  except  as  to  conquered  lands
which  were  the  public  lands  of  the  conquered
atate.  Priiate  penons,  who  were  permitted  la
retain  their  landi  subject  to  the  payment  of  a  tax,
ware  not  the  paaaeaaora  to  whom  the  agrarian  laws
applied.  In  many  casei  large  tracts  of  land  were
absolutely  seized,  their  owners  having  pciiihed  in
battle  or  been  driven  away,  and  rxleniive  districts,
either  not  cultivated  at  all  or  very  imperfectly  col-
tiratcd,  become  the  property  of  the  state  Sncfa
landa  aa  were  unoccupied  coidd  become  the  subject
of  posaetaio  ;  and  the  possessor  would,  in  all  caaea,
and  in  whatever  manner  he  obtainiid  the  huid,  bo
liable  to  a  payment  to  the  slate,  aa  above-men-
tinned  in  the  extract  from  Appian.

This  ponessio  was  a  real  intercet,  for  it  waa  tha
subject  of  sale :  it  waa  the  nse  (wm)  of  the  land  ;
it  waa  not  the  ager  «  properly. The  possevia
:lly  could not  pass  by  the  teatamcnt  of  the
poascsBor,  at  least  not  by  the  mancipatio. (Gaiua^
'.  10'2.) It  is  not  easy,  thorefcie,  to  imagine  any
lode  bj  which  the  poueasian  of  the  hetea  waa
pntected,  nnlei*  there  was  a  legal  form,  nwh  aa
Savigny  baa  aatumed  to  eiiat  for  the  general  pro-
tection of  poaaeaiionea  m  tho  public  landa. Tho
posBcaaor  of  pablic  land  never  acquired  the  owner-
ship  by  virtue  of  hiapooBesiion  [  it  waanot  aubjeet
to  usucapion. The  ownership  ef  tho  land  which
belonged  to  the  state,  could  only  be  acquired  by
the  gmnt  of  the  ownerahip,  or  by  purchaaa  froia
the  state. The  state  could  at  any  time,  according
to  alrict  right,  sell  that  land  whicli  was  only  poa-
seased,  oi  assign  it  to  anotbct  than  the  poesessor.
The  poesestion  was,  in  &ct,  with  lopect  to  the  alatc^
precarium  ;  end  we  may  suppoae  that  the  lands  so
■^  fid  would  at  first  receive  few  permanent  improve-
ent^ In  couiao  of  time,  and  particularly  when
le poaseasara had been  imdiaturbed for  many
years,  poaseasion  would  appear,  in  an  eqditablo
Di  view,  to  have  become  equivalent  to  ownv-
and  the  hardship  of  removing  the  possessor*
agrarian  law  would  appear  the  greater,  after
the  state  had  long  acquloced  in  their  ubo  and  oe-
cupatioB  of  the  public  land.
In  order  to  form  a  correct  judgment  of  thne  en-
tmenta  which  are  specially  cited  aa  agrarian  lava,
muat  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  poaseason  of
public  landa  owed  a  yearly  tenth,  or  fifth,  as  the
might  be,  to  the  state. These  annual  pay-
ti  were,  it  seems,  often  withheld  by  the  poa-
Kttors,  and  thus  the  state  was  deprived  of  a  ^nd
for  the  expeniot  of  war  and  other  .general  purpose*.
The  first  mention  by  Livy  of  conquered  land
being  diatribnted  among  the  plebs  belonga  to  tba
reign  of  Scrvina  Tullins  (i.  46,  *7).  The  object  of  Iha
agrarian  law  of  Sp.  Cassina  (Liv.  ii,  41;  Dionya,
"  — :x  484,  ia  auppoaed  by  Niebuhr  to  hava
the  portion  of  the  popnlus  in  the  public
lands  should  he  set  apart,  that  the  rest  ahould  bo
ided  among  the  plebeiano,  that  the  tithe  should
again  be  levied  and  applied  to  paying  the  army,'"
The  Dgiaiian  law  of  C  Lkiiuna  Slido  (Liv.  vt.  Sis  j


AGRARIAB  LBOES.
Atfaa,  B.a  LB)  B.C  36S,  limited  each  indi-
nih>l^  liuMiMiijo  of  public  land  to  5I)D  jngen,
Bd  inpwd  ame  otlm  rettrietiofii ;  bal  ^e  p«-
UMT  lud  m  better  title  to  the  500  jugen  wfiicb
the  Isw  kA  him,  thMn  he  fbimeilf  bad  ID  what
lit  lav  took  &nn  him.  [Lbou  Licinui.]
Ibe  iiiipliii  land  <ru  lo  be  diiided  among  the

■mbii  taw.  The  Liciaim  law  not  effecting  ita
•tftc^  Titk  SemiooQiiu  Onccbiu,  b.c  133,  n-
tmi  the  DMsnte  for  limiting  the  pouoaion  of


hTAppaB(&C.  i.  10),  are  inch  aa  might  reaioa-
jiij  he  ufnd  ;  but  he  add*  that  Oraechua  ptu-
fotci  la  gire  to  each  poeieiior,  bj  way  of  oom-
[——'''•»  far  improrementa  made  oa  tlia  pnblic
laW,  the  fiiU  awnenhip  of  £00  jugen,  and  half
that  qnastilj'  to  each  of  hia  ioni  if  he  had  anj,
I'nbr  the  lav  of  Tibctiaa  Onrahoa  thiee  commit-

thr  ihirtT  Jre  tribe*,  who  were  to  decide  all  quei-

■pa  landi  ia  the  occapation  of  poaieiBan.  The
liT  fnrndid  that  the  land  which  vaa  (o  be  le-
■Mil  iboald  be  diitribaled  in  amall  allotments
i  thejw


^  the  petioiu
who  reeeiTed  aliotmenti,  in  order  to  enable  them
IB  ilDek  their  land.  Tiberiui  Giacchiu  loit  bii
life  ■■  a  riot  &  c  133  ;  but  the  Miiala  alloired

lar  diaib  of  Tibecio)  Oncdmi,  a  tragical  erent
haul  I "'  '*  *'  Rone.  P-  Comeliu  Sdpio,  who  had
^iiiHimil  the  canae  of  the  jiiaiiiiiimi,  both  Bonum
Kid  Italiaii,  aninat  the  mfaaura  of  Qiacchua,  waa
fc^ad  dead  in  hia  bed.  Soi^Hoon  wBa  atrong  againat
tltF  pact;  id  Caina  Oncchna,  the  y mu^r  biijlhei
of  Tibinia,  whole  aiatet  Seiapninia  wat  the  wife  of
SdpaD,  bat  aa  inquiry  wu  made  into  the  cause
•f  Sc^aD*!  deuh.  Caina  Orarchna  b«am«  a  tri-
bal «f  tb*  pleba,  B.  c  123,  and  he  pat  the  law  of
bji  brather  a^aia  in  force,  fiir  it  had  virtnally  '
aoa^'aded  b;  the  aenate,  b.c  129,  by  theii  <
dnvvf  the  power*  &om  the  three  eormniiaioneiB,
atfwk^  Olacehna  waa  <■»,  and  giTicg  them  to  the
a  Tnditaana,  who,  being  en-
a  ml,  anld  not  attend  to  the
■  Giaahna  prapoaed  the  eatabliah-
neo  at  rarigiB  cohinie*  under  the  proiiajoua  of
the  b«.  To  check  hia  power,  the  xnate  called
m  (be  aid  of  another  tribone,  M.  LiTim  Druna,
whm  oslhid  Caina  in  hia  popnlar  meaaure*.  Tt
law  af  Gianhna  propoaed  that  thoae  who  recoivf
■3aCMi^Aa  of  land  ahoold  pay  the  alate  a  ama
Ma  xn  rriyect  of  each.  Dmaoa  releaaed  them  &o:
Via  payneDt.  Caina  propoaed  to  foond  two  coL
aaea ;  Dnaaa  pn^naed  to  found  twelve,  each  coi
aaiJBn  af  tfaiM  thoDaaod  men.  Caina  Oracchi
kat  ha  Efa  in  a  diil  cooimotioD  a  c  121.  Shortly
Aer  hia  death,  that  danae  of  the  Sempnmian  law
which  ibriiade  the  alicnarifm  of  the  alloOnenta,
waa  PEpealed  ;  and  they  forthwith  began  to  &11
Ma  t^  handa  of  tlie  rich  by  pdlduiae,  or  by
ifliyil  pnrrhaira  aa  Aj^ian  obacorely  natei  (B.  C.
1.^),  A  tiibmie,  Bp-jrio*  Boriu  (Borini  ii  the
i^ae  in  the  USS,  id  Appian),  canted  a  law  to


AGRA.RIAE  LEGES.  41

pniTent  fotnre  dinnoni  of  the  pnblic  land,  with  a
provinon  that  the  mm*  payable  in  reaped  of  thia
land  to  the  atate,  ahonid  be  fbnned  into  a  fond  for
the  rriief  of  the  poor.  But  another  tribune.  Spa-
rin*  XhoiiuB,  B.C.  111,  repealed  thia  law  aa  to  the
tai  fiom  the  public  linda,  and  thua  the  pleba  loat
ererything  for  the  futuie,  both  laud*  and  poor*'
money. [Lax  Tqoeiu.]

Othei  Bsramn  law*  Mowed.  In  the  aiith  con-
•nlihip  of  Marina,  s.  c.  100,  agrarian  lawa  were
carried  by  the  tribtme  L.  Appolejoa  Saturainna
and  hia  party,  the  olject  of  which  wa»  chiefly  to
proTide  for  tba  veteran  uldier*  of  Marina.  Theae
meainre*  were  carried  by  riolence,  but  they  were
Mbcequently  declared  nulL  The  tribune,  M.
Liriua  Dninu  the  yonnacr,  a.  c  91,  propoeed  the
diiision  of  all  the  pnblic  land  in  Italy  and  the
eatabliahment  of  the  coloniei  which  had  been  pro-
jected :  he  WB*  for  giving  away  eyerytbing  that
the  itate  had  (Florua,  iii.  16).  Thia  Druan*  waa
alao  a  tool  of  the  aenate,  whoae  object  waa  to
humble  the  equeitrian  order  by  means  of  Ihe  plebs
and  the  Italian  Socii.  But  the  Socii  were  alao  in-
teicated  in  oppooing  the  measnre*  of  Druau*,  a*
they  pcoteeaed  large  pacta  of  the  pnblic  .land  in
Italy.  To  gBin  their  conicnt,  Dmaui  promised  lo
give  them  the  full  Roman  citiierubip.  But  hs
and  the  aenate  conld  not  agree  on  all  thcae  mea-
aure*,  Druau*  waa  murdered,  and  the  Socii,  aeeing
their  hopea  of  the  citiiensbip  balked,  broke  out  in
open  war  (B.C.  90).  The  meaanre*  of  Dinioi
were  declared  null,  and  there  waa  no  inveatigation
aa  to  hia  death.  The  Social  or  Uaraic  war,  after
threatening  Rome  with  ruin,  waa  ended  by  the
Romana  conceding  what the  alliea demanded.

The  land  to  which  all  the  agmjian  Lawa,  priiv
to  the  Thoria  Lei,  applied,  waa  die  public  land
in  Italy,  aonlh  of  the  Macra  and  the  Bubico,  the
aouthem  boundariea  of  Gallia  Cinlpina  on  the  wcit
and  esat  coaata  ceipectiTcly.  T^a  Thoria  Lex
applied  to  all  the  pnblic  land  within  theae  limit*,
except  what  had  been  diapoted  of  by  aaaignatiou
pri(7  to  the  year  b.  c  133,  in  which  Tibeiioa
Oranhna  waa  trihnne,  and  except  the  Ager  Cam-
pnnuL  It  applied  also  to  public  land  in  the  pro-
vince of  A&ica,  and  in  the  territory  of  Corinth.
[Tboria  Lkx.]  The  object  of  the  agrarian  law
of  P.  Serriliaa  RuUna,  pmpoaed  in  the  connJ-
ahip  of  CiceiD  &  c  S3,  waa  to  aell  all  the  pnblio
land  both  in  and  out  of  Italy,  and  to  buy  land*  in
Italy  on  which  the  poor  were  to  be  aetlled.  Ten
conuniaaioner*,  with  extraordinary  power*,  were  to
carry  the  law  into  effect,  and  a  boat  of  aorveyora,
deilca,  and  other  oflicert,  were  to  find  employment
in  tbii  agrarian  job.  The  job  wa*  defeated  by
Cicero,  whoae  three  extant  orationi  ogninat  Rollni
contain  moat  inatmctive  matter  on  the  condition
of  the  Boman  state  at  that  time.  The  tribum
Flavina,  D.  c.  60,  at  the  instigation  of  Cn.  Pompeiua,
brought  fcffword  a  mfaanre  for  proriding  the  aoU
dicn  of  Pompeio*  with  land&  Cicero  waa  not  bI-
ti^ther  opp«ed  to  thia  meaaon,  for  he  wished  to
pleaae  Pcnnpeiua.  Cine  clanae  of  the  law  provided
that  lands  ahould  be  bought  tbr  diatribution  with
the  money  that  ihonld  ariaa  in  the  next  five  year*
from  the  new  lerennes  that  had  been  ciratcd  by
the  Aauitic  conquests  of  Pompeiua.  The  law  waa
dropped,  but  It  was  reproduced  in a  somewhat


43  AQRAHIAE  LEGES,

and  [fa<  C^ffi)Hiiw  Ager,  vbicb  all  preriatu  igni-
rioD  l&wi  bad  left  nnUwchoL  Tbi  Seiijie  tract  of
Capua  (Campaniu  Ags)  wai  diitribated  among
2D,000  penoiu,  who  £ad  tlie  qnalificaUoD  that  the
law  requiicd,  of  tlmt  or  more  duldmn.  After
tliii  diMiibatiDQ  of  ths  CampaDiian  land,  and  the
abolitioa  of  tlie  port  dctio*  and  talli  (jjoriond).


*  (adA


16),  "  theCB  wu  a


A  from  Italy,  oicept  tin  &\
per  cenL  (nsauu) "  from  the  ola  and  mann-
BUBnn  of  iliTea.

The  laudi  which  the  Roman  people  had  uqnired
io  the  Italian  pemnmla  W  coDqncM  wore  grcBttj-
reduced  in  amomit  by  (he  Jawf  aC  Oiaochua  and  by
uic  CoofiKatioru  in  the  civil  wara,  and  conqneati
abroad,  were,  indeed,  con^nally  inoieaiing  the
pablic  landa  ;  butlheie  land*  were  allotted  to  the
•oldien  and  t3iB  nameroiu  CDlaaiita  to  whom  the
Male  wai  craitinuilly  giving  landi.  The  lyitem  of
ooloiuMtion  which  joerailed  diniiig  the  repnblic,
mu  contunied  nsdcr  the  ampema,  and  connderabla
tiacti  of  Italian  land  wera  diipoaed  of  in  tbU  man-
ner by  AngiutDi  and  hia  fuccanon.  Vafsuan  aa-
•igned  landi  in  Samninm  to  hii  loldien,  and  gnnti
of  Italian  landa  are  mcotioned  by  mbeeqnent  em-
peron,  thongli  we  may  infer  that  at  the  dole  of
the  lecoDd  cenEoiy  of  oar  aeia,  there  wai  little
public  land  left  in  the  peniniola.  Vatpaeion  Kild
pact  of  the  pablic  landi  oiled  nieKioai.  Domiiian
gave  the  ronainder  <rf  neh  landa  all  throogh  Italy
to  the  poHcawxi  (Aggenu).  The  eonqnata  bo  -
yond  the  limili  of  Ilalj  fiuniahed  the  eioperan
with  thameanaoftawanUiigtbeTetenna  bygmnts
of  iand,  and  in  Ihia  way  the  inilitationa  of  Rome
went  planted  on  a  foreign  aoiL  Bat,  according  to
Oaiiu,  property  in  tbe  land  wai  not  acquired  by
auch  Etaat ;  the  oWDSihip  waa  Mill  in  (he  atat«,
and  uie  prorincial  landholder  had  tmly  ths  po*-
aeaaio.  If  thii  be  true,  aa  against  the  Roman
people  «  the  Caeaar,  bia  inteieat  in  the  land  wu
one  that  might  be  rcanmed  At  any  time,  according
to  the  aliict  rnlcs  of  law,  though  it  i>  eaaily  ohi-
ceired  that  aoch  foreign  posKUiooa  would  daily
acquire  iticngth.  and  could  not  tafbly  be  dali
with  aa  poMeuion*  had  been  in  Italy  by  the
Tarieu  agrarian  lawi  which  bod  cecTulaed  tbe
Roman  alate.  Thii  aaacnion  of  the  right  of  the
populua  Romanua  and  of  the  emperon,  inigfat
be  no  wmtg  "  inflicted  on  pmTindal  landownera
by  the  Roman  juriaprndawe,"*  aa  Niebohr  affirmi.
The  tax  paid  by  the  holden  of  a^  priTstui  in
the  proTineei  wa*  tbe  only  thing  which  dia-
lingalahed  the  beneficial  intereat  in  auch  land  from
luSic  land,  and  might  be,  in  legal  efiect,  a  recog-
nition of  the  owneiahip  aocording  to  Roman  law.
And  tbi*  wu  Sangny'a  earlier  (^anion  with  n-
ipcct  to  the  tax  paid  by  prorincial  landa  ;  he  con-
iideted  aoch  tax  due  to  the  Rnnan  peofJe  aa  the
•oTerdgn  a  ultimate  owner  of  ths  landa.  Hii
later  opinioD,  aa  eipieHed  in  the  ZeUiciT^  /ilr

*  Niebuhr  obaerrei  that  Frontinua  tpeaka  of
the  ^  area  paUiea  in  the  raoTincea,  in  contrndia-
tinctioa  to  the  agri  priTati  there  ; "  but  thla  he
certainty  doe*  not.  Tbii  contradistinction  ia  mads
by  hia  commentator  Af^^^tu  who,  aa  he  lunuelf
aaya,  only  conjectorea  the  mtaning  of  f  rontinoi ;
and,  perhapi,  he  haa  not  diacorered  it.  (A«  Agr.
Script  pp.  38.  46,  47.)  SaTigny-a  explanation  of
thii  pauage  ii  contained  in  the  Zaitcirift /b
GncL  ItteitwiB.  voL  xL  p.  24,


AGRARIAE  LEGES.
OmiuAaidK  Rtdaiwifautiaft  (toL  t.  p.  254),  Ii,
that  under  ths  Ca«an  a  onifonn  lyatem  of  direct
taiatico  waa  eatabliahed  in  tbe  prorineea,  to  whidi
all  provindal  land  wna  anbject ;  bnl  land  in  Italj
waa  free  ftnn  thii  tax,  and  a  prsvindat  town  could
only  acquire  tiie  like  beedom  by  receiving  the
privilege  eipreaaed  fay  the  term  Jua  Itslieum.  The
comp lets  aolution  of  the  queition  here  luidcr  dia-
— coold  only  be  cflBcled  by  aicertaijiing  the


land,  though  aiaigned
to  individnali,  did  not  by  that  oicurastance  ^ons
become  inveated  with  ill  the  chaiacten  of  that
Raman  land  which  waa  private  proper^.  It  had  not
thefsinltge  of  the  Jua  Italicom,  and  conaeqncntly
coold  not  be  the  object  of  Qoiritariao  ownenhip,
with  it!  inddcnta  of  mandpMia,  to.  All  land  is
the  [rorinoea,  inclading  even  tbal  of  tbe  liberae
dvitatia,  and  the  ^er  publieua  prDp<f1y  ao  oJled,
cDold  only  beeome  an  cbject  of  Qsirilaiian  dwdot-
ahtp  by  BBring  conferred  upon  it  the  privilege  of
Italic  land,  by  which  it  waa  ilao  releaaed  from  tbe
payment  of  the  tax.  it  ii  clear  that  then  might
be  and  wai  i^er  privatoi,  or  uiratc  property,  in
provincial  land  ;  but  tbia  iind  had  not  the
privilcgca  of  Italic  land,  unleaa  neb  privilege  waa
eipmaly  given  to  it,  and  accordin^y  it  paid  a  tax*
At  the  notioni  of  lindsd  property  jn  all  coontriea
aeem  to  nippiae  a  comiJeU  ownenhip  rending  in
lome  perun,  and  aa  the  provincial  landownu^
whoae  landa  had  not  the  privilege  of  the  Jos
Italicnm,  had  not  that  kind  of  ownenhip  which,
according  to  the  notima  of  Roman  law,  wai  cma-
pleta  ownenhip,  it  ia  difficult  to  cooouve  that  tha
ultimate  ownnahip  of  imvindal  landa  (with  tha
exoeptioD  of  tluae  of  ths  liberae  dvitales)  oanld
leude  any  where  elic  than  in  the  pmolua  Romanua,
and,  after  the  dtabUihrnent  of  the  imperial  power,
in  the  popnlna  Romanni  or  the  Caeaar.  Thia
queation  ia,  bowevef,  one  of  aome  difficulty,  oJid
well  dcaervH  fnrtfaei  eiaminaticn.  It  may  ba
doabled,  howsra',  if  Oaiui  miana  to  aay  that
there  could  be  no  Quiritaiim  ownenhip  of  pnTate
land  in  the  provincea ;  at  leoat  tbia  would  not  ba
the  OH  in  those  diilncti  to  which  the  Jua  ItalicDn
wu  extended.  The  one  of  the  Recoitoiic  laodi,
which  ii  quoted  by  Niebuhr  (Cic.  o.  /Mtaa,  L  4),
may  be  explained.  The  land  here  apoken  of  waa
land  in  Sicily.  One  object  of  the  meaann  of
RuUu  wai  to  exact  certain  extraotdinarT  pay^
menli  (nd^^oi)  bom  the  public  landi,  that  ia,
frnn  the  ponenon  of  than  ;  imt  he  exoepted  tho
"  '  Io  landi  from  tha  opcratiOD  of  hii  meatnni,
I^vata  land,  Cicero  argnei,  the  election


Tha


that  then  wai  <■  might  be  private  land  in  Sicily  >
that  ia,  there  waa  or  might  be  land  which  wcaild
rut  be  affected  by  thia  part  of  tbe  meaams  of
RuUu.  New  the  Of^mitian  of  pablic  and  [ainta
land  in  tbia  paaaage  certainly  oovea,  wliat  can
eaail^  be  proved  wichoot  i^  Hai  mdividuala  in  tha
provmcea  owned  land  aa  ittdividoal*  did  m  Italy  i
and  lueh  land  might  with  ]>opfien  be  called
priaatia,  ai  contruted  with  that  called  pMiau  i>
the  province* :  in  &ct,  it  would  not  be  caay  to
have  found  another  name  for  iL But  w%  know


AGRARIAK  LEGBS.
tCT  aamtit  in  tbe  pTorincea,  ir
d  t^  Jn  InT'


d  1^  the  pnUiouii,  vlia
fai  ibor  RDt  mcmlj  m  Btdsay,  but  HDietimc*  in
pno.  TW  iMtios  wu  munged  h;  tlu  canion,
ndtklomna  Ac  firs  yean.  TIib  fiinn,  hov-
«v.  tf  luring  the  tentba  wu  that  of  >  ale,
mmefutio.  In  mne  rf  liina  tbe  woid  loealio
m  ■niiiiil  Id  thva  Ima.  Th«  phnw  nied  by
(he  RiBaB  wrila*  «w  onghwlly  fiaebi*  locatio,
■hick  m*  the  pniper  expcMuco  ;  bat  we  find  the
ftaiie,  afnm  frmmimm  loean,  alio  ued  in  tbe
■^  ■  in».  aa  emwiigQ  which  might  fft
■■cwkat  vnlngaaDi ;  uA  cnn  q^niiB  ban.
Thick  aigkl  nca  Iha  haiinn  of  ths  pnblie  landi,
Bd  aat  of  the  toilh*  dus  aiaa  the  poneMon  el
Ihem.  Sliaba(p.623),  whsmpealdiigef  theptrt
taiia  af  C^Be  in  AeoUi,  nyi  they  woe  nld,  by
whick  be  do  doobt  neam  tha  tlwy  wen  brmed
m  eotaia  tenaa.  It  ii,  howeiw,  made  clear  by
Xirhnfcr,  Umi  Vt  awne  inilaacM  at  Itart  the  phraae
■^Hi  Idove,  doea  mean  the  haejiiji  of  the  teatha ;
■heiho-  thia  waa  ilwap  the  mcauiDg  of  the
fiiii,  it  a  not  iiiaaililii  to  afflnn.

Thcagh  tke  tern  agti  Tectiealia  originally  ez-
jumet  Ik  pnUic  laid,  of  wbich  the  tilbe  via
leaied,  H  aftcrwarda  came  to  aigni^  laud*  which
wBe  IcHed  by  the  atate,  or  by  diSamt  conxn-
ticaa.  TUa  htttf  di  ■  i  i[il  liai  would  compnlMtid
rxa  the  agK  pablioa  j  bat  Ihii  kind  of  inbEe
fwftflj  waa  giadaal^  ndneed  to  a  nnall  amount,
aad  we  find  Ue  tern  ager  Teetigalia,  in  the  bter
poiad,  apvlied  to  the  Inida  of  towna  which  woe
aa  IcHed  tkat  the  laaae^  or  thoae  who  doiTod  their
lake&0Bhim,oaDldnot  be  ejected  u  Idag  aa  they
pid  ^  nct^aL  Thi*  ia  the  ffa  vec^galia  of
ite  Uteat  (n.  dL  8),  m  the  modd  of  which  VM
fc-  '■'  -  '  -
(I


faflM  ^  tha  agec  psbliaiL  Thoogh  ho  had  only  i
jm  B  n,  ^id  tbin^  he  ia  diiitingiiiab<id  &om  thi
■wnac  (rfinMai),  yet  ha  wu  coDiideTed  M  hanng
(he  paMcaacn  of  ue  land.  He  had,  alao,  a  right
■f  acaan  again*  the  town,  if  he  waaqected  fnm
kia  faaad,  fnmded  he  bad  alwmya  paid  hii  TectigaL
TkB  mio*  of  Ihcae  agniian  Inwa,  of  which  lbs
fait  waa  the  pimioaLd  law  of  ^nuiu  Caaiim,  and
ike  kt,  tke  hw  rf  ajnlioi  Coeiu-,  B.  c  69,  i>
a^al^r  aialiinliiiid  The  fleba  began  by  claiming
a  Jwa  in  tkoae  eonqneied  landa  <£  which  the
pariaaaa  rlaiiatd  the  excinnTe  enjoinient,  (nb-
jea  to  a  fixed  payiBMtt  to  the  itate.
•hjccc  «f  Ike  Bogatitni  of  Lidnioi
fewer  tl  the  wM^  nd  to  liaiit  their  wealth  ;
aadaa  they  had  at  that  ticae  little  landed  properly,
lUa  (Bd  woold  be  aoeompliahed  by  limi^ng  their
i^rpaotf  af  the  public  land. Bat  a  more


anp^rtenaia,  or  agw  emphytaiticB:
■■7im.J Tha  righu  af  ike  lenae  of


AORARIAE  LEOE3.  43

portont  object  wa>  to  proride  for  the  poorer  citiicni.
.  country  where  there  is  little  tisde,  and  no
n&ctimng  indnitry,  the  land  ia  the  only  loorce
'hich  the  poorer  cleaaea  can  look  for  Bobaiat-
eceeh  Accordingly,  at  Rome  there  vaa  a  continoal
demand  for  aUoboenta,  and  these  aUotmenti  won
made  from  time  to  time.  Theae  allDtment)  were
jut  large  ecengh  Co  maintain  a  man  and  hie
&inily,  and  the  eiKOunigement  of  popolation  wai
uie  of  the  objeeta  contemplated  by  cbeaa  giaiita
of  land.  <LiT.  t.  90.)  Bame  required  a  coutlant
Ripply  of  aoldien,  and  the  ayitem  wai  well
adapted  to  giTB  the  topply.  But  this  gyatem  of
sm^  holding)  did  not  produce  all  the  reanlta  that
anticifated.  Poverty  and  miimanagement
compelled  the  amall  ownen  to  aeU  their
landi  to  their  richer  neigbbonrt,  and  one  clause  of
the  law  of  Tib.  Oiacchoa  ibifaade  peraom  aelling
their  allotmenta.  Thii  claue  wai  afterwarda
repealed,  not,  aa  aome  woold  nippoae,  to  fiiTonr  the
rich,  bat  limply  beeaaie  Ibo  repeal  of  n  abamd
—  enactment  would  be  beneficial  (o  all  paniei.
the  later  republic  agnrian  hwa  vers  con<
lidend  aa  one  meaai  of  draining  the  ci^  of  the
of  the  population,  which  ia  only  another
proof  of  the  inpolicy  of  these  meaiurea,  for  the
worthless  populace  of  a  large  city  will  neier
a  good  agricultural  population.  (Cic  ad
L  19.)  They  were  bJso  used  as  means
of  settling  Tetenn  uldiras,  who  must  either  be
'ained  aa  aoldien,  or  proridcd  for  in  scone
Prabably  from  about  the  cloie  of  the
second  Punic  war,  when  the  Romans  had  large
standing  armies,  it  became  tbe  practice  to  pro^
vide  Ibr  those  who  had  serred  their  period  bj
giiring  them  a  grant  of  land  (Lir.  xiiL  4)  ;  ar-*


ways  looksd  forward  to  a  leleaae  from  aerrice  after
a  certain  time,  but  it  waa  not  poiaible  to  and
him  sway  empty-handed. At  the  present  day


cooid  not  provide  tut  the  soldiers,  and  the  soldjera
would  oatunly  (Korida  fur  tbenudves  at  tbe  ex-
pense of  othoa.  It  was  perhaps  not  lo  much  a  ayi-
lam  of  policy  with  the  Romsna  aa  Dcceaai^,  which
led  tlum  from  time  to  time  to  giant  lands  in  small
allotmsnti  to  the  various  rlnrana  of  dliieni  who
haTO  been  onumeFated.

The  edecti  of  thi*  system  must  be  considered
from  Bereral  points  of  Tiew— u  a  mean*  of  ulenc-
ing  the  clamoura  of  the  poor,  and  one  of  tbe  modes
of  rdieving  th^  poreity,  under  which  aspect
the;  may  be  chuaed  with  Uia  L^e*  Fiumentariaa ;
of  diilunng  Roman  .settleti  orer  Italy,  and  thus
extending  the  Roman  power  ;  as  a  means  of  pro-
viding te  Boldiers  ;  and  as  one  of  the  ways  in
which  popular  leadera  aonght  to  extend  thHr  in.
flusoce.  The  eSecta  on  iigriculnire  could  hardly
bo  beuelicial,  if  we  tonsidct  that  the  fact  of  the
aettkn  often  wanting  capital  i*  admitted  by  an-
cient authoriliei,  that  they  were  liable  to  be  ailed
from  their  land*  for  militaiy  aerrice,  and  that
persons  to  whom  the  land  was  given  were  often
unacquainted  with  agriculture,  and  unaccnstomed
lo  hold  labour.  The  evil  that  amiesn  in  course
of  time  in  oil  states  is  tbe  poverty  of  a  large  number
of  tbe  peo{Je,  for  which  different  conntriet  attempt
to  provide  difierent  remedies.  The  Roman  system
of  giving  land  Guled  lo  remedy  this  evil »  but  it


44  AORICULTURA.

wu  a  sjitem  that  deTeloped  itaelf  of  neceiutj  in
s  ilute  connituted  like  Rome.

Thoee  who  tqaj  cboou  to  inTatigatfl  the  lub-
ject  of  the  agranBii  lavA,  will  find  the  feilowin^
rtfEmnccB  sufficient  for  the  puipofte:  —  Lit.  l  4?,
47  ;  ii.  41,  42,  43,  44,  48,  S2,  Gl,  63,  iiL  J,  9,
if.  IS,  36,  43,  44,  47,  48,  49,  £1,  £2,  56,  t.  24.
30,  tL  S,  6,  16,  21,  36,  Tii.  Ifi,  x.  13,  47,  miii.
42,  xxiiT.  40  ;  DioDya.  il  16,  viii  70,  &c  ii.
61,  iii,  I.  36  1  Plut  CJunifliu,  t  39,  T.  Grac-
diut,  CGratdttu:  Appian,  B.O.  L7, Su;  Cic.
c  Btitbm;  ad  Aa.  L  19,  ii.  16  ;  Kan  Call.
xxxrm.  l,&tilv.9,&c.iiYiL14,ilriiL2iVelL
Pat  ii.  2, 6,  44 ;  Florua,  iiL  13, 4c.  i  ZattAriftfir
Gachidulida  StchlitciaajaiAafi,  Da*  Acker^vKtz
Ton  Spuiiui  Thoriui,  toL  x.  by  Rudorff ;  Niebuhr,
Wowuw  HiOory,  toL  IL  p.  129,  &t ;  Sarignj,
Dialieditda  Bttitxa,  5th  ed. ;  Clauic^  Moieum,
Put«  V.  VI.  VII.,  Biliclea  by  the  author  of  this
artidf,  and  an  Biticle  bf  Profeuor  Puchta,  of
Berlin  ;  Folilical  Dictienarr,  ait.  Agrastiau  Law,
b;  the  anthor  of  Ihii  article.  [O.  L.]

AGBAD'LIA  {iyfootda)  waa  &  farival  rela-
biBted  b;  the  Atbcniani  in  honour  of  Agnulon,
the  daughter  at  Cecrope.  [Oicl.  of  Biogr.  a.  v.)
We  poBaeu  DO  par^colan  mpecting  the  time  or
mode  uf  it!  celebiation  ;  but  it  wan,  perhapa,  con-
nected with  the  (olemn  oath,  vbich  all  Athenian*,
when  thej  anived  at  manhood  (l^tfici),  vere
obliged  to  take  in  the  temple  of  Agrauloi,  that  they
would  %ht  toe  their  country,  and  alwayi  obierve
ita  htm.  (Lycuia.  c  Law.  p.  IB9  ;  Dem.  de  Ltffai.
p.  438  ;  Plut  AleSi.  15 ;  Stabacua,  Sernt.  ilL  141  ;
Schumann,  De  Comitiu,  p.  332  ;  Wachsmnth,  Iltl-
ia.  AHerlh.  vol  L  p.  476,  2ud  ed.)

Agnuiloi  wn>  also  honoured  with  a  foaCival  in
Cypnii,  in  the  month  Aphrodijiua,  at  which  human
Ticlinu  were  offered.  (pDiphjr.  Dt  Abtia.  ah
Ai^.  I  2.)

AGRICULTU'BA,  agriculture.

Antioriliet. — When  ve  remember  that  agncul-
turc,  in  the  moit  extended  acceptation  of  the  term,
vaa  for  many  ccntuiiea  the  chie^  »e  may  aaj,  almoat
the  ulo  pcBcsfnl  occupation  followed  by  any  large
portion  of  the  free  population  in  thoao  Eunpeac
nationa  which  fiirt  became  highly  civillied,  we  >hal1
not  be  flurpriaed  to  find  that  the  contempoiariea  of
Cicero  weio  able  to  enumeiata  upwardi  of  fifty
Greek  writen  who  had  contrihnled  to  thia  science.
Bnt  although  the  Homeric  poems  are  filled  with  a
teriea  of  the  moat  charming  picturo  derived  from
the  butiness  of  a  coimtry  'life,  Blthongh  lleiiod
inppliei  abundance  of  wiie  lawi  and  pithy  npho-
risnu,  the  traditional  wiadom  accumulated  during
many  sncceuixe  gcnciationa,  allhouffh  Xeuophon
hai  bequeathed  to  ni  a  meet  gracem  eua j  on  the
moral  beauty  of  rustic  pursuits  interspersed  with
not  a  lew  uutmctiTe  details,  and  although  much
that  belongs  to  the  Natural  Hlrtoiy  of  the  anbjett
will  be  found  treasured  up  in  the  vast  itoiehouaea
of  Ariitotle  and  Theophraitus,  yet  nothing  which
can  bo  TEgaided  in  the  light  of  a  fonnal  trcatiic
upon  the  art  ai  exhibited  m  the  pastures  and  com-
ficldi  of  Hellat,  haa  descended  to  us,  except  a
Tolnme,  divided  into  twenty  booka^  commonly
known  ai  the  Gtopomca  (Tia/wttriiii),  whose  hii-
tory  is  somewhat  obscure,  bnt  which,  according  to
the  account  comniooly  received,  ma  drawn  up  at
the  detira  of  Conitnntine  VI.  (a.  d.  780— 802)
by  a  certain  Caauanus  Bouua,  and  consists  of  ei-
tiBcti  Inim  numciDua  writen,  chioBy  Qieck,  many


AORICULTURA.

of  whom  flonriihed  in  the  second,  third,  and  fonith
centuries.  This  collection  is  syRematically  ar-
nmged  and  comprehends  all  the  chief  branches ;
but  it  haa  never  been  conndervd  of  much  value^
except  in  10  fiu:  as  it  tends  to  confinu  or  illustrate
the  statements  found  elsewhere.  The  informalioii
conTeyed  by  it  is,  upon  many  pointa,  extremely
meagre,them»t«Tia]iwerBWQri[ednp  at  alstc  period
by  an  editor  with  whose  history  and  qnalificatims
for  bis  task  we  are  altogether  rmacquainted,  whilo
the  most  important  qootationi  are  taken  from  authors
of  whom  we  know  little  or  notbing,  so  that  we  can-
not tell  whether  their  prccepla  apply  to  the  same
or  to  different  climates,  whether  ihey  give  us  the
fruit  of  thrir  own  experience,  or,  as  we  have  p


e  them-


during  the  brightest  periods  of
their  history,  were  devotedly  attached  to  the  only
lucrative  profiasiDa  in  which  any  citiien  could
embark  with  honour,  and  &om  the  lint  dawn  until
the  decline  of  their  literature,  rural  economy
formed  a  tavourite  theme  lor  composition  both  in
prose  and  Terse.  The  works  of  tha  Saseraac,
Either  and  son,  those  of  Scrola  Tremellius,  of
Julius  Hyginus,  of  Cornelius  Celsus,  of  Juliua
Attlcus,  and  of  Julius  Graecinus  hare  perished  ;
but  we  still  posaesB,  in  addition  to  Vugil,  fnac
"  Soiptorcs  de  Re  Rustiot,"  two,  at  least,  of  whom
were  praettcat  men.  We  hare,  in  tha  fint  ptacf,
162  chaptcn  &om  ^e  pen  of  the  elder  Cnio
<&  c  234—149),  B  atninge  medley,  containing
many  valuable  hints  for  the  management  of  tho
&rm,  the  dive  garden,  and  the  vineyard,  thrown
together  without  order  or  mGthr>d,  and  mixed  up
with  medical  prescriptions,  channi  for  dislooited
and  broken  bones,  culinary  receipts,  and  sacrod
litanici,  the  whole  forming  a  romaikable  onnpoiind
of  simplicity  and  shrewdoeis,  quaint  wisdom  and
hlmd  anperstition,  bearing,  moreover,  a  strong  im-
press of  the  national  character ;  in  tho  second
place,  we  hare  the  three  books  of  Vano  (a.  c  116
—28),  drawn  up  at  the  age  of  eighty,  by  one  who
wus  not  only  the  moat  profound  scholar  of  his  ngt\
but  likewise  a  soldier,  a  politician,  an  entbuiianiic
and  succesaful  fimner ;  in  the  third  pbice,  the
thirteen  books  of  Columella  (a.  d.  40  I?)),  more
minute  than  the  preceding,  especially  in  all  that
rehUea  to  the  vine,  the  olive,  gtkrdening,  and  fniit
trees,  bat  ei-idonlly  proceeding  from  one  much  leaa
familJT  with  his  subject ;  and,  lastly,  the  fourteen
books  of  PalladiUB  (a  writer  of  uncertun  date  who
closely  ei^s  Columella),  of  which  twelve  form  k
Farmer's  calpudar,  the  different  operations  bein);
ranged  according  to  the  montbs  in  which  Ihey
ought  to  be  p^ormed.  Besides  the  above,  &
whole  book  of  Pliny  and  many  detached  chapters
are  devoted  to  mattJ^ra  comiccted  with  the  labourv
of  the  husbandman  ;  bnt  in  this,  as  in  the  other
portioDS  of  that  remarkable  encyclopaedia,  the
assertions  must  be  received  with  caution,  since  thev
carmot  be  regarded  aa  eibibiting  the  reaolts  of
original  investigation,  nor  even  a  vety  cmrect  itprc-
senlaticHi  of  the  opinions  of  others.

We  oueh^  not  here  to  pass  over  tumoticed  the
great  work  of  Mago  the  Carthaginian,  who,  ns  a
ruitivc  of  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  carefiilly  cul-
tivnted  districts  of  the  ancient  world,  must  havo
had  ample  opportunities  for  acquiring  knawledfrc.
This  production,  extending  to  twenty -eight  boolta,
bad  attained  auch  high  fame  ths^  after  the  de-


AOBICOtTURA.
(tneda  af  Cmhi^  it  wM  tnndilad  into
b^  «dcn  cf  tba  I  ~ • ■ -


AGHICULTTJRA.


aOnekn


Dmjvd*  of  Ut^aod  pnUolied  in  tmat;  boi^i
itaag  11k  eaitiii7  befon  Ihe  ntnmtnetment  of
•BE  en ;  and  tbU,  agaiiit  m>  &  few  yem  aAai^
■mil  oocteiued  into  nx  booki  bj  Diophnnei  of
Nkxa,  (lul  pnnenUd  to  Kuw  DeioUnu.  In
■iai  Mloin,  Cnto,  Vwro,  ud  CdnuMlln  will  be
«x  (kief  nppata,  *ltb«igfa  Tcfennca  -will  be  made
VI  ad  illntntiani  dnirn  &om  ihe  atfaer  tonrca
KlkKcdabore.  (Vair.R/LLt;  CdLAA.  11;
PbL  H.  X.  zriiL  3  ; Fnileg.  ad  Ottpam.  in  ed.

Ronl  Econonif  maj  bs  tfeaUd  of  imdei  two
idCBCt  bmlj  —

JL  Agncnllani  jntf  (-ilfncnttara),  or  tbo  ut
cCtOlimihBMHl.

0,  T^  ^u^emait  of  Hock  (i'Mtio).
A. AGRICDLTDRA.

Afriohan  proper  toacbea  the  att  of  raiting  tbe
naam  ctaf  DBcrnary  fiir  tlw^


mtcUtd.  and  tewbt*,  ftitbor,  how  thli  may  be
Konpliaiicd  witb  Ibe  liaat  pooible  cxpenditnre
rf  ojataL Tbe  cnipa  to  which  the  Oraeki  and

Bbbm  dotij  directed  their  atlr-'-

I.  Di&not  kmdi  of  grain,  inch
laricT  ;  luiiiiiiiiiiin  Tq|etaiilei  cDltJiated  for  thetr
Meda,  Mid  aa  beana,  peaa,  and  hipine*  ;  herbi  ~~
pttm  forfaca«,iBeliaigiaM,taiei,BndluDen
aaj  flanta  nidi  hnuahed  tlie  raw  maleiisl
t^  lELtilc  Unid,  lachaabeaip  and  flax.  S.  Fruit
aeaa,  eapedallv  Iba  Tine,  the  oliTS,  and  tiie  £^
X  Gvda  atoU.  —  Fit  tke  aetond  of  theae  din
ummmtmfei  to  the  aitidea  OtmrM  and  Vinka
a^  BC  ibaD  BollMKhatallapai  pnUoingiiino
the  BioM*  d^ailt  caoiwcted  widi  thii  topic  an  o
Idle  «r no  aenioe in  illnitnting  the  etaiaici

Aariisllan  in  iti  natdcted  aenae  nmpichendi
akoawbdH

L  or  l£e  aal^ect  of  mr  ojMaliona,  that  ii,  the
bntfJ^Jmiffnudiiim),  which  mnil  be  eoaiidered.
a.  irilh  leftnoee  to  iti  aimatico  and  loil  (ftio
loot  It  fBOb).  and  6.  whh  tefeieDce  to  the  dwell.
iaf-hoaaa  md  iteadii^  (nOa  ti  ilaliiila).


at  ploawli*  and  h
m. Of  Iba


ofiaBtiant themtelTea, mch  :


IV.  Of  tbe  object  of  tbete  opentjoni,  Tii
difeamt  planta  oaiiideiDd  with  refenmce  to
i^iiia.  larietiea,  and  habiti.  Under  thii  ht*i
mej  alaa  cmTeniaillj  iodnde  what  it  termed  the


La


COGR


a  Fill


{KnoB^tdrja  of  the  Fam).  In  eelectlng  a  fenn,
the  two  pointi  which  fint  demanded  sttontion
were,  1.  Tbe  healthineu  of  the  titiution  {taia-
britai),  B.  matter  of  the  gnateat  aniietj  in  Italy,
I  the  nTsget  of  malaria  appear  to  have
not  ieu  &cal  in  ancient  thui  the;-  haTs
pfored  in  modem  timet ;  and,  2.  The  general
fertility  of  the  toii.  It  wai  eatential  to  be  fully
satiafied  upon  both  of  theae  fArticnlart ;  for  to
•ettle  m  a  pettilential  niot  wat  to  ganible  with
the  liret  and  property  of  all  concemed  (»b  aliad
at  alqiia  alea  doiHtBJ  ntu  el  rti  Jxa^iarii),  and
no  man  in  hii  lenaet  would  nndeitake  to  till
land  which  waa  not  likely  to  yield  a  frir  retam
for  hit  outlay  of  money  and  labour  (Jtucba  pro
impBua  OB  labart).  The  next  object  of  aolicitode
wat  a  good  atpect  The  property  waa,  if  ponible,
to  baTe  a  Mmlheriy  expomre,  to  be  thelteied  by  s
wooded  hill  &om  iiln  iweep  of  botiteToni  and  cnt-
ting  windt,  and  not  to  be  liable  to  mdden  Piit-
fortonea  (ae  oatamiiatum  «0,  aach  u  inundaCiont
«  Tiolent  hail  itormt.  It  waa  highly  important
that  it  ahonld  be  in  the  vicinity  of  a  populooi  town
(iifpidiim  valiAim),  or  if  not,  that  it  ilunld  be
readily  accaenbie  rither  by  lea,  or  by  a  nBTignble

well  frequented  road  {via  bona  nUrufas)  ;  that
there  ahonld  be  an  abundant  anpply  of  water  (&>•
mm  aqtarims) ;  that  it  ihonld  be  to  litnated  that
the  proprietor,  if  he  did  not  live  npon  the  ettote,
migbt  be  able  to  give  actiTe  and  eonttant  peiaonal
taperintandenee  ;  and,  finally,  that  it  ibinld  be
modenle  in  liie,  to  that  eieiy  portion  might  be
broogbt  into  Ml  cvltiration  (low^ibi  iigoitia  nm
— BagtBBH  eaUlo).

Theae  pnliminaiy  matten  being  ucerUuced,
the  toil  might  be  conaidered  in  referencs  a.  to
it*  general  exUmal  leatarei  (^ma),  0.  to  ita
intsnal  qnalitiea  (qnalit  tit  Mrm).

a.  In  ao  &r  aa  itt  enernal  featnrea  were  con-
cerned it  might  be  flat  (lobai  oonpetfra),  or  upland
rolling  gronnd  (oofliaiiiii),  or  high  lying  (numfa-
Mia),  or  might  eompriae  within  ita  limita  all
three,  which  wai  meat  denrable,  or  any  two  of
tban. Theae  Tariaticrai  would  Decetaarily  eier-


with  advantage,  and  a


forming  the  Taiioiit  opetuisna,  Uie  general  mla
at  we  axand  the  temperattin  ftHa,  that
com  and  town  cropa  in  genera]  ()agt<M)  n


being  thataa


beat  on  phiint,  vineyarda  (waane)  at  gentle  ili  ,..,
and  ^mber  Ireet  (ntKia)  upon  eleiMed  utea,  and
that  the  diSennt  Ubonrt  of  ibe  made  may  be
commenced  eariier  upon  low  than  upon  high
ground.  When  flat  it  wu  better  that  it  ahonld
mclina  gently  and  nnifbrmly  in  me  direction
laapiMIiter  in  trnant  portm  vtmu)  than  be  a
dead  level  {ad  UhtUan  ae^taat),  tot  in  the  latter
cate  the  drainage  being  uecenarily  imperfect,  it
wonld  have  a  loidency  to  become  awampy ;  but
the  wont  loim  vaa  when  there  were  c
lUpet,  for  (hers  the  water  collected  into  p

A  la  to  &r  aa itt  intomsl  qnalitiea  were  (
cemed,  toil  might  be  claiaed  under  di  headt  fb


46  AORICOLTURA.

Sum),  L  The  dcnje  (qiunini),  5.  The  ««l  (ham-
dun,  ooBonaii,  aUgiiiomim),  6.  Ths  dry  (mnim),
vkile  llie  eadlou  giadatiom  Mid  combinBtJaiu  of
■vfaicrh  the  alsmeDtuy  quolitiflfl  vrm  sUBceptibU
pn>da«d  all  tliB  euitmg  Torietiei.  Thtio  ue
umed  KHOfltmibt  &om  their  mut  obTiouA  coneti-
toents,  the  itanj  (ii^iiifonfln),  the  gnTell;  (glano'
turn),  the  Ktndj  (atmomm),  the  mortary  («aii>b-
nn},  the  chalky  (onftMum),  the  clayey  {argOlo-
tm)  ;  aoDietimei  from  their  catour,  the  block
(nignM),  the  dark{yiii&im),  the  grey  (mJaaum),
the  red  (nUeuadm),  the  white  (n/ieni)  ;  lome-
limei  from  their  ctHUUteney,  the  cnimbliflg  l^airt,
friab^  dmnUiBii),  ■•  c^poeed  ta  the  tenaciotu
((Jsuwt,  eraaum,  nunm)  ;  Mmetimo  frem  their
natunl  product*,  Uie  gna
■Ht),  the  iwedy  (i,
taite,  the  lalt  («(■»■),  the
ninca  Kema  to  hsie  baen  ■  Hit  of  red  chalky
day,  but  what  the  epilheti  rudaala  and  naterma
^plied  to  earth  (terra)  by  Cato  may  indicate,  it
ia  Wd  to  delelmine  (Coto  S4  ;  comp.  PliiL  H.  N.
xiiii.  17).  The  great  object  of  the  cultiTatoc  being
to  iqiBnte  the  paniclea  ai  finely  a*  poeaible  (mjih
anH  aJimd  at  aJtn  ^uan  rttilBtn  tt/muulan
ieman),  high  lalue  wu  attached  to  Ihoia  loil*
which  were  not  only  rich,  bat  nataially  pulveiti-
lent.  Heoce  the  fint  place  was  held  by  w&im
pimue  It  pulrt,  the  leoind  by  pingiHifr  daman,
while  the  wont  wai  that  which  wm  at  once  dry,
temdova,  and  poor  (noaim  pariler  a  4«uihh  et
nuonm)*  The  ancienta  were  in  the  habit  of  fiinn-
ing  an  ettimat«  of  untried  ground,  tiot  onlj  &oni
the  qualitiea  which  could  be  detected  \  '_
tooch,  but  alio  fnun  the  character  of  the  treea,
ahiubi,  and  herbage  grawing  npon  it  apanMoeoiuly,
a  ten  of  more  piactiod  value  than  any  of  the
othen  enumerated  in  the  aecond  Geoigic  (17? —
2SB.)

When  an  eatale  waa  pmchiied,  the  land  might
be  cither  in  a  itate  of  cultaie  (oiZja  mavaiia),
a  ilate  of  nature  (ndu  i^sr).

opaiatiTs  nloe  of  laud  under  cnltiTation
by  the  di^  which  it  waa  o^hle  of
^, I  fixed  by  Cato  (1),  aooording  to  the  fol-
lowing deteending  acale ;  —

1.  Vineyaidi  fnotaa],  provided  they  yielded
good  wine  in  abundance.  S.  Oardeu  grovad  well
aupplied  with  water  (iorAu  UT^^mi).  S.  Oiiec
beda  (loZietm).  4.  Olive  plaotationa  (ofttwi).
6.  Meadawi  (^retell).  6.  Com  hmd  (campat
fimtntariai).  7,  Onvei  whkh  might  be  cut  for
timber  or  fira-wood  (n^  onadtia).  B.
Thia  name  waa  given  to  fieldi  planted
in  regular  rowi.  Upon  theie  vmei  were  tiuned,
and  the  open  gioiuid  cultivated  for  cj
miooui  crafM  in  the  ardinary  manner,
ment  extenaively  adopted  in  Campania,  and  many
other  parta  of  Italy  in  modem  timea,  but  by  no
nieaiu  conducive  to  good  huibandiy.  9.  Qrovea
yielding  acorna,  beech-maat,  and  chei
daria  tOna).  The  Gut  that  in  the  abo'
land  ii  placed  below  modowa  maj  waHoft  be  n-
garded  ai  an  indication  Ibu,  even  m  the  tima  of
Cato,  agrkultora  wai  npon  tike  declina  amoi^  the
Romana.

When  waate  hud  wai  to  be  reclaimed,  the  or-
dinaiy  pncedora  waa  to  root  out  the  tree*  and
bmahwood  {fititia),  by  which  it  might  be  encnra-
bered,  to  remore  tlM  todu  and  itoiea  which  would
impeds  th«  bbntn  of  man  and  oxen,  la  deatioy  by


nCptoa-


AORICULTURA.
'  othoiriae  tnubleaome  weeda,  luch  ai  fetni
and  neda  (fitieat,  jaaci),  to  drain  off  the  aupei^
fluoui  moiatun,  to  meaaim  out  the  gmmd  inia
Geldi  of  a  eonvesicat  aiie,  and  to  encloae  thCM
with  BuitBble  fencea.  The  three  lait^antioned
pnceaaci  alone  require  ftny  particulBr  notice,  and
we  thaefbre  labjoin  a  lew  wordi  upon  DoaiH^
Lahd-Meabi/ris,  Fencii.
Drains  (ybi»s,jiifaahiea<i,  Haifa)  wereoftva

1.  Open  (patemla). 2.  Covered  (eateat).

1.  Foaat  paUKla, open ditcbei, alone were

rmed  in  deoae  and  chalky  loil. They  were  wid*

top,  and  gradually  narrowed  in  wedge  &ihioQ

(>m£r£cifiti«  A^itait  nnu^)  aa  they  dcacendcd.

1. J-'oaaa  cateae,  covered  draini,  oi  liren  aa

y  are  termed  in  Scotland,  were  emi^oyed  where

■oil  nai  loose,  and  emptied  themaetvea  into  tha

fimot  fwitnla. They  wei«  uinally sunk  fnin

thrfe  to  four  feet,  were  three  feet  wido  at  top  and

Lghlean  inches  at  bottom  ;  (me  half  of  the  depth

'as  filled  up  with  mall  stones  or  iharp  gravd

tuda  glana),  and  the  earth  which  had  been  dug

It,  was  thrown  in  abora  until  the  surface  waa

_!veL When  stones  or  gravel  eould  Dot  readiljr

be  procured,  green  willow  polei  wen  intmdUBei^

cmsiing  each  other  in  all  directioni  (gM^Bonmit),

or  a  sort  of  rope  wu  conitmcted  of  twigs  twisted.

together  so  aa  to  fit  eiaetly  into  the  bottom  of  the

drain ;  above  this  the  leavea  of  some  of  the  pine

tribe  were  trodden  down,  and  the  whole  coveted

np  with  earth. To  prevoit  tha  ap^tnnti  being

choked  by  the  falling  down  of  the  soil,  the  moutha

were  supported  by  two  stonea  placed  nprighl,  and


toyiMfw  lajmiilHa  ilahminari  tt  alio  apaimtisi).
To  cany  off  the  lurfaee-water  fram  land  tmdn
crop,  open  furrowi  (wM  aqaarii,  tHeei)  were  left  at
interrali,  which  diacharged  themselves  into  croM
jiinows  ifiolUqmaa)  at  tha  eitremitiei  of  the  fielda,
and  these  again  poured  their  rtreaias  into  the
ditches.  (Cat.  43.  IGS  1  CoL  ii.  2. 8  ;  li  2  ;  Pallad.
vi  S  ;  Flin.  H.  N.  zviiL  6.  19.  36 :  VitB.  Gaom.
1.113.)

MiASUBU  OF  Land. — The  mcanire  employed
for  land  in  L«tium  waa  the  fugenrm,  which  iraa
a  double  oefiit  qiadTatiit,  the  actus  quadmtai,  an-
ciently called  aena,  or  oonu,  or  rigwta,  being  k
iquaie,  whose  side  waa  ISO  Roman  f^  The
subdivisions  of  the  as  were  applied  to  the  j  ugemnx,
tha  lowest  in  use  being  the  achpidinn,  a  squaro
whose  side  waa  tec  feel.  200  jngera  formed  a
(Kitfanii,  a  tcim  which  is  nid  to  have  aiiiea  from
the  aUotineitta  of  land  made  by  Romuhts  to  the
citisens,  for  these  being  at  the  rate  of  3  ju^-ra
to  each  man,  20O  jugeia  would  he  anigned  to
every  himdred  men.  Lastly,  four  centurae  mode
a  Milai. We  thni  liave  the  fi)llowing  table :  —

1  ampulnms  100  aqnanfect,  Rimian  meaaure.
144  acripnla =  1  actual  U,400  square  fixL

" ■  =  1  jug


200  jugen =  I  centuria.


Now,  si


=  lsi


quadnti  oontained  480O
squsie  yards,  and  rinca  the  English  imperial  aero
containa  4640  square  yards,  and  gnice  ue  Romaa
foot  was  about  I  of  an  inch  less  than  the  im-
perial foot,  it  follow*  that  the  Roman  juger  waa
lest  than  |  of  an  imperial  acre  by  about  £00  tqoare

In  Campank  thf  mrwilfa  M  Iwd-WU  tiM


AGRICDLTURA.

■  BjBue  wboM  nda  «ai 100


K  of  whit  an
mw  lumuijbtm  ipaSt  laUt  jm/oiiilu  tl  jitr  ta
'  H  Hynfti  ki^miiifin  Una  iM  teni)).


rf  Ttuliia,  or  of  baked  briiki  n  in  the  noiu
<f  Italj,  (T  of  vnbaked  liridu  m  in  Satntnun,  o
'  ~ a  of  oath  vti  ftaie  pnoed  i^  "^


b  <nt>ria  miinjiind  br  the

WMtlur.  (VuT.  L

U ;  PUn.  tf.  AT.  nxT.  li ;  camp.  CoL  T.  10,  X.  9;

Plik<LL34:  Ti.1.)

TibIIt.  ■»«  tha  had  bid

Mvi  dnined,  di-

tided,  ^d  baoA,  tlw  buiki

iriiidl  Kmd  «

inn  pbniadwith

aaia,  tkc  ctn  and  the  paplu  being  pnieiTed,  in
■4ir  tB  Kctov  ■  npfjj  of  IcsTea  for  the  itock  ud
uaWt  tir  doootic  ue.  (Cu.  6.)

L  £.  Vu-u.  RusTiCA.

la  <««tiiiM  ■  boBW  and  offloi,  gnat  iiBpoctmn
«at  ataehed  lothe  chmee  of  ■  fartomble  pootian.
Tbc  ste  Kbcttd  WH  to  be  elerated  nthar  thio
Id*,  ia  erder  to  ■ecnie  nhI  Tentilaticn  oj
noed  all  danger  of  ubalatjaaa  fnan  rmmii  ^
■•■|IM»I  wMter  ;  nado-  the  bmr  of  a  hill,  let  the
■ka  if  ahdler ;  faong  the  asM  ao  ■■  to
ma^amm  i>  winto-  aad  abade  in  mmiaer ;
bat  aat  tao  near  to  a  (tnam,  and  with  pla
■Bad  nad  [aatme  iu  the  naigbbcmriiixid.
iiiailMia  «Be  to  be  atrictly  in  propcstion  t
cmaa  rf  the  fans ;  for  if  too  large,  the  original
tttt  m  Laij.  and  thej  nnnt  be  kept  in  repair  at
a  frta*  eifaiaa ;  if  too  nna]l,  ths  Twioaa  nrodacti
vaald  ra>  the  lak  of  being  injmed  b;  the  want
<f  paawT  icceptadea  (ita  ti^aa  m  «iUa  ,^mJian
.  aaea  ^ita  nCbei,  Cat.  A.  A.  3). The

'  aliliiigi  was  aaaallj  anuged  loond  two  coniti,
■ilk  a  tank  in  the  eentn  of  each,  and  divided
■te  dace  paite,  DMaed  aeeording  to  the  porpoaea
far  lahkk  tkey  vera  declined.  1.  {Pan)  Uritaia.
i.  (/Wi)  AhMb. 3.  IPan)  Pruetaana.

1.  Ctt^a. Thii  cooiprdiended  that  put  of
lie  buUag  oec^ied  b7  the  maaler  and  bia  familj,

iij  i[iail«iiiill  (otijtaib),  vttb  different  aipceti
Ik  BBaaMer  and  wintec,  ballu  (/iabKoria),  and
ftCTM  «r  ptocnadea  (—tatofaaw).  Cohnoella
naa^n^  that  tUapirtiixi  of  tbe  nanwra  iboold
ha  MB^  !•  coMOadiona  ai  the  meani  of  the  pro-
piMT  win  pcnrit,  in  order  diat  be  hinuelf  vmj
la  kwpMl  la  ^*ad  aitn  time  (bcr^  and  that  the


AORICDLTURA.  47

la^  of  the  bmil J  (nofmna)  may  be  man  willing
to  bear  bar  huaband  eom^u  j.

"  RtHAiai.  Thia  eomprahended  that  port  of  the
Bg  occupied  by  the  aerranta,  conniting  of  a
large  md  lofty  kitchen  (cafna),  to  which  tlKT
might  at  all  limea  leaoit,  bathi  (iflhaw)  ibc  their
nie  on  holidajra,  aleeping  doaeta  (gaOas)  for  the
Mrn'  kjIkH,  a  gaol  (ergeuMum)  nnder  gnnmd  lor
the  larn  vinctL  In  thia  difiiion  were  indaded
alio  the  alabln,  byiea,  iheda,  firida,  ooiirta,  and
'  nuea  of  enoy  deacriptum  (itiAita,  babilia,

.  .  aaiia,  corM)  (or  the  wooing  oien  (fiomiH
ioMt),  and  other  Mock  kept  M  home,  together  with

magaiine  or  atorebouH  (tornaiai)  where  aD  the

embam)  were  depovted,  and  within  thi^  a  lock-Dp
lam  for  the  reccpdon  of  the  inn  toola  {firra^
atfa).  In  as  &r  aa  the  diatribnliou  of  tooma
aa  coucemed,  the  nrtnaer  {e^iau)  waa  to  haTO
hia  chamber  beaide  the  main  enmnce  (jamn),  in
order  that  ha  might  obaam  all, who  came  in  or
want  oat,  the  book-keeper  (pnvKrator)  waa  to  be
placed  one  the  gale,  that  ha  might  watch  the
vittbw  aa  veil  aa  the  othara,  while  the  ahepherda
(opiEwwa),  ounen  (hiMai),  utd  aneb  penon*  were
to  be  lodged  in  the  immediate  fieinity  of  the  ani-

S.  Fimeliiaria.  Thi*  cdDprehended  that  part  of
the  building  when  the  prodnce  of  the  &nn  waa
piuaurred,  ccmaiating  of  the  oil  edlar  {oella  oIearia\
the  preB-houe  (eeiia  tora^ana\  ths  Tanlt  fbr
winea  in  the  caak  (oaSa  niaarui),  the  boiling-room
for  inipiiaating  mnat  (r£«/n(tana),  all  cf  which
were  on  the  gnnind  floor,  or  a  little  depreaaed  be-
low ths  level  of  tiie  aoiL  Aboia  were  haj-lofla
(Jbmilia),  tepontwiee  for  eha^  atrawy  laaraa,  and
other  fodder  (paharia),  gianariea  (iarrta,  gra-
itcB-ia),  a  drying-roam  fbr  newly  cnt  wood  (j^nm-
nm)  in  connectioa  with  the  inatio  bath  flnea,
and  itore-roonu  (•^oAsoh)  Ibr  wine  in  the  am-
phom,  arane  of  which  communicated  with  the
/itmariwn^  while  cptbers  receiTed  the  pat  vhoao
conteata  had  been  lufficiently  meliowid  by  the
influence  of  heat.

In  addition  to  the  moTenienoea  ennmerated
aboie,  a  mill  and  bake  hooae  (jiiilnmim  el  fiir-
im)  were  attached  to  erery  ettabliahment ;  at
!a<t  two  open  tanka  {puane,  lama  tub  dio),  ono
for  the  caltle  and  geete,  the  other  for  iteeping
lupinca,  oaiera,  and  objecta  requiring  maceration  ;
and,  where  there  waa  no  river  or  ipring  BTailable^
corned  reaervoira  (datemaa  tufr  taatu)  into  which
rain  water  woi  conreyed  for  drinking  and  cnlinair
porpoaei.  (Cbt.  3,  4,  U  ;  Vatr.  L  11— U  ;  CoL
L  6  ;  Oeopon.  iL  3.)

IL iNaTHDHINTA.

The  inatrmneDla  employed  to  coltinte  ths
groond  were  two-fold  :  a.  Persona  (iomma)  ;
6.  Aida  to  hTimon  toil  (odnunoito  komimim\
namely,  oxen  and  other  animala  employed  in
wdd^ ;  together  with  tenia  (aufrttMafti),  in  the
istticted  aenee  of  the  word.

IL  d.  HoHiNia.

The  men  employed  to  cnldTata  a  baa  might
be  either, 1.  free  ikbonjen  (tptrarii),  oi  S.  ilavea

1.  FYtt  lateann.  Goto  conaidert  the  bdli^  of
procnring  peraoru  of  thi«  deacription,  whom  in  me
place  he  calla  awrWMn'i  po^ini,  ai  one  of  the


iS


AGBICULTURA.
u  tbat  ought  to  wsigh  with  ■


_  „  1  purchBjer

a  &rtii ;  for  although  a  Urf[c
proporliaii  of  ths  imb  opon  gnat  ealatei  wai,
during  the  later  Bg«  at  lestt  of  the  Roman  re-
pabli^  alwaji  perfonDed  bj  i1bt«,  it  wai  con-
■idcred  adTantageoufl  to  employ  bireliiigB  for  thoae
opemtioDi  where  a  number  of  hands  veie  n-
quired  for  ■  limited  period,  a*  in  hay-nuiMiig,
the  oom  tutmat,  and  dis  vintage,  oi,  aunrding  to
the  cold-blooded  recomtnendation  of  Vuro,  in
unhoallby  iitu»tiooi  where  ilavea  would  hayo  died
off  fait,  entailing  b  heavj  lou  oa  their  owner.
Opvarii  OKuiited  either  of  po<^  men  with  their
fiusilieo,  who  were  hired  directly  by  the  hnncr,
or  of  gaogt  (andncritiiw  iibenmm  optrae)  who
entered  into  an  engagement  with  a  ccntractor
(ifufnxwzKu),  who  la  nil  turn  bargained  with  the
&mier  for  aame  piece  of  work  in  the  olump,  or
laitly,  of  penom  who  had  incurred  dobt  which
ther  paid  off  in  woric  to  their  eiediton.  Thio,
which  waa  an  ordinary  [oaetioa  in  the  earlier  agei
of  th>  Roman  repablic,  Moni  in  iMa  times  lo
haie  beo)  confined  to  fiieigD  coontriet,  being  com-
mon  eipecially  in  Ana  and  lUyria.  Fne  labourer!
worited  nnder  the  inopection  of  u  OTMieer  (prae-
Jeetia)f  whose  seal  was  stimulated  by  nwards  of
diffcnnt  kinds.

2.  SlsTCS  {mni).  Rustic  alaies  were  diiided
into  two  great  classes,  those  who  were  placed
under  no  direct  penonaJ  restnunt  (tetvi  ioltUC),
and  t^oae  who  woriced  in  fetters  {aem  vutcti)
when  abrced,  and  wlien  at  home  were  confined  in
a  kind  of  prijau  {vpatbiiitm^  where  they  were
guarded  and  their  wants  supplied  by  a  gaoler  (er-
gaMularit).  Slat^  moreoier,  in  Urge  eatsbUih-
menta,  woe  ranked  in  bodies  accmdjog  to  tit
duties  which  they  were  ^ipointed  to  perform,  it
being  ■  matter  of  obvious  expediency  Chat  the
soma  indrridoali  shoold  be  regularly  employed  in
the  BSBM  tasks.  Hanee  there  wer«  the  oi-driyen
(Mslo),  who  for  the  most  part  acted  as  plough-
men also  (oratefta),  tht  stable-men  (Jugatii),  who
homensd  tin  d(«nntie  animala  and  t^ed  them
in  tbnr  stalls,  the  Tine.diessen  (fnatlnnf),  the
leof^triffwrs  (Jromdatora),  the  ndinary  labourers
(nsdwitnii),  auA  many  other  classified  bodies.
These,  aceoiding  to  their  respective  occupations
worki^  either  sbgly,  or  in  small  gangs  placid
vndec  the  charge  of  inspectors  {nagiiin  cptnm).
When  the  owner  (donmui)  did  not  reiido  upon
the  property  and  in  person  guperintend  the  vanoua
opcrationi  in  progress,  the  whole  forming  esta-
tdisbmeot  wus  onder  the  contiul  of  a  genecal
overBeer(eilb£«r,<u<or),  himself  aalave  or  freedman,
who  re^ilated  the  work,  distributed  food  and
ekithing  to  the  labourers,  inspected  the  tooli,
kept  a  regnlar  account  of  the  stock,  performed  the
st^ed  sacrifices,  bought  what  was  necesHuy  for
the  use  of  the  honschold,  and  sold  the  produce  of
the  &rm,  fen*  which  he  accounted  to  the  proprietor,
except  on  very  extensive  estates  where  there  was
uaually  a  book-keeper  {pnmrator)  who  managed
the  pecuniary  transactions,  and  held  the  vWiaa  in
checL  With  the  viUicus  was  aasodated  a  female
companion  (fimtuhtmaiit  mulicr)  ojled  vUUca,
who  Vxit  charge  of  the  female  slaves,  and  the  in-
door details  of  the  family.  The  dntia  and  quali-
fications of  a  TtUicuB  will  be  found  emuneiated
in  Cat  c  5,  and  Colnm.  i.  6  ;  eomp.  Oenmn.  ii.

Tlw  food  of  the  ilavea  eempcai)^  tbe  houahold


AORICULTUKA.

under  three  heads,  1,


jt^  being  kf
d  their  food


{/aaSia}  was  clai
rw. 2. ViMIM. \

1.  Cibaria.  The  m
stantly  in  confinemen
>hi^  of  bread  at  the  rale  of  4  pounds  (Ronian
pound=ll}oE.  avoirdupois)  per  diem  in  winter,
and  £  pounds  in  summer,  until  the  £gi  came  in,
when  they  went  back  to  4  pounds.  The  sbtti
tobiii  received  their  food  in  the  shape  of  com,  at
the  rate  of  4  modii  (peeks)  of  wheat  per  month  in
winter,  and  4^  in  summer.  Those  peisons,  inch
as  the  viBiaUy  the  mlliea,  and  the  shepherd  (qpi-
Iio)f  who  had  no  hard  raantml  labour  to  perform,
were  allowed  about  one  fourth  less.

2.  VamiH.  The  qnantily  of  wine  ailDwed  varied
much  acci3rding  ta  the  season  of  the  year,  and  the
severity  of  the  toil  imposed,  but  a  ssms  loAtfw
received  about  8  amphorae  (nearly  48  tmpmal
gallons]  a  year,  and  a  semu  compidHiit  about  10
amphorae,  besides  kra  [see  VrNusi]  at  diioetioa
for  three  moutti  after  the  vintage.

S.  FuimBnlariani,  As  pnlmentaria  they  leceived
olives  which  had  bllen  fomi  the  trees  (ofaneo-
daeae),  then  those  ripe  olives  (o^sa*  tes^wbeos),
(mtD  which  the  Ifost  amount  of  oil  could  be  ex-
pressed, and,  after  tile  olives  were  all  Mten  np,
salt  fish  (Aoiec),  and  vinegar  (acetuai),  la  addi-
tion to  the  above,  each  mdividual  was  allowed  a
seitarius  (very  nearly  an  imperial  pint)  of  oil  per
month,  and  a  rnodius  of  nit  per  arunun.

The  clothinB  (vtitiaiatla)  of  the  rustic  b-
bourers  was  of  Uie  most  coarsB  description,  but
such  as  to  protect  diem  effectually  from  cold  ani
wet,  enabling  them  to  pursue  their  avtxAtionB  in
all  weathers.  It  onisisted  of  thidc  woollen  blanket
shirts  (tenoH),  skin  coats  with  long  ileevrs  (peUs
maaiailae),  cloaks  with  hoods  (s:^  cacmlleia,  cv-
culioatt),  patch-work  wrapper!  {endimtt)  made  out
of  the  old  and  ragged  garments,  together  with
strong  sabots  or  wooden  shoes  (laiipaitat).  A.
tunic  was  given  every  year,  a  aagma  and  a  pur  of
lealpaieai  every  other  year.

The  numlm  of  hands  reqiured  to  cultivate  ■
form,  depended  almost  entirely  m  the  nature  of
the  crtfis.

An  amble  &nn  of  200  jogera  where  the  ot^~
nary  cn^  of  ovn  and  l^uminous  vegetables  wera
railed  required  two  paim  of  oxen,  two  bubulci  and
six  ordinary  Ubourers,  if  tree  from  trees,  but  if
laid  out  as  an  srbustum,  three  additional  hands.

An  olive  garden  of  240  jugers  required  thre«
paim  of  Dien,  three  asses  fw  carrying  mannna
(oann  omaii  cUltUarii)^  one  ass  for  turning  tha
mill,  live  score  of  ahecp,  a  lilUcua,  a  villica,  fiva
ordmary  labourers,  three  babuld,  one  BH-driier
(oriwiriiit),  one  shepherd  (apiiio),  one  swineherd.
(mMou)  ;  in  all  twelve  men  and  one  woman.

A  vine  jard  of  1 00  jugers  required  one  pair  of
oien,  one  pair  of  draught  asios  (oidb  jHetlrarai^
one  mill  aas  (annat  vmlarvi),  a  villicos,  a  villica,
one  bnbnlcus,  one  asinarios,  one  man  lo  look  after
the  plantations  of  willows  used  for  withes  (so&o-
tiHwt),  one  aubnlcoi,  ten  ordinary  labonrem ;  ia
all  fifteen  men  and  one  woman.  (Cat  £,  56—59,
LO,  11 ;  Varr.  L  19  ;  Colom.  L  7,  8,  il  13.)

In  what  has  been  sud  above,  we  have  assumed
that  the  [oopcietoc  was  also  the  fiirmer,  but  it  was
by  no  means  uncommon  to  let  (ieoare)  land  to  a.
tenant  (poUor,  fortiariut.  Cat ;  oobnaa,  Vsit.
CtJnra.),  who  paid  his  rent  either  in  money  (jpam-
O,"*


AORICULTURA.


AGRICULTURA.


*»


bt  ttikjaf  ont  to  the  laDdlord  >  bwi  prapordoii
•f  the  pndwe  (n  anuw  W  prrti&H  IfBon),  ac-
e«4ag  to  the  ijitoa  deaoibcd  b;  Goto,  uid  al-
^kAtMbftlKjiimgitPliiij.  Hhm aJdn •omt-
li^  tilled  the  Mtte  biB  fism  &tlier  to  wn  fm
fB^Maaa  (fiarf  Jiarij^MiM),  mi  neb  wen  om-
■imd  the  mat  iennble  ocenpuili,  mea  the;
M  m  aM  of  bendiMr  UtMiot  in  the  khI,  while
m  Ao  otha  kvd  ficqiiait  dttogH  coald  Kami;
U  10  nn  injatioiB.  Tha  wont  tenosti  were
the  «•■  did  ml  cdhiiate  m  ptnon,  bat,  linng
■  MB*  (v4iBm  (dIimm),  •nplojed  gangi  ti
rinva.  Upon  (he  whole  CdmuUa  ncomnHndi
■W  •■■s  af  a  cMBU  to  keep  it  Id  hk  own  handi,
I  iiiel  ehiii  il  ii  to;  hanen,  tha  dhnala  an-
kialth;,  w  the  ilblaiiiii  from  hi*  uod  place  of
iMi  10  gnat  that  ha  <ao  iddtn  be  u^  tha
mat,  Cal»  girca  a  table  of  like  prapotiaD  which
the  parttnu  oooht  to  ptj,  aceofdm*  to  the  DMuie
•f  the  mp,  BJid  the  iatai^  of  the  r^ica ;  bat  u  be
njn  Mthng  irith  npai  to  the  mnnel  ia  which
iht  OHt  of  eahintioa  wai  dinded  between  the
^tiae,  hii  Matcaeat  giiea  u  m  practical  ionght
■n  the  natm  of  theae  Iish  (Cat  136,  137  i
C^H.  i.  7,  Plin.  ^r-  >^  37<  ix*^  "i-  '^)

IL  &. ADMINICrl.^ HOHIDHK.

The  dameetie  —■-"'■  emplD;ed  in  latwnr,  and
ihcit  tnatoent  (rill  be  couidend  ondti  the  lo-
ead  iToat  dirinco  of  on  nl^iect.  Podia,  or  the
M^iiaLiitefiteA.

TV  toeli  ( imtli  Mimilii )  chiefly  uaed  b;  the  &nnat
woe  the  plough  (umfrmi),  the  grabber  {irpim),
kanewa  {mtct,en»u  ijwtotaa),  the  nke  (nuA-ws),
tla  ^/tK  (Jyoi  P>'<>)>  the  hoe  (umliui,  Urfou,
■arrm  [?]),  the  ^od  ec  weeding-book  (moi),  the
ic;ihe  mA  v^lo  {fiddh  the  thnihing-machine
'  '  ■  "  "  '  ,  tr^mbim\  tfao  cart  (pi*-
rtt,  doJnbu).  TheK  irill  be
a  V*  go  alaog  in  v  br  u  nu;  be
■ilelligiblt


»(-


tin).  3.  Sowing  ((MB).
«»).  5.  Hoeing  (mrnfia).  6.  Weeding
>).  7.  Bea{di«  (sHni).  8.  Tbiaibing
. 9.  Wkmowing  (Bwriiirtia). 10.  Storing


9  who  ofo«dt«rifioe  on  the  Cerealia
•■CmandTeIhu,iaTakedIwelTecel<atiB]  patmu
of  iheae  laheua  b;  the  lamea  Venador ;  A9XI-

SftiTifr;  Ah— whr;  M—ar;  Ckmieelcr;  Oia-
diHr,-  Frtmitar:  ognifiiant  melhUiiHU  wfaich
■a  be  cbri;  imdentaod  from  what  loUowi,  The
fcaoina  of  the  kat  deit;  alone  do  not  &11  within
•V  iHJia  ;  bat  weahaU  add  aikotbcr  to  the  lialin
1^  ^amm.  of  StrntttiM.  (Scrr.  ad  Virg.  Otorg.  L
:i:  Ftia.  /T.  JV.  xrii.  9 ;  Lactant.  L  20 ;  Hasob.
S^Ll;  PiadBiL /'•iitipL  iii.  USj  Asgnatin.

A  C  /M.  KTifi.  If.)

1.  />In^%  (araMe).
TW  laophv  of  timea  that  land  wai  plonked,


which  tl


■e  of  the  I


r-l;ine  uil  (aa
a  1^  fir  wheat,  it  wM  oaoal  to
aa,  Snt  (pntiadm)  n  earij  m


wat  perfitfmcd,  depended  npoD  tha
lil  uid  the  crop  for  which  it  wni
jHeparea.  loe  object  of  plaugUng  being  to  keep
down  weedi,  to  pidTeriae  the  earth  as  finel;  ai
poenbis  (Virg.  Gear^,  iL  204),  and  to  eipoae  eTefj
pcrtioD  of  it  in  torn  to  the  action  of  the  atmoaphoR^
the  opeiBtiDn  wu  repeated  again  and  again  (Vii^
Gasr;.  L  47),  nntil  theae  objeeti  were  fidl;  a^

tained. When  atiff  lowJpr "'  ' "

•oaif)  waa  brcken  im

plough  it  four  timia.  Si „  , _.  _

([Hing  u  the  weather  would  pennit  (Virg.  Omrg.
i.  63),  after  vbicb  the  land  waa  tamed  nrvoiAiB,
and  hence  the  god  Fmatlor;  fir  the  iacood  time
J  ileraM^  vtnaala  Mub^m),  abont  the
aoladce,  nnda  the  patron^e  rf  the  god
StpKwalar,  and  on  thii  occanon  the  field  waa  crh*.
ploogbed  (Virg.  Onrg,  L  97) ;  for  tha  third  tim*
(torttun),  aboat  the  bwioning  of  September ;  and
for  tha  foaith  tim^  uonl;  befbn  the  aqoinox,
when  it  woe  ribbed  (bora)  br  the  nceplim  of  the
■eed,  the  ribbing  being  execntad  under  branr  cf
the  god  InnxmOer,  by  adding  two  monldboardi
to  the  [loagh  (ornfnaw  oanAaa),  one  on  each  aide
'  '  ehBie.  (Varr.i.39;  Paitad.  L  43.)  Rich
eloping  EToond  wai  ploughed  three  timea
only,  tha  plooghmg  in  ipring  or  at  the  beginning
'  September  being  omitted  ;  light  (aniit)  moiat
lil  alio  three  ttnwi,  at  tha  end  of  Angnat,  eari;
in  September,  and  aboot  the  eqmnox ;  wbjlat  tba
pocffcat  hill  aod  waA  ploughed  twice  in  rapid  ao^
cestion,  earl;  in  September,  so  that  the  nunataro
might  not  be  dried  up  b;  the  rammer  heat.  (Virg.
Gamy.  i.  70.)

The  greateit  csie  wu  taken  not  to  plough
groond  that  had  been  rendered  miiT  b;  lain,  nor
tbat  which  after  a  long  dnnight  had  been  wetted
b;  showen  which  had  not  penetrated  beyond  the
lur&ce  (CoL  iL  i ;  PoUad.  iL  3)  (  but  whether
thii  lait  il  rtall;  the  brni  earian  of  Cata,  aa
ColmneUa  leemi  to  think,  ia  b;  no  mean*  clear.
(Cat.  V.  34  ;  coup.  Plin.  H.  ff.  iriL  fi.)

With  regard  to  the  depth  to  whk^  the  ihara

yaj  precife  direc-

ida  genecall;  deep

.  camp. Plin.  H.  JV.  iviii.

mere  aoatching  {leariliealio)

light  ihaiei  (ai^iiit  vomailxt  tl  dattaUbat).

Tha  plough  wsa  olmoit  isTariably  drawn  bf
oxen,  olthoogh  Homer  (H  x.  i6\  ;  Od.  tm.  124)
prefen  mnlei,  ;okGd  cloee  together  in  laeh  t,
manner  ai  to  [nil  b;  their  ne^  and  not  b;  the
honia,  gnided  and  itinnlated  chiefl;  b;  tha  raica.
Tiie  laui  wa*  otod  lei;  ipariiwl;,  and  tha  ;oiang
•tecT  wi*  nerer  pricked  b;  the  goad  (ftrmim),
iince  it  wa*  aM  to  leodec  Um  natira  and  un-
nunageaU^  Tha  animab  wan  allowed  to  reat
at  tha  and  of  each  fitnow,  bnt  not  to  atop  in  the
middle  of  it:  when  tmhanieued,  the;  wen  cate-
fbllj  nibbed  down,  allomd  to  cool,  and  watered,
befon  they  were  tMd  np  in  the  atall,  their  moatha
haTing  baoi  jroriotalj  waihod  with  wine.  (CoL
iLl)

The  plongbman  (ilaiUgw)  wa*  reqnired  to  malie
pexfectJ;  atraigbt  and  uniform  farrow*  (ia£»  eonot
■a  orsi),  BO  doae  to  each  other  aa  allogelhei  to  oIh
litcnta  the  itaA  at  the  ihare,  and  waa  particularl;

gronnd,  and  tboa  leanng  anauia,  that  ji,  muae*
of  bard  mutinwi  earth  (aacait  entdum  aobn  d
imwKlam  nlmpal,  ^fiad  agriaUaa  aca—wa  voi


pkH^iing  (IL  3,  g  23 :  a
16)  m  pntennee  to  men
wi^  light  iharea  {vnigtik


£0


AQKICtlLTUKA.


oamt).  Tb«  ntoniil  len^  of  s  fdmi
feet,  ssd  thji  ii  the  oiicinal  import  of  the  irofd
Mtel.  A  diltinctiiBl  ia  omrn  betwecD  nrtw  and
Hnwii,  the  forma'  beins  pniperlj  the.;%TTiiw,  lh<
latter  tha  eitremity  of  tie  fitrrow,  or  the  Muning
pnnt ;  but  lliii  ii  hz  fron  being  Krietlj  olwerTed.
(CoL  iL  B.  83  27.  28.)

Font  da;*  were  aUond  for  the  foor  plou^inn
of  >  joger  of  ridi  loir-ljiiig  land  (Juyerum  foSi
agri  gualmr-  lypji  layJifiir).  Thefintplougbing
(fiTMiwaio)  occupied  two  d* ji,  the  Mcood  (itentJia)
me  da;,  the  Ibird  (farliatM  [F])  three  Ibarthi  of  *
dajf  and  nhbing  for  tbe  leed  one  fourth  of  a  day
(h  iiram  loAnt  rwd^itHr  qitadnmta  operae).  The
(une  time  ii  allowed  for  the  thtee  plooghingi  of
rich  nplsod  Mol  (foBa  pingnu  toU}  at  for  the  foui


plonghiD
being  m


d  bj  the  acclivity
Uered  by  ploughing  hilli  in  a  ilanling  direction,
ioMead  of  Knught  np  and  down.  (Cat  61 ;  Vatr.
L27.  29;  CoL  u.  2,  4;  PUn.  A  JV.  xriii.  19,  20.
S6 ;  Pallad.  L  6,  ii.  3,  fiiu  I,  z.  I  ;  Oeopeo.  ii.
23 ;  and  eaaf.  Ilim.  /L  xiii.  704 ;  iriii.  370.
440;  C«.y.  127.)

2.  MoHwriMg  (rtaitaratio).

Mosnie  (jEoui),  titraa').  Tbe  mannie  chiefly
employed  WM  the  dnng  of  birdi  and  of  the  or-
dinary domeitic  *"""■'■  (ibniu  eobaMmumy  babu-
inm,  onBum^  eopniBiini,  nuCbin,  efunxm,  cfttananc,
Ac}.  Thii  dueled  cuuidenbly  in  quality,  ae-
cording  te  the  kutk  lioDi  which  it  wu  pvcnied  ;
and  hence  thoee  who  raited  diSerent  kinL  of  crape
are  enjoined  to  keep  the  different  jorli  of  dung
Hporate,  in  order  that  each  might  be  applied  in
the  moet  adnrnt^eoui  manner.  That  denred
from  pigHKi-houHi  (eabniami),  from  ariarici
when  thnuhei  were  btlened  (ai  aaariit  tuTJanat
It  nemZoniai),  and  &>om  birdi  in  general,  except
water-fowl,  was  conudcred  ai  the  hotteat  and  moet
powerful,  and  alwsya  placed  apart,  beuig  Bwn  by
the  hand  exactly  ai  WD  deal  with  guano  M  the
pratent  moment.  Tbo  ancient  writen  Tcry  em-
phatically point  oat  the  neceaiity  of  piwnring  large
■upptiea  of  mannrc,  which  the  Romani  r^ardcd  ai
■ndo  the  eapecial  jalnnage  of  a  god  named  Sler-
ntw,  and  fannen  ware  urged  to  collect  itraw,
weedi,  leaTM  of  all  •oni,  hedge  clippingi,  and
tender  twigi,  which  went  fiiat  njed  te  litter  the
itod^  and  then,  when  mixed  with  aihei,  iweep.
ingi  of  the  hoiue,  road-Kcapingi,  and  filth  of  ereiy
deamption,  serred  to  nrell  the  dongfailla  {atenpn-
Ima),  Thcae  were  at  lean  two  in  number,  me
being  intended  for  immediate  lue,  the  other  for
Ike  leceptini  of  freah  materiala,  which  were  allowed
to  reinam  fbc  a  year;  dang,  when  old  and  well
ratted,  being  accounted  b«t  for  all  purpeaee,  ex-.
cept  f«  top-dreuing  of  meadowi,  when  it  wu
tued  aa  fnsh  ai  poaiible.  The  dunghilli  wen
formed  on  glDond  thM  had  been  hollowed  eat  and
beaten  down  at  paied,  w  that  tbe  maiiture  might
— '  ~icape  through  the  eail,  and  they  were  corered
—  ■- — ■-  —  '  —  I— J'—  -0  prevent  enpo-
■  wai  kept  cco-
ru  itill  hrther
pnmoted  by  tnmiM  it  orer  wry  frsqueully  sod
mouunting  the  di^mt  put*.

Tbe  partHobt  aDpatowhichmananwu  chiefly
applied  will  be  lotiM  heieafter ;  but  in  ao  &r  aa
MganU  tk*  tiPM  of  iiflicrtiw  it  WM  laid  down  is


with  l«nahwaod  or  hnrdlea  tl


AORICULTDRA.
IT  October,  on  the  gimnd  tbat  WM  to  ha

bruary,  on  the  ground  that  wi*  te  be  spring  nwn.
A  full  nunnring  (Anomlio)  for  a  jnger  of  land
on  in  npland  dope  {gaod  ^uiut  ftonurater)  WM
34  hiadt  (taku),  «ch  load  being  GO  modii  or  peckj  t
while  for  low-lying  land  (<piod  rarnu  Mfmmtur)
ISloadi  wereoonideredniffidant  Thedungwai
thrown  down  in  mull  he^  of  the  bnlk  i^  five
Dodii,  it  waa  then  broken  nnall,  wm  qmad  out
equally  and  ploughed  in  initantly  that  It  might  not
be  dried  Dp  by  the  imyi  oftheum,  gmtcare  being
taken  to  perform  theie  operatioa*  wfaen  the  mooD
wai  waning,  andifpoutblewithaweitwind.  Ae-
cording  to  tbe  calcuiatieM  of  Coliunella,  the  lire-
Mock  neceaory  fxr  a  fun  of  two  bondied  jugen
ought  to  yield  1440  load*  pa  year;  thai  ii,  enough
for  maauiiiu  GO  jugen  at  the  nte  of  24  loadt  to
thejugsr.  uwhatpniportiocu  thiiwaadialributed
ia  nowhere  Toy  clearly  defined,  and  mnit  nece*-
nrily  haTo  Taned  according  to  drcumataneee.  If
we  take  two  ■tatemenli  of  Cato  in  cnuMCtim  with
each  other,  we  ihall  be  led  to  cmclnde  that  he  ad~
Tiie*  one  half  of  the  whole  manm^e  made  upon  A
&rm  to  be  applied  te  the  ruiinff  of  green  crofs  need
ai  fodder  (poiafiat),  ooa-fonnh  to  the  top-dnaing
of  meadowi,  and  tbe  remaining  fbnrth  to  the  oliTea
and  buit-lKea.  Columella  recfmunend*  the  ma-
nuiinff  of  light  loil  (ariiit  terra)  before  the  eecond
ploughing  ;  but  when  rich  laodi  wbb  inmmer  Al-
lowed prerioui  to  a  com  aop,  no  manure  wu  coq'
■idered  requisite.  (Hom.  Od.  xrii.  SS7,  Theo-
phraiL  n.  *.  A.  iiL  25 ;  Cat  £,  7,  29,  36,  97,  61  ;
Varr.  L  IS,  S8;  Colum.  ii.  5,  6,  9,  10,  14,  16,
iL3i  Paltad.L33,i.  i;  Cic,  d.  Saw*.  1 S ;  PUa.
H.N.xni.  9,iviiL  19,23;  Oeopon.  ii.  21,  23.)
The  gyateni  of  manuring  by  peimiDgandfeedingf
iheep  upon  a  limited  apace  of  ground  wu  neither
unknown  nor  ne^ectM,  aa  we  pereeiTC  from  tbo
preopta  of  Cato  (30),  Vaim  (ii.  2.  1 12),  and
PUny  {H.  N.  xriiL  63),  all  of  whom  recomniraid

The  aahes  obtained  by  bnming  weedi,  boahet.


Viigil  (Gtorg.  L  S4),
n.  wu  deemed  profitable  to  let  fin  to  tbe  itabUe
■tanding  in  the  fieldi.  (Plin.  H.  M  rriii.  30.)
Canalic  lime  wa*  employed  u  a  fertiliKr  by  aome
of  the  tribei  of  Tnnnipjne  Oaul  in  the  tnne  of
Pliny,  but  in  Italy  iti  applicatitm  teem*  to  haTo
been  very  limited  and  to  have  been  confined  to
Tinea,  olivei,  and  cherry-tieei.  (Cat.  38 ;  Pallad.
L  6  i  Plin.  H.  N.  xvii.  9,  xviiL  26,  30.)

Harl  alao  (iiurr^a)  of  diflerent  kind*  waa  knowa
to  the  Oreeka,  wu  ^plicd  by  the  Megaienae*  to
wet  ooldlandB,and  wu  exteniiTely  employed  in Oaol
and  Britain ;  but  not  being  fiwnd  in  Italy,  did  not
enter  into  the  agrieollnnl  amUgementa  of  th«
Latina.  Pliny  devolea  aereral  chaplen  to  an  els'
borate  diacuaaion  upon  tb«e  (ortha,  of  which  ha
dcacribca  Taiiona  nxta  which  had  been  made  tbe
aubject  of  experiment,  daaaifring  them  accordiiw'
to  their  colour,  th«r  coittttution,  and  their  qnali-
Eiea ;  tbe  while  (alba),  the  red  (ni/a),  the  ian^
cohiured  (pobadiBa,),  the  cUycy  (orjiUoeea),  tba
nody  (anmeaa),  the  atony  (lopdooaa),  the  fiifc
(jiagru),  and  the  csuatic  [?J  (fajmra).  SonM  o^
&tm  wa  Rcogniaa  at  once,  n  fbr  example,  tbe  EaK.
white  clayey  marl  ehiefiy  u«ed  in  Bnain,  lb«  tS~.


ABRICULTCnU.

kk  rf  >l[ib  ■««  Wicrad  to  CDdir

pan. {P)u.B.y.*m.&,e;  eomp.  Vam,  i.


AGRICULTURA.


41


Siaevkil  iiwlngiwi  (o  tba  dm  of  bmA  «u  the
nMM  ittiiif^  na^uDondad  by  Thn^thiaitu  and
C<hB«Di,  bat  eaadaued  by  Pliny,  rf  conbinkia
■A  ■  ■kieh  iBBi  qolily  eiiited  in  eiceiB,  niih
itmMWMig  iffiiidti  duneun — drjr  gnW
■ilk  dalkyd^,<r  heavy  *"1°*'  whhnsd, —
tkt«t)ccl  kuBf  fivqwottlr  Bttainvd  to  a  cotun
tiMl  by  (ibiHl  idaigUiif,  which  w»  gnaily  ap-
pnd  vTm  ■  nawu  of  nunvtiiv  field*  eiluoned
ijimnacffiM^  (ThnqiliniL IL  *.  A.  iii.  2S  i
CilH.B.Ii:  PUb.«.^.  iTiLS.)


my  jara  of  Italy  ud  in  the  iiBdy  tiacli  of
mUob  Faaee.  The  &eld  mi  lawn  about  tha
•Biik  U  Siefiaha  with  beau  a  iapinea,  wbich
■m  pfanhed  into  the  gnnnd  the  fUlowing
^ng,B>UaMatnfbre  thepod  waifiilly  fbrmed.


*vr  l^poaed  to  eztfdie  an  anielioiating  indnenof^
F>nU  iheir  miti  wae  immediately  buried  by
i^  pkagh,  althsBgh  perhafx  in  tbie  caie  the  bene-
toJ  Act  Bay  MTS  nmltcd  from  the  minnre
•nlifd  btfim  they  were  eawn.  On  the  other
Wd,  on  B  giiimal,  poi^iea,  feni^THk,  and  all
np  F*'l<d  ap  by  tben>oU,nch  u  cic«rand  fiai,
nn  wpwd  Id  eihaurt  {ann)  the  uO,  which


pnm. (TbHi>hnM.n.  *.A.  Tiii.9;  Cat  37i
Vut.  i2J;  Coliim.iL IS— lfi,n.3jPallad.L

£.«i  1,1.9;  Plin.  H.S.Tn.9,  xviii.10.1*—

It)

lS»««sC«(fo)

Uiy  be  maidaednndn' three  houU. 1.  The

van  tt  unnag. 3.  The  manaiT  of  Bwing. 3.

L  He  aeed-tim.  {mmmtU)  nrr-  t^^xn",  com-

Maodn  the  autnmnai  eq<iiaoa,and  ended  fifteen

kpa  hdbfe  Ike  •*tUi«  of  the  Pleiadei  (SSd  Oo-

»b<>).aak«eoegUwet  gcoond,  or  m  Iboae  lo-

atan  when  had  weather  «t  in  Mon  i  itideed.  it

•»  aU  p«<«ri.  that,  while  a  hue  ..wing  otioi

•aeaeiw  nalked  iLem  (iwitanaa  tatiammit  lupe

_  . , s.  Spring

■nag  (frimmbri*  t^ii)  wa«  pnctiaed  ODly  in  Toy
'•^  Mif  land,  iritidi  would  admit  of  being  cropped
'  "  '  a  {mtitiiit  agtr),  at

<m  eoniiecMed  with
«  gnat  incle-
Hihle  for  Hit
;  and  henoe,  generaily
■•naoctod  to  T«iy  apano^y,  and  fbr  tha


polnriied  by  the  plough  and  hairow,  and  then
eoTEied  Dp  by  ribbing  the  land  (<«-f»  cm  aramt,
lAcno  SBHIHI,  Aocat  linn  diaaUw).  (Von.  i.
29;  comp.  Colum.  ii.  13.)

b.  The  land  wai  ribbed,  the  lesd  wai  then
dropped  upiin  the  ti^  of  the  lirat  «  elevated
ridgaa,  according  to  our  &<bian  foi  tomipi,  LUtaS

e^  ut  ndar  duot  iaimt  dalaaiet  miata^  aedias
cuamlma  aiecan  mdem  Jrwmemtit  pratbeaL  (Coliun.
iL  i.  8  S.)  This  phm  wai  Mowed  on  wet  land
to  lecnie  a  diy  bed  tot  tha  laed,  which  would
probably  be  csnred  up  by  haud-cahea  (roriru).

c  The  land  wai  ribbed  aa  in  the  farmer  oue  ;

bat  the  ieod,  inattad  of  being  dropped  iqxm  the

ridge  of  the  Gra,  waa  cait  into  uie  depraatoD  of  iha

'  ' w,  and  might  be  ooTcnd  np  eilher  by  the  bar-

ir  by  pjou^faing  down  the  middle  of  the  lin.

wai  |ffactued  en  light,  eloping^  and  therelbro


dry,  land  inaque  ia  Ura  tad  BtL  ja£oa  lalia  ager
icaiBKmdia  at,  Colum.  iL  1.  §  11}.

It  will  be  leen  cleatiy  that,  whicheier  of  the
uboTo  modea  waa  adopted,  the  aeed  would  spring
Dp  in  regular  ravi,  ai  if  eowu  by  a  drill,  and  that
only  one  half  of  the  land  would  be  covered  with
aeed.  In  point  of  bet,  the  quantity  of  leed  aown
OD  a  giren  extent  of  ground  waa  not  aboie  half  of
vhst  we  employ.

Vetchei,  fimugreek,  and  Hme  other  cniH,  aa
will  be  noticed  below,  were  fiequently  thrown
upon  laud  unprepared  (cntda  terra),  and  the  lecd*
then  ploughed  In.  The  ised  Ksmi  to  have  been
can  out  of  a  three-peck  buket  {trimodiam  talo-
riam,  ac  earbam),  which  from  supentitiout  motivea
waa  frequently  corercd  over  with  the  ikin  oE  a
hyaena.  Pliny  point*  out  how  necewary  it  waa
that  the  hand  of  the  lower  ehould  keep  time  with
hii  itride,  in  order  that  he  might  icalter  the
gisina  with  perfect  unifiomity,

3.  The  pointa  chiefly  actmided  to  in  the  choice
of  aeed  am  were,  that  it  ahonld  be  perfectly  fteah
and  free  from  mirture  or  adultoation,  and  of  aa
tmLfonn  reddiih  colour  throngbout  ita  inbatanc^
Whea  the  crop  waa  reaped,  the  largeat  and  fineat
eora  were  lelected  by  the  hand,  or,  where  the
prodnee  waa  ao  great  aa  to  render  thia  impoaaible,
the  bfSTieat  graina  were  aeparMed  by  a  aiero
Iqmdqmd  oftntfar  ti^oUirie  txptrgaadum  trti)
BDd  reterred.  In  addition  to  tbtm  precautitau  it
waa  noHuimal  to  doctor  aeed*  of  all  aorta  (futdiam
■aaaaa)  by  aprinkling  them  with  an  atkaline
liquor  (Bt^wn,  L  e.  tatibably  carbonate  of  loda),
or  with  ihe  depoait  left  bv  newly  expTdaad  oil
(mwraa),  or  by  ateeping  tham  in  tarioua  prepara-
tion), of  which  aeTenl  an  cniunerated  by  Colu-
mella and  Pliny  ;  the  object  being  twofold,  in  the
fint  place  to  increase  the  quautity  and  quality  of
the  produce,  and  in  the  aeemd  place  to  protect  it
from  the  lavages  of  Tetmin,  eapecially  the  little
animal  called  mrcaliD,  ptobably  the  «uoa  iniecl
with  va  weeriL

The  qoBoti^  if  aeed  aown  varied  aceonUng  to  the
•oil,  the  aitnatum,  the  acaaon,  and  the  weather,  tha
genelal  nda  bmng  that  leas  was  reqaiied  for  rich
and  Body  pnlTcracd  (paqfas  d  jiatn),  or  light


cntOBHn),  or  moderately  t
open  field  than  fm  an  artawaw,  less  at  tne  oegm-
ning  of  Ihe  aeaaon  than  towards  the  close  (allhingh
thia  ia  contaadided  by  Pliny,  it  jy.  nuL  ^0>  B>d


S2


AGMCULTUEA.


kn  in  Tuny  than  in  dry  weatbcT,  nuximi  vhkh
are  toll;  ciploined  b;  the  snlhoritiei  footed  be-
low. The  RTcrags  amormt  of  teed  nted  for  the
thice  princi[nl  tpeciea  of  gnin  —  wheat,  *pelt  and
borie; — mu  reepeetiTeljr,  five,  ten,  ind  in  modii
perjuger.CXenopn,0«an'17;Th«iphracLu.  G,  and
ui.  25;  Cat.  34,  3£  ;  Vair.  L  29,  S4,  40,  52  ;  Co-
Inm.  a  2,  3,  8,  9, 10,  13,  xiL  2  ;  Pallad.  L  6,  34,
x.i;Viig.OaoT^.i.  ia3,219,  225;  VUa.H.ff.
xiT.  21,  iTi.  27,  ITHL24, 73 ;  Qeopon.  iL  16—30.)

4.  /fommniiy  ioeeatia)

Higbt  ba  ■patanaei  at  two  different  periodi :
after  the  first  or  lecond  plongbing,  in  (vder  to
powder  t)iB  tail  completelT  ;  and  a&r  sowing,  in
order  to  lOTer  np  the  •eci  When  the  knd  waa
encnmhered  with  raoti  and  deep-aeatad  wecda,  a
grubber  (117101,  Cat.  10.  Varr.  L.  L,  it.  81)  fonned
of  a  immg  plank  aet  with  iron  ipike*  wu  em-
ployed, bnt  u  ordinary  aiet  wicker  hirdlet  (i>i-
mineos  cratat),  aranetime*  fitted  with  teeth  (tfai-
Mae),  were  dragged  OTer  the  ground ;  or  the  dodi
were  bndcen  with  hsnd-rakea  (niMm).  The  Kcd,
aa  we  httTe  aeen  aboTe,  being  for  ibo  moat  pari
plong^ied  in,  and  the  operation  tor  that  naaon  placed
under  the  patronage  of  a  god  Obamtor^  the  aecoad
harrowing  {iiensHo)  was  omiCUd,  except  when  the
•ucbce  still  mae  in  lumpa  (Virg.  Gtorg.  L  104)  1  but
■ince  it  vat  the  dot;  of  a  good  &raier  to  hare  hii
itelda  in  the  beat  order  before  he  began  to  aow,  the
older  Roman  writen  eontidered  harrowing  after
■awing  at  a  proof  of  bad  huabandiy.- — ^'^  Vcterei
Romani  dixerunt  male  lubactum  agnzm,  qol  aatii
frngiboi  occandni  tit."  (Colum.  iLt,  13.  iL  2
Plin.  H.  JV,  iriii.  20  ;  Virg.  Cnoiy.  I  9*,  104.)
B.  Hoaag  (Bmfta).

Tbs  next  care,  after  coTDnng  up  the  leed,  trai
to  loosen  tlie  eaith  loond  the  root*  of  tbe  jonitg
blades,  in  order  that  air  and  moisture  might  gaii
free  aceeii  and  enable  them  to  tend  forth  m«i
nDmerons  and  more  Tigonnu  ihoota  and  fibret
(itf  fnlican  potrial).  Thia  process  was  termed
fffra\tu,  sorri^  or  aaradaiia,  and  was  carried
on  by  hand  with  an  instmment  called  smsAin,
the  form  of  which  is  not  known.  Corn  was  an-
altj  hoed  twice,  for  tbe  lint  time  in  winter,  as
soon  as  it  biAj  coTsred  tbo  ground  (nun  lola
anicot  coatexermt\  prorided  there  was  no  frost;
and  for  the  second  time  in  spring,  before  the  stalk
became  jointed  {fntletfrnrm  mge$  n  ariiemlrtn  tai)  ;
great  care  being  taken  at  all  timet  not  to  injure
the  not.  On  the  tint  oecation,  and  then  only,
where  the  groond  waa  dry  and  the  lituatim  warm,
tbe  ]daati,  in  addition  to  a  aimpla  hoeing  (jiaiia
tarritio),  were  earthed  np  {a^obnten'}.  Colomella
reeommenda  sarritio  for  almost  all  oopa,  ex-
cept iLpinea ;  bot  authorities  diSetcd  much  aa  to
the  tiecassity  or  propriety  of  perfomiiag  the  opera-
tion in  an;  case,  and  these  who  adiocatcd  its  ei-
]Kdienc7  most  wamly,  agreed  that  the  pcriodj  at
which  it  ought  to  be  executed,  and  the  number  of
tiuKi  thai  It  ought  to  be  repeated,  must  depend
npco  tiie  acdl,  dimale,  and  a  vanety  of  tpeeial
cucnmstantca.  (Cat  37  j  VaiT.  L  13,  39,  36-
Colum,  iL  11,  li.  2  i  Plin.  H.  JV.  iviiL  21,  36
Oeopim,  iz.  24 ;  comp.  Plant.  CaU,  iii  6.  3
Virg.  Cteiy.  L  155.)

«.  Fr«d%  (r«Ho>tu).
Jloung  wai  Mowed  I7  ireeding  (ArramoTiJi


■AGRICULTURA.
muaSo),  which  in  the  ease  of  gnfa  ciofl  look

Kfbre  tiiej  hegiB  to  blon

the  flower  had  pasted  ai
The  weeds  wen  either  pulled  up  by  the  p
(fondiu  ianlUibiu  iaiu),  or  cut  orer  with  a  bui-
hook,  which  Palladint  terau  nuieo.  (Cat.  37 ;
Varr.  L  30  ;  Cohm.  ii.  11,  xl  2  ;  Pallad.  L  nh.
fin. ;  Plin.  H.  JV.  xriii.  21  ;  Oeopon.  iL  24.)

But  after  the  feimer  had  labonnd  nHth  nme-
mitting  teal  in  clerainE  and  pulTmiung  the  atdl,  in
aelecting  and  nndieatuig  the  taed,  in  hodng  the
yoong  blades,  and  in  eitlrpatiitr  """■
noxioai  weeds  (Mtmi,  Mtiti,  l_
ruUf  scHKi),  the  safety  of  tbe  crop  was  tl
by  a  ntt  number  of  ataailants  (Am  oorus  iOmdamt
pulas) ;  tnch  at  worms  of  Tarions  kinds  (unBDufi)
attadiiiw  both  root  and  ear,  calerpiUan  (aritaa),
■piden  (pialaiigia),  mails  {Umaat,  eoMeae),  mice
(suns),  moles  (tafpw),  and  tbe  whole  race  of
birds,  besidet  whicl^  each  kind  of  plant  was  be-
lieied  to  hare  itt  own  apodal  Tegetable  enemy,
which,  if  not  tarefhlly  watched,  would  spring  up,
choke,  and  dettroy  it.  Tbe  most  fermidaUe  of
these  pests  are  ennmerated  by  Pliny  (ff.  N.  iriiL
17),  ^oproposeasrmdiy  precaationsand  remediea,
of  which  many  are  ridiculous  ■upentitinu.  Bat
the  foe  dreaded  abore  all  othen  in  the  Tineyard
and  the  comSeld  was  a  peculiar  blight  or  mildcwr
termed  roiuo,  which  wrought  tnch  banc  in  damp
low-lying  situationi  that  it  was  icgarded  as  a  ma-
nifeslA^on  of  wrath  on  the  pert  of  a  malignant
■pint,  whose  &Tour  the  mslic  sought  to  piu^tiale
by  the  annnol  festiral  of  the  Sai^alia, [Rom-

Another  danger  of  an  opponte  deienplioii  arow
&om  the  gnin  shootinE  up  lo  rapidly  that  the  atalk
was  likely  to  become  unmodentely  loiw  and  weak.
The  danger  in  this  caie  waa  averted  by  paatnr-
iog  down  the  too  luznriant  herbage  with  iheep
(tmaiHtm  tnjEfiBK  laiera  depateil  in  iaia),  or  by-
dragging  over  it  an  iron^toothed  harrow  (crofis  et
/ema\  b^  which  '' "


withoi
had  become  ia.i  ripe,  in  order  to  aToia  the  loi


as  it  had  acquired

int  waiting  u  *'
r  to  ayoid  tl
sustained  by  thakmg,  and  by  tbe  raTage*  of
animals.  The  necessity  of  puraning  this  course
with  regard  to  barley,  ii  espeoally  insisted  upon  ;
but  is  qnite  at  Tariance  with  modem  practice.
(Colnro.  iL  9.)

Vano  describes  three  distinct  methodi  of  reap-
ing (pia  patera  nesrionu).

1.  That  fallowed  in  Umbria,  where  the  italk
was  shorn  dose  to  the  ground  with  a  book  (/oJsr) ;
each  handful  was  hud  down  ;  and  when  s  num-
ber of  these  had  accumulated,  the  ears  were  cilt
off,  thrown  into  baskets  (oortst),  and  lent  to  the
thrashing-floor,  the  straw  (ifranaifaa)  being  left
upon  the  field,  knd  afterwatda  gathered  into  «

2.  That  followed  in  Picennm,  where  ther  nacA
a  nnell  iion  saw  (ssrrwla/erraa)  fixed  to  the  eT~
tremity  of  a  cnwked  wooden  handle  Qwnttm  in  ~
omwa  batiUmki ;  irith  thia  they  hud  hold  of  la.
bundle  of  can  which  were  cat  off,  the  straw  bein^
left  standing  to  be  mown  tabeequontly.

X  That  followed  in  the  Tioni^of  Roma -and


AORICULTURA.

tb«  itaJki  n  „  .,.  .
U  half  their  height  from
ikc  ftMBd,  t^  vboU  of  ths  partion  deUched
Idif  cait^red  in  buketa  to  the  Ihrutuog-floar,
ad  iW  pan  IcA  itending  being  cat  ■ttcmrd*.

n*  Jut  two  nwlhoda  only  an  particuUriy  q<h
liad  b;  ColumcIK  "l"  dncribe*  the  ' -

mpliytd  in  the  Mond  under  tbcmuu.  —  ,

■^ "^* ["*'] ("^  '"Vh  ^  pstwEw
fi'w  ywa  %■■<} ;  and  tboM  emiila^  ia  ''

Imtiadata  mtii

»  which  h>Te

TH]t  nta&cMnlf  e^khKd,  Id  additioa  to  the
•line,  Plinf  and  PaQidiiu  de*crib«  a  re^nng-
«nfkb»  voriccd  bjr  oieci,  which  wa*  much  used
're  lerel  {daiaa  at  the  Oauli.
kllndn  to  bin"

tfoa  th>  point  aa  ttiote  of  Homer  in  the  cl

Bg  pJEtofe  of  a harren-iield coulnined il

'  '  taaik  boAaf  Hie  lUad.  (Van.L  60;  Colum.

I ;  PEa.  fl.JV.  iriii.  30 !  Pallad.  Tii.  2  i  r

(;  CBB^  Ham.  IL  li.  G7,  IfiiL  65a>


ig  (fritera).

jUhr  the  oop  had  Imn  pnpeilj  diied  and
kriocd  (tarn^eti)  by  a^oaara  to  the  ion,  it
a  oKT^vd  to  the  thrnhn^-flocdr  (IAh,  ifiirih
«  ■*«(■  ana).  Thi*  waa  an  open  apace,  on  lamt
deiWel  apot  onr  which  the  wind  had  ft«  cooree,
rf  a  ikaBlai  fon,  ilightl;  railed  in  the  ceatre  to
iHaw  BMiM&ra  to  nm  o£  The  earth  waa  com-
patU  by  hemy  roHen  (grtm  lyUadn,  molari
(^d>),  p«Bded  with  nmmen  (pmiealit),  and
w lined  t*  B  nlid  eoMiilnncy  with  day  and  cho^

hokx  alaD,  pared  with  hud  ifamet.  Here  the  torn
na  apod  ant  and  beaten  with  Oojli  (iacalu  aos-
tut^^am  eadtrm,faiieuJhigiBm'ii  mmonxnm-
■oa^,  aeept  whea  the  eaa  akoa  had  beau  breosht
6v  tha  fietd,  tooddes  oat  (lariiiin)  by  the  feet
'  a  n^bCT  of  DMS  or  honee,  who  were  driToo
hatlaaida  aad  firwanit  within  the  ring.  To  pn-
i<tt»  Ae  eSKt  mm  eutl;  and  more  petiectly,  tha
ottia  WBB  &«iaantly  yiied  to  a  machiaa  (tribit-
b^trimla.  JMlea,  tnalo),  conniling  of  a  baud
■adc  iB«^  by  anairhing  to  it  Monea  or  piecoa  of
nB,aadtaded  with  •MDeheaTy  weight; or,  what
■»  ""aiBd  a  Funic  wain  {floMbim  Poamim)
wt  caplncd,  beiif  a  kI  of  toothed  rollen
(B^ml  with  phnka,  m  which  mi  the  driTer  who

a  huge  (bed  o
. ,  f  mSdent  d '
1  the  frfule  dop.  Here  the
B&T*Dtable  aeawni  befcre  bring  tbiaihed,
ad  Inthcr  it  wai  haniedly  eonreyed  Sac  ihelter
whm  the  harreet  work  wai  jnlerrnpled  by  any
aUAtaioarai.  <Cat  91,  129;  Van.  L  13,  fil,  62;
Cil^  L  S,  iL  l»;  Palled,  i.  36,  tiill  ^  PUn.  H.
S.  iraL  29,  30 ;  Ham.  /J.  liaL  688 ;  n.  49£  ;  xn.
Ti ;  Tvf.  Oaai^  i.  176 ;  Oeopon.  iL  26.)
ft.  Jn-momuff  (iHiitilatia).
WIhs  llw  nain  waa  nixed  with  chafE^  it  waa
II  pilaa  upon  the  ana,  in  otder

a'  hi  beboneaway  by
~D  the  wind  wh  net


AORICULTURA.  Si

(\utiarrfy,  anttlalor)  who  toued  it  up  from  a
Hera  (nnmi,  ci^iufan'um)  or  ahovd  (rrtei',  naft-
labnm\  when  the  heayy  pdtion  fell  down  in  a
heap,  and  the  chaff  floated  off  thrnngh  the  ail.
When  il  wu  intended  to  keep  the  com  for  any
length  of  time,  it  wm  common  to  rmeat  tha  pnt-
cea>  (rtpurpan,  npoUrt),  tilaL  it  might  be  tho-
niughly  cleaned.  (Von.  L  62;  Colnm.  iL  9.  20)
comp.  Horn.  A  T.  199;  liiL  5B6,)

10.  FrttermiiomqfOont(daynauiitBKrpaiido)^

Afler  the  c«n  had  been  thrathed  oat  and  win-
nowed, or  St  leBit  the  ean  eefarated  from  the  (talk,
the  next  can  waa  to  itcre  np  (patdsrv)  the  grain  in
fitting  repeaitoriet  (^ranaria,  lama).  The  great
object  in  Tiew  being  to  preaervs  it  from  becoDung
mouldy  or  rotten,  and  to  protect  it  (torn  the  rawea
of  rennin,  eipedally  the  weevil  (curciifia],  we  And
that  lery  great  dirertiCy  of  opinion  eiiited  u  to
the  meana  by  which  thoee  ends  might  beat  be  at-
tained. By  nmo  the  alore-houKe  were  built  witii
brick  walla  tt  gnu  thickncoi,  for  the  pnrpoae,  it
would  aeem,  ef  Bccoring  a  unifonn  tanpnatmii,
and  had  no  window  or  BpFrlim,  except  a  hole  in
the  roo^  through  which  they  were  filled.  Othera,
^ain,  niaed  theae  atrnclurea  aloft  on  wooden
ctJunma,  and  ellawed  cutnnti  of  air  to  paaa
dUDDgh  en  all  lidei  and  even  fhnn  below ;  while
othera  admitted  particular  winda  only,  auch,  namely,
Bi  were  of  a  drying  character.  Many  plaateied
the  walli  with  a  urt  of  hard  gtucco  worked  np
with  RmuRm,  which  wua  believed  to  act  aa  a  Bfe-
guard  a^uurt  vermin,  while  olhen  am^ati  the
DH  of  bme  nnder  any  (bna  aa  decidedly  injurioua.
*"'  !  and  many  diSerent  opiniona,  together  with
,^  for  varioui  preporationa  wherewith  to
■prinkte  the  coro,  will  be  found  detailed  in  tha
aathoritiea  died  below,  among  whom  Pliny  very
naibiy  obeerra  that  the  principal  coniidoation
ight  to  be  the  condition  of  the  grain  ttaelf  when
inoed ;  aince,  if  not  perfectly  dry,  it  rami  of  ne-
cesaity  breed  miachiet  1b  many  cooDtries,  ai  in
Thisce,  Cat^adocia,  Spiin,  and  Aftica,  the  cora
waa  laid  up  io  {uta  (KnUtu)  lunk  m  a  perfectly
dry  Kiil  aiid  well  lined  with  chatf,  Bpractice  now
eiteniively  adopted  in  Tnacany.  Wheat  in  the
ear  (emu  ipiea  wa)  might,  accoidii^  to  Vano,  S
the  air  waa  ezclnded,  be  pieaerved  m  nich  retep-
taclea  Ibr  fifty  yean,  aid  millet  fbr  an  hundred.
(Cat  92;  VaiT.  L  57;  Cohm.  L  6;  Pallad.  i.  19;
Plin,  H.  ff.  xviii.  80 ;  Oeopon.  ii.  37—31.)

IV.  Cropb:

Cropi,  aa  already  remarked,  may  be  divided

0  four  chtaaea : — 1.  Oiain  or  com  cn^a.  2.  Legu-

lon*  aopa,  or  palie. S.  Crape  cot  green  for  for^.

Cropa  which  luppUed  the  raw  maloriala  <br  the

textile bbrki. We  might  extend  the nomber

laea  did  we  porpoae  to  treat  of  certun  planta,

auch  ai  pcrppiea  {pofxava)  and  juoouio,  ralaed

~  amaU  extent  only,  and  confined  to  particular

tiea  ;  hot  oar  limita  do  not  permit  na  to  em-

t»Bce  ao  wide  a  field  of  tnqaity.

In  addition  to  the  above,  moch  attention  waa
devoted  to  what  may  be  termed  aecondary  tiopa ;
thoee,  namely,  which  did  not  afford  directly  food
or  clothing  tor  man  or  brast,  bat  which  wen  re-
quired in  order  to  &eilitate  the  caltivati<m  and
collection  of  tha  primary  cropa.  Thna,  beda  of
willowi  (ao/tcbt)  Ibr  baakett  and  witbu,  aad  ^


M  -AGRICULTtlRA.

mdi  (anmdiiuta)  for  Tine-pnipi,  were  freqnenlly  in
fatrntmbU  ihaatimu  tb;  profitable,  Jul  H  land
in  certain  diitricta  of  Ksnt  Tieldi  a  large  ntnm
when  planted  with  jmmg  cbeatnnta  for  hop-piilea.
1.  Cam  Or^n  (Jrwmtitla).
The  wold  applied  in  a  general  lenae  to  denote
what  we  now  tall  "  the  total  gium  "  waa  fiu-
jiumia;  but  of  tbeae  wheat  bnne  b;fcrtheni«t
iidpartant,  it  i*  not  wonderM  tbaC  the  term  in
qneMion  ibooM  be  amplojed  ftequentlT  to  denote
wbeM  ^ndallj,  and  oecauonaU;  in  idcb  a  manner
H  to  exelndt  atber  kinda  of  giain,  ai  when  Plin?
RHUBika,  "  calamiu  aitior  fromento  quam  hordeo,"
iHMniwg  *■  in  wbeat  tke  atalk  ia  lonAer  tban  la
bariey."  The  nnl;  finunenla  which  it  will  be
neceamy  fbr  ui  to  eonaider  particulailf  in  thii

a.  TVifJoanind  Far;  b.  Hardaim;  e.  Panam
and  MUiam.

a.  Tritlam  and  Far.  No  one  entertaini  an;
donbt  that  bitiem  {rvfl^t  in  Oieek,  and  by  the
later  writer*  fffrei)  ii  the  gsnerie  name  foe  the
gtMn  which  we  denominate  tnlKoi  ;  but  when  we
proceed  to  eiamine  the  diJIeioiC  tpeciea  or  Tuietiea,
VB  are  inTolrcd  in  man;  difficulties,  fur  the
botanical dcKTiptiona  traninutted  to  na by  the

nmo;  inilancea  (o  directly  at  Tatunce  with  each
other,  that  it  becanm  almott  iinpoaaible  to  identi^
with  certainty  the  object!  to  which  they  idei,  with
thoae  biniliar  to  ounelfca.  Columella  (iL  6 ;  comp.
Dioicorid.ii.  107  i  Thoophr.  ff.P.  yiiL  1.  *),  who
Bllempti  a  gjitematic  clauiGcatiDn,  awigna  the  firat
place  among  "  frumenlB"  to  Thtiam  and  Sm
adonum,  each  of  which  contuned  aeveial  apeciea
tarietiea. Among  many  diBerentkinda  o(  triticu
he  deemi  the  following  only  deterring  of  particular


ingular  firnmeM  to


(Coll


.  Siligo,  yery  wl
lum.iL  9,  §13;


ite,  but  deficient  in  weight


1.{TfK


Plin.  H.  N.  X


i.a.)


,  rpff..,™.),  a


rtof


Le  fma  lying  three
only  in  the  ground,  being  epring-aown. We
thii kind Kmetimea denominated  Oiirimi  alao,
■iuce  in  very  warm  aitualimi  it  came  to  maturity
in  two  montha  alter  it  wai  iown.

Among  the  diffcnnl  kindl  of  ,S^
the  tbllowing  are  particulariy  noticed :

1.  far  amaam,  diltiogniahed  by  I

2.  Far  vaaie¥}iuH  nUUum. iBoth

4.  HtJitoMmm  or  Stmn  tiimuMit,  *ery  beaiy
and  of  fine  quality.  Hen  we  miiat  remark  thai
alihoogh  reiaa,  n^,  and  trimtttrt  are  aet  down  aa
particular  ipeciei  or  varietiea  of  the  more  genciai
term  tnlKiHii,  which  ia  oied  in  contiadiatinruon  to


wintar  wheat,  in  apwaition  to  both  mligo  and  odo-
ratm,  and  hence  Pbny  declaiea  that  the  mxt  tsn-


AOBICULTURA.
yean  into  nligo,  and  by  Pliny  (iviiL  8)  iJialnEt^
UI  moat  parti  of  Oanl,  pBUed,  at  the  end  of  two
jnn,  into  tritieam;  again,  Colnmella,  in  deacribing
trinaitre,  admilt  (although  contradicted  by  Plin.
H.  N,  lYiii.  7)  that  it  ii  a  ynriety  of  lUigo,  while
modem  experience  teacheiui  that  winter  and  tpriog
wheat!  are  convertible  by  nibjectin;  them  to  pecu-
liar modes  of  cultiTation.  llcnce  we  conclude  that
rnbat  and  f3igo  were  larietiea  of  what  ii  now
termed  by  botaniit!  THKnua  AjAfnum,  and  that
trimettn  waa  a  variety  of  our  Tritiaan  aalicum^
which  it  itaolf  a  variety  of  the  iyberwum.

Tba  qnenion  with  regard  to  Far,  Adot,  Senun
lomm,  Saaea,  Adorenm,  lumea  tued  indi^rently
by  the  I^tin  wiileti,  doea  not  admit  of  lueh  an
caiy  aotution.  But  after  a  rarefnl  examination
of  the  nnmeroui,  va^a,  pciplfiing,  and  contiadic-
tcmcnt!  icattercd  over  the  chiaiica,  the  dii-
of  which  lepaiBtely  would  for  exceed  onr
limit!,  we  may  with  coniidcrable  confidenre  decide
that  jfu-wBiannety  of  the  Oirnk  f^orfda,  and
of  the  modem  TWt^n  Qwifti,  if  not  abaolntely
ideitial  with  one  or  both.  Spelt,  which  ia  ftiUy
rccogniaed  by  bomniita  ai  a  diitinct  >peciH  of  trili-
cum,  ii  much  more  liaidy  than  oanmon  wheat,  luc-
ceedjng  well  in  high  expoaed  lituatirau  where  the
"  ';  nnen,  and  iti  chaff  adherei  with
the  grain,  both  of  which  cir-
were  prominent  chamcteriatin  of  y!ir.
(Cdnra,  ii.  B  j  Plin.  H.  N.  niiL  7,  8,  30.)  In-
deed, it  wai  ftnmd  impoaaible  to  get  rid  of  the  thick
double  caie  in  which  it  waa  endoaed,  by  the  ordi-
nary model  of  thiaahiog ;  therefore  it  waa  itored
up  with  the  chaff  attached  (eomatii  atm  p^ert  tma
Bondi  et  ^pala  DHtui  el  orutu  UbmOsr);  and
when  nied  aa  food  it  Wia  neceamy  to  pound  it  in  a
mortar,  or  mb  it  in  a  mill  of  a  peculiar  amitnLetion,
in  order  to  aefBrate  the  lenaciaui  hniki^a  proceaa
altogether  diatinct  from  grmding,  and  indicated  by
thewonii;Hjimi,puhr<i,p>Anj.  (Cat.  2  ;  Plin.
tf.A'.xTiii.lO.)  TheideaenterlainedhrMmecom-
inenmion,that  the  diatinction  between  triticnmand
for  conuitcd  in  the  circumilonca  that  the  latter  waa
awncd  while  the  former  wai  beaidlcsi,  a  alto-
gether nntenable ;  for  not  only  duel  Pliny  ny  ei-
prenly  in  one  pouage  (xriiL  10),  far  nu  oriMa
at,  and  in  another  (iviii.  30),  ai  diilinctl;  that  hr
had  oHi*<B,  but  it  i«  perfectly  dear  from  Vbtto
(L  48  [  compare  Piin.  H.  N.  iriii.  7),  that  ordinary
triticnm  had  a  beard,  and  from  Pliny  that  liligv
wai  genially,  although  not  unifbnulj,  without
one — -a  leriea  of  aHcrtiona  whou  eantnidictory
nature  need  occaiion  no  lUipriic,  lince  it  ia  now-
well  known  that  ihii,  like  colour,  ii  a  point  wbicb
doea  not  amonnt  to  <pccifle  dtSerence,  fiv  white,
red,  nwned,  and  bcMdlen  whcati  are  found  to
change  and  nm  into  each  other,  according  to  aoil,
climate,  and  mode  of  culture.  Another  foct  noticed
by  Pliny,  to  which,  if  correct,  botaniiti  lecm  not
to  have  given  due  attention,  ia,  that  friticnn  had
four  jointa  in  it>  ■talk,y^  lix,  and  barley  eight.

AU  agree  that  triticnm  (we  ihall  uae  the  word
hereafter  in  the  reatiicted  lenae  of  common  winter-
wheat)  (Qcceeded  beat  in  drj,  ilighdy  elevated.


Now,  wiik  R^ud  to  the  three  kinda  of  fnTiawi

enutneratcd  above,  wo  ihall  have  little  difficulty  in
deciding  that  [hoy  were  not  diitinct  ip«iM,  hut
merely  varietiea  of  the  lame  meeiei ;  far  we  are
aaiurcd  by  Columella  (ii  9),  that  triticimi,  when
aawn  in  wet  land,  paaicd  in  the  eoBne  of  three


in  ground,  w


re  the  full  ir


!  of  the  I


not  impeded  by  trees,  while  uligo  and  for
were  well  adapted  fbi  low  damp  litaationi  and  niff
clayey  lofli  (Cate  34, 35  ;  VaiT.  i.  9 ;  Colnm.  il  6  ;
Plin.  iriii.  8).  The  lowing  of  winter  wheat  (tatia
aMhamaHi)  whether  triticum,  liligo,  or  adoitum,
commoKcd  £>i  the  moat  paitj  accuding  la  ths


'*£."


.  AGRICCLTURA.

VMtaa  BtNaiit,  aflir  Aa  Boning  Kttiiu  of  tile
Plo^  tiM  ■,  b;  the  ttoMa  alndar  (u.  KaL
Nar.X  >fta  >^  34th  at  Octoba^  *nd  *m  alwrnji
nihiiWiil  'Miae  tb*  9th  of  DtcnDber,  it  hting  a
warn  Miktlj  olacrred  mBang  prddnt  lnubond-
■a  H  abMu  ftnn  bQ  SeM  rak  fiir  fiftean  dayi
WiR,  iBd  fiftaen  d>ji  iftct  the  winter  iditice.
!■  wvt  «T  light  loik,  howerar,  aod  in  alt  ei.
pmd  ■fl^TTf.  irhen  it  vu  important  that  the
nMi  iboaU  Ian  >  Gnn  hold  of  the  gnMuid  bafim
'  ■  hhI  friiM*  wt  in,  the  nwiw  wu  fre-
■d  by  the  end  i£  Septeabo:.
I  (iMfo  Mnn»u>  wM  [nctiKd
hinei  had  beat  laCTailed  b  j  ac-
Btal  atcamataDcef  boa  completiiie  hia  woriiin
ma;  or  i>  thM*  loeditiei  when,  from  the  »■
■  odd  and  hfaT7  now*,  il  vai  ftand  that  the


■■aid  poait,  that  ia,  ia  i»diiiK7  leaBna,  earij  in
UbkL  Tha  qaaoti^  af  aeed  nqnifed  wai  ban
ifB  M  u  Dodii  of  ftitw— I  or  mliyi  te  the  Jnget
■toadiaf  aa  tb«  nl  vai  lidi  or  poor;  and  bom
OK  la  t<s  vodii  af  br.  To  ■ndentand  ttiii  dif-
tncce,  m  mHt  leeoUect  that  the  br  wia  (tored
^■■d  aawii  out  in  iti  IhiA  hiulu :  md,  thCTefiiK,


haCritictn.  Than
id  noa  the-  abora  qaantitj  ef  leed  befim
it  laalil  ba  bnn^  to  the  thmhing-flocr,  reqnlied
ttadaya  aadalttlf  of  work. — Four  for  the  ploogh-
aaa  (Wafan)  j  one  far  the  harrower  (imatar) ;
tknc  b  the  hoa  (nrriiar),  two  dan  an  tho  £nt
'  a,  and  ooa  ob  tke  ioaiul ;  odo  nr  the  ireeder


("•


Tha  I


-■>j-


»(»


Italian  what  weighed  fi«n  twent  j-
j-az  poDDda  the  uodina,  which  cor.
to  Dpwafd*  of  aeientj  Ei^iih  uuDdi
■a  to  the  imperial  bodiel,  the  ttonuui
find  liiiai.  irrj  aearijll-S  oa.  aToird^  and  the
■adiaa -99119  i' an  imperial  peck.  Tbe  1iihl«t
waa  that  lawight  from  Qanl  and  from  the  Coerio-


Tha  proportiiiD  which  the  piodaca  bore  to  the
aeed  aawa  Tsried,  when  Cioen  and  Vairo  wrote,
B  the  rirhfrt  and  moat  hishlj  nlttrBttd  dinriete
W  SicOr  B^  ^-^7  ^"B  8  to  10  tbc  1  ;  Ifi  for  1
waa  laMided  aa  an  eztiaaldinBij  cn^  obtaiBcd  in

■  fcw  vi^ih  fitiMued  ^nta  onlj,  while  in  the  age
tt  Cobaaeb,  when  agfieDlnm  had  Ulen  ialo
dso^,  Ae  avenn  rrtnm  waa  kai  than  4  for  1.
Paiti  of  EgTpt,  tha  r^ionof  Bnacinm  in  Africa,
Ik  M^hliiiailaiiiil  of  Oarada  u  Snia,  and  the
li  1 1  iwa  J  of  Sfbaria  were  laid  to  Rnder  a  hmidred
m  am  a  bmidnd  end  fiflr  Mi ;  but  theao  ae-
aiwaa  were  in  ali  likelihood  groUlj  exaggerated.
(Ck.  •■  F*T.  iiL  47  ;  Van.  L  U  ;  Colum.  liL  3.

■  4 ;  pkd.  rr.  y.^  nm.  21^)

Italy,  and


BniliinBlr  repreaented  aa  tumnff  been  the
■ ' — ■ '-'-tad  in  Italy, -*

ama Its  ge


faM  laecka  of  grain  erer  cnltiTated
aa  aock  waa^en^lojed  eieloai— "-  —
mmam. Heaee  alao  Ariia
lifB  far  floar  or  naal  iHwtl


.  AGRICUI/TUEA.
reed  of  tritima  jTuina,  tiHgaita  Jbria
/anma,  eien  immaaia/ariaa  (Plin.  H.  V.  itiiL  P,
Ji.  13,  iiii.  2S).  In  the  eitnauoni/or  (nlifBwit,
jfia-  hardaeiaai  found  in  Colnnielta  (viiL  £,  1  \\far
ia  eridenCljr  naed  for  fitrima,  and  ve  ahall  lea
that  eiea  (lUjo  ia  in  Uke  manner  uaed  to  denote,  not
on];  the  uiid  grain,  but  the  fionr  produced  b;
grinding  it,  Thia  being  premiaed,  we  maj  ;ko~
ceed  U)  examine  the  mesning  af  the  termapalfoi,
umOago  a.  timila,  e&aritai,  tiSigojgoM,  aUea,  amf-
Imh,  prmea,  &c,  aeretal  <^  which  hare  noTor  bem
:  deariy  explained.  Hera  again  we  can  gire  the  re-
mit otdy  of  an  intealigatian,  in  tho  conne  of  which
we  are  obliged  to  thread  our  way  throngh  itete-
menla  al  once  obaoore  and  imccBiciiaU&  Regard-
ing trdton  and  tiliga  aa  two  well  diatingmihod
larietiei  of  wheat,  their  prodaeta  when  gnond
were  thua  claiaed  by  millcn :  —
From  triticnm,

1.  PoUai,  the  fineit  flonr  duit,  dcnUe  dreoed.

2.  Simila,  or  Saiihge,  the  beat  fint  Ooir.
S.  aAnrain  agnMitaraag,  leomd  Gdot.

4.  FtiTfiira,^Taa.

From  Biligo,
I.  SUiga,  the  finst  donUe-drened  floor,  naed
enhuiTe];  fir  paatry  and  bacj  bread.
X  FU»  (tiiigitU),  fint  fioor.

3.  OOarHM  tKoielaHKit,  aesaid  flour.

4.  Fia^itr—,  bran.

It  wcnjd  appear  that  Celina  (iL  18),  eoniideF-
ing  wheat  g


witb  the  Haiieailnim,  ASea^mm,  or  aprinR-eown
/or  of  Cohunella.  But  otts  ia  alao  naed  to  denote,
not  only  the  grain,  but  a  rartienlar  piepaiatian  of
it,  moet  dearly  deacribed  in  anothm  paaoge  of
Pliny  (xriii.  11).  The  fineat  waa  made  fioin
Campanian  lea,  which  waa  iint  mbbed  in  a  wooden
mortal  to  remora  the  huak,  and  then  (armnif
(bbuu)  the  pnre  grahi  {nmdata  mtduBa)  waa
pounded.  In  thia  manner  three  aorta  wera  pnv
duced  and  claaaed  according  to  th«r  tufrnta^  the
muBmam,  the  accaniarniiit,  and  the  raaneBt  iv
apkfteremtLi  and  each  waa  mixed  with  a  kind  of  fine
white  chalk,  found  between  Naplei  and  Pnteoli,
which  becaaia  intimately  amalganuted  with  it
(traatit  nt  wrpat,  colorttuque  el  learriiaitM  afirt).
Thia  oomponnd  waa  the  principle  ingredient  in  a
•art  of  porridge  alao  call^  alica,  while  iJiearimi,
aigni^ng  pnperiy  one  who  pounded  alica,  fre-
quently denolea  a  miller  in  genCTsI.  (Plin.  /f.  V.
r™L7,  11,  29,  iiiL25;  Cat  78  j  CeU  ri.  6  j
Mart  iL  37,  xii).  6  ;  Qeopon.  ill  7.)

Amfitiit  ia  alanh,  and  the  modea  of  preparing
it  are  deacribed  by  Cato  (87),  and  Pliny  (A.  M


wheat,  not  grnmd,  bnt  merely
nah,  and  made  into  a  aort  of  por-
GT  and  then  adding  milk.


il7).

diveated  of  it
ridge  by  boiling  it
(Cat.  88.)

6.  Hordaiat  a.  Ordtma  (vpWi) ;  Kfi,  H«n.).
Next  in  inportaoGD  to  iriHam  and  adoriam,  waa
iardawH  or  bariey,  which  waa  a  mote  ^n^iate
food  far  the  lower  auimali  thm  wheat,  waa  betlat


66  AORICULTUBA.

for  nua  vhen  nude  iau  polnta  thta 'whtU  Bt  m
in^fTcfent  qnali^,  and  fitroiibail  btccIIsiI  *tnir
■nd  ehiff  ((froMaifWH,  paha).

The  ipedai  molt  gencnll]'  ctildnled,  trained
fajoitiatinii  or  eauttHifiii— ,  WM,  TC  can  tanAf
doubt,  idoitical  with  what  we  now  call  btar  or
iigg,  tlie  Hordemm  imittatiiK  or  ni-niwed
baile;  of  bdtaiuHa.  It  mu  hwd  ifta  tlie  mnal
equinoz  (bence  tailed  Tpi^tl^n),  Tbeophr.  H.  P.
Tiii  1),  npon  land  that  had  besi  trice  ploughed,
at  the  rata  of  Gts  modii  to  the  JDgtr  ;  mcceedod
b»t  in  a  dij,  looaa,  rich  •oil ;  and  being  an  ei-
hauMing  crap,  the  land  from  vhieh  it  had  beei
reaped  wai  nunmer  bllowed,  or  ncnited  bj  ma-
nnre.  It  wa>  cnt  aa  aonn  ai  it  wai  lipe  ;  for  the
■talk  being  brittle,  wai  liable  to  be  beaten  dami ;
and  the  grain  not  being  endoaed  in  an  oatet  hnik,
wai  eaiil}-  ihnkeiL

Auothet  ipeciea,  lenned  tSiltftwiii  or  dati-
obun,  the  nme  apparently  vith  the  modem  Hor-
tteitn  m^gan,  or  vith  the  Hordaan  ditticAmm,
TBiietiei  of  the  eonunon  two-rowed  barley,  WM
remarkable  fw  ita  weight  and  whilcaeB,  and  an-
(wered  weQ  for  miiing  with  whcaten  flour  in
baking  bteod  ibr  ilaTd.  It  wai  aown  in  autnnm,
winter  oi  eariy  apHiiD,  at  the  nta  of  lii  modii  to
the  jogo'.  FiTe  modii  of  leed  hordeum  required
ail  dayi  and  a  half  tS  lolxnii  to  bring  il  to  the
thnuhing-Booi ;  rii.  ploughing  three  day*,  hamw-
ing  (amterid  gpsni)  one,  hoeing  (forrUoria)  one
ind-n-hidf^  napiog  {mtaona)  one.

Pliny  ipe^i  of  hordenm  a>  the  lighten  of  all
fnimenta,  weighing  only  15  pounda  to  the  modiui
(Komas  paundsBtl'S  ox.  avoinL).  In  mild  di-
molci  itmight  be  Kwu  early  inantomo.  (Theophr.
//.  P.  viii.  1  ;  Cat.  36  1  Van.  L  M  ;  Colam.  iL
9.1314,15,16  ;  Virg.  Ghof^.  l210;  T]iB.H.N.
iiiiL  7,  10  j  Oeopon.  ii.  U.)

c  PiownBH  and  MUatm  are  commrail;  tpoken  of
together,  ai  if  they  were  only  Tarietiet  of  the  lame
gnijn.  The  fint  ii  in  all  probability  the  Panam
lailioBtiat  or  eammcm  miSel  of  botanitti,  the
iKa/wi  or  ^\int  af  the  Oreelcg  ;  ibe  lecond  ii
pcihapa  tho  Sitaria  Itaiica  or  Ilaliaii  miUti,  which
onirnpondi  to  thedeacriptioDof  ir^7XP<"  i  while  the
apedea  noticed  by  Piiny  ai  having  been  bnnght
from  India  leu  than  ten  yean  t>efora  the  penod
when  he  wnrta  ia,  we  can  tcarcely  doubt,  the
■SoTpkim  ra^^wv,  or  Dira  of  the  Arabi.

Panicum  and  milium  were  aown  in  apting
(Vin.  Gtorg.  I  216),  (owardi  the  end  ef  March,
at  the  rate  of  four  aeilarii  (pinta)  only  to  the
juger,  bat  they  required  repeated  hoeing  and
weeding  to  keep  them  clean.  They  aucceeded  well
in  light  looae  aoil,  even  on  und  if  well  iirignted  ;
and  oi  soon  ai  the  can  were  fairly  formed,  thej
were  gathered  by  the  hand,  hung  up  to  dry  in  the
luit,  and  in  thia  itate  wcujd  keep  for  a  longer
period  than  any  other  grain.  Milium  waa  baked
mto  bread  or  cakea,  reiy  palatable  when  eaten
hot ;  and  both  panicum  and  milium  made  good
porridge  (jmit).  Although  not  mncb  nied  by  the
populatim  of  Italy,  except  perh^  in  Campania,
they  formed  a  molt  important  article  of  bod  in
the  Oanta,  in  f  antua,  in  Sannatia,  and  in  Ethio-
pia. (Cat  6  !  Colum.  ii.  9.  §  1?  ;  Plin.  ff.  K
iTiiL  7.  10,  26  1  Pallad.  ir.  3  ;  Geopon.  ii.  30  ;
Theoriir. a  *.  A.  iL  17,  ^.  i>.  viiL  3  ;  DiHcor.

■■  lis.)


AORICULTUttA.
ba  the  3pl^  doKtibed  by  Oolen  (Z>e  Al^mL
Fnen/f.  i.  2)  aa  cnltiTBted  in  Thrwa  and  Macedonia
(but  thia,  in  all  pnhoUlity,  waa  a  coane  Tarie^  of
ipdt),  nor  by  (Ma,  Varre,  Columella,  nor  Pula-
diua.  Pliny  alone  (H.  N,  zriiL  40)  apeaka  of  il,
and  in  the  following  tenna: — "  Secale  Taorini  aub
Alplbna  ^liaH  rocant,  detnrimum,  et  tantnm  ad
erecndam  famem :  fbecnnda  aed  giaciU  Itipula,
nigritia  triate,  aed  pondere  piaedpiinm.  Admia-
celur  huic  br  ut  mitiget  amaiitadinem  ejna  i  «t
tamcn  aic  quoque  ingruiniinnm  tentii  eat, Naa-


aomqne  pro  laetamioe  eat."  )n  the  prerioua
chapter  he  makei  it  identical  with  farrago^  that
ij,  com  aown  for  the  puipoae  of  being  cut  graoD  aa
ibdder. See  ranaAa  upon  i'iim^  below.

Avtma,  the  oat  (^pjfiot  a.  fif&^iu,  Theophr.
/r.  P.TiiL4;  IKoacorid.iL  16),  theJ«Haa<i'(»
of  botaniita,  need  acarcely  be  noticed  in  thia  placv
lines  it  cannot  be  taiaed  ai  a  giwn  with  any  ad-
Tanlage  in  a  climate  lo  wami  ea  that  of  Oreetn  or
afltaly. Columella  (iL  10.  g9)  andPliny  (a.  JV.

•hould  be  aown  fir  grean  fliddar,  and  the  latto'
remaika  that  it  became  a  lort  of  com  (Jrmimtift
water)  in  Qeimany,  where  it  formed  a  regular
croh  and  where  oatmeal  ponidge  waa  a  national
diah  (iH}a«  ottt  fuU*  nimU,  H.  N.  irilL  41.
S  I.  oimp.  It.  27,  tL  85).  In  another  poaaaga
(J{.  N.  xxiL  66)  the  nme  author  preaoibs  oat-
meal (oDeMKH  Jarina)  iteeped  in  Tiu^ar  ai  a
remedy  for  ipola  on  the  akin.  The  Avmtt  con-
damned  aa  B  tnmblevnne  Weed  by  Cato  (A.  R.
xuTiL  S  fi)  and  Vii^  {itarila  aetaat,  0.  L  ISt)
ia,  probably,  the  Atxtia  /atua  of  botaniati,  al-
though Plin  j  (ff.  AT.  rviil  44.  §  1 )  maket  nt •■


Oryia  (Bpi^  tpvier),  rice,  wai  unported  from
the  £aBt,  and  wai  much  eateenwd  ibr  making  gmei
{ptitamt).

2»  (ffa,  f.Si),  O^  (fcifa),  7^  (W*,),
and  ArtHca,  cf  which  the  fint  two  are  named  by
Homer,  mn>t  be  r^aided  aa  Tatietiea  of  the  Ihti'
cum  Sptla  or  Far  (Herod.  iL  36 ;  Thoophr.  H.  P.
iL  fi,  tiiL  9  ;  DioHsrid.  iL  110  ;  Oalen.  d*  AH-
•MM.  Pac^L  L  2,  13). The  al  - -


btv  of  diacordanl  autboritiea  without  attempting
to  reconcile  or  thinking  it  neceaaaiy  to  point  oat
their  oonHadiclima.  In  one  plan  (iviii,  20.  S  4)
he  nyi  diitinctly  that  jlriaca  it  the  Ol]/ra  of
Homer,  and  in  another  be  aeema  to  ny  (iviiL  II)
that  Olyra  in  Egypt  beome  Far  (Jar  n  J^gpfo
ex  olfra  eatfiatiir}.  Now  we  know  from  Hero.
dotua  (iL  36)  that  in  hii  tune  Olyra  and  Zea  were
conaidered  lynonymoui,  and  that  theaa  eichuJTclj
were  cultirated  by  the  I«yptiani.  Hence  we
ihall  be  led  to  conclude  that  the  wheat  whicli
hai  been  railed  recently  &om  the  lecda  diacovered
in  the  mummy  coaea  ii  in  nalily  the  ancient  Zea
01  Olyia,  and  from  ita  ajqieaianca  we  ahoold  fiir-
tiler  be  indaoed  to  ident^  it  with  the  TVificiiBt
nmuiOM  of  Pliny  (/f.  JV.  ariiL  21).

With  regard  to  Iria  and  HormtaMm,  of  wbich
tho  former  leema  to  have  been  tailed  ificiiur  by
the  Oreeka,  both  ennmcrated  by  Pliny  among
fnaunta,  alihough  Ik  aAetwirdi  aomawhst  qwli-


iGKICULTURA.
b>  lla  MMrti'mi,  VI  do  not  hazard  a  KmiectoRk
(PUi.  H.  y.  niS.  10.  g  1—32,  an.  76.)

We  Hj  aadaiit  tlui  KCtiaa  with  *a  emunok-
tn  rflk  iKknio]  Min*  (nipl(7«d  to  denote  the
Idrmt  pirti  of  ID  or  and  Ralk  of  eoni.

rkvDnk  fum*  named  ^mbb;  tlie  beard  or
■■1  tfvtti  the  ear,  whea  beanlleea,  ^jhd  HtN-

j  of  the  grain,
juda"

^mt,  nk  wtiich  arUse^

t^iuk  viU  the  ihort


I  planta ;  the  knotl  c
JMIB  llie  Mob,  ffmiaJi,  artiaJi:  tk  -<--->
U(  Uda  in  tk  uem  bom  which  the  e

Tht  MHtaUn  Uling  propcrir  under  thia  head,
lUrfj  dhinied  bj  tbe  anoenta,  wen  :  a.  Faba;
i.  Lwfimi :  t.  Imt  a.  LaHe-da;  d.  dixr :  t.
Omk;  /.  nauiMM ;  g.  Pitam;  to  which,
n  ndcT  u  sTDtd  mnltipljmg  rabdiTiuinu,  wa
BR  idd  S^  nd  K^nt,  nnoa  in  conunm  with
ik  IcpMtiB  Ihcy  MTTcd  ■■  fbod  both  {hr  men  and

ft  Aic  The  anciBit  /Ua,  the  m^i  of  the
Gait,  MwithMaDdins  mU  that  haa  been  urged  to
>Wa«Mj,wat  ostainlT  ana  af  the  Tarietiet  of
fiddbeau, '-■-■■

aait  of  bo(a

KjOrwdlDMnimdland.  Ifi
4ait  lav^jmg  gninid  thai  hid  remained  long
>*TH^ial  (e^giaft— ),  no  prcriana  pr^iaiatian  woa
°<BHET  1  bsldw  Med  wa*  acBtUned  and  at  once
Mel<>i  l^  fidd  WM  then  iftibed  and  buUf
™moI  (mm  a—  CTarfo  anb  fiywanawi,  mara-
'M^i^iFtihaiijaa  iwaatoiM),  the  object  being


hJ  ben  jnit  imjied  (r«rtMi'i  iy«r),after  the  itubbla
m  darad  awaj,  manon  waa  ^itead  at  the  rata
itntj-bar  nbtm  lothejngsr,  and  then  the  re-
uaiag  aftntkau  wen  the  nme  ai  abore^  Rich
M  nfBmd  frmn  fixn  to  bx  modii  to  the  jnger,
pm  ad  anaewbat  more.  A  pcstion  of  the  aeed
*M  raw itted  In  the  groand  aboal  the  middle
(■>£■  •mmlf),  the  icmaindci  at  tbe  end  of  the
Bnnmiuf  aeaann  (iqprtawUiafea  aotn).  Viivil
('■^  i.  215),  mdeal,fnai>wii«  the  practice  of  hia
HI  iioicl,  dinda  that  ban*  ahnold  be  aown  in
ifotf ;  bat  ibii  waa  diai^mnd  ef  in  the  reM  of
lalf  beta^  the  (talk*  (totda—JiiUiki),  the  poda
I^^TCi),  nd  the  hoiki  (iii<at,^6^)^»>j,  aU  of
^m  wot  tt  great  nine  a  food  ftir  cattle,  were
'~  '- — '—'  ia  the  niing-aown  (fiiNiudu  /bio)
ma]  crop.  Ctdomelb  rEcommendi
1  be  hoed  three  times,  in  which
A  no  weeding^  When  they  had
r,  tbej  were  roficd  cloae  to  the
(«■■,  wen  made  op into  ihsrea  (Jiudaili),

—  ihabiilbj  atiiiliiaaiil  thi  1 Una litfl

^"^  "'FTi^l  them  midcr  foot,  and  beat  them
rjk  lifli  (ftin  nKi),  and  finallj,  were  domed  by
*^«>wtB^  T^  haneat  took  place  in  Centist
Ita^T  ah«rt  the  cod  (f  Haj,  and  hence  the  SrsC  of
'Ot  aii  Holed  CUokAm  /'o&iirue,  beauiae  on
Miiif  newbeaBawenssedbaaaEdtitcL  From
fatlen  oMdii  of  Mcd  te^sind  twtd^a'  woA


AORICULTURA.  61

of  the  plaaghman,  if  the  knd  waa  newly  brnkeo
Of,  bot  onlj  one  if  it  had  been  en^iped  the  prerioua
BcaaoQ ;  h^rowing  occupied  one  day  and  a  half^
the  Grat  hoeing  one  day  and  a  Imlf,  the  lecond  and
third  each  one  day,  reaping  one  day ;  in  oil,  aeren
or  eight  dayt.

Bean  mral  (JoineaJiiBt,  ir/i^/ui)  wa*  baked  into
bread  or  oake*  (l^si  nj^uwi),  eapedally  if
mixed  with  the  flonr  of  wheat  or  millet ;  when
made  into  ponidga  {fahaaa,  puff  Jbtatai,  it  wa*
accoonted  an  acc^itabie  ofiering  to  the  god*  and
t<!rmed  Refma^  —  a  name  properly  applied  to  the
beaiu  brought  home  and  act  apart  for  holy  por-
poaea.  (Ham.  IL  liii.  SS9  ;  CaL  35  ;  Vaii.  i  U  ;
Colmn.iL  10,12;  Pallai  JL  9.  TJi.  3 ;  Plin.  Zf.M
xrii.  S,  niii.  IS,  iii.3  ;  Oeopan.iL3£  ;  Dioacocid,
ii.  137  J  Theopbr.  H.  P.  It.  3,  yiL  3,  fiii,  1  j  oomp.
Feat,  1.  V.  B^Tisa;  OeU.  ir.  11,  x.  15 ;  IdacroU
SaLin-,  Cic(fai>n.L30i  Or.  FhiL  f.  US.)

b.  LtyiKHt  tbe  bipfiot  of  the  Orecka,  aeema  to
include  the  Lupimtt  i^mt,  the  L.  b/taUt  and  the
L.  pOian  of  botaniila,  the  common  white,  yellow,
and  rnae  Inpnea  of  our  gardena.  The  £nt  of  tbe
aboTB  apedea  waa  that  chiefly  cnltirated  by  the
Roman*,  and  i*  prononnced  by  Colmnelia  to  be
the  moat  valnable  of  tike  legnmma,  became  it  de-


Tlittl


initead  of  exhuuting,  actoally  refreehed  and  mar
nured  tbe  land.  Steeped  in  water  and  afterward*
boiled,  it  formed  an  excellent  food  for  oxen  in
winter,  and  might  be  naed  even  for  man  during
period*  of  aiarcity.  It  conld  be  aown  aa  toon  aa
thraahed,  might  be  laat  upon  ground  unprepucd
by  plooghing  or  any  other  opera^oa  (cmdti  ■ono^
5u),  ma  WBi  eoTered  np  anyhow,  or  not  corered
up  at  all,  being  pnrteeted  by  ita  bittemea*  &om  the

The  paper  iwiann  fix  lowing  waa  early  in  an-
tmmi,  in  cnler  that  the  alalka  nught  acquire  Tigont
beftte  the  oold  weather  aet  in ;  the  qoanlity  of
•aed  was  ten  modii  to  the  jnger,  and  the  crop  waa
reaped  after  it  had  remained  a  year  in  the  ground.
It  ancceeded  well  in  any  diy  light  land,  bat  not  in
wet  tenacion*  aaiL  Ten  modii  reqnired  in  all  only
three  daya'  work  ;  one  for  covering  up,  (me  for
harrowing,  and  one  for  rtepiog,  and  of  theae  opera-
tions, the  two  £nt  might,  if  there  waa  a  nreaa  of
wod:,  be  diipenaed  with.  (Cat.  t.  Z5  ;  Colum.  ii
10,16,  xi.2i  Pa]lad.L6,ii.  S,vi.3,TiL3,ii:2;
PUn,  H.  N.  xriij.  U  ;  Oeopon.  ii.  39  ;  Virg.
Gtorg.  i.  75.)

e.  Lmi  *.  Zeattculu,  the  ^anit  of  tbe  Greeks,
the  modem  .£Jrnm  Zevi,  Fuu  Lau,  or  Lentile,

aiiaiiiffiii)  and  early  in  spring,  on  dry  hght  soil,  in
the  proportian  of  mther  more  than  a  modiua  to  the
joger.  It  waa  recommended  to  mix  the  seed  with
dry  manuie,  and  after  learing  it  in  thi*  itale  for
four  or  fire  dayi,  then  to  scatter  it.  A  modiu*  and
ahalfitqnired  eight  days' work — ploughing,  three ;
haimwing,  one  j  aoeiug,  two  ;  weeding,  one  ;  pul-
ling, one.  {Cat.  85  j  Virg,  Gtorg.  i.  228  ;  Colmn,
iL  10,  12  ;  li,  3. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iriii.  12,  31  j
Pallad.  xii.  1 1 ;  Theophr.  tf.  P.  viii.  3  ;  Diacorid.
iL  139;  Geopou.  iL  37;  comp.  Martial,  liiL  9. 1 :
OetL  xviii.  8.)

<L  (Strr,  the  ipieiriiit  of  the  Greeks.  The
(Aw  arietimai  (npiit)  and  the  CSosr  Psaiaim,  n~
rieties  of  our  ccanmon  chick-pea,  wcro  sown  in
rich  Biril,  during  the  month  of  March,  in  the  pro-
poltiMi  of  three  modii  to  the  juger,  the  seeda


68  ' AORICULTURA.

tuning  l>e«n  preriaiut;  iteqied  to  make  litem
eermin&la  mom  ntulilf .  Tbe  nop  vai  nmiidemi
iDJurioni  to  the  nil,  and  therefore  SToided  bj
jmident  hasbandmen.  Three  modii  of  Cieer  re-
(jnired  fonr  daji  fbr  jJcngliii^  vid  nwing,  tvo
dBji  fbr  hAinrwui^,  one  da;  for  boemg,  one  dny
for  wwding,  and  uiree  daji  for  palliiig  (Httntitr
(riiw).  (Colom.  iL  10, 12  ;  Flin.  H.  N.  niiL  13  ;
DioKorid.  iL  126  ;  Theophr.  tIiL  1,  3,  5,  6  ;  Geo-
pon.  iL  SG.)

e.  Gotniia,  the  Aifupsi  of  the  Gre^  th<
IjaAi/nu  aatHiHi  of  batanirti,  which  Ptin;  M«mi
to  regird  u  a  mall  TBiiety  of  the  Oieer,  mi
■ovn  in  good  land  eitber  at  ue  end  of  Octo1>e;  or
at  the  bvf^inning  of  tbe  jeai,  in  the  proportion  of
three  modii  to  ths  jnger.  None  of  Ihe  legmnina
prored  1m>  hurtful  to  tile  cniDnd,  bat  it  vat  taitlj
•  inocaufa]  crap,  fbr  it  nuFered  mott  from  tbe  diy
veathot  and  hot  windi  which  nniallj  prevailed
when  it  wm  in  flower,  Fonr  modii  oC  Cicercula
tequlnid  ui  days*  work — ploufbing,  three  i  harrow-
ing, one  ;  weeding,  one  ;  pulling,  one.  (Colom.  ii.
IW,  IS  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xTiii  13  ;  Pallad.  it  S,  iii.  4  i
Tbcophr.  ff.  P.  riil  3  ;  amp.  Plalaiih. QtatO.

/  Plateba  L  PtoncAit  (^ov^Xot ;  ^amioAot ;
^wtIbAmX  tbe  common  kidnef-beaii,  nicceeded
beal  in  rich  land  nvnlariy  cropped,  and  wat  aovn
towarda  the  end  of  Oclobei  in  the  proportion  of
Ibur  modii  to  tbo  Jugcr.  TheM  four  modii  re-
qnired  three  or  foot  daya'  worli,  —  plomhing,
or  two,  according  to  the  toil ;  hanowuig,  o
reapuig,  one. Tbepodi  ofthephueli


13,  iL  a  1  Plin.  H.  N.  TTui.  12  i  Pollad.  it  12  ;
x.1.)

g.  Paam  (rltror  ;  tiaot ;  vlnras),  the  common
field  wA,  anccecded  beat  in  a  looee  aoil,  a  warm
aituaticn,  and  a  moiit  climate.  It  waa  hwh  im-
mediately aficr  the  autumnal  equmci,  in  Ilie  pro-
portion of  relbei  leu  than  four  modii  to  the  juger,
and  cultivated  ciactly  in  the  aame  manner  oi  the
jiiaaeJHL  (Colum.  iL  10,  13  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  XYJii.  7,
12  ;  Theophr.  H.  P.  iiL  37,  tiiL  3,  5.)

Napn,  the  3ovrult  of  Dioacocidca,  is  tbe  mo-
dem Rape,  the  BruaUa  mpa  of  bolaniita.  Tta-
pam,  the  ToyruM't  of  Theophraitni,  ii  the  modem
Turnip,  the  Braaica  Napn  of  bolBsJata,  Tbe
valne  of  theie  planta  wu  in  a  great  mnuure  oicr-
looked  by  the  earlier  Roman  writcri,  while  the
Orcdu  regarded  them  too  much  in  the  light  of
' ""  ' M  upon  their  raerita,


I  [hut  Plin'


J  enlareea  ■  _
and  by  the  Gaula  beyond  the  Po,  who  wintered
their  oxen  upon  them,  their  culture
next  in  importance  to  that  of  com  and  wine.  They
were  highly  umM  aa  Ibod  for  nuui,  fbi  catllc,
even  far  birdi ;  both  the  leaf  and  bulb  verc  a<
able  ;  being  very  hardy,  they  conld  be  left  in
ground,  or  would  keep  well  if  itored  up,  and  tiiua
might  be  made  to  hold  out  until  anotbi


They  reqimed  looac,  well-nnlTeriaed,
m  at  tb<


■od  higUy-maanred  Mil R^h  id


Jmw  after  Ave  jJoagbingi  (junto  ndoo)  \  napi,
which  were  more  adaftod  for  dry  iliming  land,  al
the  end  of  Augiut  or  the  beginning  of  September,
after  fbut  ploughinp  (qtarlo  n&o) ;  both,  boworer,
in  Winn  and  well-watered  apoti  might  be  iown
in  apting.  A  Jnger  rti]nired  four  aextarii  (about
'ftw  inperiKl  pintt)  of  tamip  leed  and  fire  af


AamcnLTUiu.

tape  leed,  beouw  the  im^m  doe«  not,  lika  th
repum,  expand  into  an  am^o  bulh  (wn  ta  m^
(rem  laltadt),  but  aenda  a  tlun  root  ainigtit  ion
{md  laaiem  raJicen  deomm  ag^.  Coiimdl^
however,  diitinctly  ilatei  that  ths  repmn  ud
Topai  poraed  into  each  other,  under  the  inflacKS
of  a  change  of  hhI  or  ^■^""t**  Rapima  ia  the  tRid
for  a  bed  or  field  of  toinipa.  (Dioacnid.  ii.  134,
136  1  CaL  t.  33 ;  Colnnu  a  10 ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xtiii.18.)

8.  Onm  Fomgt  Oopt  IPeitla).

Thii  term  indnded  all  thow  cropi  which  wera
cut  green  and  employed  ercluaiTdy  aa  foage  for
the  iQwer  nniwlf.  The  moit  important  wf re :  ^^
a.  Medico,  b.  /barwn  QraeamlL.  c  Viaa.  d-
Ciara.  e.  £nwm,  Ercilia,  f.  Famgo,  Oaf-
nwB.  p.  Foaum.  The  descTiptica  of  the  laat
will  iuTolve  an  account  of  ths  ^yatcm  purtued  in
the  management  of  meadowi.

a.  Median  (HipSiK^  tc.  ■ria)  tbe  modem  Ln-
cetne.  The  moat  impartsnt  of  all  the  planta  cnl-
tivntad  for  itoek  eiclnaively  waa  Medi™,  n  called
becanae  inbiiduced  into  Gi^ecc  daring  the  Pernan
wan.  When  once  properly  lown,  it  wmld  laat
for  many  yean,  might  be  eat  reputedly  during
the  nme  toaaon,  renovated  rather  than  eihaniled
the  aoil,  wai  the  ben  &((ener  of  lean  cattle,  the
best  restoiativD  fer  thoM  that  wen  aick,  and  ao
nourishing  that  a  iingle  jnger  aupplied  anfficient
food  for  three  horses  during  a  wtat^  year.  Hence
tbegrealeat  care  woa  bestowed  upon  its  cultuic

The  ipot  fixed  upon,  which  was  to  be  neither
dry  nor  spongy,  receired  a  first  ploughing  about
the  bcstimmg  of  October,  and  the  upturned  earth
was  allowed  to  be  expoeed  to  the  weather  for  tha
winter  ;  it  was  carefnlly  plonghed  a  aecond  time,
at  the  beginning  of  Febrimiy,  when  all  the  stonra
were  gathered  off,  mid  the  larger  clods  bn^en  bv
the  hand  ;  in  the  month  of  March  it  was  [doughed
fiir  a  third  time  and  harroired. The  gronnd  tbns
prepared  waa  dinded  into  plots  cc  beds  (anoj)  ns
m  a  garden,  each  fifty  feet  limg  and  ten fivt
bnsd,  so  that  ready  access  might  be  gained  by
the  walks  between  for  tnppljing  water  and  ex-
tirpating the  weeds. Old  dung  waa  tfaen  spread
over  tbe  whole,  and  the  sowing  took  place  at  the
end  of  April,  a  cyathua  (aboat  -l^  of  an  imperinl
pint)  of  teed  being  allowiid  fbr  each  bed  of  the
dimenaiona  described  above. The  aecd  wm  im-
mediately covered  in  with  wooden  mkea  (,(igitrit .
raiieUit),  and  the  operations  of  hoeing  and  weed-
ing were  pcrfermed  repeatedly  with  wooden  im-
plements.  It  was  not  cut  for  the  first  time  until  it
had dropped some  of  its  seed,  bul afterwurds
might  be  cut  aa  lender  ai  the  fiumei  thought  fit.
After  each  cutting  it  wna  well  watered, and a»
soon  as  the  young  blades  began  to  sproat,  every
weed  was  B»duloaaly  removed. Mtouiged  in  this
manner  it  might  bo  cot  sii  times  a  year  fbr  t«i
(Pliny  seya  lliirtT)  yrara. It  irai  neceaBBry  to
use  caution  in  givmg  it  at  lint  to  cattle,  aincc  it
was  apt  to  inlbte  them, and  make blood too
rapidly,  but  when  they  were  habituated to its
nsc  it  might  be .  supplied  freely. It  is  very re-
maikable  that  this  spedei  of  fomge,  to  wbich so
much  importance  was  attached  b;  the  Romana,
baa  altogether  disappeared  from  Italy. We are
assured  by  H.  Chatcauvieni  that  not  a  single  ptant
of  it  is  now  to  he  seen. (Varr.  i.  i2  ;  Colnm. iU
10,  29  I  Virj.  Gnr]f.  L  31«  ;  Pall^..iii.  6*  T.  1  )


'AORICULTUBA.
Kl  £r.  M  zTiB.  IB  1  Diiaarid.  ii  177 :  Tbegpbr.


It  when  toBHf  n  „
(an  boBf  ttkcD  in  tba  bit  pba  not  Ui  bory  t1
Hcd  dem  (jKar^baUami  ttrilmr).  Bii  or  kti
Btia,  ■wlaeh  wa  (lie  allomiice  tot  a  jngcr,  re-
fiind  tvo  d>Ti  for  fcviiig  and  ode  lor  renranii.
(CM.  as  ;  Colon.  iL  10,  it  2  ;  Plin.  ^.  M  lyiS.
ICnrr.  19;  IKoMoid.  iL  134  ;  Thc^  H.  P.
m.  17,  Tfii.  8.)

c.  I%a  (mirvnr,  dM  AxiA'  sf  Gden),  nme
at  if  tke  *aiietiM  of  Aa  Fkh  kMhi,  tfae  Vetch
w  flints  <■>  Wioter)  Tars  of  botaniiu.
■^bt  be  KTWB  to  di7  hnd  M  diitoot  pniodi
tW  fcai;  aaallf  alnitt  the  ainiuiinal  eqimrax  when
iMnini  ftr  BTRa  fodder ;  in  Juiuuy  cr  Uter,  vhen

MiidfiraTCd. (BotKo  PlbLff.JV.

n>  ^aaftilj  wquiiad  is  ths  fbrmo-  can
mata  to  lae  Ji^v,  in  the  latter  ni.  Putimlar
can  wm  nktn  bm  to  cait  the  Red  wfa«i  then
■ai  daw  tr  aoiMufo  of  taj  nrt  upon  the  mrfiics
af  Ika  giaand  ;  the  period  of  the  day  aelectcd  far
lb*  apeimtieQ  wu  tlKrefbre  miie  famra  after  tno-
riat,  iBd  no  nae  na  aesttavd  than  cmld  be
cDvcnd  vp  bcfivv  n^t.  1 1  roqoind  Iklle  labour—'
idamhiiift  two  d^i,  hamwing  Ode,  r^Hng  dds  ;
ai  A,  tawr  daji'  vrA  tat  At  at  aeren  msdiL
(Grt.  15  ;  TaiT.  L  SI  ;  Tiig.  Otarg.  i.  75  ;  Odmn.
n.  11^139,  ISL 13;  PHn.  A.iVl  xriu.  Ijj  eomp.
Or.  PktL  T.  2«7.)
A  CSam,  the  txP"  "f  Thnphnatu,  tbe  La-


h,  the  qnantity  of  aeed  mjing,
{  to  the  nchnaa  of  taH,  from  two  and  a
■  fanr  BMdii  Ibr  the  jnger. In  Mnthem
il  wai  giren  to  At  attle  enuhed  (eiara


U  ie«d  alao,  and  fiunwd

IBS,  differinf  little  if  at
c  from  the  dnrcnla,  hot  beinB  of  a
lOE.  (Cohnn.  ii  U,§  1. 12;  PstW  iv.
IL  KJV.  xrii  ta  i  Theopir.  H.  P.  ir,  2.)
4,  T^imm,  PiiiBfi'ii.  till  Ifpiiiffiii  of  DioKoddea, are
ai^aally  imriet»  of  tfaa  Brvum  EroSg,  or  Wild
Tm  ef  botaoiita.  Errum  mixseded  beM  in  poor
dry  tvd  ;  m^  be  lovii  at  an^  tbne  between  the
aa^mml  eqninox  and  the  bcfpnuing  of  March,  at
tJK  nte  ef  fin  B»dii  to  tha  jngn,  and  demanded
httle  ^ac  The  abore  qnanti^  leqaiivd  lix  dayi^
hhav — plaogUngand  eowin^two,  harroirbi^  one,
tadna  gne,  weeding  one,  napnig  one.  (Van.  )■  32 ;
ran- CU.  iiL  100;  Calcm.  iL  10.  $34,  11.  §11,
12.  I  3,  IS.  !  I,  tL  S,  iL  2 ;  PJiad.  ii.  8  ;
P^  H.  a:  XTiil  15  1  Thei^hr.  /{.  P.  it.  22  ;
Dfaaand.  iL  131  ;  omp PlaoL  MadM.  L  I.)

/  fTwpo,  Opfmwm.  Oneomfttii^  theTaiiooi
■ilailiii  qaoted  at  the  end  of  thii  paragnph,  al-
rtiBgh  tk^  abooBd  in  ocaitndiction^  wo  ihall  be


L  TimtJ^ragt  wn  ibe  genenl  terra  onployed
to  ^»^^  BIT  kmd  of  com  eut  greoi  for  fodder.
TbtBBK  vu  doired  &oin,/<ir,  the  lefbao  of  that

"  - vbi  tbi*  pnipoaa  (fir-


AORICOLTURA.


Ofjnann  rocal,"


OMd  after  tl


rje(ueali),  ool*  (on
emplc^ed  ;  the  bit^nentioned  being,  in  the
it  ColamdL^  the  beat ;  and  thoe  gtaini
were  not  anreya  aown  alone,  bet  freijuently  irilh
an  admiitcre  of  the  letch  and  Tarioni  legumina.
Hhics  Jbrn^  ii  tuBd  by  jDrenal  ts  denote  a
amfoied  nvdle;  of  hetengeneoni  topiei.

2.  That  ai  fitrrage  pipalf  denoted  eon  eat
green  for  fbdd^,  so  ecfm^m  wai  the  name  giten
to  plant!  of  tha  bean  kind,  when  Died  in  the  lanM
manner,  betbie  they  came  to  nntnrity,  and  fbmied
pod*.  Manliua  Son  girei  the  pmpmtioni  of  ten
modii  of  haul,  two  of  vetchei,  and  two  of  erritiae
to  the  juger  ;  and  thia  comblnatian  wai  nid  to  ba
impmed  by  the  addition  of  Avna  Oram,  wwn
b  autumn  ;  it  wai  the  Grat  crop  ayuiaUe  in  the
«riy  [art  of  tha  year,  and  henoe,  of  the  three  foma
odHam,  odnmrn,  otjiaiam,  we  can  kbtcoI  j  doubt
that  ^e  hat  ij  the  meet  accorale,  and  that  the
Duna  WB)  girm  on  acconnt  of  the  rapidity  of  ita
growth  in  spring.  From  the  eiprenion  of  Ptinj,
"  Apnd  anliqnof  eiat  pabnli  goioa  qnod  C^
■"  and  die  lilenca  of  Cidnmella,
e  guden  herb  oepman  (baail)
infer  that  thia  aort  of  fsbalom  wai  little
-  -'■-  ----  ot  Varro.  The  notion  of
Ueener  that  oL^iuiuii  ia  dorer,  tha  AaiJAMr  rpir^
niAiiv  of  Calliniachiu,  ia  directly  at  Tarianea  with
tha  alstamenti  of  Pliny,  who  mailtang  tr^Wisw  aa
a  diitiDCt  )JanL  (Cat.  37,  SI,  54 ;  Vair.  i.  23,
31  ;  Coliua.  iL  tO.  g  81,  U,  zL  3.  £  SB  ;  Plin.
H.N.  iFiii.  16.)

ff.  pBemim,  Frata,  So  ranch  impOTtanee  waa  at-
tached to  Block,  that  many  cmaidered  a  good  mea-
dow ai  tbe  Boat  Tiloable  ipedea  of  land,  requiring
little  tnmble  or  outlay,  nibject  to  none  of  the  oiau^
tiea  to  which  other  cropa  were  eipoiad,  affcsding  a
■ore  retam  every  year,  and  that  twofold,  in  the
■hape  of  hay  and  ofpaatnre.  The  meadowi  were  of
two  kinda,Uie  Dry  Meadow  (iteoiMnaiipnttiin)  and
the  Irrigated  or  Water  Meadow  (praimn  rigiMtin),
The  hay  piDdoeed  &om  a  mtsdow  wboaa  own  rich
natunl  moiature  did  not  require  an  artificial
(timahii  wai  the  beet.  Any  land  which  declined
with  a  gentle  glwe,  if  either  naturally  rich  and
raoiat,  or  capable  of  iirigation,  might  be  laid  down
ai  a  meadow,  and  the  moat  approved  niethod  of
pncedure  wai  the  following ;  —  The  land  having
been  thoroughly  ploughed  and  wall  laboured  in
•ummer,  wai  in  autnnm  uwn  with  mpa,  or  nani
or  beani,  the  tblloving  year  with  wheat,  and  in
the  third  year,  all  treea,  buihea,  and  nuik  weedi
having  been  extirpated,  with  the  vetch  {vicia}
mixed  with  gniai  seeds.  Tho  clodi  were  broken
down  with  lakee,  the  nirfacs  accurately  levelled
by  wicker  hnrdlea,  go  that  tbe  acythe  of  the  mower
i/oimKCa)  might  nowhere  mconntcr  any  obWuJe.
The  vetchee  were  not  cut  until  they  had  amved  at
to  drop  thoir  iced  ;  and  after
they  had  beoi  removed,  the  gran,  when  it  hod  at-
tained to  a  proper  height,  waa  mown  and  made
into  hay.  Then  the  irtigatioa  commenced,  pm-
vided  the  aoil  wai  ati^  for  in  looae  earth  it  wai
neceamrr  to  allow  the  gnu  rooti  to  obtain  a  firm
hold.  For  the  fint  year  no  itock  were  permitted
to  graxe  lest  their  ieet  ihoold  poach  up  the  ioft
ground,  but  the  young  bladei  were  cut  bora  time
~  ~'--  In  tha  Kocad  year, after  tfae  hay-making
if  the  ground  waa  modentely  dry  and


DO  AORICULTURA.

hone*  oc  oitn  until  llw  thiid. Abaat  the

of  Febtnuy  in  cuh  jau,  tax  ■bnnduit  ti^i-dnMing

the  upper  part

«u  extended
either  of  lutuiiil  tain  or  of  artificial  itnami.
Wlien  (dd  mcodowi  became  menf ,  the  iiMt  re-
medy wu  to  ipriiilde  uhea  cc^oiuly,  which  in
many  coKl  killed  tbe  moM  ;  bnt  wlien  thii  ^cd,
the  moat  nire  plan,  wai  to  bnsk  up  tbe  Und  a&eih,
which,  having  lain  kNig  muliiturbed,  waa  aure  to
alicird  abundut  uofia.

In  mskini  hay,  the  gnu  ma  to  be  cut  (JbU-
bia  mbteBon)  h^ia  the  (tern  had  begun  to  late
iu  natani  moiiture,  whQe  tbe  feed  waa  not  yet
perfectly  lipe  ;  and  in  drying,  it  vat  eaiential  to
arold  tbe  tvo  extremea  (^  expoaing  it  for  too  long
or  too  ihort  a  time  to  the  nm  aad  aii.  la  the
fanner  case,  the  juicei  vere  lucked  est,  and  it
became  littlo  better  than  ttrair  ;  in  the  latter,  it
vaa  liable  to  lenncnt,  heat,  and  take  Hie.  Atiei
being  properly  turned  ever  with  fork*  {/iirdllit
ttitari)  it  wai  collected  aad  Iwd  in  regular  awatbe*
(martijiauu  in ffr^^an),  and  then  bound into

The  loOHi  italki  were  next  nked  together  (mtfeOu
tradi)  and  the  whole  c»p  (/oaaiida)  cairied  home
and  atorcd  in  lattM^  er,  if  thia  wai  not  codto-
nient,  baUt  up  in  the  field  into  cenical  ricki  (n
■Kfof  atfmi  eoKcwJ}.  Lattly,  the  incqualitlea
poned  orer  by  the  mowen  (fnne  Jbtnicci  pm»-
leriennJ)  were  cut  cine  and  amooth  (tidUauIa
prala,  id  al,  fiiMbia  amndaitda),  an  opciation
termed  lialir*  prattnt,  the  gleaniuga  thua  obtained,
which  farmed  a  aort  of  aRenaath,  being  called
foanm  mrd-m,  or  MBiUmeula,  (Cab  S,  8,  9,  39,
SO  ;  Van.  L 7,  49  ;  Coluin.  il.  16—13;  Pallad.

a2,iii.i,i..2.x.io.>

4.  Crept  iffbrdag  Materiali/or  tetHU  FiAria,
Of  theai^  tbe  niort  important  were,  a.  Camudni :
b-Umat.

a.  Canmabit  (mbn'otfii,  itirrxSot)  the  Gunotu
fHtia,  or  Common  Hemp  of  botuiiita,  iwiuinid
rich,  moiat,  well-watered,  deeply  trenched,  and
highly  manured  land.  Six  graini  wen  aowii  in
ereiy  aquaie  foot  of  groond  during  the  last  week
in  February,  but  the  operalion  might  be  delayed
for  a  fortnight  if  tbe  weather  waa  lainy.  Colu-
meUaiaunabJetogiTeany  detailawithre^irdto  the
amount  of  time  and  labour  neceaaory  for  isiiing  a
crop  of  hemp.  (Vair.  L  33  ;  Colum.  ii.  10,  H,
21  ;  Plin.  H.K.^i.9;  Dieacorid.  iii.  16S.)


b.  IJm


I  (Mhv),  the  Lim


A  Bometimea  in  Febraaiy  at  tbe  rate
On  account  of  it*  acourging  qoalitita


loa  the  toil  happened  to  be  peculiariy  auitcble,  or
tbe  price  which  it  bore  in  the  diatriel  leiy  in-
viting (jbti  pretimn  prrmiaiy^  It  vaa  aown  from
the  beginning  of  October  until  the  end  of  the  fint
week  in  December,  in  the  piDportion  of  eight  modi
to  the  juger,  and  «(  - ".

of  tea  modiL  On
(V!rg.Cewj,.  i.77,.
rich  land,  nich  being  leta  liable  to  be  tenoualy  in-
joRdi'bot  Bome  lowed  it  Teiy  thick  upon  poor
Innd,  in  otder  that  tbe  alalka  might  be  aa  thin,  and
therefore  the  fibrea  aa  delicate  aa  poaaible.  (Virg.
Omg.  L  213 ;  Celom.  iL  10,  II ;  Plin.  H.  N.
I'ii.  9,  xix.  1  ;  Pallad.  iL  3  ;  Oeopint.  ii.  10  ;
DioKorid,  il  125 )  Theophr.  H,  P.  viiL  7.)


AGEICULTURA.

Saaceiiai  or  AoAttmi  o/'CVvp«^

It  ia  erident  fiom  the  inatractiona  giren  bj
Columella  (il  4)  for  plonghii^  the  beat  land,  thu
a  anmmer  hllow  uauolly  preceded  a  nara  crop.  For
lines  the  £rat  ploughing  wai  early  la  (pring^  tli»
aecond  in  imnmer,  and  the  third  in  autumn,  it  ia
iiDpoiaible  that  a  crop  cculd  haie  been  railed  apon
the  ground  during  any  portion  of  the  period  bera
iadicatcd  ;  and  the  aame  author  exprauly  itatea
elaewhere  (il  9),  in  accordance  with  the  Tirgilian
precept  (O.i.  71),  that  the  land  upon  which  wheat
i/oTt  niiffo)  waa  grown  ought  to  repooe  erely  other
n_. .  :^  _i.:.i.  — . 1 — tetex,  manure  might  bo


pmctice  to  permit  nearl?  one  half  of  the  Gum  to
remain  at  reit,  while  the  prodactiTe  energie*  of  the
other  moiety  were  tailed  into  atlion.  It  will  b«
Been  from  tne  colculationa  with  regard  to  time  and
labour  for  on  oiable  fana  containing  200  jugera
(Colmn.  il  12),  that  100  Jugen  only  wen  aown
in  autnmn,  50  with  wheat,  50  with  l^ominoua  or
green  cropa ;  and  if  apring-aowing  waa  reiortcd  to^
which  waa  by  no  meaua  genetal,  30  more,  bo  that
out  of  200  jugen,  at  leaal  70,  and  more  froquentlT
IDO,  wen  left  Mowed.

There  were,  indeed,  eiceptioaa  to  thii  lyitem.
Some  land  waa  bo  peculiariy  deep  and  rich  that  it
might  be  cropped  for  two  or  more  ycara  in  raoea-
aion  (larra  ntH&ilii)  ;  but  in  thia  caae  it  waa  re-
lieved  by  varying  the  crop,  the  field  from  which
winter  wheat  (J^)  hod  been  reaped  being  highly
manured  and  sown  immediately  with  heauB,  or  tho
ground  which  had  borne  liqiines,  beam,  velehea^
Cff  any  renovating  oDp,  waa  allowed  ta  lie  fallovr
daring  winter  and  then  aown  with  apring-whstt
(/or)  (Virg.  Geoiy.  i.  73  ;  comp.  Plin.  H.  \.
Tviil  21),  while  a  third  lotatioin,  (till  more  hvaui^
able,  waa  to  lake  two  Ic^minoui  or  renovaltiig
cnpi  after  one  eihaoiting  or  com  crop.  In  Cam-
pania, the  extraordinary  fertility  of  the  aoil  al-
lowed them  to  tax  ita  eaergiet  much  more  teverely,
for  there  it  waa  coaunon  to  acw  biriey,  milteC,
tumipa  (rapa\  and  then  barley  or  wheat  i^ain,  tbo
land  receiving  manure  before  the  millet  and  tumipa,
but  never  remaining  vacant  ;  whilethat  peculiarly
bvonied  diatriel  near  Najdea,  called  the  Oimpi
Z<tiarn^  01  lirrai  Laboriae,  now  the  Trra  di
LatjorOf  yielded  an  unintemipted  leiica  of  c«ii
cropa,  two  of  hi,  and  one  li  millet,  withont  «
- ■ '- u>(,mr- ■■


It  will  be  proper,  before  bringing  thia  part  of
u  aubject  to  a  doae,  to  expl^  a  word  which
lay  Dccaaion  embanaaiment  in  conteijnence  of  ita
uiy  modified  by  (he  RamoLn


ogricultuial  writen. Thia  ia  the  adjective
which  frequently  appean  aa  a  aabstantiv^  ana  u
an  the  three  gendcn,  according  aa  i^jfar,  tern,  o


1.  The  original  meaning  of  motialit  or  naale,
iking  to  iu  etymology,  matt  have  beeo,  lamd

fww/y  reclaimed  Iran  a  atate  of  nature  ;  and  iia
thii  Kuie  it  ia  uaed  by  Pliny  (H.ff.  xvii.  6),
Tb^  (bc.  oiJar}  /en  eat  is  imalibiu  eaeta  ecterw
tgiia. (Comp.  Calliatr.  in  Pand.  ilvil  31.  3.)

2.  Varro,  m  tiia  tiealiae  De  Uxgiia  Latina  (t.
39  ]  tanf.  vi.  £9,  ed.  MiUler)t^acat  tatt^agir^


AORICDLTiniA.
bj  vUdi  ii  illowed  oeajanaiHj  to  npote,  in
ago-,  land  vhieb  ii  crapped

auMj  «mtra  «  i
mnd  henea  Plinj  (if.  N.
_  ^  .  ^  ginJ  abtnoM  aamt  aeritKr,

3.  Vamt,  m  bit  TnstiK  De  Jta  Riatiia  (L  29),
iAirt  Sege*  to  moo  >  field  whicb  hai  bera
pboffaed  Bod  iDiini ;  anwM,  a  field  ploughed  bat
trt  jet  BTD  ;  iKvafu  ubi  tabait  Jiai  admam  as-
(■■^  ontfiiiiH  rmotxtur,  nubignoiu  irardi  irbicli
■^  be  ialetjxeled  U  detiMe  &  field  which  liai
bone  ■  enp,  but  which  bu  mt  been  plonghed  Cor
>  leoaid  cnp  ;  in  which  cue  it  will  be  eqninleat

■-•■■•  e(Ti.p«.£ gl).

'Jt  Tugin  bmd  ""-

1  tt  the  igiicidtant  a
BDkt  tkat  tbe  hnnei  delighti  jhuT  hhb'iu  mi-
«*>  tf  ^m  infa,  the  latter  aonfi  ^nmwusfM  ;
•adranB{iLirae£g'()inlike  maimeT  placet  lu-
nfu  aa  paeon  land,  in  oppcalko  to  trga,  ai  com
had. — b*  Jomtitnammju  »l  mmmaiiiu  aatcabr
/'miafu  n  aisKft  (<  paMim  m  Hmfil

JL  CoiDfnella,  in  another  pawage,  place*  cn&ii
awafia.  bod  under  tillage  in  a  general  aenae,  in
•pfMitJoo  to  rmUi  agrr,  land  in  a  >tate  of  natnrs  ;
aaj  thoa  we  mnat  imdentBnd  tha  katc  toai  ca£(a
"  in  Vinil^  fint  Edogmt  (t.  71),  and  Inuu
ai  I  ttm.  the  cwtimed  fielda  baia  which  a  crop  hai
btn  mpe^ — aphnae  which  forma  the  connecting
Ikk  belli  em  tbia  menning  and  that  noticed  abora
i^a  3. (Camp.  Pallad.  L  E,  iL  10.)

B. PA8nO.
Tk  aeesod  great  department  of  oor  nlject  it


L  JAmto  fmitt,  »~.lii^mg,  1.  Sheep ; 2.
Gnta;  S.  Swine:

IL  Uagarm  Puaia,  indndii^,  I.  Kioa  %  Z
BsMa  ;  8.  Awra  ;  4.  Unlca. Vam  indeed,  for
■  appaiBillj  except  to  pRaerre  a  aotl  of
mnietij,  plaoa  mitle*  in  the  third
■•  thn  endentlj  belong  to  the  aams
•  and  aaaea,  we  haTC  to  tliia  extent


W  A*  ]naper  munlaiance  of  the  fbegoing :  i

I.  Doga  (aaa«)  ;  2.  Paeden  ipaJmi).

JlpB,  in  eaeh  of  theae  nine  anbdiTirioni  (with
the  fxeeptiea  of.mnlea  who  do  not  breed)  atten-
■■■  bbK  be  ficected  to  nine  difliocat  circom-
Mmk^  af  iriueh  Ibor  an  to  be  coniidered  in  the
fmAmt  of  Mock  (*•  pmenpanKda),  four  in  the


AORICULTURA.  «

feeding  of  ito^  (jm  paeon  fiuemJo\  wUIa  ttw


re  genend  character,  relatea  to


,.).


i.ib,.t.

The  fbor  circnnutancea  which  dranand  attentioD
in  punhujng  Block  are,  a.  The  age  of  the  animal
(actor),  k  Hii  pointi  i^cugnitio  Jbrmtut)  bj  which
we  determine  whether  be  ii  good  of  hi*  kind.
e.  Hit  breeding  (jbo  lif  lemnttD),  b;  which  we  de-
termine whether  he  ii  of  a  good  kind,  d,  Th>
legal  fbnni  {dejura  in  paraado)  eaentlal  to  render
a  lale  valid,  and  the  warrant;  which  the  bayer


K^rr


.  gaa


The  four  circmniUmcet  to  be  eonudered  after  a
breeding  ttock  hai  b«en  acqoired  are,  &  The  mode
of  feedmft  (poitto)  in  aniwcr  to  the  qoeadona
aitrt,  uHai,  and  infi  what  (n  gaa  ngioae,  tt
miarlo  et  qutU).  f.  The  impn^natioD  of  the
fenale,  the  peiiod  of  geatation,  and  hef  treatment
while  pn^nant,  all  of  which  an  embodied  in  the
word  Jbettint,  g.  The  rearing  of  the  JOQIU  (h-
trieatat)^  jL  The  preaerTBtion  of  their  health,  and
treatment  when  diaeaaed  (da  tiuitaU').


iber  of  fiocka  and  heidi  which  (an
with  advanta^  in  a  giren  tpace,
the  nnmber  of  indiriduali  which  it  ia  eipedioit  to
combine  into  one  fiock  oi  herd,  and  the  pnportiDna
to  be  obterred  with  ngard  to  the  aei  and  age  cS
the  memben  of  each  fiock  and  herd.

In  fidtowin^  the  diTiaioni  and  topica  indicated
above,  we  omit  the  diacnaauma  on  the  ditcaaea  of
atock  and  their  remediea,  which  aboond  in  the
agricnlttml  writaia,  and  which  (onn  the  mbJMrC  of.
an  cdabonta  tnaltaa  {Midifmtdidaa  a.  De  A»a
Viltrimaria),  bearing  die  name  of  F>jM(tu,  which
ii  piobab^  a  ItanalatioD  or  compilation  troni  the
wotki  of  the  Qredc  IwwUapai,  or  Teterinaiy  tur-
geooi,  executed  at  a  late  period.

I.  MiHous  Pkcitdu.


(I.)  Paaia  ifa'rtam,  whoaa  Seecca  were  not  pro-
tected artificially.

(2.)  Peau  Tanmtmam  \  Pacta  Grutcum  a.  Oea
fidiilat  s.  Ohm  toefiu,  wboae  fieecei  were  protected
from  aS  external  injury  by  akin  Jacketa.  Their
wool  being  thua  rendered  £ner,  and  beii^  mora
eatQy  tcoued  and  dyed,  brought  a  higha  prica
than  any  other.

Sheep  were  likewiae  divided  into  two  dcuaea
according  aa  they  were  home-fed  or  reared  in
extenaiTe  and  diatant  pattnrea  ;  we  fint  con^dcT
"'  ider  thie  point  of  view.


portion  of  the  year,  wherever  the  nature  of  iha
country  and  tbe  tyitem  of  cnltiTation  ponued
rendered  thia  practicable,  or,  more  ftequemly,
were  kept  conttantly  confined  in  theda  (ilalmla —
ipta  —  oailia),  bnilt  in  warm  and  ihelteied  litua-
tiona,  with  hard  floora  aloping  outwardi  to  prerait
the  Bfcumnlation  of  moiature,  which  wai  i^arded
aa  partienhuly  iajarioni  to  both  the  feet  and  tha
fieece.  They  were  fed  opon  cytiaot,  loceme,
barley,  and  leguminooi  aeeda,  or  when  neb  rich
and  luccolent  ibod  could  not  be  obtained,  on  hay,
bran,  chaS^  grape  huaki,  and  dry  learea,  aqie-
<Ha]ly  tboM  itf  tho  elm,  oak,  and  fig,  beinf.at  all


63  AGBICULTUIW.

timet  plentitoU;  lapplied  with  ulL  Tbcj  wen
litteiM  with  lesiei  and  twigi,  which  vent  fn-
qoently  changed,  ind  the  pent  were  kept  cBre-


eiteniiie  putum  ^fw  n  nUhu  ^HBiinAir)  uniall;
puwd  the  winter  m  the  lnw  pkuu  upon  die  coait,
and  wen  diiren  by  iwnlu:  drift  n»di  ifoUa
publioMi)  in  annuner  to  ue  mouctaini  of  Centnl
It&lf ,  jiut  u  ID  modem  tiinei  TUt  diora  pau
ereij  mitomn  from  the  AbniExi  to  jwek  the  more
genial  dimato  of  Puglia  oi  the  Maiemma.  Thoae
who  wen  rmplojed  to  watch  them  (opBitmei)
being  often  at  a  gnat  diitanca  from  home  were
fiimiihed  vith  beaiti  of  burden  for  tianaporting
the  materiali  required  in  the  conitmoljon  ai  fbldi
and  huti,  at  lli^  halting  piuwi,  and  all  the  itorei
neceawy  for  themaelTei  and  their  charge.  The
iheep  were  imall}-  collected  ereiy  night  to  lecure
them  againit  nbben  and  btait*  irf  pre;  i  in  mun-
mer  the;  fed  in  the  monung  and  erening,  and  re-
poeed  during  the  noontide  heat  in  ihdtored  ipoti,
while  in  wintci  they  were  not  allowed  to  go  out
nntU  the  froet  wai  off  the  ground.  The  Sodu
were  often  Teiy  nnmeiaiii,  conlaiumg  aometimet
1£,000  head,  one  ihepherd  (opiiio)  being  allowed

The  bieedi  moat  priied  b;  the  early  Romani
wen  the  Calabrlon,  the  Apulian,  which  wen  ihort
WDolled  (firvett  viilo),  the  Mileiinn,  and,  aboTo  all,
the  Tsrentine  ;  but  in  the  time  of  Caliunella  thoas
of  Ciialpina  Goal  &om  the  ricinitj  of  Allinmn
(MarL  DT.  1£3},  and  thoia  (com  the  Campi  Macri
ttmnd  Parma  and  Mutina  were  eipeciolly  es-
teemed. The  lyitem  of  croaaing  waa  by  no  meana
unknown ;  for  M.  Columella,  the  mide  of  the
author,  produced  an  excellent  lariet^  by  croating
the  tectua  tKet  of  Cadii  with  »ma  wild  ramj  from
Africa,  and  again  croaiing  their  progeny  with  the
Taientinei.  In  porchaiing  atock  attention  waa
alwaya  paid  to  the  localidea  where  they  were  to
be  maintained ;  thu*  ahecp  of  large  aiie  (  jmttmt
ov»)  were  natnrally  deemed  beat  fitted  for  rich
plains,  atont  compact  animala  {qBodraiae)  for  light
hilly  aoila,  and  the  amaller  kindi  (u^jfuoe)  foi
mountninoua  regioni,  juit  aa  in  thia  conntiy  tht
Leiceitera  aie  kept  with  grealetl  advantage  in  thi
low-ljing  hiniiant  paaturea  of  Lincolnthire,
Cheyiota  in  the  graaa  hilla  from  which  tbey  derive
IhEir  name,  and  the  black-faced  on  the  lof^  moim-
tsina  of  Walea  and  Scotland.  Aa  to  colour,  pu»
whito  waa  moat  aonght  afler ;  but  certain  natura]
tinta,  auch  aa  the  darii  grey  (  jaiba),  which  diatin-
goiihed  the  Sccki  of  Fallentia  in  Li^ria  {fiaaque
firm  PoUmtia  vilU,  Siliua,  viil  599),  the  yel-
lowiab  brown  (/kjciu)  in  thoae  of  Corduba  (i
often  celebrated  by  Martial  t.  !7,  yiii.  2.  B,  i.
6S,  liT.  IHB  ;  comp^  Ju>.  liL  40),  and  the  red
brown  (nAer)  in  aome  of  the  Ajualic  Tsrieliea,
were  highly  prixed.

The  pointi  chaiscterittie  of  a  good  animal  and
the  warranty  uiually  required  of  the  Mller  will  be
found  fully  detailed  in  Vano  (iL  2)  aod  Columella


(Tii


',')■


le  which  were  imoolh  and  ban  ondei  the
belly  (pntfre  ffIaAro\  azicientJy  called  ^itcae,
alw»a  rqecled,and  particular  mre  wu  taken  that
the  fleece  of  the  ram  ahould  be  perfectly  pore,  or
at  leoft  uniform  in  tolour,  hia  tongue  alao  Ixung


black  or  apotted,  linee  nuh  de&cta  would  tuTO


AOaiCULTURA.
been  tnuumitted  to  hit  mgfart.  (Tirg.  Qeara.  IH.
387  J  Colum.TiL3.)


'en  not  conaidered  fit  for  breeding  ui
two  yean  old,  and  they  continned  to
produce  until  they  had  reached  the  age  of  aeren  :
rama  (onlaMi)  were  beliered  to  be  r
thne  yean  old  imtil  eight. The  n:


period  fb
had  not


D  vigour  fi


„  of  the  E^b  (S3d  July)  ;  i  ,
period  of  gealation  wu  about  150  daya,tbe  coclieat
lamlN  (.agui,  agmu)  would  be  yeaned  in  Septem-
ber, the  latert  i^KUt  the  middle  of  Deoember,  than
being,  ai  waa  ranatfced  by  Celma,  the  only
animala  produced  with  advantage  in  midwinlei^
Ewea  when  aboot  to  lamb  (tnonfat)  were  placed
apart,  conatantly  watched,  and  aasitted  in  parturi-
tion. Aa  aoon  aa  they  had  brought  fixth,  the  fint
milk  which  waa  of  a  thick  oonaiitence,  and  called
(olottra,  waa  carefullj  withdrawn,  bemg  eonsideied
injurioui  in  all  animala,  and  productive  of  a  dimis
named  cotottratia.  The  lamba  were  now  tended
with  the  grealeat  aolicitude,  wen  generally  kq>t
in  the  houae  nor  a  fin  fbr  aome  daya,  wen  not
allowed  to  go  forth  to  paatore  for  a  coniidenbla
time,  but  were  partially  reared  by  the  hand  on
the  moat  tender  and  nouriabing  food,  being  liiialljr
weaned  at  the  a^  of  four  months.  Thoae  lamba
which  wen  corned  in  tho  womb  longer  than  tho
regular  time  wen  termed  fAordi ;  thoae  bom  latfl
in  the  aeoaon,  KroHni  ;  thoae  which,  in  conacquencA
of  their  mgtliers  being  unable  to  aupply  milk,  weia
suckled  by  others,  tunvnt.  Caatiation  waa  cot  par-
fbrmcd  upon  such  as  were  intended  for  wathen
(ptmeea)  until  Sre  months  old.  The  malea  let
apart  to  aupply  the  defidenciea  hi  the  breedmg
flock  (owoi'  OTKtei  wmlmitlen  ■eaboit)  were  telected
from  the  progeny  of  auch  awes  aa  usually  gava
birth  to  twins,  tboaa  which  wn«  polled  (fiaiat)
being  preferred  aa  the  whide  to  those  with  horna

Tho  management  of  oeespeffiliMdifl'credfrom  that
of  tho  ordinary  m^  viUa^d  merelyin  the  amoont
of  one  with  which  they  wen  tended.  They  wera
famished  with  an  ample  supply  of  the  most  na~
tritioKi  food,  each  individual  receiving  daily  In
winter  three  seitarii  (pints)  of  barloy  or  of  beana
cmshed  in  their  pods  {ftvaa  cum  ma  vdnUa
fibat),  in  addition  to  hay,  lucerne  dry  or  gram
cytiaua,  and  other  fodder.  Their  alalia  wera
usually  laved  with  atone,  and  kept  acrupaloialir
clean  ;  they  seldom  left  the  house,  and,  when  aK
lowed  to  pasture,  it  was  looked  upon  as  eaaeatial
that  the  ground  should  be  free  &am  bustles  and
briars  of  cvciy  description  which  might  tear  their
fleece  or  its  covering.  The  jackets  were  frequently
taken  off  to  cool  the  anunals,  the  wa(4  waa  combed
out  at  leaat  thrice  a  year,  and  well  waahed  and
annointed  with  oil  and  wine.  The  wethen  wira
killed  at  two  jeara  old,  their  ikin  being  thai  in
perleetion.

Sbeep-ahtanng  (bmiwo)  commcnoed  in  warn
districts  in  ApriT;  bnt  in  cold  situations  was  de-
terred until  the  solitiee.  A  fine  day  waa  chosen,
and  the  operation  was  performed  befon  tho  son  had
attained  to  its  full  power,  in  order  that  the  she^
might  not  be  hot  and  the  wool  not  moiat  The  meat
careful  placed  a  rag  under  the  animal  (frjrfitrii'r
saijiMfu  o«t  («aibr«  Ntosc}  that  no  paction  of  Ute  «Up


AORICULTURA.
Hgtabslart  er  danced  (h  fa  jCoia'  ta/crgoti).
T^  wwjtf  when  frnh  aboni  and  atili  uiiprefliiMl«d
<ntk  the  nroU  of  the  uuDul,  wu  called  lama
miiim:  Uv  deem  vhm  laUed  up  vera  trimBd
iiiTiiii.  V  nJiauH.  0)H  lirfaa,  when  aham,
nm  ionediatelj  meucd  wiUi  Vine  and  oil,  to
■ttiiJl  while  ni  and  hog^  lard  wen  oeouioB-
■IV  aided  ;  while  the  ^cketi  of  the  owa  pil-
M«  wcR  aooinled  with  the  Bme  mixtnie,  and
ib«  RfJaeed  on  the  animal*,  Inafad  of  thu,
BBM  robbed  in  ■  waah  compoacd  of  eqoal  pBrM  of
b^ed  lapine  juice,  leea  of  old  vine,  and  amuroL
Anr  waniid  inflicted  dunn^  the  procen  wba  dresaed
Kith  at  ( fu  ligmkla).  Oa  the  foorth  day  thej
woe  bslhed,  if  poniUe,  in  the  lea ;  if  not,  in  inin-
nur  oiled  with  nit.  In  Spain  and  Huno  other
jihn  it  ima  cnMamary  to  ibcar  the  ibeep  twice  a
jtac,  aadv  the  belief  that  the  additiiHB]  laboor
>ai  aat  than  eotnpennted  by  the  iocrcaaed  qsau-
tiifofwoeL  Theancioil  pnctioe  of  plucking  the
mi  inatod  af  ilusiiDg  it,  ttill  lingered  in  certain
datricia  CTCD  when  Pliny  winte.  (Van.  IL  1.  fi  S,
IS,  20,  iL  2  :  ColasL  L  PraeC  g  26,  liL  2,  3,  4,
B  2.  I  U  ;  PtiL  H.  ff.  Tiiu  47,  48  ;  Fallad.  iL
li^  T.  7,  Ti.  a.  TiL  «,  Till  4,  ztL  13.)
'2.  GeaM  (foon  eopnaaa)  were  dhided
'  »  gwaa  matilam  it  rarip '
1  hailed,  and  the  ponu

17 ;  bat  tnere  doei
erenoi  in  the  mode
tl  Raring  tlMm,  nor  indeed  do  they  aeem  to  bate
baa  kept  dirtinct ;  bat  it  waa  coniidered  adrii-
aUe  thU  the  old  he-goat,  the  dux  gngii,  ihonld
be  m^ilma,  becanaa  he  waa  thaa  leaa  tronbleiome
MdMnaeiHU.

Tha  painla  ehanetefittie  of  a  nod  animal  will
he  find  snoaented  in  Vans  (i£  S,  i2— 6>  and
ia  Cda^tUa  (nL  6).  The  moat  high  bred  had
aiwBja  two  loag  l^a  of  ikin  (nmuibM,  lacMae)
iiyaiiaa  frsa  the  Aroat.  One  peculiarity  eon-
oaiied  wtthaala  waa  that  they  woe  nersr  war-
natad  ia  good  hotlth,  (x  thij  were  beliered  to
he  alwqa  Bon  or  len  hbooring  imder  feier.

.  that  of  abeep,  except  that,  althongb
fioat  and  cold,  they  ihmva  better  m
'  t  "*—"  oaggy  gnnnd  or  among  copaewood,
wWe  tkn-  bmnacd  with  gmt  cagemeaa  on  the
yoaig  twiga,  than  in  opea  gruay  pliini.  Both
fivi  ^BT  wandering  imtare  and  thor  liabili^  to
CBMnct  dkOB  when  oowded  in  pona,  not  more
ibaa  Hky  waa  kqit  logcther  in  n  flixk  under  the
ckaqp  of  ika  Mme  goatherd  (cnyrariTit),  the  pro-
ftiiB  ^  MM  mala  (floftr,  Unm)  to  abinit  fifteen
nals  ifitfrmt,  nofMaei  being  commonly  ob-

Wh^  in  MaUa  (aaprffia),  tha  ilopiug  floor  waa
Bi^^  faaied  cot  of  the  natiTa  rode  or  pored
wiik  ^  Hill  MDOea,  tot  no  litta  waa  placed  be-
■Mk  Ikar  fcct.  Tha  boaaca  were  awept  ont
Uy:  aod  it  waa  deemed  laai  iifiiil  to  their  liealth
ifaa  ■•  iBiJIiilii  (w  diit  of  any  kind  thould  be  al'
iiiwad  la  aeeiBibte.  The  alie-goat  waa  citable
tf  hndkRfaaiiBeyeaioId  ontil  e^ht ;  bnt  the
JWgfj  «?  a  BKtbei  andtf  three  ycon  old  were
Baa  wwtk  In  ling  petmaoenlly,  but  Kild  olt  The
' - - ■  theand  of  antnnm;


■^  ^^^p>/  w<vB  *-"-  -«»■■  ■-  "m^'er "  "™  "~"

«M«rBgDodHadc,ihenDaBUrf(odiKed  two  or
cntt  ifaaa  at  •  btnk,  wBieh  wen  wcmed  at  tin


AORICULTURA.  fis

end  of  three  montbi,  and  then  tianaf^rred  at  cdcs
to  the  floeli  (lulimiaiBUitr  et  in  grtgt  nf^aaJ  um).
Tbe  hair  {fUt)  al  goati  wbj  ahom  or  ^ncknl
(copRu  caUcn  ia  the  technical  phrase)  out  legU'
Urlj,  and  uaed  in  the  manobcSnre  of  cc  ~


1  ftom  thia  material


Nwato). Tha  elothi  i

were termed  CUno,  h  „..._. .__

•outhem  and  central  prannoea  of  Atia  Minu,  like
the  modem  Augoia  ipeciei,  were  remarkable  fof
the  length  of  their  hair,  (/a  Giiaa  aireoqat
Sgrtet  <nl!o  lomBli  niA'aafar,  ore  the  word)  ij
Pliny,  who  here  allndet  to  the  goata  from  the
Cinypa  in  Libya,  the  "  Cinyphii  hind  "  of  VirgiL)
CCdum.  L  PraeC  g  26,  YiL  6  ;  Plm.  H.  N.  viii.
50  ;  PaUad.  zii.  13  ;  Varr.  iL  3,  ii.  1.  g  fi.  2B.)

3.  Swine  (pagw  wiQam)  were  dlTided  into  two
elaaaea,  the  ja«  dauat,  utnally  hlack  in  colonr,
thickly  corered  with  biinlea ;  and  the  ma  jiUnie,
genoally  white,  and  ccmparatiTely  STOOOth ;  but
there  leenu  to  hars  been  little  difiereoce  in  tlie
management  of  tbe  two  breeds  eioept  that  tbe
ibrmer  waa  the  more  hardy.

The  pointa  chanctoinii  of  a  good  anhnal,  and
the  irairanty  uaaally  nqnired  by  the  purchaaer,
wiU  be  lonnd  in  Vam  (ii.  4),  CotuneUn  (nL  9\
and  Palladiui  (iii  26).

Daring  a  great  portion  of  the  year,  whererer  it
waa  practicable^  they  were  driven  ont  to  feed  early
in  the  monuna  in  wooda  where  acoma,  beecb-
mait,  wild  fruita,  and  betriea  abounded ;  and  in
tbe  middle  of  the  day  they  repoeed,  if  poiaible,  in
twampy  groimd,  where  they  had  not  only  water
bnt  mod  alto  wherein  to  wallow ;  in  the  cool  of
the  evening  they  fed  again,  were  taught  to  nawnilili
when  tbe  iwincherd  (mMcMt)  Mnuided  hJi  bom,
and  wen  then  driven  home  to  the  iam.  In  winter
they  were  not  allawed  to  go  forth  when  &oat  wai
hart  upon  tbe  gronnd.  When  kept  in  tbe  houac^
their  cniaf  food  waa  acomi,  or  when  the  aapidy  of
theae  &iled,  beana,  bailey,  and  other  kindi  of  groin
and  pnlu.  The  numba  in  each  herd  varied  from
100  to  ISO,  or  even  more,  according  to  drcum-
ilancea  and  the  meani  of  the  proprietor,  and  the
proportioa  of  one  boar  to  trai  nw*  waa  naually

The  Bowa  were  not  crauido^d  fit  for  breeding
until  upward!  of  a  year  old,  and  continued  prolific
to  the  age  of  teven  ;  boon  (vwum)  wen  m  full
vigonr  from  one  year  old  tilt  four ;  the  beat  time
Eor  impregnation  waa  bom  the  middle  of  Febnary
op  to  the  vernal  equinox,  the  period  of  gettation
waa  four  montha,  and  the  piga  being  weaned  at  tbe
end  of  two,  a  doable  brrow  might  be  procured  in

Each  breeding  aow  (tcrojVf  Inaugbt  np  her  pigi
(jaraa,  pfna,  pcraOat)  in  a  iqiaiata  e^e  (itora),

might  easily  se

to  rdieve  the  progeny,
danger  of  being  aoahed  by
tbe  weight  of  tbe  mother  who  was  luppoaed  to
bring  fcrth  aa  many  young  as  she  bad  teata,  and
wai  c^iable  of  mckhng  eight  at  fint,  but  whan
thev  incnaaad  in  uaa  it  waa  deenied  advisable  to
withdraw  one  half  of  that  number.  Sucking  pigs
(ladaUu)  when  ten  days  old  were  accounted  pure


ilator)  might  i
n  pniparod  to  I


ln.(.


r,  poivMlaiia)^  whit
r,  Uiey  were  denom


«  AORICULTUHA,

nated  deii^  and  umetimefl  nefrendet^  beCBnM  not
jet  able  to  cnmch  hard  food.  The  malei  not  re-
■crred  for  breeding  were  cutniled  when  &um  tii
to  twelve  monthi  old,  and  were  then  tenned
maiala.  (Virr.  JL  4 ;  Colonu  yii.  9,  Praet  i
TiiL  SI  ;  Palkd.  IT.  26.)


AOmCULTURA.

partimt  puton]  dirtrict  of  the  Roman  waild,  w


g  ae  i  Plin.

IL Ma^okxi  PBcnnis.

I.  Kin*  (pMH  Ma&M, ammbim inMiiM)

were  dirided  into  du*ei,  »ccarding  ai  they  we«

kept  at  boma  and  emjdoTgd  in  the  labonn  of  the

ftrm  (k»a  damUi),  or  putund  id  huge  Wdt

Anal  dttHiti,  whererer  the  nainn  of  the  ieQ

and  the  mode  of  caltan  punned  permitted,  wen
allowed  to  paeturei  linm  growing  grnm  (vkidt
pabulum)  wu  eoniideied  the  mod  luilabla  of  all
food  ;  when  tltii  coold  not  be  inpplied,  it  booune
necemr?  to  iloll-fced  them  (o/en  ad  pnaepia)  ;
bnt  thej  were  nllowed  to  itand  in  the  open  air
duriag  the  hot  weather,  while  is  winter  they  were
kept  in  ipsdou  bjrea  {ibdnda,  a>iH^*i)  built  with
»  eoutherl^  aipcct  ao  u  to  be  ihelleied  &aiD  cold
winds,  the  Boon  being  hard  and  doping  to  prerent
moiitnra  from  being  ahnrbed,  and  to  allow  it  to
Ton  off  fredj,  while  to  pnnnola  the  wsnnth  and
conifoit  of  tiie  animali  they  nen  bedded  with
abundanee  of  litter  (itrmwniiat  pteori  e<  bubia
diligeiitir  lAittTwitiir,  Cat  £.),  nnullj  itnw,  or
learei,  inch  ai  thoie  of  the  ilec,  which  wae  lup-
pcMed  to  jield  little  nonrithment.  Their  liaiAe
food  &om  the  middle  of  April  until  the  middle  of
Jone  waa  vetchee,  Incame,  clorer,  and  other  fodder
cot  great ;  from  the  middle  of  June  to  the  begin-
ning of  November  the  leavei  of  Ireea,  thoie  of  the
aim,  the  oak,  and  the  poplar  being  regarded  ai  the
beat ;  ftom  the  beginnmg  of  November  until  April
meadow  hay  (/Mm™  praUtue),  and,  where  bay
eonld  not  be  procund,  cha9|  j!T>P'  hueka,  aconu,
and  Arj  teana  were  aubatitutad  mixed  with  bariey,
or  wi^  Hme  of  the  Irgununoiu  eeeda,  lueh  aa
beam,  Inpinei,  or  chick-peai  previouly  aleeped  in
water  (auMrMM),  or  cmahed  (Jiaae).  When  an
oi  wai  fed  npoa  hay,  from  30  to  40  pmmdi  weight
(Roman  pound  =  1 1 1  dl  avoiid.)  waa  an  ample
allowance,  except  during  the  monthi  of  November
and  Deoember,  that  ii,  during  the  ploughine  and
aowing  uBim,  when  they  rscnved  Enm  die  feeder
(pabmatcriui)  a>  much  food  of  the  moit  nntritioui
kind  aa  they  conld  conaome.  Lnmpi  of  nit  placed
near  the  amtepla  piorad  very  attraetlve  to  thi
jniin.T.  and  condUBd  to  their  bealth.

Large  herd*  were  paitnred  ehiefly  in  wooda
where  there  wai  abundance  of  grata,  loivea,  and
tender  twiga,  ihiftiag  to  the  coaat  in  winter  and  to
the  Dooi  ihady  hUla  in  aununer,  under  the  charge  of
herdnnea  (anmewUnii),  *  clan  altogether  <"  '  '
from  the  bidiidci^  or  hindi,  who  worked  and
theboBadomatid.  The  common  number  in
WH  from  100  to  ISO,  the  animala  were  caraiiillj
in^)eetod  every  year,  and  the  leait  promising  (rrji-
eaLMt)  waeded  out.  The  proportion  of  two  bulla,  a
joarlrng  and  a  two-year  old,  to  60  or  70  cowt  wai
luUBDy  obaarved,  bnt  Cojumella  double*  the  num-
ber of  malea.  The  Umbrian  oxen,  capecially  those
on  the  Clitumnna,  were  the  largeat  and  (ineit  in
Ilaly  ;  thoie  of  Etnuia,  Latinm,  and  Oaul  were
■m^er,  but  itrongly  made  and  well  adapted  for
labour ;  those  of  Thmee  wen  valued  for  nerrfkial
prnpoua  in  caoaaqnenco  of  being  for  the  meat  part
pure  white ;  bnt  the  cattle  of  Epuoi,  the  moat  im-


the  warranty  uinally  demanded  by  th«  buyer,  wiH
found  fully  detailed  in  Varro  (ii.  £;,  in  Coln-
;lla,  who  hare  copiea  the  description  of  the  Ckr<
thagintan  M^o  (vi  I,  20,  31),  and  in  Pallidiua


,13).


Cowa  (vacBOt)  were  not  fit  for  breeding  imtil
they  were  upward!  of  two  years  old,  and  they  eon-
tinned  to  prudoce  nndl  they  had  reaehed  the  sn
of  teiL  Canddeiahle  vaiiation  ii  to  be  fbond  m
the  agricultural  writers  ss  to  tbe  age  at  which  ths
bulls  arrived  at  full  rigour,  Vam  conaideting
that  they  might  be  employed  when  a  year  old.
Columella  and  Plmy  recommending  that  thr^
■hould  be  kept  untit  lata.  The  former,  howerer,
'  tbe  precept  of  tbe  praetiral  man,  and  is  eon-
nant  with  modem  experience.  The  lime  of  gea-
lion  being  nearly  ten  (lunar)  months,  the  moat
•Durable  period  for  impregnation  vrai  from  the
Iddle  of  June  to  the  end  of  July,  for  thus  the
Ives  (eiMi)  woold  be  bom  when  spring  waa
well  advanced  (maluro  eera).  When  pBrtaritian
wus  approaching,  the  rawnnnt  cow  (iorda  rksh)
was  caieAiUy  watched,  fed  richly,  and  protected
from  the  Buanlts  of  the  gad-fiy  and  Mher  tor-
mcnting  niiniliTiti  ;  the  calf  for  aome  time  after  ita
birth  was  sUowed  to  suck  freely,  but  aa  it  in-
creased in  strength  was  tempted  with  green  food,
in  order  that  it  might  in  aome  degree  relieve  the
mother,  and  after  six  months  had  elapsed,  waa  fed
reguluriy  with  wheat  bran,  barley  meal,  or  tender
gnai,  and  gradually  weaned  entirety.  Caatralioit
was  performed  at  the  age  of  two  jeara.  The  »i-
tuli  intended  for  labour  were  to  be  handled  ((rao-
tari)  fmta  an  early  age  to  render  them  tame,  bat
were  not  to  be  broken  in  to  work  (domon)  befors
their  third,  nor  later  than  their  ^h  year.  The
method  of  breaking  (rfomtfiira)  those  taken  wild
from  the  herd  is  fully  described  by  CdninelU
(vi.  S),  and  Palladiui  Qies  the  end  of  Hanh  aa  the
time  most  appropriate  lor  commencing  the  opera-
tion. The  membCTS  of  a  herd,  according  to  agn
and  ser,  were  termed,  Vita^,  Viuda  ;  Jupemctta,
JtnoKa;  But  nmielbu,  Buadiu;  Boi  crfn'tu,
Tbsnu,  ViKca  ;  a  barren  cow  was  iiamed  Tamra.
(Cat  a,  30  1  Varr.  iL  1,  6 ;  Colnm.  vi  1— S,  20 —
2<i  Plin. /r.K  Till  4Sf  Pallad.iT.  11, 12,  ri.  7,

2.  Honei  iptaa  ejnnMS  a.  antMni,  armatmn,

Ski'mna)  are  divided  by  ColumeUa  into  CoKroei^
n>d  hones ;  M<iiam,  horaea  adapted  for  breeding
mules  ; VvJ^oru,  ordinary  borae*.

Tbe  paints  of  a  hone,  the  method  of  ascertaining
hia  age  up  to  seven  years  old,  and  tbe  wamuty
usually  given  by  the  leiler,  are  detailed  in  Vairo
(ii.  7.  g  4,  fi,  6  )  in  Columella  (vL  29),  and  in
Palladiui  (ir.  IS).

Horse*  either  poatnred  in  gtaa  fiddi  or  were  fed
in  the  stable  upon  dry  hay  (ta  Mit«Iit  aefraeae~
pibu),  to  which  bariey  waa  added  when  the  ani-
mal  waa  required  to  undergo  any  extncrdinRrT-
btigne.  Brood  marea  wefo  frequently  kfpt  in
large  troops  which  shifted,  like  sheep  and  oxen,
ftma  the  mountains  to  the  coast,  according  to  the
■eason  ;  two  mounted  men  being  attached  to  each
herd  of  Sf^.  The  maie  (ea*a)  waa  constdiRd  fit
for  breeding  at  two  yean  old,  and  continued  pro-
HSc  np  to  Ae  age  of  ten ',  the  itallion  {admiaariiu)
KOWSwd  In  T^por  from  Qine  yewt  jdd  iintS


AORICULTUHA.
i*atj,  but  wbcD  joang  irai  limited  to  tre
£ftra  fenuloL The period of  geetaticm being
' '  .-■ >  --ndaji,  the  beat  time  An

>e  THUol  equinu  to  tb(
»  putarition  wodd  then  lokt
Doci  bnnmble  mb«oil High
dt  ■llowed  to  pndnce  more  than
Tts  diT*  ifler  birtb  the  f
[fAi  [ijlifiiii,  jy—fat)  WH  pennitted  to  ofco
|aaj  ill  dua  W  pHtnn  i  M  tbe  age  of  fiie  mont
ti  IS  canacouj  to  bcna  feeding  tbem  witb  borii  _
xal  md  bfu,  and  wh^o  a  jeai  old,  witb  pliin
EB^imd  bwlej  ;  bat  tlw  beil  colu  wen  ftllc
ID  oAtsiw  fwAing  until  tbe^  b*d  coiDpleled
T-wt,  md  at  thin  j(an  tbef  were  btoken  ij
lb  ud  ts  which  tbey  wen  deatined,  whether  for
■HB(  (ad  nraroa),  for  dnnght  (ml  nledoin),
feanyias  boKhau  (orf  ntitomi),  or  for  miliiar;
■rrae  (ad  rpJuffnai),  but  the;  were  not  ngolulf
ivked  mtil  four  off

Race  Bid  trai  hotiei  irere  notoutrated ;  but
rfffttkA  *M  fnqoentJj  performed  on  tboae  f
tbtd  far  the  road,  frnni  the  cmTictian  ihol  the
IiUilg  f  lilt  II  iai).  while  leu  bold  and  apirited  wu
■ifr  irfe  and  tnclkUe  («  viii  ioim na/iur

It  >  ta  be  obaemd  tbal  honei  were,  and  in-
<ird  tn,  nfT  littlo  lued  for  agricultuiBl  porpoaei
b  iMlf  and  SoDlhtm  Ennpe,  the  ordinary  toili
tirkf  tarried  on  alsuat  eidiuiTely  by  oxen,  and
!xue  tWr  Dcm  wen  by  any  moni  objectn  of


Spun  became  prrgnant  by  the
.^dnoiee  of  a  pvtieular  wind,  adding  that  the  eolti
cocrired  in  ibii  manner  did  not  live  berond  the
ne  of  Qtne  jtmn.  (Vair.  i.  Pratt.  %  25.  iL  1.
<  IL  7.  S  7  I  ColoDL  ti.  27,  29  ;  Plto.  H.  N.  yiiL
*-2  ;  PaUad.  ir.  13.)

].  Ama  (onai,  oaiu)  wen  dirided  into  two
'nil  I.  ib«  Gmmt  ■iiaiaiiftrw,  or  common  domeitic
'  ladnpad  (oiwa.  aaaUu),  and  the  Otmu/trmt,
tir  arild  am  (fmagtr,  omagna),  which  wu  cwnmon
i'-  Phiyfia  ud  Lyoonia,  waa  eaiily  tamed  and


it  cdebratcd  breed*  wen  thoae  of  Ai-
•a  Jia  mi  of  Reate.  The  latter  wai  h  highly  ea-
i^tuA  ia  iIk  time  of  Vam,  that  a  ringle  indi-
iliulif  lUaita^  had  b«u  known  to  letch  liity
^icH^  Botereea  (aboat  SOU  sterling),  and  a
'j^  it  tm,  ai  much  a*  foor  hnndnd  thousmd
'C^warda  «f  33ML  tterling).  Snch  animali  wen
•/  coBae  d^ealelf  DDTtnnd,  being  ted  chiefly  upon
I'jr  aad  bariey  bran  (Jiir/kni  ordtacs).  The  infc-
-.  <deaeciptioii  itf  auei  (auiNir  omAh)  were  Taloed
'7  Etfmen  becaaie  they  were  lery  hardy,  not
lai^ict  M  iliiiaii .  (apable  of  enduring  much  toil,
r^jired  little  fiiod  and  that  of  tbe  cmneit  kind,
•.eh  M  ibe  leans  and  twigi  of  thorny  ahnibt,  and
n:.-h:  be  made  atrriceable  in  tariDiu  wayi,  aa  in
-xrwvm  bprdfUi  (aaeSi  doMtmni).  laraing  com
-  iLt  "^  ena  in  fdongfaing,  where  the  toil  vai
■:.  ;  tiJL  Tbe  tine  of  impRgnation,  the  period  of
■  -■  e  maoagcmait  of  the  fiiali  {p*iU),
M  in  bonn.  They  were  Hldom
Dmnben  to  form  a  herd.  (Vair.  JL
■  I  14.iL6.i  C<ibim.yiLl  ;  Plin. /f.  M  liii.  43 ;
i-dal.  W.  It.)


AGKICULTURA.  65

4.  Mulei.  Mului  and  Mtla  were  the  genenl
lermi  for  the  hybrid  between  a  hone  and  an  ut,
but  in  practice  a  diatinclion  waa  drawn  between
Mult  and  Hiiai.  Hind  were  the  pregeny  of  a
•taliion  and  a  ibe-au,  Mali  of  a  male  an  and  a
mare.  The  latter  were  larger  in  proportion,  and
more  ciloeiaed  than  the  former.  A  croia  umo'
timet  wa>  formed  between  the  maro  and  the  onager

Uncommon  can  waa  token  by  breeden  of  raulei
la  the  aeleclion  of  the  parents.  A  Itrong  large-
boned  mare,  powerfiil  rather  than  iwift,  waa  uiu-
olly  choirn.  The  male  aiaai  at  their  birth  were
removed  from  their  mother,  luckled  by  mani,
reared  opon  the  moat  nourutiing  food  (hay  and
barley),  and  attained  to  full  vigour  when  three
yean  old.  A  good  admiuariui  from  Arcadia  or
Reale  waa  worth  from  thirty  to  fmy  thouaand  ae>-
tercea  (250iL  to  330i.  iteiling).  The  period  of
getlation  waa  obaerred  to  be  a  little  longer  than
in  the  caae  of  the  pure  hone  or  aia,  extending  to
thirteea  lunar  montha  ( in  all  other  nipecta  th^
It,  habita,  and  mode  of  Bale  were  the


The  gnat  uia  of  mulet  waa  in  drawing  ttarellii^
corriageg  (Uka  mm  Siiu  eoyanctii  omnia  Be-
hitula  n  viit  daaatur);  they  were  alas  employed,
like.auet,  in  carrying  burdeni  npoa  [ack  nddlea
(dOdliu),  and  in  ploughing  light  hmd.  The  finer
kinda,  when  kept  in  herda,  were  driven  in  aummer
from  the  rich  ploiu  of  RoHa  on  the  Velinua  to  the
Monte*  Guigurea.  (Varr.  ii,  1. 1  16,  iL  8  ;  Criam.
Ti.  36,  AT  i  Plin.  H.  iV.  viim  ;  Pallad.  it.  14.)

III.

1.  Dogi  (asKt)  were  dirided  into  thne  cUoe* :
a.  Omet  FUlatiei,  walch-dogi,  whoae  otSce  wu  to
guard  &rm-hon»)  agajnat  the  aflgreisiona  of  thieTea.

A.  Qin«r  Paatorala  a,  CaJiet  Pecaarii,  to  protect
the  flocka  and  herda  from  robbers  and  wild  beaitt.
Each  opilio  wai  ^nenlly  attended  by  two  of
iheie,  equipped  with  ipiked  collan  (lailiim),  to
Kne  aa  a  defence  in  their  cncoonten  with  wolvea
and  other  adveraariet.

c.  Cbwi  Venalki. Sporting  doga.

Vorro  and  Columella  deteribe  minutely  tha
oinU  of  the  finl  two  claiaea,  with  which  alone  tha

cal  with  the  onimoli  employed  for  the  lame  pur-
oic  at  tha  preient  day  in  the  Abrmii.  They
'ere  fed  upoD  barley  meal  and  whey,  or  in  placet
'here  no  cheeec  Wat  made,  on  wbeaten  tread
loiitened  with  the  warm  liquor  in  which  benna
had  been  boiled. (Van.  ii.  9  ;  Colum.  vii.  12.)

2.  Feeden  (poAurM).

The  flocki  and  herda  which  fed  in  the  imnc-
diate  neighbourhood  of  the  fiirmt  were  utoally
tended  by  old  men,  boya,  or  eTen  women  ;  but
thoae  which  wen  driicn  to  diitant  and  moun-
tunona  pasture)  wen  phued  under  the  care  of
li  in  the  vigour  of  life,  whoalwayt  went  well
1  and  were  accompanied  by  beaaU  of  burden
(JamttOa  doauaria),  carrying  all  the  apparatut  and
lorca  required  during  a  pretraeted  abeence  i  the
rhole  body  of  men  and  animalt  being  under  tha
Ditunand  nf  an  experienced  and  truBtworthy  in-
ividua],  ttylcd  Magaltr  PaooriM,  who  kept  all
le  account*  and  poiitwej  a  competent  knowledge
of  Ihe  Teterinary  art.

We  may  craKlnde  thii  part  of  tha  mbjecl  with
a  low  woidi  upon  tha  Eumgaaent  of  wiry  pro-


66  AGHICULTURA.

dace,  which  mi  tmted  u  a  dUtinrt  icience
(TVfxnriitn)  by  llie  Ciwlu,  who  wtDta  many
tnatijMa  upon  th«  topic

ChecK-msking  commenced  ia  Htj,  and  the
method  followed  b;  the  Rnoiaiu  wu  lubnantUlly
the  umB  u  that  now  pne^ged.  The  milk  nn-
■kimiDBd  wBi  used  ai  freih  u  possible,  wbs  slightly
wanned,  the  rennet  ((xn^nJnia)  vu  then  add^  ;  aa
BDon  aa  the  cord  TonDedf  j  t  was  tTansferred  to  baskets
{fitceil'H,  CK^ntjU)  or  wooden  cbeseU  (rbniue)
perforated  with  holei,  ia  order  that  the  wbey
(sown)  might  diaia  r^  quickly,  snd  ms  pressed
down  by  welghta  to  hssten  the  precesi.  The  mass
was  then  taken  oal  oE  the  frame,  sprinkled  with
salt,  and  placed  upon  a  wicket  crate  or  wooden
boaid  in  a'co<d  dark  place  ;  when  partially  dried,
it  was  ^ain  pressed  more  powerfully  than  before,
again  salted  and  sg^  shelved, — operations  which
were  cepeated  for  •OTeral  days  until  it  had  required
a  proper  coaiittency.  It  might  be  fiavDurcd  with
thyme,  with  pine  cones,  or  any  other  ingredient,
by  mixing  the  condiments  with  the  warm  milk.

The  rennet  or  c«eigulura  was  nsually  obtained
from  the  stomach  of  the  hare,  kid,  or  lamb  (^^oaga-
twa  fsporvnipt,  ioAJnvn,  agitimm\  the  two  former
being  pivfencd  to  the  third,  while  some  persons
employed  for  the  some  purpose  the  milky  juice
expreeied  &am  a  %-lrte  branch,  Tiaegar,  and  a
Tarieiy  of  other  substances.

s"  milk  (oaw  hubnU)  were

more  umi^^tiDle  toon  tnose  from  ewes'  milk  (ouer
evilli)  ;  the  least  nourishing  and  most  digestible
were  tbuc  from  gaols'  milk  (cam*  caprim),  the
now  and  moist  cheeses  in  eflih  case  being  more
nourishing  {magia  aliiila),  and  leH  beaiy  (in
BD>7»re  sua  teiiiUt),  than  thoae  which  were  old

Butter  is  mentioned  by  Vnno  (iu2.  |  16),  but

fbod  (Varr.  iL  1.  g  28.  1 1  ;  Chun.  Tii.  8  ;  Plin.
II.  ff. ' '- ■ - ~  ■


belieYed  U


lad.  T


9).


$. VILLATICA  FASTIO.

ViBaiiau  PnsfwiKi,  from  which  many  persons
tDvardi  the  dose  of  the  republic  and  under  the
empire  derived  targe  revennes,  were  separated  into
two  departments,  according  to  the  nnines  given  to
the  buildings  or  encloiurea  adapted  to  the  dilferent

!.  Amaria  t.  OmOhomit.
II. Vivaria.

I.  Aaaria  s.  OnitJumu,  in  the  inotl  eitCDded  sc-
ceptatioD  of  the  term,  signified  receptacles  for  birds
at  every  description,  whether  wild  or  tame,  terres-
trial or  ampkibicu^  hut  it  in  frequently  and  con-
veniently employed  in  a  moic  limited  sense  to  de-
note the  structures  formed  for  birds  caught  in  their
wild  stale  by  the  Ibwler  (oiio^w},  from  whom  they
were  purchased,  and  then  shut  ap  and  sold  at  a
profit  after  they  be<ame  fiit.

In  this way  we  may di
aAm  m  jiaia,  b.  ColamU  , _

which  the  Sist  two  only  were  koown  to  the  eaiiier

a.  Odutrt  in  jJamo,  was  the  poultiY-yard  in-
cluding the  bouset  and  courts  deilined  Air  those
domestic  fowls  which  were  bred  and  fed  on  the
&nn,  and  which  wars  not  able  or  not  permitted  to
&j  ktnMd. Of  then  (he  cUef  wne,  1.  Bam-


AQRICULTURA.

door  fbwii  or  chickens  (galliaae).  %  Qmnea  fiiwU
{gaSniM  Ntaaidicae  s.  Afriauae).  3.  Pheasants
(piaaiata).  4.  Peacodii  (paamei).  S.  Oeceo
(oassrsi). 6.  Dncka  (aixUa). 7.  Teal  (?)  {pur-

b.  CUanian'an,  the  doTe-cote.

e.  The  Onntiai  proper,  the  inmates  of  which
were  chiefly,  1.  Tbmshea  and  blackbirds  ((unfi,
DKni^),  especially  the  former.  2.  Quails  (sofar'
sua).  3.  Turtledorea  (tertens}.  4.  Ortolans  (?)
(miliarias),  all  cf  which  are  in  Italy  birds  of  pas-
sage arriving  in  great  flocks  at ' ' '


II.  1


I Viairia,  i


iployed  to  denote  all  places  c
lor  tae  reception  of  animals  need  for  food  or  which
supplied  BiJcles  of  food  and  did  not  &11  under  the
denomination  aSpeaadet  or  aws^  must  be  BeperatAl
into  those  designed  for  the  iccepdon  of  l^id  ani-
mals, and  those  for  fishes.

a.  Ltporaria,  ApUiria,  Oxbaria,  Gliraria,  and

a.  Ltporaria.  The  animals  kepi  in  Icpora-
ria  were  chiefly,  I.  Hares  and  rabbits  (Upom).

2.  Various  species  of  deer  {oerjri,  eapnat,  orygtt).

3.  Wild  boars  (opn),  and  under  the  tame  tato-
gory  rank,  i.  Bees  (apa).  fi.  Snails  (cooUooo).
G.  Dormice  (gUret),

B-  /"iseiaue  or  fish-ponds,  divided  into  —

1.  /'■soiiiae  ojiuu  ifHJcii,  fresh-water  panda  i  and

2.  PiMonae  aquat  lahae,  salt-water  ponds.

We  commence  then  with  a  description  of  the
inhabitanu  of  the  CoAort  inploMo  and  Iheii  dwell,
ing.

I.  AvuBia.
I.  a.  CoAors  IS  piano.

In  the  science  uf  rearing  poultry  (Ratio  Coior-
lalii,  ipriBoTpi^ia),  three  precepts  were  of  general
oppliration.  The  birds  were  to  be  kept  scmpuloUBly
clean,  were  to  be  abundantly  supplied  with  fresh
air  and  pure  water,  and  were  to  be  protected  front
the  attacks  of  weasels,  hawks,  and  other  vermin.

of  a  suitable  sitoatinn.  and  by  incessant  aticnlioa
upon  the  part  of  the  superintendents  {cuni/ones,
cuHodei) ;  iTie  latter  was  effected  by  overlaying  the
walls  of  the  honsei  and  courts,  both  inside  and
out,  with  coats  of  smooth  hard  plaster  or  stacco.
and  by  covering  over  the  open  spaces  with  lu^

Again,  the  attention  of  those  who  desired  to  rear
poultry  with  profit  was  chiefly  occupied  by  five
conaiderationi;  1,  The  choice  of  a  good  breedjnr
stock  (dtgaim).  2,  The  impregnation  of  the
hcni  (de  foehtra).  3.  The  management  of  the
eggs  during  incubation  {dt  ora).  *.  The  rearing
of  the  pullets  {de  puilii).  S.  Fattening  them  tor
the  market  {de  firtura),  this  Inst  proecM  being-,
however,  frequently  conducted  not  by  the  fanner
(nutenu),  but  by  persons  who  made  it  their  aole
Uarlom),

i.  U

species  of  domestic  fowls,  the  mmt  important  w

^aJfiuH,  which  were  divided  into  three  cla«ea  :

a.  OaUiaat  Villatioat  a.  Coiorialtt,  the  conunon
chicken,  t.  GaBitut  Afritaaat  a  Nnmidicae,  the
same  ptohahly  with  the  /mAsbtpMh  of  the  Greeks,
the  distinctioDi  pointed  out  by  Colnmella  tcarcely
amounting  to  a  mcific  dijterence  ;  and  e.  GaliJmaa
Suttieai.  The  bat  wen  foond  in  gtnt  abundance
In  the  Iniula  (Jallinaria,  but  it  is  so  diiSadt  to


AGBICULTURA.
icMBBt  baa  the  daenptioni  baniinitted  to  ut


AGRICULTURA.


67


In  diia  itote


■fdia  i(  |iae  diflcnat  fr
J/ntmHt,  ilnjt  icacce  ud  dear,  wen  tmted
■ImI  uietlj  in  tbc  mme  manner  ai  peooKlu,
Bd  Hnr  beame  «f  unporuaoe  to  the  fuiDDr ;  the
Jtuin  in  little  tpoken  af  except  u  ohjecU  of
OMa^,  tai  CoJnmelU  dedam  that  the;  would
■Htncd  in  rgnfintaieot  (n  MrnMe  mum  fietaiU).
We  tWRbi  CDofiiw  <mi  obaerratioiu  to  the  FU-

iMSg  the  bndi  nlebfatcd  fw  Efthting  wen
lit  TiugiMa,  th  Rluidiiii,  and  the  ChBlcideea  ;
Ik  tboc  were  uK  the  nxM  pn^tsble  for  the
^4^M.  The  pointi  o(  tk  good  bojU'doar  fowl  are
latUij  dachbcd  bj  Vanri,  Colomella,  and  Pal-
Uoi,  who  til  agree  in  recnmneDdijig  the  breeder
d  njia  Mch  u  wm  while,  i«  (her  were  mora
ir'JaU  ud  lew  [inUSc  this  thoK  wboie  plomage
m  dadur.  Some  were  permitted  to  roam  abant
(■^a)  luring  the  daj,  and  pick  up  what  thej
nM,  ba  tie  gnaler  lomber  were  analaalJ;
>te  ip  (cIomk)  id  m  pDB]tr;  jard  (oaiiinariuBt,
•fnliiemMr),  whkb  «a>  an  nidoKd  court
(«*(■>)  wiA  ■  wum  aapect,  Mrewed  with  land
'  Mka  wheniB  tbej  mi^bt  wallow,  and  covered
•V  with  a  iKL  It  eoDlaiDed  heD-hoiuea  (nmae)
t>  ■Uch  ihtj  ictlTed  at  night  and  iwxted  upon

:^'HV  acan  (cuMu)  ior  the  laving  hem  being
- ■  ■ ■  ■  1 walla. The wholo eila-

ontivl  of  n  poolUy


'■td.  Tht  inportiaii  of  one  cock  (gatlia)  to
^t  hiM  wai  eomiKUly  obMned,  the  malea  tMt
n^md  iw  beeding  bnng  killed  young  or  made
cu  (HpBi  (tap).  Their  food  coiuifted  of  barlejr
n!)  tk  hn^  lanored  (luniaH  jsuAui),  millet,
fftcfcea^  aod  ^■'^^■i  wboi  theee  articlca  eoold  be
peroiBil  ebeqi^  but  when  too  dear,  the;  were
i^ipiied  with  the  leftue  of  wheat,  bian  with  a
^  at  the  ftom  >J(Mir""g;  the  •eeda  of  cftiioi,
•adtkeUluL

The  bring  acaaoD  began  in  Jannat;  and  con-
■md  mil  Oe  avtmnna  eqninoi.  Fiom  twenty-
t^i  IB  ^Btj  egga,  the  snraber  being  incrcaied  or
^TiaiihfJ  atra^ing  aa  the  weather  wfli  hot  or
old,  wm  ibead  beneath  a  clocking  hen  {gaUima
jtff'ar)  frnn  one  to  two  jean  old,  who  wai  kept
'■^mah  diBt  op  except  at  feeding  time,  or  eren
hciM  with  food  while  m  the  not  The  cuiB-
"*  mUt  hii  rnmda  regularly  during  the  twenty
a.n  ef  iMnhatiim,  tsmiog  the  eggi,  tbsl  tliey
■ia  all  Reeive  equal  heat,  and  rejecting  thoec

RMyifc  SikIi  an  were  not  required  far  hatch-
-*.  wm  jaiaiiiiil  b;  rabbing  them  with  atrotig
.•i;«  lad  iheo  atmii^  them  up  in  chaff  or  bran.
Tst  cUrka  £>r  fifteen  dayt  wen  fed  by  hand  on
ftrsa  viad  Willi  naaturtium  (creai)  leed.

I'lii  1 1  !■  wbrn  &ltaied  for  nle,  wen  abut  up
"  ^A  PVTDW  ciiba,  light  and  motion  being  un-
^'jaabb  u>  the  |itoceai  ;  or  each  bird  waa  iwuis
noriy  in  a  faaakct,  with  a  email  hole  at  each
•3d,  MB  b  the  head,  the  other  for  tbe  mmp,  and
MiU  tpaa  the aofleat  hay tx ehaJ^ but  io


■tote  tbcy  were  crammed  with  wheat,
liuead,  barley  meal  kneaded  with  water  into
email  lumpi  (fuming),  and  other  fariuaceous
food,  the  operation  requiring  from  twenty  to
twenty-fiTfl  daj^  (Var.  iiu  S  ]  Colum,  viii.  2,  &c,
12  ;  Plin,  H.  iV.  1.  21  i  Pallad,  L  2?,  29,)

among  domeatic  poultry  by  Varro  or  ColuDiella,
but  find  a  place  in  the  compilation  of  Palladiua,
who  direct!  that  young  birde,  that  ia,  thote  of  a
year  old,  ehould  be  aclecled  ai  breeders  in  the
propoitiou  of  one  cock  to  two  hcna,  and  that  lbs
^gs  ahould  be  hatched  by  bam-door  fowli.  The
cliicki  were  to  he  fed  for  the  £nl  fortnight  on  cold
boiled  bailey  lightly  iprdnlded  with  wine,  after-
ward! upon  bruiaed  wheat,  locutts,  and  ant'a  eggs,
and  were  to  be  prevented  from  having  acceu  la
water.  Tbey  betama  iat  in  thirty  dayi  if  ahnl  up
and  crammed  with  wbest  Sour  made  up  into  amall
lumpa  (tunauiiu)  wilh  <hL (Pallad.  i.  29.)

' Peacoclu  (jiaoom*,  fum,  paau)  ore  nid  to

been  fint  introduced  aa  an  arucle  of  food  by

Q.  Hortcnaiua  at  a  banquet  aa  the  inatallatiaa  of

lugur  (aufforaii  aditiali  coena). They  ipeedUy


lingle  full-grown  b
watde  of  a  guinea  and  a  half),  and  a  eingle  egg
for  five  (upwards  of  three  aliillingi),  while  one
breeder,  M.  Ao&diat  Lurci,  derived  an  income  of
60,000  watercea  (about  £00^  aterling)  from  Ihii
lourcc  alone.  The  meet  &vouialiIe  aiUmtiaue  for
rearing  peacocki  were  afforded  by  the  amall  rocky
but  well-wooded  ialeta  off  the  Italian  coaal,  where
thej  roamed  in  freedom  without  fear  of  being  loot
or  atoten,  provided  their  own  food,  and  brougnt  up
their  young.  Thoae  peraone  who  could  not  com-
mand BUch  advantage,  kept  them  in  email  en-
doanrea  roofed  over,  or  under  porticoea,  perches
ip&rticae)  being  auppiied  for  them  to  rooat  upon,
with  a  lai^  giaaay  court  in  front,  anrrounded  by  a
high  wall  and  ahaded  by  treea.  They  were  fed
upon  all  kinda  of  grain  but  chiefly  barley,  did  not
'  tullmatnrityforhTcedinguntil  three  years


oU,w


e  eockw


taken  to  supply  each  bird  with  a  separate
nett  {dixnia  cmdtiia).  Tbe  hatching  process  waa
mott  profitably  perfbnoed  by  comioon  bam-door
fowls,  6a  in  this  way  the  pea-hen  laid  three  times
in  a  season,  firat  £ve  ^ge  (oea  pavonina)^  then
fonr,  and  lailly  two  or  Ihrcc,  but  if  allowed  to  in-
cubate herself  could  rear  only  ouo  brood.  In  the
time  of  Vano,  three  chicks  (patli  panmaii)  for
each  fuU-grovni  bird  were  coniidered  a  fair  return.
(Varr.  iil  6  ;  Cokm.  viil  U  ;  PaUad.  L  2S  ;
Plin.  t  20  i  comp.  Juv.  1 143.)

S.  Oeeia  (aiuerei)  were  easily  reaied,  but  were
not  very  profitable  and  somewhat  troubleaomc,  for
a  running  stream  or  a  pond  with  a  good  supply  of
herbage  was  essential,  and  they  could  not  be
turned  out  to  graze  in  the  vicinity  of  growing  crops,
which  they  ton  up  by  the  roota,  at  the  uunc  time
deatroying  vegetation  by  their  dung.  Birds  for
breeding  wen  always  selected  of  a  large  size  and
pun  white,  the  grey  variety  {varii  ml  faicC)  being
regarded  as  inferior  on  the  scpposition  that  they
-e  nearly  allied  to  the  wild  species.  Their
siated  of  clover,  fenugreek,  lettuce,  to-
ith  leguminous  plants,  all  of  which  were
their  use,  and  especislly  an  herb  called
aJpii  by  the  Oreeki,  which  aeemi  to  have  been


68  AGRICULTURA.

H  urt  oF  eiidiTC  ImpngnaCion  took  placa  sbont
mid-winter,  one  gander  being  allowed  to  thr^e
femiJe*,  who  when  the  laying  leason,  which  wm
fBjly  irx  ApTiDg,  mi^iroached,  were  ahut  ap  in  &  atmc-
ture  (x^yofomttiov)  comisticg  of  a  court  {ooAort\
BUtTOunded  \j  a  hi^h  wall  with  a  portico  inflida
contAining  Mcepladts  (Aarae,  celiac,  rp^imcae\
from  two  to  three  feet  tqoaK,  built  of  faewn  ttooa
or  biick,  well  lined  wltli  ehafi^  for  the  eggL  In-
cubstioDi  ocGO'diiig  to  the  weather,  luled  from
twenty-fire  to  thirtr  dayi,  during  which  period  the
mothen  wcte  lapplied  by  the  cnatoe  with  baricy
cnuhcd  in  water.  The  goilingi  mnained  ia  the
hoiue  for  abont  ten  dayi,  and  were  fed  upon  po-
lenta, poppy  «ed,  and  green  crenci  ((HMtertiiua)
chipped  in  water,  after  which  they  were  token  out
in  fine  weather  to  feed  in  monhy  mcndowi  and
poolA.  It  woA  found  in  practice  moat  adTantageoni
to  employ  bam-door  bcu  to  hatch  iha  eggi,  iince
they  mode  more  carefal  motherg  ;  and  in  thii  owe
the  gooH  would  by  three  time*  in  a  leoaon,  lirit
five  egn,  then  four,  and  laatly  three.

Goilmgi,  when  from  fonr  to  >ii  monthi  old,
were  >hnt  up  to  btl«n  in  dadc  warm  coopi  (»i^'-
ioriitm),  where  they  wera  fed  with  barley  pottage
and  fine  Sonr  moiitened  with  water,  being  allowed
to  eat  and  drink  three  timei  a  day  as  much  ob
they  could  iwallow.  In  thii  way  they  became  fit
tot  the  market  in  two  months  or  leoa.  A  flock  of
■e  fomiihed  not  only  egvi  but  feathera  alio,  for
,  xi  plnck  Uiem  twica  a  year,  in
■pring  and  antnnm,  and  <tbi>  feathers  were  worth
BTe  denarii  (about  three  ibiUingt  and  fonrpence)  a
pound.  (Varro,  iiL  10 ',  Colmn.  mi.  13  ;  Plin.
H.  N.x.2i;  Fallad.  L  30.)

6.  Ducks  (iwalst).  The  duck-bouse  (rnaa^
Tpo^tar)  was  more  cottly  than  the  chenoboicium,
for  within  its  limit*  were  confined,  not  only  docks,
but  qnerqnedulae,  phalerides,  boaouies  (whaCerer
thne  may  hare  been),  and  similar  birds  which
seek  their  food  in  pools  and  swamps.  A  fiat  piece
of  ffTonnd,  if  possible  marshy,  was  surrounded  by  a
waJl  fifteen  feet  high,  well  stuccoed  vilhin  and
without,  along  the  course  of  which  upon  an  ele-
vated ledge  (etvpido)  a  series  of  coveied  nests
(beta  cMlia)  were  fbrmed  of  hewn  alone,  the
whole  open  space  above  being  covered  over  with  a
net  or  trellice  wor^  (datrit  K^ieTjxmtia).  A  thai'
low  pond  (^nsctaa)  was  dug  in  the  oentre  of  the
encloam^  the  margin  formed  of
planted  round  with  il
■mall  stream  which  U
csnsl  into  which  was  thrown  food  for  the  inmates,
consisting  of  wheat,  barley,  millet,  aconu,  grape
skins,  smalt  crsba  or  cray  fish,  and  other  water
animals.  The  eggs  were  genemlly  hatched  by
common  hens,  the  precautions  taken  during  lacu-


I.  b.  Colia^anam,
Pigeons  (eoIunAiit,  coiamta).  Varro  diatin-
guisbes  two  species  nr  Tarieties,  the  one  Gmw
mupatUe  0.  c^^reste,  probably  the  ColatAa  Uvia  of
naturalists,  which  was  shy  and  wild,  living  in
lofty  torrets  {tabiijnet  turriadat),  fiying  abroad
without  restraint,  and  generally  of  a  dtrkiah  colour,
dappled,  and  without  any  admixture  of  white,  the
at£^  kind  more  lame  (cfeneatnu),  feeding  abont  iha
doora  of  thebnn,  and  for  the  most  part  white.  Be-


3S  ;  through  this  flon


AORICULTURA.
tweoi  tbiee  a  cross  breed  (nucaOiin)  wis  tnally
reared  for  the  market  in  a  lofty  edifice  (rtpun.
poTpe^ar  ;  wipiartptini),  csasttncted  for  the  pv-
pose. These bnildings,  placed  under  the  chaija
of  a  aobtaiariui,  were  firequently  large  eaoigh  ts
contain  £000,  were  vaulted,  or  roofed  in  wiUi  dUs,
and  fiimished  with  one  small  entrance,  but  well
lighted  by  means  of  huge  baired  or  latticed  win-
dows  (/suifnM  nnuxBUB,  a  ntiadatae). The
walls,  carefully  itoccoed,  were  lined  fnai  tup  u
bottom  with  luwi  of  round-shaped  nesti  with  a
single  small  aperture  (nobsiAarta),  often  fiimied  of
eonhenwore  fjiciilia),  one  being  assigned  to  tvery
pair,  while  in  front  of  each  mw  a  plank  was  placed
upon  which  the  birdsalighted.  A  copons  supply  of
finh  water  was  introduced  for  drinking  and  wash-
ing ;  their  food,  consisting  of  the  refuse  of  wheat
(ficntefrtfia),  millet,  vetches,  peas,  kidney-hama,
and  other  leguminous  seeds,  was  placed  in  asmw
troughs  ranged  round  the  walls,  and  filled  by  pipes
from  without. Thue  pigeons,  which  were  kept  in
the  country,  being  allowed  to  go  out  and  in  it  will,
supported  ibemsdvei  for  a  great  part  of  the  year
upon  what  they  picked  up  in  the  fields,  and  woe
regulariy  fed  (ocwpduU  amdilica  cAarid}  for  two
or  three  months  only  ;  bnt  those  in  or  near  i  town
were  confined  in  a  great  measure  to  the  wEpiOTipo-
Tpo^Ibr,  lest  they  should  be  snared  ck*  dntroyed.
They  wei«  very  fraiCful,  since  one  pair  would  tear
eight  broods  of  two  each  in  the  course  of  a  year,
and  the  young  birds  (.jmlli)  very  speedily  arrived
at  maturity,  and  began  forUiwith  to  lay  m  their
tnm. Those  set  aaide  for  the  mai^cet  hod  their
wbg  feathers  plucked  out  and  their  legs  teoken,
and  were  then fattened upon  white  br«»d pre-
TJonsiy  chewed  (mmdacalo  antdidQ  fimioit  fUBw) ,
A  handsome  pair  of  breeding  pigems  of  a  aood
stock  would  fetch  at  Home,  to^L^rds  the  close  of  the
repuhhc,  two  hundred  sesterces  (upwards  of  a  guinea
and  a  half)  ;  if  rema^ably  fine,  as  high  as  a  thou-
sand (nearly  eight  guineas)  ;  and  as  much  as  six-
teen hundred  (more  than  thirteen  pounds)  was  a
price  sometimes  asked,  while  Columella  speaks  of
four  thousand  (upwards  of  thirty  pounds)  having
been  given  in  his  time ;  and  some  persona  were
said  to  have  a  hundred  thousand  (nearly  a  thoa-
sand  pounds  sterling)  invested  in  this  kind  of  pro-
perty. The  instinct  which  teaches  pigeons  to  re-
turn to  the  place  where  they  have  been  fed  wss
remarked  by  the  ancients,  who  were  wont,  for  tha
sake  of  amusement,  to  bring  them  to  the  theatre*
and  then  let  them  loose. (Varr,  iil  7  ;  Colum.
viiL  8  1  Plin.  H.  N.  x.  £3,  7i,  zi.  64,  iviii.  42  :
Pallad.  i  24.)

I.  e,  OnsitiaB,  Aeiariam  {hfntarfnf^r),
OmithoHct,  in  the  restricted  sense,  went  di-
vided into  two  clasi«s:  1,  Those  constructed  for
pleasure  merely  being  designed  for  the  reception  of
nightingales  and  other  singing  birds.  2.  rhoM  for
profit,  in  which  tbounndi  of  wild  birds  were  cod-
fined  and  fattened.  Varro  gives  a  very  curioua  and
minute  desmption  of  an  omithon  belonging  to  th.o
first  class,  which  he  himself  possessed,  and  Lu-
cullus  endeavoured  to  combine  the  enjoyment  of
both,  for  he  had  a  triclinium  constructed  in  hia
Tuscnlsn  vilhi  inside  of  on  omithon,  delighting  to
behold  one  set  of  birda  placed  upon  ^e  table  ready
for  his  repeat,  while  othera  were  flutleting  at  Uio
windows  by  which  tlie  room  was  lightM.  Omi-
thones  of  the  second  doss,  with  which  alona  we  are


AORICDLTURA.
>t  pRMDtcawcnwd.  were  kept  bj  poulUien  (maal-
ItUTi),  and  Mhcn  in  the  city,  but  the  greater  duo
bo  «tn  (inated  in  S•LbiIla^^  becuiM  thni*h<
w«n  maM  atniDdant  in  that  t^odl  These  huge
atnwat  fimtei  by  aieloBDg  ■  (pace  of  gimind
rttli  hich  waUM  and  afreriii^  il  in  witli  u>  uthed
noL Wat^  ni  iatJDduced  by  ppco,  and  cou-

n«  fcw  and  amU,  tLat  light  miglit  be  excluded
u  BBcfc  ■■  poHible,  and  thit  the  jHiuDen  might
Ht  pine  fnCB  knAiiig  oat  opon  the  apea  coimtiy,
viae  llieir  aatc*  wtn  cnjiTiis  finedDm.  Indeed,
w  ■.■aiiiw  wn«  thniihei,  and  u  apt  to  deipond
■Wa  &nt  taagbt,  that  it  ml  the  ptBciiea  Id  ihut
tbfB  Dp  ftir  oome  lime  with  other  lame  indiridualfl
■-  their  own  kind  {vedvaJa)^  who  acted  ofl  decoys


the  iBieniT  of  tbla  hnildtng  nmnerooa  Makei(^i)
nte  fixed  Ofright,  npon  wUch  the  birdi  might
•littt :  ledft  pclea  i1b  (jierlicae)  wen  imnged  in
01  indiaed  poeitiop  teoting  ogainat  the  walU  with
^on  Bailtd  in  nwi  acRMi,  and  lofti  were  coa-
Kntiei,  oil  fiir  the  nme  putpoML  Two  imaller
B  atoched,  one  ui  which  the  nper-
kr)  denisted  the  birdi  which  died
._,  in  eM«  that  he  might  be  able  to
W  will)  hi!  maitei,  the  other,  called
. ._.  ikatim  with  the  great  ball

a  d«w,  into  wbtch  tboM  birdi  wanted  for  the
lattft  wm  diiTcn  from  time  to  time,  aad  killed
■a  if  «[^  leal  tbe  otliei*  might  droop  onwitnew-
ki  Ae  bie  of  tbeir  ewnpanioni.

KiBet  and  wild  bemei  were  given  &eely,  but
t^eir  chief  Ibod  eoniitted  of  drj  figi  corefally
pnjed  {^m^emter  fomta)  and  kneaded  with  bi  or
pOra  Tttut  tnmS  lamp*,  which  were  chewed  by  pei-
•«  hired  to  paibcin  ihii  oneniiDn.  The  birda
mlly  kept  in  an  omithon  bave  been  mentioned
uwe.  bat  oT  ibeae  by  fiu-  the  m«t  important  were
ihmfcea,  which  made  their  a^ieaiance  jn  vaat
BKki  about  the  Temil  equinox,  and  uem  to  hiTS
bc^  in  ||i**t  reqoext ;  for  out  of  a  lini^le  otLabliah-
in  the  ^me  of  Varro,  five  thouiaiid


three  drcBarii  a  head,  ihni  yiddingi
■aOfttta,  abnnt  five  handrcd  poondi  iLerliiii;.

The  !■■ bom  omhhoBei  amtaining  thruihea

Bad  Uailhiidi  waa  not  only  a  powerful  ilimalint
H  thr  lail,  bat  wai  giien  ai  tooA  to  oxen  and  pigi,
who  &ximed  m  it  rapidly.

Taitle  dom  {hirtvtt,  dim.  iarlat^lat)  belonged
19  the  daaa  which  did  not  lay  egga  in  cwtinty
-aiv  ponl  nee  tEdMdil\  and  coBBeqnently,  oi
ma  ai  (SBf^t,  were  put  up  to  fitten  {vjatara
it*  m  BapHmr  Jartxrat  i4t^malitr).  Ther  were
ht  howler  eonGned  in  an  ordinary  omitaon  but
k  a  baildinif  aimHir  to  a  doTC-cote,  with  thla  dif-
■nam,  that  the  interim',  initcad  of  being  fitted  up
nth  ealamharia,  ciRittuoed  rowt  of  bracket!  (taate-
uL  m  abort  dalu*  projeeiin^  horiiontall  j  bsta  the
»n  and  luing  tier  abore  Dec  Orer  each  row,
>e  \rwt»  of  wbidi  WM  three  feet  frran  the  gronnd,
'■ ■" ■  ■■ ■ eilrelched.


1  which  the  bird)  rtpoied  day  and  night,
-■f*  WBC  drawn  t^ht  in  front  to  prevent  tnem
'■-n  Ijmg  aboot,  which  wonld  haie  rendered  them
1^  TM?r  ^ttohed  readily  in  harveal  time,  de-
'  A6af  aut  in  dry  wheat,  of  which  one-half
z  >liai  per  day  WBl  nflicicnl  f«  130  tultleo,  or  in
-  Cit  luiitaied  with  iweet  wine.  (Varr.  to.  9  ;
rWm.  TiiL  9  ;  PalM.  I  23  ;  Plin.  Tl.N.  x.  21,


AORICULTUHA.  Gi

34.35,53,58,74;  comp.  Plant  iWoAfl.  i.  1.4*  ;
Ju..  yi.  3ti.)

II,  ViViRM.

II.  a,  Leporaria.
Leporaria  anciently  weie  amoU  walled  paddockl,
planted  thickly  wiihihrubito  giie  ohelter  ;  and  in-
leaded,  ai  the  name  impUei,  lor  the  reception  of
onimali  of  the  hoie  kind  j  til  1.  The  cotamon  grey
■gajna).  2.ThsiDaun-
Alpa,  seldom  brought
3.  Rabbit!  (awKafi).
>f  Spain.  Theee,  at  leait
tbe  fini  and  thir^  bred  rapidly,  were  caught  occa-
lionallj",  ihut  np  in  boic*,  fotteiied  and  told.  Ill
proceai  of  time,  the  name  l^toranum  wai  changed
for  the  more  appropriate  term  ^TjptoTpo^fhif,  since
a  Tsriety  of  wild  mimala,  inch  u  bean  (opn),
nagi  (ocrni),  and  roe  deer  Icapnae),  were  pro-
cured from  the  hunter  (pcmror),  and  ehaC  up  in
theia  porko,  which  now  embraced  lereral  acree
eren  in  Italy,  while  in  the  provinceo,  espedaily
Tiaiualpine  Qanl,  they  frequently  comprehended
a  rircuit  of  many  milei  of  bill  and  iwamm  glade
and  f6t«t  Thii  iince  wai,  if  pouible,  fenced
b?  a  wall  of  ttane  and  lime,  or  of  unliumt  brick
and  day,  or,  where  the  extent  rendered  eren  the
iatterCoocoelly,by  a  strong  pding  (eawrra)  formed
of  n;»ight  stakes  (itiptia)  drilled  with  holes  (;Mr
laita  ^bnu/iir),  through  which  poles  (onttes)  were
paiied  horizontally,  the  whole  of  oak  or  cork  tree
timber,  braced  and,  ai  it  were,  latticed  by  plonki
nailed  diagonally  (jen'j  rrojunfnu  eiatmn),  much
in  the  faihion  of  wooden  hurdlea,  Even  in  tho
largest  eadoimn  it  wu  ncceosary  to  support  the
onimali  in  winter,  and  in  thoM  of  moderate  size
they  were  frequently  tamed  to  soch  on  extent,  that
they  would  ouemble  at  the  SDund  of  a  ham  to  re-
ceive their  food.  (Voir.  iii.  12  ;  Colum.  ix.  1  ;
Plin.  H.  .V.  riii  52.)

Beea  (apa).  The  delight  experienced  in  the
management  of  these  creatures  is  suflicjently  proved
by  the  space  and  cnre  devoted  to  the  subject  in
Viigil,  and  by  the  singularly  minute  initiuctions
contained  in  tbe  agricultural  writers,  especially'  in
Columellt,  who  derived  his  meteriali  from  tbe  still
more  elaborate  compilatious  of  Hyginui  and  Ccl-
■no,  the  former  beuig  the  aalhor  of  a  n^bir  bee
calendar,  in  which  the  various  precepts  for  ihe
guidance  of  the  bee  fancier  {mtlhriiH,  qptoriw,'
litXrroiipfii,  nxjijniyiu)  were  arranged  in  regular
Older  according  to  the  teaioni  and  dayi  of  the  year.
The  methodi  which  the  ancicnti  describe  differ
little,  even  in  triHin^  details,  from  thoie  followed  by
onnelTU,  although  m  some  respects  our  practice  ii
inferior,  jince  they  never  deitrojed  a  hive  for  the
sake  of  ill  contenU,  but  abstracted  a  portion  of  the
honey  only,  always  leaving  a  sufficient  supply  for
ihc  support  of  the  insect!  in  winter  ;  and  the  same
swarm,  occasionally  reinforced  by  young  recruits,
might  thus  continue  for  ten  yeari,  which  wai  re-
garded as  the  limit  Our  luperior  knowledge  of
Ltnnd  histocy  has  however  enabled  ui  to  dcler-
ine  that  the  chief  of  the  hive  ii  always  a  female,
it  a  male  (rex)  ai  wea  the  general  belief ;  lo  ascer-
tain the  respective  duties  performed  by  the  queen,
Ihe  working  beeB,and  dronrs  (fiid  i.Jiirti\  which
were  unknown  or  confounded  ;  and  to  reject  iho
absurd  &ncy,  to  which  however  we  are  indebted
for  the  most  charming  epiiode  in  the  Gegrgici,
which  originated  with  the  Greeks,  and  u  repeated


with  nnlientBdiig


AGRICULTURA.

^  fiith  b;  aliDMt  e'
might  be  produced  I


of  w  ox
id  heucv  tb«y  m


genemtioD  fmm  the

(&r  bulmlit  oirport  puinfacto  :

cdmmonl)-  lenued  fiimyiras  by  ihe  pocli,  and  by

ArcheUua  floit  $fli^JiT)s  irnrenyti™  t/k™).

Tbe  early  RoioBiu  plsced  the  hivei  in  nichei,
hollowed  out  of  the  walli  of  the  faim-hou»  ilielf;
:r  tho  ehf  1t«r  of  the  eaves  {subUr  9iihffnindat\


but  in  later  t

■  regnlar  apiary  [op


f-«,), .


iHfn,  Toe^iarii


u  to  yield  5001)  pounds  of  honey  in  a  Kajwn.
Tbii  wu  a  tmall  enclosure  in  the  immediate
vitinilj'  of  the  'ilia,  in  a  warm  and  ahcltered  ipot,
aa  little  dubjert  aA  pouible  to  great  Tariations  of
tempomture,  or  (0  duturbancCB  of  any  dracriptinn
from  Ibc  ilcmenti  or  from  animals  ;  and  carefully
removed  from  the  influence  of  fnelid  eihalaiionn,
rach  a«  might  proceed  from  bathe,  kitihcni,  ttalile*,
duiighilla,  or  tbe  like.  A  supply  of  pure  water  voa
provided,  and  plantations  were formed  of  those

especially  the  cyCinu  and  Chyme,  the  former  aft
being  condariTe  to  the  health  of  bees,  the  latter  as
alfoniing  Ihe  greatest  quantity  of  honer  {aplinimuni
ad  mlificiwn).  Tbe  jew  wai  carefully  aioidcd,
not  became  in  itself  noiious  to  the  swann,  but  be-
cause the  honey  made  from  it  was  poisoT


(aln.


at.) The  hive


;  of  brie


du«g  („  ji^), if  m


cable,  and  ihesi


T  baked


■e  hollowed  out  of
a  solid  block,  or  formed  of  boards,  or  of  wicker
work,  or  of  bnrk,  or  of  earthenwarr,  tbe  last  being
accounted  the  worst,  because  jnnre  easily  aflecled
by  heat  or  cold,  whilo  those  of  cork  were  accounted
best. They  were  perforaled  with  two  email  holes

with  nioveabto  tops  to  enable  the  mclluius  to  in-
spect the  interior,  which  was  done  three  times  n
month,  in  spring  and  summer,  for  the  purpose  of
removing  any  tiUh  which  migbl  have  accumulated,
or  any  worms  that  might  have  found  entrance  ;  and

shore  another,  care  bemg  taken  that  there  sbonld
nut  be  more  than  three  rows  in  all,  and  that  the
lowest  row  should  rest  upon  a  stone  parapet,  ele-
vated three  feel  fnjm  the  gronnd,  and  coated  with
smooth  stucco  to  prevent  liiatds,  snakes,  or  other
noxious  animals  from  climbing  up.

When  the  season  for  swarming  airived,  the
movements  which  indicated  the  approaching  de-
pBtture  of  a  colony  (ejmaat)  were  watched  un-
remittingly, and  when  it  was  acttuilly  thrown  off,
they  were  deterred  from  a  long  flight  by  costing
dust  upon  them,  and  by  tinkling  sonnda,  being
at  tbe  tame  time  tempted  to  alight  upon  some
neighbouring  branch  by  rubbing  it  with  bnim
sfruni,  fitXi^iri'pv^iXoi'f  s.  tii^xvov,  a  fuXU
ott),  or  any  sweet  substance.  When  Ihejr
nan  all  collected,  they  were  qnietly  transferrrd  to
a  hive  similarly  prepimid,  and  it  they  showed  any
dii inclination  lo  enter  were  urged  on  by  iniround-
ing  them  with  a  little  smoke

If  quarrchiome,  their  pugnacity  was  repressed
by  sprinkling  them  with  honey  water  (ms/io) "
laiy,  they  were  tempted  out  by  placing  the  awi
smelling  plants  they  most  loved,  chiefly  aniaitrum
•r  thyme,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  lite  bivo.


AGHICULTURA.

fnmigatiai

quence  of  the  presence  of  two  pretendera  to  the
throne,  the  rivals  were  canght,  examined,  and  tha
least  promising  put  to  death.  In  bad  wektber,
those  stricken  down  and  disabled  faj  cold  or  sudden
rain  were  tenderly  collected,  |daced  in  ■  spot
warmed  by  artificial  heat,  and  as  they  revived  laid
down  before  their  hives.  When  the  weather  for
any  length  of  time  prevented  them  firan  goinjr
ibroad,  they  were  fed  upon  honey  and  water,  or
ipon  figs  biuled  in  must  and  pounded  into  a  paste.
The  honey  harvest  (ndfatio,  melUs  cunfsmo,
otstraiio  o/ivrvn,  diet  cusfrdnr'i,  /icAiTBririi),  ac-
cording to  Vnrro,  took  place  three  times  a  year,
but  more  usually  twice  only,  in  June  and  October ;
on  the  lint  visitation  four-firihs,Bt  tbe  secona  two-
thirds  of  the  honey  was  abstiBcled  ;  but  these  pro-
portions varied  much  according  to  the  season,  aiid
'  itrength  of  the  particular  hive.  The  syilem
led  was  tei;  simple :  the  moveable  top  was
1  off,  or  a  door  contrived  in  the  side  opened,
■ees  were  driven  away  by  a  smoking  apparatus,
the  mellarius  cut  ont  with  peculiarly  formed
knives  as  much  of  the  conteots  as  he  thought  fit.
Thecomb  (/utwi,irt|filDi'),  which  wastheproduct
of  their  industry,  was  composed  of  wax  (oeni,nipbs)
formed  into  hcuBgonal  cell!  (set  aitff*lu  ctUa),  tbe
geometrical  odvaotngei  of  which  were  soon  dis-
covered by  mathematicians,  conntining  for  the  most
part  honey  (me/,  n^M),  but  also  the  more  solid
sweet  substance  commonly  called  bee-bread  {pn>-
polit,  irpdroAir),  the  classical  name  being  derived,
it  is  said,  from  the  circumslaoce  that  it  ii  found  in
enlrance. The  eonibs


greatest  abundance  near  1

were  cemented  together,  and  tne  crences  ui  tne
hive  daubed  over  with  a  glutinous  gum,  the  erithnco
(_ipiSijni)  of  VtUTO  and  his  Greek  aothorllies,
which  seeini  tn  be  tha  same  with  what  ii  else-
where termed  meflirro  {tttkiTtefxa).

Colamelhi  and  Palladius  describe  ingenious  plana
for  geuing  possession  of  wild  swaims  {apet  ^ra-
hiu,/r™e,  ™s(i«ie,  as  opposed  to  uriooae,  nmres)  ;
and  Plmy  notices  the  humble  bees  which  con-
structed their  nests  in  the  giwind,  bat  teem*  to
suppose  that  they  were  fecaliar  to  a  district  in
Asia  Minor.  The  marks  which  distinguish  the
varieties  of  the  domestic  species  will  be  found  de-
tailed by  the  dltferent  authorities  quoted  below.

59,  60,  V.  10,  il;Var.  ii  5, 'iiL  3,  IS;  Virg.  Ceojp.
i»,  ;  Colum.  it  8.  Ac.,  xl  2  ;  Plin.  H.  A'.  li.  5,
&C. ;  Pallad.  i.  37—39,  iv.  15,  v.  8,  vi.  10,  viL  7,
ii.7,  iLl3.iii.  8.)

Snailt  (cDcifeaa).  Certain  species  of  snuis  wete
&vcurite  articles  of  food  among  the  Romans,  und
were  used  also  medicinallv  in  diseases  of  the  lungs
and  inlestinea.  The  kinds  most  prized  were  thns.^
from  Rcste,  which  were  small  and  white  ;  thns?
from  Africa  of  middling  size,  nnd  very  ^lilfid  ;
those  called  loUbnutr,  also  (rom  Africa,  hinter  than
the  former  ;  and  those  from  Illyrio,  which  were  the
hugcttofaiL  The  placewherelhcy  were  preserved
(encHearium)  was  sheltered  trem  the  sun,  kept
moist,  and  not  covewd  over,  nor  walled  in,  but
snmninded  by  water,  which  prevented  the  escape
of  the  inmates  who  were  vely  prolific,  and  required
nothing  except  a  few  lanrel  leaves  and  a  liitlo
bran.  They  were  fattened  by  shutting  them  up
in  a  jar  imeered  with  boiled  must  and  flonr,  and
perforated  with  holei  to  admit  air. It  has  been


AORICULTUBA.


■a  cBDrtracted,  mr  Taniamii,  tbe  firat  cocb-
nrima  erer  fbniRd  ia  Italy*  ■  «hort  time  before
ibtnTanrbetinenCKiu  mud  Pamper.  (Van.
EiH;  Flin.  H.  N.  ii.  S6,  ui.  7,  15;  comp.
:nIlHL  ^ag;  93.)

Donain  (^Um)  wera  regarded  u  articia  of
fA  haory  tbat  tbeir  nn  u  food  iru  forbidden
m  the  iBiBpaHrj  lawi  of  tbe  more  rigid  comon  ;
In.  BMimiuiaiuliiig,  a  p&niruni  became  a  com-
B^  appendage  to  a  rilLi.  It  vu  a  itiiBll  •paa
vf  jneokd  nnniiided  witb  a  nrawtbirallafpoliibed
or  lULLunl  ilDiie,  planted  with  Bfom-be^ng  tr«a
M  jMd  losd.  and  coDlaining  halei  (nan)  fin  rear-
bf  ibe  TBOnit.  Tbej  wen  fallened  up  in  earthen
^  (Mis)  nir  a  peculiar  amnruction,  apon  cheit-
psB.  wabou,  and  acsnu.  (Vair,  iiL  15  ;  Plin.
L  58,  liiL  69  ;


II.  LPucwu.

LiMIt,  ve  mar  nj  a  Cew  word*  npoii  artificial

tth  pood*,  which  were  of  two  kindi — fieahwatei

paodt (fiatmac dt/ca),  and nit  waler ponds

Tbe  fbcner,  from  an  esii;  period,  bad  Iicqncnt];
bees  auadied  la  ordinarjr  fiumi,  and  pnved  a
■once  of  gain  ;  tbe  latter  were  unknown  until  die
hit  balf  eenlni7  of  the  repoblie,  were  mete  ab-
Jr^  if  Jiunry,  and  were  confined  far  the  taost  part
I*  ike  licbeal  mcmberm  of  tbe  community,  to  manT
of  vbam.  Bach  ai  Hiinu,  Pbilippni,  LucuIIua,  and
lluVnune,  wbo  an  meeringlT  termed  piwditarii
br  Cicmi,  tber  became  objecti  of  intcnjc  inteir^t.
TkeaF  mcptaelei  were  conitncted  at  a  nit  coel
wi  tbe  Ra-eoast,  a  lUcceBion  being  frequently
traid  (or  diflercnl  kmdi  of  liih,  and  the  moat
ia«eaiooi  and  elaborate  contricancet  proiidcd  for
tbe  admnvioD  of  the  tide  at  jianinilar  periods,  and
fit  npilaiing  the  temperature  of  Ibe  water  ;  laige


1 for  the  I


k.  with  whicb


nn  filled,  eomiMinfc  chieSy  of  mulled  and  mu-
ta«iae  ;  and  a  bcafy  eipenH  wu incotTcd  in
ling  tbem,  iar  fiibermen  were  regularly
■  ■ '  *  "  fty  for  their  food,  and

permit  mch  mppljet  to

in  the  maritcL  Tor  tbe  moil  pert  they
yMord  DO  retain  whatenr,  daring  the  lifetime  at
kaH  at  the  pnpneton,  for  the  inmnlei  were  re-
faided  ai  peU,  and  fte<[aentJy  became  lo  tame  ai
t*  ■anr  to  tl>e  Toice  and  tat  fnm  the  hand.
WIhs  aaka  did  take  place  the  prion  wen  reiy
bitA.  Tbn*  Himi,  who,  an  one  occaiion,  Int
Ctimr  MM  amiaenae,  at  a  (abNqoetil  period
rtfinfil  4,000,000  of  leitercei  (npwardi  of
JOMH-y  for  an  ordinuy  nlla,  chiefly  in  conie-
qaeacB  at  the  pondi  and  the  quantity  of  Gib  they

A  cEflaJB  Serghu  Orata,  a  abort  time  before  the
3Canic  War,  Raimd  artificial  oyiter-bedi  (n«nia
a0Mr«i*}  Am  which  he  obtained  a  large  revenue.
H*  Int  ai  I  ti  i1  and  eitabliibed  tbs  iDperiorily  of
c4*  akeil-fiah  from  the  Lnerine  Lake,  which  haTe
a'waya  Bainlained  their  celebri^,  althoogfa  under
abc  eapire  lev  esteemed  than  thoee  from  Britain.
(Varc  It.  A  iiL  17  ;  Cohun.  tiiL  1€,  17  i  Plin.
ff.  JV.  ix.  S4,  55  ;  Cie.  od  AH.  i.  19.)

Of  Bodan  tnatiaea  coaDectad  with  the  nibject
<f  tUi  article  the  moat  important  ia  Dich»n'i
7  of  iba  AndenU,*' 3  mil,  Sm  1786,


AORIMENSORES.  71

tbe  work  of  a  Scotch  clergyman,  who  vh  well
acquainted  with  the  pmclical  detajli  of  agriculture
and  wbo  had  nadied  the  Latin  wriUn  with  great
care,  but  whole  icbolanhip  wai  luifoctanately  n
imperfect  that  he  waa  in  many  inatanca  unable  to
interpret  correctly  their  expreaiiona.  Many  nie-
fo]  and  acute  obterrationi  will  be  found  in  the  '
"  Economia  Politique  del  Rammni "  by  Donas
da  la  Nalle,  2  tomei,  8vo.  Parii,  iSlO,  buthe  atao
ii  &r  fmm  boing  accurate,  and  be  ia  emborraaaed
throughout  by  very  crroneoni  viewi  with  regard  to
the  rate  of  inteieit  among  the  Romani,  and  by  the
lingnUr  miaconeeption  that  bom  the  eipoluon  of
tbe  kings  until  the  end  of  the  aecond  Punic  war,
the  law  forbade  any  Roman  dtiien  to  poaieaa  more
than  7  jugen  of  land.  (Vol.  ii.  p.  2.)  Theae  who
desire  to  compare  tbe  anriculture  of  modem  Italy
with  ancient  uiagea  will  do  well  to  consult  Arthur
Young's  "  Traidi  in  Italy,"  and  tbe  Appendii  of
Symondi ;  the  "  Agricnltnre  Tosane  "  of  J.  C.  L.
Simonde,  Bto.  O^iiie,  1 801 ;  and  "  Leltn  ferita
d'ltalie  i  Chariea  Pictet  par  M.  Lollin  de  Cha-
teanTieux."  Sto.  Faria.  2nd  ed.  1620.  [W.  R.J
AORIMENSO'RES.  At  the  fbundation  of  a
colony  and  the  aaaignatlun  of  hutdi  tbe  anipicia
were  taken,  for  which  purpoae  the  preaence  of  the
augur  was  neceiaary.  But  the  buiineai  of  tlie
augur  did  not  extend  beyond  the  religiona  part  of

the  land  were  made  by  profeuional  measorera.
Theie  were  the  Fimtora  mentioned  in  tbe  early
writers  (Cic.  c  RaUam,  IL  13  ;  Flautoi,  PoouImi,
Prolog.  49),  who  in  the  later  periodi  were  called
Mensorei  and  Agiimenaoiea.  The  baiineu  of  a
Fiuilor  could  only  be  done  by  a  free  man,  and
the  honourable  nature  of  hii  office  ii  indicated  bjr
the  rule  that  there  waa  no  bargain  for  Ilia  lerricea,
hit  he^  receiied  hii  pay  ui  the  form  of  a  tifL
ippear  alio  to  have  acted  aa  jadieea,
'  'Ui,  in  thoie  diipntci  about
purely  ot  a  tecfajdcal,  not  a


1  of  arbi


boundaries
legnl,  character.

Under  the  rmpire  the  obaerrance  of  the  auqiicei
in  the  fixing  of  cnfflpa  and  the  eatablishment  of
military  coloniei  wai  leai  regarded,  and  the  prac-
tice of  the  Agrimeniorea  wii  reduced  lo  a  lyitem
by  Julius  Frontmni,  Hyginus,  Siculni  Flaccui,  and
other  Oromatic  writers,  ai  tbey  are  lomctimefl
termed.  As  to  the  meaning  of  the  term  Gronia,
and  tbe  denied  wordi,  see  Facciolati,  Lsxicon^  and
the  Index  to  Goesius,  Rti  Affrariat  Scriptora,
The  teschen  of  geometry  in  the  large  citica  of  the
empire  naed  to  giro  practical  inatruction  on  tbe
system  of  gromatice.  Thia  practical  geometry  was
one  of  the  liberalia  itndia  (Dig.  50.  tit.  13.  i.  1) ;
but  the  profnaara  of  geometry  and  the  tenchen  of
law  were  not  exempt^  from  the  obligation  of  bting
tutorea,  and  from  other  nch  burdena  {Frag.  Vat,
§  150),  a  hct  which  showi  the  aubordinate  rank
which  the  leachera  of  elementary  acience  then  held.

The  Agrimenior  could  mark  out  the  limiti  of
the  centunae,  and  restore  the  boundaries  where  they
were  confused,  but  be  could  not  assign  (oii^^iKire)
without  a  commission  from  tbe  emperor.  MDitaiy
personi  of  Tirioos  claaaea  are  alio  sometimes  men-
tioned as  practising  lurreying,  and  Mttling  diiputea
about  boondariea.  The  lower  rank  of  the  pfc^ea-
lional  Agiimenior,  ai  contraitcd  with  tbe  Finitif
of  earlier  periodi,  ia  ihowu  by  the  (act  that  in  the
imperiat  period  there  mieht  be  a  contract  with  aa
~  ' him  fin  hia  aerrica.


AgrinwHor  for  paying  him  te


AGRIONIA.

of  llie  later  period  wu  a


72

The  ~=  .  ,  .

empIoy«l  in  diapatci  ai  to  the  boundariet  of  pro-
penifa.  The  fonndiition  of  coloniea  and  ttie  a*-
ugnatioH  of  landi  wen  now  l«u  common,  thongh
wc  read  of  coloiiiet  being  ettabliahed  to  b  IbM

Eiod  of  the  empire,  and  the  boiuidaiiet  of  the
da  must  have  been  Ht  out  in  due  form.  (H^-
giniu,  p.  177,  ed.  Qoes.)  Thou  who  marked  out
the  i^TOund  in  campa  for  the  soldiiirfl^  tenti  an  aJoo
aiiled  Mentorei,  buithejweremililiiymen.  (Ve-
gctiut,  Dt  Rt  Miiitan,  iL  7.)  The  functioiu  of
the  Agrinienut  arc  iihown  by  a  panagc  of  Hyginua
(£«  Guifnneri.  p.  170) :  in  all  queationi  m  to  deter-
mining boundaries  b;  meuu  of  the  marlu  (tigna),
the  area  of  lorjacea,  and  erphuning  mapg  and  plana,
the  leryieeB  of  the  Agiimenaor  were  required ;  in
all  quntions  that  concerned  property,  right  of  rood,
enjoyment  of  water,  and  other  eaiementa  (aereilatei)
the;  were  not  required,  ibi  Iheie  were  purel;  legal
qneatiani.  Qcneiall;,  thetefnre,  they  were  either
employed  by  the  portiea  themielve*  to  Kttle
boiindariei,  or  they  received  their  initmctiont  for
that  purpoK  from  a  judex.  In  thi>  capacity  ihey
were  adTocalL  But  they  alao  acted  aa  judico,
and  could  fin  a  linDl  deciiion  in  that  clau  of
amaller  qiicstioiu  which  concerned  the  qninquo
pedes  of  the  Mnniilla  Lei  [Lix  Mamilia],  a>  ap-
pciui  fhini  Fioctinua  (pp.  I>3, 75,  ed.  Ooea.).  Under
the  Chriitian  empcron  the  name  Meniorei  waa
changed  into  Agrimenaorea  to  diaCinguiah  ihem
fnm  anoUtei  claia  of  Menaotn,  who  are  mentioned
in  the  codea  of  Theodoaiua  end  Jnitiniao  (vL  34,
ziL  28).  By  a  rescript  of  Conslantine  and  Con-
itana  (a.  d.  344)  the  teachers  and  leamera  of
geometry  received  immunity  from  civil  hurdeiia
According  to  a  coultltution  of  Tbcodasiut  and  Va-
lentinian  (a.  n.  440}  ai  given  in  the  coUection  of
Ooesiuj  (^  344),  they  received  jurisdiction  in  quea-
tiont  of  AUuvio  ;  but  KLdorff  observes,  "  that  the
decisive  words  *  at  judida  agrimenaoris  finiatur,^
and  *  haec  agrimenaorum  semper  esse  judicia  ^  arc  a
apurions  addition,  wbich  is  not  found  either  in  Nov.
Theod.  Tit  20,  nor  in  L.  3.  C.  De  Alluv.  (Cod.
Just.  viL  tit  41)."  According  to  another  conatilu-
tion  of  the  sumo  emperora,  the  Agrimentor  waa  to
receive  on  aureua  from  each  of  any  three  border-
ing proprietora  whoae  boundaries  he  settled,  and  if
he  set  a  limes  right  between  proprietors,  he  re-
ceired  an  aureus  for  each  twelfth  part  of  the  pro-
perty through  which  he  restored  the  limes.  Fur-
ther, by  another  conatitution  of  the  same  emperora
(Ooesiua,  p.  343),  the  young  AKrimensotea  were  to
be  called  "  clarissimi  "  while  they  were  atndeati,
and  when  they  beaon  to  practise  their  pmfeuion,
speclabilei,  Alt  inia,  which  it  repeated  by  modem
writer*,  is  utterly  incredible.  (Rudorff,  p.  420,
&&,  and  the  notes.)

(HodorfT,  Uther  die  FddnuaKr,  Zsitschrift  fUr
GeichithL  Rechtsw.  ToL  x,  p.4I2,aclearBndeiBct
eipoiition  i  Niebuhr,  vol.  ii.  appendii  2  ;  Dureau
de  la  Mnlle,  £nijsamta  Potitiqiie  da  Jioitaais,  vol  i.
p.  i79  1  the  few  mna^  of  the  last  writer  an  of
no  value.)  [0.  L.]

AORIO'NIA  (^TiH^na],  a  featival  which  was
eelebnitcd  at  Orchomeaiu,  in  Boeotia,  in  honour  of
Dionysus,  sunuuned  'Aypt^rus,  It  appears  frem
Plutarch  (Qaoarf.  Rom.  102),  that  this  f«tival  was
iolemnised  during  the  night  only  by  women  and
the  priests  of  Dionymi.  It  consisted  of  a  kind  of
game,  in  which  the  women  for  a  long  time  acted  as
if  isekiiig  Dionyni,  and  at  but  called  oat  to  ono


AQUOTERAS  THUSIA.
another  that  he  had  escaped  to  the  Muiei,  and  had
concealed  himself  with  them.  After  this  they  pre-
pared a  repast ;  and  having  enjoyed  it,  amused
themselves  with  wiving  riddles.  This  featiral  waa
remarkable  for  %  feature  which  provea  its  great
antiquity.  Some  viivins,  who  were  descended  fnuQ
the  Minyans,  and  who  probably  used  to  aascmble
around  Uie  temple  on  the  occasion,  fled  and  were
followed  by  the  priest  armed  with  a  sword,  who
waa  allowed  to  kill  the  one  whom  he  first  caught
Thit  sacrifice  of  a  human  being,  though  originjiUr
it  must  have  formed  a  regular  |«rl  of  the  feativ^
aeemt  to  have  been  avoided  in  later  time*.  One
instance,  however,  occtured  in  the  days  of  Plutarch.
(Quouf.  Graee.  3a.)  But  OS  the  priest  who  had
killed  the  woman  was  afterwards  attacked  by  dia-
ease,  and  several  eiDaordinary  accidents  occurred
to  the  Uinyana,  the  priest  and  hia  family  wero
deprived  of  their  official  functions.  The  festival,
OS  well  aa  ita  name,  is  said  to  have  been  derived
from  the  daughten  of  Minyaa,  who,  after  having
lot  a  long  time  resisted  the  Bacchanalian  &iry,  wera
at  length  aeiied  by  an  invincible  desire  of  eating
human  fieah.  They  therefore  cast  ioU  on  their
own  children,  and  as  tlippasns,  ton  of  Leucippe,
became  the  destined  victim,  they  killed  and  ate
him,  whence  the  women  belonging  to  that  race
were  at  the  time  of  Plutarch  still  called  tha
deatroyen  (AXttai  or  oioXow)  and  the  men
moumen  (<H'U<*'0.  (Miiller.Aw^uqBT,  p.  166.
Slc;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Leirigci  d.  jnttuJiasstfiolaa
AHertASmer  d.  Griaie*,  %  63.  D.  13.) [L.  S.]

AORO'NOMI  (^Tpord/ioi),  are  deuribed  bf
Aristotle  as  the  country  police,  whose  dnties  cor-
responded in  matt  respects  to  those  of  the  attynomi
in  the  city  [ABTyNOMi],  and  who  performed  nearly
the  same  duties  ai  the  hj'lori  (ikapol),  (Polit,  iL
5.)  Ariitolte  does  not  inform  us  in  what  atate
they  eiiated  ;  but  from  the  frequent  mention  of
them  by  Plato,  it  appears  probable  that  they  be-
longed to  Attica.  (Plat.  Li^.  vL  pp.  617,  618  ;
Timacua,  Lei.  I.  v.  and  Ruhnken'a  note,  in  which
scveial  passages  are  quoted  from  PUto.)

AGRO'TERAS  THU'SIA  (iyparipai  Auala),
a  festival  celebrated  every  ycflc  at  Atheni  in  honour
of  Artcmie,  aumomed  Agroteia  (from  STpa,  chase).
It  was  solcmnixcd,  according  to  Plutarch  (Dt  Ma-
Uffn.  Herod.  2G),  on  the  sixth  of  the  mraith  of
Boedromion,  and  consisted  in  a  aoifice  of  £00
goata,  which  continued  to  be  offered  in  the  time  of
Xenophon.  (XenojA.  ..4Kii.  liL  2.  3  13.)  Aelian
(  F.  n.  iL  25}  places  the  festival  on  the  sixth  day
of  Thargelioo,  and  says  that  300  goata  were  sacii-
ficed  J  but  as  the  battle  of  Marathon  which  gavo
rise  to  thit  solemn  tacrifice,  occurred  on  the  sixth
of  Boedromion,  Aelian's  atalcment  appears  to  ba
■nong.  (PluL  De  Glor.  AlieiL  7.)

This  festival  ia  anid  to  have  originated  in  the
fbllnwin);  manner;  — When  the  Fersiana  invaded
Attica,  Callimachus,  the  polcmarch,  or,  according  ta
others,  Miltiadea,  mode  a  vow  to  sacrifice  loArtemi*
Agrolera  aa  many  goati  aa  thero  should  be  enemies
slain  at  Maralhoi;.  But  when  tbenumberofenemics
alaln  waa  so  great,  that  on  equal  number  of  goata
could  not  be  found  at  once,  the  Atheniana  decreed
that  fiOO  should  be  aaerificHl  every  year.  Thia  ia
the  atatement  made  by  Xenophon  ;  but  other  bq-
cient  Buthora  give  different  accounts.  The  Scholiait
on  Aristoph.  (Equil.  666)  relates  that  the  Athe-
nians, before  the  battle,  prouused  to  tacrifica  to
Artemis  ooo  oi  Gir  every  onem;  ^wd  ;  but  vhen


AIKUS  DIKE,

at  azoi  anld  not  be  procured,  Aej
in  equal  aombn:  of  ROiU  [L.  S.]
AOYRMUS  (Ar-Vf^O-  [EL.iramiA.]
AGYRTAE  (Mpni),  muidicaiit  piioU,  who
woe  arcatoaDed  to  tnTel  through  ths  different
Mva*  of  Onto,  niidiing  almi  for  the  godi  whom
tkj  ■erred.  Tbeee  priau  cuned,  either  on  their
•koslda*  or  on  biuti  of  trarthen,  imagea  of  their
■afcctne  deilie&  Tke;  fP^  ^  ''*'*  ''*™  °'
OritoM]  engin,  and  wov  cbiefly  coooected  with
the  mobip  of  Iiii,  Opia  and  Aige  (Herod,  ir.  35),
aad  c^edaHj-  of  the  grtat  mother  of  the  godl ;
tI^kc  tb7  wen  called  it^frfi^ai.  They  were
jRacnDj  ^caking,  penrau  of  the  lowest  and  moat
■>— -*— -*  character.  The}-  imdeitaak  to  inflict
plate  ftrirroiii  bodilj  iDJoij  on  the  enemr  of  anj
iadiiidoal  iriu  paid  theio  for  nieh  aemcei,  and
mm  of  numef ,  1o  ohlaiu
whom  Ihej  lerrcd,  &r
9  indiTidoal  hiuuelf  or
ha  aiMemi  had  nmmitud.  (PlaL  A91.  ii.  p.
Kt,  k  ;  Pin.  S4»^.  c.  3  ;  Zoum.  L  1 1  ;  Max.
Tjt.  liz.  S ;  Athen.  Ti.  p.  266,  d  ;  Oiigen,  e.  Celt.
Lr-Si  PhiL  Z9.  ii.  IL  1 92  ;  Rohnken,  wf  IYmom
p.  kj^finnr  and  twayr/ai  ;  K.  F.  Her-

fl  Italj,  but  at
a,  together  with  the  wuihip
•f  the  gad*  vbaaa  they  •erred.  (Cic  Dt  Leg.  ii.
It;  Rendorfl,  ad  Her.  Strm.  I  2.  Z>

AHE'NDM. [AsNCK.]

AIKlASDlKE(a(irfaf>li[q),>u*etioiibn>aght
B  Athca^  bcfcre  the  emit  tS  the  Fortj  (oJ  rwr-
T^F^Bpra),  apinat  an;  indiTidoal,  who  had  (truck
a  liliaia  ef  liw  alaXe.  Anj  dtiien,  who  had  been
ihaa  nalted,  might  proceed  in  two  wayi  ^uiut
the  iilTiailiin)  party,  either  bj  the  aUiat  iuai,
which  waa  a  pritate  action,  or  bj  the  Stfmi  ffo^rfi,
vbdi  waa  kraked  upon  in  the  light  of  a  pnblic

■iiaigi  il  in  an  injury  done  to  any  citiien.  It  ap-
1  la  haTc  been  a  principle  irf  the  Athenian
II  ndiridital,  who  had  been  injured,
>■«  tasi  BDB  moda  <rf  obtaining  redren.  If  the
ftainiif  bnnght  it  aa  ■  priTata  mit,  the  defendant
>««ld  tadj  be  eendennwl  to  pay  a  fine,  which  the
r'"**'^  iwdred ;  but  if  the  anaa  wai  bnmght
la  a  poblk  mit,  the  accnaed  might  be  pnnuhed
e*«B  witk  death,  and  if  mialHMud  to  pay  a  Ana,
the  ktta  went  to  the  atate.

It  waa  DBsnarr  to  Btore  two  beta  in  brini^ing
the  aiaiai  tiat  iden  at  Forty.  lint.  That  the
Jifciiihiiil  had  «nck  the  plaintiff;  who  moat  hare
hata  a  fna  man,  with  toe  intentiDn  of  inaniting
koa  (^*  Btfi),  whick,  bowoTer,  wai  alwayi  pre-
■■al  to  bava  been  the  inteation,  nnleu  the  de-
(1  ailaal  eotild  {aore  that  he  only  itruck  the  plain-
tii  g>  jokf^  Thna  Ariaton,  after  proiing  that  he
hd  hecB  atiBck  by  Cooon,  tella  the  judget  that
Caoai  will  abempt  to  ahow  that  be  had  only
■nek  kim  in  play.  (Dem.  c  Cbaoa.  p.  1361.)
'■■■■dlj.  It  waa  D«eaaary  to  prove  that  the  de-
fcadan  Mndc  the  plaintiff  fint,  and  did  not  merely
letan  ibe  Uowi  which  had  been  giTen  by  the
faaatilf  (tnf*"  X'V'''  'Ulnw,  or  mtrely  Ulaw
frxw.  Den.  c.  Ow^.  pp.  lUl,  nSl.)

In  thi*  •clioa,  the  aam  of  money  to  be  [aid  by
tbr  ^rfatdaottaa  daaa^ea  ana  not  fixed  by  the  law
ua  ihe  ^aiotiff  aBEBcd  tbe  amotmt  accotding
t«aiqa>T,  wUch  ha  lliogght  he  hid  ncurad,  and


law,  tog.


ALA.  73

the  judgea  detarmined  on  tbe  jnatice  cf  the  claim.
It  waa  thua  an  aa>«aed  action,  aad  renmbled  Iho
procedure  in  pnlilic  caout.  The  oraUona  of  De-
moathenea  againat  Conon,  and  of  laocntea  againat
Locbitei,  were  spoken  in  an  action  of  thii  kind,  and
both  of  tbeae  have  come  down  to  na  }  and  there
if  Lyaiaa,  which  are  loil,  relating
in,  namely,  sgainit  Theopooipua
(Haipocrat  ».  e.  ainiat ;  Meier,
Alt.  Pra»a,  p.  547.  ftc. ;  B&kh,  PsU.  Earn.  </
-'i«j,pp  352,364,  373,  374,3nded.}

AITHOUSA  {deovaa\  a  word  only  nud  by
Homer,  ia  probably  for  afBobira  irrKt,  a  portico  ei-
poted  to  the  inn.  From  the  paiaagea  in  which  it
occura,  it  aoetna  to  denote  a  covered  portjco,  opening
m  to  the  oonrt  of  the  home,  abki\,  in  boat  of  the
remibole,  tcfityper.  Thna  a  chariot,  leaving  the
house,  il  deacribed  aa  paiaing  out  of  the  rp&aptr
and  the  olBoiwa.  (n.nir.323j  Otf.iii.  493,  it.
146, 191.).  The  word  ia  used  alio  in  the  [Jural,
to  deicribe  apparently  tbe  porticoea  which  eur-
mnnded  the  aiAi  (fi,  ri.  243  1  Oi.  viiL  S7.)
raa  in  anch  a  portico  that  guesli  were  lodged
the  night.  {Od.iiL  399,  riL  346).  It  vat
alio  the  place  of  reception  for  people  Socking  to  the
palaie  on  a  public  ociaiiDn  (/(.  ijiiv.  238  ;  Od.
viii  57)  1  and  hence  pethqa  the  epithet  ^pftiivirot,
which  HcHner  naoally  connecla  widi  it. tl*-  ^J

ALA,  a  pan  of  D  Koman  houe. [DoMUS.1

ALA,  ALARFS,  ALA'RII.  Theae  worda,
like  all  other  terms  connected  with  Roman  war-
&re,  were  uaed  in  different  or  at  least  modified
accqilatiani  at  different  periods.

Ala,  which  literally  meana  a  aiug,  was  from  the
earlieit  epocha  eni]dayed  to  denote  Uie  wing  of  an
army,  and  thia  lignincatioa  it  alwiyi  retuiud,  bnt
in  process  of  tiine  wai  fre^oently  uaed  in  a  re-

1.  When  a  Roman  army  was  compoaed  of
Roman  citiiens  excluatTcly,  the  fianka  of  the  in-
tntry  when  drawn  np  in  little  array  were  covered
on  the  right  and  left  by  the  cavalry  ;  and  henco
Ala  denoted  the  body  of  hone  which  waa  attached
to  and  served  along  with  the  fbot-aoldiera  of  the
l^on.  <See  Cincios,  de  Ra  Mtlilari,  who,  al-
thongh  he  flonijahed  B.  c  200,  i>  evidently  ei-
[Jaining  in  the  [assage  qnoted  by  Aulni  Qellini,
zvi.  4,  the  original  acceptation  of  the  term.)

2.  When,  at  a  later  date,  the  Roman  arniiei
were  compoaed  partly  cf  Roman  citiaena  and  partly
of  Saai,  either  Z<itM  or  lUUid,  it  became  the
practice  to  marthall  the  Roman  troopg  in  the  centre

if  the  battle  line  and  the  Socii  npon  the  winga.
ileoce  ala  and  aZaru  denoted  the  contingent  fur-
niahed  by  the  allies,  both  hone  and  foot,  and  the
. —  j;_:_; diatingoished  ai  ' '


two  diTisioni  w


(LiT.


L.21,


121  i


Lip*,  cb  MUa.  Rom.  iL  dial'7. We  find  in  1
X.  40,  tbe  exjavasion  fan  eaiortHut  alariit,  and  in


....  yasfiK.)

3.  When  the  whole  of  the  inhabitanta  of  Italy
had  been  admitted  to  tbe  privileges  of  Roman
citiieiu  the  tama  olnni,  eotortsi  alariat  were  ttani-
ferred  to  the  foreign  troopi  acrring  along  with  tha
Roman  ormiea.  In  Cmsai  (B.  O.  L  51)  we  see  the
Alarii  erptrtiij  distinguished  from  Uie  legiomrH,
and  we  find  the  phrase  (fl.  C.  i,  73)  ootorisiafarue
tt  Imovaiae,  wliile  Cicero  (fldpam,  ii.  17)  (peaki


74  ALAUDA.

i.  Lully,  under  the  ampin,  (lie  tens  ata  waa
applied  lo  rcgimeuB  of  hone,  niard  it  would  >«m
with  rerf  few  eieeptioiu  in  the  province!,  Mrring
apart  Inm  the  legioni  and  the  cbtsIt;  of  the  le-
giona.  It  ia  to  troop*  of  this  dncriplion  that
Tacitua  refen  when  (Am.  it.  10)  he  mentioua
Afara  PagountH  nfrur  ffwioAu.

Some  fiirlhcr  dataila  on  Chia  lubject  an  give
under  Exskcitus.  [W.  R.]

ALABASCHES  (iXaeitjnf),  appeal)  lo  hav
been  the  chief  mafpitiale  of  the  Jcwa  atAlexsndria;
bnt  wbou  dutiea,  aa  bi  aa  the  goTcnunen'
concerDed,  cbied?  oroiiitRd  in  raising  and  paying
the  taiea.  (Jo«ph.  A«t,  xriii.  18.  §  1,  lii.  S,
g  1,  II,  6.  9  3;  En»b.  H.  B.  \l  S.)  Hence,  Ci-
cero {ad  Att.  ii.  17)  calli  Pompej  BlabarchcB  from
his  laiiing  the  taiea.  The  eljmoIagyDf  Ihia  word
i)  altogether  aneenain,  and  has  given  riae  (a  great
diKputea  ;  loaie  modem  wril«n  propow,  hut  with-
out autficient  reason,  to  change  it,  in  all  the  paa-
■Bgea  in  vbich  it  occurs,  into  aroAotvAfw.  The
queition  ia  fiilly  ditcuae^  by  Stniziua.  (fit  Dia-
led.  Manrdtm.  «  AlBxaadrin,  p.  65,  At)

AI-ABASTRUM  and  ALABASTER  (iAi-
tatfrpor,  AAdfioffTpos),  a  bai  or  Tiue  for  holding
perfiuuei  and  ointmenta ;  so  caJled  bf^aoie  they
were  originally  made  of  alahaiter,  of  which  the
variety,  called  oayi-alabaater.  wu  uauoUy  em-
ployed for  thii  pntpow.  (Plin.  H.  ff.  liiL  2.  t.  3,
ixxrt  8.  a.  12.)  They  were,  however,  mhie-
quenlly  made  of  other  mnteriala,  aa,  for  iniliuice,
gold  (xpimta  AXdffaffrpa).  Such  vaaea  are  fint
mentioned  by  Heredotua  (iii.  20),  who  apenks  of
an  **  alaboater-boi  of  perfumed  ointment  "  (jiApov
iiideairriKy),  as  one  of  the  preaenu  acnt  by
Cauibyaea  to  the  Ethiopian  kmg  ;  and  after  bis
time  Iher  occur  hath  in  Greek  and  Roman  wrjtcra.
(,iri«toph.  Adiarn.  10S3  ;  Aelian,  V.  H.  lii.  18  ;
Martiat  li-  8  ;  Matth.  urn.  7  i  Mari,  lii-.  3 ;
Luke,  viL  37.)  These  veesela  were  of  a  tapering
ahape,  and  very  often  had  a  long  narrow  neck,
which  waa  aealed  i  to  that  when  the  women  in  the
Qoipela  ia  taid  to  break  the  alBbancr-boI  of  nmt-
ment  for  the  purpose  of  anoin^g  Christ,  it  ap-
pears probable  that  ahe  only  broke  the  extremity
of  the  neck,  which  wu  thua  cloaed.
ALABASTRI'TES.  [Aj-jRurmu]
ALAEA  ('AAaia),  ^mea  which  were  annnally
celebrated  at  the  featival  of  Athena,  inmamcd
Alea,  near  Tcgea,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the
magnilicent  temple  of  the  aaae  goddeia.  (Pans.
viiL  47.  j  3.)  [L.  &]

ALA'RU. [Ai*.]

ALAUDA,  a  Qanliih  word,  the  {satotype  of
the  modem  French  AbaaOe,  denoting  a  amall
nested  bird  of  the  lark  kind  which  the  lAtina  in
allusion  lo  its  tuft  denominated  Galerita.  The
name  alauda  was  beatowed  by  Juliua  Caesar  m  a
legion  of  picked  men,  which  he  raiacd  at  his  own
eipence  among  the  inhabitants  of  Transalpine
Oaul,  about  the  year  B.  c.  65,  not  aa  erroneixiily
asserted  by  Qibbon,  during  the  civil  war  ;  which
1 and disciplined  after the Roman


fubior


1  body,  he  I


•equent  period  bestowed  tbe  fteedi
Thia  aeema  to  have  been  the  lint  example  of  a
regular  Roman  leginn  levied  in  a  foreign  conntiy
and  composed  of  barbarians.  The  designation  w^
in  all  probability,  applied  from  a  plume  upon  the
hehnet,  nsembling  Ihe  "  spci "  of  the  bird  in
qneition,  or  fiom  the  general  shape  and  appearance


ALEA.

of  the  head-|uecev  Cicero  in  a  letter  lo  Atdeui^
written  in  B.  c.  44,  atalea  that  he  had  received  in-
teltigencG  that  Antonius  wsa  marching  upon  the
city  "  cum  legione  alaudaruni,"  and  from  the
Pbilippica  we  learn  that  by  the  Lei  Judidaria  of
Antoiiiua  even  the  common  soldiers  of  this  corps
{Alavdae  —  manijnUara  fs  Uffioiu  Ahttdanm)
were  privileged  to  act  aa  judicea  upon  criminal
trials,  and  etuolied  along  with  the  veteiana  in  lbs
third  decuria  of  judicea,  avowedly,  if  we  cad  Cruat
the  DTslor,  that  the  framer  of  the  law  and  hia
friends  might  have  limctionarica  in  the  coorta  of
justice  upon  whoaa  mpport  they  could  depend.

That  the  legion  Alauda,  wai  numbered  V.  ii
proved  by  severul  insmptions,  one  of  them  b^
longing  to  the  age  of  Domitian  in  honour  of  a  cei^
tain  Cn.  Domitius,  who  among  many  other  titles  ia

styled TRIB. NIL. LBS.  V. ALAUDAI. It had

however  disappeared  from  the  army  list  in  thu
time  of  Dion  Casaius,  that  ia,  in  the  (srly  part  of  the
third  century,  for  the  historian,  when  giving  a  cata-
logue of  such  of  the  twenty-three  or  twenty-fivo
legionswhich  formed  the  ettabUshmentof  Anguatua,
OS  eiisted  when  he  wrote,  makes  no  mention  of  any
fifth  legion  eicept  the  Qmta  Maaedonioa,  (Sueton.
Jul.  24  ;  Caesar,  B.C.L39;  Plin.  H.  AT.  li.  14  -
Cic.  Philip.  18.  %  20,  v.  6.  S  12,  liiL  2.  §  3,  18.
§  37  J  Grater,  Corp.  baerip.  Lot.  oxcai.  1,
KLiv.  2,  nitii.  4,  ntuL.  7  ;  Orelli,  l»taip.
M.  n.  773.)  [W.  B.]

ALBOOALE'RUa [Arts.]
ALBUM  is  defined  to  ha  a  tablet  of  any  mate-
il  on  which  the  praeIor*a  edicts,  and  the  rules
luting  to  actions  and  inteidicts,  were  writlpn.
icicTDH.] The  tablet  waa  put  up  in  a  public
ac«  in  Rome,  in  order  that  all  peraoni  might
ive  notice  of  ita  contenta. According  to  satno
ithorities,  the  album  waa  ao  called,  befanse  it  waa
ther  a  white  mateiial,  or  a  material  whitened,
id  of  course  the  writing  would  be  a  different
colour. According  to  other  anthorities,  it  was  ao
allied  because  the  writing  was  in  white  lettera.
If  any  person  wilfully  altered  or  emwd  (roKrtf,
MSTLt,  Timtamr^')  any  thing  in  the  album,  he
able  to  an  action  aSn  nrmjitif  and  to  a  heaTj
penally.  fDig.  9.  tit  i.  a.  7,  9.)

Probably  the  word  album  originally  meant  any
tablet  containing  any  thing  of  a  public  nature.
Thus,  Cicero  informa  us  that  the  Annales  Moiirui
written  on  the  album  by  the  pontifei  maxi-
(ZlB  Orat.  ii.  12.)  But,  however  thia  msy
he,  it  waa  in  courao  of  time  used  to  signify  a  liat
of  any  public  body  ;  ihua  we  find  the  cipreasifln,
amUortan,  used  by  Tacitua  {Ami.  iv.  42),
iress  the  liat  oF  senators,  and  coneaponding
word  lehorma  used  by  Dion  Caaiiua  (Iv.  3).
The  phrase  o/frvm  decuriaium  aignilies  the  list  of
decurioncs  whose  names  were  entered  on  tlM
.  of  a  manicipium,  in  the  order  prvscribed
by  the  lex  municipalia,  ao  Jar  as  the  pinviaiona
>f  the  lei  eitended.  <Dig.  60.  rit.  S.)  AlbmntJH-
Finn  ia  the  list  of  jndices.  (Suet  daiL  IG.)
Jt-nKi.]  [G-L.]

ALCATHOEA  (vAxaScut).  The  name  of
;nmes  celehnted  at  Megais,  in  cnininemaratioD  of
he  Eleian  hero  Alcathous,  boo  of  Pelopt,  who  bad
killed  a  lion  which  had  deatroyed  Euippna,  bod  of
King  Megareua.  (Pind.  fMm.  viii  148  ;  Pana.  L
42.  §  I.)  (I..S.)

ALEA,  gaming,  or  playing  at  a  gams  of  cbaiice
any  kind. Ham,  ami,  al ' ~ —


l>  «n$rter,  a


paM». Placing  with  toH  or  fe*Mnu  w.


Omatiag  ma  couideRd  dimpatable  al  Romo  ;
sd  bn«  irfiinrui"  wai  tiisd  ai  a  term  of  repnwch.
(Cn  -  Cat.  ii.  10,  ad  AO.  xiv.  &.)  It  vu  alto
litaddcB  at  RoDK  by  ipecial  la-wi,  during  the
IBBet  itf  tbc  r^mblic,  and  undCT  the  empeRMS
(nMa  J«du  iif«).  (Hot.  Gm.  iii.  24.  SS ;  Cic
/Uv-  cL  -^;  O.  7>ut  iL  470,  &c,  Dig.  11.
DL  3.)  Wc  liBTs,  howsTcr,  00  exprctt  in&rm-
Hka  ai  to  Um  tima  whim  thoa  lam  wert  cn-
■Otd  <r  ih»  tnet  proviaiant  which  they  cmtained.
Tbo*  ve  tbraa  lawi  mentioned  in  the  Digut
ILe-i  forinddillg  gunbling,  the  Lega  TOia,  PiUr-
iritttad  Cbmolu,  uid  t^eviio  a  lenatiu  con-
nllm,  and  the  |ise(ar^  cdictum.  At  vhal  time
it  no  faana  Um  were  paocd  ia  qnite  tincer-
IVB  :  bal  tiie  Lex  CoraelH  waa  probably  one  of
ihlanaf  the  diccat«  Sotla,  who,  we  know,  made
terenil  csuictmenti  to  chedc  the  exliaTagonH  and
Rpme  of  prirate  penooi  [Suhtub-J  Some
wntoi  infe  from  a  panage  of  Plautoa  {Mil.
'ittr.  iL  2.  9)  tint  gammg  msit  bBTe  been  for-
baldeQ  by  law  in  hii  time ;  hot  tbe  tax  taiaria  in
tUaja^ige  nam  rather  to  rdtr  to  Ihe  law  of  the
pBe  ikoD  10  any  public  enactBiBit  Suae  modem
nao,  hoverer,  nad  In  altaria  in  thi>  puuge.
The  oaly  kind*  of  gaming  alluwed  by  the  l&w
war,  fint,  playing  at  table  f«  the  diffe


I idayini


■  of


Dch  at  hurling  the  javelin,  :
sing,  ju.  (Dig.  JLe.)  ThoK  who  wen
eurieied  of  guDing  were  condemned  to  pay  fou;
iTKi  tbe  mm  thev  had  tlaked  (Fsendo-AKon.  n
(ic.  Ac.  g24.  p.110.  ed.  Oretli),  and  became  ■'


Wo


■Vo-n.


wtA  &e*pest]y  a  coojequence  of  a  judicial  dc
IHriMu]:  and  we  may  iziftr  that  it  wni  in  laa
CMC  from  ibc  expreuion  of  CieeiD.  {"  Hominem
In*,  quae  eat  de  ilea,  nmdemnatnm,  I'li  aiegrum
rhditmii,'  Cie.  /"itt  iL  23.)  Jnwuiian  forbade  oil
lasi^  batli  in  paUic  and  in  prirale.  {Cod.  3.  tit.
iX)  Games  of  chance  were,  howerer,  lolemled  in
laraamihof  December  at  the  Satuntalia,  which  waa
a  period  ofgrncTal  relaulioa  (Mart.  It.  14,  t.  84;
<niL  iciii.  13  i  Soet.  A-ag.  Tl)\  and  among  tba
Gteeki,  ai  well  ai  the  Ratnaiu,  public  cpinkin
a^wvd  old  men  to  amuae  theniaeWca  in  thia
ncur.  (Enrip.  Med.  67  ;  CJc.  HaeeL  16.)
Uadtf  the  an|nie  gambling  waa  carried  to  a  great
lirilht,  nd  the  biwi  wen  probsbl;  little  more
than  Baaioal.  Many  of  the  early  emperon,
Asguata*,  CUignIa,  Clandina,  Vilellioi,  and  Do-
ftiaao^  were  Toy  fond  of  gamiag,  and  Kt  but  an
e*J  exsmple  to  their  aobjecta  in  thia  matter,
f^aet.  Awg.  70,  71  ;  Dion  Cbil  hi.  22  ;  Suet
'\M.  41.  lUmd.  33j  Kon  Caal.  li.  2  ;  Suet  Don.
31.)  Pnfeiaed  ganmtera  made  a  irgular  ttudy  of
Ihr^  an  i  and  there  were  treatiie*  on  Ihc  aubject,
■oaog  wfciHi  waa  a  book  written  by  the  nnperar
i.'hadma.  (Or.  7KK.  ii.  471  ;  Snrt.  Oavl.  33.)

A3ea  aometimea  desotea  the  implement  aaed  in
;bTmf,  ai  in  the  phtaae  jatta  oiai  at,  "  the  die
9  CMC"  ottered  by  Julina  Canar,  immediately
l«<in  be  oaaed  the  Rubicon  (Suet.  Jtl.  32J ;  and
^  ii  eAea  naed  for  ehuicc,  or  uncertain^  in  gene-
ts t&vr.Oarm.  n.  I.  6;  Cic  Dm.  ii.  15.)  Re-
y  I ILU*  the  eoactBeati  againat  gtunbling,  aee
Bain,  ft«ifia»friBl(  it  tOma;  p.  833.


ALIPTAE.  75

ALEAIA  ('AA^aX  Bfeatival  celebrated  to  the
hoDom:  of  Athena  Alea  at  Tegca  with  gamea  ami
contata,  of  which  we  find  mention  in  inacriptiooa.
(Paua.  Yiii.  47,  g  3  ;  Knuae,  Die  Gynnaalii  il
Agcmutii  d.  tliUaM,  pp.  734-736  ;  K.  F.  Hel^
mann,  LeMmdi  d.  ffot^iauUleim  AlUraimer  d.
CnaaSon,  §  51,  n.  11 ;  comp.  Haidtia.)

ALI'CULA  (iWuf  or  SaAuJ).  an  upper  dreaa,
which  waa,  in  ^1  probability,  identical  with  the
cblamn,  although  Uenychina  eiphuna  it  aa  a  kind
of  chiton  (Enj^ar.  Ft.  112,  ap.  Meineke,  Anal.
AUr.  p.  137  )  Cnllim.  Fr.  149,  up.  Naeke,  Optc
Tol.  ii.  p.  86  ;  Heaych.  i.  n,  ;  Suid.  >.  c.  SUura
and  iyvT^ai;  MUller,  .drat.  J.  AaaM,  g  337,  n.  6;
Martial,  liL  83.)  [P.  S.J

ALIMENTA'HII  PUERI  ET  PUELLAE.
In  ihe  Roman  republic,  (he  poorer  citiiena  were  aa-
aiated  by  public  dutribnticna  of  com,  oil,  and  money,
which  vrcTt  called  on^tana.  [  Co  NO  [ARID  u,]
Thcio  distribulionawere  not  made  at  atated  period*,
nor  to  any  but  grown-up  inhabilanU  of  Rome.  The
Emperor  Nerva  »oi  the  firal  who  extended  them  lo
children,  and  Trajan  appointed  them  Co  be  made
every  month,  both  to  orpbana  and  to  Ihe  children
of  poor  partmta.  The  childnm  who  received  them
were  called  pueri  a  pueliae  alineHlarii,  and  alia
(from  the  emperor)  paeri  fnuilue^  V/piaai  ;  and
the  officeri  n-ho  adminiitered  the  inalitution  were
culled  fuoetforei  ;ieBiinKM  idimestatiae,  ipiaeiioTri
prTKUTotont  fUimatloramj  or  prae/ctti


The  fragmcnta  of  an  inlereating  record  of  an  in-
itulion  of  thii  kind  by  Tiajan  have  been  found
Velleia,  near  Phieontia,  from  whiih  ve  leam
e  aumi  which  wero  thui  diatribulcd,  and  the
Ban« by which the money was raijcd. A
niiar inalitulion  waa  founded by  the  younger
Pliny,  at  Comura.  {Plin.  Epitt.  vii.  IB, LB;  and
the  ijiscripiion  in  Orelli,  1 172.) Trajan-e  benevo-
lent plant  were  carried  on  upon  a  Larger  acalo  by
Hadrian  and  the  Antoninea, Under  Commodiu
and  Pertinar  the  distribution  eeaaed. In  the  reign
of  Alciandcr  Sercrus,  we  again  meet  with  otiBeii-
■■piierioaJpueiiae,«ho  were  allied  A/amnuHam,
lononr  of  the  emperor^a  mother. We  learn,
from  a  decree  of  Hadrian  (Ulp.  in  Dig.  34.  til.  L
a.  M),  that  boya  enjoyed  the  benefiia  of  this  in-
BlitutioQ  up  to  their  eightemlh,  and  giria  up  to
their  fourteenth  vear  ;  and,  from an inacriplion
(Fabretti,  23S,  619),  that  a  boy  four  j-ear.  and
lontha  old  received nine timea  the  ordi-
nlhly  diatribotion  of  com. (Aurel.  Vict.
EpH. liL  4  ; Copitolin. Ani. Pi.  8,  At.  Aur.
26, Perl. 9  ; Spart Had.  7  ; Lamprid. tkv.
Alet.  67  1 Orelli,  Ihkt.  3364, 336fi ; Fabretti,
234,  617; Raicfae,  Lex. Univ.  Ret Nam. t.  v.
7\dela  IlaUae ;  EcXhel,  Doct.  Nam.  Vet.  vol.  vi.
p.  408  ; F.  A.  Wolf, Vim  eiaer mUden  Stiftmg
Ttrgan.)  [P.  3.]

ALl'PILUS,  a  iUTe,who  attended  on  bathers,
to  remove  the  auperfluona  hair  from  their  bodiea.
(Sen,  Ep.  S6  ;  Pignor.  de  Sen.  42.). [P.  S.)

ALIPTAE  (4\.iirTaj)  amoog  the  Qrceka,
were  penona  who  anointed  the  bodiea  of  Uie
athletoe,  preparatory  to  their  entering  the  paloea-
tra.  The  chief  object  of  thii  anointing  waa '-  -I""
the '-■--  ■-  '-- - ' ■


of  the  body,  in  order  to  prevei
pcnpirBlion,Bnd  the  weekneai  conaeqnent  ihenon.
To  effect  thia  object,  the  oil  waa  not  aimply  apread
over  the  lutfece  of  the  body,  hot  nlao  well  mbbed
into  the  ikio.  The  oil  waa  mixed  wi^  fine
. ~- -  J_^


78  ALLUVIO.

African  nnd,  wTenl  janfiijl  of  vhicb  venfoDsd
in  Ibe  baihi  of  Titui,  and  one  of  then  ii  nov  in
the  Briliih  MoHain.  Thii  prepaiMoir  uiointing
waa  called  4  TopoiriinKurriiE))  Tpfi^ii.  T}i«  athlete
wn  igun  anaiuted  after  the  eonteat,  in  order  to
rutore  thfl  tone  of  tht  ikin  and  nmacla  ;  thi<
anointing  wai  called  ft  iwottpawti^  He  then
bathed,  and  had  the  dnit,  iweat,  and  oil  icraped
aS  hii  bod;,  by  neani  ol  an  initmment  mnilar  lo
the  atrigil  of  the  Romaoa,  and  called  rrrAr/yli,  and
aftervarda  (iWrpo.  The  altptaa  took  sd?Bntage
of  the  Icnowledgfl  thej  neceaiarily  acquired  of  the
■tale  of  the  muiclca  of  the  Bthletae,  and  their  Kene-
nd  (liength  or  veakncu  of  body,  lo  adviie  them
aa  to  their  eierciaea  and  mode  of  lift.  They
vere  thui  a  kind  of  medical  tisinera.  laTpa^ilrrai,
(Pink  dt  TUK-A  San.  16.  p.  430  ;  Ceinu,  LI;
Plin,  H.  N.  nil.  1,  %)  Sometimai  thoy  e.en
■npeiintended  their  eierciiea,  aa  in  the  caie  of
HUedaL  (Pindai,CKp>LTiiLM-Tl;aQdBodch'a
nole.)  [Athcetax.]  The  part  of  the  palaeatra
in  vhich  the  athlelaa  were  anointed  nraa  called

Among  the  Romana,  the  aliptae  were  alana  who
Bcnihbed  and  anointed  their  maiten  in  the  hatha.
They,  too,  like  the  Greek  iMtrrv,  appear  to
have  attended  lo  their  mailen'  constitution  and
mode  of  life.  (Cic  ad  Fam.  L  9,  36 ;  Senec  Ep.
£6  ;  Juvenal,  SaL  m.1S,  yi.  423  i  Pignoc.  d»
Sen.  p.  81.)  They  were  alao  called  melora.
They  uied  in  thdr  opemtiooi  a  kind  of  icnper
calli>cla)trigil,loireli(liBl>a),aeniiaeofail(fn<<'»'),
which  waa  uiually  of  hom,  a  bottle  [Aupulla],
and  a  imall  Teand  called  In/tculo. [Baths,]

The  apaitznent  in  the  Greek  palaeatra  whore
the  anointmg  waa  performed  wa*  called  iAtnr-
Ttifioy,  that  hk  the  Bomaii  bolfaa  wai  called
«rt«r,..«.  [P-  S.]

ALLO'VIO.  ''That,"«iyaaaiiu<ii.70,Ai.),
"  Bppeara  to  be  added  to  our  land  by  ailuTia,
which  a  rivet  adda  to  our  land  {agsr)  ao  gmlually
that  we  cannot  utimate  haw  much  ia  added  in
each  moment  of  time  ;  or,  aa  it  ii  commonly  ci-
prewed,  it  ia  chat  which  ia  added  ao  gradually  aa
to  eicape  obiervatiou.  But  if  a  river  (at  once)
takca  away  a  part  of  yonr  land,  and  hringa  it  to
mine,  thia  part  itillremaini  your  property."  There
i<  the  lamc  definition  by  Gaiua  in  bia  Ret  Cuti-
diamK  (Dig.  41.  tit.  I.  a.  7),  with  thia  addition:  -
"  If  the  part  thua  auddenl;  taken  away  ahould
adhere  fcr  a  conaiierablc  time  10  my  hmd,  and  the
treea  on  auch  part  ahould  drive  their  rooti  into  my
land,  from  that  time  auch  part  appesra  to  belong  to
my  land."  The  arquUitio  per  aHupumen  waa  con-
aidercd  by  the  Rsman  jariata  to  be  by  the  jua
gentium,  in  the  Roman  aenee  of  that  term  ;  and  it
ivaa  comprehended  under  the  gencia!  head  of
Acceaaio.  A  man  might  piolccl  hia  land  againsL
lou  &am  the  action  of  a  nver  by  aecuring  the
banka  of  hia  land  (Dig.  43.  tit-lfi;  Di  Ripa
AfHnnifa),  provided  he  did  not  injure  the  navi-
gaUon.

If  an  iiland  waa  formed  in  the  middle  of  a  river,
it  waa  the  common  properly  of  Iboae  who  poeaeaied
landi  on  each  bank  of  the  river  ;  if  it  waa  not  in
the  middle,  it  belonged  to  thoae  who  poiaeaaad  landa

(Odna,  ii.  72.) Thi


in  the


I,  ii.  73.) Thia  ia  endained  more  minnlcly
Digtat  (41.  tit  1.  a.  7). A  river  meani  a


AMBITUS.

ADtoninia  Piua,  there  waa  no  jna  illuTionii  in  the

euiiiae  modua)  waa  aaiigned  by  die  form  of  the
centnriae.  (Dig.  41.  tit  L  a.  16  i  eomp.  Aggenua
Urbicna,  in  ¥Tia/aa.C(Mtauiii.  Di  AUwaimt,  nra
prior,  ed,  Goaa  ;  and  Aoaa.)  CVrounAiBo  differa
&om  allovio  in  thia,  that  the  whole  of  the  land  in
qoeatiim  ia  anircDnded  by  water,  and  inbject  to
itt  action.  Cicero  (i)e  Oral  L  38}  enumeiatea  the
jura  aiimiioimm  and  sroim/HiKinim  aa  mallcn  in'
eluded  noder  the  head  of  rxuitat  amtnavimbt.  •

The  doctrine  of  alluvia,  aa  ataled  hy  Braeton  in
the  chapter  Da  aaimrmdo  Rmm  Daaumo  (foL  9>,
ia  taken  frcon  the  Dige«  (41.  tit  L  a.  7),  and  ia
in  aeveral  paiaagea  a  copy  of  the  wotda  of  Gaiua,  oa
cited  in  the  Dimt  [G.  L.]

ALOA  or  HALOA  ("AaAi,  'AxAi),  an  Attic
fealival,  but  celebrated  principally  at  Beujia,  in
honour  of  DemeCer  and  Dionyaua,  the  inventora  of
the  plough  and  prolectori  of  the  frnzla  of  the  earth.
It  took  place  every  year  after  the  barveit  waa  oicr,
and  only  &ulti  were  offired  on  thia  accBaion,  partly
■a  a  grateful  acknowledgment  for  the  benc^la  the
hnabandman  had  receiTed,and  partly  that  the  next
harveat  might  bo  plen^fu!.  We  learn  frron  De-
meelhenea  (c  Naatr.  p.  1 395),  that  it  waa  nnUwfid
to  offer  any  bloody  aacrifice  on  the  day  of  thia  f«-
tival,  and  that  the  prieata  alone  bad  the  [ainlegti
to  offer  Che  fruila.  The  fcatival  waa  alao  called
SoAfo-io  (Heaych.  ».  o.),  or  irwxaofuoT^ia,  [L.S.]

ALO'GIOU  ORAPHE'  (iXoTfou  y^)  an
action  which  might  he  brought  before  the  lo^atao
(hayiffToI)  at  Alhena,  agaiuat  all  penima  who
neglected  lo  pan  their  accoOBta,  whm  their  lenn
of  office  eipiied.  (Said.  Heaych.  EtjmoL  t.  o.  ;
Pollui,  viii.  Si  I  Meier,  Att.  Prtxttt,  p.  363.)

ALTA'RE. [A«A.]

ALU'TA. [CALcacrs.]

ALYTAE  (AjiAtw). [Olvkpia.]

AMANUENSIS,  or  AD  HANUM  SERVUS,
a  alave,  or  frecdnuin,  whoae  oiHce  It  waa  to  write
letter!  and  other  thinga  under  hii  maater>  direc-
tion. The  Bmannenaia  mnat  not  be  CDnfouiid«d
with  another  aort  of  ilaiea,  alao  called  ad  ■uhot
aana,  who  were  alwayi  kept  ready  to  be  employed
m  any  buiineaa.  (Suet.  Caa.  74,  Aug.  67,  Mw.
44,  Til.  3,  Ve^.  3  ;  Cie.  ite  Orat.  iiL  60,  225  ;
Pignor.  Zle  SwTH,  1 09.)  [P.  S.]

AMARY'NTHIA,  m  AMARY'SIA  CA/to.
/livSiii,  or  'Aiiofiaia.),  a  feaUval  of  Artemia
Amarynthin,  or  Amarjaia,  celebrated,  aa  it  aeenia,
originally  at  Amarynthua  in  Euboea,  with  ejEtra-
ordinary  aplcndour ;  but  it  waa  alao  aolemniaed
in  aeveral  places  in  Attica,  auch  aa  Athmonei
(Pans.  i.  31.  §  3)  ;  and  the  ACheniana  held  a  fca-
tivul,  aa  Pauaaniai  aaya,  in  honour  of  the  aajue
/[oddesa,  in  no  way  leaa  brilliant  than  that  in
Euboea.  (Heaych.  i.  v.  'Afiap^ia.)  The  fntinU
in  Euboea  wua  diatiotpiiahed  for  its  aplendid  pro-
ceaaiona  ;  and  Straba  himai^lf  (i.  p.  448)  aeema  to
have  aeen,  in  the  temple  of  Artemia  Amarjnthia,
a  column  on  which  waa  recorded  the  apli'ndour
with  which  the  Erettiant  at  one  lime  celebratnl
thia  feacival.  The  inacription  ataied,  that  the  pro-
ceaaion  waa  formed  of  three  Chouaand  bcavj-armHl
men,  aii  hundred  honemen,  and  aiity  chariota,
(Corap.  Schol.  orf  Pi^ad.  Ot  xliL  liB.) [L.  S.]

AMBARVA'LI.*. [AnViLiB  FKATnaa.]

A'MBITUS,  which  literally  aigniHea  "  a  gaiiig
about,"  cannot,  perhapa,  be  more  nearly  exprcaaed
Uian  by  cor  tmi  amvamng. Afket  the  plcba  had


AMBITUS.
iwMcd  m  dirtiiKt  ntue  it  Bome,  and  when  ths
vhole  bodj  of  the  dtrMOi  bad  become  rerj  greatly
iamaacd,  we  freqncntlj  irai,  in  tbe  Bonuui
wtia^^  of  ihe  gnat  effort!  whieJi  it  vu  nectfwy
far  c—did»t«  to  Bttke,  in  oidv  to  wcare  tlie

niun;  inta  whkb  the  elenuot  of  ptfiokr  electioii
sKen,  ■JiriwrioB  «f  ntea,  md  opoi  at  teatt
mltarmer  md  bribOT,  were  among  the  meani  bj
vkicb  a  tandidit*  Moiied  hi*  ele^on  to  tbe  office*
•f  MUe.  Tbe  electiaiu  recurred  uiniull;,  and
^Bdidklei  had  fden^  of  paetice  in  the  iwinu
■adnofcignti{>baD.

WhMcnr  OBJ  be  tbs  anthoritf  of  the  piece
■Btitkd  **  Q.  Ciceroni*  de  PetitioaB  Coimilatn*  ad
IL  TnlliinB  Fiatrem,"  it  aeem*  to  preteot  n  pretty
bar  licam  ti  tboee  art*  and  moiu,  by  irhicli  a
be  mi^t  law&Qy  endeaTour  to  aecore  the
9  fl£  Ibe  decton,  ani  also  lome  indmaticm  of
t  iBTfbl,  uid  which  it

or:  and  hia  opponent
,  ttitor.  A  candidate
iBi)  wa*  to  talted  bixa  hi*  iqipouing  in  the
paUk  plaen,  >iich  a*  the  fna  and  Campni  Mar-
tmi,  bcibev  hia  lellnw-atiisu,  in  a  whitened  tt^a.
Ob  each  oc^uoo^  tbe  candidate  wa*  attended  by
ks  fnatit  (daAitAiRf),  nt  followed  by  the  p«aer
riri»etB  (i<u«mw),  who  coiUd  in  no  other  Dianner
abn  Ibcii  good  noil  or  gire  their  atiiitance.  (Cic
pn  Mttrma,  c  34.)  The  word  aaidu^ai  ei-
d  botk  the  CRitiniia]  fr»ence  of  the  ^mdi-
'  "^  *  ' ' imtioual  lolicitationB. The

3r  lakii^  hit  walk.


,by
mpliment  which  could
«  fail  to  be  genetaUy  giati^ring  to  the  elector*.
TiK  fidiilate  acompuiied  hi*  addreii  with  a
OmkroftbilaaHprmiitio).  ThetermicB^
ftv  caaptvLaided  genoally  any  kind  of  treating,
aa  aboWB,  IebM^  &c  Candidates  lonietinica  iJt
Bmbc,  and  riajted  tbe  eolcniae  and  mnnicipia,  in


a  the  ol>)oct  of  aereisl
ila,  taken  a*  a  goxnc  term,  aBii|He-
v  ipedr^—ambiha  and  totydtimtt
(hribCTy).  UieratHiu  and  iarigmtiu  are  (^ipoaed
by  Cini^  aa  thingi  allowable,  to  anbitia  and
Iwjiifiu,  a*  thii^  illegaL  (Cic  dt  OroL  iL  3fi  ;
mi  eovfare  fn  Marma,  c  86.)  The  word  Ibr
mMlm  n  tbe  Ored  writen  ii  tmw^t.  Money
WM  paid  farnrte*  ;  and  in  Older
e  tbe  elector.


loded  theti


B  ea^yed  to  make  uu  baisain,  m/aal
hdd  the  Buary  till  it  wa*  to  be  nud  (Cic  ;<n>
CbM  S«),  and  itMon*  to  diatctbnte  it.  {Cic
mi  Att.  L  1 6.)  The  offence  of  ambitni  waa  a
wattB  whicb  bcloDBed  to  the  jndida  pablica,  and

■rtWrt  (sactment  that  ia  mentioned  limply  for-
kadc  poaeDa  "  to  add  white  to  their  dnai,"  with
a  new  Is  an  decCioa.  (&C.  432  ;  Lir.  IT.  25.)
Thia  aeoH  to  mean  nain^  K>iDe  white  tign  i^
■A^  en  the  dnaa,  to  lignify  that  a  roan  wai  a
<»rfiitale  Tbe  object  of  the  law  waa  to  check
mttitio,  the  name  fer  going  about  to  can^aaa,  in
|hee(l  wkach  anbitm  waa  (Bbacqaently  cm^oyed.


AMBITUS.  T7

Still  the  piactice  of  uting  a  wtdte  dre*a  on  oocariiHi
of  canTaaaing  waa  ntual,  and  appear*  to  have  given
origia  to  the  application  of  the  term  eandidaita  to
one  who  waa  a  pelitor.  {Crelala  ambitio,  Penioi,
Sat.  T.  177  1  Polyb.  1. 1.  ed.  Bekker.)  A  Lex
Poetelia  (b.c,  3£6  ;  Liy.  vil  1£)  fbibade  caadi.


collected. Tbe  law
of  n


LA  paaaed  maiiuy  to  i


:heck
1  tho
By  the  Lei  Cornelia  Baeb*
(B.C  16L)  thoae  who  were  conncted  of  ambitn*
were  iniBpacitated  from  being  candidate!  for  ten

CL  (Lir.  il.  19  ; SdieL  Bob.  p.  361.) The
Acilia  Calpnmia  (B.C.  67)  waa  intended  to
- -  and  other  like


:  the  pcnaltiei  were  fine,  excloiii
ite,  and  pcfpeto*!  incanacil;  to  hold
I  Case. izxn.  21.) The  Lex  Tollia
" p  of  Cicero  (b.  c  6;


the
(Di,

the  purpoK  of  adding  to
Calpmmia.  (Dion  <>ia.  inril  29  i  Cic  pro
Murena,  c  23.)  Tbe  penalty  under  tbit  lei  wa*
ten  yean*  exile.  Tbii  law  forbade  any  penon  to
eihibit  pablic  ibowi  for  two  yean  befen  he  w»
a  candidate.  It  alio  forbade  candidate!  hiring
penmi  to  attend  them  and  be  about  their  penon*.
In  the  aecond  coniulihip  of  M.  Licinina  Ciaiiua
and  Cn.  Pompeiva  Hagnn*  (a.  c  fifi)  the  Lex
Licinta  waa  [oaied  Thi*  lex,  which  ii  entitled
De  Sodalitiia,  did  not  alter  the  previoni  law*
againat  bribeiy;  but  it  waa  tpeoaliy  directed
agam*t  a  partieulaj  mode  of  canTaaaing,  which
CDnaiated  in  employing  agent!  (wdala)  to  mark
oEt  the  member*  of  the  leverol  tribe*  into  imaller
partioni,  and  to  lacnie  more  efiectuallj  the  vole*
by  thii  diviaion  of  labour.  Thi*  diiDibntion  of
[he  member*  of  the  tribei  waa  called  dtairiatio.
{Cic  pro  Flaiuio,  c  18.)  It  wot  an  obTioui  mode
of  better  lecuring  Che  TOtC!  ;  and  in  the  main  i*
rightly  explained  by  Rein,  but  completely  mi*-
nndetitosd  by  Wonder  and  other*.  Drumann
(Gfciielae  Ronu,  toL  It.  p.  93)  confbnndi  tbe  dt-
cmrialio  with  the  coiiia  or  coalition  of  candidatct  to
procnie  TOtea.  The  mode  of  appointing  tbe  judice*
in  tiiali  under  the  Lex  Licinia  wai  alio  proiided
by  that  lex.  They  were  c&Ued  Judicti  Editicii,
becanae  the  accuser  or  proaecator  Dominated  fbor
tribea,  and  the  accnied  wa*  at  liberty  to  reject  one
of  them.  The  jndtce*  wen  taken  out  of  the  other
three  tribe*  ;  but  tbe  mode  in  which  they  were
token  i!  not  quits  dear.  The  penalty  under  the
Lex  Licinia  waa  exile,  bnt  for  what  period  i*
nneeitain.  Tbe  Lex  Panpeia  {h.c.  S2),  pasaed
when  Pompeiui  wa*  lole  ccninl  ibr  port  of  that
year,  appear*  to  hare  been  rather  a  miaiure  paaaed
for  tha  occaaion  of  the  triala  then  had  and  con-
templated than  any  thing  elie.  It  proTided  for
the  mode  of  neming  the  jndice*,  and  ihortened  the

^' When  C  Jolio!  C^aeiar  obtained  iho

ne  power  in  Rome,  he  Died  to  recommend
of  the candidatea  to the  people,  who,  of


the  time  of  Auguatni,  and  it  i
forfiteyean  (DionCaaa.li¥,  i6j  Saet.Oa.Si)
thoae  who  were  cauncted  of  bribery.  Bat  a*  the
petialty  wa*  milder  than  tboae  midet  the  fanner
law*,  we  inu*t  conclude  that  thejr  were  tepeaM


78  AMBITUS.

in  whale  or  in  jart.  Another  Lci  Julia  dc  Am-
bitD  wai  puKd  (b.  c  8  J  Dion  Com.  It.  5)  ap-
ftzaatij  to  mmand  thi  law  of  B.  c  Itt.  Cudidata
irere  required  lo  depoait  i  hud  of  money  before
canTawing,  which  wa>  fDrfoilcd  If  thej  were
»ict*d  of  hriberj'.  If  tay  violence  wm  uud
candidate,  he  vu  liable  Co  exile  (aqmae  at  i^nit


The  popolar  ibniu  of  election  vere  obierved
during  the  tune  of  Angnttu.  Under  Tiberioi
they  ceaKd.  Tacitui  (Aiimd.  L  IG)  obierfei:  ~-
"  The  eomjtia  vers  tnuifemd  from  the  campua  lo
the  potrei,"  the  Mnsle.

While  the  choice  of  candidate!  wai  Chm  partly
ID  the  hojidj  of  the  aennlef  bribery  imd  corruption
(till  influenced  the  electioBi,  though  the  name  of
ambitni  mu,  itriclly  ipesking,  no  longer  appli-
cable. Bnt  in  a  ihort  time,  the  aj^intmenl  to
|iublic  offlcea  vu  entirely  in  lie  power  of  the  em-
peron  ;  and  the  magiitratce  of  Rome,  u  well  a<
the  populni,  were  menlT  the  ihadow  of  that  whkh
had  ooee  a  nibalBntial  fcrm.  A  Reman  jnriit,  of
the  impeiial  period  (Modeatinua),  in  apeaking  of
the  Juiia  Lei  de  Ambito,  ohterrea,  »  Thi>  taw  ia
now  obtoiete  in  the  citT,  becaoK  the  creation  of
magiatiatea  ift  the  buunen  of  the  pnncepe,  and
doei  not  depend  on  the  pleaaure  of  the  populat ;
but  if  any  one  in  a  manidpism  ihould  oifend
agaiuat  this  law  in  canvauing  lor  a  ncerdotium  or
magiatratiu,  he  ia  pumihed,  according  to  a  lenalua
coiuultom,  with  inimy,  and  aubjected  to  a  penally
of  lOO  aurei,"  (Dig.  4B.  tit.  U.)

The  Uwi  that  hare  been  enumerated  an  pro-
bably all  that  were  enacted,  at  leaal  all  of  which
any  notice  i>  pretened.  Lawi  to  repraa  briberf
were  made  while  the  voting  wai  open  j  and  they
continued  to  be  made  after  the  vole  by  ballot  waa
introduced  at  the  popular  elecliona  by  the  lits
Oabinia  <B.c  139).  Rein  obaerrea  that  "  by  thia
change  the  control  over  the  votera  wai  acarcoly
any  longer  poatible  ;  and  thoae  who  were  bribed
could  not  be  diitinguiahed  &nm  thoae  who  were
noL"  One  argument  in  Sanmr  of  ballot  in  modem
tiniea  baa  been  that  it  would  prevent  bribery  ;  and
probably  it  wookt  diminiah  the  practice,  thongh
not  pnl  an  end  to  it.  But  the  notion  of  Rein  that
the  ban  &ct  of  the  veto  being  necnt  wonld  in-
creaae  the  difficulty  of  diatinguiabing  the  bribed
from  the  nnbribed  ia  ahaurd  ;  fiir  the  ban  know-
ledge of  a  man'a  vote  ia  no  part  of  the  evidence  of
bribery.  It  ia  woith  nsmail  that  theta  ia  no  in-
dication of  any  penalty  being  attached  to  the
receiving  of  a  bribe  for  a  vote.  The  utraoat  that
can  be  proved  ii,  that  the  diviiom  or  one  (rf  the
daaa  ol  pcnnni  who  ooatated  in  bribery  were
puniahcd.  (Cic/iro  Plaado,  cS3,  pro  Munm,
c23.)  But  thii  ia  quite  conaialent  with  the  teat:
the  Imber  and  hii  agent*  were  puniahcd,  not  the
bribed.  When,  theiefiire,  Rein,  who  refeia  to
theae  two  paaiagei  under  tho  Lex  Tnllia,  aya  i
'^Even  thoae  who  received  money  frcan  the  can-
didates, or  at  ]«it  thoae  who  dialributed  it  in
their  namei,  were  puniahed,"  he  coaplea  two  thinga
together  that  ats  entirely  of  a  difibtent  kind.  The
pnniaaed  Lex  Aufidia  (Cic  ad  Alt.  i.  16)  went
■0  &r  aa  to  declare  that  if  a  tandidala  promiatid
money  to  a  tribe  and  did  not  pay  it,  ho  should  be
unpuni^ed  ;  bnt  if  he  did  pay  ^e  money,  he
ihould  farther  |sy  to  each  tribe  (onnu^y  ?)
3000  aMMnta  aa  loi^  aa  he  lived.  Thia  abauni
fBuftmi  «a«  bM  (Miied  i  but  it  ahow*  eleaijy


AUICTUy.
enough  that  the  priacii^e  waa  to  pmdab  lbs  bribet

The  triala  for  ambitna  were  nnmerow  in  tin
time  of  the  npoblic  A  lilt  of  them  ta  giwn  hj
Rein.  The  oration  of  Ciccm  in  defence  of  L.
Murena,  who  waa  chotged  with  ambitui,  and  that
in  defeuce  of  Co.  Plauciua,  who  wai  tried  under
the  Lex  Licinia,are  both  eitaut.  (Rein,  CHiiniit^-
rtclii  tier  Romer,  where  all  the  aulhoritiei  are  eal-
lecled  [  Cit  Pro  Pla-ao,  ed.  Wonder.) [G.  L.]

AMBLO'SEOS O  RAP  HE' (^A^wi


[Abo


».)


AMBKO'SIA  (iiitpi-na),  fca^valg  obaerred  in
Oreocc,  in  honoar  of  Dinnyiua,  which  aeem  to  have
derived  their  name  from  the  Inxnriea  of  the  (able,
or  from  the  indulgence  of  drinking.  Acconiini;  to
Tietio)  on  Heaiod  (Op.  tt  D.  v.  S04)  theae  fetti'va].
were  Hlemniied  in  the  month  of  Lenaeon,  during
the  vintage.  (Etym.  M.  a.  v.  Ativai^r,  p.  A64.  7.  ;
O.  B.  W.  Schneider,  f/cAer  dot  Attudu  Tl-taitr-
is««,p.43;  Vi.¥.iiaTaBiiTi,LBhrb.d.giMadiaalL
Ati^nk-d.  Oritdum,  gJS.n.  7.)  [US.]

AMBUBAIAE,  female  mniidBna  6om  Syris.
who  gained  their  living  by  performing  in  public,  at
Rome,  eapecially  ui  the  Circua.  Their  name  ia
derived  Ennn  the  Syrian  word  oAoA  or  oaAaA,  m
flute.  Their  monJ  condi^on  wag  that  which
femolei  of  their  claai  generally  fall  into.  The
Baynderca  of  India  will  perhapa  give  the  beat  idea
of  what  they  were.  (Hor.SW.i.2.  1,  with  Hcin-
dorf'i  Noloi  Juvenal,  iiL  63 ;  Suet.  A-er.  27  s
Priapsa,  26  ;  Petron.  lixiv.  13.)  [P-S.]

AMBU'RBIUM,  w  AMBURBIA'LE,  a  aa-
criGce  which  waa  peifonued  at  Rome  for  the  poiifi-
cation  of  the  city,  m  the  aamo  manner  aa  the
ombarralia  wai  intended  for  the  purificalion  of  tha
countiy.  The  vicljmi  were  carried  through  tha
whole  town,  and  the  nerifics  woi  uauollv  per-
formed when  any  danger  woi  apprehended  in  con*
BequODce  of  the  appcannce  of  prodigies,  or  other
circumatancea.  (Ohaeq.  Di  Frodig.  c  43  ;  ApuL
Mtlanarph.  iiL  ab  init.  p.  49,  Bipout.  j  Loean.  i.
£93.)  Sodiger  lappoaed  that  the  ambnrbiuni  and
ambervalia  were  the  tame  ;  bat  theh  dU&rence  ia
expreaaly  aaferted  by  Serviua  ifld  Virg.  Hd.  iii,
77),  and  Vopiacua  (ambtirtiiitm  etlebratum,  amiar-
vaiif  promiua  ;  Aurel.  c  20).

AMENTUM. [U.an'A.]

AMICTO'RIUM,  a  luien  corering  for  tha
hnaati  of  women,  pnbahly  the  nune  a>  the  ttro-
phinm.  [SntomiUH.]  (Mart  ziv.  149.)  In  later
timei  it  aeenu  to  have  been  ueed  in  the  nme  aenae
aiAmictua (Cod.  Theod.  S.  tit.  j.  i.  43.)  [Ann*

AHICTUS,  AMI'CULITM.  The  verb  oaaran
ia  cosononly  oppoaed  to  iadntn,  the  finmer  being
applied  to  the  putting  on  of  the  outer  gannent.
the  chlamya,  palUnm^  lacna,  or  toga  (^/utridr,  ^«-
pof ) ;  the  latter,  to  the  putting  on  of  the  inner  gar-
ment, the  tunica  (xmir).  Id  conaequence  ef  thia
diniuccion,  the  verbal  nouna,  aniKtiu  and  HttJWaa,
even  vrithont  any  farther  denomination  of  the  dreaa
being  added,  indicate  reaptclively  the  outer  and
the  inner  clothing.  (See  Tiboll.  i.  S.  13. ;  Com.
Nep.  CuiHM,  *,  DaLi.%2i  Virg.  Am.  iii.  £49,
v.  421,  compared  with  Apoll.  Rhod.  ii,  30.)  Somo-
timca,  howcw,  though  rarely,  aatutn  and  iaJaepa

to  any  kind  of  dolhing.

Id  Greek  anion  ia  eipnaaed  by  i^mirtat,
i/ifiiinnivtvi, i^i^Mftu, ^nfttUaoAu,  npi-


AMPHICTYONEa
UUwfci :  mi  imdmrt  by  irSirtu:  Hence  cunt
<fHTpii,  iiBnxirri,  ^TiSAq^  and  iriei?iaiar,
tfiti^f  «rd  nyrfiJAaiBf ,  an  outer  ganoent,  and
M|ii,uiM>erguiiient,k  tunic,  kthirt.  [J.Y.]

AlUU  (two),  ■  Oi«ek  n<euBK  of  length,
il«]  U  fcftj  i*x*"  (cnbiU),  or  (irty  »«ti  <feei).
Ii  m  oied  in  iMMDiiiig  land.  (Hero,  Dt  Afw-
-n.)  [P.S.]

AllXB'SnA  (Jtrimarfo),  ii  a  word  UKd  bj
tk  ktJ  Gnek  irriten^  Bud  from  iJiem  borrowed
^  tb«  Rflanu,  to  dooibe  the  act  or  armngemait
^  vbcb  oSitica  were  /oryoUtn,  oi  lEgaided  ai
a'  tkj  k(d  Bot  been  committed,  to  that  the  of-
ktia  (Bold  not  be  called  to  ytcconnt  ti>r  them.
Tbt  nid  ii  chiefly  lued  with  reference  tn  the
adraca  eoimiitiecl,  or  alleged  to  have  been  com-
BOHd.  apinil  the  bwa,  dniing  tluwe  eonflicta  of
■jfoni  EldHm  vhich  n  often  occurred  in  the
linrk  trpablxM,  and  in  which  the  rictorioiu
f*nj  iBully  look  a  BUgauiaiy  Tengeance  upon
^  rffoataa.  So  laie,  indeel,  wen  the  ez-
tt;om  M  thii  coune  of  tcngiaiice,  that  there  ii
•cij-  ae  CMC  of  anuieaty  in  Qnek  hiitory,  which
trjim  lay  f"*'-"!"  ootice.  Thii  waa  the  am-
M:y  i^ich  tomioaud  the  atnggle  between  the
MinfTiriial  and  oligarchical  fania  at  Athena,
•cd  eomjeled  the  TGrolndaa  by  which  the  poi

■fitarii-  "


f  iiity  TyimU  w
- i  by  tl


I  OT^Ihrown,  h.  c  4Q3.
■■ ■ if  tl ~


kiag  riiiMiiin ud  extended  to  al]  the  cilizeni

ncU^  with  the  eiteplion  of  the  Thirty  and
^c  BcTHi,  asd  the  Ten  who  bad  ruled  in  Pei-
»« ;  and  eren  they  were  only  to  he  excepted  in
OK  U  their  [cfucil  to  giTe  an  account  of  (heir
;HnBaeDt ;  their  children  were  included  in  the
•Maij,  and  were  pennitied  to  reiide  at  Athene.
it.  eddhioa  waa  made  to  the  oath  of  the  icnaton,
^^dio^  lliamul  lo  receive  maj  emdtiat  oi  apagogo
Q  iCBAmi  of  anything  done  befoie  the  amnei^,
^  Arict  oliMt^ukce  of  which  was  alio  imposed
liT  u  oalh  open  the  dicaatae.  (Xen.  JfeUen.  iL
4-  H  )S— 13  ;  Andoe.  dt  MytL  p.  44  ;  Dem.
>  &HC.  p.  1018  j  Nepoa,  Tfm^vL  3,  who
aka  a  eoofiuion  betweoi  the  Ten  Tynnta  of
i'nijfi.  and  the  Ten  who  niueeded  the  Thirty
■  tbe  dty;  Taylcff,  Z^nu  Vita;  Wachimuth,
ll<3im.AIUi1k.  toLl  pp.646,  647,  new  edition  ;
HsBaaa,  /Wf.  Antiq.  lyOrwt,  g  169.)

The  bnu  of  the  word  ia  iocoRcctlj  giren  in
ene  kBden  wiwka  aa  iftwijc^tUt,  But  Aren  the
AHBine  &nn  oolj  belong  to  later  Greek ;  being
»d  .aiy  by  Plntaich  {Cle.  42,  Awbm.  14),  Hero-
'iw  Cm-  4.  S  17,  r.  4. 1  IB,  liiL  12.  g  6),  Philo,
od  >ai  later  writent  The  better  writen  naed
'^odthefccbalfiinn  iaat/ivqa-ucoKtu-.  Re-
nectim  the  inntiaaed  allunni  to  the  word  by
(P.  S.1


MtUgarliaad  of  Onpna,  where  he  had  a  temple
■A  a  criebiBUd  ocade.  (SdaL  ad  Fi-d.  OL  ni.
Ijt  i  ike  lileB  obaened  in  hii  temple  are  de-
KnM  by  Pa^anka  <L  34.  j  3. ;  E.  F.  Hermann,
I'M.  d.  gttmdimta.  AUtrO.  d.  GrwoiM,  §  63.
>.  L)  [L.  S.]

AKPHl'CTTONES  ( 'A/<*«Tiio«.),  memben
dt^AmfAietJ/omia  ( 'A/i^Mcrwortaor'A/u^wTtoyfa).
ImEBaoBa  called  Aoiphictyonic  appear  to  have
IMed  IB  Gnece  from  time  immenuriaL  Of  their
Ubn  aid  otiject  biMory  girea  ut  only  a  general


AMPHICTYONES.  79

It  we  may  safely  bcHe'e  them  to  hare  been
onj  of  originally  neighbouring  tiibei,  fanned
far  the  reflation  of  mutual  intcicoorse,  and  the
pratectianofacDDunon  temple  or  unctuary,  at  which
the  repreaentativea  of  the  different  memben  met,
to  transact  buiineu  and  celebrate  leliginua  rite*
and  gamei.  This  identity  of  religion,  coupled
with  near  neighbourhood,  and  that  too  in  agei  of
remote  antiquity,  impliei  in  all  probability  a  cer-
tain degree  of  affinity,  which  might  of  itself  pro-
duce unions  and  confederuciea  amongst  tribes  so
situated,  regarding  each  other  as  members  of  the
•moe  great  family.  They  would  thus  preserve
among  themselTea,  and  transmit  to  their  children,
a  spirit  of  nationality  and  brotherhood  j  nor  could
any  better  means  be  derised  than  the  bond  of  a
common  religious  worship,  to  counteruct  the  hostile
interests  which,  sooner  or  later,  spring,  up  in  all
laige  societies.  The  causes  and  motires  &om  which
we  might  expect  such  institutions  to  arise,  existed
in  every  neighbourhood ;  and  accordingly  we  find
many  Aapiidyanat  of  Tarioui  degrees  of  import-
ance, though  our  information  reapecting  them  it

Thus  we  learn  irom  Strebo,  that  there  wat  one  of
some  celebrity  whose  place  of  meeting  was  a  tanc-
tuuy  of  Poseidon  (Milller,  Doriant,  iL  10.  £  fi  ;
Strab.  Tiii.  p.  374)  at  Calauria,  an  ancient  tettle-
mentoftheloniansintheSaronicOult  Theoriginal
members  were  Epidaurus,  Hermione,  Nsuplia,
Prasiae  In  Laconia,  Aegina,  Athens,  and  the  Boeo-
tian Orehomenus  (Thirlwall,  Hiit.  o/Gnta,  toL  i.
p.37£)i  whose  remoteness  Irom  each  other  makes  it
difficult  to  conceice  what  could  have  been  the  mo-
tives for  farming  the  confederation,  more  especially
as  religioue  caoies  leem  precluded  by  the  fiul,  that
Troeaen,  though  to  near  to  Calauna,  and  though
Poseidon  was  itt  tutelary  god,  was  not  a  membn-.
In  after  times,  Argos  and  Sparta  took  the  place  of
Nauplia  and  Prasiae,  and  religious  ceremonies  were
the  sole  object  of  the  meetings  of  the  association.
There  also  seems  to  hare  been  another  is  Argolj*
(Strab.  L  e. ;  Pausan.  iv.  5)  distinct  fiom  that  of
Calauria,  the  place  of  congress  being  the  'Hpour,
or  temple  of  Hub.  Deloa,  loo,  was  the  centre  of
an  Amphictyony  —  the  rellgjooa  metropolis,  or
'loTi'ij  yiiaav  of  the  neighbouring  Cyclades,  where
deputies  and  embauiei  (Staifiol)  met  to  celebrate
religions  toleinnjtiea,  in  honour  of  the  Dorian  Apollo,
and  apperently  without  any  reference  to  political
objecU, (MiiUei,  ii.  3.  |  7  i  Callim.  Hymn.  325.)

The  system  indeed  was  by  no  means  confined  to
the  mother  country ;  for  the  federal  unioni  of  the
Dorians,  lonians,  and  Aeolians,  living  on  the  west
coast  of  Asia  Minor,  seem  to  have  been  Amphic-
tyonic  in  spirit,  although  modified  by  exigencies  of
situation.  Their  main  ewenca  consisted  in  keep-
ing periodical  feniTalt  in  hononr  of  the  acknow-
ledged gods  of  their  respective  nations.  Thus  the
Dorians  held  a  Jederel  festival,  and  celebrated  re-
iigiona  gsmes  at  Triopium,  uniting  with  the  worship
of  their  nationi^  god  Apollo  that  of  the  more  an-
dent  and  Pelasgic  Damcter.  The  lonians  met  for
tiroilar  purposes  in  honour  of  the  Heliconian  Po-
seidon* at  Mycale, — their  place  of  assembly  being
called  the  Panioninm,  and  their  festival  Panionia.
The  twelve  towns  of  the  Aeoliane  assembled  at
Grynca,  in  honour  of  Apollo. <IIered.  L  144, 148,


80  AMPIIICTYONES.

149;  Dionji.  It.  26.)  Thai  thiu  MmTedemcifli
were  not  merely  for  offemive  and  defenai™  por-
powH,  mH7  be  inferred  from  their  exiitence  after
tfae  stibjug&tion  of  theK  colonies  by  Croeani;  and
we  know  that  HolicBmAuiu  was  excluded  from  the
DoriAfi  naioo,  merely  because  one  of  its  citizens
bad  not  made  thF  usual  ofTeriiig  to  Apollo  of  the
prize  he  had  von  m  the  Triopic  contests.  A  con-
lederatioa  somewhat  similar,  butmoro  polilical  than
religious,  eiiited  in  Lycia  (Sliab.  iIt.  p.  664):
it  was  called  the  "  Lycian  Byslem,"  and  was
compoeed  of  twenty-three  cities.

Bui  besides  t)iese  and  others,  there  was  one
Amphictyony  of  greater  celebrity  than  Che  rest,
and  mucb  more  lasting  in  its  duiation.  This  wns
by  way  of  eminence  called  the  Amphiclyonic
league  ;  and  differed  from  (he  other  associations  in
having  two  places  o(  meetlDg,  the  saoctnaries  of
two  diTinities.  These  were  the  temple  of  De-
meter,  in  the  TillBg:e  of  Anthela,  near  Thermop jlaa
(Henid.  rii.  300),  where  the  deputies  or  repre-
■enla^ves  met  in  autumn  ;  and  that  of  Apollo  at
Delphi,  where  they  assembled  in  spring.  The  con-
nection of  this  Amphictyony  with  the  latter  not
only  contributed  to  its  dj^ity,  but  also  to  its  per-
manence. With  respect  to  its  early  history,  Stnbo
(ii.  p.  420)  says,  that  even  in  his  daf  s  it  was  im-
possible to  loam  its  origin.  We  knew,  however,
that  it  was  originally  eoraposed  of  twelve  tnia  (not
cities  or  states,  it  most  be  observed),  each  of  which

We  learn  bam  Aescbinei  (Os  F.  L.  g  122,  ti.
Beklcer),  a  most  competent  anthoritv  (ii.c343),
that  eleven  of  these  tribes  were  as  (ollowi: — The
Tbcsialians,  Boeodana  (nut  Thebans  only),  Do-
rians, looiani,  Peirhaebiani,  Magnetei,  Locriani,
Oetaeans  or  Ainianes,  Fhthiots  or  Afhaeani  of
Phthia,  Maliana,  or  Melians,  and  Phocians  ;  other
lists  (Pan*,  r,  8,  §  2)  leave  ns  in  doubt  whether  the
remaining  tribe  wore  Ibe  Dolopea  or  Delphians;
but  Bj  the  Delphians  conld  hardly  be  called  a  dis-
tinct tribe,  their  nobles  anieanng  to  have  been
Doriaug,  it  seems  probable  that  the  Dolopes  were
originally  members,  and  afterwards  suppluiCed  by
the  Delphians.  (Tilmann,  pp,  39,  43.)  The  pre-
ponderance of  the  Thessulian  and  northem  nations
of  Greece  pnives  tbe  antiquity  of  the  institution,
no  less  than  eight  of  the  twelve  tribes  being  of  the
Pelagic  race :  and  the  bet  of  the  Dorians  stand-
ing on  an  equality  with  such  tribes  as  the  Maliaoa,
shows  that  it  must  have  existed  before  the  Doian
conquest  of  the  Peloponnesus  which  originated
several  •iifa(H  more  poweriid,  and  therefore  more
likely  to  have  sent  tbeir  respective  deputies,  than
the  tribes  mentioned.  The  Thessalians  indeed  in
all  probability  jomed  the  Icogue  about  twenty  years
before  that  event,  when  they  settled  in  Theasaly,
after  quitting  Thesprotia  in  Epeims,  and  the  dote  of
the  origin  of  the  league  itself  has  been  fixed  (Clinton,
F.  H.  vol.  i.  p.  66)  between  the  GOth  and  80th  years
from  the  bll  of  Tmy.  That  it  existed  moreover
beiore  the  Ionian  migration,  may  be  inferred  from
the  lonians  of  Asia  having  a  voti',  acquired  without
doubt  when  in  the  countr7,and  from  the  statement
of  Tacitus  {AmiL  iv.  14) :  *'  Samii  decrcto  Am-
phictyonum  uitebantur,  quia  prsecipnum  fuit  renim
omnium  judicium,  qua  tempestote  Qratci,  conditis
per  Asiom  uihibus,  on  maris  potiebantur."

We  learn  from  Aeschincs  (£.  c),  that  each  of
the  twelve  Amphictyonic  tribes  had  two  votes  in
1 1 II  mi  us.  and  that  deputies  from  neh  towns  ii


AMPHICTYONES.

(Dnimn  and)*  Cytiniim  bad  equal  power  witb
the  LacedaemiHtiDns,  and  that  Eretria  and  Priene,
Ionian  colonies,  were  on  a  par  with  Athens  (io-J^
^  Tou 'A9))>vf<Mt).  ItBoeoii  therefore  to  follow,
either  that  each  AJsphictyonic  tribe  had  a  cycle
(Strab.  ii.  p. 420  ;  Pausan.  i.  8.  %2\  according
to  which  its  component  slates  returned  deputies,
or  that  the  vole  of  the  tribe  was  determined  by
a  majority  of  voles  of  the  different  states  of  that
tribe.  The  latter  supposidon  might  explain  the
fact  of  there  being  a  larger  and  smaller  assembly —
a  PovKii  aniiKKXTiala — at  some  of  the  congresses,
and  it  is  confirmed  by  the  circumstance  that  there
was  an  annual  elec^n  of  deputies  at  Athens,  nn-
leB  this  ci^  usurped  fiinctions  not  properly  ita

The  council  itself  was  called  Pglaea  (HuXnfa)
from  its  meetmg  in  the  neighbonihood  of  Pyloe
(Thermopylne),  hut  the  same  name  was  given  to
the  session  at  Delphi  as  well  as  to  that  at  Ther-
mopylae. It  was  composed  of  two  classes  of  re-
presentatives, one  called  P^agortu  (IliiAaTdpw),
the  other  Jlieronatemonet  {'IfpQf^/iowti).  Of  the
former,  three  were  annually  elected  at  Athens  to
act  witb  one  Hieromnemon  appomted  by  lot.  (Aria-
topL  A'Hicf,  V.  607.)  That  his  office  was  highly
honouiaUe  we  may  infer  from  the  oatb  of  the
Heliasls  (Dem.  c.  Tiaoer,  S  170,  ed.  Bekker),  in
which  he  is  mentioned  with  tbe  nine  archcns.  On
one  occasion  we  find  that  the  president  of  the
ooimcil  was  a  Hieromnemon,  and  that  he  wai
chosen  general  of  the  Amphictyonic  foncs,  lo  act
against  ^e  Amphissians.  (Titmann,  p.  87.)  HeDc«
it  has  been  conjectured  that  the  Mtenmncmonea,
also  tailed  lipirfp<miurrtis,  were  superior  in  rank
tothepyliig<»W3.  (Titmann,  pp.  84, 80.) Aeicbinea

the  inference  that  the  former  otHcs  wns  the  more
permanent  of  the  two.  Thus  he  says  (c.  Qet.
§  115,  ed.  Bekker),  "  When Diognetus  wasHicro-
mncmon,  ye  chose  me  and  two  others  Pykgotae."
He  then  contrasts  "the  Hieromnemon  of  the
Athenians  vrith  the  Pylagorac  for  tbe  time  bein^,^
There  is  even  good  reason  for  supposing  that  the
Hieromnemon  was  elected  for  life  (Qhiton,  F.  If.
vol.  iiL  p.  621  ;  Titmana,  L  c),  althougb  torao
writers  are  of  a  different  opinion.  (SchOmann,  da
Cbnit.  p.  392.)  Agvn,  we  find  inscriptions  (Bdckh,
/user.  1171 1, containing  surveys  by  theHieromne-
monei,  as  if  they  formed  an  executive  ;  and  that
tbe  council  concluded  their  proceedings  on  one
occasion  (Aesch.  e.  Cta.  §  124),  by  r«solvin^  that
there  should  bean  extraordinary  meeting prevLonaly

mnemones  should  come  wiib  a  decree  to  suit  tbe
emci^[eDcy,  just  as  if  they  had  been  a  standing
committee.  Their  name  implies  a  more  immediais
conuection  with  the  temple ;  but  whether  they
voted  or  not  upon  matters  in  general  is  doubtful ;
from  the  two  Amphictyotue  decrees  quoted  below,
we  might  infer  that  they  did  not,  while  the  in-
scriptions  (1688  and  1699),  quoted  by  Schtinunn
{p.  392),  and  the  statement  oif  Demostheoei  ( pro
Corns,  i  277,  ed.  Bektcer),  lead  lo  a  contrary  con-
clusion. The  nanative  of  Aeschina  (c  Cta.
1 121)  implies  that  they  were  more  pecnliariy  the
repreacntatives  of  their  constituent  states.  Pro-
bably the  respective  functions  of  the  two  dasaca


•  Thert


a  doubt  about  the  reading.  —  3c«


AJfPHICTTONES.

B  not  itricti;  daGoed,  and
ma  H  uKnot  (iBK*,  if  indeed  ibejtis  timji
MTKdf  diaagnnbed  by  tba  witbon  who  allude
M  Ikn.  TV  JnAifffta,  or  genera]  aHicmbl  j,  in-
ifcfcd  m*  ailj  tba  iliiin  menlioDed,  bnt  olao
Aw  *ka  kad  jtuned  in  tha  ■Bcrifieet  sad  were
aoMrilBg  Ibt  gad,  ud  tt  than  wai  >  large  mul-
tindeaiigillj  tDUcctcd  at  tha  Amtliictymk  m-
na  >t  TkaiMfijIae,  it  mi  prabaUj  nuiuaDtuly
aaU.  (Htafdiiui,  «!  5cf»L  TVimI.  t.  639.)
Ii  n*  cBTcaad  on  eilnuirdiiiarf  occsftaiu  by
lie  '^»^— -  of  the  emndl  (O  rdt  yniiiai
J«4Wl^,  Aixli.  i.  c).

Of  tk  dstiEa  of  lliii  latter  -body  nothing  will
|ne  «  a  danr  Tiev  thin  the  oalhi  taken  and
*e4caaeia^eby  it.  The  uath  wag  aa  (bllovi
41(ick.J)>K£.g  131):  ""nioy  would  deatroy
••  (>ty  a{  tha  Amjdtictyona,  nor  cut  off  their
anaa  b  w  w  peace  ;  and  if  any  ihimld  do  id,
in  wsaU  match  againat  him  and  deatroy  hia
aba ;  aad  iboold  any  nUage  the  property  of  the
pd,  at  be  iriij  to  or  plan  any  thing  igakit  what
wu  ia  hit  tsu|de  at  Delphi,  they  woold  take
*a|BBca  en  hiin  with  hand  and  foot,  and  voice,
■d  13  their  might.'' Thoa  aie  two  deereei  given

nr.  f  1)7):  — "Whoi  Geiiiaeaiai  wa*  ptieat
<M^),  at  the  mmg  meeting,  it  vaa  retolved  by
■ke  plignae  nd  the  aaaeaaota  af  the  Amphictyona,
■llk|(aenlbadyofthem,"&c  Tbereaolu^oo
•lWniimdaiaewaB,tbataathe  AmphimiBnicon'-
tBari  to  caltiiatc'*  da  ■ocnJiUric^'*  Philip  of


AMPHICTVONESi


81


"iMtha  aSee,
COT  IB  labjettiDii.  Fnm  the  oath  and  the  deenea,
a*  KC  that  the  nuun  doty  of  the  depntiea  waa  the
pfCBsialu  at  the  ri^ta  and  dignity  of  tha  temple
sIMphL  Wekitov,toa,  that  after  it  waabonit
dan  (a,  c  &48},  ther  eentncted  wHh  the  Alcmae.
<aidKfarlheRbuldiDg(Heiad.ii.iao,T.62);and
AlhoaiM  (a  c  1  «a)  inlbtma  m  (It.  p.  1 73,  b)  that
■  •As  BBUtn  cmneded  with  the  wonhip  of  the
IWrUai  gad  iha;  condeatended  to  the  r^nls-
te  «f  dw  nniteat  tiiftea.  Hiatoiy,  moreorer,
^titt  ihH  if  tka  eoaadl  produced  any  palpable
<fcn,  it  waa  finn  their  iMeteat  in  Delphi ;  and
aaaith  it  kept  ap  a  *'*'^™j  neord  of  what  ought
te  hix  hem  tbs  inteinatioDal  law  of  Oieece,  it


It  iniqahana  and  onel  acta.  Of
be  aiaa  of  CriaM  ia  an  inatanee.  Tbia  town
I  the  Omit  at  Cviolh,  neat  Delphi,  and  waa
1  b*  inlgrimi  from  the  Weat.
-  -•  -J  bylhe  Delphi '-


nitty  dT  a  wimg  againat  t

t tm yean,  till,  at  the ^

■  of  the  Pleiatua  were  tamed  oli^

,  and  tamed  again  into  the  city.

A  dnok  dwir  GD,  and  Criaaa


KvcaM  aflMpUan  TB^caiKe.  fPao.  1. 87.  §  * ;


Clintno,  F. «:  vol.  iL  p.1 96  I  Aeachin.  0.  Oat.  g  109.)
Tho  Second,  or  Phocian  War  (b.  c  356),  wat  tha
mott  important  in  which  the  Amphicnoiu  were
concemed  (Thirlwall,  Hitl.  r/  Grtea,  toL  t.  p  263
— 372)  ;  and  in  this  tba  Thebani  ayoiled  them-
aelvea  of  the  aanction  of  the  council  to  lake  yen-
gcance  on  their  enemiea,  the  Phoclani.  To  do
thia,  however,  it  waa  necesaaiy  to  csll  in  Philip  of
Macsdon,  who  readily  proclaimed  himielf  the
charapion  of  Apollo,  at  it  opened  a  pathway  to  hia
own  ambitioQ.  The  Phoelana  were  subdued  (a  c
316),  and  the  council  decreed  that  all  their  eitiei,
except  Abae,  should  be  maed,  and  the  inhabitanta
diaperaed  in


vhoth


Theii


re  give.


U,  PhUip,


_  „  prateit  for  inletfcring  with

the  a&in  at  OTeeco  ;  and  olao  obtained  the  rccng-
nition  of  big  mbjecli  aa  Heltenea.  To  the  cauaea
of  the  Third  Sacred  War  atluaion  baa  been  made
in  the  decTcea  quoted  by  Demoatfaenea.  The  Am-
pbiiaiana  tilled  the  devoted  Cirrhaean  plain,  and
behaved,  aa  Stiabo  {ii.  p.  41 9)  nya,  worae  than  the
CriawBua  of  old  (x*Wi  iaar  i"pi  Toiii  iimi).
Their  lubmiBioo  to  Philip  waa  immediately  fol-
lowed by  the  battle  of  Chaeruneia  (b.  c  33S),  and
the  extincticm  of  the  independence  of  Oreece.  In
the  following  year,  a  congret*  of  the  Amphictyonic
atntea  wai  held  ;  in  which  war  waa  declared  aa  if
by  united  Oreece  againat  PeriU,  and  Philip  elected
eommander-in-chiet  On  thia  occaaion  the  Atn-
phictyooa  aiaumed  the  choiacter  of  nationa]  repre-
aenta^vea  aa  of  old,  when  they  let  a  price  upon  the
head  of  Ephiahea,  for  hia  tiesaon  to  Greece  nt
Thermopylae,  and  erected  monuntenta  in  honour  of
the  Oreeks  who  fell  there.  Henidotua  indeed
(viL  214,  Saa),  ipeaking  of  them  in  reference  to
Ephialte^  cnlla  them  ol  t£v  'EAA^ntt  nu^jryipti.

We  have  anfficiently  ahown  that  the  Amphic-
tyoTU  themaelvea  did  not  obaerve  the  eatha  they
took  ;  and  that  ihcy  did  not  much  alleTiate  the
horron  of  war,  or  enforce  what  they  hod  iwom  to
do,  i>  proved  by  man;  initancee.  Thoa,  for  in-
itance,  Mycenae  waa  deatroyedby  Argo«(B.c.*e8),
Tbeaptae  and  Plataeoe  by  Thebea,  and  Thebea  her-
Klf  twept  from  the  face  of  the  earth  by  Alexaikder
(in  iu<mt  T^i'EXAittoi  iMjpwirSiijAeicbin.  a  Cla.
g  133).  Indeed,  we  may  infer  from  Thuiydides
(L112),  that  afew  yean  beforethePeloponneeiaii
war,  the  council  waa  a  paaiive  apeclalor  of  what
he  cilia  i  lipit  ir6\rfiai,  when  the  Lacedaemoniani
made  an  eipedition  to  Delphi,  and  put  the  temple
into  the  handi  of  the  Delphiana,  the  Athetilana,
after  their  departure,  realortng  it  to  the  Phodant ;
and  yet  the  council  ii  not  mentioned  aa  Interfering.
ItwJll  Dot  be  jntiGtable  to  pnnuo  ita  hiRory  farther ;
it  need  only  be  renarked,  that  Anguitut  wished
bia  new  city,  Nicopolia  (*.d.  31),  to  be  enrolled
among  ita  memben  i  and  that  Ponaoniaa,  in  the
•econd  century  of  our  era,  mcniiona  it  aa  itill  ei-
iiting,  but  deprived  of  all  power  and  infiueoee.
In  bet,  eves  Demottbenea  (De  Paa,  p.  63),  apoke
of  it  aa  the  ihadow  at  Delphi  (4  ir  ^tK^ah  egil).
In  the  time  of  Pannniaa,  the  numbci  of  Amphic-
tyonic  deputiea  waa  thirty.

There  are  two  pointa  of  aome  inteieaC,  which
Hill  remain  to  be  conaidered  ;  and  £nt,  the  ety-
mology of  the  wold  Amphic^ou.  We  are  told
(HaipDCtat.  I.  o.)  that  Theopompna  thongjit  it  de-
rived  from  tho  name  of  Amphictyon,  a  prince  of .
Tbetaaly,  and  theauppoaed  authorof  the  inttitnbon.
Oihen,  aa  Anaiimeoea  of  Lampaaciu,  mniwdtd  it


83  AMPHICTYONS.

with  the  wiwd  ifi^ucrioi'd,  or  neigliboiiri. Very

few,  it  any,  modem  ichoUn  doubt  that  the  Utter

view  u  correct ;  and  that  Amphio^oD,  with  Hellen,

l>DriiB,  Ion,  XalhuK^ThejuluiflAnMa  Che  danghter

of  Pelu^ni,  and  othen,  hts  not  hiilorica],  hut  mythic

penonsges — tho  representatlTet,  or  poetic  Twnani-

ficstioni,  of  Ibcir  alleged  foimdatiiBU,

Ai fpT  Amphictyon  (Thiriwsll,  HitL  of  Gneet,

vqL  L  p.  373),  it  ia  too  marraUoiu


le  ihonld  lie  ngnificsiit  of  ths  ii
tion  itself ;  and,  aa  he  m*  the  aoa  of  Deucalion
and  Pyrrha,  it  ia  difBcolt  to  gncaa  of  whom  h
conncit  conuated.  (PkUoL  Matsm,  toL  iL  p.  359
Bciidea,  thongh  Herodotni  (i.  56)  and  Thocydidi
(i.3)  hod  the  c^ipaitunity,  (Iioy  y<t  make  so  men-
^n  of  him.  We  may  tonduda  thenfsre,  that  the
word  ahoold  be  writlsii  amphkUony  *,  from  ifi^-
KTlartt,  of  thoae  that  dwelt  aioaiid  aome  partieiilar


—  were  iti  msetinga  fint  held  at  Delphi,  or
Thermopyhic  ?  Then  leenu  a  greater  amount  of
BTideDce  in  iariinc  of  the  latter.  In  proof  of  thia,
wo  may  nata  the  preponderance  of  Theaaalian
tribea  ifom  the  neighSonchood  of  the  Maliac  hay,
and  the  compaiatiTe  iniignificance  of  many  of
them ;  the  aatigned  birthplace  and  reaidence  of
the  mythic  Amphictyon,  the  namea  Pylagoiae  ^d
Pylain.  Beiidei,  we  know  that  Theaaaly  wa*  the
tkatre  and  origin  of  many  of  the  moat  important
erenla  of  early  Greek  hiitory ;  wheraaa,  it  waa
only  in  later  tiraei,  and  after  the  Dorian  conqneat
of  Pelopaanciua,  that  Delphi  became  important
enimgh  Eir  the  meeting!  of  nich  a  body  aa  (he
Amphictyonic  ;  nor  if  Delphi  had  been  of  old
ths  only  place  of  meeting,  ii  it  eaay  to  account
for  what  moaC  hare  been  a  loia  of  iti  ancient
dignity.  But  wbateTei  wai  the  caiua,  *e  bam
KM  Che  fact,  -  that  there  wem  two  plaici  of  con-
gnai ;  to  account  for  which,  it  hai  bean  roppoaed
that  there  were  arijpnally  two  oonfederaCiona,
afterwardi  united  by  the  growing  power  of  Delphi,
at  cosnccted  with  the  Doiiana,  but  atill  retaining
tho  old  place*  of  meeting.  We  mtiat,  however,
admit  that  iC  iaa  matter  ofmereconjecttue  whether
thi)  were  the  can  or  not,  there  being  strong  reauna
in  lupport  of  tho  opinion  that  the  Doruuut,  on
migrating  aouthwarda,  combined  the  wonhip  of  the
Hellenic  Apollo  with  that  of  the  Pelaagian  Demetcr,
ai  celebrated  by  tho  Amphictyoni  of  Tbeaaalj'.
Equally  doubtful  ia  the  qnei(Jon  reipecting  the
inSaetice  of  Acriaiui,  king  of  Argoa  (Schot.  ad
Eurip.  OmL  1094  j  Callim.  Ep^,  ilL  ;  Slrab.  it
p.420) ;  andhow&citii  true  that  he  fint  brought
the  oonfcdeiucj  into  order,  and  determined  other
pointa  connected  with  the  inaUtutioiL  We  may
faoweier  remark  that  hia  alleged  conneetian  with
it,  ii  lignifjcant  of  s  Pelaagic  element  in  ill  con-
formation. (Thirlwall,//«t.  o/Onaoe,  ce.  i.  iliii. ;
Heeren,  Petit.  Hat.  of  Ortrct,  e.  7  ;  Bt.  Croii,
Det  Anaent  Gomentmiu  Fideraii/i  ;  Tittnuum,
Vibtr  dt»  jQuBJ  dtr  Amphu^oam ;  MUUer,
DoHmu,  bookii.3.g.6i  PMi.  Afw.  ToL  L  p.  324  ,-
Hermann,  Manuat  of  til  Polil.  Autii.  of  Oneee,
g  11^14  :  Wichamuth,  HdlatiMAa  AUaiitmu-
kmnie;  Niebuir,  Hit.  of  Some,  toI.  L  p.  31.
lran.U)  [R.W.1


AMPHITHEATBUH.

AMPHIDRO'MIA  (&fi^itp<l>ua),  a  ftinily  fc*-
tiral  of  the  Athenian!  at  which  the  newly  bom
child  waa  introduced  into  the  fiunlly,  and  receiTcd
iti  name.  No  particular  day  va*  Bxed  for  thii
■olemnity  ;  bnt  It  did  not  take  pUce  Terj  aoon  afUr
the  birth  of  the  child,  for  it  wu  beliered  that  moit
children  died  before  tha  iBTenth  day,  and  tho
(elemnity  waa  therefor*  genetaily  deforred  till
after  that  period,  that  there  might  be  at  leait  aome
probability  of  the  child  remaining  alive.  According
to  Siiidai,  the  fesIiTul  waa  held  on  Che  fifUi  day,
when  the  women  who  had  lent  iheu;  aanatanee
at  the  birth  waahed  their  handi,  bat  thii  pnrifi-
cation  neeeded  the  real  aolemnity.  The  frienda
and  relationi  of  the  pareota  whs  invited  to  the
fottiralof  theampliidn>mia,whidiwaa  held  in  the
erenidg,  and  ibej  generally  appiaied  with  jre-
ienti,  among  which  on  mentioned  the  cattle-fiih
and  the  marina  polyp.  (Heaych.  and  Haipocr.
I.  n)  The  honae  waa  decorated  on  the  ovtaide  with
olive  bmoche*  when  the  child  waa  a  boy,  or  with
garlonda  of  wool  when  the  child  wai  a  giii  ;  and
a  repoat  waa  prepared,  at  which,  if  we  eoay  jnd^
&Dm  a  fragment  of  Ephippui  in  Athenaena  {ix.  p.
370  ;  camp.  iL  p.  65),  the  gneata  must  have  been
rather  meny.  The  child  waa  than  carried  Rxmd
the  <in  by  the  nucae,  and  thni,  aa  it  were,  pre-
sented to  the  goda  of  the  bouie  and  to  tlbc  Gunilj,
and  at  the  tame  time  received  it!  name,  Co  which
the  gneiti  were  witneatea,  (Iiaeua,  Dt  Pyrrhi
Haertd.  p.  34. 1.  SO.  Bekker.)  The  cairyiig  of  the
child  ronnd  the  hearth  waa  the  principal  part  of
the  aolemnity,  &om  which  ita  name  waa  derived.
But  the  Scholiut  on  Ariitophnnea  (£yai(r.  758)
derive!  ita  name  from  the  Gut  that  the  gucati,
whUat  Che  name  wat  given  to  the  child,  walked  or
danced  arDund  iC  Thia  featival  ia  ■ametimea
called  from  the  day  on  which  it  took  place  :  if  od
the  aeventh  day,  it  ia  failed  t&otuu  oz  ISSojukt  i
if  on  tho  tenth  day,  taiTii,  &c  (Heaych.  and
Ariitoph.  ^0.523;  K.F.  Hemann,  LiAii.  d.
goUnJiimtliciai oIUrtiGawr  d,  Grwjhm,  g  48.

6.)  [US.]

AMPHIMALLUM. [Tipxa.]

AMPHICRCIA  M  AMPHOMO'SIA  (&fb

apuU  or  ifi^miioirlii),  the  oath  which  wat  taken,
both  by  the  pluntiff  and  defendant,  before  the
trial  of  a  cauae  in  the  Athenian  courta,  that  they
lid  ipeak  the  truth.  (Heaych,  Stud.)  Ac-
cording to  Pollux  (liiL  10),  the  as^Mareia  alao
included  the  oath  which  the  judgea  took,  that  tfaey
•-"'Tld  decide  aeeording  to  the  lawa ;  or,  in  case
■e  waa  no  axpmi  law  co  the  tubject  in  diipnte,
that  they  would  dedde  according  to  the  princijiles


»■]

AMPHITAPAE. [Tapis].

AMPH1THALAMU3. [Doictra]

AMPHITHEA'TRUH  (i^Uarpor)  wm  a

(cription  of  building  ammged  for  the  eitubition

of  combata  of  gtadiaton,  and wild  beaata,  and

ihlpi,  which  con!tituted  the  W>  amfAWuatniiaM.

IQljlDUIOBIB  ;  Vsnitio  ;  NiDUtcau.]

I.  If  Hiilory.  —  Such  eihibiuooa  —  which
were  peculiar  to  the  Romant.  and  which  were  iin~
known  to  the  Oieekt  till  the  Bomaoa  mtrodnced
them — originally  took  place  in  the  Posuh  and
the  CiHCua,  the  ahowi  of  gladiatrai  being  ginn
in  the  former,  and  thoae  of  wild  beaata  in  tha


AKPHITHB&TBUU.


k%  ad  tba  aan  wMtmU  ■Uagbls'  of  aninmiii,
■hid,  in  imoca  of  tinH,  cwna  to  be  the  bTODiiU
m— JM  if  the  Bamaiu,  For  theu  pnipOMa,
tki  oca  WM  kn  lung  ud  too  nanuw.  Mid  tbe
Mn  <ni  k  gnat  iaipcaiinait,  »  tlut  >  nav  fiinn
'  ■"'  '"  ' which  should  ftoeom-


MMMikglWti

«  bnldn^  ma  n


irr^iil  Inrlh
quTH  W  Deal


It  ban  &  good  tiev  of  the  qace


Ihain^  od  ananotW  the
!■■>  WM  enliBOfWU  bult  In
nH  te^  {■■*  peipetul  diM


la  plKB.  The  idea  of  inch
d,  u  the  nuns  {bnm  ^ifC,
•t  Ma  (MO,  iMorpgr,  a  liaatn)  Kemi  to  imiJ;',
bf  the  eiiiting  thcMn :  indeed,  the  £nt  am-
fUlWtR  nf  which  wa  hate  aur  acooont  —  that
■f  C  Soibcaiu  Curio  — wii,  Lterally,  ■  doMa
tii^n  *,  being  niiijum'l  of  two  theatrei,  placed
a  fnvta,  B  that  thej  ooold  be  taraed  ronnd,
fiHWm  ad  all,  and  placed  either  back  to  back,
Iniag  tm  aepanle  tbeatna  for  dnuoatic  ei-
li^itiw^  et  bee  to  &ee,  tenaing  an  ampbitheati^
W  Ihaibowiafgladialca  and  wild  bcaMa.  Thii
itiia,  which  WM  erected  bj  Curia  (the  cele-
baud  pvtwn  oT  Cbcmt),  for  the  celebia^ou  oT
U  fclher^  foDcnl  fUBo^  ii  dambed  and  lome-
by  Pliny.
L  15.  a.34  g  8.)  flie  next  amphj-
1  which  tbe
It  by  Jnlioa  Caeeir  bim-

. „  _  ,_, d  dietatonhip,  in  RC.  46

(Kb  C^  iliii.  22,  who  Ifani  deacribee  the  build-
mf.  afaiy  r(  Kanryrracir,  t  ul  jyi^if/arpar
^  ni  w^  wMPTsx^v  tSpoi  Inv  crap^i  fx*"
irmfH*^).  Thia,  howcTcr,  wa*  itill  onlj  of
wnd,  a  natenal  which  wa«  frequently  need  for
ikaina,  aad  which  wa^  tbenton,  natonlly
tiif^  la  ampUtlualrei,  bnt  which  Mmetiniea
fnnd  Badeqoate  ta  ta^ai  the  weight  of  the
'■■■B  body  of  nctUon,  and  thu  ocononed
■RBi  a-iiilnrt*  Fat  example,  ve  are  toU  that
*  »»ih»  — phitheaBe,  whiEb  wa«  built  at
nioae  in  tbe  leign  tt  Tiberiu  by  Atilini,  a
fti  I  ibaaii.  nrv  way,  in  coneeqnence  of  the  im-
fidtai^  m  the  feondatiMi  and  in  tbe  jointa  of
Ot  timbat,  mti  botied  dibec  20,000  or  £(J,OUO
VvbMd  ia  ita  nuB*.  (Soet  lOer.  40  ;  Tac
Jm.  a.  e\}  Then  woaden  hnildingi  wate,  of
imim,  alM  expoeed  ta  great  danga  bum  fin  ;
tBi  a  wooden  amphitbeatra  at  Placentia  waa
boKd  in  the  civil  war  between  Ottu  and  Vitel-
iv. (Tae^.HuiL  ii  20.)

Ii  ma  aot,  bowenr,  till  tbe  (buth  comulabip  of
lulai.t  I  m. llnl  a  niiaii  ilimlili  iiiiiiliilliiiiln.
<i  Oie^  wa  oecied  br  Statiliaal^ami,  m  the  Cam-
IB  HbIk  (IHod  CW  1L  33  ;  Snet.  Odae.  2S  ;
Tee.  Am.  B.  72  ;  SHab.  ti.  f.  3S6.)  Bat,  rince
tUi  hiiHin  *"  dettnytd  by  fire,  it  nnut  be  mp-
FbhI  Ah  Bdy  tlie  ihdl  WH  af  noDc,  and  the  kUi
b4  Ha  III of  wood. Tbia  edifice  wu  the  mly


l«'pB<aFbc«fiirlioM


oitmrdf  to  vectade,  while  the  Atom,  which
■■•  fv  lutilatiana  acccmpanied  by  miuiiL  night
t*«l(Maw  fit] J denibed bj the  wanl ^uv.


AMPHITHEATRUM.  83

one  of  tbe  kmd  until  tbe  boilding  of  tbe  Fiavinn
unpbilhcatre.  It  did  not  lotiify  Caligula,  who
eonimenced  an  amphitheatre  near  the  Septa  ;  but
the  work  waa  not  continued  by  Claudius.  (Dion
Can.  lii.  10  i  Snet.  OaL  IS,  21.)  Nem  too,  in
bis  Kccmd  conaulahip,  a.  o.  £7,  erected  a  vast  ain~
phjiheabe  of  wood,  but  this  was  only  a  temporary
building.  (Suet.  Ncr.  12  ;  Tac  Amt.  im.  31.)
The  ampbithcatie  of  Taams  wu  dutroyed  in  the
bnmii^  of  Kome,  A-n.  B*  (Dion  Caao.  liiL  16),
and  naa  probably  neTer  rolored,  as  it  ii  not  again
mentioned.  It  ia  still  a  question  with  the  lopo-
giaphert  whether  any  Itacea  of  it  ace  now  lisiblc
(Comp.  Becker,  ffioidi,  d.Ran.MfBr.  ToLi.  ff.  642,


idttaf


648.  and  Urlidia,  Seieirtibarg  Semi.  pp.  53,  H.+)

Tbe  oecticKi  of  an  amphitheatre  in  the  mid.  *
Rone,  pR^nrtioned  to  the  magnitude  of  tbe  i
was  among  the  designs  of  Augustns,  who  dalighte^i
in  the  qiectacla  of  the  lenatio,  and  eipocially  in
the  unconunon  ipedes  and  inunense  number  of  the
animals  exhibited  inthem  ;  so  that,  as  be  himself
informs  ui,  in  one  of  Ms  ttnatimut  there  were
no  less  than  3300  animals  slaughtered.  (Suet.
Vt^  9  i  Anr.  VicL  Epit.  1 ;  Momm.  Amiyr.)
It  was  not,  howerer,  till  the  reigns  of  Vesfasion
and  Titus,  that  tbe  design  of  Augustus  was  cairied
into  efiect  by  the  erection  of  the  ^npUMoofmn
Flavivn^  or,  as  it  has  been  colled  since  tbe  time
of  Bede,  the  Oibsssaiii  or  CUunam,  a  name  said
to  be  denied  from  the  ColoBua  of  Nen,  which
stood  dote  by.

This  wonderful  building,  which  for  maguituda
an  only  be  com[ared  to  Uie  pyramids  of  Egypt,
and  which  is  perbips  tbe  most  striking  mouamenl  at
once  of  tbe  material  greatness  and  the  moral  degra-
dBIioa  of  Borne  under  the  empire,  was  commenced
by  Vespasian,  but  at  what  precise  time  is  unoertun  g
for  the  genuineness  of  tbe  medal,  which  ii  quoted  by
Lipsius,  as  pladuR  its  commencement  in  bis  eighth
consulship,  A.  D.  77,  is  mora  Chan  doubtful.  (Rosche,
Lex.  Unh.  Bti  Nwm.  »L  t.  pt.  S.  p.  1017;
Eckhel,  Doelr.  Kim.  FeL  vol.  iL  p.  810.)  It
was  completed  by  Titus,  who  dedicated  it  in
A.  a.  SO,  when  6000  animals  of  difFereul  kinds
were  staagbtered.  (Suet  TV.  7  ;  Dion  Cass.  tni.
25.)  Frran  the  somewhat  obicun  auoual  of  an
old  writer  (Ortoi,  /stp,  fiam.  p.  243,  Rone.),  we
leani  that  Vcopaaian  carried  the  building  so  &r  as
to  dedicate  the  first  three  ranges  of  seats,  that
Titns  added  two  langes  moie,  and  that  Domitlan
completed  tba  building  tuqiu  ad  dypea.  Without
pto&ssing  to  be  able  to  explain  these  statements
tullj,  we  may  obserre  that  it  ia  extremely  pro-
baUe,  as  will  be  seen  more  deai^y  finm  tbe  de-
scripdco  of  tbe  building,  that  Titus  would  dedi-
cate tbe  amphitheatre  as  soon  as  it  n-ai  lit  fiir  use,
without  waiting  for  tbe  final  completion  of  tbe
upper  and  leu  essential  parts.

There  is  an  ecclesiastical  tradition,  bnt  not  en-
titled to  much  credit,  that  the  aichitect  of  tbe  6b-
liaatum  was  a  Christian,  and  afterwards  a  martyr,
named  (jaudentius,  and  that  thousands  of  the
a^lve  Jews  were  employed  in  its  erection.

The  Flavian  amphitheatre,  &um  its  enormous


Anrelian,  near  the  cbnieh  of  S.  Croce,  are  the  re-
mains of  an  amphitheatre,  of  brick,  called  in  the
NbUlia,  the  An^iOieatm  Gulraua.  Its  date  is
rely  nncertain,  (See  liirthcr  Becker,  Handb.  d.
RoMi.  Alter,  ToL  L  pp.  fi4fl,  &c)  -- ■ ,  ^  ■  - .


u


AMPHITHEATRUM.


liie,  nodered  the  nbKqnent  erection  of  any  other
inch  bailding  in  Rome  pofectl;  umeccuaiy.  It
beome  the  ipot  irhei«  jinnca  uid  people  met  to-
gether to  witaeu  ihoK  nnguinarf  eihibitioni,  the
degrading  eSecb  af  which  oa  the  RomsQ  cbaractei
am  bordl;  be  oTer-ntunated.  It  wai  thoroughl;
Tepsired  bj  Anioninm  Pjoi.  (Capit  Ant.  Pi.  B.)
Id  the  nign  of  MBcriniu,  oa  the  daj  of  the  Vulca-
nalia,  it  wai  itruck  by  lighming,  by  whidi  the
Uppernwi  of  benchea  vere  comumed, and  to  much
dAiDafle  wot  dona  to  other  parti  of  the  itruetnre,
that  the  gamei  were  br  Mime  jesn  celebnted  in  the
Sladinm.  (Dioa  Cau.  IxxdiL  25.)  Ite  reaton-
tion  wai  eommenud  by  Ebgnbaliu  and  completed
bj  Aloumder  SeTeni*.  (lamprid.  H^iog.  17  ;
AUx.  Srv.  2i.)  It  wu  again  itmck  bj  lightiung
in  the  reign  of  Deciiu  (Hienm.  p.  17S),  but  wu
■Don  restored,  and  the  gamet  continued  to  be  cele-
brated in  it  down  to  the  lixth  centuiy.  The  lateit
ncoided  eihibitioQ  of  wild  beaita  wu  in  the
leign  of  Theodoric  Sinoe  that  time  it  hai  been
used  Hmetimei  in  war  u  a  Ibrlieii,  and  in  peace
M  u  quaCTf,  whole  polocea,  iDch  ai  die  Canecllaiia
and  the  Paloizo  FaraeM,  haying  been  bnilt  oat  of
itfl  Bpaik,  At  length  the  popei  made  efforts  to
preHrve  it;  Siilui  V.  atlonpted  to  use  it  as  a
woollen  facloij,  and  to  courett  the  araules  into
■hope  ;  Clement  XL  enclosed  the  lower  anadei,
and,  in  1750,  Benedict  XIV.  conseraatcd  it  to
Chriitjana  who  had  been  martyred  in  it  The  bert
account!  of  the  building  are  contained  in  the  fbllow-
ingwnrki:  Lipiius  (is  JnpJUdnfro,-  Nibb;,  li'^
At^itaitro  Finim,  a  supplement  to  Nardini,  ToL  I
p.  233,  in  which  we  have  the  moat  complete  hia-
torical  account  j  Fea,  NhOjm  dtgli  wan  adt'
A^fitaatro  Flmio:  Bimsen,  Bndatibimg  d.  Sladt
Rom.  YoL  iiL  p.  319,  4c.  ;  Creaay  and  Taylor,
Jit  ArdttlKtmnd  AatigmSa  o/  flmm;  Muffai,
Verma  lUaitrala  ;  Stieg\la,  ArtiaoL  d.  BaiJaaia j
Hirt,  C^sdUoUe  d.  Bauhmit  bd  dm  Allat.

II.  DacrliMion  of  t^e  Flatmui  AmjiiilhMin, —
Notwithstanding  the  damages  of  time,  war,  and
spoliation,  the  Fhivlan  amphitheatre  a^  remnbia
complete  enough  to  gire  ni  a  fiiir  idea,  excepting
in  lome  minor  details,  of  the  stmctnie  and  ar-
raniHmenta  of  this  description  of  building.  The
notiee*  of  the  ancient  authors  am  eitremel  j  scanty  ;
and  VitniTiui  of  courte  hils  us  here  altff^ether  ;
indeed,  this  description  of  building  was  so  com-
jjetely  new  in  hii  time,  that  only  once  does  the
bare  word  amplatAeatrwA  occur  in  his  book  (L  7).
We  dcrire  important  aid  from  the  remains  of
amphitheatres  in  the  proTinces  of  the  ancient
Roman  empire.  We  shall  first  deaoribe  the  Co-
lisaeum,  and  then  mention  the  chief  points  of  dif-
ference between  it  and  these  atber  amphitheatres.

The  very  aitc  of  the  Flavian  amphitheatre,  as  of
most  others,  fumiahea  an  example  of  the  prodigal
contempt  of  labour  and  expense  which  the  Roman
emperors  displayed  in  then  greM  works  of  aicht-
lecture.  The  Orecka,  in  cboonng  the  ait«s  of  their
theatres,  almoit  always  availed  themsclvei  of  some
natural  hollow  on  the  aide  of  a  hill  ]  bnt  the  Roman
amphitheabea,  with  few  exceptions,  aOnd  upon  a
plain.  The  aile  of  the  Coliuenm  was  m  the  mid-
dle of  the  city,  in  the  valley  between  the  Caelins,
the  Esquiline,  and  the  Velia,  on  the  marshy  graand
which  was  prerioualy  the  pond  of  Nero^  P<i''oe,
ttagmm  fferomu  (SneC  Fttp.  9 ;  Martial.  d»  j^w*.
ii.  fi).  No  mere  measures  can  give  an  adequate
conception  of  this  Tast  sttQctni^  the  dimenstons


AMPHITHEATRUBC

ts  of  which  vere  snch  as  to  fumisli
s  for  87,000  spectators,  rotmd  an  arena  laig*
ugh  to  afford  space  fiv  the  oomhels  of  sernal
died  animals  at  once,  fcr  the  endotiDns  of
lie  sea-fights,  and  for  the  exhibition  of  artifi-
cial forests;  with  paas^es  and  staircases  to  giva


with  paas^es  a
sress,  wilhoat  i


tcndants  ot


r  the  thouaands  of
,  :hannela  for  the  n^
pid  infiux  and  outlet  of  water  when  the  arena  wai
used  for  a  iBimiaciiaj  and  the  meana  for  the  re-
moval of  the  carcaaies,  and  the  other  abominatLena
of  the  arena.  Admirable  pictures  of  the  magni-
tude and  magnificence  of  the  amphitheatre  and  iti
spectacles  are  drawn  in  the  Sain/t  of  Montaigne
(iiL  6.),  and  in  the  Utter  part  of  Oibbon^  twelfth
chapter.  Aa  a  general  dfacription  of  the  boiidiiw
the  following  paasage  of  Oibbrn  is  perfect :  —  "It
was  a  building  of  an  elliptic  figure,  founded  on  fboiv-
score  arches,  and  rising,  with  four  sncccuive  orden
ofarchitectare,totheheightof U0[lG7]fM.  Tha
outside  of  the  edifin  was  incruated  with  marble,
and  decorated  with  statues.  The  alopes  of  the  vast
concave,  which  formed  the  inside,  were  filled  anil
surrounded  with  sixty  or  eighty  rows  of  seats,  of
marble  likewise,  covend  with  cushions,  and  capable
of  receiving  with  esse  about  80,000  spectators.
Sixty-four  DDmtfonsi  (for  by  that  name  the  doons
were  very  aptly  dialinguisbed),  poured  forth  tho
immense  multitude ;  and  the  entruicea,  pusagca,
and  ataircaaes,  were  contrived  with  auch  eiquisita
skill,  that  each  penon,  whether  of  the  senatorial,
the  equestrian,  or  the  plebeian  older,  arrived  at
his  destined  place  without  trouble  or  caufusion.
Nothing  vnu  omitted,  which,  in  any  mpect,  conld
be  subservient  to  the  conTcniance  and  pleasure  of
the  spectators.  They  were  protected  from  the  aim
and  rain  by  an  ample  canc^j,  occasionally  drawn
over  their  heads.  The  atr  was  continnally  le-
freshed  by  the  phiyiug  of  fbuntaina,  and  pn~
ftuely  impregnated  by  the  grateful  scent  of  aii>-
malics.  In  the  centre  of  the  edifice,  the  arssa,  or
stage,  was  strewed  with  the  finest  sand,  and  snc-
ccssivoly  assumed  the  moat  different  forma. At

the  garden  of  the  Hesperidea,  and  waa  aftowanla
broken  into  the  rocks  and  caverns  of  Thrace.
The  subterreneoos  pipes  conveyed  an  incihanstible
supply  of  water ;  and  what  had  just  befme  b|>.
ptared  a  level  plain,  might  be  suddenly  converted
mto  a  wide  lake,  covered  with  armed  vessels,  and
replenished  irith  the  monaun  of  the  deep.  Ill
the  deooration  of  these  acenea,  the  Roman  em-
poon  diaplayed  their  wealth  and  liberality ;  and
we  read  on  various  occasinns  that  the  whole  fomi-
ture  of  the  amphitheatre  consisted  either  of  silver,
or  of  gold,  or  irf  amber.  The  poet  who  describoa
the  games  of  Caiinns,  in  the  character  ot  a  shep-
herd, attracted  to  the  c^tal  by  the  fame  of  their
magnificence,  affirms  that  the  nets  designed  as  a
defence  against  the  wild  beaats  were  of  gold
wire ;  that  the  porticoes  wees  gilded ;  and  that
the  Mf «  circle  which  divided  the  several  ranki
of  spectaton  from  tmch  other,  was  studded  with  s
precious  mosaic  of  beautiful  stones."

Tho  following  ground-plan,  externa]  elevation,
and  section,  are  from  Hirt,  and  contain  of  c«ma
soma  conjectural  detuls.  The  grnnnd  plan  ia  •■>
arranged  as  to  exhibit  in  each  of  its  qnaiteta  ths
plan  of  each  of  the  stories :  thai,  the  lower  light


AMFHITHEATRUH.
Ind  fqntH  iIhiwi  the  bue  ffntoid-^lMO^  or  that
of  Ik  lonA  noiT  1  lite  Hit  on  the  left  abowi  a
liao(tlwaecii«i<nllieleTelof  iheieoind  nw
rf  enBvir  cohumu,  u  well  u  the  aati  wtiicb
■hf«t  ion  frnn  that  lerel  la  the  lower  one  ;  the
■ul  quits  liunn  a  aimikr  plui  of  the  ttuid  order.


AMPHETHEATHUM.  SS

aad  the  upper  right-hand  quarter  exhibit!  a  view
of  the  iaterioi  aa  U  would  appear  to  an  eye  looking
vertically  down  upon  it.  The  dotted  llneg  on  the
ai«na  are  the  radii,  and  their  poinli  of  intenectioa
tbe  centiei,  of  the  Kveral  am  wliich  nuike  up  the


F THB rUVUH AHPHITHIAniK.


MUfSITUDDIAL  SICTMH


BS


AMPHITHEATRUM.

Thii  (tractnre,  like  all  the  othei  eiiating  «


phitbcatm,  ii  oif  An  eUiptical
Dealt;  lii  acn*  of  gmuid.  Tha  plaa  dividei  it-
«elf  natimdly  into  two  coueenlric  ellipiM,  of  which
the  inner  conitituted  the  arena  or  space  lor  the
cmnbati,  while  the  ling  between  thU  and  the  outer
ciiiumierence  wu  occupied  by  the  teata  tbc  the
apcclaton.  The  lengths  of  the  major  and  minor
met  a!  time  fUipeei  are,  retpeetiTely,  287  feet  by
180,  and  620  feet  by  SIS.  The  width  of  the
■pace  appropriated  to  ipectaton  ii,  theFefbre,  166}
feet  all  round  the  bmlding.  The  ratio  of  the
diajneten  of  the  ertemal  ellipM  a  neajly  that
of  6  to  £,  which  becomei  eiactly  the  prcpOTtion,
if  we  take  in  the  lubitmctioai  of  the  nnmdatioa,
Ofcaune,tha  ratio  of  the  diameten  of  the  arena  ii
difiennt,  on  acconiit  of  the  ditniniahed  liEe :  it  i>^
in  Ihct,  nearly  aa  8  to  £.  The  minor  aiii  of  the
arena  ii  here,  and  generally,  about  one-third  of
that  of  tha  outer  elhpie.  'Hio  material  uaed  wsa
atone,  in  large  hlocki,  fattened  together,  when
neeeaaary,  by  melal  clampi.  The  exterior  waa
bad  with  marble  and  adorned  with  itatuet.
The  external  eleiation  reqnirea  little  deacriptii
It  it  divided  into  four  atoriei,  oorreaponding  to  1
ticra  of  coiridon  by  which  acceu  wni  g^ed
(he  acata  at  different  lereli.  Thew!  cnridan  i
connected  with  the  external  air  by  eighty  anjhed
openings  in  each  of  the  three  lower  atonet.  To
the  piera  which  diiide  thete  archee  are  attached
three-quarter  ailumna,  that  ■•,  columna  one-fourth
of  vhoee  circumference  ^pcan  to  be  buried  in
the  wall  behind  them.  Thua,  each  of  the  three
lower  ttoriea  pieecnta  a  eontinnoua  &fade  of  eighty
columna  backed  by  pien,  with  eighty  open
between  them,  and  with  an  entablature  coi
unbroken  round  the  whole  building.  The  width  of
the  archei  it  aa  nearly  aa  poiaible  the  KUna
throughout  the  building,  namdy,  14  feet  6  inchei,
except  at  the  extiemitiei  of  the  diameteca  of  the
ellipie,  where  they  ar«  two  feet  wider.  Each  tier
it  of  a  diRerent  order  of  architectore,  the  lowett
being  a  plain  Roman  Doric,  or  perhapa  rather
TuKan,  the  next  Ionic,  and  the  third  Corinthian.
The  column!  of  the  lecond  and  third  aloriaa  are
placed  on  pedestala ;  thoae  of  the  loweK  story
are  tailed  from  the  ground  by  a  few  atepa.  The
higheat  tier  la  of  quite  a  different  character,  aa  it
meiely  conDtta  of  a  wall,  without  coiridora,  igamat
whict^  inatead  of  colrunoa,  are  placed  pilaiten  of
the  Corinthian  order  ;  and  the  wall  between  them
ji  pierced  with  windowa,  m  ^e  idtemate  interco-
InomiatioiLs  only,  and  thervTcov,  of  course,  fbr^  in
number.  The  whole  ii  cmwned  with  a  bold  en-
tablatore,  which  ia  pierced  with  holea  aboTs  the
brackets  which  aupported  the  feet  of  the  maata
upon  which  the  caforiina  or  awning  was  extended :
nndaboTetheeatablaloreiaatmaUattic.  Thetotal
boght  of  that  part  of  tha  building  which  remama
oddr,  namely,  ^>out  three-eightha  of  tiie  whole
cirenmfivBDce,  ia  1£7  &et :  the  atoriea  ara  respec-
tiiely  abont  30,  S8,  S8,  and  41  feet  hisL  The
mataiTenesa  of  the  cntwning  entablature,  the  height
of  the  upper  atory,  and  the  great  anr&ce  of  blank
waD  in  its  mtercolumniationi,  combine  to  giTS  the
elevation  i  somewhat  heavy  appearance ;  while
the  projecting  cornices  of  each  atory,  intratepting
the  view  from  below,  take  off  very  much  from  the
^ipaient  height  of  the  building.  Indeed,  it  wonld
be  a  waata  of  words  to  attempt  to  apecify  all  the
architectural  defeeta  of  the  compodtioB.


AMPHITHEATKUM.

The  Mane  naed  in  tha  bnildinf  is  a  raectea  of
tiBTertine  :  acane  of  the  blocka  are  as  rnnch  aa  five
feet  high,  and  eight  or  (en  f«t  ]iag ;  and  it  ia
remaikable,  that  all  thoae  which  farm  the  exterior
have  inscribed  upon  them  amall  numbeia  or  tigui,
which  evidently  indicate  the  place  of  each  in  the
building,  and  which  prove  how  great  waa  the
care  taken  to  adapt  erery  unglo  itona  to  the  fonn
of  the  whole  edifice.  In  some  parts  of  the  interior
large  nuusea  of  brickwork  and  tufi  an  teen:  and
in  the  upper  part  there  are  fragment*  of  other
buildinga  worked  in  }  bntthit,iio  doubt,  happened
in  aome  of  the  varioua  refairt.

There  are  coins  exlan^  bearing  on  the  revane  a
view  of  the  amphitheatre,  so  arranged  as  to  show
not  only  the  outside,  bat  a  portion  of  the  inieriw
alto.  It  is  from  them  that  we  lam  the  fact,  that
the  enter  arches  of  the  second  and  third  storiti
were  decorated  with  itatuea  in  their  openingi,  un-
less, indeed,  the  figures  shown  in  the  arches  are
meant'for  rude  reprraantations  of  the  people  paaa-
ing  through  the  outer  colonnade.  These  coim
a1»  show,  on  the  highest  story,  in  the  altemats
spaces  between  the  pilaatera,  circles  against  tlia
wall,  amvapondiog  to  the  windowa  in  the  other
alternate  apKes  ;  they  ore,  perii^H,  the  dgpea
mentioned  by  the  old  anthor  cited  above,  that  ia,
omiunental  metal  ihieldi,  hung  there  to  decorate
tbo  building.  There  are  leveral  coina  of  Titua
and  Domitian  of  this  type  (Edchel,  Dattr.  Mm.
Fei.  vol.  vi.  pfL  3S7 — 359, 37S).  There  are  similar
coins  of  Gordion,  which  are,  however,  very  inferior
in  eiecntioa  to  those  of  Titus  and  Domitian.
(Eckbel,  vol  viL  p.  271.)  The  coins  of  Titos
and  Domitian  alio  show  a  range  of  three  stoies  of
columns  by  the  ude  of  the  amphithcati^  which
(though  the  matter  it  doubtful)  is  simposed  to  re-
present a  colonnade  which  ran  from  the  palace  of
Titus  on  tha  Eaquiline  to  the  ampiiitheUre,  to
which  it  gave  acccaa  at  tha  northern  extremi^  of
its  minor  axia,  as  shown  on  the  plan.  At  the  other
extremity  of  this  axis  was  the  enlnncB  fimn  tlw
PaUtine.

The  eighty  aiehes  of  the  lower  story  (except
the  four  at  the  extremities  of  the  axes)  formed  th«
entranoea  &r  the  apectaton,  and  gave  admiasion
to  a  corridor,  running  nnintenuptedly  fmnd  tho
building,  behind  which  again  ia  another  preciacly
aimikr  coiridra'.  (See  the  plan  and  acction.)  Tha
tfnue  behind  the  aecond  corridor  is  divided  by
eighty  walla,  radiating  inwards  from  the  inner  pierv
of  the  second  corridor  ;  which  support  tho  struc-
ture, and  between  which  are  paitiy  st
"'leuppeisl

.  runs  round  the  whole  building.  Be-
yond this  OTcridor  the  radiating  walls  an  again
continued,  the  spaces  between  them  being  occa-
pied,  as  before,  partly  by  staircases  leading  on  tho
□ne  aide  to  the  pwftun,  and  on  the  other  to  tfao
lower  laiWB  of  aeala  (suenanDR),  and  partly  by
passages  leading  to  a  fourth  cnntinuona  corridor
:h  lower  and  amaJler  than  the  others,  which
divided  from  the  ama  by  a  maaaive  wall
(called  fioA'iaii),  the  top  of  which  formed  the  place
aasigned  to  the  spectators  of  the  higheat  rank.
From  this  fourth  corridor  then  an  aevoal  en-
trancea  to  the  onaa  /  and  it  is  moat  probabla  th&t
the  whole  of  the  corridor  waa  aubaerriait  to  the
airangementa  of  the  araiu.  (See  tha  tower  right-
hand  quarter  of  the  ^aa,  and  tha  sectkii.} Oit


AJlPHTTHEATBUlf.
iki  Mogad  MDTf  wt  han  the  two  otter  colon-
Bete  nalol,  tad  the  ndktiDg  mile  of  the

ti  benrem  them  ue  Annaiei  leubg  oat  on  to
■ki  1(0011  nnge  al  wti,  iitd  peaege*  leading
bB  m  mmU  hiirr  OMridor,  {ran  which  socon  ii  ob-
liieiil  to  B  aoct  of  t«n>ce  (prawiJufe)  which  timi
nod  tbe  baOdinf  betweoi  the  fint  and  nond
mtgmat  nati,  ud  inaeuM  the  bdlilM*  for  the
■II I  win  ■  gattmg  to  their  pnni  place*,  ^opi^
imv  fan  thk  ^raecnrfw  to  the  lefd  of  the  top  of
itt  pt^mm,  tad  pmioted  b;  the  iniei  Kriwof
B^ietH  waDi,  en  the  Iswv  enei  of  Matt.  On
tk  thM  rtw;  ^afaore  the  fiuv  of  irtiich  the  detaile
■s  ahaoet  entndf  eoojeclaial),  wa  hare  aflain
tfe  ^aUe  frJiMnBiVT,  the  inner  wall  of  which
a  B^KdiUdr  beUnd  the  tqi  of  the  Hcond
|e  ef  aeat^  with  ladj  the  iatvral  of  a  nanav


AMPHITHEATEUM.  87

u  alio  piened  with  viodowa. Abora  the  oater


bencfaea  lor  the  loweit  clou  of  apectaton.  Above
thia  meiiBiiiiis  wsi  a  ^crjr,  vhkh  ran  right
round  the  building,  and  the  front  of  wLicli  i^  vap-
poaed  to  haTD  been  fbnned  hj  a  range  of  coIiunnB.
It  (eema  that  the  tenaee  ioimed  W  the  top  of
thii  gailecj  voold  be  alio  available  for  apectaCoii.
And,  hedjr,  the  foj  munmit  of  Che  wall  waa
fonned  into  a  iort  of  teiracs  which  waa,  no  doobt,
oeeniHed  bj  the  men  who  worked  the  ropes  of  the
vilanmt.  The  doon  which  opened  bom  the  itair-
caiea  and  eoiridon  on  to  the  interior  of  the  am-
phitheatre were  degignated  by  the  Tei;  appmpriats
name  of  eaniiona.  The  whole  of  the  interior  wu
called  ansa.  The  following  aectian  (from  Hirt)
""'■"'""'" "' ~ ""  aa  deariy  ai  they  on


be  ihown  withaat  the  ud  of  petapecUTe.


I  coRaiDoiu^  gTAiaa,  a


l.  ILin.  IT.  Thefimritniaaaf  theexteriac.

^.  The  anna.

A-Tbepodiom.

CJJ.RF. Th«  taa  cvridni.

€KH.I. The  thne  maeuauB.

«.  TfcB  mwet  gaB««7  :  i.  The  tenaoa  owr  it


B.  The  Kiace  on  the  nmmiit  of  the  wall  fiir  tha
managere  of  tho  Telatrom.

Z.  The  itepa  which  miTOimded  Iho  hnHding  n
the  oatnde.

a.  Stain  boa  the  third  coIaaoBde  to  the  p«-


1  AUPHITHEATRUH.

b.  Short  tnniTUH  itepi  bom  the  podiiua  to  thi
It  muniBnuiD. (CompBrs  the  plan.)

c,  d.  Slain  &aiii  the  gnund  itOTf  to  the  lecond
lence  the  K«ond  maepiamim  wu  nacbcd  ii


itain  leading  direct  from  tha  ooiridon  of  the
d  itoiY  to  the  ucond  maeniamuii,  through


h.  Stain  leading  from  tiie  floor  of  the  iscond
Korr  to  the  nnall  upper  (tor;,  whence  other  itain
(I)  led  to  the  third  itorf,  A«m  vhich  aceeai  «u
obtained  to  the  upper  part  of  the  second  maoiia-
nam  b;  doon  (0)  m  the  inner  wall  of  the  aecond
corridor  a,

i.  Stain  tma  the  (Mond  *ta7  to  the  netn-


l.  Stain  in  the  mcunuiine,  leading  to  the  upper
part  of  the  third  iDaeniamuD,  and  to  the  gallery  K.

IB.  Stepi  from  the  gallery  to  the  terrace  over  it.

n.  Slepa  from  tlut  tcnsce  to  the  luiamit.

o.  p^  Onted  opening!  to  light  the  two  inner
corridon.

g.  See  nndcr  k.

M.  Window!  to  light  the  meinnine.

L  Wiadoan  of  the  gallery.

c  Reat,  and  te.  loc^*  fw  the  maMa  of  the  vela-

The'  ai«na  wai  enmnnded  by  a  wall  of  niffi-
eient  height  Co  guard  the  ipectaton  againit  any
danger  frrau  the  wild  beaita,  namely  abont  fifteen
feet  A  farther  protection  wai  afforded,  at  leart
■ometimei,  by  a  netmni  or  trellii  of  metal ;
and  it  i>  mentioned,  ai  bd  initanee  of  the  profiue
oitcntation  which  the  emperor*  were  to  fond  of
dlipliying,  that  Nero,  in  hie  amphithc&tie,  had  tbii
trellit  gilt,  and  ttl  inUnectioni  ornamented  with
bouei  of  amber.  (Plin.  H.  N.  niyiL  S.  all.
S  2).  The  wall  jiut  mentioned  appean  to  have
been  laced  with  marble,  and  to  hare  bad  idler*
BUipendsd  againit  it  ai  an  additional  protecdon


it.  (LipL  de  An^  12.)  The  terrace  on  the  t<^
of  thii  vail,  which  wai  called  podxam  (a  name
•ometimea  alao  affiled  to  the  wall  itaetf),  wu
so  wider  than  to  be  capable  of  containing  two,
or  at  the  moat  three  range!  of  movenhle  leatt,  or
cbun.  Thii,  ai  beiuc;  by  Eu  the  beat  titnotion
for  diitinctly  newing  the  aporte  in  the  arena,  and
alio  more  commodionily  acouible  than  the  aeati
bigher  up,  wu  the  place  let  apart  for  aeoalor!
and  other  penoni  of  diatinction,  loeh  as  the  am-
baMadon  of  fcnign  stat«*  (Suet.  Odav.  U  ;
Jut.  Sat.  ii.  US,  dec)  ;  the  magistntea  aeem  to
IiBva  vt  here  in  their  cnmle  cnain  (Lipaini  dt
An^  11);  and  it  wai  here,  also,  that  the  emperar
himself  used  to  sit,  in  an  elerated  place  oiUed
uggahu  (Suet  Caet.  7S  ;  Plin.  i'ow^.  £1),  or
eubiediiM  (Snet  ffem,  12)  ;  and  likewiae  the  per-
son who  eihihited  the  gamei,  on  a  phtoe  eleToied
like  a  pulpit  or  tribunal  {tdilotu  IHlnmar}.  The
TNtal  Titgins  al»  appear  to  have  had  a  place
allotted  to  them  on  the  padinm.  (Snet  Oetan.  44).
AboTO  the  poditun  were  the  gradtu,  at  seats  of
tbfi  other  apectatora,  which  were  diTided  into  stories
called  mwaiiw.  The  whole  number  of  scats  is
mppoaed  to  have  been  about  Mghty.  The  ial
■sasnOHUi,  cooiiitiDg  of  fourteen  rows  of  atone  of


AMPHITHEATRUM.
marble  seats,  wu  aj^iroprBtsd  to  the  eqneibfaM
order.  The  seats  approjakted  to  the  ieuaton
and  eqnites  were  covered  with  cushions  {p^
vOUm),  which  were  lint  used  in  the  time  of  Ca-
URula.  (Juf.  SiflL  iii.  1S4  ;  Dion,  lii.  7.)  Then,
oner  a  harisontal  ipaoe,  temed  a  prnteiitiio,  and
forming  a  continued  landing-place  from  the  sero-
lal  ntairrstrn  which  opened  on  to  it,  succeeded  tfaa
second  flUsiiufltifH,  where  were  the  seats  called
popaloTia  (Suet  Deaiitiaii.  *),  for  the  thhd  dan
of  spedBlorSiOr  thepofnifH.  Behind  thii  wasths
second  proKiaalio,  bounded  by  the  high  wall  a]~
ready  mentioned  ;  aboTe  which  was  the  third
iHiumiatHna,  when  there  were  only  wooden  bencbn
for  the  ftiBaA,  or  common  people.  (Suet  Otiae.


puilali,  or  common  people.  (I
'he  open  gallery  at  ue  top  w
part  of  the  amphitheatre,  m  which  w»u>^  ..^^
permitted  to  witness  the  games,  except  the  itatal
vinins,  and  perhaps  a  few  ladies  of  datinctioD  and
infiaeoce  who  were  suffered  to  share  the  spaca
appropriated  to  the  TCstals  (Suet  Oeiav.  44).  Tba
leata  of  the  aHunoiH  did  not  run  in  unbn^en  linei
round  the  whole  buildmg,  hut  were  dinded  into
portions  called  eiptn  (from  their  shape),  by  shmt
flight!  of  stairs  which  facilitated  the  access  to  tha
■a.  (Suet  Oct  44  ;  Jut.  SoL  tL  61.)  Sea
plan,  and  the  annexed  lectitm  of  a  small  portum


pretty  certain  also  that  the  d/lferent  amet  of

if  the  people,  who  were  at  once  guided  to  their
ilaees  br  unmbera  placed  over  the  eitenal  archea
'hich  the  building  was  entered  :  theae  numbers


ilillu


The  office


I  tlio


u  aisigned  tu  attoid-


distribution  of  the  places  w

ants  called  jbcaru,  and  the  whole  m

under  the  superintendence  of  the  altiat  ampU-

litalri.

It only  r
cenbal  open  i  ^

riYcd  iti  name  from  the  sand  i
colored,  chiedy  for  the  purpose  of  absorbing  the
blood.  Snch  empcron  o!  Caligula,  Nero,  and
Carinu),  thawed  tbeii  prodigolit;  by  niing  dnna-
bar  and  borax  instead  of  the  common  mnd.  It
was  boonded,  u  already  staled,  by  the  wall  of  tha
podimHy  but  in  the  earlier  amphitheatm,  in  which
the  podtMn  was  probably  not  so  lofly,  there  wem
ditches  {euript)  between  it  and  the  arena,  whicb
were  chiefly  meant  as  a  defence  against  the  e1».
phanti.  The  aripi  were  first  made  by  Julius
Caeiar,  and  were .  4>>pMi)«d  with  by  litn,  in


AlfPHrniEATRUK
Mdtrtggin  i^kc  ibt  the  ipBctMon. (SnaL  Cbo.
19 ;  PUn.  /r.  JV.  TiiL  7  ;  Lipuii*  <it  AmpL  12.)
TV  ipaee  itf  1^  new  wu  enudr  open,  e
ajt  tku  perbmpi  then  wh,  in  (li«  centn,  an  altar
■f  DiBB,  ir  PlaK^  er  of  Jnpiln  LaliaiU,  on  vhich,

■■iti»i,  that  a  6Mf>iiniu «■•  aorificcd  at  the nxn-
of  sf  dw  ganc*  ;  biil  the  eridmca  ii  Ttrf  ilighL
(lif.  J*  Am^  4.)  Thoe  wen  fstn  ^iocifal
amiMCT  to  it,  M  the  ertwrnitiee  «l  the  aiet  of
■k*  dlqae,  b;  pMigca  which  led  iiiectlj'  bma
ik  fan  ■  i™p>«iJ ji([  aRhca  of  the  ezMiol:
Am  woe  abe  mmor  Mttamt*  thnm^  the  wall
rf  tk  maiimm.  Then  i*  a  difflodlj  ahont  "
fx^tka  of  the  d»  of  the  wOd  beaMi.
B^iditj  with  lAidi  net  nnaiben  of  animalg  were
Is  Im  bto  the  «a  jjcorei  that  the  doie  miut
kx  b«B  diao  to  it  The  ipue  under  the
■^  to  We  been  dented  ortitd;  to  the  pawe
tf  Ik  ipeelalon,  with  only  the  «eq>ti<n  of  the
■astoaet  eotridiir,  the  eBtranoei  {ran  which  to
de  anas  NggM  the  (nhability  that  it  wu  ■ab'
■tey  (0  the  mla^  ;  bat,  eren  if  n,  it  vme  pro-
byj  aaed  nther  fcr  the  intrednctioD  and  moon]
(f  the  aniwle,  ihao  fir  tbeii  nfe  keeping.  Some
htc  ■iiaiiiai  A  dcm  in  the  wall  of  the  podium :
-  ■  ' the  jtar  181S,


^nwera  diKnoed,  which,  it  hai  been  rappoaed,
■*R  the  dema,  (toa  iriiich  the  aninall  were  let
law  na  the  aieBB  thnwh  Uf-iMn.  The
^i(f  drfBcahir  ii  to  ncBneug  each  m  anaage-
MBl  with  tha  bet  that  the  «m  wae  &«pieDtl<r
fcedid  Bid  aied  fee  a  nanl  combat,  and  that  too
ia  the  BrtOYala  betweac  the  G^ti  of  wUd-boute.
(CU)VB.  Belag.  ni.  M,  73 :  Uie  whole  poem  i*  a
■B7  iaienetiiig  diairiptinn  of  the  fjaniea  of  the
latdlhwtn.)  [NauiucKu.]  All  that  can  be
'  ~  ~  ^  'a  certainty  ii,  that  theis
deu  for  the  animala,  or
a  b  water;  and  poaubl;  they  maj  have
te^  to  anmged  aa  to  combine  both  laei,  thongh
it  ■  difiealt  to  nndetituid  how  tliii  eonld  hare
betB  Banagcd.  The  only  nwthod  of  talnng  the
difcahy  in  thoae  eaua  in  which  a  Maiaatoi  toiA
liaee  hAMoa  the  otoirtiiM,  aptaan  to  be,  to
aB^na  Ibt  the  aaianb  intaided  let  the  accond

ia  diaa  ia  ita  iiiiiiaiillalii  Tiduitj  dating  the  ami-
■aoUa  /  nnliei.  which  Hcmi  to  u  quite  incradi-

iiBe  adBittias  the  aif  to,  and  aiolndinf;  the  watei
froa,  ther  ceSa  beneath  the  anna.  In  the  am-
lliilliiatia  at  Tmoa,  then  an  nmainj  of  channel*

iyiM"ft  ill  in  initio.  batHDH  autiqitanec  belicTo
ibt  [hall  wen  only  tntended  for  dtainiug  off  the

y  ts  attempt  a  dctafled  dcacrip-
- -' Bamenta  with  whieii

^  by  wUd  the  ipeelatm  wen  ahdtend

i^  tk  BD,  nqoina  atma  ^lanatjim,  which
*£1  be  fand  ander  VkLDlc  The  nace  nqnind
(>  Ae  wtoki^  of  the  wlari— ,  and  the  ho^t
aeoeasiy  kr  keying  it  from  bandii«  down  by
te  awa  wa^  ao  lew  m  to  obattnet  theTiow  from
^  a9F«r  btarba^  an  probably  the  neeona  tot
tba  gmt  diipnipiatiaB  betwan  the  height  of  the
^ftr  (art  <(  the  ampUtbolti^  and  the  uoall
i^Am  of  ^MtMn  aetouMdMed  in  that  part.


AMPHITHEATBUM.  89

Tho  lomriooa  ^ipliancea  of  fonntaina  of  ecenled
water  to  re&eah  the  apectatan,  and  ao  forth,  an
•nffidenlly  deaciibed  in  the  pasiago  ftlnady  quoted
from  Oibbm. (Comp.  Lucan.  ix.  808).

III.  Oli^  Jt^Miaatra.  —  'nte  FlaTion  am-
phitheatre,  aa  hai  been  alnadf  itated,  waa,  from
the  time  of  ita  orectiDn,  the  only  one  in  Rome  ;
tat  the  obrioiii  reaion  that  it  wai  niScient  Ibr  Ihs
whole  population.  The  little  AwuUAtcarwu  Ou-
AwM  waa  [mbablj  enly  intended  for  the  loldlen
of  the  Roard,  who  amnied  thonaaliea  than  with
fi^ilt  of  qladiaton.  But  in  the  ptoripdal  dtiee,
and  eapeoally  the  ealmiiea,  then  wen  many  ao^
pluthcatiea.  Indeed,  it  ia  not  a  little  intonating
to  obeerra  the  contnit  between  tha  national  tartea
of  the  Qnelu  and  Htmaui,  which  it  indicated  by
the  nmoina  of  thtatna  m  the  coloniea  aC  the
fumer,  and  of  ampbitheatrea  in  thoH  of  the  latter.
The  imtnetiia  expeiue  of  theii  conitructiau  would,
bawerer,  naturally  pnrent  the  arection  of  many
inch  building)  H  the  Coliiaeum,  (Cajsiod.  £p.
T.  42l)  The  pronncial  ampbitheatna  wen,  pro-
bably, like  the  cariier  onea  at  Rome  itaelf^  gen»-
rally  bnilt  of  wood,  mch  ae  thoae  at  PlacoitBi
and  Fidenaa,  already  mentioned.  Of  theee  wooden
amphitheatrea  than  ara  of  coune  no  remains  i
but  in  Kveral  of  tha  laiger  dtiea  of  the  Roman
ampin  then  an  important  mini  of  large  am-
pbitheatna of  (tone.  The  ptiacnial  an  uoae  at
Venpi^  PaeatUD,  Ponpeii,  and  (^aa,  in  Italy  ;
at  NiuM^  Ailc^  and  F^iii^  in  Fimee  ;  at  Pda,
in  latiia  t  at  Syraeoae,  Catania,  and  ecma  other
dtiea  in  Sicily.  They  an  all  conatncted  <m  the
■ame  ganenl  [rindplei  ai  the  Colinenni,  from
which,  again,  they  all  dillsr  by  th  '
the  entemott  corridor  |  '
height  eonld  not  bare
while  iome  of  them  only  had  two.  Of  tha  Vero^
neee  anphilheatie,  tha  onler  w^  and  colonnailo
an  entiray  gone,  cicaptinE  fbnr  archea  ;  but  tha
nat  of  the  building  ii  umoat  perfect.  When
complete,  it  bad  aeTaity-two  anhei  in  tha  outer
circle,  and,  of  coona,  the  nme  number  of  radiating
walla,  with  their  paangea  and  ttaireaaet ;  the
length*  of  the  aiea  of  the  outer  allipae  wen  £00
and  404  feet,  thoae  of  the  arena,  343  and  146,
'na  probably  bnUt  nndtr  Domitian  and  Nerra.
(Mafiu,  FenMit  lOulrata.)  Tha  neit  in  import-
ance it  that  at  Nimea,  the  outer  dimanucni  of
which  an  computed  at  434  by  340  feel.  "  The
-itoioT  wall,  which  it  nearly  perfect,  coniiita  of
ground  atory  and  ufqier  atoiy,  each  pierced  with
nxty  aichea,  and  ia  aunnounCad  by  an  attic  Iti
height,  from  the  lefel  of  the  glmmd,  ia  abore  70
Engli^  feet.  The  lower  or  gnimd  ilory  ii
adorned  wilh  pihuten,  and  the  upper  widi  Tuacan
or  Doric  colinnna.  The  attie  BDOwa  the  hole*
deatined  to  raceiTe  the  poati  on  which  wai  itnlchad
the  awning  that  coTored  tha  amphitheatre.  Tha
nwm  of  aeatt  are  computed  to  hare  been  originally
I  umnber.  Than  wen  four  prindpal  en-
tttneea.  The  amphitheatre  bai  been  computed  to
h<M  17,000  penoni:  it  wai  bnilt  with  great
•olidity,  without  cemenL"  (fan.  Cyiap.  art.
iVtaKi.)  That  at  Ailea  waa  three  itorica  high,
and  haa  the  peculiarity  of  being  built  on  unefen
4  to  that  the  loweat  Hoi^  ii,  for  the  m«t
behnr  the  level  of  the  nubce,  and  the  prin-
entranee*  are  on  the  lecond  itoty,  (For  a
detmled  deacription,  we  Ouii,  DacTtfiiim  dt
rAwgMaatn  if  Aril,  1S6B  ;  and  J>s*.  Cyclop.


90  AMPHORA.

■rt,  Arbt.)  Both  theu  omphithealn*  belong  pro-
bably to  the  time  of  the  Antoainu  (Maffei,  da
An^  GalL)  The  amphithaln  U  PoLa  iMiidi
on  the  aide  of  a  hill,  uid  ii  highec  on  ono  lido  than
on  the  other.  There  is  little  to  lemaik  reapectiDg
the  other  amphithcatie*,  except  that  ■  fregmeot  of
an  iuicription,  found  in  thst  at  Capua,  informs  u>
that  it  «iu  built  under  Hadiiao,  at  the  coet  of
the  inhabitants  of  tha  citj,  and  wu  dedicated  bj
Aatonjnuf  PiTU  ;  and,  conceming  that  of  Pompeii,
that  the  earthquake,  which  preceded  the  eruption
by  which  the  city  mi  boricd,  injured  the  amphi-
theatre 10  much,  that  antiquariang  hare  been  dii-
^poiuted  in  loahing  for  any  neir  inionnation  ftom
it ;  there  ia  an  ezeeUeni  deicription  of  it  in  the
work  entitled  PoagtU,  toL  L  c.  9.  There  are  trace*
of  amphitheatrea  of  a  mder  kind,  chiefly  of  earth,
in  vurioD*  parti  of  our  own  country,  aa  at  Doi^
cheitei,  Silcheata,  Caerleon,  and  Rcdrnth.

IV.  t/n  o/eia  AmphiOtatn.—T^at  put  of
the  mbjcct  ii  treated  of  under  QLADUTOBia,
NiDUACHU,  and  ViNlTlONU.  Thii  ia  not  the
place  to  diacoB  the  inSaencs  of  the  apcctaclet  of
the  amphitheatro  on  the  character  and  deitiniei
of  the  Bomsn  people :  iome  good  remarki
aubject  will  be  firand  in  the  £*6  '  "  '

ag  KnofeUdge^  JIf auperuia,  ToL

AMPHOMO'SIA. [Akfh ^

AM'PUORA  (itupoptis,  old  form  A^i^vpi^,
nam.  IL  xxm.  107  ;  Od.  x.  ISt,  tt  iJO. ;  ScM.
in  ApolL  Rhod.  iT.ila7  ;  Shnon.  ia  AnA.  Pal.
liii.  19),  A  large  tcmbI,  which  deriTod  ila  name
from  ila  being  made  with  a  handle  ou  each  tide  of
the  neck  (torn  V^t  o"  1"^  '><'•'•  xi^  ■Kp*  ^o
carry),  whence  alu  it  waa  called  diala,  that  ia,  a
mad  v>i&  ivm  tan  {t'umt,  Sturei  sYiifiHi  or
kHutkos,  Plat.  H^.  M<(T.  p.  288,  d. ;  AtL  xL
p.  473  1  Moerii  t^  c.  ififapfa ;  Hot.  Oarm.  L  9.
8).  The  form  and  aiu  varied,  bnt  it  waa  generally
mode  tall  and  nonow,  and  termina^g  in  a  point,
which  could  be  let  into  a  Btand  or  into  the  gronnd,
to  keep  the  ¥caiel  npright ;  aeTeral  amphorae  hare
been  jonnd  in  thin  pontion  in  the  cellan  at  Pom-
poiL  The  following  cut  tepneeati  amphorae  from
tiie  Townley  and  Elg^n  eolleetiaiu  in  the  Britiah


AMPHORA.

The  nanal  material  of  the  amphoia  waa  eaithen-
ware  (Hor.  de  At.  PocL  SI),  whence  it  vaa  alao'
culled  tiOi  {Chrm.  I  20. 3) :  but  Homer  mentiona
themofgaldandof  alone  (AxziiL92;  Od.  uSt.
7i,  liil  10£) :  and  in  later  time)  glaai  amphome
were  not  nnccannioa  (Petnia.  54)  i  MTeral  hara
been  found  at  Pcanpeii ;  Mepoa  mentioni,  aa  a  great
rari^,  amphorae  of  onyx,  aa  huge  aa  Chian  eadi
{^.  Plin.  H.  N.  nut  7.  a.  12).  The  amphoni
waa  often  made  nilbout  handlei.  The  name  of
the  maker,  or  of  the  place  of  manubcture,  wai  >onio~
time*  ataniped  npon  them :  thia  ia  tha  caae  with
— -  ~  the  Elgin  collectioD,  No*.  2S8  and  244.


[Flo,


.«■]


Amphorae  wej«  need  for
Tarioua  thiugi  which  required  carefhl  keepmg,
inch  ai  wine,  oil,  honey,  grapea,  oliiei,  and
other  fruiu  (Horn.  IL  irr;;;.  170  ;  Colo,  R.  R.  i.
3{  Colum.  A.S.  liL  16,47;  Rut.  £^>od.  U.  15;
Cic  B.  Vtrr.iT.  74)i  for  pickled  meati  (Xen.  Awab.
T.  4.  §  28)  ;  and  for  molten  geld  and  lead  (Herod,
iil  96  1  Nepoa,  Haim.  9).  Then  ia  in  the  Britiih
Moieum  a  Teatel  naeanbling  an  amphoia,  whicb
containa  the  fine  African  aaod  need  by  the  athle-
toe.  It  wui  fonod,  with  aerenty  othan,  in  the
hatha  of  Titui,  in  1772,  Reapecting  the  ue  of
the  amphora  in  the  atreeta  of  Rome,  tee  Petron.
70,  79  i  PiopcFt.  ii.  S.  7S  ;  Macnh.  5at.  II  12  ;
and  the  commentatora  on  Lusetiai,  ir.  1023.
Homer  and  Sophoclea  menticm  amphoiae  aa  uied
Ibr  cinerary  una  (il  iniL  91,  92  ;  Soph.  J¥.
303,  Dind.)  ;  and  a  diacsTery  waa  made  at  Salona,
in  1825,  which  pnirea  that  they  vers  oaed  aa
coffina :  the  amphois  wa*  dirided  in  half  in  the
direcUon  of  ita  length  to  receiTo  the  caipae,  and
the  two  halrea  were  put  together  agwn  and  buried
in  the  earth :  the  akeletona  were  tonnd  atill  entiro.
(SteinbUcheI,^iIcr<jin>.p.E7.)  Amphorae  of  pu^
ticular  Idnda  were  lued  for  Taiiooi  other  pui^
poaea,  aneh  aa  the  ampAora  aontenKi  for  inigation
(Cato,  A,  A.  II.  g  3),  and  tha  ampiara  QWtes
which  waa  perhapa  a  wicker  amphora  itr  gathm-
ing  grape,  in. (nid.%2.)

The  moat  important  employnient  of  the  amphora
waa  for  the  preaerration  of  wine :  ita  nae  for  thia
pnrpoae  ia  Ailly  deacribed  nnder  Vihdm.  Tha
following  woodcnt,  Oken  from  a  painting  on  tha
wall  of  a  hotue  at  Pompeii,  re^o^aenta  the  mode  of
filling  the  amphora  from  a  wine-cart.


There  ia  an  intereatijig  auomit  of  the  aae  of
the  amphora  among  the  Egyptian!,  in  Sit  0.  Wil~
kinaoB^  Andal  ^/gitituu,  >ral.  ii.  pp.  157: — 160.


AMPTX.

plon  wu  alM  ipfilied  bolli  bf
be  SimiBu  to  &  definite  mtainra


tn^rim  id  tha  Onek  ififaptii. In  botk

in  to  bo  VI  ■JjbrQTiHXum,  Ihs  lou


ud  amphon,  tailed  oaqiloRi
a  kept  in  tli«  t(m{Je  of  Jnpler  on
tk  Ct^Mii  (Rbomn.  Fnm.  A  i'lMrf.  61 ;  Cniud.
IfoHL  1).  The  ■»  of  (bip*  ma  stiiiuted  by
Mphnar  (Cic  mi  jtM.  liL  15  ;  Lir.  nL  63)  i
Mi  tba  produce  of  a  liuejaid  wai  nckcmed  by
tha  BadMr  of  Miplerae,  or  of  chIb  (of  twen^
^p^H  (w±>,  which  it  :ri«ldtd.  [P.8.]

AMPLIATIO. [JuDKiuM.]

AMPULLA  (k^nifci,  ^gfiMiUu),  a  bottle,
•mbB;  BBda  (Mmt  of  ghii  or  (srtbenwan,  raiel;
rf  aa«  T^oibla  naUnali.  Bottla  both  of  ^tau
mimnkmwanitfntand  m  gnat  qnanthica
ia  oar  coOcctiaBa  of  anliqiiitiaa,  and  their  fanni
■*  nrj  nriaoa,  tboiuh  alwiTi  nanow-monlhed,
mi  ifma^j  nan  or  leal  uipnaching  to  ^obulBr.
Fi^  ibBT  nand  and  iwulen  ibape,  Honce  ap-
fGa  Ik  ToH,  aa  the  Graeka  did  Xitici^i,  to
iiAaae  paad  and  torgid,  but  cmptj,  langoa^
lH<e^  i.3.14,AJr./>oel.97.)  BoUleiweie
aiHl  (c  hH^*rg  all  kinda  of  liqnidi,  and  are  jnta-
UHd  — p— j-'iy  in  amiKtion  with  the  bath
Eioy  flinaah  look  with  him  la  the  bath  a  battle
J  d  (ampafia  olaaia),  for  antrintiiig  the  body
j6>r  >■— ^"g.  aid  ai  inidi  bottle*  freqoently  con-
wiaiii  tiufiiMid  mla  weRsd  of  ampiliaa  eotmiamae.
illan.iii.n.3G.) A  bottle  of  thii  kind  ii  figured

The ilralrr  in  bottlea  wna  tailed  angmSariut,
aad  part  of  Ui  bniineM  waa  to  earer  loem  with
kalker  turn  iaM>. A  bottle  ao  ooreted  wu  a"
MpdanWa. (Plant. Jteiliil451,5ttoL
I  > ,  teaparfd  with  Featni,  a.  n.  AiNita.)

AMPYS.  AMPYCTER  (l^mf,  i*iawmS/>),
(ded  by  the  BoSMoa  AnOtlt,  na  a  broad  band
V  ptea  af  Bctal,  *kich  Greek  ladita  of  rank  wore
^M  the  krAtad  aa  pvt  of  the  bead-dreH.  (/L
HB.  4a — 170  ;  Aeaeh;L  a^f.  431  ;  Tha
SX)  Raee  iliaaltribatod  to  the  female  diiii
liliiMii  wtma  a  frmlal  of  gold  (zpHr^u'  l^viiini,
Smf.  Aac  464}  ;  and  the  epithet  xpHn^nKK  is
a^  tjad  by  Honor,  Heaiod,  and  Piadar  to  the
llnoa,  lb*  Honn,  and  tha  Fates.  From  the  ei-
n^mu  94(<D'  in  B  fragment  of
■J  inte  that  thia  oniBOietit  woa
la  of  bias  iteel  (mWoi)  initead  of
foU  -  and  the  Schnliut  <ai  the  ahore  eUed  pauage


nched  vith  paciaia  itone&

Titfin^altfahmt  WH  tailed  by  the

nek KBtoiali. Hence,  in  the  Iliad,  the  honei
■sich  diaw  the  eharioti  of  Hem  and  of  Area  are


Tbv  T^mnr*^  voodent  ezhibit^the  frontal  c
bad  ^  Pepana,  taken  from  one  of  Sir  William
H^nihi^^  Taaea,  b  cantiait  with  the  crarea,
as  aa^mait  ai  alMwn  on  the  heacli  of  two  fEinalea


a  were  alio  worn  bj  elephaata. (Lit.
I.) Htajehioa  (a.  v.  toMif  N^)  lap-


poaee  t^e  men  to  hare  worn  frontali in Lj-

dia. They  appear  to  ha»o  been worn by  Iho

Jeva  and  other  nationa  of  the  Eaat. (Deut.  vi.  6,

.  18.)  [J.  Y.]

AUULSTUM {mfiamr,  mplaii/M,  ^mXa.

'rr4pwr),*ngm(ilet Thia  word  in  Aiabie  (Hama-

t)  meant  &at  tDkick  it  tiupaidtd. It  waa  probably

aught  by  Aiabian  merchania,  togelhm  with  the

ticit*  to  which  it  wni  applied,  whan  they  were

iponad  into  Euinpe  from  the  East. It  fint  occnn

Ihe  Natural  History  of  Pliny.

An  amnlet  waa  any  object — a  itone,  a  plant,

an  artificial  prodnctioQ,  or  a  piece  of  writing  — .

which  waa  nupended  from  the  neck,  or  lied  to

any  port  of  the  body,  for  the  pnipoae  of  cmutleiact'

ing  pDiMn,  curing  or  preyenting  dieeaie,  wniding

off  the  evil  eye,  aiding  women  in  childbirth,  or

obviating  calamitiei  and  aecuring  adrantagei  of

any  kind.

Faith  in  the  Tirtnea  of  amnleta  waa  almoat  nni-
venal  intbe  ancient  world,  ao  that  the  whole  art
of  medicino  coniiited  in  a  Tery  conaiderable  degree
of  directioni  for  their  application  ;  and  in  propor-
^n  to  the  quantity  of  amnleta  preterred  in  oar
coUectiona  of  antiqujtiea,  ia  the  frequent  mention  of
them  in  ancient  tratitet  on  natoial  hiitory,  on  the
pmctice  of  medicine,  and  on  the  Tirtoes  of  planta
and  ttonea.  Some  of  the  amnleta  in  onr  mnMuma
are  merely  rough  tmpoliahed  fiagmenia  of  auch
■tone*  aa  amber,  agate,  cornelian,  and  jaaperj
othen  are  wrongbt  into  the  ihape  of  beetlea,  quod-
mpeda,  ^ea,  fingen,  and  other  memben  of  tha
body.  There  can  be  no  donbt  that  the  lelec^on
of  atonea  either  to  be  let  in  rings,  oT'  strong  to-
gether in  necklaces,  waa  often  made  with  reftraice
to  their  repnted  Tirtues  as  antnlets.  (Flin.  H.  JV.
ht.  9.  i.  67,  nil-  4.  a  19,  izi.  la  a.  34.,  ixivii.
8.1.S7.) [Fiacmua.]  [J.Y.]

A^USSIS  or  AMUSSIUH,  a  carpenter's
and  mason's  instrament,  the  oae  of  which  waa  to
obtain  a  true  plane  snr&ce ;  bnt  ita  constmction
i*  difficult  to  make  out  from  the  atatementa  of  tho
andent  writeia.  It  appears  clearly  from  VitjuTina
(L  6.  S  6)  that  it  wu  different  froat  the  r^tla
(alraight  rule),  and  fitim  the  ISidla  (plumbline  or
•qtuire),  and  that  it  waa  used  {or  obtaining  a  truer
nirftce,  whether  horicontal  or  petpendiciUar,  than
those  two  inatmmenta  together  would  giro.  It  is
defined  by  the  gramnmrians  as  a  ngyia  or  U^vla,
made  perfectly  plane  and  smooth,  and  used  for
makingwerk  lerel  and  for  smoothing  atones  (Si^ab
adquam  aiiipad  aaejaoAir,  Fesloa,  i.  v. ;  wniisiu  art
aeqaaiatKiimi  Ueigaluni,  a  td  <^iad /abnt  latiila
quaedam,  qua  utuntur  ad  Kaa  lemganriii,  Tair.  ap.
Non,  i,  28) ;  and  another  grammarian  icry  dearly


93  ANAKETA.

dcKribea  it  oi  >  pUse  tarhce,  anerei  iritli  red
ocbrc,  which  VBi  pluxd  on  wodi,  in  order  to
tat  iti  HDDothneu,  which  it  of  coiuh  did  by
liA'ing  the  mark  of  tha  red  ochre  on  anj  pro-
jectioni. (^nWDii  eti  laMa  nbriaila  quae  de-

turgal,  Siwnna,  op.  Oarit,  iL  p.  176,  Pntich).
There  WHA  bUo  a  difleieace  of  opiiuon  among  the
grammanani,  whether  the  unuuia  was  only  on
inatninient  for  trying  B  lcr«l,  or  a  tool  for  actuaU;
nuikiiig  one  (Fcitui,l.ii,  Eramuaim).  The  unn^
•ii  VHc  made  Kmetimet  of  iroa  (Fat.  Uid,  \  and
•ometimei  of  muble  (VitruT.  L  a).  It  girfi  ri»
to  the  adrerba  aauaiun,  adanuatim,  and  aisniiii-
nm,  meaning  with  perfect  regnlari^  and  eTact-
neu. (See  Forcellini,  Leii/rm.)  [P.  S.]

AMU'SSIUM. [Ahubsu.]

ANADE'MA, [Mrrai.]

ANADI'KIA  (*«iB«la). IApii-latio.]

ANA'OLYPHA  or  ANAGLYPTA  [tri^
^Xv^o,  dlnlyXinrTa),  choaed  or  embeased  tcbkIi
made  of  bronie  or  of  the  predoni  metola,  which
derived  their  name  from  the  work  on  Ihrm  being
in  relief  and  not  engiaTed.  (Plia.  H.  N.  miii.
Jl,  a.  49  i  Tirtj.  Aa.  T.  267  ;  Martial,  it.  39  ;
Cailatuka  ;  ToRBDTicS.)  The  name  wbi  alio
applied  In  icDlpbind  genu.  [P.  S.]

ANAOLYPTA. [AnaOLTTBa.]

ANAONOSTAE,  alM  called  Lietartt,  were
■laTM,  who  wen  employed  by  the  educated  R«niaiu
in  reading  to  them  dnring  meala  or  at  other  limea.
(Gn-adAtt.  i.  IQi  CerB.Nep.Atl.lii  Plin..^.
1.  15,  iiL  5,  ii.  36.)

ANA00'0E3  DIKE'  (iwrywrft  tUc,).  If
an  individoal  aold  a  alare  who  had  ume  lecret
diaeaae — aueh,  for  initance,  aa  epilepay —  without
Infonning  the  purchaser  of  the  ^rcumatance,  it
waa  in  the  power  of  the  latter  to  bring  an  action
againit  the  Tender  within  a  certain  time,  which
was  fixed  br  tha  lawi.  In  order  to  ia  thii,  he  had
to  report  (dvdfiiv)  to  the  proper  authorise*  the
nature  of  Uig  diaeue ;  whence  the  action  wai  called
iraytir/iit  Sdoj.  Plato  nippliea  na  with  aome  infbim-
Btion  on  thii  action  ]  but  it  ii  nncerlain  whether
hia  remarki  apply  to  the  action  which  waa  brought
In  the  Athenian  conrtii,  or  to  an  imaginary  form  of
preceeding.  (PlaL  Leg.  xL  p.  916  ,-  Huych.  i.  n
araysryi :  Snid.  i.  v.  irarytiyl],  MytvBtu ;  Meier,
AH.  Fncat,  p.  £2£.)

ANAGO'OIA  {i»ayifn\  a  featiral  celebrated
at  Eiyx,  in  Sicily,  in  honoar  of  Aphrodite.  The
fnhabitanU  of  tha  place  believed  that,  during  thia
fntiral,  the  goddeu  went  over  into  Africa,  and
that  all  the  pigeona  of  the  town  and  its  neigh-
banrhood  likewise  departed  and  accompanied  her,
(Aelian,  HM.  A*.  iT.  2,V.H.i.U;  Athen.  it
p.  894.)  Nina  d^i  afterwardi,  at  the  M-called
fOKToyivyia  (return),  one  pigeon  haTing  returned
and  entered  the  temple,  thereat  followed.  Thia  waa
the  signal  far  general  rejcicing  and  fcaating.  The
whole  diatrict  waa  oud  at  tnit  time  to  nnell  of
tmtter,  which  the  inhabitanta  believed  to  be  a
ugu  that  ApbrodEia  had  returned.  (Atben.  ii.
p.  395  J  comp,  JC.  F.  Hermann,  LtM.  d.  gottet-
iitral.  AUerti.  d.  OritdtH,  |  SB.  n.  29.) [L  S.l

ANAKEIA  (Ifihtia)  or  ANAKEION  (dMU
Ktiar),  a  featival  of  tha  Diaacuri,  ar  'Amirrtc,  ai
they  were  called,  at  Athena  (Heaych.  vol  i
p.  92£  ;  Pollui,  I  37.)  Athenaena  (n.  p.  SS5)
mentiana  a  temple  of  tha  DiaKnri  called  'Ai^tior,
at  Athena;  be  alio  infoima  ni  (It.  p,  137)  that


ANAKRISIS.

the  Atheniani,  prababty  on  the  oceMiM  of  thia
featival,  need  to  prepare  fut  theoa  haroei  ui  the
Prytaneiiun  a  meal  coniiitiDg  of  cheeaa,  a  bailey-
cake,  ripe  figa,  alivca,  and  garlic,  in  rCBnembraoce
ef  the  ancient  made  af  living.  Tbeae  henei
haweTer,  receiTed  the  meat  diitinguiabed  hononn
in  the  Dorian  and  Achaean  aCatea,  where  it  ma;
be  anppaaed  tlut  every  town  celebrated  a  featival
in  their  hanoor,  though  it  may  not  have  been  under
the  name  of  imnio.  Panwniaa  (i.  38.  3)  moi'
tiona  a  fettival  held  at  Amphiaaa,  called  that  of  the
indnw  wafiiBr :  but  adda  that  it  waa  diaputed
whether  they  were  the  Diaacuri,  the  Curetea, »- the
Cabciri.  (K.  F.  Hermann, Zatri.  d.  goUadlaiM.  Al-
lerti.  d.  OntAat,  §  62.  n.  27.)  [L.  S.]

ANAKEl'MENA  (lHi«l>un).  [Donaafa.]
ANAKLETE'RIA  iiinicKirH)pa\  the  iiama
af  a  aolemnity  at  which  a  young  prinoe  wai  pro-
claimed  king,  and  aacended  the  tonne.  The  name
waa  chiefly  a^filied  to  the  acceaaion  of  the  Ptoleniaic
kiiaa  of  Egypt  (Polyb.  R^.  iviii.  38,  zzviii.
10.)  The  prince  went  to  Memphii,  and  waa
there  adamed  by  the  prieata  with  the  aacrod
diadem,  and  led  into  tha  temple  of  Phtha,  when


inded  of  the  auHeringa  af  <c
joicinga and  aacrificea  concluded the  aolemnity.
(Diod.  Fragm.  Ub.  Tit)  [L  3.]

ANAKLYPTE'RIA.  [MiTEWosnrH.]
ANA'KRISIS  {tjiiKfunt\  the  prelinuoarj
inveitigatian  af  a  case  by  a  magiatrate  or  archoo,
before  it  waa  brought  hefan  the  oonrta  of  juatice
at  Athena.  Fta  the  purpose  af  aacertaining  wha-
ther  the  action  waold  lie,  both  paniea,  the  oom-
plainant  and  defendant,  were  lummooed,  aeps-
mtcly,  and  if  either  af  tham  did  not  appear  with-
aut  a  formal  nqaeit  to  have  the  matter  ddiyed
(tavfuwia),  he  tacitly  pleaded  guilty,  and  accord-
in^y  loat  the  mit.  (Democth.  a  71a«r.  p.  1 324.)
The  anacriiis  began  by  both  the  plaintiff  and  th«
defendant  taking  an  oath,  the  fonner  thereby  at-
testing that  he  bad  inatituted  the  proeeention  with

latter,  that  to  the  beat  of  hia  knowledge  he  waa
innocent  (irmiuala).  (Timaeua,  Lex.  PlaL  p.  38,
with  Rnhnken*!  note  ;  Diog.  LaerL  iL  40 ;  PlaL
j4;jo^  Sotr.  3.)  It  waa  further  prraniaed  by  both,
that  the  iTibaequcnt  proaecution  and  defenca
ahsuld  be  conducted  with  faimeaa  and  jnatice.
(Hupocrat.,  Suid.,  Heaych.  a.  v.  i^mfwria :
Pfllliu,  viiL  123.)  If  the  defendant  did  not
bring  forward  any  objection  to  the  matter  being
brought  before  a  court  of  jnatice,  the  proceeding
waa  termed  tWvIuElB.  (Demoath.  e.  Plum.  p.  908,
e.  Stepi.  p.  1103.)  Such  objection*  might  1m
raised  in  regard  to  the  incompetency  of  the  cotirl

which  the  matter  waa  to  be  refoired,  or  m  regard.

the  form  in  which  tha  accoaatian  waa  bnmght
forward,  and  Iha  tike  (Lya.  e.  Fund.  p.  733  ;
PoUnx,  viiL  57}  ;  they  were  alwayi  looked  npota
will)  anipicion  (Demoath.  c  LeaA.  p.  1097,  p.
Phont.  p.  944}  ;  but,  ncTerthelcaa,  they  were  oat
unfrequently  raarted  to  by  defendant!,  either  in
the  form  of  a  tia/aipTiipla,  or  that  of  a  raprffio^.
In  the  caae  of  a  ffu/U(m<plaL,  the  plaintiff  had  t(k
bring  ftTward  witneaaci  to  ahow  that  tha  (il>..
jeclioua  railed  by  the  defendant  were  unfounded  -
and  if  thii  could  not  be  dcme,  the  defsidant  had  (^
right  to  bring  witneaiea  to  ahow  that  hia  objeetioiiM


AKAXKISIS.
H  jotiee,  and  fa  ■ccordmce  *ith
tlw  bwi. But  CMh  tf  tlia  Ihigmt  jartiei  might
—  n«  at  hk  opptmeDt  h  teite

3 —  'iwniit  mighi  be

Ifthe  !«

nfia  ma  looted  to  in  ■  dnl  csie,  the  pailj
mitt  a«  of  it  bkl  to  depoBt  a  nun  of  m
(lifnaiMfiri),  utd  when  iha  plaintiff  loit  hu
■dt,  be  had  to  paj  to  tha  defendant  a  fine  for
1  witbont  fbnndatiim.
the  pnpertjr  of
«  onJv  form  is
sd.  (BeUer,
E.  p.  236.)  The  T^wwo^  WM  an  ok-
jririo  m  wntiiig,  which  wai  made  hj  the  de-
ladao,  vithent  hii  saplojin^  any  witaaaea,
■4  vhich  VM  decided  iqion  m  eomt ;  and  in
tkia,  aba,  the  loaer  had  to  pay  a  Sat  to  tha  nrtj
te  pi^d  the  nik  (Pollux,  TuL  £8.)  When
tkepfaimiff  guucd  hii  ate,  the  praeention  pro-

. . ■ r_ r. ,__ f^^  irrr/fa^

rooni  fhia  a  mere
«  deftndant  might  tnni
Miim  llii  iiliiiililT.aiiil
ka.  S^  an  acciaal
mmI  ia  the  diiliiiilaal  chaiging
bnag  BO  right  to  iJaim  the  {oirilegBi  of  an
IrtiBJiii  dliieB,  in  eaueqaence  of  whkh  the
koa  -■■■  Kcrated  fram  uetdiing  thoee  prifi-
JnR*  aalfl  M  hid  wtiUiriied  hit  ^inu  to  them.
TVk  imi  tl  itii-ifmfi  mi  Gnqnentlf  a  men
teneelD  amur  tb«  daintiK

ii«i|liaii :  nd  bum  what  thn*  took  ,
(for  dat  the  main  part  of  the  eTidcoce
■da*  vaa  bnnglit  not  in  the  irixfirii,  and  at  the
Kgakr  trkl  in  »ait  the  main  object  voa  to  nor^
^■B  the  mmd*  of  the  jndget  through  the  in-
farari  tJ  the  onton,  wiUi  refersuie  to  the  eri-
deaee  bnt«fat  ent  in  the  iriK(ira.  The  latter,
thcn^ce,  fUBTT*— '  of  the  dmpla  etidenoe  which
leqaited  no  ontotieal  diaraaaim,  and  which  wai
- 1.  in  lam  ;  2.  in  docnmenta  ;  3.  in

■ nt  free  wiUewa  ;  4.  in  tha  nate-

■  rf  dana  ;  and  £.  in  oalhb la  all  theae


rvtj'  te  knig  tenid  nich  nthei  eridence  u  waa
■«  abeadr  ginn-  (Demoath.  c.  iStpL  p.  1006,
«7hMr.p.987.(i.i>iaiMaa.p.978.}  There  wai,
Waam,  na  etiiet  oblignion  to  comply  with  loch
a  1  (Denuath.  aObeip.  p.llBl),  and  in

iiiiaiii  caaa  the  perty  aUed  npon  might,  in  i£-
oadimee  with  lalalJlilinl  lam,  tvfitie  to  comply
with  the  i«—»l ;  bt  iutaDce,  pennu  belngmg
■•  iha  HBe  faaiily  eoold  mt  ba  conpelled  to  ui-
fBir  aa  witacBea  againat  one  mother.  (DemoatL
c.  rM.  f,  1195.)  Bat  if  the  nuling  of  a  doca-
■  111.  ihupiiig  light  npco  the  point  at  iine,  mi
iifiid,  the  other  party  might  biing  in  a  tint  «ti


^_____ ..,.._. „  ofthelawa,

a*  kMvn  ;  btf  ft  i*  Whly  Fmbable  that  any
>■  whs  toah  a  copy  in  the  archiTai,  had  to  get


Other  legal  docnmenCa,  anch  a*  contncd  (crvr-
Si\Kcu,  avyypa^),  wilU,  booka  of  occounu,  and
other  lecoidi  (Demorth.  p.  Piorm,  p.  960),  not
only  repaired  the  lignatue  and  leal  of  the  party
GODcemed,  but  tbeii  aathenticit;  had  to  b«  attetlod
bywitnceKa. (Demoath.  a  Oiwf.  p.  869).

Eridence  [liofnipla.)  woa  giien  not  only  by  free-
born  and  grawn-np  atiiena,  but  alio  by  itiangen
or  aliena  (Demoath.  e.  LaeriL  pp.  927,  S29,  930,
937),  and  eien  from  abnnt  pertona  eridence
migbt  be  procored  {iKfiaprvpia,  DemoatlL  o.  Siepk,
p.  1130  ;  Polliu,  viii.  36),  or  a  atalemenc  of  a
deceaeed  penon  might  be  lefeired  to  (^ffj]t
HafTVfur,  Demoath.  o.  SUfi.  p.  1130,  o.  Ltod,
p.  1097).  If  any  one  wai  called  upon  to  bear
witaeaa  (■Airrt^u'),  ha  could  not  r^bie  it;  and
if  he  tefiiied,  he  might  be  compelled  to  pay  a  fine
of  1000diacImiBe(Demofth.da.fU(.i^.  pp.3i)G,
403  i  Aeachin.  s.  jThkht.  p.  71),  nnleaa  ha  caold
eatabliih  by  an  oath  (^Ea/i«rla),  that  he  wu
unable  to  give  hii  eridence  in  the  cue.  Any  one
who  bad  promiaed  to  bear  witneai,  and  afterwardi
biled  Co  do  *o,  became  liable  to  the  action  of  tin)
Atn-a/upTuplou  or  0UCi]i.  The  eiidence  of  an
avowed  friend  or  enemy  of  either  par^  might  be
rejected,  (Aeachin.  e.  Taxoer.  p.  72.)  All  o*i-
dence  wai  either  taken  down  In  writing  u  it  waa
given  b;  the  ititneiiei,  or  in  cue  of  ita  hanng
been  aent  in  preriooaly  in  writing,  it  waa  tead
aloud  to  the  witneai  for  hia  recogniti<m,  and  he
had  genefsllj  to  cmfim  hie  itatement  by  an  oath.
(Denuath.  a  JUfkl.  pp.  1115, 1119,  USO,  (^Gn.
p.  1269  i  eomp.  Diog.  Laert.  if.  7.)  The  toti-
mony  of  alaTai  wa*  Talid  only  when  eitorted  by
initnunenti  of  tortnre,  to  which  either  one  poHy
might  offer  to  eipoae  a  alave,  or  tbe  other  might
demand  the  tcnoM  of  a  alare.  (Demorth.  e.  Ni-
tottr.  p.  1254,  a.  Apiab.  p.  851, «  Oiui.  p.  874,
0.  .Stifi.  p.  1135.)

A  dittinct  oath  waa  required  in  caaei  when

been  remarked  sboTs  that  mtha  were  alio  taken  to
eonfirra  the  aatbentici^  of  a  doeununt,  or  tfie  truth
of  a  Itatement  of  a  witneea, [jDBrDKJKnuM.)

If  the  eridence  produced  waa  lo  dear  and  n-
tia&ctory,  that  there  wsi  no  donbt  ii  to  who  waa
right,  toe  magiatrata  coold  decide  the  caie  at
oDce,  without  KadiDg  it  lo  be  tried  in  a  conrt.
I>iiring  the  anacrisii  aa  well  aa  aJUrwardi  in  the
regular  court,  the  litigant  partis  might  lellle
their  diapute  by  an  amicable  artBngemcnt.  (De-
nuath.  a.  TTuBcria.  p.  1 328,  e.  Mid.  p.  529  ;  Aetehin.
lU  FaU.  Ltg.  p.  269  ;  PoUiti,  riiL  143.)  But  if
the  plaintiff,  in  a  public  matter,  dropped  hii  accn-
■Blion,  he  became  liable  to  a  fine  of  1000  drach-
mae, and  iDCuried  partial  atimia ;  in  later  tfmea,
howeier,  thit  pnniinment  wsi  not  alwaya  inflicted,
and  in  ciril  caaca  the  plaintiff  only  loal  tha  imn
of  money  which  he  bad  depcdted.  When  the
paitiee  did  rurt  come  to  an  underatanding  daring
the  anacniii,  all  the  Tarioui  Itindi  of  eridence
hroQght  forward  were  put  into  a  TCiael  odled
ixinj,  which  waa  aeal^  and  entruited  to  aome
o&cB  to  be  kept  imtil  it  waa  wanted  on  the  day
oftriaL  (DemottL  c  O^;:.  p.  1173  ;  SchoL  od
AHttopk.  Vap.  1427.)  The  period  between  tha
cosduiion  of  the  [ffeliminary  invcitigatica]  and  until
tbe  matter  wu  brought  beftae  a  cour^  waa  con-
iideied  to  belong  to  the  anacriaia,  and  that  period


M  ANAXAOOREIA.

Tnu  diffiamrtly  fixed  by  law,  locording  la  the
natun  of  the  charge.  Id  caua  of  murder,  the
pcnod  vu  nerec  leia  than  thna  mmithi,  and  la
olb«n  the  trial  in  mart  commenoed  on  tbs
thiitielh  Any  after  the  banning  of  tha  anacriaU,
u^«.ff.ia  the  Sifeu  iparticaif  iftwaptmi,  firroXAt-
KoI,  and  Tpoucit  (Hsipoost  t.  v,  lfv«inu  Siffu  ;
PdUui,  TJii.  68,  101),  and  the  day  fired  for  the
trial  iraa  called  icupja  rsii  vJfUv.  (Demoalh.  c
iUid,  p.  £44.)  In  other  caiei,  the  day  vai  fixed
by  the  magutnte  who  conducted  the  anoaiaia.
Bat  either  patty  might  petition  for  a  poatpOQemoiit
of  the  triat  and  tha  oppoaite  party  might  oppcm
tha  petition  by  in  oath  that  tha  gronnd  an  wtiich
the  delay  wai  Miaght  SiM,  WW  not  Tilid,  or  im-
ntiabctuy.  (HaijKicnt.«.e.ir4v»fUKr(a ;  PoUni,
Tiii.  60.)  'nuDDgh  inch  mudunaticmi,  the  dad-
lion  of  a  (Baa  might  be  delayed  to  tha  detriment  of
jnalice  ;  and  the  amtali  of  at  Athouan  coorta  are
not  wanting  in  ntuneroui  inatancea,  in  which  the
end)  of  juitice  were  thwarted  in  thia  manner  for  a
number  of  yeaia.  (Demostb.  a.  Mid,  p.  641  ;
comp,  Meierand  SchBmann,  DerAtL  Pros.  p.  622  j
C  P.  Hermann,  Oried.  ^Saafalti.  §  HI  ;  Schtt-
man,  AiitiipiiL  Jur.  publ.  Grate,  p.  279  ;  Wacha-
moth,  Helltn.  ABerOmit^KBide,  iL  p.  262,  ftc.
2iid  edit.)  The  examination  whkh  an  archon  un-
derwent before  he  entered  on  bia  oSee,  vai  like-
wiw  caUed  iniicpuni.  [L.  S.]

ANALEMhtA  (dnUnfifia),  in  iU  erigkal
ntHining,  ii  any  thing  railed  or  mpported ;  it  ii
applied  in  the  plunl  to  walla  built  on  etrong
foundationa.  (Ueiych.  Said.  i.  «■)  VilmTina  ma
the  word  to  deacribe  an  inatiDmeiit  iriiich,  by
marking  the  leogthi  of  the  ahodawi  of  a  fixed
gnomon,  thawed  the  diffeient  altitudea  of  tha  nm
at  the  diflerent  periodi  of  tha  year.  (Vitnr.  ix.
7,  8.  a  6,  7,  Schneider.)  It  mint  not  be  con-
founded with  the  modem  analemma,  which  ia  much
more  complicated  and  preciie  than  the  inanrunent
described  by  VimiTiua.  [P.  S.]

ANAPIB'SMATA. [THaATacu.]

ANATHE'MATA  (i«%«rro.) [Donabli.]

ANATOCISMUS. [FKtui]

ANAUMACHIOU  ORAPHE'  (iwiufuixfm
ypa^),  waa  an  impeachment  of  the  trierarch
who  had  kept  aloof  from  action  while  the  reat
of  the  fleet  waa  engaged,  From  the  poiwnaJ  na-
ture of  the  offence  and  the  pnniilmient,  it  ii
olmoQi  that  thii  action  conld  only  bare  been  di-
rected againit  the  actnal  commander  of  the  ihip,
whether  he  wBi  the  eole  penon  appointed  to  the
office,  or  the  active  partner  of  the  perhapa  many
irvmkt\  or  the  mere  contractor  (i  /lurtit-
ffdfimwaj).  In  a  i^nae  of  thia  kind,  the  abaCegi
would  ha  the  natural  and  official  judgea.  The
pnniabment  pmcribed  by  law  for  thia  ofience
vaa  a  modified  atimia,  by  which  the  crimiaal  and
hia  descendanta  were  deprircd  of  their  political
fianchiae ;  but,  aa  we  leant  from  Asdocidea,  were
allowed  to  retain  poaseiaion  of  their  property.
(De  Mvd.  p.  IQ.  32,  ed.  Steph. )  Felit.  Z^,  AU.
P.6S7.)  [J.S.M.]

ANAXAOOREIA  (intirrV").  a  day  of
TBcnadon  for  all  the  yontha  at  Lampaacoa,  which
took  place  once  n-rerj  year,  in  eompliance,  it  waa
•aid,  with  a  wiah  expnaed  by  AiuiBgorai,  who,
after  being  eipelted  from  Aueni,  ipent  the  re-
Duunderof  hialife  bcce.  Thia  eon^ned  to  be  oh-
aerred  eren  in  the  ^me  of  Diogenea  La&tioa.
(.daoay.  c.  10.)  [L.3.J


ANGARIA.

ANCHISTBIA  (iTT^HTrtla). [HiBM.]

ANCI'LK [SiLiL]

ANCILLA. [Sisvua.}

A'NCORA, [Navis.]

A'NKULE  (iTiriAfl), [HAffTA.]

ANDABATAE. [Gladiator.]

ANDREIA  (irf(i*ui). [SysUtia.]

A'NDRIAS  (i><plai). [StatuauA.]

ANDROOEO'NIA  ('Arifxr)wina),  a  fcitinl
with  game*,  held  erery  year  in  be  CoaDeiciia  at
Athena,  in  hooonr  of  the  hero  Andn^ni,  un  of
Minoa,  who  bad  OTercome  all  hia  adremriea  in  the
feitiTe  ganea  of  the  Fanathcnaea,  and  wai  aftor-
warda  killed  by  hia  jealona  rivala  (Fan*.  L  27.
8  9 ;  Apollod.  iii.  16.  g  7  ;  Hygin,  F>A.  41 ;  Diod.
It.  60,  Gil.)  According  toHeaycfaina,the  beroalao
bore  the  name  of  Euiygyea  (the  poaaeaioT  of  ei-
tennTO  landa),  and  under  thii  title  game*  were
celebrated  in  hia  honour,  i  it'  E^irgniii  ^7^.
(Heaych.  tdL  i  p.  1332  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  GolltM-
diaut.  AUerH.  d.  GriiAim,  §  62,  n.  22. [L.  S.]

ANDROLETSIA  (Jit^ofCa  or  taifoK^.
+uiy),  a  legal  meana  by  which  the  Atheniana  wtm


e  upon  a  commnnity  in
«n  had  been  murdered.


which  an  Athenian  ci
For  when  the  atate  ot  dt;  m  whooe  territory  tha
murder  hod  boen  coomitled,  refiued  to  bring  the
murderer  to  trial,  the  law  allowed  the  Alhtniana
to  take  poaieaaion  of  three  indiridnala  of  that
atate  or  city,  and  to  have  them  impriaoned  at
Athena,  aa  hoatageo,  until  laliibctiDn  «a*  ginn,
or  tha  murderer  deliTered  up,  and  tha  prupertj
fonnd  npon  the  peraona  thua  aeiied  waaconfiicated.
(Demonh.  c.  Ariilocr,  p.  647  ;  llarpocrat.  t.  o.  ;
Poliui,  TiiL  40  ;  Suid.  and  Etjm.  M.  t  e,  ;
Bekker,  Aitecdot  p.  313.)  The  penma  entmated
with  the  office  of  Kiaing  upon  the  three  boa-
tagci,  were  aiually  the  trienrchi,  and  the  com-
mandera  of  ihipa  of  war.  (Dnmoith.  Ot  OaroH.
Trier,  p.  1232.)  Thia  Athenian  cnatom  ia  analo-
gnna  to  the  abvHttfw  of  the  Romana.  (Lit.  Tiii.
14.)  (L.S.]

ANDRONI'TIS.  [Doiini,  Oans.]
ANQARI'A  (irrv*ii^  Hdt  J^nop^Ior)  ia  a
word  boITowed  from  the  Peruana,  signifying  a
ayitem  of  poating,  which  waa  noed  anuing  Uiat
people,  and  whidi,  according  to  Xenophm,  waa
ealablighed  by  Cyrua  Horaea  waa  prorided,  at
certain  diataneea,  along  the  principal  road*  of  the
empire  1  ao  that  caarien  (tyyofoiy,  who  alai^  of
course,  reliered  one  oootbar  at  certain  diatiMea,
could  proceed  without  interrupUen,  both  nigbt  and
day,  and  in  all  weather*.  (Heiod.  riii.SS;  iil  126  ;
Xea.C^nip.TiiL6.  317iSuid.s,e.)  ItmayoaaUy-
be  auppoeed  that,  if  the  gOTcmncnt  anangemaita
bilcd  in  any  pomt,  the  tenice  of  praridbig  horaea
was  made  compnlsory  on  indiiidnala  ;  and  honoe
the  word  came  to  mean  compulsory  acrrice  in  It^-
warding  royal  meosagea  ;  and  in  thia  aoae  it  wraa
adopted  by  the  Romans  under  the  empire,  and  ia
frequently  found  bi  the  Roman  lawi.  The  Roman
atiffaria,  also  called  aagariamm  txUbitio  or  jira^-
ilalio,  included  the  maintenance  and  onpply,  not
only  of  horaea,  but  of  tbipa  and  meaicngera,  in  for.-
warding  both  letHn  and  bnrdena  j  it  la  defined  na
a  pavm^  aaaut;  and  there  waa  no  gronnd  of
exanption  finm  it  allowed,  except  by  the  &toii^
of  the  emperor.  (Dig.  60.  tit.  4.  a.  18.  gg  4,  29  -
tiLi.  a  10.11!  43,  tit.  18.  a.  4.  g  1 ;  Cod,  TheoA.
a  tit.  G  ;  Cod.  Justin.  13.  tit  SI.)
Aecording  to  Suidao,  tin  Paiwu  wnd  «m  oA..


yKTrieaofinrkiDd. [P.S.]
ANOIPORTUS,  nANOIPORTUM,  BiiB^


pblie  ilnet.  Tb*  ■Dcienti  dcdred  the  mrd
ftas  mgrnitm  Hid  pertut,  and  ez^in  it  u  mean-
ar.  aigmllj,  the  nurow  CDtranca  to  s  port
(Fnt.  PL  IT.  ecL  MWtr  ;  Vvto,  I)eL.L.i.  US,
Ti.4ljLlpn>,mDig.A%Bt^  FaA-fiS.)  The
uaba  of  iBeh  nsiDw- coDrti,  d —  — '


cimt  RDme.  (Cic
*•  Dm.  I  3S,  fL  MU.  21,  od  Bmn.  h.  S\  ,
PtuL  FwkL  it.  2.  8,  op.  AbL  in.  1  ;  Tcr.
J^<^iT.2.39;  HoaLCbrM.L25. 10;  CatnU.
M.  l.)  [L.  S.]

AN0D3TUS  CLATU8.  [CLJTng.]
ANNA'LES  HA'XIHL  [Pohtifsx.]
AXNCNA  B  nMd  to  npify,  1.  Tbe  imdna
rflbe  TTM  in  corn,  fruit,  inae,  iK~,aaA  bence,  2.
Ptariaiv*  in  gmenl,  ttpedalij  the  corn  which,  in
tb  IrtMr  jwn  of  the  Rpnblic,  «u  coUedcd  in
ifcr  ilniiliiin«in  of  lh»  Hate,  uid  uld  to  tbe  poor  it
Ci  of  MUcitT  J  4ud  nbich,  unda


to  the  peatde  gn-
d  nwirdj. [Con.


iiuDmly,  or  giren  u  pa;  md

GUJUTK  ; FBDMnrrino ; PBAirKTDS  An-

IB'.^^l  [P.  8.]

A'.^iNULUS  (loKtikHt),  a  ring. Enr;  free-
Dan  n  Giceee  ^mesti  to  IttTe  used  a  ring ;  end,

■  loK  in  tba  cariiot  timea,  not  ai  an  Drnamcnt,
bit  ■  u  attjde  Itr  itae,  u  tbe  ring  almm  Mrred
M  >  aeaL How  ntdoit  tho  dutom  of  wearing

ig  tbe  Ondu  was,  cannot  be  ucertained ;
.  ■  erm  Plinj  (S.  If.  ixiiii.
a,  that  ia  the  Homeric  poenu  theie  are
In  worki  of  Cctioo,  however,  and
la  in  which  the  nutomt  of  later  ages
wt  ami  np  whh  theae  of  the  eailiett  timet,  we
faid  tke  BEM  sndent  henca  daacribed  aa  wearing
n^a.  (Pna.  L  17. 1  3,  i.  30.  §  2  ;  Enrip.  Ipi^.
J^  154,  HifpoL  8SS.)  But  H  ia  higMj  probable
thtf  ike  carton  ai  wearing  ringa  waa  inOodneed
ano  Greece  from  Aaia,  where  it  appcan  to  haTo
WcB  alwct  tmiTenL  (Herod,  i.  196  ;  Plat,  da
Hr  PM.  S.  p.  SSS.)  In  the  time  of  Solon  aFOl-
rinsi  ijrpfa-r3ti\  aa  «eD  aa  the  practice  of  emin-
lo&iting  dkem,  aeem  to  hare  been  rather  eani'
EH,  br  Diogenea  I^enina  (L  57)  apeska  of  a  law
•(  SoloD  vhi^  bibade  (be  artiat  to  lieep  the  foim
•fa  aeal  (ff^jyti)  which  he  hadiold.  (Initancea
•f  cumici  felted  aeala  are  given  in  Becker^  Ckari-
Ks,  iL  p.  217.)  Whether,  however,  it  wai  .
iona>7'  aa  eailj  ai  tbe  time  of  Sdou  to  wear  r
«ak  pncisiii  ilonta  m  which  Ggnnt  wne
xrzve^  mmj  joatlf  be  doubted  ;  and  it  ii  n
maa  (asbable  that  at  that  time  the  fignrea  were
t-A  in  tka  Baty  of  the  ring  itael^  a  eiutom  which
■wtt  Bers  shandmed  altogether.  Ringa  withoat
pi^L—  itiaiea  wm  called  S^'irtat,  the  name  of  the
li-B  bang  f  T^r  oi  irfpayfi.  (Arlemidor.  Onaro-
triL  a.  6.) Ia  later  tiniea  ringi  wen

ri>v  vna  no  longer  ^Ai^ed  with  one,  bnt  wore
'^i,  thn^  or  evoi  tnore  linn
r'p  gdeJ  flif  Iboae  who  r^nlan;  loided  their  hondA
wiA  riuL  (Plat,  ffipp,  Mim.  p.  3S8  ;  Ariitoph.
Ea^.  S32.  JAi.  332,  with  the  Sehol. ; Dinaich.

■  ilMaKL  p.2»;  Diog;  I^&t.  v.  1.) Gnck


ANNULUS.  M

n  likewiae  need  to  wear  ring*,  bat  not  ao  fre-
quently B«  men  ;  tbe  lijiga  of  women  olao  appear
to  have  been  leai  coatl;  than  thou  of  men,  lor
ne  an  mentioned  which  were  made  of  amber,
•Tj,  Ac (Artemid.  I.  e.) Bioga  were  moallj
im  on  the  foorth  finger  (npi)i*vtt.  Pint  ^pa-
poi.  Fragm.  lib.  iv. ;  Qelliua,  z.  10)l The  I^ee-
daemoniaiu  an  aaid  to  hare  naed  iron  ringa  at  all
timea. (Plio. /T.A'.  ixiiiL  4.) With  the  eicep-
tim  peihapa  of  Sparta,  the  law  doea  not  appear  to
have  ever  attempted  in  any  Greek  rtale  to  counter-
act the  great  partiality  ior  thia  Inxory ;  and  no-
Qrecca  doee  the  right  of  wearing  a  gold
ring  appear  to  have  been  doafined  to  a  pattdcnlar
order  or  doia  of  ciljzena.

niMom  of  wearing  ringa  waa  believed  to
gen  introduced  into  "Roibk  by  tbe  Sabmei,
who  are  described  in  the  ariy  legenda  aa  wear-
ing gold  rings  with  predona  itimea  {genmati
aHaili)  of  great  beair^.  <Liv.  L  11  ;  Dionyi.  iL
38.)  Flame  (i.  S)  ctnlea  that  it  waa  inlndnced
ftran  Etraria  in  the  ragn  of  Taiqninina  Prireni^
and  Pliny  (t.  e.)  derivea  it  thim  Greece.  Tho
&et  that  among  the  itatnea  of  tbe  Roman  kiuga
in  the  i^itol,  two,  Ntuna  and  Serrina  Tullhia,
weiv  reprtaented  with  ringi,  con  acarcely  be  ad-
duced aa  an  aignment  for  their  early  nae,  aa  later
aniita  wonld  natorally  repreient  the  kinga  with
anch  insignia  oa  characteriied  the  higheat  magt-

ringa  may  have  become  ctutomarf  at  Rome,  thna
ich  ii  certain,  that  at  tint  they  were  olwaya  ol
n,  that  they  were  deatined  foe  the  aame  pnipoae
in  Greece,  namely,  to  be  uaed  aa  aeala,  end  that
every  free  Roman  hod  a  right  to  nae  anch  a  ring.
Thia  iron  ring  wu  naed  down  to  the  laat  period
of  the  republic  by  inch  men  a>  loved  tho  aunplicity
of  the  good  old  times.  Marina  wore  an  iron  ring
in  hia  trinmph  over  Jngcrtha,  and  aetetal  noble
tnmilie*  adhered  to  tbe  ancienl  etutom,  and  never
)regold  onea,  (Plin.  H.  ff.  xiziiL  6.)
When  aenaton  in  the  early  timo  of  Uie  repnblie
■n  lent  aa  ambasndon  to  a  foreign  atate,  they
jre  daring  the  time  of  their  miaiion  gold  ringi,
which  they  teceived  from  the  atate,  and  which
were  perhapa  adorned  with  aoms  lymbolic  repre-
■entation  of  the  republic,  and  might  aerve  aa  a
"  It  amboaaadoca  used  sold  linga  only
prirate  they  wore  their  imn  onea.
.  mm.  4.)  In  the  coorae  of  time  il  be-
cuitomary  for  all  the  lenaton,  chief  magi-
atratea,  and  at  laat  for  the  eqnilea  olao,  to  wear
a  gold  aeal-ring.  (Liv.  ii.  7.  46,  nri  38  ;  Cic
a.  Verr.  iv.  2S  ;  Lir.  xiiiL  12 )  Flor.  ii.  6.)  Thia
right  of  wearing  a  gold  ring^  which  waa  anbae-
qnently  called  the  jw  ottmdi  «irai,  or  the  jia
ommbncn,  lemained  for  aeveial  eeatnrioa  at  RinnB
the  eiclaaive  privilege  of  Benatora,  maraatrate^
and  equitea,  while  all  other  perwaa  contunied  to
naeiranonea.  (Appian,d*  A>6.i'iiB.ll)4.)  Ma-
giatTalea  and  govemora  of  prnvrncea  aeem  to  have
had  the  right  of  conferring  npoa  inferior  effioera,  or
BQch  penoni  ai  had  diitingniahcd  thenuelvea,  the
pririlege  of  wearing  a  gold  ring.  Verne  thna
presented  hia  aectetary  with  a  gold  ling  in  the
aaiembly  at  Syiacoab  (Cic  e.  Verr.  iiL  76,  80,
ad  Pom.  I.  SQ  ;  Suet  Cbea;  39.)  During  the
empire  the  right  of  granting  the  annulua  antena
belonged  to  the  emperota,  and  aome  of  them  vera
not  very  acmpnloai  in  conferring  thia  privilege.
AuguaCoa  gave  it  to  Mena,  a  ' '


W  ANNULUS.

Antoniiu  Hun,  &  pbTaieian.  (Dion  Cm.  i1i
48,  liii.  SO.)  Id  A.  □.  22  ths  enipemr  Tibcrim
radained  tbiu  a  gold  rial  ibDuld  onlf  be  vocn
by  thote  iitgenui  nhcHs  &then  and  gnmd&tben
had  had  a  propertr  of  100,000  ieat«nia,  and  not
branyfreedmaiiOTilaTe.  (Plin.  ff.M  miii,  8.)
Bnt  Uiii  reatriction  vu  of  littla  anil,  and  Ehe
ambition  for  (iis  annulni  anniu  becams  greatei
than  it  had  eTdi  been  befbra.  {Pha.Epal.'rilSe.
YiiL  6  ;  Suet.  Oalb.  12.  14 ;  Tadt.  Hid.  I  13
Bnet.  ViUL  12 ;  StaL  Sfo.  iiL  S.  143,  &.c)  Tht
empeion  Serenu  uid  Aaieliao  eonfemd  the  right
of  wearing  gold  rinn  npon  all  Roman  loldien
(Harodian.  iii.  S  ;  Voniac  AtreL  7) ;  and  Jog-
tinian  at  length  allowed  all  the  dtiieni  of  thi
pile,  whathu  ittganni  or  libettini,  to  wear
lingi.

The  atatna  of  a  pemm  vfao  had  receiTed  the  JDi
annoli  appaara  to  haTt  diffcnd  at  different  tiniea.
Daring  the  repaUie  and  the  early  part  of  the  em-
|die  toe  joa  ■onnli  aeenia  to  hare  made  a  penon
mgenana  (if  he  wai  a  libertui),  and  to  haie  laiied
him  to  1M  lank  of  equea,  prorided  he  had  the
leqaiiita  equestrian  cenioi  (Suet.  Galb.  10,  14  ;
TaciL  HiiL  L  13,  IL  S7),  and  it  wu  probably
nercf  granted  to  any  one  who  did  not  poweaa  thia
cenaua.  Thoae  who  loat  theii  proper^,  or  were
found  giul^  of  a  criminal  oSenee,  loat  the  jna  aa-
milL  (Jut.  Sit  li.  42  j  Mart.  viii.  fi,  il  57.)
Afierwardi,  eapccially  fnnn  the  time  of  Hadrian,
the  pririlege  vaa  beatoved  npon  a  great  many
freedmen,  and  inch  peraoai  at  did  not  poaaeia  the
eqaeaCrian  eenaoa,  who  theiefbre  tai  thia  reaaon
alone  could  not  luTe  become  cquitet ;  nay,  the  joa
annuli  at  thia  lato  period  did  not  eron  raise  a
freedman  to  the  atation  of  ingenuua ;  he  only  be-
came, aa  it  were,  a  half  ingenuua  (fwui  w^eiivu),
that  ii,  he  waa  entitled  to  hold  a  public  office,  and
night  at  any  future  time  be  laiaed  to  the  raiili  of
equea.  (JuL  CapitoL  Maeria.  4.)  The  LeiViael-
lia  (Cod.  9.  dt  21)  puniahed  thoae  &eedmeiL  who
»ued  for  a  pnblio  office  without  haiing  tho  Jna


through  the  jna  ai


null  become  an  equea,  if  he  bad
1,  and  the  pitiuepa  allowed  it ;
bat  the  annulut  itaelf  no  longer  included  thia
honour.  Thia  difEennea  in  the  character  of  the
annnlua  appeara  to  bo  clear  alao  from  the  fact,  that
women  receiTed  the  joa  annuli  (Dig.  40.  tit.  10.
a.  4),  and  that  Alexander  Seierui,  though  he
allowed  all  hia  aoldieca  to  wear  the  gold  ring,
'  yet  did  not  admit  any  fi«edmeu  among  the  equitea.
(Lamprid  ALSn.S.)  The  condition  of  a  libertua
who  bad  receiTed  the  jna  annuli  waa  in  the  main
aa  foUowa:  —  Hadrian  had  laid  down  the  general
maxim,  that  he  ahould  be  regarded  aa  an  ingenuua,
mhn  Jyn  patnmi.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  10.  L  6.)  The
patronoa  had  alao  to  giTe  hit  conient  to  hia  freed-
man  accepting  the  jni  annuli,  and  Commodua  took
the  annnlaa  away  bma  thoae  who  had  received  it
withoDtthiaeonaenL  (Dig.  40.  tit.  1 0.  a.  3.)  Hence
a  libertn*  with  the  anniilita  might  be  tortured,  i^
B-sr.  hia  potroD  died  an  unnatural  death,  aa  in  eaae
of  each  a  libatni  dying,  hia  patron  might  lueeeed
to  hia  ptoperty.  l^e  Besdman  had  tlma  during
hia  lifetime  only  an  imago  libotatia,  he  waa  a
qnaii  ingennni  bnt  had  not  the  atatna  of  an  in-
genuua (Cod.  G.  tit.  8.1.  2  I  Dig  40.  tiLlO.  a.6),
and  he  died  quasi  libertua.  In  the  reign  of  Jus-
tinian thoae  diitincliona  were  done  away  with.
Iiidoma  (xiz.  S3)  it  probably  alluding  to  the  pe-


ANNULU8.

riod  preoeding  the  reign  of  Juitinian,  i^Ka  IM
layi,  that  freemen  wore  gold,  freedmoi  ailfcr,
and  Blaicg  iron  ringa.

The  practical  purposea,  for  which  ringi,  or  rather
the  figurea  engrSTed  upon  them,  nm  used  at  all
times,  were  the  aame  ai  thoae  for  which  we  me
out  seals.  Beaidet  this,  howerer,  penons,  when
they  left  their  hotiaes,  used  to  seal  up  such  parts
a>  craitained  stone  or  Talusble  tbingi,  in  order  to
aeciu^  them  fri>m  thicTes,  eapcciaily  slaTcL  (Plat,
<fe  Ltg.  liL  p.  954  ;  Aristoph.  liamopk.  414,
Ac  ;  Plant.  Cos.  IL  1.  I ;  Cic  uJ  J^m.  ivi  26,
dt  Orat.  ii.  61  ;  Mart  ii.  88.)  The  ring  of  ■  Ro-
man emperor  was  a  kind  of  lUte-seal,  and  the  em-
peror Bometimea  allowed  the  nae  of  it  to  such
persons  aa  he  wished  to  be  regarded  at  his  repre-
lentatives.  (Dion  Cass.  Iitl  2.)  The  keepmgof
the  imperial  teal-ring  was  entrusted  to  an  eapecial
officer  (cam  ammS,  Just  HaL  iliiL  fi).  The
aigns  engTBTed  upon  rings  were  rcry  Tarioua,  at  we
may  judge  from  the  apecimena  atill  ertant;  they
were  portraits  of  ancestors,  or  frienda,  rabjects  con-
nected with  the  myth<Jogy,  or  the  worship  of  the
godi  I  and  in  many  taita  a  person  had  engiaTed
upon  his  sol  symbolical  allutians  to  the  real  or
mythical  history  of  his  hmily.  (Cic  a  Catil.  iii.
£  :  VbI.  Max.  ill  S.  1 ;  Cic  iti  Piaib.  t.  1 )  Suet.
7B.  £8,  63 1  Plin.  //.  N.  a  7,  &c.)  Snlla
Ihni  wcffe  a  ring  with  a  gem,  m  which  Jugurth*


H.  N.  niriU  4  ;  Pint  Mar.  10.)

ipey  nicd  a  ring  on  which  three  trophies  wers

represented  (Dion  Cast,  xliii.  IS),  and  Auguatna

first  aealed  with  ■  aphinx  afierwardt  with  a

-trail  of  Alexander  the  OreM,  and  at  last  with

own  pcRlnit,  which  waa  aubacquently  done  by

aereral  cmperora. (Plin.  H.  N.  ixiTiL  4  (  Suet.

Aiig.  £0  ;  Dion  Caaa.  IL  3  ;  Spaitian.  fladr.  26.)

The  principal  value  of  a  ring  consisted  in  the  gem

I J  :^  j(^  iij.  ^,|jjj  j^  [],g  woritmanship  of  the

The  stone  moat  frequently  used  waa
the  onyx  {aapiwat,  aafZ6yu^,  on  account  of  ita
tarious  colours,  of  which  the  artiits  made  th«
most  tkilful  use.  In  tiio  art  of  cngraTing  figure*
npon  gems,  the  ancients  in  pomt  of  beau^  and
execution  far  suipais  erary  thing  in  thia  depart-
ment that  modem  times  can  boast  of.  The  ring
Ltielf  [aptrSivn\  in  which  the  gem  was  set,  waa
likewiae  in  many  catet  of  beautiful  woAmanahip.
The  part  of  the  ring  which  contained  the  gem  ma
called  nela.  In  Greece  we  find  that  tone  ptnona
fond  of  show  used  to  wear  hollow  rings,  the  inside
of  which  was  filled  up  with  a  leas  TalaaUe  anb-
ince. (Artemid.  I  c)

With  the  incnasing  love  of  lozmy  and  ahow,
the  Romaus,  aa  well  as  the  Greeks,  corartd  their
with  rings.  Some  peraoai  alao  won  ringa
loderaU  tiae,  and  others  used  dificrent  ringa
mier  and  winter.  (QuinctiL  li  3  ;  Jut.  i.
2Si  Mart  li.  £9,  xiT.  128.)

Much  aupeifltition  ^ipears  to  have  been  om-
nected  with  ringa  in  ancient  as  well  as  in  more
lodcm  times  ;  but  this  seems  to  haie  been  the
lae  in  the  East  and  in  Qreece  mors  than  at  Raiue.
oma  peraouB  made  it  a  Ineratiie  trade  to  acll
ringa,  which  were  beliered  to  posMia  magic  poweia,
and  to  preaerTe  thoae  who  wore  them  bom  eit«iial
dangcra.  Such  peraona  are  Eudamus  in  AriBb>-
shanes  {PbO.  883,  with  the  Schol.),  and  Phertata*
-  Andphanes  {ap.  AOm.  iiL  p.  123).  ThMa
ja  were  for  the  meat  part  worn  by  the  k>weK-


AKTAE.
da^  ad  Aea  bM  BMde  of  GMlIjr  malniil,  u  m>y
k  iiliiiiiil  fh^  tlia  iria  (<aM  dnchmk)  io  the  two
iiimin  abon  Rfened  to.  Then  an  utgis]
althited  liogs  with  mipc  powen,  mentioned
W  lk>  ancient  wiitcn,  u  tbat  of  Ojgs  which
h  bod  IB  a  pan  (PUt  <l>  A^wU  iL  p.
U9,lu.;  PUn.fi.  A'.  Tniii.  1),  that  of  Chan-
(fan  (He9ul  A^  iT.  8),  and  the  into  ring  of
ImM  {LBciBii,/>UiiFa  17).  Compan  Becker,
fliiMii.  TcL  ii  p.  398,  Ac  ;  Kiiclimaiui,  dt  Au-
■^Slvri/S-  1657;  P.  BDimaiui,d«  Jm  jlna-
im,  Chi^ect.  I7M.  [L.a]

ANNUS. [Calindabidk.]
ANQUISITIO. [JuTiBx.]
ANSATAB  HASTAE. [Habta]
ANTAE  {^npafritn),  wen  onginally  poft«  or
dkot  * — '•'-g  a  doaiwBj. (Feitui,  t. «.  ^nCu.)
Tkj  «t»  of  a  •qnare  torn,  and  ace,  in  hct,  to  be
BfvM raUiB'  at  (tnngthened  terminationi of
iW  avDe  tliBi  ai  piUui  affiled  to  tfaem. Then
■  w  deac  owe  of  tbe  appliotion  of  the  word  to
dodwd  mpan  pUMit,  allbongh  Noniui  eiplaina
it  ly  )Mfn»  ahBmmam  <1.  j  12t).

He  ekief  oae  af  oolat  wai  in  tliat  form  of
^mfit,  vbicb  wai  called,  inm  them,  «  oalii  (rait
^  nyarr^nX  "lucb  VitTurint  (iii  1.  i.  2  §2,
Eib.)  deecribie*  u  having,  in  front,  antae  adached
ti  the  wall*  which  eneloeed  the  celLa  ;  and  in  the
aside,  bMwcoi  the  aalae,  two  colunuu  n^iporting
^■cUtnTe.  The  raiu  of  templet,  carreaponding
■■  tb  ih»iii[ilii«i  of  VitiDTiiu,  an  fiiimd  in  Greece
md  Am  Maar  ;  and  we  hen  exhibit  u  a  nied-
^  a  II  aim  »l  inn  of  the  front  of  the  temple  ol
An^i I^rapylaea,  at  Eleiuii,  ti^ethei  with a


ANTEFIXA.  97

U  die  rolnmiu ;  in  the  intereolumniationa  llten
ihould  be  a  marble  baliutnde,  or  hods  other  kind
if  railing,  with  gatea  iti  it ;  if  the  breadth  of  the
Dortico  exceed!  forty  feet,  then  ihould  be  another
lair  of  cotumni  behind  tho*e  between  tbe  Bnlat,
and  a  little  thinner  than  the;  ; beiidei  other  aod

In  the  pure  Qreek  arcbitectore,  the  tmtoi  haTe
other  apitali  than  a  igcceuion  of  limple  mould-

bCMjuei,  and  no  baeei,  or  Teiy  limple  onei ;  it  ia
il;  in  the  later  (Roman)  itjle,  that  the;  hare
ipitalj  and  baeei  teiembling  ihoae  of  the  columiii
between  them. The  antae  were  generall;  of  the
tbickntaa  throngboat  j  the  only  inttanee  of
their  tapering  ig  in  one  of  tbe  lemplea  of  Paettuni.
In  a  Greek  private hoiue the entrance waa
flanked  by  a  pair  of  antae  with  no  columni  be-
tween them  land  the  ipsce  thuiendoeed  wuitKlf
caJed  trafiMTdi. (Vilruv.  vi.  10.  a  7.  g  1.  Bchn.)
So  alto  Euripidea  ntet  the  term  to  denote  either
the  pronaoe  of  a  temple  (Ipk.  n  Taar.  112G),  oc
theTettibnleofapalue. (/■*»«.  416.)

Tbe  following  an  tke  chief  of  the  other  patuget
in  which  aniae  or  Tafoinitti  are  mentioned :  —
Eiuip.^]>tfrtT«.  11Q1,  whenwopaiTTdSei  apf^uurrd
twu£ei  the  aima  nupended  from  one  of  the  aaiaa
of  the  temple  t  Cladn.  Dtaiyt,  Fr,  9,  <^.  PoUma.
y'u.  122,  z.  25,  Melneke,  Ft.  Com,  Graec.  loL  ii.
p.42  )  Xen.  Hier.  xL  2:  Hem,  AiOota.  |).269i
Imtcript.  op.  GnUr.  p.  207.  See  alio  Stiegliti,
ArciaoUgit  der  BaahmM,  ToL  L  pp.  236—342.

[T.1II.LUM.]  [P.  8.]

ANTEAHBDLO'NES,  wen  ilavee  who  wen
aecoiloaied  to  go  before  their  mailen,  in  order  to
make  way  for  them  through  the  ctond.  (SuoL
Vttp.  2.)  They  umaliy^  called  out  date  iocwit
doaiino  ««D  /  and  if  thii  were  not  mSicieat  to
dear  the  way,  they  nied  their  handt  and  elbowi
[or  that  purpote.  Ptiny  relate)  an  amniing  tale  of
an  indiridmil  who  wu  nughiT  handled  by  a
Roman  knight,  becauie  hie  ilave  had  preinmed  to
touch the latter,  in  aider  to  make  way  for  hit

■Mer. [Ep.  iiL  H.) The  term  anltimlmloMi

u  alto  giTen  to  the  clientt,  who  were  aceiutomed
walk  before  their  i«trani  when  the  latter  ap-

ared  in  pnblic (Martial,  u.  18,  ill  7,  i.  74.)

ANTECESSO'RES,  caUed  ajeo  ANTECUR-
SO'RES,  wen  hone-aoldieti,  who  were  accoitomed

I  precede  an  army  on  the  march,  in  order  to  chooee
toitable  place  for  the  camp,  and  to make  the

«e*uiy  pnviijoai  for  the  army.  Thi  -  --'
menly  icontt,  like  tbe  iptaUalorei.


Intntnaa  giiM  tbe  (blloiring  rnlet  for  a  temple
■  a^H  ef  tbe  Deric  order ;  —  The  breadth  ihaDld
k  hatftke  leagth  ;  GTe-eigbtbi  of  the  length  ihould
W  a<iw|(tii1  by  tlie  cefla,  including  its  front  walli,
tW  i^Haiaing  three-eighthi  by  the  promtiot  or
l«1^  ;  tka  oafM  tboBU  be  of  the  «me  thickncu


. VitoU. 17  !  Caet.  i


neceeuiy  pnviijoai  for  the  army. They  wen  not

1y  icoDtt,  like  tbe  (peniUom. (Hirt.  2«ii.

12,  wh|  apeaki  of  tptaJabirtt  tt

Thii  nai

Roman  lav. (Cod.  L  tit.  17.  a  2.  g  9.  II.)

ANTECOENA ICobna.]

ANTEFIXA,  terra-^ttat,  which  exhibited  va-
riciui  omamental  deiigni,  and  were  need  in  archi-
tecture, to  cover  tbe  friexe  {zopiona)  or  cornice
of  the  entablature.  (Fettua,  ar.)  Theee  tena-
cottae  do  not  appear  to  have  been  uied  amofig  the
Greeki,  but  wen  pnbably  Etrurian  in  their  origin,
and  wen  llunca  taken  fiir  the  decoration  of  Roman
buildingi.

The  name  tuit^aa  it  evidently  derived  from  the
drcumitance  that  they  wen  fiini  befort  the
buildingi  which  they  adorned  i  and  in  many  in-
■tancei  they  have  been  found  fattened  to  the
&icie  wiUi  leaden  oaiU The;  were  formed  in


9S  ANTEPIXA.

noald^  md  then  bftkcd  by  Bra  ;  ao  that  the
bee  tC  them  might  tw  ioirnKd  to  tnj  e;
Of  the  great  variety  aod  aiquinta  beaut;  of  the
woriunushiii,  the  nader  ma;  beat  fbrm  an  idea  by
I  the  collectiou  of  them  in  the  Britioh


Tlia  two  imperfect  antefiis,  hoe  repneented,
■le  UDong  thoM  fbimd  at  VelletTi,  and  deacribed
bjCariem. (Aima,  IISS.)


The  fint  of  them  mnit  have  ibnned  put  of  the
■pper  border  at  the  ftieze,  oc  lather  of  the  eoniiee.
It  CDDtuiii  ■  panther'i  head,  detigned  to  lerre  oi  a
ipant  for  the  Tain-water  to  past  Ihroogh  in  dc-
■cending  ban  the  roof  Similar  antefiia,  but  with
comio  raaalci  inite^d  of  animala^  hrula,  adorned
the  tempk  of  Iiii  at  PompeiL  The  aecond  of  the
ftbove  ipecimeai  repreaenta  two  men  who  hare  a
diipDle,  and  who  come  before  the  iceptre-bcarlng
kingi,  or  jadgee,  to  hare  tbeir  onae  decided.  The
itj-le  of  thii  bai-relief  indicalei  i^i  high  ui^qnity,
and,  at  the  nine  time,  pnrei  that  the  Voltri  had
attained  to  conaiderable  taate  ja  their  architecture.
Their  anlefin  are  remarkable  for  being  painted :
the  gronnd  of  that  here  reprcseoted  is  blue  ;  the
hair  of  the  lii  men  i<  black,  or  brown  ]  their  fieab
red;  their  nrmenti  white,  yellow,  and  red:  the
chain  are  lAiile.  Tho  two  hola  ma;  be  obserred,
hj  which  thii  tlab  wae  liicd  npon  the  building.

Cato  tho  Ceneor  complained  that  the  Romani  of
hi*  time  began  to  dcapiie  onuunente  of  thii  do-
■cription,  and  to  prefer  the  marble  trioiee  of
Atbeni  and  Corinth.  (Lit.  jiiiT.  t.)  The  rijing
toite  which  Cato  deplored  may  acconnt  for  the  ni-


ANTID03I9.
perior  besntj  of  the  antefiia  pnaerred  in  tin  Bil-
tiih  Moieimi,  which  were  diacomed  at  Rome.  A
■pecimen  of  them  ia  giren  at  the  fbiA  of  the  pre-
cedine  colnmn  It  repreMota  Athtoa  ntperinteDd-
ing  the  conttnictioa  of  the  ahip  Argo.  The  man
with  the  hamm^andchiMl  iiArgn),  who  built  the
Teuel  under  her  direction.  The  ptlot  Tiphji  it
aaiiated  hj  her  in  altoebing  the  mal  to  the  yard.
Another  ipecimen  of  the  antefixa  ii  gifeo  imda
the  nrtiele  Anrrx.  *

ANTENNA.  [Nato,]
ANTEPAQMENTA,  douporia,  &»  Jamba  of
a  door.  VitniTini  (ir.  6.)  giiee  minute  innnc-
tioDi  reapecting  the  form  isd  jvoportiaiu  of  the
antepagmenla  in  the  doors  of  templet ;  and  theae
are  ibmid  in  genend  to  correipond  with  the  ec-
omplea  preeerred  among  the  Rmaina  of  Oredan
archtleetnrCL  (See  Hirt,  jSmubouf  muk  da  Gnad-
utLf  der  Alltm,  iri) [JiNUA.]  [J.  Y.]

ANTEPILA'NI.  [ExinciTDa.]
ANTESIQNA'NI.  [EimHcirBa.]
ANTESTA'RI.  [Actio.]
ANTHESPHO'RIA  (Mtrpifu),  a  flowep.
fntiTal,  principally  celebrated  in  Sicily,  in  houniT
of  Demeler  and  Peraephone,  in  commemoration  of
the  return  of  Penephone  to  her  mother  in  tlie  be-
ginning of  ipring.  It  conoited  in  withering  flowen
and  twining  gartanda,  beaue  PenephoDS  had
been  catried  off  by  Pluto  while  engaged  in  thia
occupation.  (Polloi,  L  87.)  Stmbo  (tl  p,2S8)
relates  that  at  Hipponium  the  women  celcbnted  a
aimilar  featival  in  hononr  of  Dcmeter,  which  waa
probably  railed  antbeepboria,  Bioce  it  waa  derived
&Dm  Sicily.  The  women  theniadcca  gathered  the
flowen  for  the  gozlandi  which  they  wore  on  the
occaiion,  and  it  would  hare  been  adi^Tace  to  buy
the  £owen  for  that  pnrpoae.  Antheipboria  were
alio  lolemniied  in  honour  of  other  deitica,  eipeci-
ally  in  honour  of  Heta,  tumamed  'Arlila,  at  Argoa
(Paul.  iL  22.  i  1),  where  maideni,  carrying  haikeu
filled  with  flowera,  went  in  pi
caUed  hpiK»r  wa  '  '
Etym.  GiuL  p.  i
ahipped  at Cnoai

( Hesycb.  i.  e. ),  and  haa  therefore  been  compared
with  Flora,  the  Roman  deity,  a*  the  anthe^cois
haie  been  with  the  Roman  featiTal  of  the  Florid
firttm,  or  Fbraiia.  [L.S.]

ANTHESTE'RIA. [Diontwa.]
ANTI'OOSIS  {irrOoaa),  in  iU  lilend  and

langnago.
proceeding!  under

ginated  with  Solon.  (Dcmooth.  c /-^
By  tbii.  a  citiun  nominated  to  perform
inch  aa  a  triennhy  or  choregia,  or  tt
the  pnperty-lax  payen  in  a  claai  diipn
to  hit  lueani,  waa  empowered  to  call  upon
qualified  porton  not  lo  charged  to  take  the  office
in  hia  attad,  or  anbmit  to  a  complete  exchange  of
property  —  the  charge  in  queauoo,  of  conne,  At-
taching to  the  Erit  party,  if  the  exchange  were
Gnnlly  effected.  For  theae  proceedinga  (he  conrts
were  opened  at  a  ataled  time  every  year  fay  tha
magiatralea  that  had  official  cogniiance  of  the
Daniculor  mbjcct ;  nicb  aa  the  itrali^  in  caaoa  of
^hy  and  mting  to  the  properly -taica,  and
■ ■' ' '  '  ■ Ibe  Iri-

<  of  tho


11,  carrying  haiki
avon,  wbilit  a  ta
waa  played'  on  the  flute, (Comp.
I 67.) Aphrodite,  too,  waa  wiw-
loama, under the nam* 'At^efa


the  I


of  ebon


challenger  to  aummon  hia  opponent (Dem.  i  _
Pkacmifp.  p.  1010  )  Heier,  Au.  PmOMt;  p.  471 a


ANTtOOVtlJL

m  A  IrrBnrir,  Ljlia  Tl^
i  'AMmtiiiiu,  p.  TM.) It  mj  b»  pn*iiiaed
'  ' ''  9)  ftKnaUy  icpfstid  bit  propiml,  and
'  ■ '  " ^ijeotiom,  irhich,
^gbt,  pabrnft.


*  befon  the  dicaaca,  would
J  Mgia  btfc  In  the  latter  ate,  cf  if  the
cmap  wen  acscpted,  the  latr  directed  the
cUkagcr  to  itftir  to  the  bouw*  md  Isndi  of  hii
«»t«f—H«i  aad  wcon  Titp— 11  u  ■□  the  clainu  snd
l^£^«f  iheaMla  were  to  ba  tiaaafeiTed,  &om
fiaUant  MM  ■iiil«iiina  (^  the  nal  property,  by
•ktsTiBf  vhtf  Dtctgage  placudi  (itpoi),  if  toy,
*ai  find  Bpiia  it,  and  ■ruoK  clmdatiDe  remoral
•I  ik«  otkCT  cActi,  I7  lealing  op  the  chaoiben  that
im^nri  than,  od,  if  tie  ;^«»<l.  bj  putting
l^Sfe  ia  &•  aMrioa.  (Dem.  a  J°taoi^
1^  IMO,  IMl.)  Hii  oppoacot  m,  at  thi  nine
ne,  ntMBed,  that  ba  wai  at  liberty  to  deal  in
hkc  B^aier  whk  tbs  olate  of  tha  challengET,
•ad  isoond  DMiee  to  attesd  tha  proper  tribunal
■I  a  fixed  Aij,  to  take  the  naniil  oath.  The
■aldm  kott  deacribed  nem,  in  coatemplatim  of
law,  to  hai«  been  a  eompleto  eflectnaiicai  of  the
I  I  I  (Dan.  c  Mid.  p.  £40,  e.  Piaem^.
fd  IML  2SX  aad  it  doei  Dot  ajnear  that  primarily
tboc  «aa  aaj  legal  nocenty  for  a  Atrths  laliS-
Miaa  bj  iba  diculi  j  but,  in  pnctice,  thii  mtut
daqi  ban  bees  icqoired  by  the  cocSict  of
■rtantt  bctran  the  pailiea.  The  next  pro-
(BtdBg  wtm  Ike  oath,  vhiil  mi  taken  by  both
rnv,  mi  ffoitBd  that  they  voald  bitUnllj
daaa*^  aU  ibar  laupalj,  aatept  ibana  held  in


iWi  apaiBst,  tb*  lav  CBJoiDed  that  Ihtj  ihodd


e  limp  and
(dt  [Wa'],


•a  of  an  orimaiy  htwanit  [J
Biler  A*  »hrt  if  tb*  ivgiMnto  within  whoae
JMmhiAm  it  had  gigindly  enme. TbeTeidictof


baa  ;  ^id  a*  tb*  ahanntiTe  waaopen  tothefanMr,
ad  •  aaftoMM  night  be  Kcaded  to  by  the  lat-
in^ aa  My  atige  of  the  proeeediiui,  ve  may  ipEer
Ihaa  te  ml"  g  wm  lanly,  if  eTer,  finally  oc-
■^fiiba^  The  jitauiannai,  bontei,  of  the  le-
^o^atiaa,  daring  vfaidi  the  litigant  wu  pre-
Adc4  faa  tha  nw  of  hii  own  property,  and  dis-
ihlad  6iB  hringiag  adini*  fin  embcBlemeat  and
be  Sw  BBanal  othoa  (bt  ha  pnpectire  reiia-
taaaMOC  via  rettaoed  a  part  of  Ibe  leqnea-
Hta4  eMMv  ItaB.  n  >((pU..  ii.  p.  841,  «;  Mid.
^M*},  woaid  iawiahir  caoaa a ipeedj, pabapa,
■(  Baac  caaca^  a  Ur  adjaatmant  of  the  baidoia
haitmt  la  the  oandidon  of  a  wealthy  Athenian.
iBUik,  PaU.  Ecm.  1/ AOmt,  pp.  £80— S83,
M  ed.)  [J.  a.  H.]

ANTIOONEU  (imT^u),  aerificei  iniEi-
Med  I7  Atatoa  and  c^bratad  at  Sicyon  with
r>a^^  ^iimaiiiaia,  aad  anteati,  in  honoiir  of
AMigaaai  Ikaaa,  with  wbtm  Arabia  fbrmed  m


AMTIGHAPHR  99

alliance  fir  tit*  porpoie  of  thwarting  the  phm  of
OmmeneL (Plot  Oaom.  16,  AnL,  45  ;  Poljb.

ixriii.  le,  im.  20.)  [LS.]

ANTIQRAPUE'  (irrrrpa^),  arigiinlly  rig-
ni£ed  the  writing  put  in  by  the  defimdant,  in  SH
csiuei,  whether  public  or  privBle,  in  aniTer  to  the
indictment  or  biQ  of  the  proaecutor.  Fran  tbil
ugniScation,  it  wsa  applied  by  an  eaiy  ttaniitiDn
to  the  nbatance  aa  well  aa  tlie  form  of  the  reply,
bath  of  which  are  alao  indicated  by  itva/iaila,
which  meani,  primarily,  the  oath  conobnatiDg  the
ttatament  of  tbe  accued.  Haipoentim  hai  re-
mariied  that  aal^gnipita  might  denoti^M  ar'


..IB  bill  aad

affidavit  of  either  party  ;  (u>d  ttui  remaik  Menu
to  be  jnitified  by  B  pauBge  of  Plato.  (Apohg.
Son.  f.  27.  c}  SchOmann,  howerer,  "" '""'"-
{Ait.  Prooai,  p.  165}  that  aaiigngM  waa  only
uaed  in  thii  rigiuficadaii  in  the  caie  of  penoai
who  Uld  claim  to  an  miaaiigned  inheritonee.
Hen^  neither  the  first  nor  any  other  chumsnt
oonld  appear  in  tha  chaiactar  of  a  pnwecntor ;
that  ii,  no  Su»|  or  tTii\t)im  could  be  nrictly  wd
'-  be  directed  by  one  coinpelitor  agaimt  another.


B  forward  Toinatarily  to  the  tribanal


when  all  ca


SchSmann  hua  mggeited  aa  a  reaaon  why  tha
docomcnti  of  each  claimant  were  denoted  by  tha
torn  in  qneatioD.

Perkqa  th«  word  "  plea,"  though  by  no  mmn*
a  coinddont  term,  may  beallowed  to  be  a  tolerably
pTDxiinata  rendering  of  antigr»ho.  Of  fdoaa  there
can  be  only  two  kmdi,  the  lUlatory,  and  thnu  to
tha  action.  The  former,  in  Attic  law,  oomprehendi
all  loch  allegatloni  at,  by  anerting  the  inoom-
petcDcj  of  the  oonrt,  the  dinbility  of  tha  plaintil^
or  pririli^  of  the  defendant,  and  the  likt^  would
haie  a  tendency  to  ihow  that  the  caou  in  iti
pnaent  ilate  could  not  be  brought  into  court  (j^
ilvip/iiyiiuir  tlnu  tV  Hini»)  ;  the  latter,  every-
thing that  coald  be  adduced  by  way  of  denial,  ei-
coie,  juiti£calioD,  and  defence  generally.  It  moit
b«,at  the  nme  time,  kept  in  mmd,tbiit  tbepnceai
caUed  "  ipociBl  pleading,"  waa  at  Atbem  inj^IiBd
by  ^  magiitnUe  holduig  the  anscnais,  at  which
both  partiea  pnduced  their  aUegationi^  with  the
oridence  to  anbatantiata  tbem  ;  and  that  the
object  of  thii  part  of  dte  pneeedingi  wn,  onda
the  directioDi,  and  wiUi  the  aaainaaje  of  the
nugiftiate,  to  prepare  and  ODUcUau  the  qoeation
for  the  dicaala.  The  JMloning  it  an  initance  of
the  limpfeat  form  of  in^etincat  and  plea ;  —
"  Ajxillodoma,  tbe  KHi  of  Paaion  of  Achamae^
agaiuit  Stephanuj,  ion  of  Mcneclei  of  Aehamae,
for  periury.  Tha  penally  rated,  a  talent  8le-
phannt  bon  filie  witne«  againit  me,  when  ho
gne  in  cridence  the  mstten  in  the  tableta.  9te-
phanni,  aon  of  MeDeclea  of  Acbarnaa.  I  witnened
truly,  when  I  gure  in  eridence  the  thinga  m  the
tablet"  (Dem.  m6l<9kl.  I  p.  11 15.),  The  plead-
ing! might  be  altered  during  the  maciiHi  j  but
- ■ "  •- the  echinui,  they,  aa  well  aa

_.__!__ ,. _ ..  „ p^

, „ by  the

day  of  trial,and  in  the  prnenoo

,  ine  echinni  wu  opsied,  and  the

rotd  by  the  clerk  of  Uie  coort,  tiga-

itb  iU  antagoniit  bill. Whether  it  win

~  aftsrwarda  aa  a  pnUie  record,  which  we


all  the  other  accompanyiiw  documenl
tecled  by  the  ofBdal  aeal  from  any  di
litigantL On  the  day  of  trial,  and  in


hate


™ip«*w


100  ANTLIA.

From  yrhtX  bai  been  ilnadj  iMtA,  it  wiD
lidTt  b«eii  obserred,  thit  qnHtiotu  nqnirii^  a  pi
Tious  deciuoD,  would  tequeatl^  vife  upao  the  i
logationi  of  the  plsa  ;  nnd  that  the  plea  to  the  i
tioD  in  panicolir  would  often  contain  aaaei  tl
would  lend  etwntially  to  alter,  and,  in  unM  eat  ,
to  reiene  the  relatire  paitisna  of  the  paitiee.  Id
the  firal  oue,  a  trial  before  the  dicaat*  wotdd  be
gianted.  1^  the  magiitrate  whcntTer  he  wu  loth
to  incur  the  reaponiibSil;  d[  decition ;  in  the  le-
cond,  a  crou-octioa  might  ho  inatituted,  and  car-
ried on  eepatately,  though,  perhapi,  ■imnllaneoul/
with  the  original  auit  Cua  would  alio  i»m»
timet  occnr  in  which  the  defendant,  from  coIlside^
ing  the  indictment  ai  an  unwarrantable  aggrei-
lion,  or,  perhapi,  one  belt  repelled  b;  attack,  would
be  tempted  to  retaliate  upon  tome  delinquency  of
liii  opponent,  utterly  unconnected  with  the  cauie
in  hand,  and  to  thit  he  would  be,  in  mnal  caiei,
able  to  reeort.  An  inilance  of  each  kind  will  be
briefly  giren,  by  citiug  the  comtaim  paragn^i,  u


for  tMBull  (aulu)  upon  a  primary  action
lame  (Dem.  a  Ev.  li  MwuOi.  p.  11  S3)  .
Soicifuifflu,  or  "judicial  eiamination  of  the  life  or
molali  *^  of  an  orator  upon  an  impeachment  for
mitconduW  in  an  embany  (Topaipnf («ul).  (Aeach,
H  TiaanJi.)  All  cautet  of  thit  leamdary  natiuv
(and  there  waa  hardly  one  of  any  kind  cogniiahle
by  the  AtUc  conrti,  that  might  not  occaiioaally
rank  among  them)  were,  when  Tiewed  in  their
relalioD  with  the  primary  action,  comprehended
by  the  enlarged  tignification  of  antigraphi,  or,  in
other  words,  thia  term,  iueipreiaiYO  of  form  or
aubatance,  ii  indicaliTe  of  a  repellent  or  retalialiTe
quality,  thai  might  be  incidental  to  a  great  Tiriely
of  caujei.  The  dittlnction,  however,  that  ii  im-
plied by  imiigrapii,  waa  not  merely  verbal  and
nnaubetaittial  ;  for  we  are  told,  in  order  to  prevent
frivalout  aniti  on  the  one  hand,  and  onlair  eliuion
upon  the  other,  the  loier  in  tparaffrapil,  or  croaa-
action  upon  a  private  luit,  wai  condemned  by  a
■pedal  Uw  to  pay  the  iwntttda,  rateable  upon  the
valuation  of  the  main  cauae,  if  he  biled  to  obtain
the  Totei  of  one'filth  of  the  jury*  and  certain
court  iba  (apin-waia)  not  originally  incident  to
the  luit  That  there  wai  a  luuilar  proviaion  in
public  tsuiei,  we  may  preanme  troai  analogy,
though  we  have  do  authority  to  dctemina  the
matter.  (Meier, AU.  Frtxai, p.  S2S.)  [J.3.M.]
ANTIQRAPHEI3  (li^rnJo^ii). [Obam-

ANTINOEIA  (^ii^tui),  annual  fei^vala  and
quinquennia]  game*,  which  the  Roman  emperor
Hadmn  initituted  in  hoaonr  of  hit  &Tonrile,
Antinoui,  after  ho  wat  drowned  in  the  Nile,  OT,
according  to  othen,  had  aacrificed  himaelf  for  hii
tovereign,  in  a  fit  of  rdlgioui  fimaticiam.  The
fotivalt  were  celebiated  in  Bithynia,  and  at  Man-
tineia,  in  which  placet  be  wai  winliipped  at  ■
god.  ^pirtian.  Hadriiat,  e,  11 ;  Dion  Can.
liit  10;  Pane.  viii.  9.  g  i.)  tL.S.]

ANTIPHERNA  (iiT^iipw), [Dos,]

ANTIQUA'RIL ILibumi.I

A'NTLIA  (dvr\fa),  any

machine

in  the  Tyrol,  the  a

putt  the  wheel  in

aro  mcceuively  iraaiened

Wbaa  Itxj  Teach  the  tt^  the


Atogii. Aa  the  current

u  the  jan  on  ttt  nurgin

id  filled  with  water.


ANTUA.

a  tmuh,  from  which  it  ia  conveyed  la  a  dlitiDt^
and  cEi^y  uted  for  irrigation.

Lucreliua  (t.  517)  Dienlioni  a  machine  eon-
tnicted  on  thii  principle :  —  "  Ut  fluvioi  remn
rotai  nlque  hauitn  videmui."


In  utnationi  wberc  the  vratw  wai  at  reft,  ai  {n

pond  or  a  well,  or  where  the  current  wai  too

ilow  and  feeble  to  put  the  machine  in  motioti,  it

conitrocted  to  ai  to  be  wrought  by  aniinal
force,  and  alavet  or  criminalt  were  oommonly  em-
plojed  fer  the  purpoie  {tU  irrKiair  Jraraliin
<r*i!«u,  Arteroid.  OaHroe.  i.  .""
demnare.  Suet  Ztt,  61.) Fii

Ibed  by  Vitruviua,  in  addi
been  already  erplained, .
wai  turned  nae  o^enmj  ,  , ^

injmltu. Thete  five  were,  1.  the  tymponi


harii^  inttead  of  pott,  wooden  boxea  or  backets

{madiali  qiiiuirati\  to  aiianged  ai  to  fnm  atep*  for

''  OH  who  trod  tiie  wheel: 3.  the  chain-pontp :

&te  oooUso,  or  Archimedei'  acrew :  and  fi.  vba


—1;  Driebog,  Piiam.  Erfimdmigm  dtr  Griieimt,

On  the  other  hood,  the  antlia  with  which  Hkr-
tial  (ii.  19)  watered  hit  garden,  wat  probably  the
pole  and  bucket  ODiTerHlly  employed  in  Il>ly,
Greece,  and  Egypt  Tbe  pole  ia  carved,  at  ibown
in  the  aiuwied  figure  ;  beaute  it  it  the  item  of  m


b, «  MB*  mW  bpniog  tm.  Tbt  bnilet,  bong
Mtadad  to  the  top  of  the  tnc,  beaili  il  by  iu
■cigkl ;  atd  tk*  thkkueM  of  the  other  eitremitj
>m*  a*  ■  cooDlopaiM.  Tba  gnat  uitiquit;  of
Ifait  ^**h"^  <d  niMog  vater  U  prorad  by  repre-
■mna  of  it  m  Eoyptiui  puntmg^ (Wilkin-

M*  iIm  PiB.  iTfVnibMD,  YoL  L  p.  367.)  [J.  Y.]
ANTOUO'SIA  (IfTHfuNTla).  [Ahakusib,
(k  >2,  a  ;  pAKAOKirai.]

AXrrX  (bTii{,i*ab>i%  allied  etTmologinll J
tt  iicnO,  tie  rim  or  border  of  anj  tbinr,  espe-
dd  J  at  a  iludd,  at  chariot.  The  rim  of  liui  luge
mad  ihicld  of  the  aociait  Onda  waa  tUunei
iba  the  part  which  it  endoeed.  Thiu  the  orna-
■  ■anl  bsfder  of  the  ifaield  of  Achilla*,  hbricsted
w  anlj  thredbld,  the  shield  itKlf
(fi.  iTiiL  479  J  cofflfL  n.  27fi.)
S  of  the  amtyt  of  a  itueld  m  woodcati
[A,  Abma,  Clifbdi.
Ob  the  adur  hand,  the  amijii  of  a  chariot  moit
baTt  beta  thicker  than  the  body  to  wbicli  it  ws>
■Wlthwi,  Bsd  to  which  it  gar*  both  form  and
■anth.  For  the  lanie  maon,  it  ni  often  made
deah^  ai  in  the  chariot  of  Heta.  (Aoiol  U  npl-
Wm  Anrft  fJiri,  IL  T.  TSe.)  It  IMC  in  front
<f  a  itfiiir  m  a  ctured  fbrm,  on  which  the  rein)
«Ektbeh<mp.  (fJ.T.  263,  332.)  A  limplo ibmi
if  it  y  cxhibrled  in  the  ■""*^*^  woodcut  ttom  the


AP.KTV'V.lA{iMaTiifia\  wai  >  political  fetti-
nd,  wldck  the  Atheniaiia  had  in  common  with  all
tbr  Oncka  of  the  looiu  name  (Heiod.  L  U7),
wnk  Ae  eixe{ition  of  tboea  of  Colophon  and
■^l'  I  I  It  vai  celebrated  in  tha  month  of
P/^|iiuB.  and  laMcd  lot  thne  days.  The  oH-
pa  af  lUi  ftattnl  ia  relaled  in  the  fallowing  Dum-
■b:  —  About  the  yor  1100  B-c,  the  Alheniani
VBB  mijiug  on  a  war  againit  the  Boeotiana,  am-
eenng  the  diitrict  of  Cilaenae,  or,  according  to
Mbaa,  lopRting  the  little  town  of  Ocnoe.
TW  Bueutian  Xnthina,  «  Xanlhui,  challenged
T^yancua,  hmg  of  Attia,  to  uagle  combat ;
aad  who  ha  cefiiaed,  Helinlhiu,  a  Memenian
•z3e  id  the  bonie  of  the  Nelidi,  offared  himaelf


a,  he  ■faooid  be  the  inanKir  to  Tbymoeto.
TV  atfa  «B*  accented  ;  and  when  Xanlhioi  and


beaas  the  engaaaBenl,  thete  appeared
Hhia  a  BBD  fa  the  Tpsr^  the  ilun  of  a


APATURIA.  101

bsTing  a  companion,  and  while  Xanthim  looked
aroond,  MelanthuH  ilew  the  deeewed  Xanthioi.
Fnim  that  time,  the  Atheniani  celebrated  two  fe<-
tival),  the  Apatoria,  and  that  of  Dionynu  Heloiv-
aegU,  who  nat  belieied  to  hare  been  the  man
who  appeared  behind  Xantluni.  Tbii  ia  the  itoiy
telated  by  the  Scholiait  on  AriiMphsnea.  (Adian.
146.)  Tbii  tradition  hae  giren  rise  to  a  felee  etr..
mology  of  the  name  iarirroupia,  which  was  foTDietly
eoniidered  to  be  deriTed  ftom  inerur,  lo  deoeive.
All  modern  critio,  howeTsi  (MUIIer,  Doriant,  L
5.  i  i  WelckeT.^WJyL  7H/.p288),  agree  that  the
natneii  compoted  of  a=j^(a,  and  nrriipia,  which  ia
perfectly  coneiitenl  wilh  what  Xenophon  {HeUai.
1.  7.  §  B)  sayi  of  the  fnlinl :  'Er  oTi  (dnraopfDit)
el  T(  wirr^I  ul  of  fnry7«v<tT  {^lo-i  a^laai
ainoit.  According  to  ihii  deriiBlion,  it  ia  the
fcaliral  at  wbich  the  phratriae  met,  lo  diicusi  and
•etile  theit  own  aUrt.  But,  aa  erery  citiian  waa
a  member  of  a  phratria,  the  feelifal  extended
orer  the  whole  nation,  who  aaaembled  aecorda^  to
jAratriae.  Weloker  {Aiiiaag  x.  JYilog.  p.  200),
on  account  of  the  prominent  part  which  Dionyauj
take*  in  the  legend  mpecting  the  origin  of  the
Attic  Apatoria,  conceiTe*  that  it  aiHs  fiom  the
drcamitanee  that  familiea  belonging  te  the  Dio-
nyaian  tribe  of  the  A^icona  hod  been  regitlered

The  firrt  day  of  the  (eitiral,  which  probably  tell
on  the  elcTenlh  of  the  month  of  Pyanepaion,  woa
called  Bapiria,orUpir(ui(Athcil.iT.  p.  171;  Heiych.
and  Said.  t.  o.)  ;  on  which  erery  citizen  went  in
the  CTening  to  the  phratrinm,  or  to  the  home  of  -
iome  wealthy  member  of  hii  own  phratria,  and
there  enjoyed  the  lapper  prepared  for  him.  (Aria-
toph.  Aciaru.  U6.)  That  the  cnp-bearen  (olri-
eroi)  were  not  idlB  on  thii  occaiiDn,  may  be  aeen
bma  Photiiu  (Leiic.  t.  v.  Aoprfa).

The  Mcond  day  waa  called  ini^wra  {inf-
piiir)  from  the  lacrifice  offered  on  thii  day  to
Zeui,  lomamed  fpdrpior,  and  to  Athena,  and
sometime!  lo  Dionyaua  Molana^L  Thia  waa  &
■tale  iicrifice,  in  which  all  citiaeni  took  pari  The
day  wu  chiefly  deroted  to  the  godi,  and  to  it
matt,  perhapa,  be  confined  what  Harpocration  (a
B,  Ao^inli)  mentiona,  from  the  Atthu  of  Iltraa,
that  the  Athenian!  at  the  apaturia  naed  to  drcaa
iplendidly,  kindle  torchei  on  ths  altar  of  Hephae-
etui,  and  aacrifice  and  Dng  in  honour  of  huzv
Procliu  on  Plato  (7¥n.  p.  21.  b.),  in  oppoeitioa  to
all  other  anthoritiet,  calU  the  lint  day  of  the  A[a-
tnria  irJif^ii,  and  the  aecond  topria,  which  ii,
periiapa,  nothing  more  than  a  itip  of  hii  pen.

On  the  third  day,  called  neiipevrii  (naSpot),
children  born  in  that  year,  in  the  fimiiliei  of  (he
phratriae,  or  inch  a*  were  not  yet  regiiteicd,  were
taken  by  their  fiitben,  or  in  tbeti  sbiBQee  by  their
repreeentatiTea  (nilpioi),  before  the  auemhled
raemben  of  the  phratria.  For  erery  child  a
iheep  or  goat  wai  ncrificed.  The  victim  waa
cnllea  luao',  and  he  who  ncrificed  it  luiayiwyii
(jaiayiiyiai).  It  il  nid  that  the  victim  wai  rmt
allowed  to  be  below  (Horpocrat.  Suid.  Phot.  t.  v.
tttior),  at,  according  to  Potlui  (iiL  52),  above,  a
certain  weighL  Whenever  any  one  thought  he
bad  teaion  to  oppoae  the  reception  of  tiie  child
into  the  phratria,  he  atated  the  caie,  and,  at  the
nme  time,  led  away  the  victim  from  the  altar.
(Demottb.  c  Maaiti.  p.  lOM.)  If  the  mem-
ber! of  the  phratria  found  the  objection!  to  the
reception  of  the  child  to  be  Hifficieiit,  the  vie-


103


APEX.


iHJMd,  the  father,  or  he  vbo  topplied  lilt  pkce,
wu  ohliged  tJj  ntabliih  by  oatb  tJiat  tha  cliild  ^vas
the  o&prin^  of  frvc-barn  puentt,  and  citizen!  of
AlheuL  (ln«iu,Z>a//iHnif.  CVniiLp.100.  SI9i
Demoath.  c  £MmL  p.  13l£.)  After  the  ricthn
WH  ncrificed,  tha  phnUom  gm  their  Tota,
vbidi  thej  took  from  the  situ  of  Jnpiter  Phn-

trini. Wl ' ■  -

ceptian.  Ha

conrta  of  Alhuu;  aiid  if  the  cii
vera  fcmsd  oiiobjectiaaable,  it*
that  of  the  fnther,  mi  entered
the  phntrio,  md  thow  who  hod  wiihed  to  eilect
the  excloaicai  of  the  child  vere  liable  to  he  pnniihed.
(Demoith.  e.  Maeart  p.  1078.)  Then  followed
the  diilribntiDn  of  wine,  uid  of  the  liclim,  of
wbich  cTer;  phmtor  received  hi*  >hsn ;  and  poemi
were  retiled  by  the  elder  boja,  and  ■  ptiie  wai
giren  to  bUn  who  acquitted  bimaelf  the  beat  on  the
occaaion.  (PIbL  TVm.  p.  21,  i.)  On  thii  day,  alto,
illegitunote  children  on  whom  the  privilegea  '
Athenian  ddiena  wen  to  be  beatovod,  ai  well
cfaildnn  adopted  b;  cjtiieiia,  and  newly  emit
dliiena  mm  introduced ;  but  the  laM,  it  appei
eould  only  be  receired  into  a  phntria  when  they
nad  prenoiuly  been  adopted  by  a  citiien ;  and
their  childrtn,  when  bom  by  a  mother  who  wai
a  citizen,  had  a  Intimate  dajiu  lo  ba  inamhed  in
tiie  phnlna  of  their  gnndbther,  on  Ibeir  motfaei'i
aide.  (PlBtner,S<itr(^p.iee.)  In  later  (imea,
however,  the  ditRoul^e*  uf  being  admitted  into  a
phiatiia  teem  to  have  been  greatly  diminiahed.

Some  writerfl  have  added  a  f^mrth  day  to  ChiA
fntiTal,  under  the  name  of  fri«3a  (Hetych.  >.  e.
'AwoTo^ia:  and  Simplicinl  on  AriitaL  PiyM.  it.
p.  167.  a.);  but  thii  ia  no  puticnlar  day  of  the
fcatiTsI,  fiir  (ritta  lignitiea  nothing  elie  Int  a  day
lubiequent  to  any  fei^vaL  (See  Rhnnken,  Ad
Tin.  Le*.  PlaL  p.  119.)  [L.  S.]

APAU'LIA. [MiTiimoNinii.]

APEI.GU'THKKI(J>w>\tMefKH). [Ldbkti.]

APERTA  NAVIS. [Navis.]

APEX,  a  cap  worn  by  the  H'Tniim  nnd  nlii  at
Rome.  The  eaamtia]  put  of  the  apex,  to  which
alone  the  name  properly  belonged,  wu  a  pointed
piece  of  olivo-wood,  the  baae  of  which  was  lur-
nnmded  with  a  tack  of  wool  Thii  wai  worn  on
the  top  of  the  head,  and  wai  held  there  either  by
lillcti  only,  or,  aa  waa  more  commonly  the  cue,
by  lbs  aid  of  a  cap,  which  fitted  the  hcsd,  and
wai  also  bitcned  by  meana  of  two  itcingi  or  band),
which  were  called  opiaila  (Feitna,  ld.),  v  q^
fimdimt  (FeMn(,t.  c),  though  the  latter  word  ii
also  interpreted  to  mean  a  kind  of  button,  by
which  the  itcingi  wen  balened  under  the  chin.
(Camp.  Serr.  ad  Virg.  Atn.  ii.  683,  viii.  664,  i.
270.)

The  fininea  were  forbidden  by  law  to  go  mto
pahlic^  or  CTfiD  into  the  open  air  vitfaont  the  apex
(GeU.  1. 15),  and  hence  we  find  the  eipnstion  of
oUait  opHtn  dufoii  tmpaan  nBed  u  equiralant  to
the  appointment  of  a  fliunen  dialia.  (Lit.  tl  41.)
Bulpicini  wai  deprived  of  the  pcietthood,  only  be-
came the  apex  fell  from  his  head  whilst  be  wi*
nerificin^ (VaL  Mai.  I  L  t  4.)

Dionysini  (ii  70 )  describe!  the  cap  as  being  of
a  corneal  form.  On  audsat  raonnment*  we  sec  it
round  as  well  as  ccnical.  Fnnn  its  Tarious  fiirmi,
ai  shown  on  bas-ielie&  and  on  coin*  of  the  Roman
«mp«tun,  who  aa  pfie>t«  wera  entidsd  to  wnr  it.


APHRODISIA.

six  for  the  annexed  «m)dcnk  Hm

from  a  bos-relief  ihowin^  ODa  of


ihowingn
t  hull


Albogalenu,  or  albns  galcms  wai  a  white  o^i  worn
by  the  flanwD  dialii,  made  of  the  Ain  of  a  whito
victim  McriSeed  to  Jupitir,  and  had  the  apex
&itenedtoitbymeaii*ofaaoliTe-twig.  (FMaa,
u  V.  a&^afinu,-  OelL  i.  16.)


Fnnn  apex  was  formed  tha  ^ihet  i^pAaAia,
allied  to  the  flamen  diaUi  by  Orid  IFatt.  iii.
197).
APHLASTON  (a^Juarrw).  [Nath,]
APH0RME3  DIKE'  (df-^/tqi  Sficq),  waa  the
action  brought  againit  s  buiker  or  money-lender
(TparrfiTiii),  to  recorer  fundi  advanced  for  tha
purpose  of  being  employed  as  bankii^  Olirital,
Though  nch  moneys  were  alto  ityled  — pnnaTaftt-
■oi,  or  depoiits,  to  diitingniah  them  from  the  pri-
vate capital  of  the  tenker  (lUa  d^opfi^),  tha«  is
an  eucntiii  dif!c*nce  between  the  actions  l^fiqt
and  lapoKwr^^Ktti,  a*  the  latter  implied  that  the
defendant  had  refused  to  retain  a  dcpoail  intmtted
to  him,  not  upon  the  oonditioa  of  hii  paying  a
itatcd  interest  for  it!  tiie,  as  in  the  iotmcr  aae,
Dut  merely  that  it  might  be  safii  in  his  kee[nDg
till  the  aSun  of  the  plaintilf  !honld  enable  him  to
"esnme  iti  powriaiim  in  *tcurily.  [Pabauta-
■hick'.]  The  former  action  wa*  of  the  cUm  T^t
ivD,  and  cama  under  the  jniiadiction  of  the  thesuo-
thetae.  The  qiaech  of  Denwfthen*!  in  behalf  of
Phormie  was  made  in  ■  w^wjpo^  against  aa
tion  of  thi*  kind.  [J.  a  H.1

APHRACTUS.  [NiVii]
APHRODI'SIA  CAftwKm.),  listivili  ecde-
bratad  in  honour  of  Apbradits,  in  a  great  nonber
of  town*  in  Gt«ece,  but  particularly  in  the  islaiid
ofCypnii.  HernunancienttanplewaiBtPaphca,
which  was  built  by  Alfriai  cr  Cinyna,  in  whoan
family  the  prieatly  dignity  was  hereditaty.  (Tacit.
HM.  iL  3,  Aimil.  iiL  63  ;  Maxim.  Tyr.  Smm.  83.>
No  bloody  aciificia  were  allowed  to  ba  cffertd  !•
'ler,  but  only  piiro  fim,  £»werz,  and  incoise  (Viig.
4at.  L  116)  I  and  thenfbre,  when  Taiatna  {HiA
I  3)  ipeaki  of  victinu,  we  mnit  either  ioppaaa,
vith  Emetti,  that  they  were  killed  meiely  tbt  tha
priert  might  inspect  their  inleitinea,  or  lor  thapnih
poae  of  aifbiding  a  feast  to  the  penons  preient  at
the  (utiTaL  At  all  events,  howevu',  the  altar  of
the  gnddcM  wat  not  allowed  to  be  pollnted  whh
the  blood  of  the  vietinu,  whidi  were  mostly  he-
jpiats.  Mysteries  were  alto  eelehmtsd  at  I^|^o«
m  hoDcor  of  Aphrodite ;  and  'iimK  who  wan  ini-


APOOOAPHE.
Atd^Ki  (*  tbegoddaM  m  ueca  of  Btmj,  and
mmd  m  ntna  a  mw—bw  of  nit  «Bd  ■  fihallni.
b  da  BjilBiet  IbcBKlre*,  tb?  fBcclTSd  uutTDc-
liai  ir  If  Wjpnii  fiMxui^-  A  Msaad  at  neir
hfhM  W  kcoi  InQt,  acavding  bi  ndition,  ifter
it  n^n  «K,  bj  tba  Anadkii  Ag^enor  j  ud,
■((■<■(  ItScnbaCiiT.pt  683),  mm  (nd  mmm
«B«katniii«f  tlH  UudiMBnibledttNBir
Fqitt^  ■!  rait  n  aokmo  noeCHiaii  to  Old
)^t«,idiMDe*of  ax^Mada;  and  tlw  nnne
d  Aa  piM  of  AfbiDdila,  trririif  <Hc^tci1l  k  v.),
— t »  hi*  ■ipinMd  in  bit  Iwading  thii  [xi-
«■!)■,  Afbndne  wu'wmUpnd  in  DKKtiowii*
rfCnvM,  Hid  in  other  |aiti  of  Gneoe,  meh  u
CJikn,  Sfula,  Tbobn.  Elii,  &b ' ' ' *


L  (Aths.zuLiB.G71,fi79,iiT.n.659.)
* ' '  of  ApluodiU  uid  Adaui*

APLUSTRE.


hFo>-


Smm  ■  -— 'i-—'  Im  1

X«^4Z)  [L.&]

APLUSTRE. [Nath.1
APOCI.ETI  (dnsXvnl). [AnoLi

•n.  ^  !7.  KJ.
A?OD£CTAB  (dnMrrw),  tho  BMciT«n,w«e

tMtttan  tf  AthoM,  who

rWtiwi  n  (he  fheeof  lb

(—'■iW"'). Tk^  mn  tM  in  nnmber,  i

mk  t^  tad  Ibdr  dn^  mi  to  nnire

*<Mrr  '»<■  ■>'  diMibMe  thai  to  tho  ■

dtd  k  ikn. The;  tcwdji^y  kept  1
ri^  bdetad  t*  tha  Mate,  nHtde  aitric*


bat  ■■«  paid  iii,ai
H  ftna  taa  liMo.


BO  amiMctal  with  tha  nbjecti  aada
-„-Mat  ;  tboo^  if  tha  mattan  ia  dif-
por  am  of  ■BpoMUEB,  tha;  woa  oUi|ad  to
tciattk^fic  dadaiea  into  tb*  ordiaai;  oomli.
if9Eax,-<m.»7i  EQBokig.  lb«  Hacpomt  Said.
Ha;d.i.(i;  AmtoL  A(.TiS(  Dem-e.  Jauer.
r^7l«.Tfi2;  AMdLo.anp.87fi|  Beekh,PiiM.


IPOORAPHl

Kaimta;" „_„

on^  ihi tmna  faoypd^w  aod  dinrni^^««u
Md  tint  atyiwta  ajiplicitioiiB :


n  af  tha  aecated,  woald  in


■^te  KtMlljDi  the  poMcaooo  of
ynm ;  wUck  apirifiratinn  wu  niada,  vi
B  tk  iMfaialiiai  itf  nth  (at^o^  ts  tha  itala.
a!i.dt.dn*Ml.  Am  -
.  ariy


r*bfM|>tr«iikMtp

N<i>M^.wl*aBAa«>


AP0KERUXI3.  lOS

oial  amid,  a  in  tha  owe  of  a  declared  itate
debtoF.  If  no  oppotition  were  ofTettd,  the  ofw-
gr^ii  woald  attain  it>  object,  nnda  the  can  ol


tion  Bfoa^  which  ii  alio  de-
•ignated  by  toe  tame  title.

of  the  fiiat  kind,  which  i*  nid
....  to  bare  alio  borne  the  name  rdflw
^(1  Tit  xp^fwa  aal  vdirB  TBCrn  id),  the  claimant
■gunit  the  ttata  had  moelj  to  ftore  bit  title  to
the  pn^er^ ;  and  with  thia  we  inuM  daii  tha
caM  of  a  penon  that  impogned  the  apc^/nplit,
wherebj  tha  nbituiee  of  another  wai,  or  wae  pro-
poaed  to  be,  eonfiiotad,  on  the  gnnmd  that  he  had
a  ioan  bj  mj  of  mortgaga  or  othet  lecogniaed
•enirity  npon  a  pottioo  of  it  g  ot  that  tha  pan  in
qnoation  did  not  in  an;  wa;  belong  to  thi
dabta^oipenDDnmakted.  ThiaWdol
utien  to  tha  OfngnpU  ii  iUutnled  in  the .

HMthenai  againM  Hicomatoi,  in  which  wt
at  Apolloduni  had  intdCalad  an  apograpii
ARUnum,  fcr  nr ' '


id  of  opfia-


Upon  thii,  Nico-
of  the  propen; ,  and


Htatoa  attadu  the  deamplioD  of  til

Tiutintaini  that  three  ilana  were  wnnigl;  let  down

in  it  ai  bekmging  to  Ai^thiuini,  fia  the;  wure  in

bcthkown.

In  the  lecond  caae,  tha  defence  could  of  coone
oiil;p(Doeed  qan  the  alleged  iU^ilitr  of  tha  fbnuer
pCMU;  I  and  of  Ihii  wa  haie  an  inatanoo  in  the
qwech^Ljwiaiifiathaioldier.  There  Pol;aenai
bad  been  coodonned  bj  tha  gcDetali  to  pa;  a  fine
fin  a  breach  of  diiapiina  ;  and,  ai  he  did  sol  pa;
It  within  tha  i^pointed  time,  an  apognpkt  to  the
ammmt  of  tha  £oe  wu  directed  againat  him,
which  he  oppoMt,  on  the  ground  that  the  fine  wai
Ql^al.  The  <^>qgrapH  might  be  inatitatad  b;  an
Athenian  citicso  ;  bnt  if  there  wen  no  pcJTata
ptoaacnbc,  it  beeane  the  du^  of  tba  demucbi  to
proeead  with  it  oSciall;.  Sometime^  howerer,
eitiaardiDar;  fommiiiMnfliii  ai  the  ntAfyA  and
Cirnrrof,  wen  anwintad  6x  the  poipoae.  Tha
aoita  imtitBted  a^iut  tha  o^iynipU  twlmged  to
tha  jnriBdictioa  of  tha  ELaren,  and  for  a  wliile  to
that  of  the  S;ndici,  (H^i  tihi  miiiceis  dro-
Tpo^di  iweypi^ta,  L;cDig.  quoted  b;  Harpo-
cratian.)  TIu  further  etrndnct  of  Iheia  canui
wonU,  of  eoune,  in  a  great  meaaun  depend  npon
the  cjaimant  being,  or  not  beina,  in  poaieuim
of  the  proacribed  propert;.  In  uie  Gm  laia  tba
dmypd^m,  m  the  MCODd  the  claimant,  woold
appeal  in  the  cbaiactn  of  a  plaintiS  In  a  caia
Iflu  that  of  Nicoetnui  abora  dted,  tlie  dajmant
weald  ba  obliged  to  depoait  a  certain  inni,  which
ha  Gufeited  if  be  loat  hii  came  (n^MutnTaAA^)  j
in  aD,  ho  would  probabl;  be  oUiged  to  pa;  the
ODiti  or  (oan  feea  (afwrarua)  apon  the  aame  con'

A  private  aitiaai,  who  pnaecnted  an  indivi'
dual  b;  meani  of  hoTpo^  fisfeited  a  thoniand
drachmae,  if  he  biled  to  obtain  the  Totca  of  one-
fifth  of  the  dicaila,  and  letmboned  the  deCnidant

loo,  he  wonld  probabl;  incur  a  modified  atimia,
(.  (.  a  teitriclian  fnm  bringing  nch  ectinu  for
tha  fDtBre.  [J.  S.  M.]

AFOKERUXIS  (ironiKu).  implica  the
method  l^  which  a  bthei  eonld  at  AUh»  ditanlTa
thaleg^  eon " '


oned  b;  ai


10*  APOPHORA.

^ace.  Aeemiiog  to  tlw  mUnr  at  tba  decluui-
liaD  (ID  the  mljeet  (AwaaipirrTiiians),  wUeh  lu*
gateaUj  beta  BttribnUd  ta  Lndan,  inbftBBlul
lauan*  mn  Teqaind  to  inniTe  the  nti&atkia  of
loch  eitnuitdiiiuy  wreriC;.  Thow  (ngg««ed  in
ths  tnatiH  tefened  to  m,  itSaencj  in  filu!
attffljtian,  riotoui  living,  and  profligacy  gsicnlly.
A  inbMquEnt  act  of  pardim  might  annul  llui
■alenm  njection ;  bat  if  it  wen  not  ta  avoided,
the  aim  wu  denied  by  hii  father  white  aliva,  end
dinnheiited  ■ftemrdj.  It  datt  not,  however,
Bppeu  ShM  bi>  privilege!  ai  to  bii  tribe  or  the
■tBie  imdervent  any  alCentien.  The  court  of  the
aichon  moil  faavs  been  that  in  which  caoiM  of
thi>  kind  were  bioaghl  forward,  and  the  rejedioa
weuld  be  completed  and  declared  bf  the  voice  of
the  hemid  (dnic^pEiu).  It  u  prolwble  that  an
adoptive  &thei  aliu  might  reurt  to  thii  remedy
agauut  the  ingratitude  of  a  nn,  (Meier,  AU.
FnosB,  p.  132,  Ac)  [J.  S.  M.]

APOI.EIPSIS  <i*JAi4u).  [DiroRTiDH.]
APOLLINA'RBS  LUDL  [LuDi.]
APOLLO'NIA  CAwoAAiivui)  U  the  name  of  a
propitiator}'  fettival  Klemmied  at  Siejon,  in  hononr
of  ApoUo  and  Artemii,  of  which  Paunniaa  (iL  J.
§7)  giiet  the  foUowing  acomnt :  ~  Apollo  and
Artemii,  after  the  deatruclion  of  the  Python,  hod
wiihed  to  bo  purified  at  Sicyon  {Aegialea)  i  but
being  drivEn  away  br  a  phantom  (whence  in  after~
timei  a  cenam  >pot  m  the  town  waa  called  4J(of ),
th(7  pnxseded  to  Caimonoa  in  Crete.  Upon  thii
the  inhabitonta  of  Sicyon  were  attacked  by  a  peati-
lence,  and  the  aeuia  ordered  them  to  appeaie  the
deitiei.  Seven  boys  and  the  tanie  number  of  girls
were  ordered  to  go  to  the  rirer  Sjthai,  and  batliB
in  iti  watera  ;  then  to  carry  the  atatuea  of  the  two
deitjcg  into  the  temple  of  Peitho,  end  ftom  thence
back  to  that  of  Apollo.  Similar  ritei,  uya  Pauaa-
nias,  atill  continue  to  be  observed  ;  for  at  the  fee-
tivul  of  Apollo,  the  boys  go  to  the  river  Sytbas,
and  carry  the  two  deitiei  into  the  temple  of  Peitho,
and  thence  back  to  that  of  Apollo.

Although  teeiirali  under  the  name  of  ApoUoniai,
in  honour  of  Apollo,  are  mentioned  in  no  other
place,  still  it  is  not  improbable  that  they  existed  un-
derthciamenBmeinothcftownsofareeee.  [L.S.]
APOPEMPSIS  (iwiTti^it).  [DivoBTinn.]
APOPHANSIS,  or  AP0PHA3IS  (imtpa*-
(ru  or  tri^aaij),  vaa  the  procUnwtioD  of  the  de-
eiiian  which  the  majority  a!  the  judges  came  to  at
the  end  of  a  trial,  and  waa  Ihna  alao  used  to  signiiy
the  day  on  which  the  trial  took  place.  (Dsm.  e.
£is^p.lI53;L«Rhetar.p.210.)  The  word
waa  also  employed  lo  indicate  the  account  of  a
person's  property,  which  waa  obliged  to  be  ^vtm
when  an  anfidoni  waa  demanded.  [AnTinaaia.]
APO'PHORA<ilir(.0optl>,  which  properlymami
**  produce  or  profit "  of  any  kind,  waa  used  at
Athena  to  aignify  the  pro^t  which  accrued  to  mas-
ters Irons  their  ilaTBi.  It  thus  ilgniGcd  the  sum
which  alaves  paid  to  their  moMcra  when  they  la-
bonred  on  their  own  account,  and  the  aum  which
maatert  received  when  they  let  out  their  alavea  cm
hire  either  for  the  minea  or  any  other  kind  of
labour,  and  alao  the  mmay  which  waa  paid  by  the
state  for  the  use  of  the  alavea  who  nrTod  in  the
fleet.  (DenL  o.  Ap*at.  L  p.  819,  c  iVioHtr.  p.
1253;  Andoe.  Di  MfiUt.  p.  19  ;  \m.  Bep.  AUl
i  11 1  BUckh,  PaU  Bam.  of  Atluiu,  p.  7S,  2nd  ed.)
The  term  ejtopkora  waa  ^so  applied  to  the  money
which  waa  paid  b;  the  allied  atatea  la  SfUta,  iiir


APOSTOLEIS.
the  pinpoie  of  carrying  on  tbe  war  agaimt  tba
PoioDt. When  Atbcna  acquired  the  Biqrenney,
theae  moneyi  wen  o^led  t^foi. (BHiih,  Jtid.
p.  396.)

APOPHOHETA  (bre^^iro),  pceamta  which
were  given  to  firiends  at  the  end  of  an  entertain-
ment, to  lake  home  with  them.  These  fseeenta
were  nanally  given  on  festival  days,  eapedally
'  "  alia.  Martial  givee  the  title  of
fourteenth  book  of  his  Efugranis,
wnica  contains  a  number  of  epigrams  on  the  thinga
usually  given  away  aa  ofojAonlii.  (Suet.  Pap.
19;  CWL6S',  OdoB.16.)

APOPHRADES  HKMERAI  (te««p<lStt
illiipai\  unlucky  or  unfortunate  days  (jJiet  me/iutf),
on  which  no  public  bniineis,  nor  any  important
afikin  of  any  kind,  were  tninaacted  at  Athena.
Snch  woe  the  laat  three  daya  but  one  of  every
month,  and  the  twenty-fifth  day  of  the  moath
Thargelion,  on  which  the  Plynteria  wow  ede-
braled.  (£%n.  Mag.  p.  131  t  PhlL  AUO.  Si  ;
Lucian,  PmHiUeg.  13  ;  SchBmann,  A  ComilSt,

APORRHETA  (inf^nro),  literally  "thinga
forbidden,"  has  two  peculiar,  bat  widely  djffnent,
acceptations  in  the  At^c  dialect.  In  one  of  Iheae
it  implie*  contraband  goodi,  an  enumeratEon  of
which  at  the  diflennt  periods  of  Athenian  hiatoiy,
is  givm  by  BHckh  (PabL  Bean,  of  AOim;  f.  53,
2nd  ed.)  ;  in  the  odier,  it  denotes  eettun  eonta-
meliooa  emtheta,  from  the  application  of  which
both  the  living  and  the  dead  were  protected  by
apeeial  lawa.  (Meier,  AU.  Promt,  p.  482.)
Among  theae,  haApi^mn%^  ntrpaXoUaj  and  jtnp'pa-
Kotat  are  certainly  to  be  reckoned  ;  and  other
wcfda,  aa  pti^affriij  though  not  fcffbiddot  »ni-
maUm  hv  the  law,  aeem  to  have  been  equally
actimabie.  The  penally  for  uiing  these  words
was  a  fine  of  fiOO  drachmae  {IsoctaZooL  p.  396),
recoTcrable  in  an  action  for  abusive  language
(tamiyopiiu).  It  is  surmised  that  this  line  was  in-
curred by  Meidias  in  two  aetioni  on  the  octasion
mentioned  by  Demottbenei  (in  Mid.  pp.  540,  S*3  ;
BseaIioIIndtwalcker,Z>sOu(Ut.p.l50).  [J.S.M.]

APOSTA'SIOU  DIKE'  (<ht<Hrr«W  Bin,).
This  is  the  only  private  suit  which  came,  as  far  aa
m  know,  nnder  the  eicluiive  juriadiction  of  the
polemarch.  (Ariatot  At  Atk.  Hep.  quoted  by
Uatpociat)  It  could  be  brought  agiinat  none
but  B  freedman  (^tXaMepoi),  and  the  mly  pro-
aeeulor  pennitted  to  appear  was  the  eitiani  ta
wbaa  he  had  been  indebted  Ibr  his  liber^,  unlaw
this  privilege  waa  tianamitted  to  the  aona  of  aoch
former  mailer.  The  tenor  of  tbe  accusation  wma,
that  there  had  been  a  defiuilt  in  duty  to  the  pro-
■ectttOT  (  but  what  attentions  might  be  daitned
&am  the  freedman,  we  are  not  informed.  Tt  in
said,  however,  that  the  greatest  delict  of  this  kind
vraa  the  selection  of  a  petroa  (wpMrnfriri)  other
than  the  former  master.  If  convicted,  the  defend-
ant waa  publicly  aoM  ;  but  if  acquitted,  the  nn-
proiperons  connection  ceased  for  ever,  and  the
freedman  waa  at  liberty  to  select  any  citiaen  for
hia  patron.  The  patron  could  alao  lamniarily
punish  the above-mentioned  delinquertdea  of  his

iegalaward.  (fttitiiy.-lttB.  p.  261.)  [J.aM.]
APOSTOLEIS  (iTiwTi>\t;i),  ten  publk  officer*
at  Athena,  whose  duty  it  was  to  see  that  the  ahipa
were  prepay  equipped  and  provided  by  thoee
who  weie IxNnd to  diaehaiga the  trieiaRhy.


APOTHBOSISL
n^Wlbpowc^  uioatuBCMMiOfimpriMD-
■I  tk)  Biottka  wbs  Rejected  to  {uniik  the
■Iqipnfarigr  (Dcm-rnar.  p.263)  ;  and  tlksf
niliiilLiI  I  bond.  In  etaiJiiiKtidD  mth  Hit  io-

kikinacnMoof  aUjutlcn  leluiiig  U  tha


S  p.  113  ;  BSckh,  f

jIFOTHE'CA  (bvMni),  >  pkn  in  tfaa  Dppa
pt  i(  Ikt  Imok,  in  whick  tka  Romani  frsinaillr
(Imd  Ik  tutkai  Mnphone  in  which  their  wine*
■m  IcpHttd.  Thu  p)"^  which  wu  qoila
6hm  hni  ibc  eaSa  naru,  wu  above  the
fi»n»;  liase  H  wh  thongbt  that  the  {■"■E"
if  Ik  aib  IhnHgh  the  nxm  tended  greatly  U
Hvai  the  flanor  of  the  wine.  (Colum.  L  6.
i  U 1  HoL  QnL  ill  8.  1 1,  &(<.  ii.  £.  7,  ud
"(Biaff^  HHe.)  The  pontkn  of  the  ^theot
ofhv  Hm  eE|««i«  in  Heisce  (Cam.  iiL  SI.
7),  rtmnii,  tma. (Coop.  Dedur,  OoUu,  ToL  iL

APOTHEO'SIS  (JdrMmu),  tlw  eonlmeiit  of
; the  goda. The  mythology  of


7b  ohahiluti  rf  Amphipelii,  howeret,  eSbied
■tribn  le  bwidu  aftec  hii  deUh  (Tbnc  t
■  IJiUd  the  people  of  %e(te  bnill  uiAijiaK  «
PUlpfa^  md  alH  ofoed  Hcri&H  to  him  on  as
■aixfhiaaefBOialbeuty.  (Hetod.  t.  47.)  Ii
■hi  Gaxk  Ingiaai,  which  anM  in  the  Eait  oi
Ih  Jii<ahuiii.iil  of  the  eaipire  of  Alexmder,  it
te  BN  anai  to  hare  been  mumnmrai  fei  the  fuc-
■■H  m  aim  llneoe  to  haie  oflovd  dirine  hononn
k  lie  tmaa  WTgeign.  Such  an  apolheon*  of
FnkBy,  king  of  Ecfpt,  ia  deanibed  by  Theo-
oiM  B  Ui  1 7th  Idjl.  (See  Caaanbou'i
SMA£CW.Sa)


Then


g  the  B


»,po-


pHljrigmfied  tike  eleisticn  of  ■  deeeaaed  enipefoc
■>  diiBe  henuun.  Thii  pnetice,  which  wu  coan-
■■  ^B  (ha  death  of  almoat  all  tlie  emperon,
^■■a  U  hsra  niaoi  &0B  the  opinioD,  which  wa*
looaly  calottiped  among  the  Smnau^  that  the
Mdi  a  ■ancf  of  theii  aDcealcn  became  deitiei
md  w  it  waa  t—""«—  bt  children  to  wonhip  tht
Mati  if  tbnr  Eathen,  ao  it  wu  natoial  for  dirine
U  be  publicly  paid  to  a  deceued  emperoc,
—  ~ '  d  M  the  parent  of  hia  coontiy.
a  empenir  wai  nmally  called

.. ...0  vofaim  who  received  the

^"^rfffi  apethnneia,  waa  Mid  in  dtana
■ma  e^irrv  or  umwti'il  Id  the  cariieit
"■BGlae  ii  aid  to  bar*  been  admitted  to  difina
^•mm  maia  the  name  of  Qaiiiuaa  (PhL  j
^.9-.Ur.Li6i  Cic<bA9-U-10)i  bat
*  ihi  eihcT  Itowr  kinp  ff"  to  '■■'■  i™


'Vd  Is  lui  knom  by  AngiutBa  (Suet.  ^wL  Giea.
"l :  aad  (he  exanple  tima  set  waa  fidlowed  in
^oM  efthaotbeianpenir*.

The  eBcBuniea  ebasied  ta  the  occaiion  of
*  ^Mbiiinii  haVB  been  minutely  deacribed  by
il-nilia  (ir.  3)  in  tlia  fbUowii^  pMaage :  —
*lt  ■  iha  I  Ml  laii  of  the  Sianana  to  dei^  tboie
'  ifce^  eipmri  who  die,  leatia|
"d  dii  lila tber  oil apotheoaia.


APOTHEOSIS.  105

„.  cMnbtned
with  feitinl  and  nligkui  obaenancai,  ii  niibla
thronghoDt  the  city.  The  body  of  the  dead  tbej
hoQonr  alter  himian  &ihi<Hi,  with  a  tplendid
foneral ;  and  making  a  waxen  image  in  allreepecta
reaembling  him,  they  ezpoae  it  to  view  in  the
vcatibDie  of  the  palace,  en  a  lof^  ivaey  couch  of
greU  liie,  inead  with  cloth  of  gold.  The  fignre
u  made  pallid,  like  a  nek  man.  During  moit  of
the  day  aenalorg  sit  ronnd  (he  bed  on  the  left  tide,
elotbed  in  black  ;  and  noble  women  on  tin  right,
clothed  in  plain  wbite  gannenta,  like  moamen,
weaiinz  no  gold  or  necklacea.  Theae  ceremcmiea
for  leren  daje  ;  and  the  phyiidani  lere-
raUy  spprtach  the  conch,  and  looking  on  the  lick
man,  >ay  that  he  growa  woiae  and  wone.  And
naile  beliere  that  he  ii  dead,  the
leatimn  and  choeen  jonUia  of  the
take  np  the  conch,  and  bear  it
acta,  and  aipoee  it  in  the  old
foimn.  Platfoimi  like  atop*  an  boilt  open  each
aide  i  CO  one  of  which  itaiid*  a  chonii  of  noble
Touliu,  and  on  the  oppoaite,  a  choroa  of  women  of
high  rank,  who  aing  hynna  and  longa  of  piaiao
to  the  deceaaed,  modulated  in  a  iolemn  and  moDm-
ful  atiain.  Afterwa^  they  bear  the  conch
throngh  the  ci^  to  the  Campoa  Marttm,  in  the
bioadeat  peit  of  which  a  aquare  pile  ia  cvnalnKted
en^iely  of  loga  of  timber  of  the  laigeat  aiie,  in  the
ahape  of  a  chamber,  hlled  with  GiEgota,  and  on  the
oatiide  adorned  with  banging*  inlerworen  with
gold  and  iTory  image*  and  picnire*.  Upon  thia,  a
limilai  bnt  amallei  chamber  ia  built,  with  open
' — ■* ~^"idowB,  and  above  iT " ^' '  " '

iight-honaea  which  aie
called  Phui  In  the  aecond  itoiy  the;  idace  a
bed,  and  collect  all  aoila  of  aiomatica  and  inienae,
and  erei;  aoit  of  fragrant  fruit  or  herb  or  juioe  ;
for  all  dtiea,  and  nationa,  and  penoni  of  eminence
onulata  each  other  in  canCribatino  theae  laal  gifti
in  bononr  of  the  emperor.  And  vben  a  vaat  hnp
of  aromatica  ia  collected,  there  ia  a  ptoCEaaion  of
honemen  and  of  chariota  atonnd  the  pile,  with  the
driven  clothed  in  robea  of  office,  and  wearing
maika  made  to  reiembte  the  moat  diatinguiahed
Roman  geacnli  and  emperon.  When  all  tbia  ii
done,  the  other*  aet  Ere  to  it  on  etvcj  aide,  which
eaaily  catche*  bold  of  the  fiiggota  and  aromatica  ;
and  from  the  higheat  and  amalleat  itory,  aa  from
a  iHnnacla,  an  eagle  i*  let  looaa  to  mount  into  tim
iky  ai  the  fire  aieend*,  which  ia  believed  by  the
Romaol  to  auiy  the  aonl  of  the  empent  from
and  from  that  time  ho  ia  wor-


I apothecaia. On thia


m  medali  atmA  in  honodr  of  an  apotheoaia

an  aitat  irith  fire  on  it,  and  an  ea^a,  the  bird  of
Jiqater,  laking  flight  into  the  air.  The  nmnber  of
medal*  of  thia  deacriftion  ia  Tery  nnmerooa.  We
dn  from  theae  "'*^*'*  alone  trace  the  name*  of
aizty  iadividnala,  who  received  the  bcmonn  of  an
apoueoaia,  from  the  time  of  Jnlina  Caeaar  to  that
of  Conitantina  the  OreaL  On  moat  of  tbem  the
wcrd  CoNBKKa.Tio  occnra,  and  on  aome  Greek
coina  the  word  AtlEFOClX  The  billowing  weod<
cnt  i*  taken  from  an  agate,  which  ia  mppoaed  to
repnaent  the  ^ntheoaii  of  Oermaiucaa.  (Mont-
^con,  AkL  E^  Suppl.  to),  t.  p.  137.)  In  hi*
left  band  he  holda  the  oomncopio,  and  Vicbny  ia
placing  a  laorel  oown  upon  him.


APPELLATIO.


Tidia  ii  uprmmttd  m  being  ourisd  up  U  ths
•kit*  tm  an  eagle.  Tbere  i>  m  besDtiful  repcoen-
tatim  of  tbe  apothtoiu  of  Angnitui  on  an  onyx-
ibme  in  iit  ro^  muenm  of  Pvig.

Um;  othn  monmnenti  bare  come  dawn  to  at,
Thieh  rMfeiMt  an  q>atlieo«ii.  Of  thcM  th«  in«t
celeboled  !■  the  bw^elief  in  tfaa  Townlaj  galieij
in  tbe  Briliah  Muhdih,  which  rEpcraenti  the
■pothaoHi  of  Hamcc.  It  ii  cleail;  of  Romui  mrit-
nunihip,  end  ii  Mipp«Md  lo  haTs  been  eiecatod  in
the  time  of  the  EmpMot  CUodiu.

The  wim,  uid  othei  lenule  nlationi  of  the
empenig,  aimrtinia  reaeived  the  honour  of  ao
npothratil.  Thii  wsi  the  com  with  Lina  AngmtH,
with  Pop^aea  the  wife  of  Nera,  and  with  Psiutin*
the  wife  ot  Anlsniuui.  (Snet.  Omf.  11 ;  Dion
Can.  iL  S  ;  Tac  Jm.  xtL  21 ;  Ctpilolin.  Jsiim.
PiiioL  26.)

APFAKITO'RGS,  the  gmenl  name  for  ths
public  aemuliof  the  nugiitmta  at  Rome,  noinatf ,
the  AtxRNai,  CxTtNirsK,  Coactoris,  Intih-

PRITES,  LiCTO  HIB^PrA  BOaNBB,ScRIHAI,STATOR,

Stritob,  ViiTOBie,  of  whom  an  account  iapTcn
in  ■epamte  artidee.  They  were  called  ^pmlotBa
because  thej  were  at  lumd  to  eiecul«  the  com-


'  ad  ocee^iMm,'


Soft.  Ad  Virg.  Am.


0  Ouaiit  53;  Li'.  L  8).  Their
adauce  wat  called  appanlio.  (Cic
ad  Fam.  liiL  Si,  ad  Qb.  Ft.  i.  1.  %  i.)  The
•erranta  ot  the  miliiaiy  tiibimea  were  alio  called
appariton*.  We  lead  that  the  Emperor  Seremi
Mwde  the  nulilarf  tribmie*  to  retain  the  appaii-
lona,  whom  they  wen  accnitomed  to  hani.
(Lampid.  Smr.  GZ)

Uaia  the  cmpenm,  tlte  apparilorei  were  di-
vided into  museiDiia  claaiea,  and  enjojed  pecaliar
priiileget,  of  which  an  aceoimt  i*  given  in  Juet
Cod.  I'i.  tit  62~S9.

APPELLA'TIO.  1.  Ohmk  {l^wit,  or  iwu
Iwfa).  Owing  to  the  conititotion  of  the  Athenian
trihunali,  each  of  which  wai  geneiaJly  appropriated
to  it!  paiticn^  (uhJHta  of  cogniaauce,  and  therefore
coutd  not  be  ccBUidmd  ai  homogeneooi  with  or
anbordinala  to  ai^  other,  then  waa  little  oppor-
Inni^  for  bringing  appeala  properly  eo  called.  It
ii  to  ba  obenred  alio,  that  m  general  a  caoae  waa
finally  and  imrocably  decided  by  the  TSdict  of
the  dicaila  (Blini  drnrriX^i).  There  were,  how-
erer,  ume  eiceptiotu,  in  which  appeala  and  new
Iriala  might  he  reaorled  to.

A  ntw  trial  to  annul  the  pmiona  award  might


APPELLATia
be  obtahud,  !f  the  loier  eonld  ptove  that  it  wu
not  owing  to  hia  negligence  that  jndgmott  had
gone  by  detkolt,  oi  that  the  dica«t«  had  be^  de-
ceived by  ^Be  witnefleee.  And  upon  the  eipnl-
(ion  of  the  thirty  ^ranti,  a  tpecial  law  annnlled
all  the  jndnneiitt  that  had  been  girai  dnring
tho  ninrpation.  (Dem.  e.  Timotr.  p.718.)  The
peculiar  title  of  the  aboTe-mentioned  cauiei  wb«
ardliKoi  Bluai,  which  wu  alao  ^iplied  to  all  caoae*
of  which  the  nbject-matter  wu  by  any  mama
agun  mbmitted  to  the  decieion  of  a  court.

An  appeal  fium  a  verdict  of  the  heliaeta  waa
allowed  imly  when  one  of  the  pailjea  wai  a  dtiien
of  a  foreign  Mate,  between  which  and  Adieu
an  agreement  eneted  ai  to  the  method  of
■ettling  disputea  between  individual!  of  the  r^
■pectivB  countria  (Slxal  irh  rufiCJAtgr).  If  nich
a  fereigoar  loit  hii  cauie  at  Athena,  he  waa  per-
mitted to  appeal  to  the  proper  court  in  another
itata,  which  {(KK\vr«t  riMi)  BOekh,  Sohitmann,
and  Hudtwalcka  anppoH  to  have  been  the  native
coontiy  of  the  litigant.  Plitner,  on  the  other
hand,  arguing  from  the  intoitioa  of  the  r^ulation,
vii.  to  protect  both  partiea  from  the  partiality  of
each  othcar'i  leUow-dtiEeni,  conlead*  that  aome
diaiotereeted  itate  would  probably  be  eelected  Ibr
thii  purpoie.  The  technical  woidi  employed  imoa
thia  occasion  are  ixKoXthr^  ^jCKoActimv,  and  if
tKKXiiTos,  the  laft  naed  ae  a  nibitantive,  probably
by  the  later  initen  only,  for  f^wit.  (Haipocr.
Hndtw.  Da  Diatt.  p.  13G.)  Thti  a*  well  ai  tha
other  casea  of  qipeal  an  noticed  by  PoUm  (viii.
62,  63)  in  tha  following  wordi: — ""E^ffii  ia
when  one  tnnvfeii  a  cauae  from  the  aihitiatDra
(iuUTTTraf),  or  archona,  or  men  of  the  townihip
(Sruiirai)  to  the  dicaata,  or  from  the  aeuate  to  ths
asiembly  ot  the  people,  or  bom  the  aaiembly  to  a
court  {StuarHtpuH-y,  or  £rom  ths  dieaita  to  a  frxeign
tribunal ;  and  the  caoae  waa  then  tenned  i^4<niiot.
Thoee  aulM  were  alao  called  GuAvroi  Siai,  Tbs
depoiit  ttaked  in  apptala,  which  we  now  call
jrBfaei\iar,  ii  by  Ariitolla  at^ed  MOfttaKer,"
The  appall  from  the  diaetetae  an  gsaanlly  neD-
tioned  by  Dem.  c.  Api-A.  p.  863  g  e.  Botat.  da
DoU,  pp.  1013,  1017,  1024;  and  Hndtwalcker
anppoaei  that  they  were  allowable  in  all  caaea
except  when  the  M  o&ra  tUq  wna  Reoited  to.

I"""-!

It  ii  not  eaey  to  determme  npon  what  occaaiana
an  appeal  from  the  aicbooa  could  be  pnfemd  ;  for
the  ^me  of  Solon  theii  power  of  dedding
I  had  degeneistcd  into  the  mete  presidency  of
a  court  (irft/aala  Suumtpiov),  and  the  conduct
ot  the  pnvioui  examination  of  canee*  (Ju'daipirit).
It  hat  been  alee  remarked  (Platoer,  Pros,  mid
Klag.  voL  i.  p.  24S),  that  upon  the  jdainUff^  (ait
being  rejected  in  this  previoui  examination  aa
unfit  to  be  brought  befbn  a  court,  he  would  Host


it  liU  tho


n  when  he  Ci


of  hia  year  of  of


(fM^Hi).  (Antiph.
iJt  UanKL  PL  788.)  "An  appeal,  however,  from  ths
aithoni,  ai  well  aa  from  all  other  ofScen,  waa  Ter^
potiible  when  they  imposed  a  fine  of  their  own
anthoiity  and  without  the  lanctioo  of  a  court ;  and
it  might  also  take  place  when  the  king  archon  had
by  hii  ule  voice  made  an  award  of  dnea  and  privi-
legea  (7^)  conloted  by  two  priathooda  or  awcr*
dotal  lacM. <£M;iUe<orumspp.213,19.>


APPELLATia

TW  a|i«(*l  Amu  tka  dcDWCM  vDiM  ooenr,  «b(
m  poBB  kidtn*  d«aB«d  one  gf  their  moubai
kd  bam  ^chni  by  thniMban  Btnder  n


APPELLATIO.


It  vB  karc  bca  abated,  tbat  m  the  thna
hW  ■ii«,A>fp— 1»M1M*«  fnm  few  OT  diigis
•r  btil  iadfN  M  tha  UJMiti,  vbo  wtra  nn-
■liiiJ  Ihi  iniiiiil«liii«iif  Ihii  jiiiinilii  or  0x1007.
With  mill  It  ta A» jmaeik^ vo new  docomenti
■<■  to  ban  bam  added  to  (be  (ontoiti  of  tlw
iikaaa  afoa  an  Ifip^  ;  bM  the  aaainii  mNdd
W  iiirfiiii  I  Bwdr  U  m  CTimrratfwi,  la  br  ■■
aai  BBOMivj,  af  nan  dociinMBta  wbkh  had  bean
ibad  J  f^  ia  bj  tba  hUgnM.

Thna  U  mmtt  ubauuilj  iMjiaeliug  the  twv  next
ki^a  <f  4|nl  ^^  •'"  n>ti»d  b;  Polfaui.  It  it
lajKtvadbr  tMAaam  (illl;  Avivu,  p. 771)
dM  tW  n^  ftnaa  tba  MaaU  ta  tba  ^aapla  lafen
■  oaci  innk  Aa  bmv  mra  far  lanoni  naiani
di^dsHl  tadMida,  BDd  b;  Pbtnar  (tuL  L  p.497}.
tte  it  a«tian»4  wli»  Ika  ataata  «>■  (cauad  of
laiiat  aiiaaiTiil  ill  |iii«m

L'paa  tbe  appeal  fiim  the  aaaenU;  la  eadrt,  then
«  dat  a  diBMac*  af  ofinioB  batwaca  tbe  two  kit-


At  aaaaUa  caaa  of  me  tlat  bMnnad  a  taaeji
rf  it  aaaaabl;agaiaat  bim  (apafcuj,  aar
nafa)  offing  ^KB  a  ceait  (Suunri  4|h>)  »  giTi

(kaqe  tkat  Ua  autiganirt  dadfined  (s  Mew  up.
naaa^aka  eanptatha  (aaesfaaMsiftntaRUD-
■■djr  dnaaed  bf  tfaa  aMMnblj.  aod  denandiiig
•aparclaaaBonnMinlbahebati.  [J.aUJ
S.  Bmux. Tba  word  APPaLLiTio,  and  the


d  to  be  inBkted. It

•a,  whiek  in  the  earl;

d  toiautjin  wpfeai  te  tbe  popnliu

bctiBg  life. It  would  leeni  that  the

<ttaB^  ^w  ■uiiifiii^  HoTB^os,  who  mordovd
Ua  aaMH^  appealed  &i>m  the  dmniTiri  to  the
fifa^ (Lrr.  L  SS.) The  deeemTm  took  awajt

taa  ^netad  (bat  in  fiilan  no  m^ialtata  Jumld
W  BB^a  ftea  whom  there  ihoald  ba  do  mtaL
(b  dw  Lny  <dI  5»)  Tonoda,  tbat  tbe  piabea


B  Ae  aiyallaliii  prafKriy  io  tailed  (iii  IS.  S6>.
Ap^H  <Li*.  iii-  H)  ^ftied  {^pdlatil)  to  tbe
kAi^wa;  md  wbrn  thn  {todacedna  effect,  and
ha  ■■■  amaftiil  I7  a  viatar,  ba  appcalad  (pron)-
mhT).  rw«H  (A  Ool.  il  48)  appean  to  tlliide
to  iha  H  lartUidiiaiiiil  if  the  proneatii^  vbich  ia
■■■■■ail  bjr  1^*7  (m-  U). The  ccmpliM  pEuue


9  the  ^fiellatiD,  is


eiaoi  m^ht  cKMBora  fri
K  alaqsN  nnk )  and,  of


The  ifipeab  which  have  hen  been  nfemd  ti^
were  limited  to  crimiiialiiiatteii.  IneiTtlRiitithen
wai  not,  and  could  not  be  aoj  appeal  indei  the  i»-
pablic,  iiir  the  poipoie  of  nriiing  and  altering  a
deciticm,  for  eadi  magiitnto  h&d  power  to  decide


lie  renned  bj  the  inagiatrate  who  appointed  tha

Sdei.  Tba  only  mode  in  whieEi  a,  penon  could
iTO  nlie^  in  nch  caaea,  wni  b7  the  intcnaano
of  a  ■Qperior  magirtr&te,  iv  the  appeliatio  of  tha
tribanei  which  woold  be  in  the  nature  of  a  Kaj  of
eieeaCion.  The  /■  inUgruBt  mfihrtio  alas  exiited
■rader  the  npiit>lic.

When  tba  anisema  power  became  Teated  in  the
empemn,  the  termg  prorocatia  and  nipeUatio  kst
then  origiul  ligniGcalim.  Tbni  Qelhoi  (it.  14)
baa  oaed  pronwiilu  far  apnellalia.  In  tie  Digeat
(49.  tit.  1.  i>a  App^laUonhtt)  pnToeatio  and  ap-

we  call  an  ifipeal  in  erril  matten :  bat  utiTocstio
aenmi  b  fer  to  hare  retained  ita  original  meaning
aa  to  ba the  only  tom  need for  an  mwal  m


S3)  aatabliahed  a  >;al«ni  of  ngnlai  qipoda  fiom
lil^ant  paitiea  at  Seraa  to  tha  Pnwtor  UilanDa,
aam  thapcoriacaatothegoTanun.  N((o(Saaton.
Mra,  17)  cnactad  diat,  all  appeali  Enm  frioM
(Tacit,  .^aaal.  iIt.  2S)>A<«iho>ild  be  to  the  lenBte.


ofaninfenor  to


u^icatioD  ier  rednaa  from  tbe  deonon
— t  to  a  anperiot,  en  the  Roond  of  wrong
other  anfflcient  grmnd.  Accordinf  to
UlEoan  (Dis.  49.  tit.  I),  af^tala  wen  eonmon
■mmg  the  Ronana,  "  on  acsnmt  tA  the  itijoatica
or  ignorBoee  of  thoaa  who  had  to  decide  (jarfi-
eaila),  Ihongh  aometimea  an  q>peBl  altan  a  ^tt-
fvt  decision,  u  it  it  not  a  neceanrj  oonaeqnanoa
tbst  be  who  giiFB  the  Lut  givei  aln  tiie  beat  deci-
lion."  Thii  remark  mut  be  taiuin  in  connection
with  tlie  Ronan  lyitem  of  pnteednis,  ^  which
nich  matten  wen  refaned  to  a  jndex  for  hii  deci<
Bion,  after  tha  pleadinga  had  bronght  the  matttf
in  diapue  to  an  iaane.  Prom  the  enpeni  bimielf
than  waa,  of  conne,  no  appeal  t  and  I7  a  ocoatlni-
tim  of  Hadrian,  then  waa  no  appeal  from  tba
eenato  to  tha  empcnr.  The  empaor,  in  anaunt-
ing  a  Jndai,  muht  eidnde  alt  iqipcal  and  maka
tha  deciiion  of  i&a  jndejc  finL  I(L  Anrelioi  bj'  a
reaoipt  (DiK  49.  tit  I.  *.l,  31)  directed  an  ap-
peal from  the  Jodgmoit  of  a  jndex  to  the  magii-
ttatt  who  had  apjwinted  the  jadcz.  The  qipeal,
er  tibJin  apptllaloriiu,  ahowed  who  wia  the  ap-
pellant, s^Unat  whom  the  qipeal  wu,  and  what
waa  the  jodgmsil  appealed  from.

Appellatie  alao  maam  to  toninion  a  party  before
a  jndez,  or  to  call  iqion  him  to  perform  atmething
tbat  he  baa  niHleRaken  to  do.  \Ck.  Ad  AH.  i.Z^
The  debtor  wbo  waa  aammoned  (apfiaUatei)  bj
hii  cnditor,  and  obeyed  the  aomTimi%  wai  aaid


The  nttem  of  iqipelladonea  ai  ealabliahed  imdcc
the  eoipm  waa  of  very  eitenaire  mlicatjon,  and
wu  not  limited  to  matten  of  oimmal  and  dril
pncedore.  A  penon  might  appeal  in  matten  that
reUted  to  tha  iiacat,  to  penaltica  and  fine^  and


lOS  AQUAEDUCTUS.

to  i3tO  afflcH  and  bucdeni.  Thia  labjNl  ii  fliHy
tiHled  b;  Hollwflg,  Hamdbatk  Ja  am^ma—a,
p.  SSO.  [O.  L.]

APPLICATIO'Nia  JUS. [Exm-iux.]
APROSTA'SIOU  ORAPHE' {i^jKHrmrl
ypuf^^  Bn  icticni  Uling  undfir  tba  jnriidicdoa  of
the  polflmuch,  irhicta  mi  broagbt  agBJJVt  thoM
metoeki,  sr  raidsDt  alieni,  who  hsd  neglected  to

Elide  thsnuelTei  with  ■  ptteon  (rpaFrimit).
ii  ■ction  ii  itatcd  to  h&ire  been  alia  bronglit
againit  thote  metoeld,  who  aicrciicd  the  rigbti  of
fall  citJKiu,  or  did  not  pa;  th>  lirroUmr,  a  Uz
of  twelra  dnebmoe  cTBcted  fmn  raideiit  >lieni ;
bnt  Maiei  has  remuked  tbat  tbi<  adion  wu  only
applicable  in  aucb  cuei,  piorided  that  tbe  metseki
bM  na  patnin.  (Haitiocrat ;  Zmar.  %  Suid.  and
the  other  grammariuiei  Heier,  AU,  Prottt,
p.  S15,  Ac)

APSIS  or  ABSIS  (&^i),  in  iU  litenl  meaning
frnn  IrrB,  ia  a  fiuUning  of  any  kind  ;  fbremmple,
themMheiofanet  (Horn. /^t. 487.)  Kwasap-
plied  (pedally  to  the  joining  logetha  the  eitremi'liei
of  a  piece  of  wood,  aa  u  to  give  it  the  ahape  of  a
bow  [  and  henm  it  came  to  aignify  anything  of
tbat  ahape,  anch  aa  a  bow,  an  anh,  or  a  wheeL
(H«.  C^.  424  ;  Hend.  iT.  73.)  A  potter^  wheel
ia  deacribed,  in  the  Anthology,  at  KinXat  k^'^j.
The  next  tnututioti  of  meaning  ia  to  anything
wJltd  (for  exuni^e,  4  ihrmipufa  o^lt,  fi«  vmH
tf  iimtt.  Plat  Platir.  p.  347,  b.)  i  and  in  (hia
•enae  it  wu  adopted  in  architectsn,  Grat,  lor  any
bnilding  or  portion  of  a  building  of  a  dieuUr  fbnm,
or  nulled  (Plin.  ^iL  iL  17.  §  13),  and  mora
•tpedBlly  Kr  the  oicalar  and  Tanltad  end  of  ■
Baiilica.  (PaoL  Nol..^  13;  An|pLttiii,.^203  ;
laid.  Orig.  xr.  &)  For  otha  ^filicatioDa  of  it,  all
with  the  genenJ  mraning  of  a  Tanlt  or  enrre,  aee
ForeellinL  [P.  8.]

AQUAEDUCTUa  CiJp<r)wr£a),  literaUy,  a
mter-condiiit,  would,  of  ooune,  pnperly  deecribe
any  channel  for  the  paaaage  of  water ;  but  the
wind  ia  Hand  eapecially  for  the  magnificent  atrno-
tnrea  In'  meana  of  which  Rome  and  other  dtiea
ef  the  Roman  empire  were  aapplied  with  water,
and  a4iich  may  be  deacribed  in  genera]  tenna  aa  a
channel,  conatrncted  aa  neaily  aa  poaaible  with  a
regvW  declirity  from  the  uoice  whence  the
water  wai  deriTcd  to  the  place  where  it  waa  de-


•od  OTCT  ntleji  npoQ  a  i


a  of idid


The  aqneduct  ia  mentioned  by  Strabo  aa  asung
the  itructurea  which  were  neglected  by  the  Orecka,
BDd  firat  brooght  into  oae  by  the  Roraana  (t.
p.  335).  It  will  preeenlly  be  teen  that  thia  atate-
ment  requirea  wme  alight  modification }  but,  if
nnderatood  of  the  grand  (trannrei  ws  hBTB  referred
to,  it  ia  true  enough  that  the  Orceki  (bcfiin  the
Roman  conqueat)  had  none  luch,  and  for  the
obrioiu  reaaon,  that  they  bad  no  need  of  them.
*"■ '  - . .■  .^  poaaibility  or

edocta without
which ia  the reaaon dleged b;


imnaiibility  of conatnicting  aquedncta
archea,  which ia  the reaaon alleged by _. .
viilera  for  their  not  being  naed  by  the  Oreeka  ;


there  ii  reaaon  enough  in  the  phyihsl  geography
of  the  country.  Spring*  (Hp^nu,  icpovnf)  were
•niiiciently  abundant  to  anpply  ^a  great  citiei
with  water  ;  and  great  attentioD  wai  paid  lo  the
presemtion  and  adimment  of  them  ;  they  were
conirerted  into  public  foontaina  by  the  formation  of
and  Uie  ei«ction  of  an


a  head  lor  tbeir  wit^  and  ti


AQUABDUCTUB.

amamoild  wperatniutnra ;  and  wcta  dadkttad  to
arane  gud  oi  hem.  PaoMniaa  (z,  4.  Jl)  coondera
na  {daaa  to  deaene  the  name  af  d^  wbioh  bai
not  Rich  a  fountain.  We  am  indebted  to  tba
nme  author  and  otha  Greek  writta  far  meonnu
of  aome  of  the  hhM  celebrated  faontaina  ;  anch  a*
that  of  Theagenei,  at  Hf^Bia  (Pana.  L  40.  g  1)  ;
thoaa  of  Peinne  and  Lffina  at  Corinth,  when
then  were  many  other  fbuntaina,  •*  well  aa  a
Human  aqneduct  erected  by  Hadrian  (ii.  3.  §g  S^
S,  fi  ;  4.  gfi))  that  in  the  gnne  of  AetcuIi^iiDi  at
Epidaurua  (IL  17.  %i)  ;  and  leveral  olhera  (ir.Sl,
S2,  34,  yil  G,  21,  liiL  IS),  of  which  we  nead
only  mention  the  £HHiiiraiaio>  M  Athena,  which
waa  conatjucted  by  Feiaiatntna  and  hli  tusoM,  and
of  which  Thucydidea  receada  the  interacting  &ct,
marking  the  tianaition  fnmi  the  natural  qnngi  to
the  actincial  fbtmlain,  and  allowing  the  impixtaace
attached  even  to  the  finner,  that  "  It  waa  oiled
Caltirhot!  fofmecly,  ioIm  tl«  tpringt  wtr*  isbUb
(^anpwr  -rSm  b«;w  stnir,  nnb  u.  IS  ;  Pan*,  i.
14.91):  totbUenimwntian  might  be  added  the
ipringi  of  adt-water  m  certain  tamplea  ;  aa  in
thoae  of  Erechlheui  at  Atbena,  and  of  Poandon
Hippiua  at  Hantincia. (Fana.  i  26.  gS,  TiiL  10.

In  theaa  oaea  we  hara  iw  naam  to  Bcppoaa  that
there  waa  any  thing  mote  than  a  fbontam  orar  or
doae  to  the  ipringa,  Ibimir^  a  head  i«  the  water
deriTed,  either  immediately,  or  by  very  ahmrt
channela,  from  them.  Bnt  we  an  not  withont
e^tamplea  of  oonatrnctiaiia  mon  nearly  apnmachiiig
the  Roman  aqueducta  in  kind,  though  not  in
decree.  That  the  Greeka,  at  a  very  early  period,
had  iome  power*  of  hydmnlic  engineering  la  ihown
by  the  dninage  tnnnela  of  tba  lake  iStpaii,  and.
the  aimihir  worka  of  Pbam  at  Ajrigentum
[EwisamiDH]  1  and  we  haie  an  matanee  of  b
chaonel  for  water  being  tarried  through  a  moan-
tain,  to  Bopply  the  ci^r  of  Sana*.  The  height  of
tbemfninlaia  waa  150  orgniaa  (WO  Qiedc  ftet)  ;
the  length  of  the  timnel  waa  aera  itadia  (7-8ths
of  a  Rimian  mile,  or  about  1430  yardi)  ;  ilaaectiiHt
waa  a  aquare  df  eight  Oreek  feet.  The  actnal
channel  for  the  water  waa  cot  below  thii,  and  waa,
if  the  teit  it  right,  thir^  Oreek  feet  de^  and
three  wide  ;  the  water  paaaed  tbrengh  pipea  {hilk
vtiih^pttr)  from  a  copioua  ipring,  and  waa  thua
■  ■  ■■  city,  (Herod,  iil  60.)  MUller
ecojectuna  that  the  woik  waa  one  of  thoae  arecuted
by  Folycratea  {,ATduui.  i.KiaL,  g  81).

The  chief  regnlatiima  among  the  Otedu  rapeet-
ing  fnmtaina  and  aningi,  whether  in  town  ur
countiy,  were  the  following :  —  Water  might  bo
fibbed  &om  the  public  fountaina  C7  wella  to  &
dJatBDce  of  four  atadia  ;  beyond  thia,  pencmB  muat
dig  their  own  wella ;  hut  if  any  one  dog  to  «
depth  of  ten  of^noe  (or,  according  to  Plato,  /I'XP*
rqi  mpofiillei  ^qi)  without  finding  water,  he  mm
permitted  to  take  &Dm  hja  neighbonr^  well  ■,
pitcher  of  lix  eioct  twice  a  day  (Pint.  SoL  33  ;
PlaLiay.  Tiii.p.844,a,b).

The  Homant  were  in  a  Teiy  diSovnt  poaitiDD,
-ilh  napect  to  the  anpply  of  watar,  firom  moat  <i£
the  Oreek  dtiea.  They,  at  firat,  had  reeoarea  to
the  Tiber,  and  to  weUa  lunk  in  the  city  ;  Init
the  water  obtained  from  tbo*e  aoureea  waa  "tt

iwholeaome,  and  mnat  aoon  hare  prored  innif.
iident,  (ram  the  growth  of  the  populalim,  to  ^y
lothing  of  the  tnppliei  atlerwarda  required  for  tha
'  public  batlu. It  wai  tbi*  iwaeB-


AQnASDUCrUS.
lit;  Utt  lad  ts  a*  hrcntmi  li  iqaedkcM,  in
mia  t*  ktiaf  pon  wmter  fnoi  >  couidcnblc
iiilMiii .  bam  iIm  UUi,  is  fact,  which  nmniid  tha
Cap^ps.  The  dUe  of  tha  E«  aqDedoet  w  u-
afxd  It  Fiwitiwa  to  tha  year  A.V.C.MI,  or
&c  SIS  <iV  ^tn'.  IMt  Am.  4,  ]Il  14,  ad.
jUW)  ;  u>d  Aa  aambw  af  aqBtdnU  waa  gn-
^■1^  ixnaaed,  partly  at  the  jnUk  txpaaai^  nd
[■III)  tj  ihii  iwiiirmiiaa  iJiiiiliiiiliah.  lill.  in  ihii


t,  in  tka  fol-


kMai^  tnadiaa  (mripii,  gudtDi,
T^ai  i  a>d,  alo^  tba  dJMoa*  whidi  it  Innm,
tbt  Mtbea  bnlt,  tha  mmtaiiia  ptrfoiatad,  tha
nlkfs  lardlcd  ;  ha  will  Kofta  UiM  tboe  narer
wHHythmgBatawoDdcrfbliD  thawlwig  woM."


f  ikc  Mfk  pUn  ef  Uring  pipe*  aloiu  th
md*  Ot«oaw,iti*(>«rtag»e  tlieimtiiiii)


d  jct  it  ia  tha  com
Ob  iix  af  thor  bmUing  amadncla  iuMead,  of
kiii  dwB  wB^r-pipta.  If  it  Tcce  at  all  necaa-
■■■fy  to  pnne  that  ft  natioo,  ao  br  adTaoced  in


.  . n  lard,  din  proof

ai|iK  he  •mliad  ban  fMaagaa  in  l«&aBth«i  *,
6«  A*  irbU  ail  a  mi  III!  null  fc*  tha  diatribation
tf  da  WBlar  U  iIm  aqiiadiicta,  and  from  tlia


J J i


{•£.■,■.5),

tea  ia  which  it  wai  pneticoH;  qipljed  (tilL  7.

i-CXaa  win  ha  aeen  IkIov. Plinjr  alao,  ~  '-


AQDAEDUCTUS.  109

.  izirteiice  of  their  aumcnoi  Ibimbuni ;  aaade-
cifiTe  ocular  demonatnUion,  wc  have  given  aboi«  ■
Kctton  of  ona  of  the  nuuijr  fountuDi  atJtl  eziiting
at  Pompeii  Another  reaarai  awigned  for  tbo
eoutnirtiaii  of  aqaedDcti  bj  the  Komaiu  i<  thair
want  of  tlia  maunik,aiid  the  maaabctuiiiig  ikill,
to  make  pi|Ma  of  a  nifficieiil  uh  ;  combined,  on
tha  other  unl,  with  tlta  lora  of  magnificeaM  and
tha  oatantitioiia  diawaid  of  expeoie,  b/  which
the  aidiilectaial  wona  of  the  empire  an  cha-
ncteriaed.  Some  weight  ahonld  doubtleu  be  aa-
■igDsd  to  theae  conaideiKtioni,  altbongh,  in  bet,
the  BomuB  made  uc  of pipea  u  well  v  aqoeducta ;
but  tha  great  point  ii,  that  it  baa  been  loo  iuitily
uamned  that  uia  aqwdoet  u  an  nnadentific  loode
of  amveTiag  water  to  a  lane  city  from  dialant
•osrce* ;  or  that  it  ii  pacufiar  to  the  aneienti.
Lcodon  ittelf  ia  chiefly  anpplied  bj  an  aqoeduct,
for  auch  ia  the  New  RiTei  in  principle,  although
tha  Boontiy  IhiODgh  which  it  flowi  ii  nich  ai  not
to  nqnin  arcbea  and  tumnla  like  thoie  of  the
Rooian  aqnedneti ;  and  the  remark  would  apply  to
leretal  other  gnat  citica.  Tha  whole  matter  la  >
qneatiou  of  the  balance  of  adruitsgea.  On  the
~~  >  hand  there  it  the  eipenae  of  the  aqnedoct :

the  other,  the  enormnia  pipes  which  wonld  be
required  for  lie  conieyanco  of  an  equal  qnaoli^
of  water,  their  liabiliff  to  get  obitructed,  azid  to
yield  at  the  joiuta,  the  loai  bj  friction,  e^weially
m  the  beud^  and  the  uueqaal  pceuure  of  the
water.  Id  Gict,  the  moat  recent  fcst  of  engineer-
to  the  Bonao  aqueduct,  which  tau  been  preieired
to  any  other  pion  for  conyeyiag  wuler  in  large
qoauti^ea  a  conaidenbLe  diitanoi,  over  great  in-
eqnalitiea  dF  noimd :  we  relet  to  the  aqueduct,
begnn  in  1837  and  finiahed  in  1S42,  by  which
the  water  of  tha  tirer  Cioton  ia  convejed  a  dit-
tance  of  forty  milea,  for  the  auppi;  of  New  Yoric,
and  which  ia  thna  deanibea:  —  "An  artificial
cbanne],  built  with  iquare  itonea,  anpportad  an
■olid  loaaonry,  ia  carried  orer  Tallcyi,  through
rival,  under  hilli,  on  archea  and  banka,  or  through
tonnela  and  bridgea,  ova  theae  for^  milei.  Not
>  pipe,  bat  a  aort  of  condenaed  river,  arched  over
to  keep  it  pure  and  aafe,  ia  made  to  flow  at  tha
nia  of  a  mile  and  a  half  an  hour  towarda  New
YoA."  A  mora  exact  deacripticai  of  an  ancient
lUman  aqnednct  cooJd  not  eaiUy  be  giiea  <See
iUwfrDMsu  o/  tit  CnKm  Jgatduet,  by  F.  B^
Tower,  1S43.)

The  detailed  deactiption  of  the  amngenwnta  o'
the  aqacdiuA  win  be  belter  nndentood,  after  an
ennmtntion  of  the  principal  aqnedocta  by  which
water  waa  conreyed  to  Rome  aooaa  the  Cam-

They  were  fowteen  in  mmiber ;  and  oiJy  four
of  thsm  belong  to  tha  time  of  the  republic,  while
Bto  were  built  in  the  reigna  of  Angnatna  and
Qaodiufc  Onr  knowledge  of  the  aubjeet  ia  de-
rived almoat  antiialy  from  the  tieatiaa  Da  A^ua*-
^uetibut  Uriit  AMSoe,  bj  S.  Julioi  Fnmtinui,  who
waa  fufcr  aquarum  Steeper  of  the  aqnednda)
mda  Nan  and  TrajaiL  It  ahould  b«  obaerved
that  the  Afmuduelut  a  often  called  limply  Agna.

I.  The  ^4>»<  Jppit  wu  begun  by  the  cenaor
Ajqona  Gandina  CWua  (to  whom  alto  Rome  wsa
indebted  Ibr  hs  fint  great  road),  in  B-c  SIS.  Iti
aovrcea  wtfa  tirMr  the  Via  Praemettma,  between
the  acrenth  and  eighth  mileatonea,  and  iti  ter-
minatkn  waa  at  tba  mUkm,  iy  Ua /^xAi  TV^ftaiaa.


no  AQUAEDUCTUa

lU  length  «u  11,190  paoH,  lot  11,130  oT  which
it  wu  earned  under  the  enrth,  and  fijr  the  remauiing
00  pauBt,  wtthin  the  drF,  from  the  Pnria  Capma
to  the  Porta  Tn^muna,  it  wb>  on  aitlie*.  The
diitributirai  of  it*  vatei  begsn  finm  the  Ctttnu
IVJicva.  CFrontin.  5;  Li>.  it  29  ;  Diod.  a.  36 ;
Aur.  Vict  Fir.  IBnl.  M,  who  coofbimdi  it  with
the^ni.} Natiscetofitremuii.

S.  Ths  Anio  VetuM  wu  nmmenced  Ibrty  jean
later,  b.c;  37SI,  hj  the  ceiuor  M.  Coriiu  Denlatiu,
•nd  wu  finiihed  itf  H.  FhItIiu  Flaceiu.  The  ei-
Mnie  wu  de&ajed  oat  of  the  ipoSi  taken  feim
PjTrhui.  The  water  wa«  derived  &™n  (he  rixer
AniD,  Bbera  Tihcr,  at  a  diitanca  of  twenty  Ronun
mileB  from  the  dty ;  bnt,  on  accoont  of  in  wind-
iiui,  tti  aetoal  length  wu  for^-thnx  milea,  of
i^ich  length  Ian  than  a  qnarter  of  a  mile  only
(namely,  221  pattia)  wu  abore  the  gronniL
There  lira  contideiahle  Temain*  of  thii  aqueduct  ott
the  Aoielian  wall,  near  the  Porta  Maggiort,  and
■lu  in  the  ceighbotirhood  of  TiioU.  It  wu  built
of  bloclu  of  peperino  atone,  and  the  wMer-cmirH
wulinedwithathickeoatingofcement.  (FnHitfi;
Aur.  VicL  Vv.  PL  45.)

S.  The  Agaa  Marda,  one  of  the  nml  important
of  the  whole,  wai  boilt  by  the  praetor  Q.  Mamini
Rci,  by  conunutd  of  the  icnate,  in  B.C  U4.
The  want  of  a  more  plentifiil  nipply  of  water  had
been  long  iit,  opedally  u  that  fimiiihed  by  the
Amit  PUu  wu  of  neh  had  quality  as  to  be  aJ-
m«t  unfit  tat  driiddiu  ;  and,  in  b.c  179,  the
emion,  H.  Aemilina  Lepidna  and  M.  Flaccni
Mobilior,  had  propoaed  the  erectiDn  of  a  new
■qDcdaet ;  but  the  acheme  had  been  defeated,  in
ccotequenea  of  Udnma  Ciunu  nfiuing  to  let  it
be  carried  thnragh  bit  landa.  (Lit.  il.  £1.)  The
two  exiftiTig  aqoedncU  bad  aim  fallen  into  decay
by  n^eet,  and  had  been  much  mjared  by  [xiTate
penou  diawinv  off  the  water  at  dtSeient  iiatta '


their  caaiwe.  The  lenata  thcrefaie
the  praebir  Harchii  to  lepwi  the  old  aquedocti,
and  to  bnild  a  third,  which  wa>  named  after  him.
Some  writer!  have  pretended  that  the  oiigiaal
Gonatrnction  of  thii  aqoedact  ii  to  be  aioibed  to
Ajicaft  Marcitu,  allying  a  paaiage  of  Pliny  {H,  fi,
zxiL  3.  a.  24),  and  a  medal  of  the  Mercian  geni,
fiunily  PhilippDa,  which  heart  on  the  obrene  a
head  with  the  legend  AkcV«,  and  on  the  rerene
a  lepreaentstion  of  an  aquednct,  with  the  lettera
Aqvdr  between  the  atchei,  nipporting  an
eqnealriaa  itatoe  with  the  legend  PaiLtiPFTB:
but  thoie  who  knew  any  thing  of  the  hiatory  of
Roman  &mil;  recordi  will  nnderitand  that  thia
medal  beari  no  CTidence  to  the  point  in  qneetion,
and  i)  limply  a  perpetnalion  of  two  of  the  greaCeet
dutinctiona  of  the  Mania  ffou^  their  alleged  de-
acent  hma  Ancna,  and  the  aqnednct  which  bore
their  name  ;  and  Pliny's  opinion  ii  liioply  one  of
hii  ludicnmi  blimden,  aiiilns  probably  from  hii
confoonding  Hardut  Rex  with  the  hmg  Aneni
Mardna  (Eekhel,  Dodr.  Num.  Vel.  toL  t.  p.  248.)


AQUAEDUCTUa.
length  WBi  61,7inipaBu,  of  which  only  7403
were  above  gromid  ;  namely,  628  on  aolid  inb-
(tmctiona,  and  6935  on  arvhea,  It  wu  high
enotigh  to  lopply  water  to  the  nunmtt  of  ^e
Capitoline  Mount.  It  wu  repvnd  by  Anippa
in  hii  aedileahip,  B,C  33  (•eebetow.  No.  A.),  and
the  Telmne  of  iti  water  wu  inonued  by  Ad-
gurtna,  by  meana  of  the  water  of  a  qiriiw  800
poHi  bma  it ;  the  thott  aqnedaet  which  con-
Teyed  thi)  watei  wu  oiled  the  Aqua  Aagtata,
but  ii  nerer  enumerated  u  a  ditdnct  aqueduct.
Pliny  itatei  that  the  water  of  the  Aq*a  Mania
wai  the  coldest  and  moat  wholewmie  of  all  which
wu  brought  to  Rome  ;  and  Vitniiua  and  other
writen  refer  to  the  eicellence  of  the  water  u  being
pniTerbial.  SeTenl  anhei  of  the  A^ua  Marda
are  lUU  itanding.  (Frmtin.  12  ;  Plin.  H,N.  ucxi.
3.  a.  24,  who  diSen  from  fVntinna  in  tome  of  tba
detaili ;  gtiab.  v.  p.  240  ;  Vitmr.  Tiii.  3.  f  1  ;
Dion  Cau.  ilii.  42 ;  Pint.  CbnoL  1 ;  Pnipen.  iiL
3-2,  84  ;  Martial  n.  43.  IS  ;  Slat.  Wlo.  i  fi,
26.)

4.  The  Aqm  Tepula,  which  wu  buHt  by  tb«
cenun  Cn.  Serviliui  Caepio  and  L.  Caniai  hoa.
ginui  in  &  c  127,  began  at  a  ^t  in  the  Lneallan
or  Tuicnlan  land,  two  milea  to  the  right  of  the

nth  mileatone  on  the  Ftn  Laima.  It  wu  after-
trdi  connected  with

5.  The  Ajua  Julia.  Among  the  iplendid  psblk
nrki executed  by  Agrippa in hit  aedilsiU|i,

c  33,  wai  the  formaCion  of  a  new  aqueduct,  and
e  realoration  of  all  the  old  onet.  Fron  a  ioURii
ro  milea  to  the  right  of  the  twelfth  milMbme  of
e  Via  Lalina,  he  comtmeted  hii  aqnedaet  (the
jaaJviia)  Ent  to  lilt  Ama  Tepula,  in  wht<i

wu  mei^fed  u  Ibt  u  the  reterroir  (pueuaa)

:  the  Fia  Latino,  leTen  railei  from  Rome.
Prom  thii  reeerroir  ie  water  wai  carried  akng
two  diitinct  channel!,  on  the  sune  mbitrKtiaiu
(which  wen  probably  the  original  nbitnictioRa
of  the  Agua  7)ipula,  newly  rcitored),  the  lower
-channel  being  ailed  the  Aqua  Tef^a^  and  the
ipper  the  Ai^  JuUa  ;  and  thii  double  aqueduct
again  wai  united  with  the  Aema  Jlfarcia,  orer  the

iterconne  of  which  the  other  two  were  onied.

le  monument  erected  at  the  junction  of  theae
three  aqneducli,.  ii  nill  to  be  aeen  doaa  to  the
PoT^a  S.  IjKTtno.  It  bean  an  inicriptioB  nfeiring
to  the  retain  luider  CanoUbk  (See  the  woodcut
below,  p,  112.)  The  whole  conm  of  the  Aqma
Julia,  from  iti  lomite,  amounted  to  16,426  fWMu^
partly  on  msaiive  nibitTuctioni^  and  partly  on
-  :he«. (Fronlin.  0,9,  19.)

0.  The  Aqua  Hrao  wu  built  by  AgrippK,  to
lupply  hii  hatha.  From  a  aource  in  a  manhjr
■pot  by  the  eighth  mileatose  on  the  Via  CaUatima,
it  waa  condncled  by  a  very  cireuitoua  route,  chiefly
ander  the  ground,  to  the  M-Fiadta,  v'
wu  carried  on  orchea  to  (he  Cba^wi  Mar
length  wu  14,106  pouM,  of  which  I2,8(
undergmnnd ;  in  ita  lubtemnean  eonne
caiTcd  (he  water  of  m
water  wu  u  highly  eitaemed  ihr'b
of  the  Aqua  Manki  wat  for  drinking,
of  the  (wo  aqseducti  on  the  left  hBikrf  the  Tiber,
'hich  are  itill  in  uie,  thaugh  I
■cale. (See  bdow.) The  oi


;  Caniod.  Fv.
Tii.6i  0Tid,7V«.iii,ia2aiM«ti«LT.».9v
Ti42.I8,B.47. 6.) ^-. . ^.-


AQDAEDDCTUS,
T.  n*  Jfw  AUMta  (nHtimM  mlled  (In
Afadf^i,  m  tka  wIut  lida  of  tlu  Tiber,
>■  atiraclai  bj  Angnflm  baa  the  Loch
JfiMi  (£^  di  Jtrort^MHB),  which  U;  6200
^■■t  *  tlw  ffkt  rf  the  fsnrloniUi  milMtoDC  on  tlie
Fii  Oadu,  W  tka  put  of  tlw  Anio  TVoMtlKnHi
kfaw  tb  Jmimlw.  lt>  len^  wu  32,173
fM^if  rticb  only  3M  wen  on  uehn  ;  and
in  ntr  ra  n  lad  U»t  it  oonld  only  iM.-n  bum
■todtd  b  tba  i^plj  of  Angnitni'i  NaamacUa,
mi  te  ntoiw  gwlaa.  It*  Rwmir  wu  IBOO
bik^bjriaiMwid*. <Prantin.ll.)

1^  1  tb  tn  mat  oMfinficoit  iquedncti  wen
AiilwC^rfto  md  tha  Jau  A^Mw  (or  Jjw
JaiB'  Mn),  Ixdi  CMmMmead  bj  (UignU  ia
1.  ■■  M;  i^  fiokhad  b7  Ctadini  m  i.  d.  60.
Tk  iMrif  tfct  Jm  CtnA  wu  dnhvd  fram  two
^MM  Md  ondMst  qniDgi,  odkd  OHndw  and
<Mii^  ■■■  Ihi  tliirtj-e^lith  mOertUM  Bn  ths  r^ia
Mhaaai,  nd  it  wh  iftemrdi  increued  b;  k
■M  ^nsfi  .Jftudf—t.  It*  mter  mu  reckooed
ibi  bat  dcr  tbe  Monm  lU  Ingth  vu  46,40&
f«B  (ncKly  484  mila),  of  wliicb  9G67  veie  on
mW  Of  ■  it^  gnUB  leDgth  vu  the  .Ina
AWh  "^uiA  began  at  tlic  Ian;-*«coiid  mileatone,
■  %  niStUmmuii,  md  reeeiTed  in  addition,  at
Ai  tUnjwktk  mOcsbne,  a[^[e  the  aouini  of
tt*  J)—  Cfmiia,  » itram  trilcd  tlia  flwui  /fer-
■^■■i.  It  wn  tha  kMcat  uid  th*  liigheM  of
ri  ^  ■TMiact*,  it*  kaglfi  being  DMri;  £9  miU*
'""•  rnw),  and  aoaa  </  lU  acdu*  109
' In  tbs  aeigfabouchood  of  lbs  dtf  tbeae

ou  nrdMi,  tba  Cbaniia  below  and  tbfl
Ml  abon. An


(^rtty


■U  Arte  Jfoniior^  which  wu  origioall;  a
■nifEot  dsoUa  arch,  by  man*  of  which  th«
■fMdact  waa  onied  onr  the  Fia  LahKimt  and
■k  n*  riawiifiiiii  The  i>i>rM  Laldeama  wa*
UaM  ip  b]r  Hcoarioi  ;  but  the  aich  ha*  been
'-^dMndof  ki*livtwaii*Hsi«nictianL Ovet


IWtTdnnd


_!•  anh  v*  Ihne  iaicriptiaiu,  which
fi  tbs  MMCi  of  Qwdini  a*  the  builder,  and  of
Vc^MH  ^t4  Tito*  a*  tbe  itatomt  of  the  aqie-
^a.  (Sea  tba  woodat  below.)  By  the  aide
^  im  »B3k  tba  aqwdMt  faaea  aliaig  tbe  waU  of
AmEai  tr  lonie  diMBca,  and  thi '  '


Ulaii«Dhbl7
^ <Beck«', .


Mania,  which  luut

I  tm*  cootioaed  to  the

cilkd  tbe  Arch  of  Dola-

anl  of  thi*  eamnwn  ea^tl-

HamM.  d.  JOm.  AUtrlk.  toL  i.


jf.m-mt.-i

Tboa  idM  aqaeoi

K  t^e  «f  FnDtiBM,  lAtt  thn*  neikj  of  them

" ' ' '  wbicb  m  hatdlj  be  tbsoght


•  wtia  bU  that  eiiitid  i


pinallf  I
bat  the


AQUAEDDCTHS.  Ill

nchoned  with  the  cin^  becasaa  ita  watoi  ware
no  longer  brought  all  the  wa;  to  Home  ;

10.  Tfaii  wa*  the  A^a  Orabta,  whieh  had  it*
•onne  near  that  of  the  Jtlia,  and  which  wai  ori-

Jlf  earned  right  through  the  Cireu*  Haiimu*  ;
the  water  wa*  ao  bad,  that  Agrippa  wonld  not
nnng  it  into  the  JfiHa,  but  abandoned  it  to  the
people  of  the  Tnacnlan  land  ;  benea  it  waa  csUed
Aqua  DaaaKOa.  At  «  latM  period,  part  of  ita
water  wuhronght  into  tbaJjpuiAi&i.  (Fnnlin.9.)
Conmdeiable  txaoei  of  it  remain,

Tlieie  an  atill  fonr  aqueditet*  of  latei  coii>
ttiuctiDn  to  be  added  to  the  liit.

1 1.  The  Aqaa  Thgana  wai  bnnght  t^  Tl^aa
from  the  Laau  SabatiMit  (now  itnuoion),  to
mpplif  the  i/iMtRibu  and  tba  JUgio  Thnutiitriaa.
It*  eonatnction  i*  recorded  on  cian*  of  gold,  nlTer,
■nd  hnnia,  of  the  year*  III  nod  112  a.  D.
(Eckhel,  Da*r.  Nam.  Vtt.ti.fp.  435,  428).
Trajan  alio  teitoced  and  improTcd  the  other  aqne-
dDCti,e*peciiilIythe^inoMnw.  (Froutin.  93, 93.)

13.  The  A<}aa  AlfaHdriaa  wm  conilnicted  b7
Alexander  Savanu  ;  ita  aonrce  waa  in  the  land*  oC
TuKnlnm,  about  fourtem  mile*  from  Rome,  be-
tween Oabii  and  the  Lake  Resillna.  Ita  amall
height  tbow*  that  it  wa*  intended  ior  the  bath*  of
Seyenia,  which  were  in  tme  of  the  Taiteja  of  Rome.
(Lampnd.  Aha.  StB.  26  ;  Fabntti,  Di4t.  L  S  23.)

13.  The  Jjaa  S^iikma,  built  by  Septimiu*
Seiem*,  wat,  perbapa,  onljr  a  branch  of  the  A</iia
Julia,  formed  by  the  emperor  to  bring  water  to  bi*
bath*. (Fabreiti,  Diu.  iii  §  SBS.)

14.  The  Aqaa  Algtatia  had  iti  eonrce  at  M.
A^ai  by  the  Via  Tatcalama,  9000  foaai  from
Borne,  according  to  Fabretti ;  bat  mora  probably
16,000. lu  bailder  ia  nnkuown.

Theu  aeem  to  haie  been  the  finrteen  sqaedncU,
which  were  itill  preferred  in  uae  at  Rome  in  the
Ume  of  Procopiu*  (ChA.  i.  19) ;  but  then  ii  a
donbt  rsapecting  nme  of  tbe  laat  five.  Thai  the
EipUogai  to  the  Nctitia  mention*  the  (Annul,  the
Semaaa,  and  thcilatoina,  and  majua  the  whole
numbtr  nineteen ;  while  Auretini  Victor  ena-
meiBte*  twenty.  The  acoonnt  of  Procopiu*  aeemt
the  mott  eiacl,  and  tbe  exceu  in  the  other  gtats-
menl*  may  be  explained  from  tbe  enumemtian  of
the  snail  acceuory  bnnche*  of  the  chief  aqnednct*  i
lor  the  Aqaa  Jixia  of  Bnnien  there  i*  no  nfficient
aathority.  (Btaia,Haadh.d.Ram.AUa11i.iiA.i.
p.  707.)

Great  paini  wen  taken  by  niectMiTe  empaon
to  preierre  and  repair  the  aqueduct*.  Fttim  the
Qotbic  war*  downward*,  they  have  for  the  moat
part  thared  the  &te  of  the  other  great  Romaa
work*  of  architecture  ;  their  litoation  and  purpote
lendering  them  peculiarly  eipoied  to  injuiy  in
war ;  but  itill  their  remain*  form  tbe  moat  itiiking
feature*  of  the  Cauip^no,  orer  which  their  line*
of  ruined  archei,  clothed  with  ivy  and  the  wild
ta-ttea,  tadiats  in  vuriou*  direction*.  Three  of
them  atill  aerve  for  their  ancient  use  ;  and  theae
thne  ahme,  according  to  Toamon,  aapply  tbe
modem  d^  with  a  quanti^  of  water  much  greater
than  that  which  ia  fomiihed  to  Pari*  by  the  Canal
do  IKhuxq,  for  a  population  liz  time*  a*  large.
They  ate: — (1.)  The  .Ji^oa  rer^'ne,  the  ancient
Aqaa  Virgo,  which  wa>  rettored  by  Pope  Piu*  IV.
and  funhci  embelliibed  by  Benedict  XIV.  and
Clement  XIII.  The  chief  portion  of  it*  watcn
ffoah  out  ihroDgh  the  beaut^  Foataaa  di  Traii,
,  nit  it  alio  loi^iea  twelre  other  public  fountain*,


112  AQUAEDUCTUa.

ud  the  greater  part  of  the  lower  citf.  (2.)  The
Aapm  FdKs,  named  after  the  conventaal  mme  of
ia  realorer  Siitnj  V.  (Fra  Felice)  ii,  probably,  a
part  of  thfl  Badent  Aqiia  C/attdiOy  though  some
talie  ii  for  the  Altxandriaa.  It  lappliei  twenty-
■ereD  public  fountaiiu,  and  the  eaitem  pan  of  the
cilj.  (3.)  ThvAciqHaPaiJaitiieiadeatAUetiiui,
mppliet  the  TVuutoiMn  and  the  Valkau,  and
feedi,  among  othen,  the  iplendld  Ibtmtaiiu  before
St-PetBT'L  Of  the  rainvof  the  other  aqaedncti
the  molt  exteuilve,  within  Roma,  are  thoee  of  the
Arau  Nenmimi,  and  of  the  Aqua  Orabra  ;  the
moit  intereating  are  the  Porta  Maggion,  iridi  Iba
two  channeli  ot  the  Aqita  Claudia  tui  Amw  Kmrni,
and  the  remauu  of  ihe  triple  oqnednct  of  Agrippa
by  the  Porta  S.  Laraao.  The  ibllowing  woodcut
(after  Uiit)  repreaent*  mtered  Hctioni  of  thcni,
pteHniog  tlieir  telatiTS  propordoM :  —


Figi"?.  —  Section  of  the  triple  aqaeducJ  of
Agrii^:  a.  the  Aipiii  Marria;  i.  the  Aqna
T^nJa;  e.  the  Agua  Julia.  The  two  latter  are
of  brick  and  Tinltcd  onr. The  air.Tenli  are  alK

The  magnificence  diiplaved  b;  the  Romani  in
their  pnblic  worki  of  thu  clau,  waa  by  no  meani
confined  to  the  capital  j  for  aqnednct*  more  or  lew
atapendoui  were  conatnicted  by  them  in  ranoni
and  even  Tery  remote  plrtJ  of  the  empire,  —  at
Athcni,  Corinth,  Calana,  Salona,  Nicomedia,
Ephnut,  Smyrna,  Alexandria  in  the  TraJ,  Sjra-
eiue,  Meti,  Clermmt  in  AuTotgLe,  Nimei  (the
Pont  dn  OiiA),  Lyon,  Eron,  Merida,  and  Se^via.
Thoie  at  EpfaMU  tod  Alexandria  were  built  by


AQUAEDUCTUS.
Hadrian  and  Herodea  Atticna,  and  that  at  Alhtm
wat  conunenced  by  Hadrian  and  finiihed  by  Ailo-
ninnB  Pina,  who  alio  built  thoK  at  Corinth  ud
Nioimedia.  That  at  Eiora,  which  wa>  built  by
Qnintut  Seiloriu,  ii  (till  in  good  preierfalioD ;
and  at  ita  terminalioQ  in  the  city  baa  a  very  ele-
gant coiteSinn  in  two  itoriea,  Uie  lower  one  of
which  ha*  Ionic  columni.  Merida  in  Spain,  the
Anguila  EmerilB  of  the  Romona,  who  etlab^hed
a  colony  there  in  the  time  of  Angnitua,  haa  among
ita  other  antiquitiei  the  mnaina  of  two  aquednctfi
of  one  of  which  thirty-aeren  piert  an  Handing;
with  three  tien  of  archea  \  while  of  the  other
there  are  oniy  two  which  toiin  part  of  Ihe  oripial
crautnKtiona,  the  nat  being  raodeni.  But  that  oi
Segoria,  for  which  K>me  Spaniih  writen  hare
claimed  an  antiquity  anterior  to  the  iway  of  the
Remani  in  Spain,  it  one  of  (he  mat  perfect  and
magnificent  woriii  of  the  kind  anywhere  remiin-
ing.  It  it  entirely  of  itraia,  and  a(  great  lolidity,
the  piers  being  eight  feet  wide  and  eleroi  in
depth  \  and,  where  it  tjaTcnefl  a  port  of  the  dty,
the  height  it  upwardi  of  a  hundred  feet,  and  it  hia
two  tien  of  archei,  the  lawermatt  of  which  an
eiceedin^y  lof^.

We  proceed  to  deacribe  in  detul  Ibe  eonalniD-
tion  and  arrangementi  of  Roman  aqoadiKti.  then
an  three  mstlera  to  be  conaidered :  the  learte
ftont  which  the  water  woi  derived  g  the  aqneduel
it*el(  by  which  it  wat  conieyed  ;  and  the  rtaer-
Toir  in  which  it  waa  reeeiTed,  and  fnan  which  it
wat  diatrihuted  for  nae.

(1,)  7%a  Souroa.  —  It  ia  unneceMarr  to  yiow
VitruiiuB  into  the  mjnnte  rulea  whidi  he  laya
down  for  the  ditcovery  of  ipringi,  where  they
wen  not  naturally  mibla,  end  tat  teatmg  thia
quality  of  the  water :  il  it  enough  to  refer  to  hi*
ttatementa  at  ihowing  the  importance  attached  to
theee  poinU  (Vitiuv,  TiiL  1.)  Il  wa*  alio  necea-
aary  that  the  ipiingi  ibould  have  mch  on  eleva-
tion, a*  that,  oftiir  allowing  for  the  &11  neccaaaiy
to  give  the  channel  ita  proper  inclination,  the  water
afaould  enter  the  £nal  reaervoir  at  a  aafficient
height  to  permit  of  ita  dittnbntion  for  public  and
private  uae  ;  for  then  were  no  engine*  uaad,  aa  in
modern  waterwork*,  toiaiae  the  water  to  ahi^her
etevatiiHi  than  that  at  which  it  waa  required.
When  the  aource  had  been  fixed  upon,  whether  it
waa  in  open  ipring  {/bat},  or  one  got  at  by  aink-
iag  a  well  (pHtoiu),  a  head  waa  dog  Ibr  the  water,
and  incioiBd  with  a  wall ;  and,  if  neceaaary,  tli»
■apply  woi  incieated  by  digging  rhannela  frcaa.
neighbnnring  apringa :  the  rule*  tor  theaa  opeia^
tioni  alio  are  minutely  laid  down  by  Vitmvius
(riii.  7.  a.  6.  |§  12— IS).

(2.)  71*  CSI««£,  or ^tfwiliicltbeir-*— In  ordi*
to  convey  the  water  &iim  it*  louree  to  it*  destina-
tion, a  channel  va*  conatracted,  having  a  iti^t,
—  ' leailr  at  potaible,  a  unifonn  deelivity.


*  Though  the  word  aqiaeiacba  ia  applied  ai
rally  to  the  whole  atmMura,  yet  in  it*  ipeciail
proper  meaning  it  aeenu  <mly  to  have  aisnified.
that  part  ^  the  work  in  which  the  water-cbaiuiid
waa  orriad  vra  a  valley,  on  archei  or  on  aolid
aubatcnetiona :  a  channel  on  the  tDr6K«  of  tho
ground  wai  pnpariy  oiled  rimu;  and  one  beoeaUb
Iba  Mffiue,  •*»»  wfttmoMlu,  at  OMiaba.


AQCABDUCTU3.

BiAr  to  (kn  vith  vhicli  we  an  &iii3iar  !a  out '
oilnji;  Ult  ven  piereed  ihivuRh  b;  tunnsli,
ol  vStji  cra««d  eitber  bj  lolid  robBtnicliaiu
m  a^  of  muonrj,  accordiiig  to  the  height  re-
build i  md  of  thne  arehei  there  vtn  often  two
tea.  md  tometinwi  eren  three.  The  channel
iadl  (ipKU^  amalii)  wa*  ■  tnnigh  of  hrick  or
■ai,  lined  vuL  cement,  and  corered  with  a
ofing,  which  wu  almoal  alwayi  arched  ;  and  the
nur  ether  an  directlj  through  thia  trough,  or  it
n  canied  Ihroush  fipa  laid  along  the  trough.
ITha  the  chaonJ  waa  luncd  beneath  the  mr-
An,  if  the  hill  through  which  it  pasted  waa  of
»il[,itnimcrdf  cat  inthenick;  hot  if  of  earth
'■ud,ii  wucmutnieted  of  Uocka  of  none.

7^  Ulowiag  woodcat  lepreaenU  a  portion  of
•  dosblfraiched  aqoedact,  and  (howi  a  Kction  of
t^9«>v(o):  i6  are  projcctiiig  blocLa,  which
•n  oAea  teen  in  inch  poiitians,  and  which  were
'""em  the  nppocta  br  the  centeiingi  died  in
9  theanhei.


AQUAEDOCTUS.  1!3

aqneducti,  will  ihow  how  kige  a  portion  of  them


TW  etjeet  of  nrrering  the  ipKiu  waa  to  eicladt
«■  m  tod  rmzUf  and  otha  coTnq>tion»  and  ob-

io  ihc  dr.  which  otherwiie  would  hare  been
^RHed  to  inch  a  degree  ai  to  bunt  the  walh
«  Mf  of  tbe  ifW"-  1'l>e*e  Tcnt-holei  wen
■^  at  Rgnlar  mterraU  in  the  roof  of  the  ipeau,
*t  *ka  aiMNfaer  eliannel  paned  onr  It,  in  the
Bk  'nw;  an  rtiseaented  in  the  MCtioru,  gireti
•Wxv  J  tlK  Agma  Oaadia,  Maraa,  Ac  To
>^]au  (be  aabtfuaofan  channel  of  an  aqueduct,
•  liaft  (pmt,mM)  of  maaoorr  waa  carried  to  the
■"hcf  ■d'  ths  gramd  at  intotali  of  an  oeAit,  oi
m  R^BDi  bet  (ot  two  dciiiii,  aennding  to  Pliny,
■^  aOi  them  iMmma),  ai  thown  in  the  following
— '  ■  (afker  Hilt),  which  lepreieDta  the  plan,
'  ,  and  tnumena  aection,  of
'  11  of  which


TV  rimt  m£«miiuwi  pi


I -,,


u  poaaeaaed  the  adnntage
I of  being lea expoaed to
a  a(  tenipemoR,  and  more  Ircure  '
•d  tke  s^ier  hood,  il  waa  of  coune  i
lo  get  St  when  il  required  repain.
1  ta  the  Bccoimt  giien  ilMTe,  of  the  Re


Mn]


a.  The  water-coune  ;  b,  itepi  giring  occega  to

I  e,  the  >haft ;  if,  e,  iection  of  the  qneaii  aad

a&  ;  /,  tranireree  lectiDn  of  ihein.

Initesd  oC,  or  within,  the  ^peeiif,  pipea  {fidtdat,
lubidCjf  were  ofti^n  UBed  for  the  pataoge  of  the
water.  They  were  of  lead,  or  teira-cotta  (fictila),
and  Knnelinieii,  for  the  Bake  of  econom;,  of  leather.
The  nde»  which  VitniTiui  laya  down  apply  pai-
ticularly  to  leaden  pipea,  allhongh  he  givei  the
preference  to  the  earthen  ones,  chiefly  on  the
'  that  the  water  which  paiaed  throDgh  them


The


ipeiw


length!  not  leat  than  ten  feet,  a
widtha,  which  were  denominated  in  the  nuumec
explained  under  Fistula.  They  were  cemented
together  at  the  joinla,  which  in  earthen  pipet  were
made  to  orerlap,  and  when  the  water  was  first  let
in,  nibei  were  mined  with  it,  in  order  that  they
might  settle  in  the  joints  and  atop  them  more  ccm-
pletely.  The  use  of  pipes  poimitled  Tariations  to
be  made  in  the  conitmetion  of  the  nnueduct :
namely,  the  water  could  be  carried  round,  insleod
of  through  a  hill,  if  the  circuit  wai  not  too  great ;
and  in  very  wide  lalleya,  the  costly  Blnicttire  of
archci  could  be  dispensed  with.  In  this  case,  a
low  boriiontal  tubatraclion  waa  made  acreea  the
bottom  of  the  'ndley,  and  the  pipe  waa  brought
down  the  one  alope,  along  thia  inbetmction,  and
up  the  oppoaite  elope,  to  a  height,  of  course,
somewhat  less  than  that  of  the  opposite  side  The
horizontal  part  of  the  pipe  across  tiie  bottom  of  the
Tolley  (twnter),  had  Tentilating  openings  for  the
escape  of  the  air.  At  the  bendings,  instead  of  the
pipe,  an  elLww  waa  bored  in  a  solid  piece  of  stone,
into  which  the  endi  of  the  adjacent  pieces  of  pi[>e
were  Mciurely  cemented.  (For  farther  detalla,  tee
Vitruiina.)  In  thou  places  where  the  pipci
were  laid  on  the  ntrfocc,  reserroiia  were  eomedmei
made,  at  inlenals  of  200  ocftis  (24,000  feet).  In
order  that,  if  a  part  of  the  pipe  needed  repair,  the
inppty  of  water  might  not  be  entirely  cut  oif.  The
advantage  in  the  use  ofpipas,  according  to  Vitruviua,
waa  the  &ciUty  of  repairing  them.

The  slope  (/iutigiuni),  on  which  the  aqueduct
was  built,  in  order  to  give  the  water  a  preper  fell
(K&nHBeainjn),  ought  not,  Bays  VitruTins,  to  be
leas  than  half  a  foot  in  creiy  100  feet  (1  in  200)  ;
bnt  Pliny  only  allows  a  ndiiau  {a  quarter  of  an
inch)  in  lOO  feet.  The  great  circuit,  which  most
of  the  aqueducts  of  Rome  made,  was  taken  chieHy
(as  is  the  case  with  the  New  River),  to  prerent
the  too  rapid  descent  of  the  water.  There  is,
however,  a  considerable  variatiou  in  their  do-
divitiei:  for  exomplev  the  A^aajdama  Mij  the


AQUAEDUCTUS.


At  o


eiflita  B


duct,  iu)d  especially  near  the  middle  uid  end,
tliere  wu  genenllj  a  ntenmi  (pudaa,  jaiema
Umaia) in  irlich  the  water  might  deposit  any

tkcK  leiervein  will  be  nndentood  Emm  the  fslloir-
iDg  woodcat,  which  repiemita  a  raMued  aedioii  of
one  which  itiU  eziatf.


The  water  flowed  from  tlis  aqnednct  a  into  the
fint  npper  chamber,  thence  dawn  and  up  again
thnugii  the  opening)  b,e,e,  into  the  aecond  npper
chamber,  oDt  of  which  it  paned  into  the  coDtinna-
tion  of  (he  aqoeduct  f,  having  deposited  iti  ledi-
ment  in  the  two  lower  chamnen,  which  could  be
cleaned  oat  by  the  door  d.  The  pitema  was  not
alwayi  vanlted :  Hirt,  from  whoie  work  the  above
cat  is  taken,  giiea  also  an  engraving  of  an  open
fiieua.  These  rcservoin  were  not  always  nsod;
6a  eiample,  the  Arpia  Virgo  and  the  Altittaa
were  without  them.  They  were  espociallv  necea-
•ary  when  the  water  was  conveyed  throngh  pipes.
They  were  also  osed  as  reaerroin  for  the  supply
of  the  neighbouring  coontry,  chiefly  fat  the  pur-
poses of  iirigntioo.

The  details,  which  we  hare  now  been  noticing,
ere  minolely  deecribed  by  Frontinui,  and  by
Vitruvius*  (riiL  c.  7.  s.  6),  and  briefly  by  Pliny
(ff.AT.DiLG.  fcSl).

(3.)  7S»  TirmimUiim  of  Ou  AtfudtKt,  and  He
ATrm^emaiti  for  ike  DutrOmtum  if  in  Water.
—  The  water  thus  condncted  to  the  dly  was  re-
ceived,  when  it  reached  the  walls,  in  a  van  rcser-
Tour  called  caiteiliim,  which  fanned  the  iaad  of
waUr  and  also  serred  the  pnrpose  of  a  mder.
The  more  ancient  name  in  use,  when  the  aijae-
dncts  were  flrst  constructed,  was  dividicuium.
(Fest  M.  V.)  From  this  principal  caildliBa  the
water  flowed  into  other  cailtUa,  whence  it  was
dktribtited  for  public  and  private  use.  The  term
eailellinn  is  sometimei  also  applied  to  the  inter-
Eiediale  reseiroin  already  mentioned.

The  chief  catttSam  was,  eitemally,  a  highly
deoxated  building  ;  fat  example,  that  of  Hadrian,
at  Athens,  was  adorned  with  Ionic  pillars,  and
that  at  Etdto,  in  Portugal,  had  the  Ibnn  of  a  cir>
enlar  temple.  Intemallir,  there  was  generalt;  one
Tait  chamber,  with  a  vaulted  roof  sapported  by
maMiTe  pillan,  into  which  the  water  flowed  from


'  The particular  ■


if  water  through  pipea
that  in  his  time,  wner


lome  of  the  moM  important  of  (he  aqueducts  wen
not  yet  erected,  tiM  method  mu  ray  largely
enidayed.


AQUAEDUCTUa
the  aqnednct,  and  from  which  it  wr
through  pipes  of  flied  dimensioiiB,  into  three  smaller
rnerroin,  which  were,  however,  to  arranged,  thnt
the  middle  one  was  only  tujiplied  from  uie  over-
flow of  the  other  two.  Of  theee  three  reeervoiia,
the  two  outer  supplied  respectively  Ihe  public  bathe
and  the  j^vate  houses,  and  the  middle  one  the
public  ponds  and  fountains  (^ocar  et  aalieatee)  :
"""■"'  »  - a  r  - .  nipply  for  utefiil


•0  that,  ii


case  of  a  deficit
purposes,  none  wmdd  be  waned
ihe  anangrment  alu  enabled  a  proper  account  to
be  kept  of  the  quantity  supplied  for  private  nae,
for  the  protection  of  the  revenue  derived  &om  thij
source. (Vitrav.  viiL  7,  fc  6.  gg  1,  2.)

The  minor  eailtlla,  which  received  the  water
from  this  chief  head,  were  dzitiibuted  over  the
city,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  Ajma  Appia  sup-
plied seven  rigioiiet  by  means  of  twenty  owteKo  ;
the  Anio  Vetnt,  ten  regioaet  through  thirty-fivo
aut^Ja  i  the  Marda,  ten  ro^ioiHS  through  fiF^-one
catteita  J  the  Tepyla^  four  regionet  through  fourteen
eattdla  ;  the  Jt^a,  seven  ri^ibiiei  through  seven-
teen tmltUa ;  the  Virgo,  three  rrgtoBa  through
eighteen  caitrlla  ;  the  Oaadia  and  the  Aiao  Vetia,
nineqr-two  caM^a.  {Frontin.  79—86.)  For  an
account  of  the  parts  of  the  city  supplied  by  ttie
diitennt  aqueducts,  see  Becker,  Haitdb.  d.  Bom.
Altera.  voL  i.  pp.  707,  708.

The  aubjoined  plan  and  eleratiou  tepmeot  b
ruin  atiU  remaining  at  Rome,  commonly  called  the
"  Trophiei  of  Marius,"  which  it  generally  eem-
udered  to  have  hem  tin  caiteiluiB  of  an  aquednct.


It  ii  now  mnch  dilapidated,  bat  was  tolerab!;'
entire  about  the  middle  of  the  16tii  eentuiy,  na
may  be  seen  by  the  diawing  published  by  Oamncci
(AnUdtili  di  Rinna,  iii.  p.  100),  from  which  this
restontion  it  made.  The  trophia,  then  remBin-
ing  in  their  placet,  firom  which  the  monument
derivei  iu  modem  appellation,  are  now  placed  on
the  CapitoL  The  ground  plan  it  given  ftom  an
exeaiation  made  some  yeart  since  by  the  rtndent*
of  the  French  Academy  ;  it  eiphiine  j^n  of  th«
internal  conttniction,  and  tbowi  the  eirangement
adopted  far  diipotiug  of  the  Bupeifluoos  water  or
an  aqnednct.  The  geneial  slream  of  water  it  iirat
divided  by  the  round  projecting  hnttiest  into  twn
eonrset,  which  subdivide  themtel  vet  into  five  miniiir
streanu,  and  Anally  Gdl  into  a  reservair.

The  roMla  were  divided  into  two  ell  ft,  the
fuUiaa  and  pritala. .  ^  . . . .  ^


AQDAEDUCTUa
IltMAb  fMiu  wen  ^ub  rabdiTided  into
n  ima,  vUck  fomiihad  watat  ta  tbe  fiiOowing
■■;— (I.)  The  PaMarkn  cup  (onfrn) ;  (2.)
iifnkai  Imrtuni  {hau  tt  i^mta)  ;  (3.)


(i)  bi  bMk,  ud  the  •
paim  kndicnfU,  ntcb  u  the  fiiDen,  djren,  snd
BiMTi  (ygj  puiiina)  ;  <5.)  imgnlu  diiDihationi
lo't  I7  tbt  ifiacvl  vilEr  of  the  emperoT  (nonttM
fiovDi;  (0.)  (xmndmaiy  gniiu  to  prirau
Mnitak  I9  ibe  bitot  rf  the  piince  (AMfrtoia
OMn^  TW  diMibotkn  nndec  euh  of  thei*
-  11(8,78).


pnik  ■>,  (ach  petMD  obtUDsd  fail  quanlum  by
■wnNflbml  pipai**  wado,  into  the  maia  ;
•iid  >»  psWblr  (In  CBUom  in  tbe  ige  of
VjoiriB,  H  h*  nwv  DO  mentiim  of  priTKle  is-
BHn.  Is^ed,  m  c«];  tiniH,  all  (he  vatei
b«|[k  M  R^Hfaj  tbe  aquedocM  ma  affiled  lo
^Uc  yBTii  eicliiiiTely,  it  being  forbidden  to
^daoa  Is  dinrt  anj  pDrtiai  of  it  to  their  own

—  ' —  I  -  -  „tip^  1^  Aawi  in  tho  duct*

tanted  oftM  eaduea.  (Fnntin.
n  tfaii  KimiauaQ  opened a
«  fiora  tbe  fraiidiilant  omdiict
I  the  duct!  for  the
_ . ,  hai,>Dd  a*  the  mb'

■^■.al  xthid  of  Mqijil;  nqaiinl  the  main-pqie
■•  ^  iiiminl  in  b»  raui;  iJaoea  (Froctin.  27),
•  itaedj  na  noght  b7  the  lutitntian  of  eaittUa
f^^  aad  tta  public  1  . -  . -


■»  |ino  b;  ipecial  EiToor  (ien^eJ—i)  of  tbe
"fom.  (Fmtiii.  111.)  The  taHdia  priaOa
■«*  Wit  at  the  jiunt  eipcnie  of  the  fiunilia
Kfsbd  bf  thm  ;  but  thej  were  coniideied  u
pw  p^tftf,  and  wen  ooder  the  control  of  tbe
<w<*Hi  »p  11  lai.  (Ftontiii.  106.)  The  ri^t  of
■»■(  (jm  ajBOI  MipefraAii)  did  not  fdlow  the
W  <r  jaiiilmii  of  tbe  uopeitj,  but  wai  tenowed
^  gait  opai  arMr  «bj»  in  the  uuetaion.


The  wjill'e  w«a  ngidated  bf  ■  tube  tailed
"^  ef  IM  dinimtfT  leqaired,  and  not  lam  than  a
^  >  l>nftK,  attacbed  to  (be  eitnnnilj  of  each
^Mi  ahire  it  anteicd  tbe  caatellum  ;  it  wai  pro-
**iT  <f  lead  IB  (lie  time  of  Vitrnriui,  raeh  on]  j
Hi)  11111111111!  b;  him  i  but  wa*  made  of  bnnia
(*•■■)  ahm  Fnmtiiini  wrote,  in  ordgr  to  check
>•  o^aj  of  tha  aquiii,  who  were  able
a«i  «  A;iw,i„iA  the  Sow  of  water  from  the
^xw  hjr  <iinaraiiin  or  exUnding  t^  laad.


Frontinm  alio  obieCYei  that  the  Telocity  of  the

water  pasiing  through  the  ealix,  and,  conaeqnenllj,

tbe  quastitj  giren  oat,  could  be  varied  according

tbe  angle  which  the  calit  made  with  the  aide  of

B  reaerroii :  iti  pnper  poeition  waa,  of  coun^


ni^ht  n


It  ia  cTidenl  how  watchful  an  OTC
ha¥«  been  lequiicd  to  keep  the  aqiiedu<
to  regulate  their  uH,  and  to  prerent  the  fraudulent
ahitraelion  of  iheii  water.  Under  the  republic,
thi*  office  wu  diacbarged,  aometiinei,  l^  the
ceuMn,  but  more  geuerall;  b;  the  aedjlei  (CiCi
ad  Die.  viii.  6),  and  Kunetimee  a  ipecial  otbf-
nu  appointed.  (Froatin.  95,  IIS.)  Augaatoi
ulabliahed  the  office  uf  curalar  (or  prat-
fiaha)  aqitanim  (SaeL  Odav.  37),  the  dn^ea
if  which  are  misulel;  dewxibed  h;  Fnmtinua  (99),
rho  teeme,  while  he  held  the  office,  to  bare  pei-
foimed  it  with  the  utmoit  laal :  among  other
cam,  he  bad  pluu  and  modeli  made  of  tbe  whole
coune  of  al]  tbe  a^uedncti  (17,  61),  The  ca-
ratoret  aguanim  were  isTeited  with  caniidenble
aulhodlj.  They  were  attended  oulaide  the  citf
b;  two  Ucton,  tbme  pubtic  ibiTe^  a  aeoetaiy,  uA
other  atloidanta.

In  the  time  of  Nerta  and  Tlajan,  a  hod;  d  fbni
hundred  and  lii^  bIbth  were  conitaoll;  emplo]^
under  the  ordei*  of  the  curaiom  ajtunm  in  at-
tending to  the  aqueducta.  The;  wece  divided
into  two  fuailiea,  the  /amSia  pMica,  eilabliihed
b;  Agiippa,  and  tbe  jasiilia  Cottora,  added  by
Claadiai ;  and  they  wen  inbdividcd  into  the  fol-
lowing daiaei :  —  1.  The  nBid,  wboee  duty  it  woi
to  attend  to  the  pipei  and  coUw.  3.  The  oaaU-
larii,  who  had  the  lUpeiintendence  of  all  the
aa^tlla,  both  within  and  without  the  city.  3.  The
dradlorei,  to  called  becauae  they  had  to  go  from
poat  to  poaC,  to  examine  into  the  itate  of  the  worica,
and  alio  to  keep  watch  over  tbe  latwuteni  em-
ployed upon  them.  4.  The  tUicoTU,  or  paTionn,
who  had  to  remove  and  relay  the  pavement  when
the  ppea  beneath  it  required  atlention.  5.  Tbe
Uclort$,  who  bad  charge  of  tho  maumiy  of  the
aqueducta.  Theie  and  other  workmen  appear  to
have  been  included  tinder  the  genetal  teim  of
AquiaiL  (Cod.  lii.  tit  43  or  43. 1. 10  ;  Fnntin.
116,  117.)  The  following  an  the  moat  important
woiki  on  the  Boman  aqueducta :  —  Frontiims,  da
Agmatdactibai  Uriii  Soraat;  Fatntti,  da  Jquii
tt  A^aaaduat&iH  Vtterii  Romat:  Stiegliti,  At-
liiUiiogie  tier  Baakmut;  Hirt,  OttdHiAU  d.  Bow
hmM;  Platner  and  Bunaen,  Bacireiliuiig  d.  SUuU
Bom;  Becker,  iTandlaoi  d.  BSmiOa,  AUir-
tkiimir,  ToL  i.)  [P.  8.]

AQUAE  DUCTUS. [SinviTnTM.]

AQUAE ET IGNIS INTERDICTIO.

[ExBILlfK.]

AQUAE  HAUSTUa [SnviroTU.]
AQUAE  PLUVIAE  ARCENDAB  ACTIO.

That  water  wai  called  ayaaplnvia  which  fell  from
the  clnudi,  and  overflowed  in  canaequence  of
■boweta,  and  (be  prevention  of  injury  Id  land  from
■neb  water  waa  the  object  of  thia  action.  The  action
ogaOfl  pitiviae  waa  allowed  between  tbe  owneia  of
adjoining  land,  ami  mi^t  be  maintained  either  by
the  owner  of  tbe  higher  land  againtt  tbe  owner  of
the  loirec  land,  in  caia  the  latter  by  any  thing  done
to  hi*  land  immHjaela  eptrt)  peroited  die  water
fmn  flowing  natunllT  frni  the  hkher  to  the  lawei
13 -^ -  O"


116  ARA.

luid  ;  at  bj  the  ovnir  of  tha  lower  land  agninit
the  ovcBT  of  tha  hif^er  land,  in  aue  tha  lattrr  did
any  thing  to  hi«  land  by  which  tha  water  flowed
from  H  into  the  lower  land  in  &  differmt  w&y  from
trhat  it  imtDnlly  would.  In  the  abience  of  i
■pecial  nurtom  at  law  to  tba  contrary,  lbs  loi
land  waa  lubject  to  leceiva  tha  water  which  Boved
wtniaUy  from  the  uppa  land  ;  ind  thia  rule  of
law  wu  thu*  eipfcvod, — agw  itt/erior  mperiori
mnt^ The  ferlQiaing  materiala  carried  d(

peniatioa  for  any  damage  which  it  might  i
from  the  water.  Many  difficult  qoettiwii  occnired
in  the  applicaUoa  to  practice  of  the  general  nilr
of  law  aa  to  aqua  pinvia  ;  and,  among  othera,  ihii
qnHtion, — What  things  done  by  the  ownera  o(  t'
land  were  to  be  coniidctad  u  preTonling  or  olu
ing  the  natural  flow  of  the  water*?  The  conduii
of  Ulpian  ia,  that  acta  dona  to  the  laad  for  tho  pi
poH*  of  cultivation  were  not  to  he  eoniidered  ai  at
mteifetina  with  tha  natnial  dow  of  the  waiei
Water  woicb  increaied  from  (he  tiling  of  rain,
in  conHqnenee  of  rain  changed  iU  eolour,  waa  eo
■idered  within  the  definition  of  aqua  pluiia  ;  f
h  waa  not  neceasoiy  that  tha  water  m  qoeatii  .
■honld  be  only  nin  water,  it  wb>  inSeient  if  then
wu  any  lain  water  in  it.  Thtii,  when  watei
natmally  dawed  from  a  pond  or  moiih,  and  a  pcr-
■on  did  tomelhing  to  exclude  luch  water  ma
Doming  on  Ilia  land,  if  auch  morah  received  any
ter,  and  BO  injun  ■


created  to  the  free  panage  of  the  ^

Thii  action  waa  allowed  for  (he  ipeuol  pro-
tection of  land  (o^) :  if  the  water  injnred  a  towi
or  a  baildiD^tha  caaa  then  belonged  to  dumina  ant
■tQliddia.  The  action  waa  only  allowed  to  preven
damage,  and  therefiffe  a  peraon  could  not  bavr
Ihii  romedy  agaizut  hia  neigbboor,  who  did  an;
Ibing  ta  hia  own  land  by  which  he  atopped  thi
water  which  wonld  otbeTKiae  Qow  to  that  penon*!
land  and  be  profitable  to  it  The  title  in  the
Digeat  containa  many  cnrioui  cue*.  (Dig.  39.
tit  S  ;  Cic.  iVo  Murta.  10,  Thpio,  9  ;  BoStbini,
Oimnot.  n  dc.  Top,  h.  9.)  [O.  L.]

AQUA'RII,  were  ata<ei  who  canied  water  for
bathing,  ftc.  into  (be  female  apartounta :  they  were
■lao  called  aqmarioii,  and  were  hald  in  great  con-
tempt (Jut.  tu  332  ;  Fcatni,  i.  v.  and  MUlWa
Note  J  Hieron-iJ).  27;  JnLPaul,  uL7.)  Becker
imagine!  that  the  name  waa  also  applied  to  ilarea
who  bad  tha  care  of  the  fonntaina  and  ponda  in
gardena.  (QaUiu,  roL  L  p.  2SS.)  The  aquaiii
were  alao  public  oflloera  who  attended  to  tha  aque-
dncta  under  the  nedilei,  and  alterwarda  nnder  tha
caratora  agimnaL,  (Cic.  ad  Fani,  TiiL  6 ;  Zeno,
Cbd.  JiaL  iL  tit  12 ;  AairAiDUcTuB.) [P.  3.1

A'QUILA [Sioitji  MU.ITAKU.]

ARA  (fiuiiit,  iaxifa,  am^fKor),  an  altar.
Altai*  were  in  antiquity  to  indiipeoaable  a  part  of
the  wonhip  of  (he  godi,  thai  it  aeemed  impoaiihle
to  conceive  of  the  wonhip  of  the  goda  wjthonl
altara.  Thua  we  have  tha  amuaing  ayltwiim  in
Lodan,  il  Tip  dirl  ^^1,  ilvl  lal  daol-  iUii
lAr  •'o'l  0«fU)l,  (lo-lr  6fa  ul  S*a(  {Jtipittr  Tng.
e.  CI).  In  M&iBnce  to  the  terma,  Si'i'is  praperij
ngnifiea  any  devation,  and  hence  we  find  in
Homer  fipii  fimiiit,  bnt  it  afterwaidi


ARA.

'  the  limited  aenia  of  an  altar  for  bnnil-ofieriEgi.
In  Latin  are  and  aUart  an  oftai  naed  withnt
any  diatinction,  but  propeHy  am  wai  Iowa  than
aiiiTa:  the  latter  wai  enctod  in  honour  of  Ibe
luperior  godt,  the  fonner  in  honour  of  the  inferior,
heroBi  and  demigoda.  Thai  we  lead  tu  VligU
(EcL  T.  66) ;  —

"  En  quattoor  izaa ;

Ecce  doaa  tibi,  D^hni ;  doaa,  altaiia,  Phoebo."
On  the  other  hand,  aaerificu  were  oflend  (o  tha
infernal  goda,  not  npon  altan,  bnt  in  cavitiea
(mniti,  KTtiiadi,  AWpoi,  \cIicjidm)  dug  in  the
ground. (Featoa,  i.  s.  AUana.)

Ai  among  the  aadenti  almost  every  nligioni
act  waa  accompanied  by  aaeriSce,  it  waa  often
necsBary  to  provide  altan  on  the  apor  of  the  oc-
caaion,  and  they  were  than  conatructed  of  earth,
aoda,  or  atone^  collected  on  the  apot  When  the
occaaion  waa  not  auddeu,  they  were  built  with
regular  couraes  of  maaouy  or  brichwotk,  as  ia
clearly  abown  in  leveral  example*  on  the  eolumn
of  Tiajnn  at  Rome.  See  the  laft-haad  figore  in
the  woodcut  annered.  The  firat  deviation  from
this  absolute  limpliciCy  of  form  eonaisted  in  the
addition  of  a  base,  and  of  a  comsponding  projeo-
tion  at  the  top,  tha  latter  being  intandod  to  hold
the  fire  and  the  objceta  oSered  m  sacrifice.  Theae
two  ports  are  so  common  aa  to  he  almoat  onifbrm
trpea  of  the  form  of  an  altar,  and  will  be  bund  in
all  the  figures  inserted  underneath.


Altan  wen  either  squan  <a  round.  The  Utl«T
form,  which  waa  the  leas  cnmmoa  of  the  two,  ia
exemplified  in  the  IbLlowiag  figurea.


smamented  with  ttm-
1 1  and  (be  altar  nrpc«-
ub  .^^,w^  the  manuei  in  which
•.■.Dm  lotwiii  wuD  luapended.  They  wcno  also
adorned  with  sculpture  ;  and  aoma  were  cowted
with  the  worici  of  the  tuoeC  celebrated  Brtiftt«  of
antiquity. The  £nt  cut  above  exhibits


—. , ...  w..__  with  (h*  unadorned  altar.  If  qq
altar  waa  erected  befiwe  a  atatue  of  a  god,  i%  -vrmM
limjt  to  1w  lower  lliaa  Uio  atafne  beiice  whicb  ^


ARATRUM.  117

STery  year:  Ibe  one  on  the  d»y  on  which  he
dclirend  hit  DttiTe  Uvn  &«n  tynrmy,  which
ia  ths  fifth  of  the  manth  of  Daiiiiu,  (he  una

which  the  AdieDiaiu  call  Anlhesterion  }  sad  thi<
■aerifies  they  call  nrriiput.  The  oth«  they  cele-
brate in  the  month  ia  which  they  belicre  that  be
ws<  bom.  On  the  fint,  the  prieat  of  Zeai  oSered
the  Hmficet ;  on  the  second,  the  prieat  of  Aratna,
wearing  a  while  ribboa  with  purple  apoti  in  the
cealre,  aongi  being  long  to  the  lyre  by  the
acton  of  the  atnge.  The  public  twher  (yvfwi^
•rlafX")  led  hii  boya  and  youthi  in  proceMioo,
prohaUy  to  the  heraum  of  Antua,  followed  by  the
Koaton  adorned  wi^  garlanda,  after  whom  came
those  citiiena  who  wiahed  to  join  the  pToceuioo.
Tbe  Sicyoniaas  still  obserre,  he  addi,  some  parti
of  the  aotenmity,  but  the  principal  hononra  have
been  aboliabed  by  time  and  other  circomitances.
(Wachimnth,AeasL^ftertLT0l.iLp£28.)  [L.S.]

ARA'TRUM  {iptrpor),  a  plough.  The
Oraekj  appear  to  haie  had  from  toe  earlieit
timei  diTenttiei  in  the  faahioa  of  their  plougha.
Heiiod  (,0p.  tt  Dia,  432)  adnaea  the  bnncr  to
hare  ilwayi  two  plooghs,  so  that  if  one  bioke  the
other  miffht  be  ready  for  oie  ;  and  they  were  to  be
of  two  kmdi,  the  one  called  nrrSyvan,  betauiie  ia  it
the  plough -tail  (y^t,  htrii,  iiim)  was  of  the  nms
piece  of  timber  with  the  >hare-beam  (tkvua,  dmt,
daitale)  aad  the  pole  (iinoi,  Itnatotis,  iemo)  ;  and
the  other  called  injm-ji'.t.e.  compacted,  because  in
it  the  three  aboTe-meationed  parts,  which  were
mar«OTer  to  be  of  three  diSereat  kind*  of  timber,
were  adjittled  to  one  another,  and  fastened  to-
gether by  mouu  ef  naila  (^6ii^Biaa),  (Comp.
Horn.  IL  I.  SiS,  liil  703.)

The  laethod  of  fanning  a  plough  of  the  former
kind  was  by  takmg  a  young  ttee  wnh  two  innnchea
proceeding  from  its  tnink  ta  opposite  directions,  lo
that  whitat  in  ploughing  the  trunk  was  made  to
serre  far  the  pole,  one  of  the  two  brancfaes  stood
npwards  and  became  the  tail,  and  the  other  pene-
trated the  ground,  and,  being  covered  lometimei
with  bronte  or  iron,  fulfilled  the  purpose  of  a  sharo.
This  form  ia  exhibited  in  the  appennosl  figure  of
the  annexed  woodcut,  taken  from  a  medaL Tha


next  figure  shows  the  plough  ttill  need  ui  Myna,
aa  described  and  delineated  by  3ii  C.  Fellows.  It
ia  a  little  more  complicated  than  the  fint  plough,
inasmtich  at  it  consists  of  two  ^eces  of  timber  in-
stead of  one,  a  handle  {lxi^>-V\  itita)  being  iiuertcd
into  the  Wgcr  piece  at  one  side  of  it. StiC.FeUona


Its  ARATHUM,

(CnmiM  m  Aiia  Mimir,  1H3B,  p.  71)  obwrvn
thai  each  portioa  of  thk  initnunent  ii  alill  called
by  ita  ancient  Greek  Dame,  and  addi,  that  it  teenii
mited  only  to  the  light  mU  preniluig  vhere  be
ohaerred  it,  that  it  ii  held  bj  one  hand  only,  that
the  Conn  oC  the  ihare  (Emi)  Tariea,  and  that  the
ploDgb  ia  &«qi»atly  oAed  withoat  any  ihafe.
11  drawn  by  '  .....

guided  by  >
which  hai  a  ,

the  ihaie."  See  the  loveat  figure  in  the  voodeuL
Another  recent  InTsUer  in  Qreece  giye*  the
fDUoTing  aoconnt  of  the  plough  which  ha  vw  in
that  coontiy — ■  deicriplion  qipraachini  (till  nearer
to  the  riiKti*  ipoTpoy  of  Homer  and  Ueiied.  "  It
!•  compOHd,"  nya  he,  "  of  two  cnrred  tHceet  of
wood,  one  longei  than  the  other.  The  Iimg  piece
fonoi  the  pole,  and  one  end  of  it  being  jtnned  to
the  other  piece  aboat  a  fdbl  fiom  the  bottam,
diridei  it  into  a  ahaie,  which  ii  caaed  with  iron,
and  a  handle.  The  ihan  ia,  beaidea,  attached  to
the  pole  by  a  ihort  cnna-bar  of  wood.  Two  oxen,
with  no  other  hainen  than  yokei,  an  joined  to  the
pole,  and  driven  by  the  plooghman,  who  holdi  the
ooudle  in  hia  left  hand,  and  the  goad  in  hii  right."
(Hobhoue,  Jomey  AromgA  AUwo^  &C.,  Toi.  L
pi  UD.)  A  view  of  the  pUin  of  Elia,  reptnenCkft
thia  plough  in  nse,  ii  given  by  Hz.  S.  Stanhope  in

The  yoke  and  pole  nied  ancicnlty  in  ploughmg
did  not  diSer  from  thoie  employed  for  draught  in
genecaL  Coniequendy  they  do  not  hen  nquin
any  hirthei  dcHTipIion.  [JuouH.]  To  the  bottom
of  the  poU,  in  the  compacted  plough,  waa  attached
the  }Joi^k4ail,  which,  according  lo  Heiiod,  might
be  made  of  any  piece  of  a  tree  (eipedally  the
Sfitret,  L  e.  the  ilex,  or  holm^ak),  the  natnial
curratuie  of  which  fitted  it  to  thii  ok.  But  in
the  time  and  counlry  of  Viij;i1  paiiu  were  lakui
to  force  a  tree  into  that  ionn  which  waa  moat  ez-
acdy  ad^ried  10  the  puipoM.  (Ctesr^.l  169, 170.)
The  upper  end  of  the  hnria  being  held  by  the
ploughman,  the  lower  part,  below  ill  junction  with
the  pole,  waa  naed  to  hold  the  aiar^liaiHi,  which
waa  eithv  ihealhed  with  metal,  or  drimi  bare  into
the  ground,  accordizkg  to  drcumttancea.

To  thsH  three  continuoDa  and  moit  eawntial
parta,  the  two  foUewing  an  added  in  the  dcicrip-
tion  of  the  plongh  by  Virgil :  —

1.  The  eank-boardi,  or  vatidioardi  (osru),
riling  en  each  aide,  bending  outwardly,  in  luch  a
manner  ai  to  throw  on  either  hand  the  aoQ  which
had  been  previoiuly  Nx>iened  and  raiaed  by  the
■hare,  and  adjnited  to  the  ihare-beam  which  wu
made  double  for  the  purpose  of  receiving  them ;  —
"  Binae  asm,  duplici  aptantnr  deaialia  dono."
According  to  Palladini  (L  43),  it  waa  dciiiable  to
have  ploughs  both  with  earth-boarda  (amritu)  and
without  them  (nn^tcia).

2.  The  iamila  (Wica),  which  ii  aeen  in  Fel-
lowa'i  woodcut,  and  likeitiae  in  the  fiillowing  re-
pnaenlation  of  an  andent  Italiao  plougL  VirgU
coniiden  thia  part  at  nied  to  tnni  the  plough  at
the  end  of  the  fnirow.  "  Btivaquc^  quae  cunui  a
tergo  tonju^  imoc,*^ Serviui,  however,  in hia

handle  by  which  the  pioogh  ii  directed."  It  ii  pro-
bable that,  Bi  the  eiodoUi,  L  e.  the  two  ■haie-bouai,
which  Viigil  iuppoica  were  in  the  form  of  the
Oteek  letter  A,  which  he  deaoftaa  by  i%Jn  iJorai^


ARATRUM.
the  burii  was  fiitened  to  the  loft  ihairvbean,  and
the  alin  lo  the  right,  lo  that,  imtced  of  the  iim|Je
plough  of  the  Qneki,  that  daoibed  by  Viigil,  and
uied,  no  doubt,  in  lui  coontiy  (lee  the  fdlowii^
woodcut),  WB>  mne  like  the  modem  Lancaifaire
plough,  which  ia  commonly  beld  behind  with  both
handi.  Sometimaa,  however,  the  niva  (ix*r\^
He*.  Op.  el  Dut,  487)  wna  ued  alous  and  inalead
of  the  tail,  ai  m  the  Ifyaian  plough  above  Rpr»-
■ented.  To  a  plough  ao  conitructed  the  language
of  Columella  waa  especially  aralicaUe,  "  Anlor
ativae  paene  cecCna  ionititur"  (l  9)  ;  and  the  ex-
presnoni  of  Ovid,  ■■  Slivaeqae  iuniiui  aiator"
{Met.  viiL  218),  and  "Inde  premena  rtivnm  de-
aignat  moenia  iulco."  {Fad.  iv.  B25,)  In  jjace  of
"  Bti™,"  Ovid  alao  niei  the  '


capulum  prenai  ma<
waa  held  either  by  the  ativn  alone,  or  by  the  buria
alone,  a  piece  of  wood  {manciila)  wu  fixed  ocrasa
the  inmmit,  and  on  thia  the  laboiiicr  pnaaed  with
both  bandi.  Beaidea  guiding  the  plongh  in  a
■traight  Ime,  hii  du^  waa  to  foiee  the  share  to  a
aufficient  depth  into  the  aoil.  Viigil  allude*  to  thia
in  the  phnue  "  Depiesio  aiatio"  (Otarji.  I  4fi).
The  cro*i-bar,  which  ii  seen  in  Mr.  Fellewa'a
diawing,  and  mentioned  in  Sir  J.  C.  Hobhoue'l
description,  and  whieh  puMS  from  the  pole  to  the
aboiT!  for  the  pnrposa  of  giving  additional  itrength,
waa  caUed  irrdBij,  in  Laon  fikrunk  The  conller
<nu!ter,  Plin.  N.  ff.  iviii.  48)  waa  used  by  the
Romana  at  it  ia  with  ui.  It  wni  inaerted  into  tha
pole  10  aa  to  depend  vertially  belbn  the  ihore,
enltiog  thnugfa  the  not*  which  <um  in  it*  mj,
and  thai  preparing  for  tha  more  eomidele  lonaening
and  Dvertaming  rf  the  soil  by  the  ibiuB,

Abnrt  the  tunc  of  Pliny  two  null  wheela  (rvtaa,
rulaiai)  wen  added  to  tlu  plon^  in  Rhaalia  ;  nd
Serviuj  (L  t.)  mentions  the  u«e  of  them  in  ths
DOontry  of  VirglL  The  anneied  woodcut  *howB
the  finm  of  a  whed-plough,  as  repnaented  en  a
meoe  of  engnved  jasper,  of  Roman  woikmanahip.
It  also  shows  distinctly  the  $me  or  pole,  the
conltei  or  adUr,  the  dimtalt  or  ehare-beam,  tba
6writ  or  plough-tail,  and  the  handle  or  ttnn.


Coo^^Ic


ss;


ARCHIATEB.
w  Dted  about  w.ntnn  and  Venice,  of


AcucuiToiu,  p.  4S:

AltBlTEB. [JoDix.]

ARBrraATlIA  A'CTIO. [Acna]

ARCA,« ^CMM  cdler.  —  I.  A  ebnt,  ii  wbich
tk  Boama  wen  accMtomed  to  place  their  money :
tbe  pknM  a  arm  eefa—  had  the  Mwuiing  of
ftjmqh  mAf  moocj.  (CiHop.  Gc  ad  AU.  i.
).}  Thn*  dwMi  va«  ehhei  made  of  or  bound
wittiRia,(i  other  DWtali.  (Jnr.  li.  SS,  iIt.  359.)
ne  m  arm  wit  voaUj  giren  to  the  eheiti
■  wUcft  tbe  rich  kqit  their  monn,  and  va*  op-
fMd  M  the  nmller  IbnU  (Jst,  i,  89},  taetiiu
(Jn.  n.  3(),  and  a  aiiiai  i.

2.  Jm  pmbSca  vaa  laed  nnder  the  empire  to
■nifr  the  dtjr-fbiidi,  vhich  irere  diitiiwl  from
the  aB»iiuB  nid  the  Gicni,  and  tlie  Bdmininiar
lia  «f  vhich  bdonged  to  the  iciiate.  (Va|nK.
Jan<  W.)  The  name  am  ww,  faawerer,  aln
■td  H  cqoinJent  to  ficm,  that  ii,  the  impenal
vnamj:  thaa,  w*  read  of  the  orat  y^marfurio,

1,  <te. (^ri>u>i-  ^  3S ;
■)
dm  a^nified  (be  coffin  in  which  penrau

d  <Anr.  Vict  D»  Fir.  7142;  Lnaui,

riiL  TH),  Of  the  Iner  on  wbkh  the  corpae  wu
rind  pcenaoalr  to  bvriiL  (Dig.  II.  tit  7.  *.  7.)
4.  It  via  bIm  s  (trong  cell  made  of  oak,  in  which
CBaaJi  and  ilarva  were  ccaflned.  (Cic  Pro
JHoiLcSS;  FeatDi,  K  B.  Asian.}

A'RCERA,  a  coreied  carriage  or  litter,  ipnad
yrA  dothi,  which  wai  naed  in  ancient  ^ei  in
Tli^  IB  0117  the  aged  and  infirm.  It  ii  aaid  to
hne  abtained  the  name  of  enen  on  account  of  it«
itnhknce  to  an  oat.  (Vtrr.  L.L.T.  140,  ed.
MOa  ;  OdL  xx.  1.)

ARCHKION  iinC'*>')  V"*^  >»««>*  ""7
paHic  place  bekii^:tng  to  the  ma^nratet  (comp.
DOid-  iv.  63),  but  wae  moie  paitjcnlarij  applied


ARCHIATER.  119

"(0  nU  evr'*  the  phjaiciani
,  ,,. .,  feet,  to  be  "archiater." 4.  An-

giudne  (J>>  Cteit.  Oti,  iii.  17)  i^iea  the  wotd  to
AeacobipJDi,  and  Sl  Jerome  {metaphorically  of
toaae)  to  omr  Saiioiu:  (liiL  HbmiL  i»  S.  Zue.),
in  both  which  caua  it  endentlf  meoni  "  the  chief
pbjticiaD."  S.  It  ii  apparent!?  aTDoajmona  with
pntmudiimi,  ttfra  audteot,  <iomiimi  mt^tamm,
and  nipttjieiitia  BuHtonm,  all  which  eipmnoni
occur  in  inxziption*,  fto,  and  alao  with  the  title
Rail  -ala  •l^ildibi,  among  the  Ambiani.  6.  We
find  the  namca  of  ■erezal  panooB  who  werv  phr-
■iciani  to  the  empetor,  mentioned  wHhont  the  ad-
dition of  the  title  oMUoCgr.  7.  The  arohiatri  wen
diTided  into  AnUalri  landi  pabdii,  who  attended
on  the  emperor,  and  AnUairi  popoZam,  who  at-
tended on  the  peo^ ;  n  that  it  ia  certain  that  all
thoae  who  bore  thii  title  were  not  **  phyiridane  to
the  prtnna,"  The  ehief  argument  in  bioor  of  the
ecmtiaiT  opnlon  aeemi  to  ariie  from  the  feet,  that
of  all  theae  who  an  koown  to  have  held  the  office
of  Aniiatri  the  gmaler  part  certainly  were  alra
phyuciana  to  the  emperor )  bnt  thie  u  only  what
might  i  firiori  be  eipeited,  nc  that  thoae  who
had  atlamed  the  higheet  tank  in  their  pcofeaaioa
would  be  choeen  to  attend  apon  the  prince^  *

The  Grrt  pemm.  whom  we  find  bearins  thia  title
■a  Andramachui,  phjaician  to  Htm,  and  iurenlor
of  the  Theriaa  (Galen.  Lf. ;  Etotian.  Let.  Voe.
Hippoer.  Praet}  :  bnt  it  ii  not  known  whether  he
had  at  theiame  time  any  aort  of  BOthoritj  oTer  the
reit  of  the  pnfeuion..  In  bctvlhe  hiatory  of  the
title  ii  aa  obscure  ai  ita  meaning,  Mkd  it  it  chieflj


rf^peniend  other  itate
•and,  Thia  <dce  ii  iemetimea  called  merely  ri
hfitmr.  {Dem.  dt  Cor.  p.  27j.)  At  Athena  the
■Rhiica  wee  kept  in  the  temple  of  the  mother  of
the  goda  (]d(TfifiKi\  and  the  charge  of  it  waa  in-
mned  to  the  pnaident  (h-uTdrqi}  of  the  Kuate
•riheriTe-hnndred.  (^Oem.  dt  FaU,  Ltg.  ^  HI,
h  AriMog.  L  pt  79s  ;  Paua.  L  3.  §  4.)

ARCUIATER  (lpx^f»>.  compounded  of
Ink  W  inC't  ■  chiei^  and  Urrfit,  a  phyiician},
a  ■liiial  title  mider  the  Honan  empenin,  the
nact  Bpifieaticn  of  which  bai  been  the  labieet
•f  aach  dianiinao  ;  for  while  aonw  peraona  in-
■erpvt  k  "  the  chief  of  the  phyiidana  "  (fiun
IpXaw  row  farpwp)  othva  explain  it  to  mean  **  the
rtjaitiau  Id  the  prince"  (fww  tou  ipxarros
•t^fit).  Upon  the  whole  it  leenia  tolerably  cer-
taia  that  the  fimner  la  the  true  meaning  of  the
wted,  nd  fiw  theae  naKmi :  —  1.  FiDm  ita  ety-
aden  it  can  haidhr  have  any  other  aenie,  and
1  d  the  wada  amularly  {wmed  (A^rrArriBr,
irxrrfl^uiiat,  i^wwlffiuwoi,  it)  there  ia  not
■e  thai  haaany  reference  to  "rt<  prinflt"  2.  We
fad  the  title  aj^iUed  to  phyBcia»  who  lired  at
'liaM,  Alexandria,  Ac^  where  no  king  «aa  at


to  it  In  after  timei  <aa  waa  itated  abore)  the
order  w>eaii  to  ham  been  divided,  and  we  find
two  diatind  claMca  of  atchialii,  tii.  thoae  of  the
palace  and  thote  of  the  people.  (Cbd.  Theodoa-
liii  tit  3  ;  Dt  Mtiidt  a  PraflMKrAu.)  The
anHatri  oucti  palatH  wen  penona  of  high  rank,
who  not  only  eierciied  their  iimfi  iiSiii,  but  were
judgea  on  occaiion  of  any  diapates  that  might  occur
among  the  phyaiciana  of  the  placa.  They  had
certain  priiilegca  granted  to  them,.*  g.  they  were
ecemptcd  from  all  taiaa,  aa  were  alio  their  wirea
and  children ;  they  wen  not  obliged  to  lodge
aoldien  or  atberi  in  the  prorincea ;  ttuey  coold  not
be  put  in  priim,  Su. ;  for  though  tlleae  privilegea
aeem  at  Erat  to  haie  been  common  to  all  [diyiiciBna
(Cud.  Juat  I.  tit  £3.  t.  6.  Mtdiaa  d  mtuHM
Ardiiatnt),  yet  afterwarda  they  were  confined  to
the  aichiatri  of  the  palace,  and  to  thoae  dF  Rome.
When  they  obtained  their  diamia^  fnaa  attend-
ance on  the  empeicH',  either  ^m  old  age  or  any
other  CBoae,  the;  ntuned  the  titfe  en-ariMalri,
or  BMroStafrM.  (Cod.  i.  tit  52.  leg.  6.}  The
orotiafn  piynilarf  were  eitabliahed  for  the  relief
of  the  poor,  and  each  city  waa  to  be  prorided  with
fire,  aeren,  or  ten,  according  to  ita  liie.  (Dig.
27.  tit  1.  a.  6.)  Borne  bad  fourteen,  beaidca  one
for  the  leatal  Tirgina,  and  one  for  the  gynmaaia.
(Cod.  Theodos.  L  e.) The;  were  f«td  by  the  go-


130  ARCHITECTURA.

goremori  of  tlu)  ptnTiiKO,  but  wen  elected  by  tlie
peopie  theniMlTei.  (Di((.  fiO.  tit  9.  1.1.)  The
offlceappwi  to  haiebeen  mon  luciatiTe  Ihan  Ihat
<^  anhiatri  luicti  paUtii,  tfasngh  leu  honourable.
In  Uter  timei,  m  find  in  Cnuiodonu  (kc  Meibom.
Cbnmimt.  n  Oau.  FvnaiL  Ardiialr.  Helinit.  1G68)
tbfl  titls  "  com«  arcbiatRinun,"  "  count  of  the  arch-
uRi,"  logetber  with  an  ucount  of  bii  dutiei,  by
which  it  appear)  that  be  wai  the  arbiter  and  judge
of  all  diiputei  and  difficnltia,  and  ranked  eniong
the  offlceM  of  the  empire  aa  a  vtearita  or  da*,
(See  Le  Cleic,  and  Sprengel,  Hal.  dt  la  Mtd,
Funhei  information  on  the  lubject  may  be  found
in  UTeral  worlu  lerened  to  in  the  Oifiird  edilion
af  Theophilna  Dt  Oorp.  Hum.  FiUa:  p.  27£  ;  aud
in  Ooldh«n,  De  Arehiatra  Aanoni  el  aoniin  On-
gint  uapit  ad  Jlna^  ouperii  Ramaai  OcddaUaiii,
Lipt  1841.)  1W.A.0,"

ARCHIMI'MHS. [Mmiis.]
ARCHITECTU'RA  <Vx"'««t<»*». 4pX"
Tiwuc^),  in  ita  widcit  Kue,  eignifiei  all  that
undentiuid  by  aroliCsAira,  and  by  eitS  and  m
tary  engimMrnig  ■■  in  iu  more  reitricled  meaning
ii  ike  Kience  of  building  accorduig  to  tha  lawi
proportion  and  tha  prindplei  of  beauty. In
foriner  wnac,  it  baa  ita  fonndalion  in  nannfji  .•
the  Latter,  upm  art  taking  occaiian  &um  acceui
The  hut  of  a  lavage  ii  not,  properly  ipeaWinf
work  of  Biehitecluie ;  neilbcr,  on  the  other  baud,
ii  a  building  in  wbich  different  and  ineongruoni
>tyle«  aro  eihibiled  aide  by  aide. An  arcbitectuial
conBtmction,  in  the  artistic  Knie,  muat  poisei
only  ■rf'Uj'i  but  beoMl;/,  and  oln  miity ;  it  mn
eogg^tiTe  of  »me  tJao,  and  referable  to  aome

The  architecture  of  erery  people  it  not  only
moat  interealmg  branch  of  ili  anliquitiea,  bat  alao
a  moM  imporlant  feature  in  iti  hittory ;  at  it  fbnni
one  of  the  mint  dunblc  and  moat  intetligible  evi.
denccfl  of  advancement  in  ci^^iliiatioa,  Tf  thf
Qrcek  aod  Roman  literature  and  biitoiy  had  been
a  blank,  what  idni  of  their  knowledge,  and  poi
and  Hcial  condition  would  their  morn
itill  lURgeeied  to  ni  1  What  a  alore  o
ia  Bicn  now  being  developed  &om  the
of  Alia,  Egypt,  uid  America  1

The  object  of  the  proent  article  ii  to  give  a  ver
eompendiona  account  of  the  hiatoiy  and  principle)
of  the  art,  aa  proctited  by  the  Grcdia  and  Romana.
The  delnili  of  the  aubject  will  b^  for  the  mo«
put,  referred  to  their  aeparala  and  proper  heada
The  livei  of  the  aiehilecta  will  be  found  in  the
JXetimary  of  Gmk  and  Aonuu  Mythology  and
Biograpki).

It  ii  well  obHTTed  by  Stiegliti  that  architecture

aity  for  a  habitation,  and  the  attempt  to  adorn  then
habitntioni  which  were  intended  for  the  godi,  are
the  two  ouaea  from  wbich  the  art  derive)  ICt  ei-
iilence.  In  e«uly  timei  we  have  no  reaion  to  )up-
poao  ttmt  much  attention  wna  paid  to  domeitic
arcbitectora,  bnt  we  have  much  evidence  to  the
cantnrr.  The  mourcei  of  the  ait  were  lavi)hed
upon  ina  templet  of  the  godi ;  and  hence  the
sreatar  part  of  the  hittory  of  Oredan  architecture
u  iiiMfoiably  connected  with  that  of  tha  temple,
and  bu  iti  proper  place  under  TsHn-ltif,  and  the
aubordinate  hndinga,  auch  at  Colcvica,  Tmder
which  bead)  alao  the  different  ofderi  are  detcribcd.
Bnt,  though  the  firat  rite  of  anhitectnre,  aa  a
fine  at^  ii  connected  with  tba  tsople,  jvt,  Tiew^


ASCHITECTURA.

the  adenoe  of  conanuction,  it  mutt  have  been
iployed,  even  earlier,  for  otb^r  pnrpoae),  luch  oa
B  erection  of  JbrtiGcatioiu,  pilBcet,  tnoturici,  and
]er  worica  of  utility.  Accordingly,  it  ia  tbfl
general  opinion  of  antiquaiiea,  that  the  very  eariieit
edifice),  of  which  we  have  any  remain),  an  the  ao-
ealled  Cyclopean  wotka,  in  which  we  tee  hug*
nnaquared  blocka  of  atone  buHt  together  m  the  but
way  that  their  ahapea  would  allow ;  although  it
con  be  proved,  in  some  Initaoect,  that  the  mdeucaa
of  thi)  )ort  of  work  it  no  luSdent  proof  of  it)  very
early  date,  for  that  it  wat  adoptod,  not  fttmi  want
of  tkiil,  bnt  on  account  of  the  object  of  the  work,
and  the  nature  of  the  mateiiali  employed.  (Bun-
bury,  Oa  CydopKm  Rtmaaa  n  Oailr^  Italy,  in  tbo
aa«c«J,Ui(iean,voIiL)  [MuBUS.]  rheaaotmt
of  the  CBily  palacei  cannot  well  be  tepoiated  from
that  of  domettic  architecture  in  geoerel,  and  ia
therefore  given  nnder  I>0)iIt8  ;  that  of  erection)  in-
tended, or  rnppoaed  to  be  intended,  for  tnaauiics^
will  be  found  under  THiaiUHUB.

In  addition  to  theae,  however,  (here  are  othar
pnrpoaea,  fin-  which  arehitecture,  ttill  uting  tha
term  in  itt  lower  leuae,  would  be  required  in  a
very  esriy  itaga  of  political  locicty  ;  auch  aa  the
general  arrangement  of  citiea,  the  pronuon  of
a  place  for  the  tianaac^on  of  pnblic  bniineni,
with  the  neceaaaiy  edifice)  appertaining  to  it
[AaoaA,  Foaun],  and  the  whole  claa)  of  •mtAt
which  we  embrace  under  tha  head  of  civil  en-
gineering, Buch  at  thoae  for  drunaga  [Cloaca,
EMisaABiUB],  for  communication  [Via,  Ponb],
and  for  the  tupply  ot  water  [AqniinutrrDa].  Thia
nature  of  these  aeveid  woika  among  the  Oreeka
and  Romana,  and  the  period)  of  their  development,
are  deactibed  under  the  several  article).  Ahnoat
equally  neeeaaaiy  are  placea  devoted  to  pnblic  ex-
ereitc,  health,  and  amuiement,  OvwHAtiuii,  Sta-
dium, HiFroDnoHus,  Circus,  BALNaim,  Thka-
TauH,  Ahfuithiatbum.  Lattly,  the  akiU  of
the  Bichitect  hat  been  from  the  eariieit  limei  aa-
ploTod  to  pnaerve  the  memory  of  departed  mea
and  past  event) ;  and  hence  wo  have  the  variooa
wotka  of  monumental  and  triumphal  architecture,
which are docribed  undec the head)  FUNDB,

AltCIia,  COLUHNA.

The  viPieriaU  emplojed  b;  the  arehitect  wera
marble  or  ttooe,  wood,  and  variou)  kind)  of  earth,
posseBting  the  property  of  being  ploatic  while  moiat
and  hardening  in  drying,  with  cement  and  metal
clamp)  for  fiuteningt :  the  variout  melnla  were  also
eitentively  used  in  the  way  of  omameuL  The  de-
tail) of  thia  branch  of  the  aubject  are  given  In  th«
deacriptiona  of  the  aevcral  kind)  of  building.

The^rvia)iba  of  architectural  acience  aie  uHUtJf^
proportion,  and  Aa  imitation  of  iiafKn.  The  firat
requiBito  ia  that  every  detail  of  a  building  ahould
be  aubordinate  to  iU  general  pnrpoae.  Next,  the
form  of  the  whole  and  of  ita  partt  muat  be  derived
JTom  limpls  geometrical  fignregi  namely,  the  tttaight
line,  Che  plane  tni&ce,  and  regular  or  tjTimetrical
rectilineal  figuret,  aa  the  equilateral  or  iaoecelca
triangle,  the  aquan  of  rectangle,  and  the  regular
polygon) ;  )ymmetricBl  curvea,  at  the  drdo  and
ellipae  ;  and  the  tolid)  aHaing  out  of  theae  various
figure),  aueb  aa  the  cubi^  the  pyramid,  the  cylinder,
the  cone,  the  hemiiphere,  &c.  Laatly,  tha  orea.-
mentt,  by  which  tboo  lormi  are  relieved  and
beautified,  matt  all  be  founded  either  on  geo-
metrical form)  or  on  the  imitation  of  nature.

To  thia  onllun  of  the  purpcaea  and  priuciplea  ot


AltCHn-BCrURA.

^  Kt,  it  oalr  iSMfau  lo  iubjom  >  biief  ikctcli  of
iu  Ummj,  which  Uitt  and  MUller  diyide  into  five
paMi :  tiM  ficu,  •hieh  u  chiefl;  mythical,  comtt
4m  M  ibc  time  of  Cjwliu,  OL  SO,  a.  c.  660
(UIUb  briiw*  thii  period  down  to  the  SOtli  Olfm-
^■.c5M);  ttae  Komd  paiod  comei  down  to
iW  towMtHO  of  the  Penun  vu,  OL  7&  2,  B.  c
4»  (UUlir  brim  H  down  lo  OL  80,  B.C.  4G0) :
tht  Airi  B  tba  nllknt  pmDd  fras  the  end  of  the
pHMa  mi  to  the  dcati  of  Akxaodir  the  Great,
OL  114,  I.e.  333  (HUkr  cIsmi  thii  poiod  with
Ike  iaii  of  Phiiip,  OL  1 1 1,  B.  C  33fl) ;  the  fbnnh
jmi  m  tnoghE  dnm  faf  Uiit  lo  the  battle  of
Aetna,  B,  C  SI,  but  by  MGUer  ool?  to  the
immm  enqaot  of  Greece,  ■.  c  U6;  the  latter
^trina  haa  the  aoranienoe  of  madung  the  tian-
uiia  fan  Oicek  to  Roman  archHecniTe :  Hirfa
ifth  poind  ia  tliat  of  tlu  Sranan  empire,  down  to
tke  Micatka  of  CmatantiDoide,  x.  D.  S30 ;  while
Uiills^  fifth  pariod  emhcaeea  the  whole  hiilocj  of
Rama  aiiUleetDre,  fra  the  tbae  whan  it  began
u  iastate  the  Oiedc,  down  to  the  mddle  aaa%
*tn  it  beome  mii^led  with  the  Oothie:  HntH
inina  nqaiiea  aa  to  dnw  a  mora  definite  line  of
a  than  ii  poMibte,  between  the  Roman
'"IB  B^ka,  and  alao  |daeei  that  line  loo

bwiu

ta  imiwd  onder  the  actidet  whicb  Jeaeribe  the
■neiBl  davra  of  boildinBi:  thej  an  thecefine
Mnd  in  tbia  plan  wiu  dw  ntmoit  poadUs
Imitf.  Qui  lB(iaaiali«i  iie|iiiiliim  lliii  nuljuiiiiil
it  doned  Itam  the  HeoMrio  poemi,  the  tndi-
tw  fwattied  bj  othei  writoi,  and  the  moat
■anm  Mnaamtt  of  Onece,  Central  Italy,  and
(be  HHt  td  AoB  If  intc.  Stnnglj  fortified  dtlea,
pdan^  Bad  lii—iiiin.  an  the  chief  wrrki  of
the  Mflia  pan  of  ihia  period ;  and  to  it  may  be
■risied  BMt  of  the  lo-alled  C^onean  lemaini ;
■Ui  the  am  of  the  Dnian  intatun  maiki,  in
•D  poh^ititT,  the  ommeneemeiit  of  the  Dotian
•trie  rf  li  ani  aiehitectaie^  The  prindpal  launee
•f  vtia*  bdoi^inf  to  thii  paiod  are  Daedalni,
Ewjalai,  Hyparbiaa,  Dodna,  and  aome  othen.  In
the  neaod  peiiad  the  ait  made  r^d  advancee
mdei  Ikt  powcrfal  mtmnage  of  the  aiinocinciea
■ '-'  - --  »t  ^atta,  and  of  the  tyianti  in


.  ...  Jt  Siijaii,  the  PeiuftiBtidi  at  Athens,
ad  Pahciatea  at  SanuM.  Aidntectiu*  now  a>-
■^■d  decidedly  the  cbaneler  of  a  fine  art,  and
beiaae  amiiiiali  |1  with  the  rattf  aMI  of  •cnlplme
■ad  y~"'—t,  wUdi  an  eaaentia]  to  iti  deVelop-
BoB.  Tbe  tuiriilri  of  p^t-^-t"'  deiliea  were  en-
■ichtd  mt  adoned  br  ptcaenia,  neb  ai  thoae
^xhCncaM  tent  to  ike  Pythian  ApoUo.  Mag-
■fiowt  li  iiipli  a  apnnif  up  in  ^1  the  priiici[ial
Gnek  liliia  )  Bad  while  the  Doric  order  wu
tmagkt  **-"—*,  if  not  qnite,  to  per&cticin,  in  Onece
fo^  iB  the  Dnic  ealoniei  of  Aiia  Minor,  and

■  CtMnl  Italy  and  Sicily,  the  Ionic  order  ap-
f  ami,  all  I  ad  J  pBftet  at  ita  fint  mientioti,  in  the
rn*»  tovple  ef  Attemia  at  Epheaoi.  The  mini
hM  eiialan  at  Paeetam,  Syiacnae,  AgrigentDtn,
ads^  A^iiia,and  other  pUcea,  are  imperuhable

■  iwiiauta  of  thii  period.  Nor  were  woriu  of
aa!ity  Deidecled,  ■•  wc  lee  in  the  fooataia  of  the
?i  iiaiaiiila  at  Albem,  the  aqnedaet  at  Samoa
|A«TaBaocTD«],tbe  lewcn  (iv^vfioi)  and  batiia
Inti^tfya)  at  Agrisenliim.  To  Ihia  period  al»
kthmtbapennrikBoftheRMnankrogL The


ABCHOIf.  ISt

commencement  of  the  third  and  moat  brilliant
period  of  the  art  wu  eignaiiEed  by  the  rebuilding
of  Atheni,  tbo  establiilmient  of  regular  principlea
for  the  laving  out  of  citiei  by  H  ippodamu*  of  Milc-
tni,  and  tiie  great  worki  of  the  ign  of  Peridc*,  by
the  coDtemponriet  of  Pheidiat,  at  Athena,  Eleuiis,
and  Olympia  ;  during  ita  conrte  erery  city  of
Greece  and  ha  coloniei  wai  adorned  with  iplendid
cdiiicea  of  every  deacription  ;  and  ila  termination
i>  marked  by  the  magnificent  wocki  of  Deinocrates
and  hia  conteniporaiiea  at  Alexandria,  Antioch,
and  Dlhei  cities.  The  fint  port  of  the  fourth  pe-
riod AW  the  extoiaicai  of  the  Greek  aichitectura
over  the  coDntiiea  conqneied  by  Alexander,  and,
in  the  Weat,  the  commencement  of  the  new  ilyle,
which  aroae  from  the  imitation,  with  aome  altei-
ationi,  of  the  Qret^  forma  by  Rman  architect!,
to  which  the  conqneat  of  Greece  gun,  of  conne,
a  new  impolae.  By  the  time  of  AagnitDi,  Rome
waa  adoiiied  with  every  kind  rf  public  and  pri-
vate edifice,  anmnnded  by  villaa,  and  fbmiihed
with  Toadi  and  aqnedncla ;  and  theae  varioua
erectioDa  were  adorned  by  the  fbimi  of  Grecian
art ;  but  atrcBdy  Vitruitiu  begini  to  complain  that
the  pnrity  of  tmt  art  ia  oompled  by  the  mtcimii-
lure  of  beleTogtneoni  fonna.  Thii  nrocest  of  dcte-
riotadon  irent  on  rapidly  during  the  fifth  period,
though  combined  at  fint  with  increaaing  mag-
nifimm  in  the  acale  and  nnmber  of  the  huildingi
erected.  The  eatly  part  of  thii  period  ii  made  illm-
triooa  by  the  niuneioiii  worki  of  Angoatoa,  and  hia
•aCGcaioiii  eipecially  the  Flavii,  Nerra,  Trajan,
Hadrian,  and  the  Antoninea,  at  Rome  and  in  the
{snvincea  ;  bnt  from  the  lime  of  the  Antoninea  the
decline  of  the  art  wai  rapid  and  decided.  In  one
department,  a  new  impnlae  waa  given  to  architec-
tore  by  the  riae  td  Ouiitian  ehnrchea,  which  were
genendly  built  on  the  model  of  the  Roman  Baailica.
One  of  the  most  iplendid  mecimena  of  Chtiidan
architectnre  ia  the  chtmh  of  S.  Sophia  at  Conatan-
tino^e,  boilt  in  the  reign  of  JuttiniaD,  a.  d.  £37,
and  reitaied,  afia  ita  partial  deatmclian  by  an
earthquake,  in  554,  But,  long  before  thia  time,
the  GlCQ>-Roman  atyle  had  became  thoimghly
compted,  and  that  new  atyle,  which  i«  tailed  the
ByiButine,  had  ariien  cut  ol  the  mixture  of  Roman
aichitectnre  with  ideaa  derived  from  the  Northern
nationa.  It  ia  beyond  ear  limita  to  pnnae  the
hiatory  of  thi>  and  later  itylea  of  the  art.

Of  the  andent  writer!,  fivm  whom  our  knowledge
of  the  inbject  ia  derived,  the  most  important  ii,  of
course,  Vitrnvini.  The  following  are  the  nrindpal
modem  mrkt  on  the  general  subject :  —  WinckcU
mann,  Atamrlaimpai  iiier  dii  Baubmg  der  Allot,
1762;  Stiegliti,  ^raliioJqpM  dar  BaJauat,  ISQi,
and  Cftae*>oUeArAuifaMl,laS7;  Hirt,&HiBaiJ
■aai  dot  Qrmd^lm  dtr  AUn,  1809.  and  Go-
cUditt  dtr  Bauhual  iti  dm  Allot,  1821 ;  MliUer,
Haadbatk  der  ArMiohgit  dtr  KumM,  1B25  t  the
varioua  worka  of  travels,  topt^raphy,  and  auti-
qxutiea,  auch  aa  those  of  Slunn,  Chandler,  Clarke,
Bodwell,  ftc,  all  the  moat  important  of  which
will  be  fmnd  dted  by  the  authorities  ts&nCd  to ;
and,  for  Central  Italy,  Milling  Etmitr,  and
Abeken'a  JlfiHaUoitaa  eor  dtr  Soaatetiai  Htrr-
acta/}.  (P.  8.]

ABCHITHEO'RUa. [Dblij.]

ARCHON  (I^X"")-  The  government  of
Atheni  qipeara  to  luve  gone  through  the  cycle  of
changes,  which  andent  hiatoty  rccorda  as  the  lot  of
many  other  atatea. It  began  with  monaRhf  ^  and


132  ARCHON.

■Aer  puiing  tlimigli  ■  dynutf  *  uid  anttacnuf,
cndad  in  demoOBCf .  Df  Ibe  kingi  of  Atheaa,  uta-
■idcnd  u  lliG  capilal  of  Auio,  Thcteui  may
be  Kiid  to  hnve  been  the  Em  i  !ot  to  him
wbslhec  u  a  real  indiridiud  or  a  reproentativt
of  a  certain  period,  i>  attribated  the  noion  of  the
difTarent  and  independoit  Btat««  of  At^ca  nnder
one  head.  (ThuciLlfi.)  The  lut  vaa  Codnu;
in  acknowledgmsnt  of  vhoea  patriotivn  in
mecdng  death  for  tie  eounlrj,  the  Athenian!
an  laid  to  hare  dcteimintd  that  no  one  ihoold
mecMd  him  with  the  title  of  ^atAtii,  or  king.
It  leemi,  bawerer,  aqnally  probable,  that  it  wai
the  Dobka  wbo  avuled  theDuelTca  of  thii  oppor-


inity  to  HTTe  their  own  interutt,  b;  aboliah-
mg  the  fcinglj  power  far  another,  the  pcueuori  ( '
which  the;  ^lled  dpxc^'S  or  nden. These  fc


faoDK  of  Codnu,!
tint  point  WBi  gained  bj  the  noblea,  the  office
being  made  uttiBvrtt,  v  accountable  (Fau.  n.  B.
f  i  i  Dem.  c  A^aier.  p.  1370  ;  Anilot.  Palit  ii
5  ;  BOckh,  Fai.  fifoa.  <^  Aliau,  voL  iL  p.  27.
lit  cd-X  which  of  coone  impliel  that  the  nobiHl;^
had  lome  conlcol  oni;  it ;  and  perh^it,  like  the
bannu  of  the  feodal  agej,  they  ezecciied  the  power
of  depcaition.

Thia  Hate  of  thing!  hated  for  twelve  nngni  of
archoni.  The  next  at^  waa  to  limit  the  continn-
ance  of  the  office  to  ten  ycan^  atill  craifiziizig  it  to
the  Medontidae,  or  bwiis  of  Codnu,  ■>  aa  to  csta-
bliih  what  the  Orseki  isllcd  a  dyuailj,  till  the
•ichon^ip  of  Eryiiaa,  the  lail  archoD  of  that  bmily
elected  aa  lOch,  and  the  aeTenlli  decennial  archon.
(Clinton,  F.  If.,  vol  L  p^  1 8'Z)  At  the  end  of  hia
ten  yean  (b.  c.  681),  a  much  greUtz  change  took
place ;  the  arehouhip  waa  made  annual,  and  iti
TarJMii  dutiea  diTided  amang  a  eoU^c  of  nine,
choaen  by  loAage  (x<V<>Tana)  from  the  Enpa-
ttidae^  or  Patnduu,  and  no  hraga  elected  bom  the
Mtdontidae  exdiulTely»  Thia  airangement  con-
tinned  till  the  timoecacy  ealabliihed  l^  Solon,  who
made  the  qnaiificalioa  tat  offin  depend  not  on
birth,  but  property,  still  retaining  the  election  by
aafirage,  and,  aoeocding  to  Plntarch,  lo  br  im-
pairing the  anthority  of  (he  archooa  and  other
mgiamtM,  aa  to  Iqaliae  an  appeal  from  them
to  the  coDTta  of  juitice  Inetitated  by  himie1£
(*Osa  ToTi  ipx^  (ra{(  tpinw,  i/dalui  fcol  Tcpl
jnbwr  <ii  rb  tucarripiar  i^faui  ISaiiiv,
Plot  Solan.  IS.)  The  election  by  lot  ia  believed
to  have  been  introduced  by  Cleiilhenea  (b.  c
SOB ;  Herod.  tL  109)  ;  for  we  find  thia  practice
eiiiting  ihortly  after  hii  time ;  and  Ariitotle
{PoUI.  iL  9)  Bxpreuly  iCatea  that  Solon  made  no
alteralioa  in  the  iHpttiii,  or  nude  of  election,  bnt
only  in  the  qualifiation  for  offico.  1^  however,
there  be  no  inlerpolatkn  in  the  oath  of  the
Heliaata  <Dem.  a.  Timocr.  p.  7*7),  wa  are  fomtd
to  the  concliuion  that  the  election  by  lot  waa
aa  old  ai  the  time  of  Solon ;  bnt  the  authority
of  Ariilolla  and  other  evidence  itrongly  incline
Oi  to  aome  inch  mppoaition,  or  rather  leave
IM  doubt  of  ila  neceancy.  The  laat  change  ia  snp-
poaed  to  have  been  niade  by  Ariiteidci  (rpipti
ifr^aim  Ktiyiir  tinu  rV  toaJtiuw,  aal  rali  Spxw-
nt  Ii  'Atifnur  wdi-mv  alpiiaiai.  Pint.  Ariil.
22),  who,  after  the  batUe  of  Plataea  (a  c  479),


•  Bytbiaia


ARCHON.


magiitiBcie)  to  alt  thec._
aena,  uiat  la,  lo  ths  Thetei,  ai  w^  aa  the  other
claaaes,  the  fbrma  of  whom  were  not  allowed  by
Solon'i  lawi  to  hold  any  magietracy  at  all ;  in  am-
fonnity  with  which,  vra  find  that,  even  in  the  timo
of  Ariiteidei,  the  archona  were  choaen  by  lot  from

ftdi/ivoi,  Plut.  Jriil.  ad  init.).

Still,  afl^  the  removal  of  the  old  reatrietio^
aome  lecoiity  irai  left  to  inaura  reqectability ;
for,  previonily  to  an  atchon  entering  on  iffice,  ba
nnderwent  an  examination  called  the  ir^iqiura
(Pollux,  viii.  8£  :  Dcinar.  cAritog.  p.  107  ;  roil
ivria  ApX^^'t  varpfiwe  tl  twht  «0  woaow'ar,
Dem.  0.  £MiU.  p.  1320),  u  to  hii  being  a  In-
timate and  a  good  dtiien,  a  guod  aon,  and  qualified
in  point  of  property :  «J  ri  rifaytA  ivTir  air^  ;
waa  the  queation  put.  Now,  there  are  (ScblS-
manu,  De  Cbntttii,  jl.  312. ;  B6ckh,  vol  iL  p.  277}
ttrong  reaaoni  for  aup^oung  that  thia  fium  of  ei-*
araination  csntinaed  even  after  the  lime  of  Ari-
iteidei ;  and  if  lo,  it  would  ftJiow  that  the  right
in  {[ucBtion  waa  not  given  to  the  Thetea  pn>*
miicuciuily,  but  only  to  nieb  ai  pcaaened  a  ear-
bun  amount  of  property.  But  even  if  It  wera  ao,
it  ia  admitted  uiat  thia  hitter  limitation  aoon  be-
lame  obnleta  ;  for  we  read  in  Lyiiaa  C>V  *^
'ABvntrm,  pt,  169),  that  a  needy  old  man,  an
poor  aa  to  receive  a  itate  allowance,  waa  not  dia-
quali£ed  &om  being  aicbcD  by  hia  indigence,  bot
only  by  bodily  infinni^ ;  freedom  bom  all  meli
defect!  being  reqaired  for  the  office,  ai  it  waa  ia
aome  reapecta  of  a  ixied  character.  Ye^  even  after
pnaaiDg  a  aatiafartory  irinfura,  each  of  ^archon^
m  common  with  oiber  magiatlBle^  waa  liable  tA
be  depoaed,  on  complaint  M  miaoondoet  made  be-
fore the  people,  at  the  Grat  icgnlar  aaaembly  in  e
_____ ^ . ._ .._ J„


a.  JL  1330  ;  Pdlni,  vi


1  wa
.96 1


prytany.
'lo,  aa
id  (Dem.


body  of  eirvfioC^rai  waa  deprived  of  cdoa
(irfxifortrifiti),  for  the  mkbehanoor  of  dim  oC
their  body :  they  were,  howarar,  reinitaled,  on
promiae  of  better  eondnet  for  the  Aitnre.

With  reapect  to  the  later  af«a  of  Athenian
hiitory,  we  Wm  from  Strabo  (ii.  I),  that  evan
in  hia  day,  the  Romana  alloiied  the  bwdoa
of  Athena  ;  and  we  may  eondnda  that  the  Athe-
niana  would  fondly  cling  to  a  name  aad  office
aatociatcd with lome of  their  moat chaiibad


light  expect  &om  the  analogy  of  tiie  comolate  at
tlome  }  and,  indeed,  we  leam  that  it  wai  aome-
tlmei  filled  by  itiangcn,  ai  Hadrian  and  Phrtarcb.
Such,  moreoTCT,  wai  the  demacralical  tendency  of
the  aaaembly  and  oourta  of  juatice  aatabliahed
by  Solon,  that,  even  in  eaiiier  timea,  the  archcoa
had  loet  the  grrnt  political  power  which  tfa^  mt
one  time  poiKiHd  (Thuc  L  126),  and  tiiat,  tao^
after  (he  diviiion  of  their  functisai  ammgit  niiMi.
They  became,  in  fact,  not  ai  of  aid,  directon  of  tha
government ;  but  merely  municipal  magiatratea,
eierciiing  fanctiont  and  bearing  CJtiea  which  w*
will  proceed  to  deicribc

It  haa  been  already  ■Eated,  that  tha  dntiea  of  the
•ingle  archon  were  iharcd  by  a  college  of  lune.
The  fint  or  pieiidenl  of  thii  body  waa  called
t  tpx'"!  ^3  '"'V  "f  pn-emiDenoo  j  and  Mmrtimr*


ABCRON.

ta  tbe  jeei  being  diatrngnUTied
hii  I»m«.  The  Kcond  vu
a^tel  *  jJxHjfa,  tr  the  king  mlnn  ;  the  third,
t  '•A^MpX'ti  or  cBomiaDdeT-in-ctaief  ;  ibe  nmain-
■gahCtWif^BtraSorltgabture.  Airegardithe
*KiM  •(  th*  iRbonk  it  ia  loiiMtimM  diflicolt  to
cm  indiTidmltj


■Bi^


collectiTrir. It  ■> ,
'>  utim  cf  the  Jndickl  fimeticau  of
kng*  darohed  npca  tbe  ^nilOD  £Jpa-


laMacUv  of  than  who  wm  mwU*  to  defend  them-
mtmm.  (Dm  a  MsDr.  Viitn,  p,  1076 ;  PoUnx,
im.  U.) TbM  ha  bid  to  npetlntcnd  oiphuu

it  J{(pi|fia4ftniM),  widom
MS  ^t  tbcy  wetv  not
SboDM  n7  me  do  w,  be
t  B»  nf  a  cettaiik
itolTBL  Heinoea,
■  tn  hwra  baen  oadcr  hii  pecnliar
«1B>;  &r  wa  ami  (Dan.  a.  Moear.  p.  1IK9),
th«  ha  eaild  covpal  tba  next  of  kin  either  to
■^n  ■  pear  kiiM  bnnwlf,  eTen  Ihoiigfa  ihs  weie
«f  s  la^i  (faa,  <x  to  portico  her  in  muriue  to
!■  -'  Apia  we  Sod  (td.  p.  105fi  ; Pidlox,

«^  <3)  that,  whan  ■  penm  cbimad  an  inhe-
■itiaee  ar  hanaa  adjudge]  to  otben^  ha  nmi-
■aaeri  the  jBtj  m  iinairwinn  before  the  aiebon
^■■jVHB  CEnimwiii)  who  laooght  Ibe  ate  into
oaart,  ^id  Bade  ■mcgemtnt*  tai  VfiaB  the  init.
W«  BMrt,  howaiar,  bw  in  miDd  that  tail  aotho-
li^  waa  aatj  cnnMed  in  caaea  wbcM  tba  pvtiea

*■«■  whan  the  hima  ««•  an  aliea.  ItnuMalao
ha  ^afaalood  tha^  ocept  in  -nrj  few  cnaea,  lbs
M^aoa  Ad  nat  decida  thauelTca,  bot  nwnljr
hii^hl  ihi  auMa  Ud  omt,  and  aat  Iota  fir  the
^■■aan  whe  wse  to  tiy  die  iMDa.  (Dem.  e.
Jlkiah.  n.  f.  I1S6.>  Another  dntj  of  the  arcbom
■wa  *•  leeen*  <I>»ry«ikfai  (Harpocr.  j,  c),  or  in-
^matim»  faalt  indindBsl*  who  had  wnmgtd
kanaaa,  ehUfCB  who  had  mallrcatad  tbdi  parenta,
^■lAiBa  -wkt  ^d  nagleeted  or  dafanded  tbeir
■Mifc  (ir^Hirii  «naXV">  7«^"^.  *)i^M'fli'.
Dtn.  c  iraar.  p^  1069  ;  Sdrihnann,  p.  181.)  In<
ftoMiiHB  of  anMMi  kind,  the  M«{tr  and  ^u,
wm»  alaa  laid  beCna  tba  mnynmi,  tbcn^  De-
■■theaea  (&  TiiMir.  p.707)  a«gned  tbe  finwr
to  ih*  thaaagthetna,  (SHDHXia.)  The  hat  office
^  Ac  Mdm  which  we  ihall  mentka  waa  ol  s
aa*4  (hanKier ;  weiDoda  to  hii  twerintendaMa
if  du  neater  Dionjna  and  the  ThaigeliB,  tbe
hB*9  lehLiatiid  m  hoMiT  <rf  Apalla  and  Artemii.

The  (aartiiM  of  the  ^affiXeir^  or  Kiag  At^hki,

ware  akuat  all  eneBccted  with  religion:  bii  dia-
fago^Bg  tide  alunn  that  he  wai  cnuidersd  ■
■McaenlMin  of  the  dd  kingi  in  their  capaciQ'  of
hagb  MhM,  ai  the  Res  Saoifienhia  vu  U  Rmne.
Tfca  Papcerideiatt^  Lenaean,  or  older  Dionj™;
■i^afiafeBdad  (ha  mnterie*  and  ttie  gsms  c^ed
A^mfcfaptai,  and  had  to  o9er  np  mrificea  and
■M^ia  in  the  Bloniam,  bolh  at  Athena  and


iCfMced  that  iha  ihonld  be  a


ARCHON.

n  of  {am  blood.  witboDt  itain  a


133


BaeiKivt  ami.  (Dem.  c  Laer.  p.  940  ;  e.  A»-
drot.  p.  601  ;  cNeaer.  p.  1S70;  Lfiiaa,  e.Andoa.
p.  1 03,  where  the  dotiea  are  enmnetated  ;  Elmiley,
Ad  JnXcfii.  JsJtar.  I  US,  et  Scholia ;  Hupocr.  lc
•Ei-i/wAirriJi  Tw  iBHmipUiT  [  Plato,  EaOfjiir,
ad  iniL  el  TTnael.  ad  fin,  -,  Polhu,  Tiii.  80.)

The  Po^enorok  wv  originallj,  aa  hii  name  diy
notei,  the  coDunander-in^ciiief  (Hend.  ri.  109,
111  i  PeUiiz,  viiL  91)  ;  and  we  find  him  dia-
cbaiging  military  dutiea  aa  late  ai  the  battle  of
HaiMhoD,  in  conjunctioa  with  tbe  ten  arfcirriyal :
he  that  took,  like  the  kinga  of  old,  the  eonunand  of
the  right  wing  of  the  army.  Tbia,  howereT,  leema  to
be  the  lait  otcaiion  on  record  of  ttu*  muiatiMe  ap-
pointed bj  lot,  being  inreated  with  nch  important
Weticni ;  and  in  after  am  wa  find  that  Ui
dntiea  ceMed  to  be  militBrj,  baTing  been  m  a  gnat
meaatue  trBoafeiied  to  tbe  ptotection  and  lopenit-
tendence  of  the  rendent  alieni,  >a  that  he  resembled
innunjrapectathopcaetorpeiegTiiitiiatRome.  Id
fae^  we  learn  frnn  AJiitotle,  in  hit  "  ConatitDtion  of
Athene,"  that  tbe  pdemarch  Mood  m  the  aama
relation  to  fbtvignera  aa  the  aicEion  to  citiaeni.
(Demoath.  e.  Lacr.  p.  940  ;  Ariat.  ^nd  Harpocr.
i.e.;Pollmc,Tiil01,93.)  Thni,  all  actions  aSint-
ing  alien*,  the  iaotetes  and  proTeDi,  were  brooght
b^ore  him  prerimah  to  tnai ;  aa,  for  initanc^
the  Ilaii)  iTpaaraalBr  apinat  a  fbrdgner,  for
Irring  in  Athena  withont  a  patron ;  ao  waa  alt*
the  nmr  iwaanrina  againit  a  ilare  who  Uled  in
hia  dntj  to  the  maater  who  bad  freed  turn.  More-
OTfT,  it  waa  the  ndemaich'a  doty  to  offisr  the
jearij  taciifice  to  Attemla,  in  eranmeincantion  of
the  TOW  made  bf  Callimacba^  at  Mnni^^'iin.  and
to  Bnange  the  faneial  gamea  in  booont  of  tbcee
who  Mi  in  war.  Tbeae  three  uebona,  tba
iwirv/iot,  ^ao'jAf^,  and  iroX4fiaflx_M,


with  tba  adminiatration  of  jnatice,  and  appear  t(
here  been  nOed  legiaUton  (Tbiriwall,  Hii.  if
Ontca,  ToL  ii.  p.  17),  becauie  in  the  abience  of  a
written  code,  the;  might  be  aaid  to  make  lawi,  or
itriul,  in  ib»  auaent  langoage  of  Athena,
thongb  in  nalitj  tbe;  only  declared  and  ex-
plained tbem.  They  wen  required  to  review,
OToy  year,  the  whole  body  of  lam,  that  they
rakbl  detect  any  iDconaiateneiea  or  nipetSiiitiea,
and  di»eo*er  whether  any  lava  which  were  abro-
gated wen  in  the  pahlic  recorda  amongiC  the  retL
(Aeachia  e.  Qagai.  p.  B9.)  Tbeirieport  waa  lab-
mitted  la  the  pnple,  who  refemd  the  neceaaary
ahaiBtiona  to  •  IwialatJTe  eonunitlee  ehcaen  tia
thaparpoa^  and  caflad  rv/iMTai,

The  chief  part  of  the  dutiei  of  the  tbeamothelae
ommated  in  receiving  infonnatkniB,  and  brmging
taaea  to  trial  in  the  court*  of  law,  of  tbe  daya  of
aitting  in  which  they  gave  public  notice.  (Ptjlox,
viiL  87,  88.)  They  did  not  try  them  IheDiaelTei  j
but  aeem  to  bave  conatitated  a  aort  of  grand  jury,
or  inqniat.  Thni  they  received  Mflftn  againit
patties  who  bad  not  paid  their  fines,  or  owed  any
motley  to  the  state ;  and  in  debult  of  bringiiw
the  fbnner  partiea  to  ttial,  they  lott  tbeir  right  M
gtiag  np  to  tbe  Areiopagna  st  the  end  of  theii  year
of  office.  (Dem.  e.  Meid.  p.  539 ;  t.  Moear.  p.
107S;  o.TlHioBr.707;  BHckta,  vol  L  p.  S9.  yoL  ii.
p.73.) Ai  - '-'■-


13*  ARCHON.

(flgpwi  Tpa^ol)  were  lud  before  tbam,  u  well  u
infgnniti


c  grower!,  ft


B  °P


...  ■  bUow  , ,

b7  law.  So,  loo,  wen  tbe  indictmenti  for  bribing
tho  Helioa,  or  iiaj  of  ihs  couiU  of  jnitke  at
Atheni,  01  the  lenMe,  or  fonning  clubi  for  the
oreithniiv  of  the  demooscj',  and  ogaiiut  retained
■dvDCStet  (oivl^Topoi)  who  took  brib«  either  in
public  DT  prints  caoKi.  Aaaio,  an  infomutiaa
wai  laid  before  them  if  a  ftscigaEi  cohabited  with


a  gate  m  murioga


daughter  the  child  of  anothi
adulterer  one  who  wa*  not  k.  The;  alio  had  ta
jeier  information  (titrryy^^lai)  to  the  people ;
and  where  an  infbnnation  had  been  laid  before  the
■enate,  and  a  condemnation  eniued,  it  wu  their
duty  to  bring  the  judgment  into  Ibe  courti  of
juilico  tor  coD&rraalioa  or  retiiion.  (Dem.  c.  Sbjik.
U  p.  1137;  0.  l^BKr.  pp.  13A],  1363,  UGH,
0.  Hmocr.  p.  720  ;  Pollui,  viiL  B8  ;  BBckh,  ToL  L
pp.  359.  317.)

A  di^erent  office  of  thcirt  wai  to  dnw  up  and
raiiSj  the  aiiitof^  or  agreement*,  with  foreign
atatoo,  lettling  the  Icrmi  on  which  their  citiieni
ohould  lue  and  be  med  bj  the  citticni  of  Athene.
In  theii  cdlectiie  capocilj,  the  archoni  are  said  to
have  bod  the  power  of  death  in  ca*c  an  exile  re-
turned to  an  interdicted  phice :  ihcy  alto  nperin-
tended  the  foiXfifoTovfu  of  the  magiitnilei,  held
e»eij  prylany  {iwiftrrAiri  *i  leatt  uaXit  8(^ii*),
and  brought  to  trnl  thoee  whom  the  people  de-
poeed,  if  an  action  or  indictment  were  the  eon-
■equence  of  it.  Honorer,  the;  allotted  the  dicaita
or  joiymen,  and  probably  pieeided  at  the  annual
election  of  the  itiategi  and  other  military  officer!.
(Pollni,tiiL  87,88 ;  Harpocr.i.  e.  Kcrfox<4W"*'":
SchHmanu,  p.  S31 ;  Dem.  c  Arii.  p.  630.)

We  may  hen  remark,  that  il  ii  neoenary
to  be  canCioui  in  our  inlorpretatioii  of  the  wordi
ifX^I  and  llfxo>^<><  line*  it  'he  Attic  oraton
they  have  a  double  meaaing,  (ometimea  refer-
ring to  the  aichoDI  peculiarly  lo  called,  and
aometiizia  to  any  other  magiRiacy.  Tfaui  in
Inctu  (Z>>  Qeonfmi  Haend.)  we  might  on  a
cnnory  pemaal  ii^er,  that  when  a  teatator  left
hii  property  any  from  hii  heir-at-law,  by  what
wai  technically  oUltd  a  iiaii  (Uarpocr.  j.  e. /
laBcul,  wr^  K\4tp9r\  the  archon  took  the  original
will  into  cuitody,  and  wai  required  to  be  prcacnt
at  the  nuking  <^  any  addition  or  codkil  to  it  A
more  accuiate  obaerratiim  proTea  that  by  I't  r&r
(k^X''"'*'  >■  nieant  one  Ot  the  iirrw^i,  who
fotined  a  magiitni^  (Vx4)  ai  well  ai  tho  nine
anhoQi.

A  fiiw  wordi  will  eniflce  for  the  priTilegea  and
henoun  of  the  ardioua  The  f;raiteit  of  the  fbraiei
waa  the  eiemption  from  the  irieiarchiea  —  a  boon
not  allowed  erea  to  the  incceuan  of  Harmodini
and  Ariilogeiton.  A)  a  mark  of  their  office,  they
wore  a  ehaplet  or  sown  of  myrtle ;  and  if  any
one  gtnick  or  abnied  one  of  the  thcamothelae  m-
the  archon,  whan  wearing  thii  badge  of  office,  he
became  irifiat,  or  iuiamoua  in  the  liilleat  eilent,
thereby  loting  hii  civic  righta.  (Bdckh,  toL  iL
p.  322  i  Dem.  a.  J,tpL  pp.  4<>2, 4fil,  t6£,  o.  Afeiif.
p.fi24;  Pollui,  TiiLSe.)  Theaichoua,  at  thedoaa
of  their  year  of  icmce,  were  admitted  among  tho
memben  of  the  Areic^xigua. [AuioPAoua.]

Tbe  Archon  Eponymui  being  an  annnal  magie-
tiate  at  Athena,  like  the  coniul  at  Rome,  it  ig
nwnifot  that  a  oocrect  liM  of  the  aichont  ii  an


ARcna .

rmportant  element  la  tbe  detenaination  of  Athe-
nian chrenolegy.  Naw&omOvoa(&c681),  tba
finl  annual  ardion,  to  Comiat  (a.  C.  560),  we  baia
the  name*  of  abtmt  twenty-finr.  Frmn  B.C.  £60
to  the  iuTaiion  of  Xenei  (a.  c  480),  the  namea
and  yean  of  aboat  tweo^-fbor  moa  hara  beat
determined,  from  B.  c  480  to  293,  Diodonia  and
DilmynDi  HaUcanuura  fonuih  an  alnoat  mi~
bmken  nuaiuoii  for  a  period  of  neariy  200  joui.
The  namea,  so  far  a*  &BJ  an  known,  are  girea  bj
Clinton  {F.  H.\  who  lemaiki  that  the  eompileT
of  the  Parian  maiblea  placea  the  annnal  areboni  ona
y«c  too  high  reepectively.  He  alio  Matei  (vol.  ii.
p.  12)  that  tbe  be>t  litt  ii  that  of  Ccnini,  wba
howoTerii  eurpaued  hy  Woaeling  within  the  period
embraced  by  tbe  nmaint  of  Diofima.  [ILW.]
ARCHO'NES  {ipxirnt).  [Tklonu.]
ARCIFl'NIUS  AOER.  [Aau.]
ARCUS  <a]M  fonia,  Viig.  Asl  tI.  611  g  Cic
Dt  Vrrt,  i.  7  i  Koidpa),  an  arch.  It  ji  poauble  b>
give  an  arched  form  Co  the  covering  of  any  opening
by  placing  horizcoital  coumea  of  itonee  |njectijig
oTcr  one  another,  from  both  tides  of  the  opening,
till  they  meet  at  top,  and  then  cntting  the  ends  of
the  projecting  itonea  to  a  regular  curve,  as  ihowit
below.  This  f<Km  ii  foond  in  the  moat  ancient
orchitectara  of  marly  all  oatioai,  but  it  doee  not
conitilute  a  tme  arch.  A  true  arch  ii  fenned  of
a  ieri»  of  wedge-like  atanea,  or  of  bricks,  support-
ing eacb  other,  and  aU  botind  fiinlj  togetber  bj
their  mutual  pnsiura.

Il  would  Mem  that  the  aceh,  ai  IhiB  defined,
and  as  used  by  tbe  Romans,  waanot  known  la  tha
Greeks  in  the  eariy  periods  of  their  history,  olimD-
wise  a  language  so  copious  as  theirs,  and  of  snch
nsdy  appIimtiDn,  would  not  have  wanted  a  name
property  Greek  by  which  to  diitingnisb  it.  But
Iho  conttmctiTe  principle,  by  which  an  anh  ia
made  to  hold  together,  and  to  affiird  a  aolid  n-
listonce  against  the  preunre  npon  its  circnmlfTeBce,
waa  known  to  them  even  previously  to  the  Trfjan
war,  and  its  use  ii  aiempliGed  in  two  of  tba
(ariieat  baildtngs  now  remaining  —  the  chanb^
built  at  OrchomenUB,  by  Minyas,  lung  of  Boaotia,
described  by  Paosauioi  (iz.  88),  and  the  ttwsarr
of  Atieui  at  Mycenae.  <Pani.  ii.  IS.)  Both
these  works  are  constructed  nnder  groand,  and
each  of  them  couusts  of  a  circular  chamber  brmed
by  regular  counca  of  itonea  laid  horiaontally  ovor
each  other,  sub  conne  projecting  towards  the  in-
terior, and  beyond  the  one  below  it,  till  they  meat
in  an  ^lei  over  the  centre,  which  waa  cai^ied  by  »
large  itone,  and  thus  resembled  tbe  iuide  (^  a
domo.  Each  of  the  horizontal  eouraes  of  stonea
formed  a  perfect  circle,  or  two  sanidnular  anhea
joined  together,  as  the  rabjained  plan  of  one  of
these  couriea  will  render  evident

Il  will  be  obaerved  that  the  Imennott  aid  oC
each  stone  is  bevelled  oiF  into  tha  ihape  of  •  wedoo,
tbe  apex  of  which,  if  costinDed,  vooU  meet  in  Um
centre  of  the  circle,  as  ii  done  in  finning  an  arch  ;
while  the  outer  ends  against  lbs  earth  are  left  rough,
and  their  interstice*  Glled  np  with  smatl  iiT^niUr-
■bl^>ed  tlonca,  the  immense  iioe  of  the  principal
stones  rendering  it  anneeesssiy  to  eentinne  ths
sectional  cutting  throughout  thur  whole  length.
Indeed,  if  these  chamben  bad  been  constmcted
upon  any  other  principle,  it  ti  dear  tbat  the  prea-
suro  of  earth  all  around  tbem  would  have  canaad
them  la  collapse.  Tha  method  of  o
hera  deacribed  was  communinUad  to  tha  w


ARcna.

■f  Ue  iKoFirt  utidt  bj  tliB  bte  Sir  WiHina
G*\L  Thni  it  leau  that  the  Oteeki  did  anda-
ffond  the  cuumuctiye  principle  upoa  which  arehn


n  in  the  eariieit  tinit* ;  ilthongb

It  to  tbem  to  diiide  the  circle  by  a

i  the  half  of  it  upright  to  bear  «


ihn  woe  ovlilrd  to  gain  all  theadnnlsgei  of  our
auBaj  in  makiiig  conidtn,  at  hollDir  ^sUeria,
^>d  *bieh  in  appannce  naetnbled  the  pointed
Btck,  mA  ai  ti  DOW  tenned  Oothic  Thi*  wu
tfccied  bj  nmbiB  awa;  the  nipmiiciunbenl  itanea
■  tke  wanfr  ^readjr  deacribed,  at  an  angle  of
■bawl  15^  wHh  the  hoiioiL  The  mode  of  cou-
aamclita  and  appeannee  of  inch  anhei  ii  repre-
B>atad  in  the  anneied  drawing  of  the  walli  of
Tiiyna,  cotried  fiom  Sir  Williun  Oell*!  ArgDlit.
TW  fate  of  Signia  (•S^pm)  in  l^tiiun  exhibit)  a


The  prineiide  of  the  tnw  anh  leem*  to  hare
k^  known  to  the  Romaa  fnto  the  earlieit
fB^ti :  i%  a  Died  in  the  Cfoaea  Maiima.  It  11
^atl  |««hablj  an  Etnucan  inrention.  The  ua  of
~  1  one  kadinp  dittinetian  between
jiilectiiie,  for  by  iti  qiplica-
«  enabled  to  eiecate  "woAm
tf  te  bdlK  wiWiwIim  tten  tbon  of  the  Oiedu


ARCUS  TRIUMPHALIS.

i  hridgei  and  aqnedi


125

id  Ibe  matt


durable  and  muiire  itiunuro of  brick.
Ramsng,  however,  never  need  an;  other  form  of
arch  than  the  aeniicircla.  [A.  R.]

ARCUS  TRIUMPHA'LIS(ii  triumphal  orchX
wai  a  atmctuie  pecoliar  to  the  Roraana,  among
whom  it  aeemi  to  have  taken  ita  origin  from  the
Porta  TtiMmpioiU^  the  gate  b;  which  a  general
celebrating  a  thurnpb  led  hii  annjinlo  the  city,  on
which  occaaioDi  the  gate  wai  adorned  with  trophiei
and  other  memoriali  of  the  particular  rictoiy  cste-
biated.  In  proceai  of  time  other  archei  wers
erected,  both  at  Rome  and  in  the  prorinoei,  to
celebrate  lingle  Tictoriei,  the  menwriali  of  which
were  carred  upon  tbem  or  fixed  to  tiiem,  and  theia
-  ■ ' '  They  eren

Tictory  for


■L"'^'


at  Anconn,  for  example,  wni  erected  in
Trajan,  when  be  bad  improved  the  bar
city  at  fail  own  expenae.

Trimnphal archei were inioUtsd
bniH acroit the principal itreet*  of  the
and,  according  to  the  apace  of  their
localities,  conitited  of  either  a  lingle


That
honour  of
mir  of  tha


of  a


antral  0


the apace of  their  retpectiTe


onei  on  each  lide  for  toot  pauengen,  i
■ometimea  have  tide  communicstioni  with  the
centre  arch.  Sonetiniei  there  were  two  arciiei  of
etjnal  height,  aide  by  lide.  Each  ftnnt  wai  ena-
mcnted  with  Irophiee  and  ba*-relicft,  which  were
aln  placed  on  the  lidea  of  the  [oangei.  Bath
fiipadei  had  aiually  cohunni  against  the  piera^
Bnpporting  an  entablatuie,  utnioiuited  by  a  lofty
attic,  on  the  front  of  wluch  wai  the  inicription,
and  on  the  top  of  it  bronia  eharioti,  war-honei,
italnet,  and  Cropbiei.

Slertiniui  ig  Ibo  fint  npon  re<nid  who  erected
any  thing  of  the  kind.  He  bnilt  an  anb  in  the
Pomm  Baarinm,  aboat  B.  c  196,  and  another
in  the  Circni  Haiimoi,  each  of  which  wai  nir-
moonted  by  gilt  itataes.  {Liv.  ixiiiL  27.)  Six
yon  aflerwarda,  Scipio  AEncanoi  bnilt  another  on
the  Clirni  Capitnlinui,  on  which  he  placed  teren
figurei  of  borsea  (Lit.  xxxviL


S)!


.  121,


fourth  in  the  Via  Sacm,  which  ii  called  by  Cicero
(ia  Terr,  i  7)  the  Fomim  Fabiaim.  None  of
Uieia  remain,  the  Arch  of  Aoguitui  at  Rimini
being  one  of  the  earijett  among  those  itOl  itand-
ing.  Thai  theae  ercMioni  were  either  tsmpoiary
or  very  inaignifiant,  may  be  inferred  frun  the
■ilence  of  VitmTiua,  who  aBTi  nothing  of  triompbal
archca.  We  might  be  Rare,  from  the  nature  of
(he  caie,  that  loch  itructnrea  would  opedally
marie  the  period  of  the  empire.

There  are  twenty-ono  aichci  recorded  by  dif-
ferent writen  u  having  been  erected  in  the  city
of  Rome,  five  of  which  now  remain :  —  1.  ^mri
Dnui,  which  jnt  erected  to  the  honour  of  Nero
Claodiua  Dnmu  on  the  Awi™  vay.  (SuPt.
Cbaid.  1.)  S.  Areui  Titi,  at  the  foot  of  the
Palatine,  which  wai  erected  to  the  bononi  nf
ritni,  after  hii  conqaat  of  Jodaeo,  bnt  was  not
finished  tilt  after  hit  death  j  titia  in  the  inscrip-
tion npon  it  ho  ia  called  Dnm,  and  he  is  aiio
represented  as  being  carried  np  to  heaven  npon  an
eagle.  The  bas-rdieb  of  tbii  arch  represent  the
snoili  &om  the  temple  of  Jeruvlcm  carried  in
trimnphal  tnceauou  ;  and  an  amonR  tlw  beat


126  ARCUS.

tpecimou  o{  Roman  acnlptun.  Ttui  ucb  hu
diilj  B  ■iB^e  cqtaiing,  with  two  cddTnnu  of  iht
Ramui  or  ovnpantB  aider  on  each  lide  of  it.  S,
Aran  S^mii  Smmi,  irhkh  vu  enctad  bj  tfas
■entte  (a.  d,  20;i}  M  the  and  of  the  Via  Saoa,
in  honour  of  that  onpem'  and  hii  two  Koa,
Canualla  and  Oeta,  m  accoant  of  hi*  Tictoriea
OTCT  thi  PacthuwB  and  Arabiaiu.  i.  Amu  Gal-
liimi,  ended  to  the  hononr  of  Galliean  bj  a  pii-
Tate  iadlTidlul, H.  Anleliui  Victor. &.  Arau


AREIOFAOUa


Oautamtiia,  which  i>  larger  and  n


It  n


"■W  than  the  Aich  of  Titoi.
erected  b;  the  uoate  in  honoai  of  Cmutantine,
after  hie  Yictorj  crer  Haxen^oa.  It  conaiiti  of
thiw  aiehn,  with  ailimmi  againit  each  front,  and
■tatnea  on  the  eatablatnn*  over  them,  which,  with
the  other  ■cnlptitred  ornaioenta,  ocigint^y  ds-
coiated  the  arch  of  Tiajan.  [P- S.)

ARCUS  (M'<  riiar),  (he  bow  naed  for  ■hoot-
ing aiTOwa,  ii  oue  irf  the  moat  ancient  rf  all  wea-
pon!, bnt  ii  chaiaeteriatk  of  Aiia  mlhar  than  of
Eniope.  Thtu  in  the  deioiptian  giren  by  Hcro-
dotoa  (tIL  61 — 80)  of  the  nrioui  nationi  com-
poainE  (he  amy  of  XenM,  we  obaerro  that  nearij
all  ue  tm^  withmit  eioeplion  Ued  the  bow.
The  S^thiaui  and  Partbiui  wen  the  mnt  cele-
bnUd  aithan  in  the  Eaat,  and  among  the  Oie«ki
the  Cntani,  who  fiaqnmll;  ttimA  aa  a  aepante
cofpa  in  the  Gnak  aimiea,  and  anbaeqiienllj  aju
among  the  auilkry  ttomi  of  the  Romani.  (Cam]k
Xen.  Aa-di.  12.99;  Lit.  ilii.  35.)

The  Sdrm  of  the  Scythian  and  Paithuui  bow
difiered  from  that  of  the  Gneki.  The  frainer  wai
in  the  abua  of  a  half-moon,  and  ii  ihown  in  tha
□pper  of  the  two  figurea  hen  exhibited,  which  u
taken  &Dm  one  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton'i  fictile  Taaea.
(Camp.  Amm.  Marc  niL  8.)  The  Oieek  bow,on
the  other  hand,  the  ninal  form  of  which  ii  ahown


middle  (r^x"')-  According  to  the  dcecrip-
tion  in  Homer  (II.  W.  106—128),  the  bow  win
made  of  two  piccaof  bom,  hence  frequcntl;  called
ir/|Wf  and  ODnut.  The  bow-itring  (nupa)  waa
twialed,  and  wai  firqucntly  made  of  diongi  of
leather  (riiipa  piiia).  It  waa  alwan  Eulened  '
one  end  of  the  bow,  and  at  the  other  end  thi
hon;  a  ring  or  Took  (cop^n)),  luually  made
metal  ixfi"^^)t  to  which  the  Atiing  wu  attached,
when  the  bow  waa  to  be  uicd.  Tn  the  HDu
aigc  of  Homer  we  bare  a  deicripdoa  of  a
ireporing  to  ihnot,  and  thli  account  i«  illtutrated


b;  the


tollowi


When  not  nied,  the  bow  waa  pat  into  a  <•■•
(rofoMnli  ytupirris,  Omyliii),  which  wai  made  at
lather,  and  lometimei  ornamented  f^ofiFdr,  Horn,
Od.  xxi.  £4).  The  bow-caie  it  TEiy  coiujuctiooa
in  tha  acolptored  baa-ieliefa  of  Penepotii.  It
frequently  held  the  bitows  at  well  ai  the  bow,
and  on  thu  account  ia  often  conlbunded  with  the
Piarrttra  or  quiTer,  Thoorii  iti  lue  vtai  cotn-
patatiiely  rare  among  the  Oreeka  and  Romana,


ARDA'LIOK  (IpMiuor). [FuhdilI

A'REA. [AonicDLTDaa,  p.  U.J

ABEIO'PAOUS.  The  Acaiopagu(J'AfMioT
wiiTiit,  or  hill  of  Area},  at  Athena,  wai  a  rocky
eminence,  lying  to  tha  weit  o!,  and  not  br  from  the
AcTopdia.  To  Bcconnt  (or  tha  luune,  wiona  atone*
weretdd.  Thai,umeHid thatit waaaocalledfroin
the  Amaxoni,  tha  daughter!  of  Ana,  haiing  encamped
there  when  the^  attacked  Athena  ;  othect  again,  aa
Aetchyloa,  from  the  Muri£ce>  there  o&red  by  thero
to  that  god  ;  while  the  more  receired  spiniDa  con-
nected tha  nama  with  the  legend  of  Area  harii^
been  bnmght  to  trial  then  by  Poaeidon,  for  tho
murder  of  hia  ion  Haliirhotina.  (Dem.  e.  Ariatocr,
p.  6iS ;  AeichyL  Eum.  659.)  To  none,  however.
of  theae  legenda  did  the  pbce  owe  ita  fame,  bot
nUher  to  the  eounea  ("H  Ir  'Apit^  tirrr  *«>A*>,
whiA  held  ita  liltinga  ihaie,  and  wh  tMnMinai


AREIOPAGUS.
eaUcd  "B  bm  BtAi,  to  diitinguiih  it  fmn  tbe

■  I  Mil  iif  FhE  Hnodnd,  which  nt  id  the  Cerameiciu
withn  tke  dtj.  That  it  vu  >  bodj  of  nrj  remote
astiqaiiT,  acliog  u  ■  criminal  tribunal,  wu  en-
itatij  bdiered  hj  the  AthcniMU  tbemKlTee.  In
fnaf  of  tlua,  wc  may  re&r  la  the  eipreia  uaertioDi
of  tb*  MMon,  and  (he  Ie«id  of  Or«ta  baTing
bna  triad  bafas  tba  eonnol  fbr  the  mnrder  of  hu

■  ntt  J — a  total  irtikh  took  plau  befoie  Athena,
^■i  vhkfa  Aeachjtoa  repnaeoti  w  the  orisin  of

-■■-•■ e  find  that  ^  '


' (B.


740) 1


H ^Boiana  odnd  to  nicr  the  pointi  in  dapnte  to
the  Af|pT<e  Amphidioiij,  or  the  AtbmiaiL  Areio-
pUM  (Pan.  i*.  5.  f  Ij  Thiriwsll,  HitL  Gnetx,
t«l.  L  B.  S45),  beooie  thii  body  vu  believed  to
bare  bad  jniiidietiao  in  eaMa  of  manibnghter
<aiaf  f«^),  "from  of  old."

Tkn  ii  nifficiait  pioo^  thm,  that  tho  At«ii^-
faa  okted  before  the  time  of  Solon,  though  he  ii
■^~J"*^  to  han  to  bi  modified  it>  csnitimtion
aad  ifboe  of  dntj,  that  he  might  almoit  be  called
ba  fc^ier.  What  that  anginal  conitilaUon  wu,
M  degree  be  left  to  conjecture,  though
'  nippoae  that  it  wai
.  being  taken,  liko
■ke  Epbeiae,  from  tbe  iwble  patrician  bmiliei
^a^iTiity).  We  m^  remaik  that,  after  the  time
if  SaJn,  tbe  Ephetae,  fifty-one  in  nunber,  ast
—"-'*■— Jy  in  four  different  cmirta,  and  were
ebB;t*d  witb  tbe  heating  of  -  Rich  cuea  of  acci-
dcBBl  IT  jmlifalilii  homicide  a*  admitted  of  or  re-
mand ecpiaticB,  befon  the  accoied  could  naimie
the  art  and  relipow  lighti  he  had  loat:  a  re-
■■i^liia  impoaaibie  m  aaei  of  wilfal  mnrder,  the
^^tal  pasiahmail  far  which  emild  otdj  be  eicq)ed
br  baiiiihiia  iil  lor  life,  ao  that  no  expiation  wai
nq^cdwgiTML  (MQller,  £■««.§  £4  ;Pollu,
TuL  I2S.)  No*  dke  Ephetaa  fiHrna-lr  adminii-
tacA  jartiee  m  five  eoarta,  and  tar  thia  and  ether
Ml  -»  il  lua  Wwn  nniM4wcd  that  thn  and  the
e  emut,  wbi^  dedded


naUc


.» 1.^  — — », KT  wilM  sa  occidentaL

ft  of  thia  -new,  it  hu  been  urged  that  the
Mitinn  af  fnnctiniB  *u  rendend  neceuory  by
t  cfcanga  it  Solou  which  made  the  Aieiapagui
laaigB  aa  ariitaaaiic  body,  whQe  ibe  Ephetoe
MJaiil  B^  aod  aa  nch  were  competent  to  ad-
lirtcT  tba  rigbla  of  ei[riatiim,  foimmg,  ai  tbey
,  a  fart  of  tu>  laend  law  of  Alheiu,  uid  there-
e  feft  ia  the  handa  of  the  old  patrieiana,  eren
K  tka  loaa  of  their  political  prinfegea.  On  thia
' 'lat  the  connectian  inoiited


.  IJ  reman,  that  the  connectuin  moxted
I  a  great  extort  be  trae  ;  but  that  there
,  raaqilitn  identiq'  of  fimctioiu  ii  proTed
A  (JSobm.  t,  19),  in  a  qnotation  from  the


lBI«b  (JSobm.  t,  19),  in  a  qnotation  frtini  the
of  Saba,  abowing  thateren  belixa  tbat  Ir^io-
iIm  AfHfagite*  and  Ephetoe  wen  in  tome


a  the  article  Abchon,

_,__.,  „  d  by  Solon  in

^m  aaaotitstiBn  of  Athoia,  va*  to  make  the  qnali-
&aawa  teirfBoa  depend  not  m  Urth  butifoperty  -,
oIm  ibat.ajiiiaUj  In  hii  iiiriaim.  Ihii  iiiiiiiiiiihiniii.
^hv  M  ■nemplkaalb  diicbaige  of  tbdr  dntiei,
*  w^±  ■!> "  t*  tbe  Aiaopagoa,  and  became  mem-
h^  af  it  tir  tife^  mlf  eipelled  for  miwinduet.
(Tii  iia I f-  ■-'  I  "T  ■  Fhil.&iJ:e,lS.)
TW  ta— [J  Ikn,  after  hia  time,  oeaaed  I
;  bat,ai  we  learn
w  in  apirit la  &ct,


n  is  Kud  to  hare  fonned  the  two  eoimdta,  the
ite  and  the  Areioragni,  to  he  a  check  npon  tho
loctoc;  ;  that,  ai  he  himoelf  eipreased  it,  "  the
■tatc,  ridiog  upon  tiiem  aa  anchora,  might  be  Ibm
toued  by  ■toims.'*  Nay,  oren  after  Uie  anhoni
were  no  langer  elected  by  loHroge  bnl  by  lot,  end
the  office  wa»  thrown  open  by  Aniteidee  to  all  thi
Athenian  citiz«ni,  the  "  upper  cooncil  **  >tiU  re-
tained iti  fbnner  tone  of  feeling.  We  leani,  in-
deed, from  laoaatei  (Artirip.f.\i7),  that  no  one
woe  >o  bad  aa  not  to  put  off  hia  eld  habiti  on  b»-
comiog  an  Aiwopagite ;  and  though  thli  may  roltf
to  private  rather  than  public  conduct,  we  may  not
■mnuonably  luppose  that  the  political  prindplei
of  the  yoonger  wimld  alnayi  be  modified  by  the
older  and  more  nnmerooi  memben — a  modifieatioa
which,  though  continnally  leu  in  degree,  would
■till  bo  the  oame  in  direction,  and  nuke  the  Aitio-
pagna  what  Peridea  found  it,  a  eounteiae&g  fbiee
to  the  democracy.  MoreoTer,  beiidee  these  imangea
in  it!  Gonititution,  Solon  altered  and  extended  it*
fimctioni.  Beibn  hia  time  it  woi  only  a  criminal
court,  trying  cooei  of  "  wilful  murder  and  wound-
tog,  of  anon  and  poioomng"  {Pollux,  riiu  117  i
Dem.  s.jfrH<.  p.  627),  whereu  he  gaTeit  extengire
powen  of  a  censorial  oxd  poEtita!  nature.  Thns
wB  team  that  he  made  tbe  cmmcol  an  "  oTeneer
of  ererything,  and  tbe  guardian  of  the  tan,"  em-
powpiing  it  to  inquire  how  any  one  got  hit  linng,
and  to  puniah  the  idle.  (Plutarch.  S<Aom.  c.  22  i
lioctc)

We  leain  from  other  autboritiea  that  the
Ardopegitas  were  "  inperiDtendeata  of  good  order
and  decency,"  terms  rather  unlimited  and  unde-
fined, as  it  ia  not  improbable  Solon  wished  to
leave  tlieir  auttiority.  Thare  are,  howerer,  re-
corded some  porticulai  inslancei  of  iti  eicnion.
{Athen.iF.  pp.lB7,i%— lfi8,b.  TLp.2t«,  e.ed.Din-
dorf ;  Pollux,  riiL  1 1 2.)  Thus  we  find  that  they
colled  peroons  to  accoimt  fiir  exHaTOgsnl  and  dls-
sotnte  li<>ing,  and  tliat  too  even  in  tho  later  daya
of  Athenian  hittoiy.  On  the  other  hood,  they  oe.
caiionally  rewarded  remarkable  cases  of  induitiy,
and,  in  company  with  certain  efiicen  called
Tmuwonjfioi,  made  domidliazy  Tisits  at  private  en-
lertainmenta,  to  lee  that  the  number  of  gneala
was  not  too  laiga,  and  also  for  other  purpose*.
But  their  censorial  and  political  autlisrity  wot  not
ctsifincd  to  matten  of  this  snbordinate  chaiacter.
We  leani  from  Ariitotla  (Pint.  Tknu.  c  10 ;  see
Bdckh,  vol.  L  p.  30a),  that  at  the  time  of  the
Median  inTBsiou,  when  there  was  no  money  in
the  public  bvaoury,  the  Ar«iopagus  advanced  eight
drachmae  a  man  to  each  of  the  Bilon— a  statement
which  prarea  that  they  had  a  tnaouiy  of  their
own,  rather  than  any  control  over  the  puhlio
finances,as  some  haTB  mferredfrom  it.  (Thirlwoll,
'HitL  Greeee,  toL  iii  app.  1.)  Agahi,  we  are  told
(Lycuig.  a  Leoc  p.  154)  that  at  the  time  of  tho
banle  of  Chnetoneia,  they  seized  and  put  to  death
thcae  who  deaened  their  country,  and  that  they
were  thought  by  some  to  hare  been  the  chief  pro-
serration  of  Uie  city.

It  is  probable  that  public  opinion  supported
them  in  acts  of  this  kind,  wittumt  the  aid  of  which
they  must  hare  been  powerleu  fbr  any  audi  ob-
jects. In  connection  witb  this  point,  we  may  add
that  when  heinoui  crime*  hod  notorionsly  been
committed,  but  the  guilty  pertici  wen  not  known,
ippcared,  the  Areiopagna  inqnind
,  aod  rqiorted  (ivofa&sir)  to  tba
. ...  ^-, ,  ^^.^


In  tlic  subject,  ai


128  AREIOPAGUS.

dntnu.  Tbe  report  a  iafunnaticin  wu  c&llsd
lari^mini.  Thit  was  ■  daty  which  they  igmetimei
undertook  on  their  own  rcflponaihili^,  and  in  the
exercije  of  an  old-eatahliahed  right,  and  loineuniefl
OB  the  order  of  tbe  demui.  (Deniuch.cZlniLp.97i
SchBmuiD,  Da  Olmiitiii,  p.  217,  tniuL)  Nay,
to  inch  ta  eilent  did  they  cury  thii  power,  thai
on  one  oeoubn  they  i^iprcbendtd  an  indiiidual
(Antiphon)  who  hiid  been  acquitted  by  the
general  Buembly,  and  again  brought  hini  to  a
trial,  which  ended  in  hiB  coodemnatiun  and  death,
(Dem.  Dt  Cor,  pp.  271,  273;  Deinarch.  e.Dem.
p.  98.}  Again,  we  find  them  rerokiiig  an  sppoinl
ment  of  the  people  whereby  Aeacbinei  wai  mad
the  adnKBla  of  Attieiu  bdbre  the  Amphictioni
council,  and  (Dhctitatuig  Hyperidei  in  hit  noD
In  tbeM  two  owet  alia,  they  were  moat  prohahl;
nipponed  by  public  o^ion,  or  by  a  ilniDg  party
in  the  itate. (Dem.  L  c)

They  alio  had  duties  connected  with  reliflion^
one  of  which  waa  to  inperintend  the  nered  (direa
growing  about  Athena,  and  try  thoie  who  wers
charged  with  deatroying  them.  (Lyiiu,  Iltpl  tdC
Xirici>v,  p.  110.)  We  read,  too,  that  in  the  dii-
choige  of  their  duty  fu  nligiout  eetuori,  they  on
one  occaiiou  eiainined  whether  the  wife  of  the
king  archoQ  wu,  aa  required  by  Uw,  an  Athenian  j
and  finding  >fae  wu  not,  impoaed  a  fine  upon  her
htuband.  (Dem.  «.  »««r,  p,  1372.)  We  loam
from  the  nme  pnaooge,  that  it  wu  tbeir  olRce
gcnenlly  to  puniih  the  impioui  and  irrdigiouj.
Again  we  ar«  tdd,  though  rather  in  a  rhetorioil
way,  that  they  relieved  the  needy  from  the  re-
aonicei  of  the  rich,  controlled  the  itndiea  and
educatjon  of  tbe  young,  and  interfered  with  and
puniihed  pahlie  chaiactcra  oa  lach.  (laocr.  Araep,
P.J6I.)

IndeDcndent,  then,  of  iti  jonadiction  at  a
criminal  court  in  faaea  of  wilfid  nmrder,  which
Solon  conlinned  to  the  Arelopagua,  ill  influence
muit  huTe  been  nilfiriently  great  to  hare  been  a
eonaidembla  obilaile  to  the  agnandlienient  of  the
democracy  at  the  cipenie  of  the  other  partita  in
tho  itate.  In  hct,  PIntaieh  (SoIol  c  IS),  a-
prenly  gtstea  that  Solon  had  thia  object  in  view
m  ita  'recona&nction ;  and  accotdin^y,  we  find
that  Periclea,  who  nerer  wu  an  arcnoQ  or  Aicio-
pagite,  and  who  wu  oppoicd  Co  the  ariatocncy  for
many  rcaaona,  reaeWed  to  diniinith  iti  power  and
drcumicribe  iti  iphere  of  action.  HU  coadjutor
in  thia  work  wu£p)iialle>,aitateanianof  inttciible
integrity,  and  alao  a  military  commander.  (Plut
Cm.  7,  Ptrie.  10,  1 3.)  They  eiperimccd  much  op-
poaition  jn  their  attempt!,  not  only  in  the  auembly,
but  alio  on  the  itnge,  where  Aochyloa  produced
his  tragedy  of  the  Eumcnide*,  the  object  of  which
wu  to  impreai  upon  the  Atheaions  the  diniily,  the
aaeredneii,  and  eoniEitutionai  worth  of  the  inati-
tntion  which  Periclea  and  Epbiallei


Here


tribunal  in


indi  the  Alheoi


J  that  it


ituted  by  their  patnn  goddeu  Athena,
mouth  a  populu  hanngue  full
'nnt,  end  admonitfaing


them  to  IcDTa  tbe  Ai
aid  and  well  ntnmded  nghti,  that  sndcr  iti  walch-
fdl  Kurdiaiianip  diey  might  ilecp  in  lecurity.
(MUller,  J&m.  g  35.)  Still  the  oppodtion  &flod  :
B  decree  wu  carried,  about  b;c.  158,  by  which,  u
Ariatotle  nyo,  the  Aieiopagu*  wu  "  mntUatcd,"  and
manyof  iliboeditary  rightiabotiehed.  (Aiitt-PaL
ti.9;Cie,Dt  tioL  Dtor.  u.  36,  D*  2i^.  L  27.)


AREIOPAGUS.

Cicero,  wlio  in  one  place  apeaki  of  the  conneil  m
goieming  Athena,  obaerrea  in  another  that  finm  that
time  all  authority  wu  veited  in  the  ecdeaia,  and
the  Itate  robbed  of  iti  ornament  and  honour.  Plq..
torch  (anuk,  \S)  telli  ui  that  the  peDjJc  denrired
the  Areiopagui  of  ncoriy  all  iti  judicial  antbori^
(t4»  «p(ff«(  r\i,r  iK^r  iriffta),  otabliihisg
an  uomiicd  demooa^,  and  making  thenuelTeft
luprerac  in  the  courli  i^  jnatiee,  u  if  then  had
formeriy  been  a  auperior  tribunal  But  we  inf^
&«n  another  paaaage,  that  the  cooncQ  lost  ccai-
aidet^e  antluricy  in  Batten  d  ittte  ;  for  we
learn  that  Atbena  than  aiterBd  upm  a  taner  of
canqoNl  and  aggrandiunicnt  to  which  aha  bad
preTWUiIy  been  a  atranger ;  that,  **  like  a  rampant
boiae,  she  would  not  obey  the  rcina,  but  mapped
at  Euboea,  and  leaped  upon  the  neighbouring
iglandi."  These  accouDti  in  themaelToi,  and  aa
compared  with  othen,  am  infGciently  Tigue  and
inconiiilent  to  perplex  and  embaiiui ;  acccsd-
ingly,  there  hu  been  much  diicusiion  u  to  tha
preciu  nature  nl  the  altemtiong  which  Periclea
effected ;  some,  amongst  whom  ve  may  menticn
MUUer  (Em.  %  S7),  are  of  opinion  that  he  de-
prived the  AreiofBgu  of  their  old  jnriidiction  bi
caici  of  wilful  murder,  and  one  of  hi>  chief  argn-
menti  ia  that  it  waa  eridently  the  deiign  of  Aes-
chjlui  to  lupport  them  in  tbii  preregatiie,  which
therefore  mnit  have  been  aiiailed.  Fis  a  inffl-
cient  aniwcr  lo  thia,  we  would  refer  our  readera
to  Biihop  Thiriwall<i  remarks  (Hiit  of  Greea^
vol  iii.  p.  24),  merely  itating  in  additkm,  tliat
Dcmoithenea  (e.  ArUocr.  p.  841)  •  uioesalj'
aStmi,  that  neither  tyrant  nor  demooacy  had
ever  dared  to  take  away  inaa  them  tbii  juriidic-
tion.  In  addition  to  which  it  may  be  remarked,
that  the  conaeqnencea  ascribed  (o  the  innovalioa
do  not  indicate  that  the  Arei(qiagu  lost  its  au-
thority u  a  criminal  tribunij,  but  rather  that  it
was  shorn  of  iti  power  u  lupcrintendLDg  the
morals  and  conduct  of  the  citizens,  both  in  ciTil
and  religious  matters,  and  u  eiociiing  soow
nmlrol  over  their  decisions.  Now  an  aatfaorilj
of  the  former  kind  seems  Gir  removed  tram  any
political  influence,  and  the  pi^nUar  belief  u  to  its
irigin  would  have  mode  it  a  dangerous  object  c^
ittock,  to  say  nothing  of  the  general  latit&etian
he  verdicts  had  always  given.  We  may  obserre,
oo,  that  one  of  the  chief  leatures  of  s  demociBcj'
B  to  make  all  the  idBcers  of  tlie  state  naponiible  ;
ind  that  it  is  not  improbable  that  one  of  tha
ihangoi  inlroducad  by  Ephtaltea  was,  to  make  tha
^rciopagUB,  like  other  ninctionaries,  accountable
to  the  demus  tor  their  adminiitratian,  as,  indeed,
—  know  they  afterwards  were.  (Aeach.  c  Osa.
6;  BSckh,  Ti^  i.  p.  353.)  This  limple  ra-
golation  would  evidently  hare  made  tbcro  subaer-
ient,  u  they  seem  to  have  been,  to  public  opinion  ;
'hcreu  no  such  subserviency  is  recorded  in
-■iminal^  matters,  their  tribunal,  tn  the  contrvy,
being  always  Tfoita  of  as  most  just  and  holy ;  so
much  ai^  that  Demosthenes  lays  (fi.  AritL  pp.  641,
642)  that  not  even  the  condemned  whispered  an
*  kiinualiim  asainit  the  righteousness  of  their
^edicts.  Indeed,  the  proceedings  before  tb^
j^iopegui,  in  cases  of  murder,  were  by  their
Jemnity  and  fiumeas  ~  " -''■■-


*  For  an  able  vindication  of  this


theaca,  the  mder  is  referred  to  Uermaim.
niLiT.p.S9S.


AREIOPAOUS.
I.  Tbe  poctn  wai  tu  fbltovi :  —  Tbe
kiBB  an^ga  (PidJui,  vui.  90)  brougbt  the  OM
aaa  cDDit,  and  nt  u  one  of  the  judge*,  vho  were
■wmUtd  in  tbe  open  tit,  pntably  to  gnsrd
agUDX  vij  *****■"*"*■  *^""  from  the  cnminaL  (An-
li^u.  Du  OKde  Htnd.  p.  ISO ;  Dem.  e.  AHmL
L  c. ;  Panax,  TiH.  S3.}  Tbe  ■ccotei,  wbo  wu
aid  tls  'Kftmt  riyar  iwmiiir
■Bid  la  mike  ■  KJemn  nth  (
■iiaitliiw  ma  tne,  standing  orer  tbe  tlangbteied
ritbma,  and  impvciting  enirjUkm  npon  hinueU'
Hd  Ui  wbide  baSj,  were  it  not  n.  The  ucond
Ikoi  danied  tbe  daage  with  the  Bme  lolemnity
aid  fam  of  cath.  Each  ptnj  then  listed  hii
caae  with  all  poauble  plaiinifM,  keepmg  itrictly  to
"■" - '-  ^ — '  -It  being  allowed  to  appeal  in


i.  L  1  ;  PallDx,  liiL  117.)  After  Ihi
fint  ipe«c)i  (firri  rkv  ir|i^(|ior  Ai^or),  ■  criminal
■xaaad  sf  DiicdeT  might  maait  bnu  Atheni,
^id  Ama  BTud  the  capital  punUhmeDt  Gied  b;
Diaeo^  0M^  which  on  thu  pinat  wete  lUU  m
(me.  Bzenit  in  caie*  of  parricide,  Dcilher  the
ttBmBBoi  the  Gonrt  bad  power  to  pcevoit  thii;
iut  tke  partj  who  thai  efaded  the  extreme  puniih-
■oit  waa  not  tliowed  to  retiini  home  (^^i
iti^r)!^),  and  when  auj  decne  wai  paiied  at
Atliena  to  legaUw  tba  reton  of  tcdles,  an  eioeption


I  *A^fiov  wiyov  ^t&yot
See  Fteo,  £<S^  ix.  11.

TW  repatatkn  of  the  Areiopagoa  b>  b  ^iminBl
eewt  waa  of  long  cootinBance,  ai  we  nay  leam
fras  aa  uecdote  of  Aoltu  Oelliiu,  who  lelli  tu
(kE.  7>  that  a  Dobbella,  proeonnil  of  de  Ro-
Baa  pnnBCe  of  Au,  lefrnvd  a  cafe  whkh  per-
ptmd  liiiaaiilf  aad  hii  coaneQ  to  tbe  Aniopagw
(<tf  md  jmikrt  gmviortt  enrdtatioreaqiie) ;  they
Bg^dwatj  lettled  tbe  matter  by  ordering  the
pBMka  to  appear  that  day  100  yean  (eenlainio
^mt  mdemt).  They  eiined  in  nanir,  indeed,  till
u  tmj  hte  period.  Thai  we  find  Cicero  mentiona
Ae  cs^Ktl  in  hii  letten  {Ad  Fam,  liii.  1  ;  Ad
AtL  L  14,  T.  II);  and  under  the  emperon  GrHtion
aad  Thaodoaia*  <^  n.  380),  'Pa%at  *^at  ii
rBlril  imcoDMl  of  Omece,  and  an  Areiopagite.
QfaMiMi,  Armop^

Of  the  leapecttliUity  and  numl  worth  of  the
o^BoI,  aad  the  respect  that  wai  paid  to  it,  we
kai«  aboBdaiit  pnef  in  the  wiitingi  of  the  Alhe-
Biaa  aftfm,  when,  indeed,  it  wodd  be  difficult  to
fad  it  fntinni^  except  in  term)  of  piaiie.
T^B  Lyaiaa  ipaiki  of  it  M  tnoit  righteoni  and
liiwlalill  {c.  AtAK.  f.  KM  ;  conipaie  Aeicb.  e.
T^v.  13  ;  Iiocr.jjnt^  148)  i  aod  k  great  wai
(be  nape  ft  paid  to  it*  membm,  that  il  wai  con-
aidnwii  jade  in  the  demna  langbing  in  their  pr^
mce,  "wkiie  oos  of  Ihetn  wai  "™^™g  an  addren

" "■ ■"' a  wljjeet  they  bod  been  de-

L Tbii  reapect  might,  of  coone,

mption of  wme  of  their  loit

i (apeeially  ai  they  were  lomeliiuei

iih mqainc*  on  behalf  of  the  Mate,

aaioa  to  which  wo  hare  jut  alluded.


BfBn  JMtat  tlw  itate  of  tbe  bnildinga  about  the
Pafx,  Bad  dceida  nan  the  adtnlion  or  lejectior
I  alleiationa. leociate*,  indeed,


ns  m  Ui  tinw,  wbai  tl


mxa  mqnitT  <


AROEL  129

their  moral  influence  j  but  ibortly  after  the  an  of
DETaetrjus  Phalereui,  a  change  had  taken  {rtace;
they  had  !«t  much  of  their  respectability,  and
were  but  ill  fitted  to  enfoccs  a  condnct  in  otben


of  St.  Pad  (Act.  xriu  32.)  ii  generBlly
quoted  ai  an  initance  of  their  ontbority  in  religiooi
matter! ;  but  the  wocdi  of  tbe  noed  hiitorian  do
not  nee^sBTily  imply  that  he  wn  breugbt  befbt«  the
eonndL  It  may,  bowerer,  be  temaAed,  that  they
(ertainly  took  cogniiance  of  the  intndaction  it
new  and  unanthorued  fomu  of  religiona  wonhip,
called  hABrra  \tfA,  in  contradiitinetian  to  the
•iTpWOTolder  rilsaof  thflWale.  {Haipocrat  i.  ooi
■Kvi'errai 'Eoprof ,  Scbfinuinn,  A  Onnfiii,  p.28G.
transL)  There  wu  alio  a  tradition  that  Plato  woa
deterred  from  mentioning  the  name  of  Moeee  u  «
teacher  oftheimiiyofthe  Godhead,  byhit  feu  of  the
ArcioTiegua.  (JiutinMkrtyT,CS3ib>t'.ailOraec.p.3S.)
With  reipect  to  the  number  of  tbe  AidopagDi
ia  it!  original  fbna,  n  point  of  no  gnat  nufnent,
there  ore  -farioni  account! ;  but  il  ii  plain  that
there  could  have  been  no  fixed  numbet  when  the
archoni  became  memben  of  thia  body  at  the  ex-
piration of  their  year  of  office.  Lyriai,  indeed,
•peakjaftbem(nffilToE3)|nE,  p)).UO,lll;  eee
Argam.  Orat.  c  Aadnt)  a)  forming  a  port  of  tbe
Aieiopagni  eren  during  that  time;  a  ilatemcnt
which can  only  he reomdlcd  with  the  general


fanned  a  [airt  ti  the  i

ofBoe,  bnt  were  not  permaneni

end  of  that  time,  and  after  ft


ig  a  Batiiiactory
examination.  [R.W.]

ARE'NA. [AjcpBiTHBimiJii.]

ARETA'LOOI,  a  clau  of  perwmi  vhoee  eon-
Roman  dinnei-tablcL  (Suet.  Odm.  7*.)  Tba
word  literally  ligniEei  periont  teio  diieoane  aloat
virtu)  :  and  the  clau  of  peraoni  intended  leem  to
haie  been  poor  philoeophen,  chiefly  of  the  Cynic
and  Stoic  aecta,  who,  unable  to  gain  a  living  by
their  public  lectorei,  obtained  a  maintenance  at
the  table*  of  tbe  rich  by  their  philoaopbica]  con-
Such  a  life  would  naturally  d<


tooTuly  by  Juvenal,  who  n*e*  tbe  pi
onto^d^w.'  they  became  a  *ort  of  Kvmu.  \jnT,
Sal.  IV.  1£,  IS  1  comp.  Coiaabon.  ad  Suit.  I.  e.  i
and  Ruperti  and  Heinrich,  ad  Jtn.  I.  e.)  [P.  S.]
A'RGEI.  We  leam  from  Li»y  (L  22)  that
Nnma  conaecnited  plaeea  tar  tbe  celebration  of
religiona  lervicea,  which  were  called  by  the  pcnti-
ficei  **  argeL"  Vairo  call*  them  tba  cbapeli  of  the
orgei,  and  eaya  they  wero  twenty-aeven  in  num-
ber, dlatribnted  in  the  different  diaDncta  of  tbe
city.  We  know  bnt  little  of  tbe  particular  uae*
to  which  tbey  were  applied,  and  that  little  ia  un-
importnnt  Thua  we  are  told  that  they  vere
■olemnly  viiited  on  the  Liberalia,  n  featiral  of
Baccbui ;  and  alao,  that  whenever  the  flamea
dioli*  went  (teif)  to  them,  he  wa*  tA  adhere  to
certain  obterrancis.  Tbey  aeem  alao  to  have  been
tbe  depoaitariea  of  topographical  recorda.  Thu*
we  read  in  Varro, — /■  aaerBt  if  rgeom  acr^Am
ad  tic:  Oppiitt  nuai  prrao^s,  &c,  which  ia  fbl-
lowedbyadeicriptianofthennKhbonrbood.  There
waa  a  tradition  that  these  orgei  were  named  from
the  chiaftuH  who  eaOM  with  Hervnle^  the  AtpTt,


130  ABOENTAKII.

to  Rome,  «nd  occopied  Ih«  Q^lolinc,  or,  u  it  mu
anciently  calledi  SatunuBu  hilL It  i>  inipauiblc  to

\eaend  ;  wv  may,  howerer,  noticA  its  coafonaLt;
with  the  italement  tliat  Rome  wu  fbonded  1^
the  Pelugiani,  Willi  wbom  the  Dimis  of  Argo>  wu
coiuectad.  (Van.  L.L.y.  4G,  ed.  Mliller ;  Ot.
fW.  iii.  791 1  0«U.  I.  IG ;  Niebnhr,  Am.  Ititt.
Tol.  I  p.  214.)

The  luma  argei  wu  bIio  giTcn  to  ceitaiii  6gant
thrown  into  the  Tibei  fnm  the  Sublicion  bridge,
on  Iho  Ids  of  Ua;  in  erer;  feat.  Thii  wu
doro  bj  the  pontificei,  the  veMali,  the  piacton,
■nd  other  dtitem,  efter  the  peHvnujice  of  the
ciulomary  ncrifcee.  The  images  were  thirty  in
number,  mode  of  bulnuhei,  uid  in  the  fiirm  of
men  (tfldoXa  iLriptUt^a,prucorTim  timitiacra  viro-
mn).  Qiid  mikei  Tsriooi  lUppotitiDiu  to  nccount
for  ^e  origin  of  thii  rite ;  we  an  only  conjecture
that  it  wu  t.  tjToboUcsl  offering  to  propitiBte  the
gods,  >nd  that  the  number  wu  a  repreBenlative
either  of  the  thirty  patrician  curiae  at  Rome,  or
perhapt  of  the  thirty  Ldlin  townihip*.  Dionyiiug
of  Hdicamauni  ilatci  <L  1 9,  38)  thM  the  nulom
continued  to  liis  timet,  and  wu  initituted  hy  Her-
cdIm  to  latii^  the  icruple*  of  the  nadrei  when
be  aboliahed  uie  hmnan  lacrificu  formerly  mode
toSatnni.  (Vair.  i.Z.  Tii.  «;  Ot./'m*.  T.  621;
PluL  <^aail.  Rom.  p.  L02,  Keitke ;  Arnold,  Rom.
Hid.  YoL  i.  p.  67  ;  Bun»en  and  Plainer,  BadTti-
bu-g  Rmu,  vol  L  p.  088— 702^  [R.  W.J

AKGENTA'EII  (TpanilToi),  tanken  ot
money  chaogen.  1.  Orebs.  The  banker)  at
Athcni  wen  culled  Tpnt^rai  bora  their  tahiM
(rpittda)  at  which  they  lat,  while  airying  on
their  bOAiDeM.  Pnblio  or  itate  banki  leem  to
have  been  a  thing  nnknown  in  antiquity,  though
the  »latc  mnit  have  cierciicd  tome  kind  of  euper
inlendence,  lince  without  it  it  ia  tcaicely  pouihli
to  conctive  how  persona  could  haie  placed  iucl
unlimited  confidence  in  the  banken,  u  they  an
known  to  havB  done  at  Athena.  They  had  their
•tondt  or  tables  in  the  maikct  place  (PlaL  ApU.
p.  17,  Hi^.  Mm.  p.  368),  and  although  the  bank-
ing and  money  cnanging  biuineu  wu  moitly
carried  on  by  ^irrouroi,  or  tcaident  oliena  and  freed-
men,  still  these  penons  do  not  leeQt  to  have  been
looked  upon  with  any  diuetp^t,  and  the  buainest
itself  woa  not  disreputable.  Their  principal  occu-
pation wai  that  M  chitnf^E  money  at  an  agio
(Isoosl,  TVopei.S!  ;  Dem.iJ(/iZs.i:^.  p-Sre,
e.  Pclgd.  p.  121B  ;  Polliu,  iii.  84,  tL  170)  ;  but
they  &c<inently  look  money,  at  a  moderate  pre-
mium, fiom  pcnaaa  who  liud  not  like  to  occupy
themsclret  with  the  management  of  their  own
afBiira.  Thns  the  blhei  of  Demosthenes,  a.  g.,
kfpl  a  port  of  hii  ca^Ial  in  the  hands  of  banken.
(Dcm.a.,4j)ioi.L  p.816.)  These  pfTsent  then  lent
the  money  with  profit  to  others,  and  thus,  to  a
certain  dugrec,  obtained  pouesaion  sf  a  monopoly.
The  greater  port  of  the  capital  with  nhich  they
did  businofls  in  (his  wHy,beloaged  to  others  (Dom.
p.  Fiona,  p.  948),  but  samclunei  they  alM  em-
ployed capital  of  their  owa  Although  their  eohi
object  wu  pecuniary  gain  (Dent.  p.  Phirm.  p.  953),
nnd  not  by  any  means  to  connect  themaelTci  with
wealthy  or  illnstrioua  tamiliet,  yet  they  acqtlircd
gnat  oedit  at  Athsoa,  and  fonned  buineu  con-
nections in  all  the  principal  towns  of  Greece,
whereby  their  business  wu  effectually  supported.
{S}em.t>.PlMa.f.9SS,t.I'alrti.i,l2ai.} They


ARGENTARII.

eren  maintained  so  great  a  repntation  that  not  'only '
were  they  conaidered  aa  secnre  merely  by  virtue  of
their  calling,  bat  such  confidence  was  placed  in
them,  that  lometimee  business  wu  transacted  with
them  without  wimeasea  (Isocr.  Trapa.  2),  and
that  money  and  contracts  of  debt  were  deposited
with  them,  and  agreements  were  concluded  or  can-
celled in  their  presence^  (Dcin.  c  QdHp.  p.  1S43;
c  Diaijiioii.  p.  1287.)  The  great  importance  of
their  business  is  dear  from  the  immsiae  wealth  of
Puion,  whoac  bank  produced  a  net  annual  profit
oflOOminae.  (Dem.  p.  i'Jorra.  [k  946.)  There
are,  however,  inatances  of  bankers  losing  ereiy-
thing  they  posseised,  and  becoming  utlcriy  bank-
(Dcm.  p.  Piora.  p.  969,  n.  sSpi.  L  p.  1  ]  20.)


U  ihelc  luukert  took  a  high  intertat  w


(Dem.


IVkvOr.  p.  1249.)  Their  usnal
mnresi  was  an  per  cent.,  an  interest  that  sonsly
occurs  any  where  except  in  cases  of
bottomry.  The  only  instance  of  a  hi
and  conducted  on  behalf  of  the  siaui  occurs  ai
Byzantium,  where  at  one  time  it  was  let  by  tho
republic  to  capitalists  to  &rm.  (AriaL  Otm.  ii.
p.  283  j  comp.  Bockh,  PubL  feoMm.  qf  AOmu,
p.  12<>,  &c  2d  edit.)

2.  RouxH.  Tho  ArsBUarii  at  Rome  weroalso
called  argimteai  ntnuos  exerdtora,  oryniii  dii-
traeiont  and  negoiiajont  MttpiiarffeKlariag.  (Orelli,
IrucHpl.  n.  4060.)  Tbcj  must  be  distingoUbod
from  the  mauarii  i»  public  bonkers,  though  evea
the  ancicnta  confound  the  terms,  u  the  wunarii
sometimes  did  the  aome  kind  of  business  as  tba
argentorii,  and  they  miut  also  be  distinguished
froni  the  mmina/arii,  [Mbns^kuj  NuVMf-
LARii.]  The  argcntatii  were  private  penons,  who
rarried  on  business  on  their  own  reapontibili^,  and
were  not  in  the  aerrice  ot  the  republic  ;  but  tha
sbopa  or  bd/enat  which  they  occupied  and  iit
which  they  transacted  their  business  about  tha
forum,  were  stale  property.  (Dig.  18.  tit.  1.
s.  32  ;  LIv.il.  £1.)  As  their  chief  business  was
that  of  changing  mmey,  the  argentarii  probably
existed  at  Rome  from  very  eaHy  times,  as  the  in-
lercoune  of  the  Romans  with  other  Italian  natiooB
could  not  veil  exist  without  them  ;  the  first  men-
tion,  however,  of  their  cxistmg  at  Rtane  and
having  their  shops  or  stalls  around  the  foiTim,  oc-
curs about  B.  c  3.^0,  in  the  wars  against  the  Sam>
nites.  (Liv.viUai.)  The  business  of  the  a^n-
tarii,  with  which  that  of  the  mcnsarii  coincided
in  many  points,  was  very  varied,  and  compriacd
almost  every  thing  connected  with  UHmey  ot  mer-
cantile transacticxu,  but  it  may  be  diiided  into
the  following  bronchea.  1.  Fermmb^ia,  or  tba
exchange  of  loreign  coin  for  Rinnan  coin,  in
which  case  a  small  agio  (collybus)  waa  paid  to
them.  (CIc  ta  Ferr.  ilL  78.)  In  later  times
when  the  Roman*  became  acquainted  with  tha
Oteek  custom  of  using  bills  of  exchange,  tba
Roman  argentarii,  c.  g.,  received  sunis  of  money
which  had  to  be  paid  at  Athens,  and  then  dreir
a  bill  payable  at  Athena  by  some  banker  in
that  dqr.  This  mode  of  tzanaactiog  basiupii*
is  likewise  called  permutatio  <Cic  od  AU.  xii.
24,  S7,  IV.  15  i  camp.  v.  !£,  iL  I,  24,  »<
Foju.  iL  17,  iii  fi,  ad  Qmf.  Fnt.  I  i,  p.  Ba~
Ur.  14),  and  rendered  it  necesaaiy  for  the  atgcn.-
larii  to  be  acquainted  with  the  current  value  of
the  snme  coin  in  difCsrrat  ptacM  and  at  diflermt


jUtGENTARIl.
fiML  (See  tke  anmient.  m  Cie.  pro  Qajut  4.)
2.  The  kccptng  sf  mmi  of  moae<r  Air  other  per-
■<■■.  Saeh  noDcj  mighc  be  dcpouted  bj  tbe
own0  DKnf  J  ta  i^va  bmuelf  the  tnnblfl  of  ke«p-
11^  it  BHi  Dukiag  pKjmcnti,  uid  in  tbii  case  it
«aa  aUed  d^nH(aji ,-  tbe  orgentaiiiu  thea  paid

(■••■.  When  a  pajmeut  vai  to  be  made,  the
BWOcr  citkcf  tdd  the  aigeDtariui  penontUj  or  he
«R«  a  cbcqiie.  (Plaut.  CWoL  iL  3.  G6,  &i^  iii.
M,  i*.  3.  3,  Ac)  Or  the  mone;  vu  dep«tted  on
*'"' *  '^  (aiiru  pajing  interett  ^  in

u  railed  cmdifam,  and  the
■  nubt  of  coone empio; the money


e  argenlarii  made  foy-
B^tta  m  (h*  nantt  ef  thoie  «h«e  money  they  bad
m  kiad,  are  aioitieoed  leiy  Inqueati;.  A  piy-
■cM  Bada  thraogh  a  tanker  wu  called  jwr  mea-
^^  A  mrMKt,  K  per  BcaiiH  KTipfaniH,  wh3e  a
^TSfBi  wmie  bf  the  debtu  in  penon  waa  a  paj-
Hot  m  ana  or  di  damn.  (VlauC.  CWnaZ.  i.  3.
7,  Ac^  43;,  OipttB.  ii.  3.  89  ;  Cic  wJ  Jtt.  L  S,
r<^  S  ;  SdnL  ad  /foRiL  Stf.  ii.  3.  69  ;  Seoec
•y---  2G ;  Gaha,  iii.  131.)  An  aigentariui
■enr  paid  awaj  an;  pavm*!  moDey  without
feiag  either  axtbonied  l^  him  in  peraon  or  re-
ceiiuia  a  cheqaa  which  waa  callMt  ptrtcriftio.
Mid  f£e  pajmoilitai  then  made  either  in  caih,
ec,  if  tht  psacn  who  «u  lo  leeeiTe  it,  kept  an
aaoBt  vitk  tbe  lame  banker,  he  had  it  added
a  the  bnkci^  book  to  hit  own  depoait  Thii  wai
tta  wae  called  perMTiSert  or  timplyiBfifiarB.  (Plant
J^  E.  4.  30,  &e^  CartmL  T.  2.  2D  ;  DonaL  ad
r«^  Ptorm.  r.  7.  2B,  tc,  ad  Adtlpi.  ii.  4. 13  i
C^  ad  AIL  IT.  IS,  ix.  12,  liL  SI,  PhSip.  v.  4,
■  rrrr.  T.  19  ;  Hotat  &K.  iL  3.  76.)  It  alwoc-
Mn  tint  argsitaiii  made  paymentj  for  penoni  who
had  not  dvpoated  any  mouey  urilh  them ;  tbii
«aa  rqaiTaleat  to  lending  money,  which  in  &ct
they  otai  did  for  a  cert^n  per  eentage  of  inteceit.
(PkaL  Oav.  n.  1.  19,  2.  22,  Ttkl  i.  1.  51,  Ac,
^id.  I  2.  40 ;  Tac  Ama.  vL  17.)  Of  all  thi>
baHacaa,  af  tbt  leceipti  ai  well  u  of  the  expen-
dinae,  the  argcntarii  kept  accurate  accounla  in
ha^a  ofied  (wtKn,  taialw  or  mfiaKi  (Flin.  ^.  JV.
i.  7),  nd  there  a  eioy  ramn  for  beliering  that
ihay  mn  awpainted  with  what  ia  called  in  book-
kaqaac  doable  entry.  When  an  argenlarioi  lel-
ikd  Ua  Meeanta  with  perKHu  with  whom  he  did
boBiaeaa,  it  wai  dona  either  in  writing  or  oially,
hath  pKtiea  meeting  Ev  the  poipoae  (Dig.  2.
■it  14.  a.  47.  11,  14.  tit  S.  a.  20  ;  Plaut  Ak-
U,  m.  3.  53,  lu.),  and  the  party  found  to  be  in
itht  jaii  what  he  owed,  and  then  bad  hii  name

*  *  (■OHaa  eajiedir*  cr  e^jampm)  (ram  the
hiAil"*  booka.  (FhnL  CiH.  L  3.  41  ;  Cic  ad
AA.  xri.  &.)  Aa  the  booki  of  the  aigentarii  wen
tntrfi^y  kept  with  great  accnmcy,  and  paiticn.
■dy  ai  icganl  to  data,  they  were  looked  npon  ba
dat^Bcnta  of  h^  asthorily,  and  were  appealed
ki  ■  the  eoRrti  of  jnitica  aa  unexceptionable  eri-
dnee.  (Ck.  p.  Cote.  6  ;  Oelliiu,  xir.  3.)  Hence
Ae  ■IHHarii  wen  often  ometnied  JD  civil  eaaea,
ai  m^tty  moMctioiu  wers  rarely  eooelnded  wilh-

a<a  thnr  ■"*"*'>"  or  co-operation.  Their  codicei
w  labihri  eoald  not  be  withheld  bora  a  pemn
'•h*  ii  CMBt  rafiand  to  thoo  fivthe  purpoaa  of


if  party


AROENTARIL  13

ia  caoie,  and  to  pmduea  (hem  wa
"■ " it  IS.  tl.  g  t),  orpr^firr


nac^DU  with  conuneree  and  public  auctioni.  Thia
branch  of  their  buaineaa  leeiii*  to  have  been  one  of
the  moat  ancient  In  piivata  aalea  and  purchoiea.
they  aometimei  acted  aa  agenta  for  either  pe
{ialerprtlei.  Plant  Care.  iii.  1.  61),  and  lometii
they  nndertof^  to  aell  the  whole  estate  of  a  penon,
aa  an  inhsitance.  (Dig.  fi.  lit  3.  a.  IB,  46.  tit.
3.  a.  38.)  At  public  auctiona  they  were  almoat
iniariably  (ffeieiit,  regiitenng  the  article!  add,
their  price*,  and  ponhaiera,  and  receiriDglbe  pay-
ment from  the  purchaaera.  (Cic  p.  Que.  4,  6 ;
QuinctiL  Ti.  2  ;  Soet  N*r.  5  ;  Oaiui,  iv.  126  ;
Capitolin.  Amon.  9.)  At  anctiont,  however,  the  .
a^cnlarii  might  lianaact  buaineaa  thi«igh  their
cleliu  or  aerraiita,  who  wen  called  eaaaoni  from
their  collntiue  the  money.  4.  The  teating  of  the
gemiinenett  iJ  cataa  {proiatio  aHmraanun).  The
freqnent  csaea  of  forgery,  aa  veil  aa  the  {requeut
occurrence  of  fbreiga  eoini,  rendered  it  neeeamy
to  have  peraona  to  decide  npon  their  value,  and  tho
Bigentani,  &am  the  nature  of  their  occupation,  were
beat  qualified  to  act  aa  probatorca ;  hence  they
were  proacjil  in  thia  capacity  at  all  paymenta  of
any  large  amount  Thia,  bowerer,  aeema  originally
to  bare  been  a  part  of  the  duly  of  poblic  i^cei^
the  nienearii  or  ounminlani,  until  in  the  eouiie  of
dma  the  opinion  of  an  argenlariua  iJh  came  to  be
looked  nnm  aa  deciaive ;  and  thia  cualom  waa
aauctioned  by  a  law  of  Mariua  Oratidianua.  (Plin.
H.  ff.  iriii.  9  ;  comp.  Cic  ad  AU.  XJL  6  ;  Dig.
46.  tit  3.  a.  39.)  6.  The  aoUdonm  eodtfio,  that
ia,  the  obligatioQ  of  purchaiine  from  the  mint  tha
newly  eoin^  money,  and  circoUli:^  it  among  the
peqile.  Thia  branch  of  their  funetione  occnn  tally
under  the  empire.  (Synmiaeb.  JS^iul.  ii.  49  i
Pmcop.  Anted.  26 ;  camp.  Salmaaina,  Dt  I/iar.  e.
17.  n.  304.)

Altbongh  the  a^entarii  were  not  in  the  aerviee
of  tbe  atate,  they  exiated  only  in  a  limited  number,
and  formed  a  coUeginm,  which  vaa  dmded  into
aoCMrfttfa  or  coiporationa,  which  alone  had  the  right
to  admit  new  memben  of  their  guild.  (Orelli,
Inienpt.  n.  913,  995.)  It  appean  that  no  one
but  fiee  men  could  become  membeia  of  luch  a  cor^
poiatioo,  and  whenever  alaie*  an  mentioned  aa
argenlarii,  the;  mual  be  conceived  aa  acting  only
aa  aertanta,  and  in  the  name  of  their  maatcra,  who
remained  the  reaponiible  partiei  even  if  alavea  had
tranaaclcd  buaineaa  with  their  own  peculium.  (Dig.
2.titl3.B.4.g3,  U.tit8.i.l9.)  With  regard
to  the  legal  rdation  among  the  membem  of  tho
eorporatinna,  there  eiiited  vaiiona  regnUtioni ;  one
member  (aoeiua),  for  eiample,  waa  leaponaible  for
the  other.  (Anct  ad  Hrrmn.  iL  13;  Dig.  2.  tit
14.  aa.  9,  05,  27.)  Tbej-  alao  enjoyed  aercnil
privQe^  in  tiie  time  of  the  empire,  and  Joitinian,
a  parbcnlar  patron  of  the  argentarii,  ||Teatiy  in-
er^kaed  tbeae  pririlegea  (Juatin.  Nan.  136) ;  but
diahoneit  argentarii  were  alwayaeeverelypnniahed
(Saet  GaUi.  10  ;  Aoaon.  Epigr.  15),  and  in  the
time  of  the  emperora,  they  were  nnder  the  auper.
intendenee  of  the  praefectua  uibl  (Dig.  1.  tit  ]2.
t.  1.  §  9.)

A>  regardi  the  retpectabOity  of  the  argentarii,
the  paaaagc*  of  the  ancienta  aeem  to  conttsdict  ona
another,  for  lome  wrilen  apeak  of  their  occupalioa
aa  ceapedable  and  honounble  (Cic  p.  Cote,  4 ;
AureL  Vict  72;  Suet  Vap.  1 ;  Acroo.  ad  Horat.

x8


1J2


ARQKNTUM.


sot  L  6.  86),  wtilB  othen  ipesk  of  them  with
eantenipt  (Plant.  Cure  ir.  2.  20,  Caia.  ProL  25,
&c  i  Truad.  i.  1.  47) ;  but  thii  cantndiclion  may
"be  euilf  reconciled  by  dia^gajitiing  between  a
lowsr  taA  t,  higlier  cUu  of  aimntuiL  A  wealthy
argnDtoriai  who  earned  on  bngineu  on  a  Urge
■cale,  wat  nndoabledly  u  much  n  penon  of  n-
apKtabilitj  aa  a  bu^cr  in  modem  timei;  but
others  who  did  bniineM  only  on  a  imall  Kale,
or  dcgndcd  their  oilUng  by  acting  a«  uuren,  can-
not hare  been  held  in  any  ateem.  It  bu  already
been  obierred  that  the  aiseniiirii  had  thur  ihopt
loiaid  the  fbram  (LIt.  ii.  40,  nri.  II,  27  ;  Plaut.
Tne.  I  1.  £1  i  Terent.  Phorm.  t.  8.  2S,  Ad^A.
ii.  4. 1 3) ;  hence  to  become  bankrapt,  wai  eipreHcd
by  foro  neitn,  or  aiaie,  or  fort)  nmsi.  (Plaut
Epid.  L  2.  IS]  Dig.  16.  tic  3.  a.  7.  §  2.)  The
fthopi  or  btKtthi  were  public  property,  snd  built  by
the  cemon,  who  told  the  uh  of  them  to  the  aigen-
tuii.  (Li*,  xxiuc.  U,  il.  ei,  ili.  27,  iliv.  16  ;
comp.  J.  Q.  Sieber,  Diturial.  j»  Arptntariis,  Lip-
■iac,  1737;  H.Hubert,  Di^mt.  juridiau  III.  d»
Argealana  mam,  Traject  1739 1  W.  T.  Kraut,
Da Argaiariu it Nimmilariu, Gtiuingen,

ARQEKTUM  (If>r<V«>).  •Ont.  <•"»  of  the  two
metala  which,  on  aeeoont  of  Aai  beauty,  their  da-
tability,  their  density,  and  tbeir  larit^,  haie  been
esteemed  in  all  ciriUsed  coontriea,  and  inallagei,aa

qualities  end  the  iacility  of  working  them,  been  uicd
ioi  money.  The  sncienti  were  acquainted  with  lilver
from  the  earlicit  known  periods.  (Pliny  ascribes  its
discovery  to  Ericbthonius  or  to  Aeacns,  ff.  JV.  til
£6.  ■.  £7.)  It  is  constantly  mentioned  in  Homer ;
bat  in  a  manner  which  proves  that  it  was  com-
paiutirely  scarce.  It  wu  much  more  abundant  in
Asia  than  in  Greece  Proper,  when  there  were  not
puny  lilyer  minra.  The  acconnti  we  have  of  the
lerenues  of  the  eaily  Lydian  and  Persian  kings,
and  of  the  piesents  of  some  of  them,  snch  as  Qygcs
and  Cioeaiu,  to  Pytho  and  other  shrineo,  pnTe
the  great  abundance  of  both  the  precious  melali  in
'Western  Asia.  Of  this  wealth,  however,  a  Tciy
large  pnpoction  was  laid  np  in  the  royal  and
ncred  tressurin,  both  in  Asia  and  in  Greece.  But
in  time,  and  chiefly  by  the  eflecls  of  wart,  these
accmnnlations  were  dispersed,  and  the  precious
metals  became  commoner  and  cheaper  thnmghout
Greece.  Thus,  tho  tpcUt  of  the  Asiatics  in  the
Penion  war^  and  the  payment  of  Greek  merce-
naria  by  the  Persian  kings,  the  expenditure  of
Pcriclei  on  vrar  and  works  of  art,  the  plunder  of
the  tciDple  of  Delphi  by  the  Phodana,  the  militan
eipensee  and  wholesale  bribery  of  Philip,  and,

vast  increase  in  the  amount  of  ulver  and  gold  in
actual  circolation.  The  aeeomils  we  have  of  the
treasnns  possessed  by  the  suceetson  of  Alexander
would  be  almost  inoedible  if  tliey  were  not  per-
fectly well  attested.

It  was  about  this  tiiM  aba  thai  tho  ricbei  of
tfao  East  began  to  be  bmiliar  to  the  Romans,
among  whom  the  preciaiu  metals  were,  hi  early
times,  extremely  rare.  Vtry  little  of  them  was
found  in  Italy ;  and  though  Cisalpine  Oanl  fur-
Dished  scnne  gold,  which  was  carried  down  by  the
" '  '  Lfl  totranti

„ . B  Cartbaginiai
early  period  j  and  from  this  soiuce,  as  well  ■


AROENTUM.

from  the  East,  the  Romans  no  doubt  obtained  taatb
of  theii  siker  as  an  article  of  commerce.  But
when  lint  Spain  and  then  Greece,  Asia  Minor,
and  Syria,  were  brought  beneath  the  Roman
power,  they  obtained  that  abimdant  supply  both
of  silver  and  gold  which  formed  the  initnimeDt  of
the  extravagance  and  luxury  of  the  later  republic
and  the  empire.  ."The  value  of  the  precious
metals  did  not,  howerer,  &I1  in  proportion  to  ihcir
increase,  as  large  quantities,  wrought  for  works  of
art,  were  taken  out  of  drculation.**  (BOckh.)

The  relative  valne  of  gold  and  silver  differed
considerably  at  different  periods  in  Greek  and
Roman  history.  Herodotus  mentions  it  (liL  95)
as  13  to  1;  Plato(A>f9i.  c6.  p.23l),as]2ta  1;
Mcnsnder  (op.  Paliuc.  ii.  76),  as  10  to  1  ;  and
Li<y  (xxiriii.  11),  as  10  to  1,  about  B.C  189.
Accordmg  to  Suetonius  (JuL  Caa.  54),  Julius
occasion,  exchanged  silver  for  gold
of  9  to  1  j  but  the  most  usual
the  early  Roman  emperors  was
Ld  &cim  Conatanline  to  Justinian
about  U  to  1,  or  15  to  1.  The  proportion  in  mo-
dem times,  siacG  the  discovery  of  the  American
mines,  hot  varied  between  17  to  1  and  14  to  1.

Silner  Miaa  inid  Orti,  —  In  the  eariiest  timea
the  Greeks  obtained  their  ulver  chiefly  as  an
artide  of  commerce  from  the  Phocaeana  and  the
Saniions;  but  they  soon  beaan  to  work  the  rich  mines
of  their  own  counti;  and  its  islands.  The  chief
mines  were  in  Siphnei,  Thestaly,  and  Altica.  In
the  last-named  country,  the  silver  mines  of  Laurioa
furnished  a  most  abundant  supply,  and  were  gene-
tally  regarded  as  the  chief  source  of  the  wealth  of
Athens.  We  learn  from  Xtoophon  (Veclig,  iv.
S),  that  these  mines  had  been  vrorked  iu  Rmoto
antiquity  ;  and  Xenopbon  speala  of  them  is  if  ha
considered  them  inexhaustible.  In  the  time  of
Demosthenes,  however,  the  profit  arising  from
them  had  greatly  diminished;  and  in  the  sec<md
century  of  the  Christian  era  they  were  uo  Icmger
worked.  (Paua  L  1.  S  I.)  The  Romans  obtained
most  of  their  silver  £nim  the  very  rich  mine*  of
Spain,  which  had  been  previously  w<Aed  by  tho
Phoenicians  and  Carthsguiana,  and  which,  though
abandoned  for  those  of  Meirico,  are  still  not  ex-
haualed.  The  ore  from  which  the  silver  was  ob-
tained was  called  nher  ear&  {ifryvp^it  7^,  or
simply  lifyvpita,  Xen.  Vadig.  L  6,  iv.  2).  Thn
same  temi  (temi)  was  also  applied  to  the  ore  by
the  Romans.

A  tbll  account  of  all  that  is  known  respecting
the  area  of  silver  known  to  the  ancienta,  their
mining  operations,  and  their  processes  for  the  re^
duction  of  the  ores,  it  given  by  Bockb.  (ZKstsrto-
liomomlie  Si2tw  Minei  o/£iwriDK,^S  3,  4,  £.)

Um  ofSdwr.  —  By  hr  the  most  important  use
of  silver  among  the  Greeks  was  for  money.  It
was  originiJly  the  universal  currency  m  Greece.
Mr.  Kn^ht,  however,  maintains  {Pirl  Ham.)  that
gold  was  coined  first  because  it  was  the  moro
readily  found,  and  the  mote  easily  vrorked ;  but
there  are  aufficieut  reasons  for  beUevmg  that,  on-
dl  some  time  after  the  end  of  the  Peli^nnnesiaii
war,  tbs  AtfaeDtans  had  no  gold  currency.  [Air-
Run.]  It  may  be  remarked  here  that  all  the
words  connected  with  money  are  derived  from
H^ryvpts,  and  not  from  xp^^^^i  nt  KtrrapyupA^^
"to  bribe  with  money  ;"  ifyvpaiwit6t,  "a  money,
changer,"  ka, ;  and  ifryvpa)  is  itself  not  nnfrs-
qoently  uted  to  *lgiii(y  moaey  in  gmaial  (Sopl^


ARGIAS  QRAFHE.
I^y.  SSS),  a  wi  ii  in  L&dn.  At  Rome,  on  Ilia
matMTf,  ■3nr  wu  Dot  ouued  lill  B.  a  26S,  befora
' '  *  '  d  Oreek  ulitr  wu  in  ciieulation  *t
_  J  ulTer  egin  of  the  Ro-
t,  WM  bomved  from  t^e  Gnek
Fv  further  detail)  reipccUng  mlTCr
Boarr,  OM  NuMHUB,  DxMUiut,  Dbacbh^

Ftam  ■  ^Bj  imiij  period,  rilver  wu  ojcd  aba
B  niki  of  ait.  In  emplojmeDt  for  oraamenting
■taa,  M  oAen  ic&ned  to  bj  Uomer,  belong*  to
ttuit  ^ad. Tbe  uw  of  it  fiv  men  purpoui  of


ARIES.


133


bi  I  lem  gcBsailf  pterilent  aboal  ^e  doH  of  the
Prt-p-n—y-"  nn  (Athco.  tL  p.  229,  f.),  but
Bodi  BMR  B  freoi  the  time  of  AJcundec,  after
chick  it  besoniH  n  oammen  aa  haidly  to  need


D  with  IB.  (Cic
na  diiUDgaiihcd  b
mlm  by  tailing  tl


OT.  iT,  21.)  Tha  Ro.
31  [Jain  and  chaied  >ilier
mer/mn  or  inia  (Plin.
;  Jar.  II.  141,  111-,  62  1  Mart  iT,  SB),
«B<  tke  laUcT  eoe&ita,  <up(ra,  or  fomnutfo.  [CaIt
L^TCa*  1  To»«iiTica.]

The  chief  andent  auth«ilie*  reipecling  niter,
■  writ  m  gold,  an  the  3d,  llh,  and  £tb  booki  of
Sistbov  the  5th  of  INodonu,  eapeciall;  ce.  27  and
K,  aod  the  33d  of  Plinj,  from  e.  6.  a.  31 ;  of  nu>-
Aiin  raka  the  moat  impntant  an  BSckli'i  PMio
rmaiiaij  o/AOaa,  Bk.  L  cc  1—3,  with  the  anp
lliMlimiJ  Diaaiatiom  tm  He  Siiter  Mina  o
.ri»i"iw,»iiil  jKob'l  Hidoff  a/  du  Pndoiu  Mi
Um.  [P.  S.]

A'BGIAS  GRAPHE'  (iniia  ypa^),  that  i^
aa  BcboD  Ecr  tdleneu.  Tagnnta  aid  idlen  were
n«  talented  at  Atbeu  from  Teiy  earl?  timea,  and
«Rij  penoi  waa  obliged  to  be  able  to  gCate  by
Thai  Bwan*  he  lopparled  bimielt  (Herod.  iL
177  ;  Dud.  L  77.)  Accordiiw  to  aome  (PluL
SiL  37.  PoBuz,  Till.  42),  eien  iWo  had  enacted
lawa  aoainat  idlenen,  while,  according  to  othera,
Solos,  m  bia  legiiULian,  bocrowed  theae  lava  Jrom
tb  Egjrptiaiia,  and  othen  again  ■lata  that  Peiiii-
tstH  waa  the  fint  who  intndaced  them  at  Athena,
(PIbL  SoL  31.)  Id  accordance  with  thii  lav,
whicb  ii  called  ipyloi  riiiat,  all  poor  people  were
kbligrd  Id  ainiiy  that  tliej  were  (sirying  on  eomc
luMaii  aliTi  bouneea  br  winch  thej  gained  their
findihaid  ^Dta.cEM.^\SOi;  IvxrM.  Ano-
fag,  1 7  ;  Dim ja.  n.  2) ;  and  if  a  penon  bj  hii
iiHiiaaa  injniwd  hia  fiunily,  an  action  might  be
hawgibt  agBimt  him  belan  the  aithon  epatiymni
■at  aol7  trf  a  ntmber  of  bia  teuil}',  but  by  an;
(■c  who  ehoae  to  do  n  iLnie.  Segsa:  p.  310.)
At  Ae  OBae  when  the  Aioopogai  wai  sdll  '
Ul  po^tfaaioD  cf  ita  powen,  the  aichon  lee
have  kid  the  chain  before  ^e  contt  of  the  Aieio-
pi^ia.  If  the  actHD  wu  bronofal  igtunit  a  penon
ir  tbe  fint  tine,  ■  fine  migbt  be  inflicted  on  him
iBd  if  he  wva  fbimd  goilty  a  aecond  or  third  time
he  MJ^t  br  pmiiabed  with  iri^ifa.  (Pollux,  Tiii
«3.)  Dnco  lad  ordained  atimla  u  the  pciialty
na  te  tb«  fint  eonnelnn  of  idleneoa  (Pli  -
NL  B.  c&)  IVa  kw  wu  modified  bf  8o!>
whe  higtled  stimiB  onhr  when  a  pertoD  wai  ci
ibliiJ  a  third  tine,  and  it  ia  doobtAd  at  to  whe-
•  til*  atbnia  waa  inflicted


i,  k  ■  ^bable  that  it  might

tot  is  eaae*  of  in^  ■'"d  when  no  one  csme  fop-
wad  ta  Inng  an  adiMi  ^ainat  ■  peraon  gailtj'  of


(VaLMai.iL  G;  Platner, /Vuxu.  iL  p.  1  £0,
&C.;  Meier  nnd  Schoemann,  Atl.  Pros.  pp.  193,
296,  &c ; Bdckh,  PM.  Bam.  p.  473,  2d  edit.)
'  ccoiding  to  Aelion  (  V.  H.  ii.  1),  a  limilar  law
dated  abo  at  Sardei.  [L.S.}

AR3U'RI0U  DIKE'  (lipyiifim  SIkh),  a  civil
it  of  the  daai  wpJi  ti™,  and  within  the  jurii-
diction  of  the  thennotheCae,  to  cegipcl  the  defend-
ant to  pay  moniee  in  hii  poaiession,  or  for  whidi
be  waa  liable,  to  the  plaintiff.  Thii  action  ia
caioally  allnded  to  in  two ipeechea  of  Demoi-


Cdlipi

of  the  Macedonian  army  cfAJennder'the  Oree  ,
who  were  io  called  becsuie  the;  istried  ihieldi
covered  with  ailier  platei.  The;  were  picked
moi,  and  were  commanded  b;  Nitsnor,  the  nn  of
Pannenion,  and  weie  held  in  high  honour  b;
Alexander.  AAei  the  death  of  Alexander  the;
followsd  Eomenea,  bat  afterwardi  they  deterted  to
AntigonoB,  and  deliTered  Eumenei  up  to  hinu
Antigonui,  howeier,  Kan  broke  ap  the  cocpo,  find-
ing it  too  torbident  to  manage.  (Died.  xrii.  57,
£S,  69,  iviii.  63,  III.  13.41,43,48;  Juatin.xiL
7iCurtiiB,iT.  13  S2;  i  Plutarch,,Bum«.  13,&c  (
DTo;§cn,Miei/bfa.j(iir.pBMim.)  TheGreefckinga
of  Syria  ieem  to  hare  hod  a  corps  of  the  same  name
in  their  amy:  Liry  mentioni  them  aa  the  royal
cohort  in  the  sim;  of  Antiochui  the  Oieit,  {LJT.
IiITiL  40;  Poljb.  V.  79.)  The  Emperor  Alex-
ander SeTemi,  among  other  thing!  in  which  be
imitated  Alexander  tHe  Great,  bad  in  hii  ami;
bodiei  of  men  who  were  called  aTgyroatpida  and
OryKKupida.  {LaiofnA.  Alex.  Set.  Sa.) [P.S.]

ARGYROCOPEION  (VrvfwKor.Kjv),  the
pUce  where  money  waa  coined,  the  mint,  at  Athena.
ll  appean  to  have  been  in  or  adjoining  to  the
chapel  (4pf  or)  of  a  hero  named  Slephanephorua,
in  which  were  kept  the  itandard  weighu  for  the
coinl.  Jut  oi  al  Rome  in  the  Bmctoary  of  Jono
Moneta.  [Monita.I  (Pollni,  viL  103;  Har-
poerat ;  Said. ;  BBchh,  Corp.  Inter.  toL  L  ^  161,
and  the  explanation  of  that  inacription  m  hia
FiMe  Etnaomg  of  Atiau,  p.  144,  3nded.i  comp.
T*LaNT™.)  [P.S.]

ARIADNEIA  (IpuUnu),  fbiliTali  >a1emniied
in  the  iiland  of  Naioa  in  honooi  of  Ariadne,  who,
according  to  one  tradition,  had  died  here  a  natural
death,  and  wai  honoured  with  aacrificeo,  accom-
fmued  by  rejoicing  and  meirimcnt.  (PluL  2Sm.
20.)  Another  foatiial  of  the  i
rlebrated  in  honour  of  Ariadne  :
to  have

death  in  the  month  of  Oor.
piaeoa.  The  Amatboiiani  celled  the  grove  in
which  the  gmve  of  Ariadne  waa  ihown,  that  of
Aphrodite-Ariadne.  Thii  ii  the  account  given  by
Plutarch  (73u.  20)  from  Paeon,  an  Amathnaian
writer.  (Comp.  C.  F.  Hermann,  Likri.  da  (lottet-
ditmll.  AUermmtr,  %  6S.  n.  12.)  [L.  S.]

A'RIES  (>^t),  the  battering'iam,  waa  nied  to
ibake,  perforate,  and  batter  down  the  walla  of  be-


lour  of  Ariadne  in  Q^ua,  which
B  been  inititoted  b;  Thceeua  in


n^ed  dtiei.  It  eonnaled  of  a  Urge  beam,  made
of  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  ei^ecdally  of  a  flr  or  an  aifa.
To  one  end  waa  &atened  a  maai  of  bnmae  or  iron
(itf^oA^,  ItitoXli,  TfWTDuli),  which  leiemhled  in
ill  form  the  head  of  a  ram.  The  upper  figure  in
the  BDoeied  woodeM  ia  taken  from  uie  bu-relie&
on  Iha  column  of  Trajan  at  Rome:,  ft  ahowa  iha
X  3-


134  ARISTOCRATIA.

ariei  in  !ti  linifdut  atatc,  and  u  it  trm  Wns  u

impelled  b;  hamiin  handa,  witJiout  other  bmibIvic

iron  bandi,  lo  which  ringi  wen  atlached  for  ll
purpove  of  luapending  it  by  ropei  or  ehaini  &om
beam  fixed  tranirnHl;  orer  it  See  Ihe  low
ligiiro  in  the  voodnil.  B;  tbii  contriviuee  tl
loldien  were  relieved  from  the  neceuil;  of  lu
porting  the  weight  of  the  rsm,  and  they  could  wi
eofe  give  it  a  rapid  and  forcible  motion  bockwaii


tl — fr


-fr"


::&>


The  Hie  of  iliig  machine  vaa  further  aided  by
placing  the  fmnie  in  which  it  woa  iiupcnded  upon
wheels,  and  also  by  conBtnicting  oTer  it  a  wooden
roof,  ao  aa  to  form  n  **  teatudo  "  (x'A^n}  Kfittnp6fot,
hff\aii,Bdi.Mlik.lZ;  fciftuiD a™Aim, VitrUT. i.
l9),  which  protected  the  bcaieging  partj  from  the
defeniive  ojMiulta  of  the  besieged.  Juaephm,  who
givea  adcscription  of  tho  machine  (B.  J.  iiL  7.  §  19),
adda,  that  there  waa  no  tower  ao  atrong,  no  wall
■D  thick,  aa  to  reaial  the  force  of  thia  machine,  if
ita  bluwa  were  continijed  long  enough.  The  beam
of  the  Biici  waa  often  of  great  length,  a.  ^.  SO,  tOO,
or  even  120  feet.  The  design  of  thi^  wu  both  lo
act  ocTOH an  Intenening  ditch,  and  to  enable  those
who  worked  the  machine  lo  remain  in  a  potitton  of
comparative  Kcurity.  A  hiuidred  men,  or  even  a
greater  number,  were  sometime)  employed  to  atrike
with  the  beam.

The  ariei  fint  beams  an  important  mSitaiy
engine  in  the  handa  of  the  Macedonian!,  at  tho
time  of  PhUip  and  Alexander  the  Great,  though
it  wai  known  at  a  much  earlier  period.  (Comp.
Thuc.  ii.  76.)  Vitniriua  apcaka  {L  e.)  of  Polydu^
a  Theoalian,  in  the  time  of  Philip,  who  greatly


nved  the  machine,  a


irt  of  building  theie  machines,  and  appear  to  have
employed  them  for  the  finit  time  to  any  considersblc
liege  of  Sjcacuae  ill  the  lecoiid  Punic


[H.


ARISTOCRA'TIA  {d^ioTonparfu),  a  term
in  common  nae  among  Orcck  writera  on  politica,
liough  rarely  employed  by  hiatoriana,  or  otherwiie
than  in  connection  with  poUlJcal  theories.  It  aig-
nifiei  literally  "  the  government  of  the  beat  men,"
and  as  used  by  Plato,  Arialotle,  Polybiua,  &c.,  it
meant  (in  reference  to  a  state  where  political
power  waa  not  shared  by  the  bulk  of  the  comnin-
ttit}',  but  vu  in  the  hands  of  a  privileged  clais.


ARISTOCRATIA.

eiia^g  along  with  a  class  personally  free,  and
possessed  of  dvil  rights,  bnt  excluded  froni  the
exercise  of  the  highest  political  functions)  the  go-
Temment  of  a  elus  whose  supremacy  was  founded
not  on  wealth  merely,  but  on  peraonal  dia^ction

alpaimu  rii  ipxif,  Aristot  Pol.  it.  S.  p.  137,
ed.Otitd.  'H  ifinrratfHtrla  B<>6>^rrturiiy  intiptxh'

128).  That  there  ahonld  be  an  ariatocracy,  more-
over, it  waa  essential  thai  the  adminiatration  of
aAairs  should  be  conducted  with  a  view  to  the
promotion  of  the  genera!  intereats,  not  fbr  the  ci-
duslre  or  predominant  advantage  of  the  piivilq^ed
dnsi.  (Aiiitot  PoL  iii.  S,  p.  83,  cd.  CiiltL  ]  Plat
Polit.  p.  301,  a.)  Aa  aoon  as  the  government
ceased  to  be  thus  conducted,  or  whenever  the  only
title  to  political  power  in  the  dominant  Class  was  the
posseuion  of  aaperior  wealth,  the  eonstilutioa  was
tenned  an  oligarchy  {iXiyafxia\  which,  in  tho
technical  lue  of  the  term,  was  always  looked  npon
as  a  cormplion  (rofMaais,  Aristot.  PoL  iii.  5.
p.  Si,  ed.  Qdttl.)  of  an  aiistooncy.  (Comp.  Plat,
/.ai  Arist. /-oi.  iv.  3,  pp.117,  l)8,ed.Gflttl.iT.  6,

TDi.)  In  the  practical  application  of  the  term  aiis-
tocracy,  however,  the  penonal  excellence  which  wii
held  to  be  B  necessaiy  element  was  not  of  a  higher
kind  than  what,  according  lo  tho  deepty-aeated
ideaa  of  the  Greeks,  was  commonly  hereditary  in
£imilies  of  nobis  birth  (Plat.  Mntuc.  n.  237,0.,
Craiy.  p.  39i,  a. ;  Aristot.  PoL  it.  6,  i}  -vAp  ti-
TfVtut  iirrir  ipxo^"  ■AoDtoi  ical  ifif-rii.  t.  1,
tbytrttt  Tip  itvu  ioicoJo-ii'  oli  Inripxii  uprfimr
ifrri)  Hal  iXgiiToi),  and  in  early  times  would
he  the  ordinaiy  accompaniments  of  noble  rank,
namely,  wealth,  mililaij  skill,  and  superior  edu-
cation and  intelligence  (comp.  Aristot.  PoL  ii.  6,
flikBaal  KoXta/  ....  ApnTTOftpaTlaf  Sid  r^  ^uiAAfv
djToAovOfrr  witiv  JCal  tbyittiOM  rots  tbwoptrri-
poll).  It  is  to  be  Doted  that  the  word  ipirro-
Kparla  is  never,  like  the  English  term  anttocmcy,
the  name  of  a  class,  but  only  of  a  paiticiihtrpolitiml

On  tracing  the  historical  development  of  aris-
locratital  government,  we  meet  with  a  cmdition
of  things  which  may  almost  be  called  by  that
name  m  the  state  of  society  depleted  m  the
Homeric  poems,  where  we  already  see  the  power
of  tho  kings  limited  by  that  of  a  body  of  princes
or  nobles,  such  as  would  naturally  arise  in  the  iit-
^cy  of  society,  especially  among  tribes  in  which,
from  the  frequency  of  wan,  martial  skill  would
be  >  sure  and  speedy  method  of  acquit^  supi>-
riority.  When  the  liingly  &milics  diod  out,  of
were  stripped  of  their  peculiar  privileges,  the  su-
premo power  nnlurolly  passed  mto  the  hands  or
theac  princes  or  chieftains,  who  formed  a  body  of
nobles,  whose  descendants  irould  of  course  for  the
most  part  inherit  those  natural,  and  be  also  alone  in
a  position  lo  secure  those  acquired  advantages,  espe-
cially warlike  skill,  which  would  form  their  title
to  political  superiority.  Some  aristocracies  thua
arose  from  the  natural  progress  of  society  i  othara
arose  from  conqnest  The  changes  consequent  on
the  rise  of  the  Hellenes,  and  the  Thessalian,
Boeotian  and  Dorian  conqneits  in  Qreece,  esta-
blished pretty  ^erally  a  atate  of  things  in  which
we  find  tho  pobrical  power  in  the  hands  of  a  body
of  nobles  consisting  chiefly  or  entirely  of  the  oou-
queron,  beneath  whom  is  ■  &ee  population  not


ARMA.
■aMcNed  rf  palitiol  rigfati,  coDauting  of  Ibe  Ma
aUbianU  of  1^  luM,  together  with,  in  moM
JMl  Bill  III,  >  bodf  of  tab  MtKbed  tn  llw  dnmuiu
rf  ika  uUck.  TbtM  b>t  an  dncribcd  ondei
laiiMi  iBMMa,  M  EttoTpStai  in  Attics,  or  Tmiiipot
as  ia  Sjacn*  and  wrenl  of  ths  Doric  MOUa.
Fna  tlw  mpaior  eSdenc;  of  the  andiy  ia  eul;
tnaos  >v  UB  find  tha  noble*  bj  a  dan  beuiiig
tka  BiaH  'twwtnu,  'Isrtii,  or  'Iwrntirai  (u  in
Clalcii,  Hefod.  t.  77),  limee,  gdwnll]-  ^e^king,
ihcj  ■!««  had  wealth  niSeient  to  enable  tbem  U
•fsip  thtmtdwa  for  that  kind  of  KTrla  ;  md  in
BMt  State*  tha  fint  great  adTUKe  nf  the  com-
■iMialtj  ia  paws  mae  ^m  llieir  guning  grcalct
-*'^— -y  aa  luaTf-aimed  foot  •oldien  ;  (hat  force,
wh^  pnperij  laganiud  and  anned,  being  fonnd
■•n  thaa  a  match  foi  caTatiy.  (See  opecially
Aiirt.  /^  IT.  S,  10  ;  K.  F.  Henuaiui,  Grieti.
Stmi^fl^rlL  e.  iiL  H^A— ^9  ;  Wachnoulb,  HcU
b.  AlttTHmm^  ToL  L  c  3.  |g  »,  31  ;  ThiH-
walt,  UiH.  ^  Oma,  lol.  L  c  10.  p.  391,  Ac)
CenaiB  the  aitidea  EurATKiDAa,  QtouoKi,
PiTajcn.  [C.  P.  M.]

ARHA,  AltHATU'ItA  (SrAo,  Horn.  Irrta,
Ti^X*a)i  anu,  anncni.  Homer  deacnbei  in  nriooi
paaage*  the  oitin  «nit  of  annm  of  aoma  of  hia
grcMcM  wairina,  to,  of  Achillea,  Patroclni,  Aga-

BiiB 11. Heneluu  aod  Paha  {IL  iiL  3'i8-~b39,

i».  132— 13e,iL  15— IS,  iri.  130— 142,  lit  364
— 391 )  i  and  we  obaora  that  it  eoniiited  of  the
^BBE  pjtiiip*  which  were  naed  b;  theOreek  aoldien
rrrr  after.  Horeorcr,  the  order  of  patting  them  on
ii  atwaja  tha  Mine.  The  heaTy-armed  irarTiai,
haring  slceadj  a  tonic  annmd  hii  body,  and  pre-
fariag  fcw  eoenhal,  pataon, — fint,  hiignaTet  (o^-
lutn,  eenaa)  ;  aeeoBdIjr,  hit  cniraaa  (S^fuf,  lorvxi),
M  which  belflDged  the  i^Tfn  nndemettlb,  and  the
Hse  l(Af%  Cwr*^, oa^a^m)  above  ;  tliird];,hi*
award  (ftfot,  aaaia,  gladiiu)  hung  on  the  leit  lide  of
hia  bodr  by  ncaiu  of  a  belt  which  poiaed  oii
right  aiiMiJild ;  finrthlf ,  the  luge  nnnd  ihidd
(«^B*t,  irwli,  tiipeia,  tcKtaa),  luppottcd  in
■me  jaapner ;  fifthly,  hii  belmel  (x^fU'i,  inirtti,
■ia,  g'ka)  ;  aiithly  and  lutlj ,  he  look  hia  apear
CtXOi  '■Wi  ^b''")'  '"'i  in  many  oaea,  two  apeart
<ti^H  S^).  Tbe  form  and  nac  of  thne  portio
are  deaeribed  10  aefante  aiticlea  under  their  LbI

ik  dm  of  a  Qmk  nnior  atliied  for  battle,
^wn  in  HcfM^  Oahw*  o/Of  AmcumU  (L  70).
Thaae  who  woe  defended  ia  tbe  manner  vhi
baa  now  been  iqiroenled,  are  called  by  Hon .
Wnma^ £nna their  great ibidd  (imli)  ;  alw
A)fX*p'X**>  becaaae  they  fbngbt  band to
■nik  dwir  adTeiBrifa  ;  bnt  much  more  comj ,
cauaa  they  occupied  the  front  of  the
it  ia  to  be  obaetved  that  thcae  lerma,
■a  laat,  were  hopourable  titlea,  the  ei-
pcs^  af  a  complpte anit of  annour  (rarttrXiyf,
Had.  L  60)  bemg  of  iUelf  auffident  to  pmre  the
■■■llh  and  nnk  of  the  wearer,  while  hit  place  on
the  Md  wa*  BO  lea  indicative  «f  •ttcngtl

la  later  tioM^  the  hcary-armed  aoldien  were

lalli  H  trXinu,  bccauae  the  term  SvAa  more

daOjr  douted  the  defenuTs  annooi,  the  ihiei
Ihara*  Br  waring  Iheae  they  were  diatingoiahed
ftaM  the  Ughtamwd,  whom  HerodMat  (ii.62,
SI>,  Ih  tbe  reaaon  joat  mentioned,  ealla  SwrAai,
a^  who  are  alao  denominated  '^Aal,  and  Tu/in>I,
la^ijiai.  i«  ]i|i[i~iT ImtMd  of  being  defimded


ARUA.  13S

by  the  ihidd  and  thonui,  thor  bodiea  had  a
' alight<T  covering  aonetimac  eopiiatii^  nf


of  leather  or  cloth  ;  and  in-
need  of  the  tword  and  lance,  they  commonly  Anight
with  darli,  alonea,  bow*  and  strowi,  or  tliogi.

Beiidea  the  heavy  and  light-armed  loldiere,  the
^\iTiu  and  ^lAol,  who  in  general  bore  towarda
one  another  the  intimate  relation  now  eiptuned,
another  deacriplion  of  men,  tbe  itiAtbotoI,  alao
fonned  a  part  of  the  Greek  army,  thongh  we  da
not  hear  of  them  in  early  timet.  Init«d  of  the
large  round  thield,  Iheycairieda  imallerone  called
the  xAtii,  and  in  other  retpccti  their  armour  wa*
much  lighter  than  that  of  the  hoptitet.  The  weapfni
oa  which  they  principallj  depended  wai  the  apeur.

Tbe  Roman  aoldiert  had  different  kinda  of  arma
and  annouij  but  an  account  of  the  aima  of  tha
different  kinda  of  ttoopa  cannot  be  aeparaled  from  a
deacription  of  tbe  boope  of  a  Koman  army,  and  tbe
reader  it  therefore  referred  to  ExanciTUS.  Wa
need  only  give  here  tbe  fignre  of  a  Roman  eoldier
taken  from  the  arch  of  S^imnt  Severua  at  Rome.
On  comparing  it  with  that  of  the  Greek  hoplita  in
perceira  that  the  teveial  parla  of
;pting  only  tbat  the
iwmaa  toiuier  wean  a  aagger  (/ioxoipa,  paffio)
on  hia  right  tide  initead  ofa  tword  on  hia  left,  and
inttead  of  greavea  upoa  hit  lega,  hBi/emoraiia  and
caligae.  All  the  eatenlial  pattt  of  the  Roman
heavy  armour  (lorica,  aui*,  etipau,  gaira,  hatla)
are  mentioaed  together  in  an  epigram  of  Martial
(ii.  S7)  ;  and  all  eicept  the  spear  inawell  known
paatage  (E^  -n.  Ii— 17)  of  St.  Paol,  whoae  enu-
meration  exactly  coioeidet  with  tbe  figurei  on  the
Bich  of  SeTerua,  and  who  makea  mention  not  only
of  graavea,  bat  of  thoca  or  tandali  for  the  feeL

The  Boft  or  flexible  parte  of  the  heavy  armour
were  imtde  ti  doth  or  leather.  The  metal  prind-
pally  aaed  in  their  formation  waa  that  compound  of


I)  coU  b


•  o"


amour,  uid  the  light  reflected  from  the  Bmu  of  B
wanior  ii  called  aifrt  x"^''l  l>y  Homer,  uid  lua
utna  by  Virgil.  (Xm.ii.*70.)  Iiutmd  of  copper,
iron  Hflervardfl  cune  to  be  rery  exteiuiTelj  uied
in  the  muiubctiiTe  of  Brmi,  ilthoagli  irticles  made
of  It  Hre  much  more  nrely  diicoTcrcd,  bccBoie  inm
ii  by  0  jpoeure  to  air  and  moiatiiro  eiceedinglj  liable
to  coiroaion  and  decay.  Gold  and  ailier,  and  tin
nniniied  with  copper,  were  rI»  used,  more  espe-
cially to  enrich  and  adorn  tbe  armour. [J.  Y.J

AHMA'RIUM,  originaUy  >  place  for  keeping
arma,  attcnrardi  a  cupboard,  Kt  nprigbt  in  tbe
wall  of  a  room,  in  whicb  were  kept  not  only  anna,
but  alio  clothea,  booka,  money,  araamentg,  nnnll
inuigei  and  pictnm,  and  other  artido  of  iiJue.
The  armarium  wai  genenlly  placed  in  the  atrinm
of  the  houte.  (Dig.  33.  tit.  ID,  l  3  r  Cic  i^
aim.  Si  :  Petron.  Sal.  29  j  Flip.  H.  N.  iiii.
5.  1.  32,  nxv.  2.)  The  di™ioni  of  a  library
were  called  ormru.  (VitruT.  xiL  Pme/: ;  Vopiw:.
Toe.  8.)  We  find  armarium  dittegum  mentionGd
u  a  kind  of  lepulchn  in  an  inaciiptiDn  in  Oniler
(p.  383.  No.  i).  For  Dtkec  puMgea  Me  Fonel-
lini,».c.  (P.S.]

ARMILLA  (ifxUior,  <iiXar,  or  ^^AAior,  x^i-
JMr,  Ah^Moa),  a  bracelet  or  aimlet,  worn  both  by

the  Hedei  and  Peniani  (Herod.


0.  AmA.  L  2.  g  27)  ;  and
worn  W  tbe  Oanli  and  Sab
Lit.  l  1  ] .) Bmxleta  do  not  appear  to  hare  been


T^\l


worn  aninig  the  Oreeki  bj  (he  male  KX,  but  Greek
ladiet  bad  bnteeleti  of  Tariont  raaleriiU,  ibape^
and  ttylei  of  onnnient. The  bracelet  wu  ■
timea  called cr^ryirr^p  (&mn t'^iSrfyti),  in  1
fpuMer  or  ^iitar  (PlanL  MtmoKik.  Hi.  3),  i
derived  iti  name  from  ili  keegmig  ili  place  by

Cing  the  trm  of  the  wtarer. Bracelet!  ki
been  frequently  maJe  withrat  baring  their
end*  jeiiMd ;  they  were  then  curved,  10  aa  to  rer  ^ -


ARMILLA.

when  pnt  CO,  to  be  (lightly  expanded  by  hwing

cording  to  their  length,  they  went  once,  twice.  Of
thrice  roond  the  ann,  or  ovm  a  grester  numbm  of
timet.  At  they  beqnently  exhibited  the  form  of
KTpenU,  they  were  in  luch  nuei  called  maitt
(%«)  by  the  Athenians  (H«ych.  ..t.  Kfti.).
Twilled  braceleti  of  the  kind  deecribed  aboie  often
occur  on  Greek  painted  laiea.  See  the  annexed
cut  flrom  Sir  William  Uamiltoii^  gnat  wn-k,
vol.iLpLSfi.


omamenti.  (Snel.  CU.  fi2,iVer.  30.)  Theyvero,
hnwevei,  jmblicly  conferred  by  a  Roman  gener&l
upon  loldicra  for  deed*  of  eitntordinaiy  merit
(LiT.x.«i  Plin.ff.A'.  IIliiL2i  Feitui,  i.  o. )  j
in  which  caiethey  were  worn  ai  ■  mark  of  honour,
and  probably  differed  in  fonn  from  the  ordinary
ornament!  of  the  kind. See  the  cut  below.

The  followmg  cut!  exhibit  Roman  bracelets.
The  fint  figure  repreienU  a  gold  bracelet  dta-
cotered  at  Rome  on  the  Palatine  MdudL  (Caylua,
fl«.  i-Aiit.  ToL  T.  pL  93.)  Tbe  ixnetle  in  tha
middle  ii  compoaed  of  diitinct  aad  very  delicate
leavei.  The  two  atarlike  floiKen  on  each  aide  of
it  have  been  repealed  where  the  holea  lor  Mcnriiig
them  are  itiU  Tuible.  The  leccmd  fignn  repnKnU


fnU  ain  twiited  tagedttr,  ud  tbe  mode  of  b«-
MB|il^oatLamnD,  by  aelUFi  u  voitby  ofab-
•BWioi.  IlkMVTidcnUTbecDiUdj-iomuiwDL
Ac  AM  ipm  RinMDti  in  umilU,  wliuh  miut
hnhM  intaided  M  •  Kwud  fra' •oUien,  for  it
*"U  it  lidkaliNu  to  wqipaMiDch  ■  muare  ot-
>MM  IB  hara  bscD  da^Dod  for  mmwD-  The
np4  (<  fors  g<dd,  u  mon  than  twice  the
Bflk  if  th*  fgora,  ud  «■!  found  in  ChEahin.
{Jnfaini9te,miL400.)
_jJUnLU'STMUM.  a  Rcnnm  ftMiT*]  for  tfae
^ifcilia  rfmnfc  ll  wm  cel«hr»ted  ererr  jmr
a  tit  I4lk  liefin  llw  lalaidi  of  NaTember  (Oct


•A«dMifiB«in  Um  pbca
irViaiAmitDitari,in  tbc  ISthrrgioa  of  ths^.^.
"■«^  »■ ».;  V«in),  i>i  Lb^.  Lot.  W.  32,  «.  3 ;
Lii.nrH.  J7;  p.  Viet  O.  AvKwOM^r.  R.;
I«i^  in  Oinur,  p.  2£0.)  (P- S.]

■UillA,A'KRABO,(irARRHA^'RKHAB0,
Oa(KLlI».)  n7*:  "  Whmt  ti  giren  u  am,  ii
>(nrf«f  a  comiact  of  bnjing  tai  Hlling}"  bnl
s  ibo  Ut  a  mm  gsienl  tignmcalian.  That  thing
*ii  cilkd  ntlia  which  one  contracttng  part^  gave
^  BK/^B,  wbethn'  it  waa  a  aoni  of  money  or  any
ibif  f^  u  an  rridetice  of  the  conlnct  of  aale
^^  niilc :  it  waa  no  taamtiai  patt  of  the  cdd-
faa  rf  InjiDg  and  tcUiog,  bat  od;  evidence  of
wwrataa  In  price.  (Oaiiu,  Dig.  IS.tit.  l.aSS).
•ta  (Elba  might  be  giTen  before  the  completion
<<  a  ttDtract,  when  the  agreemenE  waa  that  aomc
Inal  ■nAronwnt  in  writing  ihonld  be  made,
^^Ti  4a  CBBtfact  ahnJd  be  conaidervd  perfect.
If  k  *bo  gara  the  anfaa  refbaed  to  pei^  the
aoan,  ba  forfeited  it-,  if  he  who  had  receind
&  anjia,  relaaed  to  pcriect  the  conDact,  he  waa
^qpdtBRtanidoDUetbeamDniitofthearrha.  If
*e  mH^  waa  ^toi  aa  eridence  of  a  conOacl  abeo-
Uf  made,  it  waa  endence  of  the  nnaltenhle
riRpnjuu  <f  tlu  eantract,  which  neither  partj-
■hi*  could  icadnd  j  nnlcM  the  atiha  waa  ei-
pi^  giTCD  to  [TOTide  for  the  caaa  of  either
fn]  f^Mging  hia  mind,  on  the  emdition  that  if
^  fircr  Rccded  fnna  hia  bargain,  be  ihould  for-
^  the  sAa,  and  if  the  icceirer  receded  from
^  kBBin,  he  abedd  forieit  double  tta  Talne.
Vba  Uw  cBonact  waa  eotnjdetelj  peifonned,  in
•il  aiB  wkere  the  anba  waa  monef,  it  waa  re-
Bnd^  or  taken  aa  part  of  the  price,  tuileu  ipecial
"■■i  detonned  otherwite ;  when the  arrha


ABTABA.  137

of  money  which  a  pnichaier  of  land  in  England
genetallf  paji,  accoiding  to  the  conditiont  of  lule,
on  coutraclinK  for  hia  puichaae ;  and  the  eaineit
money aomeUniea paid on  a  aale of  moTeabIs


«b^init


Uothm.


*{,P<«mB<,).


.]  Sometiniea  the  word  airha  ii
naed  aa  aynonymona  with  pignna  (Terent.  fieot^oni.
iii.3. 12),  bat  thia  ia  not  the  l^al  meaning  of
the  term.  (Thihant,  SyHtm  ia  Pamidilm-IlKif,
9  144 ;  Inat  iiL  til.  2S ;  Dig.  18.  tit.1.  a  85  i  tit.  3.
aGj  14.  tit  3.  a.£.  gl£;  19.  tit  1.  a.11.  SG;
Cod.  4.  tit  21.  a.  17;  Oellina,  iriL  2 ;  compare
Biacton,  iL  c.  27,  Aa  oejanaifo  flernn  Domi-
mo  at  oam  Ernpliimit,  and  what  he  taja  on  the
arrha,  with  the  passage  in  Owna  already  leleited
to.)  [O.  L.]

ARRHEPHO'RIA  (ifhtipw),  a  festival
which,  acctnding  to  the  variona  wayi  in  which  the
name  ia  wiitlen  {(at  we  find  Jpmi^pia  oiif^fi^pia,)
is  atniboted  to  diSerant  deiliea  The  Gnl  form  is
derived  from  if^a,  and  thiu  would  indicate  a
festival  at  which  myslerioiu  thing*  were  carried
abont  The  other  name  would  point  to  Erse  or
Heiae,  a  dangbta  of  Cecropa,  and  wboae  worthip
waa  intimatdy  connected  with  that  of  Athena.
And  there  ia,  indeed,  anfficient  groimd  for  believ-
ing that  the  feativaJ  was  aolemniied,  in  a  higher
sense,  in  honour  of  Athcaa.  (ElfnioL  Mag.  t.  d.
'Af^^^poi.)  It  was  held  at  Athena,  in  the  month
of  Skirophotion.  Foot  giria,  of  between  leven  and
eleven  years  {ifiPTf^pvi,  ipffyjipdpoi,  ifipTj^pot :
Ariatoph.  Lftiil.  £42),  were  selected  every  year
bj  the  bing  archon  from  the  moat  diitinguished
funiliea,  two  of  whom  iDpcrintcnded  the  weaving
of  the  aacred  peplna  of  Athena,  which  was  begun
on  the  last  day  of  Pvanepsioa  (Snid.  a  v.  Xii\.
«ia)  ;  the  two  others  had  to  cany  the  mysterious
and  aacred  vesaela  of  the  roddeu.  These  latter
remained  a  whole  year  on  the  Asopolia,  either  in
the  Pajtbenoa  or  lome  adjoining  building  (Har-
poerat  a  v.  i-iin-B^ipm -.  Pans,  l  27.  3  4)  ;  and
when  the  featival  commenced,  the  priestess  of  the
goddess  placed  vessel*  npon  their  heads,  the  con-
tents of  which  were  neither  known  to  them  nor  to
the  prieiteH.  With  these  they  deacended  to  a
natural  grotto  within  the  district  of  Aphrodite  in
the  gardena.  Here  the;  dcpoiiled  the  aacred  vea-
■cla,  and  carried  bock  something  else,  which  waa
iMvered  and  likewise  unknown  to  them.  After
thia  the  giris  were  diamiased,  and  others  were
chosen  to  supply  their  place  in  the  acropolis  The
^rla  wore  white  rohea  adorned  with  gold,  which
were  left  for  the  goddeu  ;  and  a  peculiar  kind  of
cake*  waa  baked  forthem.  To  cover  the  eipenies  of
the  festival,  a  pecnliar  liturgy  was  established,  called
ifpVfpii^  All  other  details  concerning  thia  fes-
tival are  unknown.  (Comp.  C.  F.  Hermazui,  Ltiri.
da- gaOaJiaatl.  Altartk  g  61.  n.  9.) [L.  S.J

ARROOATTO. [Adoftio.]

A'RTABA  (ifrrign),  a  Persian  measure  of
capacity,  principally  used  a*  a  com-meaaure,  which
contained,  according  to  Hendotiia  (i.  1S2),  1  me-
dimnna  and  3  choenicea  (Attic),  i.  e.  51  choenicea
=102  Roman  ■eitarii^l2}gH]loni  nearly;  bnt,
according  to  Suidaa,  Hesjchiui,  PolyaeniiB  (SraL
iv.  3,  32),  and  Epipbanins  <i>(W.  24)  only  1
Attic  mcdimnus  =96  seibirii^J2  gallons  nearly:
the  latter  is,  however,  only  on  approiuiiatB  tains.


138  ARVALES  FBATRES.

There  wu  at  Egjpttan  meuon  of  the  nine  name,
of  ohich  Lhcmren  tiro  nfti,  the  old  and  the  new
utnba.  (Didymui,  c  19.)  The  old  arMba  con-
tBuifld  i^  Soman  modii  =  73  (eitarii  ^  9  gBiloni
nead;,  according  to  mut  wriUn;  tmt  Galoi
(c.  S)  makea  it  enutly  5  modiL  It  wu  about
eqnal  to  tlie  Actio  metnCa;  and  it  wai  half  of
the  Ptolemaic  medimona,  which  «ai  to  the  Attic
mediiDDiu  ai  3  :  2.  The  later  ud  mora  eoiainaii
EftTptiui  arbata  contained  3j^  modii  =  63^  MX-
tariiaiG^gBlloiu  aboat, which  ia  »  nearly  the  half
of  the  Fertiait,  that  we  maj  birl;  iii|^H«a  that  in
reality  it  wu  the  half-  It  wai  equal  to  the
Olympio  ciihio  fooL  (Rhemn.  Fann.  Canm  de
Pimd.  a  M«H.  T.  BS,  90  ;  Hienn.  Ad  Eitch.  6  ;
BSckh,  Mtlnlog.  UotmwA.  pp.  242,  &e.,  S8£  ;
PM.Bam.  of  AA.  p.  93,  Sod  ed.;  Wann,  De
PMd^  &0.  p.  133.)  [P.  S.]

ARTEMI'S[A<V»^«).oneofiheg™ife«-
tirali  celebialed  in  himoDr  of  Artemii  in  rarioai
t>artiofaiwce,intheiprinKoflhe;ear.  Wetindit
mentioiied  at  Syracnn  in  bonour  of  Artemii  Po-
lamia  and  Soteik.  (Find.  Py&.  11  12.)  It  luted
three  dayi,  which  wen  piiiKipallj  apent  in  feaeting
and  amnaementiL  (Liy.  nr.  23  ;  Plut.  MartnO.
16.)  Bread  wai  o^Md  to  her  nnder  the  name  of
itaxlf-  (Hei^h.  L  e.)  Bat  thue  feitiTali  occnr  in
man;  othei  plaeea  in  Oreeee,  at  at  Delphi,  where,
according  to  Hegeunder  (Atheo.  viL  p.  32£),  they
offered  to  the  goddeu  a  mnllet  on  thii  occuion  j
becBiiM  it  appeared  to  hnnt  and  kill  the  Ma-hare,
and  thnf  bore  eome  reaemblance  to  Artonia,  the
goddeu  of  bnntina.  The  ume  aame  wai  siren  to
the  featitals  of  Ajrtemia  m  Cyrene  and  Epheani,
though  in  the  latter  place  the  goddeu  wai  not  the
Grecian  Aitenui,  bnt  a  deitjr  of  Eaitem  origin.
(Dionyt.  ir.  2S  i  Achil!.  Tat  tL  4,  TiL  12,  viiL
17  ;  Xenoph.  EpitM.  I  2.)  [L.  S.]

ARU'KA  (lEpovpa),aOreehmeainreofnirgue.
which  would  appear,  &om  ita  aame,  to  hare  been
originally  the  cluef  land-meanin.  It  waa,  accwd-
ing  to  Suidai,  the  fourth  part  of  the  rKiSfor,
The  ukUpar,  ai  a  mcaiure  of  length,  contained
101)  Greek  feet;  ita  equare  therelbn —10,000
teet,  and  therebre  the  amra  =2500  Greek  iquan
ibet,  or  the  aqnare  of  50  bet.

Hendotna  (iL  153)  mentiona  a  meaaore  of  the
Hune  name,  but  apparently  of  a  different  aiia.  He
nya  that  it  ii  a  hundred  Egyptian  cubila  in  every
direction.  Now  the  Egyp^an  cubit  contained
nearly  17iinchea  <Hiuaey,  Am/bU  WngiU,  Ice
Ii.237)i  therefore  the  iqnan  of  100  i  17|inchea,
(.<■  neariy  HZ  feet,  giTea  approiiiDately  the  nnm-
ber  of  equal*  feat  (Engll^)  in  the  anin,  ja,
21,90*. CWnnn,  i).  Pond.  At  p.  91.) [P.  S.]

ARUSPEX. [HAaoarix.]

ARVA'LES  FRATRES. The  fratna  arralea


Lot,  T.  85,  HiUler),  from  o%cing  pnUio  ncri-
fioei  for  the  fertility  of  the  fidda.  That  they  wo*
of  extreme  antiqui^  ia  pimed  by  the  legend  which
refen  their  inititution  to  Romnlui,  of  o-hom  it  ia
■aid,  that  when  hi*  nune  Acca  Laiireutia  loat  one  of
her  twelre  aona,  he  allowed  buntelf  to  be  adopted
by  her  in  bia  ptaca,  and  called  himiolf  and  the
remmning  eletan  "  FratMa  ArraJea,"  (Oeil.  tL  7.)
We  alao  find  a  college  called  the  Sodala  TItii,  and
aa  the  latlsr  were  confeaaedly  of  Sabice  origin,  and
inalitnted  for  the  poipote  of  keeping  ap  the  Sabine


.  (Tac


Lsa),  t


ASTALEa  FRATRES.
reaaoB  for  the  aippontioB  of  NMnhi  (Amb.  Hitl.
voLL  P.S03X  tlMthnacoIl^et  (anapoadadoM
to  the  other — the  Fntret  Ariilci  being  connected
with  the  Utin,  and  the  Sodalea  TitU  with  the
Sabine,  dement  of  the  Roman  Mate,  jntt  a«  there
were  two  college*  of  the  £*$wn3,  namdy,  tho  Faia
and  the  QrimtlUli,  the  fbrmer  of  whom  itta  to
hare  belonged  to  the  Sabine*.

The  office  of  the  fcatre*  amlea  wU  br  life,
and  waa  not  taken  away  eren  finm  an  exile  or
c^itiTe,  They  wore,  aa  a  badge  of  office,  a  duuitet
of  ear*  of  com  (ipuaa  oonna)  &atened  on  their
heada  with  a  while  band.  (PIm.  ff.  Pf.  iriii.  2.)
The  nmnber  giien  by  inacriptioni  variea,  but  it  ia

legend  and  general  belief  it  amonnted  to  twelTc
One  of  their  annual  duties  waa  to  celebrate  a  three
day*'  featiial  in  hononr  of  Dea  Dia,  auppoted  to  In
Cuei,  Bometimei  held  on  the  XVL,  xiv.,  and  xui,
■ometime*  on  the  vi.,  iv.,  and  m.  KaL  Jan.,  i.  e.
nn  the  17tb,  t9tb,  and  20th,  or  the  27lh,  S9th,
and  30tb  of  May.  Of  thli  the  raaater  of  Iha
collie,  ^ipointed  annuallv,  gats  public  notics
{imiiaial)  from  the  temple  of  CoDConl  on  Iha
capitoL  On  the  Gnt  and  but  of  theee  daya,  tho
collegB  met  at  the  hmae  of  their  preaidant,  to  maka
ofFeringi  to  the  Dea  Dia  ;  on  the  aecond  they  aa-
aembled  in  the  gntre  of  the  tamo  goddeaa,  aboat
fire  milea  tenth  of  Ruine,  and  than  offend  aacri-
ficea  for  tlie  tertQity  of  the  earth.  An  acconnt  of
the  different  ceremnuea  of  this  feetinl  ia  prcaetrcd
in  an  inacriplion,  which  wu  written  in  the  fint
yeu  of  the  Emperor  Elagabaln*  (a.  D.2I8),  who
wu  elected  a  member  ^  the  college  nnder  tha
name  of  H.  Aurelina  Antoninua  Pin*  Felis.  Tha
Bune  inacriplion  containa  a  hymn,  which  appean
to  hare  been  tnng  at  the  featiTal  from  the  moit
andcDt  timet.  (Marini,  Atti  t  MoKuaaiti  dtgU
Arrtali,  tab.  ili. ;  Ocelli,  Carp,  /aaerip.  nt.  2270  ;
Klauten,  Dt  Carnant  Fratnm  Jno^oa.)

Betidea  thi>  fettiial  of  the  Dea  Dia,  the  fraties
arraica  were  required  on  Tariont  occaaioia,  nnder
the  emperon,  to  make  Towa  and  offer  up  thanka<-
giving  tn  enumeration  of  which  ia  given  in  For-
oellini.  (£«£  K  r.)  StrBbo,indeed  (t.  3),  mforma
u  that,  in  &a  reign  of  Tiberint,  theae  prietti
(I'poiuriiiiaHs)  per&rmed  lacrificet  called  the  Am~
lanalia  at  vanou  place*  m  tho  borden  of  tha
Bger  Romanu,  or  original  tenitny  of  Rome  ;  and
amongat  othera,  at  Fetti,  a  place  between  five  and
ail  imlea  &am  the  dty,  in  the  direction  of  Alba.
There  ia  no  boldncaa  in  anppoaing  tbat  thia  waa  «
euatom  banded  down  ftou  ome  immomorial,  and,
moreoTer,  that  it  wu  a  duty  of  thii  prietlhood  to
inTuke  a  btc*aing  on  the  whole  leniloij  of  Rome.
It  it  pmred  by  Inacriptkna  that  thia  college  ez-
iated  till  theMdgnoftbeEnipencQaidian,  or  >.  ik
335,  and  it  ia  prebabte  that  it  wu  not  aboliahed
till  A.  D.  400,  ti«ether  with  the  other  collegea  of
the  I'agaD  prieathooda.

The  private  ambanilia  were  outaioly  of  «
different  naton  from  thoee  mentiootd  by  Stiaba,
and  were  *o  called  from  the  rictini  {ioitia  amiar-
vdit)  that  wna  alain  on  the  occuiim  being  ted  tliroa
timet  round  the  eornfielda,  before  the  tickle  wna

a  enwd  of  mary-makan  (otonn  tf  ■oc't),  tlie
reapen  and  bim-aemiM*  danung  and  tinging,  aa
they  marched  aloi^  the  Haita*  of  Cena,  and
praying  for  her  bTonr  and  pnienor,  while  tbef
oSued  W  tha  lihatiana  ttBalk,iaa^,it'd.  win*.


{Vi^Cni^^LUS.)  TUtcncmsDjvudMeallad
■ ■ "■  —  ■ "*'  "lc«tion ;  and

a;,  4iid  the
a,  the  rmdei
m  (a.  !)■  It  U,  pnh*pa,
kllMtPiiIjbiiu(i*.31.  |9)
It  uplkable  U  tbo  Raman  am-
[  of  the  Mantinewia,  who,  he  nji
odd),  made  a  pnnflcatioD,  and
id  tlie  eitr,  and  aH  the  eoniitiy.
TWr  ia,  bsvenTi  ■  itill  gnata  reKmbUncs  to
Aa  litca  wc  haxe  bm  deHibing,  in  tfaa  cen-
■«ea  <f  the  mgation  or  gang  nek  of  the  Latin
dnck  Tliaaa  cennMcd  of  piDcsMJoiu  tlmngh
the  GcUa,  aeeompanied  with  jmyta  {ngatuma)
in  a  liliiaiin  on  the  fioiti  of  the  «aith,  and  were
n»tia«ed  doriDg  tltfee  di^  m  Whitann-weelc
n*  emttam  wit  aboluhed  at  the  BdbnnatUia  in
oaatqaapce  of  iti  abai^  and  tba  peraoiboktian  of


[R-W.]

ARX(Si^r«)<*i|P>ific^&^^I>t  «ithin  thenlli
rf'  a  dtj,  bat  which  ni  nerer  eloaed  by  a  wall
■iniaat  the  atj  in  wlkr  tiniM,  and  Tcrj  •ddom
IB  kta  timea.  The  anne  dty  mj  have  had
•etoal  met,  ■■  vaithe  om  at  RoBe;  and  hence
Vrgil  aajn  with  gnat  pmpietj  (Gtorp.  a.  GSfJ  :—

'  SeptoBqBe  una  nbi  mun  drcamdedit  aieea."

Ai,  harerav  then  waa  nnerally  one  prineipal
h^ibi  in  the  ei»f,the  Tordar*  ouneto  be  ued  ai
tqanlent  to  otf^stit  [AcKoPotltJ.  {Niehnhr,
fan  yAMw,  Tot.  iu.  note  411.)  At  Rome,  me
tl  tbc  aaBmita  of  the  CaiHtoline  hill  ni  ■peoallj
<aIM  Am,  bat  irtiich  of  them  ni  >o  oUled  hai
befla  a  anbyect  <tf  grrat  diipote  among  Roman  topo-
giijihi  n  The  opinion  of  the  beit  modem  writen
k,  ihat  th«  Oyifc*"—  waa  on  the  northern  mmmit,
ad  the  Jn  on  the  nnthem.  The  Jrw  mu  the
jrfwkr  pbec  at  Rome  far  tiUug  the  aiupiaa,  and
WIS  hence  likewin  called  OKgrnynhm,  according
•■  hnha  Diaevna,  thongh  it  it  more  pobablo
A^  the  A^nncnlmn  wai  a  place  in  the  An.
(lif.i.  18,  X.  7;  PhiI.  Diac  ae.  AagnraaJma;
BedKc,  HSmoA.  AUerO.  niL  L  p.  386,  &c^  toL  ii.
pan  L  p.  913.)

AS,  w  Utro,  a  nnmd,  the  imit  of  weight
^Hi^  the  Bomni.  [LnK^]

AS,  Ae  eailiert  dawminatiaa  ef  monej,  and
the  coMtanl  miit  of  nine,  in  tbe  Roman  mi  old
laUaa  oiatagea,  «■■  made  of  the  mixed  metal
■  ■III id  AbBi  Like  crthCT  denominatkou  ef  moDef,
it  an  deabt  siginaDj  iwnified  a  mmd  WQghl  of
ofp^  am  iMiii  i1 :  tlui  u  eipn*i»  Mated  bj  Ti-
^aeoi^  w]»  aanibca  the  fint  contge  of  lUf  to
riniipe  TotUaa.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiH.  8.  •.  13,
rniL  S  ;  Vano,  IM  S»  RuM.  u  1  i  Grid.  FtuL
T.  Ml.) Aecatdbg  to  Hme  aisomiti, it  wai

i  ■'  ttm  tbe  eomiaaBceBient  of  the  dt;  <Flin.
ff.JV.XEdr.  l^wbeothatimeofNimiaCEpipL
H^t.  U  PiKd.;  Inder.  fQna.  xtl  18)  ;  and  ac-
■^■iing  tp  iiilim.  the  fint  coinage  vai  attributed
iaJ^MoSatmn.  (Maoob.  Sotenk  L  7.)  Thie
Bjrthiaal  aMMseat  in  fact  aignifiea,  what  we  know
^a  en  hiMciod  endcBce,  that  the  old  (tatee  of
Emria,  aad  tf  Cenlnl  lialjr,  poMeiaed  a  btraHo
m  eopaer  millg"  frm  the  cailiMt  timet.  On
ih  sths  hand,  Aoae  of  Seuthon  Italy,  and
the  caaK,  aa  br  at  Ckmpaiua,  node  nie  of  lilTcr
■■■ejr Tb*  TtnmM  taanetuy  tjttem  wai  pn»-


AS.  ISB

bthl;  denTcd  from  Etrnria.  (Niebiihc,  BiiL  nf
itome,  ToL  i.  p.  457,  3d  ed. ;  Abefcen,  JtfifMI-
lUJiai,  pp.  284,  336.)

The  e^iat  eoppet  coina  were  not  ilnick,bDt  catt
inamould.  [Fouh^]  In  the  collection  of  coini  at
the  Briliib  Mntenm  dieie  ore  foni  aaei  joined  to-
gether, ■■  they  wen  token  from  the  manld  in  which

■howt  whoa  they  were  iereiEd  &Dm  each  other.

Under  the  Roman  empin,  the  light  of  coining
ulTCfand  gold  belonged  mlyto  the  empenrt  \  but
the  eoj^ier  coinage  wai  lefl  lo  the  aeiaiinm,  which
wat  under  the  juriidiction  of  the  tenata.  [Comp.
NcMHtia  i  MoNw*.]

The  at  wu  originally  of  the  weight  of  a  poond
of  twelve  ounceo,  whoiee  it  wai  odlcd  at  iiiraia
in  eontndiitincttim  to  the  ledoced  am  which  have
now  lo  be  tpoken  o^  and  which  give  rite  to  one
of  the  mott  peiplexing  qoeationi  in  the  whole
range  of  srebaeology .

Pliny  (_H.ff.  ixxm.  B.  ■.  IS)  inibimi  n*  that
inthe  time  of  the  firrt  Funic  w»i(b.  c  26*— 241),
in  rader  lo  meet  tbe  expeneea  of  die  ttole,  the  fbjl
weight  of  B  poimd  wh  diminithed,  and  asH  were
ttruck  of  the  nme  weight  am  the  leitani  (that  i>,
two  omicet,  or  <aie  liith  of  the  ancient  weight)  ;
and  that  thna  the  lepnblic  paid  off  iti  dehtt,  gaining
Gtc  paitt  in  tii ;  that  sAerwatda,  in  the  Mcond
Ponie  wBi,  in  the  dictatorthip  of  Q.  Fabiua  Mozi-
mu)  (about  B.a217),  aiei  of  cue  ounce  wen
made,  and  the  denariui  wat  decreed  to  be  equal
to  uxteen  aie^  the  republic  thui  gaining  one  half ;
but  that  in  military  pay  the  denarioa  mt  alwaya
giTen  far  tai  atet :  and  that  toon  after,  by  a»
Papiriao  law  (aboot  ■.c  191),  atca  of  half  an
onnoa  were  made^  Fcftni  alto  (t.  t.  SuMmlaHi
Ana)  minliont  the  redaction  of  the  at  to  two
onnoet  at  the  time  of  dte  Sat  Panic  war.  There
lean  to  htTe  been  other  rednctioni  beiidea  thote
mentioned  by  Pliny,  for  there  cTitt  atet,  ondpaitt
of  aiea,  which  ihow  that  thii  coin  wai  mode  of
eirry  number  of  ouncet  Irom  twelve  down  to  ont^
betidet  inlennediBte  IJactioni ;  and  there  am  top-
per coint  of  the  Tertxtian  ftmily  which  ihow  that
It  wti  dc|neued  to  ^  and  eren  ^  of  itt  original

ight Thrwgh  tome  of  theao  iiandordt  m^  be


p.  461),  that  there  mutt  have  been  teveial  le-
ductioni  before  the  £rtt  which  Pliny  mentiont.
Niebnhi  mainlaini  further,  that  tbeae  variout
ttandardi  tsora  that  Pliny^  account  of  the  ledao-
tiooa  of  the  coin  it  entirely  incorrect,  and  that
thcte  rednetioni  took  place  gradually  firom  a  very
earij  period,  and  were  caoted  by  a  rite  in  tlia
lahie  of  coffiet  in  ompariion  with  lilter,  »  that
the  denariot  wat  in  the  fint  Punic  war  nol^
equal  m  value  to  only  twenty  onneet  of  copper,
and  in  tho  teco^  Punic  war  to  tiiteen  ouncea,  in-
iteod  of  120,  which  wai  iU  ""■"■-nl  value.  He
admita,  however,  that  the  timei  when  tbeee  redoc-
tiont  wen  reedved  upon  were  chiefly  thote  when
the  itate  wat  detinmt  of  relieving  the  debtor* ;
and  thinki  that  we  mil ht  atiign,  with  t<ierabla
aecma^,  the  penodi  when  thoN  reductiont  took
place.  On  the  other  hand,  Btlclch  aignea  that
there  it  iw  proof  of  any  nuh  iiiiiiatii  in  the  vnlne
of  copper,  and  on  thii  and  miiy  otha  groundt  bit
coacioHon  it,  that  all  the  lednetiiHit  ef  tbe  weight
of  the  IM,  &an  a  pouid  down  to  two  oancea,  took


~  O"


140


AS.


in  acoompanifld  b j  a  real  ajiA  comtpmiiajt  dimi-
tion  in  the  lalua  of  the  u.  {MOnlagitiAt  Ua-
■radaaigai,  g  28.)  It  ii  impouikle  to  dre  here
en  m  mmciUT;  of  the  irgtimenU  on  both  lidei :
e  nmiariu  of  Niebniir  and  BOcUi  miut  them-
Im  be  ttndied.  Il  ii  by  no  meani  improbable
that  there  wu  •ome  incnue  in  the  lalue  of  copper


partlj

and  tlia  lUver  coinage  which  had  been  rerj  lately
introduced.  On  the  othei  hand,  it  ii  inpouible
entirely  to  reject  Plinj't  ilatement  that  the  im-
mediate o%ct  of  the  redoctiona  ho  memiona  waa
the  pnhlic  g*ia-  Mr.  Orate,  who  tide*  with  BtkUi,
remark^  tiiat  "  nch  ■  proceeding  hni  been  an
nearly  nniTeml  with  goTemraenti,  both  ancient
and  modem,  Uiat  the  coQliary  may  be  looked  upon
aa  a  remarkable  eiceplion.''  (fitaakal  Mmnm,
ToL  L  p.  82.)

Thcia  -vwiatigm  make  it  impoMble  to  fix  anj
nine  fir  die  m,  except  with  reference  to  mhim
more  ipedfic  itandard  ;  and  tUa  w*  find  JD  the
denarhu. Taking  the  TalDe  of  tliii  coin  at  aboot


w^ht  tOOOgnini:  tbelcngtbof  tbadiaroeler  En

tliii  and  the  two  (bllowing  catt  ii  half  (hat  of  the
original  coioi^


u(b.c269),  wa*  oi


tenth  of  tbii  lalue,  that  ii,  aboat  Si  ol
3*4  brthisgi ;  and  in  the  lime  of  the  aecond  Punic
war,  irhen  1 6  aiei  went  to  the  denariui,  the  ai  waa
woith  about  2|  faithings.  When  the  lilrer  coinage
got  tharonghly  eitablitfaed,  the  reckoning  waa  no
longer  by  aiea,  but  by  lettertiL  [Sistirtici]
Alio,  during  the  period  or  period*  of  reduction,
the  term  aa  gravt,  which  originally  tiniified  the
old  heavy  ccina,  aa  oppooed  to  the  reduced  aaea,
came  to  mean  any  quantity  of  copper  coini,  of
whaleier  weight  or  coinage,  ncltoned  not  by  tale,
but  by  the  old  atandard  of  a  pound  weight  to  the
as  ;  and  thii  aBndard  «ai  actually  maintained  in
certain  payment!,  luch  u  military  pay,  linei,  &c
{LiT,iv.41,60,  ».2,  xiiii.26i  Plin.  i  e. ;  Sen.
ad  HOn.  12  ;  Niehuhr,  /Tut  o/  floras,  vol.  i.  pp.
466,  467).  Thit  mode  of  reckoning  alw  nipplied
a  common  meuure  for  the  money  of  Rome,  and
the  other  atatea  of  Italy,  which  had  aset  of  yeiy
Tarioui  weighta,  moat  of  them  henrieT  than  the
Roman.  The  name  of  set  grave  waa  al»  applied
to  tho  uncoined  metaL  (Scrviua,  ad  Virg.  Aat.
Ti.  GG2  ;  JUaaa,  att  nidt,  aetaiiim  in/tctiat,
liidor.  rri.  18.  IS.)

The  oldeit  form  of  the  aa  ii  thn
the  figure  of  an  animal  (a  hall,  lam,
vhencv  the  ancient  writen  derived  tha  word  for
money, /wcano,  from  p«iu,an  etymology  on  which
no  opinion  need  be  pronounced ;  hnt  whether  thia
impreaa  waa  intended  to  repreaesl  property  by  that
form  of  it  which  waa  then  mort  commr- -  "^-^
lorn*  mythological  meaning,  ia  doubtful,
deniea  the  antiquity  of  thia  type,  but  hit  aole  ob-
jection ii  latiabctorily  aniweied  by  BSckh. The
type  •eenii  however  to  hkva  been  much  loi  ued
in  the  Boman  than  in  tome  other  old  Italian  coin-
aigea  ;  and  moat  of  the  piece*  which  bear  it  are  of
B  rude  oblong  iliape. The  next  form,  and  (he
common  me  in  the  oldeat  Roman  aaea,  ia  round,
and  it  that  detcribed  by  Pliny  (ft.  ff.  miiL  '
a.  1 3},  Bi  having  the  two-iaced  head  of  Janua
one tide,  and  the  prow  of  a  ibip  on  the  Dtl
(whence  the  eipreation  nacd  by  Roman  boji
toiling  up,  lai^  <oU  Hnni,  Macrab.  Sat.  i.  !
Th*  annexed  ipicimen,  from  the  Biitith  UaieuiD,


The aa  waa divided into  part*,  which ireiv
named  according  to  tha  number  vi  ouncea  they

the  <JaMdi,  (fariou,  djjdnm\
iaCKHf,  triaa^  qiadToiH  v
...  lu  or  fOMjutcui,  and  ttacjt
inaiating  tnpectirely  of  11,  ID,  9,  8,  7,  6,  5,  4
0,  2,  1^  and  1  ouncea.  Of  theae  diviaiona  t^ia
fallowing  were  repreaented  by  coini  (  namely,  tha

There  ia  ■  tolitary  initance  of  the  eiiilence  of  the
dodraiu,  in  a  coin  of  the  Caiiian  hmily,  bearing
an  S  and  three  balla.  We  have  no  precite  inform-
ation at  to  the  lime  when  theae  divitioBt  wera
fint  introduced,  but  it  wai  probably  neariy  aa
early  ai  the  fint  coinage  of  copper  money.

The  tsmia,  leniaii,  or  temi-ai,  half  the  at,  or  aix


,  Juno,  and  Pallai,  accompanied  by  tCrigila.
X  no  fKOtfwu,  or  piece  of  five  ouncea,  it  very  rare.
There  ia  no  ipecimen  of  it  in  the  Britiah  Huaeum.
It  it  diitinguUhed  by  fi


K  jBiiifiwii  DC  Itnmeaa,  the  lomlli  part  of

■,  or  pifcc  of  UuM  ouocet,  hu  thm  balls  to

'tt  Tahie. An  open  hand,  ft  Kriiil,  4  dol-

'  r,  head*  pf  Uemdea,

cs  m  thii  cain. Pliny

i.  3. 1. 13)  ajt  thai  both  Ihi '


of  a


Tht


I,  ibe  aiiUi  part  of  tho  ,
I,  bt«i«  t«n  baUi.  In  the  umeied  iptcimeo,
he  Britiih  Hutaia,  (hers  ii  a  cadowu  and
an  ooa  nde,  and  t,  tackle-ahell  on  tha  other.
agta  m  779  gniiu.


X  piece,  or  twelfth  ef  ibe  w.


h^  and  can  of  liailej. (For  other  davkea,  M«
Hckkel.  Ztottr.  A'«.  VeL)

Afier  iha  reduetian  in  the  weight  of  tba  41,
oiaa  wov  itnick  of  the  valu  of  2,  3,  4,  and  ctcd
10  MO,  which  were  called  ropectiveljr  diatu  or

■■liiiin  iif  Ihi  M  were  denoted  b;  wordi  of  nnilar
'  -\  iOOai  - ■■ ■  -'


iBikaUe  fad  that, while  the

of  the  a*  proTailed  among  the

of  lulj  aouth  of  the  Apenitine*,  the  deci-

■kn  waa  in  ue  10  the  north  of  (Imt  chain  ;

Sicilj  the
uixeo.  f.ruKoaRA.j  For  further
le  eoinage  of  the  other  Italian
X  Bdckhj  ^etro^  UmienmcA.  g  '27  ;  Abeken,
and  Lepeiiu,  Vtbtr  di»  Vtrhmtxng
tfamyiicwn  nm  Etnriea  am.
in  loniu  of  expceaiian,  in  which  ui  ia
wtA  far  amuej  withoot  tpeci^ing  the  denomina.

trnOt  mirm,dteia  atrit,  mean  napecliTelj  10, 1000,
IfiOCjMO  MK.

The  wnd  at  wai  nied  alio  for  aoj  wbole  which
^H te  be  prided  into  twelxe  equal  parte ;  aod

chBBR  Of  tlu  ■t~»<»jHf«i  diTiiioD  of  the  u  waiBp~
bed  BOt  oaly  to  weight  and  money,  bnl  to  meaiuni
•d  hpglh.  aurface,  and  capacity,  to  inheritancea,
Mocai,  huaata,  fanoa,  and  many  other  thingi.
HoBe,  far  enuupb,  tha  phiaies  Aiurei  a>  oik,  the
beir  l>  a  MhoU  eitate ;  iaem  u  dodnaitt,  the  heir
a  thne-faoithi,  Ac.  (Cic  Pro  Qiacia,  6  ;  Com.
3wn.  AUie.  A)  Pliuj  eren  met  the  phraaet
_>>4/Haa>(£f.MiTiiL6.(.7),a)>d  ' '

The  aa  waa  alae  called,  in  aadect  time*,  attarua
I B  n^BHia),  aad  in  Greek  rb  iarifiar.  Accord-
iM  to  PolybiB*  (ii.  15)  the  aiaariui  waa  equal  to
half  tha  obalai. On  the  coini  of  Chioa  we  find

1TM.  (Ib  ■ddilko  to  the  worki  refened  to  in  thii
Ktads,  a^  tboae  of  Uanej  and  Wunt,  much
■laaMi  mfgRoalwn  will  be  found  in  the  work
■nda^  Am  Oram  Mi  - - ■


Ronui,  II


ASCOLIASMUS.  141

0. ;  and  in  Leptiiu'i  reriew  of  it
I  tnatiae  Utbtr  dit  lyriiater-Pda*-
gei-.)  [P.  8.]

ASCADLES. [TiWi.]

ASCIA  {vnintrm,  Horn.  Od.  t.  S35),  an  adzch
Mnmlori  {/«.  Vel.  Tia.  L  354-^36)  hu  pub-
li*hed  ntunHona  reprtsentationi  cf  the  odie,  ai  it
adtM  raonnmenta.  We  lelect  the
thiee  following,  two  of  which  ehow  the  initniment
itielf,  with  a  ilight  Tariety  of  fbrro,  while  the  third
repRienti  a  ihip-buitder  holding  it  in  hii  right
i__. __  1  . r ,.  . id,^  (Jig  jjji  df  n  yj^eL


the  above  cat
coin  of  the  Valerian  &niily,  and
It  vu  chiefly  uaed  fay  maaoni,
whence,  in  tha  anctent  gloHoriei,  Acuculariia  ii
tranilated  Abt^/wi,  a  Mbm-cuiler,

Am  to  the  reason  why  A)cia  ii  repreienled  on

aepulchiol  monnmenta, lee Foicellmi, LeiicoH,

«.  [J.  Y.]

ASCLEPIEIA  (^>[\Wiw),  Ihenaraeorfcati-

ill  which  wen  probably  celelnnted  in  all  placei

here  temple*  of  AvJepiui  [Aeecul^iui)  eiiited.

be  moat  celebrated,  howcTer,  wai  that  of  Epi-

dauma,  which  took  place  every  five  jeara,  and

raa  Bolemnixed  with  conteati  of  rhapaodiata  and

loaicioni,  and  with  aolemn  proceeaiona  and  games.

(Schol  ad  Piod.  Nm.  iii.  US  j  Paoi.  il  2G.  §.  7.)

'ATicXir*'<>o  are  alio meotioned at Larapaacua

(Biickh,  Corp. Inter, id.  ii. p.  1131), and  al

Athena  (Awchin,  c.  QaijA.  p.  4fiS>,  which  were,

pnlvhly,  like  thoae  of  Epidaomi,  aolemnlEed  with

muaiod  conleila. They  took  place  on  the  eighth

day  of  the  month  ef  Elaphebolion.  [  L.  S.]

ASCOLIASMUS  (iaKmkniridi,  the  leaping
upon  (he  leathern  bag,  dffnift}  wai  one  of  the
many  kinda  of  aaiiisanenla  in  which  the  Athenians
indulged  dniing  the  Antheateiia  and  Hhef  feativala
in  himanr  of  UiaayVUL The  Atheniana  ncrificed


143  ASEBEIAa  ORAPHE.

k  hG-goal  to  the  god,  made  a  bag  out  of  Ibe  Mb,
■meored  it  with  oil,  and  then  tried  to  dance  cpon
it.  The  TUiout  accidenta  accompiuiyiiig  thii  at-
tempt affordei  gnat  Bnnuemant  to  the  ipecEiiton.
lie  who  nieceeded  wu  victor,  and  receired  the
skin  SI  a  nward.  {Scbal  ad  Ariitoph.  Plul.  1130 ;
Plat,  ^n^.  p.  190  ;  Viiv.  Geory.  il  S81 ;  Pollux,
ii.  121  i  Haych.  i.  i.  VLrniiAulCamt ;  KnuK,
Gymmaitik  uad  AgontOi  d.  Hillmtm,  p.  38S,  who
givn  a  repiHrntatioa  of  it  from  an  ancient  gem,
which  ii  eopiid  In  the  aboTe  ent.)

ASEBEIAS  ORAPHE  (l<rtf(l»-nH44),  waa
one  of  the  many  fbnni  presOTbed  bj  the  Attic
lawt  for  tlie  impoicluDent  of  impiety.  From  the
Tstioui  tenor  of  the  accuiationi  itill  extant,  it  may
be  gathen^d  that  thii  ctime  ma  ai  ill-ddiaDd  at
Alheni,  and  therefore  aa  liable  to  be  made  the
pretext  for  pcnecutiaa,  aa  it  hu  been  in  all  other
countriei  in  which  the  eiiil  power  hai  attempted
to  reach  offences  n  much  beyond  the  natural  limit*
of  iti  JDriidiction.  The  oocasiona,  howerer,  npon
which  the  Athenian  aonuel  pntfeaied  to  come  for-
wBid  may  be  claaaed  aa,  fint,  breachea  of  the  cere-
monial law  of  public  wonhip ;  and,  secondly,
indicalioni  of  that,  which  In  analognui  oaei  of
modem  tunei  wonld  be  called  heterodoxy,  or
heresy.  The  fbrmer  comprehended  encroachment
npon  conaenated  gmunds,  the  plunder,  or  other
injoiy  of  temples,  the  riolation  of  B»J^um»,  the  in-
termption  of  sacriGees  and  lestiTala,  the  mntilation
of  Blatues  of  tbe  goda,  the  introdnctjon  of  deities
not  acknowledged  by  the  state,  and  Tarioos  other
tiansgreeuona  peculiarly  defined  by  the  lawa  of  the
Attic  lacn,  such  as  a  private  celebration  ef  the
Eleiuiiuan  mysteries  and  their  divulgation  to  the
uninitiated,  injury  to  the  stcred  olive  tieea,  or
placing  a  suppliant  boDgh(IircTi)p£a)  en  a  [articular
altarat  an  improper  time.  (Andoc^leAf^.  p.110.)
The  heretical dehnqnendea  may  be  eiemplified


whether  the  gods  existed  «  not,"  in  the  peiiecn-
tion  of  Anaiagoiai  (Diog.  Lnfrt.  iL  1 2),  like  that
of  Oalileo  m  aAer  times,  for  unpngning  the  received
opinioni  about  the  sun,  and  the  condemnation  of
SocTBtos  for  not  holding  the  object)  of  the  public
worship  to  be  gods.  (Xen.  Apol.  Soc.)  The  ra-
riety  of  thcfo  exampla  will  have  shown  that  it
is  impotiible  to  enumerele  all  the  csaes  to  which
this  sweeping  accnntion  might  be  extended ;  and,
aa  it  is  not  npon  record  that  religiooa  Athens
(Xen.  Rtp.  Atli.  iii.  8)  was  scandalised  at  the  pn><
laDO  jeiti  of  Arislophuics,  oi  thai  it  forced  Epicu-
rus to  deny  that  the  gods  wue  indifferent  to  hu-
Dtan  actiona,  it  is  difficult  to  ascertain  the  limit  at
which  jests  and  loeptidfm  ended,  and  penal  im-
piety began.

With  respect  to  the  trial,  any  citiien  that  pleased
t  Pmi\6nms  —  which,  however,  in  this  as  m  all
other  public  acdiina,  must  be  understood  of  thoao
only  who  did  not  labour  under  an  incapacitating
disfranchiaement  (irifua)  —  seems  to  have  been  a
competent  accuser  ;  but  as  the  nine  archoni,  and
the  areiopogites,  war*  the  proper  guardians  of  the
sacred  olivea  (iiofitai,  inriEol,  Lysuu,  Iltpl  mC
Zi|iiou,  p.  SB2),  it  is  not  impossible  that  they  had
also  a  power  of  official  prosecution  upon  naually
discovering  any  injury  done  to  their  charge.

The  coses  of  Socmtes,  Aspasia,  and  Prolagoraa,
may  be  adduced  to  show  that  citixeni,  reudent
aliau^  and  (trangcT^  inn  equally  liaUa  to  thia


ASILLA.
And  if  a  minor,  as  repreaented  la  ths

declamauon  of  Antiphini,  could  be  piiaocnted  for
murder  (^mu),  a  crime  considered  by  the  earlr
Oieeks  more  in  reference  to  its  ceremonia]  pof.
Eapect  of  the  injury  inflicted  upon
society,  it  can  hardly  be  concluded  that  per-
sons under  age  *ra>e  incapable  of  committing,  or
snaring,  for  this  oBence,  (AntitA.  Teb^  ii.
p.  67*.)

The  nufistrate^  who  eondneled  the  pmnons  ex-
amination (iriKpiaa)  waa,  according  to  Meier
(^tt.  iVnc  pn.  300,  S04,n.  34)  invariably  the  king
—ibou,  bnt  whether  the  court  into  which  he  brought
or  the  common


1.  305)


the  causes  were  the  aiempagu^  or  thf
heliaatic  court,  of  both  of  whuh  there  a


adopted  by  the  profecntor,  oi  the  d%re«  of  com-
petency to  which  the  aruofBgus  rase  or  fell  at  the
different  periods  of  Athenian  history.  From  the
Apology  o/Socrata  we  learn  that  the  farm*  of  the
trial  npon  this  oceaaton  vere  thoae  nsual  in  all
public  actiinu,  and  that,  gemtraify,  the  amount  of
the  penalty  formed  a  separate  queition  for  the  di-
casta  after  the  conviction  of  the  defendant.  For
some  kinds  of  impiety,  however,  the  pi
was  fixed  by  special  laws,  as  in  tl


of  the  dicBsts,  he  forfeited  a  thousand  drachmae,
and  incnired  a  modified  irififa.  The  other  fmni
ol  prosecution  for  this  office  were  the  inywyA


rpaSafd)  (LiWiui,  Argiat,  ad  Den.  i»  Mid.  6  ,
10),  and  in  eiDoordinary  cases  ilnrryi\ia{A.Tiiix,
D»  Myd,  p.  43) ;  besides  Iheu,  Demosthenes  men-
tions <a.  Androl,  p.  601)  two  otier  courses  that  an
accuser  might  adopt,  iuiiinrSiu  rpii  EtfuXTftat,
and  ^piitiv  rpbs  rhr  jSoitiaAi,  of  which  it  ii  diffi-
cult to  give  u  satiflfoctory  explanation.  [J.S.  M.]
ASIARCHAE  (iffUpX"),  were,  m  the  Roman
province  of  Asia,  the  chief  presidsits  of  the  re-
ligious ritci,  vhoae  office  it  was  to  exhibit  garaea
and  theatrical  omnsementi  every  year,  in  honour  of
the  god)  and  the  Roman  emperor,  at  their  own
expense,  like  the  Roman  aediles.  As  the  exhi-
bition of  these  games  were  attended  with  great
expense,  wenlthy  persons  were  always  choeen  (o
fill  thii  office ;  for  which  reason,  Strabo  says,
some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Tralles,  which  was  one
of  the  most  wealthy  dtiea  in  Asia,  were  always
chosen  aaiarch*.  They  were  tin  in  number,  se-
lected annually  by  the  different  towns  of  Asia,
and  approved  of  by  the  Roman  proconsul ;  of
these,  one  was  the  chief  osiarch,  and  tieqnently,
but  not  always,  resided  at  Ephesns.  Their  office
lasted  only  for  a  year ;  but  they  appear  to  base
enjoyed  the  ^t^e  at  a  mark  of  courtesy  for  the  rent
of  their  lives. In  the  othef  Roman  provincei


the  Asiaiehae  in  proconsular  Asia,  ai

tbe  Bithyniatchae,  Oalalarchoe,  Lyciarchae,  &e.

(Sirah. xiv. p.  649 ; Acta, xix. 31.,  with  the

note*  of  Wotstein  and  Kainoel ;  Euseb.  H.  E.  it.

15;  Winer,  BiHiKia SKAtSrierbtei,  tAAtiar-

lAem.)

ASILLA  (IffiUa),  k  wooden  pole,  or  yoke,
held  by  a  man  either  on  his  two  shouldera,  or
man  canmcaljw  one  ihonldc*  tnly,  md  Mad  te '


■mv  hntlMia. (Ariitot.  BieL  L  7.) It
allrd  ir^fufor  b7  Arutaptume*  (Aon.  S). It  di

(UTHKe  is  nki  of  Oncuo  ut,  of  which  ua


ASSA'RIUS  NUMMUS.  [Ab.]
.\SSERTOR,  or  ADSERTOR,  caauiii*  tha
■OHmtH  the  verb  adWim,  ofhich,  wbeu  conplcd
■ruk  Ike  inrd  mtam,  •%Diliei  U  Uj  bold  of  a  thii^
M  4nB'  it  tomrd*  ddc  Heoct  tha  phrue  oilisnra
m  llrrtiji,  or  UwoU  (id«gnn  mamit,  ipplia  lo
kia  vlw  Ibji  hii  hand  do  ft  potoo  reputed  to  b<
■  ilin.  Mid  uavfi,  or  mainaiiu  hii  fntdtm.  The
pcnoB  tIw  ihoA  munlained  llie  [roedom  of  a  re-
poed  (Ian  wu  called  adtrior  (Gwui,  ir.  U),  ud
bj  th(  tan  of  tbs  TwdTB  Tabls  [t  wu  eoacted
ia  bioor  of  liberty,  thai  (och  kdHitot  ihould  not
be  ajkd  OB  to  pn  temiij  ' '


I  Uimlit
I,  wkicb  occnr  in  cluuad  aathon,
B  cBMWctiai  with  thf  *clb  adKrerc,  will  eaiilj
be  aadentaad  from  what  hai  been  mid.  {TomL
JJi^  ii.  1.  40  ;  Plut  Pitm.  if.  2.  83 ;  tee
■bo  Dig.  to.  at.  12.  DttiberaU  Omta.)  Some-
naea  iIm  word  aimm  alone  waa  nied  ai  equiia-
(Cit  Pro  FloMO,


cl7-)


iclaii


■  a  ilatc,  ocoin  in  Lit;  (ilL  M,
is.)  [G.  L.]

ASSES50R,«  ADSESSOR.  Vntra\]y,  ota  who
■!■  bf  the  lide  of  another.  The  dotiet  of  an
■II.  ai  deaoibed  by  Faolai  (Dig.  1.  tiL  21.
I.  I.)  iriated  to  "  cognitkoea,  poatulalioiea,  libelli,
fdiela,  de^ma,  epiitolae  ;  **  from  which  it  appeon
thK  tfaej  wen  employed  in  and  about  (he  adininii-
■uiea  of  bw.  The  ctavnle,  praetori,  gmeroon  af
fr^rnaor*,  and  the  joditea,  were  often  imperfrttly
'  iTnrr'H  wilh  die  law  and  the  fomu  of  proce-
dane,  and  Tt  waa  necca^tfy  that  thej  ihould  hare
tkeaidtf  thoK  who  had  made  the  law  theit  itnd;.
(Ge.  AOFBfc«,L" - "  ^ "" ""


ASTRAGALUS.  143

civQ  and  nulitaiy  functionanea,  had  their  aMeaaon.

Ad  iiulaace  ia  mentioned  by  Tadtua  (A<m.  L  73)

adtidtdal),  and  taking  b
if  the  tribunal ;  but  thi>  p  „
be  inteiprelcd  to  mean,  aa  aome  penoiuialeipret
it,  that  the  empDror  lal  there  in  the  chaiacter
of  ui  aawiaaoT  ^perlj  ao  tailed :  the  rtmarfc  of
Tadtni  ihowi  that,  though  the  emperor  might  haie

affected  to  be  aneh,  he  coold  be  conaideied  in  no
other  light  than  aa  the  h«d  of  the  ilate.  ICampaie
Suelon.  TO.  A'e™,  33,  Tib.  Oaodwt,  13).

Under  the  empire  the  pisctiee  of  haiing  aa-
aeuon  continued  <Plin.  Ep.  I  20,  tL  11,  i.  IS  j
Oelliua,  L  22).  Sneloniua  ((Ai/io,  14)  meationi  (he
caae  of  au  aiaeaaor  being  oanied  lo  the  office  of
praefcctaa  pcaelorio.  The  Emperor  Alexander
Sevenia  ga\-e  the  aaaeaaorea  a  r^ular  aalary,
(Lamprid.  Ahi.  Sen.  46.) Freedmea might  be


1  Ulpian  (Dig.  47.  I
on  the  dulica  of  aauaaon
tnhuoal  with  the  magiatrate.  Their  advice,  or  aid,
waa  giren  during  the  proceedingi  ai  well  aa  at
other  timea,  but  they  never  pronoUDced  a  judicioJ
aentence.  A»  the  old  forma  of  procedure  gtadnalty
declined,  the  aateaiorea,  according  to  the  conjec-
ture of  Savigny  {Oadickt  dtt  R'im.  RmUi  in
MiUaUaiar,  Tol.  L  p.  79),  took  the  place  of  the  judicea.
For  other  matlera  relating  lo  the  aaaeaaorea,  aee  HoU-
weg,  Hoadinek  ia  Cntipna— a,  ■D.IB2. [O.L]

ASSI'DUI. [LoctiFLiTU.]

ASTRA 'QALUS  (iffrpayrto.X  liletally  aig-
ni£ea  that  particnlar  bone  in  the  anldea  of  eertaia
qiiadmpeda,  which  the  Greekg,  aa  well  aa  the  Ro-
mana,  uacd  lor  dice  and  other  purpoaea,  aa  deacribed
under  the  corrtapondiug  Latm  woid  TiLua.

Aa  alAtin  word,<u(T<i^wiau>edby  Vitniviua,
who  of  tourae  boixowed  it  from  the  Orwk  wrilcra
n  architecture,  for  aiertain  moulding  (tlie  aitragnl)


rhich  ae


aemblance  to  a  itring  or  c  , . . ._

fad  oiwaya  uaed  in  poailiona  where  il  acema  in-
tended to  bind  together  the  parta  to  which  it  ia
applied.  It  bclongi  properly  to  the  more  highly
decorated  fomu  of  the  Ionic  order,  in  which  it
appeara  aa  a  lower  edging  to  the  larifer  mouldinga,
etpecially  the  eeUuit  (ovelo),  (Mticuhuly  in  the
capital,  aa  ihown  in  the  fbUowing  woodcut,  which
repreaenti  an  Ionic  mpital  found  in  the  raina  oTllie
temple  of  Dionynu  at  Teoa.  Still  finer  eiamplea
occur  in  the  capital!  of  the  templea  of  Erechtheua
and  Athene  Poliaa,  at  Athena,  where  it  it  aeen,  too,
on  the  lidea  of  the  Tolutea.  It  i>  alio  often  uaed
in  the  entablature  aa  an  edging  to  the  diviiiona  of
the  cornice,  frieie,  and  archilrare.  The  lower
figure  in  the  woodcut  repreaenta  a  portion  of  the
aatragal  which  ruoi  beneath  the  crowning  moulding
of  the  architraie  of  the  temple  of  Erechtheua.  It
ia  taken  (ma  a  fragment  in  the  Briliih  Muaeum,
and  ia  drawn  of  the  aame  liie  aa  (he  original

The  term  ia  alao  applied  to  a  plun  convex
moulding  of  the  game  aectional  outline  aa  (ha
former,  bat  without  the  diviiion  into  linka,ju>t
likeaAiriMaaaamallacale!  ialhiaftitmitiauaBd


U4  abtroloqia;

in  the  Ionic  bBW  (Spmi).  In  the  ofden  mbie-
quent  to  the  lonir,  —  the  CoriDlhian,  Roraui
Doric,  and  Cmnpoiila,  —  the  ulngal  wH  lerj


freel;  Died.  Ths  nJei  for  the  me  af  the  moulding
■re  pyen  by  Vitnitioi  (Ul  6.  §  S,  it.  6.  Sg  S,  H,
Schntid.)-  NBinoroiii  fine  eiainplei  of  it  will  be
fbond  Intlie  plstea  DfMauch  (J^  (Tnaobuabn  nil
Baniue!if»Bati-Ortimiaiffm,PoUdiiiB,ia4S.)  [P.S.]
ASTRATEIAS  GRAPHE'  (iffrpm-.lni
Tpo^),  wua  the  scciuation  ioatitiiled  agai


wiiD  &iled  to  appeal  among  the  tn»ps  after  tbej
had  been  enrolled  lor  the  cammugn  b;  the  generali.
(Ljt.  i»  Ale  pp.  B2i,  571.) We  mar  prenune  that


^e  ranki  (^tmrratlou),  vu  anT  dCiicn  that  ehnie
to  come  forward  <4  PooKiiuns,  A  ti'irri),  and  that
the  court  wai  compoeed  of  Boldien  who  had  Hrred
in  the  campaign.  The  preaidcnc;  of  the  court,  ac-
rording  to  Meier,  lielDnged  lo  the  genciala.  The
defendant,  if  convicted,  incurred  dii&anchiHment
—  irifila,  both  in  hta  own  penon  and  that  of  hi«
dcKzndanta,  and  then  were  tety  itringent  lawi  to
punish  them  if  thej  appeared  at  the  public  lacra,
to  which  even  women  and  (Uvea  were  admitted.
(Andoc  de  Mgit.  p.  3fi  ;  Aesch.  n  CU*.  p.  £9  j
Dem.  m  Tinuar.  p.  733  ;  Meier,  Att.  Proan,
p.  S63,  &C.)  [J.  8.  M.]

ASTROLO'OIA.  Thi*  word  ii  octaaionaUy
•mploj-ed  by  the  beat  La^  writtra  (e.  g.  Cic,  de
Divin.  ii.  ii.)  to  denote  aitnmomg  in  general,  and
indeed  if  Toond  in  that  lenie  mora  frequently  than
ortroiwinia,  whieb  i»  of  rare  occurrence.  In  the
preaent  article,  however,  we  confine  ounelvea  to
what  ia  strictly  termed  judicwl  tutraiogy^  and
treat  of  aitrononiy  under  Astronouia.

At  a  period  far  beyond  the  recarda  of  antbenUc
hiitoiy  a  belief  araaa,  which  itill  prevaila  no-
fhaken  ■■•"-■'-


It  the

moment  of  hii  birth,  and  eapecially  upon  the  atai
which  wBi  riling  above  the  horiiDn  at  the  inalani
when  he  Bw  iOM  light,  and  upon  thoae  which
were  in  ita  immediate  vidnity  (fixgmutae),  or  re-
moved tmui  it  by  a  iixth,  a  fourth,  or  a  third  part
of  a  great  circle  of  the  iphere,  or,  finoilj,  upon
thoK  which  were  at  the  opposite  extremity  of  the
aamc  diameter  {opptmtae).  Few  doubted  that  by
obaervation  and  deep  atudy  peraoru  might  aciinire
the  power  of  expounding  tl


ASTROLOGIA.

the  deitiny  of  the  child  might  be  predicted  wjlh
certainty  by  thou  who  were  ikilled  to  interpret
the  language  of  the  ilan,  and  that  the  remit  of
any  nndertaliing  might  be  foretold  from  the  nipect
of  the  firmament  when  it  waa  conunenced.  Hence
a  nnmenna  and  powerful  claaa  of  men  arose  who
were  diatingniahed  by  Torioni  deugnationa.  From
the  eenntiy  when  lationomT  wai  Gtat  ■tudicd,Bnd
their  idence  waa  finl  dev^oped,  they  were  oiled
OuJdam  or  italybaui;  bom  obaerring  the  atara,
otfraumi,  a^niagi,  jjiaaetttrii;  from  employing
diagram!  luch  ai  were  nied  by  geonietriciani,  nu-
Humaiai  ;  from  determining  the  lot  of  man  at  hia
natal  hour,  gaatUiad';  Cram  propfaeaying  the  con-
anmmation  of  hia  atrugglea,  en-avtXis/iaruial ;
while  their  art  waa  known  ai  ifrrpoAjryla,  /u.
THOpaXff)^  ytv^Xio^jrjia,  JLviTrfXto'prrur^,  Art
Chaldatartmt,  lUalifii,  or,  from  the  tablca  they
contulted,  riruarii.  Their  calculalioni  wenj
termed  BdMiaui  ntiiniri,  XuUoIiiv  iiJMiii,  Xii\-
itdttr  ^r^ittt,  Ratioitei  Cialdaieat:  their  rc-
■poniei  when  coniulled  daldatonm  mwiU,
CSaidaaynat  aabdida  pratdicla,  Aitnlogonmi
pmdkla.

The  atari  and  conatellatiaai  to  which  attention
wai  chiefly  directed  were  the  planeti  and  the
ugni  of  the  lodiac,  aome  of  which  were  luppoaed
to  exert  uniformly  a  benign  infiuence  {kyaBvtouii
dori/m),  auch  a*  Venn^  Jupiter,  Luna,  Virgo,
Libra,  Tauna ;  othera  to  be  onifbrmly  malign
(HuroivDuil  imliKs),  inch  aa  Satamui,  Mara,
Scorpio,  Capricomna ;  othen  to  be  doubtful  {trl>^
■oim  do^'pii),  inch  aa  Mercuriui.  By  the  com-
bination  and  conjunction  (ruvIfM^^,  eoinfe/toft'o)
or  oppoaition,  however,  of  thoae  benign  with  ihoaa
mabgn,  the  power  of  the  latter  might  be  nca~
tmliied  or  even  rerenad,  and  a  mart  happy-
borotcope  be  produced,  aa  in  the  caie  of  AugMitua
who  waa  bom  under  Capricotnui  (Suet.  A*g.  9<).
and  hence  that  ligure  frequently  appean  on  hia
medala  For  the  aake  of  expediting  calcnUtiona,
the  riaingi,  aettings,  moremenli,  and  reUtive  pOii-


luMtu,  Jbrma,  pMifwti,  potiiiu  tidermn  ti  tpalia)
were  carefully  regiatered  in  tablea  (riroKit,
i^iupilti).  Id  »  far  aa  the  planeta  were  con-
cerned, it  waa  of  especial  importance  to  neto
through  what  aign  of  the  xodiae  they  happened  to
be  pauing,  >inc«  each  phinet  had  a  peculuu'  lign,
called  the  donatt  or  home  of  the  planet,  during


Thua  Libra,  Capricomna,  and  Scorpio  were  ro-
■pectively  the  iows  of  Venui,  Saturn,  and  Mara.

The  exact  period  of  birth  (Wa  gnaialit)  bein^
the  critical  moment,  the  compulationi  founded
upon  it  were  atyled  yiyivit  (jmntuni),  lipomirai
(ion»eopat),  or  aimply  A'^w, and  the  atar  or


to  hare  ftond  their  way  to
Italy  even  before  ■  free  comnimicaliDn  waa  opened
up  with  the  Eaat  by  the  Roman  conqncata  in
Greece  and  Aaia,  nnee  they  are  mentioned  con-
lemptuoutly  by  Gmiiua.  (ap.  Cic  Dt  Dn.  L  S8.)
About  a  century  later  the  govemroent  aecm  to  have
become  leniible  of  the  inconvenience  aod  danger
lilicly  to  ariie  fmm  the  pretence  of  auch  impoitor^
for  in  B.C  139  an  edict  waa  promnlgnted  by  C.
Comcliua  Hiapallni,  at  that  time  praetor,  by  which
the  Chaldaeona  woe  baniihel  from  the  atj,  and


ASTBONOinA.
■dmd  to  qut  Itolj  wtihiii  tot  dap  (YaL  Uu.  i.
3. 1 3>,md  tk^  mn  a^a  banuhad  ban  tlw  dt7
ia  1.  c  33,  by  H.  Agrin>*i  *'»>  '■■■  tixn  >edile.
(Dmd  Cha.  i£^  I.)  *Mhf  men  (adinaDce  mi
bnOed  bj  Aagottni  ^ainfl  thk  dui  (Dioa  Cm.
liT.  1,  txn.  25),  but  the  fnqnott  oeaanoea  of
■ck  pbnats  ai "  cnnlit  et  nvtbcniUieM  **  (SuL
T*.  M),  "  pabu  iMlk  inalbematieii "  <Tw.  Hut.
i.  S3),  n  tka  hirtwiaiH  of  tba  aqnra  fvorg  how
bm  a  hold  Acaa  prrtoidBa  mut  kan  obtained
■ifr  t^  pdklie  mind,  and  how  profitabla  tha  oo-
Ofati^  HHt  hnn  beoi  which  could  indnix  them
li  tfMt»  diagiBce,  and  Bmelimea  a  cnol  death
(Taa.  ^iBL  iL  32). Kolwilhatandiiig  th«  number


wbkh  tli^  wen  denoimced,  th^  appear
kept  their  enond,  and  althonsh  mm  lime  to
^o  oaalmd  or  terrified  into  ^'l™*.  to  hare  to-
Tind  with  ftah  TtgDsr  in


aembendi

dnbM  or  exdted  tj  ambitkiai  loagingt,  to  ac-
T™  the  fciDciplea  of  the  art  and  to  amanlE  ita

■ — ' 1,  aa  wa  may  percei™,  not  to  multiply

;  from  the  well-knawn  ilolj  of  Tibeiiui
Ian.  Ti.aO,  21).  Hence
J  the  high  pramiKa  bj
wkiift  the  "  BwthoDatid "  (timnlated  Otho  to
mMe  ibc  pmple,  addi  in  a  tone  of  MrrDwritl


■ad n^ajlina


,  qnod  in  eiTilate
retiwbitur." (See  Cic  Dn.  ii.
T.l;Hor.Oirai.ill7.17;Perfc


T.  4§  i  JvT.  iu.  «9,  TU.  IU4,  ht.  MO,  tl  MS
—681 ;  Tat  ^aa.  ii.  27,  S2,  iiL  22,  iv.  68,  vi.
a.  xii  22,  52,  68,  itL  14,  /ftit.  i.  22,  iL  62 ;
Sart.  TDl  14,  36,  VML  14,  Men,  40 1  OeU.  L  9 ;
D^  (^B.  iliz.  43,  liL  2a,  IriL  U,  Ixr.  1  ;
Z(^.  u.  f.  142;  Lip*.  Euan  liL  ad  Toe.  Ami.
c.  :  Jni,  .Orwx  oJ  //or.  Carm.  iL  17.  17  ;  Ra-
prti,  A'al.  aJ  T'oc  ^an.  iL  27.  For  the  penal
eaamauM,  we  Ron,  Oai  Ohaanalncit  dtr
■fi  II,  p.  901,  ia.  Leipiig,  1844.  Thwe  who
wgaU  Bcqaire  a  knowledge  of  the  technical  de-
Hfli  «f  MtnJoST,  aa  {aactiied  I7  the  andenU,
■art  psaK  tbe  work*  of  Mauilini,  JdUdi  Fir-
■ie^  a>d  Ptolemj.)  [W.a]

JlSTBONO'lUA,  aatmom^.  It  ii  not  pnv
fmtA  m  the  inaent  article  to  gire  ■  techuiol  hii-
kaj  •<  tbc  me  and  fwgiew  of  ■HroDianj  amcog
the  MBEMa,  bat  to  eeafiae  sniidm  to  mat  may
hr  ij,  ■  ■ '— *  aa  tbe  popolar  poiUon  of  tha  Kienoe,
tfe  ilMiiialiiiia.  anoay,  apmthe  lehUiTe  political
ad  afMtut  DOTCMenti  of  tha  etJenial  bodiei,
■faciaffl;  the  fixed  itan,  which  from  tbe  earlieit


ibrir  *%^**  in  tbe  cfKn  air.  We  ihall  coniider ;  —
L  Tk  diBbml  namea  bj  which  tbe  conatella-
ti^  Wfw  diatingniahed  imans  the  Gmki  and
BiBBaa,  nA  t^  legenda  attaded  to  each  ;  but
we  ahall  sot  attempt  to  inreitigate  at  length  the
K%ia  of  theae  naoMa  nor  the  time*  and  placet
I  hia  and  wboe  they  woe  fint  bectowed.  The
Eaaoiali  fcr  tbia  fint  lection  hare  been  carefuU j
-■-nrf  hj  Idekr  b  hti  easf  entitled  Uidtr-
-  '  ji  '"  '  "  J  -■  J— ■•■'■'
TTiiMii  (Badin,  1809),  a  wtri


ASTBONOMIA.  145

mention  apetiJlj  once  tor  all  to  aToid  the  neceuity
of  cooitant  refeceocei ;  in  the  Uubrradt  UMtar-
wataaiy  ilitrdittatTVKimiKAinBeebacitiaiffBider
AUai,  by  tha  ome  author  (Berlm,  1806)  ;  in  a
paper  by  Bnltmann  Ubrr  dieEnMdamg  dtrSlan-
WM0-  Mi/dar  gnecluKita  ^'dn,  contained  in  tha
TnuMactioDiofthaBetlin  Academy  for  1826;  and
in  the  Ouolubg  dtr  Attnmoiait  of  Schanbseh.

3.  Tha  liungi  and  Kttinea  of  the  fiied  itan
Ddnndeicd  with  nferemce  to  Ue  ponlion  of  the  nm
in  the  ecliptic, — a  leriei  of  phenumena  which  re-
cuiriug  regularly  eierj  tropical  jeat,  KTrcd  in
the  moat  remata  agei  aa  the  lole  guidei  &r  the
operatioui  of  the  huibandman,  and  which,  being
in  later  timet  fruqnently  appealed  to  by  tha  poeli,
are  Mnnetmie*  danguated  tha  "  Poetical  Kiiingi
and  Setting!  of  (he  Stan."  Here  we  chiefly  de-
peud  npon  the  compilationt  and  diuertatiani,
ancient  and  modem,  brought  together  in  the
I/ruaofniaa  of  PetaTiiu  ;  npon  tbe  ditquintion  by  '  '
J.  F.  P&ff  entitled  OnMuaftilta  ife  Ortilmt  tt  Oo-
autiM  ^iibrvM  upad  OHdonioiiMitRit  opiNnanarw-
Iu(aiitting.l786);  nponapaperbyldeler,  [/eiv
dm  atttOHrmacliai  Tiia  dtr  fitU  dtt  Omd,  'm  tha
Trannctioni  of  the  Berlin  Academy  fbr  1822 —
1823,  and  on  the  HamBmci  dtr  C3irtauAigU  by  the
•ama  author.

3.  Tha  diviiion  rf  ths  year  mto  two,  three,  or
inare  leauni,  according  to  the  riainga  and  aetlinga
of  particular  alan  or  cluilen  of  atara.  The  Hand-
bmh  dtr  CirxmoloffU  containa  a  full  eiunination  of
all  tha  moat  important  pauses  frnni  the  Oreek  and
Roman  autbora  which  bear  upon  theu  pcinta.

The  detennination,  of  the  length  of  the  year  and
the  diitribution  c^  time  into  mouthi,  daya,  boun,
and  other  perioda,  which  in  aome  degree  belong  to
(he  lame  aubject,  are  treated  of  lepaislely  under
the  headi  of  Cai.kni>arii;i<  and  Dies,  and  con-
fining our  allention  for  the  preeent  to  the  fixed
■tan  («m3iia,  iteUu  ermtiDna,  aee  ObU.  111.  1),
wo  ihidl  make  a  few  temarka  on  tha  bodiei  of  tbo
■olar  ayUeni  under  Planbtai.
I.  Thi  HiSTony  and  NauBa  or  thi  Con-
To  b^in  with  tha  two  earlieat  among  pnibne
vritera.  Homer  and  Heaiod,  the  former  noticei  the
Bnr  or  Waggon;  Boola:  Orion;  the  Di^  cf
Orion ;  the  I'ltiadct,  and  the  Uyada :  the  latter,
Orim :  Sirim  ;  the  Pkiadet ;  the  Hyada ;  and
^retemi.  We  are  not  entitled  to  conclude  from
thii  that  they  were  not  acquainted  with  (he  name!
or  fonni  of  any  other  conatcllationa,  but  it  aeemi
cartam  that  neither  (ho  LitOt  Bear  nor  the  Dragtm
wen  known  to  Homer,  for  although  theie  nmain
alwayi  aboie  the  boriton  in  the  latitude  of  Qreece
and  Aaia  Minor,  he  tpeaki  of  the  (Orcal)  Bear  ai
the  only  conatelktion  which  never  pliu^es  into
Ocean*!  tnthi ;  and  wa  are  elaesbere,  aa  will  be
aeen  below,  diatinctlj  told  that  the  Little  Bcsrwaa
introduced  into  Gneee  fawn  the  Eaat  by  Thalca.

Pliny  </r.A'.  iL6)aJtribQtcatheinTenlionoflh8
iLgna  oftheaodiac  toCleoatiatuaof  Tenedoa(iLB.c.
500),  and  aiaerta  that  Aria  and  Sagittariiu  went
marked  ont  befbie  the  reiL  The  £nt  diatinct  in-
formation, howcTer,  with  regard  to  the  Grecian
hearena  wai  contamed  in  lha'E»rrpai' and  the
too^/uHofEudoiuaof  Cnidua,whodiedB.c.  3G2.
Bothof  theae  worki  are,  it  ialrue,  loal  with  the  ex-
ception of  a  few  frsgmetiti,  but  their  content!  are
known  to  111  from  the  poem  of  Aratna  (fl.  ■.  c  360),


ASTSONOMIA.

m  of  Hipporchui, '


littlanu


repment  in  rene,  with  very  few  TAiiatioiiii  ths
matter  containsd  in  tha  two  treatJKi  named  abore,
Mpcciall;  in  the  tatter.  The  great  popnlarit;  en-
ioyed  b;  the  pnduEtion  of  Aratiu  {Cum  nil  »t
hna  wnper  A  nifui  erii)  mnat  have  depended  upon
the  BttracUoni  preiented  by  hii  therae,  and  cei-
tainlj  not  upon  the  gpirit  or  grace  with  which  QM
theme  wai  handled.  We  know  the  namei  of
thiity-GTS  Oreekt  who  omnpaeed  eommentarie*
apon  it,  and  we  nre  acqaainted  with  no  lea  than
three  (ranilationg  into  I*tin  Torta— one  by  Cicero,
of  which  fragmenti  only  renuun  \  another  bj  Caeaar
Qennanima,  of  which  a  conaidemble  portion  ha<
been  preaerred  ^  and  a  third  by  Rnfiu  Featna
ATienoi,  which  ia  entire.  Virgil  bornwed  largely
from  thi>  Bonrce  in  Ihiiaa  partioni  of  hia  Oeorgici
vbich  contain  Rferencea  to  the  heaTCnly  bodiei,
and  particularly  in  that  leetion  which  ii  dcToled
to  prognoatici  af  the  weather.  There  an
laluahle  Greek  acholia  aacribed  to  the  younger
TheiHt,  but  tnanileilly  compounded  oC  maleriala
deriyed  from  mnny  different  quartera.  The
itielf  it  divided  into  three  porta  :

1.  A  description  of  the  conitellatioiu,  eitoiding
to  line  tU.

3.  A  abort  aecomit  of  the  Planeta,  of  the  Milky
Way,  of  the  Tcopiml  Cirdea,  and  of  the  Equator,
followed  ftom  t.  659  by  a  fhll  detail  of  the  atara
which  rise  and  act  aa  each  lign  of  the  lodiae  ap-


^(<n-


«W).


'nccs  what  la  fi«qnent]y
regarded  aa  a  aepaiats  poem,  and  placed  apart
under  the  title  Ai»rT|/i(ui,  eoniiitlng  of  a  collection
of  the  Tnriona  appearances  which  enable  an  oh-
•errer  of  nature  to  predict  the  weather.  It  will
be  seen  below  that  the  conatellalioni  described  by
Aratns  still  retniu,  wiiha  few  Tariatiotu,  the  names
by  which  he  dislingui«he>  them.

In  a  little  tmct  ascribed  to  Eratosthenes  (fl.  a  c
230),  entitled  KaTiurT»|jKrfuw',  probably  an  abridR-
tuent  of  a  more  complete  trcniiae,  in  which  he
details  the  mythologicil  origin  of  the  constellations,
together  with  the  number  nnd  place  of  the  Ran  in
each,  we  find  the  lanie  formt  ammged  in  the  same
order  as  in  Arotua,  who  is  followrd  step  hy  step.
The  Cirri,  howcyer,  i»  here  termed  the  Saaa  ;  the
CaAata  is  indiTidualiaed  into  (Mem;  and  the
Mm  of  Bvradee  appears  for  the  first  time,  haring
been  introduced  by  Conon  in  honour  of  the  sliter-
irife  of  Plidemy  Encrgetca.

SdcntiHc  OAtTQnomy  commenced  at  Alexandria
bl  the  early  part  of  the  third  century  before  our
era  \  and  the  first  steps  wore  made  by  TimochaHs
and  Atistyllni,  who  Hooriahed  about  B.  c  S90.
They  invented  the  method  of  determining  the
places  of  the  Ried  stars,  by  referring  them  to  one
of  the  great  cinloi  of  the  heavens,  and  for  itia
purpoae  selected  the  equator.  By  them,  as  we
leom  from  Ptolemy,  the  right  ascendon  snd  de-
clination of  many  stars  were  observed,  among
othcn  of  Spmn  in  the  Virgin,  which  they  Ibnnd
to  be  8°  &iim  the  equinox  of  autumn.

Ilipporchui,  abonl  ISO  years  later,  fslloved  up
the  track  which  they  had  indicated  :  his  abaerT-
ations  extended  from  B.C  162  la  B.C.  127  ;  and,
whether  we  regard  the  originality,  the  magnitude,
or  the  unportancc  of  hia  laboura,  he  is  wril  entitled
to  be  rraarded  ai  the  father  of  the  science.  (See
Flin.  ILN.u,  26.) In  addition  to  many  other


ASTRONOMIA.

serrieea,  ha  Gut  drew  np  a  ngnlar  catalogoa  of
the  fired  stan,  pointing  out  their  position  and
magnitude,  he  fint  delineated  accurately  the  shape
of  the  consteLatious,  and  he  first  discovered  Uke
preocsaion  of  Ii»  eqninoiea  hy  cmnpaiing  his  own
observations  with  those  of  Timochaiis  and  Aria-
tyllnj.  It  is  much  to  be  lamented  that  all  lh«
woib  of  10  great  a  man  should  have  perished,
with  the  exception  of  a  commentary  in  time  bodta
upon  the  desCTiption  c^  the  fixed  aUn  by  Eodoxiia
and  ArotDs  CEf^Ti^ir  Tsiv  'Apdvov  taH  VMif/n
^amnimr),  the  least  vahmble  perhaps  of  all  hia
prodnctiona.  We  have,  however,  every  leasoo  to
believe  that  the  sobstance  of  his  moat  nluable  ob-
servations has  been  jaesarved  in  the  Alm^eit  of
Pidemy,  which  long  enjoyed  such  hjg^  &me  that  all
former  authors  were  aUovred  to  sink  into  oUiviMi.
The  catalogue  of  the  filed  stan  by  Ptolemy
(S.  A.  D.  1 00),  contained  in  the  seventh  and  dgh^
books  of  the  Ahnsgest  and  derived  in  all  ]ai>-
bahility  in  a  great  meaanre  from  that  cosnpiled  by
Hipparchuf,  long  served  M  the  model  for  all  sab-
sequent  labours  m  the  same  Geld,  and  little  more
tlutn  two  centuries  have  elapsed  since  any  attempt
was  made  to  saperaede  it  by  something  more  per-
fect. It  emhiaoes  43  cimslellations  (31  northern,
15  southern,  and  the  12  aigna  of  the  codiac),  eom-
ptiaing  15  atan  of  the  first  magnitude,  45  of  UiA
second,  208  of  the  third,  474  of  the  tnirth,  317
of  the  fifth,  49  of  the  sixth,  9  obscure,  and  6
ncboloua,  in  all  102Z  These  are  the  constella-
tions, nanally  denominated  the  OU  Omitdlatiimt,
to  distinguish  them  from  the  addhioos  mode  in
modem  times,  and  these  we  shall  consider  in  re-
gular order.  The  stars  are  enumerated  according
to  the  place  which  they  occupy  in  the  figures,  the
latitude,  longitude,  and  magnitude  of  ikch  being
specified.  In  coimectioD  with  many  constallationa,
several  stars  ore  menliDDed  as  iiu^^arri^  that  ia,
not  mcluded  within  the  limits  of  any  one  of  the
figures  ;  among  those  near  the  Lion  he  notices  the
Hair  oflltreme*,  among  those  near  the  Eagle  the
At^Himi.  The  single  itois  and  small  groups  to
which  particular  namea  an  aaiigned,Bie,^KAinu,
the  Zjre,  Cbpefla,  the  Kidi,  the  Eaglt,  the  Hfodn,
the  Pteiada,  the  iUtaiffer,  the  Ana,  Btgidat
(SwriXlricoi),  VindtmiatTii,  Spea,  Aalartt,  tha
Hood  (he  does  not  give  the  name5trHi),aai<if)SD^
and  Praeym.

over  Geminna,  whose  work  EltroTWyJ)  <Ii  t&
^aiy6fAtifa  contoina  in  aixtem  chaptera  an  exposi-
tion of  the  moat  striking  {sets  in  Astnnwmy  and
Mathematical  Ocogmphy.  We  know  nothing  of
him  peraooally ;  bat  it  has  been  inferred  from  fais
book  that  he  waa  a  native  of  Rhodes,  and  that  he
flourished  about  b.  c  70,  at  Rome,  or  at  sonns
place  under  the  nme  parallel.  The  second  chapter
treats  of  the  constelUtions  and  of  those  stars  and
small  clusters  diitingniahed  by  particular  name*.
The  Cbma  Berttnca,  which  is  not  included  in  tfaa
31  Dorthem  conitellationa  of  Ptolemy,  haa  hera
an  independent  place  assigned  to  it ;  the  foal,  or
LUtb  Horn,  ia  termed  xpimiiii  Twvou  ■ad''Ir-
irap;i:si',  which  seems  to  indicate  that  it  was  in-
troduced by  Hipnrchnt ;  in  addition  to  ibe  15
Southern  Conitellationa  of  Ptolemy,  we  find  the
Stream  {x^"  ffVoror)  iuniog  from  the  um  uf
Aquarina,  and  the  Ti^nw  of  the  Centaor.  Ths
sixteenth  chapter  is  pBrticnlariy  interecting  and.
valuable,  since  it  cnntaina  a  por^MgiMjir  adendac


ASTHONOUIA.

tl  tk«  riaiiifci  BDd  Mttintii  of  the  fixed  ftaii.  with
ijwgnowici  af  tlie  wtaihtx,  aoooidiiiB  to  Meton,
Bactewen,  Endoxu,  Calip|nii,  ani  otnen,  tile  ob-
asmjaim  of  each  beins  aiuted  ■^lanttl}'.

TW  Rooaos  adopted  tlie  knowledge  d'tbsjlaii
eManuEMed  by  tho  Oiedu  wiuiout  in  tba
ri«te«  digiia  extonding  it.  Only  two  Latin
wTixn  diMoane  wpeaillj  en  the  nliitct,  Uaniliu
mi  Joliaa  Firmicai,  ud  their  tnaliHi  behmg
BBhw  tn  JadicU  Aattotegj.  The  poet*,  however,
ti^ttmBj  Olid  and  Virgil,  uake  frequent  >lla-
ama  la  the  rioageand  nttingi  of  the  Axed  Man,
■eiha  laaat  rena^ablo  couuUuiciiu  and  to  the
bed  to  ihem.  Ciccni,  QeniiBiiiciui,
as  WQ  hare  ilated  Hbore,  eieented
* '  while  in  Vilnnio*,  Pliny,

Capella,  the  Scfaoliari  on
Hjgiit«,  we  £nd  a  multitude  of
it  i*  dea,  took  Antni  for  bit

ontd ;  br  bo  daea

ti>n<aarthea)

Phy  Wfmkt  of  the  cenrtdltiolu  >a  terenty-twe

'laie  Aedouttheimn


■•  ^  Flmmim,  the  Hyadtt,  the  ITn  and  the
ftiM  ^  J|  iifei,  the  TljnM  ^  ti»  Omtttiar,
dM  Htmd  ^  Miim,  the  acgmttar  1/  FtrmM,
the  Afa^g,  the  7W  ^an,  Cfapetto,  Uie  Kidt,
tk  aUr  y  BiiMij^  the  nmg  1/  Oiaiar,  and


la  the  eatalogna  <f  Ptolemy.

The  SdMtia  m  Otnnaiiiciu  do  not  cmutinile  ■
J  like  the  Sehotia  on  Amtui,
I  tma  Entoithenei,  with  aoms
'  ■[".  added  nheeqiiHitly  perhopi,  from  the
BphMaOneca  el  Barban  af  Nigidiiu  Figuliu  and
■dcr  wofcj  •■  atttoBBiisl  myUu.

The  Pa^iam  Aitroiiomkom,  which  bean  the
■^E*  tt  Hyxinu,  i*  written  in  the  My)e  erf  Eni-
iMtheMa,  aad  ii  in  a  great  meaeure  boirowed  &am
k^  Ke  uotke  ie  btre  tekeo  of  the  foai  nor  of
^  dB^brw  Cnmt,  which  pmrca  that  at  the
IHC  W^a  it  WBi  eonpoaed,  wbenerct  thai  ma;
Wv  haea,  >■«  ettenCion  wa<  paid  to  Antui  than
le  HitjaTehm  and  Plolemy.

In  wlnt  fbOow*  we  arrange  the  conMellalioiu,
with  one  ^  two  trifling  exeeptimi,  in  the  order
■darted  fay  Ptolcny,  eiinn»nting  fint  the  twenty-
■I*  ■Httian  aigiia ;  aecnuUy,  the  twelve  udiacal
■Bia;  ^hI  laitly,  the  fiftesi  amthem  ugna.  In
^ch  ^aa  w«  gire,  Gnt,  the  oame  b;  whkb  the
owaarilaliMi  ii  known  anMUg  oonelTH;  aecoadlT,
tic  aaaa  aacibcd  to  it  by  Antni ;  and  laatly,  the
■Uar  Omih  aid  Latin  nane*  which  nuK  kt-
^^tj  aeear  v  which  dceerre  particnlu  notice.
NarSierm  Sig»*.

1.  TK>OuaTBUK,TBBPu>ITSH,  Chablu'
W4»^  'Afvrai  0*)*u»>.  'E**»fl  {Arat  27,
*cV  Jtf*^  ^R*i,  A^or  (7r*B  (Omnu).},  //<-
ha  (Oc,  HanO.  i  S(U). The  nmt  TemaricabU


liim


hiilTiwii  r  ■
Hkabebw


ASTBONOMIA-  147

nunea  of  'Afumi,  73<  Sia  Aw,  or'A/uto,  TU
Wagga,  {IL  XTiii.  4S7,  Od.  v.  275),  whjeh  tho
RonUKu  tranelated  by  the  equivalent  teimi  Una
and  PlmalTim  or  OJna.  At  a  laler  period  when
the  L«er  Bear  had  been  added  to  ihc  number  of
the  celeatial  lignt,  the  epithet*  iitydi.ti  and  Mufp^
were  applied  to  ihcm  leepcctivelj  by  way  of  dii-
tinctioB,  and  in  like  manner  Ond  (TVuC  iv,  3)
•pcaka  of  thoa  a*  magna  raiaor^iia  /trai.  Tho
andoit  Italian  name  (bi  the  aeven  bright  slnn
which  form  the  moat  cooa[UDuotu  porticui  ctf  Uie
gnwp  wBi  Septan  TKonn  (C>c),  that  is,  according
to  the  ioterprclBllon  of  Varro  (L.  i^.  vi.  4 ;  Ocll.
ii.  21 1  FcatUB,  (.  V.  JVmiui),  7^  5ci«i  Plomlmg
Obx,  an  appcllatiou  which  ai  well  ai  thai  of  4>«ia
wsa  extended  to  the  Leaur  Beai;  Thua  Aiatni
camraence*  bit  deacriptiiai

deriving  Afufoi,  ahanidlj  enough,  from  ^la;  Viigil

cdebntei

Arttonun,  ^nviaaqne  Hyadaa,  fenwuja*  Triimet,

and  VitiTiTiai  (ix.  S)  not  nnly  employs  Sqilgn-

trio  liniply  for  the  Oreatra'  B«ar,  but  diitingoUhei

between  StpUairio  ou^or  and  SeptgnUn^  iniROr,

and  again  apeaki  of  the  ArdoM,  qui  S^jtenUnonn

la  addi^on  to  the  above  deilgtiationa  wo  find
'EaIki),  applied  to  the  Greater  Bear  alone,  derived
from  jia  sweeping  roond  in  a  ciure  {k-ri  toZ  ixltr-
natoi,  SchoL  odAnit  37),  whSe  from  tho  mjlhi-
cal  connection  eatabliahed  batweoi  thia  constella-
tion and  Callialo,  daoghter  of  the  Anadian  monarch
LycBon,  the  Idtin  poet!  conatantly  refer  to  it  as
LjfcaauA  Arctoa;  ParrhoBt  Arct/aJ  Parrhasidea
lUliat;  Maaialul!rta,SLc  The  term  Cow /mm
employed  by  Pnpertitu  (ii.  24.  24),  i>  explained
below  CNo.  B)  imder  AretofAjilax.  For  the  alory  of
Callisto  anil  her  transformotion  ace  Ovid.  Mit.  n.
409,  /'tut  ii.  155;  Serr.  ad  Virg.  Gtorg.liW;
Hygin.  PoeL  AstroH.  iL  1.  2.

2.  Thi  Lesbir  or  LittLi  BiaR,  'AfWroi
SjuKpi),  Kiviaaufa,  VLvviaavpa  (Arat  27—308),
Ardut  minor  (Cic),  Cgnosm  (Cie.  MiuiiLi.  ;I0«>.
Thia  cDnatellatinn,  we  are  assured  by  manv  nii-
thorilica  (SchoL  ad  Horn.  IL  iviii.  167  1  A'chill.
Tat  Iiagag.  in  AraL  Piaea.  c  i  ;  Diog.  Loett.  L
23;  Hjgin.  PoCt.  Atlna.  ii,  2),  was  first  added  to
the  Orecian  caUilDguet  by  Tholca  by  whom  it  may
poaaibly  have  been  imported  from  the  East;  and
while  &om  ita  cloae  rcscmblanco  in  form,  it  ihaied
the  oamei  ofAfwroi  and  i^a  with  ita  more  an-
cient and  majestic  companion,  it  enjoyed  osclu-
lirely  the  appcllaliona  of  t>>iiFliini  and  Kariatvpa,
The  forma  was  derived  fnim  the  drciimatance
that  it  was  selected  hr  the  Pboeniciani  ae  the
guide  by  which  they  shaped  their  course  at  tea,
the  Oieoan  marinen  with  leas  judgment  employ-
ing Helico  for  the  naae  purpose  (Aiat  37  ;  Erat.
CaL  2;  SchoL  ad  Gtmaa.  p.  89;  Uygin.  P.  A.
iL  2).  The  latter,  ligniffing  oiau  cauda,  applied
by  the  ancients  to  the  whole  figure,  and  not  aa  in
tnodem  timea  merely  to  the  polo  alar,  aeema  to
have  been  auggested  by  the  appearance  presented
by  three  of  the  stars  which  feim  a  circnlor  sweep,
bearing  some  leacmblanee  (0  the  upturned  curl  of
a  dog's  tail,  and  will  Ihna  be  an  expceaaion  analo-
goua  to  that  of  H/iiai.  The  earlv  astronomen
•eeni  to  have  ganeiBlly  conaidered  that  ate  of  tkf


IM  ASTSONOMIA.

tua  in  the  Little  Bar  muked  tha  pouCion  of  the
pole,  but  it  ii  difficult  to  delermiue  from  their
irord]  to  which  thej  HTexnlij  refer.  Accord-
ing  to  Hygiciu  who,  hovflver,  leenu  uot  to
hare  cleul/  nndentood  Entoithanei  whom  he
qnolM,  ooe  af  the  three  Kui  fonning  the  ttul  ante
railed  Point  ind  the  two  othen,  fiom  circling
lound  it,  Xopfnwl,  lia  Dmiart,  the  uma  >PF«-
lentl;  with  the  LadaHei  of  the  bcboliut  an  Ota-


nnne*  in  Crato  to  in&iit  Jove  (Arat  SI),  and
hence  the  phrue  Orttaeat  Arr6  (Qennan.).

3.  Tak  Draoon,  AfKUw  (Ant  ii),  tnne-
l«ted  by  the  Utine  Draco  (Cit  Qennin.  Vitruv.),
Sapaa  (Oermuu  ViDuv,  MuiiL  Grid),  lud  Atyidi
(Vir^.  Orid.  MuiiL).  8erTiDi(ai{  Vity.  Omg.
L2US)  nmBrki  that  there  are  three  Atigna  in  the
ikjr,  one  lying  between  the  Bean :

Hanmni  hie  fleia  linooH  elabitar  Anguii
Circum  peique  duaa  in  morem  flmninii  Ants* :
(camp.  VitruT.  ix.  S) :  the  Kcond  giuped  bj
OpUaaa:  the  third,  to  the  tenth,  around  the  Cmta-
and  Oonmi.  The  nperior  richneu  of  the  Greek
limguige  diitinguiihed  theie  ai  ^fiKvr,'0^is,  and
*T0^.  The  deacription  of  Alatua  ham  been  ren  -
dered  almoil  Tcibatim  and  with  great  ipirit  b;
Virgil  in  the  line!  qaoled  aboie.  MytholgKJcall;,
the  dragon  wai  regarded  ai  the  make  which  ence
guarded  the  applet  of  the  Ketperidet,  or  ai  a  anake
matched  hj  Mmcrra  torn  the  gianCt  and  whirled
bj  her  aloft  to  the  pole  (H  jgin.  P.  A.  iL  3,  iiL
2  !  Ser".  ad  Virg.  Gea^.  i.  244.)

4.  CiFUaua,  Kd^kAi  (Amt.  183),  Opitia
(Cic  Vitruv.  MoniL),  laiidii  Cephtiu  (OermaiL).
Tbe  legend!  mpecting  thii  ill-fated  monarch  and
the  other  membert  of  bia  binily  who  beamed  in
the  heavena,  Oatiiiptia,  Perteat,  and  AadHmtda,
are  detailed  at  length  in  the  Cauuteritmi  of  Era-
toathenea  and  in  Uyginui.

fi.  Thi  BiAB-Wj|insN,BooTia,THiW*o-
OOMIR,  'lipmvfiXai  (Ant  91),  Arctopiyliur
(Cic  Oermau.  ManlL  L  323),  tranilalad  br  Ovid
(TVut  L  10.  IG)  Oatot  Urtae,  and  hj  Vitmriua
(ix.  3.)  Cialoi  Arcti,  or  limply  Oatot  (L  e.\  waa
denoniinated  alaa  Bo^n\t  (Arat. '.  c),  Boela  (Cic
Oermun.  Manil.),  L  e.  Babalcui,  the  ox-dnTer,  and
sccMiling  to  (he  Scboliaal  on  AraCua  (I.  e.^Tpirpfriit,
the  vintager.  The  £nt  name  which  luppoeea  the
conitellationt  to  repreaent  a  man  upon  the  watch
deootei  aimplj  the  poti^on  of  the  ngure  with  re-
gard to  tbe  Great  Bear,  or  when  the  latter  wai
regarded  ai  Calliato,  then  Aictophflai  became
faer  ton  Arcat,  by  whom  the  waa  hunted  and
alain  ;  the  aecond  name,  which  it  found  in  Homer
(04  T.  272)  rcfera  to  the  Sfuifo,  the  imagiiiary
form  of  Bot&rrjT  being  bncied  to  occupy  the  place
of  the  drirer  of  the  team  ;  tbe  third  name  ia  con-
nected with  the  period  of  the  heliacal  riling  of  the
group  which  indinCed  the  tcaaon  of  the  vlnlage.

The  chief  itar  in  tbe  conitellatiDniaAiiCTuauB,
'ApKToi^r  (Arat  SS),  Ardsrmt  (Cic  German.
VilruT.  MantL),  a  wati  of  timilai  import  with
Arctoph^ai.  It  ia  twice  mentioned  by  Heaiod
{Erg.  566,  610),  and,  at  we  ihall  >ee  hereafter,
occupied  a  pominent  place  ia  the  <alendan  of
Orevca  and  Roma. Some  lata  wiiten,  tuch  at  tb*


ASTRONOMIA.

Scboliaal  on  Oermanicoa,  Hj^unu  and  Martianna
CapeUo,  uae  the  name  Arelama  for  the  wbate  con-
alelladou,  but  Antui,  Oeminua,  and  Ptolemy  con-

Tbe  legendt  with  regard  to  Bo5teB  pnaeot  many
dilTerent  aipectt ;  by  tbe  Oreeki  be  waa  uaoally
repreaenled  at  Anau,  the  ton  of  Calliito  ;  Oiid  in
one  patnge  {Fiat,  ti.  235)  calla  him  Ljcaon,  tbe
bther  of  the  hapteta  dasiael ;  by  othen  he  waa
pronounced  to  be  Icaiint  (or  Icama)  to  whom
Bacchua  taught  the  nee  of  the  Tine,  and  then  the
oonateUation  Virgo  waa  hit  daughter ;  Erigflue,
and  either  the  greater  or  the  Iciaer  hound,  waa  ber
dog  Maera  (Oamt  Icariat,  Gv.  FaL  ir.  9311).
Hence,  too,  the  SepUmtrioaea  are  ityled  Bern
Jearii  by  Propertint  (ii.  24.  34).

Homer  (Of.  v.  272)  calla  BoStei  b^t  tieir,  bom
bia  deaceoding  beldw  the  horizon  in  an  upright
poaition,  and  therefore  very  gradually.  Compire
Ot.  J^uL  iiL  405  ;  Claud.  Rapt.  Frourp.  iL  190,
and  the  "  pigri  latraca  Bootae  "  of  Jaienal,  t.  23.

6.  Tax  NoRTHiBH  CboWn,  Sr^fuHt  (Arat
7 1 ),  Omma  (Cic  Vitruv.  MaaL),  Ariadma  aonma,
Afiitoa  oormia,  German.).  Ptoiemy  diadnguiiba  be-
tween the  Northern  and  the  Soniheni  Crown  (iri-
^oroT  ^^lor,  pi^ior),  and  hence  the  modern  name.
According  to  the  legend  commonly  adopted  thia  wiu
the  chaplot  of  Ariadne  placed  by  Bacchua  in  tbe
fiimament  to  do  honour  to  bia  miatreaa,  and  hence
the  epithet!  apjdied  by  Germanicua  aa  quoted
(Comp.  Virg.  Gtorg.  L  222 ;  Or.  FaiL  iii.


10.)


a  the


460;

The  n
.plan,
Home

7.  Hkbcoi-ks.  The  conttellation  DOW  known  by
thit  name  it  deambed  by  Aratua  (v.  63)  aa  an  uu-
known  or  nameleaa  form  (iTSh^ii*' lEurror ;  irevAfcs
t'iSAKaia),  which  &om  itt  retembhuice  to  a  man
toiling  (lUTfiam  iiApl  Itixiit  dlnAni')  <m  hia
kneel,  waa  utnally  c^ed  'Et-)^KUTU',  which  the


n  the


letter%  En-
(Cic),  ortgrtha
, ,  'atu  (VitruT.  ix,

3),  i*gmiad<a  (JuL  Firm.  TiiL  17),  NiJM  ^
ffoabat  (Vitruv.  ibid.),  jVua  ^eaii  ^leeua  (Gennaii.
HaniL  L  322,  v.  645),  DtxlTO  gata  aua*  (Ocr-
man.),  or  limply  Nitta  a.  Nisaa  (Cic  Qvra»ai,\
Imiicut  (Avien.  205),  or  with  reference  lo  the
labouring  attitude  Dtfidum  nifu,  ^figitt  dt/iebt
Ubon  (Oetnian.).

Accco^g  to  Avienua  (v.  175X  the  upellatkm
of  Hecolea  wat  bettowed  by  Panyatia,  by  oCbeta
it  wat  regarded  aa  Theacna,  by  otben  at  Cetmu^
ton  of  Lycaoii,  by  othera  aa  Protnethena  cbaioed  to
Cancatut. (Hygia.  P.A.  ii.  6,  iiL  5.)

3.  Thi  Lvbi,  XlAvi,  A^  (Arat  26BX  L^ra
(German.  Vitmv.  Manil.  I  331X  Pi^  <.Cia.\
Fuiit  (CoL  xl  2.  §  43,  &c\  Pidk^  (Plin.  H.  N.
iviii.  64  ftc).  Ptolemy  («.A.)  deaigiiatea  u
i  ^afiwpbt  T^r  hiipat,  the  peculiarly  l»ight  atfir
(a  Lyrae),  which  rendera  thit  contteliatHHi  ao  coq..
tpicuout ;  bnl  it  appeari  probable  that  the  aimpla
A^fia  among  the  Greek  aatroootneri,  aa  well  as
Fidii  and  Fidieala  among  the  Latina,  waa  Ere.
quentlf  employed  to  denote  thia  aingis  itar,  bm
well  aa  the  whole  wgn.  Maniliut  aeema  to  qtettk
of  Fiiiit  aa  a  conatcllation  diatinct  Irom  Lyra,  but
the  paaaagea  are  rerycoufbaed  (L  409  ;  conp.  324,
337).  The  invention  of  the  Lyra  being  aaeribed
to  Merauy,  we  naturally  find  the  iftlliai*  '^tolia


ASTRONOMIA.
(AnL  674\  bU^oi*  (597),  MnvoruKt  (OcT-
■n-X  C>bB>  (Ot)  uuehed  to  it

ft.  Thb  Swak,  'O^i,  aUui  Jfvii  (Ank
KJ.  274%  -ifc.  (ric),  robou,  J™  (Vilnir.
ix.  iX  lie  Bod  a  tile  uma  gimi  by  Antot
nl  GcsDDBi  to  the  oacittcllatiia  termed  bj  En-
inwlF^Fi  (c.  2£)  KAmi,  rsidcnd  Cfmiu  by
GijiHuicBi  azid  MwiiTiw^  for  irhich  the  lynorxyrn
M>r  B  lk«4iiaitlj  nibnitated.  By  mjtbologiiu  it
*i>  Rpaided  at  tlu  imn  af  Leda.

I*.  C^moFBU,  tMueitnia  (Ant  189X  Q»-
M^jtaiB  iOr.  Oman.  M*niL  i.  361),  duupn
I  VutimT.),  For  the  mjlh  ifgarding  bcr,  aae  Hygin.
P.A.  n.  10  :  eomp.  AnL  651  ;  MauiL  f.  501;
Pnfat.  L  1 7.  S ;  CohimelL  li.  2.  J  7&

11.  Puraoa,  ni^rtj  (Ant  246),  J>«hu
((^  Oonan.  VimiT.  MuiL  i.  3£7,  365),  m
|>iiwcd  M  bearing  in  one  hand  a  crooked  iwerd
•  ifr%,  bli),  aid  in  tha  other  tbe  head  af  the
CraxB  HedH,  T»ni*^  (OemiiL  Plolem.),  Qar-
jmi^  o^i^  (Vitni.  ii.  3),  Gtrgoxii  ora  (HaniL
i  S6«),  0^>B(  C^rjm™. (Hjgin.  f.^.  iii.  11).

12.  Tbi  Chauotcer,  'HrlaxDi  (Ant  1A6),
Htmttin  (Manfl.  L  369),  .rf-rvi  (Cic  GcnmuL
Vimr.),  ^vijiator  (Avitn.),  vai,  acaading  to
■■  kgcad  (Oenm.).  EriiAimiu,

QaBB  [aiiuu  oun  Tolitintem  Jnpitcr  alto
IJili  ijmii  csnipeiil  eqoii. MakU^  i.  370.
AindiaK  U  aiMlier  (OeniiiL  iivl.)  Hyrtilni  the
ihiiiiaiiii  of  OcBooaoi,  who  bdnjad  hii  i
n  Pdn.  (Htpo.  AL  U.)

Tbt  brifhteat  itar  in  thit  oaiatellatian  (a*)  vai
ki^  A^  (AnL  1£7)  bj  the  Oreeki,  vho
■Ktared  a  pM  nppiirtedDtMn  thenj^ierpaMafthe
La  am  of  the  fignt,  and  by  the  Romast  Capdia
(Ot^  ItaoiL  Plm.)  ai  Gqini  (Cic  VimiT.  Hor.
"I  I  r  1  I  1 )  TheepiUwt'aAmninAntiu
(IMXatma^a^totbeeiiJanatianorhiiSchoIiaM,
n*  ^pBed  becaaie  the  i^  loled  M  i^t  ^\^i
n*  'Kn^x^V  ■■d  heoce  Ofanr,  (HuBum  pena,
(iha^m  aihtm  lu  helkcai  ii*ing  took  plus
■m  bdiae  th«  winter  iidatini,  and  that  it  in  ~
irmnd  r^T"'™  pittnale,  vhUa  the  legend*  d(
ilmd  thac  thia  n  the  TE17  mat  Analthna  who
Kited  Japilo-  npoD  Homt  Ida.  Both  of  theao
paiaaa  br  toDebed  opon  in  the  conplet  of  Ond .
NHchsr  Oleniae  Mgnnm  jdaviale  Cspellae,

lUa  dati  codDm  pnemia  lactii  habet
The  IWD  itan  (C,  rf)  placed  hj  Antni  (166)
Ktt  Ptjeoi;  oa  the  wii«t  of  Amiga  were

Tn  KiDi,  "Ef^  (Aiat  156),  Hoedi  (Ci
Vjim.  IfaaiL  L  373),  and  an  (aid  to  haia  bei
b*t  aaaied  b;  Qeoatntiu  of  Tenedoa  about  B.  <
SW  (HygiD.  P.  A.  it  13).  They,  u  veU  aa
I'fvlbi,  tat  ipokai  of  ea  beialdi  i^  Iha  atorm.
i)Lirf.i.S72;Viig.C»rjLi.20S,.i«.ii.  663;
I]«.  O^m.  iu.  1.  3E.)  The  alar  which  marki  the
>ctba*  ben>-tip  of  the  Bull  vn,  accoiding  to
Taiiiiiin  (is.  3),  called  Ataigat  Mama,  aiaee  he
«M  ■■  lai  r  la  bold  H  in  hii  band.

IXTbb  SKKPnrr  Holdkk,  'O^wirxsi  (Ant
r>),  OfM^tmi  (Oennan.  Vitinr.),  AtoBtam*
(Cic  KasiL  t.  3S4),  Ji^ay^  (Coliimd.  iL  2.
1(5),  Sayintniia  (SchoL  Oeiman.),  wat  com-
■■111  iiaaiiliiil  by  mythical  writoi  and  poeti  aa
AcB^^  (Eiati>ah.c;  S ;  Or.  FioL  iL  735),  and
hi  aaM  aa  Baenlo^  not  to  mention  other  more
Uacn  legoda.  (Uy^  P.  ^.  ii.  K  itL  13.)
14,  Tn  SsAXB,  g»^  b7  "Dd  nmimdiag


ASTRONOMIA.  I4l

the  Ggnre,  waa  termed  tc^if  (Arat  81!),  .di^M
(Cic,  Qennan.),  or  jlsrpou  (Cic.  VitruT.),

Sayadsa  Qniia  Ophimiiiw  nomine  diatoi

Diridit,  &c  Manic  L  33S.

and  ii  reckoned  b>  a


epont.  conalalktion.
la.  IXC  ABHOW,  'OmJl  (Ant  311),  T^ov
(EiDtonh.),  So^ita  (Oerman.  VilniT.),  Clara
m/gitta,  Ftdgeiu  tagitla  (Cic),  it  dialinct  bim  th«
arrow  fitted  to  the  tw»  of  Sagittariua,  the  aicher,
in  the  todiac  Henca  Aiatu,  "
latter,  add*


bt  i-Tf  -r^fio.


■n  bAot  hJarit


(Comp.  Cic  325 ;  Gennao.  683 ;  HaniL  I  B49.)

16.  Tai  EAOia,  "Aerrft  {larit.  Ant  31fi),
Aifuia  (Cic.  VitiuT.),  or,  in  poetical  cireamloni-
lion,  JoW*  armiqir  (German.  Alien.),  JaaUakt
(Gennan.  ManiL  L  360),  .IrnuTer  iwia  tmg^mt
ala  (German.),  Pracpa  admaa  Jmht  (fir.  Fail.
li-  196).  The  principal  itar  ii  named  ^ecUly
ierifr  by  Ptolemy  ■,  but  from  the  ciicamtlance  of
hit  placing  it  among  thote  uf  the  lecond  magnitude,
it  baa  been  conjectured  that  it  wat  lea  bright  in
hit  day  than  at  preaent

Ahtinous.  Ptolamy,  when  noticing  the  itan
aRRmd  the  Eagle  not  pcoperij  iiclnded  vilhin  the
limitt  of  the  conitallation,  remarka,  jf  Sr  i
'Arrlnot,  which  cofrobonlca  the  itatemenl  of
Dion  Canhu,  that  Hadrian  aiaigned  a  itac  to  hii


•epante  conitellatioti,
fint  introdnced  by  Tycho  Brahe.

17.  Thi  Dolphin,  AiXfii  (Ant  313;,  1.
AOj^Iv,  De^Mmu  (Cic  Oeiman.  ViCroi.  Manil.
L  353),  DtlpAim  (German.)  wat  regarded  by
mylhologiati  Bi  the  dolphin  which  bore  Arion.

IS.  Tbb  Littli  HaRga,*Imni  rpora/ii,  lite-
rally, &tJattqmrUri  of  a  iont,  waa  nnknown  to
Arattu  and  !>aloatlieiMa ;  but  appean  from  the
wordt  of  Geminiu  to  haie  been  introduced  by
Hipparchni.  It  ii  not  noticed  by  ViOuiiut  noi
by  Maniliiu.

19.  PaOASC^  'I«oi  (Ant  205),  Egma  (Cic.
VitniT.  Uanil.  L  355),  Som^,  Somipa  alei
(Oennan.).  The  legenda  having  declared  that  thii
wBi  the  iteed  of  Belkmphon,  the  name  Pegaanj
(Qeimon.  505)  wu  employed  ai  early  aa  Enloi-
tboiea  to  diitinguiih  the  conilellationa,  but  Anlni
■peaki  of  it  tiniply  at  Urn  iom.  (Ot.  Fait.  iiL
450.)  The  Ggun  waa  luppoied  to  repreaeni  the
fore  quarter!  only.

20.  Andbouida,  •ArSpa^a„  (Aiat  197),
Aadromtda  a.  Andromedt  (Cic  German.  Vitnii.
HaniL  I  357,  363).  Andrameda  waa  the  daugh-
ter of  Cepbeat  and  Caaiiopeia,  and  hence  the  con-
•tcUatioD  ii  leimed  C^int  by  Maniliui  and
Geimanicut  (L  443),  while  in  conwquencc  of  her
deliToraoce  from  the  tea  mcntter  by  Penena  wo
find  Prma  in  the  Kholiait  on  Gennanicui.

21.  Tn«  TaiANOLi,  AfXTon-Jr  (Arat  235  ;
Cic),  DtUotum  (GeimBn.  ManiL  l  360),  the  Tpf-
-  WW  of  Ptolemy,  and  hence  ViUni.  i».  3,  "  In-

iper  Arietit  aignum  bdentea  itdlaa  nint  trigamim
paiibiu  lateribai."

Sign  o/Oi  Zodiac

Ta«  Ram,  Kpifi (Ant  225),  Arif  (Cic

■an.  Vilmi. ManiL i.  263X  Lamgtr  (Oer-

699  I  Manil,  ii,  646). Thii  was  the  lery

gDldm-fleaced  nm  which  box  away  Phiyna  and


150  ASTRONOMIC.

Hellc  Irom  tlie  Tratii  of  Tno,  and  benee  the  de-

■ignatiaiii  in  OTid  of  Piiyxea  Ooii,  Pkm  Alio-

2.  Tub  Buls  TaSpei  (Arat  167),  Tbsnu
(Cic.  Germsn.  VitruT.  Maiul.  L  26<),  Bta  (Ger-
moiL  llJl),  yn»  by  M>me  mytliologeii  rsgarded  u
the  bull  into  whicb  Jupiter  tranifoniied  himielf  to
gkin  Europa  j  according  lo  olhen  u  the  cow  into
vhich  lo  vol  metamorphoKd  ;  in  eilhcT  ca*e  in
abject  of  jealoiuy  to  Juno,  ai  Indicated  bj  Orid
iFatl.  ir.  7.  7).  In  another  puage  (tL  713),  in
reference  to  the  former  idea,  he  ipeoki  of  him  u
Agmoraa,  vhilc  Maitud  (x.  fil)  i^ipliia  the  epi-
theC  7>n'iit.

Thii  conitellatian  i*  cfaicflf  lemarlcable  &<Hn
inclnding  within  iti  limits  two  small  bat  clfwcly
packed  diulen  of  >Un,  which  aOiacted  attention
St  a  my  early  period,  and  are  diitinitaiihed  by
Homer  (/J,  niiL  486)  and  Hoiod  (£ry.  615)  at
the  HrjLDU  and  VLKiAnia,  mimea  which  thej
■till  retain  unchanged.

The  liVADBS,  'r<U«  (Arat  173),  Hyada
(Oennsn.  &^),  lituatcd  in  the  forehead  cf  the
figure  (JewX  iru-rl  furrintif,  Arat  ;  M  ttv  floB-
■pdnu,  Gemin.),  dcnTcd  their  name  ari  toD  Giiv,
because  the  period  of  their  getting  in  the  morning
twilight  (the  end  of  Noiember)  maikcd  the  moil
wet  and  ■tnnay  period  of  the  year.  By  the  Ita-
lian peasant*  they  were  denominaled  the  twJia,
i.  c.  the  little  iwine,  and  hence  it  hai  been  ima-
gined, but  prabablT  crroneoaily,  that  TiUti  ii  ety-
mologically  connec'tcd  wilb'Yi  (Plin.  H.N.  lyiii.
26  1  GelL  liii.  9).  They  act  in  the  evening
twilight  at  Rome,  towardt  the  close  of  the  re-

Eublic,  about  the  20th  of  April,  and  hence  were
nowi)  at  the  i^H  Farilidam  (or  PaWdam),  the
J'itri/ui(or/'afiVu),  thefettiml  which  mttrited  the
birth-day  oF  the  city,  being  kept  apon  the  21it.
Ancient  aitronomen  were  not  agreed  aa  to  the
namber  of  itara  inclnded  in  the  Hyndea  (aee
SchoL  ad  Arat).  Tbalea  reckoned  two  only  (lie
a  and  <),  die  two  eyea  of  the  hnll ;  Eoripidei
three  i  Achaeui  fonr ;  Healed  Bto  ;  Pheieoydea
MTen.  The  latter  made  nympha  of  them,  and  the
namca  have  been  preaerred  by  Hyginoa.  One  of
these.  T/iyau,  ii  pat  by  Ovid  {FOtt.  vi.  711)  far
the  whole  gTDup,  which  elaewhere  (t.  734)  he
terms  the  Sidia  HganSt^  in  sUnsion  to  a  legend
which  he  had  [fferiously  (v.  169)  nceimted.

Still  mora  important  were  the  pLKiAtiKS,
IU(ia(<i,  IU.T)idlif  (Horn.  I  c. Arat  25£  regards


ion),  I


sf  (Qer


man.  &e.  Ike.),  a  word  for  which
logics  haTC  been  proposed,  the  most  raaanable
being  the  verb  tKtir,  their  heliacal  riung  aad
letdi^  in  the  fint  half  of  May  and  the  beguming
of  Norember  haTing  been  the  s^tDil  in  the  eailj'

discontinue  his  Tayagca.  The  fonn  wsXiloId,  L  e.
On  flodi  of  jKgeoiu,  probably  originated  in  a  cor-
ruption. The  Italian  name  was  VergOiat  (Cic),
SidtH  yergiUaruin  (VitrnT.  ii.  2),  derired  taani-
fcatly  from  their  heliacal  rising  in  spring.  Antes
"" o  that  they  are  eommtmly

"  Quae  ieptem  did  sei  tamen  ease  aolent"
The  bet  ia  that  the  duster  eontiita  of  «z  (ton,
which  can  be  diatinctly  teen  b;  the  naked  eye,
wid  of  KvenI  TOy  nnBU  ones,  which  are  tele-


ASTRONOMIA.
KOpie.  Under  very  bTonrable  ctimmataiieea,  how-

e(er,  one  of  these  may  haie  ocosionall?  beoi
discerned,  u  Hi«>archns  atatee,  or,  poesibly,  aa
we  know  to  haTe  been  the  oue  with  other  Hied
Stan,  one  of  them  may  haTS  lost  a  portion  rf  the
lustre  which  it  at  one  period  posseved,  and  have
become  neaiiy  or  totally  inTisibU.  Be  this  as  it
may,  the  disajipearonca  of  the  serenth  Pleiad  gare
rise  to  a  multitode  of  l^endi.  By  Heaiod  they
an  styled  'ATAir/tvtii,  CSUUrea  of  AOca,  btaa
whom  the  Roman  poets  adopted  the  eipnasion
ASoKtida,  the  name  of  the  damsels  (Aiat  262)
being  Ab^/oma,  Mmpt,  CUosh,  Elaira,  SCttnpe
(or  Aiimpi,  Ocnaan.),  Tl^^sU  and  Maia.  Of
these  ail  wedded  diTinttiei,  the  seventh  a  mortal
man,  and  thus  her  brilliancy  became  dimmed  bj
the  inflnence  of  the  debasing  alliance.  One  or
other  of  the  abore  names  is  frequently  employed
to  denote  the  whole,  as  Diygeli  (Vlrg.  fienr^.  iv.
232  ;  Ot.  ma  iii.  £91),  Maia  (Virg.  Gnrg.  L
2tUX  Stavpt  (Ot.  THst.  i.  14),  and  in  lik«
manner  nXtiii  oi  Fltiat  ia  often  nacd  in  tbs
singular.

5.  Thi  Twins,  AHv^uh  (Arat  147},  Oemini
(Cic  German.  VitruT.  ManiL  L  265).  The  two
brightest  stars,  being  lupposed  to  lepreMnt  Quttc
and  Pollux.

4.  Thi  Ca^^  Ki^fmt  (Arat.  147),  Omar
(Cic  VitmT.  German.  Manil.  L  285),  called
Lenaeai  by  Cotnmella  (x.  313),  beouue,  according
to  the  legend,  it  crawled  out  of  the  Lemaean
Bwamp  to  attack  Hercules  while  he  was  doing
battle  with  the  Hydca.  The  epithet  lAttaraa  in
Ond  {MO.  X.  127)  and  ManiUns  (iii  S16)  pro-
bably refers  merely  to  the  erdinaiy  habits  of  the
animal,  and  not,  at  Ideler  auppcae^  to  the  aaioe

Two  amall  atari  in  thia  conateUalion  (%  t)  wera
called  "Orel,  jlnn  a.  .^Mtii',  the  Donkeys,  one  being
diatinguished  aa  the  northern  (fiSfiiit),  the  other
at  the  southern  (r^iai),  and  a  nebular  bright-
neM  between  them,  ^im),  Pratiept,  the  Stall  or
Manger.  (Arat.  891,  &c  \  PUn.  H.  N.  xviiL  35  j
Ptolem.)  These  acem  to  fonn  what  Mmillua  calls
Jtigidae  (t.  171,  and  note  of  Scalig,),  dthongti
Jitgida  is  a  name  iometimcB  applied  to  Orion.

i.  TBI  Don,  A^  (Arat.  149),  JLm  (Cic
Occman.  VitniT.  Manil  i.  266),  n^ed  aa  tba
Nemcan  lion  ilun  by  Hercules,  and  hence  con-
stantly termed  simply  JVemaciu  (e.  g.  MsniL  iiL
409).  The  bright  atnr  now  known  oa  Rigidia,  a
name  introduced  by  CopemicuR,  was  anciently,  at  ire
learn  byra  the  scholiast  on  Aintui,  colled  PairiXltr-
■Di,  and  marked  the  heart  of  the  animal  (M  rijr
KOfSiai).  InPlinyitiifl^(H:A'.iviii.2a.28>,
in  the  acholiaat  on  QenwuiJcns,  T^iienme,  which  ia
either  a  cormption,  or  arose  from  hit  miitakii^  tbe
meaning  of  the  word  in  Pliny,  who  says,  "  StcUa,
Rtgia  appellat*  TaberoDl  in  pectrae  LNmia,"  {.  e.
The  atar  on  the  Lion^  heart  lalled  Sijfia  hy

6.  Tbb  VniOIN,  JlofBhat  (Aral  96,  &c).
FJrye  (Cic  Oennan.  Vitror.  ManiL  i.  26G},  Et-U

gang  (HaniL  ii.  552,  et  pass.),  vat  mythically  tc~
garded  aa  Aini,  Jufttu,  or^tfrnin,  oraifV^oiu-,
or  as  Cem,  ot  as  Iom,  or  a«  /brfmo,  the  Inst
name  being  giien  to  her,  according  to  the  scholiast
on  Oermimicaa, "  betansethe  it  a  heodlcM  conitcl-

The  brigbtot  itu  in  Aa  eonttellation  is  caUe^
by Aiatua Srdl;(i(», S^m^^Qiwi^ Vitmr.),


ASTRONOMIjL
Sfiam (CSt),  TBI  Coiin  Em,  ud  thii  tbe
igiin  a  lopiwd  M  gTMp  in  her  left  band.

Tke  Mu  which  Bark*  tha  right  wing  (f)  na
ftfnwrtf  (Aral.  138)  (.  rpirrprrTrip  ».  Tjn^


ikvtljIiefaRthipaHditf  llHTinligb  (AimL  138
ud  acbuL  ;  CelmndL  li.  2.  S  S4  ;  Or.  Fatt.  ill
407 ;  Plio.  H.  N.  ZTiiL  26,  31  ;  Vitnir.  ii.  3,
■ft  that  tba  Onak  nama  «■■  vpn-pAyrror,  uul
tkc  Boont,  Pmtimitmia  Major.)

7.  Tb*  BaLAMC*  wm  b;  the  carlia  Greek  u-
iRHon*  innriablj- dcmomiiiAUil  XtiAoI  (Ant.
. c  Qecman.UaQiL  iL  344,  et  pui.),


L  of  the  SctupioD,  vhich  ilandi
Kn  n  uw  uHuac  OHniniu,  whDfliniri*hed,itia
kc&ned,  alMBt  B.C  80,  ii,  u  br  u  ve  knaiv,  the
fill  Onek  writer  who  dutinguBhet  tha  KTenlh
•iga  ea  Zryit,  which  ii  died  by  Plolanj  indif-
foeMlf  vilh  X«W.  The  tenn  £i&rti,  for  which
Oca*  ia  es*  pa—ge  emiilaji  JagiiBi,  waa  Gnt
irmalij  adopted  bj  the  RanBin  ia  the  CdeDdar
•(  Jaliw  Caear,  to  wheat  it  wai  laj  pnbtblf
^geated  tn-  Soaigaica.  The  &iiire,  it  WMUd  tin  iii.
wM  darirel  from  the  Eait,  and  nnit  be  regarded
■avfatbol  of  oqaafi^ intndaced  into  the  heaTcni
■a  tlw  pmod  nm  tin  catraDcs  of  the  tnn  into
that  )wnlii1tli«n  mailed  tha  Aalamn^  Eqcinoi.
The  aciadtiAc  l^tin  wiileri,  mch at  Vitiuviut,

lip  bj  tba  aama  Libra  alma ;  tha  poelt  Dto
e^T  £dr»  IT  CMat,  at  maj  loit  their  poipoae.
M—i"—  n^binaa  both  into  oue  phrtaa  (Juga
riiJiiiaii.  i.  6<t9\  while  the  ingenioni  oooceit  bj
wUdi  Viigil  n|n*eoM  the  SMrpim  u  drtwing
■a  hia  elawa  in  order  to  raahe  mgrn  for  AuguiMi,
it  koawn  ta  ernr  nsder  of  the  fint  Qeoigic-
(Ct^  Or.  JM.  iL  195.)

Ia  iba  omiBCBlaij  of  Thaon  eo  the  Almigett,
fifaa  ii  fnqntollj  rcpraatBted  hjr  AJrpa  or  AlTpai,
•  wa>4  "y*""?  beoowed  by  the  Rcraaiu  fiom
Ae  g^"'™,  tnuarfiaiaed  into  Zibw,  tad  thai
n  iwi  il  lotliB  laid  Oraektin  the  new  tttiBe  tf  a
Balncie.

I.  Tmb  SoobROH,  Xnpirlal  <Ant  BS.  304),
BiiiMfim  (Cie.  Gsman.),  Scorpioi  (HaniL  L  268,
rt  ^B-X  j!a>fpta  (Vilm-)-  Clean,  in  hit  dut-
Itif  of  Aiatnt,  isd  ManiliD^  beth  make  lua  alto
«f  the  una  A'^o,  a  word,  aceodiag  to  Faatiu,  of
AAiam  oini,  tonatiBea  anidayad  to  denote  a
JiLia;  ita  aJ  aomptiaw  a  Out  (Pknt  On.  ii.  B.  7 ;
Oc  4t  I^a.  T.  1G>  ;  and  that  CSoro,  in  line  IGO
gf  hia  ^ir*~.  dirtmctlj  indiatei  the  fborth  tign  b;
iba  waad  A'qw,  whidi  elKwhere  it  pnt  fw  ihs
Sowaia^ Aiatoa  namea  thia  coniteDalion  fi^yu

i^fi  tiiiT  f|ir )  ']ii  [ffi,iir"'.iiiiiiiiiii,iii  iiiiim

" HI  anangemeDt,  at  eipluned  in  the  Itil
k  octniaed,  together  with  itt  elawi,  the
s  ngai. (Ot.  Mti.  ii.  IS5.)
— ,  .snow  Anana,  the  nanta  giren  to  tha
todleat  Btar,  it  fint  fsiind  in  the  worki  of  Ptolemj,
'  ptahaUy  lefaa  to  ha  calovr  and  brilliuief ,  ri-
y  lk«  ef  (the  planet)  Mmtm.
T>B Auaaa, ivtiirrit, raffi/rif, and
\f  r4^(A»t.  SOO,  400, 664, 666),  SaffitaTiai
IT.),  SyHliriittmt  (Cic),  Sagitti/ir  (Oaniian.),
m  (Cie.),  and  tim{d  j  Amu  (Cie.  (Jennaa.).


ASTRONOMIA.  Ifil

ndntlited  into  dinm  {Hatmomi  arau,  Ov.  Mel.
IL  81),  thut  giiing  rite  to  a,  confuiian  between  thia
aign  and  the  Cenlaui  among  the  aoulhem  conitel-
luiani. (Comp.  0>luind].  x.  £6  ;  HTgin.  P.  A,

ii.2:.)

10.  Thk  Go^t  (i.  I.  tha  ChamoiiX  Alj6*ipat
(Ant.  284X  Aigoceroi  (Qenntn.),  O^irvsraaa
(Cie.  Oerman.  VitniT.  ManiL  L  271),  Oiper
(ManiL  ii.  6£9),  cslied  alto  nir  by  Eislatthenet.
Hjginiu,  the  tchDliut  onQeimiiuciu,  and  laidonu,
intorm  ua  that  tome  of  the  andenU  repreaeDted
thit  maton  with  the  tail  of  a  fiih,  and  in  thia
fbim  it  it  actually  Egured  oa  lerctiJ  caim  of  Aa-
guatoB,  who  wai  bora  imda  the  lign.  No  notice
.r  ._.L  .  ptculiuity  in  ihape  it  tuen  by  Antoa,

Ptolemy.

11.  ma  rvATULKJH,  TSpoxJoi  (AisL  283),
Hfdrodma  (Oerman.),  A^ariiu  (Cie  Vitmr.
Oeiman.  HaniL  L  472),  At^amt  (Oeiman.  5G0),
Piaitiit  laHcEt  (Oeiman.  388),  Aigiiortai  junaat
(ManiL  U.  5fiS),  JmuenU  gereaa  aqvaat  (Ov.  Fiui.
L  652),  and  aimpi;  Jueenit  (Hanil.  It.  709),  wat
regarded  fay  thote  who  connected  the  fignre  with
mylhical  Icgendi  tomEtimei  oi  Deacalioa  (German.
B6B\  tomclimea  at  Gw^mdet.  (HaniL  r.  4S7  ;
eomp.  SehoL  ad  Ana.  383.)

nie  Giar  itan  (v.  £>  n.  s)  «■  the  riglh  bond
wem,  according  to  Qeminnn,  named  aiUirii,  whicb
it  equivalanl  to  the  Latin  Situla,  an  Utn.
_  The  WiTiB  SrnaiM,  'tSbp  (Aral.),  xlaa
jiuM  (SchoL  Germ,
Lth  the  bright  ilu,  new  known
fay  tha  Arabic  name  Fonahaad  or  FaaaUuuil,  in
the  month  of  Ihe  Plicii  Anitralia  (lee  UoniL  L
446,  and  comp.  VitruT.  a.  4,  faoe  vcro  •AAgaario
fadi  nomratur  Aqua  pnfiaii  aitr  Pool  Atutrim
eapia  et  eaudam  (kli),  it  regarded  at  a  leparale
conttellation  nnder  the  namo  of  *T3gi(i  by  Aratua
(389— 3S3),  and  alio  by  Qeminua,  who  dtittn-
guiihet  it  at  tha  'VSap  ih  ith  rov  'TS^x^m,  "  tha
Water  flowing  from  tha  Watexman,"  in  ader  that
it  may  not  be  conloDnded  with  tha  eonitcllation
Eridanut,  the  Tlorafibs  6  &r^  tou  'dfilttmSj  ^  tha
KlTer  flowing  from  Orion,"

13.  Tbb  Fisbis,  'IxMtr  (AiaL  240)  or  in
the  dnal  'iX^,  Fitca  (Cie  VitniT.),  Gtmiui
PuciM,  Imbri/iri  duo  Piictt  (German.),  One  of
theie  wai  entitled  the  Nutbem  (AqaiknaruPucu,
VitrUT.  ix.  3),  the  other  the  Southern  Fiah  (SchoL
ad  Ana.  240  ;  Or.  Fait.  iii.  401  ;  ScboL  German.
Hygin.  P.  A.  iiL  29)  ;  bot  in  order  to  prevent  the
embanatuneiit  which  might  atite  &am  identifying
the  latter  wilh  the  "IxBi'i  ririot,  or  Fiiai  Atu-
tmlii,  a  conilellntiiEi  of  Ibe  tontbitn  hemitpbere,
Ptolemy  namei  tho  noithem  of  the  two  iTrJfKnii,
and  the  other  ^Tou^m,  a  precaution  by  no  meant
unneeetaary  Binee  Hanilini  actually  confounds  (L
272)  the  fiahei  of  the  Zodiac  with  the  Piicit
Auitlalii.  The  Scholioil  on  Aistut  remorki  that
the  Northern  Fiih  waa  reprocnted  with  a  awal-
low'i  bead,  and  on  that  acconnt  ilyUd  x'^'^^'u
by  the  ChaJdamnt,  a  circum-
rhich  Scaliget  sccounlt  by  luppoaing;
that  the  name  wai  ^ven  in  conaequince  ot  tha
entrance  of  the  ann  into  thit  couatellaUon,  when
the  iwallow  appeared  in  Greece  at  (he  herald  of

The  legends  connected  with  tbia  eonatellation
(Erototth.  £8  1  Hjgin.  P.  A.  ii.  30.  41)  bear  te-
fL'renc*  to  a  Syrian  divuiity,  leimed  by  the  Grepka
AlargatU)  a  Semitic  word  ugnifying  Tit


182  A9TR0N0MIA.

Gnat  Fiiky,  KHoetime*  Dxnxlo,  lonK^ei  Dtrne,
Thii  povoT  they  confbunded  with  Huothcr  Syrian
godden  Aitrvie,  whom  again  \htj  ideotified  wilh
their  own  Aphradite.  The  itary  an  that  when
fleeing  in  tetror  from  tho  yiolence  of  Tjphon,  ibe
plonged  into  the  Euphntea,  and  wu  tnuitfanned
mlo  ■  fiih.  (Hanil.  iL  di,  it.  ASO.)  Aiiernu
tertriB  theie  fithea  Bombydi^  &r  which  Orotiiu  ha4
rightly  pnpoaed  lo  lubitilole  Bamln/di,  for  Alar-
gatii  wta  ipecially  nonihipped  it  Bamiya  or
Jiierapolii  in  Cyrrheilica.  (Slreb,  xvi.  p.  517;
Plin.  a.  N.  T.  23  ;  Sclden,  dt  Diu  Ssriii,  it  3.)

The  hright  itor  (a)  which  la  auppoaed  to  fbnu
the  knot  of  the  two  handa  which  connecta  thg
fiihet  by  iheii  laila,  i>  by  Aratiu  (245)  named
SurflAT^t  dnupOHji,  by  hia  achgliaal  turfibj  tb-
(wioi,  hy  Oeminut  and  Oermaniiui  .imjjy  IiMiff-
lias,  temu  TBrimuly  tiaiulated  Nodia  (Cic.),
NodutPudm  (ViUuT.),  Nadut eaelitUt  (Arien.),
G>nnuiBntpuniin(PliD.  zviiLSl}.  The  banda
theiaidTei  are  oJled  in  one  fsaaage  af  Aratua
(3G2|  AtfTfiol  obftSoi,  more  commonly  A^oi  or
Aim,  tho  Vrnda  of  Cicero  and  Qermasicni,  tho
JU^nmCxM  Umltan  of  the  Kh^riiaal  on  the  latter.

From  VitmTiiia  (ii.  i)  it  appeui  that  tht
aprinkling  of  indiatmct  atan  between  the  Fishei
and  the  Whale,  waa  c^led  by  the  Greeki  'Epfl-
Mrri,  a  word  explained  by  Heajchiut  to  mean  tw
AfAuSprnf  iaripav  x^"<


ASTRONOUIA.
Among  tlie  Romani  Jtigida  or  Jtyidat  uoai  to

have  been  the  indigenoat  ^pellation  j  the  fonutf
ia  noticed  by  Vam  and  Fealna,  tha  latter  Dceua
in  Pbuitnt  {Ampli.  L  1.  IIS)  —
"  Nee  Jngnlae,  neqoa  VeapemgOi  neqne  TergOiae

hot  no  ntiiGutory  eipUoation  hat  been  fvopoaed.
Tha  two  bright  atan  (n,  7}  trndrr  the  head  vera
called  ffwiKn'. (Var.  £.  £.  vt  S.)

3.  Thi  Ehidanub,  Waratiit  (AisL  353),  Am-
nit  (Cic  Oennan.).  Aiatna  remariu  that  it  waa
coiuidered  aa  a  renmant  of  the  Eiidonna,


1.  Tita Whili,  K^rot  (Aiat.  S53),  'Oppii

(Jul.  Firm.  Aatroo-Tiii.  17),  CWw  (VitniT.  it  4  ;
ManiLL41D), Prittit (Oennan.  644  ; HaniL  I
363), Ntreia  Piitrit  (German.  714),  Neplmia
iSi(rM(Cic^comp.  German.  709). Thelaatthi
deaignation* are dlDercnt  fonna of  the Gre
np^iTTit,  which  Suidaa  inlerpreta  to  lignify  tlBst
kifTaiii  daJiMirtUiu. Thii  wai  the  acn-monab
ctnding  to  Aiutna,  lent  to  devonr  Andnuneda

3.  Orion,  'ClplMt  (AniL  322),  'tU^mr  (Find,
Callim.),  Oriat  (Cic  Qeiman.  Vilruf.  HaniL  L
399),  OarvM  (Catiill.  In.  anb  fin.),  Probt  flyrita
(Ov.  Fat. -n-JiS,  camp.  v.i95).  jdywain  Julina
Firmicua  (TiiL  9),  ia  probably  a  cofrupt  tbim '

Tbli  ia  one  of  tha  oldeit  conatellationa,  being
noticea  in  Homer  (iriiL  436)  and  Hesiod  (£iji.
596,  615,  619),  both  of  whom  employ  the  eipret-
aion  oBirot  'Xlpltivai.  The  figiui  waa  auppoied  to
Kprewmt  an  aimed  warrior  ({I'fwi  I^  -wtwHii,,
Aist),  Eiaaping  a  ahield  in  hia  icft  hand  and  a
club  in  hia  right  (fflflMi  buna  tarn  dipinim,  da-
tum ate™,  Vitniv.  it  4),  with  a  glitleriug  bell,
from  which  a  iword  depended  {Baliaa  Oriaia,
Vagina,  Oennan. ;  Cutt,  Cie-)-  The  orignn  of  the
name  ii  quite  unknown,  the  ordinary  deTivation
from  olfar,  to  which  a  mythical  legend  wu
adapted,  being  allogethn-  nnworthj  of  attention.
The  morning  totting  of  ihia  remarliBble  ctuiter,
abont  the  beginuii^  of  Norember,  pointed  oat  in
ancient  timea  to  tho  huabandman  and  the  mariner
the  approuh  of  the  moat  atocmy  peiiod  of  the  jrear.
(Hor.  Cam.  L  28.  21,  Epod.  xi.  7,  Om.  iiL
27.  18,  Epod.  I.  9  ;  Virg.  .4oL  i.  635,  ir.  92.)

An  anonymooa  Oieek  writer  qnoted  by  Bcaliger
dedarea  that  the  popular  name  for  Orion  waa
'AAtT|»TMuw,  whicD  leema  a  coiruptioD  of  'AAtib
rpoirMur,  I  e.  Coda-fool,  and  Idcler  tbinfci  that
we  can,  without  aay  great  stretch  of  &ncy^  trace  •
retenblailCB  to  a  fowlalnittsig  along.


that  mythical  non-eriatent  (rkv  f.ifia^v  7^;  Unn,
Stnkb.)  atream  which  proved  a  fhutfsl  anirce  of
apecniation  in  ancient  aa  it  haa  done  in  modem
timet.  The  Romana  identified  the  Eridama  with
the  Po  1  and  hence  while  Cicero  employa  the  former,
Oermanicna  niea  Eridanna  and  Padua  indifierently.
(Comp.  VitniT.  ii.  4.)  From  EtBtoRhene^  the
Scholiaat  on  Gennanicui  and  Hygtnua  iP.A.  a
32),  we  lean  that  thia  coutellation  waa  by  othera
called  the  Nile,  that  bdng  the  only  earthly  river
which  flowed  f^m  the  aouth  towarda  the  north,  aa
thia  atream  of  iton  i^tpean  to  do  when  riaing  abore
thehoriaoo.

4.  Thb  Hui,  Air)>if4i  (Arnt.  336),  tuefAi,
f7-nr(YitrnT  it  <),  f  mj-ra  frnaifrir  ),  laiidia
L^<H  (German.),  Vdom  Lamt  (Hanil.).

5.  Tni  OacAT  Doa,  Ki!w,  ittpiet  (Aiat  S2«\
a»u(Cic),GBBi«rti>t(Gerniaa.).  Aialna(342>
emjdoya  the  phraae  prydXatQKvrdt.  bnt  the  ^itbet
moat  be  here  uoderatood  to  nfer  to  the  magnitoda
of  the  principal  Mar  and  not  to  the  conitellution
Prayom,  which  the  Oreaka  tieier  call  the  LttSt  or

The  moit  important  atar  in  the  Gnat  Di«,  pa-
hapi  the  brighteat  in  the  heBTeni,  wai  iinjiientlj
apccially  named  KiW,  aometimea  ODiphatkBlJw
lb  iirrper,  and  by  the  Roman*  Camii  or  Gmkabi^
but  ia  more  freqnently  detignated  ]>j  the  appdlation
3ii>isr,  Siriai,  which  occun  four  timei  m  Heaiod
{Erg.  417,  SB7,  619,  Scat.  397),  although,  in  the
finl  of  theae  pasaagea,  the  ann,  and  not  a  Sied
atar,  it  probably  indicated.  Indeed  the  word  Beema
to  be  properly  an  adjcctire,  aignif|-ing  jAtearm;  or
bright;  and  Eraloathenea  remarki  (c.  33),  that
aatronomera  were  in  the  habit  of  denomipattng  other
Btara  Itiplovt  tii  -r^r  t^i  f^iryit  Kinrffir.  Homer
twice  (iZ.  v.  S,  iiii.  25)  aUude*  to  thia  atar  with-
out nanui^  it,  in  one  pataaga  with  the  epithrt
Artapiris,  which  will  be  diacuaaed  hereafter.

About  four  himdred  yean  before  our  era,  lh«
heliacal  riaing  of  Siriaa  at  Athena,  corrcapondlng
wilh  the  entrance  of  the  inn  into  the  aign  Lon,
marked  the  hotteat  apaaim  of  the  year,  and  thia
obacTTation  being  taken  on  troat  by  the  Roman*
of  a  later  epoch  without  conaidering  whether  it
anited  their  age  and  enuitry,  the  Diet  Comaiiarta
became  provnbial  among  than,  aa  the  Dog  tiofm
are  among  ouraelvea,  and  the  poetaeo — ' — ' — '
to  the  Lion  and  the  Dog  in  o
'  m*  of  midaammer.

6.  Thi  Littli  Dos,  npetiimr  (Ant  iSO),


Greece  tho  o
helically  before  tbe  (Great)  Dog. The  namn
Anttaaut and  AatKattm,  hewnavda  Batafpear


ASTRONOHIA.
U  ksra  Iwoi  gcncnUf  adopted,  fen  Pliny  (H.  ff.
xim.  28),  ncn  ipcaluiig  of  Promo,  lemarin,
"tmi  ndu  MMid  Ronuuii  non  htbet  nomen,
ic  Tcliiwuinlelligi,  hoc  Mt,  miao-
rU  loi^Iiii,''  voida  which  do
Ij  llist  Pnejoa  ctgt  wu  bc-
tmlfy  temed  CJBmiaiia  bj  the  Roman  initen,
h  thai  WH  ceituul;  Mmctmwi  the  cue  it
ttBrt  the  eipreu  ■■urtioD  of  HTgiiiui,
■  (K.  Idrii)  ulam  ma  adpeUatioiis  et
'  '  '  "  '  {OH  a  Oiatcii,  quod
,  spoKJar  adpeUatnr  "
^  1  Plinj  (H.iV,  iTiiL
O.  f  3),  «a^  Bl  fint  Bglil  appaar  to  ba  dediiTe:
'  IV.  Ifilmdii  Itaii,  Canii  oocidit,  ndna  et  per
■  TttMlM,  M  tm  pntoeeultn  Cameulimii  hsmi
A"  Bat  amci  wo  know  Ih^  ia  Northsm  Isd-
ladn  tha  Onat  Dog  not  onlj  liH  after,  but  al»
MS  hcfa*  A*  Little  Dog,  it  ii  eridoit  thatjUnlcH
m  lapaa*  Plinj  to  bo  inroliad  In  inaitfitablo
(Mi^B^  Omiemh  canDOt  hen  iwni^tbe  iioi
hscjm.  Tke  exptaiBlion  gaooal^  adopted,  u-
ik^  aonairtat  fatead,  ia  that  a  idcnnea  ii
■ale  M  tha  ptactka  of  oflaing  a  dog  in  MKii-
faa  *B  tk  ajrigalia.  (See  Or.  Au(.  ir.  936,
' "• -L  I.  Ma,  and  the  eommentalor.  on

I  probable,  Pncjon

bjtba  Romani,ia

riua  eeenu  to  hare

called  llfo*ii*r  by  the  Oreeki

the  Ril  sT  the  eoneletlatiim

(See  Oalen.  Onuunf.  m

We  e ■ ■


the  wocdi  of  HoiBce  (Oim.

Jam  PracyoD  fbrit

ccofPcacym  would  to  hie  coimtr|r-
■  nalitf  a  more  nii«  indicaUoa  of  the
no  thai  the  riling  of  the  Oreattr  Dog.
e  hare  alrmdir  intimated  that  the  Oradci
^  me  tka  two  oondlBtiana  nmply  u  Kiar
Bd  OfaK^ttr,  not  at  the  Greater  and  Leiier  Dog,
a  4*rtiai  ^ji^*  which  fverailed  among  the  Romasi,
■■  w(  pcrcdve  darij  from  VitrnTllu  (i£.  4)  ;
'Geariaea  antan  minoamhii  Canii  MitDitai  contia
Aacn  o^t ;  Haja  item  aeqiulor  Mmnem."

ftTkoi  BoStea  woi  regaided  u  Icarios,  end
Tii;gc^  ai  bia  dao^its  Erigone,  Pio^on  became
UMa,  tk  dog  of  icaiini.  (H]rgin.  P.A.iLi;
am^  Or.  PnL  U.  940.)

7.  T»  Sair  Aaso,  'hfyA  (Aiat.  U3),  Argo
,Ck.  UniL  L  4S0\  J^cmt  (CicX  Jrao  A'ocft
<Cie.),  ;Va««  «e  »>■«««-  .i^jo  fVitniT.),
J>9Da  ^^B^'i  ((jaiiiB).X  Ba&t  fftmaai  (ManiL
r  IS).  LDu  P^Hia  and  the  BqH,  it  wb>  eup-
foard  U  iqaeaeut  only  one  half  of  the  object
(l^i^^ii),  Ibe  pcrtion  namely  of  the  Tcaid  be-
Ead.  the  matt  (iiiTh'  ttxii^t  Kva"  iJrriy,  Aist.
(«$.  I'tf  frotifBr,  Oamaa.}.  The  hrishtest
•or  WW  by  Eodon*  and  Aiatoi  (SJI,  368}  dii-
tsonabcd  aa  v^Uuer  (ffHbemaaUim,  Cic.),  the
nUez,  Butead  of  wbich  Kiinreaj  (jMZa  (Wfn
'  Au  a(  •Sl'ala,  Vittnr.  iz.  4),  a  name
1  fint  in  bateathenei  (e.  37),  and
beeaBW  goienl.  Accccding  to  the
h  •I'rm  on  Ocnnanieu,  it  wai  odled  abo  PtoU-
■  auie,  »,  aa  IbitiaDU  CqwQa  ha>  it,  Plalmitaau,
m  hmmm,  •ridandy,  at  aoow  Egyptan  mosarch.


ASTRONOMIt  1,

ai  the  wrade  of  Vitmnsi  indioUe,  v
■^-'--■-jil.li--'--


cero,  in  addition  to  the  mdder,  diitingniAhei
nut  (ftiaJinn)  alio,  "  radiato  eCipite  m^om."
.  Thb  Watik  Snake,  Ttpi,  (Aiat  444),
'ra^ot  (Enlonh.  (3emin.  Ploiem),  Hfdm  (Cic^
Oenn.  Hygin.  Avien.),  Hwdnu  (Qerm.\  Aimit
(VitruT.  i..  4  J  Ot.  Fat  iL  US;  Manil.  i.  432.
See  aln  Serr,  ad  Virg.  Otorg.  L  20S  :  Hjgin.
P.A.  si.  iO,  iiuSS).

9.  Taa  Cup,  Kpinjp  (Arat  448),  OnHtr  (Oet-
man.  VttrnT.  MamL  L  424),  Fiibmu  Oralan
(Ck.),  i;nu(SchoLaemian.).

10.  TBI  Bavkh  or  Crow,  HSsAsr  ■Jpoicet
(AraL  449),  Cbmri  (Cie.  Geiman  VitniT.),
PioOo  ncB-  ala  (HsniL  i.  424).

The  Cup  and  the  BaTen  were  repreaented  ai
Mandisg  upon  the  back  of  the  Water  Snake,  end
the  whole  three  an  gRmped  together  by  Ovid
(Alt  ii  S4S)  in  the  eoaplet :  —

Continoata  loea  tria  ndera,  Coraa  et  AnguU,
£t  medim  Cnier  iatia  atrmn^oe  jacet


(Gennan.X  Sanipa  (German.),  Daplid  Otatatiu
inia/Hia  (ManiL  i.  43G),  CUron  (Gsman.  418,
624).  By  Ptolemy  he  is  repreeented  with  a  thyr-
MU  in  hii  hand,  and  theee  start  were,  ai  we  are
t>:dd  by  Geminni,  formed  by  Hipparchue  into  a  dia-
' '  >ct  conatellation  nnder  the  name  9vp(ri^vr)(pt.

12.  Tna  Wolf,  eijpfo^  (Atat  442X  BtMt
(VitruT.  ix.  4),  HoiHa  (Hygin.  P.  A.  iL  38).
Tbie,  according  to  Arattu  {L  e.)  waa  a  wild  beaM

uped  in  the  hand  of  the  Centaur,  but  it  receiTed
I  name  from  the  Oreeka  or  Romani.

13.  Th«  AlTiB,  ©vrt/MoiF  (Arat  403),  Am
_  lie  Qennin.  ManiL  i.  428),  Apia  AHaria  Boni
(685),  Bccoiding  to  Geminiu  and  Ptolemy  6ii|Ua-
T^pior,  tnuuUted  TWiMnn  by  Oermaiueai  and
Vitrariiu  (ii.  4).  The  ichDiiaat  on  Oennaniciii
fnmiibci  two  other  namea,  Saenrian  and  Pkant.

the  legend  pvserred  by  Maniliui  (i  428),  it
I  the  altar  erected  fay  Joto  when  hcaveti  waa
inTBded  fay  the  gianta.

14.  Thi  Sodthun  Crown.  Not  named  by
Aistni,  who  merely  remarki  (401)  that  nndcrthe
fore-feet  of  Sagitlariiu  are  lome  Man  iweeping
round  in  a  circle  (Buvrtrl  lAithJf),  but  to  tnese

and  Ptolemy  giTB  the  ipedfic


t  nfrioi. In


of  no


legend
tS)  de-


being  Bttacfaed  to  the  gnmp,  Oezmanjcu*  (388;


Lee,  ObpviaKDi  and  KirpvirrToF  ;  the  former
Menionua  Capella  render*  by  CbaUiin,  the  latter,
nied  by  Hipparchoi,  denotei  a  herHld't  wand  of
peace.  Othen,  according  to  the  icholiaat  on  At&-
tua,  regarded  it  a*  Ixum*!  wheel  (If  lAnt  rpox^)-

IS.  Th»  SouTHaaij  Fibh,  'Ix*'  "^frioi
(Arat.  387),  Fueu  JVofau  (HaniL  i.  446  ;  Hygin.
P.  A.  iii.  40),  i'uBf  .duKroiw  (Cie.),  Pucii
AMtriHia  (ViCmT.  ii.  4  ;  ColumelL  li.  2).

It  ^pcan  ftwn  Eratoalhenea  (38),  and  the
•choliiut  on  aeimanieni,  that  it  waa  ityled  alio
lX**»  fh^  Piiai  fanjaat


ASTRONOMIA.


Cbnu  Bemaoet;  BToata  Crvm. MSau.

I.  Thi  HiiR  or  BuiNicB,  ru^mvui  i.
MirTpiix«Btpiwiin|i  (Callim.  ScfaaLiKJ  .4ra«.  146),
CbMa  09Hi<nM  <ieB  CBtall.  lir.)  WBi,  u  «e  hrn

m  BbDT^  ftmad  bjr  Canon  oat  of  certain  unap-

"riated  (ifup^MTfl)  ttan  behind  tba  Lion'i
,  in  hoaoar  tA  Berenice,  the  wife  of  Ptolem]'
Euergelea,  and  afforded  a  tbeme  for  i.  compti-
ventarj  degy  by  Caliiinacbni^  of  vhich  wb  po*-
K«  a  tniudBlion  bj  CatuUm.  The  constellatton
being  unkBOTra  to  Atatau,  >•  not  alladed  to  bf  fai>
truulaton,  Cicen  and  Oecsianiciu,  nor  u  it
noticed  by  Maniliiu.  When  PJiny<H'.A'.  il  71)
obacTTea  **  Scptflnaionee  dod  eemit  Tmgledytic^
et  cop&iia  £gyptoi ! nee Canopiiia Italia,


pnmriated


■  Crinei


itiTo  AoKOito  cognominaTer*  Caend*  Throo<»i,
inaignei  ibi  ilellai,"  it  ii  much  man  probable  that
bo  committed  &  positive  blnnder,  iW  that,  ai
■ome  have  •nppoeed,  ho  intended  to  indicnte  under
the  nuns  of  Barttuja  CHium  Aome  loatbem  lign
to  whicli  no  one  eiie  makei  any  aUniioll.

2.  We  find  in  OTid(J^ut.  a.  793)  the  following
Bonplet  ia  lefoenoe  to  the  night  of  the  17tb  of


and  in  Pliny  (tf.  N.  iriiL  65,  §  1),  "  Caew  et
Idol  Mailiat  femlea  sibi  aimotiiTit  Scoipionii  Oc-
cam: XV.  vero  Kalendu  Aprilia  Indiae  Hnrom
oatcndi ;  dnndecimo  Kalendaa  Equum  occidere  ma-
tntlno."  Ia  (he  tint  of  theie  patufiei  we  find  a
caDitclladon  named  Mibaa  or  Ihe  Kite  deicribed
u  one  of  the  northem  ligiu,  or  at  leut  u  a  lign
Tuible  in  Italy,  and  the  period  of  iU  riunff  hxiA
tolheUtbofMnnh.  The wordiof  PIiny.Bllhaii((h
moiT  ambiguooi  thiui  tboie  of  Ovid,  vould  lead  tu
to  loppoae  that  he  vai  quilting  thit,  ai  well  >i  tho
preiwiing  obecrTOlkm,  fromthe  Calendar  of  Caesar;
but  the  abcuptneu  of  hi>  ordinary  itjle  it  luch  aa
to  prevent  cu  from  affirming  thii  with  certainty.


Nov


1  Greek  a


rtcllatioi


%  the  aboTD  name,
1  of  Orotiue,  who
, , .  .  10  Eagle  il  indicated,

for  the  riling  of  theie  ugni  il  removed  by  three
monthi  finm  the  period  here  fixed.  Idelcr  hai,  ia
all  probability,  diecovcred  the  »lulion  of  the
eoignw.  la  the  Painpegma  of  Ocmiaiu,  a  phae-
nomcnon  deicrilied  by  the  wordi  'In-ryoi  ^trtat,
i.  e.  JUilaa  i^iparrt,  ii  placed,  bj  Eudoiua  thirteen
dayi  before  the  Teraal  equinox,  and  by  Euctomon
and  Calippiu  reipectively,  eiflht  dayi  nnd  one  day
before  tio  «nio  epoch,  while  Ptolemy,  in  hii
*ifffiiir\aimr,  maiki  under  Ihe  12lh  of  Phame-
Doth  (i.  a.  Hvording  to  Ideler  Slh  Man:h),  EM^v
XeAjMr  Kill  IcrTmt  fairrrai.  Bui  the  IcTuwt,
rendend  miltat  by  the  Latiiu,  vaa,  a*  we  are
told  by  Aiiitotle  (H.  A.  iw.  16),  a  bird  of  paa-
nge,  nd  bence  the  arrival  of  the  UrTni,  like  that
of  the  irallow,  took  plan  at  and  urved  to  mark  a
urtkolar  Mswn  of  the  year.  Ovid  and  Pliny,
being  ignotmt  of  thia  fact,  and  finding  in  the
ealendin  whicb  they  centnlted  the  vrardi  JUibaa
opprM,  took  it  Sat  granted,  withont  further  in-
qairy,  that  jVt£ni«  wai  the  name  of  a  constellation;
tar  when  we  coo^der  ib*  context  of  the  naluraliit.


ASTRONOMIA.
ai  wdl  u  (be  date,  but  one  day  tatet  than  that
filed  by  Ovid,  we  can  Karcely  doubt  thai  be,  ai
well  ai  Ihe  poet,  believed  AfifcBi  to  be  a  "Stella.*  ,

IL  RlsiNQi  AND  SnriNaa  or  tbb  Fixbd
St*u.

A  nttko  lilce  the  Oree^  whow  climate  pa-
mitled  them  to  watch  their  fiocki  hy  night  daring
a  coniiderable  part  of  the  year,  could  mt  (ail  to
remark  that  certain  fixed  atari  ^ipeared  and  dii-
appeamd  in  reguhu  ntceeagirai,  ai  the  nn  paaied
through  the  different  Btagca  of  hie  annaal  career,
AccordioKly,  we  find,  that  aa  early  u  the  time  rf
Heiiod,  the  changee  of  the  leaama,  and  the  mnre
impDitaot  opemliruii  of  agrieultnre,  were  fixed  with
reference  to  the  riiingi  and  lettingi  of  Oriixi,  the
Pleiadea,  the  Hyadoa,  Aivtimu,  and  Siiiai.  Sucb
obeui  lutiona  were  in  the  firM  initanee  extremdy
rude  ;  but  after  Thalea  bad  turned  the  attention
of  hit  countrymen  to  icientific  aUroDmy,  then
celeatial  phenomena  were  determined  wilb  great
core  and  accunuy :  tablet  were  drawn  up  in  which
Ihe  riiingi  and  letting)  of  the  more  brilliant  etart,
with  referent*  lo  the  nut,  were  fiilly  detailed,  lo-
gelbcr  with  tuch  no^cea,  looching  the  wind*  aiid
wcalher  to  be  expected  at  the  diSerent  epochs,  aa
experience  enggctted.  Copiei  were  engravod  on
■lone  or  brnw,  and,  being  luuled  or  hung  up  in  the
markel-placei  of  large  town*  and  other  placca  of
public  resort,  received  tho  name  of  lOfunrfrji^ra.
Two  catalopea  of  tfai*  deKription  have  bwa  prc-
eerved  which  are  valuable,  inannucb  aa  toey
frequently  quote  the  aathority  of  the  caily  Greek
aitrmomen,  Meton,  Enctemon,  Eudoxoi,  Celipput,
&C.  fer  their  itotementa-  The  one  was  drawn  up
by  Ocminoi  (fi.  B.  c  SO),  ^e  other  1^  the  fiunoui
Ptolemy  (a,  n.  HO).  In  the  former  the  riiinga
and  icttingt  of  Ihe  Man  are  £ied  according  to
tho  pouage  of  the  nm  through  the  aigna  of  Iha
Eodiuc  i  in  the  latter  they  an  ranged  under  the
monthi  and  ^eara  of  the  Julian  Calendar.

Tho  practice  commenced  by  Heiiod  win  fallowed
by  lubieqnent  writeri  upon  rural  economy,  and
we  accordingly  find  numeroui  precepti  in  Virgil,
Columella,  and  Pliny  delivered  with  refensce  to
the  liiingi  sod  aettii^  of  the  atari,  forming'  ■,
complete  Cotandarium  Rmticum.  Ovid  hai  cotn-
biued  the  Fatti  of  the  rity  with  theae  Rural  AI-
Dianaci,  and  haa  thui  gained  an  opportoni^  of
enlivening  hii  poem  by  recounting  the  vaciooa
mythi  attached  to  the  coniteUalioni.  Indeed  it
would  appear  that  Caeiar,  when  he  recenitmcted
Ihe  Faiti  of  Home,  included  the  tiiinga  and  Ht-
tinga  of  the  itar^  lince  Pliny  firquently  quotes  the
anuority  of  Caenc  for  hii  itatemeata  oo  theaa
point!. Thus  the  Fasti  of  Ovid  may  be  coniideivl


The  eariy  Orecion  porop^jnao/a  w . . .

edly  constructed  from  actual  observation  in  th«

countries  where  they  were  Gut  exhibited,  and  muat

therefore  have  completely  aniwered  the  pmpaaft

for  which  they  were  intended. But  this  does  not

' any  means  bold good of  the  correipanding

i[HlBticiu  of the  Koniani,  who,  being liltl«

led in  aaCroiiomT  themidres,  copied  blindly

from  othen  without  knowledge  ot  discrimlnatioo.

It  il  neceisBry  to  attend  to  two  Ihcti :  —

1.  The  time  of  the  riiingi  and  setiingi  of  ths

fixed  stats  viiiea  for  the  nme  place  at  diSercnt

epochs. Thus  the  Pleiadea  which  at  Rome  rus«


ASTROKOBIIA.
1^  wilk  dw  im  on  llw  IClh  of  April,  b.  c  44,
■oa  with  the  hhi  it  Room  •enral  d»*  ekrlier  in
•kc  igc  irf  HcMD,  and  da  not  now  me  with  th«
a  at  Rons  until  MTonl  doja  taur.  Thii  ii
cmad  bj  tka  preoesooo  rf  tbe  eqniiiDici.

1  Tb*  tiaw  a(  tbc  nwng*  mnd  KttJngI  of  tiia
tuA  ■tan  Ii  differnt  od  the  tmint  dnj  in  places
^imt  iMJl-'''  i*  diffiamL  Thiu,  in  the  jai
wfen  tba  Fleiwia  tne  iloug  with  the  nm  al
BMKMlki  16th  vf  April,  thej  did  not  liHBling
«tt  tb*  HB  It  Athtu  mtil  tha  2Sd  of  ApriL

MiaN  by  tb*  Itnmii  wnten ;  ud  cooMqncntl;
R  ■*!  ■ifcviiaattlj'  diicoTcr  that  ibey  combinMl
' ■ --■  -- -»-^ n  who  lired  »l  time*


■id  Kttin^  which  ongbl  alw
fgOf  ^Mi^iu*bed  Eram  c*chi


— (bdolailatiantniidofartha  Utiiade  of  Atbeu,
Vlf  Bkodca,  or  of  Alenodria,  300  yoin  beTon,
wae  *depled  at  odds  and  trsniferred  to  their
olndai*  wilhovl  changa  or  modification.
ABBlber  loiDn  of  omfiuian  ii  >  want  of  pre-
!Dt  kindi  of  rinngt

ouier  by  q>piD[riBla

Tb*  linngi  and  aettingi  of  the  filed  ilan,  when
"""■'"  ■ ' un'i  place  in  hii

itheadi:  —

(a)  n'benBMar'ri

<t}  When  a  liar  li

ie) Whenanarw

(J)  Wbcn  a  (tai  kU  at  BuiaeL

(a)  Whes  a  itai  liia  ihoctlj  before  the  ran  n
ai  M  be  JBrt  Tjnble  in  tbe  monnng  twilight  ai  it
lainili  ■bore  the  hniion  bdbre  hi  rayi  are  orer-
[MWafed  bj  the  light  of  the  more  brilliaat  lu-
ff) Wben  a  itat  riwi  ihortlj  after  •tmicC  lo  u
t>  be  jmt  viable  in  the  eremng  twilight  u  it
WMBd*  abcnc  tbe  horimn.

(7)  Wbcn  a  «ar  ntt  ibvlly  hofbn  niniiK  »
m  I*  be  JoM  Tinble  in  tbe  numing  twilight  ai  it
■akabctov  tbe  bccinB.

<l)  Wbn  a  itar  Kti  (hotl;  after  imiKt  10  at
to  be  jut  Tinble  m  the  erening  twilight  ei  it


Tbe>i


br  which  Iheie,  taken  i
brtbeC '

:L)  and  P


TaAj^iU^au^,  P.— Orau3f<iM!£Bair<nu. True

■wvwnA^  ita^fcpA.  V.—Orlai  Fa^mbu  Vem.

<e)  aAtu  t^  H^HMl,  O.  — IV  rvyiarri-
hra  iXtftri,  T.  —  Occatai  MafHan  Vem.
Tk«e  Bomiiig  lettiiig.

<^  AAru  fowvfa  dAnfiMi,  G.  —  "Entpia
wiaairtani  dJUffiMi,  P.  —  Oamia  Vt^urtmui
Fivmt. Tme  erening  •ettins.

(a)  "EwirekJ^  t^  ^a<»f>»>l.  O.— -'Ef«  vponra-
■niJt  faiiuplvn,  P. — Ortu  Matulanu  Afyanat
a.  Ortm  ntSatmt.  Kdaai  riling,  i.  a.  Finrt  riaible
liiKc  of*  Mtr  in  the  numing  twilight.

^fi)  *EnraAj|  trrrpla  pamniint,  Q. — 'Eowipla
fcvwTWAt  faofUn,  P.  —  OrfM  FefMrtBu
tffm  ■! Lut  Tiiible  ming  of  a  itar  after


JlSTSONOMIA.  I5A

ftuPtnim,  P.  — OoMBU  JIfaMimu  Apprtmt.
Fim  vihble  setting  of  a  UBi' before  nuiriie.

(>)  A^i  l<mfla  faaniUni,  Q.  —  'Evvipb
twauaiXwa  foinifi^,  P.—Oemna  ropnfmM
Jf^nnssf  a  Oomiiu  /Wiimm.  Heliacal  letting,
1. 1.  Lut  Tiuble  letting  of  a  liar  in  the  erening
twilight.

With  regard  to  tbe  oboTS  technicaliUea  we  mmt

1.  That  Oentnoi  (L  e.)  drawi  a  diitinetioD  ho.
tween  the  wordi  draroAtt  and  ^n-oAl).  By
dnia\i  he  nndentandi  the  rinng  of  a  Kar  eon-
ndetnl  limply  with  reference  to  its  deratioo  abore
the  hoiiirai,  which  talcei  place  once  in  twsity-fimr
boun  in  canKqaence  of  the  diomal  motion ;  b/
irrroki),  the  liung  of  the  ttar  coniidered  with  re-
ference to  iti  diitance  from  the  ran,  which  dependi
ap«i  tbe  ran^  place  in  the  eeli^ic  Ai  to  iho
Kiting!  of  the  itan,  he  would  make  tiaa  tho  cor-
relaliTe  of  inrtakii  and  Kp^ii  of  iira-oxi  ;  bat  to
^lii  lB(t  definitjon  ha  dsei  not  hinuelf  adhere,
fince  he  eonitantly  emploji  SArni  Co  denote  the
letting  of  a  itar,  when  coniidered  with  referonce
to  iti  diatODce  from  the  ran.  Ptolemy,  while  he
includei  all  the  liungi  and  leltingi  nnder  the
genera]  devgnation  of  «« it  h-Aa>«r,  endcaToun
to  introdnce  an  improred  nomenclalnre,  by  Tary.
ing  the  piepoiitiDn  according  ta  the  >lar  rim  or
ieti  aloi^  with  (vir),  or  befrao  (jpi)  or  nfler
(W)  the  ran,  bnl  payi  no  regard  to  the  rule  o(
Oeminnt  with  teipect  to  iiarcKi  and  ixiroX'ti.

2.  Two  tenni,  in  addition  to  tboie  let  down
abore,  are  commonly  employed  by  wrilen  on
theie  topici,  tbe  Cobmical  riling  and  letting
(tMw  Cotmiet,  Omwu  C),  and  the  Acrohv-
CBiL  rinng  and  lettmg  (fhiat  Acroajfchia,  Oe-

The  epithet  Cbtmlau,  u  ^lied  to  thii  rabject,
firat  ocean  in  a  note  of  Scmui  on  Virg.  Geory.  i,
SIS,  "orttu  et  occaini  duo  rant:  nnui  ttXianiif
id  eit,  Kjarii :  et  liter  toaiuKis,  id  at,  sunijiunu  :
mide  fit  ut  ea  ligna  qaae  enm  lolc  oriODtor  a  nobii
non  poaiinl  Tideri ;  et  ea,  quae  Tidcmoi,  qnantom
ad  nlii  ntionem  perlinet,  ritleinlur  oecidcre,"
Modem  utronomen  haTa  for  the  moit  part  (lee
Petarint,  Vair.  Dii*.  p.  3,  ed.  1S30)  adapted  tbe
phraie  Ortiu  Coimiaa  to  indicate  the  riling  marircd
(a),  that  it,  the  (Mat  MataHma  Vena,  and  Oo-
euBi  Cotmiaa  to  indicate  the  leCCing  marked  (e),
that  LI,  the  Oeauat  MataHrau  Tinu,  hut  Idelcr
(/fufoniali  UiUermdnmsm,&c  p.  31 1\  while  ha
interpretl  Oritu  CbnninH  in  the  lenie  onially  re-
ceived, appUet  (keasat  Ounucw  to  the  letting
milked  (7),  that  ii,  to  the Oooonii  AfoMnw

Again,  the  epithet  dxpirnxo'  appenii  to  b«
firtt  lued  by  Tbeophraitni  (Dt  Siffnii  Pbn.  et  Vent.
cap.  i.  S  3)  where  draro^iii  ixpinxii  are  alono
mentioned,  and  are  diitinctly  eiplained  to  mean
the  riling  of  a  itar  at  ransct,  that  it,  the  Ortta
Vetptrtian  Vem  marked  (ft),  and  in  thit  lente
the  pbrue  OrtM  AeroinflAiii  ii  fbnnd  in  tbe  treo-
tiiei  of  PetaTioi  and  othen  who  employ  alto  tbe
eTjveinon  OeeatUM  Aeroa^ia  to  indicate  the  let-
ting  marked  (d),  that  ii,  the  Oaaau  Feiperliniu
Vena.  Ideler  concun  in  the  Utter,  but  interpretl
OrfBi  ArromfiAiit  10  mean  the  rising  marked  (6),
that  ii,  tbe  Oritu  VaperHau  Apparent.  Thii  view
ii  certainly  at  laiiuice  with  the  waidi  of  Theo-
phraitna,  which  are  qnite  explicit  and  are  cor-
roborated by  Jnlini  Firmicai  (ii  8)  ;  bat  on  the


ISG  ASTHONOMIA.

otli«r  hand  in  tlie  PanpegmB  of  Ocmunii,  in  the

obwmlioni  ucribed  to  Eudonu,  iiip6iiix<it  ii
the  geneni  Ucin  ^plied  to  all  eieniiig  settiiigi,  and
mut  of  th«a  usqaHtioiiBblj  itfer  to  cha  apparent

0f[ii  to  eipTEH  the  lami  meaning.  Ths  wordj
ApcT<>vpo(  diipiwxot  Tfnatas  Sut/ti  under  Scorpiu*
d.  B.  are  probibly  ctampt.

Under  theH  oimunMincci  to  prarent  alt  eon-
fiuion  or  ambiguity,  we  have  aJtOACtherpaiaed  over
Che  terou  (htmiau  uid  Acronvduu  in  oar  tablet
bat  have  letained  Utliaan,  woich,  like  Gimtam,
6m  occnn  in  the  paaaaae  quoted  from  Serriiu,
but  ii  applied  nniloimljr  bj  lubicqaent  writers  ta
the  pheDomeiuii  marked  (■)  aud  (i),  and  to  ne

9.  Pliny  {H.  N.  zriiL  25)  prDpoaei  to  daig-
nats  by  Emtrau,  what  we  hare  called  the  He-
liacal lUiing  (b),  becauM  the  itai  Chen  for  the
firic  time  emecgea  from  the  sm*i  rayi,  and  by
Od»2la<ui,whatwe  have  called  ikt  HeUaealSeltaig
(9),  became  thia  ia  the  latt  appearance  of  the  Mar,
which  a  forthwith  obicured  by  the  lun'i  rayi,  bnt
the»  tcrau  do  not  appear  to  haie  been  erer  gene-
rally received.

i.  It  u  manifcct  that  of  the  eight  phenomena,
named  aboie,  the  fint  four  are  piu«ly  matten  of
cslculatioa,  Bioee  the  true  liiingi  and  Kttinp  Deier
tan  b«  riiible  to  tho  naked  eye.  Theae  then
ought  alwayi  to  have  been,  and  for  aome  time  al-
waja  wer^  excluded  ^DmruraJ  calendar!  intanded
for  the  UH  of  piactical  men.  We  lind,  however,
from  the  tngmcntt  of  Calippog,  preiervcd  in  the
Parapsgina  of  Gerainua,  when  verified  by  compu-

truB  ritiagi  and  lallingi  for  the  apparent  riiinga
and  Ktlingi,  which  were  there  marked  in  the  table*
of  Ecclemon,  Metm  and  Eudoiua.  Hence,  great
caation  would  become  ioditpenuhle  in  quoting
jErom  diffoenE  authoritlea,  or  in  adTancLng  an  ori-
ginal italcment.  Iftheriaingof  a  star  wai  najned.
It  would  be  neceoaary  not  only  to  tped^  whether
it  wBi  (he  morning  or  the  evcmng  rising,  bat  alu
whether  the  tme  or  the  apparent  riijng  wai  indi-
cated, and  to  proceed  in  like  manner  for  the  letting
ofa  >Ur.  Now  and  then  we  find  in  Columellaand
Pliny  some  attempt  to  preierve  accuracy  in  one  or
Dtber  of  theie  eucntial  pointi,  ai  when  the  latter  ob-
■errca(iviii.74):  "PndicKalendai(Nor.)Caciari
Arctuma  occidit  et  Suculao  txorimiaT  can  lola  ;  "
"XVI.Kal.Octob.^gypto  Spies,  quun  tenet  Viigo,
eioritur  matutino,  Etcjiiaeque  desinunt.  Hoc  idem
Caeiari  XIV.  Sslendai  XIII.  Auyriae  >igni£-
cant;"  and  even  in  Virgil,  at  when  be  definei
the  viorm^  Mtfn^  of  the  Fleiada :  "  Ante  tihi
Eoat  Athnttdea  abacondantnr}"  but  for  the  moit
port  both  in  proae  writen  and  in  pocta,  every-
thing ia  vague  and  anaatlAfactuy ;  riunga  and
BcIIingi  of  all  dejcriptiona,  calculaKnl  for  dillemit
epochi  and  for  difliTeat  Utitudet,  are  thrown  to-
getherat  tandem.  In  order  to  nibiCBntiale  thew
cbarf^  we  may  examine  the  atalemenla  contained
in  Columella,  Ovid,  and  Pliny  with  Mgatd  to  Zifro,
a  comte21atian  to  which  coniidetable  importance
wai  attached  by  tho  Romant,  lince  the  beginning
of  Automn  in  the  calendar  of  Caesu  wai  marked
by  it*  (true)  morning  letting.  It  will  inil  oar
purpoae  particularly  well,  bocauBB  from  ita  limited
extent  eveqr  poMMD  of  the  conitetlatioa  became
viiible,  within  two  or  three  dan  after  the  upear-
anca  of  the  fint  atar ;  and  oenca  do  ambiguity


ASTRONOHIA.


could  arias  fimn  tbe  heliacal  riiinp  of  the  eitrnna


with  Orion  and  othert


atretching  over  a  large  tpace  ut  the  heavena.  Hi
treating  of  which  it  became  neceanry  to  qiecilj
[articular  portioni  of  the  figure,  u  when  we  read
"  Orionii  humerm  oritur  -,"  "  Oladini  Oionii  oo-
ddere  incipit  i "  Orion  lotoa  oritur,"  and  u  tisth.
In  the  fbllowing  qnotaticni,  the  wtcdi  J^Uu  and
Fidicula  Kem  to  be  abiolutely  lynraiymoui,  therv
baiiu  no  noun  to  believa  that  xbt  ]UUr  wai  ap-


loguei  of  m

the  d  ^Mftrpin  r^f  \{fas  of  Ptolemy,  aithongh  t
Ihii  in  all  pmbabitity  moat  oftheobaervationa  were
directed.  We  ah^I  tet  down  in  r^nlar  orda
firgt  tha  lettingi  and  then  the  ridngi.

SMiigi  of  Igr^

(I.)  Pridie  Id.  Aug.  (12  Anguit)  Viiis  ocddit
mane  el  Anctumnua  incipit. CaLzi.2.%&7.

According  to  Pliny  (iviii.  fiS),  the  aettiug  of
Fidicula  (Pidiailat  occatmj  marked  the  commence-
ment of  BUtoniD,  and  took  place  on  the  forty-uxtli
day  after  the  aolttice,  that  i>,  on  tha  6tb  of  Auguit,
if  we  indade,  according  to  the  Roman  method  of
cmnputalion,  the  34th  of  June,  the  day  from  which
ha  mJioiied.  In  a  lubacqnent  chapter  (GS.  j  2)  he
state!  that  the  phenomenon  in  qneition  took  place,
Bccordii^  to  the  Calendar  of  Caeiar,  aa  the  Ilthof
Angnit,  but  that  more  accurate  obiemtioni  had
fixed  it  to  the  Bth,  and  thii  ha  loon  afta  leptBli
(69.84).

(2.)  XIII.  Kal.  Sejrt.  (i  a.  20  Augnjt)  Sol  In
Vir^em  tranjitum  &cit . . .  hoc  eodem  die  Fidia
occidit  — X.  Kol.  Sept  (28  Angnil)  ex  endem
aidere  tempeatas  plemmque  oritur  et  ^uvia.  Cb-
ImulL  xi.  2.  %  58.

(3.)  XI.  Sal.  Feb.  (22dJaniiar]r)  Fidicula  V»-
pcre  Dccidit,  die*  iJaviua. CaUmulL  x.  2,  §  5.

Ovid  pUcei  the  setting  on  29rd  of  January.

Fulgabit  toto  jam  Lyra  nnlla  polo.  PatL  i.  G6S.

(4.)  III.  EbL  Feb.  (3D  January)  Fidicula  oc-
ddit. ColamM.  -n.  2.  g  6.

(5.)  KaL  Feb.  (I  February)  Fidia  incipit  oc-
dderoi  Ventua  Eurinui  et  mlerdnm  Auster  ciun
grondine  eat. CbliaiulL  li.  2.  §  14.

IIL  Non.  Febr.  (3rd  Febmiry)  Fidis  tola  oc-
ddit. CUnwU-Ibid.

Ovid,  without  alluding  to  what  he  had  vid  be-
fore, remaiki  on  the  2nd  of  February  (^>uC
ii.73):


Bumgt  o/ Lfra.

(6.)  IX.  KaL  Hoi.  (23rd  April)  prima  noot*
Fidicuhi  apparet,  tampeatatem  significat.  OobaulL
il  2.  §  S7.

VI.  Kal.  Mai  (261b  April)  Baiatiae  et  AtticM
Canii  Ve^Kri  occultatur,  Fidicula  man*  oritur-
PUk.  zriiL  S6.  g  1.

(7.)  Ovid  (Fori.  V.  4 IS)  names  tho  6th  of  May
aa  the  day  on  which  Lyra  risea.

(S.)  III.  Id.  MaL  (13th  May)  Fi^  mane  tx.


ASTROHOHU.


lILIdH

it


I  i'tturiiLBT.


i,  (lilh  Ubj)  Fidii msne  excsinu:
ucoMi.  li.  a.  ;  43.

{».)  IIL  Sua.  Ncrronb.  (3rd  NoTdnber}  Fi-

ii£|S4.

(1&)  VUL  Td-Nonmb.  (Sib  Naranlia')  idem
■Joi  umn  uorilar,  Aniter  Tel  PsTODiui,  huBMt.

(II.)  XVL  KaL  Dec.  (I6lh  NoTembet)  Fidii
aarilvBHie,  Anitw,  inlvdom  Aquilo  nugniu.

<1S:)  N«L  Junar.  <fth  Juniary)  Fidii  si-
■inr  ant:  lempeftu  Tuio.  CbbiuU.  iL  S.
IK.

latitsinl  None,  miuii  tibi  aubibai  atiii,
Signa  dibimt  imbrea  uurienta  Lyra.

Ova>.Fatt.L  SIS.
Pridie  Nmaa  Jansariu  (4t]i  Jonnu;)  Coesui
IMfUm  ■—"■>-"'  eiaritiir  >t  poalent  dis  Fi-
Ink Plm.  xriii.  64.


,  but  the  COD-
re  noched  a  elimai
rtn  wtnad  the  word*  "  Fidii  (or  FidicnU)  ei-
•tar  wat,"  oaed  vithont  TaiialioD  cw  eiplauatioD
to  dniMe  a  jJaenoniaiiHi  anigucd  to  the  26lb  of
Irril,  the  3d  and  IStii  of  Ma;,  tbe  3d  and  J6th
rf  Nvnmba.  By  enmining  each  poragrapli
■fiaatdy,  we  ahall  be  Mill  more  fully  csDvineed
•f  Ike  cafLltaalUM  aod  ignaance  diniliiyed.

(I.)  Tbe  frM  wmntoff  attn^  of  £«iii  Jl^pnu
■■k  jba  at  Bame  io  the  ^  df  Caewr,  on  the
19th  K  IStbofAi^oit,  and  therefore  tbe  Calendar
•f  Cttmt  hen  blloKed  by  ColninellB  vu  more  >e-
oait  thaji  the  aulhoritiei  quoted  by  Pliny,  imleu
Aat  ntoTti  to  a  different  lalitode.  Remark,
bnenr,  that  no  hint  ii  dropped  by  either  (a  in-
dicate that  tbe  fme,  and  IMt  the  aj^amU  mormg
lalMf  ia  Beaut ;  and  it  ooght  to  be  bonie  in  mind
ttal  the  latter  hat^eoed,  at  the  epoch  in  queition,
•1  Ikat  tcry  da;  at  Alezaadria.  In  tbe  Pua-
Pfnaef  Geminue  ajjo^  we  find,  onda  11th  of
Ait^(17  Iieo),  Eurrii/ioR  \ifa  Mrm.

(2.)  Thia  matt  be  the  appmvU  Mranp  mMu^
•Uck  taak  plwB  at  Roaa  on  21th  of  Aognat  fbr


(1)  The InH  teammf  teb
Alemdria  at  the  mbw  qncb,  took  place  on  23d
ft  Jnmtr/,  the  Tct;  da;  named  bj  Orid.

(4.)  Thk  ia  the  itUacal  kUu^ whieh, fot
Lttida  L;iae^  took  ^ate  at  Rome  on  28th  of

0  be  bomffed  fram
£ndon*,  aj  qnoted  by  Oe-
weaoff  {diKp6rvxot)  Kttoig  of
Lra  to  tbe  1  lib  degiee  of  Aqnarioi,  that  ia,  the
4t  rf  Frtmty  aceotiliDg  to  the  Julian  calendar.

It  aSl  be  aeen  that  the  three  lait  paragraphg
(LI,  (4.),  (5.),  witboQt  an;  change  of  eipreHioa,


. -  -  -  -  =  „ a  the

lU  jMumnj  and  9th  Fetenary  reipecliTely.

<(.)  Tbe  lyym I'al  ttaimgntimg,  which  Kenu
deal;  [— J-*-^  eat  by  the  wordi  of  Columella,
teA  aluia  ■(  Bnae  6>r  the  Julian  era  on  Utb  of
■■•OD  2«lh  of  April;  the (ra»


ASTRONOMIA.  1S7

tetaaa  riihig  at  Rome  on  23d  April,  and  to  tbi>,
therefore,  the  ilatement  of  Columella,  from  what-
erer  lotiRo  derired,  miut,  if  anurale,  apply.
Pliny  ba>  here  Mien  into  a  palpable  blunder,  and
hai  written  naae  for  eeiperi.  In  bet  be  haa
copied,  petbapa  at  lecond  hand,  the  obwrration  of
Eodoxna  with  regard  to  tbe  Lyre  and  Dog  (lee
Panpi^.  of  Oem.),  except  that  be  bai  iiuerted  the
word  now  when  the  Oreek  aitronomer  aimpl;

(7.)  Thii  will  agree  tdeiably  well  with  the
frae  ewaag  rimng  at  Alexandria  for  tbe  JnSan
era,  but  !•  twen^-one  dayi  too  late  for  tbe  apfta-
reml  ntnitig  leUaiff  at  Rome,  and  thirteen  dayi  too


mifeetl;


(8.)  Hen  all  ia  error.  V
mbetitute  veipm  for  moae  i
Colmnella  (  bnt  even  thai  the  otwermlion  will
not  gire  any  thing  like  a  doee  appnuinution  to  any
riaing  of  I^ra  either  at  Rome  or  Alexandria  in  the
Julitui  a«e.

(S.)  Copied  lobatim  aloni  with  tbe  accom-
panying prognottic  of  the  weather,  Crem  the  Para-
pegma  of  Ueniniu,  4rhere  it  ii  aaaibed  to  £uc-
tenion.  The  day,  howerer,  correaponda  clotely
with  the  Uaeal  rin^,  whicb  took  place  bI  Rome
on  Sih  of  Nocembs.

(10.)  Copied  along  with  the  prognoatic  "bie-
mat"  (Hal  i  dijj)  x'V'P^"  yi"rai  In  twt  ri
ToMjt)  from  the  nunc  compilation  where  it  ia  aa-
cribed  to  Demooitui,  who  fixed  upon  thi*  day  for
die  tnt  monmg  riiinff  <_\6fia  iwiSiX^ii  Siia  ^Alf
drlirxam).  At  Rome  thi>  riiag  fell  upon  23d
of  October.

(11.)  Copied  again  from  the  ume  aonrce,  where
it  ii  aicribed  to  Eudoxni.  Here  the  obtenation  can
in  no  way  be  itretched  u  at  to  apply  to  Rome.

(12.)  Thii,  like  the  lait,  can  in  no  way  be  nude
applicable  to  Rome  ;  but  the  luHacai  lOtiag  at
Alexandria  took  place,  for  that  epoch,  about  four
dayi  later,  on  the  9th  or  1  IHh  of  January.

Having  now  pointed  out  the  dlfSculCiei  whirh
the  ftodent  muat  expect  lo  encounter  in  prosecuting
hii  mquiriei  in  tbii  department,  we  proceed  briefly
to  examine  the  moat  remariiBhle  paiiageg  in  the
ctauicol  writen,  where  particular  perioda  of  the
yoc  are  defined  by  refening  to  the  ritingi  and
■ettingi  of  the  atari.  We  begin  with  the  moit
important,  —  the  Pleiadea,  Arcturui,  and  Sirini,
which  we  ihall  diacuu  folly,  and  then  add  a  few
worda  upon  othen  of  leai  note.

ThS PlIUDBB.

Hbuod.  —  Heiiod  indicatea  the  period  of  bar-
Teat  by  the  riling  of  the  Atlaa-bcm  Pleiada  (Erp.
3S4)  after  they  had  remained  concealed  for  forty
daya  and  forty  aightL  Now  in  the  afK  of  H«iod
(a.  c  BOO),  the  heliacal  riling  of  the  Pleiadi  took

{lace  at  Athena,  according  to  the  computation  of
deler,  on  the  19th  of  May  of  the  Julian  Calendar,
which  ii  juat  the  aeaion  when  tiie  wheat  crop
cornea  to  maturity  in  that  climate.  Again  (/.  c\
he  indicatei  the  commencement  af  the  ploughing-
■eaaon,  and  the  cloae  of  the  leaaon  for  naTignting,
by  the  morning  aetting  of  the  Pleiadi,  which  m
that  age  and  latitude  fell  about  the  third  of  the
Julian  NoTember.  In  theie  and  all  other  {aiaagca
where  Heiiod  ipcaka  of  the  riiingi  and  Ktlingi  of
the  itari,  we  mult  onqueationably  aieume  that  ho
refen  to  the  apparent  phengmena.  Indeed  it  ia
by  no  msanj  improbable  that  the  precepti  which


IS3  ASTBONOHIA.

be  incolcatei  m&j  be  tliB  mult  of  the  pervmal  ob-
HirvntiiJiu  of  binualf  aad  hii  contanporaries.

Varbo,  CoLUHiLLi,  Plint.  —  Marmnff  Rit-
img. — (1.)  Vtzto,  wbers  he  dticnbea  the  distiibu-
tioQ  of  the  jaa  into  eight  dirisioiu,  according  U
the  calendar  of  Caeiar,  ttBt«>  that  there  wu  a
■pace  of  torty-ra  day*  fiom  the  Temal  eqninoi
(35lh  Much)  to  the  liting  of  the  Pleiodea  (Veryi-
fionan  emrlum)^  whicb  n  thn*  fixed  tJ>  the  6th
9th  of  May.  (ft.  a  L  28.)

(2.)  PliuT  (niii.  66.  g  1}  muDa  the lOlh

M.y.

Columella  hu  three  diitinct  neticea  (A.  R.  zL
a,  g§  36,  39).

(3.)  X.  KaL  Mai.  (22d  April)  VtrgOiaa  am
lott  oriwUur,

(t.)  tf<mtMiBu(yiblS»j)Vergilm<mni

(S.) VI.  Idn  ».  Mai  (10th  May) Fera
Ai^  apparvU  ;  and  ihi*  kit  eormpoDdi  wit)
BMcrtion  eluvhere,  that  tha  pbeDonenoD  takea
plaeo  (ortT'Cight  daja  after  the  Toml  equinm
(ix.U.««.

Now  the  tme  momirg  ruing  of  tbe  Pleiadi
took  place  at  Rome  is  the  ofe  of  the  lUrare
writeri,  who  aie  «11  embtaced  witbin  tbe  limil*  of
a  conWiy,  about  tbe  16th  of  April,  tbe  appaient
or  belisol  riling  about  the  SSth  of  May.  Hence,
not  one  of  tbe  abora  itotemenli  ii  accuiata.  But
(1)  (2}  H)  (5)  qipcoach  datelj  to  the  ebMTi-
atiou  of  EnctemoD  (b.  c  430),  aceording  to  whom
the  Pleiad  riui  on  the  13th  of  Taurus  (8th  of
Maj),  and  (3),  vhich  eiprestly  reien  to  tbe  tme
tiaing,  although  inapplicable  to  Ronie,  will  >uit  the
hUiCude  of  Athens  for  Ibe  epoch  in  ijiieition.

Momiiig  SttStig.  —  (1.)  Varro  places  tbe  setting
of  the  Pleiades  (  Fer^Siantni  octtmnn)  fcrtj-fiTe
days  after  tbe  antumnal  equinox  (21tfi  Sept),  thai
is,  on  the  6tb  or  7th  of  Norembei  (R.  R.  i.  28).

(2.)  Plinynomea  the  11th  of  NoTctnber  (iTJiL
£0,  74  ;  tbe  text  in  c  G9  is  coirupt).

Columella,  as  before,  bas  a  succession  of  notiees.

(3.)  Xril.  el  XII.  Kid.  Nob.  (20lh  and  2Iil
Oct)  Solii  aorta  FergHiaa  aeipiiaii  oeciden.

(4.)  r.  Jfat  ffoB.  (28lh  Oct)  Fargiltat  ncd-
dtU.

(S.)  VT.  Id.  ^OD. (8th  Not.) FlrjOiat  mam

(6.)  17.  Id.  Nob.  (loth  Not.)  IkmiM  imliim.

These  are  all  taken  &oin  his  calendar  in  li.  2  j

but  inix.  U.  {11,  "  Abatguaoctio ad  Tar-

gOiantin  occamm  ditlla  XL."  k&  2d  or  Sd  of
NoTember. Compare  iL  8.  3  1.

Now  the  true  morning  setting  of  tbe  Pleiadi
took  place  for  Rome  at  that  epoch  on  tbe  29th  of
Octobor,  ihs  apparent  morning  setting  on  the  9tb
of  November.  Hence,  it  appears  that  (5)  may  bo
regarded  as  an  annnte  determination  of  tho  ap-
parent morning  setting,  and  that  (1)  and  (2)  ap-


er  ercn  three  days  must  be  allowed  in  regard  to
a  phenomenon  which  depends  in  some  degree  on
the  slate  of  the  atmosphere.  We  perceive  also
that  (4)  is  eorreet  tbi  the  true  morning  setting,
while  (3),  which  is  inapplicable  to  Home,  cor-
responds to  the  horison  of  Athens  in  the  time  of
MelotL  In  the  passage  from  Colum.  ii.  14,  we
ought  probably  to  adopt  the  conjecture  of  Pan-
tcdcra,  and  read  ilir.  for  iL
EvtniiigSill'ii9a»dEvtm»gItU»g. — Hie  eren-


A8TR0N0MIA.

ing  setting  of  tbe  Pleiades  took  place,  SceordiDg  to
Columelk,  oD  the  6l:h  of  April  (  VIII.  Idai  Aprilit
VeryiUae  Vapere  adaaiur}  ;  according  to  tbe  ca-
lendar of  Caesar  on  the  Ath.  (Colum.  xL  2.  §  3  J  ;
Plin.  H.  N.  iviii.  66.)  ThMS  >latemcnts  are  net
&i  from  tbe  truth,  since  the  apparent  evenms  set-
ting took  place  at  Rome  ibc  the  Julian  epodi  on
the  6th  irf'  April  The  apparent  evening  rising
belonged  to  Ibe  25th  of  September.

ViROiL.  — Virgil  (Ok^.  L  221)  enimns  tha
hnshandman  not  to  sow  bis  wheat  until  after  tha
mioning  aetling  of  the  Pleiades :  —

Ante  tibi  Eoae  Atlanlidei  sbscondantnt


Heiiod,  as  we  have  seen  above,  £xes  tha  com-
meocem^t  of  tbe  ploughing  season,  without  making
any  diitbiction  as  to  the  particular  aof  desired,
by  the  (apparent)  morning  setting  of  the  Pleiades,
that  ia,  for  his  ue,  the  begiiuiing  of  November.
But  it  is  impoMiue  to  teU  whether  Virgil  jalended
merely  to  repeat  this  precept  or  had  in  his  eye  tha
calendar  of  Caesar  or  some  similar  compilation.
Columella  (iL  S.  %  1),  in  eommenting  upon  thesa
lines,  understands  him  to  mean  the  true  morning
setting,  which,  he  says,  lakes  pUoe  diir^-two  days
afUr  tbe  e^ninox,  that  is,  go  tbe  25th  oi  2eth  of
October,  a  calculation  not  Bir  &om  the  truth,  sinea
we  have  pointed  out  above  that  the  2atb  was  tha

There  ii  another  paMan  where  both  the  rising
and  the  setting  of  the  Pleiades  an  mentioned  in
connection  with  the  two  periods  of  the  honey  har-
vest, (ffeoy.  iv.  231)
Bis  giavidos  cogunt  foetus,  duo  tempon  meiai^
Taygeto  siraul  oa  lerria  ostendit  honestum
"'  ' '  oceani  spretos  pede  repnlil  amnes.


Here,  again,  there  is  nothing  in  the  context  br
which  we  tan  ascertain  the  precise  periods  whim
the  poet  desired  to  define,  we  can  only  make  li
gness  by  comparing  his  injunction  with  those  sf
others.  Columella  (il  2)  tecommendi  that  tha
combs  should  he  eat,  if  fiiH,  about  the  22nd  of
April  ;  but,  since  he  adds  that  if  they  an  not  fiiU
the  operation  ought  to  be  deferred,  the  mattrr  ii
left  quite  indetmite.  Now,  the  words  of  Virgil
■eem  deaily  to  point  to  tha  heliacal  rising  which
took  place  in  bis  time  at  Rome  abont  the  23ih  of
May,  more  than  five  weeks  after  the  day  given  by
Columella.  In  like  manner  tbe  last-named  writer
advisci  (xL  2.  §  S7)  that  tbe  autumnal  colleclioin
of  honey  should  be  put  off  until  the  moith  ot
October,  although  others  were  in  the  habit  of  bc~
ginnuig  eariier.  The  tme  mominj;  setting  was,  aa
sinxAj  stated,  on  tbe  38tb  of  October,  the  ap-
parent on  the  9tb  of  November.

As  to  the  enression  "  sidus  fiigiens  obi  Piscia
aqnoii,"  it  will  be  sufil^ent  to  observe  that  al-
though tbe  "  Piscis  "  in  question  has  been  vari-
ously supposed  to  begone  of  the  fishes  in  tha
Eodiac — the  Southern  Fish — the  Hydia — tbe
Dolphin — or  even  the  Scor^cn,  no  one  has  yet
succeeded  tn  plopoaing  a  reasonabia  or  intelligibia
interpretation,  wnich  can  be  reconciled  with  nay
delineation  <^  tha  heavens  with  which  we  ar*
acquainted,

Ovid.— We  an  told  b  Oe  FtM  Tit.  ies>
-  - -  ^i, -


ASTRONOMIA.


nriida  bcipiimt  hnowros  rclenm  patsniM


ASTBONOMIA.


U9


AcofdiBi  to  tbe  legend,  tha  Pleiadt*  were  the
im^tai  <i  Atfau,  who  nppaited  the  hearau  on
ha  iknddBi,  and  kcnce,  Tttm  they  di^ipared
faa  ikt  Aj,  tbej  might  be  aid  to  rmon  ■
|inii»  tf  llwir  fttbei^  bordsn  "  human  nlsrare
fMoML"  The  apputnt  nMonig  Kiting  >•  Uie»-
hndarifdwiCed.  Birt  thii  took  ptace  U  Rmne
« ih(  Ml  af  Nonmber,  Thite,OD  the  otba  hand,
Ht  tnot  ev«iiiiis  (or  bdiacid)  Mttjug  fell  ijpon
lb  M  (T  Afcil,  Milj  or  daji  after  the  data  men-
liaad.  Hnce,  the  pact  bhmdcnd  between  the
>aaig|  lettiii);  and  tha  erauug  nttiiig',  which  are
ouf  Boolhi  apart.

Afm  (t.  5S9),  the  Pleiadti  tie  nid  b>  rite
Tutij  a  tbe  moniu  oa  iSaj  Hlh,  vaAi
"i  i^i*S  >»d  the  Dwimiiig  of  nuniner.
dK  UmI  iuii«  if  the  Plnadea  did  not  take
rhn  •>  Bona  when  Ondwntamitil  May  28tfa  ;
ho  the  pheaeiiienep  in  qncatioa  took  place  at
AihtaeaHay  IBthiDtheageofHettm.  Hence
eiidaitlT  co|aed  &om  a  Greek


lAiag  the
ler. iJow


lem


AscTinii'i.

le  difficolly  arieee  in  the  diKmnon  of

„ei  which  refer  to  Aretnrni,  from  the  cir-

MttiDf  to  tbe  whde  of  tbe  vide-apieadiDg  cod-
wlUiiw  ef  BoMei,  and  umctiinei  oaifincd  to  the
bctil  mr  in  the  koee  of  the  6gai»,

Uoan.  — Homer  (O^  t.  29)  ipeaka  of  Are-
ola ■  (f<  tiorra,  bcouue  the  apparent  etening
*  bdaol  ietting  todi  place  late  in  the  jeac  when
rata  aaa  nigh  at  hud,  and  hence  tbe  phrsM
nrtu  U  'itftToiptr  tor  tony  n^/Ui.  (See  Amt.
Ui)  Anetber  eiplanBUoa  ti  the  phiaie  haa  been
rina  ilnra whea ^ecoinle tbe conitellation


HawD.— Hoiod  iErg.Ki)  dalei  the
Boomoil  of  Spring  from  the  erening  riung  of
tuOtrm  Itnriixrrai  dapoxW^iuDi)  uitj  daya
i&ET  the  eeWtiCB.  Now  tbe  apparent  erening  ruing
b  (be  ig*  and  coonliy  of  Hedod  lelj  apm  the
^Ith  ef  PcbnafT,  Iberefiin  hia  aUtement  ia  cmect

AjpiH,  m  tbe  Hnia  peem  (659)  he  mark
Tfriod  of  tbe  rinlmo  by  the  momiDg  (heliacal)
rini  if  Aectnrna,  wbieb,  according  to  Jdeler,  feU

■  ibl^DBlbe  1 8th  of  September.
Coi.CMiu.1,  Punt. — Mornmg  Rmmg. Coli

Bdh  (ii.  14. 1  10)  piacea  the  riling  of  Arcturui
■'xat  My  dayi  aAa  the  rwng  a!  QuiicnlA ;  and

■  [R  Ac  bdiacal  iwng  of  the  bitta  fell  on  the
^  if  A^t*it  at  Boane  in  the  Jnlian  en,  and  of  tbe
fnct  aa  tha  Slat  ef  September,  the  tampalation

Pliay  (iriii.  7*\  Aretarm*  fen  neifiaa  p™/ie
Urn  (k.  S^teanhr.  oritur),  i.  e.  12tb  of  September,
•We  tbe  aiddla  pottioa  of  the  whole  coniteUstion
4  *Mifatrd^  and  tbe  obeemtion  ii  reiy  accurate.

Ihnmg  SMms.~{\.)  XI.  t  X.  KaL  Jul
(i!A^23AHtj)Antuna  mimt  ticddiL  CoL
ii.£|t3.

<1>  YII.  Id.  ^mt.  (9th  Jane)  Ardtnu  oeddil.
Ii|4L


(3.)  Pliny  (iriii.  67.  g  3)  (Mribea  Che  Aniiiri
ODSonu notetiBai  to  r.Id.Mai,Lt.  11  lb  Hay.

(4.)  Again,  in  the  lame  acction  we  find  tbot
Airtuna  moMno  oceiifif  <m  the  3th  of  June.

Now  4be  true  morning  letting  of  Arctuma  far
Rome  at  thi>  epoch  belonga  to  28th  of  May,  Iha
apparmt  morning  let^g  to  10th  of  Jtme.

Bnt  (1)  aeenu  to  be  copied  &om  the  obaerration
of  EuctemanintheParapegmaDfQeminnai  (S)  it  a
elate  approximation  to  the  apparent  mmning  letting
for  Rome ;  (3)  ii  altogether  emneoni,  and  mnat
be  a  tme  morning  letting  ertiacted  from  tome  old
Greek  calendar ;  (4)  coireiponda  with  (2),  and  it
near^  eoiiect.

JSmm^Aw^.  — (1.)  IX.  KaL  Mart  (2lBt
Fth.)  Aixiuna  prima  mtitoriliiT. CoLxL2.j21.

(2.)  OrtiuArctiiri  qid  nl  at  I" "'
(ISthFeb.). CoLii.U.

(3.) Fill.  Kal.  Mart (22d  Feb.) 1
aw  «  ;witen)  <fM  (23d  Feb.)  .4rB'
ptano. Plin.  ff.  N.  XTJiL  6S.


took  pliue  for  R


I  Julian  epoch  on  the
i.  ;rnfdenl&om  (2)


6th  of  Uarch.

that  Columella  here  employed  A

not  merely  the  itar  properly  to  called,  but  the

whcde  figure  of  Botttea,  a  latitude  of  ameral  daya

mnit  be  allowed  in  the  cate  of  thia  at  of  all  the

lacger  conateHatioiia. See  beb>w  tbe  remarka  on

Oy,  PatL  ii,  1*3. We  may  remaik,  however,  tbot

21at— 33d  of  Febraaty  will  anawec  for  the  upiv

rent  ereuing  riling  of  the  itar  AiEtuiui  at  Acheni

in  tbe  age  of  Melon.

Etmmg  StttHig.  —  ir.  Kal  Nm.  (2gtb  Ott.)
Arttanu  mtptrt  ecddU,  vmleuu  ditt.  CoL  zi.  2,
S78.

Tbit  ia  taken  reibatim  &om  as  obaervstion  of
Euctemon  quoted  in  the  Parapegma  of  Oeminua.
The  heliacal  letting  for  Roma  wat  a  few  dayi
later,  about  the  4th  of  November.  But  the  ob-
aerration d(  Enctemon  it  not  accurate  for  the  bui'
tnde  of  Athena  in  biaawnage,for  the  phenomenon
ought  to  have  been  placed  about  fire  daya  earUer,
which  prorea,  aa  Phiff  lemacki,  that  the  Greek
to  be  depended  upon  in


qaeation  that  Haniuin  pnuwuncea  tl
and  aubatitutea  FY/.  Id.  Akj/.  AquarioM  oeddU  me-
dimt,  while  P&tf  eudcavoui  to  refer  the  eipreation
to  the  culmination,  an  eipbrnation  which  ii  both
in  itielf  forced  and  cunpletely  Bl  variance  with  tbe
ofdinaiT  ntoge  of  Pliny.

Again.  Priny  (iviiL  §74],  Pridie  Kalendat
(Not.)  Ca^ari  Artttm  ocmlH,  i.e.  Slit  of  Oc-
tobei^  and  a  tew  linei  tarlbEi  on  IV.  A'owu  Are-
(imu  oeoiJif  w^icri.  The  latter  it  not  ^  Inm
the  truth  ;  the  former,  onleii  it  nfen  to  the  con-
atellalion  in  general,  mutt  haTs  been  bomiwed
bom  a  foreign  tooroe.

Vjhoil. — Virgil  (Gtarg.  I  229}  initmcti  tbg
buabandman  to  aow  Telcbea,  kidney  besni  and  len-
tilei,  when  Botttet  aeU,  by  which  ha  probably
intendi  to  indicate  the  heliacal  setting  of  Arcturua
on  the  4th  of  November.  In  h'ke  manner  Pliny
(iviiL  I£.  g  24)  oidpn  the  vetch  to  be  town  nbont
the  actting  of  Arcturua,  the  kidney  bean  at  tbs
leUhig  of  Boiite*  (zriii.  24),  the  lentiLi  in  tlw


160


AsmONOUlA.

L  12). Columella  Buigna


month  of  Nov

tbe  lowing  of  veUiliej  and  kidnej  beam,  and  P)dU-
diua  of  kidne;  beam  to  tbe  month  of  October ;  if
the  end  of  tllB  month  il  meant,  then  tbe  precept
may  be  caniidercd  u  identical  with  thoMvC  Viigil
and  Pliny  ;  if  tho  middle  of  tbe  month  i<  intended,
Ihia  will  eoneipond  with  the  heliacal  getting  of
Arctuiua  for  the  latitude  of  Aleiaadria.

Again,  in  Gtorg.  L  67.  when  treating  of  plough'
iog,  the  wordi

At  «  non  fberit  telliii  fecnnda,  anb  ipmm
Arctumm  tenai  sat  erit  ra^endeie  iiiJco,
refer  to  the  moniins  riling.  The  tree  momkg
riling  vaa  on  the  B&  of  September,  the  apparent
on  the  21gt.  The  fanner  agree*  heat  with  the  di-
rrctioni  ^ven  by  Columella  (iL  4.  S  H)  f'"'  the
ploughing  of  Teiy  light  land,  "  grocilei  din  non
innt  aeAtBtenlandifteddrcaSept^mbreeKalendu,**
and  a  little  lower  down,  when  tnating  of  tbe  aame
kind  of  (oil,  "  itaqoe  optime  inter  Kalendm  et  Idol
Septembre*  aratur  et  mbinde  iteiatur,''

Ovid.  — In  tbe  Kcond  book  of  the  Faid  (153)

Tertia  noi  reniat:  cuatodem  protinui  Unae

Adipkiei  geminoi  eraemiaae  pedei,

that  ia,  the  ecmMiation  Arctuiui  diiplaja  both  hia

(bet  on  the  11th  of  Febiuaiy,  where  il  ought  to

be  obeerred  that  from  the  poeture  in  which  Bodtea

!i  hie  two  leg!  appear  above  the  ~


It  the  a


The  a


uing


ir  Arcturui  took  ,  . ..

Fehraary,  tbe  true  evening  raing  on  the  6th  of
March  ;  but  the  calendar  to  which  Oiid  wa*  in-
debted probably  recorded  the  ^ipenrance  of  the  fint
itar  in  the  figure  which  became  viAbJe.

In  three  pauagea,  the  morning  aetting  ii  deariy
dewnbed  (i^uf.  m.  403,  t.  733,  tL  233).  In  the
fint,  it  ia  placed  on  4th  or  6th  of  March,  according
Bi  we  adopt  the  reading  gmtria*  or  gaintae  :  in  the
■econd,  on  the  26tb  of  May  ;  in  (he  third,  on  the
7th  of  June.  Now  there  ii  no  doubt  that  the
•citing  of  BoOtea  ia  apread  orer  a  conaideiable  pe-
riod ;  and  hence,  the  epithet  jajcr,  ai^lied  to  him
here  and  elievhere,  bat  in  no  way  could  it  he  made
td  occupy  three  montba.  The  itar  Aicturua  ia  one
of  the  iint  which  Beta  in  tbi>  conitdlation :  ila  true
HKiming  aetting  took  place  on  23th  May,  iti  ap-
parent morning  aetting  on  lOth  June  ;  thua  the
■econd  and  third  of  the  above  pasaagca  will  apply
to  theae  two.  In  tbe  firat  paaiage  he  haa  enoneoualy
lubatitnted  the  of^nrmJ  nonius;  Ktting  for  the
true  mainff  ritaig,  which  really  took  place,  u  we
have  aeen,  on  the  6th  of  Uareh.

SlRlUS. ClNU. ClNICCLA.

GoHiK.  HisioD.  —  Homer  (R  T.  S,  xiiL  3E)
allndei  to  SiHuB  u  the  ator  of  ^^pa,  that  ia,  of  tbe
hotleit  portion  of  aommer,  aa  wtU  be  explained
moTB  fully  below  in  treating  of  the  ancient  divi-
lion  of  the  year  into  aesaona.  The  heliacal  ciaing
of  Sirini  in  Southern  Oieece  wonld  take  place  in
the  a^e  of  Homer  about  the  middle  of  July-

The  cnlmination  of  Sirina  apoken  of  by  Heiiod
{Erg.  $09),  aa  marking  along  with  the  moming
riling  of  Aretniua  the  poriod  of  the  vintage,  would
take  place  in  tliat  age  about  tbe  20th  of  September.
The  pauags  (Er^.  41 T),  where  Zilfun  iirrip  ia
nqipiMed  to  denote  the  inn,hai  been  already  noticed.
8MaboT«p.lS3,b.


ASTRONOMIA.

VAaBO,CoLPUBtLiL,PLiMT.— Mormi^  Romg.
—  (1.)  VaiTo,  fiillowing  the  calendar  of  CaeeaT,
reekona  an  interral  of  twen^-four  daya  from  the
aummer ioldtice  totheriaingof  Siiiua  iadCamadas
ttgnum)  which,  according  to  tbia  calcdation,  would
&1I  onthe  17th  or  1 8th  of  July  (A.  fi.  L  20.)

(2.)  CdumclU  (iL  2.  g  53)  Exce  upon  the  26th
of  July  (  VII.  KaL  Aug.  daieida  apparet),  and  in
another  paaiage  (Li.  IS.  §  b)  makea  the  interral
between  the  tolatice  and  ^e  riling  of  Sliiua  about
thirty  dayi  {ptracto  toltM>  lUfM  ad  orlnm  Cbn-
ca^  jui  fin  din  tngitta  imi),  that  ii,  oo  tlu
24th  of  July.

(3.)  Pliny  (iviiL  38,  %  2),  .ayi,  thai  the  epoeh
**  gitod  canu  ottan  eoomu  **  corteapoided  with  the
entrance  of  the  aun  into  Leo,  that  ia,  according  to
the  Julian  calendar,  which  he  profbaMi  to  follow,
the  24  th  of  July.

(4.)  In  the  very  next  daue  he  i^a,  that  il  fell
twenty-three  daya  after  the  aoIitiM^  that  ii,  on  tbs
17th  of  July.

<S.)  And  a  UcUe  liuther  on  {§  4),  he  ref«i  lb«
aame  event  apedfically  to  the  17lh  of  July  (Xr/.
SaL  Anff.y.

(6.)  Finally,  in  a  diSerent  part  of  hii  wotk  (xL
14),  he  placea  the  riling  of  Siriui  thirty  daya  after
the  aoUtice  :  ipto  Sirio  fjjiimdtKeiit  porf  loitfitHUa
du/na  frusiLf  /crt,  a  pauage  in  which  it  will  be
Been  upon  referring  to  the  original,  that  he  moat
have  be^n  conanlting  Greek  authoritiea,  and  in
which  the  woi^  neceaiarily  imply  a  nft6fff  liain^
of  tbe  Blar.

Tbe  whole  of  the  above  atatementa  may  be  re-
duced to  two.  In  (1),  (4),  (5),theriiingaf  Siiina
is  placed  on  the  17tbor  18th  of  July,  twenty -three
daya  after  the  lolitice,  in  (2),  (3),  (6),  uioot  thirty
dayi  after  the  lola^ca  ;  thai  it,  24th— 3Gth  of  July.

"  iw  the  true  morning  riling  of  Sirina  for  Rome
■  Julian  era  fbll  upon  the  19th  of  Jnly,  the
q^iarent  morning  or  heliaml  riling  on  the  2d  of
Auguit,  thirty-eight  or  thirty-nme  daya  afte  the

Hence  (I),  (4),  (6),  are  doie  apuoximatioDi  to
tiie  truth,  while  (2),  (3\  (6)  are  mappUcable  to
"  le,  and  borrowed  fTom  eompntatiuia  od^ited  to
loriion  of  Southern  Greece.
ime  wordi  in  Pliny  deaerre  particular  notice ;
"^XVI.  KaL  Aug.  Aiayriae  Pm^on  exoritUT;  dein
postridie  fen  ubique,  confeamm  inter  omnea  aidna
indicani,  quod  cania  ortum  vocamui,  aolo  partem
"Hmani  Leonia  ingreuo.  Hoc  fit  poet  aolititium
!XIIL  die.  Sentiunt  id  maria,  et  tetiae,  muilae
!ro  et  ferae,  ut  auii  locii  diikniu.  Neque  eat
inor  et  veneratio  quam  deacripdi  in  deo*  aCellia.'*
Although  the  exprealona  employed  here  are  tn
from  being  diitinct,  they  lead  ua  to  infer  that
certain  remarkable  perioda  in  the  year  were  (nun
habit  and  lupenCition  ao indiaaolubly  connected

nomena,  that  even  after  the  perioda  in  quMtion
had  ctaaed  to  carmpond  with  the  phenoraoia,  iko
change  waa  introduced  into  the  catabliibcd  phim.
aeology.  Thua  the  period  of  moil  intenae  heat,
whicnat  one  time  coincided  with  the  heliacal  riiing
of  Siriut,  would  continue  to  be  diitinguiabed  in  the
language  of  the  people,  and  in  ■^"'■"■^  intended
for  geneml  uae,  aa  tbe  Camt  Eaortut,  long  iSitT
the  two  cpochi  were  removed  to  a  diatance  &Dia
each  other,  juit  at  among  ounelvei  the  tenn  dog-
dayt  havii^  once  obtained  a  firm  footing,  ia  oaed
~ '  probably  will  continue  to  he  ued  for  c<


attbonomia.

vttboat  (be  iligfalat  reprd  to  the  Rctrnd  padtiaa
il  tkc  cirtcllatioQ  at  the  linic  in  qncnion.  Aa
I  Hiijilij  Kill  laare  itrikiDg,  bccvue  it  iniot*n  an
■imaJj  MOimBlIf  RcsgniMd  by  Kuntific  men,
■  iha  jmaia  of  doianiiiiBlIiig  the  poution  at  thi
MB  at  tba*anBl  cqiinox,aa  atJInlpoiaiijfAriet,
-'-^~\  two  thouad  jcan  haTe  ela{iMd  mace
'  D  tf  lbs  cdiptie  with  tbs  equauir
oit  of  tbs  ccm-


Ewiiffn  Ana
1  is  aetally  tnTsling  the  coniteUBtioD  of
ind  cDtcn  the  i^  Taunu  long  bdbn  he
e  antellalka  Ariel.  Nov  wmethtng  of
t  maj-  (0  a  certain  eOeet  explain  tome  of


abb  ^fMuanna  fixed  apon  U  a  tccj  earlj  period
to  naik  tlie  apiroafh  ti  mnmmrr  uid  winter^  tnch
■  tfaa  riaing  and letting  of  the  Fleiadea,  may

pkte);  ideotififd  in  the  mindi  of  the  people  with
pankolu  da  ji,  that  the  cnnpilen  of  alotdan  in-
trnjf  i  fiir  gmenl  oi^  while  tlwy  deuied  to  re-
pi»a  KBoaU  ohaerratiaiii,  wen  MmpelUd  at  tilt
■Be  tiiBa  bi  include  thoae  whicli,  Mooging  to
iBBoae  agea  aud  foreiga  had),  had  neTertbcleu
aeqaiRd  a  [iTeKJiptire  daim  to  attention. We

nlj  have  been  al-
wnien  in  whou  wcalii
■  impoaaible  to  fiugire


ftiMiiiMi,  oc  the  gnaa  igDocaDce  which  thay  to
that  namleat.

rimimy  Stttoff.  Colmntlla  placei  the  erraing
Kiting  of  the  Dog  on  the  SOtli  of  April  (Prid.
KiL  MaL  OaU  m  Fapen  edat),  xi.  2.  g  37.
Ptiny  «■  the  2Stb  (/r.  Kal.  MaL  Ctaii  oeddU,
miai  ^  pir  •tt^Umau  et  cmi  pratotddtn  Casicu-
"  •<).  X


The  hrliaf  I  aetting  at  Rome  for  the  Julian
ra  saa  <a  (be  In  of  May,  whicbproTc*  the  sboTo
Maliiaiiili  Id  be  neaity  correct  The  eipreedoD  eai
/niaeeidm  CaueJam  imeetit  lU  baa  been  already
w—mted  in. Sea  absre,  f,  ISS.a.

JAnc^  SaU^.  Staiiiig  Rwuff.—liy.  711.
K^Dte.i2Sli<n.)OmiciilaotadUiJitor»i,Cal

(2.)  ///.  KaL  Jam.  (30  Dec)  Cfaafaala  eB^mt
Kam,  Ibid.  S  9«-

(X)  ///.  KaL  Jam.  (30  Dec)  JtfbMuM  omit

(1)  ia  icenialelbr  the  ^farent  morning  aetting

(-2)  aod  (3)  an  dinctly  at  lariance  with  each
athtr,  aBd  an  lutb  bhuden.  The  ^ipareat  aren-
k^  liiaiQ  took  place  at  Rone  on  the  SOth  of  De-
mha.  net  tbe  ereung  aettiDg  u  Colmnetla  would
ten  it,  oar  tbe  mming  aettjng  u  Pliny  hai  n-

Vmoa. — Vngil  inMnicta  the  bnner  to  aow
fcaai,  hccne,  and  millet:  —

Caadidoa  aniatii  ^>erit  cnm  conilmi  annnm
Tavna  ct  adraio  ccdeni  Canii  occidit  utro.

Otary.  I  317.
neaneobted  I^mu^MvotAVtoibeJa^


ASTHONOMIA.  161

alondnr,  on  the  24tli  of  April :  the  heliacal  aetting
of  Siriiu  wni  on  Che  lit  of  Uay,  lix  dayi  aflep-
warfe.  Mooy  inleipretalioni  hare  been  prepoied
forlhewoida  "adrcnc  cedent  Canii  occidit  aatroi"
of  then  the  moat  plausible  ia  that  which  eiphune
tbem  with  reference  to  the  form  and  attitude  nnder
which  the  coniteUation  of  the  Dog  wai  depicted,
which  made  him  set  backwards  hang  the  ligna
whicli  follow.

Again,  in  Otorg.  !'■  i^S,  we  find

Jam  lapidot  tomni  aitimtei  Sirini  Tndoi
Ardebnt  melo  et  medium  aol  ioiteiu  orbeni

worda  which  aie  intended  to  indicate  the  hottert
portion  of  the  day  in  the  hotteit  ii  iiam  of  the
year.  Here  the  a
nifiident  to  o

Siriua  pj  eqiUTalent  in  thii  panage  to  the
tun.  See  aboTe,  p.  15S,b.  Comp.  Lucan.  Piar,
-.209.

Onn.  — In  the  fborth  book  of  the  FatH  (x.
901)  theriringof  Sirini  iiauigned  to  the  26th  of
April,  ii  made  coincident  with  the  diHippeamncs
of  Ariea,  and  marka  the  epoch  of  mid-spring :  —^

Sex  ubi  quae  leilant  Incei  Aprilii  habebit
In  medio  cunu  tcmpoia  Veris  enint  ^

£t  frtutnt  pecudem  qnaeca  AtbamimCidM  Hdlci
Signoiiae  dant  imbrei  eioriliiTque  Cania.

A  notorioiu  hlnnder  has  bcei  here  committed  by
the  poet.  No  liaing  of  Siriiu,  either  real  or  ap-
parent, in  the  morning  or  in  the  evening,  eor-
leapondi  to  thil  season.  Bnl  thil  is  the  Tciy  day
fixed  by  Eoetemon  (ap.  Qemin.  Parapeg.)  for  the
beliaal  setting  (liw  Kp^rrcru)  of  the  Dog,  whick
bU  at  Rome  Sir  the  Julian  era  ihi  the  let  of  Uny.

Agun,  in  J^iM.  T.  733,  we  read —

Node  seqnente  diem  Canii  Erigondua  exit,
that  ii,  on  tbe  22d  of  May.  Now,  it  is  dear
from  a  fiamei  passage  (it.  939)  that  by  Omis
Srigommia  he  means  the  Qieat  Dog ;  but  the  tme
ridng  of  Siiini  look  place  for  Rome  at  this  period
00  tbe  19th  of  July,  the  apparent  on  the  2d  of

Not  much  arill  be  gained  by  suppoiing  that
Pnx^on  is  here  alluded  to  ;  fin  the  niingi  of  that
■tai  precede  those  of  Siiina  by  aboat  dght  days
only. Here,  again,  thenfbte,  we  hwo  a  grosi

PuLaoiDS.  — Palladios  (tiL  9):  "Tn  orta
CBnicnlae,qui  ajHid  Romanos  XIV.  Eal.  Ao^.  { 1 9th


July)  d


exploiant (sc.  Aegypti)  q


diat"  Now  this  is  the  exact  psiod  of  the  hdiacal
liung  in  Bgjpt  for  the  Julian  n»ch  ;  hence  the
vnrds  "apod  nomanos"  must  refer  to  a  notice  in
some  Roman  Calendar,  and  not  to  the  real  period

It  must  be  boTTMi  in  mind  that,  from  the  great
siaa  of  this  coniteUation,  its  risings  and  lettinga
aie  spread  oTer  a  considerable  space  ;  while  iia

that  no  one  can  be  fixed  npon  as  a  representative
of  the  whole,  u  in  the  case  of  BoStea,  where  the
diSerent  appeannces  are  usually  relerred  to  Arc-
tnrw  alone.  Hoice  those  WTiten  who  aim  at
prectiion  oie  neb  phrases  as  "  Oriim  indpt  onri,"


1G3  ASTRONOHIA.

"Orion  [otni  oritur,"  "Orion  incipil  occidcK;"
and  wherefer  nch  qulificatioiu  on  omitted  ifte
itstemeott  an  necenaril;  vague.

HuiOD.  —  HetMd  (Erg.  693)  orden  tbs  earn
to  be  thra«bed  r^  &r  rpmra  parp  atiivj  'Qpitavt,
For  that  age  and  coanCiy  tbe  apparent  Tnoming  or
)ieliaca]  riiinv  of  Orion  wonld  be  ccnnpleted  abont
the  9tb  of  Jiilf.

The  Kttjng  of  Drum  wu  ona  of  the  tokeni
irhich  Ksre  notice  to  the  fuinec  that  the  acawn
for  ploughing  had  arrived,  and  to  the  mariner  that
he  muit  no  longer  brave  the  perili  of  the  deep.
^Erff.  €\B.)  The  apparent  memuig  lettiiig  eE-
tended  srer  the  whole  month  of  NoTcmber.

The  cnlminatton  of  Orion,  which  comcided  with
the  vintage  (Erg.  609)  took  place  about  the  14th
of  September.

AiU9n>TLi.  —  Ariilotte  {Mttearvlrip.  ii.  S,
Pniitm.  xiv.  SE)  pUcea  the  riting  of  Onon  at  the
oommennment  of  Opora,  and  the  setting  at  the  be-

■nmmei  to  vinter  (if  iLrrala*^  tdS  difaut  ical

Now  the  two  limit!  which  iiuloded  the  be-

K'uning  and  end  of  the  t^iparent  mnning  oc
rliacsl  riling,  which  alone  can  be  here  indicated,
v^ere,  for  the  age  and  country  of  the  vmler,  17th
of  June— Uth  July ;  thou  which  embraced  the
ajumreat  morning  letting  were,  Bth  of  November —
8th  of  December  ;  while  the  tnie  moming  Kttlng
contiimed  from  27th  of  October — SOth  of  No-

Upon  examining  the  pasogea  in  qneation  a  very
curioua  contradiction  will  be  penaivod,  which  haa
long  exerciaad  the  ingenuity  of  the  commentaton.
Ariitotia  diitinctly  anerti  in  one  place  that  the
riling  of  Orion  ii  chaiacteriied  by  (uuteadT  itormy
weather,  and  oSen  an  explamtioa  of  the  bet :
in  another  place  he  >i  diitinctly  aven  that  the
rinng  of  Orion  ii  chaiadenKd  by  the  abaence  of
wind  (wf/fl  'Qplmroi  droroX^  fidXiirra  ytrrrai

Flint.  ~(1)  VIII.  Idn  (Mart)  Aquilomi
pwcU  tzortitt  et  poden  die  Onoma.  xviiL  6&  §  J.

(3)  NoBit  (Apr.)  Aisjpto  Orioa  t  gladitu  ^
tKtpiHiU  alaamdi.  iviiL  66.  g  1.

(1)  The  hnt  date,  Bth  of  Hank,  ii  u  bi  re-
moved from  the  riming  of  Orion,  whelha  in  the
morning  or  tlie  evening,  that  Ideler  i>  [mbably
conect  when  he  mppoiei  that  «ther  the  text  ia

mittnka  initcsd  of  the  m

(2)  Hera  alio  the  date,  fith  of  April,  ia  wide  of
the  truth.  The  apparent  evening  letting  of  the
middle  (tar  hi  the  b«1t  fell  at  Alejondtia  on  the
26Ih  of  April,  Kven  daji  later  than  at  Rone,  the
true  evemng  scttuig  about  the  9th  or  lOth  of  Hay.

ViROiL,  Horace. — Both  Viigil  and  Hoiaee
frequently  allude  to  the  tcmpeeti  which 'accom-
panied the  winter  letting  of  Orion  (Saeuai  M
Orkm  k&trmi  amdilKT  tadii,  Vir^.  Aem.  viL  719  ;
H»  aluiv.  52;  Hot.  OiniL  L  28.  21,  iii.27.  17,
^ai.  I.  £),  II.  7),  JuH  ai  Heeiod  (Erg.  617)
eight  hundred  ywri  hefcre  had  waned  the  mariner
that  when  the  PleiadeB,  fleeing  frem  the  might  of
Orion,  {dnnge  into  tha  dark  main  :

A)|  v^t  nanTOiur  Mim*  Simitnr  d^voi.

The  apparent  morning  nltii^  of  Orion,  which
in  tba  till*  of  Heuod  coBuaeDoad  ad;  in  No-


ASTRONOMIA.
vember,  aoon  after  tbe  morning  Ktting  of  the
Pleiadee,  thui  became  connected  in  Indttiona)
lore  with  the  £m  galea  of  the  rainy  leaion,  and
aaodation  oonUnned  for  centnriea,  although
henomenon  itielf  became  gradnally  further
and  further  removed  fnim  the  beginning  of  tba
>tormy  period. In  the  Panpegma  of  Oeminni  wa


attended  by  tempeiCa,  althcngh  each  of
the  three  dee  npon  a  dinrent  day.  For  Reme^
at  the  Julian  era,  the  apparent  morning  lettiiig
commenced  about  tha  12U  or  13th  of  NoveDber.
In  Pliny  (mii.  74)  we  find,  "  V.  Idiii  Novemta-.
(B  Novemb.)  gladiii*  Orionii  occidera  incipit,"
which  ii  the  true  morning  letting  ^  AlaxandriA
at  that  epoch.

Ovid.  — Ovid  refer*  twice  in  hii  FaMi  to  tha
Ktting  of  Orion.  In  one  paauge  (iv.  387)  ha
placet  it  on  the  day  before  the  termination  of  the
Uegaleaia,  that  ii,  on  the  lOth  of  April ;  in
another  (v.  493),  where  the  complete  diiappeaianea
of  the  figure  ii  eipmaly  noted,  on  the  11th  of
May.

Now  tba  apparent  evening  tetting  of  lUgel,  tha
bright  ttar  which  marki  the  left  fiMt,  taji  placa
for  Home  in  the  age  of  the  poet  on  11th  Apiil,
while  the  amaller  itar,  now  known  a<  K,  let  on  iho
previani  day,  the  true  evening  letting  of  BetelgeiuCf
which  marki  the  right  ihonlder,fcIl  on  the  lllh  of
Hay. Henee  it  i>  clear  that  Ovid  derived  lu*  io-


wbicb  gave  the  dale  of  the  commencement  of  tba
apparent  evening  letting  ;  the  other,  the  data  of  the
termination  of  the  true  evening  letting.

He  refen  twice  to  tha  riimg  of  Orion  alio  —
in  the  liitb  book  of  the  Faati(717),  on  tha  IGth
of  June:

At  paler  Heliadnm  radioc  nbi  tinrerit  andii^

Et  cinget  gcmnun  itella  lerraia  poloa.
Toilet  homo  validoi  prole*  Hyriea  laeertoa.


that  i^  on  tbo  36th  of  June.

With  regard  to  tha  fint,  the  date  ii  neariy  cor-
rect for  the  trae  uokmimo  (mI  ivbmino,  a>  ths
wordi  denote)  riling  of  the  two  atan  (o  o)  at  tha
extremity  of  the  loft  hand  ;  with  regard  to  tha
■econd,  the  true  momuig  riling  of  the  middle  itar
in  the  bell  fell  an  the  2 1 H  of  June,  the  apparent
on  the  13th  of  July.  There  ii  a  miilake,  thcra-
foie,  here  of  five daya,  a*  &r  Bi  Rome  ii  ceo-

HvADxa.

In  Heuod  {Erg.  615),  the  aetting  of  the  Plei-
adea,  of  the  Jiyadea,  and  of  migh^  Orion,  wmm
the  hnibandman  that  the  Ksion  bai  arrived  fbi
ploughing  the  earth,  and  the  mariner,  that  nariga-
tion  nrait  eease.  The  qiparent  meaning  tetting
of  the  Uyadei  took  place,  aeeordiw  to  the  cal-
culation of  Ideler,  ftr  the  age  and  cottnlry  of
Hetiod,  OD  the  7th  of  the  Julian  NoTembcr,  fonr
dayi  after  that  of  the  Pieiadea,  and  eight  befbiv
that  of  Orion.

Vuvil(^a>.L744,  iiL  516)  tenna  thit  elaal«
"  phiriaa  Hyadu,"  and  IIoiBce  (Ctarik  jL  S,  U)


ASTRONOMIA.
"ttriWM  HjadM,"  in  nl«iice  to


jtv. Hw  traa  BKmiiig  Mttisg  fcr  Roma
JwSmm  (fs  banmwd  on  tbs  Sd  of  NoTcmber,  the
^^mtt  OB  tke  Utli  dT  Noi
^nat  cmiBV  ndng,  which  fell  Dpoo  the  26^  of
OMittr,  waaM  likene  nit  iheM  spithsU.

Olid,  ia  kie  tnti  (ir.  677),  placa  the  eTening
■M^  id  A»  HjmdM  Ml  the  17th  of  Afnl,  the
^Tindmtk«CaIciidw<rfCmeeir(Plia.inii'  '"
1 1),  *Ule  CofauneUaiiHDM  the  18th  <A.  A. :
J  3iS).  Tbew  MMCBeata  an  Dtu]  J  iccnnte,
the  ip)Tmt  ettoing,  or  bdual  tettiDg,  took  plaoa
far  Iboa  at  that  qracb  en  the  20th  of  AynL

la  the  ffUBe  pnoi^  the  monung  liiug  ig  alliided
Mhali^

(1.)  It  ■  aid  (f.  163}  lo  take  place  on  the  2iid
it  Ma]t,  *Akh  mi  the  day  fixed  in  the  Cidendar
rf  Cacaar  (PliD.  znii  G€.  1 1),  and  adopted  hj
C«hBdh  (si.  S.  I  39),  vhoa  vonli,  Smeabt  «
■Ir  afahg,  indiate  tha  (rae  moniiiig  rinsg.

(1.)  On  ite  14th  or  May  (v.  603),  ivhile  Co-
ha^  (Ibid.  I  43)  haa,  XII.  KaL  Jam.  (21M
Mar)  aH*»u.ui  ■■■<■■

<1>  On  the  37tli  of  Ha;  (t.  Ac).

(4.)  Onlbea>B>dorjDHi(Ti.l97).

<&.)  Onthalfithof  Jniie(TL711).

Mcning  linng  of  the  Hjadta  fof
li  ma  oo  the  16lh  of  May,  the
'  [king  Da  tha  9th  of  June,

ri  the  3d  of  ISty.
Orid,  Columella,  and
PIbt,  cBfjriac  ia  (1}  a  Unnder  which  had  fbnnd
m  saj  into  the  Calendar  of  Cniaz,  laigned  the
^mag  riaifl^  to  tha  Snd  of  iimj  ^n****^  of  the
Bin  mmtf  Betting.  The  tnia  erenirg  liimg  lay
bnreen  tbe  dayi  naned  in  (S).  Tb  heliacal
puf  ma  thittecs  dayi  aAti  (3),  aeren  dayi  altar
(I>,iisd9«bdcra(6}.

T««  Ckbtam  CaoWH.
We  Wre  eeen  alnn  tlat  Tirgil  (Geory.  1 333),

■aiii  afk^  the  Plesdca  hare  act  in  the  monung ;


Rmm  at  that  •pech  m
iFfiat  or  bJiacal  ci

Hoeee  it  m  eWthat  (


■t  Bgni^  the  mUiag  itftia  Cretan


^tm  tk  9lk  of  Nofosher,  the  irrj  day  afier  the
e|]fiLBI  ■wmiiig  aelting  of  the  Pleiadea.

Orid  (Fat  ih.  W9>,  after  haTins  ipoken  of  the
tan^  of  Pepane  on  tb  night  of  Much  7th,  addi,


wadi  which  dcDOte  the  ercoin^  riling ;  and,  i


Tm  KtDi.
Trgi  (Otarg.  L  203)  when  inenleatiiig  tha
■iE^  ef  sfaicrniig  the  itan,  deelatea  that  it  it  no
Itm  naeeaaai7  lor  the  *"■'""''"""  than  fiv  the
Karaa  u  ntch  AtEtunu  and  the  gliiteoing  Snake,
ad  4b  J^t  t/  (t*  Kidt  (katiarim^  dut  Mr^
^^ii.  Elaawhue  {.Jen.  is.  BBS)  he  compsrei  a
' K  B^  of  anowB  and  jardini  latding  againit

■  ■ ■  -■■ 1>  of  ram  proceed-

Nncaofdantgfy


%  fas  Ik*  vnt  nader  ih


ASTRONOHIA.  163

UdM  (pbeulSw  loaAt).  Horace  (Carm.  iiL  I.
27}  dwell*  on  the  terron  ef  letting  Aretomi  and
the  Knv  Kid,  while  Orid  (2Hit  I  1.  13)  and
Theocriloa  (C-  £3.  See  SchoL)  ip«k  in  the  nine
■tnio.  In  Colnmellal  Calendar  (li.  3.  g  66)  we
find  F.  KaL  Odii.  (27th  Sept)  Haadi  tmrirmhiT,
and  a  little  hither  on  (g  73}  fndii  JVoii,  Odob.
(4th  Not.)  Hatdi  oritmtar  vopen.  The  fonnei
data  marki  the  pndiedayof  thefrveeoniBi^rMn;
of  the  fimraoat  kid  at  Rome  for  the  Julian  eia ;
and  hence  the  iqipomf  acimag  rita^,  which  would
&11  Mme  daya  eariio',  would  indicate  the  approach
irf  thoaa  itotmi  which  commonly  attend  upon  the


III.  DtTUION  O


«  Tkab  a


]  Sbahons.


Ai  early  a  the  age  of  Heaiod  the  m
ment  of  diSefcol  uaacni  waa  mailced  by  the  riainga
and  Kttinge  of  cenaia  Man  ;  bnt  before  proceeding
to  deleimine  theee  limiti  it  will  )»  oecaary  to
aacettain  into  how  many  compartmenti  the  yai
waa  portioiMd  out  by  the  earlier  Oreeka.

Uomer  daily  definn  thiee :  —  1.  Spring  (tap),
at  wboae  return  the  nightingale  tiilli  her  notta
among  the  greoiwood  braka  (Od.  lii.  G19).  %
Winltf  (x'V^,  X<^),  at  wboae  an>roach,  ac-
(ampaniod  by  deluge*  of  nin  (i>iir^)aTor  t/iMpoy),
the  cranet  fly  Kreaoiing  away  to  the  gtreoma  of
'" "- 4, conip. Ilaiod.  Ery,  448). 8.


Summer  (S^i),  to  which  X''!"*  i*  diiectly  oraweed
(OAriillB),  4.ThreelinMocCTirintheOdyaey
{li.  191.  liripiwiir  1X07)11 1  dipaiTiiaM/u: "


Idelcr,


IHamOiai  der  Ouvk.  L  p.  243)  that  the  tmn
wiginally  bdkaled  i^it  a  eeoaon  ae^aislo  from  and
following  aflet  mminer,  but  tha  hotleat  part  of
•ununer  itaelf;  and  hence  Siriu,  whou  heliacal
riling  took  place  in  the  age  of  Homer  abont  the
middle  of  July,  ii  deainiaUd  a  im^  tiapaht
(IL  1.  S  ;  lee  Schcd.  and  Euilath.  ad  Ice. ;  compare
alio  17.  niL  26),  wtule  Aiinotla  in  one  paaage
(Mtlamltg,  ii.  G)  maka  the  heliacal  riling  of
Siriuj,  which  he  notea  u  comciding  with  the  en<
tnnce  of  the  nm  into  Leo,  i.  e.  34tfa  July  of  the
Julian  cdeadar,  the  lign  of  the  commencement  of
iwAfa;  and  in  another  paaage</V«UM>.zii.  36,
ixtL  U>  pUcea  the  riling  of  Orion  at  &a  begin-
ning of  onfo,  and  the  aattiu  of  the  aanie  con-
itellatioo  at  the  beginning  of  wmta —  tr  iUTata\S
ToS  hifiiut  Kal  X'M™"'  —  an  exprunon  which
clearly  indtcata  that  intpa  wai  indndod  withm
the  more  general  Hoot.

Haiod  notica  fap  {Erg.  462X  Mpsi  (L  e.),
Xelfu  (460),  and  in  hii  poem  we  find  the  trace  of
a  fourfi^d  dirinon,  for  be  empkiyi  the  adjectiTO
lArtvwttpaiii  {Erg.  41£)  in  leferena  to  the  period
of  the  fint  mini,  when  the  eiceaiTe  heat  had  in
lome  denee  alwted.  Theae  raini  ha  elawhere
calli  tha  nwpwii  I/iCpoi.and  notica  them  ineon-
lection  with  the  vintage,  when  he  enjoini  the
oariner  to  haiten  home  to  port  before  the  aerene
reather  ha*  paaed  away — /tifii  lUmr  atnr  t*
'itt^  jml  Brmpmr  Bfitpow.  Moreorer,  by  making
tfpkt  proper  end  fifty  day!  after  Uie  iditice  (J^.
663)  he  lava  a  Taant  ipace  bora  the  middle  of
Anguit  to  the  end  of  Octabei,  which  he  mul  have
intended  to  fiH  by  a  fourth  Kami,  which  he  no-
-■— 1  ipedfically  nainea. A>  Itte,  hawf^  «l


161  ASTRONOMIA.

Acuhflia  (PrvBt.  tSS)  uid  Ariitopluuui  (An. '
710)  the  KBMiu  are  tpoken  of  bo  tbrc&  :t(i>uii'>
4^1  &ipoi  by  tbo  former ;  x*^t*^^t  ^^i  ortipa  bj
the  latter.  Nor  can  we  aroid  attaching  ume
weight  to  the  hct  that  the  mort  ancient  poeli  mid
utiali  recogiuicd  the  'dfai  ta  three  Old;,  bearing;,
according  to  the  Tbeogonf  (901)  the  ijiabDltail
oppellHlion  of  Order  (Eiroitia),  Jmtice  (Alni),
uid  blooming  Pcoee  (Eip^n))-  Indeed  Psnmiiu
bu  preKTved  a  recOTd  of  ■  time  when  tbc  'Dpai
were  known  m  two  goddeeiei  only — KopF^,  the
patronega  dF  &iiit«,  and  SoXXio,  the  gnardion  of
blouonu  (ii.  3B.  %  2).  We  may  hence  ufely
conclude  that  the  Qreelu  for  many  agei  diioiini-
naled  three  Kaioni  only,  Winter,  Spring,  end
Sununer,  that  the  gsneral  name  for  the  whole  of
■ummer  being  ft'pai,  the  hottett  portion  wai  dis-
tingtuihed  ai  hwipa,  and  that  the  latter  tcnn  wu
gradually  Kparated  from  the  fbnner,  »  that  dipot
vat  commonly  employed  for  eafly  mnnmer,  and
ir^pa  for  late  Rummer.

The  Grrt  direct  mention  of  autumn  !■  contained
in  the  tieatiae  Do  Diaela  (lib.  iii.  tu.),  commonly
BKribed  to  Hippocmtei  (b.  c.  4SD},  where  we  arc
told  that  the  year  i>  umally  divided  into  four  parti.
Winter  Cx"f^'),  Spring  (lap).  Summer  (Sipoi),
Autumn  (^in(irBpii»)  ;  and  thii  word  with  iti
fiyoonym  firrdvapov  occurs  regularly  &om  this  time
forward,  promj  that  tho»e  by  whom  they  were
framed  considered  iir^pii,nolaa  autumn,  but  u  the


ASTRONOMIA.

period  whioh  immediately  preceded  ratiimi  and

We  diKorer  alio  in  the  Greek  Dedkil  wrilera
tiBcee  of  a  lavenfbld  diriaion,  althoo^  there  im  no
evidence  to  prore  that  it  wai  erei  gencmlly
adopted.  According  to  thii  diatribn^oo,  lommei
i)  divided  inlo  two  pacta,  and  winter  into  three,
and  we  have,  1.  Spnng  (tof).  %  Early  anminer
(Mpoi).  3.  I«te  nunmer  (dr^pa).  4.  Autumn
(^iSw^irspor  a.  fi«rr$ingpor).  B.  The  plooghlng  la
■owing  leaion  iiporas  i.  impifr6t),  6.  Winter
proper (x<Vi^)- 7.  The  pUnCiDg  arann  (fu-

From  Varro  (R  A.  L  28),  Columella  (ix.  U,
li.  2),  and  Pliny  <iYiiL  S5)  we  infer  that  Julius
Caeiar,  in  hii  Calendar,  lelectcd  an  eight-fold
diTislon,  each  of  the  four  aeuoni  being  lubdirided
into  two,  after  thia  manner: 1. rartf  Jxtfim.


Avfuiivu. 7.  Uiema  Inittam.

We  find  no  trace  in  Homer  of  any  cc
haTing  been  established  between  the  recurrence  of
particulal  astjonomical  phenomena,  and  the  return
of  the  scaioiu.  But  in  Hsiod,  as  remarked
above,  and  in  lubaequent  writen,  the  limita  of  the
diyitiont  which  thev  adopt  are  oirefuUy  defined  by
the  risings  and  aettings  of  particular  aton  w  con-
stollations.  The  following  tabular  amngement
will  afford  a  view  of  the  meet  important  syatona ;


Dmiion  of  the  Seatont  according  io  Htavtd.


Commencement  of anm

(i^ijTot)  or  reaping  ti:

Thraehing  lime


nW^Hiot)  rising  of  Arctuiui  60  daya  after  the  winter


40  days  and  40  niihu  {Erg.  SZS).


IdiactU)


)  riling  of  the  liral  alar  in  Orion  {Erg.  656).


)pT)r«isiTe  heat  (Heliacal)  rismg  of  Sirius  {Erg.  682,  &c.).


Fifty  days  tilet  the  solstice  {Erg,  6i
(l!clia™l)risingofArcturui,  Culmination  of  Siriua and  Orion  (ay.  609>,
The  (morning)  setting  of  the  Pleiadea  (£iy.  333),  of  the  Hyadea,  and  of
Orion  (AV  615).


which  coincidea  with
ploughing  time  (dpoTai),
and  the  eloae  of  navigation


Jcaording  to  fie  Atdhor  of  the  Trraiim  "  D»  Diaeta."
Commencement  of  ipring > The  venal  eqninoi.


SnmfiM  Divuioa,  aceording  to  NippocrtUa  and  otter  Mtdical  WrUert.


Commencement  of  spring


The  Temal  equinoi.
HeliBcal  riais);  of  the  Pleiadca.
Helinral  riaing  of  Siriui.
Hchocal  riaing  of  Arctuma.
Homing  set^g  of  Plciadea.


aeaaon  (Sporoi  svopirrbr).
CoEomeneement  of  winter  proper  {x'1'^)  ~
"  planting  aeaaon  (^uroAdi)

■a  aecordag  to  Eudtmim,  Eudoma,  and  oliir  Aulien  qaoiti  in  Oie  Pan^ngma  o^Oimanx,


FtnC  breeiea  of  Zepbyrua
Appcannoe  of  tbe  awallow
AffptKCItee  of  kite  (Iimrb  ^oir^rw)
Commencraunl  of  aummat
Uidwinlec .....


le°arl7°orAqDariita,

3"ofPiac«a.

17°  of  PiKea  ( End.)  —  22»  of  Piieea  (Bncten.).

U^ofTanrua.  ^  '


AeeerrUiig  to  tit  OitaiJar  0/ Julia  Caaar.
The  breem  of  FaToniai  begin  to  blov

icilnuiigafl!ieF1eiadn[VeiBiliBa}
Mcsning  letting  of  Fidirala
tfomiDg  Kttiiig  of  llie  Pleuidei


VII.  Id.  Feb.  (7  Febnmrv).
Vm.  Kol.  Apr.  (2S  Mnnh).

VII.  EbL  mA  {9  Mdj).

VIII.  KbI.  Jnn.  (21  Juns),
III.  Id.Aiig.  (II  Augtut).
VIII.  Kill.  Oct  (24  September),
III.  Id.  Not.  (11  Norembcr).
VIII.  Kai.Jaii.  (25  Deoember).


i  i'lu^h,


B  the  itnen,  tD  keep  tbon  clean,  ud

iMililiMgi,  both  ntJic  and  priratc,  wen  in  t,  >afe
laiK,  and  not  likely  to  gmim  injury  bjr  fiHiag
ins.  (AiiMDt.  Foht.  tl  S,  «L  Sciinider  ;  PUt
£«.  li.  Plk  7fi9,  763  ;  1%  43.  lit  10.  ■.  1.)  At
AUa  ibcn  nn  len  utjnomi,  firs  fat  the  city
ud  fire  Sot  the  Peiimeeiu,  and  not  twenty,  fifteen
far  the  city  <nd  fire  for  the  PeLneeni,  ei  is  italed
in  teat  editioni  of  Hupocntion.
Sud.  *.  «.  ;  BekkoT,  Anted,  p.  '
t'ttyL.  ImKT^  foL  L  p.  337.)  A  penon  mi
^>l^cd  to  diachugs  thu  bnTdenfome  office  only
an  in  hia  lih.  (Dem.  Fnm.  p.  1461.)  The  ei-
bin  of  the  dotk*  of  the  Alheniui  aitynomi  it
DKHtain.  Ariatotk  nota  (ap,  Harpocr,  L  s.)
thai  Ihey  had  Ibe  nurintendeace  of  the  KaTengcn
(vnpaH^^H),  whidi  woold  nataraliy  belong  to
ihoa  u  aeconnl  of  their  attemdiDg  to  the  cleamiing
•f  the  Miceti,  and  be  likewise  inrunni  ni  thu
ti^^  had  the  tuperintFDdeuce  of  the  fcDinle  mofli-
cana.  It  i*  probable,  hoWBTer,  that  they  had
mW  IS  do  with  the  latter  in  virtne  of  their  duty
■f  pRvning  otder  in  the  Mieett,  amce  the  legu-


the  jni  fliyli  were  r  the  altar  of  pity,  in  the
Bgora,  the  altar  of  ZeuB  'ATOpouir,  the  altan  of
the  twelve  godi,  the  altar  of  the  Ennenides  on
the  Areiopogus,  the  Tfaeseum  in  the  Peiiaecni,
and  the  allac  of  AItemiI^  at  Mnnychia  (Meier,
Alt.  JPnc  p,  404).  Among  the  moit  celebrated
placet  of  aaylmn  in  other  parts  of  Greece,  we  may
moitian  the  temple  of  PoKidon,  In  Laconia,  on
t  Taenanu  (That  i,  12B,  133  j  Com.  Nep.
c  4)  1  the  temple  of  Poeeidon,  in  Calauria
(Plot.  Dmoilk.  29)  ;  and  the  temple  of  Athena
Alea,  in  Tegea  (Pauf.  iiL  S.  g  «).  It  woojd  ap-
'  owever,  that  all  sacred  places  were  sup-
)  protect  an  indiTJdual  to  a  certain  extent,
eren  if  their  right  to  do  lo  was  not  THognised  by
the  lawi  of  the  state,  in  which  they  were  situated.
In  such  cases,  howerer,  as  the  law  gaite  no  pro-
tection, it  seems  to  have  been  considered  lawful  to
use  any  mams  in  order  to  compel  the  indiiiduala
who  had  taken  refuge  to  leaie  the  tanctuary,  ex-
cept dragging  them  ont  by  penonal  violence.
Thn>  it  was  not  nncommon  to  force  a  perioa  from
nn  altar  or  a  ttatne  of  a  god,  by  the  application  of
fire.  (Enrip.  Andnmi.  2S6,  with  SchoL  ;  Plant
MomO.  V.  i.  65.)

In  the  time  of  Tiberioi,  the  number  of  places
postosiDg  the  jus  asyli  in  the  Greek  ciliea  in
Greece  and  Asia  Minor  became  so  numerous,  ni
lerionsly  to  impede  the  administration  of  juitice.
'  ■' ' ■' lenale,  by  the  com-


pear to  haw  Rccniised  tli
laiiB  (■  aflbcd  we  pntec


listens,  *  On^M.  Hmd.  p.  3S,  cd.  St*] . ,

wiib  i)m  dntie*  of  thai  office. (Meier,  Alt  Pro-
m.:.  p.  S3.  &q)

AbY'LUH  (bvAov).  In  the  Oieek  states
the  tonplea,  altan,  nend  gioTea,  and  slataea  of
the  gods  gcBoally  pnsiEmd  the  pririleges  of  pro-
leeung  alana,  driiMi,  and  cnmmals,  who  fled  to
The  laws,  howerCT,  do  not  ap-
(nised  the  rif^t  of  all  such  aacred
le  pntectioii  which  was  claimed  \
bat  to  Anfe  confined  it  to  a  certain  nmnber  of
li  aipli  a.  er  altan^  which  were  considered  in  a  more
npi  I  ial  iiaiiiii  I  to  hafe  the  iavyia,  or  jn  <HfU,
isenin  ad  Thy.  Am.  il  761.)  There  were
Kietml  |itai  ■  1  in  Athens  wl|ieh  posMised  Ihii  pri-
•  >^  ;  of  ^ich  the  beat  known  waa  the  The-
—^w,  ac  temple  of  Tbetena,  in  the  city,  which
w  ek^iy  intoided  for  the  protectiim  of  the  ill-
!■  IT  *  dnea,  who  eonld  take  refnge  in  this  place,
-J  naspe!  tbdr  maateia  to  sell  them  to  some
aher  poaon.  (PlnL  Tlutaa,  36 ;  Sehd.  ad
j,i»,ft  BfA  1309  ;  Heej^h.  and  Soidas,  1;  t>.
O^j^ji) The  other  place*  in  Athens  which  poa-


oF  the  <


r,  limited


0  JDS


few  cities,  but  did  n<fr  entirely  abolish  it,  m
Suetonios  (Jib.  37)  has  crroneonsly  staled.  <See
Tacit.  Atm.  iiL  60 — IT3,  iv.  It ;  and  Emesti's  Ex-
atrm  to  SvcL  TO,.  37.) '

The  asylum  which  Romnlus  it  said  to  bavo
opened  at  Rome  on  the  Capitoline  hill,  between

tion  of  the  city  (Lit.  L  8  1  VelL  plu.  8  'ffionyt
il  15),  was,  according  to  the  legend,  a  place  of
refuge  for  the  inhabitanla  of  other  stales,  nther
than  a  Hnctoary  for  those  who  had  violated  the
laws  of  the  city.  In  the  republican  and  eorly  im-
perial times,  a  right  of  asylum,  such  as  existed  in
Greek  slates,  does  not  appear  to  have  been
I  by  the  Roman  law.  Livy  seemi  to
the  right  (mv.  il)  u  pecidiar  to  the
Greeks  ^~  T'n^am  at  Apoliuat  Deliam  —  eo
jurm  aattfto  quo  not  iemjjia  quae  asyUt  Graeci  ap-
peUati.  By  a  constitutio  of  Antoninns  Pius,  it  was
decreed  that,  if  a  slave  in  a  province  fled  to  the
temples  of  the  gods  or  the  statues  of  the  emperoia,
to  avoid  the  ill-nsage  of  his  master,  the  ptaeses
could  compel  the  master  to  sell  the  abiTe  (Oaius,
L  £3)  ;  and  the  tbiTe  was  not  regarded  by  the  law
u  (t  ninawoy— /HfTiftnu  (Dig.  21.  tit  1.  s.  17.
N 3


IGG  ATELEIA.

S  12)-  Thit  coiutilutio  of  Antoninna  ii  quoteil
in  Juttmlao'i  lutiOiCea  (1.  tit.  9.  «.  2),  with  a
■light  alteration  ;  tha  wordi  ad  aedem  tcujrum  oro
fobttitDted  for  ad  Juna  deontBtf  unca  tba  joiasyii
mi  in  fail  lime  exlended  to  churehea.  Thote
■tavBi  wbo  look  iefiig«  at  the  rtttoe  of  on  em-
peror vera  comideiBd  to  inflict  diignu:«  on  their
(nuler,  u  it  wu  raMoublj  niMwd  that  no
(laTB  wonld  tika  inch  >  itep,  nnSm  he  had
ceived  m7  bad  UMge  (raai  kii  muter.  If
conld  be  prored  tliat  any  indiTidnal  had  iuMigated
the  ilare  of  aaolhsr  to  flee  to  the  tlatae  of  im  tm-
penr,  ha  wu  liable  to  an  action  a/rmpli  ttrm.
(I^.  47.  tit  11.  1.  6.)  The  light  of  o^Iuni
Beenu  to  hare  been  Kneiallj,  but  not  entlrelr^
confiiud  to  liars.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  19.  a.  36.  §  7.
Comp,  Oiiander,  D»  A$^  Gmtiliiait,  in  Gronot.
ntmaiT.  toLtL  \  SiB»n,  Air  fat  ^lyfei,  in  Mim,
it  PAead,  dti  Jatrripi.  vol.  iii, ;  Bringer,  i><  An/-
lonai  OrytHB,  Utit,  et  Abuta,  Lugd.  Bat  1828  ;  C


bom


ATHLETAE.

lutom  dutiea,  and  the  property  I


if  aajlnm  in  the  chiucbea  under
empemr^  tea  Rein,  Dot  Cnmiitalniiil  dtr  Ramtr,
p.  896.)

The  teim  iirvtda  n*  alio  applied  ID  the  H
ri^  from  plond^  (jliOvhSa  jcol  icotA  t^v  ml  K
ftdAanrai^,  irhich  was  lometimei  granted  by
■tate  to  another,  or  eran  to  ijngle  iudiiidualg.  (See
Bockh,  Corj).  Iiucr^-  i-  p.  735.)

ATELEIA  {iiTtXtia,), ;

nnptioa  Imta  lonig  oc
penon  hu  to  peifinn  lowardi  thi
munitie*  may  be  gnnted  either  u
the  ciltien*  of  a  date,  eiemptiog  them  aom  eertain
dntiea  which  woold  olherwin  bo  incumbent  i
them,  ur  the;  ue  gifen  a*  honDmi;  diatinctlong
foreign  hingi,  Bta^  commDnitie*  or  even  priTate
indiriduali.  With  r^ard  to  the  latter  the  ate-
leia  wat  luuitllf  an  exemption  bom  ctutom  dutiei
on  the  importation  or  exportation  of  goodi,  and
vu  giren  aa  a  reward  for  certain  good  lerrin*.
Thm  CroecQi  receired  the  ateleia  at  Delphi
(Hend.  L  S4},  the  Decelcani  at  Spaita  (Herod.
ix.  73),  and  Leucon,  the  mier  of^  Boaponu,  at
Athena.  (Dem.  e.  Lepl.  p.  466,  See)  It  appcon
that  if  a  penon  thus  diitioguiahed,  ot  a  citizen  of  a
tbrcign  commonity  poiKHing  the  ateleia,  took  np  hii
retidencc  in  the  itate  which  had  granted  it,  he  alio
enjoyed  other  priiilcfres,  nieb  u  the  eiemptioa
fnm  the  protection  money,  or  toi  whieh  reaident
alien!  lud  to  pay  at  Athens.  (Hupocrat.  a.  v.
IiTBTtA^t)  Nay  ihii  ateleia  might  eren  become
equiraleat  (o  the  full  franchiie,u,  *,g,  thsByian-
tinea  gave  the  exemption  from  liturgies,  and  the
fronchuo  to  all  Atheaiana  that  might  go  to  fiy^m-
tiom.  (Dem.  Dt  Ooron.  p.  SS6.)  la  many  in-
■tancei  a  poitia]  ateleia,  or  an  exemption  from
cuilom  dutiea,  wai  granted  fer  the  purpoae  of  ei-
coiuaging  eomraercc.  (Thei^hr.  tftor.  33 ;  Schd.
odAHiti^Fbit.  90S,  with  Bttckh-a  nXBiiAM,FiiiL
Earn.  p.  87.)  With  ngaid  to  the  inhabilaati  of  a
■late,  we  muiI,  u  in  the  eaie  of  Athene,  sgsin  dia-
tinguiih  between  two  duiei,  to.  the  reudent
aliens  and  real  cdtixnt.  At  Atheni  all^etident
aljeni  had  to  pay  a  tax  (fWTDuuv)  which  we  may
term  protection-tax,  beeauae  it  wu  the  price  tat
the  protection  they  enjoyed  at  Athma ;  hut  ai  it

and  (or  that  parpeae  to  attract  Mrangen  to  aettle  at
Athene,  many  cf  them  woe  ezamptad  fion  thi>
tax,  i.  I.  enjoyed  the  k^iwi  ftrrouiloii  (Den.  c


. , .  Athenian  ci

be  excmptad.  The  ateleia  enjoyed  by  Athenian
ciliieni  wu  either  a  general  immunity  (irAtia
ItirTwr),  inch  u  wu  granted  to  persou  who  had

to  theii  deacendanta,  oa  in  tbe  caae  of  Hannodina
and  Aiiitt^lon ;  ta  it  wu  a  partial  one  exempting
a  penon  fiom  all  la  certain  Lturgiei,  &om  cettain
cuatom  doltei,  or  from  ecrrice  in  the  army.  Ths
laat  of  theee  irammiitica  wu  1eg^7  enjoyed  by  all
member!  of  the  council  of  the  Five  Hundred  (I'J-
cnrg.  e.  Lmar.  1 1),  and  the  aiehon*  for  the  time
being,  b;  the  larmen  of  the  cnatom  dutiea  (Dem.
e.  Neaer.  13£3),  aiid  by  thoM  who  traded  t^  u*,
Bllhoigh  with  them  the  eiemptirai  muM  hiva  baeat
limited.  (SchDL<>J  Jrut.i>b(.9O£,.ialan<.309;
Suid.  1.  e.  tiiioait  'lU.)  Moat  infonnatiim  ra-
■peeling  the  atdeia  is  derired  fiom  Demosdienea*
speech  againat  Leptioei.  Bat  compare  also  Wolf's
Proligtm.  ad  LipL  p.  IzxL  «a;  ^O^PJiLEam.
p.  8S,  &C.;  Westerinann,  Dt  piUiou  AAememan
ffoKBribiii  tt  Praamit,  p,  S,  Ac  [L.S.]

ATELLA'NAE  FA'BULAE. [CoHOani*.]
ATHENAEUM  (ie^nuor),  a  school  {lyd^)
founded  hj  the  Empamr  Hadrian  at  Rome,  for  tha
promation  of  lileraiv  and  ideutific  itudics  (ngoit-
amfls  ar(iB«),  and  called  Athcnaenm  from  the
town  of  Athena,  which  wu  alill  n^arded  u  tha
■eat  of  intellectual  refinement. The  AClensenm
wu  lituated  on  the  Capitoline  hill. It  was  a  kind
niiersi^  ;  and  a  ilaff  of  ^fesiois,  for  tho
>tii  branches  of  study,  was  regularly  engaged.
Under  Theodoeiui  11.,  for  example,  than  wars
oratora,  ten  grammariana,  fire  a^ihista,  oaa
philosopher,  two  lawyera,  OTJn"" '" "  -=»


Ltie*  were  accuitomed  to  recite  tl
compositians  there,  and  these  prelectiona  were  sonM-
tunea  hononnid  with  the  presence  of  the  cmperota
themselrea.  Then  were  other  places  when  such
tecitationa  wen  mode,  u  the  Library  of  Trajan
[BiBLiOTHEci]  ;  somctimea  also  aroom  waa  hinsd,
and  mode  into  an  andiloritim,  seals  erected,  &a
The  Albenaenm  aeema  to  hare  continued  in  high
repute  till  the  fifth  centnry.  Little  ia  known  of
the  details  of  study  cv  disdpline  in  the  Athenaeum^
but  in  the  constitnlion  of  the  year  370,  there  an
•ome  regulationa  respectiiig  atudenls  in  Romc^  froai
which  it  would  appear  tlml  it  must  have  been  a
>ery  extenalre  and  important  institadoD.  And
this  is  cunfirmed  by  other  atatemenls  contained  in
aome  of  the  Fathen  and  other  andent  authora,
from  which  we  leam  that  young  men  from  alt
parts,  after  finishing  their  naual  acbaol  and  colics


atudiea  in  their  oi


T  piurmcf^  ni


to  Rome  u  a  sort  of  higher  unirenity,  for  tha

pnipoie  of  completing  their  education. (Aur.  Vict.

Caa.  14;  DionCIasa.  IxxiiLlTj  Capibjin. FstfiL

11,  Oordiaa.  Sen.  3  ;  Idunoiid.  Alac  Smiar.  35  ;

Cod.  Thcod.  1*.  tit  9.  B.  1.^  [A.  A]

ATHLE'TAE  {iB\inid,  lUXirr^psi),  wera  por-

u  who  contended  ia  the  public  nmea  of  tba

Oreeka  and  Romans  for  the  [liiea  (dSAo,  whenca

the  name  of  dHAirrol),  whtch  wen  given  to  thoaa

'  '  a  contesta  of  agility  and  atrensth.

in  the  later  period  of  Qredoo  hia-

_  the  Bomaoi,  pnipeiiy  confined  te

thoH  persona  who  entirely  devoted  Uemselvea  ta

eoune  of  training  vUch  might  fit  them  to  czmI


ATHLETAB.
k  nl  toMKta,  aod  vbo,  in  bet,  mad*  atUetic

iwi  OcB'  pnfbum. Tke  athlsUa  diSsred,

\bmtimt,  ban  the  qffamiMai  (btwnarti),  who
Bjy  paiaeil  nonMie  enreue*  Ibi  tiw  nke  of
"miiiibg  ikea  hMhh  and  bodily  itccnytli,  aad
tW,  ^Mgh  tkcT  HmctDDei  contended  ^  the
jnut  ki  ut  panic  giDKi,  did  not  denle  their
«Me  lin%  Uka  tka  ■tUelu,  to  im|i>nng  lot
tboc  1— ^TTtT  la  carij  times  then  doet  ant  ap-
piv  to  ha**  been  Wj  diiliiictian  between  the

■diridBab,  wD»  obtuaed  |iriie*at  tin  gnat  db-
Mal  gaaM  of  the  (Jnelu,  were  penau  of  cim-
•id«a&^


ATHLETAE.


1B7


nn  n  nad  that  PbajllDi,  of  Cntona,  who  had
ikria  oBUiiwtad  in  tbe  Prthiao  gamea,  commanded
■  nmd  at  the  battle  of  SaJamb  (Herod.  riiL  47  ;
Pw.  z.  9.  I  1)  i  ud  that  Borieiu,  of  Rhode*,
*b*  bad  ob^Dcd  the  prin  in  all  of  the  finr  great
fadrala,  waa  i,«l*l»alod  in  Oreeee  for  hi*  oj^naition
>  lW  Atbaman*.  (pBUTi.  7.  S  1.  S-)  Bat  ai
Ue  i^iridaala,  lAo  obtained  ''


.  of  the  gymnaaia,  they  would
of  gaining  th*  rielixy.  Thiu
anae  ■  daaa  of  ndindnal^  to  vbom  the  term
athletaa  waa  nnpciated,  and  who  beame,  in
inne  of  time.  We  ml  j  pcoona  who  cmtended  in
IfepBhlicgm*;

AlUeOw  wB«  fiitt  inBodoced  at  K<Hne,  e.  c
IM,  B  the  game*  cilubiled  li;  M.  Fnlriiu,  on
the  I  iBii  Imirin  of  tli*  Aeltilian  wn.  (Lir.  nxix.
a.) AouUa*  Pl^aa,  after  th*

•  (VaL  Mai.  il  *.
a  alaa  ezliibited  b;  Scamu,  in  &  c  59 ;

•  with  vhkh  Julioi
. eicadofaaaileglof

r  tbtee  da;^  and  which


(SaeL  Jid.  39.) Unda  the

, and eipedally  nnda Nero,

'f  ind  of  tlie  QreeiBit  gunea,

4ae  maaaied  greatly  in  Italy,

fi _  aad  Aua  Minor  ;  and  many  inaxiptiona

mjailiag  then  hare  anne  dawn  to  na,  which
■hia  that  pnlewinal  atbletae  were  Tery  nnmer-
■■■,  and  that  they  enjned  leTaal  pririlege*.
They  fiwiBd  at  Beioa  a  hind '


^ ._UT,  in  a  CDToed  place  oiled  lyitn)

(VitnT.  li.  10)  i  and  that  they  bad  a  [lendent,
whe  waa  eaUed  ^^laulai,  and  alee  ifx<*p<fc-

ThBB  al*'''***  who  eooqneced  in  any  of  the
pcai  Mliiaml  feilinl*  of  the  Oneka  wen  called
liiiiarnii  (tcpwucai),  and  nctired,  ai hai  beenal-
^y  maaitiil.  thegnateA  boDoun and  nwaid*.


hianatiT

in  the  walk  for  hii  lecqition,  Co  intimate,  aajn
Plntarch,  tliat  the  itate  which  poaieued  ineh  a
citiMohadnooccagiouforwalli.  HeaiiiaUypaBed
through  the  wall*  in  a  diaiiot  diawn  by  finr  white
honee,  and  went  alom  tbe  principal  ilreet  of  the
atjr  to  the  tenple  of  the  guardian  deity  of  the
ilale,  when  hymni  of  victory  were  gnng.  Tho*a
gamea,  which  gare  the  ctHtqneron  the  ri»>t  of  mch
■n  entrance  into  the  city,  were  called  itdaiHei
(from  tlinkairiiii).  Tbia  tenn  wai  originally  con-
fined to  tbe  fonr  great  Qredan  feKiTali,  the
Olymgriut,  Uthnuan.  Nemean,  and  Pythian  ;  but
WBi  B&erwanU  amJied  to  other  public  gamea,  a*,
jbr  instance,  to  thoae  inttitnted  in  Alia  Minur.
{Suet.  A'er.  3S  ;  Dion  Cul  liiiL  20 ;  Plut.  Smp.
iLS.  §2;  Plin.^.x.  119,130.)  In  the  Greek
■tatia  the  Tictm  in  ihee*  gamea  not  only  obtained
the  giealertglory  and  reqiect,  but  alio  inlatantial
reward*.  Thej  wcr»  geneiallj  relieved  from  the
payment  of  tan*,  and  alia  enjoyed  the  fint  uat
(Tp«i)pla)inaUpaU>cgaiD(«Bndipectac]e*.  Their
(tatDca  wen  frequently  erected  at  the  CMt  of  the
■tale^  in  the  most  freqaaited  part  of  the  city,  ai
the  maricet-piace,  the  gynuiaua,  and  the  neigb-
bosrhood  of  the  temple*.  (Pan*.  Ti.  13.  S  1,  ni.
17.  §S.)  At  Athens,  Bccordin^taa  law  of  Solon,
the  conquBron  in  the  Olympic  game*  wen  re-
warded with  a  ycaa  of  600  diachnme,  and  the
conqnerora  in  the  Iithmian,  with  one  of  100
diachmae  (Diog.  La&t  i  &&  ;  PluL  SoL  23)  ;
and  at  Sparta  they  had  the  privilege  of  fighting
near  the  penrai  of  the  lung.  {Plat  £jc  22.)
The  privilege*  of  the  athlelae  wen  [Hesarved  and  in-
cmied  by  Angn>tu*{8net.^iisr.  45)  ;  and  tbe  fol-
lowing emperon  ajipeai  to  have  always  treated  them
with  considenble  Sivaur.  Thoee  who  conqaned
in  the  games  called  iseloaCici  received,  in  the  time
of  Trajan,  a  anm  from  the  state,  termed  optmia.
(Plin.^.z.l]9,12a;  compan Vitruv. ii. /Vnef^)
By  a  Ttaeript  of  Dioclelian  and  Maiimian,  thoH
athletae  who  had  obtained  in  the  eacred  gamea
{ncri  dRiamnu,  by  which  i*  probably  meant  tbe
uetaiHd  hidi)  not  less  than  three  crown^  and  had
not  bribed  their  antagonists  to  give  them  the  vic-
tory, enjoyed  immunity  from  all  tana.  (Cod.  10.
Ut.53.>

Tbe  term  atbletae,  thoogh  sometime*  applied
met^horically  to  other  combatanCa,  waa  properly
limited  to  those  who  contonded  for  the  prise  in  the
five  foUawing  contests:  —  1.  Auun^  (SpJ/u>t,
caniit).  2.  W™iii-g  (iilMj,  iHcta).  3.  Boriog
[rvyiii,piigilatiu).  4.  Tliepeiibt(Ubs(W>Ta«Aov),
or,  as  the  Romani  failed  it,  guimgitirtitim,  5.  The
poKcralmm  (TafyK^nor).  Of  all  tbeie  an  account
ii  given  in  (eparale  ailicle*. [STiDitiM  j  Ldct*  ;

pDOUiATn*  ; FSNTITULON  i PANCRATIUM.]

These  contests  were  divided  into  two  kinds  —  the
sBwrv  (fiop^  Aop^tpa),  and  the  l^  ("af^
(m^^fpa).  Under  the  former  were  incloded
wrestling,  boxing,  and  the  oicrcises  of  the  pancra-
tiom,  wUch  consisted  of  wiestling  and  iniing  com-


g,  and  the  aqiaiata


pmtathlon,  snch  as  leaping,  ttiowiDgthe  discna,
Ac (PlaLC([r.  viiip.833,£>6lyi.p-271-)

Gr^  attention  wa*  paid  to  the  baining  of  the
athlelae.  They  were  geaeially  trained  in  the
palaeatraa,  which,  in  the  Orecian  slates,  woe
^■Unct  place*  fins  the  gymnaaia,  thoo^  tlwy


168  ATIMIA.

Ii>ve  beee  fraqnnillj  amfnnnded  bj  modem
wriMti.  [Palakstiu.]  Theii  visniMi  wen
■iiperiittaided  bj-  tha  gymiiMiareli  (•fviavinipxil'),
and  their  diet  waa  ngnkted  by  the  iliptei  (ixilr-
■nji),  [AlirTAK.]  According  to  Pmnnim  (tl
7.  S  3),  the  Bthletw  did  not  ucienllj  eat  m«t,
but  princjinlly  liTed  opon  fresh  choflH  (rvphv  ix
rir  raljfirr)  ;  and  Diogena  LaOtiiu  [nii.  IS,
13)  infoimi  ui  that  thek  origiml  diet  ooniiited
of  diied  figi  (io^iin  {iNuTt),  molit  or  nev  cbeoe
(Ti:(wii  byfinTi),  and  wheat  (Tupoii),  The  eating
of  meat  b;  ttie  atbletae  ii  nid,  according  to  tome
writert  (Pant  L  e,),  to  have  been  But  introduced
by  Dronieofl  of  StjntpfaaJnB,  in  Arcadia  ;  ani
cording  to  othen,  by  tho  philonpher  Pythngoras,
or  by  an  aliplo  of  that  name.  (Diog.  LsCri.  l.e.)
Aceordiog  to  Oalen  (Di  VaL  TWwf.  iii.  1),  the
nthlctae,  who  practised  (he  aeven  eTerciies  (0apti)i
dtfATrrnX),  ato  pork  and  a  paiticalar  kind  of  broad  ;
and  from  a  nmaik  of  Diogeoea  tbs  Cynic  (Diog.
Lalnt.  n.  <9},  it  would  appear  that  in  hii  time
beef  and  pork  fanned  the  Mdinary  diet  of  the
athletaa.  Beef  i>  alM  mentioned  by  PUto  (Dt
Rtp.  L  p.  33B)  at  the  food  of  the  atUetae ;
a  writer  quoted  by  Atheoaeui  (ix.  p  402,  i
relatei  that  a  Theban  who  lired  upon  goal*'  fleih
become  io  ttnmg,  that  he  vai  enabled  to  over-
come all  the  athletw  of  hi>  time.  At  the  end
of  the  eiecciKi  of  each  day,  the  athlelaa  were
obllgnl  to  take  a  certain  quaulily  of  Inod,  which
wu  uiunlly  called  irayiaifiefla  and  imrfnin-po^iia,
at  ^niot  T)ioi^  (Arirt.  PoL  liiL  i)  ;  after  which,
they  were  accuilomed  to  gleep  for  a  long  while.
The  quantity  of  animal  food  which  lome  cdebratod
athletae,  auch  a<  Mile,  Theagenea,  and  Aitydamaa,
are  said  to  hare  eaten,  appcan  to  oi  quite  incre-
dible. (Athen.x.pp.41S,413.)  Thefbodwbich
they  ate  prat  usnally  diy,  and  is  called  by  Jurenal
ooliphia  (ii.  B3).

The  athletae  wen  anointed  witli  oil  by  the
■liplae,  preTiouily  to  enteiing  the  palaettra  and
contending  ia  the  public  games,  and  were  aecua-
tomcd  l0  contend  naked.  In  the  deKTiption  of
the  gaum  given  in  the  twenty-third  bock  of  the
Iliad  (f.  683, 7 10),  the  coDibatanlt  an  said  to  hare
worn  a  girdle  about  their  loini ;  and  the  same
practice,  as  we  Icun  fnm  Thncydidci  (L  G),
anciently  prerailed  at  the Olympic  garnet,  but


Dot  give  his  o[


This  labjcct  is  one  of  such  extent  that  nothing
bat  an  outline  can  ben  bo  giren  ;  further  patticu-
Urtare  contained  inthennicletlsTMHiA,  Nikia,
OLVJiriA,  and  Ptthia  ;  and  the  whole  subject
is  treatad  meat  elaboratelT  by  Knnte,  Dia  6^-
mHUi  md  AgoKuHk  der  UtUtaa,  Leipiig,  1841.
ATIILO'THETAE.  [Aoonothitak.]
ATI'MIA  (dri^ln).  A  ciliien  of  Atheni  had
the  power  to  eieniso  all  the  rights  and  priiilega
of  a  citiscn  as  long  as  he  wai  not  suffering  under
any  kind  of  atimia,  a  word  which  in  meaning
nearly  aniwen  to  our  oatbwry,  in  as  much  as  a

Stion  {brfeiled  by  it  the  protection  of  the  lawi  of
I  country,  and  mostly  all  the  rights  of  a  citizen
also.  The  atimia  oeeun  in  Attica  as  early  as  the
legislation  of  Bolon,  wilbout  the  term  itself  being
in  any  way  defined  in  the  lawt  (Dcm.  e.  Ati*-
ioerat.  p.  640),  which  thaws  that  the  idn  coo-
nected  with  it  mutt,  even  at  that  time,  have  been
familiar  to  the  Athenians,  and  this  idea  vat  pro-
bably that  of  a  complete  civil  death  ;  that  it,  an
bdividiul  labooring  under  atimia,  togetha  wiUi


ATIMIA.
all  that  belonged  to  bim  (his  childroi  as  wdl  ai  hi*

eoperty),  had,  in  the  eye*  of  the  state  and  the
ws,  no  existence  at  alL  This  atimia,  undoubt-
edly the  only  one  in  nriy  timet,  may  be  termed  a
total  one,  and  in  cases  where  it  wat  inflicted  as  a
punishment  for  any  pBrticular  crime,  was  gene-
rally also  perpetual  and  hereditary ;  hence  Demo-
sthenes, in  speaking  of  a  person  sufiering  under  i^
often  uses  the  eipntiion  itnAinf  St>|Uoi,  or  i.w\mt
ini^rai  (c.  Mid.  p.  542,  c.  Ari^.  p.  779,  t  MvL
p.  346).  A  detailed  enumenlion  of  the  righu  of
which  an  atimos  was  deprived,  it  given  by  Ae»-
chinet  (e.  TVatordt.  pfi.  44,  46).  He  was  not
allowed  to  hold  any  civil  or  [neatly  offlco  what-
ever, either  in  the  city  of  Athens  ittelf,  or  in  any
thin  the  dominion  of  Atheni;  he  could  not
as  herald  or  at  amhamdoc ;  he  ooald
tpcak  either  in  tile  publie
assembly  or  in  the  senal^  he  wat  not  even  allowed
to  appear  within  the  extent  of  the  agora ;  he  waa
excluded  &im  Tiutii^  the  public  tanctnariet  aa
well  as  from  taldng  part  in  any  pnUic  sacri&ce ;  lie
amid  DMther  bring  an  action  oguntt  a  penon  bnm
whom  he  had  sustained  an  injury,  n<H  appear  aa  ■
witness  in  any  of  the  courts  of  justice ;  nor  could,
on  the  other  hand,  any  me  bring  an  actiim  against
him.  (Compan  Dem.  e.  Ntatr.  p  1353,  e.  Timo-
ont.  p.  739,  Dt  Lib.  Rkod.  p.  200,  PUIip.  iiL
p.  122,  c  Mid.  ^  342,  Lys.  c  Aitdoc  p.  222.)
The  right  which,  in  point  of  &ct,  included  most  of
those  which  we  have  hen  enumerated,  was  that
of  taking  part  in  the  popular  assembly  {Xtytir
and  ypi^a).  Hence,  tiiis  one  right  it  moit  be-
qoently  the  only  one  whicb  is  mentioned  at  being
forfeited  by  atimia.  (Dem.  o.  nnoonrt  pp.  715,
717 ;  Aeachin.  e.  Tinardi.  p.  54,  Sk.  \  Andocid.
Dt  MpL  p.  36  1  Dem.  &  .4MfnK.  pp.  602,  604.)
The  service  in  the  Athenian  armies  wat  not  only
regarded  in  the  light  of  a  duty  which  a  ciiiacn
had  to  perfvm  towards  the  state,  but  at  a  right
and  a  privilege ;  of  which  therefore  the  alinuit  wu
likewise  deprived.  (Dem.  c  Unseroi.  p.  715.)
When  we  hear  that  an  atimos  had  no  tigfat  to
claim  the  protection  of  the  tawi,  when  tunering
injuries  from  others,  wo  must  not  imagine  that
it  waa  the  intention  of  the  law  to  expose  the
atimos  to  the  insnits  or  ill-trealaient  of  his  fhrraer
fellow-eitiiens,  or  to  enconnge  the  people  to  mal-


Gorg.  p  506)  ;  but  all  that  the  law
was,  that  if  any  such  thing  happened,  the  atimot
bad  no  right  to  claim  the  protection  of  the  lain.
Wb  have  above  nferred  to  two  lawt  mentioned  by
Demcathcnet,  in  which  the  eliildnn  and  the  pnpcrty
of  an  atimot  wero  included  in  the  atimisL  As  re-
gardi  the  ehildnn  or  heirs,  the  inbmy  camo  to
them  at  an  inbcrilanc*  which  they  could  not
avoid.  [Haaas,]  But  when  we  read  of  the  pco-
perty  of  a  man  being  indadsd  in  the  atimia,  it
can  only  mean  that  it  sharod  the  lawless  eharW-
ter  of  its  ownu,  that  is,  it  did  not  enjoy  the  pro-
tection of  the  law,  and  could  not  be  mortgaged.
The  property  of  an  atimos  for  a  positive  crinie,
such  as  thooe  mentioned  below,  wat  probably  never
confiscated,  but  only  in  the  case  of  a  public  dcbtm',
as  we  shall  see  hereaRer ;  and  when  Andocidf*  (tfs
Myit.  p.  36)  uses  the  expretuon  ftrifUH  ^ta  vit  wii-
lion,  t4  U  xM^iora  ttx"*,  the  contrary  which  ho
had  in  view  can  only  have  been  the  oise  of  a  public
debtor. On  tho  whole,  it  appean  to  have  been


TW  giting  and  ancptiiig  of  brib«^  tha  smbenle-
Mott  (f  nbtie  maaej,  maniflcM  pioirfa  «t  aiinidiai
■  ife  Afcpn  of  hu  cooBUy,  bbe  wiawi,  &lie
«i  I  »liiM,  and  lad  ooodoct  towBrdi  unnli  (An-
inoi.  L  c.) :  DMceoTCT,  if  ■  penoD  eithu  b;  dead
•T  b;  ward  faijnnd  or  mnhed  ■  nwgiNmta  while
ka  «■■  pribraui^  tba  datiai  tt  bit  oStn  (D«in.
c  tfU.  p.  &34, /Va  JWyabp.  p.  200) ;  if  a  >  jodn
ka  Wd  bccB  rdhr  <^  fBHiafitT  (^-.JtfU.  p.  543);


™tn.71S),

«faiaad  llwt  the  TrieouDg  of  any  kind  Df  atanuri
ikiild  iMTtT  ba  propoaad  in  tha  pablic  ananUj,
miaa  aa  aMiiiilIj  ooosatii^  of  at  Icait  6000
ckiical  bad  greriodilv.  in  astnt  delibanlion.
And  ereu  than
»  amid  aolj  ba  diacDMed  in  la  iir  a*  ibe
oaate  aad  pM|le  tMMwbt  Jtofet,  It  wu  anljr  in
tiaa  when  dw  rcpablie  wai  Ibnatened  by  gnttt
drnga-  ibat  an  atioiiia  mi^ht  bope  to  [Korar  hii
lot  ngbu,  and  in  ncfa  cmumituicaa  tha  alimoi

i%bH.  (XcD.  H^m.  ii.  3.  i  II 1  Asdocid.  L  e.)
A  wiiMMt  kind  of  atimia,  which  tfaongh  in  ill
Htert  B  t(^  ana,  lattcd  Dolj  nnti]  the  pmoa
■^ect  to  it  hlfiDcd  tbaaa  dntiei  foi  tbe  nrglect
it  wUch  it  had  bean  inflicted,  wu  not  lo  mnch  a
paiiahii  lit  for  any  puticokr  cnme  mi  ■  menu  of
I  Mpillint  ■  BMO  U  nbiiiit  lo  tbe  lawi.  Tbii  wu
i^atiBiaef  public  debton  Anyatiianof Athem
who  >w«d  miBej  to  tha  public  traamny,  whathar
kii  debt  anaa  fiaii  a  &na  to  which  he  bad  been
oadcaiDed,  w  fraa  a  pan  he  had  taken  in  any
lon^  of  tbe  adniniMiatian,  or  from  hia  baring
(Icdaed  binaelf  to  tba  Tcpoblic  tor  inotber  penon,
ntBartMBoftoalalimiBif  hanfbaad  topsy  or
coald  net  p7  the  pnn  which  vaa  dne.  Hii  cbO-
dnn  daring  hii  tiietime  ware  not  included  in  hii
■tjaia;  they  tcoainad  Mt^im.  (Dem.  e.  naxrn.
p.  1)32.)  If  ha  paaaraed  in  his  lefoal  to  pay
beyaod  the  tiae  of  tba  ninth  ptytany,  hu  debt
■«  doabled,  and  bii  pcuperty  wu  taken  and  told.
fAsdocid.  1.  C  Dam.  e.  NimKrat.  p.  125B,  c.
Sma:  p.  1347.)  If  the  nnn  obtained  by  ^e
^c  WM  lalBciMt  la  pi^  the  debt,  tbe  atimia
»Ma  tD  ban  oeawd  ;  bM  (f  not,  the  atimia  not
Mly  riHWiin'-*  to  tbe  daa^  of  tha  poblie  debtor,
tat«M  nharited  l^biibein,  and  laaled  until  the
^ht  waa  Mid  oC  (Dam.  e.  Androl.  p.  603,  corn-
pan  BOikh.  PM.  BfM.  tf  AOau,  p.  391,  3d
adn. :  and  Hmaa.)  Thia  atimia  for  poblie  debt
waa  ■Jiiii  I  iim  »  aceoanaiued  by  impriionnient,  u
B  tk  oat  of  AldbiaoB  and  Cimon  ;  bnt  whetber
■  (aeb  a  tav,  at  the  death  of  the  priioner,  bit
ctdtfatB  woe  likewiaa  imnieoned,  ii  micertain.
If  a  prfarm  living  in  aliinu  fbr  public  debt  peti-
nwdte  be  irieaaed  from  hia  debt  or  hii  atimia,
W  I—I—"  nfajaet  lo  tuttiiis :  and  if  another  pet-
tm  ^ade  tbe  attempt  lot  him,  he  thereby  Ibrjaited
km  eWB  jaiiyetty  ;  if  tbe  proadroi


ATIMIA.  169

The  oniy  bnt  almoit  inpracticabis  mode
of  obtaining  leleaie  «nu  that  mantimied  above  in
connactiiHi  with  the  total  and  peipetual  atimiik

A  third  and  oniy  partial  kind  of  otinui  depriTcd
the  peraon  on  whom  it  wu  inflicted  only  of  a  por-
tion  of  fail  rigfati  ai  a  citizen.  (Andocid.  dtlUgtU
p.  17  and  S6.)  It  wu  called  the  irripia  mrri
Wf^OTotir,  became  it  wu  ipecified  in  ereiy  linDla
laie  what  particular  right  wai  fbcfeited  l^Uia
atimci.  The  Allowing  caaei  are  upready  men-
tioaed :  —  If  a  man  came  forward  at  a  publie  ao-
ciuer,  and  aftarwardi  either  dropped  the  chaive  oi
did  not  obtain  a  fifth  of  tha  Totea  in  &Tonr  of  Ui
aecnntioD,  ha  wu  not  only  liable  to  a  £na  of
1000  drachmae,  but  wu  anbjactad  to  an  a^mia
which  dapriTod  hun  of  the  right,  in  fiinm,  to  ap-

that  in  whicfa  be  had  been  dc&ated  or  which  be
bod  giren  np.  (Dem.  o.  Ari^ag,  f.  803)  Har-
pocrat  I.  V.  A^no'  -wia^)  If  Eui  aecuation  had
been  a  Tpo^  Lr^tUa,  he  alio  loat  tbe  right  of
Tiiiting  paiticalar  ten][iea.  (Andodd.  ii  Mj/ti.  p.
17.)  Some  caaea  are  alio  mentioned  in  which  an
accoier,  thongb  he  did  not  obtain  a  fifth  of  the
Yotei,  wu  not  nlnected  to  any  pnniihiuent  wbat-
ercT.  Snch  wu  ua  cue  in  a  cnaiga  broogfat  bfr-
fon  the  first  archon  reapecting  the  ul-ticatnwnt  of
parenti,  otphani,  or  hauremaa.  (Meier,  dt  Ban.
Dtwaat.  p.  133.)  In  other  eaaei  the  accnaer
wu  merely  (abject  to  the  fine  of  1000  diachmoo,
without  incnrrinB  any  degree  of  atimia;  (Pollux,
TiiL  S3.)  Bat  the  law  does  not  upear  to  hare
alwayi  besn  itrictly  obaerred.  (BGckh,  AilL
Meat.  i^Alimi,  p.  3B1,  2d  ed.)  Andoddei  men-
iome  other  kindi  of  partial  atimia,  bnt  they
to  hare  had  only  a  temporary  qiplicatian  at
tbe  md  of  the  Paloponneaian  war ;  and  the  paa-
■age  (Da  MytL  p.  36)  ii  to  obacnie  or  oorrop^
that  nothins  ran  be  inferred  ftmn  it  with  any  cer-
tainly. {Wacbmntii,  ll^lea.  AUrtk.  YoL  ii.  p.
198,  2d  ed.)  Partial  atimia,  when  once  inflicted,
laited  during  the  whole  of  a  man'i  lije.

Tbe  children  of  a  man  who  had  been  pot  to
death  by  the  htw  were  alao  atimoi  (Dem.  o.  Arit-
tog.  p.  779  ;  compare  HiBa«)  ;  bat  tbe  nature  or
duration  of  tbii  atimia  ii  unlinovn.

penm,  trnda-  whaterer  kind  of  atimia  ho
Touring,  continued  to  exerdie  any  of  tbe
rbich  he  had  forfeitsd,  be  might  immedi-
ately ba  oabjected  to  Imytryii  or  (ricifit ;  and  if
hii  tranigreuion  wu  prored,  he  might,  without
any  further  proeeedinn,  ba  puniihed  mimediately.
The  offence*  which  were  puniihed  at  Spaita  '
ith  atimia  ore  not  at  well  knowa  ^  and  in  many
la  it don  not  leem  to  have  been  expreatly
mentioned  by  the  law,  but  to  hare  depended  en-
tijely  upon  public  opinion,  whether  a  pemm  wu
'"  be  coniidered  and  boated  u  an  otinioe  or  not.
genenJ,  it  appean  that  arary  one  who  rcAied
Uto  according  to  the  national  inititutiou  loat
)  lighti  of  a  full  dtiien  (iiiatat,  Xencph,  it
Rip.  Load.  I.  7  i  iii.  3). It  wai,  howerer,  a
positiTe  law,  that  whoever  did  not  give  or  amid
lot  give  fail  contribntion  towardi  the  aymitia,  liwt
lit  righli  u  B  citizen. (Arittot  Polii.  iL  6.  p.
i9,  ed.  Gottling.) The  higheit  degree  of  in&ray
e!l  upon  the  coward  (rp^oi)  wbo  aither  ran  away
from  the  field  of  battle,  or  returned  homo  without
the  rett  of  the  army,  ai  Ariitoderau  did  after  tbe
battle  of  Thermopylae  (Hctod.  >iL  231),  though
in  thii  caie  tbe  inbmy  itael^  at  well  «o  iti  bumi-


m


ATLANTEa


lialiiij  ccoMqaencei,  mre  muiifest];  tha  mere
effect  of  public  o[uiiioii,  and  laited  until  Die  pemm
Ubotiriiig  under  it  dutuiguiitied  himielf  fa;  »nii
•igria]  explait,  and  thm  wiped  off  ths  atain  from
bu  niune.  The  Spartan,  irho  in  Spbacteria  bad
jnuTuidored  tn  the  AtEieniuia,  wen  punisbed  Tith
k  kind  of  sliiniB  which  deprired  Ihem  of  tfaor
dainu  to  public  office*  <a  pnniibment  commoa  to
all  kind!  of  atimia),  and  Rndsred  than  iniuable
of  making  anj  lairM  pnicbue  ar  lale.  After-
wardi,  howtter,  they  recoTimd  thai  righti,
(Thnc  T.  54.)  UnmBrried  man  were  aim  aub-
ject  to  a  certain  degree  of  inbmj,  in  (a  br  u  thej
were  depriTed  of  the  (nutonur;  banoun  of  old  ige,
were  excluded  from  taking  part  in  the  cclebcatioD  of
certain  fMtivali,  aud  occaumally  compelled  to  ting
defamatory  longi  againft  thenuaWei.  No  itimdi
-wu  alloired  to  marry  the  duubta  of  a  Spartan
citiien,  and  mu  thui  anapdbd  to  andore  the
ignominiaa  of  an  old  bacbelor.  (Pint.  Apail  30 1
MUUer,  Dor.  iv.  4.  g  3.)  Althoogh  an  aCimoi  at
t  to  a  gre«t  many  n-'-*-'  — — ^-
Ution  cannot  be  call
a  itate  of  in&my  pmpoly
Bren  the  atimia  of  a  cowaid  cannot  be  conndeied
equivalent  to  the  ciTil  death  of  an  Athenian  atimoa,
for  we  Gnd  bim  itlll  acting  to  wme  citoit  u  a
d^iea,  tboogb  alwaja  in  a  manner  vlucfa  made
hie  infamy  manifest  to  erery  one  irho  aaw  Mnu

(Leljreld,  ZJ«/iy^iniaa  Jiirs.^ttuo,Anutdod.
1835  ;  Wachnnolli,  NdUn.  AUerik.  &c  toL  it  p.
19S,  fte.,  2d  adit. ;  Meiar,  Dt  Bomi  Diamat.  p.
101,  &c  ;  Sditknann,  Dt  Oomil.  A&.  p.  G7,  &c
tnnd. ;  Hennanit,  PoUt.  AtiL  of  Orttee,  g  121 ;
Heier  nnd  Schtimum,  Alt.  Pnc  p.  Mi.  On  the
SjATtan  aUmia  in  particular.  Me  Wadumntfa,  ftc;,
ToL  iL  p.  lfi£,  &C,  2d  ed: ;  MUUer,  Dor.  iiL  10.
g  S.)  [L.  S.]

ATLANTES  (SrAwrtO  and  TELAUfyNES
(TfAi^uvrer),  an  tenofl  tued  in  ■rohitecbire,  iJie
former  by  the  Oreeki,  the  latter  by  the  Bomana, '
to  deaignnte  thoae  male  fignrea  vbicb  are  lomctimea
£inciMIy  nied,  like  the  female  Carjatiiei,  in  place
of  colmnna  (ViDnr.  Ti.  7.  g  G>  Schneid.).  Both
wordi  an  derired  from  iKljrai,  and  tha  fvmer
evidcntlT  rofert  to  tbe  &bla  of  Allai,  who  rap-
ported  the  Tsnlt  of  bearen,  the  lattai  fitting  to  tha
strength  of  tbe  Telamonian  Ajax.

The  Giedc  architecU  need  ancb  fignie*  (paringly,
and  ganaially  vilb  iome  adl^tiiin  to  tbe  chacaeler


ATRAMBNTUM.

of  the  building. They  ware  much  man  &«ely  naed
in  tripodi,  thronea,  and  ao  forth.

They  were  alio  applied  aa  ornamenti  to  the  aide*
of  a  Tcaael,  haiing  the  enxannce  of  aopporting  tbo

Xworiu  1  ai  in  the  abip  of  Hiero,  detcnbed  by
iaeiu(T.  p.aoa.b).

A  repreaentation  of  auch  figuna  ia  given  in  tbe
preceding  woodcut,  copied  from  the  laidarium  in
the  hatha  at  Pompeii :  auoiha  eiamjJe  of  them  ii
ID  the  tempia  of  Jupiter  Olympint  at  Agrigatnm.

(MiUlcT,  ArdaoL  d.  Kmit,  §  279  ;  Mauch,  da
GruiA.B.IiSm.liaa-OrdniBigtm,f.Ba.) [P.S.]

ATRAHENTUM,  a  teim  a^licsble  to  any
black  colouring  anbetance,  for  whatever  puipoae  it
may  be  omA  (Plant  AfoittlL  L  3.  102 ;  Cic  da
NaL  Dtor.  n.  GO),  like  the  pJAor  of  tbe  Oneka.
(Dem.  dt  O/r.  p.  313.)  There  were,  however,
three  principal  kinda  of  aoamentum,  one  called
itirariiim,  or  tetiptonitn  (b  Greek,  Tpa^lr
fi  Aw),  another  called  niAiriiim,  tbe  third  Uelormm,
A  tranattnm  lAranmM  waa  what  we  call  wridng.-
ink. (Mar.  ^.  iL  1.  236 ;  Petron.  102 ;  Cic.  ad

by  aboemakan  fcr  dyeing  leather. (Plin.  N.  tf,
ndv.  12. 1.  32.) Thia  al


■utorinm,  that  ii,  of  poigtm,  as  in  Cicen)  (ail
£.21.) ■ ■


WB>  uaed  by  painten  fiir  lome  purpoaea,  apparently
ai  a  tort  of  vsroiah.  (Plin.  N.  N.  mvL  4.  a.  25,
Ac)  Tha  Scholiaat  on  Ariatophanca  {PUL  277)
aaja  that  the  courts  of  juatdce,  or  Su£a<m^f>ia,  in
Athnii  were  called  each  after  aome  letter  of  tbe
alphabet :  one  alpha,  another  beta,  a  third  gamroa,
and,  10  DO,  and  that  agmnat  the  doora  of  each
ImaoT^piar,  tha  letter  which  belonged  to  it  wna
written  initpv  S^ifuiri,  in  "  red  ink."  Thia  "  red
ink,"  or  "  red  dye,"  could  not  of  courae  be  called
anamentun.  Of  tbe  ink  of  the  Greeki,  however,
nothing  certain  it  known,  eieepC  what  may  be
gathered  from  the  paoaage  of  Demoithenei  ^ora
referred  to,  which  will  be  noticed  agun  below.
The  ink  of  the  £gyptiaiu  wai  eridendy  of  a  very
ai^Mrior  kind,  lince  it*  colour  and  brightaeoa  re-
main to  thia  day  in  eoma  qiedmena  of  puyii.
The  initial  character*  of  tbe  pagea  are  oStta  wnttoi
in  red  ink.  Ink  among  the  Bomaai  i>  £nt  fonnd
mentioned  in  the  paaiagea  of  Cicero  and  Plairtoa
above  referred  to.  Pliny  infmna  ug  bow  it  waa
made.  He  nya,  "  It  waa  made  of  aoot  in  varioua
waya,  with  btunt  reain  or  pitch  :  and  for  thii  pur-
pose," he  adda,  "  they  have  built  fuinaco,  whicli
do  not  allow  the  amoke  to  eecape.  The  kind  most
conuncnded  ia  made  in  thia  way  from  pine-wood  ;
—It  ia  mixed  with  aoot  from  the  tiimaeee  or  hatha
(that  ia,  tbe  bypocanita  of  the  hatha) ;  and  thia
they  use  ad  vabuniia  icn&Mtfa.  Somo  alao  maka
a  kind  of  ink  by  boiling  and  itraining  the  leea  of
wine,"  &C.  (Plin,  H.  N.  ravi  5.  i.  23.)  With
thii  account  the  atatamenti  of  Vilmriiu  (viL  10.
p  [97,  ed.  Schneider)  in  the  main  agree.  Tho
black  matter  eniitted  by  the  CBtt]e-fiah  (a^iw),
and  hence  itMlf  called  tepio,  waa  alto  nied  for
atramentmii.  (Cic  dt  NaL  Dtor.  !L  50 ;  Pssiua,
6:a/.ili.l2,13;Anaaniat,iT.76.)  Arialotle, how-
CTcr,  in  madng  of  the  cnttle-fiah,  does  not  refer
to  the  uia  of  the  matter  (AoXii)  which  it  omita,  aa
ink.  (Aeliao,  H.  A.  L  94.)  Pluiy  obserrea  (Kzvii.
7.  a.  2S)  that  an  iafiiaion  of  wormwood  wilh  ink,
preferves  a  mamucript  fitin  mice> On  the  wlu^c.


ATRAMENTUM.


ATTIlnjBaES.


pntqp^  h  naj'  be  KJd  ikot  tlta  inki  of  (he  nn-  |  immd  ar  hengimal. They  had  coren  to  keep  the
---'•'-'  ...... jij^  ^^jjij  jjj^  jjj^ ^ji^  innmed  cut*  repreieDt

inkituidi  found  al  PompeiL  [Calamus.)  (Cane-
porini,  OeAiraneitiicniigM  GtatrU,  Limd.  1660;
Beckioum,  Hiilery  i^  /mmttmij,  toI.  i  p.  106,
ToL  iL  p.  266,  London,  1046;  Becker,  aianile$,
ToL  ii  p.  22!^  Ac,  GaOu,  toL  L  p.  166,  &c)
[A.  A.]


■on  RicaiUmg  the  ink  now  ued  b;
An  mknuid  wu  diKorered  at  Herm-


^)ia  Ijmpt


«f  the  pen,  ■«■  a*  iiDefa  ecanplamed  of  bj  the  an-
li  ■Ijiimii  M  it  ia  by  amaelTea. Penina  (Sat.
'a  Jbppiah  writer  ihting  down  to


*nac  qaeritBT,  cm

Nign  qiMd  infua  Tsaetcat  iqiia  lympha.'*
net  abo  added  water,  n  we  do  Mmetimc*,  to
tkk'k.

Pna  a  plmn  laed  by  DemoMheuei,  it  votdd
qptw  ■■  if  the  colanrinB  ingndient  mi  obtuned
^  r^bng  fi«a  nne  iidid  ■nbatance  (rt  /lAw
T>ilig.  Mm.  ifChr.  p.  813),  perlu^mnebaiwa
nk  InJiia  ink.  It  b  fnbable  tbat  tfaoe  were
mmj  w^i  of  aiaariog  mk,  eapeoallj  of  diAreat
I  III  w  I  RtA  ink  (made  of  unnm,  Teimilion)
vw  n>ed  fir  writina  the  titlei  and  b^inningi  ef
b*^  (Orid,  TViA  I.  1.  7),  ao  alio  waa  ink  made
"  "  "  "  "  ocbre  "  (Sidim.  liL  IB)  j  and  bo-
re written  with  ruirioa,
Ike  wvri  ratnc  ame  to  Do  vied  fm  tbe  anl  law.
(Qaksil.  xii.  3.)  So  aOmm,  a  white  or  wbited
Tahli.  IB  whid  the  {netoia'  edkta  were  written,
waa  iBed  in  K  mnilar  way.  A  penoa  deroting
kxaaetf  to  oAviH  and  raAnoi,  waa  a  pcrvon  deroting
kk^  Id  tbe  law.  [AuiiiK.]  Then  waa  also  a
iBj  expsiB*e  red-calonRd  ink  with  which  the
e»^j  aacd  to  write  hii  ngnatnre,  bnt  which  any
«  eiae  w«  by  ao  edict  (Cod.  1.  tit  23.  a.  6)
tataddui  to  OK,  excepting  the  lona  ex  near  reU-
tioHof  tb<aipecor,tawboni  tbe  pirilege  wai  ei-
SRaalj  giuted.  Bat  if  the  empowma  under  age,
ck  giudian  oaed  a  green  ink  for  writing  hi*  aigna-
tac  (Maat&ncan,  Falaaog.  p.  3.)  On  Uie  bannen
li  rii— ■■  there  wen  jrnijtlt  letten  —  foivuri
IP^/ipa  I II  (Dion  Can.  iL  16.)  On  [uUan  and
amiaaiiiili  letloa  of  gidd  and  lilTeT,  or  letten
1*1  at  J  with  gilt  and  idrer,  were  lometiniea  naed.
CCir.  Virr.  ir.  TJ;  SoeL  A<y.  7.)  In  writing  alvi
ihii  was  done  at  a  later  period.  Suetonini  (fftr.
It)  Bja,  that  i^  the  poemi  which  Nen  ndled  at
BiKK  eoe  part  waa  written  in  gold  (or  gilt)  letten
m  IdOtritX  and  conseosted  to  Jupiter  Capi-
'a  kind  of  iliuminated  wii^g  waa
in  relioiou  compontiani,

a  wwflij  to  bs  written

in  k(Mi«  of  gold  (aa  we  mtf  eren  now),  and  there-
fne  wia«  Bctsalty  written  to.  Somothing  like
whrt  we  oil  aynqiathetie  ink,  which  ia  inriiible
ta  W>t,  or  iDne  pf^Anliaa  be  anlied,  appeaia  to
hna  beea  not  BDConmco.  So  Ond  (.Jif.  .<<n.  iil
C37,  Ac.)  adnata  writing  lorfr-lettaa  with  bob
KSk,  vhoch  woold  be  tmnmdable,  milil  the  lettoi
wBK  yiiitbil  with  caal.dut.  Auonini  (.^ntt.
YTtF-  31)  gina  the  mbw  direcCian.  Pliny  (tttL
■  that  tbe  milky  np  cootained  in  aiane
'  •  nad  in  the  tame  way.

i  <ni{ler,  fwAvMxv,  FoDoi,  ir.
■a  ddier  nogle  or  double.  The  double
■■da  wau  pcDbably  intended  to  eontun  both
Ltek  aod  nd  nk,  inacli  in  the  ntodem  bihion.
TWj  wiBB  alwif  larisot  ihiftih  a*  far  example,


ATRIUH  la  ued  in  a  distinctiTe  aa  well  ai
collectiTe  aenae,  to  deriniale  a  pardcular  part  in  die
priiale  houiea  of  the  Romani  [Dautia],  and  alto
a  clan  of  public  buildingt,  m  called  from  th«r
general  retemblanco  in  comtractiaii  to  the  atrinm
of  a  private  houae.  There  ia  likewiae  a  dialincUoa
between  atrium  and  aceai  the  fonuet  being  no
opAi  ana  anirounded  by  a  colonoade,  whilil  the
Utter  bad  no  auch  ornament  attached  to  it.  The
alrimn,  moreoTer,  waa  aometimea  a  bnildinfr  by  it-
aelf,  naembling  in  mne  napecta  the  open  baiuica
[Basilica],  but  conaiiling  of  three  via.  Such
waa  the  Atrium  Publinim  ia  the  capitol,  which,
LiTy  infoima  ui,  waa  itrtick  with  lightning,  B.  c.
214.  (Liv.  nlT.  10.)  It  waa  at  oOiei  lime*  at-
tached to  aome  temple  or  other  edifice,  and  in  mch
tmn  conaiated  of  an  open  area  and  anrmnnding
portico  m  front  of  the  ttnicture,  like  that  befim
the  church  of  St.  Peter,  in  the  Vatican.  Several
of  the**  buildiiua  are  meoljoned  by  the  andeot
biiloriani,  two  of  which  were  dedimted  to  the  same
^oddeia,  Libertaa  ;  bnt  an  aecount  of  thcie  build-
ingt beloogi  to  Soman  topiq(raphy,  which  ii  treated
ofinthei^MoHow^Oc^R^jr.  [A.  R]

ATTICUROES  OArruraup?'",  »a  fie  AOui
ilj/U),  it  an  arihilectnral  term,  which  only  occnct
in  Vitmriu.  (iiL  6.  S  3,  i*.  6.  §8  1.  6,  Schn. :  aa

fragment  of  Meoaiider,  No.  623,  Heineke).  The
wnrd  ia  evidently  used  not  to  deacriba  a  dittinct  ,
order  of  architecture,  but  any  of  thoae  wiation*
which  the  geniiit  of  tbe  Athenian  architect*  made
upon  tlie  ettabliitied  form*.  In  tbe  fanner  pat-
tage, Vilnriua ^iplie*  it  to  a  aort of  hue  of


172


AUCTIO.


Blnie  and  beloir,  and  beuealh  all  ap^A;  Intt
in  MTBral  of  the  beft  enunplea  the  plinth  ii
wantm^  (FDrt1uBXH£tpn)poT^cnu,weVitmTiDL)
Thii  fram  of  bate  leemi  to  haTc  been  originalir
an  Athenian  timpUScatioa  of  the  Imic  baM  ;  but
it  vai  afterwBjda  uud  in  the  other  orden,  eapeci
■Uj  the  Corinthian  and  the  Roman  Doric  ;  uid  i
it  nniallT  regarded  a*  being,  from  ita  ample  ele-

Co,  the  mott  geneiallr  applicabls  of  all  the

In  the  aecond  of  the  pawagei  above  referred  to,
Titnivitu  appliea  thalenn  JMoiuyaloa  paitimlar
Sinn  of  door-waj,  bat  it  difftred  let;  little  from  that
which  be  dwgnalei  a*  the  Doric :  in  fact,  though
Vitnivina  enamente*  three  kindj  of  doi;rwBp  to
templea.  the  Doric,  Ionic,  and  Auic,  we  only  find
in  the  exiiting  bnilding  two  1H1II7  diitincl  fbrmi.
(Mauch,  dit  Gruai.  ».  Rom.  Bau-Ortimmgim.
p.  97.)  Actording  to  Plinj  (ff.JV.  iixri.  23.
i.  56)  equon  piUan  were  colled  AUicm  mb.


«.)


[P.S,]


ACI'CnO  ngnifiei  geaeaHy  "  an  increuing,
cnhanoemeDt,"  and  lieDca  the  name  ii  applied  ti
public  lala  of  Roodi,  at  which  penona  bid  agBioat
ooe  anoths.  The  term  (outto  it  geneisl,  and  com-
prehendi  the  ipeciee  satetio,  heMmtm  taOio  and
uB^ioM  Ai  a  ■peciee,  owfu  iignifiea  b.  public  ale
of  goodl  bj  the  owner  or  hii  agent,  or  B  tale  of
goodi  of  a  deceaicd  peraon  ibr  Ue  puipoie  of  di-
viding the  money  among  thote  entitled  la  it,  which
waa  called  oiic^  htrtdUaria.  (Cic  Pm  Camm.  S.)
The  lale  waa  aometimei  conducted  hy  an  argen-
taritu,  or  bj  a  magiater  aoctionii ;  and  the  time,
place,  and  conditioiii  of  aale,  wire  announced
either  by  a  public  notice  (fabiUa,  aliam,  Ac),  or
by  a  crier  (pn««o).

The  utnal  phiaaei  to  eipreN  the  giiing  notice
(f  a  aale  aie  aa/Honrni  pmorSun,  pratdiam;  and
to  determine  on  a  aale,  anctuiuiii  couttxAV;  The
punhaieti  (timlora),  when  aaiembled,  were  nme-
timet  said  ad  tatidaia  oioM.  The  phmaea  ligni-
fying  to  bid  are,  lieeri,  licUari,  which  wai  done
uther  by  word  of  month,  or  by  luch  aignifiauil
hinla  ai  are  known  to  all  people  who  have  attended
an  auction.  The  property  wu  aaid  to  be  knocked
down  (addici)  to  the  punhaaer  who  either  en-
tered into  an  engagement  10  pay  the  money  to
the  ai^tarina  or  magittei,  or  it  wai  aametimca  a
condition  of  ale  that  there  should  be  no  delirery  of
the  thing  before  payment  (Qaiua  it.  126  ;  Actio,
pp.  9, 10.)  An  ent^  waa  made  in  Che  booka  of  the
orgcuUiHua  rf  the  ule  and  the  money  due,  and
cndit  waa  given  la  the  aamc  boaka  to  the  purchaaer
when  he  paid  the  money  (ansua  ptaima  lata,
aaapta  nMa).  Thna  the  book  of  the  aigeutsiiua
might  be  uacd  a«  eTidente  for  the  purchaser,  both
of  hia  having  made  a  puRhaao,  and  having  paid  for
the  thing  purchased.  If  the  money  waa  not  paid
according  to  the  conditioai  of  nle,  the  argentatiua
could  ine  for  it.

The  praeco,  or  crier,  menu  to  have  acted  the  part
of  the  modem  auctioneer,  ao  far  aa  calling  out  the
biddinga  (Cic,  De  Q^  ii.  23),  and  amuaing  the
company.  Slavea,  when  aold  by  auction,  wen
placed  on  a  itoQa,  or  other  elevated  thing,  ai  ia
lomnimea  the  caae  when  alaves  ace  >o1d  in  the
United  State*  of  North  Amcrica-i  and  hence  the
phraafl  homo  de  li^»de  emlut.  It  w^  naual  to  put
up  a  tpeor,  haila,  in  aucliont,  a  aymbul  derived,  it
ia  aaid,  from  the  ancient  practice  of  aelling  under
a,  ipear  the  boo^  acquired  in  war. Hence  the


AUCTOK.
phiaae  "  mh  haala  vendere  "  (Cic.  D>  Qf.  \


8)


ted  in  Italy  to  signify  an  auction;
ia  "  vendere  all'  a*ta  pubblica,"  or
ibaals."  By  the  auctio,  the  Qiiiri-
iha  thing  lold  waa  tnuu-
ferred  to  the  puichaaec.  LBohobdh  Eutio  ;
SnCTiQ.]  [O.  L.]

AUCTOR,  a  word  which  contain)  the  aaino
element  aa  atig-to,  and  aignifiea  generally  one  who
enlargei,  conliimi,  or  givea  to  a  thing  iti  complete-
neu  and  efficient  fena.  The  numcivua  technical
aignificationa  of  the  word  are  derivable  from  thia
general  notion.  Aa  ha  who  givea  to  a  thing  that
which  ia  neceaaary  for  iU  completeneao,  may  m  tbta
lenae  be  viewed  aa  the  chief  actor  or  doer,  the
word  auctOT  ia  also  nsed  in  the  Muse  of  one  who
originates  or  propoeei  a  thing  (  but  thii  cuinot  be
viewed  as  ita  primary  meaning.  Aocordingly,  the
woid  aoetoi,  when  ojed  in  connection  with  lei  or
aenntui  coaaultnni,  often  mouii  him  who  oiiginolea
and  propoaea,  aa  appean  from  nnnwrmu  pasaigei^
(Liv.  Ti.  36  ;  Cic.  Pro  Dim.  c.  30.)  Who)  a
measure  was  appreved  by  the  aenate  before  it  was
confirmed  by  the  Totea  of  the  people,  the  aenata
were  Kud  onstorw  jtari,  and  tins  pceliminaiy  ap-
proval  wai  called  anotw  aaeUaitat.  (Cic  AnOM,
.14.)

The  eipcesiiona  "  patrea  anctorei  fiunt,"  "  pa-
trea  auctores  &cti,"  have  given  rise  to  much  dia-
enasiOR.  In  the  earlier  periods  of  the  Roman
state,  the  word  "  patrea  "  was  equivalent  to  **  pn-
'  '  'i  j "  ia  the  later  period,  when  the  patricians  had
all  importance  as  a  political  body,  the  tcnn
patres  gignified  the  senate.  Bnt  the  writeia  of
the  age  of  Cicero,  when  ipcalung  of  the  early
perio^  often  uacd  the  word  paties,  when  they
might  have  uaed  patricii,  and  tiui  a  cmruuoit
aroae  betwem  the  early  and  the  later  vgniGcaliwi
of  the  trord  patrea.

The  expreasion  "  patrea  anctorea  fiunt "  meana
that  the  delerminationa  of  the  populDs  in  thecomius

^ita  were  confirmed  by  the  patriciana  in  tha

curiata. To  explain  tbli  fiilly,  aa  to  the
periods,  it  is  necessary  Co  ihow  what  Iho
Ux  aiHaia  dt  t'njwru  was.

After  the  comilia  curiata  had  elected  a  king
(ataal),  the  king  proposed  to  the  same  body  a
la  eariata  di  imperia.  (Cic  Z)«  A7.  iL  13. 17,  IS,
20.)  At  &it  it  might  appear  as  if  there  wers
two  elections,  for  the  patricians,  that  is  the  po-
pulus,  £rat  elected  the  king,  and  then  they  had
to  volo  again  up™  the  imperium.  Ciceto  {De  Ltfi.
Agr.  iL  II)  eiplaina  it  thus — that  the  populu  hnd


election,  and  it


idcr  Iheu
chief  n


a(™


not  conferred  by  the  hi
ssary  that  the  hug  thot


necessary  that  tbe  hug  thonld
:  consequently  there  must  be  1^
diatinct  vote  upon  it  Now  Livy  aaya  nothing  of
tbe  lex  curiata  in  hia  first  book,  but  he  usea  the
eipnsaion  "  patres  anclores  fierent,"  "  paCrea  anc-
torea ftctL"  <Liv.  L  17,  22,  32.)  In  thia  aeuMi
tbe  patres  were  the  "  auctoree  comitiorum,"  an  ex-
preuion  analogous  to  tbaC  in  which  a  tntoria  add  to

*- ictoTto  hia  pnpillui. In  aome  jaaangea  the

im  "  patridi  auctnres  "  it  nacd,  which  is  an

additional  pnMf  that  In  Ae  expretiion  "  pKtres

uclorei,''  the  patrician  body  ia  meant,  and  not  tha

mate,  aa  temo  hare  aD{^»ted.

Cicero,  in  the  paaiage*  quoted,  do«a  not  nie  tbe


AUCTOR.

!*  fioDt,'*  nor  dors  Livy,
.  .  B>k  of  the  lei  eniutB  ds
mpan.  BM  tke^  V>k  of  tlx*  ■*»"<  tlungi  thmgh
ik^  Bw  diflcfoit  tifwicpi.  Thi*  expbiiu  vh;
IKoi^M*  igMHtinw  (Uei  u  ex]>eM»n  eqniTKlenl
to  **|iaaneS  Bncttfe*  fimrt^"  Ibr  patiicii  of  flmne
Btau  tkc  cmke,  tnd  not  the  aoiBtb  l^ntiq.
Jtim.  ii.  60,  vi.  90.)
TiB  tke  IMM  of  SerriH  ToDiiu  there  wen  on);
nla,  which,  u  alitad J  uplaiued,  fint
g,  aod  thaa  b  j  uiotber  vote  cenieir«d
'"  in^wiinii  conid  ddIj  be  coo-
le  penvL  It  ma,  therefore,
B  firvt  who  ^rmM  to  be  Che  p0-
■  Ofiable  of  noerring  the  imperioni ;
KB  amt  imat  wem  two  mduM*  TOtM  of  the  pb-
tra.  StiTi»  Tolliu  cituuihed  the  comitia  coi-
tanda,  m  which  the  pleb<  ilw  Toled.  When  hu
inmiiuljgu  «w  m  fall  ftne  afta  the  dila  of  the
last  Tonjimi,  tlie  patzia  had  itill  the  piiTilwe  of

omitia  ■—■'—■*".  that  ii,  the;  gare  to  it  the

■  laha  wnrti,  the  '*pBtRi''wae  "loctom  bcti."
iCk.  As  Pbmdt,  e.  3.)  That  thi*  wat  the  ptac-
tk*  aada  Uw  carij  Repablie,  we  lee  from  LtTr
(;..»,  59).

la  tha  fifth  attaif  of  Ilw  dW  S  change  WR>
aaia.  Bj  ooa  of  the  law*  of  the  plebeiaii  dic-
tMT  Q.  PaUiliQi  Phih^  it  wm  enacted  (Lit.  nii.
12)  tint  in  the  on  tt  legei  to  be  enacted  at  the
'"^  ~  patiei  ihonld  be  aactoni,
d  gire  Ibeii  aMcnt  befim
-  -IriahL  If  we  take
a.  might  Mill  reject

K>:  bid  it

HcrieiB  wnftiTHi  bCBnie  a  matter  of  hnn.  Sj  a
la  HaEuia  of  mieatain  dale  (Cic  Bntut,  c  U),
the  nme  i  hi  141  wai  nade  ai  to  electimi,  which
the  PahliliB  lex  had  made  ai  to  the  enacting  of
Iritea.  Thia  eiptaim  the  panege  of  Livy  (L  17}.
Airwiiingly,  efUT  tbe  paMing  of  the  lex  Maento,
the  "  pimn  Bnetvitai "  wa«  diatinct  fioin  the  lex
coriata  de  iupaio,  while,  befen  tbe  r*^"g  "^  the
In  Ifaecoa,  they  wen  the  lame  thiog.  Thai  tbe
ki  HaeniaTnadeihe  tax  eariata  de  imperio  a  men
<wn,t9r  tbe  ■■prr™  amid  iM  be  rafhaed,  and  k
la  tha  tMer  Bepablie,  in  oida  to  Item  up  a  ihadow
rf  ■  anliMaiKe,  thii^  licton  exhibited  the  cere-
■oij  of  holding  the  cmiita  cooitiB  ;  and  the  buo'
taina  ^trmB,  whicb  waa  tbe  aacDt  of  the  lenate,
ffprara  aa  the  mode  in  which  the  cmfifmatioa  of
tic  peopled  duaee,  and  the  omleniiig  of  the  im-
ptioDi,  wen  both  indoded,

Tlua  rxplaratinp  which  ii  fbnnded  on  that  of
Brcbr  < AoadwA  dtr  Rhwt.  AUtramMer),  and  ap-
pcaiB  to  be  wlat  ho  nodentandi  by  the  phnie
"  ptiBM  netora,"  ii  at  leaet  man  oauietBit  with
aS  tha  aalberitie*  than  any  othei  that  haa  been

la  the  atfoitl  timt,  aaetoc  ii  often  nid  of  the
(■povr  (lanbeu)  who  Rsemmesdad  any  thing  to
iW  eenate,  aad  00  which  lECommenduioa  that
My  asMed  a  acsaou-ceualtain.  (Gaioa,  i.  30,
M:S«<aD.ra^ll.)

Wben  the  ward  anctcc  ii  (ffiUtd  te  him  who
t  originate  a  legielatin

idcAil. —

Kebothv
Kotenee,  and


*  <i  28,  27.)


AUCTORITAS.
the  meeniag  of  each  a  kept  diatin
iiL  30.)


(Cit  Q^


With  reference  to  dealing!  between  Indiiiduala,
Hoctoc  hae  the  aenee  of  owner  (Cic  Pro  Cataa.
10),  and  U  defined  thna  (Dig.  50.  tit  17. 1. 175) :

ancto  ia  the  aeller  {ttmiitor),  ai  oppoaed  to  tha
bayei  (emfor) ;  the  perton  who  joined  the  aeller  in
a  warranty,  ci  u  leenrity,  wai  called  aactor  »■
cbkAu,  u  oppoaed  to  the  aeller  or  aacUtr  prmi*.
(Dig.  19.  tic  1.  I.  4,  31  1  tit.  S.  a.  i,  51.)  The
phiBte  a  male  aaelon  tmtn  (Cic.  Fair.  S.  a  22)  ;
oBctonm  tandan  (OelL  ii.  10)  wiU  thu  be  inlel-
ligible.  The  tealator,  with  letpect  to  hii  heir,
might  be  oiled  anctoE.  (Ex  Coip.  Hennogen,
Cod.  tit.  11.)

Conaietently  with  the  meanmgi  of  anelor  ■■  al-
ready eiplainsd,  the  notion  of  eoiuenting,  apHoT-
ing,  and  giving  Talidity  to  a  meaanie  affeaing  a
peraon^  atatni  eleariy  ^peaia  in  the  following  paa-
nge. (Cic  Pro  Ooat.  c  29.)

Anctor  ia  aba  ued  genelally  to  eipreaa  any  per-
aoa  onder  whoee  anthority  any  lenl  act  is  done.
In  thia  aenie,  it  meana  a  tutor  woo  ia  appointed

fiimity  <^  her  aex  (Lir.  iiiiT.  2 ;  dc  Fro  Caiem.
c25;  eaina,  L  190,  195):  it  it  alw  applied  to  a
tutor  whoee  btuineu  it  ia  to  appiore  of  certain  acta
on  behalf  of  a  ward  (p^iOiu).  (Panloi,  Dig.  26.
tit  a  a.  3.)

Tlie  term  anctoiea  jnria  ia  eqniTalent  to  jotia-
periti(Dig.  1.  titZ>.S.  gl3)  Oellioi,  ii.  c  10)  :
and  the  law  writera  or  leaden  of  panicolar  ichoali  of
law  were  called  ecAoIa*  •nubm.  It  ia  nnneceuary
totacetheothertignilieationaofthii  word.  LO.L.1
AUCTORAMENTUM.  [OLinuTonia.]
AUCrO' RITAS.  Tha  technical  meaning!  of
thia  word  correlate  with  thoae  of  anctor.

aultum  ;  it  waa  a  meBun,  incomplete  in  itael^
which  miired  ita  completion  by  aome  other  BU-

AnetoritBi,  aa  ^>plied  to  property,  ia  eviiralent
to  legal  ownerahip,  bnng  b  correlation  u  anctor.
(Cic  Thp.  c  4  ;  Pro  Camia.  e.  26.)  It  waa  a
proTiaion  of  the  Uwa  of  the  Twelre  Tablet  that
there  conld  be  no  nano^jion  of  a  Btolen  thing
(Gains,  ii.  45),  which  ia  ihoi  eipnued  by  Oelliua
in  ipeaking  ef  the  Atinian  law  (irii.  c.  7)  :  Quoi


iwnenhip  of  the  thing  alolen  wna  a^l  in  the  ori-
ginal  owner. (Cic  Z)b  Qff  L c  12  j Dirh«n,

CaicnicU,  Ac  der  ZaSf-Ta/^FrvgrnaOt,  p.  417.)
(Ai  to  tbe  expieeuon  Uiui  Anctoritaa,  aea  U&u-

Auctoritaa  lometimeB  aignifiea  a  WBrran^  or
collateral  aecnrity  ;  and  thna  correlated  to  anctor
■ecnndna.  Anctorilatia  actio  mesua  tha  action  of
eriction.  (Panlua,  SaUaL  Rae^  lib.  2.  tit  17.)
The  initmmenia  aauloiilatia  are  the  prtKj&  or  eri-
doices  of  title.

The  andoritai  of  the  praetor  ii  eomeCimei  Died
to  lignify  the  judicial  nnction  of  the  piBelar,  of
bii  inder,  by  which  a  peraon,  a  tutor  for  imtaucr,
might  be  compelled  to  do  lome  1^  act  (Oaina,  1.
190  ;  Dig.  27.  tit  9.  L.  5),  or,  in  other  woidi,
"  anctor  fieri."  The  tutor,  with  raipevt  to  hii
wardabath  male  and  female  \jHgi^]>iipSlat),m»


174  AUOUEL

?ii1mLmi  md  cooBmatioa  to  tbe  act  of  hU  ward,
hough  a  pii[Mlliu  had  DDt  a  capacity  to  do  an;  act
which  Tn  prejodicial  to  him,  he  had  a  apaciCj  to


'4>  BA;  thing  which  w


1  lor  hi
benefit,  and  in  nicli  caie  the  owfortbu  of  the  tutor
«ai  notnectuaiy.

The  anthoii^  of decided caaei  wu
iinUilar  judieaiarMm  atutontai. The  other
ingi  of  anetoritu  may  be  euilj  deriTod  ftoni  the
pnmafy  meaning  of  the  Tord,  and  from  the  a
planUione  hennTen.  [G.L.]

AUDITO'RIUM,  •■  the  nnna  implie*,  i>  any
place  fiH-  healing.  It  was  the  pndioe  among  the
Roaani  for  poeti  and  otfaen  to  read  their  compoii-
tioui  to  (heir  friendi,  who  were  umetimel  called
the  anditorimn  (Plin.  ^.  It.  7)  ;  but  the  word
wu  alia  DKil  to  eipnn  mj  place  in  which  any
thing  wu  heard,  and  nnder  the  empire  it  wu
■oplied  to  a  coort  of  joetice.  Under  the  republic
the  plaoe  for  all  judical  pnceedingi  «ai  the  CMni-
tium  and  the  fonun.  (Mi  p^;iiiit  in  comitio  mt
in  foco  ante  meridiem  eaBMon  eomicito  qoom  per-
oiiBt  ambe  ptaeaentea.  Dirimn,  Caitniafal,  Ac
p.  73£.)  But  for  the  mIco  of  abelter  and  eonro-
nience,  it  became  the  pnstice  to  hold  conrte  in  the
Baiilicae,  which  contained  halla,  which  were  alio
called  aoditoria.  Tn  the  dialogue  do  Oratoribui
(ci  39),  the  writer  obeerm  that  oialorr  had  loit
nocb  by  caaei  being  gioerally  heard  in  "  aoditoria
et  tabnioiia."  It  ia  fint  under  M.  Auieliui  that
the  aaditarimn  prindpia  ii  mentimed,  b^  which
we  muit  underatand  a  hall  or  room  in  the  unperial
leiidence  ;  and  in  anch  a,  hall  Scptimiu  SoTeiua
and  the  later  empenn  held  their  legnlar  littuigi
when  they  praiided  u  judgea.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  1.
a.  22, 19.  tit.  g.  *.  1 ;  Dion  Cau.  Ixcri.  II;  Dig.  4.
tit.  4.  a.  IB.)  The  pmTineial  goTemon  alxi  undei
the  empire  nunetimefl  lat  on  tiieir  tiibonal  u  in  the
republic,  and  lometimei  in  the  pnetorimn  of  in  on
auditorium.  Accordingly,  ttie  loEcil  juiiita  uie  the
word  genemlly  for  any  (jace  in  which  juitice  ma
adminiitcred.  (Dig.  1.  tit  22.  >.G.)  In  (he  time
of  DiocletiBii,  the  auditorium  had  got  the  name  of

(Cod.  Th.  L  tit  16.  a.  6),  the  two  wordi  leem  to
ha  Hied  a*  equinlent,  when  he  eoacta  that  both
criminal  and  cinl  ewei  ahould  be  heard  openly
(before  the  tribunal),  and  net  in  uiditona  or
tecretaria.  ValentiDianiii  and  Vileui  allowed
canaei  to  be  beard  either  before  the  tribunal  or  in
the  lecTBtariuni,  but  yet  with  open  door).  Prom
the  fifth  century,  the  eecretarima  or  Hcretum  vaa
the  regular  place  for  hearing  isuiea,  and  tho  pe<^e
were  excluded  by  lattice-work  {amaliae)  and
curtaiu  (tela)  ;  but  ihia  may  h»o  been  u  much
for  conveniencs  a*  for  any  otoer  pnrpoae,  though  it
^ipean  that  at  thit  late  period  of  the  empire  uiere
were  only  preaent  the  magiitiate  and  hii  oScera,
and  the  pwtiea  to  the  cauae.  Only  thoae  whom
the  magutiate  iniited,  or  who  hod  buineH,  or
peraoDt  of  certain  tank  (honoiati)  hod  admiaiion
to  the  conrta,  under  the  deapolie  ayitcm  of  the  late
empire.  (Cod.  1.  tiL  46.  •.  S  i  Hollweg,  HimdimA
dat  CmlpnamtM,  a.  21£.)  [0.  L.]

AUOUR,  AUOU'RIUM  i  AUSPEX,  AU9.
Pl'CIUM.  A<ig<T  or  OBipu  mtsnt  a  dinner  by
birdL  but  came  in  courae  of  time,  like  the  Greek
olflfw,  to  be  api^ed  in  a  more  extended  lenie :
hi>  artwoi  callediiii^iiriiinoraKiptcHni.  Plulanh
relate!  that  the  oti^iirM  were  originally  termed
aayieei  (Qaoeit.  flOii.  t.  72),  and  thua  teemi  no


AUOUB.
reaaon  to  doubt  thia  italemeut  at  HaitBf  doea
{IHt  HeligiOK  drr  SSmer,  toL  i.  p.  9S\  on  the
authority  of  Serriu.  (ad  Virg.  Aem.  1.  403,  iu.  20).
The  Bulhority  of  Plutarch  ii  farther  auppoMed  Toj
the  fact,  that  in  Roman  marriagea  the  penon  a^ia
repreeented  the  diriner  of  ancient  timet,  WM
called  aiupe*  and  not  lagtiT.  (Cic  dt  Dm.  i.  16).
Rubino  {Kimitek.  Vafmmg,  p.  4S)  diawi  a.  ^a-
tiuction  between  the  meaning  of  the  wradi  oaipaa
and  ua^ar,  though  he  belierea  that  they  were  need
to  indicate  the  lame  person,  the  fanner  referring
aimply  to  the  obeerralion  of  the  •igna,  and  the  latter
to  the  interpietation  of  them.  Thii  new  it  cer-
tainly mpported  by  the  meaning  of  the  rerba
aa^mri  ud  oynrari;  and  the  mna  dktincliDii
aeema  to  prenil  between  Ibe  wordt  aajpuM*  and
oit^ariiaa,  when  they  an  uaed  tcsether  (Cic  da
Die.  iL  48,  da  iVot  Dtr.  iL  3),  tbough  they  an
often  qi|4iad  to  tba  aame  aigna.  Tbe  weid  lla^|la^l
waa  aupphoted  by  aagm;  but  Ibe  tciantific  term
for  the  obaoratian  coutiuned  on  the  contiaiy  to  ba
nwipfai—  and  not  cnHnrnna.  The  etymology  of
oMpaB  ia  clear  ei>oa|^  ((mm  anit,  ood  the  root
ipeg  or  ipic),  but  that  of  aapar  ia  not  lo  cer-
tain. The  ancient  grammariana  derired  it  from
oni  and  gm  (Featu,  i.  v.  auffiir;  Sen.  aj
Virg,  Aen.  t.  623),  while  lome  modem  wiiteta
aumioae  the  root  to  bo  oi^,  aigni^ring  **  to  aor,"
and  the  aamo  aa  lbs  Sanaciit  aUd,  the  Latin
"  J,  and  the  Gi


■ori  would  ^ua  coireanond  to
Jthem  again  beliere  the  wor
b  of  Etruacon  origin,  which  i


ingliah  ■


beliere  the  word  to
„ .  ii  not  JDOompatibla

with  the  BUppoaitioa,  aa  we  aludl  >how  below,  ibaC
the  anaptoea  were  of  Latin  or  Sabine  otigia,  ainca
the  word  cugar  may  thua  have  been  ioIndDoed
■long  with  Etruacan  ritea,  and  thua  hare  npeiBeded
the  original  term  aiupea.  There  la,  howerer,  im
certain^  on  the  point  i  and,  glthoogh  tho  fitat
mentioned  etymology  aeema  improbable,  yet  btini
the  analogy  rf  aiMpeK  and  aa-cepi,  we  are  iodiaad
'"  beliere  that  tbe  fanner  part  of  tho  word  ia  of
I  aame  root  a*  <nu,  and  the  latter  nay  ba  eon.
netted  with  jmv,  more  eapadaUy  oa  Priadau  (L  GL
§  36)  givea  augar  and  oa^eniAia,  aa  the  mon  »>•
ient  &iTna  of  iwj^yr  and  tnguraiaa.  By  Greek
Friteri  on  Roman  a&ii^  the  augura  are  called
isamwihM,  olsmoaKiinu,  eEwie^aJ,  ol  tr'  olurmZt
fpitf.  The  angnra  formed  a  collf^um  at  Rooa,
lut  their  hiatoiy,  function!,  and  dutiei  will  be  better
iphiined  after  we  bare  obtained  a  dear  idea  of
what  the  auipicea  were,  and  who  had  the  power
of  taking  them.

uainlance  with  thia  aubject  ia  one  of
primary  importance  to  crery  atudent  of  Rramm  hia-
toty  and  aii^quitiea.  In  tbe  Ooat  ar  '
10  tranuction  took  place,  either  of  a
lablic  nature,  without  couaulting  the  i
lence  we  lind  the  queation  aakcd  in  a  «
■aaage  of  Liry  (ri  14),  "  Ana|Hciis  hi


B  omnia  gcii,  quia  eat,  qui  ignorelP" An
9  of  the  moat  important  &cta  lonnected  witk
lapicet,  which  ii  all  that  our  timiti  will  allow,
thorcfare,  claima  our  attentive  conaideiation,

All  the  nationaof  ontifaity  were  impnaaed  witk
the  firm  belief,  that  the  will  of  the  goda  andfntora
renta  were  rerealed  to  men  by  certain  aiffua,
'hich  were  icnt  by  the  goda  ai  marica  of  (hair
ivour  to  their  liocere  wonhippera.  Hocc,  tha
rguments  of  tbe  Stoic*  thu  if  tbcn  mto  gad^


Anontt.

Atj  can  ftr  nto,  (ml  Ihu  if  they  eve  br  men
tkvj  MBt  iBid  tban  dgn  of  their  will  (Cirx  ti«
£if^  u.  1 3X  ujitiHid  to  cmnplelely  tha  papular
Wlie^  tbat  vboerer  qncMicined  it,  voold  ban
bt^  loaked  iqion  in  no  othei  light  thaa  on  atheiaL
Bot  vhfle  (U  natioiM  nogfat  lo  beamie  Bcquainled
with  Ibc  wQl  ^  (ha  gsdi  by  Taiioai  modsi,  irfaicfa
fn«a  lin  to  iiuuuiuMde  kiadi  of  diiisuioii,  than
■w—  B  cadi  Hfante  m^oo  ■  urt  of  "-'""«'
Mief  that  lb*  patknkr  godi,  who  mlched  over
A  IM  fbtme  to  tiioa  in  a  diitinct  and
Henoi^  each  pMlila  poaeaed  a
J  or  ^wMtia,  whieli  wa*  snppoited
br  tb*  laws  and  iutitntiou  of  th«  Mate,  and  «aa
gnardeJ  frna  nuxlan  vitb  Ibnign  ekiiMiit)  bf
ctpwnla;  Tbsa,  the  Ronnng  looked
7  and  the  tWo  pnqibetie  art  of  the


la  with  oth«T  Deigbbooriiig
■  tiwy  HidiBToared  to  leam  the  fiilnro,  eape-
ewJtr  is  war,  hj  coualting  the  cmtnill  of  victimB^
eat  Mna  upon  bTounble  ot  im&Toui-
n  timei  of  danger  and  diffienlty
to  coiuDlt  the  SibjUine  booke,
fc  ibn  bad  rccttied  Erom  die  Oreeka  ;  bnt  the
!  af  ArinBtkm,  which  wa*  pendjar  ta  them,
'I,  emnitod  in  thoie  aign*
He  nC  autpicia.  The  ob-
B  of  the  anipicea  was,  according  to  the
atimonir  of  the  incioil  writeia,  more
than  Renw  itedE,  which  ii  conituilly
a  (nmded  onder  (he  aanction  of  the
1  the  nee  of  them  i>  therefbra  aaao-
d  iridi  the  I^atiBa,  or  the  lariieit  inhabitanU
at  ifac  tity.  Tfaoe  teema  therefore  no  mean  to
awgn  to  lliem  on  EEraacan  origin,  aa  maaj  modem
wTiiaa  Ba  inclined  to  do,  whUe  there  an  eeTenl
fKti  pointiBg  to  an  opponte  condniion.  Cicero,
«te  waa  himiclf  an  aDgnr,  in  hia  woik  Di  Dm-
BdCisac,  coaalaally  ■Fpeali  to  the  itriking  difference
l<«waen  lb*  antfoca  and  the  Btnucan  sfitetn  of
di'iaatioii ;  and,  while  he  freqaantl;  mentioni
' I*  wUeh  pud  attCDtion  to  the  Bight  of

'  "'o  drrine  will,  '

I  «•  in  eiiitence  among
(Ck.  ds  i>».  i  41,  iL  U,  38  1  de
■or.  ii.  4.)  The  belief  that  tht
ITC  nme  inUmatian  of  the  will  of  the  godl
o  haTc  been  prcralcnt  among  man;  nation*
0  the  Oreeki,  ai
»  onlj  among  the
it  wai  reduced  to  a  coi
mwmaem,  gmoned  b<r  fiixd  mlea,  and  handed
6iaB  genenuioD  tn  gensation.  In  Oreecs,  the
eg  nil  I  aopflanted  the  birdi,  and  the  futoie  wai
Imat  baa  Apdlo  and  other  godl,  tarch'  from
Tiiia.  wha  f  Mimed  Terj-  few  oraclea  in  Greece.
TW  Mjitaty  wai  the  caae  at  Rome :  it  waa  from
Ii^iii  that  the  futon  wai  leamt,  and  the  birdr.


■  hii


(J«


ba*  Jomt,  Cic.  lU  Dkm.  ii  U  i  IiOerjiraa  Jocit
tf^mi  ■iiii'mi"  pdHei  aii;^"*,  Cic  de  Leg,  iL  3).
b  ^^  be  nnaiuted  in  general,  that  the  Roman
^i^cB  woe  taMnliaPj  of  a  practical  natoie  ;  they
yaac  aa  ndenaatim  Rfpectii^  the  couiie  of  future
I  iiiai.  ihij  dill  ant  infnnn  irrn  irVrtinilr  iajyiai,
b^Bflj  tat^fattbemantaltf^  werg  la  do,  or  ik4


AuauR.  m

to  do:  they  aan'gned  no  nann  for  the  daoRon  ol

Jupiter,  —  they  itmply  annoonced,  yea  or  no.

The  TOfda  aaguriam  and  oK^ncwn  came  to  ba
naed  in  conns  of  time  to  eigni^  the  obserratiin
of  TBiiona  kind*  of  irgna.  They  were  dinded  into
five  urti ;  ea  cado,  tx  avSiut,  ar  trrpudiit,  t»  qua-
dmpediba,  ea  dtrii.  Of  theae,  the  last  three
formed  no  part  of  the  ancicot  auipioea.  The  ob-
lerratun  of  ugni  in  the  beiiTene,  inch  ■■  li^il-
ning^  wai  natiually  connected  with  obeerring  tha
heaTcna  in  order  to  watch  the  birde ;  and  there-
fna,  mnat  in  early  timet  haTo  formed  part  of  the
aiufaoei ;  for  in  an  eariy  atage  of  aociety,  light-
ning and  aimilat  phenamena  huTe  been  aJwayi
looked  npon  aa  aent  by  the  godi.  A  few  woida
muBt  ba  (aid  on  each  of  theae  fite  kiada  of  angmy.

1.  Eacatlo.  Thit  included  the  obaerralian  of
the  nrioDa  liinda  of  thunder  and  lightning,  and

amgiicimm.  (Serr.  od  Ftr;.  ^m.  il  693  ;  Cie.  A
Dh.  iL  18,  &c  ;  Fettna,  l  e.  Chalalia.)  The  in-
terpretation of  liine  phenomena  waa  raUtt  Etnia-
caa  than  Roman  ;  and  ths  only  point  connected
with  them  which  deasrea  mention  here,  ia,  that
whenever  it  waa  raptned  by  a  peraon  lothoriaed
to  take  the  atupieea,  that  Jupiter  thundered  or
lightened,  the  enniicia  eoold  not  ba  held.  (Cic  dt
Die.  ii.  U,  FUkpp.  T.  3.)

2.  Em  oethu.  It  waa  only  a  few  birda  which
coold  gira  anguriea  among  the  Romana.  (Cic.  d»
Ore.  iL  34.)  They  wen  dirided  into  two  daeaeaj
OaciaSf,  theae  which  gave  augnriee  by  nnging,  or
their  Toice,  and  ^ittea,  thoae  which  gare  auguriea
by  their  flight.  (Fertna,  i.v.  Otana).  To  the
forma  claaa,  beloand  lie  nTen  (aorvaa)  and  the
crow  (goniw),  tha  fint  of  theea  giriag  a  bToniablo
omen  (m^HCuHH  ndim)  when  it  appeared  on  the
right,  the  latter,  on  the  conttaiy,  when  it  waa  aean
<m  the  left  (Fiant.  Am.  ii  1.  12  ;  Cic  if*  Die.  i.
39) ;  likewise  the  owl  (.iVKibia,  Fettos, :  v,  Ouiina),
and  the  hen  Igallma,  Cic  de  Din.  ii  28).  To  the
oHf  n/itea  belonged  fint  of  all  the  eagle  (agatla),
who  ii  callsd  prAi«aiiDently  the  bird  of  Jupiter
(Jbeu  aba),  and  neit  the  Tnltum  (ea&ar),  and
with  these  two  tha  oeu  soa^iiaUf,  alao  called  osei-

fiaga,  and  the  iamaiwriaa  or  jamaacatai  an  pro-
heib\j  also  lobe  claaaed.  (Cmop.  Virg.  Atm.  I  394 ;
Ut.L7,  34;  Fettas,<;e.iaiuwi&;  Plin.ff.Ar.
I.  7.)  Some  birds  were  included  both  among  the
oaRMiand  tha  aSUi;  mch  w«>ethe  Ptcai  ilfortiaa,
and  ^eraina,  and  the  Parria  (Plm.  H.  ff.  i.  18.
I.SO  j  Hor.  Gim.  iiL  27.  16  i  Feetut,  (.o.  Oiai-
niDB  (nparftwa).  These  were  the  prindpal  biida
consulted  in  the  anipiceaL  Erery  sound  and  mo-
tioa  of  each  bird  had  a  diffirrent  meaning,  accord-
ing to  the  different  eircumatoncea,  or  times  of  the
year  when  it  waa  obaerred,  bnt  the  particnlan  do
not  deserre  foithsr  nottce  here.  When  the  birds
fitionred  an  undertaking,  tliey  were  said  odiftsers^
adrnUler*  or  neiiaifafie,  and  were  then  tailed  addia-
Una*,  advdttiBat,  teaimhe,  oipratpe^;  when  un-
&mirable  they  were  iaid(iU&w«,are«r«,  rcflfoffari,
dec,  and  wenthenealledoiherscHoraJfsRU.  Tha
birds  which  nve  nn&vtHmible  omens  were  termed

/iadrf,  Uailae,  lagairtt,  suba,  Ac,  and  nidi
ans[acea  were  called  clitiia  and  damaiona,

3.  En  TripadiU.  These  auspices  wen  taken
from  the  feeding  of  chickens,  and  wen  especially
employed  on  military  eipeditjoni.  It  waa  the
doctrine  of  the  augurs  that  any  bird  could  gin
a  tripudium  (Cic  d»  Dit.  ii,  M)  ;  bnt  it  be-


ITS  AUOUB.

oune  iba  pmetiee  in  later  tima  to  empTDj  onl^
chickeni  CjMflO  for  the  porpoie.  They  were
kept  in  %  cage,  under  ctue  of  a  peraan  ^led
jmllariiaf  uid  when  the  anipicu  were  to  be
taken,  the  pollariiu  opened  the  ea^  aai  threw
to  the  chickena  pnlie  or  a  kind  of  soft  cake.  If
thay  lefosed  to  come  out  oi  to  eat,  or  uttered  a
ciy  (oedMrmt),  or  txal  their  wingi,  or  flew  away,
the  ligDi  were  congidercct  nn&Tomble^  (Liv.  x.
to  i  VaL  Htti,  i  4.  g  3.)  On  Iho  contmy,  if
tbey  ate  ijreedily,  n  that  umething  fell  fnun  their
mouth  and  itruck  the  eartli,  it  vaa  called  tripm-
dnm  KiWinwn  (frijnuUmim  quan  terTipmnHn,
tolatinMm,  from  t^va,  according  to  die  ancient
writer^  Cic  dt  Div.  iL  M),  and  wa«  held  a
faTonrahlo  sign.  Two  other  kindi  of  iripudta  are
mentioned  hy  FeAoi,  the  tripudiMm  oHuim,  from
the  cry  of  hirdi,  and  ntnam,  from  the  uimd  of
the  pnlie  bllis;  to  the  groiud :  in  what  reapecti
the  Utter,  difieced  from  the  Mpatftim  niutimim,
we  are  not  infbnned.  (Cic.  ad  Faoi,  n.  6 ;  lee
alM  Fealna,  t.  vn.  fii*,  triyitdiim,  caciinai  tripit-

4,  Ex  qaadn^icd&a,  Augnriet  could  alBo  be
taken  fnnn  foor-fboted  animals  ^  but  these  fbnned
no  part  of  the  original  iciBiice  of  the  augnn,  end
were  nerer  employed  by  them  in  taking  aaipim
on  behalf  of  the  atate,  Di  in  the  exerciie  of  theii
art  properiy  to  called.  They  miut  be  looked  upon
^mply  aa  a  mode  of  priTata  diTination,  which  wat
natonilly  brought  under  the  notice  of  the  aogun,
asd  aeemi  by  them  to  hare  been  reduced  to  a
kind  of  ayatcm.  Thua,  we  an  told  that  when  a
fbi,  a  wdI^  a  hone,  a  dog,  or  any  other  kind  of
qnadruped  ran  acrou  a  peitcn'B  pa^  or  speared  in
an  unuiuol  place,  it  formed  an  augury.  (See  ».g.
Hoi.  Qwr.  iiL  27.)  IhejugeatupuaMm  belonged
to  thit  clau  of  anguciei.  (Cic  da  Div.  iL  36 ;  Feat
a  V- jBpaa  ozuptEiiim  /  Serv.oif  Fi'rj?.  j4as.  iii.  537-)

fi.  Ex  dirii,  ac  aiiTiiu,  Under  thii  head  waa
mcludad  every  kind  of  augury,  which  doet  not  fall
imder  any  of  the  four  dmaca  mentimed  aboTe,
Mich  aa  arnxziag,  atombling,  and  other  accidental
thingi.  (Ctmp.licTf.adViry.Aiia. if. iS3.)  There
iraa  an  imputunt  angucy  of  thia  kind  connected
with  the  army,  which  waa  calied  &v  acmninfiuf,
that  ia,  the  flameg  appearing  at  the  pointt  of  tpenn
or  other  wnpona.  (Cic  de  Div.  il  36,  dt  A'o^
Dtor.  iL  3  ;  Dinnyi.  1. 16.)

The  ordinary  maimer  of  taking  the  aoapicea,
pn>perly  ao  called  {i.e.€x  ca^
■"he  DGiacai '

the  heareua  called  tOHpl'
which  he  intended  to  make  bia  obacrradona.  The
station  where  ho  waa  to  take  the  auipicei  wai
alio  aeparated  by  a  aolcmn  formula  from  the  re*t
of  the  land,  and  waa  likewiie  called  ttrnplmn  or
tawtR.  He  then  pncoeded  to  pitch  a  teni  in  it
{tabenaailam  capert),  and  thii  tent  again  waa
alas  called  tanplam,  or,  more  accmately,  lenfbim
BHW.  [TiMFLUU.]  Wilhb  the  walU  of  Rome,
<ir,  more  pnpecly  >pnking,  within  the  pomoetium,
there  waa  no  occaiion  to  aelect  a  apot  and  pitch  a
tent  on  it,  aa  there  was  a  place  on  the  An  on  the
summit  of  the  Capitoline  bill,  called  Aagwaadiai,
which  had  been  coniecnted  once  lor  ^1  for  tliii
porpoae.  {V taUa,:  v.  Avguraaiiiim  ;  comp.  Lit.
I  IB,  W.  18  ;  Cic  da  (^  uL  16.)  In  like  manner
there  was  in  ercry  Roman  camp  a  place  called
a*g»nUa  (Tac  A.**.  %  \3,  xv.  30),  which  an.


AIIOUE,

■wered  the  nme  pmpote ;  but  on  all  olher  a>


lie  peTHD  who  7
aited  for  the  bioi


be  pitched,  aa,  tor  instance,  in  the  Campus  Mar-
tina, when  the  comitia  centnriata  were  to  be  held,
taking  the  anapioei
■arable  aigna  to  appear  ;  but  it
was  neceaiaiy  daring  this  time  that  thtn  ahould
be  no  intHTuptian  of  any  kind  whatsoarer  (itfn-
fum),  and  hence  the  word  filaalwin  was  uoed  in
a  more  extended  sense  to  si^ify  the  abaeace  of
erery  thing  that  was  foolty.  bTery  thing,  on  th«
contrary,  that  rendered  the  auapicea  invalid  waa
called  ntnon  (Cic  da  Div.  iL  34  ;  Featna,  a  «.  *i-
bafia  nrseri)  ;  and  hence  we  tonalanlly  read  iit
Liry  and  other  writert  of  eilw  aM^iifniliii  cnatit
viiio  let  lata,  Ae,  The  watching  for  the  antpicea
waa  called  Mpaetio  or  aarHine  da  oodOf  Che  dedar».

were  nnliiTDnntble,  nliaaitiatio.  In  the  latter  caac,
the  persoa  who  took  the  autpica  aeema  ujually  to
have  said  alio  die,  by  wliicb  the  buaioess  in  hand,
whether  the  holding  of  the  trtmitia  oc  any  thinf
else,  was  aitirely  stopped.  (Cic.  cfs  L^.  a,  12.)

HaTing  explained  what  the  auspices  were  and
how  they  were  taken,  wo  hare  now  to  determine
who  had  the  power  of  taking  them.  In  the  first
place  it  is  cotun  that  in  aadoit  time*  do  one  but
a  patrician  could  take  the  auspicea,  and  that  a
plebeian  bad  no  power  of  doing  ao.  The  god*  of
the  Roman  stale  were  the  goda  t£  the  potriuana
alone,  and  it  waa  consequently  regarded  as  an  act
of  probnatjon  for  any  plebeian  to  attempt  to  in-,
terpret  the  will  of  these  gods.  Hence  the  poaaca-
lion  of  the  auspices  (jkaiira  aiispicia)  is  one  of  tho
most  distinguished  jTerogotiTei  of  the  patiicLans  ;
they  are  said  to  be  penat  pairum^  and  are  callul
OMtpiaa  patnan.  (LiT.  tL  41,  x.  8  *,  comp.  It.  6.)
It  would  further  appear  that  every  patriciaQ  might
take  the  suapicei ;  but  here  a  diilinction  ia  to  be
observsd.  It  has  already  been  remarked  that  in  the
most  aident  times  no  tnmsaction,  whether  privnto
or  public,  wo*  performed  without  consulting  tho
auspices  (Bin"  auipiailo,  Cic  da  Div.  i.  1 6  j  VaL
Max.  iL  1-31);  aud  hence  aioaa  the  dialiuction  of
ampida  privala  and  aa^iida  pailiaa.  One  of  the
most  frequent  occoiIodb  on  which  the  oa^ricua
privata  were  token,  was  in  case  of  a  marriage
(Cic,  Val.  Max.  IL  en.)  ;  and  hence  after  prirata
auspices  hud  beciime  enurely  disused,  the  Romano,
in  aeeoidance  with  their  usual  love  of  pnseirins
ancient  ibcnii,  were  accustomed  in  later  times  to
employ  axipieei  in  marriages,  who,  however,  acted
only  OS  friends  of  the  bridegroom,  to  witness  tb«
payment  of  the  dowry  and  to  superintend  tbe
various  ritca  of  tho  mairi^e.  (PlauL  Cbi.  pml.
85  j  Suet.  Cbrnd.  26  i  Tac  Ann.  xl.  27.)  Tha
emiJoynient  c(  the  anipicea  at  marriages  was  one
gnat  Bignment  mod  by  tha  ("tricians  againsk
aotaatUuia  between  themselves  and  the  plebeian*^
as  it  would  occauon,  they  urged,  pertmriation^n^
atapidonm  pt/Ukoram  pnvaionaRifiie.  (Liv.  iv«
2.)  The  poBaeasiou  of  theae  priiate  auapicia  i«
expKBsed  in  another  paaaage  of  Livy  by  primUtw^
aatpida  Itaiert.  (Lit.  ti.  41.)  In  taking  thuso
private  auspices,  it  would  iqipear  that  any  |Atriria,it


*  There  can  be  no  leasonaUe  doubt  that  bv~
palm  in  these  (lanages  the  whole  body  of  tlVo
utridans  is  meant,  and  not  the  senators,  n^
Rubioo  asserts.  (Comp.  Beeka,  Rom  AUerti.  ■vot,
iL  part  L  [L  S04,  &c)


D  uteamij  oar  oMoal  in  meh
nme  to  tbe  public  mngim,  tbe
B^bon  of  tte  coUeginm,  who  an  tbenfoK
bt^aadj  oJIed  iinjiirii  futliei,  to  dittuiguuh
ik^  torn  tke  prima  uigiin.  (Gc.  ria  Z^.  ij.  a,
•rfAM.TLG;  FMBi,(.v.}«MfMp«urg.)  The
iM^  hffWwa^  wBfl  Toj  difienmt  with  reqracM  to
tkc  ■■^nB  jmUKO,  genenJIy  called  aunpida
anqdj,  ai  ihoae  which  aHuxraed  the  ctale.  The
bacT  onld  t*Aj  be  taken  bf  the  pcnoni  who  ib-
[■iialiit  the  itale,  and  who  acted  u  msdiBtoti
bUflioi  the  godi  and  iha  itate  |  for  ttiough  all
the  f  iririani  woa  eligible  for  taking  the  aotpico,
j(t  it  waa  oal;  the  laagiilialu  who  were  in  accnaJ
'j  kmg  ai  thoe  wei?  anj


Cut.  ii.  S6) ;  «h!


^they
1,  Cic.  de
*  tlwii  ctf  oa  haled,  ^kj  were


T'"»t  ^3*11-  xiii-  IS)  >  and  at  the  eipintion  of
thoraSe^  the;  laid  tbem  dawn  (pmibimt  ta  d»-
jiiila  t  mfifii.  Cic  ia  Nat.  Dm.  iL  3).  Id
a^t^  hawcTci,  that  wai  no  patrician  masinnte,
Iha  a^ipeea  becao*  TcMed  in  the  whole  bod;  of
the  pattinna,  iriiicfa  wu  eipteaMd  b;  the  wvrdi
^^Btaa  ai  f^ta  rmlemt  (Cie.  Brut.  S.)  This
haff^wd  in  lin  kingly  poiod  on  the  dnniae  of  a


, Is  like  munat  in  the

, it  waa  beliered  that  there

d.  fcaoi  anBMtlihig  bahf  (iifd'im)  in  the  anipieea
Iks  titrtian  of  the  bodhiIi,  and  thn  were
nee  to  reaign  theii  (mce,  the
D  the  wbole  bodj  oF  the  po-


iW.r.  17.  81,  Til.)

It  win  b>  Bem  from  what  hai  beei  nid  tliat
a  ipeciea  of  ihoocracj,  that


o  election  conld
be  bid.  BD  kw  pBMed,  no  war  waged  ;  for  a  ne-
^Bct  af  tlw  anapcca  woold  hare  been  eqniralent  to
a  ilniaiaiiiai  timt  the  godi  had  cowed  to  niie  the

Tkav  atiU  nnain  tlnee  poiola  in  cmnectini  with
da  aiafittt  which  Rqnire  notice: — 1.  The  rela-
MB  af  iba  ■aijw'ulia  to  th*  angnn  in  taking  the
k^^cea,  2.  Tba  manntr  in  which  the  magiitntee
iBiiiail  tk  an^icra.  3.  The  relation  of  the  dif>
Saat  ■■giitialu  to  one  aiuCher  with  reapect  to
tae  aaapeea.  We  on  only  make  a  few  bnef  le-
a^ikl  wpoa  Mdt  of  theae  impoltant  matten,  and
wmn  ilBi  aar  naden  (at  fbnsr  Infonnatiiin  to  the
■■iMri*  iliiiw'iin  of  Rabiu  (SSai.  Vafummj,
^  4^  ie.),  ta  wbom  wa  an  inddttad  lot  a  gnat


AuauR  m

1.  The  digdnctlon  between  the  dntiea  of  tho
msginntei  and  the  atigiin  in  taking  the  aiupicet
it  one  of  the  moat  difficult  pointi  connected  with
this  lubject,  bnt  perhajs  s  ratiabctoi}  tolution  of
theae  djfficnltiea  ma;  be  found  by  taking  an  hi*-
torical  riew  of  the  queWion,  We  are  told  not  only
that  the  kingi  were  in  poauaiian  of  the  aaipicea,
but  that  thej  thomaelTOi  were  acquainted  with
the  ait  and  pncti«ed  it.  Komnliu  i>  reptnanted
to  luLTo  been  the  beat  of  angun,  and  from  kim  all
■nccseding  angnn  receiTed  the  chief  mark  of  their
office,  the  lihaii,  with  which  that  king  exerdaed
bii  calling.  (Cic  de  Dh.  I  2,  ii.  17 ;  Lir.  L  ID.)
He  ia  fuiuier  italed  to  bare  B[^inled  thiee  angnn,
bat  onlj  ai  hit  aanAanta  in  takmg  the  anipicea,
a  &cl  which  ia  important  to  bear  in  mind.  (Cic,
de  Rtp.  ii.  9.)  Their  dignity  gradually  incnaaed
in  conieqaence  of  their  being  employed  at  the
inanguiation  of  the  ktogi,  and  alio  m  craueqoence
of  their  becoming  the  preserTen  and  depowlariei
of  the  science  of  aogury,  Ffvmed  into  a  collegimn,
they  handed  down  to  their  luccesHca  the  TBliona
rulei  of  the  science,  while  the  kinga,  and  ■nbae'
qoently  the  magistiatea  of  the  republic,  were  liable
to  change.  Theii  datin  thug  became  twoibld,  to
auiit  the  magiitratee  in  takij%  the  anipicea,  and
to  preaerre  a  tcientifie  knowledge  of  tbe  art.  They
were  not  in  poaaesaion  of  the  aaipicea  themaeliei,
thoagb  they  ondenlood  them  better  than  the  m^
giiliatea ;  the  lightumg  and  the  bitdi  wen  not
■ent  to  them  bat  to  Uie  magiitiatei ;  tliay  dia-
charged  no  independent  fonctioni  either  political
or  eedeuaitical,  and  are  therefore  deicnbed  by
Cicero  ai  pHvaH.  (Di  Dtvai.  i.  40.)  Ai  the
Bugon  were  theietbre  merely  the  aniitanta  of  the
magiMiatei,  they  conld  not  taka  the  aaipicea
withont  the  latter,  Ihoagh  l}ie  magiibatea  on  the
contrary  conld  diipenie  with  thck  aiiiatance,  aa
moil  &tqnenlly  hUTC  happened  in  the  appointment
of  a  dictator  by  the  coniul  on  military  ezpedittimi
at  a  diitance  fnim  the  city.  At  the  same  time  it
malt  be  home  in  mind,  that  ai  the  aogon  were
the  interpreters  of  the  Kience,  they  poaaeand  the
right  of  declaring  whether  the  anipiceg  wen  Ttlid
or  invalid,  and  that  too  whether  they  were  preaent
or  not  at  the  time  of  taking  them  ;  and  whoerer
qaeetioned  their  deciiion  was  liable  to  seTere
ptmishmcnL  (Cic  dt  Leg,  ii  6.)  They  thus  pos-
sessed in  reality  a  reto  npm  every  important  pnblio
traniactioD.  It  waa  thii  jwwer  which  made  tha
ofliee  an  object  of  ambition  to  the  most  diitin-
gaisbed  men  at  Rome,  and  which  ted  Cicero,  him-
lelf  an  angur,  to  deecribe  it  ai  the  bigbeat  dignity
intheitale  ((fi£^.  iL]2}.  The  augnn  frequently
employed  thii  power  as  a  politiol  engine  to  Titiate
the  election  of  such  parties  a*  wen  nn&ToDcable
to  the  eiclnsive  privileges  of  the  patridani.  (Liv.
Ti  87,  riil  23.)

But  ahhoagh  the  auguia  cogld  declare  that  there
waa  some  lault  in  ^e  aaipicea,  yet,  on  the  other
hand,  they  oould  not,  in  favour  of  their  office,  de-
clare that  any  mi&TOunblo  >ign  had  appeared  to
them,  since  it  waa  not  to  them  that  the  ampicea
were  tent.  Thna  we  an  told  that  the  angnn  did
not  poaaesB  the  tpectio,  that  is,  the  right  of  taking
the  stalfraui^oe*.  This  tpedio,  of  which  we  hare
already  briefly  spoken,  was  of  two  kindi,  one
more  ejttensiTe  and  the  other  mora  limited.  In
the  raie  case  the  penon,  who  exercised  it,  could
put  a  atf^  to  the  proceeding!  of  ai  ^^
tnlebyhiic'


ITS


AUGUR.


beloiiKd  Duly  to  the  highut
fa]».  dktaton,  mterregn,  and,  with  Bamfl  modilica'
"seton. In  the  DtbiT  case,  the  penoa
>nlv  exerciied  thu  ipedia  in
dntiei  of  hi!  oira  office,  and  could
not  inlerfera  with  my  other
called  iptcUo


k'lCcao


ic,  and  belonged  U  lllo
a,  the  cenion,  sedilei,  and  qnui-
ton.  Not  ai  Ihe  angnii  did  not  poueu  ^e
■ui^cei,  they  conaoiiienllf  coold  not  poueu  the
ipectio  (iaitrt  tptftiamgm) ;  but  u  the  angiui  were
eonttantly  employed  by  the  magiatntei  to  take  the
anapieeA,  lliey  extrcatd  the  BpecUo,  thongb  thoy
did  notpooBB  it  in  lirtne  of  their  office.  When
they  wen  employed  by  the  nugittntea  in  taking
the  itiiBpi«>,  they  pouetsed  the  right  of  the  sm-
tia&>,  and  thiu  had  the  power,  hy  the  declaration
of  nnfaTouiable  ligni  (otuwiAafu),  to  put  a  itop
to  all  tmpartant  public  tnuuactioni  (Cic  da  Ltg.
iL  12).  In  thii  vay  we  ue  able  to  nndenland
the  Miertion  of  Cicero  (Fhilipp.  iL  32),  thai  the
augun  poeaeusd  the  nstintu,  the  coniuli  and  the
other  (higher)  magiatntea both  the  tpa^  and

bome  in  mind  that  tllii  right  of  mtiithUo  only  be-
longed to  them  in  eonseijuenoe  of  their  being  em-
ployed by  the  magiAtratea,  (Reipecting  the  pauage
of  FeatDi,  1.  o.  tpetiio^  wbich  icema  to  teach  a  dU*.
lerent  doctrine,  lee  Rubioo,  p.  £6.)

2.  A(  to  the  majtaer  in  which  the  nugiatnlei
reeeired  the  aoipicee,  there  ii  no  reaaon  to  mppoae,
aa  many  modern  wiitera  bare  done,  that  tbey  were
eoaferred  upon  them  in  any  ipecial  manner.  It
waa  the  act  of  their  election  which  mode  them  the
ledpienti  of  the  ftiupicea,  aince  the  comitia,  in
which  they  vera  ^ipoinled  to  their  office,  were
held  aajpHuto,  and  conaeqnently  their  appointment
waaiegHidedaaiatificdby  thegodi.  Theauanicea,
therefore,  paued  immediately  into  their  hondi
iipan  the  abdicstion  of  their  predeceaion  in  office.
There  are  two  ciraunjtaneea  which  hsTe  given
liae  to  the  opinion  thai  the  mogiatmtea  receiTed
the  asapicea  bj  •ome  apecial  act.  The  fiiit  ii,  that
the  new  ma^trate,  immediately  o^  the  midiught
on  irtiich  hia  oSlce  b^an,wa«  acciutomed  to  obtcrre
the  beaTen*  in  aider  to  obtun  a  happy  lign  tat

But  he  did  not  do  thii  in  order  to  obtain  the
■oapicee ;  he  already  poaKOaed  them,  and  it  woi
in  lictne  of  hii  poaaeanaa  of  them,  that  he  waa  able
to  obaerre  the  bearena.  The  Mcond  cirenmitaDoe
(o  which  we  haTB  baea  alluding,  waa  the  iHauffU-
ralio  of  the  kinn  oa  the  An  after  their  electioB
in  the  comitia  (Liv.  L  19).  But  thii  inaiguntion
had  reference  aimply  to  the  piieitly  office  of  the
kinr,  and,  Iheicfbre,  did  not  lake  place  in  the  caae
of  tbc  repnblicsn  mogiatiatea,  though  it  continued
in  ute  in  the  qtpoiatmatil  of  ^  rex  aaoonun  and
the  other  prieata,

3.  The  auipicei  belonging  to  the  diffenmt  magii-
tnlea  were  diiidod  into  two  rlaaara,  called  aupida
MoimaiamqfimiiiA  minora.  The  fbnner,  which
beloDged  origuuUy  to  the  kinga,  paaed  orer  to  the
GonnJa  on  the  ioititiiticn  of  the  republic,  and  like-
wiu  to  the  atraoidinary  DMgiitlatea,  the  dictalon,
!nterTegea,aiid  eonaulartiilHUtea,  Wboi  tiie  con-
anl*  were  deprived  in  couiw  of  time  of  part  of  their
dntiea,  sod  iopaiata  nagiatntet  were  aarted  to
diadaige  diem,  the;r  naliually  reoaiTed  the  aaipi-
da  tuyura  alio:  tlui  waa  the  cue  with  the  cen-


AUGUB

aora  and  pmeton.  The  quaeaton  and  the  ccmle
aedilcfl,  on  the  contiary,  had  only  the  au^ieia
miwra,  became  th^  ncaived  them  firom  the  am-
auli  ud  praetora  of  the  year,  and  their  auiptce*
were  denred  &om  the  ai^ra  of  the  higher  ma-
giitiatea. (HeaBlla,  i^.  GM.  liiL  IS.)

It  remaina  to  trace  the  hiatoiy  of  the  college  of
angim-  We  have  already  eeea  that  it  waa  a  com-
mon opinion  in  antiquity  that  the  angunhip  oved
ita  origin  to  the  fint  king  of  Rome,  and  it  it  ac-
cordingly itated,  that  a  coU^e  of  three  augun  waa
appointed  by  Romulna,  anaweiing  to  tho  ncmber
of  the  eaily  tribea,  the  Ramnca,  Titiea,  and  Ln-
cerenaea.  Thii  ia  the  account  of  Cicero  {da  Brp.
iL  9),  who  anppoied  Nnma  to  have  added  two
more  (il  14),  wilhont,  howoTer,  itatin^  in  what
way  theie  latter  conHpouded  to  the  tnbea.  On
the  other  aide  atand  dimient  atatemoita  of  Litt,
£nt,  one  (It.  1)  which  ii  probably  an  error,  m
which  ^0  firat  ioatitudon  of  ougura  ia  attributed
to  Numa,  aaemlngly  on  the  theory  that  all  the
Roman  religion  wat  derived  from  the  aecond  king;
Becondly.  a  atatcment  of  &r  more  importance  (i.  G),
that  at  the  paiaiog  of  the  Ognlnian  law  the  augnra
were  but  four  in  nmnber,  which  Livy  hinuelE^  who
lecogniied  the  principle  of  the  number  of  angnn
coiTcaponding  to  tliat  of  the  tribea,  auppooea  to
bare  been  accidentaL  Thia  ii  impaohaUe,  oa
Niebuhr  baa  ahown  (Hiit.  if  Borne,  toL  iii.  p.
362},  who  thinka  the  third  tribe  waa  excluded
from  the  college  of  angun,  and  that  the  four,
tlMTefc*e,  repreaented  the  Rainnea  and  Titiea  only.


r  the  third


tUy  thia  ia
a  taiitay  in


a  hard  t  ,.  .
tiority  of  the  RaioDea  and  Titiea  o
tribe  could  have  continned  down  la  the  time  of
the  Ognlnian  law  (ac  300):  morcOTer,  aa  two
ongute  apiece  were  appointed  from  each  of  the  two
fiiit  tribe*,  and  the  remaining  fire  front  the  pleba,
it  doee  not  appear  how  the  Lucerea  could  erer  hava
obtained  the  priril«e.  A  diSerent  mode  of  re-
conciling the  contiadictory  numben  four  end  threo
ia  loaght  for  in  another  atatement  of  Cicero  {de
Dw,  i.  *«),  that  the  lilngi  were  angun,  ao  that
after  their  expulalon  another  augur  may  hava  beeit
added  inataad  of  them  to  the  oiignial  number
which  repRieuled  the  tribei.  ProbaUy  thia  ia
one  of  the  many  caaea  in  early  T
which  the  only  condnaion  we  cai
the  theory  of  what  cugii  to  hav
to  on^qnoriana  of  a  later  age  differed  bata  what
actually  toot  according  to  the  ttdieat  aoconnta  to
which  Liiy  had  recouraa.

The  Ognlnian  law  (b.c300),  which  increaaed
the  number  of  pontic  to  eight,  by  the  addition  of
four  plebeians,  and  that  of  the  augun  to  nine  hy
the  oddhion  of  fire  plebeioni,  may  be  couidered  ft
aort  of  aera  in  Roman  hiatocy.  The  rdigiona  dia-
Linction  between  the  two  onlera  which  had  been  ao
often  inaiatsd  upon  wai  now  at  on  end,  and  it  waa
no  longer  poauble  to  nae  the  aoapicea  aa  a  political
inatnonent  againrt  the  plebeiaua.  The  number  of
nine  angun  which  thii  law  fixed,  tailed  down  to
the  dictatorahip  of  Sylla,  who  increaaed  them  to
fifteen,  a  multiple  of  the  original  thn^  ^bahly
with  a  reference  to  the  eaily  tribe*.  (Lit.  ,^>it.
89.)  A  (iileenth  nmnber  waa  added  by  Juliua
Caeaar  after  hi*  return  from  Egypt.  (Dion  Caaa.
xliL  GI.)


pointed  by  the  kin^  hot  ai  the  king  himMlf  waa


AUGUH.
dO  aagw,  tLrir  q^aiotmant  bj  him
Mdmd  eontnuy  to  thi*  prind^  (AomnJiu  onfi-
*bA  ^S^n*,  A  '^  ii-  B.)  Thej  leBined  dir
n^la  of  B-optaliiD  nntil  B.C  1(13,  the  jear  o
Ibe  p— ■■*— "  1>T.  Bj  thii  lav  il  wu  eniictot
tkat  naaoH  in  the  pritMl^  eaU^<«  ihiHild  be
SOiti  ap  bj  the  TDis  of  ■  minorit;  of  (h«  tribo,
i.  c  wwBHitD  ODt  of  thirtj-fiTe  chown  hj  loL

(CSe.  A  i^  Jbt.  iL  7  I  V«1L  Pu.

Mr.  1.)  ne  Dnaidai  kv  m
SbDb  B^C  81  (PMulo-AKan.  •■  Oe.  Din.  f.  102,
•^  OnUi),  hot  i^HB  ratored  B.  c.  63,  duiiig  Ilia
aanaUup  of  <Sac«,  bf  the  liibime  T.  Anniiu
L«liiiuin,  with  (he  lappmt  of  Cunr  (Dion  Cui.
xzztu.  S7).  it  wu  ■  eeamd  time  abrogated  by
AM1H7  B.  c  44  (IK0D  CtM.  iliT.  £3}  ;  whether
■(■■I  Rstond  by  Hutiiu  and  PanM  ia  tbeii
Hijual  amnttmoit  of  die  acta  of  Anbmj,  wanu
■imilaiii  Th«  enpenn  pomiacd  the  right  of
tJactiDg  aBgnn  at  pkatore.

The  Kogaxw  vsv  elected  for  life,  and  ereii  ij
<Bpctal]j  omTicted,  aerer  lost  their  sacred  cbanV'
ter.  (Plin..^  iT.  S.)  Wheo  a  Tacancj  octttned,
tke  iiMJi'lMi'  ma  nominated  bj  two  of  the  eldei
imtoa  of  ik  coD^  (ae.  PUL  ii  3),  the  etecton
■ULL  aWBtB,  and  the  Dew  axmbei  wbj  tht
fannlj  inaiganlti.  (Cic  BnU.  1.)  On
iiiiaaiia  then wai  aln^ a  tplendid  banqiiet  giTOn,
aCwiudiaUdwaunnsere  eipectedi
/j^i. _j  K^_ -:r  te ■ ■--


AUGUST  ALES.


179


ktUbepRaent
i  13,  U,  16.;


126,  aJ  jiO.
Tim  <Milj  diatinctiDn  in  tbe  college  wai  one  of  ag« ;
at  cU^  ai^DT  alwaji  voted  before  a.  jc
if  tbe  latter  filled  me  of  the  higher  oi
itale.  (Cic  lb  Sm.  IB.)  The  had  of  tbe  college
-««  crilBd  ao^ufer  coiligii.  It  vat  expected  that
■0  tW  ■agon  ahoald  Iits  oq  friendly  temu  with
oae  ■"**^".  and  il  waa  a  inle  that  no  one  wai
to  be  dectadia  the  office,  who  waa  known  to  be  an
any  of  tbe  college. (Citod  HiBLiii.  10.)


Tbf  siignr,  who  had  inaognnted  a  yotmger  tnfluber,
wBaHlwajalobo  Rgaided  by  the  ktlei  in  tbe  lig) '
•f  m. panot (■  parmtu  turn  loeo  colere, Ci


:  IX

Afl  maipua  of  tbeir  office  the  angnrs  wore  the
a  III  I II.  ar  piUic  dieaa  (Sen.  ad  Aat.  viL  612),
■■d  (sRied  in  their  hand  the  tibai  iK  nured  wand.
ILirrcv.]  On  the  eoina  of  the  Homina,  who
£I]ed  tfce  efice  of  ■wv,  we  Bonitantl;  find  the
Itaea,  aod  ahng  with  it,  not  tmfreqneady,  the
oKa,  am  (artten  nani  which  waa  ued  by  ihcm
attaiitn.  (Lir.  k.  7  ;  Varr.  £.£.  t.  121,  ed.
~  I.) Both  of  Iheae  inatnunenta  are  aecn  in


he  nor  any  of  the  educated  claiaei  appear*  to  hare
had  any  &ilh  in  it.  What  a  &rce  il  had  become
a  few  yeen  Uler  it  eridenl  bora  tlie  italement  of
Dionyaina  (iL  6),  who  inibnna  ua  thai  a  new
magiitialfl,  who  took  the  anspicei  npon  the  fint
day  of  hia  oflice,  was  nccuatomed  to  haTo  on  ougm

00  bii  tide,  vbo  told  him  that  lightning  had  ip-
peared  on  hia  left,  which  «aa  r^rdcd  aa  a  good
omen,  and  althongb  nothing  cf  the  kind  had
happened,  thia  declarUion  waa  considetrd  inffi.
denL  (HaacoT,  DtJunAiitpidiapudJioiiuiiiot,
Lipe.  1721  ;  Weither,  Dt  Ai^uriU  Roaamt,
Lemgo,  IS35  ;  Crenia,  SyiUioiai,  voLii.  p.  93j,
&c  ;  HUller,  EtnAtr,  ToLiL  p.  l]0,dce. ;  Har-
long.  Die  Sil^iai  der  Ramar,  toL  i.  p.  9B,  &c  ;
Oiittyios,GeteiieU»dtrR'6m.Slaalitmr/:p.i9B,&ct
Becker,  Rom.  AUerO.  ToL  iL  part  i.  p.  304  ;  but
aboie  all  Rnbino,  Amu.  Verfamig,  p.  34,  &c)

AUGUaA'CULUM.  [Auoua,  p.  I76,a.l
AUGURA'LE.  [Annua,  p.  176,a.]
AUOUSTA'LES  (ic  bdi,  alw  called  ..l^iia-
(aAia,  K.  ortamima,  /aJura,  and  by  the  Oiedc
writen  and  in  Qreek  ioacriptiooi,  XiSaeTu,  X«-
Ccto'ifio,  AfrTOBordXia),  were  gamea  celebrated  in
hononr  of  AugUBtua,  at  Rome  and  in  other  parte
of  tbo  Roman  empire^  After  the  battle  of  Actium,
a  quinquennial  feitirij  {layfyfupi)  TO-rtnipd)
waa  itutituted }  and  the  birthday  {y^ri9Km)  U
Auguitus,  aa  well  aa  that  on  which  the  lictory  waa
announced  at  Rome,  were  regarded  aa  tetiiTal  day*.
(Dion  Cbu.  11  18.)  lu  Ue  pnTincei,  alio,  in
addition  to  templet  and  altora,  quinquennial  gaiaei
weie  ini^toted  in  almcat  erery  town.  (Snet.  Aig.
£9.)  The  Roman  eqnitei  were  accuttsmed  of  their
own  accord  to  cslebista  the  birthday  of  Auguitut
in  every  altemala  year  (Suet  jliRr.67) ;  and  die
piutoa,  befiire  any  decree  had  been  jHHed  for  tbe
pnipoae,  were  alao  in  ihe  habit  of  exhibiting  gamea
eToy  year  in  honour  of  Auguttua.  (Dion  Caaa.
]iT.26,S0).  Itw««DDl,however,liUn.cIl,that
the  fcatival  on  tbe  birth-day  of  AuguaEna  waa  for-
mally ettablithed  by  a  decree  of  the  aesate  (Dion
Caaa.  lir.  34),  and  it  ia  thit  festital  which  it
uaoally  meant  when  the  Anguatalea  or  Augustalia
are  mentiDned.  It  waa  celebrated  ir.  Id.  Oclobr.
At  the  death  of  Angnitui,  thit  fealival  aaaumed  a
mora  toleton  chancier,  waa  added  to  the  Faati,
and  celebrated  to  hia  honour  aa  a  gcd.  (Tac  Aim.
!.I3;  Dion(iiat.lvi.46.)  Hence,  Taeilut  .pi»kt
of  il  aa  firtt  eatablithed  in  Ihe  nign  of  Tiberiui
(.4iH.  L  £4.)  It  wat  henceforth  exhibited  annually
in  the  eiicna,  at  fint  by  the  tribonet  of  the  plebi^
at  tbe  eonunenccmenl  of  tbe  icign  gf  Tiberiua,  but
aFterwarda  by  the  praetor  peregrinni. (Tacit.  A<at.

1  U ;  Dion  Cati.  IrL  46.)  Th«e  nmca  coo-
tinned  to  be  eihihited  ia  the  time  of  Dion  Catthii,
that  ia,  about  a,  d.  230  (lir.  34).

Tbe  auguatalei,  or  anguitalia,  at  Neapolii
(N^ca),  wen  cclebiated  with  great  iplendour.
They  were  iuatituled  in  tbe  lifetime  of  Anguatni
(Suet  Amg.  96),  and  wen  celebrated  eveiy  £ts
yeara.  According  to  Stiabo  (t.  p.  24G),  who
tpeaki  of  thete  gamea  without  mentioning  their
name,  they  riialled  the  mon  magnificent  of  the
Grecian  fstiTala.  They  contiated  of  gyomaaUo
aod  moilcal  conleita,  and  laatcd  for  teveral  dayt*
At  theie  gamea  the  Emperor  Claodiua  brought
forward  a  Oreelc  comedy,  and  raceiTod  the  priie.
(Suet.  OatiL  1 1  I  compare  Diim  Can.  !x.  6.)

Augaatalis  (ZMwrra)  were  alao  celebrated  at
Alanodria,  at  appean  from an  iuciip^on  in


180  AUGUSTALES.

Onit<r(SI6.  3);uid  in  (liiidtf  there  musmag-
niliceiil  temple  to  Augnttui  {lilaimior,  Augia-
laU).  Wa  And  Tneation  of  sugnnalia  in  nmncroai
other  placeit  M  P«^Hiniu,  Nicomedio,  Ac

AUQUSTA'LES,  the  nuns  of  two  dutM  of
prieiti,  DOe  ut  Rams  and  tht  ntbu  in  tho  mnni-
dpi»,  freqaentl?  mentianed  in  inioiptkiD).

I.  Tbe  Augutlaiei  at  Rome,  prapeilj  called  r>-
dala  Attgiataiet,  vhich  n  the  name  tbej  alwaji
be&rinmBciiptkHii,irerean(Hderof  prieita(^b^u-
lalism  lacardotiam)  inititoted  by  Tibeiiiu  to  attend
to  the  wonhip  of  AagiutDi  and  tbe  Julia  geta.
Tbej  were  choHn  by  lot  fram  among  tbe  principal
penanft  of  Rem^  azid  vcn  tventj  one  in  niunber,
to  «hirb  vera  added  Tiberiui,  Dniaoi,  Chmdioi.
■ad  Oennaaicoi,  aa  memben  of  the  imperial
fiunJly.  (Tacit.  L  G4.)  They  were  alio  called
Kiamtotia  AugmlaUi  (Tacit  Atnu  ii.  83)  ;  and
■ometimeatinipIyJi^wabZu.  (TaciU  HiiL  ii.  95.)
Similaf  prieitfl  vcre  appointed  1o  attend  to  the
wonhip  of  other  emperon  oflet  their  dcoue  ;  and
ve  accotdlngly  find  in  inKiiptioai  menlian  made
of  the  todala  FUttii,  Hadrvuiaia,  Atliam,  Anio-

'  BtH,  itc.  It  (qjpean  that  iktfimaa  Angiataln
ought  to  be  diatiDguifthed  from  the  todala  Attgua-
btia.  We  find  that  fiammea  and  lacerdotea  were
appointed,  in  tbe  lifetime  of  Angiutui,  to  attend  to
big  warship  ;  but  we  haTe  tbe  enircu  utatementa
of  Suctoniua  and  Dion  Cauiua  that  thi>  worship
WM  confined  to  the  pioTincea,  and  wu  not  prat-
tieed  in  Rome,  or  in  any  port  of  Italy,  during  the
lifetime  of  Aagnatiu.  (Tacit.  Amt.  i.  10  ;  Suet.
Ai^.  52  ;  Dion  Cau.  U.  20.)  Womtm  even  wen
appointed  prieatesaet  of  Angiutiu,  aa  appeon  from
an  inaaiption  in  Oruter  (330,  10):  tbia  praetice
probably  took  ita  origin  feim  Che  appointment  of
Livia,  by  a  decree  of  the  lenate,  to  be  prieateia  to
lier  deccaaad  huiband.  (Dion  Caai.  In.  16.)  It
aeenu  probable  that  the  Kdaln  AngnitabM  were
entruaCed  with  the  management  of  tbe  wonbip  ;
but  that  the  Oamlnca  Augnatal^  were  the  peraona
who  actually  ofiercd  the  locrificn  and  performed
the  other  niaed  ritea.  A  member  of  the  aodalea
Anguflale*  wai  lometimea  a  flamen  alio  (Orelli,
Imaip.  3366, 3366)  ;  and  it  ia  not  improbable
that  the  flaminea  were  i^peinted  by  the  sodalea

II.  The  Aaffadala  in  tbe  monieipia  are  np-
poaed  by  moatmodem«rilen,incaaie<iueaceoftbB
atBtementDftheacholiutonHocace(5a(.ii.  3.381),
to  have  been  a  clan  of  piiota  telccted  by  Angiutui
from  the  libertini  to  attend  lo  the  religioua  ritea
connected  with  the  wonhip  of  the  I^rca,  which
that  empeior  wu  laid  to  hare  pot  up  in  plncea

Tol.iLpl97.)  But  A.  W.  Zumpt,  in  an  exceUent
cHay  en  tbi>  anbject,  bring)  forward  good  reaacna
fcjT  rejecting  thit  epinioTL  f  Compar.  Coui'rTALrA,!
He  thinki  it  mnch  more  probable  that  Ihia  order
of  inestB  wBi  instituted  in  the  municipia  in  imita-
tion of  the  Augiutalea  at  Rome,  and  for  the  lame
object, namely,  to  attend  to  tbe  worship  of  Auguatna,
Fram  the  nnmerona  iniciiplioni  in  which  ihey  are
mentioned,  we  learn  tbe  following  £uts  mpecting
them.  Tbey  formed  a  collegium  and  wen  ap-
pointed by  the  dtarima,  or  aenate  of  the  nnni-
etpi^  They  wen  generally  libertini,  which  ia
eatily  accounted  ibr  ^  the  bet,  that  none  but  the
frecboin  (fagmui),  conld  obtain  admiMion  into  the
euiia  of  the  municipia;  and  as  there  ie<m  to  have
been  many  expeucai  connected  with  the  diacharge
of  tha  dntiea  of  the  Anguatalea,  the  decoiicawi


AURUM.

would  not  Tie  aniiinti  to  obtain  this  diftindiaD,
while  the  libertini  on  the  contrary,  who  woe
generally  a  wealthy  claai  and  wen  not  inTCMed
with  any  hononr,  would  naturally  coTet  it.  The
Angnatalea  ranked  next  in  dignity  to  the  deca-
riones;  and  at  they  were  mostly  men  of  property,
tbey  came  in  conne  of  time  to  fo^  a  middle  claji
between  tbe  decurianei  and  pleba,  like  the  eques-
trian order  at  Rcotie.  Thua,  in  tbe  inscriptions  of
many  municipia,  we  find  the  decurvmes,  Angus-
tales,  and  plebs,  mentioned  together  aa  the  three
classes  into  which  the  community  was  dinded.
Tbe  ail  piincipaj  members  of  the  college  were
railed  Smri,  a  title  which  aeema  to  bare  been
imitated  from  the  Seeiri  in  the  equestrian  order
at  Rome.  (Egger,  Eaanm  Criligiii  da  Hittoricni
anaaudtla  VitttdiiBiffMirArg%tbi,PiiliE,\8U,
Appendix  II.,  tr»lt  of  tbe  Augnstalea  ;  hot  tee
especially  A.  W.  Zunpt,  £>■  .J  ^u(a£tiii(  (t  Ssn'ru
AtfftuiaiSiia  Conaiailatiii  i^gnmAiaa,  BeroL
1B4S.)

AUGUSTUS,  a  uuim  bestowed  upon  Octi^
Tianoa  in  R  c  27,  by  the  senate  and  the  Roman
people. It  was  a  word  nacd  in  conncclian  with
nli^on,  and  designated  a  person  at  sacred  and
worthy  of  worship  ;  hence  the  Greek  writers  trnne-
late it  by  StSnarit. (Dion  CaH.  liii  IG,  IR  ;
Suet Ai^.  7  i VdL Pak  iL  91 ;  Flor.  It.  12 ;
Orea,  Ti.  20  i  Centorin.  23  ;  Ot.  Fad.  L  607.) It
was  not  a  title  indicative  of  power,  but  simply  a
{oroame  1  and  is  hence  called  by  Suetonius  (Tiift.  36)
nomaa  kendiiarmm. It  was,  however,  bome  not
only  by  Tiberius  and  the other  emperors  crai-
nected  with  tbe  Aunlly  of  Anauitui,  but  wai  like-
wise adopted  by  all  ncoeeding  emperors,  as  if
descended,  either  by  birth  or  adoption,  from  the
''~^  emperor  of  the  Roman  worid  (ia  ^ptt  ■omev
.  gtaJam  adtgjtiomt  aid  jmn  ienditario  ttta»-
dere,  Xara^d.  Abr.  Seotr.  10). The  name  of
a  was  frequently  bestowed  upon  iemales  of
iperial  family, the  first  instance  of  which
in  the  case  of  Liria,  who  received  this  title
er  adoption  into  tbe  Julia  gens  <m  the  death
buiband  OcUvianus  (Tac  .^a<t.  L  8)  ;  but
Amgiatai  belonged  exclusively  to  the  reigning  em-
peror till  towards  the  end  of  the  second  century
of  the  Cbristisn  aera,  when  H.  Aurclins  and  1^
Vemt  both  received  this  sunuune  (Sputian.  AtL
Vtnt,  6,  M.  Ami.  FIdL  7> l-rom  this  time  we
fiequently  find  two  or  even  a  greater  number  of
Avfftati/  and  though  in  that  and  in  all  similar  aaev
the  persons  bonouiod  with  the  title  wen  ruarded
as  participators  of  the  imperial  power,  still  the  one
who  received  the  title  first  was  looked  upon  as  the
head  ot  the  empire. When  there  were  two  Aa-
gusti  we  find  on  coins  and  inscriptions  A  V  G  G,
and  when  three  A  V  O  C  G, From  tbe  time  of
pcfprtumt  Avgviiv,  and
from  Philippus  or  Claudius  Gctbicnt  tsniptr  A»-
I,  the  latter  of  which  titles  was  borne  by  the
so-odled  Roman  emperors  in  Germany. (Edihcl,
I  viii.  p.  354,  &c) [Cakoab.]
AVIATIIUM. [AoaicuLTUSi,  p.6e,b.]
AULA. {Oouoa.]
AULAEUM. [SiPARivH.]
AU'REUS. tAuRun.]
AURI'GA [Cacul,]

AURUM  (xpvais),  gold.  Tbe  remarks  made
idee  Ahoin'TIIII  apply  to  a  great  extent  to  gold


AURUH.
that  Uticle.  It  wnild  appmr  fmm  a  punge  in  the
A^igat  (t.  1638),  thai  m  Ifae  time  of  Sopbociei
g^  *>■  ran  u  Athoo.  Indeed  ttmnghout  the
whale  tt  Qiecoe,  Ihoogh  gdd  ni  bj  no  mana  un-
''  hare  been  obtained  cbiefly

' ■ ■ "inor.and  the
n  abnadasce.


•  neak  cotutantly  of  gold  o
inmo^  and  med  io  large  qnaj]


■  tm  tbe  parpoaea  of
'  itlf  aeonmted  foe  bj  the  bci  that  Homei
i.  Anatie  Gra^  The  chief  placeg  fcom
vkich  t^  Qrerki  ptwnred  theii  gold  were  India,
AnbB,  Aimoiia,  Colchii,  and  Traai.  It  tu
tammi  aiaed  with  ths  laudi  af  llie  Pactolui  and

AbwiBt  tlie  onlj  mediad  of  pnri^Ting  gold,  known
■■  the  anoeate,  leema  to  hare  been  that  of  srinding
Kid  then  naating  it,  and  bj  tbia  pnceaa  tbey  luc-
«ded  in  getting  it  yaj  pun.  Thia  ia  what  we
an  M  ondcataDd  by  tM  phiau  xptvCou  ixl^Bau
B  Tliotyilida  (iL  13),  and  by  the  word  •Anata'n
B  Piny  iH.  N.  miii.  3.  l  19),  and  eliewhere
<Fii>icelGiii  a.  V.  obnuaa).  Reipccdng  the  a*e  of
gdd  in  the  fine  arti,  eipecialiy  in  the  cbiyaele-


»  ToBii;


The  a


Id  the  Oreeki  from  the  earliMt

dsca  rf  vhieh  we  hare  any  information.  (Horn.
(td.  iB.  425,  ti.  232 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  niiii.  3.  a.  IS,
t.a.32.}

GK«nc  Gold  HoHBT.  —  The  time  when  gold
■aa  fint  eoiaed  at  Athena  ia  Toy  unceniun.
Anatophaoea  ipeaki  in  the  Fngi  (40G  B.c)  of  t1
lamiit  xf'^t  "the  new  gold  money  "  (t.  719),
wUdi  ba  inuBediMely  afterwarda  calla  vonifil
XbAkU  {t.  724).  The  Scholiait  od  thia  paaaage
Btatew  lltat  in  the  preceding  year  the  golden  itatnea
of  Viclt»y  had  Icfa  coined  into  money,  and  he
oatca  HeUuiicnt  and  Philochocna  aa  anthoritiea


» <it


of  A  them
yeu  befbra  tbe  battle  of
'\\  that  thia  waa  a  gnally  deboaed  gold


olygillii
'.  Tbiin


it  mattn  ia  diitiuet  from
.  icting  tbo  Albenian  gold
uaatftt  fie  the  Attic  mooey  waa  pmreilna]  for  ita
■■ri^,  Bod  Ibc  grammarian^  who  Mate  that  Athena
tod  •  c<ld  coinage  at  an  eaily  period,  i^oak  of  it
■■  107  pan.  Tbtre  aie  othn  panagn  m  Ariito-
fkmmem  in  which  gold  money  ia  apolceo  of;  bot  in
ikoB  be  ii  refrmi^  to  Penian  money,  which  ia
tin  ■  II  W  tmn  been  impvted  mlo  Athena  before
the  AtkaiaiB  had  any  gold  coinage  of  their  own,
■id  cTCB  tliia  aeemi  to  hare  been  a  nrity.  (See
.  102,  108,  B<piU.  T.  470,
r.  674-)  Demoethenea  alwap  oaei  ifyv^ov
wt  ■aory,  except  when  he  ia  ^xaking  of  foreign
geld.  In  the  apeeeb  againat  Pharmia,  where  he
"  "  "  3  the  wotd  xfwftw,  we  are  expreaily
-  -■--  ■ ' •  ■ unely.


tqaap  ipild  moaiey  (j^mifa')  in  eidiange  foi
ailio  <7VapEnlL  p^SST).  In  many  pauagei  of  the
■caaaia,  ould  nwney  ii  exprenly  aaid  to  hare  been
iiiHinalnlfrnm  Poiia  and  Macedonia.  If  we  look
M  Iha  Albouan  hiatoiy,  we  find  that  the  uItbi
■aae*  at  hnanao  wen  retarded  ai  one  of  the


AURUM.

!<  pouetsed  by  the  itate  ;  but


181


greateat  ti  ,

auch  mention  i>  made  of  gold.  ThoCTdidea  (iL
in  enumerating  the  money  in  the  Athenian  trea-
nry  at  the  beginning  of  the  Peloponneaian  war,
doeA  not  mention  gold ;  and  Xenophon  apeaka  of
the  money  of  Alheni  in  a  mannai  which  would
lead  ui  to  lappoee  that  it  had  no  gold  coinage  in
hia  time  (  Vedigal,  It,  10).  The  minea  of  Scapte-
hyle,  in  Thiacc,  were  indeed  worked  aome  year*
bofoie  thia  period  (Thncyd.  it.  105)  ;  bat  the  gold
procured  &oin  them  doei  not  appeer  to  hare  been
coined,  bat  to  have  been  laid  up  in  ^e  treoaniy  in
the  form  of  conntera  ((^oiBci,  BBckh,  /fucrip.  toL  L
pp.  14fi,  1 46),  Foreign  gold  coin  waa  often  brought
into  the  tnoniry,  aa  Knne  of  the  alliea  paid  thdr
iribsle  in  mooey  of  Cyiictu.  Tbe  gold  money  thus
introduced  may  have  been  allowed  to  circnlata,
while  ailTer  remained  the  cnirent  money  of  the  atata.
The  character  of  the  Attic  gold  coina  now  in
eiiatence,  and  their  amall  numb^  (aboat  a  doien),
ii  a  atrong  proof  againit  the  existoice  of  a  gdd
corrency  at  Athena  at  an  airiy  period.  There  an
three  Attic  alatcra  in  the  British  Muaenm,  and  one
in  the  Hnnterian  Mnaeum  at  Ola^ow,  which  then
ia  good  reaaon  to  believe  are  genuine ;  their  we^[hta
agcee  exactly  with  the  Attic  ilaudard.  lu  the
character  of  the  impreaaion  they  bear  a  atriking
naonblance  to  the  old  Attic  ailvcr ;  but  they  differ
from  it  by  the  abaence  of  the  thick  bulky  form,  and
the  high  relief  of  the  impreiaion  which  ia  aeen  in
the  old  ailver  of  Athena,  and  in  th*  old  gold  colna
of  other  atate*.  In  thickneo,  Tolume,  and  the
depth  of  the  die  &om  which  they  were  atruck,  they


e  the  Hoc


Noil


npoQ  the  rite  of  the  Macedonian  empire,  gold
became  plentiful  in  Qreece,  and  wai  coined  in
large  quantities  by  the  Macedonian  kings,  it  ii  not
improbable  that  Athena,  like  other  Qrecian  jtatei,
may  hare  fallowed  their  example,  and  iaiuedagotd
coinage  in  imitation  of  hei  ancient  ailTer.  On  tho
whole,  it  ajjpears  moit  probable  that  gold  money
was  not  corned  at  Athena  in  the  period  between
Peridea  and  Alexander  the  Oieat,  if  we  except  the
•olilary  iaaue  of  debased  gold  in  the  year  407.

A  question  limilar  to  that  just  discussed  arise*
with  respect  to  other  Greek  states,  which  we  know
to  hare  had  a  lilrer  currency,  bnt  of  which  a  few  gold
coins  Bie  also  found.  Thia  is  the  case  with  Aegins,
Thebo,  Aigos,  Caiystns  in  Enboea,  Acanuinia,
and  Aetolia.  But  ^  theaa  coins  all,  except  two,
bear  erident  mariti,  in  their  weight  or  workman-
ship, of  belonging  to  a  period  not  earijei  than
Alexander  the  Grent,  There  ia  great  reason,  ther^
fon,  to  beliere  that  no  gold  coinage  existed  in
Greece  Ptoper  before  the  time  of  that  monareh.

But  ftom  a  very  eariy  period  the  Asiatic  nation^
and  the  Greek  citiea  of  Asia  Minor  and  the  adja-
cent islands,  aa  well  as  Sicily  and  Cyrcne,  poBiested
a  gold  coinage,  which  wa*  man  or  less  current  in
Greece.  HeiodctnB  (I  94)  says  that  the  Lydiana
were  the  £rat  who  coined  gold,  and  the  Blulcr  of
Croesus  appean  to  hare  been  the  eerlieat  gold  ctun
known  to  the  Orccka.  The  Dane  waa  a  Persian
com.  Slaters  of  Cyiiens  and  Phoraea  had  a  con-
siderable enirency  in  Greece.  There  was  a  gold
coinage  m  Samos  ai  early  as  the  time  of  Polyctates.
(Herod,  iii.  56.)  Tbe  islands  of  Siphnoe  and
Thaaoa,  which  pooessed  gold  mines,  appear  to  haTB
hod  a  gold  coinage  at  on  early  period.  Id  most  of
the  coins  of  the  CIreek  citiea  of  Asia  Mmor  the
metal  is  Tery  base. The  Mi«edoaian  gold  coin^


182  AURUK.

tame Inta  cirenlsliDn  in Oieece iu  the  Unit  of

Philip,  and  cantinned  in  u>o  till  ttie  nibifctian

Greece  to  the  Bonuni. [DiBTCCS;  StIteh.]

Roman  Gold  Monit.  — The  Maadard  ga

aarvis,  which,  according  to  Plio  j  (//,  JV.  xtx

&  13)  wuGnt  coined  62  jean  aftei  the  fine  lilver

coinage  [Arosntum],  that  ii  in  the  yeerQa/  B-c

vol  made  e^ual  to  SO  senettiL  The  weight  of  the
■cmpulmti,  Bi  detennined  by  Mr.  Hustey  (Aiidtnl
Weij/ilMaadlHimtg)waila-Oegn.  IntheBritiih
Muieum  then  an  gold  coini  of  one,  two,  three,
md  fonc  icmpula,  the  weighli  of  nhich  are  liii,
3*S,  Sl-e,  and  68-9  grain*  respectively.  They
hear  a  head  of  Man  on  one  lide,  snd  on  the  other
an  cagls  standing  on  a  thunderbolt,  and  beneath
the  inicriplion  "  RoBA."  The  fint  has  the
zi  (SO  aeateitii) ;  the  lecond,  iim  (40  Kite
the  third,  ^  i(GO  lestenii).  Of  the  hut  we
jomanergraving:  —


Pliny  adde  that  aftcrwardi  aurai  were  coined  of
40  to  the  pound,  which  weight  wat  diminitfacd,
till  under  Nen  (the  reading  of  thii  word  i>  doubt-
ful) the;  wen  45  to  the  pound.  Thii  change  ii
suppoaed,  from  an  eiunindtion  of  extant  ipecimeni,
to  have  been  made  in  the  time  of  Juliui  Caciar.
The  estimated  full  weight  of  the  aiuci  of  40  to  the
pound  ii  1301  grains,  of  Cheec  of  4S  to  the  ponnd
ll£'64  grain). No  ipecimene  eiilt  which  come

of  Pom

age  of  the  gold  coin)  of  Juliua  Cuemr  i)  fiied  by
Lctronne  at  1S£'6G  graJna,  thote  of  Nero  116'39
graini.  Though  the  weight  of  the  aureni  was
diminiahed,  iti  pnponion  to  the  weight  of  the  de-
noriut  lemaincd  about  the  lame,  namel; ,  ui  2  :  1
(or  rather,  perh^  ai  3-1  :  1).  Therefore  lince
the  itandaid  weight  of  the  danariiu,  under  the
early  emperoti,  wai  60  grain),  that  of  the  aureu*
thoold  be  ISO.  The  avciue  weight  of  the  aurei
of  Auguitu),  in  tho  British  MuMum,  ii  121-26
grain):  and  ai  the  weight  wai  afterward)  dimi-
nithed,  we  may  take  the  arerage  at  ISO  graini.
Then  leema  to  bare  been  no  intentional  dlcy  in
the  Roman  gold  coini,  but  they  generally  contained
a  small  portion  of  native  silver.  The  aTcrage  alloy
iijju  Tb«aureu)of theRom»nemperoD,thorefore,
contained  ^g  =  -4  rf  a  grain  of  alloy,  and  there-
fore 110'6  grain)  of  pun  gold.  Now  a  eorereign
contain)  113'IS  gtainiofpure  gold. Therefore  t£a

4t)  :  )^  =  10564  =  If.  t>.  \d.  and  a  Uttle  men
than  a  baltpenny.  Thi)  i)  it)  lalue  according  to
the  present  worth  of  gold  ;  but  ita  cumnt  Tslue  in
Borne  wa)  different  from  this,  on  account  of  the  dif-
fenncs  in  the  worth  of  the  metal.  The  surHii
paMtd  for  S5  denarii  i  therefore,  the  denariui
being  BU.,  it  wae  worth  1 7>.  B^  The  ratio  of  the
Talue  o'gnld  to  that  of  iilTeri)giTenin  theartielo
Ahdintliii.  The  following  cut  reproenl)  an
aureo)  of  Augnstn)  in  the  Dritiib  Muieiun,  which
weigh!  121  giuiu.


AUSPiaUM,


Alexander  Sercma  coined  piec«  of  one-half  and
one  third  of  the  aureus,  called  SnnuRt  and  titmit-
lit  (lamprid.  Alex.  Srv.  c  39),  after  which  lime
the  auno)  wu  called  lolidui.

Consiantine  the  Great  coined  aimi  of  72  to  the
pound  1  at  which  itandard  the  coin  remuned  to
tbe  end  of  the  empire^  (Cod.  i.  tiL  70.  a.  £ ;
Hnieey,  On  AndaU  Weigliii  and  Man^;  Wnnn,
D«  Pond.  Ac.)  [P.S.i

AURUM  CORONA'RIOM.  When  a  general
in  ■  Roman  pnrince  had  obtained  a  victoiy,  it
was  the  custom  for  the  cities  in  his  own  pnTJncea,
and  for  those  from  the  neighbouring  atatea,  to  send
golden  crowns  to  him,  vbich  were  carried  hcfon
him  in  hit  triumpli  at  Rome.  (Lir.  xxxviii.  37,
xxxii.7;  Fcstiu,).!!.  7Vtuiii;ii)a/et  Omnne.)  Thi*
practice  appear]  to  have  been  borrowed  from  tha
Gneka )  for  Chare)  related,  in  hi>  history  of  Alex
ander  (ap.  Alhen.  lii.  p.  539.  a.),  that  after  thv

under,  which  amounted  to  the  weight  of  10,fiOO
talent).  Tbe  number  of  crown)  which  were  son
to  a  Roman  general  was  samclimc)  lery  ^rcat.
Cn.  Manlius  had  200  crown)  carried  befon  huu  in
the  triumph  which  bo  obtained  on  account  of  hi)
conqnejt  of  the  Qoul)  in  Asia.  (LIt.  mix.  7.)
In  the  time  of  Cicero,  it  appears  to  hare  been
uaual  for  the  cities  of  tho  provineei,  initead  oi
sending  crowns  on  occaiioa  of  a  Tictory,  to  pay

Leg.  Agr.  ii.  22  ;  Ocll.  t.  6  j  Monum.  Ancjr.)
This  offering,  which  wai  at  first  Voluntary,  camo
to  be  ngarded  as  a  regular  tribute,  and  seems  to
have  been  sometimes  exacted  by  the  goTemora  at
the  provinces,  even  when  no  victory  had  been
jiained.  By  a  Uw  of  Juliua  Caesar  (Cic.  n  Pit.
37),  it  was  pnrided  that  the  BDrnm  coronariniu
should  not  be  given  unleu  a  triumph  was  decreed  j
but  under  the  emperors  it  wb)  preicnted  on  many
other  occasions,  as,  Ktn  instance,  on  the  adoption  ot'
Antoninn)  Fin).  (Capitolin.  Aobm.  Pi<a,e.i.)  It
continued  to  be  collected,  apparently  a)  a  part  of
the  reronue,  in  tbe  time  of  Valentinian  and  Theo.
dosius. (Cod.  10.  lit.  74.)

Serous  laji  (ad  Virg.  Am.  viiL  721),  that
aurum  coronarium  was  a  sum  of  money  eiacted
from  conqncnd  nations,  in  consideration  of  tho
live]  of  the  citizen)  being  spared  ;  but  thi)  slate-

cnl  does  not  appear  to  he  correct.

AURUM  LUSTRA'LE  vras  a  lax  imposed  by
Constantine,  according  to  Zoiimus  (iL  38),  npon
all  mcTchanti  and  traders,  which  wu  [syable  at
every  luetnm,  or  every  [bur years,  and  not  at  every
''  c,  ns  might  have  been  expected  from  the  origind

igtb  of  tha  hutnim.  Thi*  tax  was  also  called
.  _ri  et  ar^enti  tallalio  or  pnmlatio,  and  thu)  in
Onek  h  tnirrikiia  i)  ni  xfuaapyipini, (Cod.  11,

,1;  Cad.Theod.l3.tit.l.)

AURUM  VICESIMA'RIUM.  [Ahahiuk.
p.  23.  b.]

AUSPKX. rAuQiiH-l

AUSPl'CIUM. [Auoirm.]

,  --- -  ^^--


II  ni^xiwd  bj  B^JttigGT
a  swd  he  beatbg  vsUr,  or  for  krepii^  it  hot
fini  i«  BDt  knovii  for  ailBin ;  but  Bdttiger
Mma,  ToL  ii.  p.  30}  cunjectana '


*i*L  a.  tah.  27),  >•  >  qieciinen

CiEMO  (fn  Rote.  Ammim.  iS)  ^lealu  ef  uthepaie

t^uag  oIImt  OMtlr  Cocinthiu  and  Deliaii  veudi.

la  WCT  tinwi  tli^  nn  moda  of  lanr. <Lam-

prid.  /Uigpdi  19 1  bnt  the  isding  ii  doub^uL)

Tfac  taiabmt  imni  b>  bsTS  bam  t  T«Mel  of  a

■iaikrkind.

AUTOUOLIAS  ORAPHE'  (ofrrofuAfat
Tfo^),  the  TnnaliTTi  of  poiota  chai^d  witb
hsTBg  JMBted  and  gouo  onz  to  the  imcni  j  during
nr  (Pidliu,  ti.  151).  There  are  no  apeechea
ntaat  opoi  tbu  ml^cct  Fetitu,  hoireTer,  col-
Irrta  ili^.  AH-  n.  Sli)  from  the  woidi  of  a  com-
mcBlatar  EpoD  Danoathaiei  (Ulpian),  thai  \ke
|,.fii.li..— «  of  thii  aima  «u  death.  Mekr  {AtL
/Vne.  p.  365)  award*  the  pmideiic;  of  the  court  in
vkicfa  it  vaa  tried  to  the  gCDerali ;  but  the  circum-
ataoce  of  poaoDa  who  left  the  dtj  in  timea  o<
riiiftil  WTtiujiit  anj  intention  of  going  oror  to  the
•aimj,  being  tried  bj  the  Areiopagoi  oi  tiaitoia
(Ljcm^  t.  Ltoani.  p.  177),  will  make  tu  pauM
hefan  «e  eoodnda  that  peraoni  not  enliated  .
Boliiiaa  cnald  be  indicted  of  thia  oSenca  before
BiIilV7  inbanaL  [J.g.M.]

AUTtyNOMl  ((dlrjnfiai),  the  nuno  giTCC
bj  tke  OrtAt  to  those  itatei  wbicb  were  goyenwd
iff  iheir  mm  lava,  and  vera  not  lubjecl  to  an-
tnign  power.  (Thne.  t.  IS,  S7  j  Xtn.  UelL  t.
I  31.)  Thia  name  waa  alao  giren  to  thoH  dtii
aobfect  to  the  Romani,  which  were  permitted  1
a^iaj  tbeir  own  lawi,  and  elect  their  own  magi
Bales  iflm*tt,  noi  UgSHU  et  jt^idit  toot,  airom-
pi^  ailQiAii,  rttummt,  Cic  Ad  AO.  n.  2).
Thia  penniaiKia  wai  regarded  ai  a  great  pririlege,
mmi  wiA  al  faoDonr  ;  and  we  Bcoodinglj  find  it
aaatiltd  <■  ciiaa  and  uadala,  aa,  for  inatance,  on
thoac  of  Aatioch  ANTIOXEOM  HHTFOnOA.
ATTOMOMOT,  <a  tboae  of  HalkuiBanu  AAIKAP-
KACCEON  ATTONOHON,  and  oD  Iboae  of  manf
aditf  citica^  (Spnbnm,  ZH  Praat.  M  Uta  A'a-
Miaa.  p.  783.  AatL  I67I.)

AVU'LSIO. [CoNFUsia]

AUXILIA'RES. [SociL.]

AXAMENTA. [Salii.]

AXINK(*f£ni). [SKUBia.]

AXIS. fCuRaiia.1

A'XONES  (Ifarn),  alao  called  boinu  (lap-
Chi),  wwden  lablcti  irf  a  aqnare  or  pynunidiol

e  ciTi),  and  the
Smitit  Ibe  religiooa  lavt ;  according  to  othera
guriam  b^  iaai  lidei  and  the  Amna  three  lidei.
B«  at  Athena,  at  all  erenla,  tfaej
MiBtiial  ainn  aoeh  ii  the  itatement  of  Aristotle
{tp.  I'M.  Sol.  3£).  They  were  at  fint  preaerved
m  tba  M(D|iolia,  bat  were  afterwarda  placed,
Ihiii^h  tka  adriis  of  Ephialtea,  in  the  ngfom,  in
tm*^  thai  all  penoni  mighl  be  able  to  read  them.
A  avail  pvtioB  of  them  waa  preaorred  in  the  tine
af  Piatai«h  in  the  prrtandnin.  (Pint,  SU.  2S  ;
&bL  ad  Ariibpk.  Av.  1360;  SchoL  ad  ApoO.
a^^  IT.  280;  HupocnLdiamiArrJfKit;  Bar-


BALNKAR.  1B3

mami,  OritA.  SKvUtdlUrA.  fi  107,  n.  1 ;  Wachi-
mnth  HtO.  AOaHiauL  loL  L  p.  491,  Sud  ed.)


BACCHANA'LIA. [DiotirBlA.]

BAKTE'RIA  <0iun^pia),  a  alaff  borne  bj  the
csiti  at  Athena.  [DicxBTB&]
BA'LATB.0,  a  prDfeaiiooal  jnter,  bnffiun,  or
panuite.  (Hor.  Sat  t  2.  2.)  In  Horace  (Sat  ii
S.21)  BalatTDiauiedaiB[BvpernBnie— Serrilim
fialBtio.  An  old  Scholiait,  in  commenting  on  thia
'ord,  deriTea  the  coffimoa  word  from  the  pcipa
unea ;  bnftooni  being  called  balatronea,  becanae
Serrilina  Balatto  wat  a  bnffoon ;  bnt  thia  ia  op.
Ltnml  inference  &om  the  former  paa-
•age,  and  waa  aaid  to  get  rid  of  a  difficult;.  Feitui
d<^TBa  the  word  from  blalea,  and  anppoaea  bn&bona
to  hare  been  called  balatrones,  becanae  tbey  wen
dirty  foUowa,  and  were  corercd  with  apota  of  mnd
(Afoieoe),  with  which  they  got  apattered  in  walking;
'  ~  thia  ii  oppoaed  to  lound  etymology  and  am-
aenae.  Another  writer  haj  deriied  it  from
barathrum,  and  anppoiea  boSbona  to  baie  been
called  balatronea,  becsnte  they,  ao  to  apeak,  carried
■  "  ■  ■  to  market,  aren  into  the  Teiy  depth
of  the  ahamblei  (iaradnm  aaalU,
IS.  31).  Ferhapa  balalin  may  be
connected  with  tala-ra  (to  bleat  like  a  ihaep,  and
hence)  to  apeak  aillily.  It  ta  probably  connected
with  blaltro,  a  bnay-body.  (QtO.  I  15.)  Bala-
tronea were  paid  for  their  Jeita,  and  the  lablea  of
the  wealthy  were  generally  imen  to  them  for  tha
take  of  the  amtiaenient  they  aobried.  [A.  A.]
BALI  ST  A.  (ToanKNnjB.]
BA'LNEAE,  Balatat,  Balaam,  Baliatam,
Themat  (kaituvtoj,B<'Saitmii,Kerrpir,Kovrf6r).
Theae  worda  an  all  commonl?  trauilated  by  oar
general  teini  bath  or  hatha ;  but  in  tha  vnlioga
of  the  earlier  and  better  anthora  they  are  nied
with  diacrimination.  Baliuwn  or  Aa^Heiun,  which
ia  derired  from  the  Greek  Pakariua'  ( Vam,  Da
lAng.  LcU.  ix.  68,  ed.  MUller),  lignjliea,  in  itt
primary  aenae,  a  hsth  or  bathing-Teiael,  anch  aa


mana  poaaeiaed  in  their  own  hoaaes  (Cic.  Ad  AH,
ii.  3),  and  hence  the  chamber  which  contained  the
bath  (Cic  Ad  Faa.  xir.  20),  which  ia  alao  the
proper  tianalation  of  tha  word  ialnitmiai.  The
diminntiTe  btdnaoiim  ia  adopted  by  Seneca  (£^
S6)  to  deiignale  the  bath-room  of  Scipio,  in  the
•ilia  at  Litecnam,  and  i<  evpreaaly  uced  to  cha-
racteriie  the  modeaty  of  republican  mannera  aa
compared  with  the  Inmry  of  hii  own  timea.  But
whoi  the  hatha  of  priiato  mdlriduali  became  more
anmplamt,  and  compriaed  many  roomt,  inalead  of
the  one  amall  chambar  deacrihed  by  Seneca,  the
plural  bainaa  or  balinea  waa  adopted,  which  atill,
in  correct  language,  hod  reference  only  to  the  hatha
of  priiate  persona.  Thoa  Cicero  temu  the  hatha
at  the  Tilla  of  hii  brother  Quintal  {Ad  Q.  FraL  iiL
1,  %  1)  Utlataria. '  Balmae  and  iafiiwiH,  which
according  to  Vam  (Ot  Ling.  LaL  viii.  25,  ix.  41,
ed.  MiilTer)  hare  no  lingular  Domber  *,  wen  the
public  bathi.  Thui  Cicem  (Pro  Caul.  26)  apcnka
of  balneal  Simat,  ioLuoj  paiUcai,  and  ta  vmfiMD


*  Babaa  it,  boweier,  uaed  in  the  ungnkir  to  de-
aignala  a  priTata  bath  in  an  inaoiption  footed  by
Reinetiua. (/aair.  iL  US.)


184  BALNEAR

taIiiairHa(ii.26),  tnd  AuliiiOeD'iiu(iiL  1,  z.S)

of  balittat  Siliai,  But  thia  mcnitxy  of  diction  u
ncglectrd  by  man;  of  the  >nbKqnent  vriten,  and
pBrticoIurly  bj  the  poetA,  unongit  vhom  balitea  i<
not  ancomraonly  nied  in  the  pluraJ  number  to  sig-
nify ths  pablic  bathl,  nnce  the  word  iaimeai  csald
not  be  iotnduced  in  ui  hexameter  Tene.  PUaj-
also,  in  the  nunc  Ktitenee,  nukei  me  of  the  nenler
plonl  ialnea  foe  pnhlic,  and  of  Jo&aiM  for  s  priTale
bath.  (£>i.ii.  17.)  21<m« (ft^p^uu, hot ipringa)
meant  pnperl;  warm  ipringa,  or  balhj  of  wann
water  ;  bat  ome  to  be  applied  to  thoae  magnificent
edificei  which  grew  ap  under  the  empire,  in  place
of  the  Am^t  iaZiAu  of  the  rtpablic,  and  which
compriMd  within  their  range  of  tiuildinga  all  tho
^ipurtenancea  belonging  to  tiie  Greek  gymnasia,
ai  well  u  a  regular  eatabliahmeut  appropriated  for
bathing.  (Jut.  Sat.  rii.  233).  Writen,  however,
UH  thoe  termi  without  dirtinction.  Thui  the
batlu  erected  by  Clsudiui  EtruKoi,  the  freedroan
of  the  Emperor  Ciandian,  are  ityled  by  Statinji
iS^.  i.  B.  13)  baiima,  and  hy  Martial  (vi.  42)
£l(nud  AfTtaibu.  In  an  epigram  by  Harld^  (ix.
76)  —  mMh  bahmn  livmu — ths  temu  an  not
uiplied  to  Che  whole  building,  bat  to  two  difiercmt
cbmibcra  in  the  ■me  edifice.

Ormt  Batiu.  —  Bathing  wu  a  pnctice  bmilkr
to  the  Oreeki  at  both  Kiel  from  the  eaclieat  timet,
both  in  fnih  water  EUid  ulc,  and  in  the  natnrai
wann  ^vingi,  ae  well  ai  Tfoeli  artifidally  heated.
Thua  Nauaicaa,  daughter  of  Aldnoua,  king  of
Phaeacia,  goei  out  with  her  Mtendanta  lo  wuh
ber  clothe*  ;  and  after  the  taak  i>  done,  the  batlua
benelf  in  the  rirer.  {Od.  ti.  £8,  6S.)  Ulyues,
who  ig  conducted  to  the  >ame  ipot,  itripi  and  takea
a  bath,  whilit  Naovcaa  and  bcr  lerrantt  itand
aiide.  (Od.  lL  210—224.)  Eunpa  aln  bathe*
m  the  Hth'  Anaumi  (MokJi.  Id.  iL  31),  and  Helen
and  her  companioni  in  the  Eurotaa.  (Theocr.  Id.
TIL  22.)  Worm  apiingt  were  a1*o  renHted  to  for
the  pnipoaa  of  bathing.  The  "HpinKtia  Xovrpi
ahown  by  HephaeWni  or  Alhena  to  Herculea  are
colehreted  hy  the  poeti.  Pindar  ipeeki  of  the  hot
balha  of  the  nymphi  —  fttp/ii  Nufi^S>i  }unrTpii
(Olymp.  oL  37),  and  Homer  (/L  xiiL  149)  cele-
iH^ea  one  of  the  ilreanu  of  the  Scunander  foe  ita
wBim  temperatcre.  The  artificial  warm  hath  was
taken  in  a  tcskI  called  ifft^urfei  by  Homer,  and
f/igara  by  Athena«is  (L  p.  2S).  It  would  ap-
pear from  the  deiciipluin  of  the  bath  adminiitered
to  [JlfMes  iu  the  palace  of  Ciroe,  that  this  t(*k1
did  not  contain  water  iteel^  bnt  was  only  used  for
the  bather  to  nt  in  while  the  wann  water  was
ponied  OTer  him,  which  was  heated  in  a  large
oildron  or  tripod,  nndrr  which  the  fire  was  placed,
and  when  tuHiciently  wanned,  was  taken  out  in
other  Teuela  and  poured  OTer  the  bead  and
shoulders  of  the  person  who  sat  in  the  iai/uySot.
(Od.i.ZS9 — S66.)  Where  c]«nlineas  merely  was
the  object  sought,  cold  bathing  was  adopted,  which
WBfl  conudered  as  most  bracing  to  the  nerrea
(Athen.  L  e.)  ;  bat  after  riolent  bodiir  exertion  or
fstigae  warm  water  was  made  use  n,  in  order  to
refresh  the  bod;,  and  relax  the  orer  tension  of  the
mnsclo,  (Id.  A.  j  camp,  Horn.  IL  x.  S76,  Od.  it.
4S,elalibL)

The  iaifwi9oi  was  of  polished  marble,  like  the
basins  (labra')  which  haie  been  discorerod  in  the
Boman  hatha,  and  sometunes  of  silTer.  Indul-
gence in  the  warn  bath  was  conndered,  in  Hnna's
time,  a  mark  of  efieminacf  (Od,  riii  248).


rfcdbyhath-


BALNEAK.
The  tue  of  the  warm  bath  was  pRceded

ingkcoldwater<Ax.67S).  The  later  >
plunging  into  cold  water  affei  the  wann  bath  mm-
tioned  by  Atiiteidea  (toL  L  OrtU.  2.  Sacr.  Sins,
p.  SIS),  who  wrote  in  the  aecond  centnrr  of  our
en,  was  no  donht  borrowed  from  the  Romans.

After  bathings  both  aexea  anointed  themselTea
with  oil,  in  Older  that  the  akin  might  not  be  left
harah  and  tough,  especially  after  warm  water.
(Od  tL  96 ;  Athen.  L  e.  ;  Plm.  H.  If.  jSl  1. 1
see  also /txir.  172,  ziiil  186.)  The  use  of  pre-
cious nnguents  (fuipa.)  was  nnknown  at  that  early
period.  In  the  heroic  agea,  oa  well  aa  lata  timea,
re&eibmenti  were  ninally  taken  after  the  Uuh.
(.Od.  yi.  97.)

The  Locedscuionlans,  who  considered  waita
water  as  cuerrating  and  eflentinalc,  tiaed  two
kinds  of  tialhs  ;  namely,  the  cold  daily  bath  in  the
Buretas  (Xen.  fl//L  t.  4.  3  26  i  Plot.  Ale.  23),
and  a  dry  sndorific  batii  in  a  chamber  heated  with
warm  air  by  means  of  a  itoTe  (Dion  Cau.  liiL
p.  SIB,  ed.  HannoT.  1606) ;  and  from  them  the
chamber  used  by  the  Romans  for  a  similar  purpoae
was  termed  Zaoowxiii  (compare  Sirabo,  iii  p  413,
ed.  Sicbenkceo,  and  Caianb.  <td  loc).

At  Athens  the  beqnent  use  of  the  pnblic  bath*
was  regarded  in  the  time  of  Socrates  and  De-
moatbenea  as  a  mark  of  Inxniy  and  effeminacy.
(Demoitii.  e.  Polfd.  p.  1217.)  Accordingly  Pho-
cion  was  aaid  to  hare  ncTcr  bathed  in  a  public
bath  (ir  fio^onfy  «n/uxr»iiom,  PluL  Pioc  4),
and  9ocratcB  to  bare  made  nsc  of  it  Teiy  seldom.
(Plato,  Sipnp.  p.  1 74.)  It  was,  however,  on^  the
warm  baths  {PaXaytia,  called  by  Homer  otpiik
Xovrpif)  b>  which  objection  was  Toade,  and  which
in  ancient  timea  were  not  allowed  to  be  built
within  the  citf.  (Athen.  i  p.  18,  b.)  The  eati-
mation  in  which  such  baths  were  held,  is  ex-
preosed  in  the  following  lioea  of  Hernu|^ns  (ap.


Athon.  L  c)


01  fu6A€tw  rhr  iripa  xp4


In  the  Oonds  of  Aristophaocs  the  Slxout  A^jvt
warns  the  yonng  nun  to  abstain  from  the  hatha
(fiaXaiilier  irixtirOBt,  1 976),  which  puaage,  oom-
pai^  with  L  1023—1037,  ahowi  that  warm  balha
oie  intended  hy  the  word  ^qA4tr»£a.

The  hatha  (jSoXimia)  were  either  public  (S9.
fijmo,  SnfisiritiiorTa)  or  private  (fSio,  ttmruii').
The  fbrmer  were  the  jxoperty  of  the  state,  but  this
latter  were  built  by  priTatc  indiTidoals,  and  wero
apened  to  the  public  on  the  payment  of  a  f»
(#TfAovTper).  3nch  priTBte  hatha  an  menticswd
hy  Plulareh  (DenHtr.  24)  and  Iiaeas  (Dt  Dieaatg.
hir.  p.  101),  who  speaks  of  one  which  was  sold  for
3000  drachmae.  (Z»  PUiod.  *sr.  p.  140.)  Botha
of  this  kind  may  alio  have  been  intended  sooe-
timei  for  the  exclnti>e  use  of  the  persons  to  whom
they  belonged.  (Xen.  Htp.  Ad,.  iL  10.)  A  small
fee  appcan  to  haTe  been  also  paid  by  each  person
to  the  keeper  of  the  public  baths  (0a)uiH^),wh>di


L  the  ti


loboIL (


p.  320.)

We  know  very  little  of  the  baths  of  the  Atkc
niaas  during  the  repnblian  period  ;  for  the  account
of  Ludan  in  his  Hipfnaa  relatea  to  hatha  co&-
stiuFted  sftef  the  Ronian  medeL  On  ancient  Tvaco^
on  which  peiwna  are  represented  bathing,  we  neTor
find  an;  thing  corresponding  to  a  modem  bath  in
which  persons  can  stand  or  lit ;  but  then  is  alway*


BALNEAE.
B  nsnd  at  onl  buin  {Xarrip  or  Anvr^fNiir),  reat-
iog  CB  A  ftand  (^rJffroTfli-),  hj  the  lidfl  of  which
dn  *ba  vc  tiMbing  iro  npicRDled  nuiding
wtdnttKd  tai  *«ihiiig  ChenuuTu,  oi  is  Hen  io
tkc  (lUawiDg  iraadent  nkeu  fniiD  Sir  W.  Huoil-


Tk  next  •Dodcnt  «  bIb  Ukw  Enmi  the  umc
wwk  <L  pL  S9),  ini  Rpntmu  tm  women  lalh-
wf.  Tbe  OH  on  Ihe  tight  hand  »  enCirel;  naked,
■1^  heldi  B  locUng  glut  in  her  right  hud  ;  Ihe  one
so  the  left  wean  onlfaibort  kind  of  x'Tdmr.  En»
ii  ti-^uuitid  hoTdiDg  om  ihp  halhing  tfu  '


J


I Aht^iki  md  A«>r4|>u  tbeie  w


■  Bt  in,  which,  m  itnted  abore,
tSat  bj  Homer  uid  w^Aot  by  the  Uler
Gnk*  (SdwL  si  ^riitefirL  £^  lOH  ;  Heijch.
a.u.  nAoM;  PoUu,  liL  166,  I68>  In  the
taaks  iLen  *>■  alw  a  kind  of  indoriGc  or  lapouc
WA  ^dkd  npis  or  rvptor^pwr,  which  ij
tiepMl  ae  '^J  ■■  the  time  of  Uerodotos  (i
(Pmimi  Pdlu.  TiL  168  ;  Atben.  i.  p.  207,  t,
i£.  f.  &19,e.;  Plot  dm.  1.)

TW  [niiiM  who  bathed  tmbablj  brooght
ll^  Mngih,  inl,  and  toweU.  The  itrigQ,  *
■M  cdbd  bj  tie  Oieeka  rrXerr''  <•'  t^<"PS

•«b«T  ^uerialh  <P1m.  liuL  Lae.  32  ;  Aelian
XB.  39.)  One  of  ths  linra  in  the  {ovcedinj
wiu  a  atiigil  in  bit  hood


]  itii^ta  are  figured below. Tbe  Omits

alio  u*ed  diHerent  maleriBli  for  cleaniing  or  wsah-

henueliea  in  tbe  bath,  to  which  the  neneral

of  *"ft

Thii  ^4f"  aiaallj  coniiiled  of  u'lje  m
or  w«d-ube>  (novla),  of  niOuni,  and  of  fijllcr'l
earth  (^  fnfuiMu,  Aiiiloph.  Ann.  7 1 0  and  SchoL  ;
Plat.  Slf.  It.  p.  430).

The  tilhwu  generally  taken  ibortly  before  the
lnym  or  principal  meal  of  the  day.  It  wu  tbe
practice  to  take  fint  a  warm  or-vapour,  and  after-
ward! a  cold  bath  (PluL  in  jrimo  pig.  10  ;  Paiu.
~  31.  g  g),  thtngh  in  the  time  of  Homer  the  cold
Lth  appear!  to  hare  been  taken  £rat  and  tbe  warm
aflerwarda  The  cold  water  wa«  uiually  ponred
on  the  back  or  ghouldera  of  the  batben  by  tbe
fia^Jvtit  or  bia  aaiiatanta,  who  are  called  wapax^
-u.  (Plat.  Rtp.  i.  p.  344  ;  Lucian,  Dmatlh.  En-
(M.  16.  t6L  iiL  p.  SOS  1  PlaL  d>  Iinid.  6,  ApophA.
tac.  49.)  The  veuel,  from  which  the  water  waa
poured,  waa  called  ifinama,  (Arutoph.  EijbU.
1087 ;  Theophr.  Oar.  9.)  In  tbe  tirat  of  tbe  pre-
ceding woodcotH  a  irapax^njr  ia  rcpreaented  with
on  ifOriura  in  hit  handa.

Among  tbe  Orecka  a  pcnon  waa  alwayi  bathed
at  birth,  marriage,  and  after  death  [FuNtis]  ;
whence  it  ia  aaid  of  the  Dirdaniana,  an  Illy-
rian  people,  that  they  bathe  only  thrice  in  their
livea,  at  birth,  marriage,  and  after  death.  (NicoL
Damaae.  ap.  SbA.  t.  SI.  p.  153,  Oaiit)  The
water  in  which  the  bride  wai  bathed  (Aoin-p^r
n^wdr,  AriaCoph.  Lgmtr.  37B)  at  Atheni,  waa
taken  from  tbe  fountain  of  KalliirhoK,  which  waa
called  frtnn  the  time  of  Peiiiatiatna  '£»v<djcpovwir.
(Thncyd.  iL  16.)  Compare  PoUui,  iii.  43  :  Har-
pocraL  L  V.  fwvtpo^ipot,  who  aaya  that  tbe  water
waa  fetched  by  a  bay,  who  waa  the  neareat  rela-
tion, and  that  thta  boy  wai  called  hmnpe^pot.
He  alao  atato  that  water  wM  fetched  in  the  aaaia
way  to  bathe  the  bodies  of  tboae  who  had  died  un-
married, and  that  on  the  numomenls  of  luch,  a  boy
waa  represented  holding  a  water-Teiael  ijjtpla\
PoUni  (i.  c\  however,  atatel  that  it  wu  a  female
who  fetched  tbe  water  on  such  oraanoni,  and  De-
moathenei  (e.  LeodaiT.  p.  10S9.  3S  ;  compare  p.
1086.  14.  &c.)  speaks  of  4  Aovrpoi^rlpei  on  the
monument  of  a  person  who  had  died  anmariicd.
In  remuna  of  ancient  art  we  find  girlg  reproentcd
as  \ow(»^(»)i,  bot  never  boys.  (Brtlnsled,  flri^
DacripHtm  af  Odrtf-tm  oneiniC  Crenl  Coses,  pL
27.  The  best  account  of  the  Greek  hatha  is  given
by  Becker,  Oaiiklet,  ToLiL  pp.  135— 146,  pp.
459—462.)

RomoK  BaOa.  —  The  Romans,  in  the  earlier
periods  of  their  history,  used  tbe  both  bat  leldom,
and  only  for  health  and  cleanliness,  not  as  a
lumry.  Thns  we  leam  from  Seneca  [Ep.  86}
that  tbe  ancient  Romans  washed  their  legs  and
anna  daily,  and  bathed  their  whole  body  once  a
week.  (Comp.  Cat.  it  LS>.  Edae.  ap.  Urns.  iiL
(.  D.  ^iii]^%»  ;  Calum.  A.  A.  L  6.  §  20.)

It  is  not  ncorded  at  what  prKiae  period  the  u*
of  the  warm  both  wai  first  introduced  amongst  tho
Roman* ;  but  we  Icom  from  Seneca  {L  c.)  tW
Scipio  had  a  warm  bath  in  his  villa  at  Litenunn  |
which,  however,  waa  of  tbe  aimpleet  kind,  conaist-
iug  of  a  single  chamber,  just  sufficient  tor  th«
necesiaiy  purposes,  and  without  any  prelcnaions
to  lurury.  It  was  "small  and  dork,"  he  says,
"^tei  the  nunner  of  the  ancients." Seneca  alM


1S3  BALXFAE.

dMoibei  Iha  pufalio  bithi  ■*  o&Mira  (<  fM^
Uploria  trndaela,  aod  u  ao  nmple  in  their  imugc-
nunta  tbit  the  kedile  judged  of  the  pToper  tem-
pcmtnn  bj  hii  handt.  Thete  wen  batiu  of  mrm
IDOter,-  but  ths  praclica  of  besting  an  qaitineat
wilb  warm  air  by  flues  placed  inunediBteLj  uudoi
It,  »  ai  (0  pndun  a  Tapour  bath,  i>  itatcd  bj  Va-
leritu  Manmn.  (ii.  1,  8  1)  and  by  Pliny  {H.  ff.  it
Bi.  s.  7S)  to  liare  been  iuTEiited  by  Sergiui  Orata,
who  liTed  in  the  age  of  L.  Cnaiua,  the  oratoi,
babn  the  Maine  war.  Tha  anmaion  naed  by
Valerina  MaxiiDW  ia  tahaa  ptaiilia,  and  b^  Pliny
IoUmoi  pauibu,  vhkh  ia  difbr^tlj  explamed  by
diffiarant  canunoitatina  t  bat  a  ihigU  glum  at  ths
plaui  inaotad  belov  will  be  fuSewDt  in  cnder  to
comprehend  tha  manner  in  which  the  flooring  of
the  cbambeiB  waa  tutpatdtd  orer  tha  hdlow  cella
of  the  hypocanit,  ealled  by  Vilnmaa  nupaBnra
BnUnrianiaa  (t.  11),  ao  aa  to  IfSTe  no  doubt  oa  to
the  pncuB  meaning  of  the  LnTentioa,  which  ia  mor«
fdUy  aiempliBed  in  tha  following  paiage  of  Aa-
mmaifJUatilLZZTi:—

mi)  ^oaa  ■ulphnrca  anbatructa  cre-
m  Hulaber  hanatiii  operto,


••QDid(m<
Bdnes,


unes,  ferrenti
VolTJt  onhetBtaa  tactona  per  caia  nammaa,
Inclnauni  glomerani  atatu  enpirante  T^rarcm  ?  "
By  the  time  of  Cicetn,  tha  UM  of  balhi,  both

Cblic  and  intate,  of  warm  water  and  hot  air,  had
coma  general  {Epiit.  ad  Q.  FraL  iii.  1 ) ;  and  we
lean  from  one  of  hii  oration*  that  then  were
already  bathi  (fabuai  Sauiai)  at  Rome,  which
were  Ofea  to  the  public  upon  payment  of  a  amall
nun  (Fn  Cad.  25,  26).

In  the  eariiat  agta  of  Homan  hiiUny  a  msch
gnata  delimcy  waa  obaerred  with  respect  to  bath-
ing, eren  amongit  the  men,  than  was  niual  among
the  Greeks  ;  for  according  to  Valerias  Hadmoa
(iL  1.  §  7)  it  was  deemed  indecent  for  ■  hther  to
bathe  in  company  with  hia  own  aon  after  he  had
atuuned  the  age  of  puberty,  or  a  son-in-law  with
hil  &Iher-in-law.  (Camp.  Gic  Zls  Q^  L  Si,  De
Ont.  iL  AS.)  Bat  Tiitue  Bused  sway  as  wealth
jncitBsed  (  and  whsn  the  uermae  came  into  use,
DBt  only  did  the  men  bathe  togetha  in  numbers,
bnt  eren  men  and  women  stripped  and  bathed
promiscDoosI;  in  the  same  bath.  It  ia  tme,  bow-
ever,-  that  the  public  eatabliahmenta  often  con-
tained aeparale  batiis  for  both  aeiea  adjoming  to
eaeh  other  (VitruT.  *.  10 ;  Vain),i)«  Za^  £<(£  ix.
6S),  as  will  be  aeeu  to  hare  been  the  case  at  the
hatha  of  PompeiL  Aului  Oellins  (i-  3)  relates  a
atoi;  of  a  connil's  wife  who  took  a  whim  to  bathe
at  Teanum  (Teano),  a  imall  pioTineial  town  of
Campania  in  the  men^a  hatha  (ioiaau  nnTAai)  \
probably,  beeanae  in  a  amall  town,  the  female  de-
tiartment,  like  that  at  Pompeii,  «a>  more  eonGned
and  Urn  conTcnient  than  that  assigned  to  the  mts  ;
Bod  an  order  waa  consequently  giren  to  the  Quaee-
tOT,  H.  Marina,  to  lum  the  nun  out. But  whether

ether'a  ehambert  iDdiaeriminately,  oi  that  some  of
the  public  establishments  had  oidj  <ma


naldy  together.  (Plin.  H.  If.  xxziii.  13.  s.  54.)
This  custom  waa  Ibtbidden  by  Hadriaa  (Spart
Hadr.  c  1),  and  by  If.  Anrelins  AntoniDni  (Ca|n-
tolin.  Anlim.  c.  2S)  ;  and  Aleianda'  Serems  pro-
hibited any  baths,


BALIfEAE.
atHfs),  fiem  being  opened  in  Rome. (ItnrpAi,
Atat.  At.  c  42.)

When  the  public  baths  ijmlmiai)  were  first  in-
stituted, they  were  oil;  for  the  lower  orders,  who
alone  bathed  in  public ;  the  people  of  wealth,  aa
well  OS  those  who  formed  the  equeatriao  and  aout-
torian  orden, used priTate  hatha  in  their  owu

Caesar  we  find  do  leaa  a  psionage  than  the  mother
of  AnguMas  making  use  of  the  public  atabliah-
meats  (Suet.  A*g.  94) ;  and  in  janess  of  time
eren  the  emperors  themselTa  buhed  in  public
with  the  meanest  of  the  people.  (Start,  HadT.
cl7;  TrebeU.Pollia,i>*G!aUn.ib<>t-c  17.)

The  baths  were  opened  at  sunrise,  and  dosed
at  innset ;  but  in  the  time  of  Alexando'  Serenu,
it  would  appear  that  they  were  kept  open  neariy
all  night  (Lamp.  AltK.  See.  L  e.)  The  alluaioa
in  Jurenol  (iajwu  wxA  wU,  Sit  Ti.  419}  pro-
bably refera  to  priTate  baths.

The  price  of  a  bath  waa  a  qnadrana,  the  amallcat
piece  li  coined  money,  bom  die  age  of  Cicero
downwards  (ClbiVvaial.  2G;  IIar..SU.  L  S.  137  [
Jit,  Sat  li.  447),  which  was  paid  to  the  keeper
of  the  bath  {bahitatar) ;  and  hence  it  ia  termed  by
Cicero,  in  the  oration  juat  dted,  qitadrnmlana  par-
imtalio,  and  by  Seneca  (^  8G)  m  fwdrmifarvi.
Childroi  below  a  certain  age  woe  admitted  free.
(JuT.,SbliL  162.)

Strangen,  also,  and  fbreignen  were  admitted  to
aome  of  ibe  hatha,  if  not  to  all,  without  {nymeat,
OS  we  learn  from  an  inscription  found  at  Rome,
and  quoted  by  Pitiscns. (Lem  Aattq.)


QUI  UVATIONSU


The  baths  were  closed  when  any  miiforlnsa
happened  to  the  republic  (Fabr.  Detr.  Urb.  Ron.
c  1  y) }  and  Suetouiui  laya  thai  the  Emperor  Caligula
coital  oSoice  to  indulge  m  the  luimy
[upoianyRligions  holiday.  (Ih.)  They
„  nally  placed  under  the  sup«inlendence
of  the  aedileo,  whose  bnsineas  it  was  to  keep  them
'  '  y  wen  kept  clean  and
r  Sen.  Ep.  86.)  In  the
prormces  toe  same  anty  seems  to  haie  derolTed
upon  the  qnsestor,  aa  may  be  inleired  btm  the
pHiaage  ahnidy  quoted  &inn  Aulus  Gelliua  (i.  3).

The  time  usually  assigned  by  the  Romans  for
taking  tha  both  wsa  the  eighth  hour,  or  afaaitl]^
ailcrwarda.  (Mart.  Ep.  i.  46,  li.  G2.)  Brfcm
that  time  none  but  iniaJida  wen  allowed  to  hatho
in  public  (Lamprid.  Abac.  Scv.  24.)  Vitraviua
Kckons  the  houTa  beat  adapted  for  bathing  to  be
from  mid. day  until  about  sunset  (t.  10).  Plin<r
took  hia  bath  at  the  ninth  boor  in  summer,  and  at
the  eighth  in  winter  (^Ep.  iii.  I,  8)  ;  and  Martial
speakiof  lokingabath  when  tatigued  and  warT,at
thetenthhonr,Bnd  eren  later.  {Epig.  iiL  36,x.'70.)

When  the  water  was  nadv,  and  the  baths  prc-
pand,  notice  was  given  by  the  sound  of  a  betl  —
<«  Uenflamn.  (Mart  £>>.  lii.  163.)  One  of
these  bells,  with  the  inscription  Fiavi  Balmka-
TOBIB,  was  found  in  the  thermae  Dioclctianae,  in
the  year  1348,  and  came  into  the  poaseaaion  of  t)ie
leaned  Fulriua Unmus. (Amaid.  ad  Ciaoccm.

Whilst  the  bath  waa  used  for  health  neidy  nr
clesnlinessi  B  single  one  wa*  ctmndned  tBttaeui

, --- -  ^^--


BALMEAE.
It  ■  lB«^  ud  tkat  aalj  when  reqniiili.  Bat  the
luwia  of  the  ^pin  koew  dd  loch  botmdi,  uid
the  daily  bMh  wu  Mmelimei  repeated  u  many  u
(em  aud  n{t'>l  t>n<*  ■»  noceakin  ^~  the  nnmber
vhicb  tlM  EDipenr  CommndTii  mdu1g«d  himielf
with. (LuB{Bid.Cba.c2.) Omdian  bathed

"  liunu  mc  or  unec

.  (Capitolin.  OiUL
Mrak  hij  DNoli  in  the  huh
n  vhkli  w«i  not  confined
U  >  diMotitg  Eoperv  ilone.  (Comp.  Hertial,
£>>»■  lii.  19.)

It  ■»■  the  anal  end  antttant  habit  of  the  R«-
■■■la  la  take  the  bath  after  ezereiie,  and  pre-
I  iiiiilj  la  tbnr  jnneipal  meal  (_nma) ;  but  the
ih  !■!■  hi  I  ■  of  the  (mpiia  bathed  after  eating  aa
stU  ai  bofcn,  io  order  to  pnmiate  di^eition,  »  ai
a  new  ^petite  for  b«ab  debcacio.  Nen
bo  baTa  vbdnlged  in  thii  ptacticek  {Sact
tatm.  Jdt.  Sal.  L  U2.)

g  the  bath  it  vaa  ninal  fbr  tbe
u  the  OitAt  to  be  anointed  with
u  habit  of  badj,  or  tendmcy  to
•omeiitnei  required  thia  order
to  be  imned ;  for  vhich  reaaon  Angoatoa,  who
aaStred  from  nemHU  diaorden,  woa  accDltonied  to
B^bi  himaelf  before  bathiif  <Saet.  .da^.  83)  j
■id  a  aimilar  practice  *«a  adopted  by  Alexander
Smrm.  (Lamprid.  Jlei.  Sen.  L  i.)  Tbo  moat
■■^  practice,  boweTer,  Kema  to  hate  been  to
Ukr  aosK  gmde  eiereiaa  (eaerafotw),  in  the  &nt


BALNEAE.  187

either  in  the  nm,  or  in  the  tepid  or  thermal  cham-
ber, and  finally  lo  lake  their  food.

The  Ramana  did  not  content  thenuelTei  with  A
nnglo  bath  of  hot  or  cold  water }  bot  they  went
thiongh  a  coime  of  batha  in  mcceuion,  in  which
the  agency  of  ur  ai  well  at  water  wai  applied.
It  ia  difficult  to  aacertain  the  preciae  order  in
vhich  the  cDuna  waa  uanslty  taken,  if  indeed
there  waa  any  gimeral  pnciiee  beyond  the  whim
of  the  indiTidnaL  Under  medical  treaCment,  the
niccesaian  would,  of  conrae,  be  regulated  by  the
nalare  of  [he  diaoue  for  which  a  cnra  waa  amght,
and  would  Tary  alao  according  to  the  diS«vnt
practice  of  different  phyaicians.  It  it  certun,
howerer,  that  it  wei  a  general  practice  to  cloie
the  porta,  and  brace  the  bodv  after  the  excemre
penpiratiaii  of  the  TSpour  bath,  either  by  pouring
cold  water  over  the  head,  or  by  plunging  at  ones
into  the  pLHtno,  or  into  a  riTer.  (Auion.  MoteU,
S41.)  Huaa,  the  phyiician  of  Augtutoa,  la  aaid  Io
haie  intiDdnced  tMa  practice  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxr.  7.
1.  38),  which  became  qnito  the  fiiahion,  in  con-
■eqaencB  of  the  benefit  which  tbe  empeioi  derived
from  it,  tbanih  Dion  (liiL  p.  517)  accoaca  Huaa  of
hnring  artfully  earned  the  death  of  Harcellua  by
an  improper  applicaticn  of  the  aame  treatment.  In
other  caaea  it  waa  conudered  conducire  to  health
to  poor  warm  water  orer the head  before the


■oc  iia|ii  I  la  aa  to  the  order  in  which  the  hatha
^iraM  be  taken ;  the  fbnner  recommending  firat  the
b4  air  ad  th*  Laeonienm  (i^  ^•IV^),  nest  the
kath  af  wann  water  (IBop  htffiir  and  ttavrpor'),
aAarwarda  the  cold,  and  finally  lo  be  well  rubbed

*  AavTfor.  In  thia  paaage  it  ia  plain  that  the
weed  **iTf*^  ia  uaed  for  a  warm  bath,  in  which
aiac  it  alas  ocean  b  the  nine  aathor.  VitruTiua
(•.II),  (B  the  eoDtiary,  aayi  that  the  Qieeka  uaed
Ike  aai^  word  to  aignify  a  cold  hath  {Jrigida
li  n'l.  jaaw  rmr-i '  rrrf nr  rnnfrrif)  Thecen-
■-■ ■'^- ■- —  ia  here  pointed


(,OtAeB,JieMeliodoMtdtndi,x.  ID. p. 703, 709, rd.
KUhn) ;  whilat  the  latter  recommends  bii  patients
firat  to  awcat  fbr  a  short  time  in  the  tepid  chamber
(Jxpidaritm),  without  undreiaing ;  then  to  proceed
into  the  thermal  chamber  (oo/HJorwn),  and  after
having  gone  thnmgh  a  regular  eouno  of  penpir"


(ac£in),  but  to  potir  a  quantity  of  w
over  the  head,  then  tepid,  and  finally  cold ;  after-
wards lo  be  scraped  with  the  atrigil  (^perfrinan),
and  finally  rubbed  dry  and  anointed.  (Celj.  D«
Med.  I  4.)  Such,  in  aQ  probability,  wai  the  usual
habit  of  the  Rouituu  when  the  bath  was  retorted


1S8  BALNEAE.

to  u  a  dailj  natre  of  pleamre,  and  not  far  any
particular  mediral  tmtmeM;  (ha  more  an,  aa  it
KHmbIs  ia  mniiy  mp«U  tile  ty>t«iii  of  bathing
(till  in  pmcticG  omongit'  the  Orimtak,  -who,  ■■
Sit  W.  Gell  tenmrk*,  "  rocceeded  by  conqueit  lo
the  luxurieaof  the  enervated  Orecki  and  Romani."
(QeU'i  Poniptii,  ToL  L  p.  86,  ed.  1832.)

HftTing  thu  detailed  from  claHical  authori^ea
the  general  habili  of  the  Ramani  in  connection
with  tlieir  lyitein  of  bathing,  it  aow  remoini  to
examine  and  explain  the  internal  anangementa
of  the  itmctniea  which  contained  their  baths  ;
which  will  terve  aa  a  pisctUsl  commentoiy  upon
all  that  baa  been  (aid.  Indeed  there  are  more
BDi[^e  and  hotter  materiaU  for  acquiring  a  thorough
tmight  into  Roman  monnera  in  thii  one  particular,
than  Ibi  any  other  of  the  oiagea  connected  with
their  domeitie  habiti.  The  principal  ancient  au-
thoritiei  are  ViliuTioi  (t.  10),  Lucian  (Jlrwlas  tl
fiatJiitiov,  a  deluled  deacriptiDn  of  a  wt  of  batlu
erected  by  an  architect  named  Hippiai),  Pliny  the
Younger,  in  the  two  letten  deacribing  hii  Tillai  (iL
17,  T.  8),  Statiui  {BalMom  Emuai,  SUv.  L  5),
Martia] (n..  i^  and  other  epigrami),  Sidoaiiu


BALNEAB.
ApoUinaria  (J^iM.  it.  2),  and  SeiMea  (EpiM.  61,

S6,B6).

But  it  would  be  alnwat  hopelesi  to  attempt  to
anange  the  information  nbtuned  fran  thete
writen,  were  it  not  for  the  help  afforded  Hi  by  the
eiteniiye  ruin*  of  ancient  hatha,  snth  ai  the
nemaa  of  Titua,  CaiBcalla,  and  Diocletian,  but
above  all  the  poblic  balhi  (balntat)  at  Pompeii,
which  were  excaTal«d  in  1824 — 25,  and  were
(bond  to  be  a  complete  act,  eonalnicted  in  all  their
important  part*  upon  mlea  very  timilar  to  thoae
laid  down  by  VitroTina,  and  in  aucb  good  pmen-
ation  that  many  of  die  chamben  were  complete,
ercn  to  the  eeilinga.

In  Older  to  imder  the  aubjained  remarka  more
eauly  inlelligiUe,  the  woodcut  on  the  preceding
patfo  ia  uuertcd,  which  ia  taken  fRnn  a  freaco
pamting  apon  the  walla  of  the  thermae  of  Titna  at

The  anoeied  woodcnt  repretend  the  groand
plan  of  the  hatha  of  Pompeii,  which  are  nearly
■umonded  on  three  aidea  by  bouiee  and  ihopi,
that  fanning  what  the  Romana  termed  an  nuZn.

Thfl  whole  building,  which  campriiei  a  doable


act  of  batha,  hai  aii  difKxcnt  entrancca  from  the
street,  gna  of  which  A,  givea  admiaaion  to  the
amallet  let  mly,  which  are  auppoaed  to  have  been
appropriated  to  the  VDmen,  and'fiic  othen  to  the
male  department ;  of  which  two,  B  and  C,  com-
municate directly  with  the  hmaco,  and  the  other
three  D,  E,  F,  with  the  bathing  apartraenla,  of
which  r,  the  neareat  to  tho  fiinun,  was  the  prin-
cipal one ;  the  other  two,  D  and  E,  being  on  dif-
^ent  aidea  of  the  bailding;,  lerrcd  for  the  conve-
nience of  thoae  who  lived  on  the  north  and  chbI
aidea  of  the  ci^.  To  have  a  variety  of  entrancea
ifatoii  mXAui  rteufia/Unr)  ia  one  of  the  quaii-
ties  oiomereted  by  Lucian  ai  neceaaniy  to  a  wcll-
eonatnicted  act  of  batha.  (Hippiat,  8.)  Paning
thtongh  the  Erincipal  entrance  F,  which  ii  rc-
moTcd  from  the  llreet  by  a  narrow  fbotw^  aur.


ronndmg  tne  innb  (the  onter  cnrb  of  which is

marked  upon the plan  by  the  thin  line  drsipn

round  it),  and  after  dcawnding  three  atcpa,  the

bather  Snda  upon  hia  left  hand  a  amail  chainbcr

(1),  which  contained  a  convenience  (lafrwa*),  arid

prwccdi  into  a  covered  portico  (2),  which raa

round  three  aides  of  an  open  coun — a/ruim  ^3\

and theae  together  femied  the  ve«tibnle  of the

baths  —  OHti'Min  ialneanini  (Cic  Prv  OaeL  36)

which  the  aennnu  belonging  to  tho  catnblUh-

nl,  aa  well  aa  tho  attcndania  of  the  bBthrra,

ilcd. There  arc  aeali  for  their  aecanunotlation


•  Latrita  waa  also  used  previouilj  lo  the  time
of  Vam  far  the  bathing- vessel,  i/moMi  hmtriita.
(Vbtto,  Di  Lug  Lai.  ii.  68.  ed.  MuUer:  coidiwt*
Lucill.op.Afo«i.e.!,n.l31j. , , _  *^


BALNEAB.
IJand  iiimIiiiwIi  tba  pMtico  (a,  a).  Tbii  mm-
pvBaA>MW<ncnctlT  lathe  Bin,  which  ig  de-
■m'bHl  by  Lmama  (J.  e.  fi).  Wilhin  Ihii  court  the
kfcper  <l  tka  Utlw  (loiwMDr)  who  emcted  the
fHtrvM  pud  bj  tadi  firitor,  wu  ■lao  Mationed ;
^■d  the  box  fcr  baldiiic  Ibt  naaej  wai  bimd  in
11.  na  tim  (4X  wEidi  nmi  bwk  fivm  tlie
pminv  Bii^  biTa  been  appn^inted  to  him  ;  or,
if  BM,  it  Bight  hsTt  been  ■&  eatmi  m  txtdr^  for
the  oonoiiBcc  of  tbs  better  ckMctwhiln  amit-
■«  tbe  RCBin  of  Ibor  ■cqdsinUDOti  from  Ihe  in-
kfiic,  in  which  oh  it  will  coimpiHid  with  the
dauDbna  norticaed  by  Lnciu  (J.  a.  6),  ■dioiiiiiig
•»  tW  wranta'  wmiting-^ace  (ir  iptrrtf^  ))  rvr

amt  tikaoiie,  u  being  the  moK  pnbiic  place,
■liilliwiiili  far  the  tholie,  o  other  uuKoiice-
Bcata  gf  geaenl  inltfot,  woe  f°*^  up,  one  of


oot,  wtie  »led  up,
a  gladJatoriBl  ihow,  at


■aiiL  (5)  le  the  coridor  wbich  condncti  from
the  (BtOBM  E,  into  the  ame  Tettibule.  (6)  A
tamll  cell  i/  anilai  ua  ■■  the  onetpDciding  one

■  tba  «ffedta  eoridoi  (1).  (7)  A  puoge  of
i^Miiiiimiiiii  wbicb  badf  into  the  chunber  (S),
thf/'i>iV^—i  which  ■!»  fared  ■■  an  opadjte-

'^-'—^-ii.a  room  fcr  nndieiMia;  and

nible  tiiB  the  Hreel  bj'  the
(■riikr  (9),  in  which  a  ansU
rhich  pntahl;  lerred  fiv  the
■ahwfar,  who  collected  the
iteriiig  fnm  the  north  itrtaL
'  '  in  mun  hare  met  btfae

__ r  of  the  bathij  and  iti

■  well  M  other  chuacteriftic  featan*

■  in  fittingi  np,  leare  no  loom  to  donbt  that  it
acnvd  aa  an  iiniliiMJim  idool  It  doee  not  appear
thai  aaj  gcnoal  mle  of  ivuiuucttoii  was  fallowed
b*  Ike  arcbitecta  cl  antiquitj,  with  regard  to  the
laiaiitj  and  tempaatnn  beet  adaptwl  iix  an
apiiljliiiaiB  The  word  ii  not  montionod  bj
VitnuBia,  ncr  i  ijimlji  bj  Ludan ;  but  he  myt
raaofb  lor  ni  to  mier  taet  it  belonged  to  the

jii'^inimm  'm  the  hathi  of  Hippiaa  (L  c  S).
-  Afiec  qaitting  tbe  hut  apartment  thioe  an  a
iwSciait  Bimba  of  chamben  for  the  batheti  to
■iJiiaa,  m  the  ootie  of  wliich  ii  an  oeou  eoD-
wai^  three  batba  of  cold  water."  Plinjr  the
I  laagi  r  eay*  that  tbe  tyoJjfcWai  at  one  of  hia
■wa  tiIIm  Bdjoioed  tbe  JngUarimm  (_Bp.  t.  6),
mi  it  ia  plain  fiem  a  paonga  ilnBd;  quoted,  that

hetW  bek^iif  la  tba  tlUa  of  ciccn^  hrathEi,
QnMa  (MB  aa  oJleraai  nfUd^Aini  aa^a&aa  pro-
■■«•>,  to  whid  taapoatore  Celaai  alw  anigni  it.
, .. _ ..  ..  !.._.  ■'„^,nd  „ld  depart-


mmit  boBg


■to  thi
(Cic.  Pro  OaiL  26.) The;  were
elan  of  ilaTee,  called  a^tarii
m^  uke  ouall  cam  in  which  children  or.
bosk*  to  fchool),  whose  datj  it  wai  to


ii  milled


BALNEAE.  189

e  chai^  of  them.  Tbew  men  vera  notorioni
dii}ioDei^,  Bnd  Jeagned  with  all  the  thicTei  of
the  cilj,  ID  that  the;  conniTed  at  the  robberica
they  were  placed  there  to  prevent  Hence  the  ei-
'on  of  CatuUua  —  O  fiinm  uptime  fn^Mori^
I  {Cam.  miil  J)  and  Trachilo  in  the  Ru-
deiu  of  Plantoa  (iL  33.  £1),  eomplaifli  billerlf
of  their  rognety,  which,  in  the  c^tUl,  waa  carried
to  mch  an  exceii  that  ret;  BTere  tawi  were  en-
acted againit  them,  the  crime  of  Mealing  in  the

bathi  being  made  a  cHutal  of'

To  ratntn  into  the  clumbe:
and  ipeciDQi,  with  Mono  leata  along  two
the  wall  (i,  b),  and  a  atep  for  the  feet  below,
■lightly  laued  frran  the  floor  (pafcvnu  tt  gradat,
VilniT.  T.  10).  Hotea  can  itill  be  teen  in  the
welli,  which  might  have  aerred  for  peg!  on  which
the  garment!  were  hung  when  taken  m.  It  waa
lighted  by  a  window  cloaed  with  glaM,  and  orna-
mented with  atncco  manldingi  and  painted  yellow.
A  aectional  drawing  of  tbia  interior  ia  given  in  Sir
W.  Gell'i  Pompai.  There  are  no  le*a  than  u
doon  to  thii  chamber  i  one  ted  to  the  entiaoce  E,
another  to  the  entrance  D,  a  third  to  the  email
room  (11),  a  fourth  to  the  fonucea,  a  fifth  to  the

aid  apartment,  and  the  aiith  opened  upon  the
d  bBtb(lO),  named  indi&ertnti;  b;  the  ancient
anthon,  naiatio,  aoJo&irnnt,  pudntL,  Aaptittenum  *,
puteM,  AflSTj™'.  The  balh,  which  ia  coated  with
while  marble,  ia  IS  feet  10  mchea  in  diameter,
and  about  3  feet  deep,  and  baa  two  marble  itepa
to  facilitate  the  deecent  into  it,  and  a  leat  lur-
roonding  it  at  the  depth  of  10  incbee  from  the
bottom,  fa  the  porpoae  of  enabling  the  batben  to
■it  down  and  woih  ihemeelTea  The  ample  aiie  of
thia  baain  explaina  to  ns  what  Cicero  meant  when
he  wrote — Latiorva  pitdmam  voiuumm,  idijadatn
bradiia  not  tifiitdtrtntur.  It  ii  probable  that
many  peraona  omtented  themaelTc*  with  the  cold
bath  only,  inaiead  of  going  through  the  aeren
couraB  of  penpiru^on  m  the  warm  i^Artntenta ;
and  M  thcjrigidariitm  alone  could  have  bad  no
effect  in  bathi  like  theae,  where  it  merely  tervcd
ai  an  i^wfjifcniai,  the  lufafia  muat  be  tefeired  to
when  it  ia  nid  that  at  one  period  cold  hatha  wera
in  atich  reqtieat  that  acarcely  any  othen  were  need.
(0eU■Ii^«9«i,te.)  There  U  a  platform,  or  am-
bulatory (aokiK  VilniT.  v.  10)  round  (he  bath,
alio  of  marble,  and  fbnr  nichea  of  the  aame  mate-
rial diapoaed  at  regular  intertali  round  the  walla,
vith  pedealala,  for  atatoee  probably,  placed  in
tbem.^  The  ceiling  ii  vaulted,  and  the  cham-
ber lighted  by  a  window  in  the  centre.  The
anneied  woodcnt  repreeenla  a  Jrigidariim  with
ita  cold  bath  (pateM,  Plin.  £^.  v.  G)  at  one  ex-
tremity, auppoaed  to  have  fiomed  a  part  of  the
Focmian  villa  of  Cicero,  to  whoae  age  the  a^Ia  ^


The word

a  bath

body,  bnt


(Plin.  £i>.  V.  6)  i«

large  to  immene  the  whole


Plin.  ^.  I

liich  he  inleipreta  iBloiH,fbt  iL

pertoni  waiting  an  opportuni^  to  bathe  -
puaage  of  Vltntvioa  (v.  10),  henafter  qnoieo,
em*  to  contradict  thia  nae  of  the  term  —  and
UI  rfere  jiaced  in  the  Jhgidarmm  adjoining^  for
e  eapteaa  porpoee  of  accommodating  thow  who
tn  obliged  to  wait  for  that  tun.


BALNEAE.

1  ths  UM  of  ths  liniiJe  Dn
elder,  undoubtedljr  belimg. Tha  bath  itaell^  in


which  the  water  Mill  conliiiiiu  to  flow  &mi  k
neighbouring  iftiaif,  'a  placed  under  the  olcoTe,
and  the  two  doon  on  each  aide  opened  into  imBll
chMnben,  which  probahlv  «erT(!d  u  apodyleria.
It  ii  itill  to  be  Men  in  the  gudeni  of  the  Villa
C^HHeli,  at  Mala  di  Qaata,  the  aile  of  the  ancient
£oimiae.

Id  the  cold  bath  «f  Pompeii  the  water  ran  into
the  baiiu  throogh  a  ipont  of  bronn,  and  waa
earned  off  again  thmi^  a  conduit  on  the  oppoiite
■ide.  It  wai  alio  fiuniihed  wiUi  a  wane-pipe
under  the  margin  to  prerent  it  from  imuung  orer.
No.  11  U  a  nnall  chombsi  on  the  oppogita  lide  of
the  fitgidarimit,  irhich  might  have  aerred  for
ihaving  (puMrima),  or  foe  keepig  nngnenta  or
tirigila;  and  {nm  the  aide  of  ibsfrigidarimit,  the
bather,  who  inlended  to  go  through  the  procen  of
n  bathing  and  aodation,  enlend  into  (13)  the


impeii  thii  chamber


Thia  chamber  did  not  cont^  water  either  at
Pampeii  or  at  thebathaof  Hippiusbutwaa  merely
heated  with  warm  air  of  an  agreeable  temperature
in  order  to  prepare  the  bodj  Isi  the  great  heat  of
the  Taponr  and  warm  balhi,  and,  npon  returning,
to  obTMle  the  danger  '  "  ...-.■.
the  open  aid  Id  the  t
■erred  likewiae  aa  bi  .  .
took  the  warm  bath ;  for  which
tinga  np  are  eTtdcnllf  adapted,  the  walla  being  di-
vided into  a  number  of  acpBIBte  comporlmnita  or
mcoKa  for  leceifing  the  gannenli  when  taken  o^
bf  a  aeriia  of  Ggom  of  the  kind  callcd^liMlu  or


giona,  with  the  TalanuMei,  ia  represented  !□  the
article  Atlamtul  Two  biinue  hencba  were  ilao
fomd  in  the  room,  which  wat  heated  ai  well  hj
ita  contiguitj  to  the  hjpocaut  of  the  adjoining
chamber,  aa  b;  a  broxier  of  bronie  (JbcuUa'),  in
which  iba  cbsrcoal  aahei  were  ttill  remaining
when  the  ercaTa^on  waa  made.  A  repreientation
i>  giTsn  in  the  annexed  woodcuL  Jtt  whole
m  ftet,  and  ita  braulth  two  feet  iii


can  be  little
adefioiitorf
oatjng  (ixanr^pi


lenoth  an


BALNEAE,
mdmriuM,  liamHaiiiim),  the  ftopet  jJace  for  which
ia  reproamleJ  by  Lncian  {L  a)  aa  adjnning  to  tha


.  and  by  Pliny  (^,iL  17)  aa  adjoinine
to  the  hypocaait ;  and  for  which  pnrpoae  amne  <d
the  nichei  between  the  Teliuunu  aesn  to  be  pc-
oiliaijj  adapted.  In  the  larger  eitabliahmenta  a
•eparala  chamber  waa  allotted  to  theie  porpoeea,
aa  may  be  aeen  by  lefening  to  the  drawing  taken
bum  the  Thermae  of  Titoa ;  but  aa  there  ia  no
other  ^>ot  within  the  circriil  of  the  Pompeian  hatha
which  cmld  be  applied  in  the  ume  manner,  we
may  tafely  conclude  that  the  inhabilaati  of  thii
city  were  aooinled  in  the  lepidaram  ;  which  aei-
Tice  waa  performed  by  alaici  called  mxaora  and
alipbu.  [AliiTiK.]  For  thia  puipoee  the  common
people  nied  oil,  Kunetimea  icented  i  bul  the  more
wealthy  claoica  indulged  in  the  greatest  extiaTo-
gonce  with  regard  to  their  perfumea  and  ungnenta.
Theae  they  either  prucored  from  the  eJaaorteWM  of
the  badu,  ra  biought  with  them  in  amall  giaia
bottlea  ampuSat  oUariaa  ;  hundred*  of  which  Wre
been  dijcoTered  in  different  exuTatlona  made  in
Tahoni  porta  of  Italy.  [AuruLLA.]  The  fifUi
book  of  Athmoetu  conlaini  an  ample  tmtiae  upon
the  numenna  kinda  of  ointmenta  uied  by  the
Romoiu  ;  which  aubject  ia  alio  fully  treated  by
Pliny  («■.  N.  ziiL).

Caligula  ia  menlicmed  by  Suetoniua  (CU  S7)aa
baring  inTcoted  a  new  loxncy  in  the  uae  of  the
hath,  by  perfuming  the  water,  whether  fact  or  cold,
by  an  infuion  of  precious  odoun,  or  ai  Pliny  itatea
(i.  a),  by  anointing  the  walla  with  nduable  un-
guenU  ;  a  practice,  he  addi,  which  wat  adopted  by
one  of  the  ilarei  of  Nero,  that  the  lunry  might
not  be  emfined  to  myal^  (w  principala  ridaaiiir

Fmm  tlui  ^artment,  a  door,  which  doaed  by  it*
own  weight,  to  pnrent  the  admiaiion  of  the  cooler
air,  opened  into  No.  13,  the  theimal  chamber  or
nnomiuTvU  ndaiio  of  VitraTioi  (t.  11);  and
which,  in  eiact  conformity  with  hii  dircctiona,
contain!  the  warm  bath^io^wa,  or  ealda  laratia

aemicinular  Tapour-bath,  or  ZoisnoiM  at  th«
'her  ;  whilat  tbe  centre  apace  between  the  two
ide,  termed  nulatio  by  Vitmviu*  (/.  t),  and  nda-


The  object  in  learing  lo  much  apace  between  the
warm  bath  and  the  LacomoBH  waa  lo  gire  room
if  the  penona  witlun
the  chamber,  who  were  accuitomed  to  promote  a
iw  of  perapintion  by  rapid  moTenienta  of  tha
ind  l^s,or  by  liftii^  weiglta.  (Joj.SoL  ii.
420.)  In  laiver  eaUbliihmenta  tbe  conTenicncoa
contained  in  thii  apartment  occupied  two  leparata
celU,  one  of  which  waa  appropriated  to  the  worm
hath,  which  apartment  was  then  tomed  ealdarimm,
alia  caldaria,  or  iabuum,  and  the  other  comprioed
'  *  micum  and  aodatory — Laamicam  tada~
(VitTUT.  L  c),  which  part  dom*  waa  then


BALNKAE.
TUi  dktribotioD  u  rejsoEnled  in  the  pain^iu
tkenlbof  tbeTbtniusoCTitiu;  in  which  t£i
it  abo  vmUmt  pecnliuitj'  to  be  obaerfed,  tIi.,  the
ft  alomuMuuieuioB  (HMnnpedo)  b«twe«i ' '


in  cLvben,  Ibe  &


m  hjvBkMuaL f-«*nMi  inb


utrfthel
ndid,  where
«  ■■  one  of  the  chancwiMic  eonnni-
9  inihe  hathiof  Uip^u,thatlhehMhen  need

— " "'"ir  Mepo  thraogb  the  whole  tiute  of

which  thcj  had  (nlered,  but  might

e  thonul  chamber  by  a  ihorter  cir-

m  of  gentle  tempentore  (Si'  llpifM

a,  Lc  7),  which  Gonunuiueated

J  with  the  frigidaraimi.

I M  WBim-walet  lath,  which  ii  tcnned  eaUa

{Ad  Att.  a.  3),  fimdiKt  at  aJida  fadaa  b;  Piinj
(^  iL  17)  aod  Suetonim  (A'cro,  37),  ai  weU
■  Uth  (Cie.  Ad  Fam.  xiy.  IG).  and  laiism  b;
QcD*  (im  Pitcm.  27\  ippean  to  haTi  beeuatap*-
amt  ^Brble  me,  aometimei  Randing  Dpon  the
tax,  likr  that  m  the  picture  Irom  the  Themuu  of
Toaa  ;  azid  eanietimefl  eitlier parttj  riermtedabare
thrfloar,  aaitwai  at  Pompeii,  or  eDtirelynmk  into
it,  aa  directed  by  VitrUTiiu  (t.  10).  Hiswotdi  are
Iks:  — "The  bath  (Ukn)  ehoDld  be  placed
iidtTDeMh  the  window,  in  nch  a  poeition  that  the
psam  who  fluid  unmd  maj  not  oil  their  aha-
ina  apan  it.  The  plallimn  which  miroundi  the
buk  (cAofaa  Mrarwa)  Bdit  be  nScientJ;  ipa.
cjaai  to  admit  of  the  mrooDdiDg  obaenen,  who
■c  wittiBg  for  tbor  turn,  to  Uud  there  without
owwdo^  tmA  otka.  The  width  of  the  paamge  or
e^BBcl  (afcaw),  which  liea  between  the  paiapet
(rii^mm\  and  the  will,  ihould  not  be  lea  than  lii
(Ht,  ae  that  the  ipace  oeoipied  bf  the  eeat  and  it*
•try  Mow  (  fmhBtmt  et  gradmi  inferioT)  ma;  take
at  jam  twsfcet  from  the  whole  width."  The  lab-
>«BBd  plaa*  ginn  b;  Matini,  will  eipkin hii


jdWiaa.  !■  iiaiaiilt  ,  D,  obw,  pamge  between  the
H^MaBdwaUi  P,;wMHM,arMat;  and  E,  the


BALNEAE.  19t

lower  alep  (jpvdn  wfirior),  which  together  take
np  two  feet

The  warm  bath  at  Pompeii  ii  s  aquare  huin  of
marble,  and  ii  aiccnded  from  the  ovtude  hj  two
■tepa  railed  from  the  floor,  which  anawered  to  the
puapet  or  jJtiaa  o(  VitnTioa.  Around  nn  a
narrow  pUtfbna  (.miola,) ;  bat  which,  in  conaeiiuenca
of  the  limited  eitent  of  the  building,  would  not  ad-
mit of  a  )«t  ( pulviBu)  atl  arooud  it  On  the  in-
terior another  itep  a11ow«]  the  bathert  toait  down
and  waih  themwlTei.  The  annend  iection  will
render  thii  eaiilf  intelligible.


E"5a333


_jrm


A,  liArmi;  ByiAola:  Cpbitaa;  D,  the  step

1  the  iniidc,  probably  called  k£mi. (PuIt.  Ui-
nua,  Arpaid.  in  CiaciorL  de THcfti.) In  the


'  oppotite  extremi^  of  tho


icc?d  penpira
here  j  whict


We  now

chamber  w

pour  bath,  >o  called  becnuie  it  wai  the  Clutom  of
the  [«cedaemi>niani  lo  itrip  and  anoint  themeelTca
without  uting  warm  water  after  the  per»pinition
produced  bj  their  athletic  eierciaoL  (Dion  Can.  liii.
p.  G16  ;  camp.  ManiaL  Epig.  n.  12.  IS.)  It  ia
termed  owb;  Cicero  (^ifQH'a<./Vii«.  iiL  1.  g  1),
from  tin,  to  drj  ;  because  it  prodi
tion  by  meana  of  a  dry,  hot  atmoi]
Celiui  (iil  cap.  nit)  conieqacntty  te
ooru,  "  dry  aweating,*'  which  he  afterwaidA  addi
(xL  17)  wai  produced  hy  dry  warmth  (m^orv
licai).  It  vu  called  by  the  Oreeka  wufiair^pui*
(VoM.  Lei.  Styat.  t.  ti.)  from  the  fire  of  the  hypo-
cauit,  which  wia  extended  under  it ;  and  hence  by
Alexander  Aphntdii.  i'llpii'  ioKtr,  "  a  diy  faulted
chtuuber."
Vitmviiu  iayi  that  it*  width  ahonld  be  equal


BALNEAB.
er  thg  emtn  a!  vhich  id  <aiSe»  ii
left,  frata  which  s  bioius  thiald  (atipaw)  wu  nu-
potded.  Thii  r^ulsMd  the  tcmperatun  of  ths
utartmeDl,  bong  nuwd  or  lonnd  bj  mtwu  of
chaini  to  irbidi  it  wu  attached.  The  foim  af  the
cell  wu  nquind  to  be  (dmiUr,  in  order  that  tho
wirm  air  firnn  Iho  hypocatut  ini^ht  encinle  it  with
grealar  fedlitj.  (VitmF.  t.  10.)  In  accordanee
with  iheaa  nJei  ia  the  l^cowceia  at  Pompeii,  s
ieclion  of  which  ii  giTen  in  the  preriou  page,
the  clipeui  only  beiog  added  in  i^der  make  the
msacing  more  dm.

A.  The  mipended  pKTemeat,  mmaaam  :  E  the
junction  of  the  hemiaphaerium  with  the  tide  walla,
imt  atnabmi  lnauiAaeTii  ;  C,  the  ihield,  eliptiu  ;
E  and  F,  the  chaioa  hf  which  it  ii  raiaed  and
lowered  ;  D,  a  iabntm,  a  flat  inirble  Taae,  into
which  a  mp^j  of  water  wu  introdaced  by  a  tingle

B(^j  aaceilsiiiod  in  thii  place,  noi  whether  the
water  it  contained  wai  bat  ot  cold.

It  would  not  be  jmper  to  diuntu  thii  acconnt
of  the  LaermioBK  without  alluding  to  an  opinion
adopted  bj  ume  wrilen,  amongit  whom  are  Gali-
ano  and  ciunenm,  that  the  Lacoxicmit  wu  merely
■  imall  cupola,  with  a  metal  <hield  owr  it,  tiling
aboTe  the  flooring  (napmiara)  of  the  chamber,  in
the  manner  repieaented  h;  the  diaving  from  the
Theimae  of  Titoa,  whicb  drawing  ha>,  doubtleu,
giTen  rite  to  the  opinion.  But  it  will  be  sbaerred
that  the  deaign  in  qneatioa  ii  little  mora  than  a
lection,  and  uat  the  utiit  maj  have  retorted  to
the  eipedient  in  order  to  ihow  the  appuatua  bo-
loDgiig  to  one  end  of  the  chaiober,  u  u  frequently
done  in  aimHai  plena,  where  any  part  which  re-
quired to  b«  repreaented  upon  a  lai^  Kale  i«  ui-
lerted  in  full  de«elopment  within  the  genaal  Mo-
tion j  for  in  none  of  the  Dumeraui  bathi  which
baie  been  diicoTend  in  Italy  or  ebewhere,  eien
where  the  pBTementi  were  in  a  potfect  aute,  haa
anysuch  contnTRncebeeo  obaerred.  Baidetwhich
it  u  manifcat  that  the  aUpen  CDoJd  not  be  laiied
or  lawenid  in  the  design  alluded  to,  leeiiw  that  ths
chaini  for  that  putpoae  could  not  be  reached  in  the
lituation  repreicDted,  oi,  if  attained,  could  not  be
handled,  u  they  mnat  he  red-hot  from  the  heat  of
the  hypocauit  into  which  they  were  inacrted.  In
addition  to  which,  the  remaini  diacorcred  tally  ex-
actly with  the  direction!  of  Vitniiui,  which  tlua

After  hariiig  gone  thnngh  the  regular  eonrie  of
ptnpiiMion,  the  Ramaiu  made  ue  of  initrumenta


called  ttrigOa  (dp  itri^M,  Jo».  ,5i*.  SiL  26S),  t.
■cnipe  off  the  perepLration,  much  in  tho  nme  waj
u  we  are  accnatomed  to  acrape  the  iweat  off  i
bona  wid  a  peca  ti  iion  hoop,  aflw  ha  haa  nm  ■


TheMiD-

Bua  of  which  an  RrpreHoted
pnrioai  woodcut,  and  nuny  of  which  lutTa
been  ducoTered  unoDgit  the  nini  of  the  nriou
hatha  of  wtifiutj,  were  laade  id  beoe,  broiue,  inm,
and  ailTer  ;  all  comipimding  ia  toaa  with  the
epithet  of  Mai^al,  **  cum  diitiingcre  IcRO  **
{Epig.  lii.  £i>  The  poorac  duaei  were  olii^od
to  Ktapo  theauelvea,  but  tho  mete  wealthy  took
their  alaTei  to  the  hatha  (or  the  porpoae  ;  a  £aet
eloeidaled  by  a  curuot  itoiy  idated  bj
(  IHadTiim.  e.  17).

conaequenJy  iti  edge  wai  tafiaued  by  the  qiplics.
tion  of  oil,  which  wu  drepped  upon  it  from  a  imaU
Tcmtl  called  giMiu',  whica  bad  a  naimr  iMck,  ao
u  to  diachaige  tti  eontoiti  drop  by  drop,  £nim
whence  the  name  ii  taken.  A  repruatatian  of  a
gnttoa  ia  giTvn  in  the  preceding  woodcut,  Augoa-
tua  ii  iclMed  to  haie  luffeied  (rem  an  onr-nolent
uae  of  the  atrigiL  (Suet,  ^i^  30.)  iDnlidaand
penona  of  a  delicato  habit  made  ue  of  ipo^ea,
which  Pliny  aayg  auwered  for  toweU  u  weU  aa
rtrigila.  They  were  finally  dried  with  toweli
(intoi),  and  anointed.  (Jur.  &■!  iiL  262  ;  Apn-
lBiu^AM.ii.;  Plin.  ^.  A^.  izd.  1 1 .  a.  «7.)

The  couunon  people  were  inppUed  with  thias
neceatarice  in  the  btuhi,  but  the  mm  wealthy  car-
ried their  own  with  them  (P«a.  Sat.  t.  126).
Lucian  {LmfA.  toL  ii.  p.  320.  ed.  Hda.)  addaalao
ao^i  and  towela  to  the  liiL


until  they  thonght  it  prndeut  to  coeovnter  ths
open  air.  But  it  doe*  not  appisr  Co  bare  been
cuitomary  to  bathe  in  the  wato',  when  there  waa
any,  which  wu  not  the  caae  at  Pompeii,  not  in  tha
batbi  of  Hippiu  (Lumn,  L  e.),  either  of  the  Itpi-


qncnce  to  bnak  the  mdden  change  from  the  ex-
treme of  hot  to  cold.

Retnming  now  back  into  the  fngidarinm  (8),
which,  according  to  the  directions  of  VitruTnii  {t.
II),  haa  a  paaiage  (14)  communicating  with  tba
mouth  of  the  furnace  (a),  which  ii  alio  leen  in  tin
next  woodcut  under  the  boiler*,  called  ww/jmif ■»!,
pr<ipmigom(^V\ia.Ef.'\\.\l'),iieoinnrffiaii{taiBwpi,
before,  and  Tmytbtt  a  fiimace),  and  paaaing  down
thatpaaeagc,  we  reach  the  chamber  (]£)  into  which
the  praefuminm  piojecti,  and  which  haa  alao  an
entiaocs  from  the  itreet  at  &  It  waa  ^ipn>|si-
Bted  to  the  uae  of  thoae  who  had  charge  of  tha
flrei  (/Einuealorat).  There  ace  two  itairmia  ia
it ;  one  of  which  ]<ada  to  the  roof  of  the  baUia,
and  the  other  to  the  coppera  which  contained
the  water.  Of  theae  there  were  thiee:  toe  of
which  contained  the  hot  water  —  enFJai  iwm  (ac
Taa,  or  ahenom) ;  the  lecond  the  Vepi  —  ttpita-
rium;  and  the  ]ul.tiitai]i~/ngidariam.  The
nann  water  wu  intndnced  into  the  wann  hath  bj
mcani  of  a  conduit  pipe,  marked  on  the  plan,
and  conducted  thtoogh  the  wall  Undenwaln  the
aUortioa  wu  placed  the  fuinace  (Jiirmt,  Nor.  ^i.
i  II.  12),  which  amed  to  heat  the  water,  and.
give  out  atreama  of  waim  air  into  the  hollow  cella
of  the  j^jkmimhMm (from  irh  and nua). It


*  It  waa  aim  ailed  on^iiUa,  Xd^nifci,
AtiMT,  iKma^por.  (Ruptsti,  All  Jwe.  i
362.) [AMruLLA.]


BALNEAE.
pBNrd  frm  tlw  fiiniace  under  tbe  fint  and  lut
id  ibe  taldnm  bj  two  £061^  which  bi«  marked
■p^  the  ptu. Thew  ooppetl  wen  coDitructtd

'  g  ftHD  the  Tbermu  of  Titna  ;  Uie  one  con-
f  being  placed  iraraediotdj'  over

■applied  from  the  next,  the

Klrcody  cotuidenblj  heated

the  flimsee  uid  the  bTpo-

hat  it  npplied  the  deficiency  of

ilM  Bp  ttaa  the  bttheat  nmoTed,  which  coutaiiied
ikr  bU  water  neeiied  diractlj  fnim  the  iqiian
rmrgir  Rcn  behind  them  ;  a  principle  vhicb
baa  at  Ingth  been  mtnduced  into  the  modem
hathiag  caaUuhnwat*,  where  it)  efficacj,  both  in
■ari^  time  and  erpenae,  it  fally  acknowledged.
T1^  boQcrv  themaclTea  no  longer  remain,  but  the
:»fVHisHiia  which  thej  haxe  left  in  the  mt>Ttai  in
1  hieh  they  wen  embedded  ace  clearlj  vitjhle,  and
(— bie  oa  to  aacettain  their  respective  pcaitiont  and
diBcnkoa,  the  fint  of  which,  the
mmaaatad  in  the  annexed  cot


tlte  ccfipen  theie  ia  anothK  conidor  p  6),
o  the  csurt  or  atriom  (17)  ^pnpnated


Brhn^tlwi ,,  ^

the  csurt  or  atriom  (17)  ^pnpnated
H  ma  •avanti  of  the  bath,  and  which  bai  al*o  the

iW  meet  by  the  door  at  C.

We  BOW  pnmed  to  the  adjinning  leC  of  bathi,
whkh  wen  aMignal  to  the  women.  The  entrance
ii  by  the  door  A,  which  condncti  into  a  imall
nadbale  (18),  and  tbense  into  the  apodyttrium
(Id),  which,  like  Che  one  in  the  nien>i  bath,  haa  a
aiat  {pwtnmt  HgrtuiMi)  on  either  aide  bulll  up
Thia  openi  upoit  a  cold  bath
to  the  inAitH  of  the  other  act,  but
"  nennoiti,  and  probably  limilar  to
sdbjPliny  (ie.)


, wand  inferiority  of  the

itti«|»«p  in  thii  Miita  of  hatha  haa  induced  aome
Itaiin  Bdqnario  fa>  throw  a  donbl  Dpen  the  lact
rf  thai  bcsif  w^gned  to  the  wonxn  I  uid  amongn


BALNEAE.  193

these  (lia  Abbate  lorio  (/>/<»  de  Pompea)  ingenj-
ouily  iB^geit*  that  they  were  on  old  let  of  balhl,
to  which  the  larger  onei  were  mbieqnently  added
when  they  became  too  araall  lor  the  incrtaaing
wealth  and  population  of  the  city-  Bat  the  atcoy,
already  qaoted,  of  the  conaol'i  wife  who  turned  the
men  oat  of  their  hatha  at  Teanum  for  her  con-
Tenieace,  aeema  toScieatly  to  aeea^Te  aueh  a  aup*
petition ;  and  to  proTe  that  the  inhabitauta  of
ancient  Italy,  if  not  more  aelfith,  were  certainly
leu  gallant  than  their  mcceHon.  In  addition  to
thia,  VitruTiiu  eipreaalv  enjoini  that  the  bstbi  of
the  men  and  women,  thongb  aeparale,  ahould  be
contiguoui  to  each  other,  in  order  that  they  might
be  lupplied  from  the  lame  boilen  and  hypocwut
(t.  10)  ;  directioni  which  are  here  fulfilled  to  the
tetter,  ai  a  glance  at  the  plan  will  demonitiBte.

It  doe*  not  come  vithm  the  icope  of  thia  article
to  inreatigate  the  aource  from  whence,  or  the  man-
nerin  which,  the  water  wai  anppUed  to  the  bath*


impeu.


I  of  Maioia,  who


d  that  tl


>pied  from  him


juat  after  the  ei-
imencea,  ana  which  boi  been
by  the  editor  of  the  Totumea  on
l-ompeii  pnbliahed  by  the  Society  for  the  Diffu-
lion  of  Uieful  Knowledge,  woa  not  ceaGrmed  by
the  eicavation ;  and  tboie  who  are  intereated  in  the
matter  tnay  coniull  the  fourth  appendix  to  the
Plan  de  Pompeii,  by  the  Abbste  lorio.

Notwithatanding  the  ample  account  which  hn>
beeu  given  of  the  plana  and  ntagea  mpecting  hatha
in  general,  lomething  yet  remaina  to  be  said  about
that  pBjticular  doia  denominated  Thermae ;  of
which  eeUbUahmenta  the  balha  in  bet  conatituted
the  imilleat  part.  The  thermae,  properiy  (peaking,
were  a  Roman  adaptation  of  the  Greek  gymnoiium^
|;ai'>iN>aiuii],or  [slaeaira,  aa  described  by  Vitni-
Tiui  (t,  1 1 ) ;  both  of  which  contained  a  tyalem  of
hatha  in  conjunction  with  conyeniencea  for  athletic
game*  and  yoothfiU  apoiti,  eicdne  in  which  the
rhetoriciana  declaimed,  poet*  recited,  and  philoio-

Shera  lectured  —  oa  well  aa  porticoei  and  veatibulca
IT  the  idle,  and  libiariea  for  the  learned.  They
were  deioraled  with  the  fineat  objecla  of  art,  both
in  pointing  and  aculpture,  covered  with  precious
marblea,  and  adorned  with  fountaina  and  atiaded
walki  and  plantationa,  like  the  gnvea  of  the  Aa-
deniy.  It  may  be  aoid  that  they  began  and  «ided
with  the  Empire,  for  it  waa  not  until  the  time  of
Auguatua  that  theae  magniBceut  atmctnrea  were
commenced.  M,  Agrippa  ia  the  firat  who  afforded
these  luxuriei  to  hia  countrymen,  by  bequeathing
to  Ihem  the  thermae  and  gardens  which  he  had
erected  in  the  Campui  Martiua.  (Dion  Caai.  liv.
ToLi.pLTBSjPlin.ff.A'.  iiTvL2i.  te*.)  Tho
Pantheon,  now  exiating  at  Rome,  aerred  originally
aa  a  vestibule  to  these  hatha  ;  and,  oa  it  vaa  cen-
aldered  too  tnagnificent  for  the  purpose,  it  ia  aafK
poaed  that  Agrippa  added  the  portico  and  coote-
craled  it  aa  a  temple.  It  appeara  from  a  pasaage
in  Sidoniua  ApoLinarii  (Cfamt.  iiiii.  496),  that
the  whole  of  these  buildings,  together  with  the
adjacent  Thermae  Neronlanae,  remained  entire  in
the  year  1.  n.  466.  Little  ia  now  left  beyond  a
few  liagmenia  of  mina,  and  the  Pantheon.  The
example  set  by  Agripja  wai  followed  lyy  Nero,
and  aFterwards  by  Titua ;  the  mina  of  whoae
thermae  an  atill  visible,  covering  a  vast  extent,
partly  undi^  ground  and  partly  above  the  Esqniluie
HilL  Thermae  wen>  also  erected  by  Trajan,  Ca-
racalla,  and  Diocletian,  of  the  two  laat  of  which


194  BALNEAE.

■tautinc,  beiid«  uveml  which  ircre  coiutnicled
bj  priTHU  indiiidaaU,  P.  Victor  enumeraUa  lii-
teen,  and  Panviuiu  {Uri.  Rom.  Dttcript.  p.  lOU)
hai  added  four  more.

PreiiDiuiy  to  the  erection  of  then  e«taUiihinent«
for  the  11U  of  the  populMioiif  it  vu  nutomaij  fur
IhoK  wha  Hught  the  &Tour  of  tfao  people  to  give
tfaem  a  daj^i  batfaiog  £m  of  expema.  Tbm,  ao-
cording  to  Dion  Cauiui  (xiivii.  p.  UZ\  Faui-
tui,  tha  Kill  of  SulU,  funuthed  wwra  b&ih*  and
oil  g™tii  to  the  wople  fiir  one  day ;  and  Auguitiu
oa  ODD  occanon  nuniahad  wann  bathi  aod  barbcra
lo  the  people  fol  the  ume  period  free  of  eipeiue
(Jd.  lir.  p.  ISi),  and  at  auolhei  time  for  a  wbole
jear  to  the  womoi  a«  well  at  the  mea  {Id.  ilii.
p.  600.)  Hence  it  ii  fiui  to  infer  (hat  the  quadiani
paid  for  admiauon  into  the  bataeae  wai  not  exacted
at  the  titmat,  which,  aa  being  the  votki  of  the
empeion,  would  natuially  be  opened  with  imperial
genemity  to  all,  and  without  any  charge,  olher-
wi*e  ihe  whole  city  would  baTO  thnnged  to  the
eatabliahmcnt  bequeathed  to  them  by  Agrippa^
and  in  confinnation  of  thii  opinion  it  may  be  re-
marked that  the  old  eatabliihrnenti,  which  were
probably  erected  by  priiate  eaterpriie  (camp.  Plin.
a.  N.  ix.  H.  u  79),  were  temwd  MtiioriM.  (Plin,
Ep.  ii.  17.)  Moet,  if  not  all,  of  the  olkei  regola-
lUily  detailed  ai  relating  la  the  economy
"-■*■'  -maej  but  it


of  the  bathi,  apply  equally  to


ii  to  theie  eitabliahmenta  etpecially  that  the  dim-
lute  conduct  of  the  emperon,  and  other  luiurioua
indulgence!  of  the  pei^e  in  general,  detailed  in

mutt  be  conaidcred  to  refer.

Although  conaiderable  remain!  of  the  Roman
thcnnaa  are  tlill  ™ible,  yet,  from  the  rery  ruin-
oui  Btate  in  which  they  are  found,  we  are  br  iroia
being  able  to  arrive  at  the  lame  accurate  know-
ledge of  their  component  parts,  and  the  uiagea  to
which  ihey  were  tqjplied,  at  hat  been  done  with
respect  to  the  babim ;  or  indeed  to  ditcoTci  a
■atitfuctoiy  mode  of  reconciling  their  conjtnictive
detaili  with  the  dewription  which  Vitruvini  hai
Left  of  the  bathi  appertaining  to  a  Orcek  palaeatra,
or  to  the  deicriptiou  given  by  Luciau  of  the  bathi
of  Hippiat.  All,  indeed,  ii  doubt  and  guett-worlc ;
the  learned  men  who  have  pretended  to  give  an
account  of  theie  contents  differing  in  almost  all  the
esaential  particulaii  from  one  another.  And  jet
the  great  similarity  in  the  ground-plan  of  the  tbreo
which  itiU  remain  lanziat  &il  to  convince  even  a
superficial  oheerrer  that  they  were  all  tonilmcted


the  subject  without  enabling  our  readers  tr
tomcthing  like  a  geneial  idea  of  these  e
edifice*,  which,  jor  their  eilent  and  magnificence.


I  of  (^aracalia,  which


_„_^  I  !-++.++++JI+-(i-4-y.++


LMimtjiiiilj


BALNEAE.
•ra  tbe  belt  pnacfrcd  unongit  tb(
mud  wbicb  w«c  pahap*  man  iplendid  Ihu
Uw  mL TboM  iputnienti,  of  vhich  the
u  ucmaiiwd  wiih  the  appaniKn  of  probsbiUtj,
UF  kknc  Dwiked  and  upkinrd. The  dutc  perta
rgfctaml  the  remaicu  ftiU  Tuihle,  the  open  linea

A,  Pottico  bvalJBg  the  Mnel  made  bj  Concolla
wba  ha  aaalnicted  bii  thenme.  —  B,  Sepanle
bmbiiift  luiaaa,  cHha-  foe  the  UM  of  ihg  comi:
peofilr,  or  pHiApi  for  anj  penooi  who  did
viih  b>  hatAe  ID  public.  —  C,  Apodrtcria  attached
to  then. — D,  D,  and  E,  E,  [he  particoea.
J.  1 1.)— F,  F,  Eudiae,  in  which  then  nn
far  tbe philiwphcn  to  hold  their  conTe
(Viaar.Le.;  Cic  Di  OraL  iL  £.)— Q,  Hjr^e-
t^ise,  paa^^ea  vpai  to  the  air  —  Hgpaeihrae  at
lifi<inn  quai  Graeci  r^plipi^u>al,  tioitri  ivit
^firihcL (VitiuT.Jle;)  — H,H,  Stadia


BALNEAE


1»5


(Vitr


'.i<^)


—  t,  I,  PoMbly  ichooli  or  academiea  where  pablic
krCBca  w*n  deliiered.  —  J,  J,  and  K,  K,  R«m>
^fBiofinated  to  the  lOTanti  of  the  hatha  (balMea-
ti^rm).  la  the  latter  an  itainaiea  for  aaeeoling
•o  tke  ^lacipaJ  reaerroir.  —  L,  Space  occupied  h^
valka  and  ihltibbeliea  —  amMatUma  inlcr  pla-
fn-iaw.  (TitnT.  i.c.}~M,  TheuEDaotttadiiuD
ia  vbidi  the  yontb  pertvmed  their  eierdMa,  with


(Vitt


'■  L  C-),  '


i  the


A^tfnAiiHi. — N,  N,  Reaerroira,  with  upper  atorieB,


le  lo  the  anangement  of  the  interior,
Terf  difficolt  to  aaaign  Btii&ctory
'Q.lejjteieata  the  principal  eoliaDcea,
•f  wkkh  there  wen  eight — H,  the  awlitfu,  ^uehh,
<r  oU-wntCT  bslh,  to  which  the  direct  entrance
EniB  Uw  punieo  ii  bj  a  Teatibnle  on  either  lide
■auknd  S,  and  which  ia  numunded  by  a  let  of
rfcoabcia  vhich  Berred  moat  pn>bablj  aa  Iwnni  tbr
aaitrnain^  ((^ofjitEna),  anointillg  iamctaaria),  and
■  iiiiaia  i*  the  tajmrnL  TboM  luaieat  to  the
pniaijle  wen  peihapa  the  eamitUria,  where  the
pirwila'  waa  kept  which  the  wrettlen  uaed  in  order
la  otxaia  a  firaur  gnip  upon  their  adTerarie* :  —
■*  nie  OTB  haaata  ipargit  me  polTere  pslmii,
laqne  ttcem  fulne  tactn  fisTeicil  arenae."
(Orid,  MtL  a..  35.)
(3S  alao  Skhnai.  Ad  TerbiiL  PaU.  p.  217,  and
Hetmialta,  Df  Art.  Gjmit.  k  9.)  The  jnlerior
^mlitj  ef  the  omanienti  which  thoe  apartmenU
kii  had,  and  the  itancaM*  in  two  of  them,  airord
t  that  thej  wov  occnpied  by  memalt
1  to  he  the  tepidariam^  with  fciui
D,  V,  r)  taken  out  of  iti  four  anglea,
n  ita  two  flanka.  Then  are  alepa
^  into  the  hatha,  in  one  of  whirh
s  of  the  eoodnit  aie  itiU  manifeat  Thui  it
n  part  of  thit  apaitment


TW  ajMitiiwiiti  bejcnd  tbia,  which  ire  too  much
diifiteled  to  be  reatored  with  any  d^jes  of  ccr-
tt*tf,  trmxr'r**^  of  ccmne  the  laconiciun  and
^A^ar^kf  tar  which  the  mmd  chamber  W,  and


ita  appurtenaDcea  aeem  to  be  adapted,  and  wbich
are  alio  coDtignona  to  the  reaervoin,  Z,  Z.  (Vilruv.

(,  (,  pmbablr  cmupriaed  the  tptiSia,  or  place*
where  the  jonth  were  taught  their  exerciiei,  vith
the  appurtenancei  belonging  to  them,  BDch  oa  the
tpiamttariKm  and  corycaeam.  The  Aral  of  theao
takei  it*  name  from  the  game  at  ball,  lo  much  in
bTonr  with  the  Roman*,  at  which  Martial*!  ftiend
WB*  playing  when  the  bell  toonded  to  aniHnince
that  the  water  waa  itsiy,  (Mart.  liv.  163.)  The
latter  ii  derived  from  Kiipuicoi,  a  eack  (Heiych.
t.  v.\  which  waa  filled  with  bran  and  oliie  hiuk*
for  the  young,  and  *and  for  the  more  robuat,  and
then  Boniended  at  a  certain  height,  and  awung
backward*  and  forward*  by  the  player*.  (Aniii,
De  Gjan.  C6m$L  p.  9 ;  AntilL  op.  Oribai.  CoiL
Med.  6,)

The  chambem  bI»  en  the  other  aid^  which  are
not  marked,  probably  aerred  for  the  exerciiei  of
the  palaeiln  b  bad  weather. (ViUnr.  t.  1 1.)

Theae  bath*  contained  an  upper  itoiy,  of  which
nothing  renuuna  beyond  what  u  jut  lufficient  to
indicate  the  bet.  Tbey  have  been  mentioned  and
eiilogiEed  by  aeveral  of  the  Latin  author*.  (Spar-
tian-  CaraadL  c  S  ;  I^mpHd.  HtlioffoA.  c  17,
Ala.  Sever,  c  25  ;  Eutiopiiii,  liil  1 1  ;  Oljmp.
ajmd  Phet.  p.  114,  ed.  Aug.  Vindel.  1601.)

It  will  be  obaerred  that  there  i*  no  [art  of  the
bathing  department  aepaiated  from  the  re*t,  which
conid  be  auigned  for  the  use  of  the  women  ex-
eluiiyely.  From  Ihi*  it  muat  he  inferred  either
that  both  aexe*  alway*  bathed  together  promiicu-
ou*ly  in  the  thermae,  or  that  the  women  were
excluded  allegetbr^r  from  theae  ealabliabmenta,  and
only  admitted  to  the  boineae.

It  remain*  to  explain  the  manner  in  which  the
immenae  budy  of  water  required  for  the  *upply  of
a  *et  of  bath*  in  the  thermae  wa*  heated,  which
ha*  been  performed  very  aatisfactorily  by  Piraneai
and  CamerDn,  u  may  be  *een  by  a  reference  to  the
two  lubjoined  aections  of  the  catliiliBn  a^wudurita
mod  padm  belonging  to  the  Thermae  of  Caracalla.


A,  Anhe*  of  the  aqnaedoct  which  conveyed
he  water  into  the  piioM  B,  from  whence  it
lowed  into  the  upper  range  of  cetli  throuah  the
Lperture  at  C,  and  thence  again  descended  into


198


BALTEU8.
s  b7  the  Bpcrtore  at  D,  which  were


the  loi  ,  .

placed  immediBtelj  oret  the  hjpocaiul  E  .
pracfiuiuon  of  which  id  leea  in  the  tiamTene
wK^on,  at  F  in  the  lower  cut.  Then  were
thin;-two  of  thcM  celli  airanged  in  two  inwi
over  the  hypocsutt,  uxleeo  on  csch  tide,  and  all
CDmmmiicating  with  each  other  ;  and  over  theee  a
aunilar  number  aimilajly  anajig«d,  which  cooi-
nunicated  with  thou  below  b;  the  apertnre  at  D.
The  parling  walli  between  these  celli  weic  like-
wiae  perforated  with  flue*,  which  eerred  to  dii-
leminata  the  heal  all  aisund  the  whole  body  of
water.  When  the  water  wla  lufGciently  waim,  it
waa  turned  on  ts  the  balhi  through  pipe*  conducted
likewiie  through  fluet  in  order  to  preient  the  lou
of  leinpeiatun  daring  the  paeaage,  and  the  lacuum
wfu  supplied  b;  tepid  water  from  the  range  above,
which  waa  replenished  from  the  pLiciaa  ;  exactly
upon  the  principle  leprcaenled  in  the  drawing  ftom
tile  Thermae  of  Titua,  ingeniontl;  applied  upon  a
much  larger  icale.  (The  moat  important  modem
worka  on  the  Roman  batba  are  the  following :
Winckelmann,  nnmeroiu  paiaagea  in  hia  worki ;
the  deacriptiooi  of  the  Roman  hatha  by  Cameron,
Lond.  1772,  and  Pallsdio  and  Scamoizi,  Vicenza,
1795  ;  StiegliU,  Jr^iHolcgit  da-  SaaJiBut,  W.  iL
p.267,&ci  Hilt,  Zaire  dfrCeAiwifc,  p.  233,  &c;
WeinbrenncT,  EiUumrfi  usd  Er^ibixiiiigBi  lUitiiBr
GMiidt,  Carluuhe,  1823,  part  1  j  the  editon  of
VilruTiui,  etpeiifllly  Schneider,  toL  ii.  pp.  375—
»91 ;  for  the  hatha  of  Pompeii.  Bechi,  Mta.  Bor-
ioa.  ToL  iL  pp.  4S— fi2 ;  Gell,  Pomptiana;  Ponr
ptii  in  the  IMi.  Eni.  Kwnc. ;  and  fiir  the  beat
ittinniiUT  of  the  whole  lubject,  Becko-,  GaUut,  toI.
ii.  p.ll,*c;)  [A.R.]

BAXTEUS,  or  BA'LTEA  in  the  plural
(TiAo^r),  a  belt,  a  ihonlder-bclt,  a  baldric,
mu  Died  to  mipend  the  iword  ;  and,  aa  the
■word  commonly  hang  beiide  the  left  hip,  it*  belt
waa  ivpparted  by  the  right  ahoulder,  and  peaaed
obliquely  orer  the  breaat,  aa  [a  seen  in  the  beauti-
ful cameo  here  introduced  Erom  the  Florentine
Museum. In  the  Homeric  timea  the  Oceeki  also


used  a  belt  to  anpport  the  ahield  ;  and  this  second
belt  lay  alec  the  other,  and  waa  larger  and  biDader
than  it  (/L  liT.  404—406) ;  but  as  this  ahield-
belt  waa  found  incouTcnienl,  it  was  aupciacded  by
the  indention  of  the  Carian  Ixanr  [Clifku&J
The  very  early  diviso  of  the  ahbld-belt  aeoonnta


nARHA.

foe  the  iact.  that  thia  pnrt  of  the  ".ii'-nt  ""^o-t
ia  noTd  eihibitcd  in  paintinga  or  >[,i-n'iin  o.  .i
third  use  of  the  halteua  was  to  auspead  tne  ituiver,
and  sometimes  together  with  it  the  bow.  (Neraea.
Cytieg.  SI.)  The  bell  was  naoally  made  of  leather,
but  waa  ornamented  with  gold,silTer,  and  predoua
stones,  and  on  il  inbjecti  of  ancient  an  wen  fre-
quently embroidered  or  emboaaed.  (Uerod.  L
171  ;  XP'""'  TfAn^i^,  Od.  xL  610;  <^infr,
n.  lil  401  i  Viig.  Aa^T.  812.)  The  belU  of
the  Roman  empeiora  wen  also  magnificently
adorned,  and  we  team  from  inscriptiona  that  there
was  a  distinct  officer  —  the  haUearua  —  who  had
the  charge  of  them  in  the  imperial  palace.  (Tre-
belL  Poll  OoBeK.  16.)

BA'LTEUS,  in  arehilecture.  VitruTiui  ap-
pliea  the  temi  *■  baltei "  to  the  hands  auirounding
the  volute  on  each  side  of  an  Ionic  capiul.  {De
AriA.m.  £.  ed.  Schneider;  Oenelli,  flri^  ii&r
Vitnn.  ii.  p.  35.)  [Columji*.]  Other  wrilcra.
apply  il  tn  the  ptoBXacHaai  of  an  amphiiheatre.
(Calpum.  Ed.  Tit.  47  ;  Tertullian,  De  SpKtaa,  3  ;
Ahfhithiatruh).  In  the  amphilheatn  at
Verona  the  baltei  are  found  by  meaaoremenl  to  be
2^  feet  high,  the  tiepa  which  they  endoae  being
one  foot  two  inches  high.  [J.  Y.]

BAPTISTE'RIUM, [BALNitiM.]

BARArHRON(Mpa«|»r),  also  called  ORCO-
MA  {ipufim),  wai  a  deep  pit  at  Athena,  with
hooks  on  the  aidet,  into  which  criminals  were  caat.
It  waa  sitnate  in  the  demua  KiipMat,  It  is  men-
tioned as  mrly  aa  the  Persian  waja,  and  cmtinued
to  be  employed  aa  a  mode  of  puniahment  in  tho
time  of  the  oiatoia.  The  eiecutjonec  was  call^
b  Mrf  ipiypitri.  {ScboL  ad  AH^oph.  Flid.  i&\  i
HarpociaL  Ln.;  Herod,  yii.  133;  Xta.Htlll1.
S  21  ;  LycBTg.  e.  Ltotrat.  p.  221  ;  Deinarch.  c
D«m.f.  49  ;  Wachsmnth,  Hiiiiii.  AUtrOsmtk.  ml.
ii.  p.  204, 2nd  edit.)  ItcomapondedtotheSpaitau
Ceadas. [Ckaiub.]

BARBA  (n^r,  yirttor,  Miwit,  Ariatoph.
LgtiH.  1072),  tbe  beard.  The  fiuhiona  which
have  prevailed  at  different  timet,  and  in  different
countries,  with  reapect  to  the  heard,  hats  been  veiy
varioua.  The  most  refined  modem  nationa  regard
the  beard  aa  an  encumbrance,  without  bonty  or
meaning  ;  hut  the  andenla  generally  cultivated  iia
growth  and  form  with  apecid  alleulion  ;  and  that
the  Greeks  were  not  behind-hand  in  this,  any
more  than  in  other  aria,  is  aufEdently  shown  by
the  atatuei  of  their  pbiloaopheis.  The  phnae
nr)«raTf»fi(7v,  which  is  applied  to  letting  tha
beard  glow,  implies  a  poaitlve  culture^  Generally
speaking,  a  thick  beoid,  iriyuf  fia&6i,  or  t<vrvi,
wot  considered  aa  a  ma^  of  manlineas.  Tho
6reek  philoaophera  were  distinguished  by  their
lon^  beards  aa  a  loit  of  badge,  and  hence  the  tenn
which  Pertius  (Sat  it,  I)  applies  to  Socmtea
BtoSHte-  iar&iiiu.  The  Homeric  horoea  were
bearded  men.  So  Agamemnon,  Ajaz,  Meoclana,
Ulyaaea  (/(.  nii.  74,  niv.  516,  Od.  ivL  176),
According  to  Chiysippni,  dted  by  Athenaeua
(liiL  p.  565),  the  Oreeka  wore  the  beard  till  tha
lime  of  Alexander  the  Oreai,  and  he  adds  that  tha
lirat  man  who  was  ahaveu  waa  called  ever  after
ttipmiv,  «  ahavcn  "  (finm  yttfpn).  Plutarch  (73a.
c.  5)  aays  that  the  reason  for  the  shaving  was  that
they  might  not  be  pulled  by  the  beard  in  battle.
Tho  custom  of  shaving  the  beard  continued  anicaig
the  Greeks  till  the  time  of  Justinian,  and  duHi^i^
that  period  even  the  italoea  of  the  phUofophers


BARDA.
mn  iritboBl  tin  bard.  Tbn  philowplien,  hov-
ntr,  pnenllj  coatiiiued  tbe  Did  b*dg«  of  their
pnfriuaa.  ud  thcit  atenUtirni  in  m  doing  gare
liie  to  the  Ajuig  thftt  >  low  bfsrd  doea  not  make
k  pbikBpbet  [nrjmnmn^  ^iXiffa^r  ai  ma),
nd  a  man,  whoH  iriuloin  itopped  with  bit  Ixard,
«w  called  in  riyurtn  vf^i.  (Comiore  OelL  ii.
?  J  QainL  xL  1)-  The  Rcmaiu  in  earl;  liin»
vt«  tbe  beaid  micM,  a*  ire  learn  from  tho  imult
vSend  b;  the  Oaul  to  H.  Painrini  (Liv.  r.  t]),
«ad  baai  Cicero  {Pro  CaeL  H)  ;  and  according
tiirHn{iJa»eAut.iL  ll)imdFlmj(i


Jl  tillB.


.  300,


Tha  P.  Tidnhu  Macnu  bnwglit  orei  e,  barbei
btm  Sidlj  ;  and  Plinj  addi,  ibil  the  fint  Koman
«ba  wai  ihsTed  (nuai)  srerf  da;  irat  Sdpio
JLbiraaBt,  Hia  cniloia,  howerer,  ni  won  fol-
lavnl,  and  iLariiig  beoune  a  regular  thing.  The
Irwri  ordoi,  then  u  now,  wen  aot  alwaji  able  to
do  Ibe  mtae,  and  hence  the  jeen  of  Martial  (riL
95,  liL  59).  In  the  later  thnei  of  the  republic
ibere  were  man;  who  ihaied  the  beard  onl;  fai-
tvOr,  and  trimmed  it,  lo  aa  to  give  it  an  oma-


Cats.  a.  10)  and  batiatali  (Cic  ad  Att.  I  U,  16,
prv  Ot^  U)  are  applied.  When  in  mouniing  all
tbe  Uglier  aa  well  at  the  lover  orden  let  '

In  the  general  way  in  Some  at  thii  tii
Iob;  b(»rd  {taria  promitia,  Lir.  ziviL  31.
tmndered a  mark  of  iloTcnlineu  and  ^laJar.
Tbe  mota,  L.  Vetnrioi  tad  P.  Liciniiu,
peDed  M.  Linni,  trha  had  been  baniihed,  o
mloncni  to  the  dty,  to  be  ihaTcd,  and  to  !■;
■aide  bia  dn^  appearance  (tovJcri  «f  aqatal
irf^*Ti%  and  then,  bal  not  till  then,  lo  came
lbeKiaIe.b^ (Lit.  niiLSl.) Thefirrttii
abning  wai  leguded  ai  the  bt^umina  of  mai-faood,
nd  the daj  no  whkh  thi>  took  place  waa  celc-
famed  aa  a  feMiraL (Jut.  Sat.  iiL  186.) There
waa  DO  psrtrnkr  time  fixed  for  thil  to  be  doc
I'nall;,  bowcTer,  it wai  done  when  the  you:
Bmoo  aHsmed  the  tof;*  Tinlia  (SueL  Od^.  ia>
AmutBi  did  it  in  hi*  ^-tth  jeu  ;  Caligula  in  hit
3«th. Tbe  hair  cut  off  on  inch  oecaiioni  wu  con-
aemted  to  lome  god. Thus  Nero  put  hii  np  in  a
■dd  bar,  let  with  pcaHi,  and  dedicated  it  to  Jupi-
ter Capitoliaai. (Suet.  A'n-.  12.)

Wilb  the  emperor  Hadrian  the  bcaid  began  lo\
trrin  (IKon  Caia.  liriii.  \&\  Plutarch  lajt  that
tbe  aitfavi  wore  it  to  hide  lome  wan  on  hu  &cc.
Tbe  [metice  alWwudi  betwne  common,  and  till
ihc  tine  of  Coutantine  the  Oriat,  the  cmperon
Wff^  in  bnita  and  coini  with  beajdi.  The  Ro-
BHia  let  their  bordi  grow  in  time  of  mourning  ;
■o  Aogaatoa  did  (Soet.  A^.  23)  for  the  death  of
JiiIm*  CaeiBi:,  and  the  time  when  he  had  it  ihaTed
•r  be  MiKde  a  HMon  of  fatiTity.  (Dion  Can.
drra.  U  ;  ramp.  Cie.  n  Ferr.  IL  12.)  The
Cmka,  eo  tbe  other  hand,  on  nich  occaiiona
riwed  tb*  beard  cloae.  Taeitoi  (Germ,  c  3)  njt
ihs  the  Caui  let  tbeir  hair  and  beard  grow,  and
wvdd  luC  bare  them  cut  till  the;  had  ilnin  an
aetaj.  (ConiBre  Becker,  ClonUsa,  toL  iL
p.  S»7,  key

B.aaBBHa,  The  Greek  name  for  a  barber  waa
utfttt.  and  the  Latin  louir.  The  term  em-
^ftd  in  modern  European  laufpa)^  ia  deriTed
fr^  the  low  Ltttin  hatitaiorint,  which  ia  fbond  in
Tbe  barber  of  the  aocienta  via  a  lar
[0  than  hii  modem  rrpro-


BARBA.  197

•entative.  Men  had  not  often  the  neeeanr;  im-
plement* for  the  TariouB  opeiatioiu  of  the  toilet ;
ibi,  mirrora,  perfumea,  and  toolj  (or  clipping,
dug,  aharing,  fta  According;  the  whole  pro-
L  had  to  be  performed  at  the  barber^  and  hence
BTeat  concDSiaa  of  people  who  dail;  goaaipped
[he  touttrixa,  or  baiber*!  *h<^  Beeidea  the
iei  of  a  barber  and  hsirdretaer,  itrietl;  ao
called,  the  ancient  tauor  diacharged  other  ofiicea.
He  WM  alio  a  nail-purer.  He  waa,  in  bft,  much
what  the  Eniliib  barbel  wag  when  he  extracted
teeth,  aa  well  at  cut  and  dreucd  hair.  People
'ho  kept  the  necenarj  inaCrumenta  ibr  all  the
diflerent  operutiona,  general];  had  alao  ilaTBa  ex-
preal;  for  the  purpoas  of  perfbnning  them.  Tho
boaincas  of  the  hubei  «u  threefold.  Firat  there
waa  the  cutting  of  hair :  hence  the  barbei'a  quei-
tioa,  ns  at  xtipa  (Plut.  i>«  OamU.  18).  For
thia  puipoae  he  need  Tarioua  kniTea  of  diiferent
aiiet  and  ih^Ka,  and  degrees  of  ihajpneai ;  hence
Lucian  (Adv.  Indod.  e.  29),  in  eaonierating  the
apparatua  of  a  baibci*i  ihop,  mentioni  vAqBoi
fiaxoiptiiBtr  (fiixatpt^  f^X'^p''*  Kovpii  are  nied
aJao,  in  Latin  cuiter) ;  but  aciaaora,  4«Xfr,  3nrA$
ltiX''ifa  (PdIIox,  il  32 ;  in  I^tin  faifa,  anda)
were  lued  too.  (Compare  Ariitoph.  Adam.  S48  i
Lucian,  Pit.  c  46.)  Ki](aipatm  theuiual  word.
Irregularis  and  nneTenncM  of  the  hair  waa  con-
■idercd  a  gteat  blemiah,  aa  appean  generallj,  and
from  Horace  (5a<.  i.  3.  31,  Bnd.£>)tAl  L  M),  and
accordingly  aAer  the  hair-cotting  the  oneren  haira
were  pulled  ont  b;  tweezen,  an  opetalian  to  which
Pollux  (iL  34)  applies  the  term  raimXiytaeiu.
So  the  hangera-on  on  great  men,  who  wished  to
look  young,  were  accuitomed  to  pal!  out  the  grey
hain  for  them.  (AriiL  %  908.)  Thiawaacon-
aidered,  bowcTer,  a  mark  of  e%minac;,  (Oell.
Tii.  12  ;  CicPro  ffoKE.  Cbn.  7.)  Thepenonwho
waa  to  be  operated  on  b;  the  baibei  had  a  luugh
cloth  {liiii>urar,  neojueng  in  Plautui,  CapL  a.  2.
17)  laid  on  hia  ihouldera,  aa  now,  to  keep  the
bain  oET  hia  dreaa,  &«.  The  aecond  part  of  the
huaineaa  wu  iharing  (rmiera,  mnlare,  {kp»'').
Thil  waa  done  with  a  (upir,  a  mmumia  (Lamprid.
Iltliog.  c  31),  a  TBior  (aa  we,  retaining  tbe  Latin
root,  call  it),  which  he  kept  in  a  caae,  Miie%
tupo94ioi,  (uptiirtit,  "  a  razor  caae"  (Ariatoph,
nan.  22D  ;  PoUoi,  iL  32  ;  Pelron.  94).  Some
who  would  not  aubmit  to  the  opeiation  of  the  laior
uaed  uiatead  aome  powerful  depilatory  omtmenta,
or  plarteta,  aa  pnlolirai.  (Plm.  niii.  10.  47;
oetda  Crtii,  Martial,  iL  93.  9 ;  Veaitma  latxm,
iiL  74  ;  dropait,  iiL  74 ;  x.  65.)  Stray  haiii  which
euaped  the  nior  were  pulled  out  with  imall
pincen  or  tweenia  (toMliit,  TpixeAdAov).  The
third  [«n  of  the  barber'i  work  waa  to  pare  the
naila  of  tbe  handi,  an  operalion  which  the  Greeks
eipreaied  by  the  wordi  irextfiu'  and  ixor«x'f»u'
(Arialoph.  Eg.  706 ;  and  S<AoL ;  ThcophraiL
aarvd.  c  26;  Pollui,  ii.  146).  The  miun-
ments  uaed  fcs  thil  purpoae  were  called  ^rbxiiTT^ui,
K.  fuixafpia.  (Pollux,  x.  140.)  Thia  piuUca  of
employing  a  man  cipteia!;  lo  pare  the  nalli  ei-
plaini  Plantui'ahnmDrauadeicriptionofthcmiacrly
Eudio  (AalaL  ii.  4.  34) ;  ~


Eren  to  the  miaer  it  did  not  seem  to  pre  hit  naita
hinuelf^andiaTC  tbe  money  be  irould  haTo  to  pa;;
hut  only  lo  collect  the  paringa  in  hope  of  making


J9B  BASILICA.

■amdhmg  T)j  thmu  So  Martiil,  in  raHjing  «  fop,
who  had  tned  to  diipenie  with  the  horber'i  ht-
licci,  by  niing  difiermt  kindi  of  plaatoi,  &>:■,
uka  him  (.^i^.  iiL  71),  (^M  JailaU  mguat
What  will  yourn«iU  doP  How  will  yon  getyonr
nula  pvedP  So  Tibnllui  layi  (L  8.  11),  fnuj
(pmdHt)  WKnidt  artifida  doeta  nbtacuitm  numn;
from  which  it  sppcnn  that  the  pcnon  addrexed
wiu  in  tha  habit  of  employing  one  of  the  tik>»
fiuhioBBbU  tonion.  The  initnunenU  lued  ore
referred  to  by  MutiaL  (Epig.  iit.  3G,  Imini-
mmla  (nusna.)  [A.  A.]

BA'RBITOS,  or  BA'RBITON. [LvHi.]
BASANOS  (iS<lirv<>t> [Tor hint UM. J
BASCA'NIA  (Bvrxi^a). [FiScnsuH.J
BASCAUDA.  H  Bridih  buket. Thii  Urn,
whicEi  Rnuini  with  very  little  Tariatioii  in  the
Webh  "  bo«g«wd,"  «nd  the  Engliib  "  bMket,"
wu  conveyed  to  Rome  together  with  the  article!
denoted  by  it. We  find  it  uaed  by  jDvenil  (ili.
16)  and  by  Martial  (dt.  99)  in  connecUona  which
iDipIy  that  theie  articled  were  held  in  mnch  eitcem
by  the  luiurioiu  Romani.  [J.  Y.J

BASILEIA  (SiurtXtia],  ■  feetiT^  celcbr&ted
at  Lebadcia,  in  Boeotia,  in  honour  of  Traphonim,
who  hod  the  inmBnie  of  Bvr'Atis.  Tbit  Cegtini
wu  alio  called  Trophonia— T,»f^ria  (PoUoi,  I
37)  1  and  wu  lirtt  ob«n-ed  under  the  latter  name
M  a  general  Jettiial  of  the  Boeotiana  after  the  battle
of  Leuctnu  (Diod.  it.  53.)
BA'SILEUS  (aiiiriA.i>).  [Bbx.]
BASI'LICA  (k  atJa,  on/a,  porliau  —  0ain-
Ancf,  alM  r^io,  Slak  Silo.  L  1.  30  -,  Snet  Aug.
31),  ft  building  which  •erred  u  a  court  of  law  and
an  exchange,  or  place  of  meeting  for  merehanti  and
men  of  butineu.  The  two  uiea  are  to  mixed  up
together  that  it  if  not  alwayi  coiy  to  ny  irhicEi
wai  the  principal.  Thai  the  buUics  at  Fanuni,
of  which  VitruTiui  hiraaelf  wtu  the  architect,  waa

held  in  a  naall  building  attached  to  it,  — the
temple  of  Angottui.  The  term  ii  deriycd,  ac-
cording to  Philander  (Cbnunotf.  in  Vilmv.),  from
BaaAtii,  a  king,  in  reference  to  early  timn,  when
the  chief  magiilnUe  adminiitered  the  kwihemade;
bat  it  iiinore  immediately  adopted  from  the  Orccki
of  Athena,  whose  accDnd  archon  wai  itjlcd  ifiX"'
fiairiKiit,  and  llie  tribunal  where  hs  adjudicated
moi  0a0i;^wi(Paai.i,3.gl  iDcraotth.e.  jlrufo-
$nf.  p.  776),  the  mbrtantiie  oa^  arportieiu  in  lAtin
being  omitted  for  conTcnience.  The  Qroek  writen
who  ipeak  of  tbe  Boman  baiilieae.  call  them  iraae-
timefl oYeol fiiurAtiadf and umetimea merely

The  name  alone  would  make  it  highly  probable
that  the  Romani  wen  indebted  to  the  Qreeki  for
the  idea  of  the  building,  which  wai  proljablj  bor-
rowed from  the  (rrni  ^ooiXeioi  at  Atheni.  In
itt  original  form  it  may  be  detcribed  ai  an  iaiulaifd
fvrHoo,  detached  from  the  o^ora  or  finm^  for  the
mora  canrenient  tnuiaction  of  buiinCH,  which
formerly  took  plaee  in  the  porticoe*  of  the  agora
itaelf  1  in  fact,  ■  lort  of  agora  in  miniatore.  The
court  of  the  Ilellsnodicoe,  in  the  old  agora  of  Elii,
WBi  ciBclly  of  the  form  ofabaulica. [Aooha].

The  fint  edifice  of  thii  dcKriptiui  waa  not
erected  until  ■.  c  131  (Li*,  xaix.  U)  i  for  it  ja
expmaly  itated  by  the  hiitorian,  that  Uiere  wore
no  baaiticae  at  the  time  of  Che  fire,  which  de-

■  and  Laerinn^  B.C.  21(k


BASILICA.
(Lit.  zzri.  27.) It  wai  litaated  in  the  forum  ad-
joining the  curia,  and  waa  denominated  baailicm

Porciui  Goto.  Bnide*  thii,  there  were  twenty
othert,  erected  at  diSereut  periodi,  within  the  citr
of  Rome  (Pitigc  La.  A'U.  t.  v.  Batilita),  of  which
the  following  are  the  moit  frequently  alluded  to  by
^le  ancient  author! :  —  ],  BatiiieaSnnproma,t:on-
ItTOcted  by  Titui  Semprmiiui,  B.  c  171  (Lit.  iIit.
16);audnippaKd,  byDonati  and  Nardini,tohaTe
been  between  the  ricua  Tukui  and  the  Velabrum.

2.  £ajtfuxil^Dtnua,  which  waa  aboTO  thecomitiniD.

3.  BaiiUoa  I^ali  Ataulii,  m  Batiiiaa  Armilia,
called  al»  Rtgia  Paali  by  Statina  (L  e.).  Cicero
(Ad  Att.  iT.  16)  mention!  two  baiilieae  of  tbil
name,  of  which  one  wai  buHt,  and  the  other  only
regtond,  by  Paulut  Acmiliui.  Both  th«e  edifices
were  in  the  forum,  and  one  wiu  celebrated  for  iti
open  pcriityle  of  Phrygian  columnt.  A  nfre-
lentation  of  Ihia  one  ia  giien  below  Irom  a  coin  of
the  Aemilia  gem.  (Plin.  H.  If.  iixri.  24  ;  Appian,
B.  C.  ii.  26  ;  PlnL  Oaa.  29.)  The  poaition  of
thete  two  baiilieae  hai  given  riae  to  mneb  cnii-
troTeray,  a  brief  account  of  which  ia  giTen  in  the
DicL  of  Biog.  Vol.  If.  p.  766.  4.  Batiiita  Pom-
peii, oiled  alio  ngia  (Suet.  Ai^.  31),  near  the
theatre  of  Pompey.  fi.  BaiHica  Jmlia,  erected  by
Juliui  Caeior,  in  the  fivum,  and  oppoeite  to  the
baiilica  Aemilia.  (SneL  Calig.  37.)  B.  BatOica
Caii  It  Luei,  the  gnndioai  of  Auguitni,  by  whom
it  waa  founded.  (Suet.  Aug.  29.)  7.  Batilica
Vlpia,  or  TVajiDif,  in  the  forum  of  Tr^an.  8.
Baiilica  Cbulosfun,  erected  by  the  emperor  Con-
itantine,  auppoaed  to  be  the  ruin  now  remainiiifp
on  the  Tie  hca,  near  the  temple  of  Rome  and
Venui,  and  commonly  called  the  temple  of  Feaeo.
Of  all  theae  magnificent  edificci  nothing  now  n^-
maim  beyond  ^he  gniund-plBn,  and  the  haiei  and
■ome  portion  of  the  column!  ind  lupcnlructura
of  the  two  Ion.  The  baailioi  at  Pompeii  ia  in
better  preierration  ;  the  eitcmal  woJI*.  nmgee  of
column!,  and  tribunal  of  the  jndgea,  being  ttill
tolerably  perfect  on  the  ground-fioer.

Tha  forum,  or,  where  there  waa  more  than  ono,
the  one  which  waa  in  the  moat  frequented  and
central  port  of  the  city,  wu  alwayi  lelecled  for  the
■ite  of  a  baiilica  ;  and  hence  it  ia  that  the  cloiaic
writer!  not  unfrequently  uic  tha  termt^nat  and
batHioa  aynonymouily,  ai  in  the  paimge  of  Clnn-
diis  (Di  Homir.  Onu.  tI.  645} :— DeiatHMpit
dagit  Rigiia  oantfii  fom  Janalmt  Ulpia  lietor,
when  the  fbmm  ia  not  meant,  but  the  haiitkn
which  wBi  in  it,  and  which  wai  aurraundedby  the
lictoT!  who  itood  H  the  forum.  (Fitiac  LtJ-  Ant.
La.,-  Nard. Rom.  AnL  t.  9.)

Vitniviui  (t.  1)  direct!  tlut  the  meat  ihellered
part  of  the  fonun  ihould  be  lelecled  for  the  lita  of
H  baailica,  in  order  that  the  public  might  lufler  oi
little  ai  pnaible  from  eipoaurg  to  bod  weather,
whilit  going  to,  or  returning  from,  their  place  of
boiineia  ;  he  might  alio  hare  added,  for  their
greater  convenience  whilit  engaged  within,  liikca
many  of  theee  edifice),  and  oil  of  the  mon  ancient
onea,  were  entirely  open  to  the  externa!  air,  being
lunounded  and  pcoiccted  aolely  by  an  open  peri-
atyle  of  columna,  m  the  annciii  representation  of
the  banlica  Aemilia  from  a  medal  of  Lcpidui,  with
the  inecripticm,  clearly  ibowi.  -

When,  however,  the  Romana  became  wealthy
and  refined,  and  cotucquently  more  cfldninate,  >
wall  WW  lubitituled  for  the  external  periUjle,  and


buldinfm,  frodi  the  tiiot  of  their  firrt  inititution,
■atl  tbe;  wen  conTrrt«l  into  ChiiitiBii  chURhn.
TW  gnand  pbo  adil  of  Ibem  u  rectaagiilu',  and
iha  width  not  man  than  b)il^  nor  leu  tbu  onc-
IkM  at  dw  length  (Vitnit.  L  c)  i  bat  if  the  urea
fB  wUck  the  edifice  »m  t^i  be  niwd  vm  not  pn>
yiHi— llj  tmg,  Bnll  ehamben  (ekaiddica)  ven
CU  oC  fim  o«  of  the  endi  (VitniT.  Z.  c),
vhidi  Mrred  u  officn  for  the  judgei  or  mer-
rlMie.  Tbii  uca  wu  dirided  intn  three  parti.
'  9  of  ft  central  nave  (witdia  porticMt),  and
.  *ch  MtjaiBied  frtaa  the  centre  hy
w  of  eolonuu  ^-  a  mode  of  conitnction
J  adapted  to  boildingi  intended  for  the
of  ■  lar^  conconne  of  people^  At  one
d  ef  tbc  centre  aiile  wai  the  tribunal  of  the
jadgc,  in  fami  either  rectangular  or  circuLar,  and
■■■etiBea  est  otf  from  the  length  of  the  grand
B«iv  (aa  ia  aecn  in  the  annexed  plan  of  the  baailica
ai  P^nqieii,  which  al»  affinda  an  e^unpie  of  the
chiBbai  of  the  jndicM,  v  chalddica,  ahore  men-


T^


tJcweii),  er  otherwiie  thrown  ont  from  the  hinder
wall  of  tlw  bmlding,  like  the  trihone  of  ume  of
tkc  moat  ancient  chnrcha  in  Rome,  and  then  called
the  bourrck — an  inatano  of  which  ii  afforded
HI  tbe  baaUKS  Tiajani,  of  which  the  plan  ia  given
Wlo*.  It  will  be  obaemd  that  thii  wa>  a  moit
pmri^'"*"  edifice,  poneaaing  a  doable  trihone,  and
dasfale  row  of  cohmraa  on  each  aide  of  the  centre
aiale,  diTiding  the  whole  into  Gte  aialei.

Tbe  intctna]  tribune  wai  prabablj  the  original
sanaDnctioo,  when  tbe  baailia  waa  ivmply  uied  aa
a  conn  of  joatke  ;  bat  when  Ihoae  ijnciona  batla
w^^  eredfd  fiw  the  cooTenience  of  tiadera  aa  well
m  luuHpra,  then  the  acmiciTTular  and  external  tri-
bate  waaHdor(ed,in  order  that  tho  noiae  and  con-
fanm  in  the  baailica  might  not  interrupt  the
paeecdinfi  of  the  magitlratea.  (VitmT.  L  c)  In
1^  coitzc  af  thia  tribune  waa  placed  the  curule
Aair  of  the  praetce,  and  aeata  lor  the  judicea,  who

fy.  fi.  S3\  and  the  adTocaice ;  and  round  the
ai^a  «<■  the  hemieycle,  called  the  winga  (odthibi),
*m  acata  (or  pcnona  of  diatinction,  and  for  the
f0tic*  enoged  in  the  prooeedinga. It  waa  in  the


BASILICA.

(TaciL  Ann.  L  7S.) The  two  aide  nialea,

been  aaid,  veto  aeparsled  from  the  centre  oi

row  of  coliimna,  behind  each  of  which  waa

aquare  pier  or  pilaater  (paroMtala,  VitcUT


columna  of  amaller  dinennani  than  thono  below  ;
ud  the«  aerred  to  aiipport  the  roof,  and  were
connected  with  one  another  hy  a  paiapet-wall  or
batnatiade  (.plula-,  VitiuT.  I  c),  which  aerred  aa
a  defence  againat  the  danger  of  falling  nier,  and
acrecned  the  crowd  of  loiteicn  abore  (nUui/iaMi*,
PlauL  Copt.  IT.  1.  35)  from  the  people  of  bnaineaa
in  the  aiHi  below.  (VitruT.  i  t)  Thii  gsllrry
rescbed  entirel;  ronnd  the  inaide  of  the  building,
and  waa  fieqaenled  b;  women  aa  well  aa  men,  the
women  on  one  aide  and  tbe  men  on  the  other,  who
went  to  hear  and  tee  what  waa  going  on.  (Plin.
/.  e.)  The  ataiitaee  which  led  to  the  upper  portico
waa  on  the  ontaide,  aa  ia  aeen  in  the  plan  of  the
baailica  of  PompaiL  It  ia  aimilarly  aituated  in  the
baailics  of  Conilantine.  The  whole  am  of  theae
niagnificcnt  itnicturea  waa  covered  in  with  three
ecpsiBte  ceilinga,  of  the  kmd  called  ttitadaianaii,
like  a  tortoiae-ahell  ;  in  technical  Uoguage  now
denominated  comi,  an  exuRaiicn  uaed  to  dittin-
guiah  a  ceiling  which  haa  thegenenl  appearance  of
a  vault,  the  central  part  of  which  ia,  bowerer,  flat,
while  the  margina  incline  by  a  cylindrical  ihell
from  each  of  the  four  aidea  of  the  central  aquare  to
the  aide  walla  ;  in  which  farm  the  ancienla  ima-
gined a  reaemblance  to  the  ahell  of  a  lortaiae.

From  the  dcacription  which  haa  been  given,  it
will  be  evident  bow  much  tfaeae  edifice!  were
adapted  in  their  general  form  and  conatmctjon  to
the  uaaa  of  a  Chriiiiim  church  \  to  which  pnipoae
many  of  them  were,  in  (act,  contorted  in  the  time
of  Conalantine.  Hence  the  kler  writen  of  tU
0  4 ^  O"


200  BASILICA.

enpire  afipl;  the  tetm  builicae  ta  all  ctmrclm

bmll  after  lh<  model  joM  dseribed;  i

the  eariiut  «di£cei  dedicated  to  Chrittiaa  ironhip,

which,  with  their  original  deaignstioo,  continue  lo

thit  daj,  bein^  itill  called  nt  Rome  batiiide. t

ChriitiBn  boiilica  coniiiled  of  four  principal  parti

—  1.  Ilfiii'aoi,  the  lertibuli ■■ *--  "  ■■  "

u  divided  from  ihe
a  row  of  cohimtu  on  ca>:h  of  iu  ndn.  Here  the
p«)ple  auembled  for  the  porpoKi  of  wonhip.  3
'Atx«m  (fnm  InrfolHu',  la  aicendX  olorw  (thi
choir},  and  aggatiim,^  part  of  the  lover  eilremit;
of  the  naie  laiied  above  the  geneial  Inel  of  th(
floor  by  a  flight  of  itepa.  4.  'Ifpuriibr,  ItfUi
pyilio,  taattimnum,  which  aiuwered  to  the  tribiute

ranctnaij  na  placed  (hs  bish  altar,  under  a  taber
nade  or  caoopj.  Hch  ii  ■tilTremaiai  in  the  boiilica
of  St.  John  of  Lalctan,  at  Rome,  at  which  the
pricR  oRiciBted  with  hi>  fiua  trnned  lovardi  the
people.  Around  thll  altar,  and  in  the  wingi  of  the
•anclnarium,  were  kbU  for  the  auiitant  deijiy,
with  an  elerated  chair  for  the  biihop  tt  the  boltoni
ot  the  circle  in  the  anlre.  {Timtr.  BatU.  Firm.
cuia  JoKp.  Harl.  Canon,  ill  p.  3  ;  Ciomp.  Vti.
Mm.  \.a.ttl>t  Soar.  Ed. ;  Stiegliti,  AttUiol.  d.
Baubuut,  ToL  iii.  t^  19,  &o  ;  Hin  I^rt  d.  Gt-
b'dwle^  pp.  IRO,  &c  i  Bunion,  Die  Btwiiken  det
OrvUidm  Horn*,  Munich,  ie«.) [A.  R.J

BASl'LICA.  About  a.  d.  076,  the  Greek
emperor  Baiiliui,  tbe  Macedonian,  commenced
thii  work,  which  wai  completed  bj  hii  un  Leo,
the  philoiopher.


Code,  and  the  Ic.
riMdOroelcTenionotthem.  The  Dumerooi  Con-
■tituiioni  of  Juitinian'i  niceeaiar),  and  the  contra-
dictoiy  intupretationl  of  the  jnniU,  wen  a  further
reaion  fai  publlihing  a  reriied  Qreek  text  under
the  impaiiBl  authority.  Thii  great  work  wai
called  tinuiiSaftiu  tw  tat.aiair  rifuty,  ri  Jfif-
■oirUiCAjor,  i  0airtKiK4t  (rJfiot)  and  ri  BaaiXuii.
It  wai  reriied  b;  the  order  of  Cooitantinui  Por-
phyrogenneta,  about  A.n.  94fi.  The  Baiilica  com-
priied  ibe  luititntee,  Pandijct,  Code,  the  NovcUae,
and  the  imperul  Conatitutioni  luUeqiieiit  to  the
time  of  Juitinian,  in  uily  booke,  which  are  nibdi-
ridedinto  titlei.  For  the  Inilituta  the  paiaphiaie
of  Thnphilui  waa  tued,  for  tho  Digeit  the  i-Xdroi
of  Stephanni,  and  the  commentacy  of  Cyrillui  and
of  an  anonymoni  author,  for  tho  Code  the  xitri
rdtot  of  Tbalelaeui  and  the  work  of  Thcodorui,
and  for  the  NoTellao,  eicept  the  168,  tho  Summae
of  Theodorui,  Athnnaiiui,  and  Philoienua. The

ii  aathoriied  body  of  law  in  the

'  0  gr^ual  diaiue  of  the
iktioni  of  Juitinian  in  the  Eait.  Out
more  finnly  Mtnhliihed
in  Baalem  Enropa  and  Weitcm  Aiia,  where  it
bai  nuinlained  itielf  among  the  Qreck  population
to  the  preient  day.

The  anangement  of  the  matter  in  the  Baiilica
ia  at  followi :  — All  the  matter  relating  to  a  given
anbjact  ia  lelccted  from  the  Corpui  Jurii }  the
CTtracti  from  the  Pandect  are  placed  jint  under
each  title,  then  the  conilitationi  of  the  Code,  nnd
ncit  in  order  the  proriiioni  conlmned  in  the  Initi-
tutei  and  the  Novellae,  which  coniinn  or  complete
'  '  u  of  the  Pandect. The  Builicn  duel


BAXA.

not  contain  all  that  tbe  Corpai  Jurn  conl^ni ;  but

ancient  juriita,  and  of  imperial  Conititutiuia,  which
are  not  m  the  Coipui  Joiii.

The  Baiiliea  wen  pnbliihed,  with  a  Latin  ver-
lion,  by  Fabrot,  Parii,  16*7,  leton  Toll,  folio.
Fabrot  pnbliihed  only  thirty-iii  booki  complete,
and  ill  othen  incooiplete :  the  other  hooka  were
n  extract  frtni  the  Baiilica  and  tho
r  of  the  deficient  booki  were  iflar-
wardi  found  in  MS.,  and  pnbliihed  by  Qorbaid
Meeman,  with  a  traitilation  by  M.  Otto  Reitz,  in
the  fifth  Tolume  of  hii  Theaauiui  Jniii  Cirilii  et
Canonici  ^  and  they  were  aln  pnbliihed  ■eparalelj
in  London,  in  1765,  iolio,  ai  a  eupplement  to
FabiDt'i  edition.  A  new  diticd  edition,  by
C.  OuiL  E.  Helmbach,  Leipcig,  1833,  ftc,  4ta,
hai  beeu  commenced,  (Bficldng,  fa^thtfjaaai,  toI.
L  p.  lOS.)

BASTERNA,a  kind  of  litter  (Mw)  in  whfeb
women  were  earned  in  tho  time  of  the  Roman  em-
perort.  It  appean  lo  have  reiembled  the  lectica
[LacTlCAj  T^  cloiely  ;  and  the  only  diflerenee
ajqarently  vai,  that  the  lectica  wai  carried  by
■laTFt,  and  the  baitema  by  Iwo  mule*.  Several
etymciogiea  of  the  word  have  been  proposed.  SbI-
maiiai  nippoiei  it  to  be  derived  from  the  Greek
0iurriii,(Seiia.adLanpnd.I{tliog.2l).  A  de-
•cription  of  a  baitema  ii  given  by  a  poet  iu  the
'utA-ZaLlii.  103.
BAXA,  or  BAXEA,  a  nndal  made  of  vega-
lile  leavea,  twigi,  or  fiWei.  AceonUog  to  Iiidora
(Orig.  lii.  33),  thii  kind  of  nndal  wai  wwn  oo
the  ttage  by  comic,  whilit  the  cothutnui  wai  np-
pnpriato  te  trr^c  aclon.  When,  Ihcrcfbic,  OHO  of
the  cbiraoten  iu  Plautni  {Afem.  ii.  3.  40)  aaja,
cme'  we  may  luppoie  bim  to
point  to  the  landalt  w  hii  feet.  PhiloHphen  alaa
I  landali  of  thii  description,  at  leait  in  the
of  Tertullian  (Di  PidOo,  4)  and  Appulelua
{Met.  a.  and  li,),  and  probably  for  the  lakcotiiiii.
pUcity  and  cheapneu. Iiidorc  addi,  that  baieas

made  of  willow  (u  taiia),  and  thai  they

ulu  called  oabnei;  and  he  thinkt  that  the
tcnu  wai  derived  from  the  Greek  ■iAjw,
wood.  From  numeroui  ipedmcai  of  them  dia-
ovcred  in  the  catacombi,  we  prrceive  that  tha
!$7ptiani  made  them  of  palm-luva  and  p^ynia.
,Wilkinu>n,Jtfiinuirt  i»iiai^m(,voLiiL  p.  336.)
They  are  lomelimci  obwrvablc  on  the  feet  (rf
Kgyptian  itatuea  According  to  Hercrdatui,  ^m-
d^  of  papyrui  (irot^fwra  Ri€\ira,  iL  37}  were
a  part  of  the  required  and  chancteriitic  dien  <^
the  Egyptian  print!. We  may  praome  that  hs


Greek  language  h
original  compilatio:
the  Itoman  lav  w


ended  hii  vordi  t


mode,  itrictly  ipcaking,  of  pe^iyrua,  bat  those  alao
in  which  the  Icavci  ol  the  date-palm  were  an  in-
gredient, and  of  which  Appnieiui  makei  diilinet
ihtion,  when  he  deicribei  a  young  prieit  covered
111  a  linen  iheet  and  weormg  landali  of  palm
{tiaidt  amiadit  urJortuM,  pedaquA  pairmgu  ba^riM
HffHtem,  AleL  ii}.  The  acconifonying  woodcut
■hoHi  two  laudali  exactly  aniwcring  lo  thii  de-
scription, from  the  coUccIion  in  the  Britiih  Muicani.
pper  ono  wu  worn  on  the  right  IboL  It  hw
^  CO  the  right  iide  fiir  Eaitening  the  hand
which  went  acroai  the  inilep.  Thit  band,  togf  tha
with  the  ligature  connected  with  it,  which  wai  in-
serted between  the  great  and  the  second  loe,  ia
made  of  the  item  of  the  papytui,  undivided  and
DBWTought. Tho  lower  figun  ahawa  a  Mulal  in


BBNDIDEIA.
wUcb  Ibe  pcrtuai*  at  tlu  iialiii-l«r  an  uit«riu«d
vidt  gtat  mahif  and  n«iihrity,  the  letnag  nod
hbdiqn  briaf  eflccM  b;  Gbra  of  papynu.  Tha
tkicc  hnici  mtj  be  dtwerrcd  for  th«  pouige  of  the
hmiS  ml  Ugattm  ■Imdj  racDtiotied. [J.  Y.]


I»  i|cht  ibe  battle  himKlf  (aira/uxtu'),  w:
ftmd  19  tbe  Toidor  u  the  woper  defendiuit  in
«*!•«■). If  the  Tendor  1


him,  md  might  be
■a  vhea  the  eune  '


w  tW  legal  nmeij
■vamot  ts  bj  the  pdithaaer  eren  vm
bIt  hwl  hecB  inid. (Hupooat  &  n
f^idura.) Fnm  the  paMigei  in


B  -Si^.  IT.  1  fi)  that  the  liwbilitr  to  be  eo  called
^■a  waa  mberent  io  tha  chancter  of  a  Tendra',
and  tbcn&R  not  tbe  nbieet  o!  ipedfic  wamnty

Aidea.  fran  the  gloMM  of  Heejchin*  and  Suidai,
ibM  tbit  aetioa  n^ht  in  Hke  monier  be  bnnghl
BiHaBtaftaDdiilcDlDuRgagei.  iAnimad.inSi^m.
r>.  a.  in  fin.)  If  the  dumut  had  eilabliihed  hii
i^rt(>aBd  beab^tbgdedaioaof  thedioitipaCin
l<;p*t  WTarian  rf  tb«  ptepaty,  whether  morable
at  a^tnriw,  ai  afpean  {nxn  the  caae  ia  Iha
ifi-i**  a^iaat  PaafeiBietiM,  the  ejected  pnrehaaa
VBB  sitiuad  la  loe  tin  rebiibaneiiKnt  from  the
'i***  bf  the  aetioti  in  qoeRioD.  (Pollin,  tiiL
C)  Tbe  owe  ■  cliaed  by  Meier  (AH.  Proem.
f.  596)  BBonc  the  tfmu  TfJi  tih,  or  dnl  octiona
that  ftQ  vithin  the  cogniwioe  of  the  thnno-
tbrtat  [J,  9.  M.]

BEM A  (0v>a),  the  tdalTonn  from  which  the
■auta  ipohe  in  tlie  Athenian  iaiKiiiria,  ia  de-
•oibei!  HBderEocLSUA.  It  ii  nwd  by  IheOreek
wtiaica  oi  Bmian  a&iia  to  iodieale  the  Roman
tribal (Bee  i.g.  Phit  Ponp.  41.)

BSNDIDEIA  (BfoSOfu),  a  featrral  celebrated
B  tbe  port  town  of  Peineeu  in  hcmoiu'  of  Dtndii,
a  Tbcaoaa  dmoity,  iriuwe  wonbip  eeenu  to  have
haen  iatmilnctd  into  Attica  oboat  the  time  of
SHBto,  far  Plato  (£ia  Ai  Pmil.  init.)  introduce!
Saosae*  ^^TBg  an  opinion  to  the  Becdidaia,  and
»kf  tiaat  it  mm  then  ettelimted  fit  the  Gnt
tae.  It  waa  celefanled  on  the  30th,  or  accordioft
to  etfaen,  ao  (be  ISth  of  Tliargelion.  (SchoL  ad
Mm.  Repmb.  i.  p.  3£4  :  Prodoi,  oif  PlaL  Tim.
rt>  >--37.) Tbe  icalinl  leaembled,  in  it*  cha-


BENKFICIun.  BOl

-,  tboae  celebrated in hononr  of  Dimyina


coDuited  in  a  pracenkm  held  by  the
Thndana  lettled  in  Peiiaeeoa,  and  another  held
by  the  PeireeuiB  themielTea,  which,  accodins  to
Plato  (Z*.  flB  PmU.  iait.),  were  held  with  great
decorom  and  jnnpriety,  and  a  tonh  laca  on  hora»*
beck  in  the  srening.  The  Atheuiani  identified
Bendii  with  their  own  Artemia  (Heiych.  a.  o.
B64u),  bit  the  temiJe  of  Bendii  (BcvtfStur)  at
Peiiaeeui  wai  new  that  of  Aitemii,  whence  it  ia
cl«r  that  the  two  diiinitiea  mut  have  been  dia-
tinct  (Xenoph.  HiSai.  il  4.  g  11  ;  camp.  Lir.
xnriiL  41 ;  Rnhnlcen,  ad  Tin.  Gbat.  p.  62 ;  Oin-
ton,  F.  H.  yt)\.  iL  p.  402,  Sd  edit)  (L.  S.J

BENEFI'CIUM  ABSTINENDI,  [Hbbis.]
BENEFI'CIUM,  BENEFICIA'HIUS.  The
word  beueficinm  ii  equTalent  lo  feodom  or  fief^  in
the  wiilon  on  the  feudal  law,  and  ia  an  intereat
in  land,  oi  thinga  iniepaiable  from  the  land,  at
thingi  immonble.  {Fend.  lib.  S.  tit  1.)  Tha
beneficiarina  ii  ha  who  haa  a  beneficium.  The
word  beueGcimn  oiten  occnn  in  French  hiitorkal
docnmenla  &am  the  fifth  to  the  ninth  centnry,  and
denotea  the  aame  condition  of  landed  proper^,
which  at  the  end  of  the  ninth  eentoiy  ia  denot«d
by  feodnm. From  the  end  of  the  ninth  ccntory  tha


worda  are  often  naed  indiflerently. (Guiaott
'on  de  la  OmUtaHim  n  Fraaee,  toL  iiL  p.  S47,)

The  term  benefice  ia  alao  applied  to  an  ecdeaiaitiiai


pelennent. (Ihuange,  Gbm.)

The  term  benofi  " ' "
the  Roman  law,  in  tbe  aenae  ol  acme  apecial  nin-
bionr  granted  lo  a  penon  in  reapect  <tt  agt^
condition. Bnt  the  word  waa  alao  nied  in
other  aeniea,  and  the  meaning  of  tbe  teim,  aa  it
I  clearly  dtrivable  from


the  later  reptiblican  and  earlier  imperial  timea.  In
tha  time  of  Cicero  it  waa  nausJ  for  a  general,  or  a

'"  provinte,  to  report  to  the  treaanry  the

le  nnder  hia  command  who  had  done
good  aerrics  to  the  atale:  thoae  who  w«e  inclnded
in  lueb  lapott  were  nid  m  bm^au  ad  <»ninii>s
dtfirn.  (Cic  Pn  ArtA.  c  5,  Ad  Fam.  t.  SO,  and
die  note  of  Manntina.)  It  waa  leqairsd  by  a
Lex  Julia  that  the  aamea  alunld  be  given  in  within
thirty  daya  after  the  aceonnta  of  the  graoal  or
gorenot  A  htiMfieiit  \a  theaa  paangea  may  mean


»  ytaaa  an
who  had  de


peraotia  who  had  deaeTTcd  well  of  the  alatcv  and  ao

the  word  btaifeimm  may  have  reference  to  tbe
itcea  of  the  individiiali ;  bnt  aa  the  object  for
ich  their  aerYicea  were  reported,  waa  the  benefit
of  the  individual!,  it  asemi  that  the  teni  had  re-
ference alio  to  the  reward,  immediate  or  remote,
•hlained for  their  lerricea. The  hoaonn  and
officoa  of  the  Roman  alate,  in  the  republican  period,
called  the  beneficia  of  the  Popolua  Romanua.
ineiidum  alao iignified any  promotion  con-
1  on  or  grant  made  to  addiera,  who  were
IheiKfl  called  benehciarii ;  thii  practice  waa  com-
gn,  aa  we  lee  from  inacriptiona  in  OnKer  (IL  4,
TV.  5),  in  Bome  of  which  the  word  beneficiariua
rej^eieiited  by  the  two  Ictten  E  F. In  ihia


(,Dt  BeO.  Civ.  ii.  16)  when  ho
beatfida  nnd  the  magtiat  dm
Citerior  Spain.  BeDeficiarii
Cneiar  (He  BdL  Ga.  L  75),


ipeakioftheiM^Ki
tha  of  Pompeiu!  in
■  ia  alio  lued  by
lo^oxpreia  the  per-


203  BIBLIOTHECA.

■DD  who  bad  reotiyed  a  benefirinm.  It  don  not,
bawerer,  appear  from  tbna  paingci,  wliat  the
benefiaum  actually  wai.  It  might  ba  an;  kind
of  bommr,  or  ipecial  ciempticn  from  aertice.  (De
BilL  CSn.  iiL  BB ;  Sueton.  7a.  13  i  Vegetitu,  Dt
Be  MilHari,  u.  7.)

Dencficianii*  ia  oppoaed  bj  Feitm  (i.  n.)  to
nuDifex,  in  the  iedm  of  one  who  ii  nleued  from
miUta<7  •ervice.u  oppoaed  to  one  who  ii  bound  to

Oianli  of  laod,  and  otboF  thingi,  made  hj  the
Roman  emperon,  vere  called  brneficia,  and  were
eatcTcd  in  a  book  called  Liber  Bn^ionm  (Hj-
giniu,  D)  LinitibBi  GnHtil.  p.  19S,  Oon.).  The
•ecretary  or  clerk  who  kept  tiiii  book  wa«  called
a  eommaUariii  benefiaomm,  a>  appears  from  an  in-
iniplion  in  Orntw  (dlnviii.  1.)  [O.  L]

BESTIA'RII  {Siyi<iiuix<u),  penoni  who  fonght
witb  wild  beaila  in  the  gamei  of  the  drcui.
They  vera  either  pervmi  vho  IbaKht  (or  the  uke
of  pay  (oaeioramBtitiaii),  and  »ho  were  allowed
armi,  or  they  were  criminal!,  who  were  onially
permitted  to  haTe  no  means  of  defence  againit  the
wild  bcaala.  (Cic  pro  Sat.  64  ;  Sen.  Dt  Bait/,
iL  19,  F^.  70;  Tertull.  ApoL  9.)  The  beitiarii,
who  fought  witb  the  beaiti  for  the  uke  of  pay,
and  of  whom  thera  were  gnat  nnniben  in  the
latter  days  of  the  npnblic  and  under  the  empin,
ore  alwaya  apoken  of  as  diitinct  from  the  gIadialor!i,
who  ibn^ht  with  one  another.  (Cic  in  Falin.  17;
ad  Qk.  fy.  u.  S.  %  S.) It  appean  that  Uiere  were

Gt;ht  with  wild  bcaita  (idiolat  ieitianim  or  ieOia-
rionm,  Tertull.  JjaL  SB,)

BIAION  DIKE'  (fiaimn  llrq).  Thia  action
might  be  brought  whenever  rapes  of  free  penons,
or  tbe  illegal  and  ibrcihle  teixun)  of  property  of  any
kind  were  the  mbject  of  accusation  (Harpocrat,)  ;
and  we  learn  bim  Dcmoethenn  (e,  /'mfaAi.p,976.
II)  that  it  come  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Forty.  Accordbg  to  PluUuvb  {StAm,  S3)  the  law
prescribed  that  raviiben  ihoiild  pay  a  £ne  of  100
drachmae  ;  but  other  accounts  merely  state  gene-
tally  that  the  convict  was  mulcted  in  a  nun  equal
to  twice  that  at  which  the  damages  were  laid
(BirAqv  r^r  e^Mnr  iifitiXtir,  Lyi.  Da  Caede
Enloili.  p.  33 ;  Dem.  c.  Mid.  a.  S3B.  SO  ;  Horpo.
ctat.) ;  and  the  plaintiff  in  auch  oue  received  one
half  of  the  fine  ;  ond  the  atate,  aa  a  party  medi-
ately injured,  the  other.  To  reconcile  theae  ac-
oonnta  Meier  (Ail.  Proe.  p.  BtS)  supposea  the  rape
to  )iave  been  eslunated  by  law  at  100  drachmae,
and  that  the  plainlilf  fixed  tlie  damages  in  refer-
ence to  other  injuriea  timultaneona  with,  or  conse-
quent upon,  tbe  perpetration  of  the  main  offence.
With  respect  to  sggTMsions  upfoi  pTDperly.  the
action  fiuuttf  ia  to  be  diatingniehed  cram  i^oii^vit,
in  that  the  former  implies  the  employment  of
aetnal  violenc^^,  the  latter  merrly  such  detention  of
praperty  aa  amounted  to  violence  in  the  cootempla-
^on  of  law  (Meier,  AH.  Pnc  p.  546),  as  for  in-
stance Ilie  nonpayment  of  damages,  and  the  like,
to  the  sncnssnil  litigant  after  an  award  in  his
favour  by  a  court  of  justice.  (Dem.  o.  Mid.  540.
24.)  [J.S.M.]

BI'RASIS  (eWwrii). [8ALTi.Tio.]

BIBLIOPO'LA. [Liuan.]

nrnLIOTHE'CA  (fliffXioWim,  or  imftSni
$it\liir),  primarily,  the  ploce  where  a  collection
of  books  was  kept  |  secondarilj,  the  odlection
il«el£ (FeMna,  i.  •,) Little  aa  tha  atatea  of  an-


BIBLIOTHECA.
tiqnity  dealt  with  the  intb^ctiDn  of  the  people,
public  collections  of  books  appear  to  have  twen
vctj  ancient  That  of  Peiustntns  was  intended
tar  public  oae  (GeU.  vL  17  ;  Athen.  L  p.  S)  ;  it
was  aubaequently  removed  to  PetBia  by  Xerxea.
About  the  aame  time,  Polycratea,  tyrant  of  Samoa,
is  said  to  have  founded  a  library.  In  the  best
days  of  Athens,  even  private  persons  had  largo
collections  of  books ;  the  moat  important  of  which
we  know  any  thing,  belonged  to  Euclid,  Enripidea,
and  Aristotle.  Stnbo  says  (liiL  I)  that  Arutotle
was  the  fint  who,  to  hia  knowledge,  mode  a  col-
lection of  books,  and  taught  the  Egyptian  king*
the  anangement  of  a  library.  The  most  impcfftont
and  splendid  public  library  of  antiquity  was  that
founded  by  the  Ptolemies  at  Aleundria,  began
nnder  Ptolemy  Soter,  but  increased  and  re-arranged
in  an  orderiy  and  systematic  manner  by  Ptolemy
Philadelphns,  who  also  appointed  a  fixed  librarian
and  otherwise  raovidcd  for  the  nsefnlness  of  the
institution.  Tho  library  of  the  Ptolemies  con-
tained, acoffding  to  X  Oellius  (vi.  17),  700,000
Tolumea  ;  according  to  Josephus,  £00,000 ;  and  ac-
cording to  Seneca  (De  Trmj.  An.  9),  400,000,
The  different  reckoning  of  di&erent  anthon  may
be  in  some  mfsaure,  perhaps,  lecanciled  by  sup-
posing that  they  give  the  namber  of  books  tmly  in
a  jBil  of  the  libruiy ;  for  it  consisted  of  two  parts,
one  in  the  quoner  of  the  dty  called  Bmcheion,
the  other  in  the  part  oiUed  Senpeion.  Ptolemy
Philadelphns  bought  Aristotle's  coUoctinn  to  add
to  tbe  library,  and  Ptolemy  Euergetea  continued
to  add  to  the  atock.  A  great  part  of  this  aplmdid
library  was  consumed  by  fira  tn  the  siege  of
Alexandria  by  Julius  Caosar:  lome  wiiten  say
that  the  whole  was  burnt ;  but  tbe  discrejwicy
in  the  nnmbera  stated  above  seems  to  confinn  the
opinion  that  the  fire  did  not  extend  so  &r.  At
any  rate,  the  library  was  soon  natored,  and
continued  in  a  flourishing  condition  till  it  was  de-
stroyed by  tha  Arabs  A.  n.  640.  (Sea  Gibbon,
c51.)  Connected  with  the  greater  division  of
the  librury,  in  the  qnarUr  of  Alexandria  called
Btucheion,  was  a  sort  of  college  to  which  tbe  name
of  Mouseion  (or  Mnaenm)  was  giveiL  Here  many
Favonred  literati  punued  their  studies,  Imiacribed
books,  and  ao  fonh  ;  lectures  also  were  delivered.
The  Ptolemies  were  not  long  without  a  rival  in
seal.  Eumeocs,  king  of  PcrgamuB,  became  a  patron
of  literatura  and  the  sciences,  and  established  a
library,  which,  in  spito  of  the  prohibition  against
'xporting  papyrus  issued  by  Ptolemy,  jcsdom

to  Claopatra.
(Pint  Atilim.  SB.)

The  firat  public  libiwj  in  Raee  waa  that
founded  by  Asinius  Pollio  (Plin.  H.  JV.  viL  30  :
Isid.  Or^.'vL  5),  and  waa  in  tbe  atrimn  Libertatia
on  Mount  Avenline.  Jultna  Caesar  had  projected.
a  grand  Greek  and  lAtin  library,  and  bad  com-
missioned  Vairo  to  take  measures  for  the  estabUsh-

dath.  (Suet.  Jtd.  44.)  The  libnuy  of  Pollio
WBB  followed  by  that  of  Anguatus,  in  the  templo
of  Apollo  on  the  Mount  Palatine  (Snet-  Ai^.  29  ;
Dion  Cass,  liil  1),  and  another,  bibliolheaie  Oc-
tavianae  (so  called  from  Augustus's  sister  Octavia),
farming  port  of  the  PorticUB  Octavia.  (Dion  Cms.
lia.  43;  Plot.  MannO.  30.) There  ware  alao


is:;


nd  probably  ec


BroENTAL.
KhntJM  on  tbe  mpiM  (Sast.  Domi.  30),  id  tha
tn^  ef  Pc««  (OelL  xvL  8),  io  tht  palue  of
Tiboia  (Oea  xiiL  I B),  bcndM  th«  Ulpiaa  libruy,
vfcich  VM  the  mat  faimm,  founded  by  Tnjui
<GflL  xL  17  ;  Dion  Ob.  liriiL  16),  called  Ulpiwi
&«B  bk  own  DUiia,  Ulpiiu.  Thii  libiai;  mi
■nachnl  by  Diodetoui,  u  u  cusuncnt,  to  hi*
tbOBK. {VefiK:.  Proi.  Z)

Pritmtg  caU«tiiiiu  of  books  wen  mode  at  Rome
•na  afta  the  Kcood  Punic  ni.  Tbe  nal  of
Gnn^  Aukai,  «nd  othcn  in  incRtumg  their
EWsiiei  u  wdl  known.  (Cic  Ad  Aft.  L  7,  10,
n.i;A4  QmiaL  Ft.  iiL  4.) The  lihnirj  of  Li


BLABES  DIEE.


203


■  Tery


e  allawr


pshfic  free  aco^  (0  It  (Plot  LmcMU.  4.2.)  To-
■aidi  the  end  of  the  repablic  it  became,  in  liict,
tbe  faahn  to  lukTe  ■  rnom  ekgantly  furmghcd  u
B  bljnrf,  and  TevTred  for  that  parpoie.  However
ipMaat  or  unitndiona  a  penoa  might  be,  it  was
bihimaUe  to  ^Vf"  I^^nied  b;  having  a  library,
tkniifli  lie  might  aenr  eitn  read  the  titlet  of  tbe
Wiia.  Scnea  (fit  TVaitf.  A*.  9}  condemna  the
BCe  tr  B>acboiA-CDlleeting,aad  callieithoee  who
were  ■■■«  [Ji  an  il  witb  the  ODtiide  than  the  ia-
Bde.  LaaaB  wtote  a  H)juate  piece  to  expoM
tka  eooOKia folly  (ipif  iraOtimr  ml  toAAA

A  tibmy  genenDy  had  an  eaitem  upeet.
(T'mT.  Ti  7.)  In  HercnlBnean  a  library  fully
faraiihfd  «bi  diKoTeted.  Roond  the  walli  iI  had
in  rollg  [LiBia] ;  thcM


Itw
■0  laail  that  a  pcnon  by  Etrctchinff  oat  hii  ■rnia
enld  UHch  both  lidn  of  iL  The  caiei  were
aEed  either  anurw  (Plio.  £^  il.  17  ;  Vopiac
Taat  8),  or  loadamiitta  (Seneca,  Dt  Jhma.  An.
iU  mfiruB  (Jqt.  SaL  iiL  219),  or  nidi  (Mart.  L
IIB.  ia,TiL  17.5);  Aiiniiu  Pollio  had  ME  the
faahim  ia  fail  pvbUi:  libraiy  of  adorning  tho  nam
with  the  pertniti  and  buiti  of  celebrated  men,  ai
■tD  aa  (UliHa  of  Minerva  and  the  Muses.  This
cmaple  was  soon  fallowed  in  the  private  Labnuriea
rf  the  lirL  (Jdv.  iiL  219 ;  Plin.  Ep.  m.  7,  iv.
±S ;  Cic.  wf  Fam.  ni  23 ;  PUn.  //.  N.  inr.  2 ;
iJwL  TO.  70 ;  Hart.  ix.  £i>.  ad  niraa. ;  Lipeios,
Oe  AOfioCiHu  J^irii^iKi,  in  Opera,  nJ.  iiL ;  Becker,
timOmt,  TsL  L  p.  160,  Ac)  [A  A]

BItX)S  (0uo>),  the  name  of  aa  wtboi  venel
i>  annual  an  anoog  the  Oreeka.  (PoUni,  tL
ll,  viL  162,  X.  73.)  Heajchina  (i.e.)  definet  h
aa  a  writat  wiUi  han^ei.  It  was  used  for
heUiag  wine  (Xen.  Amdi.  L  9.^26),  and  salted
OM  and  fish.  (Atfaen.  iiL  p.  116,  C)  Herodotu
G.  IM)  qieaks  of  ^Inevt  foirunjlmif  atriyoviri
Aa*  wAioM,  which  some  coounentaton  interpret
br  '  iiiiaili  node  of  the  wood  of  the  palm  tree  foil
^wiK."  Bat  as  Enstathins  <ui  Od.  p.  I44£)
tfokM  of  ofrev  ^owinw  0ucot^  we  ooffhl  |ko-
biUy  la  Tead  in  Haodotos  pliaut  ^ifucqbv,  ■.  r.
x."  *ea*els  fall  of  {lalm  wine."

BIDENS. (BurkDH.]

BIDENTAL,  the  name  given  In  a  pbce  whei«
aav  ODr  had  been  stmck  by  lightning  (Festus,
(.  r.  fijgtrilmm),  at  where  any  one  had  been  killed
by  laming  ai^  boricd.  Such  a  place  vaa  cod-
aiaiA  aau/id.  Priefts,  who  woe  called  biden-
H^  ^  c  mctrdola)^  collected  the  earth  which
hid  beea  ton  ap  by  the  lightning,  and  everything
dat  had  beea  ■eorcbed,  and  boitit  it  La  the  grmmd
with  ■  anvvfiJ  matmar,  (Looin,  L  f<i6.)  The
(  ;riM  wa*  nid  amdtnjilgar  (Jut.  Sat.


n.  587  ;  compaie  Orelli,  fsKr.  vol.  L  p.431.  No.
2482) ;  he  lixrther  caoKOated  the  spot  by  tairi-
ficing  a  two-year-old  iheep  (Ahjou),  whence  the
luune  of  the  place  and  of  the  priest,  and  also
erected  an  altar,  and  surrounded  it  with  a  wall  nr
fence.  It  was  not  allowable  to  tread  on  the  place
(Penins,  ii  27),  or  to  tench  it,  or  even  to  look  at
it.  (Annn.  Marc  niiu  fi.)  Sometintea  a  bidenlal
which  had  nearly  &ilen  to  decay  &am  length  of
tinte  wai  restixed  and  renovated  (Oielli,  Tata:
No.24B3)i  but  to  lemove  the  boundi  of  one
(nonn  itdsatol),  or  in  any  way  to  violate  ita
soiled  ptedncts,  was  considered  as  aaerilege.  (Hot.
Art,  PoeL  471.)  From  tbe  panage  in  Honce,  it
appeen  to  have  been  bellev<Hl  that  a  person  who
was  guilty  of  prs&ning  a  bidental,  would  be  pu-
nished by  the  gods  with  frenzy ;  and  Seneca  {Nat.
QmcsL  II  53)  mentions  another  belief  of  a  iimilar
kind,  that  wine  which  hod  been  struck  by  lightning
would  prodnce  in  any  one  who  drank  it  death  or
madneia.  Persons  who  had  been  itntck  by  light-
ning (.JVgiaiti)  were  not  removed,  hnt  were  bujned
on  the  spot.  (Pers.  &<.  iL  27 ;  Plin.  H.  N.
iL  54 ;  Hartung,  Etligiim  itr  Romtr,  vol  ii.  p.
13.)  [A  A.]

BIDIAEI OiIkusi), called in inw^ptioni
Bitici  or  ^flvei,  were  mBgisttates  in  Sparta,  whom


Their  honae  of  meeting  (d^sXa
market-place.  {Pans.  iii.  II,  g  2.)  They  were
either  five  (Pans.  I.  c.)  or  »ii  in  nnmbet  (BSckh,
Carp.Incrip.  nr.  1271.  1364),  and  had  a  preu-
dent  who  ii  called  in  inscriptions  rp'o^i  fiaiaii'.
(Bbckh,  Corp. Inmrip.  tall.  p.  611.)  Bflckh  con-
jectures that  ial>«ii  or  dihwi  ia  the  Laconian  form
for  Itiwi  or  ffflvoi,  and  algoliies  witnesses  and
judges  among  the  youth.  (Camp.  HUUer,  ZtorioH,
ul  7.  §  8.)  Valckenaer  (ad  Htrod.  vi.  57)  sup-
posea  that  the  bidiaei  were  the  same  as  the  npo-
^i\aKn ;  but  the  inscriptions  given  by  B0ckh
show  that  the  bidiaei  and  m/ta^itjutfa  were  two
separate  classes  of  officBa.

BlOA  or  BIOAE. [Conitiie.]

BIGA'TCS. [DaffiRiua.]

BIPA'LIUM. [P*L4.]

BIPENNI3. {SicuBis.]

BIREMI3. [N<vis.J

BIRRUS  iBifM,  a  ope  n  hood,  which  waa
wom  out  of  dooia  over  tbe  shoulders,  and  waa
Bometinieielevatedsaaitoeoverlhehfad.  On  the
fonner  accovnt  it  is  classed  by  an  ancient  gram-
marian with  the  laeenta,  and  on  the  latter  wi^  the
cowl,  or  cacHlliu.  It  had  a  long  nap,  which  «a*
cemnwnly  of  sheep's  wool,  more  rarely  of  beaver's
wooL  It  pmbebly  derived  its  name  from  the  red
colour  (rifi^s)  of  the  woo!  of  which  it  was  made.
Jt  it  only  mentioned  by  tbe  later  vmlera.  (Vopisc.
Carin.  20 ;  Claudian,  Spigr.  37.)

BISE'LLIUM. [SxiJ-i.]

BISSEXTUM- [CitKJDiBIDlL]

BLABES  DIKE'  {B>Jti,s  liiai).  This  actdoa
ms  available  in  all  cases  in  which  one  person  had
lustained  a  hiaa  by  tbe  conduct  of  another ;  and
&mn  the  inrtances  that  are  extant,  it  seems  that
whether  tbe  iujniy  originated  in  a  iauli  of  omission
or  commiuian,  or  impiured  theactual  fortune  of  tbe
plaintifF,  or  hit  prnspecUve  advantage,  the  acljon
would  lie,  and  might  he  maintuned,  agair^ t  the
defendant  Itisof  course impcasible  to  enumerate
all  the  particular  cases  upon  which  it  would  arise,
but  the  two  great  elaaset  into  which  jBAiCa)  nuj


»4

be  diTidedsre  thaMwum  »od  the  Ww/ioi.  Thi
fint  of  theH  will  include  all  cmuci  arumg  from
ths  noiifulfilin«Dt  of  a  cozttnict  to  which  a  penal
bocid  vu  aiuuicd,  BDd  tboH  b  vhicit  the  Un-
■pedfied  the  penalty  to  be  paid  by  the  defcadtmt
npon  cODTiclion ;  the  teconiJ,  ail  iDJniKa  of  prqxx^
which  the  law  did  noE  ipecify  nominatim,  but
gencrallj  dincted  to  be  puniihed  hy  a  fine  eqaal
to  twice  the  eatimated  damage  if  the  offence  waa
inlenlionat.  if  otherwiH  b;  >  bale  compenutioa.
(Meiei,  AU.  Proc  p.  188,  &c^  p.  476,  &e. ;  Dem.
t.Atid.  p.  633.)  Betide*  the  general  woid^AitCqi,
othen  more  tpedfic,  a*  to  the  natoia  of  the  caae,

Uii>  kind,  ai  iripBwiSmr,  TfTpovrttiMr,  /irroAAudt,
and  the  like.  The  dcdaiatiiHi  of  the  plaintiff
aeemi  alwayi  to  hare  began  wHh  the  wocdi
"ESkieln  iH,  then  came  the  name  of  tbo  defendant,
and  next  a  dncriptjon  of  the  injnry,  m  obx  iwoSitoi'i
i/ici  Ti  ifyipiap  in  Dcmoalheaea  (Pro  Piorm.
f.  960.  21).  The  proper  conit  wai  determined
bj  the  gabjeet  of  litigation  ;  and  when  we  con-
uder  that  the  damage  done  br  Philodeon  la  the
mke-woman'i  baikel  (Ariitoph.  Ft^.),  and  mp-
poiititioDi  tettiiaen;  given  Ln  the  name  of  another,
thereby  Rndering  «uch  perwm  liable  to  an  aetion,
i^uSotiofTupiar  (Dem.  e,  Apiok.  iii.  p.  849.  20),
were  equally  ^Xttcai  at  Attic  Liw,  the  Taritly  of
the  sctioni,  and  eonie^nllj'  of  the  jmudictioiu
Onder  whidi  they  fell,  will  be  a  lufGcieiit  eiciue
for  the  abtence  of  farther  ipedfioUion  npon  tbii
point  tJ.S-M:]

BOEDRO'HIA  OoqJpdfua),  a  ttaM-ni  cele-
brated at  Athena  OD  the  Kventh  day  of  the  month
of  Bofthomion,  in  hononr  of  Apnllo  Boidromiiu.
{Hilller,  Cor.  iL  8.  §6.)  The  name  Botsdiomini,
by  which  ApoUo  wi«  called  in  Booolia  and  other
parti  of  Oreec«  (Paiu.  ix.  17.  g  1  ;  Callimach.
Hymn.  ApolL  69),  Kemi  to  indicate  that  by  thig
featlral  he  wai  hononied  ii  a  martial  god,  who
either  bj  hia  actnal  preicnee  or  by  hia  oraclee
■ffuded  aaiiatance  in  Che  dacgen  of  war.  The
origin  of  the  featiyal  ie,  however,  traced  by  dif-
ferent antfaon  (a  difiereat  event!  in  Oreeion  lUry.
Plntareh  {J»e».  37)  laya  that  Theteni,  in  hii  war
against  the  Amaioni,  did  not  nve  battle  till  after
be  had  ofiend  a  lacrifice  to  Phoboa  ;  and,  that  in
commemoration  of  the  mcceaifnl  battle  which  took
place  in  the  month  of  Botidinniion,  the  Atbeniaui,
down  to  fail  own  lime,  continued  to  eelebrule  the
teetical  of  the  Bolidnimia.  According  to  Snidaa,
the  Etymol.  Magn.  and  Enripidea  (ioa.  S9),  the
festival  derived  ita  name  and  origin  from  the  cir-
Vamalance  that  when,  in  the  reign  of  £rechthenj,
the  Alhenisni  were  attavked  by  Eumolpua,  Xnthui
or  (according  to  Philoehonu  in  Hacpocration,  i,  v.)
bii  ion  Ion  oune  to  their  auIilaQce,  and  (Hucnred
them  the  victory.  Reipcctbit  the  particular!  of
thii  feitival  nolhuig  ii  known  except  that  aacrificei
were  offered  to  Artemis.  (Comp.  Spanhcim,  ad
Catlat.  Hrm.  w.rfpa^69.)  [L.S.]

B0E0TARCHE3  (au-r^xm, or  Boitrrd^
' ' nqwaed  under  thii  head  to  give  a  brief
le  Boeotian  conititation  as  well  as  of
the  BoeotarchL

The  Boeotiaiis  in  indent  timei  oeeujued  Atne
in  Thtenly.  (Thnc  I  13.)  Sixty  yean  after
the  taking  of  Troy  they  wen  expelled  by  the  Thea-
■aliani,  and  Kttled  in  the  cmmny  then  called  Cad-
rdsBoeol'  ~ "
of  it,  ■


B0E0TAHCHE3.


itatei,  aintaining  euh  a  nrinetpal  dtj,  with
(yrrtKA  or  fijmopoi  (inhabitant*  rf  the  a
^■fs,  or  diitiict)  living  aroond  Lu  Of  these
greater  utatei,  with  dependant  lenitoriea,  thera
seem  to  have  been  in  fonncc  time*  fourteen,  —  a
number  which  freqaentiy  occun  in  Boeotian  le-
Is.  (Pans.  ix.  &  §  4.)  The  names  are  dif-
mliy  given  by  different  writeei  on  the  subject ;
we  know,  however,  bt  certain  that  they  formed  a
eonfederaey  called  iba  Boeotian  league,  with  Thebes
at  its  head,  the  dependencies  of  voJch  city  farmed
about  a  third  part  of  the  whole  of  Boeotia.  Thru
dependent  towna,  or  diatricta,  wen  not  imniedi-
ately  connected  with  the  national  confederacy,  but
with  the  neighbouring  chief  city,  u  Cynoicepbaiae
was  with  Thebe*.  In  fact,  thej  wen  obliged  to
furnish  troops  and  money,  to  make  np  the  con-
tingent fumiihed  by  the  state  to  which  they  be-
longed, to  the  general  oonJederacy.  (Arnold,
ad  TImc  iv.  76.)  Of  the  independent  stales  Thn-
e^didea  (iv.  93)  mentiona  seven  by  name  ;  and
give*  ni  reaioni  for  concluding  that,  in  the  time  of
'  e  Peloponnetian  war  they  were  ten  or  twelve  \a
imber,  Thebes  bting  the  chief.  Plataca  had
ithdrawn  fixun  thsn,  and  placed  itself  under  tfao
protection  of  Athens  as  eariy  as  B.C.  £19  ;  and  in
B.  c  374,  Thespiae,  another  member  of  the  league,
was  destroyed  by  the  Thebani,  (Clintoo,  F.  tl.
vbl.iL  p.  aSS;  Thuciii.  66.)

Each  of  the  principal  towns  of  Boeotia  seems  to
have  had  its  0«a.4,  and  tSiUoi.  (Xen.  HiU.  v.  2.
g  29.)  The  3o>*^  was  presided  over  by  an  arcbio,
who  probably  had  sneceeded  to  the  piieatly  fnne-
jona  of  the  old  kings  ;  but  poaaMaed  littl^  if  any,
iiecutive  anihoiity.  The  polemarchi,  who,  in
jeatiea  and  agreementa  an  mentioned  next  to  tho
anhon,  had  aome  executive  antbofity,  but  dtd  not
command  forcea  ;  :g,  they  ooold  imprison  (Xen.
HtU.  Lk),  and  they  directed  (he  levies  of  mapa
"  It  betides  the  aithoa  of  each  lepaiBte  state,  there
L*  an  archon  of  the  confederacy  ^  if^x^"'  '^
tif^  Bourrvr,  most  pnbably  alwa  ''^ ^


13.) Hi».


BiedtoaU


ipacta  which  coDcerned  the  whole

infederacy,  and  he  waa  pnaident  of  what  Thney-
ide*  (v.  36)  calli  the  four  eonncili,  who  directed
le  iffiur*  1^  the  league  (Iwar  vi  xtipgt  fx»v)-
n  importnnt  qnestiona  they  leem  to  have  been
nited  ;  for  the  tame  anther  ipeaki  of  them  aa  i)
^ouX^,  and  iiifomu  us  that  the  determination*  of
the  Boeotanba  required  the  ratification  of  thia
body  befiae  they  were  valid.  The  Bocotanha
therruelvet  were  properly  the  miUtary  hods  of  the
infiMieracy,  chosen  by  the  diBerent  states  ;  hot  wo
»  find  them  diicharging  the  functions  of  an  ex-

prescnted  by  Thucydidei  (v,  38)  aa  forming  an
'^''  '  with  foreign  ilalea;  aa  receiving  amban-
ihctr  return  home ;  aa  n^otiating  with
rom  other  countries  ;  and  acting  a*  the
representatives  of  the  whole  league,  though  the
fiovXii  refused  to  sancti«i  the  meaaurea  they  bad
resolved  on  in  the  particular  <aie  to  which  we  are
now  alluding.  Another  iiutanco  in  which  tbo
Boeotarchi  appear  aa  executive  is  their  interference
with  Ageailaui,  on  his  embarking  ftnm  Anlia  for
'  ia  (B.C.  S96),  when  they  prevented  him  of-

ing  lacrifice  aa  he  wished.  (PiuL^j^et.  6  ;  Xen.

JJ.  iil  4.  S  4.)  Still  the  [nindpal  duty  of  the
BoeolaRha  waa  of  a  militBiy  natun:  thaatheylod
into  the  field  the  Umo^  of  their  rtapeftiTe  atalea ;


BONA.

vd  vbn  •!  kom^  thev  look  wbtUm  ntannt
vae  nqniiitB  to  tinnid  tbe  nulitv;  t^mtuma  of
I'll  Infill,  or  of  their  own  itate:  ibc  exanpls,  we
md«f  oooofthoThelaaBocaURhiordeniig  the
Thebas  to  COBW  ia  ■rm*  U  the  tcdtat  for  the


n!ii)


e  Theb


loftho


0  (Thnc


91,  TiL  30  :  Diod.  xr.  SI)  ;  ilthini^h
BOB,  L  t,  tAtr  the  iTtnni  of  the  exi]»  with  Felo-
ptda  (k  c  379},  ve  read  of  then  being  thno  tt
ThrbM.  (nn.  Filop.  13).  The  totKl  nomber
Ina  Ihr  whole  coofederacy  mied  with  Ihe  nnmber
•(  the  indepemleiil  MMei.  Hcntiini  it  made  of  the
Boeotaicha  by  Tbocrdidei  (it.  91),  in  coanection
viAthebatde  of  IMinm(B.c424).  There  ii,
hii*e<0,  a  difeence  of  opiuin  with  leepeet  to  hii
— nJM  :  oone  imdaMaDd  him  to  (peak  of  eleven,
■ncM  tweJTc,  and  othen  of  tluiteen  BoeaUrcha.
De.  AntM  B  diipOMd  to  adopt  the  hut  number;  md
%t  think  the  cooteit  it  in  Snrmr  of  the  opinion
IhH  tha«  vera  thtn  thirteen  Boeotaiehi,  u  that
tlr  Bambcr  of  freestBta  wai  tweWe.  Atthetime
rfthebuleof  LeDcn(B.c.  371),  we  hnd  leTeii
BJtoiinJu  mBHioDcd  (Diod.  XT.  G2,  £3  (  Paoi.  ix.
11.  1 3);  on  another  occajion,  when  Greece  wu
iai^ed  b;  the  Ouili  (b.  c.  279),  we  read  of  fonr.
Ljf?  (xiii  43)  mtet  that  there  wen  tveWe,  but
be&n  Um  tinw  (a.  C  171}  to  which  hia  atataiieiit
nfsa,  PblMK  had  bem  icanited  to  the  league.
!^cO  the  mmbs  mentkoed  in  asj  oua  la  no  teat
rf  the  artaal  munber,  "*'■"*'■  bj  we  are  not  anie
titat  an  the  Boootacchi  wen  ant  oat  hy  their  n-
ifrt^ya  Hatea  on  cnzj  eipeditioii  or  to  eTety
battle.

Tbe  Boeotvchi^  what  oigand  m  militaiy  aer-
tiee^  fianed  a  nniieil  of  war,  Ue  dsciiioiu  of  which
wn  deOnained  by  a  majmilj  cf  TOtea,  the  pro-
adott  boBg  one  of  the  two  Tbeban  Boeotarclu
wba  — -—"■*-*  altomitelT.  (Thnc  It.  91 ;  IHod.
IT,  SI.)  Their  peiod  of  aerrice  waa  a  jam,  be-
ipnof  sbevt  the  wints  aolitice ;  and  whoeiet
iiialiiaiiiil  m  olBee  longer  than  hi*  time,  vai  prniiih-
able  with  death  both  at  Thebet  and  in  other  dtiea
<PlM.J>dci>.S4jPaaa.ix.l4.§S.)  Epameinondaa
^^  Peiopidaa  did  ao  no  Ihnr  niraaiini  of  Laomia
(a.  C 169).  bnt  their  eminent  aerricea  nni  them  ;
in  fact  the  jodgea  did  not  mm  come  to  a  vote  re-
■pecting  tka  Cmner.  At  tbe  eipiration  of  the  jrtar
a  DmjuUfch  wta  eligible  to  offlee  a  aecmd  time,  and
Pdapidaa  wm  repntedlj  choaen.  Prom  the  caie
rf  FfiHwUM^aa  and  Pdopidaa,  who  wen  broq^ht
brfiac  Tbeban  jodgea  (tutaarat),  for  tnmagnanon
af  ihe  hw  whidi  Innited  the  time  of  office,  we  maj
Mcdada  tbat  each  Boeotareh  wai  reaponuble  to
hit  ■rwn  atMe  alooe,  and  nM  to  the  Btneral  body  of
the  fear  cranrila.

Jf  eattieBi  s  made  of  an  election  of  Boeotareht  bj
Urj  (ixxiiL  27,  iliL  U).  He  fliithet  infbrma
m  tkal  tke  Itagne  (comdSim)  wai  bTokeu  ap  by
thcKaoana  &cl71.  (Compare  Polyb.  ixniLS.
f  ]«— T»BewrArHMt>>T<XWi,.)  StiUitmnat
k»e  htai  wtidly  rtTiTed,  aa  we  are  told  of  a
»*^H  hnaking  np  by  the  Bnmana  after  the  de-
■crac^B  Id  Omith  B.  c  1(6.  (Pana.  *iL  16.
f  t)  [H.  W.]

BOMBTCINUH. [Suiicitii.]
BONA. The  word  boia  it  totoetiniea  nied  to
npnai  the  whole  of  a  man'a  property  (Panlut,
<«^  SutimL  T.  a,  l«;  Dig.  37.  tit.  1.  a.  3  ]
54.  tit.  16.  a.  49) ;  aod  in  tha  phnaea  bcmonon


BONA.  MS

emtio,  ceaiio,  fwaaeoiD,  nsufitictaB,  the  word
"  bona "  ia  equivalent  to  property.  It  exptetaea
all  that  a  man  haa,  whether  at  owner  or  moely  aa
potienor ;  and  OTory  thins  to  which  he  haa  any
right  Bat  it  it  aud  (Dig.  £D.  tit.  16.  ■.83):
"  Propiie  bona  diei  ooo  poatimt  qnao  plu  incom-
■"  ■ ' - However,  the  nae


n  the  D


compcEfaended  both  thi
'  im  of  t'  "  ■

nor. ]
anohj.


, property
;  It  doea  not  eiproM  the  oaton  of  tha
US  oeiwaen  it  and  the  penoa  who  hat  the
enhip  or  tha  enjoyment  of  it,  ''

word*  "all  '*'  "  ' " "  "


legal  relstion  of
acribea. The  \e,


haTO,"  'allthat  I  am
,"  hi  Engliab  ahow  the
that  which  he  thnt  de-


l}iaritarua  tmrnerMp,  and  the
Datore  of  the  diatinction  will  be  eatily  i^prahcnded
by  anr  peiaon  who  ia  ilightly  convertant  with
Engliih  Uw.

"There  it,"  tayi  Oaini  (iL  40), "  among  fbrugnen
(jtatgrua)  mHj  one  kind  of  ownetthip  (t^DBusuun),
BO  that  a  man  u  either  the  owner  of  a  thing  or  bo
ia  not  And  thia  waa  formerly  the  caie  among  the
Roman  people  ;  for  a  man  waa  either  owner  ex
jure  Qmiitinm,  or  he  waa  noL  Bat  afterwuda  the
awnerahip  waa  aplit,  u  that  now  one  man  may  be
tbe  owner  (_domim$)  of  a  thing  ex  jure  Qidritinm,
and  yet  another  may  hflTe  it  in  bonit.  Forinitance,
i^  in  the  caie  of  a  raa  mandpi,  I  do  not  tranifer
it  to  you  by  mancipatio,  nor  by  the  form  in  jure
ceatio,  bat  merely  deliTer  it  to  yon,  the  thinv  in-
deed become!  your  thing  (in  k»i),  b
Duun  mine  ei  jure  Qniritium,  until  I  _

you  have  it  by  uiocapion. For  when  tl

pion  it  DDce  complete,  from  that  time  it  begini  to
be  yonta  ahiolnlely  (pi  '  "'


both  ii

juat  aa  if  it  had  been  mancipated  to

ferred  to  yon  by  the  in  jura  cetaio.'- in  una  [aa-

■sge  Guna  refbrt  to  the  three  modea  of  acqniring

property  which  were  the  peculiar  right!  of  Soman

citiiena,  mancipatio,  in  jon  ctatioy  and  utnc^iian,

which  an  alto  particularly  enumetated  hj  him  in

another  paatage  (iL  65)-

From  tbii  paatage  it  appean  tbat  the  ownerahip
of  certain  kinda  of  tbinga  among  the  Romana,
tailed  ret  maacipi  [MancipiuhJ,  eould  onlyba
txaniferred  fnaa  one  peiiton  to  another  with  cerUua
fmualiliea,  or  acquired  by  umcapion.  But  if  it
vat  dearly  tbe  intention  of  the  owner  to  tranafei
the  owneithip,  and  tba  nocaaoiy  fonna  only  wera
wanting,  the  porchaaer  had  the  thing  in  bonk,
and  he  had  the  enjoynunl  of  it,  thoarii  the  original
owner  wat  leffol^  the  owner  nntil  the  nnie^noa
waacompleted,notwithitaadingh«  bad  paitad  with


It  t]


I  appeart  that  Quiritarian  ownenhip  of


owneiahip  of  a  thing  which  the  Roman  law  re-
CDgniaed  at  nteh ;  it  did  not  expreai  a  compound
hot  a  eimpla  nDtion,  which  waa  that  of  slioolnle
ownerthip.  Bnt  when  it  waa  once  (atabliabed
that  one  man  might  haTo  the  Quiritariaii  owner-
ahip, and  another  the  enjoyment,  and  the  tolo
right  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  tame  thing,  the  nm-
plote  notioa  of  Quirituian  ownenhip  became  a
notion  compounded  of  the  tlrict  legal  notion  of
ownerthip,  and  that  of  the  right  to  enjoy,  oa  nnitad


SOS


BONA.


in  the  nine  penoo.  And  u  >  man  miglit  hs'
both  the  QuiritBTiu  ,>wnenhip  and  the  right  to  tl
enjo^ent  of  a.  thin^,  n  oofl  might  hive  Clie  Quir
tarian  owDenhip  onlj-,  and  Bnothei  might  have  1}
•DJOfmeal  of  it  oolj.  Tiiu  bus  ewiunliip  vi
umetinua  expceued  hj  the  suae  teciu  (er  jm
QwritAuii)  M  that  ownenhip  which  wa*  conplet


Jk*  QnriHiim  (Oaiu^  iii.  lOO),  and  ;et  the  peoon

who  had  mch  baie  light  was  atill  lalled  Joim'aiii,
and  hy  thii  term  he  ia  contiailed  with  the  ■»•


The  hiitorical  origin  of  thia  nation,  oF  the  (epa-
tation  of  the  ownenhip  fitnn  the  right  to  enjoj  a
thing,  ia  not  known  ;  bat  it  may  be  eoiilj  conjee-
tund.  When  nothing  waa  wanting  to  the  nanifer
oF  ownenhip  but  a  compliance  with  (he  itiict
legal  form,  wo  aa  eaaily  conceive  ibM  the  Koman
juriiU  would  KOD  get  over  thii  difficulty.  The
•trictncM  of  the  old  It^  initiCntioni  of  Rome
wai  giaduallj  relaxed  to  meet  the  wanli  of  the
people,  and  in  the  inilanca  alnadf  mentioned,  the
joriadiction  of  the  praeloc  tupplied  the  defecu  of
the  Ibw.  Thui,  that  interen  which  a  man  had
acquired  in  a  thing,  and  which  only  wanted  certain
fonu  to  make  it  Quiritarian  ownenhip,  wu  pro-
tected by  the  pmetor.  The  pmetnr  could  not  give
Quiritanan  ownerthip,  bat  he  could  protect  a  man
in  the  enjoyment  of  a  thing  —  he  could  mnintam
hii  poHaaaioD :  and  thii  ii  pnciiely  what  the
praetor  did  with  reipect  to  thou  who  were  poa-
Muan  of  pojdic  land ;  thej  had  no  ownenhip,  but
only  a  poueeuon,  in  which  they  were  protected
by  the  pioetor'i  inleidict.  [Aaa^aUB  LaoKa,
p.  38.)

That  which  wBi  in  bonimhen,  WM  that  kind  of
intereet  or  ownenhip  which  wai  pmtected  by  the
pmetor,  which  inleien  may  be  called  boniloiian  or
ben^oal  ownenhip,  at  oppcaed  lo  Quiiitonan  or
ban  legal  ownenhip.  Ic  doea  not  appear  that  the
Tsrd  ■inmininm  ii  ever  applied  lo  inch  bonitahan
ownenhip  except  it  may  be  in  one  pauage  of
Gaina  (L  51),  the  aiplanalion  of  which  ii  not  bve
fiom  difflculCj.

That  intereat  called  in  bout,  which  arote  Irem
a  bare  tradiljon  of  a  ree  maucipi,  waa  protected  by
the  eicepUo,  and  the  aaia  ntUu  in  rem.  (Dig.  11.
tiL  1.  a.  £2.)  PDuetaio  it  the  geneial  name  of  the
interest  which  wu  thni  piotectod.  The  penm
who  hod  a  thing  in  bonia  and  ei  jnila  cauH  wai
ako  entitled  In  the  actio  Publiciana,  in  caie  he
loat  the  pofieuion  of  the  thing  before  he  had
gained  the  ownenhip  by  otucspion.  (Ooini,  iv.
36.)

The  phraaei  biaMHinn  poaMlfiis  bntonun  poiaea-
tnr,  might  then  andy  to  him  who  haa  had  a  m
nancipi  tranafcriM  to  him  by  tndition  only ;  but
the  pbnue  appliet  alio  to  other  caiet  m  which  the
praetor  hy  the  help  of  Gctiont  gave  to  peraon)  the
beneficinl  intereit  to  whom  he  could  not  give  the
ownership.  When  the  piaetor  gnve  the  goods  of
the  debtor  to  the  creditor,  the  creditor  waa  nid
<■  poucaiantm  nnm,  or  EoKmia  dMiorii  tiiHtL
(Dig.  42.  tit  S.  1. 14,  &c}  [BoNOBUu  Emtio  ;
BoNaauH  Posaissia]

Ai  to  thingi  nee  nianci)n,  the  ownaihip  might
be  tranaferred  by  bare  tradition  or  dalirery,  and
each  ownertbip  wai  Qniritorian,  inaimDch  aa  (be
Roman  law  reqoind  no  ipeoal  form  to  ba  ob-
(erved  in  the  tranifer  of  the  ownertbip  of  rea  nee


BONA  CADUCA.

the  jna  gentium  (in  (he  Roman  aenae  of  that  tern).
(Ooius,  iL  26,  41,  20 ;  Ulp.  Frag,  i  !&)

(Zimmera,  Utbardai  Waaidamigmaiadet  had-
lantdtiK  EigmUamt,  Simitci.  M—./ikr  Jarvpr.
iii.  3.)  (O.  L.]

BONACADU'CA.  GateH  litenlly  lignifira
that  which  Ub :  tho^  gimii  caduat,  aeeordiu  to
(Una  (Dig.  50.  tit.  IS.  a.  SO),  ia  (he  mart  which
falla  from  a  tree.  CadncDin,  in  ita  general  tcnae,
might  be  any  thing  withont  an  owner,  or  what  (ha
penon  entitled  to  neglected  to  take  (Cic  D»  Or.
liL  31,i>*^i.6);  buttheitrictlegalienieofcb-
dncnm  and  bona  cadtica,  ia  that  ttided  by  Ulpiaa
{Frag.  iriL  D*  Cadnca),  which  it  aa  foUowi :  —

If  a  thing  ii  left  by  teatament  to  a  penon,  to
that  he  can  take  i[  by  thejut  civile,  but  bom  toms
came  hat  not  taken  it,  that  thing  it  called  cofia^
txm,  u  if  it  bad/oZfai  ttota  him  ;  for  initanco,  if
a  Iqncy  waa  leii  to  an  nnnuuiied  pemm,  or  a
LattQua  Junianua  ;  and  the  unmarried  pctaon  did
not  within  a  hundred  daya  obey  the  lav,  or  if

the  Jut  Quiritium,  or  had  become  a  peregrinua
(tee  CnjaciTit,  ad  Ulpiani  HfaJbi  JCXIX.  vol.  L  ed.
NeapoL  175S),  the  legacy  wat  cnducom.  Or  if  ■
iera  a  parte,  or  a  legatee,  died  belbre  the  opening
of  the  will,  the  thing  waa  oinJwwn.  The  thing
which  &iled  lo  come  to  a  penon  in  conaeqnenc«
of  tomething  happening  in  the  life  of  Che  tealotnr
waa  aaid  to  be  ia  oiua  cadad;  that  which  failed
of  taking  ellect  between  the  death  of  the  (citator
and  the  opening  of  the  will,  waa  umply  cailod
ooifaauB.  (Camp.  Dig.  3B.  til.  5.  a.  62,  and  Dig.
31.  lSI;  OxfaCinJ,  Art.  1039,  &c)

The  law  above  alluded  to  it  the  Lei  Jnlia  at
Fapia  Foppasa,  which  ii  aomctimei  aimpl^  aiiei
Julia,  or  Papia  Poppaea^  Tfaia  law,  which  waa
pOHed  in  the  dme  i^  Anguttut  (a.  u.  9),  had  tha
double  object  of  enconcagmg  mairi^ea  and  enrich-
ing the  traaaiuy — atraruda  (Tadl.  Ann.  m.  25),
and  contained,  with  reCarcoca  lo  theae  two  objecta,
a  great  number  of  pronaiona.  Martial  (t.  £^  75>
aUudot  In  a  penon  who  mairied  ia  order  to  complv
with  tha  Uw.

That  which  waa  cadncnm  ame,  in  the  lint
place,  to  those  among  (h«  heredei  who  bad  cbil>
dren ;  and  if  the  herede*  had  no  children,  it  tans
amongthoaeorthelegMeoiwhohBdchildren.  Tha
law  gave  the  jna  accrcscendi,  that  is,  the  right  to
the  Olducum  as  far  as  (he  third  degtn  of  oon-
languinity,  both  ascending  and  deacending  (Ulp.
Frat/,  IB),  to  those  who  wen  nuuie  heredei  i^  iha
will.  Under  the  proviaiona  of  the  law,  the  ladu-
cum,  in  case  there  wat  no  prior  daimant,  belonged
to  tha  aeiarium ;  or,  as  Ulpian  (xxviiL  7)  eapressea
il,  if  no  one  waa  entitled  lo  the  bonorum  poiaessio,
or  if  a  penon  wat  entitled,  but  did  not  aisert  hia
right,  the  bona  became  rnblic  property  (jt^ula
de/enmiHr)f  according  to  Ine  Lex  Julia  raducaria  ;
but  by  a  constitution  of  the  Emperor  Antoninua
Catacalla  it  was  appropriated  to  the  litccs:  the  joa
accrcscendi  above  mentioned  wat,  however,  itill
retained.  The  lawyen,  however  («i
Biai),  by  TBiiona  doTicet,  toeh  aa  r
often  aacceeded  in  making  the  law  of  no  effect.
AciKit  mentioned  in  the  DignC  (28.  liL  4.  (.3),
in  which  bona  caduca  were  daimed  by  the  Gacus
in  tha  time  of  Maicut  Antoninns,  and  another  in
which  tha  fiicni  it  mentioned  even  under  Hadrian,
where  one  wtuld  expect  to  find  the  term  aerarinm
naed. (Sarigny,  ^ftcm,  Ac  IL  273,  nsta  qq.)


BONA  FIDES.
He  wbo  look  th«  portign  of  a  here*. «hi
broBc  tadmuD,  took  il  by  aniTeniU  nicccuio
n  the  taw  cf  ■  hgicj,  the  aducuiD  wu  >  imgakr
■inuMim Bat  ba  who  took  an  bendilai  fmlnrap
look  it  with  tlw  beqnota  o[  [reedom,  of  legacin,
■nd  fidci  ■— -'~'— -  with  which  it  mt  burtheued

tiurga  with  which  thej  wen  bnilbawd  becainB
adiKa  aba.  In  the  time  of  Coulaiitiae,  bolh  the
ueAeha,  and  the  ofhoi,  or  childleei  penon  (who  wm
Older  ■  limited  iacapacil;),  obOuiied  the  full  legs]
Ofani;  of  taking  th«  inhetitaocc  (fhd,  viiL  SS.)
Juiiiuaii  (On'.vLfil}  put  u  end  to  the  mdocam,
with  all  ill  itgui  CDutqucDcaL  In  thii  '
tiiiMd  tilk  (JM  Oadaeu  toiltadii)  it  ii  il
thai  the  name  and  the  thing  (aoaieB  t
eadamm)  had  their  origin  in  the  an]  '
BaoT  pnviuoaa  of  the  Law  were  evaded,  and  many
Ivd'beeome  obaolele.  (Jut.  &<.  iz.  38  j  Gum,
L  ISO.  ii.  307,  iiL  141,  26E  ;  Lipriu,  Eicnn.  ad
Tadt.  ^M.  iiL  2S  i  MaieioU,  LduiuA  dtrluHM.
im  Am*.  Jtebt) Aj  to  the  Doi  Cadnca,  *ee

Dim.  [O.L.]

BONA  FIDES.  Thii  term  frequently  occs
il  the  I^tin  wiiten,  and  particiilariy  in  the  Roman
jariita.  tl  can  ooly  be  defined  with  refeience
ihingi  eppawd  to  it,  namely,  mala  fidei,  and  do
mataa,  bM  of  whidi  teimi,  and  eepecially  I
IiCteT,  m  fivqaoitly  ued  in  a  tecliajcal  ten
[Itoitr*  Hu-Da-]


ge  ef  all  ttand  and  Dubir  dealing  or  aediig. In
thit  loue,  booa  Gdea,  tbat  ia,  the  abaence  of  all


Ana  fii*  ftuidtn  appliea  to  him  who  haa
failed  the  poaKanoQ  of  a  thing  under  a  good  title,
aa  he  aappoac^ He  who  pooieaMd  a  thing  bona
fide,  had  a  capaciQ'  «f  acqmring  the  ownenhip

Fablioaua.  Thoa  a  pttion  who  rec^red  a  thing
nibtr  aaaiipi,  or  nee  toandpi,  not  from  the  owner,
but  fnm  a  wraoa  whom  he  heliered  to  be  the
swna,  eoald  aajnire  the  ownenhip  by  luucapion.
((iaiae,  iLU ;  Ulp.  iViy.  xii.  S.)  Athii^which
waa./Sir<tDa  or  n  po—eita,  or  the  lei  mancipi  of  a

h  waa  ddiracd  bj  her  under  the  anctoritai  of  her
toUr,  waa  not  rabject  to  niueapion,  and  therefore


:eofbc


(Oaiu,  L  192,  iL  45,  &<:. ;  Cic
Ad  AU-  L  L,  Pn  Flaeeo,  c  34.)  A  penon  who
biBfiit  bin  a  inpillui  without  the  suctotitai  of
hii  iBlEr,  IT  with  the  aaclatitai  of  a  perion  whom
he  knew  not  to  be  the  tutor,  did  not  puicbate


tt  mi  hia  popUliii  ^  and  if  be  porchaaed  it  &om
inathfT  to  whom  a  mm  bona  fide  lale  had  been
made,  tb  f-"wi-i—  waa  uulL (Dig.  26.  tiL  tl.

In  tatioQi  aetiofii  arinng  out  of  motnal  dealing!,
■ch  aa  baying  and  felling,  lending  and  hiring,
y**nmhtp,  and  othen,  bona  fidee  ie  equifaleiil  to
anjaBM  and  Jnatnm ;  and  each  actiona  were  aome-
tiia  called  bimae  Sdei  actiimee.  The  formula  of
u  the  aathorily  of  the  judei.


BONORUM  CESSIO.  S07

nied  initead  of  ez  bona  fide.  (Oaiug,  iv.  62 ;  Cic.
Qriii.l7,  rDpio.e.I7i  Briawniu«,£M/bojiiiaj,
&t  lib.  *.)
BONA  RAPTA.  [Fuituk.]
BONA  VACA'NTIA  were  originallT  the  pro-
pet^  which  a  penon  left  at  hie  death  without
haTmg  diipoied  of  it  by  will,  and  without  leaving
an;  ism.  Such  property  waa  open  to  occnpancy,
and  ao  long  ai  the  itrict  lam  i^  inberiEaniw  ez-
iated,  nch  an  event  muit  not  bare  been  uncom-
mon. A  remedy  waa,  howeTer,  found  for  thia  by
the  banorum  poaaeaaio  of  tbe  piaetor.

It  doee  not  appear  that  the  itata  origiDallj'
claimed  the  property  of  a  person  who  died  intea-
tate  and  without  ktnda  UgHaii.  The  claim  of
the  ilBlB  to  inch  property  leona  to  have  been  firat
eatabliihed  by  the  Lex  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.
[BonaCiddca.]  The  itate,  that  ia,  in  the  eailier
perioda  the  aeiarium,  and  afterwards  the  fijcua,
did  not  take  nch  pnmerty  aa  hem,  but  it  took  it
per  muvertUalem.  In  the  later  perioda  of  the
empire,  in  the  cau  of  a  aoldiec  dying  without
heredei,  the  legion  to  which  he  belonged  bad  a
claim  before  the  fiicai  \  and  Tarioua  corporate
bodies  hod  a  like  preference  in  the  caie  of  a  mmi-
ber  of  the  coiporation  dying  without  hwadM.
(Mareioll,  LetTtmck  der  laHit.  da  SSnt,  RtAH;
Sm-igny,  Si^tem,  *a  vol.  iL  p.  300.) [O.  L.)

BONO'RUM  CE'SSIO.  Then  were  two  kinda
of  bonorum  cessio,  ia  jars  and  a^rajta.  The  In
jun  ceaaio  ia  treated  under  its  proper  hoid.

Tbe  JMOnm  cshw  extraju  was  introduced  by
a  Julian  law,  pasted  either  in  tbe  time  of  Jolioa
CacBi  or  Aognstni,  which  allowed  an  iwolvemt
debtor  to  give  up  hia  property  to  hia  cieitora.
The  debtor  might  declare  his  wiUingnem  to  give
^  his  proper^  by  letter  or  by  a  verbal  mcaaige.
The  debtor  thus  avoided  the  infiiinift  oonacqaeat
OD  the  bonorum  emtif^  which  was  involuntary,
and  he  waa  boo  fiom  all  penonal  execulidL  He
waa  also  allowed  to  retain  a  small  portiim  of  his
property  for  bis  support.  An  old  ^oaa  deacribea
the  banorum  cesiio  thus  :  Ctdm  iomt  tit  oi  h-
BeriSaii  nrani  nanmt  reoerfsrs.

The  prc^er^  thus  given  up  waa  sold,  and  the
pmceedi  ^tnbuted  among  the  ciedilors.  The
purchaser  did  not  obtain  the  Quirltanan  oimerthip
of  the  property  by  the  act  of  purchaae.  If  the
debtor  lubaequently  acquired  property,  this  also
as  liable  to  tbe  payment  of  his  old  debts,  with
uoe  limitationi,  if  they  wen  not  alrmdy  Adly
itiified.  A  conslitution  of  Alexander  Serena
{Cod.  7.  tit.  71.  a.  I)  dedorea  that  those  who  made
a  bonorum  cessio  were  not  released,  unless  the
creditor!  wen  fully  paid  ;  but  thay  lud  the  privi-
ly of  not  being  imprisoned,  if  judgment  waa  given
against  them  in  on  action  try  one  of  their  old  (re-

The  benefit  of  the  lex  Julia  was  eitanded  by
mperial  constitutiaiia  to  the  pmvincea.

The  history  of  the  boDorum  ceaiio  doee  not
«cm  quite  clear.  The  Juhan  lav,  however,  waa
lot  the  oldeit  enactment  which  relieved  the  perion
>f  the  debtor  from  being  taken  in  execution.  The
CI  Poetelia  Papiria  (b.  c  327)  exempted  tbe  per-
ion of  the  debtor  (ntn  thi  kojxbh  nuniiaet),  and
inly  made  his  property  {bata)  liable  for  his  debts,
[t  doea  not  appear  front  the  faatage  in  Livy  (viiL
!B)  whether  this  was  a  bonorum  ceuio  in  the
senu  of  the  honarum  ceisio  of  the  Julian  hiw,  or
oolj  a  banorum  emtio  with  the  privDage  of  tieedom


908  BONOBUM  EMTIO.

from  UTeit,  Tfae  Tablet  of  Hermcin  (Mnioccbi,
p,  423)  qicBlu  of  thcis  gui  vt  jure  boHam  fnpton
jarabmil ;  a  phrue  which  iippean  lo  be  cqninleat
to  tbo  bonoTum  ceuio,  uid  wu  a  declAtatioD  on
oath  «  ^ni,  tbat  ii,  befon  tho  pnetor,  b;  the
ir  that  hii  propen;  mi  niffldent  lo  par  hii


debtt. But  ihii  n


\  MQI  ■eeompuiicil  n


decUntion  of  •oItchcj  vu  nqmRd  from  the
debtor  b;  the  Poetelia  lex.  The  Juliui  lav  nm-
dend  tha  pTDoen  of  the  emio  bsnamm  more
■imple,  bf  making  it  a  pnicedon  ezln  jui,  and
g^viiig  farther  privilege!  to  the  iiuolTent.  Like
AeveEVil  other  Julian  lawi,  it  appean  to  faaTO  con-
aolidatsd  and  extended  the  pnvuioiu  of  preTioiu
enacnnents.  The  term  bononmi  ccnio  ii  naed  in
tha  Scotch  law,  and  the  earh  pnetiee  wai  darired
frua  the  Boman  nilenL  (Oanu,  iiL  36  \  Dig.  42.
tit  3  I  Cod.*iLtiL7i.)  [0.L.1

BONO'BUM  COLLATIO.  Bj  the  ilricl
iul«  of  the  ciiil  law  an  emancipated  ion  had  no
right  to  the  inherilanca  of  hii  father,  whether  he
died  tertata  oi  inteitate.  But,  in  codtm  of  time,
the  pnetor  granted  to  emancipated  children  the
|tfitilega  of  equal  tucceasion  with  thoaa  who  re-
mained in  the  power  of  tho  ftther  at  tfae  time  of
llit  death ;  and  thii  grant  miffht  be  either  trmtta
"it  thu  faTOur  waa  gianled


1  purpoae  ol
childnm,  w


their  {ather'i  popertf,  and  for  thi
equal  diiinoa  among  aU  the  hther^
erer  propertf  thej  had  at  the  time  of  the  fiither'a
deatl^  and  which  would  hare  been  acquired  Ua
the  father  in  caie  they  had  i^l  remained  in  bit
power.  Thii  wai  otlled  bonorum  collatia.  It  le-
aemblai  the  old  Engltih  halchpot,  npon  the  prin-
dple  of  which  ii  framed  the  pniTiiion  in  the  ttatnte
32and23Charie<n.  c  10.  a.  5,ai  lo  the  diilri-
balion  of  an  inteitats'i  enate.  (Dig.  37.  tit.  G  i
Cod.  vi.  tit  SO  ;  Thibaut,  S^item  da  PambJUm
Serilt,  %  901,  &c,  9lh  ed.,  where  the  rulea  appli-
cable to  the  bonorum  callatio  an  more  porticuliirly
atated,)  [O.  L.1

BONO'BUM  E'MTIO  ET  EMTOR.  Tho
erpreiuon  bonorum  emtio  appliea  to  a  aale  of  the
propeitf  either  of  a  living  or  of  a  dead  penon.  It
wu  in  eflixt,  aa  to  a  living  debtor,  an  ezecntion.
In  tha  case  of  a  living  penon,  hii  goodi  were
liable  to  be  acid  if  he  concealed  hinuclf  for  the
porpoae  of  defrauding  hii  arediton,  and  waa  not
defended  in  bia  abaence ;  or  if  he  made  a  bouonim
ceaiia  according  to  the  Julian  law ;  or  if  he  did  not
pay  anjr  aum  rf  money  which  ha  waa  by  judicial
aentence  ordeied  to  pay,  within  the  time  lixed  by
the  lava  of  the  Twelve  Tablet  (AuL  OelL  xr.  13,
XX.  1)  or  by  the  praetor'a  edict.  In  tha  caae  of  a
druA  penon,  hii  property  wai  lold  when  it  wai
aieertuncd  that  there  wu  neithfr  herea  nor  bono-
rum poateBor,  nor  any  other  penon  entitled  to
lucceed  to  it.  In  thil  case  the  property  belonged
to  the  Btatfl  after  the  r*J!ti"g  of  tho  Lex  Julia  et
Papin  Foppaea.  If  a  peraon  died  in  debt,  the  pne-
tor ardered  a  aala  of  hu  property  on  the  application
of  the  ctcdilon.  (Gaiui,  ii.  154,  167.)  _  Id  the
cBie  of  the  property  of  a  living  peraon  being  aold,
the  praetor,  on  the  application  ot  the  creditota,  or-
dc^ri'd  it  to  be  poneucd  (jtoaideri)  by  the  creditora
for  thir^  nuxoiive  dayi,  and  notice  to  be  given
of  the  nle.  This  explaini  tha  expreniun  in  Livy
(il  24) ;  "  ne  (fat  militia,  donee  in  caatrii  eawt,


BONOBUM  POSSKSSIO.
bona  patttdtnt  aut  venderet" The  creditors  wero


■  pot


I  dtUto


(ingle  credilw  obtained  the  posteaiio.
vt  aea  leveral  crcdilon  obtained  the  puaaenio,  it
wai  oiuol  to  entrust  the  management  of  the  buii-
ncaa  to  one  of  them,  who  was  chosen  by  a  majority
of  the  tndiloti.  The  ctediton  then  mat  and  choH
a  magiiter,  that  is,  a  penon  to  sell  the  jtopenj
(Cic  AdAa.19,  ill;  Pro  P.  Qantis,  c  U),
or  a  curator  bonomm  if  no  immediate  sale  was
intended.  The  purchaser,  tmior,  obtained  by  tha
sale  only  the  bonorum  poaaeatio :  the  property  ms
hia  In  bonis,  until  he  acquired  the  Quiritarian
owncnhip  by  usucapion.  The  foundation  of  tbia
mie  seems  to  be,  that  the  consent  of  the  owner  wai
conaidcnd  necessary  in  cider  to  transfer  the  ownei^
ihip.  Both  the  bonorum  possessores  and  the  em-
tores  hod  no  l^ol  right!  (tjirwtas  actiimei)  against
the  debtors  of  the  pemo  wboae  prapaty  vras  pos-
sessed or  purchased,  nor  could  they  be  legally
sued  by  them ;  but  the  pnetv  allowed  utiia  oo-
tuma  both  in  tiieir  tkronr  and  against  them.
(Oaius,  iii.  77;  iv.  Sj,  6i  and  111 ;  Dig.  42.  tit
4,  S  ;  Savigny,  i>ai  RkU  da  Ba^itn,  p.  410,
fith  ed.)  [O.  L.]

BONO'BUM  POSSE'SSIO  U  defined  by
Ulpian  (D)g.  37.  tit  1.  a.  S)  ta  be  "  the  right  of
ining  for  or  retaining  a  patrimony  or  thing  which
belonged  to  another  at  tha  time  of  his  death."  Tba
strict  laws  of  the  Twelva  Tables  as  lo  inheritonn
were  gradually  relaxed  by  the  praetor^  edict,  and
a  new  kind  of  succession  was  introduced,  by  which
a  person  might  have  a  bonorum  poneasio  who
eonld  have  no  hereditas  or  legal  inheritance.

Tha  bonorum  posscssio  was  given  by  the  edict
both  ODHfra  taiiilai,  leauidum  tatmlat,  and  tmltt-

An  emancipated  aon  had  no  l^al  daaa  od  tho
inheritance  of  his  &ther ;  bat  if  he  was  omitted  in
hii  bthsr's  will,  or  not  expressly  exheredatcd,  tho
praetor^  edict  gave  him  the  bonomm  poateano
contra  tabnlaa,  on  condition  that  he  would  brinff
into  hotchpot  (bonorum  eollaiio)  with  hii  brethren
who  continited  in  the  parent's  power,  whstever
property  be  had  at  the  tmie  of  the  parent's  death.
The  bonorum  ponesao  was  given  both  to  children
of  tha  blood  (itatarvlt$)  and  to  adopted  children,
provided  the  fbrmn  were  not  adopted  into  any
other  bmily,  and  the  bCter  irere  in  the  adoptive
parents  power  nt  the  tune  of  hit  death.  If  a
freedman  made  a  will  without  leaving  his  patron
half  of  hii  property,  the  patron


the  freedman  appointet


aeenndum  tabnlai  w
ie  prsclor  gi
ably  to  the  words  of  the  will,  to  thoaa  named  in


n  which  tfae  p


IT  gave,  conform-


hoedee,  when  there  was  no  person  intitled  lo
make  a  claim  agoinit  the  will,  or  none  who  chose
to  make  such  a  claim.  It  waa  alio  given  lecundnia
tabulas  in  cuei  whan  all  the  laqniaite  legal  fi»in-
alities  had  not  been  abierved,  jMDvided  there  wer«
■even  proper  witncssei  to  the  wflL  (Oaina,  iL
147,  "  li  modo  dcfunctus,"  tu.)

In  the  case  of  intestacy  (MetMlj  there  were
■even  degrees  of  pcnoni  who  might  claim  tha
bonomm  poaiessio,  each  in  his  order,  upon  thero
being  no  claim  of  a  prim'  degree.  The  three  first
clou  were  children,  bff^mi  hertdet  and  prorimi
cognaH. EmaneipaUid  children  could  claim  aa  well


BOONA&

3t  children

win  lad  been  adnpUd  into  iDOthcT  family.  If
■  bsad^Bi  djid  inUMfttc,  lomng  onlj  ■  wife  (in
■■■)  B-  ao  mtofdre  nn,  tbe  patron  ni  entitled
to  tkc  ^■■— "—  pnwMtiii  irffnu  halt  of  titi  prapeit;.
Tha  hBOwm  pnwawia  ma  giran  eilh^  era  re
mmmn.  It  waa  giTBi  «  ra,  wiien  ths  peraon
M  wkon  h  wai  giTen  thetebj  obtained  tlw  f«i}-

laanar  pHxia  coald  Mint,  hia  claim  ta  the  in-
bBOaacB  bj  the  ju  driU  t  u  if  *  man  died  inlea-
tat  karaf  •  am  Icrw,  the  gnnt  of  the  tnnonmi
paB^M  woold  hnn  na  dbct;  for  tbe  hare*  could
III  III  »■  bk  legal  t«hl  to  the  inheritance.  Or  if
a  pmaa  «bo  «m  paraed  herea  in  a  ralid  «ill  waa
Miified  witk  U*  tida  aceoiding  to  the  joi  drils,
mat  did  aat  cbaoae  to  Bik  fat  tbe  booomm  pawcuio
(■bkh  k  wBi  oitilled  to  if  he  cboM  ta  bare  It),
Ibaae  wbo  wsold  ban  bean  hoedci  in  cue  of  an  in-
fcatacj  wight  ehim  the  booonmi  ponmio,  which,
bawam,  voald  be  miaTailing  agxmM  tbe  legaJ  title


ie  of  their  being

■ahe  tb*  daim  vitUa  ft  hmdnd  daja.  Oa  the
fatea  if  neb  par^  tt  make  bii  claim  witbiu  the
pafHT  t^c,lbe  right  le  daim  tbe  boDcitim  pot-
■-■ ■ --• — jjn  Older,  IhtiHigh


«aa  aoBTCrted  iata  Qiuritaiian  ewnenhip  {domi-
miHm^  AH  the  daiisa  ai^  ebligatiDni  of  the  de-
^aaid  penen  wme  (zanaTerted  with  the  bononun
fiBtHD  ta  tba  pameaiiir  oi  pnetoriau  herta  ;
Bd  be  waa  intectad  in  hia  paaaeiaiai  b;  tbe  in-
tardktBB  QaBma  bcoacum.  Tbe  benefit  of  thit
■lardiet  waa  limited  to  caae*  of  bononim  peaaeoiio,
mti  ibk  w^  tba  icanD  why  a  wMm  woo  could
drnm  iba  iabvibnca  in  laae  of  intiatacj  bj  the
inil  lav  iiwiilip"!  f  cboaa  to  aah  for  tbe  bonomm
paacaaa  alao.  Tba  joaetinan  heiea  could  only
BE  ml  ba  ned  in  leapeet  of  tbe  ptopraty  by  a
lepUficliMb  HewainotablataoBtainatfJiwto
■oil .-  bat  in  ader  to  pn  him  thii  capi^ty,  he
•aa  bj  a  ftctioo  of  law  aoppooed  to  bo  what  he

" - —  ■  » «  aaidjMo  m  imda

la  which  he  could
(Cit  Ad

/*«■.  TiL  31  ;  Oaiw,  iil  25— 3S,  It.  31 ;  Ulp.
fj^.  tiL  28,  39  i  D^.  37.  tlL  1.  i.  19  ;  ^t.  11  ;
IMf.  3&  til.  t ;  a  good  geneial  new  of  the  brawrum
i  iiiiiiii  it  gira  by  Manoll,  Lttriuct  da-  Im-
-  -  ^ASiL  AdUe,  §174;  Thibaut,  5m-
—  d;»/^JaM.»aBto.|MS.9theJ.)  [O.L]
BOIiO'RUM  P0S3ESSI0.  [Intudictiiii.}
BOSO'EUMRAPTO'EUM  ACTIO.  LFu*-

BCK>7f  AE  (Saiinu),  peraoni  in  Athetu  who
pmidaaed  exa  for  the  public  BCtifioe*  and  feaata.
Thcj  an  ipoken  of  by  Detaoathciua  (e.  Mid.  f.
(74>  ba  ceayaactioD  wuh  the  Ufowoiol  titi  thoie
vh  wijiliiil  vTW  tba  njMciiea,  and  are  ntolced
b(  Idiaaoaa  (AefaM.  TiiL)  with  the  aitanae,  gene-
~'-.  aadambam ailnri  Tlwirofficeia  apokenofu
bHOBBbte  bj  HaipoaatMa  (f,  v.)  j  hnl  Follux


BOULE.  SOS

(TiiL  114)  Inclndei  them  among  the  in&aior  offices
or  olEcea  of  acirice  (fcnjpwtai,  Bdckh,  FhH.  Earn.
a/.4ttsH,p.3ie,2ded.)

BOREASMI  or  BOBEA^MUS  (fiaptaa^
01  Boftaaiiii),  a  featival  celebrated  by  the  Athe-
niuu  in  bonoui  of  Boreu  (HeeycL  t.  e.},  which,
01  Hen>dotai  (viL  189)  leema  to  think,  waa  initj.
toted  during  the  Petiian  wui^  whoi  the  Athauani,
being  commanded  by  an  oiscle  to  inioke  thtrir
Tt^pJj  iriinjupot,  prayed  to  Bonaa.  The  fl«t
of  Xenea  wa*  Kon  afterwarda  'deatnyed  by  a
north  wind,  near  Cape  Sepia*,  and  the  gnUeflil
Athenian!  erected  to  hii  honour  a  temple  on  the
banka  of  the  Iliaana.  But  conaidering  that  Boreal
waa  in^mntely  connected  with  the  early  hiitory  of
Atlia,  aioce  he  ii  aaid  to  have  carried  aS  and
married  Orcilbya,  daughter  of  Erechlheu  (Herod.
L  a.  i  Paua.  L  19.  S  G\  and  that  he  waa  fuuiUai  to
them  nnder  the  name  of  bnOttr-ix-icaii,  we  hara
reaaon  to  tuppoae  that  even  pievioua  to  the  Penion
won  certain  bonoun  were  paid  to  him,  which  were
perh^a  talj  revived  and  increoaed  after  the  e*«K
locorded  by  Herodotui.  The  ieatival,  however,
doea  nut  aaem  ever  Co  have  had  any  great  celebrity  ;
for  Plato  (,Plaedr.  p.  229)  lepreaenta  Phaedna  aa
nnacqnainted  even  with  the  lite  of  the  temple  of
Aiieai.  Paiticulara  of  thia  festival  are  not  known,
except  thai  it  was  relBbnI«d  with  hanqaeta.

Pannniai  (viii  36.  %  i)  menliona  a  feitivil  cele-
brated with  annual  ucri£ca  at  Megalopolii  in
honour  of  Boreaa,  who  wai  thought  to  have  been
their  deliverer  from  tbe  Laccdaemoniana,  (Comp.
Aelian,  C./f.  lil  61.)

Aelian  (t.  e.)  aayi  that  the  Thuriaaa  aln  offered
on  annual  aucnSca  to  Boreas,  becauae  he  had  d»-
ilroyed  the  fleet  with  which  Diooyaiua  of  Syi»-
cuae  attacked  them  ;  and  addi  tbe  cunoua  remark,
that  a  decree  waa  made  which  bestowed  upon  him
the  right  of  citixenahip,  and  aaaigoed  to  him  a
house  and  a  piece  of  land.  This,  however,  ia  per-
bapi  meitly  another  way  of  eipreaaing  the  met,
that  the  Thuiiant  adopted  the  wonhip  of  Sanaa,
end  dedicated  to  him  a  temple,  with  a  piece  of
land.  [La]

BOULE'  (SopAli),  a  delibenta  aaaemUy  ot
council.  In  the  heroic  ogea,  represented  to  ua  by
Homer,  the  jSovX!^  ia  aimply  an  aiiatocratical
council  of  tbe  nobles,  aittizig  under  thctr  king  aa
pceaident,  who,  however,  did  not  poaaeaa  any  gieatei
authority  than  the  other  membera,  except  wut  that
poaition  gave  him.  The  noblci,  thui  aaaemblod,
decided  on  public  butinea*  and  judicial  mallera,
frequently  in  connection  with,  but  apparently  not
ntbject  tov  nor  of  ncceaaity  controlled  by,  an  ifofi,
or  meeting  of  the  buemen  of  the  atate.  (,11  iL  £3,
U3,  xviiL  503,  Od.  iL  239.)  Thia  form  of  aorem-
ment,  thotigb  it  existed  for  some  time  in  the  Ionian,
Aeolian,  and  Achaean  itates,  was  at  last  wholly  abo-
liihed.  Amongst  the  Dorian*,  however,  apeeially
with  the  Spartaaa,  thla  was  not  the  caae  ;  for  it  ia
well  known  that  they  retained  the  kbgly  power  of
the  Hencleidac,  in  conjunction  with  the  yrpouaia
[OasouauJ,  or  aisembly  of  eldcra,  uf  which  the
kings  were  members.  At  Athens,  ^ere  were  two
conncila,  one  usually  called  the  Artiopagiu  from
ita  meetins  on  Che  bill  of  Axes  (4  '>'  'Apai^i  liytf
0«iA4),  whicb  was  more  of  an  sristocratical  cha-
TBder,  and  ia  apoken  of  under  AaiioPAOua,  and
tbe  other  called  Tie  CcameS  or  Samtt  ^  lit  Pin
Hmadrtd  (4  rai  TnrraitBctiir  Bmi^-fl),  or  simply
Tie  Caacil  or  Saiait  (4 0avM), which  was  a


310


BOULE.


nprcKOitBtire,  and  in  meat  retp«eta  a  popular  body
(AifurTwdr).  It  ii  of  tlie  latter  coimcil  that  the
Moving  uticla  treats

It*  Ent  inB^tntioQ  ii gmuallj  attribnted  to
Solon. There  aie,  bowerer,  ittong  reuonifor  mp-
posing  that,  ai  in  tba  oua  of  tiie  sniopBgiu,  hs
merelj  modified  the  conilitntion  of  a,  bodj  which
he  foond  already  eiiiting. Id  the  Gnt  pkcs  ''  '-
improbaUe,  and  in  &ct  almart  inconiiilait
(he  ei)stenc«  of  any  goremment,  ojicept  an  abso-
hite monarchy, to  lUppoM tliat there wu  do
nch council. Betides thit, Herodotn*  (t.71)
tellt  sa  that  b  the time  of  Cjlon  (b.  C  6^"
Athena  waa  tmder  the  direction  of  the  pmidi
of  llie Nanemiei  (vavKpoflai), the  numbei
vliich  waa  fiirtjr-aglit,  ttrelre  out  of  each  of  the
ffani  liibes. Uammx,  we  read  of  the  aac  of  thi


that  Iiagoraa,
c  party  at  Atheni,  endea-
Touien  to  Bnppreu  ine  council,  or  ^uA^,  which
Oeiithenei  had  taiaed  to  600  in  number,  and  to
mt  the  gOTenuneitt  in  the  handi  of  300  of  hia
own  parly.  (Herod,  t.  72  ;  Plat  Soi.  12.)  This,
■i  TliirlwaU  {Hit.  of  Gtho,  toL  ii.  p.  41)  n~
marki,  aa  IianUy  have  heen  a  chance  coincidence ;
and  he  alio  >nggati  that  there  may  huve  been  two '
eooncili,  one  a.  emsUer  body,  like  the  Spartan
ytpovffia,  and  the  other  a  general  usembly  of  the
Eupatrida  ;  thna  correaponding,  one  to  tho  aetuitna,
tile  other  to  the  comitia  cnrista,  or  aaiemlily  of  the
bnrghera  at  Rome.  But  be  Ihia  ai  it  may,  it  it
admitted  that  Soion  made  l?ie  number  cf  hit  fiouA^
400,  tailing  the  memben  from  the  three  firatcluaea.
100  from  each  of  the  four  tribei.  On  the  tribee
being  remodelliid  by  Cleiathenee  (b.c510),  and
nuied  to  ten  in  nnmber,  the  council  alio  wu  in-
creaied  to  £00,  Slly  being  token  from  e«ch  of  the
ten  tribes.  It  ii  doubtful  whether  the  P<m\rvnd,
m  councillon,  were  at  Erat  appointed  by  lot,  at
they  were  afterward*  ;  bnt  oa  it  ia  alated  to  have
been  Sobn'*  wiah  to  moke  the  PmKii  a  reatraint
upon  the  people,  and  a*  he  ia,  mareorer,  aoid  to
hare  choien  (twAtf/iiiimi,  Pint.  SoL  19)  100
member*  fmm  each  of  the  tribea,  it  aeema  reaaon-
able  to  auppoao  that  ifaey  were  etuclerf,  mere  eape-
01811?  when  then  ia  no  endence  to  the  contrsir.
(ThiHwall,  ToL  Ii.  p.  12.1  It  it  at  my  rate  cer.
taio  that  an  election,  when  the  enpatridt  might
hare  naed  infinence,  would  hare  been  more  &rour-
able  to  8o!on^  liewa,  than  on  appointment  by  lot.
But  whateTcr  wa*  the  practice  originally,  it  it  veil
known  that  the  appointment  woa  in  after  timet
mode  by  lot,  ai  la  indicated  by  the  titie  (si  Airi
tdC  Kuvioo  ptniKarriil),  aoggeited  by  the  nae  of
beana  in  drawing  the  W  (Thnc  viii  89.)  The
individualj  thut  appcdnted  were  required  to  aubniit
to  a  aerutiny,  or  Ssmfuurlci,  in  which  they  gxTe
eridence  of  being  genuine  dtutent  {yrtivun  4i
ilipoii),  of  nerer  having  lort  their  dvic  tighta  by
iiiinia,  and  alao  of  tieing  above  30  yean  of  age.
They  remained  in  office  for  a  year,  receimg  a
drachma  (jua^t  PovKtirriKit)  for  esch  day  on
which  they  tat:  and  independent  of  the  general
aecounC,  or  tieirai,  which  the  whole  body  had  to

E've  at  the  end  of  the  year,  any  aingle  member  waa
ible  to  erpultion  for  miaconduct,  by  hi*  coUeagnei:
(Harpocr.  a.  e.  'ZnfiitAoipcpia  ;  Aetch.  e.  Tiaarti.
f.  IS,  43,  ed.  Sleph.)

Thi*  tenale  of  SOO  wsi  divided  into  ten  tectiona
tt  Mty  each,  the  mnuben  of  which  were  called


BOULE.
pTjIaati  (wfurirta),  and  wen  all  of  tha  KOt

tribe  ;  th^  acted  a*  pteaidenii  both  of  the  cancil
and  the  astembljei  doling  36  or  S6  day^  ■  the
caae  might  be,  ao  at  to  oomiilete  the  Inuar  nr  ot
3S4  daya  (12  ■  29}).  Each  tribe  tmaad  Diae
fimctiona  in  turn,  and  the  period  of  office  wai  ollpd
a  Prylaiis  (Tpvrartia).  The  tnm  of  eacb  tnlxi
wai  determined  by  lot,  and  the  fonr  aapernunMniry
dayi  were  given  to  the  tribe*  which  came  tut  In
order,  (Clmton,  f.Zf.  voL  iL  p.  34S.)  Afoceovs,
to  obviate  the  diffieolty  of  b*Ting  too  man;  In
office  at  once,  every  fifty  waa  tabdivided  into  En
bodiei  of  ten  each  ;  It*  ptytany  alto  being  poRiansd
out  into  five  peric^  of  teren  dayi  each  -.  to  that
only  ten  aenatm  preilded  for  a  week  over  the  mt,
and  were  tboice  called /Vii«ifri(ir|iJtt^).  Agiio,
oat  of  Ibeae  proedri  an  EpiitaUi  (irurriinn)  waa
chotm  fH  every  day  in  the  week  to  preiide  a*  m
chairman  in  the  senate,  and  the  aaaembly  rf  the
people  ;  during  hi*  day  of  office  he  kept  the  pub-
lic recotdt  and  teaL

The  prytanei  had  the  right  of  conrenbg  tbe
council  and  the  aaaembly  (iniAtitia).  The  duty
of  the  poedri  and  their  preudent  waa  la  ptopote
tubjecta  ti»'  ditenitlon,  and  to  take  the  tMea  boA
of  the  conncilliHi  and  the  people  g  toi  neilKt  of
their  duty  they  were  liable  to  ■  fine.  (Dem.  e.
Tttmer.  p.  703—707.)  Moreover,  whenever  a
meeting,  either  of  the  council  or  the  aaaembly,
waa  convened,  tho  chairman  of  the  proedri  tclected
by  lot  nine  olhen,  one  from  each  of  the  non-.pre-
aiding  tribet :  theae  alto  were  called  prrwdri  and
poaaeaaed  a  ehurman  of  their  own,  likewiae  ap-
pointed by  lot  from  among  thcmtelvea.  On  their
funcliona,  and  the  probable  object  of  their  appoint-
ment, eome  remariti  an  made  in  the  latlar  part  of
thit  article.

We  now  proceed  to  tpenk  of  the  dotie*  of  th«
tenatea*  a  body. It  it  obaerved  under  the  Aauo-
FAG  ca  that  the  chief  object  of  Sidon  in  lonning  ths
tcnate  and  the  areiopigui  wai  to  oootrol  the  de-
mociatical  power*  of  the  itBte ; for  tbia  pnrpo*B
Solon  ordiuiwd  that  the  aenate  thonld  diiciua  and
vote  upon  all  mattert  before  they  were  mbinitted
to  the  aaaembly,  ao  that  nothing  coold  be  laid  be-
fore the  people  on  which  tbe  tcnate  had  not  come
to  a  prerioua  decision. Thi*  deciaion,  or  bill,  waa
called  Probotdevna  (vpo^o^fv^),  and  if  the  aa-
aembly had  been  obliged  either  to  acquieacc  in  any
~  :h  proparition,  or  to  gain  the  consent  of  the  eenata
their  tnodiEcatlon  of  it,  the  aaaembly  and  tb«
mta  would  then  hnvo  been  almoat  equal  p
tbe  ilate,  and  neariy  related  to  each  oti
r  two  housea  of  puliiunenL But  betides  ana
,  ion  of  adapting  or  rejecting  a  w^CoiAaafUt, or
if^f 'irfa  aa  it  wat  lomelime*  called,  the  peopla
poaaeaaed  and  eieniaed  the  power  of  earning  to  a
decirion  completely  different  Erom  the  will  rf  the
i,  aa  exprened  in  the  rpolaiKiiiiia, Thna  in
matters  relating  topeace  and  war,  and  crnifederacica,
waa  the  duty  of  tbe  aenatore  to  wateh  over  tho
itereata  of  the  state,  and  they  coold  initiate  wbat-
rcr  meaaurei,  and  coma  to  whatever  resolutiniia
in  misht  think  neceaaary  ;  bat  on  a  diaeuBsiait
efore  uie  people it  wna  competent  fiv  any in-
diridnal  to  move  a  diffisrent  or  even  conCnary  pro-
tion. To  take  an  example :  —  In  the  EDbonta
(&  c  350),  in  which  the  Thebani  woe  oppoBpd
:be  Athenian*,  the  aenate  voted  that  all the
caTsIiy  in  tbe  city  should  be  lent  oat  to  aaaist  tbe
forc«a  then  besieged  nl  Tamyiae  ;  a  wpaCirfAa  waa*


BOCI&

et  WM  fnpottd  to  the  ftofit,  tut  tlwf
U  til*  canJij  won  not  noted,  loii  the
WH  BOt  nDdenaken. Olber  initsiKe*
■t  Ikii  ktad  nocor  in  Xoupluio. (HaO.  L  7.  S

Ib  BiUitiiB  lo  tin  bill*  which  it  wu  tlw  duty  of
Ik  male  tspnpDie  b[  their  own  ■ecmi,  thne  wen
■then  of  ■  diffennt  chftittctcr,  til,  loeh  u  vij
pritM*  ^dindnal  might  wiih  to  liBTe  nihmitted  to
tk  poofli.  To  MC^^iih  this  it  wh  Gnt  nceea-
^7  f)r  tba  pu^  I*  oMrin,  b;  pedtiim,  the  fvin-
kfc  af  Mcaoi  (•  tbo  mala  {wftaalQi'  ypi^aa^),
ol  ban  to  prnpoM  hii  motun  ;  and  if  the  mea-
tmw  Hct  witb  thctr  kppnbatioa,  he  could  then
nkst  it  to  tha  vwinbl;.  (Dam.  a.  Timoer.  p.
iISl)  pnponli  of  thii  kii^  which  h&d  the
HMliB  of  tt*  Kiiate,  woe  «]io  edlad  rpaSmAti.
^■n,  lad  bnquaitlj  nUled  to  the  cnifeiTiiig  of
•MM  ^ttirwhr  hooonr  or  prinlege  upon  an  indi'
tMmL  Tboi  the  inpial  of  Ctcuphon  for  crown.
■f  DMHlhfM  ii  »  i^Ied,  SI  bIm  that  of  Arit-
titaum  te  eanfariBg  eitnoidinBrj  pnTilesea  on
ChaJJimu^  an  Athoiian  commander  in  Thiace.
JiMT  aaaiue  of  thii  Mtt,  which  wu  thai  approTed
«f  bftlMaaMrtaiWatbeo  nibmitted  to  the  piwple,
lad  br  tktm  RDpl;  adoptad  or  rejected  ;  and  "  it
■  ■  no*  and  wnhT  caica,  that  the  italemsct  of
the  goMBBarian*  it  true,  that  no  law  or  meaiure
«u  W  prtamled  f«  ratification  bj  the  peo^B
withaM  the  pTETisai  B|mTobation  of  the  tenale,  bj
wkidh  it  •anmed  the  fonn  of  a  dean  paued  by
, Dt  Camitiit, p.  10^


In  the  BWtniMy  the  tnll  of  the  Knate  waa  flnt
nad,  peclMfa  \fj  the  cticr,  tlta  the  intnidactorf
;  Btid  then  the  pnedri  put


tn.  (Ari*lap)).n«;a90.)  The  peoplo  dcdand  their
■S  bf  a  (haw  of  hamU  (iifoxttparBtla).  Some-
taB^  bBwenr,  the  bill  waa  luit  picfwBed  and  ei-
fkaed  by  laie  of  the  pnedri,  bat  by  a  prirala  m-
dtTidaal — either  the  original  applicant  for  leara
l>  btBC  &»ward  the  meaamc,  or  a  lenator  diltin-
paAnA  fo  aatodca]  power,  Eiamplei  of  ihia
■•  gt«  bf  BchnDMin  (£■■  Oml  p.  106,  tnuiiL).
Jftki  ■yaMkAfUi  of  the  lenBte  wse  rejected  by
the  peifie,  it  wai  of  cnme  anil  and  Toid.  Ifithap-
peocd  tkt  it  wai  nettber  eouGrmed  nor  rejected,
ii  waa  iminttK,  that  ii,  only  remained  in  ibne
iaihg  tke  jvar  the  aenate  »a«  in  office.  (Dem.
(■  Arit.  f.  Ul.)  If  it  waa  cnofinned  it  becanie  a
*t>i«ya,  «  decree  of  the  people,  bindiag  upon  all
(hiaaca.  Tb«  Ibnn  for  dnwing  up  anch  decreei
nried  im  diflereut  agea.  Before  the  aichonthip  of
P»rieid(a  (a.  c.  403),  they  were  generally  htaded
by  iIm  tank— "£)•(<  tj  3»A^  mlr^A^:


Ae  ill!  II II  wna  paiaed  ;  then  the  naraea  at  the
Tf^ifimrw^  ir  laibe,  and  chaifman ;  and  laatij  that
■f  the  aatfcia  of  the  naohitiiHi.  Example*  of  thia
fmi  Kiev  ia  Andoeidea  {Dt  MgM.  p.  13) :  thu—
"Oae*  *f  0a»*f  ml  Tf  S4fi^  Aiorrlj  irpBniHH,

tmif^'l  nrtjpm^.  (Conn.  Tboc.  it.  118.)
fnm  the  archondiip  of  EDcleidca  till  about  B.  c

aw'hau  ;  then  codm  the  day  of  the  nHrath,  the  tribe
m  Ae,  and  httly  the  uuae  of  the  pnpoin'.  The
■atiie  far  paanng  the  decn-e  ia  next  ataled  ;  uod
ihas  ^hnri  the  deene  ilael^  Fn:Aced  with  tha


BOL'LB.  511

Ibnnnhi  SMxhi  rf  ^uA^  koI  if  Hiur.  The
Roder  ia  referred  lo  Demoalhonei,  De  Omnu,  for
enuopln.  Afters,  c  S2i,  another  form  waa  nied,
which  continued  unaltered  till  tha  laleat  tiona.
(SchSmann,  p.  136,  tronal}

Hention  hu  jual  been  made  of  the  7pafi/«n't£i,
whote  name  wu  alBied  to  the  ifnt^io-furro,  aa  in
the  exampls  giien  abora.  He  waa  a  cleik  choien
by  let  by  tha  leoate,  in  every  prytany,  for  the  pur-
pnae  of  keegHog  the  leoocda,  and  rctolutioni  pa«*ed
during  that  period ;  be  waa  called  the  clerk  ac-
cording to  the  piytany  (A  jcari  w/Hrrqnlop),  and
the  nama  cf  the  cleric  of  the  Giit  prytany  waa
•onietimca  need  to  deaignate  the  year.  (Pollux,
Tiii.  SB  i  BtkJth,  PmiL  Earn.  ^  Allmt,  p.  196,
2nded.)

With  leapeet  to  the  pows  of  the  acoate,  ii  aiiut
be  dearly  undentood  that,  except  in  caaea  of  amali
importance,  they  had  ady  the  light  of  ohgiiiatiiig,
not  of  finally  dociding  on  public  queationa.  Since,
howcTBr,  the  aenaton  were  conveocd  by  the  pcy-
tanea  every  day,  except  on  fcttivala  or  ir^rrrot
illiipai  (Pollux,  TJil  96),  it  it  obTJoiia  that  they
Tfoold  be  fit  recipienta  of  nny  inteUig^eace  affect-
ing the  intcnala  of  the  ilate,  and  it  i*  admitted
that  they  had  the  right  of  piopoaing  any  meaaura
to  meet  the  emergency  ;  for  example,  we  find  that
Demoathenca  giiet  them  an  account  of  the  conduct
of  Aeachinea  and  hiouelr,  when  lent  out  aa  ambaa-
■adora  to  Philip,  m  coruequeiice  of  which  they  wo'
poae  a  bill  to  the  people.  Again,  when  Philip  aeiaed
on  Elateia  (e.  c  it:Sti),  the  semits  waa  immediately
called  together  by  the  prytanen  lo  detenainB  what
waa  beat  to  be  done.  (Dem.  £>t  FaL  Ltg.  p.
346,  Di  Cor.  p.  set.)  But,  beiidsa  paeaeaiiog  the
initiatory  power  of  which  we  have  apoken,  the
■enate  waa  lamelimea  delegated  by  the  people  to
detemuDB  abaolnlely  about  particniar  mattcra,  with-
out reference  to  the  asiembly.  Thua  we  era  told
(Dem.  D*  FaL  Lig. -p.  3S9)  that  tha  iieapla  gare
the  aenate  power  to  decide  abonl  aending  ambaa-
ladora  to  Philip  ;  and  Andoeidea  (n<pl  VLvtntf-
pit^i)  infbrma  ui  that  the  aenate  waa  inTotcd
with  abaolnte  anlhcntj  (i|r  yif  (UVroupdrop),  to
invaligale  the  outn^ea  committed  upon  the  atatuea
of  Hermea,  pieTjoualy  lo  the  Ailing  of  the  Sicilian
eipeditioo.

Sometime*  alao  the  aenate  waa  empowered  to
act  in  eoDJtmction  witb  the  nomolhelae  (ovtm-
liatrTtai),  a*  en  Che  reriuon  of  the  lawa  after
the  eipulaion  of  the  Thirty  by  Thnuybului  and
hii  party,  B.  c  403.  (Aadoc.  Dt  MgH.  p.  12  ;
Don.  A  Timocr.  p.  708.)  Moreorer,  it  waa  tha
proriBce  of  the  acnale  to  leceiTe  tlacrftftdai,
iofoima^Dna  of  extTaoidioaiy  Crimea  comn '
ogainit  the  Btote,  and  for  which  there  wat  no  nie-
cial  law  piDTtdcd.  The  aenate  in  each  (aaea  either
decided  themtelTCB,  oc  referred  the  caie  to  one  of
the  eouru  of  the  hdiaee,  eapecially  if  they  thought
it  required  a  higher  penalty  than  it  waa  competent
fat  tliem  to  impote,  tIe.,  600  drachmae.  It  waa
alao  their  duty  to  dedda  on  the  qnalification  of
■tale*,  and  the  chancta  of  members  of  their
body.  But  beaidea  the  dutiea  we  haTo  ena-
mented,  tha  aenale  dtachorged  important  functiona


AUlc


deed,  in  BDch  inattera  reated  with  tha  people,  the
amonnt  of  expenditure  and  the  aouieea  of  revenue
being  determined  by  the  decree*  which  they
paaaed  \  but  the  adininiatratioD  waa '  entmated  to
the  aenOf,  aa  the  execnti?e  power  of  the  atata.


«nd  mponrifals  ((nMwai)  to  the  people.  Tbni
Xcnophan  {De  Rep.  Ath.  iiL  3)  telli  lu  that  the
•eoatfl  vu  cxcnpifld  with  providing  mone^,  with
receiTins  tha  tribute,  and  with  tfaa  management  oT
naval  afliun  and  the  l<mple>  ;  and  Lyaii*  (a.
Nkom.  p.  1B5)  makea  the  folloiring  remark:  —
"  When  the  aenate  ha*  anfficieat  mane;  for  thi
■dmiuiimiion  of  aKn,  it  dou  nothing  tnx/ag ;
but  when  it  ii  in  want  o(  fiuida,  it  leceivei  in
fbrmadona,  and  confijcaUi  the  property  of  thi
dtiKm."  The  letting  of  the  datiea  (Tthtnvi)  wai
al»  under  id  luprnntendence,  and  thoH  vhi
were  in  poaBeaDon  of  any  sacred  or  pnblie  moneya
(If|»  nil  Ikria)  were  bound  to  pay  tfaem  into
the  ■cnatB-hooie  ;  and  ia  debnlt  of  saymcnt,  the
aenate  bad  the  power  of  enforcing  il,  in  conlbmiity
with  the  lawi  for  the  &nnuig  of  the  datiea  {il
T4Awu[ol  r6iiet).  The  acconnta  of  the  moneyi
that  had  been  receited,  and  of  thou  itill  re-
maining due,  were  delivered  to  the  aenata  by  the
^ritdeetae,  or  public  trcaaurera.  [ApODECTAik]
"  The  aenato  arranged  a]»  the  application  of  the
public  money,  pven  in  tri£ing  matten,  mch  ai  the
aalaiy  of  the  poeti  j  the  Hiperiatcndence  of  the
ravalty  maintained  by  the  nale,  and  the  ex-
amination of  the  infirm  {iHn/ariii]  lupporlAd  by
the  itate,  aie  paiticulaily  mentioned  among  iti
dntiei  j  the  public  debta  were  alao  paid  under  iti
dirpotion.  From  thU  enumeration  we  are  justified  in
iliferring  that  all  questiona  of  finance  were  confided
to  it!  lupreme  regulation."  (Bikkh,  Pidil.  Eam,
^  Alkaa,  p.  164,  2nd  ed.)  Another  veiy  im-
portant duty  of  the  lenaton  wai  to  lake  care  that
a  certain  number  of  triremes  wai  bnilt  every  year,
fa  which  pnrpcae  they  were  lupplicd  with  money
by  the  itate  ;  in  de&ult  of  »  doing,  they  were  not
allowed  to  claim  the  honour  of  wearing  a  crown,
at  chanlet  (rr^^oHi),  at  the  eipiialion  of  their
year  of  office. {_Afg.  On^  ».  AitdnC)

It  hai  been  already  atated  that  there  were  two
ekaaei  or  leti  of  pcoedri  in  the  aenate,  one  of
which,  amounting  to  tan  in  number,  belmged  U
the  presiding  tribe ;  the  other  consisted  of  nine,
chosen  by  lot  by  the  chairman  of  the  prevding
poedri  &om  the  nine  non-pmidiDg  tribe^  one
from  each,  ai  often  aa  either  the  KUato  or  the  peo-
ple were  conveaed.  It  must  be  remembered  that
they  were  not  elected  as  the  other  proedri,  for
MTcn  dayi,  but  only  for  sa  many  hours  si  the
aeasioD  of  the  senate,  or  meeting  of  (he  people,
lasted.  Now  it  hai  been  a  question  what  were
the  respective  duties  of  these  two  classes  \  but  it
■ppcan  clear  to  us  that  it  was  the  proedri  of  the
fr^dag  niba  who  proposed  to  the  people  in
assembly,  the  anbjecu  for  ditcossion  ;  redled,  or
caused  to  be  recited,  the  pievioui  bill  (irpoCo^
Xri^)  of  the  senate  ;  officiated  as  presidents  in
conjunction  with  their  trvrriirt)},  or  duuirnan,  and
discharged,  in  fiict,  all  the  functions  implied  by  the
words  xpij/iorl^cfr  rp&s  t^v  t^^f.  Fcr  ample
arguments  in  support  of  this  opinion  the  reader  is
referred  to  Schumann.  (0s  Com.  p.  83.  Uansl.)
Il  does  indeed  appear  friun  decrees  furnished  by
inicriptions,  and  other  anthoritioi,  that  in  lator
time  the  proedri  of  the  «■<  tribes  exerciKd  lotne
of  those  functions  which  the  orations  of  Demoa-
thenes,  and  his  contempraariei,  justify  us  in  assign-
ing to  the  proedri  of  the  piesiding  tnhe.  It  muat,
however,  t«  nmarked  that  all  soch  decreci  were
paned  after  ii.c.  308,  when  there  were  twelve
tribe* ;  and  that  we  oauno^  &om  the  practice  of


BOULE.

thoae  days,  anive  at  any  candnsinni  tebliire  to  lb*
CDitoms  of  fonner  ages.

Jf  it  is  asked  whM,  then,  were  the  duties  of  these
proedri  in  earlier  timeo,  the  answer  must  be  in  a
□jectural  ; but  the


SchOmi


obaenet  that  the  prylanes  had  extensive  and  ha-
portont  dutie*  entrusted  to  them  ;  that  they  wen
al!  of  one  tribe^  and  therefore  closely  connected  ;
Uiat  they  officiated  for  35  days  as  pmidenta  of  the
representatives  of  the  other  tribes  ;  and  that  they
had  ample  opportumties  of  combining  for  the  bene-
fit of  their  own  tribe  at  the  expense  of  the  commu-
nity. To  prevent  this,  and  watch  their  conduct
wfaenerar  any  bnainesa  was  brought  before  the
senate  and  aaanubly,  may  have  bean  the  reason  fi»r
^^lointin^  by  lot,  nine  other  quasi-presideDta,  re-
presentatives of  the  neo-presiding  tribes,  who  would
protest  and  iuterfen^  ot  ^>pn>Te  and  sanction  as
they  might  think  fit.  SujqxisiDg  thi*  to  have  been
the  object  of  their  aj^minbnent  in  the  fiiat  instance
it  il  easy  to  sea  how  they  might  at  last  hare  been
united  with  the  proper  proedri,  in  the  perfonnanca
of  dutiea  originally  appnpriated  to  the  latter.

In  connectioi  with  the  proedri  we  meet  with
the  expression  4  wpof^^nMra  ^vX^.  Onr  in-
fDrmaUon  on  this  subject  is  derived  Irom  the  speech
of  Aeschinei  against  Timoichua,  who  infotm*  ua,
that  in  consequence  of  the  unseetnly  conduct  of
Timorchns,  on  one  occasion,  before  the  asimnhlj,
a  new  law  was  passed,  in  virtue  of  which,  a  tribe
was  chosen  by  lot  to  keep  «der,  and  tit  ai  presi-
dents under  the  S^^io,  or  platform  on  which  the
orators  stood.  No  rcmurk  w  made  on  the  subject
to  warrant  us  in  sopposlng  that  senator*  only  were
elected  to  this  office  ;  it  seems  more  probable  that
a  certain  number  of  penoni  was  chosen  from  the
tribe  on  which  the  lot  had  fitllcn,  and  commiiuoncd
to  sit  along  with  the  prytane*  and  the  [svedri,  and
that  they  assisted  in  keeping  order.  We  may
hen  renuu^  that  if  any  of  the  speaker*  (^<)td^i)
misconducted  themselves  either  in  the  senate  oi
the  assembly,  or  were  guilty  of  any  act  of  violence
to  the  h-iimtnii,  after  the  breaking  up  of  either,
the  proedri  had  the  power  to  inflict  a  snnuuaiy
fine,  or  bring  the  matter  before  the  i  '
"'atther


■asemhly  al


[t  mooting,  if  they  thought  l)i«


The  meetings  of  the  lenato  were,  as  we  lesun
horn,  various  pasaages  of  the  Attic  oratora,  afea  to
ittanger*  ;  thus  Demonhenes  {£■*  Fiii.  £^.  PL  346)
says  that  the  senate-bonsa  wa^  on  a  articular  oc-
casion, full  of  stiangen  (fuirrbii  %r  auermt)  :  in
Aeschine*  (a  Ctu.  p.  71.  SO)  we  read  of  a  motioa
"  that  itrangen  do  withdraw  "  (/wrarniir^rumr
ToiiCii^at,  Dobree,J<fiierT.vol.Lp.£12).  Nay,
priraU  individuals  were  sometimei,  by  a  special
decree,  authorised  (o  come  forward  and  give  a(Ivic«
to  the  senate.  The  senate-bonse  was  called  i-k
^uXtvr^puv,  and  contained  two  chapels,  one  of
Z«i;t  ^biAbuu,  another  of  'Afti))«  wuAofo,  in
which  it  woa  cnstomaiy  iat  the  senator*  to  offer
up  certain  [akyers  befon  procoeding  to  buaineaa.
(Antiph.  D»  Ckor.  p.  7S7.)

The  faytanei  alio  had  a  building  to  hold  tlieir
meeting*  in,  where  they  were  entertajned  at  tho
public  expense  during  their  prytany.  Thia  was
called  the  rpvrai/tlov,  and  was  used  for  a  variety
of  purpose*.  [Pmvt*n«ion.]  Thucydidoa  (ii_
16),  indeed,  tolls  us  that  before  the  time  of  Tfae~
itv*  every  city  of  Attica  had  ita  ^NAsirwiar  amd


BKASIDEIA.


213


:  306,  wben
DnRriu  Poliorctta  hoj  libentid  the  dl;  from
the  nmrpatioB  of  Cunndcr.  Two  wen  then
added,  ud  olkd  DcradriM,  and  Antigoni*,  in
kmoBi  of  Demetriui  and  hii  Euher.  It  ii  cTidcnt
tin  thk  cbuige,  and  the  anueqiiait  ■ddition  oF
100  iBaBbfn  to  the  lenale,  mnit  hale  micd  the
iffder  and  length  of  the  pijtana.  Tbe  triba  juil
andaoed  wot  afcerwatdi  oiled  Ptolemau  and
Altalii ;  and  in  the  lime  of  Hadrian,  who  bean-
tifitd  and  unpnired  Atbou  (Pani.  I  Ifl.  %  6\  n
tbinKslh  wai  added,  called  fnim  him  Hadiianii.
An  edict  of  this  tnipeiDT  ha*  been  preaerred,  which
pnnca  that  eren  bi  hi*  time  the  Athenian!  kept  up
the  ibov  gf  their  ftnnei  inilitntjoni.  (Hennann,
Cfiri,  Staababalk.  g  126,  &c  ;  Schfimaiin,  De
Gm^iii  Aliaimium.)  [R.  W.]

BOULEU'SEOS  GRAPHE'  OouXttwMij
T^pff),  an  impeachment  fai  eonipiracy.  Emkii-
rmn,  being  in  ihii  oue  the  ahlnvriated  form  of
MnAtivut,  ii  tbe  name  of  two  widely  different

ti  fm^HTacjr  againat  life,  and  might  be  inatitaud


pam  (rifwi).  In  cue  of  the  plot  baring  tuc-
eecded,  the  deeeued  might  he  repreaented  m  the
^niLuiiiai  bj  Deu  kinamen  (oJ  irrii  ilmf  i^rirrat),
IT,  if  thej  wen  incompetent,  by  the  K&piot,  aa
ibne  Bentiooed.  (Heicr,v<a./'rDe.  p.  164.)  The
tinaiaalitjr  of  the  accuaed  w«i  independent  of  the
itaoll  el  tbe  coupinc;  (HupociaL),  and  the
poaltT.  npoa  eonTiction,  wu  the  Mma  aa  thai
waned  hf  tbe  actoal  monleRrB.  (Andoe.  D»
itjiL.f,  46.  S.)  The  pniidenej  of  the  court  upon
a  trial  of  thia  kind,  u  in  moat  Siiui  ^wfilcaf,  be-
laged  to  tbe  king  archaD  (Meier,  Att.  Proe,
f.  313),  and  the  coort  ilielf  wsa  compoaed  of  the
-r****—.  aittiDg  at  the  Palladium,  according  to
liaii  and  AnatolU,  Ba  cited  bj  Ilaipocnition,
vk^  howeier,  aiao  mentiona  ibnl  tbe  areiopagu)
i*  alated  bj  Deinaichua  to  have  been  the  proper

Tbe  Mhs  action,  fiatAtietm,  wu  BTailahle
■pea  a  penon  finding  himaelf  wrongfully  inacribed
»  a  (tale  debtor  in  tbe  regislen,  or  rolli,  which
wen  kept  bj  the  dliferent  fmanciul  officen.  Meier
(.J«/Voi:.pL33B),h.wcTer,.nggnU  that  a  ma-
giitcaae  tkat  had  lo  oSendcd,  would  probably  be
pucmdedagainatat  the  tM^,  or  tnxtifi/roiflai,
tbe  two  occaaiona  upon  which  the  public  conduct  of
- "~di  ao  Ihat  generally  the


IcriL  Fmn  the  |Aiaage  in  Demoathenei,  it  seenu
iaBhtSvi  wbe^ler  the  diaenfnzichiiemeDt  (dri^)
•(  the  [daintiff  aa  a  itate-debtor  «u  in  abeyance
■kiW  ^i>  actioii  wu  pending.  Dirooilhaiei
im  amat»  (k  AriMas.  L  p.  77S.  1 9),  hut  afti
™nla(pL792.1)or(pi«  that  it  wu  not  (See,
WwvTB-,  Ueier,  AH.  Proe.  p.  340,  and  BOckh-i
MB.)  Tbe  dininctioi)  between  thia  action  and
tba  Bmilar  one  feiiJcyypa^f,  ia  explained  imder
lb*  latter  title.  [J.S.M.]

BOULKUTE'RION.  [Bouli,  p.  212.  U}
BEACAE  or  BRACCAS  (IntupIBii),  tmi
Tbcw,u  well  u  nriooi  otb


aniclea  orannonr  and  of  drcn[AciKACis,ARCii^
Abhilla],  were  common  to  all  the  naliona  which
encircled  the  Greek  and  Roman  populatioD,  ex-
tending fnm  the  Indian  [o  [he  Atlantic  ocean.
Hence  Arittagonu,  king  of  Miletna,  in  hia  inler-
ith CleomeBel,  king  of  Sparta,  dficribpd


tofa


irgepo


1  of  then


ihort  Bpcor,  and  go
K>  uHiLiD  jD  uowaen  aoa  with  hata  tipon  their
headi."  (Heiod.  t,  49.)  Hence  alto  too  phiue
Braeeaii  militU  ama,  aignilying  [hat  thoae  who
wore  tmwien  weie  in  general  aimed  with  tbe
bow.  {Piopert  iiL  3.  17.)  In  peitirular,  we
an  informed  of  the  uae  of  tnwKii  or  panlaloon*
among  the  following  natiani:^the  Medea  and
Peniani;  the  PBrthiini;  the  Phrygian!;  the
Sacae ;  the  Saimatae ;  the  Daciant  and  Oelae  ;
the  Teutonn ;  tbe  Belgue ;  the  DriMna ;  and  the
Gaol.,

The  Latin  word  braaae  ia  the  lame  u  the
Scottiah  "  breekj  "  and  the  Engliah  "bieechea."
Coireiponding  tenni  are  tued  in  all  the  northern
kuiguagei.  Alio  the  Caaaack  and  Pcnian  trowKra
of  the  preaent  day  differ  in  no  material  reipect
&Dm  thoK  which  were  anciently  worn  in  the  aame
conntrica.  In  ancient  monumenU  we  find  the
aboTe-mcntioned  propli  conalantly  eihihited  in
(lowaen,  thu  clearly  diidnguiihing  them  from
Oroeki  and  Romaoa.  An  cuunple  ii  aeen  in  the
aimeied  gioi^  of  Saimatisna,  token  from  tbe  co-
lumn of  Tnjan.


^  probably  the  Aaiatici

were  atriped  (viiyalae,  Pnipert.  ir.  11.  43),  luid
ranamenled  ¥dlh  a  woof  of  ranoui  coloun  (TamlXat,
Xen.  AniJi.  i.  S.  S  8).  The  Greeks  aecm  never  to
hare  worn  them.  They  were  alio  unknnn-n  nl
Rome  during  the  republican  period  ;  and  in  i.  n.
69  Caecina  gaie  great  offence  on  hia  march  into
Italy,  became  he  wore  ^nucae,  which  were  re-
garded u  ttffma  barfanini.  (Tac  Hitt.  iL  2U.)
In  the  next  century,  bowerer,  ihey  gradually  came
into  nae  at  Rome  ;  but  they  would  ^ipear  aetcr  lo
have  been  generally  worn.  It  ia  recorded  of
Alexander  SeTetui  that  he  wore  white  braccae,
and  not  crimaon  one*  (ooaaiuiu),  u  had  been  the
coatom  with  preceding  emperon.  The  uae  of  them
in  the  city  wma  forbidden  bj  Hotutriu^  ( I^mprid,
Alex.  StBiir.  to.)  [J- Y.J

BBASIDEIA  I0fturtttu\  •  SMxnl  ceUbiautd


3U


bRauronia.


>t  Sparta  ta  honoar  nf  their  gnat  general  flnuidsii,
wfaci,  after  hu  death,  in  b.  c  42'J,  reui-  '  ■'-
honoun  oE  a  hero.  (Pan*,  iiu  14.  §  1 ;
Etk.  Nu.  T.  7.)  It  WM  held  cverj  jt
onttDM  and  contects,  in  which  none  hnt  Sportsiu
were  alloired  to  partake.

Braaidcia  were  aUo  celebialed  at  Amphip
which,  though  a  colon;  of  Alheni,  tranifrncd
honooi  of  KTlrrrrit  bom  Hagnon  to  Gnuidiu,
wai  buried  there,  and  paid  him  hemic  honoun  bj
«D annuAl fintiial with ucrificc*  and  conteiti.
(Thucrd.v.  11.)  [L.S.]

BKAUHO'NU  (Bpoipiria),  a  feitival  cele-
bnt«d  in  honour  of  Aileniii  Bmoronia,  in  the
Attic  town  of  BraDmn  (Herol  Ti.  13B),  where,
aecording  (0  Paaianiai  (i.  23.  §  9,  33.§l,iii.  IS.
g  6,  Tiii.  46.  §  2),  Onstei  and  Iphigeneia,  on  theii
tetnm  from  Tanrii,  were  luppoKd  by  the  Athcniani
to  have  landed,  and  trft  the  ttotue  of'  the  Toarian
goddeai.  (,»ce  MUller,  Dor.  i.  9.  %S  and  6.)  It
waA  held  every  fifih  year,  nnder  the  luperintend-
■ «oiol  (Pollui,  Tiii.  9, 31 )


lief  Hlom


ic  girli  between  the  agei  of  five  and  ten
yean,  drcued  in  crocui-colonied  gamenta,  went  in
ulemn  pniceuion  Co  the  nnctuary  (Suidu,  t,  n.
'ApKToi;  Schol.  on^rwMpi.  Zjnufr.  616),  where
thej  were  conteerated  to  the  goddeu.  Dunng
thii  act  the  Uporotol  locnfleed  a  goat  and  the
girlji  performed  a  propitiatoiy  rite  in  which  they
imitated  hetui.  Thii  rile  ma;  haie  ariuii  timply
from  the  circnmatnnce  that  the  bcnr  waa  aacrcd  to
Aitemii,  espcdallj  In  Arcadia  (Miillcr,  liar.  iL  9.
§  3)  i  bat  a  tisdition  preserved  in  Suidaa  (i.e.
'AiJKroi)  relates  ill  origin  ai  followi ;  —  In  the
Attic  town  of  Phanidae  a  boar  wai  Itcpt,  which
wnn  10  lame  that  it  wai  allowed  to  go  about  quite
frcelj,  and  received  ita  food  from  and  among  men.
One  6ay  a  girl  ventured  to  pla;  with  it,  and,  on
treating  the  animal  rather  hanhl;,  it  turned  round
and  lore  her  to  piccea.  Ilcr  brothcri,  enraged  at
thia,  went  out  and  killed  the  bear.  The  Athenisnt
now  were  viaited  by  a  plague  j  and,  when  they
conmlted  the  oiacle,  the  answer  wui  given  that
they  would  get  rid  of  the  evil  which  had  befiillcn
them  if  they  would  compel  tome  of  their  citiicna
to  make  their  daaghlera  propitiate  Artemis  by  a
rite  eaUed  ipimiiu',  far  the  crime  committed
a^init  the  animal  sacred  to  the  goddeu.  The
command  was  more  than  obeyed  ^  for  the  Athenians
decreed  that  from  thenceforth  all  women,  before
they  could  marry,  should  have  taken  part  once  in
thia  festival,  and  have  been  consccialod  to  the
f[oddeu.  Hence  the  giria  ihemselvea  were  called
ifKTBi,  the  consccnition  ipurtla,  the  act  of  con-
aecrating  lifWT(i«v,  and  to  celebrate  the  feibval
ifKTtiiirBai.  (Hesych.  and  Harpoctat.  i.  o. ;
Schol.  on  Aritb^A.  L  c)  But  aa  the  giria  when
they  cclcbniled  tbis  festival  were  nearly  ten  ycais
old,  the  verb  SfifttTfCiii'  was  aometimcs  need  in-
stead of  dpim^ir.  (ComrtC.  P.  Hermann,  J/of^A.
der  ffolUtdmuO.  AUertk.  g  62.  note  9.)

There  was  also  a  qninquennial  festival  called
Brauronla,  wbieh  was  celebrated  by  men  and  dis-
sidute  women,  at  Bnnron,  in  honour  of  Dionyans.
(Aiistoph.  Pax,  670,  with  the  note  of  the  Scho-
liast; and  Suidai  s.  c.  B,Hup<er.)  Whether  ita
celebration  look  place  at  the  nme  time  na  that  of
Arlemia  Branronia  (aa  has  been  auppaed  by
MUllor,  Dor.  iL  a.  I  S,  in  a  nolo,  which  has,  how-
ever, been  omitlcd  In  the  En^iA  tianiLilion j,  nnift


BREVIARinM.

remain  nncertoin,  although  the  very  diilerent  cha-
iBclen  of  the  two  feativalB  incline  us  rather  ta
believe  that  they  were  not  celebiated  at  the  tame
time.  According  to  Hesychitu,  whoie  statement,
however,  is  not  supported  byanjandent  authority,
the  Iliad  was  recited  at  the  Brauronisn  fealivnl  of
Dionystu  by  rhapsodiata.  (Comp.  HemaleA.  ad
Pnifaam,  ii.  7«  i  Wekker,  Dir  EpMie  Ct/du*,
p.  391.)  [L.S.)

BRCTI.VRIUM,  or  BREVIA'RIUM  ALA-
RICIA'NUM.  Alaric  the  Second,  king  of  the
V'isigotha,  who  reigned  bora  a.  D.  464  to  1.D.S07,
in  the  twentyiecondycarof  his  reign  (a.o.  fi06>
commissioned  a  body  of  jnrista,  proimbly  Romans,
to  make  a  selection  from  the  Roioan  lawa  and  the
Roman  law  writers,  which  should  lonn  a  code  for
the  use  of  his  Rotnan  aubjecta.  The  code,  when
made,  waa  conRmed  by  the  bishopi  and  nobiUty  at
Aduris  (Aire  in  Oascony) ;  and  a  copy,  signed  by
Anianua,  the  cefeiendanus  of  AUric,  waa  sent  to
each  comei,  with  an  order  to  nia  no  other  law  or
legal  fomi  in  his  court  (u/  vtjhro  (no  naJla  atiaUx
Htqmjarv/brmiiia  profirri  nil  reeipi  prnnmalur).
The  rignature  of  Anianua  waa  fu  the  pnrpoie  of
giving  authenticity  to  the  (dicial  copiea  o/the  code  ;
a  cinmmalance  which  hu  been  so  for  misunderalood
ihm  he  hoi  aometimes  been  considered  aa  the  com-
piler of  the  code,  and  it  has  been  called  Brtviarinm
Aniani.  Thia  code  has  no  pecnliar  name,  »  far
aa  wa  know :  it  was  called  Lex  Bomaua  Visi-
gothorum,  and  at  a  later  period,  frequently  Lex
Theodosii,  &om  the  tilla  of  the  first  and  moat  import-
ant part  i^  ita  content*.  The  nooie  Breviarium,  or
Breviarium  Alaricianom,  does  not  appear  before
the  sixteenth  centory.

The  fallowing  are  the  contoiti  of  the  BnTinrimii,
with  their  order  in  the  code:  —  1.  Codex  Theo-
doaiantis,  ivi  books.  2.  Novellae  of  Theodonus  ii,
Valcntinian  iii,  Maieian,  Majoiian,  Sevaui.  3.
The  lustituliona  of  Qaina,  ii  books.  4.  Paoli
Receptee  Santtntiac,  v  books.  6.  Codex  fhvgo-
rianus,  t  books.  6.  Codex  Hermt^emanua,  i
book. 7.  PapinianUB,  lib.  L  Responionun.

The  code  waa  thos  composed  of  two  kinds  of
materials,  imperio!  constitntioni,  which,  both  Id  tbe
code  itself  and  the  comraoijitorinm  or  notica  pre-
fixed to  it,  are  called  Ziigei ,'  and  the  writing!  of
Roman  juriita,  which  are  called  Jta.  Both  tha
Codex  Gr^orianni  and  Hcimagenianns,  being
compilationa  made  without  any  legal  authority,
an  included  under  the  head  of  Jua  The  selre-
liona  on  eitrncts,  which  aic  accompanied  tiiitli
an  inteipretatian,  except  in  the  case  of  the  In-
stitutions of  Gains  ;  aa  a  geneial  rule,  the  text,  sa
far  ns  it  was  adopted,  was  not  olltred.  The  InatU
tutions  of  Gains,  however,  ace  abridged  or  epito-
mised, and  such  alteia^ona  as  were  conaidered
neccstsry  for  the  time  an  introduced  into  tbe
text :  thia  iiort  of  the  woik  leqnired  no  inlecire-
tatlon,  and  accordingly  it  baa  none.  Tbo«  aii«
jnssages  in  the  epitome  which  are  not  taken  from
"aiua. (Oaiui,  iiL  127,  ed.  Ooeschen.)

Thia  code  is  of  considerable  value  fiff  thahistoiy
of  Roman  law,  as  it  oootaini  seretal  somcea  of  Iba
Roman  law  which  an  otherwise  QnkDown,  e^ent-
alty  Paoloa  and  the  five  firaC  books  of  tha  lW-
dofian  code.  Since  the  disoorery  of  tba  Instilii.
ticoi  of  Gains,  that  part  of  this  code  ■  of  loa

The  anthor  of  tha  EplonN  of  Gains  in  th»
Brariiriiiin  paid  little  atltaticu  to  ral^mng  llw


BUCCINA.
««di  tt  tke  Ensinal,  and  ■  cxnnpuiHii  of  the

^atDOM  and  tbe  11&  of  0*iu  k  thcKibra  of  little
iJtMiUge  in  tliii  point  of  riev.  The  Epitome  it,
htverov  rtin  nwfol  in  ihawina  tIiH  lobjecti  were
diKONHl  in  Guni,  (nd  tliiu  Slling  i^  (u  br  u
lit  muerial  ooDtoiti  In  cecccined)  nme  of  the
bcoBc  of  tbe  VcTon*  US.

A  (OBplcta  edition  of  thii  code  m*  pnblitbed
bi  Siehacd,  in  liii  Codex  Tlieodoiiuiiu,  Baulne,
lS38,ndl(blii>.  (Sdmlting,  Jun^inidatw  FoW


I,  1815  :  Julii  PaulU  Rt-
vfLSt^m.  Ub.  T.  ed.  Anidli,  Bonn,  1833  ;
Strignf ,  GoEMatft  iba  Sam.  Rm*U  im  MitUlaUtr.
0.  c  S  ;  fifidcii^  ImttiMiama,  L  90,  &c  ;  Ouiu,
Pntf^io  Primal  Ediiiom  PratmUit.) [O.  U]

BRUTTIA'NI,  lUiTet  vhow  dutr  it  na  to
■■it  Bfoa  the  Bomwi  nugialntei.  Thtj  are  nid
to  IwTe  been  onginallj  token  bom  unong  tliB
BimkiM,  betaue  thii  people  emtiaued  from  £nt
!•  ktf  bitkfnl  to  HumiU  (Fettiu,  t.e.  fntfiian;
GdL  X.  3)  ;  but  Niebolu  (Hut  ef  Sunt,  ml  iil
agte  9*t)  i*  dinoeed  to  think  that  IhcM  Kmnta
boR  thii  naiae  wng  before,  ainca  both  Sirabo  {ri.
f^SU)  iDd  Diodvu  (iri.  15)  lUta  tint  tliia  word
■fnified  renlted  ilaTee.

BU'CCINA  Ovuir*),  ■  kind  of  hom-lnimpet,
ac^rtlj  ivde  oat  of  ■  ibelL  It  !•  ikni  LippO;
diMiilnl  bj  Orid  (AfA  L  335):—

**  Can  bUEciiia  mnitui  itli
Totfli^  fai  latum  quae  toibine  aadt  ab  imo :
Boedna,  quae  in  medio  ccdiccpit  nt  aera  ponto,
Litma  voce  replet  nb  uuoque  jaeentia  Phoebo.*'

Tba  ouBcal  initniment  iwEna  oearl;  retembled
■  ifcapa  tb«  ahell  buiauim,  and,  like  it,  migbt
ihanrt  be  deKiibed  fnnn  the  aboTs  liaea  (in  the
l^oge  of  eoaebiilogiili),  at  ipiral  and  gifabou.
Tba  tws  diainugi  in  the  amiend  woodcnt  a^ree
with  thia  atcoont.  In  the  6nt,  taken  from  ■  fn»e
iBuBtjr^  Hitary  af  Mime,  toL  L  pi.  6),  the
'  ia  cnrred  fiir  the  coDToiieiice  of  the  per-

with  a  T(Tj  wide  moath,  to  difitue  and
'd  the  next,  a  eopj  of  an
from  BlanehiniH  work  (Dt

^p.ifi.pLa,ie),  ■

il  fbtm  of  the  tbell.


BULLA.


ais


made. In  later  tiniea  it  wat  arred  from  bom,

perhapa  Inrai  wood  or  metal,  »  ai  to  imitate

the  aheU. The  hmxima  waa  chief);  Died  to  pn>-

lim  the  watche*  of  ths  da;  (Seaee.  TJfeM,  798)

id  of  the  iu|!ht,  hence  called  bacdaa  prima,  tt.

auida,  Ac (Poljb.  liT.  3  [  Lit,  iiri.  15  ;  SiL

ItaL  TiL  164  ;  Propett.  ir.  i.  63  ;  Cie.  Pn  Mar.

9.) It  va*  alao  blown  at  faneiala,  and  at  feative

entotamment*  both  before  littiag  down  to  table

and  after. (Tacit  ^n.  tt.  SO.) Macrobini  (L  8)

tclU  ua  that  tritoni  holding  bmaae  were  fixed  on

the  roof  of  the  temple  of  SatunL

The  moaiciaii  who  played  t!w  bnaahia  wu  called
emaUtr.  [fl.  J.J

BULLA,  a  dieular  plate  ta  boa  of  metal,  bo
called  from  itt  reaembumce  in  fbim  to  a  babble
floaling  upon  water.  Blight  itnda  of  thia  deaerip-
''oD  were  mod  to  adorn  the  aword-belt  (oarm
liMt  cagiia,  Virg.  Ar*.  ii_  S£9  ;  bMiM  axp^
ihiKM,  Sid.  ApolL  Oarm.  2).  Another  lue  of
lem  wai  in  doora,  the  parte  of  which  were  tn-
med  together  by  bnu-headed,  or  even  b;  gold-
«ded  naili.  (Plant.  Attn.  iL  4,  QO ;  Cic  Verr.
I.  fiS.)  The  nu^inificent  bimze  doon  of  the
Paatheon  at  Rome  an  enriched  with  hlghlj  orna-
mented boMCi,  aeme  of  which  are  here  ihown.


ill)  maifciaiiili  |1  with  it. The  hoeciDa  iee
lata  beoi chieflf  diMJsgniahed  bj  the  twiited
faH  af  Ac  (bdl,  fna  wUch  it  waa  oripnally


We  moat  freqaend;  read,  bowerer,  of  bulla*  aa
onuunenta  worn  by  childr^  auapended  from  the
neck,  and  eapeeiall;  by  the  una  of  the  noble  and
wealthy.  Such  a  one  ii  called  AarM  Mbtaf  hy
JoTenal  (5U.  lir.  4).  Hii  bnlla  wai  made  of  thin
platei  of  gold.  Ita  niual  fimn  i>  thcwn  in  the
annexed  woodcot,  which  repneenta  a  fine  bulla
preaerred  m  the  Briti^  Moieum,  and  ia  of  tlia
ajva  of  the  originaL


Tbe  lue  of  the  bidia,  like  that  of  the  [useleila,
waa  deciTed  faun  the  Etnucana,  whence  it  ia
called  by  JnTenaI('r.  164)  (Hm  £lnwi«.  Il
waa  cuiginally  won  only  by  the  children  of  tbe
patiieiBna,  but  ubieqnentl J  by  all  *f  fice  binh  (Gift


Verr.  L  68)  ;  vliilc  children  of  &t  libeitiiii  wen
onlj  permitted  to  wear  an  anumi<nt  of  dia  nme
kind  mode  of  leather  (norfw  (oaten  el  •igmim  d*
paupen  ion.  Jut.  t.  165 ;  IJiertinH  teortta,  Aacan.
ad  Cic.L  c).  Tbe  bulla  wu  laid  aaide,  togetfaer
with  the  pnatcita,  and  ni  coucfnted  on  Ihii
occuiDn  to  the  Lues.  (Pera.  t.  SI.)  EianplM
of  boyi  represented  with  the  bulla  an  not  on&e-
quent  in  itsCnei,  on  tomba,  and  in  other  worlci  of
art.  (Spun,  Mue.  p.  299  ;  Middleton,  AnL  Mtm.
tab.  8.)  [J.  Y.]

BORIS. [ARjniuK.l

BUSTUA'RIJ. [FuNHS.]

BUSTUM. [FuNL-g.]

BUXUM  (iritoi),  propprlj  meani  the  wood  of
the  box  tree,  bnt  waa  given  ai  a  name  to  man^
ihinn  Duule  of  this  woed.  The  tableU  used  fur
vritiDgon,  andcoTcred  with  wax  {ia/miagcemiiv)^
ven  nfiult;  made  of  this  wood.  Hence  we  read
in  Propertini  (iiL  23.  8),  "  Vulgari  haio  iordidii
cera  fuit."  Then  liMiM  were  loinetiiaH  oiled
arala  iuo.  In  the  ome  way  the  Greek  nfllr,
formed  from  rH"^  "  boi-wood,"  came  to  be  ^i-
plied  to  any  tableta,  whether  the;  wtre  made  of
ihia  wood  or  any  other  aubalanee  ;  in  which  aeoie
the  word  occun  in  the  SeptuaginI  (ri  iruffn  ri
Alein,  Emd,  niT.  12;  compare  I*,  xxx.  8  ;  Hta.
iLS).

Topa  were  made  of  box-wood  (vMbU  innaii,
Viif;.  Jai.  TiL  382  ;  Pen.  lu.  £1) ;  and  alH  all
wind  initnunenti,  eipecially  the  flaCe,  aa  ia  the  caae
in  the  proaent  dnj  (0>.  Ex  FaaL  1 1.  *S,  Mel.  liL
158,  Faii.  Tt.  697i  Vii^.  Xn.  ii.  619).  Comba
alao  were  made  of  tho  Hune  wood  ;  whence  Juvenal
(iIt.  194)  apeaka  vi  oapvZ  Madum  burnt.

BYSSUS  (fiitraia).  It  hat  been  a  tabject  of
some  diaputo  whether  the  byiitta  of  the  ancienla
wo*  cotton  or  linen.  Herodottu  (iL  36)  aayi  that
the  ronmmiea  were  wrapped  up  in  ijrwu  nrndat
{awtint  Sineimi  raAofiuri),  which  RoaeUini
and  many  modem  writers  maintain  Co  be  cotton.
The  only  deciaire  test,  howevur,  aa  to  tho  materiaJ
of  mnmmy  cloth  is  the  microacope  ;  and  from  the
nnmeroua  examinationa  which  have  been  made,  it
ia  quite  certain  that  the  mummy  cloth  woa  made
of  Sax  and  not  of  cotton,  and  therefore  whenever
tlie  ancient  writera  apply  the  term  hyuua  to  tbe
mummy  cloth, wo  must  undentand  it  to mean

Ttio  word  byiana  appeoii  to  come  from  the
Hebrew  bnix,  and  the  Qreeka  probably  got  it
thrauDb  the  Phocniciana.  (See  Oesenins'a  Va-
Hunu.)  Pauianiai  (yl  2S.  %  4)  aays  that  the
diatrict  of  Elia  mu  well  adapted  for  growing
hyaaua,  and  remirlu  t}wt  all  the  people,  whose
land  ts  adapted  for  it,  sow  hemp,  flax,  and  t^aaus.
In  another  peauga  (t.  5.  S  2)  be  says  that  Glii  ia
the  only  place  in  Greece  in  which  byasus  growa,
and  remark)  that  the  byiaua  of  Eli>  ia  not  inferior
to  (hat  of  the  Hehrewa  in  fine^e^^  but  not  so  vel-
low  {iarHi).  The  women  in  Patrao  gained  dietr
liring  by  nuking  head-dreuea  (ttKp&fiASu),  and
weaving  cloth  trom  the  bjwua  grown  in  Elia.
(Pana.  riL  21.  g  7.)

Among  later  writer^  the  word  bTtsns  may  per-
haps be  iiaed  to  indicate  either  cotton  or  Imen
cloth.  Bbttiger  (Siiiiu,  toL  iL  p  105)  sunoses
that  tho  b^sans  was  a  kind  of  muslin,  which  was
employed  m  making  the  edebiatcd  Coaagarmsnts.
It  IS  msDtioned  in  the  Onrael  of  St.  Luke  (iri  9)
■a  part  of  the  dresa  of  a  ridi  man. (Compare  Rm,


12.)  It  wat  sonetimei  dyed  of  a  pniple  or
crimson  colour  (pirvirar  wap^vfiKr,  Hesnih.).
" ■ I  rfflax


CABEl'RI  A  (■aC<(pu),mjiteriea,  (MitaU,  and
wprt  solemnised  in  all  place*  in  which  the  Pela*-
gian  Cabeiri,  the  moat  mjaterioui  and  perplexing
deities  of  Grecian  mythology,  were  worshij^iod,
but  eapecially  in  Samothiace,  Imbrce,  Lemnos,
Tbebea,  Anlhedon,  Per^amua,  and  Berytoa.  (Pans.
ii.2J,  §i,  iv.  ].  Si,  ii.32.  tJG,  L4.S6i  Eitseh.
Pniep.  Evang.  p.  31.)  Little  ia  known  reapecting
tbe  rites  observed  in  iheae  mysteries,  ai  no  one  waa
allowed  to  dirulgcthem.  (Strabo,  i.  p470,&c;
Apollon.  Rhod.  £  917  ;  Orph.  ^fjoa.  469;  Valer.
Place.  iL  436.)  Disffcna  ia  aaid  to  have  provoked
the  hif^est  indignation  of  the  Athaniaos  by  hia
having  made  theae  and  other  myaterie*  pubtk.
(Athenag.  Lag-  "■  '■)  I'''*  °™t  celebtatad  were
those  of  the  iiland  of  Ssnothrace,  which,  if  we
may  judge  from  those  of  Lcmmi,  were  solemnised
eveiir  y«r,  and  Isaled  for  nine  lUja.  The  admis-
uon  was  not  confined  to  men,  for  we  find  initancea
of  women  and  boys  being  initiated.  (SchoL  ad
Eutip.  Phot^  7;  PluL  AUx.  3 1  Donatua  ad  TmtiL
PAorm.  L  15.)  Persona  on  their  admiiaion  seem
to  have  undergone  a  sort  of  ciamination  respect-
ing the  life  tacy  had  led  hitherto  (Plut.  Ijiad,
Apopilk.  AtOalad.  p.  141,  fd.  Tanchniti],  and
were  then  puiiSed  of  all  their  crimes,  even  if  thej-
had  committed  murder.  (I-ivy.  iIt.  fi  ;  SchoL  ad
Tieocrit.  iL  12 ;  Heaych.  s.  e.  Ksfqt.)  The  piiert
who  undertook  the  pnrifi^tion  of  mnidercta  bora
the  name  of  ualiii.  The  peiaona  who  were  ini-
tiated received  a  purple  ribbon,  which  was  worn
around  their  bodies  aa  an  amulet  to  preserte  them
againat  all  dangers  and  storms  of  the  seau  (SchoL
ad  ApMm.  L  c. ;  Diodor.  v.  49.)

Roapecting  tbe  Lemniao  Cabeiria  we  know  that
their  annual  celebration  took  place  at  night  (Cic
De  NaL  Dear.  L  43),  and  lasted  for  nine  days,
during  which  all  fires  of  Che  island,  which  were
thought  to  be  impure,  were  extinguished,  sacrificea
were  offered  to  Che  dead,  and  a  laoed  veasel  wa<
sent  onCtofetchncwfire&omDelos.  Dnrii^tbeSB
■acrifices  the  Cabeiri  were  thought  to  be  absent  with
the  Mcred  vessel ;  after  the  return  of  which,  tho
pure  fire  wu  distributed,  and  a  new  life  began,
probably  vrith banquets.  {?i^<A.ad  ApaOm.  RAod.
L  608.)

The  gnsC  celebrity  «f  the  Samothrainan  mys-
teries aeem  to  have  ohacnred  and  thrown  into  ob-
livion thoae  of  l<emnoa,  itom  which  Pythagoras  ia
said  to  have  derived  a  part  of  hia  wisdom,  (lam-
blich.  Va.  Pylh.  c  151  ;  compaie  MUlkr<a  Pro^-
mata,  p.  150.)  Conccmine  the  celobratioa  of  tba
Cabeina  in  other  places  nothing  is  known,  and  thej-
seem  to  have  lallcn  into  decay  at  a  veiy  early
period.  (Comp.Guthbeilet,  £«  jU>Ariui>aDms
OiiironiR,  Franequene,  1704,  4to. ,  WcJdier,XK*
Aadyi-Tri.  p.160,  &c,  E.  G.  Hanpt,  A  A  "


CACAHUS. l,AvTHiPU.J


KAKOSia.
KAKRO<rRIAS  DIKE'  {«»4pi7(M  Stin,),
va  m  *etim  br  abMirc  lugMua  in  tha  AttSo
ontt.  This  ictian  a  like«i«e  oJlad  uur^Yoplov
He*  (On- a  iWil  p.  S14),  Awtoflu  Knt  (tKtwr
XJiylM,  AriMnph.  Flip.  1307),  md  awB^kirrfai
Kq.  ThU  Ktiou  coold  be  tmtight  ^aiiut  u
Umdod  who  applied  to  ■doUkt  certtm  abnuTO

~B  inclodtd  DBder  tbs  gntml  nania  of
[Akirbhbta.]  Itm)  no  jutificm-
Imm  w(Kd<  wm  Bokm  in  asgei.  {Lji.

PPlB72,878.) ^  ■  taw  rf  Sdlon  it

wnikaftrtiddaitospaikniloftlwdnd)  and  if

■  poMB  did  Ht  ka  wa>  labia  la  tliii  action,  wUdl
mill  ke  tnagbt  •aunt  bin  br  the  neanat  Tata-
(ia  rf  the  deetaaed.  (Den.  e.  L^itai.  p.  488,  c
A^p^lOSS;  PhLJULbZI.)  IfuibdiTidiid
abaed  taj  ma  wko  «•■  eng*§ed  in  uij  public
iCce,  the  nttadtf  net  oily  aaffind  the  tsdioaij
pHiikBart,  bat  incaired  uie  1m*  of  hi*  tiffat*  u  a
dtBH  (h^ila),  noee  tha  Rate  mu  contidered  to
h*<«  ham  inaoltad. (Don.  e.  MA  p.  5S4.>

If  (ba  dofaidiiit  «M  (onneted,  he  hmd  to  pay  a
ia*  af  AM  dndimae  to  the  pliintiE  (luc  e.
UA.  p,  3iW  I  Lji  e.  TlanBL  p.  U4.)  Plutanh,
hawM«,mMUkn*  that,  Mimliim  to  one  of  SoIod'i
ta>^  whaaiarapakaanlof  apenmia  tbetemtJta,
carta  tH  jaatia^  pablia  oSeea,  or  in  public  foti-
nla,  had  to  JK]  Gn  diachmaa  ;  but  s*  Platner
(/Vva«  W  dm  ^OOn,  toL  ii  p.  I»2)  hsa  ob-
•emd,  tha  lav  of  Solcn  ma  {nbaU;  changed,
aad  ihit  heailn  Ina  of  £00  ^^^f^^^^«^■  mbatitnled

■  iha  pbea  of  tha  analler  aon.  DamoalheDa^
n  U*  aotiaa  ^aioat  HaidiM  (pL  S4S)  ipaaka  of  a
fa*  *f  1000  dnchmaa  ;  but  thia  i*  probably  to  be


. ThkaEtidDinipnbatiljlniighlbeibretlie
■othoMa  <D<n.  o.  Mii.  p.SU),  to  whom  the
niMii  Wtt«n-\fa^\  bdoi^ed.  The  two  apeechc*


KAKOUKQIAS  DIKE'.  [KiiiooHua
Dm.]

SAKfySlS  (icduwu),  in  the  bouwa  of  the
Attir  law,  doaa  not  Bgnify  erery  Und  of  ill-treat.
aeat,bat

I.  TV  m-treatiaait  of  panntabjtiiair  children
itimmma  -ptbrny  %  Of  women  by  their  hni-
tea^  (nliwvu  TiMWii*).  3.  Of  hebmei  (kI-
■mnr  fauA^pB*).  4,  Of  OF^usi  and  *idawi
by  their  giardian*  or  any  othei  peiaaa  (nimwit

1.  K<taiavU7<v*iirwB*(oniDittedbytbo*ewho
MWfk  their  HBOila,  or  applied  abwre  apilbet*  to
tbia,  or  mated  than  the  nmi  of  nppart  when
they  vera  aUa  Is  aSotd  it,  or  did  not  buy  them
■ftfi  the*  dsth  and  pay  them  proper  honouni
(i1i'w*Hih  rill  TfiT.nfir.  Said*j,t.o.  nfAafryiicbt
*if»t^  It  VB*  ne  jD*tififatiao  bs  children  that
-'■■-■■' mbHily. I£.howeTer,

■  their  ponoti,  they  could  not  be
|i— ■  nil  id  far  idtmta. (Meier,  SU.  Proatm,  p.

a  committed  by  hiu-


KAEOTECHNION  DIKE. -iir

wirea  the  mairiaga  dntie*  ;  fiv  W  a  law  of  Sokn,
the  biulsDd  vaa  bound  to  vitit  hii  wiia  liuBO
timei  ereiy  month,  at  lean  if  ahe  wai  an  heireia^
(Plut.  S(L  20,  fro/m  23.)  In  the  comtdr  of
Cratinni,  callsd  the  "  Wine  Flaik "  (nirrfn))^
Comedy  wa*  represented  a*  the  wife  of  CntiDUi,
who  bronghl  an  action  againithmi  becaiue  he  neg-
lected her  and  deToted  alt  hi>  attealioD  to  the
wine  flaik. (SchoL  ad  Arilk^  EqtUt.  899.)

S.  KiiMO'ii  t£v  truiKtipAr  wa*  cranmitled  by
the  naaiest  rdatire*  of  poor  beinaaei,  who  neither
maitied  them  thanuelre*,  nor  gare  them  a  dowry
in  order  to  many  them  to  peraon*  of  their  own
rank  in  lifb  (Dem.  e.Mioart.  p.  107S ;  Haipoer.  n  m.
'EwOurat.e^t ;  Said.  PboL  #.  e.  »iiti*»)  i  or,  if
they  married  them  themaelTea.  did  not  peribim  tha
marriage  dmu*. (Plut.  Sol.  20.)


vowSr  waa  committed  by  tboie  who  injnitd  11
any  way  either  orphan*  or  widovr*,  both  of  whom
were  cooiidered  to  be  in  an  eapecial  manner  under
thepiotectionorihechiefarchon.  (Daa. e. Macart.
pl(l76;  i  Vx<*>'i  t'Tis  i-niukiero  t»  xtP^"
Kol  tSv  ifi^arur,  Ulpian.  ad  Canuril.  e.  Timmr.)
The  ipcecboflncDi  on  the  Inheritance  cfHignia*,
ii  a  defence  againit  an  ihanrrt^ia  noKAftmi  of
thiilind.

All  them  cue*  of  xijiitffu  belonged  to  tha
jimtdiction  of  the  chief  archon  (fyxerv  ^ir^myuf).
If  a  penon  wronged  in  any  way  orphani,  beiieateo,
or  widow*,  the  aRhm  coold  inflict  a  fine  npon  them
";  or  if  he  cinuidered  the  penon  deeerrini


IffiiBte  indiridual  could  alio  accuia  partie*  gnilly
of  miiHirrii  by  meana  of  laying  an  infoimadon
(cta-oyjxUa)  before  the  chief  arcBoi,  thongh  •moa-
timet  the  accuier  proceeded  by  mean*  of  a  regular
indictment  (ypa^),  with  an  Intupuri*  before  the
orehon.  (Dem.  e.  Pamtaaut.  p  980.)  Tho*e  who  ,
accnied  penon*  goillj  of  icdinwif  mconed  no
danger,  a*  va*  ninoUy  the  caae,  if  the  defendant
wu  acquitted,  and  they  did  not  obtain  the  £fth
part  of  the  tdIc*  of  tha  dicaala.  (Ilarpoa.  t.  v.
ElBayytXltt}

The  pmiiahnient  doea  not  qipear  to  hare  been
fixed  for  tha  difierent  caoe*  of  tiictiaii,  bat  it  nt
generally  icTere.  Tboie  Ibtmd  goiltjr  of  nUnxri*
yor4iir  loit  their  ciril  right*  (irifila),  hot  were  al-
lowed to  retain  their  property  (i^oi  Ari^f  ifirv
t4  aiyaia,  ri  !J  x^^^wo  Hx",  Andoc  D*
MpO.  36  ;  Xen.  Mtm.  iL  2.  g  13) :  but  if  the
ttitttta  coniiated  m  beating  their  parenti,  the
hand*  of  the  offender*  might  e>en  be  cut  oC
(Menrnna,  11am.  Attic,  i.  2.)

KAKOTECHNION  DIKE  (««(n-«x""
3Linj),  correepoDds  in  Boma  degree  with  an  action
for  <nbomation  of  peijury. It  might  be  inititnted

fiarty  to  a  jreiint*  nut,  whoie  witneiwa
y  been  eonrieted  of  &laehoad  in  an  action
rvpiw.  (Harpocr.  t.v.  ;  Dem.  e.  Ev.
ama  M—.  p  1139.  11.)  Il  ha*  been  aUe  nu-
miied  that  thi*  ptoceeding  wai  aTOilable  ^ain*t
the  oame  party,  wtien  penoni  bad  mbicribed  Ibem-
eelTca  &l*ely  a*  aommonen  in  the  decUiation  or
indictnnnt  in  a  preTion*  luit  (Meier,  AH.  Proc
p.  386} ;  and  if  Plato'i  authority  with  reapect  to
the  term*  of  Attic  taw  on  be  con*idered  condu-
lire,  other  ooe*  of  cooopincy  and  cmtriTonce  may
hare  borne  thi*  title.  (PtaL  Lm.  xL  p.  S36,  e.)
With  R^icct  to  the  coon  into  which  tfaele  au«c»


lainit  a  party  I
id  already  beer


AU.  Proa  pp.  45,  386.)  [J.  S.M.

CADA-VBa [FUNUB.]
CADISCI  (itaSlnM). [Puphui.]

CASU'CEUS  (kd^iuv,  Kfipitwr,  Ilucjd.
S3  1  aqfiMr^Iar,  Hsrod.  ix.  100)  ma  the  lUIT  oi
macQ  ouricd  by  henldi  and  unbMndan  in  tima
of  WH.  (PoUqi.  Ti!l  158.)  Thii  uma  ii  &1»
^Tea  U  tLa  lUff  wiih  vhicii  Hermaa  or  Mercuiy
u  ujiullj  repmeated,  u  it  ihowii  in  tha  fallawing
fgon  <^  Hsrmea,  taken  CRon  u  inciBit  we,
wbieh  it  giTea  in  Millm'i  Piiitlum  it  Vata  A»-
Hqm*,  vol  L  pL  70.

The  otdnceni  mi  erigiDilly  oolj  m  olire  bnucb
with  tlie  vriiitiara  whKh  win  ■Aerwird  fanned
into  mBket.  (MlUler,  AniStiogit  iar  KiaH,  p.
Ml.) lAter  mythdlogiiM  ioTsnted  tilei  about


Hjgintu  telli  HI  that  Mercnrr  once
found  two  inekca  fighting,  sod  divided  them  vrilh
bii  wand ;  fnm  which  drcuznilaoce  they  were
uaed  u  an  emblem  of  peace.  (Compare  Plin.  H.  N.
nil.  3.)

Fcom  cadnceiu  wu  fcnoed  the  word  Cadumalor^
which  ligniSad  a  penon  Knt  to  tnut  of  peace.  (Lit.
xiiii.33;  Nep-Zfanii.  11  ;  Anun.  Hate  iz.  7  ;
Cell.  z.  37.)  The  pononi  of  the  Oafaoeatoni
wereauiideradiacied. (Cato,ap./'M<:t.«. ;  Cie.


■i^nuM,  which  woe  arriedbr  the  FMnlea.  (Dig.
I  tit.  S.  >.  8.) [Fbtulu.]

CADU'CUM. [BoNi  CiDuc*.]

CADUS  (inilai,  iMSti\  a  large  *euel  ninally
made  of  earthen-wan,  which  wu  Died  for  aerenl
potpoBca  anHDg  the  ancient*.  Wine  wai  fie-
quenllf  liept  in  it ;  and  we  learn  ftom  an  author
quoled  by  Pollox  that  the  amphon  WM  alao  called
Dadm  (Pdlux,  x.  70,  71  ;  Suidai,  1. 1.  Kilet).
The  Tcnel  ued  in  drawing  water  bom  welli  wu
called  eadni  (Arirtoph.  Ecdai.  1003  ;  Pollni.  x.
31),Dr7(i»\Ji.  (Suidu,i.«.rai>^Jt.)  Thename
of  tadui  wu  Hmetimea  giren  to  the  Teiael  or  oiii
in  which  thn  counten  or  pehhlet  of  the  diaiti  wen
put,  when  (hey  gave  their  nte  os  a  bia],  but  the


l,i\S.


CAELATURA.
diminnUn  vslloiuii  wu  more  oommonly  ued  in
thia  ligoiGcalion. [PaSNiD&]

CAELATU'RA  (roptwiai),  a  branch  oi
the  fine  aili,  und^  which  all  aorta  of  omaueotal
troA  ia  metal,  except  actual  itatuea,  ■ppeB''  to
be  included.  The  principal  jiiooeaMa,  which  theaa
worda  were  med  U>  Jeaigiale,  aeem  to  ban  been
of  ibite  kinda :  tiammeiing  metal  plate*  into
mouldi  or  diei,  ao  aa  to  bring  ont  a  niaed  pat-
tern ;  HigraviD^  the  aurbce  of  metala  with  a  aharp
tool ;  and  working  a  jAtlem  d'  oue  metal  upon  at
into  a  ani&ce  of  another :  in  ihort,  the  Tariaua
proceuei  whieb  we  deecribe  by  the  wordj  ukaiiity,
rfuaoaceiautfri  Ac  Millingoi,  who  ii  one  of  tbs
heat  Ralhoritiea  on  luch  auhjccta,  aaya  "The  art  of
working  the  ^edoua  metali  either  aepantely,  oC
uniting  them  with  other  lubalaDoea,  Wia  oiled
Umttick.  It  waajcnown  at  a  Tery  euHy  epoch,  •■
may  be  inferred  from  the  ahield  of  Achillea,  the
ark  of  Cypacloa,  and  other  prDdnetioDS  of  the
kind,"  There  ia,  howevtr,  lome  doubt  whether
in  their  original  n^eoning,  the  word*  ropfinuclj  and
aatliam  dcacribed  the  firat  or  the  aeeond  of  the
above  proc«i

an  in  fiiTour  of  the  latter  view
neani  originally  lo  ion,  la  pura  U/  euiUmg,  and
the  cognate  nbttantivai  taptit  and  tafii  are  ap-
plied to  any  punted  initnunenC,  nch  u  the  toiil
of  du  engnrer  (ro^anili:  ace  Seilv  n.  Jacobite,
HamdteStltrtiiA  d.  GrieiA.  ^mdu,  i.  ee.).  So  in
Latin,  cado  (to  chaae),  and  oae^im  (the  chaaing
tool),  are  undoubtedly  connected  with  coedo  (to
cut).  It  may  alao  be  Dbaerred  that  for  w
metala  by  hammering  other  worda  ai
rcir,  ^puff^Xjnaif  iKKpoitiii,  x^^*^'*',  aBW-
dsrt,  and  that  vorka  in  metal  made  by  hammer-
ing plataa  into  a  laiaed  pattern  an  called  iri.
■)>Xu^  and  iKTawa  [ANAOLTrBiJ.  With  legard
to  the  tiaage  of  the  tenna,  it  ia  enoogh  to  remark,
that  a  Tciy  huge  proportion  of  the  omamental
wocka  in  metal,  allnded  to  by  the  auoBit  writen,
froDi  Horaer  downward*,  mntt  have  been  encated
by  the  poccaa  of  engnnng,  and  not  of  hannnering.
But,  whichever  procei*  the  tema  may  hare  beat
originally  intended  to  deaignat^  in  practise  both
proceaaea  were  frequently  united.  Foe  all  Timrli
made  out  of  tbin  platea  of  metal,  ihe  praceH  acona
to  have  been  fint  to  beat  out  the  plate  inta  tha
niiaed  pattern,  and  then  to  chaae  it  with  tha
graving  tool.  Thne  ia  an  exampU  of  thia  kind
of  woA  in  the  Britiah  Muacum,  notioad  by  Mil-
lingen.

Another  queatioo  hu  been  luaed,  wbetbef
TopavTuni  and  aKfaters  an  preetiely  equivaloit :
but  it  ia  the  opinini  of  ths  bat  writer*  on  ait
that  they  an  ao,  though  Qnabera^  de  Qnincy  and
othen  (Uppote  Topiifrixf  to  refer  to  any  woi^  in
relief  and  even  to  ebryaetephantine  atatnea.  (Sea
Oantoni,  in  Cie.  Tarr.  iv.  2S  ;  Sahnu.  £urc  od
lSoUi.  p.  736,  folL  ;  Hcync,  AtHgaar.  At^iSUt,
u.  p.  137.)  Quintilian  (iL  21)  eipreaaly  di*-
tinguiahea  majatsni  and  iciilpliira  by  mjing  that
the  farmer  indudoa  work*  in  geld,  tiUtr,  imttai
mbA  inm,  while  the  hMter  emhracea,  beaidea  thea*
material*,  alio  wood,  ivory,  marile,  jrfiua,  and  puma.
It  muat  thenfbre  be  nnderatood  u  an  >cEOmnM»-
daled  iiae  of  the  term  when  Pliny  ay  a  of  glaaa,  —
"  Hventi  modo  aelatur."  (_H.  N,  axivi  2&  i.  66.)

nie  &ct  which  ia  implied  in  tha  worda  jut
quoted,  thai  ailvec  wai  the  chief  material  ua
which  the  curator  worked,  ia  expnaly  atatad  bf


CAELATURA.
Plky,  It  lie  BCBUHDcmKiit  d[  tha  pi— ge  wbtcli
lira*  «cu  of  «bc  ckief  tathnitiet  on  tlie  aabjtct
la.  ff.  xxdiL  13.  >.  M)  ;  vhav  be  menticnu  it
m  ■  tonukable  &ct  that  manj  had  gaioed  ts-
Mvn  far  chauBg  in  nItss  bat  nans  for  chanug  in
pU :  it  i*  not  icwtjet  to  be  intend  that  gold
*«  nat  chmil,  hi  voit*  in  gi>ld  are  fKquenttr
MfBliaMd  bf  odta  anthon.  Froni  the  aaoK  aee-
tjia,  and  Snoi  other  antboritiet,  we  ieom  that
wafca  af  thia  kiid  wan  «1»  executed  in  bronie
ad  inn  (Qnitrt.  H  a  ;  Fiucelliiii,  i.  c).  Two  ti-
trnfit*  ft  dialing  in  inn  dnerre  eapeeial  notice,
the  oae  tar  ita  aotiqaitj,  the  other  fbr  it*  beonty :
the  fcma  ii  the  ino  haae  of  the  viae  dediisted
W  Aljirttea,  kin;  irf  Ljdii,  It  Delphi,  wbidi  wai
tta  mA  of  (UaDoi  (f  Chioi,  ind  iru  chaied
viih  aaaO  Egnna  of  f""—'',  inieeta,  and  planii
Olmd.  i.  35 ;  Paoi,  z.  1«.  «  1  ;  Ath.  t.  p.
311,  h.  c. ;  .ZMA  y  0*9.  *.  e.  Oloarai} :  tha  latter
li  tka  iroa  hebiM  of  Alazanda-,  the  tratk  of
•n  [I -II.  which  glittaed  like  lilnr  (PlnL  Ahr.
Kl:  Sttalia,  moRors,  UMntioM  the  people  of
a  Alia  Hinr,  aa  noted  lor  thur  ikill  in
iLp.63IX

ne  at^acti  od  which  tha  eoabtor  nadied  hii
BK  wcm  chiafl;  weapijaa  and  mnar — ennudlj
■UeU^  dnrieu,  tripod^  and  other  TotiTB  offeiingi,


aiji«,in


I,  and  all  kfoda  of  nid  md  ulver
pan.  Ann  wen  oftoi  vnameDted  with  pattenu
ia  |eU  <7^«r*  ir  t*\^  *rXP^9  'Ii^  (Corp.
fuv.  i«L  L  No.  134 ;  NaftiM  tifyegri^liiAam,
TRhdL  Ctaad.  14).  CiMMd  hnmn  hebneta  and
fisna  hne  becD  feond  at  PoBpeii  and  daewhen.
(JfH.  Bar*.  iiL  60,  ir.  13,  T.  29  ;  BrSnited,  dii
Amaim  vtm  Sirit.)  Chahotl,  eqieciallf  iboie
■ed  in  the  chariot-nm  and  triomphal  jnweta,
woe  sAen  made  of  bnnie  richly  chaaed  [Con-
Kit]:  nndB-  the  Roman  empeton  priiate  csniagea
taaiaui)  wen  often  corerc^  vitb  pUtei  of  chiied
kwoe,  aiiiei.  and  eren  gold  (PUn.  H.  N.  niiiL  1 1.
a  49 ;  Svet.  Clami.  16  ;  HirtiaL  iiL  72  ;  Lamprid.
-  '.  43j VopiK.  AanL  49  j Cukuca).

-^— -' —'  no  forth,  the  remain*

■  artmema  an  aie  ^trj  neo.  An  elaborate  ac-
MOM  af  ^nart  Iripedi  w  giren  in  MOUer^  may,
Uittr  dm  n^adtm,  in  ^  Amatiliaa,  Toll.  L  and
n.  Hi  ninliim  TCaad*  of  gold  and  lilfer  {date,  sod
ether  laiiiMiiiia.  aaung  Un  nnnierDo*  reference!
<t  tha  newot  nthon,  thow)  irf  Cicero  (is  rerr.
h.)^  BKt  niny  (H.  JV.  miiL  11,  IS.  >.  BO— Si)
an  OMOC  the  nod  imporlaul  and  inlereating.

wi^  with  which  the  chaser

1  Boniiited  either  of  liinplB

n  of  plant!  and


fa  oinect!  DO


e  lam


•JUia,


(CictaiTrebelLOaintn):
oiflhaieeoiid  daea  were  common  on  the
I  geld  laM  of  Cointh  (Ath.  T.  p.  1 99,  e.)
inodi  {AmalU.  Td.  iiL  p.  33}  ;  and  the
aBb}eeta,  wbich  were  genenOy  taken
uama^  were  teeerred  fbr  the  wnfci  of  the
M  aaaten  of  the  art :  tbey  were  genemlly
Md  ia  raty  high  relief  (imaglffUi.  In  the
wofki,  the  cnamentai  pitlanwai  fiwqnently
(t  bain  the  naad,  to  which  it  wai  uther
led  penHuently,  cr  n  that  it  could  be  le-
I  at  plfaoiR,  the  Tcnel  being  of  lilTer,  and


n,  ine  j^inucun,  ai  ai>OT«
aed  to  great  nrofidracy  in  ib
,  djnai^  of  Iifdiio  kingi,  a
en  to  the  ait,  eapedally  by


CAELATURA.  319

«  r«rr.  IT,  2S  i  Jut.  i  76  ;  MattiiL  riiL  61 1
Ovid.  MH.  T,  ai  ;  Ath.  T.  p.  199  ;  PanlL  SmL  iii.
6,  8  ;  Senec  Bp.  5  ;  eonip.  Chrvbindxu).

The  an  of  DmaraenlBl  nelal-work  waa  m  an
idTanoed  ita^  of  pngrcH  among  the  Greeka  of  tha
heroic  period,  ai  we  lee  from  numenni  futaget  at
Homer.  In  Italy,  alio,  the  Etnucani,  ai  aboT«
■lated,  hid  eariy  attained  to  great  pi  '  '
In  the  time  of  the  laM  djn  '  '  *
grtal  impulia  wa«  given  K
Uidr  ma^ificoit  preaenti  to  tha  Delphian  ten^';
and  belniging  to  thia  period,  we  hare  the  name*  of
Oiaooii,  at  i&gady  mentioned,  and  of  Tfaeodrau  ef
Samoa,  whotnadaagRatulTerTemelfcsCrMini,
the  ling  of  Poljoatei,  and  a  golden  Teaael  which
afterwarda  adorned  the  pdaee  of  the  Fenian  kings.
But  ill  pnfectioa  would  of  conne  depend  on  that  ot
the  arte  if  dctign  in  generaJ,  eapecially  of  icnlptnre  t
and  thnt  we  can  rsdily  accent  the  italament  of
Pliny  that  itaoririn,  in  thehigb  ortiitie  aenae,  lata
be  aacribed  to  Pueidiaa,  and  ita  complele  derelop-
mentlopolycleitoa.  (Plin./r.  JV.iniT.  B.1.19.|I,
primmgaa  IPiidiai]  ortoa  tonatianajientumatqm
dmumitraitt  maitaj^iettbir;  ibid,  g  3,  ffu  (Fo^
ehtiu)..Jiidicalarlntiilitam  tutrudiMaa,  iri  PUdSa
ofwrn—t).  There  em,  indeed,  be  no  donbt  that
tba  toleatic  ait  waa  an  nnpoitant  aceoaoiy  to  tha
art!  of  itatuBiy  and  lenlptnre,  eapedally  m  woAi
ezecMedinbromeandinintyindgold.  In  bet,
in  the  latter  daaa  of  wi^ca,  tha  laita  eiacated  in
gold  belonged  properly  to  the  depwtotent  ti  tha


tine  atatnea  a  branch  of  the  lorentic  ai
Ornate  oonnection  of  thii  art  with  itatnary  and
aailptnre  ii  fiirther  ihown  by  tha  &ct  that  aerenl
of  the  great  aniita  in  theae  depoitmenti  were  ilea
renowned  aa  ai]Te^^JlaaeTi,  inch  ai  Mynn  and
Paaitelet.  In  the  age  of  Pheidia^  the  mart  dia-
tingniahf  d  name  ij  that  of  Myi,  who  raigraied  tha
battle  of  the  Lsphhaa  with  the  Centanra  on  the
ahield  bf  Pheidiu*a  coloaial  bronie  atatne  of  Athena
Fromachua  in  the  Acropolia,  and  who  ia  aajd  to  Iut*
woAsd  from  detigna  dnwn  by  the  hand  of  Par.
rfaanna;  but  tile  httor  point  involTea  a  ehrradogical
difficnlty.  (See  DkL  of  Biag.  a.  tn.  Mgt,  Pna-
iUlm.)  In  die  period  ftnm  Uie  time  af  Pheidia*
to  that  of  the  Roman  eooqneat  of  Greece,  tha  fol-
lowing nomea  an  pinemd;  Aoagat,  Boethua,
and  Mentor,  th«  noit  diatingaiahed  of  ill  the  irtiitB
in  thia  dapartmait  { the  •eolptor  Myron  and  hia  aon
LydiH  ;  after  them,  Calamii,  Antipater  ;  and  the
maker  of  i  work  mentioned  with  eapeeial  admiia-
tion  by  Pliny,  Stiatonicai )  a  little  later,  TamtHOi
of  Cjiicui,  Ariatoi  and  Euniena  of  HytQene,  mid
Heeataena.  The  Oreek  kinga  of  Syria,  eqieeialty
Antiochui  Epiphanet,  were  great  palrona  of  the  art
(Ath.  I.  p.  393,  d.)  In  the  lait  ue  of  the  Ro-
man Republic,  the  peruling  wealth  and  Ininry,
and  the  preMOce  of  Greek  artiata  at  Rome,  com-
bined to  bring  tite  art  mora  than  erer  into  leqiu-
litini.  SilTer-chaaen  teem  to  hare  been  njpilarly
auj^oyed  in  the  eatabliahmcntB  of  tha  grcmt  men
of  Borne ;  and  Flmy  mantiona,  aa  belonpng  to  tha
am  of  Pocanay  the  Qnat,  Pinldea,  Poaidouu  of
Epheini,  Laottratidea,  Zapjrat,  Pytheaa,  and
lait^  Tenoar.  After  thlapnnod,  the  art  anddenly
fell  into  dimse,  ao  that,  in  the  thne  of  Pliny,  chaaed
Tcaiela  were  T^ned  only  fee  theii  age,  tlwogh  tha
chaaing  «na  ao  worn  down  br  naa  that  ofen  the
fignm  could  not  be  diilingniahed. (fl.  JV.  ziziiL


12.  t.6S,n

utiita Bbsi

The  principii]  utdent  viiten  on  tliu  art,  wAoh
vorki  Pliny  lued,  irere  Antigoniu,  Menuchmm,
Xenocrata,  Doris,  Menarder,  and  etpecially
PuitclH,  who  wrote  ndralnlia  opera.  (Plin.  If.  N.
Elench.  lib.  miiL)  The  moat  imporUut  modeni
worki  on  the  labject  itre  th«  fallowing ;  Winckd-
mann,  Wtrie,  pauim  ;  MUlingen,  Vaatilad  Mam*-
menti,  il  12  ;  Veltfadm,  EltBai  iHtr  Menaun'i
Biidirimh,Xem'iStiiara^  Toraitit,&c  i  Quatre-
lailt  de  Qdidc;,  Lt  Jvpiltr  Oltfnipim ;  Welcher,
ZtOtciL  f.  Gack.  u.  Aaltg.  d.  ait.  KmH,  toI.  L
put  3.  p.  230 ;  Hirt,  Uebtr  dot  Material,  die
Taehiik  &C.,  in  the  Araailiea,  tdI.  L  p.  239.
ML ;  HUller,  Haitdh.  d.  ArchiuiiBgie  der  Kmil,
S3U)  [P.8.]

CAELIBA'TUS. [Am Uxowum  ; Lai

JCLII  BT  PlPU  PoPPAIL]

CAERITUM  TA'flULAE. [AiRimL]
CAESAR,  >  title  oE  the  Roman  empcnin,  vu
originally  a  &mily  name  of  the  Julia  geiu  ;  it  waa
■aiumed  by  OctsTianui  as  the  adopted  ton  of  Ibe

Ct  diclatia',  C.  Joliui  Caem,  and  wai  by  him
led  down  to  hia  adopted  wm  Tiberim.  It  con-
tinued to  be  uied  by  Caligola,  Claodiui,  and  Neto,
01  memben  either  by  adoption  or  female  deiccnt  of
Caesai'i  &mily  ;  but  though  the  fauiilT  Ixcame
extinct  with  Htm,  nicceeding  empenmilill  retained
the  name  ai  part  of  their  lillei,  and  it  vai  the
practice  to  prefix  it  to  their  own  namea,  ai  for  in-
■tance,  Ivtperator  Caetar  DomiHamiu  Atgiutiit.
When  Hadrian  adopted  Aeliiu  Varua,  he  aLowed
the  latter  to  take  the  title  of  Caeur  ;  and  from  thia
time,  though  the  title  of  Aagiutat  continued  to  be
confined  to  llie  reigning  emperor,  that  of  Oaetar
was  alio  granted  the  leomd  penon  in  the  itate
and  the  heu-  preanmptiTe  to  the  throne.  (Eckhel,
Tol.  viii.  p.  367,  Ac) [Aitoubtus.]

CALAMlSTRUM,an  inilromcntmade  of  iron,
and  hoUev  like  a  ned  (folaaua),  uied  for  curling
the  hair.  For  thii  purpote  it  waa  heated,  the  per-
aon  who  pofhrmed  the  ofiice  of  lieating  it  in  wood-
aihei  (eiiiu)  being  ailed  cutyio,  or  cBWntiim.  (Hor.
Sat.L2.98;Heaiiot1,adloc.)  Thia  dk  of  heated
iioni  waa  adopted  very  early  among  the  Romani
(Plaut  Attn.  iii.  a.  87),  and  became  a*  common

Aen.  lii.  100.)  In  the  age  of  Cicero,  who  frequently
alludes  to  it,  the  Roman  youlht,  oa  well  Bi  the
inatroaa,  often  appeared  with  their  hair  cnried  in
thia  nianner  {eaianti^rati).  We  aee  the  mull  in
many  antique  atatnet  and  buatj,  [J.  Y.J

CA'LAMUS  (ndAivioi,  PoIIdi,  i.  15),  a  aort
of  mid  which  the  ancients  uaed  aa  a  pen  for  writing.
(Cic.  adAU-Tia,  Hor.De  Art.  pMt.  447.)  The
beat  lorta  wen  got  &Dm  At^j^t  and  Cnidua.  (Plin.
^.  AT.  iri.  36,  64.)  So  Martial  (xiT.  38),  "  Dat
ehactii  babiletcalunoiMetnpbitica  tellna."  When
tbe  ned  beesme  blunt,  it  was  aharpened  with  a
knife,  KxUpnm  Utranmn  (Tac  Aol  t.  B  ;  Suet,
Fil»lL  S)  ;  and  to  a  reed  lo  iharpened  the  epithet
temperatoa,  naed  by  Cicero,  probably  refen  <Cic
Ad  Qa.  P.iLid,  " calamo  et  atramcDto  tetnperato
Tea  agetui ").  One  of  the  iukatanda  giTen  onder  the
article  ATluiiBHriiM  haa  a  ealamua  upon  it  The
calamuB  wai  apiit  like  our  pena,  and  hence  Auionins
(liL  49)  calla  it  fia^  or  doTeufinted. [A.  A.]

CALA'NTICA. [Coma.]

CA'LATHUS,  ^m.  CALATHISCUS  (,<ii^a-


CALCEUS.

Our,  nii^jiSiaiiaf),  alto  called  TiUafHu  nnioll;  ato-
nified  the  basket  in  which  womsi  placed  iheir
work,  and  especially  the  materials  for  spinning,
rhua,  Pollui  (x.  125)  speaks  of  both  riXaim  and
KiAaSos  OS  rS)s  TvRumgrlTitgr  miOii :  and  in  an-
oUier  passage  (viL  29),  be  uomet  tbem  in  coanee-
tion  with  spinning,  and  nya  that  the  ribji^i  and
mhaMa-iDi  were  the  aain&  These  boakets  vers
made  of  oaiersor  reedi  J  whence  we  read  in  Pollitt
(riL  173)  rA^eiv  ToAtlpavi  Kol  jia>,a0fin<oui,  and
in  CatuUus  (IxiT.  319)  ^
"  Ante  pedes  ontem  candentis  moUia  lame
Vellera  Birgati  custodiebant  caJaHud,"
They  appear,  however,  to  hsTe  been  made  m  eulEtf
times  of  more  lalusble  materials,  since  we  read  in
Homer  (Od.  U.  125)  of  a  silier  riXapoi.  They
frequently  occur  in  paintings  on  toks,  and  often
indicate,  as  BSttiger  (  Passi^ein.  iiu  44)  has  re-
marked, that  the  scene  represented  takes  place  in
the  gynaeconitii,  or  women^a  apaitmenta.  la  the
following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  painting  on  a  tabb
(Millin,  Pemttm  dt  Vait  Aitima,  vol.  I  pi  4),
a  ilare,  belonging  to  the  class  called  qataSiainim,  is
presenting  her  mistreu  with  the  otlathns,  in  which
the  wool  was  kept  for  embroidery,  &c.


Baskets  of  this  kind  venalsotued  for  other  puF>
po«»  (BSttiger,  SbiUwr,  voL  ii  pp.  252,  258X  sneh
as  fgr  carrying  &nits,  fiawers,  &c  (Orid.  AH.  Am,
ii.  264.)  The  name  of  calathi  was  also  giTai  ta
cups  for  holding  wine  (Virg.  Ed.  y.  71).

Calalhus  was  ptoperiy  a  Greek  word,  thongh
used  by  the  Latin  wiileta.  The  La^n  word  cor-
responding  to  il  wot  gralia  (ffor.  Carm.  iii.  12.
4),  irqwuiam  (FeMua  t.  Oalatiat ;  Cic.  PUiqi<.  iii.
4  ;  Prop.  IT.  7. 37).  From  fttcuiZiH  came  TDiui^iaria,
the  name  of  the  sIbfo  who  spun,  and  who  was  con-
sidered the  meanest  of  the  female  slares.  (Pctrofl.
132  ;  Tibult.  i>.  10.  3.) [Fusue  )  TaLi.)

CALCAR  (/iiiiii+i  h"*"!^;  Pollux,  1.13),  a
spur.  The  Greek  name  for  spats  was  taken  troD
theilies,  which  infeathotie* with  theiritings:  henc«
the  Terb  fivnlfiir,  to  spar.  (Xcn.  de  lie  Eq.  liiL  5,
i  I,  2  i  Heliodor.  ii.  p.  4S2,  ed.  Commelin.)  The
Athenian  gentry  sometimes  showed  their  conceit
by  walking  about  the  Agora  in  spun  al^  ndinf^
(TheophrasL  CKor.  xii.)  Spars  were  early  osed
by  the  Romans,  as  appears  from  the  mention  of
them  in  Plaaloi  {Am.  iiL  3. 1 1 8)  and  Lucretius  (t.
1074).  ThrrarelikewiseoftenalladedtobyCicem
(ZJeOm/.  iii.9,  a>f  .4e(.ll  1),  Grid  (Z)«  PdnA),  iL
9.  SB  ;  IT.  2.  35),  Virgil  (/smita  alee,  Aai.  lU
714),  snd  snbseqaent  Roman  authon. [.T.  Y.)

CA'LCEUS,  CALCEAMEN,  CALCEA-
MENTUM  (JuKXtuM,  tilAo*),  a  shoe  or  bom.


CALCEUS.
taj  Amf  ■dipted  to  eonr  and  tn'Mefre  the  bet  in '

Tsnl  uBang  the  Graekj  and  Romuu.  Tbc
UotHiic  htntt  kn  repnwnted  without  almei
ifin  inned  for  battle.  ARoiding  to  the  inilitn-
tkb*  of  Lj'ror^iUT  the  joong  SjartBiii  wen  brought
np  witluat  wearing  ihoea  {irvTo^ifixla^  Xen.  A^Ti-
£de.-3),  ID  odler  that  they  might  hi<«  the  full  lue
oT  their  feet  in  nuuiiug,  leaping,  and  climbing.
Ssoalea.  Phockm,  and  Cale  Jrequentlj  went  hme-
fHt  livmHraf,  AriMoph.  A'ni.  lOa,  362  )  Xen.
tbm.1  6.  g2,  f»da  nub.  Hot.  ^L19.  12).
The  RnoBi  ihTCi  had  no  ihoea  (amfs  Mo,  Jut.
TiL  16),  their  naked  feel  being  marked  with  chalk
•r  (jpunu  The  corering  of  ^e  feet  wa*  remoTed
beive  reclining  at  meali.  [CoiNi.]  To  go  baie-
boi  alio  indicucd  hatle,  grief,  diitiaetiiHi  of  mind,

■  an;  TJolenl  emotion,  aa  when  Venni  goea  in
mat  of  Adonit  (iadriiUoi,  Bion.  L  21),  and  when

' '  e  from  Rome  with  the  appontiu  of

. (Plor.  LIS.) Foi  liroilai  leuom

with  naked  feet,  when  intent  npon

Kof  magical  KU  (Sen.  Mtdia,  It. Z  U ;

*^  Orid.  Mit.  Tii.  1S3  ;  ptdilmi  nxfu,

am.  LS.  34),  although  (omelimei one  foot

■aa  nnahod  (mihiii  aaata  pidtm  vmdii,  Vitg.

i>.  SIB),  and  ia  ao  laiuled  oa  fietile  niei.

it  waa  ■  TCTT  ran  thing  at  Rome  to  lee  a

t  of  door*  without  ihoet,  ia

dor  fnn  the  ailooiahmait  eiperienced  bj  Orid

(foA  li.  397),  until  be  wai  infonned  of  the  naion

■fit,  IB  a  |jutietdar  inftaoce.

"  Hoe  pede  "*'"""■"  Tidi  deacendeie  undo :

Obtlupui  tadtua,  anatinuique  giadum."

The  feH  were  aometimea  bare  in  attendance  on

haeiab. Thoa  the  remuna  of  Auguitua  were  col  -

lened  from  the  pyim  bj  noblemai  of  the  £nt  nmk

wok  naked fecL (Suet.  ^19.  1CH1.) A  pictme

fanod  at  Henulanemn  eihibita  peraona  with  naked

feet  ecpiged  in  the  wonhip  erf  laia  {Ant.  d*EreoL

B.  320)  ;  and  thia  pnctiea  waa  obaerred  at  Rome

■  kawu  of  Cfbele  (PiudeuL  Prrit.  164).  In
(*ae  of  dnio^t,  a  pmeaiiao  aod  ceremoniea,  called
fli'mJiptdadta,  wtn  po&cned  with  a  new  to  pro-

e  the  gndi  bT  the  nune  token  of  grief  and
Iktign. (TertulL  Apol  40.)

T^  idea  of  the  defilement  ariaing  from  eontact
wkk  sqr  thing  that  had  died,  led  to  the  entire  di*-
■•e  ef  akin  or  leathet  bj  tlie  prieiti  of  Egypt.
Thdr  ahoea  wse  made  of  vegetable  material*
(cyaww»rFD,Hart.Cap.3.) [Baia.]

Thaae  of  the  Oreeka  and  Romani  who  won
Aaea,  indndiiig  gmmll j  all  paiona  except  j outba,
ilam,  and  avetica,  coiuulted  their  conveuieDce,
aed  indulgid  their  &ncr,  bj  iuTenting  the  greateM
yiaaible  nuiet;  in  the  fonni,  coioun,  and  materiali
ti  xhat  aboa.  Hence  we  find  a  mi '  '
■aire,  the  exact  meaning  of  which  it  ia
to  aaeataiu  ;  bat  which  were  often  deri
Simm  the  penm*  who  were  nijqxiaed  to  hare
laiMgbl  eettaia  kinda  of  ihoe*  into  faihion,  or  from
ihi  ^eca  wbere  the;  wen  jzocnnd.  We  read,
t«  — -—[J-  oC  "ahoea  of  Alcibiadea ;"  of  "Sicyo-
an,**  aad  "  Penian,"  which  were  Udiea'  ihoea
(Ot  Om  OnM.  i.  64  ;  Heafcb.)  ;  of  "  Uconii

ia'Bhoca(Anataph.na.l49);  and
~  "ileffian,"  and  **  Athenian  "  ahoea.
la  depending  npon  ferm  may  be
fiMtall;  diiidcd  into  tiioae  in  wliich  the  men  uk
rfaafcMwaaandwd  to  the  ide  of  the  foot  b;


ub]  ;  and  thoae  which  aacended  higherand  higher,
wording  ai  the;  corcred  the  anklea,  the  calE,  or
lawhoia  of  the  leg.  To  calceamentaof  the  latter
kind,  I.  &  to  ahocB  and  booU  aa  diatinguiihed  from
aandali  and  tlippera,  the  term  "talceiu  "  waa  ap-
plied in  ita  proper  and  reatricted  iena&

Beaide*  the  ditlerence  in  the  mterrala  to  which
the  calcena  extended  from  the  aole  upwarda  to  the
knee,  other  Tirieliei  arote  fram  ita  adaptation  to
particular  profeiaiDna  or  model  of  life.  Thua  the
CALioi  waa  principally  worn  by  aoldiera  ;  thepina,
by  labontera  and  luitic*  ;  and  the  corn  urn  us,  by
tragedian*,  banters,  and  honemen.

Underatanding  "(alceua"  in  ita  more  conlined

plication, it included  all  thoae  mon completa

reringi  for  the  feet  which  were  uaed  in  walking

t  of  doon  or  in  trarelling. Aa  moat  commonly

worn,  thcie  probably  did  not  much  differ  from  our

shoei,  and  are  exemplilied  in  a  pwnling  at  Henni-

laneum  (Atil.  ifETailamo,  L  Tav.  21),  wbieh  repie-

a  female  wearing  bmceleta,  a  wreath  of  irj,

panther'a  akin,  while  the  ia  in  the  altitude  of

dancing  and  playing  on  the  cymbala.


On  the  other  hand,  a  marble  loot  in  the  Brilith
Muoenm  exhibit*  the  form  of  a  man'a  ahoe.  Boih
the  aole  and  the  upper  leather  are  thick  and  itRtng.
The  toe*  are  uncovered,  and  a  thong  paaan  between
the  great  and  the  aeccoid  toe  a*  in  a  tandaL


223  CALENDARIUH.

Tha  form  and  colour  of  ths  catceni  win
among  the  uuignia  of  rank  uid  office.  ThoH  irho
wen  devsled  lo  tbe  Muate  tmte  high  ihoei  liki
boskliu,  leiUiied  in  front  with  four  bkck  thongi
(niffrii  peUibui,  Hot.  SaL  i.  S,  27)  wd  Bd
with  &  nnall  creMsnl.  (Martii.29i  Jn
J92.)  Hence  Cicero  (J-iiiiii.  13),  .peaking  o£
the  uaamptiDnof  thaun&toriaJ  digni^  by  AsLoiniy
■ayi  mttaoit  ca£aru.  Amonff  the  calcei  worn  by
laDKlon,  thme  called  nmUei,  from  iheir  reumbUnce
b>  the  Kalei  of  the  red  mullet  (Iiid.  Or,  xit.  14),
were  panicalnriy  admired ;  m  well  a*  othen  oUed
aiHlat,  becaiua  the  leather  waa  nftened  by  the
OHnfaluni.  (itirU  Jut.  U,  cc. ;  hjdaM,dt  Mag,
\  32j  OTid,  DtArtAm-i^  271.) U-  Y.]

CALCULATOR  (XoyKrHit)  aignifieaa  keeper

■ignificBtion  of  a  teacher  of  arithmetic ;  whence
Martial  (x.  62)  claiHa  him  with  the  RoCaniu  or
writing-maMei.  The  name  mi  derired  from  cat-
aiii,  much  wan  commonly  nacd  in  tcadting  arith-
metic, and  alae  in  leckoning  in  gmera].  tAucua.]
Among  Ihe  Oreaka  tha  tityairiis  and  Tpowun-urT^i
appear  to  haTe  been  unallT  the  lama  perwn.

In  Roman  &miliea  of  impatance  there  wat  a
ealaiiattir  or  accoiint-lieeper  (Dig.  38.  lit.  1.  >.  7),
who  ie,  havener,  more  frequently  called  b^  the
name  of  diMptntaitrr  or  procurator,  who  wat  a  kind
of  ilewnrd  (Cic  ad  AU.  li.  1 ;  Plin.  ^.  iiL  !9  ;
Suet  Galb.  12,  Vitp.  22;  Beckeir,  GaU.—,  ToL  L
p.  109.)

CA'LCULI  were  little  itonea  or  pebblea,  n*ed
for  variotu  porpoeei;  inch,  ibr  example,  ai  the
Athenian!  naed  in  voting,  or  inch  ai  Demoethenea
put  in  hit  month  vhea  decbuming,  in  order  to
mend  hit  pronunciation.  (Cie.  De  Orat.  I  61.)
Calculi  were  med  in  playing  a  lort  of  draaghta
[L*TBUNCIiLi,]  Sobiequendy,  inBeadofpebblai,
iTOTj,  or  Ailver,  or  gi>1d,  or  ouier  men  (u  we  call
them)  were  uied ;  but  lUll  called  oalcalL  Tbe
calculi  were  bicotora.  (Sidon.  E^  liiL  12;
Ocid.  TVirt.  iL  477 ;  Mart  Epi^  lir.  17.  2,  xir.
20.)  Calculi  were  also  uaed  in  reckouing,  and
heoce  the  phraiea  cabsiltan  pontri  (Colum.  liL  3),
ealadim  wMkbk. (Cic  Dt  Fin.  iL  19,  &c)

[ABiCDB.]  [A.  A.]

CALDA. [C*LiDA.]

CALDA'BIUM. [BiiNSii.]

CALENDA'RIUM,  or  rather  KALENDA'-
BIUM,  ia  the  account-book,  in  which  ocditon
entered  the  uamea  of  their  debton  and  the  auma
wliich  they  owed.  Ai  the  interett  on  borrowed
money  wai  due  on  the  OJendiu  of  each  month,
the  name  of  Qdeidiaiun  waa  giTen  lo  auch  a  book.
(Senec  Dt  Bcvf.  L  2,  Til  10.)  The  word  waa
anbuqueully  used  to  iudioite  a  icgiiter  of  the
daja,  weeka,  and  monthe,  thni  coircapondiug  to  a
modem  "Imaiai-  or  calendar.

I.  Qheee  CALaNDAH.  —  In  the  earlieat  timea
the  diTiaion  of  the  year  into  iu  rarioua  aeaaoni
appcon  lo  baTB  been  rerj  aiiDple  and  rude,  and
it  would  aeem  that  there  waa  no  other  divt-
iion  except  that  i£  aummer  (pifi)  and  winter
(xaifud').  To  Iheaa  itrongly  ntariced  perioda  there
were  afterwarda  added  the  periods  of  tranai-
tion,  lia.  ipring  ((^i)  and  automn  (h^pa),  with
certain  aubdivitioni  according  to  the  different  agri-
cultural pnnuita  peculiar  lo  each  of  them.  Aa,
however,  the  aeaioni  of  the  year  were  of  great
importance  in  regard  to  agricaltore,  it  became
necewaty  lo  fix  theii  beginning  aod  end  by  con-


CALENDARItlM.

neeting  them  with  the  riiing  or  KtUng  of  oratua
BtuB.  Thua  Heiiol  (C^  at  Ditt,  381)  deacribaa
tbe  time  of  tbe  rising  of  the  Pleiadei  aa  ths  tima
for  harreating  (H^irrof),  and  that  of  their  letting
aa  the  tune  for  plongbing  (Ifwriii)  ;  the  time  at
which  Aictuma  roae  in  tbe  morning  twilight  as  tbo
proper  leaaim  for  the  vintage  (/.  e,  607),  and  other
phenomena  in  nature,  anch  as  the  arrival  of  birdi
of  passage,  the  blmoming  of  certuu  plants,  and  the
like,  indicated  tbe  jooper  seaaona  for  other  agri-
cnltural  occupationt  j  but  although  tbey  may  hsra
continued  to  be  obaerved  for  centuries  by  aimpta
nistics,  the^  nera  aeqnirad  any  mipartaiiee  in  tbe
icientific  diviaioii  of  tiie  year. [AffntONOUiA.]

The  moOD being  that heavenly  body  whoae
phoiCi  an  most  oaily  obaerved,  formed  tb«  baaj*
of  the  Oreek  aleudor,  and  oZI  the  religiona  festi-
vals were  dependent  on  it. The  Ureek  ycai  waa
a  lunar  jear  of  twelve  months,  hut  at  Uie  nma
time  the  conrte  of  the  son  also  was  lakon  into
consideration,  and the combination of  the two
<Grmin.  Itag.  6  ;  comp.  Ceniorin.  D«  Die  Nat.  18  [
Cic.  ni  Verr.  iL  62)  involved  the  Gtwks  in  gnat
difficulties  which  rendered  it  almost  impoaaible  for
them  to  place  their  chrcuolDgy  on  a  sure  founda-
tion. It  aeems  that  in  the  early  times  it  waa  be-
lieved that  1 2  rerolntiona  of  the  moon  took  plaoa
within  one  of  the  aun  t  a  calcolatiaa  which  waa
tolerably  correct,  and  with  which  people  wore  aalia-
fied. The  time  daring  which  the  moon  revolved
around  her  axia,  waa  oilcuUled  at  an  areiage  or
round  number  of  30  days,  which  period  waa  tsHed
a  month  (Qemin.  L  c.)  ;  but  even  as  (urly  as  tha
lime  of  Solon,  it  waa  well  known  that  a  lunar
month  did  not  eonlain  30  days,  but  only  29^ Tbo
etior  contained  iu  thia  lalcnlatian  could  not  long
-'main  uoobaerved,  and  attempta  vrere  made  t^
(T«t  it. The  principal  one  waa  that  of  creBtin;
cycle  of  two  years,  called  rptrrripity  at  aamt
Infant,  and  eomaining  25  montha,  one  of  the  two
yeara,  conaiiting  of  12  and  the  other  of  13  montba^
The  ntonthi  thenuelves,  which  m  the  time of
Hesiod  (Op.  1  Diet,  770)  had  been  reckoned  at
30  days,  afterwards  alternately  contwned  30  daya
((uU  months,  w^pfii)  and  29  daya  (hoUow  montha.
KOiXot.) Acctading  to  thia  arrangement,  (me  ycav
of  the  cycle  contained  3S4,  and  the  other  334  days,
and  the  two  together  were  aboot  7^  days  more
' 1  two  tropical or  solar  years. (Oemin.  6 1
serin.  13). When  this  mode  of  mkoning  waa
>duced,  ia  unknown  ;  hat  as  Herodotos  (L  32)
tioDS  It,  it  ti  clear  that  it  mutt  have  been  belois
tune. The  7^  days,  in  the  coarse  of  4  yean,
e  up  a  month  of  30  daya,  and  auch  a  montli
acccfdingly  insotfld  in  every  fourth  yvar,  and
the  cycle  of  four  yeara  was  called  a  nrratniplu
(Censorin.  L  c.) But  a  tar  more  important  cycla
ta  the  Intamiptt,  or  the  cycle  of  8  yean,  for
was  practically  applied  by  the  Oreeka  to  tlw
aSain  of  ordinaiy  life. Tbe  cakulatjon  waa  thia :
aa  the  solar  year  is  redconed  at  865^  dan,  8
auch  year*  ccotain  2923  daya,  and  dght  lonar
yeara  2833  days  ;  that ia, 90  days  less  than  S
reara. Now  these  90  daya  were  ooattitntad
ee  months,  and  inaerted  as  thna  intercalary
la  into  three  difierent  yean  of  tha  ^nvatntplf,
that  is,  into  the  third,  fifth,  and  eighth.  (CeosoriiLi
Ocmin.  tt,  so.) It  alu»ld,  however,  be obaerred
MatTobiuB  (Sal.  L  13)  and  SotinDt  {/UJjiUM.
. itBtc  that  the  three  intercalary  months  wars
all  addedtothelaat^Hit  «f  tlwN


eALBWAHlUM.

itained  tH  dayi.  But
The  period  of  8  soUr
jtu^  bitber,  nmismi  39  rcrolutioiu  of  the
k^n,  wllkb,  »ith  the  addition  of  the  three  inter-
(dirj  miHithi,  make  3923^  dayi ;  to  that  in  eyerj
I  jean  then  a  IJ  daj  tw  matif,  which  in
(be  mane  of  100  jian,  igsin  nDiDimU  to  one
BB^  The  eimeaeterii,  Record  ^  _ .
iKsmrt.  The  line  *t  vhich  the  cjcli
aeanait  mi  introduced  ii  nncertun,  hut  ita  inac-
cuicT  caUed  forth  a  nnmher  of  other  imjnDTemeDtfl
m  attCDapti  at  (atahliihiDg  chrooolc^  on  a  loimd
(■a,  tbe  dhM  celehraled  nmotig  whicli  ii  that  of
ICnoL  Tba  onmber  of  thae  attcmpli  ii  a  auf-
lidiM  proof  that  none  of  them  wu  erer  •ancliDned
•r  adopted  h]r  law  in  an;  of  tlie  Qceck  npuhUcs.

Thae  limiiiiili tenia  it  ahnoat  impoagible  to

in  Oieek  hiilonr  to  the  exact

T^  Otedu,  aa  (arlr  u  Cite


*»«  Otedu,  aa  carW  u  Cite  tin
;eK  Id  ha*e  been  pei&ctl;  bmili
liH  rf  the  jmc  into the twel>


Ifli'iilitt)  er  da;  ii  meabautd.


of  Homer,  u-
with  the  dii^
lunar  numthi
ilenslary  month  (fi^v
ltd.  Independent  of
ue  UniMa  at  a  nonlh  into  dajra,  it  wu  divided
UB  period*  amrding  to  tLe  increaae,  and  decrease
rftheaoaa.  Thnt,  ihefinldaf  orneirniaon  vni
ailed  nvmna-  (Horn.  Oi.  i.  14,  lii.  325,  u.
lil  xiL  358;  Ho.  Q)>.  <1  Dia,  770.)  The
pttiod  fniiB  the  mfii|>(a  undl  the  moon  wa>  fiill,
n  exjaiaatd  bj  ffl^i  fimi^yaii,  aod  the  batter
pan  Imiiw  vbich  the  moon  decnated  by  nvii
itHamtat.  (Han.  Od.  xi*.  1 62.)  The  SOth  day
ef  a  BMMh,  i.  <;  the  day  of  the  conjunetion,  vaa
aStA  TpionU,  or,  aceonlmg  to  a  regulation  of
Solon  (Phit.  ScL  25),  Irq  ml  tin,  betauH  one
fart  «f  that  d^  bi^oaged  to  the  expiring,  and  the
MbtT  to  the  begiiminf  month.  The  day  of  the
Ul  iHBa,  «  the  l|ud^  of  the  month,  ii  ume-
lon  deawnated  by.  3ixi<fU)ru. (Find.  CU.  ir.


CALENDARIUM.

The  month  in  vhich  (he  year  began,  a


well


of  the  monthi,  diflered  ii
lerent  conntries  of  Qreece,  and  ic  eome  parti  evaa
no  namea  eiitted  for  the  monthi,  they  being  dii-
tiiiguiihed  only  numerically,'  ai  the  fint,  Mamd,-
third,  fourth  month,  &c.  In  order,  theiefoie,  to
acquire  any  latis^tory  Ifnovledge  of  the  Oieek
calendar,  the  different  itates  muit  be  coniidered

The  Attic  year  began  with  the  rommer  lolitice,
and  each  month  vaa  diiided  into  three  deeadi,  from
the  lBttolhBlOth,frDm  the  10th  to  the  SOth,  and
from  the  SOtli  to  the  29tli  or  30th.  The  Gnt  day
of  D  month,  <x  the  day  after  the  conjonction,  waa
rsufiTirJa  \  and  ai  the  firet  decod  wai  deaignated  aa
tmanitav  lOfii,  the  dayi  were  regularly  coonted
Bi  ItuTipa,  TpfTTj,  TrrJjjTTj,  &c.,  /«J»lt  lara^U-
rev.  The  daya  of  the  lecond  deaid  were  di»-
tingniihed  ai  tri  tiKo,  ta  laaoZrrot,  and  were
counted  to  20  regularly,  ai  TpAni,  tturipa,  r^mi,
Ttrrifm,  &£.,  iwl  tdm.  The  20lh  ilaelf  waa
called  •Ifcdi,  and  the  dayi  from  the  SOlh  to  the
SOth  were  counted  in  two  different  wayi,  via.
either  onward^  u  wpini,  JnffipB,  t(i(tii,  &c,
iwl  tlxiii,  or  haclfwnrdi  bam  the  laat  day  of  tho
month  with  the  addition  of  ^iyortst,  vwio^i'ov,
X^TotTDi,  or  ii-Wroi,  aa  irrini,  IhkItti,  Ac.,
ipelviirTBi,  which,  of  coune,  are  different  dalea  in
hollow  and  in  fnll  monthi.  Buttbia  mode  of  count-
ing backwardi  aeema  to  have  been  more  CMnnionly
uied  than  the  other.  With  regard  to  the  hollow
tnoothi,  it  mutt  he  observed,  ^t  the  Athenian),
generally  apeaking,  counted  29  daya,  bol  in  tho
month  of  Boedromion  they  eennted  SO,  leaving
out  the  •ecoud,  became  on  that  day  Alhann  and
Poacidou  were  believed  to  hare  diaputed  about  the
poaacHion  of  Attica.  (PIdL  D>  FnU.  Am.  p.  AS'J,
SsfHpiH.  iz.  7.)  The  following  table  ahovi  the
ancceision  of  the  Attic  montha,  the  niunber  of  dayi
they  coDtftinad,  and  the  caneipanding  mootha  <d


10  dayi,  and  ccneapondi  nearly  to


t.  Praaefiaa  (niwa^)  — 21

5.  MaimactBioo  (HairuucTtfw^) — 31
ft  Poaeideoa  (nwaJteA-)  — 2!

7.  Oaveiioa  (r<v«)Ai^->  — K

a.  Antkeaterion  {'ArttartpM)  — 2!

91.  Eh^bolion  ("EAa^toAi^} — 3(
IOl  Nnojchion  (Mwr>xi^>  — 2!

11.  Thargelian  (aofytiKiir}  — W

12.  SeirivbonoD  Ct"f>ofop>>ir>  — 2!
At  Ibc  time when the Julian  Calendar  waa

^Bpted  bf  tlw  Alheniana,  probably  about  the
tise  «f  the  Empemr  Hadrian,  the  lunar  you  Ti-
tian to  have  been  changed  into  the  solar  year ;  and
■1  hM  fiBtber  been  amjcctured,  that  the  beginning


ar  July.
Augnit.

—  —  September

—  —  October

—  —  November

—  —  December.

—  —  January

—  —  FebruuT.

—  —  March.

—  —  May.

of  the  year  waa  trauferred  fiom  the  lummei  ki]-
aiee  to  the  aatnnumt  eqninox.

The  year  of  the  Lacedaemoniani,  which  ia  be-
lieved to  have  benui  at  the  lime  of  the  autumnal
equinox,  contained  the  following  monthi :  —


.  Henuins ('apian
2.  Apdheua  (**"**"«»)
8.  Dtoithjitt  (MAr«u»)
4.  UnknowiL
5l  Eleuainiui  (XAeKrlnor)
8.  Oenatiui  (TtpitTat)

7.  ArtHiAina  ('Apnftlawi)

8.  Delshinini  (AaAffFiax)

9.  Pb&aial  (*A(dffwi>

10.  HecBtsnbena  (^nr^tCvfc)

11.  OafDODi  <XhiMwi)
13.  FaaBui  (lUa^iM)


nearly  correapanding  to  our  October.


■^~  FebraaiT.

—  March.

—  April

—  May.

—  July.


CALENDARIUM.
full;  expluii«d  in  the  voclc  ntvred  to  *t  tlM  end
of  utit  anicl&

OE  the  few  of  Uio  Boeotiau,  which  begui  at
tho  winter 4alitic^  the following mcmtU  m

nouly  coneipondi  to  onr  Joniuuj.
—  — Febnurj,

— -  — Hueh.


a  Siptembei.
October.
Haveaha.


^  — ' Februuy.

—  — March,

—  — May,

—  — July.

roonded  cnly  on  a  oonjectoie,  and  tiw  lut  nay  tw
eitherthelOlii.nth,  orlSthi-


Sat  CALENDARIUM.

It  ihoiild  ba  obHTTcd  that  tha  oriar  of  moit  of
thew  montlu  ii  merely  conjectanl,  and  of  lonie  it
IB  not  efen  certain  a<  to  whether  they  rtsally  wero
Lacedaamonian  nwnthi.  But  hare,  at  in  the  other
liM^  we  fallow  Homaun'i  new,  which  he  hai

1.  Buca^ni  {Bminitui),

2.  Hcimaaui  ('Epfuubi)
S.  Pmtaterioi  (Jlptarariput)

4.  Unknown.

5.  TbeUathiiu  (etiAoiMioi)

6.  Unknown.

7.  Unknown.

8.  Hipliodronmu  C^mtpiiuai)  -

9.  P^iamua  (ILir^uu)  —

10.  Unknown.

11.  Dunatrhu(a4ulrpiu)  -

12.  Alakomeniiu  ('A\aAM>i^vu>i)

Tha  montha  of  tbs  year  at  De

1.  Bocatiui  (BouiuiTioi},  neaiiy

a.  Heneiu  ('Hpiubt)  —

3.  Apellaeiu  CAr'AAuii)  ~-
i.  Unknown.

6.  Dadaphoriu*  (Aflo^^oi)  —

6.  Poetropini  (nonyiirHM)  —

7.  Byiiua  (BArwt)  —

8.  ArtenoBiua  CA^tfJvioi)  —

9.  Hetadeioa  C»p<U\tu>t)  —

10,  Boathoul  (Boci^t)  —

1 1.  llaaiu  OUnut)  ~
13,  Thaoieniui  {atafiruit)

Tha  nanMi  rf  the  montha  at  Cjtiaa  are  given
In  tha  fallowing  order,  though  the  fint  of  them  ii

1 .  Boediomton  (Borrt^fu^), ucaily  aniwan  to  our  Octoher.

2.  Cjaneptinn  {Kvorr^Hir)  — — NoTember.

3.  Apaturion  (^A^anvpuir)  — — December.

4.  Pueideoti  {n«anl«^)  — — Janna/y.

5.  lienaeon  (Ai)hi^v)  — — Fabrauy,

6.  Antbaflerioa  ('A>«faTi)piA>)  — — Maich.

7.  Aitemiaion  (^Afrtiuri^r)  — — ApriL

8.  Calanuwon  (KoAofuu^'}  — ~ lltj.

9.  Paiwmiii  (nJjTifuii)  —  —  June.
10.  Taureon  (Taiipeif)  —  —  July,
]  1  and  12.  ai«  onknowiL

Among  iha  Sicilian  monlhi  the  fbltowii^  an  known  :^

1.  Thnmophoriai  {eM>tsf^iM),  pnhalily  aaiwen  to  tm  OctohMi

2,  Dalioa  (A(Uw(>  — — NomnbA
8.  Unknown.

i,  Agrianiui  CA-)puii'iot)  — — Januaiy,
6.  Unknown.

6.  Tbeodatina  (e<iiSiiruf)  — — Hanh.

7.  Artamitnu  ('A^r^rut)  — — A[riL

8.  Unknown.

9.  Badiomioi  (BoIpJfuot)  — — Jma,

10.  Hyadnthina  <T««(»««»)  — — July.

11.  Cuneioa  (Kap'tHu)  — — Angul.

12.  Panamo*  (lUn^i)  — — Sa^embsr.

Wa  fbrthei'  know  tha  namri  of  Mraral  iaolated
tnonthi  of  other  Onak  itaUa  ;  but  aa  it  ia  ai  yet
imponibla  to  datennine  what  place  they  occnpied
in  the  calendar,  and  with  wUch  of  am  monthi
they  raneapond,  their  enomeiation  here  would  be
of  little  or  no  nie,  Wa  11011  therebra  confine
onnelrea  to  giring  lonia  acconnt  of  the  Macsdoniaa
nwnthi,  and  of  anna  of  the  Aiiatic  citiei  and
iatanda,  which  are  better  known.

On  the  whale  it  iq)pean  that  the  Macedonian
yeat  asmed  with  IhM  of  the  Gnek*,  and  that  ac-


cordingly it  wai  a  lunar  year  of  tvelra  nranlha,
ainm  wa  find  that  Macedonian  monthi  are  daaoibed
aa  coincident  wilk  thoia  of  the  Atheniani.  (Sea
a  leuar  of  King  Philip  in  Demoath.  D*  Coram,
p.  280  1  Plat.  OamO.  19,  Al^  8,  IS.)  AD  cbn.
nidogsa  agree  aa  to  the  order  and  lucceaaiai  of
the  Macedonian  monthi ;  but  we  an  altogether
ignonnt  ■■  to  the  name  and  pUoe  of  the  intenalaiy
month,  which  nnat  hace  eiiited  in  the  Macedonian
year  aa  well  ai  in  that  of  the  Greek  ilatn.  Tha
Older  iiufoUowi:  —  1.  Diua  (Ami),  S.  ApeUaeu


ULENDARIUM.
OAnAAus),  iAudpiiieui  (AMukuoi),  ■


Peri-


ihKiu  (aiwAirfO,  7,  Anemiiiiu  CAprf/iiffmi),
S.  Daaiu*  (AoIituit},  9.  Puemu  (ndn|/wi),
10.  Looi  (AAot),  11.  Oorpiaetu  (rofxuiut).  13.
HTperbcROnu  (Tripetprri^s).  The  difficult;
■  to  idmiifT  the  Macedaman  numtlu  with  ihoie
•I  ibc  AlbcDiaiu.  From  Plntanh  (Ounif.  19,
Ko)!,  wiUi  Jfu.  16)  ve  Ism  t)iat  the  Maeedooiaa

lioo  ;  but  while.  According  to  Philip,  tho  Mbcc-
doniui  LoDi  wu  the  ume  Ai  (he  Athenian
BMdmnion,  Plulonh  (Ala.  S)  identifiei  the
Lon  with  the  Attic  HeoitambaMn.  This  di*-
(n|j*iiej  hu  giicn  rite  to  wiotu  conjectnrei,  Kime
npjMaiig  tbM  between  the  time  of  Philip  and
PliilaRh  a  tmupaiition  of  the  uuDcaof  the  monthi
had  dken  fita,  and  otben  that  Plutarch  made  ■


CALENDARIUM.  22S

mistalce  in  identifying  the  Lom  with  the  Heca-
tombaeon.  Bat  no  utia&ctoiy  lolntion  of  tha
ditGcnltf  haa  yet  been  offered.  We  know  that
the  Macedonian  year  began  with  the  month  of
Diua,  ccmmencing  with  the  antniniial  equinox.
When  Aleiandec  conquered  Aiia,  the  Macedoiuan
calendar  wai  ipread  orei  many  parta  of  Alia,
though  it  onderwent  Taiioni  modincationi  in  tha
dilEerent  coontriea  in  which  it  waa  adopted.  When
aabsequentlj  the  Aiiatici  adopted  the  Julian  Ca-
lendar, thote  modihoitioni  aln  eierdied  their  in-
flnence  and  prodnced  difierencei  In  the  namea  of
the  monthi,  although,  generally  Rieshing^  the  aolar
year  of  the  Aaiatici  b<^an  with  the  antnmnaL  ■
equinox.  Dniing  the  time  of  the  Boman  empajn,
the  following  calendui  occur  in  the  pmyince  of'


1.  Caeaario.  (K««rdp.o.) had  30  daja,  and  tegan  on  tha  24th  of  September.

2.  Tiberiot  (Tie^lMOi)

31

24th  of  October.

SI

24thofNo.ember.

4.  Pondaon  (OoTAUir)

30

2Sth  of  Decemhet.

S.  Leoaeu  <A4>w«t)

2S

2*th  of  January.

30

32d  of  Febnmiy.

31

24thofMBich.

a.  Em^^na  (Ei«rWAu«)

30

24th  of  ApriL

31

24th  of  Mar.

31

24th  of  June.

n.  Ant*™  rA»r«.)

31

aSthoEJuly.

80

—

—

25thofAuguiL

AnxpDgthoEpbwuuw

efindth

1—1.  Unknown.

as  loom

NoTember.

6.  Poieideon  (n«ni!«lr)

7.  Lenaeon  CAi,««fe.>

January.

8.  Unknown.

9.  AitemiiiiHi  CAprfpin^) --

March.

April

11—12.  Unknown.

later  time  the  Epheaiani  adopted  the  sune  1  with  the  month  of  Dim on the 2<lli of

ca  aa  the  Mf"^'"""'!  and  began  their  year  j  tember.


TheMowinj
J.  Hezaeua  ('Hpw4),

2.  HcrmBeoi  (^  Epfimoiy

3.  Metroui  (Mtrpro>)

4.  Dionyiiua  (^oniiruij)
6l  Hencleim  ('HpdirA(ut}

5.  I>iat(Aun)

7.  Beudidaeni  (BtrUtoui)
B.  Strateini  (XTfJertua)
9.  Periepraa  {Uipitrun)
la  Areini  {'Afiot)

Aphrodiuni  CAfpaJCirtsi)
"  ■—  (Aji/i^rpuH)


;  ia  a  lilt  of  the  Bithyniao  months :  —
contained  31  daya,  and  began  chi  tha  23id  of  September.

—  30  —  2«h  of  October.

—  Si  —  23nl  of  NoTember.

—  SI  —  24lh  of  December.

—  28  —  24th  of  January.

—  31  —  2UtofFebniaiy.

—  SO  —  24th  of  March.

—  31  —  23rdofAprCL

—  30  —  24th  of  May.

—  31  —  23rd  of  June.

—  80  —  24th  of  July.

—  31  —  23td  of  Angnit.


The  following  lyatem  wai  adopted  by  the  Cypriani :  -


1.  Aphnidiaini  CAfpoHirioi),

^  Apwiniaia  CAwa'>«Furj$f)

1  A^na  (Airucifi)

1.  jDlin  (tdiMoi)

i.  raiJiilin  (gaijrf^ni)

6.  Sebuliu  (Sttmrrii)

7.  AntOOTtoriena  (Afrroicpm-opuiii)
a.  DmdDchexnuni  (Ainiapx'i''^'")
a  FbtbyiiatBa  illXjfiiwarBi)

aOM  CffX^fi'^


d  began  on  the  23rd  of  September.
24  th  of  October.
23rd  of  November.
24thofI>a»nber.
24th  of  Jonnai;.
Slat  of  February.
23rd  of  March.
23rd  of  April
24th  of  Kb;.
23rd  of  Jane.
24th  of  July.
23idof  Ai^gqadp

I '  --•  -  c^


Rfl  CALENDARIUM.

Tha  lyiUm  of  tbe  Civtau  wu  iha  Mine  u  th&t

1.  Thomopliisioa  (Btvfia^tpiii'),  nmUuned  .

2.  Hennacu  {'Efvui^i) —  i

3.  liintui  (E^uor) —  1

4.  MetarcMni  (M»ti^ioj) —  !
6.  Apjioi  ('Atuioi) —  ;

6.  DuKcnnu  {AiiaKoupat)  —

7.  Theodoniu  {Btotiiriet) —  i


CALENDARIUH.


8.  Poni


.  (nirro,)


9.  Rhabiuthiiu  ('PofMuu)  —

10.  Hjperberetqi  (Tit.ptJptTiii)  —

U.  Neeyrim  (Ntnimoi)  —

12.  Bwlioi  (BosDuai)  —

It  alioDld  be  obaerred  that  nreial  of  tb«  Enilen
netione,  for  Uie  pnipiwe  of  prevention  confaaion  ir
their  oJculatioiu  irilh  cllier  nMiooa,  dropped  tlii
TUUDci  of  theii  mmtlu,  tmd  merely  couated  tlii
monthi,  u  the  fint,  Mcond,  thiid,  Slc  taaaxh.
For  fbitlier  infornution  >«  Conini,  Fait.  AU^
vhicii  lioAGver  ii  rery  imperfect ;  Ideicr,  liand-
budi  dtr  Malitn.  ■.  tedmitdm  dronoi.  toL  i.  p.
227,  See. ;  Glinlon,  FaiL  Hiliai.  ToL  ii.  Append,
lix  ;  and  more  eepecisUy  R.  F.  Hcniann,  Uiier
OriaiucAe  Momtihmd),  Oottingen,  1844,  4ta.,
and  Th.  Bergk,  Batraga  nr  GruoiuBAai  Monati-
hmde,  OituKii,  ]e45,  Svo.  [L  S.j

2.  RoHjN  Calikdih. — Thiyear^JiomiUii:
— The  nime  of  Bomulm  ii  cooimoiily  attiulied  to
the  year  vluch  ii  nid  to  have  pnivled  io  the
(«ilieit  time*  of  Borne ;  but  tradition  ii  not  im-
liatent  with  ngsrd  to  the  fbnn  of  it  The  hit-
toriana  Licinini  Hacer  end  Fenettella  maintained
that  the  oldeit  year  ctmiiited  of  twetie  monthi,
nnd  thai  it  wai  already  in  thaw  dayi  an  nun
wrUu,  that  ii,  a  year  which  coincided  with  the
period  of  the  lua'i  conne.  Ceniorinui,  howerer,
in  whoH  walk  thil  gtatement  occun  (,De  Die
Nalali,  c  20 ;  coin[an  alia  the  be^nuiog  of  c  19),
gD«  on  to  tay  that  more  crcdil  u  due  to  Oiac.
eaniu,  Fulviiu  (Nobilior),  Vano,  and  olher^  «e-
coidiog  to  whom  the  Romaiu  iu  the  earliett  timei,
like  the  people  of  Alba  from  whom  they  ipnng,
allotted  to  the  year  but  ten  monthi.  Tbia  opinion
)i  mppoitod  by  Ovid  in  iSTenl  peaaagea  of  hii
Fold  (L  27,  4S,  iiL  99,  119,  161) ;  hy  GeLini
{NocL  AIL  iil  16),  Macrobioi  (Sahm.  L  12),
Solinna  {PMl.  L),  and  Serriui  (_ad  G»Ty.  i  43).
Idaily,  an  old  Latin  year  of  ten  montfai  ii  implied
in  the  lact,  that  at  Laurentuni  (Maenb.  L  IB)  a
Bcrifice  waa  offered  to  Jono  Ealendaria  on  the
fii¥l  of  erety  month  except  Fehmary  and  Jinnaiy.
Theae  ten  montha  were  called  Harthii,  Aprilu,
Maiui,  Jonina,  Qoinctilia,  Sextilii,  September,
October,  Norember,  December.  That  March  wai
the  Gnt  month  in  the  year  ii  implied  in  the  lait
ail  names ;  and  eren  Plutarch,  who  ucribet  twelve
monthi  to  the  Romolian  year  {Nunia,  e.  13),
phicea  Janaariai  and  Fobraariua  at  the  end.  The
foci  ia  also  confirmed  by  the  ceremony  of  rekindling
the  racrcd  Bre  in  the  temple  of  Veala  on  the  fint
day  of  March,  by  the  practice  of  placing  &eih
lanteli  in  the  piibbc  building*  on  that  day,  and  by
many  other  cnitomt  recorded  by  Macrabini  (l
12).  With  regard  to  the  length  of  the  numtha,
Cenaorinna,  Maerobiua,  and  Solinni  agree  in  aicrib-
ing  thirty-one  daya  to  four  of  them,  called  pifm
■uhjb;  thirty  to  the  iCBt  called  can' nauaf.  Tha
four  longer  montha  were  Martini,  MaJni,  Qnkie-
tilii,  and  October;  and  theie,  ai  Maaabia*  ob-


—  23rd  of  November.

—  24lh  of  Dccemhec;

—  24  th  of  Janoaiy.

—  21rt  of  February.

—  23rd  of  March.

—  23rd  of  ApriL

—  S4lh  of  May.

—  23rd  of  June.

—  34th  of  July.
~~  23rd  of  Auguat

■ervca,  wen  diatingoiihed  in  the  Inleit  form  of
the  Roman  calendar  by  bavins  their  none*  twa
daya  later  than  any  of  the  other  moDlha.  The
lymmctrr  of  Ihia  anangement  will  appear  by
pUcine  the  numben  in  lucceiaion:  —  31,  30  ;  31,
30;  31,30,30;  31;  30,30.  Ovid,  indeed,  iii-
peaia  to  ipiali  of  the  montha  ai  coinciding  with  tba

"Annni  eiat  dedmumcunlnna  repleventaaDnm:'*
but  the  language  of  a  poet  mntt  not  be  pnaaed  bra
doiely.  On  the  other  band,  Plntareh,  ia  the  poa-
■age  already  reteind  to,  while  he  aaaigni  to  the  old
year  twelve  montha  and  S65  dayi,  ipeakB  of  the
monthi  aa  varying  wilhoot  ayitem  between  the
limit!  of  twenty  and  thiity-five  dayi.  Such  an
{[regularity  ii  not  incredible,  ai  we  find  that  even
when  Cenaorinui  wrote  (a.  d.  23S),  the  Alban
calendar  gave  3$  daya  to  March,  22  to  May,  IS  to
Seitilii,  and  16  to  September ;  while  at  Tuacnhus
Quinctilli  had  36  daya,  October  32 ;  and  again  at
Aricia  tho  aima  month,  October,  had  no  lea  than
39.  <CenI0Iinnl^  c  22.)  The  Romulian  year,  if
we  follow  the  majority  of  oathon,  oonlained  bat
304  daya ;  a  period  differing  ao  widely  from  tlie  real
length  of  the  Km'a  coone,  that  the  montha  wonld
rapidly  revolve  through  all  the  leaaona  of  the  year.
Thii  inconvenience  wai  remedied,  iay>  Maerobiua
(L  13),  1^  the  addition  of  the  proper  namber  of
daya  lequired  to  complete  the  year ;  bat  theae  daya,
he  goea  on  to  Bay,  did  not  leoeive  any  name  ai  a
moutL  Serviui  apeaka  of  the  mtercalated  period
at  conuating  of  two  montha,  which  at  fint  Imd  no
name,  but  were  eventually  called  after  Jonui  and
Februni.  That  lome  lyitem  of  intcrcalatioa  w«a
employed  in  the  Romulian  yeaj,  vai  olio  the
opinion  of  Lidniua  Maccr.  (Mofrob.  L  IS.)  Thia
^^>ean  to  be  all  that  ii  handed  down  with  regard
to  the  earlieat  year  of  the  Romani.

At  a  y(«r  of  ten  mouthi  and  304  dayi,  at  once
fiilli  greatly  thort  of  the  aolor  year,  and  contaiua
no  exact  number  of  lonitioni,  lome  have  gone  ao
far  at  to  ditpnte  the  truth  of  the  tiadiliiHi  in  whole
or  part,  while  othen  have  taxed  their  ingenoity  to
auonnt  for  the  adoption  of  ao  ascHUaloua  a  year.
Potoanni  <£«  ffvidiaa,  in  Otaevioi'  Theiaanu,
voL  viiL),  calling  to  mind  tbat  the  old  Roman  or
Etruican  week  contained  eight  dayi  *,  eveiy  eighth

*  Hence  there  ore  found  attached  to  tha  mc-
ceauve  daya  in  the  old  calendara  the  recnrring-
aeriet  of  letten  A,  B,  C,  D,  £,  F,  0,  H,  no  doubt
for  the  purpooe  of  fixing  the  nundinea  ia  the  wnlc
of  eight  dayi ;  pieciacly  in  the  aame  way  in  which
the  fint  (even  Iclten  an  atill  employed  in  ecds>
(iatttcal  calendar^  to  mark  the  daya  of  tha  ChrU-


CALENDARIUH.
iar  being  ipecuUl;  dcTotcd  to  nligioui  and  other
poblk  poipmci,  UDder  ths  BUne  of  aataa  or  mi-
^u«,  m*  Ilw  fint  U  psillt  OBt  that  tha  nnmber
»4  ii  ■  incM  maltiplB  of  dght  To  tbii  obKrr-
■BiB,  ID  indf  of  littla  Bomeat,  Niebohr  hu  giTcn
mac  weight,  b;  fmher  noticing  llml  the  38  mm-
diiH  ia  k  TCU  of  S(M  d«yi  lallj  exictl;  frilli  the
nunbcc  M  dirt  JaiH  aftcnnudi  retained  id  the
laUta  calendar.  ADotber  writer,  Pooleden,  ob-
■sTcd  that  304  bore  to  SGfi  daji  imbiIj  tie  ratio
ef  5  to  0,  fix  of  the  Komolian  ^eofi  smtaioijig
It'll,  Si«  ef  tbo  longer  psiodi  1625  dayi;  ud
Siebnhr  (Rom.  Hid.  tdL  L  p.  271),  who  is  a  wanti
•dnKate  of  the  leD-mooth  jeai,  hu  made  much  ue
tf  ifaie  MuidrentioiL  He  that  exjduui  the  origin
nf  the  wcil-known  qninquemual  ptviod  caned  the
loMRB,  which  Cenearinm  (&  18)  eipnnly  csDa
B  ■*■■>  M^giwii  that  ia,  in  the  modem  hugoi^
of  ctnaology,  a  ejck.  IfoTovra^  tba  ;oar  ot  ten
KBUhi,  nji  tin  lune  writer  (p.  279),  wu  the
Irm  fisr  nunnmi^  for  pejing  portiou  left  hj  will,
fs  oedil  DD  the  lele  of  Jeui;  profit! ;  nunt  pro-
taUf  for  all  toane ;  and  it  wai  the


IF<N


Lealj,  he  findi  in  the  axittenoe  of  thit  ihort  year
tkc  Kiliniiia  of  oertain  hielarical  diffimltiea.  A
ptao,  or  nuber  truce,  with  Vsii  wa*  concluded
IB  the  jtar  2a0  of  Bonn,  for  40  jean.  Id  316
Fideaae  reroliAd  and  joined  Veii,  vbich  impliet
ibt  Vtii  wai  almdj  at  war  with  RoiDe )  yet
ihi  Veieatanee  an  not  aecnaed  of  having  famkra
ihnr  oBiha.  (Lit.  it.  1 7.)  Again,  a  twenly-y ean'
mm,  made  in  329,  ii  nid,  by  Livy,  Is  uve  ez-
prcd  b  347  (it.  38.)  Thew  &cti  are  exphuned
fmng  the  yean  in  qneation  to  hare  been
I  ten  nKsUiB,  lor  40  of  theie  are  eqaal
B  m  erdinary  Tean,  90  to  Ifi) ;  n  that  the
fvma  tnce  termmated  in  314,  the  latter  in  S46.
:>ia)ilBilj,  the  trace  of  eight  yeari  eonclnded  with
liie  Volacbna  m  323,  extended  in  Jael  to  no  DMre
tbm  Sf  fiill  yean ;  and  hence  the  Voliciini  re-
nmed  tiM  war  in  331,  wilhont  eipoaii^  tiiem-
•eirn  to  the  charge  of  peljury.

1  lu«e  iovmiooi  and  perh^n  ladabetory  epecn-
kikn*  tt  the  German  critic^of  nniiH  inqily  that
tile  dedmeatiHl  year  itill  anrriTod  loog  after  tha
r  -ail  guwnBion  had  ctaaed  (  and  in  &ct  he  be-
liena  that  thia  year,  aad  the  hmar  year,  ai  deter-
Biud  by  ScaUgCT^  peopoeed  cycle  of  22  yearv


mbcr  af  eiglit-4ay  wedca  ;  eight  of  tlie  monUu,
t*  iiMlann,  faarioE  (bar  nich  weoi,  the  two  othen
bn  three.  Eno  m  the  ao-called  calendar  of  Noma
Ttr  tad  the  Emacan  week  affiming  the  dirision
•(  the  noBth,  them  being  eight  daji  between  the
ami  and  idrO,  fram  which  dtmniilaiicea  tfae  nonoi
neeifed  thdr  name  ;  and  again  two  each  veelu
tam  tb*  hIc*  to  the  Old  of  the  month  )  and  thii,
■lirtte  tk«  wbok  moath  ecotaiiMd  31  or  29  dayi.
Tb  r»r  a/  Nwma.  — Hsrine  deaeribed  the
Hwailiiii  year,  Ceneorinna  (c  90)  pnceedi  thai :
—  -  Abanrdi,  either  by  Nuna,  a*  Fnlnw  hai
i^  or  BCEordiiv  to  Joniu  by  Taiqnin.  there  wu
iitfitalBd  A  yenr  of  twelre  mon^  and  35£  daya.


CALENDAHIUM.  227

prolAble,  to  that  supenllLioDi  feeling,  Bcci>rding  to
which  on  odd  nuiDber  su  accounted  full  (pAnuu)
and  more  fortunsta.  Be  thia  u  it  may,  to  the
year  which  had  [reTiouily  been  in  u>e  (that  of
Romnloi}  ono-and-fifty  dayi  wore  row  added ;  but
u  theee  wennotnifficient  tocooititnte  twomoutha,
a  day  wu  taken  fnnn  each  irf  the  before-mentioned
hallow  montha,  which  added  thento,  made  up  67
dayi,  ml  of  which  two  moDtha  were  formed,  Janu-
arini  with  29,  and  Febraoriiu  with  28  dayb  Thui
all  the  mmtha  henceforth  wera  full,  and  contained
an  odd  nomber  of  daya,  nie  Febraarioa,  which
alone  wu  hollow,  and  hence  deemed  more  unlucky
than  the  net"  In  thia  psuaga  it  ii  fitting  to  ob-
aerre  that  tha  terma  plod  and  ODoi  MaiuEf  are  q>-
idled  in  a  eeaie  preciaci;  oi^onte  to  the  ptacUoe  of
tha  Oreek  laiHtiage  in  the  phraeu  fiqrcr  wAqpeir
and  uiXoi.  The  mytteriou  poner  aacribed  to  on
odd  nnmber  ii  fiuniliar  from  the  ffmium  dwi  tn-
of  VirgiL Pliny  kIm  {H.  N.  uriii.


i)ol


It  w


of  conrae  impoeaibla  ti


iber  of  dayi  at  the  ■
tno  year  on  ine  one  hand,  and  to  each  of  the  twdve
moDlhi  on  the  olha  ;  end  yet  the  object  wu  in
•ome  meaaore  eSeeted  by  a  diTiaion  <i  February
itaelf  iola  23  days,  and  a  MpeniumetarT  period  of
Gtc  daya.  (See  the  nwde  of  inlmalation  below.)
The  year  of  Nmna  then,  aocording  to  Cenacrinoa,
contnined  65£  dayi.  Plutarch  telli  nt  that  Namu
eetimated  the  aoomaiy  of  the  nm  nod  nwon,  by
which  he  mesn*  the  difference  between  twolTe
lunationi  and  the  run's  annual  coune  at  deren
dayi,  i.  a.  the  difference  between  SGfi  and  35*  daya.
Mactobinr,  too,  sayi  that  the  year  of  Noma  had  at
£ist  3S4,  ajftervardi  355  daya.  Compare  herewith
Lit.  i  19 ;  Grid.  Faiti,  L  43,  iii.  151 ;  AureL
Vict,  c  3  ;  FlotUB,  i.  2  ;  Solinu),  o.  1.

TvelTB  hmationa  amonot  to  SG4  dayt,  Sh.  40'
36",  n  that  the  ao-caaiod  ytsr  of  Nnina  wu  a
tolerably  correct  lunar  year ;  thoogh  Ihe  monthi
would  hBTe  coincided  more  accurately  with  the
■ingle  lunationi,  if  they  had  been  limited  to  SO  and
39  daya,  innead  of  31,  29,  and  28  daya.  That  it
wu  in  bet  ad^ited  to  the  nioon'i  coium  ii  the  can-
current  asiertioD  of  ancient  wflters,  more  patticu-
lariy  of  Livy,  who  uyi :  (iVsma)  tmxiiBH  primaui

Unfortnnately  howeTer,  many  of  the  ajne  writers
aacribe  to  the  nune  period  the  introduction  of  inch
a  ayotem  of  interca^ion  u  mut  at  once  have  dis-
located the  coincidence  between  the  civil  month
and  the  hinar  period.  At  the  end  of  two  yean
the  year  of  Nnma  would  have  been  about  22  dayi
in  amar  of  the  aolar  period,  and  accDTdingly  it  ii
laid  an  intercalary  month  of  that  duniiJo^  or  else
of  23  daya,  wu  inserted  at  or  near  tha  end  of  Feb-
niaiy,  lo  bring  the  civil  year  into  agreement  with
the  regular  return  of  the  acaaona.  Of  thia  lyittm
of  intercalation  a  nun  accurate  account  shall  pre-
•ently  be  nven.  Bnl  th«ii  ii  itnmg  reuon  fiir
believing  uat  thii  particular  mode  id  mtercabtion
wu  not  eoutempoiary  in  origin  with  the  year  of

In  antiqturian  snbjects  it  wiU  gsnenl^  be  fnmd

that  the  uiiilance  Of  etymology  is  eisential  i  be-
cause the  original  names  that  belong  to  an  initito-
tion  often  continue  to  eiiit,  even  after  such  changes
hiTB  been  introduced,  that  they  are  no  longer
adopted  to  the  new  order  of  things ;  thus  they
useful  mempriaWof  the  [oat, In^

a  3  '^


223  CALGNDARIUU.

vmy  we  uc  enable  oj  the  original  niaiaing  of
worda,  aided  bj  &  few  TnigmeDtj  of  a  Cnditioiuil
chuBcter,  tn  itate  that  the  Romaai  in  eaiij  timet
pnuened  a  year  which  altogethec  depended  upon
the  phasei  of  the  moon.  The  Latin  word  mettii
(Varro,  D>  Ling.  Lai.  Ti,  or  in  the  old  edilioni,  y.
£4),  tike  the  Qreek  fil)'  or  Ifli,  and  the  Eugliih
mo«A,  or  Qerman  aoaati,  a  erideutlj  connecled
with  the  word  mooR.  Again,  while  in  the  Greek
language  the  name  muiattia  (new-mooii),  or  Ini
lad  r4a,  ^Ten  to  the  fint  itj  of  a  month,  betntyi
itfl  lunar  origin,  the  eune  remit  ii  deduced  fnnn
the  explanation  of  the  word  kalmdae^  aa  fbond  in
Macrobiut  (L  16).  "  la  andent  times,"  iaj>  that
writer,  "  before  Cn.  Fhtrini  the  acribe,  agsinit  the
pleainie  of  the  patricianj,  made  the  &iti  known  to
the  whole  people  (the  end  of  the  ith  century  b.  c.),
it  wai  the  dutj  of  one  of  the  pootificea  muiorea  to
look  out  [or  the  firat  appennnce  of  Ihe  new  moan  ;
and  aa  aoon  aa  he  deacnod  it,  to  carry  word  to  the
rex  aacrilicnln^  Then  a  sacrifice  was  offered  by
these  priests,  after  which  the  same  pontiFex  haTing
Bnmmoaed  the  pleba  (aJata  pitbt)  to  a  place  in  the
capitol,  neat  the  Cnria  Calabra,  which  adjoins  the
Coia  Romnli,  there  announced  the  niunber  of  dttja
which  still  remained  to  the  nonea,  whether  Atc
or  aOTen,  by  ao  often  repeatini;  the  word  ffnXA,^
There  woa  no  necessity  to  write  this  last  word  in
Greek  characters,  as  it  belonged  lo  the  old  Latin.
In  fact,-  in  this  rery  passage,  it  occun  in  both
calala  and  adaira  ;  and  again,  it  remained  lo  the
latest  timei  in  the  wotd  nomadator.  In  n^ard
to  the  paasage  here  quoted  from  Maaobiua,  it  must
be  recollected  that  while  the  moon  is  id  the  inline-
ijiate  licinity  of  the  inn,  it  it  impossible  to  see  it
with  the  naked  eye,  so  that  the  day  on  which  it  ia
first  seen  is  not  of  neoasity  the  day  of  the  actual
conjunction.  Wo  learn  elsewhere  that  aa  aoon  aa
the  pontifex  diacoTered  the  thin  disc,  a  hymn  was
aung,  beginning  Jaoa  movdia,  the  word  Jana  (Mo-
crob.  Sat.  I  9  ;  Vun,  Dt  Re  RaaL  L  37)  being
only  a  dialectic  variety  of  Diana,  just  as  Dieipiler
or  Diupitcr  cotresponds  to  Jupiter  ;  and  other  ex-
amples might  readily  be  giren,  for  the  chongo  occurs
in  almoflt  erery  word  which  has  the  syllablei  de  or
or  di  before  a  Tovfel-  Again,  the  consecution  of
the  kalends  to  Juno  (Orid.  Faiti,  1  65,  vi.  39  ;
Mocmb.  Sai.  L  9.  IG)  is  nfbmd  by  the  latter
writer  to  the  fiut  that  the  months  originally  began
with  the  moon,  and  that  Jnno  and  Lnna  are  the
same  goddess  ;  and  the  poet  likewise  paints  at  the
aame  connection  in  his  explanation  of  Jnno^
epithet  Lucina.  MoreoTer,  at  Laurentum  Juno
was  wonhippedasJunoKoIendaris.  £>en  so  late
as  448  B.  c  strictly  tunai  months  were  i^l  in  use  ;
for  Dionpins  (Anlij.  x.  £9)  says  that  Appius,  in
that  year,  received  the  consular  authority  on  tho
ides  of  May,  being  the  day  of  full  moon,  for  at
that  time,  he  adds,  the  Romans  regulated  their
mmllia  by  the  moon.  In  bet,  is  completely  was
the  day  of  l3te  month,  which  they  called  the  ides,
associated  with  the  idea  of  the  fiiU  moon,  that
aome  derived  the  word  i>b  Tai  (Rout,  ^uod  to  die
fijmui  tpedem  lana  demmtrei.  (Maoab.  Slid.')
Quietly  to  inaeit  the  idea  of  pfanim,  when  the
Greek  word  signified  merely  tpfoewi^  is  in  accord-
ance with  those  loose  notions  which  preTBJled  in
■11  ancient  aHonpta  at  e^mology.  But  though
the  derivation  ia  of  eonne  gronndlesi,  it  ia  of  his-
torical value,  OS  showing  t3ie  notion  coDnecled  with


CALENDAR!  UM.

For  the  same  reason  probably  the  ides  of  March
wen  selected  for  the  sacrifice  to  the  goddess  Anna
Ferenna,  in  irtioBa  name  we  hare  nothing  more
than  the  feminine  fbnn  of  the  word  onns,  which,
whether  written  with  one  a  or  two,  whether  in  its
simple  Ibrm  aaum,  a  diminutive  iwaAlt,  still
always  signifies  a  drtte.  Hence,  as  the  maacnlino
form  was  easily  adopted  to  denote  the  period  al
the  ton'^  course,  so  the  feminine  in  like  manner
might  well  be  employed  to  signify,  first  the  moon'a
roYolution,  and  then  the  moon  heraelt The  l»n-

repeated,  first  as  a  mala  and  then  as  a  female  deity,
has  been  noticed  by  Niebohr ;  and  there  occurs  a
complete  puallel  in  the  name  Diinus,  atlem'arda
Janus,  (or  the  god  of  liiM,  orlightjthe  sun;  Diana,
afterwards  Jana,  Ibr  the  goddess  of  light,  the  moon;
to  say  nothing  of  the  words  Jupiter  and  Juno.
That  the  month  of  March  sheold  have  been
selected  arose  from  its  being  the  first  of  the  year,
and  a  sacrifice  to  the  moon  might  well  take  place
on  the  day  when  her  power  is  fidly  displayed  to
man.  The  epithet  Ferenna  itself  means  no  more
than  evsr-sniaf;.  Nay,  Haerobina  himself  (c  1 2)
connects  the  two  wivds  with  OMuit,  when  he  stalea
the  abject  of  the  sacrifioa  to  be— xJ  amor*  perta-
nareqaa  o^mnoiif)  Uoeai.

Another  argument  in  favour  of  the  lunar  origin
of  tho  Roman  month,  is  dedudble  &om  the  practice
of  counting  the  days  backward  from  the  Kalends,
Nones,  and  Ides;  Ibr  thephtasea  will  then  amount
to  saying  —  "  It  wants  so  many  days  to  the  new
moon,  lo  the  ttrst  qnarter,  to  full  moon."  It  weald
be  difficult,  on  any  other  hypoihcaia,  to  accennc  for
the  adoption  of  a  mode  of  calculation,  which,  to  onr
notioni  at  Icosl,  is  so  inconTenient ;  and  indeed  it
is  expressly  recorded  that  this  practice  was  derived
from  Greece  nnder  which  term  tho  Atheniana
probably  are  meant ;  and  by  these  we  know  that
a  strictly  lunar  year  was  employed  down  to  a  late
period- {Macrob.  i,  16.)

But  perhapa  the  most  deciuvo  proof  of  all  lie*
in  the  simple  statement  of  LiTy  (i  1 9),  that  Numa
BO  r^pjlated  bis  lunar  year  of  twelve  months  by
the  injwrtion  of  intercalary  months,  that  at  the  end
of  every  tMtUiMh  year  it  again  coincided  with


We  qnote  the  text  j  because  editors,  in
support  of  a  theory,  have  taken  the  liberty  of  alter-
ing it  by  the  insstion  of  the  vrord  qmaria^  forget-
ting too  that  tha  words  qmarta  rt  nceetimo  wma
signify,  notmery  taeatf-fourA  year,  which  their
theory  requires,  but  every  taaifViird,  accordmg
to  that  peculiar  riew  of  the  Romans  which  led
them  to  count  both  the  extremes  in  dcfioiiu  tha
interval  &om  one  point  to  another ;  and  wttich  stiU
survives  in  the  medical  phiaaca  tertian  and  fwrtoia
well  as  in  the  French  anreasioDS  keit
jcvn  for  afaibe^A.
Accordingly,  il


Now  19  years,  it  is  wall  known,  CO
convenient  eyde  fw  tha  coiyuiictioii  -

tolaryear.  A  mean  Innationi  or  synodic  montltiac


CALEKDARIUM.
(odi^  bi  atodcTii  utrmMEpj,  ii  IM.  12K  44'  3",
«cd  *  B>t«n  BupiaJ  )^M  365d.  ih.  4B'  <S".  Hence
it  wiU  ba  fuinil,  Uiat  23£  lnnalinn>  uDOunt  to
(i9S9d.  IGh.  SI'  4G",  vhils  19  tropical  j«n  pre
SaSai.  14h.  27'  13",  »  thmt  the  differeoce  ii  onlj
Sh.  4'  S3".  Altturngb  it  mi  mly  in  ihs  Keaiui
cnilD^  B.a  thu  Hippuclmi  gaie  to  titrDnomicat
otiaemtioiii  a  niocljr  which  cmild  pretend  to  dtal
viih  Kceodt*;  jel  cren  in  the  ngal  period  oF
Rome,  the  Onek  towni  in  the  mhIIi  of  loHj  muft
■ZnadT  hKTe  jnniieii  il  >itTaiiiiiiier«,  from  whom  the
»ili.w— rt»  of  l^thuu  eoald  hiTs  bsmwed  mch  a
nifh  pnetical  knmriedge  of  both  the  moon  and
BD^  period,  w  wu  rafficieat  to  ihow  thu  at  the
Old  of  19  Kiki  ;ea»  the  moon'e  *ge  would  he


e  ncoUeetsd  that  the  name  of  Nimu  ii
i  bf  tnditiBn  with  the  Iwning  of
At  an^  nte  a  cycle  of  19  yeait
«  Meton  at  Atlwni,  in  the  year
4X1  B-c  i  md  the  knowledge  of  it  among  the
learard  naj  probabljr  haie  pieeeded  bf  a  long
period  it*  intnidDctioa  into  papalar  nee,  the  more
■a  aa  rd^iona  fstiTale  are  generally  connected
*ilh  llw  Tarioa  diriiiBia  of  time,  and  Btpentitian
t^cti^ve  Toold  be  moit  cenainlj  oppoecd  to  in-

haTc  bitenalMed  in  their  1 9  lunar  jean  the  wren

the  rtoU  Bomber  of  2M  (->  1  a  ■  1 9 -f  7  )  Iimationi,
ie  a  labteet  npoo  wbicb  it  venid  ho  luoleH  to


the  date  (C  the  change.  We  haTe  Kcn,  bo
that  ens  in  the  year  448  *.  c,  the  yew  wi
Rfnlaie4  liy  the  nun'i  conne.  To  thii  m
.  added  that,  ■eesriii^  to  Toditanna  and  (
H^dna.  a  bill  on  the  mbjecl  of  iulercalatic
n  the  people  by  thoee  decemTii
vs  new  table*  to  the  preceding  Ten
3),  that  i*  in  the  year  450  b.  c  That
B  at  theie  decemriri  ma  called  to  the
a  aho  pniTed  by  the  eoDleDta  of  the
EIrfBith  Table,  vhennn  it  ii  decreed  that  "  (he
fcatinla  ihall  be  let  down  in  the
haie  tba  aothocity  of  Vam  indeed,  that  b  ayilem
•f  intcnalalioD  already  eiitted  at :
iir  he  any*  that  there  waa  a  reiy
jtiaTHi  «■  a  bnnie  pillar  by  K  Pinaiioi  and  Fnritu
in  their  aamlate  an  aunfio  mitnalarit  oncnMi
We  add  ibe  laM  wiffdi  in  Latin  from  the  text
UaimbiDa  (c  13),  beooae  their  import  ia  donbtfuL
If  BC  ace  rignl  in  interpreting  them  thni — "  the
date  iqwi  which  ii  erpreeaed  by  a  month  called
■■laniiriiji."  all  that  ia  meant  may  be  one  of  the
iaiiiialaij  I"™''— "i  which  mnat  hare  eiiate'
era  in  iba  old  lunar  Tear.  At  the  period  of  th
dnfaninl  leaiahtien  there  waa  probably  inititnte
llu  fixB  of  tiw  year  of  U4  di^  which  waa  col
~  d  by  tke  abttt  iotercahny  mnith,  cafled  Mel
"  "  ■"■  !  bat  to  cofTscted  ai  t
iiBofallcnnneetioa  wit
Tbe  leu^  of  tbe  aeTtnl  m


CALENDARIUM.  |

diturymantha  whi  probably  Ibal  which  Ce
ha*  emmeonily  allotted  to  the  montha  of
lunar  year,  liz.: —

Martini 31  dayt.

ApriUa 29 „

Mttina -


39 ,


September  39  di
October 31
NoTember  39


I 29 „


Such,  at  an;  rale,  waa  the  number  of  daya  in
each  month  inunediately  prior  to  the  Julian  conec-
tion  1  (or  both  Cemorinui  and  Uacrobiua  uy  that
Caeaar  added  two  daya  to  Jannariui,  Seitllii,  and
December,  and  cme  to  Apniia,  Jnniui,  September,
Hence  Niebuhr  i


la  {yoL  ]i


1179)


that  July  acquired  two  more  daya  at  the  refonn-
ation  of  the  calendar,  and  founda  thereon  a  charge
cf  caiele«neu  af^init  Livy.  HoreoTer  that  No-
Tember had  but  29  daya  prior  to  the  correction^  in
other  wDida,  that  the  XVII.  KbL  Dec  immediately
ibllowcd  the  Idna  Not.,  appean  from  a  comparison
of  CiuiD^  letten  to  Tiro  {Ad  Fam.  in.  7.  9) ;
tor  he  leacbea  Corcyia  a.  d.  V.  Id.  Nov.,  and  on
the  XV.  KaL  Dec.  complain*— Sj)(miB(»jiBn  ditm
itatbaautr.  The  Kren  daya  in  quealion  would  be
IV.  Id.,  III.  Id.,  Prid.  Ii,  Id.  Not.,  XVII.  KaL
Dec,  XVI.  KaL  Dec,  XV.  KaL  Dec  That  the
place  of  the  nmei  and  idea  waa  in  each  month  the
■ame  before  the  Julian  correction  ai  afterwaida,  ia
Biaerted  by  Macrohini.

The  main  difiicnity  ia  with  regard  to  Clio  modo
of  inleTcalBtion.  Plutarch,  we  haTe  already  ob-
leTTcd,  apealu  of  an  intercalation,  by  him  referred
to  Nuna,  of  29  daya  in  alternate  yeara  in  the
month  of  February.  Cenaorinui,  with  more  pre-
daioo,  nyi  that  the  number  of  dayt  in  each  inter-
cslaCion  waa  either  22  or  23,  and  Macrobini  agrcea
with  him  in  anbalance.  Of  the  point  at  which  the
mpemmneiary  month  waa  inaerted,  the  occounta
aretheae:~VaRo(i)eUy.£a<.Ti.&6)  ■ayi.tho
twelfth  month  waa  Pebnury  ;  and  when  inlercala-
^ona  lake  place,  the  tut  lait  daya  of  ihii  month
an  remoToL  Cenaorinu  agieea  herewith,  when
he  placea  the  intercalation  generally  (^Mun'snini)
in  the  month  of  Fehiuaiy,  between  the  Tennicalia
and  the  Regifiiginm,  that  ia  immedialely  after  the
day  called  by  Ue  Romaiu  a.  d.  VI.  K^  Mart  or
b;  n*  the  24ch  of  February.  Thit,  again,  ii  con-
firmed by  Uaerobitu.  The  letting  aaide  of  the  laat
fire  daya  agreei  with  the  practice  which  Herodotoa
aaciibca  to  the  Egyptiaiu  of  coiuideriog  the  £ve
daya  over  the  360  aa  Bcarcely  belonging  to  tbe
jear,  and  not  placing  them  m  any  month.  So
completely  were  theae  flTC  daya  coniidoRd  by  the
Komana  to  be  aometbing  eitraneou),  that  the
aoldier  appean  lo  haTo  recciTed  pay  only  fur  360
daya.  For  in  the  time  of  Angnitui  the  uldier  re-
ceiTed  (feat  oon  per  day,  i. «.  ||  of  a  denariua  ;
bnt  Domitian  (Snet  Don.  7)  addidU  quartun  iti-
paditait  aaraM  ttnua. Thui,  a*  25  denarii  made

(360  M  10}<M  6  denatii  =  (360  x  10}-t-(  16  K  25)
Bnrei>~9  aurei;  and  thua  the  addition  of  three
aurei  waa  pirciielf  a  Ibnrth  more.  Laitly,  the  fea-
tival  Terminalia,  aa  iti  name  impliea,  marked  the
end  of  the  year,  and  thi>  by  the  wayBgnin  pravea
that  March  waa  originally  the  firal  month.

The  intcnalarr  month  waa  called  MtpxiiiyDi,  or
,  HtfiiCTpMi'uii. (Plutarch,  iVuiiiqi.l.S;  dtjK^bS.)


330


•  CALENDARtUM.


Wc  giTe  it  in  Gicek  character!,  b«caiiM  it  bappcni
■omewlial  strangelf  ibu  no  Lalin  ainbor  hat  men-
tianed  the  name,  the  term  mecuia  interiulajia  or
intcrkalarini  nppljing  ita  place.  Thna,  in  the  yeai
of  intercalation,  ibe  daj  after  the  idea  of  February
wai  called,  oat  u  nnial  a.  i.  XVI.  Kolendu
Martial,  bat  a.  d.  XL  Kalendai  inteikalam.  So
■lio  there  wera  the  NooBa  inlerkalars,  and  Idoi
interkahun,  and  after  thia  laat  cune  either  a.  d.
XV.  or  XVI.  KaL  Mart,  according  u  the  month
Iwd  22  or  25  days,  or  mther,  if  we  add  the  6n
remaining  dayi  atruck  oE  from  February,  27  or  28
daya.  In  either  caae  the  Regilu^um  retained  ita
ordinary  deiignatian  a.  d.  VI.  KaL  Mart.  (See
Aaconiua,  Ad  Orat.  pro  Miione,  and  tbe  FaM  Tri-
ampluiia,  493,  A.  u.c)  When  Cicero  writei  to
Atticiu  (vi.  1 ),  .^eo^'twu  ItOanu  a.rf.  K.  rerrflnsNa
(i.  (.  Feb.  19)  ;  he  naei  thia  itrange  mode  of  de-
finini;  ■  date,  beeauae,  being  thsi  in  Cilida,  he  wai
not  aurare  whether  any  intercalation  liad  been  in-
aerted  that  year.  Indeed,  be  aaya,  in  another  part
of  the  lame  letter,  E  '  ...


Beiideg  the  inlcRslar)'  month,  mention  it  occa-
aionally  made  of  an  intercalary  day.  The  object
of  thia  tnu  tolely  to  prevent  the  firit  day  oF  tiie
year,  and  perbapi  aleo  tiie  nonet,  from  coinciding
with  the  nundinac,  of  which  mention  haa  been  ai.
ready  made.  (Hacnb.  I  13.)  Hence  in  Livy  (i
44),  Inanafaettm  eo  anno/  pottridie  Termim
inlereaiant  Jvtnad.  Thia  would  not  have  been
taid  bad  the  day  of  intrrcahition  been  invariably
the  tame;  and  ognin  Livy  (iliii.  11),  Ubo  (aao
ntcroalatam  oL  Trriio  dig  pati  Terminaiia  Caien-
dat  iniiTvaiara  fiiert,  i.  e.  two  daya  after  the  Ter-
minalla,  to  that  the  diea  intrrcalaria  waa  on  thia
onaaion  tnierted,  at  veil  aa  the  month  ao  called.
Nay,  eren  after  the  reformation  of  the  calendar,
tho  iame  Bupentitioos  practice  remuned.  Thut,
in  the  year  40  R  c,  a  day  waa  inierted  for  thia
purpoae,  and  aflcrwardt  an  omittion  of  a  day  took
place,  tbat  the  talendar  might  cot  ba  diatorbed.
(Dion  Can.  iliili.  33.]

The  ayttcm  of  intercalating  in  iltemate  yearn
22  or  23  dayi,  tbat  U  ninety  daya  to  right  yeara.


retold  b


mUie


Oreeka ;  and  tbe  auertion  it  probable  enough,  firaC,
becaats  from  the  Greeka  the  Romani  generally  dc-
rired  all  tcientific  a»itlance  ;  and  lecondly,  becauie
the  dccemTual  legitlatioo  wnt  siowcdly  drawn
from  that  quarter.  Moreorer,  at  the  very  period
in  queation,  a  cycle  of  eight  yeara  appeart  to  haie
been  in  uie  at  Athena,  for  tLe  Metcnic  period  of
19  yean  vaa  not  adopted  before  432  a.  c  The
Rmnana,  however,  teem  to  have  been  guilty  of
tome  clomeinett  in  applying  the  (deuce  they  de-
rived from  Oroece.  The  addition  of  ninety  daya
in  a  cycle  of  eight  yeara  to  a  hmar  year  of  354
da3>t,  would,  in  aubdancc,  have  amounted  to  the
addition  of  11^  (aigO-l-S)  dayt  to  each  year,  to
that  the  Komana  would  virtually  have  poiaested
the  Julian  calendar.  At  it  waa,  they  added  the
hitercalalion  to  a  year  of' 355  daya  ;  and  conae-
quently,  on  an  average,  every  year  exceeded  ita
pn^ier  length  by  a  day,  if  we  negicct  the  inaccu-
laciea  of  the  Juian  odendar.  Accordin^y  we  iind
that  the  civil  and  aolar  yeara  were  greatly  at  vari-
'-  ■>- .~. . ^  - Q„  ^5 im „f


Ideler,  can  bavB  been  no  other  than  the  one  which


CALENDARIUH.
oceumd  on  the  14th  of  March,  190  a.  c  of  the

Jnlian  calendar,  and  which  at  Bome  wat  nearly
total.  A^in,  the  aame  hittorian  (lUv.  87)  mni-
tiona  an  eclipee  of  the  moon  which  occurred  in  the
night  between  the  3rd  and  4th  of  September,  in
the  year  of  the  city  £86.  Thit  msat  have  been
the  total  eclipte  in  the  night  between  the  21it  and
23ndof  June,  168  B.C

That  attempt*  at  Icgiahttim  far  the  purpote  of
correcting  to  aerioua  an  error  were  actually  made,
appean  tnm  Macrobiua,  whc^  aware  himtelf  of  the
cauieof  the  error,  iayi  that,  byway  of  correction,  in
every  third  ocloennial  period,  initead  of  90  inter-
calaiy  duyi,  only  66  were  insetted.  Again  it  ap-
pean that  M'.  Atjliui  Olabrio,  in  hit  conaaJthip
1R9  B.C.,  that  ia,  the  very  year  before  that  b
which  the  abore-mcntioned  lunar  eclipee  occiund,
introduced  aome  legialative  mesaure  upon  (he  tub-
ject  of  intercalation.  (Macrok  i.  13.)  Accord-
ing to  the  above  ttatement  of  Macrobiui,  a  cycle
of  24  yean  wat  adopted,  and  it  it  thia  very
pajiage  which  haa  induced  tlie  editeta  of  Livy
to  iaicrt  the  word  qaarlo  in  the  tsit  already
quoted.

Aathe  feativalt  of  the  Komana  were  for  the  meat
part  dependent  npon  the  calendar,  the  regulation
it  the  latter  waa  intnated  to  the  college  of  ponti-


,i..i.


body  of  patriciariB.  It
the  power  of  the  college  to  add  to  their  other  meani
ofoppreiaing  the  plebciona,  by  keeping'  to  them-
aelica  the  knowledge  of  tbe  daya  on  which  jnitiee
could  be  admin iatered,  and  aiaemblietof  the  people
could  be  held.  In  the  yenr  304  a.  c,  one  Cn.
Flaviua,  a  aecretary  (tenAa)  of  Appiua  Claudioe,  ia
aaid  traudulently  to  have  made  Uie  Fa^  public
(Liv.  iL  48;  Cic.  Pro  Mamn,  c.  U  j  Plin.
//.  A'.  iiiiiL  I  ;  VaLManiLS;  A.  Qelliat,  vl  9 ;
Mocrob,  i.  15  ;  Pomponiui,  ZJa  Or^iat  Jmt  in  the
Dij^t  1.  tit.  2;  and  Cicero,  Ad  AtL-TLi.)  It  ap.
pom  however  from  the  last  pageage  that  Atticiii
doubted  the  truth  of  the  itory.  In  either  eaie,  the  .
other  privilege  of  regulating  the  year  by  the  ineer-
tion  of  the  intercalary  month  gave  them  gtrat
political  powCT,  which  they  were  not  backward  to
employ.  Every  thing  connected  with  the  matter
ofintertshition  wat  left,  layiCentorinui  (c2a),  lo
the  unrestrained  pleanue  of  the  pontifleet ;  and  the
majority  of  tfaete,  on  penonal  gronndi,  added  to  or
took  firim  the  year  by  capriciout  intertsla^ona,  ao
aa  lo  lej^bai  or  iborten  the  period  during  which
a  magiitrate  remained  in  office,  and  aeriouily  to
benefit  «*  injure  the  farmer  of  the  public  revenue.
Similar  to  thii  it  the  language  employed  by  Ha-
crobiui  (L  4),  Ammianui  (mi.  1),  Solinua  (cL),
Plutarch  (Cbu.  c.  G9),and  their  awertiona  are  con-
Grmed  by  the  letten  of  Cicero,  written  during  hia
proconiulate  in  CiliciB,  the  eontlant  burthen  of
which  ia  a  reqneat  that  tbe  pontifcea  will  not  add
to  hia  year  of  garemnicnt  W  intercalation.

In  cHiaequence  of  thia  licence,  aaya  SaetoniDi
{Caa.  40),  neither  the  leitivalt  of  the  barvett
coincided  with  tbe  tummer,  nor  (hole  of  the  vin-

bettar  proof  of  the  confoiiDn  than  a  eompariion  of
three  ihort  pauagei  in  the  third  book  of  Caemr'a
Bdl,  Civ.  (c  6),  PridiemmaiJiawtriia  naeii  loAnl

jam  meaia  iramieranl^  tiemijampraecipUcnfrat.

Year  o/  Juiiui  Caetar.  ^-  In  the  year  46  B.  c

Caenr,  now  nuuter  of  the  Romun  w>dd,..tiownDd


CALBNDARIUM.
Ilii  otki  gnM  laTkcs  to  hii  connln
'•Dg  kia  kBtborilT,  H  pontilei  ni


CALENDAMUM.


331


ntllBi


id  M.  FlaTiuj,  tliougii


m  ciil.  For  thii  p
■nOed  hnuHlf  af  the
BenoMMic,  and  ktcrita
M  himrlf  toot  we  an  told,
with  aanoaaf,  wd  indeed  wm  the  utfaor  of  &
wvk  ef  loinc  mmt  npco  tlie  labjecl,  wliicli  wu
itillutant  in  tbe  time  of  Pliny.  The  cliief  antbo-
dtin  opQO  the  fnb^ect  of  the  Joliaa  lefonuatioa
Kt  nonrcli  (CW  c  fiS),  Dka  Cauiue  (iliiL
tC),  Appiu  (DeSeU.aiD.iLkd  extr.),  Ond
(fUi,  ill  1&5),  Saebniiu  (Oitt  c  40),  Plinj
(/f.  M  zriii.  17),  Cemorinn*  (c.  20),  MBcrobiiu


.-  It),  .


«Uini


SiJiam  Cu  4£).  Of
(ndee :  —  "  The  eonfoiion  wi>  at  bit,"  mji  be,
**  onicd  B  br  that  C  Ctenz,  the  pontifei  mui-
■n,  in  hia  third  ewmihlf,  with  Lcfodiu  {ca  hii
eoUoigntt,  iiiiert«d  betweoi  Norembat  and  Decem-
bd  two  inlMtriaiy  month)  of  67  dura,  the  munth
rf  Falnny  baring  dnady  fecMTed  an  intenala-
lia  of  2S  daji,  and  thm  made  tha  wbolB  jtar
U  coBiiBt  of  US  dayi.  At  the  nune  tune  be  {fo-
tided  edeimt  a  Rpelitioa  of  cimilar  txvai  b;  cul-
iiig  aode  the  inlsialaiy  month,  ud  sdiqiting  the
r<ar  la  the  nm'i  ooone.  Aeeonlin^y,  to  the  S££
daja  of  the  pnrioiulf  eriMing  jtmt,  he  added  ten
d^a,  vbkb  be  ao  diMiilnted  between  the  HTen
■indH  haring  29  daji,  that  Janaaty,  Sutiiia,  and
I>eeciBber  recdTcd  two  ocli,  the  othen  but  one  ;
•ad  theae  additional  dan  be  placed  at  the  end  of
the  ktsbI  monthi,  no  doubt  with  the  witb  not  to
naien  the  Tariani  featirala  from  tluaa  pcntJoni  in
the  lenn]  montba  which  ikiej  bad  to  long  occn-
pjed.  Eoiee  m  the  naenl  oalondar,  olthongh
tlav  ate  aeren  moothi  of  81  d^y^  yet  tfae  four
meclhi,  which  from  ibe  fint  poaaeued  that  nnm-
her,  an  ttill  diitingnialiablB  by  baring  their  nonei
<e  ibe  aeicnth,  the  rat  baring  Ihem  on  the  fifth
ef  the  month.  I^rily,  in  eonudenlirai  of  tlic
fnarter  id  a  day,  which  he  coniidrred  u  com-
plttiag  tlte  tnie  year,  he  eatabUtbed  the  inle  that,
at  the  aid  of  evetr  fonr  jeara,  a  liiwle  day  abould
be  inienahted,  when  the  mouth  had  been  hilberlo
iaaerted,  thai  ia,  immedialely  after  the  Terminalia ;
which  ^y  ia  now  oiled  the  Biaatwm,"

Thia  ytar  of  US  dayt  ia  commonly  oJled  by
chjoftokiyiitt  thcycarofconfonon  ;  bnt  by  Macro-
biaa,  mon  fitly,  the  tail  year  of  tonfiuiim.  The
kainda  of  Jaonaiy,  of  the  year  706  I.  o.  c,  fell  od
the  13th  of  October,  47  2.  c  of  the  Julian  calen-
dar ;  the  kalenda  of  Hatch,  703^.1;.  con  the  111
tl  Jacnan,  46  B.C. ;  and  laatly,  the  kalendi  of
Jaaaan,  (09  *.  D.c^  on  the  lit  of  Jonuaiy,  4£
B.C.  Of  the  Kcand  of  the  twn  intercalaly  monthi
am  I  [I  il  in  thia  rear  after  November,  mentiDn  ii
Hde  m  Cicen>>i  lelten  {Ad  Pam.  ri.  14).

Il  waa  pnbaUy  the  ocigioal  intention  of  Caetar
la  onmena  the  yearwiih  the  ihoRcatdiy.  The
wiats  tDlatiee  at  lUme,  in  the  year  46  B.  (l,  occur-
ndia  tlie  24lhDf  Decemboof  theJolianoilendiU'.
H  ia  motiTe  fiir  delanw  the  commencemeot  for  leicn
ilijiliaigi  I,  inafiail  laiiliiiij  Mm  riilliiiiiii|i  iliij,  naa
BabaUy  the  deaiie  to  gnti$  tfae  npentidon  of  tfae
itiBiaiM.  by  eaoung  the  fini  year  of  tfae  refoimed
ealoidartD&Iloatbedayafthenewmnm.  Aceoid-
a^y,  it  ii  tsand  tbat  tlw  tnean  new  moiai  occumd
u  Rone  on  the  lat  of  Jannaiy,  4G  ■■  c,  at  Gh.  1 6'
rjL  iBliiiawayalisaeanbeeiplaiDedtbepbraw
■Bd^Hacnbna:  Jmaai  ewitew  Oaaar,  iabib't


ad  lam


jmpoMito  pabiiiavil,  Tbji  edict  ia  alao  mentioned
by  Plutarch  when  he  girea  the  anecdote  of  Cieere,
vfac^  U)  being  told  by  loms  one  that  the  conitel-
lation  Lyra  would  riae  the  next  mDnung,  obaerred,
"  Yei,  no  doubt,  in  obeditnce  to  the  cdusL"

The  mode  of  denoting  the  day>  of  the  mimtfa
will  csoie  no  ^Sedty,  if  it  be  remllecled,  that  Ihe
kalenda  alvayi  denote  the  flnl  of  the  month,  that
the  nonea  occni  on  the  aeventh  of  tlia  fonr  montha
March,  May,  Quinctilit  or  July,  and  October,  and
on  the  £[th  of  the  other  maclhi ;  that  tlie  idea
alway)  &U  eight  dayi  bter  than  the  nonea  ;  and
laitly,  that  the  intermediate  daya  an  in  all  caaea
rechoned  backwaida  upon  the  Rranan  principle
already  explained  of  counting  both  eitremea.

For  the  month  of  January  the  DolstiDn  will  be
aafcUowa;  —


1  Kd.  Jan.

3  a.  d.  IV.  Nnl  J<
Sa.d.111.  Non.  J

4  Prid.  Non.  Jan.
6  N«i.  Jan.

6  a.  d.  VIII.  Id.  Jan.

7  a.  d. VII.  Id.  Ji


17a.d.XTI.  Kal.  Feb.

18  a.  d. XT.  Kal.  Feb.

19  a.  d.  XIV.  KaL  Feb.
20a.d.XI]I.KaLreb.
"a-d.  XII.  KaL  Feb.

a.  d.  XI.  KbI  Feb.
33  a.  d.  X.  Kal.  Feb.
O  a.  a.  VI.  Id.  Jan.  24  a.  d.  IX.  Kal.  Feb.
Sa.d.  V.  Id.  Jan.  2S  a.d.  VIII.  Kal.  Feb.
10  a.  d.  IV.  Id.  Jan.  26  «.  d.  VII.  Kal.  Feb.
lls.d. in.Id.Jau. 27a.d. VI.  KaL  Feb.

12  Prid.  Id.  Jon.  28  a.  d. V.  Kal  Feb.

13  Id.  Jan.  39  a.  d. IV.  Kal.  Feb.
14B.d.XIX.Kal7eb. 30  a.  d. III.  Kal  Feb.
13a.d.  XVIII.  KalFeb. 81  Prid.  Kal  Fob.
16a.  d.  XVII.  KaL  Feb.

The  iettBi  a  il  an  often,  Ihnogh  ennr,  written
tcselhar,  and  ao  confonndml  with  the  prepoaition
adf  which  would  hare  a  different  meaning,  for  ad
kaltndat  would  ligui^  Cy,  I  e.  on  or  bi/ore  tia
hdamdi.  The  letten  are  in  iact  an  abriilgement
of  ante  ditm,  and  the  full  phraae  for  "  on  the  aecond
of  January  "  would  be  ants  diem  partum  aanu
Januariaa.  The  word  amie  In  thia  ex|Keaaitm  aeema
really  to  belong  in  isue  to  uhbu,  and  to  be  ths
csuDO  wby  noaof  ia  an  acduatire.  Henee  occur
•nch  pbmaeaaa  (pic.FliiLm.6),aatUeditmq>iar-
tea  A'fiZ.  DwanbTU  diital^,  "  be  put  it  off  to  the
fourth  day  befon  the  kalendt  of  December,"  (Caea.
B^.  0^1.6)1,  din  er^iaU  diem  V.  KaL  Apr^
and  (Caea.  Bell.Oie.  I  11)  laUt  fan*  diem  ilana
lii,  tor  gm  die.  The  Bme  confiuion  exiita  in  the
phiBK  pmi  paaeoe  dia,  which  meani  "  a  fev  daya
after,"  and  ii  eqniralont  to  patuii  pM  didma.
Whether  Ihe  phrou  Kahmdat  Januarii  waa  ever
uaed  by  the  beat  writen  ia  doubtM.  The  worda
are  commsnly  abbieriatfd  j  and  thoae  paangca
where  Aprilia,  Deoembrii,  &c.  occur,  are  of  no
arail,  ai  they  are  probably  accuiatirea.  The  ante
may  be  onitted,  in  which  coae  the  phnae  will  be

■• ■  ■ ■  1-, ,,.,  (1.  ™. .

it  dayi  of  February  were

Feb.  33.1.3  8.  d.  VII.  KaL  Mart.
Fcb.34.Esa.d. VI.  KaL  Mart  poateriorem.
Fcb.35.~a.d. VL  Kal  Mart,  priorem.
Feb.26.-=a.d. V.  EaL  Mart.
Fob.37.<=-a.d. IV.  KaL  Mart.
Feb.28.  =  a.d. III.  KaL  Mart
Feb.  29. «  Prid  Kal.  Mart
In  wbicb  Ibe  mtiipriorttiA  fo^mprne  nfed  in


4  i


•  o


CALENDAHIUM.
X  to  ths  KtToRrade  diicetion  of
inch  Bt  leatt  i>  the  opmionof


thereckor
Idder,  wli


ntm  to  Celru  in  the  Digat  (50.

From  the  &ct  that  the  mtenalal«d  j«ftr  haa  two
daji  called  ODlf  ififlnt  fscftini,  the  tiajne  of  biBacxtile
hiu  been  ^)plied  to  it  The  term  ovuu  bitialiUs,
Lonevcr,  doea  not  oceor  in  any  writer  prior  to
Beds,  bat  in  plaee  of  it  tha  phnse  famii  iunuAit.

It  wa>  the  intentiaa  of  Caeur  that  the  biaaei-
tnm  ahonld  be  fauerled  peratia  guadriamii  cmuiln,
M  CcnsoriniK  i&Ta,  or  qaimia  tpuque  ndpmU  tuoto^
to  Daa  the  irarda  of  Macnbiui,  The  phrue,  how.
em,  which  Caeiar  uted  aeemi  to  hare  been  quario
}H>9ug  amio,  vhich  vaa  interpreted  b;  the  pri«tt
to  mean  eTerj  third  yni.  The  cooaeqaence  waa,
that  in  the  year  S  &  d  the  Emperor  Auguatna,
finding  that  thiee  moi '


itercaladont  had  been
don  of  the  Uv,  lare
[t  twelve  yean  Ihete


directicffu  that  for  tht
ahoold  be  no  biaKilile.

The  lerricea  which  Caeai  and  Augaitu  bad
oonfeiTed  upon  theit  eoimtiy  by  the  cetbnnation
of  the  year,  leem  to  have  been  ibe  imnwdiBte
canae*  (U  the  compliicenta  paid  to  them  by  the  in-
aertion  of  theii  namea  in  the  calendar.  Joliua  wu
■ubatiCnted  for  Quinctilia,  the  month  in  which
Coemr  whi  bom,  in  the  acconil  Jnlian  year,  that  ia,
the  year  of  the  dictatofa  death  (GensorinDa,  c  32) ;
for  the  fint  Julian  year  waa  the  6nt  yeoc  of  the
oomMaf  Julian  calendar,  that  ii,  45  B.  c. The


CALENDARIUM.

name  Angmtna,  in  place  of  Seitilia,  waa  introdneHd
by  the  emperor  himielf^  at  the  time  when  he  recti-
fied the  eiTDT  in  the  mode  nf  intercalating  (Snet.
^■7.  e.  31),  omu  ^sgsitaiio  am.  The  firat  year
of  the  Auguitan  cia  waa  27  B.  c,  viz^  that  in
which  he  &nt  took  the  name  of  Auguatna,  aa  n'i,  4
M.  Viptiuao  As/rifja  con.  He  waa  bom  in  Sep-
tember ;  but  gaTO  the  preference  to  the  preceding
month,  for  reaaoni  alated  in  the  tenatua^conatdtum,
preaeired  by  Maciobins  (i.  1 2).  "  Whercsa  the
Emperor  AngiutD>  Caeiar,  m  the  laondi  of  Sez-
tilis,  wai  fint  admitted  to  the  coniulale,  and  thrios
entered  the  city  in  triumph,  and  in  the  niae
month  tha  legiona,  from  the  Janicnlnm,  placed
themaalTBfl  under  hia  auapicea,  and  in  the  Rune
month  Egypt  waa  brought  under  the  anthority  of
the  Roman  people,  and  in  the  aame  menth  an  end
vaa  put  to  the  ciril  wan  ;  and  wbereai  for  theaa
reaiooB  the  laid  month  ia,  and  hag  been,  most  for-
tunate to  thii  empiie,  it  ia  hereby  decnwd  by  the
aenate  that  the  eaid  month  >baU  b«  csUed  Angua.
toe."  "  A  plebiadtum,  to  the  aame  effiut,  wu
paaaed  on  the  motion  of  Seitoi  Pacnnni,  tribune
ofthepieba."

The  month  of  September  in  like  manner  receiTad
le  name  of  Oetmanicni  from  the  general  10  called,
id  tha  appellation  app«n  to  have  eziated  even  in
le  time  of  Macrobim.  Doniitian,  too,  confeited
e  name  upon  October  ;  but  the  old  woid  waa  i«-
(tored  upon  the  death  of  the  tynmt.


Our^-jj.<..b.

"cSWS.»

da,>.

Hafi.

ban  ao  da;!. '

,

KiiiBOia.

K^tLIODKL

KALINDla.

KALtinua.

2!

vr.

IV. 1 ante
III.  J Nonai.

r,. }  c.

IV. l Ante
III. f  Nonaa.

V. ante

IV. Uonoa.

Pridie  Nona*.

Pridie  Nonas.

Pridie  Nonas.

HI.

KOHIS.

NONH.

NoHia.

Pridle  Nonav

VIII. ■

VIII.  1

VIIL

NoHia.

VII.

VII.

VII.

s.

vnr.

VI. ante

VI. ante

VI.

9.

VII.

V. Idua.

V. Idu..

V.

10.

VI.

IV.

IV.

IV.

V.

Idua.

III. J

III. J

IS.

IV.

Pridie  Idua.

Pridie  Idui.

Pridie  Idua.

13.

in.

IDIBDI.

iKIBUa.

Idiius.

14.

Pridie  I

ua.

XIX.

XVIII.

XVI.  -

IS.

XVIII,

XVII.

XV.

16.

XVH.  1

XVII.

1

XVL

XIV.

17.

XVI.

1

XVI.

XV.

XIII.

IS.

XV.

XV.

1

XIV.

Xll.

19.

XIV.

XIV.

•

XIII.

h

XI.

s

XIII.

XIII.

-.-=.

XII.

X.

1

•a

SI.
SB.
S3.

XII.

If

XII.
XI.
X.

^1

XI.
X.
IX.

jj

IX.
VI 1 1.
VII.

24.

IX.

|i

IX.

VIII.

VI.

1

25.

VIII.

VIII.

3

VII.

V.

86.

VI  r.

VIL

VI.

a

IV.

VI.

1

VL

1

V.

III.

28.

V.

V.

■«;

IV.

Pndie

Ueadaa

29.

IV.

<

IV.

III.

sa

III.

Pridie  Kal

endaa

31.

Pridie  K

dendas

Pridie  Kal

endas

(of  the  month

(of  the  month

(of  the  month

following).

following).

following).

CALIDA.

TIh  Fuli  of  Caerar  btn  not  come  dmm  to  na
in  theii  cntin  G>nD.  Sncb  fragrnenU  u  eiin  maj
be  wBto  ia  Grnlit'i  /menjjrtaum,  or  mora  toni-
plrtelj  b  Foggilii't  wortc,  Faiknm  Aani  Romam
. .  Rtiiqmiae.  See  bUo  mne  paperv  b;  Ideler  in
the  BdOi  TVouoi^iMj  for  1822  and  IBSS.

TVCVfjnnan  ygnr. — The  Julian  calendar  tnp-
p»s  tlic  man  ttopiol  jeu  to  be  SGSd.  6h. ;  but
ihii,  u  we  haie  aliradj  aeen,  exeeeda  the  nal
aaoont  b;  11'  12^*,  the  Mxumnlatian  of  which,
yen  after  jar,  cauaed  at  laat  ctHuidenble  incon-
raiiaica.  Actordinglj,  in  the  jnr,  1582,  Pope
Gnpvj  the  XIH,  a»ii«t*d  by  Aloyihia,  Lilins,
Chiutflph,  Clavioa,  Petmi  Ciuoniiu,  and  othen,
ajnin  nfbnnrd  the  calendar.  The  ten  daji  by
irliich  the  jear  had  been  aodnly  Ktarded  wen
Knd  out  bj  B  regulation  that  the  da;  afler  the
faarth  of  October  in  that  year  ihonld  be  called  the
Bileeiith ;  and  il  wai  otdered  that,  whereat  bilherto
an  intncalarr  day  had  been  ituerted  eTcry  four
yeva,  Inr  the  future  three  nuh  intenalationi  in
the  omrae  of  fonr  hundred  yean  ahonld  be  oroitted,
TIL,  in  thoae  yean  which  are  diTiiible  without
mnaindeTbTlOO,  bnlnatby400.  Thai,  accord-
in;  to  ike  Jidian  calendar,  the  yean,  1600,  1700,
Vm,  1 900,  and  2000  were  to  hare  been  biueitjie  ;
but,  by  the  regulation  of  Orcgory,  the  yean  1700,
1800,  and  1900,  were  to  receive  no  intercalation,
while  the  yean  1600  and  2000  were  to  be  biiaextile,
i>  belcre.  The  bull  which  efiected  tbii  change,  waa
tmed  Feb.  24,  1 582.  The  inlleat  acomnt  of  thia
cntRcliao  ii  to  be  found  in  the  work  of  ClaTiug,
cotitlfd  Aasan'  CaUndarii  a  Gngario  XIII.  P.  M.
fotHaH  Eipliealio.  Ai  the  Oiegurian  calendar  haa
nly  97  leap-yean  in  B  penod  of  400  yoan,  the
nvaa  Giegorian  year  ii  (303x365  +  97x366)
•i-40a,  that  ii  366d.  Sh.  49'  12",  or  only  21"
DOR  than  the  mean  tropical  year.  Thia  difference
h  GO  yean  would  amount  to  24',  and  ia  GO  times
Ce,  s  3600  ywa,  to  24  hourt,  or  a  day.  }Ienee
the  French  aibmomer,  Delambre,  haa  propoaed
that  the  yeaxa  36O0,  7200,  10,600,  and  all  multi-
pit*  of  3600  ahould  not  be  leap  yean.  The  Gre-
pnao  —'"•**'  waa  introdnced  in  the  greater  part
of  Italy,  aa  weD  at  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  on  the
day  named  in  the  boll.  In  France,  two  monthi
•firr,  by  an  edict  of  Heniy  HI.,  the  9th  of  De-
cember wai  followed  by  the  20th.  The  Catholic
parla  of  Switzerland,  Oermany,  and  the  Low
Caqmrien,  adapted  the  correctian  in  1583,  Poland
b  1586,  Hangary  in  1567.  The  Pnteatant  parU
vl  Ennipe  reaiated  what  they  called  a  Fapiitical  in-
imtiea  br  nxire  than  a  tHicury.  At  laM,  in  1700,
PmHtant  Osmany,  a*  well  aa  Denmark  and  Hol-
laod,  allowed  reaaoa  to  prerail  over  prejudice ;  and
the  Pnteslanl  cantona  of  Switierland  copied  their
eiample  the  following  year.

In  England  the  Gregoiian  caJeudar  waa  first
adi^  in  1752,  and  m  Sweden  in  1753.  In
Rnaaia,  and  tboae  emmtriea  which  belong  to  the
Creek  chnnch,  the  Julian  year,  or  old  ityla  oa  it  ii
caDed,  Kill  pmaila-

In  tU*  article  &k  nae  haa  been  made  of  Ideler^
wQcfc  I^Bhmdt  der  CSmmologie.  Fv  other  inibnn-
aiea  snoectrd  with  the  Roman  meaaorement  of
tiBB,  aee  Aitbokoiiu  ;  Diia  ;  HoROLOOiDif  ;
LnfmcM;  NDHniiiaii  Sakulum. IT.H.K.]

CA'LIDA,  or  CALDA,  the  warm  drink  of  tht
frmkj  and  Homana,  which  conaiated  of  warm
water  mixed  with  wine,  with  the  addition  ]m>bably
<f  jpicea. Thia  waa  a  Tetybvourile  kind  of  drink


CALIGA.  233

with  the  ancients,  and  could  always  be  procuredat
certain  shops  or  tavemi,  called  themu^ioiia  (Plant,
Cv.  ii.  3.  1 3,  TVt'il  ir.  3.  6,  Had.  ii.  6.  45),  which
Claudius  commanded  to  be  closed  at  one  period
of  hia  reign  (Dion  Cass.  k.  6).  The  Tends,  in
which  the  wine  and  water  were  kept  hot,  appear  Co
hare  been  of  a  Tciy  elegant  form,  and  not  tmlike
our  teo-nma  both  in  appeannco  and  construction.

the  Mum  Borionico  (toL  iii.  pL  63),  from  which
the  following  woodcnt  is  taken.  In  the  middle
of  the  Teasel  there  ia  a  amall  cylindrical  furnace,
in  which  the  wood  or  charcoal  was  kept  fur
heating  the  water  ;  and  at  the  bottom  i^  thia
fnniBce,  there  are  four  small  holee  far  the  ashes
to  bll  through.  On  the  right  band  side  of  ths
vessel  there  ia  a  kind  of  cup,  conununicaling  with
the  part  enirounding  the  fnrnace,  by  which  tho
Tessel  mwbt  be  filled  without  taking  off  the  lid  ;
and  on  tho  left  hand  side  there  is  in  about  the
middle  a  tube  with  a  cock  for  drawing  off  the
liquid.  Beneath  the  conical  cover,  and  on  a  level
with  the  rim  of  the  vessel,  there  ii  a  moveable  flat
cover,  with  a  hole  in  the  middle,  which  doses  the
whole  urn  except  the  mouth  of  the  amall  fhmace.

Though  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  thia  vessel
•raa  used  for  the  puipoae  vltich  haa  been  men^ooed.


it  ia  difficult  to  determine  ita  Latm  name  ;  but  it
waa  probably  called  auUupia  [AtiruaFa*.]  Pol-
lux (x.  66)  mentions  aeveral  namea  which  were
applied  to  the  vessela  uaed  for  heating  water,  of
which  the  linvAJSiit,  which  also  occun  in  Lncian
{Lnipk.  8),  appean  to  answer  best  to  the  veiael
which  baa  been  described  above.  (BSttiger.  S(M-
ao,  voL  iL  p,  34  ;  Becker,  Galbu,  vol.  il  p.  1 75.)

CALIENDRUM,  a  peruque  or  wig,  mentioned
by  HoiBce. (^Serrn.  i.  S.  48.)

CA'LIQA,  a  strong  and  heavy  shoe  warn  b^
the  RomHU  loldien.  Although  tho  uaa  of  thii
spcciA  of  caleeamentnm  extended  to  the  ceuto-


934  CALLISTEIA.

rioni,  it  ma  not  worn  bj  lhi>  superior  offlcera.
Heaa  tbe  comiDga  Kildicn,  mcluduig  ceDluridni,
were  dutinftuiibed  by  tbc  name  of  eatigati  (Suet
A  ug.  25,  FiltlL  7)  ;  whoa  Cicera  therefore  nyg  of
Pompej'  "  miiii  caliou  tjiu  nan  pbccbant "  (Ad
A  a.  0.  3),  be  merelj  naei  the  vocdi  to  mdicate
hi<  niililMy  power.  Serrjce  in  (he  lanki  wu
daignatsd  ^ler  tbi*  utide  of  attin.  Tbni  Mi
wu  aid  to  hflTB  risen  to  tbe  eonmlBfaip  a  eattga,
)'.  a.  from  the  nnki  (Sen.  Dt  Buff.  ^  '"
Ventidiui  JymmitHn  mopam  h  eaUffa  n
n»H  (Plio  H.  N.  TiL  U).  The  Empenw  CaliguU
Tecaired  tbtt  cognnnen  when  ■  bo;,  in  ooa»-
qnence  of  wearing  the  oligti,  wbich  hii  Tatber  Oct-
iDBnicni  put  on  hii  lou  in  older  to  picue  the  lol-
dien.  (Tacit.  Ait.  i.  H  ;  SneL  OJig.  9.)  The
tritunphal  monmnenti  ef  Rime  )ho<r  moat  dii-
tloedy  the  diSbrence  between  the  oliga  of  tba
common  loldier  [Arha]  and  the  ca1«tu  worn  by
men  of  higher  rank.  [Abolli  ;  Aba.]  The
■ole  of  the  oJiga  waa  thickly  atadded
naiia  (c^on  ooit^om,  Plin.  H.  If.  :
in  18  ;  Jut.  Sof.  iii.  232,  iri.  2i).

The  ealiga  wptadatona  (Snet.  CaSs-  •
for  the  nie  of  apiei  (^HcuUorw),  wu  probably
mncb  llghler  than  tba  ordinaiT  abo*  vom  by  tba
■oldien.  [J.  Y.]

CALIX  (<iilx.it,  eomp.  Macrob.  SaL  t.  21).
I.  A  anwll  drinkuig-cnp,  conatutlj  need  at  >ym-
p«ia  and  on  aimilar  occationi. It  ii  frequently

diinking-Bcenea,  and  when  empty  ii  niuallT  held
upright  by  one  of  ill  bondlei,  u  ahown  in  llie  ent
under  Stuposiuh.  (Xen.  Symp.  ii.  36  ;  Cie.
7^K.iii.  19;  Hor.  Sam.  iL  8.  S5,&c>  2.  A
TEuel  u«d  in  cookinf;  (Vur.  L.  L.  t.  137,  ed.
MlUler  ;  Or.  foK.  t.  £09.)  3.  A  tube  in  tbe
aqnucducli  aCUicbed  to  the  extremity  of  each  pipe,
where  it  entered  the  caalclliun.  [Aquauidctuii,
^ll£,>.]

CALLIS,  a  beaten  path  or  track  nude  by  the
feetof  csltte.  (Serr.  ad  Virg.  Am.  iv.  40S  ;  Iiidoc.
Orig.  XT.  16.  g  20.)  Tbe  abcep-walka  in  the
mountamona  parti  of  Campania  and  Apulia  were  the
property  of  the  Roman  atate  ;  uid  aa  they  were  uf
conaiderable  Tilue,  one  of  the  quaeaton  uaually
had  these  eaUja  aaaigned  to  bim  la  hii  piOTlnco,
whence  we  read  of  the  CaUism  jrrmtwia.  Uia
principal  dntiei  were  to  receive  the  teriptwa,  or
tax  paid  for  the  poatnrage  of  the  cattle,  and  to
protect  life  and  prepertj  in  theie  vild  and  oioun-
tainoui  diatricts.  When  the  icnate  viihed  to  put
a  (light  upon  tbe  eonaula  on  one  occaiion  tbey  en-
deavoured to  aaugn  to  them  m  their  pcovincea,
the  care  of  tbe  wooda  (jriieae)  and  ahcep-walka
{ailla),  (Tac  Am.  ir.  27;  Suet  Caa.  19,
Ctaud.  29;  in  tbe  laat  paange  the  reading  ii
doubtful.)

CALLISTEIA  {KaMMTiia),  a  fealival,  iwper-
bapa  merely  a  port  of  one,  held  by  the  women  of
Leaboa ;  at  which  they  aamnbled  in  the  eanc-
tuory  of  Hem,  and  the  flureit  reecived  tbe  priie  of
beauty.  (SchoL  ad  II  \i.  128  ;  Suidaa,  t.  V.  ;
Antholog.  Pal.  ix.  169  g  Athen.xiiL  p.61U.)

A  limilar  conteet  of  beauty,  initituted  by  Cjp-
aelna,  formed  a  part  of  a  featival  celebmled  bv  the
Parrhaiiaoa  in  Arcadia,  in  honoor  of  the  Elenai-
nian  Dcnielei.  Tbe  women  taking  part  in  it  were
called  XpHnxf-JpH.  (Alhen.  liiL  p.  609.)

A  third  conteal  of  the  lanie  kind,  in  wbieb,
bowcTcr,  men  only  partook,  ia  mentioned  by  Athc-


CALUUNIA.

naena  (f.  e. ;  compare  Etj/mnl.  Afagn.  K  v.)  aa  oc-
curring among  the  Eleani  in  honour  of  Athena.
Tbe  fairest  man  receJTed  ai  friia  a  suit  of  aimour
which  be  dedicated  to  Athena,  and  waa  adorned
by  hia  friendi  with  ribbona  and  a  myrtle  wreath,
and  accompanied  to  tbe  tonple.  Frma  tbe  woida
of  Atbenacna  (ziiL  p.filO),  who,  in  speaking  of
these  coDteata  of  bcaoty,  mentiona  Teuedos  laoag
with  Lesbos,  we  moat  infer  that  in  the  former
island  also  Callisteia  were  celebrated. [L.  S.]

CALO'NES,  the  semnU  of  the  Roman  sol-
diers, said  to  hare  been  ao  coiled  &vm  tarrying
wood  {KaXa)  fw  their  use.  (yestus,  a  v. ;  Serr.
ad  Virg.  An,  ii.  1.)  Tbey  are  goieially  anppoced
to  have  been  alaTca,  and  tbey  almoat  fbnned  a  part
of  tbe  army,  la  we  may  learn  bmn  many  paaiages
in  Caew :  in  &ct,  w«  an  told  by  Jcaqibna  that,
from  always  liTing  whb  tbe  soldiers  and  being
present  at  their  exerdaea,  they  were  inferior  to
^em  ahme  ia  skill  and  TsJonr.  Tbe  word  calo,
however,  waa  not  oonfined  to  this  aignifica^on,  but
waa  alio  ^iplied  to  brm-servanU,  instances  of  which
nsage  are  Ibnnd  in  Honce  (Z^iiA  i-  H.  42  j
SM.  L  6.  103).

In  Caesar  this  tram  ia  geoaraUy  ibnad  by  itself  i


cal  with  2i«. Still  tbe  «


:  the  latter,  in  bet,  w


It  and  lua*  were  not


tbe  SI

moely  followed  the  ounp  fo

and  merehaodiie,  and  were  so  &r  from  being  in-

diipeniable  to  an  anny,  that  they  were  somedmes

forbidden  to  follow  it  (m  lima*  mjamaitiir  txtr-

aWm,  Sail.  BeS.  Jug.  45). Thus  again  we  read

of  the  Snu  mercotorsifiis,  fu)  ^Bifru  iiiCro<i.par-

tabaal  (Hirtins,  D*  BtU.  AJr.  IS),  words  which

plainly ahow  that  the liisa  wen tiaden  and

dcaJeca. Livy also  (t.  6) speaks  of them  as

cairying  on  buiineu. The  term  itself  ii  supposed

' be  connected  with  liia,  an  old  vati  ugnifying

Iter,  inoaench  aa  the  liiae  supidtad  tbia  article

the  soldiers: since, however,  they  probably

fomiihed  iwdy-cookcd  proriiiona  (ditnt  tttot),  tt

■eema  not  unlikely  that  (in'r  appellation  nay  hsTa

some allusion  to  thia cinnuaitaoce. (See  Salt.

0.)  [H.  W.]

CALU'MNIA. CilumniaH is defined by

srciau  (Dig.  18.  tit.  16.  a  I),  Falta  enmina  w-

iendera :  a  defiiiidon  which,  as  there  given,  waa

only  intended  to  apply  to  criminal  matters. The

definition  of  Paulut  {SaUtnt.  SaiepL  L  tiL  5)  ap.

i  to  mslli^n  both  criminal  and  ciiil :  Caitaiin-

ni  ^  Kunu  pradmt^  per  fivrndaa  mgoliam

icomparai. Cicero  {titC^.x.  10)  ipoki  of

"  calnrania,"  and  of  the  aiaut  taUidt  H  tnJitioia

jura  iaterpnlalia,  u  tbings  related. Gains  nys,

"^ibmmia  ta  adfedu  tl,  tietd/wH  aimm  the

iminality  wu  to  be  determined  by  tbe  intention.

When  an  occnser  &iled  in  hia  pnut^  and  tbe

us  was  acquitted,  there  might  be  an  inquiry  into

the  conduct  and  motives  of  the  accuser.  Jf  tbe  per-

aon  who  nude  this  judicial  inquiry  (gut  cpjnueit),

found  that  tbe  accuser  bad  merely  acted  Cnun  mar

judgment,  he  acquitted  liim  in  tbe  form  noa  pr».

haki;  if  be  conncled  bin  of  enl  inlentiBi,  he  d>-

clared  liis  sentence  in  tbe  wads  enhaiaiaftii  as,

hich  sentence  wis  fallowed  by  (be  l^al  puniab-

According  to  Marcian,  the  puniabmcnt  for  ca-
luninia  waa  fixed  by  tbe  lei  ftemnia,  or,  is  it  is
' p*  incoRcctly,  nuned,  tbe  lex
Max.  iii.  7.  9  ».) But  it  is  not


hiilid  of  Kalun


CAMARA.

katvii  win  llmlexinwpsned,  nor  what  wen  ito
ptDilbef.  It  appBH*  front  Cicsm  (Pro  SmL
Jiete.  Jmirmo,  t.30\  that  Ihe  bin  acouiT  might

'  '  '  '  'le  fcicelKad  vitti  the  letter  K,  the
IB ;  And  it  hju  been  coDJectnred,
xn  emjectorB,  that  thia  paiugh-
id  br  the  la:  Raamia.
It  In  calimiiuat  wu  also  exailiom,
idtptio  in  ■""'""i  or  lea  of  nnk  (orrfini  onu-
m) ;  tnt  pcobaUf  onlj  m  iriininal  cuei,  or  in

ieiiliim1iilhn[lii  ■  iimi'iiiiil liliiiii (Pudni,

S^mL  BKtpL.  T.  L  fi,  T.  i.  11.)

In  the  caK  of  utioDe*,  the  calomnis  of  the  actor
vH  ebedcd  by  the  calomniu  jndicimn,  the  jndi-

Ae  reetipolatio ;  whidi  ue  puliealarif  doKribed
Vj  Ouu  (i*.  174—181).  Tba  defisndaat  might
iaaUaie*  anil  hinnelf  ofthe  calamniu  judicium,
br  which  the  plainti^  if  he  vu  found  lo  be  gniltj
<t  MlmnDia,  wm  mulcted  to  the  defendant  in  the
Imlh  put  of  the  Talne  of  the  object-mntteT  of  ^e
nil.  Bat  the  actor  wai  not  mulcted  in  thii  action,
■ale)*  it  wu  ahowa  that  he  brought  hia  auit  nith-
on  feondalion,  kiuwiiiriy  and  deaignedlr.  In  the
nobuinm  jodidiun,  oi  which  the  defendant  could
eolj  anil  himadf  in  certain  caw*,  the  lectituda  of
thi  plaintiffs  pmpoM  did  not  ate  him  from  the
pf  oallj.  Initeail  of  adopting  either  of  iheie  modo
«r  ptoceeding,  the  defendant  might  requiro the

n  the  efieet,  Sa  HOI  oiZwuiDH  ouiia  a^en.  Iniome
oaea  the  defendant  al»  waa  requind  bf  the
fnetor  to  iweai  that  he  did  not  diapute  the
pbinciff 'a  cLum,  tahtmmat  aaMa.  OenemlJy  epeak-
lajt.  if  the  pUintiff  put  the  defendiint  to  hii  oath
(jt^junmiium  n  irfir^iat\ the  defendant  might

at  the  pbintiff  to  hii  oath  of  calumny. (Dig.  IS.

.  n . .^  , T_ --'ini,  the  oath  of  m-


it  Hail*  that  the  oath  cf  alumnia  waa  requind

If  the  iHtipalatioaui  poena  wai  lequiied  from
the  arttw,  tlia  debidant  eotdd  not  bsTo  Che  benefit


The  edict  De  Calumniataribna  (Dig.  3.  tit.  S.)
applied  geneiallf  to  ihoae  who  icceired  money,
alamciae  cuiibb,  fat  doing  an  act  or  abttaining
fnCB  doing  an  act  The  edict  applied  ai  well  lo
publics  aimina  a*  to  pecnniariae  caune  ;  for  iu-
■aaCB  in  tho  matter  of  repetnndae  the  edict  ap-
plied to  him  who  for  calumnia  RceiTed  money
■  of  pnaeculing  or  ml  protecnting  a


fit  2.)  [G.  L.]

CA'MARA  iiai>Afa\  or  CAMERA,  properiy
■sniifiea  any  arched  or  nultcd  corcring,  and  any
thing  with  (nch  a  coveting :  HcTDdoIui,  for  in-
■riiiii .  ealU  a  mtered  carriage  ni/iapa  (L  139).
It  it  duett;  tiaed  in  the  two  followiiig  lenaei :  —

1.  An  arched  or  nulled  ceiling  liiinied  by  lemi-
BTCahr  band*  «c  beami  of  wood,  orer  the  interrslt
tf  which  a  ooating  of  lath  and  plaater  was  wprrad,

tm  anwngrt  ua. (VitroT.  TiL  3  ;  Saa  CU  AS  ;
Gc  oJ  Q.  ».  iii.  I.  g  1  ; coop.  Flin.  //.  K.


CANATHRON  2SS

i:n.  S6.  a.  St.)  Under  the  emperon  ennunH  wen
formed  with  jJaUa  of  glan  (Plin.  H.  ff.  mrl  25.
L  €4)  ;  aometimea  alio  the  bsuna  were  gilt,  and
tho  ceiling  between  them  waa  made  <^  iTUy.
(Propert.  iiL  2.  10.)

2.  Smsl)  boala  naed  in  eariy  timet  by  the  peoplo
who  inhabited  the  ahorea  of  the  Eudne  and  the
Boapoma,  and  called  jcofufpu,  from  tbor  hariiw
a  binsd  arched  deck.  They  were  made  with  boU
enda  alike  to  aa  to  work  in  either  direction  witboat
tnming  [  and  were  pM  together  without  iron.  They
continiied  in  oaa  nnlil  the  age  of  Tadtua,  by  whom
their  comtmetioa  and  uaet  are  deacribed.  (Saab,
li.  p.  49S  I  EsalBlh.  adDiaist.  Peri^  700 ;  AuL
OelL  X.  2£  )  Tac  HvL  iii.  47.  Beipecting  the
other  nica  of  the  word  >ee  SeDer  and  Jocobila,
HoHialinahiiA  d.  OriaA.  SpratU.) [P.  S.]

CAMILLI,  CAUJLLAE,  boya  and  ^la,  em-
doyed  in  the  religiwu  litea  and  ceremimiea  of  tha
Romani.  They  were  required  to  ba  perfect  in
form,  and  aoimd  in  health,  &ea  bom,  and  with
both  their  parenti  alira ;  or,  in  other  wcrdt,  ai
cording  to  the  CKpnation  of  the  Rei
pHellaa  iagtami,  iMk  iiMjiif,  fxdru
The  origin  of  tneae  worda  gara

them  to  coTTHpond  to  the  miV^uXof  among  the
Cnretca  and  Coiybaulea ;  othen  connected  them
with  Cadmilua  a  Caimilua,  one  of  the  Samothn-
cian  Cabeiri ;  but  we  know  nothing  certaia  cm  the
matter.  Reipeetiiig  the  employment  cf  the  Ounil-
hia  at  Soman  mamagei,  aee  U«tb.iiio)<iuii.
<DionytiL31,22;  Van.  L.L.  m  34,  ed.  MUl-
ler;  Macrob.  JliL  iil  8;  Serr.  ad  Virg.  Aa.  a.
£43 ;  Featni,  t.  m  GmuHiu,  Oaura,  Flaatimaa
CoBiObu:  JitHsa,a,DitRiligimdTiaiiitr,  toLL
p.  157.  ToLii.  p.  71.)

CA'MPAGUS,  a  kind  of  ihoe  worn  by  the  later
Roman  empenra.  (TiebelL  PoU.  GalHm.  16,  with
the  note  of  Salmaaiua.)

CAMTOUS. [DonoB]

CAMPE3TRE  (ac.  xJiigar)  waa  a  kind  of  girdle
or  apron,  which  the  Roman  youtha  wore  around
their  lomt,  what  they  aierciaed  naked  in  the
Campna  Martini  (Angntlin.  D»  Cm.  Dti,  ziT.  1 7)>
The  campeatie  wia  aometimea  worn  in  warm  wea-
tlwT  in  place  ofthe  tmic  under  the  toga  {amtpalTi
ai5  toga  ciMfM,  Aacon.  ad  Oie.  pro  Scam,  p.  30.
ed.O™ll.!  Hw.  £p.  L  11.  18.)

CAUPIDOCTO'RES  wete  pinona  who  taught
aoldieta  their  aierciaet.  (Veget.L13.)  In  the
time*  of  the  repnhlic  thii  duty  waa  diachaned  by
a  cratnrion,  or  Teteran  aoldier  of  mmt  and  £itinc-
tioo. (Cranp.  Plin.  Pan.  13.)

CA'NABUS  (ir1ki«oi),  wai  a  fiiure  of  wood
in  the  form  of  a  skeleton,  round  which  the  clay  or
plaater  wai  Laid  in  forming  modda.  Figurea  of
a  limilar  kind,  formed  to  diaphiy  the  miuclea  and
TCiui,  were  itndied  by  painten  m  order  to  acquire
acme  knowledge  of  anatomy.  (Ariit.  /fU.  Jaiia.
uiB,D»  Gm.  Anim.  iL  6 ;  Pollni,  Tii.  Ifi4,  z.
189 J  Snid.  and  Ileiych.  t-v.;  MOller,  Areiiial.
.Jerfxuf,  §305.n.7.)

CANA'LIS,  and  tha  diminutin  Cimaiiadtu,
which  aignify  a  water-pipe  or  gutter,  are  nacd  alao
in  architectnie  for  any  channel,  mch  a>  the  Salinga
of  a  column,  and  the  channel  between  the  Tolnlei
of  an  Ionic  capiOl  (VitruT.  i.  14,  iii.  3). {P.  S.]

CANATHRON  (KinOpor),  a  cniriage,  the  up-
per part  of  which  waa  made  of  basket-work,  or
nioie  properly  the  baaket  iUelf,  which  waa  fixed  in


33S  CANDELABRUM.

thecamBjje.  (XfB.Agei.raL7 .Plat  Aget.  clS.)

Homer  allt  thia  kind  of  baiket  nlpat.  (IL  xni.
i  90,  267 ;  ind  Euitath.  ad  loc  Compan  SUuU,
/.».  Xmoph.  I.  V. KAimapor  ;  Scheffu, Dt  St


Vthie.


.66.)


CANCELLAHIUS. [Camcblll]

CANCELLI,  kttice-work,  placed  befora  ■  TID-
dow,  ft  dat>r-WBy,  Ika  triboDBl  of  a  jad^e,  or  any
other  place.  (See  s.  g.  Cic  pre  JU.  58  ;  Voir.
R.RA^B;  Oi.Jm.iiL  2.  U;  Dig.  SO.  tlL  41.
t.  10  ;  33-  tit.  7. 1.  10.)  Hencs  waa  denied  Ihe
word  OamMarwi,  which  originally  ligiilied  a
poner,  who  itood  at  the  latticed  or  grated  door  of
Ibo  emperor^i  palace.  The  emperor  Cariniu  Aave
great  diualiflfiictiDii  by  promoting  one  of  hia  Can-
cellarii  to  be  Praefectoi  urbL  (Vopijc  Cam.  16.)
The  cancellaiiua  also  «gni£ed  a  legal  icriba  or
•aeretaiy,  who  tat  nithia  the  canceiii  oi  lattice-
work, by  which  the  crowd  waa  kept  off  from  the
tribiuuda  of  the  jndgei.  (Cauicd.  Var,  li.  6.)
The  chief  icribe  oriecrelary  waa  called  Canccllarius
icErr'  iio-xiir,  and  wai  eicntnally  inTeited  with
judicial  power  at  Conatan^nople  ;  bat  an  acconnt
of  hii  dutiea  and  the  hiitory  of  thii  office  do  not
SaSi  within  the  acope  of  the  preaent  work.  From
thia  word  hai  come  the  modem  Chancellor.

CAND£'LA,  a  candle,  made  eitha  of  wax
{eena)  at  tallav  (jiibaaa\  waa  oaed  nni*enally
by  the  Bomani  b^ore  the  inTantion  of  oil  lanipe
(beonu*).  (Van.  J]«  Ua^.  ZoL  <r.  119,ed.  HUI-
ler;  MarQal,  iit.  43 ;  Athen.  it.  p.  700.)  They
Died  for  a  wick  the  pith  of  a  kind  of  raih  ailed
tdrput  (Flin.  H.  N.  xn.  70).  In  later  dma  on-
delae  were  only  oied  by  the  poorer  danea ;  the
hooiet  of  the  inixe  wealthy  were  alwayt  lighted
by  luceniae  (Jut.  SoL  m.  %Vi  ;  Becker,  Qalh;
ToLiL  p.20li

CANDELA'BRUM,  waa  originally  a  candle-
a^ck,  but  waa  aAerwarda  used  to  anpport  Lampa
(Avx'vl'xot),  in  which  aignification  it  novt  com-
monly occun.  Tbe  candelabra  of  tbii  kind  were
naually  made  to  aland  upon  tbe  ground,  and  were
of  a  conaiderable  height.  The  mnt  common  kind
were  made  of  wood  (Cic.  u'  Qib  i^.  iii.  7  i  Martial,
xir.  44 1  Petnm.  95 ;  Athen.  xt.  p.  700) ;  but  thote
which  hsTO  been  found  in  Uerciuanemn  and  Pom-
peii are  moatly  of  bronze.  Sometimea  they  were
made  of  the  more  preciona  mctnli  and  even  of
Jewcia,  ai  waa  (he  one  which  Antiochni  intended
to  dedicate  to  Jupiter  Capitolinul.  (Cic  Farr.  It.
38.)  In  the  templea  of  the  godi  and  palacea  Ibcre
werv  frequently  large  candelabra  made  of  marble,
and  fattened  to  the  gronnd.  (jtfwso  Pto-CJem.  ir.
1.  6,  T.  1.  3.)

There  ia  a  gnat  raemblance  in  the  general  plan
and  appesiBiice  of  moat  of  the  csndetebra  which
hate  been  found.  They  naunlly  cooiiit  of  three
parti:— 1.  (be  fi»t  {Biea)  ;  2.  the  ahaft  or  atom
(KmKit)  %  3.  the  plinth  or  tay  (Svnit),  large
enough  for  a  lamp  to  atand  on,  or  whh  a  aocket  to
receive  a  wax  candle.  Tho  foot  umally  coniiata
of  three  lioni'  or  grifiiai'  feet,  ornamented  with
kavea ;  and  the  ahafi,  which  i>  either  plain  or
fluted,  generally  enda  in  a  kind  of  capilaL,  on
which  the  tray  reata  for  aupparting  the  lamp.
Sometime!  we  tind  a  figure  between  the  capital  and
the  tray,  aa  ia  accn  in  the  candelabrum  on  tbe
right  hand  in  the  annexed  woodcnl,  which  tt  taken
from  the  ilHito  Bojiimwa  (iy.  pi.  67),  and  repie-
■onti  a  candelabrum  found  in  Pompeii.  The  one
on  the  left  hand  it  alao  a  reprcicnlation  of  >


CANDELABRUM.
ondelabmm  fimnd  in  the  lame  city  {Mom.  Bui.


The  he»t  omdelabra  were  made  at  A^ina  and
Tareattun.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xcai.  6.)

There  arealiacandetabTaof  Tuieoi  other  fbrnia,
though  thoK  which  have  been  giTen  aboTo  are  bj
far  the  nuMt  commoiL Tbey  aometjmea  conaiat  at


CANDT3.
B  Ggua  rappntiiig  a  lamp  {Mm,  Ihii,  tiL  pL  15),
or  of  k  ^un,  bj  the  aids  of  vhicli  the  ihaft  ig
placed  with  two  bnachea,  each  of  vhicb  (ermi-
Date*  in  ■  flat  diic,  apon  which  a  lamp  vai  pbced.
A  cand^bnnD  of  the  laCtei  kind  ii  giren  in  the
pnccdiug  woodcDt  {Mm.  Barb.  ii.  pL  69).  The
■tcm  ii  fdrnKd  of  >  liliueoui  plant ;  and  at  the
tue  i>  ■  nuM  of  bionw,  on  which  a  Silenn*  ia
waled  engaged  in  trpiis  to  pour  wine  from  s  ikui
which  be  heldi  in  nia  left  hand,  into  a  cnp  in  hit

There  waa  another  kind  of  candelabrum,  ailiiely
di&Tent  from  thoae  which  ban  besn  deaciibed,
vhich  did  not  itand  opou  the  gromid,  bat  waa
traced  upon  the  table.  ThcH  candchtbra  luuall;
conaiM  oif  pillaia,  bum  the  capitola  of  itbicb  aeieial
hnpa  hang  down,  or  of  tnet,  from  whoae  branchea
lan^  alao  an  anipended.  The  folloving  woed-
cDt  RDRaCDta  ■  raj  elt^ant  candelabrum  of  tbia
kind,  bund  in  Panoeii.  {Miu.  Bori.  ii.  pi.  13.)

The  anginal,  inflwling  the  atand,  ia  three  feet
high.  Tbe  pillar  ia  not  placed  in  the  cenin,  but
ai  me  end  of  the  plinth,  which  ia  the  case  in  al-
meat  erei?  aodelabmm  of  ihii  descriptioD  fet


J.  206,


famtd.  Tbe  plmth  ia  inlaid  in  unitation  i
tbe  Wna  cf  which  are  of  (ilTer,  tbe  alem
of  lK%bt  brauck  On  one  aide  ia  an  n
wood  and  fire  upon  it ;  and  on  the  other  i
lidiBg  OD  a  tigfT.  (Becker,  Galiut,  lol.  ii
Ac.)

CANDIDATUS. lAitBiTVa.}

CANDYS  (tiityi),  agown  worn  bv  tbe  Medea
n^  Peniaiu  dtct  their  trowien  and  other  gar-
meina.  (Xa>.£>r.i.  3.  g  S,  ^h6.L  fi.  gB;  Diod.
%.s«i.77.)  It  bad  videale«Te«,Bndwaama<'-
•f  wobIIbi  cloth,  which  waa  either  purple  or
acae  otba  afJendiii  colour.  In  the  PereepoilU
acalptiira,  neariy  all  the  principal  pcrsonBg
ur  clothed  in  'A  The  three  here  ahown  a
taka  bxm  Sir  R.  K.  Portal  TmeU  (ral.  i.  ]
WJ.  IJ.  Y.]


CANE'PHOROS(>u^Jpgi).  Wbenaiacri-
B  waa  to  be  oEered,  the  round  cake  (Tpo^''
fflotf,  wJvayor,  ^4,  mofa  Malta),  the  chaplet
wen,  the  knife  naed  to  ilay  the  Tictim,  and
imei  the  bankiueeiue,  were  depoailed  in  a
flat  circular  baiket  (iiimcf,  ainufrwn},  and  this
requeutlj  canied  by  a  virgin  on  her  bead  to
lar.  Tha  practice  wu  obaerred  more  eipe-
cially  at  Athena.  When  a  private  man  aacrificed,
either  bi»  danghter,  or  lome  nnmarried  female  of
hia  ^milj,  officiated  aa  his  conephoroa  (Ariatopb,
Adam.  241—352)  ;  but  in  the  Panathenaea,  iba
Diocyiia,  and  otber  public  lalivall,  two  viimna  of
the  &i(  Atheuion  familiea  were  ajnninted  foi  tho
pDipoae.  Their  function  ia  deacnbed  by  Olid
{MO.  ii.  713—715).

That  the  office  waa  acconnted  highl;  hononisbla
qipeori  from  the  fact,  that  the  reaentment  of  Har-
modiua,  which  inatigated  him  to  kill  Hif^ar^ua,
arose  from  the  insult  offered  hj  the  latter  in  for-
bidding tbe  liater  of  Uatmodlui  to  walk  ai  cane-
phoroa  in  the  Fanalhenaic  proceasion,  (Thucjd.
li.  £6  ;  Aelian,  V.  U.  iL  S.)  An  antefiia  in  the
Britiib  Mnaetim  (see  woodeot)  Tepieaenta  the  twe
canephoroe  apprcnchii^  a  candelabrum.  £ad  of
them  elenUea  one  arm  to  >a;q>on  the  baaket,  while


ihe  tlightlj  raiiea  her  tunic  with  the  other.  Tbil
attitude  wai  much  admired  h;  ancient  arlista.
Pliny  (H.  N.  invi.  4.  a.  7)  mentions  a  marble
tanephotoa  bj  Soopas,  aud  Cia^ro  ( Verr.  'v.  3)
deacribea  a  pair  in  bronie,  which  were  tbe  ciquisiw
workofpolycletm. [C*RViTiB.]  [J.  T-]

CANISTRUM. [CANarHORoe.]

CANTABBUM,  a  alandard  med  at  the  time
of  the  Roman  empire,  and  canied  in  feative  pro-
ceuiooa. (TertnlL  ApoL  16  j  Minne.  Felix,  29.)

CANTE'RII  ia  used  by  Vitruviui  (iv.  3)  for
the  raften  of  the  roo^  extending  from  tbe  ri^  to
the  eavca.  [P.  S.]

CA'NTIIARUS  Ci«W<vo()  wai  a  kind  oE
drinking-cup.  fnrnithed  with  handles {caaihana


,  Virg-iy,
from  one  Canthania,


7  ;  Hor.  Can.


L  20). It  ii


238 CAPISTRUM.

form. (Atien.  li. p.  171,  e  ; Pollni.  vi.  96  ;

tbcya

Plin.i/.A'.iiiiT.la.  §25.) The  fflnihm..  wu

the V

the  cup  mired  to  BKchui  {MBcrah.  Sat.  T.  21  (

S«thc

Plio.  //.  ff.  niiil  53),  who  ii  freqiiQRUy  repre-

•ented  dd  ancieiil  tiu«  holding  it  in  hia  hand,  ai

in  Die  foUowiug  woodcut,  »hich  i>  taken  fe>m  n

pdnting  on  u  udmt  Ta«. CMiUingen,  />«..

(r™^«ft«-«,pL83.) ^^

CA'NTICUM.  In  the  Raman  tEicntre,  between
the  lint  and  lecand  uu,  flute  miuic  appcan  u>
liHTe  been  introduced  (Plaut.  pKudtL  i.  5.  160),
which  vu  accompanied  by  a  kind  af  r^itatirc,
performed  bj  a  aini^lc  oclor,  or  if  there  were  two,
ihe  lecond  wu  Dot  allowed  to  ipnk  with  tbe  tint
Thai  Diomede*  (iiL  p.  189.  ed.  Patickjuji:  —
"  In  canlicii  nna  tantum  debet  eMe  penana,  aol  li
duoe  fiierint,  ita  debcnt  ease,  u(  ex  occuito  nnit
andiat  cec  colloquntur,  aed  kcuid,  li  epni  liierit,
verba  &ciaC~  In  tlie  om^cum,  aa  violent  geiti-
eulatioD  waa  requind,  it  appean  to  have  been  the
cuitom,  from  the  time  of  Liviui  Andronicni,  fbr
the  Bclor  to  confine  himielf  to  the  geiliculatiiHi,
while  another  penaa  aang  the  iccitalive.  (Liv.
viil3  :  LuciaD,  Zte ;Sb2M{.  30  ;  laMac.  Or^.iviii.
11.)  The  canticum  alwaji  ionned  a  part  of  a
Roman  coniedj,  Diomedee  obiervei  thai  a  Roman
comedy  eoniiita  of  two  port*,  dialogue  and  canticum
( Lalniae  conioediat  Autst  lanlinn  membrii  caalanl,
rfwwAto  et  cmlim).  Wolf  {De  ObMum,  p.  11)
endtafoura  to  ihow  that  cantica  alio  occnircd  in
tmgediea  and  the  Ateltanae  fabulae.  There  can
bo  no  donbt  that  thej  did  in  the  latter  ;  they
were  uinally  competed  in  the  Latin,  and  lomelimei
in  Che  Greek  langung«,  whcrcai  the  other  pani  of
the  Atellano  plaji  weM  wrilteu  in  Oscan.

CAFISTRUH  (•popfiii),  a  halter,  a  tie  for
hoTMit,  auea,  or  other  animali,  placed  roimd  the
head  oi  neek,  and  made  of  oaien  or  other  fibron*
ninCerialL  In  repreientationa  of  Bacchanalian  prt>-
ceuiouA  the  Cigere  or  panthen  ore  attached  to  the
yoke  bycapiitiB  made  of  Tine-hrancb«.  Thui  we
read  of  the  n(e  capiatniae  tigm  of  Aiiadne  (Ovid,
Efiit.  ii  BO  ; Sidon.  ApdL  Cam.  xdL  2S>,  and


The  term  ipnfttti  wai  alu  applied  to  a  contriv-
ame  oaed  bj  pipen  (aiXTrrol)  and  tntmpetera  to
compma  their  moulhi  and  cheeko,  and  thiu  to  aid
them  m  blowing.  It  ii  often  oecn  in  vorlu  of
ancient  ait  [Chiridota],  and  wai  nid  to  be  the
invention  of  Idanyaa.  (Simonidet,  Bruadt.  At.
L  122  ;  Sopbocle*,  op.  Oe.  ad  Alt  il  16  ;  Aiia-
toph.  At.  862,  Fen.  580,  Ea.  IU7  ;  Schd.  ad
a.)  [J.Y.]

CAPITA'LIS. [Caput.]

CA'PITE  CENSI. [Caput.]

CA'PITIS  DEMINUTIO. [Capft.]

CAPITIUM,  a  portion  of  a  woman-i  d™»,
■ad  by  Varro  to  bo  »o  tailed,  hecauie  it  covera
(oo^hO  the  breaiL  (Van.Z.  L.v.  131,  ed.  UUller,
and  Dt  Viia  P.  R.  iv.  ap.  Nonium,  t.  V.  mpiHa;
comp.  Qell.  ivi.  7  ;  Dig.  31.  tit.  2.  ■.  24.)  But
the  word  ilaelf  would  rather  lead  ni  to  luppoao
that  it  wu  originally  a  covering  foe  the  head
(iBpal).

CAPITOLI-NI  LUDI. [Luni.]

CAPITULUM. [CottTMNA.]

CAPSA  Cdim.  CA'PSULA),otSCai'NIUM,
the  box  lor  holding  bookg  among  the  Romans.
Theie  boiei  were  uiually  made  of  beeeh-wood
(Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  13.  a.  81),  and  wer«  of  a  c.vlin-
driial  foim.  There  ii  no  donbt  reipecting  their
form,  lince  they  are  often  ^aced  by  the  aide  of
itatuei  dreaaed  in  the  toga.  The  following  wood-
cut, which  repriienla  an  open  capea  with  tii  rolla
of  bookj  in  it^  ii  from  a  painting  at  Pompeii,


There  doei  not  appear  to  have  bcm  any  dif-
ference between  Ibeeapta  and  the  (cnanm,  eirept
that  the  latter  woid  wai  uiuolly  applied  to  thoee
boiee  which  held  a  eonjidetabic  number  of  rolli
(acrtaid  da  nagHii,  Mart  i.  3).  Boies  naed  liir
preserving  other  thing!  beoidei  books,  were  aloo
called  capue  (Plin.  H.ff.  iv.  17.  a  18  ;  Mart.  li
8),  while  in  the  icrinia  nothi
been  kept  but  book*,  letten,  U


Iff  appmn  to  h
id  other  WTOinB


•  o"


CAPUT.

Tbe  lUttt  vho  bad  (he  chargii  of  tleie  book-


Iwtmid  xbtix  jcKiDg  niBiterm  the  books.  Sec  of
tbe  ■u  of  recprctabls  Romani,  vhen  (hejr  wenl
IiDcbual,  wen  alio  called  tapmii.  (Jut.  x.  117.)
Wc  a«<irdinBlj  find  them  meotiaied  together  with
Hiemedagcp. <5ueL  Mr.  36.)

Wh«i  the  cajsft  CDaCained  booki  of  impaRsnce,
it  ni  Hied  or  kept  nader  lode  and  key  (Uart,  L
67) ;  vhcncc  Hoiaee  (^.  t  20.  9)  b?!  Io  hi>
vnk,  0llu6' atoco,  if  jrrota  arTiIia  fwius.  (B«ku,
CoOii,  ToL  i.  p.  191  ;  BOttiger,  Sabimi,  loL  i.
p.l03,ftc)

CAPSA'RII.themune  of  thice  different  dasiei
of  iUto  :  —  1.  Of  thoM  who  took  oire  of  the
ctotliea  ef  penoni  while  balking  in  the  pnblic
badu.  [BALHi«i,p.  169.]  In  Utei  times  the;
vBT  labject  to  the  jurudicticin  of  the  pnefectut
■iplinn.  (Dig.  L  tit.  IS.  ».  3.)  a  Of  tkow  who
had  the  caic  of  the  opaae,  in  which  booki  and
Itttoa  were  kept.  [Cam*.]  3.  Of  thoae  who
arricd  the  booka,  &c  of  boya  to  KhooL  [Capaa.]

CATSDLA. [CiPSi.]

CA'PULUS  (c^rq,  Aa«4).  1.  The  hilt  of  a
ivonl,  which  wai  freqnentlf  nnch  omameDted.
tCLxDirs.]  The  bandlet  of  kuiTU  were  alio
much  ornamented ;  and  of  the  beautiful  worii-
Bauhip  ■ometima  beitowed  on  them,  a  judgment


CAPUT.


Bij  be  tanned  btm  the  three  ipecimens  here  in-
tndBcd. {UaU^aam,  AnL  Ejjiliguie,  ill  132.

H-ei.)

2.  A  bier  or  coffin. [Fdhvb.]

CAPUT,  tbe  bead.  The  tern  "  head  "  ii  often
U(d  hj  ihc  Raanm  writen  aa  eqninlent  to  "  per-
■ii,''<«'*bDmaiibein^.''  {Caa.BdLGatl.iT.lB.)
Bj  IB  eatj  tniwtiiin,  it  wa*  aaed  toaignify  "  life : "
tloi,  tapiU  Jaainari,  pbdi,  &c.  Ire  eqiuTaleat  to

Ckpni  ia  alao  naed  to  opreaa  a  man^  cinl  eon-
diiiis  ;  and  tbe  pencoawho  were  regiatered  in  ^e
labka  of  tbe  coiaor  are  ipaken  of  at  cap^  aome-
tiaa  with  the  addidra  of  the  word  cmant,  and
•oetiBK*  not  iUT.m.U,T.i7.)  Thus  to  be
rnptUrtA  m  the  Eenna  vat  the  Kune  thing  at
c^i^  iaian :  and  a  iUto  and  a  filiui  familial,  in
lU)  ^nae  of  the  word,  were  lud  to  hnie  no  a^ml.
Tbe  lawcat  csitnT  of  Serrioa  Tnlliiu  compriaed
ii  and  the  capite  cenii,  of  wiiom  the


a  poperty.


(OelLr


239


laltei,  bavbg  little  or  n
~~.ted  aa  to  many  Uad  at
it  ftt  flgi.  jL  22.)
He  who  changed  bii  condition  for  an  mferioi
le  wsa  laid  to  be  ayiti*  ranwrw,  dtmmiat,  oi
ppaumHor.  {Hor.aim.  iii.6.42.)  Thephnue
tapila  dtniiaien  wsa  alu  applicable  in  oue  of  a
Tolnntary  change  of  condition.  (Cic.  Top.  c.  i.)
The  definition  A  Featui  (>.  s.  danaiailui)  ii,  **  De-
ni  tspite  appellatnr  qui  dritate  mulatu  at  i
alia  &nulia  in  aliam  adoptatui,  et  ooi  libei
alteii  mandpio  datna  et* '  ■'  ■'"'  '"  '*'"


et  qui  in  hoatinm  polei.


Then  haa  been  lome  diacoaiion  whether  wo  ghould
uae  tapitii  deminatlD  or  diminalio,  but  it  ii  indif-
lierent  which  we  write.

There  were  three  diTiaioni  of  Capitii  deminutio
-  Mftidnia,  Media,  ■omelimea  called  Minor,  and
iiniSa.  The  maxima  capitia  deminutio  con^ted
in  the  lou  of  libertta  (freedom),  *in  the  change  of
the  condition  of  a  &ee  man  (whether  iogenuui  or
libeitinni)  into  that  of  a  ilaie.  The  media  con-
■ialsd  in  the  change  of  the  condition  of  a  civia
into  that  of  a  peregrinua,  aa,  for  initance,  in  the
caae  of  deportatio  under  the  emjure  ;  or  the
change  of  the  condition  of  a  dvia  into  that  of  a
Latinoi.  The  minima  coniiated  in  the  change  of
tbs  condition  of  a  pater  familiu  into  that  of  a  mius
familial,  ai  by  a^ooation,  and,  in  the  later  law,
by  legitimation ;  and  in  a  wife  in  manu,  or  a
filint  fuoiliu  coming  into  maocipii  canaa  ;  con-
lequently,  when  a  filiui  bmiliaa  waa  emancipated
or  adopted,  then  waa  a  capitia  deminntio,  ibr  both
theie  ceremonies  were  iiucparably  connected  with
the  mancipii  cansa  (ciun  emancipari  ocmo  ponit
niii  in  imagioarinm  terrilem  causam  deductiu.
Oaiiu,  L  134,  162).  Thii  eipluna  bow  a  Gliiia
familiaa,  who  by  emancipation  becomei  loi  jorii,
and  thna  impnnea  hig  wcial  condition,  ii  atill  laid
to  hare  andergone  a  cnpitii  deminntio  ;  whid  ex-
prenon,  aa  obacTred,  applies  to  the  foim  by  which
the  emancipation  ii  e%cted.

Capitia  minutio,  which  is  the  vme  m  deminntio,
is  d^ed  by  Oaini  (Dig.  4.  tit.  5.  s.  1)  to  bo
status  pennulatiD ;  but  this  deCnition  ia  not  suf-
ficiently exacL  That  capitis  deminntio  which  had
tbe  mott  coniequence  waa  the  maxima,  of  which
the  media  a  minor  was  a  milder  fonn.  The
minima,  at  already  explained,  waa  of  a  technical
chamcter.  Tbe  maxima  capitis  deminutio  was
instsined  by  those  who  reftued  to  be  roistered  at
the  cenins,  or  neglected  tbe  i^istration,  and  were


liberty  j  hot  this  being
nliienship  and  freedom,
auch  penalty  could  not  be  inflicted  directly,  and
the  object  waa  only  effected  by  the  fiction  of  the
citizen  baring  hinuelf  abjured  hia  freedom.  Thoao
who  refnaed  to  petfonn  military  lenico  might  alio
besold.  (Cic.iVi>0Mci^S4;  Ulp./Vi^.xi.ll.)
A  Boman  cititen  who  was  taken  prisoner  by  tbe
enemy,  lost  hi*  civil rights, together  with his


[P'


)UB  puniifamenta,  as  to  the
mea  ub  maxima  capitis  deminutio.  A
who  cohabited  with  a  slaie,  nfler
to  her  by  the  owner  of  tbe  slave,  be*
came  an  ancilla,  by  a  lenatvs-consaltnm,  uased  in
the  time  of  Claudius.  (Ulp.  Frag.  xi.  II  i  com-
pare Tacit.  ^«.  xii  £3,  and  Suet. Teip.  t,l.X


S40


CARCER,


A  jadiciom  c^itale,  or  poena  i^iulu,  ma  ono
which  affected  a  cilizenl  caput.  The  lubject  of
tbe  Capi^  deminnda  it  fitUj  diuaued  b;  Decker,
//onJiuel  der  RomiMthat  AUerlliamer,  ToL  ii.
p.  100;  and  by  SaiigiiT,  AateM,  &c  tqI.  ii.  p.  S8;
&c  [G.L.]

CAPUT. rF«Nus.l

CAPUT  EXTORUM.  The  Roram  lootb-
^jen  (jtaruApuBi)  pretended  to  a  knowledge  of
coming  events  from  the  impecUon  of  the  cntnuli  of
viclinu  ikizi  forthat  pucpoae.  The  part  to  which
the;  eapedsllj  directed  their  attention  vaj  ;'
liver,  the  conrex  upper  portion  of  which  Menu
have  been  called  the  soptKertonim.  (Plin. /f.  A".
37. 1. 73.)  Any  diseaae  or  deficiency  in  thia  organ
waa  conudered  an  uniaToiuabla  omeQ  ;  wheroni,
if  healthy  and  perfect,  it  wai  belicTCd  to  indicate
good  fortone.  Tba  haiuipicei  divided  it  into  two
parta,  one  called /itniitoru,  the  other  ioitifu  .*  &om
the  former,  tbey  foretold  tbe  bte  of  friendg ;  from
the  latter,  that  of  enemies.  Thiu  we  read  (Lir.
viiL  9),  that  the  head  of  the  liver  waa  mutilated
by  the  knife  of  the  operator  on  the  ^'  familiar  **
part  (c^m/  jxiaoria  a  Januiiari  parte  oaeaitm\
which  wai  alwayi  a  bad  aign.  But  the  von!
**  caput"  here  leemiof  doubtful  appliculon  ;  for  it
inay  deaignala  either  the  convei  upper  feat  of  the
liver,  01  one  of  the  prominences  of  the  Taiioui  lobei
vbich  lorm  iti  lower  and  kieguJorly  concave  part
It  ii,  however,  more  obiioui  and  naCuial  to  under-
Mand  by  it  the  npper  part,  which  i»  formed  of  two
prominence!,  called  the  great  and  ■moll,  or  right
and  left  lobci.  If  no  o^t  wai  fbnnd,  it  wai  a
had  aign  (nihil  trittiiu  acadanpoiuU)  ;  if  well  de-
fined or  double,  it  was  a  lucky  omen.  (Kc  Di
Din.  a.  12,  13;  Liv.nvu.  26,)  [R.W.]

CARACALLA  wai  an  outer  garment  used  in
Qaul,  and  not  unlike  the  Roman  lacema.  [La-
CERNA.]  It  was  £nt  introduced  at  Rome  by  the
emperor  Aureliui  Antotiinus  Bassianiu,  who  com.
pelied  all  the  people  who  came  to  court  to  wear  it,
whence  ha  obtamed  the  mniamB  of  CaiBcalla.
(Aurel.  Vict  Bpil.  21.)  TMl  garment,  as  worn
in  Oaul,  does  not  appear  to  have  reached  lower
than  the  knee,  but  Cuncalla  lengthened  it  so  ai  u
reaeh  the  ankle.  It  oflwwarda  became  common
among  the  l<oman«^  and  garmenta  of  this  kind
were  called  coiafallafl  Anlonianae,  to  distinguish
them  trom  the  Oollic  caracollae.  (AureL  Vict.Z>e
Caa.  21 ;  Sportian.  Sm.  21,  Anion.  Car.  9.)  It
usually  had  a  hood  to  it,  and  came  to  be  worn  by
the  clergy.  Jenuno  (^  138)  speaka  ofpaUioltaa
BURH  pvlciriiadviu  »  nodam  caracaHanm  led
aitjaa  iwcuUit.

CARBA'TINA. [Pbro.]

CABCER  ittritr,  German ;  yepyipa,  Greek),
a  prison.  Thia  word  i>  connected  with  fpMt  and
^pytB,  the  gattonl  being  interchanged  with  the
aspirate.

1.  Oiiiut.  —  Irafoisonmmt  was  seldom  used
(mong  the  Qieeki  a*  a  legal  punishment  for
offences ;  tbey  prBferred  banishment  to  the  eipcnse
of  keeping  prisoners  ia  confinement. We  do,  in-


of  the  duties,  and  mdr  bondsmen,  were  liable  to
imprisomnent  if  the  duties  were  not  paid  by  a
specified  time ;  but  the  object  of  this  was  to  pre-
Tont  the  esope  of  dcfiuillers,  and  to  insure  regu-
larity of  pafment (Bttckh,  PnU.  SsH.  ^.itioi^


I.  339,  &&)  Again,  persons  who  had  been  mnldud
n  penalties  might  be  confined  till  thej  hod  paid
hem,  (Dem.  a.  Mid.  p.  i29.  2G.)  The  Stibw
,  if  they  eierclsed  the  rights  of  citiiensbipi


(Dt.


wjujtm^Bjiui,  oc


-.p.  732.  17.)  Moreo
S«r^i  for  thcli  ;  but  this  was
additional  penally,  the  infiictioc
the  option  of  tbe  court  which  tned  the  osc  ;  and
the  Stasis  itself  was  not  an  imprisonment,  but  a
public  exposure  in  the  woBoKdKKTj^  or  stocks,  for
£ve  days  and  nighta  — '  the  rh  iy  i^^  StiiaBai^
Still  the  idea  of  imprisomnent  per  ss^  as  a  punish,
ment,  was  not  strange  to  the  Athenians.  Thns  wa
find  that  Plato  (£^.  z.  p.  90S}  proposes  to  have  three
prisons :  one  of  these  was  to  be  a  o-B^nrrrVior,
or  penitentiary,  and  another  a  [dace  of  punishment
—  a  sort  of  penal  settlement  away  &om  the  city.

The  prisons  in  djfierent  countries  were  called  by
different  names :  thus  there  was  the  'ArayniuBrf
in  Boeo^  ;  the  Kipafua,  at  Cyprus  ;  the  Kii,  at
Corinth  ;  and,  amongst  the  lonuns,  the  yopyvpa,
OS  at  Samoa.  (Herod,  iii.  145  ;  Pollui,  ii.  45.)
The  prison  at  Athens  was  in  former  times  called
Sia/iJarfipioy,  and  afterwards,  by  a  sort  of  euphe-
mism, eiicrnia.  It  was  chiefly  used  as  a  gnard-bonse,
or  place  of  execution,  and  was  imder  the  cbano  of
the  public  officers  oUled  the  eleven,  oi  Ii&ina.
One  gale  in  the  prison,  through  which  the  can~
demned  were  led  to  eiecnlion,  was  called  rb
Xapanlor.  (Pollux,  viii,  103  ;  Wachsmnth,  HM.
AUerthvauk.  vol.  ii.  pp.  141,  20!,  2d  ed.)

The  Attic  expresaion  for  imprisonment  was  Btjr.
Thns  in  the  oath  of  the  3ouA(in-aI,  or  scnalora,
Kxnrs  the  phrase  obSi  IHitm  'AOnraim-  aitira.
lence  we  have  the  phmse  SStirfwi  ipi/Kaiiii  (Thnc
ii.  34),  the  "libera  cuslodia"  of  Che  Remans,  sig-
lifying  that  a  party  was  under  strict  snrveillanco
md  guard,  though  not  confined  within  a  prisoa.

2.  Roman. — A  career,  or  prison,  was  first  built

it Rome by  Ancos Iilaitius, overhanging the

brum. (Liv. L 33.) This was enlarged  by

Sfjvius  Tullioa,  who  added  to  it  a  soutenain,  or

^geon,  called  &om  him  the  Tttliiamum, Sallnst

(Oal,  65)  describes  this  as  being  twelve  f«1  under

nd,  walled  on  each  side,  and  arched  over  with

9  work. For  b  long  time  this  was  the  only

in  at  Rome  (Juv.  jU.  iiL  312),  being,  in  fact,

the  "Tower,"  or  slate  piison  of  the  city,  which

Limei  doubly  guarded  in  times  of  alarm,

he  chief  object  of  attack  in  many  con-

CLiv.  jxvi.  27, ixiiL  26.) Vano

(L.  L.  t.  lei,  ed.  Hiiller)  tells  us  thai  ihe  Tnl-

wDs  also  named  "  I^ntamiae,"  from  soma

s  in  the  neighbonrhHid ;  or,  as  others  think

aion  to  the  "  Lautnmiae "  of  Syncnse,  a

cut  oat  of  the  solid  rock. In  later  timea

o.e  building  was  oJled  the  "  Mamcrtine.*

Close  to  it  were  the  Scalae  C}emoniae,  or  steps,

down  which  the  bodies  of  those  who  bad  beeD

~  TDwn  into  the  Forum,  to  be  cx-

of  the  Roman  populace.  (Cramer,

Andtnl  Hal/,  ToLi.  p.  430.) There  were^  how-

vcr,  other  prisons besides  this,  though,  as  ws

misbl  expect,  the  words  of  Roman  historians  )[cne-

rally  reftr  to  this  alone. One  of  these  was  built  by

AppiuB  Claudius,  the  decemvir,  and  in  it  he  wa»

'  ■ *!lf  put  to  death. (Liv.  iiL  67  ;  Plin.  //.  If,

36.)

'be  carter  of  which  we  are  treating,  was  chiefly
1  as  a  place  of  conftncment  for  penon*  imdet


CARDO.
tin  tha  timB  oF  tiki ;  and  alio  u  i


Wged  thoe.  Liij  >!•■>  (tiLt.  22)  ipnlu  of  a
"-ipi-''--  being  datigatmi  ta  TWfionin,  which
is  ■DMhO'  pauige  (xiiiT.  M),  ii  otbcrviw  ei-
]!!■  i1  by  the  wDrdj  ■■  ia/tnormt  dtatitttt  ear-

Tbt  laDw  pan  of  the  priaon  vu  alio  mlled
"rabar,^  if  wa  maj'  judge  from  the  wordi  of
Jataa:  —  Bttar  ta  eaeem  diatar  it  loau,  fao
jnaipitatar  miJtfeonm  gami.  Thil  ilentit;  i)
fmbs  ibon  bj  the  oie  mada  of  il ;  for  it  ii
ifoluo  si  u  ■  place  of  eieeulion  in  the  following
pwagta:- — /■  roior*  <t  tmibrii  et^Tort  (Liv.
mtiii.  59  ;  SaUoal,  I  c).  «oiiir  et  mnm  (it
Tvpdan)  ■Hftm'  (Tacit.  ..laa.  It.  29).  Sa  SJM
nnad  of  the  cofeiiat  —  et  Itaiim  roAiir.  (Hdf.
Ci™.ii.  IS.  IB.)  [R.W.J

CA'RCBRES. [Cnicu«,l

CARCHE'SIUM  («ivx*'«»').  1-  A  bcaler
«r  dnnkiiig-4ii|i^  wbich  wa»  iiicd  hy  the  Gneki  in
nrj  eaily  times  *°  '''"  ™'  >■  ■^■^  ^  '""'  ''^■'
^mi  b;  Jopiter  to  Alcmcna  oD  the  night  of  hit
Tiiitio  in.  (Pherecjdn,  ^  97—100,  ed.  Sturti.)
Itwu  (lightlj  concncted  in  the  middle,  and  iti
t»D  Iwullea  extended  from  the  top  to  the  bottom.
(Alhen.  li.  p.  474  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  t.  21.)  It  wai
BBch  coplojed  in  libatioiu  of  blood,  wine,  milk,
and  honey.  (Sappho,  Frag,  70,  ed.  None ;  Virg.
Gmy.  iT.  380,  Am.  J.  77  ;  Ovid,  lUtL  lii.  246 ;
Sm.  JeUU.  ii.  6.)  The  anncied  woodcut  rcpre-
■ntt  a  magnificent  carchaium,  which  vai  pre-
•ntfd  by  Charici  the  Simple  la  the  Abbey  of
St  Dcoji. It  >M  cot  o«t  of  m  ungle  tgala,  and


CARNEIA.  241


ricUy  cngraTad  with  npreKntatian*  of  bacchana-
Eaa  aabJKti. It  hiM  coniiderably  mere  than  a
fiat,  aod  iM  handlea  were  to  laige  n  eaaily  to
admit  a  nuui^  hand.
2.  The Bppn  part  of  the  matt  of  a  ihip.


IN*.


CARDO  (Aoipji,  ffTpoftii,  mf6^cyi,  ylrr^v-
ft),  ■  binge,  a  pilot  The  ibit  figure  in  the  an-
aeied  woodent  it  dedgned  to  iluw  the  general
in  of  a  door,  at  we  find  It  with  a  piToI  at  the
■cfi  tod  bottora  (a,  i)  in  ancient  remaini  of  itone,
■aiUe,  wohI,  and  bronie.  The  lecood  flguie  re-
|iucuu  a  brome  binge  in  the  Egyptian  collection
gf  the  Britith  MuKnm:  in  pivot  (A)  ii  eucdy
cjlindricaL  Under  the«e  it  dnwn  the  Ihreihold
■f  a  temple,  or  other  larn*  edifice,  with  the  plan  of
the  Uiiag  don.  The  pi<ota  more  in  hola  fitted
ta  man  tlien  {b,  6),  each  of  which  it  in  an  angle


fordo,  Viig.  Orii,  222 ;  Enrip.
Ptom.  114— lie,SchoLarftoi).

The  Greekt  and  Romana  nlto  uaed  hingei  ex-
actly like  thote  now  in  comniDn  uk.  Four  Ronum
hingetof  bronze,  preterred  in  the  Britith  Hutenm,
are  here  thawn.


The  lorni  of  the  door  abore  delineated  makei  H
manifeat  why  the  principal  tine  Md  down  in  inr-
Teying  land  wat  called  "  cardo  "  (Feitut,  »,  o.  Oe-
fonanu  ;  laid.  Orig.  xr.  14) ;  and  il  further  ci-
plaint  ike  application  of  the  tame  term  to  the
North  Pole,  the  luppoaed  pivot  on  which  the
heavent  revolved.  (Vair.ZlB  Aa  ffuf.  i.  2  ;  Ovid,
Exf1mlo,iL  10.  45.)  The  lower  eitn^mity  of
the  nniverae  waa  concnved  to  turn  upon  another

CI,  torreipondlng  to  that  at  the  bottom  of  the
<Cic  De  Nat.  Dear.  iL  41 1  Vilruv.  vi.  1,
ix.  1) ;  and  the  concep^on  of  tbeie  two  principal
pointt  in  geography  and  aitrononiy  led  to  the  ap-
plioitian  of  the  anme  term  to  the  Eait  and  Wcat
alao. (Luean.  V.  71.) Hence  our  "fbur  pointt  of


oardiaa  oHmt  terrarum,  and  the  four  principal
windi,  N.  S.  E.  and  W.,  ace  the  can/iaatet  venlt,
(Sen.  adAea.i.  85.)  [J.  Y.l

CARI'NA. [Navis.]

CARMENTA'LJA,  an  old  Roman  fctlival  e*.
lehrated  in  honour  of  the  nymph  CaimenCa  or
Cannentis  for  an  acconnl  of  whom  aee  JUvl.  o/
Biag.  i.  v.  Camtnae.  Thii  featival  wai  cplebnilcd
annually  on  the  llth  and  the  I5th  of  January,
and  no  other  particnlart  of  it  are  recorded  eitspi
that  Cannenta  vraa  invoked  in  it  aa  Podvorta  and
Aalevorla^  epitheta  which  bad  reference  to  her
power  of  looking  back  into  the  paal  and  farwnrd
into  the  falnte.  The  feitival  wa>  chiefly  obKTved
by  women.  {Ov,  Fatl.  I  634  ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  7;
Gell.  ivl  16  i  Serv.  arf  Fi^.  ,4iw,  viiL  339  j  Har-
lung.  Die  PtTigion  dtr  Rmer,  vol.  ii.  p.  199.)

CARNEIA  (■af»'«a),  a  great  natwnal  fealiml,
cel«bmted  by  die  Spariant  in  tioiiaur  of  Apolla


2Ja  CARNIFEX,

CuTwioi,  irUch,  aoording  to  Sonbioi  (i^.  A&en.
xiT.  p.  635),  wa>  uutitut^  Olymp.  xxvi. ;  ftlthougb
Apollo,  under  th«  nvoe  of  Cuneioa,  wu  wonhipped
in  Torjoua  plA£ei  cf  Pclaponneflui,  particularly
Amyclae,  at  n  verj  early  period,  tad  even  bcfb
the  Dorian  niwntinL  (MUUer,  Z)or.  L  S.  §8.  ai
iL  8.  S  IS.)  Wachimath  (HiOm.  AUrraMmA.
p.  632,  Sd  ed.),  nfcmng  to  (h«  pamge  of  Ath»-
Dacus,  aboTB  quoted,  llunka  that  the  Cbhk
long  befote  been  nlebnUsd;  and  tbat  w!
Oljmp.  HTL,  Theipandei  gained  the  Tictorr,
quiIfbI  conlHti  wen  only  added  to  tbe  mutial
Milenuiitiei  of  the  fntiviL  But  tbe
Athenaena,  wbo  i*  the  onb  anthuity
Wachimuth  refen,  do  not  allair  of  luch  an  inter-
pretation, for  no  diitinction  ia  there  made  between
eailier  and  later  ulemnitjea  of  the  fatiral,  and
Alhenaeui  limply  tayt,  the  inniCntion  of  tht
Cameia  took  place  Olymp.  xxri  ^E-rirrro  tj
4  i&^u  T&r  Kapywimr  Kara  rijr  fjirqF  jcol  f LfDOT^i
'OAv^TuUo,  ias  Xwrf^cJf  ^o'v,  tr  rf  wfp]
■Xfitm.)  Tha  feetiTal  began  on  the  leventh  day
of  the  month  of  Carneioa  =  HetageiUion  of  the
Athenian!,  and  latted  fsi  nine  dayi.  (Athen.  ~
p.  HI;  Eiutath.  cKl72.zxiT.  nijb.,-  PlutS^
viii.  1.)  It  wu,  ai  bi  u  we  know,  a  warii
futival,  limilai  to  tbe  Atlic  Boildroinia.  Ituring
the  time  of  ita  celebialion  nine  tenti  wen  pildied
near  the  city,  in  each  of  which  nine  men  Lred  in
the  manner  of  a  military  camp,  obeying
thing  the  comraanda  of  a  berafd.  MUller  alto  tnp-
poiea  that  a  beat  wu  ouried  round,  and  npon  "
a  Hatoe  of  the  Comeian  Apollo  CAwJUUnr  im/
uotIiu),  both  adorned  with  luitntory  garlandi,
called  ilier^r  rri/i^iariiuav,  in  alluiioa  to  the
panage  of  tbe  Doriam  from  Naupactua  into  Pelo-
ponnetui.  (ZWiaiu^  L  3.  $  S.  note  i.)  The  ptien
conducting  ^e  aacrificet  at  the  Caneia,  waa  called
'KfTfr^i,  whence  the  featiial  waa  aomelimea
aignated  by  the  name  'ATi^dpia  or  ^Kfrtri^A
(Ueiych.  t.  n.  'AyijT^'oO ;  and  finm  each  of  the
Spattan  tiihei  fiie  unmarried  men  {KnpvidTu)
wen  cboien  ai  hia  mmiaten,  whole  office  laated
four  yean,  diuing  which  (leriod  they  wen  not  al-
lowed to  many,  '"
of  Ihcm  bore  the  c
t.  T. ;  compm  Behkei,  Anted,  p.  205.)'  Ther-
pander  waa  the  fint  who  gamed  the  piiia  in  the
mutical  conteita  of  the  Cameia,  and  the  moiiciani
of  bii  acbool  were  long  diatinguiihed  competiton
for  the  priia  at  Ihia  fcBtivn]  (MUller,  Hot.  i(.  6.
g  3),  and  the  lait  of  thia  Khool  who  engaged  in
the  conteit  waa  Perideidaa.  (Pint.  Dt  Mm.  6.)
When  we  read  in  HcrodoQi  <yL  106,  TiL  206)
and  Thucydidea  (i.  £4,  and  in  other  placet)  that
the  Spartana  during  the  celebntion  of  thia  fbatiral
wen  not  allowed  to  take  Uie  field  againat  an
enemy,  we  mntt  remember  that  thit  natnction  waa
not  pecnliar  to  the  Cameia,  hnt  common  to  all  the
great  feitical*  of  the  Orccki:  tncei  of  it  are  found
eien  in  Homer. (Od.  xu.  258,  &e.)

Cameia  were  alao  celebrated  at  Cynne  (Calli-
mnch.  fl-jmui.  «  JpolL  72.  lai.),  in  Tberu  (CaUi-
mach.  L  e. ;  Pindar,  PylL  y.  99.  aeq.),  in  Oylhion,
Mcuene,  Sicyon,  and  Sybaria  (PauL  iiL  21.  £  7,
and  24.  S5,i<.  33.g5,iL  10.  gS;  TheocriCT.  33;
compare  MUlIcr'i  OraSom.  p.  S27).  [L,  8.]

CA'RNIFEX,  the  pohlfc  wecntioner  al  Rome,
who  pot  alaiei  and  foicignen  to  death  (Plant
Book.  IT.  i.  37  t  CapL  t.  1.  22),  but  no  citi»HU,
who  were  puniahed  in  a  manner  diSennl  bom


CARPBNTDM.

alaroL  It  wat  alao  hi*  bnoni
tortnre,  Thii  offioe  wai  conaidered  ac
that  he  wai  not  allowed  to  rewde  withi
(Cic  ProSabir.  fi),  but  be  lived  wilhont the  Portt
Metia  or  Eaqnilina  (Plant.  Puud.  L  3.  93),  near
the  place  deatined  fn  the  poniahment  of  alatea
(PUntGu,ii  6.  2;  Tadt  J«.  it.  60;  Har.
99\  called  Soteitinm  inder  the  (oipenn.


(Plot.


4.20.)


It  ia  thought  by  aome  writaii,  fhm  a  paaaage
in  Plantoi  {Rwi.  iu.  6.  19),  that  tha  omifex  waa
anciently  keeper  of  the  prnon  nnder  the  trinniTiii
c^itatea ;  but  then  doea  not  appear  nzfficisit
authority  for  thia  opiuiou,  (Lipaiu^  Exam,  ai
Toot  AmH.  IL  32.)

CARFENTUM,  ia  one  of  tha  eailieat  kind  of
Roman  cairiagea,  of  which  we  find  mention.  (Lit.
i.  34.)  It  waa  the  carnage  in  which  Roman  mationa
were  allowed  to  be  conveyed  in  the  public  featol  pro-
ceoaiona  (Lir.  T.  25 ;  Iiid  Orig.  u.  12)  ;  and  that
thia  waa  a  couiiderable  prinlege  ii  evident  tkom
the  fact,  that  the  uae  of  cairiagea  In  the  city  waa
itirely  forbidden  during  tbe  whole  of  the  tepubUe.


Tilege  to  femalee  of  the  imperial  bmily.  (Dion
CaaL  Ix.  22,  33;  Tac  Ann.  xiL  42.)  The  form
of  thia  carriage  ia  aeeo  in  the  following  medal
atruck  ia  hononr  of  the  elder  Agiippina  after  ber
death.


The  caipeaCom  waa  alao  naed  bj  prirale  penciu

tor  journeyi ;  and  it  waa  likcwiae  a  kind  oC  atats
carriage,  richly  adorned  and  ornamented.  (Prop.  it.
1.  23  ;  Jut.  tIIL  147,  ii.  133.)

Thia  cairiaga  contained  leala  for  two,  and  innB-
timei  for  three  peraeni,  beaidea  the  coachmao.  (LIt.
L  34  1  Hedala.)  It  wai  commmily  drawn  by  a  pair
of  mnle*  (earjientian  mulan,  I^unprid.  H^tog.  4}  t
rarely  by  oxen  or  honea,  and  aometintea
oraea  like  a  iinadiiga.  For  grand  oooa-
wai  very  richly  adorned.  Agripplna'a
carriage,  as  above  repreacnted,  ahowi  paintmg  or
earring  on  ihe  panela,  and  the  heed  ia  aupparlsd
by  Caryalidea  at  the  four  conten.

When  Caligula  inititnted  gamea  and  otbef  •»•
nnitiei  in  honour  of  hii  deccaaed  mother  Agrip-
oa,  her  caipentom  went  in  the  proceanon.  (SoaL
Caiig.  15.)  Thia  practice,  *o  aimilar  to  onra  of
acnding  carriage!  to  a  fimenl,  ia  evidently  alluded
to  in  the  alurilievo  here  repreienled,  which  !«
preaerved  in  the  Biitiih  Muenm.  It  haa  bean
aarcopbagna,  and  exhibit!  a  cloae
by  tbiir  bono. Mercury,  the


and  Caator  and  Pollux  n
ude  panel
Cerpenta,  or  corored  cait^  wars  n


CARRUCA.
tlw  firifaxM,  tbc  Ouli,  tht  Ciinhri,  tlit  Allobn^


a,  Md  10.) ThcM,  tOfClhtr  wilh  Ha  a


•  oftbs


to  hart  bwn  omqiRhnided

I,  wliidi  i*  the  Celtio  nune  with  a
Ths Oulj wid Ilelrctii

;  nd,  when  thcj  wen  encu
■  Hgiu  ucH  in  cImc  order,  u  at  to  fi»m
In*  af  dtamnlUtiaL (CuL  B*tf.  Coti.  L  24,
US.)  [J.  Y.]

CABPOtJ  DIKE'  (nmfnS  Slci)),*  cinl  action
BnW  the  jacudiction  of  the  Iheaincitbelae,  might
W  JaatkalMl  againit  a  hnan  da  de&ah  '
■sirffsrt.  iilaa,Jtt.Proe.f.Sil.)
■1m  adopted  to  odbccc  a  judicial  awaid  when  the
^■aceaa&l  liiipBit  nfcaed  to  •nmada  the  land
U  tit  ip^oaml  (Hadtwaleker,  p.  lU ;  Meier,  ^O.
Pn^  pL  i  AO),  and  m^ht  be  ived  to  detennine  the
rigtl  to  land  (Hatpooat.  m.  e^  vid  O^vloi  Atni),
■■  tke  judgment  would  detennine  whelher  the
fhaKifmild claim mt of  tbedrfendanL  [J.S.M.]

CABRA'GO,  *  kind  of  fortificaliao,  couining
•t  a  great  noaber  of  wa^qunu  placed  nmud  an
■■J.  It  was  employed  b;  barbanut  niliuu,  la,
far  BBtBce,  tke  Scjthiau  (Tre belt  Poll  GalUtH.
13),  O—la  [C^Krumm],  and  Oothi  (Amm.
JfafC  "TJ  20). Compan  Veget.  iiL  10.

Cmago  tito  onifiea  aometimei  tfae  baggage  of
"^bdL  PolL  Oami.  8  j  Vopiw.  Ai


, like the  oupenta  [C^l-
■IS  thej  ^ipeu  to  have  beoi
id  vitfa  ptala  of  Inane,  (ilTer,  andcTBi  gold,
[tad  with  emboBd


wwk. "— — *"  SenroM  allowed

Keae  to  lae  <amt»t  and  riwdaa  plated  with  uItbt

r  iB|il Alt,.  StB.  43)  ;  aad  Haitial  (i"  —


„  . ..  iLiu.l6.23;HiUii«tn,

Cairf.  JfH.u.  14.) CaniMM  wse  alto  DKd  for

IjBg  auMWl,  and  wen  then,  a>  well,  pe:ii^>s

■  Mhaow^dnwnbrsuks  (Dig.Si.  til.3.


CARTATIR,

«  U1plan<Dig.21.  I


343


....  38.  8  8)

CARRUS. [CiKFINTUU.]

CA'RYA  arCAHYATlS  (impio,  «ap™T(i),
a  feitiia]  celebnied  at  Caryae,  ia  Laconia,  in
hoDoui  of  Anemia  CaiTitU.  (HufcLi.o.  Kop^)
It  wu  celebnited  ereij  yar  l^  Lacedaemonian
maideni  (KopwrrliSEr)  with  uationa]  dancce  of  a
rttj  liTely  kind  (Paua.  iiL  10.  g  8  ;  ir.  16.  g  5 ;  Pol-
Iax,iT.  104),  and  with  tolemnhjmni. [L.  S.]

CARYAT19  (napimru),  pL  CARYATIDES,
Fmrn  the  notice!  and  tatimoniei  of  ancient  au-
thon,  we  maj  gather  ihe  following  accouDl : — That
Caiyu  wa>  a  city  in  Atcadio,  new  the  Laconian
bords  ;  that  ill  inhabitant!  joined  the  Peniani
after  the  battle  of  Theimopjlae  (Heiod.  riii  26  ;
VitTDT.  L  1. 9  S) ;  that  on  the  defeat  of  the  Peniani
the  allied  Oreeki  dedrored  the  town,  ilew  the
men,  and  led  the  women  into  captiyil;  ;  and  that,
a!  male  fignm  iepre!Bntine  Penian!  wen  aftei-
warda  employed  with  an  hiMorical  reference  initend
of  column!  in  anhiteeton  [AfLAKfaBi  Pbkbae],
•0  Piaxitelea  and  otfaei  Athenian  aitiil!  employed
female  fignrca  for  the  lame  piiqnae,  intending
■hem  to  eipreu  the  garb,  and  to  commemorate  the
diegrace  of  the  Cuyatidei,  oi  women  of  Carjae.
(VitniT.  L  e.  1  Plin.  //,  N.  iixvi.  4B  and  II.)
Fignrei  of  Caiyatidet  are  eiceedmgtj  common  in
the  lemaini  of  ancient  architectun.  The  foUowing
ipedmen  ii  taken  &om  MUUer*!  DtainiaUr  der
•■ KumL


After  the  mbjugation  of  lbs  Car^ratae,  their
tenitory  became  part  of  Laconia.  The  fertrEu
(xapuw,  Steph.  Bye)  had  been  coniecraled  to
Artemii  (piaaa  Carfoiit,  Serr.  u  Virp.  Ed.  riii.
30),  wboee  image  waa  in  the  open  air,  and  at  whoae
annual  fiatinl  (KapiiSTit  iofrii,  Heeych.)  the  La-
I  TiTgina  continued,  ai  before,  to  perfomi  a
of  a  peculiar  kind,  the  eiecutioa  of  which
lUed  KB^nwrlCuv.  (Paua.iii.  10.  gSi  it.  16.
i6iLiuini,IitSaU.)  [J.Y.]


2U


CASTRA.


CASSIS.  [Oalu  1  Hm.]
CASTBLLUM  AQUAE.  [AQni»nncTDS.]
CASTRA.  It  ii  well  known  that  Roman
(nniu  narer  hilMd  for  n  lingle  night  without
fonnmg  ■  regolnr  eDtrenchmeiit,  tcnncd  eailra,
capable  of  receiring  withia  ita  limiti  the  whole
'boAy  of  fighting  men,  their  besila  of  burden,  and
the  baggage.  So  eaKntial  wu  thii  operation  con-
udend/that  eren  when  preparing  for  an  immediate
engagnnent,  or  when  adnal];  aiKuled  by  a  hoftile
ibice,  it  wu  never  omitted,  but  a  portion  of  the
aoldien  wen  emplc^ed  in  conftcncling  the  necei-
aarr  woHci,  while  the  mnunder  were  atanding  to
their  armi  or  reaiidng  the  enemy :  and  ao  com-

Slelely  wai  il  recogniied  as  a  part  of  tlie  ordinary
uliea  of  each  march,  that  pervmin  ad  loean  ler-
ti'u . . .  fvarfit  .  .  .  wptes^nw  oulrw  are  the
eAabUihed  pbiates  for  ex|HHiing  the  nimiber  of
daji  occmpied  in  paiaing  from  one  point  to  another.
Whenever  circnnulanca  rendered  it  expedient  for
a  force  to  occupy  the  aame  ground  for  any  length
of  tiroe,  then  the  encampment  waa  diitinguiRhed
u  antra  HaHm.  (Liv.  uriL  12  ;  Caet.  B.  O.
TiiL  lB,fl.ai.  42;  Hirt  B.  A/,  il,  B.A:.7i.)

When  the  protracted  and  dlilant  vara  in  which
the  lepablic  became  oigaged,  aa  iU  away  wai
gradudly  eitendod  firal  over  the  whole  of  Italy,
and  >nb>e<guently  over  Gieece,  Aaia,  and  A&ia,
rendered  it  impoiiible  for  the  leipoaa  to  retom
hmne  in  winter,  the;  niually  retired  during  the
monthi  when  active  military  ojieiationa  were  ina-
pended,  into  some  city  where  they  conld  be  pro-
tected ^m  the  inclemency  of  the  icaioa,  and
wliere  the  comforti  of  the  men  coujd  be  readily
aecured  ;  la  they  were  lUaperted  up  and  down  in
detachment!  among  friendly  viUagei  (n  Ubtrwa
ataadirt;  atraiam  ia  Aifvma  diaiiUert
tiin»  per  dvUalu  m  Hienia  diaden).  Il
that  eitnordinary  emergenciea,  inch  ai  a  protimcted
blockade,  or  lis  neceaaity  of  uainlaining  a  conalant
watch  upon  the  movementi  of  a  neighbouring  and
vigoroui  foe,  misht  compel  a  commander  to  keep
tin  field  for  a  K^ole  yew  or  even  longer,  but  to
order  an  army,  except  in  caac  of  neceuity,
under  canvaii  (iiaaan  fli6  peliibiu  ;  Au
temtoria  en^rra)  wai  long  regarded  a>
puiiiihmBnt,  inflicted  otdy  is  couHqucnc«  of  grievoui
miKnnduct.  (Frontin.  StnU.  iv.  1.  g  24.)  At
the  boundarie*  of  the  euifuie  were  gradually  puahed
forward  into  wild  and  barbarian  Imdi,  where  there
were  no  large  towni  and  no  tribe*  ou  whoM  &ith
relianoe  could  be  placed,  nich  ornuigementa  became
impracticable,  and  anniei,  whether  of  invBiion  oi
occupation,  were  farced  to  remain  comtontly  in
cvnpa.  They  uiually,  however,  occupied  differenl
ground  in  nunmer  and  in  winter,  whence  amac  thf
distinction  between  catira  aettna  and  catira  H-
tena,  both  alike  being  ilaiiva.  Such  poet*  vers
ftequentty,  if  ■lluated  advantagtoudy,  garriwned
penuanenUy  ;  and  the  peaceful  nativea  who  iought
to  enrich  themielTei  by  trading  with  their  con-
igneion,  lettled  for  Kcurity  in  the  immediate  vi-
dnit^.  (Cnet.fi.O.  vl37.)  Thui  in  the  diitant
provincet,  theae  fbrta  fbnned  a  centre  round  which
B  Dumeimu  populatico  gindaally  cduitered  ;  and
many  important  towni,  atill  exiating  in  onr  own
oonntry,  mdjcate  their  oi^ia  by  the  terminaCiim

But  whether  a  camp  wai  temporary  or  peima-
itent,  whether  tenanted  in  lumnier  or  in  winter,
lb  maia  featam  of  the  in>rk  were  alwayi  tlie


CASTRA.

Intf  or  itona  would  t
tentt  of  the  aeativa  (hence  aedificars  U6enu),  and
in  iCativa  held  for  long  peripdi  the  defencea  would
preaent  a  more  iobetanti^  and  finiihed  Bapect,  but
the  general  outline  and  diipoiition  of  the  porta
were  invariable  :  a  csmp  wu  laid  down,  arranged
fortified  according  to  a  fixed  and  well-known
plan,  modified  only  by  the  numben  for  whom  it
waa  required  to  provide  acconunodation,  but  alto^
gether  independent  of  the  natmn  of  the  nuund  or
of  tlie  fimey  of  the  general,  ao  that  each  battalioa,
r,  and  each  individual,  bad  a  place
'hich  they  could  at  once  repair  without
Older,  queilien,  delay,  or  confuion.

At  what  period  the  practice  of  throwing  up
elaborate  field-wotki  for  Ue  protection  of  an  amy
igaged  in  active  aervics  waa  fint  cotnmenced  l^
le  Romant,  it  ii  impoaaible  to  determine  ;  but  we
ay  safely  conchide  thai,  like  all  other  parb  of
leir  military  tactici,  it  wsj  matured  by  aalov  and
gradual  procai.  Livy  and  Dionyaina,  iodeed,
would  lead  u  to  auppoae  that  regular  campa  existed
from  the  moat  remote  epoch  to  which  their  annala
extend  ;  but  the  language  of  these  hiiloriani  is  in
general  so  loose  upon  all  matters  of  antiquarian  re-
search, and  they  are  so  much  in  the  habit  of  cnms-
feiring  to  the  earliest  agea  the  uiages  of  their  own
conlempoiaries,  that  do  safe  inference  regarding
points  of  this  nature  can  be  drawn  from  their  words,
rrontinns,  on  the  other  hand,  declares  tkat  the
idea  of  a  fortified  encloaure,  calculated  to  contain  a
whole  Bimy,  was  firrt  suggested  to  the  Romsns  by
the  camp  tk  Pytrhiu,  which  they  captured  near
Beneventnm  ;  but  the  atatements  of  thia  author
have  never  been  deemed  to  poaaeu  much  weight,
and  in  this  particular  instance  many  conaiderations

Sredude  ua  nom  admitting  bis  testimony  as  credible,
t  is  evidoit,  however,  liinn  the  &cli  detailed  in
the  article  Exikcitus  that  a  camp,  such  as  the
earliest  of  those  of  which  we  possess  any  detailed
account,  could  not  have  assumed  that  siu^ie  onlil
the  tactics  of  the  {Jialanx  were  auperseded  by  the

that  each  of  the  great  wan  in  which  the  Common-
wealth waa  sncceasively  engaged  for  more  than  m.
century — with  the  Samnitee,  with  Pvtrhos,  with  the
Cisslpme  Oanls,  and  with  the  Cartbaginiant,  muit
have  led  to  a  series  of  impiwements.  The  system
was  irobably  brought  to  perfection  in  the  cam-
paigns against  Hannibal,  and  underwent  no  ma-
teria] alteration  until  the  ornnic  changes  in  Iha
conitilvtion  of  the  army,  which  look  placv  not  long


the  camp  unavoidable.  Hence,  although  it  would
be  at  once  vain  and  impmiitable  to  attempt  an  in-
VBstigation  of  the  various  changes  throiqh  which  &
Roman  camp  passed  befote  it  assumed  what  may-
be called  its  normal  shape,  it  is  evidently  abaolutely
neceanry  for  all  who  desire  to  obtain  even  a  slight
knowledge  of  the  Roman  art  of  war,  to  make  them-
selves acquainted  with  this  iraporUot  feature  in
their  ayatcv  during  the  best  days  r>f  the  republic
and  the  empire.  And  fortunately  the  recorda  oT
antujuity  enable  us  to  snpply  such  mrotnaliim  with
considerable  minutenesa.  Polybins,  the  friend  and
companion  of  the  younger  Scipio,  baa  tranamittcd.
to  ua  a  descripticsi  of  a  Roman  Amp,  inch  as  hn
mmt  bare  often  wen  with  lu)  «wa  eyva^  *Bd  B  Mr*


CASTRA.  CASTRA.

tn  Hj^n%  B  gnmatiett  <r  bnd  iniTejir,  irha  j  nctl^  from  Poljbiiu,  and  lliiiu  witb  legud  to  ibo
loaiiilMd  andK  Tlmju  and  Hadrwii,  lua  left  ni  a  MEond,  bran  Hygiuui,  imlmt  whra  the  aiatmj  i*
' ' ' "  ' "' - - ■  I djitjntily  indidted. But  while


^cdKd  IB  kk  cm  daj.  To  tfaaa  nnie  might
fad  "- J"- ■<  to  idd  llw  tmuAj  of  Vqeliiii,  who
fircA  doriBK  Ibo  idgn  of  Valentmiui,  bat  Sai
imi  whA  an  MMed  olKwkcn  [ExibcitdiJ
k  «a  b*  MN«  Mfa  to  n^ect  him  altogetlKr.
W«  AiU  intaed  t»  Swrilw  th«*a  two  ounpi

•IU^hbM  ntb  npud  b>  tha  6at  an  tikan  di-


endeoTour  U
explun  elcBrI;  lU  the  [oiti  ofthecanipithemaelTa,
we  miut  refer  to  the  article  EzKRCITUB  for  HYtrj-
thing  lliat  coacani  the  different  kindi  of  Iroopi,
their  di*iii<mi,  theii  ditdpliae,  acd  their  offiCBn.
I.  Cmr  or  Polybidb.
The  mnp  dsKiilwd  b;  Polybiu  is  locb  aa
would  bo  fiimad  at  the  doaa  of  an  oidiiiai;  day^


!
i

Xo

Ci

jia

o<

El

Ka

1

i

Kl

So

Hi

Bi

Bi

<

(•l

Zo

t

■p

V-

■R

^

f  -y

f^

Ki

n^

.,

"

^

Zr

...Cpiiglc


Slfl  CASTRA.

mBTcli  bf  a  regular  coDntsr  anny  crautrting  of  tm  '
Roman  legioD)  with  the  full  amdngenl  of  Sacii.
Each  legion  ii  alculnted  cl  4200  inbntry  Kid  300
cavalry,  the  Socii  furnished  an  equal  uatubcr  of
infantr;  and  twice  ai  niauj  csfalrf,  id  that  the
vhole  fbiee  would  amoimt  to  16,800  foot  and  ISM

OoiBt  of  lit  Crgwl.— Allliougli,  a*  Mated
above,  the  geneni  outline,  the  defence!,  and  the
interna!  eoononij  sf  a  camp  were  altogether  inde-
pendent of  the  Datnie  of  the  graund,  ret  gnat
unpoitance  wai  attached  to  the  choice  of  a  fitting
ailuutioa  which  ihould  admit  of  heing  readily  laid
out  in  the  requind  form,  which  ahould  alTord  no
&cilitie>  for  attack  or  annoyance,  which  ihould  be
conrenient  for  procuring  wood,  water,  and  faiBge,
and  which  the  aimj  mi^ghl  enter  and  quit  without
danger  of  lutpriu.  Skill  in  the  Klection  of  inch
a  ipot  (fiaprn  haim  comMi)  wae  ever  coniidered  ai
a  high  quality  in  a  general,  and  we  find  it  recorded
aroong  the  pniici  of  the  iDOit  renowned  eom-
manden  that  they  were  wont  in  penon  to  peHbnn
thii  duty  (cff.  Liv.  ix.  17,  nir.  U,  28  ;  Tacit.
HiH.  ii.  i.  Agric  20  ;  comp.  QuintiL  I.  O.  riL  3.
§  5).  Under  ordinary  circumttancea,  howeTer,  the
taili  wai  devolved  upon  one  of  the  military  tribune),
and  a  certain  number  of  ccDturioni  appointed  from
time  to  time  for  the  purpoae.  Thete  having  gone
forward  in  advance  at  the  army  until  they  reached
the  place  near  which  it  wat  intended  to  halt,  and
having  lafcen  a  general  lurvey  of  the  groand,  le-
lected  a  spat  from  whence  a  good  view  of  the  whole
propoied  area  might  be  obtained,  that  ipot  being
coniidciably  withui  the  limit!  of  Ihc  conlcmplalcd

OomtTvtHoit.  —  The  ipot  aniweiing  theae  con-
diliou  and  which  we  ihall  caU  A  (fig.  1.)  wu
marked  by  a  imoll  white  Bag.  The  Dcit  object
wni  to  aicertain  in  what  directina  water  and  fodder
might  be  rooit  efl»ily  and  Kcnrely  provided  —

joined  figure.  Upon  the  poiitioD  of  A  and  the
direction  cf  the  arrow  depended  the  diqxiaition  of
all  the  other  pnrti  of  the  work  ;  for  theae  two  pro-
liminory  pointe  being  decided,  the  buiineu  of  mea<
■uring  out  the  ground  (nulari  oufra)  commenced.


d  n>di  {defxmjKilae)  by  penoni  de-
nominated mtiatortt.  The  difiercnt  itcjia  of  the
proccM  may  be  moat  briefly  and  diatuictlj  act
down  in  the  oidinary  tongaige  of  *  geometiiall

Through  A  draw  a  atnif^t  line  Ao  A , ,  rarallel
to  the  direclion  of  the  arrow,  a  itiaigfat  liae  Bg  B,
at  right  onglei  to  A„  A,.  Theae  two  atraight
linea  AoAi.and  B,,  B.,  lerred  ai  the  baaea  by
which  the  potition  of  all  the  different  diiiiiona  <rf
the  camp  were  determined.

AlongAAo  >et  off  AA,™100  feet;  A,  A,
=  50  feet;  A.  A,  I  A,  A,  ;  A,  A,;  A,  A,  ;
A,A,i  A,A,.each  =  ]OOfcet;A,oA,,  =  iO
feetiA,,  A,,;  A,,A,,i  A,,  A,,  ;  A,^  A,,  ;
A,,  A,,each=100foeli  A,.  A,,=200  feeL

Altmg  AA,  act  off  A  A,;  A,  A,„esch— 100
feet;  A,,  A, ,=  167  feet;  A,,  A,o^200  feet.

Through  A„;  A, ;  A. ;  A,  ;  A.-g  A,,;  A,,;
A„drawCoC,  !  DoD,  ;  EoB,  i  F„F,  ;  0„G,  ;
Hgll,  1  EoX  ;  LoL,  itiaight  linea  panUel  to
Bg  B,,  and  in  like  manner  draw  ihnngih  A,;  A,;
....  A,,  atraight  linea  puallal  la  Bg  B,,  ai
mariud  in  lb*  fiptn.


CASTRA.

OnBgB,  make  AB,  ;  AB,  each^lOO  freL
Throngh  B,  ondB,  draw  atraight  Uueaponlld  to
AgA,  cutting  C„C,  in  C,  and  C„and  mtting
Dg  D.  in  D,  and  D,  J  in  thii  manner  a  aqnara
area  C,  C,  D,  D,  ia  determined,  eac^  aide  of
which  =  300  feeL

Along  A,  F„  aet  off  A,P--26  feet;  PQ-
100  f^:  QR=SOfeet;  RS  =  SOfeet;ST
=>  100  feet;  TV=iaO  feet,  V  W  =  60leet;
WX  =  133ifKt;  X  Yc^SM  feet;  Y  2-200
f^et.


Thnngh  Z  Z'  draw  atnight  linea  parallel  ta
Aq  A„  cutting  Og  O,  ini  and  i',  and  cutting  L,
L,  in  0  and  0'.  The  aqoare  area  0  (y  i'  i  thui
determined  waa  the  camp.

Again,  through  P  j  Q ;  R . .  » ,  Y,  and  through
P'  1  Q' ;  R' . . . .  Y'  draw  atiaight  linea  pandlel  to
Aq  a,,  cutting  the  paralleli  to  Bg  B,  in  the  point*
marked  in  the  fignrc

Finally,nnHgH,  Uy  off  A,,  H,  aDd  A,^H,


each=25 feet,  and thmiBh H,  ; H.; dn
atraight  Ibeapualld  to  Ag  A,,  ealUng  Eg  E,


ondK^

hii  conttmetion  betog  eompteted  we  now  pro-
:r^ain  the  arrangenieiil  of  the  dil&nnl
mng  to  figure  2,  in  which  the  Imea  no

Tr  ticceaaaiy  are  obhteratcd,  the  apacee  occu-
by  the  tmopa  or  officen  endoani  by  darit
iinei,  and  the  atreeta  (viae)  diatinctly  laid  down.
In  practice  the  moat  important  pointa  were  marked
by  white  polea,  aome  of  which  bore  Aagi  of  vnrioni
coloun,  BO  that  the  different  hattaliona  on  reacbii^
the  ground  canld  at  once  dijcover  the  place  ai-

The  white  Sag  A,  which  aerved  aa  the  atartinR
itmction,  marked  the  poaition
pf™«oii"w,  BO  called  brcauaa
prartoT  waa  the  ancient  term  for  any  oi


UteBar  A


and. The  •>


•  C,  D,


ipen  extending,  aa  we  have  aeen,  a  nun
dred  feet  each  way  from  the  praetoiium.  That
portion  of  the  camp  which  Uy  m  the  direction  of
the  arrow  (wp^i  tV  'irrii  hn^amiui)  ftom  the
line  E„  E  J  (fig.  1 )  waa  termed  the  front  or  fbrv-
<n  the  camp  (td£ worrit  irxlifWTOf  aBrA


-pArw


')■


of  legiona  bong  two  and  the  mua<
ber  of  tribune*  in  eaich  being  aii,  their  testa  woia
anansed  ail  and  tSx  at  equal  dialanee*  along  tha
line  Eg  E,  (fig.  1)  exactly  oppoaite  to  and  looking
towaida  the  legiona  to  which  ihoy  belonged.  Hence,
at  will  be  *een  from  what  foUowt,  ihcy  did  not
extend  beyond  the  pninta  E,  and  E,,  but  whether
they  were  diatributed  at  equal  diatancea  alraig  th«
whole  of  the  line  E,  E^,  or  whether  the  apace  in
&Dnt  of  the  pTaetorimn  waa  left  Tacant,  aa  in  oar
figure,  ai  Beemimoalptnhable,  may  admit  of  doubt.
The  ipace  of  fif^  feet  included  between  the  pa-
ralleli Cg  C,  and  Eg  E,  (fig.  1),  immediately  be-
hind the  tent*  of  the  tribune*,  waa  appnpnaUd
to  their  honea,  beaata  of  burden  and  baggage*

The  ten  aieai  mariied  1  were  let  ^«rt  lor  tba
cavalry  of  one  legion,  and  the  correaponding  teo
areaa  marked  1'  forth*  aralry  of  the  othn  l^on.
Theae  all  heed  towvdi  Ihe  itreet  P  P',  and  euh
ana,  cootlining  ■  tftna  of  10,000  aqnan  GsM,
waa  allotted  I*  one  turraa  or  tnop  of  30  dntgooDa,
with  thtir  hme*  aad  taggl^


CASTBA.  CASTRA.  211


D(  D({


„  •'  .Lli  ••


idglttd  to  a  mvuiile  of  60  men  ;  boiea^  4cnaduiff
•  Aa  ralrahlirn  hoi  fDlkmd,  ■  dragoon  tad
n  ksM  «<n  aOoind  tt  much  ipice  ••  4  foot


In  Iban


•  Bufced  3  lod  S'  being  the  Triarii


cmuaoed  10,000  iqun  feet,
<a4  «■■  (IlDtted  to  a  mauipla  of  two  caitDrie^

la  tb*  ■!(■■  miAid  4  md  4',  buk  to  back
THk  Aa  viDcipa,  and  looking  oat  upon  tin
^atuVW,  V'W,  ma  qoaitend  dts Haiuti
rf  tW  two  k^aat,  the  nambn  of  man  beiitt  the
M  ia  dw  Piindpei,  and  an  eqnal  apace  being


■and  tod

^^  111


a  dw  CBTal^  af  the  allUa.


theM  1  or  200  oere  tepantted  n

BtnorrJiaiini,  and  quaiteied  in  a  diSeicnl  pert  of
the  camp.  Conaeqnentlj,  each  of  the  ipocei  5  and
5'  wa*  lalciilaled  to  accommodale  40dngoona  with
tboir  honei ;  and  alloHing  ihem  the  ume  ipaca
ai  the  legionar;  cavalij,  each  of  thcac  anst  muat
hare  conlained  lomBwhat  man  than  1 3,333  aqmire
feet

Back  to  back  with  the  canlrr  of  ihe  alliei,  and
looking  towardi  the  minp^  which  enclosed  the
camp,  the  inbatry  of  the  alliea  wm  quartered  in
the  anaa  marked  6  and  ff.  The  total  nmnbet
waa  SOOO  for  each  legion,  but  of  then  ^  or  600
were  aapaiatad  aa  aMnun/Moni  and  qiuuleied  in
a  different  part  of  the  camp.  Hence  there  would
[HDoin  2400,  or  340  for  each  of  the  ipocei  6  and  6',
and  thcae  occordin^j  contained  20,000  aquoia
feet.

The  open  V>oe
and  bagpge  of  the


248  CASTRA,

ind  left  of  the  (pace  allotted  to  the  genenJ,  wm  m-
aigned  on  qqc  aulfl  to  a  fonun,  mnd  on  the  other,  to
the  cjnaeitor  and  his  depBitmcnt  (t^  t»  Ti^Jf,  nl
nut  d^ia  ni^9>  xopirrBui).  Thoe  ue  marked  7
and  8,  but  we  are  Dot  told  on  which  aide  thej  le-
(peciively  tteod,

Still  fnrther  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  praeto-
riiun  in  9,  10,  end  9',  IQ',  looking  leapecdTel;  lo-
wardi  (he  lomm  ud  the  qnaettorium,  wets  a
body  of  cavalry,  aelected  (nm  the  extnordinarli
equitei  (ol  TMi'  iirAiieTm' Inriiar  i,ir6XiicT0i\ati
a  body  of  cavalry  Berring  n  Tolunteen  out  of  com-
pliment lothe  general  (vul  Tinr  tUt  iOtKoirrijIAw
BTpartuoiiimr  Tp  tSii  itdrmt  x^"'\  analogous
probably,  to  the  EnxoH  of  later  timei.  Back  to
back  with  these,  looking  towardt  the  rampart,  in
11, 1  Sand  11'  l^'.wereqiuutered  the  foot-soldien
belonging  to  the  nine  elawei  u  the  caxaliy  jnit
named.  On  the  march,  these  troops  were  alivayi
near  the  penon  of  the  consul  and  of  the  qnaeator,
and  nerved  hi  a  sort  of  body-gvard  to  tfacm.  Thtnr
number  is  tutwhere  specified,  imd  hoKt  the  exact
apace  required  for  their  acoonunodation  ctumot  be

In  1 3  and  1 3',  looking  towards  the  quaestorium,
pntetorium,  and  fomm,  were  quartend  the  re-
roaindcr  of  the  eitraordinarii  eqoitei.  Back  to
hack  with  these,  lacing  Iheramparu  in  14  lad  W,
were  the  remainder  of  the  extraordinaiii  peditu.
The  ipaccs  marked  15,  IS'  on  the  flanks  of  13,  14,
13',  14',  were  asaignsd  to  fntign  troops  or  to  allies
not  included  in  the  regular  contingent,  who  might
chance  tc  be  present  (joU  &AA4^\0u  kb]  Toa  ix
Tou  KOipoi  rf4t<rftynfiivait  (ru/4^xo(0-

The  form  of  the  camp  was  an  eiact  square  {Twpd-
ymray  Icr^A«ir|Kr),  the  laogtli  of  each  side  being
2017  Roman  fceL

The  clear  space  between  the  ranparU  and  the
tents  (Mtrvdhm)  was  200  feet,  and  this  was  of
the  greatest  serricD  in  beilitatuig  the  marching  in
and  out  of  the  SDldien  without  crowding  or  confu-
sion. Here,  also,  cattle  and  other  booty  were  kept
and  guarded  ;  and  the  breadth  was  sufncieut  to
preTent  any  ordinary  missile  or  fire-brand  huried
into  the  camu  from  doiug  serktus  injury.

The  principal  street,  alrctching  right  across  in
ftont  of  the  tents  of  the  trihnne%  was  100  fret
wide  and  was  named  Priitapia,  It  will  be  ob-
served that  the  lengthened  Im«  of  the  ten  turmae
and  manipuli  in  each  division  is  inlenectcd  at  the
termination  of  the  first  five  by  a  road  fifty  feet
wide,  called  the  Via  Q^ntmBi.  The  position  of
the  lemaining  five  viae  in  the  fore-part  of  the
camp,  all  of  which  intersect  the  Via  Qnintaoa  at
right  angles,  will  he  imdcntood  at  once  by  in->
spccting  the  plan,  the  width  of  each  being  SO  feet.

When  two  r^nsalar  armies  encamped  together
within  the  same  rampart,  two  ordinary  camng  were,
it  may  be  said,  applied  to  och  other  at  the  enda
nearest  to  their  rapectiTe  praetoria.  The  two  prae-
toria  faced  in  opposite  directions,  and  the  legions  of
the  two  eoniuU  stretched  their  lines  in  front  of
each  pnetorinm,  so  that  the  figfure  of  the  camp  was
now  no  longer  a  square,  but  a  rectangle,  whose
length  was  twice  that  of  an  ordinary  camp,  tha
breadth  beiag  the  same.

Although  the  wcrdi  of  Polybins  an,  as  a  whole,
•0  full  and  deal  that  we  can  have  (itila  difficulty
in  forming  a  distinct  concepdon  of  the  camp  which


GASTRA.

f1

lionally  bit  lan-
guage is  not  entirely  free  from  ambiguity.

Under  the  head  of  omissions,  we  must  note  — >
I .  The  absence  of  all  informatien  with  ngaid
to  the  manner  in  which  the  VJiUt  were  dli[»sed
ol  These,  at  the  lime  when  Polybius  wrote,
amomted  to  1200,  or,  at  the  lowett  eomputelioD,
to  1000  for  each  legioni  and  taking  the  tamo
number  for  the  contingent  of  the  SociJ,  we  shall
thus  have  a  body  of  at  least  4000  men  nnprofided
for.  It  is  true  that  he  subsequently  staled  in  a
passage  which  we  quote  below,  that  the  Telilci
kept  guard  by  night  and  bv  day  along  the  whola
extent  of  the  rampart,  and  that  they  were  Btalioaed
in  hodiei  of  ten  to  watdi  the  galea  Hence  some
have  supposed  that  the  light-armed  troops  aiwaja
bivouacked  onttide  the  camp  ;  others,  that  they
Dccniued  the  intervallnm  ;  othen,  that,  just  as  in
the  line  of  battle,  they  did  not  f«m  a  distinct
ccKpt,  bat  »er«  distribatad  among  the  baslati,
prindpet,  and  triarii,  according  to  a  given  ratio,  to
m  like  manner  they  were,  in  the  camp,  quaitoed
along  with  those  diritioni  to  which  they  were  at-
tached in  the  field.  The  velites  oeased  to  form
a  portion  of  the  Won  about  the  time  of  Haiiut,
and  consequently  the  later  Roman  writers  throw  no
light  upon  the  qnettion.  It  is  lemarkable,  alto,
that  while  Polybins  passes  them  oier  completely  in
the  internal  arrangements  of  his  canip,  to  also  he
take*  no  notica  whatsoever  of  them  when  describing


■a  or  the  older  of  march  in  which  ai


2.  No  mention  is  made  of  the  ligatL  Lipaiui^
in  hii  plan  of  a  Roman  camp  after  Polybins,  nsaigna
to  them  a  compartment  next  to  the  praetorium  on
the  tide  opposite  to  that  where  the  qaaeatcnnm
stood  1  but  this  ii  merely  a  conjecture.

3.  The  prmjicli  midorm  likewise  are  patted
over.  Since  they  corresponded  among  the  troopi
of  the  allies  to  the  tribuni  in  the  legions,  it  sosns
highly  probable  that  their  teals  were  tanged  aloii<
a  prolougatirai  cf  the  iine  on  which  the  UMer  ttoo^
and  thus  they  alto  would  be  placed  immediately
opposite  to  and  looking  towards  tha  soldien  under
their  immediate  command.

4.  The  number  of  tents  allowed  to  each  monifda
or  century  is  nowhere  stated,  and  consequently
the  number  of  men  in  each  tent  is  unknown,  nor
are  we  very  distinctly  told  how  the  centurions  and
other  officers  of  the  in&ntry  and  cavalry  inferior  to
the  trihunea  were  prorided  for  ;  it  is  merely  said
that  the  rofliv^oi  in  each  maniple  took  the  tnX
tents  on  each  side,  that  is,  probably,  at  each  end
of  the  row  whicb  held  one  maniple.

6.  With  regard  to  the  fortifications  of  the  camp
it  ia  itated  that  the  digging  of  the  ditch  (vo^ia)
and  the  fbnnation  of  the  rampart  (xofiamniitB)
upon  two  aide*  of  the  cemp  was  assigned  to  the
socii,  each  division  taking  that  tide  along  whicb  it
was  quartered ;  while  the  tiro  mnaining  tide*
were  ui  like  manner  completed  by  the  legicmariea,
one  by  each  legim.  The  work  upon  each  tida
wat  poMioned  ont  among  the  maniplet,  the  ccn-
turiont  acted  at  inipecton  of  tha  tasks  petfi)nned
by  dieir  respectivB  companies,  and  the  genenl
superintendence  was  nndertakm  by  two  of  tW
tribune*.  The  natnra  and  the  dlmenaiont  of  tha
defenses  are  not,  however,  specified.  These  con-
sisted of  a  ditch  (Jbssa),  the  earth  btsa  which  waa
thnwD  inwardj^  wA  fiiraied,  aloog  with  tmf  and


1  bnung  tha  nuntart  {Falbim
F^m—xtfO- We  on  KucdT  doubt  that
tks  deptk  of  tba  ditch,  tagetbix  widi  tlia  height
aod Mcttdth  of  {tha  iffiBr,  were,  Dnder  ocdiiuij

odoully  Btmtioosd  in  inlMed  pungei  do  not
yafnAf  taoA  with  (acli  other.  Among  ttio
mki  at  DyiibKluiiai  (Cu*.  S.  C  iil  63}  wo
nad  tt  m  dheh  IS  feet  deirp,  ud  a  Tallmn  10  feet
Ugh  ud  10  feet  bnad  ;  in  tbo  war  agaiiM  tb*
BeihnKi  and  etlwr  Oaoliih  tribca  we  SoA  Caeaar
(A  O.  niL  9)  fatti^ing  bii  amp  with  *  donhle
dita^  15  bet  de^  with  peneadicnkr  lide*
(Anta  i*r«H),  and  a  TaUma  13  Ceet  high,  on
(ha  Mp  of  vUdi  wa»  a  tciil  waA  (Juriaib)  ud
■OBcnvi  tvwen  Ihna  alariM  high  connected  with
■ih  alWi  b]r  Indga^tbe  ndea  of  theae  bridgea


Tha

fiaaico  ti  a  laui  period  i^  aa  wa  ihall  lea  helow,
amm  dady  defined  bj  Hjginu  ud  othen.

&  Nettbo  tba  mmbs  nor  lEu)  quh  of  the
^— ««g«  m  the  TBnms  on  giTeo.  We  hara
itmdaM  eridoica  to  prare  thu  there  were  £ini :
—  (1)  PiMta  Primdpalit  d—tn  and  12)  Poria
■>-■--■— ^■-  -^.J—  —  •!-  —  -— ■■•i^  of  (he


. . la  licini^  af  tba  qaaitera  of

iiidjii  ii.-  (4)  Fci*iDtmmna,¥>  oiled
g  irtltlM  en  that  cod  where  tha  tenth
ul  tenth  aan^dca  in  ndi  diriiion  were
.  Thia  gate  waa  alao  calbd  Artu  ^u<»-
" ~a,  of  the  Qh»-


i«uaiBtlMBBi
liu.  The  popleiitjr  camad  b;  theae  itate-
B  hia  i-J— *<  Moe  oitici  to  icTcne  tlie  poti-
u  and  the  PMa  Z>»-


a  (tin  mora  amoQi,a«
ting  Peljtniu  and  the
id  to  at  the  and  of  thii  paagnqih  i


vmi,  wmUs,  Kid  otha  uLLutarj  nippUu  wotdd
le  aaat  eadr  ud  ■ecoielj  [aDiidtdii  (Liv.  xL
37,  a.  ^  K.  K,  xndT.  il ;  Tadt  ^n  L  6G,  it.
M;  Feotaa,  i;  vo.  iVogtoria  ^orto,  Pnw^paiu,
T  -  -  Svntu.  Mr.  36.)

Wo  ^  Boacd;  donbt  that  tba  Poitaa  mut
lua  beta  alwaft  defended  b;  hanjeii  of  aome
hkd:  !■!  wliea  apadal  pncutiom  wen  nqnind
i  hj  ttgqhi  gatea  datended  bf

7.  la  wUch  dinetiBi  di


CA9TIIA.  949

tavarda  the  Porta  Praetoria  or  towarda  the  l^ona
ud  the  Port!  Decnmana?  On  tha  npl;  to  thia
queilioa,  which  can  be  autwend  from  conjectnre
onlj,  depend!  the  aolntion  of  the  problem  aa  to
whidi  wu  the  Porta  Prindpalii  dti&a  and  the
P.  P.  liniWm.  Id  like  manner  we  cannot  aacertain
OS  which  lida  of  tha  Pnetorinm  the  Qnaeatorinm


the  daacriptiim  of  Polrbiu.  Our  limili  will  not
pomit  u  to  do  moM  than  aimply  to  indicate  cmo
important  point  when  a  certain  dsree  of  am-
bigoily  in  nil  phtaaeolog;  hai  given  rue  to  doobt,
diacoaioD,  and  an  ineeondlable  diJUtrenee  at  opi-
nion. After  detailing  the  anangementa  adt^ted
when  two  conmlar  anniei  encamp  together,  he
addi  theie  remarkable  woidi — Rror  Si  XPf^t  ^
&AAa  /Hit  imaiTUt,  Tj]r  If  irfBoify  koI  ri  rofufioi',
Kol  ri  sTpar+yuir,  /liaar  neiam  rir  timr  ffrpa-
TBn&vr,  Takiur  thii  aentenca  b;  itael£  if  tbo
e,  and  if  the  word  arpartw&mi  b«


ai apparently
in  we  aliDiild  b


itlj-  it mnit  be  r

I  be  led  to  the  c«

aingle  camp,  the  Ftaetoiiiun,  the  Qoaeeto-
num  ana  the  Forani  were  all  litaaled  •omewhen
aboat  the  middle  of  the  Via  Qnmbdu ;  and  thia
coDcInnon  Schalini,  one  of  the  moat  aente  and
Itarued  wiitm  on  the  militai7  affiiin  of  tha  Ro-
mani,  hai  actually  adopted.  Thii,  howsTer,  ii  ao
cam[jatdf  at  variance  with  the  whole  pnrioiii
nanativo  of  the  hiaUnan  who  occnpiea  himielf
bom  the  commencement  with  a  tingle  counilar
camp,  ud  Ian  down  the  lita  of  the  pntetorimn,
•a  we  have  done  above,  in  a  manner  lo  clear  aa
to  admit  of  no  aivil,  the  whole  candraction,  in
biA,  depending  npon  the  ipot  tbtu  auigned  to  tba
pmetocinm,  that  we  are  driven  to  make  choice  of
one  of  th«e  iltemBUvei,  either  that  there  ii  a
cotraptiDn  Iniking  in  the  text,  or  that  PolybiuB  ia
here  allnding  to  lomo  pecnliar  expedient  which
wai  reaarted  to  vhen  two  wnnilar  aimiea  en-
camped beaide  each  other,  bat  wen  not  actoaUy
indnded  within  the  tinea  of  a  tingle  camp.  For  •
foil  and  &ii  azaminatiDn  of  thia  and  of  other  dif-
ficnltica  wlikb  inggeat  IhcmaelTea  npon  a  dote  ex-
amination of  Polytaut  and  an  impanial  review  of
the  chief  aiigomiata  addooed  bj  oontending  ciitica,
the  atodant  may  canaolt  ■  tract  cDiitled  '^  Polybii
Caatnnm  Romanonim  fimnae  interpretatjo,  icrip-
ait  O.  F.  Batlig,'' 4ta,  HannoT.  1  SSa.

We  now  poceed  to  notice  variona  puticolara  eto<
neetad  with  tlie  internal  diadpline  of  the  ounp.

71a  Ony  Oa&, — When  an  atmy  encamped  for
the  fint  tim%  the  tnbnnei  adminiatered  an  oath
to  each  individoal  qonrt^ed  or  emplojed  within
ita  limita,  including  tlava  u  well  aa  Beemen,  to
tha  e&ect  that  he  would  atal  nothing  out  of  tha
camp,  but  if  hs  chanced  to  find  anjproperty  that
he  would  bring  it  to  the  tribnnea. We  mnit  anp-

cnniidered  u  binding  daring  the  whole  campaign,
for  it  wonld  have  beni  impotaible  to  have  repeated
a  ceremony  »  tadioni  at  the  doae  of  each  march.

i>i4niitfiiiii  o/A4y  rnoiv  tit  Q^iatra.— In  eaeh
legion  the  tribunea  divided  themielvea  into  tbna
aectiona  of  two  each,  and  each  taction  in  turn  un-
dertook for  two  monlht  the  tuperintendence  of  all
matten  connected  with  tba  camp.  ]t  it  not  im-
probable that  one  trjbone  in  each  lection  aanuned
the  chief  cmmiand  upon  alternate  day*,  or  perhapa
during  allonala  ■Donib^  and  iMMe  PtdjbiiH  B<a»-


StO  CASTRA.

nllj  apeakl  of  ons  tribuna  only  ■■  acting,  or  of

tiro  vheu  raRsrenoa  ii  uuda  to  Iwth  Itgioiu.

QffU»n  pamh,  — -  Bray  mginiiig  at  day-bnak
tha  ceotnrioni  and  the  eqaitca  fnaented  tbem-
mItm  befon  tba  taut*  of  the  tnbinca,  cod  iha
tribona  id  like  muaer,  atboded  perfaafia  by  the
cantariona  md  eqnilea,  preaented  thenuelTta  at  the
pietaiinm.  The  ocdsn  tnr  the  day  wen  then
uniad  by  the  connl  to  the  tribnnaa,  comnninicated
by  the  tribnnci  to  the  centnnoni  and  equilH,  ud
tiumgh  the  eentmiaiii  and  equitM  laadied  the


Oaartit,  SBOimli,  iti!.— Oot  of  flu  tweoty
maniplea  of  PrmciiKa  and  Tiiaiii  in  each  legirai,
tno  vera  appointed  to  take  chatge  of  tha  bnad
paamge  a  atreet  called  /Vi'nc^ia,  extending  right
BfToaa  tbc  ounp  in  frrmt  of  the  lent*  of  the  tribuH*.
Thii  being  the  place  of  sBDent  naart  dming  the
day,  and,  u  ve  know  fiom  niiooi  MHiieea,  the
part  of  the  camp  in  whicb  the  altaii  and  tha  eagtce
alood,RTeat  puni  were  takoitbat  it  •hould  be  kept
perfectly  cteaii  and  ngnlariy  watered,  a  labaar
trbich  would  &U  Tsry  light  when  portioned  ont
among  four  maniplee.

Of  tbe  lemBioing  eighteen  maniplea  of  Prin-
eipa  and  Haetali  in  each  legion,  three  were
aaigncd  by  lot  to  each  of  the  lix  tribimet,  and  of
thete  three  maniplea  ono  in  turn  rendered  each
day  certain  aervicea  to  the  tribime  bs  whom  it  waa
apedally  atCaebed,  Tt  took  charge  of  hia  Cent  and
baggage,  nw  that  the  former  vBi  properly  pitched
upon  ground  dulr  lerelled  &11  raond,  and  [a>o-
tscted  the  Utter  bom  damage  or  plunder.  It  ilao
fimiiihed  two  guard*  (^^Akhh)  of  four  men
each,  who  kept-wateb,  acme  in  froDl  of  the  tent
and  «ome  behind,  among  tbe  honei.  We  may
remark  in  paaaing,  that  bj-ai  wat  tbe  regnlar  num-
ber (br  B  Roman  guard  (pufAxtar)  j  of  these  one
always  acted  aa  lentioel,  whOe  the  othen  enjoyed
a  certain  degree  of  lepoae,  ready,  howerer,  to  start
up  at  the  first  nlaim.  Compare  the  Acta  of  the
Apostles,  cap.  liL  rapcJhib)  riampai  rtrpotlait

Tbe  Triaiii  were  exempted  from  those  dntiea
imposed  upon  tbe  Principe^  and  HasCati,  hut  each
maniple  of  the  Triorii  ^misbed  daily  a  guard  of
four  men  to  that  turma  of  the  Equite*  which  was
quartered  immediately  behind  them,  in  order  to
watch  the  hones,  end  to  take  can  that  they  did
not  sustain  any  injnry  from  getting  entangled  with
their  baiters  and  heel  ropes,  or  break  looaa  and
cause  confusion  and  mischieC

One  miuiipte  was  selected  each  day  fVom  the
whole  legionaiy  Ions,  to  keep  gnard  beside  tha
tent  of  the  general,  tlat  ha  m%ht  be  secured
alike  from  open  danger  and  hidden  troacheiy ;
diia  honooniWe  task  being  derolTed  npon  ereiy
maniple  in  mtaticm.  Three  aentinds  w«v  usually
pasted  at  the  tents  of  the  quaestor  and  of  the  1»-
gati ;  and  by  night  sentineh  kept  watch  at
maniple,  hemg  choaen  out  of  the
tii^  guorded.

The  Veliles  mounted  guard  by  day  snd  by
night  along  the  whole  extent  of  the  vallum  i  to
tlum  also  in  bodies  of  ten  was  committed  the
charge  of  the  gates,  while  strong  bodies  of  inbntiy
and  cavalry  were  thrown  fiirward  in  advance  of
each  gate,  to  rtaiit  any  sadden  onsets  and  giTS
timely  Dotica  of  tha  aj^iniaeb  of  the

Etaibiati  arftJas  agm;  laai


CASTBA
gnard  iriielluc  hj  night  or  by  day.  Vigitia$;
vigilku  agtn;  tigOan;  ara  reafricced  to  night
duty :  Ematia*  and  t^giHai  ficqntnlly  deiule  sot
only  tha  asfrica  it»eU,  bat  alao  tba  indhridDali
who  pBriaimed  ib  iSlolsbwt  la  sted  qiadaQy  to
denote  tha  adTanoad  poaM  tfanwn  fbrwaid  in  frcat
of  the  gatca,  Othadm  m  Otstodug  tbe  sartisa
who  watched  tbe  gatca  themaalvea,  i^osiidia  the
aentineli  on  the  tampait^  but  all  than  Wotda  are
Mnploynl  in  ma;^  otber  itgnif


ntud(fvA2Mia

JonrmoB,  and  <*


theafti


of  the  four  watches  into  which  tha  nigbt
was  dlrided.  The  sentinela  to  whom  it  AH  to  go
duty  m  the  Gtat  watch,  wen  ccodnetad  n
'  inUKO  to  the  tent  of  the  tribune  by  liente-
naniB  of  the  maniplea  to  which  they  bdonged.
Bach  of  tbeae  men  reeeiied  from  the  uibnue  foaz
small  tokens  ({v\4^),  numbered  front  one  to
fimr  for  tbe  four  watchee,  and  bearing  alio  marks
indicating  the  l^icm,  and  manide  or  centnry  from
which  the  guoid  was  token.  The  indiridual  who
raoeiied  theae  tokens  retained  the  one  which  en-
ivered  to  hia  own  watch,  and  disBibntsd  the  real
among  hia  three  comradea.  The  duty  of  going  the
rounds  (  F^nUn*  ovmire  t,  eiretmiit,  camp.  Feat.
>.  D.  fraaan)  waa  committed  to  tha  Eqnitea,  and
for  this  purpoae  each  kgioD  aopplied  doily  fbn^
picked  out  fiom  each  tmma  in  mtaticsi  by  tba
commander  of  tba  troop.  Tlte  eight  penms  thoa
selected  decided  by  lot  m  which  watch  they  shonld

watch.  They  then  repured  to  tha  trihma,  and
each  indiTidual  lecHTod  a  written  order  spee^ring
the  posts  which  he  was  to  yisit,  erery  post  being
risited  in  each  watch  by  one  or  other  tt  the  two


duty  of  one  of
notm  of  the  commencement  of  each  watch  t^  a
trumpet  bisst,  At  the  appmnled  time  each  eqnas^
accompaiued  by  some  tnnids,  who  acted  aa  wit-
neaeea,  Tiiited  all  the  peats  named  in  hia  wtittco
order,  from  each  auitinel  whom  he  {bond  on  tba
alert  be  receiTed  ona  of  tba  tokana  desoibed
obore,  hot  if  the  sentinel  was  aaleap  or  abaen^
then  the  eqnes  of  the  mondt  called  upon  hia  com-
paniona  to  wilneas  the  bet,  and  departed.  Tba
nune  pncesa  waa  followed  by  all  tba  otben,  and
on  tbe  titUoving  morning  the  ideas  of  tbe  rooada
repaired  to  tbe  tent  of  the  tribune  and  deliTered
np  the  tokeni.  If  the  mmiber  of  thsaa  waa  Ibnnd
to  be  complete,  then  all  waa  well,  bnt  if  any  ana
was  wantmg,  then  it  could  be  at  once  ascerttiued
to  what  guard  and  to  what  watch  tha  nuMinv
token  behmged.  The  eaitarion  of  Ilia  companj-
wai  ordaced  to  bring  Ibnrard  t]»  ma  nnplicatet^
and  they  were  confronted  with  the  qffloer  of  tba
roonda.  If  tbe  latter  eoold  pnm  by  raasas  of  baa
wilneaaca,  Ibat  he  bad  actoally  ntited  the  peat  in
qneation,  and  firand  th ' ■ '  ■ -

Um  tbe  gnill  of  these
of  doibt )  bat  if  the  of
then  tbe  blame  fell  iqion  h
otae  tbe  cnlfrit  was  fcothwith  i
court  martiaL Sometimes  we  find  centoriona,  tri^
,  bniMa,  ani  aten  tbe  gencnl  in  chief  k


CAsnUL

m  gmg  tht  roBoia,  bat  nider
Wth,  (be  dnty  mi  perfbnned  u  we  tun  de-
Kribcd.  (Ut.  xiii.  1,  xxriii.  U  ;  Sail,  JtM  4S.
TtdfL  Him.  iL  29.)

IfMdhnvrf. — Tlic  iratebvocd  lor  tlia  niglit  ma

not  wmrnmiralrJ  TerWly,  bnt  ty "  -

^ofl  Tcttangaln  laUet  of  wood  (tAi
TfW*^ — Imau — to  bi  areftJly  dirtingniihed
ham.  tlie  t«iA^^ur  of  ths  kit  ]i>iBgnDb),  upon

W  (ad  «<  Umc  msdplei  and  tnntuta  which  n
fBitcnd  K  tkat  eitiaii^  of  Ihe  line*  moat  nmota
&IB  tbe  Priiwi^  Each  of  thne  indiTidnal*
fjaBnan)  lepamd  towardi  Huuet  to  ths  tent  of
tke  triknnc,  tnd  nocired  Eram  him  &  hmro,  on
wUcb  the  pMnnd  ud  iko  ■  cert&tn  mnsbet  or
■■k  ««f«  acrihtd.  With  thii  be  tetaniad  to
tke  Mnijile  v  tonu  to  which  ha  bdongad,  md
lakqg  wiBMMtt,  ddlvBcd  it  to  the  officer  of  the
■at  ■Jjaming  Duiph  ar  tntma,  nd  he  lo  tbe
■at  «nd  il  bii  paMed  along  tbe  vhiJa  line,  vbeu
k  *aa  letnned  ^  tb
ti  Aa  tribnie, T^i


^■fc,  lod  if  a^  one  aa*  bond  vanliiig  at  the
■ftiuiiiltil  time,  tbe  raw  to  which  it  belonged  could
W  at  moe  ffiecnrewd  by  aMaia  of  the  nnmber  or
Batk  Mtiead  abore,  m  ioTeMigalioD  took  place  at
mt»  tab)  ibe  eaaw  of  the  delay,  and  ponuhment
«aaBffiEledapaithe;*rtieifoimd  tobe  in  fiult
Net  obI  J  man  jamimtit  wen  circulated  in  thii
wnma,  lot  abo^  occaaoDally,  general  ordoa,  ae
yAiea  we  lead  a  Lhy,  zzriL  46,  "  Teaeera  p9
tailfs  ab  Lirio  cmnle  data  eiat,  ut  Iribimoin  tri-
1,  eqnea  eqailem,  pedei


:iB  to  give  the  watebwocd  to  hit  gnaide.
(Tacit.  JiK  I  7 1  (nav>  Sost.  Omd.  42,  JVer.  9.)
auabiiiu^aChay.— Ontbefiartagnalbriiw
jLi»L«  by  tbe  tnnnpet,  tbe  tenti  wen  all  etnidc  and
tbe  l«i|igii  packed,  tbe  tenta  of  the  gmoal  and
tbe  Branca  beoK  diipaeed  of  befm  the  olhcn
wen  tntbeJ.  At  tbe  eeeood  ngnal  tbe  bemage
■ae  (Jacsd  apw  tba  boeti  of  bnrdeD :  at  theUura,
tbe  wbak  Hiey  bq|anto  mOTe.

IL  Camp  or  Htodeimi.

arw.  TbeMBHi:^
^oat  liiiiiian.  ntb  the  eicentini  of  the  (ks-
amai^  ban  dinppand.  Tbs  dutribntion  of  the
nldieaato  raBo,  AiuMJ,  Abh^mi^  and  TVwn
fid  an*  uidlij  awre  than  half  a  nmttiry atetbe
«■  rf  PalybfaM ;  tbe  vganiatioD  by  maniplei  ma

canliy  wen  de-


•  «ae  period  in  a  gnat
1  by-  tbe  tohivta,  and  V*  ci
ri  feeaa ~


In  lifce  Banner  tbe  SocS,  aftel  the  admii-
M  af  Ae  Ilaliai  itatea  to  tbe  Roman  fianchiie,
anaal  Id  ban  a  a^aiate  clai^and  Aeir  place  ii
•eveBCBficid  by  a  moUiT  cnwef  fiaeignen  and
lartwh— eriagm  baBdi,dedgQated^itianga
Mh.  Wa  IK  nannded  ^aa  that  the  lepubliow
It  badgim  way  to  the  dmniniou


CASTIU.  S51

titnde  of  boiueliDld  tnopa  and  imperial  body-
pnaidi,  diitinguiihed  by  TaiioDi  ^^idlatione,  nnd
invcated  with  pecnliar  privilegei.  A  conpleto
Roman  aimy  did  not  now  ceudat  of  Rimimaa
Legiaui  tuatSodit,  or  of  Legiaui  ohilSocui  H
AtmSiitt  bat  of  Ltgiam  am  SuppltmaitU,  tbe
tennAypbawfa  inclnding  the  whole  of  tbe  nriom
denominttiaiii  alluded  to  aboTb  In  what  followa,
ws  tholl  attempt  to  delineate  a  lunimer  camp  (pat-
Ira  onfrHito),'  intended  to  conlain  three  legione,
with  their  lupplemcDti,  a  Ibree,  which  in  the  tinu
of  HyginUB  correaponded  to  the  ngnlar  coniuUr
aimy  i^.tbe  nith  and  Hvenlh  centnnea  of  the  cily.
ll  ii  but  right,  howeier,  to  call  attention  to  the
fiwt,  that  we  do  DO!  hen  tnad  upon  gmnnd  eo
finn  £1  when  Poljbina  wai  our  guide.  The  text
ef  Hy^ui  preaoiti  many  difflcniljea  and  many
cDrmptiODA ;  and  then  are  not  a  lev  paangefl  in
which  ve  an  Ihnwn  too  much  upon  catjectnn.
I^  bowero',  be  it  undentood,  appliet  almeat
excluarely  to  tbe  mfarate  detail*,  lot  tbe  geooal
ovtlme  of  tbe  whole  ii  cleat  and  well  aacertaioed.
The  plan  Aelched  bdow,  ii  taken  almott  entirely
fann  Schdhu,  and  the  pn^nnioni  of  the  difibent
paiti  are  oaiefnlty  pteterted.  Omitting  ia  thia
caie  tbe  goometncat  conMmetion,  ws  proceed  at
onoe  to  arplain  the  fisun.

Tbe  point  &am  which  the  whole  of  the  mcanm-
menti  prooeeded  ii  matked  with  a  imall  oDea,  and
wai  called  Ormn,  that  being  tbe  name  of  an  in-
nrumeat  employed  by  (iTTcyora,  analogoo*,  in  ila
uaea  at  leaal,  to  the  modem  ooaa  ital^  plane  table
and  level

The  general  fonn  of  the  incloaon  wea  an  oblong '
the  two  longer  lidei  being  M  equal  diitanoea  from
the  Gnmia,  rounded  off  at  the  anglea  (mi^iilot  ana-
drdman  oporitl),  232D  feet  in  length  by
let  in  breadtb,  tbe  general  rale  being  that
}th  ahonld  exceed  the  breadth  by  raw  third
ia  qaaaium  fieri  fotairit  ttrliata  tut  ahia-
taal)  i  whan  laiser  it  wat  called  Oufra  Cbaafeo,
becanaes  am  Hyginni,  tbe  ordioaty  Baecjaam  or
bugle  conld  not  be  luaid  diatincdy  from  one  ci-
'^emiqt  to  the  other.

The  Gtema  (taod  in  the  middle  of  the  prii^pal

. . /m. !>_-__.. — ..■_^ — Jijjli y,^ ,j^ fgg^

the  canip,  with  tho
la  eitremitiea.  The
two  remaining  gates,  whieb,  like  the  former,  re-
tained Ibcir  ancient  namea,  wen  the  Porta  Pra».
tona,  which  wai  niBreit  to  tho  enemy  (porta
prailoria  anipar  AoiteH  ipaclart  dtiti),  and  tbe
Porta  Dtemaaaa,  and  tbeae  were  placed  in  tbe
cenin  of  tbe  t«o  ibortei  aidei  ta  the  obkog.
Immediately  behind  the  Onma,  a  rectangular
apace,  720  feet  loi^  by  180  broad,  waa  let  i^art

' — "^ commander-in-chio^  aod,  ai  in

...  termed  tba  PraHariaai.  Im-
madialdy  bdiiud  the  Piaetvimn,  that  ia  to  aay,
~'  the  extmrntf  most  diilaot  from  the  Oroma,  a
eet  called  ths  Via  i^Mana,  40  fiiet  vide,  ex-
tended acnwa  tbe  camp  parallel  to  ths  Via  Prin-
eipalia.  When  the  camp  exceeded  the  ordinary
dimoialona,  then  two  additimal  gate*  wen  fiiraisd
at  the  sitieniiliea  of  the  Via  Quintana,  the  breadth
of  which  waain  that  ease  incraaacdto  50  feeL


Itw


iti  by  ths  Via  Pimapalia
sod  the  Via  Quintana.  Each  of  theie  eegmanta
bad  a  namo.  The  whole  of  tbe  middle  aegment,
lying  to  the  right  and  tbe  left  of  tbe  Ptaaterium,


ftnnddBZafara  AoAnfi  Thei^nKntincIadcd  I Tli«  l«gionw  bring  th>  mart  IwrtgwUty  of  tW

tmnrwQ  the  Vi*  Prindp^  and  tllat  uda  of  tlu  Boop*  b  tns  pranncis,  ntn  qrartcnd  bj  coWn
amp  in  vhidi  ths  Porta  Pnetoria  Uood  foimad  th<  I  next  la  tha  nmput  all  mmd  tlia  amp,  aneitcluig
PmUmlimt.  The  Kgrneut  iudodsd  between  the  Icoi^ilatelj  whfalkeirliBeathemaaca  n  fbraif|iici^
Via  QuiutaDB  and  that  aide  of  ths  cainp  ia  wbich  I  who,  tonlbar  with  the  imperial  gnardi,  fiiiiinii
the  Parta  Dtammm  wood  (bnned  dw  Aftr»ft»w. {Om  wapjUmmA.


CASTRA.

A  At  tfix  rf  60  feet  (WwwIEhi)  ni  left
tifwn  the  tcnM  of  the  legionmrin  nid  Uw  run-
pvtt,  Mad  thej  mre  sepuBted  fnuo  the  quvten
of  ilie  otba  tnoia.  whom  tbs;  imTDQudeJ,  by  a
■dm  called  tbe  Via  SagtIarU,  which  no  com-
ptetd*  imad  tbe  ounp,  •■>  that  the  vEiale  of  the
legwouM*,  vjtii  llie  eici^tion  of  the  fint  cohort
m  each  leg™,  and  three  flrdmuj  cohoitt  for  whom
tkoc  ii  not  nxun  is  (be  oaler  ring,  «ete  branded
•a  one  lide  b;  the  intemUiun  rad  on  the  other
by  the  Via  Sasmhru.  The  remaiiung  itneti  not
F*nkiit*ri;  ipecified  vere  compnhaided  nudei  the
gntinl  nune  Viae  Fiauariiu  t.  FicmtUit,  and
their  bmdlh  wu  20  feeL

Tbe  defsKci  oTa  camp  might  be  fonitbld:  —  1.
Am. 2. FallKm. 3.  Omli. i.  Aran.

1.  The  Foaa  might  be  of  two  Icindi^  a.  The
^i^BjadipaJa,  vith  both  udee  eloping^  »  ai  to
fonn  ■  wedfte  ;  or,  i.  (he  Fata  Pimica,  of  which
the  outer  tide  wbi  perpendicular,  the  innu  lide
■iOKDg,  ai  in  the  £aaa  {utintiL  The  bmdth  in
ntker  cate  «m  to  be  at  ieul  fi  feet,  the  depth
3  Ctet*  Ontaide  of  each  gate  a  ditch  waa  dug  ex-
tending <B  both  lidei  umewhal  beyoad  (he  gate  :
Itia,  on  accniBt  of  ita  •hortjuaa,  wai  <alled  TUsfw,
and  in  froal  of  the  titnlni  wa*  a  imall  Mmidrcnlar

3.  The  Falbim  waa  fomed  of  earth  and  tot^  or
■f  oone.  6  feel  in  height,  B  feet  broad.

3.  When  the  nature  ot  the  ground  did  not
■daiit  of  the  cDDnnetioD  of  a  anffieient  Tallinn,
then  a  che*aui  de  frtie  (eervoii)  waa  enhatituled.

4.  When  neither  a  Vallom  not  Cenuli  coold  be
eiB|Aiyed,  then  the  camp  waa  mntrotided  by  a
ring  of  armed  men  fooT  deep,  immenna  lenLriea
wen  poated  in  each  line,  and  tha  csraliy  patrolled
B  lam  in  ereiy  dincttoa.

Tit.  wotdi  of  Hyginiu  would  lead  na  to  lop-
paie  that  when  no  danger  wai  apprehended,  a
dhch  alcmc  waa  conaidered  anffieient ;  and  ereu
tUa  waa  neaTated  merely  for  the  laka  of  exereia-
iag  the  men  (eaua  ditdpliiiae).

We  can now  proceed to  point  ont  in  what

laa the  thnc  a^ment*  were  occupied,  nfer-

riaf  to  tbe  nmabera  on  the  fignia,  it  being  nnder-
Moed  thai,  aa  belore,  we  ihall  not  enter  here  into
any  dkenHiona  regarding  the  oripn  and  cbsneter
af  the  diSoant  battalinu  named,  all  information
^■B  aaeh  mattan  being  given  in  the  article  £i-

A.  Fratlatirmtt  Lalira  Praibim.

i.  FrattarimiiL 2.  Arae,  on  which  public  aa-

oificE  waa  oHered. The  poiition  anigned  to  them

ia  caDJcrtajal ;  bat  they  were,  '"  ""  '"  '"""  '"  '^'

■  which  tba  Impetauv  tiuk  the  auapii
alaia  were  ptrhapa  aect«d  in  front  of  Ihii  place,
at  Inat  (oeh  waa  the  lue  lometimei.  (See  Tacit.
Amm,  XT.  30;  where  the  form  Aagamle  ii  em-
tiajfi-i  4.  Tnimmd,  the  delated  platform  from
which  additaaea  were  delivered  to  the  troopt.
Ckae  lo  the  praetoaioin  wai  a  guardboiiae  (jfaAbai
'ofium  peda$  vigmti),
peniBwl  itsfT  of  the
g  whan  the  chief  ^ter,  next  ta
iha'Via  Prineipalia,  wai  aMigned  lo  Uie  Praefeetoi
Putmia.  S.  EfmU»  tii^alara  Imperalorit  it
Jfit-a  ProtttriaiH  I  the  nomber  of  theae  waa
TM'jahle  :  bat  Hyginoa  girei  aa  an  arerage  450
«<  the  tmma  aad  400  of  iba  latter. 7.  GJaila


tuor. Primipilara. EveeaS. Qfl-
piaetoriana  were  allowed  twice  aa
moch  apace  aa  the  tnwpi  of  the  line. 8.  Ala»
9.  In  each  of  the  i


mailied  9,  on  the  eitnina  right  and  left  of  the
Piaetarinm,  boidering  on  the  Via  Sagularii  [per
rigortm  not  mgtilarii)  waa  placed  the  Grtt  co-
hnt  and  the  ncifliirn  of  one  legion.  The  £ist
eohort  and  the  Tesillarii  of  the  remaining  l^;ion
will  be  found  in  the  Praeteabua. The  £iat  co-


10.  Seaaumm  Ltgatonm. The  qnarten  of  ll


11.  S


jd  the  tegati,  were  the  legionary  trihnnea  and
the  tribnnei  M  the  meloiiau  cohoitL

In  the  language  <n  •arreyon,  auomaaw  ¥raaa  rec-
tiTignlwr  fignie,  whaaa  bnadlh  eioeeded  ita  leoglh,
itr^  a  rectangnhr  Egnre,  whoae  length  eie«eded
hibteadlh,  So^  5^h  and  TbtnUaua  are  ihe  termi
nsed  with  referenoe  to  the  diiectioD  of  the  lenslh
and  breadth  rtapectiTely :  thui,  "  Cohen  pruna

quoniam  duplnm  numetum  habet,  dapLun  pedatn"
nun  accipiel,  nt,  puta,  Offnir  ptdrs  cnium  figiatif
UAuliao  pedtt  tramiat  ttraginta,  tul  ngjiii  omdan
odiigmia  liibidim  peda  duantoM  quadr^miaj^  It
ia  the  mere  neceauiy  to  call  altenlion  to  thia,  be-
caiiae  theae  lignificationi  have  been  paiied  oTer
by  the  beat  lexicogiaphen,  and  we  find  that  aiHue
modem  eiponndera  of  Hyginua  imagine  ToAnJonoB
to  hare  beeo  an  office  where  the  boolu  and  ac-
coonta  of  the  legion  were  kept.  Another  erampla
of  the  nae  of  theae  wmda  will  be  giien  lelew,
12.  Aiaa  miBiiviae  faofaor,  one  in  each  of  theia
fiwT  compaitmenti. 1 3. Vai^adimarvim,  the  hoi-

E'tal  for  the  aick  loldien.  14.  fetenearwm,  the
lapitol  ta  the  lich  honca.  I£,  16.  CSaaua,
maiinea  emjJojed  aa  pioaeera.  Mauri  taiala
Kxenli.  Fammmd  Ftndaru  oOuyeKti.  Theae
two  bodiei  of  light  caTaliy  were  quartered  near
the  claaaiei,  becanae,  when  the  latter  were  aent  in

theforms'.  17.  Eiplora^mt.  C
plan  placet  them  in  theae  two  miBll  corapanmenta.
bat  il  qtpeara  more  probable  from  tbe  worda  of
Hyginua,  that  they  were  qnailered  all  together
on  the  ude  next  to  19.  18  and  19.  The  fint
cohort  of  the  remainbg  legion  and  ita  Viaillarii,

On  the  oppoMte  aide  ot  the  Via  Praetocia,  throe
legionary  cohorta,  for  whom  there  waa  not  anffieient
apace  ontaide  of  the  Via  Sagularia.

In  the  FiBeteotnia  Mood  alio  the  FaiHea  or
woiluliop  of  the  carpentera  and  annonren,  erected
at  a  diilance  from  the  VnletuiKnarium,  ao  that
the  noiae  might  not  diiturb  the  patienia.

Within  Ue  acamnom  of  the  legati  were  the
S/Aalat  of  the  fint  cohort*,  the  placca  apparently
where  the  inpetior  officen  c^  the  fegiom  auembled
in  Older  to  neeiTe  the  general  ocden  of  the  day.

20.  QiuuKan'am.  Thia  apace  correaponded  in
name  o^y  with  the  Quaealarium  of  the  Fdybian
camp,  for  it  wat  no  longer  aiaigned  lo  a  quaeator


nl). It  WBI  occupied  partly  by
hetlagea,  and  plunder  and  hen


p?rbap<  thfl  Praef«tiu

quartered,  DTilen  we  are  to  look  idc  bim  manoag

tho  Comtta  ImperaCoria.

31.  Slatonim  cBtttvit  daat,  w1u>  guarded  th«
Rar  of  the  pneloritim,  ud  iliraf*  kept  doM  to
the  penon  of  tte  Impoator.  ThcH,  like  the  jnae-
toriuu,  had  donble  ipac*  ungned  to  tbem.

22.  CbAortn  t^ailaiae  mtiUoriae  daat, Cuhortet


23.  OAorla  fBiitatai»


34.  A'lKiaw*. Bvlwrion tn»p«. PiUmyti
tpungnti. Oattaa  maipaUi.  Dati  i^itBytt.  £n~


which  UD  raiB  hu  lueceeded  ia  eipiauiing,  bnt  il
ii  in  ali  pnbabilitj  a  cranpt  fonn.

Cimeli  with  their  riden  (taauli  nm  tail  ^pi-
hatii)  were  frequentlj  indoded  anuHi^  the  cod-
itJLnenti  of  an  armj,  b^iDg  aBed  both  m  offisuiTe
operatioiu,  ejid  alio  ia  cairjiog  plDlkda.

Two  points  itrike  oi  forcibly  when  we  cmnpaiQ
the  aunp  of  Hj-giniu  with  that  of  Poljbiu  ;  OrM,
the  Sinaj  chiiractet  of  the  fortiliestKini,  which
miut  b«  attributed  to  the  ditinelinatim  felt  by
the  lotdien  to  perfonn  regularly  aod  iteadily  tbe
Bme  unoiuit  of  labour  which  wai  cheerfully  eie-
eated  liy  nldien  of  the  Rpablic  ;  and,  leciaidly,
the  deiire  efnty  wbue  vinble  to  eeononuM  ipaee,
and  compreM  erery  thing  within  the  DuroweM
pouible  linut*.  Although  tbe  niunben  of  an  amy,
Kich  ai  we  have  been  coniidering  abore,  cannot  be
detennined  with  abaolute  prednon,  they  mnvt,
on  the  loweat  compntatioi,  ban  exceeded  40,000
men,  and  tbeie  wen  tnwded  together  into  leat
than  one  half  the  ipaca  *hich  they  woold  hate
Dccnpied  accodii^  to  the  anciflDt  ^Men,  the  pm-
portian  of  caTslry,  monortt,  being  mneh  larger  in
the  imperial  fone.  The  camp  of  Pdybiu,  caka-
latcd  tor  leu  than  20,000,  contami  npwaida  of
fonr  miUioni  of  ■qnare  feet,  while  the  camp  of
Hyginiu  embnicei  little  moie  than  three  miliiong
and  KTsi  hnndrcd  thoniand.

We  may  condado  with  a  few  wordj  Dpco  a
topic  entirely  paiaed  over  by  Polybini,  hut  on
which  Mygiani  aSbrdi  ample  mfbrmation  in  lo  fiv
u  the  lUBgei  of  hit  own  day  are  concerned — the
smuber  and  amngement  of  the  tenta.

A  double  row  of  tenti  (poptfuHw)  &cing  each
other,  with  a  ipsce  between  for  piling  the  amu  of
the  loldien,  and  for  reeeirine  the  bewte  of  harden
and  the  ba^^age,  va*  tamtiStriga;  a  lingle  row,
with  a  coneqiniding  nace  in  front,  tfemiiingiiai.
The  wmnal  breadth  of  a  Striga  waa  fiO  feet,  of  a
Himiilrigiiim  SO  f^  made  up  aa  lollowa :  —
10  feet  were  aUomd  tn  the  depth  of  each  tent,
6  feet  tn  a  pui>a*  behhtd  the  lent,  S  feet  f«
the  amu  piled  in  fiont  of  the  tent,  9  feet  (or  the
Jtimmta  and  bamaga  ;  total  30  ieet  for  the  bemi-
■trigimn,  whidi^wUed  lor  the  itrigB  girea  60,  the
(pace  betwetn  the  row*  being  28  feet  The  length
t4  the  atriga  ot  henuitrigium  nried  according  to


A  full
Hnmni
pied  10  [
papaio  »

•nd  2  feet  for  lateral  paoagei  (■
Hrae),  and  tbna  the  length  rf  the  line  along
which  the  papilionea  of  a  century  atretched  waa
10n1!<>i  120  feat. Oat  df  tbil  the  sentniiMi


CASTRA.
had  a  apace  allotted  to  him  equal  to  that  reqiund
fer  2  tenta,  ao  tiiax  the  private*  d  the  century  od-
coined  8  teat*  only,  that  ia,  they  wse  qnartered
at  the  rate  of  10  men  to  each  tent.  ButainoelS
men  or  4  guardi  (rerfiaSIa)  in  each  century  wo*
alwaya  out  upon  dn^,  th(f«  were  never  men
than  e  mn  a^aally  in  a  tent  at  the  nine  tmM

(Kb-  <■)


'nnnnnDanEfiS


cnnnDnaDnn«


.QS.QQOnQCiSii


to  9  eenturiea,  and  nnca  an  ordinal?  legicoary
cohort  contained  6  oentariea,  it  fbllowa  that  the
apace  required  for  each  cohort  {padatiira  eaiortu)
of  480  men  wai  21,600  iqnate  feet.

The  troopt  woe  nanally  qnaitared  in  coborti^
and  thew  might  be  Tarioiuly  diqnaed,  it  beins
alwayi  deurahle  that  b  whole  ceatn^  ahoold
~ '  wDji  be  ranged  in  an  unbroken  line.

If  the  atrioa  waa  equal  to  one  ccntiuy  in  lei^th,
then  the  cohort  would occupy three itrigae  in
brodth,  that  ia,  a  ipwie  120  feet  long,  by  180
btaul  =  31,e00iqiiarefeeL See  fig.  (6.)
<Fig.  fi.)


nnnannaanD


lannnnnnDan
InnnnpDDnan'


(nnnanDaDnD
(npnnnnnonn


nnnnnaDnm


would  occupy  one  whole  atrigK
and  a  hemiitrigiom,  that  ia,  a  apaca  240  feet  loDg  by

""iMtlmMl-Sl^iqiunlML 8Mfig.(r.)


QcirindDnnnoDDDODDDDD


DnDDDnnnDnDDDDDaonnc


nnDDDaDDDDDDDDDDDnan


■  cabwt  wmld  owoiiir  (bc  ttiisa  1  ^ZlieOO  iqwn  fHk 8m  %  (&)


■  nnaDDnnDDDDnnaDaDDaaDnnnnaannn


DaConDDDDDDDDnnnnnnannDDnaa


It  litolMobiaTCdlliatiDtlwphDof  thacuip
ghta  abora,  the  IcgioiUT  cohorti  on  tlw  longer
•idet  B«  in  fBigH  of  3M  feat  b  length,  ibote  on
1W  ibotlcT  ndn  in  itrigu  of  360  AM  fai  lagth.

Whea  the  nmlMi  of  kfiom  in  an  unf  wm
peata  te  pnnottion  to  tlw  np|iIaD«nl>  tbm  in
IW  m^  mddi  we  hne  nrieved,  tEien  in  odor
tW  tber  a%lit  Mill  be  noged  oaUide  of  the  Via
S^Blam,  the  itrigio  pmented  their  bnsdth  to
the  nllm  mrteed  of  their  loigth,  u'  to  n*e  the
tEchniol  phnee,  the  length  wlueh  in  the  fonnei
■aw  had  beat  angned  to  the  Sum,  wu  now
^>a  ta  tha  TUaUm  {^«W  l^iama  plura  aa-
■  mpfU


IfABbsthelineortha  nUiim,  C  will  Rpcr-
lat  the  poniiaB  of  the  oohnt  in  the  toe  sue,  D


jMepbiH,  in  hit  tccoont  of  the  Jewiih  war,
take*  nHcial  notice  of  the  Ranao  enompmenta,
and,  although  ha  doee  not  enter  into  mimite  detaili,
hii  ohaern^oni,  with  which  we  ahall  conclude
thii  article^  fbim  a  maful  ntpplement  to  Hjginne.
It  ■•  erident  from  the  numeroni  artiiani  for  whom
worbhope  are  prorided,  &om  the  towen  with
which  the  TOllnm  wna  itrengthened,  e^  frran  the


Cailrs  StaliTB.  He  1xf[ini  by  remartLing  (B.  J,
iiL  £)  that  the  Romana  when  invading  an  enenj^
coontrr  nerer  haiard  an  engagement  until  ther
haie  foitified  a  camp  (ot  n^  drnwrm  fidx'"  %
rnxfcu  rTpBTAnSsf),  whidi,  in  form,  ia  a  aqnare
(VuifirrpfrrBi  9i  w^e^oXf}  TrTp^')4rt"ai),  with  four
patea,  one  on  each  aide.  The  nrnpatt  b;  which
It  ii  annDUnded  eihibita  the  appeaisnce  of  a  mil
fnniiihed  with  towera  at  equal  diatancci,  and  in
the  ipua  between  the  towen  it  placed  the  artilleij
leady  fat  fannediate  aemoe  (rait  t<  ^^tMfKiit,
Kol  UKtKttMa,\  jnt  AjfoCJAo,  cat  «r  i^rH^pur
tfrjwttf  TiMoru',  barra  it^t  rb  ^a>^  freipi).
The  amp  ia  dirided  canreDieotlj'  bj  itreeta,  in
the  middle  ate  the  tentt  of  the  (rfEcen,  and  in  the
Teiy  centre  of  all  the  ptaetoriom  (ri  o^par^rio'')  ;
thne  it  alao  a  fonim  (iyopii  fit  irt^bcrvru),
and  a  place  fn  ai^cert  (x^f'^X""  X''9^'"'\
of  whom  a  gieal  number  Mow  Uie  traj  widi
biulding  toolij  and  aeata  tor  the  tribnnet  and  ceo-

thej'  decide  an;  ditpntee  which  tnaj  ante.  When
necoMVT  (<I  A  htrjvi)  a  ditch  ia  di^  d  ronnd,
Amr  eublta  deep  end  fenr  cubiCa  bread.

At  daj  dawn  (Wi  U  tV  (■)  all  the  aaldirai
inair  to  the  tentt  of  their  teepectiTe  ceaturioiia
(Arl  Toil  JaoTcvRlpxi)  lad  vdnte  them;  the
caitariona  repait  to  dw  tribunet  (wpb  raiv  x*-
,  tJif^nm),  Uoag  witk  wbev  all  tha  «


SK  CATAPHRACTI.

(nliafx^)  MpBir  to  the  eonim<mdBr-i]iH:liief;  from  |  (
whom  the;  receive  the  -wBlchwDrd  (mtufiar)  and
the  general  orden  of  the  day,  to  b«  canrejed  b;
them  to  their  mpectlie  diTiBioni.

When  B  camp  it  broken  up,  at  the  fint  blait  of
the  tnuDpel  the  lohiiera  (Dike  the  tenti,  aod  pack
up  the  nleiuili ;  at  the  lecood  the;  load  the  mulei
and  other  beaati  of  bordcji,  let  fire  to  every  thing
which  conld  prove  tcrvicesble  (o  ta  enemy,  and
Bland  like  counen  rtsdj  to  ilart  forward  on  ■
race  ;  the  third  give)  the  lut  wanuag  that  all
things  being  now  prcpered  every  man  muit  be  in
hia  place.  Then  the  henld,  ilonding  at  the  right
hand  of  the  general,  demandi  tliricc  if  they  mt
ready  far  war,  to  whkh  they  all  reipoad  with  loud
and  repeated  cheeri  that  they  are  ready,  and  foi
the  moat  port,  being  filled  with  martial  ardoor,
anticipate  the  qacation,  and  r^ie  their  right  handi
on  high  with  a  ihout.  (B.  J-.  iii  S.  §  i.)  [W.  R.]

CATAGO'QIA  (Kiriyiiyia).  [ANiOoQli.]

CATAORAPHA. [Picruai.]

CATA'LOaUS  (mrdAoTot),  the  catalogue  of
thote  penouA  inAtheni  who  were  liable  to  regular
Tnilitacy  urrice. At  Athens,  those  persona  alone
who  potsessed  a  certain  amount  of  property,  were
allowed  to  serve  in  the  regular  infantry,  whilst  the
lowerclau,  the  thelcs,had  nottblipriiilcge.  Thi
the  former  ore  called  i^  iit  KaraX6ycu  ffrfmrtifo\
Ttt,  and  the  latter  ol  t{»  tsS  (otoA^u. (Xei
JVeH.  ii,  3.  g  20.) Thoee  who  were  eiempled  by
their  age  from militaiy  service,  ore called  by
Semoethenei {Dt  S^. p. 167.) ol Mp  tir
mtrdAayor. It  appears  to  have  been  the  duty  of
irals  (oTponrxoI)  lo  make


IS  liable  t


»  [AsTn


^h  duty  they  were  probably  assisted  by  the
demorchi,  and  sometimes  by  the  ^uXtvral,  (Dcm.
e.PolyeLp.1208.)

CATALU'SEOS  TOU  DEMOU  ORAPHE'
{icoT«*iffini  ToD  Sfiiuo  7p»t^),  was  an  action
bnnght  against  thoeo  penoni  who  hod  altered,  or
attempted  to  alter,  the  dcroocratlcal  form  of  go-
vernment at  Athens.  A  person  was  also  liable  to
this  action  who  held  any  pnblic  office  in  the  slate
after  tha  democracy  had  been  subvened.  (Andoc
tU  Mjil.  p.  48.)  This  action  is  closely  connected
with  the  TpeXoalat  11^4^  (Jvl  it|iiitiKrlf  t^i
roK4»St  4  ^1  jtoroA^ri  rmi  ft^/uu,  Demosth.
c  Timonr.  p.  748),  with  which  it  appears  in  some
cases  to  have  been  almost  identical.  The  fom  of
B  in  both  eases,  namely,  by


leding  was  thi
)7ixra.  In  th


of  H


J  death  ;  the  property  of  the
oflcnder  was  confiscated  to  the  state,  and  a  tenth
pul  dedicated  ta  Athena.  (Andoc  Dt  Myit.
p.  48.)

CATAPHRA'CTI  (laniLpparTti).  1.  Heavy-
armed  cavalry,  the  horses  of  whkh  were  aJw  co.-
vend  with  defensive  urmonr  (Serv.  ad  Virg.  An.
x\.  771),  whence  they  are  caUcd  by  Pollux  (L  140)
ittl>af^pay)i.ivat.  The  armour  of  the  horses  con-
sisted cither  of  scale  armour,  or  of  plates  of  metal,
which  hod  different  names  according  to  the  pans  of
the  body  which  they  protected.  Pullui:  (L  140)
speaks  of  the  irpo^crwrffiidv,  wapinrtov^  xa^loii^
vpaiTTt^vfSLOf,  ]rapairA«ypI0u»-,  irapaft.iipihtov^  vet.
paKrrifilCui¥.  Among  many  of  the  Eastern  nations,
who  placed  their  chief  dependence  upon  their
cavaliy,  we  find  horves  protected  in  this  manner ;
'  ■  ong  the  Romans  wo  do  not  read  of
if  this  dcacripl


CATARACTA.

ittoyed,  and  the  c
placed  on  the  cavalry.

This  species  of  troops  wu  common  among  the
Persians  from  the  earliest  times,  from  whom  it  was
adopted  by  their  Macedonian  conqnenwa.  (Liv.
mv.  46  j  zxtviL  40.)  In  tha  army  of  the  elder
Cyrus,  Xenophon  {Cgr.  tL  4.  g  1)  savi  that  the
horses  were  piotected  by  coverings  for  the  loRhead
and  chest  i^fofirTwiioii  iral  wpoorfpFiSloit)  ;
and  the  same  was  the  case  with  the  aimy  of  Arta-

(x™  - -  ^

were  colled  tjiiamra  by  the  Persians  {eaiaphTacti
tqaiXa,  yaot  diiaaanot  dictitoHt  Pertae,  Amm.
Marc  ivL  10  ;  compare  I,amprid.  Ala.  See.  56).
We  first  read  of  cstaphiacti  in  the  Roman  army  in
the  time  of  Constantino. (Amm.  Marc  L  c)

2.  The  word  was  also  applied  to  ship*  which
had  decks,  in  opposition  to  ApkradL [IVAl'ra-J

CATAPIHA'TER  (icaTair«pwn,pia,iao\ti),  the
lead  used  in  sounding  (In  r^  PoTkIC""),  or  &thom-
ing  the  depth  of  water  in  navigation. The  mode


.  lors,  and  is  described  with  oiactness  in  the  ac-
count of  St.  Paul's  voyage  and  shipwreck  at  Me-
{AcU,  xxviL  28.)  A  eylindricsl  piece  of
was  attached  to  a  long  line,  lo  as  to  admit  of
g  thrown  into  the  water  in  advance  of  the
!l,  and  to  sink  r^idly  to  the  bottom,  the  lino
being  marked  with  a  knot  at  each  lathom,  to  mea-
sure the  depth.  (Isid.  Orig.  xii.  4  ;  Euststh.  n
H  V.  396.)  By  smearing  the  bottom  of  the  lead
'itb  tallow  (fuKlam,  Luolius,  op.  Ind.  L  c),  tpe-
imens  of  the  ground  wore  hniught  up,  «howin([
hether  it  was  clay  (Herad.  iu  S),  gravel,  or  hard
kIl  [J.  Y.]

CATAPULTA. [Tobusntubi.]
CATARACTA  ((ara^^Jimii),  a  portcullis,  so
aliai  because  it  fell  with  great  force  and  a  loud
noise. According  to  Vrgclius  (Dt  Rt  MS.  iv.  4),
:*  ....  ...  additional  defence,  suspended  by  irvii


troop*  of  ib


cription  till  the  later  timei  of  tbo


.byGoogIc


CATENA.

riifi  and  rape*,  bcfm  the  gam  af  i  city,  in  nicb
a  Bumtr  tmt,  what  tite  raaoj  bad  onni  ap  lo
ibe  gua,  tlu  portoiUu  D)if{ht  be  let  down  k  u  to
•hat  then  in,  and  to  enable  the  boieged  to  aHul
thcK  frcuB  aboTC  Id  the  aecompuiyidg  plan  of
tluB  jriaafml  entianca  lo  Pampeu,  there  an  tvo
■dewmja  far  bot  paiaeiigen,  and  ■  mad  between
thcB,feaztesi  laet  Tide,  for  cairiage^  The  gatee
wsa  placed  at  A,  A,  taming  on  [UToti  [Cardo],
aa  ia  pnved  b;  tbe  holea  in  the  paTCmeut,  which
Btill  iiiaaiii  Thii  tnd  of  tbe  road  vnu  nearett  to
tk  town  ;  ID  the  spniiu  direEtiDn,  the  road  led
iala  the  coiuiUj.  The  pcctcolli*  wai  at  B,  B,  and
wia  Bade  to  aUde  in  gitwrei  cnt  in  the  wilU.  The
■dewajB,  HLUied  witL  imalleF  gatea,  wen  roofed
m,  wbfTiaa  the  portian  of  tfa«  main  nad  between
ilwntea  (A,  A)and  theponoillit  (B,B)  waa  open
la  the  ikj.  When,  thenfne,  an  attack  wu
■■dc.  the  lanilanti  were  either  excluded  by  the
pincallia ;  at,  if  they  fOTeed  their  waj  bto  the
Wbiean  and  atlonpted  lo  bnak  down  the  gates,
the  dtiafaa,  faiiaiDding  and  attacking  them  from
aboTc,  bad  the  gnateat  poaaible  bdlitiei  tor  im-
pedmg  and  deatnying  lltan. Vegetiiu  ipeaka  of

H  appcan  to  hare  bcoi  employed  itj  the  Jewi  at
JentHlem  u  early  —  the  time  of  Dand.  (Pial.
joii.  7,  9 ;  cooip.  Jar.  to.  2.  Sept.) [J.  Y.]

KATASKOPES  GRAPHE'  (nmenirw^t
lf*4i\  ao  action  brought  againM  tpia  at  Athena
If  a  tfj  waa  diacorered,  be  waa  placed  on  the
lack,  in  crdcr  to  obtain  infonnatkiD  (nan  him,  and
aft^'warda  pat  to  death.  (Antiphanea,  <^,  AiAgti.
ii.  ^fi<,  d.;  Dem.  ZH  Gr.  p.  273;  Afachin.
e.  6ki^  p.  SI  6 ;  Pint.  Vil.  dee.  Oral.  p.  848,  a.)
It  fp**^  that  fonigneia  only  wen  liaUe  to  tbi*

ciiBe,  wen  accnaed  of  wpotoirfB.

CATASTA. ISaaTUB,]

CATEIA,  a  niaaile  lued  in  war  by  the  Ger-
■■M,  Oanli,  and  Hme  of  the  Italian  nation!  ( Virg.
Am.n.  741)  Val.  Flat  ri.  83 ;  AoL  OelL  i.
2£).  foppoaed  to  reoemble  the  aclia.  (SerT.  u
Ja.  L  c  ;  laid.  Or^  iriiL  7.)  It  probably  had
in  ame  friBB  oMmg  :  and,  if  m,  the  Welab  tenni
itii,  a  we^oo,  cateia,  to  cat  or  mangle,  and
^tam,  to  6gbt,  are  nearly  allied  to  iL [J.  Y.]

CATELLA. [Catoia.]

CATrNA,  dim.  CATELLA  (buru,  dim.
ixinar,  iXuvOur),  a  chain.  The  ehaini  wbkh
wtrt  i£  npfTiar  Talne,  either  oo  aecoimt  of  tbe


eaAdai  (iXifna),  the  diminntiTe  expreftnng  their

TW  iyi.i.iiyi.iia  of  aneieot  chain!  whieb  we  hare  in
hnaae  laiBpi,  in  acaka  [LibaaJ  ,aod  in  ornament!
fv  the  penoB,  especially  neddaeei  rHoNiLB],ibow
a  gnat  tariecy  of  degani  and  tngeoiou  patt«ni.
Btiadei  a  plain  circle  oi  oral,  the  lepante  link  it
'  '"':e  the  figure  8,  or  ii  a  bar  with


^^^gggg^saa


CAUPO.

platted  win  or  thisad,  like  tbe  |old  el
mubctund  at  Venice.  Thii  11  repn
«  lowcBt  figore  of  the  woodcat.
Theae  valualjle  cbaiu  were  tometimei  ^nn  aa
wardt  to  the  ioldiere  (Liv.  TiiiT.  3l);lratthey
vn  commmly  worn  by  women  (Hot.  Ep.  L  17.
i)  either  on  the  neck  («pl  th»  T^x-lAor
\Mar,  Menander,  p.  92,  ed.  Mein.),  or  round
e  waiti  (Plin. //.  A'.  luiiL  12);  and  were  naed
nupend  peaii!,  or  jewel!  eet  in  gold,  keya,
locketa,  and  other  trinket!.  [J.  Y,]

CATERVA'RII.  [OLaDiaToaaa.]
CA'THEDBA,ateat;  bU  the  term  wai  more
paniculariy  ^iptied  to  the  aofl  hbIi  nied  by  wo-
men, whercB!  atUa  lignified  a  ant  common  to  both
texei  (ator  j^msmiu  ealMfu,  Mart.  iiL  63,  ir.
7S  :  Hor.  Sat.  I  10.  91 ;  Prop.  iv.  5.  37).  The
cathedrae  were,  no  doubt,  of  varioo!  fiirmi  and
■ilea  ;  bnt  they  uaually  appor  to  hare  lad  backi
to  tleni,  aa  ii  the  caae  in  the  one  repnaenled  in
inneied  woodcut,  which  ia  taken  from  Sir
am  Hamilton'!  work  on  Greek  vaiei.  On
ilbedn  ii  leated  a  bride,  who  ii  being  fanned
female  ilare  with  a  fan  made  of  peaeock'i


Women  were  alio  acctutomed  lo  be  carried
abroad  in  Iheee  citbedme  initead  of  in  lecticae,
which  piactice  waa  scmetiinei  adopted  by  elTerai-

oatkidra.  Jut.  Sal.  L  65  ;  compan  ii.  £1).  The
word  cathedra  vai  alio  applied  to  the  chair  or
pulpit  from  which  lecture!  were  read.  (Jut.  Sal.
TiL  203;  Mart  L  77.)  Compare  BSttigcr.  Satua,
ToL  i.  p.  35 ;  Schefler,  Di  Ft  VeiiaU.  u.  i.

CATILLUS. ICiTiNin]

CATIN03,  or  CATINUM,  a  largo  diih,  on
wUch  £>h  and  meat  wen  •erred  up  at  tabic
Hence  Haiace  apeaki  of  an  oi^Mtw  pofwai  ai  an
inditation  of  niggiidlioea  on  the  part  of^the  hi~'


(Hor,


,a  the  d.


udlioea  on  the  part  of  the  hat
77  i  Per*  iiL  II.) From  tbia


CAVAE'DIUM.

CAVEA.

CAUPO.  The  nature  of  the  bnimei!  of  a
caupo  ii  explained  by  Gaiua  (Ad  EdaL  Pimac.
Dig.  4.  tit  9. 1.5):  "cnopo, ,


3£8  CAUPONA.

non  pro  eiutodia,  Kd  . . .  nt  Tiatorea  maoent  in
eanpona  patiatur .  ■ .  et  tamen  eiutadiu  nomine
tenetur."  The  aupo  lodged  tnTellen  in  hii
hoiue,  uidf  thoogh  hii  hoiufl  wu  not  DpnMd  for
the  MfB  keeping  of  traiellen'  goodi,  yex  he  wu
aniwerable  for  their  goodi  if  atolen  cat  of  hi>
boute,  and  alao  for  dunage  done  to  them  there.
The  pnetor*!  edict  wu  in  thia  form ;  "  NauOe
(onien  W  ica),  cuxpoau,  itabolBjii  (poreons  who
kept  (tabfei  for  beuta),  quod  enjuque  (alTuia
tbie  leceperint,  niti  leatitnent,  in  eoa  jadidnm
dabo.*'  By  thia  edict  nich  penona  wen  made  ge-
nerally liable  (or  the  thing!  which  came  into  their
ore  ;  for  the  worda  "qnod  eujttaqiu  aalviun  fore
leceperint,"  are  EipUined  thna,  "  qnamcmuiDe  nra
riTe  Dienem  reeeptrint.''  But  if  the  gooda  of  the
traveller  wen  ImI  oc  damaged  owing  to  any  un-
■Toidable  caUmity,  aa  robbery,  fire,  or  th<  like,  the
canpo  wBi  not  anaweiable.  The  action  which  the
edict  gave  waa  "  in  bctiun,"  or  an  action  on  the
caae  ;  and  it  wag  Honorariai,  that  ia,  given  b;  the
pnielar.  The  reaaon  why  aa  Honoraria  actio  waa
allowed,  though  there  might  be  actionea  civilei,  ia
explained  by  Pomponiua  (quoted  by  Ulpian,  Ad
Edictum,  Dig.  4.  tit,9.  a.  3.  $  1) :  m  cotain  caaea
there  might  be  an  actio  locati  et  eondacti,  or
an  actio  depoiiti,  againet  the  oiapo  ;  hut  in  the
aclio  locati  et  coaducti,  the  canpo  would  be  an-
aweiable only  for  culpa,  and  in  the  actio  depoaiti
he  would  bo  aniweisble  only  for  dolua,  whereaa  in
thia  hoaoraria  actio  he  waa  liable  even  if  there  nst
no  culpa,  except  in  the  excepted  caaea.  The  Eng-
liah  law  aa  to  liability  of  aa  innkeeper  ia  the  aame.
(Kent  D.  Shuchard,  2  B.  &  Ad.  803.) [Q.  L.]

CAUPO'NA,  aignified,  1.  An  inn,  when  tia-
Tolleca  obtained  food  and  lod^g  (  in  which  aenae
it  anawered  to  the  Greek  worda  rarStKtuat,
tterayAyuir,  and  KaTiXinrii.  2.  A  ihop,  when
n-ioe  and  ready-dreaaed  mettt  were  aold,  and  thni
'  '  'fl  the  Greek  itonjAtibr The  per-


calledoi


It  baa  been  niamtained  by
the  Oreelta  and  Ronumi  had  no  iuni  for  the  ac'
commodation  of  penona  of  any  retpectability,  and
that  theit  eoH^Knoa  and  wdi^aeia  were  mere
bonica  of  iheller  for  the  loweit  claaaea.  That  auch,
howeier,  wai  not  the  caae,  an  attentive  pemaal  of
the  dauical  anthora  will  aufficienlly  >how ;  though
it  ia,  at  the  aame  time,  veiy  evident  that  their
honwa  of  pobtii;  entertainment  did  not  correapond,
either  in  aiie  or  convenience,  to  umilar  placet  in
modem  times.

Cnai  Iiuu.  —  The  hoapitalitf  of  the  esrlieat
^cB  of  Greece  tendered  inna  uoneceiaary  ;  but  in
later  timea  they  i^por  to  have  been  veiy  name,
loua  The  public  ambaaaadora  of  Athena  were
aometimea  obneed  to  avail  themaelvei  of  the  ac-
commodalion  of  auch  bouaea  (Aeachin.O«  Fidt,  Ltg.
p.  373),  aa  weit  aa  private  penona.  (Cic  De  Die.
L  27,  Int.  ii.  t.)  In  addition  to  which,  it  may
be  remarked,  that  the  great  noniber  of  feativali
which  were  celebrated  in  the  difierent  towna  of
Greece,  beaidea  the  four  great  national  feativala,
to  which  penona  Socked  fiom  sU  parta  of  the
Hellenic  world,  muit  hare  required  a  conaidemble
mmiber  of  inna  to  accommodate  atiangen,  not  only
in  the  placea  when  the  feativala  wen  celebrated,
bat  alao  on  the  nada  leading  to  thoae  platea.
(Becker,  OanUet,  vtJ.  L  p.  134.)

The  word  itanjXrun-  i^ified,  aa  haa  beea  al-
Mftdy  i«ma^ed,  k  place  whan  wijw  wd  teady-


dresaed  proviaiona  were  (old.  KdiniXor  aigaiGM
in  general  a  retail  trader,  who  aold  gooda  in  anuU
qoantitiea,  whence  he  ii  aometimei  called  va^jy^
KdrTiAos,  and  tiia  buaineia  rakiyKiani\tinr  (Dem.
a.  Dioi^todor.  P.12S5;  Ariatoph.  PImL  IISG;
Pollux,  vii.  12)  j  but  the  terra  ia  more  particularlr
applied  to  a  peraon  who  aold  ready-dreaaed  provi-
aiona,  and  eapecially  wine  in  amall  qnantitieBi
(Plat.  Oors.  p.  618.)  When  a  retail  deaJcr  in
other  ccanmaditiea  ii  noken  of^  the  name  of  hia
liade  ia  qanallj  prefixed  i  tbna  we  re&d  of  rpod-
Tom^Xoi  (Pint  Perid.  24),  SwXmr  nlmAoI
(Ariati^h.  Pair,  I17S),  i^rrlttrw  >nlm\gi  (M
439),  PttXiotiinitJH,  3lc  In  theie  umiXiui
cmly  peraoua  of  the  very  lowett  chua  were  accua-
inmed  to  est  and  inik.  (laocr.  Armip.  e.  IS ;
Becker,  CbrriUet,  voL  i.  p.  259,  &c)

2.  Roaan  Ivu.  —  A  Boman  inn  was  called  not
ordy  on^ona,  but  alao  tabenta  and  AiABnu  rfitur-
aoTTo,  or  ainiply  dmrtorixan  or  devn-torium.  Along
all  the  great  rsadi  of  Italy  there  wen  inni,  aa  we
■ee  from  the  deacription  which  Horace  givej  of  hie
jonmey  from  Rome  to  Brnndiaium  {Sat,  L  £),
though  the  accommodation  which  they  offsred  waa
generally  of  a  poor  kind.  We  alao  find  mention
of  public  inna  in  Italy  in  other  paasagea.  (Clc.
pm  OmoO.  39,  PkU.  iL  31 ;  Mor.  Ep.  L  11. 11 ;
Propert  iv.  S,  19;  AetM  of  lie  A/wiLa,  xniii.
15.)  At  Borne,  there  muat  have  been  many  iiuis
to  accommodatA  atrangeix,  but  they  an  hardly  ever
■poken  of.  We,  however,  End  Sequent  mention
i^  bouaea  where  wine  and  resdy-dreaacd  proviaioiu
were  Bold,  and  which  appear  to  have  been  nume-
rooa  in  all  parte  of  the  city.  The  hoasea  where
peraona  were  allowed  to  eat  and  drink  wen  nanatly
called  PcjiBiat  and  not  cauponse ;  and  the  keepera
of  them,  Pcpae.  They  wen  principally  freqnented
by  ilavn  and  the  lower  danea  (Cic  Pro  MO.  24),
and  wen  eonacqnently  only  furnithed  with  itooU
to  tit  upon  instead  of  couchea,  whence  Martial  (t.
70)  calll  theae  placea  idlariolai  papima.  Ttiii
cirotunatanco  ia  illuatratod  by  a  painting  found  at
Pompeii  in  a  wine-ahop,  re^tteaditiag  a  diinkin^-
acenc.  There  are  four  peraona  aittmg  on  itoolB
nund  a  tripod  table.  The  dreia  of  two  of  the
Gguna  ia  lemarkable  for  the  hoodi,  which  Rsemhle


thoae  of  the  oapotea,  worn  by  the  Italian  nUara
and  fiabermen  of  the  preaent  day.  They  uae  etipa
made  of  horn  inatead  of  g^aaBea,and  from  their
whole  q>pearance  evidentiy  belong  to  the  lower
orden.  Above  them  an  diflerent  aorta  of  eatablea
hung  upon  a  row  of  pega.

The  Timiopolia,  which  an  apoken  of  in  tile
article  C^LIDA,  appear  to  have  been  the  aame  lu
the  popinae.  Many  of  tbeae  popinae  wan  littl«
better  than  the  iMpmaria  at  tatMbalt;  wbanca


CAOTia
>  (Ac  il  4.  63) aUi


tt  Fmmcu,  when  tbs
■aJBiing  dcBcribcd  above  wu  fimnd,  mmdi  to  Imra
k«a  ■  honiB  irf  thii  dMo^ion ;  for  behind  the
■bop  tha«  a  u  icmer  duunbci  ccntunDig  pwnt-
Migi  of  crarf  ipediet  of  indecau?.  (Qdl*!  Fom-
rmamm,  nLu. f.  10.) Tbe  Oaaeat,  vhich  an

niem  (3aet,  TtL  U),  nn  hrothcli,  wbaxs
tky  BB  ofteo  cliied  willi  the  butra.  (Lit.  ixtL
■ ;  Ck.  PttL  liiL  11,  Ao  SttL  9.)  Under  the
i^mai  Ban  J  Bttoopu  wars  mda  to  regnlatc  the
MMMB.  hot  ijjfanDtlT  witli  little  noHL  Ti-
WnM  ferted  ail  cooked  pnmnoiu  to  be  eold  in
ikat  Aop  (SuL  TO.  34) ;  and  Claadiiu  eom-
■■iiiliii\  Ih^  to  be  ihut  op  altugether.  (Dion
Cam.  Ii.  0.)  Thej  appear,  howeTer,  to  han  been
■IB  epened  Main,  if  tbe;  vae  erer  eloeed ;  tot
Nice  cMaroamled  tbat  nathing  ahonld  be  aold  in
tbfla  bat  djfffamt  kindi  of  coiAcd  puLie  or  TOge-
tabbe  (Suet.  Mr.  16  ;  Dim  Can.  LdL  14)  j  and
an  (dirt  to  the  ame  efieet  wae  alio  pnbllihed  bj
Vi^Biiaii (Dial  Can.  Ixri.  10.)

Pemoe  who  kepi  inna  «  bonaea  of  public  enter-
bath  Boam  tM  Oieeka  and  Saaaat  (Theophr.
Oar.  6;  F1al.£ep.zLpp.9IB,SlS);  BDd  tlMUgh
the  i[arhi  ti  ti  t*^fi^  1™  maSgmi,  vhicb  Honce
pna  to  them  (,SaL  L  1.  Sjt,  L  S.  4),  may  nbf
adf  W  fttiwhr  innkeepen,  jet  they  aeon  to  ex'
■nag  die  ^^1^^^^™^  D|anion  entertained  leapeetiiig
iWvholadw.  iZtll,DmWiraMiMt)rd.Ali»»j
SwA— ■.  Dt  Papaii;  Bocka.  OaOu,  tdL  i.
,^S-I7-99fl.)
CAUSA  UBERA'LIS.  [AaanToi.]
CAUSAE  PROBA'Tia  [Cnriru.]
CAUBLA  (avtfb),  a  ht  with  a  bnad  brim,
wUA  wat  Bade  of  fUt  and  wora  bj  the  Mace-
I  liii  'i  I  (Vater.  Max.  T.  1.14.)  Iti  fonn
ia  an  in  tbe  BDnexed  Sgiam,  which  an  taken
faaan  ietila  *aie,and  ban  sBwdai  at  Alexander


CAUTia  259

acor^glj  modified'  b;  ita  adjnncl^  aa  cautio
fidejuaaoria,  pigneiaticia,  oi  hjpotheearia,  and  u
ea.  Cantio  ia  nasd  to  eipieai  both  the  lecuri^
which  a  magiiEiBtiza  or  b  judex  maj  requin  one
partf  to  giro  to  aDother,  which  appliea  to  caaet
where  then  ia  a  matter  in  diapota  of  which  a
coDit  hat  aliesd;  oegninuca  ;  and  alio  the  aecn-
li^  which  ii  givm  and  teceiTed  b;  and  between
partiaa  not  in  litigatiiia.  The  went  cantio  and
iTere  an  man  paitJcnlariy  nied  in  the  latter

If  a  thing  ia  made  a  ieenritr  from  one  panoo  to


■  (PIbdL  MiL  Olor,  ir.  4.  42,  Ptn.
LI  75;  Aiili]).Theia.  ja£n>Klu^iHl.aill'
aad  nae  cqiedaUf  the  Einpeior  Cancalla,  wl
■eid  le  iminte  Aleamdor  the  OreM  in  bia  ct
me. (Hen)dian.iT.  S.g&)  [J.Y.J

CAUTIO,  CAVB'KB. Tfaeae  wordi  are


,  _  .  «,  aad  haTC  ■  gr™t  Tariety  of  aignifica-
■■■■  aiwailiim  to  Ik*  naatlcr  to  which  the;  nfer.
Tbdr  t^mtl  iigp**— **—  ia  that  of  •ecnhir  iriten
ty  ae  pacHD  to  anotba ;  alec  lecnrit;


«■  legal


Tbe  general

■rilr"1r1  into  iti  lurirf  according  to  the  par-

r  hi^  at  tbe  ■ecariQ',  wliidi  ma;  be  b;

'^.


a  fide-

itio  waa  moat  freqantl;  a  writii^  which

the  object  of  the  partiea  to  it ;  accord-

inglj  the  word  cantio  came  to  lignifr  both  the  in-

umant  (cUnjpTijJum  cr  iiutriiiiiaifiin)  and  the

jcct  which  it  waa  the  parpoae  of  the  ineBoment

lecura. (Dig.  47.  tiL  2.  a.  27.) Ciceio  {Ad

Din,  tIL  18)  uaea  the  tipnmua  anlio  afa'nynipfa'

Mti. The  phrue  ixnen  aUgtad  aticmi  ex^eaaed


a.  18.)

Ulpian  (Dig.  46.  tiL  6)  diridca  the  praetoriae

atipuUtionei  into  three  apeciea,  judicialea,  cautio-

nalea,  commnnea ;  and  he  definei  tbe  cautiouale*

be  thoaa  which  aie  eqniTalent  to  an  aetion

liar  oMmit  taiml)  and  an  a  good  gronnd  ibr

■ew  action,  aa  the  alipiilationn  de  legalia,  tutela,

am  rem  haboe,  and  ■*"■"""■  infectum. Can-

nea  dien,  which  were  a  bi«neh  of  atipalatioaea,

re  inch  emtmeti  ai  would  be  gronnd  of  actioni.

The  fallowing  exampka  will  explain  the  paMige  of

In  man;  raana  a  hem  conld  not  aafel;  pa;
legaciea,  mileaa  the  legatee  gave  aecuii^  (soiA's)
to  refund  in  csee  tbe  will  under  which  he  claimed
ahonld  torn  oat  to  be  bad.  (Dis.  B.  tiL  3.  a.  1 7.)
The  Mnriana  cantio  applied  to  the  caae  of  t«at^
mentar;  condition!,  whic


order  that  the  peraon  who  cmld  take  tbe  hereditaa
or  the  legBc;  in  the  erent  of  the  condition  being
bnken,  might  have  the  pmpert;  aecured,  he  waa
entitled  to  have  tlie  Muciaua  cantio.  (Dig.  35.
tiL  1.  a.  7,  IS,  73.)  The  herea  waa  alio  in  aome
eaaei  bound  to  gire  aecnrit;  for  the  pajmeot  of
legadea,  or  the  legatee  wu  entitled  to  the  Bononmi
Poaaeaaio.  Tntorea  and  cnmtorea  wen  required  to
give  aecnnt;  (aofiaiora)  for  the  due  adminiatntion
of  the  pn^KT^  intfuated  to  them,  nnleaa  the  tutor
waa  ^ipointed  by  tcatament,  or  nnleai  the  cnntor
wat  a  coratoi  leKilimua.  (Oaioi,  L  1 B9.)  A  pn-
enmtor  who  aued  in  tbe  name  of  an  abaent  part;,
might  be  nqnired  to  gire  aecnrity  thai  the  abaent
par^  pnmld  conient  to  be  nmcluded  b;  the  act  of
hia  pneiintor  (Id.  It.  9S)  ;  thia  aecniit;  waa  a
apeciea  latiadationia,  mciuded  under  the  genna
cantio.  (Dip:.  46.  tiLS.  a  3, 13,  IS,  dec)  lathe
owe  of  dMnnnm  infectiun,  the  owner  of  the  land  or
pmpert;  thnntaud  with  the  miacbie^  might  dum
aecnrit;  from  the  peraon  who  wu  threatening  the
miachie£  (Cic.  T<y>.  4 ;  Ouoi,  ir.  31 ;  Dig.  43.
tiL  8.  (.6.)

If  a  Tender  aold  a  thing,  it  waa  nmal  for  him
to  dadace  that  be  had  a  gmd  title  to  it,  and  lint


•  3


•  o"


MO


CELLA.


if  in;  penm  ncoreied  it  ftom  the  parahun  bj  B
bcttn  title,  he  woold  nuke  it  good  to  the  pur-
chusr  i  ud,  ID  vme  cues,  the  caatia  wu  foF
doable  the  nlna  of  the  thiog.  (Dig.  21.  tit.  2.
1.  60.) Thii  WH,  ■ '

The  wold  caatio
vhich  a  debtor  obtahied  from
^ing  hia  denuuid  :  in  thii  mdm  cwilio  i>  cqoin-
leat  to  >  modem  iMeipt ;  it  u  the  debtor'i  Kcurit;
aguoat  the  wne  dnauid  being  nsda  a  Hcoud
time.  (Cic  Bnt  6  ;  U^.  46.  tit.  3.  •.  69,  94.)
Thoa  cBTcra  ab  aliquo  ngiufiei  to  obtain  thii  kind
of  lecori^.  A  penoB  to  whoni  the  tUD)  frnctoi
of  ■  thing  VM  giTen,  miphl  ba  nquirsd  to  gire
•ecnritf  tiM  he  would  enjoj  and  ue  it  propotlj,
and  not  wute  it. (Dig.  7.  liL  S.}

Carere  ia  alio  applied  to  expreaa  the  pnfeaaiDnal
adTice  and  aaiiilaiice  of  a  lawyer  to  hia  dient  for
hia  coadnct  in  uj  legal  matter.  (Cic  Ad  Font.
iiL  1,  tiL  6,  i^  Miataa,  c  10.)

The  word  OTere  and  ila  derivatiTea  are  alio
nted  to  eipmi  tlio  proriaiona  of  a  lav,  bf  which
■nj  thing  la  fbrbiddea  or  ordered,  at  in  the  phnae,
—  Cantam  ed  tipt,  prtMctpaHlmt  ontBi&duiuhia,
Ac.  It  u  alao  uaed  to  erproa  the  wozdi  in  a  will,
by  which  a  tealator  declaiea  hia  wiah  ^ia(  certain
thinga  thonld  be  done  afler  hia  death.  The  pre-
parsiim  of  Iho  inatnuneala  of  cautio  waa,  of  conne,
the  bnabeaa  of  a  lawyer.  [0.  L.]

CEADAS  (K«i3ai)  oi  CAEADAS  (KokUoi),
waa  a  deep  oveni  or  chaam,  like  the  Soroiirai  at
Athena,  into  which  the  Spatlana  were  accnatomed
to  thruat  petnna  condemned  to  death.  (Thoc.  i.
134  ;  gnab.  TiiL  p.  367  ;  Paoa.  ii.  la  g  4 ;  Suidaa,
t.  e.  Bifaepw,  Kaiitat,  KidSu.)

CEDIT  DIE8, [LioATua.]

CE'LERES,  an  aaid  to  ha>e  been  three  hun-
dred honamcn,  who  formed  the  bodj^oBrd  of
Romuliu  both  in  peace  and  war  (Ljt.  i.  16  ;  Dio-
nja.  il  13  :  Pint  Ron.  26).  There  can,howeTer,
be  little  donbt  that  these  Cclere*  were  not  limply
the  body-guild  of  the  king,  but  were  the  nine  aa
the  eqnitea,  or  honemea,  a  bet  which  ia  expreaaly
anted  by  aone  wiitoi  (Plin.  H.  A',  xniii.  S.  a,  9),
nnd  imidted  byothen  (Diooya.  i.  c).  [Equitis.]
The  etjmology  of  Celnra  ia  nrionaly  siren.  Some
writrai  dniTed  it  from  their  leader  C^er,  who  waa
Bid  to  have  aloin  Remua,  bat  mott  writer*  con-
nected it  with  the  Greek  iti\tit,  in  reference  to  the
qoickneai  of  their  lerriee.  (Serr.  ad  V'rg-  Ant.
XL  603.)  Niebohr  lappoaei  cafam  lo  be  identical
with  fnkridH,  and  maintaina  that  the  fonoet  word
wu  the  name  af  the  whole  claaa  aa  diitingniabed
from  the  reit  of  the  nation  {/Tut.  of  Roma,  ToL  I
p.  331) ;  but  alUioogh  the  equitaa  were  at  firit
onoubtedly  ehoaen  from  the  patriciani,  then  leemi
CO  naion  let  belie'ring  that  the  word  eafani  waa
■ynonymoni  with  patriea.

The  Cdem  woe  under  the  conunand  of  a  TVi-
iwHi  CUmm,  who  itood  in  the  aame  relation  to
the  king,  aa  the  magiater  eqoitum  did  in  a  labe^
quent  poiod  to  the  dictaloi.  He  occupied  the
•econd  [Jacs  in  the  itala,  and  ia  the  abaaaice  of  the
king  had  the  right  of  eosToking  the  eomitia.
Whether  he  wai  appointed  bjthe  king,  or  elected
by  the  comitia,  baa  been  qnaitioaed,  but  the  former
ia  the  more  jHobable.  (Lyd.  C*  Mia.  L  14  i  Pom-
pon, de  Ong.  Jv.  in  Dig.  I.  tit.  3.  a.  2.  jl  IS,
19;  Dionjn.iT.  71;  eomp.  Becker,  HamiimAdtr
BomiiA.  AUaik,  toL  il  part  L  pp.  23B,  33fi.)

CELLA,  in  ill  jaaaiy  aenaa,  neani  a  itoM-


room  of  any  kind.  (Vair.  Da  Lb^.  Lai.  j.  1 63.
ed.  MUller.)  Of  theie  there  were  Tarioua  de-
KTiptiam^  which  took  their  *^iF*ingw^*>iing  deno-
'  ilea  they  contiiaed,  aa,  for
ia  or  pauriOf  the  eelia
The  alaie  to  whom  the
charge  of  llicH  atorta  wu  intnuted,  wu  called
nMiriiu  <Plant  GipL  It.  2. 1  Ifi  i  Senec.  ^.  122),
or  pnnmmt  (Colom.  xii.  3),  or  eomdia,  "  quia  promil
qood  amdiiam  at "  (compare  Hor.  COrm.  L  9.  7,
tiL  21.  8),  aad  lometinies  Tmsmsr  eowjw  and  pro-
atrrUor  paoi.  (Plant.  Pimt.  iL  2.  14.)  Thiian-
aweia  to  onr  butler  and  houaekeeper.

Any  number  of  imall  roonu  clnatsed  together
like  the  celia  of  a  honeycomb  (Vuf.Geaiy.iy.  164)
wen  alio  termed  aiiat ;  hence  the  domitorica  of
ilaTci  and  meniali  are  called  aittat  (Cic.  PUL
iL  27  i  Colum^  I  G),  and  nOai  finuHarifat
(VitruT.  tL  10.  p.  132)  in  diatinctioa  to  a  bed-
dlamber,  which  waa  CMbtadmm,  Tbni  a  aleeping-
reom  at  ■  publichonae  ii  alao  termed  offo.  (Petron-
G6.)  For  the  nme  leuort  (he  dou  in  a  brothel
are  orfiae,  {Petren.  8 ;  Jnr.  Si*.  tL  128.)  Each
female  ocmpied  one  to  henelf  (Ibid.  122),  orer
which  her  name  and  the  price  of  her  &Tauii  were
inaciibcd  (Senec.  Qmlrtn.  i.  2) ;  hence  ttlla  o>-
ampM  meani  a  brothel  (Mart.  zL  iS.  1.)  CVla
««ii™  (VilmT.  tL  10  !  Petnm.  29),  or  jamtarit
(Suet.  ViUlL  16),  ia  the  porter>a  lodge.

In  the  bolha  the  ea^  oaldaria,  tapidarioy  and
/riffidariay  wen  th«e  whicb  contained  mpectivel  j
the  wann,  tnid,  and  cold  bath. {Balnbak.]

The  interior  of  a  temple,  that  ia  the  part  in-
cluded within  the  ootatde  ahell,  a^xis  (tee  the
lower  woodcut  in  AMTaa),  waa  alio  called  eella.
There  waa  aome^ea  more  than  one  <xlla  wilhla
the  aame  peiiitjle  or  under  the  aame  roof;  in
which  caae  they  were  either  tamed  back  to  back,
aa  in  the  temple  of  Home  and  Venoa,  built  br
Hadrian  on  the  Via  Sacra,  the  ren^ina  of  which
an  1^  riaibia  t  or  paralld  to  each  other,  a*  m  the
temple  of  Jnfritar  Optimal  Haximna  in  the  CapitoL
In  each  initancei  each  celt  took  tbe  name  of  Ihe
deity  whoae  itatue  it  conlained,  aa  <cSa  Jrna,eclla
Junonia,  ceiJa  Hinerrae.  [A  R.J

CELLATIIUS. [CaLLi.]

CENOTA'PHIUM,  a  cenot^h  (hv^i  and
Tdipot)  waa  an  empty  or  hmoiary  tomb,  erected  aa
a  meniorial  of  a  penon  whoie  body  waa  buried
elaewhere,  or  not  fimnd  for  burial  at  bIL  (Comp.
Thoc  il  34  ;  Viig.  Am.  iil  303.)

Cenotaphia  wen  conaidered  a*  nSgwa,  and
therefore  dmn  jiirit,  till  a  reacript  of  the  aa-
pcTon  Antoninut  and  Vemi  pnmannced  them  not
to  be  ao.  (Heinec  AM.  Rom.  iL  1.) IR.  W.]

CENSITOB. [C«Nao».]

CENSUA'LES. [CaMwa.]

CENSOH  (ti^it^i),  the  name  of  two  magia-
tratea  of  high  mik  in  the  Roman  republic  Their
ofiica  waa  called  OBuara  (riioiTila  ta  Ti/orrla).
The  Ocnmt,  which  wat  a  regiattr  of  Roman
citiiena  and  at  their  proper^,  wu  fint  eatib-
liahed  br  Serriua  Tulliua,  the  fifth  kii^  <rf  Rome.
Afta  the  eipnWi  of  the  kinp  it  mi  takmi
by  the  coniula  ;  and  apedal  magutialea  wen  not
appointed  for  the  poipoae  of  taking  it  till  ths
year  a.  c  44S.  The  reaaon  of  thb  alteratioa
waa  owing  to  the  appointmoit  in  the  pteeeding
year  of  tribnni  militam  with  cteiular  power  in
lAu»  of  the  coniula ;  and  aa  these  tribnuea  might
be  plebeiana^  the  patridant  d^ied  the  oooaola.


s^"73r


CENSOR.


light  at  ttking  tkn  cowu,  ind  e


wcR  to  Iw  cboMO  eidnui«l;  &an  tbe  pairidsiu.
TIk  — jiilmy  notiniwd  to  bg  a  ntncun  ooe
tO]  >,  c  Ul,  wlwn  C  Hucim  Roliliu  vai  the
btpiebeiumiHr  (LiT.  ni.23).  TwbItc  ;Mn
■ftawBda,  B.  c  S39,  it  mi  provided  b;  ooa  of
tk*  Pobliliui  kwi,  that  one  of  Ihg  csunn
BMomilj  be  a  plebnui  (Lit.  niL  1 S),  bat
■«  tin  B.  &  360  tba  *  liebeim  eeatat  paior
the  lalmn  parificUiiiD  of  tb<  people  (balniiit
A«^Ut.J^1S>.  IdkcISI  tfaetBocenson
w*R  tat  the  fint  time  plebeiuu.

Then  wen  alwaji  tvo  tauon,  becanw  ths  two
taoak  had  pnnoailj  taken  tlis  cenani  togeths.
If  «ae  of  the  ceuoca  died  dming  the  time  of  hii
oCce,  another  bad  at  fint  to  be  chaeD  ia  hii
■Ind,  aa  in  the  awe  of  the  caunli.  Thii,  how-
ei«,  hewi  at  il  onl;  oom,  namdj,  in  B.  c  S9S  ;
i  III,  the  aMnn  of  Rome  bj  tin  Owili  in  thii
bMnat  excited  religioai  iian  igainit  the  ptaetice
<IiT.  T.  II). FnathkUmcifaieoftbe


nsiua  beid  midei  the  pneidencj  of  a  anuoL
(OdL  ziii.  15  ;  Li>.  iL  i6.)  Niebohr  nppowi
that  tbe7  were  at  fint  elected  lif  the  cotnitia
a,  and  that  their  electioD  wa*  ccnfinned  b;
E  i  bat  there  i<  ita  aothont^  for  thii
md  the  tnth  of  it  depeodi  entirely
'~  '~  '  a  ef  hii  Tlewi  reelecting  the
.  [CoNin.]  It  «*
n  iheiild  be  elected  o


fVrJM  of  the  a


if  the  fint
vest  fcr  notbin^  and  iww  comitia  bad
<LiT.  ix.  34.)  The  comilia  for  the  election  of  (he
CFaaai  w^n-  held  under  diffocnt  an^icet  Ipm
thaae  at  the  Section  of  the  eouml*  and  pnelon  ,
■ad  the  oeHsn  were  aceocdingly  not  re^trded  u
ihdr  follwyira,  altbongh  tbeji  Ukewiie  powoKi'
thr  ■nriin  amifirin  [flrll  TJii  11)  Tbecomiti
woe  held  bj  the  connl*  of  the  jtal  Tery  noi
afts  the;  bad  mteted  npoa  tbeit  office  (Lir.  nil
It,  *— "  41)  ;  md  the  cenora,  at  lOon  u  thej
woe  elected  and  the  eeuoiial  pevec  ba*

B^dkd  in  theii  office.  (Cic.  dt  Ug.  Agr.
Lrr.  iL  4S.)  Ai  a  geneial  piinciple  the  only
poMaa  dicUsIa  lo  the  office  wen  tboas  who  bod
pn'iiuaJj  been  coonli ;  bat  a  few  eiceptiaii
aeor.  AI  fint  there  wai  no  hw  lo  (RTent  a
penoi  bciBf  eeonr  a  ncood  time  ;  but  the  only
li  twin  deeted  to  tbi ~


aired  in  cooaeqneiice  the  nrnaine  of  Cenioriniu.
(Plat.  CtewL  1 ;  VaL  Max.  ir.  1.  9  3.)
The  caamhip  ii  diatingnithed  fran  all  other

wbdi  it  waa  held.  The  coiem  wen  originallf
ehiiai  Ck  a  whole  hutmm,  that  ii,  a  period  of
&«e  j^n  ;  bat  their  office  waa  limited  to  eighteen
Batha,  ae  earir  ai  ten  jean  alW  lU  intti-
taia  (a.  c  433),  by  a  law  of  the  dictator
" ■>  (LiT.  iT.  34,  ii.  33).


Thae


>  Tery  [


CENSOR.  281

with  rcipect  to  rank  and  digni^.  No  imperinm
WHi  beitowed  npon  them,  and  accordingly  they
badnolicton.  (Zonar.iiL  19.)  Tbe^^oBUvw
wat  glutted  to  them  by  a  2»  andiriata,  and  not
by  the  curiae,  and  in  that  ropect  they  ven  in-
ferior in  power  to  the  cannUi  and  pneton.  (Cic
dt  Leg.  Agr.  iL  11.)  Bnt  notwithitanding  thii,
the  cBuonhip  wii  ragaided  ■■  the  higheil  dignity
in  the  itale,  with  the  exception  of  the  dictatonhip;
it  wBi  an  IipA  Vx4,  a  kukAu  magiitrtttiu,  to  which
the  deepeat  leTerence  m  due.  (Pint  Oat  Mai.
IG,  ftantm.  18,  CaaiU.  3,  14,  .damiJ^  PauL  SB  ;
Cic  ad  Faai.  iii.  10.)  The  hightank  and  dignity
vhich  the  eenionhip  obtained,  wat  owing  to  the
Tuioni  important  dntiai  gmdwlly  totnuted  to  it,
and  etpedaUy  to  iti  poncmng  the  ryjwai  lunMi,
or  general  contnl  orer  the  condoct  and  mcnli  of
tfae  dtiiHii  ;  in  the  eieiciM  of  which  power  tbey
wen  ngolated  toUy  by  their  own  Tiewa  of  dnty,
and  wen  not  reiponiible  to  any  other  power  in  Ue
■tale.  (Diooyi.  in  Mat,  JVocn  QiL  nL  ii.  p.  S16 ;
LiT.iT.24,xiix.87iVil.Hax.Tii.2.SS.)  The
cenion  paaaied  of  coune  the  acQa  ennilii  (Lir.
iL  46),  but  with  retpeet  t  -'■-"■■■•
ii  tome  doubt.  From  a
Po^bina  (tI  fiS),  d»«a
imiginei  at  fnnenli,  we  may  oondode  that  a  om-
ml  or  praetor  won  the  ptaeteita,  one  who  triumphed
the  b^  picta,  and  the  eoiior  a  pnrpte  toga  pecu-
liar to  him ;  but  other  writen  ipnk  of  their
oAoal  dreu  ai  the  lame  at  that  of  the  other
higher  migiitnlei.  (Zonir.  Tii.  19;  Alhen.  iit.
p.  seO,  c)  The  foDersl  of  a  eentor  wu  alwayi
conducted  with  great  pomp  and  iplendonr,  and
hence  a  /lawi  DOuorniin  vat  voted  even  to  the
empson. (Tac  Amt.  iv.  13,  liiL  2.)

The  cenionhip  eontmnad  in  eiiitsnce  for  43]
yeara,  namely,  &om  b.  c  443  to  b.  c  22  ^  bnt
dniing  tbii  poind  many  luitia  pawed  by  wilhont

■Utement  the  office  wu  aboiiihed  by  SnUa
(Schol.  Omxir.  ad  Cic.  Din.  h  OudL  3,  p.  384,
cd.  Orelli),  and  although  the  authority,  on  which
thii  itBtement  reiti,  it  not  ot  mnch  weight,  the
bet  itielf  ii  probable ;  for  there  wat  no  eeuDi
doring  the  two  luiln  which  elapaed  from  SdU'l
dictattnhip  to  the  fint  conmlihlp  of  Ponpey
(a.  c  S3 — 70),  and  any  itriet  ngimoi  monun
wonld  hare  l«en  found  very  incoavenient  to  the
orirtocncy  in  wbote  &vonr  Sulla  Initiated.  Tf
the  cewHahip  wai  done  awsy  with  by  Sulla,  it
wai  at  any  late  THlored  in  the  eoniulihip  of
Pranpey  and  Cramu.  Itt  power  wu  limited  by
one  of  the  lawi  of  the  tribime  Clodiu  (a  Ci  SB),
wbicb  [niCTibed  certain  regular  fomu  of  proceed-
ing before  the  centon  in  expelling  a  pcnou  {nm
the  tenate,  and  the  concurrence  of  both  ceoaon  in
inflicting  thii  degradatian.  (Dion  Call.  iixviiL
13;  Cic.  pmSut.  2.%de  Prai.  Oaiu.  15.)  Thia
lav,  however,  wai  repealed  in  the  third  conmkhip
of  Fompey  (b.  c  £2),  on  the  propsiition  of  hii  col-
league  uieciliui  Metellnt  Seipio  (Dion  Caii.  x1.
£7),  but  the  centonhip  never  racovered  ila  framer
power  and  influence.  During  the  civil  wan  which
followed  ioon  afterwardi  no  cenaon  were  elected  ;
and  it  wai  only  after  a  long  interval  that  they
wen  again  appomted,  namely  in  b.  c  22,  whai
Anguttui  cauied  L.  Hunatini  Plancni  and  Paalna
Aemiliui  Lepidui  to  fiU  the  office.  (Suet  Aag.
37,  Oimd.  Ifi  ;  I>ian  Caii.  liv.  2.)  Thii  wai  the
mtuilcdi


363  CBNSOIL

the  enpsran  in  ftitim  dkchugcd  the  dntiM  of
their  <iSa  mufar  the  nmie  of  JVat/h^imi  3fam,
Some  af  tha  empcmn  mDetimea  took  the  name  of
cenur  when  lh<y  actuUr  held  t,  contj  of  the
Bomin  peo^  h  m  the  caio  with  CUndiiu,  who
ofipainted  the  elder  Vitelliui  u  hit  coUMgiu  (Suet.
Oaiul.  16  ;  T*c.  Aim.  xU.  4,  Hul.  L  9),  utd  with
Vnpaiiui,  vbo  IlkewUe  hsd  a  colleague  in  hii  mo
Titua.  (Snet.  FeMp.  a,  TIL  6.)  Domniu)  aaamed
the  title  of  «»«■  perjitint  (Dioa  Can.  lUL  16),
but  tbii  eiain[Je  vu  not  iniiUted  by  neciiediDg
empeisn.  Id  the  reign  of  Decint  we  find  the
eldW  Valerian  ncnoinated  to  the  eenionblp  vithoiit
a  nlleagiie  (TnbdL  Pollio,  Fofar.  1,  2)  ;  and
tomrd*  the  end  of  the  fouth  eentnrf  it  waa  pro-
poied  to  KTiTe  the  cemonhip  (Symmach.  Ep.  ii.
29,  T.  9),  but  thi>  dengn  mi  nerei  tamed  into
eSlMt.

1  may  be  diiided  into
irere  boire*er  doiely
coimected  with  one  another:  I.  71a  Caum,  or
Rviiter  of  the  uttleni  and  sf  their  property,  in
vhich  mie  included  the  Mto  ■shAh,  and  the
ncagiatio  ambim;  II.  Tii  Higiiiuii  Monm  ;  and
I[I.  naa^iiimitraticmi^aafiiiaiicaii^aeitate,
under  vluch  were  daaed  the  •apariulendaice  of
the  public  bdildingi  and  the  oeetioD  of  all  nev
public  wolfca.  The  original  buaincaa  of  the  ceaaor-
■hip  wai  at  fint  of  a  nnch  mofe  limiled  kind  ;  and
waa  reithcted  abnoat  entiidy  to  taking  the  ceniua
(IJT.  It.  8)  i  bnt  the  pMaeoiioa  of  thu  power
gndmlly  brouht  with  it  freah  power  and  new
dutiei,  oi  i>  ibown  below.  A  penenl  riew  of
thcH  datiei  ii  briefly  erpraaed  in  the  fbUewing
paauce  of  Cicero  (rfa  Ltg.  iiL  3) ; -^ "  Cenior«
populi  aevilala,  tobolea,  bmiliaa  peenniaiqae  cen-
•enU :  nrbia  Umpk,  Tiai,  oquai,  aenriiim,  Tecti-
galia  tacnto :  popnlique  putei  in  tiibni  diitri-
bnunto ;  exin  peconioi,  aerilatei,  ordilla  partionto :
eqnitum,  peditomqae  pmlem  dcecrihunto :  cacUbea
oae  prohibeDto :  morea  popuii  rcgnnU :  probrum
in  i«tiBta  ne  relinquunto."

I.  Tbk  CmauB,  the  tint  and  prindpol  da^
of  the  ccnaon,  fbi  which  ike  proper  expnsaion  ii
Daum  ^ara  (LiT.  iiL  3,  22,  it.  8),  waa  alwaja
held  in  the  Oue|ru  Martina,  and  from  the  ;ar
a  IX  43£  in  a  apecial  boilding  called  Villa  FuUiaa,
which  waa  erected  for  that  pnrpoae  bj  the  aecond

£of  cenure,  C.  Furina  Pocilai  and  M.  OegBnina
«bnu.  (Ut.  It.  22;Varr.ff.A.  iiL2.)  An
acoiDDt  of  the  fbnnali^ea  with  which  the  cenaoi
waa  opened  ia  girea  in  a  fragment  of  the  Tabulae
Oaitoriae,  pfcaerred  hy  Vano  (£.  L.  vl  86,  87,
ed.  MUller).  After  the  anipicia  had  been  t^en,
the  dlimia  wen  aammoned  by  ■  public  oyer
(pratco)  to  appear  before  the  crnaon.  Each  tribe
wot  called  up  aepaiatelj  (Dionyi.  t.  75)  ;  and  the
Damea  in  each  tribe  were  pnbabl;  taken  aanrding
to  the  liatt  preTioDilj  mode  oat  b;  the  tribunea  of
the  tribec  Every  pstcrftmiliiu  had  to  i^ipenr  in
penon  befora  the  ceoion,  who  were  arated  in  their
enmle  choira ;  and  thote  namea  were  talim  fint
which  were  coniidcrad  to  be  of  good  omen,  sach
■a  Valerini,  Salrina,  Slatorina,  &c  (Feitna,  a.  c.
Laeat  Luerimi ;  SchoL  Bok  ad  Gc  pm  Samr.
p.  374,  ed.  OrellL)  The  cenaoa  waa  conducted  ad
attitriam  eeaorii ;  bat  lbs  cenaora  laid  down  cer-
tain ralea  (Lir.  It.  B,  xziz.  15),  aometimea  called
bga  eaam  cmieado  (Ut.  itiii.  14),  in  which
mention  waa  made  of  the  different  kind*  of  pro-
per^ antject  to  the  eaDaa%  and  ta  what  wi^


CENSOR.

thflr  Tilne  waa  to  be  eatimated

thaoe  lawa  each  citjaen  had  to  giTe  an  aoeoant  of

himaol^  of  bia  bmily,  and  of  hia  property  apoD

iliii  14.)  Fiiat  he  had  U  giro  hia  fall  nuM
(praaawan,  uoiai,  and  aogmmm)  and  that  of
hia  bther,  or  if  he  were  a  freedraan  that  of  hia
patno,  and  he  waa  likawioe  obliged  to  atate  hit
■ga.  He  waa  then  aaked,  TV,  u  anna  ba  aea-
(eaAo,  ■  KiiijiH  toiai  J  and  if  nuuried  be  hod  ta
gin  the  name  of  hit  wife,  and  likewiae  the  num-
ber, uameo,  and  oget  of  hit  children,  if  any.  (OelL
IT.  20  -  Cic  da  Orat.  iL  64  ;  Tak  EeneL  HQ
(SB)  i  Dig.  50.  tiL  15.  a.  3.)  Single  wemen  (adMot)
and  Drphani  (arbi  ori«fw),  were  tepreaonlad  by
their  tnloree  ;  their  namet  were  entered  in  ta;uaM
liata,  and  they  were  not  ioduded  in  the  aom  total
of  capilL  (Comp.  Ut.  iii.  S,  BpiL  A9.)  After
a  dtiuo  had  atated  hia  name,  age,  binily,  dte.,  h*
then  had  to  giTe  aa  accoont  of  all  hia  pRqieity,  to
far  ai  it  wat  aubject  to  the  cenaoa. In  mdciog

depmient,  "  to  Talne  or  eatimate  himaeH"  or  ai  a
paitiTe  "  to  be  rained  or  ealiniatad : "  the  cenaor,
who  receiTed  the  atatemeot,  waa  alao  aaid  enjan^
aa  well  aa  acdpen  wanm.  (Comp,  Cic  pn  Fiooi.
32 ;  LiT,  Tcxai.  16.)  Only  luch  ihinga  were  liable
to  the  cennia  (eaani  inuw'o)  aa  were  property
a*  jurw  Qmritimm,  At  fiiat  each  ddaea  ^>peafa
lo  haTe  merely  giTen  the  nine  of  hia  whole  pro-
perty in  genoal  without  eotering  into  delaila
(Dionyi.  ir.  15  ;  Cic  <£■  Lc^.  iii.  3  ;  Featoa,  ai  b;
Cbuoru)  \  bnt  it  aoon  became  the  practice  to  girv
a  minute  ipeciScattOD  of  each  artide,  aa  well  ae  the
genera]  Talne  of  the  whole.  (Comp,  Cic.  pn  Flate.
33  i  OelL  Tii,  II  ;  Pint  CaL  Mig.  18,]  Lw)d
formed  the  moat  important  article  in  the  oentua  ;
but  public  land,  the  poaaatio  of  which  only  b^
longed  to  a  dtizen,  waa  exdodcd  aa  tut  being
Qo^ritaiian  ravpcrty.  If  we  may  judge  fiMB  the
pmclice  of  (he  ioiperial  period,  it  wu  the  etitten
'  e  a  meet  minute  apeiHfication  of  all  aocb  land
nliien  held  a  jtm  QuiriSam.  He  bad  to
atate  the  name  and  litua^im  of  the  land,  and  (o
q»cify  what  portion  of  it  waa  aiable,  what  meadow,
what  vinejaid,  and  what  olire-annrnd :  and  to
Ibe  land  thui  minately  deaeribed  he  had  to  aiSx
rn  TalnatioD.  (Dig.  £0.  tit.  iS.  a.  4.)  Slarea
attle  tbrraed  the  next  moot  important  item.
«naoii  alio  poatetud  tbe  right  of  railing  fbra
return  of  aucb  objecte  aa  had  not  uaually  been  giTen
nich  aa  clothing,  jewels  and  caniagei.  (,LiT.
dx.  44  i  Plat.  Oal.  Mig.  16.)  It  hai  been
ibted  by  tome  modem  writeit  whether  the  een-
I  poaBeaaed  the  power  of  aetting  a  higher  ralo.
m  on  the  property  than  the  citiiena  UKmaelTaa
had  put  j  but  when  we  recollAct  the  dkcfeUooary
nature  of  the  cenaon'  powera,  and  the  necead^
almott  thul  eiiited,  in  order  to  pieTeot  fraad,  that
the  right  of  makkg  a  autchaige  ahould  be  Tcated
—  "oebody'i  handa,  we  tan  hardly  donbt  lint
sniort  had  thia  power.  It  ia  numorcr  ex-
pnnily  atated  that  00  one  oecaaion  they  made  aa
■itraTi^ant  aurcharge  on  artidet  of  luxury  (Lir.
Uli£.44;  Pint  Oat.  Maj.  16);  and  OTen  if  they
lid  net  enter  in  their  bodu  tha  property  of  a  peiaon
il  a  higher  ralua  than  he  reCnmed  it,  they  aceom-
plithcd  the  aame  end  by  compelling  him  lo  pay
down  the  tax  apon  the  property  at  a  higher  rate
than  othen.  The  tax  (fri^aim)  waa  uaually  one
per  Ihouaand  opon  the  property  eotttcd  in  Uia  book  a


CENSOR.

■  fBoUaiatt,  Bdmpdltd  >  pemn  to  j»j  eight  per
ihoBBDd  (oE^vAote  OmtH,  LlT.  IT.  24).
A  pmoo, wba  lolnnUnly  aljteiited himielf

k  aid  Is  km  thraMoed  th«  inoBiuiu  with  im-
Hiiiiam  toA  death  (Lit.  l  44)  ;  uid  in  tlie  re-
p^Utm  Mriod  b«  mi^t  be  vdd  by  the  mie  u  ■
•hm  <Cie,/f«Cta«K.34.)  In  the  later  tanHi
rf  tb«  iqMUic  K  paHO  who  •na  abioit  fnun  the
eamm,  i^ght  be  wpmmled  bj'  (mother  >nd  thui
bt  i^iMaed  bj  the  ccmotl  (Van.  £.  £.  n.  66.)
WhMher  the  nUicn  wba  mm  aliKnt  on  KTrice


a  tba  aiddai  tmekbig  oat  of
war  pmrcnlal  the  couoi  fttnn  btaag  ukau  (LiT.
ti.  SIX  bf^BM  ■  la^  munbei  of  the  duieni
vaold  neeeaariljr  ba  •iMiit. It  if  mppoeed  froni

■  |- I m  Liry  (xiix.  37),  tliat  in  ktar  timet

witb  fall  powcn  to  take  the  cnuui  of  the  Romui
(sUien  there  ;  hst  thii  leemi  to  have  been  only  a
ipiiial  fMH.  It  ii,  on  the  centcarr,  pnbiibta  Enun
the  way  in  which  Cieen  plcadi  the  abaezm  of
•-'"'-  u  Rone  with  the  army  under  Lnndlm,
tm  Stw  hi<  not  having  been  en-
B  (^ro  Ami.  6),  that  Krriee  in
mi  a  valid  eieoia  lor  abtence.
k  ceoaon  had  raouved  the  dums  of  all
ibe  (itiiBD*  with  the  ■mount  of  ibeii  propoty,  they
tba  had  to  mka  eat  the  liit*  tf  the  tribei,  and
■ko  af  tbe  ihiiri  and  oentnriea  ;  for  by  the  legi*.
iMka  ef  Snria  Tolliiu  tbe  pomtion  of  each  dtiien
in  tha  ante  na  detenained  by  the  amBimt  of  hii
piwitj.  [CoMini  CBKTDaUTA.]  Thete  liiti
fanad  a  nut  imponantpact  cif  the  rota^  On-
^riac,  vader  vbieh  name  wen  iodnded  all  the
iiaaaiiiiH  I  Miiimliiil  hmij  iiaj  lilhthi  dlKhaive
of  tbe  eenaon' dntiet.  (Cic  di  Lig.  ul  S  ;  Lit.
ndr.  IS  ;  Pint.  OaL  Mi^.  i6  ;  Cx.  dt  £9.  Jffr.
L  2.)  Tlwae  liita,  ai  &t  ■!  katt  ai  they  were  con-
aailiil  with  tbe  foanoei  of  the  Mate,  were  depoaited

■  tlv  aeiaiium,  which  woa  the  temple  of  Sotom
(Ut.  -nil  37)  ;  bat  the  regular  depaitary  for  all
tbearekin*  of  the  coiKn  waa  in  eaiUer  time*  tt -
AbriaiB  Ijbertatk,  near  the  Villa  pablica  (Li
xliiL  1 6,  iIt.  15),  and  in  Utec  Ciinei  the  temple  of
thaNympb. {CM.pnMiLil.)

Beaidea  tiM  ,ainuiganenl  of  the
tAea,  ceotarita,  and  elaMto,  the  eoiioa  had  alto
to  B^a  oM  the  liaU  of  llie  Kosloca  tat  tho  en-
«■(  LaaMam,  or  till  new  cenacn  vera  appointed  1
NriUoR  aot  tbe  namee  of  rach  a*  they  oimiideted
iwacAy,  and  Bakiu  additum  to  the  body  ftom
Aeae  wka  wen  qoali&d.  Thii  hnportant  part  c^
their  Satam  it  expfauned  onder  Sinatus. In  tho

c^aa  pdbliea,  and  added  and  remoTcd  nainea  a*
dwy  jadged  pcopet.  [Eduirn.)

Afts  the  Urii  had  bam  eompleled,  the  nninbi
<f  dtia^  via  Eoanted  an,  and  the  BUn  total  ai
Backed  ;  and  accnduqjj  we  Gnd  that,  in  tb
,  the  nmnbei  of  dtiieni  ii  lilu

They  aie  in  raeh  ouea  ipolcen
of  the


CENSOR.  263

which  taueed  their  office  to  be  the  moat  le-
I  and  the  moat  dreaded  m  the  Roman  itatei
itnnlly  grew  ont  of  the  right  which  they  po>-
d  of  Bxcluding  unworthy  persona  ftom  the
Una  of  cdtiieai  (  for,  ai  hai  been  well  romarked,
"  they  would,  in  the  £nt  place,  be  the  aole  jndgea

Uaatiani  of  fiiet,  inch  a>  whether  a
the  qnalififalioai  reqaiied  by  law  or
lin  tbe  rank  which  he  dauned,  or  whether
he  had  eret  inconed  any  judicial  lentenee,  whidi
rendered  him  in&mooa :  bat  fzaa  thence  the  tianai-
'  in  wae  eaiy,  iKcordiiw  to  Homan  notiona,  to  the
cinoDof  qoeattotu  alright;  anehaa  whether  a
eitiuD  wai  nallj  worthy  af  retiuning  hii  nnk,


hethn  he  had  not  committed
the  law."  In  thii :


n  giadnally  b«.


tame  imieeied  of  a  camplete  nipcnniendeace  01
the  whole  pnblio  and  pnT>b>  Ilia  of  ereiy  dti»


morality,  but  thnr  great  object  wu  to  maintain

the  old Homan  chaiacter  and  habita,  the  not

bmn. The  proper  ei)naaion  for  thii  branch

their  power  wnt  rmaum  Moniai  (Cic  it  Leg.

3 ;  LiT.  iT,  8,  ziiT.  18,  iL  46,  ili,  27,  xliL

,  Saet.  A^.  27),  which  w

of  the  empire  aarti  or  pra^

of  t)u>  branch  of  their  dntiei  waa  called  iVofa  or
NbUHo,  or  AiBmadtmia  Cbanno.  In  inflicting  it
they  wen  guided  only  by  theii  conadentiooa  con-
Tietioni  of  du^  1  ther  had  to  take  an  oath  that  they
would  act  neither  UuDogh  paniality  nor  &Toar  t
and,  in  addition  to  thit,  (hey  wete  bonnd  in  ereiy
ca*e  to  itate  in  their  litta,  oppoiita  the  name  of  the
guilty  citiien,  the  cauae  (^  the  pnniibmenC  inflicted
on  Him,  —  Submriptio  cauoria.  (Lii.  irrJT.  43  ;
Cic  im  Cttitid.  42—48  ;  Oell,  ix.  SO.)

Thia  part  of  the  cenun'  office  invetted  them
with  a  peculiar  kind  of  jnrtidictiou,  which  in  many
napecti  membled  the  exerdae  of  public  ojnnion
in  modem  timet ;  ior  there  are  innumerable
actiona  which,  though  acknowledged  by  evety  ihu
to  he  prejndidal  and  immoral,  itill  do  not  come
within  the  reach  of  the  poaitire  lawi  of  a  country,
if  real  crunea,  the  poatire  Iowa  fr».
Jie  particolkr  offence,  while
offender,  eien  after  be  hai
„ .  (,  ia  ttill  bKanudtatcd  fi>r

certain  honoun  and  diatinctiooa  which  ore  gtanted
only  to  poionB  of  uublemiihed  character.  Hence
the  Roman  cenaon  might  brand  a  man  with  thdr
nota  cenaaria  in  oae  he  had  been  cmvicted  of  a
crime  in  an  ordinary  court  of  joitioe,  and  had
already  aufTered  puniahment  for  it.  The  conae-
quence  of  auch  a  nata  wai  <mly  ^Tnoniwu  and  not
iabmia  (Cic  d»  Rep.  iv.  6)  [InfaMu],  and  the
eenaorial  verdict  waa  not  a  jwdioiaH  or  rea  jmli-
aOa  (Cic.  pro  CkmL  42),  for  iu  rfeeta  wen  not
taiting,  but  might  be  remored  by  the  following  cen-
■on,  Dt  bya  lex.  A  nota  ceniona  waa  mareoTer  not
valid,  cnlea  b<

waa  thiu  only  a  tranaitoiy  cspitia  diminnti ,
deet  not  even  appear  to  have  deprived  a  magia-
tnte  af  hia  ofGca  (Liv,  xiiv,  16),  and  certainly
did  not  diaqoalifr  penona  labouring  under  it  for
obtaining  a  mogutracy,  for  being  appointed  aa
judioei  by  the  praetor,  or  for  aerving  in  the  Roman
amiiea. Mam.  Aemiliuj  wa*  thua,  notwithatand-


quently  puniah  mly  the  particular  offence,  while
in  pubiie  qpbuoD  the  offend
nndergene  pnnithment,  ia  a


le  ignominia


264


CENSOR.


lor.  (Liv.


iv.  31.)

A  pcrua  might  be  Tnvided  with  a  r
DOta  in  a  Tuiety  of  iuh,  vlikh  il  would
putaibU  to  ipecih,  u  ia  >  fnM  nunj  init
depended  upon  the  diacretiou  of  the  cau
ihs  licw  the;  took  of  a  caie  ;  ind  loinelia
one  wt  of  cCDSon  would  oretloak  tm  oSeiiM  which
wu  terereljr  ebaitiwd  bf  tbeii  tncccMon.  (Cic
lU  Simel.  IZ)  But  tba  oSeneei  which  in  le-
corded  to  lUTe  been  poniihed  hj  tha  ceuton  in
of  H  Ihnefold  natun.

1 .  Such  M  occutnd  tn  tfae  priTsta  Ufa  of  indi-
Tidnali,  »,  g.  (a)  TJTing  in  celibat?  at  b  time
when  a  perKm  oogbt  to  be  mairied  to  provide  th*
■mte  with  d^Koa.  (Val.  Max.  IL  9.  S  1.) Tb<

igation  of  manTinx  wai  Eroiuenllj  imneued
n  the  ciduiu  hj  the  muhfi,  and  the  rerun!  to
fulfil  it  waa  poniihed  with  a  fine  [Aia  Uio
{b)  The  diuolution  of  matrinon j  or  belnthi
an  improper  nj^  or  ibr  imufficieat  naaona
Max.  iL  9.  I  3.)  (a)  Imi^epra  ooDdnct  t
one^  wife  or  cbildnn,  a<  well  ai  harihpeai
gnat  indulgence  lowardi  children,  and  diaabedi-
encs  of  the  latter  lowaidi  their  parentL  {Fli  -
Cat  M<fj.  1 7  ;  compare  Cic  <fa  Rip.  it.  6  ;  Dion}
XX.  3.)  [d)  Inordjnata  and  lunuiotu  mode  of
tiling,  or  an  eitTavagaat  eipenditnn  of  money.
A  great  manr  inalancea  of  (hia  kind  an  cecDrded.
(LiT.  Epit  U,  mil.  H  ;  Flut.  Cat  Maj.  18  ;
OelliuB,  W.  8  ;  VaL  Max.  iL  9.  §  4.}  At  a  later
<6ne  the  Icffea  lamtuariaa  were  ToiAa  to  check  the
growing  lore  of  lunuMa.  (a)  Neglect  and  can-
leianeaa  in  cu1:ifBting  eot't  fietda.  (Qell  it.  12  \
Plin.  H.  N.  TTiii.  3.)  (/)  Grneltf  (owinli  alaTei
oi  clienta.  (Dionji.  xi.  3.)  (g)  The  carrying  on
of  a  diarepntahle  bade  or  occupation  (Dionja  Lc-),
atich  ai  acting  in  thotrei.  (LiT.  nL  2.)  (i)  Lb-
gacjr-hnnting,  dc&anding  orpbani,  Ac

2.  Offeneea  committed  in  public  Ufc,  eitha  in
the  capacity  of  a  public  officer  or  againat  magia.
tralea.  (a)  If  a  magiatrate  acted  in  a  manner  not
befitting  hia  dignity  aa  an  offlcai,  if  he  waa  accea-
aible  to  bribea,  or  forged  anipicea.  (Cic  da  SnaL
12  ;  LiT.  xxiii.  42  ;  VaL  Max.  iL  9.  §  3  ;  PinC
CaL  Mig.  17  ;  Cic  ib  I^iim.  I  16.)  («}  Im-
proper conduct  towarda  a  magiatmte,  or  the  attempt
to  limit  hii  power  or  to  abrogate  a  law  which  tne
cenaora  thought  neceaiBiy.  (Lit.  ir.  24  ;  Cic  dt
Omt.  u  64  ;  VaL  Max.  iL  9.  S  6  i  Gelliui,  It.  20.)
(«)  PetJDTjr.  (C^  >ia  Of  L  13 ;  Ur.  xxii.  18  ;
OelL  Til  IB.)  (fi  Neglect,  diaobedienee,  and
Gowardics  of  aoldiera  in  the  army.  (VaL  Mai.  iL  9.
§  7  ;  Li<.  xxiT.  18,  iiTii.  11.)  (a)  The  keeping  of
the  eqani  publicoa  in  bad  condition.  [Equiras.]

S.  A  Tarie^  of  actiona  or  puraniU  which  vera
thonght  to  be  injuriooi  to  public  morality,  might
be  forlndden  bv  the  cenaon  by  an  edict  (Oelliua,
XT.  11),  and  tlioae  who  acted  contiaty  to  anch
edict!  wen  branded  with  Che  nola  and  degraded.
Fh  an  enumeralian  of  the  ofHencca  that  tnight  be
puniahed  by  the  cenaora  with  ignominia,  ace  Nia-
bohr,  HiiL  of  Rome,  toL  iL  p.  399,  6lc

The  pnniihnienta  inflicted  by  the  cenaon  gens-
nlly  differed  acconling  to  the  atation  which  a  man
occupied,  though  HnnelLmea  aperaon  ofthahigheal
rank  might  inffer  all  the  poniihmenli  at  once,  by
being  degradad  to  the  loweaC  chut  of  dtiiena  But
they  an  generally  diTided  into  fiiiiT  claaM* :  —

1.  Moiio  Qt^Ktio  taaaote,  or  the  OTcliuioD  of  a
man  Aom  the  number  of  •cmuora. Thia  pooiab-


CENSOR.

ment  might  either  be  a  aimple  eicfaialon  from  tlie
liat  of  aenatott,  or  the  penon  might  at  the  iBiiw
time  be  excluded  &am  the  tribei  and  degraded  to
the  rank  of  an  aerarian.  (LiT.  xiIt.  18.)  The
latter  courae  aeema  to  have  been  aeldom  adopted  ;
tbe  ordinary  modo  of  infiicting  the  puniabment  wn
aimply  thia :  the  cenaon  tn  their  new  liala  omitted
the  namea  of  auch  aenatora  aa  they  wiihed  to  ex-
dude,  and  in  reading  tbeae  new  liata  in  public,
paaaed  orer  the  namea  of  ihoae  who  wen  no  longer
to  be  aeaalon.  Hence  tbe  eipreaiion  prattai^
tmalartt  ia .  equiTalent  to  »  maatu  giMi.  (Li*.
xxiTiii,  28, HTJL  11, xxxiT.  44  j Feat.  t.  a.


didn< .

ing,  but  addmaed  the  aenalor  whom  they  had
noted,  and  publidy  reptimaiided  him  for  hia  can-
duct  (LiT.  xxiT.  18.)  Aa,  howerer,  in  ordinaiy
caaea  an  ei-aenatoc  waa  not  diaqnalificd  by  hil
ignominia  for  hfJding  any  of  the  magiabaciea  which
ipened  the  way  to  the  aenate,  he  might  at  the  next
xnau  agam  become  a  aenalor.  (Ck  pro  Cbmit.
42,  Pint.  CSc  17.)

Z  The  adtafiio  tgai,  or  the  taking  away  the
|uui  publicua  from  an  equea  Thia  puniahmeiit
ight  Ukewiiflbe  aimgrie,  or  combined  with  the  ex-
iiaiun  from  the  tribei  and  the  degradatioii  to  tbe
lank  of  an  aerarian.  (LIt.  xzit.  18,  43,  xxriL
"  1,  xiii.  87,  iliii  16.) [EQurraa,]

3.  Tbe  moAoa  Iriba,  or  the  exduaion  of  aperaoD
from  hia  tribe.  Thia  puniahmcnt  and  tbe  de^ra-
' *  the  rank  of  an  aerarian  wen  originaUy

;  but  when  in  the  conna  of  time  ■  dia-
nu  made  between  tbe  tribua  nialicae  and
the  tribua  orbanae,  the  metis  e  tribn  tianafencd  a
fium  the  ruatic  tribca  to  the  leaa  rcipectabia
ibei,  and  if  the  fiirther  dHiadation  to  the
[  an  aerarian  waa  combined  with  the  motio
tribn,  it  waa  alwara  eipteaily  atated.  (Li*.  xIt.

called  r«^mt  m
zar.  la-.Cx.  pro  Cbumt  43)  or
(Lit.  xiiT.  43),  and  might
--  thought  by
1  Thia  de-
gradation, pnperly  apeaking,  included  all  tha
ither  poniabmenta,  for  an  equea  could  not  be  made
m  aenrioa  tinlcta  he  waa  pniioualy  deprired  of
hia  hone,  nor  cnuld  a  member  of  a  niatic  tribe  b«
made  an  aeiariui  unleia  be  waa  [nTionaly  excluded
'  >m  it. (Uv.  iT.  24,  xiIt.  18,  Ac)

A  penon  who  had  been  branded  with  a  nota
nutia,  might,  if  he  conaidered  himaelf  wnnged,
deaiDur  to  pnTa  hia  innocence  to  the  cenion
waam  agert  apad  ccuom.  Van,  da  Rt  Jiutl.  i.
7),  and  if  he  did  not  tucceed,  he  might  try  to  gain
le  pnlection  of  one  of  the  cenaon,  thai  he  might
Ltercsde  on  hia  beha]£

III.  ThI  ADUINIBTniTIOH  OF  TB*  FlI(il^'CB•

r  THI  Stati,  waa  anolhci  part  of  tha  cenaora'
fice.  Tn  the  £ral  place  the  friMuM, «  ptopcrty.
tax,  had  to  be  paid  by  each  citiaen  aocording  to  the
amount  of  hia  property  regiiteredin  the  ccauua,  and,
accordingly,  the  ngulatioa  of  thia  tax  naturally  fell
under  the  inriadiction  of  the  cenaora.  (Comp.  Li*.
tnix.  44)  [THiBDTUai.]  They  alto  bad  tha
oiperinlendencs  of  all  the  other  nTennca  of  the
itate,  the  ctct^/aSa,  aach  aa  tha  titbei  |iaid  fis  tba
public  landa,  the  nit  worka,  the  mise^  the  cd»-
toma,  &c  [VMTiaALlA.]  AH  theaa  braochea  of
let  ant


CENSOR.


aes


t*  the  Ughol  bidder  for  the  qace  of  >  liutnnn  at
in  jean.  The  act  of  tetting  wu  tallsd  nmdilio
m  hatHo,  ud  hbu  to  ban  takm  place  in  tbe
amh  of  Haidi  (Macnh.  Sat.  I  12),  in  a  public
pbc  is  Rtme  (Ctc  <h  Ltg.  Agr.  L  3.  ii.  21).
Tbe  tfiBi  en  which  thej-  won  lit,  together  vi^
(be  i%bt>  and  datiu  of  the  porchaaen,  wen  all
(fteified  in  the  Itga  ettonat,  wlucb  the  onaon
pabliahed  in  eroj  caic  befon  the  bidding  coiD'
aHBd.  (Cic.  od  e^  n-.  L  1.  g  12,  VwT.  iii.  7,
*•  .Vc^  Zteor.  iiL  19,  Vair.  it  Sa  Rml.  iL  1.)
Fur  farther  puticnlan  KaPoBLicANL  Tbe  con-
■n  alia  ptaatiaed  the  right,  thaagh  prabablj  not
vitbant  the  tmaimaa  of  tbt  lenate,  of  impoaing
aew  TfctigaliB  (Lir.  nix.  37,  tI-51),  and  aren
•f  leOing  tba  laiid  bdn^iDg  to  the  itata  (Lir.
taJL  7$.  It  wDold  thu  a|near  that  it  wia  the
dnjr  of  tbe  ceoaon  to  bring  bmnrd  &  badget  for

me. 8a  hr  tbeii  dntiet  leaerabled  thoae  of  -


[.did IHt ti


Tbe  o


a  of  tbe  itate.
_  Hf  ne  paid  into  the  aerarinm,
«U(h  wa*  «Dtinl*  andet  the  jniiidktion  of  the
«Me  land  aD  diabamnanta  wen  made  bf  odei
rf  lUi  bodj,  which  enplered  the  qnaealon  «a  ila
(Can. [Anikitrn ;  Sihatoi.]

■1  with  tba  Bipendituv  cJ  the  Dntdic  moorr ;
tbga^  the  ai  iiial]aj  iimili  wen  n»  doubt  made  bf
.1.  .  . .  ^ Till  mmiMahid  Ihii  mmiiial  iiniiii

isn)  ;  nd  la  meet  the  ezpenaea  emmected
•nth  lliia  part  af  thaii  dntiea,  tba  Knate  Toted  tbem

ibej  woa  lealrictad,  W  which  they  inigfat  at  the
lame  tine  evplay  aocotding  to  th«r  diaoetiou.
{Pajjh.  n.  13  ;  Lir.  zL  46,  iUt.  16.) Tbe/  had


hiild-


B^  woe  in  a  goad  Kate  of  repair
taen  Bad  aorta  facta  tiiffire,  Lir.  ixit.  id,  ini.
37.  iGi.  S,  itr.  15),  that  no  pnblie  plana  were  en-
rnaehad  apOQ  bj  the  occnpation  of  private  petiona
■ ', Lir.  iKl  S,  iliii  16),  and  that  the


■1  to. [AOD^lSDITCTCrs; VlU  ; ClMACAM.]

IV  repairs  ef  the  pnblie  woha  and  tba  kee|Hiig
at  A^  in  proper  eenditkni  wen  let  out  by  the
t-aaoca  bf  paUic  aoctiaD  to  the  loweat  bidder,  jut
M  lb*  rM^ib  wen  let  out  la  the  highMt  bidder.


i^  fte.  ;  and  tbe  dntiea  the;  bad  to  diacbarga
"  '  '  '  '  laCiiionat.  Tbecenion
il  tbe  eipenaea  connected
q>  of  the  godi,  even  for  inataace  the
ftedkf  af  the  acred  geeee  in  the  Capital,  which
wnealaoletaatooccotiact.  {Plat.  Qltatt.  Horn.
X  :  Fhm.  Jf.  /f.  i.^  i  Cic  pro  Hbkl  Ant.  20.)
"liiln  keepiiig  eiiilii^  pablic  wofki  in  a  proper

ma,  iwhT  iv  scmment  w  otilil;,  both  in  Rome
■ad  ia  other  parti  of  Italf,  neb  aa  tan[Jea,
'"■'■"tar,  Thmlm.  portieaea,  Sira,  walli  of  towni.


bad  been  gnoled  to  them  bj  tbe  •enile.  (Lit.
iL6I.  iliT.  16.)  Thef  wereletDuttocontiBcton,
like  the  other  woi^i  mentioned  aboTe,  and  when
they  wen  completed,  the  ceoajn  hiid  to  Me  that
tbe  woric  wBi  perfoimed  in  aooordance  with  tba


a  nfbTK (Cie.  Far


L  B7  ;  LiT,


'.  22,  iIt.


Lperintendence  orer
tbe  pablic  bnildingi ;  and  it  ii  not  eaay  to  define
with  accniai?  tba  napeetiTe  dutiea  of  the  eaneoti
and  aedilea ;  bnt  it  maj  be  lemaAed  in  genenl
that  tbe  ■upaintendencfl  of  the  oedilca  bad  man
of  a  police  chanctec,  while  that  of  the  eaiaon  had

After  the  cenicn  had  peifonned  thsr  niiona
dntiea  and  taken  the  eennu,  the  tudnim  or  tolemn
pmificatien  of  the  people  followed.  When  the
oeiuon  entered  upon  their  office,  they  draw  loU  to
■ee  which  td  them  ahonld  perfiiinn  thij  pniification
(AuAian/bsn  or  eomdm,  Varr.  £.  £.  tL  86  ;  Ut.
ziii.  37,  nxv.  9,  uiTiiL  S6,  ilii.  ID);  but  both
cenaon  woe  obliged  irf  eoone  to  be  pieeant  at  the
ceremony, [hvtnt.vu.']

In  the  Roman  and  Latin  eolonici  and  in  the
mnnidpia  then  wen  cenaori.  who  likawiae  bon
the  name  of  piuijBiaaatw.  They  an  ipoken  of
under  Colonu.

A  coMU  vae  aometimea  taka  in  tbe  {aorincea,
eraa  under  the  npoblic  (Cic.  Farr.  ii  63,  £6)  ;  but
then  aeema  to  hare  been  do  gmeial  caiaDa  taken
in  tbe  prorincei  till  the  time  i£  Angnatua.  Ttaia
snpem  canaad  an  aocoiMe  aconmt  to  be  taken  of
all  penona  in  tbe  Roman  dominioo,  together  with
the  amonnt  of  their  property  (£0.  Lumt,  il  t,  2  i
Jeaeph.  AnL  JwL  xm  IS.  |  6,  xriii.  1.  S  1.
2.  S  V)  ;  and  a  limilar  coma  waa  taken  &om  time
to  time  by  mcceeding  empenn,  at  fii«t  ereiy
ten,  and  labeeqaBnlly  erery  fifteen  yean.  (Sa-
Tigny,Aomualg,St»en>n/afHflir,  in  ^stKiirs/),  toL
Ti.  pp.  37&— 383.)  Tbe  emperor  aenl  into  the
prorincei  eipedal  officen  to  take  the  ceuna,  who
were  called  CBuOom  (Dig.  fiO.  tit.  15.  a.  4.  g  1 ;
Caiaiod.  For.  ii.  11  ;  Onlli,  /-wr.  No.  36£2)  ;
but  the  daty  waa  aomWinKa  diacbaigcd  by  the  im-
perial logatL  (TBc..^«n.L3i,ii6.)  TheOwii-
tont  wen  auiited  bf  nborduiate  offlcen,  called
Ctauwlai,  who  made  ont  the  liita,  &c  <CepitoL
Ootidiat.  13  ;  Symmaeh.  .^  z.  43  ;  Cod.  Throd.
6.  tit.  Z)  At  Rome  the  cenaoa  attll  continoed  to
be  taken  nnda  the  empire,  bnt  the  old  ceremooiee
connected  with  it  wete  no  longer  contanned,  and  the
cenmony  of  the  luatntion  wna  not  perfonned  after
the  tinu  of  Veafiaaian.  The  two  gnat  jniiata,
PbdIoi  and  Ulpian,  each  wnte  vorkg  on  tbe
cenni  in  tbe  imperial  period ;  and  MTeia!  eitiacta
fana  theee  wocki  an  givea  in  a  chapter  in  the
Digtat  (30.  tiL  1£),  to  which  we  muit  nbr  our
roaden  for  litrther  detail!  reipecting  the  imperial

The  word  eauaa,  beaidei  the  meaning  of  "  Talna-
tion  "  of  a  penon*!  eatata,  baa  other  tignificationa,
which  mut  be  briefly  mentioned  :  1.  It  signkfied
the  amonnt  of  a  penoo'i  ui^ierty,  and  hence  we
read  of  ammt  tetMeriut,  ue  tatate  of  a  lenator  ;
iMuai  ymfrit,  the  eatate  of  bb  eqnea.  2.  Tbe  liita
of  tbe  cenaon.  S.  The  tax  which  depended  npon
the  TBlnation  in  the  cenni.  The  Leiicona  will
inpply  eianiplei  of  theae  meaningi.

(A  eonudeiable  portion  of  the  preceding  article
haa  baan  taken  fnm  Bfclur^  nR^ltnt.imaoDt


366  CEKSIT3.

of  the  cenionhip  in  hia  Hatdbit^  dtr  RmiaA&n
AHeHiOmer,  voL  iL  put  iL  p.  191,  &c.  Coiii[Mre
Vh\mia,HiilofjofIi<niu!,n\.ilf.  397;  Amold,
JEttory  (/  Rome,  vol.  L  p.  346,  &C ;  OSnling,
JGnitcit  Slaatmirfiuuaig,  p.  S38,  &c  ;  Oeiiiich,
Die  Ji'dmi$ei*  Gnuw  tfe  lirvni  Fer&oZtMUH  mr
Vtrfamng,  Bud,  1842  -,'  DuRsu  de  la  Halls,
EmitonaaFolitiq»eieiRimma,  ToLi.  p.  Ifi9,&c}
CENSUS.  — 1.  Ob«ik,— The  Greek  term  for
a  mtui'i  pnper^  u  ucertamed  by  the  cennu,  ib
mil  M  for  tlifl  >ct  of  oicertmiiuig  it,  i<  TlfiT^jtu.
The  only  Greek  >tate  coacetiiiag'  irfioie  arruge-
neut  of  the  ceom  we  httre  aDf  ntu&cton  iD-
tbrmuiaii,  ii  Atheu  ;  for  vliat  ve  know  of  the
other  itates  ii  onl;  dE  a  &igiiieDkU7  natnie,  uid
inta  not  eoRble  ni  to  Ibrni  an  aeconts  Dotioii  of
theit  ceuiu.  Prarioiu  to  the  ^e  of  StJoa  no
cenna  had  been  institated  at  Athea%  u  a  riCiEen*!
rightfl  wae  olmya  detennioed  by  birth  ^  but,  u
Solon  labititated  property  for  binh,  and
citixen^i  rigbti  aod  dutiea
party,  it  became  a  maiui  of  neceuity
by  a  ^eral  censui  the  amount  of  the  proparty  of
the  Atheaian  citiieni.  According  to  oil  eensni,
all  ctliieni  were  divided  into  fbni  clanei:  1.
nuTOHhTiafAAi/AAvi,  01  peraon<  poaeving  landed

Cperty  which  yi^ded  »  anniuJ  iaeome  of  at
ft  6Q0  medinmi  of  dry  or  liquid  prodace,  2.
'In-fTi,  L  e.  knighu  or  penona  ahle  to  keep  a
Mu-hone,  irerB  Qam  whoia  [and*  yielded  an  ao-
DDal  [Kodiice  of  at  leait  300  medinmi,  wliencs
they  aie  ■!»  called  TpumMriafiAi^ini.  8.  Zfh
yTru,  L  e.  penoiD  able  to  keep  a  yoke  of  oien
(f«S>ot),  wore  lho«e  whoie  annual  income  con-
aitted  of  M  leait  160  medirani.  4.  The  ^rit
coDtaJned  all  the  leatof  the  Eiee  population,  whoae
ineome  wat  belov  that  of  the  Zengitae.  (Pint
Stil.  JS,  and  the  Leiioographen,  (.n.)  Theie
dauea  Ihemaclvei  were  culed  Ti/i^furra  ;  and  the
conititnCion  of  Athena,  ao  long  aa  il  vaa  baaed
upon  theaa  daaiet,  rni  a  liiDocracy  (Ti^ianpirrta  or
u^  Ti/iTf/utno-  iniAiT(Iii).  The  higheit  magiitnicy
at  Alheaa,  or  the  archonihip,  vm  at  £nt  ae-
uuible  only  to  peraoni  of  the  fint  daaa,  ontil
AiiatJdes  tluew  all  the  atata  officea  open  to  all
daaKa  iodiacriminately.  (Pint.  ^ruC  1,23.)  The
maintenance  of  the  repoblic  mainly  derolied  upon
tho  fint  three  claaiea,  the  laat  being  exempted  from
all  taict.  Sometiiaei  we  indeed  &id  mention  of  a
ftirrwbi'  WAoi,  and  the  eiprewon  SijTwiir  TfXtlr,
to  pay  the  tax  ofd^ci  <I>cm.  c  MaaarL  p.  1067;
Bckkar,  Anted.  Grate,  p.  261  ;  Etym.  M.  i.  o.)  ;
but  thia  cannot  be  ondentood  of  a  apecial  tai
which  the  fourth  claaa  had  to  pay,  but  muit  be  ex-
plained in  a  more  general  ■onaa,  for  rixat  rrAfiP
nuani  generally,  to  perform  the  datiea  ariaiog  out
of  peraoDi  being  connected  with  one  or  other  of  tho

In  regard  to  tlie  datiei  which  the  above-men-
tioned ceniga  impoaed  npoo  the  Gut  three  of  the
clawea,  we  mnat  diatingniah  certain  poional  obli-
gatioDi  or  litttTgiea  (Xeiroifp/fai)  which  had  to  be
perfbrmcd  by  individnala  according  to  the  clau  to
which  they  behmged  [Liiti/hoiii],  and  oenaia
laiea  and  bordeni  which  were  regolated  Dccoiding
to  the  daaaei ;  ao  that  all  citiient  belonging  to  the
nune  diua  had  the  tame  burdena  ii&posed  upon
them.  Ai  ^the  land  in  the  legiilation  of  Solon  waa
regarded  ai  the  (^ilal  which  yielded  an  siuioal
income,  he  regulated  hia  lyatem  of  taxation  by  tbe
nlua  a(  the  land  which  waa  tnated  ai  the  tuablo


CENSUS.
capitaL  There  ia  a  paaiaga  in  PoUoi  (riii.  ISO^
1 3'2)  in  which  ha  taya  that  a  pentacodomediamu
expended  onelalenton  the  pnUio  aceoont,  a  Imh
thirty  minBe,Biid  a  ffvytr^i  ten  inina&  Nowthia
aeenu  to  be  impcwible ;  for^  aa  Solon  (Plut.  Sal
23)  reckoned  the  medimnua  of  dry  produce  at  ooa
dischma,  we  muil  aupfuie  that  a  member  of  the
fint  claaa  vu  reckoned  to  have  an  aDnial  income
of  son  drachmae,  or  tho  twelfth  pan  of  a  talsib
But  the  difficulty  may  be  lolled  in  thii  manner.
The  valuation  which  Solon  put  apoo  the  land  of  aa
Athenian  cdtiien  wu  in  reality  neitha  the  real
value  of  the  property,  nor  the  amount  of  the  pro-
per^ tax,  bat  only  a  certain  portioa  of  the  real
property  which  wat  treated  aa  tho  taxable  capitaL
Solon  in  hia  cennu  aacotuned  a  pmoo'a  luided
property  frani  ita  net  annu^  pndnoa  ;  and  tha
niunber  of  medimni  which  it  waa  nppaaed  to  pm-
dnco  were  reckoned  aa  to  many  drachmae.  But
the  preduoa  wat  probably  not  calenlatad  higher
than  wat  dose  when  the  etlate  waa  let  eat  to  &m.
The  rent  paid  by  a  brmer  wag  piubably  not  much
mom  than  oght  per  cant,  aa  it  wat  in  the  time  of
iMeua.  {D*  Moat.  Hend.  §  42.)  Now,  if  we
in  the  time  of  Solon  it  wat  61


tnppoae  tb


■I  exactly  Aof


of  the  pn^erty  of  a  penon  belonging  ti
ciata  wat  one  talent ;  in  the  aecond,  3600  dmetaniae  I
and  in  thethird,  IBOOdiachmae.  Solon, in  tumf
the  citiaena,  wii  iriae  enough  to  tee  that  the  aana
atandard  could  not  be  applied  to  all  the  three  elaaaci^
Ita  the  tmallcr  a  penon'i  income  it,  the  amaller
ought  to  be  the  itaodaid  of  tuaCion.  AoooTdingfy,
a  pemm  bdonging  to  the  Gnt  elaat,  being  tha
wealthieat,  had  to  pay  a  tax  of  hit  entire  prcpectj,
while  only  a  portion  of  the  property  of  the  pertona
lielongiog  to  tbe  two  othtr  flnitrit  waa  ngaided  oa
taxable  capital ;  vit  peraoni  of  the  ncond  paid  the
tax  only  of  j,  and  penona  of  the  third  claia  only  of
j  of  their  property.  Liatt  of  thii  taxable  property
(iiroTpo^)  were  kept  at  fint  by  tho  nancrari,
who  alto  had  to  conduct  the  oeuaua  (Ueaych.  i.  d.
nAsAiipoi),  and  afterwarda  by  the  damaiuhi  (Har-
pooaL  a.  B.  t^iiafx'").  A)  property  it  a  fiuetoatiag
thuig,  the  cenaua  waa  repeated  itam  tioM  to  time,
but  the  perioda  differed  in  the  variona  parte  of
Qreeea,  for  in  tome  a  cenaua  wat  held  every  year,
and  in  othan  cvety  two  a:  four  yean.  (Aiiatot.
PUU.  V.  8.)  Every  perton  had  conacientiouily  to
atata  the  amount  of  hit  property,  and  if  there  waa
any  doubt  about  hia  honeaty,  it  teema  thai  acoun tec-
valuation  (iiTirJ^ujirii'  ■  '  ■  '
"  the  I

that  the  stale  wanted  60  talenlt,  or  ^  part  of  it,
each  dtiaen  bad  to  pay  away  ^  part  (d  hit  tax-
able property  ]  that  it,  a  perton  of  the  Srtt  daaa
pud  120  druchniae  (the  SOlh  part  of  6000),  ■  per-
ton of  the  aecond,  60  drachmae  (the  £Oth  part  of
3000),  and  a  penon  of  the  third  claaa,  30  drachmaQ
(the  50th  pert  of  1000).  It  ia,  however,  not  irn-
^Bobable  that  pertont  belonging  to  tho  tame  claaa
had  to  pay  a  difierent  amount  of  tazei  aotarding
at  their  propwty  wat  cqul  to  the  minimum  or
above  it ;  and  BHckh,  in  hit  PiMa  Eeaumy  of^
AtAeaa,  hoa  made  ont  a  table,  in  which  each  claaa
ia  lubdivided  into  three  lectiona.

Thia  lyttem  of  toiatioa  according  to  clattoa,
and  baaed  upon  the  poateetjan  of  productive  eatatfa,
underwoit  a  ooiaidenble  change  in  the  tim  of  the


CENTDMVIRI.
Pdi^HBDMiui  vu,  tbough  tbs  dinripn  fnto  d«w>

.1  _.  1 _ ^  ^  beolHBwd  br  a  CMUnder-

ti  of  Iha  lepablic  io-
u  wen  poaMMsd  oC
bigc  iMii^Hlj  withoot  banig  landed  pnpnston,
tkc  arigiaBl  hod-toz  wn  dumgad  into  a  pnipectf-
tB^  In  thi*  mumv  we  moit  w^lain  th«  propoval
■f  Earipidc^  •bortlj  bdiice  b.  c  393,  to  niia  £00
nkalt  by  UBtoiag  k  ttx  of  ana  faniMli  put.
(Ahm^  Bed**.  823,  b.)  Foi  (he  laxabla
ofital,  liib  30,000  bilcnti,  &r  exnedi  the  unoimt
tfaUthclmdedpniper^iiiAttioL  Thiapnpenj
tax,  wkidk  <na  (nbititmcd  te  the  hnd  tax,  m*
alM  iljfepit,  cnmning  wliich  eea  EisraoK^
Cooqan  Lminniaux ;  and  for  the  laica  paid  bj
inident  aliou,  UnoKX  (BBiUi,  PM^  Earn,  of
AOtm,,  p.  495,  ftc  Sd  ediL)
Z  Roman. ICiKMa.]  [I-S.]

CENTG'SIHA,  nuwl;  jMn,  oc  the  htmdiedth


, .  (Cit  ad

BrA  18,  pro  AdUr.  Pet.  11 ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  1&
1. 17.  f  3.)  Thu  tax,  «■  Ttdtu  iAnm.  L  7S)
aji,  wBi  mtondimd  after  tlie  dnl  wrci,  tbmgh
hi  being  mentMBied  by  Cucn  ahoin,  that  th^
cm]  vara  ^maot  hare  been  thoee  between  Octa-
Tkn  and  Anionj,  but  msat  be  on  eariiei  ciTil
nt;  p— *-p  that  betweco  Marina  and  SnQa.  Iti
pndBce  wai  anttned  by  AngaMoi  to  the  aero-
rimi  wiSitan.  Tiberioi  ledneed  the  tax  to  one
half  per  cant,  (famafaiiwa),  iftCT  be  had  ehasged
Capiiidacia  into  a  inrinee,  and  had  thnabj  in-
iTMiid  the  Kicona  of  the  enpira.  <Tac  Atm.  a
IZ)  Caijanla  in  the  bcgioniiig  ef  hia  reign
ahoUAtd  &B  tax  altogethet  fi«  Italy,  aa  ii  al-
KMed  by  Soetooini  (CUy.  16)  and  alao  W  an
aadmt  aiedal  of  Caljgala  on  which  we  find  C.  C.  R.

I S),  iriuaa  aathori^  on  Ihit  point  omist  outweigh
1^  of  SoeMDU  and  Tadtu,  itatea  tlat  Tibenoa
JnoaaLd  (ha  rfaowfcwwa  to  a  awfen'ma,  and  in
■aicher  paaaage  he  agtea*  wHh  Snetonint  in  itating
thMCaUgoiaaboUAed  it  altogether  (lii.  9 ;  comp.
Bennans,  Dt  Vinia.  Pap.  Som.  p..70).  [L.  S.]
CSNTB'SIUAE  UBU'RAE.  [Fanra.]
CENTUWIRL  T1ieori^eonititalion,and
ponn  of  (be  ooort  of  centmnriii  are  eioeedin^jr


. J  TOW of  thU

■aj  of  HoUw^  Vbtr  dit  Com-


ISfh  and  the  eoaj  of  IWiMm,
^md  Ham^nt,  ocMain  all  the  anthu
■mil .  bm  these  two  eaaaja  do  not  agree  in  all

The  II  iilaMiiiii  wae  jndicea,  who  reannbled
•(her  jadkes  is  thii  reapect,  that  thej  decided
data  rades  the  anthority  of  a  maginiatui ;  but
ihej  dilfaed  baa,  other  jndicat  in  being  a  d^uile
lady  or  colkgiBm.  Thii  oaUeginin  uemi  to  have
h^  dirided  into  faor  paila,  each  of  which  tome-
*" — r  aai  hj  itaelC  The  crigiu  4^  the  ctmrt  ii  un-
^ewB ;  bat  it  ia  certainly  prioT  to  the  Lei  AebuUa,
whid  pitt  40  Old  Id  the  legii  actionn^  except
the  aaltcr  of  Daonnmi  Inleimm,  and  bi  the  cam
catannlea.  (Gaioi,  ir.  31 ;  OelL  xtL  Ii  ,
Aaaadiqg  to  FeMn*  (a  Cmtaniniia  Judida),


CENTUMVmi.  287

thiee  were  choeot  ant  of  each  tribe,  and  totue-
qonlly  the  whole  nnniber  out  of  the  SS  tribu
would  be  lOS,  who,  in  round  numbert,  wAe  called
the  hnudred  men ;  and  a>  there  were  not  36  tiibea
c.  241,  it  lua  been  aomeliniea  inferred  that
■  time  we  mnit  auign  the  nigin  of  the  oen-
tnniTiri.  But,  ai  it  hat  been  lemariied  by  HoU-
weg,  we  cBonot  akoaetbtl  idly  to  the  authority  of
FeBtui,and  the  omcluiirai  >o  drawn  from  hia  itate-


The  pnnaedingi  of  thia  coiirt,  in  cinl  ntatten,
weie  per  leui  actionem,  and  by  the  eacramentnm.
TheprDoeaaneie,BHin  the  other  jadiciapriTata,  con-
lilted  of  tm  pan^  mjm,  ih-  before  the  pnetor,
and  u  JadicHi,  ot  befbre  the  ccntumTiri.  Tin
iiaetor,  howerer,  did  not  initnict  the  centimiTiri
ly  the  formnk,  ai  in  other  caaca,  which  ii  farther
explained  by  the  {act  that  the  praeltc  g^eiided  in


itnniTiralia.  (PIm.  JJ>.  t.
mi  i>etty  clenr  that  the  poweri  at  the  cen-
were  limited  to  Rome,  or  at  any  rate  to
HoUweg  niftintwin*  that  their  poweri  were


IHM.  E  91 ;  Phaedr.  ii

The  aubilitntion  of  ontforrtinthapaBage
of  Qniutilian  (Ind.  Oral,  ir.  1.  S  57),  eren  if
luppoted  by  good  H39.  ai  HoUweg  affirmi,  can
hudly  be  defmded.

The  dril  Batten  which  came  under  the  oogni-
mwe  of  diii  court  are  not  com|iletdy  aacatained.
Many  of  them  (thoogh  we  have  na  reason  (br  aay-
ing  bU  of  them)  u«  enmnented  by  Cicen  in  a
— "' IDtOnAliB).  Hollwegmeu-


,  and  that  other  maltan  were  not  within
their  coguizauce  ;  and  funkier,  that  loch  matter)  aa
wire  within  their  coffuiiancs,  were  olio  within  the
cagnisance  of  a  nngU  judex.  HoUweg  mainteine
that  acti(me)  ia  rem  or  Tindicatioaea  of  the  old
dvil  law  {with  the  exception,  howerer,  of  actionea
piaejudicialea  or  itatni  quaeationei)  conid  alone  he
bnntght  before  the  centumTiii  ;  and  ^t  neithn  a
pcnokal  aetiDD,  one  ariilng  frnm  coutnct  or  delict,
nor  a  atatni  qnaealio,  ia  eiei  mentiDDed  ai  ■  caiua
eentDmrinli*.  It  wai  the  practics  to  lel  up  a
near  in  (he  place  where  the  cenCtunviri  were  lit-
tmg,  and  aosrdingly  tl»  w«d  haflta,ar  haita  cen.
tnmTiialiif  ia  KHue^el  uaed  ai  eqniTalent  to  the
word*  judiciom  ecotumnrale.  (Suet,  OttatKoi.
S6;  QiiintiL  Int.  Omt.  T.  2.  g  1.)  The  apear
wai  a  lymbol  of  qniritarian  owuenhip :  for  "  a
mac  «a<  conaidered  to  haTO  the  beat  title  to  that
which  be  took  in  war,  and  accordingly  a  ipear  ia
eet  up  in  the  centamriialia  judida."  (Gams,  iT.
It!-)  Such  was  the  exjdanatiou  of  the  Romaii
jmiflta  of  the  origin  of  an  ancient  cuatam,  from
which  it  ia  argued,  that  it  may  at  leait  be  inferred,
the  cantnmTin  had  propeHy  to  decide  matten  re-
lating to  qniritariau  owneiihip,  and  queationa  con-
nected therewith.

It  haa  been  already  laid  that  the  matten  which
bdonged  to  the  cogniiance  of  the  centnmTiii  might
also  be  hnmglit  \mert  a  judex  ;  but  it  ii  conjee-
tnied  by  HoUweg  that  thii  wai  not  the  cue  till
after  the  paaing  of  the  Aebatia  Lex.  He  coniiden
that  the  court  it  the  eeidumviri  wm  (aMb"  '


268  CEREALIA.

ia  eoilf  tiiDM,  ibr  lit  >p«ii]  pnipoM  of  deciding
quHtioiu  of  qairiarian  ownenliip ;  and  the  n-
porlBiice  of  luch  qneitioDi  ii  apporait,  when  ve
couider  that  the  Romw)  citiient  van  nted  ac-
cording to  their  quirituriui  property,  that  on  their
rating  dep«ided  their  dau  and  centory,  and  con-
■eqncntlj  their  than  of  powei  in  the  public  ai-
■embliei.  No  priiate  judex  could  decide  on  a
Hgbl  which  might  thai  indiiwtly  aflect  the  c^xit
of  a  Romtui  ciuien,  bnt  only  a  tribunal  telteted  eat
of  all  the  trihei,  Coniiitentiy  with  thi»  faypothena
we  find  not  only  the  rei  Tindieatio  within  the
Juriidjction  of  the  centnmTiii,  but  alio  the  heiedi-
talii  pelitio  and  actio  confesioria.  Hollwcg  ii  of
Opinion  thai,  with  the  Aefaalia  Lex  a  new  epoch  in
the  hiilory  of  the  ceatuniTiri  conmieacet ;  the  legit
actionee  were  aboUehed,  and  the  fbnnnls  [Actio]
wae  introdnced,  excepting,  howere^  at  to  the
omui  omfwacira/ei .  (Oaini,iT.3a,  91  ;  QelLiri
la}  The  formula  it  in  ita  nature  adapted  only
to  pcnonal  actiont ;  but  it  appean  that  it  wai  alio
adapted  by  a  legal  device  to  lindicalionea ;  and
Holtweg  attribniet  tbi*  to  the  Aebutia  Lex,  bf
which  he  coniiden  that  the  twofold  fff<DccA  waa
in^ednced  i  —  1.  per  le^  actionem  apod  centnnj-
Tiroe ;  2.  per  fcamulam  or  per  iponaionem  beffve  a
judex.  Thai  two  mode*  of  pnccdore  in  the  caaa
of  actione*  la  cem  wece  ettabliihed,  and  tuch
actioni  were  no  longer  eiclutirelf  within  the  jurii-
diction  of  the  centnmrirL

Under  Augoito^  aeeordin^  to  Uellweg,  the
(linclioni  of  the  ccntumTiri  were  lo  &r  modified
that  the  more  important  Tindicationei  were  put
under  the  cogalnuca  of  the  centumviri,  and  the
Ida  important  were  delemiiiied  per  iponiioiiem
and  befun  a  judex.  Under  tbii  emperor  the  court
■ltd  renmed  ita  fimner  dignity  and  intportaoce.
(Ato^  dt  OoMt.  CkirnqK.  Eloq.  c  3S.}

The  younger  Pliny,  who  practiaed  in  thia  court
{Ep.  ii.  14),  makei  frequent  alluaiona  to  it  in  hia
letleta.  (J^  L  £,  v.  1,  ix.  23.)  The  ccntmniiii
are  menlioued  in  two  excerptt  ia  Uie  Digeat  (£.
tit  2.  a  13,  17)  and  perhapt  eltewhere  ;  one  ex-
cerpt  ia  from C.  Scaevola and the other  from

The  foregoing  notice  ia  founded  on  Hollweg'i
ingenioui  eaaay  ;  hit  opiniooi  on  aome  pointi,  how-
ever, lie  hardly  estabtiihed  by  anthoiitici.  Thote
who  deiire  lo  mieatigate  thi«  exceedingly  obtcure
matter  may  compare  the  two  esaaya  cited  at  the
head  oF  thia  ar^de.  [O.  L.]

CENTU'RIA. [CouiriA  ;  Ekibcitl'b.]

CENTURIA'TA  COMI'TIA. [Couiru.]

CENTU'RIO. [ExBaciTUB.]

CBNTC'SSIS. [As.]

CERA  {inpi>\  wu-  For  itt  empIoymcDt  in
painting,  tee  PicruKi,  No.  1 ; and  for  itt  ap-

f'ication  at  a  writing  material,  tee  Tabiilai  and
xsTAtfamoH.

CEREA'LIA,  a  fettiTal  celetnated  at  Rone  in
hoaonr  of  Ccm,  whoee  wandering*  in  Btaich  of
her  loat  daughter  Proiarpine  wece  repreaented
by  women  clothed  in  white,  running  about  with
lighted  torchea.  (Ot.  PaM.  w.  494.)  During  ita
continuance,  gamei  wen  celebrated  in  the  Circui
Maiimut  (Tacit  Am.  ir.  53),  the  apectatota  of
which  app«red  in  white  (Or.  Fad.  it.  620)  ;  but
on  any  octaaicm  of  public  mourning  the  gamea  and
featiTala  were  not  celebrated  at  all,  at  the  ma-
Inma  could  not  appeal  at  them  except  in  while.
(Ut.  xzii.  S6,  xxxiT.  6.)  Iha  diq^  of  tbe  Cenalia


CERTI.
it  donbtful ;  fame  think  it  was  tli«  Idea  or  13t&
of  April,  othen  the  7lh  of  the  tame  moDth. (Ot.
foK.  It.  aaa.)  [R.W,]

CEREVl'SIA,  CERVI'SIA  (fMoi),  ale  or
beer,  waa  almoit  or  altogether  uiiknown  to  tha
andant,  ai  it  ia  to  the  modem  inhabilanti  of
Oreece  and  Italy.  But  it  waa  nted  very  generally
by  the  anrrounduig  oationa,  whoaa  aoil  and  climatA
were  Im  ^Toumble  to  the  gn>wth  of  Tinea  [im
Gallia,  ofiugne  prsoiinu,  Phn.  H.  K.  xal  32  ;
Theophrait.  Da  Oaaiii  Plait,  ii.  II ;  Diod.  Sic.
IT.  2,  T.  26  ;  Strab.  x*iL  2.  S  ;  Tacit.  Germ.  23).
Acerading  to  Herodotui  (iL  77),  the  Egyptian!
commonly  drank  "  barley-wine,"  to  which  cualon
Aeachylni  alludea  {ix  Kfi6ar  /Mv,  Si^ipL  964  ;
/■eknoot  paaiiIa^ai,CalDm.i.  116).  Diodonu
Siculna  (L  20,  S4}  aayi,  that  the  EgJptMn  beet
wai  neaiiy  equal  to  wine  in  aDength  and  flavour.
The  Iberiani,  the  Thraoani,  and  Sie  pe<i[de  in  tha
north  of  Aaia  Uinor,  iuateod  of  drinkii^  their  alo
ot  beer  out  of  enpa,  placed  it  belbie  tbem  in  a  huga
bowl  or  Tiie  (tpariif),  which  wat  ntnetinM  of
gM  or  nlm.  Thia  beiiig  fbll  ta  the  biim  witb
the  givna,  at  well  at  the  fermented  liquor,  tha
gueati,  whsi  they  pledged  «ie  another,  dnuJi  to-
gether out  of  the  aame  bowl  by  atooping  down  to
It,  ahhongh,  when  thia  token  of  firiendihip  waa
not  intended,  they  adopted  the  mon  refined  method
of  ancking  np  the  fluid  tbnntgb  tnbea  of  canr^
(Archil,  f^.  p.  67,  ed.  Liebel ;  Xen.  Arab,  it.
g  S,  26  ;  Athen.  L  26  ;  Virg.  Gaorg.  m.  S80 ;
Sen.  ad  bm.)  The  Sueri,  and  other  northern
nationt,  ofloed  to  th«r  god*  Hbatiooa  of  beer,
and  expected  that  to  drink  it  in  the  pnaence  of
Odin  would  be  among  the  delighia  of  Valhalla.
(Keyiler,  Antig.  S^HmL  p.  150—136.)  BpDroy,
one  of  the  namca  lor  beer  (Archil.  L  e. ;  Hella-
nicua,  p.  91,  ed.  Starti ;  Athen.  x.  67),  tecmi  ta
be  an  ancient  paaaiTe  participle,  from  the  verb  to
bna.  [J,  Y,]

CE'RNERE  HEREDITATEH. [Hanaa.]

CERO'MA  (irtfwfui)  wai  the  oil  mixed  wiA
wax  (ni^i)  with  which  wretllei*  were  anointed.
After  they  had  been  anointed  with  thit  oil,  thejr
wero  coTered  with  duit  or  a  toft  tend  ;  whencs
Seneca  {Ep.  57)  aayi  — ^  cmmalt  no*  i<94a
(&^)  ttctpil  ■■  trypla  tftapolitaaa.

Ceroma  alto  aigmSed  the  place  whue  wreatleia
were  anointed  (the  atonaawims  Vicrar.  t.  II),
and  alBo,  in  later  timei,  the  place  where  the^
wreatled,  Thia  word  ii  often  used  in  eonneetioii
with  infOBfrn  (Pliu.  ff.  AT.  xxit.  2),  hut  we  do  not
know  in  what  ntsect  theae  placea  differed.  Senco
(Oi  Brtv.  ViL  12)  ipeakt  of  the  ceroma  aa  ■
place  which  the  idle  were  accutlomed  to  frequent,
m  order  to  tee  the  gymnattic  iportt  of  boyi.  Ar-
nobint  (Aiv.  GM.  iii.  SS)  infbrmi  ut  that  tha
catoma  wai  under  the  prolection  of  Heremy.
(Kiauie,  GymaatHi  and  AffOmMi  dt  Hlliam,
Tol  L  p.  106,  &a)

CERTA'MINA. [Athlwta*.]

CERTI,  INCERTI  ACTIO,  it  a  name  wbieh
haa  been  given  by  tome  modBm  wrileiv  to  tboaa
actiana  in  which  a  determinate  or  indetenninats
■um,  aa  the  caaa  may  be,  ia  nentioiied  in  the  for>
mula  (rsadnBuafts  etrtoa  fteaaiaa  Ml  taoarfat^
Oaiot,  ir.  49,  &c).

The  expretaion  incerta  formula,  whieh  occuii  ia
Oaiui  (iv.  54),  inqiliet  a  oota  formula.  With
reapect  to  the  inleotio,  it  may  be  called  eertm
when  tLe  ■<— — ~*  of  tha  actor  ia  dMannisMa,


CESTUS.

A  cotsin  thing  thU  lie  dananili,  ar
of  mmey  (Qaiui,  iT.  4S,  <7).  The
s  vhen  thg  claim  ii  not  of  ■  de-
ll exprcMed  b;  ihe
I,  Sui.  {Gsio»,  IT.  47,  136,  137.)
It  the  mloitio  i*  ioetrM,  the  cmdemnatio  miut
be  incata.  If  the  iatentk)  wu  ctrtn,  ths  nm-
iliiiMliii  might  be  cotha  certi  or  iacal&  (Quui,
ir,  SO,  51).  In  the  caopilBtiDni  of  Jutiiuan,
ikentbe  eifiopi  inceni  actia,  ineerta  ictio^
iDcatnni  jodiciiun  otcor,  ihej  apeeialtjr  spplv  to
the  actio  fiaacriptit  Tarbit,  which  contauwd  an
JBERia  inlcMiD  ud  eondemnatia.  (Actio  ',  Sa-
•nj,  i^ak-,  &<;  ToL  T.  p.  74.)  [O.  L.]

CERU'CHL ISato.]
KERUX  (ic4pti{). [CiDucina  i  Pitulis.]
CE^IO  BONO'RUIL  [BoNOKDu  Cusio.]
CE'SSIO  IN  JURE. [In  J»«  Cissio.]
CESTRUH. [Pktdb^  No.  6.]
CBSTUS. 1.  The  thong*  or  handa  of  lather,
wijth mn  tied  roimd  the  handa  of  boxen,  in
icdcT  to  noder  their  blowa  mon  powerfuL Thoe
taadi  of  leather,  vhich  utte  called  liiirrn,  or
^idrm  mmriMtt,  in  Greek,  woe  abo  frequentlj
tied  mnid  the  am  ae  high  aa  the  elbov,  a<  ii
•kn in the  foUowinB  itatoc  of  a  boxer,  the
•rigisa]  of  which  ie  m  the  Loam  at  Paiu. {See
Quae,  Mmttt  4.  Sca^  AwL  tt  Mod.  nL  iii.  pL
»7.i.2*43.>


The  iialm  wh  need  b; boxen  finm  the  eatlieit
tiaea  When  Epeini  and  Eniyaln^  in  the  Iliad
(ixBL  6S4),  p>pan  ihenuetrei  fat  bniing,
pel  an  their  landi  tbongi  nude  of  ox-hide  (Iiidr-
fn  ^^lf^^l— I  0al>  iypa^oit)  ;  bnt  it  thoold  be
miQected,  that  the  ceetn*  in  heroic  ttmea  appean
^  have  mtiaiitrd  mcrelj  of  thonga  of  leather,  and
iAnA  mattp^^r  frna  the  friffhtful  weapons,
lodad  wHli  lead  and  irDD,  which  were  naed  in
bter  tima.  The  different  kindi  of  ceitna  were
oBed  W  the  Oreeka  in  later  time*  fuiAJxai,
Ti^i  BmUi,  vfaipai,  and  >t(Vv"l*«  '■  of  which
the  poXixai  ga*e  the  loften  blowi,  and  the
llfmMii  the  nort  KTen.  The  iinMx<u,  which
■nc  ^  BM*t  ncient,  aie  deacribed  tn  Panianiai
im,  M.  I  3)  H  made  of  taw  ox-hide  cat  into


CEIRA.  269

thin  ineces,  and  joined  in  an  ancient  manner ;  they
wire  ued  onder  the  hollow  or  paJm  of  the  hand,
leaTing  the  Bngers  nncovered.  The  uhlctae  in
the  [HlaeitrHe  at  Olympia  need  the  )iii^x<"  in
practiung  for  the  public  gvnea  (l^uftTHr  twv
fwXanwripvi'f  Pane.  ri.  23.  |  3)  ;  bnt  in  the  gamee
thenuelTeOf  they  ujed  thoee  which  gave  the  le-


Tbe  ceatug,  nied  ii


later  ti


a  in  the  public


Terga  boom  plnmbo  iniato  ferreqne  rigebant."
StBtitu  (Titb,  yi  732)  E^ea  ipealu  at  ngrantia
piiBiJto  tegtnima.  Such  wc^poni  in  the  bandi  of  a
trained  boxer,  mtut  hare  frequently  occaiioned
death.  The  nip/aiKft  were,  in  fact,  H
called  yvurripai,  oi  "  limtHbreaken."
with  the  cestui  frequently  occur  in  aneieni  monn-
menti.  They  were  of  nrioui  fomu,  u  appears
by  the  Ibllowiag  tpecimeni,  taken  from  ancient
monnmenta,  of  which  drawings  are  giren  by
FttbretU  (Dt  ColiaiuL  Traj.  p.  261).


S.  Cmtds  bIn  signified  a  hand  or  tie  of  any
kind  (Varr.  Dt  S»  Ru^  L  8)  ;  but  the  term  wat
more  particularly  applied  to  the  lotie  or  girdle  of
Venus,  on  which  was  repieamted  eieiy  thing
that  could  awaken  lore.  (II.  xir.  2U  ;  VaL  Flicc
ri.  470.)  When  Juno  wiabed  to  win  the  affec-
tioni  of  Jupiter,  she  bonowed  thii  ceitus  from
Venni  (/i  i  e.)  j  and  Venni  hetielt  employed
it  to  oqiliTBte  Man.  (Hart,  li.  13,  xi>.  206,
207.)

CETRA,  or  CAETRA  (hJtpm,  Heiyeh.),  ■
target,  j. «.  a  nmll  round  shield,  made  of  the  hide
of  a  qoadmped.  (Ind.  Orig.  xriU.  12  ;  Q.  Curt,
iii.  4.)  It  wu  also  wotd  by  the  people  of  Spain
(fittmat  Hupauiat  eoiarta,  Cm&  B.C.  i.  36,  4S)
and  Mauritania.  By  the  latter  people  it  wai
sometimei  made  from  the  akin  of  the  elephant.
(Stiab.  irii.  p.  828.)  Frem  thete  account*,  and
&om  the  distinct  aiseitian  of  Todtos  (Jffric  36}
that  it  was  used  by  the  Britons,  we  may  with  con-
fidence identifr  the  cetrs  with  ths  target  of  the
Scottish  Highlanders,  of  which  many  ipecimeni  of


732)  of  the  two  accompanying  figures,  which
are  copied  from  a  MS.  of  Pnidentiui,  probably
written  in  this  country,  and  as  early  as  the  ninth
century. (Cbd.  Cotton.  Cltop.  t  8.)

It  does  not  appear  that  the  Romans  erer  wore
the  retia.  But  LiTy  compare!  it  to  the  pdta  of
the  Grveki  and  Hacedoniani,  which  was  also  a


CHALCIDICUM.


null  light  ihidd  (aliplat,  fsot  ptiHula*  fxaiil,
mi.  36). [Pu,Ti.]  [J-Y.]

CHALCEIA  (xaA«'«),  «  ™7  muient  fatiTal
celebnled  U  Adieu,  whicli  at  different  time*
Kcmi  to  h>Te  had  s  different  cbanclei,  fbi  at  fint
il  wai  HlemniKd  in  faonaiu  of  Athena,  Rimanied
Erguw,  and  bj  the  whole  people  of  Atheni,
whence  it  ma  called  'ABiraia  or  IIitrSiTfidt.
(Soidaa,  f.  v. ;  &fmoL  Mag*. ;  Enitath.  adtLa.
p.  234,  S6.)  At  a  later  period,  howeier,  it  wu
celebrated  onlj  b;  attiHOi,  eipeciallT  unitbi,  and
in  bonoiir  of  Hepfaaottu,  whence  itt  name  wu
changed  into  XoAjcf  ui.  (Pollux,  in. !  05.)  It  waa
kept  on  the  30th  day  of  the  month  of  Pysnepsion.
<Suida(,  Haipocnt  Eualath.  i.  e.)  Henandei  had
written  a  comedj  called  XoAJnio,  a  fragment  of
which  ii  preaerrcd  in  Athen.  iL  p.  602.  (Comp.
Welcker,  Die  Aadifi.  Trilag.  p.  290.) [L.  S.]

CUALCI'DICUH  iimcnl;  defined  b;  Fnbu
(i.  c.)  ai  a  lort  of  baildini  (jfcnu  aediJidCj,  wt
(sllcd  &om  the  city  of  Chsldt,  hut  what  urt  ii
not  eiphuaed  ;  neither  do  the  inieriptioni  or  the
poMBgea  of  ancient  writen,  in  which  the  word  oc-
ean, give  anj  deacription  &am  which  a  concliuion
can  be  dnwn  with  certaiulj  reipecting  the  fonn,
lue,  and  locality  of  tneh  ba^dinga.

haiiUea*  (VitruT.  T.  1 ),  in  r^noce  to  which  the
following  ittempta  at  idenCifirstion  bars  been
■Dggefted ;  —  1.  A  mint  atttcbed  to  the  biuilica,
from  x^i^^'  and  91m,  which,  thongh  an  inffeniona
canjectnre,  ii  not  (Bpportcd  b;  infficient  dauical
anthority.  2.  That  iian  of  a  batUia  which  lin
dirocll;  in  front  of  the  tribnne,  correaponding  to
the  nave  in  a  modem  cbnnb,  of  which  it  waa  the
original,  where  the  1aw]FTn  ttood,  and  thence
Icnned  mseit  aaaidiea.  S.  An  apartment  thrown
ont  at  the  hack  of  a  baailica,  eitheron  the  ground
floor  or  at  the  extremity  of  the  apper  gallery,  in  the
fonn  of  a  balcony.  1.  Internal  chamben  on  each
aide  of  the  tribune  for  Che  conveniaue  of  the
jitiica,  ai  in  the  builica  of  Pompeii.  5.  The
TeMibale  of  a  baailica,  either  in  front  or  nw  ;


le  fallen  of  cloth  (JiMaAla) :  ■
UKACiiiA.  L.  F,  SiciRD,  Pub.  •  •  •  •
*  *  •  <  •  Cbilcidicuii.  Crtptak  Pokticuh


I  it  clear  that  the  chalcid
goly  b«  nfened  to  the  rat


CHARISTIA.

decoration  likewise  coTTeapond  in  richneas  and
chaiacler  with  the  Tcetibole  of  a  boailics  described
by  Pnco^iui  (E>a  Aedific  Juti'a.  L  10),  which  tt
twice  deaignated  by  the  term  xaAM.  The  resti'
bole  of  the  hatilica  at  Pompeii  ii  ahown  upon  Uw


plan  on  piga  1 99,  a.


laaynonniM


the  word  il
"  Scribuntor Dii Teatn i:
KleaUbna  atqoe in ckalctdida  anreia
(Atnobioi,  p.  H9). Tbeie  wolds,  cook-
paxed  with  Horn.  Od.  xxiu.  1,

rptitt  IT  tit  imp^  httiiinTO  itayxa^Attca^
and the Dantlation of Jw-tpyor by Anaouiua
(PmooL  liil  Odya.),

^  CAaJddiatn  gressu  nntrii  npetabat  anili,**
together  with  the  known  loolity  of  the  ancimt
ojtmaada,  aecn  fijllj  to  aath«iso  the  interpreta-
tion giTeu. (Tuneth  Adnm.  ziiiL  31 ;  Sahnas.
H^orl  PoEBH.  jVvr.  c.  13.  p.  677.)

Finally,  the  word  aeemi  alio  to  hare  been  used
in  the  nme  aenie  ai  moeiBinini,  a  bakony.  (liid.
Dt  Orig. ;  R«nesiu>,  Var.  Laet.  iiL  5.) [A.  H.]

CHALCIOI'CIA  (xo^waw),  an  annual  f^
tiral,  with  sacrifices,  oelebiated  at  Sparta  in  honour
of  Athena,  nimanied.  Xa\ii[<>iiias,  L  e.  the  goddeaa
of  the  biaien-hoDsa.  (Paaj.  ill  17.  9  3.  x-^§6;
and  Ooeller  ad  Tlaiefd.  i  \W,  &«.)  Yoong  men
naiched  on  the  occasion  in  frill  annoui  to  tho
temple  of  the  goddess  ;  and  the  ephon,  allboogli
not  entering  the  temple,  bnt  remaining  within  it*
ncred  precmcts,  wen  obliged  to  take  port  in  the
mrifiee. (Polyb.  iv.  35.  §  B.)  [L.S,]

CHALCUSU<>^J"ii'),BdenoininationDr  Greek


was  originally  the  nnireiial  cnirtmcy,  and  coppef
Bppean  to  have  been  seldom  coined  till  after  the
time  of  Alexander  the  Oint.  The  x<i^fa  ni^
at  Athena  issued  in  B.  c  106  (SAoL  ad  Arittopk.
So*.  737)  were  a  peculiar  eicepdon ;  and  they  wero
aoon  afterwardi  called  in,  and  the  ailver  curreney
restored. (Ariitoph.  Eaiatiax.  B15--S32 ;  Act.

) It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that  Ifao

copper  coin  ailed  x'^^'oi''  ^^aa  in  cinnilatiDn  in
Athena  atill  earlier.  The  amalleri  ailver  coin  tX
Athena  was  the  quarter  obol,  and  the  x'^'out
was  the  half  of  that,  oi  the  eighth  of  an  oboL  Itj
value  was  somewhat  more  than  3-41h(of  abrthingt.
It  aeema  to  have  been  used  on  account  of  the  dif-
ficulty of  coining  lilvo  in  acch  minute  pieces.  Tho
XaAkoui  in  later  times  was  divided  into  l^itit,  of
which,  according  to  Suidas(KeD.  TdXavror,'0<ii\i(i),
it  contained  seven.  There  was  another  copper  coin
current  in  Greece,  called  aiiatotjir,  of  which  llio
value  is  not  knowtL  PoUnz  (iiL  9}  also  mentjom
miXAvCoi  as  a  copper  coin  of  an  earlier  age  ;  but,
Mr.  Husaey  baa  remarked,  this  may  have  been
common  name  for  small  money  ]  since  Ki^vSas
signified  generally  ^  changing  money,"  and  ao^
Aufurr^f,  **  a  money-changer."  In  later  timeA^
the  obol  was  cobed  of  copper  as  well  as  silver.  Tha
Oreek  italca  of  Sicily  and  Italy  bad  a  copper  coia-
>t  a  very  early  period  [LrrsA].  (Uussej,
Awmu  Wi^itt  owl  Mowy,  c.  8  ;  BSckh,  PaU.
Earm.o/Aamt,p.  G82,2ndod.i  UdierGrmiAu,
Miv/um,  Ac,  pp.  1*2,  312.  &C.) [P.  S.]

CUAKI'STIA  (from  xMi'l^i  to  grant  •
&TOur  or  pardon),  a  Roman  fnst,  to  which  none
but  relations  and  memben  of  the  ome  family  wen
invited,  in  eider  dut  any  qsMtel  oi  diMxrecuieut


•  o"


CHELIDONIA.
wUck  bid  nwen  nungit  ttwm  nnght  be  made
■[I.  iiiil  ■  innmilMriiiii  iiffir  liirt tt  «>* celebrated
•mr  jrmz  aa  the  19th  of  Fsbrnuy. (Or.  AUL  iL
S17:  V>LMai.iLLg8i  Mutii.S6.> [B.W.]

CHAHTA. (LiBSB.]

CHEIHONO'MIA (x«f'rl>l«\  »■  mimetic
nanaent  of  the  baud*,  vtiieh  farmed  a  pan  cf

Tke  WBfd  ii  aW  naed  io


ftjw^in  it  aaa  applied  to  the  moremaiiti  aS
the  hand*  ia  xffK-^-  craabat ;  and  it  ii  luad  in
eiBBectiiB  siu  the  tens  >X'<V'<9C*^-  (Atheii.iiT.
IL  629.  b. ;  Horeh.  to).  iL  a  1S47.  Alb. ;  Hend.
n  129;  Adim.  T. /f.  qt.  »  ;  Dion  Cev.  ncn.
13  i  Pia.  Ti.  10;  S  1 1  Hdiod.  AHUiyi.  it.  p.  73  ;

*J.iLe.3.  II.)  [P.S.]

CUEIROTCKNIA  Ociyvrm^).  InlhaAtb»-
■liB  i^wiililiin  twvBode*  of  Todw  wm  pnctiaed,
tltt  ta»  by  pabUM  [Puraoa^  the  other  }rj
K  abow  of  hwdt.  (x«^vnnu').  Tbo  btter  ma
mpdojcd  in  the  tledigD  if  IliMa  wagietfatta  vhe
wne  fhniiK  ia  the  poUio  MMnbliia  {ifxcaft-
rin),  tmi  who  wen  bcon  called  xup^anrToi,
ia  Teting  ^co  lawi,  and  in  Mme  liindi  of  tiiali
•■  BaMen  which  laneemed  the  people,  ai  opon
■yitaHal  and  (I»rr<Aiai.  We  frequntlj  iind,
b»wnf^  the  word  ifqfCfwSai  nnd  whne  the
woM*  mn  leallj  giren  bj  ihow  of  hand).  (Lj«.
c  JSWaA  p.  131.  IG.  and  PL  137.  8.  ed.  Steph.
Dem.  O^M.  i.  p.  S.)

The  manntr  itf  nitiiig  b;  a  ihow  of  bandi  ia
ttii  by  Saidaa  ($.  r.  K>t«x*'P»  r^fy  w)  to  baTsbeen
aalUbwi: — Tkl^nldMd:  "  Whoerertbiuki
tkM  Ilodiaa  ia  gmltj,  bt  him  lift  up  hia  tiand."
IVa  tkae  wlie  tho^ht  ao  Mntcbed  forth  theic
kaodi.  Then  the  henU  nid  agun :  "  Whoera
tkink*  that  Meidiaa  ia  not  gniltr,  let  him  lift  op
him  h^d ;"  and  thoao  who  were  of  thii  opi


kaada  wai  Cdanted  each  thne  b;  the  hoald  ;  and
tka  pMJdeat,  npon  the  lienld^  n^cti  declared
aaa  which  nde  the  majohlf  TOled  (iraryopiitir  ^^-
X—fnrim^  Attt^L  s.  OnqSL  g  2).

It  i*  inpoftant  to  andentand  dsrij  the  a
[H^"J'  of  thia  wnd. A  Tote  eondemniui:
aoe^ed  pcncn  ia  Krrax'V'rla  :  cue  acquitting
kwm, hxvxfiftrt^ (Dem. c  MtiA. pp.  fil6,
£53^  5S3)  ;  irtjcofamrtit '»  to  ecnfinn  bj  a  ma-
^itr  li  Tolaa  (^tsa.  Dt  Oorm.  pp.  235,  SSI)  j
rfw^iytfT— ia  iw  Fiyifir  WH  a  reriiicn  of  ^
law^  lAicb  took  pboa  at  the  beginniogofa
n^ ;  fr^tt^anwia  rir  dnCfif  waa  a  Toto  ti
B  tka  £nt  aa^falr  of  each  Prylaiijr  on  the
dKt  of  the  m^irtmta :  in  thcae  cana,  thoao
laaeil  &r  thi  oeafiimatito  of  the  law,  or  far  the
samliDiauica  inofiae  of  the  magktme,
imrxffTtif&r,  tboaa  tn  the  Mha  tide  iaox"l>"«-
«■&  <DcB,  e,  Twv,  p.  706  ;  Harpoerat.  and
SnidH  a.  «.  tbfU  iaJaffia ;  Dem.  e.  Tineryt.
fL  1 330) : liaxevro*^  ia a  TOte far  ana of
t*w  ahonatina  (Dem.  B.  A»dntiim.  p.  596  ; o.
yTaMiw.  p.  707  i  c  ATMar.  p.  1346)  :  irrixMpvro.
p^^_  to Tnta  apinat  a pvopaahjoii. The  eom-
I of ii^ti(*rtat  ImTs  umilai meauinga.
■aao.  A  a»a^ Irtmiamaai,  pp.  ISO,
13S,  2*1.  251,  390.)  [P.  &]

CHKLnXKNIA  (x»uUna),


CHIROCtRAPHUM.  S7I

BoEdromim,  the  time  when  the  awallowi  rebmwd.

Doriog  that  leaan  bojl^  called  x'^'Su'WTal,  went
'— n  lumaa  Id  hooae  edlectiiv  little  ipft*,  oitentibi  J
the  ratonungiwsUowa  (jcfKitmitai),  and  uiw-
ing  a  aong  which  iaitill  extant  (AtheTi.TiiLp.360;
cmnparo  Jlgen,  Ofoo.  PUL  i.  ^  161,  and  Euitath.
ada^xxLmifiii.)  It  ia  nid  to  bate  been  in-
trodnced  hj  deobnlni  of  Lindni,  at  the  tame  period
when  the  town  waa  in  gint  dUDeiM.  The  chsli-
dmia,  which  baTo  KmiMimee  been  called  a  fea-
tiTiI,  leem  to  haTe  been  nothing  bat  a  pecsliat
mode  of  begging,  which  on  the  occauon  of  the  »-
tom  of  the  iwaUowi  waa  airied  on  by  boyi  in  the
manner  atated  abora.  Hon;  analogiei  maj  >tiU
'^i  obearred  in  Tariou  oaimtrie*  at  the  nriooi
B»on.oftboTe«r.  [L.8.J

CHBLY8  Ck&").  [Ltia.]
CH£hf  £  (xvii),  a  Onek  liquid  meante,  the
capacitir  of  which  (ai  ii  the  oie  with  mort  of  the
■mailer  mcaaDna)  it  diffsntlj  atated  b;  diffraent
■othraitiea.  There  waa  a  am^  chnme,  which  con-
tained two  cochlearia,  or  two  dnchmae,  and  waa
the  (aTsntr-aacoad  put  of  the  eotjle,  =^  '0066  <^
L  jaat  En^iidi.  (Rheni.  PamL  r.  77.)  The  large
ibema  waa  to  the  amall  in  the  [Kapcrtian  of  6  to  S.
Other  liiia  of  the  cheme  aie  mentJOTied,  bot  tbey
iSa  u  much  that  we  cannot  tell  with  eertaintj
rhat  thej  reall;  weie.  (Hniwf ,  jlamaat  Wti^itt,
&c  1  Wnrm,  IM  Pond.  &c)  [P.  8.1

CHENISCUS. [Nath.]
CHERNIPS  (x'p"*)- [LtjmiiTio.]
CHEROSTAE  (;t7lfw<rral). [HlBXB.]
CHILIAHCHUS. tEiuwiTOt]
CllIRAMA'XIUM  (bom  X'tfi  end  l^a),  a
aoTt  of  eaay  chair  or  "  gD-cart,"  nied  fbi  inralida
and  children. (Petron.  28.)
CUIRIDOTA. [Tnmcj.]
CUmCyORAFHUM {xt'p6ypaipar), meant
fiiat,  aa ita denTation  impliea,  a hand-writing
orantogTsph.  (CicPULiL  4.) Inthia  ita  umple
aenae,  X'tp  in  Qreek  and  matnu  in  Latin  are  often
anbttitulad  for  iL

Like  aimiUr  woida  in  all  langnagea,  it  acquired
iCTersl  technical  aeniea.  From  ila  fint  meaning
wai  eaailj  detixed  that  of  a  tignatnre  to  a  will  im
other  iuatnmient,  eapeciallr  a  note  of  hand  givm
bf  a  debtor  to  hii  creditor.  In  thia  latter  caie,  it
did  not  OHialitDte  the  legal  obligation  (hr  the
debt  might  be  proTod  m  aome  other  way)  ;  it  wM
only  aproof  of  the  abli^atioiL

Aoonding  to  Aacamoa  (n  Pirr.  iiL  SO)  ciUre-
yiUfilBH,  in  the  aenaa  of  a  note-ef-hand,  waa  dia-
tingniahed  from^i^pnnta  /  tbe  fiomeiwia  alw^a
gircB  tar  maatj  actoallf  Itn^  the  latter  migbt  be
~  mas  abam  agnement  (aomething  like  a  bill  of


nerei  beem  aetnalljr  in-
aaita.  ine  auro^noint  waa  kept  by  the
ifadiltf,  and  had  only  the  deblorli  aignalun  i  the
iHngntpia,  on  the  sontraiy,  waa  aigned  and  kept
by  bodi  partict.

In  the  iMin  of  the  middle  ages  (aee  Dn  Freine,
a.  «,)  cApqgrgpil— 1  wai  mod  to  figoi^  trilnjte  col-
lected mider  the  aign-manual  of  a  pcmm  in  aalho-
rily,  limilai  to  the  briefa  a^  benarolence*  of
farmer  ^ee  in  oar  own  country.  It  waa  alao
uaed  (lee  Blackrtona,  b.  iL  c.  20),  till  Ter^  lately,
in  tbe  Engliib  law  far  an  indenture.  DDplicatca  u
deed)  were  written  on  one  piece  of  parchment,  with
the  wind  eUrojiraphm  between  Kiem,  which  waa
cut  in  two  in  a  atiaight  or  wbtj  line,  and  tiva  parti


272


CHIBUROIA.


given  to  ihe  are  of  th*  penojil  nmeeraed.
t)ie  Cunmini,  Bladitone  remaiki,  tbs  wold  ^a-
ffrapia  or  ^ptgrr^Jaa  wai  em|Joy«d  id  (he  tuat
ws;,  and  beDcs  gavo  in  bum  id  thcM  kind  of
writinm.  [RJ.]

CHIRU'HOIA  Cx«ip™p7*a).  •n'g=7.  The
pncticB  of  jurgery  wv,  for  a  long  time,  anuideccd
b  J  tbfl  uudenta  to  be  meretj  &  put  of  a  phjiician^
dot; ;  but  u  it  ii  now  almnt  iniTenail;  allowed
to  be  a  •eparata  branch  of  tfae  prafeuion,  it  ~  '"
perluqM  be  mon  canTcnJent  to  trcM  of  it  imi
■epoiule  bead.  It  wjU  not  be  neceiBiy  to  t
upon  the diflpnted  quntieu,  wbicb  it  the


the  profeoion  g  nor  eien  to  trf  to  gire  nich
definLtiDD  of  tbe  word  akinirgia  ai  wonld  be  likeljr
to  imJeIj  both  the  phjiidan*  and  imgeou  of  the
prewDt  daj ;  il  will  be  nffirient  to  determms  the
»en>e  in  which  the  word  w«  nied  b;theaiuuiifi;
and  then,  adhering  dosely  to  that  meaning*  to  give
an  aecoont  of  thia  dinmon  of  the  icieiue  and  an
of  medicioe,  ae  pcactiied  among  the  Gieeki  and
Bomani,  idariag  to  the  actide  Ubucina  for
fiirthei  particnlan.

The  word  chinugia  i«  deriTed  from  x'^  'Iw
hand,  and  Ipyor  a  voi^  and  ia  explained  by
Celini  (A  M/d.  lib.  tIL  Pne&L)  to  meu  that
part  of  medicine  91U0  nam  atrai^  **  which  com


Kal  naliir,  "  bjr  o

■a  tbe  wiitec  ii  aware)  it  it  era  need  by
autbon  in  enj  other  Knee.  OmittiDg  tbe  bbnlooi
and  mrthDlogu*]  penonagei,  Apollo,  AeKulapioi,
Chiron,  &c_,  the  only  certain  traditicHu  reapecting
tbe  Mate  of  nugety  before  the  eilabliihment  1^
the  repnblica  of  Qreoee,  and  eym  until  the  ''
the  Peloprameaian  wai,  are  to  be  finuid
Iliad  andOdyiaey.  There  it  appean  that  I
wiu  almoR  enliiely  confined  to  the  trcstment  of
wonndi ;  and  tbe  inwgiiuuy  i


1  with  t:


, ....  ),  8*3,  Ac.  &C.) The

Oceeke  receiTed  inigecy,  together  with  the  other
bnnchee  of  medicine,  from  the  Egyptiaiii ;  and
from  lonie  obaervationi  made  by  the  men  of
■cienca  who  accompanied  the  French  erpeditioD  to
Egypt  in  1798,  it  Kiptua,  that  there  are  docu-
mente  folly  pioving  that  in  Tery  remote  timei  thia
eTtntordinary  people  had  made  a  d^tee  of  pnn
grea  of  which  few  of  Ihe  modetni  ba>e  any  con-
ception :  upon  the  ceilingi  and  walU  of  the  templa
at  Tai^ra,  Samadc,  Luxor,  dtc,  ba*M-relieTO>
an  Ncn,  repnaendng  limbi  that  hare  becD  cnt  off
with  inatnunenti  ntj  analogoni  to  thoie  which
are  employed  at  tbe  pnieat  day  for  amputatkina.
The  lame  hutramcDta  an  efain  obaerred  in  the
hieroglyphicB,  and  Teitigei  of  other  surgical  opeia-
tiona  may  be  tzaced,  i^ch  affbid  convincing  pnxifa
of  Ihe  skill  of  tbe  ancient  Egyptiaai  in  this  branch
of  medical  icience.  (Idiry,  quoted  in  Coopcr'i
Surg-DitL)

The  earlieit  remaining  mrgical  writing*  ace
thoH  of  HippDcratea,  who  waa  bom  m,  c  460,  and
died  m,c.  S57.  Among  hia  npated  wnki  then
an  ten  tnatiiet  on  thia  aubject,  only  one  of  which
hawaier  i*  contidend  nudoabtedly  genuine.  Hip-
poeiatei  far  mrpaned  all  hii  {redeceaton  (and
indeed  meat  of  hi*  meceMcn)  in  the  boldnoM  and


CHIRURGIA.

pRTmled  hU  attuning  any  Tery  great  pofeetion,
atill,  we  ahould  rathET  admin  bia  gemua,  which
enabled  him  to  do  n  mach,  than  blame  him  be-
caoK,  with  hia  deficient  information,  he  waa  able
to  do  no  more.  The  icientific  (kill  in  reducing
bactniea  and  Inxations  diiplayed  in  hia  worka,
Dt  Fradurit,  D*  ArticalU,  eicilea  the  admita-
•ion  of  Haller  IBUJioO.  Ck^vg.),  and  he  wai
moet  probably  Che  inientor  of  the  omie,  an  old
chirorgital  machine  for  dialoationi  of  the  ihoolder,
which,  though  now  &Ueu  into  dtniK,  for  a  long
time  enjoyed  a  great  repatatim.  In  hit  work  Da
Otpitit  FaiiBrUmt  ho  girea  minuM  direetiou
.  the  time  and  mode  of  niing  the  trephine,
•uu  -ma^oi  the  apentn  againtt  the  pnbahilily  of
hii  being  deceived  by  the  luturea  of  ihe  craninn,
at  he  coaiftaaei  happened  to  himaelf.  (Ita  Mori,
Ptdgar.  Ub.  v.  p.  SGI,  ed.  KUhn.)  The  author  of
the  Oath,  commonly  attributed  to  BippooMea,
bind*  hia  pupili  not  to  perform  the  operatiim  of
lithotomy,  but  to  btin  it  to  penont  aceuatomed  to
it  (4p>^n  itifim  wpHuii  T^Sa ) ;  from  whidi
it  would  i^pcar  aa  if  ootain  pioont  confined  then-
ielna  to  porticolar  01 — '^ —


uunediately  anccacdiog  thoaa  of  Hippooatet ;  bnt^
with  the  exeeptioD  of  tane  fragmenti,  tnaerted  in
the  writing  of  Oalm,  OribuiJu,  ACtina,  Ac,  all

their  wriungi  have  peiiahed.  AicbagMhnt  de-
tenet  to  be  mentioned,  aa  he  ia  laid  to  have  been
the  £rat  foreign  iunecoi  that  aettled  at  Rmne
B.  a  319.  (Caatiui  Htmina,  opKJ  PIm.  H.  JV.
nil.  6.)  He  waa  at  firal  itxj  well  received,  ths
>a  Qmritiim  waa  conferred  npoD  him,  a  abop  was
bought  for  him  at  the  public  eipenae,  and  he  re-
ceived the  honouiable  titie  of  FubmffiM.  Thi%
however,  on  acconnt  nf  hia  frequmt  ue  of  the
knife  and  caateiy,  waa  anon  changed  by  the  Ro-
niana  (who  were  unnted  to  inch  a  mode  of  prac-
tice) into  that  ti  Carm/a.  Aidepiadea,  who
lived  at  the  beginning  of  the  Grtl  century  B.  c,  ia
Bid  to  have  been  the  fint  peraon  who  pnpoeed
tbe  openuim  of  bmncbotomy,  though  he  huna^
never  pofonned  il  KToeL  AoreL  De  Mvii.  Aaut,
L  14,  iii  4) ;  and  Ammonint  of  Alexandria,  nir-
have  lived
of  lUIny

^  a  calcolna
bladder,  when  fbuod  to  be  too  large  for
■afe  extraction.  Celaiia  hu  minntely  described
hia  mode  of  operating  (Dt  Mtd.  viL  26.  g  S.  p.
4S6),  which  Terr  much  Rsembles  that  lately  in.
troduced  by  Cinale  and  Haurtekup,  and  whicli

■'-at  bowcTer  mnch  credit  ihn-  may  da-

bringing  il  again  out  of  obuvion  into


■sya  Cclaua,  **  it  to  ba  so  inunnaled  behind  Iha
stone  a4  to  reeiat  and  fvevcait  ita  recoiling  into  the
bladder,  even  when  almck ;  then  an  iron  inalni-
ii  used,  of  modeiau  Ihicluiesa,  flattened
towards  the  end,  thin,  but  btunt ;  which  being
placed  against  the  atone,  and  itrudc  on  the  fbrthar
end,  deavea  it ;  great  ore  being  taken,  at  tb«
nme  time,  that  neither  the  bladder  ilsdf  be  ia.
jnred  by  tlie  instnunent,  nor  the  fragmenta  of  tha
The  next  surgical  writM'


CHIBVBOIA.


baoki  of  hii  sok,  DtM»^dmi,taA  opeeullj  the
wwBlh  aad  eigbtli,  entire^  to  nugical  matlan.
It  ■!¥«■«  phinlj  Erm  m&ng  CeUui,  that  lince
■ka  tina  of  HinmtntM  n^gny  had  made  mr
Unal  |«  mil  I  ■■.  uid  had,  io&ad,  reached  a  high
dqna  if  perfediaL  Ha  ii  tha  fint  anlhoc  who
fcina  dinatiooi  fat  tha  opcntioii  of  litbotomj  {D*
Mti.  iJL  36.  1 3.  p.  4^),  and  ths  method  de-
■Bibed  b7  him  (called  lit  ofponiAu  «n»r,  or
aimt'-M  ■tdorf.)  ccntimwd  to  ba  {nclbad  till  tbc
iwiiamn  mini  of  tbe  ■iiteenth  ceaturr.  It  vaa
piiiaiaiiil  at  Parii,  Bordeaux,  and  other  place*  in
France,  ii|na  patianta  of  all  agat,  STen  as  lale  at  ■
hndrtd  ud  fiftf  yeaa  ago  ;  and  •  modem  author
<AIIaB  (Mf  ffiiHaa/,  p.  IS)  nconunend*  italwaji
la  b*  paefand  on  boja  ond^  fbnrteen.  (Cooper'A
ite.  ^  Prme.  Sarg^  arLLiliutomy.)  Ha  de-
anba  (nL  3&  g  3.  p.  428)  tbe  opemlion  of  Im-
airfirtfu,  vhid  waaaoonmnontjperfbnnedbythe
aieienla  upos  ajngara,  &£,  and  ii  often  alluded  to
■a  daancal  aotbora.  (Saa  Jdt.  ii  73, 379 ;  Senec
^uiLattmL  Dmim.  bunt.  L 16;  Hut  lipigr.

™.  92. 1.  u.  38.  ia,  DT.  ai5.  1 J  Tertoa  d*

CaromtUO-U.)  Ha  alao  deHribo  (liL  25.  1 1 .
p.427>  tha  opoatioa  alluded  to  brSLPaal  (I
Cor.  Tii.  IB)  ttfrrtriayiirta  T\tlt>Jfiti:  fi^  iri-
twirii.  Compare  Paatloa  Aegioete  (Da  St
Mti.  Ti.  53),  vbo  tnnacribea  bttat  Antyllu  a  ae-
(md  nwtbnd  ti  perfbrniiDg  the  opsmtian.

Tbe  faUewing  dracriptton,  giTcn  by  Cclnia,  of
"*  '■" '■  '  a  mgeon,  deamii

"  nji  be  (UtA.  vi


...  I  ahake;  ho  ihonld  be  able  to  oaa  hii  left
hnd  vlh  aa  mocb  deil^tj  aa  hii  right ;  bu
I  j»  eight  ihaalil  be  acala  and  dear  ;  bit  mind  ia-
tR|»d,  and  ao  br  nibjeet  to  [u^  a*  to  make  him
dimirniw  of  tbe  recoTerj  tX  hii  patient,  but  not
aa  faraa  tomffer  bimaelf  to  be  moTed  bjbij  crie^;
ha  ihonld  naitber  harry  tbe  operation  mora  than
the  oaa  nqoina,  aor  cut  Ic«  than  ii  neceaurf ,
bat  do  cTCfy  thing  jut  a*  if  tbe  otber*!  acttomi

Pdhapt  tbe  onljr  imgicnl  remmlE  vortb  quoting
fiiB  Arctaena,  vlu  lired  in  the  fint  centnry  a.  d^
k  that  he  oondemna  the  opentioi  of  broncLotomy,
aid  think*  "  that  tbe  wnund  woidd  endanger  an
— '-- "tan,  co^b,  and  itrangling  ;  and  tbs'  '''


tbe  daa«  of  being  choked  coald  be  aToided  by
tUa  meUnd,  jet  tha  porta  wonld  not  beal,  do  being
oitO^iiMBa.''  (Da  Jfof&  AaL  C»t.  i.  7.  p.  237,
•d-KBlm.)

OiaittiDg  Soibiniiu  I^igniv  MeacLiozi,  and  So-
naaa,  tbe  Bozt  aatbn  of  importanca  ii  Coeliui
Aanliaa*,  who  ii  mppoied  to  bare  lived  about
tha  t-ji-ming  of  the  iacond  century  *.  D^  and
■  whoa  witk*  then  ii  a  good  de^  relatini  to
■igMj,  thoogh  nolbing  that  on  be  called  originaL
H*  Kjected  aa  abaoid  tbe  operation  of  brDnebo-
^■j  (Zh  Mori.  CbM.  liL  4).  Ha  mcntioiii
a  OK  ef  aKitea  that  w«a  cured  by  paraeealeiii
(Ibidl  iii  8),  and  alaa  a  penon  who  recorered
abf  being  (hot  tbimgh  the  hmn  liy  an  aiTOir.
(Ibid.  iiL  la.)

flnljia.  the  meat  raluminiRU  and  at  tbe  lame
loaUe  medial  writer  of  antiquity,

aa  a  aargeon  dun  I

Ua  aiqieaiB  to


CHIJtUBGIA,  273

Rome  (a.  D.  166),  he  entirely  unfined  Umtelf
to  medicine,  fijllowing,  aa  he  Bay*  bimaelf  {JM
Me&.  Mtd.  TL  20),  tbo  cutom  of  tbe  place.  Hia
wiitinga  prore,  howeier,  that  be  did  not  entirely
abaodoD  auij^ry.  Ilia  Commentariei  on  the
Treatiao  of  Uippocratei,  D*  QjScni  Mtdad,  and
hia  treatiaa  Va  Fateiii,  ahowi  that  ho  waa  well
tefiad  eren  in  the  minor  detaili  of  tbe  art.  He
appean  alao  to  haie  been  a  ikilful  operator,  though
DO  great  aurgical  inventioui  are  attributed  to  him.

Antyllna,  who  lived  aonw  time  betveen  Galen
and  Oribauna,  i*  the  eariieit  nriter  wboae  diieo
tiona  for  performing  hronchatomy  are  atill  eitont,
though  the  operation  (aa  wai  ataled  above)  waa
^vwoaed  by  Aadepiadei  about  three  hundred  yean
before.  CUly  a  few  bagmanta  of  the  writii^  of
Antyllna  remain,  and  among  them  tbe  following
psaaage  ii  pKaened  by  Peulna  Amneta  (Da  Aa
Med.  vi.  33): — "  Ooi  beat  auiceona  have  deacribed
thia  operation,  Antyllna  partuularl;,  thni ;  '  We
think  thii  practice  uaeleaa,  and  not  to  be  attempted
where  all  tbe  arteries  and  the  lungs  are  affected  ;
but  when  tbe  inflammation  liea  chiefly  about  the
tbruat,  the  cbin,  and  tbe  tonaili  whidi  cover  the
t(^  of  tbe  windpipe,  and  tbe  artery  ia  unafFectad,
thia  experiment  la  rery  ta^onal,  to  prevent  tha
danger  of  auflbcatiraL  When  we  proceed  to  per-
form it,  we  muat  cut  tbrongh  aome  part  of  tbe
windpipe,  below  tbe  larynx,  about  the  third  Mr
fourth  ring ;  for  to  cut  quite  through  would  ba
dangerous.  Thia  place  is  the  moat  conunodiona,
beoutte  it  ia  not  coremd  with  any  flcsb,  and  be-
anise  it  hai  no  reisela  near  it.  Therefore,  heitd-
ing  the  head  of  tbe  patient  backward,  so  that  tha
windpipe  luay  come  more  forward  to  the  view,  we
make  a  tnuuTene  lection  between  two  of  the
ringi,  so  that  in  tbii  caae  not  tbe  cartilage,  but  the
membiBno  which  incloses  and  lutito  the  cartilagn
together,  ia  divided.  If  the  operator  be  a  little
feojfnl,  he  may  first  divide  the  akin,  extended  by
a  book ;  then,  proceeding  to  the  windpipe,  and
separating  tbe  tcbicIi,  if  any  are  in  the  way,  he
mnal  make  tbe  indsioo.'  Tbni  tm  Antyllna,  who
thought  of  this  vay  cf  cutting,  by  observing  (when
it  was,  I  anppcoe,  cut  by  chance)  tial  the  ail
mahcd  tbrongh  it  with  great  violeuce,  and  that  tbe
•oice  woa  intermpted.  When  the  danger  of  auffb-
cation  is  over,  tha  lipa  of  the  wound  must  ba  united
by  suture,  that  ia,  by  sewing  tbe  skin,  and  not  tha
cartilage  ;  then  proper  vulnerary  medicinea  are  to
be  applied.  If  these  do  not  a^utinate,  an  incar-
nant  must  be  naed.  The  some  metiiml  must  be
pursued  with  iboae  who  cut  their  throat  with  a
design  of  committing  auicide."*

Oribasiua,  [ihyaiciaa  to  tbe  Emperor  Julian  (i.d.
361),  profeiaes  to  ba  merety  a  compiler;  and
tbougb  there  is  in  hit  great  work,  entitled  Zuni-
Twyol  'loTfiiiisf,  CcOeela  Midicmatia,  much  sur-
gical matter,  there  ia  nothing  original.  The  same
may  be  said  of  Aiitius  and  Alexandra  Trallianus,
both  ef  whom  lived  towards  tbe  end  of  tbo  si


u  for  any  snrgiial


>  has


given  up  tl


ork,  Dt  Se  Maiua,


*  This  operatiun  appears  to  have  been  veij
seldom,  if  ever,  performed  by  the  ancients  upon  a
human  being.  AvenxQai  (p.  Ifi)  tried  it  upon  a
goat,  and  found  it  might  ba  done  without  moth
danger  tr  difficulty  ;  but  be  says  he  ihould  not
like  to  be  the  first  person  to  &7  it  npm  a  man.


in  CHIRUBGIA.

cnCirel;  to  mrgtrj,  and  liu  inKrUd  in  them
much  DB^i]  nulteTf  the  iruiia  chiefLj  of  h!d  own
obiemition  Bud  nperieoce.  He  wai  perticolsrl]'
celebrated  for  fail  ikiU  in  inidwifei7,  end  fbmels
diKatei,  and  vu  called  on  that  account,  by  the
Arabians,  Ai-Kainabeii,  "  tho  Afcouchenr,'*  (Abol-
phanj,  Hut,  Dyual.,  p.  ISl,  ed.  Pococke}.  Two
punphleli  wen  puhliihed  in  1 766  &t  OUttiagen,
4(0.  b;  Rod.  Aug.  VoRel,  nitilled  Dt  Piali
Argautat  Mtritit  m  Mtdidnai*,  imprimiifai
CHinujiian.  Pauloi  A^inela  lired  pTobablj-  to-
wardi  the  end  of  the  leienth  fentntj,  a.  n.,  and
ii  the  laM  of  the  ancient  Qreek  and  Latin  medical
wiilen  whoae  inrgtcal  worki  remun-  The  luiait*
of  HTenl  othen  bis  nconled,  but  they  an  not  of

For  fuitho-  inJbnuatian  on  the  luhJKt  both  of
medidnc  and  tuigeiy,  aee  Mbdicihi  ;  and  for  tht
legal  qualificationg,  tocial  rank,  &c.,  both  of  phy-
■iciana  and  migeoui  amoog  the  ancient  Qleekl
Bud  Romans,  lee  Mxntcus.

The  nugical  instruments,  from  which  the
companying  engravings  are  made,  were  foond  b;

fhysician  of  Petenhurg,  Dr.  Saveoko,  in  1319,
'ompeii,  in  Via  Consulaiis  {Strada  Qmtalart),
B  bouse  which  is  supposed  to  hBTe  belonged  t
inigeon.  Tbej  lie  now  presCTved  in  the  mnsei
at  Portid.  The  engraving*,  with  an  account
them  bj  Dr.  Savenko,  were  oiiginallj-  published
in  the  Seaie  MeJieali  for  1821,  toLiiL  p.  ^27,
&C.  They  wen  BilerwBtds  inserted  in  Froriep's
A'ottsn  QH  Jim  GtHtU  dar  Naiur-u^-IIeUhade
Sat  18-2a,  tol.ii.  n.ae.  p.  57,  Ac  The  pUti
containing  these  instruments  is  wunling  in  thi
copy  of  the  Anas  Midicait  in  the  librBTy  of  thi
College  of  Surgeons,  so  that  the  RccompBoying
figures  are  copied  from  the  Oerman  work,  la  which
•onw  of  them  appear  to  be  dmwn  Tery  hadly.
Tbeti  authenticity  was  at  first  doubled  by  KUhn
^De  Inttmai.  Chirurg-,  Vtteriina  agniiit^  et  ituper
^ins.  Lips.  1623,  4to.),  who  thought  ^ey  were
^  same  that  had  been  described  by  Dayirdi  m
hii  Calid.  AiUU).  ]Uom<a*txL  Htnalami  ^fbi  Nap
1751.  IbL  n.  S3S— 394  ;  when,  howeiec,  hii  dii
SertAtion  was  afterwords  republished  [OpmK
Acadam.  Mtd.  <ri  pjUU.,  Lips.  1827,  1626,  6to.
ToL  IL  p.  309)  he  acknowledged  himself  to  be  com
pletely  satisfied  on  this  point,  and  luu  giTcn  id
the  tncl  relened  ti:^  a  leained  and  iDgenioni  do-


Ij  Dtade  of  coniGr,  the
sa  and  a  half  long,  and


CHIRUROU.

scriptico  of  the  instminenti,  and  Ihdr  iumsjmJ
iue«,  from  which  the  following  accoont  is  chiefly
abridged.  It  will,  howeier,  be  seen  at  once,  thM
the  Una  of  roost  of  them  is  so  simple,  and  their
uses  so  obTious, that very  little  axplanation  it

1,  2.  tWo  pttibei  (.psciUHR,  fXikq)  made  of  iron  i
the  larger  lii  inches  long,  the  smaller  fbnr  and  »
half.  3.  A  canlary  (icavrVu*)  made  of  jren,
iBlho  more  than  four  inchea  long.  4,  5.  Two
lancets  (soo^MZfasi,  wjJ*i|),  made  of  copper,  the
fonner  two  inches  and  a  half  long,  the  other  three
inches.  II  seems  donbtful  whether  they  wdB
used  tor  blood-lettmg,  or  for  opening  absmva-
&C. 6.  A  knife,  apparently  made  of  conw

the  handle  is  lo  short  that  Saienko  thinks  i
bare  been  bnikeiL  It  is  nnoertain  for  what  par-
ticuLu  purpose  it  was  used ;  KUhn  eonjectnre*  that
(if  it  be  a  lumcal  instrument  at  all)  it  may  hava
been  made  with  such  a  curved  edge,  and  such  a
straight  thick  back,  that  it  might  be  struck  with  «
hammer,  and  so  amputate  fingers,  toes,  dte.  7.
Another  knife,  apparently  made  of  copper,  the
blade  of  which  is  of  a  triangular  shape,  two  inches
Img,  and  in  the  broadest  part  eight  lines  in  breadth  j
the  bock  is  straight  and  one  Ibe  broad,  and  thia
breadth  continues  all  the  way  to  the  pomt,  which,
therefore,  is  not  sharp,  hut  guarded  by  a  sort  of
button.  KUhn  thinks  it  msy  have  beoi  used  for
enlarging  wounds,  &C.,  Ibr  wldch  it  would  be  par-
ticularly fitted  by  its  blunt  point  and  braad  back.
6.  Aneedle,  about  three  inches  long,roade  of  inn.
9.  An  elentoi  (or  instrument  for  raising  depressed

Cions  of  the  skull),  nude  of  iron,  five  inches
^',  and  very  much  resembling  thoee  made  use  of


In  (he  pnaanC  day.  10 — U.  DiSerent  kmds  of
forceps  (nbstta).  No.  10  has  the  two  ddee  sepau
nUed  from  each  other,  and  ii  fire  inchea  lODg.
"- '  1  is  also  Gto  inches  long. No.  12  is  thi««


CHLA1IT&
^  pdat  af  miaQ,  and  bccoma  braadBT  b;  degicca
Wwardi  tlw  other  end,  when,  when  cltaed,  tW
Ictm  ■  kind  of  aidi.  Il  ihonld  b«  noticed  tlut  il
ia  faniufaed  wkb  s  moicable  ring,  exactly  like  ths
It  aai  iiliiw  iomja  aajdoTad  kt  the  pnwnt  da;.
iia.  19  «a*  naed  Ibr  polling  out  hain  by  the  rooti
(TfiXaJUiCli).  Mo.  14  il  ni  inchn  limg,  and  ii
bo*  ia  Iks  BiddkL  It  mi  pnbabl;  Died  f»i  ai-
IBCIBS  tmiigi  bi>die*  that  bad  iliick  ia  the  oeu-
*kig«  (or  gollet),  «  m  the  bothui  of  a  woosd.
Ul  a  n^  oUhatet  (omajUiifa),  niu  inchM  in
lagth.  Tkc  ahape  ■■  isma»able  hom  ita  baring
Iha  doaUe  com  like  the  tetter  S,  which  ia  the


the  eidehtated  Fnoch  asrgeon,  J.  L.  Psdt.  16.
PrabaUr  a  tcraale  catheter,  fom  incbei  ia  lenslh,
CeiiH  tkna  deacnbei  bcFth  male  and  female  csQie-
Mn  (£>•  IH-L  TiL26L  S 1.  p.429) :— «  Themujeoa
abiilrl  hBTs  three  male  calbeten  {aama  jaMa),
of  vhicb  the  loDgeat  ahoold  be  fifteen,  the  next
tmlTc,  and  the  ihorteet  nine  inche*  in  length  ;
and  be  ikoold  lutre  two  lemale  cathetera,  the  one
ami  iBcbea  loog,  the  other  aix.  Both  xtrti  ahould
be  a  little  cnrred,  bat  eipecially  the  male  ;  thej
aboold  be  perfectly  iminth,  and  neither  too  thick
nor  too  thin."  1 7.  Suppoaed  by  Froriep  to  be  an
iBKriBient  fir  eitractug  teeth  (Marritypn,  Pol-
lux, It.  f  181)  i  bat  Kilhn,  witb  much  mora  pra-
babilirf,  esojeeturei  it  to  be  an  initnuneal  oied
Is  aaopittating  part  of  an  enlaiged  arala,  and
qwMa  Cdna  <£*•  Mod.  vii  12.  g  3.  p.  401),
■whn  wjtt  that  "no  method  ot  opentiag  ii
BMC  aanaiieat  than  to  lake  hold  of  the  umla
vnb  tlw  fcrcepa,  and  then  lo  eut  off  below  it
■1  ■JoA  aa  ia  neceMaiy."  IS,  19.  Probably  two
qaalae.  [W.A.a.]

CHITON  {x"-*')- [TojiKA.]

CHITCyNIA  (xn-Arn),  a  feitiTsl  eetebrated
B  the  Albc  town  of  Cbilooe  in  bononr  of  Artemii,
^iMBed  ChiUna  at  Chitooia.  (SchoL  ad  Colli-
mmtk.  Hftm.  im  JrUm.  73.)  The  Syraciuani  alio
edcbcaled  a  feitinl  of  the  aame  name,  and  in
kaaaar  ti  tba  aame  deity,  which  wai  diaiinguiibed
hy  ■  f**^'""''  kind  tA  danc^  and  a  playing  on  the
iv»B.  (Athen.  xi>.  p.  629  i  Staph.  Bya.  i.  ■.  X;-
**♦)  [L.  S.]

CULAJNA  (x'^'^)- [LaiMA ;  Palliuh.]

CHLAHTS  (x^W'.fi'*-  X^^"'«')>  >  •a^
Ths  Icni,  beii^  Greek,  denoted  an  article  of  the
Aaavma, «  oater  raiment,  which  wai  in  general
ifcaiaililMlii  of  the  Oreeki,  and  of  the  Oriental
nca  wkb  which  they  were  connected,  allhongb
bad  n  ila  ben  and  ia  iti  appbcalion  it  approached
v^j  anch  b>  the  Lacikna  and  Paludamintun
af  tbe  BiMini,  and  waa  iUelf  lo  lome  eitent
ailiHili  i  by  the  Boniau  tmder  the  emperera.  It
■laa  fe  the  moat  part  woollen ;  and  it  differed
trmt  the  l/^iar,  the  nmal  amictui  of  the  male
aex,  IB  thtin  R^eetl,  that  it  wai  mneh  amaller  ;
■b  faer,  tUmkcr,  mote  nriegaled  in  cdoor,  and
■Me  iiiytible  oT  onanient  II  moreoTer  dif-
tati  m  beng  obloig  initead  of  aqoare,  iti  len^h
baw  gBieiaDy  abinit  twice  in  brradth.  To  the
aajalM  ehlong  a,  i,  c,  d  (lee  woodcat),  goon  were
aMad.  otho  in  the  tbnn  of  a  right-angled  triangle
a,  e,^  pndadog  tbe  modificatiaa  a,e,g,d,  which
ia  aiiajjilifiiiil  in  ibe  annexed  figure  of  Uercory  ;
•V  ef  an  obtnw-angled  triangle  a,  e,  6,  producing  die
•  S  «.  ^  a.  P.  oI>  which  il  exemplified  in
'  a  youth  from  the  Panathenaic  friew
kMaiennL Thwe  goata  van  wiled


Trp&yts^  wn^,  and  the  acarf  with  tbeie  additiona
wu  diatinguiibed  by  tbe  epithet  of  Theanlian  or
Macedonian  (Btyn.  Mag.),  and  alto  by  the  liama
of 'AAAif  or  Jlitn^.  [Alicdla.]  Hence  (hean-
cient  geographett  compand  the  form  of  the  in-
habited earth  (4  oIiBUfi/vii)  to  that  of  a  cblamyi,
(Strabo,  ii.  i  ;  Macrabioi,  Di  Sona.  Se^.  IL)

The  larf  doea  not  appear  to  have  been  miKh
worn  by  children,  although  one  wai  giien  with  ita
brooch  to  Tiberina  Caetar  in  bia  in&ncy.  (Snet.
Tib,  6.)  It  wai  generally  aiiamed  on  reaching
adoleeoence,  and  wai  worn  by  the  ephcbi  Cram
about  aeTBRteen  to  twenty  yean  of  age.  (Philemon,
p.  367,  ed.  Melneke  ;  tjiMica  cUamj/di,  Apuleioa,
Mm.  X ;  PoUux,  I.  1 64.)  It  wBi  alio  worn  by  the
mililBiy,  eipecially  of  high  rank,  orer  tfaeir  body
armour  (Aelian,  V.  H.  lir.  10  ;  PlauL  Piemd.  iL
4.  ib,  Epid.  iiL  3.  55),  and  by  hontera  and  tra-.
lellcra,  mora  particnlarly  on  honeback.  (Plant.
PotH.  iiL  3.  6,  31.)

The  acsrfa  worn  by  youiha,  b;  aoldien,  and  I7
hnnten,  differed  in  coloor  and  fineneat,  according
to  their  dettlnation,  and  the  ^  and  rank  of  Iha
wearer.  The  x^^A^r  '^Curll  wai  (ffobably  yel.^
low  or  ufiron-coloured  (  and  the  j^Bfths  OTpcmo^
riit^.  icailet.  On  the  other  hand,  the  hunter  com-
monly  went  oat  in  a  icarf  of  a  dull  onconapicnoua
coloiu,  aa  beit  adapted  to  eicape  the  notice  of  wild
animala.  (Pollux,  t,  13.)  The  more  amamental
■carfi,  being  deiigned  fl^  femalei,  were  taitefiilly
decorated  with  a  border  (Ujnbut^  Virg,  ^oa.  it.
137;  matander,  t.  251);  and  thou  worn  by
Phoeniciani,  Trojini,  Phrygiani,  and  other  Aaiatic^
were  alio  embroideied,  or  inlcrwoien  witb  gold,
(Viiv.  U.  ce.  i  iiL  483,  434,  xL  775  ;  Ovid,  MeL
Y.  51  J  Val.  Flaccuj,  tL  228.)  Actora  had  (heir
chlafflyi  ornamented  with  gold. (Pollux,  ir.  116.)

Tbe  uioal  mode  of  wearing  the  icorf  wu  to  peia
one  of  in  ihorter  lidei  (a,  d)  round  the  neck,  and
to  foiten  it  by  meana  of  a  bnwcb  (JUiala),  either
over  the  breatt,  in  which  caae  it  hung  down  tho
back,  reaching  to  the  otlTca  of  the  lega  ;  or  over
the  right  ahonlder,  ao  ai  to  corer  the  left  inn,  aa'
it  aeen  in  the  cut  on  p.  269,  and  in  tbe  well-known
example  of  the  Belndeie  Apollo.  In  other  in-
nanca  it  wai  made  to  depend  gncefiiUy  from  the
left  iboulder,  of  which  the  branie  Apollo  in  thw
Britiih  Maaeuni  (aee  the  annexed  woodcut)  pre-
aenti  an  example  ;  or  it  woi  thrown  lightly  behind^
the  back,  and  paaied  over  cither  one  arm  of
iboulder,  or  over  both  (lee  tbe  lecond  figure  in  the
lait  woodcut,  taken  from  Hamilton'a  Vasci,  i.  2)  •
or,  laitly,  it  wai  laid  upon  the  throat,  carried  be-
hind the  neck,  and  created  »  ai  to  hang  down  tbv
back,  aa  in  the  figure  of  Achillea  (p.  196),  and
Etremitiei  were  again  brought  ior-
anni  ot  ihoidden. In  alvir^  th<


ranama  of  mcient  ui  at  ercrj  deuriptiaii,  iliinr
in  haw  bigh  K  degrea  the  Kaif  contributed,  b;  ili
sndleu  diTenity  of  amngement,  to  ths  diiplny  of
tbo  btiaum  fbnn  in  its  greabst  beauty  ;  and  Ovid
lu  lold  M  how  iiiniible  the  ephebi  were  of  iti
Bdvantagea  in  ths  account  of  tbs  can  bettowed
upon  thu  pert  of  hii  Ulin  b;  Uenmrr.  (JHeL  iL
73£.)  The  aptitade  of  tho  tait  to  be  turned  in
ereiy  poniblB  (bim  around  tfaa  bodj,  made  it  um-
fnl  even  &I  defencb  Tba  banter  nud  to  wn^
bii  ehlunyi  about  hia  left  um  when  punuing  wild
■oimili,  and  preparing  to  fight  with  them.  (Pol-
ux  V.  IS;  Xen.OnAi.  tL  17.)  Alabada  died
fighting  with  fail  icaif  railed  toimd  hit  left  hand
inilfBd  of  a  ihield.  The  annexed  woodcnt  eibibitt
a  figure  of  Neptane  armed  with  the  trident  in  hie
tight  hand,  and  having  a  chlaraTi  to  protect  Ibe
left  It  ia  taken  bom  a  niedal  which  wai  itmck
in  conrniemoration  of  a  naTal  Tictoiy  obtained  by
Demetrioi  Paliorcetei,  and  wai  evidently  designed
to  expieu  hii  lenH  of  Neptune'i  nicaiiir  in  the
conflict When  Diana  goea  to  the  chaac,  ai  the


doei  mt  require  her  uaif  for  puipom  of  defence,
ihe  drawl  it  from  behind  oTer  her  ibonlden,  and
twiita  it  nnnd  ber  wuit,  u  that  the  belt  of  her
qniier  paiaei  acroia  it,  aa  ahown  in  the  staloea  of
thla  goddeu  in  the  Vatican  (lee  wcodcnt).

It  appean  from  the  baa-rclieb  on  marble  naes
that  diuicen  took  bold  of  one  another  by  the
ehlamya,  aa  (he  modem  Oreeki  itill  do  by  their
acarfi  or  handkerchief,  initead  of  taking  one  an-
other*! banda.

Among  the  Ronana  the  iarf  came  more  into
me  under  llu  emperon. Caligula  wore  one  en-
riched with  gold. (Suet.  Gi%  19.) Alexander
Sererui.  when  be  wai  in  the  eoontiy  or  a
•  a  Marf  dyed  with  tlw  c


CHOREQUS.
(dJamyde  ewnao,  Idmprid.  AL  S^.  40 ;  COmpaM
Matl.  nriL  28,  31).  (J.  Y.]

CHLOEIA  orCHLOIA  OcX^u  or  xAoui),  a

featical  celebrated  at  Athena  in  honour  of  Oemetcr
ChloE,  or  atmply  ChloS,  whoae  temple  itood  near
the  Acropolia.  (Heaydi.  «,  r.  x*^"  i  Athen.  rir,
p.  61B  ;  Sophocl.  (M.  OJ.  1600,  with  the  Scho-
liait ;  PaoL  I  32.  §  3.)  It  wia  ulemiiind  in
ipiing,  on  the  nilh  of  Thargelion,  when  the  bloe-
aomi  began  to  appear  (hence  the  namea  x^  ""^
xMiia),  with  the  ncnfoe  of  a  goat  and  much
mirth  and  rejoicing.  (Enpidi^  a/md  SeM.  ad
Soph.  0»d.  CoL  L  c)  [L.S.]

CHOKNIX  (xnr-t),  a  Oredc  meaanre  of  ct-
pacitj,  the  aiae  of  which  ia  differently  given  ;  it
wBi  probably  of  diflerent  sisea  in  the  aeTaal  alatea.
Pollux  (iv.  2Z),  Sviiat,  Cleopatra,  and  the  frag-
menti  of  Oalen  (c.  7,  9)  make  it  eqnal  to  threa
cotylae,  or  nearly  11  pintfl  Engiiah  ;  another  fiag-
ment  of  Gelen  (t  i\  and  other  authorise.  (Pane-
ton,  Mtlnleg.  p.  233)  make  it  equal  to  four  cotylae,
or  nearly  2  pinti  En^h  ;  nhemnini  Fannioi  (t.
69),  and  another  bagment  of  Oalen  (c  S)  make  it
eight  cotylae,  or  ueaiiy  4  pint!  Engliah.  (Wnnn,
i><PD<K<.i<3feu.&c,pp.  133,112,199;  Hnuey,
AndiM  WfighU,  Ac  pp.  209,  2U.  [P.S.J

CHOES  Ix^ii). [DiONTBiA-l

CllORE'OIA. ICnoniaug.]

CHORE'OUS  CxopijrJi).  one  who  Lad  te  dia-
charge  the  dntiea  <tf  the  Cfiorfgia  (xoftrn^)-  Tha
Choregia  wai  one  of  the  moat  cxpenaiTe  of  the  or-
dinary or  encyclic  liturgiea  at  Athena  [LltTVR-
OJA.]  Tbe  chncgna  wai  appointed  by  hii  tribe,
thoogh  we  an  not  infonned  according  to  what
order.  The  lame  perion  might  icne  ai  choregua
for  two  tribca  at  once  <Antiph.  lU  Otoreitfa,
p.  768;  Dam.  cLtpl. 'p.  i67);  and  after  B.C  il2
a  decree  waa  paiaad  allowing  two  persona  to  unite
and  undertake  a  choregia  together.  (SchoL  ad
Arvi.  Ran.  406.)  The  dutioa  of  the  choregia
coniiited  in  pioTiding  the  ebonuea  for  bagediea
and  comedies,  the  lyric  cboruies  of  men  and  boya,
tbe  pyrrbicisti,  the  cyclic  cbonuei,  and  the
chorutca  of  flute-playen  for  the  difienint  religion!
fcatiTala  at  Athena.  When  a  poet  inltnd«l  to
bring  out  ■  play,  be  bad  to  get  a  chorui  auigned
him  by  the  anjion  [Chobus],  who  Dominated  a
choregu*  to  fulfil  the  requiaite  dutiea.  The
cboregui  bad  in  the  fint  place  to  get  the  chorentae,

timei  a  difficult  mattei,  since,  in  cxnue^nence  of  tba
prevalent  paedeiaitia  of  the  Oreeki,  pareali  were
frequently  unwilling  to  lofler  their  bi^  la  ba
ehoreutae,  lot  th^  should  be  exposed  to  conupt-
ing  ioflucnce*  dnnng  their  tiaining.  Solon,  with
the  view  of  lessening  the  dangers  to  which  thejr
might  be  exposed,  bad  enacted  that  choregi  ibmld
ba  more  than  forty  yean  of  age.  But  tbe  law
waa  by  no  meana  rigidly  obserred.  (Ataeb.
B.  THHnit.  p.  391.)  irtbeboysconldbeobtained
in  no  other  way,  compulsion  was  allowable.  (An-
tiph.  L  c)  Having  pDcni«d  tho  chovutae,  the
choregui  had  next  to  provide  a  trainer  lor  them
(XopoJiUimaXai).  It  waa  of  courie  a  matter  of
great  importance  to  gel  a  good  trainir.  Tbe  ap-
portionment of  the  tiuinns  waa  decided  by  lot,
that  is,  aa  Bt^h  imaginei,  the  chott:^  decided  hj
let  in  what  cider  they  were  to  select  the  trainera,
which  was  in  hct  ^e  mods  of  proceeding  with
respect  to  Ibe  finte-player.  (Don.  a.  Mrid.  p.
519.) The  chocegnt  bad  (o  pa;,  not  eul;  tha


CHORUS.
taima,  bat  Ibe  cIimuMs  thenmlvei,  and  mun-
tun  thrta  wbilv  ihtj  wm  in  tiuniiig,  pnttiding
tkia  with  nch  fb«4  m  wh  Bdapted  to  itRB^m
the  rntca*;  ud  to  pniide  a  nitible  tnumig
Dltca  (x^pvriiv)  if  be  had  no  place  in  hii  OWD


CHORUS.


277


■.  UM;  P\ai.dtGler.Ali.p.Si


It  U  tmrid*  the  ehoru  witb  the  nqc
ifMM,  cnvni,  and  muki.  (Dem.  a.  M«d.  p.
SIS;  Athra.  iii.  p.  10S,£)  It  ii  not  to  be  nip-
fini  d.  hoscTO',  Ibat  die  ckongni  dsfrajel  (be
wttala  «pam  itf  tbe  plaj  to  be  represented.
The  eboi^m  vbo  wai  judged  to  have  peilbnned
hii  datin  in  tbe  bell  mtiuiei  reccired  ■  liipod  si
a  pne,  tbe  expona  of  irbicb,  boiraTer,  he  had  to
de&aj  bicuelf ;  and  thi*  eipeofe  friquentlj  in-


trbich


A  Miect  at  Atbeiii
Soeet  of  tbe  Tiipeda,  torn  being  lined  with  tbcae.
TW  tiibe  ta  vhicb  tbe  cbonni  beloBged  ■hand
tbe  banaiuB  of  tbe  Tidoiy  i>i£  him,  and  the  name*
■f  both  wen  iuciibed  upon  tbe  tripod  n  nuani-
mbL  (Pam.  L  20.  f  1 ;  PlaL  Ooiy.  p.  473  ;
™  L,  Kk.  S.)  The  mu  expended  hj  choiegi
'  ei  largvr  than  wae  abio-
.  (Lja  pro  AritL


I  ehoru  of  m
e  (?  the  tli


D  on  another  occuian,
,irii«,  hfl  bad  to  deba;
>  tripod ;  800  diacbmae  ibr  a
chawi  o€  p^nfiieina ;  SOO  diachiote  for  a  lyclic
dank  (Lfh  huX.  Impit.  pp.  e9S,  ed.  Raike.)
A  cbom  of  flnte-playen  eoit  moie  than  a  tragic
^WM.  (Dem.  e.  Mtid.  f.  SeS.)  In  timei  of
^Uie  diMrcM,  the  leqniiite  oomtwr  of  chorc^


tboregn*  Ua  three
yean,  tin  DeanMhemi  TolnnliTilj  imdcTtaok  tbe
lAce.  (DeaL  c  Mtid.  pp.  «78.  579 ,  comp.  Bockb.
/^ritfbuL^r^ttBu,  book  iii.  c3Z)  [CP.M.]
CIIOROBATE3,BO  butrnmentfia  detenniimig
tW  ilope  of  an  aqaednet  and  the  lerela  of  the
y  throagh  which  it  ma  to  pau.  Froni  tbe
'  aigiTen  of  it  by  VitniTiiu,  it  ^ipean  to


l«el,w


idtcBlar  piece,  aoauut  WUell
hman  a  pJanthiiiie. Tbe  ebonbalei  bad  two  per-

Mead  afanDgle  OBeinthenuddlb  ThederiTidm
tt  tW  wori  ii  bom  x^V"  ""^  S'bnt,  from  iti  lue
B  iwrTeniK  land  minnlely.  [P.S.]

CHORUS  ixfi'\  >  word,  the  orsinal  meaning

tion  of  wlUcb  are  eoniewhat  oncerlain.

bo  Heiycbini  the  word  ii  equivalent  to
■■KAM  at  rrifiavi.  If  lO,  tbe  word  probabl)-
■^nilii  il  grigiaaUy  a  compaoj  of  dancen  dancing
B  a  ring.  Tbow  who  adopt  that  riew  of  the
•ripB  of  tbe  word  coooeet  it  with  x<Wai,  xopcwdi.


and  Kopwdr.  Otheri  luj^wie  tbat  tbe  earlieat
■JgiuficatHHi  of  the  wold  ia  that  of  a  level,  opeu
ipace,  inch  aa  would  bo  inited  for  dancing,  and
connect  it  with  x^P'  uid  X^p^t,  to  that  the  later
and  ordinary  liguification  of  the  wmd  would  be
derired  freni  inch  plaeea  being  employed  for  dano
ing.  Tbii  leems  a  Wa  likely  account  of  the  wotd
than  the  otbei.  If  the  name  xopol  tru  giren  to
inch  placea  viih  rtferaun  to  lAtdr  kw  /or  draicng^
we  Bhoald  itill  bare  to  look  to  thia  latter  idea  Sa
the  origio  of  tbs  name  of  tbe  pbice  ;  if  the  name


very  little  diatiactife  of
them,  namely  their  meeting  in  an  open  ipace.  On
the  other  bypolhnii  it  ii  any  to  nndentand  haw
a  wrad  lignifying  a  body  of  dancen  thoold  come
to  ijgnify  the  place  where  they  danced,  and  theiv
more  generally,  an;  place  niited  (ar  the  pnrpoae,
A(  regaidi  tbe  mage  of  the  word,  in  Homer  it


of >


Odyney  (riii.  260,  364,  xlL  4}  ^auBgee  are  fbond
where  it  meeni  a  place  for  daiKmg  ;  ibfixifoi  ia
found  both  in  Homer  and  in  lalor  wrilen  ai  an
epithet  of  dtiei  having  large  cpen  eqnarei  or  placea
•oiled  br  choral  peifotmancei.  A  companion  with
the  corre^ianding  W(vd  niAAlxiipDi  ibowa  that  the
notion  of  daadag  nnut  net  be  loet  ngbt  d£  At
Spans  tbe  agora  wm  called  x<^t  (Pau.  iii.  U.
§9)-

In  later  timea,  a  choric  performance  alwayi  hn-
pliei  tbe  linging  or  muical  recitation  of  a  poetjcsl
conpoeitioQ,  accompanied  by  appropriate  dancing
and  geitiniiation,  or  at  leait  by  a  meaaored  mareh.
The  cbornaei  that  we  lead  of  m  Homer  ore  merely
companiei  of  dancen,  who  more  to  the  moaic  of  a
■ong  iong  by  the  miniuel,  who  accompanie*  him-
idf  on  the  cithara  or  phormini.  In  tbe  palace  of
Alcinoua  tbe  dancer*  perfonn  their  eraiutioDi,
while  Demodocui,  to  tbe  moaic  of  tbe  phormini,
lings  the  loves  of  Area  and  Aphrodite  (tW.  liii,
256,  &c).  In  the  cbonu  repreienCed  on  ^e  ihield
of  Achillei  (/J.  Kiik  SSO,  &c.)  a  band  of  youths
and  maideni  dance,  holding  each  other  by  the
band,  Binetiniei  in  a  ring,  (omelimea  m  parallel
linei  oppoute  to  each  other.  In  the  midit  of  the
dancen  an  two  nCionrrqpti,  or  tumblen,  who,
^rparently,  by  their  geaticolationi  direct  and  lead
ofiHipX-"^"}  tbe  meainred  movementa  (,uArf,)
at  the  dancen.  So  m  tbe  Homeric  bymn  to  the
Pythian  ApoUo  (10,  Ac)  a  comjany  of  goddesies
dance,  while  theMniea  ting,  and  Apolb  plays  tba
dlhara.  Tbe  port  of  the  mieumrnjim  i>  per'
farmed  by  Ares  and  Hermei,  who  geiticulBIe
(rolfeuri)  in  the  midit  of  the  dancer*.  In  tba
description  of  tbe  nnptio]  proceaiion  in  Ueiiod
(Siirld  o/  Htrc  272,  &c)  it  ii  not  quite  clear
whether  the  choral  of  yoothi  are  tinging  and  danc-
ing to  tbe  lound  of  the  pipe,  or  playing  the  pipe
themielves.  Tbe  band  of  reiellers  (iBfiD))  who
follow  both  dance  and  ling.  That  the  chonii,  in
the  eoilieat  timo,  coniiated  of  tbe  whole  papulatbn
Fmbled  for  doncea  oodbymna  in  honour
rdiangod,  might  be  true  if  tbe  whole
papahition  joined  in  th
for  the  term  choru  ncn

Whether  tbe  Doriani  were  the  fint  who  bad

cbonuei  at  festive  or  religiooi celebntiom,  or

' Apollo  waa  the  deity  in  ...


»aet,  •(*  poiati  which,  in


S78


CHOHUS.


denco,  an  best  left  ondMided.  The  mi-daneei
of  the  Curetet  in  Crete  jn  hoaooT  of  Zeiu,  teeto  (
be  quite  u  iDcient  u  any  that  we  knov  of  i
iiononr  of  Apollo.  Howerer  ducea  may  liBi
ongisated,  it  wu  natmsl  that,  like  iniuu;  an
pocUy,  thej  ihDuld  al  a  lerj  etilj  period  bi  on
nected  with  the  wonhip  of  the  godi ;  and  in  thi
cammtion  it  a  certunlj  tnie  that  it  wai  imoD^
the  Doriani,  and  tonnectod  with  the  ■wonhip  of
Apollo,  that  the  chonu  received  it)  earliett  de-
TclapmBIlt,  though  there  doea  not  qipear  inlGcient
eiidence  to  tappoct  the  amclauan  that  the  vc  ' '
of  Apollo  eiiaied  newhen  wilhoiit  hniag
intioduMid  by  the  Doriana

The  imperfect  ^pe  of  the  later  chonu  aj^iean
hi  the  earlien  period  in  the  paean,  at  mug  bj
•  eompany


S  with


him


lUDg bj
LLiier  uiuiig  (till  (if.  i.  173),  St  mo '
a  meaaored  itep  (JL  niL  391}.
byma  to  the  Pythian  Apollo  ve  : .  .
iMJf  ai  leadec  of  the  chonu,  playing
I,  while  the  chonu  of  Cretani  fellow


iin].  Thig  eihihiu  Che  pMan  in  a  KDie-
what  later  itafpi  of  deTelopment  In  Homer  it
appean  at  a  leu  famial  and  lyitemalic  perform-
■nce,  Dancing  waa  reiy  early  coDDticted  with  the
wonhip  of  Apollo  in  Delsi  <Hyinn.  ApolL  Del.
I.  149,  Ac),  and  in  Crete,  (llceiod.  Fr.  91.
Oattl.)  It  wu  in  Crete  that  the  mimetic  dance,
called  Hyporchema,  took  ItA  origin  [HYPOncircMA;
SaltatioJ,  and  it  waa  thence  alao  that  the  inb-
aeqnent  InDOvationa  upon  the  ilaid  giarity  of  the
Paean  were  derived,  meet  of  the  origin  of  which
were  pnaerved  in  the  name  of  the  ihythma  and
dancea  (MUlIer,  ZJonoiH,  ii.  3.  g  ]i.)  To  Tiia-
lalaa  an  attributed  the  moit  important  impnie-
menti.  He  eultirated  the  art  of  daodng  no  leai
than  that  of  muaic,  and  adapted  the  evolationa  of
the  choma  to  the  more  apirited  morementi  of  the
Phrygian  atyle  of  maiic.  He  ia  aaid  to  have  com-
poaed  both  paeana  and  hyporchemea,  Che  latter  of
which  he  adapted  for  the  Pyirliic  or  war-dance  j
and  from  haring  given  them  a  mon  aitiitic  fbnn,
he  came  to  be  regarded  by  lome  aa  the  inventor  of
them.  (Milller,  Hilary  of  Ot  Literatart  of  .Jn-
ami  Gmae,  p.  1 60,  4c.)  Paeanj  began  to  be
aung  with  an  orcheatic  accompaniment  on  the  part
of  the  chonu,  eapecially  at  the  fcatival  of  the
Qfrnnopaedia  [Othnofaidia],  and  bj  degreea
became  icnrcely  diiCinguiibable  from  the  hypor-
ehema.  (Mliller,  1.  a  p.  160  ;  Bode,  GKtA.  da
HtOin.  Dicitk.  voL  ii.  part  i.  p.  46.) That


which  f


6nd


Uter  timei,  lo  which  the  remark


dnced  by  di^reea.  It  had  taken  place  before  the
time  of  Alcnian,  who  introduced  into  hii  choml
eampoiitiana  an  antietropbie  character.  A  large
number  of  these  he  compoaed  tar  chonuet  of  vii-
gini ;  in  lorae  there  waa  a  dialogue  between  the
ehorua  and  the  poet.  (MUller,  f,  a.  p.  194,  &c)
In  hia  compoaitioni  atjophei  and  antiatrophea  of
the  lame  meaiun  oaaally  aucceeded  each  other  in


dding  an  epodc,  daring  wb
iland  atiZl,  to  the  itrophe  ai
aa,  I.  ih  Tpfa  Initrixipw  j  '.


i  Miilier,
Le.  f.  199.)  In  the  anangmieat  of  hia  ehonuea
he  iceau  to  have  had  a  great  partiality  fiK  the
Bctagwnl  ibnD,  or  lor  certain  oombinatiMi*  of  ught.


CHORUS.
wlience  anaa  the  proverb  nlrra  imi. At  CalaM
there  waa  erected  to  him  an  octagonal  moonment
with  6  columua  and  8  alep^ (SuWa,  t.  v  vdrm
iicr^  and  irtfiftxopot,')

In  all  the  Dorian  atatea,  eapecially  among  tha
Spartani,  these  chond  pettemanoea  wen  cnllivatsd
with  greet  aasidni^. Varioni  c:

this,  aa  for  axampla,  th  '


the  wonhip  of  Apollo,  the  bet  that  they  w

lot  confined  to  the  men,  bat  that  ir ' ~


part  in  them,  and  that  many  of  the  dancei  had  a
^Rumttic  character  given  them,  and  were  eo^
ployed  aa  a  mode  of  tiaining  to  Tmi"»l  cTeivisea,
[Saltatiol  1  Hence  it  aroK  that  Uie  Dorian  lyric
poeti  directed  their  labonn  alnraat  mtirely  to  aop-
ply  the  demand  for  aonga  and  hymni  to  be  nmg  aa
aocompanimenti  to  the  dancea,  and  Chat  Onic  lyrio
poetry  became  alnwat  eidiuiveiy  choral,  whicb
waa  not  the  caae  with  the  other  gnat  ichool  of
Greek  lyric  poetiy,  the  Aeolian  ;  lo  that  the  Doric
dialect  came  to  be  looked  upoi  at  the  apprapriata
dialect  (or  choral  compotitirau,  and  Doric  forma
were  retained  by  the  Atheniana  even  in  the  chonl
compoaitioiu  which  were  interwoven  with  their
dramai.  <Milller,i>oru«,  iv.  7.  S  S.)  Sdll  it  ia
not  to  be  luppoud  that  thus  waa  no  dioral  poetry
which  wn>  not  Doric  Beveral  Leatnan  lyric  pocnu
appear  lo  have  had  a  choral  character.  (HUller,
flul.  o/LO.  of  Greta,  p.  16£.)

The  Spaniuu  had  varioni  kinds  jf  daneaa
(MUller,  jDor.  iv.  S.  g  8,  Alc)  ;  but  tha  tartte  prin-
il  atylea  were  the  PyirUc^  tha  Oymnnpaedie,
I  the  Hyporchematic  (Athenaeoa,  ^v.  p.  631,
p.  €73),  in  all  of  which  aometlung  of  a  mimetic
character  wai  to  be  found,  bnt  more  eapedailf
in  the  lait.  Milller  (IM-ofOr.  p.  161)  expmaea
an  Dpinian  that  the  Eymnopsedie  atyle,  to  which
(he  lufiikiia  of  tragedy  correapondcd,  ia  not  to  be
confounded  with  the  danc«  of  the
feetival.  The  Pyrrhicorwi
"  haplilea  wfni\<ii)  waa  mane  totaarviait  to
aatic  and  martial  training.  Hence  the  analogj
may  be  traced  between  the  eooilructioa  and
tion  of  the  choma  and  of  the  lochna.  (MUller.
iiL  12.  g  10  ;  Lucian,  da  SalCat.  7-)  At  tha
Oyninopaedia  lar^  chomaea  of  men  and  boyi  ap-
pmred,  in  which  gnat  namben  of  Che  citiioia
nuld  have  lo  take  part  (MUller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  g  4.)
t  several  of  the  festiiidi  then  wen  distinct
loruaes  of  boys,  men,  and  old  men.  (Pint.  1^
1^.  21 ;  Pollui,  iv,  107  i  MUller,  Dor.  iv.  6,  g  5,
Hilt,  i/  a»Lil  ofGr.  p,  194.)  Dancea  in  which
yonthi  and  maidens  wen  intermii^led  wen  ailed
Sp/ioi.  {LBciii,drSaiLl2.)  It  was  in  the  hyp«-
chematic  dance  especially  thai  the  cbcma  both
sang  and  danced. (Athen.  liv.  p.  631.)

trilh  the  Doric  chiasl  poetry  w
the  Pyrrhic  dance,  however,  me  note  was  em-
played. (MUller,  Dor.  n.  6.  g  7,  /fist.  Gr.  lit.
161.) In  tlie  hyporchenuuic  petformancet  at
ilos,  described  by  Lncian  {dt  Salt.  6),  both  th«
cithan  and the  flut«  were c '
speaks  of  the  flute  aa  an  aeoompaniment  tc
' '  iau  paean  (ap.  Athen.  v.  p.  ISO). It  ii
fore,  quite  correct  to  say  that  whenvei
the  Sate  employed,  we  have  not  a  pi
chcsns  bnt  a  comni.  (Comp.  Bode,  voL  iL  part  L

. ,  ^■'l ^

Style,  prabobly  made  ni


ie  nmncaedtc
(rpMii.  Homer


CHORUS.

le  tht  flnle  nmiic  m*  fint  ialrodiieed  iato
(btvonliipar  Apollo.  (Bode,ToLiL  poTliL  pp.  13,
li;  17,  33,  34,  244.)  Fes  the  kA/ioi,  however,
(riiidi  mi  ■  ninbful  and  irreguUr  proceuioo,  in
Thkh  tboM  who  took  pBit  in  it  both  Bug  ind
dnced  (m  in  the  »^i«  port  of  thfl  mBiriage  pro-


A  gnat  impetni  ni  gnen  to  choral  poeti?  by
Son  to  the  jithTnnib.  Thii  indent
D  peifijmunce,  the  origin  of  which  ii
any  nU«  wriicT  tbui  ArcbDochni,  who  in  ooe  of
b  of  hi*  poetiy,  m.jt  ibat  "  he  know*
ff  the  dilhytsmb,  the  bamlifnl  long
rtwn  hi)  mmd  ii  inflBmed  with  wine"
(AtWnT  zir.  p.  636),  (cemi  to  h&re  been  i  hfmn
•OBJ  hj  toa  or  non  of  •  n^ui,  oc  in^nkr  band
«f  RnOm,  to  tba  niuic  of  the  Ante.  Aiion  waa
the  Km  wlra  pt-n  ■  tegnkr  ehonl,  or  anlirtnphic
txm  to  tlN  dithjnmb.  Thii  improTement  wu
iMndond  M  Corinth.  (Herod.  I  24  ;  Pindar,  OL
no.  18  or  2S,  with  the  note*  of  the  commenta-
ton.)  Tbe  ebcraMa,  vhkh  ordinaiil;  cotuiited
tl  fifty  BCD  ec  joolhi  (Simonidei,  Epigr.  bS,  Be. ;
ThMfi,  pr^.  ad  Lftoplir.  yiL  L  p.  261,  ed.
HCUer),  dancoi  in  a  ting  niiuid  the  (liar  of
BiaajnM.  Hence  Ihxj  wen  tenned  i^/ilic  channel
(■Mtw  XV^i  ■xd  dithpambie  poeti  wen  un-
IiiWimI  Iq'  the  term  nKAuIilUa'iRiAsi.  Thii  aim
eii&iiii  tbe  nsme  Cycleui,  giren  to  the  fatbei  of
Anna  (UDlkr,  HiA  Or.  Lit.  p.  204).  With  Che
tendoctioD  of  a  regnlat  choral  character,  Arion
d»  nhatinied  the  tdlhara  lor  the  flute.  The
Mil  I  ■mill  that  he  mi  tbe  inrenlw  o(  the  Iragie
t^  (rfKfu^  Tfimn),  mani  prsbablj  that  he
iWwdi»a  dh^iambt  of  a  gloomj  chatactcr,
'  g  lot  tbdr  nbieet  tbe  aocrowi  of  Dionjaoi,


■V  Bervuxi  wero  in  n-
when  tbe  poet  wu  usable  ta  drill  the
inuelf,  and  then  often  bad  a  bodj  of
chotcotae  attached  to  them.  The  redtation  of
Findar'i  lecDiid  lithmiaa  ode  vai  undcrtakea  io
waf  bj  Niceiippiu,  with  an  AgrigeDlin*
cbaroi.  The  iixtb  Olympiaii  ode  wu  nndeitakan
by  Aaneaa,  a  Boeotian,  with  ■  trained  chorni
which  he  brooght  with  him  (SchoL  ad  Find.
Iitim.  iL  e,  0{^  iL  14B).  Mart  rf  Pindar^
epinicia  were  caanu-aonn,  thoogb  not  all  (Bode,
*  2.  p.  2G5— 357),  aniflhe  comniea  which  ang
em  mnit  freqnentlf  haTC  been  of  a  iomewhat
BitificiBl  conatmctjoo.

Rcapccting  tha  mode  in  which  tngedj  wai  da.
sloped  from  the  dithyramb,  and  the  Amctiou  of
tragedy,  the  leader  ii  rdemd  to


aaveOai


Le.  fnL3D4,  290).  £ion  ii  iIh  laid  to  lure  been
At  fint  to  iotrodBcs  mto  theae  cborruea  ntyn
^— tinj  in  Tene.  Lama,  of  Hermione,  gave  a
ftetf  Ibna  ts  tbe  dithyramb,  by  diretting  it  of  it*
antatmihie  character,  and  let  the  example  of  in-
Vodacing  the  ditbyrambic  ityle  into  campaitioui
aot  imiBedislely  eooneeted  with  the  wonhip  of
Dinyiaa.  He  alao  nnited  with  tha  repretentation
tl  the  dithyramb  taunting  jeati.  It  wai  throngh
kirn  that  dithyrambic  cmttati  were  introdu(»d
AS  Atbcfii^  at  which  tbe  price  for  tbe  njccaifal
pact  wai  a  tcipoi,  and  far  the  cbonu  a  balL  (See
Ae  epitopli  ca  Smonidei,  ^aiioj:  PaL  tL  213,
Pr.  p.  190,  ed.  Jacobe  ;  SchoL  ad  Ariitoph.  Ran.
MO,  Fe^LUOS.)  The  dance  of  tbe  cyrlicchomi
waa  the  IXonyiiac  mriety  of  the  Pyrrhic  (Aiii-
to^..4R  153;  Athen.  lir.  p.  631,  a.).  In  the
time  of  SoDonidea,  throngb  the  innoTationi  of  La-
aa^  OcKm,  Phrynii,  and  otbeia,  the  dlhanedic
T*— *-"'  wiidi  ArioQ  had  giTea  to  tht  ditby-
Bab  had  iiam  H  into  the  adoedic  Ai  tbe  di-
fkjnnib  leat  iti  antiitrwhic  character,  it  became
■an  and  men  thoroogldy  mimetic  or  dnmalic,
mti  tm  ita  pofennance  required  mors  than  ordinary
ikm,  <Btlm«sbl  came  to  be  peifbnned  by  i
Man  (Aiktot.  PrM.  it.  9,  RieL  iiL  9  ;  Plu
jrBK.29.p  lUl.b.;  Pnicttu,  ap.  PjIoC  cod.
^  330,  ed.  Bekker  ;  Bode,  ii.  part  iL  p.  312,  &c)
r«r  oiJiinaj  ehoniaea  the  muTem]  ml  tore  of  mnaic
lad  4gH'ty  woold  make  it  no  difflcoll  mattci
iad«cbina,  Wtabbr  men  or  tyianti  no  do
■aialained  ehfetilM^  w  they  maintained  h
lai  MMoni. Poato  of  dtitiDction  would  ti


theai


cle  Tni


From  the  time  of  Sophoclea  onwarda  tha  tegnhi
mber  of  tbe  chorua  in  a  tragedy  wai  1 5.  (ScboL
od  Ari^b.  Equit.  fiS6,  Av.  298 ;  Follai,  if.
108.)  The  account  giren  by  Suidaa  (f.  e.  2o^
■A^t),  that  Sophodei  railed  the  number  from
12  to  15  ii  deierrtiig  of  attention,  though  there  are
n«t  difficultiei  connected  with  iL  Pollux  (ii.
1 0)  bai  an  abnud  itoty  that  the  number  of  the
horui  waa  £0  before  the  repreteatatioa  of  die  En.
lenidei  of  AeKhylni,  and  that  the  muubei  wet
hen  reduced  by  a  law  on  account  of  the  terror  pro-
duced by  the  appearance  of  the  50  Enmenidea.  It
Menu  H^rtely  pouibte  to  aniie  at  any  definite  cen-
clniion  with  rt^^ard  to  the  Dumber  of  the  choma  in
'  early  dramaa  of  Aeicbyhia.  The  bet  that  tha
.b«  of  the  dithyrambic  chorui  wai  50,  and
that  tbe  mythological  number  of  tbe  Octaiudei
Danoidei  wai  the  aame,  tempta  one  to  luppoie
that  the  chorua  in  the  PrtHnetbena  and  tbe  ba^
plicei  coniisted  of  50.  Moat  writen,  hcwereTf
tgret  b  thbking  that  loch  a  number  waa  too
luge  lo  hare  been  etn^oyed  (Welcker,  Aetd^
Tnbigi*,  f.  27,  &c  i  Uermaim,  £>uasrt.  dt  Oioro
Emam.  L  and  ii.  Opn«x  loL  IL)  MlUler  (Z>w-
tit  Emiimdti  tf  AackstiH,  I.  A. ;
HiA  of  Or.  LiL  ■^.  300)  prDpoundi  the  theory
that  the  dithyrambic  chorua  of  SO,  when  tiana-
feired  to  tragedy,  wai  tednced  to  48,  and  that  a
chorua  of  that  number  wu  aMigned  to  the  poet
for  four  playa,  tbe  trilogy  and  the  latyric  drama,
and  wai  nbdiTided  into  lectioni  of  12,  each  of
which  wai  the  chomi  fox  one  play.  In  tapport
of  thii  he  endeavoun  to  point  out  inttaacea  of
cbatuaea  of  thia  number  being  found  in  Aeecbylui,
ai  that  in  the  Agamemnon,  which  re-appoan  aa
the  Areopagitei  in  the  Enmcoidea,  and  that  in
the  Peiiae.  But  tbe  inniffidency  of  the  eiidenca
brought  forward  to  eatabliib  thia  hai  been  aatia-
foctivilT  painted  out  by  Hermann  in
HlUler'-a  edition  of  the  Eumenidea
Ti).  Theideathatthechoruiofthi
tilted  of  three  (Blomfield,  Praif.  ad  Aaak.  Pen.),
hai  met  with  Tery  little  fiivenr  among  German
igh  the  argnmenta  bron^bt  agaiiut  it


■  (Opaue.  ToL


It  all  of  tl


ig  kind,  and  it  ia
that  the  introduction  of  the
Areopagltca,  &c.  into  the  pli^,  would  render  the
fewneu  of  Buch  a  chami  leu  ttrikiug  than  would
otherwiae  hare  been  tbe  caae.  The  later  chonu
of  15  waa  tbe  only  one  thai  the  grammariana
knew  any  thing  abouL  It  wu  arranged  in  a
qaadtaagnlar  fiinn  (jtrpdyunn,  Etym.  Magn.  i.  v.


Tpoytftla ;  TiDoiioii*!  Amalola,  U.  a.  178),  in  rank
(i«yi) >nd  file  (ortxti, TroSx"')- It  entered


e  th«tr«  bf  the  puiBge  to  Ihs  right  of  tha
■pedaton  tTQKATSUM].  When  it  entered  Ihres
■breait  it  waa  xud  to  come  in  mrA  fir)^,  wiien
five  abrcMt,  hot*  itto(x«ii  {Pollni,  W.  108),  [U
enCniKe  m*  termed  rdpotsi ;  it>  l«Ting  the  ilage
in  tlie  courva  of  the  play  nrrAffnins ;  its  re^
enOsnca  Inn^wlai ,  iu  exit  Si^I.  (In  the
Eunienid«  the  chonu  entered  in  in  irrcgulBi
manner  mofdlhir.)  A*  it  entered  in  three  lino,
with  the  ■pedaton  on  iti  loft,  the  ttage  on  ita
right,  the  middle  choreatea  of  the  left  row  (rpirni
ipiOTipm)  vaa  the  Cocyphaeui  or  Hegenion,  who
in  early  tiniea  at  loait  wu  not  unfrequently  the
efaoTBgni  himieli  (Athen.  lir.  p.  633 ;  Snid.
I.  V.  xvt^^)  When  they  had  tolcen  their  Ma-
tioni  in  thia  order,  the  row  ncareat  to  the  ipecta-
ton  bore  the  name  ifimtpotriTiu,  that  towarda


the  Coryphaedi,  wen  called  KfamnSiTia.  These
pliieei  were  alio  called  draiiKTuir  raS  x^P""-
(Pollni,  iL  161,  ir.  107  ;  Photina,  p.  210,  ed.
Bekkei ;  Plat  l^p.  t.  E.  p.  676,  d.  j  Hetjdi.
I,  ce.)  MUller  anangta  them  lo  that  the  Cory-
phaeui  Btandt  upon  the  Thymelc,  or  at  leaat  npon
the  aUpa  of  it  (Eunien.  DistrL),  and  ao  conToraed
with  the  acton  mer  the  headi  of  the  chonu.  Her-
mann {See.  of  MuHer't  Eatnen.  OptlK.  vol.  tL
p^  U3,  &c)  deniea  thii,  and  infer*  from  tho  ac-
connti  of  Vitraiina  and  ether  ancient  authon^ci
that  tbe  choma  took  ita  atation  and  perfarmed  iu
erolntiona  upon  a  plaltbrm  one  or  two  feet  loner
than  Iha  itage,  and  teaching  ficm  the  atage  to  the
ThjTOele  which  alood  in  tho  middle  of  the  entire
apace  called  ■wfffTpn.  On  the  alen  of  the  Thy-
mele,  and  therefore  below  the  ipy^vrfo,  property
•0  (died,  were  stationed  the  moiiclana  and  a:r-
tnin  poliee-officen  lo  keep  order.  Of  coune  the
positions  tint  taken  up  by  the  choreutae  were  only
letained  till  they  commenced  their  erolutiana.  To
gnide  them  in  theee,  linei  were  marked  upon  the
boards  with  which  the  orchestra  wa  floored.  The
Ante  aa  well  as  the  dthaia  was  need  as  an  accom-
paniment to  Uie  choric  song*.  The  dance  of  the
tiBgic  choms  was  called  iiifitMuL,  answering  to
the  gymnopaedic  dance  of  the  Dorian  choruses
(Athen.  I  c).

The  ordinary  nomber  of  the  chorus  in  a  comedy
was  3*  {Schol,  Bd  Ariat  ^o.  298,  Adtan.  210,
EipU.  .^66  ;  Pollni,  iv.  109  j  Tzelaea,  proiy.  ad
Lyonphr.  p.  I).  Like  the  Imgic  chorua  it  was
nrmnged  in  a  quadrangular  form,  and  entered  the
orchcsLra  &om  opposite  ^es,  according  as  it  was
supposed  to  come  &nm  the  city  or  from  the
country.  It  coniialed  aomedmea  halt  of  male  and
half  of  female  choreulae.  It  seems  to  be  a  mis-
take  of  the  scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Hpiit.  1.
(86)  that  in  such  cases  the  former  were  13,  the
latter  11  in  number.  At  least  in  the  Birdt  of
AiistopTranes  tbe  chorua  consists  of  IS  male  and
12  female  birds.  (297—304.)  The  dance  of  the
eomic  chonu  was  the  (ilpSaj,  which  answrrcd
a  tha  Hyperchematic  atyle  of  the  Doric  chorus.


ty.  Ita  dance  was  called
vfKiwit.  It  answered  to  the  Pyn-hic  (Atban.  L
p.  20,  xiv.  p.  630.)

When  a  poet  inlendod  to  brmj  forward  a  l^y.


CHRONOLOaiA.

ha  had  to  apply  for  a  chonu  (xop^  oh-iw)  to  tho
arcbatis,  to  the  kiog  archon  if  the  phiy  was  to  ba
brought  forward  at  the  Lenaea,  to  the  archoB
eponymua  if  at  tha  great  Dionyaia-  If  the  play
were  thought  to  dcscrre  it,  he  received  a  chorua
(Xop^i*  Ao^^fu'),  the  expenses  of  which  were


which  Aeschylus  often  did  (Athen.  L  p.  21),  or
entmated  that  husinesa  lo  a  profeased  chorua  tiaJner
(xo|»titiiirKa\ot),  who  usually  had  an  assistant
(ftrrfiSJiTjKaAot,  PoUux,  iv.  106).  For  tiaioing
the  chorus  in  ita  cvolntioni  there  was  alao  aa
Ap;i^irToSjRe[ffjca\or.  The  chorus  in  comedies  at
first  consisted  of  amatenn  iiitKarrai,  Aiist.
Poet.  6).  £C.P.M.]

CHOUS  (xotiii,  xo50.  »  Oreel'  M'^A-  meaanrs
hich  is  alated  by  ijl  the  authorities  to  be  equal

the  Roman  congius,  and  to  contain  sir  £fimu
or  acxtarji,  nearly  6  pints  English.  Suidas  alone
makes  a  distinction  between  the  x"^'  and  the
Xiit,  making  the  forraer  equal  lo  two  seitarii,
Biid  the  latter  eqiul  to  lii.  Now  when  we  re-
member that  the  xovi  was  commonly  used  as  a
drinking  Teasel  at  Athenian  entcitaiiimentB  (Ari'
stoph.  Adam,  t,  1066),  that  on  the  day  ef  tba
Xi's  [Dionybia],  a  prize  waa  given  lo  the  persoa
who  Erst  diank  off  his  X""']  and  that  MiU  of
Cioton  is  sajd  lo  have  drunk  three  x^"  of  wina
at  a  draught,  it  is  incredible  that  in  these  cases
tba  large  x'>'>  mentioned  above  could  be  meanL
It  seems,  therefore,  probable  that  there  was  also  ■
smaller  measure  of  the  some  name,  contaming,  aa
Suidas  states,  two  sertarii,  or  nearly  2  pints  Eng-
lish. At  first  it  v^as  moat  likely  (he  common
name  for  a  drinking  vessel  According  to  Ctatea
{Ap.  Aliai.  li.  p.  496),  the  xout  had  originally  a
similar  form  to  the  Panathenaic  smphone,  and  waa
aL»  called  r>^n).  (PoUui.  i.  73  ;  Wnnn,  £*•
/■out 3/'(ms.&c,  pp.  137.136,141, 198;  Hussey,
A^eient  Weipii,,  &o.  p.211— 213.) [P.&]

CIIKEOUS  DIKE  (ja>^'  ■!«)).  >  >imido
action  for  debt,  was,  like  moat  of  the  other  asa
arising  upon  an  allied  breach  of  contract,  refened
to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  iheamothetae,  when  tha
SUM  in  question  amounted  to  more  than  ten
drachmae.  If  otherwise,  it  fell  under  the  cogni-
umce  of  those  itinerant  magistiales,  who  were
originally  thirty  in  number,  and  styled  accordmglj
ol  Tfutdron-a ;  but  afterwards,  in  conaequencc  of
the  odium  attaching  to  this  name,  which  had  alao
served  to  designate  the  oligarchic  tyrants,  received
an  accession  of  ten  colleagues  and  a  corresponding
change  of  tide.  (Pollux,  viiL  100.)  Ifthecaoaa
could  he  dossed  among  the  f/i^igmt  Slimi,  as,  fiv
iniiancc,  when  the  debt  aroae  upon  a  mcrcantilo
transaction,  the  thesmothelao  would  still  have
jurisdiction  in  it,  though  one  of  the  parties  to  the
suit  were  an  alien,  otherwise  it  seenu  that  when
such  a  person  was  tbe  defendant,  it  was  bnnght
into  the  court  of  the  polemacch.  (_M.eitf,AU.
Process.)  If  the  cause  were  treated  aa  a
Sim)  'E»m)i>iHi,  as  above  mentioned,  the  plaintiff
would  forfeit  a  sixth  part  of  the  sum  eontealed,
upon  foiling  to  obtain  the  votes  of  ona-fiflh  <^  the
dicasU  (Suid.  a  e.  'E«o<«cA1b)  ;  hut  wa  wa  sot
informed  whether  this  regulation  was  affiliate,
rnider  similar  circumstances,  in  all  prosecutions  for
debt.  The  speech  of  Demosthenes  against  Timo-
thens  was  mode  in  a  cause  of  this  kind.  [J.S.M.]

CHHONOLO'OIA  (sffw"^')*  '<*  lb"  acleuce


■  O"


InwUchtdwan
•(the  tan,aai  n


CHRONOLOGl.^

RO«d  Mcordinfi  (a  tlia  cooim
V  OpediLUj  of  Ilie  fiin  and
mam  ;  MR  m  Uc  mors  limilcd  kok  in  wliich
wm  ban  to  tnat  of  ehiMtolog;  here,  it  ii  a  part
■f  UMot7,  tad  Uachtt  m  to  uiiga  each  tuitonal
enot  to  the  <lUe  to  which  it  beton^  The  redac-
tka  of  BIT  giTOi  due  in  utiqui^  to  the  coi~
rtepwrfing  ;c>i,  moith,  ot  daj,  in  onr  modem

fitrnt  di&raltT.  nod  dtsn  of  abeolute  impoan-
Uitjt ;  (it  Bfari;  all  the  LMiiooa  of  •otiqniQ'  be-
' '  '"  '" "^" eome  need  iobu


M;aDd  the  hiMotiui  wbamnnhi  hnn  eomo

fan  to  M,  ate  mt  *lw)^  itrj  {recite  in  mark-
lo  which  the  treatM  belong,  "  ''^~'


u  the  artele  CaI-iKDaiiuh,  end  ws  iholl  here

which  tboee  uMini*  alcnkled  and  itMed  the
I  nan  tt  that  hiitorf.  The  Oreelu  reclconed
tkot  Jtma  goienll;  Kcotdins  to  their  niagia-
liilw.  in  the  earij  timea  Bnorduig  to  the  j«n  of
dM  tv^  of  their  hiugfl,  and  aAcrwardi  ocrarding
*■  tbs  ^mal  magiitntea.  At  Athene  the  year  wu
aDed  by  the  Daine  of  one  oC  the  nine  archoni,  who
ft^  ihia  I  ill  II  ii'i"~  wu  called  tnc"  Jninyioi

jMBB  WO*  called  after  one  of  the  fire  ephoc^  who
Sm  tUi  meon  wai  IJkewiae  tefnwd  iwArviua.
(TfaDC^  ii.  2  ;  XeoopL  Ami.  iL  1.  1 10  ;  Polyh.
z^I3;  Paai.  iiL  11.  S  9.)  Bat  the  joui  of  the
i1  ihaiiiaii  anJtooi  aad  the  Spaitau  q^n,  omn-
g-with  the  dril  year  in  thoee  ataleij  did  not


lo  beginning  oi


t. «.  'HforlStt)  ;  and  the  inhabitatiU  of  El
ilj  Rckmcd  BocoTding  b>  the  Olympic  gomei,
WBB  cdebnted  ererj  fifth  yeai  during  the
Ul  MOB  whidi  followed  afker  the  imnmei
thii  Baonet  erei;  Greek  iBte  or  dlf
■e  rfiTTiling  to  ita  own  pecoliar  or  local

o  ef>  which  wai  tued  by  off

o  for  the  ordinary  poinK*  of

.. ... (diiK,  down  to  tlie  middle  of

iha  thitd  eadmy  a.  c^  (raqnenllr  made  ue  of  the
ige  attuned  t^  moi,  in  oidei  to  Si  the
I  noner  ialell^iblfl  to  all  Qieeki.  The
Bga  Mtaioed  ^  man  (t^wJ,  o^h),  ii
1  by  Heindatng  (n.  9U)  at  33(  Tean.
-....-  ^280,  w-  -'


fat  hiiliiiiaii  who  coiinlcd  the  youi  bj  OIviD-
■■d^  ad  of  which  oonlalaed  four  jean.  The
■liiiaa^  al  the  01]nn)iiadi  >*  conunonlj  fixed  in
the  j«i  S93S  of  the  JdiiD  period,  or  u  B.  c  776.
If  wc  want  toredDceanrginnOljtDpiad  to  Tran
hrfm  Chnt,  a.  f.  OL  87,  wt  lake  the  number  of


CHHOKOLOOIA.  331

the  Oljmpiadi  actnall;  elqaed,  that  ia,  86,  mnt-
lip[j  it  hj  4,  and  deduct  the  niziober  obtained
&tim  776,  K  that  the  fint  jear  of  the  87th  01.
will  be  the  tame  at  the  year  *SB  B.  c  Jf  the
nmnboT  of  Olympiadi  amoonti  to  more  than  776
yean,  that  it,  if  the  Olympiad  &lk  aflei  the  birth
of  Chriit,  the  pioeeai  ia  the  nmo  aa  befeie,  but
from  the  nun  oblaiDect  by  mtxlliplyiog  the  Olym-
piada  by  i,  we  muM  deduct  the  number  776,  and
what  remaini  ia  the  numbs  of  tiu>  yean  aftei
Chiift.  Thii  caleolatiDD  according  to  Olympioda,
howerer,  doei  not  aeem  to  huTe  been  eier  aj^ed
to  the  oidinaij  huameaa  of  life,  but  to  hate  been
confined  in  lileiatare,  and  more  etoecially  to  hia-
tory.  Some  writen  alio  adopted  the  Trojaa  em.
the  &11  of  Troy  bemg  placed  by  Erntoathenet  and
thoee  who  adc^ted  thia  era,  in  the  jaa  B.C.  1184.
After  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Onat,  htobI
other  eraa  were  introduced  in  the  kingdom*  that
aroee  out  af  hii  empire.  The  fint  waa  the  Philip-
pic ere,  aometimea  alao  called  the  era  of  Alexander
or  the  em  of  Edeaaa  g  it  begui  on  the  12th  of  No-
rember  a.  o.  334,  the  date  of  the  accoMioo  of
Philip  Atrhidaeoa.  The  tecond  waa  the  en  of  the
Seleueidae,  beginnmg  on  the  I H  of  Jlctober  &  c.
312,  the  date  of  the  victoiy  of  Seleucaa  Nicator  at
Gam,  and  of  hii  is-eonqneit  of  Babylonia.  This
aa  wa»  lued  Ten-  trtauively  in  the  Eaat.  The
Chaldaean  era  diffired&om  it  only  by  >ix  monthi,
beginning  in  the  ipring  of  B.  c  S!l.  Laatly,  the
eru  of  Aatiach,  of  wlikb  there  were  three,  but
the  one  meet  cenunonly  need  began  in  NoTen>-
ber  a.  c  49.  In  Europe  none  waa  lo  generally
adopted,  at  leeit  in  litoature,  a>  the  en  of  the
Olympiad*  ;  and  aa  the  Olympic  gamei  were  cele-
brated 293  timea,  we  have  298  Olympic  cyclea,
that  it,  1172  yean,  776  of  which  M  before,  and
396  after  ChnaL  But  when  the  Qneki  adopted
Chrtatianily,  they  probably  teased  to  rcdun  by
Olympiad!,  and  adopted  the  Julian  year.  (Coi-
■ini, /'oati^UKs  Florence,  1744— 56,  4  Tola.  4to.;
Ideler,  /foiK&wi  (far  maOm.  UKd  Itdmuck.  Ckro-
•ml.  Berlin,  lB2fi,  2  Tok  Byo.  ;  Clinton,  FaUi  HA-
bmia,  Oifnd,  1830—1884,  3  Tola.  Bto.)

The  Romani  in  the  eorliett  ljm«  counted  their
yean  by  their  higheat  magialratea,  and  fiiun  the


.  .  ._.  FaitL  Thia
era,  wluch  may  be  tetmed  the  aem  amnjarit,
howerei  did  not  b«in  at  all  timei  at  tho  aoine
point,  for  in  the  earUeat  timei  of  the  republic,  the
conaoli  entered  upon  their  office  on  the  calendaa
of  Sextilii,  at  the  tune  of  the  decsmTirate  on  the
idea  of  May,  afterwardi  on  the  idea  of  December,
and  at  >  (till  later  time  on  the  idea  of  Manh,
until  in  ac  1  £3  the  conanli  b«gaa  n^ntarly  to  enter
upon  their  offics  ou  the  lit  of  Jannaiy,  Thia  con-
ilant  ahifling  waa  undoubtedly  one  of  the  ouiaea
that  produced  the  confnaion  in  the  conmlar  era,  of
which  Liry  (iL  18,  21,  Ac)  complauu.  The  000-
Bular  era  waa  the  one  commonly  nied  by  the
Romast  for  all  practical  purpoaea,  the  data  of  an
OTent  being  marked  by  the  namei  of  the  conauli,
in  whooe  yeer  of  ofBca  it  had  happened.  Bnt
along  with  Ihia  en  there  eiiatcd  another,  which
aa  it  waa  never  introduced  into  the  uSain  of  com-
mon life,  and  waa  Died  only  by  the  hiatoriant,
ma;  be  termed  the  hialorical  era.  It  reckoned  the
yean  from  the  fomdalion  of  the  d^  (/A  mri>  eem-
dila)  ;  but  the  year  of  the  (bundatioD  of  the  city
waa  ■  qneation  of ■-■—--  - ■•


3(2  CHTHONIA.

thtnuclra^ U.  Tcnotiiu  Vsm  pUnd  It  on  ibe


L  BB  ;  Ck.  D»  Dh.  il  *7  ;  VeU.  Pat  L  8  j  Cen-
•orin.i>eDti(  Va(.  17.)  Thium  irai  «dopted  by
VaUsilu  Polerculiu,  Flia^,  Tacitiu,  A.  Odliui,
Dion  Cudiu,  Eatnqiiiu,  tnA  othen.  Next  (o
tbe  Vunnian  aw,  the  moat  celebrated  vu  that
of  M.  Panmu  Cato,  who  plocod  tha  fanndaCion  of
Rome  in  the  fint  ytu  it  tha  7tfa  Oljupiad,  or
in  thoipringof  B.a  7fi2.  (Dionji.  L  71 ;  STncell.
Giraug.  p.  191,a.)  The  dite  fixed  npon  in  the
atra  Cbpftilna  (m  called  bom  the  Foiti  Capi-
telini),  b;  Poljbiuj  (DionyL  L  c. ;  Cis.  Di  A<p.
ii.  10)  and  Cornelini  Nepoa,  ma  one  year  later  ;
Q.  Fabiiu  Pictor  placad  the  foundation  in  the  Gnt

J  ear  of  the  8th  Olympiad,  I  a.  7*7  B.C  (Dionyi.
0.),  and  Cintini  Alimentni  eien  placed  it  in  the
fourth  yw  of  the  ISth  Olympiad,  L  e.  B.C.  729.
Enniui,  on  the  otbci  hmd,  placed  the  building  of
Borne  about  100  or  110  youi  eartier  than  moat
other  writen  (Vairo,  Dt  Re  flwt  iiL  l)j  and


iJacing  it  38  yean  before  tbe  firtt  Olympiad.
But  no  reliance  can  be  placed  on  any  of  thraa
■tatementa  ;  aa  hawero  it  ii  nneaaary  to  hars  one
point  to  Itait  from,  the  Voironian  eta  haa  been
molt  commonly  adopted  by  modem  writen.  f  Comp.
Fiicber,  Abnucia  ZeillqfVH,  p.  4,  ftc) (L.  S.]

CHRYSE'NDETA,  cwUy  ehaaed  diihea  nMd
by  tha  Romau  at  theii  cntertainmeuta.  They  are
menticned  aererd  timet  by  Martial  (ii.  13, 11,  rL
S4,  liT.  97),  and  bom  the  epithet/ma  which  he
appliea  to  them,  aa  well  aa  fnm  the  etymology
of  the  name,  Ihey  appear  to  have  been  of  viver,
iritb  golden  omamenta.  Cicero  (Ferr.  iv.  21— 23)
menliona  leaaela  of  thlt  kitld.  He  calli  their
golden  omamenta  in  general  tigiUa,  bat  again  di>-
lingniihe*  them  aa  emiae  and  mnbletaata  (c.  23)  ;
the  former  were  probably  emboaaed  fignrea  or
chaaingt  fixed  on  to  tbe  ailier,  ao  that  they  conld
be  remored  and  tmnafeired  to  other  leweli,  and
the  latter  inlaid  or  wrotight  into  it  (camp,  c  21 ;


a  cqjte  im  ai^^iAij  a


wmatpocalit  illigahat,

includebat,  &c.).  The  emtKnaea  worn  appeua  to
be  lefeRed  to  by  Panllua  {cvmhia  ary^tteU  cntaiU
illigaia.  Dig.  34.  tit.  2.  a,  33),  and  the  inkid  omo-
menti  by  Seneca  (a/ytaJw,  ia  ouod  $olidi  ami
padabiTa  itnenderitt  Ep.  T.).  [Comp.  Caila-
Il.llA.1  [P.  8-1

CRYSOA'SPIDES.  [Augyraspidis.]
CHRYSOUS  ixpoaai)).  [Auruk.]
CHTHO'NIA  {x^»ia),  a  fcatival  celebrated
at  Hecmione  in  honour  of  Demeter,  aumanied
Chthonia.  The  Ibllawing  ii  the  dacription  of  it
nven  by  Paovniaa  (ji.  3£.  §1,  Ac)  :-^"  The  in-
habitant! of  Hennione  celebiate  the  Chthonia
OTer;  year,  in  anmmer,  in  thii  manner :  —  They
form  a  proceiaiDD,  beaded  by  the  pricata  and  ma-
giatratea  of  the  year,  who  ere  followed  by  men
and  women.  Even  for  children  it  ia  cuitomary  to
pay  homaga  to  the  goddeaa  by  joining  the  procea-
■ion.  They  wear  white  gamienta,  and  on  thor
beada  they  haTs  ch^lela  of  flowera,  which  ther
call  jmrfuffdi^BAci,  which,  howerer,  from  tbeir
aiie  and  eolonr,  aa  wdl  aa  from  the  lettera  in-
acribed  on  them  recording  the  prenutore  death  of
Hyodnthua,  aeem  to  me  tn  be  hyarintha.  Behind
tju  pncoaoon  (here  follow  peiaona  leading  by


a  accood  he^r,  then  a


itringa  an  tmlamed  heifer  jnit  taken  fiwn  the  herd,
and  drag  it  into  tbe  temple,  where  four  old  womoi
neifbmi  tbe  lacrilice,  me  of  them  cutting  the
throat  with  a  acytbe.  The  doon  of  the
ffhich  dnrii
are  thrown  open,  ai
for  tha  pnipoie,  lead
thinl  and  a  foorth,  all  of  w
the  matroua  in  the  manner  dncribed.  A  curion)
ciimniitance  in  thii  aalemnit;  u,  that  all  the
heifen  muat  fall  on  the  aama  aide  on  which  the
fint  fell.^  The  aplendonr  and  rich  o0eringg  of
thia  ieatiTal  an  alio  mentioned  by  Aelian  (HitL
Animal.  iL  4),  who,  howerer,  makaa  no  mentiiKI
of  the  matnma  of  whom  Paoaaaiaa  qieakt,  but
aaya  that  the  lainfice  of  the  heifera  waa  per&nned
by  the  priMcM  of  Demettr.

The  Jdcedaemoniana  adopted  the  vorahtp  of
Demeter  Chthonia  &Dm  the  Hennioneana,  aome  of
whoia  lunnnen  bod  aettled  in  Ueaaeoia  (Pane.  iiL
14,  g  £)  ;  hence  we  may  infer  that  tbey  celebrated
either  the  nme  feetiTal  at  that  of  the  Hannioticaiia,
or  one  >in:iilar  to  it.  [L.  S.]

CHYTRA  (xilrpa). [Oli*.]

CI'DARIS. [Tuaa.]

CILI'CIIIM  (JU^ia),  a  hair-cloth.  The  mate-
rial of  which  the  Oreeka  and  ,Romaiu  abnoat
UDinTMlly  mode  Ihii  kind  of  elotii,  wai  the  hair
of  geata.  The  Aaiatica  made  it  of  camel  "B-hair.
Qcata  were  bred  for  thia  parpoae  m  the  nraleat
abundance,  and  with  the  longcit  hair,  m  Cilieia  ;
and  from  thia  country  the  Latin  name  of  aocb
doth  waa  derired.  Lyda,  Phiygia,  Spun,  and
Libya  alao  produced  tha  aame  article.  The  doth
obtBined  by  apinning  and  wcaiina  goat'a-hair  waa
nearly  bbu^  and  wai  oaed  for  the  cearte  habita
which  »il«i  and  Gahermen  wore,  ai  it  waa  the
leaat  aubject  to  be  deatroyed  by  being  wet ;  alao
for  hone-dotha,  iHita,  Mcka,  and  baga  to  bold
workmen'a  tooli  (Jabniia  van),  and  for  tha  pur-
poie  of  corerinK  military  cnginet  and  tho  walla
and  towiu  of  b^ieged  dtiea,  ao  aa  to  deaden  the
force  of  the  ram,  and  to  preaerre  tha  woodwwk
from  being  aet  on  fire.  (Aiiatot.  IliA  Amm.  liiL
28  ;  Aelian,  itL  SO ;  Vair.  Da  Hi  Bat.  ii.  1 1  ;
Virg.  Otorg.  iiL  312;  Alien.  On  Mar.  91S —
221 ;  VeOBt  Att  Fet  L  12.)  [J.  Y.l

C1NCTU8  OABI-NUS. [Tooi.]

CI'NOULUM. [Zona.]

CINERA'RIUS. [C*LAicwi«l7M.]

CI'NERES. [FiTNOT.]

CI'NIFLO. [Calakmtbdm.]

CIFPUS.  1.  A  low  e<dmnn,aometimet  nnmd,
hat  more  frequently  rectangular,  need  aa  a  ae-
pulchral  monuEunL  (Pen.  Sat.  L  3B.)  Serenl
of  aacb  cippi  are  in  the  Townly  cdlection  in  tba
Britiab  Mujenm,  one  of  which  ia  giro]  in  tha
woodcut  annexed.  Tbe  inacription  ia  to  tbe  nt»-
mory  of  Vina  Prinutiro,  tho  wife  of  Lndn  Viiiua
Helioi,  who  died  at  the  age  of  eighteen  yean,  ona
month,  and  twenty-fiiur  dayi. Below  llM  Ublet,


1  of  frnita


ndflow


comera  are  two  aphiiutet,  with  a  bead  of  Pan  in
the  area  between  thtoi.  On  aertral  dp|n  wa  find
the  letten  S.  T.  T.  L.,  that  ia,  ^  fOt  ftrra  lens,
whence  Pefaina,  in  tho  paaBge  olmdy  refrnrd
to,  aavi,  JVba  fanor  of^imt  mae  im^rimit  ona.  It
waa  olao  naual  to  plaee  oa  the  cij^ma  tbe  eitmt  of
the  bDr7ing.groiiDd  both  ■lotiK  tha  nad  <^
Jnmie),  and  backwarda  to  the  field  (Ai  agrwrn)^


craciNus.

■nd  EkewiM  Ibe  iiucriptioii  lioe  i
imilm  mm  mfBlmr  ;  in  orirx  thai  i
p«>  OTCT  to  ue  heicdca  umI  bs  lold


b;  u«n  I


nrtDM.  (Hw.SiiLi.&  12,  IS;  OnUi,A<n^.
Na.4379.4U7,&c)

X  A  bonndBfj-Mana  Mt  Bp  by  the  Agrmwntom
to  ^ark  lb*  diiinnia  of  laDdi.  (ScnpAint  ija'
J^.  p.  S8,  <d.  Ooctitu.)

X  A  mOtlaiT  cntRDcbment  made  of  the  tninki
rfmcaaidpdinda. (Cm*.  S.  (?.  liL  73.)

CIRCENSBS  LUDI. [Cikcus.]

ClltCINUS  (SuOtrqi)'  ■  nxopui.  Tbe  com-
plH  aaed  b]r  MatnuiH,  ■rchilecu,  muotu,  and
jipmtLii,  >  (rflai  repneated  on  the  tamba  of
•nA  ntificcn,  togetber  witb  tbe  other  irulnuneau
■f  •Iwa'  prefenion  or  ttade.  The  umeicd  Tood.
at  M  eepiffd  frnm  a  tomb  foiind  at  Rome.  (Omter,
Cv^/acT^Li  pwtiL  f.eu.) It  exbibiti


Be  vHh  cnrrcd  lem,  pnbablj  intended  to
^R  lb  ttiekiieM  of  (stamni,  tjlindricsl  piem  □>
■••d.  V  mmki  ebjccti.  Tba  common  kind  ii
JMuibui  bj  tbe  Kboliut  on  Ariitopbaitea  (tfui.
ITtX  «b*  eeapne*  iU  fana  to  that  of  tbe  letter  A.
ISm  «t  nda  Nobka.] Tbo  n^tlwlogitti  mp-


CIRCU3.  MS

poied  thii  initrmnent  to  have  been  inTnited  bf
Perdii,  who  wai  the  nephew  of  Daedatu,  and
thiDDgh  envy  thrown  by  him  oser  the  piwipice  of
the  Athenian  acropolis  (Olid,  Mel.  liil  241 —
2fil.)  Compauu  of  Tarioiu  fbrmi  were  diMOiered
in  a  ■tatnary'i  hoiue  at  Pompeii  [J.  Y.l

CIRCITO'RES. [Cabtr*.]

CIRCUMLI'TIO. [PicTiTHi.]

CIRCUMLU'VIO. [Alluvio.]

CIBCUlTCyRES, [Castha.]

CIRCUS  (liniltfw^f),  a  place  &r  cbariot.
laca  and  hone-raoea,  and  in  which  the  Boman
racee  (ftmmm  Ladi)  took  plac&  When  T«i-
quioiiu  Priuni  had  taken  tbe  town  if  Apioha
from  the  lAtini,  at  ralaled  in  the  eiriy  BomaQ
l»end>,  he  mramemoraled  hii  luccae  by  an  ex-
hibition of  nee*  and  pogitiaUc  omtuti  in  the
MnRian  nlley,  between  the  Palatine  and  AtcD'
tine  hilli  t  aroimd  which  a  nmnbec  of  tempoiaiy
plalCbrau  were  erected  by  the  patiea  and  eqnilea,
called  ipedaa^/ori,  or  /bruti,  from  their  mem-
blance  to  the  deck  of  a  ihip ;  each  one  rai^g  a
•tags  for  bimaelf;  apon  whidi  he  ilood  to  liew  the
^mee.  (Lit. I  3B;  Fiatai.  t.  v.  Fmm  ;  Dionya.
lu.  p.  lEf^f&c)  Thii  counc,  with  iti  ntToanding
KsAddingi,  wai  teimed  circu ;  either  becatue  tbe
■pectalon  ihwd  ronnd  to  aa  the  ihowi,  or  becaoae
the  proctHion  and  rue*  went  roond  in  a  dnuil.
(Van.  De  Lag.  Lai.  t.  ISS,  154,  ed,  Mmiei.)
Pretioiuly,  howerer,  to  the  death  of  Tarquin,  a
permanent  building  wa«  conaCnicted  for  the  por-
poK,  with  regular  tien  of  leat*  in  tbe  lorm  of  a
theatre.  (Compaie  Lir.  and  Dionya  0.  «.)  To
Ihii  the  name  of  Ciicoj  Maiimiu  wai  lobeeqnently
giien,  ai  a  diitinetion  from  the  Flaminian  and
other  aimilar  buildingt,  which  it  aurpaswd  in  ex-
tent and  iplendDni ;  and  hence,  like  the  Cainpit*
MBrtiui,it  ii  often  tpoken  of  ai  Ui  Circiu,  withoot
any  diitingniihing  epithet.

Of  the  Cinnu  Maiimui  Karcely  a  (Cftige  now
lenmina,  beyond  the  palpable  evidence  of  the  tit*
it  Dccupied,  and  a  few  mniira  of  rabble-work  in  a
circular  farm,  which  may  be  leen  under  the  walti
of  »me  honaei  in  the  Fia  de'  Cerdii,  and  which
retain  tiaoi  of  having  lopported  tbe  itone  teat*
(Dionyi.  Lc)  {a  the  ipectalon.  Thii  loM  ii  for
tunatdy  nipplied  by  the  remaioi  of  a  nnall  dmu
on  the  Via  Appia,  commonly  called  the  Ciiclu  of
Caracalla,  the  giannd-plan  of  which,  together  with
much  of  the  anpentructiire,  remaini  in  a  itale  of
coDiiderable  preaervation.  The  graimd-plaa  of  the
cimu  in  qoeition  ii  repmenled  in  tbe  annexed
woodcut ;  and  may  be  lafely  taken  aa  a  model  of
all  otheri,  lince  it  agreet  m  every  main  fcBtore,
both  of  general  oatline  and  individual  parta,  with
the  deicriptioa  of  the  Ciicua  Maiimu*  given  bf
Diony.iui(iiLp.l92).

Around  tbe  double  linea  (A,  A)  were  arranged
the  leate  (gradmg,  aedSia^  tahteUid)^  aa  in  a  theatre,
termed  collectively  the  eatra  ;  the  lowed  of  which
were  teparated  from  the  ground  by  a  jtodnan,  and
the  whale  divided  longitudinally  by  pratenKtiima,
and  diagonally  into  amti,  with  their  tmHtforra
attached  to  each.  Towardi  the  extremity  of  tbo
upper  branch  of  the  onwd,  the  general  outline  i*
broken  by  an  outwork  (B),  which  wai  probably


belt  iitnation  for  leetng  both  the
.  and  end  of  tbe  eoune,  and  in  the
moat  pmminent  partof  Ibedreni.  (Snetdowf- 4.)
Id  the  oi^otile  hnneti,  ia  obacrnd  aaothc*  in-


'^^^SL,


^r^


t«Tii|ition  to  Iba  nniCoim  lins  of  leata  (C),  be-
tokening alio,  from  iti  conitnictiiiii,  a  plnce  of
diitiiMtioB ;  vhieh  might  Ewtb  been  uiit^ned  to
tbe  penon  M  wboac  expenM  the  game*  were  gireQ


In  the  centre  of  tbe  *:


B  lev  vaU  (D)  I  lelUt


At  encli  eitremily  of  the  ipioa  were  placed.
Upon  a  bHBe  (E,  E),  three  wooden  cylinders,  of  a
GOniiAl  ahape,  like  cyprcu  treoa  (meUutfoe  imttata
e^ntmt,  Ovid,  Met.  i.  106)  compare  Plin.  H.  N.
ITL  GO),  which  wen  called  mttae  —  Ihs  goali.
Their  lituatioo  ia  diitinctl;  leen  in  the  preceding
woodcat,  hat  their  form  a  more  fiilly  deTeloped  in
th<  DM  anneied,  copied  from a maible  m  the


The  mort  remarkahle  ohject  upon  Iheiptiio  w«re
two  colomni  (F)  upporting  leTen  conical  balla,
which,  trom  their  reaemblonce  lo  cgga,  were  called
aa.  (Vair.Z^A*AHt.L2.  911  ;  LiT.ili.27.)
Then  wa  (mq  in  the  woodcnt


•pino.  Their  use  wu  la  enable  the  ipcctatora  to
count  the  number  of  ronndj  which  had  bcon  nin  ;
for  which  purpoie  ihey  aie  nid  lo  haTC  been  fin(
introduced  by  Agrippa  (Dion  Caw.  ilit  p.600),
though  LiTy  (ili.  27)  apejti  of  them  long  before.
They  ore,  tbereforc,  leTxn  in  number,  guch  being
the  number  of  the  circuit!  made  in  each  race ;  and
ai  cnch  round  waa  run,  one  of  the  ota  wai  put  up
(Cesiiodur.  Var.  Ep.  iiL  61)  or  taken  down,  ac-
cording lo  Vniro  (I>s  fls  Rut  12.  gll).  An  egg
waa  adopted  for  thii  purpose,  in  honour  of  Castor
and  Pollux.  (Tenal\.  JM  ^mctae.  c  9.)  At  Iho
other  extremity  of  the  ipijia  were  two  limilar
column!  <Q),  icpreiented  alio  in  the  woodcut,
OTcr  ihe  lecond  cWiot,  auitainiiig  levcn  dolphin!,

Sal.  Ti.  590),  which  do  not  appear  to  have  been
intended  to  be  icmoTcd,  but  only  placed  there  ai
coireaponding  omamenti  to  the  ova  * ;  and  tbe
fiaurc  of  the  dolphin  waa  lelccled  in  honour  of
Neptune.  {TertiJL  I.  e.)  Some  wrilen  !uppiMe
the  eolnmnt  which  !U|f»rted  the  om  and  dr/piinaa
to  he  the  pialaa  or  /u/ae,  which  Juvenal  men'
tioni  (/.  c).  But  the  jMat  were  not  calumns,
hut  towcrj,  erected  aa  eircunulancea  required,  be-
tween the  metiM  and  euripia,  or  extreme  circuit  of
the  area,  when  iham-Rghta  were  reprcsenled  in  the
circus.  (Compore  Featui,  I.  0.  Piahe  ;  Serr.  ad
Virg.  Arn.  ii,  706.)  tteude!  these,  the  tpuu  waa
decorated  with  many  other  objects,  luch  a*  obe-


*  In  the  Lyoni  mouue,  lubiequcntly  noljced  in
the  text,  the  ddpiixat  are  repreoenivd  at  founiouu
!poutmg  water  ]  hut  in  a  bat-relief  of  the  PaJaaco
Barberini  (Fabretti,  Syntagia,  dt  CoAuril  TVq^dai,
p.  n't),  a  ladder  ii  phiced  ogaiuit  the  eoluiniu
which  support  the  dolphin!,  appanatly  for  the  [wt-
pota  of  aacending  to  take  them  up  and  dowik


CTKCU3.
Ikk^  vtatEKs,  illan,  ud  tonpln,  vluch  do  ndt
tffttr  10  luTfl  had  mnj  fixed  locnlity.

It  viil  be  obacmd  in  tbc  grotmd-plan  that  there
it  ■  fmMmft  between  the  mrttu  wid  tptiBt,  the  ei-
tRBc  cndi  of  the  latter  of  which  ue  hallowed  ont
into  a  ciimlar  T*tfm  :  and  KToml  of  tha  ancient
•cnlitena  ■fibcdiimilareianiptei.  Thii  might hais
been  br  pofcnning  the  Bcrifice,  or  other  officea
id  relipoaa  wnnhip,  with  which  the  game!  eom-
Boefd ;  farticnlarij  ai  mall  chopeli  can  Mill  be
■HB  BBc^  the  wHlnf,  in  which  the  itatnei  of  lome
diTinniea  moM  hare  been  pland.  It  wai  pnbablj
uder  tba  fiiM  of  ihe«e  ipacci  that  the  altar  of  the
^  Caumt  wa*  oncealed  (TertuU.  Di  ^wlae.
c  i),  which  waa  excaraled  npm  each  occaaion  of
these  JBHK. (DioOTK  ii.  f.  97.)

Ai  the  eztmnitj  of  the  circna  in  which  the  two
bom  of  iIk  ateaa  terminate,  vera  placed  the  ilnlli
fcr  the  hone*  and  charioti  (H,  H),  commoDly
ailed  owwriH  at,  and  labaeqaentl;  to,  the  age  of
V irra :  bat  nxre  anrientl j  the  whole  line  of  build-
ingi  which  ecnfiDed  thii  end  of  the  circui  wai
lenied  afpiiim :  beouue,  with  iu  gat«  and
(■wen,  it  naonbled  the  walli  of  a  town  (Futiu,
a  r. ;  Vam,  Di  Umg.  LaL  t.  153}  ;  which  it  forci-
bly iUiBtnted  by  the  eircna  under  oonaidention,
when  tbe  two  towen  (I,  I)  at  each  end  of  the
oanin*  arc  Kill  itanding.  The  number  of  onvm
IB  Hpfoatd  to  haTe  been  lunally  twelve  (Caaiiodor.
Fv.  £>.  iiL  51),  la  thej  are  in  thii  plan  ;  but  in
the  Bcaaic  diacorered  at  Lyona,  and  pubUihed  hy
Artod  (OeKT^itaaa  <f«  AfoHiifiM,  &c  Lyon,
iaoe\  there  are  mly  ei((hL»  They  were  tbuIi^
doaed  in  ftoal  by  gale*  of  open  wood-work
(i—ifli).  which  were  opened  limultaneooily  upon
the  aipal  being  giien  (Dimya  iii.  p.  192j  Cai-
Md«.  Le. ;  conpan  SiL  Ital  iri  316),  by  re-
Bonig  a  rope  (SavKvri.  Dinnyi.  Le. ;  comFora
ft^A.  ad  T\m>iT.  IdyL  viil  57)  attached  U  pilac
ten  vf  tke  kind  ciiW  Hamae,  placed  (or  that  pu-
roae  between  each  (tall ;  upon  which  the  gate*
nn  immediately  thrown  open  by  a  number  of  men,
pubahly  tbe  anwftirii,  aj  Te[«eaenlcd  iu  tbe  an-
■eaied  weodcnt,  taken  Erom  a  tcij  cutjoui  marble
in  tbe  UaMO  Borgiano,  at  VeUetri  \  which  alu
*  DoK  of  the  other  pecoliaritiea  abma-


la  the  aeMic  of  Lyoni  the  man  ii  repretenled

H^KKly  in  the  act  of  letting  go  the  rope
(IrwA^TP  in  tbe  manner  deacribed  by  Dionyinu
iLe.\  The  cot  below,  which  ii  from  a  marble  in
the  Brtlah  Huenm,  repnaentt  a  let  of  fourcmnvru,
wiih  their  Htrwtat,  tai  eaaeilli  open,  at  toft  after


*  Thi*  Kuaic  hat  teTeial  peenliahtiet.  Matt
rf  the  oljeeti  arc  doable.  There  it  a  doable  let
rf*«  aiid  d/iftimar,  aoe  of  each  aortal  each  end
tf  ihc  ipiaa  —  and  eight  cbarioti,  that  it  a  double
•tt,  fcrod  cdoor,  in  inaetteA


the  chuiott  bad  alaited  ;  in  which  tbe  gatet  an
ide  to  opco  innrdi.

The  preceding  account  and  woodcutt  will  be
fGcient  to  ejqdain  the  measing  of  the  nuriout
irdi  by  which  the  oamrai  wen  deiignUcd  in
poetical  language,  namely,  oloaifra  (Slat  ITitb.  tL
339  ;  Hor.  Epui.  i.  U.  9),  erypta  (Sidon  Cam.
niiL  Z19),/aaiK$  (Cauiodor.  Far.  EpiU.  iii.  51),
oitei  (Anion.  £>ut  iviii.  1 1  )Jbra  mroHt  (Orid,
THilT.  9.  29),  npagaSa  (Ovid,Afet.  iu  155  ;  SiL
ItaL  xii.  316),  iinoma  equoniin  (Id.  iiL  317).

It  will  not  ful  to  be  obeerved  that  Iha  line  of
the  conxm  it  not  at  a  light  angle  with  tbe  Mpma,
but  fonni  the  legment  of  a  circle,  the  centre  of
which  ii  a  point  on  the  right  band  of  the  arena  ;  tbe
reaion  for  which  it  obvioiuly  that  all  the  charioli
might  hare,  at  nearly  at  potlible,  an  equal  di»-
tauce  to  jaaa  orer  between  the  earverVM  and  mouth
of  the  coune.  Moreover,  the  two  tide*  of  the
circui  are  not  parallel  to  each  other,  nor  tha  ^ma
to  either  of  them  ;  but  they  are  k  phmned  that
the  coune  diminiahei  gradually  from  the  month  at
(J),  until  it  reachei  the  coireiponduig  line  at  the
oppOflite  lide  of  the  ajama  (K),  where  it  it  narrower
l^  thirty-two  feet.  Thii  might  hate  proceeded
{ma  economy,  or  be  neceuary  in  (he  rareient  in-
ttance  on  account  of  the  limited  eitant  ofihe  circui;
for  at  all  the  tour,  or  tix,  chariot!  would  enter  tha
month  of  tha  courte  nearly  abreait,  the  grealeet
width  would  be  required  at  that  tpot ;  hut  at  they
got  dowu  the  coune,  and  one  or  more  took  the  lead,
the  tame  width  would  be  no  longer  neceaiaiy.

The  DonmiM  were  dirided  into  two  lett  of  lii
each,  accunlely  detcribed  by  Caaiiadorui  (L  t.)  aa
bmaia  oMia,  by  an  entrance  iu  the  centre  (L),
called  poria  pompae  i  heraute  it  wai  tha  one
through  which  the  Circsntian  piDceuion  entered,
and  which,  it  ii  inferred  from  a  paiaage  in
Auionint  (EpuL  xtiii.  13),  wat  alwayi  open,
forming  a  thorongh&re  through  the  circui.  B&-
lidei  thii  entmnce,  there  were  four  othert,  two  at
the  termioatioD  of  the  teatt  between  the  Bovta  and
the  oryMum  (M,  M),  another  at  (N),  and  tha
fourth  at  (0),  under  the  fault  of  which  the  fretco
decoiBtioni  are  ttUl  riiible.  Thii  ii  luppoied  to  he
the  i>ort<i  Trinapiaiu,  to  which  itt  tituatico  Hemi
adapted.  One  of  tha  othen  wat  the  Poria  Libi-
fwafii  (Lamprid.  Cimmod.  1 G),  lo  called  beouiie
it  wai  the  one  through  which  the  dead  bodiei  of
thoie  killed  in  tbe  gamei  were  carried  out  (Dion
Cau.  IxiiL  p.  1322.)

Such  wen  the  general  featurei  of  a  drcui,  at
far  ai  regardt  the  interior  of  the  labric.  The  area
bad  alu  itt  divitiont  apjmprialed  to  perticulai
purpose!,  with  a  nomenclature  of  iti  own  attached
to  each.  The  ipace  immediately  before  the  cppi'
dim  wai  termed  cirau  primut ;  that  near  the  aula
pnata,  eirew  inierior  or  latuiiu  {Vnrr.  DeUng.
Lot.  T.  in),  which  latter  ipot,  in  the  Circuj
Maiimui^  wat  olio  lenned ad  Murom, or  ad


38«


emeus.


ciacus.


Muniam,  from  the  iJtu  of  Vcniu  Mortis,  or
Mnnlo,  placed  there.  (Camion  Apuleius  Met,  tL
f.  396,  td.  Oudendorp  ;  TertoU.  de  Spaiaa.  8  ;
Mlilter,  ad  VarraL  I.  c)  The  [em  anna  twlonn
to  an  unphilhntre  ;  and  it  a  iherefan  probabla
that  il  wai  applied  in  tha  cirdu  to  the  large  open
apace  between  the  aawrti  and  pn'mo  tatta,  when
the  circoi  waa  uaed  for  the  eihibition  of  athletii
snmei,  for  vhicti  the  localitj  leenu  beat  od^ted  .
but  in  Siliu  Ilalicci  (iri.  415)  it  ii  pat  for  the  pan
down  the  jpHu.  When  the  circiu  waa  lued  for
ncing,  the  coune  wu  tamed  ^mtitm  (Jut
vL  £82)  OF  ipatia,  becsuae  the  match  indnded  more
than  one  citinit.  (Viig.  Aex.  t.  316,  325,  3S7,
Otars.  L  £13  :  Slat  HuL  tL  £94  ;  Hot.  £pu(.  L
14.9;eMinan%LItal.zTi.836.)  It ii alao called
OBivnfSiLxTL  3ill),andpoeticallv(K9iu>r  (Id.
414).

At  the  rnitnnce  of  the  comae,  exactlj  in  the
direetioit  of  the  line  {J,  K),  vera  tm)  amall  pe-
dealali  {igrnui'i}  on  each  iide  of  the  podium,  to
which  wai  attached  a  chalked  rope  {atla  liiiea,
Cauiodcff.  Lc.\  Ah  the  pnrpoae  of  making  the
alart  fail,  preciaelj  aa  i>  pnctued  at  Rinne  far  the
hone-raeea  during  Cameral.  Thai,  when  the
ilo<Ha  of  the  careem  were  thrown  open,  if  an;  of
the  hoTKi  nuhed  oat  before  the  othen,  they  wne
bnmghl  Qp  b;  thia  rope  until  the  whole  were  birij
■breait,  when  it  waa  looaened  from  one  aide,  and
all  pomed  into  the  courae  at  once.  In  the  Lyona
moiaic  the  alia  Una  i>  diitinctl;  traced  at  the
■pot  juit  mentioned,  and  one  of  the  chaiiota  ii
obaerred  to  be  Dpaet  Bt  the  itiy  place,  vhilit  the
othen  pnnne  their  cotine.  The  writer  hat  often
aaen  the  lame  accident  happen  at  Rome,  when  an
0Te>eaget  horae  nubea  agaioit  the  lope  and  geti
thiDini  down.  Thit  line,  for  an  obiiooi  reaton
(Plin.  H.  ff.  ZXTV.  58),  waa  alao  called  otZi,  and
errta  (Cie.  dt  Am.  37  ;  Senec.  S^riit.  108),  from
whence  cornea  the  allouon  of  Penini  l,Sat  t.  177),
entala  omiitia.  The  iikAm  aelred  only  to  regulate
the  turning!  of  the  comae,  the  ttffftt  linea  anawered
to  the  ituting  and  winning  pott  of  modem  davi  —
"  peracto  Icgitimo  cunn  ad  entam  itetere."  (Plin.
H.  N.  viiL  65  J  and  oorapare  tut.  £8.)  Hence
the  metaphor  of  Cicen>  (Sn«t.  S3),  **  qnaii  decnrao
^latio  ad  orcerea  a  caloe  reTocan  ^"  and  of  Horace
(Epiit.  I  16.  79),  "mon  aftiru  liata  lerum."
(CoiDp.  Locret.  il  92.)

Fram  thia  deacription  the  Cirena  Maximna  dif-
fered tittle,  except  in  tine  and  magnilieenoe  of  em-
belliahmcDt.  But  aa  it  waa  uaed  fat  hunting  wild
heaata,  Juliua  Caeaar  drew  a  canal  called  Euripna,
ten  feet  wide,  around  the  bottom  of  the  jjodam,  to
pfotflct  the  ipeclBton  who  aat  there  (Dionja.  iii

R193  ;  SoeL  JaL  39),  which  waa  rcmoTed  by
en  (Plin.  H.  N.  liil  7),  but  lubuquentl;  re-
alomd  bjr  other  princca.  (Uunprid.  IMiogab.  23.)
Il  poaiBiKd  alio  another  Ttmet;  in  three  open
oalleriea,  or  baleonica,  at  the  ciici^  end,  called
iiKnxBODTmaflnma.  <Snet.  CbL  18.)  The  num-
bera  which  the  Circu*  Maiimua  waa  capable  of
eontainiiig,  are  compntcd  at  1 50,000  by  Dionjiiut
(iii.  p.  19-2),  260.000  by  Pliny  (ff.N:  inri.  24.
j  1 ),  and  385,000  by  P.  Victor  {Rtt/ia  iL),  all  of
which  are  probably  correct,  bnt  have  n^ference  to
diDerent  periodi  of  itt  hiitory,  Ila  rery  gimt  ex-
tent ia  indicated  by  JuTenal  (Sat  xi.  19£).  Iti
length,  in  the  time  of  Jnlitu  Caeaar,  waa  three
Madia,  the  width  one,  and  the  depth  of  the  bntld-
li^  Decayed  half  ■  iiadiom  <Fi^.  1.  &),  which  ia


n  by  Dionyiiu


(iii. p.  192),  and  thua exactly  ai
variation  in  hii  compatatioa.

When  the Circui Haiimaa  w; , ^

formed  by  Tarquinioa  Priacu^  each  of  the  thirty
curiae  had  a  partiealar  place  aaiigned  to  it  (DionTi.
iii.  p.  1S3)  ;  bnt  aa  the  piebeiana  had  no  right  to  a
■eat  in  thii  circua,  the  Circiu  Flaminina  waa  afto^
warda built ftH-theirgaraea.  (Comp.  Niobnhr, /fu*.
o/ADM,ToLLp.36i^TaLiLp..S60.)  Of  <eni»B,  in
the  latter  dkja  ef  ibe  iqioblic,  whan  the  diatinetiiHi


Haiimna.  (Suet.  Ju.  44.)  The  aeati  wen  then
maiked  off  at  iDlerrala  by  a  line  la  gmm  drawn
acnua  them  (tinea),  ao  that  the  apaoe  ioelndsd  be-
tween two  linei  afforded  ailting  room  for  a  eertnin
number  of  fpedatraa.  Hence  the  alluion  of  Ovid
{Amor.  Hi.  2.  19):  —

Quid  fruttra  tefbgia  ?  eogit  noa  liaea  jnngi.
(CompareOTid.  Jr(.  ^nolL  141.)  Aatheieata
were  hard  and  high,  the  women  mad*  uae  of  a
cuahioD  (pahwrtu),  and  a  Ibotitool  (KOmHM,  aon-
Mfna,  Ovid.  Art  Amat  i.  160,  162),  for  which
pnipoaa  the  railing  which  ran  alcuig  the  upper  ed^^e
of  «ch  pratdactia  wai  u>ed  by  thoae  who  aat  im-
mediately aboia  iL  (Grid.  Amor.  iiL  S.  64.)  But
under  the  empercn,  when  il  became  neceaaary  to
giie  an  adrentitiout  rank  to  the  upper  claaaea  by
prinlpgei  and  dittinctiona,  Aoguitua  firat,  then
Claudiua,  and  finally  Nentmd  Domitian,  aepataled
the  tenatoti  and  equitea  from  the  common  people.
(Suet  Avg.  44,  Cloud.  21,  Nero,  11,  Donit.  %.)
The  KB!  of  the  emperor— fia/rHar  (Soet.  Ji^.  44,
Clamd.  4),  odAadim  (Id.  Nero,  12),  waa  moat
likely  in  the  aame  ailuation  in  the  Circui  Haiimaa,
aa  in  the  one  abore  deacribed.  It  waa  genoally
npon  the  padiitm,  nnlesi  when  he  preiided  lumaeH^
which  waa  not  i^wayi  the  caae  (Suet.  Nero,  I  e.)  ;
but  then  he  occupied  the  elCTated  tribsnal  of  the
pretident  (eaggeiliii),  orei  the  porta  pompae.  The
comuli  and  oSier  dignitariea  aat  abore  the  careeraa
(3idon.  Carm.  niii. 817),  indicatioDi  of  which


The  exterior  of  the  Cimu  Maiimua  waa  aui-
rounded  by  a  portico  one  atnry  high,  abore  which
were  ihopt  fiir  thoae  who  eold  refreahmenta,
(Dionyi.  ilL  p.  192.)  Within  the  portico  were
langei  of  dark  tanlla,  which  lappotted  the  aeata
of  &e  auaa.  Theae  were  let  out  to  women  of  the
town.  (JuT.5itf.  iiL  6£;  Lamprid.  Heliag^  26.)

The  eirceniian  gamei  (Lmdi  dmemee)  were  fint
matituted  by  Homului,  according  to  the  legenda,
when  he  wiAei  to  attract  the  Sabine  population  to
Rome,  for  the  purpoae  of  hmitbing  hia  own  peonls
with  wi>e*  (V^.  Max.  iL  4.  |  S\  and  were  ciJe-
brated  in  bononr  of  the  god  Couana,  or  Neptnnna
Bqnettrii,  from  whoa  they  were  itjled  Oontaabw.
(Lit.  i.  9.)  Bat  after  the  conatruetiou  of  the
Circua  Maiimua,  they  were  called  indiacriminately
Cfraiua  (Serriua,  ad  Virg.  Gears,  i^i-  1 B),  Remami,
or  MapaL  (Lir.  I  3fi.)  They  embraced  ux  kinda
of  gamei;  —  I.  Cotsns  j  II.  LODtJB  Tsojab  g
III.  PnoNA  EQiruTRis  ;  IV.  Certamin  Bvm-
mcuM  ;  V.  ViMaTio  j  VI.  N*i7XiCHii.  Tha'
two  laat  were  not  peculiar  to  the  dittia,  but  were'
exhibited  alao  in  the  amphithtatre,  la  io  huildiaga
appropriated  fix  them.


CIRCUS.
■a  with  ft  „

_^_  _  .  ,.  n  which  lU  tho»e  wl
R  to  exliibil  in  the  dreni,  u  well  u  penoni  of
atMTtf-.  ben  >  part  The  iIatD«  of  the  godi
ftnacd  tlw  moat  cmupiauHu  feotore  in  the  ipot,
vhkk  nn  panuled  npon  voodeu  pUtfonna,  oiled
fin^ataiamMM.  {Saet.  JuL  76.)  The  fbnnei
wtte  bacse  tpaa  thti  ■hgoldcn,  u  the  itmtun  of
■■inu  Me  (WTHd  in  modern  proccuioni  (Cic  de
ilf.  L  U) ;  the  latter  drawn  along  upon  wl


(tMSi


c  7\  and  Aii(  tx'


rhich  bore  the  itstue  of
atnm  by  Tertnllian
lot,  hj  Dion  Cauiiu


e  al  l%fat  material ;  the  lattei  for  Ihe  hour
■anea.  The  whole  proceuion  ii  miontely  de-
ioibed  b;  DioDjiiua  (xii.  fp.  U7,  f  58 ;  comp.
Uiid,  ^av.  iii.  2.  43,  &c).

L  Ct'BacB,  the  ncea  The  cairiaga  nmally
fBplajd!  in  the  cinni  wu  dnwn  by  two  or  foni
k«e.  <%a,  f«fr^). [CuBBUiJ

The  nn^  nuabcr  of  charioU  which  Harted  lot
tach  nee  wu  four.  The  dnTen  (aariffiK,  agi-
a^iiii)  were  alio  dinded  into  [bar  companiea,
adi  diitingaitlieil  by  a  diSennl  colnnr,  to  repro'
(Hit  the  hai  icaaoni  of  the  yeai,  and  called  a
/«<■•  (FeMai,  (.  v.)  :  thni  fiitio  praiaa,  the
pn,  Rptotnted  the  (pring,  whence  (Juv.  Sol.
li.  196)  "  Bienuun  eiridu  quo  coUigo  pama;"
/mitia  I  aiaifti,  red,  the  nunmcl  i  /ixVia  wngfo,
anre,  the  aolanm  ;  and  /actut  alia  or  aliaia,
whiu,  the  winlo.  (T«nulL  ^  ^wetac  9 ;  compare
the  anlbgntin  quoted  by  Rnperti,  ad  Jm,  TiL
Hi)  OtigiDally  there  weie  hot  two  fcttiona,
■flaw  and  rmoata  (TertoU.  L  c),  and  conKqnentl;
■ily  two  cbaiinU  Harted  at  each  race.  Domitian
d  the  whole


fryma  (SoeL  Dom.  7} ;  but  thia  ^pon  to  hai
Wa  an  exception  to  the  anial  piactice,  azid  not  i
fcmrai  nae. Tha  driitr  Mood  in  hii  car  within


A  fail  danffer  in
iiath  of  Hippol


Hippolnal.  (Eur.  Hijjp.  1230,  ed.
JBW  1  Bopan  OtuI,  AM.  it.  £24.)  To  axoid
thia  peril  a  Mct  of  knife  or  bill-hook  wni  cairied
aa  llv  waiat,  for  the  purpoae  of  cutting  the


^B^  aHA,  and  ii  mote  cltariy  illuatnted  in
the  ——■— ^  woedcnt,  cniied  baa  a  fragment  for-
aad;  bdia^iiig  to  the  Villa  Negroni,  which  al»
afcda  a  ^edmen  of  the  dres  of  an  aariga.  Tl
una  only  raaaini  of  thia  atatoe  ;  but  the  head
■piJJLd  baa  another  antique  repreaenting  an
avVp^  in  the  Villa  AlbanL

Who  all  wai  nadj,  the  doon  of  the  ca
WfR  tMaf  open,  and  the  chariola  were  formed
ahiaat  tt  the  aHa  uin  bj  men  called  mor
faai  tbeir  doty  i  the  aignal  Toi  the  Mart  waa  then
gicHi  by  the  penon  who  iseaided  al  the  gamei,
■niaiBc*  by  aiiBnd  vS  trumpet  (Ovid.  MiL  i.
(53:  SidiK.  OwB.  xziiL  341),  n  men  uiually  by
)ttcaf  bU  a  ii^>kin  (mappa.  Suet.  Sem,  22 ;
VttL  £f.  xiL  29.  9),  wfaenc*  ibe  Circeniian  ganm
n  aDcd  ^mtataia  mappae.  (Jut.  SoL  li.  191.)
TW  vipa  at  thia  cxutom  la  fbonded  on  a  story
ikrt  Ntra,  while  at  dinner,  healing  the  ihsul
ifcc  pmle  who  were  darnrvoni  tx  tha  (ottnr
b^pi^  iWw  down  bii  napkia  «*  the  iiguL  (Cat-


dodor.  Tar.  Bp.  iJL  SI.)  The  offia  Iwea  wu
D^  and  the  race  commenced,  the  extent
of  which  wai  leTen  timta  round  the  t^a  (Vairo,
op.  CrS.  iiL  10),  keeping  it  alwaya  on  the  left.
(OTid.  Jutor.  iiL  2.72;  SiL  ItaL  xtL  362.) A

and  twenty-fiTc  was  the  number  of  lacei  ran  in
each  day,  the  lait  of  which  vu  called  mum  «nt-
n'Bi,  bectiuie  in  early  time*  the  eipcnae  of  it  waa
de&ayed  by  a  collection  of  money  (aai)  made
amongtt  the  people.  (Serr,  ad  Virg.  Oearg.  iii.
18  ;  comure  Dion  CaaL  lii.  p.  90S.)  Upcn  one
occaiioo  Domitian  reduced  the  nnmber  of  ciieuila
from  leren  to  five,  in  order  to  exhibit  100  munw
in  one  day.  (Suet.  Dom.  4.)  The  victor  dcHXnded
from  hii  car  at  tha  conctuaion  of  the  race,  and
aacended  the  fpna,  where  he  received  hia  re-
ward (Arurnm,  bma  tha  Greek  fifottar,  Paul.
1  Coriutk.  ix.  24),  which  conlialed  in  a  coniiderable
anm  of  money  (Juv.  SaL  TlL  113,  114,  243;
Snet.  Oaud.il),  which  accounta  for  the  great
wealth  of  the  chaiioleen  to  which  Juvenal  allndei,
and  the  truth  of  which  ia  testified  by  many  aepul-*
chral  inicriptioni.

A  aingle  honeman,  anaweting  to  the  c^Aqr  of
tha  Qreeki^  attended  tach  chariot,  the  object  of
which  ieema  to  hare  been  twofold ;  to  aiaiat  hii
companion  by  nrging  on  the  horae*,  when  hii  handa
were  occujned  in  managing  the  reina,  and,  if  necea-
■ary,  to  nde  forward  and  clear  the  coutm,  aa  tern
in  the  cut  bom  the  Britiah  If  uaeom  repreaenting  the
nutoa,  which  duty  Calaiodoma  (For.  Ep.  iiL  £1)
aaaigna  to  him,  with  the  title  of  ejani  demflcnai.
Other  writen  apply  that  term  ID  thoae  who  prac-
liaed  feata  of  horaemanahip  in  the  circua,  leaping
from  one  to  another  when  at  their  ipeed.  (Coinnn
Snet.  JtJ.  39  ;  Cic.  Fro  Mimn.  27  ;  Dionyi.  p.
462  ;  Panvin.  D*  Lud.  Onau.  L  9.)  In  other
ivapecta,  the  hone-raciiig  fallDwed  the  aame  rulea
aa  the  chariota.

The  entbnaiaam  of  the  Romaua  for  theae  racei
eioeeded  all  bounda.  Liata  of  the  heiaea  (UiaUi),
with  their  namea  and  cohnin,  and  thoae  of  the
drivera,  were  handed  about,  and  henry  beta  made


i.l.l5>iaii


L  167, 168  I


8SS  CISTA.

timn  tlie  tontciU  belwven  tvo  parties  brake  out
into  open  liolcnos  md  btondy  quaircU,  until  M
but  the  diipute*  which  originated  in  ^e  circni.
Lad  neul;  loat  llw  Empenr  Jiutinian  iiit  croini.


<aibl


iO,)


II.  LuDirs  Trojax,  b  sort  of  iham-fight,  isid
to  have  been  LcTonted  bj  Acneai,  performed  br
young  men  of  rank  on  honeback  <Tacit  Aim.  u.
11),  often  exhibited  by  Angmtug  and  lucceeding
emperon  {Suet.  ^i^.  43,  ^sro,  7),  which  ia  de-
MTibed  by  Virgil  (Am.  t.  553,  &,c).

III.  PUOKA  EoDKHTRIfl  IT  PiDESTRIB,  t  Tt-

preseatuion  of  a  battle,  upon  nbkh  oceanou  >
ounp  wai  Ibnned  in  the  ciicui.  (Suet  JaL  39,
DoM.  i.)

IV.  Cshtauxn  aruNicuM.  See  Athlctak,
and  the  rcrcicnca  to  the  erticlea  there  giren.

V.  [VaSiTio.] VI.  INauiiachu.]

The  pompa  ciroeuii  wai  nboliihcd  by  Con-
•lantine,  upon  hii  conTenion  to  Chriitianilj ;
and  lbs  other  game)  of  the  cireua  by  the  Oolhi
(a.  D.  410}  ;  but  the  chariot  racei  eodtinued  al
ConMaDtinople  until  that  dCy  wu  beiteged  by
the  Venetian,  (a.  n.  1204),  [A.  R.]

CIRRUS. [Coma.]

CI'SIUM,  a  gig,  i.(.  a  light  open  caniaga  with
two  wbeela,  adapted  to  cuty  two  penont  rapidly
from  place  to  placa It*  Sinn  U  ■calptnred  on

Ihe  monumental  column

mt  IgeU  near  TreTei  (h«
woodcut).  It  had  a  box
ra  tue,  protablj  under
the  wM.  (F«Iui.Lti. FIo-

qnickly  drawn  by  inulei
<cfn  rolamliM,  Virg.  OalaL
Tii!.  3; Cic.  Pfci iL  31). Ciecm


In  (he  reprteentationi  of  the  Dionytiaii  [mcea-
■ioni,  which  frequently  tonn  the  (uhject  of  paint-
ing! on  ancient  luei,  women  canyina  ciitae  ars
conatanlly  introdnced  ;  they  an  niually  sf  an  ob-
long fbnn,  and  thui  difier  completely  &1im  the
ciilae  tuod  in  the  Roman  comilia.  From  one
of  thene  pointingi,  given  by  MiUin  in  hi(  Pom-
turei  di  Viua  Amligiia,  the  following  woodcut  ti


■e  (rf'  a  meoengcr  n
boon  in  loch  vehicles,  «
the  ilationt  along  l!


nen  kept  for  hire  at
le  great  rcadi ;  a  proof  that  the
ancienu  consiaerea  iii  Roman  tnilei  per  hour  ai
an  extraordinary  ipeed.  (Pro  SiHcio  Amer.  7.)
The  conductor!  of  thcie  hired  gig!  were  called
aiiaru,  and  were  subject  to  penaltica  for  care-
lei!  or  daogerona  driving.  <Dig.  19.  tit.  2.  >.
13.)  [J.Y.J

CISTA  (uiimi),  a  nnall  box  or  batket,  com-
monly made  of  wicker-work,  in  which  any  thing
might  be  placed.  (Cic  Vtrr.  iiL  95  ;  Hot.  Ep.  I
17.  £4.)  In  the  Roman  comilia  tbe  ciila  was  the
Mlot-box  into  which  the  Toten  cait  tbeir  tabellae
<Plin.  ff.  N.  xiiiiL  3.  «.  7  j  Auctor,  ad  Hfrtiat.
L13;  Piendo-Awon-odCTcfit™.  7.  p.  loa,  cd.
Orclli).  The  form  of  the  ciila  i>  preacrved  on  a
coin  of  the  Cawia  gena,  which  it  repretmled  in
the  annexed  cut,  and  which  i>  eiidentl;  made  of
■wicker  or  limllar  work. The  material


Tibnllui  in  the  line
occoltis  coneciacufa
bai  been  liwjnently  i


(L  7.  48)  -


lluded  to  by


The<


_,  __.ifriunded  with  the

latter  waa  the  am  from  which  the
name!  of  the  tribei  or  coituriea  wer«  drawn  out  by

lot [SiTKLLA.]

The  name  of  cialae  waa  alio  given  b>  tbe  imall
boEC!  which  were  earned  in  proceaiion  in  the
Grot^  fatiTa]!  of  Demeter  and  Dionyiua.  Theee
boiea,  which  wen  always  kept  doted  in  the pnhlic
pnceaaiona,  conUuned  saci«d  thtnga  connected  with
the  worahip  of  theaa  deitio.  (Ovid,  Da  An.
Amat  IL  609  ;  Cnttdl.  IdT.  360  ;  TibnU.  i.  7.  48.)


CISTO'PHORUS  (jfioTo^po,),  •  ailver  coin,
which  belonged  to  the  kingdom  of  Pergamni,  and
which  wai  in  general  drculnlion  in  Alia  Uinor  at
the  tinu  of  Iho  caiqneat  of  that  country  by  the
Rotnaoi.  (Liv.  xxxvii,  46,  68,  inii.  7  ;  Cie.  ad
Alt.  il  6,  xL  1.)  Ila  value  ii  extremely  uncer-
tain, ai  the  only  information  we  poueia  on  tbe
nibject  il  in  two  panagei  of  Feitui,  which  are  at
variance  with  lach  other,  and  of  which  certainly
one,  and  pmbably  Iho  other,  ii  corrupt. (Featut,


&c  ;  aoe  Miiller-i  note>)  :  and,  w
existing  apcciment,  it  ii  donbtfiil  whether  they  are
double  or  ainglc  eittopkari.  BSckh  suppoaes  tbcm
to  have  been  originalLj  didrachnu  of  the  A^nrtan
standard ;  othen  lake  them  for  telradrachma.  Mr.
Hnue?  (pp.74,  75),  from  exi!ling  coins,  whicb  he
take*  for  atloiiari,  determines  it  to  be  about  \  of
the  later  Attic  drachma,  or  Roman  denarina  of  the
republic,  and  worth  in  our  money  abotit  7^^  The
existing  apedmena  are  extremely  acaroe.  The
general  device  ia,  on  the  one  side,  the  aaoed  cheat
(aita,  whence  the  name)  of  Dionyms,  half  opeo,
with  a  aeipent  creeping  ont  of  it,  lanoiuidcd  by
an  ity  wreath,  and  on  the  reverse,  the  car  of  Do-
metcr,  drawn  by  serpenU.  The  period  doling
which  cislophori  iren  struck,  is  supposed  to  have
been  bwa  about  ac  300,  down  to  the  bstttle  of
Actium.  (Panel,  tfe  (UOplorw,  Lngd;  17U  ;
Eckhel,  ToL  ir.  pp.  853—368  ;  Bflckh,  MatrU.
DnlKmA.  pp.  lOf,  107.)  [P-S.I

CITHARA. [LvRA.1

CIVI'LE  JU3. [Jus  Civil*.]

CIVl'LIS  ACTIO. [Actio.]

CI'VITAS  <nbr«Ea>,  cHiMBtUp. 1.  Okuk.


CTViTAa

U  tke  ILM  book  of  iit  Politia,  ArirtoUe  com-

tkqaertuii,  **  What  (nutitaln  a  citiieQ  ?  "  (ira-
Xirff).  H*  dcGns  ■  dlina  to  be  one  vhD  i*  a
pntDH  in  Ike  l^iiktin  luiil  judicial  power  (jtira-
X"  ipumn  nl  ipx^i).  Ha  definition  will
e^uDj  apfilT  to  bU  ibe  diSenmt  >lBte«  of  Qnece,
ir  to  taj  liagle  rtnto  -■ '■"-


an  tboM  «


diffeiHit  t

or  leu  propeii


IB  A»  horoic  agta  w;


dcrind  ail  their  prinkgei,  civil  a*  well  aa  reli-
pon,  bun  their  uoUci  and  prince*.  Nothing
could  hare  bean  further  from  the  Dodou  of  Ihiwe
tintt,  than  the  ideal  napecting  (he  nntuial
eqiialhj  of  freancD  which  wen  cmuidered


a  the  dem


of  a


J  then


period,  la  the  ear);  goremmi
(nail  itipiilaiiciii ;  the  kinga  were  Bmenable  ui
tlw  gait  alsu.  The  ibadowi  of  a  council  aad
aMi  aildj  wae  alnady  in  eiiatenca,  bat  tbcir
baaineiB  waa  to  01x7.  Commimit;  of  Isogoage,
af  tdigioD,  and  at  legal  righti,  u  Inr  ai  they  then
I  limil,  waa  the  bond  of  onion  ;  and  their  pri-
(ilqNC,  iwfa  aa  the;  were,  were  nadilj  grwited
to  BitBialiaeid  atraiiga^  Upon  the  whole,  ai
Wachanurth  hai  well  obaeriod,  the  notion  of
a  the  heroic  age  only  aiiated  lo  far
ItioQ  of  atiena  at  of  domestic  alaTCB


bH«,at


«  of  a  dominant  clau  gradnally  orer-
raonarehiei  of  aiKJeDt  Onen^  Of  nich
%  wore  good  birth


Tlte  1


To  theae  cWacten  the  uamei
.  ttroTpISat,  &C.,  aeTerallj  Gorre-
■poi^  Strictlr  meaktiig,  theae  were  the  only
maeaa;  jet  tlie  lower  clan

6bh  bsBdncD  V  abiea. It  ■ .,,

ihtt  1^*  Bobilitj  occirpied  the  fortified  lowna,
vUle  the  KifuH  Und  in  the  cooitnr  and  followed
wheneTd  the  latter


,  _«  difference  of  rank  waa

loat,  nd  w^lh  made  the  only  itandard. The
qaamli  sf  the  nobili^  among  Ihemielrei,  anf '
adauxtaic  of  popalatioD  atiung  from  inmiigrnt
aB  tiilrrt  to  raiaa  the  lower  order)  frnn  their


thai  the  [iffiaB  of  doroeatic  alavei,  if  it  placed
then  i>  no  bow  lelatian  to  the  goremina  body,  at
mr  ntepn*  them  leinre  to  attend  to  the  hi^hei
Aoiea  of  a  ddwn,  and  thai  lerred  lo  increaae  Sieii
falibial  eBdauy.

Daring the connilnoDa which followed  thi
heteae  age*,  natanliaatioD  wa*  readily  gnmted  ti
al  wbo  deaind  it ;  aa  the  ralne  of  eitiienahip  in
it  wai,  of  ODOHF,  more  iparingly  beitowed.


It  the  Tpofnifai
af  a  bts  paiod.  In  politii^  intercoarac,  the  im.
ftlam  of  theae  law  aeon  begm  to  be  felt,  and  the
fifm  at  AlheDa,  at  after  timea,  obtained  righta
aaly  iiifaiarto  Bctnal  otiHiaabip. [H<


I  panicolar  priri-
ths  right  of  mter-


CIVITAa  289

marriage ;  tyxniini,  the  right  of  acquiring  lauded
properly  ;  irfXiia,  immunity  from  taiation,  eepe  -
dally  iTikHB  /Lrroinlau,  frim  the  tax  impoaed  on
Tiideot  aliena  All  theae  priTilcge*  were  indvded
nder  the  general  term  Iitot^iib,  or  lovrB^lTtio,
nd  the  daaa  who  obtuoed  them  weiB  tailed
TaTt\iii.  Th^  bore  the  aame  burtheiu  with  the
itiiena,  and  coi^  plead  in  the  eonrtt  or  tnnaaet
oiincaa  with  the  people,  without  the  inlerrontioD
S  a  rpoarir^l.  lBiisk.ti,  Puilie  Eaon.  1/ AAtni,
. .  £40, 2iid  ed.  1  Niebuhr.tfuf.  fiofa.  iL  p.  £3 ;  Her-
Inar^£aMaal  d.  Oritci.  StaabaUh.  §  116.)  If  the
right  of  citiienship  wu  conferred  for  lervicaa  dooa
the  tlate,  ^e  rank  termed  upottpia  or  tbtprftaiti
might  be  added.  Naluraliied  citiieni  even  of  the
highett  grade  were  not  preciieiy  in  the  nme  oon-
ditioii  with  the  cltiien  by  birth,  althoogh  it  ii  not
ngreed  la  what  the  di&rrince  coniiited.  Some
think  that  they  were  eicloded  fivm  the  awemblj
;  '  '  r,  (.  e.J,  other)  that  they  were  only  in.
eliHible  to  office!,  or  at  any  rate  to  the  archooihip.
The  candidate  on  whom  the  dtiienibip  waa  to
conferred  wan  propooed  in  two  aucceau*e  Baaem-
the  lecond  of  which  at  leaat  six  tfaooaand
Toled  tor  him  by  ballot :  eren  if  he  ino-
ceeded,  hia  adauidoti,  like  erery  other  decree,
a  whole  year  to  a  7pBf>4r
■ai  r^iitered  in  a  phyle  and
dome,  bat  not  enrolled  in  the  phraCria  and  genoi  ;.
and  hence  it  hai  beenargaedtbatbowaiineUgible
to  the  office  of  aichon  or  prieat,  becanae  niiable  to
paitidpate  in  the  aacred  nti*  of  'AvtfXXvr  Ilarp^
01  Zfiit  'EpKfiai.

The  object  of  tlie  pbnitriaa  (which  were  retuned
the  conttitution  of  Cleiathenea,  when  their  nam-
a  no  longer  correaponded  to  that  of  the  Iribea)
aa  to  preaerre  pnrity  and  legitimacy  of  deicent
among  the  dtiieni.  Arittotlo  uyi  {PtL  iii.  2)
that  tor  practical  purposea  it  waa  infEdent  to  de-
■uen  81  Ue  un  or  grandun  of  a  eiUien,
and  the  rwirter  of  the  phralriaa  waa  kept  chiefly
Bi  a  record  of  the  dtiienihip  of  the  porenli.  ]f
any  ona'i  claim  waa  ditpnted,  thia  neater  waa  at
'  id,  and  gare  an  aniwer  to  all  donbta  about  tha
^  111  of  hii  parent!  or  hie  own  identity.  Every
newly  mairied  woman,  heraelf  a  dtiien,  waa  en-
nilled  in  the  phialriae  of  her  hniband,  and  ereij
infiuit  regittered  in  tha  phratriae  and  genoa  of  ila
&lher.  All  who  were  thug  ruiateted  moit  haro
been  bora  in  lawful  wedlock,  of  parent!  who  were
Ibemielie!  dtiieni ;  indeed,  ao  far  wat  this  car-
ried, that  the  omiieian  of  an;  of  the  requisite
fbrmalitiea  in  the  iDBrriage  of  the  parenta,  if  it
did  not  wholly  take  away  the  rights  of  eitiien-
ahip, might  place  the  oSipring  under  lerioui  dia-
abilitiea.  Thia,  howerer,  was  only  carried  ont  in
its  ntmoit  rigoDT  at  tha  time  when  Athenian
dtiien!hip  wai  moat  valuable,  Tn  Solon^s  time,  it
1!  not  certain  that  tha  offipring  of  a  dtiien  and  of
a  fiireigD  woman  incurred  any  civil  diaadvantage ;
and  even  the  law  of  PeridC!  {Pint.  Peric  37),
which  exacted  dticenahip  on  ^e  mother's  aide,
Kpfetn  to  have  became  obaolete  ve^  aoon  after-
ivards,  aa  we  find  it  re-enacted  by  Ariatophcn  in
thearchouhipof  Eucleidea,B.c403.  (Atben.  ziii.
p.i7r.)

It  is  evident  then,  from  the  very  object  of  the
phiatriae,  why  the  newly-admitted  dtixan  was  not
enrolled  in  them.  Aa  the  !ame  reason  did  ttot
apply  to  the  children,  theae,  if  bom  of  women  who
were  eittaena,  were  emotled  in  the  phmtria  of  thni


090  CIVITAS.

maUnd  gmtd&tlio.  (Imeiu,  D*  ApaL  Herrd.
e.  15.)  ^11  u  adjitioml  Mfegmud  wu  pcg'ided
bj  the  npMif  of  th*  denw.  At  the  i^  of  lii-
tam,  ths  Mn  of  a  cidieii  vu  requind  to  de'ote
tn  yean  to  the  excidiea  of  the  gymnBiiia,  at  the
•xpintioD  of  which  lemi  he  wai  emoUed  in  hil
deme ;  uul,  after  taking  the  ntth  of  a  dlizen,  ^vni
aimed  in  the  pnaeoce  ^  the  auembly.  He  wa>
then  of  age,  and  might  many  )  hnt  waa  reqaired
to  qieud  (wo  yean  more  ai  a  wiplwa^ai  in  frontier
■orice,  before  he  wu  admitted  to  take  part  in  the
aiaeinbly  of  (he  people.  The  admiiaiou  into  the
phratria  ead  deme  wen  alike  attended  with  oathi


nt  genoal  acnidny  of  the  cUimi  of  dtiieni  took
place,  it  wai  enlnulad  to  both  of  them ;  indeed
tbe  ng»trj  of  the  dama  wai  the  only  check  upon

Thcae  priTilegta,  howoro,  wen  only  nijoyed
while  the  dciien  wai  ja-ki^f :  in  other  wiu^
did  not  incur  any  Kwt  of  bri/iSti,  which  waa  of
two  aarta,  either  partial  or  total,  and  it  ipokco  of
at  length  elHwhere. [Atihu.]

Bacuninf  then  to  AJietotle'i  definition,  we  find
the  eaentiu  {Kefeitiea  of  Athenian  citiicnihip  to
haTB  coniiited m  the  ihan  poateiatd  by
citiien  in  the  legiilatare,  in  the  election  of  ]
,  la  the  SoKi^utflo,  and  in  the


a  magii-


Tbe  lowaat  unity  under  iriuch  the  dtiiai  waa
oontained,  waa  the  -yAvi  or  ebn  ;  iu  memben
mat  temad  ymTtrai  oi  i/tryiXaicTn.  Thirty
ytrri  formed  a  ippaTfia,  which  latter  diTiuaa,  aa
vai  obaerred  abore,  con^aed  to  aubtiit  long
■fter  the  Ibar  ttibea,  to  which  the  twelve  phiatriee
■ndsntly  cozreapcnded,  had  been  done  away  by
the  oonnitntiDD  of  Cleiithenee.  There  it  no  ttaaon
to  nppoae  that  theao  diTi>inn>  viginited  in  the
oranmon  deaccot  of  the  peraoo*  who  wen  inshded
in  them,  ai  they  certainly  did  not  imply  any  anch
idea  in  latffi  timea.  Bather  they  an  to  be  con-
aidered  a*  men  political  unioni,  ret  formed  m
imitation of  the  nattual  tiea  of  the  pathanbal

If  we  would  pietnre  to  ounelTea  the  (me  notioo
which  the  Oreeka  embodied  in  the  word  vrfAii,
we  mut  lay  aude  all  modcn  idena  mpeding  the
nature  and  object  of  a  itale.  With  ni  ptacticalty,
if  not  in  theory,  the  object  of  a  itale  hardly  em-
bntcea  mon  than  the  protection  of  life  and  pro-
perty.  The  Oreeki,  oa  the  other  hand,  had  the
nwit  Tirid  conception  of  the  itatc  aa  a  whole,
eiery  part  of  which  wai  lo  co-opecato  to  iome
gnat  did  lo  which  ell  other  dntiea  wen  conaidered
aa  Hbordinate.  Thni  the  aim  of  democracy  wai
aaid  lo  be  liberty  ;  wealth,  of  oligarchy  ;  and  edn-
cation,  of  ariitooacy.  In  all  fforemmenu  the
cndeaTour  wai  10  draw  the  aocial  imian  at  cloae
aa  ponible,  and  it  teemi  to  have  been  with  thi*
liew  that  Aiittotle  laid  dawn  a  jHinciple  which
aniwered  well  enough  to  the  accidsitai  drcum-
ataocca  of  the  Qredan  itatea,  that  a  wiXts  mnat  be
of  a  certain  liae.  {PoL  jili  i  l^c  EO.  a.  iO.
06  yif  it  Hna  fu/pidSw  iri^a  Iri  iprfr.)

Thi*  nnily  of  pmpoae  waa  nowhere  ao  folly
arried  oat  at  in  the  goremment  of  Sparta ;  and,  if
Sparta  it  to  be  looked  npon  aa  the  model  rS  a
Dccian  Mate,  we  may  add,  in  the  other  Dorian  go-
nnimenta.  Whetbo  6«itan  iivtitntioni  in  their
enential paiti wen  the  creation of a  aiogte


CIVITAS.

£ed  only  by  the  genivi  of  Lycnrgui,  tbrir  deaign
waa  evidently  lo  unite  toe  goreming  bodj  amwig
thenueivefl  againat  the  piperior  nmnbert  fS  the
aubject  popnlation.  The  diTiaion  of  lazida,  the
ivuitia,  the  edncstion  of  Ifacir  youth,  all  tended  to
thii  nvat  object.  The  moat  importaiil  thing  next
to  union  among  (hemielTis,  waa  lo  divide  Ihe  nib-
ject  claai,  and  Bceardingly  we  find  tbe  goTcnuncnt
conferring  ume  of  the  righta  of  citiaenthtp  on  the
helota-  Pnperiy  apeeking,  the  heloCe  oumot  be
■aid  to  have  had  any  political  righli  ;  yet  being
aetfi  of  the  toil,  they  were  no)  abaolulely  under
the  contnd  of  their  nuutert,  and  were  never  aold
out  of  tbe  coimtTy  even  by  the  itate  itielf  Theii
condition  wai  not  one  of  hopeleai  lervitude ;  a  legal
way  wBi  open  to  them,  by  which,  throngb  many
intermediate  itagea,  they  might  attain  to  liberty
and  citiienihip.  (MUllci,  Doriau,  iii  a.  §  5.)
Thoae  who  foUowed  ibe^  mailen  to  war  wero
deenied  worthy  of  eipecial  confidence ;  indeed,
when  they  eerved  among  the  benvy-armed,  it
leeme  to  have  beoi  uiual  to  give  them  their
liberty.  The  BetrromoKurrcu,  by  whom  the
Spartan  fleet  waa  almoit  entirely  manned,  were
freedmen,  who  ware  allowed  to  dwell  when  tht^v
pleaied,  and  probably  had  a  portion  of  land  al-

tale. After  they  ha.

liberty  for  tome  time,  they
appear  to  have  been  called  rfoSo^i^dfif  (Thoc  vil
SB),  the  nnmber  of  whom  aoon  came  near  la  that
of  the  dtiiai*.  The  /Mam  or  /tMann  (oa  their
name  impliei}  were  alio  emandpated  heloti ;  their
deecendanti,  too,  moat  have  received  the  righta  of
citixenthip  at  Callicratidai,  Lyinnder,  and  Qylip-
pni  wen  of  Hothade  origin.  (MUllcr,  Doriant,
li.  3.  g  6,}  We  cannot  tappoio  that  the;  pancd
necenarily  and  of  conne  into  tbe  foil  Spartan
fnnchiie  j  it  it  mnch  more  probable  that  at  Sparta,
at  at  Atbeni,  intermairiage  with  citiieni  might
at  last  entirely  obliterate  the  badge  of  fonner  aer-

Tbe  perioed  are  not  to  be  coiuidered  aa  a  mb-
ject  dan,  but  rather  ai  a  dietinct  people,  ■epuati'd
by  their  cuitomt  at  well  at  by  their  origin  fnm
""■■'■  It  unlikely  that  they
Spartan  auemblv  ;
yet  they  undoubtedly  poflieaicd  dvil  righa  in  tKe
eommunitiee  to  which  they  bclongrd  (Holler,
Donmt.  iiL  2.  §  i),  and  which  would  hardly  have
been  called  ^6\ta  nnleia  thry  had  been  in  tome
lenic  independent  bodiea.  In  the  nrmy  thoy  tom-
monly  icrved  at  ho^itea,  and  we  find  the  com-
mand at  aea  intnuted  to  one  of  ibii  clan.  <Thiii%
viii.  22.)  Inreipect  of  political  riKlli,lhe  perioori
wen  in  tbe  nme  condition  with  the  plebeiani  in
the  eariy  hiRory  of  Borne,  allhouf^h  in  every  otbcv
reipect  fat  better  off,  ae  they  participated  in  ths
diviiion  of  landi,  and  enjoyed  the  eiclutive  nri-
vilege  of  engaging  in  trade  and  commerce.  What
conflrmi  the  view  hen  taken,  ii  the  hct,  that,  as
&r  ai  we  know,  no  individual  of  tbii  claia  waa
eyet  rmied  lo  partidpale  in  Sfartan  privilogca.
Kolhing,  however,  can  be  more  emneoni  than  to
look  npon  them  at  an  oppreaaed  race.  Even  their
eiclosion  from  the  aiaeiably  cannot  be  vieired  in
thii  light ;  for,  had  they  poawsKd  the  privUrfre',
their  reaidenca in  the  conntry  woold have de~

to  coniidcr  in  what  the  ioperiority  of  the  gennine
Spartan  may  have  coniiited.  In  the  Erit  placr,
beaidea  the  right  of  Todng  in  the  aatemUy  and


CIVITAS.
bcoaung  ■  ouiilidBti  for  the  _
WH  |iiMiMi  it  of  luidi  aod  iUtcb,  and  wu  that
dOBpt  baa  ill  ore  atxmt  the  aeceaarict  of  life  j
■iiinllj.  ID  the  &dd  i^  battle  he  alwsyi  eerred
■minit  ihs  bofilitee ;  thirdly,  he  psrticipKled  in
the  ^lUtm  ednnttim,  and  is  all  other  Dorian
mititiiiiota,  both  dril  and  idigiosa.  The  n-
hmance  which  Spaxta  iluwed  to  admit  fbnigiien
wu  (cowticned  te  the  lalue  of  theae  priviluei:
indeed  Boodotui  (iz.  S5)  mji  that  Sparta  had
ealj  eenfemd  the  full  franchite  in  tvo  inituiee*.
1b  le^  righti  all  Sjaitaiu  wen  eqnol ;  bat  then
wen  Tet  Mienl  gndaUDna,  whidi,  when  ance
fmDe^  Rtaiscd  their  bold  on  the  iriitocrMic
ftriil^  ij  Che  people.  (MQller,  Donamt,  iiL  S.
i  7.)  Fint,  ■•  we  ahoold  naturally  expect,  there
wai  du  dignity  of  the  Heiadide  bmiliei ;  and,
f"~" *— '  with  thi^  a  certain  yn^xMaeoeo  of  the
Hyllan  tribe.  AHithet  djatiortion  wai  that  be-
txcoi  (he  IfaiK  and  (nvuioru,  which,  in  later


iMcr  Icna  piohaUy  caopnbcDded  tboaa  citiaeni
who,  fran  oegOMncy  of  nMuUMce  at  other  cauae*,
kadaDdaaoDrMOMkdDdof  dtild^ndation.  To
theae  th*  ^awi  wen  o^pMed,  althoo^  it  ia  Dot
etnain  in  wiM  the  pncue  dibraoo*  cranated.  It
Mcd  kidly  he  added,  that  at  SpoM,  aa  ^wwhcn,
the  BsiBi  rt  wealth  with  birth  alwayi  gaT«  a  not
tt  ad*cMitii>aa  rank  to  ita  paweaiiw.

All  th«  Spartan  dtjaeni  woa  included  in  the
thne  Bibca,  Hyllfui,  DyUaea  ot  Dymanatae,
aad  Panphiliam,  each  of  which  wm  divided  into
fas  obn  «T  phntiiia.  Under  then  obee  there  moat


diriiHD,  which  HQllo,  with  gnat  probability,
—fBaam  to  ban  been  tenued  Tpuun£i.  The  dtiaeni
ef  apana,  aa  of  iiMt  digarebical  itato,  wen  land-
owaoa,  abboogh  thii  doea  not  leem  to  hare  been
loBted  open  aa  an  caaencial  of  citimuhip.

It  wooU  exceed  the  limite  of  ihii  worit  to  giie
aa  aeaiaat  tf  the  Qfedan  conatitulkiDa,  except  to
far  aa  nay  tUaatnle  the  ri^ta  of  dtiaenihip.
What  perrenkna  kk  the  finn  of  ^aramment,  ac-
ceadiag  te  Ondi  ideaa,  won  niSeieDt  to  dealroy
the  f— Tifial  Dotim  ot  a  dtiaen,  ii  a  qiieedon
whkl,  UlDwiif  Ariatolla'i  example  {PeL  iiL  A),
we  aay  be  emtail  to  leave  undecided.  He  who,
biiiH  I— — — "t  tree,  eajoyed  the  fulleat  political
inrikgea,  finrif  ted  in  the  aaKmbiy  and  ooarta
if  jadjeUore,  vaa  eligible  to  the  higheet  officea,
aad  zeedrcd  aH  Uua  by  ichsitance  from  hia  an-
eeasta,  neit  oitirdy  laliified  the  idea  which  the
Gteeka  iiijiiaaiiil  in  the  wotd  nUrqi. [B.  J.]

2.  BtHUKL  Cnitat  meoni  the  whole  body  of
cirafc  tr  »anbei%  of  any  giTn  date.  Cintataa
an  defined  by  Cven  (Samit.  Seip.  e,  3)  to  be  "  coo-


The  «
d  by  ^  Roman  wtilen  to  enoeai

frm  thattf  otfair  penona  dM  Ronaa  duen^aa
■  lb*  phnaea  An  tiiiMim,  duaan  eidtale,
uimjmir  flaetelM.

If  w(  al[»ii|il  to  dwdnnnah  the  membm  of  any
pnm  dritaa  frm  all  s&er  people  in  the  world,
■V  tma  ally  do  it  by  enamoain^  ell  the  righta
■d  ArtiB  of  a  msnbci  of  this  dnlai,  which  an
■K  dgka  and  dotiee  of  a  poion  ^o  ii  not  a
■■■licf  af  thii  dritaa.  If  any  rigtati  and  duliei
did  belaig  Id  a  member  of  (hia  dritaa,  and  do


C1V1TA8.  291

not  btJong  lo  any  peraon  not  a  member  of  thii
dvitaa,  are  omitted  in  the  eoqmentiim,  it  ia  an
iocomplale  mDinciation  ;  Eir  the  lighti  ani,  datjea
not  expreuly  inclDded  mint  be  aaaunied  aa  common
to  the  membera  of  thia  dvitai  and  to  all  the  world,
or,  to  ue  a  Bomitn  eipreiiion,  they  exiit  jure
gentium.  Having  cnnmeiated  all  the  chaiacter-
iatica  of  the  membera  of  any  given  dvitaa,  we  haia
then  to  ihow  how  a  man  acqniiea  them,  and  how
he  loaei  them,  and  the  sotian  of  a  member  of  inch
dritaa  ia  then  complete.

Some  membera  of  a  political  communiw  (oea)
may  bare  more  poUtiial  righta  than  oUien ;  a
pnndple  by  the  aid  of  which  Savigny  {OttcUcUt
da  Ron.  Aeaba  in  MiltttaiUr,  (^  iL  p.  23)  haa
expreaicd  brieSy  asd  dearly  the  diatioetion  be-
tween the  two  great  claiaet  of  Bomao  dtiieau
under  the  repuUic ;  —  "In  the  fne  r^nblio
there  woe  two  claaiea  of  Roman  dtiieni,  one
that  bad,  and  another  that  had  not,  a  ihan  io
the  aovcnign  power  (opMiw)  jiiri,  mw  Optimo  jim
ctes}.  That  which  pecnliauy  diatdngiiiihcd  the
higher  ctaia  wu  the  right  to  Tote  in  a  tribe,  and
the  capad^  of  enjoying  migiMiadea  (njfivgimt
tt  ioKoreM)."  Accrading  to  toil  view,  the  jni  dvi-
tada  oompRhended  part  of  that  which  the  Romaua
(oUed  jna  publicum,  and  alao,  and  moat  parlicnlaily,
that  whidt  tbe^  called  jtu  pnvaCiun.  The  jua
privatum  comfBclieDded  the  jua  CDnanlni  and  jua
i,  and  thoaa  who  had  not  theit  ' *


.  ether  wotda,  they  vi


miplete


Optimo  jure  civea.  Thoae
who  had  the  priralDm,  bat  aot  ue  pobliciun  jua,
wen  dtiieBa,  ^Migh  dtiieBB  uf  an  inferior  daaa.
The  jui  ^Tatum  acau  to  be  eqaivalent  to  the
jua  Quiriiuim,  aad  the  dritaa  H™«»n  to  the  jna
pnblicoiB.  Aocordin^y,  we  lomelimea  find  the
jua  Quiritinm  contnati^  with  the  Romana  dvitaa.
(Plin.^  t*.  29;Ulp.i*a9'.  lit.3L§2.)  Livy
(zxxviiL  36}  wi  that  until  B-  c.  1 B8,  the  Formiani,
Fuudani,  and  Arpiualea,  had  the  civiBa  withont
the  tnfiaginm  ;  and,  at  an  earlier  time,  the  people
of  Anagma  received  the  "  Civitaa  doe  iuffissiila-
tione." (Liv.  11.43.)

Ulpian  (Aiy.  tiL  £.  g  4  i  IB.  g  4  ;  SO.  §  8  ;
Hi  S  6)  haa  at^eda  diitiaction,  aa  eiiatinff  in  hia
thne  among  the  free  penoDi  who  wen  wiUuu  the
political  Imiila  of  the  Roman  atate,  which  it  ii  of
great  importanoe  to  i^^nbend  deariy.  There  wen
three  daoea  of  free  penona,  Cirea,  l^tini,  and
Pengrioi  Oaiui  (L  IS)  pmnti  to  the  tame  divi-
non,  wheia  he  laya  thai  a  lUve,  when  made  free,
might  become  a  fSrii  Ruuanua,  or  a  Latinui,  or
might  ba  iu  the  munbet  of  the  peregrici  dediticii,
acording  to  diaimflancea.  dieta,  according  to
Ulpian,  la  ha  who  pcaaaaaea  the  complete  righta  of
a  Roman  citiiea.  The  Pengriimi  bad  not  com-
merdnra  and  connnbinm,  which  were  the  charao-
ttfiitio  rights  of  a  Roman  dtiaen,  not  riewed  in
hia  politi^  cqioci^r  i  bnt  the  Peregrinnt  had  a
capacity  for  malcuig  aH  kindi  of  coutracta  whidi
wen  jJlowable  by  the  jni  gentium.  The  tatima
waa  in  an  intennediata  Mate  ;  he  had  not  the  con-
nnbinm, and  conaeqnently  he  had  not  the  patria
potolaa  nor  righta  of  agnatio  ;  bnt  be  had  the
commerdnm  or  the  right  of  acquiring  qairitarian
ownenhip,  aud  he  hod  aln  a  capod^  for  all  acta
inddent  to  quiritarian  ownenhip,  aa  rindicatie,  in
jun  csui^  mandpatio,  and  teatamenti  (vKio,  whidi
laat  compriaei  the  powtr  of  making  a  w31  Bi  Bmian


292  CIVITA8.

form,  of  becoming  ierei  or  leg»lee  micler  a  will,
aad  of  being  a  widfu  to  m  will  ;  hIh  he  could
coatroct  many  obliga^onei  which  >  Percgriniu
coald  not.  TtaeM  were  tha  general  capacitiea  of  a
Latinoi  and  pere^iinia  j  bnt  a  I^tinui  or  a  pera-
griniu  miffht  oblam  by  ipecial  &Toiir  certain  ngbiM
which  ha  Dad  not  by  virtaa  of  bii  cooditiini  only.
Tha  1ef[itim&  hereditaa  wu  mit  included  in  the
tenamcDti  &cCio  ;  tor  the  legithna  hereditaa  pre-
auppDfed  agnatic,  and  Bgnatia  pnwippaeed  conna-
binm,  or  the  apacity  to  coatnct  a  Romui  mairiage.

Accoiding  to  Saiignj,  tba  notion  of  dvii  and
ciiitaa  had  it*  origin  in  the  union  of  the  patricii
and  the  f^ebei  aa  one  eitate.  The  peregrinitas,  in
the  KHie  abora  itated,  originated  in  the  eonqneit
of  a  ilate  by  the  Romana,  when  the  eonqoend
atate  did  not  obtain  the  ciritaa  ;  and  he  cnnjeclnrea
that  the  notion  of  percgrinitai  waa  applied  originally
to  all  citiaena  of  foreign  atat«  woo  had  a  foedua
with  Rome.

Tha  ciiitai  then,  hiitoricaUr  riewed,  wu  in
brief  aa  foUowa  : — Originally,  the  Romana  divided
all  peraona  into  Cirei  and  Peregnai :  the  cirea,  con-
aideied  ai  noa-politiisl  peraona  and  limply  ai  indi-
Tiduali,  had  connubjum  and  cammercinni ;  tba
pert^rini  had  neither.  But  Ihia  merely  negatire
deacription  of  a  peregiinua  would  apply  aJao  to
riaiea,  and  to  the  memben  of  atatea  with  which
Roma  nerer  had  any  connectjon,  and  conaequcntly
it  11  rcqoiails  to  giTa  to  the  Dotias  of  pecegrimu
■omething  of  a  poaitiTe  character  in  aider  to  de-
tenniiw  what  it  ia.  A  peregtinua  then  waa  one
who  had  no  legal  tspamtf  according  to  the  jni
civile  RoDumoiuni,  bnt  had  a  capacity  of  aequinng
righta  according  to  the  jna  gentinm,  which  righta
the  Roman  courta  of  joitiea  acknowledged.  The
fdlowing  penona  then  would  ba  inclnded  under
Pcregiini ;  1.  Baibre  the  time  of  Antoninui  Cais-
calla,  tha  inhabitanta  of  almoM  all  the  Roman
prorincea.  2.  The  citiaena  of  fbnign  itatea  which
were  in  friendly  lelation  with  Rome.  S.  Romaiu
who  had  loat  the  civitai  in  canaequence  of  unne
legal  penalty,  ai  deporlatio.  (Dig.  AS.  tit  19.  a,
17.  §1.)  *.  Libertini,  who  were  dediticionim
noinero. (Ulpian,  Frag,  tit.  20.  g  14.)

The  1b1«  diviaion  of  penona  wai  thil  —  Cim,
I^tini,  andPeregrinL  The  condition  oTciTea  and
pengrini  mw  michanged ;  but  a  third  claai,  that
of  Latini,  waa  fbnned,  who  bad  a  limited  ciniaa,

Gonnubium.  By  poaaeHing  conmurciura  tLe;  ap-
proached to  the  claaa  of  dvea  j  by  not  having  con-
nnbium  they  approached  the  claaa  of  peregrinL
Yet  penona  who  belonged  to  tha  claia  of  La^oi  or
Per^nni  might,  by  grant,  receive  a  higher  legal
cSfBcilj  than  that  which  belonged  to  peraona  of
th!>  claiL (Ulpian,  FVag.  tit  5.  %  4, 19.  §  4.)

Thai  thai  there  were  at  one  time  in  the  Roman
■tate  only  two  claaiea  of  peraona  with  different
legal  capacitiei — Ciie*  and  Pen^rinL  At  another
a^  a  later  time  there  were  three  elaiae* — Civea,
Latini,  and  Peregrjni.  It  remaina  to  explain  when
the  tturd  claaa,  lAtini,  wai  eatabliihed,  and  what
peraoni  were  included  in  the  term  Pengrini  at  the

Before  the  Sodal  war  b.  C  90,  the  Romana  had
acquired  the  dominion  of  all  Italy,  and  the  itata
then  compr^ended  the  following  penona :  —
1.  Ciiea  Romaii,  that  ia,  the  inhabitanta  of  Rome,
the  citiaena  of  the  coloniaa  civhun,  and  the  citiioia
tl  tin  mnsicipia  without  teqiect  to  thur  origin.


CIV1TA3.

2.  Latini,  that  ii,  the  ciliieni  of  the  old  iMm
toinia,  except  thoie  which  were  railed  to  the  rank
of  municipia  j  the  term  Latini  also  included  the
numeroua  Colouiae  Idtinae.  3.  Socii,  that  is,  the
free  inhabitanta  of  Ilalv,  who  were  not  included
in  1  or  2.  4.  Proiincidcs,  or  the  free  labjecta  of
Rome  bejond  the  limit*  of  Italf.  Bat  thrae  fbnr
deuriptuma  of  peraona  were  all  comprehended  onder
Cives  and  Peiegrini ;  for  the  term  peregrini  com-
preliended  nnmben  2,  S,  and  4.

After  the  Social  war,  and  in  b.  c  90,  by  a  lex
Julia  the  Roman  dtixen^hip  was  extended  Co  all
Italy,  properly  ao  called,  and  even  to  Oallia  Cia-
padana.  The  conaeqnence  of  thia  change  waa  that
the  Sodi  and  Latmi  were  merged  in  the  claag  of
cirea  Romani,  and  there  remained  only  dvea  and
provindalea,  but  the  prorindalea  were  still  pere-
grinL It  was  at  thil  time  apparently  that  the
claaa  of  Latini  waa  established,  which  did  not,  aa
foimeriy,  denote  a  people,  but  an  artificial  daat  of

Enona  with  a  particular  legal  capadtf.  Thit
jal  capadty  or  half  citiienihip,  at  already  ex-
plained, conaiated  in  the  poaaeaiion  of  the  Com-
merdum  without  the  Connubium.  One  object  of
forming  thia  new  daaa  was  apparently  to  prepare  a
gradnal  tnniition  to  the  full  crrilas  for  such  pere-
grini  a*  the  state  might  wish  to  favour.  The  con-
dition of  the  class  of  Latini  waa  eipreaaed  by  the
term  Latinilaa  or  Jut  LatiL [LATiniTAa.]

From  thia  time  there  eiialed  the  three  daaaea,
deacribed  by  Oaina  and  Ulpian— Civei,  Latini,  and

out  either.  Only  ^e  circa  had  the  political  righti,
the  lu&B^um  and  bonorea.  The  names  of  the
three  classes  existed  to  the  time  of  Juatinian^

The  rights  of  a  Roman  citisen  were  acquired  in
seveial  way*,  bat  most  commonly  by  a  person
being  bom  cf  {Brenta  who  were  Roman  dtiieni.
A  Roman  pat^  familiaa,  filina  &miliaa,  mater
larailias,  and  lilia  iamilias  wen  all  dvee,  thoagh
the  fint  only  was  sui  juris  and  the  leat  were  not
If  a  Roman  citiien  married  a  Latina  or  a  pav-
grina,  believing  her  to  be  a  Roman  dtiien,  and
begot  a  child,  tbii  child  waa  not  in  the  power  of
hia  father,  becauae  he  waa  not  a  Roman  dtixen,
but  the  child  waa  either  a  Latinua  or  a  poegnnun
according  to  the  condition  of  his  mother  j  and  no
child  fallowed  the  conditioi  of  hii  bther  witboot
there  was  connubium  between  hia  father  and
mother. By  a  senatus- consul  turn,  tha  parents  were

pTvban) ;  and,  on  this  being  done,  both  the  mother
and  Che  child  beome  Roman  cicit^ns,  and,  aa  &
consequence,  the  ton  waa  in  the  power  of  the
father,  (Oaina,  L  67.)  Other  caiea  relating  to  the
matter  called  caune  pcubatio  an  stated  by  Gaios
(1.  29,  &C.  i  L  66,  ftc),  from  which  it  appesn  that
the  facilities  for  obtaining  the  Roman  civitas  were
giadnally  extended.  (See  also  Ulp.  Fhig.  tit  &.
DiLatHut.)

A  ihtva  might  obtaui  the  civitas  ij  manumia-
aion  (vBniicia),  by  the  ccnmi,  and  by  a  testa~
mentom,  if  there  was  no  l^al  impediment ;  but  it
depended  on  circnmslanecs,  as  already  atsted,
whether  ha  became  a  Civis  Komanna,  a  lAtinu*.
or  in  the  number  of  the  per^rini  dediticii.
[Hahcwissio.]

Under  the  republic  aikd  bcfbn  the  Soeiid  war,  Ihs
diitu  could,  of  ranne,  be  eonfantd  by  a  lai,  aa^


CIVITAa


<Li7.


li;


and  in  tlie  faje  of  the  FeroitiiiAtei,  Li

Cinro,  pm  Baiba,  13.) Tha  Julia  lex,  R.C  90,

(^ro  BaOa,  c  8),  redUkriu  that  man;  of  the  people
aC  Uoadeik  ud  Nnpolii  made  *ome  Dppo(itioii  to
■ecepdng  tha  ttnai  oSoed  bf  the  lei,  and  muld
hare  prefefred  their  fonner  relatioa  to  Rome  u
dritals  foedBatH  (Jbtdtrit  nd  Ubertaltm)  to  the
RvBo  emiM.  The  lex  gire  the  Roman  dvilai
■at  isly  to  the  natiie*  of  the  Italian  towtu,  but
alM  ID  uatiTea  of  tawna  out  of  Italj-,  who  had  be-
due  chiiau  of  Italian  tovni  before  the  lei  vaa
enaeled.  Thiu  L.  Maolini  (Cie.  ad  Fam.  liiL  30),
k  natira  of  Catiiia,  in  Sidly,  obtained  the  Roman
driiaa  by  tirtoe  o(  baring  been  ennJIed  it  a  ciliien
«f  Neapslii  (ern<  ■■»•  ei  id  mrncgiHfm  adtcrip-
te)  babn  the  pawing  of  the  lei.  The  lex
PlamJa  Papiiia,  which  vu  piopoeed  bj-  the  tci-
boDH  M.  PUotiu  SilTumi  and  C.  Papiriu  Caibo,
a.  c  89,  csDlained  a  pviiiioa  that  semuii,  wim
had  bacu  nmlied  at  ciiiient  of  the  focdenlao
drilatca,  and  who  had  a  domicile  in  Italy  al  the
liaM  when  the  law  wai  puaed,  ihould  hate  the
Baoan  dvitaa,  if  thej  gave  in  their  names  lo  the
partor  within  liitj  daya  {aptd  praetaraa  tttoU
ftvf^am^  Chi  pro  Ardaoy  c.  4).  Archiaa  claimed
tW  beoefic  of  Uiit  lex  aa  hating  been  enrolled  a
chitai  of  Henwlta,  and  haring  in  the  olhei  re-
apecta  complied  with  the  lei.  The  caH  of  L.
M— .i;—  mpprart  to  abow  that  the  lei  Julia  applied
U  peiwmi  not  natiTfc  of  an  Italian  town  if  they
had  beoHDe  dtiieni  of  auch  town  before  the  paje-
■f  of  the  lex  ;  uid  it  u  not  clear  what  waa  the
fredae  object  of  the  lex  Plautia  Papiria,  whether
■oely  to  eiplain  or  to  limit  the  operation  of  the
Jalia  lei.  It  tka  Julia  lex  merely  declared  that
ihaae  wh«  were  adirTjM  in  the  Italian  towni
iitam  Iba  piaiiig  of  the  lei  ibould  acquin  the
Afaan  cariiaa,  it  would  be  neceaury  to  pioride
aotae  aecority  ^ainit  &aadulait  regiatrationa  which
■igbt  be  made  after  the  paiaiiig  of  the  lei,
tad  lUa  woohl  be  effected  by  leqciring  adicripti
to  giTc  in  their  namet  at  Rome  within  the  aiily

With  the  eitabliihment  of  the  imperial  power,
the  paliiical  righti  of  Rranan  citixene  became  in-
■ignifii  ant,  and  the  conuoBeimn  and  the  conno-
bHB  wen  the  only  paiti  of  the  cinlaa  that  wen
talMble.  TbeeontfiQittuiof  AaloninoiCancaUa,
wbkb  ^Tt  the  dntaa  to  all  the  Roman  world,  ap-
fiiti  laly  to  commnnitiea  and  not  to  indiridiiali ;
ila  eSta  waa  to  make  aD  the  citiea  in  the  emfrin
MBDcipta,  and  all  Latin!  into  taja.  The  dialinc'
nm  M  drta  and  Latini,  froni  tblt  time  lorward,
ealy  applied  la  indiTidnali,  namely,  to  freedmen
aad  il>dr  childioi.  The  perrgrinitaa  in  like  man-
■K  ctaaed  to  be  applitable  to  commnnitiea,  and
■dy  eiiated  in  the  deditidi  aa  a  daai  of  indindnali.
The  legkhliai  of  Jnarinjan  finally  pot  an  end  to
what  maaioed  of  thii  aodnt  diriiioa  into  clasaea,
aad  ib«  only  diTiaim  of  penona  waa  into  nibjecti
af  the  CaoBT  and  alaTca.

The  weed  ciTJlaa  it  oRen  laed  by  the  Koi
■rhaa to  enreaa  any  political
Qritaa  ABtifffhifnainm,  ftc.

(Saiigay.ZaUEirt^,  &c  toL  r.,  Utitr-
l^f,ht^dirLi^imtat;  iiA-is^DtrllaMiKitVoUa-
tMmm  it*  Tiifiivim  Heroic :to\.^  NoMrSgt
afiHtnm  Atititm  tiidStTigny,Sfittm  dn  i^
'—"■-"■- fl*sto,»ol.ii  p.  23,  4«. 10.  L.]


CLAVUS  LATUS..  2S3

CLANDESTI-NA  POSSE'SSIO. [Iiit««-

ICTtlK.]

CLARIGA'TIO. [FmiLBS.]

CLASSES. [CouiTiA.]

CLASSIATtll. [ExBBCiTus.}

CLA'SSrCUM. [CoRND.]

CLATHRI. [DoMi;8.J

CLAVIS. [Janu*.]

CLAUSTRUM. [Janda.]

CLAVUS  ANNA'LIS.  In  the  eaity  age*  of
Rome,  when  lettem  were  yet  scarcely  in  xue,  the
Romani  kept  a  reckoning  of  their  yean  by  driving
a  nail  (daaa),  on  the  idei  cf  each  September,  into
the  aide  wall  of  tha  temple  of  Jupiter  Optimua
Uaiimna,  which  ceremony  waa  performed  by  tha
conaul  01  a  dictator.  (Featua,  i.  v.  Clav.  AimaLs
Liv.  viL  3,  TilL  IB,  ii-  28  ;  Cie.  ad  Att.  r.  16.)

CLAVUS  GUBERNA'CULI. [Navis.]

CLAVUS  LATUS,  CLAVUS  ANQUSTU8.
The  meaning  of  theae  wordi  hai  given  liaa  to
much  dispute  ;  bat  it  ia  now  establiibed  beyond
doubt  that  the  datm*  lalut  via  a  broad  purple
extending  perpendicularly  firom  tha  neck
the  centre  of  the  lunita,  and  that  the  davut

^  hu  consisted  of  two  narrow  purple  ilipt,  rnn-
ning  jniallel  to  each  other  from  the  top  to  the
botlomof  the  tunic,  one  from  each  shoulder.  Hence
we  find  the  tunic  oJled  the  tunica  lalidavia  and
angiatielacia. These  purple  stripes  wen  woven

■  he  tunic  (Plin,  H.  N,  viii.  48) ;  and  this  eir-
ance  accouoU  for  the  fact  that  the  clavua  ia
represented  in  works  of  acalpture.  It  only
occors  in  paintings,  and  those  too  of  a  very  lata
period.  The  cfanu  latai  ia  represented  in  the  an-
neied  cat,  which  is  copied  &am  a  painting of


Rome  personified,  formerly  belonging  to  the  Bar-
berini  family.  The  danu  amffuttiu  It  seen  m  Iho
three  GgOTei  intndnced  below,  all  of  which  are
taken  fnsn  tepulcbral  paintings  eiecnted  lubse-
qnently  to  the  inttoductian  of  Christianity  at
Rome.  The  female  figure  on  the  left  band,  which
it  copied  from  Booncrotti  (Omrvaziaii  K^/ra
alami  F^rammmli  di  Fait  oaficAi  di  Vttro,  tav.
xxi^  fig.  1),  repressits  the  goddess  Monat^  The
one  on  the  right  hand  it  from  a  cemetery  on  the
Via  Solaia  Nova,  and  repretenls  Priscilla,  an  early
martyr.  The  next  figure  ia  selected  from  three  of
a  umitoT  kind,  representing  S' ' ' " ■ *^


CLAVUS  LATUS.


Tbc  latui  daaa  ww  &  diadnctiro  badge  of  Ilie
■autorian  order  (btem  dtaaH  ptdon  otowin,
Ilor.  SaL  L  6.  SR  1  Oyid,  Triit.  W,  10.  35) :  and
bcnce  it  ii  lued  to  lixnif;  the  tenitorial  dignity
(SucL  Tii.  35, Pe^  ^  *)  i  and  latidavait, '


oyi  il


rt.^^.38.) In


diilinclion  to  the  imgDitni  clsiiu,
puTjmra  major  (Juir.  Sat.  i  106),  pwywo  latior
(Plin.  //.  Af.  miii,  7) ;  Mid  tho  garment  it  de-
coiBtcd,  luniat  potau  (SUt.  Sylv.  x.  3.  29).  The
tiBaca  laiidtnia  wu  not  fastened  iriund  the  vaiit
like  the  common  tnnic,  bat  left  loose,  in  order  that
the  elniui  might  lie  flat  and  conipicDonil;  orei
ihcchut (QuindiLilS.  |13B.)


The  I


•  the  d


.  of  the


eqnettrinn  order  ;  but  the  right  of  wearing
latu  danu  wbi  alao  given  to  the  children  of
equestrittM  (Orid,  IViit  ir.  10.  39),  at  lea«  in
the  tune  of  Augoitiu,  bi  a  prelude  to  entering  the
•cnate-hDiiM.  Thii,  bowerer,  wnt  a  matter  of
perunal  indulgence,  and  not  of  indindual  right ;
for  it  vaa  gnnted  only  to  person*  of  Tery  ancient
family,  and  caircsponding  wealth  (Stat.  ^i.  it.  8.
59  ;  Dig.  S4.  lit.  1.  L  43),  and  then  by  ipecial
bvoor  of  the  emperor.  {SoM.  Ftip.^;  IkiI- Ab*.
xvt  17;  Plin.  t^iuL  a.  9.)  In  such  cases  the
Utni  dans  waa  aaanmed  with  the  toga  ririlis,  and
worn  nnt3  the  age  arriroi  at  which  the  joiain
equestrian  was  adLiiarible  into  the  senale,  when  it
and  the  angnstui  claiu  reanmed,
1  on  hi*  part,  or  any  other  einnnn-
incs,  pcerentcd  him  ban  estering  the  senate,  as
■■  the  caiewilli  Orid  (aimiiare  TriiL  ir.  la  37,


CLIENS.

with  38).  But  it  seems  that  the  lalni  clams  conld
be  a^in  resumed  if  the  same  indiiidnal  suhse-
qnently  wished  to  become  a  senator  (Hot.  Sat.  I  6.
26),  and  hence  a  fickle  character  is  deaignaled  a*
one  who  ii  always  changing  hti  claTia  (Hor.  Sal.
iL  7.  10).

The  lalni  claTna  is  taii  to  have  beoi  inlrodnecd
at  R«ne  bj  Tnllu  Hoatnini,  and  to  haTe  been
■dtqiled  by  bim  after  hit  eonqueat  <^  the  Etniscana
(Plin. /r.  AT.  ii.  63)  ;  nor  does  it  appear  to  hare
been  confined  to  any  poiticalar  class  during  the
eariier  poriodi,  but  to  hare  been  worn  by  all  ranha
promiscuouily.  (PIm.  H.  A^.  miii.  7.)  It  win
laid  aside  in  public  mooming. (Lit.  ix.  7.)  [A.  R.]

CLEPSYDRA. [HnaoLoOttiH.]

CLERU'CHl  (irttipBiJxoi). [CoLOKia.]

CLERUS  (*xi)po>). [HuiB.]

CLETG'RES  or  CLETORES  (tXirr^pft  or
■Afrop"),  nimmonera.  The  Athenian  nmunonera
were  not  official  persons,  but  merely  witneaiea  to
the  prosecutor  that  he  had  aerted  the  defendant
with  a  notice  of  the  action  bniught  agatut  lum,
and  the  day  upon  which  it  would  be  reqniiita  for
him  to  anxsr  belore  the  proper  magisliale,  in  ordel
that  the  first  examination  of  the  («se  might  com-
mence. (Harpocmt)  In  Ariitopbanea  (A'ai.  13*8,
Fe>7>.  1403)  we  read  of  one  numnoner  only  beiDg
employed,  but  two  are  generally  mentioned  by  the
oraton  aa  the  utnal  nmnber.  (Dem.  e,  Mnut.
p.  12SI.  5,  pro  On*.  244.  4,  &  Botal.  p.  1017.
fi.)  The  names  of  the  summonin  were  anlambed
to  the  declaration  or  bill  of  the  proaecDtor,  and
were,  of  coone,  essential  to  the  tahdity  of  all  pn-
cecdinga  foiinded  upon  it.  What  has  been  hithsto
stated  appliet  in  genersl  to  all  cauAS,  whether  Sfjni
or  ypafai :  but  in  some  which  commenced  with  an
infrirRuuian  laid  before  oiagislratee,  and  an  arreal  of
the  accused  in  coniequence  (ea  in  the  case  of  an
Iriniii  or  <Jira77*Afa),  there  would  be  naoccuioa
ht  a  summons,  nor,  of  course,  witncasca  to  ita  aer-
ticci  In  the  tMroi  and  loai^ioriw  also,  when
held  at  the  regular  timea,  no  summona  waa  issued,
as  the  persona  whose  character  might  be  a&cted
by  an  aocuaaCiim  were  naceanrily  )*eaent,  or  pre-
sumed to  be  so  ;  but  if  the  pmaecntor  had  let  tbo


tUirti  at  any  ol


be  M«ncy

Of  the  SaKi^ioa-Ial  thai  of  the  onton  alone  had  nn
filed  time  ;  but  the  first  step  in  the  cause  we*  dm
the  nsoal  legal  aumniona  (wpde'cAqvit),  but  im
announcement  from  the  pnaecnter  to  tba  acenanl
in  the  assembly  of  the  people,  (hfeier,  AtL  Pw-
MM.  pp.  212,  S7J.}  In  the  eteut  of  peneiu  auU
acrihuig  ihemseltes  blsely  as  summonen,  they
expoaed  themieWea  to  an  action  (4>4if9eaAirT-«W}
at  the  suit  of  the  party  aggrietcd.  [J.  S.  M.l
CLIBANA'RIl.  tCATiPHBAcn.]
CLIENS  is  supposed  to  contain  the  Mine  ele-
meat  a*  the  tcrb  ciiie™,  to  "  hmr"or"obeT,"  ami
is  accordingly  compered  by  Niebuhr  with  the  Ger-
man word  ioerigBr,  "  a  dependant"

In  the  time  of  Cicero,  we  find  patraraa  in  the
aenae  of  adtiser,  adtocate,  or  defender,  eppoaed  to
eliena  in  the  sense  of  the  person  defended,  or  ib«
consults ;  and  this  nse  of  the  wad  must  be  re-
ferred, aa  we  shall  see,  to  the  original  character  of
the  patronui.  (Otid.  Art  Am.  L  38  ;  Hor.  SaL  i.
1.  10,  £>.!.&  31,  ii.  1.  104.) The  lektico  of  a


CLIENa
■aMcr  tD  bia  liboated  iIstb  (/i&erfKi)  wai  hIm  ci-
IRMed  bj  Ilw  wcrd  fAlninai,  and  the  Ubertiu  n>M
llie  cli«u  oE  hii  paOoDui.  Any  Rotdui  eitiiea
wbo  nntcd  &  [Koteckic,  migbt  attach  lumiclf  to  a
patzmu.  Bod  vvald  thcDceforvard  be  a  cJieni.
^trac^m  who  cune  into  exiliam  at  Rome  might
do  the  aiot  Ou  applieattaiu,  Cic  dt  Or.  i  39}.
DitttBgmubed  Boniani  ven  alao  wmetimet  the
[■DCKU  af  (taU*  sod  dtica,  wUch  were  in  a  cer-
tain nhlua  of  nibjcictian  or  friendiliip  to  Rome
(Swlon.  Octacim.  Oiaar,  17}  ;  and  m  thii  rc-
tfiea  )iay  maf  be  compoied  to  colonial  Hgenli.  or
jrfrrrfii  UDong  na,  who  are  employed  to  look  afLer
tlM  iiiUR*!*  of  the  colony  in  the  mother  country  ;
eioefM  that  among  (be  Ronuoi  nicb  aervicea  were
'  d  iirectly,  tbougk  there  might  be

tion. (Cfc. Div.  20,  Fro

Or.  S£.}  Thii  nlationibip
1  waa  upreaied  by  the
t.  XTT.  IS),  which  alio
eiiamtd  tha  whole  body  of  a  mac'i  dicnti.
(T*aL  Ana.  in.  61.)  In  the  Greek  writen  on
Rooiao  hiitoiy,  pAtToniu  iarepnwnted  byirpoOTd-
Tm:  and  di^  bj  vtMrns.  (Pint  7K.  GracA.
13,  MarimM,  6.)

The  dienicla,  bat  in  a  diflerent  foim,  eiiited  ai
far  back  n  tba  ncordi  or  tnditioni  of  Ramaii
kiMafj  eitsid  ;  and  the  following  ii  a  brief  notice
of  in  cngin  and  chanctCT,  aa  ataled  by  Dionyiina
{Aaliq.  Sam.  ii.  9),  in  which  the  wriCei'i  tcrma
«.kopt:  —

Roajaloa  gave  tn  the  fbwvtpitv  the  con  of  re-
Egiso,  the  hcofKCf  (EpX'"'},  the  adminiitration  of
jucice,  and  the  admuuitiatiDD  of  the  itale.  The
IHjiTiirot  (whom  in  the  preceding  chapter  ho  hai
ecplained  to  bo  the  wA^iIoi]  bad  none  of  theie
pritikga,  and  thoy  were  alio  poor ;  huibandry
■ad  the  nrrrmrr  arti  of  life  were  their  occupalion.
Boonloi  tfam  entnuted  the  t^furrwol  to  the  nje
ketping  <S  the  warfuim  (who  aie  the  c^arplBu),
■od  pennitled  each  of  them  to  chooie  hii  patron.
Thia  nlatSooahip  between  the  patren  and  the  client
BM  called,
Cic  Rtp,  il .

Tie  idalin  right!  and  dntiee  of  the  patnma  and
ike  iliiBli  'Kot,  aceocding  to  Dionyaini,  aa  ibllow
(DioDya.  iL  10,  and  otbo

Ikpalninwaa"^-  '  —
be  >a<  the  dient'*  ^  ,

waathagDardiaaandpntectorof  hia  ownchildroi ;
benaintained  the  client *■  nil  when  hewaa  WTonged,

being  wiuuged  by  him:  in  a  word,  the  patron  waa
the  gnardian  of  the  cUent'a  interevt,  both  private
■od  pablic  The  client  contributed  to  the  marriage
pstioa  of  the  ntroo'i  dangbter,  if  the  patrou  waa
poor  ;  and  b>  hia  ranaom,  or  that  of  hi*  children,  if
they  woe  taken  priaraen  ;  he  paid  the  coiti  and
diiiimn  of  a  aait  which  the  pabou  loot,  and  of
a*y  poal^  in  which  he  waa  condemned ;  he  bore
part  of  the  patnn'i  eipenaet  incurred  by  hia  dia-
c  dntiea,  at  fillbig  the  honourable
K  Mate.  Neither  party  could  accnie  the
■give


otlui  pauagea) :
e  It^adiliero


ihatgiiig  pnUii
pbcaialhett


It  the  other,  <


t  the  other.  The  dienta
paaicd  thew  palnni  to  war  aa  — '■  (Dionya.  i.
41)  Tbii  idatiooihip  between  patron  and  client
antaiated  far  many  gmeratiem,  and  ceaembled  in
aS  napccta  tha  relationihip  by  Uood.  It  waa  a
i—aulien  that  wai  faeceditaiT  ;  the  eliena  bore  the
gcBtile  Dane  of  Ilw  patrmn^  and  be  and  lua  de-


CLIENa  29fi

acendanta  were  thni  eonnecled  with  tha  gena  of  the

Clronut.  Il  waa  the  glory  of  illnMrioua  fiuoOiei  to
TO  many  clienti,  and  to  add  to  the  nomber
tnnamitled  to  them  by  their  aneeston.  But  tha
dienta  were  Dot  limited  to  the  Bij^iOTiirei :  tha
coloniea,  and  the  elatci  connected  with  Rome  by
alliance  and  Irieodihlp,  and  the  conquered  itatea,
had  their  jiatruna  at  Rome  ;  and  the  aenate  fre-
quently referred  Che  dispute*  between  luch  Malei
to  their  patroni,  and  abided  by  their  dedaion.

Dionyeiuagirca  a  tolerably  mtelligible  itatemen^
whether  true  or&lie,  of  the  relatioaofa  patron  and
client.  What  petiODa  actually  compoaed  the  body
of  client!,  or  what  waa  the  real  hiitivital  origin  of
the  dientela,  ii  immaterial  for  the  porpoee  of  nn-
dentanding  what  it  waa.  It  ii  clear  that  Dio-
nyaiua  tmdentood  the  Roman  atata  aa  originally
conajHting  of  patricii  and  plebeii,  and  he  baa  eaid
that  the  dienta  were  the  pleba.  Now  it  appeara,
horn  hia  own  work  and  from  Livy,  that  there  were
dientea  who  were  not  the  pleba,  or,  in  other  worda,
dientea  and  ^eba  were  not  coUTcrtible  termi.  Thia
poauge,  then,  boj  little  hiitoHcal  Tslue  aa  ai-
plaming  the  origin  of  the  dienta.  Still  umethmg
may  be  exttacted  &am  Che  paaaage,  though  it  ia
impoeaible  to  recancHo  it  dtogetber  with  all  other
evidence.  The  dieati  were  not  aerri :  they  bad
property  of  their  own,  and  freedom  [ISierbu).  Cdq-
■iitonlly  with  what  Dionysiua  aayi,  they  might  bo
Roman  dtizeni  in  the  wider  aenae  erf*  the  term  dvia,
enjoying  only  the  commerdnm  and  connnbium,  bnt
not  the  Bu£iigium  and  honorea,  which  bdonged  to
tbdr  patrouL  [Civrr^s.]  It  wonld  alio  I^  ceo-
aiitent  with  the  atatement  of  Dionyiiua,  that  there
were  &ee  men  m  the  atato  who  were  not  patridi,
and  not  dientea ;  but  if  anch  petaona  exuled  in
the  earlieat  period  ef  the  Roman  itate,  they  niiat
haie  laboured  under  great  ciiil  diinbilitiea,  and
thii  alu  ii  not  inconiiitent  with  the  teatimony  of
hiitoiy.  Sack  a  body,  if  it  eiiated,  mnat  have
been  powerleaa  ;  bnt  wch  a  body  might  in  -niriana
waj-B  intreoao  in  numben  and  wejih,  and  grow
up  mtD  an  estate,  auch  aa  tha  plebi  afUrwardi  waa.
The  body  of  cliuile*  might  include  freedmen,  aa  it
cortainly  did :  bnt  it  aeenu  an  aianmptjon  of  what
requires  proof^  to  infer  (aa  Niebuhi  doea)  that,
became  apatmnoaconldpitt  hiafreedman  to  death,
he  could  do  tha  aame  to  a  client ;  for  thia  inTdvea
a  tadt  aaramption  that  the  clienta  were  originally
alavei ;  and  uiia  may  be  tnia,  bnt  it  ia  not  known.
Beaides,  it  oumot  be  tme  that  a  patron  had  the
power  of  life  and  death  orer  hia  ncedman,  who
had  obtained  the  civitaa,  any  more  than  he  had
OTer  an  emondpated  aeo.  There  ia  alao  no  met
that  the  dientela  in  which  liberti  atood  waa  here-
dila^  like  that  of  the  proper  dienta.  The  body
of  dientea  might,  conaiitently  with  all  that  we
know,  contain  peregrini,  who  had  no  priiil^ea  at
all ;  and  it  might  contain  that  claaa  of  penoni  wbo
had  the  commercinm  only,  if  the  commerdam  ex~
iatcd  in  the  early  agea  of  the  atsta.  [Citita&]
The  latter  claaa  of  peraona  would  require  n  pUroma
to  whom  they  might  attach  thcametrei  ibr  the  pro-
tAction  of  their  property,  and  wbo  might  ane  and
defend  them  in  dl  sniu,  on  accotmt  of  the  (heia
aunmed)  inability  of  anch  peiaoni  to  ane  in  their
own  name  in  the  early  agoa  of  Rome.

The  relation  of  the  patroana  to  the  diena,  aa  re-
[nsented  by  Dionyaina,  hai  an  analogy  to  the
patria  poteitai,  and  the  form  of  the  word  patranoi


S9«  CLIENa

It  ii  lUted  by  Niebahr,  that  "  if  ■  climt  di«d '
witbont  facin,  hii  pBtron  inherited  ;  and  thii  law
ertendcd  to  the  oue  of  freedmea  ;  the  power  of
the  palnm  qtct  vrbom  mmt  certainly  haTfl  been
fomidsd  nriginallj  on  the  general  patronal  right."
Thii  MaCement,  if  it  b«  collect,  wuuld  beeeniuteDt
wilh  the  quui  patrU  poteatu  of  the  ntnam.

But  if  a  dieni  died  viiA  haa,  conld  he  nudce  ■
will?  and  if  he  died  indoftf  heiia,  coald  he  not
diipOH  of  hii  property  bj  will  P  and  if  he  could
not  make,  «  did  not  make  a  will,  and  had  bein,
who  miut  thej  be  ?  miut  they  be  mi  irrrdeir
had  he  a  bmilia,  and  eonKqueatly  agnad  ?  had
he,  in  bet,  that  conniihiiun,  by  Tirtoe  of  which  he
coald  acquire  the  patria  poleilai  F  He  mishc  haTe
nil  tbii  coniiatcntly  wilb  the  ilalement  of  Diony-
■ioa,  and  yet  be  a  citixen  mtm  optima  jbts  ;  for  he
had  not  the  honocei  and  the  otbei  diitinrniihinK
privileget  of  the  patridi ;  isd  eoniitleDtly  with
the  itatement  of  Dionyaisa  he  caold  not  Tots  in
the  comitia  coriata,  Tt  ia  not  pouible  to  prore
that  a  client  had  all  thii,  and  it  Hemi  equally  im-
ponibte,  from  eiiitinr  eridence,  to  ihow  what  hia
lighli  really  wen.  So  &r  aa  our  eitant  andeat
authoritiei  ihow,  the  origin  of  (he  clienteli,  and  iu
true  eharmcter,  were  unknown  to  them.  There
waa  a  body  in  the  Roman  atate,  at  an  earlj|  period
of  iu  eiiatence,  which  warn  neither  patrician  nor
dient,  and  a  body  wbicli  once  did  not,  bat  ulti-
mately did,  participate  in  the  (OTereign  power :
thit  waa  the  plebi.  The  dientei  alao  eiiated  in  the
nrlieat  period  of  the  Roman  alate,  hut  onr  know-
ledge  of  the  true  condition  of  thia  body  muat  re-
main ineiact,  for  the  want  of  aaffident  evidence  in
amount,  and  aufBeienlly  tnialworthT.

It  ia  atated  by  Liiny  (iL  £6)  that  the  clientea
had  TOtetin  the  comitia  of  the  centunca:  they
were  thenfcn  regialend  in  the  eeaura'  booka,
and  could  hare  qutritarian  ownership.  [Cintuh-
ViRt]  They  bad  therefore  the  commercium,  poi-
aibly  the  comiubtnm,  and  certainly  the  lufTiaginm.
*' uay  be  doubled  whether  Ditanaioa  ondentood


their


1  haie  the  laf&agiun


_ I  hut  if  luch  wai  the  Irgal  eondition  of  the

dientea,  it  ia  impotaible  thai  the  ezpoution  of  their
relation  to  the  patricinna,  aa  given  by  aame  modem
writen,  can  be  altogether  correct

It  would  appear,  tnun  what  hat  been  atated,
iLat  patronua  and  palridui  were  originally  con-
vertible termi,  at  leail  unlit  the  pleba  obtained
the  honoraa  From  (hat  time,  many  of  the  reaioni
for  a  penm  being  a  eliena  of  a  patricini  wonld
ceaaa  ;  for  the  plebeiant  had  acqnired  political  im-
portance, had  became  acquainted  wilh  the  law  and
the  legal  fontf,  and  were  fiilly  competent  to  adviie
their  dlentt.  Thii  change  mnit  bava  ccotributed
to  the  dettructton  of  the  atrict  old  dientela,  and
wai  the  traniition  to  the  dienlela  of  the  Uter  aget
oftherepubiic  (Hugo,Le*r*w*,&cvoL  i.  p.«8.)

Il  hag  been  coajectuitd  (Bedter,  tfandbuiji  dtr
AMuobH  AlUriiSma:  toL  ii.  p.  125)  that  the
elicntebi  waa  an  old  Italian  iutitnUon,  which  ei-
iated among  tome  of  Ihoae  people,  cot  of  which  the
Romantu  Popolni  aroae.  When  Tatiua  and  hit
Sabinet  tettled  in  Rome,  their  dienU  tcttled  there
with  them  (Dionya  iL  16)  ;  and  Attiui  Clauna
brought  to  Roma  a  large  body  of  dienla.  (Liv.  ii.
16  J  Dionja.  t.  tO).  It  it  further  conjectured,
and  it  ia  not  improbable,  that  the  dientea  were
Italiui,  who  hod  been  conquered  and  reduced  to
a  Mate  of  tul^iectiiNi.


Admitting  a  ditCinction  between  the  pJehi  and
ic  old  dientea  to  be  fully  ealabliihed,  then  it
jU  itnm  for  eanful  inveatigation  ai  lo  the  real
mdidon  of  the  dientea,  and  of  the  compoaitiaa  of
the  Koman  itale  before  ihe  eitate  of  the  plebt  «ai
ide  equal  to  that  of  the  patridani.  [0-  ^]
CHENTE'LA.  tCiiaWB.]
CLIHA  (vAi^ia),  Uteially  a  tiif  or  iMtHmatum,
u  uaed  in  the  mathematical  geogn^ihy  of  the
Oreeki*  with  le^rence  to  the  indination  of  variont
partt  of  the  eaith'i  luibce  lo  the  piano  of  Iba
equator.  Before  Ihe  globular  figure  of  the  earth
waa  known,  il  waa  luppoaed  that  there  waa  a
general  dope  of  it]  anrfiiee  fiom  anith  to  noMh,
and  thta  wai  called  K\lfia.  But  ai  the  Kienee  of
mathematical  geogzaphy  advanced,  the  word  wai
applied  to  diSerent  belli  of  the  earth'i  aurfaoe,
which  were  determined  by  the  different  lengthi  of
the  tongcit  day  at  their  linca  of  demarcation.
Thii  diviiion  into  cUmalei  wat  ^^ied  only  to
the  northern  hemiaphare,  at  the  geogr^hea  had
no  piBctiotl  knowledge  of  th*  eortk  aonth  of  the

Hipparchui  (about  a.  c.  160]  aeani  to  hare
been  the  firat  who  made  uie  of  tiui  diviaion  ;  hit
ajttem  ia  explained  at  length  by  SDabo  (iL
p.  1S3).  Aiaumlng  the  circnmlerencr  of  a  great
circle  of  Ihe  (sith  to  be  252,000  iladia,  Hippanhni
divided  thii  into  360  di^reet,  of  700  atadia  to
each  ;  and  then,  beginning  at  the  paimlld  of  Mem^
and  proceeding  northwardi,  he  undertook  to  de-
acribe  the  aatronooiieal  phenomena  obaervedat  each
degree  of  latitude,  or  every  700  aladia ;  amonE
thcie  phenomena,  he  obaerred  that  the  length  of
the  longeit  day  at  Meto£  waa  13  houn,  and  at
Syene  19^.  The  obtnTatient  of  later  aammomcra
and  geogiaphert,  inch  aa  Oeminni,  Stiaba,  Pliny,
and  Pidemy,  are  detcribed  in  the  wotki  dted
below.  The  following  table,  from  Ultert,  ihowa
the  dimatei,  ai  given  by  Ptolemy  (Oaojr.  i.  23).
It  will  be  aUerred  that  then  an  nineteen  dimatca,
(he  beginning  and  middle  of  which  are  maAed  by
linei  oiled  iiaralleli,  of  which  the  fitil  ma^  the
equator,  and  the  thirty-third  the  arctic  cirde.  Up
to  thii  point,  then  are  aixtcen  dimilei,  of  which
twelve  an  determined  by  the  increaae  of  balf-an-
hour  in  the  length  of  the  longen  dav,  the  13th
and  Uth  1  hour,  and  the  ISth  and  16th  3  houta.
In  the  remaining  climato,  within  the  aretio  circle,
the  dayi  no  longer  increaae  by  houn  but  by
montha.  Eliewhere  (Alnag.  il  6)  he  maliea
ten  climatei  north  of  the  eqnator.  beginning  at  tha
paiallel  of  Tapnbane  in  lat  4°  IS',  and  ending  mX
that  of  Thule,  in  lat  63o  ;  and  one  to  the  aouth,
beginning;  at  Ihe  e<imilar,  w  the  paiallel  of  Cape
Ruitum,  and  ending  al  the  parallel  of  AntimuiiB
in  iat.  16*"  ai'.

The  term  gtS/ia  wai  afterwaidi  applied  to  tfa«
average  temperacure  of  caeh  of  tbeie  regiona,  and
hence  onr  modern  uee  of  the  word.  (Slrab.  Let
Dion.  Hal  L  9  ;  Plut  Afar.  1 1,  AtM.  Paul.  5,
Morai.  p.  eSI  ;  Polyb.  vi  6.  §  I,  I.  I,  8  3  ;
Alh.  lii.  p.  S2S,  e. ;  Oemin.  Ebm.  J^rrm.  5  ;
Plin.  H.  ff.  iL  70—78,  a.  73—77  ;  Agathem.  L  3  ;
Cellar.  G-ng.  L  S  i  Uk«n,  Oeag.  vol  i  pt  2,
r9- 182.  &C-)  [P-  S.)


(VitniT.  L  I

AuL  OelL  ziv.  I  ;  Colum.  ilL  19). Clima  «

only  Died  at  ■  lata  period.


CLIPEUa

CLIPEUS. 297

Oi—M.

PnlW.

L«f-tD.,.

ijma>.

Fwlagtbioiigb !

I.

2

12h. On.
12 15

4

0"
15

Tiprobuw.

11.

a

4

12 30
19 4i

8

25
SO

&i,as  Anlltw
Adule  Si°u>.

IIL

5
6

13 0
13 15

16
90

97
14

Mero£.

N.P.U.

IV.

7
8

13 30
IS 45

33
37

SI

19

SfeiM.

V.

9
10

14 0
14 IS

30

2
18

Mid^eof^Unicu.

VI.

19

14 SO
14 45

S6
3S

0
35

Rhodui.

VIL

13
14

15 0
15 15

43

S6
41

MudlLi.

VI IL

IS
16

IS SO
IS 45

45
46

1

M'iddletiftbeEuiine.

'^

17
18

15  0

16  IS

50

SS

Hiddi.ofth<,p.]u>ni>«)t;..

"

30

16 4S

51
59

40
50

Soulbem  Biil^
Houtba  of  the  Rhine.

XL

Si

17 0
17 15

54
55

30
0

Mouths  of  the  Tuiauu
The  Brigutea  in  BriUuL

XII.

S3

17 30
17 45

56

57

0

BnuonU  M«nu.

XIIL

25
96

IS 0

IS 30

58

59

0
SO

South  of  BriunnU  P«™.
Middle  of  ditto

XIV,

S7
S8

19 0
19 SO

61
69

0

North  of  ditto
Ebudai  lu.ul>e.

XV.

39
SO

90  0

91  0

63

^

Thule.

UnknovD  ScjtluiD  Tiibo.

XVL

31
39

22 0

S3 0

65
66

30
O

Vakaown  Sojthmn  Tribe*

' XVIL

33

94 0
1  nxHitb  about

66=8
67"

40"

1  xvnt

35
36

3 ZH

?l

30
20

1 IIX.

3T
38
39

5

78
84
90

0
0

V  bra,  and  ii  Hid  to  hmve  been  fint  ni
Ptaam  mi  Acririin  of  Ai^  (Pool.  iL  25.  g  6J,
•adtkmfae  iMaUtdil^iauATgoaiin{Vag.Aai.
A.  t37\  md  likeiKd  to  the  nut.  (Corapare  alu
inOa  *dpT«r'  ib^r.  Ham.  II.  HI  347,  t.  453,
inOa  ttrnttXam,  lit.  438  ;  Vur.  Di  Lag.  lot.
'■  l>,  *L  MBIIct  ;  Feitn*,  1. 1>.>  According  la
tdtt  mntmlM,  howenr,  tho  Oncka  obtained  the


■hirid,  HI  mil  u  tlie  hehnet,  ironi  the  Egrptiuu
(Hend.  iT.  180  j  PlM.  Tta.  p.  2*,  b.)

The  ihield  laed  b;  the  Homeric  heron  wu
large  enough  to  coTtr  the  whole  flun.  It  vaa
tometimea  made  of  otieti  twitted  together,  called
trill,  or  of  wood :  the  wood  or  wicker  wai  then
eorered  oier  with  ox  hidea  of  MTeral  foldi  deep,
end  finajly  bound  round  the  edge  with  metal.
(Horn.  IL  lil  29£.)  The  onter  rim  ia  termed
fcTnf  (/t  lYiii.  478),  (tw  (Enr.  Tnad.  1206),


S98  CLIPEU8.

npi^iptM  or  ificAat  (_Il.  iL  33).  [Aktyx.]  1
tbe  centre  ma  a  piojectian  odled  iM^^Xnt
unrtiupiKjoi',  Binto,  which  wrred  M  k  Miit
ireapoa  bjr  iUelf,  or  Ckuud  the  miuilei  of  tl
aiemjr  lu  glance  cff  from  the  ihield.  It  ia  w«ti
the  neil  woodcut,  from  the  column  of  Trajan.


Id  ths  Homeric  tinea,  the  Qneka  uied  k  bell
la  auppoTt  the  ahield  )  bnt  thia  ciiatom  wan  asbae-
jnently  discontinued  in  conaeqiiSLca  of  ita  great
inconvenience  [BaLTKUb],  and  the  fbllowing  me-
thod waa  adopted  in  ita  atead :  —  A  baud  of
tnelal,  wood,  or  Icntlier,  lenncd  Korir,  wai  placed
icron  the  inaide  from  rim  to  rim,  like  the  diameter
at  a  dide,  lo  which  were  a^ed  a  number  of


CLIPEU&

iron  hara,  cTO«aing  cack  oiler  aomewliat  in
nn  of  the  letter  X,  which  met  the  Wm  below
ner  bend  of  the  elbow  joint,  and  aerred  to
Bleady  the  orb.  Thia  ^tparmtuaf  which  ia  laid  lo
baio  been  inieatedb;  the  (^riani  (Herod,  i.  171),
wai  termed  tx'o'Bi'  at  ix"^'  Annmd  the  inner
edge  nn  a  lesthei  thoDr  (■•V">{)i  'i"''  ^J  "Bila
at  certain  distance*,  ao  uiat  it  formed  a


iAii.1396). Tbe  prvcedingwoodcnt,  which  al
the  whole  apporatna,  will  render  thia  ace
telligible. It  ia  taken  from  one  of  the  tc


1  the  irjpruc'


e  taken


popular  oulbmk  ;  which  cnatom  accounta  for  the
alarm  of  Dcmoathenea  in  the  Knighta  of  Ariito-
phanea  (669),  when  be  nw  them  banging  up  with
their  handle*  cm.

The  Jiowfi  waa  carried  b;  the  heaT7-armed  men
(jrXtTai)  dnring  the  hialorical  limea  of  Greece,
■nd  ia  oppoaed  to  the  lighter  ri\Tti  and  f^fifior :
hence  we  find  the  wold  ivwii  naed  to  aigni^  B
bodf  of  ^XTrw  <Xen.  Anai.  L  7.  S  1*)>-

According  to  Lir;  (i.  43),  when  the  ceniu  waa
instituted  bj  Serviui  Tuilina,  the  fint  claaa  onir
uaed  the  dipaw,  and  the  seconi  were  armed  with
the  KuAun  [SctrrtiM)  ;  but  after  the  Roman  aol-
dicr  rec^Tcd  pay,  the  ef^ou  waa  diacontinoed
alli^gcther  for  the  S^ine  mteni.  (Lir.  liii.  8  ;
■" "■ " "' Diod.  Ec/og.


derieea,  the  origin  of  ai
lidenble  an^ui^.  It  ia  menticUKd  aa  eari;  ns
the  time  of  Aeaclijlna,  who  npreaenta  the  aeren
chiefa  who  marched  againat  Thebei  with  auch
ahi'Ida  (Aeschyl.  Sv*-  <•  Titb.  387,  ftc ;  comp.
Virg.  Aa.  nil  6fiB  ;  Sil.  Itat.  TiiL  386). Th<4


CLOACA.
adpn  ii  nhutntcd  by  the  [needing  bcaotifiil
g^  htjm  Ac  utiqnef  in  vluch  the  figure  ot  Vic-
tiwj  il  EepcCMOted  imeritniig  upon  &  cUpau  the
■m*  «r  mriu  cf  nne  deccutd  hero.

Eech  Bonmi  Mildiec  had  alio  fail  own  oime  in-
■aibf4  wpuB  hie  (hield,  m  order  that  he  might
rtaiHj  6nd  hk  own  whoi  the  nder  wu  giren  to
BBfik  mnm  (Vegct.  iL  17) ;  Bud  (onietiiDei  the
■■■■  of  ifca  eoauBudet  node  wham  he  (bnght.


Tk  (■


T  bath. [Balniak,  p.
isia.)  '  (A.R.]

CLITBLLAE,  a  pair  of  panaien,  and  there-
(n  (ailf  Died  in  the  plan]  number.  (Hor.  Sit  I
S.  47  :  Plant  Mod.  iiL  2.  91.)  In  Italy  they
wm  nmiKiiily  luid  with  mnlee  or  *»e>,  but  in
iiThi  camtrica  they  wen  atio  applied  to  honei,  of
vhid  en  '--~~~  ii  giTcn  in  the  annexed  wood-
eut  buai  the  alunm  H  Tnjan  j  and  Piautni  {IL
94)  fignatiTel*  deacribea  a  man  upon  whose
itonlden  a  load  of  any  kind,  eitber  nuual  or  phy-
rical,  it  cbugad,  ai  toMO  diuSaria. [A  R.]


CLOA'CA,aaimmoa>ewer.  The  term  doaea
a  genenDy  naed  m  refcroKe  only  to  thoH  ipadoaa
nbtoiaDaoDi  nulta,  ntber  of  atone  or  brid^
thnagb  which  the  fool  waten  of  the  dty,  u  well
"  ""  ' ' lo  Rome  by  the  aqne-


II  the  city  wai  fdmitbed  to
cwiy  <J[  iu  bnpniitiea  into  the  main  conduit.
The  wh^  city  wu  thn>  intenecled  by  labter-
raai.iniB  jagmget,  and  ii  therefore  called  ariii
fiMiAt,  in  Pliny'*  enthnriaMic  dcacriptiua  of  the
<i«w.  (,H.N.xixJi.  1&J.24.)
The  EMM  eelebralad  of  Iheaa  diuni  wai  the

tArA  la  TaiqaiQina  Priiciii  (Lit.  L  SB ; Plin
L  t),  and  which  wai  fbnned  to  carry  o9  thi


■  Vda


of  the  Fon


Thi


-k  of  the  gnat
■aiHaity  of  the  woik  ;  it  ii  not  tfac  peperino  of
GeU  Bid  the  Alban  hOli,  which  wai  the  cmnmon
Mdii^-Btiiiie  in  the  time  of  the  commonwodth
bailie  the  "tD&litoide"  of  Brocchi,  one  of  tlu
nlcBBic  fcrmatiaiu  which  ii  found  is  many  plaeea
il  ff^e,  and  which  wa>  iftswardi  inpplanted  '
pAfie  ^""Mny  by  the  finn  qnality  of  the  peperin
(.\naU,  HiiC  AM.  tdI.  I  p.  S2.)  Thii  cloaca
wa  tajiil  by  three  arcbea,  one  within  the  other,
iIb  nuBOM  of  vhieh  ii  »  Mmiencidai  nolt  of


CLOACA.  Si

IS  BoniBn  palmi,  ibout  14  feet  in  diameter,  eai
of  the  hewn  blocki  being  Ti  palmi  long  uid  4
high,  and  joined  together  without  cement.  Tl
a  of  coniliuction  ii  ihown  in  tlie  annext
nO,  taken  on  the  ipot,  where  a  part  of  it
uocoTered  near  the  aieli  of  janua  Quadrifroni.


The  month  where  it  reacbei  the  Tiber,  nearly

oppoiite  to  one  eitremity  of  the  imila  TUerim,
-■"  Temami  in  the  ilate  referred  to  by  Pliny  {Lr.).
rcpreiented  in  the  sniteied  woodcut,  wiUi  the
idjaoent  buildinga  u  they  atill  eiiit,  the  modem
fiibiici  only  which  encumber  the  lile,  being  left


The  punvei  in  Sttabo  and  Plin;r  which  itata
tbat  a  cart  (<Mi<i{ii,  Mbu)  loaded  with  hay,  conld
pan  down  the  duca  maxima,  will  no  longer  ap-
peal incredible  from  the  dimeniioni  gi»en  of  thii
■tnpendoui  work  ;  but  it  must  ctill  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  Trhiclei  of  the  Romaiu  were  much
■mailer  than  our  own.  Dion  Canini  alio  ilalis
(xlix.  43)  that  Agiippa,  when  he  cleanaed  the
•even,  patied  through  them  in  a  boat,  to  which
Pliny  probably  alladei  in  the  expreauon  urbt
laitar  naingaia;  and  tfaeir  extrBordinory  dimen-
iioni,  ai  well  bi  that  of  the  embonchotea  throogh
whiiJi  the  wKten  poured  into  them,  ii  tlill  further
teitified  by  the  expbiti  of  Nero,  who  threw  down
the  lewen  the  onfortunate  Tictinu  of  hii  nightly
rioti.  (Soet.  Ntn,  26  ;  compare  Dicmji.  i.  £3  ;
Cic.  Pn  Stn.  SS.)

The  cloaca  matimOf  formed  by  Tarquin,  ex.
tended  only  fraia  the  fomm  to  the  rirer,  but  woi
■abeequentfy  eontinoed  ai  br  up  ai  the  Snbura,  of
which  branch  MOW  TcatigeawcM  diMorend  in  the

.Tl.  , ^., , ^.,.^


300  ELOPES  DIKE.

jRU  1743.  (Veintl.  jKtidiiti  di  Soma,  Tol.  L
p.  98  ;  Ficonni,  Vriigii  di  Rama,  pp.  71,  7S.)
Tliii  wmi  ths  crigita  Aihirw  to  wbidi  JuTemtl
nfen  (SoL  T.  106.  Conp.  Diet.  q^Or.  oitdRam.
Otog.  »tt.  Rom.)

Tha  eipeiua  of  deuuing  and  repairing  than
*  cUaraa  ma,  of  conne,  tsi;  gnat,  uiil  wa*  de-
frayed partly  hj  the  treaiuiy,  and  partly  by  an
UHumeDl  called daaoarit'iit. (Ulpun,  Dig.  7.
tit  i.  1.27.  19.1 Under  the  republic,  the  ad-
miniitiation  of  toe  leirera  waa  entmited  to  the
cenaon  ;  bM  nndar  the  empire,  particiiki  offii
wen  appaintad  for  that  poipoK,  cAnfiinim  n
torn,  Ttaalicsy  of  wbom  i>  (bond  la  inacripli
(flp.  Ond.  p.  eierii.  5, p,  eicriiL  2, 3,  4,
p.edii  1  ;  Ulpian,  Dig.  43.  bt.  23.  a.  3). The
emparim  employed  condemned  criminala in tha
laak. (Plin..^put  I.  11.)

Rome  ma  not  the  only  city  celebrated  fo
mrki  of  thia  kind.  Diodorua  (iL  2b)  vaket
fpeoal  Dwotioii  of  tha  aeven  (inHfiai)  of  A^-
ventum,  which  were  conatmeted  ftbout  ac  4B0,
vj  an  architect  named  Phaeax,  after  whom  they
were  ailed  4«I«>i.  [A.  R.]

KLOPES  DIKE'  (kAoit^i  tint),  the  action  for
theft  wa*  brongbt  in  the  tunal  manner  before  a
diaetetea  or  a  court,  ths  latter  of  which  Meier
lAU.  fraettt,  p.  67)  infers  lo  have  been  under
the  preaidency  of  the  theamotbetae,  whether  the
proaecator  preferTed  hia  accnaation  by  way  of
tfoi^  or  tin).  We  leam  from  the  law  qnoted
by  Domaathenei  (c  Timoer.  p.  733),  that  the  cri-
minal upon  conTiction  waa  obliged  to  [ay  twice
tha  Tolue  of  the  theft  to  the  pUuitiff  if  the  latter
ncoTered  the  apecifie  thing  atolen  ;  that  failing  of
thia,  he  waa  bound  to  Teimbune  him  tenfold,  that
the  court  might  infiet  an  additional  poulty,
and  that  the  criminal  might  be  confined  in  the
atoclu  (■oSoKibcini)  fire  dnya  and  ai  many  nighta.
In  lome  caiea,  a  penon  that  had  been  robbed  waa
permitted  by  the  Attic  law  to  enter  tha  honae  in
which  he  niapected  bii  property  ma  coitcaaled,
and  inatitute  a  aearch  for  it  (^aipw>,  Ariatoph.
A'kfiu,  497  1  Flat.  Dt  Ltg.iii.a.  9£4) ;  but  wa
are  not  infbnned  what  powen  he  waa  lupplied
with  to  enfora  thia  right,  Bendea  the  above
mentioned  action,  a  proaecntor  might  proceed  by
way  of  YP"^  ■i'^  when  the  delinqnent  waa  de-
tected in  tlie  act,  by  impftryii  tr  i^rtrfifn.  To
theae,  howcTer,  a  penalty  of  1000  diBchmae  waa
attached  in  <aaa  the  proaecntor  fiuled  in  establiih-
ing  hia  caie ;  ao  that  a  diffident  plaintiff  would
of^n  conaida  them  aa  Icai  eligible  mraui  of  ob-
tslning  redreaL  (Demoatb.  c  JfvJral.  p.  GQl.)  In
the  ag)^Taled  caiee  of  stealing  tn  the  day  time
plopcrty  of  gn«lcr  amount  than  £0  drachmae,  or
by  night  any  thing  whataoefer  (and  npoa  thia  oo-
camoD  the  owiwr  wai  pennitlod  to  wound  and
eren  kill  tha  dapiedatoi  in  hia  flight),  the  moat
tiifling  utiele  fiim  B  gynmaiiom,  or  any  thing
worth  10  dnohmaa  fimn  the  porta  or  public  hatha,
tbe  law  axpreaaly  directed  an  i^ayiiyti  to  the
Gleren,  and,  upon  coniietion,  the  death  of  the
ofiender.  (Demoath.  e.  TTnscr.  p.  73G.  1.)  If  the
tpa^ih  were  adopted.  It  ia  probable  that  the  punlah-
ment  waa  fixed  by  the  court ;  but  both  in  thia
me,  and  in  that  of  coarictiDn  in  a  liici),  beaidea
'  n  of  tha  alolen  poperty,  the  diafran-
t  (ib-i^)  of  the  cnmiul  voold  be  a
'  inddant  d  cmTiction.  (Meier,  Aa.
i'nwaa,  ^  US.)  [J.^M.]


COCHLEA.
COA  VESTIS,  the  Coan  dotb,  i.  __._

b^  Tariooi  Latin  authora,  but  moat  fivqnently  and
diatiziclly  by  the  poeta  of  the  Angnitao  age.
(TibulL  iL  4,  iL  6 ;  Propert  L  2,  iL  l,iT.  2,iT.6{
Hot.  Carm.  ir.  13.  13,  Sat  L  2.  101  ;  Orid,  Art
Am.  iL  29S.)  Prom  their  eipceiaiona  we  leam
that  it  had  a  gnat  degree  of  tnnaparency,  that  it
waa  remarkably  fine,  that  it  waa  chiefly  worn  by
women  of  looae  ntpatation,  and  that  it  waa  aome-
tinua  dyed  porpte  and  enriched  with  (tripea  of
gold.  It  baa  bean  luppoaed  lo  haie  been  made  of
■ilk,  becanae  in  Coa  ailk  waa  apnn  and  woren  at  a
Tery  early  period,  ao  aa  to  obtain  a  high  celebrity
for  the  manubcturea  of  that  iaiand.  (AiiitoL  IlitL
Anim.  T.  19.)  In  the  woodcnl  under  Cont,  a
female  ii  repeaented  wearing  a  robe  of  thia
kind.  [J.  Y.]

COACTOR.  Thia  name  waa  i^iplied  tn  cd-
lecten  of  Tariona  aorta,  e.  ^.  to  the  aenanta  of  the

Siublicani,  or  facmen  of  the  public  taiea,  who  eol-
Bcted  the  lerenuea  for  them  {Cie.  Pn  Rob.  Foil.
11)  ;  alao  to  tboae  who  collected  the  money  hom
the  porchaaera  of  thinga  lold  at  a  public  anction.
The  bther  of  Horace  waa  a  collector  of  ibe  taiea
fumed  by  the  publicanL  (Hor.  Sai.  i.  6.  36  ;
Suet  Fit.  Hor.  init)  MoreoTcr,  tha  aemmta
of  the  money-changen  were  ao  called,  from  col-
lecting their  debta  for  them.  (Cie.  Pro  Claeii.
64.)  [R-W.)

CO'CnLEA  (nxAloi),  which  pioprrly  mcena
a  ansil,  waa  aiio  uaed  to  ugnify  outer  thinga  of  a
apiial  form.

The  woodcut  annexed  repreaenti


walked  by  two  upright  aocwi  (cuoUbm)  prKiaely
in  the  laraB  mannar  ai  oar
(Afna.  Boiioniao,  h.  60.)


A  acrew  of  the  aame  deacription  waa  alao  uard
I  oil  and  wine  pnaiea.  (Vitniv.  ii.  9.  p.  180,  ed.
.ipont. ;  Palladina,  ir.  10.  g  10,  iL  19.  j  1.)  The
iread  of  the  acrew,  for  wlJch  the  Latin  langDags
aa  DO  appro[nata  taim,  ia  callad  wtfucix>^t«^ui
OnA.

3.  A  apiial  pump  lor  rsiaing  water,  inrented  by

nshimedea  (Diod. Sic L  34,  r.  37  ; csmpaire

Sttab.  iriL  30),  fixim  whom  it  haa  a*er  aince  been

called  the  Archimedean  acrew.

length  by  Vitnriua  (z.  11).

, --- -  ^^--


CODEX.

3.  A  paeoliar  kind  of  door,  thnogli  vliic)
viU  bcuu  puKd  fr  -^  ■-  ' —  '--  "■-
if  tlw  uiiphitlicUn^


bj  Virro(Le.)  ■•  pceuliirij  adapted

tir  m  tiaxj,  to  ibat  the  penoa  esnld  go  in  and
lit  wilboM  atfuiiog  tha  Inrdi  an  sppoftiinitj  of
fji^tawaj.  SehDoder  (£• /ai  &Rp^  A  A.  «. «
Catn),  bowTTCr,  munteiiu  that  the  coaUn  in
fastka  wao  mthing  Dum  tbftn  a  partmiiiB  {axta^
ptfvda)  niwd  b;  ■  tovw,  which  Inteipretatian
diM  not  fpta  "  pmbahla  aa  the  one  girea
•biTK  [AK-I

CO'CHLEAR  (mx*jipii>T)-wtt^KBd  of  ipoon,
tkich  affifati  to  have  terminated  with  a  point  at
■K  end,  and  at  tbe  other  wu  bnad  and  halbnr
like  ow  own  tpaam.  The  pointed  end  wai  Died
fgr  dnwing  anaui  (moUug)  oat  of  their  ahelli,  and
mjag  them,  whence  it  derived  ita  name  ;  and  the
(naacT  jajt  for  fating  eggt,  &c  Martial  (tit.
]  3) )  neatiaQi  both  these  uea  of  the  coebltar,  —
*  goal  (odileii  babSn  nee  >ani  minu  ntilii  orii."
(CoD^re  Plin.  H.  N.  nriiL  t ;  Petran.  33.)

Coehlisr  vai ' '


II  alio  the  name  RiTcn  to
IT  ipooiifbL Aceoning  to  R


[c  like  I
Paofiiiia,  it  wai  -^  of  the  ej^thi

COCHLIS,  which  ii  property  a  fliminntiTB  of
ckUh.  ii  naed  ai  an  adjectiie  with  so&imaa,  to
^aeribe  aoch  cohnnna  ai  the  Trajan  and  Ad-
tsiiiDe ;  but  whelhet  the  tenn  wai  mod  with  le-
isnee  to  the  tpiial  itainaae  within  the  adunn,
«  u  tlw  apiral  taa-relief  on  the  mtaide,  oc  to
boO,  mnot  be  nid  with  certainty.  (P.  Vict,  de
Bfim.  Vt*k  AOK.  8,  9.)

Ptmr  apidiea  the  irad  abo  to  a  ipecia  of
fOB  foond  m  AiaUa.  (tf.  N.  nivil  12.
a  74.)  [P.S.]

CODES,  dim.  CODICILLUS,U)denticai  with
iiiafiii,  ai  dianiiMt  and  Cbiimt,  damitriim  and
liiKm,  BiHla  and  coda.  Calo  (ly,  PfKU.  Epi*.
•td  M.  Aatm.  L  3)  Mill  med  the  form  anvJise  in
tHe  Biae  Knae  in  which  afterwaidi  eail»  wu  Died
idniiTrly.  (Ompare  Grid.  Milan.  liL  *32.)
The  word*  originaUj  lioniGed  the  tnmk  ix  item  nT '
a  tiee  (Virg.  Omg.  u.  30  ;  Cnlnmella,  liL  19 ;
Plin.  H.  N'.  iri.  30),  and  wu  abo  ap^ied  to
Iriigaatr  anything  eonpcaed  of  targe  piecea  of
nod,  whence  the  mall  fiihins  or  ieiry  boati  on
the  Tiber,  which  may  siginally  hare  been  like


noghly  bewn  planka  nailed  together  in  a  nde  and
'led  wtm  eamdiairiat,  at
CFt*L  and  VaiTD,  op.
i  Oellitu,  T.  25.)  The  nnuune
[  gifen  to  Appini  Clanding  mnat  be
d  to  tbii  ngnififntion.  But  the  name  codei
>ii  e^edally  applied  to  wooden  tableU  boond
kfRha  and  Imed  with  a  coat  of  wax,  for  the
pvpoH  of  writing  upon  them,  and  when,  at  a  later
a(r,  panhmnit  or  piqieri  or  other  materiali  wen
Hkicitsted  for  wood,  and  pat  together  in  the
ikifit  of  a  bogk,  the  name  of  coder  wai  itill  ap-
rUedlotbem.  (Clt  r*fr.  iL  1,36  ;  Dig.32.  tit  1.
aS3;  SMtaL  Ai^  101.) la  lbs  tins  of  Cicen


CODEX.  SOI

we  find  it  alio  applied  to  the  teUet  on  which  a
bin  waa  written ;  and  tha  tribune,  Cornelini,  when
one  of  hii  collesffaei  forbade  hii  hill  to  be  read  by
the  herald  or  tcnbe,  nad  it  himaelf  (Itgil  eodieem
nam;  lee  Ctc  n  FoL  2,  and  Aicon.  Ped.  n
Argam.  ad  Omul,  p,  AS.  ed.  Orelli).  At  a  atill
later  period,  during  the  time  of  the  empenua,  tha
woni  waa  ued  to  expreu  any  collection  of  lawi
or  coDititiiliDni  of  the  emperan,  whether  made  by
primte  indiriduali  oi  by  pablic  anlhorily.  S«
the  following  artidei.

The  diminu^Te  eodidllaM,  or  nther  todieiBi,  wu
naed  mnch  in  the  BiDo  way  u  eodei.  Itorigmalty
ngnified  tablets  of  the  kind  deicrihed  above,  and
waa  anbseqnailly  employed  to  indicate  any  imall
book  or  docoraenC,  made  eitber  of  parehment  or
paper.  (Cic  PluL  viii.  10,  ad  Fan.  vL  IS;  Suet,
CSaad.  29.)  Respecting  ita  meaoing  in  connec-
tion with  a  person^  teitaniHit,  see  TmaiilN-

TVH.  ll^S.}

CODEX OREOORIA'NUS  and  HERHO-

QENIA'NUa.  It  does  not  ^^pear  quite  oertain
if  this  title  denotes  one  collection  or  two  coUec-
tioni.  The  general  opinion,  however,  ii,  that  there
were  two  codicea  compiled  reapectively  by  Orego-
rianuB  and  Hcrmogenianni,  who  are  sometimes,
Ihongh  incorrectly,  called  Orrgorini  and  Henno-
genea.  The  codex  of  Oregorianos  was  divided
into  booki  (thnnmnber  of  which  is  not  known),  and
Ibe  booki  were  divided  into  titles.  The  baginenU
of  this  codex  begin  with  eonatitutions  of  Septimius
Sevens,  A.  D.  19S,Bnd  end  with  those  of  Diocletian
and  Haiiniian,  A.  D.  SSS— 805.  The  codex  of
Hermogenianni,  so  far  u  we  know  it,  is  only
quoted  by  titles,  and  it  only  eontaini  connitntimi
of  Diocletian  and  Msiimian,  with  the  eicepCiDn  of
one  by  Antoninus  Caiacalla  ;  it  may  perhaps  haTs
consisted  of  one  book  only,  and  it  may  have  been
a  kind  of  supplement  to  the  other.  The  name  Her-
mogBusnus  is  always  placed  after  that  of  Oi^ori-
anus  when  this  code  is  qnoted.  According  to  the
Consultationes,  the  codex  of  Hermogenianus  also
contained  constitutimi  of  Valeni  and  Vslentinian
II.,  which,  if  tme,  would  bring  down  the  compiler
to  a  time  some  yean  later  ths^  the  reign  of  Con-
stantioe  the  Qreat,  under  whom  it  is  gnieially  as-
■amed  that  he  lived.  Th(*e  codices  were  not
mode  by  imperial  anlhorily  i  they  were  the  work
of  private  individnali,  but  apparently  soon  came  to
be  considered  u  authority  in  tourts  of  jastico,  as  is
shown  indirectly  b^  the  feet  of  the  Tbeodosian  and
Juitinian  codes  being  formed  on  the  model  of  the
Codex  Gregorianni  and  Hermogenianni.  (Zim-
mem,  Ouahwife  iJet  AwBistn  PrroaJneBi/i,  HeideL
1826;  Hugo,  ZairiaM  der  GadadOt  da  Rim.
Reekit,  Beriin,  1832;  Frag.  Cod.  Ong.  el  Herm.
in  Schnltingi  Jvriiprudtmtia  VH.  Ac.,  and  in  the
As  CMU  AMgu^in.  BeroL  1SI6  ;  BOckina.  /a-
•tftetenat.)  [0.  L.]

CODEX  JUSTINIANE'US.  In  Febraary  of
the  ynr  a.  o.  S2S,  Justinian  appointed  a  commis-
sion, craisistmg  of  ten  persons,  to  make  a  new  col-
lection of  imperial  constitntioni.  Among  these  l^i
were  TnTwrnanui,  who  was  afterwards  employed
on  the  Digesta  and  the  Inititutionea,  and  Theu-
philiu,  a  ttacher  of  law  at  Constantinople.  The
commisiiwi  waa  directed  to  compile  one  ci>de  &om
those  of  Gregorianus,  Hetmogemanua,  and  Theo-
dcatns,  and  alao  feno  the  constilntiani  of  Tfaeo-
dosins  made  anbaequenlly  to  bis  code,  finn  thoao
of  his  sBccBssofs,  and  bom  the  raistitiitiona  of


earj  preunblefl,  rFpetiti<


gfiugs,  and  to  placs  them  under  qipnpriate  tills
to  add  to,  take  fniin,  or  Tary,  (he  wordi  of  the  oJ


Thsco

Indnde  ntcripti  and  edieta,  ai  veil  ai  eoDatilii-
llDius  pnuir^r  ao  called.  Frarteen  monthi  afkii
the  date  of  the  eommurion,  the  coda  ma  comideted
and  declared  to  be  law  (16th  April,  fi39)  under
the  title  of  the  JnUioiimeiu  Codez ,-  and  it  wB>  de-
clared that  the  aource*  from  which  thii  code  wu
derlTCd  were  do  loDger  to  have  any  binding  force,
and  that  the  new  code  alone  ibDuld  be  referrad  to
ai  of  legal  aathocity.  (CbtuU.  d*  Jiulia.  Cod.
Cbmfirnvtndo.)

The  Digetta  or  Pendectoe,  and  the  InititatJanca,
wore  eempiled  after  the  publication  of  thii  code,
rabieqnentljr  to  which  fiftf  dcciiioaei  and  Hme
new  Gonititutionea  alio  wefo  promulgated  by  the
emperor.  Thii  rendeied  s  reviaion  of  the  code
neeauai}- ;  and  accoidmgl;  a  conuniaiao  for  that
pnrpoH  wBi  given  to  Tribonianna,  to  Dorotheni,  a
djatlngoiihed  teacher  of  law  al  Berjtna  in  Phoauda,
and  three  otheri.  The  new  code  wai  pmnulgated
at  CanitanUnople,  on  the  ICth  NoiemberSSl,  and
the  UH  of  the  dcciainacB,  the  new  coiutitinioaea,
and  of  the  fint  edition  of  the  Jnitinianent  Codex,
waa  forbidden.  The  lecond  editim  (maada  ediho,
rtpaUla  proebctio.  Coda  ripetitat  jjradaOiomt)  ia
the  code  that  wb  now  posieai,  in  twelve  booki,
each  of  which  ie  dindcd  into  titln :  it  ia  not  known
liBw  many  boolu  the  Snt  edition  cootained.  The
GooBtitutionee  are  airanged  under  their  HTcmJ  titles,
in  the  Older  of  time  and  with  the  nomet  of  the  em-
peron  by  whom  they  were  reapeclively  mode,  and
their  dates.

The  oonalitutionf  in  this  code  do  not  go  further
back  than  those  of  Hadrian,  and  those  ai  the  im-
mediate successors  of  Hadrian  are  few  in  number ;
a  circumstance  owing  in  pirt  to  the  nae  made  of
the  curlier  codes  ui  the  campiladon  of  the  Juilinian
code,  and  also  to  the  &cl  of  many  of  the  earlier
constitutions  being  incorporated  in  the  writings  of
tbe  jurists,  &om  which  alone  any  knowledge  of
many  of  them  could  be  derived.  (fiautiL  Itt
Ematdalvmt  Cod.  Drm.  Jiulin.)

The  constitntiona,  as  they  appeal  in  this  code,
have  been  in  many  cases  altered  by  the  compilers,
and  coiuequently,  in  an  hiitoriul  point  of  view,
tbe  code  it  not  always  trustworthy.  This  &ct
uqtcors  from  a  comparison  of  this  code  with  the
Theodosian  code  and  the  Novellae.  The  order  of
the  subject-matter  in  this  code  comaiionds,  in  a
cerlam  way,  with  that  m  the  Digest.  Thua  the
seven  pans  into  which  the  fifty  booka  of  the
Digest  are  distributed,  coireapond  to  the  first  nine
books  of  the  Code.  Tbe  matter  of  the  three  last
books  of  the  Code  is  hardly  treated  of  in  the
DigvsL  The  mailer  of  the  first  book  of  tbe  DigeM
u  [daced  in  the  fint  book  of  the  Code,  alUr  the
law  relating  to  ecclesiaitital  matters,  which,  of
coone,  is  not  contained  in  the  Digest ;  and  the
three  following  books  of  the  £tst  uart  of  the  Digest
conespond  to  the  second  hook  of  the  Code The


CODEX.

'  ttdlowing  bocb  of  the  Code,  the  nhith  iododed,
conespood  respectively,  in  a  general  way,  to  the
fbllowing  parts  of  the  Digest  Some  of  tiie  eon-
■ticutions  which  were  in  the  EW  edition  of  the
Code,  and  are  refemd  to  in  the  Inititutionea,  have
been  omitted  in  the  aecond  edition.  (Inatit.  2.  tit,
20.  L  27  ;  1.  tit.  6.  s.  24.)  Seven]  constitutions,
which  have  also  been  lost  in  the  course  of  time,
hare  be«i  ivstored  by  Charondas,  Cujadus,  and
Contius,  &om  the  Oreek  veniim  of  th«n.  (Zim-
meru,&c  ;  lioga,Lcirbiiekder  Gaciitilt  da  Bam,
RtdUi,  Ac;  locking,  IniHMuMHrn.) [G.L.]

CODEX  THEODOSIA'NUS.  In  the  year
429,  Theodosius  IT.,  commonly  called  Thcodauna
the  younger,  appointed  a  commission,  consisting  of
eight  peiaons,  to  form  into  a  code  all  the  edieta  and
generoleaconslitalionesEromthetimeafCoDttiintiiH^
and  acccrding  (o  the  model  of  the  Codex  Orego-
rianns  and  Hermogenianni  (ad  tinalUtidBuai  r^rs-
goriami  ei  l/erouigeniaM  Oodiai).  Tn  4S5,  tha
initructians  were  lunawed  or  repeated  ;  bot  the

ochus  wat  at  the  head  of  both  commisiiona. It


mja.


classical  jmists,  and  the  constitutions  prior  to  thoae
of  Conilantine.  However  this  may  be,  the  first
eommissioD  did  not  accompUih  this,  and  what  we
now  have  is  the  (ode  whiek  was  compiled  by  tho
•eeoud  commission.  This  code  was  completed,  and
promulgated  as  law  in  the  Eastern  empire  in  438,
and  dedared  to  be  the  tnbttitote  fbrall  the  consti-
tnlims  made  since  the  time  of  Constantlne.  Tn
the  nroe  year  (136)  the  code  was  forwarded  to
Valentinian  III.,  tbe  son-in-law  of  Theodosius,  by
whom  it  was  laid  before  the  Bomsn  Senate,  and
confirmed  as  law  in  tho  Western  empire.  Nino
yttat  later  Theodoiiua  forwarded  to  ValcntiniaQ


Lulgated  as  law  in  the  Western  empiiv,
aa  a  coimec^on  existed  between  the  Eastern  anil
Western  empires,  that  It,  till  the  overthnw  of  the
tatter,  the  name  Noielloe  was  given  to  tbe  con-
ititu^ons  Bubtequent  to  the  code  of  Theodosius.
The  latest  of  these  Novellae  that  have  come  down
to  us  are  three  of  the  time  of  Leo  und  Antbemios,
^  n.  468.

The  Codei  Theodoaionua  coiuiita  of  sixteen
books,  the  gnater  part  of  which,  as  well  as  bis
KovellBe,  eiiit  in  their  genuine  state.  The  books
ore  divided  into  titles,  and  the  titles  are  aub-
divided  into  conatilutionu  or  lawa  The  valoable
edition  of  J.  Ootho&edos  (S  vols.  fbL  Lugd.  1 G65,
re-edited  by  Riller,  Lips.  1736— 174S,  6  vols.  foL)
contains  the  code  in  its  complete  form,  except  the
first  five  booki,  for  which  it  was  neceisan  to  uae
the  epitome  contained  in  the  Brevisrium  [Okbvia-
Kiuu].  This  is  slso  the  case  with  the  edition  of
this  code  contained  in  the  .^H  Cbrili  Anlijutiiuina-
Hws  of  Bcrlm,  1S15.  But  the  recent  discoTery
of  a  MS.  of  the  Breviarium,  at  Milan,  by  Clossiua,
and  of  a  Palimpsest  of  the  Theodosian  code  bX
Turin  by  Peyion,  has  contiibuted  largely  botb  to
the  critical  knowledge  of  the  other  parts  (rf  this


COENA.
£nL HiDtl^  duconrici  sIm  hart  tiiti  to  oor
knowlcdnef  thel>terbiiQlu,(iid  hi*  edition  of  Ibe
Tk_j~Ln  ''~<c,  Bonn,  1837,  ito,  i*  th*  UUit

r  epiUma  of  the  Gnt  Sn  boolu  in
ii  reiy  Kuil;  j  262  kvi,  or  fi^-
Bniti  of  lam,  wvn  oti^fcwd,  which  tha  diH»Ter»
if  CluBioi  uid  PrjroD  nidnctd  to  2C0. Hon  ra-


t.JT-J  diSwai  DBtter,  ud  to  omit  whit  m>  not
iiiMfrtkl  ••  lapafliunii.  The  unogemaDt  of  the
TbtoH-^i*''  o^  iiSta  in  the  maio  from  that  of
tfcf  code  of  Jnitinian,  which  tieata  of  jui  ecdoi-
■Uteoa  ia  the  b<^iniuiig,  vhila  (bat  of  Theodoaiui
IB  iht  fint  book  traU  tbkBj  of  otGca  ;  and  the
grcM]d,ihird,fixiTth,aiidbegmiuDgofthe  fifth  book
dvat  of  jnj  piiTBlanL  The  order  hare  obterred,
■•  nil  u  in  the  coda  which  it  jroteucd  to  follow
B  a  model,  wai  the  ocdei  of  the  wrilen  on  the
tnctorian  edict.  Tb<  eighth  book  conlaiiu  the
Un  at  to  gifta,  the  prnalUe*  of  oelibacf ,  and  that
'^lO  joa  libcronnn.  The  ninth  book
The  lawa  rdating  to  the
in  the  nzteenth
tod  lait  book.  It  ia  oh«iou  from  tha  ciimm-
ittKca  anda  which  the  Thoodctian  and  Joitiaian
odea  van  caiBpi]ad,aDd  from  a  compaTiaiHi  of  them,
tliat  the  Joatinnui  node  wag  gn&tl;  indebted  to  the
ThaodeaiaD.  TheTheodoiiu  coda  vaaalia  the  haaii
of  the  edict  of  Tbeodatic  kdi^  ij  the  Ottro^olhi
it  wai  ^leniaed,  with  an  iDlerptetati(B^  m  tl
ViiigMb  Lex  Rcmana  [BbiViakiuh]  ;  and  the

Lihn-  KcapociKniini,  wii  fonoded  upon  it.  [G.  L.]
CODICILLUS^ [Codkl]
CODON  {■iBiw),a  belL [TiHTiNNaBULUK,}
COE'MPTIO. [MiTBiMOHiui..]
COENA  {tfinar},  the  prinnpal  miol  of  the
Gmki  and  Romani,  eorrapoD^g  to  our  dinner,
mhet  than  aoppcr. A*  the  modi  aie  not  all
ckarir  diatingiuihed,  it  will  be  conTenient  to
a  brwT  ■ODBnt  of  all  of  them  under  the  pn
hrad.

L  GaaiK. — The  »-t»ri«l«  for  an  aecam
the  Gtcck  neala,  daring  the  elaatieal  period  of
Aihcaa  and  Sjiatta,  are  almoat  cooivDed  t

Sttaml  aaciott  aothora,  tenned  Icnrr^AoTiu,  are
rd  by  Atboiaeu ;  but,  uiilbrtunateir,  theii

agt  enlf  nuTiTc  in  the  bagmenta  quoted  bj
Hie  gicBl  woA,  the  Deipooaqihiila,  ia  an

haortible  tnamir  of  thit  kind  of  knowledite,
bat  31  anaaged,  and  with  Uttle  attempt  to  dia-
TJniiiih  the  cMtonu  of  difierail  periodi.

The  poemt  of  Homer  oontiin  a  real  picture  of
^7  maoncn,  ia  CTcry  way  woithj  of  (he  and-
fnarian^  attfotlao-  Aa  they  atand  apart  from  all
c4her  writing!,  it  will  be  coUTenient  to  exhibit  in
car  TJcw  the  Uate  of  thing!  which  they  deicribe.
It  i*  not  to  be  expected  that  the  Homenc  mcali  at
ail  agne  with  the  cDatmna  of  a  later  period
dead  It  wdbU  be  a  men  wula  of  time  to  att


COENA.  303

adapting  the  one  to  the  other.  Atbenama  (L  p>  8)
who  hai  entned  fiillj  into  the  aabfeet,  renaika  on
tha  aingolar  aimpliei^  of  the  Haneric  banquet^
in  whidi  kingi  and  prrrate  men  ail  partake  of  the

age*  to  prepare  their  own  meali  (IL  ix.  206--218  ;
compare  Gen.  xzriL  31),  and  Utyna  (Od.  xr.
322)  dedaiea  hinuelf  no  mean  proficient  in  the

nSp  T*  «i  npjaai,  SiA  t)  ^iKa  ttri  Ktiirmu
AaiTp(£(ral  ri  aol  twrijaai  ical  olroxii^ai.

Three  names  of  meali  occur  in  the  Iliad  andOdjney
-ifunar,  ittmr,  i6fiioi/.  Thia  diyiiion  of  the
neali  it  aicribed,  in  a  fragment  of  Aeichylui
|uoted  bj  Atheaaeui  (I  p.  11),  u  Palamedea.
The  word  V"^"' iiniformly  mouu  the  eartf  (l/i'
IDS  O^-  x*i-  2)  ai  trtpvar  doei  the  late  meal  ;  but
\tiwnr,  on  tha  other  hand,  ii  nied  for  either  (/i.
L  36J,  Od.i-m.  170),  apiHimtl;  without  any
eference  to  time.  We  ihould  be  CBreful,  how-
ever, how  we  argue  from  the  tmaettled  hahiti  of  a
amp  to  the  regulai  cuitomi  of  ordinary  life.

From  anmersui  [UHagea  in  the  Iliad  and  Odyaiey

ifipean  to  haTe  been  uiual  to  ail  during  meaf-

timei. In  the  palace  of  Telemachui,  befwe  eating,

a  ienant  bringi  Mincrrii,  who  ia  habited  at  a

ttranger,  the  x'P>'"f'  or  loilral  water  "


l0d.\.


H  (/t  xxL  363)


we  lean  that  bailed  meatt  were  held  to  be  br  from
tmtaTDDiy.  Cheeae,  flonr,  and  occanonaUy  frnita,
alao  fbnned  ynt  of  the  Homenc  meali.  Bread,
brought  on  in  boakett  III  ix.  217),  and  tah  (lAi,
to  which  Homer  givea  the  epithet  d^tor),  are  men-
tioDed:  &Tim  Od.  inL  i6B,  the  latter  qipeart,
eren  at  thia  eaiiy  period,  to  have  been  a  ugn  of
hoipitality  ;  in  Odl  XL  122,  it  ii  the  mark  of  a
itruige  people  not  to  know  ita  uie.

Each  gueit  i^ipean  to  hare  had  hia  own  table,
and  he  who  waa  first  in  rank  pieaided  orer  the
leat.  Menekani,  at  tha  muriage  feait  of  Henuona,
begini  the  banquet  by  taking  in  hit  hand*  the  iide  ,
and  pUeing  il  befoie  hit  fiiendi;


{Od.  -r>


ifi.) .


id  dancing  are  inOuduced ;  -.-  **  The  dirine  min-
■tiel  hymned  to  the  lonnd  of  the  Ine,  and  two
tomblera  (mCumrrqfM)  tiegan  the  featjie  ttram,
wheeliu  round  in  the  midiL"  It  wai  not  beneath


beroea  to  battle  (A.  xiL  311),

'Elfni  Tl,  Kfiaaiii  re,  IS)  wAifoit  Se«B«fcru",
and  Ajax  on  hit  retain  &oai  the


with


with  the


Hector  x

The  namea  of  aeTeral  arliclH  of  the  leatiTa  board
occur  in  tha  Iliad  and  Odyitey.  Eniret,  itdta,
cnpt  of  Tarioui  ihapea  and  liiei,  bottiea  mode  of
goatskin,  oiki,  &c.,  are  all  mentioned.  Uany
■oiti  of  wine  were  m  ute  among  the  heroei ;  lome
of  Ncatot'i  ia  remarked  on  at  being  dcien  yean
old.  The  Maianeon  wine,  lo  called  from  hbron,
a  hero,  wai  eapecially  celebrated,  and  would  beat
mingling  with  twenty  timci  ita  own  quantity  of
water.  It  may  be  obterved  that  wine  wit  laldam,
if  erer,  dmnk  pure. When  Naator  and  Machaoo


3M  COENA.

«t  doim  togethct,  "  a  womBn,"  like  unto  ft  god-
deu,  nla  before  them  a  poHihed  table,  witb  a
hinaen  tnij,  M  Si  Kpifivov  tAt^  tfifor.  Then  liw
mmglM  a  eup  of  Pnunnkn  wine  in  NMtor'i  own
gobkt,  and  cnU  the  cheeu  of  goit^  milk  with  a
BUel  knife,  Kotlmng  white  flour  over  it  Tbe
guerta  drmk  to  one  another ;  thne  tbe  godi  {IL  iv.
4)  itittx'xt'  iJAifium,  and  UlvHca  pledged
"■ ~!S).  Wine


Achillea,  mying,  X»?p'<  'Ax'*"''


il  [Cu


«]ir


the  rrupi  fhim  which  It  wai  dronk,  and  before
drinkiiig,  libationi  were  made  M  the  goda  h;  pour-
ing lome  of  the  contenti  on  the  gronad.  (It.  viL
480.)

The  intereating  acene  1>etweai  Ulyatea  and  the
swineherd  (Oi  xiv.  420)  givea  a  p^e!  xiew  of
earl;  mannen  in  a  lower  grade  of  life.  After  a
welcome  hai  been  gtren  lo  the  atranger,  "  The
awineherd  cleaiea  (he  wood,  and  thtr  place  tlie
awine  of  Are  ycara  old  on  the  hearth.  In  the
goodneaa  of  hia  heart,  Eumaeui  Jbtveu  not  the  im-
mortal godi,  lUid  dedicates  the  firttling  lock  with  a
prajer  for  Ulyaiea'i  return.  He  neit  amitea  the
auinial  with  a  piece  of  deft  oBk,  and  the  attend-
anta  liuge  olf  the  hair.  He  then  cuta  the  law  meat
all  roimd  from  the  liraha,  and  laying  it  in  the  rich
fiU,  and  aprinkling  floor  upon  it,  throwi  it  on  the
fire  ai  an  oflering  (i.nf-i(fi)  to  the  ^oda,  the  rcat
the  anendanEi  cut  op  and  pieroe  with  qiita,  and
haTing  cooked  it  with  cunning  akiU,  draw  off  all,
and  lay  the  mcaa  on  the  tablea.  Than  the  awine-
herd itanda  Dp  to  diiide  the  partiona,  iOTea  por-
tioni  in  all,  fiTc  fbr  himaelf  and  the  gueati,  and
one  apiece  to  Mercury  and  the  nympha."

There  ii  nothing  mcie  worthy  of  remark  in  the
Homeric  maimera  than  the  heapiCality  ahown  to
atrangera.  Before  it  ia  knows  who  they  arc,  or
whence  they  come,  it  ia  (he  cutom  of  the  timea  to
gira  them  a  welcome  reception.  (Od.  i.  MS,  Ac)
When  NMtor  and  hia  aona  aaw  the  atrangera,
"  They  all  ome  in  a  crowd  and  nlnted  them  with
the  hand,  and  made  them  ait  down  at  the  feait  on
the  iott  flcecw  by  the  aea  ahon."

The  Oreeki  of  a  hiler  age  uanally  paiteok  of
three  meali,  caDed  IcpdriiTfia,  ifurnr,  and  Stfmw.
The  laat,  which  correlpondi  U  the  Sipror  of  the
Homeric  poama,  waa  the  evening  meal  or  dinner  ;
the  iftarait  waa  the  luncheon ;  and  the  iufdrur/ia,
which  anawera  to  the  iptaror  of  Homer,  wai  the
earir  meal  or  bccakfoat.

The  Aupderivfia  waa  taken  immediately  after
riaing  in  the  morning  (^(  v^r^r,  tmiir^  Ariatoph.
AtKt,]2aS).  Itnauallyconiiated  of  bread,  dipped
in  unmixed  wine  (JljcfKrroi),  whence  it  denied
ita  name.  (Plut  Sfnip.  viiL  6.  9  1  ;  SchoL  ad
Timer,  L  Gl  ;  Athenaeua,  L  p.  1 1.)

Neil  followed  tlie  Spurrov  or  luncheon ;  but  the
lime  at  which  it  wai  taken  ia  uncertain.  It  ii
frequently  mentioned  in  Xenophon'a  Anaheaia,
and  appcan  to  have  been  taken  at  diSerent  timea,
a*  would  naturally  be  the  aae  with  aoldien  in
active  aorrice.  Suidaa  (a.  o.  Aamwr)  aaya  that  it
waa  taken  abont  the  thud  hour,  that  ia  ahoDt  nine
o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  but  thia  account  dcei  not
agree  with  the  itatementa  of  otfaei'  ancient  writcn.
We  may  conclude  from  man;  circnmatancet  that
thia  meal  waa  taken  about  the  middle  of  the  day,
and  that  it  anawered  to  the  Roman  pramlBm,  aa
Plutarch  (^pap.  viiL  6.  §  fi)  aaaerta.  Beaidea
which  the  time  of  the  rAfSmva  ^Topd,  at  which
1 to  have  be«n boi^ht  for  the


COENA.

SpioTor,  waa  from  nine  o'clock  till  noon.  Thia
Bgreei  with  the  account  of  Ariatophanea  (y^p.
605—612),  who  inHoducea  Pbilodeon  doacribing
the  pleaanre  of  rctuming  home  after  attending  the
CDuita,  and  partaking  of  a  good  ifnirrvw.  The
courta  of  juatice  couM  icalcely  have  finiibed  theit
littingi  by  nine  o'clock.  Timaeoa  alao  dcfinea
taiAit  Tpcitn,  which  we  know  u  have  beoi  the
cariy  part  of  the  afternoon  [Diin],  aa  the  time
before  the  (IfKirov.  The  tpirro/  waa  nanally  a
ahnple  meal,  hnt  of  coorae  varied  according  to  the
labita  of  individuaU.  Thna  iKhomacbua,  in  de-
Kribing  hia  mode  of  life  to  Soeratca,  who  grmtlj
appmvea  of  it,  aaya,  'Apun^  fcra  iiifrt  uris  /f^rt
terar  rX^t  8ijjfnp#i»w  (Xen.  Oacoa.  iL  la>.

The  principal  meal,  however,  wai  the  Stinw.
It  waa  uanally  taksi  athei  late  in  the  day,  fre-
quently not  belon  aunioL  (Lyaiaa,  c  EralaM.
p.  26.) Ariatophanea  {Eed.  6S2}  aaya,

2d1  H  iHK*fti,
5rar  ^  Bcfnttfov^  rh OTofX'ior  ^jwaaibv X^P*^

Bnt  in  order  lo  ascertain  the  time  meant  by
(endroirr  vi  Frovxtior,  the  reader  ii  referred  to
the  article  HoKOLOoinit.

The  Atheniana  were  a  social  people,  and  were
very  fond  of  dining  in  company,  ^totaininenta
were  uanally  given,  both  in  the  heroic  ages  and
latter  times,  when  aacrifice*  were  offered  to  the
godi,  either  on  pablie  or  prirato  oocaaiona  ;  and
alao  on  the  anniveraaiy  of  the  birthdays  of  mem-
bera  of  the  family,  or  of  illnatrioiu  peraona,  whether
living  or  dead.  Plutarch  (^ni^.  viiL  1.  g  1)
ipeaka  of  an  entertainment  bmng  i^ven  <m  tbe
anniversary  of  the  birthdays  both  of  Socrates  and
Plato.

When  young  men  wiahed  to  dine  together  they
frequently  contributed  eachacertuammofmoney.
called  vvjitoKii,  at  brought  their  own  pnrisioi
with  them.  When  tbe  first  plan
they  were  said  drA  irvfiSoK&v  flem
individual  was  uiusUy  entmtted  with  the  mooey
to  procure  the  proiisiona,  and  make  all  the  ncccs-
auy  prepanUions.  Thai  we  nai  in  Terence
(£»acil,iiL4)  —

"  Heri  aliquot  adoleacentuli  coimut  b  Piraco,
In  hunc  diem  nt  de  aymholia  esiemua.  Chaereun

Praefecimni :  datt  annuli :  locui,  tempos  conni-

Thia  kind  of  entertunment  in  which  each  gnrst
contributed  to  the  eipcnae,  is  menlionod  in  Homer
{OiL  L  226)  under  the  name  of  tfum.

An  entertainment  in  which  each  person  brooght
hia  own  provigioni  with  hnn,  or  at  Irail  ron-
tribnted  aomelhing  to  the  general  stock,  was  called
t»i*rar  kwh  <nni^Sa%  beoinse  the  provisions  were
brought  in  baikets.  (Athen.  viiL  p,  366.)  This  kind
of  entertainment  is  also  spoken  of  by  XenophoD
(«™.iiil4,  SI).

The  most  usual  kind  of  entertainments,  how-
ever, wero  those  in  which  a  perwm  invited  hia
friends  to  hia  own  house.  It  waa  expected  tliat  Ifaey
should  oomo  dressed  with  more  than  ordinary  care,
and  also  have  bathed  shortly  before  ;  hence,  when
Soctates  was  going  to  an  entertainment  at  Aga-
thon's,  we  are  told  that  he  both  washed  and  put
on  hia  shoes,— things  which  he  seldom  did.  {Plato,
Sfa^  c.  3.  p.  174.) As  soon  as  the  ntatt  uriTcd


adopted.


COENA.
M  Ike  hcmtt  of  tlwir  boat,  their  ifaoei  or  andnU
nrauktaoffbTllie  '  • • < -


I  off  by  the  sUra


*rt  we  EreqaaUlj  ...
pntnucd  in  the  Bct  of  taking  off  the  iliaci  al  tbs
gHti.  of  whkh  in  eiamplc  ii  girrn,  from  a  tern
BA1X  in  liie  Britiib  Muacuzn,  in  p.  308.  After
Ihclr  feet  kid  beea  washed,  the  gueat*  leclined  on
tbt  mUtiu  <b  cwKhes  (Kal  i  fiir  l<pJi  iaraylCtw  Thv
r^k,  bn  ■iiTiut/iMTo,  Plato,  Sfogi.  t  3,  p.  175),

It  btt  alRKdy  been  remuked  that  Homer  neyci
daaiba  poaoni  u  nclioing,  but  slwaji  aa  litting
~ '  '  ' 'at  what  time  tbe  change  wu

tain.  MIUlci  (Donav,  iv.  3.
3  from  a  faagment  of  Alemiui,  quoted
11  (iiL  p.  Ill),  that  the  Spoitani  were
\o  nclins  at  their  meati  u  early  m»  the
tint  if  Alcman.  The  Doriana  of  Crete  alwaji
■I ;  bat  the  Alheniani,  like  the  ^laitani,  were
*— -— nH  to  rediiiB.  Tbe  Greek  women  and
cKilliBi,  howeTer,  like  iht  Roman,  cantinned  to
•it  M  tlieir  meali,  ai  we  find  them  rcpreiented  in
■Bdat  worki  of  aiL

It  val  tuoil  Cot  only  two  penoni  to  recline  on
eech  cmcb.  Thoa  A^tbon  nji  to  Ariitodemu,
Zi  f,  'Af<CTit^iiM,  wcy*  'tfvllfuix'"  KuTaiiAivriii :
and  U  Soaotfo,  tuSfa,  iAxpartt,  wi^'  ifii  narii-
Hi#(  (Plata,  ^|Fnp.  e.  ^  4.  p.  175).  Alw  at  a
Wqaet  gircD  bjr  Attaoinni  of  Thebei  to  fifty
Pmna  and  £f^  Oreeli,  we  on  told  that  one
Pfnian  aad  Doe  Greek  reclined  on  roch  couch.
la  apcialt  wodu  of  art  we  uiuollj  lee  the  gueita
npraoMed  in  thia  ws;  ;  bnl  aoavtiiDei  there  ii  a
laiga  ■umber  an  ooe  loDg  lAln) :  tee  the  cut
■ada  the  artida  SvuFoaiUH.  The  manner  in
wbid  tbej  reclined,  the  ex^f  ^^f  mn-acA/crMii,
ai  Pbtartb  (.Syiip.  t.  6)  colli  it,  will  be  under-
Uasd  by  refemng  to  tbe  woodcoC  atieady  men-
tiofied,  when  tbe  gonta  are  reproented  lecUning
with  their  UA  acma  on  itiiped  pllowi  (Anryx^ia),
Bad  hanng  their  right  free  i  whenca  Lncion
(£e>^  c.  6)  qteaki  of  IW  ijnAvi  itmur,

Aher  tbe  gueeli  hod  placed  tbcmielcei  an  the
aXitflt,  the  uTn  brought  in  water  to  wuh  their
kanda  (B^  tmti  ;(<i^i  JUffq). Tbe  BubMqi
paceednga  of  the  dinner  are  briefly  deacribed  in
tn  lim  of  Ariuopbanei  (  fup.  1216),
'Tta^  BKTi  xfipif"  '■*»  fpairHat  tl/nptptir
iUtrrtSlirw-  Inrof/ififS^  <)Si|  irririi/iiiv.

Tha  iiooer  waa  theD  Krred  np  ;  whence  we  read
B  *"tl'T'"''**i  ■■id  elaewhere,  of  tIu  TpariCi"
mrfifnr,  by  which  eipreaiion  we  arc  to  nader-
■■id  But  Biovly  the  diihei,  but  tbe  tablea  them-
•dTca.  <PblIoien.UFL^U<!-.i<.p.Ue,f:>  It  op.
pan  that  a  l^ile,  with  proviaioDi  upon  it,  wai
pheed  bcfitre  each  cAii^ :  and  tbu  we  find  in  all
■nil ail  wki  of  art,  which  repreaent  banqneta  or
ajiayia,  a  ■nail  table  a  bripod  placed  before  the
■U^  and  vbeo  then  are  more  than  two  penona
K  tka  KXi*^t,  aerenl  of  aicb  tablei.  Theae  tablei
are  eridoilly  amall  Booogh  to  be  moted  with


a  ipotm,  called  i/variXn^
f^TTfi.  sanetonea  they  oied  uutMa  oi  a  tfaatt,
a  koliawied  jriece  of  br«d,  alio  called  famrtei).
(Palbix.  ri.  87,  I.  89  )  Ariatopb.  E(tmU.  1164  ;
laiJM.  t,  w.  ftwrkq.) After  eatiiv  they  wieed


na  j  the  x'V^fxtTpa  and  tK/iaytla,  which
arc  Bometimea  mentioned  (Potlui,  Le.),  were  towela,
which  were  only  aaed  when  diey  wnabed  thoir

It  appears  (hat  the  amngcment  of  the  dinner
wua  entmated  to  certain  tlniei.  (Plato,  Sguip.  c  3.
p.  175.)  The  one  who  bad  tbe  chief  manasement
of  it  wai  tailed  Tpariioroiit  or  TpmiQiitiiiat
(Alben.  i?.  p.  170,  e.  j  PoUui,  iiL  4!,  vL  13).

It  would  exceed  the  limita  of  thia  work  to  gi^a
an  account  of  the  diScient  diihei  which  were  in-
troduced at  a  Greek  dinner,  though  their  number
ia  fiir  below  tboie  which  were  usually  partaken
of  at  a  Itoman  enteriainment.  The  moat  commoa
food  among  tbe  Greeka  wai  tbe  /ulC"  (Dor.  fufSIa),
a  kind  of  frumenty  n  aoTt  cake,  which  waa  pre-
pared in  different  wayr ■— -'


The  fitwT^  /tiCa,  of  which  Philodeon  partakea  DI
returning  home  Irom  the  courti  (AriiLoph,  Vap,
610),  ii  isid  by  the  Schaliait  to  hare  been  made
of  bnrley  and  wine.  The  fiAia  continued  to  the
latest  timei  to  be  tbe  common  food  of  the  lower
claues.  Wbealcn  or  barley  bread  waa  the  lecond
moat  ninal  apeeiei  of  food  ;  it  waa  aometimea  made
at  home,  but  more  niually  bought  at  the  market  of
the  ifrtari>,tu  or  dprorifAiSd.  The  Twctiblea
ordinarily  eaten  were  mallowi  (/laxdxi),  Icitucea
(Splint),  cabbagea  (^d^orai),  beam  {Kinfui),
Icntib  (^uoT),  &c  Fork  wbi  the  moit  fayoiirita
animal  food,  aa  waa  the  caoo  among  the  Romooi ;
Plutarch  [S^mp.  ir.  £.  S  1)  calla  it  rh  liKiuiiKtat
Kfifas.  Sauiages  alio  were  very  commonly  eaten.
It  U  a  curiout  feet,  which  Plato  (Os  Rep.  iii,
c  13.  p.  404)  haa  remarked,  that  we  nerer  read
in  Homer  of  the  hcroca  partaking  of  fish.  In  later
timci,  however,  fiih  waa  one  of  the  moat  &Tourite
fooda  of  the  Greeki,  iniomucb  ao  that  the  namo  of
6+01-  wai  applied  to  it  kbt"  ^tox^i-.  (AOicn.  vii.
p.  SiG,  e.)  A  minute  account  of  the  fiihea  which
the  Oreeka  were  accuitomcd  to  eat,  ii  given  at  the
end  of  the  levenlh  book  of  Athenaeus,  arranged  in.
alphabetical  order.

The  ordinary  meal  for  the  fiimjly  waa  cooked
by  the  mistreu  of  the  houie,  or  by  the  [emala
■tares  under  her  direction  ;  but  for  ipecial  ocoa-.
■iona  proreieional  cooki  (futytipoi)  were  hired,  of
whom  there  appear  to  hare  b«n  a  great  number.
(Diog.  Lafrt.  ii.  72.)  They  are  frequently  men-
tioned in  thi  fragmenti  of  the  comic  poeti ;  and
thoM  who  were  aequainled  with  all  tho  rcfino-
mentt  of  their  art  were  in  great  demand  in  other
parts  of  Greece  beiidea  their  own  country.  The
Sicilian  cooki,  bowercr,  had  the  greateat  reputa-
tion (Plato,  Dt  Rep.  iiL  c  13.  p.  404),  and  a
Sicilian  book  on  cookery  by  one  Milhoecui  ia
mentioned  in  the  Qoigiaa  of  Plato  (c  156.  p.  5If).
Comjare  Muiim.  Tyr.  Dia.  ir.  5)  j  but  (he  moat
celebrated  work  on  the  aubject  waa  the  raorpo-
Xoyia  of  Arcbeitratus. (Atnen.  iiL  p.  104.  b.)

A  dinner  given  by  an  opulent  Athenian  tiaiially
coniialed  of  two  couraea,  called  reapeclively  rpirrai
rpiniai  and  BiiVrtpai  Tpdi.fiu.  Pollui  (vi.  83),
indeed,  apeaka  of  three  counei,  which  waa  the
number  at  a  Roman  dinner ;  and  in  tbe  earns
way  we  find  other  writen  under  tbe  Bouian
empire  apcakmg  of  three  eounes  at  Greek  din-
ner*; bit  befiire  the  Boman  ctmquert  of  Greece


SOS  COENA.

and  (lia  introdaction  of  Ttouum  ciutonu,  m  on}?
re&d  of  two  conrses.  The  first  courae  embraced
the  whole  of  what  we  consider  tha  dinner,  comely,
fish,  poultry,  mfat,  &c  ;  the  second,  which  cor-
responds to  our  deuert  and  the  Romaii  beUariOy
comtBted  of  difieient  kinds  of  &uit,  sweetmeati,
confections,  &c

When  the  Gnt  coune  was  finished  the  lablei
were  token  >way  (afpfo',  iral/mr,  Iraipiir,
ifiupi?v,  impiptii/,  ftamiCtur  rii  Tpor jfru),  and
water  was  giyea  to  the  guests  for  the  purpose  of
WBiliing  th«r  hinds.  Cnwii  made  of  gadsnds  of
flowen  were  >1sa  then  given  to  Ihem,  u  wall  ss
Yariotu  kind*  of  pcrtiunes.  (FhilylL  ap.  Alkai.  a.
p.  408,  a.)  Wine  wu  not  dnmk  till  the  litM
cnarsB  wu  finished  ;  but  U  shib  as  the  gneiti


I  smoll  qtuintitj  bi  t.  libatiotL  T)iis  liba-
tion was  laid  to  be  made  to  the  "  good  spirit "
(jtyoAiu  Jolfuvoi),  and  was  niasUy  accompanied
with  the  singing  of  the  parwi  and  the  playing  of
flutes.  After  this  limtion  mixed  wme  was
brought  in,  and  with  theic  first  cup  the  gnesia
drank  W  Aiii  awrfipoi.  (Xen.  Spitp.  iL  1 ;  PUlo,
Syaip.  ci.f.  ne-.  Died,  Sic.  W.  3;  SBidBi,..o,
'A-raSm  AaSfioras.)  With  the  inrorSal,  the  tfrnov
dosed  ;  and  at  the  introduc^on  of  the  dessert
(SiOrtpBi  Tpatri^tu)  the  -rins,  crufurjriav,  or
Kti^si  commenced,  of  which  an  ocoxiDt  is  ^rcn  in
the  article  Svufo&ium.  (Becker,  CiariHe$,  ToL  L
pp.411— 450.)

2.  Roman.  In  the  following  aceonnt  of  Roman
meals,  we  take  the  ordinary  life  of  the  middle  ranlcs
of  society  in  the  Augustan  age,  noticing  incidentally
the  most  remarkable  deriationi,  either  on  the  side
of  primitiTe  simplicity  or  of  late  refinement.

The  me«l  with  which  the  Romsn  sometimes  be-
gin the  day  was  the  jailaai/aai,  a  word  derived,
as  IsidofB  would  have  ns  believe,  aiyiaiio  soteejHi),
and  ansfL'ering  to  the  Greek  iJrpaTLff}ia,  Festos
tells  ns  that  it  was  also  cdied  prandicuia  or  viaiam,
Thoogh  by  no  moaos  uncommon,  it  does  not  ap-
pear to  havB  been  nsnol,  except  fn  the  case  of
children,  or  sick  persons,  or  the  Inxiuions,  or,  as
Nonius  adds  (Dt  R»  Cih,  H),  Of  labouring  men.
An  inwilai  meal  (if  we  may  so  express  it)  waa
not  likely  to  have  any  very  regular  time :  two  epi-
grams of'^Martial,  however,  seem  to  fix  the  hour  at
about  three  nr  four  o'clock  in  the  morning.  (Mart.
Ep.  siv.  233,  viiL  67.  9.)  Bread,  as  we  leun
from  the  epigram  just  quoted,  formed  the  snbctan-
tisJ  part  of  this  early  hreakfasl,  to  which  cheese
<Api^.Afe(.  L  p.110,  ed.  FiBncaE  1621),  w  dried
fruit,  as  dales  and  raisins  (Suet.  Aug.  76)  w«e
sometimes  added  The  jaUiKuhm  of  VitelUos
(SueL  Vil.  c  7.  e.  13^  was  doubtiess  of  a  mon
solid  chaiBcler ;  bnt  this  was  a  case  of  monstrous

Next  fiillowed  the  prandimH  or  luncheon,  with
persons  of  simple  habits  a  frugal  meal  —
"  Qnantum  interpellet  inani
Venir*  diem  dniare."

Hot.  jU.  L  6.  137, 12S.


COENA.
agreeably  with  Seneeali  aceonnt  (i^  S4),  Pmit
dmide  iieau  tt  tin»  aaaa  pranditim,  pai  quod
non  ttiU  /tnajtdae  tMonmt.  From  the  Utter  paa.
sage  we  learn  incidentally  thai  it  was  a  hai^
meal,  such  as  smIots  ( Jnv.  Sirf.  vi.  101)  and  Kildien
(Liv.  iiviil  14)  jartook  of  when  on  duty,  w''


The,


originated  in  these  military  meals,  and  a  doubt  haa
been  entertained  whether  in  then  orduiary  life  tha
Romans  look  food  more  than  once  in  the  day.
Pliny  (Ep,  iii.  6)  speaks  of  Aufidios  Bajsus  as  fid-
lowing  the  aaderU  custom  in  takbg  luncheon  ;  but
a«ain  (Ep.  m.  1),  in  describing;  the  nuumen  of  an
cJd-^hioned  person,  he  mentions  no  other  meal
but  tho  coaio.  The  following  references  (Sen.  Bp.
87  i  Cic  adAlLT.li  Mart,  vi  64)  seem  lo  prora
that  luncheon  was  a  usual  meal,  although  it  can-
not be  supposed  that  there  were  many  who,  like
ViteUiiis,  could  arait  themselves  of  aU  the  various
times  which  the  different  &shioiis  of  tha  day  al-
lowed (Suet.  Va.  13).  It  would  evidently  be
absurd,  however,  to  lay  down  unifotm  rules  for
matters  of  individual  caprice,  or  of  &shian  at  beat.

The  pnadam,  called  by  Suetonina  (Aug.  78)
dbat  nerHianua,  was  nsaall;  taken  about  twelvo
or  one  o'clock.  (SueL  Od.  6B,  Oiud.  34.)  For
the  luxuriaos  palate,  as  we  gather  incidentally
from  Horace's  satires,  veiy  different  provision  waa
made  from  what  was  described  above  as  his  own
simple  repast.  Fish  was  a  revisits  of  the  table
(Art.  il2.  16)  —

"  Foris  eat  pmnus,  et  abura
Defmdeni  pisces  hyemat  mare,"
to  which  tha  choicest  wines,  sweetened  with  ths
finest  honey,  were  to  be  addrd  —

"  Nisi  Hymet^  mella  Falenia
Ne  biberii  diluta,"
which  latter  practice  is  condemned  by  the  lamed
gaMronomer  (Sat.  iL  4.  36),  who  rcewumenda  a
weaker  mixture  —

"  Leni  piaecordia  mulso
Proloetis  melius,"
and  giavely  advises  to  finish  with  mnlbaiies  fraah
^Ibered  in  tha  morning  (Ibid,  21 — 23 ;  sea  Tate^
Horatt,  2nd  ed.  pp.  97 — 106).

The  words  of  Festus,  eosn  apad  aatinat  diee-
haturguod  aiifldpnwjiiim,  have  given  mudi  Iranble
to  the  critics,  perhaps  needlessly,  when  we  ramem-
ber  the  change  of  hours  in  oui  own  cnontiy.  If
we  translate  eoaia,  as  icoording  to  oni  notions  we
ought  to  do,  by  **  dinner,"  they  describe  eiactly
the  alteration  of  our  own  manners  during  the  last
century.  The  analogy  of  the  Oieek  word  StiWvr,
which,  according  to  Atbenaens,  was  nsed  in  ■
umilar  way  for  Spurrof,  also  affords  assiitBiKe.
Another  meal,  termed  vtenmda,  is  mentioned  by
Isidar«  and  Fetms,  for  which  several  tdned  dia-
tmetions  are  propossd  ;  bnt  it  is  not  certain  that
it  really  diflered  fcom  tiie  proKdmm,

The  table,  which  was  made  of  dtreo,  maple-wood,
at  evfui  of  ivory  (Jnv.  SaL  xL),  was  oovered  witb
a  MiMtafs,  and  each  of  the  diBermt  coones,  «>Be-
timei  amoaating  to  seran  (Jnv.  SaL  L  SS),  asred
upon  a  finmlim  ir  waitsr.  In  the  *  Brndk
iupallex  "  of  Hoisce,  great  car*  was  taken


Oft^nt  (ibi  ttb"


COENA.

Aid  m  tW«ua»  ncf  riini,  the  wbola  djnna,  which
cfiwteil  o<  Tcptablci,  ni  ««n«d  up  «  a  mbiU
pluto  <T.  3).

T*  nton  to  oar  deacription,  Iba  dimui  vnuDj
wiirtBil  of  thne  omiM* :  lint,  the  fnvmaltii  or
IMB  (Cib  adFam.  UL  20),  called  dw  OMJoAii
(Pom.  Sot.  31>,  made  up  of  »U  lorta  </ idaim-
kiili  ta  the  upatile,  neh  m  thaw  dcacribed  b^
Hnaia  (Sot  a.  8.  9),
'  R^mla,  bctncae,  ndica,  qmlia  IiMimi
PcrreOBat  MomBchnni,  uier,  >1b^  faecolk  Coa."
bn  abD  (Cie.  ad  Fim.  ix.  20 ;  Hot.  JUL  I  3.  6)
to  th*  iint  conna  that
e  Id  it  (at  BCD  Uij^  ad
it  of  Tiimakhio^  lanier


rf  Coriathum  brau  u

et  of  bbdc  (diTts,  ttmnA  with  two  large
iMOibad  with  Tiimalchio^  nunc Nut


iBMt  nn
Id  the  p


enh)  Ml  a  ^1

Wwew,  wen  impdial  hunrica  ;  the  frngali^  of
Ifaitkl  aoh  aUowed  of  lettoceaudBiceniaiioliTei;
iifaiil  he  JuBHcIf  lella  lu  that  the  fnrmltit  vai
a  nfaMOwnl  of  modein  limrf  (^  liiL  14.  1).
HM»U>a  {SoL  iL  9)  hai  left  an  uthentie  leeord
^  a  oHii  pomMcmi  (we  Hot.  Oma.  ii.  U.  S8),
(ncB  b;  Lantafiu  oa  hit  tIectioD  to  the  office  of
flaiafn.  in  which  the  fint  coune  alone  wai  made
n  rf  iha  ialkiwing  diihea :  —  Seieral  kindi  of
ahdl-fiah  (irfki,  oi«Tua«  iraitoe,  yiorida,  tpondgU,
f^maridn,  mmicim  pmrpmrat,  haiaiu  oOt  et
■yrO,  thra^wa,  aipai^ni,  a  btlcd  hea  l^alUia
dib),  bracafieoea  (/taJrim),  nettlea  {urtiaa),
the  faamhra  of  a  g«t  and  wild  boai  (buabi  eapra-
fiai,  ^rm^i),  rich  DMata  made  mto  pHtiea  (flOiiia
m  /wrma  aian/aJa),  man;-  of  vhich  an  twice  le-
faued  m  the  iti<eatoi7-

It  wovid  br  exceed  the  limita  of  thiivarheren
1*  iMiitiiai  tH  the  diihea  which  fomKd  the  aeaind
I  ii^ai  rf  a  Beaian  dinner,  which,  whoever  likei,
■^  find  DDmilcI;  docribed  in  fioleiutnu.  (Di
n  '  •'.  iL  and  iiL)  Of  birdi,  the  Qninai  hen
i4/iw  aavX  the  pbeaant  (fiaiiima,  eo  called  from
Pbak,  a  lira  of  Celchii),  end  the  tlinuh,  wen
Mgat  JB'Kpata ;  the  liTet-  of  a  capoD  Reaped  in
^Ik  (Plinj),  Mid  heccaficoea  (_fiadiiiae)  dnued
wkk  pepF^  were  held  a  delicacy.  (Hdit  iiL  6.)
The  paiiiiV,  areording  to  MacTobiiu  (Snf.  iL  9),
vaa  faat  iotnidiieed  ^  Hoctenaitii  the  oaior,  at
^  ia«i|iii»l  ntVi  '"^  aaqoired  each  repute
aa^ig  the  Ronao  gonnnandj  aa  to  he  oom-
m^r a^ ''  Gft? denaiiL Other  biidi  an


of  a  aow  KTved  np  in  milh  (mmm,  lUd.  S^  U),
the  flitch  of  bamo  (pefan,  £^  5G),  the  wmb  of
a  »w  (ealni,  Sp.  £6),  are  all  nieoticiied  1^
Maitial.  Boor^  fleth  ajid  Teniion  wen  alao  in
high  rapale,  eapeclilly  the  fbnoet,  dewiibed  1^
JoTenal  (_Sai.  i.  HI)  ■*  animal  jinplar  eomvivia
BofwK.  CcmdimcDti  wen  added  to  moat  of
Iheae  diahea :  neh  wen  the  narta,  a  kind  of
pickle  made  from  the  tuanj  Gih  (Uart.  xjii  103)  ;
the  jnmiii  mcwniat,  made  from  the  intcatine*  of
the  mackerel  (amiiar),  ao  called  became  bnught
from  abroad  ;  aitc,  a  tort  of  brma  ;  .^lac,  the  ledi-
ment  of  wine,  Ac^  for  the  nceipM  of  which  m
moet  ^ain  nfer  the  reader  to  CatiagV  learned
initrottcr.  (Hor.  SaL  iL  4.)  Serenl  kinda  of
fimgi  (Ibid.  T.  20)  are  mentiaiwd,  tniflea  (baltti),
maahroonu  (hJurtt),  which  either  made  diihea  1^
IbgnuelTei,  or  farmed  the  garmtnre  for  larger  didie«
It  mnit  not  be  nippcaed  that  the  arUila  of  im-
perial Rame  wae  at  all  behind  Dnndrea  in  the
preparatioD  and  anwiKementa  of  the  table.  Id  a
large  booaahold,  the  functiiiaariaa  to  whom  thia
impiMtaot  part  id  domaatie  eeuiomT  waa  anffnitod
wtra  four,  tht  batler  {pnmuu),  the  a»k  (oreU-
maginu},  the  ananger  of  the  diihea  {dndor),
and  the  earrtr  {oarjitor  or  iciaaor).  (Waning  waa
taoght  aa  an  art,  and,  according  to  Fetronhia  (3d,
36),  perfonned  to  liie  aoond  of  mnui^  with  qipn-


.  >.  tht  bvd^  and  flaminiD  (piamiitipttnit,

Mmt,  noi.  71),  the  touw  of  which.  Martial  telU
f  ceaunaiaad  ilaelf  to  the ddicale


. (Mart  Xiaii,  liiL) Ofj
to  bare  been  the  faTouiila  diah,
• <llM.i)ii.41)tlhami


(Jnv.  SaL  t.  131},
10  aaoe  diacrimina  relist


"Necm


placed  aome  ap-
gooae  on  AqDarioi,  a  pair  of
Bcaiei  with  larta  iicnbUtai)  and  cheeaecakea  [pla-
catae)  in  each  acale  on  Libra,  &c  In  the  middi*
waa  {daced  a  hiTa  au^ianed  b;  ddicate  barban
Preaentlj  four  alarei  come  hTW»iA  daneiag  to  3m


lentlT  four  alarei
id  01  mniic,  and


the  diih  j  beneath  appear  a
meati ',  a  ban  with  wingi,  u  unnaie  regaaoa,
in  the  middle ;  and  fbtu  finjei  of  Uarajaa  at  the
cranen,  pouring  hot  aauce  (^arwi  piperatwai)  orar
the  hih,  that  wen  iwimming  in  the  Enripua  be-
low. So  eotirelr  had  the  Homani  loot  all  ahooia
of  lumij,  aince  the  dap  when  Cincioa,  in  anpport-
ing  the  Fannian  law,  charged  hii  own  age  with
the  enormilf  of  introducing  the  pomH  Tn/jaiHii
(ar " ' —--'"■ ■


O^


ited  of  frnila  (which  t
nnully  ate  uncooked),  ancb  aa  almonda  [aii^igdalae),
dried  grapea  {ane  ......

laa,Jad^ClioCMt  . . .

edtiHa  auUUa,  dmltiaria,  and)  a


cakea  {eoptae),  tarta  (tenblilae),  wbenoa  the  maker
of  them  waa  mlled  piiler  ctaZc^onaa,  piaemtarau,
liiimatf  &C.

We  will  now  auppoaa  the  taUe  apread  and  the
gneata  uaembled,  each  wilh  hia  Btappii  or  napkin
(Mart.  liL  3a),  and  in  hia  ditmer  dreaa,  called
coaaloria  or  ctiilona,  uanally  of  a  bright  colour
(Petron.  c21),andTariegated  with  floven.  Pint
the3r  look  off  their  iboea  (v  fear  of  aoiling  the
conch  (Mart  iii.  90),  which  ww  ofiea  inlaid  with


'303  COENA.

iTOiy  «  tortouHhell,  and  emtnA  with  ctotli  of
sold.  Next  Ihej  Iwd  dowa  to  cat  (Hot.  Sal.
I  4.  39),  the  head  mtiiig  on  tbe  left  elbow  and
mpporled bj  duhiooi. (Mart.  iii.  B.) There


■toad  the  Kmnta  (tmitiri)  clothed  in  ft  tunic
(Hot.  jbJ.iL  6. 107).  and  girt  with  napkins  (Suet
OaL  26);  •ome  removed  the  diihei  and  wiped  the
table*  with  a  nmgh  eloth  (gaiuape,  Hor.  Sai,  ii.
8.  11),  othen  nre  the  gueeta  wbI«  for  their
htndt,  or  cooled  the  room  with  &n>.  (Hait  iiL
Sa.)  Hera  itood  ui  Altera  joath  (Jm.  Sal.  t.
AS)  behind  hii  maiter*!  couch,  ready  to  anawei
tha  noiK  of  th«  fingen  {digiti  tr^iibii.  Mart.  tL
S9),  whils  othen  bore  ft  large  platter  (namnmuun)
of  different  kinds  of  meat  to  the  gueati.  (Hor.  fill.
ii.  8.  86.)

Whatever  change!  of  &>hioa  had  taken  place
lines  primilii


(MA


•.If


Cicero'i  dsj


la  luual  to  baths  about  two  a^a
at  throe,  honn  which  leem  to  liaro  been  obierved,
tA  least  by  the  higher  daaiea,  l<mg  after  the  Au-
gnilan  age.  (Mart.  if.  8.  6,  iL  63.  3 ;  Cic.  ad
Fam.  ix.  26  ;  Plia.  Bp.  iii.  1.)  When  Juvenal
mentioni  two  o'clock  a*  a  dinner  hoor,  he  evi-
dently meani  a  eenmra  on  the  Inxury  of  the  penoa
turned  {Sal.  I  49,  BO),

"  Eiol  ab  aUma  Marini  hihit."
In  tha  lianqnet  of  Naiidienni,  iboul  ths  lame  hour
it  intended  when  Horace  taya  to  Fundanina,
'  Nam  ndhi  quaeroiti  convivam  dictiu  here  niic
De  midio  potare  die."

Honce  and  Maecenas  uied  to  dine  at  a  lata
hoor  ftboHt  lunaet.  (Hot.  Sal.  ii,  7-  33,  Ep.  i.
6.  3.)  Perhapi  the  varioua  atatementi  of  clauical
BDthon  upon  ^is  subject  can  only  be  reconciled  by
■apposing  (hat  with  the  Romans,  as  with  ounelvea,
there  was  a  great  vaiiety  of  houn  in  the  diSerenl
ranks  of  society.

IHnner  waa  act  out  in  a  room  called  cotnatio  or
diaela  (which  two  wordi  perhapa  conveyed  to  a
itoman  ear  neariy  the  tame  dittinctioa  u  our
dining-room  and  parlour).  The  amoJio,  in  rich
inon''s  bouses,  was  fitted  op  with  great  magnificence.
(Sen.  Ep.  90.)  Suetonius  (Ken,  31)  mentions  a
■upper-room  in  the  golden  palace  •£  Nero,  con-
itricted  like  a  theatre,  irith  shifting  scenes  to
change  with  every  course,  la  the  tnidit  of  the
coenatio  were  tet  three  couches  (tridiaia),  answer-
ing in  shape  (o  the  square,  at  the  long  semicircular
couchei  (ligmeia)  did  to  the  oval  tables.  An
account  of  (he  ditpoiition  of  the  couches,  and  of
the  pUce  which  each  guest  occupied,  it  given  in
the  aiticlB  Tricliniuh.

The  Greeks  and  Romans  were  aoruslomed,  in
later  times,  to  recline  at  their  meals ;  Ibough  tbis
practice  eoidd  not  have  been  of  great  antiquity  in
Greece,  since  Homer  never  describet  persons  as
nclining,  but  always  as  tittbg,  at  their  meals.
Isidore  of  Seville  {Orig.  ix.  11)  alto  attributes
the  Bme  pnctice  to  the  ancient  Romans-  Kven
in  the  time  of  the  early  Roman  emperors,  children
io  lamiiies  of  the  highest  rank  used  to  Mil  logelhi'i
at  an  inferior  table,  while  (heir  &then  and  elden
reclined  on  couches  at  the  upper  part  of  the  room.
'<'racit.jlin.iiii.  16;  Suet  Ji^.  6£,  OoW.  32.)


at  table,  even  after  the  recumbent  p
become  common  with  the  other  sei.  (Vairo,  ap.
Itid.  Orig.  n.  1 1 5  Val.  Mai  iL  i.  §  3.)  It  ap-
pears to  have  been  considered  more  decent,  snd
more  agreeable  to  the  severity  and  purity  of  ancient
manners,  for  women  to  sit,  more  especially  if  uaeij
persons  were  present.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  we
find  easel  of  women  reclining,  where  there  was
conceived  to  be  nothing  bold  or  indelicale  in  their
posture.  In  tome  of  the  bat-reliefs,  repreimling
the  visit  of  Bacchus  1»  Icama,  Erigone,  instead  of

of  her  bther.  In  Juvenal  (SaL  iL  ISO)  a  bride
reclines  at  the  marriage  supper  on  the  bosom  of
her  hnihand  ;  which  is  illustrated  by  the  fallowing
woodcut,  token  from  MonttaDcou  (Ail.  Erp.Suppt,


■eema  intended  to  reptieaent  a  scaie  of  perfect
imonial  felicity.  The  husband  and  wife  re-
on  a  sofa  of  rich  materials.  A  three-lef^ed
is  spread  with  viands  before  them.  Their
tons  an  in  front  of  the  tola,  one  of  them  sit-
in  the  manner  above  described,  on  a  low
,  and  playing  with  the  dog.  Several  females
1  boy  ore  performing  a  piece  of  muHc  for  the
■  linraent  of  the  married  pair,
lai  been  already  remnrked  that,  before  lying
the  shoet  or  sandals  were  taken  off.  In  all
cient  paintings  and  bos-reliefs  illustrative  of
ibject,  we  see  the  guestsreclining  with  naked
and  in  those of  them  which  conlun  the


D.g,l,.™byGOOglC-


COONATL
bTooilc  nlgMt  of  tba  Tiut  of  Bacdn*  to  Icwni^
v« obterre  a  fium  {KifDnniiig  for  Bocciiiu  thii
•Sbb. Th«  ptectding  nodcat,  ttkmi  from  a  terra

Hbjcel,  bMk  ■hon  the  naked  feet  of  Icanu,  who
la  paitlr  niaed  himedf  from  bia  omch  Co  welcome
Ut  gacM,  and  alio  that  Bacdmi  hu  one  of  hii
fiet  BlnadT  naked,  vhUft  the  lum  it  is  the  act  of
liMuiiiig  Ibe  ahoe  frora  the  olhei.  [B.  J.]

COBNA'CULUH. [DoMUB.]
COENATIO. [CoiNA,[i.30S,a.]
COENATCBIA. [Cobk*,  p.  807,  b. ;  Svn-


W.1


{Bof  Ulpjon


"  Tk  kendilate*  of  ialeitala  ingenni  behms  in
At  tut  place  to  tbor  rai  heredeis  Uiat  u,  ckildran
trh*  an  m  tba  powa  of  tbe  ptrent,  and  thoie  whD
Vt  ia  the  ijai  ii  of  childroi  (at  gnuidchildien  for
■■aan)  ;  if  tkoe  an  do  mi  herMIe^  it  belongi  to
tha  -— — ff-''"',  that  it,  bnthen  and  liiten  b;
tke  ^me  blha  (it  wu  not  neeeualj  that  they
■ktald  be  bf  the  isnw  mother)  ;  if  then  an  do
ivMMviaei,  it  beloop  to  the  nmujuug  neantt
■pali,  that  ia.  Is  tbo  cognatt  ti  the  male  tei,  who
naee  tbdr  iliam  ill  thnagh  SMlei,  and  an  of  the
MMt  bmOia.  Aod  Ibit  it  proVided  bj  a  law
•f  tteTwdnTaUea:--A'Hia<ato  iKntiir  en


Ca|nati  an  all  ihoee  whi^  according  to  the  Ju
OotwD  ar  Ju  Natnnle,  an  ipnmg  ama  one  per-
MB,  blether  mala  or  female  (eognau  . .  qiiui  ex
BBt^,  D^.  3&  til.  a  a  1. 1 1.). Pun  Natuialit


tiagt.  Oneqi
pCen  io  maniaga  aod  net  begotten  in  mairiase,
and  cbiUmi  <tf  ode  mother  b^pjUcn  in  marriage  bj
diflosit  fathen,  an  eagoati.  The  natural  relation-
diip  bj  ptvcreaU™  wat  called  natonlii,  a>  op-
poaed  to  cognalia  ciTilit  tf  legitima,  which,  though
t— ^-Hl  on  tbe  natiualia  coguatio,  leceired  tnia
pgaitiTa  law  a  diatinet  character.  Thit  oatunlit
a^BtJD  «at  cAco  umplj  called  cogTiatio,  and  the
cinl>  ar  legitinw  wat  tailed  agnatio.  Nnturalit
fojBatia  tbep,  nmply  in  itteli^  wai  no  dvilia  cog-

A  oarect  tkotioo  of  the  term  agnatut  aumat  be
kad  wiiboDt  nfierriiig  to  the  mtion  of  the  palria
inlialaa.  and  to  one  of  the  tenaea  of  the  word
faailia.  In  one  lente,  then,  fiunilia  aigaifiea  all
tboK  &ae  penona  who  an  in  the  power  (in  patria

- - ™«)«(tbe- -


a  tha  pallia  poteMaa,  cootequeatl;
faaed  fait  of  tba  ^— ''•*i  and  wen  agnati.
A^apt^  childnB  wen  alao  in  the  adoptiTe  hther<>
pomr  i  nd  coDaaqnently  wen  ^nati,  though  they
wan  mat  rf*"'P?rt  cognatL Accordio^y,  if  the

K-f*i"t  which  aroae  &om  adoptioi,  wat  dia-
d  by  — — -T-^^^"!  then  rEoamed  no  eagaatjo :
kil  if  U*  tpatK^  whid  anae  Irom  cognatu,  wai


COLLEGIUM.  S0»

diaaolTcd  by  emancipation,  there  atill  remained  tha
DBtaiaUi  cognatio.  The  patcr&miliu  maintained
hit  power  orei  hit  fimulia  K  long  aa  he  lived,  ex-
cept orer  thoae  who  were  emancipated,  or  puaed
into  another  bmiliii,  or  in  any  way  anitained  a
deminatio  caintia.  On  hit  death,  the  common  bond
of  the  patria  poteitaa  wai  dia»lTed,  and  hia  aoiu

,  became  ictpeetiiely  heada  of  bmilita  ;  that  im,  of
pecacna  who  were  m  their  power,  or,  with  reapect

[  to  ma  anotha*,  wen  agnati. Bat  al!  theae  penona

I  oontinoed  to  be  memben  of  tbe  nma  bmilia  [  that
ia,  they  wen  atill  agnati,  and  eonteiiiientlj  the
agnatio  isbntted  among  penona  to  long  aa  they
cmld  trace  back  their  deacent  throngh  mdu  to  one
common  palofimuliat.

Agnan,  then,  m»  be  briefly  aiplaioed  to  be
tbota  "  who  vtmld  be  in  the  patria  pototsa,  or  in

jm,  at  a  wiie  in  auatit  viri,  or  in  tha  manua  of  a
urn  who  ia  ia  die  btber't  power,  if  the  pater&mi-
liat  wen  aliia  ;  and  thit  ia  true  whether  auch
penona  erer  wen  actually  ao  or  not."  (Hugo,
LiirfmA,lLc)

The  imperfection  of  an  indiridial,  aa  ■  living
being,  ia  cmnpleted,  Fint,  by  marrtage,  which  unitea
two  penona  of  different  aeiea  in  a  tociaty  for  life.
Second,  the  imperfection  of  an  individoal  which
ariaea  from  hit  limited  eiiileiice,  ia  completed  in
tha  inatitntion  of  Roman  law  in  tha  patria  poteataa,
to  which  it  attached,  partly  aa  a  further  develop-
ment, partly  aa  a  more  natural  or  leti  legal  analogy,
kinabip :  ^  at  a  further  development  in  agnatio,
which  ia  only  tbe  raidunm  of  a  previont  eiiating
patria  poleatat  with  conilant  continnalion  ;  at  a
natural  analogy  in  cogna.^  in  which  the  jaj  gen-
tium recogniaea  the  community  of  individualt
which  rtata  on  deicent,  at  the  jut  civile  in
agnatio."  (Savigny,  ir)ial«i,&e.vDl.Lp  3<1,&c.)
Wa  mnat  auppoae  then,  in  order  to  obtain  a
daa  notion  of  agnatio,  that  if  tbe  male  brim
whom  the  agnati  claim  a  common  deacent  wei«
alive,  and  they  ven  all  in  bia  power,  or  in  hit
manna,  or  in  the  mannt  of  tboce  who  are  in  hit
power,  they  wonld  all  be  agnati.  In  order,  then,
that  agnatio  may  lubaiat  among  peraona,  tbe
Dude  from  whom  the  deacent  ia  clami^  muat  hare
lott  hia  patria  poteitaa  by  death  only,  and  not  by
any  tapitii  deminutio,  and  conieqiiently  not  by
any  of  hia  obildien  pauing  into  loy  other  patria
poteataa,  or  into  tbe  manua  viri,  which  woiud  in
c9ect  be  poaaing  into  another  agnatio ;  for  a  penon
could  not  at  the  aame  time  be  an  sgnatna  of  two
altogether  di&rent  familiM  Accordingly,  adoption
deatnr^ed  the  former  agnatio,  ajid  tba  emaniripa-
tion  of  a  ton  look  away  all  bii  rightt  of  agnntiis
and  bit  ibrmer  agnati  loet  all  their  righti  againat

The  legal  definitim  (Oaiut,  ilL  10)  that  agnati
are  thoae  who  an  connected  W  kgitima  ownatio,
and  that  legitima  cognado  it  the  cognatio  through
peraona  of  the  male  aex,  mnat  be  viewed  aolcly
with  reference  to  the  natural  relation  ;  for  agnatic^
aa  a  diil  initiCution,  com^xhended  Ihcae  who  were
adopted  into  the  fiimilia  ;  and  further,  thote  wbo
wen  adopted  oat  cJ  the  hmilia  lott  their  former
agnatio.

The  meaning  of  conMnguinei  hat  already  been
given  by  Ulpian.  Thoao  who  wtn  of  the  aame
bhiod by both parenta,  wen aometimea  called


i.

Tiiii«pot»

Thin  table  iliain  all  llie  degrcn  of  n^atio.
The  degree  of  relationtliip  of  any  giren  penon  in
this  BtemmA,  1o  the  penon  with  retpect  lo  whoa
the  rpUdonihip  ii  iaqoitrd  after  {I'l  wn,  &c),  ii
iDdicaled  hj  ihc  figiuet  attached  lo  the  aeVnal
wordi.  The  Roman  ddiscibIi  denoCa  the  degree
of  cognatio  in  the  canon  law ;  and  the  Anhie
nomerala,  the  d^reea  in  the  Roman  or  Ciiil  law.
The  lallcr  mode  of  nckoniiig  ii  adapted  in  Sag-
land,  in  ueertaining  the  penoni  who  an  entiti^
u  next  of  kin  to  ihe  pentnial  ettats  of  an  inteetate.
In  the  ranon  lav,  the  number  which  eipnuea  the
coUatenl  d«ree  ii  alwap  the  greater  of  the  two
nomben  (vEen  the;  an  difhnnt)  which  ezpnn


COLLEQIUU.


ladonibip  ia  aicertained  bj  caunting  from  either  0[
the  two  penoot  to  the  other  tbroDsh  the  annmon
BnceaCoT.  All  thoie  wordi  on  wnich  the  Bame
Roman,  or  the  Mime  Arabic,  nonMnaU  occur,  i^
preaent  perwnu  who  an  in  the  tame  degrte  of
cognatio,  accoiding  to  these  icapactiie  lawi,  to  the
penon  it  son,  &c.  (Hugo,  Ltkrimck,  &c  ;  Han<
Kill,  Ldiriadi,  Su. ;  Dig.  38.  -tit.  10,  Dt  GradUmi,
&c  ;  Ulpianua,  Frt^.  ed.  BttdiiDg  )  BBckJiu,  /«-
ttitmiimtii.)  [O.  L]

CO'ONITOR. tAcno.]

COGNO'MEN, [NowiN.)

COHERES. [Huis.]

COHORS. [EziBciTU«.]

COLA'CRETAB  {KmKixptrat,  alto  oalled
mAayp^rai),  the  name  of  reiy  anient  muiitimte*
at  Athena,  who  bad  ^  maoagfrnent  of  all  finaadaJ
matten  in  the  ttms  of  the  king).  Thej  are  Hiid
to  have  derired  their  name  from  collecting  entaJB
parti  of  the  Tictinu  at  waifica  (i*  Tsii  irytlfiiw
rir  KitAAt).  The  le^ilalure  of  Solon  left  the
Colacretae  nntoached ;  but  Cleiitlienu  deprired
them  of  the  charge  of  the  financet,  which  he  tmu-
fcrrod  to  the  Apsdcctae,  who  were  eelablithed  in
their  itead.  [AroniCTAE.]  From  thit  tiiDO  th*
Colacrela«  had  only  la  pivvide  for  the  male  in  th*
Prytancimn,  and  nihaequently  bad  likewiie  to  pij
the  feei  to  the  dicana,  whsi  the  jsaclice  of  paying
the  dicniM  wai  introduced  by  Faidea.  (Aniti^h.
Fetp.  693,  m,  with  SchaL ;  Etym.  M.  PhoL  Hb
>ych.Snid.Tini.i  KvbBk.tKn\m.PlaLLm. p. iji;
BOckh,  PM.  Eton.  o/JtlttnM,p.  173.  &&,  3nd  ed.>

COLLA'TIO  BONO'RUM.  [BoHomsMCol.

COLLEGATA'RIUS. [Lmatcm.]

COLLE'QIUM. The  perwni  who  fanned  a.

caDed  coUegai  or  Bcfalae. Ths

'd  coUeglmn  ptupsiy  BxpreHed  the  mttDu  of

tral  pertoDt  being  united  in  any  office  or  for

'common  puipoee  (Lit.e.  13,22;  Tacit .Jm.

31)  ;  it  afterward!  oma  to  liniify  >  body  at

loni,  and  the  union  which  hound  them  togediar.

;  collegium  waa  the  Iraifia  ot1h»  Gieeki.

The  notion  of  a  cdleginm  wai  ai  fbllawi ;  — ■

sUegium  or  eorput,  ai  it  wai  alai  called,  mnit

list  of  thiee  pereoni  at  leaat. (Dig.  M.  tit.  1 6.

L  Bfi.) Pcnoni  who  legally  fanned  eitch  an  bibcw

datioD  were  Bid  eor^nH  iahen,  which  ii  equiTft-

lent  lo  001  phraae  of  being  iacorpoiBtad  ;  and  in

1al«r  timea  they  were  aaid  to  be  corTnni^  aad  tha

body  WBi  ailed  a  t>?r7»ni6>>. Thoce  who  farmed

the  public  rerennea,  minei,  or  ealt  wdAi  (njoui)

might  han  a  corpus The  power  of  fonninf^  auch

I  coU^nm  or  ncietu (fw  thii  tenn  alio wm

leed),  wei  limited by  Tiriosi  legei,  KDatiiaMO-

■ulta,  and  imperial  eonitilutiam. (Dig.  S.  tit.  4.)

AuDciaEiDns of  Hidividuali, who wore entitled

'  aTo  a corpui,  could hold proptfty  in  com-

; they  could  hold  it,  u  (be  RoDUin  juriati

remark,  jut  ai  the  itale  held  property  (ru  cbbh

niMHi). Theie  collegia  had  a  eomnHni  cheat,  and

conld  ane  and  be  med  by  their  ijndieni  or  actor.

That  which  wai  dae  ta  the  nllcfinn  or  ■niTmitaa

(for  thii  wai  a  itill  more  geoenl  tun),  waa  not

due  to  the  indiTidnali  of  it ;  and  that  whick  tlie

collegium  owed,  wai  not  the  debt  af  the  nidiTiduda.

The  propeMy  of  the  colleginn]  wm  lialile  to  ba

•riied  and  io)d  for  hi  deW T

waa  gOTemed  by  ia  •


a  ooUewimn  ur
rangdUioiM,


■  O"


COLLKOIUK.
wUA  wi^  ba  mj  ngnlMiinii  that  tha  maabm
tffnd  ^fiMi,  |«OTided  thej  wen  not  coatnry  ta
hv:  tka  pnmiicn,  m  Oaiui  conjectum  (Dig.
47.  Ih.  22),  «u  dmnd  &om  a  law  of  Solgn,
*Ud  ke  ^aoM*. Tke  enllcgium  itiU  mbaiitad.


omlnctiiig  and
Aj  hKTing  ■rana  obiect  OC  sd-
■  Ticved  u  luiita  (magutniRu

nt  (Dig.  50.  tit.  1.
«.  2A).  Aa  hning  aoiindt;  to  bold  pnpeR;,  ths;
■•  ffifij  Bnitiiiiii  or  Btifidal  penonagei,  aad,

o  conpoM  thii  artificial
n  m  ths  liiiitg  pemjiu  bj
vtMa  mnty  Ibii  irtiSaal  penoo  dvea  the  sen
wkick  tn  mtatmrj  fat  the  aaqoiution  and  admi-
■MntMO  of  ila  pnperlj. Itiiaiilj  with  refennce


on^tktN


apenon. There
•OBe  farther  nmiriu  Bodef  UHiviaaiTii.
L  lawfdlly  eoutitued  coJlegiam  wu  le^iiti-
L AMOoHioni  of  indiTidoali,  vhich  affected
d  ■•  oJli^ia,  but  to*  fubtdden  by  law,  were

I  doa  Dot  »W*  Ih>w  collegia  woe  ionned,
'en  ipeciallj  ailablithed  by  l^al
wmmntf.  \,tjn.  T.  SO,  62 ;  SmL  Oaa.  i2,  Aug.
31  i  1%.  S.  th.  i.  L  I.)  Other  cdlegia  were
piihalilj  famed  bjr  folimtuy  anodatiaiu  of  iodi-
Tidaala  Buda  Iba  pnraioDa  of  •oma  genenJ  kftal
^Airitj.  TUa  aaffxailiai  would  aoeoont  for  the
fact  <f  a  gnM  nmaiier  of  collegia  being  fenaed  in
lb*  Boane  of  tinK,  and  nanf  of  them  being  ocm-
miallj  inraMed  aa  not  legitima.

SoMa  «  thaae  eorpoiata  bodiea  naembled  our
CHMfaaici  or  nildi ;  amh  were  the  &brorani,  pif-
unn,  Aa.  ecJlegia.  (l^npridiiu,  Alti.  Snaiu,
13.) Ottew  wen  of  a  idigiont  cbantcter  ;  luch

caOagia.  Ottifn  wera  bodiea  ooDcerned  about
laiiaaiai  nl  and  adminiitntioD  ;  ai  tribnnonun
jIMt  (Lit.  xliL  33),  qaaeatamm,  decnnonum
edkfpa.  Tbe  litlea  of  nimieniua  othei  collegia
^Bf  be  eoUected  Iraoi  tha  Bamau  writen,  and


1  who,  kt  the  tnpe,  filkd

.raold  baro  b«en  a  contndict
'*  bM  be«D  Raarred  far  modern
■tiaJaw^  mder  the  name  of  a  ratponttian  Mle.
Bm  tbe  ■adog  of  ma  pcam  laMtedinfl  to  all  (he
qgba  «f  a  predaeonr  waa  iuniliar  to  the  Romani
H  iba  CM*  of  a  aingla  bena,  and  tbe  nme  ootim
^■it  hne  exMted  wilb  reapaet  to  iudiiidiiali  wbo
kUanT^ksiu  Mtpetoal  neeeaaioiL

o  Ulpmn,  a  onmnilai,  tbongh


;  Mr  tbe  indindnal  pnaiiaaei  all  tbe
B-ba  of  tha  uBTttaitai,  and  nied  tha  name  by
Aaki>wdia«nyri»h«J. (1%  3.  tit  4  •.  7.)


C0L0NATU3.  311

When  a  new  memb»  wai  taken  into  a  eolte-
gium,  ho  nu  uid  co-ophai,  and  tbe  old  memberi
were  nid  with  respect  to  him,  ncipere  w  cuttegiam.
The  mode  of  filling  up  Tuanciei  would  mj  in  dif-
ferent collegia.

Civitatefl  and  rea  pablicae  (cItiI  commanitiea)
and  monicipiiL  (in  the  later  aeuiB  of  tbe  term)
wen  viewed  oa  fictitiotu  pernor

According  to  Plinj  {^.  i.  7  ;  Ulp.  Fr.  tlL  23.
I,  £)  rea  publiise  and  munidpia  could  not  tako
ai  here*  ;  and  Che  reaaon  given  if,  that  the;  wen  a
corpm  incertum,  and  lo  conld  nr


which  B


ihejwena


he  conienM  to  be  a
heiei,  Jbr  the  beiGa  eonld  not  in  thia  matter  act
bj  a  represenlatiTe.  A  rei  publica,  ihetcfoR,  ai
being  a  fictitlout  penon,  eonld  not  do  the  neocaaBiy
act  Municjpia,  like  other  fictitiona  peraon^
could,  hanorer,  acquire  property  in  other  wayi,
and  by  oieahi  of  other  penani,  whether  bond  or
free  (Dig,  41.  tit  2.  1.1.  §22);  and  they  could
take  fideicommiua  under  the  usatnucntulloiB
Apcooianum  whicti  waa  paoed  in  the  tims  of
Hadrian,  and  extended  to  licita  collegia  in  the
time  of  JS.  Aunliui.  (Dig.  34.  tit  S,  a.  21.)  Bj
anotber  •enatuacoaiullum,  the  liberti  of  mnnicipia
migbtmake  tha  monicipetlheir  hemdei.  Tbegedi
oonid  not  be  made  heredea,  except  aucb  deitiea  aa
poawaaod  thia  capacity  by  apecial  aenaluacoD-
lulta  w  imperial  conatitutiona,  nich  aa  Jupitw
Tarpeiiu,&c  (Ulp-i^r.  tit  22.  s.6.)  Byacon-
■titution  of  Leo  (Cod.  ri.  tit  24.  >.  12)  ciTitatei
obtained  the  ca^iacity  to  take  property  aa  herediM.
Aa  early  aa  the  time  of  Ncrra  and  Hadrian,  civi-
talet  could  take  legadea.

Theagh  dvitalea  within  tbe  Ronan  empin
could  not  originally  leceiTe  gifU  by  will,  jet  lu-
dcpendent  itatea  could  receive  gifta  in  that  way
(Tacit  AmM.  It.  43),  a  caae  which  fumiahea  no
objectiona  to  the  atatement  abore  made  by  PUny
and  Ulpian. In  the  aame  way  the  Roman  itate


The  Roman  tawyera  conaidered  luch  a  giA  to  b(
accepted  by  the  jiu  gentium.  (Dig.  3.  tit  4  ;  47.
tit  22  ;  Sorifiny,  SgittBi,  Ac.  yoL  iL  p.  234.  ftc.)
[UmvHtMTia.]  [G.  L.]

COLONATUS,  COLO'NL  The  Coloni  of
the  later  Impeiial  period  (armed  a  cLua  of  igri-
ctdluriala,  whoie  condition  baa  been  the  aabject  of
elaborate  inToitigalioii


might  be-


Inqoilini,  Tribniarii,  CenattL  A  pi
come  a  Colonua  by  birth,  with  lefcreni
the  term  Originariu*  waa  uaed.  When  both  the
parenla  were  Coloni  and  belonged  to  the  aame
maater,  the  children  wen  Coloni.  If  the  fiither
wai  a  C^lonna  and  the  mother  a  alave,  or  con-
Terwly,  the  cbildren  followed  the  condition  of  the
mother.  If  the  (ather  waa  free  and  tbe  mother  a
Colona,  the  children  wera  Coloni  and  belonged  b)
tbe  maater  of  the  mother.  If  the  bther  waa  a
Colonua  and  the  mother  free,  the  children  before
the  time  of  Juatiniin  fallowed  the  coodidun  of  the
bther:  afterworda  Juatinian  declared  auch  cbil-
dren to  be  free,  but  finally  be  reduced  them  to  tha
eooditian  of  Coloni.  If  both  paienla  were  Coloni
and  bdoogad  to  diOerent  mailera,  it  wai  Goally
letlled  that  tha  maalara  ahould  divide  the  children
between  them,  and  if  there  waa  an  odd  one,  }t


312  C0L0NATU3.

■boulil  go  io  the  ownei  of  the  mother.  If  ■  man
lived  (or  thirty  yeaix  u  a  Colonui,  he  booune  the
Colonui  of  th«  owner  of  the  land  on  which  ho
lived  1  and  though  he  wu  itill  free,  he  coold
not  Imre  Che  land :  and  a  man  who  bod  poi-
•ewed  for  thirty  yean  a  colonui  belonging  to
another,  could  deicnd  himKlf  againat  the  elaima  of
the  farmer  owner  by  the  Praescriptio  triginla  an-
norum.  A  eonstitution  of  Valentinian  III.  de-
clared how  free  perwiu  might  become  Coloni  by
agreement ;  and  though  there  ia  neither  thii  nor
any  limilar  regulation  in  the  Code  of  Juatinian,
there  ia  a  pouage  which  apparfmtJy  lecogniiea
that  penona  might  become  Coloui  by  auch  agree-
ment. <Cad.ii.  lit.47.  ■.22.)

The  Coloni  were  not  tUiea,  (hou^h  their  con-
dition in  ccrlaio  reapeeta  wu  ooiiniilaled  to  that
of  alavei ;  a  ciramutance  which  will  explain  their
being  tailed  »ervi  tenae.and  aometimee  being  con-
trasted with  liberi.  They  had,  bowerer,  ccnnn-
bium,  which  alone  ia  a  ehoracteriatic  that  dii-
tinguiahca  them  dcsrly  from  itarci.  (Cod.  iL  tit.
47.  a.  21.)  Hut,  like  ihiTea,  they  were  liable  to
corponl  puniilitnent,  and  they  had  no  right  of
action  ogainat  their  mailer,  whose  relalion  to
them  wag  eiprcssed  by  the  term  Palronoo.  (Cod.
Theod.  t.  tiL  U.)  The  colonus  waa  attached
to  the  toil,  and  he  could  not  bo  permanently
aepaialed  from  it  by  hii  own  act,  or  by  that
of  bii  pntronoi,  or  by  the  cojuent  of  the  two.
The  patronua  conld  sell  the  eitate  with  the  coloni,
but  neither  of  them  without  the  other.  (Cod.  xi.
dt.  47.  a.  2.  7.)  Ho  could,  howerer,  tmnafer
raperabondant  coloni  from  one  to  another  of  hia
own  eslnte^.  When  an  ealate  held  in  common
va*  dirided,  married  peraona  and  relationa  were
not  to  be  tcparaled.  The  ground  of  there  being
no  legal  power  of  aepaiating  the  coloni  wid  the
estate  woe  the  opinion  that  auch  an  arrangement
vaa  favourable  to  agriculture,  and  there  were  also
financial  ien«>n>  for  this  rule  of  law,  aa  will  pre-
sently appear.  The  only  oa«e  in  which  the  colonui
could  be  aeparalcd  from  the  land  wai  that  of  his

be  done  with  the  palroa'a  consent,  aa  tho  biirden
of  recruiting  the  army  waa  imposed  on  him,  and  in
Ihia  instance  the  state  dispensed  with  a  general
rule  for  renaona  of  public  conveniences

The  colonua  pnid  a  certain  yesirly  rent  for  the
' '  '  ■  ■  ■ ]j,j^ .  (he  amount  waa  fiied  by


uldm


e  it,  the.


IS  had  ij


might  attempt
auch  cote  for  hia  protection  a  right  of  lutiuii
against  him,  which  waa  aa  eiccption  to  the  gene-
ral rule  aboifl  Mated.  (Cod.  xi.  tit  47.  a.  S.)
Tliete  were,  howcrer,  oiea  in  which  die  rent  was
fixed  by  agreement.

A  further  analogy  between  the  condition  of
Scrvi  and  Coloni  appears  from  the  &ct  of  the  pro-
perly of  Coloni  being  called  their  Peeulium.  It  ii
however,  diatinctly  noted  that  they  could  hold  pro-
perty (Cod.  Theod.T.  tit.  11}  ;  aiid  the  eipreoamna
which  declare  that  they  conld  have  nothing  "  pro-
pria "  (Cod.  iL  tit.  49.  a.  2)  aecm  meiely  to  da-
elare  Ibat  it  was  not  propria  in  the  aenae  of  iheir
having  power  to  alienate  it,  at  least  without  the
conient  of  their  patroni.  It  apoean  that  a  co-
lonns  canid.make  a  will,  and  uat  if  he  made
none,  hii  pnperly  went  to  hit  next  of  kin  ;  for  if
a  bifhoB,  preabyUT,  deacon,  &c,  died  intestate
•nd  withoat  kiti,  hii  property  west  to  the  chinch


COLONATUS.

or  conrent  to  which  he  belmgvd,  except  inch  u  ha
had  aa  a  colonus,  which  went  to  hi)  palTonuj,  who
with  respect  to  hia  ownenhip  of  the  land  ia  called
Domioiu  poHCHionis.  (Cod.  Theod.  v.  tiL  S.)
Some  daiies  of  Coloni  had  a  power  of  alienating
their  property,  (Cod.  li  tit  47.  a.  33.)

The  luid-toi  due  in  reapeet  of  the  land  occapied
by  the  colonua  waa  paid  by  the  dominna  ^  but  th*
coloni  were  liable  to  the  payment  of  the  p(J1-tax,
thongh  it  wai  paid  in  the  Snt  instance  by  the
dominu)  who  recovered  it  fxtna  the  colonui.  Tho
liability  of  the  colonna  to  a  poll-tax  explain!  why
thii  claas  of  persons  waa  H  important  to  the  alaie,
and  why  their  omdition  could  not  be  changed
wlthoal  the  conieat  of  the  itale.  It  was  only
when  the  {oloDiii  had  lived  ai  a  free  man  for
thirty  yettrt  that  ho  could  maintain  his  fraedom  by
a  pneaeriptio,  bnt  Juitinian  aboliihed  ihii  prae-
scriplio,  and  thna  empowered  the  dominna  to  aMeit
his  right  after  any  lapse  of  time.  (Cod.  iL  tit  47.
a.  23.)  With  respect  to  their  liability  to  the  poll-
tax,  the  coloni  were  ealled  tribttani,  rnutb'  cr
cnuifrw  oiiKmi,  otbcr^tH,  adKriptitim  amditioiiU,
and  oauAua  adieripti.  Thia  term  adsoiptiD  ap-
pears to  have  no  reference  to  their  b<


it  Mfen  t«  Ata


b«ns  atlai
liability  to


poll-tax  11  being  rated  in  the  tai-booka,  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  that  the  Greek  tenn  Ua  Ad-

Bcriptitiui  is  'Y,viaiyfa)^t,

Ai  the  Coloni  were  not  Mrri,  and  aa  the  claa
of  Lditini  and  peregrini  hardly  exiitcd  in  the  later
agea  of  the  Empire,  we  mnit  coniider  the  Coloni
to  have  had  the  Civitai,  auch  aa  it  then  WM  ;  and
It  IB  a  coniequenceof  this  that  they  had  connubiom
generally.  A  Conilitolion  of  Jurtiniin,  howsTeT
(A'bo.  22.  e.  17),  declared  the  marriage  of  a  colonn^
who  belonged  to  another  penon^and  a  tiw  woman
to  be  vai£  The  Canltitntion  doc*  not  leem  to
mean  any  thing  else  than  that  in  this  case  tho
Emperor  took  away  the  CaaDabium,  whether  for
the  reaaona  atatcd  b^  Savig^iy,  or  lor  other  reasona,
ia  immatcrioL  This  apecial  exception,  however^
proves  the  general  rule  ai  to  Gonnnbium.

The  origin  of  these  Coloni  ia  uncertain.  They
appear  to  be  referred  to  in  one  pamgo  of  the
Uinest  (Dig.  30.  1. 112),  under  the  name  of  In-


quilii


which  c


of  Coloni  The  pamge
states,  that  if  a  man  bequeaths,  as  a  Ii^acy,  Uio
inquiiini  without  the  proedia  to  which  they  adbertt
(n'fitf  praMiU  tpttbut  adhoerait\  It  ia  a  void  legacy.
Savigny  conceivea  that  tbii  passage  may  be  ti-


withou


are  speaking ;  but  the  ex-
planation that  he  luggeoti,  seema  a  very  {breed
one,  and  the  same  remark  appliei  to  his  aiplanatKifi
of  another  passage  in  the  Digest  (fiO.  tit  IE.  a.  4>.
The  condition  of  the  old  Clients  ieemi  to  b«or
■ome  relation  to  that  of  (he  Coloni,  bvt  all  hiatorical
trace!  of  one  elan  glowing  out  of  the  other  ara
entirely  wanting.

Savigny  observea  that  he  doea  not  perceive  anj
historical  connection  betireec  the  villeini  (eiUowt)


to  the  lord  had  nothing  coireapaading  to  them  in
the  caw  of  the  Colaai,  >o  fiu'  aa  we  knov.  Srmm
modem  writers  wonid  haatily  infer  an  hiiloHeaJ
coanaetion  of  inXilutioai  which  happen  to  hava


COLONATCS.
LttdrtoD'*  Tcnom
>n(M.6.24),i>ujbe
to  the  ioeidaiM  of  VOIeimge.

TkbiMvoftbacoiditioD  of  AeCblMii  it  from
SitignjH  Eanj  ob  Ibe  nib)ect,  which  ii  imuteled
b  tke  PkOobfial  Momud,  toL  il

The  qdcMioa  of  tlia  origin  a(  tittm  Cotimi  ii
—-'--J  M  gnat  Ici^  Irr  A.  W.  Zmnpt,  Uiber
•b  B\^*imij  md  Uilaritdit  Suteialafw^  da
OibMtfi  {OUMiiim  M—mm/Ur  PkUalogia,  Ncoe
Fol^  184fi).  The  aothoT  it  of  cfunioD  Chat  the
sipi  of  Uw  iiwtilntiBa  b  to  l>e  tnced  to  tbs
■rttlcmnt  of  QiTiiiBiue  paojde  by  the  Homaa  em-
posi  vitliiii  tfaa  limilt  of  tbe  ompirs.  The
tsiiat  BEBtiaD  ti  Cdom,  in  the  mdm  in  which
U>  OMj  trcmti  of  them,  ii,  u  be  italo,  a  eoniti-
nttka  of  CeoMmtiiw  a.  d.  SSI  (Cod.  Theod.  9.
lit.  SI.  1. 1,  2}  ndiich,  howercT,  giTc*  no  infbnn-
■tiaa  aboat  their  coadidoiL  Bot  a  laBer  conflti-
tnioa  el  CiMHtutiw,  A.  D.  333  (Cod.  Theod.  5.
tit.  9,  dc  fbgitiTii  adonii)  doo  giie  totne  inform-
alJiHi.  The  eooditioti  of  theie  fmign  KItlcn
bosf  once  ealabliahed,  the  anthar  inppoK*  that
fm  Ronan  dtiaeiu  m^ht  enter  into  ihii  amdition,


eipluwd,  b;  lenl  compuliion.  A  ccautitalirai  ^
ThndosiDO  the  Yom^cr  (Cod.  Theod.  5.  tit  4,  do
bak  aiilitan,  a.  3,  ed.  Wtnck),  cmlains  tome
•ahahle  inlbniatiaci  on  the  coloniiation  or  tettle-
Btnt  sf  tbe  bacbariam,  and  dedam  them  Eo
bdong  to  Ibc  eonditiaii  exfreaaed  hy  the  tatm
Cobaatsa.  The  leni  eolooot  often  ocean  in  the
viicrTa  wbsan  eiGa|Ked  in  the  Digal  (41.  tiL  3.
1.  SO:  I  £  ;  19.  tit.  3.  t.  3,  9.  g  3 ;  19.  tit  1.
a.  13.  I  30,  and  dtawlure)  ;  bnt  theae  Coloni  are
1  to  be  menl;  a  Icind  of  tenanla.  The
'  the  Sigett  (Sa  •.  113)  which  dCea  a
a  of  Hacew  Anrelini


piiditer)  ;  bat  it  ms
-  J^-'-  to  accept

The  wird ColoDatnj,  it
_  _..  ocoi  in  the  Digot  i  but  that

ntffOin  bet  inrrea  little.  The  nat  [Tobabia
•oblicn  tt  tbe  qatttion  it,  that  the  condition  of
the  CdoBi  mantioDed  in  the  Digeit  wai  the  model
cfthecatditkoof  tbe  baihuiuii  Kto  were  lottled
n  tbe  RenMn  anpire  ;  and  it  it  do  objection  to
thii,  that  tbe  eondhion  of  the  baibariaiit  might  be
^ad*  more  budentome  and  leai  free  than  that  of
tbe  Cttaa,  wbo  altvad;  exitted.  Nv  it  it
..... — --■--on,  if  the  eondition  of  the


•fallAcCokm.  The  tcaaou  for  filing  the  bar.
knaa  ■Cttkn  to  the  ioQ  are  obrioDi  enoogh.
Tbe  tabcj  at  tba  empanel  wu  to  people  the
a^^rj,  nd  to  ditpcne  man;  of  the  tribe*  whoee
aaiM  wvaM  ban  been  daogBow.  If  the  letolti
■(  Zai^t^  iDftdrr  tanuit  be  'AmlntA  to  their
Ulexteal,  it  moat  be  allowed,  that  be  baa  thrown
fnatligbto  tbe  nb}ect,aDd  nobably approached

.T...  ._.i.  --inoonofthedifflenlty,

■' ■ ■■  it  the  co-
ed totirel;  in  the  lellleinent  of  ihete
ic  tecma  much  more  probable  that
a  Boddled  the  barbariao  Mttlemeoti
that  aliead;  exitted,  thoogh
n  migbt  not  be  preeliely  the
--  '---=— -n  to  which  the
. [G.I.]


COLONI  A.  SI  3

'  COLO'NIA,  a  colony.  1.  GmhC.  The  com-
■non  Oreek  wind  for  a  colony  it  itrowfa  and  for
a  colooift  fanucai.  We  alio  find,  but  Dot  com-
moniy,  ^ourta  and  txoum.  (Thnc.  ii.  37  •
Aritbjph.  jle.  1307.)  The  former  wordt  have
reference  to  their  bemg  wanderen  from  their  own
home  I  the  latter  wordt  to  their  letlling  in  a  new
home.  The  term  ic\i|>>oiixia  indifstea  a  diviiion
of  canijDered  tandt  among  Athenian  dtiieni,  and
tbote  who  occupied  lacb  landi  were  called  kX.ii-
fWDxoi :  bnt  ai  they  were  tbna  colonial^  we  lome-
timet  find  the  general  term  of  farouuh  B|^ied  to
them.  (Thnc.  T.  116.)  fVBmel,  Di  Duorimim
Foeabalonat  lA-^foixiis,  ftrouul,  froum,  Ftank-
tan,  1838.)

The  eariier  Oreek  eoloniea  woe  naoally  com-
poaed  of  mere  bandt  of  adrcntnien,  who  leii  their
DBtiTe  coontry,  with  tbeii  bmiliet  and  property,
to  Keh  a  neir  home  in  themaeWet.  Some  of  the
eoloniea,  which  ante  in  comeqnenee  of  foreign
iniaiion  or  ciril  wan,  were  undertaken  without
anj  formnl  content  bom  the  rett  of  the  eom-
mnnil; ;  bat  nansUy  a  ooioay  wat  tent  ont  with
the  approbation  of  the  mother  conntry,  and  under
the  management  of  a  leader  (olmirnii)  appointed
by  it  Bnt  whateret  may  hare  been  the  origin
of  the  colony,  it  wat  alwayi  coniidered  in  a
political  point  of  view  iDdependcut  of  the  mother
coontiy  (called  by  the  Oredu  liTrrpitalui),  and
entirely  emancipated  from  itt  oontroL  At  the  lorae
time,  tlioagh  a  colony  wat  in  no  political  nibjntion
to  it*  parent  atate,  it  wat  united  to  it  by  the  tiei
of  filial  oSection ;  and,  according  to  the  geneialty
receiTcd  opiniont  of  the  Oieekt,  itt  dutiei  to  the

CDt  ilate  correiponded  tn  thote  of  a  daughter  to
mother.  (Dionyi.  iii.  7  ;  Polyb.  lii.  10.  %  3.)
Hence,  in  all  matten  of  eommon  intereat,  the
colony  gate  precedence  to  tbe  mother  alate ;  and
the  foimder  of  the  colony  (bUutHis),  who  might
be  conndered  u  the  reraetentatire  of  the  parent
Rote,  wai  nnially  wonfajpped,  after  hi*  droth,  oi  a
hero.  (Herod.  Ti,  38;  ThncT.  11;  Diod.iLS6,
II.  102.)  Alio,  when  the  colony  became  in  ita
turn  a  parent,  it  uiually  loaght  a  leader  for  the
colony  which  it  intended  to  fonnd  fenm  the  ori-
ginal mother  conntij  (Thnc  i.  34) ;  and  tbe  tarns
feeling  of  retpect  wat  manifealed  by  embaiaiea
which  were  tent  to  faoDoni  ibc  principal  fettiToU
of  the  parent  itate  (Diod.  liL  90  ;  Weneling,  ad
be.),  and  alio  by  beitowing  placet  of  honour  and
other  marki  of  retpect  upon  the  ambaaiadDn  and
other  memben  of  the  parent  itnte,  when  they
visited  the  colony  at  Cettiiali  and  limilor  occaaiona.
(Thoc.  i.  35.)  The  ooloniatt  alao  wonhipped  in
their  new  ■ettlemeot  the  aame  deitiea  u  they  had
been  accntiomed  to  honour  in  their  natire  country  j
the  Bcred  fire,  which  wni  eonttanlly  kqiC  bam-
iog  on  their  public  hearth,  wat  taken  from  lbs
Prytaueium  of  the  parent  city ;  and,  accoiding  to
one  Bceount,  the  printi  who  miniitend  to  the  god*
in  tha  colony,  were  brought  frcm  the  parent  alate.
{3cti<tlad  71m.  I  3fi;  compare  Tacit.  .^iM-iL  54.)
In  the  Bome  tpirit,  it  wa*  coniidered  a  violation
of  Bcted  tie*  for  a  mother  countrr  and  a  colony
to  make  war  upon  one  another.  (Herod,  viii.  S3;
Thue.  L  38.)

The  preceding  account  of  tbe  relationi  between
the  Greek  eoloniea  and  the  mother  eotmtry  ii
elneidattd  by  the  hittory  which  Thucydida  give*
nt  of  the  quarrel  between  Corcyra  and  Corinth.
ConjiB  wat  a  colony  of  Corintb,  and  Epdamnua


su


COLONIA.


>  oAaij  of  CoKTt* ;  but  the  Imia  (otKunfii)  gf
the  ojlanj  c^  EpidumuiB  vm  >  CoriutlxiBii  vbo
wu  inrited  £nim  the  metiopalii  Cotinth,  Id
conm  of  time,  id  comaqnenca  of  cinl  diueDiuHii
■nd  Bttacka  from  the  neighbouring  buibariuu,  the
SpidnmnJani  applied  foi  ud  to  Corcfia,  bat  their
Rqnat  WM  njtoted.  They  next  tfiplied  to  the
Ciriatluaiu,  who  took  Epidwunu  uodcr  their
protscliaiii  thinking,  nji  Thucrdidu,  that  the
cal<Of  ni  DO  lea  tbein  Chan  ue  Conathiani' :
aitd  mito  induced  to  da  u  throngfa  haired  of  the
CoRTnaaiii,  becaiiwi  thej  neglected  Ibem  thiNuh
ther  wen  coloDiiti ;  for  the;  did  not  giTo  to  Ua
Connthiiuia  the  cnstaimuy  hoaonn  and  defefsnce
in  the  pabliculemnitiea  and  sacriSca  uthe  othei
colonist  vete  WMit  to  pa;  to  the  motfaa  conntr;.
The  Corcj^aeaiu  who  had  beasne  laj  poverfu!
by  KS,  took  oBeoce  at  the  Cocinthiani  nceinng
Epidaowiii  under  their  protection,  and  the  teanlt
mi  a  war  batweoa  Conjia  and  Corinth.  The
Corcjraeani  aent  amtaiaada*  to  Athttii  to  a^
«».i.Km- ;  and  in  leplj'  to  the  objectiea  that  the/
were  a  colcoy  of  Connth,  thej  Mid  "  that  evai;
colony,  aa  long  aa  it  it  tnated  kindly,  reapecti  the
mother  coimtry :  bat  when  it  ii  injoied,  ii  alienated
from  it ;  for  coloniatt  are  not  unt  ont  «  nihjecta,
but  that  (hey  may  have  Equal  righta  with  thoae
that  ramus  at  home." (Thoc  L  34.)

It  10  tint  that  ambitiou  itateA,  Kich  aa  Athat^
•onKtimta  claimed  dominion  oret  other  atate*  on
the  groond  of  nlationihip  ;  bat,  ai  a  general  role,
coloniea  may  be  regarded  aa  independent  atatea,
attached  to  their  mattopolli  by  liei  of  lynipathy
and  common  deanat,  but  no  foithcf.  The  taaa  a(
»  which  the  Cotrnthiana  aeni  annually


COLONIA.
SvouMi  wu  not  menly  ma  of  word)  but  of  (hia|i.
The  eadier  csltKuea  uiually  eriginated  in  pdiala
enterpriai^  aod  became  independeut  o^  and  loit
their  intosat  in,  tlu  parent  itate. On  the  other


been  an  flic^ition  to  tfae  g^ieial  rt*
56.)

The  KkitfttrxU",  of  which  mention  waa  made
above,  were  coloniea  of  an  entirely  different  kind
from  the  iTouUi,  of  which  we  have  hitherto  been
ipeoking.  They  belonged  eidoaiTely  to  the
Athenian! ;  and  the  earlieat  erample  to  which  the
term,  in  iti  ttrict  tenie,  ia  appUnble,  ia  the  occn-
pation  of  the  domaini  of  the  Chi^cidian  knighta
{lrro€6Tai)  by  four  thouiand  Athenian  citixena,
B.C.  fi06. (Herod.T,  77;  comp-Ti.  100.)

Tn  aaaigning  a  date  to  the  commencement  of
thii  ayitem  of  coloninttion,  we  mmt  remember
that  the  principle  of  a  diviaion  of  conqnentd  lands
had  eiiiled  fcinn  time  immemorial  in  the  Grecian
atatei.  Natutt:  heraelf  aeemrnl  lo  intend  that  the
Greek  ihould  rule  and  the  barbarian  obey ;  and
hence,  in  the  cate  of  the  barbarian,  it  wore  no  ap-
pearance of  hanhneaa.  Such  s  lyitem,  however,
waa  more  rare  between  Greek  and  Greek.  Tet
the  Dorians  in  tbeir  conqncit  of  the  Peloponneee.
and  itill  more  remariubly  in  the  Bubjagation  of
Meaaenia,  had  set  an  example.  In  what  then  did
the  Atheniitn  KXijpouxf"  differ  from  thia  diviaion
of  territory,  or  from  the  ancient  coloniea  ?  In  the
firit  place  the  name,  in  ita  technical  aanae,  waa  of
later  data,  and  the  Qreck  would  not  have  apoken
of  the  HAiifvuxIiu  of  Lycuigui,  any  man  than
the  Roman  of  the  "  Agminn  lawa  "  of  Romnlni
or  Ancua.  Becondlf,  we  should  remember  that
the  term  waa  alwayi  oied  with  a  reference  to  the
original  aCotment :  u  the  landi  were  deriaed  or
tmniferred,  and  the  idea  of  the  fint  diTiaion  loit
sight  of^  it  would  gmdually  coue  to  be  applied.
~  r,  between  (AijpoSx"  "nd


xKTtpovx^  that  it  should  be  a  poblic  ent^ipnte,
and  should  olwaya  retam  a  connection  mon  or  leaa
Inlimata  with  AUiens  heneE  The  wold  KAitpevxIa
conveys  the  notion  oC  property  to  be  eipeclod  and
fomuilly  apffopriated :  wbeoeaa  the  ittmat  of
ancient  timea  went  out  to  conquer  lands  for  thon-
•elvea,  not  to  divide  thoaa  which  were  alieadf
conqnered.

The  connection  with  the  parent  stat*  aabaiitad,
as  has  been  juit  hinted,  in  all  degreea.  Som»-
timea,  as  in  the  caae  of  Leaboa,  the  holden  of  land
did  not  reflide  upon  their  eitatea,  hot  let  thcau  ta
the  origmal  inhabitaata,  while  thcnuelvea  remained
atAlhcna.  {36ck.h, PtibliB Earn. ijfAlluiUyf. ii\,
3nd  ed)  The  conditkai  of  Iheaa  kAqp«vx*i  did
not  dtff^  from  that  of  Athenian  cidiena  who  had
eatatea  in  Attica.  AU  Ibdr  political  rjghta  thej
not  only  retained,  bat  eieiciaed  aa  AthaiiaBa  g  ia
the  mf/stj  of  luidholden  of  Laabot  they  could
■carcely  have  been  recognised  by  the  sLate,  or  bava
borne  any  corpamte  relation  to  iL  Another  cua
was  where  the  uXupoirxoi  reaided  on  their  eatatea,
and  eithtf  with  or  without  the  old  inhabitanta,
formed  a  new  cammanity.  Thcae  still  leuinod
the  righta  of  Athenian  citiiena,  which  diataaca
only  pednded  them  from  eienniing ;  they  used
the  Athenian  conrta ;  and  if  they  or  their  chil-
Atheni,  natuially  and  of

pnK>f(Baddi,  JUd:p.439>:  aa  dia  object  of  thaas
KXttpmiXiat  waa  to  form  ouqioata  for  tu  defence  of
oonuoarce,  it  waa  the  inlereat  of  tha

parent  itate  to  nnite  them  by  a  tie  at  kindly  aa
poetible :  and  it  cannot  be  auppoaed  that  indl-
viduola  wonld  havt  been  found  to  riak,  in  a  doubb
ful  enler^iae,  the  righta  of  Athenian  citiaana

Sometnuea,  however,  Che  connectiDn  might  gn<
dually  dissolve,  and  the  nX'^foSx"  (ink  uto  ths
[  mtre  alliea,  or  leparate  wholly  baa
country.  In  Aegina,  Scione,  Potidae*,
placeo,  where  the  ordinal  cammuDiQr
way,  the  colonists  wore  most  conpletdj'
nnd^  the  control  of  Athens.  Whoa  tho  ^  in-
habitantt  wen  left  umnoletted,  we  may  eoncaiva
twofold  effect:
comerB  would  make  conmion  canaa
1  Chut  ironid  ariaa  the  alunotioB
alluded  to  abova  ;  or  jealeoty  and  dread  of  tha

antirelr  dependem  on  the  molhai  iti


rely  dependem
oaoble  to  deOn


define  aeemately  whan  the  iaopolita

'iitioa  with  Athena  may  have  oeoaed,  allhougk
ch  eases  andonbtedly  occnrred.
A  queatian  bat  been  laiatd  aa  In  whether  tb*
"^V^ihC"  wers  among  the  Athenian  tribntariea.
Probably  this  depended  a  good  deal  npm  the  proa-
penty  of  the  odony. We  cannot  '' '

colonic!  which  were  eatabliihed  a
poita,  m  otherwise  vn&voarable  ai
bear  tneh  a  burthen  :  at  the  tame
improbable  that  the  state  would i
forego  the  tribute  which  il  had  previontly  neenej,
whs«  the  lands  had  fonneriy  betcoged  to  tribotaiT

Pcridca  Atbaaa  WW  ^i^  indAtaA


Ktth— li,  His  |iiiiet|al  otg«ct  «m  to  ptorkUi
b>  tka  mhBiduiciBt  of  ptpaMtum,  and  imua  tlu
foacr  dtaai*  u  a  ibMaio  bocoioing  ths  dignilf
rf  AA«n  aiBBPi;  It  «FM  gf  tUi  dam  of
foBoa*  tba  ittdo*  wtm  ^M;  CMnpnnd ;  ths
ttato  patidad  tbm  vilk  umi,  and  ietfjid  tin
npom  (f  tMi  JDune;.  Tlie  priDcuU  of  diri-
MB,  Jo«hdi«,  vn,  tint  ill  win  wiaW  u  pu>-
tCu  m  Ik  ■diuluuv  applifd  Tolantarilj  ;  it  wu
t^  dmawlmi  l?  IM  vbo  iboiild  or  ilioiild  not
natnailaaB.  Bauadn*  tlnj had  a  leodar  ^
fCBMd,  wha^  ifh>  ^atk,  iMcirad  all  the  hmoun
■ttk  inder  <tf  a  aJoB7  (•lumti).

noOnwUaowasloMbjrthabattlgof  Aen-
folnai,  hil  pBtUlj  nsland  od  tha  leriTaT  <rf'
tthirii  powtr.

(Spukcin,  DtUm*  PnmL  Nimiimi.  tA.  i
ft&i,  &&:  BDngunim  ^nb  AmlM  Is  ifriitff
daaaiiyuhi  aiic^aMiM-fuflnbatM^jfai,  Pari*,
i745t  Bijna,  £»  FiMmt  Orfnaiai'ai  ^an
t>ta«  Cfcaii,  OatL  1786.  d»»  ia  C^aieala,  tiJ.  i
r^SM;  Santa  Croix,  iXprAtftt^ArtdnCMgNin

£b«r.  wi  IBA  NmhiMMn,  A  OiAhh  At
(Ma^M  ft*<rf^  Ahon,  180S ;  Kaonl-Bodiette,


CiT^— ,  Patia,  1815,  4  nk.;  Wichc^  /)a
ftliuM  r«sm^  GmuDgac,  1S25;  PMafccm,
Oil  OJoMa  dtr  AMJriAm,  KlhiigitMig,  18S3 ;
"[■■■a.  XaMaal  ibr  OiraL  StaaOaia.  g78.
Ac;  i  WadoBvth,  H^^  jftttrtiaHi.  ToL  i.  p.  9£,
^cd.;  S^Baann,  Aaiiq.  Jmrii  PabUai  OnHs.
p.414.  &c  ;  BOckh,  PaUit  Jkot.  of  AOmt,  p.
«4,*e.)  [B.J.]

Si  Bomak Tlte  word  ODlauacontaiiu  the  Bins


a,  whkli  pnJabljorigiBall;  ligniSed
"t&rif  thaaartlL"  Tha  Eogliah  word  eohtiij,
'''  iadaan«dftnatlMX«tm,pertaf« --

--  --  d  in  Ihia  woid  ~


la  <I*pl  w*T,i),  U.
■e^ftranowkiaB.  iOiamy.  Ant^.  Horn.  1 16.)

tmn,  mi  aach  tHaam  latha  Macobled  tha  old
" ' •  by  which  R«(De  ei-


■a  rf  the  cityaxtatd,
•aa  Ika  paMcs  waa  eoDtiaaed  dniiag  tka  lapnblic
•ad  —iia  Aa  csnae.  Sjgnioa  (Di  JitigMi
JW  ilaffat,  p.  315,  Ac.)  ounMatea  ux  main
cBHB  V  B^aMa  lAi^  &ian  tiaie  to  lintB,  iadscad
I  to  tend  Mt  eoloiica  i and  tlMaa


M«ktfc^UBl«i;  and Miatanaa and  Sinniaaa
<>.3I),  n^aa  ami  Placaolia  (zxriLUX  which
■oo  fa^adad  tir  aimilaT  poipoao;  Cicoo  (Dt
£914^.  u.  27)  alii  the  bU  Italiao  coliBiea  the
"*  ^lyaigBaEula  iauKrii  ;"  aad  in  another  paiaa^
<pn  FamL  t.  l)be  all*  Naiho  Martini  (Nar-^
m),  whidi  wai  in  the  jnmneia  Gallia,  "  Co-


COLONLL  S15

.  „  Anotho'  obiaet  ws*  to  iaaeaae

I  power  of  Roma  bj  incnaiing  tha  popnlatiao.
(LJT.xnU,  S.)  StnstilDea  the inmadiata  ohiect
of  a  cdm;  waa  to  (aii7  off  a  sinnbci  of  bubalort
and  diiconlented  penou.  Colcniea  woe  alaa
eatnbliihed  for  the  pmpoaa  of  proriding  bt  Teteran
wddiera,  a  practice  which  waa  hegtai  nnder  tha
lapofalie  (Lit.  tni.  i\  and  continned  mida  the
anraenn:  theae  eoloiaae  wen  otlbd  militana.


of  Italy,  that  the  anoent  nauei  of  ths  placa  were
retained,  end  that  thoogfa  the  people  in  hii  time
were  all  Roman,  thej  were  <alled  by  the  naniH  of
die  pnvioni  occupien  of  the  loil.  TIui  ftct  ii  in
Kcwdance  wilii  the  character  of  the  old  Reman
Doloniea,  which  were  in  the  nature  o{  goniscna
planted  in  coaquored  towni,  md  the  cokmina  hod
portion  of  the  oonqneiad  (erriloi;  (omially  a  third


.  the  ccJoniita,  Tha
definition  of  a  eeloniB  by  OcUina  (rrL  13)  will
ajfftut,  from  what  hai  been  nid,  to  be  anffioentl*
exact:  —  "EidTitata  qoBM propagataa  —  popnU
Roman!  qnaal  idgiei  parraa  ammlaaqne."

No  eolonia  was  eilabliihed  witliont  a  lei:,  {do-
hiicitnin,  or  Benatnaeonaiiltiim  ;  a  &ct  which  ihowa
that  B  Roman  colony  wa)  never  a  mere  body  of
adTentnreii,  bnt  had  ■  regular  organiaalion  by  the
parent  alal&  According  to  an  andcnt  definition
quoted  by  Niebnhr  (S^.  isJ  Vtiy,  Aen.  L  IS),  a
colony  ii  a  body  of  dtiiena,  cl  aodi,  lent  out  to
ponen  a  eommonirealth,  with  the  uipmhotion  irf
their  own  itate,  or  by  a  public  act  of  that  people
to  whom  thn'  belou  ;  and  it  ii  added,  thoae  are
cotmiiea  whidi  are  Mtmded  by  public  act,  not  by
any  iteawion.  Many  of  tbo  kwi  which  relate  to
the  eaabliahnxDt  ef  cokmiaa  wae  tegea  agroriae,
or  hiwilbr  the  dinuon  and  aiaignment  of  poblte
land*,  of  which  Bigonina  baa  given  a  liit  m  hia
wMk  already  referred  to.

When  a  law  wu  poaied  lor  Inniding  a  cidony,
peraoni  were  Of^iointed  to  inperintend  its  Jbnna^
tion  (tolonoH  <lediicert),  Theie  penons  nuied  in
nnmbei,  hut  three  waa  a  common  nomber  (traon-
fvi  ad  dobaoa  Muttrnb)*,  Lit.  zxniL  46,  Ti.  31 }.
We  also  nad  of  duionTiri,  qoinqneTiri,  vigiutidri
for  the  nma  pnrpooe.  The  law  fixed  the  qnantitr
of  land  that  waa  to  be  diitribnted,  and  how  much
waa  to  be  onignad  to  each  penoa.  No  Roman
could  be  aent  ont  >a  a  coloniit  withoat  hii  fiea
Gonaent,  and  when  the  colony  wai  not  on  inriting
one,  it  waa  difflcolt  to  fill  up  the  number  of  Tolnn-*
teera (LiT.n.21,  x  21.)

Roman  cidnna  who  were  willii^  to  go  ont  a*
nenbea  of  a  colony  gave  in  their  namca  at  Rome
(■CBHO  ilM<ffMt;  IdT.  i.  1 1,  the  firit  time  that  he
hat  gecaaion  to  oaa  the  mfimmm).  Cicero  (Pro
Dom.  e.  M)  ana  that  Rooan  dtiaeni  who  dioaa
to  beccana  monbera  of  a  lialin  colony  moat  go  to-
lantarily  (andorm  JbtS),  &r  Ihia  wai  a  capitia

S3)  he  ollegea  the  bet  of  Roman  atiieni  going
ont  in  Latin  coloniei  ai  a  proof  that  loaa  of  ciTitaa
mnit  be  a  lolunlary  acL  It  ii  true  that  a  member
of  a  Roman  colony  would  niitain  no  capitii  do-
mination bat  in  thia  caw  alao  Ibo*  aaema  m  raaam


816  COLONIA.

for  ■npporing  Hat  be  era  joined  •ncli  ■  colony.

The  colouia  proceeded  to  its  place  of  deitinB^c
Id  the  fiicm  of  an  arm  j  (nt  viailla),  whicti  ii  ii
dkatod  OQ  the  coini  of  tome  coloniae.  An  orbe,  if
one  did  not  already  exiit,  mi  a  aeetanary  pan  of
a  now  eoionv,  and  iU  limit*  wtpo  marked  out  by
a  plough,  which  a  alu  indicated  on  andent  coins.
The  colonia  had  alio  a  tenitory,  which,  whether
marked  out  by  the  plough  or  not  (Cic.  PUL  ii.  40),
wnt  at  leaat  mariced  out  by  metei  and  boondi.
lima  tbs  urbi  and  terrilo^  of  the  colonia  rt-
■pectiTelj  corraponded  to  the  nrb*  Roma  and  iti
tmitoiy.  BeligiDiu  ceremoniei  alwayi  accam-
panied  the  finindatiim  of  the  colony,  and  the  an-
uiTcmiy  wai  afterwanb  obierTed.  (Plnlarch,
C.  Graedaa,  11  ;  Serriiu,  ad  Am.  t.  7fiS  ;  Cic
ad  Attic.  IT.  I).  It  ii  Blated  that  a  colony  could
not  be  icnl  oat  to  the  same  place  to  which  a
colony  had  already  been  Kot  in  due  fonn  (anipi.
eaio  dtdneta),  Thii  merely  meana  that  lo  long  at
the  oolony  maintained  itt  existence,  there  coold  be
no  new  colony  in  the  same  placo  i  a  doctrine  that
would  faaidly  need  proct^  for  a  new  colony  implied
a  new  asiignmcnt  of  lands  ;  but  new  tettlen  (noui
adxripli)  might  be  tent  to  occupy  colonial  landi
not  already  asiigued.  (l.ir.  vi.  30  ;  Cic  Plal.  ii
40.)  Indeed  it  wni  not  nnnsnal  for  a  colony  to
receive  a  ntj^maiiinii,  as  in  the  esse  of  Venniia
(Liv.  xxii.  49),  and  in  other  cstei  (TaciL  Aim.
siv,  37)  ;  and  a  colony  might  be  re-calabliahed,  if
it  seemed  neceasmy,  Srosa  any  CBote  ;  and  nnder
the  emperon  loch  re-eitablishmant  might  be
entirely  arbitrary,  and  done  to  gratify  pertonal
vanity,  or  from  any  other  motive.  (Tacit.  Amk.
xW.  27.  PutecJi ;  and  the  note  m  Oberlin't
Tacitus.)

The  commistionen  appointed  to  condact  the
ec^ny  had  apparently  a  profitable  office,  and  the
otablithmBnt  of  a  now  letttemcnt  gave  employ-
ment to  nnmeroui  fnnctionariBa,  ammg  whom
Cicero  ennmeratei  —  apporitoies,  ecribae,  lihraiii,
pfaecones,  architect!.  The  foundation  of  a  colony
night  then,  in  many  cu»,  not  only  be  a  mere
party  measure,  carried  fn-  the  pnrpota  of  gaining
popDlarity,  but  it  would  gjie  thote  in  power  an
oppnrtunily  of  providing  p1a(«a  Gw  many  of  their

A  colonia  wat  a  part  of  the  Roman  slate,  and  it
bod  a  ret  publica ;  but  itt  relation  to  the  parent  ttate
might  vaiy.  In  Livy  (iixii.  SS)  the  qnealion
WHS  whether  Aqnileia  should  be  a  colonia  civiom
Romiuionmi,  or  a  Latina  colonia ;  a  qnestion  that
had  no  reference  to  the  penoni  who  should  form
the  colony,  but  to  their  political  righCt  with  reioect
lo  Rome  ai  memben  of  the  colony.  The
of  a  Roman  colony  (colonia  iwiuni  Rem
mutt,  at  the  term  itself  impliet,  have  always
the  same  rights,  which,  at  citlient,  they  would  have
ftt  Rome.  [CiviTAB.]  They  were,  as  Niebohr
remarks,  in  the  old  Roman  colonies,  "  the  popnlus  ;
the  old  inhabitants,  the  commonalty."  These  two
bodies  may,  in  coune  of  time,  have  frequently
formed  one  ;  but  there  eonld  be  no  pi^itical  union
between  them  till  the  old  inhabitants  obtained  the
n  and  connnbinm,  in  other  words,  the


skened  the  old  colonics,  and  ren-
r  anpi^iet  of colonist!  necessary, vt
imnate  the  want  of  Roman  women  ;  hi
ibe  cbildnm  of  a  Raman  were  not  Roman  eitiieiii


COLONIA.

unleai  hti  wife  was  a  Rsmsn,  or  unteai  she  belonged
to  a  people  with  which  there  was  connnbium.

It  is  impoitaut  to  fivm  a  pncise  notion  of  tho
rdation  of  an  ancient  Roman  colcmia  to  Rome.
That  the  colonitta,  as  already  obterved,  had  all  the
rights  of  Roman  dtlient,  ia  a  bet  oipable  of  per-
fect demmtCnttion ;  though  most  writeia,  following
Sigonius,  have  ti^poaed  that  Roman  citizens,  by
becoming  members  of  n  Roman  colony,  lost  the
saffraffium  and  honora,  and  did  not  obtain  th^n
till  after  the  patung  of  the  JoUa  lez.  Such  an
opinion  it  inomuitenl  with  the  notioa  of  Roaan
citisenthip  [(^TlTAa],  which  wai  a  penonal,  not  ■
local  rifht  I  and  it  it  also  inconaitait  with  the  very
principle  of  Roman  poli^  appannt  in  tho  establish-
ment of  Roman  colonies.  Further,  the  loss  of  the
lui&agium  and  honona  would  have  been  a  specjea
of  capitis  deminnlio,  and  it  is  dear,  bom  what
Cieero  layi  of  the  consequences  of  a  Roman  volnn-
larily  joining  a  La^  odony,  that  no  such  conse-
qnencca  resnlted  ftom  becoming  a  member  of  a
Roman  coboy.  If  a  Roman  ever  became  a  member
of  a  Roman  colony  without  hit  content,  it  must
have  been  in  the  early  ages  of  the  ttat^  when  tho
colonies  still  retained  thor  garrison  ehaiacter,  aod
lo  join  a  cohiny  waa  a  kind  of  military  service ;  but
snch  a  duty  to  pnteet  the  state,  instead  of  imply-
ing any  lost  of  privilege,  Jnidfies  quite  a  diSarent

Puteoli,  Salemnm,  Buxenttun  wat  soloniae
eiriom  Romanonim  (Liv.  nxiv.  iS)  ;  the  Feren-
tinates  made  a  claim,  that  lAtmi  who  ihoald  give

Romancrum,  should  theieby  beomne  dvea  Romanl
Some  Latini  who  had  ginm  in  their  names  for
the  coloniae  of  Pntecdi,  Salemnm,  and  Boientnm,
'  ■ " uini,  but  the

This  showa,
cites  of  Aomanaa
be  dvet  Romaiu. (JAt.


senate  would  not  allow  their  claim,
if  it  requires  thowii
nJoniae  oontinned  1


whom  the  Romans  sent  their  eoionisla.  They
were  not  Roman  citiiens,  nor  yet  were  they  socii  ;
itill  they  were  in  a  tense  a  part  of  the  Roman
ttate,  and  in  a  tente  they  wen  cires,  though  enr-
tainly  they  had  not  the  tnlbragium,  and  pethapa
originally  not  the  oonnnbiuiii.  Jt  it  [nbable
that  they  had  the  commereinm,  but  evoi  this  is
not  certain.  They  might  be  a  part  of  the  RonuiD
dvttas  withont  being  civea,  and  the  difficulty  of
ascertaining  their  precise  cmditiDn  is  increased  by
the  circumstance  of  the  word  dvitai  being  tised
looidy  by  the  Roman  writers.  If  they  were  dvca
in  a  tente,  this  word  imported  no  [^rilego  ;  for  it

ttate  at  a  coopered  p
administering  their  oi
ihare  in  the  administration  of  the  Romsn  state  ;
they  had  not  the  honoorable  rank  of  socii,  aod
they  were  snbject  to  military  service  and  taiation.
They  lost  all  jurisdictio,  and  it  is  ptobable  that
Ihey  were  brought  entirely  withm  the  mlet  and
pracednre  of  (he  Roman  law,  to  for  at  that  wsia
pnctirable.  Even  the  eommeRiaai  and  cmuQ-
bium  with  the  people  oftheir  own  ttock,  were  aoxne.
times  taken  from  them  (Liv.  ii.  13,  viii.  11),  and
thus  they  were  disunited  &om  their  own  nation
and  made  a  part  of  the  Roman  state,  without  having
the  full  dvitai,  .Sobr,l)Hn,«HthedntH  (witk-


COLONTA.
i)  bniii  being  almji  a  ilennble
I  wrilai  lure  luppOKd,  that  i1
-WM  in  bet  tbe  b*dgt  of  tenitudc  ;  ud  >ome  itila
ertn  |Rfnnd  thtit  fbrmer  nlation  to  Home,  to
being  incofponW  wiUi  it  u  compleM  citiuni. It

juri  dictuido  wu  Knt  from  Roma  to  adzDiniiter
JMMktt  UHoj  thfl  ojDqaorcd  people,  ukd  between
(Iktn  (ltd  tbe  colouL  It  appean  aUo  to  be  clearly
imred  bf  nametDni  iiulance*,  thnl  the  condition
it  tbe  cmqnettd  people  among  wbom  a  colon;  wu
aent,  waa  uat  or^inaUj  alwajra  the  lame  ;  uoie-
tliBK  depended  on  tbe  leeiitance  of  the  people,
aad  tke  temper  of  tbe  Rotnaoi,  at  tbe  time  of  the
cepqtat  or  mrender.  Tbo)  the  cnnqneied  Italian
tsn*  migfat  originall;  bave  tbe  dfitaa  in  different
defm*a.  BBtil  tfaer  all  Gnalljr  obtained  ihs  complete
diitBi  b;  reeeiTtng  tbe  inffragiom  ;  eome  of  tbem
•btained  it  bebn  tbe  ucial  war,  and  otben  bj
tbe  Jnlialei.


CiTira*  and  LariNiTAS.

Bw^lfa  tbeae  coloniae,  there  were  coLoniae  Italic!
jarii,  aa  hom  writen  term  them  ;  but  which  in  fact
ma9  Mrt  cakniec  Sigonioi,  and  moat  lubieqaeiit
vriHci,  hara  comideRd  the  Jiu  Italicun  a>  a  per-
■Mal  licbt,  like  the  CiiitM  and  Latinilae ;  but
SsngBTbw abown  it  to  be  quite  a  different  tbing.
Xka  JBi  llalKma  wai  granted  to  iavoiired  jHovincial
ritka ;  it  w»  a  graal  to  the  commimitj,  not  to  the
JBdiTidaali  eompaiing  iL  Thii  right  coniieted  in
qmnHriao  swnenhip  of  the  toil  (oommeieium),
aad  ita  apportenant  cajKicit;  of  mancipaiio,  ntu-
(■pien,  and  lindicatio,  together  with  freedom  from
taaea  ;  and  alio  in  a  miuucipel  conititution,  after
the  btkioB  of  the  Italian  towna,  with  duumTiii,
qainqaennalea,  acdilea,  and  a  jmiidictio.  Man;
pmiiaJai  lowu  which  poafcaacd  the  jot  Italicno^
bsTa  OB  their  coin!  tbe  figure  of  a  itmding  Silenui,


with  tbe  band  ruaed,  wbich  wu  (he  pecnlitr
wnabol  of  ■»— "■"[-'  libotjr.  (Oitamdai  Manj/a,
Aaimt.  ««  L  6. 12a)  PlbiT  (iiLSand2l>  hu
■wrtifloed  acToal  towna  that  had  tbe  jut  Italicum ;
aai  LagdnnEm,  Vienna  (in  Danphin^,  and  colonia
Agrippinenaii  had  thia  fniilege.  Jt  fi^Uowa  from
the  natare  of  thia  prinlege,  that  towna  wbich  hod
the  i-ri-;i—  gr  ti,B  Ciritai,  wbich  wiu  a  penonal
priT^ege,  might  not  bate  the  jui  Italicum  ;  but  the
WwDi  which  had  the  jni  Italicum  could  bardlj  be
aaf  other  than  ihoae  wbich  bad  the  cirilai  or


_  -n  of  PeregrinL

Tbe  wlwial  irMm  sf  fUxoA,  wbich  ori^nated
iatb*«arliertagei,waa  well  adapted  to  itcengtlien


COLONIA.  817

onpire  wu  coiuolidated,  tbe  deca;  of  populatioa
checked,  the  unit;  of  tbe  nation  and  of  the  lan-
guage diffuaed."  (MBchiavellt,  quoted  b;  Niebutir.)

tbe  lioiiti  of  lUil;,  were  inhabited  b;  nationi  that
cultivated  the  uil  and  bod  citiei.  To  deitiD;  luch  a
popululon  wu  not  pouible  nor  politic  ;  but  it  waa
a  wiie  policf  to  (ake  part  of  their  landi,  and  to
plant  bodiei  of  Roman  citizcna,  and  alio  Latinaa
coloniae,  among  tbe  conquered  people.  Tbe  power
of  Rome  over  her  coloniei  vat  derived,  ai  Niebuhr
hae  well  remarked,  "  From  the  lupremac;  of  tbe
parent  Hale,  to  which  tbe  coloniei  of  RMne,  lika
•oni  in  a  Roman  tamil;,  even  after  the;  had  grown
to  maluril;,  continued  tmalierabl;  lubjecL"  In
fact,  the  notion  of  the  patna  poceelai  will  be  found
to  lie  at  the  fbundation  uf  the  initltulioni  of  Rome^
The  principlei  of  the  sjitem  of  coloniBation  wer«
fiilljr  MtaUiibedintbeenrlyageeofRome;  buttha
coloniei  had  a  more  purely  mililac;  character,  that
ia,  were  compoied  of  toldien,  in  the  latter  part  ti
the  republic,  and  under  the  earlier  emperor*.  The
Eret  colon;  eitabliibed  be;ond  the  limiti  of  Ital;
wu  CaniiBgo  (VelL  iL  15)  ;  Nsrbo  Martiui  waa
the  next,  Netnaujua  (Nimei)  wu  made  a  colony
by  Auguituj,  an  eient  which  ii  commemorated  by
medali  (RaKhe,  i*B««i  Ra  Nma " '


criptioi


itNim


In  addition  to  tbe  evidence  from  written  book)  of
the  numerooA  coloniei  eitabliibed  b;  the  Romaiu
in  Ital;,  and  lubiequcntly  in  all  parli  of  the  empirci
we  haie  the  teitimony  of  medali  and  intcriptioni,
in  which  COL.,  the  abhreviation  of  coloma,  indi-
cstei  thi*  &ct,  or,  u  in  tbe  caie  of  Sinope,  tbe  Greek
inicrip^on  KOAilNElA.  3eptimiui  SeTorut  made
Tj-re  a  colonia  Veleranorum  (Raiche,  Laiam  Rti
Numariae,  Tvna).  The  prodigioui  activity  of  Roma
in  Killing  cnlonie*  in  Italy  it  qiparent  fnnn  the  litt
given  b;  Frontmut  or  the  Pteudo-Frontinoi  {Dt
Colomii),  moit  of  which  appear  to  have  been  old
towni,  which  were  either  walled  when  the  colony
wu  founded,  or  itrengthened  b;  new  defence*.

Colonic*  were  tomelimei  eitabliibed  under  tbs
late  republic  and  tbe  empire  with  cinumitance*
of  great  oppretiion,  and  landi  n-ere  aaaiguedto  the
veterant  without  i«gard  to  eiitting  righti.

Under  the  omperon,  all  legiilative  authority
being  then  lirtaally  in  them,  the  foundation
of  a  colony  wu  mi  act  of  imperial  gmce,  and
often  merely  a  title  of  honour  conferred  on  aome
faTonied  tpot.  Thui  M,  Aureliui  nlied  to  tha
tank  of  colimia  the  imall  town  (vicui)  of  Ilalal^
at  the  fool  of  Taurai,  where  hit  wife  Fauttina
died.  (Jul.  Capitol.  Af.^>i^/>:i^.c  26.)  Tbe
old  military  coloniei  were  compoied  of  whole
le^m,  with  their  tribimei  and  centurioni,  who
being  united  by  mutual  affection,  compoied  ■
political  body  (mpubUca) ;  but  it  wa*  >  com-
plaint  in  the  time  of  Nero,  that  taldiert,  who  wets


818  COLONIA,

■trsngen  to  mi«  uiotlieT,  without  any  hail,  witfa-
oat  any  bond  of  DnioD,  were  niddenly  bnmffht  to-
gether on  ooe  ipot,  "  munBini  mwii  qnun  colonia  *<
{Ttcii.  Ann.  iiY.2T).  Asdontbewtanonofthe
mutiny  of  Iho  legions  in  Pannmin,  opon  the  at~
Cfluioa  of  Tiberiiu,  it  wu  one  ground  of  cranpliiiljt,
that  Chs  aoldieii,  after  KTring  thirty  or  forty
yean,  were  Kpamted,  and  dinpen^  in  ri~"'"
puti  i  where  ucy  recdied,  under  the  nuni
gnat  of  lindi  (per  «in«  agrormii),  iwampy  tncti
and  bancD  mountami. (TaoL  Atm.  I  17.^


plete  otnuBBBoa." (.wiTigi

u  the  cdoniestit'FOFnl""

tha  MTereign  power  j  they  chon

and  could  eien  m>]u  lawa. (Cic  De  L»g,  ii


etlyta

In  ths  later  timet  of  the  Rpablie,  the  Raman
■Hte  cDnaiited  of  two  diitinct  oigtuiiud  parts,
Italy  and  the  Pcorince*.  "  Italy  mntiiled  of  i
great  nnnibec  of  rrpublici  (in  the  Roman  loiae  o
the  term),  wha«  dtiiBH,  afts  the  I^tian  war,  bs
tame  moitben  of  the  laTeRign  people.  The  com
anmitiea  of  these  dtiieni  were  lubiecti  of  thi
Roman  people,  yet  the  internal  adminittnttion  a
the  communitiei  belmged  to  theniMlvea.  Thia
free  munieipal  conatilntioa  wm  the  ^todamental
chaisctettrtic  of  Italy  ;  and  the  nme  lemaik  will
apply  to  both  principal  claiaet  of  nch  ooottitn-
tioRi,  munidpia,  and  coloniae.  That  dlMinetion
which  made  a  place  into  a  pnefcctnia,  ia  men-
tioned afterwudi ;  and  fan,  emudliabnla,  cattella,
are  merely  amaller  commnnitiet,  with  an  incom-
plete oimniBlioo." (SaTigny.) A»  in  Rome,  lo

.^  <i.~ -^ — r__  *L^. 1 Taembly  bad  originaiiy

' e  the  manitrates,
- ■ ■iLU.)

in  Rome,  and  the  elactiou  were  buuferred  by
Tiberio)  to  the  woBle,  the  nnw  thing  liappened
in  the  coloniea,  whole  lenatei  then  acquired  what-
eier  power  had  once  belonged  to  the  communi^.

The  cammon  name  of  thii  lenata  waa  ordo  de-
Cnrionum  ;  in  later  timet,  umply  ordo  and  curia ;
the  membera  of  it  were  decnrionea  or  corialca.
{Dig.  SO.  tit.  2.  Da  Daomiomtui,  tie)  Thu^
hi  the  lalsr  agta,  curia  ia  oppoied  to  aenatoi,
the  former  being  the  aenate  of  a  colony,  and  the
latter  the  aenate  of  Rome.  But  the  term*  leuatoi
and  Knaloi  wore  also  applied  to  the  aenate  and
membera  of  the  aenate  of  a  colgny,  botii  by  bit-
toHani,  in  inicripljoiit,  and  in  public  reeordi ;  aa,  for
jnitancc,  in  the  Heracleot^c  Tablet,  which  contiuned
a  Roman  lex.  Afler  the  decline  of  the  popular
BWemblie),  the  aenate  had  the  whole  inttnial  ad-
miniitration  of  a  city,  conjointly  with  the  magia.
tntui ;  but  only  a  decnrio  conld  be  a  msgiatmlut,
and  the  choic*  waa  made  by  the  decuriimea.
Aoguitui  aeemi  to  have  lud  the  foundation  for
thn  praeticBl  change  in  the  conalituLion  of  the
coloniet  in  Italy.  All  the  citiieni  hwl  the  right
of  Toting  at  Rome ;  but  auch  a'prJTi!^  would  be
oaelesi  to  moat  of  the  dtiieni  on  account  of  tiwur
diitance  from  Rome.  Augtutoi  (Sneton.  c  tf)
deni«d  a  new  method  of  Toting :  the  decnrionea
aent  the  totce  in  writing,  and  under  leal,  to
Rome  j  but  the  decorionea  only  TOted.  Though
thii  wna  a  matter  of  no  importance  after  Tiberioa
had  tnnifcrred  the  el«nionB  at  Rome  from  the
popular  ouembliea  to  the  aenate,  thia  meamre  of
AugUBtui  would  cleoHy  prepare  the  way  Jbr  the
pre-eminence  of  the  decuzionei,  and  the  decline  of
the  popular  power.

The  higheil  magiatratni  of  a  cdonia  were  the
dmmiTiri  (Cib  4^.  Leg.  iL  Si,  «i  dUic.  a,  6),


COLONIA.
or  qnattuorriri,  io  nlled,  aa  the  nnmben  migU
Tory,  wboee  functiona  may  b«  comnaied  with  tluaa
of  the  conaulate  at  Rome  before  the  catabliahment
of  the  [OBetanhip.  The  name  dunmnri  aeema  ta
haTB  been  the  meet  csnunnt.  Thdr  jffincipal
dutiea  wen  the  adminiitratioii  of  jnatiee,  and  ae>
cordingly  we  find  on  ioacriptiona  "BuiunTiii  J.
D."  (jmi  dieaitdo),  "  Qnattuorriri  J,  D."  They
were  Atyled  magiAtratua  pn-eminenUy,  though  the
name  mBgiaOatua  voa  properly  and  orivinallj  the
moat  goiaal  name  fiir  iM  penona  who  fiUad  aimihr
aituationa.  The  nmna  omanl  alao  occBia  io  in-
aciiptiona  la  denote  tUi  chief  magatncy;  and
eren  dklator  and  pnetor  ooonr  mider  the  onpii*
and  under  the  repnblic;  The  nfllce  of  the  danmnri
loaled  a  year.  SaTigny  dwwi  that  midcr  the  te-
pablio  the  jnrisdietio  of  tin  dnimriii  in  citS
matten  waa  nnlimited,  and  that  it  waa  only  ander

which  appeara  bom  the  extant  Roman  law.

In  aome  Italian  towni  there  waa  a  pnefeetu
juri  dieundo ;  he  ma  in  the  place  o^  and  not  co-
eiiaCent  with,  donrn'riri.  The  dunmriri  were,  ••
we  hare  aeen,  originalty  choaen  by  the  people  ;
but  the  paefeclua  waa  appointed  annully  in
Rome  (LiTy,  htL  16),  and  sent  to  the  town
railed  a  proefectuia,  which  might  be  either  a  mo-
nidpinm  or  a  eolonia,  fat  it  waa  only  in  the  matter
of  the  praefbetoB  that  a  town  <alled  ■  pnefectm
differed  from  other  Italian  towni.  Ckpna,  which
waa  taken  by  the  Rsnona  in  the  aecond  Pnnia
WW,  waa  made  a  pnefectura.  (VelL  iL  44,  and
the  note  of  Reimarua  on  Dion  Caiaiui,  iziviii.  7.)
Arpinum  i>  called  both  a  mmiidpiuii  and  a  pnae-
fsctuiK  (Cic  ad  Fttm.  xiiL  1 1 ;  Fettot,  t.  o.
Prmftetwa) ;  and  Cicno,  a  natJTa  of  thia  placa,
oblamed  the  highest  hcmoura  that  Kama  eoold

The  oenioT,  curator,  or  qninquennalii,  aQ  whiA
names  denote  the  aame  nmctionBry,  waa  also  A
mnnicipnl  magistrate,  and  comsponded  Io  tba
censor  at  Rome,  and  in  some  cases,  peihaps,  tn
the  qnatator  also.  Censtn  are  menticmed  in  LiTy
(nil.  IG)  as  magistnitea  of  the  twd>e  Latin
colonies.  The  qninqnennale*  ware  lometimea
dntunyiri,  sometimce  qnattuorTiri ;  but  they  are
always  carefully  distinguithed  fiom  the  duumviri
and  quattuDrriri  J.  D. ;  and  their  {unctions  are
deoiiy  shown  by  Saiigny  to  ha*e  been  those  of
censon.  They  held  their  office  for  one  yar,  and
during  the  tbor  intennediate  yean  the  functiona
were  not  exercised.  The  office  of  censor  or  quin-
quennalis  was  higher  in  tank  than  that  of  th«
dnnmTiri  J.  D.,  and  it  conld  only  be  filled  by  thoss
who  had  discharged  the  other  <^cea  of  the  muni-


empitB,  the  reader  is  referred (c

chapter  in  Sangnj  (OsKiiUalW  ifss  AJna,  Ruttt,

&CTDLip.I6,&&).

The  tenni  municipiiEin  and  mimicipaa  le^nire
explanation  in  eonnection  with  the  prcaent  lalgeet,
and  the  explanation  of  them  will  render  the  nature
of  a  praetactma  still  dearer.  One  kind  of  manid.
pium  was  a  body  of  petiona  who  leara  mk  (Feats^
(.  c.  Jtf  Hneqmiai)  Roman  eitinni,  but  pcMeiaed  aO
the  ri^ta  of  Roman  dtitoia  except  the  anf&aginin
and  the  hmoref. But  the  communititB  ennmoated

FnndMU)  Fonaianit  Cmnani*  AoanvDi-  I^onTBit


COLONIA.

. ,  Akli  wen  eanqDered  EMa  (Lit.

._L  14),  and  RCeiied  tht  ciTJIu  without  the  nT-
&igiiun ;  anl  aU  thcM  phm  ncdved  the  coin~
plete  drita*  bdtrs  the  ndal  ma,  or,  u  Feittu
fciuci-w  it,  **  Pot  ■liquol  ■DDM  dTei  lUniuii
effect!  ■mL"  It  ii  nnvnlu  that  another  ancient
definilion  of  Hut  clue  trt  miuucipui  nyi,  that  the
pmofu  who  bad  the  righta  of  Roman  dtizene,
except  the  honores,  uwv  ciTct ;  and  unong  (nch
eiMuuiuutka  are  cnnnienlcd  the  Gamani,  Aoer-
rani,  and  Atellani  Thia  diicrepiuicy  merelj
that  the  later  Bnnui  wiileii  uied  the  ward
a  a  Terj  Iooh  lenie,  which  we  cannot  be
'  at,  ai  ihej  wrote  at  a  time  when  theee
a  had  ceeaed. Another  kbd  of  mani-

Bomaa  Hate;  ai  in  the  caie  of
,  T.  ix.  23),  Caeritei,  and  Aticmi,
«ha  eonpletdj  loM  all  mternal  adminiitiatiim  of
their  dtiea ;  while  the  Tnaeulam  and  Lannvini  re-

tnte  called  a  dictator.  A  third  cIbm  of  mnniapia
«■•  these  whoee  inhahitanti  poneued  the  ml
fiiBqtca  of  RoDHHi  dtneni,  and  alao  the  internal
■  ■  "  -  -  ^ien  «f  their  own  dlie»,  aa  the  Tibortes,
;  Pkani,  Urbinatea,  Nol " ~


ff).  The  fint  Ere  of  th


It  iat  alao  bcea  alieadj  nid  that  a  [caaGseton
waaia  caDed  fron  the  ciRunutaDce  of  a  praefectiu
J.  IK  heing  aait  there  from  Rsme^  Tboea  towns
in  Ilalj  wm  called  praefeetmie,  nyi  Fettni,  "  In
^boa  et  JM  dkebatur  et  nmdinaa  agebantur,  et
era*  qnaedam  eanm  teapubtica,  neqne  lamen
■agiiliilm  Hisa  habehant ;  in  qnai  legibni  prae-
feeti  idtteUatar  qnotannii,  ipu  jiu  diceient."
Thna  a  neftclnn  had  a  mpablica,  bat  no  magis-
bBtia.  FeMoa  then  make*  two  diTiiioni  of  praefec-
tane^  To  the  fiiwt  diriuoa  were  lent  fbni  ptaefecti
Aatea  at  Kome  (pcpuS  n^agio)  \  and  he  enu-
■eiawa  loi  plaeei  in  Campania  to  which  thne
qaattDorriri  were  tent,  and  among  them  dunae  and
Atena,  which  were  mnnidpia ;  and  Voltomuni,
Lhennna,  and  Pateoli,  which  were  Boman  coloniei
cMaMiihed  after  the  aecDnd  Puiic  war.  The
•eecBid  diiukm  of  pnefectnrae  compriaed  thcac
^aa»  to  which  the  praetor  nrbanui  Mnt  a  prae-
Itsttaa  every  year,  namelj,  Fmidi,  Formiae,  Caere,
Vaiafium,  Attibe,  PriTcmmn,  Anagnia,  Fnurina,
Itiali,  Satamia,  Nnrtia,  Aipinom,  aliaqne  eom-
jtam.  Onlj  one  of  them,  Satnraia,  wat  a  colony
of  Roman  dtiuni  (Lit.  nxii.  6S) ;  the  reM  are
r— ^'j™  It  ii  the  eonclnnm  of  Znmpt  th
■be  Boaidpia  of  the  older  periiMl,  that  ii,  up
time  whoi  the  ccmidete  ciTitai  wai  giToi  '
Latod  and  the  Kieii,  were  pnefectiuac^  and  that
1^  of  llw  cdooiea  of  Booan '■^ '—


g  inelice
_  y  tent  &om  Honie,

i  neaa  that  thia  waa  one  anHFng  the  many  ad-
BnUaparto  tt  the  Smian  polity  lor  maintaining
kamcaj  b  the  wkde  pditical  *J[Nem  by
Immiij  if  law  lad  pnuedire.  The  name  piae-
fcel^  ccrtinBed  after  the  jew  B.C.  90 ;  bat  It
n^  tkrt,  is  nan  plaeea  at  Met,  thia  ftuKtionaiy
ai«*d  la  h«  aeiU  froB  Some,  and  TiriMU  naefee-
kna  Mfidnd  th*  irirtt^  of  hiTl^ -mt^itntiif


COLONIA.  SIS

of  their  own  chooaing,  ai  in  the  case  of  Pnleoli,
(Cic  De  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  31.) The  firrt
kmd  of  pmefccd,  the  qnsttnorriri,  who
It  mto  Cainpania,  waa  abolithed  by  Aa-
n  confbnnity  with  the  genera]  tenor  of  hii
polity,  B.C  IS. After  the  paaiing  of  the  Julia
Lex  de  Cirilate,  the  dties  of  the  aocii  which  re-
cdicd  the  Roman  civiua,  nill  retained  their  in-
ternal crautitntion ; but,  with  reipect  to  Rome,
all  indnded  nnder  the  name  of  mnnicipia:
Ihui  Tibnr  and  Praeneate,  which  were  latmae
itatea,  then  became  Roman  monicipia. On  the
er  huid,  Bononia  and  Lata  whidi  were  origin-
ally Latinae  coloniae,  also  became  Roman  mn-
nicipia in conieqnence of  reoeiring  tho  Roman
dritaa,  thoogh  they  retained  their  old  colonial
conatitution  and the name  of colonic Thoa
Cicero  (m  Pia  c.  23) conld  with  propriety  call
PlaoentiB  a  munidpimn,  though  in  iti  ongin  it
wai  a  Latin  coionia ;  and  in  the  oration  Pro  Siat,
(c  14) he  ennmentei  munidpia, coloniae, and
praefbctuise,  at  the  three  kinda  of  lowna  or  eom-
nprehended  all  the
(owna  of  lialy. The  teitimony  of  tha  HsacleotiB
tablet  if  to  tbe  like  efiecl ;  for  it  ipcaka  of  mnni-
lia,  coloniae,  and  praefeetarae  a*  the  three  kinda
placei  which  had  a  magittratni  of  tome  kind,  to
lich  ennmen^on  it  addi  fora  and  eondliabola,  aa
LDg  all  the  kinda  of  plocea  ia  which
^-^— dweh.


bodiea  of  Romen  d


ifort  afker  B.C  90,  and  u.
this  nairowei  import  ngnified  the  civitatea  sociorom
and  coloniaa  Lalinae,  which  then  became  complete
member!  of  the  Roman  ttate.  Thus  there  was
then  really  no  difference  between  these  mnnidpia
and  the  ec^ooiae,  except  in  their  hiatoricn!  origin,
and  in  their  original  internal  constitation.  The
"oman  law  preyailcd  in  both.

The  follDwing  recapitolation  may  be  useful :  —
Tbe  old  Roman  colonies  (ctenn  Romamtnan)  were
placed  in  conquered  towns ;  and  the  eoloniita  con-
'  inned  to  be  Roman  dtizena.  These  coloniea  woe
tear  Rome  (Liv.  i.  11,  27,  £6,iL21,  39),  and  few
n  number.  Probably  some  of  the  old  Latinae  colo-
liae  were  e atabliabed  by  the  Romana  in  conjunction
rith  other  Latin  atates  (.^sti'iini).  After  the  con-
qaeat  of  Latium,  Latinae  coloniae  were  establiahed
by  tbe  Romana  in  various  parte  of  Italy.  These
coloniea  aboold  be  diatingniahed  from  the  coloniea
ciiiam  Romanonun,  inaamuch  aa  they  an  some-
time) csUrd  coloniae  populi  Romani,  thoogh  they
were  Tiot  coloniae  dnum  Romanomm.  (LIt.  zxtii.
9,  nix,  15.)  Roman  dtiiena  who  chose  to  join
such  coloniea,  gaTc  up  their  dyio  rights  kt  tha
more  aolid  adTantage  of  a  grant  of  land.

When  Latin  colonies  began  to  be  eMabliabed,
fi-w  Roman  coloniea  wen  founded  until  after  tbe
dose  of  the  second  Funic  wac  (b.c.  201),  and
these  few  were  chiefly  maritime  colom'es  {Anmr,
ftc).  These  La^  coloniea  were  soltjeet  to  and
part  of  the  Roman  state ;  bat  they  had  not  the
cidtaa :  they  had  no  political  bond  among  them-
selvea  ;  bat  they  had  the  adminiatration  of  tbcoi
internal  a&in.  The  colonies  of  the  Oracchi  wef«
Roman  coloniea ;  bnl  theii  object,  like  that  ef  aub-
sequent  Agnrian  laws,  wat  merely  to  pmide  ibr
the  poorer  dtiten* :  the  old  Roman  and  the  Latbi
odoniea  had  for  their  olijeet  the  extctuioi  and
ccnnTBtliB  of  (hf  B««U  ospim  b  I^ Aflai


330  COLORES.

tbe  pawnf;  of  the  Lex  Julia,  wliich  gnvc  the
civitaa  to  the  ucii  and  the  LUio  coloniea,  the
ohject  of  eatabluhing  Roman  and  Latin  colonin
ceaied  ;  sDd  militar;  coloniea  were  thencefbrmrd
■etiled  ia  llolj,  and,  under  Uie  empenm,  in  tbe
proriocee.  (Pliu,  JVio!.  «i»(.iii,4.)  TheK  militaij
cDloniei  had  the  civitac,  inch  u  it  then  wni ;  hut
their  intemal  organiution  might  be  Tariou.

The  following  raterencea,  in  addition  to  thota
already  given,  mil  diracl  the  reader  to  abundant
etrurcea  of  information ;  —  (Sjgoniut,  De  Jurt  An-
liqao,  &c  ;  Niebuhr,  Bomaa  Hutoryj  SaTignj-,
Ueicr  dai  Jut  Ilaliam,  ZeOacir.  toL  t.  ;  T<dnilae
JleradttBta.  AfatoiAi,  Neap.  1 754  ;  Savign;,  Drr
HSniKJu  VoUemAiiut  der  TaJU  nw  Heradea  ;
and  RndorS^  U^ier  di»  Lex  Mmuilia  de  Cotoniit,
ZeituAr.  toL  ii.  ;  RudorO;  Dai  Aeker-jaelz  wm
^.  Thorin,  and  Puchta,  Ueiier  den  Inkalt  da-
La  Rmbria  dt  GiMia  Citalpina,  Zattehr.  vol.  i.  ;
Beaufort,  Hip.  Horn.  t.  p.  278—308  ;  Madvig,
OpiHaAi,  Da  Jan  et  Conditiaie  CUnianm  PopiUi
Romaia,  Hanniac,  1631  ;  Zumpt,  UAer  dtn
VwUneii^  der  Baaemiagat,  Mmdpiim,  Colomt,
Prarfictim,  Beriin,  IBIO.}  [O.  L.]

COLO'RES.  The  Greekt  and  Romant  had
&  Tciy  eiteniive  Acquaintance  with  coloun  ai
pigmenta.  Book  vii.  of  Vitniviui  and  Mveral
chaptui  of  hooka  niiu.  xxxiv.  aod  hit.  of
PliDf*!  Natural  Hiitory,  coDtain  nuch  intereating
matter  upon  their  nature  and  compoaition ;  and
Iheae  woriu,  together  with  vhat  ii  contained  in
book  T.  of  Dioscoridca,  and  wHoe  lemaiki  in
Tbcophnitui  {Dt  LapidSaa),  conilitule  the  whole
of  our  information  of  any  importance  upon  the
lubject  of  ancient  pigmcata.  Froai  theio  uunea,
through  tbe  eiperunenta  and  obiervationi  of  Sir
Humphij  Davy  {P)aL  JVoiw.  i^At  Soyai  Soculf,
1815)  on  tome  remaina  of  ancient  colonia  and
painlingi  in  the  batha  of  Titna  and  of  Livia,  and
in  other  mini  of  antiquity,  we  are  enabled  to  col-
lect a  tolerabl;  aatiabetoi?  account  of  tbe  colour-
ing materiftla  employed  by  the  Greek  and  Roman


The  paining  of  the  Oreeki  '■
coniidered  lo  have  been  inferior
thia  partially  ariiea  from  very


I  very  generally
o  tbcir  iculpture ;
imperfect  infiirm-
ation,  ana  a  very  etroneoua  nouon  reapecting  the
reunccca  of  the  Greek  painten  in  colouring.  The
ems  originated  apparently  with  Fliny  himaelf,
who  aayi  (hit.  32),  "Quatnor  eoloribui  >oHi
immortalia  ilia  opera  feccre,  ex  albia  Melino,  ex
lilacei*  Altico,  ci  rubrii  Siaupide  Pontica,  ei
nigrii  atiamento,  Apelln,  Echion,  Mclanthiui,
Necomachoi,  clnriuimi  piclorcai"  and  (ixxv.  36),
"  Legentei  memincrinl  omnia  ea  quatuor  eoloribui
bda."  Thia  miitake,  at  Sir  II,  Davy  hai  aup-
poied,  may  bsTc  ariaen  from  an  imperfect  recollec-
tion of  a  psuagc  in  Cicero  {lirulia,  c  IB),  which,
however,  directly  contradicta  the  itatemenl  of
Pliny;— "In  pictuia  Zeuiira  et  Polygnotum,  et
Timanthcm,  et  conim,  qui  nan  aunt  oai  pluiquam
qunltuor  colarihua,  fomtaa  etlinramenta  landamui;
at  in  Echione,  Nicomacbo.  Protoftene,  Apelle  jam
perfecla  lunl  omnia."  Here  Cicero  eiloli  the
doi^  and  drawing  of  Polygnotui,  Zeuiia,  and
Timanthca,  and  thoie  who  nied  but  fbiir  coloun;
and  obaervca  in  oontiadiatinction,  that  in  Echion,
Nicomachna,  Protogenci,  and  Apellei,  all  things
were  perfect.  But  tbe  lemtirk  of  Pliny,  that
Apctlea,  Echion,  Melanthiui,  and  NJcomachua  oaed
but  fmir  GOloui^  mcladjiig  both  bladt  and  white


COLORES.

!  eidusion  of  all  blue  (unJeai  we  underatand
SI  nigrii  atiamento "  bhidt  and  indi|^),  ia
evidently  an  error,  independent  of  ita  contisdietion
to  Cicero  ;  and  the  conduaion  drawn  by  lome  from
1  the  remark  of  Cicen,  that  the  earif  Greek
paialen  were  acquainted  with  but  four  pigmeata,
■■  Eiiuullr  without  fgundstion.  Pliny  himielt
iki  of  two  other  coloura,  beaidei  the  feu  in
quettion,  which  were  nied  by  the  eaiiiot  painten;

which  he  culU  al^  minium  (uiiiL  36).  He
mentiooa  alio  (xxev,  21)  the  tjetrian  earth  uied
by  Nicomachua,  and  the  elepJusntinMin^  or  ivoiy-
bUdc,  uied  by  Apellei  (hit.  25),  thui  contra-
dicting himaelf  when  he  aiierted  that  Apella  and
Nicomachui  Dud  but  four  coloiui.  The  abova
tiadition,  and  ibeiinyilei  color  oi  Quintilian  (Oral.
Imtit.  lii.  10),  are  our  only  aothoriliei  for  defining
any  limili  lo  the  ua  of  odoura  by  tbe  early  Greeka,
aa  applied  to  painting ,  hot  we  have  qo  authority
whatever  for  nippoiiug  that  they  were  limited  iit
any  nimaricahle  way  in  their  luqaaulamie  with
them.  iThal  tbe  painten  of  ths  earUeit  period
had  not  lueb  abundaut  reaourcea  in  thia  dGpart*
meat  of  art  aa  thou  of  the  later,  i*  quite  ocmaiilent
with  experience,  and  doea  not  require  demooitra-
tion  I  but  lo  au[qHMe  (hat  they  were  confined  to
feuc  pigmenta  ia  quite  a  giatuitoui  luppcaition,
and  la oppoaed to both leaaoa and  evidenea.

IPlCTtR*,]

Sir  H.  Davy  alio  analyied  the  coloara  of  tba
ao-called  *^  Aldohmndini  marriage,"  all  the  reda
and  yellowa  of  which  he  diicovend  to  be  ochrea  ;
the  biuci  and  gnena,  to  be  oiidea  of  copper ;  tba
blacks  all  carbonacooui ;  the  hnwai,  miitum  of
ochrei  and  black,  and  lome  containing  oiide  of
manganeae  ; tho white* were all  carbnnatei  of

The  redi  diKovered  in  an  earthen  Taie  contun*
ing  a  variety  of  coloura,  were,  red  oxide  of  lead
(nuauun),  and  two  inn  ochres  of  diSertnt  tinia,  a
dull  red,  and  a  pnrpliah  led  ncariy  of  Uie  laiiM
tint  ai  pmiuate  of  copper ;  they  were  all  mixed
with  chalk  or  orbonate  of  lime.  The  yeUiwa
were  pure  ochrci  with  ^bonntc  of  lime,  and
ochre  mixed  with  minium  and  carhonata  of  lime.
Tbe  blucfl  were  oiidei  of  copper  with  carbonate
of  lime.  Sir  K.  Daiy  discovered  a  frit  made  by
mcaoa  of  aoda  and  coloured  with  oj
iqiproaching  ultramarine  in  tint,  i
poaed  to  be  the  frit  of  Aleiandria ;  its  composition,
he  aaya,  waa  perfrct  —  ^tbat  of  embodying  the
colour  in  a  compotiljan  resembling  itonc,  so  aa  to
prerent  the  eacape  of  elaatic  matter  from  it,  or  tho
decompoaing  action  of  the  elements  ;  this  ia  a
■pecica  of  artificial  lapii  laiuli,  tbo  colouring  matter
of  which  ij  naturally  ioherent  in  a  bard  ailiceoua

Of  greena  then  were  many  ihadea,  all,  howercr,
either  carbonate  or  oxide  of  copper,  miied  with
carbonate  of  lime.  The  browns  consisted  of  ochrpa
calcined,  and  oiidei  of  iron  and  of  nuuigBne*c,and
compounds  of  ochrea  and  blacka.  Sir  H.  Davy
could  not  Bseanain  whether  the  lake  which  he  dia-
covered  waa  of  animal  or  of  vegetable  origin  ;  if  of
animal,  he  lupposcd  that  it  waa  very  probably  the
Tyrian  or  marine  purple.  Ha  diieoTered  also  k
colour  which  he  supposed  to  be  bla^  wad,  or
hydratcd  binoiide  of  manganese  i  also  a  black
colour  compoBcd  of  chalk,  miiad  with  the  ink  of
duaefiaafficiMOiiarcatlla-Sili. The  (ni^aieiti


11  copper.


COLORES.
Vatgkmet  ihe  iocmidU  he  fbtmd  ta  ht  tt ..
vith  oxide  of  cobalt,  and  the  porpis  wilL  oxide  of

Tm  faDmnag  lilt,  eranpilsd  bran  the  different
HBTce*  of  OBT  infemMwD  Bonccniiiig  the  pigmenu
kDova  to  tha  anciently  will  nrre  te  convey  an
idem  of  ^  gnt  imarcei  of  the  Omk  and  Ho-
vaa  paintaa  in  thia  departincnt  ef  tlieir  art ;  and
vUch,  in  the  opinion  lif  Sir  H.  DaTf,  wa«  full/
cqoal  to  the  RaooRei  of  tbs  gteat  Italian  paiuten
in  tbe  (ucteenth  cenlarf : —

Rkd.  The  iDcieDl  redi  wan  T«rf  uumennu.
Kujifa^L,  fiiXftt,  aimaiani,  einiiabai,  TsnuUion,
^  of  nxmuy,  caUed  alio  b;  PliDj  and


The  mawiampt  IvIwA-,  atmabarU  laiiea,  men-
lioiKd  bj  Plinjr  and  Dioaenridef,  wai  what  is
Tnlj^j  oUed  dragon'i-Uood,  the  leain  obtained
fna  miou  qieciee  of  the  ahuDm  palm.

MlXrn  leeiiu to  have  had  Tmioiu  lignififs-

and  ntrjeof  fed  ochre. Then  wan  TarioDa  kindi
of  ntrilDaa,  tiie  Ca^fadoeian,  the  Egyptian,  tht
Spaniah,  and  the  La '
nd inn oiidca, of


;  all  * .
rhich the bcM  vera  the

rnbrica  Sinopka,


*  fiitt  bniight
unca  tailed  Atrodmm,
*,  ltd  oxide  af  lead,  led  lead,  w


;  bj  the  Oreeka,  /liAroi,
iTBla  (t.  I3S),  aiOafiiai.
Pliny  tejla  aa  that  it  wai  diaccrrend  threngh  the
■cajeclal  alcfoUioa  of  wmiB  onuaa  (white  lead)
by  a  fitc  in  the  Peiiaeena,  and  wai  fint  need  aa  n
p^ae^l  by  Nidaa  irf  Athena,  aboal  330  B.  c^

The  Roman  aandaiacha  leema  to  haTi  had
wioa*  i%iiificationa,  and  it  u  aridently  need
diAfcstlj  by  the  Oteck  and  Roman  writara.
Plinj  ipatlu  of  dii&nnt  abide)  of  laudancha,
the  i»Ie  «  muaicot  (yellow  oxide  of  lead),  and  a
■utnn  of  the  pale  with  mimmn ;  it  appatently
daa  iiguified  Eealgar  or  the  red  lolphnnt  of  aneoic :
thne  waa  alao  a  conpoDsd  oAoai  of  equal  parte  of
aaadaZB^a  and  nibna  calcined,  called  nndyz,
«Jrfi<. Sir  &.  DaTy  luupuatd  thia  taVna  to  ap-


freqaitlj  glaied  with  porjde  to  gire
iBKieL

Platy  apcaki  of  a  dark  ochia  tram  the  iela  of
Syna,  whidi  ha  ealla  Syricom  ;  but  he  wya  alao

Siaapia.

YnLLOW.  TelUnr  odire^  hydiated  penmde  of
■H.  ilie  ■«  of  the  Romana,  the  *Xfa  of  the  Gieeki,
ftraed  the  haae  of  many  other  yellow*  mixed  with
uiaai  cdIobti  and  carbaoate  c^  lime.  Ochn  wai
laiiuiied  friaB  difirnnt  parti ;  the  Atde  waa  con-
■idciTd  the  beat ;  it  waa  fint  vaed  in  painting,  ae-
"  g  U  Pliny,  by  Polygnotn*  and  Micon,  at


0»a».  aoytaeeOa,  XpwrJiwUa,  whidi  ap-
I  hate  been  green  arbmnte  of  topper  or
la  (ffrtn  Toditer),  waa  the  green  moft  ap-


321

prored  ef  by  the  andcnta  ;  ita  tint  d^iended  upon
the  qoantity  of  carbonate  of  lime  mixed  with  iL

Pliny  mentioni  Taiioiu  kindi  of  verdigrii  (dia-
cetate  of  copper),  mnigo,  Wi,  lit  X"^'",  eypria
aaraTD,  and  aernca,  and  a  particular  prepaistion  of
ferdigrii  called  icoltda.  Sir  H.  Ihtry  lappoaea
.1 : ..  ._ ^  ^[^  acetate  of  copper


being  fjund  iqxm  the  i
Smyrna  ;  Ajjiiaimm  ;  and  the  creto  vindii,  com-
mon green  earth  of  Venna.

Bluk,  The  ancient  bine*  were  alao  Tery
nraneroni ;  the  principal  of  Iheie  wa-  — '

Kiaraj,  oiurc,  a  apecieg  of  yerdiler  oi

nata  of  copper,  of  which  then  wen  many  rarietiea.
It  waa  generaily  mixed  with  carbonate  of  lime.
VitrUTiu  and  Pliny  apeak  of  the  Alexandrian,
(he  Crpiian,  and  the  Scythmn ;  the  Alexandrian
waa  the  moat  Tslued,  aa  apprDaching  neareat  to
□Itnmariae.  II  nai  made  alio  at  Pomioli  by  >
certain  Veatorina,  who  bad  learnt  the  method  (H  ita
picfantion  in  Egypt ;  thii  waa  diatingoiahed  by
the  name  of  sos^  Xhtre  waa  alio  a  wuhed
caerulemn  called  ^ofunfint,  and  an  inferior  deaoip*
tioD  of  thii  ailed  Mfaia.

It  appeara  that  dltiamarinB  (lafua  lamli)  waa
known  to  the  ancienta  tuider  tiie  name  of  Amu-
ai— ,  'Apuirmr,  fiaai  Armenia,  whence  it  waa
procnred.  Solphmet  of  iodlam  ia  the  colonring
princijJe  of  l^ui  laanli,  according  to  M.  Gmelin  of


Cobalt.  The  ai
not  known ;  hut  it
Xi^jiii  of  Theo] "


ancienta  had  alao  aeTcial  kmda
inHB,  odnm,  l^itgimim,  and
soioon.  The  moat  Talnable  of
iwruBiR,  prepand  by  mixing
with  the  poipio  Kcniion  erf'
the  nmm  {rtp^ifa).

JHj/tffiiimn,  Ho-ywov  (Bfyii,  woad  7),  Etocording  la
ViCruTiot,  ia  a  colour  between  icarlet  and  purple.

The  Roman  <Mtnim  wai  a  componnd  of  red
ochn  and  blue  oxide  of  o^tper.

VitraTina  mentiima  a  purua  which  waa  obtained
by  cooling  the  oebu  aabi  with  wine  noqat.
SMai  radii,  madder-root.
BaoVN.  Oobxt  aidi,  bnmt  ochie.  The  broama


loitly  carbonaceorua.  The  beat  for
the  puTpooca  of  painting  wen  ebpilaa^HiHa,  i\t-
^irrmr,  iTon-black  ;  and  tryffhnm,  tfiyiniT,
vine-black,  made  of  burnt  vine  tvigi.  The  former
waa  aaed  by  Apdlea,  the  httlei  by  Polygtutna  and

The  AwuHtem  Itdiatm,  mentioned  by  Pliny
and  VitroThii,  waa  probably  the  Chineeo  Indian
ink.  The  blaiia  fiom  aepia,  and  the  black  woad,
have  been  already  mentioned.


COLOSSUS.
riritr,  u  called  from  the  place  of  ita  origin
:  conn  oF  Afrka,  not  fu  frim  KgTpt  Then
1k)  b  whiM  (srth  of  Entria,  and  the  umn-
whil«,  «re(a  onibna  or  swi&ipe,  made  fmm
I  In  the  riuga  of  the


CBrbnuBle  of  lead  or  white  lead,  anata,  ^liini-
Aw,  wBi  appaieutlf  not  much  owd  b;  the  andnit
painten  ;  it  vaa  nonliere  fonnd  amongit  the  Ro-

Sii  H.  DaTj  i*  of  opinion  that  the  aioR,  the
led  and  yellow  ochm,  and  the  blaclu,  hate  not
DndeTgane  any  change  of  colour  wbatSTer  in  the
ancient  fineo  paintiiipa  ;  but  that  manj  of  the
gteena,  which  an  now  carbonate  of  copper,  wen
oriKin^  J  laid  on  in  ■  itate  of  acetsle.

Plinj  divide*  the  coloura  into  eolomjlondi  and
telom  cHUfari  (hit.  12);  the  ccdmn  Boiidi  wen
thoee  which,  in  hi«  tiine,  were  inpplicd  b^  the
employer  to  the  pointer,  on  account  of  then:  ex-
penie,  and  to  lecnce  their  being  gEnnIne  ;  they  weie
minium,  Annenium,  cinnsbana,  chiyncolla,  Indi-
emn,  and  purpuriuum  ;  the  lett  were  the  aoiteri.

Both  Pliny  (hit.  12)  and  VitmTiui  (vii.  7)
clau  the  coloun  into  nataral  and  oiti&nal ;  the
mtural  are  thoee  obtained  inunediatelj  &om  the
earth,  which,  according  to  Pliny,  am  Sinopii,
rulsica,  paiBetooium,  melinnin,  Etetria,  and  — '
pigmeolum ;  to  tho»  VitruTim  addi  ochra,
duacha,  minium  (nmi^KHi),  and  chiyaocdta,
being  ol  metallic  origio.  The  othen  an  called
artificial,  on  account  of  requiring  lome  particular
prepMation  to  render  them  fit  for  nic

To  the  above  liit  of  coloun,  more  namea  might
atitl  be  added  ;  but  being  for  the  moat  part  merely
compound!  or  modificationi  of  thoae  already  mei
tioned,  they  would  only  take  up  apace  withoi
giving  ui  any  additional  inilght  into  the  reaoum
M  the  ancient  paintert  j  thoae  which  we  hai
already  enumerated  are  inScient  to  ibrm  an  ii
finite  rariely  of  colour,  and  conclnaiieiy  proi
that  the  ancient  painten,  if  they  had  not  mon
had  at  leaat  equal  rewnmea  in  tlua  moat  eiaentlal
branch  of  painting  with  the  artiati  of  our  ov
limea.  [B.N.W.]

COLOSSUS  (KoXimmJi).  The  origin  of  Ih
word  ia  not  known,  the  anggeationi  of  the  grai
mariana  being  either  ridiculoiu,  or  imperfecl  :
point  of  etymology, {Etym^  Mag.  p.  £2ti.  16  ;


T.) It  i.


.Tcry  ai


bably  of  Ionic  extraction,  and  rarely
Attic  writen.  (Bloml  Glou.  ad  Aaek.  Agam.
406.)  It  ii  UKd  both  by  the  Qredii  and  Romana
to  aigniiy  a  itatue  larger  than  life  (Heajch.  a.  v. ;
Andi.  AgaiH.  406  ;  SchoL  ad  Jm.  Sid.  liii  230),
and  thence  a  pa*on  of  eitcaordinary  atstnra  ia
termed  mtoueroi  (Suet  O^.  35)  ;  and  the  archi-
tectural ornamcnta  in  the  nnper  memben  of  lofty
bnildinga,  which  require  to  be  of  huge  dimenaiona
in  consequence  of  their  remoteneaa,  an  termed
eolo—iaiUra  {noAooo'uiiTfpa,  Vitrui.  iiL  3,  com-
paire  Id.  x.  4).  Statuea  of  thia  kind,  limply
ooloaial, but not enormouily lar^ were too


0  aa  atich  ;  the  word  being  more  fire-
qoently  ^iplied  to  deilgnale  thoie  figurea  of  gi-
gantic dimcmioca  (mofaa  itadiannR,  tarriiait  porea,
Plin.  IT.  ff.  »«i*.  7.  a.  18)  which  were  fint
executed  in  Egypt,  and  afterwarda  in  Greece  and
Italy.


COLUM,
Among  the  coloaaal  atatnea  of  Oceece,  the  moat
celebrated,  according  to  Pliny,  waa  the  bronn
oojottua  at  Hhodea  by  Cliai«a  of  Lindua,  a  pupil  of
Lyaippua.  (See  tHel.  of  G.  <ad  R.  Biog.  art.
Chora.)  Pliny  mentioni  another  Greek  coloeaoa
of  Apollo,  the  wia-k  of  Calamia,  which  coat  £00
(alenti,  and  waa  twenty  cubita  high,  in  the  dtj  cf
Apollonia,  whence  it  waa  tranaferred  to  the  iXffiuA
by  M,  LncuUua  ;  and  alao  thoae  of  Jupiter  aod
Herculei,  at  Tanntum,  by  LyaijqiuB.  (Did.  of
G.  oadR.  &og.  art.  Ls^fjua.)  To  the  liat  of
Pliny  mut  be  added  the  men  impolUnt  cokwal
atatnea  of  PfaeidiBi,  the  moM  beautiful  of  which
wen  hia  chryielephantine  statues  of  Zeoa,  at
Olympia,  and  of  Athena,  in  the  Parthenon  at
Athens ;  the  largest  was  his  bronu  atatae  of
Athena  Ftomaohua,  on  the  Acnpolia.

Amongst  tile  woriu  of  this  deacription  made  ei-
preaaly  by  or  far  the  Romana,  those  moat  fre-
qnenily  alluded  to  an  the  foltowii^ : — I.Aalatuo
of  Jnpitcr  npm  the  capltol,  made  by  order  of  Sp.
Carriliua,  from  the  annour  of  the  Samnitea,  which
waa  lo  large  that  it  could  bo  seen  from  the  Alban
moouL  (Plin.  I  c)  2.  A  hronse  atatae  of  ApoUo
at  tbe  Palatine  library  (Plin.  lc\V>  which  the
bnnce  head  now  pna^rud  in  the  capitol  pcobablj
belonged.  3.  A  fanwie  statue  of  Augnatus,  in  the
fomm,  which  bore  hia  name.  (Mart.  Ep.  rilL  44.
7.)  4.  The  coloanu  of  Nero,  which  waa  executed
by  Zenodom*  in  marble,  and  tbere&n  quoted  by
Pliny  in  proof  that  the  art  of  caaling  metal  waa
thenloat.  Its  height  waa  110  or  120  feet.  (Plin.
1.0. ;  Suet  A'em,  31.)  It  was  originally  placed  in
the  Tcatibnle  of  the  domiu  aum  (Mart.  Spai±.  iL
1.  ^  L  71.  7  ;  Dion  Caaa.  liiL  15)  at  the  bottom
of  the  Via  Saera,  whue  the  baaement  npm  which
it  stood  ia  atill  to  be  seen,  and  from  it  Uie  cdd-
lignoua  amphithcMn  ia  auppoaed  to  have  gained
the  name  of  "  G^anetun."  Having  suffered  in  tho
fin  which  destroyed  the  golden  house,  it  was
npMred  by  Ve«pa»an,  and  by  bim  converted  into
a  statue  of  the  sun.  (Uiennym.  ia  Hob.  c  6  ;
Suet.  Faip.  18  ;  Plin.  L  o. ;  compan  Lamprid.
Comad.  M ;  Dion  Caai.  liiiL  15.)  Twenty-
fbnr  elephanta  were  employed  by  Madriaii  lo  n-
move  it,  when  he  waa  about  to  biuld  the  temple  of
Rome.  (Spart  Hadr.  19.)  h.  An  eqneatrian
of  Domltian,  of  bninie  gilt,  which  waa
-'  e  centre  of  the  forum.  (Stat.  Sj^  i.
.^L7l.  6.)  [A.H-]

COLUM  (4«f>J0,  ■  stiainer  or  colander,  waa
wine,  milk  olir».<al,  and  otlier


trfii


=^^-


I^


igic


COLUMNA.
liqaidL  Ttoi  we  find  it  employed  in  the  DioliiDg
of  oliT«-oiL  ta  receive  the  joiee  of  the  beiry  whei
lauent  oat  by  the  prelom.  Such  colA  were  modi
if  bur,  Innm  or  nuhee  (Vitg.  Georg.  ii.  342
C«bm.  R.H.  liL  19).  Thote  that  wen  tued  lu
ntids  irf'  hmitj  fbc  ttniiuDg  wine  wen  be-
^Donlj  made  of  Mma  meul,  inch  n»  hraros  a
bIts  (Alben.  p.  470,  d.)  Vuioiu  ipecimeni  o
eiiia  kan  been  finnd  at  PompaiL  The  preceding
nodcnt  ihowt  the  |dui  ud  profile  of  ons  whien
B  of  Him  (Mh.  Boti.  ToL  -riii.  U.  fig.

Tb  Bcaa»  filled  the  itaina  with  let
{ala  amaria'i  m  grdei  to  cod  and  dilute
■tt^*aiiiamiiaIli>titwMr:liared.[Nii.J  [J.Y.]

COLUHBA'RIUH,  Utenll;  ■  dove-cote  or
pi^gefk-haoae,  ii  oaed  ta  tifteu  a  variety  of  ob-
jicta,  all  of  which  howerer  derive  tbeir  name  from
Ibeir  naBsblanee  to  a  dav»«ote.

1.  A  vp^hial  cbamber. [Fi

2.  Id  a  machine  DBtd  to  niee  water  for  the  pur-
byVitruviu.(;r.9).

iMs  (be  raeiTing  trough,  wen  tenned  CobaAaria.
Tbia  win  b«  nndsMood  by  refeiTing  b>  the  wood-
e>latp.llM).  [AxTLU.]  The diO'cieoce  between
that  rrinaaitaliin  and  the  machine  now  under
"— 'Ht**'™'.  conained  in  |be  following  pointa:  —
The  whed  of  the  Utter  ie  a  M>lid  one  {tfmpa-
amX  iHteBd  of  radiated  (rate) ;  and  wu  worked
a*  a  luiliiiiil,  by  moi  who  itood  upon  platforms
laiyiliiig  frecn  the  fiat  aidea,  ■^■''*^  of  beLng
tarned  oj  a  itreani.  Between  tbe  mtenali  i^
odi  platfcmi  a  isiea  of  groorrt  or  cbanneli  {eo-
lamtm  iri)  were  ibcined  in  the  udea  of  the  tynipft-
nmn,  thnogh  which  the  water  taken  up  by  a
BBBbfT  of  Koopi  placed  on  the  outer  mugia  of
1,  like  the  jsn  m  the  cut  reFerred  to,  wu
'  □  Irougb  below  ijabntm


which  n


V.  I  a).


\  by


tr%iypb*  in  the  Doric  order,  were  tenned  i
iwia  bj  the  Roman  architect* ;  thai  ii,  wbilit
thry  i^oained  empty,  and  nntil  filled  Dp  by  the
bnd  of  the  beam.  The  csmapotidijig  Greek  term
KM  iaml  ((nxn  i>4,  a  iob),  and  hence  the  (pace
betweoi  tiro  nch  eaviiiea,  that  ji,  in  the  corn-
pine  boildinf,  between  two  triglyphi,  wn»  called
|aT^r^,  ■  metope.  (Vilruv.  iv.  2  ;  MaiT|uea,  DtW
OrJimt  Dorim,  viL  37.)  [A.  R]

COLUHEN,  which  ia  the  Mme  word  a>  ad-
mm,  i*  need  in  arthitectnre,  either  generally  for
the  naf  of  a  building,  v  jsrticularly  for  a  beam
■  the  higbect  put  of  ihei1opeofaiw£  By  tbia
deacnptiod  Vitntviu*  aeemi  to  mean  either  the  cot-
fi  'iiiii.  at  the  ix^pHf,  but  mote  probably  the
iMla,  BB  be  derive*  eobmaa  fran  coUnun  (Vi-
BW.  iv.  2-11.  Schn. ;  Featn.).  [P.  S.]

COLUMNA  (n^,  I'M.  auvCi,  ■ijnw,  KHirl-
vaar  rri/tot,  ifiaa.  rniXli,  miAioni),  a  pillar  or

The  BB  of  the  tnmka  of  tree*  placed  npright
for  M^ii^-WMig  bnildingt  unqoeationably  lod  to  the
a<niiiiai  of  aimilar  auppcni  wnnght  in  ttone.
AacBf  llie  ^rioiltonl  Oreelu  of  Alia  Minor,
•k^  laadn  of  life  appear  to  have  niSered  little
(^■fa  far  Bon  tban  two  thoimnd  yeara.  Sir  C.
FeOma  otatrred  an  exact  eoofoiiDity  of  atyle  and
■niMBcU  liiilnaiii  the  wooden  hula  now  occa-
(iedbj  tht  ptamttj.  of  (oa  of  wliich  be  haa ,


COLUMNA.  BBS

given  a  akelch  (Jbmiaj;  p.  234  ;  aee  woodcut),
and  the  iplendid  tomb)  and  lemplea,  which  wera
hewn  oDt  of  the  rock,  and  eonitruOed  at  the  ex-
penie  of  the  moat  wealthy  of  the  ancient  inhabit-
anla.  We  have  alao  diiect  teitimoniei  to  joDve
that  the  ancienta  made  me  of  wooden  columni  in
their  edifice!.  Pauuuuaa  (vL  24.  |  7)  deunbea  a
vBij  ancient  monument  in  the  market-place  at
Elii,  contiating  of  a  roof  tuppitfted  bj  piUara  of


oak.  A  temple  of  Juno  at  Melapoatiun  wst  lup-
ported  by  piflan  made  from  the  trunk*  of  vine&
(Plin.  If.  jV.  niv.  1.)  In  the  Egj-ptian  architec-
ture, many  of  the  greateat  atone  colnnuu  are  mani-
feat  imitalimu  of  Die  trunk  of  the  palm.  (Herod.
iL  J69.)

As  the  tree  required  to  be  baaed  npon  a  fiat
•qnare  None,  and  to  have  a  atoDe  or  tile  of  aimilar
form  fixed  on  iU  nnnnit  to  preterve  it  from  decay,
10  the  colunm  was  made  with  a  tquare  base,  and


In  the  Doric,  which  is  the  oldest  s^fle  of  Greek
arcbitecttire,  we  must  conuder  all  the  columns  in
the  lame  nw  aa  having  one  common  base  (jx/dium),
whema  in  the  Ionic  and  Corinthian  each  column
haa  a  sepaiate  bate,  allied  rrvt^i.  [SriHA.]  The
capitals  of  these  two  Utter  orders  show,  on  com-
parison with  the  Doric,  a  groiter  degree  of  com-

and  the  chancier  of  lighUeas  and  elegance  u
further  obtamed  in  them  by  their  more  slender
•haft,  its  height  being  much  greater  in  proportion
to  its  thickness.  Of  all  these  circumstances  some
idea  may  be  fbnned  by  the  inspection  of  the  three
accompanying  specimen*  of  pillars  selected  from


321  COLOMNA.

each  of  Che  prindpal  orden  af  ancient  arckitectim.
The  first  U  from  b  cnlmim  of  lEic  PirthsDon  at
Alhena,  th«  capital  of  wbich  u  ahown  on  a  luger
■calc  at  p.  1.  Tbe  McDnd  ii  from  tha  templs  of
Bacchut  at  Teot,  the  capital  of  vhicli  ii  iDtnxliiced
at  p.  141.  The  third  u  from  the  ramaini  of  Ihs
temple  of  Jopiler  at  Labranda.

In  all  the  orden  the  ihaft  (tcafmi)  tapcn  from
the  bottom  tonrdi  tbe  top,  thtu  unitating  tbe
natni^  foim  o(  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  and  at  the


upright  bodiet.  The  •ban  wai,  hov
with  a  (light  iwelling  in  the  middle,  which  wai
called  tbe  aitCafu.  Il  waa,  moreortir,  almoit  tuu-
Tenally,  and  from  the  eaflicit  timea,  channelled
or  finted,  L  a^  the  nulaide  woi  ilriped  with  inci-
woni  parallel  to  the  biil  (VitniT.  it.  i.)  Theie
inciiiona,  called  (trios,  were  alwayi  woiVcd  vith
exncme  reftnlaritjr.  The  Kction  of  them  by  a
^ane  parallel  to  the  baae  waa,  in  the  Ionic  and
Corinthian  orders,  a  aeinicircle  ;  in  the  Doric,  it
waa  an  arc  mnch  leu  than  a  Kmiciicle.  Their
nnmber  waa  20  in  the  colunmi  of  the  Putheaon,
■bore  repreaanted ;  in  other  initancei,  31,  28,
or  33.

The  capital  waa  commonlj  wiDnght  ODt  of  one
block  of  atone,  the  ahaft  coniiating  of  aeieral
CTlindrical  piecea  fitted  to  one  anotber.  When
the  coltunn  wai  erected,  ita  component  parte  were
fimilj  joined  together,  not  by  mortar  or  cement,
but  by  iron  erampa  fiied  in  the  direction  of  the
BJda.  The  annexed  woodcut  ia  copied  finrn  an
engrariiig  in  Swinhume'i  Tour  m  the  Two
Siciliea  (VoL  ii.  p.  301),  and  repreunta  a  Doric
column,  which  bin  been  thrown  proabata  in  mch
a  manner  aa  to  ihow  the  capital  lying  aepaiate,
and  the  fi>e  drama  of  the  abaft,  each  four  feet
long,  with  the  hnlet  for  tbe  iioD  crampt  by  which
they  were  nnitcd  together.


Columna  of  an  aatoniibing  aiae  were  nerertbeleH
erected,  in  wbieh  the  ahaft  wai  one  piece  of  itooe.
For  thii  porpoee  it  wn»  hewn  in  tha  qusny  into
the  reqoiiite  ibrm  (Virg.  Aat.  1 128),  and  wai
then  rolled  orer  the  iround,  or  mored  by  the  aid
of  varioua  mechanical  contriTBacra,  and  by  im-
menae  labour^  to  the  apot  wbrre  it  waa  to  be  aet
np.  Tbe  mamoleom  of  tbe  Emperor  Hadrian,  a
cmnilar  boilduig  of  inch  dimenaiona  that  it  lerrea
Bi  the  fortreaa  of  modem  Rome,  vaa  ■nrrounded
In-  foi^-etght  lofty  and  moit  beanliful  Corinthian
piUan,  the  ahaft  of  fuh  pillar  being  a  ungle  piece
of  marble.  Abtrat  the  time  of  Conilantine,  tome
of  theie  were  taken  to  lupport  the  loterioi  of  a
chnrch  dedicated  to  St.  Paul,  which  a  few  yeara
ago  WBi  dettnyed  by  Ere. The  intereit  attached


g«,d  e


of  thew


loble  c


COLUMNA.

niRoent  indrnduala  to  employ  their  wealth  in  pre-
aenting  them  to  public  itructurea.  Thui  Croenii
contributed  the  grestpc  part  of  die  pillan  to  the
temple  at  Epbeaua.  (Herod,  i.  92.)  In  tha  nimi
at  LdlOBoda,  now  called  Jaekly,  in  Caria,  tablet!
in  front  of  ^e  columna  record  the  names  of  the
donon,  aa  ia  ahowu  iu  iba  apednien  cf  ibem  abo<a
exhibited.

Catnnuu  were  naed  in  tbe  interior  of  btuldinga,
to  auatain  the  bcsms  which  nipported  the  celling;
Aa  both  the  beama  and  the  entire  ceQing  were
often  of  stone  or  marble,  which  could  not  be  ob-
tained in  piecea  of  so  great  a  length  aa  wood,  the
columns  vera  in  lucb  druumitances  frequent  in
proportion,  not  being  more  than  aboutlen  or  twelve
feet  apart.  The  opiithodomot  of  the  Parthenon  of
Athena,  aa  appears  from  traces  in  the  remainlDg
niina,  had  four  coIiudub  to  anpport  tbe  ceiling.  A
common  arrangement,  especially  in  bnitdingi  of  an
oblong  form,  waa  to  hare  two  rows  of  cotumns
pomtlel  to  the  two  aides,  the  distance  from  each
side  to  the  next  row  of  columns  being  leta  than
the  diitance  between  the  rowi  ihemsdres.  This
constiuction  waa  adtmtrd  not  only  in  temples,  hat
in  palaces  (otitai).  The  great  hall  of  the  palace
of  UlyBKa  in  Ithaca,  that  of  the  king  of  the
Phaeaeiar^  and  that  rf  the  palace  of  Hercuiea  at
Thebes  (Eurip.  /ft™.  Far.  875—1018),  are  aup-
poeed  to  have  been  thus  constructed,  the  seats  of
honour  both  for  the  master  and  miatresi,  and  for
the  more  diitinguishad  of  tbair  guests,  being  at
the  foot  of  certaui  pillori.  (,(».  tI  307,  viiL  66.
iiS,  niii  90.)  Id  these  regal  halls  of  the  Ho-
meric era,  we  are  also  led  to  imagine  the  pillars
decorated  with  arms.  When  Telemadnu  entera
bis  &tber'a  hall,  he  place*  hia  spear  againit  b
column,  and  "  within  the  poliihed  apear-hglder,"

channels  of  the  ahaft.  (Od.  I  127—129,  xvii.  29 ;
Virg.  Am,  lii.  92.}  Aromid  the  base  of  the
columns,  near  tbe  entianee,  all  the  warrion  of  the
femiiy  wore  accustomed  to  incline  tbdr  spears ;  atid
from  tbe  upper  part  of  the  nme  they  suspended
their  bowi  and  qmTera  on  na3a  or  hotdLs.  (Htnri.
ffynm,  il  Ap.  8.)  Tbe  minatiel^  lyre  hung  upon
ill  puf  from  anodur  column  nearer  the  top  of  the
room.  (O*  Tiii.  67 ;  Find.  OL  i  17.)  The  co-
lumna  of  the  boll  were  also  made  lubserrient  to
less  agmable  uses.  Criminals  weie  tied  to  them
in  order  to  be  scourged,  or  otherwise  tormented.
(Soph.  Ajia,  108  1  Lobed:  ad  he. ;  Diog.  I^en.
viii.  21  ;  Hasiod,  Thog.  £21.)  According  to  the
description  in  the  Odyssey,  tha  beams  of  the  ball
of  Ulyuea  were  of  sUTn-Gr  ;  in  such  a  can,  the
apartment  might  be  leiy  spadona  witboat  being
oTcnrowded  with  eolumna.  (Od.  xix.  SS,  xziL
176,  198.)

Rowi  of  eolmnna  woe  often  employed  witbia  b
building,  to  enclose  a  space  men  to  tbe  aky.
Beams  supporting  ceilings  psssed  from  abore  tha
colnnms  to  the  adjoining  walls,  so  as  to  ttma
corered  passage*  or  ambulatories  (crrinf).  Such
circuit  of  ednmni  was  called  a  pgrik^  ^-Ktpl,
Tv\or),  and  the  Roman  atriwa  was  built  upon
lis  plan.  Tbe  hugest  and  moat  splendid  temples
ncioaed  an  open  apnea  like  an  atrium,  which  nvna
accompliahcd  by  placing  one  peristyle  upon  snorthor.
In  such  eases,  the  lova  raws  of  adumoa  being
Doric,  the  upper  were  acanetinKiS  Ionic  or  Corin-
thian, the  lighter  being  [si^jtrjy  based  apaa  the
heaTiec. (Paus.  tuL  15. 1 1.) A  temple  m  con-


*ti«c(cd  wM  oDcd  ifpaOffiU  (Enutfin). [Tkh-

Bnt  it  m*  m  tlw  extoTO  of  public  buildingi,
■•d  f^vcjallj  df  templei,  thit  eolnimu  wen  dit-
phnd  in  the  most  bcanliriil  annbiutiou,  dlher
rnmniding  tlu  building  cnlirelj,  nr  unngad  in
pvrtiCDci  sa  sos  or  man  of  its  ^tmta.  (For  tha
nriaiu  unoHSHiti  of  ailunuQi  ue  Tiupldm.)
Their  wiginw  and  proper  ue  vat,  of  coons,  lo
npfiivt  tlM  roof  of  the  boilding  ;  LDdt  amidst  all
tbc  daboatioiia  of  arcbitectim]  dnign,  tbia  object
*  w>*  Hill  kept  in  new.  Tke  natonl  amogemeiit
in  lach  B  CM*  is  obriou.  A  conliDDoiu  beam  (or
actiei  «f  beuna)  would  be  laid  on  ths  topa  of  a
row  III  adinuia  On  tbia  beam  would  rat  tbe
■nda  of  the  oow-beami ;  whicb  would  be  tied
together  by  anetbec  cootiiraoiu  piec^  panllel  to
tbe  fint ;  and  abore  tliii,  if  Iba  oolomiu  vece  at
Be  end  of  tba  bnildiog,  wonld  riia  tbe  pitch  of  the
noC  Now  in  the  actual  parts  of  an  anhitectuial
■tdo',  wa  see  the  Biact  cosiilerpart  of  these  ai-
iMigiiiiiiila  On  tbe  snnusit  of  the  row  of  coluous
■cats  lie  anHtrvct,  L  e.  dot/  6tam  (iriaTi?uar,
aMbk.'  abon  this  is  tbe  fiittt  (fi>af<(|ioi,
(mfifat,  xcjAenu),  in  wbicb  the  moat  andent
■ider,  aanclj  the  Doric,  ahowi,  in  its  trigljrpbi,
wbat  wBc  ttiginallf  the  ends  of  the  croas-b^nu :
in  the  oths  ordos  these  end)  are  geaeislljr  cvn-
caied,  and  tha  fricaa  fbmn  a  flat  msAae,  whici  is
freqaeinlj  cnammted  b?  flaoKa  in  lelio^  whence
ita  Graak  aaata.  Above  the  bust  pn^ects  tbe
CMUoa  (npiatt,  tormii,  a  Borma),  foraiing  a
a  fiiuib  to  the  eotablatan  (for  so  these
■nbcn  takoi  tHetbei  ate  called),  and
Ibe  ndea  of  tba  boildine,  serring  to  tmile
boflbemftanof  tbeiDot  Tbe  ttiangular
■d  of  tba  not,  abore  the  entabUCore,  is
*  yarfnu^.  [FAmoiDK.]  Tbe  det^Ud
a  of  the  larions  portiont  of  tbe  eolomn
!,  in  each  of  the  ordeia,  will  be
i  bj  rejerencc  to  tha  fbltowii^
which  sn  taken  from  MBach*!  ffrit-
u-Ordwimgm.
I  cbancUriud  by  tbe
imm  and  rapid  diminn-
tiMi  of  the  abaft,  and  ths  limplicitj  of  tha  i^ital,
which  canntta  af  a  deep  otoea^  soi^Mtted  by  a
Toy  Sat  oral  mooting,  called  eoi^UH^  beoiath
wUeh  are  frm  three  to  five  Meps  or  channels
IWbtwi,  mmaH),  Jnabad  of  tbe  l^jnlraduUam
(a  serf  of  aiA  which  nnitca  the  ihaft  lo  the
optal  in  the  otba-  vdeit)  there  is  merely  a  anall
pettka  of  the  shaft  cot  i^  by  one  or  more  namw
daoBck.  In  the  oilabtatace,  the  aicfaittaTe  is  in
aae  taAa,  and  quite  plain  :  tbe  tntta  is  oma-
■uiled  by  ttigljflii  (so  called  bam  the  tbt«  flat
bawls  Bila  which  tbey  are  dirided  by  the  inter-
Ttning  channels),  one  of  which  is  finuid  oia  each
cehnn,  and  «Bie  mer  each  inletcolDmnialiaii,  ez-
cipc  thai  the  trigiypb  o»tr  a  earner  oolnmn  is
plated,  not  dts  the  centra  of  the  column,  bat  at
the  eibvHuty  of  the  arcbt^Te,  - —  a  deeisire  proo^
aa  TitnriBs  Rmaih*,  that  the  triglyphs  do  not
mamut  windows.  Tha  metopes  between  the
nialy;^  woe  onsmenled  with  scnjptares  in  high
nbcC  The  eonios  is  flat,  and  pnjecli  fiv,  and  on
iti  Btder  aid*  art  eat  aeriBal  sets  of  diopt,  called
■aniha  (mi^iJii,  one  orer  each  tiiglyph  and  cacb
■napt,  the  lorbeea  of  which  follow  the  slope  of
tha  ttid,  and  which  are  Mid  by  VitraTios  to  repre-
■an  (be  ends  if  the  raftcn  of  the  mof. Id  tbe


COLUMNA.  32S

moat  andent  ezamplca  of  the  older  tbe  coInnuH  are
very  short  in  proportion  to  tbetc  gieateat  thickneaa.
In  tbe  temple  at  Corinth,  which  ii  aoppoeed  to  be
the  oldest  of  all,  the  height  of  the  colnmna  is  only
7}  modalei  (i.  a.  lemi-dtsmelen),  and  in  the  great
tanple  at  Paettnm  only  8  modules  ;  but  greater
lightness  was  afterwanli  eiiea  to  the  mder,  so
that,  in  the  Parthenon,  which  is  tbe  best  example,
the  he%ht  of  the  columns  is  12  Dndnles.  The  Ad-
lowing  profile  is  from  tbe  temple  of  Apollo  £[ii-
curins  tx  Phigaleia,  bnilt  by  tba  same  aKhiteet  at
the  Paithmon. For  ■  comparison  of  tbe  other


The  Boman  arcbiteeti  made  coniidenhle  rari'
aCiooa  in  the  order,  the  details  of  which  are  showi
■a  tbe  engiaTing  on  the  fallowing  page,  from  an  ex-
ample at  Alhano  near  Rome.  In  the  later
of  tbe  Roman  Doric,  a  base  is  given  lo  th

II.  Tbe  loma  Order  is  as  much  diatingnithed
by  tim^  graccfidnesB  as  the  Doric  by  majestic
Btrengln.  The  column  is  much  man  slender
than  the  Doric,  baring,  m  the  arlicat  known  ei-
ample,  namely,  the  temple  of  Artemis  at  Epbeana,
a  height  of  16  modolet,  which  was  afterwards  in-
creased to  IS.  The  tbaft  tests  upcm  a  base,  which
was  either  the  elabonto  Ionic  or  tbe  Attic  [Snu  \
Atticuhoib].  Tbe  capital  either  sprinn  di-
rectly from  the  shaft,  or  there  is  a  kypatradieSiiiK,
icpuited  from  the  shaft  by  an  astragal  moulding.


and  Mmetiinei,  u  in  ths  Enchtheiiim,  (dorned
wilh  le«f-work  (irelfuor).  The  capital  itorff  ran-
•iiU  o^  6nt,  an  utngai  moulding,  aboK  which
ii  an  echinni,  iculpnuvd  into  eggi  and  KrpcDU'
Mngnet,  and  above  Ibii  (Kimetiiiiea  wilh  a  Ainu
bterveniog)  the  canaUt,  from  wbich  ipring  th«
(piral  Tolulo,  nliich  are  tho  chief  chanicterlitic*
of  the  order.  There  ii  ^nerall;  an  omanicnted
abaciu  bctwem  the  capital  and  the  enublstun.
The  arcbilTBTe  ii  in  three  facee,  the  one  tlightiv
projecting  bejond  tha  other ; there  it  a  uuaU


COLUMNA.

comics  Ijetween  the  aPclitmvB  and  the  frieie,  and
alt  three  mciobcn  of  the  entablature  are  raore  or
IcB  ornamented  with  mouldingi.  The  finst  ipe-
cimeiu  of  the  ordei  in  ili  moat  limple  form  are
thoee  in  the  temple  of  the  llisnii,  and  the  temple
of  Atbeoa  Poliai  at  Priene  ;  the  Intltr  a  unallj
conaiderEd  the  betl  example  of  all.  Ths  praties
of  ths  temple  of  Athena  Poliai,  adjoining  to  the
Erechtheinm,  at  Athens,  diiplaji  a  greater  profiuion
of  ornament,  hut  ii  equally  pure  in  ill  ontlinca.
It  ii  ahown  in  tfae  preceding  engraving.  ,

The  uie  of  the  Ionic  Order  preaented  one  im-
portnnt  difficulty.  In  the  aide  liew  of  the
capital,  the  vnlutee  did  not  ihow  their  beautiful
apiral  curl,  but  only  a  roll,  bound  together  hj
aatiagala ;  ao  that,  where  the  order  hod  to  be  car-
ried round  a  comer,  it  voa  ncccuaiy  that  the
capital  of  the  comer  column  thould  preteot  two
fecei.  Thii  waa  occompliihed  by  giving  the  outer
volute  an  incIinatioD  of  i5°  tn  the  anr&CH,  and
aculptuiing  the  ipiral  on  each  of  ita  udei,  ai  ahowD
in  the  following  engraving  j  in  which  the  upper

tide,  and  the  lower  figure  a  plan,  of  a  Goner  capital
of  the  lonie  Order.


telulei.  Their  mlutei  alio  are  uiually  ititF  and
meagre,  and  the  order,  u  a  whole,  remu-hablj  in-
'  riorto  the  Grecian  rismplra.  Fora  cnllecttoD  of
ecimena  of  the  order,  aee  the  plalei  of  Mauch.
III.  The  Cbrwftnn  Order  it  atill  more  itender
than  the  Ionic,  and  ia  eapeciallj  chamctenaed  bj*
a  beautiful  capital,  which  ia  aaid  to  have  bera
lE^geated  to  the  mind  of  the  cclcbmted  aculptor
Calllmachua  bj  the  light  of  a  baikct,  covered  Iij
- '"'"  ""'  ivernrown  by  the  Leavci  of  (ui  imigfAw,
t  had  accidentally  been  placed.  The
iber  of  the  capiul,  anawering  to  tho
aort  of  calfx  (_aiUaiiai),  fma


COLUMN  A.
vhifh  living  gvDcnilly  two  kiwi  of  acsnthoi
laTH,  lunnoDDted  at  csch  comer  by  A  lOuill
Tolotf,  the  rpacet  bctvven  the  Toliitei  being  oc-
maeA  bj  flowsi,  muki,  or  anbdqneB,  or  t^  ao-
aotrr  pur  of  Tolala  mtenHining  with  each  other.
In  the  cailicr  emunplei,  however,  tfaere  i*  fre-
qnoitl;  onl;  one  row  of  tomthiu  lesTea  ;  and  in
the  K)-!*!^  Towet  of  the  Winda  tba  Tolnira -


WBUtUV, I


1  1»


only of ,


V  at  bmgue-ihiqKd  learei.  In  aJI  the  eiamploa,
except  the  lut-mentioaed,  tbf  abftcUB,  inttead  of
being  tqnue,  u  in  th<  other  orders,  it  hollowed  at
ibe  edge*,  uid  the  middle  of  each  edge  ii  onii-
meolcd  with  m  flower.  The  onuunenti  of  the
lapiHl  mn  Hmetiinct  cut  in  bronie.  The  order
■em*  to  hBTe  been  inTealed  abont  the  time  of  the
Pelopuumiu  War;  but  ildidnot  coma  into  general
aae  tin  wane  time  ailermrdt.  The  eariiot  known
c^uapb  of  ilj  nie  thiuoghout  a  building  ia  in  the

m  ».c.  3U  (ice  Did.  t/ Bing.tit^  Liftierata),uiA
bimi  which  the  fbUowing  eDgrxiug  ii  taken.


COLUMNA.  327

the«  three ordoi  the  Romnn architoct*

added  two  othen,  which  hare,  howeva*,  no  claim

be  cooflidered  u  distinct  orderi. The  Tkmat

only  known  to  ui  by  the  deacriptioti  of  Vitm-

a>,  ai  no  ancient  example  of  it  Lai  been  pre-

■cn-ed. It  wBi  evidently  nothing  more  than  a

modification  of  the  Roman  Doric,  itiipped  of  itt

e  Roman  or  OompiMtt  Order  ii

a  Krt  of  mongrel  of  the  Corinthian  and  looie;

general character  being Corinthian,  except

that  the  apper  part  of  the  capital  ii  fbnned  of  an

loaic  capital with  angular  volutea : and  both

capital  and  eDtablature  are  overioaded  with  oma'

Dienti. The  engraving  li  from  the  triumphal  arch

of  Tituj,  which  ia  coniidered  the  beat  example.


^immM


For  further  detaila  mpecting  tho  ordon  and
their  anppoKd  hiitorr,  lee  the  3d  and  4(h  booka
of  Vimviua,  the  work  of  Maoch,  and  gtiegliti^
AnAJiiAigi*  der  BambauL

It  only  remain!  to  mention  lome  other  tuci  of
columng,  bendet  their  ordinaiy  employment  for
supporting  bnildingi  either  within  or  without

Colnmna  in  long  rowa  were  u»fd  to  convey
water  in  aqnedncla  (Cmtea,  op.  AUtea.  vi.  94);
and  ainj^e  pillin  were  fired  in  harbour*  for  moor-
ing ihipa.  <Orf.  nil.  466.)  Some  of  Ibeae  an
found  yet  atanding,

rate  pervonaor  eventa.  Among  theae,  aome  of  tho
moel  remarkable  wrt«  the  cahnaiM  nufrTtbie,
called  by  that  itnme  becauie  three  thip-beakt  pro-
ceeded from  each  aide  of  them,  and  deiigned  to
record  ancceaaful  engo^ementa  at  aea  (Virg.  Geary.
iii.  29  (  Serviua,  ad  toe,).  The  moat  impirtant
and  celebrated  of  thoae  which  yet  remain,  ii  ona
erected  in  honour  of  the  coniul  C.  Duilliaa,  on
occaiian  of  hii  victory  over  the  Carthaginian  fleet,
B.C  261  (aee  the  annexed  woodcut).  It  vaa
originally  placed  in  the  fbnun  (Plin.  H.  M  xixiv.
1 1  J,  and  ii  DOW  pRMerred  io  .Ihe.mufwo  of  the


COLUMNARItlM.


espitoL The  inicripli
that  ot  the Twch


It.  in  grcBt  pan
□nwieie  Latin,  aimilu  to
TahlM.  (Quinctil.  i.  7.)
vv  nen  iihiuo  wera  railed  to  ennoble  licton  at
the  Olympic  and  other  gamn,  or  to  commemorate
persons  wko  had  obtained  any  high  distlDction,  the
tribute  of  public  homage  waa  rendered  i^l  more
notorioui  and  deciuTe  by  fixing  their  Malnei  upon
pillan.  Thev  thai  appeared,  at  Plin;  obtena
(ff.  y.  izht.  13),  to  be  raiwd  abare  other
mortala.

But  colnimii  were  mticfa  more  cammonlj  nted
to  commeniarate  the  dead'  For  this  purpose  they
Taried  )Q  siE«,  from  the  plain  marble  fullar  bearing
a  simple  Greek  inscription  (Leon.  Tarent.  in  Br.
AaaL  I  239)  to  those  lofty  and  eUburnte  columns
which  arc  now  among  the  tnoit  wonderful  and  in-

colmnn  on  the  right  hand  in  the  last  woodcut
eihibits  that  which  the  senate  erected  to  the
honour  of  the  Emperor  Tiajan,  aad  crowned  with
his  colossal  statue  in  bronic  In  the  pedettul  is  a
door  which  leads  to  a  spiral  slaircasa  for  ascending
to  the  summit.  Light  is  admitted  to  this  staircase
through  numerous  apertures.  A  spiral  bas-relief
is  folded  round  the  pillar,  which  npiaents  the
emperor's  nctories  over  the  Daclaiu,  and  is  one
of  the  molt  laloable  aalhorities  for  archaeological
juquirici.  Including  tho  statue,  the  Lieight  of  this
monument,  in  which  the  ashes  of  tiie  emperor  were
deposited,  was  not  leu  than  130  feet.  A  similar
column,  erected  to  the  memory  of  the  Emperor
Marcos  Aurelins,  remains  at  Rome,  and  is  eem-
monly  known  by  the  ^pellation  of  the  Antonine
column.  This  sort  of  ojumn  was  called  coddU  or
colmm  codUit.  [CocHtia.]  After  the  death  of
Julius  Caeaar,  the  people  erected  to  his  memory  a
column  of  solid  marble,  20  feet  high,  in  the  forum,
with  tlia  tnscription  parinti  fatbia*.  (SueL
Jal  85.)  Columns  still  exist  at  Rome,  at  Con-
stantinople, and  in  Egypt,  which  were  erected  to
other  emperors.  IP.  S.]

COLUHNA'RIUM,  a  tax  tmpoied  m  the  time
of  Julini  Caesar  upon  the  pillan  that  supported  a
house.  (Cic  ad  All.  liiL  S.) It  was  probablj  im-


COMA.

posed  by  the  lez  sumtuiria  of  Julius  Caetar,  and
was  intended  to  check  the  passion  for  the  building
of  [olaces,  which  then  prcrailed  at  Rome.  Ths
OslianuH  wa«  a  similar  tax. [Ostiakiusi.J

The  m/iniiuniiiR  teiicd  by  Mctellns  Scipio  in
Syria  in  a  c.  49—48,  was  a  tax  of  a  similar  kind,
but  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  tax  lo  which
Cicero  altudea  in  the  posnge  qnoted  above.  Thii
colnmnarium  wai  simply  an  Ulega]  means  of  ex-
torting money  from  the  pravinciala.  (Caes.  B.  C
Hi  32.)

COLUS,  a  distaff [Fosus.]

COMA  (t^fii),  aoupii},  the  bur.  1.  Gmis.
In  the  earliest  times  the  Qneks  wore  their  hair
long,  and  thai  they  are  constantly  called  in  Homer
infr)Kaii^iTtt  'Ax<udI.  This  ancient  practice  was
preserved  bj  the  Spartans  for  many  cenluriei.
The  Spartan  boys  always  had  their  hair  cot  quite
short  (ir  XPV  Kilpoyris,  Plot  Lfc  16)  ;  but  u
soon  as  they  reached  the  age  of  puberty  (f^-
£oi>,  they  let  it  grow  long.  They  prided  them-
aelvcs  upon  their  hair,  calling  it  the  cheapest  of
ornaments  (rwr  KStrtiar  Haarew^eeroi)^  and  be-
fore going  to  battle  they  combed  and  dreased  it
with  especial  care,  in  which  act  Leonidas  and  hii
follonren  were  discovered  by  the  Persian  spy  be-

■ :" ■ iisoe.

Spartan  men  and
women  tied  their  hair  in  a  knot  over  the  crown  of
the  head  (comp.  Aristoph.  Lgt.  1316,  ■sfiu'  rofi-
afitiiiSU,  with  Hot.  Corfu.  iL  II,  n  eom-plMm
Lactnae  mart  comai  rdigala  nodun :  MUUer,  i>ar.
~  3.  §  1).  At  a  later  time  the  Spartans  abiui-
and  won  their  hair
erroneously  attribote
this  practice  to  an  earlier  period.  (Pans.  liL  14.
S  2 ;  Philostr.  ViL  ApolL  m.  IS.  p.  106,  ed.  Olcw. ;
Piut  Ale  23.)

The  cusUm  of  the  Athenians  was  differerL
They  WDTO  their  hair  tons  in  childhood,  and  cut  it
off  when  they  reached  the  age  of  puberty.  The
cutting  ofF  of  the  hair,  whi^  was  always  dona
when  a  boy  became  an  (^t|$a(,  was  a  lolenm  act,
attended  with  religions  ceremonies.  A  liba^n
was  first  offered  to  Heiculea,  which  was  called
oivio-T^IHa  or  elnoirrApia  (Hesych.  and  Phot.
>.  V.)  ;  and  the  hnir  after  being-  cut  off  was  dedi-
cated to  some  deity,  usually  a  river-god.  (Aeschyl.
C&oepk.  6  i  Paua.  i.  37.  §  2.)  It  was  a  vctjt
ancient  prac^ce  to  repair  to  Delphi  to  pertbim  tliia
ceremony,  and  Theseus  is  said  to  have  doae  so.
(Plot.  TTta.  6;  Theophr.  Ciar.  21.)  The  ephebi
aro  always  repreaented  sn  works  of  art  with  their
hair  qnite  short,  in  which  manner  it  was  also
worn  by  the  Athletac  (Lneian,  Dial  Mtr.  6).
But  when  the  Athenians  passed  into  tbe  ago  of
manhood,  they  agun  let  their  hair  grow.  In
ancient  times  at  Athens  the  hair  was  rolled  op
into  a  kind  of  knot  on  the  crown  of  the  head  ;  and
fastened  with  golden  clasp*  in  the  ibapo  of  graas-
hoppers.  This  fashion  of  wearing  the  hair,  which
was  called  ffpvf^Xor,  bad  gone  out  just  before  tho
time  of  Thncydides  (i.  6)  ;  and  what  succeeded  it
in  the  mate  tci  wc  do  not  know  for  certain.  The
Athenian  females  also  won  their  hair  in  the  same
fiishian,  which  was  in  their  case  called  KipvtiSot,
and  an  example  of  which  is  given  in  the  follav-
ing  figon  of  a  female  taken  from  Millingcn
{Fantsra  Awtiqm,  plate  tO).  The  word  Ot^ym-
bivru  is  osed  in  ■  suniiar  sense  by  Petraaius
(clIO).


On  n*e*,  honrer,  «s  DHHt  freqnnit];  iind  the
t*«di  of  fiaiuilca  coTcred  villi  a  kmd  of  baud  ar  n
aif  of  net-work.  Of  theM  coiffbm  one  wu  called
r^fwUni,  which  wM  >  braid  bond  acnu  the  fore-

l^olko,  adorned  vith  gold '.  to  thU  the  Tume  of
rrXrjyli  m>  alia  giTen,  ud  it  uppran  to  have
bcBi  mKh  tlie  umo  u  the  l^irv(  (Pollux,  tu.
""'j,iii.p.225jAi<prx).
lad  of  hewl-drcM  for
u  emBed  b;  tlie  ^Mnl  ntiaa  of  impi-
$Mms,  and  thii  ni  dirided  into  the  thi«e  iptatt
it  fufitaXai,  riiaut,  and  /ifrpa.  The  Kticp^
f«x*i,  in  hi  taitotia  lente,  wu  a  c&nl  or  coif  of
■M-woffc,  cmHpaiding  to  the  Latin  retiaiiMm. It

— 1 — -—^  (jj^  jj^y  1^  ^jjjj  ^  jjjj  night,  and

u  Djc  from  Iho  moat  ancient  times
•s  llw  prearnt  daj.  It  ti  mentioned  bj  Homer
flL  Tiii  US\  and  u  itill  worn  in  Ital;  and
Bfam.  Theaa  hair-oeu  wen  freqaentl;  nude  of
gold  thnada  (Jdt.  iL  96  ;  Petnn.  67},  •ometjniei


COMA.  329

of  lilk  (Salnua.  Earn,  ad  Solm.  p.  392),  or  the
Elean  hjuiu  (Paiu.  rii.  21.  %  7),  add  probably
of  other  miteijali,  which  are  not  meatioDed  1^
andent  wiiten.  The  perMHU  who  made  theta
neti  were  called  mnpu^ioXoirWifin  (PoUui,  riL
179),  Female*  with  thii  kind  of  head-dleu  fre-
qoenllj  occur  in  painlingi  found  at  Pompeii,  from
one  of  which  the  preceding  cot  [>  taken,  repTMent-
ing  a  woman  weanog  a  Coa  Veiti*.  [CoA
ViBTiB.] [Mum  Borfxm.  lol.  viiL  p.  5.)

The  o-iEiuai  and  the  Itifin  were,  on  the  con-
trary, made  of  doee  materioli.  The  rowcoi  covered
the  head  entirelj  like  a  lack  or  bag  ^  it  waa  made
of  varioni  material!,  nch  ai  lilk,  byHOa,  and
vooL  <Comp.  Aiinoph.  Titan.  257.)  Som»-
timet,  at  leait  among  (he  Romani,  a  Uadder  wai
lued  to  auwer  (he  nine  purpoae.  (Mart  vJiL  33.
19.)  The  iilrpa  wai  a  broad  band  of  cloth  of
different  coloon,  which  wu  woiind  roond  tha
hair,  and  wai  worn  in  varioni  waji.  It  waa
origloallj  an  Eailem  hfoddreu,  and  may,  there-
fore, be  compared  to  the  modem  turban.  It  ia
•ometimeg  tpokeu  of  ai  characteriatic  of  the  Phry-
giaD*.  (Hernd.  i.  195,  liL  62  ;  Virg.  Atm.  ix.
GI6,  617  ;  Jnv.  UL  66.)  It  wai,  however,  alto
worn  by  the  Grecki,  and  Pdygnotui  ii  nid  to
have  been  the  firat  who  pidnted  Greek  women
with  mitras  (Plin.  H.  Jf,  mv.  9.  a.  S5).  The
Roman  catamiica  or  oaivatwa  ii  laid  by  Serviui
(ai  1^.  JtH.  ix.  616)  to  have  been  the  lame  aa
the  mifrn,  bat  in  a  pasiage  in  the  Dignl  (34.
liL  2,  I.  S£.  §  10)  they  are  mentioned  ai  if  they
wen  diitinct  In  the  anneied  cut,  taken  from
Uillin(/>aa/an9di  Vam  A-iiqHf,  ml  H  fUS),
the  female  t -■'■■' *  '  ■

(hatn


ale  on  the  lisht  hai
the  left  a  /ilrpo.


With  reipect  to  the  colour  of  the  hair,  black
wai  the  moit  &eqnent,  but  blaidt  ({orM)  icdfLi))
vai  the  moit  prized,  la  Homer,  Achillea,  Ulya-
MI,  and  other  heroei  are  repiaenled  with  blonde
hair  (/L  i  197,  Od.  liiL  S99,  Ac)  At  a  later
time  it  aeemi  to  have  been  not  nnfrequent  to  dye
hur,  ao  ai  to  make  it  either  black  or  blonde,  and
thi*  waa  done  by  men  oi  well  ai  by  women,  eipe-
clally  when  the  hair  wai  growing  gray.  (Pollni,
ii  35  i  Aetian,  V.  H.  vil  20 ;  Athen.  liL  p.
5*2,d.jLucian,^iBor.  *0.)

RauiN.  Beiidei  the  generic  ama  we  alio
find  the  following  Horda  iignifying  the  hair :  oa-


t  in  the  A


in  the  old«t  itatuei  in  the  age  of
Vano  '(£)■  Re  AuL  iL  H.  §  10),  Bed  hence  the
RomajiB  of  the  Anguitiui  age  deiignatad  Ihfii
anceM4>n  nJout  (Or.  Fat.  iL  30)  and  oapUlali
<Jdt.  tI  ao).  But  ifter  the  intitidaetian  of  bus
ben  into  Italy  about  B.  c  300,  it  became  the
[OBctice  to  van  their  hair  ■horL  The  women  too
'It  dnsHd  their  hair  with  gnat  timplictty,
a  period  a  variety  of  different
neod-ilraMa  came  into  tashioD,  many  of  which  are
deKTibed  by  Ovid  (dt  Art.  Am.  iil  136,  Ac).
Sometiinei  thcK  hewl-dnsHa  were  laiied  to  a
great  height  by  lows  of  &l4a  curia  (Jav.  Sot.  yl.
£03).  The  dnaaing  of  the  hail  of  a  Roman  lady
al  tbii  period  waa  a  nuHt  important  affiui.  So
mnch  attention  did  the  Roman  ladiei  devote  to  it,
that  they  kept  ilsTc*  aapecially  for  thia  purpeee,
called  omatnca,  and  bad  them  inilmcted  by  a
master  in  the  art  (Or.  lU  Art.  An.  Hi.  339  ;  SneL
Claud.  40  ;  Dig.  3S.  tit.  1.  •.  6S).  M»t  of  the
Greek  head-dreues  mentioned  abore  were  alio
■n  by  the  Roman  ladin  ;  hut  the  mifnH  appear


o  hare  been  cc


i  66).


a  of  wealing  the  hiur
wai  allowing  it  to  M  down  in  trsNet  behind,  and
only  conlinmg  it  by  a  band  encircling  the  head
[ViTTi].  Another  bTonrite  plan  wai  filattinff  the
hair,  and  then  ^atening  it  behind  with  a  large
pin,  01  is  shown  in  the  figore  on  p.  14.

Blonde  hair  waa  aa  much  priud  by  the  Bomani
Bi  by  the  Greek*,  Bud  heneo  the  Roman  ladies
mod  a  kind  of  compoaition  or  wash  to  make  it  ap-
pear thia  colour  {tpuma  camiKla,  Mart  zIt.  26  ;
Plin.  //.  .V.  nyiiL  12. 1.  SI).

False  hair  or  wigl  (^rtlin),  irr)rlln),  galam)
wen  worn  both  by  Oreelu  and  Romani.  (See
a.  jr.  Jut.  n.  120.)  Among  both  people  likewise
in  ancient  tiroes  the  hair  waa  cut  close  in  mourn-
ing [PuNmJ  ;  and  among  both  the  alaies  bad
their  hair  cut  cloae  aa  a  mark  of  aerritnde.
(Ariatoph.  Ava,  9U  ;  Plant  AmpA.  I  1.  30G  ;
Becker,  CianJa,  ToL  iL  p.  SSO,  &c  i  Biittiget,
5lifiiM.ToLLp.lSe,&c)

COMES,  fint  signified  a  nei*  attendant  or
commnion,  distinguished  from  •nsw,  which  alwaya
implied  some  bond  of  unioa  between  the  persona
mentiooed.  Henca  anna  aareml  technical  teiuei
of  the  wold,  the  coniteclioo  of  which  may  be  eaaily

It  waa  applied  to  the  attendanta  on  ma^itiatfx,
in  which  lenie  it  is  used  by  Suetonina  (^tiJ.  Cbei.
42).  In  HoracB'a  time  (f^niL  L  8.  2)  it  waa  cna-
tomary  for  young  men  of  iamily  to  go  out  aa  ODn^iiieT'
naia  lo  govemon  of  provincea  and  commanden-in-
chiet^  imder  whole  eye  they  learnt  the  arts  of  war
and  peace.  Thia  aeema  to  haie  led  the  way  for
the  introdnction  of  the  comita  at  hotne,  the  nmin-
tenance  of  whom  waa,  iu  Horace  "a  opinion  (jU.  l  S.
l01),oneDflhemiaeriea  of  wealth.  Ilcnceapenon
in  the  suite  of  the  emperor  waa  termed  ama.  Aa
all  power  waa  supposed  to  flow  from  tbe  impenal
wilU  the  terra  was  cosily  transferred  to  the  Tarioua
offices  in  the  pelnce  and  in  the  province*  (amiia
paiatiai,  pnmiiiaala).  Alwnt  the  time  of  Con-
Btantine  it  betamo  a  regular  hononuy  title,  indud.
ing  inrioua  gisdes,  answering  Co  the  oomttef  onjtsu
prim,  Kvtadi,  Itrtii.  The  power  of  these  officers,
npccially  the  provincial,  laried  with  time  and  place;


presided  over  a  particular  di
Jted  authority,  aa  we  ibonld  term  them,  bdic-
laera  / othen were invested with  all  tbe
powers  of  the  ancient  proconsnli  and  praetors.

The  namea  of  the  following  tfficera  eiplun
themaelvee : — Conm  Orientia  (of  whom  theie  seem
to  have  been  two,  one  the  auperior  of  the  other),
cornea  Aegypti,  comea  Britanniae,  cornea  A&icae,
comes  rei  militaiia,  comea  pcnnum,  comea  atahuli,
comea  domeaticonim  equitmn,  comea  dibanarina,
come*  linteae  veiija  or  veidarii  (master  of  the
lobea).  In  tact  the  emperor  had  as  many  aaaila
aa  he  had  dnliea:  thna,  comea  conaialorii,  the  em-
peror^ privy-conndUor  ;  comti  largitionum  [siva-
tanuu,  an  officer  who  managed  the  emperor's  pri-
vate rerenue,  aa  the  comea  lai^tiouum  aacrarum
did  the  public  eicheqner.  The  latter  office  united
D  a  great  measure  tJie  fimcdons  of  the  aedile  and

rliom  the  govenmieut  granted  the  exdusin  privi-
lege of  trading  in  ailk  with  barbarians,  wen  nnder
his  control.  An  acconat,  however,  of  the  duties
and  fiuicticHis  of  the  comites  of  the  later  empire  ■

~xa  not  M  within  the  scope  of  the  presenc

oA.  [a  J.]

COMISSA'TIO  (from  K-pM,  Varr.  De  Lmg.
Lot,  vii.  S9,  ed.  MUller),  the  name  of  a  drinking
inmenC,  which  took  place  after  the  coena,
rhich,  however,  it  mnit  be  distingxiiabed.
Thus  Demetrius  says  to  his  guests,  after  Ibey  hard
taken  their  coena  in  his  own  house,  ^  tjuio  co-
ld &alrem  iuuis?"  (Liv.  d.  7) ;  and
juiaa  comea  to  Trimalchio's  house  after
taking  bis  cocoa  elsewhere,  it  is  said  that  "  Comis-
intravit "  (Petnn.  66).  It  appairs  to  huTe
the  custom  to  partake  of  aome  food  at  the
satio  (Suet  Titdl.  \3,\  but  uiually  only  aa  s
kind  of  relish  to  the  wine.

liaaado  waa  frequently  prolonged  to  a
late  hour  at  night  (SueL  Tit.  7) ;  whence  the  verb
leans  "to  revel-  (Her.  Carm.  iv.  1.  H),
and  the  substantive  amiitator  a  "nyellcr"  or
debauchee."  UenmCicero  (^c/.4U.  L  16)  calla
le  supporters  of  Catiline's  conspiracy  aimiuatom
wpmrtDitu,  (Becker,  Oa&a,  vol  ii.  p.  235.)
COHITIA.  Thia  word  iaibrmcd  from  CD,  exBt,
or  coa,  and  wv,  and  therefore  cons&'im  ia  a  plnec  of
meeting,  and  anuria  the  meeting  itael!^  or  tho
assembled  people.  In  the  Roman  constilnlion  tbo
comitia  were  the  ordinary  and  l^al  meetings  or
aaasmblies  of  the  people,  and  distinct  from  the
amaoKa  and  ooadiia ;  or,  aocording  to  the  atilL
mon  atrict  definition  of  Mesaala  (op.  Gatf.  liil  15),
comitia  were  those  assemblies  convened  by  a
magistrate  for  the  purpose  of  putting  any  subject  to
their  vote.  Thia  definition  does  not  indeed  com-
prehend al!  kinda  of  comitia,  since  m  the  comtMii
ealala  no  subjects  were  put  to  the  vote  of  the
people,  certain  things  bung  only  annonitced  to
them,  or  they  being  only  witnesses  to  certain
solemn  acts,  but  with  this  single  erception  the  de-
finition is  latisbctory.  The  Qreek  writers  on
Roman  aftaira  call  the  comitia  al  ifiXB^'^t  ^^
ifXaipiiTia,  iKKKifria  and  ifm^o^opla.

All  the  powers  of  goveranient  were  divided  at
Rome  betvieen  the  senate,  the  magiatnto,  and
the  people  in  their  assanbUea.  Properly  apeak-
ing,  the  people  alone  (the  populmt)  was  the  n«l
lovereign  by  whom  the  power  was  delegated  to
the  magistratea  and  the  senate ;  and  the  inuia-
trale*  in  particular  could  not  perform  any  pauHc


COMiriA.
■d,  imlfW  tk(7  von  wttboriKd  }>j  ibe  Kimte  and
peupfe. "Afl  BTaei^  peopla  or  popntui,  bomTer,


duB  (or  |ialRi}  mlj,  tha  plebi .__

fcrmiDR  US  put  of  tbs  popnlui,  but  being  withoaC
tlw  pale  of  tbe  itBla.  The  original  popoliu  wai
drruled  into  Hatj  cariat,  and  thn  aMembl^  of
Ikeae  cnriaa,  cr  Ibe  mmilia  ainaia,  tharrfore,  ven
Ibe  odIj  aaaemUj  in  wbicfa  tba  popufata  ma  i«-
pfmaled.  A  kiiui  at  anialganiatinn  of  tba  patri-
naaa  and  tba  [Jeba  altarwaitli  amored  in  tba
■OBitia  gf  tba  eetrtnriei,  iuititated  l^  kmg  Serriiu


m  popoliu  was  ap-
1  plabeiaiu  aocm-


it  Scrrioi  had
alia  mde  m  local  drrinoa  of  tba  wbola  RoBum  ter-
RMtT  iota  thir^  tribea,  wbicb  held  their  maetingi
m  aaai  iiililjiia  calltd  cokMs  b'titta,  wbicb,  in  tbe
le  of  tuaa,  acqnind  tbe  cbancter  of  natiDnii]
' "  -' -  tbe  ponle  tbua  aeeembled  were

d  bj  tbe  terra  popDlol, Wa
' '' Btan,  power,  and  busi-
it  omttla.

I.  CoMiTU  ciLATA, Then  and  the  comitia

ialm  mn  tha  adi  j  aaaamUiea  that  laat  and  wen

Rcanoiicd  at  Roiaa  (nrioDB  la  tba  time  of  Serrini

TnUiini,  and  inanmch  ai  dia  popnlu  of  which

"■  -^  .-•  —  .» u  jj  (jij  populr"  ~  ■'

:  atM  be  called
i  m  their  objccti,
pnisaa  inoding  at  than,  and  in  tbe  pUco  of
» I  ting.  Tba  eomilia  olata  wen  held  ondet  tha
firaieeej  of  tbe  esUqe  of  pontiSi  (QelliDi,  xr.
37),  wbo  tlao  cfmrened  them.  Thej  deriTed  theii
■me  calaia  (&«nn  ealare,  i.  e.  mean)  from  the  cii-
"- rWtiiTpf  tbat  tbe  attendanti  at  eerranl*  of  the
piBtiSi,  who  were  inbaUj  emplojed  in  calling
tbaa  -tngetlWT,  wen  temed  ealataret,  (Serr.  ad
Kry,  Oeoiy.  i.  368.)  Tbeir  ^lace  of  maelmg  wu
ftohably  ^wayi  on  the  Capitol  in  boat  at  tbe
nria  Cwabta,  which  aaemi  to  have  been  an  officb!
bailding  of  tba  pontifii,  and  to  bare  been  denintd
Jar  ibia  pnrpoae.  (PanL  Diac  p.  49,  ed.  MQtlet ;
Tana,  D*  Limg.  Lai.  v.  ].  p.  24.)  With  Kgiii
to  tbe  fanctiont  of  tbe  eomitia  calaln,  all  wmen
aia  agreed  tbat  the  people  aiaembled  acted  merelj
a  puaire  part,  tbat  tbej  mat  only  for  tha  porpoie
af  hcBring  what  wai  asDODneed,  and  of  being  wit
neac*  ta  the  aelioni  there  perfbmad.  One  of  tbi
tbinga  which  were  made  uown  to  the  people  ii
ihiii  coimttia,  wai  that  on  tbe  calenda  of  erer;
moaitb  it  wBi  proclaimed  on  what  day  of  tbe  new
toentb  tbe  nonea  &&,  and  perb^v  alao  tbe  idee
a*  well  ai  the  natnn  of  the  other  daji,  nunelj-,
whether  tbej-  were  fiaati  i>  ne&ati,  comitiBlea,
fafia^  Af-,  beeanae  all  tbaae  ihingi  wera  ~
in  tba  eailj  Cmei  to  tba  pontlfEi  exdniiTal;.
is.  46 ;  HKnb.  SaL  L  IB  ;  Serr.  ad  A.
CM  ;  Tain,  Dt  Lbiff.  LaL  n.  t.)  Another  finio-
tioi  af  tba  eadtia  eaiata  waa  tba  inanguration  of
tbe  B^iiiiw^  and  afcer  tbe  baroabinent  of  tbe  bingi,
aba  that  of  the  rei  BcrDimn.  (Oellina,  ^  c.)  A
t^ad  Iwiim  aa  which  wu  tnnaacted  in  them  wai
tha  lirtiiafi'.fiiiti'i,  or  the  making  of  a  will  Tha
III  jia  I  of  tbn  waa  pnbabl;  to  pRrenC,  after  the
death  of  tha  teatator,  laij  di^te  concerning  bit
win,  to  wliieh  the  whole  aMemblf  of  the  popalm
b^  beoi  a  WLtneai ;  and  it  ia  not  impTobabla  that,
aa  t^  art  of  writing  wa«  not  mfiicienlljr  knnwn  ia
tbaa  time^  it  wn  thought  a  matter  of  mipottauca


COMITIA.  Ml

bafa  the  whole  popniua  m  a  witneee  to  auch  an
act,  wbicb  perbapa  coniiited  in  an  oral  declaration.
Tlu  popnliia  tbna  did  not  vote  npon  tbe  nliditj
Of  innhdit;  of  a  will,  bnt  aolely  acted  tbe  pert  of
-  -^^eaa.  <0«lliua,  it.  27;  TheopbiL  il  10.)
abliea  for  tha  eipren  pnrpoae  of  making  tho
poDolna  witneai  to  a  vill  wen  ia  tbe  eailieat  timei
held  twic«  in  arerr  year  (Gaina,  iL  §  101)  ;  bnt
bia  niatoni  afterwvda  fell  into  deenctude^  (Oaiiui,
i.  9  103.)  A  fenrtb  baiinei*  tnnvcted  in  tha
onutia  lalatn  woe  tbe  dttatatro  anCTwam,  which
rat  in  all  probability  an  act  connected  with  tha
teatamenti  bctio,  that  ia,  a  aolenin  daclorBtion,  by
which  the  bail  was  enjoined  to  undertake  the  aacm
priTata  of  tha  teMatnc  along  with  the  reception  of
tail  property.  (Oallint,  r>.  37,  eomp.  n.  13.)  It
baa  alr^y  been  obaerved  that  original]  j  only  the
membera  of  the  curiae  formed  the  eomilia  calata,
to  that  they  were  tha  tame  aa  the  eomitia  cnriata,
in  thia  reipect ;  but  from  tbe  word)  of  Galliua
(ainiia  aaMn  aSa  «h  arida,  iJia  eattuHata),  i\
it  clear  that  after  the  time  of  Seirioa  Tnllhit,  there
mutt  have  been  two  kinda  of  eomitia  calata,  tho
one  convatied  aecoiding  to  curiae  by  a  lictor,  and
the  othw  according  to  eenturiea  by  a  comicen.  At
regarda  tho  bouneat  of  the  latter,  we  ban  no  in-
finniBtiDii  whatCTer,  though  it  it  not  impoaaibb!,
that  in  tbeni  all  announcementt  retpecting  tho
calendar  were  made  by  tha  pontifli,  at  thit  wu  ■
matter  of  intered  to  the  whole  people,  and  not  to
tbe  popnlu  alone  (Macroh.  and  Serr.  IL  tc)  ;
and  it  may  fnrtbei  be,  that  in  the  caW  centnriata
tba  teatamenta  of  plebeiana  were  laid  before  tho
aaeembled  peopla ',  at  in  tbe  calata  cnriata,  they

ire  laid  before  tha  aaaemfaled  curiea.

II,  CoMiTU  cnnuTA  (/nicXiriria  ^/parpueli
or  ^BTpiiHt^)  were  of  br  greater  importance  than
the  eomitia  calata,  inaamuch  u  tha  popoloa  here
was  not  preaeni  in  a  mere  paaaiia  capacin,  bat
had  to  decide  by  ita  votet  at  to  whaucr  a
mcsnire  brought  before  it  waa  to  be  adopted
or  rejected.  At  tbe  populua  waa  at  first  only
the  body  of  no]  cituena,  that  ia,  the  pain-
ciana,  or  tboee  contained  in  tbe  ntriae,  none  but
memben  of  tbe  curiae,  that  ia,  patriciana,  had  a
right  to  take  part  in  theae  aatemhliea.  It  ia  a
diaputcd  point,  ai  to  whether  the  dienta  of  tho
patriciana  had  a  right  to  rote  in  the  eomitia  cnrints  i
but  it  ia  highly  probable  that,  when  thay  appeared
in  them,  they  cinld  not  act  any  other  part  than
tbat  of  liatenen  and  ipcctalora.  They  were  con-
vened, in  tbe  kingly  period,  by  tbe  king  blrntel^
or  by  bit  tribimua  celemm,  and  in  tha  king'a  ab-
aence  by  the  praefectua  urbL  (Liv.  i.  £9.)  After
the  death  of  a  king  the  eomitia  wera  held  by  the
interrej.  In  the  republican  period,  the  preaident
waa  alwaya  one  of  tbe  high  patrician  magittratei,
Tiz.  a  conanl,  piaetor  or  dictatm,  (Cic.  IM  l.eg.
Agr.  iL  11,  13  ;  Lit.  ii.  38.)  They  were  called
together  by  lictort  or  beraldi.  (Oellina,  it.  27 ;
Dionya.  iL  7.)  The  rotes  were  given  "bj  curiae,
each  curia  baring  one  collectiTe  iota  ;  but  within
a  curia  each  dlizen  belonging  to  it  hod  on  inde-
pendent Tote,  and  tho  majority  of  the  memberg  of
a  cnrin  determined  the  vote  of  tha  whole  enria.
(Gea  f.  c  ;  LiT.  L  49  ;  Dionyt.  iL  14,  It.  SO,  81,
T.  6.)  Now  at  the  cnriae  were  thirty  in  number,
it  wu  impcatibte  to  obtain  a  tim^a  majority,
which  mutt  alwaya  bare  coniiated  of  16  curiae.
How  matten  were  decided  in  cate  of  IS  curine
voting  for  and  IS  agiunil  ■  meanue,  it  quite  un-


SS2  COMTTIA.

ceftiin ;  and  tbe  bet  that  tlis  awlcinTd  number
3D  mt  choacn  or  ntaiiied  fcr  the  utraobl;  out  be
■canntad  for  onlj-  by  tfas  bet  that  the  nuinbH
thne  and  il«  maHiplcfl  had  a  certain  la^Ted  irapart
in  all  niattcn  caanacted  with  tfaa  cgtutitatioii.
The  order  ia  vhich  the  eunae  TOted,  wai  not  £ied
1^  anj-  ngnlation,  but  it  appears  that  tha  one
•wbitb  gm  ita  Tote  iint,  and  wai  colled  priHC^iim,
wai  detennined  by  lot.  (Tar.  ii.  3S.)  Further
particolan  regarding  the  method  oF  noting,  how-

~ " Tha  preiidant  in  tha  comitia

-  lerton  that  bad  dmniked
J  period,  either  the  king
niiuHU,  «  tna  penon  tnat  acted  ■«  bii  Ticegecent,
and  the  meatiug  ni  alnyi  held  in  the  camiuam.
Ai  ngardi  the  powen  and  fiiDctioDfl  of  the
coiDitiB  niriata,  il  mint  fint  of  all  he  bome  in  mind,
that  in  the  early  timea  no  comitia,  of  whatoier
kbd  thej  were,  had  the  rigbt  to  ori^nalo  any
meotiue,  to  intiiidiice  amendmenti,  or  to  ditcou
the  merit*  and  dementi  of  any  inhject  that  waa
brought  hefcBv  them.  All  they  could  do  vu  to
accept  or  reject  any  meaanre  which  waa  brooght
befots  them,  so  that  all  propoaala  were  in  bet  no-


eier,  an  not  luiowo.  '
euriats  waj  alvaji  tb
Ihcm,  that  ii,  in  the  kinglj


thing  but  rogationee  (jnpidut  ngatiir),  which  the
people  paaeed  by  the  fiirinnla  aii  rogai,  or  rejected
by  the  formula  latiqiio.  Whaterer  waa  thtu  de-
creed became  lav  for  the  king  and  Moete  no  leu
than  fiv  the  people.  The  main  pointi  npoo  which
(he  popnlui  had  to  decide,  were  the  election  of  the
ma([utratei,  inclading  the  king  hiniieU^  the  pul-
ing of  lawi,  peace  and  war,  the  capital  puniihmt


of  Rinnan  dtiieni  (Dionyi.  il  14,


■.  20,b


41),


and,  loitly,  upon  certain  afiairt  of  the  eoHae  and
f^tra.  In  the  kingly  period,  the  only  magiitrala
in  whou  per>at  all  the  powen  of  the  republican
olEccn  were  concentnled,  wai  the  king  hiniKiC
All  tha  other  offlceri  were  appointed  hy  him,  with
the  exception  of  the  quaeitorca,  who  were  elected
by  the  people  {Ulpian,  Ci^.  ii.  13;  but  comp.  Tac
Aia.  zi.  3-2;  QuiBsron).  With  re^d  to  the
election  of  the  king,  the  aitembly,  at  m  all  other
malten,  wu  limited  to  the  peruni  propCKed  by
the  Hnate  throngh  the  pieiident  in  the  aatetnbly,
that  ii,  when  the  lenate  had  paaied  a  decree  re-
apecUng  the  dectioo,  the  interregei  determined
upon  the  caodidalea,  bum  among  whom  he  waa  to
be  choacn,  and  then  pnqwied  them  to  the  euiiae.
(Dionyi.  iir.  3i,  40,  80,  ii.  £6,  60,  uL  36  ;  Lit.  L
n  iCis.  Oe  Ht  P<JJ.  ii.  13  j  comp.  Intibrbx
and  Rsx.)  The  prieitly  officen,  inch  aa  the  Cn-
rionei,  Fbuninei  Curialea,  were  likewiio  either
elected  by  the  curiae,  or  at  leait  inangnraCed  by
them  (Dionyi.  iL  32  ;  GelL  L  c),  until  in  later
timn,  B.  c  104,  the  Domltian  law  tianifurred  the
whole  appointment  of  the  prieatly  coll^ea  to  the
comitia  of  the  tribea.  Lenilaiire  propoaala  wen
laid  before  the  curiae  by  the  lung  or  the  aenate,
and  they  might  either  paii  them  u  Uwt  or  reject
thenj.  Such  Inwi  belonging  to  the  kingly  period
were  tha  iO' called  ^apBi  rojnai;  their  numbB- cannot
have  been  great,  ai  euitom  and  religion  had  hal-
lowed and  firmly  eetabliihed  the  principal  rule*  of
conduct  without  there  being  an;  necexity  lor
fonnul  legal  eooctmenti.  The  right  of  finally  de-
ciding upon  the  life  of  Roman  citiieni  (Judiaa  dt
tapUi  aint  Somami)  it  laid  (o  have  been  giren  to
the  popdni  by  king  Tallni  Hoitiliua  (Lir.  L  26,
TiiL  S3[  DionyL  iii.  22)  ;  and  pretioui  to  the  eon-
ilitntton  of  Seniui  Tullini  thu  priTJInge  wu  of
CMtTM  confined  to  the  patticiani,  for  whom  il  wu


COMITIA.
nothing  else  but  the  right  of  ag^iealiiig  from  ibe-
•entenee  of  the  king  or  judge  to  the  aiaembty  of
their  peeri.  When  Valeiiui  Puhiicola  Rnewed
thi>  law,  it  mnat  hate  been  extended  to  the  ple-
beian! al».  The  fourth  right  of  the  avemhly  t^
the  populua  waa  that  of  deciding  upon  war  aiul
peace,  but  thia  dediion  again  could  only  be  made
when  it  waa  prqioied  by  the  king.  With  rqiaid
to  the  dechintion  of  wu  there  ia  no  doubt  (Lit.
i.  32 ;  Gellini,  iri,  4  ;  Dionyi.  TiiL  91,  ii.  69)  j
but  then  il  DO  inatance  on  record  of  the  populaa
enr  having  had  any  thing  to  do  with  the  concfai-
■ion  of  treatiea  of  peace  ;  no  Usee  of  it  occuri  till
long  after  the  eatabliihnent  of  the  r^mblic,  ao  that
we  ma^  birly  preanme  that  in  early  timea  tha
concluiion  of  pcaee  wu  left  to  the  king^  (or  tha
coniuli)  and  the  aeoate,  and  that  IHcoyaaa,  aa  m
many  other  instancea,  tnuufetred  a  later  enatom  to
the  rariy  timea.  Beaidea  theie  great  fimetiaiiB  the
curiae  had  unqueationably  many  othera  nlating  to
their  own  internal  admiuUtration ;  and  among
them  ws  ma^  mention,  that  no  new  membera
timid  be  aduutted  into  a  curia,  etlher  by  the  n^-
oplatio  of  itrangen  or  fay  the  adlectio  of  plebeian*,
without  the  conaent  of  the  aiaembly  of  the  cDtiea  ;
and  that  no  arrogatio  could  take  place  without  the
concuntnce  of  the  aiaembled  curiae  under  the  pr»-
■iden^  of  the  pontiSi.  The  eoDient  of  the  curia*
in  luch  caaei  ii  eipreaaed  by  the  term  Iw  curiofa.
(Oellioi,  T.  19  !  Tac  HiH.  i  15.)  It  mnit  further
be  remarked,  that  when  a  magiitiate  (luch  ai  the
king)  pmpoaed  to  the  auembly  had  been  elected,
the  popnlua  held  a  aecond  meeting,  in  which  bs
waa  formally  inducted  in  hia  new  offiee.  Thia
rormality  waa  called  2w  atriata  d»  imptrio,  where-
by the  magintnte  rece[*ed  hia  injierun,  together
with  the  right  of  holding  the  comitia.  (Lir.  t,  52  ;
Dion  Cau.  mil.  19,  ilL  43  ;  Cic  Dt  £9.  Agr.
il  12.)  Ilwaanot  tilt  am^trate  had  thui  been
lolemnly  inilalled,  that  he  wai  a  mo^ulniliu  op-
tima legt  or  optimjtrty  that  ia,  in  the  full  poaie*-
lion  of  all  the  lighta  and  privilege!  of  hii  office.

Down  W  tha  tune  of  Seniua  TuUiui,  the  comitia
curiata  wore  the  only  popular  auembliei  of  Rome,
and  remained  of  coune  in  the  imdiminiibed  po*-
■eaiion  of  the  lighti  above  deacnbed  ;  but  the  con-
ititution  of  that  king  tomght  about  a  great  duutge,
by  hii  tnnafeiring  the  piocipal  cighta  which  had
hitherto  been  enjoyed  by  the  curiae  to  thk  new
mitional  ai»?mb]y  or  the  comitia  csnturiaa.  The
power  of  electing  the  magiatrates,  the  deciiion
upon  war,  the  pasiing  of  laws  and  joriadiction  in
caaea  of  appeal  to  tha  body  of  the  Roman  people,
were  thua  traniferred  to  the  comitia  of  the  cen-
turie*.  But  while  the  patFiciani  were  obliged  to
■hue  their  right*  with  the  pleheiani,  they  nicrred
br  themaelrei  the  rery  important  right  of  MM^
lioning  at  rwcting  any  meaiure  which  had  been
paucd  by  the  eentonea.  Ereo  independent  of
their  right  jinally  to  decide  open  theae  quealioni,
they  leem,  for  a  time  at  leait,  to  hare  eieiciied  m
coniiderabte  power  in  aerenl  denartmenli  of  the
goremment :  thin,  the  abolitioi  a  loyally
eitabliihment  of  the  republic
decreed  by  the  curiae  (Dionyi.  iv.  75,  84) ;  id
like  manner  the;  decided  upon  the  pn^er^  of  the
lait  king  (Dionya.  t,  S),  and  upon  the  rewardi  to
be  giren  to  thote  who  had  given  information  rv-
■pecting  the  conipincy  (t.  G7).  The  lanction  of
decree!  paued  by  the  cennriea  ia  often  eipreued
by  pofrsa  okcAjth,^!*!^,  and  down  to  the  timeof  tlie


a  loyalty  and  the


COMITIA.
PdbGlBB  law  BO  dcoM  of  th*  cntsriM  ar  tribe*
onld  humi  law  wilhont  tbi*  lunioii.  Il  dihI
hatdlj  be  muAed  tliat  tbe  nuiu,  u  long  u  ihej
oiMed,  Rtlmed  the  eiouM  of  mcfa  lighti  ai  >f-
fnted  llu  wdbn  of  their  own  COTpantiona  and
tbe  religiou  rilei  eauKcted  widi  than.  We  nb-
jsin  ■  lift  if  tbe  powo*  and  fbDctioD*  wUeh  the
cniiBe  sntbnwd  to  excroM  down  to  the  end  of
tbe  npablit

1.  iksj  confiCTtd  tbo  imperinn  and  tbe  light
of  uking  the  ■mpicea  npou  magutiatei  after  tbeir
cleetioa  ;  tbii  wu  dona  bj  the  Itr  imriaia  dt  «»-
jurie.  Thi*  t^bt  boweter  muM,  in  tbe  eonne  of
tine,  hsTs  txanie  a  men  Toatter  of  tana,  and
in  Hie  time  of  Ckiero  {ad  A


crtr


!«.  IT.  IS,  ad  /fan.

t  ibnn  the  |dan  of
inr  three  aognn  to  dedsre  (l^t  they
Bteanit  in  tbe  comitia  of  the  curiae,  at
imperinin  bad  been  conJeired,  altbatiffh
in  lealit;  nu  mch  comitia  had  bJcen  place  at  uL
Tbi*  But  wananta  tbe  eondnaiDn  that  at  that
tine  few  penooi,  if  any,  noticed  iocb  onnitia  or
tke  gnating  of  tbe  imptriom  in  them.  {Comp.
Cie.  mi  Fam.  i.9,ad<i.  Ftatr.  in.  2.)  2.  The
itBagaratioa  of  oerMin  [irieati,  inch  —  the  Fla-
mines  and  tbe  Bci  Socnstun,  though  thii  tuA
II  In  ■  n  in  Iboee  eomilia  of  the  cnriae,  wbicb  were
aiiei  slaK.  Tbe  cario  maxiuioe  wai  in  all  |m>-
baliiitr  eonaeaated,  if  not  elected,  in  the  conitia
CBiiati.  (Lir.  xxwu.  8.)  S.  The  inlenial  afitin
af  tbe  otriae  thimidTei  md  of  the  bmiliei  eoa-
■ectad  with  than ;  hot  tnott  of  them  cane  onlj
Mmb  theeomitHicBbla.  (Seeabore.)  Tbeital
cBBitia  coiiata  bnan  to  Iw  a  mere  fannatitr  ai
eoriy  aalbetiaeafthB  Panic  wan,  ud  tbe  ancient
difiwa  into  eniiBe,  a*  it  giadnallj  lott  iti  im-
paniact,  feu  into  oblinon :  tbe  pbee  of  the  palii-
daaa  waa  filled  bf  tbe  nobilea  or  aptimatea,  and
the  B^itia  of  ttu)  fonaer  beame  a  mere  empty
Aow  (Cic  Da  Li^.  Agr.  ii.  13),  and,  innead  of
tbe  tbiilr  curiae  themaelTe*  giring  thoT  rotet,  the
d  by  thinr  lieton. Tbe


III. COHITU CKHTinUTJt ft ^JnC"" U-

lA^via). Tbe  object  of  tbe  le^iiation  of  3er-
*iaB  Tnllmi  waa  to  nnite  tbe  difierent  elamentB


COUITIA.  338

CI  political  bodj,  in  which  power  and  in-
ice  wen  to  be  ddennined  by  property  and
age.  For  thia  pDipoae,  ha  diridod,  in  hit  couna,
tbe  whole  body  of  Roman  citixene  into  ux  pr^
perly  daeaea,  and  193  centuiiae  (A^xaO  "f  TOtaa,
froDi  which  tbe  aaiembliea  in  which  iiie  people
gare  tbeic  Tole*  wore  called  comitia  centuriala.
[CiNsus.]  By  thii  meaoi,  Servini  brought  about
an  amalgamation  of  timocruy  and  aiietooracy ;  and
tbe  Kioc  dtiiena,  tbongh  they  met  their  veallhieT
bieuiTen  cm  a  fining  of  eqnality,  yet  were  nn-
abte  to  eieniie  any  gieal  indoeoce  upon  publio
affiura,  fei  tbe  wealthier  danei  Toled  iint,  and  if
they  agreed  amcog  themaeliea,  they  farmed  a  majo-
rity bdlon  the  poorer  claaie*  would  bo  oiled  npon
to  Tote  at  all.  In  order  to  render  tbeae  genenl
obaerfationa  mon  intelligible,  it  je  neceiaaiy  to
give  aoma  aamml  of  the  cennu  which  Sertiai  in-
■litntod,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  the  lOlea
wero  diitribnied  among  the  aeienl  diTiaioni  of  (be
people.  The  whole  people  waa  conceired  aa  an
army  (aaareitu,  or,  acording  to  tbe  mon  ancient
term,  oJotnt),  and  wat  iberelore  dirided  inlo  two
parta :  the  caTalry  (tt/mtit),  and  infiutry  {jitdita),
though  it  ia  not  by  a


that  the  people  i


smWed  ii


mi). The  in-


body  of  people,  wbote  property  did  a
to  tbe  cenana  of  the  fifth  tkM,  at  a  aiith.  The
cUm  to  which  a  citiien  belonged,  determined  the
tnhtittim,  or  war  tax,  he  had  to  pay,  H  well  aa  the
kind  of  aerrice  be  had  to  perform  in  tbe  army  and
the  armour  in  which  he  had  to  aene.  But  for  tbe
pnrpote  of  Toting  in  the  comitia,  eaeb  claaa  waa
tubdivided  into  a  nunber  of  centuriei  (ontenoe,
pmbkbly  becauae  each  waa  conceived  to  contain
1 00  men,  though  tiio  centutiea  may  bare  greatly
diffend  in  the  nnmber  of  men  they  contained),
one  half  of  which  coniiiled  of  the  aaawra^  and  the
other  of  the  Jtmiona.  Each  century,  ftirther,  waa
counted  aa  one  Tote,  to  that  a  daaa  had  at  many
Totee  at  it  contained  centmiea  In  like  manner,
the  cquitea  were  dirided  into  a  nnmber  of  centnrie*
or  TDtea.  The  two  prindpel  aulhoritiea  on  theae
aubdiTiaiona  an,  LiTy  (L  «3),  and  Dionyaioa  (iT.
1 6,  Ae^  TiL  £9),  and  the  annexed  table  will  ahow
the  centnt  aa  well  aa  the  nnmber  of  eenturiea  or
Totei  aaaigned  to  each  claaa,and  the  order  In  which
IhoyTOtei


IL  CLAMie. Cenana:  7fi  minae.


III.  CLuaaie. Centui:  10


IT.  CLAasiB. Ceutna


hhram(one  TOting  with  tbe  aenioiet
ith  tbe  Juniorea).


ae  jniuorum.
Ete  eomicinnm  and  tnbidnmn  (one  voting
with  tbe  teniont,  and  tbe  other  with  tbe


AccDTdisg  Co  both  Dionyniu  and  Litj,  the  eqnita
Toled  in  eigbtMn  oennriet  befon  the  Knioni  of
the  Gnt  lira  i  (nd  hmce,  there  wen  iccoidiiig  to
Liiy,  allagethei  194,  md,  eccordii^  to  Dionyeiua,

193  oeDturiee  or  Tolee. Liij*!  erm  nomber  of

1 94  ceTxtoiie*  vtwld  bBva  rendered  it  iiopOBUble  to
obtain  an  abnlole  majocil;  in  the  oomitiK  ;  and  it
hu  been  (Mamed,  that  he  made  k  mialaka  in  the
three  oentnriae  aocemonim,  canudmiin,  tnbieiDiun,
which  he  adda  to  the  Gflh  eliH.  Dionjriua  Kem<
to  hBTe  npnaenled  the  matter  in  ita  right  light,
and  ii  alio  bom  oat  b;  Cioero  {Di  St  PaU.  iL
22),  who  deaciibea  ninety-eix  ai  the  mioarit;  ;  bat
in  other  raapectt,  Ciufo  ii  iirecondleable,  both
with  Llsy  and  Dionyaiiu ;  a  difficulty  which  will
probably  ccTer  be  eolTed  la^bctoiily,  u  the  text
>*  comipt.  The  other  diiaepanciei  belweoD  Livy
and  Dionyiini  an  not  of  great  importance.  They
cenAiit  in  the  placea  auignod  to  the  two  centuriae
fabnun,  the  two  of  tho  camiune*  and  tabicinee,
and  ic  the  cennu  of  the  fifth  claM.  With  ngaid
to  ths  iut  point,  Dionyiiui  i)  at  any  nie  man
coniiiteat  in  hii  gradatlciD,  and  in  eo  &r  deMrvM  to
bo  prefenedto  Liiy.  Ai  for  the  placea  aeilgnedto
the  jbor  centnrie*,  it  u  impoaaible  to  detcnniae
whether  Lity  or  Diimyiiiu  ii  right ;  and  we  can
only  Bay,  that  Cicero  agrea  with  neither  of  them,
auigning,  ai  hs  does,  only  one  centuiy  of  the  fiibri
tignarii  lo  the  Grit  due.

In  thia  manner  all  Rinnan  d6amt,  whether
pntriciana  or  plebeiazu,  who  had  property  to  a  cer-
tain amomit,  were  piirileged  to  lake  [an  and  Tate
in  the  centoiiata  corailia,  and  none  wen  eicinded
except  ilaiei,  peregnnt,  women  and  the  aeniii
The  jnniom  were  all  men  from  the  age  of  icTen-
teea  to  that  of  (orty-jix,  and  the  leniaiea,  a]]  men
from  (ho  age  of  foriy-gii  upwnrdi.  The  mder  of
toting  waa  arranged  in  >uch  a  manner,  that  if  the
cighteoi  cenCuriea  of  the  eqnilei  and  tha  eighty
centuriea  of  the  fini  clau  were  agreed  apon  a
meature,  the  queilion  wai  decided  at  once,  there
being  no  need  for  calling  upcm  the  other  clauea  to
TOte.  Hence,  although  all  Roman  citiiena  ap-
peared in  tbsH  cnmilta  on  a  footing  of  equality,
yel  by  bt  the  greater  power  wm  thrown  into  the
handi  of  the  wealthy.

Ai  Rgardi  the  function*  of  the  comida  eeiitaiiata,
it  mnat  be  obaerred  in  general,  that  all  the  buiineu
which  had  bcfon  belonged  to  the  comi^  coriata,
wu  traniferred  by  Sorviui  to  the  comitia  coita-
riola,  (hat  ii,  they  rtceired  the  right  of  electing
the  Ugher  magiitratex,  of  making  lawa  ai>d  of  de-
ciding upon  war,  and  afterwarda  alio  of  oondnding
peace  with  foreign  nationi.

(a.)  Tie  eleetiam  of  magutrale$,  Afiet  the  pre-
liding  magiitiate  had  cao«ulted  with  the  eenate
about  the  candidalei  who  had  offered  themeelyee,
ho  put  them  to  the  Tote.  The  magittratei  that
were  elected  by  tha  canturiea  are  tha  cangali

LiT.  L  60,  z.  II),  the  pseton  (hence,  eomilia
Braelona,  Uv.  til  1,  x.22),  the  military  tribunes
with  ccmaular  power  (Liv.  r.  53),  the  ceneon  (Lir.


Ice

TiL  22,  iL  *i),  and  the  decemviri.  (Li».  iu.  33, 35.)
Then  an  alio  initonee*  of  pnconiDla  bein^  elected
by  the  centuriea,  but  thit  happened  only  ui  extn^
ordinary  caML (Liv.  Jiriii.  30,  hzjt.  IB.)

(b.)  L^iilatiam.  The  iegiilatin  power  of  the
centoriei  at  firat  eonained  m  their  paiaing  («  n-
jecting  a  meatnrc  which  was  broiuht  bef«e  then
by  tha  preuding  magiatnta  in  the  &nD  of  a  •enatua
coDultnm,  BO  uiat  the  aaaemblj  had  no  ligfat  of
originating  any  l^islatiTO  measure,  hot  Toted  only
upon  (uch  as  wne  brougbt  before  Cham  as  rmIu-
tiooi  of  the  ienste.  When  a  proposal  was  passed
by  tha  centuries  it  became  Uw  (^).  The  firrt
Uw  passed  by  tha  centuries  of  which  we  hare  any
record,  was  me  iei  Valeria  de  pnnocationa  (Cio.
DiJtePiJi.  iLSl),  and  the  lawi  of  the  twelTa
tables  were  sanctiimed  by  the  csitnriei.

(c)  7^  ^coairM  Hpoii  mr,  to  the  gronnd  of  s
seUBtuB  coniulCnm,  likewite  belonged  to  the  ceo'
tnriei  and  is  often  toentioncd.  It  ii  genraally
beliered  that  they  had  also  to  decide  npmthe  ton-
dudon  of  peace  and  treaCiea,  bnt  iC  has  been  aaCiB-
fcctorfly  proted  byHuhino  (Peier  JtiakSbHrtrnKT^,
p.  259,  &C.)  that  in  the  early  part  of  the  repubhc,
and  perhaps  down  to  the  pease  of  Candinni,  thb
was  not  the  easa,  but  that  peace  wu  coocluded  by


(d.)  za*  luglieit  jKUaal  poutr.  The  oomita
cenlonata  were  in  the  Gnt  place  the  highest  eoort
of  appeal  (Dion  Cass.  xaix.  27.  Ac  j  oomp.  Ar~
FSLLATio),  and  in  the  second,  they  had  la  try  oU
offences  committed  against  the  alata ;  hence,  all
cases  of  pgrduttUut  and  ni^ettat,  and  no  cose  in-
Toliing  the  life  of  a  Roman  eitlien  mold  be  do-
dded  by  any  other  court  (Cic.  p.  SetL  SO,  34.
/)i  fls  PkU.  ii,  36,  Dtl^.iii.*i  Polyb.  li.  4, 14.)
This  last  right  was  revived  or  tntnduced  t^  the
Valerian  U«  (  Plot  PkU.  1 1),  and  Spurins  Cosiius
was  condemned  by  the  comitia  of  the  coitariea.
There  is  no  muon  for  beliering  that  the  laws  of
the  IwelTo  tables  increased  tha  pows  of  the  ceit-
turies  in  this  respect ;  and  Serviu  Tullios  seema,
in  consisleniy  with  hi*  principle*,  lo  hare  been
obliged  to  constitute  hi*  national  Huembly  at  tha
same  time  as  the  high  court  of  Janice.

All  the  powers  which  we  haTD  here  mentiaoed  aa
possessed  b^  tha  centurie^  bad  to  be  anctiined,
wbenexarcjsed,bythecQnea,and  thronghthisaoiv-
tiiHi  alone  thay  became  valid  and  blndmg.  The  elec-
tion of  a  magislrala,  or  the  passing  of  alaw,  ihoogli
it  was  made  on  the  groond  of  a  senatos  ccosnllna,
yet  required  the  sanction  of  the  cnrica.  Bnt,  in
the  course  of  time,  the  assembly  shook  off  ^i*
paws'  of  the  curiae,  which  became  merely  a  (ar-
maUty,  and,  in  the  end,  tha  cnrias  wen  obliged  to  '
give  their  sanction  beforehand  to  whatever  thg
oentnrics  mig^t  detemuue.  This  was  effected  by
the  Publilian  biw,  in  b.0.  337.  (Liv.  vUL  12.)  Ai
thus  the  centmies  giadaally  beeanu  poiretfb]
1.  ..  j..._ with  the  sanction  of  the  c«  '


1  they  also  Bcqiured  Ibe  right  of  discna^iu  i

"""' 1  whie^  0(9  aut  ^ingKt


deciding  upon  m


ba-


i>  origimlly  wen  dM  allomd  to  elect  mj
uuept  tkoM  vbo  mm  pnnnMd  by  the  pre-
t.  tia  faiudf  «■«  antuc^  piidrd  by  the
of  the  Moata  i  bnl  in  Che  00
poapta  tmettti  thoir  rigbt  w  bi
pnudort  to  pnpoie  ooy  cmndidate  that
t  htfudf,  vithoot  tho  iHVTiolu  BDctioii  of  the
■tc  Thii  ehangn  took  placa  about  s.  c  483.
IfsuUtira  meoHun  ■  Kiatiu  CDiualttim  WM


»  to  oblwB
that  might


bmght  bofixe  the  paopls  by  the  cdtudI  at  the
MBitiT  vbo  bid  onginUol  the  loaniiE,  after
H  bad  pRTioDily  baeii  exhibited  in  pablk  for
wmtMta  dayi,  to  gin  the  people  an  a[^iortDiiity
of  W'^'-g  BcqoBinted  with  the  natnn  of  the  pro-
pwd  hw.  (Appian,  de  Bill.  Cn>.L&9;  Cie.  p.
SeM.  £1,  •■  PuoL  IS.)  Whsther  the  eonutia
wquiied  a  isialiii  -"-"I'"'"  in  caaca  when  they
acted  aa  the  lapceme  conit  of  jmtice,  u  nncertain,
at  Icaat  we  hare  do  example  of  a  Knatiii  eonialtnin
is  lacb  a  caae  ra  record.

The  oomitia  eentnriata  could  be  held  ontj  on
Jut  aaolUn  «  /aM,  aa  which  U  wat  lawfiU  to
iiainail  bosncai  with  people,  and  the  mnnbei  of
and  dap  ia  ettrj  year  wat  about  190  (Vbitd,
IH  L.  L.  Ti.  29  ;  Feat.  *.  e.  Oonitiaia  diet;
lUenb.  &L  L  IE)  ;  bat  on  dia  ae/hiti  (that  ii,
^mfa^firiaSi  eomp.  Diu),  and,  at  UrM,  alw)
OB  (be  Tw^diBf,  DO  cnmitia  could  be  held,  until
in  B.  c  297  the  HoitHuian  lav  ardwned  that
the  Bimdiiiae  ahoold  be  rqarded  ai  diia  &ati
(Macnfa.  Sai.  L  16),  lO  that  heacelbnh  comitia
DUfiht  be  bdd  oo  the  Dundinet,  thoDgh  il  waa  dona
nidy.  (.Qte.adAtLi.\K:)  Comitia  ibi  the pnr-
pBae  tf  paMng  btwi  conld  not  eren  be  held  ou  all
dieafiwcL  (ac^viiroo.ClHu.19.)  Thecomitia
ftr  cfartiaBe  UA  |dBca  eveiy  year  at  a  certain
period,  tbongh  h  d^aded  Dpon  the  tenate  and  the
eoaanla,  aa  ts  whetber  ibey  viibed  the  electioni  to
take  place  tailiei  or  later  than  nnutL  (Cie.  p.  JUiL
9,  1^  Fam.  yia.l.p.  jtfmt  2A.)

The  plus  where  the  (cuturis  met,  wiis  the
Caaqnu  Hanin*  (Cie.  ad  Q.  FtoL  iL  2  ;  Dioun.
It.  84,  TiL  £9),  which  contained  (be  aepta  fat  the
rotoa,  a  labernaenlam  for  the  preaident,  and  the
TJUa  pnbliis  lor  the  angnn.  (Cie.  p.  Bab.  Ptrd.
4  t  OcUioi,  xiT.  7  :  Varn,  Dt  Lag.  Lai.  li.  87.)
The  {naidcDt  at  the  comitia  wu  the  lame  m^i*-
tnue  who  ctmoked  them,  and  thia  light  wai  a
pririlegc  of  the  connli,  and,  in  their  absence,  of
tbe  (aaetai.  (Cie  ad  Fam.  z.  12.)  An  inlelTel
and  dictator  alao,  or  hia  repnaentatiTe,  the  mogiater
eqnitum,  misht  likewiie  codtcdb  and  preeide  at  the

M. 'iT.  ^:t  oa  —T.  3;  Cie.  !><£.¥.  ill.)

"!« ■

a  £>T  the

ceoaak  (Lit.  L  GO)  i  and  the  coiion  aiKtmbled
tbe  people  only  on  acconnt  of  the  ccnm  and  the
iHtmB.  (Vam,  De  L.  L.  n.  B6.)  In  ouei
a  bill  tbe  tm  iiililj  mi  comtitated  aa  a  court  of
•jmJBB,  inftnor  masiiltatea,  after  haring  obtained
tbe  penniiaiai  of  thia  orHunl^  might  likewiie  pro-
aide.  (LiT.  nti  3.)  One  of  the  main  dutiea  de-
ntrmg  opon  the  aeaidoit,  and  which  he  had  to
petfacBi  bcfin  btuding  the  comitia,  wat  Co  connilt
the  aiufiua.  (Jaapaorn.)  For  thia  pwpoaa,  the
magiatrale  aceempanifd  bjr  ■■■  "f^  "Bot  out  of
ibcdqroariy  m  t^  tMniiic>ia  eheae  a  taber-


COMITIA.

ir  lemplnm. There  the  angut  bt


hia  opiaion  either  that  the
comitia  might  be  held,  or  that  they  moit  be  deferred
dll  another  day.  Thia  dedantioa  waa  giren  ti
.1.  i_^__.. _..._.. 1  tJiB  ampicea  were  fiTOur

led  together,  which  wai
e  and  distinct  acta :  Che
Gnt  waa  quite  a  geneial  iuTiCotion  Co  come  to  the
aaaembly  (bdicimL,  Varro,  De  L.L.1I  94,  comp.
86,  88).  At  the  nme  time  when  Ihii  invitatian
waa  proclaimed  dnm  moenu  or  da  aweru,  a  hom
waa  blown,  which  being  Che  more  audible  ugnal,
ii  mentioned  by  aome  writera  akme,  and  witnoat
Che  inlicium.  (Oellina,  it.  2?  ;  Varro,  DtL.L.
T.  SI.)  When  upon  Ihii  ognal,  the  people  aa-
Kmbled  in  irtegnlar  maiaea,  then  followed  Che
aecood  call  by  the  accenioi,  or  the  call  ad  eondoHtm
or  MiMiMtKiarai ;  that  ia,  to  a  regular  aiaemblj,
and  the  crowd  then  aepaiated,  grouping  tbonaelrra
according  to  their  chuae*  and  ages.  (Vairo,  Dt
L.  L.  ti.  88.)  Hereupm  the  conul  appeared,
ordering  the  people  to  come  ad  amitia  emlmala  1
and  led  the  whale  enrcitaj  —  for,  in  thete  comitia,
the  Koman  people  are  alwaya  conoeiTed  aa  an
eiercitni  —  out  of  the  aXj,  lo  the  Campua  Martina.
(VaiTo,  Le.;  Liv.  nxii.  16.)  It  waa  cnatomary
from  the  eaiiieat  time*  for  an  armed  force  to  occupy
the  Janicalum,  when  the  people  were  aiaemhled  in
the  Campua  Hartitu,  fiir  the  psrpoae  of  pnitectiiig
the  ciCy  againat  any  audden  attack  of  the  neighbout-
ing  people  ;  and  on  the  Janicolinn,  a  Terillum  waa
hoiated  during  the  whale  time  that  the  aaaembly
laated.  Tbiacualom  continued  to  be  obiarredeTen
at  the  time  when  Rome  hnd  no  bnger  any  thiiw
to  fear  from  the  neighbouring  tribe*.  (Ut.  Let
OelL  XT.  27  ;  Uaenb.  SaL  L  i6  ;  Dion  Caaa^
xuriL  27,  Ac  ;  Serr.  ad  Aim.  riil  1.)  When
the  people  werelhua  regularly  ataembled,  the  boal-


Byer  of  the  preiideiit,  who  then  took  hia  teat  iHi
tribunal.  (Dionya.  ill  59,  x.  32  j  LIt.  xhL
7,  rail.  16  ;  Cie.  p.  MiavH.  1  j  Uy.  uri  2.)
The  preaident  then  opened  the  bnaineu  by  laying
before  the  people  the  aubjed  for  the  dedaion,  upon
which  they  heid  been  convened,  and  concluded  hia
eipoiicion  with  the  word*:  Trtau,jiiiiaiit  Qairitett
e.  g.  bdlam  ndiei,  at  fit  M.  TvUio  aata  igiu  inler-
dictum  Mil,  or  whateTer  the  aobject  might  be.  Thja
formula  waa  the  atanding  one  in  all  comitia,  and
whole  eipaition  of  the  preaident  waa  called
,  <io  (Lit.  i..  6,  Yi.  40,  iil  1 7,  nil  10,  nt  43  ;
Cie  £4 /lis.  ii.  16,  ni'uD8.29,  p.Zlo>k17,  30  ;
Qell.  T.  19.}  When  the  coznicia  were  aaaemhled
lor  the  puipcte  of  an  election,  the  {aeaiding
inaKialtBle  had  to  read  out  the  namei  of  tbe  can-
didaCci,  and  might  exerciie  hia  influence  b;  ro-
conunending  the  one  whom  he  ihougbc  moit  St  for
Che  offios  in  queiCion.  (Lir.  x.  22,  xiii.  36.)  Ha
waa,  boweTCr,  not  obliged  to  announce  the  naraea  of
all  the  candidate!  that  offered  themael>ea  ;  aa,  for
iple,  if  a  (xndidate  had  not  attained  ^e  legi-
e  age,  or  when  he  aucd  for  one  office  withnit
having  been  inreated  with  thoae  through  which  ha
bad  to  paia  prerioualy,  or  if  there  wai  any  other
legal  obatacle  ;  nay,  the  preaident  might  declare,
tluitifapcraon,tawhom  he  had  any  anch  objecCioo,
thonld  yet  be  elected,  he  would  not  reccgniae  hia
'  ctionaavalid.  (LiT.iii.21,  iiii.  7  ;  VaLMai.
8.  §  S.)  If  the  oaaembly  had  been  cODTened
for  the  purpoae  of  paaaing  a  legiala^Te  meaaure,
the  preaident  uaually  reommended  the  prcpoaJ,  or


33ti  COMITIA.

ha  might  gnuit  to  othe™,  if  they  de«ired  it,  per-
misioa  la  ipesk  about  tfai  meniure,  either  in  it*
favour  or  agsiiut  iL  (CbKumea  dart,  Liv.  iiL  71,
jiiri.  6,  At,  iliL  3*  ;  Appiim,  De  B.C.  HI;
Dion  Cbu.  inyiii.  4  ;  Qumtil,  iL  4.  3  3.)  In  this
csae,  hove¥er,  Et  vtu  nutomuy  tot  private  per-
■ana  to  ipeak  b«fan  (m J  mugiitnte,  and  tbe  oniort,
tuitil  ths  time  of  GrBcchoi,  nhile  apeaking  tamed
their  &ee  tomrdi  the  comiliam  ud  the  winUe
houe.  (Dion  Cam.  xiiit.  35  ;  Cie.  LaiL2S  ;
Pint.  C.  Graodt.  6,  Tit.  GraeA.  1*.)  When  the
comitia  acted  u  ■  conrt  of  jnitice,  the  preaident
itated  the  crime,  pnpoied  the  piuuihnient  to  be
iuBicted  upon  the  offender,  >nd  then  lUowed  others
to  apeak  either  in  defeoce  of  the  uxnaed  or  Bgunrt

When  the  anbjeet  brought  befbre  the  auemhl;
wu  ioffideDllr  diaensKd,  the  [maident  called
upon  the  pecfile  to  prepan  for  Toling  b;  the  woida :
il»  vt  tafiagiiaL,  bmejavnitilmt  diii.  (Lit.  zKxi.
7.)  He  then  pasted  the  atreun  Fetrania,  and
went  (a  the  a^UU.  If  the  number  of  ciuiena
present  at  the  assembly  ms  thought  too  nmll,
the  decision  might  be  dcferted  till  aoothec  day,
but  dua  wu  mrel;  done,  and  a  qucatiqu  was
usually  pot  to  the  Tote,  if  each  eeatuiy  was  but
lepresented  hj  a  lew  dtiiena.  (Lit.  lii.  )8  ;  Cie.
p.  Siai.  £1,  d*  Ltg.  Agr.  ii.  9  ;  Plot.  TB.  QneA.
Ifi;  Dion  Can.  xniz.  30.)  Ropacting  the
manner  in  which  ths  Totes  were  given  in  the  ear-
lieat  timei,  opinions  are  divided :  some  think  that
Uiey  were  given  viva  voce,  and  olhera  bj  means
of  ealaiii,  or  in  both  ways,  though  it  aeemi  to
be  more  piobable  that  calculi  were  uied.  The
leges  tabellariae  introduced  a  change  in  thia
reapect,  otdaining  that  the  Totca  ahould  be  giien
in  wiiling.  [Liaxa  Ti^iLLAKLiLj  But  pre-
vious to  the  lege*  tabellariae,  the  rogatorea,
■who  subsequently  collected  the  written  votes,
stood  at  Che  entrance  of  the  septa,  and  asked
every  dtiseu  for  his  vote,  which  was  taken  down,
and  used  to  determine  the  vote  of  each  century.
(Dionyi.  vli.  64.)  In  l^islaUve  astembliea,  Che
voter,  probably  from  the  eailiat  timea,  ligniAed
his  disapproval  by  the  word  anligw),  and  taia  ap-
proi-al  by  i^  ngai.  (Liv.  vL  3S,  i.  8,  m  43,
ixiL  8,  luiii  3S ;  Cie.  de  Ltg.  iL  10.)  At
elections,  the  name  of  the  tucceaaM  csndidate
wu  mentioned  to  the  riMatai,  who  had  to  mark
the  bvDuiable  Totes  by  dots  which  he  made  by
Che  tide  of  the  name :  hence  pancta  fern,  to  be
luccessfiil.  (Liv.  z.  lH,  S3,  ziii:.  32.)  The
custom  of  Totmg  at  electionB  by  tablets  with  the
name  of  the  candidates  written  on  them,  wot  in-
troduced in  B.  c  1 39,  by  Che  lei  Oabinia  tabellaria
(Cie  Dt  Leg.  iii.  16)  j  Cwo  years  later  L.  Cawius
introduced  the  ssme  caitom,  in  coses  of  the
comiiia  acting  as  a  court  of  justice  (CiCi  Bmi.
37),  and,  aflerwardt,  it  was  establiahed  alto  in
legitUtivc  assembliei,  and  in  cotei  where  ths
comitia  tried  peraoDs  for  perdacllio.  [LiOhta-
BILLARIAI.]  The  two  tablets  which  were  given
to  each  peison  for  the  pnipose  of  voting  on  legis-
lative mcasDtea,  were  marked  the  one  with  U
and  the  other  with  A  (n/i  ngat  and  ataiqio.  Cie.
ad  Att.  L  14).  At  elections,  the  ctliiffiis  obtained
blank  (ablett,  that  they  might  write  upon  them
the  name  of  the  candidate  for  whom  they  voted.
(Cie.  PUL  li.  a  :  Pint.  C.  GroocJ.  5,  CaL  Afw  46  i
Plin.  EjiiM.  iv.  25.)  In  judicial  atectnblics,  every
citiion  itccived  Cwo  tablelt  marked  A  (oitotoi)


COMITIA.

C  (coiulernno), and  there
Child tablet containing  the l<


I,  periiapi,  a


I  N.  I


litpid),  but  this  it  an  uncertain  point.  There  wen
in  cbe  Csmpna  Martins  septa  or  inclosures  (whether
they  emitted  from  the  earliest  times  is  unknown),
into  which  one  class  of  citizens  was  admilled  after
another  (or  the  purpose  of  voting.  The  fint  that
entered,  were  the  eighteen  centoriea  of  the  equitea,
then  followed  the  Ant  class  and  so  m.  It  very
rarely  happened  that  the  lowest  class  was  called
upon  to  vote,  as  there  was  no  necessity  for  it,
unless Eho  flrsC  class did  not agree with  the


equites. (Dionys.  iv.  30,  V:


LB2,t


43.)  After  the  time  when  the  oomitia  of
the  centuries  became  amalgamated  with  those  of
the  tribes,  pteviaus  to  each  assembly,  a  lane  space
near  the  villa  publica  wot  ninoundc^  with  on  ea-
doBure,  and  divided  into  compartmenta  for  the
teveral  ttibea.  The  whole  of  thia  encloaure  wat
ailed  onSt,  t^itiy,  cartent,  or  eaudli;  and  in
huHding,  cmtuning  the  whole

An  the  classes  as  well  as  the  tribes  and

,  narrow  passages  called  poBta  oc  ^loUli-
imli.  On  entering,  Che  dtltena  received  their
tablets  (Cie.  aJ  AILl  14,  dtLt^.  ixL  17,  caPu.
IS,  p.  Pboa.  6)  1  and  what  they  hod  ctaualted
within  the  enclotniet,  they  puKd  out  of  them
again  by  a  pom  or  panltni&it,  at  which  they  threw
their  vote  into  a  chest  icuta)  which  was  watcbed
by  rq^atorsf.  Hereupon  the  ro^otons  collected  the
tablets,  and  gave  them  to  the  dirSiitonM,  who  cUa-
ai£ed  and  counted  the  voles,  and  Ihm  huided  them
rer  to  the  cuttotjei,  who  again  checked  them  off  by
pointi  marked  on  a  cablet.  (Comp.  Cie,  it  Pit,  15
"  Tca  togatoret,  voa  diribiCoies,  Tea  etutodaa
tabellamm.")  The  order  in  which  the  ceDtotiea
'oted,  irat  determined  in  Che  Scrrian  coostitutiai,
n  the  manner  described  above ;  bnt  aflertha  imioii
ofthe  cea  turiet  and  tribes,  Che  order  wu  determined
thii  was  a  matter  of  no  alighC  import-
frequently  bappoied  thaC  the  vote  of
the  Aral  determioed  the  maonef  id  which  aubs^
quent  ones  voted.  The  voting,  of  eoniK,  wat  crai-
Cinned,  until  the  majori^  was  ascertained.  In  the
ease  of  electioni,  the  toccessAil  candidate  woe  pro-
dumed  twice, — Ant,  by  the  piaeco,  and  then  by
ident,  and  without  cbis  renuntiotio  Cb*
elecdon  woi  not  valid.  After  all  the  butioesa  was
done,  the  president  pretunmced  a  prayer  (Cie.  /k
Pints.  6,^  Mumi.  1 ),  and  dismissed  Uie  aaai  iiililji
with  the  word  diieedxte.

Cases  an  frequently  mentioned  m  which  the
pnceedinga  of  tiiO  assembly  were  disturbed,  ao
that  iC  was  necessary  to  defer  the  buunet*  Ciil
another  day.  This  occuned — 1.  when  it  was  dis-
covered that  the  auspices  had  been  nnhvommble,
or  when  the  gods  manifested  their  displeasure  bj
rain,  Chmider,  or  lightning  ;  3.  when  a  ttibone
interceded  (Liv.  xIt.  SI  ;  DioByt.  vL  B9  ;  Ctc  ■•
PaL  3)  i  3.  when  the  sun  set  beAne  the  bnsineaa
was  over.  Air  it  was  a  prindple  that  Che  anspice*
were  valid  only  for  one  day  &om  anuriae  to  aunaet
(Vain,  i)B  Z,  L.  viL  SI  ;  Dton  Cata.  ixiiz.  6£  t
Liv.  I.  32,  zIL  17  ;  Dionys.  iz.  41) ;  4.  when  a
norimt  oontfiafii  occurred,  L  e.  when  one  of  the
aiEcmbled  dciiens  was  seised  with  an  epilatic  fit
(Dion  Cast,  ilvi  33  ;  Oellius,  ziz.  2 ;  Itaimb.
Sat.  iL  8)  ;  fi.  when  che  vezillum  was  taken  aw»
from  the  Janiculnm,  Chit  being  a  ogoal  «1iich  M.


COMITIA.
cili«ni  Inl  to  tlbtj  (Lit.  xziii.  IS  ;  Dion  Oms.
nxriL  37  i  MKrgh.  JUL  i.  16) ;  6.  vfaan  u;
ttiBslt  w  mmrectiin  bnke  ont  in  the  ci^,  u
fcappwHnl  now  uid  thin  dnriDg  tbo  letter  period
of  tbe  npnfalic  (Cie.  p.  Snl.  36.)  In  all  the»
taie*,  ^  MiH»yy  had  to  contma*  it*  buinei*  on
wmt  Mhn  d«r>  toDwtinici  on  tha  nut. The


L  {Lir.  ii.  M.)

IV.  CoKtTU  TMIBDTA ( juc^lfirld  ftAfTWl)).

nwwHnUislikewiH  nn  called  into  exiitBia
bj  the  —■"■'■■''""  of  Semm  Tnlliiu,  wbo  divided
ilii  ItiMiaiiliiiiilKj  iiiliilliiiljliinl  liilm  AithcM
dinBoaa  were  originall;f  a  porely  tcfngrapbial  ar-
iaii[[iiiiiiil.  tiny  ven  of  little  or  do  imptrtaiHe  to
Ilw  Mate  ;  bnt  in  the  coiuie  of  time,  theH  local
dinoiBa  ne  fbmwd  into  a  politieal  union,  and  the
aMCnbliea  of  the  tribe*  bcouae  mott  fiumidable
rink  d(  Ikoae  of  Ihe  centmie*.  The  dediion  npon
the  qwatico  ea  to  vhat  portioa  of  the  Roidbd
pafahdoB  bad  the  right  to  take  fart  "  '*'  -
Iribnta,  dqienda  npoD  tha  queatMii,  i
the  tiibea  wen  iutitnted  ai  a  local
■f  the  whole  pmplo  tatridani  aod  plol
wlwtkcr  tb^  wen  fataBded  &c  tha  pMDawu
milf.  Moat  modem  wrilan  have  ad<j>led  (he
OfBiiea  of  Niabnhr,  that  iitt  patcioiani  wen  not
[nariitrtd  ai  nembcn  of  ^  tribea,  eod  that  ae-
aadiagir,  tbey  had  do  ligfat  to  lake  pan  in  their
■uMBbliea,  iBrtil  the  time  of  the  decemrind  legii-
latioi.  The  qneatioD  ii  nol  one  that  can  he  pri»ad
with  aatialaetoiy  erideiKe  ;  hot  at  any  nte  no
■Jijtiil  aifument  baa  ^ et  been  bnnght  Ibnrard
to  igiBet  NieimhT^  Tiew,  Sa  the  bet  irf  |iatriciani
•nd  tbeir  cUenta  being  pnaant  at  the  ^laee  of
laii  fiin  (lir.  iL  56),  fat  the  pmpaae  of  dMmting
the  camitia  Iribota  and  pmmting  their  coming  to
a  deewion,  dot*  not  pnra  that  the;  poneeaed  the
ri^cif voting.  Afiicthei
ibe  ftiichin  had  the  right  of  Totiag  in
MBUie*  of  the  tribea,  which  weie  then  al
mtd  lij  the  higher  magiatntca. (liv.


COMITIA.


tST


J]  wbetlwr


Doi;  a  bull  power  -,  thef
lect  tbe  tnbntaim,  and  to  fimiih  the  condngenta
lir  tha  annf  (Konjt  ir.  I*,  &t>  ;  they  may
fiirtk^  have  diacnned  the  internal  aSure  of  each
tribe,  tncb  aa  the  makmg  or  keeping  op  of  leadi,
weQa,  aod  the  like.  Bat  iheii  iimnence  gradoaUy
iiiiiiMiiil,  fir  the  cmnmonalty  being  more  nnme-
maa  than  tba  patrinuu,  and  beii^  in  a  tiate  of
gfDwth  aad  derdopnoit,  and  gnided  by  aetiTe
and  enenetic  tribiiDei,  the  interna]  adminiitiatiaD
of  ^  tr^ea  giadoalhF  aMomed  the  character  of  an
adnioirtiBtiBi  of  the  mtonal  a&irt  of  the  repohlic,
while  the  oomttia  of  the  esitnriea  woe  mon  cal-
oit  the  Mate  m  it!  relationi  (o
Al  the  comioonalty  grew  in
le  gnMer  claim* ;  each  vietory  gave


.  71*  if  mIi'm  iifli*  tinner  magitlnttt,  whcae
ofle*  it  wa*  to  pvteet  Aa  comBonaln  or  to  >oper-
nnH-'  Ilw  B&in  of  the  tribea.  "na  Publilian
kw  hi  K  c  471,a*eBnd  to  the  eomitia  tribnla  the
right  of  nil  I  lam  the  tribnnei  ef  the  pleb*.  (Lit.  iL
MiDioDiiiiz.49.) InlikeBBDiw^theaedila*


elected  by  them,  though  tha  enrale  aedile*
elected  at  a  difiennt  time  from  the  plebeian
aedilet  and  nndet  the  prsidency  of  a  conanL
(QelL  xiiL  16,  TL  9  ;  Cic  p.  FUme.  4,  20,  22,  od
AU.  IT.  3,  ad  Fhat.  Tiu.  4  ;  LiT.  ii,  46,  itt.  2.)
At  a  itill  later  time,  the  qoaeaton  and  tribune*  of
the  loldiera,  who  had  beEore  been  appointed  by
the  crawnlt,  were  appointed  in  the  oaMinbliH  oftbs
-^•---.  (Cie.  ad  Fam.  viL  90,  »  Pot  i  i  Lit.  iv.
1  G,  ix.  SO  ;  Sell  ^V.  63.)  The  procoorala
to  be  tent  into  the  pinnncei,  and  the  pnlongatioa

in  a  pmTince,  were  likewiie  point*  which  wen

detannined  by  the  tribet  in  later  time*.  (Lii.  viii,

2S,  26,  ii  42,  t  22,  nriL  22,  nii.  13,  txx.

27,  niL  £0.) The  inlarioi  m^gittntea  elected

by  tha tribe*  are :  —  the trimnviri capitale*,

inmnn  Toonotales,  the  cniatore*  Tianim,  decern-

ri  litibni  jndicandi*,  tribuni  aeiarii,  magiatri

unnn  et  pagonun,  praefecti  anmnae,  dmunviri

LTaJea,  quinqnoTiri  mnri*  tofribnique  re£ciendu«

iumTtn  coloniae  deducendae,  niltmviri,  qontno^

ihi,  &£.,  memaiii,  and  laitlj,  after  the  DomitiBn

lav,  B.a  101,  alto  the  memboi  of  college*  of

iuta. The  pontifei  marionu  had  been  elected

r  the  ptople  Bom  an  cariier  time. (LIt.xit.  fi;

Gc  de  Lig.  Jgr.  iL  7.)

2.  Tin  legidatiut  fmctr  of  the  oomilia  tributa
wia  at  £nt  Tery  inaigniScaot,  fbi  all  they  could
do  wu  to  paw  Riolotion*  and  make  ngnlation*
concenung  the  local  aSun  of  the  trilM*,  bnt  they
did  not  in  any  way  aSect  the  itale  aa  a  wbola
But  after  a  time  whoi  the  tribe*  began  to  be  die
real  rcpreaentstiTei  of  the  people,  mattcn  affecting
the  whole  people  alio  wen  brought  before  them
by  the  tribiinu,  which,  ftamed  ■*  reaolntioni,  wen
iud  befbn  tha  aeDate,  when  they  might  either  be
■ancticoed  or  rejected.  Tbii  pnctice  of  the  tri-
bata  oimitiB  gndiully  acquired  for  them  the  right
of  takmg  the  initiatiTe  in  any  meamn,  or  the
right  of  originating  meamna,  until  in  &  c  449
thu  right  WB*  recogmaed  and  nnctioned  by  a  law
of  L.  Valerini  Puhlicola  and  H.  Hontioi  Bar-
batui.  (LiT.  iiL  SG,  67  ;  Dion:;*,  ^i-  *S.)  This
lav  gave  to  tha  decreei  piued  by  the  tribe*  the
power  of  a  real  bsr,  bindii^  npon  the  whole  people,
prorided  they  obtained  the  sanction  of  the  lenate
and  tha  popolna,  that  i>,  the  people  auembled  in
the  eomitia  curiata  or  in  the  comilia  centnrjala.
(Dionya.  x.  4,  33.)  At  fir«t  the  tribe*  acted  with
conaiderable  tnodention  and  modeity,  diKnuing
only  tboie  mbjecti  which  affected  their  own  order
or  indiTidoal  plebeiana,  nuh  aa  the  amneaty  after
tba  KceHign,  plebeian  magigtratea,  naary  and  tha
like.  In  a.  c  3S9,  the  Pnblilian  law  enacted  ut
fltbaeOa  owut  gnritef  tnefnA  (Lir.  riiL  12.)
Thii  law  wai  elihet  a  n-enactmcnt  of  the  one
paised  in  a  c  449,  or  eontamed  a  more  detailed
■peofication  of  the  caie*  in  which  plebiidta  ihonld
be  binding  upon  the  whole  nation,  or,  laitly,  it
made  their  T^dity  independent  of  the  aanction  of
other  eomitia,  h  that  nothing  would  be  required
except  the  aoent  of  tha  eeiute.  In  s.  c  2B7,  the
Hortenuan  law  wu  paued,  which  aeemi  lo  haTe
been  only  a  rerrntl  and  a  confirmatian  of  tha  two
preceding  lawi,  for  it  wu  framed  in  *]moit  the
Kuna  term*  (Plin.  H.  ft.  rri.  10  ;  Oell.  it.  27  ;
Oaiut,  L  3)  ;  bat  it  may  alao  be,  that  the  Uorten-
lian  law  mide  the  plebiidta  independent  of  the
nnction  of  the  aenate,  n  that  benaaforth  the
eomitia  tribnla  wen  qnita  iDdcpendeBt  in  Uteir


COMITU.

,  it  ii  tne,  occor  tSta  thi>  time  in
taanj  inatanfjj,  but  it  doe*  not  follow  that  fbr  thii
ntMon  a  HDEtiv  mnnltiiiD  wm  nflceoaiy  for  erery
plebisciCum  (Dionfi.  ii.  il),  tor  we  miut  dii-
tingnith  betiroai  tboM  plsbiidtk  which  ifTeded
the  ri^ti  aC  the  people,  and  them  which  tonched
apon  tLe  ■dminutntitm  ut  the  repablie  ;  the
fbnuT  of  thciB  He canitantly  mentiaaed  with-

ipL«B1«CITUM.]

S.  Tkijwiiaalpomr  of  thaixB^^tnba.t»
Bmch  mora  limited  than  that  of  the  i*"™^*'*  i
tnri&ta,  iaaKnoch  u  Ihi^  coald  lake  cogniianee
only  of  oSenCH  agumt  the  majeny  of  th«  people,
while  all  erimei  cammitted  iguiut  the  itale  wen
Inoagfat  belbn  the  eaitniiea. EnD  jAtriciiiu,
when  they  had  o6ei>d«d  agabift  the  ooiDiDODaltjr
or  iti  memban,  wem  tried  and  fined  by  the  triboi.
Thi*  waia  cooMitatca  a  diflennce  betwoan  thi
Jadkiaf  power  of  the  cantoriei  and  that  of  thi
tribe*,  for  the  fonius  could  inflict  capital  pnniih-
ment,  but  the  latter  ordy  fioea. There  are,  *
deed,  calea  in  which  tha  tiibu  might  appeaj
have  Mntroced  penoni  to  exile  ;  but  nich  eiil
not  the  reenlt  of  a  rael  teidiet,  bat  only  a  maai
taken  againtt  thoM  who  dnring  the  trial  went  i
tolnntaiy  exile,  which  might  then  be  mado  a
ceeeory  exile,  by  the  iattrdictio  aqvtu  ft  igmis  being
added. (Lii.  xxy.  3,  xiyi.  3  j  Cic  OroL  p.  Dom.
16,  &C.) When  the  Iribei  aojturad  thii  right  ii
uncerlain,  for  that  it  wae  not  originally  pr«aeeeed

bf  them,  ii  clear  from  the  expreBiou  uied  t

■othoritiea. The  oSencca  for  which  penoni


COKITIA.
higher  roigiitnta  also  aometimea  acted  aa  pren-
denti,  though  perhapa  not  without  pretionity  ob-
taining the  peimiauon  of  the  tribunes  There  are
only  a  few  inatancea  of  higher  magistntea  picaiding
in  the  eomitia  tribnta  when  aaembled  fis  pnipoae*
of  Iwelation  (Plln.  H.  ff.  iri.  IE  j  Cic.  p.  Baib.
24  ;  Dion  Can.  xxxriii.  6,  ccxix.  6a  ;  Aim
fleU.  (Sb.  iiL  7,  27)  ;  bnt  the  c ' ^


6  :  Amian,  Dt
U  and  praeton

SG,  64;


it  dntita,  D^ect


magirtiate

Otdn^,  il. ...  ..„._. .

the  paUie  matey,  and  a  Tarie^  of  offencea  of  pi-
vate  indiTidiuli,  uich  a<  dtetnrfaasca  of  the  pnblu
peace,  uoiy,  adolteiy,  and  the  like.  The  comitii
tribala  alio  acted  ae  courta  of  appeal,  t.  g.  when  i
penon  [Hotected  againat  a  fine  impoaed  by  a  nugl'
itrate.  (Dionyi.  vii.  17)  CicCaZ^.  iiL  S;  Lir
zL  12  ;  Zoom.  rii.  17.)  The  penon*  who  acted
a*  acenaen  in  the  oomitia  tribnta  were  the  nibonei
and  oedilea

With  regard  to  the  time  at  which  theae  eomitia
were  or  could  be  conTCned,  the  tame  regulation*
were  obaerved  ai  at  the  eomitia  centnriata.  They
ought  aiaemble  either  within  or  without  the  city,
but  not  fnrther  Enan  it  than  ]  000  poeei,  beiwiia
the  power  of  the  Iribunet  did  not  extend  brther.
For  electioiu  the  Campai  Hartini  «u  uanally
vhosm  (Cicad^«.iT.  a,  adFam.-ra.39\  Flut.
C.  Graeck.  3>,  hut  lomelimea  alio  the  forani.  (he
Cepilol,  or  the  CJictu  Flaminiua.  (Cic  ad  Att  i.
16  1  Lit.  iiiiiL  10,  ixiiL  21.)  The  pmideatt
were  commonly  the  tiibnnei  who  went  ■apnoitad
by  tha  aedUea,  and  no  matta  conld  be  brought  be-
iiire  the  tribei  without  the  knowledge  and  content
of  the  tribunea  (Liy.  xiriL  22,  ixx.  41  ;  Cic.  da
Lig.  Agr.  iL  S)  \  eren  the  aedilet  could  not  bring
a  propon3  before  them  without  the  penniuion  of
the  tribunee.  (OdL  It.  4 ;  Dionya  tL  80.)  One
of  them  wai  choaen  either  by  tot  or  by  commim
^leement  to  act  a*  pietideat  (Lit.  ii.  £6,  liL  64,
IT.  37,  T.  IT)  ;  but  bii  cdlleagnet  nraally  had  to
aign  tha  pn^iwal  whidi  he  bnmght  helbre  the
commeuahy.  (fSa.p.att.lAy  itlAg.Agr.'o,9.)
Aa  the ■"-  — '  -  ^


bmee,  asdilea,  and  qnaeatioi  ,
Dicnyi.  iz.  41, 4S,  49 ;  Appian,  Dt  BM.  <%.  i.
Ga.p.Plmii.iQ,ai  AU.\i.%,mVaLt,ad  Pam.
TO.  SO)  ;  o  well  aa  when  the  conutia  tribnta  wrb
aetembled  ai  a  eoutt  of  jutice.  (Lii.  iit.  1 ;
Appian,£toaiS.CI>e.LBI;  Uion  Caaa.  xxriil  ] 7.)
The  preparatiimi  for  the  comhia  tiibula  were
lea  formal  and  KJemn  than  for  thoae  of  the  ten-
Iniiea.  In  the  ose  of  ekctaooa,  the  candidate*  had
to  give  in  their  namca,  and  the  pnaident  eou-
municatad  then  to  the  peo;^  (LIt.  iiL  64 ;  Ap-
piui,  Dt  BA.  (So.  L  14.)  What  a  legi^tira
meaanre  waa  to  be  brought  before  the  a*Kmbly,  a
tribune  (the  jHopoaer  of  the  bill  wa*  called  rq^nAjr,
and  the  others  adKnpiont}  made  the  people  a^
quaintedwith  it  in  ODadana^and  that  on  the  three
pnceding  oundine*.  The  same  wai  the  case  when
the  people  were  to  meet  ai  a  court  of  jnitice.  Tha
aiupicia  wen  not  coniulted  for  the  eomitia  rf  the
tribe*,  but  the  ^kHo  alone  wa*  sufficient,  and  tha
trihmiei  had  the  right  of  oimmHalio.  The  con-
Tcning  of  theae  aaiemblie*  wai  likewise  le*t  sdenm
than  tiut  of  the  centuries,  for  the  tribune  wbo  had
been  chosen  to  preside  either  at  an  election  or
bnat^t  ferward  a  rogadou,  simply  mrited  the
eitisent  by  hit  riotores,  wbo  were  alto  sent  into
diSennt  parts  of  the  oonnlir  to  inrite  Iha  pefi|da
UTinsaladiattMa.  (Appian,  i)e  AA.  CCn.  i.  29.)
At  the  meeting  itsdf;  he  at  on  the  tribunal  rap.
p«ted  by  bit  colleagues  (Lrr,  xrr.  3 ;  Dion  Cata.
xxrii,  65),  and  hud  befise  the  pei^  his  Inll,  the


with  the  nature  of  Che  offenos  <n  whkb  Ibey  bad
to  pea  sentence,  concluding  with  the  words  vtiHt,
jaiio/u  Qiarifsi.  The  bill  was  nerec  read  by  tbs
tribune  himself  but  b;  a  praeco,  and  then  begas
the  debates,  in  which  person*  might  either  oppoaa
or  recommend  the  measure,  though  priTate  persons
had  to  ask  the  tribunes  for  pe(mi**i<m  to  spaik.
When  the  ditcnssiou  was  onr  the  peaident  called
upon  the  peoplo  Os  m  m^rafiamf  as  at  the  craiitia
centariata.  They  then  faned  tbemselna  into  their
tiibea,  whii^  like  the  ccntiiri**,  atcMtained  tbeir
own  Tolea  in  (Ddosnn*  (*apta).  Which  of  the
3S  tribta  wa*  to  ^e  its  Tote  Bitt,  vai  detomined
by  lot,  and  that  tribe  was  called  pnungalioa  M
/nw^nm  (the  othen  were  teemed  jm*  toealat),
'^e  Tote  of  the  first  tribe  wa*  giTeo  b]
on  of  diitinctian  whose  name  was  mi
he  plebisdttmi,  if  it  was  of  a  legiilatiTe  .  _
'ha  manner  of  collecting  the  volea  waa,  on  Iho
rhola,  the  nme  as  in  the  oomitia  centariata.  Tho
announcing  of  the  leanlt  of  the  nte*  wa*  the  rt-
—ftntin.  If  it  so  happened  that  two  candidatoa
had  tha  anne  nmnber  of  votea,  tha  quation  w
decided  by  drawing  lot*.  The  ch
might  caaie  tiia  meeting  to  hreal.  . ,
bnnness  till  another  day,  an  tha  i


COHITIA.
■Ibr  tkt  owitii  tlw  aDgnn  decbnil  that  •mii
tCBalilj  had  beoi  Deglectnl,  tha  deciee  of  thi
■■niiblj  thenbj  beamie  iDid,  and  penou  vbi
kad  btat  declod  u  an  office  wen  obliged  to  vrith-

lawatedviitIHi»eo

H  kog  ai  DO  great  change  took  place
the  tcfiahlK^  but  vhsn  the  coinage  and  the  (laadarl
of  fcoiitKy  had  beoocae  altered,  when  the  conttitn-
tiia  at  the  araj  had  beat  placfd  on  a  different
' "'  ' bars  all,  wheo  the  plebeiaoi  b^an

a  great  and  aaieatial  elem
a  laa  ■■"— "  Haia,  it  mut  have  been  tboud
EgaTtnient  to  kan  to  the  aqulM  and  the  tnt
cUm  »  great  a  jnpaadeoDca  in  the  comitia  of  the


id  gniim  in  itraigtb  and  m*  IliJt  gtowing.
iBj  hare  boa  the  iututioa  to  combiae  the
itia  tentnntta  and  tributa  in  nch  a  maimer
0  Ewke  eoly  vie  ueonblf  of  than,  but  thii


Mta  fi>B  oar
>1nt,>a  M  the


on  bam  incidental  alluiiona.
of  the  change.  From  Utj
(It.  31}  it  vonld  tppmr  that
Ac  chann  did  not  tahe  plan  till  after  the  com-
pletnic(ltnUtnbei,i.e  afiatB.c341.  Sotna
mill  III  writoi^  tbocAice,  leftr  the  diange  lo  the
iiwi«ilti|i  ef  C  Plammha,  a.  c  230,  who  ii  nid
la  hare  Bade  (ha  conftilnliaa  mon  denraoatie  ;
vhile  Niehrahr  and  othcta  date  ths  ehanga  from
the  tiaiinhip  nf  Q.  Fatdot  and  P.  Deeraa,  b.  c
304.  BatlbniaendaKethatitmnatbeawgned
to  em  •■  earlier  date  than  thii,  Gic  the  (Viboi)
paoBptin  ia  mtnbened  aa  eariy  m  n.  c.  396  in
the  eleetko  cf  the  comihi  tribunal  (IAt,  j.  18),
who*  tb*  pale  cgmilia  tiibnla  canoot  be  m^t,
ni  a  ocBMJB  pnetogatira  ii  a  thiag  unknoirn.

The  qneatjia  ^Dot  the  manner  in  which  the
esabjaades  of  the  two  kh>d>  of  esmitia  waa  tt-
tvted,  haa  beeo  the  inlgect  of  eren  much  mora
iliaawjiai  and  doubt  than  that  about  tha  time
■hca  if  WIS  taoight  about.  The  moot  ptibabte  of
the  BBBSDaa  a|muiiDa  which  hare  been  adranced
an  tha  mt^eet  u  that  of  0.  Pantagathni  (Fair.
Ui^HBO,  ad  Lit.  L  43},  which  hw  been  nrj  ela-
bacatetj'wecbdoBtbjratttling,  (OHiLd.Ani.
•  iiieriiai/  Fp,  380,  die,  S06,  fte.)  Pantuathna
bdiena  tl«t  the  citiatiM  ttf  (uh  taibe  were  dirided
iaio  fire  laofierly  dawea,  oteh  ooBJiting  of  aeniwaa
aal  joaian^  ao  that  each  of  the  35  tiibee  con-
and  all  the  tribea  together


/K  p.  S3,  JL  nme.  7,  d)  Jb /UJ:
B.  SI ;  fialL  J»p.  te),  but  heneelbnh  the;  wae
Bat  diaelf  nnlied  wUl  tha  tribea,  whereai  bcbre
the  tribea  bad  bean  mcie  loial  diTitimii  and  en-


lirdy  iad(T<nd<al  of  prefer^.  The  union  now
eSemd  waa  that  the  rliMri  boeanu  nbdiTiainni
Hi  the  tribv.  aad  that  ■acndhigl}  eentoriee  occur
ho(h  m  tha  rloTi  Bd  in  the  tribea.  (Cie.  p.
Mh.  so,  a  J^  Jgr.  a  2.)  Bach  tribe  eon-
liiaii  un  oilaiiM,  two  of  the  fint  daai  (one  cl
the  aaHKia  aad  tot  of  tha  jmuKca),  two  of  the


COMITIA.  B39

•econd  (likewiie  aeniorea  and  joiJotea),  two  of  tha
third,  two  of  the  Iburth,  and  two  of  the  fifth  chut.
Ths  equitei  were  likewiie  diiided  according  to
tribea  and  centnriet  (Dionja  ii.  13^  liL  72),  and
th«  >eem  to  hare  voted  with  the  fint  diua,  and
to  hsTe  been  ia  fact  indoded  in  it,  lo  aa  to  ha
called  centnriei  of  the  firM  cUh.  (Cic  PiiL  a.
33,LiT,  iliil  16i  AureL  Viet,  (ie  Vir.  libatr.  &7  i
VaL  Mai.  -ri.  6.  g  3.)  The  centuria  of  the  cor-
□icuiei,  tubicinei  and  &bri,  which  are  no  longer
mentiooed,  probablj  ccsied  to  eidit  ai  dittinct  cen-
turies (Comp.Cic.rf««ei'a«.  ii22.}  Reapect-
ing  the  manner  in  whicti  the  Tctea  were  giren,
there  are  two  opiniont :  according  to  the  uit,  a
whiJe  tribe  wai  choien  bj  lot  lo  giro  it>  vote  (10
centuriee)  fint,  and  acoording  to  the  lecond,  one
century  of  the  fint  clua,  hsTing  beea  determined
by  lot.  If  we  adopt  the  former  opinion,  the  Totea
of  the  ten  centuri«  contained  in  a  tribe  would  hare
been  giien  one  after  another,  and  the  majority,  lii,
would  have  omitituted  the  raolt  or  toIb  of  the
tribe.  Now  ai  13  out  of  the  36  tribea  conitituted
ijority,  it  ii  evident  thai  lOS  centuriei  might
I  conitituted  a  majority  egainit  the  remaining
242.  Thii  ii  an  ibMirdily  of  which  we  aumot
conceire  the  Roman*  to  hare  been  guilty.  The
oting  by  tribea,  therefm,  cannot  be  cooceiTed  aa
Btional,  except  in  thcae  caiei  in  which  the  ten
centuriea  of  eisy  tribe  were  nBanintoiu  ;  thii  mny
have  been  the  can  very  often,  and  when  it  waa  m,
the  tribni  praerosatira  wia  certainly  the  triba
choaoi  by  lot  to  give  iti  nnanimoni  TOta  Gnt  But
if  there  wai  any  difierenoe  of  opinion  among  the
ceututiei  making  up  a  tribe,  the  true  majority  could
only  be  aicertained  by  choaing  by  lot  one  of  Ibe
70  centariaa  of  the  fint  chua  to  gin  ita  vote  lint,
or  rather  it  wai  decided  by  hit  &nn  which  tribe
''-  -  --ro  cenmriea  of  the  fint  dau  were  to  be  taken
e  their  vote  fint  (Hence  the  plunljinHni'
gativae,  Fiend.  AiCDD.  ad  Oie.  tM  Vtrr.  p.  1S9  |
"i.x.  20.)  The  tribe,  monover,  to  whidi  thoee
ilnriea  belonged  which  voted  Gnt,  vai  ilaelf  like-
le  called  tribua  ptaerogaliTa.  Of  the  two  cen-
turiea, again,  that  of  aeniorei  gave  iti  vole  befbn
the  jtiniorei,  and  in  the  docuntenti  both  were  called
by  the  name  of  their  tribe,  aa  Galeria  jmaonmi
(Ldv.  Kxvii.  S,  1.  a.  the  juniorea  of  the  fint  claia  in
the  tribni  Qaleria},  Axtamtjtitiormi  (Liv.  niv.
7),  Fitew  janorwit  (Liv.  iivL  21 ;  comp.  Cic
f.Plaini.7a,Pi!i.u.i&,D«Dii!.'±S6).  Aiioon
aa  the  praerogativa  had  voted,  the  renuntiatio  took
placa,  and  the  remaining  centuriei  then  deliberati^
whetha  they  ihoold  vote  the  lame  way  or  not.
When  thii  wat  dooe  all  tiie  centuriei  of  the  fint
tribe  proceeded  to  vote  aliHico(I>ionyi.iv.  21),  for
there  would  not  have  been  tinu  for  the  350  cei^
to  vote  me  after  another,  aa  wai  dooe  by
the  193  centuriea  in  the  cunitia  centariala.  (Cic
■0.20,  ia  Vtrr.  v.  Ii,  p.  Rtd.  m  StmaL  II,
ad  QtiT.  7  ;  Liv.  t  9,  22,  mv.  7,  iiii.  22,
zxviL  24  ;  SaeL  Qieji  19.)

Thoe  comitia  of  tha  centuriea  combined  with
the  tribei,  were  Sax  more  demooatial  than  the
comitia  of  the  centuriea  ;  they  continued  to  ba
held,  and  [reaerved  their  powK  along  with  the
comitia  tribnta,  even  alter  the  lattor  had  acquired
their  lapreme  importance  in  the  repabiic.  Daring
the  thoe  of  the  moral  and  political  ccaniption  til
tha  Bomam^  the  latter  appear  to  have  been  chiefly
attended  by  the  populace,  which  wai  guided  by
1 2  '■^^JK?^


340  COHITIA.

■Me  citiuni  luid  litlle  influence  in  tkem.  Wben
the  libenioi  and  kJI  the  llali«ii>  wen  incflrporated
in  the  old  thirty-fiie  tribes,  and  when  the  political
CDTnipCion  ha^i  reached  ita  heighL,  no  tnco  of  the
sedat«  and  modemte  character  mi  left  bj  which
the  comi^  tribata  had  been  diitiiigniiihed  in
fbmier  timet.  {Sell  OaL  Z7 ;  Satl,  Cau.  ii  i  Cic
ad  AiL  L  ]6.)  Violence  and  bribery  beaoma  the
(tfder  of  the  daj,  and  the  need;  moltituda  lent
mlling  ean  to  an;  initigatiooa  ooming  from
weallhj  biiben  and  tnbnnea  who  were  mere  de-
nugognea.  Solhi  foi  a  time  did  avsj  with  theaa
odioua  proceeding! ;  lince,  according  to  aome,  be
•bolithed  the  comitia  tributa  aJtt^ether,  or,  ac-
cording to  olhen,  deprlTcd  them  of  the  right  of
electing  the  oceidolca,  aod  of  all  their  Iq^ialntiTe
and  judicial  powen.  (Cic  a  Verr.  I  13,  16,  <je
Legg.  iiL  9  ;  l.iv.  Epit.  89  ;  Appian,  di  Btll.  Ch.
L  59,  98  j  camp.  TsiBUHUB.)  Bot  the  conittln-
tjon,  such  aa  it  had  eiiated  before  Sulla,  waa  ig-
nored aoon  after  hit  death  by  Porapey  and  othcn,
with  the  eiception  of  the  jnriadiction,  which  waa
fbr  ever  taken  from  the  people  by  the  legitlation
of  9nlla.  The  people  luffered  another  Ioh  in  the
dictatonhip  of  J.  Cacnr,  who  decided  upon  pnce
and  war  himaelf  in  connection  with  the  te^ale.
(Dion  Caai.  xUL  20.)  He  had  alto  the  whole  of
the  legislation  in  hii  handa,  through  hia  influence
with  the  magiatntei  and  tho  tribmiet.  The
people  Ihnt  retained  nothing  hut  the  election  of
in<Hpitratei ;  bnt  eren  thia  power  waa  much  li-
mited, ai  Caeaar  had  the  righl  to  appoint  half  of
the  magittiBtea  hiffladf^  with  the  eiccption  of
the  conanla  (Soet  Caet.  41  ;  Cic  PiUip.  vii.  6  ;
Dion  Caat.  xliil  £1),  and,  ai  in  addition  to  thii,
he  ncommended  to  the  people  tboie  candidala
whom  he  withed  to  he  elected :  and  who  would
haie  oppoaed  hia  with  P  (Dion  Caat  iliiL  47  ;
Appian,  dt  Ball.  (Se.  a.  18.)  After  the  death
of  Caeaar  the  comitia  continued  to  be  held,  but
vere  alwayi  more  or  leat  the  obedient  initnimeDta
in  tho  handa  of  the  mien,  whoae  nnlimited  powen
Were  even  recogniied  and  tanctioned  by  them.
(Apjiian,  dt  BetL  Oe.  it.  7  j  Dion  Can.  ilii.  SS,
xItii.  2.)  Under  Angnitua  the  cfmiitia  ttill  tanc-
tionod  new  lawa  and  elected  m^atralea,  but  their
whole  ploceedinga  were  a  mere  fcice,  for  they
could  not  Tenture  to  elect  any  other  penoni  than
those  recommended  by  the  emperor.  (SoeL  Aug.
40,  *c  1  Dion  Casa.  liiL  2,  21,  It.  34,  lyi.  40.)
Tiberini  deprired  the  people  eTcn  of  thia  thadow
of  th^  former  power,  and  conferred  the  power  of
Section  npon  the  tsnate.  (Tacit...4iHia/.  L  15,  81,
iL  36,  «  (  Veil.  Pal.  ii.  126.)  When  the  clec-
liona  were  made  by  the  tenale  tho  retult  waa
annonnced  to  the  people  aatembled  at  comi^  een-
toriata  or  tribota.  (Dion  Can.  liiii.  20.)  Legit-
tation  vat  taken  away  fnim  the  comitia  entirely,
ud  wat  completelr  in  the  handi  of  the  lenate  and
the  empertir.  (^tgula  placed  the  comitia  again
Dpon  the  lame  footing  on  which  they  bad  bocD  in
the  time  of  Ansnitua  (Dion  Caia.  lii.  9  ;  Suet.
Cai.  16)  I  but  thu  regulation  waa  loan  abandoned,
and  erery  thing  wat  left  at  it  had  been  arranged
by  Tiberiua  (Dion  Cau.  lii.  20.)  From  thia  time
the  comitia  may  he  Mid  to  have  ceaicd  to  eritt,
Tereign  power  fbnoerly  poueotcd  by
__ ._». — 1 .1.  „nperorby  the


aa  all  the

the  people

lex  Rgia. [Lkx  Rigu.] The  people  only _

•embled  in  the  (^amput  Martini  tor  the  pnipoae  of

ncuTing  infcrniation  aa  to  who  laid  been  elected


C0MMIS30RIA  LEX.
or  qipointed  ai  ita  magiatiatea,  until  at  laat  cTcn
thit  announcement  (rwiaalwtfio)  appean  to  have

In  addition  to  the  wcnka  on  Roman  hiatory  in
general,  the  reader  may  nrnmlt  UnterholDier,
£>>  Mulata  Cntmitionm  Camti.  a  Smio  ThSio
R^  lutitttormt  Ratume,  Bretlau,  1835  ;  O.  C.
Th.  Fnncke,  De  Tribmni,  it  OtrimM  lOqae  0«-
terwrwi  RaHau,  Schleiwig,  1824  ;  Huachke,
Dit  yerfjmmg  da  Stnma  TVtiat,  1638  ;  HUll-
mann,  Ronuidt  OmmtvirfiunBig ;  Ruhino,  ETit-
tenaiiampat  Via-  dit  Aioa.  Yafutm^,  1839  ;
Zumpt,  train-  die  .jJarinaiMy  da  Blm.  Folia  w
CWiirutanwtn.  [I-S.]

COMITIA'LIS  DIES. [Dira.]

COMI'TIUM. [PonuM.]

COMHKA'TUS,  afbriongh,  otlfsTe  ofabacnco
from  the  army  fbr  a  certam  time.  (Tadt.  Aim.  xr.
10  i  Lit.  iiL  *6.)

COMMENTARIENSIS.  [Cohnbhtarius.]

COMMEKTA'RIUS,  «  COMMENTA'-
RIUM,  meant  a  book  of  memoira  or  memcnndDm-
book,  whence  the  eipreiaion  Caetarit  OommeHlarii
C  Hinc  Caetar  libroa  da  bcUii  a  le  gealia  commen-
tariot  intcripait,  quod  nndi  eatent  omni  oroatn  ora-
lionia,  tani^uam  Tcate  detncto,"  Cic  Bntut,  c  75).
Hence  it  it  oaed  for  a  lawyer^  brief^  the  nolet  of
B  tpeech,  du. (Sen.  Ciniirov.  lib.  iiL  Pro&o.)

In  the  imperial  period  the  word  tommtniariauit
occun  in  the  tenie  of  a  nolaiy  or  clerk  of  the
Fiunii  (40.  tit.  14.  l  4£),  and  alao  of  a  keeper
of  a  priion  (Walter,  OadadUe  da  Romiteitm
AsUf  9§B18,  819,  2ded.)  A  military  officer  ao
railed  ii  menliiined  by  Atconiui  (I'a  Per.  iiL  28),
who  probably  bad  limilar  daliei.  The  word  ii
alto  employed  in  the  tenae  of  a  notary  or  teoelary
Mott  of  the  religious  colleges  hod


[B.J.]


jtoittijiam.

COMME'RCIUM. [CmTi8.j

COMMISSO'RIA  LEX  it  theterm  applied  to
a  clauae  often  inaerted  in  eonditioni  of  talc,  by
which  a  Tnidor  rcaerved  to  himielf  the  pnTilege  of
retclndmg  the  sale,  if  the  poichosa  did  not  pay
bis  purcbue-money  at  the  time  agreed  on.  The
lei  commiatoria  did  not  make  the  tiantactton  a
conditional  pnrchase  ;  for  in  that  vie,  if  the  pro-
perty were  damaged  or  destmycd,  the  loai  would
be  the  ion  of  the  Tender,  ioaimuch  oa  the  pur^
chaser,  by  nan-payment  of  the  money  at  the  time
agreed  on,  would  bit  to  peifarm  the  condition  ;
but  it  wai  an  abaojnte  lale,  subject  to  be  rescinded
at  the  ule  pleasure  of  the  Tendoc,  if  the  money
was  not  paid  at  the  lima  agiend  on ;  and  conie-
qnently  if  after  this  agreement  the  property  waa
lost  or  deitTDyed  before  the  day  agreed  on  for  pay-
ment, the  loss  fell  on  the  pnrchaier.  If  the  Tcudor
intended  to  take  adTantagfl  of  the  lex  cranmlaioria,
ilwaaneceisarythatheihonlddeclarchil  intention
aa  soon  ai  the  condition  waa  broken.  If  be  re-
ceived or  claimed  any  part  of  the  pnrcbaio- money
after  the  day  agreed  upon,  he  thereby  wiUTcd  the
adTunlage  of  the  lei  cammiiioiia.  It  wot  uanal
to  inaert  in  the  commiiaoria  lex  an  agreem
if  the  Tendor  had  to  aell  the  {voperty  af,
firvt  purchaser  should  make  up  any  defidcn^  in

the  price,  that  ia,  the  difleimce  1 --«---

fbr  which  it  woi  fitit  sold,  ai
which  it  produced  at  the  second  tale.  [PtaNux.]
(Dig.  18,  tit  3  ;  Thibaot,  ^Mm,  te.  S  £48,
9ih  ed.)  O.  L.}


COUMUNl  DIVIDUNDO,  ACTIO.


3  do  Hmetbing  wrang."

vhieh  It  ciihei  done  or  omiKed  to  bs  done  bj  a
hcna  agaiut  the  will  i^  s  teatator,  and  make  bim
■Dbjtct  10  s  pmalEf  01  ferfeiCun  ;  Ihiu,  eommun
boHlitu would be bo  iofaerimnce  forfeited  fu

torn.  ziii.  S6)  ipRiks  of  *a  hypolheesud  Ihing
brcnning  tommim  ;  that  ii,  becoming  tho  abio-
Idir  proptTtj  of  tbe  creditor  for  debult  of  pay-
mi  hkMbu  or  caden.  ComnuMum  wu  alio  ap-
plied to  a  thing  in  napect  of  wfaich  the  Teetigal
ni  not  paid,  or  *  proper  retnm  madt  to  the  pDb-
licaai-  A  thing  tbni  fisfeited  {veetigalHim  saauiH)
Dpafldd  to  be  tbe  propertj  of  tbe  owner,  and  waa
firfinted,  under  the  anpire,  to  the  fiaciu.  (Dig.  39.
Iii.4i  SDet.Cbi^.ctl.)  [0.  L.]

COHMI'XTie. [CoNFifaio.]

COHMODATUH  il  one  of  Huh  obligationa
wbicb  are  tentiacted  re.  He  who  ienda  to  another
a  ihii^,  for  a  definite  time,  to  be  nwd  lor  a  definite
pnrpoae,  without  any  psf  or  reward,  ii  tailed  by


. — J ,  nowerer,  [mpeny  pef-

wuHj  BLuoua(Dig.  10.  tit,  1,  a.  1),  but  diatingniahed
from  other  peiwnal  actiona  by  tbia,  that  in  theaeao-
tiona  diaputed  oaneiihip  coold  alto  be  detemined.
'SsTigny,  Sflem,  iie.  vol.  t.  p.  US.) Thii  actioD

1  comtDoa  of  acoipoml  thing,  which  accordingly
raa  allied  ret  comnimii ;  and  it  wai  mainlainabla
rhethcT  they  were  ownen  (lAmtni),  or  had  merely
-  right  to  tbe  ^btioana  actio  in  rem ;  and  whethtr
they  were  lociitaa  in  lojne  taaee  of  a  joint  pnicbaae,
or  not  ndi,  aa  in  the  caae  of  a  thing  bequmthed  to
them  (fegata)  by  a  tealamait ;  hut  the  action  could
'  :  maintained  for  the  diriaion  of  an  hereditaa.
I  action  on  aecoimt  might  be  taken  sf  any
mjury  dcmg  to  tha  oonunon  [uiiperty,  or  anything
xpended  on  it,  «  any  profit  nceired  from  it,  by
ny  of  the  joint  ownera.  Any  eoifoieal  thing,  aa
.  piece  of  laud,  or  a  alave,  night  be  the  aabject  of


(rno  BBtUBin  in  thia,  that  the  thing  lent  ia  not  one
of  thote  thinga  jkob  ponder*,  mmem,  msmnm
iiiaafiiaf.  aa  wine,  cran,  Ac ;  and  the  thing  commo-
daa  doe*  not  berome  the  proper^  of  the  receiver,
who  ia  thnefbre  boond  to  natore  the  aame  thing.
The  lender  rtaina  both  the  ownenhip  of  the  thing
and  the  piMiaaiiai  It  difien  from  locatjo  et  coa-
daetio  in  thia,  tbattbeiue  of  the  thing  ia  gratnitoiu.
The  eamnudatariu  ia  liable  lo  tbe  actio  Bumnodati,
if  he  doea  not  reaEore  tbe  thing  ;  and  he  it  bound
Id  Biake  good  all  injury  which  be&lla  the  thing
while  it  ia  in  hia  poaieaaion,  prorided  it  beaach
■rrfbl  penon  codd  have  prevented,
it  be  an  injury  which  tho  thing  bai
laniaca  m  6dng  uied  contrary  to  tbe  conditioni
IT  pnipoae  of  the  lending.  If  a  thing  woa  lent  tt
two  pmona,  eacbwaiMverally  liable  fiir  the  wholi
(b  anlidmn). In  aome  caaei  tha  eommodatarina


njaty  ■


waa  liaUe  for  any  mjury  malained  by  the  d
daaiioa  thmgh  hia  doloa,  a  culpa ;  aa,  for  im
if  he  knowingly  lent  him  bad  renela,  and  tbe  wi


fietiiiii.  (Oaiua,  It.  17  ;  I>ig.  13.  tit.  6 ;  Initit.
iti.  U.  S  3i  Thihaut,  SyHat,  tu.  |  177,  du.
»th  ed.  [O.  L.]

COMMD-NI  DIVIDU'NDO.A'CTIO.ia  ca
•T  tkae  aetiooa  which  have  been  oiled  miitae,
btm  the  etrcnmataDce  of  theii  bemg  paitly  n  ma
and  partly  ia  pmomam  ;  and  duplida  judieia,  &am
Ihe  dmmatancB  of  both  pluntiff  and  defendant
hcing  eqnally  inlereatcd  in  the  matter  of  the  anil
(Oaina,  ir.  1  GO),  Uioagh  the  peiaon  who  inaticnted
the  Iml  ^sceedioga  waa  pnperl^  the  actor.  It
ia  a^  is  the  laatitDtioiia  of  Jnatinaa,  of  the  three
aeiioaa  lor  a  diriaion,  '^miitam  cauvm  obtinere
liihiilai.  tBB  in  rcM  quHi  in  panwaia  "  (Intt-  4.


t.6. 8  a


COMOEDIA.

. They  wete,  however,  propeiiy  pef-


ally  (Oaioi,  iv.  42)  to  ^e  aereral  penona,  and
irder  (anu/ennum)  tbe  party  who  had  the  mora
'aliublfl  thing  or  thinga  to  pay  a  aum  of  money  to
he  other  by  way  of  eqoality  of  partition.  It  fbl-
owB  from  Ihi)  that  the  thinga  mnat  have  been
'alued  ;  and  it  appeari  that  a  ale  might  he  made,
fiir  the  judex  waa  hound  to  make  partition  in  the
way  that  wat  moat  to  tha  advantage  of  the  joint
ovrnera,  and  in  the  ny  in  which  they  agreed  that
partition  should  be  made  ;  and  it  appeart  that  the
joint  ownera  might  bid  lor  the  thing,  which  waa
common  property,  before  the  judex.  If  the  thing
waa  one  and  indiviaihle,  it  waa  adjudicated  to  one
of  the  partiei,  and  he  waa  ordered  to  pay  a  fiied
•urn  of  mcmey  to  the  other  or  otbera  of  the  partiea.
Thia  action,  ao  &r  aa  It  appliea  to  land,  and  thitt
of  &niiliafl  eniacundae,  bf&r  aome  naemblance  to
tbe  now  aboliahed  Engliih  writ  of  partition,  and
to  the  bill  m  eqniiy  for  partitiaiL  (1%.  1 0.  tit.  3  g
Cod.  3.  tit.  37  ;  Cic  Ad  Fam.  viL  12 ;  Braclon,
foL143.)  V^-'i^^

COMOE'DIA  (mt^fa},  comedy.  ).  Oaizii.
The  ariy  itagea  of  the  hiatot7  of  comedy  are
involved  in  great  indiitinctneta,  aa  they  neva
fijrmed  the  lubject  of  much  inquiry  even  when  in-
formation waa  extant.  Thia  waa  the  cate  even
among  the  Atheniani,  and  to  a  ttill  larger  extent
among  the  Doriana.  The  andent  Orei&a  aeldom
■howed  much  ^titode  for  antiqnarian  reaearch,
and  for  a  long  tune  comedy  waa  acanzly  thonebt
deaerving  of  attention  (AriatoL  Poa{.  £),  fiir,
though  iprisging  out  of  the  Dionyiiao  feativali,
it  had  not  that  predominantly  raligiona  character
which  tragedy  had.

That  comedy  took  ita  riae  at  the  vintage  fiati-
vala  of  Dionyaoa  ii  certain.  It  originated,  aa
Ariatotle  i^i  (FitL  K\  with  tiioae  who  led  off
the  phallic  aongi  (iwA  T£r  i\a^y&9tvip  tA  ^a\-
Aud)  of  the  band  of  reveller*  (irHfMt),  who  at  tbe
vintage  fettivala  of  Dionyaua  gave  eT]»eatIon  to
the  fwlinga  of  exuberant  Joy  and  merriment  which
were  r^uded  aa  appropriate  to  the  occaaiou,  by
parading  about,  partly  on  foot,  partly  in  wagona,
wiA  the  tymhol  of  the  productive  powen  of  na-
ture, nngtng  a  wild,  jovial  mg  in  hononr  of
Dionyaua  and  hit  eompaniona.  Tlieaa  aocgi  were
commcoly  intenperaed  with,  or  followed  by  petu-
lant, exten^ofal  (d>roffx<iiaaTuc4,  Aiiit  P»*.  4


S43  COMOEDIA.

winiclama  vith  which  the  nrellen  uxuled  th«
bjilaniien  (tea  the  demriptioD  of  the  phillophnri
at  Sicf on  in  Athen.  iit.  p.  623),  juil  ai  Hit  chonu
in  the  Pra/s  of  Arutophanei,  afiei  Ibeii  amg  to
Iscchui,  b%ui  ridiculing  Archedemua  <417,  &c.).
Thii  origiii  of  comcdj  i>  indicated  by  the  name
KBiU^la,  which  undoubledlj  man*  "  the  Kiag  a(
tbo  Kv^us.*^  Thifl  i^jpean  both  from  the  tatimoay
of  Ariitotle  that  it  ame  out  of  the  phsJIic  magi
and  from  Demogtbenea  (c  Mad.  p.  S17\  where
wa  fiud  mentioned  together  ^  K^fiot  vol  oi  Kttfuf-
SoL  (Comp.  MUller,  //iH.  o/  Or,  LiL -ml.  ii.  p.  4,
i)ar.  iT.  7.  §  1  ;  Bode,  GiicL  dtr  I/eStm.  Didlk.
itA,  ii.  put  2.  p.  1,  dLb  I  Kanngieuer,  die  aUe
Xomueia  BiOmr  at  Ali/rm,  p.  32.}  Other  deriva-
twill  of  the  name  were  howeTer  given  even  in
astiquitf.  Tha  Hegariani,  conceiiing  it  to  be
connected  with  the  word  xd^i),  and  to  mewi  "  nl-
lage-MBig,^'  appealed  to  the  nanu  at  an  evidence
of  the  niperiotit;  of  their  ciaim  to  be  con>idi:rEd
ai  Um  originatnrt  of  comedj-  over  that  of  (be
,  Athcaiani  (Ari*t.  J'Het.  3>  Thii  derivation  wu
aUo  adopted  bj  Kveral  of  the  old  grammariani
(He  Ticliei,  ia  Cratnei'a  Anend.  Or,  Tol  iiL  pp.
335,  337  1  Anonym,  npl  mriuftiiu  in  Meineke,
JlitL  Crii.  OBHic.  Graa.  pp.  535,  533,  553,  and  in
Bekker*!  Aied.  Gr.  p.  74?,  where  a  vciy  abiurd
account  of  the  origin  of  oomed;  ii  given),  and
hna  the  unctian  of  Beotley,  W.  Schneider,  and
eren  BenJiaidy  (finmdrin  d.  GrucL  Lti,  vol.  IL
p.Hi)2).

It  waa  among  tha  Doriani  that  comedy  finrt  at-
(nmed  anj  thiw  of  a  regular  abape.  The  Mega-
riana,  both  in  the  mother  countiy  aud  in  SicSy,
cUinied  to  be  conaidered  ai  ita  originaton  (Ariit.
Fitt.  i\  and  »  br  ai  the  comedy  of  Athena  i>
concerned,  the  clum  of  tho  former  appean  well
ibuided.  Thej  ware  alcaja  noted  for  their  coane
hmnoor  (Aiialoph.  Vap,  57,  with  the  achoL  ;
AnthoL  PaL  xl  440  g  Snidaa,  i;  v.  -yiMit ;  Bode,
ToL  iL  pL  3.  p.  27),  and  ihaii  democntical  con-
■titutioD,  which  wai  eatabliihed  at  an  eeriy  pariod,
&Taunid  the  derelopment  of  comody  in  the  proper
aauie  of  the  word.  In  the  ariatociatical  itatet  the
mimetic  impolie,  at  connected  with  the  laughable
or  abtiird,  waa  obliged  to  content  itielf  with  a  leu
imrcitraiiied  mode  of  manifeatation.  The  Lace-
daemoaiana,  who  had  a  great  (rodneu  for  ntimetic
and  onheatic  amuaementi,  had  their  ituniAurral,
whose  exhihitiooa  appear  to  have  bam  bnrieaquea
of  chancten  of  common  life.  The  fttoorite  per-
aonagei  were  the  froit^taaltr  and  tha  foreign
qoack,  lor  the  repreaentatioD  of  which  they  had  a
peculiar  mimetic  dance.  (Pollui,  iv.  §  1 05  ;  Athen.
ziv.  p.  621  i  Pint.  Jgn.  21.  p.  607,  d,  ApigM.
Lae.  f.  312,  &c  |  Schol.  ad  Apollai.  i.  746  ;
UUller,  Dor.  Sv.  6.  §  9  ;  Bemhardy,  L  e.  f.  8S4.>
AnaloBooa  to  the  Stiitr)\imcd  wen  the  Api«\-
AjKTai  (Hcaych.  i;  k).  AmcoR  the  loremiinen  i^
comedy  moat  be  mentioned  the  Phallopbori  and
Ithypballi  at  Sicyon.  It  waa  liere,  where  at  an
early  period  the  dithyramb  alio  waa  diamatiaed,
that  the  K%uii  firat  aaiamed  a  more  dramatic
form,  and  Dianyioa  waa  even  aaid  to  have  in-
TCQted  comedy  at  Sicyon  (AnthoL  PaL  xi.  32).
Tha  PLallophori  had  no  maaka,  bnt  covered  their
bcf  with  duplet!  of  wild  thyme,  acanthui,  ivy,
■nd  violeti,  and  thnw  akina  nmnd  them.  After
aingiag  a  bymn  to  Dimyana,  they  flonlad  and
jecxed  at  any  one  of  the  byatandera  wbom  they
•elected. The  Ithjoballi  wow  ffl-'


COMOEDIA
ing  dnmkoi  peraooi,  and  wen  equipped  in  ether
napecta  in  a  manner  which,  if  not  vuy  decent,
wai  appropriate  to  the  part  they  had  to  anataiiL
(Athen.  L  c.)  It  waa  the  iambic  improviaatiooa
of  the  eiarchi  of  anch  ehonuca  which  gave  riie  to
tho  later  comedy.  Antheaa  of  Ltndua  ia  ipiAen
of  aa  a  poet  who  composed  pieces  for  tuch  comuiea
of  phallna-bfsren,  which  were  called  comediea
(AUlen.  X.  p.  415^  Such  [uecei  have  been  ityled
lyrical  comedie*  by  many  acbolan  (aa  BSckh,
Ojrp.  ItacrijU.  No.  1684,  note  ;  and  Miiller,  Hut.
of  tie  Lii.  cf  Graeee,  vr^  ii.  p.  5),  to  diitinguiah
them  from  the  comedy  proper.  Lobeck  and  Her-
mann however  itoaJy  deny  that  there  waa  any
luch  thing  aa  lyrital  tragedy  or  comedy  dialioct


affirm  that  the  tiagediei  and  cmnedia  whic
hear  of  before  tho  riu  of  the  regular  drama  were
only  a  epeciea  of  dilbyramb  and  phallic  aong.
(Hermann,  de  l^'ogoedta  CoaordiaqM  l^frifo^  in
Opiuc  loL  liL  p.  211,  &c)  The  diapnte  ii  more
about  niunea  than  about  thingi  ;  and  then  aeons
no  great  objection  to  applymg  the  tena  bfrieal
tragedy  or  cosicrfjr  to  piece!  mteaded  to  be  per-
formed  by  ehonuca,  without  any  actora  diatinct  from
the  choriu,  and  having  a  more  dramatic  caat  thaA
other  purely  lyrical  longi.  Thia,  apparently,  waa
the  point  to  which  comedy  atlained  among  the
Megariana  before  SniarioD  introdnced  it  into  At-
tiau  It  ame  out  of  the  union  of  the  ismbjo
lampoon  with  the  phallic  songi  of  the  comoi^  juat
a>  tra^y  amw  out  of  tho  union  'of  ihajHodinl
recitationa  with  the  dllbyiamb.

Among  the  Atlieniant  the  first  aCtcmpta  at
comedy,  according  to  the  almost  unanimona  ac.
count!  of  anliqnitj,  were  made  at  Icaria  by  Su-
aarion,  a  native  of  Tripodiacni  in  Hegarn.  (schoL
ad  Diai^fi.  Time,  in  Bekker'i  .Jitgcii.  Gr.  p.  748  ;
Aapaiiua,  Ad  AriiloL  Eli.  Nic  iv.  3.  30.  foL
53,  B.)  Icaria  wis  the  oldeil  sent  of  the  wonhip
of  Dionymt  in  Attica  (Athen.  iL  p.  40),  and
eonina  procoaiona  must  nudoubtcdly  have  been
known  there  long  before  the  time  of  Susarioit.
lambiatic  raillery  waa  also  an  amuaement  alrcad;
known  in  the  feativala  of  Bacchus  and  Dcmetec
(MiUlcr,  HiiL  <f  Lit  cf  Gr.  ral  I  f.  132  ;
ilciychius,  •.  V.  rtfiipurrai  ;  Suidas,  a.  v.  yt^v-
piCur;  SchoL  Arist  AiAan.  703).  From  tha
jests  and  heuteringa  directed  by  the  Bacchic  co-
mus,  as  it  paraded  abont,  againal  the  bystanders,
or  any  otnen  whom  they  selected,  arose  tha
prorerb  ri  ii  ifiaint  (Schol.  Aiiat.  Smut.  544,
Nat.  296  i  Suidas,  k  v.  ;  Ulpianus  ad  Demoath.
da  Cor.  p.  2e8,  ed.  Reiika ;  Bode,  J.  a  p.  S3  ;
Photios,  Lea.  a.  «.  t^  J>  T«r  l^w).  Thia
Bmusemmt  continued  customary  not  only  at  the
rural  Dionytia,  but  at  the  AniheMeria,  on  tha
Kcondday  of  lhefestivB][DioNTSuJ.  Itwna  in
the  third  ^ear  of  the  60th  Olympad  (b.c  578),
that  Sosanon  introduced  at  Itaiia  comedy  ia  that
st^e  of  development  to  which  it  had  attuned
among  the  Megariana  (Mar.  Par.  ep.  40.  in
Bilckh's  OoTjmi  lucript.  vd.  iL  f.  301).  It  ia
not  however  easy  to  decide  in  what  his  improve-
ments  conaiited.  Of  coune  there  wen  no  actm
beside  the  chonu  or  comns  ;  whatever  there  waa
of  dnma  mnst  have  been  p^fbrmed  by  the  latter.
The  introduction  of  an  actor  acfarate  fran  the
chonis,  was  an  improvement  not  yet  mode  in  the


CXJMOEDIA.
*^**-'*«ir— ■-*'"'— '■'•^ [infill iMimiiiif  till
e^um  >  tnkr  BBtriol  Ibnn  (ScboL  ad  0009$.
•nrac  ap.  Bckktf,  Amiet.  (fr.  p^  718  ;  Hcineke,
Le.f.  M9>.  H*  na  doubt  nbuituted  far  the
BKCe  aDeicnt  iraimrintiai*  of  tbe  clunii  and  iti
badn  pnaieditued  ecnpcwtkoi,  though  Kill  of
tka  Haw  gnwal  kind  ;  for,  u  Ahftotle  BJi
tP—L.  c.  5X  Cnta  ni  tbe  &n  who  ^*w,
*f<jiiini  ▼$*  lav^uw  BAu  «Wa«v  (wm
Ail— I  4  ftMcH;  ThoB  wmdd  Mam  alio  Co  hsTe
been  aBne  kind  of  poatical  eottteit,  tat  m  Icam
Urn  tba  pile  far  die  niceeMful  pnet  Inu  *  ba>k«t
of  %■  and  a  jar  of  wiua  (Mann.  Fab  f,  c ;  Bentley,
Di-iH.  M  «>  £>.  1/  i>U:  ToL  L  p.  3i9,  ed.
Dje«)L It  «M  aln  tba  pfaetica  of  thcaa  who

•-Ua,  d


aDed  Tp>7^^'»  <■  lataoB^  Ollien  taaumMi
tbe  oaBa  with  the  draanKance  of  s  jn  of  new
■nw  (Tp^O  being  the  prim  fa  the  mooMdnl
pact.  (AtbcD.  ii.  p.  40  ;  ADan.  ap.  Heineke,  L  e.
p.  SM  ;  AtiitDpta.  Adurw.  L  478,  ftc ;  Fngm.
ap.  Alha.  xiL  p.  BH  ;  JctarHL  3il,  803,  Vi^,
tat,  1634  ;  Scbd.  ad  AriK.  ^(ion.  S97,  4M  ;
ScboL  ad  Plal.  di  Rtp.  iiL  p.  S2S,  ed.  BmL  et
OlcIL :  BfBtlej,  Dumrt.  cm  tUBp.  o/PiaL  t»1.  I
p.  Ml,  Ac  ed.  Dim;  Bode,  J.  D.  p.  33.)  There
OB  be  bat  little  qoatien  that  Btmrion'i  piece*
«n  aMielj  inttoded  bt  tha  naianDeiK  of  the
boar,  aDdwcnwitcamBittad  tomi^  (Batla;,
I.e.  f.  250,  Ac  ;  AiMmjin.  de  Com,  af.  Heineke,
Lcf.  540  :  Bode,  L  c).  The  eomedy  of  Suarioa
iliialiiliM  partook  of  that  petahuit,  eoane,  aDd
aanatiajiied  penonalit;  for  which  the  M^ariaii
t«edj  wa*  noted.  For  aitBtainmeiita  of  rach  a
character  tba  AtheDiaiia  woa  not  yet  pnpamL
Tbtf  mjaitad  tba  ficedom  of  a  democrac;.  Ac-
cadn^.aaMd^  waadiieonnvediBDd  for  eiaht;

«f  it  in  Attica.

It  waa.  bowna,  in  Bicilj,  that  eoocdj'  wai
•aiUtat  farongfat  to  •Hnathing  like  perfecttoiL  Tbe
Giaek*  in  SieiljalwaneilubitadaliTelj'tanpeni-
n^A,  aad  tba  gift  of  wmkisg  np  any  oecDRsiee
iate  a  a^tad,  Snent  dialogae.  (Cic.  Vtrr,  it,  43,
7>«a.  H  Caaa.  9,  OraL  u.  £4 ;  QnintiL  n.  3.
I  4L)  Thii  beol^  finding  ita  iUninliu  in  the
I II  ill  ■ml  [aiiiliiu  il  by  the  political  cDnteati,  which
win  BO  freqacot  in  the  diflerait  dtiia,  and  the

th  tba  wtnhip  of  DcDwter


cailf  take  ill  liaa  aBoog  than.  Yet  bdve  the  tiow
of  tk  Parnaa  wan,  we  oolj  baar  of  iaabio  cem-
j—i-i— — .  and  af  a  moAi  poet,  Anatoxeuu,  Tlie
pRfMiam  wo*  calhd  •fa'scMta^  i.  a.  iapo-
niatena  (AAoL  xir.  >  622. ;  EtjnLMun.Ke;
a»nKrfS.;B«MatiLa/AxLp,BS4.45;  He^rch.
LK,-AnBlol.Afaliil7.|l  ;  Bode,  La.  p. B,  Ac),
■od,  aabaeqncBtly,  Iiv4w.  Their  entertaiumenU
hrfng  of  a  ebotal  chancier  were,  dosbtleo,  ao-
I  naiiaiiii  il  bj  miuie  and  dancing.  Athenaeoi
(nr.  p.  «39)  menliin*  a  dan»  called  the  lo^ia^,
wbick  be  ranka  with  the  ntptoj  and  aiiumt.
Aflacwarda,  tba  cianie  einneul  *«•  developed
'  a  of  nligioin  legend*,  partly


COHOEDIA.  143

and  Xeaarehni.  Epichanmn  ia  Tery  eomnkouly
called  the  inientor  cf  comedy  by  the  gnumnariani
and  othm  (Theoer.  Epls.  17  i  Snidoi  i.  v.
'EvlxBpw  ;  Solinni,  b,  13);  thii,  howarer,  ■■
Ima  only  of  that  nuae  artiitical  *h^ie  which  be

Sra  to  it  (Benihardy,I.s.  i).9D0.)  In  hii  (Aorta
appear!  to  hue  b»ni  aaiociated  with  Phranii,
a  ocimewhu  older  ecatempoiaiy.  Tha  Megariina
in  Sicily  claimed  the  honour  of  tha  inTentieb  of'
oomedy,  on  account  of  hii  luTii^  lired  in  Megan
befi»e  he  went  to  Syiaenae.  (^Dittiaiiirji  ofBiog.
aitd  MfUL  art.  .^iiatiiiiiiai.)  According  to
Aiiitolle  (PoA  5)  Epichannua  and  Phmmia
were  the  fint  who  began  /Movi  mUai  j  wbicb
Bemhaidy  {Lt.  f.  898}  nDdentandf  to  mean  that
they  were  the  firal  to  inlrodneei^ntarplota. Tba


„  it  baa  been  aenuned
(Qiyw,  d*  Dor.  Cam.  p.  300,  ftc)  that  he  and
Phonaia  were  tba  eartieat  comie  poeti  whoae  worb
naiJied  poataitr  in  a  wiittni  finin.  (Bentlay,  La,
p.  461.)  But  tba  comedy  of  Epichannii  waa  rf
biief  duration.  We  hear  of  no  ancetaaow  to  hiai
except  hia  ion  or  diaciple  Deinoloehna.

Ia  Attio,  the  fint  comic  poet  of  any  impot-
anca  whom  wa  hear  of  aits  Sniarian  ia  Chiooidei,
who  i*  aaid  to  hare  brought  ml  idayi  in  a,  c  488
(Snidai  1.  ti.  XiwUhii).  Enetea,  Enienidea,  and
Hyiluiwere  probably  contempontTiei  of  Chinddei ;
he  waa  followed  W  Magna  and  Ecphanlidea^
Their  connnailioBa,  hawerar,  aaem  to  baie  been
tittle  hot  tha  nimdiictiao  of  tba  old  Hegaiie  farce
of  Soaarioi,  dinring,  no  donht,  in  fiini,  by  tha
inttadnction  of  .an  actor  or  aclot^  aajarale  from
the  cbona,  m  bnilation  of  the  iin[iOTenMntB  that
had  been  made  in  taagedy.  (Bode,  Lap.  39 — 36.)


admin  iitration  of  Peridci  oonwdy  funnd  lira
•cope,  and  npidly  rtached  ita  perfection.  Ciatinna
ii  mid  to  have  been  the  firit  who  introdnoed  three
actora  in  a  comedy.  (Anonym,  da  Cbak  ^h  Mei-
neke^  p.  640.)  Bat  Ciatet  ii  apoken  of  ai  tbe  lint
whs  began  laMAdu  woiiik'  Aifynit  1)  >iMovi  (Ariat.
Pmt  A),  I  e.  railed  comedy  from  being  a  mere


rcali^,  or  atorita  of  bia  own  ianntko  nceived
■  Erae,  poetic  trcabnent,  tha  cbaraclHi  introdnoed
being  iMbet  genandiaatioiii  than  particalar  indi*
Tidula.  (Sea  Arialotle^  diatinelion  batncn  t&
KoT  ftaerw  asd  t&  *M>j»,  PoeL  9.)  In  what
ia  known  of  hia  pleoeano  tmoca  aneac  of  anythmg
of  a  peraooal  or  politkal  kind.  Ha  wa*  the  liral
who  introduced  into  bia  peeta  the  character  of  a
dmnken  man.  (Anctiym.  dt  Chm.  ap.  Meincke,
p.  £30.)  Tboogh  Oatea  wa*  a  younger  coatem.
poraiy  of  Cra^nu,  and  at  Gin  an  aotra'  in  hia
pecea,  yet,  except  perba{a  hia  earlier  playi,  tha
comedie*  of  Cralmna  were  an  imtmrement  nnin
those  of  Crate*,  a*  they  miited  with  the  uniTeraaHtr
of  the  latter  the  pnngenl  psaooal  ■tire  and  eameil
political  porpcae  which  chaiactetiaed  the  cJd  conedr
(Bemhudy,  JL  a.  pp.  942,  946.)  CsKa  and  hia
imitator  Pherecrate*  nen  in  the  eharaour  qf  Ih^
piece*  to  haT«  had  laim  aAni^  with  tha  niddk


3U  COMOEDTA.

tbu  vitb  the  old  coined;.  The  litter  lot  bc«n
d«cribed  ai  the  camed;  of  oiic&tDR,  and  nicb
indeed  it  »u,  but  it  wu  *1m  a  grat  d«l  more.
A%  it  appeared  in  the  haodi  of  iti  gnat  maaten
Criitinii^  Hemiippm,  Eapolia,  aod  eipeciallj  Aiia-


thmn^oat  paStieaL  ErctTtbing  (hat  b«v  npon
dw  polhiad  tr  Mcial  inlenat*  of  the  Atheniuu
famuhed  mUeriali  for  h.  It  aMuled  erajtliiiig
that  thnataned  liberty,  religion,  M>d  the  old  eata-
Uiahed  priDcipIc*  of  aoeial  monlit;  aod  taate,  and
t«Ddcd  to  detract  fnm  the  tiue  nobleaeei  of  the
Greek  chsnctec.  It  perfonuEd  the  fimctiona  of
a  pnhlic  cenaocahip.  (Hot.  Serm.  14.  1,  &c  ;
Jncmt.  da  Pate,  p.  161  ;  Dion  diryMMt  voliL
p.4,  ed.  Rail.;  Cic  di  Htp.  iv.  10.)  Thongb
menl;  peraooat  ntire,  haring  no  higher  ohject
than  the  apart  of  the  mament,  wai  by  no  meoui
excladed,  yet  conunonlj  it  ia  on  poliliau  or  getieml
gtonnd*  tlut  iadJiidiiala  an  faraught  fonrud  and
Mtiliied.  A  gmondworic  of  reality  uauallj  lay  at
the  baaia  of  the  moat  imaginatiTo  fonna  which  ila
wild  licence  adopted.  AH  kinda  of  pbantaatic
impeninationiaiidniythologicitlbeingiTere  mixed
>p  with  thoae  o(  real  life.  Wiib  luch  unbounded
■torn  of  materiala  for  the  nihject  and  form  of
comediea,  tomplicated  plota  were  of  cooiaa  an-
DOceaBuy,  and  vere  not  adopted.  Thoogh  the
old  comedy  could  only  anbain  under  a  dctnocraey,
it  deaerrea  to  be  remarked  that  iti  poeU  were


were  to  be  foond  among  the  comic  poetL

In  the  year  B.  c.  140,  a  law  wai  pawed  toG  fij)
iuitHf9i!r  (SchoL  Ariit.  Adorn.  67),  which  ce-
majned  in  fane  fiir  lliree  yean,  when  it  vai  re-
pealed. Some  (c.g.  Clinton,  F.H,  i,  a.)  nndci-
ttuii  the  law  to  Iiave  beena  prohibition  of  comedy^
allogethei^  othen  (Meineke,  J.  a  p.  40  ;  Bemhardy,
p>  943)  a  piohibition  agoinat  bringing  forward  in-
UTidnala  in  their  proper  hiatorical  penonality  and
ludo'  their  own  name,  in  order  Co  ridicule  them
(jtil  iimtufittii  bniioari).  To  the  aame  period
probably  belongi  the  law  that  no  Areopogite  ihould
writs  comediea.  (Pint.  <k  Otar.  AIL  p.  348,  c)
Aboat  B.C.  415,  apparently  at  the  initigation  of
Alcibiade^  the  law  of  440,  or  at  all  eventi  a  law
t^  nmfi^fito'  hfofiOFrlj  vaa  again  paaied  on  the
nutian  of  ona  Syncoahu  (SchoL  AriiL  Ant,  13S7).
Bat  the  law  rady  remained  in  fcjrce  for  a  abort
time(Haineke,  p.41).  Thenatore  of  the  political
eventa  in  the  enmiiig  period  would  of  jtaelf  act
m  check  npon  the  ticenea  of  the  comic  poeta.  A
man  named  Antimachoa  got  a  law  like  that  of
Syiacoaiua  paaaed,  hot  the  date  of  il  ii  not  la
<gchoL  Anat.  Aiiatii.  1149.)  With  the
throw  of  the  democracy  in  411,  comedy  would  of
conna  be  lilenced,  but  m  the  reitontioa  of  the
democracy,  comedy  again  rerired.  li  wu  donbt-
leaaagainreatnined hythe  thirty  tynnta.  During
the  liltei  part  of  the  Petoponneoian  war  alio  it
became  a  matter  of  dilliculty  to  get  chor^  ;  and
bindraiicia  were  eometimea  thrown  in  the  way  of
the  comic  poeU  by  thoae  who  had  been  attacked  by
them.  <Sciial.AiutAi».l£3,)  AKyrrhitia, thoogh
when  ia  not  known,  got  the  pay  of  the  poeta
Itsaened.  (Schol.  Arut.  Bai  102.)  The  old
Attic  comedy  laated  from  OL  80  to  01.  94  (a.  c
458 — 104). Pram  Ciatinaa  to  Theopompoi  then


fbenm


COMOEDIA.
tbem  aimanted  altogether  to  3GS.  (Anon,  dt
a>iB.8p.Meineke,p,S35;Bode,te.p.lOB.)  An
"  ~  and  oompendioaa  acconnt  of  theae  poet!
ii  giien  by  Bemhardy.  {Onmdriii  dtr  Oritti.
£tl.  ToliL  p.  94S — .954.)  A  more  extended  acowiit
will  be  found  in  Meineke  («ut  Oril.  Chaae.  Oraec
forming  voL  L  of  hia  Praffm,  Cobl  Oraee.)^  and  in
Bode  (QaA  iter  HtOtn.  Diciilk.  roL  iiL  pL  iL  p.
106,  &c  Ac).  The  reader  it  alao  nfored  to  the
Biticlea  Cnte*,  Cratinni,  PherecisteB,  Ilermipptta,
Eupolia  and  Aiiatophanea  in  the  Dietiatary  0/
GrviamdRomoMBijigrapifandAffliolagf.  (Cwnp^
Rfitacher,  Arittojilama  lurf  ana  Za^ilcr:  and
Schleget'a  ZsAuaion  Drmiatie  Arl  aitd  LUtrtiiBt.)
The  lator  piecei  of  Arittopbanea  belong  to  the
Middle  nlher  than  to  the  Old  Comedy.  The  old
Mc^ianc  comedy,  which  waa  imfvured  by  Maeaon,
by  ^0  intiodnction  of  itanding  chancten  (Athen.
ii>.  p.  659,  a.)  continoed  for  aome  time  to  aabaiat
by  the  ude  of  the  more  artiatically  deieli^wd  Attic
comedy,  aa  did  the  ancient  lambiatie  entertain-
mentt  both  in  Syiaenae  and  in  the  Dorian  itolet
of  Greece. (AriR.  PatL  4  ;  Bode,  JL  0.  p.  28.)

It  waa  not  viual  for  comic  poeta  to  brmg  forward
mon  than  one  or  two  comediea  at  a  time  ;  and

could  not  bring  fbrwaid  comediea  before  he  waa  of
a  certain  age,  which  ii  lariotuly  elated  at  thirty  or
forty  yesn.  (Arittopb.  NmI>.  530,  with  the  icho-
liaaL)  To  decide  on  the  merita  of  the  comediea
eibibitcd,  five  judgea  wen  appointed,  whicb  waa
half  the  number  of  thoae  who  adjndged  the  priie
fi»  tnoedy. (SchoL  ad  AriaL  Av.  445  g  Heaych.

The  chonu  in  a  comedy  eoniiatad  of  twenlj-
four. [Chobue.]

The  dance  of  (he  chonia  waa  tha  'if^oi,  tha
morementa  of  which  wen  cspricioQi  and  licenliooa,
conaiiting  partly  in  a  reeling  to  and  fro,  in  imitation
of  a  dronken  man,  and  in  TBTiom  unieemly  and
imraodeit  galura.  For  a  ciliien  to  dance  the
Kiftai  tober  and  without  a  nuuk,  waa  looked
npon  aa  the  height  of  ihameleesneaa.  (Tbeophiaat.
Oarad.  6.)  The  choientae  were  attired  in  the
moat  indecent  manner.  (Schd.  ad  Ariat  Nmi.
£37.)  Ariatinbanea,  howerei,  and  probahtj  other
comic  poett  idao,  fiw|uent1y  diipenaed  with  the
*ipiti.  (AriiLiVW5.S37,&c5£3,&c.:  Schneider,
' - ■ ■ —  p.  229,  St) Comediea


the  Farabaaia,  when  the  acton  having  lefi  the  ataigc,
tha  choral,  which  waa  ordinarily  divided  bto  four
rowi,  eonlaining  six  each  (Polinx,  it.  103  ;  Schd.
ad  Ariat  /tu.  733),  and  wu  turned  towarda  tha
ilage,  turned  round,  and  advandng  towarda  the
apcctaton  delivered  an  addreaa  to  them  in  the
name  of  the  poet,  either  <Mi  pnbtic  topica  of  KeDctal
intereit,  or  on  matten  which  concerned  the  pout
peraonally,  critioaing  hU  rivala  and  oalling  attention
to  hia  merita ;  the  addreaa  having  nothing  what-
ever to  do  with  the  action  of  tha  ^y.  (SchoL  ad
Ariat.  NA  518,  Pae.  733,  Iti/rii.  505.)  The
giammariana  apeak  of  it  ai  being  dinded  into  the
Ibllowing  portiona :  — ^  1 ,  A  abort  introduction  (the
Mmiirtor)  ;  3.  The  rafUmaii  in  the  namwer
•erne  of  the  word,  or  drdracrrDt,  which  waa  the
prineipBl  part ;  and  ntiully  conaitted  of  a  tyitem
of  onapaeatie  or  trochaic  tetramctera,  in  which  caao
it  waa  the  practice  for  it  to  cIom  with  what  waa


COHOEDIA.
icDo,  vbich  the  >p«ker  bad  to  Qttcr  in  s  bnath,
tad  bj  «Ucb  he  mi  to  appar  to  bs  choked  ;  3.
Tlie  irrpefBi ;  i.  The  twif^/ut ;  B.  The  iw.-
rrftfi,  mumriiig  to  tie  mpafi ;  6.  The  irr-
*«i#T|>in,  «ii«wgriiigto  the  *-W^  The  (tnipfae
And  Bntiitrmbe  irvn  tang  by  half  cboroKi,  and
mra  pnbaUjr  ■econpanied  t^  dancing,  being  the
mlj  part)  cf  ths  pantMS  that  wen  k>  aceom-
pBued.  (Bode  Ls.  P.2TS.)  The  rtienm  and  epir-
ftmaa  was  ottend  b;  nngle  chomitBe.  The  jwn-
bana,  howwer,  did  not  always  contain  all  theae
pane  ampltte.  The  oricia  of  the  patabana  la  not
qaite  char.  Poaiiblj  in  tbo  eulier  atagea  of
wtdy,  ^w  poet  nni  with  Ihe  oomn*  pracenion,
and  in  the  coone  of  ita  performance  addressed  a
jpcfch  in  faia  own  penon  to  tlie  apectatora.  (EtynL
Hagn.  p.  6-28  ;  PoUnz,  it.  1 1 1  ;  SchoL  ad  Aiirt.
A~^510,  1113,  PiK.7iZ;  HTpolho.  sd  AriiL
Kmi.  :  HoiBann,  Eltm.  DoeL  MMr.  iil  21,  p.  720,
ht.  ;  KaDDgieaaei,  AlU  San.  BHau,  p.  iSB,  Ac  ;
Koltfn,  dt  Pantaii.)  The  panbana  wu  not
mnoBDjinlndiuadithneiJajB  otAriatsphaiua,
tha  Tfiiliaiannar, LTuatrata,  and  Platua  hare

Aa  tbe  M  Attic  c<n«dy  wu  the  ofitpiing  of  the
piJitioU  and  aocial  ngonr  and  freedom  of  the  age
dnriag  vhicb  it  donriabed,  it  natnrally  dedined
aad  navd  with  the  decline  and  orerthnw  of  the
frcedaa  and  ngont  which  were  necnaaiy  for  ila
derdafancBt.  It  «ai  re(Jaced  bjr  a  oomedy  of
i  aaai  ahnt  diffamt  gtjle,  which  Toa  knewn  u
tke  Hiddla  ccotedj,  the  age  of  which  luted
turn  tbr  «od  of  the  Peloponnenan  war  to  the
BTtrthrowof  libertjbyPhilipofMacedon.  (OL  9i
— 110.)  Dining  thia  period,  the  Athenian  state
bad  dia  4brm,  but  n<HH  of  the  spirit  of  its  earlier
democntical  eanitilotion,  and  the  eueig;  and  pab-
be  ^irit  of  (BTtiet  jean  had  departed.  The
oaaedj  of  this  period  accordiDglf  finuid  ita  mate-
lab  in  aatiriaing  daaea  of  people  instead  of  indi-
*idBla,  in  criiiciaing  the  syatems  and  raerits  of
phihiphefl  and  literary  men,  and  in  panxties  of
the  csmpantioDa  of  liTinc  and  earlier  poets,  and
naitatiea  of  mythologicBr  anbjectL  It  formed
traaartiaD  from  (he  old  to  the  Dew  comedy,  ar
aptaiiiiuiated  to  the  latter  in  the  greatec  attentii
TO  ibe  ecaiametian  of  plots  which  •eem  freqnenllj
to  bale  been  fmmded  a>  aminona  intrignei  (Bode,
p.  3M),  and  in  the  abaence  of  that  wild  grotnqne-
ntas  which  marked  the  old  comedy.  As  regards
iu  eitfraal  ftnn,  the  plajs  of  the  middle  comedy,
genefB%qieaUi^,hadneilhnparal)a)ianorchorna.
(Pbttiajna,  de  D^.  Gm.  ap.  Meineke,  p.  633.)
Tke  abaCDce  of  the  chomi  was  occaiiDDed,  partly
by  tbe  change  in  Ihe  apirit  of  comedy  itaet^  partly
1^  the  inereaaing  diffimlty  of  finding  persons  capabi  e
if  andotaking  the  dniiea  of  choregns.  At  the
cfaai^  in  comedy  itself  waa  gradual,  so  it  ii  most
Ukdy  that  tbe  Blteratiaa  in  form  were  brought
aboBl  by  dagraea.  At  first  showiDg  the  want  of
prapa  mnsial  and  orehesUc  training,  the  chomi
was  at  last  imffprA  altogether.  Soine  of  the  frag-
aents  of  piece*  of  tbe  middle  comedy  iriiieh  bare
ivadked  ns  are  of  a  lyrical  kind,  indicating  the
prewncc  of  a  choraa.  The  poets  of  thia  school  of
comedy  aeem  to  baTe  been  eitraardinaiily  prolific.
Alheuena  (TiiL  p.  336,d.)  says,  that  he  had  read
aiore  SM  dramaa  d  the  middle  comedy.  Only  a
tew  fiagmenta  are  now  eitanL Heineke  {Hi^

CriL  Com.  Or, — "

roaticflbam


COMOEfilA.  345-

were  Antiphanea  and  Alexis.  (Bode,  Le.f.  393,
he  J  Bcmhardy,  p.  1000,  &c.)

The  new  comedy  was  a  further  development  of
the  last  mentioned  kind.  It  answered  aa  nearly
as  may  be  to  the  modem  comedy  of  mannera  or
character.  Dropping  for  the  moat  part  personal
allnnona,  caricaOue,  ridieole,  and  parody,  which,
in  a  more  general  form  than  in  the  oM  comedy,
had  maintained  their  ground  in  the  middle  comedy,
the  poets  of  the  new  comedy  mads  it  their  boainess
to  reproduce  in  a  geneialiied  fnm  a  picture  of  the
etery-day  life  of  those  by  whom  they  were  sui-
ronnded.  Hence  the  grammarian  Aristophanea
asked :  1  VUnitf  k^  jSIf,  tniripoT  ip'  i/iAr
simper  briiutrtiirizTO  (Meineke,  prae/.  Mm,  p,
33).  The  new  comedy  might  be  described  in  ths
words  of>Cicero  (lis  AgD.  It.  11),  as  "imilalionem
vitae,  speculnm  coninetndlnia,  imaginem  veritalii."
The  frequent  introdncCion  of  sententious  niaiima
was  a  point  of  reaemblanca  with  the  later  tragic
poets.  There  were  Tarions  standing  characters
which  finmd  a  place  in  moat  plays,  such  aa  we
find  in  the  playi  of  Plautus  and  Terence,  the  laio
petjuna,  amator  firvidm,  urtmbu  BaUidia,  amua
illudau,  iBdalu  opituialar,  mila  prMliatcr,  jMro'
tiim  edaSf  partnteM  teBoast,  ntetiefrkMt  pmcaca^
(AppBl/tor.  16;0rid,-lnu»-,L  16,17.)  Inlho
new  comedy  there  was  no  chomi,  and  the  dramaa
were  commonly  introduced  by  [aohigaa,  spoken
by  allegorical  penonagea,  soch  titt-iyxpt,  *Moi,
'A^p.  The  new  comedy  flonriahed  Gram  about
B.  c.  840  to  B.  c  260.  The  poets  of  the  new  comedy
amounted  to  64  in  number.  The  moat  distinguished
was  Menander.  Next  to  him  in  merit  came  Phile-
mon, Diphilua,  Fhilippldet,  Poaidippus,  and  Apol-
lodonu  of  Carystua.  (Bemhardy,  p.  lOOB,  &c ;
Meineke,  i.  a  p.  *35,  &c.)

Respecting  tbe  maski  used  in  comedy  the  render
is  referred  to  the  article  PsnsoiiA.  The  ordinary
costume  was  the  jfo^i,  which  for  old  men  waa
unfulled.  Peasants  carried  a  knapsack,  a  cudgel,
and  a  skin  of  soma  kind  (Ilf-hpo).  Toimg  men
had  a  purple  tunic  ;  parasites  a  black  or  grey  one,
with  a  comb  and  a  box  of  ointment.  Courteians
bad  a  coloured  tsnic,  and  a  variegated  cloak  orer
it,  with  a  wand  in  Iheir  hand.  ShiTes  wore  a
small  TariegHted  cloak  over  their  tunic  ;  cooks  on
unfulled  double  mantle  ;  old  women  a  yellow  or
blue  dress  ;  priestesKs  and  maidens  a  white  one  ;
beireasea  a  white  dress  with  a  fringe  i  bawds  and
the  mothETS  of  hetaeruc  had  a  purple  bond  round
the  head ;  panderera  a  dyed  tunic,  with  a  varie-
gated cloak  and  a  atiaight  italT,  called  Sfttrxai.
(PoUui,  iv.  IIB,  &C.,  viL  «7  !  EtymoL  Magn.  p.
349.  43 ;  A.  Oell.  vil.  IS.)  The  authorities
howerer,  on  these  pointa  are  not  very  fiill,  and  not
quite  accordant.

2.  Raii.iN.  —  The  accounts  of  the  early  stages
of  comic  poetry  among  the  Romans  are  scanty,  and
leave  many  points  unexplained,  but  they  are  f^.
bably  trustworthy  as  br  aa  they  go.  Little  is
known  on  the  subject  bat  what  Livy  telli  ns  (viL
4).  According  to  his  occonnt  in  the  year  n.  c  363,
on  (he  ocosion  of  a  severe  pestilence,  among  other
ceremoniea  for  averting  the  anger  of  the  deities
Bcenic  entertaimnenta  were  introduced  from  Etmria,

ment.  Tuscan  players  {Iadv3*a\  irtio  were  fetched
from  Etiuria,  eihibited  a  sort  irf  pantomimic  dance
to  the  music  of  a  flute,  witbont  any  song  accom-
fonyiog  their  dance,  and. without  jtgnlw  i^Miatio


3iG  COMOEDtA.

get&aHttim,  Tha  unowmcnl  becanui  popoln,  and

m*  imitated  bf  the  young  Hnnmm,  who  (though
Iwir  MNn  ii  Dot  itattd)  impnnd  apm  the  original
(mtoituiuiieot  bj  tmiting  with  it  ratemponoooiu
nntnal  niUery,  couipoted  iA  a  rnds  invgulw  ish-
ture,  A  ipecies  of  divmion  which  hod  been  loog
ImowD  among  the  Rooiaai  at  their  agntriao  lo-
tiiali  nniler  the  name  of  ffgoamMn  {FascaN-
Hina].  Thejr  leguUted  their  dance*  w  aa  to  ei-
pieu  the  unae  of  the  iroida.  Thoae  who  had  ao
aptitude  ior  this  aort  of  rejffviealatioB  Kt  them-
•elvei  to  improra  ita  form,  tnpplaiiUDg  the  old
FeKemiiae  Tenet  b;  more  regidar  oompoaitioui,
'which  howcTBT  had  not  sa  yet  aoy  tlung  like
dnuoatic  unity  oc  a  ruulai  plot,  but  boat  the  mi*-
oellaneoni  natiue  of  the  lubjeeta  intnduoed  were
oiled  ntaraa  [Satusi].  ThOH  who  took  jmit
in  IhcH  eihihitiona  were  called  iiiMomei,  JMer
being  the  EtnucBo  word  which  aniweied  to  the
Latin  Itdio  [Hibthio].  It  wti  133  yean  after
the  fint  introdnction  of  tbaw  acaaio  pnfonnaDcet
before  the  iinproTHtient  waa  introdaced  of  luiTiiig
a  regular  ploL  Thii  adTaoee  iraa  made  by  Liiiva
Andronicui,  a  native  of  Magna  Oraecia,  in  B>  c.
340.  Hia  pieces,  which  were  both  tragediet  and
Hnediet,  were  merely  adaptationa  of  Oreeir  draiaai.


aa  a  teiidenc
a  tnop  of  playen,
pece*. The  lepretentation  of  regular  piayi  of  thia
Bort  wai  now  left  to  those  who  were  hiatrionoa  by


fbroigncn  or  alarea  ;  the  freo-bom  youth  oC  Rome
cooGned  iheii  own  Kenio  petfiniitancet  to  the
older,  iiTegular  farces,  which  long  maintained  their
ground,  and  were  aubKquently  odled  axodia,  being,
aa  Liiy  u^  B/mKriu  filellii  pBiaamum  Alellimu,

that  time,  wai  himself  an  actor  in  hia  own  pieces.
Uia  Latin  adapta^ona  of  Oceek  ptaya,  though  they
had  DO  chorus,  were  interapened  with  monodies,
which  were  more  lyrical  in  their  metrical  form,
and  more  impaaaioned  in  their  tone  than  the  ordi-
nary  dialogue  partL  In  the  mnaicol  recitation  of
those  Liiiua  leena  to  have  been  very  aucceasliil,
and  was  frequently  eDCOied.  The  eiertioii  being
too  much  for  hie  Toioe,  he  mtrodueed  the  jaactice
ID  these  monodies,  cff  an/us,  of  placing  a  alave
beaide  the  flute  playK  to  mate  or  chaunt  Uie  wordi,
while  he  himself  went  through  the  appropriate
gneticiilBtiaa.  This  became  the  uanal  practice  from
that  time,  so  that  in  the  cantica  the  histcioaet  did
nothing  but  geaticulat^  the  only  parts  where  thev
nted  Ueii  voice  being  the  dialoguca  {dieoiia).
Lirr'a  accoimt  taa  beca  absurdly  miaanderstood
aa  unpljing  that  the  introdnctioD  of  thia  ahive  to
chimnl  the  cantioi  led  to  the  nae  of  dialogue  in  the
Roman  dranuu,  as  though  there  had  berai  Da  dia-
logue betbre  ;  in  which  caae,  aa  there  waa  cartunlj
no  chorus,  Liiiua  muat  have  adapted  Oredc  divnai
K  aa  to  admit  of  being  lepteseated  in  a  aeria  of
monaloguea,  a  anppoeilion  which  it  confuted  by  ita
own  ahsordity.  It  is  perfectly  clear  that  the  plays
of  Livina  were  an  improvement  on  the  old  aceiuc
aaturac^  which  conaialed  of  dialogue,  and  that  the
impiuvement  araa  limply  that  of  adapting  the  dia-
logue to  a  r^iiular  plot  Hennann  (_lHnerL  de
Om>.imPiJ,.KaBc  Opusc.TDLip.a9a,&e.)haa
mfficiently  ihoWD  that  the  cantica  were  not  men
■  '■ "uMmgorgca-


COHOEDU.

tieulation,  Inlrodnced  betwean  the  acta,  bnt  the


»••  m  the  Qredc  theatre.  Bat  than  ia  m
I  ahow  that  iDdi  inukal  iatoindea  wne  aeooin"
toied  with  ^eatiadation  by  any  actor ;  and  it  ii
A  merdy  without  but  agmat  aU  anlhatity  to  call
ich  mterlndo  canticb  Hermann  baa  alao  shown
that  it  ia  quite  a  mistake  to  iunioee  that  the  Lead-
mg  acton  only  geatieiilated  in  the  cantica,  and
took  no  pan  in  the  ordinary  dialogue.  The  can-
tin  wen  only  moDodiet  put  into  the  nwolh  of  one
or  other  of  Ate  dramatia  paionaa.  Then  is  a  ubb-
fnl  treattaa  on  tiiii  lutqeot  by  O.  A.  B.  WoUT  (.lU
Cautidt  wAcauaonaa  I^Mii  teaiiebi),  in  which
the  anthor  hat  endcavonled  to  noint  oat  which  an
the  caotia  in  the  niaaining  pkyi  of  Plaitia  and

TbefirftimitatoiofthedniBatic  works  of  Livina
Andrmicna  waa  Cn.  Naevina,  a  native  of  Cmm-
pania.  He  cunnoaed  both  tiageiUea  and  oomediea,
which  were  either  tranalations  or  nnitati«u  of
thou  of  0>«ek  writers.  In  oonedy  hi*  models
seem  to  have  been  the  writen  of  the  old  comedy.
{Diet,  if  Or.  imd  Rom.  Bag.  <md  Mylk  tn.  Nor-
n'u.)  The  moat  diitinguished  auccHBor*  of  Nae-
vhu  wen Plaotua(Ibid. ait  Plauths), who  chiefly
imitated  Epichatnint,  and  Terence  (Ibid.  art.  Ti-
RENTiua),  whose  materials  woe  drawn  chiefly
from  Mensnder,  D^hiloa,  PbikmoD,  and  Apollo-
doma.  The  comedy  of  the  Romana  waa  through-
oat  but  an  imitation  of  that  of  the  Oreeka,  and
chiefly  of  the  new  comedy.  When  the  characten
wen  oatoiaihly  Greek,  and  the  acene  laid  in  Athena
or  (onto  other  Greek  town,  the  oomediea  were
termed  faiSiaioA.  AU  the  comedies  of  Tennce  and
Plaotua  belong  to  this  dais.  When  the  itny  and
character*  were  Roman,  the  play*  wen  called
fi^alas.  But  the  fabulae  togalas  won  in  fact  liltlo
else  than  Oreek  ccmediet  clothed  in  a  Latin  dnta.
(Ai  Horace  laya;  "  didtnr  Afroni  tega  conveniaaa
MeDandn."  EpuLixhSl .)  They  took  their  name
because  the  eottome  was  the  ton.  The  tngatse
wen  divided  into  two  ckssea,  Ue  (roiantag  and
rding  aa  the  subject  was  taken
igh  or  from  low  life  (Euacthiiu,  it  Pabidd).
In  the  coinediae  palliatoe,  the  coatnme  of  lh«
ordinary  acton  was  the  Greek  pallium.  The
playa  which  bon  the  fume  of  jmutt^atoB^  wen
not  ao  much  tragedies  at  hiatorica]  plavi.  It  ia  a
mistake  to  repretent  them  at  conwdica.  There
wat  a  tpedei  of  tragi-oomedy,  named  bnm  the
poet  who  introduced  that  atyle  RkJMiiatiaa.  A
tragedy  the  argument  of  which  wia  Greek  waa

claased  with  the  Latin  comedies  (Hermann,  d*
FiAtda  logata.  Opuc,  voL  v.  p.  354,  Ac)  R»-
*pectiiig  them,  the  reader  it  refemd  to  the  article
MiMva.  The  mhnea  difiend  from  the  Gomedio*  in
little  nHH<e  than  the  joedominanoe  of  the  mimic
representation  over  the  dialogno,  which  waa  only
inter^eraed  in  varioua  paita  of  the  npieaentatioo.

the  diamaa  of  the  new  comedy,  of  which  ihey
wen  for  the  moat  part  imitatiocu.  like  them,
too,  they  wen  introduced  by  a  pnlogtie,  which
aniwered  aoma  of  the  purwxe*  of  the  pan^aitia  of
the  old  comedy,  to  &r  aa  beqieakiDg  the  good  will
of  (he  apectatua,  and  debnding  tba  (oat  ■v^'''


COHOEDIA.
U*  rmdi  ni  eMndn.  It  iIm  cw<i«wniat»J  w
BBck  iiii— tjniM  w»  neciHUT td  mkdcnttul
tke  itDcj  of  the  plaj-  'I''"  pnlngiw  «»  ton-
ngalj  ^uka  bj  one  of  the  [Ufv*,  or,  pcriiau,
bf  the  Bimagtr  of  tha  tnmp.  OeewMwIly  the
•pcaJur  of  it  wfKnwd  »  •epantemuk  and  eoAnw,
far  the  ecoan  (Phut  Pom.  ynL  126  ;  Terait.
/Vtt  il  1).  SanMtimM  th«  fnl*niB  i«  ^kan
bf  aie  of  lh«  dmokti*  r~*™"  (Plamt.  ^apit.  /
Jfit  Glor. .'  Jfve.},  er  b;  md*  n^cnttniil  (v

mmria  <f  PlmlBi,  Arctnnu  in  the  Aadou,  Aui-


_ _  ■  in  PnJogi  im  Asm.

/^npt  in  JahB-a^rain.  i.  S.  p.  Ml,  Ac  ;  Bdker,

Ig^ riiwJin'i ) Hm  mt  of  the  piece  anuuted
(»  Dniedee  i^i,  iiL  ^489)  of
Thii  iinuoo,  baimer,

nipoatioii  of

bin  bed  refaenee  to  tbeie  caotka.
tbo  Utidi  Pii^
thej  wer*  fint  inEroduccd,  u  a
(WAIL  de  Omtiiu,  p.  23,  fto. ;
liSU^Us^Jt  Ptnamarmm  Ut»  n  Xwltt  (m.  r^.
Ibm, ;  Stiare,  ii  Rti  umiaw  op.  Rom.  Origin.)
Th*  iliMieilim  iatndaeed  mn  mnch  the  ame
■■  B  the  aev  eomady,  and  ibeii  ontoma  wu  net
Wf  di&nnt. Dcntau  gim  the  fbUomiif  *e-

"l-rt-r.  qaed  n  uidqiuuiiiini  luuie  memantnr,
■ilnlmiiiliTiiH  diiesloc  Mtribnitnc. Bern  aamid

A  qao  expeditine*  egut.


ei  obamftiuii  hitewn  dMnr."
■  to  be  wid  on  the  Aidbmat
>Maa.  Tbeee  vcreiKitofBaiii(ii.batofItaliui
ongiD,  and  were  not  intndaced  anuaag  the  Honiaiu
tin  dkB  btWc  came  into  conlact  with  the  Cam-
[— T—  Ttwae  pie«  bnli  their  oame  from  Che
tewa  af  Aldla  in  Campeiria.  Fran  being  alwaji
Litiuaiid  in  tha  Oeoin  dialect,  thej  woe  alio
called  Imii  Otci,  or  Uunm  OtuMm.  At  fint,  and
aianip)  tba  Oacana.  thej  anpaar  to  hare  been
mde,  iannm^toTy  bzcea,  mthont
■terian,  but  foil  ul  niUnr  and  •

ibtT  taenyed

•f  tk*  U


So Ib


Bnt  tba  Oecan  bicea  had  not
n  which  formed  a  chief
pan  »l  dw  fattbr,  and  thcae  who  took  part  in
thai  powBBted  ehatactaa  Teinaentmg  niioiu
ckaaea  itf  ibaoaBtty  pai^  like  the  Haaehere  of
ihe  modmn  llatiai^  Tuaa  bad  legnlar  namn  ;
th<n  wn  JUaaa*,  a  wrt  of  down  or  fad  ;  fiae-
■oHa.  Le^  tabUen;  PvP—;  Siatat  or  Simnu,
the  hafaeeD.  Tba  Owaek  erigin  of  anne  of  these
iBBKa  vtold  Kan  to  indicate  that  tbe  Qreek
lettlcfB  in  Italf  bad  aome  inSoence  in  the  dera-
lipwiiit  of  thii  ^Kciaa  of  amnaeoent.  Tha  Atei-
loae  fAolae  were  diitingmihed  from  tha  mimca
hj  dw  ahaeDce  of  low  bnfrDenery.  The;  were
■Kfced  bj  a  refined  hnnunr.  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  ii.
IS;  VbL  Max.  ii.  I.)  Thej  wen  eommanly
dirided  into  fire  acta.  (Hacrob.  SatimL  iiL)  Re-
■mlTat  tba  aaodiii,  aea  tbe  aitkla  Ezodidm.


OOMPITALIA.
Tbe  Oacan  dialect  waa  preserred,  eien  wbcn  tbej


(Strabo,t.  p.3fi6,a.)
ThrDDgb  at  fint  impnTiaatoiy,  after  tha  t^rdar
drama  acquired  a  mora  aitiilic  charactet,  tbe
Atdlanae  came  to  be  wiitlen.  Lnchu  Pcmpouini
of  Boaonia  and  Q.  Novitu  are  menlicDed  la  writan
of  dieak  Regnkr  biatrionea  were  nrt  allowed  to
nvfom  in  thun.  The;  were  acted  b;  free-bom
Ramani,  who  were  not  mbjaetad  to  an;  diil  de-
gndatioB  for  ^mearing  in  them.  In  blec  timea,
the;degtDentaa,aDd  beeama  more  like  tbe  mimea,
and  wen  acted  b;  biatrionea  ;  but  b;  that  time
the;  had  filllai  int»  c«naidaable  Defect. (C.  E.

" Lipa.  )m  ;  Weyer,

S;  Neakiieh,d>/^
Mi)  liguAi,  pp.  30,  e  1,  &e.  i  BKhi,  G«L  der  Aoai,
-ittambo-.)  [C.P.JI.]

COMPENSA'TIO  il  d{£ned  b?  M  '


•uita  and  paymenla,  b;  aaccrtaming  to  wbicfa  part;

a  balance  waa  doe, Originally  compenutio  onl;

took  place  in  bonae  fidai  jndiciii^  and  ex  eadem

bnl  b;  a  reactipt  of  M.  Annlini  there  could

~  ~  tin  in  itricti  juris  jndidii,  and  ex  dia-

When  a  peraon  made  a  demand  in

light  of  another,  ai  a  tntor  in  rjglit  of  bia  pupilhia,

the  debtor  could  not  hare  compenaatia  in  reject

of  a  debt  dna  to  him  from  the  tnbn  on  bii  own

A  GdeJDBKK  (mrel;)  who  waa  called

ftj  hii  prindpal'a  debt,  might  baTe  oom-

:,  either  in  reipect  of  a  debt  dne  b;  the

t  to  hiraaelf  or  la  hi*  prindpal. It  waa  a

rale  of  Roman  law  that  there  eonld  be  no  cainpen-

tie  where  tha  demand  cenld  be  aniwsred  b;  an

:captio  peranptMia ;  for  tbe  ccmpoiaalio  admitted

e demand, mbject to the  proper deduction,

hareai  tha  object  of  the  exceptio  wai  to  atata

Bomething  in  bar  of  the  demand Set-off  in  Eng-

liih  law,  and  compenaation  in  Scotch  law,  ceire-

apond  to  Gompenstio. (1%.  16.  tit.  3  ;  Thibant,

Sflm,  &C  i  606,  9th  ed.  conlaina  the  chief

inlea  aa  to  compenaatio.)  [O.  L.]

COMPBRENDINATIO. [Jcnax.]

COMPETITOa tAMaiTOS.]

CO'MPITA. [CanpiTALi*.]

COMPITA'LIA,  alio  called  LUDI  COMPI-

TALI'CII,  ■  leatiTal  celebmted  once  a  jHii  in

honoor  of  tha  Urea  ounpilalea,  to  whom  lacrificea

were  oSisred  at  the  placei  when  two  or  mon  waya

met  (eonipila,  Varm,  IM  Lng,  LaL  tL  36,  ed.

MUller  t  FeaCui,  >.  t>.). Thia  feattnil  ia  aud  b;

aome  wrilen  to  have  been  inatitnled  by  Tarqninioa

Priicui  in  conaeqoence  of  the  mincle  attending  the

birth  of  Senioi  Tollinl,  who  wu  luppoaed  to  be

the  vm  of  a  lar  bunUiarii. (Plin.  H.  N.  mrl

70.) Dimnina  (iv.  U)  aaeribea  ita  origin  lo

SerriDs  Tullina,  and  deaciibca  the  futiTaJ  ai  il  waa

celebrated  in  1^  time. He  relatia  that  the  lacri-

ficea  oonuated  of  boney-cakei (w^Aonu),  which

were  prciented  by  the  inhabitanta  of  each  honie,

and  that  the  peraoni.  who  anUted  aa  miniilering

aenanla  at  the  featinl,  were  not  free-men,  biK

abTa*^  becawa  tha  tana  took  pleuon  m  tha  aev-


S4B  CONCILIUM.

Tice  of  alaTei :  he  farther  addi  that  the  compiLaJLa
wen  celebrated  a  few  dsyi  ifler  Che  SllnniBlu
with  great  •plendDur,  and  that  the  liares  on  ihii  nc-
miaD  h&d  fall  libei^  pna  Utem  to  do  whM  ttey
-pleated.  We  ^irther  lam  from  Maovhins  (Sajmr^
t  7)  that  the  celehiation  of  the  compitalia  wu
iHtored  by  l^rqauuni  Superbiu,  who  ncrifced
boyi  to  Mania,  the  mothei  of  the  laret ;  but  thii
piactico  wu  changed  after  the  eipulaion  of  tha
Tarquina,  and  garhc  and  poppiei  offered  in  their
(lead.

Th*  penoni,  who  pccuded  oier  the  fettival
wen  the  Magittri  vid,  who  were  on  that  occuioD
nllowed  to  wear  the  praeteita  (Ascod.  ad  Cia  a
Pu.p.7,ei.  Orelii).  Public  nuKa  wen  add«d
St  aame  lime  dining  the  repabUcan  period  to  thii
feitiTal,  but  the;  wen  rapjKeued  by  command  of  i
the  aeiiate  ia  b.  a.  68  ;  end  H  wsa  one  of  the
chufiet  brought  forward  by  Cken  againat  L.  Fito
that  he  allowed  them  to  be  celebiUed  in  bii  con-
■nlabip,  B.  c.  S8  (Cic,  tuPii.  t  ;  Aicon.  J^o.)  Bot
that  the  featiraJ  ilielf  atill  continned  to  be  obeerred,
theogh  the  garnet  were  aboliahed,  ia  erident  bom
Cicero  (ad  AtL  ill  3).  Dnring  the  ciTil  wnra  the
fefltiral  fell  into  dianae,  and  waa  accordingly  re-
atored  by  the  emperor  Augnatna.  (SueL  Ai^.  31  ;
eemp.  Or.  Fait.  T.  12e--U6.)  At  AngnHui  wu
now  the  pabr  palriae,  the  wonhip  of  the  old  laiei
wat  duomtinned,  and  the  Una  of  the  emperor
Goiueqnently  became  the  brea  of  the  state.  Hence,
the  Scholiail  on  Horace  (adSaLU.S.  281),  lella
HI  that  Angnatua  Kt  np  larei  or  penatei  at  placca
where  two  or  more  wayi  met,  and  inatituted  for
the  pnipoae  of  attending  to  their  wonhip  an  order
of  prieata,  who  were  taken  from  the  Libertini,  and
were  odled  At^nOaln,  Thoae  Aogoalalei  are  en-
tirely different  from  the  AuguitaJes,  who  wen
appointed  to  attend  to  the  wonhip  of  AugiuOu  aflsi:
hia  deceaie,  ai  hai  been  well  ahown  by  A.  W.
Znmpt  in  h»  eany  on  the  tubject  (_Dt  Atgut-
UUAn,  &C.,  BeniL  1346.) [Auoustalw.]

The  compitalia  belonged  to  the  feriat  ateep-
tiBae^  that  ia,  feativaia  which  were  celebrated  on
daya  appointed  annually  by  the  ma^tratea  or
prieiti.  The  exact  day  on  which  thii  fetcival  wai
eelebraled,  appesn  to  hare  TOried,  though  it  waa
alwayg  in  the  winter.  Dionyiiua  relitei  (ir.  14),
■a  we  hare  already  aaid,  that  it  waa  celebrated  a
few  dayi  after  the  Satnrnalio,  and  Cicero  (is  PitoK.
4)  that  it  fell  on  the  Kalendi  of  Jannuy  ;  but  in
one  of  hii  lecten  to  Alticiu  (liL  7 )  he  tpeaka  of  it
u  falling  on  the  fourth  before  the  nonea  of  January.
The  eiact  worda,  with  which  the  featiTsI  waa  an-
Ooanccd,  are  preacrred  hyMaoobiua  (Saiam^  i.4)
and  Aulua  Oelliui  (i.  24).

COMPLU'VIUM. [DoMDi]

COUPROMISSUM. [JuDii  ; Hkbpta

COMUS  (n/ui)- [ChobdH;  CouoKniA.]

CONCHA  (iiJTx^),aOieek  and  Roman  liqnid
neoanio,  of  which  there  were  two  aiici.  The
■mailer  waa  half  the  ^ottw  (=tlil2  of  a  pint
Englith)  ;  the  laraer,  irtiich  waa  the  aame  aa  the
■u^ioptan,  wat  tbioe  timea  the  farmer  (='1236
of  a  pint).  (Huiaey,  pp.  207,  209  ;  Wurm,  p.
12a)  [P.S.]

CONCILIA'BULUH. [CoLONU,p.313,a.]

CONCILIA'RII. [AeaxsKiiu]

CONCl'LIUM  generally  hsa  the  aame  meaning
--'-  - - - -  ■■- ^"it  the  technical  impart


CONCIO.

imblyofapoiVina  of  the  people  (GaU.  r


27),


fonn  the  genetal  aaiembliea  ot
(Feat  ^50;  Cic  Dt  L^.  u.Up-H«l.  iaSim.  6.)
Accordm^y,  aa  the  comitia  tribata  embraced  only
a  portion  of  the  Rqman  people,  tIk.  the  plebeiama,
Iheae  comitia  are  often  deugnated  by  the  term
oosoIh  plMi,  (LiT.  vii.  5,  uriiL  fS,  luii.
Ifi.)  Upon  the  aame  priodpte,  it  might  be  lup-
poaed  that  the  comitia  cnriata  might  be  called
cancilia,  and  Niebohr  (HiiL  of  Romt,i.  p. 425)
belierea  that  the  concilia  popoli  which  are  men-
tioned now  and  then,  actually  woe  the  comitia
cnriata  ;  bat  there  it  no  eridenco  of  thoac  patrician
aaaembliee,  which  in  the  early  timea  certainly
neier  looked  npon  themielTga  at  a  mere  part  of
the  QBtint,  haTiig  erer  been  called  by  that  name.
In  &ct,  all  the  paataga  in  whieb  concilia  pepnli
occur,  dearly  ihow  that  none  other  bnt  the  coaitta
tributa  an  meanL  (Lir.  L  36,  iL  7,60,  ilL  13, 16,
64,  71,  m.  24,  mriiL  113,  iziii.  15,  iliii  16,
Cic.  ia  Vat.  7.)  At  concilium,  howerer,  haa  the
meaning  of  an  aaaembly  in  general,  we  cannot
woDdef  that  lometimea  it  ia  na^  in  a  looae  way  to
deaignate  the  comitia  of  the  centuriea  (LIt.  iL  28)
or  any  concio.  (LIt.  u.  7, 23,  T.  43  ;  0(^  iriiL  7  ;
comp.  Becker,  Handh.  der  Rom.  AUarli.  lol.  iL
parti,  p.  359,  note  693.)

We  mnat  here  notice  a  peculiar  aenie  in  whieb
omciliam  ia  used  by  Latin  writeti  to  denote  the
aaierabliet  or  meetingi  of  cruifederale  towna  or
nalicoia,  at  which  either  their  depntiea  alooe  or
any  of  the  citisena  met  who  had  ^e  and  In-
clination, and  thui  framed  a  repreaHitative  aa-
aembly. (Lii.L  50.)  Such  an  aaiembly  or  diet
ia  eiunmonly  detignaled  at  annininia  encttnut  or
rh  ■cou'ilv,  e.  g.  Adanmm,  AiMamm,  Batolonim,
Macedamiat,  and  the  like.  (lii.  zzxtL  31,
imiiL  34,  iVl  43,  ilv.  18  ;  OeU.  iL  6.)  Of  the
■ame  kind  were  the  dieta  of  the  I«tina  in  the
gTOTB  of  Fenntina  (LIt.  L  61,  li  33,  »iL  25,
viii.  3),  the  meedmga  of  the  Elrnacana  near  the
temple  of  Vollmnna  <  Lit.  it.  SSy  25,  61,  t.  17,
tL  S),  of  the  IlDtiiiani  in  the  circoa  of  Anognia
(ii.  42),  of  the  Aeqoiant  and  Samnitca  (iii.  2,  i*.
26. 1. 12).  (L.  S.]

CO'NCIO  or  CO'NTIO,  a  canlnction  f«  eam-
vmlio,  that  iB,a  meeting,  or  aoomgHAu;  (Featua,
p.  G6,  ed.  MUUer.)  In  the  technical  ien»,  how-
eTsr,  a  concio  waa  an  aaaembly  of  the  people  at
Rome  couTened  by  a  magiatrnta  for  the  purpoae  of
making  the  people  acquainted  with  meaaurea  which
wen  to  be  btooght  hefbn  the  next  comiliB,  and  of
working  npon  them  either  to  tn)^iort  or  oppose  the
meaanre.  But  no  qneation  of  any  kind  could  be
decided  by  a  concio,  and  thia  cooalitntei  the  diSer-
enca  between  concionea  and  cinnitia.  (GelL  liiL
14;  Cic  p.  Sett.  60,  53-,  LiT.niii.  15.)  Still
condonea  were  alio  convened  for  other  pnrpoica,
e.g.  of  pennading  the  people  to  take  part  in  a
war  (Dionya.  vL  26),  or  ef  bringing  complninta
againat  a  [Huty  in  the  icpnblie.  (Dimya.  ii.  25  ;
Plut. C OntooL 3.)  Meetuwa  ofthiikindnalarally
wen  of  Tery  frequent  occancnca  al  Rome.  The
aertiett  that  it  mentioned,  it  one  held  immediately
after  the  death  ot  Rmiulut  by  Juliut  Pncnlut  in
the  Campui  Martiui  (LIt.  L  16  ;  Pint.  Ann.  27)  ;
the  fint,  after  the  ezpuliion  of  the  kinga,  wat  held
brBruma.  (Liv.iL  3  ;  DionyaT.  10,  &c.)  Every
had  the  eight  to  convene  coucionei,  but
at  frequently  exeniaed  by  the  ooniula


■  O"


CONCUBINA.
A  a  gnat  mSaeucc  ma  tlie  people  in


■  onmnuidand  t'he  vebe-
nean  of  tW  hvangning  tribunu  rmdeRd  eon-
ciiMwa  often  toj  tmmiltDDui  and  ziotooi,  especiiillj
duiii^  tbe  laKer  period  of  the  iqinbljc  Tbe
ammaiiag  magiMiMe  either  iddneied  the  people


d  other
be  g»n  permiMHin  to  tpeak,  fo


ID  pnTBtfl  penc


T.  11;  LiT,  uL  71,  diL  34;  Cic.  ad  Alt.  iv.  2.)


the  (beam,  tbe  Capilol,  the  Campoi  Mutini,  and
the  Cinaii  FlamiDiltL  (Cic.  p.  Se^  U,  ad  AILl
1.)  It  ibodd  be  lemuied,  that  the  term  concto
ii  alio  aaed  (a  deeigiiBte  the  ipoechei  aod  hniviguei
•ddTM«d  to  the  people  in  an  aMemblf  <LiT.iiiT.
22,  ixTii.  13  ;  Cie.  u  Fat  1),  and  that  in  a  Ioom
mail  of  qiet^ing,  coneia  denote*  an;  uaembl;
•f  the  pemte.  (Cic  p.  Flaa.  7  ;  corap.  the
Lata.)  [L,  S.}

CONCUBl'NA  (nhXiucli,  nUairlt).  1.
Oaasx. — The  ToUaini^  or  nUacfi,  ocoipitd  al
AlhoH  a  kiad  of  middle  lank  betveea  Ine  wiJa
and  the  ballot  (JtraifitCf.  The  diidmtion  between
the  traJpH,  coAAaic^,  and  legal  wife,  ii  accniatelj
^•mbedbjDenuMthenea  {o.Ntaer.f.  1386),  tju
pir  fip  iralfiu  i/SBr^i  hnii  fxi"*'  ^  "  "^
Aanhr,  r^  n^  iifiipaw  btpantas  toD  irifittTos:
tia  M  TBHLnLf,  roG  rtuiowottiaiat  ynifflut  iral
fir  Irtov  fitiana  iris^  fx'"'  Tbni  Antiphon
ifraki  <rf'  tlie  nAXuiS  of  Philmeos  u  following

hbgaat  at  table.  (AntipL^nib  Fm^^  pp.  613,
614  ;  amp.  BtAa.  Ckantbf,  vol  il  p.  433.)  If
her  pefaon  wen  riolated  bj  force,  the  ume  penalty
wBi  ex^ibla  fiom  the  lanahei  aa  it  the  offence  bad
been  comautted  upon  an  Altic  malnn ;  and  a  man
mpciied  by  the  qnaii-hnihaDd  m  tho  act  of  orimi-
Dal  iototmna  with  hii  raAAoif^  nuht  be  ilajn
bjr  him  «  the  ipot,  ai  in  the  panlld  caao  (Lyi.
0a  Onfg  Emali.  p.  96).  [Adultskidk.]  It
doea  not,  hovcTO',  qipear  tkj  claarlj  bom  what
pJiii—'  dawn  Goncabinea  ws<  chi^;  lelected,
ai  cabaUtotian  with  a  fiumon  ({'n)}  woman  wai
■Irictif  IMiiddai  bj  law  (DeinaMh.  -a  Ntair.  p.
1350),  md  the  pTDTinoiu  made  by  the  itate  foe
tvpua  of  Attic  Isailiea  mnit  in  moet  cue*  lave
prrvdilad  thrir  linhing  to  thia  omdition.  Some-
taacs  oertvnly,  whoe  then  wen  ■arcial  deititate
Canale  mpham,  thk  might  lake  place,  si  the  nut
af  kin  wa*  not  obliged  to  proiide  &T  more  than
•oe  ;  md  we  may  ako  eraceiTe  tlie  una  to  have
tikai  place  whk  mpect  to  the  donghtera  of  bmi-


2,  S3.)  The  dowry,  in  &ct,  Mema  to  bare  been  a
dednire  criterion  ai  to  whethei  the  connectioa  be-
tween a  male  and  Cemale  Athenian,  in  a  itale  of
oohahitetiaii,  amoonled  to  a  marriage :  if  no  dowry
had  beoi  giTeo,  the  child  of  meh  union  would  he
~ ' '  ;  ii  ui  the  eontmiy,  a  dowry  had


ackia)wled|iiiait  «  in  nceipt,  tbe  female  vat
My  estitled  to  ail  coujnnl  rigbti.  <Petit  Leff.
AIL  p.  548,  and  antluai  uera  qaoted.) It  doee


CONFARREATIO.  34»

not  g.ppear  that  tbe  lUTe  that  wnt  takoi  to  her
nuiter't  bed  acquired  any  political  rights  in  coii>&*
quence;  the  concubine  mentioned  by  Antiphon  i<
treated  ai  a  ilaie  by  her  maiter,  and  after  hii
death  undeTKoee  a  leirile  pnniihrnent  {Id.  p.  615).
[Hwr*m*.J  [J.S.M.]

2.  RuHAH.  According  to  an  old  definition,  an
munarricd  woman  who  cohabited  with  a  man  wa«
d^nally  called  pellei,  but  afterwaidi  by  the  man
decent  ippellatioo  of  concubioa.  (Hauuiiui,  op.
PoaZ.  Dig.  30.  tit.  16.  g.  144.)  Thii  remuk  baa
appenntly  nfenEice  to  the  Lex  Julia  et  Papla


Poppaea,
le^  chu


by  1


chanuler.  Thii  leg^  concubinaRu  coniiited
m  me  permanent  cohabitattDn  of  aa  munairied  man
with  an  unmarried  woman.  It  therefore  differed
from  aduJterium,  itaprum,  and  incatoa,  whkh  wen
legal  oBsices  ;  and  from  cmtubemiam,  which  wai
the  cohabitation  of  a  free  man  with  a  tlaTO,  or  Iha
cohabitation  of  a  male  and  female  tkre,  between
whom  then  could  be  no  Roman  marriafle^  Bcfon
the  peuing  of  the  Lex.  JoL  et  P.  P.,  the  name  of
concahina  would  have  applied  to  a  woman  who
eohabited  with  a  married  man,  who  had  not  diTorced
hii  fint  wife  (Cic  Di  Ond.  I  40}  ;  bnt  thii  waa
not  the  itate  of  legal  concubinage  which  ivaa  after-
werdi  gatabliihed.  Tbe  oSenca  of  itt^nm  waa
BToided  in  the  caae  of  the  cohabitation  of  a  free
man  and  an  ingenna  by  IhU  permiuiie  concubinage ;
bnt  it  would  Kem  to  be  a  nectanry  inference  ^t
thoe  ihoold  be  aome  formal  declam^oD  of  the  in-
tention of  the  poniei,  in  order  that  there  might  be
no  itninun.  (Dig.  48.  tit.S.  a.  34.}  Heinecciul
{Syiitag.  Ap.  lib.  L  39)  deuiei  that  on  ingenna
could  be  a  ooncubina,  and  awerti  that  thoae  only
could  be  concubinae  who  coold  not  be  mom  ;  bnt
thii  appean  to  be  a  miiBke  (Dig.  25.  tit.  7.  a  3},
or  perhapa  it  may  be  said  that  there  waa  a  legal
doubt  on  thii  >nbioct(/iJ.i.  1);  Aundian  prohibited
the  taking  of  ingennae  ai  concubinae.  (Vopiacui,
Awt&an.  19.)  A  conttitntiDn  of  Conitanline
(Cod.  I.  tit.  27. 1.  6)  tnatt  of  ingennu  omcnbiuae.
Thia  concabinage  waa  not  a  marriage^  nor  wen
the  children  of  auch  marriage,  who  were  •ometimes
called  liberi  natnralet,  in  the  power  of  their  father,
and  conieqnently  they  followed  the  condition  of
the  mother.  There  ia  an  inacription  in  Fabretd
(p.  337)  to  tho  memory  of  FanlliBniu  by  Aemilia
Prima  "  concnbina  ejua  et  hem,"  which  Mema  to
show  that  the  term  concnbina  waa  not  a  name  that
a  woman  waa  aibamed  of.  Under  tbe  Chriadan
emperon  conenbiDage  waa  not  &Toared,  but  it
itill  eiiitad,  ■*  wa  lee  from  the  legiilation  of  Jui-

Thia  legal  coticubinage  reaemhled  the  moivanatio
marriage  {ad  vior^anatioam),  in  which  neither  the


wife  enjoyi  the  rank  of  the  huaband,  c
children  the  righta  of  children  by  a  legal  mi
[IMi.PBid.  ii.  29.) Amongtheitomana,widoweR


u  marriage.


who  hod  already  children,  and  did  not  a
contract  another  legal  mairiage,  took  a  eoncubino,
aa  wa  aee  in  the  case  of  Veapaaian  (Soet  Vap.  3),
Antooinni  Piua,  and  M.  Auielioi  (JnL  Cap.  VU.
Atit.cZ;  A<B^  C.29;  Dig.  26.  Ut.  7  j  Cod.  t.
tiL  26  ;  Panlui,  Aaogpt.  Stoiait  a.  tiL  \&;  20  ;
Mot.  is,  c  3  :  89.  c  13.)  [0.  U}

CONDEMNA'TIO. [Actio  ;  Junax.]

CONDl'CTIO. [Actio.]

CONDITO'RIUM. [FoNug.]

CONDU'CTIO. [LocATio.]

CONFABREA'TIO. [Matiumohiuii.]

^--i^l^-


S50  CONFUSIO.

COKFESSCRIA  ACTIO.  If  >  rou  hu  a
■erritiH  [Sirvitub],  and  ths  eisiciH  of  liia  right
ia  impeded  b;  in;  pemm,  ha  an  mBiotun  it  by
u  actio  in  rem,  wmeh  k  >  Moritiitia  nodiatio.
Accoidingl;,  vlien  a  man  ehimi  a  jua  ntoidi,
finendi,  eniidi,  igendi,  &c,  the  actio  ii  lalled  coo-
fsuraia  da  nia&actn,  Aiv  If  tha  ownflr  of  a  thijlg
was  intoiTupted  ta  hii  ezcluDTa  «ijojrasDt  of  it  hy
■  penon  -I'lrnmg  or  attempting  to  exeniae  a  ierritd*
in  it,  fail  claim  ot  gnund  of  actioa  waa  n^atiTe,
"jua  illi  BOH  oae  ire,  agere,"  Ac,  wheocs  the  action


o  and  tha  ugaidTa,  which
«ai  foimded  on  a  lugaliTB  aaritiu^  ve  diicniaad
uider  SaariTDa.

In  the  negatoria  in  nm,  vfaich  miiit  be  dif-
tinguiahad  tma  the  negatira  actJa  bonded  ea  a
negatiTa  Rrribi^  tha  phmtiff  dauoed  Ratitnlian  of
the  things  ■§,  for  mitance^  wba  the  defendant  had
onuped  tha  nniEniclui ;  or  temo^  of  the  canaa  of
complaint ;  alie  danu^  fat  injnrj' done,  and  seciuitf
(c«i^)ag>inEt  fotura  acta  of  the  lika  kind.  (Gaiui,
IT.  3  )  Dig.  a.  tit  J  ;  BnaUHiiiiA,  Di  /bnaa/tt;
Fachla,6toiw,&cn>LlLpp.663.Tn.) [Q.L.]

CONFU'SIO  ^npaij  ngaiSxt  the  mixb^  of
liqnida,  ac  the  fhaing  of  melaU  into  one  maia.  If
thingi  of  the  noM  at  of  difl^mit  kind  vere  con-
iiiaed,  eithar  by  the  content  of  both  oinieta  or  by
aaddeo^  the  componnd  vaa  the  property  of  both.
If  the  canfuio  vBa  aiued  by  me,  without  the
content  of  the  othet,  tha  componnd  waa  (oly  joint
property  in  cate  the  thiiua  wen  of  the  tame  kind :
but  if  the  thingt  wen  Afferent,  to  that  tha  eom-

EDund  wat  a  new  thing,  thit  wai  a  cata  of  vbat,
y  modem  w  - * -


thsRonu


eiproned  by  the  U


bu  own  wine  and  hit  neighbdlir^  honey.  In  tuch
a  cue  the  peraon  who  cauted  the  confuaia  became
the  owner  of  the  componnd,  but  he  wna  bound  to
make  good  to  the  other  the  tbIuo  of  hia  proper^.

Coimniitio  ia  need  by  modem  writera  to  aignify
the  miitore  of  aoUd  thmga  which  belonged  to  dit
fereat  ewneia  ;  but  Coimniztio  and  Omfuio  ara
■ued  by  tbe  Roman  writer*  to  eipreu  tbe  onion
of  thingt  either  aclid  or  finid  (Dig.  41.  tit.  1. 1.  7.
8  3;  6.  tit  1.  a.  3.  g  2.  L  6.). gliU,  Commii^o  it


nay  tapanite  it  k
ipoaaible,  aa  if  tv


ia  impoaaible,  aa  if  two  heapo  of  com  are  mixed,
each  owner  ia  entitled  to  a  part,  according  to  the
pn^xirtiaii  of  Ma  leparate  property  to  the  whole
nail.  It  ia  a  caae  of  conunirtio  when  a  man's
money  it  paid,  without  hit  knowledge  and  content,
and  the  money,  when  paid,  ia  to  mixed  with  other
money  of  the  receiTer  tbat  it  camtot  be  reeognited;
otherwiia,  it  nraoint  tbe  plopslty  of  the  penon  to
whom  it  baloaged. (Dig.  46.  tit  3.  a.  7a)

Specificatian  (which  ia  not  a  Roman  wcrd)  took
place  when  a  Eoan  made  a  new  thing  {non  apeciet)
either  out  of  bit  own  and  hia  neighbMir't  material,
or  mt  of  hia  neighbonr't  only.  In  the  fbimar  cate
auch  man  acquired  the  ownsihip  ef  the  thing.  In
the  kttertaa^  if  tha  thing  could  be  bronght  back
to  the  roogh  material  (which  it  obTiontly  pottible
in  Teiy  few  raant).  it  lEill  belonged  to  tbe  onginal
owner,  but  the  tpecificator  had  a  right  to  retain
the  thing  tilt  ha  wat  paid  the  value  of  bit  labour.


CONOIARIUM.
if  be  had  acted  bona  Gde.  If  the  uev  (pedea
oould  not  be  brought  back  to  iti  original  form,  Iha
tpecificatcK  in  all  oue*  became  the  owner,  if  be
deaigned  to  make  tbe  new  thing  for  bimtelf ;  if  be
had  acted  braia  fide  ha  wat  liable  to  the  owner  j
tbe  ttufl  fa  ila  jalna  only  ;  if  mala  fide,  he  wat
liable  aa  a  thiet  Tha  catca  put  by  Oaina  (ii.  29^
an  thote  of  a  man  nakiog  ¥iina  of  aoother  man^
gt^iea,  oil  of  hia  oliTet,  a  ahip  or  bench  of  bk
timber,  and  to  au.  Some  jurittt  (Sabinoa  and
Caaaiua)  were  of  ofuniou  that  the  ownenhip  of
the  thing  waa  not  changed  by  each  labour  being
beatowed  uu  it ;  the  oppoiite  achool  were  of  opi-
nion thai  tbe  new  thing  belonged  to  him  who  had
beatowed  hit  Ubonr  on  it,  bat  they  admitted  that
the  ofigina]  owner  bad  a  legal  remedy  for  the
talna  of  hia  property.

Two  Ihinga,  the  proper^  al  two  peraon^  mi^t
beemna  ao  united  at  not  to  be  tepaiabla  witbout
injury  to  one  or  both  ;  in  thk  cate  the  owner  d
the  principal  thina  became  the  owner  of  the  accei-
toiy.  Tbut,  in  us  cate  of  a  man  huildins  on  an-
other man'a  ground,  the  bnilding  belonged  to  tha
owner  of  the  gmund  (lupctficiet  tolo  cedit)  ;  or  in
the  oue  of  a  tne  planted,  or  teed  town  on  another
nun^  ground,  the  rule  waa  the  tame,  when  tba
tree  or  teed  had  token  root  If  a  mu  wrott,  even
in  lettsi  of  gold,  •  '  -  . -

paper,  the  whole
ptrchmoit  or  t
painted  on  another  man'i  canrata,  the  canmi  be-
came the  property  of  the  owner  of  the  pctni&
(Oaint,  iL  7S,  A^) If  a  piece  of  land  w '


e  belonged  b


IT  of  tha


eame  the  pn-
y  attached  t«


per^  of  the  latter  when  it  wat  firmly  al
,.  Ti.:.  ;.  .  Ji-lOTit  <«o  from  that  of  Alluvio.
nue*  the  Ituog  party  wat  eotitled
,  with  tcnne  exceptioat  aa  to  catea
of  mala  hdea.

Confuaio  oecnra  in  tha  caae  of  righta  alio.  If
the  right  and  tbe  duty  c€  an  obligatio  beconH
lited  in  one  penon,  then  ia  a  coofotio  by  which
oobliEaIioiteitingiutbed(Dig.4B.  DL  3.  t.  75).
If  he  woo  hat  pledged  a  thine  becomea  tbe  bona
of  the  pledgee,  the  ti^lt  and  dutiet  of  two  poiona
are  united  (confundnutur)  in  out.  If  a  man  who
piaedial  territni  In  anothn  mao't  hud,  ba-
tbe  owner  of  the  terrient  land,  the  tenitnt
:  territntea  [nediamm  coufbnduntir,  ti
idem  ntrinaque  praedii  dominua  eaae  ceepcrit.
■nig.  B.  tit  e.  I.  I.)

Tlie  rnlet  of  Boman  law  on  Ihii  nbiecl  aM
itated  by  Brinbnan, /aiM.  ^ar.  Aoaa.  §  398,  Ac  ;
Mackeldey,  LtMmd,  At  Eg  24G,  251,  &C.  12th
ed. ;  Inat  2.  lit  1 ;  Qi^  ii.  70,  Roathirt,  Onrnd-
timitB,  ftc.  S  63.  [O.  L.]

CONOIA'RIUU  {lO.  Mt,  from  coviai),  ■
riatel  containing  a  odf^iBa.  [Conoit;!.]

In  the  eaiiy  timet  of  the  Boman  repuUic^  the
DBI^Hia  waa  the  ntoal  meaanra  of  oil  itf  wine  which
raa,  on  certain  ocoaiima,  diatribnted  among  tbe
people  (Lir.  iir.  2) ;  and  thua  ^;e^^7iari>■>,  at
Qmntilian  (vL  3.  g  52)  aayt,  became  a  name  lor
liberal  donaticcia  to  tbe  pK^e,  in  general,  whether
eontitting  of  oil,  wine,  com,  or  money,  or  other
thinga(Plin./f.MiiT.U,  17,xxm.7,41i  Soet
.rfi^.  41,  TO.  20,  An-.  7  I  Plin.i>«B9.25i  Tacit.
Ann.  lU.  41,  liiL  31  i  LIt.  ixzril  BJ\  while
donatiooa  made  to  the  aildieit  w
thngh  they  w«t  aa


CONSTITUnONES.
(Ck.  I'd  jo.  ^n.  S;  CvM.  tL  3). Chmgianum


tnlfUi  fn%  U  ^  tamffimt.  (QnintiL  t  a  ;  campnn
Ck.  ^  Rbl  fiiL  1  I  SeDBca,  Da  Stwit.  Fit^  Dt
»>.  iL  16  ;  Sbm.  rtqi.  18,  Cbo.  37.) (L.  3.]

ayNOltlS,  a  Boiiu  liquid  mcuore,  which
(Ktainsd  nz  •extaiii  <Rlian.  Fum.  v.  72),  or  Ifae
Bfbxh  put  of  th«  unpluin,  tliat  ii,  not  qiute  lix
jntL It  «Bi  sqml  to  the  )arga  dtoiu  of  the


(Ch«


"■I


a  conghn  io  endoice,  ciUed  ths  eoo-
gioa  it  VwpMJan,  or  the  f^nww  amgiui,  bsuing
m  iyu  iptiap,  which  atatn  that  it  wu  midi  in
the  year  75  A-  D-,  aocmding  to  the  itaudard  mea-
■ue  ia  tha  ofiuA,  and  that  H  contaiiied,  bj
vwhl;  tmpomdi.  (lmp.Oaf.yi.T.Oatt.  Aug.
P.  ml  Col.  Mmmrae  ttaOae  u  CapibJio,  P.  i. ;
tittit¥atOM,t.t.PiitlicaPomiiita.)  ThiiooDgini
ii  (m  of  tlw  BHu  by  which  the  BltempI  hu  been
xale  to  fix  tha  waight  of  tha  Reman  pocmd.

Cbm  tdli  aa  that  ho  waa  wont  to  gira  each  of
hii  darci  a  emgina  of
~ ■ ■  1.  <!»•«.  ft.  1 57-3 Plinj


1  FalBMti(/a<er^

f-iM).'  [p.aj

CONNU'BIVU. [UATUkOHtOM.]

COKOPE'UH  (uHwiL.*),  a  gnat  or  Dnu-
qait»oDtaiii,  t.  (.  a  oorering  nwde  to  be  expanded
STB-  bed*  and  (oncbca  to  kaep  away  goati  and
atha  Sjing  mMCli^  n  called  bom  n'lwf ,  a  gnat.

Tba  pat-cnttaioa  ucftthawd  br  Horace  (.f^wt.
ix.  IS)  wrnpnhaUy  of  linao,  but  of  the  textzue
•f  CTBB.  The  DM  of  tb«n  ia  itill  coimnon  in
Iti&,  Onacc,  and  other  eoanliiea  nuronodiDff  the
lIcditefniMaii.  Q»piM>  ii  the  ongiu  i^  the
fii^uk  wiad  cmofg.  (See  Jiiif^  z.  21,  xiii.  9,
xri  19:  Jut.  ii  BO  t  Van.  Dt  B*  BttL  iL  la
i  «.)  [J.  Y.]

C0NQU1S1T(VRES,  pmou  employed  to  go
ahaat  tk  eosBtaT  and  ii^inB  eoldien,  when  there
va*  a  difflenl^  in  ^■"r'^"?  *  '"?■  (^'-  "'■
niC^fnMiL^iBiA,B.AI»a.%)  Some-
tnn  I  ewiiiiwimi  i  ■  wen  q)poiated  by  a  decree  of
the  aoiate  to  the  pBpoaa  <n  nvking  a  eonqniiilia.

(liT.IXT.6.)  [B.W.]

CONSANOUI'NEI. [Cosnatl]
CONSCRIPTL [S>H«TDi.]
CONSECaATIO- lAwnHaoaiai iNiu-

C0NSEN5US. [OBLiQATiDireii.]
CONSILIA'HIL [CoHvn(ru8.J

CONSI'LIUM. [CONVKNTIIB.]

CONSTITUTA  PKCU'NIA.  [PacrMU.]
CONSrrrUTIO'NEB.  "  Conrflatio  prind-
~  N  (i  A),  ■*  ia  that  which  the  hn>

it  em  been  donbted  that  luch
B  Itae  the  fern  ol  law,  inaemiifh  oi  by
law  the  kapaator  recaJTBi  the  imperinm."  Hence
auk  Ian  woe  t&ea  called  jnininpalea  conetita-
— J ^'-■io  M  oaed  in  tbaDigcat


6ntt^ TbavDida


(4.  til


CONSUALIA.  SSI

1.  9.  g  S)  to  tigniff  an  iolertDculory  of


the  piaetai.

An  imperial  conititDtw  in  ita  widen  Mgue  might
mean  eierything  by  which  the  bead  of  the  >lale
declared  hii  pleanin^  either  in  a.  nutter  of  I^ia-
lation,  adminiitratiou,  vjuriidictioiL  A  decretnm
«ai  a  jodgment  in  a  matlw  in  diqmle  between
two  paitiea  which  came  befbie  him,  eithu  in  the
way  of  appeal  or  in  the  tint  inRanee.  Edicta,  »
called  from  their  aniJo^  to  the  old  edict  (Oaiiu«
L  93),  edictalef  legca^  generalei  legea,  lege*
petose,  du.  were  Uwi  binding  on  all  the  empei
rabjeeta  Undtr  the  general  head  of  reecnpn
(Oiius,  L  72,  73,  &C.)  were  contained  epiitolu,
mbwriptionei^  and  annotstionea  (Oaini,  L  9<,  9S,
104),  which  were  the  auwen  of  the  cmpetvr  to
thoee  who  consnlled  him  either  ea  pnblic  Ainciion-
ariei  or  indiTiduaU  (Plin.  ^  x.  3.1  The  epie-
tola,  a>  the  name  imj^ica,  wu  in  the  Ibtm  of  a
letter :  rabicriptioaet  and  annotatkoea  woe  ihnrt
anmere  \e  qneaCioni  propoimded  to  the  empeior,
and  written  at  the  foot  or  margin  of  tbe  paper
which  ecmtained  the  qawtiana  Tn  the  time  of
Tibnina,  the  word  reeCTiptiun  had  hardly  obtained
the  legal  BiniifiatiiHKrf' tha  time  irfQaina,  (Tacit.
Aim.  Ti.  9^  It  ii  eiidant  that  deoeta  and  re-
•eripta  oonld  not  from  their  natoie  hare  (he  fcR«
of  Icgee  genenlei,  bnt  inunmch  ai  tlieie  deteimi-
natioBt  m  porticidar  caaea  might  be  of  gtneral
ilication,  they  mi^t  gradnally  obtain  the  force


se


Under  the  early  emperon,  at  leaat  ia  the  time

of  Angnatna,  many  Iqea  w

dme,  and  tbat  of  hia  i

ti  Hadrian,  we  find  m

conaull^ In  lact  the  empeiai,  in  whom  the  an-

preme  power  wai  Teated  mat  the  time  of  Angnatni,


■lid  to  be  made  "  impenlore  anctore."  Probably,
about  the  time  of  Hadrian,  Kniitiu.conaoln  became
leet  comnon,  and  finally  imperial  trautitatiaiwa
became  the  commm  form  in  which  a  law  waa

At  a  later  pwiod,  in  the  InKitDtea,  it  ia  de-
eland  that  natera-  the  impeiato  detcmilned
{crauMuf)  by  ejaatola,  oi  dedded  judioally  (oq^
nwosu  dtermt),  at  declared  by  edict,  wai  law  ;
with  tbia  limitation,  that  theae  cooatinrtiDna  woe
not  lawi  which  In  their  naton  vaie  limited  to

Under  the  general  head  ef  eonatitatiooea  we
aljo  read  of  mandata,  oi  inalmctiini*  by  the  Caaoi


Many  of  theae  oonatitationa  are  preaerred  in
their  original  form  in  ttie  extant  codea. [Codsx

THBODOMiNTTg,  4c.]  [O,  L.]

CONSUAXIA,  a  featiTal,  with  gunea,  cele-
brated by  the  Romana,  accotding  to  Featna,  Orid
{FiuL  iiL  199),  and  othera,  m  faononr  of  Canau,
the  god  of  aeciet  ddibaationa,  at,  aocordinglo  Ury
(I  9),  of  Neptnmia  Equatria.  Plutarch  (Otatd.
Bam.  M),  DioiyiiDa  of  Haliianaaaiia  (iL  SI),
and  the  Paendo  Aacoulua,  howeia  (ad  Ck,  n  Y*rr.
p.  U3.  ed.  Oi«lli),  BTthat  Neptanoa  Bqneatria  and
Conana  were  only  d^rant  nanwa  for  one  and  the
aame  deity.  It  waa  aolemniaed  erery  year  in  the
circiu,  by  the  aymbolical  ceremony  of  uKOrering
an  altar  dedicated  to  the  ged,  which  waa  buried  in
Uie  earth. For  Bmnbia,  who  waa  canndoed  ai


363


CONSUL.


the  fennder  of  ths  tailjnl,  mi  wd  la  hare  di>-
coTcnd  ta  tlat  in  tbe  taiih  on  ttut  >poL  (Com-
pare  Nielmhr,  Hiii.  Ron.  (oL  i.  DDlei  629  and
630.)  The  loleainitr  took  place  on  the  21itoC
Augoft  wiJii  bone  um  chariot  nco,  and  libationi
Vene  pound  into  the  flaraea  vhich  coomiaed  the
•uaifiua.  Duiios  tbna  feitife  game*,  honea  and
mnlei  van  not  aSowed  to  do  aa;  work,  and  vere
adorned  with  garimdi  of  fiowera.  It  waa  at  their
fint  celebntion  that,  according  to  the  ancient
legend,  tbe  Sabine  maideni  were  carried  oS.
(yam.  Da  Lag.  ZoC  tL  20  ;  Dioaji.  i  2  ;  Cie.
A  S^  iL  7.)  Viigil  {Am.  liiL  636),  id  ipraking
of  the  rape  of  the  Sat^ea,  detcribea  it  aa  haTing
occoned  during  the  eelebi*tian  of  the  Orenuiaa
yamtt,  which  can  only  be  accomUd  for  by  up-
indng  that  tile  gnat  Citcenaian  garnet,  ia  labaB.
qnent  timea,  anpeiMded  the  ancient  Coninalia  ;  and
tut  thna  uie  poet  anbititiited  game*  of  hia  own
time  for  ancient  onea  — a  bvourile  piaclioe  with
Virg^  ;  or  that  ho  only  UMaot  to  ny  the  tape  twk
place  Bl  Uie  well-known  feitiTal  in  the  dicu  (tliD
Coniualia),  without  thinting  of  the  ladi  Ciicenua,
pnmeily  »  oUed.  [L.  S.J

CONSUL  (Bnn-oi),  the  hi^heat  lepublican
magiitiata  at  llama.  The  name  u  probably  com-
potod  of  am  and  lal  which  containi  the  »me  root
n  bUo  ;  10  that  amtalet  are  thoee  who  "  go  to-
gether," JDit  a«  and  ia  "  one  who  gw*  ont,"  and
praanl,  i»  "  wio  who  goea  befKrc."

There  waa  a  tradition  that  King  Serrioi,  after

^nliih  „.  .

orer  we  may  think  of  the  tndition,  the  penon  who
deriaed  it  mut  htTC  had  a  deep  intighl  into  ihe
nature  of  the  Roman  atate  and  ili  irnlilutiooi ;  and
the  Sut  tliat  n  the  abolition  of  royalty,  il  waa  in-
ttiluted  forthwith,  asHoa,  at  any  lale,  to  thaw  that
it  bad  been  thought  of  before.  Thnt  mnch  U  alao
certain,  that  the  coninlihip  waa  note  Latin  inatiCn-
tien,  for  in  Latiam  the  kingly  power


by  the  dictatorahip,  a  i


lutnkcy  inieated  with  the


a  magutiw  _
Mune  powci  aa  that  of  a  king,  except  that  it  Jaatad
only  for  a  time.

Tbe  cmnlibip  which  waa  ettablithcd  aa  a  re-
pnblian  magictracy  at  Rams  immediately  after
the  abolition  of  royalty,  tbowed  ita  lepoblican
chanctar  in  the  onmniatance  that  ita  power  wu
dirided  between  two  indiridoala  (iiipirini  di^ilae),
andthatitwaaonlyofo(ieyear'idnratiai(ainHHi}.
Thia  priiid[je  WM,  on  the  whole,  obaored  ihrongh-
ont  the  tepnblican  period ;  and  the  only  eieeplioni
arc,  that  Bometime*  a  dictator  waa  appointed  in-
■Imd  of  two  coDnili,  and  that,  in  a  few  initancca,
when  one  cf  the  eonaula  bad  died,  the  other  is-
Oained  in  oliii»  alms,  either  beouiie  the  remaining
portion  of  Iho  year  was  too  thort,  or  from  religioui
eeniplei  (Diooyi.  t.  67  j  Dion  Caia.  uit.  *),  for
otherwiie  the  rule  waa,  that  if  either  of  the  am-
•uli  died  in  the  year  of  bii  ofbce,  or  abdicated  be-
fore ill  eipitation,  the  other  waa  obliged  to  con-
'  ia  fiir  ^e  purpoae  of  electing  ■  auc-


r  (nirwBM  i
ig  the  tuttott


during  the  diatorbancea  in  the  lait  centoiy  of  the
tepablic,  that  a  Cinna  maintained  hinudf  aa  aolo
connil  for  msrly  a  whole  year  (Appian,  £U  BtU.
Gv.  L  7(i ;  VoU.  PaL  iL  2*  ;  Lir.  EpU.  83) ;  and
that  PoDipey  caa  appointed  tole  conint,  in  order
to  prersnt  hia  becoming  dictator.  (Ascon,  ad
Cic  p  Mil,  p.  37  ;  Ut.  Epit.  107  ;  Appiao,  Dt


CONSUL.
BalL  Cia.  iL  23,  25.) Nay,  in  thoao  traobled


In  |}ie  oulicit  timet,  the  title  of  the  chief  nu

tratee  wai  not  ammUt  bat  pmtorti

them  ai  the  commandera  of  the  aj

public,  or  a>  tbi ~

tate.  TracH  of  thia  title  occur  m  ancieni
and  ecclealaattcal  docnmenta  (Lir.  lii.  3 ;
H.  iV.  TiiL  3  i  Put.  p.  161),  and  alM  in  tbe


o  itand  at  the  head  of


1<*»1  a
PEn./!


pmeforu  in  the  Roman  camp.  (PanL  Kac.  p-123;
Paeudo-Aacon.  ad  da.  m  Terr,  i  II.)  Some-
tiniea  alto  they  are  deiignnted  by  the  title  Jiiditn,
though  it  pcfhape  nerer  waa  their  official  title,  hot
waa  giTcn  them  only  in  thdr  capacity  of  Judgn.
(VaiTo,  JMl.l.-ri.S;  Lir.  iii.  66.)  The  name
Ganaalei  waa  introduced  for  tbe  higbeit  magiitnUd
in  B.  c  305  (Zonar.  rii.  19),  and  henceforth  re-
mained the  citabliahed  title  until  the  final  orei-
throw  of  the  Roman  empire.  Upon  the  citabliih-
ment  of  the  republic,  after  the  haoiihment  of  Tat.
quin,  all  the  powen  which  bad  bekn^ed  to  the
king,  wen  tranaferred  to  the  coninli,  except  that
which  had  conitituted  the  king  high  prieit  of  the
itate ;  for  thii  wai  kqit  diitinct  and  tianafatred  to
a  priortly  dignitary,  called  the  rta  taenrum,  or  rea
nerifiadut.

Ai  regarda  the  election  of  the  connli,  it  iuta-
riahly  took  place  in  the  cooiitia  coituriata,  nnder
the  presidency  of  a  conaul  or  a  dictator ;  and  in
their  abienca,  by  an  interred  The  coninla  tbua
elected  at  the  beginning  of  a  year,  wen  atylcd
oofwtla  ordiAarii^  to  diitingoiah  them  &om  the
nfffidi,  or  luch  aa  were  elected  in  the  place  of
those  whu  had  died  or  abdicated,  though  the  privi-
legei  and  powen  of  the  latter  were  in  no  way  in-
ferior to  thuae  of  the  former.  (Lir.  niT.  7,  &c.;
comp.  ilL  IS.)  At  the  time  when  tbe  oonanlihip
wat  aupenedrd  by  the  inititution  of  tbe  trituli
miiitant  eeauidari  jKteatala,  the  latter,  of  coune,
preiided  at  electiona,  aa  the  coniuli  did  before  nod
after,  and  muit  in  general  be  r^arded  at  the  repre-
lenlatiTa  of  the  coniult  in  every  reipect  It  waa,
howBTcr,  a  rule  that  the  magittiate  preiiding  at  an
election  ahoold  not  be  elected  himaeltl  though  a
few  excoptioni  to  thia  rule  are  recorded.  (Lir.  iii
SS,  ril.  34,  uiT.  9,  nriL  6.)  Tbe  da^  of  the
election  which  wai  made  known  by  an  edict,  three
nundinet  befonband  (LIt.  iii  36,  It.  6,  iliL  28\
naturally  depended  upon  the  day  on  whidi  the
magutratea  entered  npon  their  office.  Tbe  latter,
howeTcr,  wai  not  tbe  lame  at  all  timca,  but  waa
often  changed. In  geneiul  it  wat  obterred  at  a

ihould  enter  upon  their
idm,  nnlcai  particular

;  imponible ;  but  tbe
monthi  themielTea  varied  at  different  timpa,  and
there  are  no  lew  than  eight  or  nbe  monthi  in
which  the  coniula  ate  known  to  hare  entered  npon
their  functioni,  and  in  many  of  these  caaet  we
know  the  rcaiona  far  which  the  change  waa  made.
The  real  csiua  ippean  to  haxe  been  that  the  con-
inli, like  other  magiitratea,  were  elected  for  a  whole
year  ;  and  if  befbn  tbe  cloee  of  that  year  the  nugia-
tiacy  became  ncaut  either  by  death  orabdicarioni
their  lucceatara,  of  coorte,  nnderteok  their  office  oo
an  irregular  day,  which  tficn  remained  the  Met  id-
lamit,  until  another  erenl  of  a  limilar  kind  nndered
another  change  necctuiy. The  Gut  couula,  ai


CONSUL.
En  M  «•  know,  cnlend  opoD  iheit  dSIm
ida  of  SqXanlMr. (Dionys.
~'m  em  ckugt


.  1 J  Liy.  Tii.  5.)
•t  been  bnnght  about
kj  tba  If.  tiwinii  of  the  plebi,  B.  c,  49S,  irbm  the
camk  tntttvd  im  tlu  kilcDdi  of  Septsmber.
(DiwTi.  Til9.)  IiiB.c.479,theday  muthiDHn
>  wbole  moDth  backward ;  for  of  tha  coiuuli  of  tbe
ffeecding  jiai  me  had  fklleo  in  battle,  aod  tho
mIht  abdioted  two  OKintb)  before  the  end  of  hit
jnr ;  bents  the  new  conmli  entered  on  the
kalenli  of  SextilU.  (DionrL  ii.  13  ;  LiT.iii.  6.)
TUa  dvr  TerauDcd  until  B.  c  461,  ohen  the  coa-
nb  abdkated  to  maks  loom  for  the  deeemvin,
vho  tatatd  Dpua  their  ofBce  on  the  idea  of  Hay.
Hw  ■one  dair  tanaiiked  for  the  tva  following  yean
(Dinyi;  x.  S6  ;  Zooar.  vii.  la  ;  FaM.  Cap!)  ;  bnt
vkea  tbt  decMBiirate  wbi  aboliibed,  another  da^
wmit  hftTfl  becoow  the  diea  folennii,  but  which  it
*B  if  asknows,  until  in  B.  c  443,  we  find  that  it
*■  ibe  idea  of  December.  (DioDya.  zL  63.)  Thie
I  la  Hill  bad  been  ocaiioiwd  by  the  tribuni  militarta
ahoBad  bom  elected  the  year  hefoie,  and  had  been
M^dkdtoabdkata,  (LiT.ir.7i  Dicoiy*. li. 63.)
From  B.  c  £09  to  493
— —493  —  479


Tha  day  ^  wbiA  tba  couali  entered  on  their
eSta  detoiUDed  the  day  of  the  election,  thongh
tUn  waa  no  fixed  nde,  and  in  tha  eeriieft  tinm
lb(  iltukni  pnb^y  took  placa  very  abartly  be-
faic  tbidoaeflf  tbeoaeialyou',  and  the  nmewBi
iiiMJiaiillj  iba  aae  dmiiig  the  latter  period  of  the
rfpdlie.  (Ut.  xzznu.  43,  ilil  28,  iliiL  11.)
Bm  whan  tbe  &nt  of  Jaiiiiaiy  waa  find  apon  ai
tha  day  far  enleting  apon  the  ofGee,  the  contnlai
eniiia  wna  nnullj  held  in  July  or  oren  eu4ier,
at  1^  bdora  tha  Kaleada  of  Sextili*.  (Cic  od
J(L  L  16  :  od  Fam.  niu  4.)  Bat  OTen  during  that
pttbd  the  day  of  deetim  depended  in  a  great
■vaMin  iqrai  the  diacretian  of  tho  aenata  and  con.
■da,  w)m  oftis  delayed  it, (Oe.  adAa.ii.20,  ir.

Dama  la  Iba  yen  B.  c  366,  tha  eoniiilahip  ma
aeeeHble  to  DoiM  but  [latriciana,  bnt  in  tbat  year
L.  "— *"■  waa  tba  fint  plebeian  ooniul  in  eenag-
qaMSt  of  Iba  hw  of  C.  Lidniin.  (Lir.  tL  42,
in.  I.)  The  patridaiia  bowerer,  notwithalaoding
tba  lair,  repeatedly  contriTed  Is  keep  the  plebeiana
oM  (Ut.  Til  17,  la,  19,  22,  24,  2B),  nntU  in
H.  c.  MS  tba  baonectioo  of  tho  armjr  bI  Ctpm
waa  fiil]iiwcd,aaau  o&ar  inpoitaBteaiiaeqiuDeet,
hf  the  film  nlililiahiiiHil  of  tba  plabuan  conanl-
ahip ;  aad  H  ii  aran  aaid  that  at  that  tiDM  a  ple-
teotoaa  waa  paMod,  *"^'^"g  that  both  conaota
■ogbt  be  |debe>aoa.  (Lir.  jiL  42)  Attempta  on
tbc  part  tl  Ibe  patridana  to  exclude  the  plebeiana,


42.) The  andidatea  naaaiiy  were
I  aata.  tbe  et»  deairaoj  to  obtain
ther  Is  obtui  the  pbbaun


CONSUL.  MS

Henced^tli  Ilia  idea  of  Decabiber  remained  (at  a
loag  tinie  tke  did  aoleania.  (Liv.  W.  37,  v.  9, 11.)
In  iLc  401,  the  military  tribunea,  in  CDnaeqaeace
of  the  defeat  at  Veii,  abdicated,  and  their  aueceaun
ent^ed  upon  their  office  on  the  kalenda  of  October.
In  B.  c  391,  the  coniula  entered  upon  their  office
onthakalendiof  Quintilii.  (Lif.T.32  ;comp.31,
Tii  is,  litl  20.)  From  ihla  time  no  further  change
ia  mentioned,  though  iOTaial  eroita  are  recorded
which  mnit  have  been  accomiiaoied  by  an  alte>
atlon  of  tha  diea  aolennia,  nntil  in  &  c.  217,  wa
learn  that  the  conaala  entered  upon  their  office  '
on  the  idea  of  March,  which  coatom  remained  un^
altered  for  many  yeara  (Lit.  niL  I,  uiii.  30,
Txri.  1,  26,  iliv.  19),  until  in  B.C  IG4  it  waa  de-
creed that  in  fdture  tha  magiatrataa  ahonld  enter
npim  their<ffica  on  the  1  at  of  January,  a  regulation
which  began  to  be  Dbaerred  the  year  after,  and
nmained  in  force  down  to  the  end  of  the  republic
(Liv.  EpiL  47  i  Fa^.  Praimttl.)  The  chaage*  in
tha  time  at  which  tiie  connla  entered  npon  their
office  at  diflerent  Idmei,  may  tkerafbre  be  giren  in
the  following  tabular  view :  —

the  Idea  of  SeptembOT.

— Kalends  of  Septembec

—  — *in  — 131 — Ealendi  of  Seitilia.

—  —  451  —  449 — Idea  of  May.

—  —  449  — 44Boc400IdeaofDecember.

—  — 400  — [mbably  till397,KaleudaafOclob«i.

—  —  397  —  329  (peih)^  327),  Kalenda  of  Quinlili*.

—  —  827  —  323  unknown.

—  —  223  — 133  Idea  of  March.

—  —  lS3  —  tiUtheend,lheKalendaof  January.


place  in  tha  coninlahip  (in

Lir.  HIT.  10).  But  aa  in  Uia  eonna  of  thne  tha
patriciBni  wen  thrown  into  the  ihade  by  the  riling
power  of  the  aoMIei^  it  came  to  naai  that  both  coo-
anli  wen  plebeiana  In  b.  c  2t5,  the  angura  in-
deed oppoUd  the  election  of  two  plebeiana  (Lit.
niiLSl);  hat  not  long  after,  in  B.cl72,  tha  &ct
of  both  conanla  being  plebeiana  actually  occurred,
and  after  thii  it  waa  often  repeated,  tiie  ancient
diatinction  between  patriciani  and  plebeiana  &llij^
completely  mlo  obliiion.

The  contulahip  waa  throughout  tha  repablie
regarded  u  the  higheet  office  and  the  greateat
htmoui  that  could  be  conferred  upon  a  man  (Chx
p.  Flam.  25  ;  PanL  Disc  ^  136  ;  Dionyi.  It.  76),
bt  thedictatonhip,  thongh  It  had  a  BiMM  HNpgrwm,
waa  not  a  regular  magiaCrscy ;  and  the  cen ' '


tbongh  confeiTed  only  upon  coaanlan,  wia  yet  hr
infenor  to  the  eonnzlahip  in  power  and  infloenca.
It  waa  not  till  the  end  o!  the  repuldic,  and  eapedally
in  the  time  of  J.  Caeaar,  Uiat  the  conanlahip  loM  ita
formes  dignity  ;  lor  in  order  to  honour  hia  bienda,
he  canaed  them  to  be  elected,  aometiDKl  far  a  IsK
nLonthi,andaomeIimeaeTeafarafBwhonra.  (Sueton.
Ow.  76,  80,  Ntn>,  If  ;  Dion  Caaa.  xliii.  4S  ;
Macrob.  SaL  ii.  3.)

Tha  power  of  the  conanla  waa  at  firat  eqnal  to
that  oTthe  ktngi  into  whoae  place  thn  atepped,  with
the  exception  of  the  pritatly  power  of  the  rex  ncro-
mm,  which  waa  detached  from  it.  Eren  after  the
Valerian  lawa  and  the  inititution  of  the  tribunethip,
the  coniula  who  alone  wen  inTcated  with  the
execntJTe,  retained  the  meet  eiteniiTepowen  in  all
deputmenU  of  the  goramment.  But  in  the  gradual
development  of  the  eonititution,  lome  imnstant
the  conanlahip  and


d  to  new  offioera. Thia  w


•  o"


•  fiiat


M  coo&ned  to  holding  Xbe  oensiu  ud  rq
tho  citizana  accorduig  to  their  differe
,  but  alWmrdi  4Gqaind  yerj  eitenii
I.  (Cbnsob.] Tba  •Mond  fbnetioit  that  n


jndioul  power,  irbieh
to  ■  dii^Dct  DUgbtnuT  upder  tbe  titla  of  the
pnatonhip  [Fai.BTOR]  t  tad  hencefuth  the  con-
nil*  appeared  ai  Judge*  ouly  in  extnordiuaiy  caia

of  a  oimioal  nature,  when  the;  wece  called  apon
hj  a  unatu*  ooDiullum.  (Cic  Brat.  32  ;  Lit.
zxiix.IT,&i:.,iIL9.)  Bui,  notvithataiiding  theee
ciulailingi,  the  counlihip  (till  continued  to  be  re-
gBideda*llierepre«enlatiY«ofregs]power.  (Poljb.
Tilli  Cic.  fir  iiy.  iil  S.)

Id  legord  to  the  nature  of  the  poirer  ef  the  con-
mil,  we  muit  in  the  outlet  divide  it  into  two
pan*,  iiia*iuDch  ai  the;  were  the  highut  dn!
BUtbarily,  and  at  the  lame  tuna  the  mpiema  com-
nuoden  of  the  anoica.  So  long  a*  they  wen  in
the  dty  of  Rome,  they  were  at  the  heti  of  (he
government  and  ihe  BdminiiCntioo,  and  all  the
other  magittratea,  with  the  exception  of  the  CiibuneB
of  Ibe  people,  were  tubradinate  to  them,  Tbej
oaiTeiied  tlie  lenate,  and  u  pmidenli  conducted
the  buibau ;  they  had  to  carry  into  efcct  the  dc-
eiMi  rf  the  HuaM,  and  umttima  on  urgent  emcr-
gcDciei  they  might  even  act  on  thdi  owu  aathoritr
and  reiponilbility.  They  were  the  mediom  through
which  foreign  aSain  were  brought  befwe  the  •enatc;
all  deipaliis*  and  report*  were  placed  in  their
haodi,  before  they  were  laid  before  the  lenate  ]  by
them  foreiffn  ambaHadoz*  were  introduced  into  the
•enate,  aaa  they  alone  carried  on  the  negotiation*
batwean  the  laiiate  and  faieigu  atate*.  They  alio
conTcned  the  aawmbly  of  the  people  and  [reiided
in  it ;  and  thn*  oondocted  the  election*,  put  leg!*-
iMive  meainret  to  the  vote,  and  had  lo  carry  the
decree*  of  the  people  into  effect  (Polyb.  tL  12;
Conrru ;  SsHATua.)  The  whole  of  the  internal
nmchinery  of  the  republic  wa*,  in  fact,  under
thnr  anperintendence,  and  in  order  to  give  weight
to  th^  executive  power,  they  had  the  right  of
anmmming  and  aireiting  ihe  obatrepenu*  (nuolu
and  jmmio,  Cic  n  Vat.  9,  p.  Dom.  41 ),  which
WW  limited  only  by  the  right  of  appeal  from  their
jodgnieat  (/•rowaWu)  ;  and  their  right  of  iziflicting
puniihment  might  be  eieniied  even  againat  in-


oulward  aigna  of  their  power,  and  at  the
■ame  time  the  mean*  by  which  they  eieniaad
it,  wen  twelve  liclora  with  the  &icci,  withont
whom  the  ooond  never  appeared  in  publio  (Liv.
ht.  17,  ixriL  27 ;  Val.  Max.  i.  1.  g  9  ;  comp.
Liv.  li  34,  v"'v  12),  and  who  preceded  him  m
a  line  one  behind  another.  (Liv.  ixiv.  44  ;  Val.
fiiLX.  in  2. 1  4.)  In  the  city,  however,  the  axei
did  not  ^fwai  in  the  fiwce* ;  a  regulation  laid
to  have  been  introduced  by  Volerina  Publicola
{Dlimn.  r.  2,  IS,  7S,  x.  66),  and  which  ii  io-
timaldy  eonnected  with  the  tight  of  appeal  from
>  eonaol'i  agutence,  whence  it  did  not  apply  to
the  dietalor  nor  to  the  decemvin.  Now  a*  the
pnvocatio  could  take  {Jaoa  imly  within  the  city
and  a  thooaand  pace*  in  circomierence,  it  mnit  be
ntppoied  that  the  aie*  did  not  appear  in  the  iuce*
witfiin  the  lome  limit*,  an  wimou  which  i*  not
contradicted  by  the  bet  that  the  conaula  on  ntum-
ing  from  war  upeared  with  the  aiei  in  their  faacea
fa  ihaCawpM  Martini^  at  the  Taryptci  of  Bwnoj


CONSUU

for  they  had  the  imperium  militare,  whieli  waiiil


1  citr,  a

When  . „

decreed  by  the  aenate,  the  conanls  conducted  the
levy,  and,  at  fint,  had  the  appointmeiil  of  all  the
■ubordiDBte  officera  —  aright  which  aubseqnoitly
they  ahared  with  Che  people ;  and  the  loldiEn  had
to  take  their  oath  of  all^iance  to  the  conmla.
They  alio  determined  the  contingent  to  be  (nr-
niahed  by  the  alliei  ;  and  in  the  prarinco  aaaigned

not  only  of  aU  military  affiun,  but  of  cveiy  thing
else,  even  over  life  and  death,  eicsp^i^  cailj
the  conduion  of  peace  and  treatie*.  (Polyb.  vi,
IS  )  oompare  ExiBCraus.)  The  treaaury  wu,
indeed,  under  the  control  of  the  aenate ;  bat  in
r^ard  to  the  eipenae*  for  war,  the  conaula  do  not
appear  to  have  been  bound  down  to  the  (omi
granted  by  that  body,  but  to  have  availed  IhemT
•elvea  of  the  public  money  a*  ciicmnslance*  re-
quired ;  the  quaealnra,  however,  kept  a  altict  ac-
count of  the  expenditure  (Polyh.  vl  12,  13,  li  ;
Liv.  iliv.  1 6).  But  when  in  timet  of  need  money
wai  to  be  taken  from  the  aarurwii  tmdiH,  of
which  the  keya  leem  to  have  been  in  the  exeloaive
potieiaion  of  the  conaula,  the;  had  to  be  authoriaed
by  a  scnatUB  coaioltnnL  (Liv.  Kxvii.  10.)  In  the
early  time*,  the  coniult  had  the  power  to  diapoia
of  the  booty  in  any  way  they  pleaaed  ;  lometRnn
they  dirtribnted  the  whole  or  a  port  of  it  among
the  Mldien,  and  aometimea  they  nM  it,  and  de-
poaited  the  prodnce  in  the  public  treaaury,  which
m  later  time*  became  tiw  unial  practica.

Abuae  of  the  ctnuular  power  wa*  pro¥«ated,
fint  of  all,  by  each  ef  the  omaula  bdng  depeadent
on  hia  colI«aue  who  wa*  invotted  with  equal
right* ;  for,  if  we  except  the  (mincea  abioad
where  each  waa  permitted  lo  act  with  nnlimilcd
power,  the  two  conioli  oonld  do  nothing  nuleai
both  were  unanimona  (Dionyi.  x.  17  j  Appian,  Dm
fieU.  Civ.  il  1 1),  and  agunat  the  aeateuce  of  one
conanl  an  appeal  might  be  brought  before  hii  col-
league ;  nay,  one  conaul  might  of  hia  own  accord
pnt  hi*  veto  ou  the  proceedinga  of  tha  other.  (Liv.
iL  le,S7,  iii.  34  ;  Dionya.  T.  9  ;  Cie.  Dt  Lig.  ia.
i.)  But  in  order  to  avoid  every  muuceoBiy  dia-
pute  or  rivalry,  arrangement*  had  beoi  made  from
the  fira^  that  the  real  fimcticau  of  tha  office  ahoald
be  pecf<Hined  only  by  one  of  than  every  altenkato
month  (Dionya  ii.  43)  ;  and  iho  one  who  waa  ia
the  actnal  eieniae  of  the  coninlar  power  for  the
month,  wa*  preceded  by  the  twelve  Ucton,  whcDca
he  i*  comminily  deKribed  by  the  woidt  pma  gmm
fuat  erant.  (Liv.  viii.  12,  ii.  6.)  In  the  tuly
time*,  bia  colleague  waa  then  not  acconqaniad  by
the  liclora  at  all,  or  he  wa*  preceded  by  an  accenao*,
and  the  lictora  fbUowed  after  him.  (Cic.  D*  Km
PM.  ii.  31  ;  Liv.  ii  I,  iii.  33  )  comp.  Dionya.  v.
2, 1.  24.)  Aa  regarda  the  later  time*,  it  ii  ceitaiji
that  the  comul,  whai  ha  did  not  peifann  the
functioua  of  the  offlc^  waa  foUowed  by  the  twelve
liclora  (Snet  Oiea.  20)  ;  when  thia  cnitmn  anae  ia
unoertaio,  and  we  only  know  that,  in  tiie  time  of
Polybiua,  the  dklator  had  twenly-foor  lictora.  It
ia  commonly  believed,  that  the  oonul  who  for  the
mimth  being  performed  the  fonctioni  of  the  office,
waa  designated  aa  the  omial  an{ior ;  bat  tha  an-


CON30L.
«en  doabtfnl  m  to  wbetber  the
torn  ^tplitd  ts  Um  nw  who  had  tfaa  &Ka,


if  ikc  eonnl,  h  thu  the  elder  of  ^  two  na
(iDed  amiml  nwior.  (Lit.  hztu.  47  ;  Cic  Da
Jb  I'M.  iL  81  ;  VaL  Mu.  ir.  1.  §  1  ;  PbL
AIL  13  :  Dirain.  n.  57-)  Owing  to  the  itftet
faid  to  the  Mb,  ha  pmided  at  the  meeting  vt
Ai  m  lahi  which  wn  b^  imiapdiately  aAv  the
riieliaa.  <Ut.  iz.  8 ;  Oellhu,  iL  15.)  Another
pnat  wUdi  acted  u  a  check  npim  the  ererciie  of
tW  eoop^  pow*!',  wu  the  eertain^  that  aftet
tlMCn^Btiai  «f  lltsireace  th^ni  *~  '
WMBMBtlathaMniiwm  whi '
ilailiil  ihimwliiii  Ml  Ihiiii  uniiiil
oaea  an  en  noari,  ia  which  aftn
thef  woe  acrord  and  eondaaned  not  onlv  S>  il-
tqal  or  nneanititatiiHal  aeti,  but  alio  tor  miwiRDiMa
n  wai^  wiadi  woe  aicnb»d  eilher  to  their  care-
kMoaaarwantetabitity.  (LiT.il «1,52,54,61,
m.  31,  nil.  4a  49,  xxn.  3,  S,  iiTiL  S4  ;  Cic
&  MA  On-.  iL  a  i  VbL  Max.  TtiL  1.  §  4.)  The
ets  '  ■  ■  i"ff  amgance  aad  povei  ef  the  tribnnei
did  not  Map  here,  sod  we  oat  trnfreqaentlj  find
1^  f**Tfr*^,  ersi  doling  the  time  of  their  office
wen  mat  oilj  thRateoed  with paniihrnent  and

iw[iiiiii Ill, but wen  actuaU; labjected  to

thfs.  (Lir.  IT.  26,  t.  S,  iliL  31,  Epil.  4S,  BS  ;
(Sc  />■  £(ff.  UL  9,  H  Tof.  S  ,  Val.  Utx.  ii.  6.  g  3  ;
Kb  CaaL  nxTiL  50,  xxxriiL  6,  zzxix.  S9.)
fliiaiiliMii  the  people  theuuelTO  oppoied  the
tnMk  in  tba  aiaviae  of  tbrir  power.  (Lit.  iL  SS,
19.)  hnttj,  the  eoDMili  were  dependent  npon  the
■Ml  1.  [Sbnatub,]  Thoe  ocraned,  haweT«,
tiaea  wliiu  the  power  of  tba  oonnli  thni  limited
br  Mpahlicaa  inetitatiani  waa  thoo^t  inadequate
to  mm  the  Tepablie  froa  periU  into  which  ehe


B  fbll  dictatorial  power  not  re-
■iniaBd  elfaa  bj  the  loiata,  the  peqile,  or  die
trih^wa.  In  the  nrij  timet,  (neb  tenBtQi  coa-
Mha»  anij  meutkoed,  w  it  wai  ciiitoinii7  to
npaiat  a  dictator  on  taeh  emergenciei ;  bat  when
lie  dklatanhip  bad  Men  into  dinua,  the  lenate
Vf  tba  ahoT*  noitioned  focmnla  iuTctted  the
■aaaali, fer  the  time,  with dietalarial  power.

IDKrATOK-l

Ob  Bitauig  npoo  Ihur  office,  the  conmli,  and
after  waida  the  pnelon  aba,  *sneA  among  one
aaotWraa  ta  tbebariiKM  which  each  had  to  look
»ha,  ao  that  eiel;  we  had  hii  diitinct  i^ere  of
actka,  vhicb  wai  teiMd  bit  pnmKBB.  The  or-
tmMj  w^  in  which  the  pn^ncei  mre  attigned
IB  (aeb.  waa  bj  lot  (■urtwipraeiniu),  nnlea  the
etBeaBWa  t%iuii  iiiiiih  themielTet,  without  an;
aaA  BHana  of  dedrim  (eamparan  attrm  f*««i-
lim,  Ut.  ziiT.  10,  zxi.  1,  TTTJi.  B  ;  Cic  oif  Fam.
L  9\  The  dMinen  h?  lot  wai  moitad  to  fia  no
•liMr  natca  than  beaoaa  the  two  counli  had
aqaal  lighta,  and  not,  aa  aine  belioTt,  beeaoae  it
wiB  thntr  iBtended  to  leaTc  the  dedtieo  to  the
fBk  If  It  wai  tbovght  thu  one  of  the  cowiU
waa  eadacMly  qaalifiod  for  ■  paiticnlar  [toTiiKe,
•ithar  en  ateoont  of  hi*  eiperioncs '


b  V  <^  i^Bla  md  witbant  a^  dnwing  of


consul:  US
lota.  (IJT.iiL3,TiiL  16,xixiiL  1)  (^cod^tf.i,
19  1  eojnp.  Liv.  hit.  SO,  ilL  6.J  In  the  eariiert
timet,  it  teemi  to  baTe  been  the  cnatom  fn  only
one  tS  the  contuli  to  march  ont  at  the  bead  of  the
army,  and  for  the  other  to  remain  at  Rome  for
the  pmlection  of  the  city,  and  to  cairy  on  the  ad-
miniitiation  of  the  dTic  i&in,  onlcaa,  indeed,
wan  wan  cairied  on  in  two  diiltinmt  qnarten
which  lendcmd  it  neceuary  for  both  coniuli  to
take  the  field.  (Dionya.  tL  34,  91  ;  coup.  LiT.
ia  4,  33,  TiL  38.)  Nay,  we  find  that  CTen  when
Rome  bad  to  couund  with  one  fbrmidabia  enemy,
the  two  conioli  marched  ont  together  (Lir.  JL  44,
iiL  8,  SB,  TiiL  6,  ftc)  ;  bnt  the  fenei  were  equally
diTided  between  than,  in  each  a  manner  that  each
bad  the  oommBiid  of  two  Icgioni,  and  bad  the
' allonala  day.  (Polyb.


iiL  107,  110,  fi  28  ;  LiV.  ir.  46,  zzil  27,  41,

xzriiL  9  ;  camp.  iii.  70.)

Wben  the  Roman  dominion  extended  beyond
the  naluial  boundaiiea  of  Italy,  the  two  eonnili
ware  not  enough  to  ODdortaka  the  adminiitntion
of  the  prorincet,  and  praoton  were  appointed  to
undertake  the  command  in  tone,  while  the  more
important  onea  were  naerred  fra  tba  eoninla.
Hence  a  diilinction  waa  made  between  prminaa^
Bamiant  and  pmtloriaa.  (Lir.  ilL  S.)  [Fro-
viNcu.]  It  remained  with  the  senate  to  detei'
mine  into  wbich  ]»DTinoe*  ecoaoli  were  to  be  aent,
and  into  which  pmetm,  and  thia  waa  done  either
befora  the  mamiUatea  actnally  entered  apon  their
office  (Lit,  XXL  17),oraAer  it,  and  on  the  proposal
oftheconnili.  (Liv.xxr.  1,  xxtl  3a,xxiiL  7,&c)
Upon  tbia,  the  nugiitiales  either  agreed  among
themielre*  aa  to  vbich  proTincs  t&ch  waa  to
Dndenake,  oi  they  draw  liAa,  Gnt,  of  couiir,  the
conaala,  and  after  them  the  pnwton.  One  of  the
laws  of  C,  Qpaccbni,  however,  introduced  the  r^
gulalion,  that  erery  year  the  senate,  pnTions  to
the  contolaf  electiani,  ahoald  determine  npon  the
two  consular  proTincea,  in  order  to  aToid  partiality,
it  being  yet  onknown  who  were  to  be  the  CDnsuli.
It  had  been  cnstoman  from  the  eaiiieat  Umet  for
the  coninla  to  eater  their  province  in  the  year  of
their  conaolship,  either  at  the  veiy  beginning  ca
afterwards  ;  hot  in  the  latter  period  of  the  repohlic,
the  ordinary  practice  of  the  amsula  was  to  remain
at  Rone  dnring  the  year  of  their  office,  and  to  go
into  tbeir  pronnce  in  the  year  fidhiwing  at  pro-
coninla,  nntil  at  length  in  B.C.  5S,  a  eenatnt  con-
mltmn,  and  the  yisr  after  a  law  of  Pompey
enacted  that  a  conitd  or  praetor  sboald  not  go  into
any  proiince  till  fire  yean  after  the  expimtion  of
their  office  (Dion  Cam.  iL  46,  56.)  When  a
pmrince,  hit  imperiom  was


limited  to  it,  and  to


province  wai,  at  all  timea,  eonaidered  lUwnL  (Liv.
X.  37,  ixii.  19,  xiiL  48,  xliiL  1.)  In  aonie  few
caaea,  this  mle  waa  OTCilooked  ibr  the  good  of  the
lepnblie.  (LiT.xxTii  48,xxiz.  7.)  On  the  other
band,  a  conaul  waa  not  allowed  to  quit  his  pni-
•ince  beiora  ha  had  accomplished  the  pnrpoie  for
which  ha  had  been  tent  into  it,  or  before  the  arrival
of  hia  anceeaaor,  onleet,  indeed,  he  obtained  the
apecial  pcnniaion  of  the  emate.  (Lir.  xixviL  47.)
Other  AmctioDi  also  wero  aometimei  divided  be-
twesi  the  naiinla  by  lot,  if  diey  csnld  not  agree,
far  example,  wbich  of  them  waa  to  preside  at  the
comalar  elaeticns  di  those  of  the  cenaors  (Lir.
HIT.  10,  incT,  6, 20,  xiiii,  82,  ilL  6),  wbich  of
them  waa  to  dedicate  a  temple  (Ut.  iL  S,  37),  ol


356


CONSUL.


Dominale  ■  dictator.  (Lir.  it.  26.)  So  Ion);  u  tlii
conauli  bad  to  Mi  the  cennu,  tbej,  undaubtedt}',
drew  lotA,  wbkh  of  them  mudtrel  lasinim,  and
eren  when  they  went  out  on  a  commoa  erped'
they  leem  to  hare  determined  by  lot  In  wha
RctioB  each  thoold  eien  hi*  activity,  (Lii.  xli.
18.)

The  entering  of  a  coand  npon  hit  office  vu
connected  with  gnat  •olcomitiu :  httiat  ii.y'bntlL
cscli  camalted  the  aupicea  for  himid^  which  in
the  early  time*  wu,  andoabtedly,  ■  matter  of
ffTcat  importance,  ttuHtgh^  at  a  later  period,  we
ktww  it  to  hiTe  been  a  men  ionnility.  (Diony*.
iL  i,  e.)  It  matt,  howeTcr,  be  aheerred,  that
wbaterer  the  natore  of  the  angpice*  were,  the
entering  upon  the  office  wu  nerec  either  tendered
impuiiblo  or  delayed  thereby,  whence  we  moit
suppose  that  the  object  merely  wai  to  obtain  fk-
Toumble  tigni  from  the  godi,  and  a*  it  vete  to
place  under  the  protection  of  the  godi  the  office
on  which  the  magiitrate  entered.  After  the
Buipica  were  consnhed,  the  counil  retnnied  home,
put  on  the  taga  pratli»la  (Lir.  iiL  63  ;  Ot.  ii
Pind.  ir.  4.  25,  FaA  i.  61),  and  receiTed  the
■alutatio  of  hU  friendi  and  Uie  •entton.  (Dion
Can.  kiiL  £  ;  Or.  u  Fomt.  it.  4.  37,  Ac)  Ae-
componted  by  theie  and  a  hott  of  curioui  ipectaton,
the  conml  clod  in  hi*  official  robea,  proceeded  to
the  temple  of  Jopiler  in  the  Capitol,  where  a  Hlemn
nerilice  of  white  bulla  wat  offered  to  the  god.
It  teemi  that  in  thi*  proceuion,  the  lella  cnrnlii,
ai  an  emblem  of  hi*  a&Bt,  wu  carried  before  the
aaunl.  (Ot.  2.  a  it.  1.  29,  &c,  it,  n,  &c  ;  L!t.
Hi.  63  !  Cie.  i)«  Leg.  Agr.  ii.  34.)  Afler  this,  a
meeting  of  the  aenate  took  place,  at  which  the
elder  <^  the  two  cooanii  made  hi*  report  eonctm-
icg  the  republic,  beginning  with  matlen  referring
to  religion,  and  then  piaiing  on  to  other  at&in
(nArra  ad  tanahm  dis  rtimt  divimi  it  hamanu,
LJT.Ti.  !,  il.  B,raTii.  I  j  Ck.  ad  Qmr.paiiRad.
5.)  One  of  the  £nt  among  the  leligiou*  thinga
which  the  coninli  had  to  attend  to,  waa  the  fixing
of  the  feriae  Latinae,  and  it  wai  not  till  they  had
performed  the  Hleinn  ncrifice  on  the  Alban
mount,  that  they  could  go  into  their  pronneea.
(LiT.  ixL  63,  xiiL  1,  zit.  12,  ilii.  ID.)  The
other  affiun  upon  which  the  eonnila  had  to  report
to  the  aenate  had  reference  to  the  dtltribution  of
the  proTincea,  and  many  other  mattera  connected
with  the  admin  iitratim,  which  often  were  of  the
higheat  importance.  After  theae  lepoita,  the
meeting  of  the  aenate  brake  Dp,  and  the  membei*
BccDoipanied  the  con«uis  to  their  homea  (Or.  a
Font.  ir.  4.  41 ),  and  thia  being  done,  the  conanl*
were  inatalled  in  their  office,  in  which  they  had  to
eiert  tbemielTei  for  the  good  of  Ibeir  eountiT.

Iteipecting  the  Tariooa  oScet  which  at  different
timea  were  tempmiary  aabetitatea  for  the  conful-
ahip,  inch  ai  the  diclatontiip,  the  decemTiiate,
and  the  office  of  the  tribuni  militore*  conaalari
pDteatata,  the  reader  ia  lefened  to  the  teporate
article*.  Towaida  the  end  of  the  republic,  the
ODoaulihip  lost  i(a  power  and  importance.  Caeaar,
in  hia  dictatojwhip,  gare  it  the  lint  aoTere  blow,
fbr  he  hinuelf  took  the  office  of  eonaol  along  irith
that  of  dictator,  or  he  arbitrarily  cauaed  penona  to
be  elected,  who  in  their  actiona  were  mtirely  de-
pendent npm  hia  will.  He  hinuelf  wai  elected  at
firat  for  &n  yean,  then  for  ten,  and  at  length  fbr
life.  (3noE«.  Caa.  76,  80  ;  Dion  Cam.  ^ii.  30,
sliiL  1,  46,  49;  A^iaa,  Dt  SaKOcB.  il  106.)


CONSUL.

Ta  the  reign  of  Aognatna,  the  ommlar  pswei  wU
a  men  ahadow  of  what  it  had  been  liefbre,  and
the  oHiauli  who  were  elected,  did  not  retain  their
office  for  a  full  year,  but  had  usually  to  abdi-
(ate  after  a  few  montha.  (Dion  Cas*.  ilTiii.  35,
iliiL  46  1  Lucan,  t.  399.)  The*e  iirqulaiitiea
increased  to  soch  an  extent,  that  in  the  reign  of
Commodn*  there  were  no  leva  than  twenty-fiTe
consul*  in  one  year.  (Lamprid.  Cbramotf.  6  ;  Dion
Caia.  lnii.  IS.)  In  the  republican  tinw,  the  year
had  rceeiTed  it*  name  fiom  the  constils,  and  in  all
public  docnmenli  their  names  vers  enteied  to  mark
the  year  ;  but  kam  the  time  that  there  were  mora
than  two  in  one  year,  only  those  that  entered  upu)
their  office  at  the  beginnu^  of  the  year  wen  re-
garded as  eamtla  ordinarii,  and  gate  their  name*
to  the  year,  though  the  mffecti  were  Itkewiaa
entered  in  the  Futi.  (Sueton.  Domil  2,  GaO.  6,
r;te^2;Senec£ia7V<i.iii.3I  ;  Flin.i^H<9r.  38  ;
Lamprid.  AL  Sen.  28.)  The  contules  ocdinaiii
ranked  higher  than  those  who  were  elected  aftw-
warda  The  eleclion  Erom  the  tdme  of  Hbarioi  wu
in  the  hands  of  the  senate,  who,  of  coqtks  elected
only  those  that  were  recommended  by  tin  eia-
peioi ;  thoae  who  were  elected  were  then  annaaneed
{mamtian)  to  the  people  aaaembled  in  what  vaa
called  comitia.  (Dion  Caai.  IriiL  SO  ;  Plia.  Paa^.
77;  TacAn.  ii.  68.)  In  the  last  centuries  ef
the  empire,  it  mu  cnstomaty  to  create  hMmary
eoosnls  (amnda  hom/mni)  who  were  chosen
by  the  senate  and  sanctioned  by  the  empetnr
(C^aaied.  i.  10  ;  Justin.  Nob.  In.  60.  c.  1).  and
conanlea  aufiecti  were  thai  aorcely  heard  of  at  all,
for  Ccmatantine  reitored  the  old  CQalom  o'  ~  ~  '~ '
ing  only  two  conaula,  one  for  Constantin
the  other  for  Rome,  who
judges  (under  the  empsw)  fbr  a  whole  jcai,  and
besides  these  two  there  were  no  other*  except
honorary  conanb  and  eonsulares.  Altboogli  tb*
dignity  of  these  himorary  conml*  a*  well  •*  of  the
consoles  ordinarii  and  ndecti  wis  menly  iMWinal,
still  it  was  regarded  a*  the  bigheat  in  Um  amidr^
and  wai  taught  after  by  nolrie  and  wealthy  persdM
with  the  greatest  eagemeaa,  notwithatandmg  ths
great  eipemea  connected  with  the  office  on  ac-
count of  the  public  entertainments  which  a  newlj
appointed  consul  had  to  give  to  his  friend*  and  tba
people.  (Lydns,  De  MagiUr.  ii.  8  ;  Liban.  OnA.
" "  '""■'"  Sidon.  Apidli^


i.  25.)  Sometimea  the  emperoci  tl
ed  the  conanlahip  ot  confened  it  upon  im-
perialprincea.  The  last  eoosol of  Ronie was Deei-
mns  Tbeodoms  Paulinu^  a.  d.  636,  and  at  Cod-
atantinople  Flavius  Basilins  Jnnkr,  in  A.D.S4L,
After  tint  tim^  the  empenin  of  the  East  took  tba
le  of  consul  fiir  themsdrcs,  until  in  the  aid  it
II  quite  into  obliTJon.

The  official  function*  of  the  nmsul*  imdei  tin
apirs  wen  as  fbllowa.:  —  1.  They  jnaided  in  the
senate,  though,  of  conns,  nerer  without  the  lanctiaa
nf  the  emperor ;  2.  They  administered  jusliea,
partly  tOra  ordii**  (Tac  Jan.  iv.  19,  liii.  4  t
QelL  liii.  34),  and  partly  in  ordinary  casea,  *ach  ■•

mian.  MaieelL  xiii.  7  ;  Csaaiod.  vL  1  ;  Snatos.
Clatd.  23  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  13)  ;  3.  The  letting  at
the  public  terenuei,  a  doty  which  had  haaaAj
been  perfcnned  by  the  censors  (Ot.  an  PmL  it.  E.
19);  4.  The  conducting  of  the  games  IB  the  Ciiew
and  of  pnblic  sdemnitiaB  in  boooorof  tki  tngmta.


mn  of  appunt-
antinoplc^  and


C0NTUBBRNALE3.
br  lAidi  Okt  bad  to  AAaj  tlie  txpauM  out  tt
dMtr  own  mcBiia.  (Stutmi.  fftro,  i  ;  Jairn.  li.
193,  Ac;  Cmtani-Lc^  ud  iiL  39,  t.  IS,  n.  10.)
Rfunn  anpowm  indeed  gnnwd  the  mane;  necewuy
tw  (ocb  pupoaet  ud  tadecmurad  to  check  the
gnwing  EttntTiguiea  of  the  counli,  bat  ibcte
icnktioa*  were  *U  of  ■  tianulorj  natnn.  (  Lam-
pnd.  AL  Stt*r.  43  ;  VofnK.  AtnL  12  ;  Joitin.
JVm.  IDA.)  CoDsan  bende*  ths  nuiou  vorki  on
Baamn  hbtoij,  K.  D.  HnUmMm,  Am.  Gnadver-
fjim^f.  p.  135,  fte. ;  K.  W.  OUttling,  OwL  dn-
JOiL  SkHtoccr^  p.  209,  &c,  ud  absTe  all,  Becker,
fhmdtmdi  dt  lOm.  AUerA.  tti.u.jmtt\lff.al
—128.  [L.S.I

CONSULA'RIS,  thioBghoDt  the  time  of  the
Ri^iaB  repnUic  lignlGei  a  penoa  who  faaa  heen
■mated  witb  the  connilihip  ;  but  Duder  the  em-
fin  it  beome  ■  mere  tide  for  the  higher  ehue  of
offieai,  -wia  ihenbj  obtained  permituon  to  hue
Ike  i—ig""  of  a  coiual,  irithoot  erer  h&ring  ac-
tnllj  Men  coamli.  Henee  the  title  wu  aWift
•qaivaltnt  to  thM  of  an  "  hononi;  coiuul "  (noua^
lumerarimt;  Cod.  Thflod.  Ti.  <aX.  19. 1. 1,  n.  tit  2.
■.2).  Tba  title  vaagiTeoetpeciallT  to  gaKnli,ai
faniHlr  nenona  aftet  theit  eouuluiip  had  utnallf
aod  of  an  intiy  in  tlie  pro-


n  b;  the  fan  aa-
pmn  to  gJT*  to  pi'niMSi  of  imperal  province*  the
title  of  conanbrii,  irmpeetiTe  of  Iheii  ever  having
bfa  tmrnHm.  (Suet  Auf.  33,  7U.  33,  DoMif.  6  ;
Tk.  Agrie.  B,  li,  40.}  Conftdarii  tbni  gnduallj
bc^ma  tba  eetabltabed  tills  fir  tbaae  entnuted
with  t


TV


ipecot  Hadrian  divided  Italj  iota  fonr  n-
od  OTCT  eacb  he  placed  an  officer  who  like-
boce  the  title  of  cmnhuii,  and  waa  aitmated
mittiation  of  joitica  in  hii  diitikt,
berjoendT  c^ed  Juridiaa  (Spsr-


u.). At


Lta  ik  the  iqnaodacte  (connilani  aqsamni),
who  had  to  MO  that  all  pahlie  and  ptifaCe  placa
wa«  pnpcHy  lOiiiilied  with  water,  and  who  (eem

■ ■ ' ' 'a  the  cumtorei  aqnanun

qaently  maitiaDFd  in  b-

»  Codei  of  Jnttinian  end

TheodooML  [I^S.]

CONTRACTUS. [OBLioATionia.]

CONTROVE'RSIA. [Judbi.]

CONTDBBRNA'LES  (««riin|rw).  Thiimrd,
in  ita  original  ncaning,  ligni&ed  men  who  Mr*ed
ia  the  HBW  annf  aodlivM  in  the  warn  tent. It


which,  aceerding  to  Feetu,  wia  the  original  name
fa  a  mO&aiT  tent,  at  it  wai  made  of  boarda
(Iriajat).  Each  tent  vaa  occnM  by  ten  loldien
ta),with


caapvaCicAw

To^  Re^uH  tf  fllaMriou  bnuliel  nnd  I
ana^nijr  a  diiliDKiAhed  genenl  on  bii  eipedi
tBM,  er  to  Ui  fremioB,  fcr  the  pupcaa  of  galnfev,
jailir  \it  lypMinWDdtnee  a  nactial  training  in
dM  Bt  af  DW,  <r  ta  tk  adirnnieWatiap  of  psUie
^1^  Md  wwe^  Hke  nldim  living  in  the  aana
-  <Cio.Pt»tt<t  JO,


CWiVEMTUS.  837

Pro  Plaie.  It  ; Saet.  Caa.  13  ; Tacit.  Agr.  6  ;

Frontin.  Strai^.  ir.  1.  U  j  Plntarck  Pomp.  3.)

In  a  ttill  vtdcr  lenK,  the  name  amdiiinH&t

i>  app)ied  to  peraona  connected  b;  [lei  of  iulj.

kte  friendahip  and  living  under  the  ume  roof

(Cic.  Ad  Fam.  a.  2 ;  Plin.  Epitt.  iL  13)  ;  and

hence  when  a  &«  man  and  a  alave,  or  two  ^vei,

who  were  not  allawed  to  ooDtiael  a  legal  mairiage,

lived  together  at  hoibwid  and  wife,  they  were

__i[.j  1 .^.  jjiij  ,jj^[j  connection,  aa  well

a;  L  8  i  Petron.  Sat.  96 ; Tacit,  Hitt.  L

71.) Cieen(^rf^«.iiiL28)  callaCanar

ilatenHi/tf  of  QnirianB,  ibereb;  alluding  (o

the  fact  that  Caeear  had  alloved  hia  own  itatoe  to

be  erected  in  the  temple  of  Qoirintii  (comp.  Ad

Alt.  xiL  tS,  and  SoeL  Oati.  76).  [L.  a]

CONTUBE'RNIUM. [CoNTOBsaNuis ;

CONCUBIMA.]

CONTUS  (ko^-iJ.,  ftom  wn-fa,,  I  priA  ar
em),  wBi,  a*  Noniua  (iriii.  Si)  eipreiaea  it,  a
Dg  and  atnmg  voodcai  pale  or  atake,  with  a
poiated  inu  at  the  me  end.  (Vin-  Aim.  v.  208.)
It  wai  Died  fv  varioDi  pntpoaei,  but  chiefly  aa  a
popt-poie  by  aailon,  who,  in  ihaHoiv  water,  thiuat
It  into  the  ground,  and  thui  pnthed  <m  the  boat.
(Horn.  M.  ii.  387  ;  Viig.  (.  e.  and  vi.  302.)  It
alio  aerved  oi  a  meani  to  loond  the  depth  of  ths
water.  (Feitaa,  a  c.  Pmcmelatio,  p.  214,  ed.  HUl-
ier  ;  Donat.  ad  TentU.  Hto.  L  2.  2.)  At  a  later
period,  when  the  Romuii  became  acquainted  with
the  huge  lancei  or  piku  of  mom  of  the  noKhem
borhaiuna,  the  word  nootei  waa  applied  to  that
kind  of  weqon  (Vi^g.  Am.  ix.  £10  (  TaciL  HiiL
L  44,  iiL  27 ;  Lamprid.  Commod.  13)  ;  aod  the
long  pikea  pecnliai  to  the  Sanoatiaai  were  alwaja
dceignated  by  thia  name.  (Tacit.  Hitt.  L  79,
■<iKd.-n.SS;  Slat.  AiM.  iL41S;  Valer.  Flac
.  1 62.  and  Dtheta.)  [L.3.]

CONVENI'RE IN MANUM. (MATai-

CONVENTKVNES. [OsLioiTioNii.]

CONVENTUS  (ainto,,  avnurla,  or  owa-
ywy^)  ia  property  a  mune  which  may  be  given  lo
any  aiiembly  of  moi  who  meet  fcr  a  certain  par-
poie.  (PaoL  Diac  p.  42,  ed.  MUUer.)  But  when
tito  Romana  had  tedaced  fbieign  ootmtiiei  into
ths  fbnn  of  prorincea,  the  word  sommdH  aaiiuned
a  more  definite  mcBmng,  and  waa  applied  to  ths


pointed  by  the  praetor  or  proeonaal  fat  tbo  pvr-
poiB  of  adminiilering  juatice.  (Cic  aa  Farr.  iL  20,
24,  SO,  if.  29,  48 ;  Cic  ad  Fam.  xr.  t ;  Hont.
,Saf.  i.  7.  22  i  Caea.  BtU.  On.  ii.  21  j  Hiit.  Bdl.
Afr.  97.)  Id  order  to  bcililata  the  admiiiiitration
of  jnttice,  a  pmvince  waa  divided  into  a  nnmber
of  diatrieti  or  dicoila,  each  of  which  vat  likewiao
called  owiwufm,  Jirrm,  or  jarimiittia.  (Cic.  m
., ....._._  j._  p,^  ff.  JV.  iiL


r.  22,  V.  29.)


apro-


the  jwiadiction  of  the
enraMBl,  and  aceorifaigly  all  that  had  to  aettle  anf
baafaieai  at  a  eonnotaa  had  to  make  their  qipeai-
ance  then.  The  lowna  which  had  the  Jua  Ita-
lioom,  had  magiilrate*  o(  their  ova  with  a  jnria-
diotio,  from  whom  there  waa  no  doubt  an  appeal
to  the  pnrataoL  At  aeitain  thnet  of  the  year,
fixed  by  the  [micanaiJ,  the  people  aMembled  in
the  shief  town  at  the  diatrict  To  hold  a  con-
ventoa  wai  exneased  by  (oaMMa  ogert-^M^en^
finm  <vtn,  iyvfaiia  (at  i/jJfat)  t^,  &e.


SS8  C0RBI8.

(Cta.  Butt  Cfafl.  L  54,  '■  1.  "ii-  *^:  Ad-  Aport.
xix,  38,)  At  locfa  n  coDTmQu  litigant  poiti
applied  to  the  proamnl,  who  lelected  a  nmnber
judges  from  the  conveoliu,  geDerally  from  aiaoi  ^
thB  Ronuuu  raiding  io  the  proriace,  to  tij  their
csiu«a.  (Cib  M  Verr.  iL  13,  &c  ;  Niebnhr,  HtiL
Aim.  toL  iU.  p.  733.)  The  proconaul  hiouelf  pre-
sided at  thfl  triala,  and  pmruniDoed  the  sent^rti
sccarding  to  the  viewi  of  the  judge*,  who  vers  b
BueiKiii  (oonnfiifin  or  cofw^oni)-  Aa  the  prt
coniul  had  to  cany  on  all  official  proceedingt  in
the  Latin  languags  (Val.  Max.  iL  2.  S),  he
alway*  attended  by  an  interpreter.  (Cii.  in
ill.  S7,  ad  Fan.  liiu  64.)  Theae  cwiTenliu  appear
to  have  been  generally  held  after  the  procaiLtul
had  ieltled  the  mililajy  a&in  of  the  province  ;  at
leait  vhen  Caenr  wu  proconial  of  Gaul  he  made
it  a  regular  practice  to- hold  the  conventna  after
hia  anniea  had  retirad  to  their  wiatet-quarteia.
In  the  tbne  of  the  emperora  eertsin  townt  in
each  prerince  were  appointed  ai  the  MSti  of
itanding  comti,  aa  that  the  comemtma  were  anper-
aeded.  (Cod.  Juat.  i.  tit.  40.  a.  6.)  The  term  con-
Tentoa  ii  laitly  applied  to  certain  bsdiei  sf  RonHm
ciliicni  liring  in  a  prarioee,  fbrning  a  sort  of  cor-
poration, and  repreaenting  the  Roman  people  in
their  diatriet  or  town  ;  and  it  wot  &aia  among
theae  that  ^wonaola  genenlly  took  their  uai«t-
anta.  Such  corpfHationa  an  repeatedly  mentioned,
ai,  fir  example,  at  Spaciua  (Cic  ta  Verr.  ii.  1 3,
29,  iiL  13,  IT.  36,  SI,  T.  36,  &c),  Capua  <Caei.
DiBM-Civ.  LlliCic/i.SE^'O,  Sa]ana(Caea.
Z>e  BtlL  Civ.  iii.  9),  PnteoU  (Cie.  n  Vat.  S),
and  Corduba  (Caea.  JM  BtlL  Oe.  ii.  19  i  comp.
Provincia.)  [L.S.]

CONVI'VIUM. [SvitPOBUTM.]

COOPTA'RE. [CoLLBOlDM.]

CO'PHINUS  (nrfqSiMf,  Enil  a^\  a  Luge
liind  of  wicker  baaket,  made  of  wiliow  btanchea.
(Moer.  Att  and  Heiych.  t.  V.  •A|)^ix<")  .  From
Ariitopbanea  (,le.  122S)  it  would  aeem  that  it
woa  aaed  by  the  Greeki  aa  a  baaket  or  cage  for
birda.  The  Rooiaiu  naed  it  for  agricultuial  pop-
poaea,  and  ColumeUa  (iL  3.  p.  460,  ed.  Bip.)  in
deicribing  a  method  of  pronmng  early  cactimben,
saya,  that  they  abould  be  town  in  well  manured
Boil,  kepi  in  a  copbinua,  n  that  ia  tbia  cue  we
hare  to  conaider  it  aa  a  kind  of  portable  hot-bed.
Juienal  {SoL  iiL  14,  and  ii.  £43),  when  apesking
of  the  jcwa,  ntea  the  eipreaiion  eopUiua  at
/hanun  (a  trun  of  hay),  figuiatiToly  to  deiignate
their  high  degree  of  poverty.  [CoMis.] [L.  S.]

CORBIS.  dim.  CO'RBULA,  CORBICULA,
a  baiket  of  veiy  peculiar  form  and  common  uie
among  the  Romana,  both  for  agricultural  ajid  other
purpoacL  It  waa  made  of  oaiera  twiated  together,
and  waaof  a  conical  orpyiamidalib^ie.  (Var.£.£.
T.  139,  ed.  MUUer  ;  ludr^.  Orig.  u.  9  ;  Cic  pro
SaL  Sa  1  Or.  MtL  lir.  643;  PUnt.  JaJL  iL  7.  4  ;
Suet  Ntr.  19.)  A  baiket  aoiwering  preciaely
to  tbia  description,  both  in  tbrm  and  material,  ia
still  to  be  Been  in  eyerjday  nee  among  the  Cun-
panian  peaaanDy,  which  ia  called  in  the  language
of  the  coontiy  "  la  corbella,"  a  repreaeatatioo  of
which  ii  intiodnced  in  the  bwrr  portion  of  the
■mieaed  woodcoL  The  hook  attached  to  it  by
a  string  is  for  the  poipoae  of  suspending  it  la  a
branch  of  the  tree  into  which  the  man  dimbs  to
pick  hii  oranges,  lemmi,  oiiiea,  or  (m.  The
upper  portion  of  the  wvodcut  (.rfntMiid  ^  Er-
tcimo,  torn.  iiL  tar.  39)  tepreaeou  ■  Bnnui  &iib,


CORNU.

in  which  a  Suming  man,  in  tlie  shape  of  a  dwarf-
i>h  satyr,  ia  eeen  with  a  pole  (ivEUa)  Bcross
hii  ahoiilder,  to  each  end  of  which  ia  impended  a
baaket  reaemblinj;  in  etery  reipect  the  Canipanian
oorieUa;  alt  which  colnddencea  of  name,  form,
and  deacriptiitn  leare  do  doubt  aa  to  the  identity
of  the  lettu  with  the  abject  reprBsanted. [A.  H.]


CORBITAE,  merchantmen  of  llie  laner  daia,
called  becaun  they  bung  out  a  wnii  at  tks
matt-head  for  a  sign. (Feslus  ;  Neoius,  a;  tk)
They we»  alto  tennad smniriaa; and  brDoa
Plautoa, in oider  to  deeignate  the  roiacioua  ap-
pelitea of  lonw  women,  nys,  "  Colbilam  dbi
mesie  posmnl "  (Ow  iv.  1.  20). They  wm
ited  for  their  hesTy  build  and  sluggish  sailing
(LuciL.^.A'oa.i.e.Cbriteu;  Plant. /■DaLiiL1.4£
~md  carried  paasengers  aa  well  ai  meichandiie,  an-
iwering  to  the  large  "  felucca  "  of  the  present  day,
jicera  pnowaed  to  lake  a  paisage  in  one  of  ihoaa
ressels,  which  he  oppotea  to  the  smarter  class  of
packets  (aHiiariiU,  ad  AIL  iiL  6). [A.  R.]
CORDAX  ((dptaf). [Cbobub,  380,  a.]
CORNI'CINES. (AiNiATOBw.]
CORNICCLA'RII. [Eimcitui.]
COItNU. [Eiucrrus.]
CORNU,  a  wind  instrument,  anciently  made  of
im,  but  afterwardi  of  braia. (Vair.  Z.Z.T,  117,
LMliller.)  A(E(|rdingloAtheDaeni(ir.p.ie4,a.)

^•boy  it  differed  from  the  Saa  in  being  a  larger
and  more  powerful  initnunent,  and  from  the  M*
itacl^  in  being  curred  neaiiy  in  the  shape  of  a  C,
with  a  cnia-piece  to  steady  the  initrumenl  for  tha
conTcnieace  of  the  peifoimer.  In  Greek  it  ia
called  iTTfiriyiiKy)  ff^n^  It  had  no  stopple*  at
plugs  to  adjust  the  icale  to  any  particular  mods
(Bumey's  UiM.  of  Mttic,  ToL  L  p.  £18)  ;  th«
entire  aeiies  of  notes  wni  produced  without  keys
or  holes,  by  the  modification  of  the  breath  and
the  Hpt  at  the  mouthpiece.  Probably,  from  th«
description  giren  of  it  in  the  poets,  it  was,  ilka
our  own  ham,  an  octave  lower  than  the  trumpet.
The  dutiOBii,  which  ori^nally  meant  a  signal,
tather  than  the  musital  initrument  which  gave  tba
lignal,  waa  usually  sounded  with  the  aorm.
"  Sonuit  nfleio  cbsBcinD  emm,
LituuHiu*  adnncQ  ttridaloi  canta
ElisUwm.-  (SafcO»*|^) .


COBONA.
n«a  which  linn  wt  teun  th>  diidiKt»n  bclweoi
tb  tanm  mi  Htmit,  u  from  Orid  IMetaia.  L  98)
T<  kun  that  betwm  tlie  (Ilia  ud  (vnw —

**  Noo  taha  dincti,  sdo  Miu  comua  fleiL"
Tbs  lijlawing  mudait,  toksi  bom  Butholini  (£ta
71UH,p.403),illBRnti*theB]wTescc<iimL  [BJ.]


COROLLA. [CouNA.]

CORCKNA  (aT^foni),  a  crowit,  that  it,  ■
dirolar  onraieat  at  mMAl,  InTn,  ot  floven,
vm  by  the  ancieata  nund  the  head  or  neck,  and
)iied  aj  a  featin  at  well  ai  funeial  derantian,  and
M  m.  reward  oS  talent,  militaij,  oi  na?al  prove**,
■■d  dvil  worth'  It  indudea  the  ijnofijaie*  of
th*  ipedea,  far  which  it  ia  often  uied  ^iioIiUely,
mfilmt,  #T^i,  eTt^drMjia,  conlla,  ttHmm,  a


;  for  it  ii  lu
ledeliateP
a  BBldBi  oown  decoiatea  the  head
afTooaia  thehjmn  talhalgodda*  (1  and  7).

Ita  liiM  inlnidDetion  at  an  hononi;  nwaid  ii
Mtribuahla  to  the  athletic  gama,  in  aome  at  which
h  WM  bcMdwed  ai  a  priie  npnn  the  rictor  (PliiL
ft.  ;v.  CT.  S9  ;  Pmdar.  Ofymp.  it.  36),  trom  vhenca
■>  «a*  adopted  in  the  Rinnan  dreiu.  It  wag  the
ealj  ene  coatended  for  by  the  Sputaoi  m  their
gjmnatic  coolsti^  and  wn  wmi  bj  them  when
gains  to  hattle.

The  Roman*  leEned  npto  the  tnactice  of  the
Oieeka,  and  mvented  a  great  TBiietir  of  cmwna
fatned  of  diSErent  mateiiali,  each  with  a  aeparale
tyribtinn  and  appropriated  to  a  particular  puipoae.
We  pncwd  to  ennnMnta  these  and  their  pmcT-
le  detail  u  accoimt  of  the

1.  CoaoNA  Obudionalu.  Among  the  hcinciiai7
QQwaa  beatowed  b;  the  Roman*  for  militaiy
adiieTEment*,  the  moat  dlfficnlt  of  attainment,  and
Ike  ooe  which  confeiTed  the  highnt  honoiir,  waa
the  (BOW  oMJionafu^  pmenled  bj  a  beleagueied
naj  aflet  it*  libeiatioD  to  the  geoeai  who  broke  np
the  nr^t.  It  wai  made  vf  grau,  or  weed*  and
wild  flown*  (PUn.  H.  K.  xxu.  7\  thence  oJled
a.  ff.  W.  nil  4),  «nd  jromt-


belfagnered  armj  had  ....
:  ;  AuL  OeD.  r.  6  ;  FeMni,
In  allnnon  to  a  cnitom  of  the


teatofiOnigthiragililf  plndted  a  banc

bmm  the  lueadow  whoe  the  atraggle  Imk  place,

^ti  pnt  it  to  hi*  ifipoDent  a*  a  ^en  of  ricloiy.


CORONA.  SW

(Anl  Oell.  1.  e ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iriL  A  ;  PeeCua,

i.v.OMdioiialu J  Senr.  ad  Virp.  Aim.yui.  128.)
A  li*t  of  the  few  Roman*  who  gained  tbii  honoar
i.  giTen  by  Plinj  (tf.  N.  iiiL  4,  fi).  A  repre-
■entation  of  the  coroiia  graniBtta  it  introduced  in
the  annexed  woodcut  (Guichaid,  Di  Antiqidt
TWwi^iiu,  p.  268  ;  compare  Hardouin,  odFlm.
H.JV.  1.68).


IL  Corona  Civica,  the  aecond  in  honour  and
imputmice  (Plin.  H.N.  i",  3),  waa  prtaented  to
the  lotdier  who  had  preeerred  the  life  of  a  Roman
eidien  in  battle  (AuL  Oell.  t.  6),  and  therefore
accompanied  with  Che  inKriptioa  01  ctMDi  avmAiM
(Senee.  CUm.  L  26).  It  waa  originally  made  of
the  Uea,  aflerwaida  of  the  imWw,  and  finally  of
the  faamu  (Plin.  H.  N.  iti  6),  three  different
aorta  of  oak,  the  teaion  for  which  choice  ia  ei-
pjained  by  Flnloith  (Qaoeri.  An*,  p.  ISl,  ed.
Reiik.). It  ia  npnaented  in  the  next  woodcnt^


A*  the  pa*KHion  of  thit  crown  waa  ao  high  an
hoDDur,  ita  attainment  waa  leaCricted  by  very
aerere  regnlationj  (Plin.  H.  N.  iri  6\  *a  that
the  fbllowing  combinationa  moat  haie  been  satis-
fied bsfbre  a  claim  nai  allowed :  —  To  hsTe  pre-
*erred  the  life  of  a  Roman  cititan  in  battle,  ihiin
hii  opponent,  and  maintained  the  ground  on  which
the  action  took  place.  The  teatimony  of  a  third
party  wa*  not  admiaaible  j  Che  peraon  reicued
miiat  hinuelf  proclaim  the  fact,  which  incteaaed
the  difficaltj  of  attainment,  aa  the  Roman  aoldiei
wnl  commonly  unwilling  to  acknowledge  hi*  otali-
gBtioo  to  the  proweot  of  a  comwde,  aLd  lo  ahow
A  A  4 ^  L^ "  ~


360  CORONA.

Lim  that  deference  which  he  WDoId  be  compelled
to  pe.y  to  hj<  preflerreT  if  the  cUiin  wen  eitabLjihed.
{Cic  Pro  Plane.  30.)  Originally,  therefore,  the
oorau  aeiea  ni  preunted  by  t£e  re«caed  loldier
(AuL  Qell.  T.  6  ;  Pol^b.  tL  37),  aflei  the  cUim
had  been  thoroughly  mTCuCifiBted  by  the  tribnne
who  coinpelled  a  reluet«nt  pBTty  to  come  forward
and  give  hit  evidence  (Polyb.  L  c)  ;  bnl  onder
the  empire,  when  the  prince  waa  the  finnitain  from
whcDCe  &I1  hononra  emanated,  the  civic  crown  wai
DO  longer  leceired  from  the  handi  of  the  penon
whoee  preeertation  it  rewarded,  hut  from  the  prince
hiniKl4  or  hit  delegate.  (Tacit.  Ami.  xr.  12 ;
mmpar.  iii  2.)

The  preterration  of  the  life  of  an  ally,  eren
though  ^  were  a  king,  would  not  coofer  a  raffia
cifnl  title  for  the  civic  crown.  When  once  ob-
tained, it  might  alwayi  be  worn.  The  wldier  who
had  acquired  it,  had  a  place  reaerred  next  to  the
tenale  at  all  the  public  ipectadei  ;  and  they,  ai
well  a*  the  re*t  of  the  oom|!aay,  roae  up  npun  hii
entrance.  He  w»  freed  froni  all  public  hurtheni,
ai  wen  alio  hit  &diCT
father  :  and  the  perxin

waa  bound,  ever  after,  u  cnenso  nii  preierver  ai
a  ptrent,  and  afibrd  him  all  luch  officei  ai  were
dne  from  a  un  to  hii  btber.  (Polyb.  n.  37  ;  Cic
Pro  FUuK.  SO  ;  Plin.  H.N.ItiS;  Aul.  Gell.  t.  6.)

A  few  of  the  principal  penoiu  who  gained  thii
reward,  are  enumerated  in  the  following  pu-
•agci ;  —  Plin.  H.  ff.  rii.  29,  ivi.  6  ;  Lii.  vi.  20  ;
z.  4S.  L.  Oetliiia  Publicola  propond  to  confer  it
upon  Cicero  for  having  detected  and  cnuhed  the
conspinuyofCaIiline(AuLOelLT.6);  and  among
the  honoon  bulowednponAugiutual^theKnBte,
it  wHi  deoHd  that  a  civic  crown  ihonld  be  ini.
ponded  fnjin  the  top  of  hli  houM  (Dion  Can.  liiL
16  ;  Val.  Mai.  ii.  8.;^  ;  Ovid.  FtuL  L  614,  iv.
953,  TVut  iiL  1.  6  i  Senoc  dan.  i.  2G  ;  Suet.
0%.  19,  compare  Claud.  17,  7U.  26)  ;  hence  a
cmwn  of  oak  Icsvei,  with  the  inicriptioQ  si  dea
tereaiot,  is  frequently  leen  on  Ibe  revene  of  the
Auguitan  medalt,  ai  b1»  on  tboae  of  Oalha,  Vi-
tclliui,  Vetpaiian,  Trajan,  Ac.,  ihowing  that  they
likewise  auumed  to  themselvea  a  limilar  bonour.

III.  CoaoHA  NiviLia  or  Rostrata,  railed
alto  Clabsica.  (VclL  Pat.  iL  61.)  It  ii  difficult
to  deleijnine  whether  thcae  were  two  diitinct
oowiia,  or  only  two  denomination!  for  the  lame
one.  Virgil  (Aen.  viii.  694)  nnitei  both  termi  in
ona  ientence,  "  TempoiB  aavali  fulgent  nwfrnbi
corona."  But  it  aeenu  probable  that  the  former,
beeidei  being  a  generic  term,  wua  inferior  in  dignity
to  the  latter,  and  given  to  the  tailor  who  fint
boBided  an  enemy-|  >hip  (Plin.  H.  H.  ivi.  3)  ;
whereai  the  latter  waa  given  to  a  commander  who
dntroyed  the  whole  fleet,  or  gained  any  very
■ignal  victory.  M.  Agrippa  ii  latd  to  have  been
the  fint  penon  who  received  the  honour  of  a  naval
crown,  which  wai  conferred  upon  bim  on  bit  con-
queat  of  Sex.  Pompciui  in  b.  c  3G  ;  though,  ac-
cording to  other  authorities  M.  Vuno  .wu  the  fint
who  obtained  it  from  Pompeiui  Maonua.  (Comp.
VelL  PaL  i.  c  1  Liv.  ^al.  129  ;  Dion  Caai.  ilii.
14 1  AoL  GelL  1.  6;  Senec  D>  Sem.  iil  32 ;
FeMna,  a.c  JVomfit  Omma;  Plin.  H.N.  viiL  31,
Ivi.  i;  Suet  Ckmd.  17.)  At  all  events  they
were  both  made  of  gold  ;  andonc  at]eaBt(raffniAi)
decorated  with  the  beahi  of  ihipa  like  the  nubs  in
the  fcnuu  (Plin.  ivi.  4),  ai  aeen  in  a  mtiMi  of
Ajfrif^  i  the  other  (aooafu),  with  arepieaentation


CORONA.
of  the  entire  bow,  aa  thown  in  the  lubjoined  wood-
cut. (Quicfaard.  Ik  AnHq.  TriMmph.  p.  267.)


The  Athenianalikawinbeatowed  golden  crowna
for  naval  •ervieet ;  tametimea  upon  the  penon  who
got  hii  trireme  lint  equipped,  and  at  othen  upon
the  captain  who  had  hii  t«m1  in  the  ben  order.
(Dem.  Dt  Otrtm.  Prof.  Nov.  pp.  278,  279.  ed.
Schaeffer.)

IV.  CoaoNA  MOHAtia.  The  Bnt  man  wha
xaled  the  wall  of  a  beveged  city  wai  praenled
by  hii  comnianderwithamnnderown.  (Anl.  OeD.
V.  6.  4  ;  Lir.  nvi  48.)  It  wai  made  of  gold,  and
decorated  with  tuireti  (mtri  punw,  AoL  GelL  L  e.\
11  lepreienled  in  the  next  woodcut  (Gnichard,
Dt  Aatiq.  7Wm;A  p.  26£)  ;  and  being  ooie  of  tha
higheit  orden  of  military  decarationi,  wai  not
awarded  to  a  claimant  until  after  a  atrict  invcoti-
gallon. (Lit.  L  o.  ;  compars  Suet.  Ai^.  25.)


Cybele  ia  alwayi  repreaented  with  thia  ciown
ipon  her  head  (Lucret.  iL  607,  610  i  Ovid.  Fatt.
V.  219  ;  eompre  Virg.  At*,  i.  2£3,  vL  7SS)  ;
lut  in  the  woodcut  annexed  (Caylui,  Baawtl
iFAntiq.  ToL  V.  pi.  3)  the  form  of  the  crown  ia
very  remarkable,  for  it  include!  the  whole  towera*
wellai  the  lurrett,  thai  affording  a  euriooi  qiecimea
of  the  ancient  ityle  of  lbrti£catiao.


V.  CtiaoNA  CAaruNaiB  a  VALtAKts.  Tin
fint  soldier  who  larmotuited  the  ■"^^™,  and  focred
an  entrance  into  the  enemj^  <*mp,  wai,  in  like
mamKi,  pnaenled  with  a  goldan  crawa,  oiled
eonura  eaWnwit  er  loaBarit  (AuL  QcIL  ■.  6 ;
compaiQ  VaL  Max.  L  &  g  6),  wUcb  waa  om^


■alc4  *itli  Ike  palindei  (mUO  ned  in  fonuni
w  MttBMhawBt,  u  nfiRWDUid  ID  the  Roneied
weodcaL (OnkhuiLOi  Ja6v.  T'ruu^p.SGQ.}


TL  CoaoHi  TaiOMraiLis.  There  were  ih™
Me  of  DiUBplwI  aownt,  the  Gnt  of  which  <na
rwB  nnBd  th«  head  al  the  eomniuider  during  hii
tnapk.  It  mi  made  with  Unnl  or  bay  Icats
(AbI,  OdL  T.  6  i  Otid.  PomL  ii.  3.  81  i  TibulL  L
T  7),  lAkh  pbnt  ii  freqaentl;  met  with  na  tlie
«nart  HHiie,  both  with  the  bemet  and  wiihoat
tho.  It  wu  the  kUer  kind,  according  to  Plin7
(a.  If.  XT.  39),  which  wu  uttd  in  the  triumph,
u  ii  ibown  in  the  annexed  woedcut,  from  a  medal
■iM  the  Panhan  trininph  of
ientoiaiit  of  Antmy.  Being  the
le  of  the  thlee,  it  vat  termed  lama
B  (lir.  Tii.  13)  and  imdgmt  eartma  (nnipi-


Tke  aeeond  cue  wu  of  gold,  oAen  enriched  with
^vd%  wUdi  being  too  wige  and  muuTe  lo  be
waa,  wa*  beld  otct  the  bead  of  the  general  daring
kk  ''Fiiaiih,  bj  a  public  officer  (atrvai  jmUicur,
Jar.  Sat. x.  il). Thii  aown,  a*  well  ai the


a  (PhiL  ^iihI.  PoaL  3i),  and  ihen-
■n  OMj  wan  iln  temed  jrariiteiidu.  (TertnlL
Dt  Oarm.  MO.  e.  13.)  In  (be  earlj  agei  of  the
nyablic,  iheaa  vera  gntmtoni  prewntt,  bat  iub-
wi|aiBllj  thij  woe  exacted  ai  a  tribute  nnder  tbe


the  Onckt,  nr  Iher  were  pra-


(Aiixn.  xii.  p.
sblj  boRowed  I


and the
n  fana  the

. ,.  H  COBOKUUUM.]

VIL  CokohaOvilu vaitnotbererawnofleei


>i  who  ■wely  deisnd  an  ontkn,


h  bippesed  when  tha  war  w
stared,  or  wu  auried  on  againtt  ■


-nrju


pirstei ;  or  when  the  Tictoiy  wai  Dbtained  without
danger,  difficnltr,  or  bloodihed  (Anl.  Qell.  t.  6  ;
Fntni,  I,  V,  Ovalii  Conma)  ;  on  which  acconnt  it
wai  made  of  mjrtle,  the  ehrub  ncied  to  Venm,
^  Quod  noa  Martiut^  sed  qnaii  Vtntri$  qnidam
triumphui  ibret."  {Aul.  QelL  L  e. ;  Pint.  MarceO.
23  ;  oompaie  Plin.  H.  N.  it.  39  ;  DionjL  t.  47.)
The  mjTtJa  ciown  ii  thown  in  die  woodcut  ao-
leied,  baa  a  medal  of  Anguitui  CaeMT.


VIII.  CoBOHJ  OLaioiNi.  Thii  wai  likeviea
I  honoiaiy  wreath,  made  of  the  oliTe  leaf,  and
crafencd  opon  the  wildien  ae  well  ai  their  cam-
tnanden.  According  to  Gellini  (t.  G),itwa)giTeii
to  uij  penon  or  penoni  through  wboae  inetrn-
mentali^  a  triimpb  had  been  obtained,  but  when
thej  were  not  penooallf  pretent  in  the  action.  It
ii  lepreeented  in  the  next  woodcut,  from  a  medal  of
Lepidni,  and  wai  conferred  both  by  Auguilui  and
the  tenata  upcm  the  poldier?  m  tOTeral  occaiioni,
(Kon  Cam.  ilix.  14,  ilTi.  40.)


(Mden  ovwnt,  withoal  any  tarticnlat  deaigni-
tioo,  vete  bequoitlr  [SeKnted  out  of  compliment
by  one  indiTidnal  lo  another,  and  b;  a  general  to
a  aoldier  who  bad  in  any  wa;  diitingniued  bim-
■elC (Ut.  tiL  10, 37,  X.  44,  nz.  15.)

The  Qtoehe  in  genenl  made  but  little  dm  of
erowna  aa  rewardi  of  Taloni  in  the  earlier  and
better  periodi  of  theii  hinoi;,  except  ai  priui  in
the  athletie  conteati  ;  but  pvTioui  to  the  time  of
Alexander,  erowne  of  gold  wers  profiieelj  diitri-
bnted  amimg  the  Atheniani  at  liatt,  for  emj
trifling  feat,  whether  ciTi],  uaTal,  or  militarf
(AeecL  e.  Ctaipi. ;  Dem.  D»  Canm.  puna),
which,  though  lariifaed  witbont  much  di  ----
tien  ai  br  aa  regard*  the  cbaiaetv  of  th


Qlegalr


whkli  they  were  confened.  Kiey  could  not  be
picMTled  but  in  (be  public  anembliee,  and  with
ths  cODKnt,  that  ii  by  lU&age,  of  the  people,  or
bj  (he  KDaton  in  liiaz  council,  oi  by  the  dibea
to  their  own  memben,  la  hj  the  tviiirai  to  mem-
ben  of  their  own  tq|ui.  Aocording  to  the  atole-
ment  of  Aeachins,  the  people  could  not  lawfi^lly
preient  ciowni  in  any  place  except  in  their  b«-
lembly,  nor  (he  lenBtoti  except  in  the  loiate-
home  ;  nor,  according  to  the  BUia  authority,  in
the  theatre,  which  ii,  however,  denied  by  De-
moMhenea  i  nor  at  the  public  gamea,  and  if  any
crier  there  proclaimed  the  crowni  he  wa<  tubject
to  drififo.  Neither  could  aoy  penon  holding  on
office  receive  «  crown  whiUt  he  wai  ^rt Amros,
that  ig,  before  he  had  petiei  hia  BccannC*.  But
CTOwna  wen  Hometimee  preeentcd  by  foreign  dtiea
to  particular  citiaecA,  which  were  termed  ffrnpdfm
(nnnol,  eoTwvu  horpibdea.  Thii,  however,  could
not  be  done  until  the  uabauRdora  jrom  those  cities
had  obtained  permiraion  tram  the  people,  and  the
party  for  whom  the  bononr  wa*  intended  had  nn-
dergone  a  public  invertigation,  in  which  the  whole
couTM  of  Vix  life  was  submitted  to  a  itrict  inquiry,
(Ae>ch.Dem.U.«.]

We  now  proceed  to  the  lecond  clau  of  aowna,
which  were  emblematical  and  not  honoraiy,  at
leait  to  (he  penon  who  wore  them,  and  the  adop-
tion of  which  wai  not  r^ula(«d  by  hw,  but
euitom. Of  theee  there  were  alio  Mveral  kindi.

I.  ConoHA  SACiHnoTALis,  ID  cslled  by  Am-
mianut  Jdarcellinai  (iiii.  £.  §  6).  It  wai  worn
by  the  priesta  (aaoerjatet),  with  the  exception  of
the  pontifex  Msiimui  and  hia  miniiter  (cmnUiu),
M  well  la  the  byituden,  when  officiating  at  the
aaerifice.  It  doei  not  appear  to  hare  been  omfined
to  any  one  material,  but  wai  aometimea  made  of
otice  (lee  the  preceding  woodcnt ;  Stat.  7Vt.  iiL
4GG),  aomelimea  of  gold  (Prudent.  Tltfi.  3ri^.  x.
1011  1  TertulLZ>>f<U.18),  andumctimeiofthe
can  of  com,  then  termed  conma  ipkta,  which  kind


(TibnlL  L  1.  16  ;  compare  Apul.  Mat  li.  p.  110.
Varior.)  It  waa  likewJM  rwarded  aa  an  emblem
of  peace  (TibnlL  L  10.  67),  in  which  chamctei  it
■ppeara  in  the  mbjoined  medal,  which  comms-
momtc*  the  conclusion  of  the  ciril  war  between
Antony  and  D.  Albinui  Bmtua.


II. COBONA FUNIBBIB amd 8lFIIl>CHHAL1t.

The  Oreeka  firat  aet  the  example  of  crowning  the
dead  with  chapleta  of  leavca  and  flowera  (Eur.
Pliem.  I6i7  ;  SchoL  ad  loe.),  which  waa  imitated
bj  the  Ronuuu.  It  waa  alao  provided  by  a  law
if  Ills  Tmlva  laiHat,  that  any  pcnao  who  had


CORONA.

acquired  a  erewn  might  hare  it  placed  upon  hia
head  when  carried  out  in  the  funeral  procearian.
(Cic  DtLig.iL2i;  Flin.  H.tf.  izL  £.}  Ou-
Isnda  of  flower*  were  alao  placed  npon  the  bier,  or
scattered  from  the  windows  under  which  the  pn>-
cession  passed  {Plin.H.Miii.  7;  Dionys.ii.  39),
or  entwined  abont  the  dnerary  nin  {Plat-UarntU,
30,  Danttr.  S3),  or  aa  a  decoration  to  the  tomb
(Plio.H.  ff.uLS;  Ovid.  THst  tii.  2. 82 1  TibuU.
ii.  4.  4a).  In  Greece  these  crowns  woe  oommonly
made  of  [anley  {rikirap).  (Suidaa,  *.  (L  ;  Plut.
T^moi.  26.)

III.  Corona  CoNVivuLiB.  The  use  of  ch^
lata  at  fcalJTe  entertainments  spnuig  likewise  fna
Greece,  and  owe  their  origin  to  the  piactics  of
tying  a  vraoUen  fillet  tight  round  the  head,  for  the
purpose  of  mitigating  the  effects  of  intoxiiaticBi,
(Comp.  Plant  .Jnpi.  iiL  4.  16.)  But  aa  luxtny
increased  they  were  made  of  wioui  Sowera  of
^rubl,  such  as  were  lupposed  to  preTenl  intotiia.
tion  ;  of  itises  (which  wen  the  choicest),  videta,
mjitle,  ivy,  piUjrv,  and  even  paidey.  (Hoi.
Oamt.  iL  7.  31,  Bt  alibL)  The  Romans  wei«  not
allowed  (0  wear  these  ctdwh*  in  public,  "  in  on
pramiacno,"  which  waa  cmtraiy  to  the  pnetice  of
the  Oreoks,  snd  those  who  attempted  ts  do  an
were  puniahed  with  impriaooment  {Plin.  H.N,
xiL  6 ;  compare  Hot.  &d.  iL  8.  2G6  ;  VaL  Max..


IV.  CoHONA  NuPTiALia.  The  bridal  wnsth
(irr^f  yafiijijor,  Bion.  Ii^  i.  88)  was  also  vf
Greek  origin,  among  whom  it  was  made  of  floweit
plucked  by  the  hnde  herself  and  not  bought,
which  waa  of  ill  omen.  Among  the  Romans  it
was  made  of  mrheaa,  also  gathered  by  the  bride
herself,  and  worn  under  theyI(iiniM«i»t(Featus,i;i^
CoroOa)  with  which  the  bride  wa*  always  en-
veloped. (CatnlL  III  6,  8 ;  Cic  i>«  OnU.  iiL  58.)
The  bridegroom  also  wore  a  chapleL  (Plant  0»t
iv.  1.  9.)  The  doon  of  fats  house  were  likewiie
decorated  with  garUnds  (CatalL  Ixiv,  294;  Juv.
Sat.  vL  £1,  227).  and  also  the  bridal  conch.

V.  Corona  NATALmA,tJie  chaplct  suspended
over  the  door  of  the  vestibule,  both  in  the  houses
of  Athens  and  Rome,  in  which  a  child  waa  bain.
(Jut.  Sat.-ii.  8£ ;  Meuraint,  AtHa  LkI.  it.  10.)'
At  Athens,  when  the  inbnt  waa  male,  the  croTm
was  made  of  oUtc  ;  when  female,  of  wool  (Hesych.
I.  e.  tri^vrvt) ;  at  Rome  it  was  of  laniel,  ivy,  oc
parsley  (Bartholin.  Dt  Paerp.  p.  127).

Besides  the  cmwns  enumeruled,  there  were  a
few  othen  of  specific  denominationa,  which  re-
ceiTed  their  names  either  from  (he  mauriala  of
which,  or  the  manner  in  which,  they  were  com-
poced. These  were  —

I.  Corona  Lohqa  (Cie.i>«  Lrg.  34;  Ovid,
Fait  It.  738),  commonly  thought  to  resemble
what  w«  call  faibMiu,  roA  as  such  seem  to  have
been  chiefly  used  to  decorate  tombs,  curule  chain,
triumphal  can,  kouies,  6a.  But  the  vrord  must
hare  had  a  more  pceclae  meaning,  and  wu  pro-
bably called  Ibi^  from  it*  greater  sise,  and  meant
aeircular  string  of  anything,  like  the  "rosary'"
used  by  the  lower  orden  in  Catholic  ccsmtriea  to
reckon  up  their  prayers,  which'  in  Italy  is  itJU
called  la  aonma,  doubtless  tndng  its  origin  to  the
ODmu  bmga  of  their  heatfaoi  ancatrn^  to  which
description  it  answers  exactly.

II.  Corona  Etrubca,  a  golden  ciown  made  (a
imitate  the  crown  of  oak  lesTos,  Rndded  irith
gema,  and  daoofated  with  ribbai  (Jaaaud)  at


'  O"


COaPtS  JURIS  CIVILIS.

cr  irtiliallj  RpnMalsd,  wu  alio  termed
imni'iuidi,  a  tfeamtai  of  which  ii  given  bj  Cayliu
(Jtnrnt  iTAt^ii.  tbL  t.  pL  fi7.  No.  B).

IIL  Cou>H^  PicTiLia  (Plin.  H.  ff.  ni.  8),
intaUr  tba  HUH  u  the  amw  pbMiKi  of  Plintui
(.AwoLL  1.  S7},<»rwi(Dr«>(PiDpen.iiL20.  IS,
ed.  Snmad),  pltia  (Anl.  OelL  xriii  2),  ind  M
Ae  mfJwi  TXdiTiit  viil  JTvXiirr^  irrt^iini  of
the  Grecka.  It  wu  made  of  Soma,  ihrulM,
giM,  hj,  wod,  (r  inj  SsxihlB  mUeml  twiilad


■MUad  of  bong  wicMhed  with  tbefr  leana  nnd


I  of  which  wtn
■linlti  ban  tba  whole  flower,  and  lovsd  tegetbtr
by  a  AOfiil  hud,  lo  u  to  foim  an  elegant  chulet.
(PfiB.  If.  ff.  izL  S.)

V.  ComtmA  Tonal  or  ToNaiLU  (Virg.  Atm,
V,  £56)  waa  mnde  of  leavea  tail;,  of  the  idive  or
laoRl  tor  ^tanee  (Serr.  ad  Fby.  Otorg.  iii.  SI),
isd  ae  taHad  in  diitinetioa  to  uttilit  and  athen,
in  wUeb  Iba  whale  bnoch  waa  inaertad.

VI.  CoM>HA  lUniATA  (Stid.  7M.  L  28)  wu
lbs  ne  grran  to  the  god*  and  deified  benwa,  and
aaaoaad  bf  aona  of  the  empetiBv,  h  a  token  of
their  firinitj'.  It  mn  be  aeen  on  ths  eoini  of
Tn^  CkUnh,  If.  Andioa,  Valsriu  Proboi,
ThuJuaiuB,  ftb,  and  ii  giran  in  the  woodent  an-
neaed,  bam  a  medal  of  M.  Antcoinh


TIL  The  sawn  of  irine  Icarei  (pn^wwa)  wa»
^T^Bfriated  li>  Bacchu  (Her.  Carm.  iii.  26.  SO,
ir.  t,  38),  and  canadered  a  (jmbol  of  lipeneM
anacU^tsdecaj;  whence  the  Koman  blight,
wben  ha  aw  Ctanoiiia  with  mch  a  crown  npoo
kk  hfd,  ai^nred  thit  ba  would  not  nuriTe  the
anfiBB,  (Tadt.  Awt.  li.  1 ;  eomiBre  Artemidor.
L79L)  fA-H.]

COBOTHS  (npwfi),  the  cornice  rfaD  BnUibU.
tan,  brrope^aGreek  worfngnifTinguijlhing
oancd  (Siiid.  ad  ArilofA.  PbiL  2S3  ;  Heejcb.
M,  kJ^  It  ia  alao  aaed  1^  I^liu  writen,  bnt  the
■caa^e  I^tfai  word  far  a  conoB  ii  onmi  or  ooro-
■i«.  (¥itr.i..T.2,a.)  [P.  8.1

COBPORATI. COBPORATIO. [Cot-

CORPUS. [CoLLMnrif.]
CORPOS  JURIS  CIVIXia  Thothiee  great
- ^  the  Pm-


COH^US  JURIS  CIVILIS.  SSS
volamiim.  The  Digeat  wa*  diatribnted  into  tluee
lolumtDa,  nnder  the  reopectiTe  nimea  of  Digeatnm
VeCiu,  Infortiatom,  and  Digntum  Novum.  The
fborth  nlome  contwned  the  fint  nine  booki  of  Iha
Codex  Repetibie  PnelectieiUL  The  fiflb  lolonie
contained  the  loititatei,  the  Liber  Anthenticonun
or  Novellae,  and  the  three  latt  booki  of  the  Codex.
The  divitian  into  five  TOlamina  ippean  in  the
oldeat  edition)  ;  but  the  uinsl  atrangBment  now  ii,
the  Innitalca, Digat,  the  Codc^  and  Novellae.


The


leCmpneJnri


thia  coHectiGS  bj  Jutinian,  nor  bj  an;"  of  the
^oantorea.  Savuny  aaaerti  that  the  name  waa
uaed  in  the  twelfth  eentnrj :  at  anj  rate,  it  be-
oma  conmnm  from  the  date  of  the  editian  of  D>
Qothofredu,  160*.

Uoet  editioai  of  the  Colp<u  ako  contain  the  Ibt-
lowing  matter: — Thirteen  edicti  of  Joatinian,  fira
conttitntioni  of  Joatin  the  jounger,  levenl  cooati-
tationi  of  Tiberina  the  jomiger,  a  aaiei  of  onuti-
iDtiona  of  Jnatinian,  JnaUn,  and  Tiberioi ;  113
NorellM  of  Leo,  ■  conctitnlirai  of  Zeno,  and  a
number  of  eonatiti^ont  of  diSeient  emperon,  under
the  name  of  B(wi%utaJ  Aiardfiii
Conititntioaea  ;  the  Canonea  Sai
landonmi  Apotttdonnn,  Libri  Feodoium,  a  coniti-
tntion  of  the  emperor  Frederick  11.,  two  of  the
"irHenrjVII.  called  Ertravegantet,  and  a
de  pace  Conttantiae.  Some  edition!  alio
-  the  fragment!  of  the  Twelve  Tablet,  of  the
iBn  edict,  dtc

The  Roman  law,  ai  ncoved  in  Eanpe,  eonuala
only  of  the  Cnpna  Jnrii^thit  if,  the  three  compila'
tioniof  Juttinjan  and  the  NoTdlaa  which  were  le-
aned after  Iheae  con^ialiaoa ;  and  fhrthra',  thit  Cor-
nu  Jnrii  k  onlfrecdved  wtlhin  the  limitaand  in  the
Knrn  which  waa  givot  to  it  in  the  adiool  of  Bologna.
AccordingI;,  all  the  Ante^Jnatinian  hw  ii  now
eiduded  from  alt  practical  ^licalisn ;  alao,  the
Qreek  leite  in  the  Digeat,  in  the  place  rf  which
tho  ttuulBtimi  leceired  at  Bologna  are  labeti-
toted  ;  and  furUier,  the  few  nnimportant  rcatora.
^nu  in  the  Digeet,  and  tba  mon  important  reito-
istioni  in  the  Q>deK.  Of  the  Ihiee  collectimu  of
Novellae,  that  ohIt  ii  nceived  which  ia  called
Aothenticnm,  and  m  the  abbreviated  form  which
WBB  given  b)  it  at  Bologna,  called  Iha  Vulgata.

Bat,  on  the  other  huid,  there  are  received  the
additiont  made  to  the  Codex  in  Bologna  b;  the
reception  of  the  Antbentica  of  the  Gmperora
Frederick  I.  and  II.,  and  the  atill  more  nnmeroia
Antbraitica  of  Imerina.  The  application  of  the
matter  compriaed  within  theae  limita  of  the  Corpna
Jnria  hai  not  been  delennined  b;  the  achocl  of
Bdogna,  bnt  by  the  opnalion  of  other  prindplea,
inch  Bi  the  entUBiBty  law  of  diSereot  European
coontriea  and  the  development  of  law.  Variona
titlea  of  the  Corpni  Jurii  have  little  ot  no  appli-
cation in  modem  timee ;  tia  inilance,  that  part  of
the  Roman  law  which  concemi  conatitiitionM  fbnna
and  adminiitntim.  (Sarigny,  J^aftai  dn  Had.
Aonuotaa  RbcUm,  voL  L  p.  £6.)

6ome  edition!  of  the  Coipot  Jntii  aie  publiihed
with  the  ^oaaae,  and  aome  without.  Tht  lateit
edition  inth  the  gloeaae  ii  that  of  J.  Fehini,  Lngd.
1627,  ail  voU  folio. Of  the  etUtioni  witbont  Uie


iprinted  ;  Contha,  Lugd.  1571  and  1£8I,  IE  vol*,
12inoi  Lud.  Charondae,  Antw. ^1,  Chriit  Planliii,
IG75,  folio;  IKonja.  Gothofredi,  Lngd.  1533, 4tD


B64  COByBANTICA.

of  vbieb  Htm  *ra  Tirioni  cditiou,  i»s  of  tlw  lK*t
by  Sim. Van  Lccnven,  Ainit.  1 663.  folio  ;  O.  Cht.
Ocbwmi,  cim  G.  Aog.  Spingenbwg,  aoettiiig.  1 7  7  S
—1797,  SioliLlta;  Scbrader,  1  toL  Ito,  Berliti,
1832,(>f  whiclmtilf  the  Initiuto  «e  jel  publuhed.

For  fiullui  mfbrnuttioii  «i  the  ^Cioiii  of  the
Crapni  Jniii  and  it>  wrenl  portrau,  aee  BUckiss,
/■HiMiaiiM,  p.  7B,&c,uidMulddej,£alr4iral,
ftcg97,i,12tlleA  [G.L.]

CO'RREUS. [Obuoitionu.]

CORTI'NA.  1.  In  iu  ptinwrr  mdm,  >  Ui^
cirenlu  rauel  foi  contaming  liquidi,  wd  uied  m
djeiog  wool  (Plin.  H.  N.  U.  63),  ind  recoiring
oil  when  it  Snt  Son  from  th«  rnna,  (CoL  ^
Ai  Auf.  S6.)  a.  A  me  in  wliich  water  «u
mried  ntmd  the  elinii  dniiog  the  gunei  {Pluit.
Pom.  *,  S.  13},  fbr  the  me  of  the  honee,  driien,
or  Ulenduiti.  Se«  Iha  rot  on  p.  SB4,  in  which  two
of  the  ehildran  thrown  down  bj  the  hone*  are
fsmiahed  with  anual  of  thii  kind.  3.  The  able
ir  hollow  ilBb,  lapported  b;  >  tripod,  apm  which
&a  pristeu  at  De!^  nl  to  deliver  bet  mponiec;
and  heoca  the  word  ii  nted  fbr  the  oiade  itulE
(Virg.  Atm.  tL  347.)  The  RonuDi  made  tablei  of
marble  or  hnme  after  the  patton  of  the  Ddidiiaa
tripod,  which  thej  nied  aa  we  do  out  fideboudf,
for  the  piupoe  of  diiplaying  their  plate  at  an
cnt,  or  the  Taluable*  coDlained  in  their


Ibe  altan.  Theae  were  termed  eerftaa*  iMpiUau,
or  Difyildcat  limply.  <Plin.  H.  ff.  iniT.  6  i  SchoL
adHor.Sal.L  6.  116  i  Mart  lil  66.  7;  Sneb
Aug.  AH.)  t.  Fnnn  the  conical  fbnn  of  the  Teaeel
which  contain!  the  fint  notion  of  the  word,  it
rame  alto  to  lignily  the  nolted  part  of  a  theatre
oiar  the  ilage  (nuuw  cortina  titatri,  Berei.  n
AtlM.  294),  tuch  ai  u  in  the  Odeinm  of  Periclea,
the  ebapa  of  which  we  aie  erpreuly  told  was
made  to  imitate  the  tent  of  Xenei  (Pau.  I  20.
S  3  ;'  Plut.  FtrieL  IS)  {  and  thence  metaphoiimlly
fbr  anything  which  bore  the  appeoiance  of  a  dome,
a>  lbs  nult  of  heaven  ( Ennim,  <9i.  far.  De  Ling.
Int.  TiiL  48,  ed.  Miilter) ;  or  of  a  circle,  ai  a
group  of  littenen  tnironnding  any  object  of  at-
tnction. (Tacit.  Da  Orat.  i9.}  [A.R]

C0RYBANTE3  (lupMorrtt}.  The  hiitoiy
and  eiplanatioa  of  the  deitiei  bearing  thli  name,
in  the  t«ly  inylh<Jog]'  of  Greece,  cannat  be  given
In  tbi*  place,  u  it  wonid  lead  oi  to  enter  into  his-
torical and  mythological  qnectioni  beyimd  the
limit!  of  this  Dictionary.  The  Corybantn,  of  whom
we  haTetoipeak  here,  were  the  mini!t«n  orprienta
of  Rhea  or  Cfbele,  the  great  mother  of  the  gade,
who  was  WBiihipped  in  Phiygia.  In  theb:  siJcnm
ftilinls  they  displayed  the  meat  eitnvngant  fury
in  their  dances  in  aimonr,  aa  well  as  in  the  ac-
companying mnsic  of  flntea,  cymbaU  and  drunu.
<9tnb.  X.  p.  470.)  Hence  Ktfvtarriaitit  was  the
Jiame  pTea  to  an  iinipnary  disanae,  in  which  per-
aonafelt  as  if  soma  great  noise  was  rattling  in  their
ma.  (Plato,  CHto,  p.  S4.  d..  witb  Stallbanni'a
note.)  [L.  S.]

CORTBA'NTICA  (Koeutarriiii),  a  featiTal
and  EDTiteria  cdcbnted  at  Cnoisua  in  Crete,  in
comnemoralion  of  one  Carjbas  (Stiab.  x.  p.  4  70.),
who,  in  common  with  the  Cnrelei,  brought  np  Zeus
and  cODecaled  him  fium  his  &ther  Cronos  in  that
island.  Other  accounts  say  that  the  Coiybanles,
nine  in  aumbeT,  independeot  of  the  Curetes,  saved
and  educatad  Zens;  a  third  legend  (Ck.  Di  NaL
Dtor.  iii.  33)  stales  that  Corybat  wm  the  fatbec


COSMETAE.
of  the  Cretan  Apdlo  who  disputed  the  sorereigaty
of  the  island  with  Zens.  But  to  which  of  iheio
traditions  the  fetliral  of  the  Corybantica  owed  its
origin  is  uncertain,  allhoogh  the  £rst,  which  was
cnmnt  in  Crete  itself^  soems  to  be  beat  entitled
to  the  luBonr.  All  we  know  of  the  Corybantica
is,  that  the  penou  to  be  initialed  was  seated
oo  a  thtme,  and  that  those  who  initiated  him
formed  a  circle  and  danced  around  him.  This
port  of  the  Bolemaity  wai  called  bpimaa  or  &pt-
«r^i.  (Phuo,  jEUijita.  p.  377,  d. ;  Dim  Chty-
sost.  OraL  ai.  p.  S87  ;  Fiodos,  TlwU.  Plot.
Ti.13.)  [L.S.]

CORYMBUa CORY'MBIUH. [Coua.]

C0RVU3,  a  sort  of  crane,  used  by  C.  Duilios
against  the  Carthaginiao  fleet  in  the  battle  fought
off  Mylae,  ia  Sicily  (b.c  360).  The  Rtmaua,  wa
are  liJd,  being  nnused  to  the  sea,  saw  that  thni
only  chance  of  victoiT  was  by  bringing  a  aea-light
to  retcmble  one  on  land-  For  this  poipOH  tbcy
invented  a  machine,  of  which  Folybiua  (l  32)  haa
left  a  minute,  although  not  rery  penpcuoui,  de-
soriptJoD.  In  the  tm  part  of  the  ship  a  round
pole  was  fixed  perpendiculaily,  twen^-tinr  feet  in
beight  and  about  sino  inche*  in  diamctar;  at  tho
top  of  this  was  a  pivot,  upco  which  a  laddtr  wai
sev  thirta^ui  feet  in  length  and  tour  in  breadth.
The  ladder  was  goarded  ly  cross-bouu,  &staocd
to  the  iqjfight  pi^  by  a  ring  of  wood,  wbidi  tamed
with  the  pirot  above.  Along  the  ladder  a  ropa
was  passed,  one  end  of  which  look  hold  of  the
BHTu  by  means  of  a  ring.  The  oornH  itsdf  was
a  strong  piece  of  IrcHi,  with  a  spike  at  the  end,
which  was  raised  «  lowerad  by  drawing  in  or
letting  out  the  rope.  When  an  enemy's  ship
drew  near,  the  machine  was  titmed  oDtnards,  by
means  of  the  pivot,  in  the  direction  of  the  assail-
ant. Another  part  of  the  machine  which  Polybiua
has  not  deoriy  described  is  a  bieastwnk,  let  dawn
(as  it  would  lenn)  from  the  ladder,  and  serving
OS  a  bridge,  on  which  to  bosrd  the  enemy^  veaseL
(Compare  Cnrtiiu,  iv.  3.  4.)  By  mewis  of  theaa
cranes  the  Carthaginian  ships  were  either  btnken
or  closely  locked  with  the  Roman,  and  Duilina
gained  a  complete  victny.

The  word  comu  is  also  applied  to  variooi  kinds
of  giappling-hooka,  such  as  the  eamt  dtmelUor,
mentioned  by  Vitrnvitu  (x.  19)  fbr  pulling  down
wall^  or  the  terrible  engine  ipokcai  of  by  l^citua
{ITuL  ir.  30),  which  being  fixed  on  the  wails  of  a
fortified  place,  and  suddenly  let  down,  carried  off
one  of  the  besiesing  party,  and  then  by  a  tun  of
the  machine  put  nim  down  within  the  walla.  Tha
word  is  used  by  Celsus  fbr  a  scalpel.  It  is  hardly
necessary  to  remarit  that  all  these  vteanings  havo
their  origin  in  the  supposed  rescmblsnca  of  tho

irioui  inscmments  to  the  beak  of  a  raven.  [DJ.]

CORY'TOa. IAiu:ii«,p.l26,a.]

COSME'TAE,  a  claH  of  ilaica  among  the  Ro-

ani,  whose  daty  it  was  to  dress  and  adorn  ladisa.
(Jnv.  SaL  vL  476.)  Some  wiilen  on  Bnliqiutica,
and  among  than  Bttt^er  in  his  gabina  (L  32>
have  luiipuani  that  the  oosmetos  were  femalo
slavey  bn  the  passage  of  Jovenal  is  alone  suffi-
cient to  refute  this  opinion ;  for  it  was  not  caa-
tomsry  for  female  slaves  to  take  off  their  tunica
when  a  pnniahment  was  to  be  inflicted  upon  them..
There  was,  indeed,  a  class  of  female  slans  who
were  onployed  for  the  same  purposes  as  the  cos.
metae ;  but  they  were  called  comririm,  a  nams
which  Naeiins  chose  as  the  title  br  on*  of  hia


COSHL
raardiea. (Sm Hondoi^ ad Hani. SaL  L
2.  SB.)  [L.  8.1

COSMETES  {inivnirHit),  *a  officer  in  tiis
AtlmBii  Ojmtiaui  in  the  time  of  the  Rmuni.
[Gtmxamum.]

COSMl  {lAtiitt),  tha  chief  migiHialai  of
Crte.  It  ii  [mpMtd  m>der  thk  head  to  gire  k
Wicf  KcooDt  of  (kg  CnMo  eomtiliitioo.

Tke  ncU  (nd  poUtiad  inititalkDi  <f  &etr
*nc  aa  «iai|ileirlj  Doriu  id  dnncto',  and  as
HDilar  te  the  Spartan^  that  it  wai  a  diapnted  point
aw^  Ibe  andoDti  whether  tha  Spartan  omid-
tsiiso  had  ita  origin  then,  or  the  OeUn  na  trant-
frned  boa  I^coaia  to  Ciete.  The  hiitorian  Ephonu
u  |>.ie2)  encml?  iMtea  thai  the
itoticoi  had  their  origin  in  Crete,  but
vne  perftcttd  and  completed  in  Spaita  ;  ta  that
th«R  la  good  rcMon  for  the  aaMrtioi  of  MUUn
{Din i—a,  ilL  I.  §  SX  "that  the  conitiCDticH)
favaded  on  the  prineiplea  of  the  Doric  race,  vaa
there  fint  moalded  into  a  eoniiatent  ihape,  but
em  In  a  men  linipie  and  antiquated  fonn  than
ia  Sparta  at  a  ubaeqtient  period."  Thai  noch,  at
aj  mie,  we  know  for  certain,  that  there  were
nrioaa  Dinui  citio  in  the  ialand,  the  political
aimniBiiiiH  of  which  ao  cloMlir  reaemhled  each
Kher,  that  co*  dnn  of  gorenment  «••  ueribed  to
ail  (Th>ri">''<  ff^  Gnau,  ■nA.l  ■a.  2B4.)  In
■he  eaflicM  agea  of  which  we  have  hiitorical  in-
fanaat)oa,thia  wai  an  ariatoeracy  connating  of  three
cMBpiacpt  bodiei,  the  CotmL,  the  Benuia  (ytpou-
«U),  nd  the  Eadaia  (JiicMxrla).  The  conni
were  tm  ia  nomber,  and  aia  b;  Ariitolle  (Po£.  iL
7),  EphenM  (Dp.  Atrai.  L  c.\  and  Ciceiv  (di  Kip.
B.  S3)  eonpand  to  the  qihon  of  Sparta.  MQHer,
bowem  (iu.B.  1 1)  compare*  them  with  theSparlan
kiii^  and  aa|«ae<  them  to  hare  locceeded  to  the
faactiEaia of  the k

iweataUiahed  u Crete. TbcM  co
wTTv  ten  ID  Dnniber,  aikd  ehoaoi  not  from  the  bod^
<f  the  people,  hot  fnm  certain  ■f4r7i  or  hontea.


Tbey  eomnuuided  in  war,  and  alao
le  bofineaa  of  the  itate  with  the  repre-
■entatiiea  and  amtaaandoii  of  other  citiei.  With
reject  to  the  domeatic  goTemment  of  the  atate,
Ihpr  aMiear  to  hate  aereiaed  a  joint  anthority
wii^  Me  memben  of  the  gemaia,  ai  thej  are  Bid
to  bar*  oBiaahed  with  them  co  the  moat  important
— [im  (Epbor.  L  c)  In  the  timea  inbacqiieDt
to  the  ago  of  Alexander,  the;  aUo  peifiinned  cer~

daetiiiti  at  the  iawmila  into  court,  hj  tlie  Athi

. (UOller, /.s.) Their  period  of  office


opliei  that  thej  were  independent  of  the  '
Titten  law  "  of  cuatom  and  uaage,  or  uninflnencea
bj  an;  fixed  princij^e*.  (Thirlwall,  Hit.  Onto,
TM.Lp.186.)  On  important  occaaiona,  ■>  we  have
bebca  nmarked,  the;  were  ii/iSmikai,  or  cooncil-
lenotthecoaiiL
The  deoMCTatie  skawDt  of  the  IAbIiiu  waa  al-
oat  poweden  in  Iht  coiuCiluttao  ;  ila  pririlegea,
too,  Kem  to  bars  been  mereljr  a  matter  of  form  ;
for,  Bi  Ariitolle  obaerrei,  it  eiociied  no  fonction
of  gotunment,  except  lUiljdng  the  decreei  of  tha
yipomt  and  the  KMyui.  It  ii,  indeed,  not  im-
probable that  it  vai  ool;  lumnoned  to  give  ita
sanction  to  theaa  deoma }  and  thoash  thia  ma;
appear  to  impl;  the  power  of  withhdding  aiaint,
itiil  the  foree  of  habit  and  cnitom  would  prerent
:  an  altematiTS  being  attempted,  or,  parh^ia,
eren  thought  oC  (ThirlinUl,  toL  L  p.  286  ;  GStt-
ling,  Baairpu  ad  AruM.  a.  7.)

From  theaa  obaerrationi,  it  ii  clear  that  tha
Cretan  conttitDtion  wai  fbnnert;  a  Dorian  ai


•ad  dntf  power  id  laoat  <rf  tha  citiea  of  Crets.

Tlw  Gmila,  er  coandl  li  Mm,  oUed  b;  the
CMna  BouU,  cooiiated,  aeendtBg  to  Ariitotle
{PtIiL  n.  7X  of  thir^  menibai  irin  had  fonnerl;
hciB  oeanii,  and  wen  Id  other  reject*  approred  of
<TlllXil.lU■•/u>■^lrJ/Mn^Ephor.  f.<C).  The;
~  «  fcr  Kfe,  and  ate  nid  to  hi
caDia  before  them.


3


which,  in  the  age  of  Ariitotlt^  had  d^eno-
what  he  alia  a  tmnartia,  ■'.  a,  a  gorero-


mcnt  Teeted  in  , ^

quarrelled  one  amongit  tha  other,  and  ndaed  be-
tiona  or  partita,  in  which  the  demii  joined,  to  that
the  couititutira  waa  fteqnentl;  broken  up,  and  a
lanpoiai;  monarch;,  OTiatherananh;,eatablithed
on  iti  luini.  The  eoami  were,  in  fact,  often  de-
poied  b;  the  moat  powerful  citinna,  when  the
latter  wiibed  to  impede  the  cooiae  of  juitice
(>il)  Ssvroi  Bbcoi),  and  an
dUcovfifa  then  eniued,  without  an;  l^al  magia-
the  head  of  the  itale.
:  time  of  Pol;biiii,  the  power  of  the  ari»-
toctac;  had  been  complelel;  orerthrown ;  for  hs
111  ui  that  the  election  of  the  magiitralei  waa
luunl,  and  determined  b;  demooatical  principlea.
(Pa1;b.  Ti.  44.)  Id  other  reapecta  alao,  be  point!
It  a  diSerence  between  the  inatitntiooi  of  Crete
ad  thoM  of  L;cnnu>  at  Sparta,  to  which  the;
ad  been  compared  b;  other  wrilen.

MOller  obaerrei  that  the  coami  were,  w  &r  aa
'e  know,  the  chief  magiitiatea  in  all  the  citiei  of
Crete,  and  that  the  couititulion  of  theie  citiei  wai
in  all  tsaential  pointi  the  lane — a  pnof  that  their
political  inititntioTU  were  determined  b;  the  prin-
ciplea of  [he  goreming,  1. 1.  the  Doric  rue.

The  iDcial  relationi  of  the  Cretana  aeeui  to  havs
been  almoit  identical  with  thoia  of  the  Bpartana.

The  inhabitant!  of  the  Dorian  part  of  Ue  idand
were  divided  into  three  claiia,  tha  freemen,  the
perioeei  or  bwhtoai,  and  the  ihiTe*.  The  second
cbv  wai  ai  old  at  the  time  of  Hinot,  and  wu
ondoubtedl;  cfnupoeed  of  the  dEacendauta  of  the
conquered  population  ;  the;  liTed  in  the  ruial  dis-
tricts, nnmd  the  riktti  of  the  conqnerun  ;  and,
thongh  peiaonallT  free,  ;et  exereiied  none  of  the
prinlMe*  or  influence  of  citiiens,  either  in  tha .
adminutratioD  and  enactment  of  the  Uwa,  or  the
use  of  heaiT  arms.  The;  occupied  certain  Unda,
for  which  the;  pvd  a  ;cari;  tribute  or  rent,  sup-
posed, from  a  statement  in  Athenaeus  (ir.  p.  143),
to  hare  been  an  Aeginetic  ilater.*


*  The eipieiaion  of Doaiadai, i


' tt^MV


or,  tanbabl;  refen  to  tha  poioeci,  )«ii\ai
being  used  ai  a  geDeric  term  fn  those  who  wen
not  &U  and  bee  atinaa


««  COTHURNUS.

Tbe  darel  wen  divided  into  . .......

publu;  bcmdvnen  (4  kow^  SovXtfaj,  nnd  the  iIhtf*
of  indiiiduk.  Tba  fbnnei  were  called  th«  fiwo,
fifola,  iirttta,  a  HiFotia  oiinloi :  tho  ktler,  i^ct-
fuirrai,  or  KXofvtm,  Tba  ifi^iurriu  vera
luoied  fixim  the  cnltintion  of  the  loti  of  land,
ii^a)iiat,  auigned  to  prints  dtiiem,  and  vera
therefore  agnculmnJ  boudonen  (al  kbt'  irfpir,
Athen.  Ti  p.  SS3).  The  finb  wu  diitingoiihed,
bj  man  pieciia  wiilen,  both  ftom  the  perioeci
and  the  sphaiiuotae  ;  h  that  it  hia  been  eoocinded
(bat  ererf  >tato  b  Cnle  pemwtd  a  pnUie  do-
nain,  cultinted  bj  the  mnotae,  jiut  as  the  pirate
allolmenta  wh«  by  the  bondniKa  of  the  indiyidoil
proprielon.  The  <rord  fwola,  al  Thirinll  haa
rauarked,  ii  mon  probaUj  connected  with  jffuii
than  Minoi.

The  origin  of  the  dan  called  fuvk,  and  the
■XapHToi,  wu  pcobabi;  twofold  ;  for  the  aaaJeg;
of  otho'  ouei  would  lead  at  to  loppoae  that  th«j
cnuiiled  partly  of  the  ^Tca  of  the  conqiiered
fteamen  of  the  counti;,  and  partly  of  nich  &«meii
aa  nee  againit  the  conquoron,  and  were  by  them
ledaced  to  bondage.  Bat  beiides  these,  there  wai
also  a  dau  of  hoiuehald  aernujli  employed  in
menial  laboun^  and  called  xpvVfdFTrTdi ;  they  were,
aa  their  name  denotee,  purchaacd,  and  intported
from  foreign  countrie*.  [It>W.]

COTHURNUS  ifii^iifsas),  a  booL  Iti  eiKn-
tial  dlitincttoa  vaa  iu  height ;  it  rote  aboia  the
middle  of  the  leg,  m  a>  to  nimnnd  the  calf  {aUc
mnu  main  eodaamo,  Virg.  Am.  L  337),  and
■ometimca  it  nachedubigh  ai  the  kneei.  (Millin,
Vatu  AnL  tdL  L  pi.  20  and  72.)  Il  wai  worn
prinapally  by  bonemen,  honlen,  and  by  men  of
rank  and  anthority.  The  ancient  nurblei,  repre-
■cnting  these  di&rent  characters,  show  that  the
ootbaraiu  was  often  ornamented  in  a  very  tasteful
and  elabonte  matiner.  The  boots  of  the  ancients
wen  laced  in  fntA,  and  it  vu  the  objccl  in  so
doii^  to  make  them  fit  the  leg  ai  doaoly  at  poi-
aible.  It  it  evident  baa  the  nrioua  repntent-
alions  of  the  eothumni  in  ancient  statue^  that  ill
sole  was  commonly  of  the  ordioarr  thidcness.  Bnt
it  wu  tometimea  made  much  thicker  than  niaal,
pnbahly  by  the  insertion  of  slices  of  cork.  (Serv.
»  Virg.  EcLILbb.)  The  object  waiW  add  to  the
afmarenl  itature  of  the  wearer  i  and  this  was  done
cither  is  the  case  of  women  who  were  not  so  toll
aa  they  wished  to  appear  (Ju*.


COTTABOS.

ceamentum,  and  had  the  scdet  mads  mmanslly.
thick,  Bi  one  of  the  methods  adopted  in  order  to
mignify  their  whole  appeaiancf^  (ViiJ.  EcL  TliL
ID  ;  Hor.  Sal.  i.  S.  6i  ;  An  Poet.  2S0.>  Hence
tngedjr  in  general  was  called  coltKnin,  (Ov.
TritL  u.  1.  393  1  Jqt.  vi.  633,  if.  29.)

A*  the  cothnmns  was  commonly  worn  in  bant-
ing, it  is  represented  both  by  poets  and  statuaries
as  pan  of  the  coatume  of  .Diana.  It  was  also
attributed  to  Bacchus  (Veil  PaL  iL  62),  and  to
Mercury  (Hamilton^  Fatf,  roL  iiL  pL  B).  The
pnceding  woodcut  shows  two  cothnrai  &vm  its-
(ues  in  the  Mnseo  Pio-Clementino  (vol  iL  pL  Ifi.
and  vd.  iiL  pi.  88).  [J.  V.]

COTTABOS  (Ionic.  KiTVatos  or  SrraAii),  a
dal  game  which  wai  introduced  from  SicilyinUi
Greece  (Athen.  iv.  p.  665),  wheie  it  became  one
if  the  favourite  amusements  of  joung  people  after
heir  repasta.  The  simplest  way  in  which  it  ori-
ginally wai  played  was  this :  —  One  of  Ihe  nan-
'  tluew  ont  of  a  goblet  a  eertem  quantity  of
pun  wine,  at  a  certain  distance,  into  a  metal  bawn,
vDuring  to  perform  this  exploit  in  such  a
!r  as  not  to  spill  any  of  the  wine.  While  ha
aing  this,  he  either  thought  of  or  pronounced
■ume  of  his  mistress  iEtjfmoL  Mag.  t.  v.
KoTTaCifH),  and  from  the  mon  or  lem  fiill  and
pun  sound  with  which  the  wine  slnck  against  Ihe
metal  baiin,  the  lover  dnv  bit  conclusious  retpcct-
ing  the  altacbmenl  of  the  object  of  his  love.  Tha
sound,  as  weU  as  the  wine  by  which  it  was  pro-
duced, were  called  Xdrof  or  •[6mgi}t ;  the  metal
basin  had  variooi  names,  either  Korrif  lor,  or  icin--
(ioi',  M  karxfiior,  or  xd^""',  or  A<n(n|,
rcd^.  (Pdluz,  vi  109  ;  E^moL  Mag.  I  e.  ;
icn.  IV.  p.  667.  wi  j^)  The  action  of  thnw-
ing  the  wine,  and  sometbnes  the  goblet  itidf,  woa
called  intiKii,  because  the  persons  engaged  in  the
game  tomed  nmnd  the  right  hand  with  great
dexterity,  on  which  they  prided  themielvea.  Henoo
Aeschyloi  ipoke  of  KirrBMat  iyKvKtrriiL  (Adien.
IV.  p.  667.)  That  the  coltabui,  in  its  simplest
form,  was  nothing  bnt  one  of  the  many  metfaoda
rhich  lovers  tried  to  discover  whether  their
was  relomed  or  not.  But  this  umple  omnia-
gradually  assumed  a  vaiie^  of  di^rent  cha-
racters, and  become  in  tome  initancca,  a  nsnlar
contest,  with  priiai  far  the  victor.  One  of  the
most  celebrated  modes  in  which  it  was  carried  oa
is  described  by  Athenaeut  (2.  c.)  and  In  the  ffjnmj.
Mag.,  and  was  culled  Ji'  iiuti^ar.  A  basin  wa«
filled  with  water,  with  tmail  empty  bowls  swim-
ming upon  iL  Into  these  the  young  men,  one  after
anoUer,  threw  the  nnmant  of  the  wine  from  their
goblets,  and  he  who  had  the  good  fortune  to  drown
most  of  the  bowls  obtained  the  priie  {norrdSiiiy),
consisting  either  of  simple  mkes,  iwect-mcats,  or


A  third  and  mora  eonmlicated  Ibnn  of  Ihe  cot-
labus  is  thus  described  by  Snidas  (t.  e.  KorraSlfsr).
—  A  long  piece  of  wood  being  erected  on  the
ground,,  another  wui  placed  upon  it  in  an  hori-
■ontol  directiau,  with  two  dishea  hanging  down
&am  each  end  ;  ondetUMlh  each  dish  a  vnad  fuD
of  water  was  placed,  in  each  of  which  itood  a  gi^t
biaien  itatne,  odled  >uEin)i.  Every  one  who  took
port  ui  the  game  stood  at  a  distance,  holding  a  cnp
full  of  wine,  which  he  endeavoured  to  throw  into
of  the  diihea,  in  mder  that,  struck  down  by
the  weight,  it  might  knock  against  the  head  of  the
itatua  which  wai  concealed  under  the  water. lie


CRATER.


8fl7


«lw  ifSBt4  liMt  of  ths  «i»  gained  the  nMrj,
mat  lienb;  k>a»  tint  ht  wu  lored  by  hii  mit-
OM. (Sea  SchoL  nrf  Latiait.  LtMpi.  i.tcLa.

A  feonh  khid  of  cottahu^  which  -mt  (ailed

TaCv),  m  docnbed  by  FoUoi  (n.  109),  the
SchaliiM  «  AfiAgptaH*  (fVu,  117S),  md  Athe-
>»■  (it.  p.  667). The  HHaDed  fxbip  ml

the  diih  hmgiBg  aret  it  Duut.  b;  mouu  of  wina
fniectad  fnn  um  goblet,  be  thinwn  apoa  it,  and
ihimi  bll  into  ■  btiin  filled  with  water,  which
fnm  Ihii  Ul  gmre  forth  ■  loimd  ;  and  be  who  pn-


V  of  thi*  game ;  and  it  i>  coiiy
add,  itM  the  chief  obiect
mS  tb«  laiiana  modifiolioiii  of  the  csttsbui  wu  to
thraw  the  wine  out  ti  the  goblet  in  luch  a  nuomot
that  it  ihoBld  nmaia  tigether  end  nothing  be
^Ihd.  aad  that  it  ehould  produce  the  puiett  and
^lanjial  pgadUe  eoaitd  in  the  place  when  it  wu
thmwiL  In  SicilT,  the  popularhf  of  thii  ^n»
vai  (D  gnat,  that  hooeei  woe  boilt  br  the  eepedal
panoM  et  plajing  the  (ottabna  in  them.  Thoee
leaden  wb*  wiah  to  becana  hUj  erqiieinted  with
aO  the  lariaot  Ibimi  of  thi*  game,  maj  axwalt
r.  p.  666,  &&),  the  Greek  Lexico-
1,  and,  abore  all,  Oreddeek  (Utttr  dot


a  hii


fer-


0,  pp  IBS— 238),
BoUerteJ  md  diaciibed  tune  diffennC  fomu  in
whkhitwwpbTed.  Be^ei  ((SonUu,  L  pt  47e,
Ac)  ia  ef  opinion  that  all  of  them  were  bnt  modi-
SnliiBa  o(  two  principal  form.  (Compete  aUo  Fr.
Jacnba,  tTihr  dw  foMib*  in  Wiilamt;  AttMm
AfiMBK,  m.  1.  pp.  47ft— 4Se.)  [L.  8.]

CiyTTlA  (mt^)  vu  a  meanre  of  capad^
a^iBg  the  B  net  in  and  Oceeki :  by  the  former  it
»^  alee  (riled  haiiea;  by  the  latter,  TptfdAier  and
^^M  or  irJfuo.  ItWMtbebaUoftheaeilaHu
oc  £irTYi,  and  eonlainad  6  (yath^  orueari J  half  a


A  »eeeel  of  hwn,  i
r  cjtia&ical  ibqx^  of  the  capadt;  of
•■■  dindtd  inU  twdTe  cqnal  porta  by  linea  cut
on  inade.  The  whcJe  naed  wu  called  fitro,  and
awArfthepaitianoimee(aaeki).  Tbii  mearan
kcM  aiitt  oBDcca  (by  weight)  of  oil,  M  that  the
nnia  of  the  weight  of  the  oil  to  the  nomber  of
^Bsaa  it  ocemicd  is  the  meaian  woold  b«  9  :  13
«r  S  :  d.  (Qaleaiia,  £U  Oomfot.  MnUcam.  pa-
tlmtn,  in.  3,  L  IS,  17,  ir.  11,  ▼.1.  6,  n.  6,  3
Yfaxm.DfI'mi.Mau.ht.x  Hnvey,  Oa  Jaon

ir«9*<^Ac)  [P.  a]

COTTTTIA  or  COTTYTES  {mrtrroL,  nfr
II  niginall;  celebrated


If  held  at  night,
^d,  MCMdhf  to  Stirim,  lenmblod  the  ftetirali
a<  «ba  Caheih  and  the  Phrygian  (^bda  But  the
"^^efCotya,  together  with  the  Eatinl  of  the


mercial  intend  to  maintun  fiiendly  ralatioitt  with
Thrace.  Amoig  theie  Corinth  it  oxpmdy  men-
tioned by  Snidu,  and  Stiaba  (i.  p.  471)  leemi
to  inggtat  that  (he  wonhip  of  Cotyr  wai  odqrted
by  the  Atiieniaui,  who,  u  he  obeeirei,  wero  aa
h(ia|ritable  to  foreign  godi  ai  diay  wei«  to  foreigncn
ia  genanL  (Comparo  JuTen.  SoL.  iL  93.)  The
^eata  of  die  goddoM  were  fonnarly  nppoeed  to
hare  boine  the  nam*  of  beptaa ;  hut  BuMmaui
Ini  ihowa  that  thta  q^nini  !■  attarly  gronndleiK
Her  featiTali  wen  netorioai  auong  the  andentl
ibr  the  diuolnia  manner  and  the  debenehetici  with
which  they  were  eelebnlad.  (Snidai,  *.  e.  K^nn  ;
Huet^pndLsriLSS;  ThoocRt.n.40.)  Anothet
fcaUnl  of  the  tame  name  wu  cdebrated  in  Sicily
(Pint.  Prtmah.),  when  boaghj  hone  with  akea
and  fruit  wen  orried  aboat,  which  any  perwni
bad  a  riphi  to  pluck  off  if  he  cbnoa ;  bnt  we  hare
no  mention  that  thii  latiTa]  wu  pallnted  with  any
of  tha  licentinu  practice!  which  diigiaod  thoee  of
ThiBce  and  Greece,  unleia  we  refer  the  aUntion
made  by  TbeocriOu  to  the  Colyttia,  tn  tha  BicQian
feitiTBl.  (Omipare  Bnttmaou'i  eaiay,  Vibtr  Jit
Xo^Uia  mnd  die  Ilaplae,  in  hi)  MgOobma,  nd.  ii
p.  1S9;  Lobeck,  Aglaopk.  pp.  637,  1007,
Ac.)  [L,  8.1

COVINA'RII. [CoTiireaJ

COVI'NUS  (Celtic,  fctnn},  a  kind  of  car,  the
apokee  of  which  wen  anned  wldi  long  odlet,  and
which  wu  uied  u  a  HTthe-cbariDt  chiefly  by  the
ancient  Bcl)(iani  and  Brilona.  (Mcli,iii.G  }  Lucan,
i  42S ;  Silitu,  iriL  432.)  The  Romaai  dewgnatad,
by  the  name  of  coiiniu,  a  kind  of  tiaidling  car-
riage, which  wonu  to  haTa  been  ooieied  on  all
ddea  irith  the  eioeption  of  the  front.  It  had  no
ieat  for  a  driTcr,  hot  wai  eonducled  by  the  tiaTelt
1b  hfaniel^  who  nt  innda.  (Mart.  Epig.  iL  34.)
There  muM  haTs  been  a  great  nmilarity  between
the  Belgian  acytbe-chariot  and  tile  Roman  tiaTel-
ling  tairiage,  u  the  name  of  the  one  wu  tranaf^tred
to  the  other,  and  we  may  jnttly  conclude  that  tha
Belgian  car  wu  likewiae  carend  on  all  ridea,  ex-
cept the  frcoA,  and  that  it  waa  occupied  by  one
man,  the  coTiimritii  only,  who  wu,  hj  tha  itmc-
Inn  of  hia  ai,  ruffirioitly  protected.  The  nvi-
■onj  (the  word  oocun  only  in  Tacilui)  ttma  to
have  eouititaled  a  regalu  and  diiUnct  part  of  a
Britieh  amy.  (TaciL  Agr.  Sfi  and  S6,  with  hi.  J.
H.  Becker'!  note  1  Bnticher'i  ^aauoa  Tbat.  a  e. ;
Becker,  GaDat,  ToL  i.  p.  323 ;  compare  the  article
EaannuM.)  [L.  S.]

CRATER  (aiwrV!  Ionic,  K/nmSp:  Lat.  crtiter
or  cTwlsro,-  from  Ktpinyiu,  I  mil),  a  *euel  in
which  the  wine,  according*  to  the  cuatom  of  the
andentl,  who  very  aeldom  dnnk  it  pan,  wu
mixed  with  water,  and  fram  which  tha  eupa  were
filled.  In  the  Homeric  age  the  mtiton  wu  al-
waya  made  in  the  dining-room  by  heralda  or  yonnf
men  (jmiipiH :  k«  A  iiL  p.  36S.  M.  TiL  182,  nl
371).  Tha  Ufa  gf  the  leaeel  ia  auffidanUy  d(w
&am  the  expreuicu  *o  frequent  in  the  poema  of
Homer :  KfniT^  ntfinatm,  l  *.  obw  ml  Hup
4¥  ipirrW'  /"faT"* :  wl""  >V>r^f  (W  oaptr  *li»
enter);  Kprriifn  trrttaaaitu  (cnlem  tiataen,  to
place  the  filled  crater  near  the  table) ;  Kptrr^fot
enorJiffffAu  -irvrMii  (to  fill  the  cratera  to  the
brim,  lee  Buttmann,  LibL  L  1 J),  The  crater  in
the  Homeric  age  wae  generally  of  lilret  (OtI.  ix.
303,  I.  3S6),  aometimca  with  a  gold  edge  (OA
iT.616),  andanmetimraallgohlarfoU  (/^  iiiii.
21tL) it  atood  up«a  a  tripod,  and  iia  ordinarf


868  CBATER.

plocs  in  till  iiiyaptr  wai  in  the  moat  tononnbla
pin  or  the  rooni,  at  the  btthut  end  from  the  en-
tnmcs,  and  ntw  the  seat  of  the  matt  diitinguiihod
among  the  giwiti.  (fid.  ixL  US,  uiL  333,  aaa-
pared  wiih  341.)  The  aiu  of  the  enter  leemi  to
have  TBiicd  according  to  th«  noinber  of  gnvitB  ;
ioT  where  theii  nmnlMr  ii  inCTvoied,  a  Uigei  crater
ii  uked  lor.  {IL  ii.  202.)  It  vonld  Mem,  at
leoit  at  a  later  period  (fot  m  the  Homeric  poeiu
we  find  m  trace*  of  the  ciutom),  that  three  cnten
were  filled  at  ereiy  feael  after  the  tablet  were  re-
noTed.  Thej  mult,  of  coune,  halo
according  to  the  nnmber  of  gneata.
Soidai  (i.  B.  flpoHifi  the  £nt  wai  dedi<
Hermei,  the  Hcoad  to  Chariaiut,  and  the  third  to
Zeiu  Soter;  but  other*  called  them  by  different
namo;  thai  the  lint,  or,  accordina  to  othera,  the
laat,  wu  alw  dettgnated  the  tptrritp  Jryadoi  Sti-
liom,  the  enter  of  the  good  genini  (Soidu  i.  e.
'Kn[a8att  Nullum :  compare  Alben.  iv.  p.  692,
&c  ;  Ariitoph.  Vi^.  507,  Pan,  300),  *pariil>
irfuUt  and  iirranrrplt  or  /urimrTpov,  becaoM
it  wai  the  enter  from  which  the  copi  were  filled
after  the  waihiiw  of  the  hand!.  (Atbeo.  xr.  p.  629,
t&c)

Craten  were  amraig  the  fint  ihin^  on  the  an-
belliahment  of  which  the  indent  artiMa  ezereiied
their  ikilL  Homer  (R.  u^.  711,  &c)  nwntioni,
■mong  the  prizei  propoKd  b;  Achillea,  a  betuiti-
fiilly  wnnight  ailTer  enter,  the  work  of  the  ingezii-
(nu  Sidoniaiu,  which,  by  the  elegance  of  ita  work-
manihip,  raeelted  all  otheri  on  the  whole  earth.
In  the  reign  of  Ccoeani,  king  of  Ljdia,  the  Lace-
dienkoniana  aent  to  that  king  a  hruen  crater,  the
border  of  which  waa  all  Dier  ornamented  with
figurei  (fifiw),  end  which  wai  of  mch  an  enor-
moDi  lite  that  it  contained  300  amphonie.  (Herod,
i.  70.)  Cnenu  himiclf  dedicated  to  the  Delphic
god  two  huge  cralen,  whichtheDetphioni  believed
to  be  the  work  of  Theodonu  of  Samoa,  and  Hero-
dotna  (i.  £  1 )  wai  induced  hj  the  beautj  of  their
workmanihip  to  think  the  aame.  It  wai  iboat
OL  Sfi,  that  the  Samiana  dedicated  lia  talenta  (the
tenth  of  the  profit*  made  by  Colaeng  on  hii  lojraga
to  Tarteiatu)  to  Heia,  in  the  ihape  of  an  immenie
brazen  crater,  the  biudn  of  which  waa  adomed
with  projecting  head!  of  giiffina.  Thia  oater,  which
Herodotui  (it.  163)  calli  Argire  (_fima  which  we
mnit  infer  that  the  Argire  artiata  wen  celehraled
for  their  entten),  waa  npportsd  b;  three  coloMal
bmen  itatuei,  aevoi  cnbili  long,  with  their  kneei
chaed  together.


The


(0  ha»e  been  Terj  great. Liri


j^gamemoon  returning  fntm  Troj  with  no  leaa  than
3000  craten  (Cic  ad  fim.  vii.  I),  and  Cioero
<H  Verr.  iv.  58)  aays  that  Verm  carried  away
from  SjncDH  the  most  beantifiil  hraaea  oaten,
which  moit  probably  beloi^ed  to  the  varioui  tem-
plei  of  that  city.  But  craten  woe  not  only  da-
dieaCed  to  the  godi  ai  anathemata,  but  were  need
on  varioni  lolemn  oecaaioni  in  their  aerrice.  Thua
we  read  in  Theocritus  (t.  53,  compare  Virgil,
Edcff.  T.  67) : — "  I  ahall  oSer  to  the  Matei  a  enter
fiill  of  &ah  milk  and  aweet  oliTe^il."  In  lacri-
fice*  the  libation  waa  alwayt  taken  from  a  crater
(Demoith.  Di  Fait.  L^;at.  p.  431,  e.Z^p.jOfi,
o.Afidlp.£3l,o.Maa]rtp.l073;  compere  Bekk.
Aatedal.  ^  274.  4),  and  lailon  before  the^  aet  out
00  th«r  journey  n«ed  to  take  the  libatiM  witb


L8j  VirB.,<«,


CRIMEN.
Iter,  and  pour  it  into  t)»  m.
tiodor,  liL  3  ;  Ajiion,  AagA^
765.)  The  name  crater  wh
aiao  lomeiunee  oaea  aa  aynonjmotu  with  crirAieft
BhiZa,  a  paii  in  which  water  waa  fetched.  (Naer,
•^md  Nob.  XT.  38;  Heaych.  «.Ii.  ig>irr%(i.)

The  Romana  used  their  orator  or  cntera  f«  the
■ame  porpoaea  fur  which  it  wai  nied  in  Greece  ;
but  the  moet  elegant  apeumena  were,  like  moat
other  woAi  of  art,  made  by  Qreeka  (Viigi  Am.  L.
727,  iii.  I>2b  ;  Ond,  FaiL  T.  522  ;  Hor.  Oarm.
iiL  18.7.)  [L.S.) .

CRATES  (Tdfvoi),  a  hnrdle,  used  by  the
ancienti  for  aeienJ  poipoiea.  Fint,  in  war,  eapt'
eially  in  ananlting  a  ci^  or  omp,  they  were  pieced
before  or  over  the  head  of  the  aoldier  to  ihidd  off
the  eneny'i  miuile*.  (Amm.  Marc  iiL  19.)  From
the  pbdti,  which  were  employed  in  the  nme  way,
they  differed  only  in  being  without  the  corering  of
mw  hidea.  A  lighter  kind  waa  thrown  down  to
make  a  bridge  ocer  fbaiei,  for  examplei  of  which
•ee  CacMT,  B.  G.  tIL  81,  86.  By  the  beiief[ed
(Vi^et.  IT.  6)  they  were  ujed  joined  together  ao
ai  to  fbrm  what  Vegetiua  caila  a  mttnOa,  and  filled
with  alonea  :  theH  wse  then  poiaed  between  twv
of  the  battlomecl* ;  and  aa  the  itormiug  par^
approached  npm  die  ladden,  orertumed  on  \bm


and  hurdle*  h


heaped.  (Lir.  I  51,  ir.  50  ;  TaeiL  Qtnum.  12.)
Crata  called  fioariae  were  need  by  the  ouuntrj
people  upon  which  to  dry  fig*,  gnpea,  &e.,  in  tha
rayaofiJionm.  (Colmn.  lii,  15,  16.)  Theae,  aa
Columella  iulonni  ni,  were  made  of  ledge  or
atraw,  and  alio  employed  a*  a  aort  of  matting  to
aereeo  the  ^il  from  the  weather.  Virgil  (oiorff,
L  94)  reorimmendi  the  nta  of  turdlee  in  ogncultan
to  leTel  the  ground  afto'  it  haa  been  turned  vp
with  the  heary  nke  (nutrva).  Any  texture  it
rodi  or  twiga  aeema  to  haio  been  euled  bj  the
general  name  crala.  IB.  J.]

CBG'FIDA  (apirrft),  a  ilipper.  SUpf«ra  weta
worn  with  the  pallium,  not  with  the  toga,  and
were  pnwerly  characteriitie  of  the  Qreelia,  though
adopted  trom  them  by  the  Ramani.  Henoe  SuO'
lonina  (ayi  of  the  Emperor  Tiberiua  (c  13),  Dtpo-
mlBpatno  haiiiii  ndigii  m  ad  paUium  el  er^iidat.
Aa  the  tolhumua  wu  aouined  fay  tragedian^  b*-
eanie  it  wu  adapted  to  be  fut  of  a  grand  and
ilatelf  attire,  tho  actui  of  comedy,  on  the  otho'
hand,  won  ere^dae  and  ottm  cheap  and  connMn
ooToing*  for  the  leeL  [Bxx*a  ;  Soocoii]  Ala^
whena*  the  aadenti  had  tbtor  m«e  finiahad  boots
and  ihoe*  made  right  and  left,  their  lUppoa,  at
the  other  hand,  were  made  to  fit  both  Ent  iadif.
fmntly. [lud.  OrK7.i1.  34.)  [J.  Y.]

CREPITA'CULUM.  [SiWEUM.]
CRE'TIO  HEREDITA'TIS.  (HwM.]
CRIMEN.  Though  thia  word  ocenn  as  fr«.
quendy,  it  ii  not  caay  to  fix  ita  meaning.  CrimeB
ia  oftoi  eqniTalent  to  acenntio  (nmrfOfU) ;  but  it
freqnently  meana  an  act  which  ii  legally  piniah-
able.  In  thia  latter  aenie  then  leemi  to  be  no
exact  definitim  of  it  by  the  Rcoiao  jnriata.  Ae-
cording  to  lone  modem  writes*,  erimtna  an  either
pofalie  or  private  (  but  we  have  itill  to
the  notion*  of  public  and  private.  Then  «
want  of  {ndae  leiminalagj  a*  to  wha^  in  cm


CRIMEN.

„  „  ,  t  called  crinunl  afience*  umiDg  the
HonuB ;  tai  thU  defect  mppean  in  at]i«r  ijiteou
■f  JDiiqindmec  Crinien  hu  beta  alto  defined  by
■Bodcni  vritm  to  be  that  which  ii  capitalii,  u
Birds',  A.C. ;  delictom,  that  which  ii  a  private
iojiuy  (prJTBU  noxa) ;  a  djatinctian  fbuidcd  ap-
puBtlj  on  Di^.  21.  tJL  1.  •.  17.  g  IS.

fMicti  (debcta)  were  maleGcia,  wnmgful  acta
(Kg.  47.  tiL  I.  I.  3),  and  Ibi  fimiid&tioii  of  one
dia  of  obli^tiine* :  tiiaa  dslict*,  aa  eaumcrated
bf  Oaina  (iiu  182),  an  fnttam,  rapina,  dsinnam,
injariae ;  they  gare  a  right  of  iclion  Co  the  ind>-
nhial  BijniHl,  and  intitled  bini  to  compenution.
Thcae  lUicIi  wen  wmetinin  called  crimina  (cri-
■Bi  fiiiti,  Oaiiu,  ilL  197}.  Ciimen  tbeiefore  ia
aoOKtinm  apfdied  to  that  clui  of  delicta  called
pcinn  (Dig.  47.  tit.  1.  Z>e  FmatU  Dttittit)  ;  and
■cEtrdiDgly  crimoi  maj  be  liewed  ai  a  geatu,
of  vbidi  the  deUeta  enamerated  bjr  Oaipa  are  a
^edes.  But  crimen  and  delictom  are  ionietimei
ned  ■■  ajnaujnnoaa.  (Dig.  4S.  tit.  If.  *.  1.)  In
me  1  n-  (Di^  48.  tit.  19.  i.  fi)  we  raad  of
^«  delicta  (a  trim  impljing  that  theu  ace
■iniita  delicte),  whiefa  aipreauon  it  coupled  with
Ac  (uqnaaioii  omnia  crimina  in  foeb  a  -my  that
the  infemica  of  crimen  conCaiaing  delictum  ii,
br  ea

Ihmlkedi

SoiK  jadida  pablica  were  caiutalia,  and  aome
vcn  BOL  (Di^  46.  tiL  1.  a.  2.)  Jadicia,  which
oaKxnwd  oimmB,  woe  not,  fw  that  reaaon  only,
pBblka.  There  were,  therrfore,  crimina  which
woe  ant  tiied  in  jadkiB  pnblica.  Tbia  ia  con-
aiaUBt  with  what  ia  alated  abore  aa  to  tboee  eri-
MJna  (d^iela)  which  wtre  the  nbject  ofactiona.
timt  oimina  coly  were  the  anbject  of  jndicis
poblkm,  which  were  made  ao  by  apeoal  lawi ;  aoch
■a  the  Julia  de  adDlIeriia,  Cornelia  de  licaiiia  et
-Tnt^"*!  Pompua  de  pairicidiia,  Julia  pecolalna,
Omelia  da  teatanHmtii,  Jolia  de  Ti  prirata,  Julia
dt  ri  poblira,  Julia  de  ambitn,  Julia  iBpetundaima,
Jul^deamun.  (Dig.  4a  tit.  1.  a.  1.)  So  &r  aa
Cuon  (Z>i  OraL  il  26)  ennoMratea  ooaaa  crinii-
■■m,  tlM7  were  anaae  {mblid  jodicii ;  hM  be  adda
(iL  3 J),  ■■crininaii  est  mnltinulo  inGnita."  Again,


but  odIj  ef  thcae  oimma  which  were  **  poblici
jH^ti^iL"  A  condemnolioa,  thereibre,  £jr  a  crimen,
Mot  poblid  jodicii,  waa  net  followed  by  iniiunia,
iiiili^  lbs  crimen  laid  the  foondation  <^  an  actio,
ID  wrbich,  erm  m  the  caae  of  a  printnm  jadicimn,
\ym  candeamtiflD  waa  followed  by  infunia ;  aa
fill  tuna,  la^oa,  iojnriae. (Dig.  48.  tit  1.  a.  7.)

Moat  moden  writeia  m  Roman  law  bare  oun-
■idoed  deHeta  a*  the  geoeial  term,  which  they
tevB  aabdirided  into  delicta  pablica  and  privata.
The  diriiioD  of  ddicta  into  pnbtica  and  prirata
]a^  psnly  i>a  origin  in  the  (pinion  generally  enter-
tsoHd  of  the  Datore  of  the  delict ;  bat  the  legal
ijartin-*™*  nmat  be  derired  fivRi  a  coniideration  of


by  an  KcBatio  nUiea,  were  more  aapedally  call
ftT—inj  ;  and  the  penaltiei,  in  caae  of  conrictic
tr^rt  loaa  of  !■&,  iit  freedom,  of  dritaa,  and  the  co
i.t.MBN  iiT  «rfMwia^  and  Bometimca  pecnniaiy  penallj
^bou  Thoaedelieta  not  proTidcdfbrai  aboTeme
1  by  acboo,  and  wen  t


CROCOTA.  36»

aabjecta  of  judicia  prirata,  in  wliicb  pecnniaiy  com-

Cniation  waa  awarded  to  the  injored  party.  At  a
^er  period  we  find  a  clau  of  crimina  extmoT^
dinaria  (Dig.  47.  tit.  11),  which  are  aomewbaC
raguely  defined.  They  are  offcncea  which  in  Che
eulicT  law  wonld  have,  been  the  foundation  of
actiona,  but  were  saaimilated,  aa  to  their  punish-
ment, to  crimina  pablici  jndicii.  Thia  now  claaa
of  crimina  [new  aa  to  the  foim  of  judicial  proceed-
inga)  mnat  haro  ariaen  from  a  growing  opinion  of
the  propriety  of  not  limiting  ponuhment,  in  certain
caaei,  to  compenntian  to  the  party  injured.  The
peraon  who  inquired  jndicially  eitia  ordinem,  mi^t
affix  what  puniahment  be  pleaaed,  witbm  reaaon-
ablelimita.  (l>ig.  48.  tit.  19.  a.  13.)  Thu^  if  a
peraon  intended  to  proaecute  bii  action,  which
waa  founded  on  mal^cium  (delict),  tor  pecuniary
compenaation,  he  followed  the  jua  ordinanum  ;  but
if  he  wiahed  to  pnniah  the  ofiender  otberwiie  (eitta
ordiaemejuareipoenanieietceri(e?)  relit),  then  he
bwk  criminal  proceedinga,  "  anbacripait  in  ciimm."
(Dig.  47.  lit.  1. 1  3.)

The  finty-aerenth  book  of  the  Digcat  lieata  fint
of  delicta  priiata  properly  ao  called  (Tit.  1 — 10),
and  then  of  aitcaiordinBria  ciimina.  The  forty-
eighth  book  tieata  of  crimina,  and  the  Ent  title  ia
De  Publicia  Judiciia.  Compenia^ou  might  be  de-
manded by  the  heredea  of  the  injured  peraon,  and
of  the  heredea  of  the  wrDng.doer  ;  but  the  hnedea
of  the  wrong-doer  wen  not  liable  to  a  penal  ai
Qwenalit  acdi^  Dig.  47.  t''  '


jured  party,  waa  aued  fra-  by  the  itale,  or  by  tboaa
to  whom  the  power  of  proaacution  waa  gii-en,  aa  in
the  caae  of  the  lez  Julia  de  adulieiiia,  &&  In
the  cate  cf  delicta  publics,  the  intention  of  the
doer  waa  the  main  thing  lo  be  conaidend :  the
act,  if  done,  waa  not  for  that  reascni  only  pnniabed ;
nor  if  it  remained  incomplete,  waa  it  ia  that  r»-
aon  only  nnpnniahed.  1  n  the  caae  of  delicta  pii-
vata,  the  injnry,  if  done,  waa  alwsya  compenaoted,
even  if  it  waa  mecely  culpa.  [O.  L.]

CRINIS. [Com.*-]

CRISTA. [Oil, -


CRITAE  (KfHToi),  judgea.  Thia  name  waa
applied  by  the  Oreeka  to  any  peraon  who  did  not
Judge  of  a  thing  like  a  Sueaor^r,  according  to
pontiTO  lawa,  but  according  to  hia  own  acoue  of
jnatice  and  equity.  (Herod,  iii  160;  Damoath.
OlgoO.  i.  p.  17,  c  3fKf.  p.  £20.)  But  at  Athena
a  number  of  ic|»ral  waa  choaen  by  ballot  from  a
□amber  of  aelected  landidatea  at  erery  celebration
of  the  Dionyain,  and  were  called  ol  Kpnai,  ftar*
Jfox^f.  Their  office  waa  to  judge  of  the  merit  of
the  difierent  chomaea  and  dtamatic  poenu.  and  to
award  the  priiea  to  the  victora.  (laocr.  IVapBt,
p.  SGfi,  0.  with  Corttt'  sole.)  Their  number  ia
atated  by  Snidaa  (a  o.  *Er  riirrt  KpiTvy  yoAntrt)
to  have  been  fire  for  eomediea,  and  O.  Hemianii
haa  anppoaed,  with  great  probability,  that  th«e
were  on  the  whole  ten  Kpiraf,  fite  for  comedy,  and
the  lainB  number  for  tragedy,  one  being  taken
from  every  tribe.  The  eipreiaion  in  Ariatophanea
(Jo.  421),  yiKor  aWi  tm  upatus,  aigniSet  to

K'n  the  victory  by  the  imanimoni  conaent  of  the
:  judgea.  For  the  complete  literature  of  tbia
anbject,  aee  K.  F.  Hermannla  Mamai  of  Oe  PaL
.JiatD/0™a«,|149.  n.  13.  [L.S.]

CRO'BYLUS. [Coma.]
CROCO'TA  (aceutia.-  apBurr^  ac  tfdirier.


870


CROTALUM.


or  Kpomtrli  k.  x"^*)'.  *»»  »  kind  ot  gala  drcu,
chieily  vDm  by  women  on  lolonm  occantmi,  uid
in  Grcecfl  eipecIoU  j,  at  tho  festival  of  tile  DJcinj«ia
(Aciitoph.  Ant.  i6,  with  the  Sdiii.  t^itlt
a  ;  PdUui,  It.  18.  1\7.)  It  wai  alio  woni  bj
the  priest  of  Cybda  (ApoL  MeL  6  and  II
Yog.  Ail.  ix.  614),  and  lometimei  by  men  a
efiimimate  chaiaclei.  (Ariatapb.  Tlittmoplt.  253
Suidaa,  :  c ,-  Plant,  and  Noariiu,  op.  Nmtuni,
liv.  S.  and  xvi.  4  -,  Cic  Hanap.  Bap.  21.)  Ii
ii  STident  fram  the  pauage  of  ViigiJ,  that  iu
nojno  was  derived  &om  cnvua^  one  of  the  bvourite
oolourt  of  the  Qreck  ladieo,  ai  we  bLiII  lee  in  the

?'cturea  diacorered  at  Herculaaeiun  and  Pompeii,
he  circnmalance  that  drtuet  of  tbii  colour  were
in  Latin  conuDonly  mlled  Tcatei  crooitaa  oi  cro-
eeae,  boi  indnad  loiiie  wiitccs  on  astiquitiea  to
■uppoH  that  ODCOta  wu  derived  {roro  ipaiet)
(woof  or  weft),  or  icpacli  (a  Sake  of  wool  oi  colloD
on  tlie  aur&ce  of  the  cloth),  to  that  it  would  be  a
■oft  and  wooUj  kind  of  drew.  (Salmaa.  ad  Ca-
pUolin.  Pirtimc.  8.  t  L  p.  B*7,  and  ad  Turtidl.  Dt
Fall  p.  3a9.)  But  the  psuagei  above  refcired  lo
are  Bukcient  to  refoto  thii  opinion,  and  the  name
Gcocota  wu,  like  many  olhen,  adopted  by  the
Romana  from  the  Gieeki.  (Compare  Bedcei'B
Chariklei,  vol.  ii.  p.  35  ] ,  it)  [L.  S.]

CRO'NIA  (.Kp6via\  a  featiral  celobrated  at
Athena  in  honour  of  Cronoa,  whoae  worahip  ma
(aid  lo  hare  been  introdoced  into  Attica  by
Cecropi.  Ha  had  a  temple  in  common  with  Rhea.
(Pbul  L  la  S  7  j  comp.  vL  20.  e  1.)  The  fa.
tival  waa  held  on  the  twelfth  of  the  month  of
Hecalomhaeon  (Demoith.  o.  TiiuKr.  p.  708  ;  Plot
Tia.  la  !  Eiym.  M.  i.  c),  which,  at  an  early
period  of  the  hialorj  of  Allica,  bora  the  name  of
>iV  ■Kpovlav, (Athen.  liiL  p.  631.)

The  Rhodianaalaocelcbiatedalestival  in  honour
of  Cronca  —  perb^  the  Phoenitjan  Moloch


the  aixtccnth  of  Meta^itnion.  (Poiphyr.  De
AbHiixml.  il  64.)

Oreek  writera,  when  ipeaking  of  the  Boman
Saturnalia,  apply  to  them  the  nama  Kp6via^  which
in  the  early  timea  aeem  to  have  really  reumbled
them  in  th^  eiceaaive  mGrriment  (See  Albeo.
IJT.  p.  639  ;  Appian,  Samn.  10.  §  5  ;  Buttmaun,
JlfjtM.  vol.  iL  p  6-2,  &c)  [  L.  &.]

CKO'TALUM  (K/f^TaXoi-),  a  kind  of  cymbal,
emneoiiily  auppoied  by  aome  writen  to  be  the
aame  with  the  tufrwn.  LSiaratiM.]  The  miiUkca
ot  learned  men  on  tbii  point  an  refuted  at
leaigth  by  Lampe  (De  f>ni4.  Vet  L  4,  S,  6).  From
Snidas  and  the  Scboliait  on  AriilophaneB  (_Niiiei,
260),  it  app(«r»  lo  haie  been  a  aplit  trod  ot  cnne,
which  cUttend  when  ihakcn  with  the  hand.  Ac-
cording to  EmtBtbini  (IL  iL  i  60),  it  waa  made  of
ahell  and  brao.  a»  well  aa  of  wood.  Clemeoi
Aleiandrinua  further  aaya  that  it  waa  an  inienlion
of  the  SicUiana.

Women  who  played  on  the  crotalum  were
tenned  enlaliilriat. Such  was  Virgil'i  Copa  (2),

"  Cri«piun  anb  dotalo  docta  movero  latua."

The  line  alludei  to  the  dance  with  erolala  (limilar
to  oiataneu).  for  which  we  have  the  additional
teatimony  ofMacrDbiuB(Saf.ii.  10).  The  annexed
woodcut,  taken  from  the  drawing  of  an  ancient
malble  in  Spon'a  Miacellanea  (tec  i.  ait.  tL  fig.


CRUX.
43),  represoDta  one  of  theae  mbtliiHai  perfom-


The  word  nfSraXur  ii  oflcn  applied,  by  an  easy
letnphor,  to  a  noiay  talkative  pencn.  (Ariitopfa.
Nub.  448  ;  Eorip.  tjiei.  ICH.y  [R  J.]

CRUSTA. [Ci«t*TUR*  i CuRYGBNDirA  1
MBLIMAT*.]

CRUX  (.artaip6t,  vxiKo^),  an  inaCrameiit  of
capital  punishment,  uacd  by  several  ancient  nations,
ipecinlly  the  Romans  and  Carthaginians.  The
orda  irravpiti  and  (mAsirlfB  are  also  applied  to
eraian  and  Efiyptian  puniahmcnta,  but  Casaabon
(£ter.  Aalibarrm.  kL  77}  doubts  whether  tbey
describe  the  Roman  method  of  crudfirion.  From
Seneca  (Cbas.  ad  Man.  ii.,  Epiat.  lir.  1)  we
loam  the  latter  to  haie  been  of  two  kinds,  the  leaa
Lsnal  sort  being  rather  impalement  than  what  we
hould  describe  by  the  word  crucifixion,  aa  the  crimi-
lal  wai  transfixed  by  a  pole,  which  passed  through
the  back  and  spine  and  oune  out  at  the  month.

ToaiwBsofaeveial  kinds  ;  one  in  ibc  shape
,  called  eruji  Andnrata^  because  tradition
3l  Andrew  to  have  au^red  npon  it ;  an-
as foimed  like  a  T,  as  we  learn  finm  Lucian
{Jadio.  Voad.  li


ieamii


It  the  Ictl


third,  and  most  common  Mst,  waa  made  of
of  wood  croised,  eo  aa  to  make  four  right
t  waa  on  tfaia,  according  to  tbe  unani-
mous testimony  of  the  fctbcrs  who  sought  lo  con-
firm it  by  Scripture  itwlf  (Lipa.  De  Omce,  i.  91,
that  our  Saviour  suffered.  The  punishment,  oa  u
well  known,  was  chiefly  inHictcd  on  slaves,  and
the  wont  kind  of  malefactors.  (Jur.vi.  219;  Hor.
5a^.  L3.S2.)  The  manner  of  it  waa  as  fbllowa:
— .  The  criminal,  after  sentence  pronounced,  carried
bia  cress  lo  the  place  of  execution  ,  a  custom  men-
tioned by  Plutarch  {De  Tard.  Da  Had.  hwrroi
rai  mxoipyimi  ii^tpti  tht  airoS  irrauf6r),  and
Artemidonis  {Ontir.  iL  61),  as  weU  as  in  the
OoiikIi.  From  Livy  (ixiiii.  36)  and  Valerius
Maiimos  (L  7),  seourgins  appears  to  have  formed
a  part  of  this,  aa  of  other  capita!  punishment*
among  the  Rmnani.  The  scourging  of  onr  Sa-
viour, however,  is  not  to  be  rf^arded  in  this  light,
for,  as  Gre^us  and  Hammond  have  observed,  it
was  inflicted  before  sentence  was  pronounced.
(St.  Luke,  xxiiL  16  ;  St  John,  lii.  L  6.)  The
criminal  waa  next  stripped  of  his  clothe*  and
nailed  or  bound  to  tbe  creaa.  The  latter  wa*  tbs
more  painful  method,  as  the  suSerH'  was  left  to  die
of  hunger.  Instances  ere  recorded  of  penons  who
snirived  nine  days. It  was  usual  to  li^ve  tho


CRTPTEIA.
,  b«uue  bjr  tlu  Jawiih  lav,  it  u
ti^imSj  nmukcd,  the  bodice  could  not  Rmain
<■  tbe  croM  dorinii  the  Sabbath-day. (Liptiiu,
D» Orwtti Cawwibno, Bttr. Ant^artn. xvi.

77.)  [RJ.]

CBTPTA  (from  Kfirma',  to  amoiiil),  a  crypt.
Aao^lt  ike  Homani,  any  long  nairmr  nult,
vbnher  vbdly  «  panially  below  tbs  liiel  of  the
nnh,  it  oircaed  by  thii  tcim  ;  lucb  u  a  lewer
\rrffta  Smbmvt,  Jur.  Sat.  t.  IOG)  [Cloaca]  ;  tho
emnwn  at  tbe  dnni  [Cihcub,  p.  2a£J  ;  cr  a
BBftaxiiie  tor  tbe  recepticui  of  agricultuisl  inoduce.
(VimiT,  li.  S  i  eomp,  Vano,  A.  A.  i.  B7.)
Tba  qwdfic  MnM*  of  tha  word  an :  —
I.  A  coTflnd  portico or  ansdfi  ;  adied  more


n  aJamna  lika  tbe  ordiiuiy  portico,
bat  cioaed  at  tbe  lidea,  with  window!  only  for  thfl
admiaiiBI  of  %bt  aod  air.  (Plio.  ^liiL  il  IS,
t.  6,  TiL  21  ;  Sidoa.  EpiiL  iL  3.)  TheHi  wen
bcqaoUid  doriim  uUDUier  for  th«ir  cocJDcaa.  A
pactkn  of  thia  kind,  almoat  entire,  u  (till  ramain-
bg  in  tba  nibnriwi  nlla  of  Asiiii  DitHnedei  at
' PampeiL [PoBTictnkJ

Smbc  tbeatrea,  if  ddI  all,  had  B  ainulai  portica
attached  to  tbem  for  tbe  (onTenienea  of  the  pec-
fanen,  wha  then  reheaiied  their  paita,  (Suet
CU  iS  ;  ennpani  Dion  Caai.  Hi.  20  ;  Joieph.
Amii.  lii.  1.  I  U.)  One  of  Iheae  ii  toentioDed
by  P.  Victor  (A^u  ii.)  aa  tba  crypta  BaOi,  at-
tached to  the  thcwn  built  by  Cometini  Balbni  M
the  inatigatko  of  Anguatui  <Snet  Aiig.  39  ;  Dion
Caa.  lit.25X  '"^'^^  >•  •uppow^  to  be  tlie  ruin
■ew  lem  in  the  Via  di  &.  Maria  di  Cacabecia,  be-
tveea  the  chnrch  of  that  name  and  the  S.  Haiia
diPnlo.

3-  A  gntto,  partkularly  one  open  at  both  ex-
tmnidea,  fgcming  what  in  modem  longnags  ia
dcnoauiMted  a  **  lomiel,"  like  the  gntto  of  Pauai-
lipfjd,  well  known  1o  every  vUitant  of  N^lea.
Thii  it  a  lonnel  euantcd  in  the  tf/b  lock,  abont
20  fret  fa^b,  and  1800  tons,  fbrmisg  tbe  direct
eeniBBniation  between  Naplea  and  Pomioli  (/'u-
teuA},  laDed  by  the  Rmiaiu  crjBiin  JVaopoWiBBi,
a*  deaeribed  Inr  Seneca  (fiitrf.  £7)  and  Stnbo
who  calla  it  b^wf  nfwrri)  (t.  p.  24S  ;  compare
Pelnn.  Fmff.  xiij.).

A  (abternuiau)  Tanlt  wed  for  «ay  aecret  wis-


3.  When  Ae  piaelice  of  eonauiniiig  the  body  by
tie  waa  relbiquiahed  [Fdnus],  and  a  nnmber  of
' '~  oiigned  to  one  place  <if  bnrial,  a«


called  oypla.  (Sahnaa.  Eiercit.  Phuian.  p.  650  ;
Araig.  Am.  Saiterr.  >.  1.  |  9  ;  PndenL  n<pl
Xr^.  xL  I5JL)  One  of  theae,  tbe  trypta  Nepo-
Ch^a,  wluch  waa  in  the  viav  Fatndia,  nndflr  tbe
ytq.i;T;if.  (Featoi,  >.  «.  Sfpttmot^nim),  wu  und
b;  the  eaily  Chiitdana,  daring  the  timee  of  their
IHieuition,  a*  a  place  of  aerret  wonhip,  a*  well
aa  of  intoiiMDt,  and  containa  many  iotereeting
iaamptiana.  (Nardini,  ifoBh  Antie,  \i.  3  ;  Vait-
b^  71k  Ovfil  a  On  OXoami*.) [A.  R]

CBYPTEIA  {Kpvmla,  also  called  rpvrrfa
at  Kfrrrlt),  wtt,  accofding  to  Atiatotle  {ap.  PbiL
Lfc  28).  an  iutitDtiaa  introdoeed  at  Sparta  by
t&B  IcfiaUtiDa  of  Lyenrgiu.  Il«  chaiaatar  wai  lo
<nel  and  atnciooa,  that  Plutarch  ntHtj  with  great
ittMlMW  fabmhled  lo  the  anthohty  of  Arialotle


CRYPTEIA.

a  intioduction  to  tbe  Spartan  1^


in  atcribing  it

giver.  The  deiciiptioa  which  be  givca  of  ii
thii ;  —  The  ephon,  at  interrala,  (elected  /lom
among  the  young  Spartani,  thoie  who  appeared  to
be  but  qnoliiied  for  the  tatk,  and  aent  them  in
THiioiia  direction)  all  over  the  country,  provided
with  daggen  and  their  neeeuBry  food.  During
the  daytime,  theae  young  men  concealed  them-
aelvea ;  but  at  night  they  broke  fedh  into  tbe
bigh-nada,  and  maoacnd  thoae  of  the  heluta
whom  they  met,  or  whom  they  thought  proper.
Sometimei  ales  they  tanged  over  the  fietde  ( in  the
daytime)  and  detpatchod  the  atrongeat  and  beet  of
tbe  helota.  Thia  account  agreea  with  that  of
Keradeidea  of  Pontua  (c  2),  who  ipeaki  of  the
piactice  aa  one  that  wai  itill  carried  on  in  hia  own
time,  tboDgb  he  deacribet  iti  introdnctioo  by  Ly-
cnrgni  only  aa  a  reprot*

The  ajpttia  haa  generally  been  eonaidered
either  aa  a  kind  of  military  training  of  the  Spartan
youthi,  in  which,  aa  in  other  cbki,  the  livei  of
the  helota  were  unacrupuloaaly  aacrifiied  ;  or  aa  a
meena  of  lesaening  tbe  numben  and  weajuaing
the  power  of  the  alavei.  But  UUller  (Ooruuy
ill  3.  §  4),  who  ii  anxioni  lo  aoften  the  noliona
genenlty  current  rtapec^ug  the  nlationi  between
the  helota  and  their  maaten,  tuppoaei  tbat  Plutarch
and  Hetacleidea  repreaent  the  inetitutioa  of  the
aj/pteia  "  aa  a  war  which  the  ephon  thenuelvce,
on  entering  upon  their  yearly  office,  proclaimed
egainat  tho  helota."  Heiadeidea,  however,  doea
not  mention  thit  proclamation  at  all ;  and  Plutnrch,
who  mraitiona  it  oa  the  authority  of  Arialolla,
doea  not  repreaent  it  aa  identical  with  the  crypteia.
MUller  aUo  lappoaea  that,  according  to  the  re-
ceived opinion,  thii  cbaio  of  the  alavea  took  place
regularly  erery  year  ;  and  ahowing  at  once  the
abaurdity  of  aocb  an  annual  proclamation  of  war
and  moaiacre  among  tbe  ibiyea,  be  rejecia  what  he
calla  the  common  ognnion  altosether  aa  involved  in
inextricable  difficultiea,  and  haa  recouns  to  PIolo
to  aolve  the  pnbLem.  But  Thirlwall  (Hiit.  Gtrree,
ToL  i.  p.  311)  much  more  judieionily  conaiden
that  thii  proclamation  of  war  ii  not  altogether
groundteta,  bot  only  a  miarepreaentation  of  gome-
Ihing  elae,  and  t}»l  ila  real  chancier  waa  muat
probably  connected  with  the  oyptei^  Now,  if  we
■  ■  the  thing  here miirqireaented  and


premiae  which  the  epbiai  on  entering  upon  their
office  were  obliged  lo  make,  for  initance,  to  ^(ecl
the  atate  againat  any  danger  that  might  ariae  from
too  great  an  incKBae  of  the  numbm  and  power
of  the  betoti  —  b  promiaa  which  might  lery  caail^
be  diatorted  into  a  proclamation  of  war  —  there  la
nothing  conbary  to  tbe  ipirit  of  tbe  legidadon  of
Lycuigui ;  and  inch  an  inatitudon,  by  no  meana
aurpriaing  in  a  ilave-holding  atate  like  Sparta,
where  the  Dumber  of  free  citlieru  waa  comiaia-
tively  Tcry  email,  would  hare  conferred  upon  the
ephora  the  l^al  anthoriiy  oonnoni/^  to  acnd  out
a  number  of  yonng  Spartona  in  choae  of  the  helota.
(laocr.  PamaL  p.  271,  b.)  That  on  certain  oc-
caaiona,  when  the  atate  had  rcaaou  to  fear  the
overwhelming  number  of  ilaTaa,  thoueinda  were
maaacied  with  the  nnction  of  the  public  authori-
liea,  ia  a  well-known  bcL  (Thncyd.  iv.  SO.)  It
ia,  howeirer,  probable  enough  that  inch  a  ajatem
may  at  iitat  have  been  carried  on  with  aome  degree
of  moderation  ;  but  after  ottempta  hod  been  made
by  tha  ilaTea  to  emancuate  UiemaeU-e«  and  put
bb3 ^  t^  ^


872  CUBITUS.

their  mutcn  to  death,  a>  wb>  the  cnie  durinj
nftrr  the  otrthquaJte  in  Laconia,  it  HMumei
barbaroDg  and  alrocioui  chniaclei  which  we
deBoibed  above.  (CompawPlnL  Zyc  2S,  RiSjSit.)
If  the  CTjpUia  hod  taken  (diue  atmnall^,  and  at  a
fiird  time,  we  ihould,  indeed,  hate  reajon,  wilh
Mliller,  to  wonder  why  the  helote,  who  in  many
diitricta  lired  entirely  alone,  and  were  united  by
despair  for  the  inke  oFeommon  pntection,  did  not
cierf  yeai  kindle  &  moit  bioody  and  detennined
war  thcDt^bout  the  whole  of  Laconia  ;  butPlularcb,
the  only  authority  on  which  thig  auppoiition  csn
rest,  doea  not  say  that  the  crypteia  toot  plate
frtry  jfear^  but  iia  xp^>'av,  i.  e.  ^  at  intenala,**  or
occasionally.  (Hemiann,  aJ  Viger.  p.  856.)  The
difficulties  which  Miillec  finds  in  wlut  be  calls  the
conimoD  account  of  the  crypteia,  are  thai,  in  our
opinion,  removed,  and  it  ii  no  longer  necosiuy  to
serk  their  lolutian  in  the  description  given  by
Plato  (De  Lrg.  L  p.  633,  fi  p.  763),  who  pro-
posed for  big  Crelan  colony  a  limilar  iniOtntion
under  the  name  of  crypteit  From  the  known
partiality  of  Plato  for  Spartan  institutions,  and  hii
inclination  la  represent  Ihcm  in  a  lavouiable  light,
it  will  be  admitted  that,  on  a  subject  like  this,  bis
evidence  will  be  of  little  weight  And  when  he
adopted  the  name  crypteia  for  bis  institution,  it
by  no  means  follows  that  he  intended  to  make  it
in  eveiy  respect  similar  to  that  of  Spaita  ;  a  partial
resemblance  was  sufficient  to  bansfer  the  name  of
the  Spartan  institution  lo  that  which  he  propoeed
to  eglablish  ;  and  it  is  eufficiently  clear,  from  hig
cords,  that  his  attention  was  mare  panicu-


M,d


1 hardships  as  die

even  Plato's  colony

humane  character,

as  his  KpinrrgI  were  to  go  oat  in  arms  and  make

free  use  of  the  slaves.  [L  S.]

CRYPTOPO'RTICUS. [CbTpt*.]

CUBICULA'RII,  were  lUvei  who  bad the

eare  of  tie  sleeping  and  dwelling  rooma. F«tlifiil

'ected  for  thii  office,  as  they


ent.  the  c


:  of  theil


.  When  Julius  Caesar  wai  taken  by  the
I,  he  dismissed  all  his  other  gtavtc  and
ants,  only  rctuning  with  him  a  physician
10  cnbicularii.  (Suet  Caei.  ^^  It  was  the
duty  of  the  cuhicularii


roaster  (Cic.  ad  A


for  which


-ellin.


!.  §5,  .-.


i.  4);


an'anteToom  (Suet  7».  -21,  Dom.  16).
le  later  empcron,  the  cnbicularii  belong-

II  ot  hiKh  rank, (D , ,


«[Doi.


8],b.


applied  to  the  pavil

public  games.  (Snet  Ner.  12  ;  Plin.  P™^.  61.)
It  appears  to  have  been  so  called,  because  the
empenri  were  accugtomed  to  recline  in  the  cubicnla,
instead  of  sitting,  as  was  anciently  the  practice,  in
a  sella  cunilil. (Emegli,  tui  Svet.  I.  e.)

CU'BITOS(i>flX"),ani™u«oflen|(thu»edbj
the  Greeks,  Rinnans,  and  other  nationg,  was  origi-
nally the  length  of  the  haman  arm  from  the  elbow
to  the  wrist  or  to  the  tip  of  the  forefingrr  ;  the
latter  was  its  signification  among  t)ie  Greeks  and
Ropumg,  It  was  eqnal  to  a  foot  and  a  half ;  and
therefore  tho  Roman  cabit  was  a  little  lea,  and


a  foot  and  a


CUDO.
the  Greek  cubit  a  little  more,
half  English.  The  cubit  wa
Qreeka  into  2  spang  {amSaiud},  6  band-hreadthi
{iroAiudTBl).  and  24  finger  braidtlis  (BitifAoi),
and  by  the  Romans  into  1^  feet  6  brcadtbi(^nO,
and  21  thumb-breadtbi  (poWwi).  (Wurrn,  De
Pood.  Mem.  &c.  ;  Huiaey,  Om  Aodait  WagkU,
&C,,  see  the  Tables.)  Respecting  the  Egyptian
and  other  cubitg,  see  BSckh,  Metrol.  UnlertMti.
p.  211.  [P.S.]

CUBUS,  a  vessel,  the  sides  of  which  were
formed  by  six  equal  squares  (indudmg  the  top),
each  square  having  each  of  ill  sides  a  foot  long.
The  solid  contents  of  the  cube  were  equal  to  the
amphora.  (Ithem,  Fann.  De  Poni,  Ac.  v.  59—
62  ;  Mbtrstib).  In  Greek  *ieas  is  the  equin-
lent  of  the  Latin  TmsiRx.  [P.  S.]

CUCULLUS,  a  cowl.  Ai  the  cowl  was  id-
tended  to  be  need  in  the  open  air,  and  lo  be  drawn
over  the  head  to  protect  it  from  the  injuries  of  the
weather,  instead  of  a  bat  or  cap,  it  was  attached
only  to  garmenti  of  the  coaiKtt  kind.  Itg  form  ia
seen  attached  to  the  dress  of  the  ghepberd  ia  the


eiedw


ii  taken


the  Florentine  cabinet,  and  represenla  a  Roman
shepherd  looking  at  the  ghe-wolf  with  Romalua
and  Remug. The  cucuilui  wai  alio  used  by  per-


sons in  the  higher  drclea  of  society,  when  Ibey
wished  lo  go  abroad  without  being  known.  (Jnr.
vL  330.)  The  use  of  the  cowl,  and  aUo  of  the
cape  [ButHim],  which  served  the  same  purpoae,
was  allowed  to  glavei  by  a  law  in  the  Codei  Thca-
dogianni.  (Vosiiui, Hjw, iiniJ. £«(.  t.  v.Bitrut.)
Cowls  were  imported  into  Italy  from  Sainlei  in
Fiance  (SintaiKv  OKaOo,  Jut.  viii.  I4S  ;  Schol.
ia  loc),  and  from  the  country  of  the  Bardaei  in
Illj-ria.  (JuL  Cap. /"ertiBa*,  8.)  Those  from  the
Utter  locally  were  probably  of  a  peculiar  fiubton,
which  gave  origin  to  the  term  BardoaiaUiiu,
Libunnd  cueuUi  are  nmtiaied  by  Martial  {xi*.
139.)  [J.Y.]

CUDO  orCUDON,aikull-cap,  made  of  leather
or  of  the  rough  shaggy  fur  of  any  wild  aninwJ
(Sil.  Ital.  viii.  195,  xtL  59),  such  as  were  wnni
by  the  wlila  of  the  Roman  armies  (Polyb.  vi.  20),
and  apparently  synonymoni  with  galanu  (Virg.
Am.  vii.  688)  at  galeriailat.  (Frontin.  SIraifiai,.
il.  7-  1 29.)  In  the  iculptur«  on  the  Column  of
Trajan,  some  of  the  Reman  soldiers  are  rejve-
aented  with  the  ikin  of  a  wild  beast  drawn  over
the  head,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  fare  appean
between  the  upper  and  lower  jaws  of  the  animal,
while  the  rest  of  the  skin  bila  down  behind  over
the  back  and  shonlderB,  as  described  by  Vi»il
(Aau  vii,  666),  Thi^  however,  wai  an  citia  de-
fence  (Polyb.  L  c),  and  must  not  be  taken  for  the
ead^  which  was  the  mp  itself  j  that  is^a  particular


CULPA.
Qalsa.] The  ronoiriiig  npra-
lo  ii  taken  frum  Choul'i  QMra-
?onmu,  1581.  {A.  R.]


CULCITA, ILbctus.1

CU'LEUS,  or  CU'I-LEUS,  a  Rmaai  mewiire,
which  wu  oKd  lar  tttiatiiag  the  produce  of  rme-
jirda.  It  mi  the  largeal  liquid  meuure  naed  b;
the  RontHU,  contuning  SO  all•Jl^o^at,  oi  1  GO  eaigii,
Iht  ii,  KfanoR  119  gdlou.  (Khem.  Finn.  Dipatd.
hx.  *.  S6,  87  :  PliiL  H.  JV.  xix,  <  ;  Vatro,  R.  R.
i  2.  $  7  1  CalmiL  iiL  S.)  [P.  S.]

CU'LEUS  <a  CU'LLEUS.  >  ndt  uted  in  (he
poniihmefil  of  parricidei-  (L>i  CokHbLu  di
SiciaiH.]

COLI'NA, [DoMUB.]

CULPA.  The  general  notioa  of  dolui  rndna
MT  be  eonrenientlj  erplained  under  Itiii  h«d.

Culpa  in  it!  mod  f[EDenl  juriitical  Koie  of  any
illegal  act  of  cooiniiuion  or  amiuion  comprehenib
doliia  ualu.  But  the  fpecial  meaning  of  culpa  ia
dictiBct  from  thai  of  doliu  malm.  Dolui  maltii  ia
thna  defined  bj  Labeo  (Dig.  4.  liL  3.  a  I) :  —
**  DdIu  maliia  eat  omnia  oUiditaa,  Eallacia,  nuuhi-
natis  ad  eununieniendnm,  bUendum,  decipienduo]
ahoum  adhibita."  Dolui  malua,  therefore,  hat
Rfcmiix  to  Ihs  eril  deaign  with  vhich  an  act  i>
accsiB|diihed  to  the  injorj  of  another ;  or  it  may
be  ihe  eril  draign  with  which  an  act  ii  omitted  thai
aught  b>  be  done.  The  defiaition  of  Aquiliiu,  a
leacBcd  Jiiriat,  the  friend  of  Ciceio  and  hi*  colleague
m  the  jnelwihip  (ifa  Qf.  iii.  1 4),  labour*  under  the
dcfeel  of  the  definition  ofSerriua,  which  iicriticiied
bj  Labeo.  (Dig.  4.  lit.  8.  i.  1.)  Thii  leemi  to  be
the  AqDilim  who,  by  the  edict,  gaie  the  action  of
dolai  malua  in  all  caaei  of  dolui  nAlu*  where  there
wia  pa  legiilatiTe  pniiiiffii,  and  there  wu  a  juita
CBiai.  (Cie.  dt  NaL  Ikor.  iii.  30.)

qiecial  aoiae  may  be  either  an  act  of  commiiaion
or  (Hiiaaioa ;  and  that  an  act  may  fall  ihort  of
doloa,  aa  not  coning  within  the  aboie  defimlioD,
bat  h  may  appnaeh  veiy  Dtai  to  dolui,  and  io  be-
■e  culpa  dolo  pnuima. But  the  charutenatic


of  oilp«  aj


which  ii  n<


oatitute  culpa
' the  act


deriTea  iu  tnlpoee  ehaiacter  nlher  from
that  ia  oBiitied  than  from  what  11  done.

Cal;)*  then  being  cbancteriied  by  an  act  of

foettiaa  alwayi  ia,  how  br  ii  the  pmon  charged
with  cvlpa  bound  to  look  after  Ibe  intereit  of  an-
oclter,  or  to  uie  djligenti^  There  ia  ^o  loch  ge-
wn)  obligadon,  but  there  ii  nch  oUigalion  in
p-j«i™l-r  ois.  Cul[a  ii  Kmetime*  divided  into
Ian,  lent  ■^  leriHima. Lota  culpa  "  eat  nimiu


id  eil,  Don  intellirere  qued  omnei
utetiJgunt.'' (Dig.  60.  tiL  16.  a  213.)  If  then  one
man  injured  the  property  of  another  by  gnua  care-
leianeu,  he  waa  alwayi  bound  to  make  good  [ho
damage  (damnum  praeatara).  Such  culpa  waa  not
dolua,  became  them  wai  not  intention  or  deaign,
but  it  wai  aa  bad  in  ita  contequencei  to  the  penon
charged  with  iL

Lerii  culpa  it  negligence  of  a  amaller  degree.
He  who  i*  aniweraUe  ftir  lena  culpa,  ia  anawer-
able  for  injury  aiiued  to  the  property  of  another
by  Bome  omiuion,  which  a  carehil  peiaou  could
baie  preTeuIed.  For  inilance,  in  the  case  of  a
thing  lent  [Couhodatuu],  a  mwi  muit  take  at
laut  aa  mach  care  of  it  aa  a  carefiil  man  doea  of
bia  own  property.  There  ii  nevet  any  culpa,  if
the  peraon  charged  with  it  hai  done  in  that  the
moat  carefiil  p«non  coidd  do  to  preieni  loia  or
damage.  Leviaiima  culpa  came  within  the  mean-
ing of  the  lenn  cul^w  is  the  lex  Aquilia ;  that  b,
any  injury  that  happened  to  one  nian>  property
thnngh  the  conduct  of  another,  for  want  of  aucn
care  a*  the  molt  careful  penon  would  take,  waa  a
culpa,  and  therefore  pnniihable.  But  the  eiprei-
iion  lei-iitima  culpa  ia  aaid  to  occur  only  once  in
the  Digcat  (Dig.  9.  tit  2.  i.  41).

In  the  paaHge  of  Honca  {SaL  iL  2.  123.)

"  Poit  hoc  InduB  ent  culpa  polare  magiatra,"
Beutley  hai  the  abnrd  cmendatiiHi  of  "  cuppa."
The  general  meaning  of  culpa  in  the  Rinnan
wrilera  ii  well  ciplained  by  Ha*ae  (p.  8).  There
i*  great  diflicnlly  in  stating  the  Koman  doctrine
of  dolua  and  culpa,  and  modem  juriita  are  by
uo  mean*  agreed  on  thii  matter.  The  chief  etaay
on  thi)  auhject  ia  the  claaiical  work  of  Haaio
"  Die  Cul[«  dea  Rtlmiachen  Kechli,  aecond  edition
by  Bethmann  — HoUweg,  1838.  HaaK'*  riew  i*
briefly  eipluned  in  a  note  by  Roaahirt,  to  hi*  edi-
tion of  Mackeldey-a  Lehrbuch,  S  342  (12lh  cd.);
but  it  require!  a  careful  itudy  of  bia  work  to  com-
prehend Haaie'i  doctrine  fully,  and  to  appreciate  the
great  meriii  of  thii  excellent  eiaay.  Whatiiaiated
in  thi*  ahort  article  ia  necoaarily  mcomplete.  and
may  he  in  aome  retpecti  incorrecL  [Q.  L.]

CULTER  (probably  from  odlo,  pererllo  ;  dim
aduUai,  Engl,  eoulttr  ;  in  loutherD  Germany,  dai
ioUer  ;  French,  amteau  ;  Greek,  /laxoipo,  Kmrd,
or  afayli),  a  knife  with  only  one  eigt,  which
formed  a  itralght  line.  The  blade  wa*  pointed
and  iu  back  curred.  It  wai  Died  for  a  Tiricty  of
purpoaea ;  but  chiefly  for  killing  animala  either
in  the  ilanghter-benie,  or  in  hunting,  or  at  the
altara  of  the  god*.  (Lir.  iii.  48  ;  Scriboniua,
Compoi.  Mid.  \ii  Saet.  Aug.  9;  PlauL  Ak^.  L2.
45  i  Virg.  Otors.  iiL  492  ;  Ovid.  FomI.  I  321.)
Hence  the  expittiioni — ionm  ad  caltnim  etaert,
"  to  buy  an  ox  for  the  pni^ioie  of  ilanghlcring  it "
(Vano,  De  Rt  Rat.  iL  6)  i  nx  ni  altn  Imipal,
"  ha  Iclrei  mem  a  ilate  like  that  of  a  victim  dragged
to  the  altar"  (Hor.  Sai.\.  9.  74)  ;  mad  imUm
loaart,  "  10  become  a  beatiariua  "  (Seneca,  Ep.  BT).
From  aome  of  the  paaugei  aboie  referred  to,  it
would  appear  that  the  culler  waa  carried  iu  a  kind
of  ihealh.  The  print  who  conducted  a  ucrilicfl
nerer  killed  the  victim  hinuelf  ;  but  one  of  hlB
miniidi,  ^n>ointed  for  that  purpote,  who  waa  called
either  by  the  general  name  maiiter,  or  the  moro
apeciflc  popa  or  eu/trtmia,  (Suet.  Q^.  32.)  A
tomb-atone  of  a  cnltrariua  ia  alill  extant,  and  upon
it  two  cultri  are  rcpreaented  (Qruter,  Jatcripl.  vol.


The  nimF  eulter  wu  alfo  applied  (o  raun  (Cic
Db  Off.  il  7  1  Plia  TIL  69  i  PMron.  Sat.  108),
Bnd  kitchen  koim  (Vaim,  op.  A'm.  iii  SS).  Thai
in  then  CUM  tha  colter  wu  different  from  thoae
■boTD  repreienteil,  ud  moit  probnhly  nnaller,  ii
certain  ;  unce  whenexer  il  wai  n»ed  for  ihrning  or
domeitic  prupowji,  it  wu  *]wn^  diitinguiihed
fiom  the  eommon  enlwr  by  ume  epWiet,  u  aHer
Umtarvtt^  evUtr  eoqumarit.  Fruit  knirea  were  alvi
^ted  cultri ;  but  ihey  were  of  a  mujlu  kind
(aiUeBi),  and  made  of  bona  or  ivory  (Coliun.  lii.
14,  *5  ;  Plin.  xu.  2S  ;  Scribon.  i^  8S).  Celu-
DielU,  who  giT«  [ir.  SG)  a  very  rninnte  deaerip-
tton  of  n/ali  vmlioria,  a  knile  for  pruning  vinei,
■ayi  that  the  part  of  the  hlule  neareit  to  the
handle  wu  called  cnlter  on  acoiunl  of  il>  limiiarily
to  aji  ordinary  cultfr,  the  edge  of  that  part  form-
ing a  itraight  line.  Thii  colter  according  to  him
was  tued  when  b  bnmch  was  to  be  put  alT  which
required  a  bud  pivnare  of  the  hand  on  the  knife.
The  name  cnlter,  which  wu  also  applied  to  the
■harp  and  pointed  inn  of  the  plengh  (Plin.  H.  ff.
xriil  18.  48),  is  ittll  eituit  in  Bngliah,  in  the  form
coaster,  to  deaignate  the  tame  thing.  [AmrRiiM.]
The  eipreanon  H  cullmm  or  n  caUro  aUocabu
(VitniT.  I.  10,  14)  signifiei  placed  in  a  pcrpendi-
cnlar  poaitinn.  [L.  S.]

CULTRA'RIUS. [CcnTEH.]
CU'NEUS. [ExiHcirna ;  Thwtbuh.]
CUNI'CULUS  (4*iJhv"i). a  mine  or  pu-
n^  uitdeTground  wu  so  called  from  iti  reeemblance
to  the  bnimwing  of  a  rabbit. Thni  Martial  (liii.


myi.


Fidenas  and  Veij  ace  nud  to  hare  been  takei
by  mines,  which  opened,  one  of  them  into  thi
citadel,  the  other  into  the  temple  of  Jnno.  (Lit
It.  22,  T.  IS.)  Niebnhr  (HiiL  Ram.  vol.  ii
p.  483)  obaores  that'there  is  hardly  any  authen


.of  a


ig  taken


related  of  Veii,  and  ■uppoae*  that  the  legend  ann
ant  of  a  tradition  that  Veii  wu  taken  by  means  o
■  mine,  by  which  •  part  of  the  wall  wu  oier
thrown.  IR.  W.]

CUFA,  a  wms-nt,  a  Tc«el  Ttry  much  like  tb


CURATOR.
-  ifafi'ma.  and  uied  for  the  aame  pnrpoee,  namely,  to
receive  the  freih  mnat,  and  lo  contain  it  daring  the
precea  of  feimentation.  Tho  infeiioF  winea  were
drawn  for  drinking  from  the  eupiL,  withont  being
bottled  in  antphorae^  and  hence  tho  term  etnua  dt
n^u  (Van.  191.  Noo.  ii.  113  ;  Dig.  IttiL  6.  i.  1.
.34).  Thephrasein  Honica<5at.  ii.2.133),c>9>
\polan  viagittra,  if  correct,  wonld  mean,  to  make
the  wine  vessel  the  aole  magUir  bOmiJi ;  Bentley
adopta  eiija  in  this  panage,  u  another  form  di
eapa,  a  hutat,  a  word  connected  with  aarpo :  thia
word  ocean  in  SaetaDiis  <^er.  27),  and  one  of
Virgil's  minor  poenis  ww  entitled  Copa  or  Copa.
(Charii.  L  p.  47,  pQtach.)  In  the  pange  1^
HoIBce,  however,  the  reading  tmpa  is  only  eoo-
jectotal:  tbe  MSS.  give  culpa,  ont  0!  which  a
Rood  sense  can  be  made.  (See  the  notes  of  Ilsin-
dorf.  Orelli,  and  DUntaer.)

The  eupa  wu  either  made  of  earthenware,  Ilka
the  dolnm,  or  of  wood,  and  oovered  with  pitch,  la
the  latter  case,  pine-wood  wu  preferred  (Plin.
/f.  fif.  Tvl  10.  a.  18).  It  was  n*ed  for  other
imrpaseB,  iiKh  as  jrrtKrnd  finiti  and  com,  fom-
ing  rafis,  and  conlajning  oombnstiblea  in  war,
and  even  for  a  mcoph^si.  (See  the  pnasBsea
cited  by  Forcdlini,  s.d.) [CompL  DoLiuH  ;  Vi-

NDX.]  [P.S.]

CUHA. [CDaaTOB.]

CURATE'LA. [CuaiTon.]

CURA'TIO. [CuBiTOB.]

CURATOR.  Up  to  the  time  of  pabeitu,
erery  Roman  citiien,  u  a  ganoral  rale,  wu  inca-
pable of  doing  any  legal  act,  or  entering  into  anj
contract  which  might  be  injniioaa  to  him.  The
''~ne  when  pubertu  was  attuned,  was  a  matter  of

ipnte ;  some  filed  it  at  the  commeneemcnt  of  Uio
B^  of  procreation,  and  some  at  tbe  age  of  fonrtoen.
(Gains,  i.  169.)  In  all  tiansBC^on*  hy  the  impnbea,
it  wu  necessary  for  the  anctoritu  of  the  tutor  to
ba  interposed.  lAnoTORiTis ;  Tcroa.]  With
the  age  of  pnberty,  the  youth  attained  the  o^iadlf
of  contracting  nuuriags  and  becoming  a  pater-
familias: he  wu  liable  to  military  service,  and
entitled  to  vote  in  the  comilia ;  and  consistently
with  this,  he  was  fteed  friHu  tbe  contnJ  of  a  tutor.
Fema'ei  who  had  attained  the  age  of  puberty  be-
oune  fubject  to  another  kind  of  tntela.  [TuriLa.]

With  the  attunmcnt  of  the  age  of  puberty  by  «
Roman  youth,  every  legal  capacity  was  aeqnired
which  depended  on  age  only,  with  the  eic«ptioii
of  the  capacity  for  public  offices,  and  there  was  no
rule  about  age,  even  as  to  public  olGca,  befuv  ths
massing  of  the  lex  Villis,  [AidiLbs.]  Il  waa,
lowerer,  a  matter  of  necessity  to  give  some  legal

r  age,  were  Ii
niitlantly  with  the  developmen
ndcnce,  this  object  wu  effiictpd  without  mtet~
'd  principle  of  full  legal  canacity


lav  eiialed  when  ^antu  w
69). This  law  eMabtiihed  a  i
which  was  of  great  pnctieal  il .  . „ .  _

ing  the  dtiiens  into  two  elaaica,  those  above  and
these  belov  twenty-five  years  of  age  (MMom  tvimti
fwnfw  ounu)^  whence  a  person  TtaArr  the  lut-
menUoned  age  was  aotnetmMs  simply  called  ananr-
Tbe  olgect  ^iLa  lex  wa*  to  pntcct  pemna  mdcr


CURATOH.
twVDtj-fire  jrmi%  of  vge  ■gmiiut  all  Inuid  (_doJMty
Tbe  pcnon  who  wsi  gniJtj  of  mch  ■  fnad  wv
lablfl  to  ■  jodieiimi  pubLicnm  (Cic  De  JVW.  £>00r.
iiL  30),  IliDagh  tlw  offence  wbi  inch  u  in  the
OMt  of  %  penoTt  of  fbll  age  would  uil;  bave  been
■mill  of  (cbni.  Tbe  puniibraent  fixed  by  Ibe
kz  Plactoin  wu  pnbabl;  a  pecuniu^  penalty,
md  the  nmHiDailia]  puniahineiit  of  mmmi&  or
kat  af  pulitiol  tigbli.  The  minor  who  had  been
bandnleiitlT  led  to  miikekdiudTuitJigeoua  contract,
BJglit  imteet  tumielf  igainit  on  action  bj  a  plea
af  tlte  lex  PlaeUria  (tzeqifia  1b|]u  Plaeloriae),
Tbe  lex  alaDappfan  to  ImTs  fuithei  fsorided  that
an*  poaoo  who  dtalt  with  >  minor  might  aroid  all
li^  tt  the  antiqgtoBa  of  the  PUetoiia  lex,  if  the
Biogr  ma  aided  and  aaaiited  in  mch  dealing  by  a
omtor  Bamed  or  choaen  for  ths  occaiion.  Bat
tbe  CDatar  did  not  act  like  a  latoi :  it  can  hardly
be  avpntd  that  hii  caueot  wu  even  ueeeuary  to
ibe  mwiact ;  fa  the  miner  bad  full  legal  cspBCttj
ta  act,  and  the  buaiiiaa  <^  tbe  cnialar  wu  merel;
to  pnmt  hii  being  defrauded  or  luipriwd.

The  practontD  edict  mried  itill  further  the
piadple  of  tbe  lei  PLaeUnia,  b;  pcotectiDg  minon
gBKallj'  a^unit  poailiTe  acta  i^  their  awn,  in
all  run  in  whieh  the  conieqaencea  might  be
BjjnrioQi  to  them,  Thia  wu  done  by  tbe  "  in  ia-
tegnm  reatitatb ; "  tlM  gaeUa  aet  aiide  tnuu-
actiDB*  of  tbia  dcaciiption,  not  only  on  the  ground
of  fisad,  bat  to  a  enudaation  of  all  the  drciun-
alMiim  of  tbe  raae.  Bat  it  vaa  neeeiaaiy  for  tbe
aiasc  to  make  qi^icBtioD  to  the  praetor,  either
dariag  Ue  mintri^,  at  within  ow  year  after  attaiu-
iag  hb  MijiniTj.  U'  be  daimed  the  natitulio ;  a
'■—■'"■—'  nsb^Iy  foimded  on  the  lei  Placlona.

TV.  __;.L_.  „t  lh»  In  w«  I


CURATOR.


an


Tbe.


if  thia  lex  were  thiu  lopeneded
eaiary  by  the  jnriidictioa  of  thi
find  Tuy  few  tracei  of


aknHU  winciple  of  1
It.  4  ;  De  MiDoiibaa  s


rdmgly  we
wiatLa  R
Ulpan  and  hii  contcmporariea  ipeak  of  adole-
HCBlea.  DDdet  twenty-five  yean  of  age,  being  nndet
if  dircctton  and  adnee  of  coiotorea,  aa  a
iciple  of  law  at  that  time.  (Dig.  4.
■ "  " The  eatablieh-

^^__  _. ^.  mled  by  Capilo-

bna  (M.  jlabn.  c  10)  to  the  emperor  M.  Aureliua
iaapatetage  which  bugiTeoriae  to  moch  diacuuion.
Sangny^  eiplanatian  ia  u  foUowi :  ~~  Up  to  the
tiaa  at  Hafou  Anreliiu  there  were  only  thne
^^  ar  kiadi  of  aualek:  1.  That  which  waa
fcaaili  il  on  Ibe  lei  Plaetoria,  by  which  a  minor
wk*  wiabed  to  enter  into  a  cootmcl  with  another,
atki  li  (be  powtor  fa  a  cutator,  atating  the  gnuad
ar  III  imrrr  ef  the  petition  (rwUtta  ooua).  One
alji  1 1  irflbr  ^liimti-n  waa,  to  aave  the  other  con-
Im  ■"  j^  patty  from  all  ritk  of  judicial  [ncecdinga
B  oMMaqnaiee  of  dealing  with  a  miiu».  Another
ulijii  1  waa,  the  benefitofthe  applicant  (the  min«};
fir  DO  pndeot  pcaaon  would  deal  with  him,  ex-
it with  tba  Ic^  leciirity  of  the  conlor.  (Plaut.
~  '  .L3.69.  "Lcxme  perditquinavicenaiia:
.  reden  omne*.")  2.  Tbe  coralela,  which
n  in  the  caae  of  a  man  waiting  hie  lab-
m,  *ba  wia  atUed  "  prodigna."  3.  And  that
llie  <aae  of  a  man  being  of  tmaoand  mind,
aaa»,'  '  furiofu."  In  both  llie  kat-mentioiwd
■  [nnnoa  waa  made  eitbo  by  the  lai


might  be  their  age,  were  placed  nnder  the  cnra  <d
their  agnati  by  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tabic*.
When  there  waa  no  legal  provision  for  the  appoint-
ment of  a  curator,  the  ptaetor  named  one.  Cora-
torea  ^ipointed  by  a  conaul,  praetor,  or  gavemu
of  a  poiince  (pnetet),  were  not  generally  required
to  give  lecariLy  for  their  proper  conduct,  having
been  choaen  aa  fit  persona  for  the  office.  What
the  lei  Plaetoria  required  for  particular  tianaa^
liona,  the  emporor  Aorelios  made  a  general  rule,
and  all  minora,  withoateiception,ai>dwithaDCany
special  grounda  or  reasons  (n«  nddiiu  tt(i«a),
ere  required  to  have  curatores.
The  follDwingitthereaultof  Sarigny'sinTeatigft-
>na  into  the  curatela  of  minora  after  the  conititutioa
of  M.  Aureliua  The  subject  ia  one  of  considerable
difficulty,  but  it  ia  treated  with  the  moat  conaum-
mate  skill,  the  result  of  complete  knowledge,  alhd
unrivalled  critical  lagacily.  The  minor  mly  re-
ceived a  general  curator  when  be  made  amilicatioii
to  the  piaetoT  for  that  puipoae ;  he  had  the  right
of  proposing  a  penon  u  curator,  but  the  praetor
might  reject  the  perton  propcaed.  The  apparent
conUodiction  between  the  mle  which  required  all
minon  to  have  a  curator,  and  the  &ct  that  ^e
minor  received  a  general  curator  only  when  he  ap-
plied for  one,  is  eiplained  by  Savigny  in  his  esaay
(p.  S;2,  &C.).  The  curator,  on  being  ^ipoinled,
had,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  minor,  as
complete  power  over  the  minor's  pn^erty  u  ths
tutor  had  np  to  the  age  of  pnba^.  He  could
in  respect  of  the  minorV  property,  get  in


to  him  that  he  toanaged,  and  not  the  ocquiaitiona
of  the  miner  subsequent  to  hii  appointment ;  and
herein  he  differed  from  a  tutor  who  had  the  core  of
all  the  property  of  the  pupillua  It  it  was  intended
that  tbe  curator  should  haie  the  care  of  that  which
the  minor  acquired,  oAer  tba  curator's  ^point-
ment,  by  will  or  otherwise,  a  apecial  ^iplicatiin
for  this  purpose  wu  necesury.  Thua,  u  to  the
property  which  was  placed  under  the  care  of  the
curator,  both  u  r^ards  alienation  and  the  getting
in  of  debts,  the  minor  wu  on  tbe  aame  tooting
u  the  prodigua :  bia  acta  in  relation  to  such  mat-
ters, without  tbe  curator,  were  void.  But  tbe
legal  c^Bcity  of  the  minor  to  contract  debts  wu
not  affected  by  the  appointment  of  a  curator  ;  and
he  might  be  aued  on  his  contract  either  during
his  minority  or  altec.  Nor  wu  there  any  incon-
sistency in  thia:  the  minor  coold  not  ipend  hii
actual  property,  for  the  preservation  of  hii  propertf
durii^  minority  wu  the  object  of  the  curator^  ap-
pointment But  the  minor  would  have  been  de-
priied  of  all  l^al  c^iacity  for  doing  any  act  if  he


.  have  become  1


. The


tke  lav  of  the  Twelre  Tablea,  were  called  legitimi
tbooe  who  w«  named  by  the  praetor,  were  calk
hiMimiii A foiiom  and  pndigiia, whaMva


immediauly  in,
rious,  and  when  tbe  time  came  for  enforcing  it
againit  the  miner,  he  had  the  general  protection  of
the  reatitutio.  If  the  minor  wished  to  be  adio-
gated  {AnoFTIoJ,  it  wu  necessary  to  have  tbe
consent  of  the  curator.  It  ia  not  atated  in  the
extant  authnitiea  what  waa  the  form  of  proceeding
when  it  wu  necesiery  to  dispose  of  any  property
of  tbe  minor  by  the  manclpatio  or  in  jure  ceaaio ;
but  it  may  be  safely  osnuned  that  the  minor  acted
(for  he  ahme  could  act  on  such  an  ocaiion)  and
the  curatoi  gave  hia  tonient,  which,  in  tbe  asa
supposed,  would  be  analogous  to  the  anctotilu  ef
tba  tuloi. But  it  would  differ  &dgi  the  aocloiilaa.


376


CURATOR.


in  not  ^xwg,  tike  the  mdoiitu,  i\seauiy  to  tb«
completion  of  the  legal  act,  bat  merelj  neeeuar;
to  TemoTe  all  legal  objectioiu  to  it  vb
pleted.

The  cura  of  ipendthiifti  and  poiOfU  of
mind,  aa  alimdy  obwrred,  owed  ita  otigi
Ibwi  of  the  Twelve  Tablet. The  technical  word
fbr  a  penon  of  nnwrnnd  mind  in  tbe  TweWe  Tables
ia  finom, whieb  ia  enoiTali
both  wordi  are  diatinguiihed  from  njonu. Thougli
Jkntr  impliei  vioiemee  in  condocti  and  demmtia  oa]j
tnenlai  tmbidil^  than  vaa  na  legal  diflbreoce  be-
tween the  two  leiDU,  ao  bi  at  concerned  tbe  cnra.
Intaiiia ii merelj  weakneat  of  undentandi
(itnlliiia  eautaiitia,  id  eti,  nuilaCaeaemu,  Cic  Tn
Quoft.  iiL  B),  and  it  wat  not  pforided  for  by  t
law*  of  the  Twelve  Tablet. In  later  timet,  I
pntetor  eppmnled  k  ciuatat  for  all  penoni  wb«e
infinnitiea  nqniied  it. Thit  law  of  the  Twel'
ipilla. 1  .
, , ,  mind,  the

tutor  vat  hit  curator.  If  an  agnatnt  wat  the
curator  of  a  furioaoa,  he  had  the  power  of  alien-
ating tbe  property  of  the  fiirioma.  (Qaiua,  iL  £4.)
The  prodigna  only  received  a  curstor  up<m  appli-
cation being  made  to  a  magiitrutai,  anda  icntence
of  interdiction  being  promnmced  agstnat  him  (a
bomii  interduttat  at.  Compon  Cie.  De  Sane.  e.  7).
Tbe  form  of  the  inlerdictio  wat  thai :  —  "  Quando
tibi  bona  pateraa  avitaqua  neqniiia  toa  di^)erdii,
liberotquB  tooa  ad  weitatam  perducii,  oh  earn  rem
tibi  ea  re  commercioque  interdico."  The  em  of
the  prodigDi  continaed  till  tbe  interdict  wai  dii-
lolved.  It  might  be  inferred  £»m  tbe  form  of  the
interdict,  that  it  wat  limited  te  ^e  caae  of  per-
aoni  who  had  cbildrai ;  hut  perhapt  thit  vai  not
ao.  (Dig.  27.  tit.  10;  Cod.  S.  tit.  70  ;  loM.  L
tlL  23.)

It  will  appeal  Inm  what  hat  been  taid,  that,
whatever  limilaritr  there  maj  be  between  a  tutw
and  a  cniater,  an  eaaential  diatinction  liea  in  tbia,
that  the  curator  waa  qieciallf  the  guardian  of  pro-
perty, thougb  in  the  caie  of  a  fnriotut  he  mutt
alia  have been  tbe  guaiditu  of  the  pernm. A

fnnctionB,

accept  the  dutf,  nnleat  be  bad  aome  legal  eiemp-
tioD  (ucHotio).  The  curator  waa  alao  bound  to
account  at  the  end  of  the  cuiatela,  and  wat  liable
to  an  action  ftir  miacondncL

The  word  cnra  bat  alto  other  legal  applkationt ;
—  1.  Cnra  ioaonim,  in  the  cate  of  the  good*  ofa
debtor,  which  are  lecured  for  the  benefit  of  hit
credilon.  2.  Cura  trmanai  et  vaUrit,  in  tbe  caae
of  a  woman  being  pregnant  at  the  death  of  faer
hntband.  S.  Ciira  iendilatit,  in  caie  of  a  diipute
at  to  who  it  the  herea  of  a  peram,  when  hia  inp-
poatd  child  it  nndcr  age.  i.  Oim  ItmdUatii
jaeimtit,  in  tbe  ouc  of  a  property,  when  the  herei
had  not  yet  declared  whether  or  not  he  would  ac-
cept the  inh^tance.  5.  CWu  Aoaonnt  oAtotfu,  in
i  of  propen;  of  an  abaent  penon  who  bad


._ jf  the  mratela  of  minora  it  from  an

emj  by  Savigny,  who  baa  handled  the  whole
matter  m  a  way  equally  admirable,  both  for  the
acieniific  preciiion  of  the  method  and  the  force  and
penpicuity  oftha  kngnaga.  (.Ftm  timn Sdiiili dtr
Miaderfdiripm,  Ztibtirifi.  vol  X. ;  Savigny,  ran
Btnif,  &e.  p.  102  1  Oaiua,  L  197i  Ulp.  Fmg. »!.  i
Dirka.ii,  Vtbtrtkiil,  tu.  Tai.  j.  Frag.  J  ;  Ubc-


CURATOBES.
keldey,  Ltirtud  Aa  kaitigai  IfSmitclm Sedti,

I68H,  &c  (12th  ed.)  ;  Thibaut,  .^4«i  dn  Am-
il»klm'RKilt,  i  78fi,  &c  9tb  ed.  &c) [Q.  L.]

CURATCRES,  wen  public  offioen  of  varioiu
kindi  under  the  Roman  empire,  tenfal  of  whom
were  first  eatabliibed  by  AuBuitoa.  (SneL  Aug.
37.) Tbe  matt  important  of  them  wen  aa  foi-

1.  CcKAToaBB  Al7ii  >i  Ripabdm,  wbo  had

the  charge  of  the  navigatioD  of  the  Tiber.  The
dutiea  of  their  office  may  be  gathered  from  Ul]rian
(Dig.  43.  tit.  15).  It  waa  reckoned  vetyhononr-
able,  and  the  penoni  who  filled  it  receivBd  af)er-
warda  the  title  of  comitea.

2.  CuaaTORBa  Annonu,  who  pnnhaaed  com
and  oil  for  the  itate,  and  told  it  again  at  a  email
price  among  the  poorer  dtiHOia.  They  were  alao
called  Buratom  iKsiidi  Jhinumli  tt  obi,  and
iriTiwu  and  i^wAnt.  (Dig.  £0.  tiL  A.  a  IB.  |  A.)
Their  office  belouged  to  the  ptrtaulia  niaMi  u  ,■
that  it,  it  did  not  reqnin  any  expenditure  of  a
pcmm'a  private  property ;  but  the  euntorea  ro-
ceived  from  the  ttate  a  tuffiuent  lum  of  money  M
puichue  the  required  amoont. (Dig.  SO.  tlu  8.

■.».  U.)

9.  CUBATOKSB AaDABUM. [AqUAB DCO-

4.  CfBATOKU  KaLiNDABii,  vho  had  tba
rare  in  municipal  lowni  of  the  hidmdaria;  that  it^
tbe  bookt  which  coDtained  iin  r.amea  of  the  per-
lonj  to  whom  public  money,  which  wat  not  wantad
for  the  ordinary  eipenaei  of  the  town,  wai  lent  on
intereiL  The  office  belimged  to  the  ptnoaalia
naiKra.  (Dig.  50.  tit  4.  i.  IS.  S  3;  tit  a  a  8.
§  7;  Heinecc  Amliq.  Rom.  n\.  IS.  g  4.)  Then
officer!  are  menUoned  in  intcriptioot  foniid  in  ma-
.1  lownL  (Orelli,  Inerip.  No.  3940,  44S1.)
CoaATORU  LuDonnx,  who  had  the  can  of
the  public  gamet.  Pertgnt  of  rank  appear  to  hsv*
been  utualiy  appfunted  to  thia  office.  (Tadt.  Anm.
&  M,  liii  22  J  8net.  Oil  27.)
they  are  utnally  ttllcd  0i

6.  Cdhatorib  Ofikuh  PirBLtcoRtiJI,  who
bad  the  can  of  alt  public  buildinga,  auch  at  tba
theMree,  hatha,  aquacdncia,  Ac,  and  ^reed  whli
tha  contncCora  for  all  neceaaary  rejoin  to  tliani.
Their  dntiet  under  the  republic  were  dlachatnd
by  the  aedilea  and  cenion. [CiRSOKBa.] Tbej

e  frequently  mentioned  in  inacriptiona.  (Ordli,
tcrip.  No.  24,  1506,  3273.)

7.  CuRAToaaa  Rboioniim,  who  bad  the  can
of  tbe  fourteen  diitrictt  into  which  Rome  waa
divided,  and  who^  du^  it  waa  to  [nvent  all
diaoider and eitertion in their  Tanectivs  dia-

Thia  office  wat  £nt  inititnlod  by  Aogna-
tot.  (SueL  .^i^.  30.)  Th»e  ware  utoaUy  two  i^-
cen  of  thit  kind  tat  each  dittriet ;  Alaiandar
01,  however,  appetn  to  have  appointed  tailj'
ir  each ;  but  theae  wen  penoni  of  """'tit
,  who  wen  to  hnve  juiitdiction  in  coBJoiMtioa
with  the  piaefectat  urbL  (Laiaprid..JIa;Ac>SS.>
We  are  told  that  M.  Aatonuna,  anMog  otli^
regolationi,  gave  tpeeial  directiont  that  the  enis-
lorei  regionum  ahoold  either  puniih,  or  bring
befue  the  pnefeelni  urbi  for  umiahmait,  all  per>-
•oni  who  exacted  from  the  inhabituM  man  thwi
the  legal  taxet. (Jul.  CapitoL  M.  AMb».  12.)

8.  CuaaTOBM  RaipmLicaa,  alto  called  Lo-
oltTAB,  wbo  adnuDitlcnd  the  landad  propaitj

- Bidpia. (Dig. £0.^1.8.  a. 9.  S3;  3.  IiL  U


CnBIA.
a.  37.) UbilB  wiDle  ■  Kjuats  mtfc,  Dt  OgitiB

CD'BIA,  lignifics  both  a  diTincin  of  the  Raman
pHq4e  and  the  |dacB  of  aiHinhlf  fer  nwh  ■  divi-
VOK.  VaJlMU  etyniDlogii*  of  Iha  word  haro  beni
pnpoaed,  bnt  doih  Kdiu  to  be  h  plaiuible  ai  that
whxh  connect*  it  with  the  Sabine  word  ymrir  or
oirn  (wboMe  tlw  y"*"-  of  Juuo  CWntif  among
tbeSabiM*).

Each  of  the  thne  andent  Ronnlian  tribe*,
the  RamiMa,  Titio,  and  Licena,  wat  mbdirided
inlo  10  cDiiae,  n  that  the  whole  bodj  of  the
pe^na  <w  the  patiiriani  were  dinded  into  30
esme.  (Ur.  L  13;  DioDja.  iL  7,  23;  Plot.  Aon.
19.)  Tbe  pjebetao*  hid  do  coimeclion  whaterer
with  tlw  curiae,  and  the  client*  of  the  fiaCriciani

(Peat  f.  38J,  ed.  UQlkr ;  tnmp.  Pitkich,  OmTts.)
All  the  Membeii  of  the  diSerent  geattt  belonging
to  one  curia  wcte  called,  in  raapect  of  one  anoUer,
cwwalia.  The  diriuoo  into  eanu  wm  of  gnat
' "' '' "  ■'  m  of  Bane,


WitiMMa  lepaei
(COMITU  CDBi^T'],  frna  whom  all  other  powen
emanated.  The  aenalon  and  aqailei  wen  of
tmaae  deaea  from  amoog  them ;  but  thair  import-
aoee  waa  eaptdallj  mani&at  in  the  religion*  id!ain
of  the  aOUf^  Each  coria  ai  a  corporatioD  had  ita
ponliai  mam  (FeiL  pp.  174,  245  ;  PaoL  Disc
p.  49^  «L  Uiiller),  and  b«*ida  the  god*  of  the
Btete,  thej  wotihippcd  other  dirinitie*  and  with
|— ■'"'  ritea  and  cerenonit*.  For  luch  religioui
pupeaa  each  curia  had  iti  own  place  of  wonhip,
caDed  cnria,  which  at  fint  majr  hare  contained
— '^'-f  bnt  an  ailar,  aftowardi  a  ■aedlum,  and
fioaJly  a  Imil^iig  in  which  the  cnriale*  asiembled
far  lie  parpaae  M  ditcnuing  politioJ,  financial,  re-
lifrioB*  and  other  matter*.  (PanL  Diac  m.  63,
&4  ;  KoDja.  iL  50.)  The  leligioiu  a&in  of  each
ana  wen  taken  are  of  by  a  ptieat,  amo,  who
«••  aMJiti  i\  hj  another  atOed  cnrialii  Flamen.
<PnL  Diac  pp.  49,  64 ;  Vairo,  Dt  L.  L.  t.  S3.
ri.  49;  Dionjt.  ii.  21  ;  comp.  Cmio.)  The  3D
each  it*  diitinet  name,  which  are  laid
ED  dcrired  from  the  namea  of  the  Sabine
a  who  bad  been  carried  off  bj  the  Romano,
"it  that  lome  derired  their  namci
icta  or  froni  ancient  eponjmoiu

Few  at  tbae  nanta  nij  are  known,  nch

aa  eoria  Titia,  Panda,  Cakbia,  Forieniia,  lUpta,
Triiowia,  Tibta.  (PauL  Diac.  pp.  49,  366  ;  FhL
^174;  Lit.  L  13 ;  DionrL  ii  47 ;  Cic  Di  Hi
/•mU,  B,  8.)  The  political  impvtaace  of  the  curiae
^aik  B  propoctiaii  aa  thai  at  iho  plebeian*  and
a  of  the  Dobilila*  iiae ;  but  the^  atiU
the  RligMNU  obaCTTanw  of  their  ccr-
mil  in  the  end  tbiae  alio  lott  their  im-
rt  fell  into  oblirioD. (Or.  Fial.

a  ako  med  to  deeignata  the  place  in
aiDale  held  iti  neetinn,  inch  a*  eniia

. .  miaJnlia,  CDiiaMaRelJi,  curia  Pranpeii,

<^na  OelaTiae^  and  fron  thii  there  gradually  aioae
he  iiMl  I  ef  caUmg  the  aaate  itaelff  in  the  Italian
■  ■■a  caria,  but  nerec  the  wnate  of  Rome  The
A^bI  revdeiee  of  the  Salii,  which  wai  dedicated
»  Man,  wu  lifcewifa  iljled  cnria.  (Cic  de  Die.
.  \1%  DiM^L  zii:  5)  Ptat-OMBB:  S3;  cemp.


CURIUS.  877

Becker,  ^(nrft.  iln-  Kim.  AllaU,  rciil  port  L
P^SI.fta)  [L.S.]

CU'RIA  {fioaXniripar,  ytptvrla),  in  arcfai.
taetuie.  The  bnilding  in  which  Ifao  highest  coon-
cil  of  the  itate  n»t,  in  >  Oieek  or  Id^n  ciC7,  i(
deBcrihed  by  VitniTini  a*  being  adjacent  to  the
offtfra  or  /ormn.  It*  Jbrm  wa*  quadrangular ;
either  Bt^uare  or  oblong.  If  fqnare,  it*  height  was
oneandahalftimeiit*length  :  if  obloD([,  the  height
WM  half  the  torn  of  the  length  and  breadth.  Thui,
a  senate  honte  40  feet  iqiiare  would  be  60  tbet
high:  and  one  60  feet  by  40  would  be  50 ^et  high:
which  are  *omewhat  reniarkable  proportion*.  Half
way  op  mch  wall  there  va«  a  projecting  ihelf  at
cornice  to  preTent  the  Toice  being  iMt  in  tbe  height
of  the  building.  VitrvTini  nyt  nothing  of  columna
in  the  aria,  bnt  we  know  that  in  Hnne  Oreek
■enale  hoiue*, a*  in  that  at  Phodi,  there  were


(Pani.


I.  S),  and  thi*  olao  waa  tbe
rt  of  religion*  character  n


were  often  *tatnea  of  the  god*  placed  in
i.e.) Hespectino  the  three
Hrstilia,  the  Julio,  and  the  Fi


(Pan*,
me,  the
DieLof


Fompeiano,  i
. art  Roma. (Vi
SlieglilI,.ireiiiot  d.fli»iiBi*(,TD!.  iiLp.21  ;  Hirt,
Icirt  d.  OtSawie,  pp.  186— IBB),  [P.  S.]

CURIA'TA  COMI'TIA  [Co«iti*.]
CU'RIO,  the  penoD  wbo  itoodat^  head  of  a
curia,  and  had  to  manage  it*  abira,  e*pecially
thoie  of  a  nligioua  nature  (Dionyi.  iL  7,  62  ;
Vaito,  Oo  i.  i,  T.  15,  32,  ri.  6)  :  in  their  ad-
miniitiation  he  waa  a**i*ted  by  another  prieat,
called  flamen  coriali*.  (Paul.  Diic  p.  64  ;  Dionyi.
il21,64.)  At  there  were  thirty  curiae,  the  number
of  cimonea  wo*  likewiae  thirty,  and  they  formed  a
college  of  prieat*,  which  wa*  haded  by  ono  of
them  bearing  the  title  of  carta  nuunniu;  (PanL
Diac  p.  126  j  Lit.  nvii.  8.)  He  wa*  elected  in
the  comitia  curiata,  and  had  authority  orer  the
curiae  a*  well  a*  orer  the  cuiionea.  It  need  hardly
be  obeerred,  that  tbe  office  of  c^irio  could  not  be
held  by  any  one  except  a  patrician  ;  at  a  com-
[«aliTely  lata  time  we  indeed  find  now  and  then
a  plebeian  inTCtted  with  tbe  office  of  curio  maiimua
(Lir.  urii  B,  ixxiii.  42),  but  thi*  only  ahowa  bow
much  the  ancient  inttitution  of  the  curiae  had
tben  loit  of  it*  original  meaning  and  importance  ;
and  at  the  time  when  the  plebeisno  bad  gained
accea*  to  prieatly  dignilie*,  the  office  of  curio  aeem*
to  bare  been  looked  upon  in  the  light  of  any  other
prieatiy  dignity,  and  to  bate  been  confared  upon
plebeian*  no  lesa  than  upon  patrician*. [L.  S.j

CU'RIUS  (nil""!),  tignka  generally  the  per-
aon  that  waa  mponiible  for  the  wellare  of  meh
Donbera  of  a  fomily  a*  the  law  pmmned  to  be
incapableofprotec^gthemictTC*  ;  a*,  for inatancc,
niinonanddaTea,andwonienaf  ellage*.  Fathen,
tbenfcre,  and  naidian%  hnabanda.  the  neareet
mab  relatiTea  of  vemen,  and  maater*  of  familiea,
wonld  all  bear  thu  tills  in  icipect  of  the  Ticarian*
function*  eierciied  by  them  m  behalf  of  the  re-
■pec^Te  object*  of  their  care.  The  qnoiifications
of  all  theoe,  in  rapect  of  which  thry  can  be  com-
bined in  one  cla**,  deaignated  by  the  term  (vrru^
were  the  male  *ex,  yean  of  ducretion,  beedom,
and  when  citiieni  a  nifRcient  ihare  of  the  fnnehiie
(^TiTifila)  to  enable  them  to  appear  in  the  law
cbort*  aa  plaintiffs  or  defendant*  in  behalf  of  their
iereral  cbugea  ;  in  the  cata  of  tbe  i  »i  iai  betng  a


378  CURRUS.

mident  alien,  Uic  dcficieac;  of  firancliiu  vould  be
■applied  b;  hii  Atheniui  potiDn  (ir|iD<rr^r))t).
Toe  datio  to  be  perfbimed,  md  m  de&ilt  of  their
peifbrmBDce,  the  peoaltia  incmred  by  gaardiuu,
■nd  the  proceedinaa  *■  to  Iheii  ftppflinttnenl,  aie
men^oned  under  ueir  more  uautl  title  [Epith.o-

The  bniineM  of  iIhw  wiio  were  more  eipecially
de<igiut«d  aim  m  the  Attic  lawv,  wm  to  protect
the  intemli  of  woinen,  whether  ipinitenotwidawi,
or  penoiu  lepualed  from  their  huibanda.  If  a
citiuai  dial  JnleBlate,  leaviog  BQ  orpbaa  daugbtiiT,
(he  Kin,  or  the  lilher,  of  the  deceaaed  wai  bound
to  aupply  her  with  a  Bnificientdovnyjiind  pre  her
ia  marriage  ;  and  take  care  both  tor  hig  own  aake
and  that  of  hit  ward,  that  the  hiubud  made  ■
pnper  aettlement  in  return  Jbr  what  hi>  bride
bronght  him  in  the  way  of  dower  (iworl^q^io,
Harpocr.).  In  the  event  of  the  dmth  of  the  hiu-
bind  or  of  ■  diTOTce,  it  be<ame  the  dutj  of  (he
Mrim  thM  had  betrothed  her,  to  receiTe  her  back
•nd  recover  the  dowry,  or  at  bU  cveali  oli-
IHiny  from  the  hoiband  or  hii  repreienlatiTes.  If
the  &ther  of  the  woman  had  died  inteitate,  with-
fiat  leaving  nich  relation!  aa  aboTB-mentioned  nur-
viving,  Cfaeie  dutiea  devolved  upon  the  next  of
kin,  who  had  alu  the  option  nl  marrying  her  him-
aelf,  and  taking  her  fortone  with  her,  whether  it
were  great  or  niulL  (Bunien,  De  J.  If.  AlL  p.  4G.)
If  the  fortune  waa  amall,  and  he  via  unwillinf;  to
many  her,  he  waa  obliged  to  make  up  iti  defici-
cnciet  acouding  to  a  r^nlatien  of  Solon  (Dem.
e.  Maeart.  p.  1068}  ;  if  it  were  large  he  might,  it
appean,  loraetimet  even  lake  her  away  from  a
huihand  to  whom  ihe  had  hem  married,  in  the
lifetime  and  with  the  couMDt  of  her  lather.

There  were  vaiiooa  lawi  for  the  protection  of
female  oiphiuia  againit  the  neglect  or  cruelly  of
their  kinimen  ;  ai  one  of  Bolon'a  (Died.  lii.
p.  S98),  whereby  they  could  compel  their  kinimen
to  endow  or  mairr  them  ;  and  another  which  afler
their  marriase  enabled  any  Athenian  to  bring  an
action  mnevirfBii,  to  protect  them  againit  the
cruelty  of  their  huabandi  (Petit.  Leg,  AtL  p.  ,^13)  ;
■nd  the  archon  waa  apeciBlly  entrusted  withoflicial
power  to  interlcrein  their  behalf  upon  all  ocouioni.
(Dem.£.Afaairt.p.l»76.)  [KlKORlR.]  (J.S.M.]

CUKKUS  <3f^),  a  chariot,  a  car.  The«
tcrmi  appear  to  have  denoted  these  two-wheeled
refaiclei  fin'  the  carriage  of  peracna,  which  were
open  ovMhead,  thai  ditfering  from  the  tarpeatmit,
and  doaed  in  front,  in  which  they  differed  from
the  sunm.  The  meat  euential  article*  in  the
conalruction  of  the  cnrru»  were  ;  —

1.  The  taOfc  C**Ti^),  or  rim  1  and  il  ii  nccord-
ingly  ieen  in  all  tho  chariota  which  are  represented
either  in  thia  article  or  at  pp.  101,238.  (Antvje.]

2.  Thca*^mndeofoak(4i47iVMKtii»',  Horn. /£
T.  SSB,  imitaKd  by  Viigil,y^^  wu,  Geor^.  iii
173),  and  aometime*  alio  of  ilex,  nth,  or  elm.
(Plin.W.A'.  ivi.  84.)  The  axJe  waa  firmly  fiied
imder  the  body  of  the  chariot,  which,  in  reference
to  thii  eircnmatance,  waa  called  iTifrripJa,  and
which  waa  often  made  of  wicker-work,  incloicd
by  the  ar»{  (Hom.  A  xiiiL  S33,  436  ;  Ucs.
&M.306).

3.  The  vAtelt  (icJirAn,  ^fit%iA,  rofja)  revolved
upon  the  aile  oi  hi  modem  carriages ;  and  they
were  prevented  from  coming  off  by  the  insertion  of
pina  (irtpjmu,  tfititj)^  into  the  eilremilie*  of  the
axle  (iiqM{nr(ii). The  porta  of  tbe  wheel  irac  a*


CURRUS.

folloira:— (o)  The  hch.  caUed  -wKM^rn  (H(
II  V.  726,_ii;ii.  339  ;  Hea  &*/.  309),  xovu


(I  (Plm.


H.  N.  ii.  3). The  tv


■re  toundsd  on  the  resemblance  of  the  nave  to  a
modiuB  or  bushel  <A)  The9iDitai,io4{iuu(lilenllr,
Ott  &!^),  radii.  The  nmnber  <^  spokea  of  counc
differed  in  different  wheels.  On  one  occauon  we
rt«dofeight(*itT(l««i|fua,iiv,7a3).  (B)The^A
fvuf  {Hom.  11.  V.  724).  This  was  commonly  made
of  some  flexible  and  elastic  wood,  auch  u  poplar  (//.
iv.  482—486),  or  the  wild  fig,  which  was  also  used
farthe  rim  of  the  chariot ;  heat  was  applied  to  aniil
in  producing  the  mquisilc  carvature.  (IL  xxL  37,
3a,cainparedwithTheocrit.iiv.247~2Jl.)  The
felly  was,  however,  composed  of  separate  pieces,
calledan9(a^nti,Hea.0p.«li>ist,426).  Hniod
(I.  c.)  evidently  intended  to  recommend  that  n
wheel  ihould  consist  of  fbnr  pieces,  (d)  The  tin,
iwlairrpor,  <nUu  HomCT  (IL  v.  725)  describes
the  chariot  of  Hera  aa  having  a  tire  of  bronze  upon
a  golden  felly,  thus  placing  the  harder  metal  in  a
position  to  resist  friction,  and  to  protect  the  softer.

4.  The  paie  (fviiit,  tamii). Jt  wu  firmly  fiird
at  its  lower  extremity  to  the  axle ;  and  at  the
other  end  (icjio^d^uor)  the  pole  i
ike  either  by  a  pin  (ffU*  ~
uiot  engraved  below,  oi
ana  oanda  [Juoum].

All  tne  pari!  now  enunuratod  are  seen  in  an
ancient  chanot  preserved  in  the  Vatican,  a  repce-
sentolioD  of  which  ii  given  in  the  annexed  wood-


Carriages  with  two  or  .
nied  by  the  Lydians.  (Aeschyl  ftrs.  47.)  Th«
" — 'is  and  Romans,  on  the  other  band,  appear
to  havo  used  more  thsn  one  pole  and  ona
yoke,  and  the  cums  (hns  conitracted  was  com-
lonly  drawn  by  two  hones,  which  were  attached
)  it  by  their  necks,  and  therefore  called  Itfuytt
rmu  (Hom.  IL  v.  19*,  X.  473),  mw^f  (X™.
/frit  L  2.  S  I),  " gtanini  jngalet -  (Viig.  ^la.  viL
SeO),  ■'cqoibijages''(0«>y.  iiL91).  If  a  diinl
horse  was  added,  as  was  not  un&eqnently  the  eas(%
it  was  fastened  by  tiaces.  It  may  have  been  in-
tended to  take  the  place  of  either  of  the  yoke  faoiara


t  f,Wi^  w^FaineeHf,  vi^L  |>,H2}  haapib-


cunRua

d  Inn  dnwingi  of  ehariati  witli  three  he
Etntan  tUM  in  the  collcclion  at  Vii
fmt  waplife)  u  jUacei  on  the  right  ol
rDkehctm.  (9ee  wiwdciit}  Wsslnobi
•  [■■iiig  between  the  tiro  imrfts,  uid
■■g  fraa  the  from  of  the  chariot  on  each
le  middle  hunt.  Tbtte  pnbHbl;  luiiti
rhing  the  third,  or  eiln  hone.


.  _e  honn  were  commonl;  huneaed  in  ■
quadriga  after  the  nnnner  already  repmenled,  the
ro  atrongeit  honei  being  placed  under  the  yoke,
id  the  two  Dthen  batened  on  each  aide  b;  meana
'.  ropei.  Thii  'a  implied  in  the  lue  of  the  epi-
leti  frci|»i<)t  er  atipa^ifos,  and  ftmiaUi  at  fmia-
■  Jn,  for  a  hone  »  attached.  (Iiid.  Orig.  iviiL
35.)  The  two  exterior  honei  wen  further  dia-
tingoiihed  from  ana  another  ai  the  right  and  the  left
trace-hone.  In  the  iplendid  triom^  of  Aogiutna
afterlhehattleofAetinm,thetnice-honeaofhii(Sr
— ■»  ridden  bj  two  of  hii  young  rehitioiu.  Tibs-
rode,  ai  Soelonini  relatei  {Tib.  6.)  imiittnort
J — iti  tqto,  and  MarceUai  itirlarion /wkH  apio.
A*  the  worlu  of  au:ient  art,  etpeeially  lictile  vaMi,
ibonnd  in  repmentationi  of  quadrigae,  numerona
Inilancea  ma;  be  obaerred,  in  which  the  two
middle  horaei  (i  iiieat  tt{iii  ical  6  liiaot  ifiirrt-
phs,  SchoL  u  AriilopiL  Nub.  122)  are  yoked  to-
gether u  in  the  bine  ;  and,  ai  the  two  lateral
ouea  hsTe  collin  (X^ilni)  equally  with  the  yoke-
horaeo,  we  may  prenune  that  Etom  the  top  of  theia


he  repea  which  wen  tied  lo  the  rim  of
the  or,  and  by  which  the  trace-honei  aniiled  lo
dnw  it.  The  fint  figure  in  the  annexed  woodcut
i>  the  ehariot  of  Aurora,  a*  ]»inted  on  a  nue  found
at  Cmamm.  (Oerhard.  Ua-  LitJi^ioaiatai,  pL  jii.
%  I.)  The  rein*  of  the  two  middle  horwe  pau
thnB)(h  rtagi  at  the  ertremitiea  of  the  yokt  All
the  lATticolan  whif  h  have  been  mentioned  are  itill
man  diatinctJy  leen  in  the  aecond  figuic,  taken
tiaa  ■  tma.ootla  at  Vienna.  (Oimrot,  ToL  iL
pf.  107.  108.)  It  tcprrKnti  a  chariot  overthrown
m  puainft  the  goal  at  the  circna  The  charioteer
haring  Ulcn  backward!,  the  pole  and  yoke  are
ihnwB  upward*  into  the  air  ;  the  two  trace-hortei
Jiaie  Ulica  on  their  kneei,  and  the  two  joke-
honca  aiw  prancing:  m  their  hind  legi.

If  WW  nay  lely  on  the  eridcnca  of  nnmeroua
■ockj  of  (ft,  the  eurma  waa  aometimea  dram  by
ha  hufna  without  eithrryoke  or  pole  ;  forwcaee
two  J  th^  diTerg;ing  to  the  right  hand  and  two
ID  the  left,  aa  in  the  aawo  in  the  royal  collection  of
Biiiin,  which  exhibit*  Apollo  lummnded  by  the
■igaa  of  the  todiae.  If  the  ancienta  rodly  drove
Ibf  qnadriftae  thna  hameaaed,  we  an  only  auppoae


n^  and  leaning  with  hia  whole  body
tackwarda,  ao  aa  to  make  the  bottom  of  the  ou  at
ita  hindfxnnt  border  acnpe  the  gtonnd,  an  act


and  an  attitude  which  aeem  not  nnfreqnently  to  ha
intended  in  antique  refRvientationa.

The  corraa,  liko  the  ciaium,  waa  adapted  to
carrr  tvo  peraona,  and  on  thia  account  waa  called
in  dreek  Siifipoi.  One  of  the  two  waa  of  couraa
the  driver,  lie  waa  called  iirloxas,  becauae  he
held  the  reina,  and  hia  companion  rapaitimi,
bmn  going  by  bi>  aide  or  nou  him.  Though  in  all
reapecti  anpcrior,  the  nptutiryft  waa  often  obliged
to  place  hioiBcir  behind  the  rirloxot.  He  ia  ao  r&-
pretented  in  (he  bigao  at  p.  1D1,  and  in  the  Iliad
(lii.  397)  Achilln  himielf  itanda  behind  hia  cha-
rioteer, Astomedon.  On  the  other  hand,  a  per-
aouage  of  the  higheit  rank  may  drive  hia  otrn  car-
riage, and  then  an  inferior  tnay  be  hia  Topaifdnit,
u  when  Neator  conveya  Machaon  {rip'  ti  Maxdow
0alrt,  n.  XL  512.  517),  and  Hera,  holding  (he
reina  and  whip,  convey*  Athena,  who  ii  in  full
armour  (v.  721)— 775).  In  auch  ca«a  a  kindneaa,
or  oven  a  compliment,  waa  conferred  bv  the  driver
upon  him  whom  he  conveyed,  aa  when  Diony.
•iu»,  tyrant  of  Sicily,  "himaelf  holding  the  reina
■--'-'""-'-■ -' -" (Aelion,  r./f.  i>,.


e  PUlo  hia  wopmWTijt,''


18.)

Chanoli  were  freqnenlly  employed  on  the  field
of  battle  not  only  by  the  Aaiatic  oaliona,  but  alto
by  the  Oreeka  in  the  heroic  age.  The  ioioT^M,
i.  e.  the  nobtlity,  or  men  of  tank,  «  ha  were  com-


380  CURRUS.

plele  miiu  of  aimoui,  all  took  liieii  c^iariott  vith
then,  and  in  an  engegement  placed  thenuelia  ii
tont.  In  (be  Hmneric  batdei  we  find  that  tlii
honemaOf  vho  ibr  the  porpoae  of  uinf  hii  weapons,
and  in  oonieqaencs  of  tba  weight  of  hii  umooTf  is
nnder  the  neceaiin  of  taking  the  place  of  ira|9u-
einii  (aee  above  the  woodcut  of  the  triga),  often
Buailfl  or  cballengea  a  diitant  foe  fiom  the  chanot ;
but  that,  when  he  encounten  hii  advenaiy  in
ctoie  combat,  they  both  dinnauut,  "  t(Hingiflg  &om
their  cfaacioti  to  the  ground,"  and  ]an'mg  tbeai  to
tho  care  of  the  1^0X01.  ( A  iu.  29,  xrl  426, 437,
ivii.  480—483  i  Hei.  Scui.  Here  S70— 372.)
Aa  soon  ai  the  hero  had  finiahed  die  trial  of  hit
itrength  with  hi«  omonent,  he  retiimed  1
cbaridl,  one  of  the  chief  uk>  of  which  waa  to  i
him  fnnn  dangei,  ThcH  chaiioti,  aa  reprnenled
on  bat-relieti  and  fictile  tases,  were  eiceedmg]
light,  the  body  often  camUting  of  little  beiides
rim  futened  to  the  bottom  and  to  the  axle.  Thi
we  find  Diomed,  in  hii  uoctunud  viait  to  tl
enem;'!  amp,  dclibeiatuig  whether  to  draw
away  the  iptendid  chariot  of  Kbeau)  by  the  pole,
or  to  cany  it  off  on  hi>  ahDuIder.  UL  i.  S03— 505).
In  lat^  timea  the  cbahola  were  chiefly  em-
ployed in  the  public  gamea.  Their  fonn  wai  the
nme,  except  that  they  wen  more  elegantly  deco-
rated. Cfaarioti  were  not  much  died  by  the  Ro-
mani.  The  moet  iplendid  kind  were  the  quad-
rigae, in  which  the  Roman  goierala  and  empeten
rode  when  they  (riiunphed.  The  body  of  the
triumphal  car  wai  cylindrical,  aa  we  often  aeo  it


mid  (oHrto  cum,  Flor.  L  5  ;  Hot.  Epod.  it  23)
and  ivory  (Ot.  TriH.  iv.  2.  63.  Fo^.  OL  4.  35).
The  ntmotl  ikilt  of  the  painter  and  the  Kulptor
WBi  employed  to  enhance  Ita  beauty  and  iplendoitl.
More  particularly  the  eitremitiei  of  the  aiie,  of
the  pole,  and  of  the  yoke,  were  highly  wrought  in
the  form  of  animali'  headi.  Wrealhi  of  laorcl
were  (ometimea  hung  round  il  (curnm  laurige-
n,  Claudian,  De  Land.  Stii.m.  10,  TerU  (.hr


Hone


.  130),  I


-white  horaea.  (Mart.  liL  7.) The

car  wai  elevated  »  that  be  who  triumphed  might
be  the  meat  conipicuoua  penon  in  the  preceuion,
and  for  the  tame  reaaon  he  ¥iag  obliged  to  etand
erect  (m  aim  ilairiu  eima,  Orid,  L  c).  The
triumphal  car  had  in  genera]  no  pole,  the  honea
being  led  by  men  who  were  itationed  at  their


CTATHUS.
niarbto,  an  example  of  which  lait  ia  ahon  in
the  preceding  woodcut  &mn  an  ancient  chaiiot
in  the  Vatican,  were  among  the  moat  beantilul
omamenta  of  templei  and  other  pobltc  edificei.
No  paini  were  ipared  in  tbejr  decoration ;  and
PUuy  infbrma  ui  (H.  N.  inir.  19)  that  lome
of  the  moit  eminent  attiiti  were  employed  upon
them.  In  nmneroui  inalancei  they  were  de-
■igned  to  perpetnate  the  Guue  of  thoae  who  bad
conquered  in  the  chariot-race,  (Paua.  vi  10.)  Ai
the  emblem  of  Tictory,  the  quadriga  wat  aome-
timei  adopted  by  the  Romana  to  grace  the  trium-
phal arch  by  being  placed  on  ita  nmunit ;  and
even  in  tbe  private  houeea  of  great  fiimilin,
charioti  were  displayed  aa  the  iadicationa  of  nnk,
or  the  memoriala  of  conquest  tud  of  triomplL
(Juv.  viii.  3.)  [J.  Y.]

CURSO'RES,  ilaTe^  vhoae  dnty  it  wai  to
nn  before  the  carriage  of  their  niaitera,  for  tbe
lame  purpoie  as  our  DDtridere.  They  were  not
used  during  the  timei  of  the  republic,  but  ^por
to  have  fint  come  into  taihion  m  the  middle  of  lbs
fint  century  of  the  Christian  aera.  The  ilavei
employed  for  thii  purpose  appear  to  have  fie-
quently  been  Numidiant.  (Senec  E^.  87,  126  i
Marc  iiL  47,  liL  24  ;  Petrou.  28.)  The  word
curaorea  waa  alio  applied  to  all  ilarea,  whom
their  niaiters  employed  in  carrying  lettera,  mes.
Hgea,  &c (Suet.  Ner.  49,  2B.  9  ;  Tacit  Agric.


P8.I


[S«LLA  CuttWMB.]

CUSTO'DES. [CoviTi*.  p.  336,  b.]
CUSTO'DES, CUSTO'DIAE. [CAsrai,
p.  aso,  h.j
CUSrOS  UBBIS. [PHAiPicTtJs  Urbe.]
Cy'ATHUS  (ki««oi),  is  one  of  the  numeroul
words,  coutuning  the  element  jrv,  and  aignifying
something  hollow:  it  ii  applied,  for  e^utiplc,  to
the  hollow  of  the  hand. Its  general  meaning  is  a
cu^  of  any  kind  ;  and  it  constantly  oamrs  as  the
name  of  a  sort  of  drinking  vessel  used  by  the  Ro-
mans, who  borrowed  it  from  the  Grcelci  (Varro,
Dt  Ling.  Lai.  t.  124,  ed.  HUlIer)  j  but  whether
it  designates  the  cup  out  of  which  tbe  wine  was
drunk,  or  the  small  ladle  by  meani  of  which  it
IransCerrod fiom  the  miiing-bowl  (iipaT^)
the  drinking-cup,  is  a  disputed  point. Orelli
[U  that  it  is  never  used  in  tbe  latter  sense,
and  that  the  ladle  was  called  Mxvu,  or  frWa
■inaHa (.Ad  Horat.  Cam.  iii.  S.  13). But  the
laasagca  in  which  the  word  ocean  bear  out  the
ipinion  of  Becker,  that  the  ladle  was  called  gh


-,Slll^xM-,yGOO^IC


CYMBALUU.
ribi.  (See  ttiB  Lenamt  of  9catt  and  Liddtll,
SrHer  ud  Juobiti,  Mid  FudoUci ;  Becker,
•,  roLi.  f.  *63.)  Two  of  theu  cyiilhi
'  *  'a  the  preceduig  woodcut,  &om
tte  A/u«  Sartancs,  to),  i*.  pi.  12.  They  WOB
hbUj  of  biai»  or  nlver.  The  (foJiai  ii  re-
femd  to  u  ■  DHunre  of  the  qnutity  af  wine
wbieh  B  pcnon  dnnk.  (Har.  Cam.  iii.  S.  13,  19.
1^)  A  ilare  wmm  Hppointed  to  mpply  the  dlink'
iiw.ciDi«  of  the  banqaetcti  by  ataxa  of  the  ig^
<a*u  (Hv.  Carm.  L  29.  S  i  Suet  Cxi.  49  ;
Jbt.  Sit  ix.  46.)

Another  kdm  in  which  the  woid  occun  i>,  in
watgtTj,  fat  ft  cup  for  mppiiv  (Ariiloph.  Lyt.
444,  /'u,  £42  ;  AriitoL  FnM.  a.  9).

Ti»  (joliiw  mi  a  definite  mnture,  with  both
ibE  Gneki  lud  the  RomMU,  cmtuaiiig  one-twelfth
at  the  Mi^anu^  It  wu  the  nao,  coniidered  with
reftTFiKc  to  (he  (Bi<lipuu  h  the  unit ;  hence  «e
han  «<w  wed  foe  ■  Teiwl  conlainiiig  the  linh
tt  the  mtiariut,  or  two  goCU,  fiHxfniM  far  one
fimtafrfng  three  a/aUtif  JHou  for  fear  go^  quiu-
rmmr  tor  Gn  ijiofU,  &c  (Wonn.  Da  Fcmderi-
in,  jifaMnn'i,  &c. ;  Houejr  Oi  ..liuiaC  IFo^ibi,
ic.)  [P.  S.]

CTCl^AS  (nwXdt),  ■  dnnlai  robe  void  by
woo,  to  the  bottooi  of  which  >  border  wu
afiied,  inlaid  with  gold.  (Prop.  ir.  7.  40.)  Alei-
mder  tiettnu,  in  hie  other  sttemptB  to  reatzun  the
luniy  ef  hi*  i^  oidained  Ihmt  women  should
ptmrm  enly  one  cycUi  emch,  Aad  th&t  it  ihonld
Bot  be  adonied  with  mon  than  lii  <uiciBe  of  gold.
(Lamp.  Alex.  Sa.  41.)  The  cydu  appcan  to
ban  beai  tunallf  made  of  Kinie  thin  material
((SB  M  lytlale,  JsT.  tL  2S9).  It  u  related,
among  otber  iuitaneea  of  Caligula*!  eSeminaey,
thai  be  aameliinet  went  inlo  public  in  ■  garment
af  thia  dooiptioii. (Snet  Od.  S2.)

CYCLOPEIA- [AncHiTiCToai].

CYMA  (iciifui),  in  architectiiie,  an  lyaa,  a  waTo-
ilwpi  il  Bmldiru,  onuiiting  of  two  currei,  the
•Da  anoTa  and  the  other  conTei:.  There  were
two  fcma,  the  tjma  rtria,  which  wu  concaTe  shore,
and  csnttT  below,  thai,  3,  and  the  cyma  neam,
which  wa«  conTex  above  and  concBTe  below,  thui,
^.  Tbe  diminntiTe  cytnatiMm  or  cvraotnn*  (nf^ii-
TMr)  ia  alio  nied,  and  il  indeed  the  taore  commen


CYMBALUM.  361

.^e  gruDHUiriani  and  IciicogiBphen ;  but  the  dv-
Kriptiona  of  the  latter  ate  »  mgne,  that  it  le  im-
poiiible  to  identify  one  with  the  other.  A  Urgo
clau  of  cymbalfl  wu  termed  KpoOtxara^  which,  if
they  were  really  diatinet  from  the  ^pdroAo,  aa
Spohn  and  Lampe  auppoae,  cannot  now  be  exactly
detcribed.  [Ckotaluu.]  The  annexed  drawing
of  a  upovita  ig  taken  from  an  aocient  marble,  and
iuerted  on  the  authorilj  of  Spohn  {MitM.ta!.  1.
—  «.  fig.  44).


an"d  the


h./y.70,ed.


The  original  for
Itewerer,  a  iimple  hoUow  ■
Thi*  w>*  ealied  the  ijTiutii
vlhft  the  ^iiaatiini  LabicvL
DindorC;  B&kh.Qir7i./«cr.  TOLL  p.'^IH;  vilraT.
iii.  3^  a.  5.  f  7,  Schn.  i>.  6.  g  2—6  ;  Onitw,/wr.

Or.  wd  AW.  Barnard,  pp.  6,  7  :  {or  eiomplea,  aee
(he  infib*  on  p.326.  [P.S.]

CYMATIUM. rCvm.]

CYHBA  (lif^^)  ia  deiiied  &om  Ki,iMi>t,  a
kaOow,  and  ia  employed  to  a%nif7  any  tmall  kind
of  boat  oaed  on  lakea,  riTen,  &c  (Cic.  DtOf.iii.
14  ;  Amt.  li.  303.)  It  appeara  to  have  been  tnach
the  aaoie  aa  the  udrun  and  teaplia.

Cy'MBALUM  (Ki^a}^),  a  muaical  inatni-
Bcst,  in  the  ahape  of  two  lulf  globea,  which  were
held  one  m  euA  bani  by  the  perTonnet,  and  played
by  beini  atniek  againM  each  other.  The  word  ia
or^inal^  Onek,  being  derived  from  irdfiCoi,  a
haQew,  with  wbich  the  L«(in  eyata,  a/mUum,  &e.
urm  lo  be  connected. Sevenl  kindi  of  cymbali

haad  a  gmt  nany  namea  hate  been  pmerred  by


The  KfiJ/iteXa  tnentioned  in  (he  Homeric  hymn
to  Apollo  (161—164),  were  of  thia  kind,  played
on  by  a  choiua  of  Delinna,  The  KobiUa  or  iipoi~
T/(ia  vers  alao  on  the  aame  principle,  only  played
with  the  fiwt,  and  inierted  in  the  ihoe  of  the  per-
former ;  they  wen  naed  by  Sute-playera,  perhapa
to  beat  time  to  their  mniic  (Pollux,  x.  33.)
Other  kinda  of  (rmbala  were,  the  a-XoroT^i  an
invention  of  Archytu,  mentioned  by  Ariatotle
(Pol.  liiL  6),  and  iti  duninutive  tXarcrriirimr,
which,  from  the  deacriplion  of  Jutina  Pollux
and  Heqrchiui  (t.  v.),  appeara  to  have  been  a
cbQd'a  rattle:  i{Ma^  Uia  two  parta  of  which
Snidu  telta  na  (a.  c)  wen  made  of  different  mate-
teriali  lor  the  lake  of  variety  of  unnd :  imi^ta,
mentioned  in  tile  bagmenti  of  Aeachylua,  with
aeveral  otbera,  noted  by  Idmpe  in  hia  work  D»
OmiaU$,  bnt  perhapa  without  anfficient  authority.
Tbe  nmba]  wu  uiiially  made  in  the  form  of  two
half  globea,  either  nnming  off  lowardi  a  point  lo
aa  to  be  graaped  by  (he  whole  band,  or  with  a


handle.  Tl  waa  commonly  of  bronxe,  hut  aome-
timea  of  baser  mnlerial,  to  which  Ariitophanet
alludei  (Aoaw,  1305^, Tbe  preceding  woodcot


382  DAEDALA.

of  a  cytnlmTtfltfiB  a  taken  from  bji  anciHIt  marblCf
and  givfln  an  the  authority  of  Idmpe.

The  cjmblll  wu  a  yely  ancient  initm
being  lued  in  the  ffnnbip  of  Cybele,  Baretiui,
Juno,  and  all  tho  earlier  deities  of  the  Grecian  and
Roman  mythology.  It  probably  came  from  the
Eaat,  from  whaace,  thiough  the  Phoeniciana,  it  vai
conyeyed  to  Spain  (compora  Martial*!  litutiea
Ommaia).  Among  the  Jan  it  t4ipean  (fnan
2  Chron.  T.  12,  13  i  Nebem.  ziL  27]  to  hare  been
an  iniCrument  in  common  uie.  At  Rome  ire  tint
hear  of  it  in  Liry'i  account  of  tba  Bacchic  orgieai


a.  (II


r.9.)


For  fu^moi,  which  eomo  hava  refarred
claig  of  cymbda,  ees  SiBrai/M.  [B.  J.]

CYRBEIS  (itipSfn). (AioHia]
CrZICE'NUS  OECUS. [DoMUB].
CYZrCK14U8  NUHMUS. [ar^TiB].

D.

DACTTUOTHE'CA(>i»TuAHiM>n)),ataKDi

box  where  ringt  •rem  kept.  (Mart.  li.  £9.)  Tbi
name  wu  alio  applied  to  a  cabuiet  or  collection  of
Jewell.  We  leani  from  Pliny  (ff.  N.  iinii.  fi),
that  Scannu,  the  Btep-ion  of  SulU,  waa  the  firet
penon  at  Rnne  who  had  a  collection  of  thit  kind,
and  that  hii  wm  the  only  one  till  Pompey  bnogh;
Id  Home  the  collection  of  Mithridalo,  which  he
placed  in  the  cuitoL

DA'CTYLUS  (SricriAot),  a  Greek  meanuc,
eiun-ering  to  the  Roman  i/Miu,  each  eigniljinE  a
fingtr-bnaiillL,  and  being  the  eiiteenth  part  of  a
fbot [Pia.] (See  the  Tablet.)  [P.9.]

DADU'CHUS.  [ELiuaiNia,]
DAE'DALA  or  DABDALEIA  (SbISoXo,  >«-
SiA'in),  wen  namei  nied  by  the  Greeka  to  eig-
nify  thoie  early  worki  of  art  which  were  atcribed
to  the  age  of  Daedalu,  and  eipecially  the  ancient
wooden  natucB,  ornamented  with  gilding  and
briaht  coloiin  and  nal  drapery,  which  were  the
earliert  known  lonna  of  the  tmagea  of  the  godi,
after  the  mere  blocki  of  wood  or  (tone,  which
were  at  iint  nied  for  aymbob  of  them.  (See
Diet,  of  Greet  and  Roman  Biog.,  art  Drudalut,
vol  i.  p.  928.)  [P.  9.1

DAE'DALA  (JaUoAa),  a  feati™],  celebrated  in
ItocDtia  in  bononr  of  Hera,  inmamed  Nc^ctio^^t^
or  Tfhfia  (Pana.  ii.  2.  §  S).  Ita  origin  and  mode
of  celebiation  an  thna  deKiibed  by  Paoaaniai  (ii.
S.  %  1,&c.): — H era  waa  once  angry  with  Zcaii,and
withdrew  henclf  to  Euboea.  Zeui  not  beuig  able
lo  peniiado  her  to  retnm,  went  to  Cithaeron,  who
then  governed  Plataoae,  and  who  waa  aaid  to  be
uneqaalled  in  wiadam.  He  adviaed  Zena  to  get  a
wooden  itatue,  to  diaaa  and  piaco  it  upon  a  chariot,
and  to  aay  that  it  waa  Plalaea,  tho  dnughlec  of
Aaopua,  whom  he  waa  going  to  marry.  Zena  fol-
lowed the  advice  of  Cithaeron,  and  no  aooner  had
Hera  heard  of  her  huaband'a  projected  marriage
than  ihe  retnmed.  Bnt  when,  on  approaching  the
chariot  and  dragging  off  the  coTeringi,  ihe  aaw  the
wooden  atatne,  ahe  waa  pleaaed  with  the  device,
and  became  reconciled  to  Zena.  In  nnnemhnnce
of  thia  reconciliation  the  Plataeona  aolemniaed  the
featival  of  the  daedala,  which  owea  tta  name  to
AalSuAo,  the  name  by  which,  in  ancient  timea,
atatuea  were  deaimated.  (9ee  preceding  article.)
PaDaaniaa  waa  told  that  the  featinl  waa  held
•my  KTenth  year,  bat  bo  bdterei  that  it  Wok


DAMABETION.

place  at  aJmrter  intenala,  thongh  he  w


Thia  fbatival  waa  celebrated  by  the  Plalaeans
alon^  and  waa  caBed  the  Uaer  Daedala  (AwSoAs
fujcpd),  and  waa  cslebiated  in  the  following  man-
ner:—la  the  neighbourhood  of  Alalcamene  waa
the  greatest  e«k-&ie>t  of  Bocotia,  and  in  it  a
number  of  oak  tnmlu.  Into  thia  fbmt  the  Pla-
taaana  went,  and  eipoaed  [necea  of  cookod  meat  to
the  rayena,  attentively  watching  npon  which  troo
any  of  the  hirda,  after  taking  a  piece  of  the  meat.
would  aettle ;  and  the  treea  on  which  any  of  the
ravena  aettl^  were  ent  down  and  worked  into
dafdwla,  t.  a.  roughly  hewn  atanin.

Theffrtal  Datdala  (AoISaAn  fwfdXa),  in  ths
calebiatioD  of  which  Gh«  Platacana  wan  ioioed  by
the  other  Boeotiana,  took  place  eiay  uitieth  ytsr ;
beeanae  at  one  time  when  tho  Flataeaui  wen  ab-
sent &om  their  country,  the  featival  had  not  been
celebrated  for  a  period  of  aiity  yeaca.  At  each  of
the  leaaer  Daedua  fourteen  itataea  wen  made  in
the  manner  deacribed  ahote,and  diatribated  by  II.
among  the  towm  of  Plataeae,  Conmeia,  Thai[Hae,
Tanagro,  Cbaeroneia,  Orchomenoi,  Lebadeia,  and
Thebea;  the  amaller  towna  took  one  itatue  in
common.  The  Boeotiana  aaaembled  on  tlie  banks
of  the  Aaopua ;  here  a  atatue  of  Hera  waj  adorned
and  tailed  on  a  chariot,  and  a  young  bride  led  the
proceaaioD.  The  Boeotiana  then  decided  by  lot
m  what  coder  they  were  to  form  the  ptTKeaiion,
and  drove  their  cbariota  away  &om  the  river  and
up  mount  Cithaeron,  on  tho  aununit  of  wluch  an
altar  waa  erected  of  aquore  piecea  of  wood,  fitted
together  like  atonea.  Thia  lUtar  waa  covered  with
a  quantity  of  dry  wood,  and  the  towna,  peraona  of
rank,  and  other  wealthy  individnali,  ^eied  ^i^
a  heifei  to  Heia,  and  a  hull  to  Zena,  with  plenty
of  wine  and  incenie,  and  at  the  aame  time  placed
the  daedahi  npon  the  altar.  For  thoae  who  did
not  poaaeaa  aofiicient  means,  it  waa  cnstomaiy  to
oSer  amall  sheep,  but  all  their  oSeriogi  were  burnt
in  the  aame  manner  a>  thne  of  the  wealthier  per-
sons. The  fire  conanmed  both  offerings  and  altar,
and  the  immense  flame  thua  kindled  waa  seen  ^

The  account  cf  the  origin  of  ths  daedala  given
by  Paoaaniaa  agree*  in  the  main  point!  with  the
atoiy  nlated  b;  Plutarch  (apud  Eaieb.  IM  Pmi-
paraL  Etung.  va.  p.  63,  and  Fragai.  p.  759,  ftix
sd.  Wyttenb.),  who  wrote  a  worii  on  the  PlatMan
daedala  j  the  only  difference  ia  that  Plutarch  re-
eaenta  Zena  aa  receiving  hia  advice  lo  deceiv*
era  from  Alalcomenes ;  and  that he calls  the
Kiden  atatne  by  which  the  goddeaa  was  to  be  de-
lved Daedala,  instead  of  Plaaea. Plutarch  also
da  Boma  nmarki  reapecting  the  meaning  of  the
festival,  and  blinks  that  the  dispute  betwren  Zeaa
and  Ueia  had  reference  to  the  pbyaical  revolutiona
which  Bocotia,  at  a  very  remote  peiii>d,  had
been  subject,  and  their  recondliation  to  the  lealoc-
atioa  of  order  in  the  elementa. {See  Crenaer,
SgnboL  rnnd  Mytiai.  iL  p.  £D0,  and  HUUer's  Or-
'om.  p.  ai6,  &c  Sd  ediL)  [L.  8.]

DAMARE'TION  (Aivuv>^tuw  »>^'»)i  «
Siciliaui  coin,  reapectjng  which  then  ia  much  dia-
pute.  Diodoraa  tella  ui  (iL  26 )  that  after  Gelim'a
gireat  tictory  over  the  Carthaginians  at  Himera,  hii


bainonla


a  token


D.UINUM  INPECTUU.
talmti'  weight ;  npoD  nceiTiog  which,  ihe  itnck


■i^iTptr,  from
...... J  J

'  by  oUm

(Udiuof

ip  thmroimnwMi  M  bo  cooad  into

,,_  wnpflrOtloB^neceMitiei  iaiinf

w  war.  (Pdllai,  is.  <fi  ;  Hayek  t.  d.  ^HfrnpC
THv.)  Id  ad  tpigoun  >Kribcd  to  Simcmidei,  who
ma  imbBbly  bnng  at  the  cooit  of  Oelon  Mt  thii
«7  tii»  (SclKd  <hI  FiMd.  Pglk.  1 1G5  i  Antk-P-d.
Ti.  2U  ;  No.  196,  Schnaidewin),  it  ii  nid  that
OrloD  ■nd  hi*  bcDtfaoi  dedicated  to  tbe  Pythian
Apdki,  after  their  Tictary  over  the  bubanana,  a
Iripod  ^afrriam  ](fyaai,  where  then  can  be  no
doubt  that  Bendej  ii  nghl  in  reading  Laiiafrriao,
but  it  ii  not  equally  certain  wliethei  the  laat  twa
linca  of  the  epigzam  are  Dot  altogether  ipuriooa.
(Coop.  3chDeIllewiI^  nd  io&,  and  BUcfch,  MitnL
fmkamek.  p.  301.)  At  all  ertdta,  the  paauge  ii
an  indicatioa  of  tlie  nuilorm  Inditian  rcapectinj;
lUf  "  Damacetian  gcii  ; "  the  exact  hiitocy  of
which  ia  of  vecy  Uttle  CMueqiMaca  compared  with
ibe  ideiilificatioD  of  tba  cranage  to  which  the  atate-
aaita  retar.  Fnn  all  the  diacnaaiiHi  of  tkia  point
fay  Eekbd,  UBUo,  Unaaey,  Btfdch,  and  olWa,
the  BOft  pn>bBble  cendaiioB  aaenu  to  be  that  the
eoiB  wai  of  goU  and  not  of  tSutr  (althongfa  coiiu
of  eqnal  Tafaie  were  at  tome  time  or  other  nmck
in  lilTer  alio),  and  that  the  itatementi  which  give
ila  weight  aa  fifty  Sicilian  litiaa,  or  tai  Attic
drachmae,  are  to  be  nndenlood,  not  literally  of  ita
Mij^f.  Iwt  of  ita  vdm,  ai  ectimiled  by  thote
wagUt  of  tHrnr :  in  ihortjitwai  a  gold  coin,  equal
in  Talne  to  fifty  Htiaa  or  Ico  Attic  drachmae  of
nlnr:  that  ia,  a  half  atater.  (Eckhel,  Dud.  A'uM.
r«.  ToL  L  a  3&0  1  Houey,  OHAmdmU  WtlgkU,
a.  57.  Ac  ;  BOckh,  Mtbnt^/udf  UnUnm^Mgrn,
^30*,Ae.)  [P.3.]

DAMIUHOL [DutiuiML]
DAMNUM. Duuniun  lignifiea  geneially  any


inhii


fiifieili  (dai

wlud  Iw  baa  reaaoD  to  ftar  (daonram  iofeeCnm).
<S%,  39.  tiL  2. 1.3.)  DaammB  actoally  iooa  ii
gi  iiiiiaHj  called  damnani  liniply.  The  liability  to
laal  II good  a  loaa  ia  praeataie  damnnm.

Tbe  I  mil  I  of  damage  an  either  chance,  acm-
dent  ((sni),  or  the  fine  acta  or  ""'««'""*  of  rea-
■«aUe  hmnaa  bdngl.  (Dig.  9.  tit.  2.  >.  5.  §  2.)
If  the  ■<"""""■  >>  caoaed  by  the  jnM  exerctie  of  a
light,  it  ia  indirect.  In  any  othti  caae  it  ia  direct
or  iojaria  datmn  ;  and  when  it  ii  injuria  datum,
thoe  nay  be  neitberdolna  sa  culpa,  or  then  may


Tba  obtiptioatDBBka  a


lim  (at  ndinei  loaa  or  daii«e  (Dig;  39.  tit.  3.
a.  36  ;  47.  tiL  9.  a  3.  |  7);  nor  for  direct  diun^,
if  BcitbcT  dalna  dot  culpa  can  be  imputed  to  him,
Mifbobeaad.  (Dig.  9.  tiL  3.  Lfi.  S2,  30.  §  3  ;
Thibaat,  4iA«,  Aa.  9lh  ed.  g  163.)  Aa  to
^BMa  deoe  by  an  animal,  aee  PauriKiae.  [Q.U]
DAMNUM  INFECTUM,  ia  damage  (dam-
bub)  Mt  daw,  bat  apfrehfoded.  (Dig.  39.  tiL  2.
a.  2.)  Tbe  nactcr'i  edict  prorided  fur  aoch  caaea.
If  Ifat  bnldnig  flf  oiw  mn  ihtMtelMd  dam^  to


DAMNUM  INJURIA  DATUM. 383

another  in  conacqnence  of  ita  dilapidated  atalB,  the
owner  of  the  dilapidated  property  might  be  required
to  repair  it  or  to  give  aecuriiy  sgaiiut  an;  damago
that  might  be  cauaed  by  the  atate  of  hit  building.
The  aecuiity  (cantio)  waa  demanded  by  an  Di:tia  ui
Gutom,  bi  all  («iea  when  the  aecnnty  conld  be
reqnired.  Erery  peraon  who  waa  in  poaieaaion  of  the
property  that  waa  threatened,  wheUier  aa  owner  or
in  any  fltha  riffht  (bntnot  a  bonae  Cdei  poaaeaaor\
could  claim  thit  ootia.  (Dig.  39.  tH.  2.  a  £.  g  3  ;
13  S  5,  le  1  13.  g  4,  9.)  The  owner  of  the  rainoui
[ffopertj  or  any  perion  who  had  a  right  therein,  and
a  bonae  fidei  poaaesaor,  might  be  required  to  give  thia
cantio,  which  might  be  giien  by  a  ahuple  promiae
or  by  siting  gnretiei.  The  complainant  hod  to
ivear  that  be  did  not  require  the  cautio  cahimniae
cauaa  (Dig.  39.  tiL  2.  a  7  i  inav«  .  NON  .  K.  a.
BI .  PiciRi .  IVKJPIHIT.  Tab.  Vel.  c  n.)

If  the  defendant  wrongfblly  refuaed  to  give  the
tecurity,  the  complainant  waa  empowered  to  enter
upon  the  property  which  threatened  the  damage,
and  apparently  for  the  pnrpoae  of  protecting  bim-
aelf  againat  it ;  if  thia  paodnced  no  remit,  the  de-
fendant was  ejected,  and  the  complainant  waa
allowed  to  lake  poaaGeiion  of  the  property,  and  the
dcDendant  loat  all  bit  righli  to  iL

If  a  minoDi  houte  (aedei  ruinotae)  tell  and
damaged  a  nei^bour  before  any  caotia  had  been
giyen,  all  the  nght  that  the  danaged  pertoa  had
waa  to  retain  the  maKniala  that  had  blleo  on  hi*
land  (Dig.  39.  tit.  2.  tt.  S,  7.  g§  2,  fi)  ;  but  it  teem*
that-  the  ownw  of  the  iniaoui  haute  could,  if  he
liked,  pack  Dp  the  material!  and  carry  them  off.
(Cic  Top.  4,  /a  Verr.  i.  £6  j  IneL  i.  tiL5  ;  Thi-
bant,  SyMtB^  fte.  §  274,  ftc.  91h  ed.) IG.  L.]

DAMNUM  INJURIA  DATUM.  Thamott
usual  form  of  proceeding  in  eoaet  of  Damnum  in-
juria datum  waa  by  the  Lei  Aquilia  (Dig.  9.  tit  2),
which  repealed  all  pretiona  legiahitioD  on  the  aab-
jecL  Thia  Lex  Aqnilia  waa  a  plebiacitnm,  which
waa  prepoaed  by  Aqniliut,  a  tribanaa  plebia.  If  the
owner  of  the  damaged  thing  tned,  then  migbt  In
two  CTiaci.  The  damage  might  be  done  by  cor-
poreal cratact  of  the  wrongdoer  (corpore),  or  by
iomething  which  he  directed,  and  done  to  another
thing  (corpua),  to  at  to  impair  ita  Talue  or  deatrn
it ;  and  in  thia  cote  there  waa  tbe  directa  actio
Legit  Agoiliae.  Tbe  fint  chapter  pnvided  that
if  a  man  killed  (injuria,  that  u,  dole  aut  colpo,
Gaiut,itii.  21l)ailaTBorqna<!nip^(qnBepecudam
numero  lit)  which  belonged  to  another,  he  waa
bound  to  pay  the  highett  Talne  that  the  tlare  or
animal  had  within  the  year  preceding  tbe  onlaw-
fiil  BcL  If  the  wrongdoer  wilfully  denied  tbe  fact
of  the  damage,  he  waa  liable  to  make  eompentnlion
to  double  the  tbIhc  The  third  chapter  provided
for  the  caae  of  a  ilave  or  qnadmped  (quae  pecudnm,
&C.)  bebig  damaged,  or  any  thing  elae  being
damaged  or  detlroyed.  In  thit  caae  he  had  to
pay  the  highett  nine  that  the  thing  bad  within
the  thir^  daya  preceding  the  mdawfut  act.  If
the  damego  waa  done  to  a  thing  (coipna),  bat  not
by  a  cocpui,  then  waa  an  ac^  Dltlia  Legit  Aqui-
liae,  which  it  alto  an  actio  in  Aictum  or  on  the
cote.  Such  a  cate  would  occur  when,  for  inatance^
a  man  ahonld  purpoaely  drin  hit  neighbour^  beatt
mto  a  rirer  and  It  ihoDld  periah  there.  (Dig.  9.
tiL  2.  a.  7.  8  3,  S.)

If  At  thing  waa  not  damaged,  bat  tho  owner
waa  damaged,  then  migbt  be  an  actio  in  hctom  ;
aa,  for  inataiMe,  if  a  mas  out  of  «


~  O"


381  DAPHNEPHORIA.

siutllter  man'*  iUtb  who  wu  boimd  nnd  lo  gSTc
faim  ths  opportoDitj  of  eta^g.  A  man  who
■ma  nat  owner,  miglit  hare  an  ocUo  alilu  Icgi*
Aqailiae  or  in  tctiim,  if  he  had  on  interctl  in  tha
thing,  OA  a  &iictuarias,  DiiiariaA,  a  iKmac'fidei  po(-
■euor,  or  a  penon  who  had  receiTcd  a  thing  ai  a
pledge.

If  a  man's  iUts  wu  killed,  the  ownu  might
lue  for  djunagea  under  the  Lei  Aquilia,  and
protecuCe  lor  a  a^ta]  ofience.

(Cie.  Pro  Roiao  Commdo,  c  11  ;  Qaina,  iii.
210,  &C.  ;  IniL  1.  tiL  3  ;  Thibaut,  Sytlein,  &c^
9Ih  ed.  g  fifil,  ice  ;  Rein,  i)»  Aomuob  PrinK-
ncU.)  [O.  L.]

DAMOSIA  (Sofuwla),  the  e^ort  or  mite  of
the  Spartan  kinga  in  time  of  war.  Il  coniiited  of
hii  tent-coiniadM  (o^riiroi),  to  whom  the  po]e-
marcbi,  Pythiant,  and  three  of  the  eqnali  (liuiioi'l
aim  belonged  (Xen.  Rep.  Lao.  liiL  l)i  of  the
prophets,  anrgeoni,  flntfrplajeia,  Tolunteen  in  the
armj  (Xtm,  Rip.  Lac.  nh.  7),  01jni[rianeoDquanm
(Plat,  lye  S-2),  public  ■ervanti,  &c  The  two
■phon,  who  attended  the  king  on  mililuy  expedi-
tioDB,  alio  formed  part  of  the  damotia.  (HlUler,
Doriam,  iii.  12.  §  5.)

DANACE  (ioniini),  the  noma  of  a  foreign  rain,
according  to  Heiychiui  (i.  r.)  worth  a  little  more
than  an  aboloa.  Accordjng  to  lome  writen,  it  waa
B  Fenian  coin.  (Follui,  ix.  83,  and  Henutet.  ad
loc)  Thii  name  wai  alio  given  (o  the  oboloi,
which  wai  placed  in  the  mouth  of  the  dead  to  paj-
the  ferrfman  in  HHdn  (Heijch.  j.  e. ;  Lucisn,  De
Lutf,  c.  10,  Mort.  Dud.  i.  3,  li.  4,  nil  ).}  At
the  opening  of  a  gmre  at  Same  in  Cephallenia,  a
coin  wu  found  between  the  toi^lh  of  the  corpse.
(Slackelbcrg,  Die  Ordbir  dcr  HMtntn,  p.  42  ;
Becker,  CharUla,  tdI.  iL  p.  170.}

DANEISMA  (8iHMr/«). [Frnwus.]

DAPIINEPHO'RIA  (SoipMWwpi'a),  a  featiTal
celebrated  cTer;  ninth  jear  at  Thcbe*  in  honour
of  ApoUo,  nmuuaed  lemeaiui  or  OaUiiua.  lis
name  was  deri?ed  Iram  the  laurel  branchea  (Sd^nai)
which  were  carried  by  (hose  who  took  part  in  its
celebration.  A  foil  account  of  the  featiral  ia  giTen
by  Proclus  (Chmtomiik.  p.  1 1). At  one  time  all

the  command  of  an  oracle,  lud  eiege  to  Thebet,
which  ¥«■  at  the  same  time  attacked  b;  the  Fe-
lasgiana,  and  rani)^  the  neif;hbourinj{  conntry.
But  when  the  day  lame  on  which  both  parties  had
to  celebrate  a  fettiTol  of  Apollo,  a  truce  was  caa-
cluded,  and  on  the  day  of  the  festiTid  they  went
with  lanrol-bougha  to  the  temple  of  the  god.  Bat
PolemaUu,  the  general  of  the  Boeotians,  had  a
viaion  in  which  he  saw  a  young  man  who  pce-
iented  to  him  a  complete  auit  of  armour,  and  who
made  him  tow  to  institnte  a  festival,  to  be  cele-
hiated  every  ninth  year,  in  hononr  of  Apollo,  at
which  the  Thebans,  with  laurel-boughs  in  their
hands,  were  to  go  to  his  temple.  When,  on  the
third  day  after  Uiis  Tision,  bolli  pattica  Oi^ain  were
engaged  in  close  combat,  Foleioatai  gained  the
Tictory.  He  now  fulfilled  his  promise,  and  walked
himself  to  the  temple  of  Apollo  in  the  manner  pre-
•cribed  by  thi  being  he  had  seen  in  his  lision.
And  erer  since  that  lime,  continoei  Proclns,  this
custom  has  been  strictly  ohserred.  Respecting  the
mode  of  celebrslion,  he  adds:  —  At  the  d^ne-

Ciria  they  adom  a  piece  of  olira  wood  with  gar-
di  of  laurel  a  ' ' "  ....


DARICUS.

ones  an  snipended  ;  pnrple  Dsrloudi,  smaller  than
these  at  the  top,  are  attached  to  the  middle  [art
of  the  wood,  and  the  lowest  part  is  covered  with  a
cTDcus-colonred  envelope.  By  the  globe  on  the
tjjp  they  indicate  the  sun,  which  is  identical  with
Apollo  ;  the  globe  nnmediately  below  the  £nt,
represents  the  moon  ;  and  the  smaller  suspending
^bes  ore  symbols  of  the  start.  The  niunber  tt
garlands  being  365,  indicates  the  coune  of  the
year.  At  the  head  of  the  procession  walked  a
yoDth,  whose  lather  and  mother  most  be  living.
This  youth  wot,  according  to  Panssnias  {ix.  10.
%4),  chosenpiiest  of  Apollo  every  year,  ai>d  called
ila^ni^pot :  he  was  always  of  a  handionw  6gure
and  strong,  and  taken  frran  the  moal  distinguished
families  of  Thebes.  Immediately  befwe  this
youthful  prieat  iralked  his  nearest  kinsman,  who
brae  the  adorned  piece  of  olive-wood,  which  waj
called  KarrA.  The  priest  followed,  bearing  in  bis
hand  a  laurel-bianch,  with  dishevelled  and  floating
hur,  weating  a  golden  crown  on  his  hesd,  a
migpificent  robe  which  reached  down  to  his  feet
(w«4pq>),  and  a  kmd  of  shoes  called  l^pirAn,
from  the  general,  Ipbicratea,  who  hod  first  intro-
duced than.  Behind  the  priest  there  followed  a
choir  of  maidens  with  boughs  in  their  hands  aad
singing  hymns.  In  this  tnanner  the  proceasion
went  to  the  tonple  of  Apollo  Ismenins  or  Oalaiius.
It  would  seem  Emm  Pantanias  that  all  the  boys  of
the  toim  wore  laurel  garlondt  aa  this  occasion,
and  that  it  waa  cnttomary  for  the  tans  of  wealthy
parents  to  dedicate  to  the  god  braien  tripods,  a
considerable  nunbec  of  which  were  seen  in  the
temple  by  Paosaniaa  bimselt  Among  them  waa
one  which  was  said  to  have  been  dedioaled  by
Amphitryon,  at  the  time  when  Heracles  was
daphnephorns.  This  hist  circumstance  shows  that
the  daphnephoria,  whatever  changes  may  hare
been  anbsequcnlly  introduced,  was  a  very  andcnt

There  was  a  great  similarity  between  thia  fes-
tival and  a  solemn  rite  observed  by  the  Delpbiana,
who  Bent  evKy  ninth  year  a  sacred  boy  to  Tempe.
This  boy  went  on  the  sacred  read  (Pint  Qaosat
Or.  12),  and  returned  home  as  launsl-bearer  (ta^
yjl^pos)  amidst  the  joyfnl  songs  of  chornsca  of
maidens.  This  solemnity  was  observed  in  com-
memoiBtion  of  the  purification  of  Apollo  at  tba
Hilar  in  Tcmpe,  whither  he  had  fled  after  killti^
the  Python,  and  was  held  in  the  month  of  Thar-
gelion  (probably  on  the  seventh  day).  Itisavpry
probable  conjecture  of  Mliller  {Dor.  ii.  B.  S  4)  tliat
the  Boeotian  daphnephoria  took  place  in  tho  same
month  and  on  the  same  day  on  which  the  Delphian
boy  broke  the  pnri^'ing  laurel-boughs  In  Tempe.

The  Athenians  seem  likewise  to  have  cclebcated
a  festival  of  the  tame  nature,  bnt  the  only  mentiaB
we  have  of  it  is  in  Pmclus  (.^  PlutiMm,  p.  987),
who  says  that  the  Athenians  honoured  the  seventh
day  as  sacred  to  Apollo,  that  (hey  carried  laurel-
boughs  and  adorned  the  basket  {lArnr,  sec  Cani.
FSoaoH)  with  garlands,  and  sang  hymns  to  the
god.  Respectmg  the  astronomical  character  of
the  daphnephoria  see  Mliller,  Oniom.  p.  215,
2d  ediL ;  and  Cnuier,  SgmiiU.  md  MgOoL  ii.
p.  160.  [US.]

DARI'CUS  {hiftudt),  or,  to  give  the  name  ia
faU,  rrariif  teftaiii,  (is  dUar  q/*  Oamns  (Thoe.
viii.  23),  waa  a  gold  coin  of  Petiia,  stamped  csi  one
side  vnth  the  flgure  of  an  archer  crowned  and
kneeling  npoo  oae  knee,  and  on  the  other  wHh  k


DARICUS-
HTt  of  qodimta  mcnta  oc  deep  deft.  Ws  know
fron  Harodotiu  (ir.  166)  thit  Dueiiu,  the  )aii  of
TTj  iTiiiw,  nfanned  the  Puiias  cnmnry,  and
>taMi|wd  giUd  of  llie  pnrect  itandBrd  ;  ud  it  is
fmoaUj  bdiared  that  ths  darimi  wu  u  called
frooi  him.  Hupocnlirai,  hoWBrei,  taji  (•,  v.)
tbal  the  suat  wu  older  than  thii  Dueiiu,  and
lakca  fnra  w  esrliei  king.  OeKniua  (Ileir.
/jiinon)  nifOM*  the  nune  to  it  deriTed  from  an
AflOHit  Poun  woni  ligni^ing  kiiigt  <)f  tujd
phrr.  a  llle  bo*  of  ths  king,  in  aliniion  to  ths
figuR  ■ttmpcd  upon  it,  Ths  beat  uthon,  hov-
•<cr,  lUnk  that  uun  ii  no  niifirieat  ground  for
■qjpouif  eithfs  the  name  or  the  oota  to  be  alder
thin  Duciu,  the  Km  of  Hfttaapo.  (B<>ckb,
MttnL  Vt^trtmA.  p.  129;  Orote,  HiMory  of
Gnta,  ToL  ir.  p.  320.)

Tbii  coin  had  a  very  eztenuTe  drcnlation,  not
vilj  ia  the  Pavan  lanpiie,  but  alaa  in  GreOK.
The  pay  giTOi  bj  Cjma  to  the  loldien  of  Clcsr-
diua  wan  a  daiicoa  a  moalh  (Xen.  Av^.  L  3.
S  21)  ;  aod  the  Bine  pa;  wa*  ofTeied  ta  ths  nme

{Ibid.  to.  6.  i\).  In  the  later  booki  of  ^T^
Twwmen^  the  daricui  i«  nippoeed  to  be  mentioned
asder  tke  naaiei  of  (daikoi  (llS'ntt}  ■od  darke-
Bm  <]toyTD.  (Sae  1  Chim.  nil.  7 1  Em,  tm.
27,  n.69VN«hem.ra.70,T2.)

All  ancient  aatbcaitiea  agree  in  Mating  that  the
^rieni  wai  the  pfccite  equivalent  of  the  Lydian
Bsd  Attic  ibJtr  ;  that  ii,  it  vu  equal  in  might  to
two  Attic  diaehmae.  (Hupoa. ;  Lex.  Seg.  ;.
Said. ;  SeboL  ai  AruUfk.  Evi.  &W.)  Thit,
acrccding  to  the  ordinal;  Tutio  of  gold  to  nlTer,
10:  l.wmld  make  ita  nivt  equal  to  tventy  ailrer
dnchmaa  ;  which  agree*  with  the  itatement  of
Xcnophoo  (Aiuli.  i.  7.  i  13  ;  comp.  Aman.  Aaab.

iT.ilS.

Fi*e  daria  made  a  mina  of  uItsi,  and  300
darita  a  talent.  Xenophon  alto  mention)  half
dariea  i^i^utafttMnut,  AwA.  L  3.  S  31.)

The  nine  of  the  dariou  in  our  mone;,  eompuled
baa  the  drachma,  ii  1 6t.  3d.;  bat  if  reckoned  by
eoatpariviii  with  onr  gold  money,  it  ii  wotlh  mtich
■Hfc  The  darici  in  the  Briliih  Hmeom  wesh
128*4  giuna  and  ISfi'G  graiua,  reapeetirely.
Hoaae;  {Aittiaa  WagUi,  dee.  tIL  B)  caleiJat«>
the  daricni  ai  contuning  on  an  aierage  about  123*7
graina  of  pun  gold,  and  therefore  equal  in  Tslno
u  i^  of  a  nreieign,  or  about  \L  U  IM.  176

Vaj  few  daiic*  har*  come  down  to  ni ;  their
ataiulj  maj  be  acconntad  for  bj  the  feet,  that
afker  the  tanqiieat  of  Poaia,  they  wen  melled
down  and  fecoioed  Dnder  the  iffe  of  Alexander,

There  wen  alao  lilTB  dariea,  bearing  the  lams
derke  ai  the  gjLi,  namely,  the  figure  of  an
miAiB.  (PlM.  dm.  lOi  Aelian.  V.  H.  L  22.)
Theii  weight!  ntry  bam  Vlt  to  230  giaini ;
ibae  of  the  htla  weight  mint  have  been  (tmck,
aa  waa  not  tctj  n


In  aOniiHi  to  the  derice  of  an  archer,  the
darici  were  often  called  t^otu,  and  it  ia  related  of
ft  Hf  ail  ana,  that,  when  resiled  to  Qreece,  he  taid

by  ff  na  if  J0,l>00bownKn,  leJeirii^  to  the  aun


DECASMU3.  Ses

which  waa  entruited  to  Tiraoeratei  ths  lUndian  to
liibe  the  demagoguei  of  Tbebea  and  Athena  to
make  hii  pceaence  neceiaaiyat  home.  (Plut.  Aga.
Ii,  Arba.  20,  Loam.  Apophih.  p.  IBl.)  Ary-
andea,  who  waa  appointed  governor  of  E^ypt  tnr
Cambyies,  ii  luppaied  to  have  been  the  lirat  who
(truck  theae  ailier  ccina,  in  imitation  of  the  gold
ifDsreina  Uyataipia. (Herod.iT.  1G6.)


DE'BITOR. [OBLlOiTIONKS,]

DECASU'CHI  {itKotBix'"),  tbe  memben  of
a  council  of  Ten,  who  aooxeded  the  Thirty  in  the
aupreme  power  at  Athena,  B.C.  403.  (Harpocrat.
I.  B.)  They  were  choaen  from  the  ten  tribee,  one
fi™  ew^  (Sen.  BdL  '^  i.  %%  23,  74)  ;  bnt,
though  op{iOKd  to  the  Thirty,  they  lent  ambai-
■adoia  to  Spaita  to  ask  for  BHutanio  agunat
Thraiyhulva  and  the  eiileL  The;  rcnmined
maiten  of  Athens  till  ths  patty  of  Thruybulu
obtained  poiteation  of  the  city  and  the  democracy
w«i  renored.  (Lja.  ft  Entottii.  p.  i20  ■,  Wacha-
mith.  Hdlm.  Altertkumik.  vol  L  p.  646,  2d  ed.)

DECAOtCHIA  or  DECADA'RCUIA  (tiKop-
>:la,  tKoiapxio),  was  a  auprems  council  eata.
bliahed  in  many  of  the  Orecian  eitiea  by  the
lacedaemonianj,  who  intruated  to  it  the  whole
goremment  of  the  atate  under  the  direction  of  a
It  alwaya conaiated  of  the


snben  of  the  i


d  party, (Har.


.  Schneider,  ad  Arii
147.)  Thia  form  of  goTemment  appears  to  hale
been  £nt  eatablithed  by  Lyaander  at  Epbegus.
(Pint  Lyi.  S  ;  Wacbamuth,  /WW  AllathmiL
ToLLp.£17,  2ded.)

DECASMUS  (SMnrfuft),  bnlierT.  There
were  two  actions  for  bribery  at  Athens :  one,
called  Siaoo-fiou  ypapi,  lay  against  the  nenoa
who  gaie  the  bribe  :  and  the  other,  ailed  Srifwr
or  iupotatiai  ypa^,  against  the  peraon  who  ra-
ceiied  it  (Pollui,  viiL  42.)  These  actiona  np-
plied  to  the  bribery  of  citixena  in  the  public  at-
aembliea  of  ths  people  (mirtfiniff  v  r>ir  liacXiiiriar,
Aesch.li.  Tfauroi.  p.  12),  of  the  Hcliaea  or  any  of
the  cootts  of  justice,  of  the  Seuh^  and  of  the  pnblic
adTOcstee  (<ninr/6poi,  Dem,  e.  Slq)k.  il  p.  1 1 37,
]).  Demottbene*  (De  FaUa  Leg.  p.  343),  in-
deed, aaya  that  oibIois  were  forbidden  by  the  law,
not  merely  to  abstain  from  receiving  gifts  for  tho
injury  of  the  state,  but  ercn  to  recsiTe  any  pretent


ses


DECEMVIRL


Acfurding  to  Ariitotls  {afmd  HarpocraL  >.  n.
tt*i(iiit),  Anjtui  wu  the  fint  pcraon  at  Atheni
trho  bribed  tbs  Judgei ;  and  we  leom  fnim
Plutarch  {CorioL  c  14)  that  he  did  »o,.  wtcn  he
wa<  charged  of  having  been  guilty  Df  treachery  at
Pyloi,  at  llie  end  of  the  Peloponnetian  war.  Other
writen  uj  that  Melitoi  wu  the  fint  penon  who
bribed  the  judgci.  (Petit.  Lig.  AiL  f.  127,  and
DDkerV  nat&)

Actioai  for  bribery  were  nnder  the  jiiri»diclioD
of  the  thetmothetae.  (Dem.  t  Strjii.  /.  e.)  The
punishment  on  conviction  of  the  defendant  wat
death,  or  payment  of  ten  timea  the  ntlue  of  the
gift  received,  to  which  the  court  might  add  an  ad-
ditional pDniBhment  (irpai7Ti^i)|u).  Thui  Demoo-
thenea  wu  tentecced  to  a  fine  of  £0  lalenle  h^  an
action  for  bribery,  and  alto  thrown  into  pnion.
(Biickh,  PiM.  Ea*.  of  Atitm,  p.  3U,  3d  ed. ;
Meier,  AO.  Procat,  p.  362.)

DECASTY'LOS. ITbmpldji.]

DECATB  {iinirti). [DicuMAa.]

DECE'MPEDA,  a  pole  ten  feet  long,  lued  by
the  agrimenKirei  in  meamring  land.  (Cic  Pro  Mil.
27;  HorC^miLii.  IE.  U  ;  Cic  Piilipp. lir.  i.)
That  we  find  that  the  wimcnioree  were  Hnnetimei
called dKwfl^wJiiterw  {Cic  PkU^.  xHL  i8).  The
decempeda  woe  ID  bet  the  atondard  lind-tneanire.
r Acres;  AoRii(aNBoR«s.J

DECEM  PRIMI. [SiNATUg.]

DECE'MVIRI,  the  Ten  Hen,  the  name  of
tbHoub  magiatAlcs  and  fanctLonanea  at  Rome.

1.  Dkcihtihi  LioiBca  Schibindib,  were  tea

Cnona,  who  were  appoiLted  to  draw  np  a  code  of
vi,  and  to  whom  the  whole  govenuoent  of  the
Mate  wu  entnuted.  Aa  eu4y  as  b.  c  462,  a
law  wai  proposed  by  C.  TerenttHua  Am,  tbat
commiiaionen  thould  be  ^>pointed  for  drawing  np
a  body  of  lawi ;  but  this  wa»  violently  oppoeed  by
the  patriciona  (Liv.  iiL  9) :  and  it  waa  not  till
after  a  itmggle  of  nine  yean  that  the  patriciani
conHnled  to  send  three  pcnoni  to  Greece,  to  col-
lect >ueh  information  retpecting  the  lawi  and  con-
atitutiona  of  the  Greek  itatei  si  might  be  uteful
to  the  Romana.  (Liv.iiL  31.)  They  were  abaent  a
year  ;  and  on  thdr  return,  after  conaidemble  dia-
pute  between  the  patriciant  and  plebeiani,  ten
commiaaionera  of  the  patrician  order  were  ap-
pointed with  the  ^tle  of  "  decemiiri  It^bui  ocri-
beudii,"  to  whom  the  reviuon  of  the  Uwa  waa
cominiUed.  All  the  other  magiitratea  were  ob-
liged lo  abdicate,  and  rio  riception  waa  taade  even
in  favour  of  the  Oibunea  ;  for  there  ia  no  reaaon  to
■uppose,  aa  Niebohr  haa  done,  that  the  tribnnc-
ahip  wai  not  given  up  till  the  ucond  decemvirate
(Cic.  <fa  A^.  iL  36  i  Ut.  iii.  32  ;  Dionya  i.  66).
They  were  thna  entrutcd  with  auprcme  power  in

The  deceniiri  entered  upon  their  office  at  the
beginning  of  a.c.  451.  They  eonaiited  of  App.
Clandiua  and  T.  Oenuciua  Angurinua,  the  new
conauli,  of  tbc  pcaefectui  uibi,  and  of  the  two
quaeatorei  parricidii  ai  Niebohr  conjecture!,  and
of  fire  othera  ehoiea  by  the  ccntuties.  They  dio-
chorged  the  dutlea  of  their  office  with  diligence,
nnd  diapenaed  juatice  with  impartiality.  Each  ad-
Eniniitered  the  goremment  day  by  day  in  luccea-
sioa  ai  doling  an  interregnum  ;  and  the  foocea  were
only  canned  before  the  one  who  preaided  for  the
day.  (Liv.  iii.  33.)  They  drew  np  a  body  of  lawa,
diitrihHled  into  ten  acctiona  ;  which,  after  being
appnied  of  by  the  aenate  aiid  the  cotnitia,  were


DECEMVIRI.
tngraven  on  lahlei  of  metal,  and  ai


p  in  the


On  the  expiration  of  their  jaa  of  office,  all
paniei  were  ao  welt  aatiilied  viih  the  manner  in
which  they  bod  diacharged  their  dutia,  that  it  waa
reaolved  to  continue  the  aame  form  of  government
for  another  year ;  man  cipecially  aa  game  of  the
decemvin  aiud  that  their  work  waa  not  finiihed.
Ten  new  decemvira  were  accordingly  elected,  of
whom  Appiua  Clondiui  alone  bekmged  to  the  fiuraer
body  (Liv.  iii.  3a  ;  Dionya.  t  i3)  j  and  of  hia

nine  new  coUeagnea.Niebuhrt'-"'---'--  '

piebeiana. ""
Iswo, whic


Thei.


!  ^iproved  of  by  the  eoitariefl,
two  additional  tsblea.  They
acted,  iTowever,  in  a  moot  tyraniiical  mannci.  Each
waa  attended  by  twelve  lictora,  who  tarried  not
the  rodi  only,  but  the  aie,  the  emblem  of  aovt-
reignty.  They  nude  mmmon  canae  with  the  patri-
cian party,  and  committed  all  kinda  of  outnges
upon  the  peraona  and  proper^  of  the  piebeiana  and
their  fiimiliea.  When  their  year  of  office  expired
they  refnted  la  raeiKn  or  to  appoint  aacceioara.
Niebuhr,  however,  conaidcra  it  certain  that  they
were  appointed  for  a  longer  period  than  a  year  ;
aince  otherwiae  they  wonld  not  have  been  required
to  leaign  their  office,  but  intemga  wonld  at  the
expiration  of  the  year  have  stepped  into  their  fdoce.

decemvira  were  at  the  time  in  poaKuion  of  the
whole  power  of  the  atate,  and  would  have  pn-
vented  any  attempt  of  the  kind.  At  length,  the
unjual  dedlion  of  App.  Claudiua,  in  the  cooe  of
Virginia,  which  led  her  bther  lo  kill  her  with  hia
own  banda  to  lave  her  from  proelilution,  occaaioned
on  inaurrection  of  the  people.  The  decemvin
were  in  conaeqnence  obliged  to  reaign  their  office,
B.  c  449  ;  after  which  the  nauol  magiatraaCB  were
re-citabliahed.  (Niebuhr,  HuL  if  Romt,  voL  ii
pp.  309— 35e  j  Arnold,  Ui<*.  r/  Rimt,  voL  L  pp.
250—313  ;  Becker,  ASnwcL  AUa&tin.  ToL  iL
pBrtii.pp.I2B— 136,)

The  ten  tablet  of  the  fiirmer,  and  the  two  lablM
of  the  latter  decemvira,  together  form  the  lawa  of
the  Twelve  Tableo,  of  which  an  account  ii  jriven
in  a  leparatc  or^de. [Lax  DtJoniciH  Tab.]

2.  DiCEHviBi  LiT^Boa  or  Stlitibus  Judican-
Dia,  were  nwgiaCratct  forming  a  court  of  juitice,
which  took  cf^nizonce  of  dvil  caaei.  From  Pom-
poolui  (da  Orig,  Jw.  Dig.  I  tit.2.  a.  2.  S  29)  it
would  appear  that  they  wer«  not  inttitutcd  till  the
year  B.  c  292,  the  time  when  the  triomviri  capi-
talce  were  fint  appointed.  Livy  (iii.  55)  however
mcnlioui  decemvin  aa  a  plebeian  mogiitiacy  very
loon  after  the  legiilation  of  the  Twdre  Tahlei ;
and  while  Niebuhr  (ffijt  ^  Home,  vol  iL  p.  324,
dLc)  refCra  theie  decemvin  to  the  decemviral
mngiatralei,  who  had  ahortly  beliire  been  aboliihed,
and  thua  nbidci  by  the  aceoont  of  Pompmiiu,
OSttling  (GmA.  der  Ron.  Slaaliii.  p,  241,  &c)
helievcB  that  the  decemvin  of  Livy  are  the  de-
cemviri litiboa  judicandii,  and  refen  their  inati-
tntion,  together  with  that  of  the  centumviri,  to
Serviua  Tnlliua.  [CiHTimviRL]  Butthe  hiatory
aa  well  aa  the  peculiar  juriidictton  of  thia  comt
during  the  time  of  the  republic  are  involved  in
inextricable  oUcurity.  In  the  time  of  Cican>  it
■till  eiiiled,  and  the  proceedinga  in  it  took  ^oce
in  the  anneal  lorm  of  the  saenmentam.  (Cic  pm
GwriH.  33,  pro  Dom.  29.)  Angaatoa  tranabned
to  theoa  decanvin  the  pnudeno;  in  tha  courta  id


DECIMATia
(Saet.  Ats.  I


wUch  i


3.  Dbcbmvuu  Sacub  Facidki
oiled  tittfij  DacxKVUU  SacbokdII,  wen  Ifaa
iBbtTi  of  Bt  eodariutical  edlegimn,  lad  w«n
*k«t«d  frc  Ufa.  Ilcil  diief  dalf  wu  to  Uke  an
of  tbc  Sibjibw  bo<^  ud  to  itupect  thsm  on  «11

{Lji!'riL  27,  xii.  62,  xxiL  12.)  Vugil  Urn.
TL  73)  allDdc*  to  thsm  in  Ui  addiMi  lo  the  Sibyl
—  **  Lccto*  ntntbo  Tinii''

Uada  Ike  kii^  tha  CUB  of  Iha  Sibf  lline  boolu
ma  ewBwittoJ  to  tm  bbi  (Juimwn')  of  higb
rank  (Dimju  it.  63),  <ae  of  whom,  called  Atiliot
or  Tolliais  mi  psiiiliBd  b;  Tutjniaiaa,  for  being
BBbitUnl  to]iiitnut,b7bai4Uwedup  in  a  nek
ud  cMt  faila  the  Ha,  (DioDTL  L  c. ;  VaL  Mu.  I
1.  ■  13.)  On  Iha  aipaliios  of  the  king^  the  an
of  thm  bnki  m  enttmttd  to  the  noblcM  of  the
fstoidaa^  iriw  were  >xa)q>ted  from  oil  nulitwir  and
dril  dotiei.  Their  Dumber  wu  hunaMd  about
ibe  jear  367  ■.  c  lo  ten,  of  wbom  fiia  were  ehoeen
fma  tbo  Htridan  and  Gtb  fatm  the  plebeieni.
(Lit.  Ti  37,  42.)  Snbeegnentlj  their  number  wu
■tin  tliilba  iniiamil  to  fifteen  (juiadaoMinn)  ;
bat  al  what  tima  ii  nneettain.  Ai,  hoveTcr,  there
wen  decemTiri  in  KC  62,  when  the  capil  ~
bant  (DioajL  L  e.),  and  we  Ttad  of  qnindee
in  the  Dne  of  Citcra  (ad  Fam.  TiiL  i),  it  ■
pntaUa  that  their  Dombei  wai  iaoeuad  k
ta  fifteen  bj  SaUa,  eqwdaUj  ai  we  know  that  he
inercaacd  the  nRmben  of  HToal  of  the  other  eeele-
aiaatiol  conontioni.  Joliiu  Caenr  added
■en  IB  their  Dimber  (Dion  Cau.  xliL  Gl)  ;  bnt
thn  pRCedent  wm  not  foUowed,  aa  the  colle^um
affean  to  hare  eomiated  afterwardi  of  rail;  fifteen.

It  WM  alao  the  dot;  of  the  decemTiri  end
qniBqiieTiri  to  eelebnte  ibe  game*  of  Apolk>  (Lit,
X.  8),  aul  the  Hcalar  paat».  (Tac  Ann.  li,  11 :
Her.  Oanm.Saie.  70.)  Thof  wen,  in  &ct,  oon
^^edpiotaof  Apdlo,  whence  eai^  of  them  had
in  ha  hiian  a  taonn  tr^iod  dedicated  to  thai  deitj.
(Sen.  ad  Piisi  ,Jea.  iiL  333.)

4.  Dmbhtibi  AoBia  Dividdhpib,  were
tinea  appnnted  for  diatribnling  the  pafalic  land
aaa«  the  citiieiia. (LIt.  mL  4,  ilil  1.)

DBCENNA'LIA  or  DECETJNIA,  a  feMiTil
(dehcBUd with  game*  eTerf  Un  jean  h;  the


to  the  Cvt  that  Aogoitni  reftued  the  mpreme
power  whoi  oSend  to  Mm  for  hit  life,  and  would
oolj  UBiBLut  to  aoept  it  lor  ten  jean,  and  when
ibne  expired,  lt«  another  period  of  tm  jean,  and
■D  OB  to  the  ad  of  hi)  life.  The  memoij  of  thii
oisi^j,  aa  Gibbon  hai  b^ipilj  called  it,  wu  pre-
■erred  lo  the  laat  age*  of  the  empire  bj  the  featiral
■f  the  Paaaaiifiii.  which  waa  aolenuuied  bj  eub-
m  ererj  tmlh  jear  of  tbj '

oijeara.  (Di
a.  liii  16,  Ut.  12,  iTiil  24,  Iziri  1  ;  TiebelL
PelL  aUHh.  3,0attn.  7.)

DECIMATIO,  waa  Ike  idectiaD,  hj  lot,  at
FTOj  tentk  man  toe  pamalmeat,  when  anj  nombei
<f  — Idifwin  jhe  Roduu  amj  had  been  guiltj  of


rluapcmiabnwnt  doea  not  qipenr


DECUHAE.  SB7

the  re|nl)lie  t  but  ia  Enqnenllj  mentianed  in  the
mat,  and  under  the  empire.  It  a  taiS  to
been  rerired  bj  Ciaatni,  t,(ltt  being  diecon-
linued  Stic  a  long  time.  (Plut  Chm.  10.)  For
«  of  thia  pnniihnieul,  eee  Liv.  iL  S9  ;  Saet.
Atig.  24,  Oalia,  13  ;  Tadt.  HiH.  L  37  i  Dkm
Cata.  xli.  3£,  ilii.  27, 38.

Sometimea  ouIt  the  twentieth  man  wai  puniabed
>a>iuHi<w),orthehandreth  ((eaCennuttD,  OpitoL


Ilia

of  the  erauL
ition  of  the eenste. A  decretam  of  the

raltom,  in  the  waj  aboie  indiated :  it  wai  limited
to  the  apecial  ocouioa  and  ciicunutaocea,  end  thia
"  be  true  whether  the  deoetnm  waa  of  a
il  or  a  legi^tite  character.  But  Ihii  dii'
D  in  the  uie  of  the  two  worda,  at  applied  lo
of  the  loiale,  waa  P^hs»  Dot  alwayi  ob-
•erred.  CicerD(ad/Vin.  liiL  £6)  appoaeacoietum
decretnm  ;  between  whicb  there  ii,  in  thia  foa-
Bge,  apfsrently  the  tame  analogy  ai  between  a
coneultum  and  deereium  of  the  Knate.  A  de-
cretum,  aa  one  of  the  parte  or  Icindi  of  conatitntio,
judicial  deeiuon  in  a  am  before  the  eore-
when  it wai  carried Ui  the auditociom


oetiinet  amlied  to  a  d»-


Imperialea

Oaiui  (It.  140),  when  he  ii  ipeaking  of  interdieta,
laji  llut  thej  are  pnipeit  j  i^led  decreta,  "  cum
([iaetor  aul  proconiul)  fieri  aliquid  jubet,"  and
inlerdicta  vh^  he  fijibida.  A  judex  it  aid  "  con-
demnaie,"  not  **  deceraere,"  a  wold  which,  in
judidal  proceeding  ia  appropriate  lo  a  nMwiitralai
who  baa  juriidictiik  [U.  L.]

DE'CUUAE  (tc  jurto),  tba  tilbea  [nid  to
the  (tale  by  the  otcnpien  of  the  ager  publicna
[Aaui  PnHUcDS]:  hence  the  Pnbliiani  are  aba


{Publkahl]

A  nnular  tj^tam  likewiaa  exialed  in  Oreeee.

Puiiatnitaa,  for  iiutance,  impoeed  a  lax  of  a  tenth
on  the  laiWta  of  the  Atheniani,  which  the  Peiiiitra-
tidae  bwered  to  «  twentieth.  (Thuc  tl  64.)  The
lame  prinriple  wu  alao  applied  lo  leligioua  pur-
potei :  tbua  Xenophon  tnbjected  the  oeenpieri
JTofri  Ijcamu  mil  Ka/nrmn^ma)  of  the  land  he
pncohaaed  near  Scillua,  to  a  pajment  of  tilhei  in
■uppoct  of  a  temple  of  Arlemii,  the  godden  to
whom  the  parchu».moner  waa  dedicated  ;  the
Dellan  Apollo  olao  receiTed  lentht  from  the
Cyeladea.  (Xen..diHi.  t.3.  g  H  ;  Callim,  ffjnta.
DeL  372,  Spanheim.)  That  many  luch  chBi)[ea
originated  in  conqocit,  ot  eomething  limilar,  ma*
be  inferred  from  the  etatement  of  Uerodotut  (rii.
1 32),  that  at  the  lime  of  the  Penian  war  the  cod-
ledemlu  Oreeki  made  a  tow,  by  which  all  the
ilatee  who  had  luirendered  IhenuelToa  lo  the
enemy,  wen  lubjected  to  the  pajment  of  tithea
for  the  me  of  the  god  at  Delphi

The  tenth  (t^  tritiKaTtr)  of  confiMaled  pro-
peitj  wat  alao  eometimei  apjJied  to  limilat  ot>-
jecla.  (Xen. /fiUL  7.  311.)  The  tithei  of  the
public  landi  belonging  to  Atheni  were  &nned  out
BJ  at  Rome  to  contnctort,  called  Iwetbhi  :  the
term  Si*aTii*.iyiu  wai  applied  to  the  colleetoi* ;
bnt  the  calling!  were,  aa  we  might  iuppote,  often


SSB  DEJECTI  EFFUSIVE  ACTIO,
united  in  the  sune  penon.  The  title  liKtrrFirraf
u  applied  to  both.  A  ttnln)  or  tenth  of  a  dif-
ferent kind  wsa  the  iirbitnrj  eiu^oa  impoted  by
the  Atheniao  (b.  c  410)  on  the  caigoei  of  all
■hipe  wiling  into  or  oot  of  the  PonHu.  They  loet
it  by  the  huile  of  Aegnpotuni  (b.  c  405)  ;  hot  it
-wu  re-alahliihed  by  Thrujbnlae  about  B.C.  991.
Thia  tithe  wu  liia  let  ODt  to  bim.  (Dentath.
e.Lep.f.  475  ;  XsD.  H^  it.  8.  %  27,  31.)  The
tithe-houH  for  the  receipt  of  thia  doty  wu  called
nil  by  n(

,— kh.  r  ■■ -

&c,2nded.)
DECUMA'NI, [DwDuiLj

DECUNCIS,  uiothei  name  lor  the  dextuia.
[Ad,  p.  140,  b.]

DECU'RIA. [Eimcrru*.]

DECU'RIAE  JUDICUM. [Joot]!,]

DECURIcyNKS. [Colonu  ;  KimaciTua.]

DBCU'RRERE. [Funub.]

DECUSSI8. [Aa,p.UO,b.]

DEDICATIO. [lN*uauRAiio.]

DEDlTI'Cn,  ore  one  of  the  three  clum  of
libertiiiL  The  lei  Aelia  Sentia  prorided  that,  if  a
alBT«  WM  pol  in  bondi  by  hia  muter  u  a  puniah-
ment,  or  bnnded,  or  pat  to  the  tortuie  for  an
offence  and  conricted,or  deliieied  np  to  Sght  with
wild  heula,  or  lent  into  a  ludtii  (gladialornit),  or
put  in  eonGnement  (miiodia),  and  then  manmnitted
•itbei  by  hii  then  owner,  or  by  another  owner,  be
tnenly  aoqnired  the  atBtna  of  a  peregrinua  dediti-
eim,  and  bad  not  eT«  the  priTJlege*  of  a  Latinna.
The  peregrini  dedibeii  were  thne  who,  in  ferrner
timea,  had  taken  sp  anni  agauut  die  Roman
lieople,  and  bein^  eonquered,  had  nrrendered
themielTBa.  They  were,  in  bet,  a  people  who
were  abaolutely  mibdued,  and  jielied  nncon-
ditionally  to  the  csniineron,  and,  of  conne,  had  no
other  relation  to  Rome  than  that  of  inbjecU.  The
form  at  deditio  xxiut  in  Liiiy  (L  37).

The  deditidi  eiiitod  a>  a  clan  of  penoni  wbo
were  neither  ilaiea,  nor  elvea,  Qi^  Latini,  at  tcaal
la  late  u  the  time  of  LTlpias.  Their  dvil  condi-
tion, ai  it  italed  above,  wai  formed  by  analwy  to
the  coodilion  of  a  conquered  people,  who  did  not
indiridnally  loac  their  freedom,  bnta*  a  common  Ity
ktt all  political eziMence.  Inlheaueorthe  Volaci,
LiTy  inclinea  to  the  opinion  that  the  four  thounnd
who  were  aold,  were  iliiTeaiand  not  dedlli.  (Gaina,
L  13.  &C. ;  Ulpianu,  JVoj;  tit  1. 1. 11,)  (G.L.]

DEDI'TIO. [D«nrriciL]

DEDUCTO'RES. [Akeitds.]

DEFENSO'RES. [Provincu.]

DE'FRUTUM. [Vinum.]

DEICELISTAE  (SfutMim.'). [Comobdu.]

DEIOMA  (Stfy/ia),  a  urticubr  [Jace  in  the
Peineeui,  aa  welt  u  in  the  harluara  of  other
itatei,  wboe  mercbuita  erpoeed  aamplea  of  their
goodi  foriale.  (Harpocnt.  i.  e.  (  PoUni,  ii.  34  )
Arittoph.  Squil.  974  ;  Dem.  e,  Laer.  p.  932.  20  ;
Theophr.  C&ir.  23.)  The  lamplei  themaelTee  were
•In  called ('(^'Bata.  (Pint  Csmutt.  23  ;  BNckh,
PM.  Bam.o/AAau,p.  SB,  2nd.  ed.)

DEJECTUM  EFFUSUM. [DaocTi  Effu-

DEJECrt EFFUSIVE  ACTIO. If any

perton  threw  or  poured  ont  anything  frmn  a  place
or  upper  chamber  ('Caeaadmn)  npon  a  road  which
waa  frequented  by  pamengera,  or  on  a  place  where
people  ued  to  atand,  and  thereby  csnied  any
daiDigE,  the pnetot'i edict  gan the injured


DELATOR.

penon  an  nc^o  in  dnplum.  The  actloa  waa  agaiut
the  occupier.  If  leieral  penon*  inhabited  a
caenaculum,  and  any  injury  waa  done  to  another
by  a  thing  being  tbrown  or  poured  oat  of  it,  he
had  a  light  of  action  ■fn'i'ut  any  of  them,  If  the
doei  wu  uncHlain.  The  damagra  reooverable
were  to  double  the  amount  of  the  damage,  except
in  the  caH  of  a  Uher,  when  they  were  fifty  aunl,
if  he  waa  killed ;  and  any  penon  might  ane  for  the
money  within  a  yew,  bnt  the  right  of  action  waa
given  in  preference  to  a  peraon  **  cnju«  intcrptt,*'
or  to  affiaei  or  cognatL  If  a  man  waa  only  in-
jured in  hia  penon,  the  damagea  were  "  qoantnm
oh  cam  rem  aequum  judiei  ndflhitur  enm  cum  quo
agatur  condemnari,"  which  included  the  eipcnc«
of  a  medical  attendant,  loai  of  time,  and  lose  of  a
man*!  earning!  during  the  time  of  hia  cure,  or  Idb
of  hlure  eamingi  by  rcaaoo  of  hia  having  be«i
rendered  incapable  of  making  auch  earninga.  If
injury  waa  cwued  by  a  thing  being  thrown  from  a
ihip,  there  wu  an  actio  utilii ;  for  the  worda  of
the  edict  are,  "  Undb  in  eum  locum  quo  volgo  iter
fiat  vel  in  quo  conaiitatur,  dejectum,"  fte.

The  edict  applied  to  thinga  which  wCTe  ana-
pended  over  a  public  place  and  which  by  their  fall
nii^ht  injure  people.  It  allowed  any  penon  to
bnng  an  action  for  the  recoreiy  of  ten  auiei
agaiuit  any  perKn  who  diin^ganled  thi«  rule  of
the  edicL  If  a  thing  h  anapended,  fell  down  and
injured  any  peraon,  there  wu  an  actio  agatnat
bim  who  placid  it  there.

Aa  many  of  the  honaea  in  Rome  were  lofty,  and
inhabited  to  the  top  by  the  poor  (CJc.  Jgr,  iL
35  ;  Hor.  E^.  L  1.  91 ;  Jui.  Sal.  i.  17),  and
probably  u  there  were  very  imperfect  mnna  (or
airyiog  off  lubbiih  and  other  accnmulationa,  it
waa  neceaiBiy  to  provide  agumt  actidmli  which
might  happen  by  Buch  things  being  thrown  through
the  window.  According  to  Labeo's  opinion,  the
edict  only  applied  to  the  daytime,  and  not  to  the
night,  which,  however,  wu  the  more  dangciwu
time  for  a  paaaer-by.  <Dig.  9.  tiL  3 ;  Dig.  44.
tit.  7.  a  £.  S  5  1  Intt.  4.  tit.  £  ;  Jot.  Sk.  iiL  268,
&e.;  Thihant,5*<Am,&cg£G6,  Sthed.)  [O.L.]

DEILIAS  GRAPHE'  (BeiXloi  ypaft),  the
name  of  a  init  inititnted  againet  aoldien  who
had  been  guilty  of  cowardice.  {Aeach.  e.  Cle*rpL
p.  566  i  Lyi.  a  Alab.  pp.  520,  535.)  The  pre-
■ideney  of  the  court  belonged  ta  the  atralegi,  and
the  contt  wu  compoied  of  loldien  who  bad  aerved
in  the  campuigu.  (Lya.  e.  Aldb.  p.  521.)  The
puniihtnent  on  conviction  appears  to  have  been
arifito. Compare  Abtratius  GiurHB.

DEIPNON  {a.arw). [Co«N*.]

DELA'TOtt,  an  informer.  The  delatom,
under  the  emperon,  wen  a  claii  of  meo  who
guned  their  livelihood  by  informing  againat  their
fbllow-citiiena  (Snet  Tih.  61,  Dom.  13  ;  Tacit.
Awi.  iv.  30,  vL  47.)  They  conitantly  brought
forward  blae  cliargea  to  gratify  the  avarice  or
jeolouey  of  the  different  emperora,  and  were  con-
•equently  paid  according  to  the  impotaace  of  the
rbich  they  b
law  apecified
to  bo  given  to  infbrmera.  Thus,  when  a  murder
had  been  committed  in  a  bmily,  and  any  of  the
ahvM  belonging  to  it  bad  run  away  before  the
qoaeatio^  whoever  apprehended  auch  alavei  re-
ceived, for  each  alave  whom  he  apprehended,  a
reward  of  five  aurei  from  the  property  of  the  de-
ceaacd,  or  elie  fnm  the  ilate,  if  the  aom  coold


DELIA.
not  be  nitid  Aon  the  pnpertj  of  the  decnsrd.
(1%  29.  tit.  S.  1.  26.)  Id  tbe  wnatui  cauaiilluni
quoted  liT  Krantiuiu  {Dt  AipaeiiiHl.),  ihe  mfonner
lecrind  half  of  tha  peullr  in  which  the  penon
wai  finnl  wbo  tmugrtaHd  the  decnw  of  the  Hnate.
There  iRsu  abo  to  haie  beea  a  fixed  nun  giTen
to  iafcnMn  bf  the  lex  Pb]»,  nnce  we  ue  told
tbM  Nera  Rdwad  it  to  >  fbnnh.  (Snet.  Nv.  1 0.)
Tbe  iramber  of  mftonen,  hawenr,  mcnued  to
lapidljr  mder  tbe  ttiij  emperon,  end  oocanoned
■0  BDcfa  mBchief  in  •odetf,  that  mmj  of  them
wen  frequently  baniafaed,  and  pimiihed  in  other
WSJ*,  by  nrioni  empenn.  (Snet.  m  8,  Dam.
9  i  MuL  L  «  ;  Plin.  PmHg.  U  ;  BtiMonini,  Ant

DELECTUS. [EiBscrrni.]

DE'LIA  (fttJua),  the  auoe  of  fntinU  end
■ma  cd^nted  u  the  great  pan^rii  in  tbe
alBDd  ef  Deloe,  the  cailre  of  an  amphk^onf,  to
wUch  (be  Cjelade*  and  ths  Deighbouiing  lonieni
n  tbe  aaMi  bdai«ed.  (Ham.  H/mm.  »  ApolL
147|  Ac)  Tbii  amjdiktTODj  leelDi  oiigioBlly  to
baic  been  iiulitBted  rimii!;  for  the  pnipoH  of  le-
ligiodi  voihip  in  the  (oinmoa  nnctneij  of  Apollo,
Ike  a^  Trrp^  of  the  loniwu,  who  wa«  beboTcd
to  ban  been  bora  et  DchK.  The  Delia,  a>  ap-
pon  bvta  tbe  Hymn  on  Apollo  (compels  Thncjd.
iii.  I<M ;  Polhu,  ii.  61),  bad  exUted  from  laj
tarif  time!,  end  were  Mlobrated  eierf  fifth  year
(Palhu.  Tiii.  104),  and  u  BOckb  Bsppoaea,  with
great  ptobabDitj,  on  the  aixth  and  lerenth  dnyi  of
Tlmgi  liim.  the  biithdayi  of  Apollo  and  Aitemia,
The  iteabcn  of  the  aDiphicUoiiy  aueiDbled  on
ihian  oceaiwaa  (Utifoar)  \a  Dclot,  in  long  gai-
■cota,  with  thidi  wira  and  children,  to  worihip
the  god  with  gjnmaitic  and  nnuiod  ooateMi,
ihiirMii.  and  dancea.  ThM  the  Atheniana  took
yart  ia  tbeae  aoleodutia  at  a  rery  eaily  peiiod,
IB  eTvlent  fimm  tbe  IMiaatae  (afterwardi  called
AwpeO  moitioDed  in  the  lawi  of  Solon  (Alhen.  yi.
p.  334):  the  aaoed  Tcaacl  (Ampli),  moreoier,
wbicfa  they  aent  to  Detoa  enry  jai,  waa  Bid  to
be  tbe  aame  which  Theaena  had  aent  after  hia  re-
IBn  bom  Crete.  (See  the  crannwntaloii  on  Plain,
Oito,  p.  43,  e.)  The  Deliana,  daring  the  cetebn-
tMQ  of  these  aoleninitka,  perfbimed  the  office  of
euk*  far  tboee  wbo  Ttiited  iheit  iaiand,  whence
tbej  wTte  taUed  'EVeS^v  (Athen.  W.  p.  178).

Id  tbe  conrae  of  time  (he  cetebiMion  of  thia
mdent  pao^yria  in  Ddoa  had  eaaaod,  and  it  waa
not  leriird  nntil  OL  88.  3,  when  the  Atbeniana,
aAa  baling  purified  tbe  ialand  in  tbe  winter  of
■hat  yiar,  natcared  the  ancient  nlenonitief,  and
added  baiae.rac(a  which  had  nerer  brfoie  taken
ptacc  at  tbe  Delia.  (Thucyd.  f.e.)  After  thia  re-
1-— •'— _  Athroa  being  at  the  bead  of  the  laaim
caBfEdency  took  tbe  nuxt  prominent  part  in  the
uLlaaliiai  of  tbe  Delia ;  and  thongh  the  ialamdera,
m  fiamiTi  with  Atheoi,  prorided  the  choruaea  and
Tictkaa,  tbe  leader  (ifX'^'a^O,  *ba  condncted
tbe  whOe  aolemiiity,  wa*  an  Athenian  (PIdL  Nie.
3  i  WolC  Mntrl  ad  Dtmaa.  Left.  p.  ic),  and
die  AtbBiiau  had  the  aepsintendence  of  the  olm-

belonging
rl  dlalmgiuih
n  celebrated  erery  year,  probably
B  the  6lh  efThacgdieD.  The  Atheuaaa  w  thM  oc-
MMi  MM  the  aaoad  imml  (Atupti),  which  the
■vft  of  Apallo  adorned  with  knrd  bnochee.


DEMABCHI.  389

w  aailed  to  the  uland,  Aoifal ;  and  befDrc  they
;  sail  a  aolenm  aacrifice  vaa  ofiered  in  the  Ddion,
Marathon,  in  order  to  obtain  a  han>y  voyage.
(Mliller,  Dor.  ii.  2.  g  14.) During  the  absence  of
the  Tcsael,  which  on  one  Dccaaion  lasted  30  dayi
(PIat.i'.iaaJbi(,p.6a;  Xen.  Afonorat.  ii.  S.  3  %
ihe  ci^  of  Athena  waa  potified,  and  no  aiminal
waa  allowed  to  be  execnted. The  leater  Delia
were  aaid  to  haTS  been  inititDted  by  Theaeu^
thoogh  in  aome  legenda  the;  an  mentioned  at  a
mnch  oulier  period,  and  Plntaich  (Tte.  23)  re.
latea  that  the  ancient  THsel  used  by  the  fixmdeT
el^  thongh  often  repaired,  was  pmerred  and
by  the  Athenians  dawn  to  the  time  of  Dema-
Phaleteno, (BHdih,  PuU.  Earn,  of  AA.  p.
214,  &c  Sd  ediL  1  Thirlwall,  HitL  i^Gnm,  t4
iiL  p.217.)  [L.S.]

DELICTUM.  [CkiMBH.]
DELPHI'NIA  (i>AfJ«a),  a  feitiTal  of  the
■me  eipiatnry  character  ai  the  ApoUonia,  which
waa  celebrated  in  Tariooa  towns  of  Greece  in
honour  of  Apollo,  Fnnumed  Dejdiiniua,  wbo  wii
considered  by  Ihe  loniana  aa  Ihfir  fttbi  ntrp^at.
The  name  of  the  god,  as  well  u  that  of  hia  fta-
liTol,  must  be  derixed  from  the  belief  of  the  an*
cients  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  month  of  Mnnj-
chion  (probably  identical  with  the  Aeginetan
Delphinius)  ApoIlD  came  thmogh  the  defile  of
Pamaaans  to  Delphi,  and  began  the  battle  with
Delphyne.  As  be  thoa  aaaumcd  tbe  character  of  a
wnthful  god,  it  was  thoogbt  necessary  to  appeaaa
him,  and  the  Detphioia,  accordingly,  were  cele-
brated at  Athens,  as  weil  aa  at  otho  place*  where
hia  worafaip  had  been  adopted,  on  the  6th  of  Muny-


Innipla),  into  the  Delphiniun. (Pint  Ha.  16.)

The  Delpbinia  of  Aegina  are  mentioned  by  the
scboliatl  on  Pindar  {PfiL  viiL  88),  and  from  hi*
remark  on  another  paatage  {Ol!fmp.  viL  151),  it  ia
dear  that  they  were  celebrated  with  conteata.
(Compare  Diog.  La&t  Ftt  THoi.  e.7;  MDlfcr,
Dor.  iL  8,  g  4.)  Concerning  the  celebration  of  tbe
Delphinia  in  other  places  nothing  is  known  ;  bnt
we  hate  rcaaon  to  sunuee  that  the  ritea  obeerred
at  Athena  and  in  A^na  were  eomnion  to  all
festivals  of  tbe  same  name.  See  MUUer,  AtgiuA
p.  1G3.  [L.  i]

DELPHIS  (SaXfh),  aj>  inatimneat  of  naTa)
war&re.  It  consisted  of  a  large  mass  of  iroo  or
nded  on  a  bfam,  which  projected  from
if  the  ahip  like  ■  yaid-arm.  It  WBt  nsed
lo  ami,  or  make  a  hole  in,  an  enemy^  Temel,  by
beiji|{  dropped  upoa  it  when  alongaide.  (Aiistoph.
E>p^  7S9  i  Thnc  TiL  41  ;  ScboL  ad  Jbo. ;
Heiych.  I,  o.)  There  seenia  no  necessity  for  mp-
poaing  that  it  was  made  in  the  shape  of  a  dolphin.
Ban  of  iron  osed  for  ballast  an  at  the  fneaent  day
called  "  pin,"  thongh  they  beer  no  raaemhiance  to
that  animaL  Probably  the  ttx^int  woe  kuated
aloft  only  when  going  into  action.  We  may  alas
conjecture  that  they  were  fitted,  not  ao  mnch  lo
the  ivift  (raxfuu)  triremei,  aa  to  the  military
transpnts  (orpari^iSat,  ArMTiyttyoi)^  lor  the
sailing  of  ^e  fonner  would  be  mnch  impeded  by
so  large  a  weight  of  malaL  At  any  lale,  those
that  Thocydidea  spaaki  rf  were  not  on  tbe  Iri-
remea,  bnt  on  the  J^jtiiSii.

DELUBRUU. [Tbmfluh.]

D£HARCHI(>4fuv>X«)t  tile  chief  migiatratM
of  tbe  dami  (>v^)  >>■  AUicc.ul  Md4lohaTt


390  DEHIOPRATA.

Iiean  flnt  sppoislcd  bj  Cleiitbenei.  Their  dutlei
wtn  vaiioni  mi  important.  Thui,  they  ocniTeiici?
IIMtingl  of  the  demtu,  and  took  tlie  tdIh  npoi
•U  qoationi  uidei  coniidention  ;  th«j  had  tht
cutody  of  the  Krj^mpx"^^  ypotiturttioi'^  ot  hook
in  which  the  msmben  of  the  demui  were  snToUed
and  thcf  mode  and  kept  a  ngutar  of  the  landed
Brtat«a  (xififo)  in  their  diitiicti,  whether  belong-
inE  to  indiTiduaU  or  the  bod;  oonamte  ;  n  thai
whenever  an  iCrrfapJ,  or  eitrandinaiy  propeil/-
tax  wBi  impoaed,  the;  miut  hare  been  of  great
Berrica  in  aiaeaiing  and  collecting  the  qnota  of
tadi  estate.  Honeya  due  to  the  demui  for  rent,
&c  were  collected  b;  then  (Dem.  s.  £i<i.  p.  131S),
and  it  ma;  lafel;  be  allowed  that  the;  were  em-
ployed to  enforce  tBymenI  of  larioui  dehta  and
duea  claimed  b;  the  ttato.  For  thii  pnipoaa  the;
aeeni  to  have  had  the  power  of  diiltainmg,  to  which
aUniion  ii  made  h;  Ariilophanea  [NiJi.  37).  In
the  dutiei  which  bkie  been  enumerated,  they  lup-
planted  the  siHicniri  {ninpafei)  of  the  old  con-
ulittition  ;  their  function*,  howeTer,  were  not  eon-
fiiied  10  dutie*  of  thii  dau,  for  they  alto  acted  aa
fa\KB  msgiiUalei:  thiu,  in  conjunction  with  the
dicaiti  uf  the  towni  (tucaaral  xari,  Hiitovt),  they
aoiiitcd  in  preaerring  peace  and  order,  and  were
lei^uired  to  huiy,  or  cauie  to  be  boiied,  on;  dead
bod  lei  found  in  their  diitrict:  ioi  n^lect  of  thig
duty  the;  were  liable  to  a  fine  of  1 DOO  drachmae.
(Dem.  0.  jVow.  11)69.3^)  Lattl;,  the;  eeem  to
haTe  fumitbed  to  the  proper  anthoritiei  a  liat  of
the  membert  of  the  townthip  who  were  fit  to  Hrve
in  war  (*(rrciAi7«fr  hntfyrarr^  Demoath.  e.
Polya.  p.  1208  ;  Harpocr.  ).  e.  ;  Poll  viiL  118
K.  F.  Hermann,  CrucA.  jUaoteiJbrit.  §  111
BSckh,  PtAliB  Eoan.  of  JlJumt,  pp.  1S7,  Si2  .
Scbilnuinn,  De  Comtiit,  f.  376,  &e.).  Dmardd
waa  the  name  giren  by  Oraek  writoa  lo  the
Roman  tribune)  of  the  plebt,  [B.  W.]

DEMENS. [CuitAToa.]

DEMENSUM. [Smvub.]

DEME'NTIA. [Cuhatok.]

DBMETRIA  (trtforrfii'),  an  annua]  featiral
which  the  Atheniatu,  in  307  B.  c^  inttitnted  in  ho-
nour of  Dentetriui  Polioroetet,  who,  together  with
hii  lather  Antigonna,  were  conaeciated  under  the
title  of  BtTiourgoda.  It  waa  celebrated  every  year
in  the  month  of  Munychion,  the  name  of  which,  ai
well  ai  that  of  the  da;  on  which  the  featiTal  waa
held,  wai  changed  into  Demetrion  and  Demetriai.
A  prietl  minittend  at  their  allan,  and  oonducted
the  KJemn  proceaiiim,  and  the  lacrificea  and  gamea
with  which  the  featiTal  wai  ceiebrated.  (Diodor.
Siczz.t6;  Plot  Dtmitr.  10,46.)  To  hoDonr
the  new  god  Mill  more,  the  Athenian!  at  the  ume
time  chafed  the  name  of  the  fertival  of  the  Dio-
uyaia  into  that  of  Demetria,  aa  the  ;oun^  prince
waa  fimd  of  bearing  himaelf  compaied  to  Dmnyaoa.
The  demetria  mentioned  h;  Athenaeua  (ziL  p.
C36)  an  pfobabl;  the  I>ion;iia.  Rapecting  the
other  eitrannnt  flattcriea  which  the  Athenuint
heaped  npoD  Deaielriiii  and  Antigoimi,  ten  Athen.
n.p^363i  Henn.  PcUL  ^nl.  ^  Grwce,  §  1 75.  n.
6,7,and8j  and  Thirlwall, /fut  Q^  (rRen,  voL  rii.
p.  331.  [L.S.]

DEMINUTIO  CAPITIS. [CaFiTT.]

DEMlOFItA'TA  (Sii/uJirpara,  ic  wp^fiara
or  KT^/wTs),  waa  piopert;  contiacated  at  Athena
and  Kdd  by  public  anction. The  confiieation  of

laTeDBa  in  maiij  ef  the  Grecian  (tale* ;  and  Arit-


DEMOCBATIA.

tophann  {Vttp-  ^%  with  Sibid.)  menUona  tha
Sijfu^poTa  aa  a  leparate  branch  of  the  public  re-
lenue  at  Athena.  An  account  of  auch  propetl;
waa  pn»«ited  to  the  people  in  the  fint  aaKmbl;
of  erery  prytaneia  (Pollui,  yiii,  96)  ;  and  liila  of
it  were  poated  apon  tableta  of  atone  in  diffeimt
placea,  aa  waa  the  caae  at  Eleuaii,  with  the  cala-
lisue  of  the  artidea  which  accrued  to  the  temple
of  Demelai  and  Penephone,  from  petaona  who
had  committed  an;  offence  againat  theie  daiticit
(PdIIoz,  I.  97.)  Man;  nonnmenta  of  thia  kind
were  collected  by  Oreelc  antiqiiariana,  of  which  an
account  ia  giyen  by  BSckh  {PM.  Beat.  o/AOau,
pp.  197,  392,  3d  edit)  and  Meier  (£ia  Boat  Dam-
aotorvn,  p.  1 60,  &ix).

DEMIURGI  (twuoifr^  Theae  nu^iatiBtea,
whoae  title  ia  eipreoaiTe  of  dieir  doing  tlia  aerrice
of  the  people,  are  by  lome  grammariana  atated  to
hare  been  peculiar  Id  Dorian  atatei ;  but,  perhapa,
on  no  Bothority,  except  the  form  Saiuaufyoi.
MUlIer  (Ztorioni,  toL  ii.  p.  US)  obaeTFea,  on  the
cnnlrary,  that  **  the;  were  not  uncommon  in  tha
Pdoponneiai,  hut  the;  do  not  occbc  often  in  the
Dorian  atatea." The;  eiiated  among  the  Eleiaua


n  theyu


been  the  chief  executive  magialncy  {ol  huuovpyvi
(ol  fi  *»A^,  K.  r.  \^  That  T.  17),  We  alao  read
the  Achaean  league,  who  probably
ranked  next  to  the  itialegi.  [Achaicuk  Foaouh,
p.  3,  b.]  Officen  named  EpidaaiuTgi,  or  upper
denjjiugi,  were  lent  by  the  Corinthiana  to  manage
the  government  of  their  colon;  at  Potidaea.  (Thuc
■  B6.)  .  [R.W.]

DE-MIUS  {Hiuci). [ToaKaMTuat.]
DEMOCBATIA  ifyiaKfarU),  that  form of
natitotion  in  which  the  aovereign  political  power
in  the  handa  of  the  denra^  or  commonalty. In
the  artide  AniBTOcairu  the  reader  wUl  find
of  the  diatinction  ba-
the politically  privileged  claia  of  ooblea  and
'" " claaa  peraonally  free,  though
iitionally recogniied  political
(ommonalt;  which  waa  prtv
perl;  termed  the  demua  {t^t). The  naCntal
and  inentable  effect  of  the  pregnaa  of  aodet;
being  lo  diminiab,  and  finall;  do  awa;  with,  thoaa
diitinctiona  between  the  two  claaaea,  on  which  llis
ori^nal  diffennce  in  pomt  of  pdiiical  power  iraa
founded, ^ -■ *  ....


and  importance  with  ^e  originallj  privilt^cd  claai,
now  degenerated  into  an  oligarchy,  a  itn^le  wm
—  ■- in  which  the  demna,  unleaa  orer-


laitery. Tha  aoTcreign  power  of  the  donua


democracy. Thse  might, however, __

modificationa  of  the  victoiy  of  the  commooalt;.  If
the  Btru^le  between  the  claaaea  had  been  pro-
tracted and  fierce,  the  oligarcha  were  commonlr
expelled.  Thia  waa  frequently  the  oaa  in  tlie
■mailer  alatei.  If  the  victon  of  the  commonalty
waa  achieved  more  by  the  ftiree  of  moral  power
than  by  inteatine  warbie  and  force  cf  airaa,
through  the  gtadual  conceaaion*  of  "  the  few,"  the
reanlt  (aa  at  Atheai)  wai  aimpi;  the  entire  sb-
liteiation  of  the  original  dininclirau.  Thia  form  of
the  conititution  waa  atill,  in  the  m«t  literal  hdb*
of  the  term,  a  democnc;  ;  for  aa  wealth  and  birth

longer  famed  the  title  lo  political  po>«r,tli«ii)h


DEMOCRATIA.
1^  wcallh?  and  mble  gtiU  remained  dtiieni  of

intnitt  >nd  poipoHi  in  the  haadj  of  tbe  clau  for-
naif  mutitiituig  Hix  demiu,  by  Tirtne  at  their
being  the  nunc  mmieiaDi.  (Arictot  PaL  it,  i,
p.  133,  ed.  OettliDg.)  When  the  two  eUua
wen  tliiii  eqaalijcd,  the  tenn  deinui  itfelf  vu
frequently  need  to  denote  the  entire  body  of  ^eo


Bt,  coniittenlly  with  the  mBiii-
araenUl  jHincipte  of  the  supreme
0  haodi  of  the  demut,  vuionB
■  of  tha  eoniiitution  in  detml  might
toMt,  and  different  riewi  might  be  held  aa  to  what
ma  the  perfect  type  of  a  demociBiy,  and  what  vaa
an  imperiect,  or  a  diaeaaed  Eorm  of  iL  Ariitotie
ip6L  it.  3)  point!  out  that  a  democracy  cannot  be
dHiDed  fay  the  meni  coniidentioa  c^  muobcn.
Fur  if  the  wealthy  were  the  more  nutnerDUi  and
'  '  preme  power,  thia  urould  net  be  a
democracy  ia  mther,  when  every
a  member  of  the  iOTereigii  body
(tqyuH  ^r  itrrof  ffror  ol  iXtMtpoi  Kl^foi  &rir),
Thia  deiinitlan  be  eipreuea  in  a  more  accurate
farm  thai :  tim  SirfUKtmrla  /lir  Inr  ol  iktiSifoi
aW  t*9foi  irArlflvs  «Waf  K6pu/i  r^t  Apx^t  iffw.
It  voold  Mill  be  a  demoaacy  if  a  certatu  ■mount
at  pnperty  were  reqaieite  for  filliog  tha  public
itfoea,  [n>Tided  the  tunoDnt  irere  not  loige^
(/W.  iT.  4.  p.  132,  ed.  OStU.)  A  Polileia  itwlf
a  apedea  of  democracy  (PoZ.  iy.  S.  p.  117),
cncy,  in  the  full  lenaa  of  the  word,  beiog  a
of  wapiKtaait  of  iL  Bat  for  a  pofect  and
fan  democney  it  wag  neccuuy  that  no  free
tioua  ibootd  be  debured  on  acoount  of  hia  in-
ftnonty  in  imk  n  wealth  from  upiring  to  any
aAee^  «r  exeiciiing  any  politiral  fonetioD,  and  thut
(■(h  eitiitu  iboald  be  aUawed  to  bllow  that  mods
rf  life  which  he  ehoac.  (AriiL  P<J.  iv.  4,  tl  1.)
In  B  paange  of  Herodotua  (JiL  BO),  where  we  pro'
hably  IttTe  the  ideaa  of  the  writer  himKlf;  the
chanderiatiea  of  a  democracy  aie  inecified  to  he —
I.  cqoali^  of  1^  rigbti  (Iian^ii)  ;  3.  the  aji-
pomoiiHit  of  ma^utnlci  1^  lot ;  3.  the  acooont-
ahili^  of  all  mgulntea  and  officer! ;  4.  the  refer-'
oue  of  an  poUic  matlen  to  the  deciiion  of  the
— ■■■m.iiy  at  lane.  AriMotle  alw  [AU.  L  8.
I  4)  mn :  fo"  "  fcjuoapirria  filr  luAmU  /»  J

■i  bi  TifoiiiArmr.  In  another  pSHa^  (PoLn.  1),
afiet  DUDtioniiw  the  eawnttal  principle!  on  which
a  demoerBey  it  MLted,  he  goea  on  to  ny :  **  Tha
UlowiDg  point*  ace  characteriilic  of  a  democracy  ;
that  all  magiitiatea  ihonld  be  choaeo  out  of  Uie
whole  body  of  citiieu!  ;  that  all  ihould  rule  each,
■od  (ach  in  turn  rule  all ;  that  either  all  magiitn-
dcs  "  thoae  not  requiring  eipoience  and  profet-
(ioaal  knowledge,  ibould  ba  auigned  by  lot ;  that
thse  ibould  be  no  property  qtuluicatioii,  or  but  a
III)  ■null  mi,  fur  filling  nnjTiin|riitriirj,  that  the
^BC  man  ahould  not  fiU  the  aarae  office  twice,  or
ihantd  fill  office*  but  few  timea,  and  hat  few  of-
£cM,  «zoept  m  the  caac  of  military  commands ;  that
■H,  or  aa  many  aa  poaiible  of  the  magiitracies,
abnU  be  tt  brief  duration  ;  that  all  citiienB  thould
be  qualifed  to  lerre  ai  dicaiti  ;  that  the  taprema
power  in  eTeiylhing  ihould  reaide  in  the  public
itm  iiiM]i.  and  that  no  magiatrate  ihould  be  eu-
truted  with  irreapaoiible  power  eiecpt  in  very  Buuill
■Mtco. iOmp.  Plat.  Sfp.  vul  pp.  B&B,  S62,


of  citinnahip


DEMU3.
663,  leg.  i
(/■otiv.  3,

modiBcationa  wluch  a  democracy  may  annme.  Tt
i«  tomewhal  curioug  that  Deithu  in  practice  nor  in
theory  did  the  repreientatLve  ayitem  atliacC  any
attention  among  tna  Qreekg.

That  diaeaaed  form  of  a  democracy,  in  which
ay  to  Che  poorer  citl-
the  public  auembly,
and  from  other  caoaea,  the  predominant  pai^  in
the  atate  came  to  be  in  fact  the  loweat  clau  of  tha
citiieni  (a  nsta  of  thinoa  in  which  the  democracy
in  many  reipecli  leiembled  a  tyianny :  lee  Ariat.
PoL  It.  4)  waa  by  later  writeri  (Polyb.  ri.  4,57;
PluL  ife  Monank.  t  3)  termed  an  OdHoenuy
(ix'«*fw£o  — the  dominion  of  the  niob)i  but  the
term  li  not  found  in  Aiistotla.  (Wachimuth,
HcUmiKU  AUartkmiuk.  c.  7,  G  ;  K.  F.  Her-
mann, LeArimi  der  Grteeh.  SlaalMaltalliUaur,
SB £2,66— 73;  Thiilwall,Hi.tof*orCr««,ToLL
do.)  IC.P.M.]

DEMONSTRATIO. [Actio.]

DEMOPOIETOS  (fcjjiwoJirToi),  the  nama
foreigner  who  waa  admitted  to  the  rigbia
by  a  decree  of  tha  people,
uu  ncuiuuii  ui  lemcts  rendered  to  the  itatc  Such
citiiena  were,  howerer,  eiclnded  from  the  phi»-
triae,and  coxdd  not  hold  the  offices  of  either  arch«i
or  prieat  (Dem.  e.  Neaer.  p.  1376),  but  were  re-
gigtered  in  a  phyle  and  deme.  [Civitab,  Oriik,
p.  2S8,  b.]

DEMO'SII  (SttMrux),  public  gla<ei  at  Atheng,
who  wen  purcbaaed  by  the  atate.  Some  of  them
ULed  lubordinate  pUceg  in  the  aaaembly  and  courta
of  Juitice,  and  were  alio  employed  aa  herald^
checking  clerka,  dec.  They  were  ngaally  called
tiViJinai  aldfrn,  and,  at  we  leam  from  Ulpian
(ad  Don.  O^md.  iL  p.  16),  were  taught  at  the
eipenae  of  the  atate  to  qualiiy  theili  tot  Che  dia-
charge  of  guch  dntiei  ai  bare  been  mentioned.
{Hematerb.  ad  PoUmo.  it  10  j  Mauaaac.  ad  liar-
' '  Petitua,  Lig.  Aa.  p.  342.)

"  I  not  belong  to  any  one
...  o  have  poaaeaaod  certain
legal  righta  which  ^vate  ilaveg  bad  not.  (Meier,
Aa.Proatt,  pp.401,  £60;  AoKhin.  <;  Jimani.
pp.79,  B£.)

Another  daia  of  public  slaTea  formed  the  aty
guard ;  it  waa  their  duty  to  pnaent  order  in  the
pubhc  aaaembly,  and  to  remore  any  peraon  whom
the  PiTtaneig  might  order.  (Schneider,  Jd  X/m.
Mem.  liL  6.  3  1  i  Plato,  Pnb^.  p.  319,  and  Hein-
dorf*!  note ;  Ariatoph.  Aokarm.  Bi,  with  the  coni-
mentatora.)  They  are  generally  c^ed  bowmen
(Tot<(nu) ;  ot  from  Che  natJTe  country  of  the  ma-
WiCy,  Stytbiana  (S«Woi)j  and  alao  Speuginiang,
from  the  name  of  the  praaon  who  fint  eitabliahed
the  force.  (PoUm,  viiL  131,  132  j  PhoHua,  lv.
Tofttroi.)  Then  were  atao  among  them  many
Tbnciana  and  othsr  barbariani.  They  origizially
liTid  in  tenta  in  the  maiket-pkco,  and  afcerwirda
upon  the  Aniopagng.  Their  offlcoi  had  the  name
of  toiarchi  (r^apxo')'  Their  number  waj  at  fint
300,  purchaied  aoon  after  tha  battle  of  S^mi^
but  waa  aflerwardg  increaied  to  1200.  (Anchin.
ntpl  Tltfiaptat.  p.  33i  j  Andoc.  De  Pan.  p.  S3  j
B&lh,iVrf.  EcoL.  q^AAoH,  pp.207,  208,  2d

DEHU3.  The  word  Kjias  oriuinally  indiated
a  diatrict  oi  tract  of  laud,  and  ig  by  lom  derlTcd
from  3^  ig  if  it  gignified  au  "enchmn  mariced


993  DEMUS.

off  fnm  the  wute,"  jnit  u  oat  woid  tawn  oimei,
accordiig  to  Horns  Tooke,  fiwu  the  Saxa"  -"'■
"  tjnui,*'  to  e&cliMa.  (Amold,  ad  T^ue,
Appendix,  iiL)  It  leeidi,  howerer,  more  Dniple
to  comiecl  it  with  the  Ditrio  IS  for  70.  In  tliu
mesniDz  of  a  CDuntiy  dittiiet,  inhabitid  and  ondar
cultitttlion,  Sfiias  it  contmled  with  ir(J>--  •'•—
*e  baTS  irS/Av  Sijtiir  ri  itikir  rt  {Hi
'  iJtga,  £27);  bnl  tha  tniuition  from  a  loalitj  to
it*  occnpien  it  «aiy  and  natmal,  and  hence  '  '
earlier  Oreek  poeti  we  find  Sq/ioi  applied
oatlfing  connlty  popolation,  who  tilled  the  landi  of
the  chieftaini  or  inUbitsiU  of  the  cilj  ;  10  that
flq/ior  and  itoXItoi  cazne  to  be  oppoaed  to  each
other,  the  fenner  denotini  the  mbjixt  peanntrj,
the  tntter,  the  noblei  in  the  chief  towni.

The  Dmii  (of  Kf^O  in  Attics  were  n]bdiTiiioiii
of  the  (ribet,  corretponding  to  oar  loamAipM  or
famindt.  Their  inttttution  ii  ucribed  to  Thetena;
but  we  know  nothing  about  them  tiefbre  the  age
of  Cieiithenei,  who  broke  ap  the  four  tribea  of  the
old  conititutioo,  and  nibitituted  in  th«i  place  ten
local  tribea  (^W  Tnnitiii),  ouh  nnned  after  aoma
Attic  ben.  (Hend.  t.  6S,  69.)  Tfaeae  wm  aub-
dirided  each  into  ten  demi  or  conntt;  panahea,
poaaeaiing  each  it*  principal  town ;  and  in  aomc
one  of  theae  dcmi  wen  entnlled  all  tho  Athenian
dtizcna  reaident  in  Attica,  with  the  eiceptioo,
pcrhapa,  of  Ihoae  who  were  natirea  of  Alheoi  itaelF.
(Thirlwall,  Hitt.  if  Gntm,  toL  ii.  p.  7«.)  Thcaa
aabdjviaioni  coireiponded  in  aome  degree  to  the
rmiKfoflai  of  the  old  tribei,  and  were,  aanrding
to  HerodDtnj,  one  hundred  in  number;  bat  ai  the
Attic  dcmi  amomited  in  tha  tinie  of  Stnbo  (ii.  ji.
396,  c]  to  1 71,  dmibu  have  been  niud  about  thii
italement.  Nicbiihr  has  infemd  fhjm  it  that  the
tribea  of  Cleiitbeaea  did  not  originaltr  iDclude  the
whole  popuUtjon  of  Attica,  and  "  that  tome  of  the
additional  71  moat  hare  been  canloni,  which  had
previouily  been  left  in  a  alate  of  dependence ;  by
hi  the  chief  part,  however,  were  honata  (yin))
of  the  old  ariilQcmcr,"  which  were  inclnded  in  the
foDc  Ionian  tribea,  but,  according  to  Niebuhr,  were
not  incoTpoTHted  in  the  ten  tribea  of  the  "tnial
commonaltj,"  til!  after  the  time  of  Cieiithenei.
Thii  inference,  howerer,  eeemi  Terf  quMtionahle  ;
for  the  nnmber  of  the  demi  might  increase  from  a
Tarietj  of  caotn,  mch  aa  the  growth  of  the  popa-
htion,  the  creation  of  new  tribee,  and  the  diTiaion
of  the  larger  mlo  amaller  demi ;  to  laj  nothing
of  the  improbabililj  of  the  eo-exi»tence  of  two
different  orderi  of  tribea.  "  Another  bet,  more
difficnlt  to  account  for,  ia  the  tTanapoaition  bj
which  demei  of  the  nme  tribe  were  fmind  at  op-
pcnileextremitiea  of  the  country."  (ThiriwaU,/.!!.,
and  app,  i.  vol.  il)  The  namei  of  the  diiferent
demea  were  taken,  aome  from  tha  chief  towns  in
them,  aa  Manthon,  Bleuiia,  and  Achamae  ;  aome
from  the  names  of  honses  or  dana,  loch  aa  the
Doedaiidae,  Boutadac,  &c  The  largest  of  all
was  the  demns  of  Achamae,  which  ui  the  time  of
the  Poloponneaian  war,  was  10  extensive  as  to
anpply  a  force  of  do  leas  than  three  thonsand
henvy-anned  men. (Comp.  Thnc  ii.  191.)

In  explanation  of  their  conalitution  and  lelation
to  the  ilate  in  general,  we  ma^  obierrc,  that  thev
Ibrmed  independent  coiporationi,  and  had  each
their  nTeral  mogiitrales,  landed  and  other  pro-
perty, with  a  eommon  treoauTy,  They  had  like-
wiaa  their  respective  convocatiana  convened  b?  the


DEHUa.

the  public  bnainesi  of  the  demua,  anch  as  the  leaf-
ing of  its  estatei,  the  electioni  of  officers,  the  ro-
Tliion  of  the  registen  or  lists  of  J}tmaiae  (^/d^oj),
and  Iha  admiision  of  new  merabera.  [DmiHCHi.]
Moreover,  ach  demns  appeata  to  have  kept  what
vaa  called  a  rlnf  ixuKiiaiaaTaiAt,  or  list  of  thoBA
Demotaa  who  were  entitled  to  vole  at  the  general
aisemhlies  of  tho  whole  people.  In  a  financial
point  of  Tiew,  they  snpplanted  Ihe  old  *  nancn-
riea  "  of  the  four  tribea,  each  demua  being  required
to  famish  to  the  state  a  c«tain  quota  of  money,
and  contingent  of  trenpa,  wheoever  tKceaaaiy.
Independent  of  theae  bonds  of  union,  each  demoa
aeema  to  hare  had  ita  pecalisr  temfJes,  and  reli-
gious worship  Ifitiiurtui  hpd,  Paoi.  i.  3!  ;  Pcdlux,
YiiL  103),  Ue  officiating  prieala  in  which  were
chosen  by  the  Demolaa  (Doa.  o.EiAal.  p.  1313);
BO  that  both  in  a  cifil  and  religiona  point  of  view,
the  demi  appear  as  minor  communjtiea,  whose  mar-
gistrates,  moreorer,  were  obliged  to  aobmit  to  is
Imtifwala,  in  the  same  way  aa  the  public  ofRcera
of  the  whole  stale.  But  beatdea  the  magistralea,
such  as  demanhs  and  Ireuorera  (t^Ju),  elected
by  each  parish,  we  alao  read  of  judge*,  who  were
called  iunurTa]  (ori  t^vr :  the  nnmber  of  theae
offieen,  originally  thirty,  wa*  afterwarda  inaraaed
to  forty,  and  it  appeals  that  theyr- '-  ' — '■"
thiungh  the  different  districta,  to
in  all  cases  where  the  mat
more  than  ten  dnchmae  in  ,

questions  being  reserved  for  the  (uurqraf. (llndt-
walcker,  p.  37.)

On  the  first  institution  of  the  demi,  Cleiathenaa
increased  the  strength  of  tha  tq^wi,  or  commonaltT,
by  making  many  new  dtisens,  amongst  whom  aro
said  to  have  been  included  not  only  stnngen  and
reaident  foreigner!,  bnC  alao  slavea.  (AriaL  Pet^
iii.  1.)*  Now  admiiaion  into  a  demua  waa  necea-
aary,  before  any  individual  ooold  enter  upon  hia
full  rights  and  prinl^ea  a*  ao  Attic  citjien  1  and
though  in  the  first  inatance,  every  one  vra*  enrolled
in  ue  register  of  tba  demns  in  which  his  property
and  residence  lay,  this  relalion  did  not  continue  to
hold  with  all  the  Demotaa  ;  for  since  a  aon  waa
registered  in  the  demus  of  hi*  real  or  adoptive
father,  and  the  forms'  might  change  his  leaidenra,
it  would  fAen  happen  that  the  memben  of  ■
demos  did  not  all  reside  in  iL  Still  ihia  wonld
not  cause  an;  inconvenienca,  linca  the  meetings
of  each  demua  were  not  heU  within  il*  limits,  tiat
Athens.  (Dem.  a  EakaL  p.  1908.)  No  one,
waver,  could  purchase  prtmerty  liCoate  vrithin  «
mus  to  which  he  did  not  himself  bdong,  withoot
pacing  to  the  demarche  a  fee  for  the  privilege  of
domg  *D  (^YKTiTTiK^r),  which  would,  of  coarse,
go  la  the  tnasniy  of  the  demns.  (.BOiih,  PM,
Scan.  ofAOfu,  p.  S97,  3Dd  ad.)

Two  of  the  most  important  fimetiona  ef  tha
general  aiaemhlie*  of  tho  demi,  were,  the  adrais-
'  m  of  new  memben  and  the  revision  of  the
mes  of  memben  already  admitted.  The  registCT
oirulment  waa  ojled  Aitfuvx"'''  T^'W""'''*
becaoie  any  pe»on  whoae  name  waa  iniixibed  in
'  could  enter  upon  an  inheritanca  and  enjoy  k


floXAobt  ^uA^iKH  ihmt  ml  tod^en
IcoiiT.  This  passage  has  given  rise  to  much
dtsputs,  and  has  been  considered  by  many  ciitici
to  aSbrd  no  aenao  ;  hut  no  emandatmn  which  haa
been  ptopoaed  is  better  than  the  received  teiL  8ae
Otote, mdmy  t/Ormei,  nLir.f.  17^


DEKARIUS.
,. ._) erpnumi Ibr  which in  Attic

Inn^  eqniT^eat  to  tbo  Roman  phiBfle  adin  hen-
rfiMan.  Tboc  Rciiten  mra  kqit  b;  the  ds-
nanlu,  who,  with  &t  kpprobalion  of  the  membcn
of  tbe  dsBiu  aMcmbled  in  ^nenl  meeting,  in-
uns  KOHduig


tioB  wBtdotcnnmed  bjamijoiiljof  Tola.  (Dem.
cBmb.  p.  1318.) The  Mme  pnccM  wu  obMned

ofado^liaL  (laew,  i>>  jlfioU.  Mrat  p.  66. 1 7.)
Sum  I  linn,  baweTB,  >  deinarch  mi  bribed  to
place,  or  But  ia  placing,  m  the  Mgiitei  of  ■
dnnni,  p«nou  who  had  no  claim  to  dlimihip.
(DcoMMh.  e.  Lrod.  p.  1 091 .)  To  remedy  thit  ad-
ajaaioa  tt  qanocu  eitiKU  (iroprry^airTai)  the
■aa^tfwu  wai  inititntcd.  [DiAPBirHUis.]
I  iittj,  CTowaa  and  other  hononiy  ditunctioni
cDVld  be  awarded  hj  the  demi  in  the  vme  way  ae
kf  the  brihea.  (K.  F.  Hermann,  OrieiA,  Staatt-
MfUk.  gill,  kc;  Wachnnnth,  RdbK.  Alia-
dmmJL  ToL  L  p.  S4«,  Ac,  Snd  ed. ;  Leake,  7^
ilOH  i^  AUiiit,  Londoa,  1841,  2nd  ed.;  Rom,
Dm  Dtmrm  M.  Attihi.)  [R.  W.]

DENA'RIUS,  the  prindl^  lilTcr  coin  among
the  Romany  wu  lo  called  became  it  wai  originallj
eqoRJ  to  tea  aiaea  ;  but  on  the  reduction  of  the
weight  of  the  aa  [Aa],  il  wa<  made  equal  to  liz-
teen  aaca,  eiccpt  in  miliDu;  ;>]',  in  which  it  wu
idll  redond  M  eqoal  to  ten  auea,  (Plio.  H.N.
miii  13.)  The  denaritu  wu  Gnt  mined  fire
jean  beface  the  Gnt  Punk  wu,  h.  c.  269.  [Aa-
aiirruM.]  Tb(s»  were  originally  S4  denarii  to  a
poond (Plin. ff.  M miil  *fl i  Celma,  t.  l7.glX
hot  falHeqaently  96.  At  whaltime  thil  RdDction
wi«  made  in  the  weight  of  the  deaairai  ii  uncertain,
at  it  ia  not  mentioned  in  hiilorf.  Soana  hiTe  con-
JM-tuied  that  it  wu  completed  in  Kero'i  reign ;  and
Mr.  HaaKy  {Attatut  WtigUt,  Ac  p.  1S7)  juitly
ROBrka,  thai  Snetoniua  {JaL  U)  prorei  that  84
denarii  westitill  to  the  pound,  abont  the  year  B.C.
50  ;  lince  if  we  rnkon  96  lo  the  pnuid,  the  pro-
poniim  rf  the  nlue  of  gold  to  rilrei  ii  ~'"  '~  '
which  ia  incredibly  lo*  ;  while  the  vali
■thee  aBppoaition,  SD  lo  I,  ii  more  probable.  Corn-
Mr.  Hoaeyeaknlate*  the  avenge  wdgbt  ofthi
denarii  oined  at  the  end  of  the  commoDwealth
at  60  giaiBa,  aad  thaae  under  the  empire  si  b2^!
gisM.  If  we  dedoM,  aa  the  aTengo,  j^  of  thi
wogkt  tot  all<7,  from  the  denarii  of  the  common
«<Mk,  then  wUl  rciBaiii  GS  gi^iu  of  pore  direr  .
taA  met  the  ihiUiDg  ontaini  80-7  giaini  of  pore
S8
■ilTe^  the  lalna  of  the  beat  denarii  will  be  gj-^

af  a  lUIUi^,  cr  8'624S  pence ;  which  may  be
reckooed  in  round  mnnbeii  B^J.  If  the  lame
■ctbad  of  reckoning  be  applied  to  the  later
denarioa,  ite  nine  will  be  about  7'i  pence,  or  7^/1,
(Hnaaey,  pp.  141,  142.)

The  Roman  coini  of  lilier  went  at  one  time  u
1b«  down  aa  the  fiatietb  part  of  the  denarioi,  the
tefWBcini.  Tbej  were,  the  guaariai  at  half  de-
■ariai,  the  takrimi  or  irBrter  denariu  [fiuran-
Ttvi],  iheJtbfia  «r  IcBlk  ef  Iba  denarnu  [equal  lo


DEJjARIUS.  39S


the  aa),  the  wnieUa  or  half  libeQa,  and  the  tena-
dtu  or  quarts  libella.

The  quinaiiui  wai  alio  called  vieloriatm  <Cic.
Pn>  Fonl.  G),  from  the  imprBuion  of  a  tignre  of
Victory  which  it  bore.  Pliny  [H.N.  miii.  13)
■ayi  that  Tictoriati  were  fint  coined  at  Rome  in
punnance  of  the  lex  Clodia  ;  and  that  prerioui  to
that  time,  they  were  unpcrled  aa  an  article  of  trade
from  Ulyria.  TheClodiiit,vho  propoied  thit  laff,
il  auppoeed  to  have  been  the  penon  who  obtained
a  triumph  for  hii  Ticloriea  in  Iitria,  whence  he
broneht  home  a  large  nun  of  money  {Lir.  ilL  13);
which  would  &i  the  Gnt  coinage  of  the  Tictoriati
al  Rome,  B.C.  177;  thai  ii,  92  jeara  after  the  fint
lilier  coinage.

If  the  denariui  weighed  60  gtaine,  the  tenineiui
would  only  hare  weighed  1}  gr. ;  which  would
haie  been  w  unall  a  com,  that  lome  haie  doubled
whether  it  wai  eyer  coined  in  ulTer  ;  for  we
know  that  it  wai  coined  in  copper.  [As.]  Bui
VaiTo  {Dt  Lifig.  Lai.  t.  174,  ed.  MUller)  nsmea  il
among  the  lilver  coiua  with  the  libella  and  aem-
bello.  It  it,  honerer,  improbable  that  the  lerun-
ciiu  continued  lo  be  coin^  in  lilrer  after  the  aa
had  been  reduced  lo  ^ij  of  the  denariui ;  for
then  the  teraneiui  would  baie  been  ^th  of  the
denariui,  whereu Varro  only  dcicribei  it  u  a

ihdiTiiion  of  libella,  when  the  latter  wai  -^Ih  of


In


of  Cicc


appear!  to  have  been  the  nnaUeet  ail

w  coin  in

D»

(Cic.  Pn.  fioK.  O™.  e.  4)  I  and  it  ii  frequently

UKd,  not  merely  to  cipieB  a  tilver  coin  eqiisl  to

the  ai,  but  any  very  nnall  turn. (PlauL  Cm.  iL  G.

7,  a^.  y.  1.  27.) OronoTiu  (Zta  Sateniu,  iL  2),

howeter,  mamtaini  that  there  wu  no  luch  coin  a*

the  libella  when  Varro  wrote  j  but  that  the  word

wai  uied  to  ligniiy  the  tenth  part  of  a  leitertiui.

No  ipedmeni  of  the  libella  are  now  found.

If  the  denarin.  be  reckoned  in  value  BW,  the
other  coini  which  have  been  mentioned,  will  bo  of

tha  following  value  :-

Pene*

Firth.

■fi3l3S

SembelU ....

l'062i

Libella

21 2S

2

■G

Quinnriui  «  Victoriatui

1

Denariui ....

8

2

It  bu  been  frequently  itated  that  As  danariu


39*  DEPOSITUM.

ii  equal  b  Tilna  to  Ibe  drachnu  i  bat  tbu  ii  i
quite  correct. The  Attic  diachms  w»  dmi
equal  to  9j<J,  whereu  we  bm  ueo  that 1
deoariiu  wu but  littla bIxits  S^d. The  IbI
diuchmoe,  faoweTer,  ippcu  to  hafa  fiJIen  off
weight ;  lUid  there  can  be  no  doabl  that  the<r  irere
■t  oDo  time  neariy  enDug h  eqoal  tn  pui  for  equal
(JronoTiiu  hai  gsTtn  all  the  authiiritict  upon  the
■ubject  in  hi*  £ie  Satertiii  (iiL  2),

The  earlie»t  denarii  h»Te  vnally,  on  th
Tene,  the  head  oC  Rome  with  ■  hehnet,  the
DiouDii,  or  the  head  of  Jupiler.  MaiiT  ha<
the  rerene,  charioU  drawn  b;  two  or  lour  I
(ii^ae,  gnadrigae),  whence  thef  are  called  reipect-
irclj  i^oii'aad  qiadrigati,  ac  npHHu.  [Biqatus.]
Some  denaiii  were  (ailed  ttrrati  (TadL  Ofm.  6),
betaxue  their  edgea  were  notched  like  b  hw,  which
^>pean  to  have  been  done  to  pioTe  that  they  were
■olid  tilrer,  and  not  plated.  Manv  of  the  gentile
denarii,  u  tlioee  of  the  Aeliaa,  Calpurnian,  Pa-
pinian,  TuUian,  and  nnmeRKU  other  gentet,  tie
marked  with  the  nomeml  X,  in  order  to  ihow
their  value.

Plinf  (/f.  ff.  niiiL  13}  ipeaki  of  the  daariu,
aumu.  GraaDTini  (£K  SaUr.  iii.  }£)  laji,  that
thii  coin  waa  nerer  itncli  at  Rome ;  but  there  ia
one  of  Auguitn*  in  the  Britiah  Muieum,  weighing
60  grains,  and  otben  of  leai  weighL  The  aiernge
weight  of  the  common  aureua  wui  120  giaina.
[AuRitu.J  In  later  limea,  •  copper  coin  wai
called  denariaa.  (Ducauae,  i.  e.  Dmariiu.)

DENICA'LES  FE'RIAE. [Fbrlib.]

UENTA'LE. [Ahatrihi-I

DKNTIFRI'CIUM  (JBoiTiirp.w"),  dentrifice
or  looth-pQwder,  appean  to  haTo  been  ikilfiillj
prepared  and  gonerall;  uied  among  the  Romoiia.
A  Tariely  of  auhalancci,  inch  ai  the  bonea,  hoob,
and  bonis  of  certain  animali,  crabi,  rgg-ihelli,  and
the  ihells  of  the  eyater  and  the  murei,  constituted
the  baaii  of  the  preiaratioa.  Haiing  been  pre-
Tiously  burnt,  and  aometimea  mixed  with  honey,
they  wen  reduced  to  a  fine  powder.  Though
fancy  and  auperatition  often  directed  the  choice  of
thcae  ingredients,  the  addition  of  nitiingent*,  inch
B>  niyirh,  cr  of  nitre  and  of  hartshorn  ground  in  a
raw  state,  JniiicatM  acience  which  was  the  result  of
erperience,  the  intention  bcinv  net  only  lo  clean
the  teeth  and  to  render  ihcm  wliitc,  but  also  to  fix
them  when  loose,  to  itrengthta  the  gtinu,  and  to
HSiuage  Cooth-ache.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xzriii.  49,  mi.
46,  TTTJi  21,  26.)  Pounded  pumice  wat  a  more
dubious  artide,  though  Pliny  (xiiil,  42)  nya,
"  Utilisalma  fiant  ei  hia  dentifricia." [J.  Y.]

DEPENSI  ACTIO. [1nt««c«s8io.]

DKPORTA'TIO. [EiaiLmM.]

DEPO'SITI  ACTIO. [Dbpmitum.]

DEPO'SITUM. The  notion  of  depositom  ia

another  to  keep  until  it  ia  demanded  back,  and
wilhoat  any  reward  for  the  trouble  of  keeping  it.
The  (arty  who  makes  the  dcpoaituoi  it  called  iJe-
praau  or  Jijniilor,  and  ha  who  receiYea  the  thing
is  called  depoiHanai.  The  act  of  deposit  may  be
purely  Toluntary  i  or  it  may  be  from  ncceaeity,  as
in  the  case  of  fire,  shipwreck,  or  other  caaiulCy.
The  depoailarius  is  bound  to  toke  caie  of  the
thing  which  he  has  cemenled  to  receive.  He  can-
not nae  the  thing  noleaa  be  has  permiaiion  to  uie
it.  either  by  eipreaa  words  or  by  neeewaiy  im-
plicaUon.  If  the  thing  ia  one  "  quae  uso  non  eon-
aumitur,"  and  it  ia  given  (a  a  pcnon  to  ba  uaed.


DESULTOR.

tbe  trannctioD  bocomea  a  case  of  loci^o  and  eea-
dnctio  [LocATio],  if  money  ii  to  be  paid  for  ths

tum],  if  nothing  is  to  be  paid  for  the  use.  If  a
bag  of  meney  not  sealed  ap  is  the  subject  of  the
depoaitum,  and  the  dcpoaiOttiaa  at  any  time  aska
tor  penniuion  to  use  it,  the  money  becomes  a  loan
[Mutuuh]  from  the  time  when  the  peimission
is  granted  ;  if  the  depaoens  proferi  tba  nse  of  iha
money.  It  becomes  a  lean  frrao  the  time  when  the
depoailariuB  begins  to  uae  it.  (Dig.  12.  tit  1.  a  9,
§9,1.10.)  Ifmoney  iadepoaited  withtheccodition
that  tbe  same  amount  be  letumed,  the  use  of  it  ia
tacitly  given.  If  the  depositum  eonlinaes  purely  m
depositum,  the  depoaitanut  it  bound  to  oudce  good
any  damage  to  it  which  happens  through  dolus  or
culpa  lata  ;  and  be  ii  bound  to  restore  the  thing
on  demand  to  the  deponena,  or  to  the  person  to
whom  the  deponena  orders  it  to  be  reatraed.  If
aeveral  persons  had  received  the  deposit,  they  were
•evemlly  liable  for  the  whole  (in  solidam).  Tbe
remedy  of  the  deponcns  agunst  the  depDetiarios,  ia
by  an  actio  depositi  directa.  The  deposilatius  ia
entitled  to  be  tecored  against  all  damage  which
he  may  have  tostained  Umneh  any  culpa  on  the
part  of  the  deponena,  and  to  a!U  coats  and  eipensea
incurred  by  his  chj^ge ;  and  his  remedy  gainst
tbe  deponens  is  by  an  actio  depositi  cooDaiia,
The  ac^o  was  In  dnplum,  if  the  deposit  was  made
from  neceuily ;  if  the  depotitaiina  was  gnUty  of
dolus,  inbioia  was  a  consequenoe.  (Inst  3.  tit.  14
(IS) ;  Cod.  4.  tit  34  1  Dig.  1 6.  tit.  3 ;  Clc  d*  (^
L  ID  ;  Juv.  JU.  xlii.  GO  ;  Diriisen,  Uebrrmlit,  &c
p.  £97  ;  ThiUnt,  ^j^m,  &.c  i  480,  &c  9tlt
ed.)  [O.L.]

DESBRTOR,  ia  defined  by  Modettiniu  to  be
one  "  qui  per  pndiiura  tempui  ragaMi,  rodncitDr,"
and  differs  {mn  an  ennawr,  "  qui  din  vagatus  ad
a  egreditnr."  (Dig.  49.  tit.  16.  s.  3.) Thooe
deserted  in  time  of  pace,  were  poniibed  bj
if  rank,  corporal  chastisement,  fines,  ignomiak
liimission  from  tbe  service,  &c TboM  who
left  the  standards  in  time  ef  war  woe  tunally
poniihed  with  dtath. The  trOBfi^^iie,  or  descncra
to  the  enemy,  when  taken,  were  sometimes  de-
prived of  their  hands  or  feet  (Liv.  nvL  12),  bat
generally  were  put  to  death. (Lipsius,  .Ds  AfiCO,

DEsiGNATOR. [Funds.]
DBSMOTK'RION  (ti<r;wr^isv).  [Carcul]
DESPOSIONAUTAE  (8»^o<rui«i>T-(u.)  [Ci-

DESULTOa  (iini«jTii(,  luntdTiisX  lite-
rally  "  one  who  Io^m  off,"  waa  applied  lo  a  jia-
soQ  who  rode  Mverid  horses  or  chariots,  kapiag
>ne  to  the  other.  As  eoriy  ns  the  Homerio
we  find  the  descriptimi  of  a  msu,  who  kee^M
lones  abreast  sC  full  gallop,  and  leapt  {ram
I  another,  amidst  a  crowd  <rf'  sdmicing  spec-
.  {IL  IV.  679—684.)  In  the  games  of  the
Roman  citent  tfait  sport  wat  alto  very  popolar.
The  Roman  desultor  generally  lode  only  two
horses  at  the  tame  time,  sitting  on  them  withoat  «
saddle,  and  vaulting  upon  either  of  them  at  hia
pleasure.  (Itil  Orw.  ivilL  39.) He  wore  a  hat  or

carried  to  so  great  an  extent,  that  young  men  of

the  highest  rank  not  only  drove  bigae  and  qnsd-
rigae  m  the  circus,  but  exhibited  (hete  feats  of
'  irtemanihip.  (SueL  JaL  39.)  Among  other  na-
imi  thit tpeciea  of  eqnetliian  dexterity waa


DUDEHA.

iffdicd  ts  th«  pmpoHs  of  mr.  liry  rami
troop  <tf  hnfiB  in  tbe  Nomidian  army,  in
tmeb  ■nldier  ni  aqiplied  iritb  a  couple  of  1
and  ia  Uw  bott  of  battle,  aod  when  dad
DOnr,  would  leap  with  the  greatnt  taw  and  cele-
ritj  Erom  that  irhidi  via  weari«d  or  disabled  opoQ
tit*  bark  of  the  bone  vhicb  wai  itill  g^iind  and
inah.  (iiiiL  39).  Tbe  Scylbiani,  ArffieDiaiu,  and
•one  of  tbe  lu^aiu,  wen  (killed  in  the  aame  art.
Tbe  amtend  woodcnt  ibonri  three  iigurei  of
dHulloca,  one  from  a  brenic  lamp,  pablithed  bj
Bartoli  (^aAib  LmeTm  SepoUraH,  i  34),  the
Bthen  fnim  coina.  In  all  tbiae  tbe  rider  w
pileiia,  ir  isgi  of  Ut,  and  bii  hone  ii  wit]
•addle  ;  but  thew  example*  pnre  that  he  hi
■le  both  of  tbe  vbip  and  the  reiiL  On  the
we  aleo  ebeerre  tbe  wreath  and  palm-branch  ••
angna  of  Tielcvj.  [J.  Y.]


DETESTATIO  SACRORUSL (Qins.}
DEVKHStKBIUM. [Cadpon*,]
DEUNX. [As,  p.  UO,  b  ;  LunuuJ
DEXTANS. lAs,  p.  UO  b  i  Linii*.]
DIABATE'RIA  (auCinVa).  >  nerilice  of-
iertd  to  Zeo  and  Athena  by  tbe  hinn  of  Spaita,
ap^  r*afin|^  tbe  &ootien  of  Idcedaemorx  with

BBbTonnble,  they  diibanded  the  anay  and  re-
timed bame. (X*n.  Dt  Ra.  hue.  li.  3  ;  Thoc

».«,«.  lie.)

DIADE'HA  (SidSiifu),  a  wbite  fillet  wed  to
node  lb*  bad  (>kh  a&a.  VaL  Mai.  ii  2.
I  7).  Tbe  ioiendoD  of  thii  amament  ii  by  Pliny
(to.  SI)  attribotcd  to  "  Liber  Pater."  Diodorui
Skaloa  add*  <iT.  p,  260,  WecKl.),  that  he  wore  it
to  aamge  headarhe,  the  craueqnence  of  indnlgenee
HI  wine.  Acawdinglj,  in  work*  of  ancient  art,  Dio-
njvi  wean  a  plain  bandage  on  hi*  bead,  ■*  shown
ia  tbe  em  mider  Cinthabu*.  The  decoration
ia  pvpiriy  OtieutaL  It  ii  eommoDly  tepmenled
•B  (be  bade  of  Eaitera  monarcbi.  Jnnin  (liL  3)
refartea  that  Alennder  the  Orat  adopted  the  Urge
diadem  of  tb*  kii^  of  Penia,  the  endi  of  which
&I1  ^HHi  the  iboalden,  and  thai  ihi*  mark  of  roy-
ally wa*  [aiauiLd  by  hi>  mcceHon.  Antony  I
aaiBed  it  n  Ua  lunnoiu  inletcourM  with  Clei>.  j


DIAETETICA.  396

petra  iu  Egypt.  (Flonu,  iv.  11.)  Aelian  eaya
(  ¥.  H.  iL  36)  that  the  kingi  of  that  cornnry  had
the  figure  of  an  asp  npou  their  diadema,  In  pro-
eese  of  time  the  i^ptora  phuied  the  diadems
on  the  head  of  Zeu*,  and  Tarious  otber  divinitiea
beiidet  Dionynu  ;  and  it  waa  alu  gisdoallj  ae-
■umed  by  the  lOTereigni  of  tbe  Wettern  world.
It  waa  tied  behind  in  a  bow  ;  whence  Tacitui
(^m.  tL  37)  ipeaki  of  the  Euphialea  rising  in
warei  "  wbite  with  foam,  to  aa  to  reaemble  a  dia-
denL"  'Bj  tbe  addition  of  gold  and  gemi,  and  by
a  cDntmnal  incrcaie  in  richnesi,  liie,  and  aplen-
donr,  tbii  bandage  vai  at  length  conTerted  into
the  oDwn  which  hai  been  for  many  centnriei  tbe
badge  of  lOTereignty  in  modem  Europe. [J.  Y.]

DIADICA'SIA  (SuJiKrurla),  in  iu  moit  ex-
tended sense  ia  a  mere  lynonym  of  Zimj ;  techni-
cally, it  denote!  the  proceedjngs  in  a  contest  for
preference  between  two  or  more  rival  portie*  ;  as,
for  inilasce,  in  the  case  of  several  claiming  to
succeed  as  beirs  or  Icfjatees  to  the  estate  of  a  de-
ceased panon.  Upon  an  occasion  of  this  kind,  it
will  be  observed  that,  as  all  the  cUimants  are
umiUrly  sitnaled  with  reipect  to  the  (nbject  of
dispute,  tbe  ordinan  clasaification  of  the  litigants
OS  plaintiSs  and  defendants  becomes  no  bngei  ap-
plioible.  This,  in  Gict,  is  the  essential  distinction
between  tbe  prweedings  in  queation  and  all  other
suits  in  which  the  parties  appear  as  inunedtaloly
opposed  to  each  other ;  but  aa  &r  as  forms  an  con-
cerned, we  an  not  told  that  they  were  peculiarly
characterised.  Beside*  the  case  above  mentioned,
then  an  seieial  others  to  be  classed  with  it  in
reject  of  the  object  of  proceedinga  being  an  ab-
solute Bcqnisitioii  of  property.  Ajnong  these  are
tD  be  reelumed  the  claims  of  private  creditors  apon
a  eonfi*«t«d  estate,  and  the  contests  between  in-
formera  rLtimmg  nwardi  proposed  by  tbe  state  for
the  diaeovecy  of  crimes,  &c.,  as  upon  the  occasion
of  the  mutilation  of  the  Hermae  (Andoe.  14)  and
tbe  like.  The  other  class  of  cnases  included  under
tbe  general  term  smsisti  of  cases  like  tbe  antidoait
of  the  trieianhi  [Antidosis],  contests  aa  to  who
was  to  be  held  reapontible  to  the  slate  for  pnblic
property  alleged  to  have  been  tianifetred  ou  one
band  and  denied  ou  the  other  (a*  m  Dem.  e,
E-iirg.  tl  Afw.X  and  quealiona  as  to  who  should
undertake  a  cboregia,  and  many  others,  in  which
ixempliona  from  persona]  or  pecimiary  liabiiitiea
o  the  state  were  tbe  subject  of  claim  by  rival
paniea.  In  a  diadicasis,  as  in  Bo  ordinary  Sfin),
the  proper  court,  the  presiding  magistrate,  and  the
eipenses  of  the  trial,  mainly  depended  upon  the
peculiar  abject  of  tbe  proceedings,  and  present  no
leading  cbaracterittica  for  discussion  under  the
general  term.  (Platner,  Procea  md  Klofoi,  iL
P.I7.S.9.) [DiKM.]  (J.S.M.1

DIATOSEIS  (SioJ^tii.) (DiANOHAX.]
DIAETA. [DoHus.]

DIAETE'TICA,  or  DIAETE'TICE  (Shutb-

ur^),  one  of  the  principal  brancbes  into  which

he  ancients  divided  the  art  and  science  of  medi-

ine. [MiDiciNA.] The  word  is  derived  from

'loiTo,  wbicb  meant  much  the  anme  as  our  word

din. It  is  defined  by  Celsus  (De  Mtdic  Prae&t

lib.  L)  to  agaiff  that  part  of  medicine  jwh

la  Budelta;  "  which  cores  discaaea  by  mtani  of

imen  and  diet ; "  and  a  similar  explanatioii  ia

„ en  by  Plato  (op.  Diog.  LaerU  iii.  1.  %  8fi.)

Token  slrictlj^  in  this  sense,  it  would  correspond

very  neariy  with  the  modem  ditUiOf  and  tnia  i*


!9e  DIAETETICA.

the  mcanine  wfaich  it  h1w>ji  bean  in  tlie  earlier
medical  wntini,  and  ibal  whicb  will  be  adhered
to  in  the  preieiit  article  ;  in  Mimo  of  the  later  an-
thers, it  acenu  to  comprehend  Ccliua^  Boomd  grand
diTiaian,  fharrnaooieica,  and  ii  lued  b^  ScriboDini
Lnrgni  (De  Ckmpoi.  Afidiaim.  S  200)  nraplf  in
oppoiitioa  to  cAirargia,  k>  aa  to  auwsr  tiaOlj  to
t£eprorin«nfot.rp*,«ffl«.

No  attention  kcidi  to  btre  been  [«id  to  thii
branch  of  medicine  beion  tbe  dote  of  Hip[>i>
OBtei.  Homer  repmenu  HBchaim,  who  bad  been
woonded  in  the  ahouldu  b;  an  arrow  (,IL  li.  £07)
and  forced  to  quit  the  field,  aa  taking  a  draught
eompoied  of  wine,  goat'i-milk  cheese,  and  flour
(tW.  63B),  which  ceitalalj  no  modem  lurgeon
would  prtacribe  in  lueh  a  caae.  (Siw  PlaL  De
Ripiihl,  iii.  pp.  40S,  toe  ;  Mar.  iVr.  Sirm.  29  ;
Athen.  L  p.  10.)  Hippocratea  aeenu  to  cUin  for
himielf  the  ovdit  of  being  the  firaC  penon  who
had  itndied  thia  anbject,  and  nja  that  "  the  an-
cienti  had  written  nothing  on  it  worth  mention-
ing" (flafliK.  Pict  ii  Mori.  Acvi.  vol  iL  p.  26,
ed.  KUhn).  Among  ths  worki  commonl;  aaeribed
to  Hippocratea,  there  are  four  that  bear  upon  thii
anbject.  It  would  be  out  of  phioe  here  to  attempt
anj  thing  like  a  complete  acconnt  of  the  opiniona
of  the  ancienti  on  thi>  point ;  thoie  who  wiah  for
more  detailed  information  mnit  be  nforred  to  the
different  worka  on  medical  antiquitiei,  while  in
thii  article  mention  t>  made  of  onlf  aueh  parti-
cnlara  aa  amy  be  auppoud  to  bare  aome  intereat
fat  the  general  reader.

In  the  woiiia  of  Hippoctatn  and  hii  nicceaaon
ahnon  all  tbe  articlea  offiwd  nsed  by  the  ancienti
■re  mentioned,  and  tbeic  real  or  >npp«ed  pro-

Ctrtiu  diicnued,  aoraetimea  quite  aa  fandfulljr  a>
J  Button  in  hia  AnaUntj/  of  MiJaiiduilg.  In
aome  reapects  thej  ^tpear  to  biiTe  been  much  leaj
delicate  in  their  taatsa  thnn  the  modemi,  aa  we
find  the  fleih  of  the  fox,  the  dog,  the  herac,  and
the  aaa  ipoken  of  aa  comnian  articlea  of  food.
(Piondo-Hippocr.  Dt  Tut.  Rat.  lib.  iL  vol.  L  pp.
679,  680.)  With  regard  to  the  qoantit;  of  wine
drank  b;  tho  ancienli,  we  maj  atrin)  at  (ome-
thing  like  eerlainl;  firum  the  &ct  that  Caeliua
Anrelianua  mentioni  it  aa  aomething  extraordinary
that  the  &moiia  Aaclepiadei  at  Rome  in  the  lirai
century  n.  a,  aometimea  «dered  hia  patienta  to
double  and  treble  the  quantity  of  wine,  till  at  laat
.  tbe;  drank  half  wine  and  half  water  (,Df  Moth.
Otroa.  lib.  iiL  c  7.  p.  38S),  brnn  which  it  appean
that  wine  wai  commonly  diluted  mth  fiia  er  ail
timea  iU  quantity  of  water.  Hippocratei  recom-
mendi  wine  to  be  mixed  with  an  equal  quantity
of  water,  and  Qalen  approrea  of  the  fHrnortion  ;
but  Le  aerc  {Hitt.  dt  la  Mid.)  thinki  that  thii
wa>  only  in  parlicolar  caKi.  In  one  place
(Paeudo-Hippoer.  De  Via.  Rat.  lib.  iii.  w  fin.)
the  patient,  after  gnat  fiitigue,  it  recommended
/vfiue^roi  Irof  4  Alf,  in  which  paasage  it  baa  been
much  doubted  whether  actual  atojfication  it  meant,
or  only  the  "  drinking  freely  and  to  cheerfnlneaa,"
in  whicli  Koae  the  lame  wold  ii  need  by  St  John
<iL  10)  and  the  LXX.  (On.  xliil  M  ;  Oaut.  t.
1 ;  and  perhapa  On.  ix.  31).  Accrading  to  Hip-
pecntea,  the  proportioni  in  which  wine  ood  water
ahoold  be  mixed  together,  mj  aceotding  to  the
anaon  of  the  year ;  for  initanee,  in  summer  the
wine  abould  he  moat  diluted,  and


DIAETETAB.
ing,  ore  alao  much  inaiated  upfm  by  the  writera  on
diet  and  regimon ;  but  for  further  particulan  on
th«a  lubjecli  the  articlea  Balnias  and  Qyhna-
etUH  mnat  be  contulted.  It  may,  bowner,  be
added  that  the  bath  could  not  hare  been  very
common,  at  leaat  in  private  bmiliea,  in  the  time  of
Hippocratea,  a>  he  aayi  (De  RM.  Viet,  in  Mori.
Aad.  p.  62)  that  '^  there  an  few  honaea  in  which
the  necesaarr  conTemencea  are  to  be  found."

Another  taj  &Tourite  practice  with  the  an-
cieDla,  both  aa  a  preeentiie  of  aiekneai  and  a*  a

lime.  The  autfaoi  of  tbe  tnatiia  Dt  Vietu  Ra-
Uau,  ftlaely  attributed  to  Hippocratea,  recom-
menda  it  two  or  three  timet  a  month  (lih>-  iii-  p-
710).  Celtna  conaiden  it  more  beneficial  in  the
winter  than  in  the  aummcr  (Oa  Mtdit.  i  3.  p.  28),
and  layi  that  thoae  who  take  an  eme^c  twice  a
month  had  better  do  ao  on  two  anccstiTe  daya
than  once  a  fortnight  {Ibid.  p.  39).  At  the  time
in  which  Celaua  wrote,  thia  practice  waa  ao  com-
monly abuied,  that  Aadepiadea,  in  bia  work  D»
Saa^ab  TWWo,  rejected  the  uie  of  emetica  attn-
gether,  "  Ofeiiua,"  aaya  Celaua  (lUd.  p.  27),
^  eorum  coniuatudine,  qui  quoddie  ejicioiido  to-
randi  bcultatcm  moliuntur."  (See  alio  Piin.
H.  ff.  xxri.  8.)  It  woi  the  ctutom  among  the
" "■  take  an  emetic  immediately  befnte  their


n«^in


e  themaeirea  to  eat  m


plentifully  ;  and  again
any  injury  from  repletion.  Cicero,  in  hia  account
of  the  day  that  Caeiar  ipent  with  him  at  hia
home  in  the  country  (ad  Att.  (IiL  S£),  aaya,  "  Ac-
cubuit,  itirrmiir  agebat,  itaqne  et  edit  et  blbit
aSt&t  et  jucunde  i**  and  thia  aeemi  to  hare  been
conaidored  a  aort  of  compliment  paid  by  Coeaar  to
bit  heat,  aa  it  intimated  a  reaolution  to  paaa  the
daj  cheerfully,  and  to  t«t  and  drink  freely  with
him.  ]le  ia  repretented  aa  having  done  the  aamo
thing  when  he  waa  entertained  by  King  Deietarua
(Cic  Pro  Daol.  c  7).  The  glutton  Viteliina  ia
■aid  to  hare  preierred  hia  own  life  by  conatant
emetics,  wblle  he  deittoyed  all  hit  o(>m)«uiona
who  did  not  luc  the  lame  pretaucion  (Suet.  FUdL
c.  13  ;  Dion  Caaa.  Iit,  3),  ao  that  one  of  them,
who  waa  prevented  by  iilDtsi  finm  dining  with
him  lor  a  few  dayi,  laid,  "  1  thould  ceRainlf
have  been  dead  if  I  had  not  fiillen  aick."  Even
women,  after  bathing  beibre  aupper,  nied  to  drink
wine  and  throw  it  up  again  to  ahaipan  their  ■{>•
petite  —

[Folemi]  "  aeitarini  oiler
Ducitnr  ante  dbum,  labidam  bctorua  onxim."

Juv.M.vi.  427,  i28.
10  that  it  might  truly  be  eaid,  in  the  atnmg  laa-
gungo  of  Seneca  (Ohu.  ad  AeA<.  9.  g  10),"  Vomunt,
ul  edant ;  cduni,  nt  vomanL"  (Compare  SeneOL,
Dt  Pnnid.  c.  i.  g  II,  ^lid.  Sfi.  g  31.)  By
aome,  the  practice  waa  thought  to  effectual  fw
itrengthenin^  the  coniCitntiait,  that  it  waa  tho
conitant  regimen  of  all  the  athletae,  or  ptubaaed
wreitlen,  trained  for  the  public  ahowi,  in  older
to  moke  thsn  more  robuat.  Cdana,  however,
(i.  e.  p.  28),  watna  hia  reoden  againat  the  too
frequent  uae  of  emetics  without  neceaaily  and
merely  for  luxury  and  gluttony,  and  Bya  thftt
no  oDs  who  hai  any  re^rd  for  hii  health,  and
wiihea  to  lire  to  old  age,  ousht  to  make  it  a  doilw
practice.  .  [W.A.O.]

DIAETBTAB (Siam|TaO<  arbitntora, um.
prf, Tbe  dJMMtoe  nunliantd  b; '


DUFTCTAE.
oMm,  wm  at  tm  kindi ;  tbe  ona  public  ud
■nnmtad  bf  IM  (ithi|^in«[),  the  otliEr  prittte  and
ckoani  {^Jftntj  b;  the  taitia  who  referred  to
tfatm  tlu  dednn  of  a  duputed  point,  inatead  of
trrbir  it  befbn  >  cmirl  of  jmtica  ;  the  judgineiiU
of  boih,  acconiiiu  to  Ariilotle,  bcins  fbunded  on
eqahr  imther  ^aii  kw  {i  7i|>  Iiwrqrl)>  rk
^Hiiilt  ipS,  I  U  auourrin  rh*  ri/uir,  SiitBr.  I
13).  We  (halt,  in  the  £nt  plus,  treat  of  the
public  dkeinae,  Mlowing  ai  doaelj  la  ponlble
lb«  ntdci  aad  UatOBenta  of  Hndtwaloker  in  hi*
Matbe  "Ueber  die  H&ntlicben  nnd  Print-
ScUedaichlai  DiltMen  in  Athm,  nnd  den  Pncca


_  lo  <K  v.\  the  pnhlie  Diutctae
d  to  be  not )««  than  SO  jtara  of  ige  ;
«  (o  PoUu  <nii.  136)  and  Heajchina,  mt
um  laao  CO.  With  (vpect  to  theii  nnmbei  Oiece
a  ■BBC  dilBeal^,  in  coniaqDenca  at  a  MatemeDt  of
ripian  (DoDoKh.  e.  3f«^  p.  £42.  IS),  aoording
le  wbieb  it  «u  ilO,  •'.  «.  44  for  facli  tribe,
^jja*  M  riftraptM  mil  TgnrgpArorTB,  jnif  4fiJ<m^
f^V)-  Tbii  number,  bovever,  appean  u  un-
BKeaBlOjr  lane,  more  apedall;  whRi  il  it  cm-
■dend  that  t£e  Attic  ontoca  frequentij  femk  of
iBilf  one  ariutnloc  in  each  ea*e,  that  tome  writen
baTB,  vitb  good  nuat,  niqweed  the  reading
■hoaU  be  —  fear  U  maafdiarTa,  timafti
c  4.  f.  At  anr  rate,  litigioni  ai  the  Athenian!
VCR,  it  etmia  Uat  40  mun  hare  baen  anoogh  foi


Tbewnrda  (


le  wnrda  Kaf  inicnir  ^iAVi  hnpljr  that  each
Bnc  had  iu  own  atbiltator  ;  an  inference  which  it
■nalcd  far  I>eiDO*tbenei((i.£ca:^  1^1142.  36),
vfeen  ba  qxaki  of  tbe  arbilialori  of  the  Oeneid
aid  beetbeid  tiibei ;  aa  well  aa  b;  I^nai  <e.
Pm^f.Jil),  who,in  tbewcsdf  «f*niVv»rffi*ni
aMr  apbf  Tsii  T§  'ijaafcrrJi  (iidfbrTai,  ia
Ikaght  Id  allode  to  tbe  Diastetaa  of  the  Hippo-
i^gotid  tribe.  With  r^inl  to  the  elcdirai  of
Ibea*  otteen,  it  !•  doubtful  whsthei  the;  were
AaaBi  bj  th*  raeniben  of  the  tribe  Ibr  which  tbejr
adjndialed,  or  in  a  gimaal  aaaemhly  of  the  people.
HadtwalckcT  indinea  to  tbe  latter  auppoaitKHi,  u
bring  lagre  pnhable  :  wa  do  not  think  lo  ;  for  il
aeaaa  jmt  aa  likely,  if  Dot  more  lO,  that  the  fbui
arbiDBton  of  each  tribe  were  choacn  in  an  aaum-
bh  of  tbe  tribe  iudd  Again,  whether  thej  were
afyomwd  fee  life,  or  onlj  lor  a  definite  period,  ia
a*  entealf  moitioned  bf  the  oratora ;  but  aa
■a  of  tbe  Albeniaa  magiitratei,  with  the  eicep-


•1  of  tbe
«•«,  aod  DenathoMi  (a.  Arwf.  p.  542. 1 J)  apeaki
af  tbe  bM  daj  of  the  llth  month  of  the  ytai  u
bci^  Iba  laat  d^  of  the  Dkeletae  (4  TtAnToia
ilUfa  Tim  SurnrTar),  it  aaemaalmoat  certain  that
tbey  wo*  elected  fca  a  -Jen  adj. The  only  ob-

B  a  Ik^iMDt  of  loau  ^  Sfil,  ed.  Reiike),  where
an  acbbrMer  la  apoken  of  aa  being  en;;aged  on  a
axit  far  twg  yean  (Mo  In)  t»  luunrnu  -Hgt
Unr  fxarret) :  V,  howerer,  we  admit  the  odd-
JMtnia]  mdiDg  tw  SiainrT«',  the  moming  wonid
ba  in  Bocwdance  with  what  wa  infer  from  other
ntbaritifa,  and  would  only  imply  that  the  lame
c*BH  (ame  befiite  tbe  arbitnton  of  two  different
ycao,  a  ate  which  might  not  nn&aqnently  happen
i^  ^  tbe  emtrafy,  lbs  reading  of  the  teit  la  cor


DIAETETAE.  3S7

ia  doabtfiil  whether  the  pablic  Diaatetaa
took  any  general  oatb  befi««  entering  npon  tbeir
dntiet. Such  Bgnaiantee  would  aeem  to  bamuw-

7  I  for  we  nad  tt  their  taking  oatba  prerioita
to  giving  judgment  in  the  fntiaSar  laiea  which
came  before  them.  (laaeua,  Dt  Diaatcg.  Hard.
p.  £4  ;  Dem.  a  Oallip.  p.  1344.)  From  thia  cir-
conutance  wa  ahonld  mfcx  that  no  oath  waa  ex-
acted from  them  befne  they  entsed  npon  office  :
Hndtwalcker  ia  of  a  conttarr  opinion,  and  cng-
geata  that  the  purput  of  their  oath  of  office  waa
'  e  Mme  oi  that  of  the  HeliMtic  cath  giren  by

craoathcnea  (o.  Ttascr.  p.  747).

The  Diaetctae  of  the  diffennt  tribei  anxar  to
hare  aat  in  diSuvnt  plocea  ;  as  tonplea,  haUo,  and
conrta  of  jualice,  if  not  wanted  for  other  pnipoaea.
Thoae  of  the  Oeneid  and  Erectbeid  Iribea  met  in
the  hdJacK  (Dem.  a.  EBtrg.  p.  1142.  2E.)  ;  we
read  of  othera  holding  a  court  in  the  delphininm
'-  Awot.  ii.  p.  1011),  and  aUo  in  ^a  <mi
!Aii  (a.  Sig*.  L  p.  1106).  Again,  we  are  told
of  alBTea  being  examined  by  the  Diaetetae  aitling
for  that  porpoae,  under  the  a[^>ellation  of  Pafari-
irrgX  [ToRUBNTUii],  in  the  hephaiit^inm,  or
temple  of  Poaeidon.  (Iwcr.  Tpoi^  p.  361.  31,  ed.
Bekker.)  Moreora-,  wa  are  told  of  priTote  acbi.
tralora  meeting  in  the  temple  of  Auiena  on  the
Acmpolia  ;  and,  if  the  amended  reading  of  Pallni
(riii.  126)  is  conect,  we  an  informed  hy  him,  in
genenl  tsma,  that  tbe  arbitnton  f«iner]y  held
their  couita  in  the  templea  {Aij^w  'r  lepoit
w^Aai).  Haipoaation  olao  (a.  c)  oailiuta  the
dicaali  with  the  arbitnton,  obaerring  thai  tbe
fbrmn  hod  regularly  appoinlad  court!  of  joatica
(iwoStitiynira).

Another  point  of  difference  waa  the  mode  of
payment,  inaamoch  oa  the  dicaita  reeeiTcd  an
allowBDce  £nna  the  ttata,  wheteai  the  only  rcmu-

tion  of  the  Diaetetae  waa  a  drachma  depoiited

TBfdtrrvra  by  the  complainant,  on  the  com-
mencement of  tbe  mit,  the  lame  anm  being  alao
[aid  for  the  iintapaaia,  and  erery  briiiaria  awotn
during  the  proceedingi.  (Pollux,  riii.  39,  127  ;
HarpocT.  j.  v.)  Thia  mfiiaroffit  la  the  aame  aa
the  I^X/4  TsS  A«irofiapTiip<«i  mentioned  by
Demoatheoea  (c.  TimalL  p.  1190).  The  deloidant
in  thia  caoa  bad  biled  to  give  eridence  ai  he  ought
to  hare  dont^  and  thetefote  the  plamtiff  com-
menced pnceedinga  againit  him  for  thia  neglect,
befere  the  arbitnton  in  the  principal  anil,  the
fint  elep  of  which  waa  the  [«yment  of  the  rapi-

Tho  public  arbitratiHi  were  hrtMunM,  i.  i,  ereiy
<me  who  had,  or  bncied  he  had,  a  anoe  of  com-
plaint againat  them  for  their  dedaiono,  might  jim-
ceed  againit  Ihem  by  itaayytiJt,  or  infbrmatiatt
laid  b^ore  the  lenate.  For  thii  puipoae,  oayi
Ulpian,  whoee  atatement  ia  confirmed  by  Perno-
ithenea  <c.  Miid.)  in  the  caae  of  Strolon,  the  public
DiK^tetae  were  towaidi  the  dote  of  their  year
of  offic^  and  during  the  latter  daja  of  the  month
Thaigelion,  required  to  preaent  theniaelTea  in  aome
fixed  place,  probably  near  the  aenale-hooae,  that
they  might  be  ready  to  onawer  any  chat^  bnmght
agomat  them,  of  which  they  nceived  a  pretima
notice.  The  ptmithmenl,  in  caie  of  Dondemnatiou,
wai  attaiia,  or  the  loaa  of  chic  lishtt.  Harpo-
cntion  (i.  r.),  however,  infanui  na  Uiat  tbe  tla-ar-
TfAla  againat  the  arbitntora  wai  bnoght  before
the  dlcaata  or  judgea  of  the  regular  cotuta,  but  thia
probably  h^pmed  only  on  apfea^  or  in  caae*  of


S9S  DIAETETAE.

gnat  iniporlaiice,  inoiniuch  u  tha  0»\4 muld
not  infiict  a  STeMer  peusltf  thui  a  fine  of
dnchnuia  witb  aCunio.

Ai  (o  the  extent  of  the  jorudictiim  oT  the
DiuUtse,  Pallni  (tuI  136)  itate^  tliat  in  fbimer
timn  no  nit  vat  biviight  into  ■  court  beSan  it
hftd  been  inrefl^galed  bj  th«  Dia«I«u«  (irsUoi
ovlifila  JIiTi  itplr  ^1  Smrnfrit  iKBta  lUr^yrro).
There  can  be  hot  little  doubt  that  the  noid  ntuu
here  refen  to  a  time  *hicb  vai  ancient  with  re-
fennce  to  the  ige  of  the  Athenian  onton,  and
Iheiefbie  that  tlua  pnniDH  inreatigatiaii  wai  no
loDgei  requieita  in  the  daji  of  Demoethenee  and
liie  conlampontiei.  Still  wa  find  the  Diaetetae
mentiDned  hv  them  in  very  many  caaea  of  civil
action!,  and  it  ii  not  nnlikely  tha
vhoie  du^  it  mi  to  bring  ■
(tltriytir^  encemaged  tha  pmceaa  befbra
miDTt,  u  a  meani  of  MTUig  the  itata  the  pay-
ment which  would  otherwiae  ban  been  due  to  the
dicaala.  Hudtwaldcer  ii  aceocdingl
that  the  Diaetetae  wen  eompetent
caaeB  of  drU  actiou  Ac  raatiutioa  or  osnpeiiaa-
tion,  but  not  of  pend  or  criminal  indictnwnta
(ypafoj),  and,  moreovar,  that  it  mted  with  t
complainant  whether  hia  caoje  vaa  brought  befc


a  fint  inttance,  or  lent
higher  court  of  jadicalnre., (Dem.
p.  601.  18.)


.  AndrU.


of thii  tort  the
rf  inquiry  on  ;
cooTOiientiy
a£(Qi4.p.ll06),


Diaetetui  wt  u  commiauonen
ten  of  bet  which  could  nut  I
mbed  in  a  court  of  juatice  (Dei
jnat  ai  what  ii  odled  an  "  i:
directed  by  oar  own  Court  of  Chancary  to  an  in-
feriu  eonrt,  for  the  pnrpoae  of  trying  ■  queation  of
bet,  to  be  determined  by  a  jnty.  Either  party  in
a  Hit  eonld  demand  or  cballcuge  (tpona^iivScu)
an  inquiry  of  thii  aort  before  an  arbitntlor,  the
challenge  being  called  Tpin^ifvit  -.  a  term  which
wa>  al»  applied  to  the  "arlklM  of  agreement"
by  which  the  extent  and  object  of  the  inquiry  were
defined.  (Dem.  e.  N«»r.  p.l3B7.)  Many  in-
lUncea  of  theie  rpvt\4ifftts  are  found  in  the
ofiktori ;  one  of  the  moat  frequent  ii  tha  demand
or  ofier  to  examine  by  torture  a  ilaTC  nippoaed  to
ba  cogniiant  of  a  EoBIter  in  dlipnte,  the  damage
which  might  renll  to  the  owner  of  the  ahiTe  Ixing
guaranteed  by  the  party  who  demanded  the  eia-
minatiDO.  (Harpocr.  i.  v.  a-p^nXnirii.)  See  alto  De-
moalhenea  (OMtor.  i.  p.  674),  who  obaerrea  Chat
the  testimony  of  a  ilsve,  elicited  by  torture,  waa
thought  of  more  tbIdo  by  the  Atheniana  than  the
eridmce  of  freemen.  Anolhei  inalance  aomewtiat
aimihir  to  the  laat,  waa  the  rpiiAriBii  tit  imfm-
piar  (Pollux,  viiL  62),  when  a  party  jxopeaed  to
hit  opponent  thU  the  deciaien  of  a  diipuMl  point
thonld  be  determined  by  the  oridencc  of  a  third
party.  (Antipbon,  Dt  CiortuL  p.  U4,  ed.  Beh-
ker.)  Somelimea  alto  we  road  of  a  vp^icAitffii,
by  which  a  jartj  waa  challenged  to  allow  tha  ex-
aiuiuation  of  documsnta  ;  ai  willi  (Dem.  e.  SlijJi.
p.  1104),  dceda,  banken'  hooka,  Su.  (e.  Tiwli.
p.  1197).  II  it  manifeat  that  the  fbnu  and  ot>-
jecu  of  a  TpiiicAqiru  would  Tary  acoording  to  the
matter  in  diapute,  and  the  evidonco  which  waa
producible,^  we  ahall,  thsefrae,  eraitent  QunelTea
with  adding  that  the  term  waa  alto  need  when
a  party  challenged  hia  adTeraary  to  make  hia  alle-
galioo  under  the  nnetion  of  an  oath,  or  ofTercd  to
make  hit  own  ilatenenli  under  the  tame  obliga-


DIAETETAE.

tion.  (Dem.  e.  ApaL  p.  S96,  e.  Com.  p.  1239.  19.)
The  pmninption  or  pmpoaiettion  which  m^ht
ariaa  from  a  loluntaiy  oath  in  the  lait  caae,  might
be  met  by  a  aimilar  rp6n^^it^  tendered  by  the  op-
potite  party,  to  which  the  original  challenger  ap-
pear! to  ban  had  the  option  of  contenting  or  not
aa  he  might  think  ympa.  (Dam.  TliwtL  p.  1203 ;
compare'  Ariat  AM.  L  16.)  In  all  caaea  wheT«
any  of  theae  inreatigatiana  ,or  depoaitionB  were
made  before  the  Diaetetae,  we  may  conclude  with
Hudtwalcker  (p  48),  that  they  m^^l  be  called  aa
witneatet  in  lubeequent  ttagea  ef  the  action,  either
to  Bate  the  eridniee  they  had  taken,  or  to  un-
duco  the  documeott  tliey  had  examined,  and  which
wen  depodled  by  them  in  an  echinus  [Appkl-
LATio  (Obhs).]

The  proceadinga  in  the  triali  before  the  pnblk
arbitiaton  were  of  two  kind^  lit,  When  two
partita  agreed  by  a  regular  oontraet  to  refo'  a
matter  in  dilate  to  a  judge  or  jodget  nbdtd  from
them.  Sdly,  Wboi  a  canaa  waa  breaRht  belbre  a
public  arbittBtor,  witfaont  any  mch  prenooi  com-
promiie,  and  in  the  tegular  eonne  of  Uw. The

ce  brcoDtiaet  between  two  paitiea,  the
award  waa  final,  and  do  appeal  could  be  brought
before  another  court,  though  the  untncceaafol  party
night,  in  aome  inilancea,  more  for  a  new  trial
(t^  /lil  vlfar  irriXjixiai,  Dem.  a.  AfarJ.  ii  541).
Except  in  thii  point,  cf  non-^ipeal,  an  arhitratoc
who  waa  aelected  from  the public  piaetetae  by
litigant  partiet,  leemi  to  haw  beoi  mbject  to  the
and  to  haTa  ttood  in  the  aame  re-
■rtiea  aa  an  artritrator  appointed  by
of  proceeding  alto  appean  to  hare
been  the  aame  before  both  (Dem.  e.  Mad.  p.  54 1 ),
LCeount  of  which  it  giTea  betow. It  moat,  how-
r,  be  fint  atated,  that  theie  are  itnmg  reaiona
npport  of  Hudtwalcker^  opinion,  timt  when-
r  a  tnitor  withed  to  bring  an  action  before  odo
nore  of  the  public  Diaetetae,  he  afniied  to  od«
of  the  many  oiBcaa  called  ilme/tryta  (Dem.  e,
' ■ 910.  6,  e.  Pantatn.  p.  976.  10  ;  Polloz,
duty  it  vat  to  Inng  the  ouiae
ytr)  mu  a  proper  court By  aome auch
,  at  any  rstt^  a  requitite  number  of  irbitra-
rat  allatted  to  the  complainant,  care  being
that  they  were  of  the  aame  tribe  aa  tlie  de-
fendant. (Haipocr.  a  e.  Siamrrol.) PrJlnx  (riii.
infbnni  ni  that  if  a  Diaetetei  refuted  to
I  caaae,  he  might  be  pnnithed  with  od'ana  .-
appeaia  that  under  extraordinary  circum-
■tinoea,  and  after  hearing  the  caae,  a  Diaetstea
imethnei  refuted  to  decide  bimaelf^  and  referred
le  partita  to  a  court  of  jnltice, (DaM.e.Pkonm.
.  gla.)

The  pmceaa  befbra  the  pnblie  DtaetatM wma
ootidocted  in  the  following  manner. After  con-
pUint  made,  aed  paj^ent  of  the  wapiirrant,  the
{daintilF  icpponed  fail  sTerment  by  an  oath,  to  the
~ 1  that  hia  accniatian  waa  true,  which  the  de-
int  met  by  a  like  cAth  at  (o  the  matti?  of  hia
ice. When  the  cath  (hmtiwaUi)  had  been
taken  by  the  partiea,  the  arbittatort  eolercd
the  inquiry,  heard  witBenci,  enmined  docs-
t,  and  hdd  aa  many  craifaeDcea  {trirttut}
with  ibt  partiea,  ai  might  be  necemary  fiir  the  aet-
tlement  of  the  qneation. (See  anthonlica,  Hudt-
walcker, p.  80.) ThedayofproDonncing  jttdgment
(4  itiimrtt  r^t  Uni,  Dem.  e.  Evira.  p.  1153)
waa  ptobably  fixed  b;  law,  if  wa  may  JDOge  htm


aerltf.  S40.
ii.  93),  wha


DIAETETAR.

tiw  BBH  (4  ■■p'a  KiL  iuilpa)  lij  which  it  ii
oBti  ID  the  onion  i  il  iiug)iC,^DircTer,  withcon-
■enl  of  both  putiea,  be  poMpoied.  The  T«dict
piToi  mu  cmmtenigDod  bj*  t]ie  proper  outhoritiee,
prrtnpa  bj  the  tlff^jnrytU^  and  thenbj  ecqaizwl
ill  nlidity.  The  trEtioiu,  mentioned  by  Demo-
ub««  (f.  MtU.  f.  6i3)  u  hariug  tigned  ft  jiidg-
■mL,  were  pnbablj  theneolbetK,  m  the  iction
■B  >  BUt  — mTTf  l»»,  D^uch  k,  nuMOTU,  tailed
ID  JM^BTTM  Msa  fuw  tUq^  J. «.  m  letioa  whne
tbeplDigtiff  WM  DotraquRd  to  hkm  tha  danuwca
'  n  !>(•■),  Uw  pavltf,  ID  cue  of  a  Tonuet

DDied  b*  In :  thi*  mlone  [>  nif-


in  of  righli  or  property  :  nor,  indeed,  doe*
n  >n  J  mem  for  ntppoeing  that  thrii  jnrij-
dictko  wBi  not  extoided  to  tKe  frjwti  Ti^i^raf,  or
H  when  the  phuntiffwM  nquired  tOBMoaaoT  '
BJ  nil  dDDiage*,  pnirided  the  >ue««ment  did  not
oceed  loCDe  filed  mmoont.  In  inpport  of  thii
DtiaioD  ve  nu;  adduce  the  anlhorilj  of  Pollni
(•ilL  127),  who  eipnolj  ilatee  thst  the  plaintiff
Bight  aaaeaa  hie  damagca  before  the  ar^itnun^
«ba  tlK  lav  did  not  do  M  for  him.

[f  the  defigtdast  wen  not  pteaent  on  the  proper
dij  to  make  hii  Uit  dcfnoe,  uidgnitnt  went
•niart  him  bj  deboll  (iptinir  i^t),  the  ar-
bitnter  being  obliged  to  wait  till  the  enning  (W
it^fO,  Dem.  c  Mad.  p.  Si],  e.  Ttmotli.  p.  1190).
^wKtiirffT,  bowerer,  the  time  of  proDonacing  kd-
tBKt  wst  deferred  in  eoofeqiKtice  of  u  depoeitioD
((n«urta,  PdUux,  liiL  SO ;  Haipocr.  >.  v.)  ^-
l^big  B  Btii&c1«T  cBDie  for  poa^nement,  luch
M  iii>iiiB,  BbacDce  finn  town,  military  terrice,
«  Btba  reaion^  To  mbitanttate  the«,  the  ^-
flionl,  when  poamble,  appeared  penonall;  ;  bnl  if
a  jparlj  wM  pterentcd  from  appearing  on  the  day
it  Bnl,  by  any  Dneipectad  etenl,  the  iwuiuMila
aiighl  be  made  DD  oath  by  anthoiMd  friendi.
(DBa.e.O(pi|i.p.ll74.4:PaUni,TiiL5fi.}  The
*ni)»e»Ca  iDJ^t  be  met  hj  a  nRmter^dateoioit
{iittunymBi£)  fiem  the  oppoaite  par^  affirming
hie  bdief  that  the  leSHU  alleged  were  fictilioui
•r  alonnible.  Id  eomtettion  with  thii  point,  we
m^  obecTTe  that,  actording  to  PoUni  (viiL  60),
Ifae  notiDo  for  a  new  trial  could  only  be  inatained
in  caaea  wbse  the  applicant  had  made  a  fkw^iefffit,
and  demnied  ather  pcnonally  or  by  proxy  aoainit
the  panig  of  judgment  on  the  regiJar  day.  More-
■rn',  it  wai  incumwnt  on  the  peity  who  wiihed  for
a  DTw  trial  to  more  for  it  within  ten  dayi  after
jadgnetit  had  been  ptonoonced,  and  aren  then  he
vaa  obliged  u  take  a  kind  of  hw^os-Ia,  to  the
eflret  thu  hii  abaence  on  the  proper  day  «u  in-
ToJnntary.  (PoUnx,  Tiii.  60.)  In  de&ult  of  com-
pjmaee  with  tbeae  conditioni,  the  preTiom  aenteoco
W1H  confirmed.  (Dem.  cl  Af»f.  p.  £42.)  We  are
told  alao  by  Photioa  (Ln.  i.  v.  fifl  "Aro  W^),  that
it  waa  competent  fu  pUinnff  at  well  at  defendant
to  sure  lot  a  new  trial  od  the  groundt  we  have
mentiaDed.  Whenjt  waa  granted,  the  fonnerter-
diet  waa  aet  laide  (4  'p4f  *  JAlteTD),  and  the  jei-
tin  went  again  before  ao  arbitrator,  probably
thmgh  the  mMnmentality  of  the  tLnryiiyfit,  to
irltoin  applicalian  had  been  made  in  the  fini  in-
aiaiwe.  The  pneeaa  iuelf  it  called  irrUntir  in
Greek,  and  doea  not  aeem  to  haie  been  confined  to
Iriale  hefore  the  Diaetetae :  the  (oneapiaiding  term


DIAUASTIOOSIS.

Thia,  howerer,  wat  not  the  ouljr  mea

ting  adde  a  judgment,  inwmnch  at  it  mil

effected  by  en  *^(rii,  or  ^iped  to  tl

tonrta  [Al  '"


{GnMK)],ar._._  _..

had  been  tendered,  by  a  iCini  Koiiarixr'mi
(Harpoer.  i.  v. ;  Dem.  c  TfautLp.  1201.  G).

It  remaina  to  apeak  of  the  atrictly  private  arbi-
tratora,  ehoaen  by  matual  agreenwat  between  con-
tending parties,  and  therefore  generally  diatinguiihed
by  the  title  olpersl,  of  whom  it  mutt  be  onder-
abwd  that  they  were  not  adeded  from  tha  ImrqTal
of  tlia  Iribea.  The  power*  with  which  they  wers
inToated,  ware,  at  we  might  aappoae,  not  ilway*
the  lanio  i  aometimea  they  were  meidy  (loAAacTa^


that  laaeoa  (Bt  Dtoatog.  Htrtd.  p.  £4,  ed.  Bekk.)

■peaka  of  arhitratort  oBering  either  to  bring  about
a  reeoncilia^rai  if  they  could,  withoat  taking  an
oath,  orto  make  anaward  {in^v(o4aj)  upon  Mtb.
Sometimea,  on  the  other  hand,  they  were  purely
referee*,  nnd  then  their  pnwen  depended  upon  the
tetma  of  the  agreement  of  reference;  if  tbeae  pcwert
vere  limited,  the  arbitntion  waa  a  idurs  M
A)r°»(Iaacr.i>.Gia:p.S73,ed.Bekk.).  Theagree-
ment  waa  not  merely  a  Tcrbal  contract  {•({pa/a^),
but  drawn  np  in  wnting  (Arrrpowi)  mri  svAfytas,
Uem.  e.  Pkor.  p.  912),  and  tigned  by  the  paniea  ;
it  fixed  the  number  of  refenea  (generally  three),
dctomined  how  many  nnanimoua  yolea  were  n»
ceaarr  fiir  a  valid  dediion,  and  [robablj  reacned
or  prohibited,  aa  the  <aie  might  be,  a  right  of  ap-
peal to  other  antboritiea.  (Itocr.  c  CdL  p.  S7G,
ed,  Bekk. ;  Dem.  d,  AtaL  p  897.)

If  there  were  no  Iloiitationi,  tbeae  Diaetetae
were  then,  to  to  tpeak,  arhitratort  proper,  accord-
ing to  the  definition  of  Featna  (p.  IG,  ed.  MU-
ler) ;  — "  Arbiter  dicitnr  Jndex,  qnod  totioa  rei
habcat  arbitrinm  et  poleatalem."  MoreoTcr,  no
a^Ktl  could  be  brought  agmnit  their  judgment
(Dem.  c.  Af«d.  p  G4G)  ;  though  we  read  of  an  in-
■tance  of  a  party  baring  penoaded  hit  opponent  to
Imve  a  matter  to  the  arbitration  of  three  peiaona  i
and  afterwarda,  when  he  found  they  were  likely  to
decide  againtt  himtelf,  going  be^re  one  af  the
public  arbitrator).  (Dem.  c.  AjAtb.  p.  S6Z)  We
thould,  however,  tupcoae  that  in  thii  caae  there
WB<  no  written  ovyW"!.  The  award  waa  fre-
quently given  under  the  aanction  of  an  oath,  and
had  the  tame  force  aa  the  judgment  which  pro-
eeedad  from  a  court  of  law,  ao  that  it  might  be  fal-
lowed hya  Sun,  /Jotont.  (Dem.  c.  (Mip.  p.  1240.
22.)  We  may  add,  that  theae  private  Diaetelaa
are  ipoken  of  aa  titling  it  rf  (ip^,  it  if  'Hfxu-
erflqi,  and  that  in  tome  catea  it  waa  cuttnmary
to  give  notice  af  their  appointment  to  the  proper
arcbon  or  migialiata  (iTo^pfir  wpis  t^r  ifxit),
who,  aa  Hodtwalcker  luggeita,  may  have  acted  aa
an  flaayirriit  in  the  caae.  (Dem,  c.  OM'p.  p.
1244.  14,  lAfcii.  0.542.14.)  [R,  W.J

DIAQRAPHEIS  (iiayfa^u), [EiapHOBi,]
DIA-LIS  FLAMEN. [FLaniN.]
DIAMARTY'RIA (JiafuipTupIa.) [Aha-

DIAMASTIOO^IS  (B«vu(rrl7«it),  waa  a
aolemnily  perfiinned  at  Sparta  at  the  feetivsl  of
Artemia  Orthia,  whoee  temple  wu  caDed  Lim-
naeon,  from  it>  titnation  m  a  maiaby  part  of  the
town.  (Fan*.  iiL  16.  S  6.)  The  aolemnity  waa
thia; — Spartan  yontha  ((fnifai]  were  acourged  on
the  occtuon  at  the  altar  of  Artemia,  by  penona
^pointed  fic  the  porpeae,  mitil  thut  blood  gg^ed


400  DIAPSEPHI3IS.

£jnb  and  eorerad  the  slur.  Tho  •eaarging  itwlf
-wiu  preceded  bj  a  prepantion,  b;  whicb  thgae
who  intended  U  nsdergD  the  ditunutigov)  tried  to

deAcribe*  the  origin  of  the  wonhip  of  AnemiA
Orthiot  and  of  tbe  diamoitij
mumflr;  —  A  wooden  Rati
Oreata  bad  bionght  from  Taurii,
buib  by  Aitnbaraa  and  Alopeciu,  the  ioni  of
Iiboi.  Til*  two  men  vera  immedialelf  itmck
mad  at  the  aight  of  it.  The  Linmaeani  and  the
inbabitonta  of  otber  neighbouriiw  placea  then  of«
fered  aaaiScet  to  the  EoddeH  ;  bat  a  qnanel  en-
■ued  amoitg  them,  in  which  Mieral  individnali  were
killed  at  Me  altar  of  Aitemia,  who  now  demanded
atnnement  lor  the  paIlutJ6n  of  her  nncluaij.  From
henceforth  hnman  rictima  were  Kleeted  by  lot  aud
ofiered  to  Artemii,  ontil  LjCDivn*  intto^ieed  the
•coDiging  of  jomig  men  at  na  ^tai  ai  ■  lubatitute
lor  human  uctificea.

a  mbatitate  fw  huinan  ncnfice,  and  Ljcurgui
node  it  also  Mire  hia  pnrpoHa  of  edncation,  in  ■)
br  ■«  be  made  it  a  pArt  of  the  s^tem  of  harden-
ins  the  Spartan  yootbi  against  bodily  luSeriiigi.
(Plot  lyj.  18,  Imlit.  Load.  p.  251i  Cic  7\uaU.
T.  27.)  According  to  another  &a  leu  probable  ac-
count, tbe  diamaatiKDeit  originated  in  a  cinnun-
alnnce,  recorded  by  Plutareh  (AriMtid.  17),  which
hqipened  before  the  battle  of  Plataeae.

The  woiahip  of  Aitemii  Orthia  vai  nnqnettion-
abl;  <«7  ancient,  and  the  dianuatigoiu  only  a  itep
from  harbariim  towardi  ciTQiutien.  Many  anee-
dotei  are  related  of  the  coorage  and  iittnpidity
with  wbieh  young  Sfartana  bore  tbe  laahea  of  the
BCOUTge  i  aome  even  died  witbonL  uttering  a  moimur
at  tbetr  anSeringa,  for  to  die  under  the  atrokea  nui
conaidered  aa  honourable  a  death  a>  that  on  tbe
field  of  battle.  (Compare  Milllei'ai)Dr.  u.  9.  S  6.
■olei,aiidiT.  G.  SS.,iu<ea.;  Manao,  .^rta,  I  S.
11.183.)  [L.S,]

DIATJOMAE  (llui«^  or  DIA'DOSEIS
(piatiiTtis)  were  public  donationi  to  the  Athenian
people,  which  correapoaded  to  the  Roman  oomgiaria.
[CoNQiAHiUM.]  To  these  beloi^  the  free  diath-
bntiona  of  com  (Aiiitoph.  Vi^.  71S>,  the  clem-
cbiae  [CQI.ONU  (Greek)],  the  revenue!  from  tbe
minei,  and  tbe  money  of  the  tbeorica. [Thio-

DIAPSE'PHISIS  (tiajrifuns),  a  political  in-
atitution  at  Athena,  the  object  of  whicb  waa  to  pre-
vent alisna,  or  aucb  aa  were  the  ofiapring  of  an
milawful  marriage,  from  aiauming  the  righti  of
citiaena.  Aa  naurpationa  of  tbia  kind  were  no'
nncommon  at  Athena  (PluL  PtHd.  37  i  Haipoci
:v.  m-o/uit),  lariooa  meaturea  had  been  adapted
againit  them  (ypo^  [tvlsi  and  Siipo(irlai) ;  but
ai  none  of  them  bad  the  duired  effect,  a  new  me-
thod, the  tta^ftpt^is  woa  devised,  according  to
whicb  tbe  trial  on  ipuiioua  citiieni  waa  to  be  bold
by  the  dpmotae,  within  whose  dame  intmden  were
aoipected  to  eiiit ;  for  if  each  deme  aeparstely  waa
kept  clear  of  intniden,  the  whole  body  of  citicena
wiHild  naturally  feel  tbe  benefit  Every
therefore  obtained  the  right  or  du^  at  c
^mei  to  leviie  it*  lexiarchic  rcaiaten,aodto
tiun  whether  any  had  entered  tuair  namea  whe  had
no  dainu  to  tbe  rights  of  cidicni.  The  asaembly
of  the  dcmotae,  in  which  tbeu  inveMigadoni  look
place,  was  held  under  tbe  preaidoDcy  of  the  de-


DIASIA.

(Harpoer.  j.  e.  mnofx") ;  loi  in  the  case  bnmght
Kirirard  in  the  oration  of  Demnttbenes  against
Eubxdidea,  we  do  not  find  that  be  was  demacch,
but  it  ia  merely  ataled  that  be  waa  a  member  of
the  0niA4.  When  the  demotae  were  assembled,
an  oath  waa  administered  to  them,  in  which  they
promised  to  judge  impaitially,  wilhmt  hraur  to-
ward*, or  enmity  agomil,  thoac  penma  on  whom
they  might  hare  to  paa*  aentcnce.  The  preaideut
then  naA  tbe  namea  o(  the  demotae  &om  the  re-
gister, aaking  the  <qiLnion  of  tbe  assembly  i^St^^/rt'
fiCtirSai)  respecting  each  indi'idaal,  wbetherthey
thought  bim  a  tme  and  Icgiumata  dtisan  or  aot.
Any  one  then  bad  the  r^^ht  to  say  what  he
thought  or  knew  of  the  peraoa  in  question ;  and
when  any  one  nas  impeached,  a  regulai  trial  look
place.  (Dem.  e.  EnbuL  p.  1303;  Ae*^in.  Zte
Fait.  Leg.  p.  MS.)  Pollux  (viiL  IB)  gaya  that  tbe
demotae  on  tbi*  occa*ion  gare  their  votea  with
leave*  and  not  with  pebbln  as  was  usual,  bnt  De-
mosthoiea  simply  calls  them  •liTJifot,  If  a  peraoo
was  found  guilty  of  baying  usurped  the  rights  of  a
citizen  (irinfiif  IfurSoi),  his  name  was  Unck  from
the  lenarchic  iwster,  and  be  binuelf  waa  de-
graded to  the  ran^  of  an  alien.  But  if  he  did  not
acquiesce  in  the  verdict,  but  appealed  to  the  great
conrta  of  juatioe,  at  Athena,  a  hecvicr  puniahment
awaited  bim,  if  he  waa  found  guilty  ^ete  also ;  tor
he  was  then  sold  as  a  dave,  and  his  prop«ty  was
confiscated  by  the  state.  (Dicny*.  Hal.  de  Iiaeo,
c  16.  p.  G17,  ed.  Beiske ;  Arsumnt  ad  Deamti.

If  by  any  acddent  tbe  leiianhic  t^isten  had
been  loat  or  deetroyed,  a  careful  sontiny  of  the
same  nature  as  that  described  above,  and  likewise
called  tm^^iirit,  took  place,  in  order  to  prevent
any  spurious  ciUsen  from  having  bis  name  entered
in  tbe  new  regiiten.  (Dcm.  i.  c  p.  1306.)

It  ia  commonly  believed  that  tbe  iiai^uru  waa
introduced  at  Athens  in  b.c  419,  by  one  Demo-
philna.  (Schtknacn,  Dt  Ooaatiu,  p.  358,  tnuuL  ;
Wachamuth,  ftiliat.  AlterliMiaA.  vol  I  p.  519,
2nd  ed.)  But  it  baa  justly  been  remarked  by
Sicbelia  on  Pbilochoma  {Fragm.  p.  SI),  that
Harpociation  (i.  v.  Iuii|4f  urit),  tbe  ^ipatent  ou-
thoiity  far  tbia  supposition,  taiuiot  be  iDleipicted
in  this  SQise.  One  taifft^na  ia  mentioned  by
Plulwch  iPtrid.  37)  aa  early  a*  B.  c^  445.  Qin-
ton  [F.  H.ii  f.  141)  haa,  moreover,  ahown  that
the  JioiH^iTK  mentioned  by  Uaipocratirai,  in  the
archonabip  of  Archias,  doea  oot  belong  to  a.  c.  419,
but  to  ac  347-  Compere  Hermann,  Mamaido/lia
Pol.  AiU.o/GTiKae,\l23.  n.U,  &c.i  and  Scho-
mann,  L  c,  whole  tengtbened  ateoont,  hoitevcr,
abonld  be  read  with  great  tare,  sa  he  roakea  tome
statement*  which  aeem  to  be  irreconcilable  with
each  other,  and  not  founded  on  good  authority.
The  BOURe  fiom  which  we  derive  most  infbrmatian
onthia  subject  is  the  oration  of  Demosthenes  againit
Eubnlidoa.  [L.  S.]

DIA'HIUM. [aaavua.]

DIA'SIA  (Sufiru>),agTeat  featival  celehnted  at
Athena,  without  the  "rails  of  the  city  (IJti  t^i
T^Hu),  in  hononr  of  Zeus,  surnamed  MtiXixm
(Thuc.  L  126).  The  whole  people  took  part  in
it,  and  the  wealthiercitiiena  om^red  victims  (iipiTa),
while  tho  po«eT  daiaei  bomt  soch  iacente  as  their
country  luiniiUicd  i&iiia-ra  trix^ia),  wbieh  the
icholiait  on  Thncydidei  erroneonaly  erplaini  ai
cakes  in  the  shape  of  animal*.  (Cmnpere  Xen*
AmJi.  viL  8.  S  4;  Lnaaa Tim.  J;  AriatofL


DICASTBBION.
Ktk  402,  ftc)  Tbe  imA  took  pLue  in  tbe  U^
ur  bdf  of  the  montli  of  ADthnterioD  (Schol.
adAriMepii,  i.  e.)  with  feasting  and  rejoiungK,  and
Wfli^  like^poat  odttf  fntJTala,  accompanied  by  a  fair,
(AiutDplLA^ai.841.)  It  wulliiifealivalal  which
Ctloo  <na  airaatA  bjp  an  onide  to  take  posiosin]
«  tka  ■aoiniii  of  Atieni ;  bat  ba  miilook  tb<
mde,  nd  made  ths  attempt  during  the  oelcbm-
tiai/  the  Oljmpian  gamei.  (Compare  Pallni,  L
26  \  Soidu  t.  e.)  The  etjniolagr  i^  Sidam,  giren
bj*  DHl  of  the  ancient  grmmmBrian*  (from  Aihi
ui  lir^)  ii  &1k,  the  nams  ii  a  men  denratiio
frma  Iiii.  ai  'AraAA^rm  from  'Kti>>\mr.  [L.S.]
DIASTYLOS.  [TiMFLUM.]
DIATKETA.  [Vitruii.J
DIAULOS  (<£»*«>. ISTiDtut..!

DIAZCHA  (M^«*w}. [SUBLIOACDLUtl.]

DICASTE'RION  (tuBurVwr),  indicatca  both
ibo  aggrogUe  jndgea  tbat  lal  in  cooit,  and  the
place  itielf  in  which  thef  held  their  aittinga.  For
u  aecoitDt  of  the  fonncr,  tbe  reader  is  referred  to
the  article  DnuBTIS :  with  reapect  to  the  latter,
war  inlcainaMn  ii  tbit  imper&ct.  In  the  earlier
■goi  tliae  weic  fire  celebrated  pLaceB  at  Atheni  set
Bfwt  is  tlM  Bttiogi  of  the  judges,  who  had  cog-
aimee  <^  iIm  giaiei  ranaca  m  which  tbe  Ion  or
hmna  lifig  wn  iTCDged  or  eipiated,  Tii.  tbe  areio-
pagitea  and  ilw  ephetaA,  Theae  places  were  the
AniDp^nt  [AKHIor  aoub],  and  the  ^1  HoAXaJfr,
M  AfAfury,  tt\  Hfnrriml^  and  Jv  ^fttrrTtil
Tbe  aotiquin  of  theae  fbui  lait  is  nfiicientlj
reached  ftw  b;  tbe  aiduik  chniactei  of  the  din-
uB  of  the  canaet  that  were  i^iprapriated  to  each :
m  tke  fiiM  we  are  told  that  accidental  deaths  were
it  ■!  ns>  il  i  in  the  second  homicides  confessed,  hot
jaitificd ;  in  the  third  there  were  quasi  trials  cf
"—^■tr  t^ing*,  which,  hj  falling  and  the  like,
U  mmiiasil  a  has  of  hnman  lift ;  in  the  fouttli
hsBidda  who  had  Rtamed  from  exile,  and  com-
■itled  ■  flush  mauslaaghlcc,  were  appointed  to  be
tried.  Witk  feapect  to  tbeie  ancient  institntions,
tl  whid  little  more  than  the  name  remained  when
the  histcirieal  ige  commenced,  it  will  be  soflicienl
u  obBCrre  that,  m  accordance  with  the  ancienl
(ireek  frrlipg  reapeding  morder,  ¥it.,  that  it  par-
tool  Bire  of  the  nature  of  a  ceremonial  pollution
than  B  political  ofience,  tbe  preuding  judge  was
icTiriaUj  tbe  king  archon,  the  Athenian  r«i  sa-
il ud  that  the  pUcea  in  which  the  trials  were
en  to  tLe  sky,  to  aToid  the  conlami-
I the  judges might  incur  by  being


wUek  th.  ,  „
mu^  the  same  roof  with  a  murdere
IM  Jmd.  Alk.  p.  157.)  The  places,  however,  re-
aained  afko-  the  office  of  the  Judges  who  originally
sal  there,  wss  abolished ;  and  the?  appiar  from
I>eBoathnie*  (e.  Neatr.  p.  1MB.  31}  to  hsTe  been
snasiaiaDy  naed  by  the  ordinaiy  Heliastic  judge*
■hea  tryinfc  a  cause  of  tbe  kmd  to  which  they
vffe  cnginaUy  appropriated. The  moat  important

are  tsU  Iry  tbe  gnmmariaDS,  the  weightiest
OBSB  woe  decided  ;  and  if  an,  we  may  conclude
the  [kiMimthiran  were  the  prending  magiitratca.
Ilvdee  thia,  ardinaiy  Heliattic  courts  sate  in  the
(Mejam,  in  the  courts  Trigouon,  the  Greater
(Mufw},  tbe  Middle  (M/o'or),  the  Oreen,  the
Bed,  that  of  Hedodiiu,  and  the  Patabj-tton:  but
cf  tbiae  we  ale  unable  to  fix  the  localities,  or  to
what  aiaQJiliitii  it  wa*  nsoal  to  iqiportion  them.
Th(7  were  all  painted  with  their  dotiDctiTe  co-
len ;  nd.  It  i^fcat^  bad  k  lettta- of  the  alphabet


DICASTE8.  401

inscribed  orer  the  doorway.  With  the  eiceptirat
of  the  KeliaesL,  and  those  in  which  causes  of  mur-
der were  tried,  they  were  probably  pnlected  from
tbe  weather.  The  dicBsts  sat  upon  wooden
beucbes,  which  were  coTcred  with  rugs  or  matting
(^riaSfii,)  and  there  were  elevations  or  tribune*
(0iyurTit),  upon  which  the  antagonist  advocate*
stood  during  their  address  to  the  court.  The  ipace
occupied  by  tbe  penons  engaged  in  tbe  trial  was
protected  by  a  nuling  (iftv^dJCTOtt)  from  the  intru-
sion of  the  byilandcn ;  but  in  causes  which  bore


the  security  of  this barrier  guaranteed  i)_
presence  of  tbe  public  slaiei. (Meier,  JU,  Pne,
p.  11*1.)  [J.  aM.j

DICASTES  (iiit<urrtit),  in  its  broadest  accep-
tation a  judge,  more  peculiarly  denotes  the  Attic
functionary  of  the  democra^c  period,  who,  with  his
colleagues,  was  conslilutionaily  empowered  to  try
and  pass  judgment  upon  all  causes  and  questions
that  the  laws  and  customs  of  his  country  pronounced
susceptible  of  judicial  investigation.  Inthecircum-
atancc  of  a  pluiatily  of  persons  being  selected  from
tbe  most  of  private  citirene,  and  associated  tempo-
rarily as  representatives  of  the  whole  body  of  the
people,  adjudicating  between  its  individual  mem-
bers, and  of  such  delegates  swearing  an  oath  that


tbey  would  well  and  tnily  discbarge  the
entrusted  (o  them,  there  appears  some  nsen  ...
between  the  constitution  of  the  Attic  dicasterii
and  an  Inglish  jury,  but  in  nearly  all  other  respects
the  distinctions  between  them  are  as  great  as  the
intervals  of  space  and  time  which  iepniale  their
iOTeisI  nationk  At  Athena  the  conditions  of  his
eligibility  were,  that  the  dicast  should  be  a  free
citaen,  m  the  enjoyment  of  his  full  ftanchise
(^iti^iIb),  and  not  lesa  than  thirty  yean  of  age,
and  of  persons  so  qualified  six  thousand  were  se-
lected by  lot  for  tbe  lerriee  of  every  year.  Of  tbe
precise  method  of  their  appointment  our  notices  are
somewhat  obscure ;  but  we  may  gather  from  them
that  it  took  place  every  y«r  under  tbe  conduct  of
the  nine  archons  and  their  official  scribe  ;  that  each
of  these  ten  pcrsooagos  drew  by  lot  the  names  of
>ii  hundred  penons  of  the  tribe  assigned  to  him  ;
that  tbe  whole  number  so  selected  was  again  divided
by  lot  into  ten  lections  of  500  each,  together  with
■  lupemnmenry  one,  consisting  of  a  thonsand  per-
sons, frtna  among  whom  the  occasional  deficiencies
in  theicctions  of  500  might  be  supplied.  To  csch
of  Ibe  ten  sections  one  of  tbe  ten  first  Ictten  of  the
,^  ,  .  ed  as  a  dittinmiiBhi
tablet  (rii

letter  of  the  section  and  tbe  nameof  the  individual,
was  delivered  as  a  certificate  of  his  appointment  to
each  dicast  Three  bronie  plates  found  in  the
Peirseeus,  and  described  by  Dodwell  (2>n«&,  vol.  i.
pp.  *33 — 437),  are  supposed  to  have  served  this
purpose  ;  the  inscriptions  upon  them  consist  of
the  following  letlcii:~&.  AI0AI1F02  tPEA,
E.  AEINiAJ  AAAIETI,  and  a  ANTIXAPMOS
AAHn,  snd  bear  besides  tepresenlations  of  owls
and  Ooigon  heads,  and  other  devices  symbolic  of
the  Atdc  people.  The  thonsand  lupernumetarics
had  in  all  probability  some  different  token,  but  of
this  we  have  no  certain  knowledge.

Before  proceeding  to  the  exercise  of  his  func-
tions the  dicust  was  obliged  to  swear  the  official
oath ;  which  waa  done  in  the  earlier  ages  at  a  place
called  Ardettna,  without  the  eity,  <ia  the  botiki  of


•  o"


403  DICASTE3.

the  Ilirani,  but  in  after  dmet  at  nme  other  ipot,
of  whkb  we  are  not  iafaniKd. Id  the  time  of
Demoglhmi^ the eath (wlikh  ii  grrea at  full
length  in  Denu  c Tiaoe.  p.  746)  uurted  the
quuification  of  the  dicuti  and  a  lelEnm  engage-
menu  b;  tun  la  diKhacge  hii  office  ^thfullf  and
incomiptibl;  in  REneral,  ai  welt  u  in  certain  >pe-
cified  caiei  which  bore  reference  to  the  oppcnnt-
mcnt  of  magiitratei,  a  matter  in  no  imall  d
under  the  control  of  the  dicut,  inumuch  a.
eould  enter  npon  anj  office  without  hating  had
their  election  labmitlf  d  to  B  court  for  iti  approb
tion [Duciuasia]  ;  and begidee theK, it  coi
taiued  a  general  piomiie  to  anpport  the  exittii^
cmutilulion,  which  the  diraat  would  of  coniM  be
peculiariy  enabled  to  do,  when  penoni  wei
cueed before him  of  atlempting iti aubve
Thii  oath  being  taken,  and  ute  ditiiioDi  ma
aboTo  mentioned,  it  remained  to  aaiign  the  •
to  the  KTetnl  icctiont  of  dicaata  in  which  they
wen  to  ut  Tbig  waa  not,  Uke  the  fint,  an  appoint-
mBDt  intended  to  laat  during  the  year,  but  took
(Jace  under  the  conduct  of  the  thnmothetae,  di
nom,  every  time  that  it  wa*  neceiaary  to  impo-  '
a  number  of  diraita. In  ordinary  caieB,  when  c
two,  or  mora  Kctiimi  at  SOD  made  up  the  comj
mcnt  of  judges  appnprialed  to  trying  ihepHTtici
kind  of  csDse  in  hud,  the  pioccu  wu  eitrem
(imple. Two  nnn  or  caiketj  (itATjfWT^pia)  w
produced,  one  containing  ticketi  inicribed  with  the
diilincIiTe  letten  of  the  Kctisni ;  the  other  liii


with  >


lickeu  to


dicale  the  conrti  in  which  the  ailtingi  wen
held.  If  the  caOM  wu  to  be  tried  by  a  lb
aection,  a  tic}le(  would  be  drawn  limuitaneoi
ftom  each  um,  and  the  rcaull  announced,  that

thousand  dicaiti  were  requisite,  two  tablets  would,
in  like  manner,  be  drawn  ftom  the  um  that  re-
pteaented  the  sections,  while  one  was  drawn  from
the  other  aa  above  mentioned,  and  the  annonnce-
ment  might  run  that  sections  A  and  B  were  to  sit
in  court  r,  and  the  like.  A  more  complicated
system  must  have  been  adapted  when  ^tional
puts  of  the  section  sat  by  themaeltet,  or  were
added  to  other  whole  sections :  but  whattbia  might
have  been  we  can  only  conjecture,  and  it  it  ob-
Tiona  that  some  other  process  of  selection  must
hare  prevailed  upon  all  thoae  occasions  when
jndgea  of  a  peculiar  qualification  were  required  j
aa,  hr  instance,  in  the  trial  o!  violators  of  the  mys-
teries, when  the  initiated  only  were  alUiwed  to
iodge  I  and  in  that  of  military  offenden  who  were
eft  to  the  juatice  of  thoee  oaly  whose  comisdes
they  were,  or  should  have  been  at  the  time  when
the  offence  waa  alleged  to  have  been  committed-
It  is  ^ty  deal  that  the  allotment  of  the  dicasts
to  their  several  ccnrta  for  the  day,  took  place  in  the
manner  above-mentioned,  in  the  market  fUa,  and
that  it  was  conducted  in  all  rasea,  except  one,  by
the  theemoChetae  i  in  that  one,  which  was  when
the  msffiatiBlea  and  public  officers  rendered  an  ac-
count (^  their  conduct  at  the  expiratioa  of  their  teim
of  office,Bnd  defended  themaelveaigainatall  chai]gea
of  malversation  in  it  [EUTavNx],  the  logiitaa


allotment  had  taken  place,  each  dkaat  received  a
Blaff^  on  which  was  painted  the  letteiand  colour  of
the  court  amrded  him,  which  might  aerve  both  ai
a  ticket  to  procnrs  admittance,  and  also  to  dii-
''"g""''  him  tcoai  any  loilem  that  might  endea-


DIKE.

TOUT  clandestinely  la  obtun  a  sitting  after  bnsintta
had  begun.

The  dicasts  received  a  fee  for  their  attendance
(rh  Sunurriarfv  or  filrAit  tmaimiiit).  This  pay-
ment is  aaid  to  have  been  Erst  instituted  by  Pe-
ricles (Ariatot.  PolU.  il  9.  p.  67,  ed.  OOItlmg ;
PluL  Per.  9  (  Plat.  Gars.  p.  615] ;  and  it  is
generally  supprned  from  Aristophanet  (JVaft.  84  0),
who  makes  btrepaiades  say  that  for  the  firrt  obalua
be  ever  received  as  a  dicaflt,heboughtatoy  &r  hia
aoD,  that  it  waa  at  £nt  only  one  obolus.  Accord-
' the  Scholiast  on  Aristophanes  (Ran.  140)


the  pay  was  rabseqaently  increased  tc


•  oboU,


from  the  paseage  of
triodolrm  (f  piMaXor)  occurs  as  aaij  aa  ik  c  425  in
the  comedies  of  Aristophanes,  and  it  afterward*
mentioned  frequently.  (Aristoph.  Eg.  51,  255,
Vttp.  584,  6S4,  660,  Ran.  1540,  &c)  Backh  hat
inferred  from  theee  pasangct  that  the  triobdcin  was
introduced  by  Clean  about  &  c  431 ;  but  O.  ner-
mann {Prtuf.adAri^^Ntli.  p.l,ftc.  2nd  edit)
haa  disputed  this  opinion,  at  Imtt  to  fiv  ai  it  is
founded  upon  Aristophanes,  and  thinks  that  the
pay  of  three  oboU  for  the  dicasts  existed  before
that  time.  However  this  may  be,  thus  much  (a
certam,  that  the  pay  of  the  dicaaU  waa  not  the
tame  at  all  times,  alOiaugh  it  is  improbable  that  it
ahould  ever  have  been  two  oboli.  (AriKot.  i^
SeM.  ad  Aridopk.  Tap.  682 ;  Heiych.  a  e.  S»ii-
ffTM^r  ;  Suid.  (.  V.  ^XjoffTot.)  The  payment  waa
made  alter  every  assembly  of  a  court  of  heliaitae
by  the  Coladetae  (Lncian,  Ba  aoaaat  12,  IS)  ia
the  following  manner.  A^er  a  citjifn  had  been
appointed  by  lot  to  act  at  judge  m  a  particular
court,  he  received  on  entering  the  court  logethet
with  the  staff  (fiaimipia  or  /MCBsi)  a  taUet  or
titket  (aiiilokmr).  After  the  businesi  of  the  court
was  over,  the  dicasi,  on  ginng  out,  delivered  h>a
ticket  to  the  prytaneit,  and  receiTcd  his  fee  in  re-
turn. fSchoL  ad  Arviopk.  Flat  277  ;  Suid.  i;  v.
pwmi^ ;  ElymoL  M.  >.  h.  riiita\ar ;  Pollux,  vtiL
1 6.)  Those  who  had  come  too  late  had  no  claim
to  the  triobolon.  (Aristoph.  Fetp.  660.)  The  an-
nual amoimt  of  these  fees  is  reckoned  by  Arialcv
phanet  (r«ip.  S6D,  &c  with  the  SchoL)  at  150
talents,  a  sum  which  it  very  huh  and  can  perli^ia
only  be  applied  to  the  moit  nourishing  Umea  of
Atheni.  (Bdckb,  PaU.  Eon.  o/  Ali-u,  p.  237,
2nded.  i  Meier,  .4 it,  fttje.  p.  125,ftc.  IJ.S.M.]
DICASTICON  C8«ooT«dr).  [DzcAmwp.]
DIKE'  <*IjO|},  signifies  generally  any  proceed-
ings at  law  by  one  party  directly  or  mediatelj
afcainet  othen.  (Harpocrat.  a  v.  f  PoIIaz,  viii.  40,
41.)  The  object  of  all  anch  actions  is  to  jinlMt
the  body  politic,  or  one  or  more  of  ill  individual
mentben,  from  injury  and  aggreoion  ;  a  dlttjnc-
lion  which  has  in  most  countries  auggeated  Ihe
division  of  all  cause*  into  two  gieal  dastea,  ll>«
public  and  the  private,  and  assigned  to  each  jta
peculiar  fixm  and  tnaCment.  At  Athens  Ihe  firat
of  these  iru*  implied  by  tiie  term*  public  ttmi,  or
i^wttior  stiDmonpeailiar^yby  Tpa^t  laiiaia
of  Ibo  other  class  wen  termed  private  Hnu  or
Jc)wn>,  or  simpliriUaiinitt  Unuledtaua.  Tber«
ii  a  ttill  farther  subdiviuon  of  Yfici^  into  Sqpiaviai
and  Bwi,  of  which  the  fbimer  is  somewhat  siDdii-
gous  to  impeachment*  for  oSeaee*  directly  againat
the  itate  ;  the  latter,  to  aiminal  praaecnliona,  in
which  the  Mate  appeal*  aa  a  party  mediatelv  in-
jured in  Iho  violeuce  or  oUmt  vioog  dona  to  tndi-


DIES,
rilnl  dtiKn  II  wiU  In  obwmd  that  cum
freqnaitly  uiia,  which,  with  nfeniDcs  to  th«
mw  -— pi-"— <  0^  m»  with  «qu*l  propriet;  be
hmi^c  bJon  >  coon  m  the  fonn  of  tha  igu^
lut  BMUtioaMl,  (S  in  tbM  of  so  crdinu;  iimi,  and
ndsr  tbna  dnsmManui  the  law*  of  Atheiu  gayc
Ika  pmauulo* an unpls  dunca  of  metliadi


nj  ■)  a  |j«iTniff  in  modem  tunc*  maj.  Cur  tha
■Be  affoica,  profer  an  iudictmant  for  luwilt,  <r
briif  hi*  diil  (ctioD  Ibc  tie^ui  oa  tlw  pcnon.
Il  nH  be  neoe«Bi7  to  mantian  •ome  sf  tha  prin-
Hof  tha


nte  waa  dinctlj  attacked,  almoit  mj  alieo,  wa*
c^iowacd  to  do  an.  In  all  prints  canua,  eiccpt
Ihoi*  «f  ifriXiit,  fitaiir,  and  iiaipinin,  the
poially  w  other  «ab)ect  of  omtantiaii  wai  u-
doHidy  Taoorend  by  ths  jdainti^  while  in  ntoit
(thai  the  (tale  akme,  oi  joimly  with  the  pn**-
nOac,  fasGled  b;  the  peeimiai7  pgniihmtnt  of  tbo
tBe^a-.  The  court  foot,  caUad  ptytaneii,  were
paid  IB  {nrata  but  not  in  public  aiuca,  and  a
ptiUie  pnoeeatoc  that  compcaniiied  the  action  wilh
the  deMadant  waa  in  moat  caiea  poniihed  bj  a
iae  of  a  tboajaDd  diachmae  and  a  modified  dit-
fanckiaamcat,  while  there  waa  no  1^  impedi-
Bmt  at  aaj  peiod  of  a  priiats  lawtoit  to  the
ifnoaUalian  of  the  litigant  partita.  (Meier,  Alt.
/••«Mm,  p.  161)

Tha  pneeednigi  in  the  tiic^  were  comnunced
bj  a  r—'~™*  to  the  defendant  {-rpiexKiiaa)
la  appear  to  a  oartain  daj  before  the  propo-
aiigiwrntB  (fIffa)wT*fa),  and  there  aniwer  the
clwn  preftiRd  agunat  him.  (Aiiat.  A^ai.  1321,
.ia-lMfi.)  TUa  •ammont  waa  oiWi  KTved  b;
the  plainHf  in  pataon,  aonmpauied  by  one  or
tva  winwaaea  [CLiraaaa],  whoee  name*  were
(BdoBMd  npoa  Ou  dedaiBtion  (A^ii  or  tynKtuia).
If  Ihere  waa  an  inattScient  icrrice  of  the  iiuii-
■ooa,  the  lawinit  waa  itjried  iirpianXirTot,  and
ilaaiMiiil  bj  the  magiatiala.  (Heaych.)  From
ihedrEnmaMDce  of  the  mam  officer  that  condocled
the  anaiTiiii  being  alao  Dcceaaarily  praent  at  the
trial.  Bad  a*  thoe  woe  beiidea  diet  nefuti
(laa^pilfu)  and  feetirala,  during  which  none,  or
■olj  aoBc  qiecial  aofta  cmld  be  commenced,  the
pswK  al  the  plainliff  in  aeLeeting  hi*  time  waa,  of
ffarar^  in  avaa  degree  limitwi  ;  and  of  lereral
caaaea,  we  know  that  the  time  for  their  inatitnlion
vae  partjeahriaed  by  lav.  (Ariitoph.  iVai^  U9<J.)
Thna  war*  alao  ooaaioaa  upon  which  a  peraonal
ainat  of  the  pKT  [SDoeeded  againtt  loolt  the
iJiiii  a^  or  at  all  OTOit*  waa  limnltaneona  with,
the  aariee  of  the  anmmoni ;  ai  for  initooce,
wboi  the  plaintiff  doobted  whether  aach  party
woold  not  leare  llie  country  to  ardd  aniweriw
tha  actitB  {  and  accardin^y  we  find  that  in  nieh
a  (Don.  a.  ZmUk.  ^  8»0,  o.  Aritb^  p.  778)


DIKE.  40S

1  the  polemarch'a  office,  and  there
ill  appeannce,  or  fiiiling  to  do  an,
■aomii  w  remom  in  cuitody  till  the  trial  The
word  ittrrtrfpKnf  ii  peculiarly  lued  of  thia  proceed-
ing. Between  tho  lervice  of  tha  iimuoani  and  I^
pearanoe  of  the  partie*  bolore  tha  maginiate,  it  it
Teiy  probable  that  the  law  preteribed  the  intcr-
Tcotiaa  of  a  period  of  fire  nay*.  (Meier,  All,
Prtmett,  p.  £80.)  If  both  pBitiei  aracaied,  the
proceeding*  Bxnnuiiced  by  the  plaintiff  putUng  in
Bia  dedaiaUon,  andat  theiime  tinie  depcailing  hit
■han  of  the  conit  f^  (vpvTanta),  the  mn-pay-
Bwnt  of  which  waa  a  &tal  objection  to  the  Wlhar


ject  of  litigaticn  waa  nUed  at  leai  than  I
drachmae,  nothing  waa  paid  j  if  at  more  than  iOO
diachmaeandlcaa  than  1000  drachmae,  3  diachmae
waa  a  mfilcient  dcpoail,  and  ao  on  in  proportien.
If  the  defendant  neglected  or  refiued  to  make  hia
payment,  it  ii  natoral  to  conclude  that  ha  under-
went the  penaltiea  coniequent  upon  nan-appea>
ance  ;  in  all  cuaa  tha  lucceatfiU  laitj  wai  leim-
hnned  hia  piytaneia  by  the  other.  {Meier,  Alt,
Proau,  jf.  S\i.)  ThBinvi«i(raCD\4  waa  another
depoiil  in  ume  caaea,  but  paid  by  tha  plainljlf
ont}'.  Thii  wai  not  in  the  nature  nw  ^  the
uioal  amount  of  Uie  court  feet,  but  a  kind  d
pinialty,  u  it  waa  (bifcited  by  the  luitor  in  cue  ha
biled  in  ealabliahiog  hi*  muH,  Jn  a  nut  againit
the  tieaiury,  it  waa  filed  at  a  fifUi ;  in  that  of  a
chiim  to  the  property  of  a  deceaied  peraon  by  an
alleged  heir  or  deriMe,  at  a  tentb  of  the  ndna
•ought  to  be  recoremd.  (Matth.  De  Jad.  Ali.
p.  260.)  If  the  action  wai  not  intended  to  be
brought  before  an  heliaatic  court,  but  mer?ly  inb-
mined  to  the  arbiUation  of  ■  diaetetca  [Dua-
TaTSHl,  a  couraa  which  wa«  competent  to  the
plaintiff  to  adopt  in  all  prirata  actiona  (HuUt-
walcker,  De  Dmatat.  p.  E£),  the  diachma  paid  in
(he  place  of  the  depotil  abore  mentioned  boie  the
name  of  tapiariuiii.  The  depouti  being  made,  it
became  the  duty  of  the  magiatiata,  if  no  ntanifeit
objectico  speared  on  Che  &ca  of  the  (teclaratton,
to  caute  it  Co  be  written  out  on  a  tablet,  and  ei-
poaed  for  the  inapection  of  the  public  on  the  wall
or  other  place  that  aaned  a>  the  cauaa  liit  of  hia
court (Meier,  AU.  Proem,  p.  605.)

The  magiitrate  (hen  appainled  a  day  for  the
further  proceediun  of  the  anacriiia  {ANJcniiia),
wbich  wai  done  by  drawing  lota  for  ths  priraity
in  caae  there  wat  a  plurality  of  ouuei  inititnted  at
the  tame  time  ;  and  to  thii  proceeding  the  phnae
AaTx^'iv  BliTT^r,  which  generally  denotea  to  bring
an  action,  ia  to  bo  primarily  atdibuted.


of  cooiae,  fell  to  the  ground ;  if  the  defendant
made  defiuUt,  judgment  paned  agtuut  him.
(Meier,  dtt.  Frootu,p.  t>33.)  Both  paitiei,  how-
CTer,  received  an  official  Kunmoii*  before  theit
non-^ipeaianee  waa  mads  the  ground  of  either  ifr
■olL  An  affidBTit  might  at  thii,  ai  weU  aa  at
ether  periodi  of  tha  action,  be  niade  in  behalf  of
a  pemm  unable  to  attend  npon  tha  alnn  day,
and  thii  would,  if  aUowad,  hare  the  ewct  of  pott-
poning  further  proceedingt  (hnfiavla)  g  it  might,
howerer,  be  combated  by  a  counteraffldarit  to  the
effect,  that  Iba  alleged  naaon  wu  unfounded  or
otherwiae  inaofficient  (drdmw^iofrfa)  ;  and  a  quea-
tion  woold  ariie  upon  thia  point,  tbe  deciiion  of
whiiih,  when  advarts  to  the  deMdant,  woold
.•2 ^-- -^,.-


404  DIKEL

leDder  liitn  liable  to  tli<  pmallj  of  contmnan'.
(Dsm.  e.  apup.  p.  1 174.)  Tha  plaintiff  wai  in
thii  CAM  nid  ifftiair  4A(ir :  the  defendant,  iftmitr
l^Kfor, Blmr  b^g  the  irord  omitted  in  liotb

Ciaea.  If  the  ouie  were  primarilj  bnTogliG  be-
an nmpitv  (ScofTT^r),  toe  anaoiiii  wai  con-
dncled  by  him  ;  in  am  dT  appeal  it  wai  diipenicd
with  ai  nnpnceniiy.  The  anaeruii  b»ui  with
the  alBdayit  af  the  pltuntilT  (irpiw;i«rlii),  then
followed  the  aniwei  <n  the  defeodanC  (^vfuxrli
orliTtTpo^  [ANTiQii*rH«],  then  the  partieii


i«d  their  TdpeetiTc


evidence  to  writing,  and  pnt  in  origin&lt,o
tkated  copio,  of  ell  the  recordi,  deeds,  and  <»n-
tract!  that  might  be  luefDl  in  eitabliiliing  their
caie,  u  well  a*  memoranda  of  oflcn  and  lequiii-
tknu  then  made  by  either  aide  (rpaii.iiatitY
The  whole  of  Iha  docnment*  were  then,  if  the
ouiM  took  a  itreight-farward  oanne  (tMuCufEn),
encloeed  on  the  lut  daj  of  the  anaaifia  in  a
aikel  ('x<n')i  which  wai  lealed  and  entnuted
to  the  nulody  of  Iha  preiiding  magiitnle,  till  it
wu  pradoced  and  opened  at  the  triu.  During  the
interval  no  alteration  in  iti  contenta  wu  per-
mitted, and  accordingly  eiidence  that  had  been
diKOTered  after  the  anacriiii  waa  not  ptvdocible
at  the  trial.  (Don.  e.  Boeot.  I  p.  99S.)  In  »mc
cauaei,  the  trial  before  the  dicoata  va>  bf  law  ap-

aa  were  not  pmrided  for  by  inch  icgolationB,  we
may  siippose  that  it  would  principally  depend  npon
tile  leisure  of  the  magiitrate.  The  paniei,  faow-
erer,  might  deltc  the  day  (irvpi^  by  mutual  con-
aenL  (Dem.  c.  i>.l<iait.  p.  11)42.)  Upon  the  court
being  Buembled,  the  magiitrate  called  on  the  canie
(Platner,  Pntta  und  Klagai,  toI.  I  p.  1B2),  and
tile  plaintiff  opened  hi>  caae.  At  the  eommence-
Ntenl  of  the  tpeech,  the  prr^r  officer  (4  ip'  SSi^)
filled  the  clepaydra  with  water.  Ai  long  at  the
water  flowed  brm  thi>  Tetael,  the  etator  wai  per-
mitted to  ipcak  ;  i^  hawerer,  endenu  waa  to  be
read  by  the  officer  of  the  court,  or  n  law  recited,
the  water  wnaiU
The  quantity  of '

of  tha  ipeechea,  waa  not  by  any  meana  um  aama
in  all  (anaea ;  in  tha  apeecfa  againat  M'^^r^rt■^n^.
and  eliewbeie,  one  ampbon  only  waa  deemed
anScient ;  eleren  are  mentioned  in  tba  impeach-
nent  at  Aeachinea  fbi  miicondact  in  hii  embany.
In  aome  £bw  caaei,  at  thoae  of  a^Msto'it,  accordmg
tc  UatpoerBtion,  no  limit  waa  pretcribed.  The
apeecbei  were  eomelimei  interrupted  by  the  cry
aanECa — "  go  down,"  in  eSect,  **  ceaie  ipHking"
—  from  the  dicsita,  which  phtced  the  adToeate  in
a  aerioiii  dilemma ;  for  if  after  tbit  he  atill  per-
niled  in  bia  addreaa,  he  coold  hardly  fiiil  to  ofhnd
thoie  who  bid  him  atop  ;  if  be  obeyed  the  order,
h  might  be  lotrnd,  after  tbe  Totea  had  been  token,
tbat  il  had  emanated  fmm  a  minority  of  the
dicaata.  (Arirtoph.  Vap.  913.)  Aflerthe  ipeechet
of  the  adrocatet,  which  were  in  general  two  on
Mcb  ude,  and  the  inddental  reftding  of  the  docn-
tnentaiy  and  other  evidence,  the  dioula  praceoded
tanratheirjadgment  by  ballot. [PaiPBoa.]

When  tba  iriDcipal  point  at  iine  waa  decidol  in
fcroiirafthaplainti^thera  followed  in  many  caaea
>  (iirther  diaenanoa  at  to  the  amonnt  of  damogei.
or  penally,  which  the  dafendant  ihoold  pay.
[TluiHA.]  The  method  of  Toting  upon  tliu
question  aeema  to  ha*e  nried,  in  that  the  dinata
Dtcd  a  aoiall  taUet  mttcad  of  a  ballot-ball,  ^ou


DICTATOB.
which  Ihoae  tbat  approved  of  the  bemvier  penalty
drew  a  long  line,  the  otfaen  a  ihort  one.  (Arittoph.
Vt^  167.)  Upon  judgment  being  given  in  a  [si-
vate  mit,  tbe  Athenian  law  left  it>  execn^a  very
much  in  tbe  banda  of  the  mcceaafiil  party,  who  arai
empowered  to  aeiae  the  movablei  of  bii  antagoniat
at  ■  pledge  for  the  payment  of  the  money,  or  inati-
tute  an  action  of  ejectment  (4{a4A>|t)  againat  the
refaactoiy  debtor.  The  judgment  of  a  court  of
dicaitt  WW  in  general  dedtive  (ifioj  afrrwrt^j)  ;
but  npon  certain  ocaaioni,  at,  for  inatancc,  when  a
groB  caae  of  peljoiy  or  conipincy  coold  be  proved
by  the  onaucceislul  party  to  have  operated  to  hia
ditadvantage,  the  cauie,  upon  the  conviction  of
anch  contpiraton  or  witnewei,  might  be  com-
menceddeMeo.  [Ami.LATia  (Ohiie).]  Inad-
dition  to  which,  the  par»  againtt  vbom  judgment
bad  pasted  by  de&nlt,  had  the  power  to  revive
the  cauie,  upon  proving  that  hia  nen-appearanca
in  eoart  wai  inevitable  (H|v  Vfr^nr  drriAax*!',
Plainer,  Fncea  umd  Kbgai,  voL  L  [l  396)  ;  thia,
however,  wai  to  be  eienited  within  two  montha
after  the  niginal  judgment  If  the  partiea  were
willing  to  refer  the  matter  to  an  mniriie  (Iiai-
•nfHii),  it  wni  in  the  power  of  the  magiitnte
to  tranifer  the  proceedinga  u  tbey  itood  to  that
oQcer  ;  and  in  the  nme  way,  if  the  diaetelea  oon-
lidered  the  matter  in  hand  too  high  for  him,  ha
might  rekr  it  to  the  •lairfity*6j,  to  be  brought  bj
him  before  an  beliaatic  court.  The  whde  of  thja
proceedings  before  the  diaetetei  were  analcgont  to
thoH  before  tba  dioutt,  and  bme  equally  the  name
of  ilinj:  bntitieemi  that  the  phrate  arTAaxti>
tV  fil  ••Srrar  a  peculiarly  applied  to  the  revival  of
a  cauae  before  the  umpire  in  which  judgment  hod
patted  by  defanlL

The  following  are  the  principal  actiont,  both
pablic  and  piivite,  which  we  mad  of  in  the  Qreek
writeia,  and  which  are  briefly  diacusaed  nndef
their  levenl  headi ; —

iiini  or  I>a^ — 'AJucCoi  irpif  tI*  t^iar:
'Ayitifytm :  'Kypa^mi :  'Aypipoii  /larduov :
ACkIu:  'AJtaylav:  'A/tSluirHn :  'JtfutJou:  'Avb.
TKT^T  1  'Anii;iaX''X> :  ' SrSftatSuriim :  'AiApa-
«i(w:  "Airin^ff«iijToDBii^5:  'Aeop/iiji :  'Awo>
Af fifmi :  'ATOirijiifMM :  'Airoffrnfflou ;  'Ai-pooTs-
ffioB:  'kfyiai-.'kpyvfUv:  'Awdlnt:  'Kmftmias:
MnaitofJm:  AtVroTiA^:  hitiuiann:  Bwlw:
BAdtqt:  BovXeto-Mi:  Kamryoplu:  Kaatfrwi;
Ka(onx>™r.  Krfpnw:  KsroAiirtM  Tovfi|fiH>;
KaTwraoa^v :  Xpious :  Xttpiou :  KAdr^ :  Amir-
lioS :  AiiAlot :  tkiptir :  Anpotnioi :  'Et^^i  •
'Ewwlav :  "EirirpiTipapx^fiaTai :  'Evtrpoiriii :  'Efo-
7ir)>^t:'£faip4irMfi:'E{s^i|ir'ApnTqi:EIpT^v-.
'ETaifnta-dft :  'IfpMuAloi :  "TnCeAf  i :  *TCpH>i ;
A«rsfui^Ti;pisu :  Aiiv«wirr(o> :  AinoOTparCsu :
AinvratioH:  MirtsS:  HirMffwi  elinu ;  Mai.
Xflat :  NaidviiarattiaftcfSi ;  OIkIu!  na^olnn-*-
B^KJit :  nopanlal ;  nafari/imr  :  Iljpgrpertiim  ■
n^tMTpo^i:  ti^fidnir:  Mm :  *spu  ifovoSi
imI  luiiiiupirns :  ttcfta  vw  l\mtifiir :  npOB-
ywyfu ;  npsSoffdu  :  IlpoiifffspSi :  Hfoaiii :  T*v-
ttYfpa^s :  VtuSoKXiTTiUs :  VistaftapTHpiAr  t
'P^ofiur^;  3inifiU:  iVrm:  luM^awlaj:  Sufitit-
Xaimr,  or  3vritiiiAr  wafoUmn :  Tpaf iwvai  tm
■Wftntai ;  TupawlBor.  [J.  3.  M.l

DI'CROTUM. [Nina.]

DICTATOR,  an  extraordinary  maglMnte  at
Soma.  The  name  it  of  J«tin  origin,  and  the  of-
fice [nbaUy  exiBtad  in  many  Latin  towni  befbie  it
wai  intmdaeed  into  Bona  (Ditmya.  t.  74).  We


DICTATOR.

in  yerj  ble  times  (Cie.
pn  Mtt.  10).  At  Home  tbia  nugiatimU  wu  oH-
nuallj  called  auffitter  jx^ttiti  and  Dot  duialoTf  ajid
10  ibe  ■■uti  booki  he  wu  bIwhji  d«igiiBted  bj
the  fonner  uns  down  to  tbe  blot  timn.  (Cic
A  Rtp.  L  40,  dt  L^.m.  3,ibPm.m.22;Vai.
X.£.  T.  S2,  ed.  MiUlei)  FoRu,  t. «;  ^Kiiiia  iu,
p.l98,ed.Mli)1erO

Od  the  establuhment  of  the  Rcumm  repub^K
tht  garemment  of  tbe  itute  wai  aitiiiit«d  to  too
muulSp  that  tbe  citiieiiB  might  be  tbe  better  pro-
tect^ igAuiit  tbe  tjTUuucal  eierciH  of  the  lupreme
pDTcr.  Bat  it  wM  loaa  felt  that  cimimnancei
night  anae  in  vhich  it  mu  et  importance  f»i  tbe
■fctf  of  the  (Ute  that  the  cD7eiiinient  ibould  b«
KMcd  in  the  huda  of  a  ain^e  penon,  who  ahotild
poaaeaa  for  a  aeuoa  abulnle  power,  and  fnm  wbote
deciiiaQ  tbcte  ahmld  be  no  appeal  to  anj  other


, la  inatitoted. The  oama
of  iLe  firat  dictstot  and  the  inunediale  natao  of  hit

Thcoidat  utboriliH  meDtion  T.  Idicioi,  one  of
tbe  T*TfT"l«  of  the  year,  aa  tbe  fint  dictaloTi  bnt
Mhsi  ascribed  thii  faoUDiit  to  M-.Valeriiu.  (Liy.  ii.
It.)  Lii7atata(Jlc)lhataI(iniudabIe  watwilb
Ibe  I^tini  Ird  to  the  appaintment ;  and  he  alio
' ' — -I!--'- 'a  that  tbe  eonauJa  of


coflld  not  hare  been  ooe  of  the  cohsoIl  DioDysios
Riilea  at  length  (t.  63—70)  that  the  plcba.  wbo
wen  oppRaaed  bj  the  weight  of  tbeii  debt*,  took
admrtage  of  tbe  danget  of  the  republic  to  obtain
«NM  nutintku  of  tbeir  auffeiiivai  and  refuaed  to
KCic  in  Ute  army,  and  that  Uerenpon  recouna
vai  bad  ta  a  dicUcs  to  bring  them  to  their  dnlj.
Bui  aa  Livy  makei  na  mentioa  of  an;  internal
''  -  '  a  in  tbia  j'ear,  and  doei  not  ipesk  of
'-'  vu  DD  account  of  debta  till  fonr  yean
.  we  may  condnde  that  Dimyuu  baa
.  u  he  hu  in  many  otbeti,  deKTted  the
D  older  to  giie  what  qipeared  to  hii
JOD.  It  ia  true  that  Eh
Failed  themaelTea  of  the
I  of  opfffeuing  tbe  plebl ;  bnt

it  ia  etrtainly aairj  to  aeek  the  Gnt  inatita-

ticB  af  the  lAce  in  any  otha  caiiae  than  the  aimple
■M  ntotioiKd  by  Ijtj,  namely,  Iha  great  danger
with  wliieb  iha  atata  traa  threatened. Modem
■holan  hare  alated  other  reasau  for  tbe  eatabliib-
Bent  of  the  dictatotabip^  which  on  lo  pniely  con-
jeetDial  andpoaaeai  anch  little  iabeient  imbability,
tWt  thej  do  not  require  any  nfiitatioiL Thui
Niebnht  mfen  (ffut.  o/^Rome,  toI  L  p.  G64)  E
the  Ronaa  dietatir  being  appointed  only  fbi
BBotlK,  that  he  waa  at  tbe  bcsd  both  of  Rome  and
*f  the  L^tin  leagve,  and  that  a  I^tin  dictator  pot-
araaed  the  ai^ireme  pows  fu  tbe  other  ux  montha
if  the  jat  1  bnt  thii  ntppoahioD,  independf
other  cnoaideiatiana,  ii  contradicted  by  tlie  fiicl,
that  in  the  year  in  which  tbe  dictator  wa>  fint  i
posted,  Rane  and  the  Latina  were  piepoiing
wv  with  CBK  anoths. In  like  manner  Hoacli
{Fafatmff  d.  Sermt  TUUu,  p.  SIB)  atarti  1
Bomga  bypothaia,  that  the  dictalonhip  waa  part  of
tlK  CDOMiliUioo  of  Serrina  Ttdlini,  and  that  a  dic-
latatvaa  to  ba  nominated  eroy  demminni  for  the
parpaae  of  tihg  the  ofna**  aniaBfia  and  of  holding


DICTATOR


406


By  the  original  law  reipecting  tbe  i^poiDlment
if  a  dictator  (Ju  dt  didaton  ereamlo}  no  one  wai
eligible  for  thit  olhce,  naleu  he  had  pieviouily
»en_  conaul  (Lit.  il  18).  We  find,  faowerer,  a
few  inataucea  in  which  tbia  law  waa  not  oUerved,
(See  e.g.  Li.,  i..  26, 18,  rii.  24.)  When  a  dic-
ator  ma  considered  neceaaaiy,  tbe  aenate  paiaed  a
enama  conanltum  that  one  of  the  coniula  ahould
lominata  [dieere)  a  dictator  ;  and  without  a  pre-
iona  decree  of  the  senate  the  cotuuli  bad  not  the
lower  of  naming  a  dictator,  althongb  the  conlruy
4ed  to  be  aiaerted  in  most  wivka  mi  Roman  an-
iqoitiea  In  almost  all  caaea  we  find  meitlion  of
.  previona  decree  of  the  lenBla  (lee  e.  j;.  ii  80,  it.
7,  21,  23,  26,  57,  Ti.  2,  TiL  21,  rii  17,  it  29,
:.  11,  iiii.£7);  and  in  the  few  instances,  iu  which
he  appointment  by  tbe  conaul  ia  alone  ^nken  oi^
he  senatus  consultum  is  prob^lj  not  mentioned,
imply  because  it  was  a  matter  ot  courae,  Niebuhr
' '  [Hid.  of  Aons,  toI.  L  p.  5G7)

. .  ,  e,  whom  Ibe

curiae  elected  and  the  conaul  thai  pcoclaimed
(ifint) ;  and  after  this  proclamation  tbe  newly
elected  magistjate  receiTea  tbe  imperiom  bom  the
curiae.  Niebahr  forthei  luppoaes  that  tbe  right  cf
canfening  the  impetimn  may  baie  led  tbe  curiae

tion  i^  tbe  icDBle.  But  tbii  electiim  M  the  dic-
tator by  tbe  curiae  is  only  supported  by  two  pas-
sages, ma  of  DiooyiiuB  and  the  other  in  Featns,
neither  of  vbicb  ia  conclusive  in  &TOUt  of  Niebnbr's
Tiew.  Dionyiiut  limply  tay*  (t.  7I>)  that  tbe  dio-
tator  ibould  be  one  "  whom  the  senate  ibould
uominate  and  the  people  approve  cf "  {iriifni^iff.
rtfrcu),  but  Ibis  may  merely  refer  to  the  gianting
of  the  imperium  by  the  curiae.  In  Festua  (p.  198)
we  read  "  M.  Vderiua  —  qui  primua  msgiater  a
pojmlo  creatua  eat ;  "  biit  eren  if  there  wen  no
coemption  in  this  paiaaga,  «e  need  only  uoder-
itand  that  a  dictator  waa  appointed  in  virtue  of  a
aenatna  conaultum,  and  certainly  need  not  aupposa
that  by  fupa/w  xht  coiiae  are  intended:  Itiera
can  however  be  hardly  any  doubt  tiiat  the  passage
is  coiTupt,  and  that  the  true  reading  is  "  qui
primus  magitter  popaZt  creatus  est."  We  Imiy
tboefoie  i^y  reject  tbe  election  by  the  curiae.

The  nominatiou  or  proclamation  of  tbe  dictativ
by  tbe  etmaol  waa,  however,  necesiaiy  in  all  taaea.
It  waa  alwayt  made  by  the  cuuul,  pnbabty  with-
out iny  wilnenea,  between  midnight  and  morning,
and  with  tbe  observance  of  the  auspices  (mr]/BU  or
orieMt  node  tUtjOio  *  dictatoretn  divUdj  Lit.  Tiii.
23,  iji.33,iiiiL  22;  Dionys.1.  11).  The  tech-
nical word  fur  this  nomination  or  proclamation  was
dictrt  (seldom  cmnr  otJattrB).  So  esKDtial  was
tbe  nomination  of  tbe  consuls,  that  we  Cud  Ibe


having  leoou
smpel  the  co


bimes  of  the  people  to

nata  a  dictator,  when  they  had  refused  to  do  ao
(Liy.  iv.  26)  ;  and  after  the  battle  at  the  lake
Traaimenoi,  when  all  conmiuniQitian  with  the  aur-
riring  consul  waa  cut  of^  tbe  senate  pnrided  for
the  emergency  by  csuaing  the  people  to  elect  a
prodictaior,  because,  says  Li^,  tbe  people  could
not  elect  (erscm)  a  dictator,  having  never  up  to
that  time  exercised  anch  a  power  (Liv.  nii.  S)^

*  Respecting  the  meaning  of  lifestfaia  in  rela-
tion to  tbean^icea,  aee  Atiaus^ji,  176ilk
DD  a  "  0"~


and  if  tho  o


406  DICTATOR.

Id  tbe  nine  ipiril  it  became  a  qcdtion,  wheller
the  tribuni  mititnm  with  eoiuulu'  poircr  conld
nomiiiBte  a  dictator,  and  thej  did  nol  Tentnra  to
do  »  tin  tha  angon  had  been  conmhed  uid  dc-
dared  it  aBovabla  (Lir.  ir.  21).  The  uominauon
el  Sulla  b;  u  inteiTei  and  of  Caeiac  br  a  piaelor
wai  cODtrary  to  all  precedent  and  altogtmer  iIl^L
(Comp.  Cic  ad  Alt  ii.  IS.)  The  Moate  wem*  to
have  lunallj  mentiooed  in  llieir  ietne  the  Dams
of  the  penon  whom  the  eonaul  was  to  nominate
(LiT.lT.  17,21,23,46,  tI  2, -rii  12,  TiiL  17,  ii.
29, 1.  11,  nil  £7)  i  bnt  that  the  coiuul  wai  not
abiolutel;  bound  to  nominate  the  penon  whom  the
fenale  had  named,  ii  eiident  from  tha  caaea  in
which  the  coniuli  appointed  peruni  in  oppoution
to  the  visbei  of  the  aenate  (Lit.  Till  12,  S^
19 ;  SiieL  TUi.  2.)  It  ii  doubtful  what  role  wai
adopted,  or  whether  an;  eiiitMl,  for  tha  pucpoH
of  determining  which  of  the  two  comnit  thould
nominate  the  dictator.  In  one  cue  we  n&d  that
the  nominatian  was  made  bj  the  ctminl  who  had
the  fauei  (Lir.  fiiL  13),  in  another  that  it  waa
decided  by  lot  (iv.  26),  and  in  a  third  that  it  was
DuUter  of  ognament  among  themielTei  (It.  21}.
In  later  tisiai  the  lenata  ninalljr  entnuted  tho
oflice  to  tha  coruul  who  wai  nearett  at  hand.  The
ook  place  at  Bome,  a>  a  general  rale  ;
onnili  were  absent,  one  of  them  wai
itj',  whenerer  it  waa  practicable
(LiT.  Tii.  19,  niii.  22)  ;  bat  if  thia  coold  not  be
done,  a  Knatm  oonioltam  aathoriung  the  appoint-
ment was  sent  to  the  coniol,  who  thercnpon  made
the  nomination  in  the  camp.  (Lit.  m  21,  TiiL  23,
ii.  38,  xzT.  2,  mii.  £.)  NeTertheleo,  the  rule
wai  muntained  that  the  nomination  codd  not  take
place  DuUide  of  the  Agtr  JRomaiau,  though  the
meaning  of  thii  expreajon  was  extended  so  as  to
include  the  wholo  of  /(oUi.  Thos  we  find  the
lenate  in  the  second  Pnnic  war  oppuin^  the  nomi-
nation of  a  dictator  in  Sicily,  bceauie  it  wai  out-
iideof  the  agerRomanoi  («(ni  <i!;naii  Romoman —
(ma  antna  IlaHa  temntan,  Liv.  xzrii.  G).

Originaliy  the  dictator  was  of  cnuae  a  patrician.
The  Snl  plebeian  dictator  was  C.  Harciui  Rntilua,
nominated  in  B.  c  3S6  by  the  plebeian  cimial  M.
Fopillius  Laenai. (Lit.  nL  17.)

The  reaaoni,  which  led  to  the  appointment  of  a
dictator,  required  that  there  ihonld  be  only  one  at
a  time.  The  only  exception  to  this  rule  occuned
in  B.C  21S  after  the  battle  of  Cannae,  when  M.
Fabiui  Buteo  was  nominated  dictator  for  the  pur-
po*e  of  filling  np  the  laianclea  in  the  senate,  al-
thoogh  M.  Jnnini  Peia  was  dischaiging  the  regular
duties  of  the  dictator  ;  hnt  Fabiui  laigned  on  the
day  of  hii  nomination  on  the  ground  that  tha%
eould  not  be  two  dictalon  at  the  aune  time.  (Lit.
Xiiii.  22,  23 ;  PluL  Fat.  9.)  The  dictators  that
were  appointed  for  canying  on  the  buiineu  of  the
stale  were  aid  to  be  nominated  m'  genadat  onus,
or  iometimci  aeditiom  mdamitu  cataa;  and  upon
them,  as  well  as  upon  the  other  magiitralei,  the
imperium  was  conferred  by  a  La  CuTxata.  (Lii.
ix.  38,  39  1  Dionys.  t.  70.)  Dictators  were  also
frtqnently  appointed  (br  some  ipecuil  purpoac,  and
fiequentty  one  of  small  importance,  of  whom  fui^
ther  mention  will  be  made  below.  At  present  we
confine  our  nmarki  to  the  dutiia  and  powers  of
the  dictator  rei  cerundae  causa.

The  dietatonhip  was  limited  to  lix  months  ((^c
■b  C^.  iil.  S  ;  LiT.  iii.  29,  ix.  34,  xiiiL  23  ;  Dio-
Dji.  T.  70,  X.  2S ;  Dim  Can.  xxxri.  17,  iliL  21  ;


DICTATOR.

Zonar.  Tii  1 3),  and  no  initance*  oeeiir  in  which  a
penoD  held  this  offirc  for  a  longer  time,  for  the
dictatonhipi  of  Sulla  and  Caeiar  are  of  course  not
to  be  taken  into  accomiL  On  the  contnry,  though
a  dictator  was  appointed  iat  ax  monlhi,  he  o^cn
resigned  his  office  long  prcTJoosly,  immedBtely
after  he  had  despatched  the  businesa  for  which  he
had  been  appointed,  (LIt.  iii.  29,  iT.  4fl,  tI  29.)
As  soon  ai  the  dictator  was  Dominated,  a  kind  of
toipension  took  place  with  respect  to  the  T™*f^ilf
and  all  the  other  maginratea,  willi  llu  ezeqilioa
of  the  tribuni  plebii.  It  ii  {reqiwMly  staled
that  the  dacies  and  functions  of  all  the  ordinary
magistntes  enCirelj  ceased,  and  some  writtn  bare
eTen  gone  so  for  as  to  say  that  the  consols  abdi-
tsted  (Polyb.  iii.  87  ;  Cic  de  /^.  iii.  3  ;  Dionyg.
T.  70,  72)  ;  but  this  is  not  a  correct  way  of  stating
the  &cti  of  the  caie.  The  regnlar  magiittstes
continned  to  discharge  the  duties  of  their  lariont
offices  under  the  dictator,  bnt  diiry  were  no  longa
independent  olficeis,  but  were  subject  to  the  higber
imperium  of  the  dictator,  and  obliged  to  obey  hi*
otderi  in  cTery  thing. We  often  find  tha  dictator


den  in  CTery  thing. We  cfl
d  the  consul!  at  Oie  head  ol


mt»  time,  and  canying  on  i
one  another  (Lir.  iL  30,  TtiL  29;  ;  we  see  mat
the  soldiers  lencd  by  the  dictator  took  the  oath  of
allegiance  to  the  ocmiul  (Lit.  ii.  33),  and  that  tba
consuls  could  hold  the  consnlar  cranitia  dnrinff  a
dictatonhip.  (Lit.  niii.  23.)  All  this  ahowa  £at
the  Musuls  did  not  resign  their  functiim^  althoogt
they  were  sobjecl  to  the  imperimn  of  the  dictator ;
and  accordin^y,  as  soon  as  the  dictator  abdicated,
they  ogiun  entered  forthwith  into  the  fiill  pmm
■ion  of  tha  consular  power.

The  superiority  of  the  dictator^  powfr  to  that  of
the  consuls  consisted  chiefiy  in  the  three  fbUowinf;
points  —  greater  independence  of  the  senate,  nxuv
extenUTe  power  of  punishment  without  any  ap-
peal (prvooKitia)  from  their  sentence  to  the  people,
and  irrtaponsibility.  To  these  three  points,  moat
or  course  be  added  that  he  was  not  fettered  by  a  col-
league.  We  may  naturally  suppose  that  the  dk-
tator  would  usnolly  act  in  unison  with  the  senate  ;
but  it  is  expressly  stated  that  in  msny  cases  where
the  consuls  required  the  co-operation  of  the  senate,
the  dictator  could  act  on  hii  own  responiifailitj.
(Polyb.  iii  87.)  For  how  long  a  time  the  dic-
tatorship was  a  magahriiat  tia  pr«teeatiau,  ia
unccrtaui.  That  there  was  origJnaDj  ■»  appeal
irom  the  sentence  of  the  dictator  is  certain,  and
accordingly  the  licton  ban  the  aiei  in  the  ftscea
before  them  eren  in  the  dty,  as  a  symbol  of  their
absolute  power  orcr  the  lirei  of  the  cttixens,  al-
though by  the  Valerian  law  the  axe*  had  disB{H
peored  front  the  foscei  of  the  consuls.  (Li>.  iL  IG,
29,  iiL  30  j  Zonar.  til  13  ;  Dionys.  *.  70,  (5  ;
PoiapiD.dtOry.Jitr.ila.)  That  an  ^ipotl  afto^
watdi  lay  from  their  senlenee  to  the  people,  is
expresily  stated  by  Festos  (a  e.  optima  far),  and
it  has  been  lupposcd  that  this  ptiTilege  wns
granted  by  the  lex  Valeria  Horatia,  passed  af^r
the  abolition  of  the  decemrinle  in  K.C.  449,
which  enacted  "ne  qnii  KJJHn  tmigiitialBm  sitw
proTocatione  cnareL"  (Lit.  iii.  IJS).  But  elcien
years  afterword!  the  dictatorship  ii  ^lokan  of  as  *
'IS  »H  provooaiiime ;  and  tbe  only  i&-
U^i  (Tiii.  33—34)  in  which  the  dictm-

ii  threatened  with  proTocatio,  cstainly  data
not  proTa  that  ibii  wai  a  l^al  right ;  fis  L.  P»-
pitias,  who  wai  then  dictator,  treated  the  proTiH


■■tiB  tM  m  bfringennit  of  tbe  rigbta  of  hia  af&ee.
W»  BBj  tkenfbn  nfipow  that  tbe  Lei  VnlerU
Hontk  ally  applied  to  the  regniu  ni«giitraciei,
■ad  tiM  ihe  dictatonhip  wai  re^uded  «  exempt
froB  it.  Whetber  bowers  the  ngbt  of  pnoooaiio
li  giren,  oc  the  Blalameut  in  Fe«iu
M  be  determined.


(notmoed  ia  c^ce  during  a  dictatcnl

ban  no  iimbii  Io  belien  thai  the^  bad  any  coo-

nedina  by  tboii  imtavmo  u  (uuiiwH,  M  tbe;
anld  la  the  cut  of  tbe  eania]*.  Tbe  few  in-
itaaoea,  which  appear  to  prove  tbe  eoalnry,  are
tB  be  eifilained  in  a  differeol  manner,  ai  Becker
bia  ahowR.  That  tbe  tribunei  conlinned  inofficeoi
irdftffndmt  nugiiUIe*  during  a  dictatonhip,  *b  lie
all  the  olbar  mantnte*  beeame  limply  the  oflicen
of  tbe  dictator,  u  to  be  explained  by  tbe  Gict,  tbat
tlw  Ji#  A  didalar*  trtando  wai  poued  before  the
■iMtiniti^  of  the  tribuneabip  <^  the  pleba,  and
coBaaqncntly  nude  no  mention  of  it,  and  that  ai  a
■'t**tT'"  waa  appointed  in  rirtae  of  a  Knatni  con-
lallBBi,  the  aoiata  had  no  power  over  tbe  tribunei
<(  the  pkba,  tbongh  thej  eeold  nupcDd  the  other


ll  bM  been  already  itated  tbat  tbe  diclatar  wa*
i~fp~-iK'«,  thai  it,  be  wbi  not  liable  after  hii
abdieatjon  tc  be  called  to  afcoont  for  any  of  hji
iSdal  acte.  Tbig  ii  eiprmly  natsd  by  ancient
■tilen  (Zonar.  TiL  IS,  Dionya  T.  70,  vlL  56  ;
Plat.  fM.  5  ;  Appian,  B.  C  ii.  23),  and,  eTen  if  it
had  OM  beoi  itated,  it  wonld  iollow  from  (he  reiy
Damie  of  the  dictalonbip.  We  find  moicorer  no
bcancF  recotded  in  which  a  diclBtor  after  bia  le-
ugnaliDu  wM  made  aniwerable  for  the  miinie  of
hia  power,  with  the  ereeption  of  Camiiliu,  whoae
car  howerer  waa  a  >er;  peculiar  one.  (Ceiapare
Btckei,  RSmaek.  AUtrO.  toL  iL  part  iL  p.  172.)

It  mt  in  caniequeDce  of  the  gieat  sod  irre-
•paoBble  psmr  pDiireied  by  the  dictatanbip,  that
■<  find  it  ftequendf  compared  with  tbe  regal
di^ty,  from  wbich  it  only  differed  in  being  beld
Ik  a  liaited  time.  (Cic  dt  Rep.  iL  32  ;  Zonar.
liL  13;  Dioiya  t.  70.73;  Appian,  JJ.  C.  L99;
Tk.  Aan.  L  1.)  Then  were  hoveret  a  feir
liaiili  to  the  power  of  tbe  dictator.  1.  The  matt
impmant  waa  that  which  we  bare  often  mcn-
tiwd,  that  tbe  period  of  hia  office  waa  only  ax
■mtha.  2.  Ue  bad  not  power  oier  tbe  treaiory,
bnt  coold  only  make  Die  of  the  money  wbich  waa
jBiaud  bim  by  the  lenate.  (Zonar.  liL  11)  3.
Ue  nanotallORd  to  loiTe  Italy,  lincehe  might  in
that  eaie  eaiily  become  dangenni  to  the  republic
(Dion  Can.  nxri  17)  ;  tboagb  the  caae  of  Ati-
liva  Calatinna  in  tbe  firat  Panic  war  forma  an
encptioD  to  ihia  rule.  (Lii.  EpiL  19.)  i.  Ue
waa  not  allowed  to  ride  aa  boncback  at  Rome,
withont  pniioniiT  oblaininfr  tbe  permiaiioQ  of  the
people  (Lit.  iiiiL  14  ;  Zonar.  vil  13)  ;  a  re-
gaktiiBi  appanntly  capriciDu,  but  perhapa
adopted  that  he  might  not  bear  too  great  a  reeem-
btanee  (o  the  kiogi,  wlo  wen  accnatomed  to  rida

Tbe  HitrgniBufttiT  conanlt  wen  ueari;  the  aame
■i  tboM  of  the  kingi  in  eailier  timia  ;  and  of  the
eeaanla  aabaeqnenllj.  Intttad  however  of  having
^y  twelve  Uctora,  aa  waa  the  caw  with  the  ctm-
'  '  '  J  Iweo^-fbar  bearing  the


■nh,  be  waa  preceded  bj  Iweo^
aecsw  ai  well  •*  the  bMcm,


DICTATOR.  407

and  loga  pnuiala  alio  belonged  to  tbe  dictator.
(Polyb.  iii.  87  ;  Dionra,  i.  24  ;  Pint.  Fal:  i  ;
Aman,  S.  a  i.  1 00  ;  Dion  CaH.  liv.  1.).

The  preceding  account  of  the  dictatonhip  ap-
pliea  more  particubuly  to  tbe  dictator  rei  gerandoa
cBiua;  but  dictator!  were  alto  frequently  qipointed,
eapecially  when  the  conaul*  were  abeent  from  the
city,  to  perform  certain  acta,  wbich  could  not  be  done
by  any  inferior  magiattate.  Theie  dictalon  had
little  mon  than  the  name  ;  and  aa  they  were  only
appointed  to  diicbazvc  a  particolar  duty,  they  had
to  reiign  immediately  that  duty  itbi  performed,
and  ihcy  wen  not  entitled  to  exeniie  the  power
of  their  ol£ce  in  reference  Co  any  other  mailer  than
the  one  for  which  they  were  nominated.  Tbe  DC-
caaiona  on  which  inch  diclaton  were  qipointed,
wen  principally :  —  1.  For  (he  porpoie  of  holding
the  comitia  for  the  electieiu  (EmuAbmm  habm-
donaa  aaud).  2.  For  fixing  the  daaa  anw/u  in
the  temple  of  Ju[uter  (tJaeifffeadi  ooava)  in  times
of  peaiilence  or  civil  diicord,  becauae  tbe  law  aaid
that  thia  ceremony  wai  to  be  performed  by  tbe
pniftar  nuuiam,  and  after  the  inilitatian  of  the
dictatonhip  tbe  latter  wai  regarded  aa  the  bigheat
mogiitracy  in  tbe  etate  (Li>.  viL  3}.  3.  For
appointiag  hdidaya  ifirianiBi  camii^tiaidanoit
cuim)  cu  the  appearance  of  piodigiee  (Liv.  viL
28),  and  for  officiating  at  the  public  gamee  (Ik-
dommJaaaidoriBii  own),  the  preaidency  of  which
belonged  to  the  ccmtuli  or  raaetm  (viiL  40,  ii.
34).  4.  Foe  holding  triali  (ftxMKtiwiai  Banal-
dit,  ii.  36).  6.  And  on  one  occwon,  for  filling  up
vacuiciei  in  the  lenale  (legemlo  taialta,  iiiil  22).

Along  with  the  dictalur  then  waa  alwaya  a
magiiter  tquitian,  tbe  nomination  of  whom  waa  left
to  the  choice  of  the  dictator,  unleai  the  lenatua  con-


of  tbe  perun  who  waa  to  be  ajniointed  (Liv.  viii.
17,  iiiL57).  The  magiaterequitum  had,  like  the
dictator,  to  receive  the  iraperium  by  a  lex  cariata
(Liv.  iz.  36).  The  dictator  could  not  be  withaat
a  magiater  equiCnm,  and,  eoniequenll;,  if  the  latter
died  during  the  aix  monthi  of  tbe  diclatnrahip,
another  had  to  be  nominated  in  hia  itead.  Tho
magiater  equitum  waa  anbject  to  the  imperium  of
(he  dictator,  but  in  the  abience  of  bit  auperior  he
became  hi*  Rpreientalive,  and  eierciied  the  »me
powers  as  the  dictator.  On  one  occaiion,  ihortly  bo-
fon  legal  dictaton  oeued  to  be  appointed,  we  find
an  inatance  of  a  magiiter  equibim  being  inreated
with  an  imperium  equal  to  diat  of  the  dictator,  ao
that  then  were  then  virtually  two  diclatora,  but
thii  ii  eiptcHly  mentionod  aa  an  anomaly,  which
had  never  occurred  bcfbn  (Polyb.  ill  103,  106).
The  rank  which  the  magiater  equitum  beld  among
the  other  Boman  magiitntca  ia  doubtfiil.  Nie-
bubr  aaaerta  (vol  ii.  p.  390)  "  no  one  ever  mp-
poaed  that  hii  olTice  waa  a  cnrule  one  j  ^  and  if  he
ii  right  in  luppoeing  that  tbe  coninlar  tribunate
wu  not  a  cunile  olhce,  his  view  ia  inpported  by
the  account  in  Livy,  that  the  imperium  of  the
magiater  eqnitnm  waa  not  regarded  ai  inperior  to
that  of  a  consular  tribune  (vi.  39).  Cicero  on  the
contrary  places  tbo  magiiter  equitum  on  a  par
with  the  pnetor  (i^  Leg,  iii.  3)  j  and  after  (ho
eitahUihment  of  the  praetorafaip,  it  teenu  to  have
been  coniideied  necessary  that  tbe  penoo  who
wai  to  be  nominated  magiater  equitum  ahould
jvevionsly  have  been  pnetfv,  juit  aa  the  dictator,
according  to  the  old  law,  bad  tobeehoaen  bnm  the
ctaisalan  (Dioa  Can.  ilil  21). Aceoidin^y,  we


408


DIES.


find  >t  ■  later  lime  tbat  the  msgittei  equitmn  hiS
tbe  iiuigiiB  oF  a  pnetor  {Dion  Cbm.  ilii.  37)
The  iDBgiater  efjuitiun  wha  originally,  u  bii  nnmf
importi,  the  commander  of  [he  cavalry,  while  thi
dictator  vat  at  the  head  of  the  legioni,  the  in-
&ntcf  (Liv.  iii.  27),  and  the  relation  between
them  waa  m  thii  respect  limiUr  to  that  which
■aluLitad betwefoi the king  and the tribnnna

Dictator!  wen  only  appointed  »  long
Roman!  had  to  cany  on  wan  in  Italy.  A  lolilaiy
itittance  occur)  in  the  lint  Punic  war  of  the  nomi-
nation of  a  dirtntnr  for  the  ptirpoee  of  our; ing
on  war  out  of  Italy  (Ivr.Epti.  19);  hut  thii  was
never  repeated,  became,  aa  haa  been  aln&dy  r
narked,  it  wai  feared  that  »  great  a  power  mig'
become  dangcroui  at  a  distance  from  Rome.  B
after  the  battle  of  Tia«menc  in  B.C  216,  wh<
Rome  itaelf  wu  threatened  by  Hannibal,  recoune
wae  Again  had  to  a  dictator,  and  Q.  Fabias  Maxi-
mna  waa  appointed  to  the  office.  In  tbe  neit
jaa,  B.  c  216,  aflcr  the  battle  of  Cannae,  M.  Ju-
niui  Pera  vai  alio  nominated  dictator,  but  thia
wtu  the  tait  lime  of  the  appoinlmcnt  of  a  dictator
rei  gerundae  eauio.  From  thai  time  diclaton
were  frequently  appointed  for  holding  the  ilectioni
down  to  B.  c.  202,  bm  ftum  tbat  year  the  dictator-
^ip  diaappean  oltogetbe^  After  a  lapse  of  120
yean,  Sulla  caused  himself  to  be  appointed  die-


(Veil.  Pat.  iL  2S),  hut  as  Niebuhr  remaik^  «  the
title  was  a  men  tisme,  without  any  fpvund  for
auch  a  use  m  tbe  ancient  constitntiDD."  Neither
the  magistrate  (interrei)  who  dominated  him,  nor
the  lime  for  which  ho  waa  appointed,  nor  the  ex-
tent nor  eiereise  of  his  power,  was  in  accordanoe
with  the  ancient  laws  and  precedents  j  and  the
nme  was  the  case  with  the  dictatorship  of  Caesar.
Soon  after  Caesar^  death  the  dictatorship  was
abolished  tor  ercr  by  a  lei  proposed  by  the  consul
Antoniua  (Cic  P/ni.  i.  1  ;  Liv.  Epii.  116  ;  Dion
Cass.  ilii.  61).  The  title  indeed  was  oSered  to
Angusliu,  but  be  resolutely  refused  it  in  conse-
quence of  the  odium  attached  to  it  from  the  tyranny
of  Sulla  whan  dictator  (Suet,  Aug.  S2).

Dnring  the  time,  however,  that  the  dictatorship
was  in  abeyance,  a  substitute  was  invented  for  it,
whenever  the  circnmstancea  of  the  republic  re-
quired the  adoption  of  eitiaordinary  meosnrcs,  by
the  senate  investing  the  consuls  with  dictatorial
power.  This  wu  done  by  the  well-known  Ibrmnla,
Vidtimt  or  doit  operam  r»uti£«,  wi  oidif  Tajabliai
detriiseati  capiO. (Comp.  SaU.  CW.  29.)

(The  j)tecediiig  acconot  has  been  mostly  taken
fivm  Becker,  Handbuck  der  KomMiat  AUrr-
Aiima;  vol  ii.  part  il  p.  I  fid,  &c. ;  comp.  Niebuhr,
HiH.  of  Rant,  vol  l  p.  Sfi3,  &c. ;  Gflttling,  Ga-
daiAie  igr  Roiiiitdi.  Slaatmtrfauiag,  p.S79,  &c)

DICTY'NNIA  (giirrfwia),  a  festival  with
ncritices,  celebrated  at  Cydcnia  in  Crete,  in  hononi
of  Artemis,  lumamed  Alirrvrm  or  A,
from  llicTuoi',  a  hunter's  net  (Diodor. !
compare  Strabo  x.  p.  479  ;  Paosan.  il  30.  g  3.)
Parliculais  respecting  its  celebration  ore  not  known.
Artemii  Afrrwmi  was  also  worshipped  at  Sjarta
(Paus.  itL  12.  I  7),  and  at  Ambrrsus  in  Phocii.
(Pans.  T.  36.  §  3  I  com|«re  the  Schol.  ad  Aritiopk.
Aim.  I2S4,  Vfp.  3i7  i  and  Meunius,  Crtta,
a.  3.)  [L.  S.]

DIES  (of  the  nme  n»t  as  Bnfi  and  dna,  Bult-
naim,  MfAtL  %  p.  74). Th«  ume  diet  was  q>- 1


Dund  the  earth, and  thit
il  dav  (,dia  cm/it,  in  Qreek
,. , . ,  .  included  both  night  and

day.  SeeC«nsorn.£iei>i«JVata3]  Plin.H".JV,
ii  77,  79  i  Varro,  Dt  Re  Rat  i,  2B  ;  MacroUSot
i.  3).  The  Datura]  day  (diet  noAmiZit),  or  the
time  fiwn  the  rising  to  Ue  setting  of  tbe  nn,  wns
likewise  designated  by  the  name  ditt.  The  dvii
day  began  with  the  Greeks  at  tbe  selling  oT  the
snn,  and  with  the  Romans  at  midnight ;  with  the
Babylonians  at  tbe  riung  of  the  nin,  and  with  the
Umbiians  at  midday.  (Macroh.  L  e.  ;  Gdlius,  iii.
2.)  We  have  here  only  to  eonsida'  tbe  natonil
day,  and  as  iu  subdivisions  weie  diflerent  at  dif-
ferent tunes,  and  not  always  the  same  among  the
Greeks  as  among  the  Ronuiu,  we  shall  endeavoiir
to  give  a  brief  account  of  the  various  parts  into
which  it  was  divided  by  tbe  Greeks  at  the  diffe-
rent periods  of  their  history,  and  then  proceed  lo
consider  its  divisions  among  the  Ramaiu,  tn  which
will  be  subjoined  a  short  list  of  rema^ahle  days.

At  the  time  of  the  Homeric  poems,  the  natural
day  was  divided  into  three  parti  (711  ni.  111).
The  fint,  called  4^<,  began  with  stmrise,  and  com-
___i  _j,|j  ^g  whole  space  of  time  during  which
med  to  be  increasing,  i,  *.  till  midday.  (VI,
,  ii.84,  OiJ.ii.SG.)  Some  aneient  gram-
marians have  supposed  that  in  some  instancca
Homer  used  the  word  4^i  for  the  whole  day,  but
Nitsach  (Anmefhn^en  mr  Odjnet,  L  13S)  hu
shown  die  incorrectness  of  this  opinion.  The
second  jart  was  called /i^iror  ^)iap  or  midday,  dnr^
ing  which  the  sun  was  thon^t  to  stand  stiU.
(Hennias,  ai  FlaL  Fiaedr.  p.  S42,)  The  third
part  bon  the  name  of  StlXii  or  SdeXsr  i|fup  {Od.
xrii.  606  )  comparo  Bullmann's  Zsxii:^,  il  n.  9S),
which  derived  its  name  from  the  inoeased  wsnnth
if  the  almoaphere.  The  last  part  of  the  StlXq  waa
ometimes  designated  by  the  words  wn-l  )vrtpar
ir  flovXtn-iJi  (Od.  iviL  191,  H  ivL  779).  Besides
,heae  three  great  diviaiona  no  others  aeem  to  havn  .
Men  known  at  the  time  when  tbe  Hraneric  pocma
vere  composed.  The  chief  infbinistion  reapecting
tbe  divisions  of  the  day  in  the  period  after  Homer,
especially  the  diviaiona  made  by  the
.  is  to  be  derived  from  Pollni  (Osoas.  i.
68).  Tbe  fint  and  lost  of  the  divisions  mad«
'  ''  ''  e  of  Homer  were  afterwarda  subdivided
parts.  The  earlier  part  rX  the  morning
was  termed  Wfierf  or  »pi  Tflt  ifiieia :  the  later,
wAqSa^t  T^t  d-)ai|iat,  or  wspl  wX^Sounr  tyepir
(Hersd.  iv.  161  j  Xcn.  Mtmonb.  i  I.  S  10,
HeOau  I  1.  §  30  1  Dion  Chiysost  OmL  Iivii).
Tbe  lUirini  iiiap  of  Homer  was  aftarwards  eipn*-
sed  by  utirruitpitL,  fUoov  fm4pat,  or  fitr^  4^p^
Lprehendod,  as  before,  the  middle  of  the  day,
ie  sun  seemed  neither  to  rise  nor  U>  dedine.
a  pan*  of  the  afternoon  were  called  SalX^
■rpittn  la  wpvta,  and  StfAq  j^i)  or  Hia  (Hemd.
vii.  167,  viii  6  i  Tbncyd,  iiL  74,  viil26  j  coid'-
[Mre  Libonius,  EpiiL  1084).  This  diTidno  con-
tinued to  be  observed  down  to  tbe  latest  period  of
Otccian  history,  though  another  more  accurate
''"risinn,  and  mcve  adapted  to  the  pniposa  of  cmn-
>n  life,  was  introduced  at  an  early  period ;  for
larimander,  <a  according  to  others,  bis  disdpla
Anaximenea,  is  said  to  have  made  the  Qreeka  ae-
qu^lcd  with  tbe  uae  of  the  Babylonian  chnno-
mOa  or  tuo-dial  (called  wiktt  at  tf^Jn%a»^


w  spiilict  vtml
u  of  which  the


■mtilfaiir  or  4Xu>-


dividrd  into  tnln  aqml  ifScM  of  time.  (HccoiL
iL  109  ;  Diae.  UBA  li.  1.  3  ;  PUn.  A.  JV.  iL  6.
7S  i  Snida*,  i.  «.  'Araiifuatpot.)  Thew  (pom
vtte,  of  cooiM,  bant  or  *btnter  according  to  tha
Tirian*  iimiiii  of  tha  year.  Tha  nama  houn
(Ipoi),  hovera,  did  net  boiim  into  genenl  lua  till
t  to;  lata  penad,  and  tbe  diRrenca  between
Htuml  and  «iaiaaclial  hoan  waa  fint  Dbaerred  bj
the  Aluandtiae  aatnoomen.

During  tbe  earl;  agei  of  tha  hiatocj  of  Rome,
■hen  artificial  nuuia  of  drriding  tiioe  wen  jet


hfht  and  dathnCM  fumed  irjth  tha  Romani,  aa
•ilb  the  Orcdu,  the  Mandard  of  diTiaJon,  u  va
an  bam  tha  ragne  erpreauoni  in  CenMrbiiu  (Db
Oil  NaL  2i).  Pliny  (tats  («,  N.  fii.  60)  that
hi  tb«  Tvdra  '[U>tea  only  the  riling  and  tha
teHiiig  of  the  nm  wen  mentioned  ai  tbe  two
puti  mto  which  tbe  day  waa  then  ditidrd,  bnl  from
CFflaoriinit  (L  a.)  and  Oellini  (ivii  2)  we  leant
that  midday  Ijmndai)  waa  alu  mentioned.  Vano
(01  Z^  /^  tL  4,  fi,  ed.  HDUer  ;  and  leidor.
Orif.  T.  30  and  31)  likewiae  dialingniihed  tbiee
port!  ef  the  day,  rii.,  amiv  mtiidim,  and  n^imiu,
■jL  bn^wAii,  aftd  which  no  aoembly  conld  be
hiU  in  the  fiirmn.  Tbe  lei  Phetoiia  prcactibed
that  ■  henld  abonld  pnelaii ''  - -  ^ ■>


•Xi,


(  aa  it  waa  of  impoitanca  that  tbia
■n— ]ut  ihoold  ba  known,  an  eipecial  officer
[AccnnKJSJ  waa  appointed,  who  proclaimed  the
time  af  vidday,  when  fiom  tha  cniia  he  law  the
■o  ■Tnr'"-g  hetwaan  the  nalia  and  the  graeco-
tant,  Tha  diniioa  af  tba  day  into  tweire  eqnal
■pana,  which,  bera  aa  in  Oteece,  were  ihcrler  in
winter  tboi  n  aonnDer,  waa  adopted  at  the  time

trudaerd  BHaog  tha  Romana  from  Oieece.  Tbii
wM  about  tba  year  ■.  c  2S1,  when  L.  Papiriua
Connr.  befece  tbe  wai  with  ^rrhni,  bnmgl
Raqia  an  iuatnuuent  ^led  aolanmn  horolwimn,
<r  smt^  aolarinm.  (Phwt.  i^  O^wm,  iiL  S.
f  fi  ;  PUd.  H.  N.  TiL  GO.)  Bot  aa  tha  ularinm
bad  been  made  for  a  diffennt  tatitnda,  it  ihowed
the  tiiH  at  RcDK  very  incomctly.  (Plin.  L  «.)
Sei»  Naaiea,  tberelbre,  eieeted  in  b.  c  1S9  a
paWe  dcfaydiB,  which  indicated  tbe  boun  of  the
■igbt  aa  well  aa  of  the  day.  (Cenaorin.  c.  ""  "
BfEoic  iIm  erection  of  a  depaydia  it  waa
taoajy  far  <■»  of  the  anbordinata  officera  nf  tbe
praetaa  to  uoclaiin  the  third,  aixtb,  and  ninth
tnara  ;  wbich  abowa  that  the  day  vnt,  like  the
night,  dirided  into  fonr  parti,  each  coniiating  ol
tbce  boon.  Bee  Diaaen'i  treatiie,  Dt  Partim
Noitii  el  Did  a  DmaoBilmi  Vi^mm,  i
XUmt  Lalmiaaewtd  DeuUdia  Sckriflm,  pp.  ISO,
IJO. Cannara  tbe  artkle  Hobounjidm.

JlII  the  uya  of  the  year  woe,  according  t
hi*M  pfnnta  irf  Tiew,  divided  by  the  Roman
iliffinitt  ilaaia For  the  porpoae  o(  tha  ti
atBlisi  bT  joatice,  and  faoldiiig  aMembKea  of  tbe
faaplf,  aD  tba  d^a  wan  divided  into  din  fiuli

OiiB  rA*n  were  the  dqra  on  which  dMimator


DIES.  409

wat  allowed  lo  adminirter  jmtice  in  the  pnbKg
comla  J  they  derived  their  name  from  jSm'  (Jiri
tria  veria  /  do^  dica,  addiea,  Grid,  FaM.  L  45,  Sec  ;
Varro,  Dt  Lb^.  Lot.  vi.  39,  30.  ed.  HUUer  ;  Ma-
crob.  Sal.  L  16).  On  aome  of  tha  diea  &ati  comilia
could  be  held,  btrt  not  on  alL  (Cicero,pnidte)L  15,
with  da  note  of  Manntina.)  Diea  might  be  ba&
in  thiH  diSiaent  waya :  Litafialiprrfritettotl
or  um[Jy  itiafaitl,  ware  daya  on  which  the  pae-
tor  naad  to  bold  hia  conrla,  and  could  do  ao  al  all
hoora.  They  were  marked  in  tha  Roman  calendar
the  letter  F,  and  their  number  in  the  courae  of
1  yim  waa  M  (Niebnbr,  HiM.  q/"  Romt,  m.
p.  314)  ;  2.  dia  pnpria  Kd  turn  lati/agi,  or  dtt$
kUeniti,  iiyt  on  which  tbe  ptaator  might  hoid  hia
conrta,  bnt  not  at  all  honra,  lo  that  •omelimei  one
half  of  iBcb  a  day  waa  fiutna,  while  the  other  half
Bi  ne&atoa.  Their  number  waa  B6  in  tbe  year,
id  they  wen  marked  in  tbe  calendar  by  the  ligna

■  ■ " Q.  ReiC.F—jma

■ -I  Ji^

'tmtiir: a. din

n  pnprit  md  eon  fiaU, or  daja  which  were

t  mati  properiy  apeaking,  but  became  fiuli  ae-

lantally  i  a  diea  comitiuia,  for  initanee,  might

coma  jaatoa,  if  nther  daring  iti  whole  couiae,  or

dnring  a  part  of  it,  do  comitia  were  held,  to  that  it

Tmg^  heome  either  a  diea  &ataa  totui,  or

ei  parte. (Uacrob.  SoLi-iS;  Varro,  Z>*

,.Lat.l  e.)

'at  nsrASTt  were  daya  on  which  ikdther
conrtt  of  jmUce  nor  comitia  were  allowed  lo  ba
bold,  and  which  were  dedicated  to  other  purpotea.
(Varro,  /.  a)  According  to  the  ancient  "
tiiey  were  aaid  to  have  been  Sied  by  Nun
pilina.  (lir.L  19.)  Fmm  tba  temarki  made  BDore
It  will  be  undertlood  that  one  part  of  a  d^  might
be  Gutiu  while  anotber  waa  nebatna.  (Ond.  Fail.
SO.)  The  ■— Jitaa,  idiich  bad  originally  been
iea  bati  fiar  tbe  ^boana,  had  been  made  nefiuti
at  the  time  when  the  twalvniMiDtha-jear  wh  in-
troduced ;  but  in  &  c  286  they  wen  agoin  made
&eti  by  a  law  of  Q.  Horteniiua.  (Macroh.  SaL  I
16.)  Tbe  lenu  diea  ne&ati,  which  originally  bad
nothing  to  do  with  religion,  but  aimply  indicated
dayi  on  which  no  eoortt  wen  to  be  held,  waa  in
mbaeqnent  timee  applied  to  nligioua  daya  in  ge-
neral, aa  diea  nebati  were  maaCly  dedicated  to  the
worabipofthegoda. (Gellioa,  i».  9,  t.  17.)

In  a  religioua  point  of  view  all  daya  of  the  year
were  either  diajv^  or  Oet  profigti,  or  ditg  oIbT'
eta.  Acetfding  to  the  deGmtion  given  by  Hacro-
bini,  die*  feati  were  dedicated  lo  the  goda,  and
spent  with  aacrificea,  repaata,  gamea,  and  other
Bolemnitica  ;  diea  profeati  belonged  to  men  for  the
adminiatiatian  of  their  private  and  public  affeira.
Thej  wen  either  di—jbtii,  or  eomitiaUi,  or  «■■-
permdimi,  or  ilati,  or  prntliaia.  Diea  inteiciai
were  cranmon  between  goda  and  men,  that  ii,
partly  devoted  to  the  worafaip  of  tbe  goda,  partly

Wa  have  laitly  to  add  a  few  nmaika  on  loma
of  tba  anbdiviaioDa  of  tbe  diea  profeatL,  which  are
Hkewiae  defined  by  Hacrebim.  Dia  eomUiak*
wele  daya  on  which  comitia  wen  held  ;  their  nnm-
ber  waa  1B4  in  a  year.  Diet  inntparvBfJni  were
d^  to  which  any  action  wai  allowed  to  be  tnna-
fened  (gmbiu  vajnoanm  Uetl  diaert,  Qaina,  iv.
I  IS).  iMat  tfati  were  daya  aet  qiart  Sol  taoaaa
between  Raman  eitiicaia  and  foieignert  (]■<  jmdiai


■■  leoendi
ma  Pom-


410


DIMACHERI.


imp.Anti


MMa  CMI  pareprnnt  Eufitnalur).  Diet  pn^iaia
w«ra  lU  Aaji  on  vhich  leligion  did  not  forbid
GorameDce  a  nr  ;  a  lilt  of  d&ya  ud  feitiTHli
nhich  it  wu  mnlnij  to  reliEion  lo  camniciia
war  i>  KiTen  by  Macrobiu.  S«  aln  Fcatui,  c
Compate  HanuLiui,  Dt  Ftiemm  Ditnm  ftaliime,
and  Che  article  CitLaMQAKiiiii.  [L.  S.J

DIFFAREA'TIO. [Divortiom.]
DIOESTA. [PiNDicria.]
DIOITA'LIA. [MiMici,]
DI'GITUS. [Pia.]

DIIPOLEIA  (SiHT^u),  alu  <s1led  &«i\>
or  AiTdAjB,av«7 ancient  featival  celebrated  eve,
year  on  the  acropolii  of  Athena  in  honour  of  Zeni,
■umamed  Uafjnt.  (Pau.  i  •  ■  "  ■
pluia,  130.  ID.)  Suidai  a
Aiutophauea  {Pat,  410)  are  mutaxen  m  Di
that  the  Diipolia  wen  the  umo  festinU
Oiaua.  It  WW  held  on  the  14th  of  Sciirophorion.
The  manner  in  which  tbft  tacrifice  of  an  ot  wa>
offered  cm  tbia  occasion,  and  the  origin  of  the  rite,
are  deacribed  by  Poi]ib<rriiu  (De  JUtiiiaiL  ii.
S  29),  witb  whoM  account  may  be  compared  the
&aaii)e]itar]r  deKiiplioiu  of  Paiuaniai  (i.  S3,  g  11)
and  Aelian  (  r. /f.  riii.  3).  The  Alhaalaui  placed
barlejr  mixed  with  wheat  upon  the  altar  of  Zeu
and  left  it  unguanjed  ;  the  ox  denined  to  be  ncri-
ficed  wai  then  aUowed  to  go  and  take  of  the  leeda.
One  of  the  plicati,  who  bore  the  name  of  fim^nt
(whence  tna  futinl  wai  Hinetiniei  called  ^v-
pirm),  at  teeing  the  ox  eating,  matched  the  axe,
killed  the  OK,  ud  ran  awaj.  The  othen,  ai  if
not  knowing  who  had  killed  the  animal,  made  in-
quiriei,  and  at  lait  alio  lummoned  the  aie,  which
wa*  in  the  end  dcdand  goiln  of  baring  comi
the  murder.  Thii  cnMom  a  uid  lo  haro
from  die  (bllowing  drcnnBtance  :  —  In  the  reign
of  Erechtheui,  at  Iha  celebration  of  the  Dionysia,
or,  according  to  the  Ekholiaat  on  Ariatophanet  {Wai.
972),  at  the  diipolia,  an  oi  ate  the  cakei  oflcred
to  the  god,  and  one  Banloa  or  Thaolon,  or,
•ccoiding  to  othen,  the  Boapiivf,  killed  the
OI  with  an  au  and  fled  from  hit  country.
The  murderer  hanng  ibu  eeeaped,  the  axe  wai
declared  gnilty,  and  the  rite  ohaerved  al  the
diipolia  wag  petioimed  in  commemonition  of  that
event  (Compaie  Snidu  and  Heejch.  t.  v.  Pon-
fiiiA.)  Thii  legend  of  the  origin  of  the  diipolia
manifnllj  leadi  ni  bach  to  a  time  when  it  had  not
jet  become  enitomaly  to  oSer  animal  aacrifite*  to
the  godi,  but  merely  the  fmiti  of  the  earth.,
Poranjrini  alao  infbraia  oi  that  three  Athenian
**""'"*  hod  their  etpecial  (probably  heteditaiy)
hnctioni  lo  perfonn  at  thi*  feitivaL  Hemben  of
the  one  diOTe  the  ox  to  the  altar,  and  were  thence
colled  MvrpiiUcu  :  another  bmily,  deuended  ii«n
BanloD  and  odled  the  ^mn-vrei,  knocked  the
lietim  down  ;  and  a  third,  denguated  by  the  name
of  Sairpct,  killed  it  (Compare  Creiuerl  MMoL
■ad  j^mU.lp.172,  ir.  p.  122,  dec) [L.  &]

DIMACHAE  (ii»ulx<u),  Macedonian  faone-
■oldien,  who  alio  fboght  on  foot  when  occaaion
required.  Their  armour  waa  hearier  than  that  of
the  ordinary  honeioldien,  and  lighter  than  that
of  the  regular  heoTy-armed  foot  A  aervant  ac-
mmpanied  otch  toldier  in  order  to  take  care  of  hij
hone  when  he  alighted  to  fight  on  foot  Thia
ipeciei  of  troopa  ii  laid  to  have  been  but  inUn-
dnood  by  Alexander  the  OnaL  (Pc^uz,  i.  132  j
Ciutiua,T.  13.)

DIHACHERI. [QLinuToua.]


DIONTSTA.

DIMENSUM. [SskviFa.]

DIMINUTIO  CATITIS. [CiPPr.]

DIO'BOLOa [Dr^uha.]

DIOCLEIA  (iiitxta),  a  featival  celebrated  hy
the  Megariani  in  honour  of  an  ancient  Athenian
hero,  Dioclea,  aionnd  whoae  grave  jonng  men  »a-
aembled  on  the  CHvaiion,  and  amuaed  uemaelvet
■■'  ■■ ' ■'  -Bti. We  read  that

iTe  the  iweeteit  kiaa  obtained  the  pciic.
of  a  garland  of  flowerii  (ThtncriL
27,  &e.)  The  Schaliait  on  TheoctStui
(i.  a.)  reutei  the  origin  of  thia  fettinl  oa  fol-
lows ;  —  Dioclea,  an  Athenian  exile,  fled  to  Me-
fiara,  where  he  found  a  youth  with  whom  he  fell
in  lore.  In  lomc  balUe,  while  protecting  the
object  of  hia  lore  with  hii  ihield,  he  waa  alain.
The  Megariana  honouied  the  galluit  lover  with  a
tomb,  miied  him  to  the  rank  of  a  hero,  and  in
coramemonition  ot  hit  fiiithfiil  attachment,  inati-
tutcd  the  fea^ral  of  the  Diocleia.  See  Bbckh,  ad
Pmd.  (Hfnip.  vii.  157.  p.  176,  and  the  Scholuit,
ad  Ariiapk.  AdariL  730,  where  a  Megarian
twcan  by  Dioelco,  from  which  we  may  infer  that
he  wot  hdd  in  great  hononr  by  the  Mcgoriant.
(Compare  Welcker't  Ssfpto,  p^  39,  and  aJ
T^toffu.  p.  79.)  [L.  aj

DIONY'SIA  (Auv^ia),  feativala  celebrated
in  varioua  parta  of  Greece  in  honour  of  Dionyiua
We  hare  to  coniider  under  thia  head  aevcial
featinla  of  the  uune  deity,  although  aome  of  them
bore  different  ruunea ;  for  here,  aa  in  other  csica,
the  name  of  the  featiral  waa  aometimea  derived
from  that  of  the  god,  Kimelimei  fnin  the  place
where  it  waa  celelniited,  and  tometimea  bom  aome
particular  cinmmitance  connected  with  ita  celebra-
ion.  We  thall,  however,  direct  onr  altentim
ihiefij  to  the  Attic  fettivala  of  Diocyiua,  aa,  <hi
iccount  of  their  intimate  connection  with  the
irigin  and  the  development  of  dramatic  literature,
Jiey  ore  of  ateatei  imporlaace  to  u>  than  any  otba

The  general  character  of  the  feativala  of  IKo-
nyxui  waa  extravagant  merriment  and  entfaoaiaatto
jor,  which  manifested  then
The  in
and  ab .

during  the  celebration  of  the  Dionyiia,  baa  brra
well  explained  by  HUller  (//iaC  i/Ab:  £il.  ^Jae.
Grsea,  i  p.  SS9) :  —  "  The  intcnae  deiire  felt  by
every  war^ipper  of  Dionyaua  lo  £ght,  to  conquer,

tuffer  in  common  with  bim,  made  them  regard
beinga  (latyn,  ponce,  and  nympba,
god  himaelf  w  < <  •


undej,  and


by  whom  the  god  E
through  whom  lile  at
'cgetation,  and  branch  off  into  a  variety  of  beami-
ul  or  groteique  foimi),  who  were  ever  pceacnt  to
he  faon  of  the  Oreeki,  aa  a  convenient  atep  by
vhich  they  could  appnach  more  nearly  to  the
iceaence  of  their  divinity.  The  custouii  n  prrva-
ent  at  the  feativala  of  Dionyaua,  of  taking  the  dia-
[Uiie  of  latyn,  doubtleaa  originated  in  thia  feeling,
md  not  in  tbe  mere  deaire  of  concealing  exceoaea
under  the  diaguite  of  a  moilt,  otherwiae  to  asiou*
and  pathetic  a  apectacle  oi  tragedy  could  never
have  originated  in  the  chortuea  of  theao  aatyn.
The  deure  of  eacaping  Emm  aelf  into  somelliing
new  and  itrang^  of  living  in  an  imaginan  world,
breaka  fiirth  m  a  thouaond  inatancn  m  theae
feativola  of  Dionyaua.  It  ii  aeoi  in  the  colnuriiw
tbe  body  with  plaiter,  anot  vermilion,  and  dtf.
femrt  aotti  of  green  and  red  jnicea  of  planti,  wcai


OlONTSIA.
ca  ddn  mmd  dw  laim,  corerii^
^atai  pluiu ;  and,
i  wood,  bwfc,  mmI
ale  tsftiuiie  bdong-
DnmkamaM,  md  tic
c  of  Solo,  cjmbBli,  Biid  drnm,
WB«  iiKBwMe  coanHD  to  ill  Dkn^nu)  fntiTBlL
la  tha  fneMUMU  callad  &(««  (from  Sila^),
vitli  wkMh  tha]>  wen  celebrated,  womeo  sin  took
p«t  ia  tk«  diigiUM  of  Bw«)iM,  Lanu^  Thjadea,
Ndaln,  Njmphi,  tu^  adonKd  wilb  gutudi  of
'  '  '  -■  -*  jffn^  B  tlwii  liadi  (beutt
t  callod  AirAJ^up^),  10


aagoj,  in  whkh  hk  ciploili  and  aebiorarocDt*
woe  extirflod.  [Csoana.]  Tha  phallis,  the
^■ImI  of  the  ftidity  of  bbIuk,  mi  ilu  earned
B  tk«ae  rrocewon  (Pint  Dt  O^rnL  Dnit.  p.
S37,  D  ;  AriODph.  ^okinL  229,  with  ibe  SchoL  ;
Hsiid.  iL  49),  and  men  dagUMid  u  wonum,
tabd  JMfaAAai  (HMjeh.  •■  e. ;  Athen.  iiT.  p.
KS),  fblkiwad  the  ptallnt.  A  wcmaii  «al1od
Xina^f^n  earned  Il>e  )Jxnf,  a  long  liaikst  cm-
tiiiiiig  the  iiaa|[i  d[  the  god.  Haideni  of  noble
birtk  (a»])f<|iyi}  Bed  to  cany  fin  in  baiketi,
vUd  woe  loaietiDia  of  gold,  ud  to  veai  gar-
kadi  of  fi|ti  roond  Ibeii  nedu.  (Aiiitoph,  Adam,
£.e,;Lj«Mr.  fl47;  NalaL  ConLT.  13.)  The  in-
dulpiiee  in  drinking  na  onwiderad  bj  the  Qraeka
la  a  dn^  of  natilude  which  thej  owed  to  the
gHcr  af  the  naa ;  bom  in  oome  pkcti  it  wai
D  aobra  St  Ibe  Konyna.


<L.


■.ZtfO


■.16.)


The  Attic  featiTala  of  Dionftnt  «en  tiinr  in
—aliu :  the  AurliinB  mr'  irjfoit,  or  the  nml
Dianrnai.  tlia  AVa«>>  tbe  'Arfdrr^pia,  and  the
fliBilaw  ir  l«T(i.  After  Rnbnkan  (jlMtor.  ad
th-^A.  ToL  L  Pl  199)  and  Spalding  {AblamiL
iT  Bert.  Acad,  ran  1804—1811,  p.  70,  Ac)  had
^ftUicd  the  AntbeMeria  and  tbe  Lenaea  to  be  onl;
twe  nana  fat  one  and  the  nme  featini,  it  vu
genaally  taken  lor  granted  that  there  conld  be  no
daabt  as  to  the  nal  identity  of  the  two,  nntC  in
1817,  A.  BS^h  read  a  p^Ms  to  the  Berlin
AeadBj  (FoH  UfttneUaUdir  AtSidiim  Lmatm,
A^t^iritm  wd  tSadl.  Diatj/timt,  pobliihed  in
1319,  ia  the  Jikmdl.  d.  Bai.  Aad.),  in  which
he  I  mlJiihi  il  by  the  itioDgeet  ugnnKiiti  the
<ifaeiMj  between  the  Leaaea  and  Anthaterin.
An  abridgnrat  of  BBdch^  eany,  containiiu  aU
Ihn  ii  Beeaauy  In  form  a  cleat  idea  of  the  i^ole
ywiiai,  il  giTBi  fn  the  PbHoto^cal  Houmn,
■d.  ii.  a  373,  Ac.  A  -writer  in  the  Oameai  M»
■n^  Tb.  Dyer  (toL  it.  p.  70,  ate),  in  aince
I  ail  ■  1111111111  to  npFon  Rnhnken^  Tiew  with  wane
new  argiPBenta.  The  iiaaim  of  the  year  nered
to  pMijaaa  waa  dming  the  monthi  neareet  to  the
ibsTtcM  day  (PhU.  Da  tl  i^.  DM.  B),  and  the
Attic  fcatjiala  were  acendingly  edebnted  in  the
Poaridna,  OameUon  (the  Lenaaon  of  the  loniaiu),
ABtbeMeriao,  and  Efawbebolioa.

The  Aiuefcfia  naf  irjpait,  orfUcpcC,  the  ninl  or
Itmtt  Dion  jaia,  a  lintagB  featiial,  were  eelebialed
in  the  Tanna  demea  of  Attica  in  tbe  month  of


DIOyySIA.  411

held  with  the  higbot  degree  of  meiriinent  and
freedom  ;  eren  ilaTea  enjoyed  full  hljeity  daring
itt  celebnlion,  and  their  boiiteroiu  ihonta  on  tbe
oowion  were  ilmoat  intolerable.  Jt  ia  hen  that
we  hare  to  aeek  fi>r  tbe  cngin  of  comedy,  in  tbe
jeali  and  the  tcniriloBi  abnie  which  the  pcannta
lented  upon  tbe  byatanden  from  a  waggon  in
which  they  mda  abont  (urifio*  i^  iMm).
Aritlophane*  (Vev-  ^^  ■^  '^7^)  <^'>  ^  '=<"°^
poet!  Tfuy^itoi,  lee^aingen ;  tai  mmedy,  rpvytftta,
iee-«mg  (Aekan.  i6i,  834  ;  Athen.  ii.  p.  40)  ;
from  the  cnaCotD  of  Anuaring  the  &ce  with  leea  of
wine,  in  which  the  meity  eomitry  people  indulged
at  the  Tintage.  The  Atcolia  and  otha  annue-
menti,  iriiidi  wen  aflerwardi  introdnoed  into  the
(ity,  uon  ^10  origin^  to  bsTe  bean  pecnliB  to
tha  nual  Diooyna.  TbcDionyaainthePeiraeeiu,
a>  wen  ai  tlwM  of  the  otha  demea  of  Attica,  ba-
knsed  to  the  leaaet  Dionjnia,  ai  ia  acknowledged
both  by  Spalding  and  BBckb.  Tboae  in  the
PeJrateni  were  celebrated  with  ai  much  iplendoor
ai  thoae  in  the  dty  ;  for  we  read  of  a  proceuion,  of
the  performance  of  comedici  and  tiaf^iea,  which
at  fine  may  hsTe  been  new  u  well  ai  old  piecca  ;
hot  when  the  dnma  had  attained  a  regnlar  fonn,
only  old  ^ecei  wen  npreaentod  at  the  rural
Dionyiia.  Their  liberal  and  demooatiial  character
Menu  to  hare  been  the  caoH  of  de  oppoaitica
which  tbeae  fealivsli  met  with,  when,  in  the  tiate
of  PeiiiiCratoi,  Theajna  attenipt<!d  to  inDsdnee  tbe
rural  amiuementt  of  the  Dionyiia  into  the  atj  of
Athou.  (Pint  Sol.  e.  SS,  30  i  Diog.  UJSn.  SoL
c  H.)  That  in  other  places,  alio,  tbe  inliodDO-
tion  of  the  wonhip  of  Dionynu  met  wilh  gnat
oppoeitian,  bum  be  inferred  from  the  legendi  of
OrchomoHi,  Tbebet,  Argot,  E[Aen*,  and  other
placea.  Somediiug  limikr  aeema  to  be  implied  in
the  aceorail  of  the  .  .  .  r .


r.  67.)


itiT^  the  Ltnaaa  (&om  Aigrdr,
the  wine-preu,  &Dm  which  aln  the  month  oif
Oamelion  waa  called  hv  the  loniani  I^enaeon),  waa
celebrated  in  the  montn  of  Oamelion  ;  the  place  of
it)  celebiation  ww  the  ancient  temfile  of  Dionynu
Limnaeiu  (from  Xlfin),  ai  the  diitiiet  waa  oii-
g^lly  a  iwamp,  whence  the  god  waa  iilio  called
\ijinrfriii).  Ttiia  temple,  the  Lenaaao,  waa
aitoate  aouth  of  tho  theatre  of  Dionymia,  and  doaa
by  it.  (BchoL  ad  AHtUfA.  Xam.  180.)  Tbe
Lenaea  were  celebrated  with  a  proceation  and
B<«nic  contctta  in  (rasedy  and  com^y.  (Demoith.
0.  Mid.  p.  £17.)  Tbe  pmxeaion  probatJy  went
to  the  Lienaeou,  where  a  gnat  (rp^tyoi,  hence  Ibe
ehonia  and  tragedy  whid  arae  out  of  it  were
called  rpTfUtit  X'V^'i  ■n^  *fn^^)  waa  aacii-
fieed,  and  a  dwrua  itanding  around  the  altar  aang
the  dilhyninbieodB  tothegod.  Aitfae  dithyranib
waa  the  element  ont  of  which,  by  the  introdnction
of  an  actor,  tragedy  aroae  [CaoaCH],  it  ia  natural
that,  in  the  acinic  conteaC*  of  thi)  featiral,  tragedy
ahonld  have  preceded  comedy,  aa  we  lee  bom  the
imporlant  docmnenCs  in  Demoathenet.  {L  c.)  The
poet  who  wiahed  hia  play  to  be  brought  out  at  the
Lenaea  applied  to  the  aecoud  arebon,  who  bad  tbe
luperintendence  of  thia  ieeti"*]  aa  well  b«  tbe
Antheiteria,  and  who  gsre  him  tbe  chama  if  tbe
{uece  wai  thought  to  deeerre  rt.

The  third  Dionyriae  featiral,  the  AwOaMa,
waa  celebrated  on  the  12th  of  the  month  of
Antbeetetion  (Thugrd.  iL  IS)  ;  that  ia  to  my,  tbe
•econd  day  Ul  oa  the  ISth,  for  it  hMed  thnw


413  DIONTSlJt.

dayi.  Bid  thfl  Ent  feu  on  ttu  1 1  111  (Soidu,  i.  e.
Xeit),  sad  the  thiid  on  Ihs  13th  (Philocb.  ap,
Sladam,  1. 1.  X^pu).  The  Hcoad  irchoii  nipo
intended  the  celebntioa  ef  the  Asthnteriii,  uid
dutiibuted  the  prim  amoiig  the  lictm  in  the
miioui  gunei  which  vera  csiried  on  during  the
.  (Aiiitaph.^abira.lU3,irilh  theSchel.)
'  ■  •  ■  ns  at"  •  "  '  ■■
10  third,
; SchoL

Athen.  I.  p.  437,  tiL  p.  276,  md  ir.  109.)  The
fint  daj  denied  ita  nune  from  the  opening  of  the
eulu  to  tule  the  wine  of  the  preceding  ;ew  ;  the
Moond  tnm  xoi't,  the  cup,  sod  teem  la  luve  been
the  daj  deTDted  to  drinking.  The  ucolia  Hem  to
have  been  plijed  on  thil  dn.  [AflCOLlA.]  We
md  in  Suidu  (i.  ■.  'Airic/i}  of  another  umihu
amutement  Mculiar  to  ihii  da;.  The  drinker
phced  hinuelf  npan  a  bag  GUed  with  air,  tnunpeta
irere  xtiinded,  and  he  who  emptied  hii  cup
quickeat.  or  dnnk  moat,  received  ai  hii  priie  a
leather  bag  tilled  with  wine,  and  a  garland,  or,  ac-
cording to  Aeliaa  (K.  H.  ii,  41),  a  golden  crown.
(Ariiloph.  AduHn.  943,  with  the  ScboL)  The
■d/wi  i^'  ifia^  alto  togk  place  on  thii  daj,
and  the  jeiM  and  abuie  which  periont  poorcd
JOTth  oa  Uiii  ocouion  were  donblleu  an  imitation
of  the  amiuementi  cutomat;  at  the  mini  Dion  jtia.
Athenaeni  (i.  p  437)  Mja  thai  it  wai  cuitontarr
on  the  daj  of  the  Cho£i  to  tend  lo  the  lophidi
(heir  galaiin  and  preaenli,  that  the?  too  might
enjoy  tbenuelTu  with  their  frienda.  The  third
day  had  iu  same  from  x^P"^  >  P°U  »  ""  ^hia
day  pemita  offered  pota  with  flowen,  aeeda,  or
CDoked  TeoTlatilei,  aa  a  aaciifioe  to  Dtonjaiu  and
Hermea  Chthoniua.  {ScboL  ad  Arittopi.  Acian.
lOOS  i  Snidaa,  t.  v.  XAt^h.)  With  Ihia  lacriflee
WBTB  connected  the  ir/iint  x^rpuiH  mentioned
by  the  Scholiait  on  Ariitophanea  (Am.  220),  b
which  the  lecond  archon  diitTibat«d  the  priiea.
SlaToa  were  permitted  to  take  part  in  the  general
Cejoieingi  of  the  Antheitcria  ;  but  at  the  cloaa  of
the  day,  they  were  aent  home  with  the  worfi
Siipai;  Kapts,  aliclT"A»fl«rr^pia.  (Heaych.tD.
eipaCi ;  Fraclui,  ad  Haaod.  Op.  tt  Diet,)
It  ia  nnoerlaia  whether  dmuaa  vera  pe
at  the  Aniheateria  ;  but  Bttckfa  auppOMi  that
media  were  rei««ented,  and  thai  tragedit)  which
were  to  ba  brought  oat  at  the  great  Dionyaia
were  perbqia  leheaned  at  Ihe  Antheateria.  The
Dyeteriea  connected  with  the  celebiation  of  the
Aiitheatcria  were  held  at  night,  in  the  ancient
tampte  iy  Affinui,  which  wai  opened  only  once
a  year,  on  the  12th  of  Anthertanon.  TTiey  were
likewiae  under  the  uperintBUdenca  of  the  aecond
archon  and  a  certain  munber  of  ftifiiKitraL  He
appointed  fourteen  j^ieateaaei,  called  yipaipal  iff
ytpapid,  the  Tenerafale,  who  ecnidiicted  the  cere-
moniea  with  the  aaaiitann  of  one  other  priealeaa.
(PoUui,  (iil  9.)  The  wife  of  the  leoind  anhon
(Au-lAjinni)  ol&red  a  myatarioiu  aacrifice  for  the
walbie  of  the  city  ;  ahe  waa  betrothed  to  the  god
In  a  aecret  aolemnity,  and  alu  tendered  the  oath
to  the  geraerae,  which,  according  to  Demoathenea
(t.  Niair.  p.  1371.  22),  Ian  thu :  — "  I  am  pure
and  onipolted  by  any  thing  that  poUutei,  and  haie
neier  had  intertnurae  with  man.  I  will  lolemniae
the  Theognia  and  lobakcheia  at  their  proper  time,
■ccordtiig  to  the  lawi  of  my  .anceaton."  The  ad-
ntaiion  to  the  myaterica,  from  which  men  wen
•idnded,  h>^  placo  after  eqncial  preporatiotu.


DIONTSIA.

which  ieem  to  haTa  ccoaiated  in  poiifieatioaa  I^*
ab',  water,  or  fire.  <SerT.  od  Am.  ri.  740  ;  Pan*,
ii.  SO.  e  4  I  LiT.  ■■■^T  13.)  The  initiated  per-
Boou  were  akjna  of  bwna,  and  aometima  thoae  of
panthen.  Inalead  of  ivy,  which  waa  woni  in  the
public  pait  of  the  Dtonjaia,  the  myttae  won
mynle.  <3ch<^  ad  AriMtfk.  Bm.  330.)  The
aacrifice  oSered  to  the  god  in  theae  myaleriea  con-
dated  of  a  aow,  the  nasal  aacrifice  of  Demeler,  and
in  aome  phK«a  of  a  aow  with  calf.  It  ii  moie
than  pcobable  that  the  hiatory  of  Dionyaua  waa
aymbolically  lepreaenled  in  Iheae  myateiiea,  aa  the
hiatcry  of  Demeter  waa  acted  in  thoae  of  Elenaia,
which  were  in  tome  recpecta  connected  with  the
Ibnner. (ScboL  ad  AritUij*.  Am.  343.)

The  foiirth  Attic  featival  of  Dionnua,  Aiat^m
if  tarn,  dd-ruci  «  iijryi>,a,  waa  eelehraled  aboat
the  12th  of  the  month  of  El^habolion  (Aeach.
e.  OaipA.  p.  63)  ;  but  we  da  not  know  whether
they  laated  more  than  one  day  «  not  The  order
in  which  the  aolemnitiea  took  place  waa,  acoording
to  the  document  in  Dcmoithenea,  aa  fdlowa :  — -
The  great  public  proceauon,  the  chorua  of  boya,
the  laiio]  [Cnoaua],  comedy,  Bnd,laally,  tragedy.
We  poaaeM  in  AthraiOEUa  (v.  p.  197,  199)  the  de-
•cription  of  a  gnat  Bacchic  proceaDOii,  held  at
Alexandria  in  the  reign  of  Plalemaeoa  PhiUdcl-
phua,  from  which  we  may  fbnn  aome  idea  of  the
gnat  Attic  proceition.  It  aeema  to  haTe  been
coalomary  to  rejffeaent  the  god  b;  a  man  in  thia
proceaoion.  PlaBrch  {Nic.  3),  at  ItMt.  relatw
that  on  one  occaaion  a  beantifiil  alare  of  Niciaa
repreaented  Dionymi  (compare  Athen.  t.  p.  200).
A  ridiculona  imitatiro  of  a  Baobjc  pnccMiou  ia
deictib^d  in  Arialophanea  {Eecb».  7&9,  &c).  Of
the  dramaa  which  were  perfonned  at  the  gttnt
Dianyna,  the  trogedie*  at  leaat  were  gen^lly
new  piece* ;  repeliliona  do  not,  howcTor,  aaem  u
hare  been  excluded  from  any  Diwjaiac  fealiraL
The  Gnl  archon  had  the  aaperintrndcnce,  and
gave  ths  chonu  to  the  dmoatic  poet  who  wiahed
to  bring  out  hii  piece  at  ihia  feativa].  The  price
awarded  to  Ihe  dramatiat  for  ths  beat  pU;  con-
aiatcd  of  a  crown,  and  hia  name  waa  proclaimed
in  the  thcatn  of  Dionynia.  (Demoalh.  Dt  Cbrsa.
p.  SS7.)  Stinngcra  were  prohibited  from  taking
port  in  the  choniiea  of  boya.  During  thia  and
aome  other  of  the  great  Attic  feaUvala,  priaonera
"""  free,  and  nobody  »


.  of  a  deht


de  Norn


celebration.  (Demnith,  i
p.  999.)  Aa  tho  grtM  Dionyaia  were
at  the  beginning  of  apring,  when  the
navigatjon  waa  reopened,  Athena  wna  not  only
viailed  by  numben  of  conntiy  people,  hut  aloo  bv
ttiangera  bom  other  paita  of  Greece,  and  thi:
Tsriooa  amutementa  and  eihibitiooa  on  thia  oe-
caaion  wen  not  unlike  thoae  of  a  modern  tail.
(Iiocr.  Ateif.  p^  203,  ed.  Bekker  ;  Xen.  Hiero,
L  11  ;  compare  Becker,  aaKUe(,iL  p.  237,  &c>
Retpecting  the  acrupulona  regularity,  and  Ihe
enormoui  aami  apent  by  the  Athemaai  on  the
celebntion  of  theae  and  othB-  feativala,  tM  De-
moathenea (J'liiiip.  L  p.  50).  Aa  many  circum^
atoncea  connected  with  the  eeleblatiai  of  tho
Dionyaia  cannot  be  made  clear  without  entering
into  minuto  detaili,  we  nuat  refer  the  reader  la
BHckh^emy.

The  wnnhip  of  Dionyaua  waa  almott  auiTenal
among  the  Oreeka  in  Aaia  aa  well  at  m  Europe,
and  tho  ehaiwtar  of  hit  lettiTala  waa  tha  mian


rroNYSiA.

,  oilr  modified  bj  tht  nadmil  SiSep-
BM  tt  tha  nrimn  nibs  of  tfaa  Onekl.  It  ii
txfnmlj  itatBil  lint  ibe  Spmlaiii  did  not  iudnlgc
d  BBch  in  drisking  dnring  the  celcbnlioD  of  tba
Dicnjiia  u  ctber  Oittk*.  (Albm.  ir.  p.  156  ;
Plat*,  Dt  Ltg.  i.  ^  637.)  The  mnhip  of  l>i»-
njin*  *■■  in  gatenl,  vith  Ibe  exception  of  Co-
liilh,  KeycB,  ud  the  Doric  colaniei  in  natbera
Inly,  \em  pcpalw  Bsong  the  Doric  Mats  than  in
Mbet  nrti  of  Oneee.  (Htll]e[,  Oornu,  iL  10.
1  e ;  Rtttim  !*>»  *■  AnAaKL  dtr  Maitni,
f,  its,  ftc)  It  wu  moit  oitfauiaitic  in  BoeotiB
ia  tin  eefis  eo  Meant  Citbunn,  m  ii  weU
known  fran  tdlmwiH  enJ  ' — ^-^—
fUmm  poMK TbM  (he


(he  eitisTaant  meninient,
omdnet  with  which  nil  fee-


tinh  of  ihii  dui  wen  orklBiled,  did  Is
eovne  of  tin*  lead  to  diB  gmeteri  emess,  anno
be  denied ;  bat  we  nnut  4t  the  ame  tima  a^Dow
kdfe,  that  nt^  eieeMM  did  not  dccht  intil  i
~.  At  a  Tary  <i
I  hiatoj,  Bacchic  fstiTala
bwJMJ  with  humm  kKnficS)  and  tracee  of  thii
caetaa  an  diecemible  eran  until  raj  lata.  In
Chiaa  ihia  cmtom  wu  upmaded  by  another,
aceaidiiig  to  which  the  Bacchae  wen  obliged  to
fM  ths  nw  pecee  at  Beth  of  the  risliin  which
woe  diatriboted  imoag  tbem.  Thii  act  vu  called
afufwiia,  and  Dionyani  detired  from  it  the  name
rf  ifiilni  and  jfoirHit.  Then  wii  a  npoit  that
ra  Thoaiatoete*,  afUr  the  lattle  of  Sahunie,  Bcri-
fced  thne  noble  Peniani  to  thi*  dinni^.  (FlnL
TlaauL  13,  Fdop.  21 ;  oompan  Thirlwall,  BiiL
^Cncn,  ii.  p.  310.)  But  Platanfa^  aowunt  of
ibii  THj  '— **~".  if  true,  ihowi  that  at  ihie  time
mch  imiagt  lilea  woe  kMJccd  upon  with  horror.
The  wenhip  ef  DioGynu,  whom  tha  Rontana
**  '  ~ '  '  9  the  Bacchic  mjileiis

I,  an  nid  to  have  been

I.  8),  where  fc
a  in  Kcrel,  and,  daring
tbe  latter  psiod  of  their  ezutence,  at  night. The
imtiated,  aecardiiu  to  Lit

when  tbor  miudi  wen  hsled  with  wine,  they
iadnlged  in  the  eoanst  eiceaeea  and  the  ~ '
■HBUnl  rieee. Young  girii  and  yonthi
•edaeed,  and  all  modcfty  wa>  aet  uide ;  i
kind  of  nee  (tamd  hen  iti  fiill  stiifiutian. Bnt


changed  Ae  whole  method  of  celebiatiou :
admitted  men  to  the  initiatjoo,  and  tianift^
the  aolemnijation  which  had  hitiierto  taken  [riace
dniinB  die  daytime  to  the  night  InMead  of  thm
dayi  m  the  year,  ibe  ordered  that  the  Bacchanalia
ihonld  be  held  doriag  five  daya  in  eiery  month.
Tt  waa  fnta  the  time  that  thse  orgiee  wen  car-
ried on  after  thi>  new  plan  that,  accordim;  to  Ihe
statement  of  an  eye-witnw  (Lit.  niu.  13),
ticentionanea  and  aims  of  every  detcription  were
conimitted.  Men  ai  well  ai  women  indnlged  in
the  meet  imnatnnl  appetitei,  and  thoee  who  at-
tempted to  ttop  or  to  oppcae  mch  odioni  pitv
eeedinm  Jell  at  vininu.  It  waa,  ai  Livj  syi,  a
priDoiwi  of  the  Kciety  to  hold  eiery  ordinance
of  god  and  naton  in  coatempt.  Men,  u  if  niced
by  fit*  of  nadDeai,  and  nnder  grst  ammliioni,
gave  ends ;  and  the  matnmi,  dmaed  ai  Bac-
eliae,  with  dieheielled  h^  and  bncning  torcbei  in
thai  handi,  bd  down  to  the  Tiber  and  pimiged
thMr  torehs  into  the  water ;  the  torchea,  how-


tinguithcd.  Men  who  refued  to  take  part  in  the
trims  of  theae  onis,  were  fieqnenlly  thrown  into
darit  caTcmi  and  detpatched,  while  tlte  perpe-
bslon  declared  tbat  they  had  been  earned  off  by
the  goda.  Among  ^e  nmnber  of  the  memben  of
thse  mysteris,  were,  at  the  time  when  they  wen
tnppnned,  penont  of  all  claats  ;  and  dniing  the
lait  two  yean,  nobody  had  been  initiated  who
waa  abore  tbe  age  of  twenty  ytara,  aa  thia  age
wai  thanght  UMt  fit  fet  ladnction  and  •ramal
pleanin.

In  the  year  B.  o.  1 B6,  th>  eonnli  Sninni  Poa-
tnmiu  Albinui  and  Q.  Macciiu  Phitiiqau  wne
informed  of  the  enlens  of  theee  meemin  ;  and
after  having  aioertuned  the  &cla  Dienticaied  above,
ihey  made  a  npot  to  the  aenate.  (Uv.  "xii.
14.)  The  teoale,  alanned  by  thii  lingnlar  dia-
cdveiy,  and  although  dreading  leet  memben  of
' "* '  [ht  ba  involved,  inveated  the


hei  misht  be  involved,  mi
ixtraordinaiy  power,  to  in(
the  natun  of  theae  nocturnal  m


v  the  prieeti  and


pneeti  and  pnecteuea,
thnughout Borne  and


ia^:  theii  enoae^aeacM  wen  manifnt  in  all  direc-
taaa  t  ftr  Uiit  (ritneaeea,  iMgerie*,  &l*o  wiUe,
and  JaiiiDciatioBi  proceeded  from  thi>  fbcni  of

■ddo-  tbe  eonf  of  the  aeciety  ;  and  tbo  voics  of
Ikoee  whs  had  been  fraudulently  drawn  into  theae
ei^iea,  aad  wmld  cry  cnl  aganut  the  ihamelea
pwdioea,  wen  dmwivd  by  the  afaoali  of  the  Bac-
cbuMea,  and  the  dslcning  unodi  of  dnmi  and
cyahaU

The  tiCMi  of  initmtion  laited  tan  daya,  dnrins
-which  a  penon  waa  obliged  to  ahatain  from  aU
Bcusl  intercoiiiae  ;  on  the  tenth  he  led  a  iolemn
tnol,  Bsderwent  a  porification  bj  water,  and  va*
led  into  the  noetnary  (Samiaaa/).  At  fint  only
wy^gn  wen  initialed,  and  tbe  oz^s  were  eelo-
heated  errry  year  dning  thne  dan.  Matrena
iliiiiMiI'lj  nrfiimid^  ibn  mni lirmi  nfiirinili But

la  act Boda  the  dinct  inflnenoe  of  Bacchu,


Italy,  forbidding  any  oi
Baohic  mytlenea,  or  to  mnt  for  the  pnipse  of
celebrating  them  )  bnt  above  all  thingi,  to  nifanut
thse  individual!  who  had  already  been  tecnred
to  B  rigid  trial.  The  e<«unl>,  after  having  given
to  tbe  labordinate  magiatrats  all  tbe  neeeeaazy
initrnctioBB,  held  an  aaaembly  of  tbe  people,  in
whicb  tbe  beta  jutt  diMOvored  were  explained  to
the  public,  in  vder  tbat  the  object!  of  the  pro-
ceedmgi  which  were  to  lake  place  might  be  known
lo  Btery  citiien.  A  nwaid  wai  at  Ue  aame  time
offered  to  any  one  who  might  be  able  to  jrive
further  infonnB^n,  or  to  name  any  one  that  be-
longed to  the  conapiracy,  u  it  wa!  called.  Mea-
anni  wen  also  teken  to  prevent  any  (me  from
leaving  Italy.  Daring  the  night  following,  a  great
number  of  penoni  wen  t^pnbended ;  many  of
them  put  an  end  to  their  own  livea.  The  whole
uumber  of  the  initialed  wai  laid  to  be  7000.  The
trial  of  all  thoee  who  wen  appnheuded  laated
thirty  dayi.  Roma  wu  aJmoel  dseited,  !at  the
aa  well  u  the  guilty  had  naeon  lo  feai.


. _  the  guilty  __

The  poniihment  inflicted  on  thoee  who  v .
victad,  varied  aeeocding  to  the  dqne  of  iheir
gtiiK ;  eome  were  thrown  ii '


their  paioiti  or  bmbandi,  that  the}  miglil  TeceiTB
tkeir  puniahmtnit  in  print*.  The  nvmli  then
vers  oidcied  by  the  tenMa  to  deetroy  all  BkcIu-
niUa  tbronBhoat  R
tion  of  taca  allon
exiited  thufl  from
vsHt  &  natoration  of  the  Bacchic  oigiee,  the  oele-
brued  daOM  of  the  Hn*te  (SomAh  aucionlaM  dd
faeelanaUu)  «»  iuued,  camDUodbg  that  no
Bacchanalia  ihoiild  be  held  eitha  in  Rome  or
Italy ;  that  if  any  one  ■hoold  think  nieh  cae-
Bimiu  necB— ry,  «  if  he  onild  >ut  oeriect  them
enu,  he  ihodd
iht  then


apply  to  the  [neliv  nrbaoni,  who  n


y  of  the  1


than  fiva  penona  v
bntion  ;  there  ibaa


litting  of  not  teu  than

might  aolemniae  the  Bacchic  hob  {  bnt  no  more
-' '  'at  at  the  cele-

m  fund,  and  no
a  or  prieet.  (Lit.  mii.  18.)
Thia  decree  ia  alio  mentiuaed  by  Ciocfo  (,De
Lt^.  iL  15).  A  braaen  table  containing  thii  im-
piKtant  document  wai  diacarerBd  near  Baii,  in
aonthem  Italy,  in  the  year  164D,  and  ii  at  preaent
in  the  imperial  Mnaeam  of  Vienna.  A  copy  of  it
ii  giren  in  Dnkenboreh'i  edidm  of  Litt  (to).
TiLp.l97,4e.).

We  hare  in  our  aoBonnt  of  tbe  Romu  Baccha-
nalia elHclj  foUoved  the  deaaiption  girm  by
Liiy,  which  may,  indeed,  be  aomewut  eiag-
genited ;  but  eoniidering  the  diScnsca  of  character
between  the  Orcein  ud  Ibimani,  It  cannot  be
Buipriting  thai  a  tHtival  like  the  Kooyiia,  when
once  introduced  among  the  Roman*,  ihould  hare
immediately d^enerated into the  groneet  and

immediately  after  the  time  when  the  Romani  wen
made  "^"'"'"^  with  the  dtgaace  and  tbe  lunriea
of  Oreok  life  ;  for,  like  barbaiuni,  ibey  knew  not
where  to  itop,  aad  became  brutal  in  tbeir  enjoy.
menta.  Bnt  whether  the  accouDt  of  Liiry  be  ex-
aggaated  or  not,  thia  much  ii  oartain,  that  tbe
Komana,  ever  nnce  the  time  of  the  mppreaaioo  ot
the  W«wlnii«li«,  edoiidered  theaa  oi^ea  u  in  the
kighett  degree  immond  ami  Uoentiani,  aa  we  aee
fiom  the  roamier  in  which  they  applied  the  worda
deriied  bom  Bacdiiu,  e.  g.  taoAor,  bacdaiit,  bae-
etoCHi,  iaeeUau,  and  othen.  Bnt  the  moat  nir-
inimng  tdrcnmuann  in  the  account  of  Livy  ii,  that
the  Bacchanalia  ihaald  baTe  been  celebrated  far
KTCnt  yean  in  the  boiileroni  manner  deaciibed
In-  him,  ud  by  thnuandi  at  pertom,  without  any
of  the  magiitialei  aiqiearing  to  bare  been  aware

WliDe  the  Bacchanalia  woe  thai  auppreued,
anocber  mora  nnipla  and  innocent  feitiTU  of  Bac-
chua,  the  Li&iralia  (bom  lArr,  m  lAer  Faler,  a
name  of  Baccbni),  continned  lo  be  celebrated  at
Rmne  every  yeu  on  the  16th  of  March.  (Grid.
FatL  iiL  713.)  A  deamption  of  the  eeremoniea
tt  thii  fcMiial  ii  ginn  by  Orid  (/.  a ),


•doi»d  with  gadand)  of  iTy,  eanled  throogh  1


th(f  with  an  altar  with  a  handle  (oiHito
the  middle  of  which  then  waa  a  mull  fire-pan
(fiealmt),  in  which  from  time  to  time  nciificea
were  bornt.  On  tliia  day  Roman  yontha  who  had
Mtained  their  uitaeoth  year  icceired  the  toga


DIKIBITORE&

Tjrilii. (Oc  ad  Jit.  ii.  1.) That  the  LibenUia


aw  it  from  the  name  Ladi  LSmralf,  wluch  a
aometimaa  need  inatead  of  Liberalia ;  and  NaeTiiu
(i^  FaL)  eipnaaly  aays  that  penoni  eipreaaed
thermdiea  reiy  freely  at  the  Libeialia.  St.
AugoitiiM  (Sa  Civ.  Da,  ni.  31)  enn  ^icaka  ol
a  high  degrae  of  lieentiDuaneH  orcied  on  at  thia
fcatiTal.  [L.  a.]

DIOSCUIUA  (Iwnuifim),  featirala  cele-
brated in  Tariona  parU  of  Otaece  in  baionr  of  tbe
dioBnuL  Tbe  Spartan  dioacmna  msilioned  by
PaoaaniM  (it.  27.  §  1  ;  ooanparc  wit^  iiL  I&  g  3)
and  Spanheim  (ad  (Mm.  Hgim.  n  Aifl.  34),
were  celehiated  with  lamGcea,  rejoicinsi,  and
drinking.  At  Cytane  tEia  dioecnri  were  ukewiae
honouMd  with  aneat  fatiTaL  (S^toL  ad  Paid.
FyO.  T.  639.)  The  Athenian  teatiTal  of  the  diaa-
cori  baa  been  dcacribad  nnder  Aniciu.  Tbeir
vonhip  waa  vary  generally  adt^ted  in  Oreece,
eapedally  in  the  Doric  and  Achaean  italea,  ai  we
condode  &om  the  great  nmnbef  of  ttonplea  dedi-
cated to  them  ;  but  acarcely  annhine  it  hnoim
retpecting  tbe  mannn  in  which  tbeir  fartiTala
•rare  celebrated.  [L.  8>]

DIO'TA. [AHPHoa^]

DIPHTHERA  (B<^«<^),  a  kind  of  doak
made  of  the  akina  of  Timal^  and  worn  by  berda-
men  and  country  people  in  general.  It  ia  fre-
quently mentioned  by  Oieek  wrilen.  (Ariitc^
Ntt^  72,  and  Schd.  Vap.  414  ;  Pbilo,  Grit.  p.  S3 ;
Lncian,  Tim.  o.  IS.)  Fctlu  (ni.  70)  lairi  that  it
bad  a  coToring  for  the  head  (h-utpdHw),  in  which
M^iect  it  wodd  ootreapond  to  tbe  Boman  OKat-
ba.  rCDCDLLtia.]  (Becker,  CSariUai,  tsL  iL  p.
849.)

DTPHROS  (.W^fot). [CtntntTB ;  Tk>ohi;«.1

DIPLAX  ()iVW). [PjiLiiFK.]

DIPLOIS  (tirXoti). [Palliom.]

DIPLiyMA,  a  writ  or  pablic  document,  which
conferred  upon  a  inwm  any  right  or  pririt^e.
Boring  tbe  republic,  it  wat  granted  by  the  cco'
anla  and  aenate  ;  end  under  the  empire  by  Iba
emperor  and  the  magiitntea  whom  he  asthortaed
to  do  ao.  (Cic  ad  Pom,  tL  12,  ikUH.  i.  17,
e.  Pii.  S7  ;  Sen.  8m.  ni.  10  ;  Suet  Oal.  3B,  Mr.
12,Ott.  7',  Dig.  4B.  tit.  10.  1,37.)  The  diplona
waa  tealed  by  the  empenr  (SneL  Am/,  SO)  ;  ft  coo-
aiited  of  two  IcaTea,  whence  it  derived  it*  name.
Theae  writs  were  (specially  given  to  public  conriaa,
or  to  thoae  who  wiabed  to  procure  tbe  nee  of  Um
public  boiaea  or  cairi^ea.  (Flin.  I^.  x,  14, 131  ;
compare  x.  S4,  SS.)  Tbe  tabellarii  of  the  «n-
peror  weald  naturally  alwayi  baTO  a  diploma ;
whence  ve  read  in  an  inacHption  (OrelU,  No.
2917)  of  a  diphmariti  toUtenai.

DI'PTYCHA. [T.iBDLix]

DIRECTA  ACTIO. [Actio.]

DIRIBITO'RES,  an  aid  1^  moat  modem
writera  to  hare  been  the  peraoni  who  gate  to  the
eititen*  ^  ftikQa  with  which  dkey  voted  in  tbe
comitia  ;  but  Wunder  haa  moat  dittinctlj  prartd,
inlhepnfam  tohiiC)Klar£;^bmi&(j4i.ciiTi —
dniL),  that  it  waa  the  efflce  of  the  diribilcna  to
•Unde  tbe  TOte*  when  taken  oat  of  the  dMat,  k>  ai
to  determine  which  had  tbe  majority.  He  remaika
that  tbe  etymology  of  ijwiliara  wcnld  lead  na  to
anun  to  it  the  meaning  of  "  aapaiatiou "  or
■*  diTtnon,"  aait  iicomponodedof^and  hiUn,


DISCUS.

llw  k  linpptm  u  b  pm^en  ud  dtbtn,  *hicb
CDRM  rapvctirely  fion  pm  and  kaitra,  and  d«
nd  UvL  la  KTcnl  pamgn  tbe  mird  cannol
hare  wnj  oUm  s^nifiotioa  than  thst  giTea  lij
Wmdtt  (Cie.  An  /taitf»,  SO,  oil  <^.  Fratr.
iii.«.  |1  ;  Vun,  £)■  A*  AwCiii.  3.  1 1,  iii.  S.

lie.)

Wboi  Ckan  nji  (i<  Pww.  IS),  *  Tca  rogi-
Imt,  n*  diribitDn*,  roa  ciutodet  tabdlanun,"  we
^  I*v«umc  that  hs  mentiau  thae  officera  in  the
ordR'  m  which  thej  diachai^ed  their  dntSes  in  tha
tamtia.  Il  wai  the  offlca  ol  tha  n^alonf  to  col-
kct  tha  tabdlie  which  each  ceataij  ga«,  ai  the;
ued,  befbte  the  ballot  wai  btrDducad,  to  a^
(ni^iin)  (ach  ccDtnij  Bir  iti  Totei,  and  report
tboa  ta  tha  magiatnte  who  jveaidBd  grer  the
BOhk.  Tha  dmtitom,  ai  haa  been  alresdj  to-
marked,  dnided  the  Tola  when  taken  oat  of  tha
ciria*,  nid  handed  them  orer  ic  Ihe  aabida,  who
chedud  tbem  off  b;  poinii  marked  on  a  laUeL
[Cmnra  Cut*  ;  SfTUbA.]

DISCUS  («««),  a  areolar  pUla  of  atone
{>itbm  tlant.  Find.  Ink.  L  34),  or  meta]  {ijJm-
ata  pomdtn  iud.  Hart.  ilT.  161),  rude  for
ifaowmg  to  a  diataacs  ai  an  eiefriie  of  itnogth
■ad  dexteritjr.  Tliu  waa,  indeed,  one  of  the  prin-
"■'  "ic  exerciKi  of  the

le  PadalUim. It  <

...]!  age.  (HoOLiliL  77*,  Od.

IK-lra,  zril  168.)

The  diaciii  ww  ten  or  twelTC  inchea  in  dianwter,
M  ai  la  reach  abore  the  middle  of  tha  foreami
•h(o  bdd  in  the  right  band.  The  object  waa  to
Iktow  it  fRnn  a  fixed  ipot  to  the  gnaleat  diitance  ;
Bad  in  doing  thii  nch  player  had  a  friend  to  mark
the  pmnt  at  which  the  dieeiii,  when  thrown  hy
kiB,itmd[  the  grrand.  (Od.  riii.  1B6— 200  i
''^-.  TkA.  Tt  70S.) The  diatanca  to  which  it


(iLniiL  431,523.)

,. Q  which  the  diacoboltu,  or  tbrewei

•f  the  diacna,  itood,  wai  tailed  PaMlr,  and  waa
indicated  by  being  a  little  bigber  than  the  ground
nmnndiDg  it.  At  each  man  took  hia  itation,
wilh  hn  hodj  entiielj  naked,  on  Ihe  SeliMIs,  be
fhctd  hia  right  tool  iorwaid,  bmding  hia  knee.


DIVINATIO.  41.S

and  rMting  ptincipaD;  on  tliia  foot  The  diacna
being  held,  readr  to  be  thrown,  in  hia  right  hand,
ke  alooped,  tummg  hia  bodf  towards  it,  and  bia
left  hand  waa  natnnllj  tomed  in  the  aame  direo-
tion.  (Philoatr.  fnuff.  I  24  ;  Welcker,  ad  bK.)
Thia  attltade  waa  repreaanted  b;  the  acolptor
Hfton  in  one  of  hia  woriia,  and  ia  adduced  br
Quntflian  (/srf.  Or.  iL  13.  (  10)  to  thow  how
mnch  greater  akill  ia  dinlajed  by  the  artiit,  and
hnr  much  more  powetfdl  an  a%ct  ia  prndoced  on
the  fpectator,  wian  a  peraoa  ia  repreaented  in
action,  than  when  he  ia  at  reat  or  itanding  erect.
We  fbrtonatrif  poaaf  acTenl  cofMea,  more  or  leaa
entire,  of  thia  celebrated  atatue  ;  and  one  of  the
beat  of  them  ia  in  tha  Britiah  Mnieuni  (aee  the
preceding  woodnit).  It  repnaenta  the  player  jnit
ready  to  awing  round  hia  oDtattetcbed  arm,  ao  aa
to  dauribe  with  il  a  eemleircle  in  the  ab,  and
thni,  with  hia  collected  force,  to  project  the  diacaa
at  an  angle  of  fbrty-fire  degreea,  at  the  woe  time
aprmnng  forward  ao  aa  to  giro  to  it  the  impetna  of
lua  wboU  bod}r.  Diacmn  "  nato  contorqnet  tnr-
bine,  el  ipae  proaeqaittir." (Slatiua,  L  c)

Sometunea  a  beary  man  of  a  iphetical  farm
(rS^ei)  waa  naed  inatod  of  a  diacaa,  aa  when  the
Greeka  at  the  fnneial  gamea  contended  for  a  lamp
of  inm,  which  waa  lo  be  giren  to  him  who  could
throw  it  f[irthe(t.  (71.  niiL  826—848.)  The
ir^\oi  waa  perforated  in  the  centre,  ao  that  a  npe  at
Ihimg  might  be  piaaed  thnmgh  and  oaed  in  throw-
ing It.  (Entoath.  ed.  Bemhardy,  p.2j1.)  In  thia
form  the  diicobolia  ii  a^L  pimctiaed  by  tht  monn-
taineen  of  the  canton  of  Appeniell,  in  Switzer-
land. They  meet  twioe  a  year  to  throw  nmnd
atooee  of  great  weight  and  liie.  Thia  they  do  hj
a  Ridden  leap  and  forcible  awin^ng  of  the  whole
body.  The  aame  atone  ia  taken  by  all,  aa  in  the
caae  of  the  andent  diacua  and  ffdAor :  he  who  aenda
it  to  the  greatcat  diatanco  receivea  a  public  prize.
The  alone  ia  lifted  aa  high  aa  the  right  ihinldn
(aee  woodcat  ;  arruiallaa,  IL  udlL  431)  befon
being  piojected.  (Ebel,  SeUldurtia  dtr  (Mtraa-
tUlier  der  Sckaeili,  I  p.  174.)  [J.  Y.]

DISPENSA'TOR. [CALCULiTOR.]

DITHYRAMBOS. [Chobub.]

UIVEBSO'EIUM. [C*DroNi.]

DIVIDI'CULUM.  [AQCi.DDCTDB, p.

114,  a.]

DIVINATIO  ia,  aceorduig  to  CicMv  (Da
Dttitiai.  i.  1),  a  pnaeaaiu]  and  a  knowledge  of
fblnre  (hingi ;  or,  according  to  Chryaippiu  (Cic
Di  Dioauii.  ii.  63),  a  power  in  man  which  fonneea
and  crplaina  thoae  ligna  which  the  godi  throw  in
hia  way,  and  the  dinner  moat  theiebne  know  the
diapoeition  of  the  gods  towarda  men,  the  import  of
their  aigna,  and  by  what  nuani  theee  aigna  an  lo
be  obtained.  According  to  thia  latter  definilian,
the  meaning  of  the  Latin  w«d  dlrinatia  ia  nar-
rower than  that  of  the  Greek  >iarru<4,  in  aa  mnch
ai  the  hitter  tignifiea  any  meana  by  which  Ihe
deoeea  of  the  goda  can  be  diacoiered,  the  natoral
aa  well  ai  the  artificial ;  that  i*  to  aaj,  the  aeen
and  the  oraclea,  when  the  will  of  the  goda  ia  re-
vealed by  inB[ritation,  aa  well  aa  the  lUrinatiD  in
the  aenae  of  Chryaippaj.  In  the  one,  man  ia  the
piaaiTe  medinm  ULcongh  which  the  deity  teTcala
the  fbtnre  ;  while  in  the  other,  man  diacoreA  it
by  hia  own  ikill  or  experience,  vitbont  any  pre-
tenaioD  to  inapiratioa.  Aa,  howcTor,  the  aeer  or
lalea  waa  alao  traqnendy  ailed  divinoa,  we  aball
ttcs^  undo  thia  head,  of  aeoi  aa  well  aa  of  otbet


416  pIVINATIO.

kindi  of  diTinUHk Tha  fnbjeet  of  oimclev  i<  dif-

CUiKd  in  ■  lepuaie  utide. [Oriculuu.]

The  belief  thU  (he  decree  of  tht  divim  will
vers  axuKHully  lerealed  b;  tlie  deil;  hinuel^  «
could  be  discorered  by  ccrtun  iudlTidiulB,  u  oue
which  the  cluaical  uMiotu  of  uiIiqiiiL;  had,  in
common with mu^  other  natioiu,  before  the


In  eerij  a(


belief  n


„  »  of  inteiiectu«]  i»Iti-
■ocb  ■  belief  wai  OHtuiHl,
n  the  feeling  of  a  Taij  clcae


in  the  conne  of  tiine,  when  meD  bacu
quaiDted  with  the  kwi  gf  utaifc  thii
■laiidoiMd,  U  IcaM  bj  the  mgte  epu^
while  the  multilndei  itill  contiuaM  to  «dhete  to
it }  and  the  goTeniment*,  nuDg  the  adTentiga  to
be  dcHTed  Enm  it,  not  mlj  nonleauKal,  bnt  en-
tauraged  end  rapponed  it.

The  teen  or  iJarTta,  who,  under  the  direct  infla-
ence  of  the  godi,  chiefly  thu  of  Apollo,  annoonca)
the  future,  eeem  originally  to  hsTe  been  connected
with  certain  plkcea  when  oncle*  wen  giiEa  ;  but
in  aubiequsnt  timei  they  foimed  >  diitmet  dau  of
penoni,  mdependent  of  mi;  locality  ;  one  of  them
ij  Calchu  in  the  Homeric  pocmi.  Apollo,  the
god  of  prophecy,  wei  ganmlly  the  lonrce  from
which  the  leen,  am  well  ai  other  diTineii,  derired
tbeir  knowlodgBp  la  many  bmiliee  of  uen  the
inipind  knowledge  of  the  futtin  wM  canaideml
to  be  hereditaiy,  and  to  be  tmumitted  from  biher
to  ion.  To  thete  bmilie*  belonged  the  lamidi
(Paui-iilll.  SS,&c.,  BMckh,  adPM.  OL  ri.
p.  1£2),  who  from  Olympia  ipread  over  a  ctm-
■ideimble  part  of  Otvece ;  the  Bnnchidae,  near
Uiletui  <Coiion,33)  ;  the  Eomolpidi,  UAthmi
wd  Elenaii  i  the  Clytiadi  (Pau*.  n.  17.  i  i},  the
Telliadi  (Herod.  tiU.  37  ;  Psni.  i.  1.  §4,  &c  ;
Herod,  ii.  37),  the  Acunanian  leen,  and  othen.
Some  of  Iheie  bmiliea  retained  theii  celebrily
tUl  a  Toy  late  period  of  Grecian  hiHoiy.  The
manteia  made  their  rerelalioiu  «ther  wnco  n-
quealed  to  do  M  on  impanant  emergeudei,  er
they  made  them  ipontaneouily  whoever  they
thought  it  DcceuBiy,  either  to  pnTent  ume
ealunitf  or  to  ildmuhite  their  eounlrymen  to  wiDe-
thing  bcneficiaL  The  dvU  goienunent  of  Athena
not  only  tolerated,  but  protected  and  honoured
tbcm  1  and  Ciceio  (Dt  Dimmit.  I  H)  aayi,  that
the  maoteit  were  pKUnt  in  all  the  public  laaem-
'  blie>  of  the  Atheniani.  (Compare  Aliilopfa.  Pax,
1025,  with  the  SchoL  ;  Nab.  SS5,  Ac  and  the
SchoL  ;  Lycnig.  e.  LtocraL  p.  196.)  Along  with
tha  wen  we  may  alao  mention  the  Bacidei  and
the  Sibyllae.  Both  eiiited  from  a  Tsry  nmote
time,  and  were  distinct  from  the  uanteii  lo  &r  ai
they  pretended  to  deriTe  tbeir  knowledge  of  the
future  from  naei  booki  (yomriiof^  — i — <■
coneulted,  and  which  w
u  and  Rome,  ke.
especial  officen,  in
mott  rerercd  lanctuaiy.  oacia  waa,  acconung  lo
PauaanuH  (i^  13.  g  6  ;  compare  with  It.  27.  %  2},
in  Boeotia  a  general  name  for  a  man  impired
by  nymphi.  The  Scholiait  on  Aciitophanea  (Pax,
1009}  and  Aelian  (V.H.  xiL  iS)  mention  three
original  Baddei,  one  of  Eleon  in  Boeotia,  a  eecond
of  Athena,  and  a  third  of  C^hyi  in  Arcadia.
(Compare  Ariitoph.  Eqmt.  I3S,  996,  Aat,  963  ;
Clou.  Alei.  SInm.  L  396.)  From  theee  three
Baddei  all  other*  were  aud  to  be  deaeended,  and
|o  bare  deiired  theii  name. Anticharca  (Hend.


DIVINATIO.
T.  43),HaMMu(Eaod.TiL6>,Eado(iiaf  Carina

(Pbul  I.  12.  £  6),  and  Lyeui,  ion  of  Pandion
(Paul.  I.  t.X  probably  belonged  to  the  Badde*.
The  Sibyllae  wen  prophetic  women,  ptobably  of
Aiiatic  origin,  whow  peculiar  cuatom  leemi  b>
haie  been  to  wander  with  their  aaoed  boi4u  bam
place  to  place.  (Lir.  L  7.)  Aelian  (  V.  H.  m.  36)
■tatei  that,  according  to  Kme  authora,  then  were
loor  Sibyllae,  —  the  Erythraean,  the  guniaa,  the
Egyptian,  and  the  Sardinian  i  hut  that  othera
added  tix  tnore,  among  whom  then  wu  one
(ailed  the  Cnmaeon,  and  another  called  the  Jcwiah
Sibylla.  Compare  Suidaa  (i.e.  liftFAAw),  and
Pausaniai  (i.  12),  who  hat  devoted  a  whole  chap-
ter to  the  Sibyllae,  in  which,  howerer,  he  doei  not
clearly  diltinguiih  between  the  SibyUae  properly
K  called,  and  other  women  who  travelled  about
and  made  the  prophetic  art  their  pmfenion,  and
who  teem  to  bare  been  very  numeroui  in  all  porta
of  the  ancient  world.  (Clem.  A]ei.,S(rDii>.  L  319.)
Tha  Sibylla  whoie  booki  gained  10  great  an  im-
portance at  Rome,  wai,  according  to  Vam  (oft
LadmL  L  6),  the  Erythraean  :  the  booki  which
■he  waa  aaid  to  haia  told  to  one  of  tha  Tarquina,
were  cuefully  eoncealcd  &am  the  public,  and  mly
aecesuhle  to  the  duomiirt.  The  eariy  eiiiteuoa
of  the  SihylUe  it  not  aa  certain  aa  that  of  the
Baddei  I  but  in  acme  legoida  of  a  late  data,  tbey
occur  eien  in  the  period  previou*  to  the  TrofBD
war,  and  it  ii  not  impobable  that  at  an  early
period  every  town  in  Greece  had  it«  prophedei  by
Badi  a  Sibylla.  (Pan*.  Le.)  Theyieem  to
retained  their  celebrity  down  to  the  tiuie  of
Antiochua  and  Demetriua,  (See  Niebuhr,  Hid.  ^
Route,  L  p.  503,  &c)

Beiidei  theae  mora  reapectabla  pt^heta  and
propbeteaHi,  there  were  niunben  of  dinnen  i^  an
inferior  order  iy^iiatioKfriQi},  who  made  it  thaic
huaioeaa  to  erplain  all  torti  of  aigna,  and  to  tell
brtunea.  They  ware,  howerer,  more  particularly
popular  with  the  lower  lodcn,  who  are  eierywherv
moat  ready  to  believe  what  la  moat  marrelloua  and
leaat  entitled  to  belief.  Thia  daia  of  divii«ra,
however,  dota  not  aeem  to  have  exiated  until  a
compantivelylale  period  (Thucyd.iL  21;  Ariatoph.
^oci,  897,  Pat,  986, 1034,  &c),  and  to  have  been
looked  Dpon,  even  by  the  Greek*  theiuelvea,  aa
nuiaancea  to  (he  public

Theae  loothaayen  lad  ua  natonlly  to  the  mods
of  dirinatim,  of  which  iuch  frequent  uie  irai  mad«
by  the  ancienta  in  all  the  afbira  of  public  and
private  life,  and  which  chiefly  coniiated  in  the  io-
teipretalion  of  numberleai  ilgna  and  phenmiena.
No  public  undertaking  of  any  mnaequence  ww
ever  entered  upon  by  tha  Oreeka  and  Rusaaa
without  couaultujg  the  will  of  the  godi,  by  obaerr-
mg  the  ligna  which  they  aent,  eapedally  thou  in
the  lactificta  o^red  for  die  purpoae,  and  by  whidi
they  were  thought  to  indicate  the  locceai  or  tha
fiulnre  of  tiie  undertaking.  For  thia  kind  of  divi-
natiou  no  divine  inajMratiao  waa  thought  neceavry,
but  merely  experience  and  a  cettam  knowledga
acquired  by  routine  ;  and  although  in  tome  caaea
jmata  were  iqipoinled  fts  the  purpoce  of  obierving
and  explaining  aigna  [Auaniii  HiUDSfix],  ywt
on  any  audden  emetgency,  eapecially  in  privata
a^in,  any  one  who  met  with  aomething  eitraot-
dinary,  might  act  a>  hia  own  interpreter.  Tba
prlnapal  lisna  by  which  the  goda  were  thought  ta
declare  their  will,  were  thinga  connected  with  tba
offering  of  aactificea,  the  flight  and  voice  of  bitda»


■II  kma>  df  I


DlVMATia
il  pheBtmena,  wdinaij  u  Till


DIVINATIO.


^17


Tlxt  iotapnntioii  of  ngns  of  the  fint  dsu
(IfpOfHPrvia  or fepHnuvio, Aonr^Mriin  or  an

492,  Ac),  Ihe  ianntioD  of  Pnuaelhciu.  It  uenu
ts  bBTe  been  ma*t  cnltjniied  li;  tho  Elnueaju,
Mmmg  whom  it  ma  ru*e4  tntfi  a  complete  KisiFe,
ud  frmn  whonj  it  paiied  to  the  Romaiu.  Sacri-
fice wen  either  offered  {n  the  special  purpoee  of
eoiwiltiDg  tbe  Eodi,  or  in  the  ordinuy  vhy  ;  but
n  botli  attt  an  ngat  wen  obaerred,  mi  when
ihrj  wen  pnphioQt,  the  <acn£ce  wu  wd  iciiUit-
^.  The  pmciial  paint*  that  were  noerallf  ob-
lerrcd  woe,  t .  The  muiiKi  in  which  the  Ticdm
■|T '—  *-^  to  the  allar,  whether  atteriug  ■  •oimd
gr  Dol ;  tho  forma  vru  conndered  *  broonble
■men  m  the  Moi&e  M  the  Pinioniuin.  (Stmb.
Tiii.  PL  384  ;  aunpue  Put.  ir.  3Z  g  3.)  2.  The
■iiMi  if  the  iatestinei  with  reipect  to  their  colour
Md  ■HMbKB  (AeKJiyL  Pnmeti.  493,  &e. ;
£nip.  SbtL  833)  ;  the  liver  ind  bile  were  of
BBtiealBt  impcrtiaxe.  [Caput  Extohdh,]  3.
The  mum  of  the  fl*nie  which  CDnnuned  the
■crifice  (M  Vilckoiwr,  «f  jEVrp. /'jioflL  1S61);
hrvoe  tl^  wwd^  wvpofmrrtia,  fyrvpct  ff^fttrTa,
♦>j|ei»t  fitpwro.  That  the  nnoke  rinag  fnim
Ike  ihaK,  tbe  libation,  and  iBtknii  other  thing!
•fiaed  to  the  goda,  Hers  likewige  coniidered
Bi  a  meua  throngh  which  the  will  of  the  goda
■t^fht  b*  leanwd,  ia  clear  from  the  nainea,
■■■■■^■miii.  Xitarotiarrtia,  cpttfo^iavrtla,  and
BihBi.  Eqieeial  can  wai  alao  taken  daring  a
naifice,  that  no  inaiiipici<mi  or  EriTtdoui  worda
wen  Httocd  bf  mj  of  the  bjilanden :  hence  the
ailiwitiuM  of  the  ptieMi,  fi^/uireaDd  rA^fifo,
■  n>KT*,  ruHririj/avite  titigiai,  and  othert ;  lor
*"pT*y^r  ejcpcBuinm  were  not  only  thonght  to  poi-
hde  nd  pcafane  the  Bcred  act,  bat  to  be  anlnckj
onnit  (iiwiynula,  aXiiUni,  ^4/w,  ^mof  or
VMPiB^  OLtL  112;  Ham./^iL  41).
The  art  of  iiitet]netiag  ngai  of  the  lecond  doH

■ai,  Elu  the  former,  aunmon  lo  Ore^  and  Ro-
■ani,  faM  WM  DCTer  developed  into  ao  complete
a  rjMaa  hj  the  former  aa  b;  tbe  latter  ;  nor  did  it
«Ts  attain  the  Hme  degree  i^  importance  in  Oreece
aa  it  did  at  Kme.  [Ananii.]  The  Oiecka,
whtn  sbaovi^  the  flight  of  hirda,  tnmed  their
face  tawards  the  Dcrth,  and  then  a  bird  appearing
to  ifae  riglit  (ea*t),  ttfeaaHj  an  eagle,  a  heron,  or
a  Ucan,  waa  a  favooiable  aiga  (Horn.  II.  lir.
274,  xxir.  310,  Od.  it.  S24) ;  nhile  biida  ap-
Bone  to  the  left  (weat)  were  eonitdered  u  un-
liKkj  ligiia.  (Horn.  n.  liL  201,  230  ;  Featna,
i.  e.  Stttfroe  A  m.}  Sometimea  the  mere  appear-
*aee  af  a  bird  wai  thoogbt  mfEcient :  thua  the
Atbdimiia  aJwaya  cnnaidered  the  appearance  of  an
owl  aa  a  hiek;  aigii ;  heitee  the  uoTerb^  yAo^
brarai,  **  the  owl  la  oat,"  t.  f.  we  uto  good  luck.
'ttbar  inioBla  uporing  nneiDeetedlj,  eapeciali;
In  tnialkn  on  their  rotid  (Mtia  ri/itiAa),  wen
alao  t^ogte  eatinona  ;  asd  at  Athens  it  wai  cm-
lidgad  a  Tcfj  anlodt;  omen,  when  a  weoael  u-
^-and  dafing  tbe  aMembljirf  the  people.  (Ariilopb.
fate.  793.)  Snpetatitioaa  of  thia  kind  are  *ti!
latt  *i^  in  Mraal  Enrapeaa  eoontriea.  Variona
•thtc  laiana  wsa  ued  U>  ascertain  the  wjU  of  the
flit,  mA  aa  tbe  attiifafiamia,  or  dirinatioQ  by


ttamg  anawaim
>7  ahiiiiui|tb«i


ahiiiiiii|llliifnt I  "liiil Uiiil  Irniirnami  i1


a  ^OToro^urTala,  or


dicmatiaa  by  wnlmg  gee's
id  leares,  which  were  then
eipoied  to  tbe  wind,  Ac.

Of  greater  importance  than  the  appearance  of  ani-
mall,  at  leaat  to  the  Greeka,  veto  the  phenomena
in  the  hearcna,  particakrly  during  «nj  pulilio
tTBDiactioiL  The;  were  not  only  obaertea  and
interpreted  fa;  pdiate  indiiidcala  in  their  own
af&iiii,  but  bj  the  public  msgislratea.  The  Spartan
ephon,  aa  we  learn  from  Plutarch  (_AgaU.  11),
made  regular  obaervationa  in  the  heavens  avejy
ninth  year  daring  the  night ;  and  the  fiunll;  of
the  Pjthaistse,  of  Athena,  made  limilar  abien-
ations  erei;  jaa  before  the  theoria  act  sail  ibt
Debs.  {MilUer,  Deriau,  ii  2.  g  14.)  Among
tho  unlucky  phenomena  in  the  heavenj  [tiotrtf/Uiaf
s^ao,  01  poriBila)  were  thunder  and  lightniag
(ArisU^h.  Ectia.  793  ;  Euslath.  ad  Ham.  Od.  xx.
1 01),  an  eclipte  of  the  ana  or  mooa  (Thocjrd.  viL
50),  earthquakes  (Xen.  NiBm.  It.  7.  g  4),  rain  of
blood,  ilonea,  milk,  4c.  {Hom.  il  xi.  43,  Ac. ;  Cic
De  DitnaL  i  43).  Any  one  of  these  signs  ma
tnffieient  at  Athens,  as  well  aa  at  Rome,  to  break
up  the  aaaembly  of  the  people,  (Schumann,  D»
Oimit.  Alh.  p.  146.  &c.  tnosl.)  In  common  life,
things  apparently  oE  no  importance,  when  occuiring
at  a  cridml  moment,  were  dionght  by  the  sncients
to  be  signs  aent  bj  the  goda,  trom  which  eODclusioiis
might  be  drawn  reapectmg  tbe  future.  Among  theae
common  oecuneacea  we  may  mention  aneeiing
(Horn.  Od.  iviL  £61,  with  the  note  of  Enatatb. ;
Xen.  Amib.  ili  2.  g  9  ;  Plut.  Ilaiiit.  IS  ;  Ovid,
Htroid.  IS,  IBl  1  Propert  ii.  2.  33),  twinkling
of  the  eyea  (Theocrit  iiL  37  ;  Plant.  Pietd.  i.  3.
106  ;  compere  WUstemann,  ad  Tfawril.  Le.),
tinkling  of  the  ean,  and  niunberless  other  thingi
which  we  cannot  here  enumerate.  Some  of  them
have  letaloed  their  significanee  with  the  super-
Btitiona  multitude  down  to  the  present  day.

The  art  of  interpreting  difoma  (6ftipon\ia)^
had  probably  been  introduced  into  Enrope


a  still  a


temple,,
Kor  (


aeema  in  the  Homeric  age  to  have  been  held  in
high  esteem ;  for  dreams  were  said  to  be  tent  by
Zeus.  (Hom.  fi.  l  63,  il  init,  Od.  iv.  841,  xix.
457.)  In  subsequent  times,  that  class  of  diviners
who  occupied  ihianselves  with  the  inlerprelation  of
dnarni,  aeema  (o  have  been  very  numerous  and
popular  1  but  they  never  enjoyed  any  [nlediDn
from  the  state,  and  were  only  resorted  to  by  pri-
vate individu^  Some  penoos  an  said  lo  have
gained  their  Uvelibood  by  thia  profession.  (Pint.
ArMd.  27.)  Regpecting  the  atacles  which  wen
ebluned  by  passing  a  night  and  dreaming  in  a
Ok*cdi.d».
'or  further  infoimation  concerning  the  art  of
"'  m  in  general,  see  Clean's  work,  Di  Dwi-
Tho  fiVTin)  of  the  Greeks  is  treated  of
length  by  Wachsmuth  iHtUtm.  AlUrlh.
259,  &C.,  vol.  iL  p.  686,  2d  edit)  Com-
irlwall^  IliiL  afUnm,  \.  p.  2D6,  &c
word  divinatio  was  used  in  a  particular
by  the  Romans  aa  a  law.lerm,  which  re-
ome  eiplaoatiira. If  in  any  case  two  or


same  indijidual,  it  was,  as  the  phrase  tan,  deddad
by  dnriaatio,  who  abould  be  the  chief  w  real  ac-
euser,  whom  the  others  then  joined  aa  sabicrip-
tores  ;  ■'■  t.  by  patting  their  namet  to  die  charge
brought  againit  the  omnder.  This  Iraosaction,  '^  ~
whtcu  one  of  aoveial  anasm  was  selecled  to  c
■»■■ ■  ~-'  '  O"


by


dncttlie


DIVORTIUM.

u  CBllsd diTinatio,  u  the

iboal  bcU,  but  about  Kme-

bo  done,  and  wbicb  eould  not


ba  found  QUI  oj  wiuieHia  or  Hniten  awumenn  ;
$a  that  the  jadicei  liad,  ai  it  were,  to  divine  tbe
foune  which  tbey  had  to  take.  (AacoiL  in  Arffnm.
ad  Cie.  Dmmai.  in  OuB.  p.  99.  ed.  Orelll)  Hence
the  (KStiDn  of  Cicero,  in  which  be  trie)  to  gbsir  that
he,  and  not  Q,  Caedliu  Niger,  ought  to  conduct
the  accuiatiun  igainat  Verrea,  ii  called  Divinaiia
n  CaaiUum.  Coinfaie  c  IS  and  20  of  the  otatiou,
and  Oellini,  iL  4.  [L.&.]

DIVI'SOR. [Ajibitds.]

DIVORTIUM,  diTorce.  1 .  QauK.  The  tenn
for  thii  act  vaa  ^ri\MV^ia  a  iiriti/i^it,  the  fonner
dawttiag  the  act  of  a  wife  leSTing  her  hmband,  and
the  latter  that  of  a  hnabaod  diiminiiig  hii  wiA.
(Dam.  e.  OmL  p.  8Sa,  e.  Ntatr.  pp.  1362,  1366.)
The  vAj  Onek  Mates  rcapecting  whoae  lawi  of
diTorca  w  hire  anj  knowledge,  an  Athena  and
SpaHa.  In  both  itate*  the  lav,  it  appian,  pennitted
both  hnabandandwife  to  call  for  and  eSKt  a  divorce,
thongfa  H  waa  much  aader  for  a  huiband  to  get  rid
of  hia  vrifa  (hao  for  a  wife  to  Ret  rid  of  her  huiband.
Tbe  taw  at  Atbena  allowed  s  man  to  divorce  hii
wife  witiont  ceremonj-,  liniplj  bj  bia  act  of  lending
her  ont  of  hia  houae  {tKriffiwuif,  iwowdfArtir\  hut
be  waa  boiuid  to  rcatne  to  her  the  dowry  which  she
had  bioughl  to  him,  or  to  paj.her  the  iuterctt  of
nine  obdi  per  drachma  eterj  month,  and  in  ad-
dition to  thii,  to  pravide  for  her  mainteDaoce.
(Demorth.  a.  Niatr.p.  1362.)  It  would,  howarer,
■Km  that  a  biuhond  thni  diamiaaing  hia  wife,
uiuallf  did  BO  in  the  ptnence  of  witneaaea.  (Lt-
aiaa,  a.  AleA.  p.  541.)  What  became  of  the
children  Id  neh  ■  caia  ii  not  mendoned,  but  it
ia  pmhable  that  they  remained  with  the  &lber.  I^
an  the  other  hand,  a  wife  wiihed  to  leaie  her  hna-
band,  ihe  wat  obliged  in  peraen  tA  appear  before
the  archon  and  to  deliver  np  to  him  a  memorial
egntaining  the  rouoni  wh;  ahe  wiahed  to  he  di-
vorced. (Pint.  Ahib.  8.)  Bhe  had  to  conduct  ber
caae  qnita  alone,  for  a<  (be  wae  in  her  hiuband'i
power  ao  long  a*  the  verdict  wai  not  given,  no  one
had  a  right  to  come  forward  and  plead  her  cue.  H
both  partiea  agreed  upon  a  divorce,  no  further  pn-
ceedingi  ware  required,  mutual  conicnt  being  auf-
fidant  to  diaadve  a  maniage.  But  if  one  partv  ob-
jected, an  action  (Im^i^Hi  or  Jnro^tlifwt  Wi])
might  ba  brought  i^auut  the  other :  the  ptoceEd-
idgi  in  aucb  a  laaii,  however,  are  unknown.  {Heff-
ter,  AOm.  OthaiUeeif.  pp.  250,  414  )  Meier,  AO.
Pnc  p.  413,  ftc)

At  Sparta,  itaeemB,KmanmlgbtdInniiahiiwife,
if  ihe  bore  him  no  iune.  (Herod,  v.  39,  ri.  61.)

Charondua,  in  hii  liwialation  at  Thurii,  had  per-
mitted dirorca,  bat  hii  law  wai  inbaeqaently  modi-


Barn-apenoo  joungw  than  the  one  from  whom  be
(at  ^)  had  been  aenaiBtcd. (Oiod.  lil  la)

A  woman,  after  her  divorce,  returned  to  the
honaa  of  her  father,  or  of  that  relative  who  waa
nnder  obligation  to  protect  her  if  ihe  had  never
been  married  at  aU.  In  reference  to  ber  be  waa
heraipwt.  (DeniDBth.ii.^«oer.  P.1S63.) CL.8-]

S.  Roman.  The  word  diwrimm  lignifiad  ge-
noally  a  aeparation,  and,  in  a  ipecial  lenae,  a  ^
Bolntion  of  marriage.  A  Roman  Diarriage  waa  dia-
Bolved  bj  the  death  of  tha  wife  or  bujbaad,and  by
diTortiom  in  the  lifeliDw  ^tbe  huaband  and  wife.


DIVORTIUM.

The  itBtement  of  Plntarcb  {Samd.  23)  that  Ihe
busband  alone  had  originall  j  the  power  irf  eSeitiug

together  on  luch  an  authority.  In  the  oiea  of  con-
T&ctio  in  nuuium,  one  might  luppoie  that  a  woman
could  not  effect  a  divorce  wiihout  the  coiuent  of
her  hnateod,  but  a  (aiuage  of  Gvui  0- 137)  aeema

the  wife*!  fl'eedom  of  divorce  at  the  time  when
Oaioi  wrote  (Bjkking,  laitit.  I  229.  n.  3).  The
paaaigo  of  DionTaioa  (Amliq.  An.  ji.  SS),  in  which

Che  marriag

Ai  the  CMential  part  of  ■  marriage  waa  tbe  con-
luit  and  conjugal  aAetion  of  Ihe  partiea,  it  waa
eonaidered  that  ihia  affection  waa  uaceiMiy  to  ita
continuance,  and  accordiDgly  either  party  might
declare  hii  cv  ber  intention  lo  diaaolve  the  em-
nection.  No  judicial  decree,  ud  no  interien^tce
of  any  pahlic  authori^,  waa  requiaite  to  diaaolve  «
mamagc.  Piliibmlliai,  of  couiie,  required  the
"■ ' -■ !-  - 1 power  they  i¥«e. The


fint  k


t  Rrane  i


iccnrred  abont  b.  c  234,  when  Sp.  Carviliua  Ruga
put  away  bii  wife  (A.  OelL  iv.  3,  xviL  21  ;
VaL  Max.  il  1.  §  4)  on  the  groimd  of  hauroi-
neai :  it  ii  added  that  hia  conduct  wai  gcnenlly
condemned.  The  real  meaning  of  the  atoiy  ia
eiplained  by  Saviguy  with  hu  naual  acoloKaa
(ZaUdinft,  &C.  voL  V.  p.  269).

Towanli  the  latter  part  of  the  lepablie^  and
under  the  empire,  divorcee  became  very  cmnmon  ;
and  in  the  caae  of  marriagei,  where  we  asaumo
that  then  waa  no  conventio  in  manum,  there  wai
no  particular  fcrm  required.  Cn.  Pompeisa  di-
Toreti  hit  wife  Mucia  for  alleged  adultoij,  and  hii
conduct  waa  approved  (Cic  ad  AO.  L  13,  IG)  ;
and  Cicero  ipcaka  ef  Paula  Valeria  (ad  Fam.
viiL  7)  08  being  ready  to  aerve  ber  hnahand,  on
hii  return  from  hit  province,  with  notice  of  divorce^
(Compare  Juv.  vL  2-24,  fee  j  Mart.  vi.  7.)  Cicem
himiclf  divorced  hii  wife  Terentia,  after  living  with
her  thirty  yean,  and  married  a  yoong  woman
whom  he  afao  divorced  (Plut.  Ck.  41).  Cato  the
younger  divorced  hit  wife  Mercin,  that  hii  friend
Horteniiui  might  marry  her  and  have  children  by
her  ;farthiiia  the  true  meaning  of  theltory.  (Plut.
CU.dfta.23.)  IfahuibBnddiv«CEdhiiwif^,the
wife^  doa,  ai  agenciol  rule,  wat  rettored  [Dos]  ;
and  the  lume  wai  the  caie  when  tbe  divorce  took
place  by  mutual  content.  At  dimce  became  mora
commm,  attempti  were  made  lo  check  it  indi-
rectly, by  a^Ting  pecuniary  penaltiea  or  pecnniaiy
Ion  on  the  party  wfaoae  conduct  rendered  the  divorce
neceaiary.  Thii  wat  part  of  the  object  of  the  lex
Papia  Poppaco,  and  of  tbe  rtdei  at  to  the  retentio
dotii,  and  judicium  mornm.  There  waa  the  re-
tentio  dotil  propter  liben^  when  the  divorce  waa
cauiedby  the  &ult  ofthe  wife,  or  of  ha  blher,  in
wboie  power  ahe  wai :  thiee^iuthi  of  the  doa  waa
tbe  limit  of  what  could  ba  lo  retained.  On  ac-
count of  matten  morum  graviarnm,inch  ai  odulteiy.
a  tilth  [an  might  be  retained  ;  in  the  taie  of
matten  momm  levioxum,  one  eighth.  The  huihand,
when  in  &ult,  waa  puntihcd  by  being  required  to
return  tbe  dot  earlier  than  it  wai  otberciie  re-
turnable. After  the  divorce,  either  party  might
marry  again. (Suelon.  Aug.  34.)

By  the  lex  Papia  Poppaea,  a  freedwoman  wbo
had  married  hor  patnnui  could  not  divorce  hc^
aelf ;  then  appean  to  bBT«  b««n  no  oilier  dMa  of
, --- -  ^^--


IKWANA.
fen^a  inljwtcd  ta  ttiii  iDapuitr. (Dig.  24.
Bl.  3.  •.  1 1.)

Cotnapguding  to  tbe  ibnu  oF  nuiriage  bj  caa-
b(n«tio  and  cgmniii,  then  were  ths  fiirnu  of
dinrce  bj  diibnaUto  and  nmuicipBlio.  Accord-
nig  tn  FealDi  (l  c.  Z>ij>hm»(K)),  difiurealio  mu  >
kmd  (f  religiaiu  cHimoDj  »  csUed,  "  qnu  fiEbat
ftimi  libo  ■dbibilo,"  bj  which  m  murugB  warn  di»-
•olnd  ;  and  Ptatareh  (QwiM.  Aw.  50}  hat  been
atifnxl  >o  allode  to  ^  csnnanj  in  Ihe  cue  of
a  ilinna  balwtai  the  Sanun  dialia  and  hit  wifa,
■aid  that  iviginallf  mamagta  contncted  by
—  -TO  wen  indiaolubts  ;  aod  in  a  later  age,
UB  «■■  ihe  OH  with  the  marnaga  of  the  flamen
dklia  {(ULx.  IS),  wfaa  wu  maitied  bj  mahi-
la  tb*  «aaa  reCHmd  to  hj  Platanh,  the
w  sMkaind  the  dinne.  A  maDiage  by
- - 4  by  • ^^^^  ■


I  mamue  by


a  dmaa :  Iha  limple  tact  of  either  partj  con-
InetiBg  asoUwi  mairiage  wa*  not  a  legaJ  diToree.
(Oe.  Ont.  L  10.)  Ths  ceiauoay  of  bnakkg  tha
nfHaht  laiaiat  (TadC  Ami.  il  3Q),  oc  of  taking
the  kaja  of  the  hanae  from  tha  woman  and  turning
ha  oat  cf  doon,  ware  probably  convdered  to  be
tu  J  ibemacliei  sgnificant  enough,  though  it
■■y  b*  pnamaed  that  they  were  genaially  accom-
pamad  with  dedaralioiii  that  could  not  be  mii-
aadameod.  Tbe  general  practice  wat  apparently
4  deliTB'  a  written  notice,  and  perbapa  to  aaugn  a
Ran.  In  the  caie  of  Paula  Valecie,  mentioned
hy  Cietn^  no  reaaon  wa*  aiaigited.  B;  the  Lex
Julia  de  Adiilt«di*,  it  waa  proiided  that  there
ilnaU  be  aeren  witneaaei  to  a  diforce,  Roman
otiiae  of  fall  age  (fmbmi),  and  a  freedman  of
the  |iarty  who  made  ibt  dirorca. (Dig.  31.  tit.  3.

Uado-  the  early  CbriMian  emiieron,  the  power
a(  diraa  reanined,  ae  before,  mbjed  to  ^e  ob-
lavaute  tt  certain  forma.  Jnitinian  reitricted  the
JMTC  of  diTone,  both  on  the  part  of  the  huiband
and  the  wife,  to  certain  caaes,  and  he  did  not  allow
a  diiBRC  em  by  the  content  of  both  portiei,  unleu
Ihe  abject  of  the  partiea  waa  to  lin  a  life  of  ehis-
■  ■ .  of  hii


:e  (Di|.  60.  tit.  IS.
divortiinn  and  n-


The


»  are,  ni


tera,  divulium  been  ;  and  the  f«m  of  wotdi
ii%ht  be  aa  follow  —  **  Tnaa  m  tibi  habeto,  tuaa
na  tibi  ^ito."  (Cic.  i%2.  iL  28  ;  Plaut  AmpUI.
iil  S.  47,  7V««.  ii- 1.  43.)  The  phnKi  uaed  to
eqnat  the  renuncialion  of  a  mairiage  contnict

dinre.  and  ropadiam  ;  and  the  form  of  wordi
■ight  be,  "  Coaditkine  tna  nan  utar.**  (Dig.  S-l.
tlL  2  ;  Ulp.  FK^.  Ti.  i  Heinecc  Sfnti^aia;  Cod.
i,&.  IT.andat  ;  Rein, Oil iicwualafVnalmU ,-
■d  ■•  (D  Ihe  lata  Rontn  iMr,  Thibant,  Sj/atui,
Ac  9th  ed.)  [0.  L.]

IXyCANA  (ri  Um-K,  fimn  laiit,  ■  beam)
wa  BD  ancient  •ymbelieal  lepceeentation  of  the
DinKori  (Caatnr  and  Polydeiica),  at  Sparta.  It
eanaaaed  of  two  npright  beanu  with  ntheia  laid
■ooa  llwai  tanntady. iPUit.  Db  Jmar.  F^air.


DOCIMASIA.  419

1,  p.  Se.)  Thii  mde  aymlal  ot  fiatemttl  raiili'
evidently  points  to  a  very  remote  age,  in  which
Karcdy  any  atteropu  in  acnlptnre  can  hare  been
made.  At  a  hiter  time,  when  worhi  of  art  wen
introduced  into  all  the  tphpres  of  ordinary  life,
tivifl  mde  and  ancient  object  of  wonhip,  like  many
othen  of  in  hind,  wu  not  aapciaeded  by  a  more
appropriate  aymbol  The  Dioscuri  were  wonhipped
u  godi  of  war,  and  we  know  that  their  imogei
ied  the Spartan  king! »hoie»er  t!


when  in  the


year (104  RC  the  two  ktngi,  during  their  inra-
ikm  of  Attica,  failed  in  their  undertaking  on  ac-
eonnl  of  their  secret  enmity  towardt  ea^  other,
it  wBi  decreed  at  Sparta,  that  in  fntnre  only  one
king  tbonld  «ODimaDd  the  army,  and  in  conie.
quenea  tboold  only  be  aooamfanied  by  one  of  the
im^eaofthaDioecmi  (Herod,  t.  75.) Il  ■•  not


king!  into  the  field,  w.

were  now  diijointed,  so  that  one  halt  of  the  ijia-
bol  nmained  at  Spoita,  whQe  the  other  waa  taken
into  the  Grid  by  one  of  the  kings.  Suidaa  and  the
Etymols^cam  Magnma  (t.  c.)  Mate  that  Mnm
waa  the  name  of  the  grares  of  the  Dioacuii  at
Sparta,  and  decired  from  the  rerb  Mxufioi.  (MUl-
ler,  Doruw,  L  5.  S  13.  noten,  ii  10.  g  Sj  Zoega,
Zt.  Oieii™,  p.  228.)  [L.S.]

DOCIHA'SIA  (lon/uiffia).  When  any  db-
aen  of  Alhen*  wu  either  appointed  by  lot,  or
choaen  by  m&iga  (nAijptfT^j  jcol  oiperdf),  to  hold
a  public  office,  be  wna  obliged,  before  entering  on
its  duties,  to  submit  to  a  docimam^  or  acmtiny
into  bia  pcevioiu  lifo  and  oondoct,  in  which  any
person  could  object  to  him  aa  nnfit.  This  wat  the
caae  with  the  orchoni,  the  senaton,  the  strategi,
and  other  magiitjates.  Tha  examination,  or  ana-
criiia,  for  the  orchoiuhip  waa  conducted  by  the
senalon,ormthecoDrttofthebeliaea.  Tbedodnia-
fin,  however,  wu  not  confined  to  peraona  t^ipointed
to  public  offices  I  for  wo  read  of  the  denouncement
of  a  scrutiny  (iTarfftKla  tmcifuurlai)  nitainrt  om-
ten  who  spoke  in  the  assembly  while  leading
profligate  liiea,  or  after  hariog  committed  flagi-
tiooa  crimes.  This  denonncement  might  be  made
in  public  by  any  one  Tfir  tcKifiaffltw  too  ^iov,
I.  6.  to  compel  the  party  complained  of  to  appear
befon  a  court  of  Justice,  and  give  an  account  of  bis
life  and  conduct.  If  found  guilty,  he  was  punished
with  atimia,  and  prohibited  from  the  aasenibliea.
(Aesch.  Ttmani.  p.  5.)

The  phnte  MSpa  elvu  Ssicifiao^Hu  needs  a
few  words  of  eiplanation.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,
every  Athenian  Iwcnmo  on  ephebns,  and  a^er  two
yean  waa  enrolL'd  amongst  the  men,  so  that  be
could  be  present  end  vote  at  the  assemblies.  (Poll,
viii.  lOB.)  In  the  caae  of  wards  who  wero  heirs
to  property,  tbia  enrolment  might  take  place  before
the  eipimtion  of  the  two  years,  on  it  being  eata-
blished  by  n  docinuirvt  that  the  youth  was  physi-
cally qualified  to  discharge  ony  duties  the  state
might  impose  upon  him.  If  ao,  be  was  rclouod
from  gunrdinnahip,  and  ^  became  a  man  *^  (Ai^p
tyirrra,  or  Joxi^iiiftj),  being  thereby  ei


ijoy  0


priTilcgcs,  juBi  at  if  he  were  of  the  full  ajie  of
twenty.  (Harpocr.  s.  e.  'EriBleTii  4*^™ :  Dem.
B.  Apjoi.  p.  H57,  c  Ond.  p.  865,  e.  Sipk.  p.  1135.)
Wemayadd  that  the&lateqientsofthcgrammaj^a
and  otntort  are  at  variance  on  tbia  point ;  but  tha
have  given  seems  the  boM  tray  of


*aO  DOLABRA.

ncoooling  tlicm,  and  iL  Bgim  in  inbalaDec  witfa
tbs  mppMition  of  SchSmuiii,  "  that  among  tb«
Athmiani,  no  ons  period  vsi  i^pointed  for  enrol-
ment, piDfided  that  it  wv  not  dona  before  the
attainment  of  the  1  Bth,  nor  afta  the  compkdoa
of  the  aoth  Tear."  (SchOmaim,  D»  ConiWi,  pp.
76,2*l,it<!.)  [R.W.]

D0DRAN8. [As.]

DOLABRA,  dMt.  DOLABELLA  (ffjJAT),  dim.
f  fuAlav),  a  chiiel,  a  celt,  wai  Died  for  a  Taiietf  of
pDipoMg  in  ancient  u  in  modem  timet.  Thejr  wete
ntqaently  emplaned  in  makiiw  eDttenchnunt*  and
in  deitioying  fortification*  (Lir.  ii.  37,  ni.  II  ;
Curt,  it  S  i  Taiit  HiA  iii.  20)  ;  and  henca  they
ace  often  fennd  in  ancient  eanh.wad:i  and  en-
campmeuta,  They  abound  in  oar  public  mn-
leonu,  being  known  undet  the  equiTalent  name  of
"  celt*"  to  antiqaariea,  who,  hoireTer,  generally
lUe  the  word  without  uuienUnding  ita  tme  Kni&
(Sea  Jamie»n-i  £3^  DieL  j.  c.  CUl.)  C^tM  ii
an  old  Latin  word  for  a  chisel,  probably  derived
from  an^  to  engrave.  Thni  the  phraie  etiit
acB^paate-  n  lifiM  occun  in  the  vulgsta  Teraira  of
Job  (lix.  S4),  and  aaUiiAii  M  <^it  Umrtu  tiUa  in
an  injcriplion  fonnd  at  Pola.  (Gmter,  p.  329.)
Theae  articles  are  &r  the  moat  part  of  binnie,
man  lately  of  hard  Uone.  The  liaea  and  farm
tvhich  they  pment,  are  as  rariotu  ai  the  naea  to
which  they  were  ^iplied.  The  anneied  woodcnt
i>  doigned  to  ihow  a  few  of  the  moat  remark-
able Tarietiea.  Fig.  I  ii  from  a  celt  found,  with
aaveial  otheia,  at  Kambrl  in  Cornwall  (Borlaae,
AvL  qf  ComaaU^-iiL  13.)  Ita  length  waa  lix
iDchea  without  the  haft,  which  waa  no  doubt  of
wood,  and  fixed  directly  into  the  Hcket  at  the  top.
It  moat  httTB  been  a  very  eHectiTe  implement  for
lemoring  the  atona  in  the  wall  of  a  ci^  or  fortifi-
cation, after  they  had  been  first  ahatlered  and
looaened  in  some  degree  by  the  batterJDg-rani,
The  car,  or  hwp,  which  it  seen  in  thia  and  maDy
other  celti,  would  be  naefiil  to  mspend  tbem  &Dm
the  soldier'!  girdle,  and  may  also  haTS  hard  a  cord
or  chain  attached  to  it  to  uaiat  m  drawing  back
the  oelt  whenever  it  became  too  firmly  wedged  be-
tween the  atones  of  the  wall  which  it  was  intended
to  destroy.  Figt  2  and  3  are  fmm  Sir  W.  Hamil-
ton's collection  in  the  British  Huieuiu.  These
chisels  seem  best  adapted  for  the  use  of  the  cu-

Cer.  The  celt  {fig.  4)  which  was  found  in
less,  GO.  lAuaiter  {Ardaiiihsia,  v.  p.  IDG),
instead  of  being  ahi^ied  to  receive,  or  to  be  in-
■erled  into  a  handle,  Uke  the  three  preceding,  is
made  thick,  amooth,  and  round  in  the  midd'
as  to  be  conreniently  manipulatrd  withi
handle.  It  is  9  inches  long,  and  weighs  2  lb.
Its  sharp  edge  is  like  that  of  a  common  baUhet,
and  may  have  been  uied  for  polishing  thnber. On


DOUICILIUU.
fore  Ulaatrate  the  account  gimn  by  Julins  PoUuz,
who  reckooa  thia  nune  tool,  the  a>iUii,  among  the
ifya^w  ToS  VKvrorAfUPf,  Thia  instrument  was
lied  for  cutUng  p^iet,  and  pmbably  in  ths
manner  (irfiiAa  xafrvriiiat,  sidla,  Philoz.
Glon.).

The  follewing  woodcnt  ahowa  a  snail  bnoie
celt,  fiied  into  a  handie  of  stag's  honi,  snd  there-
fore exemplifies  eae  of  Uke  Btodea  of  attachmg  tile
metal  to  its  haft.  It  was  endentl;  adapted  for
Tery  fine  work,  and  is  siraigly  eootraated  with
the  aboTe-figured  olt  from  ComwiU.  It  waa
fijund  in  an  aadent  tomb  in  Wiltdiire.  (Sir  R.
C.  Hoaie'a  An.  WSU.  SouA,  vf.  182,  203.)  Tha
ither  fignna  in  thia  woodcut  reprtacnt  ths
nsed  in  sactificaa,  as  it  is  ofun  uhibitad  oo
s  and  bas-relie&,  being  the  anao,  saoMa,  or
ddabra  paat^liaiu,  menticned  by  Fcatas  (i^  v.
iSesaa)  j  and  the  aseani  dolairata,  or  hatchet  far~
niihed  with  a  ehisal  (Psilad.  Da  St  R-L  L  43)  aa
tculptaied  on  a  funereal  mimumeat. [J.  Y.l


DO'LICHOS  (»*ux«). [Stadiom.]

DCLIUM. [VimiM,]

DOLO  {I6^itr},  I.  A  seoet  paniard  or  dagger
contained  in  a  case,  used  l»  the  Italian*.  It  w«a
inserted  ui  the  handles  of  whip*  (Dig.  9.  tit.  SI
1.  62  i  Serr.  ad  Fay.  Aai.  viL  6Bi\  and  also  in
walking-iticks,  thus  eoirespimding  to  our  sword-
stick.  It  was  a  weapon  of  the  latter  kind  that
Tib.  Oracchus  carried  (PlaL  TO.  Oraak.lf) ;  a»p.
Helych.  t.  B,  AJXwsi).

2.  A  small  top-sail [Natis.]

DE  DOLO  MALO  ACTIO.  [CtTLr.!.]

DOLUS  MALUS. [CuLPi.]

DOMK'STICI. [PBAvroaiiNL]

DOMICI'LIUM.  Thia  wrad  si^e*  a  nian<B
regular  piece  of  abode.  It  waa  used  in  the  Les
Plantia  Papiria  in  aoch  a  manner,  that  when  tkat
lex  was  enacted,  >.  a.  89,  tha  word  donkJIiuiit
mnst  ham  hsd  a  fixed  mtauing :  "  Si  qui  fbadantia
civitatibus  adscript  fuissent,  si  turn  con  lex
ferebatuc  in  Italia  domieilium  habnissent,  et  ai
teisginta  diebna  apnd  praetorem  essent  pirfeaiL*'
(Cicero,  Pro  ^reUo,  ci.)  Thia  furtbet  appoo*
from  another  passage  in  the  same  chapter :  "  At
domicUiam  Aomae  non  habnit:  is  qui  tot  annia
ants  dTitalem  dalam  aedun  saaniniB  Rfwa  ae


DOHimUH.

"  ud  thu
_  . .  «■  agrm,  in  put,  vich  one  in  tlia

Code,  vUdi  will  pnuntlj  be  cited.


Ibt  Csrpu  Jnrii;  One  of  then  (Dig.  M.  tit  1.
a,  yj.  §  1)  detenniiwi  Qat  &  penoD  muit  be  con-
aimi  to  hm  hii  domicilioiii  is  &  aoiiicipiiim,  if
be  baja  and  teU)  there,  (tteadt  the  pnblji:  mo-
ttdee,  keep*  tin  feetinl  deyi  then,  ud,  in  fine,
tajm  ill  tba  (dnntem*  of  the  mnninpiniii,  md
MM  ef  tbe  coUoB,  or  the  plue  where  he  ia  merely
fer  Ik*  pMi[w  <d  coltintioa  (ubi  colendi  tnrii
^m  iiiMliilJ  Id  iDolher  pMoge  (Ced.  10.
dL  40  (S9.)  L  7),  it  u  Msted  t&at  a  cirii  ii  made
ij  irigB,  BlulBIDiHia,  BlIeMia  lel  ideptia  ;  bat
'"'''"  m  edict  of  Dinu  Hadriunu


leeo  ^-g"'"«  hkbeie  deraidliom  nan  unbifitui  n1


nodt  earn  frahOm  eti  pengriiuffi  Tideter,  quod
(qao^)  u  redih,  peregnuri  jun  deititit."

'Bcoboi  «■■•'"  ■iid'*d(aiieiliaB  habere  "are  naed


any  pmpoHi,  to  deter-
BiM  vhoe  a  sao  Ind  hii  pmnneDl  abode.  An
Bctia  int  baasd  to  ob^  the  magiitntea  of  the
jdiee  *b<fie  he  ma  an  meola,  ud  elao  the  mngii-
BUn  <{  tlH  ji^a  irheie  he  wu  a  cini ;  and  lie
«■■  sot  0BI7  nibject  to  the  mmiicipal  jotMlctiDn
in  boA  nmuicipii,  bat  be  waa  bmnd  to  perform
■0  pahlk  finwIiiBi  (poblks  numera).  If  ■  man
wie  bsimd  (obliptol),  to  pay  ■  imn  of  money  in
Italr,  aad  Ind  ^  donieuam  in  a  prorincia,  he
■ight  be  taed  eithor  in  Italy  ot  in  the  pnrinee
<Kg.  G.  tit  1.  1.  19,  f  «).  A  K>D  followed  the
dnlia  which  waa  the  natiialit  origo  uf  hit  fatheT,
aW  did  uM  fallow  hii  bther'i  domidlimn.  If  a
■an  had  no  le^  bther  ( jnitoi  pater),  he  followed
th*  oTigo  of  bia  mothei.  In  the  Pnocriptia  longi
«— i-fM  decan  nl  liginti  umonm,  it  WM  enacted
by  Jnatinian,  that  the  ten  yem'  prescription  ibonld
•ifij,  H  bodl  paniea  (lam  peteni  qnam  pcaudont)
'-'■'-"  '-—'-'- —  —  -"-B  Hme  pTOrinebi ;  if  the


(tavoMe,  the  pnacriptiai  of  twenty  ytsn  applied.
(Cod.  7.  lil.3X  *.13l)

The  BoAan  law  of  Donueile  ia  a  branch  of  what
ii  anaatiiBea  called  intonatimal  law ;  and  many
■f  the  pcincipla  which  an  admitted  in  mo'  —
tinea  an  fbonded  on  the  Bonan  mlea.  (Tit
y  Oemialt  by  Bcbert  PbilUman^  lBi7  ;  Bmge,
flM^irf-rrr  oa  Cbbnid  oiij  An^  Loih,
wli.)  [G.L.J

DOHI'NIUM. Dominnim  iinii£es  qnintarii
waaaiahip  <^  a  thing ;  and  dommiii,  or  domina

taii  ia  not  a  ittielly  oxieet  nae  of  the  word.
13u  BBBBta,  "to  hare  ownoihip"  it
d  by  "poaudeni"  and  the  thin


(Saripiy,  JJat  JtitM  d—  fiBtCut,  p.  85,  Gth  ed.)

Tbe  cnatpleta  nolian  of  noperty  01  awneniip
oaapi^tadB  the  dretemiinatioD  of  the  thingi  which
■^  bs  ths  oWaeW  of  ownoalup  ;  the  power  which


DOUINIUH.  491

toat  j  the  peraona  vho  are  rspable  of  Bcqntiing,
tianaleiriiig,  or  loiing  ownenhip.

Rei  it  the  general  name  for  anything  which  ia
the  object  of  a  legal  act  The  cliief  diiiiion  of  m
ia  into  nn  diTini  jiiri4,  and  ret  homani  juria.  Ret
divini  jnrii  are  thoae  which  are  appropriated  tc
religioui  porpoia,  namely,  rea  aaciae,  nnctae,  re-
ligioiae  ;  and  lo  long  aa  ^ey  bare  thii  character,
they  cannot  be  abjecti  of  property.  Rea  honumi
jarii  are  all  other  thinga  that  can  be  the  objecti  of
property  ;  and  they  are  either  rea  pnblicae  or  m
itae.  Rea  pablicae  betoog  to  the  Hale,  and
only  become  prirate  property  by  being  de-
prired  of  thia  pablic  character,  [Aohabias
Leoik]  Res  nnitwiitBlii  are  tbe  property  of  a
nniveraitaa,  and  are  not  the  pnperty  of  any  in-
diridiial.  The  phraae  ret  nnllioa  ii  ambi|iioiu ;
it  tometimea  meana  that  the  thing  csnnDt  be  the
property  of  any  indiTidira],  which  ia  aflimaed  of
"■"'""  '■" '"li  juria  ;  when  applied  to  thinga  homani
etlmea  ni(«Rt  that  they  are  not  the  pro-
perty of  an  indiridtal  bnt  of  a  nnimiiilat ;  yet
inch  thingt  maf  became  the  property  of  an  in-
^--'Inalj  rea  heceditoriao  are  ret  nnlliut  until  there
herea.  Ret  conimnnet  are  thoae  which  cannot
be  the  objecli  of  proper^,  and  therefbrt  are  Ri
nulliDB,  aa  the  tea.

Ret  eorporalet  are  defined  to  be  tliote  "  quae  tangi
poaaunt ; "  iocorporska  an  thoee  "  qua  tangi
non  poaannt,  aed  in  jore  conaiatant,**  aa  H«aB-
DiTAa,  UsiiSTKTjn'UB,  OiLioiTiDNia  ;  and  Ihey
are  conieqDenlly  incapable  of  tiaditian,  or  ddiTciy.
The  diatraclion  of  thingi  into  eorporeat  and  inD:r-
poreal  did  not  eiiit  in  ue  older  Reman  law  ;  and
It  ia  a  uteleit  dttUnctton.  An  incorporeal  thing
ia  merely  a  right,  and  10  it  ia  eiplained  in  the
InttitDlionea  (ii.  tit.  3,  ed.  Schrader).

CorpOKsl  Uiingt  are  dirided  into  immobilea,  or
Bolnm  et  rea  eoli,  and  mobilet.  The  groand  (lolum),
and  that  which  la  ao  Bttached  lo  the  ground  at
to  be  injeparable  from  it  without  being  detlToyed,
ai  a  boilding  for  inatance,  are  rea  inunobilei.
Mobiles  rea  an  ^  inch  aa  tan  be  remored  from
one  place  to  another  without  the  dcitniction  of  their
character, TheclsaiDfreaniDbilea  "  quae  pondere,

oil,  eoTD,  tl]*er,  gold,  which  are  of  mch  a  nature
that  any  the  eune  namber,  weighs  or  meaaure,
may  be  conndered  the  nme  thing.  [HfTitttu.]
There  ia  another  clata  of  res,  contiiting  of  thoie
"(loae  nan  conanmrnitar,  minanntnr,"  and  thoto
**  qnae  non,  ftc**  The  term  iingnlae  ret  eompre-
hendi  either  one  thing  or  teveral  thmgt,  aefsntely
contidered  at  ooee.  Snch  thingt  are  either  aimple,
at  an  animal,  a  atone  ;  or  compoonded  of  patti,  aa
a  mi^,  or  a  ihip.  Any  rmmber  of  tbingi,  not
mechanicslly  connected,  may  in  a  legal  tenie  he
Tiewedaaone,  or  as  a  nniTenitai.  (Dig.  41.  tit.  3.
a.3l)i  G.tit.1.  a.93.S£.)

Some  thinga  are  appnrteiuDit  to  others,  that  it,
as  Bubordinate  partt  they  ge  with  tiiat  which  forms
the  principal  thing.  (Dig.  18.  tit.  I.  a  49.)  If  a
tlung,  at  a  honae  or  a  ship,  wti  pnrchued,  the
bnyer  got  erery  thing  that  wai  a  put  of  the  hoose
ocahip. (Dig.SI.  ticZ  1.44.)

Fractoa  are  what  it  prodoced  ont  of  a  thing  by
ita  own  pndnctiTo  power  ;  at  the  gnaa  in  afield,
the  trait  on  a  tne.

The  diTition  of  thinga  into  rea  mancipi  and  lea
nee  mandpi,  waa  one  ofandent  origin  ;  and  it  con-
tinaed  to  a  tale  period  in  tlw  empra.  Raa  Bunidpi
■  ■"■  3  ' "■ ■  0"~


DOMINIUM.

ii.)  uc  praedia  in  lulico  nlO,  both
in  ;  atso  jam  nuticorum  Diaediraum
II  ™,  itfir,  aquaodi


All  the  Ihion  hare  been  eanmentcd  which  ue
the  object  of  duniniiun,  nnd  ume  which  ut  col.
Emj  dominua  hu  s  right  to  the  poucHioQ  of  the
thing  of  which  he  ii  dominui ;  but  poacstion
slece,  wbieh  ii  a  bore  lut  wilboat  ao;  legal
ehiiBct«r,  neithei  malut  ■  man  domimu,  noc  doc*


m  to  a  legal  right  to
T  to  opelBte  upon  it
onliiiglTtbe  donriae
ownenhip.  Thingi
Msuo  civilii  whicli


Pouwion  hu  the  nine  relnlii
a  thing,  ai  the  phyiical  pcwi
lu  to  the  legal  power;  and  ace
of  poaaeuion  piijcedn  (hat  of
caODoI  be  the  object)  of  pea
cannot  he  the  objecte  of  dominmm^

Certoia  things  are  not  properly  objecte  of  owi
ibip  (domBHiai),  thoogh  ■  claim  to  them  ii  [
Hcuted  by  an  actio  in  rem :  thej  are  Krriui'
emphjleiuii,  lupcriicirt,  andpigniuand  hjpotbi

Doininimn  properly  Bigtifin  ihe  right  of  dealing
with  a  corporeal  thing  u  a  peraon  (dominai)
fJeoie*  1  thia,  of  couiie,  impliea  the  right  to  ex-
dode  all  olhiti  from  meddling  with  it.  The  da
miniii  hu  the  right  to  poueu,  and  ii  diitingiiiahed
in  that  rupect  from  the  ban  poueuor,  who  hai
only  (he  right  of  poueuion.  He  who  hai  tht
BWiithictDs  of  a  thing,  ia  nerer  eooiidered  aa  owudt  :
and  proprictaa  ii  the  name  for  that  whicb  remain!
after  (he  oiuifnictiu  ii  deducted  from  the  owner
^ip  Ownenhip  may  be  either  absolute,  (hat  it,
aa  complete  aa  the  lav  nllowa  any  ownenhipto  be,
er  i(  may  be  limited.  The  diitmcllon  hclweer
lare  owucnhip  and  ewnerahip  united  wi(h  the
beneficial  intereat,  i>  explained  in  another  pkce.
rik)M«.j  A  pcnon  who  hai  no  ownership  of  a
uing,  may  have  rigbti  in  or  (o  a  thing  which,
aa  hr  aa  they  extend,  limit  the  ewnet'a  power  orei
hii  ]Hopertj,  aa  hereafter  eipkiued.  Ownership,
being  in  iti  nature  single,  can  only  be  conceived
na  belonging  to  one  penoa ;  consequendy  there
cannot  bo  several  ownera  of  one  thing,  but  scleral
pcnona  may  own  undlTided  abarei  or  parts  of  a
thuig.

As  a  mnnls  r!gbt  to  deal  with  a  thuig  and  to
exclude  others  from  the  nse  or  enjoyment  of  it,
nay  be  limited,  (hiamay  arise  either  from  his  being
bound  to  allow  to  another  person  a  certain  use  or
cnjoynicnt  of  the  thing  of  which  he  is  dominua,  or
from  his  being  bound  to  abstain  fiom  doing  certain
nets  on  or  to  hia  property,  and  for  the  bcncGtof
aomo  other  person.

This  limitation  of  a  man's  enjoyment  of  hia  own
ia  explained  mider  Sekvitt;tba.

In  order  to  acqoire  ownership,  a  person  mnit
have  a  legal  capacity  to  ocquiie  ;  and  ownership
may  be  aciiDired  by  aneh  a  peraon,  or  by  another
for  him.  There  muat  also  be  a  thing  which  can
be  tho  object  of  inch  owiership,  and  there  must
be  a  legal  mode  of  acquisition  {aequiaitio  o'Wtr).
Ownerthip  may  be  acqnlied  in  aii^  things  (i


m's  property  (Oaii


DOMINIUM.

thecwnerof  all  the  adngaled  pn^
L31);


se  of  a  teatamenlaiy  herea,
re  piopeily  dii-


^  ,  lint  bo  ac-
of  affliniring  the  whole.

whenamanadcogalea  another.


Acqniiitionea  per  universitatem
cussed  under  other  bcada  [Anoprio  ;  nmis ;
Succsasio  ;  Umvirsitib].  The  fbUowiag  ro-
marks  ^iply  to  acquiiitiooet  ranuu  nngnlarunL
Acqniaitinnea  wers  either  cirilei  (ss  jmrt  dvili)  ;
«'  naturalea  (tx  jmr*  j/a^nini),  that  is,  there  was  no
formality  prescribed  for  the  mode  <j  Bcqnisitioa  t
in  both  cases  dominium  could  be  acquired.  The
ctf  ilea  acquiaitiones  of  singile  (hin^  i««e  by  manci-
patio,  in  jure  cessio,  and  oaucqno  :  those  natoiali
jura  were  by  tiaditio  or  delitery.  In  the  cose  of
res  mancipi,  the  only  modes  of  acquiring  domininni
were  mandpatio,  in  jure  cessio,  and  naooipio  ;  but
uaiicapio  qiplied  also  la  things  nee  mandpL  The
alienatioa  of  thicga  Dec  mancipi  wai  the  peculiar
eOecC  of  traditio  or  dcUrery  (Ulp  Fhiff.  lii.  B),
__..,.. , .._.  .  1^


thus


re  for  the  delive


in  the  caae  ot  res  nee  nuuicipi,  oan  ir
a  juata  caiua  did  not  conlo'  qoiritarin
or  dominium,  ia  emnoona  ;  for  when  (ue  itoman
law  did  not  require  peculiar  forma,  the  tiansler  of
ownership  was  eSected  in  what  may  be  called  the
natural  way,  that  is,  the  simplest  and  moat  eaay
way  in  which  the  partiea  to  the  act  godU  abow
their  meaning  and  cany  it  into  efiect.

A  nun  who  waa  dominus  of  a  (liing,  vliathcr
acquired  jure  cifili  or  naturoli,  proaeeUed  hiatight
to  it  in  the  tame  way,  by  (ho  rei  vinditalM  Ha
could  not  of  conrae  proaecnte  auch  a  light  imliiaa
he  was  out  of  poiaession ,'  and,  in  order  toaneceed,
he  must  prove  hia  ownership.  If  he  bad  a  thing
in  bonia,  and  was  in  possession,  he  ctnld  acqaiTD
the  ownership  by  iuu<9q)ion :  if  he  waa  out  of  poa-
•cssion,  it  jeema  not  an  improbable  conjeelnre  of
Untcrholiner  (NJuaM.  Mia.  fiir  Jmri^^.  Er^ir
Jairsioff,  p.  129),  that  ho  was  aided  in  hia  actin
after  the  time  when  (he  legia  actimes  fell  into  dii-
use  and  the  tbmiiila  waa  indodnced  (for  aa  to  a
previous  time  it  ia  diiEctd(  to  fonn  anyoonjecture)
by  (ho  Gctim  of  hit  having  reeeirod  the  pnipartjr
by  mancipatio.  There  are  example!  of  a  similar
fiction  in  the  case  of  the  boRDmra  posaesaor  and
the  bonorum  emtor. (Oaius,  it.  Si,  36.) A  man

idtha

minium  of  it :  if  he  had  not  (he  dominium,  ha
lid  only  give  pet  damnaliimem  or  linendi  modo.
A  slave  who  waa  the  property  of  his  master  {domi-
mu) might  attain  the  Roman  cititat  by  the  act  of
~  umiaaion  ;  if  he  was  only  in  bonia  of  the  pfnea
manumitted  him,  he  became  a  l«linus  by  tht
act  of  mammiiaaion.  The  diSbmca  between  quiri-
ownenhip  and  in  boaia  waa  daalmad  bj
the  legiriation  " '""""■""  — '- J--'-- »  -  ' ■


n  Iwiul. Ths
„  I bj  Ulpun  (Fhv.

lii.  SO^  21 ).  A  boDU  fidei  poMeuu  lutd  ■  o^o-
til;  (ir  acfiiiriiig  by  nHK^non  the  ovocnhip  of
dw  thing  wUefa  be  ponowd.  Be  had  a  kind  of
vtiiai,  actio  pabljciaiia  in  mn,  b;  which,  if  he  loat
the  poHHiim  befdn  he  had  aajniied  tiie  owiia~
■hi]i  b;  iBBc^ka,  bt  goold  recOTer  it  aguut  all
mxpt  the  swDcr,  «  nuh  penMi  m  bad  a  better
REhl  than  himad^  in  vhich  UUei  retpsci  he  dif-
irnd  frmn  bun  who  had  a  thing  in  bonii,  for  hii
chiB  vaa  good  againft  the  pereon  who  bad  the
bu*  swnenhip. (Dig.  8.  lit.  2.)

Aa  tD  fimdi  laoTinciBiet,  it  wai  an  old  prin-
ciple of  Ranau  law  that  there  could  be  no  domi-
niaia  in  tbant,  tbU  it,  no  qolntarion  ownenhip ;
n*  woe  tbej  uid  ta  be  m  bnnii,  but  the  occDpiet
had  111  I  mill  and  nuifnictiu.  In  fitct  the  temii
dmDiiiini  and  in  bonii  weie  not  applicable  to  pro-
Tindal  bnda,  not  wen  the  flctiona  that  were  ap-
ilisbk  to  thil^  ID  booil  i^inble  to  pnTincial
Inda  ;  Wt  it  ii  in  mgeniea*  conjectnte  of  Untei-
bohno,  dkat  the  fennnla  actionu  wu  adapted  to
the  aae  of  nrmcial  landi  bj  a  fiction  of  thrii
king  Italic  bndi,  combined  with  a  fictim  of  their
bdag  aequired  bj  nncapiotL  Id  the  cue  of  the
ta  pablieni  in  IbIj,  the  domiDitUD  wai  in  the
RamB  people,  and  tfae  ttnnt  potKNio  and  pot-
■m»  WFR  approjirUte  to  the  enjojment  and  the
poagn  by  vbua  the  land  wu  enjojed.  Still
the  jaufieitj'  in  pnTincial  land  wBa  like  the  pn>-
ptn;  in  booia  in  Rome  and  Italj,  and  it  conie-
qaiatlf  became  ''"■"i"'""-'  after  the  diitinction
between  qniritaiBn  and  boDitaciaa  ownenhip


OwBetabip  w


■a  alio  uqnind  in  the  cau  i
0, Ac [Accutto  ; Alluvio  ;
Coxmio.]
A  nan,  wba  bad  •  legal  cipBci^,  a»ld  acquire
'ij  ihoae  who  wecB  "  ii
'  He  could  (Tea  acqnin
.  ,- _  .  n,ai  in  the  caaeof  an  here

ditMjaDd  be  anldabethniacqainaiegBCT.  Ifi
aliTe  wv  ■  nan^  in  bonia,  erery  thing  that  the  tlari
acqaiicd  bdoued  la  the  owner  iDbaDii,andnDtti
faia  wbe  had  the  ban  qaiiitanan  ownsihtp.  If  i
■aa  wai  tbe  **  bona  fide  poucMor  "  of  another  per
MB,  vfether  that  peran  happened  to  be  a  finenuu
npfKiaed  to  be  and  poaKaeed  as  a  iUtc,  or  wai  thi
p<upetti  of  another,  the  poawaur  only  acquired  tbe


U  mlj  the  aaaibactai ;  and  the  rule  wu
linaU  with  tba  rale  jut  laid  down,  for  unu£
na  not  [aupeitj. Sana  who  were  in  the  power
•f  a  faths,  and  alam,  of  erarte,  could  not  acquiie
priM^  fw  theiuelTei. [PKULifH.]

UwDoihip  mat  loaf  either  with  the  conaent  of
ibe  swDs  a  agamd  U.  With  the  ccoient,  when
be  liawiiiiil  It  to  anotbot,  wbieb  wu  tbe  general
a*de  flir  aeqidring  and  loaing  property  ;  without
thi  eonaoit,  whai  the  thing  periibed,  when  it  be-
i^ae  tka  laupeitj  of  another  bj  acccHian  or  un-
c^H,  wbBi  it  wai  jodidaD;  dedand  to  be  tbe
ftafotj  at  auMber;  or  forfeited  br  beinEi  pledged.
"  ' '  I  loft  by  death,  fn  the  hem

le  petaon  oi  the  de-


DOHUS.  423

that  other*  bad.  Thui  the  pnpert;  of  a  pufdllni
~  '"  -n»  in  tutela  li^ilima,  onild  not  become  the
pivpcitj  of  another  by  uiucapioii ;  a  fundamental
principle  of  law  which  Cicero  wat  rarprised  ^lal
bit  friend  Alticui  did  not  know  {Ad  AU.  i.  6).

neiahip  might  be  Icat  by  the  Mn^nia  capitig

ulio  ;  when  it  wai  the  conaequence  of  a  caa-

1  foe  a  coital  eriiae,  the  property  wu  fbr-

to  the  itale. [SacTio  ^nokum.] The

media  capilii  diminutio  only  eftected  an  incapacity

'--  iiairitahan  ownenhip : the  peiion  could  atill

retam  or  acquire property  by  the  jua  gentium  ;

if  the  media  capitia  dinunntio  waa  the  conie-

ica  of  coniiction  for  a  capital  cnme,  it  bad  the

1  amaequencea  u  the  Marima. (Mackeldey,

LeMaA,  &c  12th  ed.  ;  Uttir  dit  Fertdudawm

detE^aitiiBiu,A.cTimVaUxbo\Bia,liJniia.

Afut.  Enter  Jaitg.  ;  QuDS,  ii.  1,  Ac  ;  UIp.  frag.

til.  lii.  I  Thibaut,  Syttm,  &c  %  146.  Ac,  §  212,

Ac,  9lh  ed.)  [0.  L.]

D0MINU3  meanimaater,own(r  [Douinidm).
Dominni  ii  oppOKd  la  Scmi.  u  maatcr  to  akre.
Ptiniut,  in  bu  letten,  alwap  addreiia  Trujuiua
aa  Dominua  ;  bat  tbii  mut  be  viewed  islhei  u  a
mode  of  ihowing  bia  retpect  than  any  acknowledg-
ment of  a  title.  (C  Plinii  Caecilii  Secundi  Ep.
ed.  O.  H.  ScbaeffF,  p.  £00,  note.)  Domitianni
cburaed  tbe  titlet  of  Diuninna  and  Dona,  (DionCaaa.
livil  13,  and  the  note  of  Reimani  ;alao  Hartialii,
Bp.  T.  8,  and  i.  72,  when  Domitianu  wu  dead.)
It  ia  (aid,  that  Anreliaiwi  fint  adopted  the  title
Domiuu  on  hia  medala.  (Eckhd,  DacL  Nm.  Vet
TOL  riL  p.  482.)  [0.  L.]

DOMUS  (oW,  olifo,  and  in  aid  Greek  ti/iot),
a  bouae.  1.  Oriee.  —  The  anBDgement  of  the
■ereral  parta  of  the  dwellingi  of  the  Orceki  forma
one  of  the  meat  difficult  uhjectt  in  tbeirantiquitiei.
The  only  regular  deamption  of  the  Greek  home,
that  of  VitiuTioi,  ia  in  many  reqwcti  incot
with  the  alluaioni  foond  in  the  Greek  w
while  thoK  allniioDe  thenueltei  are  &r  loo  Kmtj
and  obacure,  to  be  woren  into  a  dear  deacriptiiHi.
It  ia  manifeat,  alao,  that  the  aimngement  of  the
parta  differed  much  at  different  pciioda.  To  lay
nothing  of  the  (arij  period  when,  acceding  to  tra-
dition, rude  buta  of  clay,  or  wood,  or  atone,  began
to  be  uaed  inatead  of  the  hollow  treei,  and  cavea,  and
clefla  in  the  rocka,  in  which  the  aaTage  abotiginea
found  aheller  (Diod,  v,  68,  Paui.  1. 17),  we  ^>e  to
diitinguiab  between  tbe  houaei,  or  rather  "^^'^'■**
of  the  heroic  age,  (o  which  Homer'aalluirai
tlie  bouiea  of  the  hiatorical  period  d
lime  of  Alexander  the  Greet,  and  those  after  hie

Then  ven  also  ctoridertible  differencea  betweoi
the  arrangementa  of  a  town  and  a  country  bouse.
All  of  these  had  two  principal  fcatorea  in  com-
mim.  Firstly,  in  Qmce,  u  in  ail  warm  climilea,
the  general  arrangement  of  a  house  of  the  belter
sort  waa  that  of  one  or  more  open  couila,  anr-
[ounded  by  the  Tarvma  room*.  Secondly,  in  a
Greek  frnuly  the  women  lived  in  frivate  i^ajU
menta  allotted  to  tbdr  eiduiiTe  uac.  Hence  the
hoosB  was  aiwayi  diiided  into  two  distinct  por-
tions, namely,  the  Aadromiit,  or  men^  aparb
mcDt*  (irtpairmi),  and  the  GyHaecomiit,  or  wo-
men's iqiBrtmenU  (-yiiKiuwrrrti).  In  the  tariiest
timea,  aa  in  the  bouica  referred  to  by  Homer,  tbe
women's  apartments  were  in  tfae  upper  story  (J>n^
Buy).  The  same  arrangement  is  found  at  the  time
of  the  Pdopcnnesian  wu  in  the  bousa  spoken  of


rri


494


DOMUS.


b;  Ljiiu  (De  Oud.  Enaodk  n>.  13, 13  ;  comp.
AiiitiHih.  EceUi.  961,  Therm.  iSi). But  it  dsei

not  follow  th*t  that  waa  the  uiiul  nutam  at  thii
period.  On  Iha  contnr;,  n  hnie  the  oihcm
tatimoDj  of  HTenl  writen,  and  of  Lygiu  him-
■elf  wDong  the  rot,  thkt  the  Ojiuecoiiitia  wu  on
the  nme  4tor7  with  the  Andronitie,  md  behind  il
(Lniu,  c  SimiM.  p.  139  ;  Demoith.  c.  Entry,
p,  11£S  i  X«L  OsBB.  ii.  fi  ;  Antiph.  d*  Vtrnf.
p.  611)  ;  and  eren  the  Dmgic  poeti  mnifer  to  the
oeioic  igei  the  practin  of  thekt  om,  *nd  deieribe
both  Htio{*]iaititienUuonthemnefloor.  (S(^h-
Otd.  Ty-  12*1—1262.)

The  acantf  noticn  of  the  domeilie,  or  rather  At
nUtiBl  archilecture  of  the  eiri;  Oreeki,  which  we
find  in  Homer,  Bte  iniuSlrient  to  give  ui  jueurate
■wtion  of  the  name*,  uwi,  *nd  urangement  of  th«
•pertment*  ;  beaidei  which,  en  aUowenee  muit  no
doubt  bfl  nude  for  poetical  engf^eiation.  The
nrioni  pamoa  and  wordi,  m  Hamer,  which
throw  any  light  npon  the  lubject,  are  ootlected  and
dieciuicd  by  Schneider  {EfriM.  ad  Xaupi.  Mm.
iil  8.  g  9),  bj  Kmiue  (in  Panly^  Rtat^Bmcgd^.
d.  Oral.  AUerlA.  >.  ■,  jDmnit).  and  b;  Hirt,  who
ffivei  a  gronnd-plan  of  the  Homeric  hcniie  {Gadi-
tdle  da- Baahaal,  to].  I  ^.20a--2lS,taii  Plate
VL  fig.  1 ).  The  generel  plan  wai  not  veiy  dif-
ferent fntni  that  of  the  hiler  hoiiK*.  The  chief
pointi  of  difference  appear  to  hare  been,  the  poii-
tion  of  the  women*!  acortmenta  in  the  upper  itory,
and  the  great  court  in  ftvut  of  the  hotue,  wbich
wai  wanting  at  lent  in  the  ordiDuy  town  dwellingi

We  linl  gain  pre«ue  mfonnation  on  the  mtiieet
•iMUt  the  time  of  the  Pdoponneiian  war ;  and
from  the  alhuiona  made  by  Greek  writer*  to  the
hooae*  of  thii  and  the  immediately  aubeeqnent  pe-
riod*, till  the  dme  of  Aleiander,  we  may  omclude
that  their  general  amogement  connponded  with
aiatdeeeribed  hyVitruvin*  (tL7,  Schneider).  In
thit  description,  howerer,  them  i*  one  eomideiablc
difiicnltf,  among  other*  of  leu  importance.  Vitru-
vin*  mm*  to  describe  the  Ognatcem^  a*  lying
before  the  Andrnxilii,  on  arrangement  alike  incon-

the  Orceic  womea  wcrt  kept,  and  alio  with  the
alloiioni  in  the  writen  of  the  period,  who,  a*  aboTe
stated,  almcnt  oniiijnnly  refer  to  the  two  ict*  of
afartmenti  ai  being  on  the  aame  floor,  the  Gfmnt-
OMil^  behind  the  Amiromlit.  Becker  (aariUm,
ToL  i.  pp.  1S4,  18fi)  notice*  the  different  eiplana-
tifRU  which  haTa  been  glren  of  the  inconiiatency
between  the  Hatemcnt*  and  the  deicriptioa  of
VitniTiiLS,  the  meet,  phiiifibte  of  which  i*  that  of
Qaliani,  namely,  that  in  the  time  of  VitraTin*  a
alight  change  had  taken  place  in  the  diapoaition  of
the  apartmenti,  by  which  the  Audroniti*  and  Qy-
naeconiti*  were  placed  lide  by  itde,  each  of  them
having  it*  own  &nnt  toward*  the  Btreet,  and  it*
own  entrance.  Itiealwi  yeiy  likely  that  Vitrnviu*
to  Ktme  extent  miaondentood  the  deecriptiou*  given
by  hi*  OredL  autboritiei.

The  Gniol  trf  the  houae  toward*  the  Hreel  vai
not  large,  a*  the  aparcmeota  extended  nther  in
the  direction  of  it)  depth  than  of  it*  widtK  In
town*  the  honte*  were  often  hnill  *ide  hy  aide,
with  ^y  wall*  between.  (Thucyd.  iL  S.)  The
extenor  wall  wa*  plain,  being  eanpoeed  generaH;
of  atone,  brick,  and  timber  (Xen.  Attm.  iii.  1.  S  7]
Demonh.  n<pl  ZiWTat,  p.  17B\  and  often  covered
with  atucco. (Pialwh.  Cbnp.  Arit.  tt  Oat.  4).


d  a  correeponding  <D-
iDcuaa  of  die  princiiBl
Iready  bi^iin  to  reeeiT*


DOHUS.
Plntinh  qieaka  of  Phodoo'a  honee  aa  being  cob*
mented  with  platea  of  iron. (PluL  Pioa.  16.)

The  general  character  of  the  ordinary  honaee  in
town*  wai  very  plain,  even  at  the  time  of  ths
PelopannBian  war  ;  the  G[«k*  preferring  to  ex-
pend their  wealth  co  temple*  and  other  pablic
iniildinga.  The  sue  with  which  the  Plataeani
broke  thrrsngh  the  party  w^li  of  their  houaca,  to
conmiunieals  with  one  another,  in  the  initance
jitat  quoted,  ihow*  how  indiS^nttly  they  were
conatrncted ;  and  even  at  Athen*,  in  the  time  of
Periclea,  fiveignera  were  •track  by  the  coalmt
between  the  iplendour  of  the  pablic  bnildijig*  and
the  mean  dwdling*  of  the  common  peo^e.  (Thuc.
il  14,  6S  :  Dicafsreh.  SlaL  Cnue.  p.e.)

Xenophon  (Mm.  iil  8.  g§  9,  10)  npnaenta
Socrotea  aa  atadng  briefly  the  chief  requi*!  tea  of  a
good  hoDse :  that  it  should  be  cool  in  snmmer  and
warm  in  winter,  and  that  the  apartment*  ahoold
fumiih  coiTenient  abodea  for  the  family,  and  aafe
reccptactei  for  their  property  :  for  the  former  pnt-
poae,  the  chief  apartment*  *hauld  fitce  the  loath,
and  ibould  be  lofty,  ao  aa  to  receive  the  full  laja
of  the  aan  in  winter,  and  to  be  ahoded  by  their
projecting  roof*  in  aommer  ;  and  that  thote  hctog
the  north  ihonld  he  lower,  for  the  lakc  of  ahelter.
Paintiug*  and  elab«ate  decoiatiani,  be  aayi,  de-
•troy  mote  pleanuo  than  they  fomiih.

The  advance  of  luiuiy,  afleir  the
Alexander  the  Oreat,  cauaed  a  con
provement  in  the  dwelling-hociaea  o'
Greek  citiea,  which  bad  already  bi  _
more  allentiou,  in  proportion  a*  the  public  hoOd-
inga  were  neglected.  (Deraotth.  «  Ariitoer.  a.
ens,  (Mya.  iil  p.  36.)  It  i>  probably  to  the
larger  and  man  aplendid  henaea  of  thi*  period
that  the  description  of  Vitrariua  applie*  ;  but  thera
i*  no  reason  to  auppoae  that  the  general  oirangfr-
ment*  of  the  previou*  period  were  mnch  altered.
The  fDllowiog  deacription,  therefore,  which  ia  de-
rived from  a  eompaiiaon  of  Vitruvin*  with  the
allnaiona  in  the  Oreek  writen,  will  aerre  for  the
profiabie  arrangement*  (fiir  further  we  cannot  go)
of  the  Oreek  houae,  al  the  time  of  the  Pdopon-
neiian  war  and  onwatda.

That  there  waa  no  open  apace  between  tlw
street  and  the  hnue-door,  like  the  Roman  resM-
'  I  plun  &om  the  law  of  Hippiai,  which  laid
]  hauae-doDTB  opening  outwardi,  beauiae
roached  upon  the  atreet.  (Ariatot  (^cob.
1347.  Bekk.)  The  wpoKpur,  which  U
sa  mentioned  (Herad.  vl  35),  eeem*  to  be
merdj  the  apace  in  front  of  the  houae.  We  learn,
however,  from  the  aame  hw  of  Hippiaa,  that
hoD*e*  sometimei  *Uud  back  from  the  atreet,  with-
in endomrea  of  their  own  {vpo^ptt/furra  or  Spd^a-
■Tsi,  HeracL  Pont.  PoSt.  1).  In  front  of  the
houae  waa  generally  on  altar  of  Apollo  Agyiena,
or  a  rude  obeliak  emblematlesl  of  the  god.  Some-
time* ^ere  wa*  a  laorel  tree  in  the  same  poaition,
and  aMnetimea  a  terminal  bn*t  of  the  god  Hermea.  ''
(Thucyd.  vi.  37;  AriWoph.  Plal.  1163.)

A  few  *tep*  (iwftrt/iol)  led  up  to  the  hooae-
door,  which  generaUy  braie  iome  inscription,  fit
the  sake  of  a  good  OBwn,  or  a*  a  charm,  aach  aa
EtaoStiKpdnrn'A-Yiie^&aiiaH.  (Ptucarcfa,  J^i^.
ra.  Ontt.  1  Diog.  Laftt  vi.  «l.)  The  form  and
friteningf  of  the  door  are  deacribed  under  J^NUA.
Thia  diKff,  aa  we  have  aeen,  stmietbnea  opened  oiM-

iida ;  bat  the  oppoaha  «a*  the  geaen]  rules  *■

{Mved  \r]  the  eipnaaien*  Dsed  tbt  opening.


DOHUS.
bUSrmi,  mi  dnUfaw  K,  twundmitai  ind  if^-
Einttmi. {Piaanh.P<i<g,.U,Di«,S1.) The

T^  bosM-docr  wu  called  oCXtisi  or  oiiXHa
M^  (PiD<L  tfem.  L  19 ;  Hupon.  i.  v. ;  Eutath.
•d  Ifai,  uti.  ee),  becaoH  it  led  to  the  b&X^-  It
pre  ■JmittencB  to  &  dutdv  pnwnga  {hofit^taai,
nAw,  AiipMr),  CB  toe  lidt  i^  wbich,  in  a  luge
hm^  mn  llis  ilabta,  oo  the  ether  the  portei'I
bdg&  Thg  dntf  of  the  porter  (Aiijwpdi)  wu  to
(dntt  Tinuo,  lod  to  ptBnmt  ujtliiiig  impmper
fam  bnng  anied  inb>  or  oat  of  the  boowi  (AiiitoL
0«aa.i.G.)  Pl>Io(/'r«Av.  P-SU.)  gi^"  BliTel;
jijctaca  of  u  offidooi  porter.  'Hie  pOTtsr  w»
■ttoded  b;  a  dog.  (ApoUod.  opwi  ^(ikM.  i  p.  3 ;
Tbeeo.  xt.  43  ;  Aiiitoph.  TknL  416,  ^i^
102jl) Hean  tba  pluua  tt

"  ■ ' -  ■-.  msu  a


(AnMvh.  li


t  tha  fbither  and  of  tba  punge  Vitmnni
phcea  *"^^'**'  d«^  which,  haworer,  Aam  not
mn  gracndl;  to  hsTe  eiiited.  Flutunh  (<U
Co.  ^iv.  IB)  ncDtiant  the  hoiue-door  *•  being
rinUc  fiam  the  perirtjle.

FlOB  the  AifaifHwr  we  pan  into  the  perinjlo
ot  osnrt  (npuriXuv,  oMi)  of  the  AndiDnitit,
>hid  wB«  a  ^ace  open  to  the  ikr  in  the  eealre
(,Umtfm'\  and  ramiuided  on  all  foDT  lidei  I17
fOMicaB  (tfTgol),  of  which  one,  probahly  that
■ant  tbe  atiuce,  wat  oiled  wporrior  (Plato,
Pnla^  ff.  314,  315).  Theae  pcstkoea  were  nnd
far  oBciie,  and  icanetiiim  lor  dining  in.  (Follnx,
173;  Plato,  ^Sya^b  p.  213,  iVtAi;.  p.311  ;  Plu-
tuth.  A  Oh  Sacr.  S3.)  Here  waa  commuilj
the  ataar  od  vhkh  ncrifieei  were  oSered  to  the
hnaKhnli  god*,  hot  fivqoentljr  poctabla  altui
woe  Bifd  bt  thit  pnipoie.  (Plato,  eta  RtpaU.  i.
p^lSa.)  VitniTiiu(J:e.)  nji  that  the  pDRioH
li  the  poiitjle  wen  of  equal  height,  or  el»  the
ne  bmglhe  loMhwai  built  «ith  loftier  colunni.
Tkk  be  oUi  a  Rhodian  periitfla  ;  and  it  cor-
nipeoda  with  the  ananganent  recoTmnandcd  b;
T_ > r._  -I (a  of  obtaining  a»  mnch


mB,  m  BOMiUe.  (Xen.  Oaam.  'a,  4  ;  Mm.  iiL  S.
|»;  AnMoCOHoa-lS.)

Bimd  tbe  petii^le  weR  ananged  the  chunben
and  bj  ^  aiea  (liUai,  brtfannt),  nich  ai  ban-
loetiBg  Kxani,  which  wen  largo  enauch  to  eon-
tain  aneial  lela  of  coocfaei  (^tfin^jnu,  irriiOuiret,

iliiiailaiil  issai  iot  attendant*,  mnticBna,  and  per-
fanain  at  gaaua  (VilruT.  L  b.  ;  Xen.  Symp.  1.  4.
1 13 :  PlDtaich.  ^pKp.  T.  6.  S  3 ;  AriMopL  Eedti.
fl9)  i  pwboi*  or  liC^  rsomi  {iiapai),  and
^laUer  cbamboi  and  aleepiug  roonu  (ffv^idriq,
MHTvaai,  almbiaTa)  ;  pictnn-gallEtiei  ud  libiaiiea,

Beat  it  thae  aputmenti  altenlion  wai  paid  to
Oeir  aapect.  (VitnT.  L  c ;  Ljiiai,  da  Cauda  Era-
teO.  p.  28,  ■■  BratetA.  p.  369  ;  AiiitopL  fbotu.
S,  t4  ;  PoUbi,  i  79;  Plato,  i'lviag.  pp.  314.  S16.)
Tba  perittjle  of  the  Andranitii  wai  eonnected
with  tl»t  of  the  Ojnaenmitii  bj  a  door  called
fit^Aaif  lniaanKoty  or  fuouJAiu,  which  WM  in
the  auddla  ef  the  potico  of  the  periitjle  oppoule
to  the  atiaDCe.  VitnTtni  appliea  the  itome
pim>i»s  to  a  paaove  between  the  two  peiiitjiet,
m  whkb  wai  the  fiiffav^i  Sfpo.  Bj  meant  of
thii  door  all  ownpiunicatica  between  the  Andronitii
and  lh«  OjsMcocitii  could  be  ihnt  olE In  oKt


D0MU3.  42*

an  mentioned  b;  Xenophon,  who  calli  it  bipn
0a^onrr6s  (Otarn.  ii.  B ;  compare  Pint.  Aral.  36).
It!  name  nirmiKos  i>  evidently  derired  from
lUrni,  and  meaua  the  door  Uiaeta  the  two  oiKal
or  penatylea.  (Suidaa  t.  e.  KiaaiXmr :  Ael.  Dion.
apid  EaUaO.  ad  Iliad,  v.  G47  ;  ScboL  a  Jpoli.
Biod.  iiL  33£.)  The  other  nnme,  /i^auAoi,  is
taken  by  aooie  writen  ai  merely  the  Attic  fbtm  of
fi^auAii.  (Hoa.  AU.  p.  364.)  Bnt  it  ahould
lather  be  derived  from  /irri,  ai  being  the  door
itiiiid  nr  liyaiid  the  Bi>4,  with  mpect  (a  the
otfAf  101  aOpo,  lLjiat,<UOatd.EnLp.2a;P\u\.
Symp.  TiL  1  ;  Ael  Dion,  i^xid  Entalk.  I  c.)  It
thoDld  be  obterred  that  in  the  home  deecribod
by  Vitmrioi,  if  the  Andronitii  and  Ojnaeconitia
lay  aide  by  lide,  (he  fiirouAai  bipa  woold  not  be
oppouta  to  the  entrance,  bnt  in  oae  of  the  other
iidea  nf  the  peiiatyle.


the  periiCyla  of
the  Oynaaerautia,  which  diSered  from  that  iS  the
Andronitia  in  haTing  particecs  round  imly  three  of
its  lideit  On  the  fourth  tide,  that  oppoaita  to  the
fiiffmkof  Upa  (the  lide  &cing  the  MUth,  accord-
ing to  VLlm*iiii),  wen  [daced  two  antae  {Antai],
at  a  coniiderahLe  distance  Emm  each  other.  A
third  of  the  diitance  between  theee  antae  waa  let
offinwudi  (VitmT.  Lo.  §1.  QunJam  ntor  mtai
dittat,  ea  to  teiHa  deapta  ipafym  datar  atrorra),
thoe  forming  a  chamber  or  reidbule,  which  waa
called  TpQ^iis,  To^vrrdj  and  pcrbapfl  nerdf,  and
alKi  n^ofwt ;  although  lome  of  the  Uter  Cheek
wrilcti  apply  the  wotd  wpHoiui  to  the  teatibule
of  tha  Androni^,  and  nich  Memt  (a  hare  been
ita  meaning  in  Homer')  dme.  (PoUnz  ;  Sold. ;
Hesych  ;  E^moL  Mag. ;  VitrnT,  i  e.)  On  the
right  and  left  of  thii  wpoirrdi  wen  two  bed-
chambeia,  the  ^dAopu  and  d^iftiAa^uH,  of  which
the  former  wae  the  principal  bed^chamba  of  tha
hoOH,  and  here  also  seem  to  haTe  been  kept  the
vasea,  and  other  valtiahla  artidei  of  ornament.
(Xen.  Oeam.  ii.  3.)  Beyond  these  n»m>  (for  thii
leenu  to  be  what  VitmTint  meam  by  n  Ut  ioaii
ntroma)  wen  large  aporbnenti  (larum)  used
fbf  working  in  wool  (oen  magnij  n  quibia  matfat
fiaaliarvm  cww  iamJicU  habait  sfaioaai,  VitruT.).
Round  the  peristyle  were  the  eadng-nHmii,  bed-
chambers, store-rDams,  and  other  i^artmeiits  in
common  nse  (Mc&na  quottdiaua,  culnaila,  tt  oellaa
fitmiHaritat).

Beeides  the  otlXtuH  S^pa  and  the  uimuKoi
bipa,  thse  was  a  third  door  {lapraia  btpt)  lead-
ing to  the  garden.  (Pollni,  I  76  ;  Demestb.  n
Batrg.  p.  IISG  ;  Lyiiai,  m  EraloslA.  p.  393.)
Lyiiaa  (£.  c.  p.  394)  speaks  of  another  door,  which
pnbablj  led  &om  the  garden  into  tba  street.

Then  wu  asiully,  though  not  always,  an  upper
story  (4w(p»flf ,  Sttf'),  which  teldmi  extended
over  the  whole  space  occupied  by  the  lower  story.
The  ptincipBl  use  of  the  upper  story  was  for  the
lodging  of  the  slaTea.  (Demcsth.n^ierjr.p.  IIGG,
where  the  words  ir  rf  iripyif  seem  to  imply  a
buUding  seTonl  stories  high.)  The  occeu  to  the
upper  Soar  seems  to  hare  been  aometimea  by  stairs
on  tha  ontside  of  tha  boase,  leading  up  Snm  the
street.  Quests  wen  also  lodged  m  the  upper
atory.  (Antiph.  da  Famtf.  p.  611.)  But  in  Ktma
large  house*  there  were  rooma  aet  ^lait  for  their
reception  ({nwti)  on  the  gronnd  floor.  (ViliUT.
L  ft  ;  PoUui,  iT.  125  ;  Eurip.  AUal.  564.)  In
ouea  of  emergency  itore.roonii  wen  fitted  up  for  the
' " '  (PUto,PnKiv:F.31S.)

■ --' •  o"


<26


DOMUS.


Porttoni  of  the  npper  ibny  iametinies  projected
beyond  (bi  walla  of  the  lower  put,  forming  bal-
eoniei  or  Tentndihi  (vfweohal,  ytiaiinitltiiara,
Follaz,  L  Bl).

The  following  plan  of  the  gTomid'fioar  of  a  Greek
hmue  of  the  larger  liie  ia  taken  from  Bskker'i
CiariUtL  It  ia  of  coniae  eonjednral,  a>  there  are
no  Qreek  hauiei  in  eiiilence.  Other  plana,  differ-
ijig  Tery  much  from  this  and  &om  one  anothn,
■re  giren  by  Hirl,  Stiegliti,  and  the  comnieDtston


»■  or  bvpir :  A,  peristy
Andninilu  :  o,  iit  halls  and  chajnbera  of  Ihe  An-
dnaitii ;  ft,  fiirnvXot  or  fiiata^oi  &ipa :  r,  peri-
■IjIb  of  the  Oynaeconiti*  ;  y,  chambcn  of  the
Oynaecenitia  ;  ir,  wpoTriij  or  vapturr^:  0,  d<UA-
fus  and  l^i0dXa^c:  I,  rooma  for  working  in
wool  (lo-rHcti)  -,  K,  garden-door,  >n)irafa  Aipa.

The  roofi  were  genemllj  flat,  aad  it  waa  cpb-
tomary  to  walk  aboat  npon  them.  (I^yaiaa,  adv.
jiinaiL  p.  U2 ;  Plant  MU.  iL  2,  3.)  Bnt  pointed
roofi  were  alio  uied. (PaUu,  i.  SI.)

In  Ih«  interior  of  the  hoou  the  place  of  doon
wai  lomeLimei  lopplied  by  curtaini  {rafiarrriir-
/ietil),  which  were  either  plain,  or  dyed,  or  em-
bnidered. (Pollox,  i.  32  ;  ThoophraiL  5.)

The  ijrincipal  openingi  for  the  admiuion  of  light
and  til  were  in  the  roofi  of  the  periitylei ;  bnt  it
ii  incomct  to  anj^Kiae  that  the  hoaaea  had  no
vindawa  (ihiplSti),  «  at  Irut  none  oTerinokiag
the  atrcflt.  Thej  were  not  Bt  all  nncommon.
(Ariitoph.  T^lenn.  797,  Eaiei.  S61 }  Plutarch,  de
Ckrioi,  13,  i>»n,  A6.)

Artificial  warmth  waa  procured  partly  by  meona
of  fire-placec  It  ia  rappoaed  that  chimney*  were
altogether  tmtcnown,  and  that  the  Bnoke  neaped
through  an  opening  in  the  roof  (mmtJn),  Herod.
TiiL  137).  It  ii  not  eaay  to  nndentand  how  thii
could  be  the  case  when  then  waa  an  upper  itory.

Little  portabln  itovM  (/irx'^ptu,  fo^opi'Stt)  or
cbafii^  diihn  (inipiuM)  were  fr«qnm(ty  uied.


DOMUS.

(PlotarcL  ^ptfibL  i.  p.  717 ;  Ariatoph.  nsfi.  81 1 ;
Poliiut,  vL  89, 1.  101.) [Focus.]

The  decontiona  of  lbs  interior  were  v^  plaia
at  the  period  to  which  our  description  refen.  Tba
floiira  were  of  alone.  At  a  hito  period  coloured
■lonn  were  used.  (Flin.  H.  N.  xxxrl  Sfi.  t.  60.)
Mosaics  are  first  mentioned  aa  inttodiiced  nnda
the  kings  of  Pergamna.

The  wall),  np  to  Che  fbnrlh  eeatnry  b.  c,  aoein
to  have  been  only  whited.  The  fint  inrtance  of
punting  them  ia  that  of  Aldbindea.  (Andoc.  ns
Aldi.  p.  119 ;  Plutanh.  AleA.  16.)  This  inno-
TRtimi  met  with  conaiderable  oj^iotilion.  (Xeti.
Man.  iii.  3.  §  10  1  Oeam.  ix.  2.)  Plato  menlioci
the  paining  of  the  walls  of  bouaes  as  a  mark  of
a  Tpu^tn  itjXii  (A<7iwiiii.pp.373,373).  These
allusioD*  fcvn  that  die  piactica  waa  not  uncommon
in  the  time  of  Plato  and  Xenophon.  We  have
also  mention  of  painted  ceilings  al  the  nme  period.
(Plato,  Rqwi.  vii.  £29.)  At  a  later  period  thii
mode  of  decoratian  became  gvneiaL  (The  com-
mentatora  on  ViUuTioa,  L  c  ;  Schneider,  ^irnt.  ad
Xm.Mm.  i  lUtK,  Die  LdtniUr  f^iiiuia,  pp.  287
— 2S8;  Stif^iti,  ArekaiiL  d.  Scmfata^  Tol.  iu
pL  2  pp.  130— IAS ;  Becker,  Ouriila,  toL  L  pp.
166—205.)  [P.  a]

2.  Roman.  The  house*  of  the  Romaoa  wen
poor  and  mean  for  many  eenturiea  after  the  founds
alien  of  the  eily.  Till  the  war  with  Pynhiu  the
honaea  were  covered  only  with  ^teh  or  ahiDj^ea
(Plin.  If.  {f.  xvL  15),  and  wcie  oaually  boill  of
wood  DT  nnbaked  bricka.  !l  waa  not  till  the  latter
timea  of  the  republic,  when  wealth  had  berai  ac-
quired by  conqueats  in  the  Eojt,  that  housea  of  any
aplendoui  began  to  be  built ;  but  it  then  bscune
(he  Ebshlon  not  only  to  build  houui  of  an  immenaa
aiic,  but  also  to  adorn  them  with  eolonma,  faint-
ings,  atatocs,  and  eoatly  works  of  art.

M.  Lepidns,  who  wai  conml  a.  c  78,  was  the
lint  who  introdaced  Numidlan  marble  into  Roma
fi>r  the  purpose  of  paving  the  threshold  of  hia
house ;  but  the  fiuhion  of  buildmg  magnificent
bouaes  incieaied  so  rapidly  that  the  home  of  le-
pidns, which,  in  hii  consulship,  was  the  firrt  in
itome,  was,  thirty-fire  years  later,  eelipacd  br  a
hundred  others.  (Id.  lUrL  8.  24.  g  i.)  Lucullua
especially  inrpasBrd  all  his  contempocuiea  in  the
maanificance  of  hia  houeea  and  the  aplendour  id
their  decorattona.  Marble  colnmoi  were  first  in-
ttodaced  into  priTOte  houses  by  the  ontor  L.  Cna-
atia,  but  they  did  not  exceed  twelve  feet  in  height,


tailed  Lucullean,  thirty-eight  feet  high,  and  of
such  immense  weight  that  the  contractor  of  tha
severs  took  security  for  any  injury  that  migtit  bs
done  to  the  seven  in  consequence  of  the  columna
being  carried  along  the  tlrecU. (Id.  izxri.  2.)

The  Romans  were  exceedingly  partial  to  maiUe
fiir  the  decraBtion  of  their  hooaca.  Mamnna,
who  waa  Caesar^  piaefectai  &bri)ni  in  Ooul,  set
Ihe  example  of  lining  hia  room  with  slabs  of  roar-
ble,  (Id,  iixTi.  7.)  Some  idea  mav  be  formed  at
the  aiie  and  magnificetice  of  the  bonaei  of  tba
Roman  noblea  during  the  later  timea  of  the  re-
public by  the  price  which  they  fetched.  The  ooih.
lul  Mf«BlIa  bought  the  hooae  of  Autronioa  f<*
3700  sealertia  (nrariy  33,0001.),  and  Ciceio  tbs
house  of  Cniaaua,  on  Ihe  Palatine,  ibr  3500  eea-
tenia  (neoriy  31,0001.). (Cic  ad  AIL  i.  IS,  ad


DOHtlS.
Am.  T.  fi.)  Tb«  bMMe  oT  P.  Clodiot,  vbon  Milo
kyied,aM  14,800  MMita  (about  ISl.OOW:)  ;  and
the  Tncabm  vUk  of  Bcram  «u  fitted  up  with
net  BUnificcoco,  tint  when  it  mu  batnt  by  hii
ihn,  b»  \aU  100.000  wtertk,  upvanb  of
88t,000L  (PliiL  ».  AT.  mri.  31.)  Th«  honn-
nut,  vbich  pemu  in  poor  eiRomitiumi  iuubII}-
nid  U  Rome,  wu  about  2000  leitercei,  belweea
171.  nkd  lU  (Soet.  ^xJ.  36.)  It  «u  brought  u
>  ihMtji  of  cilnngnMB  egwnil  Caelini  ibal  he
nud  M  K«atiK  (ftboot  366^:)  tar  the  nut  of  hit
Uav.  (Cic  j>n  OnI.  7.)

Hbbm*  wcM  ongimllj  only  one  itorj  high ;
tM  M  the  nine  of  gnnnd  imjeaitd  in  tha  city
ikf  «a*  built  HTenl  itotiei  in  heighL  In  many
bnaea  ladi  May  mu  let  out  to  aniants  tenmti,
the  Ugkert  Boon  being  unully  innabiled  by  the
PMC  fCSe.  Agr.  iL  35 ;  Hor.  Ep.  i.  1.  SI  \  Jut.
&<.  lit  36B,&^i;17.)  To  gtuid  ■gsinit  danger
frtn  the  extreme  lieigbt  of  aouei,  Augmttu  n-
(trieted  tbc  beighl  of  ill  new  honsn  wBich  were
bub  by  the  nde  of  the  inblLc  roadi  to  seventy
fed:  (Stnb.  T.  p.  ass.)  Ti!l  the  time  of  Neio,
the  (ticcta  in  Hone  were  neirow  and  iiregtilar.
Ad  boiB  tnoei  of  the  haite  and  confiujon  with
which  ibe  city  mi  built  after  it  had  been  burnt
W  Ae  Oub  ;  but  after  the  great  fin  in  the  time
m  that  aoperer,  by  which  tvo-tbiidi  of  Rome
■a*  bant  lo  the  gniiuid,  the  city  wu  built  with
fraM  tqalariqr.  The  ttieet*  were  made  itniight
sd  teMd ;  UK  height  of  the  houMa  woa  re-
•trided,  and  a  certain  part  of  each  was  required
to  ho  baSt  of  Gabian  or  Atbim  atme,  which  wu
pwf  agaiDM  Ere,  (Tadl.  Atok.  it.  43  ;  Snot.
A*r.  38.)

raa^iBuM  of  a  Rooyui  dodw  u  pnndpally  deriTed
bam  the  deatription  of  VitruTiui,  and  the  remaini
<£  tha  hi—ia  which  hare  bmi  found  at  PompeiL
Hbij  pointa,  hawerer,  arc  itiii  doubtful ;  but
wiAaat  oitsing  into  aRhilectnral  details,  we
•hall  eonEne  oonclTea  to  thoee  topjci  which  lerre
to  Ohalnu  the  elaiiical  writcri.  The  chief  roomi
a  mpectable  Roman,  though  dif-
in  liac  and  aplendonr  accoraing  to
a  of  the  owner,  appear  to  hare

A  accoiding  to  the  latto  and  cir-
uaceairf'tbeDiaHer.

le  {KincipB]  paiti  of  a  RanaD  home  tven
.  YmUMitm,  S.  (Mini,  3.  Atrim*  or  Ctmm
I,  4.  AloA,  h.  TMaim,  6.  Foaat,  7.  P»-
*.  The  pam  i£  a  booao  which  were  con-
■diVed  of  leai  impertaiMe,  and  of  which  the
■mngBDoit  difleced  in  different  houiei,  were  the

1.  (Mieida,  %  Tridaia,  3.  Otd,  1.  Bmdraa,  B.
FimKBlkia,  6.  Bibiiatluca,  7.  Babumm,  B.  OtOia,
9.  Camtc^a,  10.  Dmla,  1 1.  Solaria,  We  ihall
^-•k  of  caeh  in  order.

1.  VamauLDH.  The  rettibulum  did  not  pro-
p(ri7  tarn  part  of  the  bcnuc,  hot  was  a  Taoml
iptiCK  befcR  the  door,  fbnniag  a  coort,  which  wai
WTiDBiided  rai  three  (idea  by  the  bonje,  and  via
ap^  a  the  fcarth  to  the  atrsol.  The  two  aides
of  the  blue  joined  the  atieet,  bat  the  middle  part
of  it,  wh«e  the  door  wai  placed,  was  at  some
Utile  diHance  from  the  itreet.  (Gell.  itL  5 ;
UaeretiL  jU.  tL  B.) Hence  Plantna  (MoMl.  iJL

2.  132)>ayi,  "  Viden' Tettibuluni  ante  acdri  hoc
et  BiabDla^um  qnoimmodi  T' "

2.  Osnirx. The  atium,  which  Ii  abo  called


rr


DOMUa  *2t

and  fim,  wu  the  entrance  to  the  house.
The  itreet-door  admitted  into  a  hall,  to  which  the
name  of  ottiiun  wu  olio  giTeo,  and  in  which  there
wu  &eqoently  a  imidl  ronm  (nffa)  for  the  porter
(Jamlor  or  iittiarin),  and  also  (or  a  dog,  which
wu  iwually  kept  in  the  ball  to  guard  the  house.
A  full  account  of  thii  part  of  the  house  is  given
under  Janqa.  Another  door  (Jtaua  iadtrior)  op-
poaite  the  street  door  led  into  the  atriom.

S.  Atbiuh  or  Cavuu  Aidiitm,  as  it  is  written
by  VaiTO  and  Vilmvius ;  Pliny  writes  it  Caxu-
ifiwa.  Hirt,  MUller  iEtrvJia;  tdL  I  p.  U5),
Marini,  and  moat  modern  writera,  consider  the
Atrimn  and  Carnm  Aedimn  to  be  ^e  some ;  but
Newton,  Stratico,  and  more  recently  Beclter  (GaU
(as,  voL  i  p.  77,  4c.),  maintain  that  thn  weto

■  rooma. It  is  impossible  to  give  a  deciaiTO
on  the  subject ;  but  from  the  statements  of

{Dt  La^.  Lai.  T.  161,  HUUer)  and  Vitru-
Tina  (tI.  3,  4,  Bipont),  taken  in  connection  with
the  bet  that  no  houaea  in  Pompeii  havD  been  yet
diacovered  which  contun  both  an  Attinm  and
Caium  Aedinm,  it  ia  moet  probable  that  they
were  the  same.  The  Atrinm  or  Caium  Aedium
waa  a  large  apartment  roofed  over  with  the  oiccp-
6on  of  an  opening  in  the  centre,  called  eompiu-
tiivm,  towards  which  the  roof  sloped  so  aa  to  threw
the  rmn-wBter  into  a  aatem  in  the  floor,  termed
implimiim  (Varro,  L  c  ;  Festus,  i.  o.  /mpAntim),
which  wu  frequently  ontamcnted  with  statnes,
columns,  and  other  wo  As  of  art  {Cit  c  Var.  ii
23,  £6.)  The  word  imphanmn,  however,  is  also
employed  to  denote  the  Bperture  in  the  root  (Ter.
.^m.  ilL  £.  4 1.)  Schneider,  in  bis  commentary  on
VitmTius,  anppoies  cavum  aedium  to  mtan  the
'hole  of  this  apartment  including  the  impluvimn.


whole  a^traent,  and  caviun  aedinm  only  to  the
uncovered  part.  The  breadth  of  the  impluvium,
according  to  Vitruviua  (vi,  4),  wu  not  leu  than  a
quarter  nor  greater  than  a  third  of  Che  breadth  of
the  atrium ;  its  length  wu  in  the  same  pnipoction
Recording  to  the  length  of  the  atriuiiL

VitmrinittL  3)  distinguishes  five  kinds  of  atria
01  cava  aedium,  which  irere  called  by  the  fblhiw-
ing  names:— :

(1.)  Tiairmmm.  In  this  the  roof  waa  sup-
ported by  foni  beams,  crossing  each  other  at  tiEbt
angles  the  included  tpaix  tmming  the  camplu-
vium.  This  kind  of  tttrium  was  probably  the  most
ancient  of  all,  u  it  is  more  simple  than  the  others,
and  is  not  adapted  for  a  very  large  building.

(2.)  TUnu^uTi.  This  was  of  the  same  form
u  the  preceding,  except  that  the  main  bouna  of
the  roof  were  supported  by  pillan,  placed  at  tha
fonr  anglea  of  the  implnviom.

(3.)  CorinAium  was  on  the  same  principle  as
the  tetrastyle,  only  that  there  were  a  greater  num-
ber of  pillan  around  the  imjJuvinm,  on  which  the
beams  of  the  raof  reeled.

(4.)  Diiplmiaiam  had  its  roof  aloping  the  con-
trary war  to  the  impluvinm,  so  that  (he  water  lell
outside  the  house  instead  of  being  carried  mCo  the

(G.)  TVaftcfiiufwR  wu  roofed  all  ova  and  had

The  atrium  wu  the  meat  important  room  in  the
house,  nnd  among  the  wealthy  a-u  fitted  up  with
much  a[Jendour  and  miigDifica»&  (Compan  Hot


428  DOMUS.

Oirn.  UL  1.  46.) The  maibU  colunma  sf  Se
atmdy  spoken  of  were  placed  in  the  AtiiDm, The
Atrium  appeon  ongiimllj  to  haxe  been  the  oiilj
lilting-nwm  in  the  Douk,  uid  to  haie  uned  alio
u  >  kitchen  (S«rT.  ad  Virs-  ^«>-  i- 126,  Hi  353)  -,
■nd  it  probably  tonliDued  to  da  u  Bmong
lairer  sod  middle  clauei. In  the  hmuei  of
wealth;,  hoverei,  il  wu  diitioct  from  the  pri<
Sfaitmenti,  and  ni  tued  ai  a  teccptJDn  room,
when  the  patron  received  hii  dienla,  and  the
great  and  noble  lie  numeroiu  viiiton  vlio
accuttomed  to  call  ever;  morning  to  pa;  the
■pecti  or  lolicit  bvourt (Her,  Efi.  I  5.  30 ;
TiL  7,  91.) Cicero  fr«qnent];  compliiiu  that  he
wai  not  exempt  from  thii  annajmice,  when  he
leUred  to  hi>  tsuntrj-haosea. {Ad  AO.  il  H,  T.
2,  &c) But  thoimh  the  atriom  doca  not  appesr
to  have  been  uaed  bj  the  wealth;  ai  a  li '
mom  for  the  bmil;,  it  ilill  continaed  to  bi
ploj-ed  for  rnaoT  purposei  which  it  had  onginall;
served. Thai  the  aiqitial  coucb  wa«  placed  in  tbe
atrium  oppoeita  the  dnor  (m  auto,  Hor.  Ep.  L  1.
67  ;  Anon,  in  Cie.  pn  Mil  p.  43,  OrelU),  and
alio  Ibe  inttiument*  and  malerinli  for  ipuiiiing
and  weaving,  which  were  formerl;  carried  on  b;
the  women  of  the  &mil;  in  thii  room. (Ai
L  e.) Here  alio  the  imogei  of  theii  ancei
were  placed  (Ju*.  vilL  19  ;  Mart  ii.  90),  and  (he
ibcua  or  fire-place,  which  poiueued  a  tacred  cha-
racter, being  dedicated  lo  the  Larca  of  each  bjnil;.
[Focufl.]

4.  Alai,  wingi,  were  miall  apartmrnta  or  re-
ceatea  on  the  left  and  right  lidet  of  the  af
(Vilruv.  vi  4.)

6.  TiBLiNUH  wai  in  all  pnibabilit;  a  rec
toom  at  the  flirtbec  end  of  the  atrinm  oppoii:
door  leading  into  the  hall,  and  wag  regarded  ai
port  of  the  atriuiL  It  coataijiedtha  fiunUy  recardi
and  anhivei.  (VitruT.  vL  4  ;  Feitni,  t.  «. ;  Flin.
H.  N.  inv.  a)

With  the  taUinom,  the  Boman  hoOK  appean
to  hare  ariginall;  eeaaed  ;  and  tbe  ileeping  roomi
were  probabl;  arranged  an  each  tide  of  the  ai
But  when  tbe  atrium  and  iU  inrnnrndiDg  i
were  ued  for  the  receptitm  of  clienla  and  other
public  viiiton,  it  became  necesaac;  to  incrcaso  the
■iie  of  the  house ;  and  the  following  rooma  —
nccordingl;  added :  —

6.  Faucbs  appear  to  have  been  paiaagei,  which
paued  £nim  the  atrium  to  the  p«itl;liLm  r-  '-
terior  of  the  houte, (Vitruv.  vi.  a.)

7.  Pkribtilihh  wu  in  iti  general  form  like
tbe  atrinm,  but  it  waa  one-third  greater  ia  breadth,
neamred  Iranivenel;,  than  in  length.  (Vitniv.
fi  4.)  It  wai  a  conrt  open  to  &e  >k;  in  the
middle  ;  the  open  part,  which  wu  luminnded  b;
columni,  waa  larger  than  the  unpluvium  in  the
atrinm,  and  waa  frtquentl;  dacocaled  with  fiowrai
and  ihrnba.

The  arrangement  of  the  rooint,  which  are  next
lo  be  noticed,  Toried,  aa  hai  been  rentarked,  ac-
cording to  the  taele  and  circumalaocci  of  the
owner.  It  ii  therefore  impoaaibla  Co  aaiign  lo
them  any  regular  place  in  the  house.

I.  CiiBn3ui.A,1>ed-cbamben,  appear  to  bare  been
nnall;  imalL  There  were  aepainte  cubicula  fc9
the  da;  and  night  (cuiactUa  diitna  ei  nootemo,
Plin.  Ep.  L  3) ;  the  httter  were  also  called  dorai-
loria.  (Id.  V.  6  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  17.)  Vitruiius
(vL  7)  recommends  that  the;  should  bee  the  cast
for  (ha  benefit  of  tbe  rising  sun. The;  tome-


DOMUS.

times  had  a  small  snte-room,  which  wai  allpd  b;
the  Oieek  name  of  rpiwwTiir. (Plin..^.  ii.  17.)

2.  TaicLiNU,  dining-toonu,  are  treated  of  in  a
separate  article. [Tricliniuu.]

3.  Obci,  from  the  Oreek  awof,  were  ipaciou
halls  or  viloans  borrowed  from  the  Greeks,  and
were  frequenti;  used  u  triclinia.  The;  wen  to
have  the  same  proportions  u  triclinia,  but  were  10
be  more  spacious  on  account  of  having  ccJanmi,
which  triclinia  had  noL  (Vitmv.  vi  6.)  Vilm-
viuj  mentions  four  kinds  of  Deci :  —

(1.)  The  TMnufjife,  which  needs  no  fiuthti  de-
scription. Four  columns  supported  the  not

(2.)  The  Cbn'stUan,  which  possfued  ool;  ona
n>w  of  colunuu,  supporting  the  architnve  (qsMQ^
Hum),  cornice  (mroiu),  and  a  vaulted  n»L

(3.)  The  Aiffiiptian,  which  wa>  more  splendid
and  more  like  a  basilica  than  a  Corinthian  tricli-
nium. In  die  Aegyptian  oecus,  the  piUan  tup-
parted  a  gallery  with  paved  Soot,  whiu  formed  a
walk  nand  the  ^>artnient^  and  upon  theae  pillan
others  were  placed,  a  fourth  part  leu  in  height
' '  ■  ■  '  ided  the  roofl. Be-


rn the


ipper


colon


(4.)  The  axiaiu  <Kiifw)niQ


of  Vitr


seldom  ued


eni  meant  fiir  m
looking  to  the  north,  and,  if  postible,  facing  pt-
itat,  to  which  the;  opened  by  folding-doois.
Plin;  bad  oeci  of  this  kind  in  hia  villa.

4.  ExaniiAK,  which  appear  to  have  been  in
form  much  the  same  u  the  oeci,  for  Vitruvius  (vi.
5)  speaks  of  (lie  exedrae  in  connectioa  with  oeci
quadrati,  were  rooms  for  conversation  and  the
other  purposes  of  society.  (Cic.  di  Nat.  Dear.  L  G,
De  Ont.  iiL  5.)  They  served  the  same  pnipotta
as  the  eiedrae  in  the  Tb^mae  and  Gyimuua,
which  wers  semicircular  rooms  with  seats  bt  pbi-
losophert  and  others  lo  convene  in.  (Vitrav.  v.  1 1,
viL  9  j  BaIiNIAI.)

5.  6,  7.  PiNAcoTBacA.  BmLioTHBCA,  and
BALiNBUk  [tee  Balmiab],  are  treated  of  in
separate  articles.

6.  CuLiNA,  the  kitchen.  The  food  waa  origin-
all;  cooked  in  the  atrium,  aa  hat  been  alread;
stated ;  but  (he  futgKtt  of  refinement  aftecwardi
led  to  the  use  of  another  part  of  the  house  for  this
puipoeo.  In  the  kitchen  of  Pansa's  house,  of
which  a  gTcond-plsn  is  given  below,  a  stove  for
ttews  and  similar  preparations  wu  found,  ver;
moch  like  the  charcoal  stoves  used  in  tbe  present
day.  (See  woodcut.)  Before  it  lie  a  knife,  a
■trainer, and a kind of  fryiug-^an with four

aggt.


D.g,l,.™byGOOglC


DOMUS.

Id  ihii  kilcbcn,  tt  mil  u  in  nunf  othen  at

Pmnpeii,  there  tit  puntingi  of  tho  Lan«  or  do-

BstK  ggdi,  ooder  whoaa  care  llie  pRnuiou  sad

■II  tbe  (Hdcing  ntenriU  wen  placed.

9.  CoiNicuLA  prDperij  lignilied  nmni  to  dine
a  ;  bal  after  it  b«aiie  tlie  bihion  to  dioe  in  the
vffB  put  of  the  home,  the  whole  of  the  roomi
tbore  tlie  gnnDd'flooT  were  called  oeMoatla  (VuT.
■b  Lag.  Lot  T.  1E3,  MQllei),  and  hence  FeiEnt
Mfi,  **  Coenacola  dicnntor,  od  quae  Kali5  aaceadl-
tu."  (Compue  Dig.  S.  tiL  3.  a.  1.)  Ai  the  iwmu
n  the  grgand-flaoi  mre  of  different  height!  and
wattimw  RBched  to  the  laoS,  all  the  mmii  on
the  mpftt  •tiny  amii  not  bo  tmjted  with  one  an-
ollia',  and  conieqiientlj  difiercDt  Kti  of  >tun
mold  be  needed  to  connect  them  with  the  lower
HM  of  the  honae,  t  we  find  to  be  the  caie  in
iMMca  at  FompeiL  Sometiioe*  the  itain  had  no
maettkn  with  the  lover  jaxt  of  the  houie,  bat
Mceadid  at  ODM  from  the  •tieeL  (Lir.ixiiz.  14.)

10.  DuKTA  waa  an  apaitment  lued  fbr  dining
ii,aid  tbc  the  other  poipoMi  of  life.  (Plin.£^iL
IT  i  8wL  OMUL  10.) it  If/pem  to  ham  baen


DOMU&  439

imaller  than  the  trictininm.  Diaeta  !■  alw)  the
name  giTcn  bj  Plinj  {Ep.  vL  5)  to  roomi  contain-
ing three  or  font  bed-chambert  (oBiicBij).  Plea-
■ure-houei  or  niniiner-houHa  are  b1»  called  di-
aetae. (Dig. 30.  tit I. a.  *3  ;  7.  Ut.  1.  1. 13.

ge.)

11.  Solaria,  properly  pbcei  kc  baikuig  in
the  tnn,  were  lemcei  an  the  topt  ef  bouiei.
(Plant  MO.  ii.  3.  6S,  it  *.  36  ;  Suet  Ntr.  16.)
In  the  time  of  Seneca  the  Romani  formed  arU£cial
gaidnu  on  the  tope  of  their  houAea,  which  con-
tained exen  froit-treei  and  fiih-pondi.  (Sen.  Ep^
122,  Cvdr.  Etc.  r.  5;  Suet.  Oiaid.  10.)

The  two  woodcuta  annexed  repieaent  two  atria
of  honaea  Vt  Pompeii.  The  lint  ia  the  alrium  of
what  ia  uaually  called  the  honae  of  the  Quaeitor.
The  Tiew  ii  taken  near  the  entrance-hall  bring  the
tablinom,  thlxmgh  which  tiie  columna  of  the  pen-
(tjle  and  the  guden  are  aeen.  Thia  atriom,  which
ii  a  ipecimen  of  what  V  itniTiui  lalla  the  Corin-
thiaa,  ii  iniioimded  1»  tarioui  looma,  tnd  is
beautifully  punted  with  usbeaqne  deaigni  upon
nd  ind  yellow  gnmndi.


>  Dcit  woodedt  repceienta  the  atiinm  of
■  oanaUy  called  the  hooae  of  Cere^  In  tlie
ia  the  imidDTium,  and  the  pauage  U  tlie


Tbe  preceding  Bceoimt  of  the  different  looma,
and  eapeclallj  of  tbe  anangement  of  tho  atriiun,
lablinum,  periatyle,  &C.,  ia  beat  iUuatrated  by  the
hooaei  which  hare  been  diainterced  at  Pompeii.
The  ground-plan  of  two  ia  accordingly  anbjoined.
The  nrat  ia  the  plan  of  a  honae,  oiually  called  tbe
honae  of  the  tragic  poet

Like  moit  of  tbe  otlier  hoitiei  at  Pompeii,  it
had  no  TstibuliuD  Bccoidiog  to  the  meaning  which
we  have  attached  to  the  word.  1.  The  oatiom  or
entrance  halt,  which  ia  aii  feet  wide  and  nearly
thirty  long.  Near  the  atreel  door  there  ia  a  figure
of  a  laige  fierce  dog  worked  in  moaaic  on  the
paTemait,and  beneath  it  ia  written  Gfea  Ostein.
The  two  laige  roama  on  each  aide  of  the  leitibula
appear  &om  the  large  openinga  in  front  of  them  to
have  been  ihopa  ;  they  communi^te  with  the  en-
trance hall,  and  were  tbcrefore  probably  occnpied
by  the  matter  of  the  houie.  2.  The  atrium,  which
ia.abont  twenty-eight  feet  in  length  and  twenty  in
breadth ;  iu  impluTinm  ia  nou  the  centre  of  the
nnm,  and  ita  floor  ia  paved  with  white  leuerse,
apotled  with  bbick. 3.  Chamben  for  the  uae  at


the  fiunily,  or  mtcndi:d  foi  the  mcption  of  pi'
who  were  entitled  to  claim  hoipilalily.  W
■  boaae  did  not  posaon  BJi  hoapitiuni,  or  re
eiprenly  for  the  rwwplion  of  gue<U,  they  ap-
pear to  have  been  lodged  in  roonu  attached  U
theatriom.  [Hoapirnm.]  <.  A  nnBll  room  witf
a  ittui-oue  teadini  up  to  the  upper  iwnns.  5.
AUe.  6.  The  tablinum.  7.  The  ftiuce*.  6.  Peri,
ttjic,  with  Doric  colnmni  and  gBiden  in  the  centre.
The  iaige  room  on  the  right  of  the  porrilyle  it  the
triclininm ',  beudc  it  ib  the  kitchen ;  and  the
imallcr  apartmenta  sre  cubicula  and  other  ro
for  the  me  of  the  fiunily.

Tlie  next  woodcut  coDtama  the  ground-plai
an  omfa,  which  waa  properly  a  hoiue  not  joi
to  the  nsighbouriug  houaea by  a  common nalL
(Festiu,  t. c.) An  insula, however, genemlly
Gontuncd aereral aeparala honaea, or at  le;
•epamte  aportmcnti  or  ahopi,  which  were  let
different  bmiliea  ;  and henc« the (cnn don
under  the  emperon  appeaia  to  be  applied  to  1
honao  where  one  fnmilr  lived,  whether  it  wets
intula  or  not,  and Inanla  to  any  hired  lodgin^
Thii  inmla  contaioi  b  houBe,  aurroimded  by  ahops,
which  belonged  lo  the  owner  and  were  let  oat  by
him. The  home  itself,  which  ii  uaually  called  the
houie  of  Panaa,  eiidently  belonged  to  one  of  the
principal  men  of  Pompeii. Including  the  garde
-which  ia  a  third  of  the  whole  length,  it  ia  nho
800  fb— '  "■'■->--


le  itreet. N.  Culina. H.  Servonta'  halt,  with

back  door  to  the  ttrcet  P.  Portico  of  two  stories,
which  provtfl  that  the  houae  had  an  upper  floor.
The  lilo  of  the  staircaae,  however,  ia  unknown,
though  it  it  thought  there  ii  aome  indicniian  of

le  in  the  pau^,  M, (j.  The  garden. H.  Rewr-

lir  for  anpplying  a  tank,  S.
The  preceding rooms  belonged  cxdDnveJy  10

inaa"i  honie  i  bl  ' ''^  "  ' "


n  the  in


a  good  mi


nbii


and  100  wide.
A.  Uationi,  or  en  trance -hall,  paved  with  mosaic
R  TuBcan  atrium.  I.  Implu»ianu  C.  Chambers
on  each  tide  of  the  atrium,  probably  for  the  recep-
tion of  gueits.  D.  Ala.  E.  Tablinum,  which  ia
rn  to  the  periityle,  so  that  the  whole  length  of

paiaage  (faucea),  F,  beaide  it,  the  tahlinnm  might
probably  be  cloaed  at  the  pleaiure  of  the  owner.
C.  Chomben  by  the  fences  and  lablinum,  of  which
the  lua  is  uncertain.  G.  Perialjle.  D.  Ala  to
the  perialjle.  C.  Cubicula  by  the  aide  of  the
pcrialvle.  E.  Trieliniom.  L.  Oecna,  and  by  iW
tide  there  is  n  pena^i!  leading  fivm  the  periityle
to  the  garden. M.  Back  door  (jiailkmii  orium)  to  ,


ilion.  a.  Six  thou  let  oat  to  tenant*.  Thoaa
I  right  and  left  hand  comers  «»e  baken'
ahopa,  which  contained  mills,  orena,  &e.  at  i.  Tho
ic  on  the  right  appeort  to  hate  been  a  large
itablithment,  ai  it  contoina  many  rooms,  e.  Two
3uaes  of  a  veiy  mean  closa,  having  fonnerly  an
apper  stoiy. On  the  other  aide  oie  two  houaea

"  Ting  given  a  general  description  of  the  rooms
Raman  house,  it  remains  to  apeak  of  the
(I)  floors,  (2)  walls,(3)eeilingt,  (1)windows,aud
(5)  the  mode  :rf  winning  the  rooms. For  the  doors

(1.)  The  floor  (sobn)  of  a  room  wa*  seldom
boarded,  though  this  appean  to  have  been  some-
done  (ilnila  tola  laMala,  SUX.  Si^.  L  5.  57).
I  general!/  covered  with  atone  or  marble,  or
mMak*. The  somnHHi  flvot*  wen  farad  with


DOHUS.
prwt*  dF  hri^  tilo,  iUhih,  fte^  forming  *  kind
of  cDmjnilMi  ailed  ndentio.  (Vitniv.  liL  1.)
AdoIIih  kind  of  paTunent  wu  that  called  17)111
'iijiriini,  which  wu  a  kind  of  platter  made  of
tiln  brmXBi  to  powder  and  tempend  willi  mnrtar.
It  derired  ita  name  frgm  Signii,  a  (own  •>(  Italy,
ceLcbrated  for  it>  tilea. (Plir.  H.  N.  hit.  46.;

smpgotko  gnond,  whkh  appear  to  have  formed
the  Soon  called  iij  P[mj  iaiiarica  or  laittgulama,
Bod  wbieh  imbabl;  gaie  th«  Hem  of  moiaki.  Aa
tht*c  flocn  wen  buttn  down  (jneifa)  with  lam-
i^n  (Jutaeai),  the  word  parimailam  became  the
goMial  Dame  for  ■  floor.  The  kind  of  paTCDient
imtled  m^tmntum  wai  fint  introduced  in  the
toapleof  JapiteiCajfltoliniu  after  the  heginning  of
the  third  Piinic  war,  bnt  became  i^aile  eumtuon  in
B^aa  bdbn  the  btginniiig  of  the  Cinibric  war.
<Id.  zmcri  61.)  Hoaaiei,  called  bj  Pliny  Uiio-
rtii<i  (AiMrrpn-a),  tboogb  thii  woid  hai  a  men


me  in  Sullal
made  vne  in  the  temple  of  Fortnne
(Id.  iixvi.  64.) Monic  work  1


■flirwardi  called  Afui'run  qpw,  (Spurtian.  Poem.
Nh-  8  :  TrebelL  PoUio,  T^n.  Tjriant.  24  ;
Angnwio.  Di  OrilaU  Dei,  iri.  8.)  Tlie  floon  of
the  hoiue*  U  Pumpeii  are  frequently  compoMd  of
Duaaiei,  which  are  Dmallj  formed  of  black  &et(
a  white  gnnnd,  or  white  onei  dd  a  block  ground,
tboogh  nne  of  them  are  in  coloured  ma ' '
The  materiali  of  which  they  are  generally  Ibnned
an  BBta  piccta  of  red  and  whita  marUe  and  red
tik,  »et  in  a  *err  fine  cement  and  laid  upon  r
deep  bed  of  mortar,  which  lerred  ai  a  baie.  Thi
three  eiamplet  here  giTen,  which  are  taken  fron
Imb*c*  at  Pompeii,  will  conTCy  a  general  idea  of
tkeir  lonn  aad  aFpeuaoe&


Mo«ic  pATemeati,  howerer,  baie  been  dii-
coTered  at  Pompeii,  which  repreient  (ignrea  and
ecena  of  actual  life,  and  an  in  ttality  pictnret  in
moaaic  One  of  the  mott  beautlAU  of  theie  ii
given  in  iu  original  colouit  in  Oell'i  Pompauma,
2Dd  eenea,  plate  iIt.  It  ii  campewd  of  Tcry  fina
piecea  of  elan,  and  lepiaenta  the  choiagia,  or
maiter  of  the  chorus  initncting  tbeacttn  in  their
parta.  A  ttill  mors  eztiBordinarr  moaaic  painting
wai  diaeoTered  in  Pompeii  in  1831  ;  H  ia  nippoied
to  repnaent  the  battle  U  Iwni.  (JVawo  Borimito,
Tiii.  L  36—45.)

(3.)  The  inner  walli  (porii^u)  of  prliate  rooma
were  frequently  lined  with  tlabt  of  marble  (Plin.
H.  N.  iini.  7),  but  were  more  n»nally  covered  by
painting),  which  in  the  time  of  Auguilui  were
made  upon  the  walli  Ihemiehca.  The  pretalenco
of  Ihii  practice  ii  ilteiled  not  only  by  Pliny
(W.Ar.iiiT.3r),butalMbylhe('  ' '


The  geiKial  appBiraoee  of  the  walb  may  be
aeen  from  the  woodcnli  given  aboTe.  Snbjecti  of
all  kinda  were  choaen  for  painting  «i  the  walli,  oi
may  be  aeen  bja reference  lathe  UuKoBorbonico,
Qell,  Maioia,  fa.  (Compnn  Vitnv.  vii.  S.)  The
colonra  leem  uinally  to  have  been  laid  upon  a  dry
ground,  but  were  lometiiDea  placed  upon  it  wet,  aa
in  the  modem  fmco  painting  (on/oru  mdn  Uxlorio
induam,  Vitniv.  vii.  3).  The  wulli  alto  appear
to  have  been  aanielime*  omamenled  with  miied
fifturei,  or  a  ipeciei  of  baa  relief  (Ijipoi  in  tecta-io
airioli  mdudm^  Cic.  ad  Atf.  i.  10),  and  Bome*
tirnci  wilh  mould. (Plin. //.  JV.  xxivi.  64.)


433  DOMU&

(3.)  The  ceilingi  leeni  originally  to  hnve  been
left  unooTcied,  the  beams  which  inpportcd  the
trtot  or  the  appcr  itoiy  bein?  Tisible,  A^rwHjda
planki  ven  placed  acroRa  these  beama  al  ccrtaio
mtervali,  leaving  hollow  i]Hcea,  called  laeipuiria
or  laquaina,  which  wcnj  (requenllj  covered  wilh
gold  and  ivory,  and  lometlmo  with  painting*.
(Hor.  Carm.  ii  18  i  Plin.  //.  N.  iiiiiL  IB  j  Sen.
Ep.  90  ;  Suet.  JVer.  31.)  There  waa  an  anhed
ceiling  in  common  use,  called  CiMiRi,  which  ii
described  in  a  Beporate  article,

(4.)  The  Roman  hooja  had  few  windowi
(fiaairaa).  The  principal  apottments,  the  atrium,
perialjle,  &c,  were  lighted,  ai  we  have  aeen,
from  aboie,  and  the  cabtcula  and  other  amall
rooma  generally  derived  their  light  from  them,  and
not  fimn  windowi  looking  into  the  itreet.  The
loomt  only  on  the  upper  itocy  aeem  to  have  been
uaiiaUy  iighled  by  windowi.  (Jut.  iii.  270.)
Very  few  houHs  in  Pompeii  h>Te  windowa  on  the
^und-fiooi  opening  into  the  itnet,  though  then
u  an  exception  to  tab  in  the  honae  of  the  tragic
poet,  which  bai  lii  windowi  on  the  gnmnd-flaor.

near  the  gnrand  aa  in  a  modem  hoaae,  but  are  iix
feet  III  incbei  above  the  foot-pavement,  which  ia
niied  one  foot  leven  inchea  above  the  centre  of  the
ttreet  The  windowiara  imall,beinghaTdl;  three
fiset  by  two  ;  and  at  the  aide  there  ia  *  wooden
frame,  in  which  the  window  or  ahutter  might  be
moved  hnckwardl  or  fbrwarda.  The  lower  part  of
the  wall  it  occupied  by  a  row  of  red  panela  four
feet  and  a  half  high.  The  following  woodcut  re-
preaenti  part  of  the  wall,  with  aperturea  for  win-
dowB  above  it,  aa  it  appean  from  the  atieeL  The
tiling  upon  the  wall  ia  modem,  and  ia  only  placed
there  to  preaerra  it  Eram  the  weather.


The  windowa  appear  originally  l»  ha»a  been
merely  openiuga  in  the  wall,  closed  by  meani  of
ahutten,  which  freqaently  had  two  leavea  {Ufint
finelnu,  Ovid,  i'oHt.  m.  8.  i),  whence  Ovid
(Amor.  I  b.  3)  aay^
"  Pan  adqierta  fiiic,  para  altera  claaia  feneitraa."

They  are  fbr  thia  nnaon  aaid  to  be  joined,  when
they  are  >huL  (Hor.  Carm.  ii  S5.)  Windowa
wen  also  aometimci  covered  by  a  kind  of  lattice
n  trellia  work  (tJalirJ),  and  aomelimei  by  net-
work, to  prevent  aerpcnu  and  other  noiioiu  rep-
tilea  from  getting  in.  (PlauL  MiiL  ii  1.  25  ;
VaiTo,  Jti  Out.  iii.  7.)

Afterward!,  however,  windowi  were  made  of  a
tnnaparent  Mono,  call«l  iapit  ipecJaru  (mica),
which  waa  iint  (bund  in  Hiipania  Citerior,  and
sfterwarda  in  Cyprut,  Cappadocin,  Sicily,  and
Africa  ;  bnt  the  beat  came  from  Spain  and  Cap-
padocia. It  waa  eoaily  aplit  into  the  ttunneat


DONARIA.

lamime,  but  no  piecea  had  been  diacovered,  aaji
Pliny,  above  five  feet  long.  (Piin.  H.  N.  xuvi
45.)  Windowi  made  of  thii  atone  were  called
ipftiiiaria.  (Sen.  Ep.  SO  ;  Plin.  Ep.  ii  17 ;
Mart.  viiL  14.)  Windcwi  made  of  glaii  (rifnui)
aie  firit  mentioned  by  Lactantiiia  (De  Opif.  Da^  H),
but  the  diacoveriea  at  Pompeii  pnjvo  that  glaii
waa  uaod  for  windows  under  the  early  emperan,  ni
ftamei  ofglaaa  and  ghiu  windowi  have  been  found
in  aeveral  of  the  hoiuei.

(S.)  The  roomi  were  heated  in  winter  in  dif-
fei«nl  waji ;  but  the  Romani  had  no  itovei  like
onn.  The  cnbicula,  triclinia,  and  other  roonia,
which  were  intended  for  winter  uae,  were  built  in
that  part  of  the  house  upon  which  the  aun  ihono
mott ;  and  in  the  mild  climate  of  Italy  thia  fre-
quently enabled  them  to  diipeuae  irith  any  arti-
Rcial  mode  of  warming  the  roonu.  Rooma  eiposed
to  the  tun  in  thia  way  were  (ometimea  called  ia/io-
nmiat  (Plin.  £p.  ii  17  j  Dig.  8.  tit  3.  i.  17.)
Theroomi  were  lometimea  healed  by  hot  air,  which
waa  introduced  by  meana  of  pipes  from  a  famaco
below  (Plin.  Ep.  ii  17  ;  Sen.  £^  90),  bnt  more
frequently  by  portable  tiimacea  or  biaiiera  (Jactt/i),
in  which  coal  or  chanoal  waa  burnt.  (See  wood-
cut, p.  ISO.)  The  oBRinmi  waa  alao  a  kind  of
itove,  in  which  wood  appears  to  have  been  uaually
burnt,  and  probably  only  differed  from  the/oca/ai
in  being  larger  and  £ied  to  one  place.  (SueU
VOelL  B  ;  Hot.  Sal.  I  S.  SI.)  It  bai  been  a  tub-
ject  of  much  dispute  among  modem  writers,
whether  the  Romani  had  chimneyi  fbr  carrying
off  the  smoke.  From  many  paisagei  in  ancient
wrilert,  it  certainly  appeara  that  rooms  usually  had
no  chimneyi,  but  that  the  imoke  eicaped  through
the  windowi,  doon,  and  openkigi  in  the  roof
(Vitrav.  vii.  3  ;  Hor.  (.  ft  i  Voaa,  ad  I^.  Gtorp.
it  242)  ;  bnt  chimneys  do  not  appear  to  bine  be«i
entirely  imknswa  to  the  ancienti,  ai  aome  are  mid
to  bavo  been  found  in  the  ruins  of  ancient  build-
ings. (Becker,GtiZfiH,  vo).i.p.  102.)

(WinkeImann,&iirVlMi  iber  die  HirJcaiaiiKim
Enldedemigai :  Hirt,  Q—dtiMe  dtr  Bmkaiut;
Moioia,  La  Ruaui  d»  PompU,  part  ii.,  Lt  Paioit
de  Stauna ;  Gell,  Fiympnana ;  Pompni,  Lond.
l2nio. 1B33  ; Becker, Galiuij Schneider, ad

DONA'RIA  (ini»4/wrB  or  iKicti^ra),  are
names  by  which  the  aucienta  dea^pated  preeenti
made  to  tho  goda,  either  by  individuals  or  cdo-
munities.  Sometimes  they  are  alio  called  doma  or
Iwn.  The  belief  that  the  godi  were  pleased  with
(oitly  prcsenls  waa  ai  natural  to  the  ancienta  aa
the  belief  that  they  could  be  influenced  in  (beii
conduct  lowiudi  men  by  the  offering  of  lacrificea  ;
and,  utdoed,  both  aprang  Enmi  the  same  feeling.
Presenli  ware  mostly  given  aa  tokena  of  gratitude
for  some  lavour  which  a  god  had  bestowed  ta
man  ;  bnt  in  many  cases  they  were  intended  to
induce  the  deity  to  grant  some  special  bvoor.
At  Athens,  every  one  of  the  lii  theunothetae,  or.
according  to  Plato  (Phatdr.  p.  235,  d),  all  the  nine
anhont,  on  entering  upon  their  office,  had  to  Cake
an  oath,  that  if  they  violated  any  of  the  laws,  they
would  dedicate  in  the  temple  of  Delphi  a  gilt
itatue  of  the  liie  of  the  man  who  dedicated  it
{i»Spiiij-ro  xf'Woii'  liroiiiTinrrar,  see  Pint  SoL
35  :  PoUui  viii  65  ;  Suidaa,  >.  e.  XfaaH  Ek^r  ;
Heraclid.  Pont  e.  1.)  In  this  last  am  the  ana.
tbema  wai  a  kind  of  ponishment,  in  which  the
statue  was  regarded  at  a  lubstitule  fiir  tbe  persoa


farlriled


DOKARIA.
1  the  gaim. Alm«t  ill  pmsita  or  th'ii


;!■■■  ta  Mpcckl  boilding  mi  added,  in  which
Ibog  litMUiLi  wen  pwerred.  Such  buildingt
wa«  altci  i^mufol  (tnaunriea)  ;  and  in  the  mott
fraqatDted  tonplc*  of  Ofhcs  many  itntn  hud  ihetr
■epuBte  toanriea.  (B<id[h,  Pui.  Eton.  ofAth.
p.  441,  ftc  2d  cdh.) Ths  act  of  dedicatian  wai


Tbe  aBtom  nf  nuking  danatioiu  to  the  goit  i)
faukd  amoog  ths  tndenta  from  t^  oirliut  tinm
tt  wbich  wt  h«Te  iny  rewnd,  down  to  tba  intro-
doctian  of  Chiiniuul;  ;  and  iTen  aflci  lliBt  period
it  wai,  with  lanw  modificstioni,  abKTTcd  by  tha
ChriitBiB  dnrinr  the  middle  iget.  In  the  heroic
Mff  of  Onciui  biilixy  the  MMtheinatit  were  of  ■
MiHila  deaoiptioD,  aad  eontitted  of  chapleU  and
gtibait  of  flowen. A  raj  eonunon  donation  to


id  to  aonie  deity.  (Hi
l4l  :  Aeachyl.  Ckani.  6  i  Euiip.  Otai.  96  and
1497,  BaeA  493,  Htbu.  1093 ;  PluL  Tin.  B  i
ha*.  L  57.  9  2.)  Thia  coatom  in  amne  flactt
katcd  till  a  rof  late  period :  ite  maidoni  of  Deloi
dedicsted  their  hair  berore  their  wedding  to
Heivc^  (Pana.  L  43.  g  4}.  and  ihoae  of  Megan
b  Iphtiue.  Pauaniaa  (iL  11.  g  6)  otv  the  itnliie
sf  HffinB  at  Titane,  corend  ali  dtot  with
locka  of  hair  which  had  been  dedicated  by  women.
Coitlj  gannenU  (w^Aai)  are  likawiao  mentioned
aiaimg  the  cailieat  preaenla  made  to  the  godt,
eapeolly  to  AtlieUB  and  Hen.  (Horn.  IL  tI.
•293,  M3L)  At  Atfaona  the  aacied  *twX<,i  of
Atheoa,  m  which  the  great  adientiirea  of  ancieal
bfTBca  we»  w<rfced,  waa  woTen  by  mudeni  eyeiy
fifth  year,  at  the  featiTal  of  the  gnat  Panalhenaas.
[AkasrHOU^]  (Compaie  Ariatoph.  Av.  792  ;
Polhz.  TiL  50  ;  WiMding,  ad  Dial.  Se.  ii.  p.
440.)  A  limilar  pc|Jni  waa  woTen  every  fire
jrmt  at  Oljmpia,  by  ajitecn  women,  and  dedi-
cated t>  Bert,  tPana.  t.  16.  g2.)

At  tfae  time  when  the  fine  aitt  flonriihed  in
Gneea  the  anathemala  were  genoally  worki  of
art  af  exqnint*  wnriaoanahip,  inch  a*  high  tiipoda
bearing  naea,  oaten,  cnpa,  rsndelabna,  pictnrea,
tfAtdea,  and  miona  other  things  The  materiali
of  vhidi  they  wen  made  diflcred  accoiding  to  cic-

gold  (AtlKn.Ti.p.231,  &c),  and  their  number  ii
ID  BB  alnsat  incineeiiahle.  (Dcmoath.  Ofyili.  iiL
fi.  HB.)  Tbe  treamrea  of  the  templei  of  Delphi
and  Olyaipia,  in  paniciilar,  torpaia  all  conception.
ETen  PsnauoM,  at  a  period  when  niunberleai
witf^  af  art  pinat  bavo  periibed  in  the  Tariona
iBTi^va  and  plnndera  to  which  Gneco  had  been
eipiMed,  aaw  and  deacribed  an  aatoniahiDg  nnnibei
gf  aiialhiraala  Uanf  woAi  of  art  are  atill  «-
iBBt,  IwariDg  eridcoee  by  tbeir  inacripliona  that
Iber  wefo  dedicated  to  tbe  ndaaa  tokeoa  of  grati-
tude. ETeiyoBeknawaof  Uemagnificent  pnaenta
wb^Ciaeanmadeto  the  god  of  Delphi.  (Herod.
L  50,  lie.)  It  waa  an  almoat  iniariable  euatnn,
aA^  tbe  Ivniy  iwne  of  a  war,  to  dedicate  the
tenth  part  of  the  apnl  (iaptiinor,  lapdAtuw,  or
aiarrr*'"— J  to  the  nda,  gentnlly  in  the  Innn  of
.^ntkefatt  (HtnlTJil  82,  131;  Thueyd.
L  133  :  PaBa.iiL  ]&  SA  ;  Athen.n.p.331,dLe.)
la  of  aiiDonr,  inch


no  lew
goda  by  anathemata


DONARIA,  433

ai  minthomata  for  the  gods.  (Ariitoph.  SguU,
792,  uid  SchoL)  Tha  Atheniana  idwaya  dedi-
isted  to  Athena  the  tenth  pact  of  the  ipoil  and
of  confiacsted  gooda  ;  and  to  all  ths  other  goda  eol-
lectiTely,  the  fiftieth  part  (Demoath.  c.  TVnioo-.
p.  73a,  &c}  After  a  aeafi^ht,  a  ahip,  placed  upon
Borne  eminence,  waa  aoraelimea  dedicated  to  Nep-
ttine.  (ThuC7d.ii.  S4  ;  Hend-TiiL  121.)  It  i*
Dot  im^niljable  that  Iniphiea  which  were  alwayi
erected  on  the  field  of  battle,  aa  well  aa  the  ilatuea
of  tbe  victora  in  Olympia  and  other  placei,  were
originally  inloidcd  sa  lokena  of  gratitude  to  the
god  who  waa  mppoaed  to  be  the  csnae  of  the  anc-
ceu  which  the  victorioua  party  bad  gained.  We
alao  find  that  on  aome  occaaioni  the  tenth  part  of
tbe  profit  of  aonie  commercial  imdertaking  waa
dedicated  to  a  god  in  the  ahape  of  a  work  of  nrt.
Reapectlng  the  large  and  beautiful  crater  dedicated
by  tlie  Sainioiia  lo  Hera,  *»e  the  article  Cji.iTKit.
id  earaped  from  aama  danger


ir  gialitn
ll  frequently,  a


Thei


I  illnei


ighta  in  A  temple
of  JVaclepiOB  (mcaiatio).  The  moat  celebrated
templc9  of  thia  divinity  were  thoae  of  Epidanrua,
Coi,  Tricca,  and  at  a  later  period,  that  of  Rome.
<Plin,  a.  N.  nil.  i  i  compare  F.  A.  Wolf;  Yer-
miKAlaSckrifieaiBidAt/iSlie,f.  4ll,&c)  Cnrea
were  alao  effected  in  tbe  grotto  of  Pluto  and
Proaerpina,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Niaa,  (Strah.
is.  p.  437,  liT.  p.  649.)  In  all  caaea  in  wbich  a
cure  waa  effected  preaenla  were  made  lo  tha
temple,  and  little  tableta  (iaiuliu  mftoaa)  wen
anapended  on  ila  walla,  containing  an  aecoimt  of
the  danger  front  which  the  policut  had  eacaped,
and  of  tne  manner  in  which  he  had  been  reatored
to  healtL  Some  lableta  of  thia  kind,  with  their
inacriptioni,  are  atill  extant. (Wolf;  i.  c  p.  424,

infer,  that  in  aome  eoaea,  when  a  particnlar  part  of
the  body  waa  attacked  by  diaeaae,  Che  peraon,  aflfr
hia  recovery,  dedicated  on  imitadon  of  that  part
in  gold  or  ailver  to  the  gT>d  to  whom  be  owed  hia
recovery.  Peraong  who  had  eacaped  from  ahip-
wreck  uanolly  dedicated  to  Neptune  ihs  dreaa
which  they  wore  at  the  time  of  their  danger  (Hor.
Cana.  L  fi.  13  ;  Viig.  An.  lii.  768)  j  but  if  they
bad  escaped  naked,  they  dedicated  aome  lodta  of
their  hair.  (Lucian,  deMerc  Caul,  c  ).  ToLL  p.
6S3,  ed.  Reii^)  Shipwrsckod  persona  alao  ma-
pended  TOtire  tableta  in  the  lempie  of  Neptune,  op
which  their  accident  waa  deacribed  or  painted.
Individuola  who  gave  up  the  profeaaion  or  occupa-
tion by  wbich  they  had  gained  their  livelihood,
&niuenlly  dedicated  in  a  temple  the  inatnunenta
which  they  had  uaed,  aa  a  gral«ful  ackaowledgmeot
of  tbe  hvonr  of  the  goda.  The  aoldier  thua  dedi-
cated hia  arma,  the  fiaberman  hia  net,  the  ahepherd
hia  Ante,  the  poet  hia  lyre,  dtbaja,  or  harp,  dte.

It  would  be  impoaaible  to  attempt  to  enumerala
all  the  Dccaaiona  on  which  individuola,  aa  well  aa
commnnitiea,  ahowed  their  gralefulneaa  towurda
the  goda  by  anathemata.  DeacTiptiona  of  the  moat
remaikahlo  prea«]ta  in  the  vorioua  templea  of
Greece  may  be  read  m  the  worka  of  Herodotua,
Strabo,  Panaaiuaa,  Athenaeoa,  and  othera.

The  cnatom  of  making  preaenta  to  the  goda  waa
common  to  Greeka  and  Romana,  bat  among  the
1 .v_ 1 :. neither  aa  imnMNiac  mc


■■w  w  ■


'  O"


*3*  DONATia

•I  magmfiicnt  u  in  Onece  ;  and  it  w&i  more  fre-
quent unong  the  HomuiB  to  >hoir  iheir  gntitude
towudi  ■  god,  by  building  him  a  tsmple,  bj  publii
pr&yen  and  thankigivingt  {uj^iliiiaiio),  or  b;
G^biatLiig  fistiTB  gamn  in  honour  of  him,  than  to
adom  hii  nncttiaiy  with  bauitiful  and  ccatlf  vorki
of  art.  Hence  the  wocd  donatia  waa  oied  by  the
Romau  to  deaignate  a  temple  or  an  allar,  aa  well
M  atatnea  and  other  thingt  dedicated
(Virg.  Gtorg.  iiL  i3S  i  Orid,  Fad.  iiL  336.>  The
occaaioni  on  which  the  Romana  made  donaiia  to
their  gods,  ate.  on  the  whole,  the  aune  ai  thote  w<
have  described  among  the  Oreeka,  a*  will  be  aeen
Irom  a  coDipaiinn  of  the  (ollowing  pauagea :  —
Liv.  X.  36,  uix.  36,  ndL  30,  iL  40,  37  ;
Ptin  H.  N.  Tii.  4B  ;  Suet  Ctasd.  25  ;  Tacit.  Am.
iiL  71  i  Pkut.  Amplalr.  iiL  2.  SS,  OmmL  i.  1.  61,
ii.  2.  10  ;  AnreL  Vict  Catt.  35  ;  Oelliiu,  ii.  10  ;
Lucas,  iz.  eiS  ;  Cic  Da  !faL  Dior.  iii.  37  ;
Tibull.  iL  6. 29  ;  HocaL  EpiiL  i.  1.  4  ;  Sut  Sih,
IT.  92.  [L.  S.1

DONA'TIO. Dooalio  or  gift  ii  an  sgreemenl
betweoi  two  penona  b;  which  not  givei  williool
nrnuneration  and without  any  lofpil obligation
(nollo  ion  cogente),  and  the  other  ucspta  aome-
thing  that  haa  a  pecuniary  Tuine. (Dig.  24.  tit  '
a.  6.  §  8,  16  ;  S9.  tit.  S.  >.  19.  g  2,  29.) It
properly  called  an  agreement,  becauie  it  iinotaul
cient  that  there  be  a  penon  to  give :  then  nii
n  wbo  conaenta


who  hai  a


of  hU

entlyincaf


erery  pei

capable  of  ncclTii^  a  gift  The  exceptions  to
theas  Tul»  occomd  in  the  caae  of  peraonB  who
were  in  certain  lelationa  to  oae  another,  aa  pater
and  tiliui&niiliu ;  yet  thia  exception  ilielf  is
aubject  to  cicepCiona  in  the  matter  of  pecalium.
It  ia  eaaenlinl  to  the  notion  of  gift  that  the  girer
givea  in  order  that  the  property  of  the  reeeiTer
may  be  incnaaed  by  the  gin :  there  must  be  the
animua  donandL  The  object  of  gift  may  be  any
thing  which  accomplishes  thia  end  ;  for  inaonce,
the  iclnue  of  a  debt.  A  gift  of  the  whole  of  a
fenoa'i  property  camprisci  no  mon  than  the  pro-
perty after  the  donor's  debtj  an  deducted.  Such
■  gift  ia  not  a  caae  of  nniTeraal  succeasion,  and
conaequently  the  donee  ia  not  immediately  liable
for  the  debts  of  the  donor.  By  the  old  Roman  law
a  men  agreement  (pactum)  to  give  did  not  confer
a  right  of  action  on  the  intended  donee.  In  order
that  a  gift  should  be  falid,  it  waa  re<{uind  to  be
either  in  the  lonn  of  a  itipulatio,  or  to  be  made
complete  at  once  by  the  delivery  of  the  thing.
Oifta  also  were  limited  in  amount  bj  the  leiCuicia.
The  t^^islBliim  of  Jnatinian  allowed  a  penonal
action  in  cosea  of  a  men  pactum  donationis,  where
then  had  been  neither  delivery  of  the  thing  which
wai  made  a  ^t,  nor  slipulntio.  (Cod.  8.  tit  £4.
a  25,  29  ;  35.  g  6  ;  Inst  2.  tit  7.  S  2.)  Thus,
the  premise  to  give  was  put  on  the  tuotuig  of  a
eonsoniual  contract,  when  the  promiae  related  to  a
gift  of  leu  than  500  aolidi :  when  the  gift  wai
■bove  fiOO  aolidi,  a  certain  fcrm  waa  required,  at
will  pnaently  be  explained,  and  the  form  waa  re-
quired whethH*  the  gift  whs  perfected  at  once  by
Iiadilio,  or  was  only  a  promiae  to  give.

If  a  nun  gave  tomething  to  another  foe  'the
benefit  of  a  third  person,  the  third  penon  could  tne
bim  to  whom  the  thing  wm  given.  (Cod.  8.  tit
55.  1.3.)


DONATIO  MORTIS  CAUSA,

It  was  required  by  the  legi^tion  of  JnttinioD,
that  a  gift  which  was  in  value  mon  than  SDO  so-
lidi,  moil,  with  the  exception  of  some  few  caaei,
hare  the  evidence  of  certom  aolemnitiea  before
official  panona  (insinuatio).  If  theae  fiitmalitiet
were  not  observed,  the  gift  waa  invalid  aa  to  ^1
the  amount  which  exceeded  the  5UD  snlidL  Soma
few  kmda  of  gifta,  which  exceeded  500  aolidi,  wm
excepted  from  the  aolemnitiea  of  indnoatio.

If  then  a  gift  waa  not  perfected  at  once  by  de-
livery, or  what  was  eqaiialent  to  deliven-,  the
donee  might  ane  ex  itipolatu,  if  there  had  bccD  a
atipulatia  ;  and  if  there  had  not,  he  might  sue  by
virtue  of  the  aimple  agreement  (Cod.  S.  tit  54,
De  Donationibos,  a.  35.  9  5.)  The  right  of  actim
which  anses  from  the  promiae  to  give  is,  aonrding
to  the  Roman  lyitem,  the  real  gift  (Dig.  50.  tit-
le, a.  49)  :  the  actual  giving  waa  the  psynienl  of
a  debt  Accordingly,  if  there  waa  a  promiae  of  a
gift  between  a  man  and  a  woman  beibn  Iheir
mamage,  the  payment  during  the  marriage  was  a
valid  act,  because  the  pnmiie  was  the  gift,  and
the  payment  wai  not  the  gift  (Sanguy,  Slitlf,
&C  iv.  118.)  The  heiedea  of  a  man  nughl  im-
pugn the  validity  of  a  donatio  inofEcioaa  by  a
querehi  iuofficioiae  donationia ;  and  the  donor  could
revoke  hit  gift  if  the  donee  was  guilty  of  gicaa
ingratitude  towoidi  him,  aa  for  instance,  of  ol^riDg
violence  to  his  penon.  (Cod.  B.  tit  56.  t.  10.)
But  the  donor^  claim  was  only  in  peraonam,  and
he  could  not  recover  the  fruita  which  the  donee
had  enjoyed.  (Inst  2.  tit.  7,  S  3  1  Savigny,  Sp-
tew,  &c  vol  iv.  f  142,&c.,  SAaiamg;  Mackel-
dey,  Leirbach,  Slc,  %  421,  &c,  12th  ed. ;  Ortolan,
ErpHratiiM  Hutortaae  da  Imlitiitt,  vol  i.  p.  472,
6lh  ed.)  [G.  L.]

DONA'TIO  MORTIS  CAUSA.  There  were,
according  to  Julianua  (Dig.  39.  tit  G,  a.  2),  three
kinds  of  donatio  m«lia  canaa  :  —- 1.  When  a  man
under  no  apprehension  of  present  danger,  but  moved
aolely  by  a  considention  of  mortality,  makea  a  gift

another.  8.  When  a  man,  being  in  immediate
dajiger,  makes  a  gift  to  another  in  tuch  manoK
that  the  thing  immediately  bacoma  the  pnpert^nl
the  donee.  3.  When  a  man,  mored  by  tha  ooif
aideration  of  danger,  gives  a  thing  in  inch  manoer
that  it  shall  become  the  property  of  the  ^oaee
only  in  cnie  the  giver  dies.  Every  penon  could
receive  inch  a  gift  who  waa  capable  of  recdving  a
legacy.

It  appear*,  then,  that  there  were  seveml  forma
of  gift  called  donatia  moitia  ania  ;  hut  the  third
is  Uie  only  proper  one  ;  fiir  it  was  a  rale  of  law
that  a  donation  of  this  kind  wai  not  perfected  un-
le«a  death  fidlowed,  and  it  wai  nvoobla  by  the
donor.  A  thing  given  absolutely  could  hardly  bu
a  donatio  mortia  canaa,  for  tbii  donatio  bad  a  con-
dition attached  to  it,  namely,  the  death  of  the
donor  and  the  snrvivorthip  of  the  donee.  (Corn-
pan  Dig.  39.  tit  6.  a.  1  and  35.)  Accordioftly,  a
donatio  mortis  cauaa  haa  been  defined  to  be  "  n
gift  which  a  man  makei  with  rdcci-nee  to  the
event  of  hia  deaUi,  and  lo  makei  that  the  right  of
the  donee  either  commence*  with  the  death  of  the
donor  or  ia  in  nupenae  imtil  the  death."  It  n>
■emblei  in  aome  reapecti  a  pnpar  donatu  or  gift :
in  othera,  it  naonblei  a  legacr.  It  wai  Decenary
that  the  d<matio  ahould  be  accepted  by  the  dwiee,
and  conaequently  there  most  betiaditioerddi*ny,
or  a  proffer  or  ofier,  which  ia  aiaentsd  la.  Yet
the  donatio  might  be  maintained  ai  a


No
pOMO  coold  maks  >  dmatio  mortii  cxiM,  who
EDold  not  mako  m  tKUmeut.  Tha  deatli  at  the
donee  befgn  the  deuh  of  the  dnuB'  wu  ipM  jun
a  rammtioo  of  the  donatio.  It  veuld  qipeu  u  if
tbe  1b«  about  mcli  donUioo*  wu  not  Sne  from
diSoolnr.  Tbn  vera  final)  J  oniinilaled  to  legBcid
bf  JaMaim,  uongh  thU  had  been  done  in  nioe
putienlan  Ixlbni  hu  tune.  Still  thej  differed  in
una  rtaptiti  fixiro  legwHa ;  tar  iniUDca,  lach  a
't-ratifiti  (Sold  ttkt  effect  tlunigh  there  waa  no
pmsa  to  take  the  hereditaa.  A  CUiu  {uniliu
la^fct  wHfa  hia  &thet^  omaEOt  make  a  donatio
urtia  cans  of  hia  PeeoliBm  PioleMiliiim.

The  Engliah  ii«  of  donatioaea  mortii  caiua  i>
&nl  alated  by  Biacleo  (il  c  36)  in  the  very  wordi
gf  the  D^cM  (39.  tit  6.  a.  2,  ftc)  ;  and  the  pre-
•nt  law  ii  eipoanded  bf  Lad  Hardwicke  (Ward
r.  Tvraa,  3  Vca.  431)  ;  bat  what  he  there  ilatu

..  .  .  The  rulea  of  donatiimca
■Mrtii  mam  in  EngUifa  law  an  now  prttty  well
fiifd  bj  nrioni  recent  deciiioaa.  Tradition  or
ddiretj  ia  cDnaideRd  one  Macaliai  of  luch  a  gift,
aad  the  death  of  the  doott  in  the  life  of  the  danee
i>  aiMiha  eaaential.  The  gift  ia  not  an  abuluta
fifl,  bat  a  gift  made  in  amlem^tiim  of  death,
and  it  ■  rencahle.  (Dig.  3S.  tit.  6  ;  Cod.  B.  tit.
^7  ;  Inat.  2.  tit  7  ;  Sarign;.  ^iUk,  &c  ir.  276  ;
raVaJiirt/iiriiail  RtcUtunaaudu^iil p. iOO,
{'i£fr  £.  SMa,  42.  pr.  1  Da  mor.  ca.  dco.  j  Tbibaat,
Smttm,  Ac  |  495,  ftc  »tb  ed.)  [Q.  L.]
DONATIO  PROPTER  NU'PTIAa  The
explained  in  the  Irutitn-
t.  7.  3  3).  It  WBi  originallf  nltcd
*  take

e  the  donatio  aAcr  marriage,  ood
(0  ccmtitiite  it  altogetha  after  marriage,  the
BHrc  tsminhauiTe  term  donatio  propter  nuptial
waa  oaed.  If  a  dot  had  beea  siTen  by  the  wife,
■r  OB  the  part  of  the  wife,  and  the  bubaod  by
the  tsmi  of  the  contnct  wat  entitled  to  it,  or  to
a  pan  of  ii  in  caie  of  the  viie'i  death,  it  wai  neca-
laiy  that  tbe  bsiband,  or  tome  perun  on  the  pari
of  the  hualjand,  ihould  give  or  lecure  umething  to
ihe  wi&  vhkh  ibe  ihoold  haie  in  the  ennt  of
the  hnaband'i  death :  tbii  wai  a  donatio  propter
nnptiai.  Jutiniao*i  legiilstion  required  that  the
diMAUo  moM  be  eqnal  to  what  wai  lecuied  to  the
hiiah«nd  in  om  of  the  wife*!  death,  and  that  it
■mat  he  inmaaed  if  the  dot  wai  inct«aied  during
the  naaniage.  The  hoiband  had  the  nuaagement
■r  tbe  pnpeity  ginn  ai  donatio. Such  pan  nf  it


■111 nalr  or  pltdge  eren  with  the  couent  of  hii
wife,  aaleaa  ihe  ratified  her  conaoit  af^  two  jean.
If  the  hoihaBd  became  impoTeiiahed  duiiog  the
if  the  wife  wai  entitled  to  the  pnnta  of
ID  far  her  lupport  ;  and  it


thiid  poum,  who  bad  made  the  donatiD,  wai  en
titled  le  ban  it  bjr  the  tetmi  of  the  agreement
If  the  baibaad  died,  tbe  erent  had  happened  with
rhich  tbe  donatio  waa  made  ;  the  wife


uia,and  tbe  pro
m  c^  the  mamagt


peft  J  of  it  bdongeil  ta  the  ehildnn  of  the  marriage
if  tliMB  were  any :  if  there  were  no  ehildnn,  the
■ifc  ebtaiDad  bj  tbe  death  of  Um  huiband  fiiU


DONATITUM.  435

power  of  diipoution  orei  the  pn^erty  included  in

The  opinioni  of  modem  juiiiti  are  tnuchdiTided
ai  to  the  notiona,  pnrpoie,  and  law  of  the  donatio
propter  nuptiaa  The  term  donatio  propter  nuptial
11  UKd  by  BnctoD  (il  c.  39)  ;  and  the  lav,  ai
there  itated,  ii  appanntly  formed  upon  a  Roman
originaL

(Cod.i.  tits  ;  Not.  22.0.20  i  97.0.1,2;  98.
c  1,2;  Mackeldey,  Leiriiui,  ftc.  15211,  12th
ed. ;  Thibaut,  .^niw,  &c  g  743,  9th  ed. ;  Orto-
lan, Etplicatiim  HaUriqm  da  Injtitutt,  dtc,  vol  i
p  479.)  [G.  L.]

DONATIO'NES  INTER  VIRUM  ET
UXO'REM.  During  maiiiage  neither  hnaband
nor  wife  could,  ai  a  general  rule,  make  a  lift  of
anything  to  one  anDther.  The  reaaou  for  thii  rule
'ai  laid  to  be  the  pmerration  of  tht  matriaga
elation  in  iti  purity,  *■  an  agreeroant  nihaiitiiig  by
affection,  and  not  maintained  by  pnrcbaae  or  by
gift  from  one  party  to  the  other.  Donationea  M
thii  kind  were,  howarer,  lalid  when  there  wen
certain  coniiderationi,  ai  mortii  canaa,  dirnrtii
laoaa,  lerri  manumttteudi  gratia.  By  certain  im-
perial conitituciona,  a  woman  could  make  gifti  to
her  hoiband  in  order  to  qualify  him  lor  certun
hoDOoia.  Thii  wai  a  gift  "  ad  proccBui  viii "
(Dig.  24.  tit.  1.  a.  41  :  Jut.  5al.  L  39  ;  and  the
note  of  Heinrich). The  wife  had  the  meani  of

in  manum  (Oaiui,  iL  98),  a  wii^  retained  all  ber
rigbti  of  property  which  >he  did  not  >|irrender  on
her  marriage  [Dot],  tad  ihc  might  during  the
marriage  hold  property  qoite  diitiact  from  her
hniband.  It  ¥iai  a  coniequence  of  tbii  rule  ai  to
giftt  between  huiband  and  wife,  that  etei;  legal
Cbcmbywhich  the  gift  wai  affected  to  be  tranilerred,
aa  mandpatin,  ceuio,  and  traditio,  conveyed  no
ownenhip  ;  itipulationei  wen  not  binding,  and
aceeptiiationea  wen  no  reteaie.  A  difficulty  might
remain  ai  to  unioqiiDn  ;  but  the  law  proiided  for
thii  alio.  If  a  woman  reeeired  team  a  third  per-
•on  the  property  of  her  hniband,  and  neither  iho
third  pcnon  nor  ihe  nor  her  huiband  knew  that
it  waa  the  botband'i  property,  ihe  m^ht  acquire
the  ownenhip  by  utncapion.  If  both  the  gixer
and  Ihe  buiband  knew  at  ^e  time  of  the  gift
that  it  wai  the  hniband'*  property,  and  Ihe  wife
did  not  know,  it  might  alio  become  her  pnpuly
by  uiucapion  ;  bnt  not  it  ihe  knew,  for  in  that  caie
the  bona  fidei  which  wai  eaiential  to  the  commence-
ment of  pouoiion  wsg  wanting.  If,  before  the
ownenhip  wai  acquired  by  mnoipion,  the  huiband
and  wife  diieoiend  that  it  wai  the  htubond'a,
thongh  the  hniband  did  not  chooia  to  claim  i^
then  waa  no  aamapioa  ;  for  thii  woold  bare  been
a  men  OTaiion  of  the  law.  1^  befora  the  owner-
■hip  wBi  acquired  by  uivcapion,  the  wife  alone
diicoTered  that  it  wii  the  hujtwid''t  property,  thia
would  not  destroy  her  right  to  acquire  tbe  pro-
perty by  uiucapion.  Thli,  at  leait,  ii  Savigny*)
tageniom  explanation  of  the  paaiaga  in  Uigeat
24.  lit.  1.  t.44.  The  Itrictneai  of  the  law  aa  to
tbeae  donatioiu  wai  relaxed  in  the  lime  of  Septimiui
Severui,  and  they  wen  made  valid  if  iha  donor
died  fint,  and  did  not  nroke  hti  gift  before  death.
There  wen  alio  nme  eiceptioni  ai  to  the  genial
rule.  (Dig.  24.  tiL  1  ;  Cod.  G.  tit  16  ;  Saiigny,
ZeOiain/l,  &c.  L  p  270  ;  Haekeldey,  Letritei,
&cS531,  12thcd.)  [O.L.]

DONATI'VUM. [CoNauRtui|.S


*36  DOS.

DORMITORIA. [DoMu«.J
DORODO'KIAS ORAPHE (J<^>oS(«lu

DOnON (Mfw), ■  rmtm  or  hond-brcadth.
rPM.1
DORON GRAPHE  {S<ifmr  yfnpii). [Db-

DOROXEfNIAS ORAPHE (S«p«{'»«

TfC^)- [XSNUSOllikPHB.]

DO'RPIA  {tipna). [APATuau.J
DORPON  (W(nro.). [Co«N*,p.303,b.]
DORU  (tifm). [HiSTA.]
DOEtV'PHORI  (tapi^ipai). [MxaciNABJi.]

DOS  (ll)»l{.  f»p>-4),  doHTJ.  1.  Oreik.  Eu~
ripidei  (Mtd.  23li)  mtkei  Medeis  compUin  that,
independeDt  cpf  other  misfortiuia  to  which  women
vetc  (Ubjcct,  ikej  were  obliged  to  buy  their  hui-
buidi  b;  (treat  aumi  of  money  (jcyiifidrmr  iwip-
tiKp).  On  thii  the  SchDiiut  nnurki,  that  the
poet  vTote  u  if  Medeia  had  b«en  hja  contem-
poraij,  and  not  a  chancier  oF  the  heroic  ago,  in
vhicD  it  wai  dutomary  for  the  hufbaod  to  pur-
chaBQ  Lib  irife  from  her  relationi,  by  giAe  c^led
(Ih  a  ffSnt  The  nme  practice  prevailed  in
the  £a4t  during  the  patiiarcha]  agei  (freqei.  xixiT,
2|,  and  Tacitiu  (OsTTa.  c  18)  aaye  of  the  ancient
Qermani,  "  Dotem  nan  mor  maiilo,  ted  uiori
maiitiu  oSerL"  The  cuitam  of  the  heroic  limca
il  iliiuUaled  by  manv  pauagea  in  Homer,  Thni,
we  read  sf  the  iifptlno,  and  iivpla  SSra,  or  many
)(iftj  hy  which  vim  were  purchased.  (IL  ivi,
178.  ISO.)  .  In  another  place  {H.  a.  Si3)  we  are
told  of  a  hundred  oxen,  and  a  thoound  iheep  and

Ell,  having  been  given  by  a  Thmcion  hero  to
maternal  grandfather,  whase  daughter  he  was
about  to  marry.  HoreoTer,  the  poetical  epithet,
AA^toiu  (Heyne,  ad  Jl.  iiiiL  593),  applied
to  femalei,  ii  nippoicd  to  hsTc  had  ita  origin  in
the  preaent*  of  thii  aort,  wXich  wore  made  to  a
wonian*a  celaliTet  on  her  raarriafie.  Theae  nuptial
^fta,  bovever,  or  eqiuTaieuta  &r  them  were  re-
lunied  to  the  hniband  m  the  event  of  the  conmiia-
■ion  of  adultery  by  the  wife,  and  peih^H  in  other
caaea. (Od.  viu.  318.)

We  mmt  not  infer  Eroni  the  above  beta  that  it


the  fubia  or  marriage  ^ti  which  men  gave  with
their  daughten  (MSuKor),  and  we  are  told  bp
Aetchinea  (ntfi  naptXpta.  33),  of  one  of  the  aoni
of  TbeKUi  having  received  a  territory  nou  Am-
phipotia  ag  a  ^e^  or  dower  with  hi>  wife.  Mort-
nver,  both  Andnnnache  and  Penelope  are  apoken
of  Bi  (UoxBi  wokitttpoi  (,11.  vi.  394,  Od.  uiv.
394),  or  wivn  who  brooght  to  their  huabanda
roanf  gifti,  which  probably  wonM  have  been  re-
turned to  their  relation!,  in  cate  of  a  caprieioua
diiioiual. {Od.ii.  132.)

The  Doric  term  far  a  portion  wai  twrlrri,  and
MUller  (Dor.  iii.  10)  Dbterre..  that  ve  know  for
certainty  that  daughten  m  Sparta  had  orimnslly
no  dower,  bnt  were  married  with  a  gift  of  clothei
only ;  aflerwarda  Ihey  wen  at  leaat  provided  with
money,  and  other  peraonal  property  (PbiL  Ia/u
30) :  bat  in  the  Urn*  of  Ariatotle  (PiM.  ii.  6.
S  )0)i  to  great  were  the  dowert  given  (3ii  fi
wptiiaa  ttilrai  iirjiXat),  and  ■>  luga  the  number
of  MuXiipoi,  or  female  repreientativM  of  famitit*
(etmi),  that  nearly  two  liftha  of  the  wh<^  teni-
totj  «f  ^ula  had


r.'malel.  The  regnlationi  of  Solon  were,  accrad-
ing  to  Plutarch,  umewhat  umilai  io  rapect  of
dower  Is  the  old  n^laliona  at  Sparta:  ibr  the
Athenian  legislator,  as  he  telli  ua,  did  not  allav  a
woman,  unleia  ihe  were  an  MicXnpoi,  to  have
any  ^firl\  or  dowec,  except  a  few  elothea  and
articles  of  bonaebold  furniture  It  ia  plain,  how-
ever, that  inch  an  interference  with  private  rigbts
could  not  he  permanent ;  and,  accotdmgly,  we  find
tbat  in  ataa  timea  the  dowen  of  women  formed,
according  to  the  account  in  Bbckh  (PiA.  Earn,  cf
A&eiu,  p.  314,  2nd  ed.),  a  eonuderable  put  n(
the  moveable  property  of  the  atale:  "even  with

Cr  people  they  varied  in  amount  from  ten  to  a
idred  and  twenty  mina^  The  daughter  of
Ilipponicns  received  ten  talents  at  ha  nurriage,
and  ten  othen  were  promised  ber."  Tbii,  bow-
ever,  was  a  very  latpi  portion,  for  Demoitbenei
(c.  JKpLp.  1112.  19,  and  p.  US4.  S)  informa  iis
that  even  five  talenta  waa  more  than  was  usually
given  ;  and  Lucian  (i>i'<ii.  MertL  7.  p.  298,  cd.
Reiii}  also  speaka  of  the  same  sum  u  ■  larf^
dowry.  The  daughten  of  Ariileidee  received  from
the  state,  as  a  portion,  only  thir^  minae  each.
(Plut  .drill.  27  ;  Aeich.  e.  Cta.  p.  SO.)  We  roar
observe  too,  tbat  one  of  the  chief  distinctiona  lie-
tween  a  wife  and  a  waAAoid),  coniisted  in  the
former  having  a  portion,  whereas  the  latt«r  had
not  i  heuce,  penona  who  married  wivea  wiihool
portion*  i^ipear  to  have  given  them  cr  their  guar-
dians an  ifto^JTfla  irpeatAs  (Jsaena,  D*  Pyr.
Hmd,  p,  41),  or  acknowledgment  in  writing  by
which  the  receipt  of  a  portion  wia  admitted.
[CoricOBiNA.]  Moreover,  poor  heuenei  (tut
iriKkiipuf  So-fu  ftTiriKiii  Ti^oiiirir)  were  dtber
married  cr  portioned  by  their  next  of  kin  [Ak-
CHQH],  according  to  a  law  which  fiied  the
amount  of  portion  to  be  given  at  five  minae  by  a
PentacaaiorDecliimiiu,  three  by  a  Honeman,  and
one  azid  a  half  by  a  Zeogites.  (Dem.  e.  Afacar.
p.  lOSa)  In  illuitntion  of  thia  law,  and  the
amount  of  portion,  tbe  reader  ia  rtrcned  to
Terence,  who  says  (Plana.  iL  I.  75),

**  Lei  est  nt  orboe,  qui  aint  genoe  poximi
lis  nubant : "
and  again  (iL  2.  63),

"  Itidem  ut  cognala  *i  sit,  id  qned  tei  jubel,
Dotem  dare,  abduce  hanc;  minai  quinque  accipe."
It  nmains  to  itate  tome  of  the  cuidition*  and
obligationi  attached  to  the  receipt  of  ■  portion,  or
TplI^,  in  the  time  of  the  Athenian  oratora.  The
matt  important  of  these  waa  the  obligation  noder
which  the  hnaband  lay  to  give  a  seenrilj  for  it,
either  by  way  of  settlement  on  tbe  wif^  or  ■«  a

ihould  arise  to  require  it.  With  regard  to  this,
we  an  told  that  whenever  relative!  or  gtiardiana
gave  a  woman  a  portion  on  her  marriage,  thej
took  fnm  the  husband,  by  way  of  aecurity,  HUne-
thing  equivalent  to  it,  us  a  house  or  piece  of  land.
The  person  who  gave  this  equivalent  (ri  &wa-
rlfiniia)  was  taid  dworifiiSF:  the  penon  who  re-
ived it  iroTi^uivftiL  (Harpooat,  s-  e^ ;  Dcaa.
OasL  p.  S66.)  The  word  inir^qw  ia  aba  mrd
generally  for  a  •ecurily.  [PoUui,  viill42.)  Tha
neeeaaity  for  thia  (ecarity  will  appear  bem  tba
lacl  that  the  portion  ne  not  conaideted  tlie  pro-
poly  of  tbe  hnaband  him>el(  bat  rather  of  hU
«ife  and  ohildna. Thna,  if  a  botband  died,  mx>i


tbc  wift  left  tlw  bmilj  {trikiti  Tir  olmr),  ilie
migbt  dum  ha  poituHi,  wdd  though  childivn  had
b«n  boni  (Dtm.  Owl.  da  Dol.  p.  1010);  and  ia
tht  trent  of  «  wife  djing  without  iuue,  her  fxn-
tioD  rtTsted  lo  ths  itUtiv«  who  had  giTen  her  m
muriage  («J  *^pvf)  uid  portioned  her-  (Ituui,
De  Orom.  Hmd.  p.  69,  Dt  Fy.  Hend.  p.  41.)
The  poTticu  ni  alio  ntonied,  if  a  hDibuid  piit
mj  hia  wife,  and  in  Hms  eatea,  probabl;  i«tucd
hj  law,  when  a  wooiaii  left  ha  hiuband.  {D»
Pyr.  Hni.  p.  45.)  That  after  the  death  of
toe  witfe^  her  partion  belonged  to  her  children,
if  ihe  had  left  any,  maj  be  inferred  from  De-
DWihenei  (c.  Botct.  dt  DoL  pp.  ID23,  10S6)  ;
if  ihrf  was  mioon,  the  intemt  wu  let  ^rt
for  ibtir  tdncalinii  and  maintenance.  When  the
fautmod  died  beibra  the  wife,  and  >he  remijned
ia  the  funDy  (jMn^tntt  ir  rf  o^v\  the  law  ap-
jrai*  to  haie  IiTen  bci  portion  to  her  loni,  if  of
^e,  nbjcfX,  hnwcrer,  to  an  allowimce  fur  her
■nhncnanee.  (Id.  c  Piaen.  p.  1047.)  IF  the
repraentatiTM  of  the  deceaied  biuband  (al  t^
Mfitifa^  Ix'"")  wrongiullj  withheld  her  portion
frm  hia  widow,  her  guaidiana  could  bring  an  ac-
tko  againat  them  for  it,  aa  well  ai  for  alimonj
(Km  wfmuAs  jnl  ffirw).  (Ineiu,  De  Fyr.  Iltrtd.
p.  45  i  Hudtwalcker,  Diart.  note  Bj.)  More-
oveT,  if  a  hoabond  ailer  diimiaaing  hia  wife  re-
baed  to  retom  her  portion,  he  might  be  aued  for
intstat  upon  it  aa  well  at  the  priodpal:  the
fijTmer  w«dd,  of  eonrv,  ba  reckoned  fit>m  the
daj  o^  diamiiaal,  and  the  rate  waa  fixed  bj  law  at
nine  oboli  for  craj  mina,  or  about  ]  8  per  ceaL
lbs  fuardiani  wsie  fiitthet  aulhoriied  by  the
■me  law  to  toing  an  action  for  alimony  in  the
aSUt.  (Dem.  e.  Neaer.  p.  1362.)  We  may
add  that  a  ting  wjiourti,  waa  one  of  the  f/i/innii
>Uw  or  aniu  that  might  be  tried  enrr  monlL
(PiQni,  TiiL  (j3,  101.)  [R.W.]

2.  Roman. D»  (m  laoria)  i>  every  thing


by hci, or  by  another  petion,
to  the huaband'a  fiilher  (if

hia  Cathet"!  power),  fnr  the

pDipeae  af  enablii^ the  hoaband  to  luttain  the
charjie*  of  the  marriage  ttata  {oMra  nuMsumt)-
All  the  pn^erty  of  the  wife  which  waa  not  made
do^  or  waa  nol  a  donatio  propter  nnptiaa,  con-
snatd  to  be  her  own,  and  waa  coiaptued  nnder
the  naoie  al  Piaafiatia. The  doa  upon  iU  delivery
hecnne  the  hoaband^a  property,  and  continuec'
he  ha  BB  long  aa  the  marriage  nJailon  eiii
AQ  thing*  that  could  be  objeda  of  property,
ta  ^x  apything  by  which  the  aubatance  of  the
haalBDd  eoiild  be  incmaed,  might  be  the  objecti
*f  doa. AQ  a  woman'a  property  m^ht  b«  m  '
dca  ;  bat  the  whole  propertj  waa  only  whi
vaioed  af^  dedocting  the  debta. There  w

the  hnaband  waa  not  perwnally  anawerable  for  the
wife'a  debta. Any  perami  who  bad  a  legal  power
to  diaprwr  of  hta  pnperty  could  give  the  doa  ;  X"'
the  doa  waa  dirided  into  two  kinda,  doa  profecti
and  dna  adventi^  a  diviaiOD  which  had  refurer
la  the  demand  of  the  doa  after  the  puipoaea  wi

tttilia  which  waa  given  by  the  bJiia  or  fatherV
Guba-  of  the  bride ;  and  it  ia  profectitia,  eren  if
tha  danghlif  waa  emancipated,  Rxirided  the  father
pit  it  aa  aocli  (at  partrnt).  XH  other  doa  ia  ad-
Tcmitib Tba  doi  tecq>titta  waa  a  apecin  of  doa


'a  the  kuaband,  o


DOS.  4S7

idvenlilia,  and  waa  that  whicb  waa  given  by  aome
ither  penon  than  the  hther  or  bthH*!  &Iher,  on
he  omaideration  of  marriage,  but  on  the  condition
hat  it  ahould  be  lealored  on  the  death  of  the  irife.
The  giving  of  the  doa  depended  on  the  will  of  the
giver  ;  bat  certain  peruni,  anch  aa  a  &tbec  and
bther'a  father,  were  bound  to  give  a  doa  with  a
ahfl  married,  and  in  proportion  Xa
The  doa  might  be  eitW  given  at
the  time  of  tha  marriage,  or  them  might  be  an
'  to  give.  The  technical  worda  ^ipli-
the  doa  were  dare,  diart,  jmrnottert.
Any  peraon,  who  waa  competent  to  ditpoae  of  hia
property,  waa  competent  dan,  ptvmittera. The

"l  , .

3t  binding  nnleaa  cc

legal  forma  were  obaerred  (noi

ftfofli  mtiio  aitetore  diai '  "'

cCHnpare  Pro  Ptaeea,  c

20). An  example  of  a  Komiaaio  dotia  ocean  in

Pkutiia(7VniiM.T.  2).  The  hnaband  had  a  right
a  the  aola  management  of  tha  doa,  and  to  the
niita  of  it  (  in  fiict,  he  eiendaed  over  it  all  the
igbla  of  ownerahip,  with  the  exeeptioa  hereafter
nentioned.  He  could  diapsaa  of  nich  parte  of  the
loa  aa  conaiatcd  of  thinga  movable  i  but  the  Julia

lex  {di  adullenuy  prevented  him  from  alienating

aucb  part  of  the  doa  aa  waa  land  (Jieidmi  dolalitf

dolalia  pratdia, Cic oil Ait. XT. 30 ', delaU*
■  "jr.  Ep.  L  I.  21)  wilhoDt  hia  wife-a  coo-
pledging  it  with  her  conaant. (Gaina,  ii,

63  1  Jnat  ti.  6.)  The  Illation  of  Juatinian  pre-
'ented  him  bsm  aelling  it  alao  even  with  the  wife^
iinaent,and  it  extended  tbaUwtopnvincia]  land*.

Still  lher«  were  aoma  catei  in  whicn  the  land  givea

aa  doa  could  be  alienated.

The  huaband'a  right  to  the  doa  ceaaed  with  the

maniage.  If  the  marriage  waa  diaaolved  by  ths
death  of  Ihe  wife,  her  fiither  or  fiither'a  fiither  (aa
the  <aae  might  be)  waa  inticled  to  recover  the  doa
profectitia,  unleaa  it  had  been  agreed  that  in  anch
oue  the  dot  ihonld  belong  to  the  huaband.  The
doa  adventitta  became  the  property  of  the  wife'a
hein  (Cod.  £.  tit  13.  S  S)>  unleaa  the  penon  who
gave  it  had  atipulaled  that  it  tbonld  be  relnmed
to  him  {dot  Tte^iHtia) :  aa  to  the  older  law,  are
Ulpian,  Frag,  vi,  5.

In  the  caac  of  divorce,  ths  woman,  if  aha  waa
aui  jurii,  could  bring  an  action  for  the  reatitution  of
the  doa  ;  if  ihe  waa  in  the  power  of  her  father,  he
brought  tha  action  jointly  with  hia  daughter.
The  doa  could  be  claimed  immediately  upon  the
diwolution  of  the  marriago,  except  it  cntiatcd  of
thinga  quae  numrro,  &c.,  for  which  time  waa
allowed.  (I5\f.  Frag.  tL  S:  but  compare  Cod.
7,  til.  13.  g  7.) [DrvonriUM.]

Tho  doa  could  not  be  rcatored  during  the  mar-
riage, but  iiT  '^*  — — ^  '^"  ^ — * — ■**-  — "1—


V.  p.  311,  eaaay  by  Haiat)
What  ahould  be  returned


doa,  depended  on
Ihe  fact  of  what  waa  given  aa  doa.  If  tha  thing!
given  were  ready  money  (dot  tauatrata,  Cie.  Pn
CWcmo,  c  4),  or  thinga  ettimnted  by  qoanti^,  &^


138  DRACHMA.

the  bnaliuid  mnit  rMnm  the  like  mm  or  the  like
qusntity.  If  Ihe  thin^  whether  movable  or  im-
momhlf,  were  TaJued  when  they  were  giTBTi  to  the
huibuid  {dos  a^iaaia),  thii  whib  ipeciei  af  lale,
and  At  the  end  of  the  murisge  the  nuiband  mmt
ratore  the  thing*  or  their  tidue.  If  the  thingi
were  nol  Tolaed,  he  miut  realon  the  ipecific  thingi,
And  he  miut  make  gooA  &11  l^ai  or  deterioration
which  had  happened  to  them  eicept  by  iceidenL
"■■■■'  intilled  to  be  reimborted  for


«llnec, . ,

fur  initnnce,  neceuary  itpain  of  hi

hj  him  in  respect  of  hi)  wife"!  pnipen;,  and

for  all  oullajt  by  which  he  had  imprDied  the

pertj  {impnttat  utUst).

The  hiuhnnd"!  hoin,  if  he  were  dead,  were
bonnd  to  reiton  the  doi.  The  wife'i  Cuher,  or  the
vurriring  wife,  might  demand  il  by  an  actio  ei
■tipulatu  dc  dote  reddenda,  which  wu  an  actio
•tricti  juria,  if  there  wai  any  agreement  on  the

which  wu  an  actio  bonae  fidei,  when  then  waa
ea  aereemenL  A  third  perwin  who  hiid  given  the
doa  muBt  alwaji  demand  it  ez  Btipulatu,  when  he
had  bargained  for  ita  reiteration.  Jujtiniaji
enacted,  that  the  action  ahoiild  alwnyi  he  ex
aLlpuJatu,  even  when  there  wu  no  conlnct,  and
ahould  be  an  actio  bonaa  HdeL

The  wife  hod  no  tecniity  fiir  her  dot,  except
in  the  case  of  the  fitndni  dotalig,  nnleaa  >he  had
by  contract  a  special  Kcuritr ;  but  the  had  lome
prifilegea  ai  compared  with  the  huiband'a  cre-
dilon.  Juitinian  enacted  that  on  the  diwelu-
tion  oF  the  marriafle,  the  wife*!  ownenhip  ihould
teriTe,  with  all  ttie  legal  reraediea  fiir  recorer-
ing  luch  parti  of  the  doa  aa  itill  eiiited  ;  that
all  the  huiband'a  property  ihould  be  considered
legally  pledged  (lacila  ijpottem)  u  a  aecnrity
for  the  dot  1  and  that  the  wife,  hut  ihe  alone,
ahould  have  a  piority  of  claim  on  ineh  property
orer  all  other  creditort  to  whom  the  »me  might
be  pledged.

The  doa  waa  a  piatter  of  great  importance  in
Roman  law,  both  becanie  it  wu  an  inffredient  In
atmoit  erery  maniage,  and  wu  aomelimea  of  a
huge  amount.  The  frequency  of  diToree*  olio
gare  riie  to  many  le^l  queitiona  aa  to  d«.  A
woman  whole  do*  wu  large  {dolala  uior)  had
aome  influence  orer  her  hiuband,  inumach  a>  the
had  the  power  of  diioicing  herael!^  and  thui  of
depriting  him  of  the  enjoyment  of  her  pTDpcrij.
The  aliiuiona  to  the  dna  and  it>  reititution  are  ,

liT. 13.)

It  ii  a  dtiputed  point  whether  there  could  be
doi,  properly  to  called,  in  the  caae  of  a  marriage
with  convontio  in  manum.  IMatkiiionium.J
(Haxe,  Rhaa.  Wm.  il.  15.)

The  name  by  which  the  Greek  writen  designate
the  Roman  dot  i>  ^<prti  (Plutarch,  OuBr,  c.  1,
Marita,  c.  38,  Ciam,  c.  8).

(Ulp.  Prrig.  Ti.  ;  Dig.  23,  lit  3  ;  Cod.  6.  tit  12  ;
Thibaat,  Syttm,  At,  g  728  4c.,  9th  ed.,  g  747,
4c.  1  Maekeldey,  LtiHmck.  4c.,  g  617,  4c.,  12th
ed.)  [O.L.J

D0UL03  (SoBAoi). [Sirvub.]

DRACHMA  (apox*"^),  th»  principal  ul.er
coin  among  the  Greek*.  Like  all  other  denomi-
nationi  of  money,  the  word  IpaXf^  (lomettmei
written  Spayiiti)  no  doubt  lignified  originally  a
weight  i  and  it  continued  to  be  uacd  in  tlii*  aenie.


DRACHMA.
u  one  of  the  mbdiiiiioni  of  the  tahmt,  of  which
it  wu  the  SOOaih  part.  [TiLli«Tti><.]  The
original  meaning  of  Ihe  word  i*  a  hamdfkL  The
two  chief  (taadarda  in  the  cuinnciei  of  the  Oreck
atatet  were  the  Attic  and  Aeginetan.  W*  *hiill
therefor*  fint  ipoik  of  the  Attic  draduna,  and
afterwarda  of  the  Aeginetan.

The  aierage  weight  of  the  Attic  drachma  from
the  time  of  Solon  to  that  of  Alexander  wu  66-5
graina.  It  eontuncd  about  ^th  of  the  weight
alloy  ;  and  hence  there  remain  (ifi'4  grain*  to  be
rained.  Each  of  our  ahilliiigi  contMni  807  graina
""he  drachma  it  therefore  worth


?".,


■hilling,  or  9'T2  pence,  which  may  ba


called  Sid.  (Huuey.  Anmat  We^Ui  aid  Mimeg,
pp.  47,  46.)  After  Aleiander'i  time,  there  wu  a
■light  decrease  in  the  weight  of  the  drachma  ;  till
in  coune  of  time  it  only  weighed  63  grain*.  Tha
drachma  contained  six  obol*  (»oAoI)  ;  md  the
Athenian*  had  aepaiate  eilvcr  coin*,  from  fbnr
drachmae  to  a  quarter  of  an  oboL  Among  th»e
now  preaened,  the  telradrachm  i*  commonly
found  j  but  we  poiui*  no  ipecimcni  of  the  tri^
drachm,  and  only  a  few  of  the  didrachm.  Speci-
men* of  the  tetrobolus,  triobolu*,  diobolus,  thm>-
quarter-ohol,  hulf-obol,  and  qunrter-obol,  are  alill
found.  For  the  respecllTa  value*  of  theae  coiiii,
see  Ihe  Table*.

The  tetraJrachm  in  later  timeiwu  called  (later
(Phot.  1.  e.  ZtitHIp  ;  Hesych.  j.  n.  Tkaim  Anu.
piamioi :  Matih.  ixvii.  27) ;  but  it  hu  been
doubted  whether  it  bore  that  name  in  the  flourish-
ing times  of  the  republic.  (Huuey,  Ibid.  p.  49.)
We  know  that  ilalcr,  in  writers  of  that  age,
ntiuilly  aigniSca  a  gold  coin,  equal  iu  laluc  to
twenty  drachmae  [Statik]  ;  but  there  appenr
itnng  rtaaon*  for  belienng  that  the  telradrachm,
even  in  the  age  of  Thncydide*  and  Xenophon,  wu
■ometime*  called  by  thi*  name.  (Thncyd.  iii.  70.
with  Arnold-*  note  ;  Xen.  IlelL  v.  2.  g  '22.)  The
oboloB,  in  later  times,  was  of  bronie  (Lucian,
Conlmpl.  1 1.  Tol.  L  p.  504,  ed.  Rcii)  ;  but  in  the
beat  timea  of  Athens  we  only  read  of  tilrer  obol*.
The  x"^^'"'  *o*  *  copper  coin,  and  Ihe  eighth
piit  of  an  obid. [Chaicus.]


The  Aeginetan  atandnrd  appear*  to  have  been
n*ed  in  Greece  in  irry  early  timet. Aoeordint;  to

Aegint  by  order  of  Pheidon  of  Argo* ;  and  the
Aeginetan  standard  wa*  used  in  ahnoat  all  the
■tates  of  the  Peloponneanr.,  in  Boeotla  and  in  eorae
other  part*  of  northern  Oreece,  though  the  Attic


he  average  weight  of  the  Aeginelaii  luH^iiiam,
ilalcd  by  Mr.  Jlutsey  (pp.  i9,  60)  fnm  the
■  of  Aegina  and  Boeotin,  wa*  96  giaina. ■-


DVODECIH  TABULARUU  LEX.
f  tiim  iboM  JfiiA  put  of  the  weight  alloj.
HoK*  in  nlma  u  93  gniui  of  pun  uItu,  or,  m
hAn,— of  >  ^nUng;  that  ia,  U  id.  i-2

bcthiagi.  The  bigMt  coin  of  the  AMinetui  Man-
dnd  ippwi  lo  haie  baen  tlia  didTachma,  and  iha
nloH  of  the  dificRnl  coiiu  of  thia  ataudatd  will
ba  Immd  is  the  TaUei.

The  pnqioctiDD  of  tha  Aeginetan  dncbma  to  tlie
Atti^  accordii^  to  tba  Talne  giiea  abofe,  ia  aa  93
lo  SS-4,  or  aa  4'18  to  3  twarly.  Aworfing  to
PoDoi,  hovem,  ths  proportion  vaa  fi  to  3  )  for  he
mtaa  (ix.  76,  S6)  that  the  Aeginetan  diaehma
wia  a^ml  to  10  Attic  obeli,  and  that  the  Aegine-
laa  taknt  conlaioed  IO,IKN)  Attic  diachmae.  For
a  fnlt  dimuaion  of  thia  quntion,  vhich  ia  one  of
[he  Boat  inleieMing  ID  ancienL  nnmiamatict,  and
of  ite  Ripectire  talnea  of  the  other  atandarda
■hich  vere  tued  b;  the  Gnalu,  ■«  Nunuus
indTi


ECCLESIA.  «39

DUPLA'HII or  DUPLICA'RII,  were  aol-
dien who nceiTed  on umnnt  of their good
tdoct  double  aJlowance  (jitipUda  aiaria\  and
perh^H  in  tome  caae*  doable  pay  li]Eowii&  (Vairo,
A  £^.  LaL  Y.  90,  MUIlei ;  Lit.  IL  £9,  kiIt.  17  ;
Orelli,  Itucrip.  No.  3635.) They  an  frequeDtly
moDtioned in iDaeripUoD* (Onlli, Noa.  3539,
4S94},  but  mora  commonly  nnder  the  name  of
dnplariL (Orelli,  Koa.  SS31,  3BiS,  3476,  3481,
'  il) In  one  inacription  the  fbim  dupliOLriaa  oc-
n. (Orelli,  No.  3534.) Tegetiua  (ii.  7)  oUa
em  dwplana  miiilaM.
DUPLICA'TIO. fAcTio.]
DUPONDIUe). [Aa,p.Hl,a;  Pn.]
DUSSIS. [Aa.  p.  141,  a.]
DUU'MVIKI,  or  tha  two  men,  tha  name  of
Tioni  magiiCntei  and  functionanei  at  Rume,  and
the  coloniae  and  monicipia. Iii  inHcnptioiu  we
vt  meet  with  the  form  daomvina  (Orelli,  /Awrija,
No.  3808),  and  daonir  (Onlli,  No.  8886).

Dunuvoj  Juu  Die  UNDO,  the  higheit
magiatiatea  in  the  miinidpal  towna.  [Colonic,
p.  318.)

2.  DuDMVnil  NIVALIS,  eitraordiiiaiT  mgia-
Imea,  who  wen  enated,  wheneTet  ocaiion  n-
quind,  for  the  puipoaa  of  equipping  and  npairing
ihe  fleet  They  ^ipcM  to  have  baea  oc^nially
appointed  by  the  owHida  and  diclatora,  bnl  wen
fint  elected  l^  (he  peopla,  a.c  811.  (lir.  ix.  80,


Aa  ibe  RamsBi  reckoned  in  aeitercta,  ao  the
Oneka  generally  reckoned  by  drachmae  ;  and
wb<B  a  mn  ia  nentinDed  in  the  Attic  writen,
■ilhiHt  auj  ipecificatiDD  of  the  unit,  drachmaa  are
voatly  meant.  (Bfckh,  Pal.  Ecai.  i^AAeiu,  L
p.2i.)

DRACO. [SioNi  HiLiTiBU.]

DUCENAOtll,  the  lUiB  of  nrioiu  officen
and  magiatialea,  in  the  impetial  period,  of  whcoi
(he  pnncipl  wen  ai  follow :  —

1.  The  imperial  pncuialoea,  who  received  a
aakiy  ef  300  aeatertia.  Dion  Caaiina  (liiL  15)
my*  that  the  pneiratotea  fint  leceiied  ■  a^aiy
ia  the  dme  af  Anguatoa,  and  that  they  deiiTed
tbev  title  from  the  amoant  of  their  nlaiy.  We
tiwa  land  of  ctnlenarii,  Ac.,  aa  well  aa  of  dnce-
BviL  (See  O^tolin.  Fer&i,  2  ;  Oietli,  loKrip.
NcL  946.)  Clandiua  granted  to  the  pncuratorei
duoiaaiii  tlw  Mmlar  unamanta. (SoeL  ClaMd.

Z  A  data  or  decona  of  jndiaea,  fint  eatabliihed
hf  Aagnttoa.  Th^  wen  ao  called  becanaa  iheir
pwflj,  aa  tailed  in  the  ecnm*,  only  amounted
la  300  atatertin,  and  they  tried  canaei  of  imall
i^MaacA. (Soat.  .di9:  82.)

3.  Offieeia  who  cammanded  two  centnriea,  and
«W  held  the  >ame  rank  ai  the  primi  baatati  in
the  ancient  )>sion.  (Veget.  ii.  8 ;  Onlli,  /Hcrip.
No.  8444.)

4.  The  impeiial  honaehDld  troopa,  who  wen
■nd«r  the  antluHily  c€  the  nagitter  lyfiaiDnHB.
They  are  fniniently  mmtioned  among  the  agtnim
b  ntmM,  or  mhen. (Cod.  1.  tib  31  ;  12.  tit.  20.)

DUCESTE'SIMA. [Ckhtuiki.]
DUELLA. [Uhcu.]
DULCIA'RII. [Piaroa.]
DUODGCIM  SCRIPTA [LiTnnNCDLL]
DUOUECIU  TABL'LARUM  LBX.  .[Lii.]


o.]


[Pmd.


I.  DuuHTimi  QuiNduiNNALia,  the  cen»n
in  the  municipal  towna,  who  moit  not  be  con.
fonnded  with  the  duumriri  Juri  dicando.  [Co-
lo mi,  p.  318.]

S.  DuimviBi  Sicai,  extraordinaiY  magirtralee,
like  the  duumnri  NaTalea,  appointed  lor  the  pot-
if  building  or  dedicating  a  temple. (Lit.  tIL


28,=


L33,=


41.)


charge  of  the  Sibylline  hooka,
aflciwarda diacharged by the dtomBiri merit
/admdu, [DaciKVim,  No.  3.]

7.  Dddhviri  Viib  (XTBi  uaniH  fuboan-
Du,  were  offleen  under  the  aedilet,  who  had  the
charge  of  the  itreeta  of  the  auburba  of  Rome,  out-
aide  the  city  gatea.  (TahuL  HeracL  L  SO,  ed.
Ojjttling.)  Their  office  appeara  lo  hare  been
aboliihcd  by  Augoatna,  and  (heir  dntiet  dcTolied
npon  the  Qaattaomri.  (Comp.  Dion  Caaa.  lii.  26 ;
Pompon,  lit  Orig.  ^w.  |  30  ;  Becker,  JUbmoI,
Allenh.  Tol.  ii.  part  iL  p.  368.)

DUX. [Paovihcia.]


SCCLE'SIA  {iKuXmria),  tha  general  aMcmbiir
of  the  dtiieni  at  Athena,  in  wmch  ihey  met  to
diacoia  and  determine  upon  matten  of  public  in-
tereat.  Theae  auembliH  were  either  or^tinary^
and  h^  Am  timea  in  each  prytany,  or  aatfni-
or^imrjh  that  ia,  ipccially  convened,  upon  any  vid-
den  amergency,  uid  thenfon  called  aiyKX^rti.
On  octauona  of  extreme  importance,  wh«i  it  waa
desirable  for  aa  many  peraoni  ai  poaiible  to  be  pro-
aant  at  the  diaenaiion  of  any  quntinn,  the  peopla
were  (onunoned  by  erpreia  from  the  country  tp
the  city,  and  then  the  aasembiy  waa  called  a
KcrBN\i)ffla,  the  pn^ier  meaning  of  rcraiaAi^


being  to  call  troin  the  conntif  into  llie  dt; .  The
ordinATJ  Buembliefl  vere  called  yA/xifioi  or  xipiai,
according  lo  the  Scboliaet  on  ArutophanM  (Jbbir.
19),  who,  monoTer,  infomu  oi  that  thero  wrre
three  nch  in  ererj  monik.  But  according  ta  the
bett-infbrmed  gninmariiui*  who  followed  A  riototle,
the  name  mpta  vai  appropriated  to  the  fint  only
of  the  regular  auembliei  of  each  prjtanv.  Such,
at  leait,  1.  the  account  given  bj  Polloi  <^ii.  96)
and  HarpoCTation,  the  former  of  '  '  ' '

the  third  of  the  regnlar  OHcmbllei  in  each  prytony
wu  portly  decoled  to  the  reception  of  j '
from  foreign  ttalfi.

Ariilophane*,  howeTer,  ii "  "

repreaenti  ambsuodan  who  had  jiut  returned
trom  Penia  and  Thioce,  ai  giriDg  an  account  of
their  embaii;  in  a  Kuflta  'iuA,i)a'^  wh'  '
coidizig  to  Pollai,  would  be  not  the  tbiid
finl  of  the  rogidor  uiemblin.  With  a
reeoncilin;^  tbex  diKrepuicici,  Schdmonn  (£u
Cnmil.  t.  i.)  luppoKS,  that  Solon  origirudlj
painted  one  regidar  aiaemblj,  called  Kvpia,  u
held  on  a  oertiun  daj  of  erery  joytonj,  and  that
afterword)  additional  auembliei  were  inttituled,
apprawiated  icapectirelj  to  particular  purpotet,
though  the  term  Kvpia  wu  ttill  reoerred  for  the
(uicniblj  Ibrmerl;  oo  called.  If,  howerer,  the  re-
pnaentalion  of  Ariitophanea  ii  in  agreeioenl  with
the  praclicfl  of  hi<  age,  we  mmt  further  nipposc,
what  ii  very  probable,  thai  the  arinngcnienn  for
buftineoB,  aA  deimbed  by  Pollux,  were  not  alwayt
obaerred  even  in  the  time  of  tho  poet ;  and  aince  a
few  ycQn  oftor  Ariatolle^a  tiiQe  many  chang<efl  took
place  in  the  conttitudon  of  Athena,  it  may  hare
happened  that  the  name  of  mipia  waa  then  given
to  all  the  regular  auemblief,  in  which  tan  thu
Seholiait  probably  identified  the  nutonu  and
termt  of  a  late  age  with  those  of  an  earlier  period.
Moreover,  the  number  of  prytauica  in  each  year,
originally  ten,  one  for  each  tribe,  woi,  on  the  in-
cresH  in  the  number  of  the  tribei  M  Athena,
raiKd  lo  twelve  ;  u  that  tha  piytauiet  would
(hen  coincide  with  the  montha  of  the  year,  a  fact
which,  taken  in  conjunction  with  other  circiim-
sCances  (Schiknann,  iL  4t),  leema  lo  ahow,  that
the  autboritiea  who  apeak  of  thre«  regular  aa-
Kmbliei  in  each  month,  had  in  view  the  limea
when  a  prylsny  and  a  month  were  the  aame  thing.
Some  author!  have  endeavoured  to  determine  the
particular  dayi  on  which  Che  four  regular  suem-
bliee  of  each  prytaay  were  held,  but  Schomann  (iL
47)  haa  proved  alm«t  to  demonatntioUf  that  there
wen  no  ioiariably  fixed  dayi  of  osumbly ;  and
at  any  late,  even  if  there  were,  we  have  not  luffi-
cienl  data  to  determioe  them.  Ulpian  (ad  De-
aoM.  TimoB.  p.  706)  nya,  in  allution  to  the
timet  when  there  were  .three  aaiembliei  in  every
month,  that  one  waa  held  on  the  eleventh,  another
aboul  the  twentieth,  a  third  d&os(  the  thirtieth
of  each  month  j  and  it  is  of  coutm  Dot  impro-
bable that  they  were  alwayi  held  at  nearly  eqoal
intervali.

The  place  in  which  the  aaiemhliea  were  anciently
held  WW,  we  an  told  by  Uarpociation  {■.  v.
UiiiSiliai  'ApptllTTi),  the  iff^  Aflerwatdi  they
were  tnuifeired  to  tha  Pnyi,  and  at  la*t  to  the
neat  theatre  of  Dionyiot,  and  other  placei.  Thua
Thucydidea  (viiL  97)  apeaki  of  tha  peoi^o  being
punmoned  to  the  Pnyx,  the  uiual  place  of  aaaembly
in  hi<  timea ;  and  Anatophanei  (Eqail.  43),  in
dexiibing  "  DeDuu,"  Um  repreiaUBtiTa  of  the


ECCLE8IA.

Athenian  peo[dE,  juit  ai  "  John  Bull "  i>  of  tba
Englioh,  ealia  that  character  A^fuu  ni«r(vi)i,  at
Demua  of  the  (pariib  of)  Pnyx;  a  joke  by  which
that  place  ia  repreaented  a*  the  home  of  tha
Atheniana.  The  tituatum  of  it  w««  to  the  weft
of  the  AreiojHguo,  on  a  alope  connected  with
Mount  LycabetluB,  and  pertly  at  leaiE  within  tha
walla  of  the  city.  It  waa  Bemicirculor  in  form,
with  a  boundary  wall,  part  rock  and  part  maaoniy,
and  an  area  of  about  12,000  iquare  yardi.  On  the
north  the  ground  waa  filled  np  and  paved  irith
large  alonei,  ao  at  to  get  a  level  aurrace  on  tba
alope  j  Snm  which  fact  aome  grvnuuriana  derive
ita  name  {rofii  ij)r  tw  XiAor  wwifvir'a).  To-
warda  thli  aide,  and  doie  to  the  wall,  waa  the
isms  (pj\)ia),  a  itone  platEsnn  or  huitinga  ten  or
eleven  feet  high,  with  an  ateent  of  alepa  ;  it  waa
cnt  out  of  the  aolid  rock,  whence  it  i*  aoraetimea
called  i  AfSot,  ai  in  Ariatophanet  (/>u,  680)  we
read  loTu  Jtpnnt  rjf  Toi  XlBoir  toSf  t^  nHcrl.
The  poaition  of  the  inia  waa  anch  aa  to  command
a  view  of  the  aea  from  behind  (on  which  aceaant
the  thirty  tyrant!  are  nid  lo  bava  altered  it),
"id  of  tiie  Upawitjua  and  Parthenon  in  fcen^
lOugh  the  hill  of  tha  Aeiopagui  lay  partly  be-
I'een  it  and  the  Acnpdia.  Usue  DemoMhenei
(Ilf^XutTaf.  174),  when  reminding  the  Atbeniaoi
from  thia  veiy  beaa  of  the  otbor  aplendid  wotka
of  their  anceaton,  nyi  eDtphatically  tlpert^ttia
Toin-B :  and  we  may  be  inre  that  the  Athenian
oTslon  would  ofien  rouic  the  nstiMial  feelingi  of
their  heareia  by  pointing  to  the  aitcmblage  of
magnificent  edificca,  ^  monumenta  of  Athenian
Beatitude  and  gloiy,"  which  thoy  had  in  view
&om  the  Pnyx.  (Cramer,  Amdeiii  Gnue,  vaL  iL
335  ;  Wordaworth,  A&ea  imd  AUiea.  In  tha
;ter  of  then  work*  are  two  viewa  of  the  te-
lini  of  the  Pnyx.)  That  the  general  ■itnalion
the  place  was  elevated  ia  dear  6om  the  phiua
irataiiitiy  lU  lifr  iKKfuialaii,  and  the  worda  wit
i  iiiiioi  iim  naBiira,  applied  10  a  meeting  of  tho
people  in  the  Pnyx.  (Dem.  Dt  Cor.  p.  365.)
Afier  the  great  theatre  of  Dionyiui  wai  biult,  the
auembliea  were  Ircquentlj  held  in  it,  aa  it  aSvded
•)»ce  and  convenience  for  a  large  mnltitnde  j  and
in  aome  particular  caaei  it  waa  apeciaUj  deter-
mined by  law  that  the  people  shoald  aaaniililo
there.  (Dem.  a  Afoi^.  p.  £17.)  Auembliea  wera
alao  held  in  the  Peiroaeui,  and  in  the  theatre  at
Muuycbia.  ( Dem.  De  Fait.  Le^.  p.  359  ;  Lyaiat,
p.  Agar.  p.  1 33  ;  Thucyd.  viiL  BS,)

Toe  nght  of  convening  the  people  generallT
'«ted  in  the  pcytanea  ot  pnsidoita  of  the  council
if  Five  Hundred  [Bouli]  ;  bat  in  taiei  of  aud-
len  emenency,  and  eepedallj  during  wara,  tbe
itiat^  olio  had  the  powct  of  calling  eitraordi-
lary  meetingi,  for  which,  however,  if  we  may
judge  by  the  form  in  which  aeveral  decree*  am
drawn  up,  the  crauent  of  the  aenala  affieara  to
have  been  necesaaiy.  (Dem.  Dt  Cot.  p.  34S.)
The four udinaiy  meetingi of  every  pryiany

neverthelrai,  alwoja  oonvened  by  the  pvy.

who  not  only  gave  a  preriona  notice  (wpo-
Tpi^ai  T^f  JwXqffbi')  of  the  day  of  aasemUy,
and  publiahed  a  progiamm*  of  the  tufajeda  to  be
diacnaaed,  but  alao,  a*  it  appean,  aent  ■  oier  raand
collect  the  citiiena  (mnfTHr'  rhr  S^fwv,  PnU
t,  viiL  95  ;  Harpocnt  a.  e.  Kvfla  "iaiX^rla  ;
Dem.  e.  ArMig.  p.  773.) At  anj  rate,  whenerer


1  £jr tW  purpow {Srr


if  ths  light  which
ned  gf  conTsmng


(Me  of  Fctide*  (Thncrd.  ii.  22)  tiut  B  (tnte^
had  the  pow^  of  juBTOidiig  any  utnnbly  being
caUed. It  ii,  howeict,  impoiant  to  olaerTe,  that


Poieka;

■taajlateafict' the  timeaf  Solon,  the  aiKmUica
were  alwaji  colled  b;  the  jSTtsnei.  All  pemmi
wlw  did  DM  obnj  ths  call  wen  nibjeet  to  a  fine,
■■d  iii  nugiatnwi  called  leiiarclu  (^titiapx")
-  L,  whoae  dnt;  it  wu  (o  take  care
I  attended  the  meeting!,  and  to  lev;


thM  the  people  at
bea  iBitlHae  i^K


(OdOK. (Poltui,

IIH.)  With  anew  lo  thii,  whenerer  an  aiKmbly
•»  to  be  held,  eettun  pablic  tkni  <2w»ai  or
T*{^Tw)  wOB  lent  ronud  to  •weep  the  agon,  and
•thtr  (dacea  of  public  lewrt,  with  a  rope  eolMued
witk  ntnilioD.  The  diffamt  penona  whom  tbeie
lapewni  met,  wbb  diiTsn  by  them  towardi  the
ecdeaia,  and  thoae  vbo  iflfoied  to  go  were  maded
bj  tbe  npe  and  fined.  (SchoL  ad  Ariil.  Adiar,
•  ■ ' -t  (La.)  aUndea  lo  thii  nbjecl


M the  mecIiDg  wen blocked  o

(t^Vs),  which  wen  >1m  lued

plirn  *t  twambly  againet  the  intnuioD  of  penooa

■ha  had  DS  i^bt  to  be  pnaent ;  their  lemaTsl  in

.. • ._  1 Trredae  a  lignal  fn-


ra  who  might  w
ipla. ~(DeiiL  c.  Nratr.  p.  1375.)
1  JodncemeDt  to  attend,  with  the
fowa  I  la«  ri.  wu  ths  fuaSii  iiiitX.yitiairrui6i,
^n  wUch  Ibef  Teceiied  for  it The  originator
ths  pcactic*  Menu  to  baie  bean  a  peiaon  named
CaUMrBtna,  who  introduced  it  "  long  after  the
h<Haiiiiim of  the  influeiies of Feridet.'' *"'
[■jiaml  itieli^ otigimll;  an  obolni,  wai
waida  laiaed  to  three  by  a  popular  bvourite  called
AfjiMaa,  cf  CoUytu. The  increue  took  place
feat  >  abon  tbse  before  the  Eccleaiamaae  of  Arit-
taphnea  cune  oat,  or  about  &  a.  392. A  ticket
{tf^fcSoAflp)  appcan  to  bare  been  giTS]  to  tli
irbo  attended,  on  prodadng  which,  at  the  clo«
(be  jaTxeediiigi,  they  received  thft  money  fiom
■r  tbt  tkamathelae.  (Aciitoph.  Etdtt.  293,  Slia}
Thia  payBtst,  however,  wb«  not  made  lo  the
ticker  dawn,  wbo  attended  the  aoembliei  gratiB,
aid  an  tbenbn  called  siicifaiTDt  JuKXigstEmu
few  ibe  pact  Aatlpbanca  in  a  Aagment  pieeerved
}n AthaaacM  (vi.  p.247,  t). The  .me w< '
•■■dnrai  >■  mlisd  geuerally  to  a  ponon  who
oina  BB  t*T  i"  l>i*  aerricei.

Wkb  napect  ts  the  tight  of  attending,  we  jc
•batft*  tbtt  it  wu  enjoyed  by  all  legitimate  e
■cDa  wbo  were  of  the  {Hoper  aga  (genoally  v
peaed  to  be  twenty,  certainly  not  leai  than  t\^
tttm\  and  not  labooiing  nnder  any  atimia  ex  1
at  a*3  rigbta. All wtn  «an«idered dlue


BCCLESIA.  ti\

vboee  parente  were  both  inch,  or  who  bod  been
prnented  with  the  freedom  of  the  itale,  and  en-
rolled in  the  regiilet  of  HiDe  demni  or  pariah.
(Dem.  0.  iV«*r.  p.  1380.)  Adoptedcitiaeni,  how-
am  (wDitrrof),  were  not  qnalified  to  hold  the  offica
of  anhon  or  any  prieaChood.  (/rf.  p.  1376.)  De-
crepit old  men  (yiporttj  o2  ij^tfUvvt,  perhape
thoae  above  bIx^)  aeem  not  to  have  been  a^itted,
althoDgh  it  i*  not  eipreulj  ao  itatod,  (Aristot,
Palit,  iii.  1.)  Slave!  and  hrcignen  bI»  vmrc  eer-
tatnly  excluded  (Ariitoph.  Thtm.  S94) ;  tbongh
oceaiiooa  would  ii  eoursa  occur  when  it  would  be
neceuary  or  detirable  to  admit  them  ;  and  fivm
" !thenei  (a  A'sw.  p.  137S)we  may  infer  that


B  of  the


pmeeadhigi,  w
ihe  da;  hul  bet


itherwita  they  Hood  oalfide. (Aeecb.  e.  (Xu.

The  JoVTfXf (T,  or  foreiffnefa,  who  enjoyed  nearly
equal  privilegei  with  toe  citixeni.  are  by  aome
thought  lo  haiD  hod  the  lame  right!  aa  adopted
citiiena,  with  ropect  to  voting  in  the  lUaembly,
{V/o\i,adDem.UpLf.la.)  Thli,  however,  >«Dii
"'cry  doubttiil ;  at  any  rate  the  etymology  of  iha
rord  ta'oTcAi7i  doe*  not  jnitify  nich  an  opinion.

In  the  article  BofLi  it  ia  eijJained  who  the
piylanea  and  the  proedri  were  ;  and  we  may  here
nmark,  that  it  waa  the  duty  of  the  pcoedri  of  the
same  tribe,  under  the  preaidency  of  their  r>ia!i-iian
(6  tturriinii),  to  lay  before  (he  people  the  mijecta
to  be  di>cntaed  ;  to  read,  or  cauee  to  be  read,  the
prevjooa  bill  (vi  wpttaiKivita)  of  the  aenate  ;  and
to  give  penninion  {yv^tiot  'rfvrtiiytu)  to  the
ipeakeii  lo  addreia  the  people.  They  moat  pro-
hably  lat  on  the  itepa  near  the  beom,  to  which
they  were  on  aome  ocoaion!  called  by  the  people.
Ir  later  timea  they  were  auiited  in  keepiog  aider
((bdM-fifa)  by  the  member!  of  the  preaiding  tribe
{h  ttpotiftiotnra  ^ikI),  Acoch.  e.  Cttttph.  p.  £3,
and  Boui-e)  ',  and  the  ofiicera  who  acted  under
them,  tbe  "  aeijeantfrat-arma  "  were  the  crier  (A
icApuj),  and  the  Scythian  bowmen.  Thna,  in
Aiulophanca  {Adarn-U),  the  crier  >ayi  to  a
ipeaker,  who  waa  out  of  [oiler,  KdAgav  ciyn,  and
in  anotha  paaa^a  tbe  i^i^at  are  cepreeented  aa
dragging  a  drunken  man  out  of  the  a«aetnbl7.
{Eecla.  143.)  Whenthe  diicuuionaponany  lub-
jecl  had  terminated,  the  chairman  of  the  pmedri,  if
he  thought  proper,  put  tbe  qneation  to  the  vote :
we  reed  in  lome  in!tancea  of  hii  refining  to  do  k^
(Xen.  Mm.  L  I.  §  18  ;  Thuc.  vi.  14.)

Previoua,  however,  to  the  commencement  of
any  bnaineea,  ic  wae  luual  to  make  a  luttia-
tion  or  purification  of  the  place  where  the  aa-
aembiy  waa  held.  Tbia  waa  performed  by  an
officiating  prieat  called  the  Peritlardaa  (ripiinla^
X<")t  a  name  given  to  him  baeauso  be  went  before
the  lujtial  victim!  (Tit  rtplirria)  aa  they  were
carried  ronnd  the  boundary  of  tlie  place.  The
fcvourita  victim!  were  tucking  pigttxoipllia)  :  the
blood  of  which  waa  iprinkled  about  the  leata,  and
their  bodiee  afterwarda  thrown  into  the  aea.
(Schd.  ad  .druftipi.  La,  ad  And.  e.  Timar.  p.
46.)  Afker  the  periatiaich  the  crier  followed,
boming  incenae  in  a  ceuer.  When  tbeie  cere-
monie!  were  concluded,  the  crier  prochumed  silence.,
and  then  oGered  up  a  joayer,  m  which  the  goda
were  implored  to  bleaa  the  proceeding!  of  the  meet-
ing, and  bring  down  dealruction  on  all  thoae  who
weta  hottilelf  diapOMd  lowania  tbe  iMte,  ot  irbo


■*«  ECCLF-SIA.

tnutoroDilj-  plotted  its  oTnthnw,  or  received  bribci
ibr  miileadiog  and  docfliTing  the  people.  (Amtoph.
Ttsmi.  330.)  On  tbe  conclnaion  of  tbU  pr^er
biuineu  began,  and  the  firat  lubject  prapai«l  wu
said  to  be  brought  forward,  ir^vm  ^4Td  tA  ^«ptL
(Dem.  c  7!n»cr.  p.  706.)  We  maat,howflTer,im-
dflntiuid  that  it  waa  illegnl  to  propoie  to  tbe  ecdesin
an;  panicnlor  meBiuio  unleu  it  had  prerioiulj  te-
ceiTed  the  Hnction  of  the  Knute,  or  been  formall?
referred  bj'  that  body  to  the  people,  under  the  tills
of  a  nftXaiKtMjia.  The  auembly,  neiertbcleu,
had  the  power  of  altering  a  preTJon)  decree  of  the
lenata  a>  roigbt  Be«m  fit.  Further  informatim  on
this  point  will  be  found  under  Bo[>i.a,te  -which  we
maj  odd,  according  to  Sehifmann  (Da  Omntw,  c  9),
that  tbe  object  of  the  law,  mentioned  b;  the  giam-
inariani  ('ATpofaiUivroi'  nifAti  ifn^ir^  t^itm
it  rf  I4f<4>),  leenu  to  have  been,  Dot  to  provide
that  no  motion  ihould  be  propoaed  in  the  auembly
unleei  previooil}'  ^tprorad  of  by  tbe  lenale,  hut
lather  that  no  lubject  (hould  be  preiented  for  dii-
oLsaion  to  tbe  people,  about  which  a  bill  of  the
acnate  had  not  been  drawn  np  and  read  in  the  a«-
aamhly.

The  priTilega  of  addreeaing  the  auembly  wai
not  confined  to  any  daia  or  age  amoneit  theae  who
had  the  light  to  be  preseot :  all,  withont  any  dil-
tinctlon,  were  invited  to  do  ao  by  the  pnclamalion
(Tfi  \-fOfita  Sm/Arroi)  which  waa  made  by  the
crier  after  the  proedri  had  gone  through  the  necea-
aary  preluninariei,  and  laid  the  aubjecl  of  diicna-
aion  before  the  mee^ng  ;  for  though,  according  to
the  inititulioni  of  Solnn,  thoaa  penoDi  who  were
above  flfly  yeeia  of  age  ought  to  have  been  called
npon  to  ipeak  fiiat  (Aeieh.  a.  Cte^^  p.  64),  IhU
rvgula^on  had  in  the  daya  of  Ariitophanra  became
quite  obaolete.  (Dem.  D*  Cor.  p.  3US  ;  Ariatoph.
Adiam.  *3.)  The  apeakera  are  (ometimea  aimply
called  of  TB^forrd,  and  appear  to  have  worn  a  crown
of  myrtle  en  their  faeadi  while  addreating  the  a«-
aembly,  U  intinale,  perhapa,  that  they  were  then
repiesenlativca  of  the  people,  and  like  the  archona
when  crowned,  inviolable.  (Ariatoph.  Ecda.  130,
H7.)  They  were  by  on  old  law  required  to  con-
fine themBehea  to  tbe  lubjcct  before  the  meeting,
and  keep  themaelvea  to  the  diicuHioa  of  one  thing
at  a  tunc,  and  forbidden  to  indulge  in  acuniloni  or
abuaive  language :  the  law,  however,  had  in  the
time  of  Ariilopbanea  become  neglected  and  almoat
forgotten.  (Acach.  c  Timor,  p.  i  \  Ariitoph.
Eeda.  142.)  The  moat  influential  and  pcactiaed
apeakeia  of  the  asaembly  were  genemlly  diatin-
guiahed  by  the  name  of  ftrri>f*i.

After  die  ipcaken  bad  concluded,  any  one  wu
at  liberty  to  propoae  a  decree,  whether  drawn  ap
beforehiuid  ot  framed  in  the  meeting  ('Ev  t^  Stiiitf
tirfyfd^vBn,  Plat.  Gorg,  p.  45 1 ),  which,  how-
ever, it  waa  ncceaaary  to  pttient  to  the  proedri,
^t  they  might  tee,  in  conjunction  with  the  ro/io-
piKoKn,  whether  there  waa  contwned  in  it  any-
thing injurioua  to  the  atate,  or  contrary  to  the
eiiating  hiwa.  (PoUui,  viil  S4-)  If  not,  it  waa
read  by  the  crier ;  though,  even  aAer  the  reading,
the  chairman  could  prevent  it  being  put  to  the  vote,
unleu  hia  oppoaition  waa  overborne  by  threnta  and
damoura.  (Aeach.  De  Fall.  Leg.  p.  39.)  Private
individuala  alto  could  do  the  aame,  by  engaging
upon  oath  (Am/uffbi)  to  bring  agiunat  the  author

■ailed  a  •ffa^  n^w^/uv.  If,  however,  the  chair-
BBn  fsfuaad  to  anbmit  any  qontioa  (o  tbededaim


of  the  people,  he  might  be  proceeded  aganut  by
nufauu  (Plav  ApcL  p.  SS)  ;  and  if  he  allowed  tbe
people  to  vote  npon  a  propoaal  which  waa  contmy

liable  to  (Kiiiiia.  (Dem.  c  Tlinie.  p.  716.)  I^  oa
the  contrary,  no  oppoaition  of  thia  aort  wat  offered
to  a  propoaed  decne,  the  votea  of  the  people  w?re
taken,  by  the  permiaaian  of  the  chainnan  and  with
the  cooaent  of  the  rt*t  of  the  proedri :  whence  the
permiaaion  ia  aaid  to  have  been  givsi  aometimea

by  tbe  proedri  and  aometimea  "by  the  l

who  ia  alao  aimply  called  i  wpijt^t,  juit  ai
proedri  are  aomelunes  atylcd  prytanea.  (Acach.
e.  C!(ei^p.61;  Dera-c-JW-firf.  p.  517-)  Thede-
daion  of  the  peorde  waa  given  either  by  ahow  of
handa,  or  by  ballot,  t.  e.  by  caating  pebblea  into
uma  (irnJiiTKai)  ;  the  former  waa  eipreaaed  by  the
word  xttforima',  the  latter  by  ^^fwflcu,  ■!-
though  the  two  termi  are  frequently  cimfciundcd.
The  more  uanul  method  of  voting  waa  by  ahow  of
handa,  aa  being  more  expeditioua  and  convenioit
(X'tpirrerla).  The  proceaa  waa  aa  followa  :  — the
crier  firit  proelumed  that  all  thoaa  who  were  in
fitvoar  of  a  propoaed  meaaure  ahould  hold  up  tfaoir
handa  {trif  JonaT  *.  t.  A.  ifira  r)(»  x»^)  ■  then
he  prodaimed  that  all  (hoae  who  were  oppoeed  to
it  ahouiddo  the  aame(ST(i(ii(*oirt;i(,T.X.):  they
did  ao,  and  the  crier  then  formed  a*  aecnrate  an
idea  aa  poatible  of  the  numbera  lor  and  t^nat
(jjp^fLti  Tckr  x'^f'tu),  and  the  chairman  of  the
meeting  pronounced  the  opinion  of  the  Tnajority,
(Snidaa,  i.  v.  Kiirfx>'povdn)0w.)  In  thia  wnv
moat  matlera  of  public  interett  were  detenuine^
Vote  by  ballot  (KpMSt)*),  on  the  other  hand,  waa
only  uaed  in  a  few  apecial  ceaei  determined  by
law  ;  aa,for  inalanoe,  when  a  propoaition  waa  mado
for  allowing  thoae  who  had  auflered  atimia  to  appes]
to  the  people  for  reatitution  of  their  former  righU  j


Jictuig  e:


mrdin


ly  pun


olTeeled  pi^vato  penona
pp.  715,  719.)  In  OMi  of  thia  aort  it  waa  aettled
by  law,  that  a  decree  ahould  not  be  valid  unleaa  aix
thousandcitiieniatlaut  votedinjarotirofil.  Thii
waa  by  far  the  majority  of  iboae  eili«na  who  were
in  the  habit  of  attending  ;  for,  in  time  of  war  the
number  never  amounted  to  five  thonaand,  and  In
time  of  peace  acldom  to  ten  thonaand.  (Thne^
Yii.  72.)

With  J.


ballot


e  ecct>


the  actual  mode  of  voting  1>y


u  probably  the  ■


in  the  CD


blea,  or  ahella,'pu[  into  una  (mllricai)  ;  the  w
for  adoption,  the  black  for  rejection  of  any  given
meaaure. (Schol.  ad  Ariil.  V«^.  981).

The  determination  or  decree  of  the  people  waa
called  a  i'H;iiilunKi  (if-^^w^),  which  property
aignilie*  a  lav  propoaed  to  an  aaaembly,  and  ap-
proved of  by  the  people.  The  form  for  drawing
up  the  Paephiama  varied  in  dilfcrentagM.  [BovliJ
We  now  come  to  the  diuuiBial  of  the  aaaembly  ;
the  order  for  which,  when  buiincaa  waa  over,  va*
given  by  the  prylanea  ItKitvaf  rJji'  imyifrlmr)^
through  the  proclamatioa  of  the  tna  to  the  peofJa
(Ariatoph.  Arian.  173)  ;  and  at  it  waa  not  eiu-
louiarj  to  continue  meedngi  which  niually  begaii
early  in  the  monung  (M  20)  til!  after  annaet,  if
one  day  were  not  aufficienl  for  the  compietioD  of

iy  bnaincet,  it  wa  ...  . _  .

1  ataemUy  vai  ac


ECCLKSIA.
wbctkcr  am^tlnte  or  priiMe  indindoal,  dedand
iliat  h*  Bv  aa  BB&mmbla  omen,  oc  (wneived
tboDdar  and  Ughaung^  The  ndden  anouance  of
laio  abot  <•  vie  ^Mck  of  aa  aarthquake,  ot  aoy
Batonl  1*— """-"■  of  the  kind  called  tumifiiu,
«•■  a  HiSideBt  leano  fi>r  the  ha*^  ■djouniniait
of  IB  aMmblr.  (Atutoph.  Nmb.  579  ;  Thoc  r.
46.)

W«  haTe  alnadj  alated  in  ganenJ  tenu,  that
aS  watttrt  of  fwUiB  and  nafianif  intenal,  whether
tmin  or  dsaBnic,  wen  detenniaed  aum  b;r  ^^
fca^  in  their  annabliei,  and  we  •hal)  eondnde
thia  aitiele  bj  Madng  in  detail  what  >ome  nl  theie
mMOat  wtn.  On  tliii  paint  Juliu  Pollai  (liiL
95)  infbcat  u,  thai  in  the  fint  uiemblj  of  ertxy
(cjtBBy,  which  wai  called  inipla,  the  fei^'ipoTwla
«f  ibt  noginnle*  wai  held  ;>.'«.  an  inqaiittion
intn  tiieir  eondact,  which,  if  it  pTDTed  DDhTonT-
■  fUlawed  bjr  their  depootion.  In  the
i;  the  ihrryMai  or  ei-


pl^  m  wdlaiallB


w«Jirf:

t*  of  esDfiacated  property.  Bad
(^  aoBM  ef  thoae  who  had  entered  npen  inherit'
aoeea.  The  aecond  wu  dnotcd  to  the  hearing  of
ihnaf  who  qipand  befon  the  peojde  u  luppli-
aati  fc>  aome  &tdiit,  er  fio'  the  prinlege  of  ed-
ilindnn  the  aweniblj  withnit  inemring  a  poial^
la  whidi  they  otherwiie  would  bSTe  been  liable,
K  Ck  htdaanily  frerioni  to  ginng  information
abaot  anf  Mine  in  which  they  «««  aceomplicei.
Ib  all  the*  ceae*  it  wai  mceuai;  to  obtain  an
Una,  i.  a.  a  apedal  pomiMioD  or  immmi^. In


««r*  reeeind. In  the  feutli,  idi^eu  and  other
P^Mk  BBttoa  of  the  Hate  were  diKuwd.

Ffnai  thia  Matenwot,  compaied  with  what  ii
■aid  oader  EiaAHoauA,  it  ^pean  that  in  cam
wUd  required  on  extnotdinary  trial,  the  people

thej-  anially  idierred  rach  matten  to  the  court  of
the  HeUae*.  There  ware,  bowenr,  other  ca«e(  in
which  tber  eicniHd  a  judicial  power :  lliua,  for
irrftnrtf*^  ua  proedri  coold  ex  officio  pmeecnte  an
iadindiKl  be&n  the  people  for  mitcoodiict  in  the
iiiliiia  (Aeaeh.  e.  Tliivinal.  p.  6.)  Agun,  on
MmK  occaaicu  inbrmation  (ji'mnvii)  wai  amply
hid  be&n  the  people  in  aMcmbly,  without  the  in-
faiiail  making  a  regular  ioiptaehment ;  and  al-
I  the  final  determination  in  csie*  of  tbii  lort
red  to  a  court  of  law.  Rill  then
■1  doobt  that  the  people  might


tioa.  IteeaiiTeT,  in  tntbnlent  and  excited  timei
ifaof  mwhad  inenrRdthediiplcanreof  thepeopk
ibcy  ast  Bnfanqaently  paieed  inmmaiy  MDteDC
^OD  hiia,  witluDt  any  regard  to  the  regular  am
ulabljhcd  Ibnna  d  proceeding ;  aa  eianplea  of
wkkh  m  DM7  mention  the  eaiea  of  Demoilheni
aai  FbaciaD.  The  {voceedii^  called  ir^oA^  ai
twrrri^i*  wse  abo  iniljtated  before  the  peoHi
teths  iniinaatkn  with  reelect  to  them  u  gin

The  legidatiTe  powen  of  the  peoplt
■»  fu  aa  thejwBB  defined  bjr  the  i
Selm,  we  ray  limited  ;  in  ftict,  itrietly  (peak-
ia^  aa  lawa  coald,  without  Tiolaling  the  ^irit  ol


the  Athent


might,  howem,  donbtlen  happen  that  ifn^^ia-fwra
paned  by  the  aaiembliea  had  reference  to  general
and  pemaDOtt  objecli,and  vers  therefbn  lirtnally
ri/m  or  lawi  [NoKOTBrras]  i  moreoTer,  if  we
may  judge  by  the  oomplaiat*  of  Demoathenn,  it
^>pean  that  in  hi*  dayi  the  inatituUotu  of  Sijon
had,  in  thia  reipect,  Ulen  into  dinue,  and  that
new  lawa  were  mode  by  the  people  ootlectiTcly  in
■aeembly,  withont  the  mterrention  of  the  court  of
the  Domothetae.  (Dem.  c  T^anaor.  p.  744  ;  Ariitot
Pofit  ir.  *.)

The  foreign  policy  of  the  itate,  end  all  matten
connected  with  it,  and  the  regnUtion  and  ^propria-
lion  of  the  taiee  and  reTenoei,  were,  at  we  might
expect,  determined  nptm  by  the  people  in  aseembly.
The  domeitic  economy  of  the  ilate  wn>  under  the
■ame  inperinlendence  ;  a  bet  which  PoUui  briefiy
eipreuet  by  iakrming  oi  that  the  people  decided
in  the  fourth  auentbly  Tfpl  Up&r  Kid  IhttioctMV^
i.  e.  en  all  matten,  whether  tpjrilual  or  ucular,  in
which  the  dtiieni  collectiiely  had  an  inleteit.
Such,  for  eiample,  uy>  SchtSmann  (p.  298),  -  are
the  priefthood,  the  templet  of  the  goda,  and  all
other  Bcred  thingi  ;  the  trcaaary,  the  public  [and,
and  pablic  property  in  general ;  the  magiitracy,
the  conrtt.  the  Uwi  and  inititntioni  of  the  itate,
and,  in  fine,  the  Btate  itself:  "  in  connection  with
which  we  may  obeerre,  that  the  meetings  for  the
election  of  magiatratea  were  called  ipj^aiptfftiu,
Lailly,  ai  Schamaon  remarki,  "  the  people  liliewine
determined  in  auembly  upon  the  pnpnety  of  con-
ferring rewanla  and  honour)  on  nch  citiieni  or
atrongen,  or  eren  foreign  itatei,  aa  had  in  any
manner  ngnolly  benefitted  the  eommonwealth."
It  ia  hardly  neceoasry  to  add,  that  the  ligtiification
of  a  religioua  aatembly  or  chnreh,  which  eecfena
bore  in  later  timei,  apiang  from  ita  (sdier  meaning
of  an  OMembly  in  geneisl,  whether  of  the  (on-
atitueney  of  a  whda  alate,  or  of  iti  aab-divi-
uoni,  mch  aa  tribeaand  cantooi.  See  TRiBcaand
Daunit  [R.  W.]

ECCLETI  (haXirroi),  waa  the  name  of  an
aMOnhly  at  Spaita,  and  aeema  to  hare  been  the
iBine  a>  the  io-called  luaar  ainiiiMy  (1)  lUKpi  ko-
\a,,Uyr,  i«KAiti£a.  Xen.  ffofl.  iii,  3.  S  B).  lu
name  aeema  to  iztdicate  a  lelect  auembly,  bat  it  ii
difficolt  to  determine  of  what  penona  it  waa  eom-
poeed  ;  ainee,  howeier,  Xenophon  (ffdf.  ii.  4.  |  33)
mention*  the  ephora  along  with  and  aa  diatinct
fram  it,  we  cannot  with  Tittniaa  {GritdL  Staatn.
p.  100)  andWachamuth  (UtU-AUer.  voLL  ^464,
690,  3d  edit.),  couiider  it  aa  haTing  cotuuted  of
the  Spartan  magiatratea,  with  the  addition  of  aomg
deputiea  elected  fiom  among  the  dtiioia.  Aa,
howBTer,  the  (mrA^n  do  not  occur  until  the  period
when  the  franchiae  bad  been  granted  to  a  great
number  of  frcedmen  and  aliena,  and  when  the
number  of  ancient  citiiena  had  been  conaiderably
thinned,  it  doea  not  teem  improbable  that  the  letter
aaiembly  eonslated  excluairely  of  ancient  citiiena,
either  in  or  ant  of  office ;  and  thii  aunpoaition
leema  reiy  well  to  agree  with  the  &ct,  ihal  they


iTOtion  that  might  be  mode  by  the
ephoia  Of  the  new  dtiuni.  (Thirlwall,  Hitt.  e/
Gnta,  iv.  p.  373,  *c.)

The  whole  mbject  of  the  IxiAtfm  ia  in-rolved  in
difficulty. Tittmonn  thinki,  that  tbai^b  die  muna


of  thia  UHmbly  ii  not  mmtiDned,  it  nftted  long
before  the  PeniBo  mn,  and  that  ia  nun;  ok*  in
which  tha  magiitiBta  (r'^n,  ipX"'^"  "^  ^KC"^)
are  laid  ta  hava  made  deem*,  the  magiitnlaa  an
QentiMied  initead  of  the  ImrAirnH,  of  whom  tbejr
were  the  chief  memben.  Thii  lut  mppotition  if
lejectea  h?  MlUler  {Dor.  iii.  S.  §  10),  who  ob-
lervei  that  the  magiltnlei  wen  often  Hid  to  hare
decreed  ■  meamn  (upeciallj  in  foreign  a&in),
though  it  had  bren  diKiu»d  before  the  whole
asKPiblj  and  approTed  by  it ;  for  the  nugi)tnit«
were  the  repreaentativei  and  the  organ*  of  the
aucinb1y,and  acted  in  it)  name.  Mliller  i)  alio
of  opinion  that  htXtrrai  and  ignXiitia  are  idential,
and  diitincl  fimn  the  leHcr  aiieniblf,  which  he
eotuiden  to  hare  been  a  kind  of  (elect  aoembly.
But  hit  argnmenti  on  ihii  point  are  not  conrincing.
The  lnKXifriii  and  the  leuer  auembly  ate  men-
tioned about  the  lame  time  in  Grecian  hiitoz7,and

eicept  the  regular  iticktiirlti  of  all  the  Sportani,
(See  Xen.HiU.y.u.i  33,  ri.  3.  §  3.) [L.S.]

E'CDICUS  (fwlucai),  the  name  of  an  oSiccr  in
many  of  the  towns  of  A>la  Minor  during  the  Ro-
man dominion,  vhoae  principal  duty  wat  the  care
of  the  public  money,  and  the  proaecution  of  all  par-
ties wDo  owed  money  to  the  itate* The  word  U
tranilated  in  the  ancient  giofaariei  by  cognitor,  an
allomev. (Cic  ad  /'on.  liii.  Sfi  ;  Plin.  Ep.  z.
Hi  :  6mnDTiui,ibSutert.  ir.  3.  p.  277.)
E'CDOSIS  (iKit^ii). [Fbndb.]
KCHTNOa  (ix!"')- [DiKi]
ECLOGEIS  {IkAjtyiTi). [EiirRo«A.]
ECMARTY'HIA {Jif^uvrupla), lignifiei  the
depotilion  of  a  witneii,  who,  by  reaion  of  abaence
abroad,  or  illneai,  wsi  nnable  to  attend  in  court.


Hi>


•-  of  penoni  erpreatly  appointed
It,  and  afterward!,  upon  their  awearing  to  iti  iden-
tity, wo*  r(sd  u  eridence  in  the  cauu.  They
were  laid  fAOftrvptir  rJjf  iKfiafrvpiar  :  the  abient
witneu,  iK/tofrvptTr ;  the  par^  who  procuri-d  the
evidence,  iK/fopTvpUw  vcitfo^oi,  Tt  wal  considered
ai  the  teilimony  of  the  deponent  himself.  Dot  that
of  the  certifying  witneaKi,  and  therefore  did  not
come  within  the  deacription  of  heanay  ciidence,
which  (eicept  the  declaration  of  a  dccented  per-
■on)  wni  not  admiuible  at  Athena.  The  law
was,  ittoifrtUsu  fuifruptlv  7%Brtwrci,  iKfioprvpSar
II  ^ipofiloi;  (al  tSvrdTm,  The  deponent  (like
any  other  witnen)  was  liable  to  on  action  for  Uie
lei^ony  if  the  conlenli  of  the  deposition  were
untrae,  unlen  he  oonld  show  that  it  wag  incar-
rectl;  taken  down  or  forged,  in  which  case  the
certifying  witnesses  would  be  llaU&  Therefore
(Iiaeua  tells  lu)  il  was  usual  to  select  persons  of
good  cliaracter  to  nceire  snch  eridoice,  and  to
hare  ai  many  of  them  aajnuible  (Isaens,  Di
PgTT.  Ilertd.  23,  24,  ed.  BekL  ;  DenL  e.  I^epi.
pp.1130,  1131.)  [MtKTirBlA.]  EC.R.K.]
E'CPHORA  (Utopi).  [FuMus.)
ECPHYIJX)PHO'HIA{*t#«Wj.fO(Wi).{Ki.

ECULBUS.  (EquuLsua.]
E'DERE  ACTIO'NEM.  [Actio.]
EUlCTUIiL  The  Jut  Edicendi,  or  power  of
making  edicts,  belonged  to  the  higher  msgiatiatus
populi  Romaui,  bat  it  was  principally  exercised  by
the  two  ^actors,  the  )aae(or  urlaiiua  and  the
ptaMor  peregrinui,  whose  juiiidietionwaseierdsed
m  theproiincesbytbefneKi. Theomilaaedilea


EDICTUM.
also  made  many  edicts,  aad  their  juriidictioa  was
exorcised  (under  the  empire  at  lost)  in  the  pro-
rincias  popoli  Homani  by  the  qaaestota.  (Oaina^
L  6.)  There  was  no  edict  pcomnlgated  in  the  pro-
Tiaciae  CoesBiia.  The  tribunea,censiK«,aad  ponti-
fieet  alto  promolgated  edicU  relating  to  the  niatlera
of  their  retpeetire  jurisdictions.  The  edicta  are
enumeiated  by  QfOMt  among  the  sonreea  of  Roman
law,  and  this  part  of  the  Roman  biw  ia  tunetimca
called  in  the  Pandect,  Jus  Honocanotu  (IHg.  il.
lit  7.  •■  S3),  apparently  beaose  the  edictal  power
belonged  to  those  ma^slralet  only  wbo  had  the
honoros,  and  Dot  to  much  ad  hoaoiem  pi
(Dig.I.titl.a.7.)  At  the  edicts  of  It
wen  the  moat  important,  the  jus  hrmon
sometimes  called  jus  (naetoiium ;  but,  pnq)eriy,
the  jut  honomrimn  was  the  term  under  which  waa
comprehended  all  the  edictal  law.

Edictum  lignifet,  generally,  any  piibUe  natifw
made  by  n  competent  authority  (Tacit.  Jim.  17;
Llr.  iiiL  6,  it.  SO).  Bnt  it  apedally  ngniliea,
QDdcr  the  republic,  a  rule  promnlgated  by  a  magia-
tratui,  which  was  done  by  writing  it  on  an  album,
and  placing  il  in  a  conspicnoas  place,  **  Unde  de
piano  recto  iegi  potest.*'  From  tiia  circumstsjux,
the  Edict  was  considered  to  be  a  fort  of  the  jua
scri])tiim.  As  the  oSioo  of  a  magiitratut  wu
annual,  the  ndet  promulgated by  a  predecessor

confirm  or  adopt  the  rales  of  his  ivedecessor,  and
introduce  them  into  bis  own  Edict,  and  hence  laeh
adopted  rules  were  called  edictum  tralalitium  (Cic
ad  AIL  ilL  23,  v.  21  ;  ad  FOm.  iii.  S ;  i>  Vtrr.
I  1£),  or  letos,  at  opposed  to  edictum  norum.  A
repentinum  edictum  was  that  rule  which  was  mad«
({ffont  res  inddit)  for  the  occuion.  (/■  Verr.  iii.
1 4.)  A  perpemon  edienun  was  that  mis  which
was  made  by  the  magistiatus  on  entering  upon
ofiice,  and  which  was  intended  to  ^>ply  to  all  lasea
to  which  il  was  applicable,  daring  the  year  of  hia
office :  hence  il  wat  lometinic*  oilled  also  annnm
lex.  It  wat  not  called  perpeCuum  because  tha
rules  were  fixed,  but  because  each  piBetor  pub-
lished bis  edict  upon  entering  on  hit  office,  end
thus  them  was  a  peipetunm  (continnona)  edictuio.
Until  it  beanie  the  practice  for  magialntni  to
adopt  the  edicta  of  their  predoceiton,  the  edicta
could  not  ibrai  a  body  of  permanent  binding  rulea  ;
but  when  Ihia  practice  b«ame  cotnmen,  the  edicta
(edictum  inilatitium)  soon  constituted  a  lar{|0  body
of  law,  wliich  was  practically  of  as  mneb  impott-
ance  as  any  other  j»rt  of  the  law.  Tha  seroat
edicta,  when  thus  eitabliihed,  wse  designated  by
the  names  of  their  promulgaton,  at  tha  Edictum
CariKoiannm  ;  or  they  were  named  with  lefcrenr*
to  the  formula,  and  the  actio  which  they  rsla-
blished,  aa  Aquiliana,  Publiciana,  Rntiliana.

The  origin  of  the  edidal  power  caanot  be  hia>
toricnlly  shown  ;  but  aa  the  pnetor  was  a  magiitiate
eitabliahed  for  the  admiaiatretiou  of  juaticc  on  ac-
count of  the  occupations  of  the  eoosnla,  and  Iha
consularpower  was  the  lapreseotatiTe  of  the  kingly
power,  it  seems  that  tha  jut  odioendi  may  have
been  a  remnast  of  the  kin^y  pnogatira.  How-
erer  thii  may  be,  the  edictal  power  waa  early
exercised,  and  so  &r  established,  that  the  jus  piac-
torium  waa  a  nccsniied  ditiiioa  of  law  in  abd
before  the  time  of  Cicero  (w  Vtrr.  I  4*},  in  whuss
age  die  study  of  the  Edict  formed  a  part  of  tha
--' -  study  of  the  law.  (i*  £M;i.  5,  ii.  33.)
■ I  tha  b ■


Tha  edict  of  the  Mdilaa  aboot  i


a  bt^ing  and


KDICTUM.

irBoB  et  ikTca  ■•  menCioncd  bj  Cicero  (dt  Of.  iiL
17)  ;  the  Ediethmn  Aedaitiu  an  allnded  Id  hy
PlulBi  (O^iv.  2,  *.  43)  ;  ud  bh  edict  nf  Uie
pnrtor  Pengiinai  i*  mcntiioed  in  tha  Lh  (lalliu
Cialptnar,  which  pnbiblf  balongi  to  the  begin-
ning of  the  eighth  cenCnr;  of  the  oXj.  The  Lei
Comelia,  "w,  c  67,  prorided  Bgainat  Bbnicfl  of  the
ediral  yrma,  b;  deckting  thai  the  pnelon  ihuidd
decide  in  particiilu  cuea,  coofbcniabtjr  to  theii
perpetual  edict.  Ttw  (dicti  made  in  the  proriDcet
we  often  meutiooed  by  CiccTO.  The;  were  founded
an  the  edictnra  nrbuiunf  though  they  likewiie
Lfluupehended  niee  ^iplicable  only  to  the  ad-
jBiButiatioii  of  JDitice  in  the  fmiincei,  and  lo  br
-* - - - - '- -'■  -  - - ■  ■ Thai


EDICTUM.


44S


relaied  to  the  paUiani,  and  unther,  la  which  ha
pn»  DO  aanie^  nlating  to  manen  of  vbic^  he
aaya,  **ci  edietoet  poatnlari  et  fieri  lolent''  Ai
U  all  (b«  reat,  h«  mado  no  edict,  bat  deelued  that
be  WDold  fiama  all  hii  dacteca  (decrela)  npon  the
edieta  artana.  It  appeal*,  then,  that  in  the  time
•f  Cioero  the  edicta  already  fbimed  a  lugs  bod/
•f  law,  which  la  eanfirmed  b;  the  bet,  that,  in
hii  liate,  an  attenpt  had  beat  already  made  to
ledaee  it  into  order,  and  to  eonunent  on  it  Sa-
naa Solpieiaa,  tha  great  joriat  and  ontor,  the
Iricad  and  eoDtemponry  irf  CKen,  addreiied  to
Bnnx  two  very  ibon  boolu  on  the  Edict,  which
waa  Mtowed  I7  the  work  of  Ofiliu  (Pomponiiu,
Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  ■■  2)  ;  thoDgh  we  do  not  know
whether  tha  work  i£  OGIiiu  wa>  an  attempt  to
oIlKt  and  atnnge  the  vaiioiu  edida,  like  the  inb-
aeqaent  aompilalioa  of  Joliao,  or  a  commentary
like  thoae  of  many  nbteqnent  jnriati  (Ofiliui
adietom  )>aetorii  prinu  diligenler  compsaail).

The  object  of  the  Edict,  according  to  the
RemBa  jnrift*,  waa  the  fallowing  (Papinianoj,
Dig;  1.  tit.  1-  •■  7) :  —  "  Adjn>  andi  tbI  mpplendi
Tel  uitiigeiidi  JDria  dfilia  gratia  propter  utilitatem
pablicam  :  "  the  Edict  i*  abo  dncribed  aa  "  riTa
»ox  jnria  citilia."  It  waa,  in  effeil,  an  indirret
raethod  of  legiihiting,  and  it  waa  tha  meant  by
which  nEmaHu  nilei  of  law  became  eatablitbed.
It  waa  fiamd  to  be  a  more  effectoal,  beiaiua  on
eaiieT  and  mole  ftactital  way  of  gTadnalty  en-
larging and  altering  the  exiiting  law,  and  keeping
tke  wnole  ayitein  m  hacmony,  than  the  mtthoi!  al
direct  legialaiion  ;  and  it  ii  nndoniable  that  the
Meat  talnUe  part  of  the  Roman  law  ia
fron  tha  adicta.  If  a  praetor  ealaUithed
whi^  waa  Iband  to  be  inconTenient  or  injurioua,
il  fell  into  diMiae,  if  nnt  adopted  by  hit  tnccetwr.
The  pnUicity  of  the  Edict  mnrt  alio  haTe  been  a
jpeat  ■ecorily  againit  any  arbitrary  changet,  fi^  a
laaijitlialiia  wotdd  hardly  vantore  to  promnlgale  a
nle  to  which  a|Mnioa  ud  not  by  autinpatioo  al-
ready gifcn  it*  niKtian.  Blany  of  the  mlea  poo-
■laigiwad  by  the  Edict  were  mtfely  in  conibmity
la  eria^  enalan,  Bun  partknlariy  in  caaea  of
ontiBCla,  and  that  the  edict  wonld  hare  tha  eflcct
flfeanTOtiagaiitoni  intolaw.  Thia ia  what  Cicero
■ec^  to  laeHi  (d*  JaMat  iL  33).  wtuo  he  aayi
ifaal  ik  Edict  depeod*  in  a  mat  degree  on  cnttom.

Aj  la  the  matter  of  the  Edict,  HmD*t  be  mp-


■ay  Bttiatrs
dM«A*,lM


natara]  eqnlly  (Jui  Nalnrale  or  Oentiom).  Under
the  emperon,  alio,  it  may  be  pretomed,  that  tha
opinioni  of  legal  writen  wonld  act  on  pnblto
opinion,  and  on  thoae  who  had  the  ina  edicendi.
Hence,  a  large  part  of  the  edictal  mlea  weia
finmded  on  the  ta-called  jna  gentium  (  and  the  ae-
eeaaity  of  tome  niodi£cBtioni  of  the  itrict  mlei  of
the  aril  law,  and  of  additional  mlea  of  law,  would
beoom*  the  more  ^iparent  with  the  ezteniion  of
the  Roman  power  and  their  intereoniie  with  other
nation*.  But  the  method  in  which  the  ptaHor
introduced  new  role*  of  law  wat  altogether  con-
formable la  the  ipitil  of  Ronum  inititntiont.  The
proccat  waa  ilow  and  gradual ;  it  waa  not  effected
by  the  deitructioa  of  that  which  eiiated,  but  by
adapting  it  to  circmnttancei.  Accordingly,  when
a  right  exitted,  nr  ws«  recogniied,  the  pcaetor
wonld  gire  an  action,  if  there  wa*  none  ;  he  would
interfiere  by  way  of  protecting  poaieaaion,  bat  ha
could  not  make  paaaeuion  into  ownerabip,  and,
accordingly,  that  waa  eflected  by  the  law  [Uaq-
CAFUi]  :  he  udad  plamli&  by  flctioni,  ai,  lor  io-
itance,  in  the  Publiciana  actio,  where  the  fiction '
waa,  that  the  pouetsor  had  obtained  Ihe  ownenhip
by  uiucapion,  and  to  wat  quati  ex  jure  Quirilium
dominua  (Oaiua,  it,  36)  ;  and  he  alto  aided  partiea
by  eieeplionea,  and  in  inlegnm  reatitntio.  [Jus.}

The  old  forma  of  procedore  were  few  in  number,
and  they  were  often  ineonrenient  and  biled  to  do
jutice.  Accordingly,  the  praetor  extended  the
remediea  by  action,  at  already  intunaled  in  iho
caae  of  the  Publieiaaa  actio.  Thia  change  pro-
bably commenced  after  many  of  the  legit  aetione*
were  aboliahed  by  the  Aebutia  lei,  and  the  necet-
lity  of  new  form*  of  actloti*  arote.  Theae  were  in-
troduced hy  the  piaeton,  and  it  ii  hardly  a  matter
of  donbt  that  in  eitablubing  the  formalae  they
followed  the  analogy  of  the  legit  actione*.  It  k
the  conduaion  of  an  ingeniona  writer  (iUan.  Miu.
fir  Jurii.  L  p.  £1,  Die  Otamome  da  EdiMi,
Ton  tIelTter),  "  that  the  edict  of  the  jaaelac  nrbann*
waa  in  the  mam  part  relating  to  actiont  ananaed
after  the  model  of  the  old  luit  actione*,  and  Uiat
the  *y*tem  it  apparenl  in  the  Code  of  Jnatlntau,
and  itill  mors  in  Ihe  Digeat."

Under  the  empron,  there  were  many  comman.
talon  on  tha  EdicL  Thut  wa  find  that  Labeo
wrote  f«nr  booki  on  the  Edic^  and  a  wnk  of  hit
ia  Ihirly  book*,  Ad  Edictnm  Praelorit  Per^rini,
i*  cited  by  Uipian.  (Dig.  4.  tit  3  *.  9.)  Salrina
Jnliunui,  a  dutinguiihed  jnnit,  who  lired  in  the
lime  of  Hadiian,  and  filled  the  office  of  praetor,
made  a  compilation  of  Edictal  law  by  udet  of  the
emperor ;  the  mtk  wat  arranged  in  title*,  ae-
cording  to  anbjecM  <B8cking,  /ajtil.  i  30.  n.  11).
It  waa  called  Edictum  Perpetaum  ;  and  it  teema,
that  from  the  date  of  Ihi*  trcatite,  tha  name  Per-
penimn  waa  mora  particnlarly  applied  to  thi*
edictum  than  to  that  which  waa  originally  and  {bd-
pciiy  called  the  Edietmn  PefpetoDm. Jnlian  ap-

i .,__.j  —'  fnif^agpi  the  old  edicts

led  what  had  Ulan  into


and  be  probably  both  on


Julian  moat  have  had  gnat  mfluenoe  on  the  atndy
of  the  law,  and  on  auhteqnent  jnrBtical  writinaa.
It  doea  not  aeem  pnhable,  that  the  edict*  <^  t^
two  Roman  praelota,  tosether  with  the  Edictma
Prorineiale,  and  the  edieta  of  the  cumla  aedilia,
were  blinded  into  one  m  thia  compilation.  If  tba
woA  vl  Jnliaa  eompnliandad  all  thiM  edicll^


44S  EDICTUM  THEODORICI.
thej  niiut  hiis  beea  kept  diitinet,  u  theiubjsct-
matter  of  ihem  wu  diltbrent.  Wa  know  thu  tha
edicU  of  ths  ouTktc  udiln  ware  the  labject  of
difltinct  trantuat  by  Ouiu,  Ulpniif  and  Paultu,
and  the  Edietum  PiDfiDciale  wmdd,  fium  iti  mttun,
be  of  nacawtjr  kept  ■epanto  &<nn  kll  the  reit.
But  nma  wrilan  are  of  opinion,  that  the  Edietum
Paipetunm  tS  Julianui  nutde  oua  bodr  of  law  oot
of  tha  edicta  sf  the  praetor  nrbonai  and  pera|[nniu,
that  then  wai  alio  ineofpoiated  into  it  much  of
the  EdietUD  ProTinciBie,  and  a  lugs  part  of  the
Edietum  AadiUtiom,  h  an  qtpend^e  at  IiuL
The  E^et  thui  wniigcd  and  lyptrniaritrf  ni,  it
ia  farther  nippoaad,  pmnalgated  m  the  pCDTinccH,
■od  thu)  bname,  ai  br  ai  ill  proiiiioiu  eitended,
a  bodj  of  law  for  the  empire.  Thi*  viair  of  the
edictuiD  of  Jnliantu  i*  confinned  bj  the  bet  of
Ital;  being  dirided  by  Hadrian  iota  the  city  of
Rome  with  iti  qipurleaaQt  part,  and  four  diitricta.
The  magiitiatm  remained  u  before,  bat  the  jurit>
diction  of  the  praetor  wai  limited  to  Home  and  ila
territoi; ;  and  magiitratee,  called  cotDolaraa,  aad
•nlMeqnanlly,  in  the  lime  of  Anrelioi,  jnridici,  vera
appointed  to  adminiiter  jmtice  in  the  diitriet*.
Aa  the  edietal  power  of  tha  jaaetot  wm  tbna
limited,  the  nooMity  for  a  oompnbenaiie  Edict
(lach  at  the  Edietora  Pnpataam  of  Joliao)  i*  the

Than  wtfa  n
baai


ima*  limply  entitled  Ad  Edictnm,  according
u  ine  citation!  in  the  Digeat ;  and  there  were  alio
other  jariitical  wiitingi,  not  M  ottitlad,  which  fol-
lowed the  order  of  the  Edict,  aa,  for  iutance,  tha
epitome  of  Hennogenianna.  (Dig-  1-  tit  S.  a.  2.)
UltimalelT,  the  writing!  on  tha  Edict,  and  thoie
which  followed  the  arrangement  of  the  Edict,  ob-
tained more  anlhority  than  tha  Edict  itiel^  and
became  the  baai!  of  iutraction.

Some  few  ftagmenti  of  tha  older  edicta  are
found  in  tha  RMnan  writcn,  bnt  it  ii  chiefly  from
the  writing!  of  the  jniiati,  M  eicarpted  in  the
Digeit,  that  we  know  anything  of  the  Edict  in  ita
later  fonn.  It  ieona  pretty  clear  that  the  order  of
Jnatinian's  Digeet,  and  m«e  particularly  that  of
hii  CcKle,  to  Bome  extent  followed  that  of  tha
Edict  The  writing!  on  the  Edict,  M  well  aa  the
Edict  ilaelf,  wera  dirided  into  titnli  or  rubricae,
and  thoe  into  cajNta ;  aoma  ipecial  or  detached
rale*  wan  named  claotnlaa  ;  and  iome  parte  ven
snnply  named  adictom,  aa  Edictom  Carbon  iamun,

&C.

The  Edicta  or  Edictalea  Legca  of  the  amperon
are  mentioned  under  Cohbtitutio.

Tha  Dii^t,  ai  already  obaerved,  containi  nn-
marou)  fiagmenl!  of  the  Edict!.  Tha  moat  com-
plete collection  of  the  fragment!  of  the  Edict!  ii
by  Wieling,  ia  hU  "Fragmenla  Edicti  Perpetui,"
Fianek.  1T33.  The  lateat  euay  on  the  labjett  ii
by  C  O.  L.  deWeyhe,  "  Libri  Trei  Edicti  liie
de  Origine  Fatiiqae  Joriipradendae  Romanae  piae-
icTlim  Edictonm  Piaeteria  ac  de  Forma  Edicti
Perpetoi,"  Cell  1621.  The  twenty-Grit  book  of
the  Dipst  (tit  1)  ii  on  tha  Aodilitinm  Edietum.
(Zimmem,  GnoUcAft  dn  Ram.  /Vieufnnbi  /  Ma-
nioll,£«t>iKi,&c.:  Rain,  AuAinwicie  Pn'ciK-
(wU,  Ac,  Leipzig,  1B36  ;  Sarigny,  OetekieiU  da
A.  R-,  &a  nl.  i.  c  I ;  Sangny,  SftUm,  Ac,  loL
i.  pp.  109,  Ac,  ltG,&e.)  [O.I^]

EDICTOM  THEODORICL  Thiiiithefint
eaUaetion  of  law  that  waa  made  after  tlie  dowofitl


EISAO00BI3.
of  the  Roman  power  in  Italy.  It  Vai  promulgated
by  Theodoiic,  king  of  the  Oitrogolhi,  at  Rome,  in
the  year  A.  o.  SOO.  It  eoniuiti  of  ISl  chapten,
in  which  we  recagmia  part!  taken  fivm  the  Code
and  NoreUae  of  Theodniii!,  from  tha  Codieei  On-
gDrianoa  and  Hermogeniano!,  and  tha  Sententiaa
ofPauliu.  TbeEdictwa>,doubtleu,dnimupl)y
Roman  writ«a,  but  the  original  aouicea  are  mora
diaflgurad  and  altered  than  in  any  other  compila-
^on.  This  colli^ioa  of  taw  wai  intended  to  apply
both  to  tha  Qotha  (Bacbin)  and  the  Romao!,  !«
fitr  ai  it!  pRiTiiiani  went ;  bnt  when  it  node  no
alleiation  m  the  Gothic  law,  that  law  waa  alill  to
be  in  force  for  the  Barbori ;  and  the  Roman.
Uw  waa  ibU  to  pnTail  for  the  Romana  in  thota
caaea  to  which  toe  Edietum  waa  not  appliable.
Aihalarich,  the  grandaoo  of  Theodoric,  at  rather
Amalaauntlia,  the  mother  of  Athalarich,  who  waa
a  minor,  completed  thii  Edietum  by  a  new  one ;
but  after  Nanea  had  again  nnitad  Italy  to  the
dominion  of  Jaitinian,  the  legiilalion  of  Juitiniaa
waa  etlabliihed  in  Italy  (a.  d.  £S1),  and  tha
Edictnm  of  Theodoric  had  no  limget  anthority.
The  opinion  of  modem  writer!  aa  to  the  deaign  and
object  of  the  Edictom  of  Theodoric  ia  by  no  mrana
uniiorm.  Thne  ii  an  editido  of  thit  Edietum
by  0.  F.  RboD,  Halie,  ISIG,  Ito.  (SaTigny,
OadueiU  da  R.  R.  Su.;  BBcking,  IttU.  i.
89.)  [G.L.]

EEDNA  (hi«). [Doi.]

EICOSTE  ((Wnt),  a  Ui  or  duty  of  ooe
twentieth  (five  per  cent)  upon  all  cixnmoditiei  ex-
ported or  imported  by  aea  in  the  itatea  of  the  alliea
■abject  to  Athena.  Tbia  lax  waa  firat  impoaed
a.c4 l.f,  in  the  place  of  the  direct  tribute  which
had  up  to  this  lima  been  paid  by  tba  aabjeel
alliei  ;  and  the  change  waa  made  with  the  hop*
of  raiaing  a  greater  nrense.  (Thac  lii.  2a)
Thi)  tax,  like  all  othen,  wai  farmed,  and  the
farmen  of  it  were  called  tiaaloiigi  (•ixoffrgA^Tw).
It  continued  to  be  collected  in  B.  c.  405,  as  Atia-
tophanes  mention!  ao  tioMbilogat  in  that  year
(iton.  310),  It  waa  of  coone  tecminated  by  the
iaane  of  the  Pelopmmeiian  war,  bnt  the  tribiit«
was  afterwaidi  tevired  on  men  eqiutable  prin-
ciplat  nnder  the  name  of  fiyatoau  (olWafii).
{mdOi.I'vU.Sdai.ofAliau,  pp. 325,401,  2iid
ad.)

We  also  read  of  an  «wc«fa  leried  by  the  aoM
of  Paiiiitistiia.  This  tax  was  a  twentieth  of  the
produce  of  the  lands  in  Attica,  and  was  eoly  hmlf
of  what  had  bean  leiied  by  Peinstratus  himael£
(Thuc.  Tt  Bi.)

EIREN  (tl>i|r)  or  IHEN  (tn'X  the  nam*
^Tcn  to  the  Spartan  yonlh  when  ho  attained  tba
age  of  twenty.  At  the  age  of  eighteen  he  emerged
from  childhood,  and  waa  called  jVfu/farvm  (f  X-
\>[)n|i>.  Pint  Lfc  17).  When  he  had  attained
his  twentieth  rear,  he  began  to  axerciBe  a  diract
infiuenca  orer  liia  jnniora,  and  was  entmsted  with
the  command  of  trao[«  in  battle.  The  weed  ap-
peals to  have  orignally  lignified  a  commander.
Heiyebius  explains  IpoHr  by  dpxcrel;  tu^
unti;  and  ilfmrdC"  hj  jqnriZ  The  Ifirwt
mentioned  in  Herodotni  (ix.  85)  wen  certtiolj
not  youthi.  but  eommaadan.  (HlUler,  Deriau,
ToLii.p.31S.)

EISAOO'OEIS  (slnrjirriTt),  at  Atheni,  wen

hot  the  name


n  to  the  ordinary  maffiiOa
waa  made  to  tam  Cx  tl


EISANOELIA.
fannginf  a  canto  ((untrtir)  ioto  ■  pntper  omrt.
IDurrrr^i;  Dub.]  The  cauH  itBlf  wai
tried,  u  ia  eipluDed  nnda  DiKi,  b;  dicuU
cboMa  bj  lot ;  but  ail  ihs  pnlimuwij  pnceed-
ingi,  Hieh  u  tsxirmg  tba  BccnsUion,  dcmwing  np

&c^  wen  ciDidneted  bj  lbs  regular  magiitnte,
wba  attcaded  in  hii  own  d>ptut«ieiit  to  all  that
d  in  Athnuaa  lav  by  tha  -^Ti^urfa
Thiu  *s  £ad  ibe  aliategi,  tbe
IcgiUwi,  tba  JruTTirai  tw  houHrlw  IpYoWi  tbe


Mthec)


nofu


of  t^  public  magiitiBtM,  except  of  thi
and  pefbap4  of  tb«  dtiBn.  The  chief  psit  of  tha
datiea  of  tba  bnoBr,  and  apeciilt;  of  the  thes-
mMbrtae,  cooaiitcd  in  nceiving  aonuatioiu  nod
brii^iiic  (mua  to  trial  (lUiyiir)  in  the  proper
oam. [Abchon.]

EISANOE'LIA  (doaryMa),  dgnifiiw,  u  il*
primaiy  aod  moat  genenl  kdh,  a  deniuicialiaii  of
tMf  kind  [Schilmann,  Zt*  Ofnibw,  p.  131),  bnC,
BOEb  man  nraaUr,  an  infimaitioD  laid  b«fbn  tba
Condi  or  tlw  uKmhlf  of  the  peopie,  and  the
caaaaqoent  imfrf  hmtmt  and  trial  of  Mata  crimi-
nala  at  Atbcoa  ondet  ldtcI  a  extiaaTdinBi7  cit-
ciuuatauoea.  AmoDg  thete  veie  the  ocxsiiont
■pm  which  manifeft  aintm  were  alleged  to  hate
bc^  committed,  and  jM  of  tncfa  a  natiue  at  the
ciiriing  law*  bad  tailed  to  anticipBle  oi  at  Icait
dcaoibe  qiedficali j  C*T("t"  Uuciuian),  tbe  retnlt
iJ  which  omiaiion  would  bate  bean,  bat  for  the

Bight  be  prelen«d  (ri/iat  fliricryfATiK^i),  thai  a
pnaoGDtoc  would  not  have  known  to  what  magia-
tnte  to  qipl;  ;  that  a  maginiate,  if  applied  to,
ceold  not  with  lafety  have  accepted  tbe  indictmant
ac  bnoght  it  into  court  ;  aod  that,  in  ihort,  there
would  ^Te  been  a  total  lailnie  of  jottice.

Cat.  I.  B.)  The  pnceii  in  qaealian  w
f  adapted  to  lUpplj  tbeae  defiden
pnnted  DOI,  at  the  aulhorit;  competent  to  deter-
une  tbe  criminaliEj  of  tbe  allied  act,  tbe  aa-
aoablj  «f  the  peo^e,  to  which  amlicatirau  for
thi*  pvcpaae  nugnt  be  made  on  the  nnt  bntinaai-
day  of  eadi  ptjtaaf  (*t^  fairtijffia,  Harpocmt.),
«  the  esmtdl,  whtdi  «ai  at  bH  timet  citable  of
uadeRakins  iodi  iDrettigationa  ;  and  occauoualiy
the  accntation  wat  lubmitted  to  the  cognizanca  of
both  theae  bodiet.  Aftei  the  ofience  had  been
dedaced  pcsil,  the  foimt  of  the  trial  and  amoont
t£  the  pmutfament  wen  preacribod  by  tba  tamo
■Btkceitj  ;  and,  aa  upm  the  conTiclioD  of  tbe
sffendeti  a  pncedenl  wonld  be  eitabliehed  for  tbe
lolaEe,  tbe  whole  of  tbe  proeeediiig*,  although  ei-
tcucdiiury,  and  not  onginatiDg  in  any  iped£c
law,  otajr  be  taotidtrcd  a*  Tinually  ealablithiiig  a
f  mal  atatote^  retioepective  in  ilt  £nl  Dp[diialiDn.
(Lycag.  &  Ltacrat.  p.  US.  ed  Stepk)

The  apeech  of  Euiyptolenmi  (Xcn.  Htil  L  7.
^  jb.)  deariy  ahowi  thai  the  oime  charged
afamit  the  ten  geneiala  who  fought  at  Arginntae
wat  me  of  thcae  tuupectfied  ofiioicet.  Tbe  decree
«f  the  acoata  againit  Antqibon  and  hit  collfagnea
(Plot.  Fa.  Dm.  OnUor.  p.  B33,  e),  directing
ibM  they  ihonld  be  tried,  and,  if  found  guilty,
fniabml  aa  tnitova,  aeema  to  wanant  tbe  infer-
(Bcc,  that  their  dalinqnency  (ria.  haiiog  under-
taken  an  embaaay  to  Sf>ar1a  b;  order  of  tha  Four
Mukdnd,  a  gnreniment  dcclartd  illagal  upon  Uw
f-TJitmr— It  of  the  iaaaaiicj),  did  not  amount


EISANOELIA.  44T

in  the  oaual  aente  of  Ae  tenn,  Init  ra--
quind  a  apecial  dechmlion  by  tba  KOats  to  Rndet
e(f;niiable  aa  auch  by  the  Heliaea.  Anothet
tanee  of  treason  by  implication,  proaecated  at
eitnordinaiy  and  unapecified  dime,  ^ipeara  in
icaaeof  Leoci«tet,wbo  it,  in  the  Ipecch  already
ed,  accuaed  of  having  abtented  himielf  Erom  hu
conntty,  and  dropped  the  character  of  an  Athc-

daogcr.  OSencea,  bowerer,  of  thit  naftin
by  no  meant  the  only  onea,  nrs  indeed  the
numerout  clan  of  thoae  to  which  eiCnordi-
dennnciatiana  were  applicable.  They  might
be  adopted  when  the  cha^  embiaced  a  combina-
tion of  Crimea,  ai  that  of  ireBton  and  impie^  in
tbe  frmoui  cats  d  Alcibiadei,  for  each  of  which  a
indictment  (7|>n^)  wat  admisaible,  whan
■ed  were  pecioni  of  great  influence  in  tba
hen  the  imputed  crime,  though  pnniahable
by  Ule  oidinaiy  lawa,  waa  peculiariy  heinout,  or


:  ipeedy  trial  tl
of  buain


u  permitted  1^
mew  waa  reqoiiite  to  ao-
ipliih  the  enda  of  justice.  (Schitiuanu,  Dt  Cam.
p.  190  I  Harpomt.)  Circunulancea  ancb  at  thcae
would,  of  coune,  be  very  often  pretended  by  an  in-
fbimer  to  cictte  tbe  gtealer  odium  againat  the
aceuaed,  and  the  adopt^n  of  the  pnceea  in  que>-
tion  muat  have  been  much  mora  frequent  than
waa  abaolutely  neeeaaaiy.

Tbe  first  atep  taken  by  the  inibnner  wai  to  re*
duce  hit  denunciation  to  writing,  and  submit  it
immediately  to  the  cogniiancs  of  the  coundl,
which  had  a  ditcretiouary  powar  to  accept  or  re-
ject it.  (Lys.  c.  Nicon.  p.  1 3G.)  Schumann  main-
taint  that  a  reference  to  thit  body  wu  alao  necea-
lary  when  it  was  intended  to  bring  tba  mattM
before  the  asaemfaly  of  the  people,  bnt  that  ita
agency  wat  in  audi  caaea  limited  to  pennittiiig
the  impeachment  to  be  announced  for  discusaion,
and  diiecting  the  proedri  to  obtain  a  hearing  fiir
the  infoimer,  The  thcemotbetae  are  alto  men-
tioned by  Pollni  (liii  87)  at  taking  pan  in  bring-
ing the  matter  before  the  assembly,  but  upon  wut
occaainn  they  wen  to  employed  we  can  only  con-

In  canaea  intended  for  tbe  eogniance  of  tha
eonncil  rady,  after  the  reception  of  the  demmei^
tion,  three  counea  with  reapect  to  it  might  be
adopted  by  that  body.  If  the  allied  oSenca  wen
pujuahable  by  a  fine  of  no  greater  amount  than
five  hundred  dtachznae,  the  council  itaelf  formed  a
conrt  competent  for  itt  trial ;  if  it  wa*  of  a  giaTer
character  they  might  pest  a  decree,  mch  at  that  in
tha  oua  of  AJitiphon  already  mentioned,  directing
the  proper  officen  to  introdius  tbe  cause  to  a  Ue-
liastie  court,  and  preacribing  the  time  and  fomt
of  the  trial,  and  the  penalty  to  be  inflicted  upon
the  conviction  of  tbe  criminali  j  lattly,  if  the  mat-
ter were  highly  important,  and  from  doubtt  ot
other  reotoni  they  required  the  aanction  of  tbe
astembly,  they  might  tuimit  the  cause  aa  it  ttood
to  tba  GoniideiBtian  of  that  body.  In  tha  first
cstP,  the  trial  waa  conducted  before  the  conncil
with  aU  the  forma  of  an  codinaiY  court,  and  if,
upon  the  asBoaameuE  of  penaltiea,  the  offence  toeat*
ed  to  dcaerre  a  heavier  punishment  than  lell  with-
in its  competency,  tbe  trial  waa  tnnaf^red  to  a
Heliaitic  court,  t^  tba  deliver;  of  tbe  tentenc*  of
the  council  (iiai*)w«n>)  to  the  tbeamothetae  by
tbe  tcribe  of  the  prytanei,  and  upon  thete  officers
it  then  devolved  to  bring  the  crininalt  to  joiticr.


<46  EISANOELIA.

(Dem.  tt  T^moer.  p.  720.)  The  acciued  wwe  in
thft  meanvhilfi  put  into  priion  for  mfe  cuitodj  bj
the  ■uthodt;  of  the  council  When  ths  oSeatx
wu  obTiouilj  bgyDOd  the  reach  of  the  Mnue**
competimE;,  th«  tiut  wu  diipenwd  with,  uid  ■
decree  iaiiiied»t«lj  dnwn  np  fee  (nbmitdng  the
cuiw  to  ■  niperior  court.

When  ■  ouH  of  thii  kind  wu  >o  nfemi,  the
decice  of  the  Kn&tB,  at  lote  of  the  people,  aMO-
eiated  other  public  ad'Tocato,  ^{encrall;  ten  innum-
bet,  with  the  infonner,  who  receiTed  a  drachma
tach  fi™n  the  public  treuiny  (ffw^Topoi).  And
betidei  these,  penniuion  wu  giren  (o  anj  othi
citizen  to  Tolnnteer  his  ktvuh  sd  Ihe  lidc  of  th
proiecDtion.  If  the  infonUBlion  were  laid  befei
the  auemblj.  either  b;  the  teenier  himielf,  DT  th
■ennle,  the  fint  proceeding*  in  the  csuu  had  for
their  object  to  eitablUh  the  penalty  of  the  ofif-
or  the  apparent  culpability  of  the  accnaod  ;  and
being  decided  byaiote  of  the  people  after  a  pi
diacut^on,  the  mode  of  canducting  the  trial  and
the  penalty  were  neit  fixed.  In  the  eaie
ten  general),  the  aaiemblj  directed  that  the
■hould  propoae  the  requiaite  arrangemeati.
plan  of  the  aenate,  however,  wu  not  necei  ^
adopted,  hut  might  be  combated  by  rival  pnpouli
of  any  prirata  citiien.  The  aiaembly  very  often
teSurni  the  matter  to  the  Heliaitic  conrtt,  bat
Dccaaionally  tuidertook  the  trial  itaelT ;  and  when
the  priaoner  wu  accued  of  treaaon,  we  are  told
(Xen.  L  e.)  that  he  made  hii  defence  to  the  aiKm-
bly  in  chaina,  and  with  a  keeper  upon  either  aide  ;
and,  accofding  to  another  authoril;  (Schol.  ad
AriHoph.  EaJai.  1081),  that  the  time  for  such  do-
feDca  wu  limited.  After  thii  the  tribei  voted  by
ballot,  two  nmi  being  awigned  to  each  tribe  for
thia  purpoae.  The  infomer,  la  the  erent  of  the
priaoner  being  acqaitted,  wu  aubjecled  to  nn
penally  if  he  obtained  the  Tote*  of  u  many  u  n
fifth  of  the  judget ;  ather«iie>  he  waa  liable  to  h

ditciutioD  of  the  ttiali  in  quntion  the  reader  ii  re-
ietred  to  Schtlmaml  (Z>>  dnniliii,  e.  iL).

Beaidea  the  clau  of  cauiea  hitherto  detcribcd,
there  were  alao  two  othen  which  equally  boro  the
name  of  eiMngalia,  though  by  no  meani  of  the
mna  importance,  nor  indeed  much  resembling  it
in  the  conduct  of  the  pnxzediDga.  The  fint  of
iheae  coniitti  of  caaea  of  alleged  xiturii,  L  e.
wrong  done  to  aged  or  helpleaa  parents,  women,
or  orphana.  Upon  anch  occaalona  the  infenner
laid  his  indieOaent  before  the  archon,  if  the
aggriered  peraonl  were  of  a  five  Attic  (unily  ;  or
bcfiire  the  polemarch,  if  they  were  resident  aliena.
The  pecoliaritiei  of  thia  kind  of  cauae  were,  that
any  Athenian  citiicn  might  undertake  the  accoia-
^on  ;  that  the  infonner  wu  not  limited  u  to  time
in  hia  addreia  to  the  court,  and  incnrred  no  penal^
whaterer  upon  &tlina  to  obtain  a  rerdicL  With
teapect  to  the  accused  It  ia  obvious  that  the  cauae
mutt  hare  been  Tifi^i,  or,  in  other  wordi,  that
the  conrt  would  have  the  power  of  fining  the
amount  of  the  penalty  upon  eonTiction.  The  third
kind  of  nnngalia  waa  aTailable  against  one  of
the  public  aiutialon  (iutr^rqi),  when  any  one
complained  of  hia  having  given  an  unjust  verdict
against  him.  The  infonnation  wu  in  this  case
laid  befeiB  the  soiate ;  and  that  the  magistrat«
who  had  M  trlliaided,  or  did  not  wpear  to  defend
himself  might  be  punished  by  dnfranchiaement,
wa  know  tma  tbt  inatance  mentioned  by  Demot-


EISPHORA.
thenes  (e.  Mmd.  p.  S42. 1  i).  This  paange,  how-
ever, and  an  allusion  to  it  in  Harpocralion,  can-
atitutes  the  whole  of  our  information  upon  the
■ubject.  (Hudtwalcker,  libtr  dit  DiattL  p.  19  ;
Meier,  Au.  Froaa,  p.  270.)  [J,  &  M,]

EISITE'RIA  ((IirnVa),  sol.  lipi,  saoificn
which  were  ofiercd  at  Athens  by  the  senate  be-
fiKe  the  aeasion  began,  in  honour  of  the  BtA  Bm-
?j^\,  i.  a.  Zeiu  and  Athena.  (Antipfa.  De  dor.
p.  789  J  Bflckh,  Corji.  ZajcnjK.  L  p.  671.)  The
■aenlics  iru  accompsnied  by  libationi,  and  ■
common  meal  for  all  the  seuatora.  (Demoath.  A>
Fall.  Lxg.  p.  400.  24  ;  comiuvd  with  a.  Mid.
p.  553.  2,  where  tlrtrifoi  tn  said  to  be  offered
for  the  senate,  ^ip  t^t  ^evA^s).

Suldu  (f.  e.)  cailg  the  tleiTtipoi  a  feative  day —
the  fint  of  every  ye«-— on  which  all  the  Athenian
magistrates  entered  upon  their  office,  and  on  which
the  senate  offered  up  aacrificea  fcr  the  purpoao  uf
obtaining  the  goodwiU  of  the  goda  for  the  new
magistralea.  But  this  BtBlcment,  u  well  u  the
fnnber  temarka  he  add^  teem  to  have  ariaea  from
a  gmia  miaundentanding  of  tha  pasuge  of  Demoa-
thenes  {De  Fall.  Leg.  p.  400),  to  which  he  refen.
SchOmaun  {Dt  Omit.  p.  291,  transl.)  adopla  the
account  of  Suldas,  and  rejects  the  othar  tiatement
without  giving  any  reason.  [L.  S.]

EI'SPHORA  (slfT^ofxi),  literally  a  oontributioi
or  tribute,  was  an  extracrdinary  tax  on  fvoprrty,
raised  at  Athens,  whenever  the  means  of  the  state
wen  not  sulEcieDt  to  cany  on  a  war.  The  mmoy
thus  raised  was  Hmetiniei  called  tA  naraCAtifUirii.
(Ueraotth.  c  Timocr.f.  731.)  Wemust  cai«fUlly
ditiinguiih  between  this  tax  and  the  vnriuut
liturgies  which  consisted  in  peraonal  or  direct  aer-
vices  which  ciliians  bad  to  perform,  wherou  the
tltripepi  contitted  in  paying  a  eertaln  eontribalion
towards  defraying  the  expenses  of  a  war. Some


^OIyiai.ii  p.33,<.)  entirely  confounds  them  ;

it  it  partly  owing  to  these  inaecnracie*  that  thia

subject  it  involved  in  great  difficultiea. At the

sent,  who  equipped  themselves  and  served  without
pay,  the  mtlitaiy  service  wu  indeed  nothing  but  fi

-—  -' -tiiordiaaiy  liturgy  ;  bnt  wb™  mer-

e  hired  to  perform  the  dnties  of  tb«
in  wara  became  mors  expensive  and
frequent,  the  sOls  was  obliged  to  levy  cootribo-
lions  on  the  dtiaen*  in  order  to  be  able  to  tairj
them  on,  and  the  cltisent  then  paid  money  for
' '  :h  previously  they  had  pettboned  ia

qnile  ccrtun  when  this  piupaitj-tajt
xi  ;  for,  although  it  it  commcoly  in-
(ened,  finn  a  passage  in  Thucydidet  (liL  19),  that
It  wu  first  inttitnted  in  428  &  c.  in  order  to  de-
fray the  eipenset  of  the  tiega  of  Hytikoe,  yet  wa
find  ilrfapi  mentioned  at  an  earlier  period.  (,Se*
Antiph.  TttraL  I  A.  c  12  ;  liaena,AZNcw<9.  e.  37  t
and  Tltlmann,  GMoal.  SbiaUa.  ^  41,  note  SI)  |
and  even  the  pus^s  of  Thnt^rdidei  admlta  of  an
interpretation  quite  in  accordaDce  with  this,  for  it
it  certainly  not  impoMbla  that  ba  merely  meuu  to
lay,  that  to  large  an  amoimt  at  200  talents  bad
r  before  been  nited  aa  dv^ivi  But,  bow-
tbit  may  be,  after  the  yaat42B  b.c  thlt  [>»-
perty-taz  teems  to  have  frequently  been  raised,  fori
yesn  afterwardi,  Aiiatopiitiiet  (Eqml.  922>
I  oT  it  as  K -'  *


EI3PH0RA.
Sack  a  oiDtribiitioa  could  ncTic  be  ruiod  without
a  decree  of  the  people,  who  also  fixed  npon  the
■mooat  nqnited (Demoelh.  c,  Feiiyi. [l  1208
■ " '  nenl*  lopmiileDde.

n  the  coiirti  vh«n
._,....  A  wilh,  or  uiunn  from,  the  leyy-

n«  of  the  tax  nen  Ktlled.  (Wol^  Fniig.  n
licfiU.  jL  M  ;  DemoMh.  e.  BokL  p.  1002.)  Such
diipDtea  KCm  to  hsre  occurred  rsihec  frcquentl]- ;
psioiial  enuitj  not  Mldoni  induced  the  oScen  to
tu  peneu  higher  than  wu  lawful,  aecardiiig  to
th*  aoMant  of  their  ptoper^.  (Ariitaph.  L  c  ;
DtmwtL  cAflu/i.  p.  SIS.)  The  nnul  eijHei-
Bea*  far  jajint  thi>  pnnettf-tai  an  -.  tlir^iptur
XirtfBra,  Ai^^ir  lit  Tar  rdAi/iar,  tl>  TJ)r  ina-
TTfimr  Tft  wiXita  tSr^apki  tlaA4i>tw,  and  thue
■ha  mid  tt  mm  called  el  ila^ipomt,  On  the
MOBco  BcntiDned  by  ThucTdide^  tlw  amnint
which  *a*  railed  wm,  u  we  hare  Men,  200
uleala,  wUch,  if  we  luppoie  the  tuable  propertf
10  hare  been  20,000  tulenti,  WM  a  tax  of  one  per
ent.  (Bitckh,Pi.U&<H.  p.£30,2dedit.)  On
och«  oeoiioiii,  (he  nla  wers  higher  or  lower,  ac-
eotdiog  to  the  vaaU  of  the  repnliUc  at  the  time  ;
webnascDUnliofralaoF  a  twelfth,  a  fiftieth,  a
fc— *—*'*■_  and  a  fire  hundredth  part  of  the  tai-
■UepnpeTtr.

Th  ccBina  irf  Solon  wu  dorinft  the  lint  period
ike  KaikUid  — ""-t"^  to  which  the  tio^ofid  waa
rain  111,  nntil in S77  a.  a,  in the  archouihip  of

the  peii|Je,  for  the  pnipoie  of  fixing  the  latei  of
th*  pnper^-tax,  w«e  divided  into  a  numbor  of
(fnmorae  (mfvuplu)  or  cLauca,  un:iilar  to  thoee
wfciek  were  aflerwaida  made

a.  jmdnt.  p.  606  ;  Ulpian,  ad  Daunli.  OJyalL

^  33,  *.) The  mCure  of  thii  new  cenuu,  not-

withataading  the  minnte  ioTcitindon  of  BSckh

{/•M.  Bam.  hoA  n\  ii  ilill  inyolied  in  nrtat  ob-

acarit^. E«h  of  the  ten  phjlae,

Ulpiaa,  qtpmnled  120  of  il»  wealthii

wWi  woe  diTided  into  two  part*,  uxording  to  tbeir

""  ' "'""  each  couiiiting of  liity

.»..  if  the  wealthier  of  the
_ .  obliged,  in  ixiea  of  urgent

..  adiance  totaled  wealthy  the  Bun

n^ii  ftc  ibe  da^ofi  (wpotur^opi,  Demoath.  &
JAL  p.  M4,  Ac).  When  the  wanti  of  the  Mate
ha4  ban  tfana  np^ied,  thoae  who  had  adianced
tke  aaanj  eoold  at  their  eaae,
«sy,  exact  their  nuoey  back  fntm  thaw  to  whom
IhiT  had  idianeed  iL The  whole  nnmber  of  per-

tbe  lynunoriae  wb«  1200,  who

itira  of  the  whole

, BJickh  jnatly  ob-

ba  ahanrd  to  mppoie with  I11i»an  that

tbeea  1340  akoa  paid  the  mpra^-tu,  and  that

all  tiw  R*l  wen  enaiDt  ban  iL The whole

I I  ■/  6000  (DenMMli.  Dt  j^nrnor.

-  'ly«rs7S0ta]enli<Polyb.iLea.§7},wH
7  Mt  Ibe  propertT  of  1200  eitiitni,  but  the
Ua  pnperty  of  Uie  whole  republic.  Many
r^  tkenfti^  tbragh  tbdi  woperty  wu  mailer
Ite  tl  the  1300,  mul  baie  contributed  -


Tha  faedr  of  1300  waa,  according  to  Ulpian,
Mm  4i*ided  into  four  daaHa,  -  . .■-


They  probably  conducted  the  proceeding!  of  the
■ymmoriae,  and  tbw,  or,  which  u  more  likely,  iha


the  trieiarchj.
oplii ;  Demoelk


had  to  laiue  tbe  taxable  property. Other

uuiizn  mm  appointed  to  make  oat  the  licta  of  the

ratof,  and  were  called  irtypaptii^  BidiypacpfTF,  or

'icha7tu. When  the  wanti  of  the itate  were

preuuig,  tbe  300  leaden,  perhapt  in  connection

with  the  300  included  in  Che  aecond  cUa  —  for

Ulpian,  in  tbe  fint  portion  of  hii  remark,  itatea

th^  the  richer  tymmoria  of  eieiy  phjle  had  to

.hii  daty  ~~  adranoed  tbe  money  to  the

the  abore-mentiDned  termi  (Demoath.  <.

Pha^pp. p.  146), which,  bowerer, wu norer

done  unleai  it  va>  decreed  by  the  people.  (Demoitb.

-  Polfd-  p.  1209.) Tbe  ral«  of  taxation  for  the

at  elauo  bare  been  made  oat  with  great  ;«tiba-

bilily  by  BHckh  (PaAf.  Eeam.  p.  A19,  2d  edit-X

wluiie  work  the  following  table  ia  taken ;  —

Pir^  Oaa,  fion  tadra  ieiaiit  upaanlt.

Tu.bleO.pltJ. J^;S^S
100  taL . . . £  taL


Stcomd  Clotty  Jrom  tit  taienU  tad  uptpardt,  but
under  hodve,

■IWWe  C.plt.1.  J^^p^
ItaL £Omin. 550  diach.


Ttinj  Clan,  ffon  too  lalaiit  apaardM,  but  under


oarli  Cbu,  /ram  twenif-fitta  nu'iua  upaardi,  tut


3M. Tht  fint  da^M


45  m


*


*50


22i ,
15


12* n

in  the  phyle
landed  property  lay,  M  anpean  from
ition  of  Demonhenot  againit  Polycin  ;  and
if  any  one  refmed  to  pay,  tbe  itate  had  a  right  to
confiicate  hi.  state,  but  not  lo  punieh  the  indi-
(idwl  with  atimia.  (Demoitb.  c.  AadnC  p.  603,
e.  TimacraL  p.  762.)  But  if  any  one  thought  that
hli  property  wat  taxed  higher  than  that  of  another
man  on  whom  juiter  claimt  could  be  made,  ho  had
tbe  tight  to  oall  upon  thia  penon  to  take  the  office
in  hii  itead,  or  to  lubrail  to  a  complete  exchange
of  property.  [ANTiuoaia.]  No  Athenian,  on
the  other  hand,  if  belmgiui  to  the  tax-paying
cluau,  could  be  exempt  from  the  tCo-^Ofnt,  not  eren
the  deKeitdanta  of  Hanudiu  and  Aiiitogibm.


460


ELSCTRUH.


<I>mmmL&£9(k  tL4G2,  &c)  Onlwiu, though
•mnpt  bam  liUigiet,  mre  obligtd  to  ;&;  the  pn-
perty-tal,  ■*  we  *eB  in  Ilie  iutiuiee  of  Demottbr
SCI,  who  vu  ona  dF  tliB  laden  of  tho  ijinmoria
ior  ten  jean  (c.  Mid.  p.  S6S ;  compare  Itteui,
^  Dionji.  Iianu,  p.  108  ;  atOnd-Graie,  ri'
p.  331,  ed.  Reiike).  E'en  triwarrh)  wen
exempt  fmm  paring  the  tSirfopd  thsmidyec,
although  they  coiud  not  be  compelled  to  pay  the
w/manpofi  (DemcMh.  cPolfcL  p.  1309,  cPAae-
a^  p.  1046.)  It  Hwmi  thni  alieui  were  likewiu
■n^Mt  to  it,  for  the  coir  mttanee  we  have  of  an;
•Kcption  being  made  u  one  of  nlieni.  (Mum.
Oion.  ii.  idT. ;  BCckh,  PmU.  Sam.  ^  fiSS.)

For  further  iniormation  coKceming  the  nhjeet
of  the  ttr^api,  tee  the  fourth  book  sf  Bikkh*!
PuiUc  Eeemamg  ^  A&aa:  Wol^  PnUgomaa
w  Uflm.i  Wnchimoth,  H^km.  AlierA.  vol  ii.

fdB,  3d  ediL  ;  Hennann,  Pii.  A»L  of  Orttei,
181  [L.&7

ELAEOTHE'SIUM.  [BiLinjE,  p.  190.]
ELAPUEBO'LIA  {tka^gikui),  the  grealett
Hutiral  in  the  town  of  RTampolit,  in  Phocit,  wlieh
«a>  celebrated  in  boiiaiir  of  Aitemii,  in  commemo-
ntion,  it  ie  nid,  of  a  Ticlsn'  which  it<  inhahitaali
liad  gained  orer  the  TheoaJJau,  who  had  nvnged
the  connliy  and  rednoed  the  Phodant  in  the
neigbbouriiHid  of  the  town  nenrl;  to  the  1a>t  si-
tremitj.  (Plut.  Dt  Mid.  VirL  p.  267  ;  Piiu.  i.
85.  §  4.)  The  onlj  particular  which  we  know  of
it*  celebration  it,  that  a  peculiar  kind  of  cake
(IXo^f)  wBi  made  on  the  occaiion.  (Athen.  zr.
f,  G4&)  Theae  caket  were,  ai  ibeir  nanie  indi-
cate!, pnhablj  made  in  the  ahape  of  a  atag  or
deer,  end  ofiered  to  the  goddcN.  The  fectiial  of
the  elaphebolia  wai  alto  celebnted  in  manj  ether
part*  ef  Oreeee,  but  no  particnlan  are  known.
(Etymol.  Magn.  i.  o.  'EXo^JoAuJ*.)  [L.  &]
ELAPJIEBO'LION.  [Calbwdariuii.]
ELECTRUM  (^XfirTpoi  and  ^kirrpor).  It
wed  by  the  BDcLOit  writert  in  two  different  mski,
either  for  on^  or  fee  a  mixture  of  metala  com-
poaed  of  gold  and  lilTcr.  Jn  the  fanner  Knie,  it
doea  Dot  came  within  the  icope  of  thii  work,  ei-
cefi  ai  a  lubetance  uied  in  the  arta,  and  alao  on
account  of  the  dilBeally  of  deciding,  with  reaped
to  (eieral  of  the  pauagcc  in  which  the  word
oecnn,  in  which  of  the  two  aenwt  it  ii  uted.  If
we  could  determine  whicb  waa  firal  known  to  the
Oreeki,  the  minenJ  or  the  metal,  the  ubject
would  be  «rapli£ed  ;  but  the  only  meana  we  haTe
of  determining  tbia  queition  ia  the  alight  internal
eridcnce  of  a  few  puaagea  in  Homer.  If,  a*  wc
■hall  endearour  to  >how,  thoia  paiiagei  refer  to
amber,  a  aimple  explanation  of  the  twofold  uae  of
the  word  luggeata  itaelf -.  namely,  that  the  word
origina%  meant  wnfar,  and  that  it  wai  aAerwarda
applied  to  the  mixed  nietal,  becauie  ill  pale  yellow
eolonr  membled  that  of  amber.  Etymolegicalty,
the  word  i>  probably  cnnneclcd  with  fiximip,  Su
fun,  the  root-meaning  being  Mfianr.  <,PiM,&fm.
Fortdt.  pt  L  p.  237  :  thia  derimtion  wu  known  to
Pliny,  //.  M  ixirii.  1  i.  11:  Botlm8ini"a  deriv-
tiiaa  from  tXxm^  ta  drav,  ia  objectionable  both  cai
philological  and  hiatorical  groDndi ;  the  aCtractire
power  of  amber,  when  nibbed,  ia  laid,  and  no
doubt  correctly,  to  hare  been  diacorered  long  after
the  mineral  waa  finl  known.)

The  word  occni*  Uirae  tinea  in  Homer ;  In  two
catea  wtien  mentioD  ia  made  of  a  necklace  of  gold,
brand,  a  held  tagetha^  pJKTfomi;  whete  the


ELBCTRmL

phuil  ia  afaiuM  alone  anSciant  to  prore  that  tba
meaning  ia,  with  amAgr  iiadt,  (Oof.  u.  450,  iriiL
295.)  In  the  former  paiaage  the  necklace  ie
brought  by  a  Phoenioan  mui^hanE.  The  other
[•aiage  ia  in  the  deacriptjoti  of  the  palace  of  Me-
nelaoa,  which  ii  eaid  to  be  ornamented  with  tba
brilliancy  of  ct^per  (oi  bronie)  and  gold,  and
electnun,  and  ailrer,  and  irory.  (Od.  il.  73.)
Now,  aince  the  mct^lic  electnun  waa  a  mixture  of
gold  with  a  amall  porticn  of  direr,  the  entmiin.
tion  of  it,  aa  diitinct  from  gidd  and  ailrer  would
aeem  almoat  anperflunoi )  alio,  the  mppaBtiiai  that
it  meana  amber  agreea  rery  well  with  the  anliae-
qnent  mention  of  irory ;  moreorcr,  the  oidet  a'
the  worda  aupporta  tbia  riew ;  {1a^  apptyiiig  to
them  the  principle  of  patalleltm, — which  ia  ao
MHnmon  in  early  pacta,  and  among  the  net  i>
Homer,  —  and  remembering  that  the  Bomeric  Una
ia  really  a  diatich  diridod  at  the  caesua,  we  ban
gcid  aid  oBi&ar  reiy  ^itly  oootiaated  with  aafaiar

XffufTaH  ^  Itkirrpeu  re

In  thia  lait  paaaase,  Pliny  nsdoatDod  the  wood
to  mean  the  metallic  electnna  (tf.  ff.  xxxJiL  4.
a.  S3)  ;  hut  Ml  authority  on  the  meaning  of  a  paa-
aage  of  Hinns  ia  wortfaljai :  and  indeed  the  Latin
wiitera  aeem  geoeially  to  hare  mdentond  the
word  in  the  aenae  of  Ifae  metal,  rathtf  than  «f
amber,  (or  which  they  hare  anotlur  wotd,  aiB-
oinim.  In  Meaiod^  deacription  of  the  abield  of
Herculea  (r.  141),  the  word  again  occur*,  and
we  hare  fffpnm,  md  tMt  mrg,  and  ilirhtum,
connected  with  lilnui^  9^  •>■■(  cfamee,  where
ambei  it  tbe  more  utaral  intoixelalioD  ;  ^tboogk
here  again,  the  Roman  imitator,  Viigil,  eridoitiy
nndcntood  by  it  tbe  metal  (Aat.  riil  402.)  For
the  diacuaaion  of  other  paiangra,  in  which  tlw
mMUiing  ia  more  doublfsl,  tee  the  Lexicetia  of
Liddell  and  Scott,  and  Seller  and  Jacobitx,  nd
eapecially  Buttmann't  Mi^Ualofftu,  Sajig.  T.  Vtbtr
du  EliMnm,  roL  il.  pp.  337,  foU.

The  eariieat  paaai^  of  any  Greek  writer,  in
which  the  word  ia  certfuui^  tved  for  the  natal,  ia
in  the  Amtigomi  of  Sophodea  (1038),  ^wra  iMs-
tion  ia  made  of  Indian  pJd  aatd  tie  iilm  ri  aai  ^
fiiirrfit,  u  objeeta  of  the  higheit  raloe.  Theaaian
be  little  doubt  that  what  ia  here  meant  it  the  nla
gold  depotitad  by  certain  rirsit  of  Aaia  Himr,
etpedilly  the  Pidolo,  which  contained  a  eaHi-
deiable  alley  of  ailrer.  We  hare  boa  an  eaaiuiiie
of  fKtfwc  aUetmm;  but  the  cmapuoud  wai  uaa
made  artificially.  Plinr  tlBtei  that  wheat  gold
fifth  part  of  iilrer,  it  it  (ailed  dkofm  ;
foond  ia  reint  i^  gold  ;  and  tlat  it  it
alao  made  by  art:  i^  he  adda,  it  oontaina  anoac
'  (ilni,  it  beecanc*  too  brittle  to  bo


Among  ita  psintiea  are,  aoeoidiiig  u
the  tane  anthor,  tbe  reflecting  the  light  of  a  Innp
man  brightly  tlan  rilrer,  and  that  a  mp  of  BMrra
electnun  detect!  the  pretenea  of  putoo  by  tcnain
dgni.  One  cannot  bat  raniect  that  the  laM  atate-
mmt  it  copied  &om  aooa  Gnek  writat:,  who  Mad*
it  reelecting  ambcT,  <b  acewnt  of  tba  aiBilai  jvo-
perty  that  need  to  be  attributed  to  ufti.  (Plia.
tf.  M  xxiiii.4.  a.aS.withHatdain'aBalBi  comp.
iz.  60.  a.  efi  ;  Paua.  r.  13. 1 6.)  latdoraa  abo  dk-
tingnithet  the  three  kindt  of  elsctnoi,  nanely,
(1)  amber ;  (3)  the  metal,  ftond  in  Ita  nataral
■tato ;  <3)  Om  metal  ailificUly  iiaptMi  a(  4lrat


naiter  fmrpmet  fin  whbA  g


Imnipnijat  tall*  u,  that  Alexander
ancni*  itreck  cabu  ef  it ;  and  coiu  are  in
"^^l""!  of  diii  metal,  riniek  }>j  the  kingi  of
ITi^iiii  aa.  bj  Sjncaaa,  and  by  otker  Onek
Malta.  (Eckhal,  J>ai«.  ffmt.  ViL  tdL  I  pp.  xxIt.
nr.)  [P.  S.1

BX£PHAS  (Mfot).  Ai  m  Late  to  ipeak
rfirar;  chiafrf  in  amnKtiDn  with  Greek  art,  wa
pbre  wkat  we  bate  ta  wj  of  it  under  iu  Greek
ime, in pRferom  to  the  pioper Latin  word


haj  ;  yof.  Gaary.  iii,  38,  ^n.  iii,  184,  vi,  S96.)
In  the  earij  writm,  inch  at  Homa,  Hciigd,  and
Pill  iti,  tka  vocd  innciably  ncant  iaarj,  never  ths
Afimdi  jaat  becaoH  the  Oreaka  obtained  iforj
I9  tiBBarce  long  beta*  tbey  erat  aair,  or  had
tuaaioa  tg  ipeik  tt,  the  aninat  from  vliich  it  waa
nhtaaeJ.  Bot,  m  die  other  hand,  there  tao  be
"J^S"^ ■ ■' "


the  Owpki  icaeiTed  the  tutonaw  ircvj,  together
■itb  the  >■■■«  it  the  animal  iriiich  {mduca  it,  and
Mlanflj  affiled  tha  htur  to  the  former.  <Re-
ijiiliig  tha  nana  m*  farther  Udd^  and  Scotfi
itmtoii,  and  PMt^  Bijfm.  FbneL  pt.  L  p.  lixxi)
Btndotai,  atnigfat  be  eipected  frem  bii  rcacaichea
m  Afia  and  *ft^,  knair  that  irorj  came  honx
tte  tsaA  of  tha  deplut.  (ir.  191  ;  PUn.  H.  N.
ns.  S.  a.  4)  ;  vkife  on  the  other  hand  wiiteB  ai
laM  ■(  Joha  (PliB.  I,  &)  and  Panaaiat  (t.  IS.  l  1.)


The  tailietf  naotiiin  of  iTorf  in  a  Greek
vriter  ana  ^m^  of  ths  Iliad  (t.  68S),  vhen
it  ^ptan  m  aa  mament  br  harneaa  (4'bi  ^.i^
ftJfaiii). In  tha  OdjMeritaviM  Man  article  of

~  a  refctmd  to.  IhW  it "  " '


la  sf  Ana  Minoi^  and  no  dmbt
g  GieecB  Ftapar.  It  afpeota  among  tka
iM  of  hnatta,  faimtore,  Teaaela,  armon^
a,  and  la  bMh. Neither  ia  then  any  oo-

moDgthe  Qnek)


■riirA  tat  the  ala^yhteri  «  the  unphithiBtR.  It
■■■  aaed,  Bot  ndf  aa  an  ir***"**"*  117,  bat  ai  the
cBBeiaalBiilof  cb«ii%bedi,f9olitoola,and  nher
huafe,  aadnea,  flntei,  and  the  framea  of  Ijna,
badea  mmtj  otbs  electa.

Tha  Boat  inportaBl  upUaatioD  of  itotj  wbj  to
waiha  ef  «t,a^e^ada]lf  to  Ihoae  itatoea  which,
^timf  f— pi— *  oT  geld  and  xnwj,  *et«  called
rhi7»4tTphntina  (x(aw«i^»<faf  «.)■

The  an  of  dijedephantbe  itatiw  nnut  be


»..iW.i  1.11.1


DM^  (OBBected  with  orring  in

M  ioi&catad  bj  the  ap^ieatlon  of  the

Kin  thiiHt  (Saab.


PL  373).  While  the  KDlptar  wroogbt  at
once  DpoQ  a  material,  which  had  been  uompaia-
Uvelj  neglected  in  the  cariy  itagea  of  art,  on  ac-
of  tha  diSeidty  of  working  it,  while  the


tic  material,  another  daoe  gf  oMiBB  derelopad
capabtlitiea  of  the  other  original  hiuch  of
eenlpton,  earring  in  wood,  which,  on  acconnt  of  it*
&ciUtr,  had  been  the  moat  extenuTdj'  |>Bctiied
in  (od;  timeo,  eepeciall;  ia  the  ttaluea  of  tha
godi.  (Comp.  STATUAnu,DiidDuLo/S>i9.  art
DtuA^at.)  The  nde  wooden  imagee  were  not
nnlj  improTOd  in  fom,  bat  alaboalelj  decoimtad,
at  fint  with  coloma  and  ml  diapetf,  and  oAei-
ward)  with  mure  eoitlj  mateiiala.  Tha  tnt  gnat
■tep  in  their  improremoit  waa  to  laaka  tha  parta
which  were  not  cohered  W  dnperj,  mundjr  the
face,  handt,  and  feet,  of  while  marble ;  nch  atatoca
were  called  acreiitia.  The  next  wai  to  mbititDU
plaiei  of  iToiy  far  the  maible  ;  and  the  fbrdier  im-
worement,  the  nee  of  beaten  gold  m  placs  of  real
dn^wr;,  conititatcd  tha  dayteUpliamtmt  datatt.
Thu  art  waa  one  of  thoae  which  nave  attained  to
their  perfection  alrauat  M  aoon  a*  they  have  re-
ceived their  fint  devdopment.  Tbeie  were  »onie
worha  of  thii  deeer^ion  before  the  time  of  Phei-


bnt  the  art,  ptupslT  regarded,  wai  a
once  created  and  perfected  by  him  ;  and  the  reaaa
Kit  ill  immediate  parfrcCion  woo,  that  the  artii
WBi  ]>repaied  fer  hie  work,  not  only  by  hi
but  al»  bv  - ■  - ■

bwa,  end  Ui
depvtmenti  of  hii  art

ChryielephaiUrae  etotiiaiy,!*  piactieed  by  Phei-
diao,  combmed,  ui  addition,  to  that  peijectiao  of
ftitm  whiefa  ehafocterieed  all  the  great  worki  of
the  age,  the  elatnentt  of  coloiul  grandenr,  eaqoi-
aite  beauty  and  delicacy  of  material,  and  tha  moot
rich  and  eUborate  nibtidiacy  decoralione.  Tha
general  effect  of  hil  Zeni  or  Athena  woe  that  of
tha  moat  impoeiag  grandeur  and  tha  moat  perfect
illnatoD  to  which  ait  can  attain.  In  a  bfonie  or
marble  Matue  tha  material  at  once  ditpola  tha
illoiian  of  reality  ;  bnt  the  ini)mtioii  [rodacad
upon  a  ipeelatar  by  Che  lofi  tinte  of  the  ivory,  the
edonnd  aye*  and  the  gidden  robe  tS  the  Olympiaa
Zeo^  to  ny  nothing  of  the  eipceMioa  of  tha  fca-
tnna  and  tha  flgma,  waa  almoal  that  a!  hnking

.X. .^^^^^^ Tbeta  alatnaa  wata  tha

made,  and  pcobaUy  that  evai
xma  DB  mHE,  uj  invBet  ■  religion  of  idolatry  with
an  aitemal  appeaiaacs  of  nhly  g  and  Sot  the
nke  of  ihii  immediate  eflect  tha  artiit  waa  willing
to  fiwego  the  laMing  lama  which  he  would  have
obtained  if  he  had  eiecated  hit  greateat  woiki  in
a  more  durable  moleriaL

The  moot  celabialed  chryadephoutina  atatnea  in
Greece  and  the  tirtak  italei  were  thoae  of  Athena
in  the  Acmpolit  of  Athena,  of  Zeua  at  Olym|ua,  of
Aadepiui  at  Epidoumi,  a"  ' — ■■■

the  Hen  ne ■  ' "


^eat


IT  Algol  by  Polycleit


lathem


*  Maition  ii  made  of  chryaelephaatine  natae*
by  Dorydeidea,  Theodea,  Uedon,  Caoachn^  Ma-
oaechmna,  and  Snidoa. (See  the  articlea  in  tha


tS2


ELBPHAS.


Kt  op  It  DapliM  bf  Antiachni  IV^  in  imitatioi
of  thw  of  Phf  Jdiu  ;  certain  lUtuH,  in  the  temple
of  Zeiu  Oljnipiiu  at  Albena,  which  are  praised,
but  not  ■pedlied,  by  Pausuiiai:  md  eren  tome  of
the  Grcelt  kiiig«  of  the  conqnered  italtt  of


higbm


the  pie^  of  earlier  timet  eoold  pa;  to  the  godi ;
ibc  PauBniu  uw,  in  the  t«miJa  of  Zeni  at
OlTmpia,  m  iTOiy  itatoe  of  king  Nicnoiedea  (t.
12.  S  6).  The  chief  of  the  aboie  worki  are  folly
docribed in  the  Dieliomary  of  Biogn^t),  aiti.

The  qneition  Rspeetiog  the  mechanical  exKD-
tian  of  chryid^banliDe  alataea  innlTH  certain
difficulliet,  which  haTo  been  tbij  elabotalely  and
ingeniooitj'  examined  bj  QoatRDitre  de  Qsincy,
in  hii  iplendid  wnik  entitled  "  Le  Jnpiter  Olym-
pien,  00, 1'Ajt  de  k  Sculpture  Antique,  coniidM
Mtu  un  noafean  point  da  Tue;"  &c  Parii,  1815,
folio.  A  Teiy  ilight  coniidemtion  of  the  DUleiia]
employed  will  ihow  the  nature  of  the  difBcoltiea.
EVom  a  li^  of  wood  or  a  block  of  marble  the  re-
quired figure  can  be  elahomted  by  cutting  away
cettun  portion! :  day  am  be  moulded,  and  brome
or  plaiter  cait,  in  the  fgnn  pceTionilj  determined
m :  but  the  material  Ibi  an  inry  itatue  ii  pre-
•ented  in  piecea  which  mu>t  be  made  to  auume  an
entirely  new  fom  before  the  work  can  be  com-
menced. Now  De  Qnincy  luj^ntca  that  the
■nciena  pcaieaatd  the  ait,  now  loit,  of  catting  the
eorred  parti  of  the  el^hant^  toak  into  thin
platei,  Tiiying  in  bmdih  op  to  13  or  even  20
inchei,  and  bending  them  ioto  the  exact  curve*
nqnired  by  the  vaiiHU  parti  of  the  figun  to  be
coToed.  Theaa  plalea,  having  been  broogbt  to
^eir  pnper  fonaa  by  companion  with  a  model,  on
wUch  each  of  them  mu  marked,  ware  phtced  ipon
the  eon  of  the  atatue,  which  wm  of  wood,
■trengthened  with  metal  todi,  and  were  fattened
to  it  and  to  each  other  chieSy  by  idnghui ;  and
of  eoune  the  whole  luiface  wai  poluihed.  (An
excellent  account  of  the  proeeu,  according  to  De
Qniucy'i  viewa,  ii  gireo  in  the  worit  entitled
MewgB^  ToL  iL  c.  13.)  Tiie  iroiy  wai  nted
for  the  fleah  parti,  that  ii,  in  the  coloual  atanei
of  the  deitiea,  the  &ce,  neck,  brcaat,  aimi,  handi,
and  feeL  The  other  paiti  af  the  woodoi  core
were  eorered  with  thin  baten  gold,  to  repreienl
the  hair  and  drapery,  which  ww  affixed  to  the
■tatoe  in  inch  a  maimer  a>  to  be  taken  off  at  plea-
■ore,  ai,  nltimately,  it  waa.  The  gold  waa  in
many  placea  emboiaed  and  chased ;  and  coloora
were  frnly  employed.  The  eyei  were  formed
either  of  jvecioQi  itonta  or  of  coloured  marble*.
To  preoene  the  ivorr  from  injury,  either  from  too
ranch  or  too  little  mouture,  oil  wai  poured  ot«  it
in  the  fint  caie,  water  in  the  KCood.  (Camp.
DicL  ofBiog.  art  PMrf >a>,  and  MUller,  ATti.  d.
Sanl,  t  31S.)  The  pmdigiana  qnantitie*  of  ivray
leqnired  for  tbaae  worka  were  imported,  in  the
time  of  Pheidiai,  chiefly  from  Afrii^  (Hermipp,
mAli.i.f.27.)

9  of  iTury  in  the  arti  wen  chi  '
ilaluellet  and  other  n  "  ' '
tarred  at  once  out  of  t
of  the  tnik ;  and  for  ancb  puipoiea
^are  been  employed  from  a  very  fariy  period-
Thna  on  the  cheat  of  Cypiehii  there  were  ivory
Agnrei  in  relief  [Pani.  v.  17.  §3).  VaiioDi  amall
«^  in  ivory  have  come  down  to  ni,  belonging
to  all  pviodi  M  the  ait,  among  the  moit  inteteit-


BLEUSINIA.
ing  of  which  are  writing  tablet*  (iJXrai,  Uri  rie-

p/umliiii),  with  two,  three,  five,  or  more  Invs
(dip<!/cia,  /np^nlo,  pttitapifAa,  8lc\  either  en-
tirely of  ivory,  m  with  the  leave*  of  fttrcbmenl  and
the  cove™  of  ivory  ;  the  covh»  are  earted  in  reiiet
Theae  tablet*  are  chiefly  of  the  later  age*  of  Rome,
and  are  divided  into  two  chuMa,  Omiarin  aad
Eaittiiutira,  which  are  diaCinguiahed  by  the  earr-
ing! on  their  coven ;  the**  on  the  former  being
figure!  of  coniula  at  the  poaapn  OtrrmtU,  wiawaaa!,
and  10  forth,  thoie  on  the  iKter  rnnaendng  bibli-
cal inhjeet!  (Milller,  Le.  n.  3).  The  teeth  of  the
bippopatamu*  wcra  lometime*  n*ed  a*  a  nbati-
tuta  for  ivory in  voriu  of  art. (Pan*.  viiL  46.

§  2.)  [P.  a)

ELEUSI'NIA  CEknwfna),  a  lalival  and
myiteriea,  arigiaally  celebiated  only  at  Eleona  in
Attica,  in  honaor  of  Demeter  and  Penephonc.
(Andoc  Oa  MytL  IS.)  All  the  andecH  who  hav«
occaiion  to  mentian  the  Eleuainian  myitoie*,  or
&»  mfiterica,  ai  they  were  aometime!  called,  agre*
that  they  ven  ibe  holiett  and  moat  nnenhle  of
all  that  wen  celebrated  in  OiHCe.  (Arictot.  A4a(L
iL  24  ;  Cic  /)e  NaL  Dmr.  i  43.)  VarioM  tiadi-
tioni  were  current  amang  the  Oreeka  rvapecting
the  authorof  tbe*emy!tenea  ;  far,  while  aome  eon-
lidered  Eumolnu  er  Mumeni  to  be  tfaeit  founder,
othcn  atated  that  they  had  been  introdaced  from
Egypt  by  Erechtbeaa,  who  at  a  time  of  eearcity
pmcided  hi*  coiuitry  with  com  from  Egypt,  and
uuported  from  tha  eame  quarter  the  laoed  ritea
and  myiterie!  af  Eleuui.  A  third  tradition  atDi-
buted  the  initilutioo  to  Demeter  henel^  who,  ^rhai
wandering  about  in  atareh  of  her  daiigfat«T,  Pene-
phone,  wa*  bdiered  to  have  come  to  Attica,  in  the
reign  af  Ereehtheni,  to  have  mpplied  it*  inhahh-
ant!  with  com,  and  to  have  in«tiliited  the  rtXrraf
and  myiteiiei  at  Eleuwl.  (Died.  Sk.  L  29  ;  laomt.
Piuuggr.  p.  16,  ed.  Steph.)  Thit  lait  opiniao
aeema  to  Imre  been  the  moat  common  among  iLb
ancient*,  and  in  anbaeqitent  tinea  a  atone,  called

the  well  CalliclKinia  at  Bleun!,  on  which  the  god-
dea*,  overwhelmed  with  grief  and  &tigne,  wa*  be-
lieved to  hare  retted  on  her  anivil  in  Attkx.
(Apollol  BilJMk.  i.  G  ;  Ovid.  FaiL  iv.  602,  Ac)
Around  the  wall  Caliichoroa,  the  Eleoainian  womem
were  laid  to  have  fint  petlonned  their  choma,  and
to  have  nuig  hymn*  to  the  goddet*.  (Pani.  i.  38.
%  6.)  All  the  accoonti  and  altonon*  in  andcnl
writer!  leem  to  warrant  the  coocluiian  that  the
legend*  concerning  the  intnidnction  of  the  Elea-
nniaara  detcdpticD*  of  a  period  when  the  inhabit-
ant! of  Atlica  were  beemning  acquainted  with  tha
benefit*  of  agriculture,  and  of  a  ngnlarly  crniati-
tuted  fbnn  of  aociety.  (Cic  D*  Ug.  ii.  14,  »
Firr.v.  14.)

In  the  reign  of  Eiechthen*  a  war  ia  mai  to  ban
broken  oot  between  the  Athenian*  and  Klnarnian*
(Hermann,  PoU.  Autiq.  rf  Grtaat,  {  91.  Dale  9),
and  when  the  latter  wen  defeated,  thaj  adtnow-
ledged  the  aopremaey  of  Athena  in  eveiy  thing  ez~
cept  the  nXrroI,  which  they  wiihed  to  coadaet
and  regulate  for  themaclve*.  (Thucyd.  iL  IS  ;
Pan*.  L  SB.  §  3.)  Thni  the  inperinundBica  n.
mained  with  the  deieendant*  of  Eumolpoi  [Eti-
HOLFiDii],  the  daugfatera  of  the  Eleuainian  ktt^
Celeui,  and  a  third  cLaia  of  prieata,  the  Ksycea,
who  teem  likawiie  to  have  been  dHmected  with
the  bmity  of  Eumolpui,  thcagh  they  ihanaelvei
tncad  th^  origin  to  Uetmei  aad  ApaUM,


BLBU8INIA.
At  th«  tine  wbcD  the  Itml  gDnnuneDli  of  tbs
•ennl  laira^i)«  of  Attick  mn  cmcculnled  at
Atlwoi,  the  ofHlal  became  alio  the  ceptre  of  nli-
paa,  mi  acTcnl  deitia  who  had  hitbarto  onlj  en-
jajed  •  local  «onlii[i,  mre  now  nued  to  the  ii


vhip^  nremirnued
Thii  •eemi  a]»  tc


^W,  o


*  became  natonll?


thaaf[h  ha  otigiiial  place  of  wanhip
with  which  ao  manj  ai '
Becuid,  alfll  retained  ib


^j,  to  fflmaii :  it  waa  hen  that  the  moat  aolemn
fan  of  the  iBend  ritec  waa  peifoimed.

We  moat  diitiagBiih  betweea  the  grata  Elcu-
lima  which  wen  eetebialed  at  Alhou  and  Eleiuia,
and  the  leaaer  which  wen  held  at  Agne  on  the
niMoa.  (Slc^  Bn  a-e-'ATpn.}  From  the  tia-
ditiao  napecting  Ue  inatllutioii  of  the  leaaer  E)eD-
liaia,  it  eeena  to  be  cleat,  that  the  initiation  into
the  Kieoainian  Bjaterict  vaa  originally  confined  la
la  only  ;  fbr  it  ii  nid  (hat  Henelea,  before
into  the  lower  world,  wiihed  to  be  in>-
taled,  bot  aa  the  bw  did  not  admit  itisngen,  the
Inata  Beoainia  were  ioatitnled  in  Older  to  evade
ihe  law,  and  Dot  10  diaappoint  the  great  beneflutor
rfAltica.  {Sciiol.  aJArutefk-PluLBte.)  Other
icgisda  coDcmiing  the  initiation  of  Heradei  do
not  DMPtioii  the  lenrr  Elensnia,  hat  netelf  Mate
that  he  waa  adopted  into  Ihe  Eunilj  of  one  Pjlint,
in  arder  Id  becoine  lawfully  intitli^  to  the  initia-
tioB.  But  both  taditiooa  in  reality  eipren  Ihe
Mae  thing;,  if  we  nippoae  tiial  the  initiation  of
Haadai  waa  cdIj  the  Snt  alafga  in  the  real  ini-
tiatioa  i  far  (bt  kaaet  Elenainia  were  in  reality
anly  ■  prepuation  (spMniei^ii,  or  rfodyrtvru)
fee  tk  Ral  mjitetiea.  (Schol.  ad  Aritlapk.  I  c.)
Aflet  the  time  when  Ihe  Wua  Eleiuinia  are  aaid
to  bare  been  initilnted,  we  no  longer  h«r  of  the
I  of  any  one  from  the  myilfriea,  eicept
la ;  and  HeivdotDi  (TiiL  66)  eipreialy
Baua^  that  any  Greek  who  viihed  it,  might  be
kitiated.  The  leaaer  Eleuainia  were  held  ereiy
year  is  the  month  of  Antheateiion  (PluL  Denetr.
26),  and,  according  to  Hme  acoxuiti,  in  bonaur  of
PetaaphiBe  alme.  Thoae  who  wen  initiated
ihcB  Don  the  nanM  of  myttae  OiAo-rn,  Snidaa,  i.
"ErfwYip),  md  had  to  wait  at  leaat  anolhu  year
beiiiw  tbn  coold  be  admitted  to  the  great  mya-
leriea.  "Aa  nrindpal  litee  of  thii  first  itage  of
"T'tT*''—  (naialed  m  the  aacrifee  of  a  low,  which
the  nyatae  aeem  to  have  £nt  waahed  in  the  Can-
tbariB  (Aiialoph.  Jtiarm.  703,  with  the  Sehol.
720,  a^  Pa*,  XB  ;  Vano,  D*  Rt  Riul.  ii.  i  ;
nnl.  Fhoe.  2S),  and  inthepuiificationby  apiint,
who  ban  the  name  cf  llydnnot.  (Hcaych.  :  c.
T^axh  ;  Polyaen.  t.  17.)  The  myalae  had  alao
to  take  aa  oath  of  aeereey,  which  waa  adniiniilered
to  thca  by  the  nyatagogaa,  alao  called  ltpo$itm)i
ar  nfa^\ri)t ;  they  nceiTed  acone  kind  of  pn-
|— if*ry  inatnction,  which  enabled  thnn  after-
tnu^  to  m^eiitaiid  the  mnteriea which  vere


ELEUSINIA.  453

remained  dming  the  aolemnitiei  in  the  Teatibnla.
(Seneca,  Qwwt.  Nat.  lii  91.)

The  great  myatetiea  wen  celebrated  eiery  year
in  the  month  of  Boedromion  during  nine  daji,
&om  the  15th  to  the  Q3d  (Pint.  DmOt.  26  )
Heunina,  EUum.  c  21),  both  at  Athena  and
Gleniil.  The  initiated  wen  called  triwrai  or
t^upei.  (Suidaa,  i.e.)  On  the  fiiat  day,  thoae
who  had  been  initialed  in  the  leaaa  Eleniiuia,
aaaembled  at  Athena,  whtoce  id  name  waa
iyvpiiit  (Heayeh. ».  o,) ;  but  itrangert  who  wiabed
to  wjtneaa  the  celebntion  of  theae  national  ao-
lemnitiea  likewiae  liaited  Alhena  in  great  nnmbera
al  thia  Kaaon,  and  we  £nd  it  eipteaaly  atated
(hat  Athena  wna  crowded  with  viaiton  on  the
Dccaiion.  (Muim.  Tyr.  Dimrt.  O.  tut  fin. ;
Philoetrat.  ViL  JpolL  ir.  fi.) On  the  aecond  day


rational  phiaae  by  which  the  myatae  w
Tited  to  ataemble  for  the  puipoae.  (Heaycb.  t. «. ;
Polyaen.  iii.  11.)  Suidaa  (t.  b.  '?tml:  compan
Pana.  L  3S.  g  2.)  menllooa  two  riTnleta,  called
^•irol,  aa  the  place  (o  which  the  myttae  went  in
order  to  be  purified.  Of  the  third  day  xareely
anyihing  ia  known  with  certainty  ;  ve  only  learn
(Tom  Clement  of  Aleiandiia  (Profnpl.  p.  IS,  ed.
Potter)  that  it  waa  a  day  of  hating,  and  that  in
the  cTening  a  fingal  meal  waa  taken,  vhich  con-
aiated  of  cakea  made  of  aenuDe  and  honey.
Whether  tscrificea  wen  offered  on  thii  day,  ai
Meuniua  inppoaea,  la  uncertain ;  but  that  which
he  aiaigni  to  it  coniitted  of  two  kindi  of  aea-Gih
irplyt.^  and  /uurlf,  Athoi.  «ii.  p.  32A),  and  of
cakei  of  barley  grown  in  the  Rharian  plaini  (Pana.
L  3&  g  fi.)  It  may  be,  bowcTer,  that  thii  aacri-
fice  belonged  to  the  fourth  day,  on  which  alao  the
KoAiUai  tiSotas  teenii  to  have  taken  place.  Thia
waa  a  procetgion  viih  a  baakct  containing  pome-
giaoatei  and  poppy-aeeda ',  it  waa  (aixied  on  a
wegKOB  dnwn  by  oieii,  azid  women  followed  with
amall  myitic  catei  in  their  handt.  (Callim,  Hjfmm.
aCer.;  ViiR.CeoF^.  i.  166  ;  Hcuraiut,  L  cc  25.)
On  the  fifth  day,  which  appeart  to  hare  been
called  the  tonh  day  (4  rir  Kofmlmr  Wpa),  the
mntae,  led  by  the  Sifiovxgi,  went  in  the  cTening
with  torchea  to  the  temide  of  Demeler  at  Eleuaia,
when  they  teem  to  hare  remained  daring  the
following  night.  Thitrile  waa  probably  aiymboli-
lal  repntentation  of  Demetei  wandering  abont
in  aeoich  of  Pertepbone.  The  uith  day,  called
Takchoa  (Hetych.  i.  v.  1ux<»),  waa  the  moM
tolemn  of  aU.  The  itatue  of  lakcboa,  aoo  of
Demeter,  adorned  with  a  garland  of  myrtle  and
bearing  a  torch  in  hii  hand,  waa  carried  along  tho
■acred  road  (Pint.  Aldb,  34  ;  EtymoL  Magn.,  and
Suidaa,  i.  e.  'lepi  'Otii)  amidit  joyDna  ahouu
(fiuiXlC«r)  and  aonga,  fiom  the  Csameicua  to
Eleuiia  (Aritloph.  Ran.  315,  &.c  ;  Pint  P*a-
son,  2B,  and  Vslcken.  ad  Hervd.  liiL  69.)
Thit  tolemn  pncetjion  waa  accompanied  by  great
nmnben  of  foilowera  and  apectatora,  and  the
ttory  related  by  Hcrodotua  ia  founded  on  (he
Buppotition  that  30,000  pcrtoDi  walking  along
the  tacnd  road  on  thii  occaiion  wai  nothing
uncommon.  During  the  night  from  the  liilh  to
the  aerentfa  day  Xbe  myttae  remained  at  Elea-
lii,  and  were  initialed  into  the  latl  myaterici
(horrffa).  Thoae  who  were  neither  twirtm
noi  iiitrrai  wero  lent  away  by  a  henld.  The
'e«3 ,  --■ -  ^^--


tU  ZLEUSINIA.

mjtfu  sow  repeated  tbe  Mth  of  «ecnij  which
bod  besn  adminiiumd  tt>  them  at  tha  leanc  Elah
linia,  undfrwoit  a  nnr  puiifcatian,  and  dien  the;
mn  led  bj  tha  mrMi^ogni  in  the  daiknen  o(
night  iota  the  ligfated  intarior  <f  tb*  mattatrj
{f^nrrityU),  and  were  lUawed  to  m  {a^roffa)
what  none  ucept  tJie  epoptae  ever  beheld.  The
awful  and  horrible  mBimer  in  which  the  initia-
tion it  dcKribeai  bj  Uler,  eapecisllj  Chrieliaa
wriloi,  leeiia  partly  to  proceed  from  their  igno-
tanee  of  it*  real  chUBcter,  parti;  from  their  horror
■nd  BTcnion  to  theio  pagan  rilM.  The  more
andent  writeti  alvaji  abttuned  from  entering
DMo  an;  deampUan  of  the  labject.  Each  in-
difidial,  after  hu  initiation,  ii  mid  to  haTO  been
diimiued  hjr  the  wmU  ic^,  V<>(  <Hea;cL  i.  c.)>
ki  eciler  to  make  room  for  other  myita&

On  the  KTCDth  daj  the  initiated  returned  to
Athoii  amid  Taiioiu  kindi  of  raillery  and  jetti,
CQieeially  at  the  bridge  over  the  Cephiiui,  where
thej  at  down  to  ml,  and  ponied  forth  their  ridi-
cale  on  thoM  who  paved  by.  Hence  the  wordi
Ttfupfjltir  and  y^ivur/Ut  (Stnbo,  ii.  p.  395;
BaidUjKC.ri*^))!^**:  Haycb.j.o.  r<Tw/H»Ttt(:
Aelian,  Hid.  AnimaL  it.  4t ;  MHIIer,  HiiL  of  He
IM.  of  Onto,  p.  132).  Theio  BuiMian  leera,
liha  the  procHum  with  torchei  to  Eleuiii,  to  have
been  diamatical  and  lymbolical  rcpreienliitioni  of
the  jeiti  by  which,  accivding  to  the  ancient  l^end,
larabe  or  Baabo  had  diapelled  the  grief  of  the  god-
den  and  made  her  araile.  We  may  here  obwrre,
that  probably  the  whole  biitoty  of  Daineler  and
Petaephone  waa  in  Hme  war  or  other  aymbolically
Kpnaenled  at  the  Eleiuinia.  Hence  Clemeni  of
Aleiandria  (/'n^'^  p.  12,  ed.  Poller)  edit  tha
Elauahuan  myateriea  a  "  rayitifal  dmaa."  (See
HHUar,  Hit.  ^  Oa,  LU.  of  Onaa,  p.Se7,  Ac.)
Tba  eighth  day,  called  'X.inSaifia,  wa*  a  kind  of
additional  day  for  thoae  who  by  kiok  accident  bad
naoe  too  late,  or  had  been  preT«ited  ftnta  being
biitiated  on  the  uith  day.  It  wai  laid  to  bare
been  added  to  the  original  nnmber  of  daji,  when
Aeclepiuif  caning  over  from  Epidaome  to  b«  in-
itialed, anifed  too  late,  and  the  Atheniani,  not  to
dimppiHnt  the  god,  added  an  eighth  day.  (PhDoaCr.
Vk.  Af^  iT.  6  1  Paul.  iL  96.  \  7.)  The  ninth
and  hit  day  bore  the  luunc  afT\inuxJai  (Pollux,
X.  7i  1  Athen.  TL  p.  49G),  from  a  peculiar  kind
of  Tcaael  called  vXiffio;):  ji|,  which  ia  deaeribed  ai  a
mail  kind  of  ii^ti>\h.  Two  of  Iheae  Tnaell  wcib
on  tbia  day  filled  with  water  or  wine,  and  tha


> of  the  I


aandce;


cribed


aboTS,  ieTpral  otht
known  to  which  day  they  belonged.  Among  tbnn
we  ahall  mention  odI;  uie  Eleniinian  game*  and
conteati,  which  M^nniiu  asaigni  to  the  aerenth
day.  ThcyaremCTlionedbyGelliiu(iiy.20),and
arc  i^d  to  bare  been  the  moit  ancient  in  Greece.
The  jxice  of  the  Tidon  coniiated  in  ear)  of  barley.
(SchoL  ad  PAid.  01.  ii.  ISO.)  It  waa  conaidercd
aa  one  of  the  greateat  pnfanatioae  of  the  Eteuamia,
if  during  their  celebratwn  an  ^i/ui  came  ai  a  mp-
pliant  to  the  temple  (the  Kleuunion),  and  placed
aia  oUto  branch  (htentpCa)  in  it  (AndoiiZVJUyif.
p.  £() ;  and  whocTer  did  lo  might  bo  pnt  to  death
withont  any  trial,  or  had  lo  pay  a  £ne  of  one  thon-
Hod  drachmae.  It  may  alio  be  remarked  that  at
Dthei  tealiTal^  aa  wall  aa  the  Etennnia,  no  mal^


ELEUTHERU.
who*  oetakuiiig  die  featinl,  eodd  ha  aoted  «
aireMedfccanoffinM.  (Demoath.ii.Mtf.p^£71.)
Lyougna  made  it  a  h>w  diat  any  woman  odng  a
eaniage  hi  the  laueaaion  to  Blaoiit  abonid  h«  find
am  thottaand  diachmae.  (Plat  Dt  Cap.  Da.  a.
p.  MS  ;  Adian,  V.  H.  liiL  34.)  Tha  eiiat«a
Bgainit  which  thla  taw  waa  ditected  aeema  ta  have
tnen  Teiy  enomon  before.  (Demoath.  c  Afti.
p.  663.)

The  Eleniinian  myiteriea  long  anrriTed  the  in-
dcpendrace  ofOreece.  Actemptato  aappreaa  them
were  made  by  the  empenir  Valmtuuan,  but  ha
met  with  tirong  oppoaitian,  and  they  acHn  to  have
continued  down  lo  the  time  of  the  elder  Theodo-
uua.  Reapeeting  the  tecret  doctrinea  whkh  were
revnled  in  them  to  the  iniliatad,  nothiiffi  eeitaui
ia  known.  The  general  belief  of  tba  aocwnla  waa
that  they  opened  to  mas  a  comforting  poapect  of
a  hitirra  itate.  (Pmd.  nre*.  p.  8.  ed.  BOckL)
Bnt  thia  fKtnre  doei  not  aeem  to  hare  been  ori^
nally  connErcted  with  Iheae  myiteriea,  and  waa  pro-
bably added  to  them  at  the  period  which  followad
the  opming  of  a  regular  intercourae  between  Oreece
and  Egypt,  when  eome  of  die  ipecnlatiTe  doctriHi
of  the  Utter  oountty,  and  of  the  fiaat,  may  hare
been  introdneod  into  the  mpterita,  and  hallowed
by  tha  namet  of  the  Tenerable  horda  oC  the  mythi-
cal age.  Thii  anmoaition  would  alao  acconnl,  m
•ome  meainre,  for  the  legend  of  their  inlndacCion
from  Egypt.  In  modern  tunea  many  attempta  haie
been  made  lo  diacoiec  the  nalore  of  the  myatoie*
KTealcd  to  tha  initiated,  bat  the  renlta  hare  been
aa  Tariooa  and  aj  hnciful  aa  might  be  erpeclcd.
The  meat  lobet  end  raobable  <iew  ii  that,  ac-
csrdiag  to  which,  "  they  wtca  the  temaina  of  a
wonhip  which  preceded  the  riae  of  the  Hdlenie
mythiriogy  and  lit  attendant  ritea,  gronitded  on  a
Tiew  of  Datum,  teaa  bncifhl,  more  eanieat,  and
better  fitted  to  awoksi  both  philoaophieal  thought
aodrel^otafeeUng."  (Thiifwall,  iTuC  a^Grwce,
iL  p.  140,  &C.)  Reelecting  tha  Attie  Elenunja
•ee  Mennina,  Smiaaa,  Liigd.  BaL  1619  ;  8l
Croix,  RceitrMt  HU.  H  CHUq.  w  la  Mnlim
du  Pagauau  (a  >econd  edition  wai  pnbliehed  m
1817,  by  SylTeatra  de  Socy,  in  2  »oU.  Parii)  ;
Oawanff,  Eaai  nr  la  Mytlira  iCEUiau,  3d  edi-
tion, Paria,  1816;  Wachmmth, /f<^ .^ Oar.  rel.ii.
p.  fi7S,&c2dediLp.  249,ftCi  Cnasa,  SgwiieL
».  AfftU:  iT.  p.  334,  &e. ;  Ntuach,  D*  Elmaim.
FaHimt,  Kid,  1843.

Eleuainia  were  alio  celebrated  in  other  parti  of
Gnecc  At  Epheaua  they  had  been  mtrodacpd
finm  Athtna.  (Stiaho,  lir.  p.  633.)  In  Laconia
they  wsc,  aa  Sir  aa  wa  know,  aoly  celetnted  by
the  inhabitaniB  of  the  andoit  town  of  Bdoa,  who
on  certain  daya,  ouried  a  wooden  atatoa  of  Per-
lephone  lo  the  Eleuiinion,  in  the  haighia  of  Tav-
getna  (Pane.  iii.  20.  f  fi,  Ac)  Crete  had  likewiM
lla  Eleuainia. (See  Henra.  £&w.  c  S3.) [L.  S.]

ELEUTHCRIA  {lKntifia\  the  Ibaat  it
liberty,  a  fbitlTsl  which  the  Orerka,  alti>r  the
batae  of  Plataeae  (479,  B.  c),  inatHoted  in  honnit
of  Zena  Eleulherioa  (tha  deltTerec).  It  waa  in-
tended not  merely  to  be  ■  tc^n  of  their  gratitnde
to  the  god  to  whom  they  beliered  themaetTea  to  be
indebted  lor  then'  Tictory  onr  the  haibariana,  but
alao  aa  a  bond  of  onion  among  themie1*ca  ;  (at,  in
an  aaaembly  nf  all  the  Oreeka,  Ariatidea  carried  ■
decree  that  delegalea  <irpMou\w  aa)  ftwpel)  trtm
all  the  Oreek  atate*  ahoidd  aaaemble  erery  year  al
PhUaeae  for  the  eeklKation  of  the  El


ElUNCIPATIO.
Mvnitalf  WMkt  tkaMmetisn  dedw^  atcrcd
ami  innolabla,  m  loog  m  iti  dtiiCDi  oBeied  Ulb  ui-
uul  MiifiMi  which  <nn  then  iulitoUd  oh  btiitU
(fOracok  EreirfifihTcu  theuulemmtietiiera
nlcbnlnl  vitb  coDtata  (M^  tm-  'EAwfi^fw)
in  whi^  tha  Ticlm  wan  rewuded  with  chaplelt
(ty^  ytiaiaila  vrffariT^i,  Strab.  U.  p.  412}.
Tha  annid  aolanuulj  at  PUluw,  which  cou-
tinaad  to  bo  obacrred  dawn  to  the  tuna  of  Plutarch
(^H^A^lS,31(PaBi.ii.2.g4),waiaafiiIlowt:  —
Oa  lb«  lixtcsith  oT  the  awDth  i^  Maimacteiion,  a
^mwii,  led  b;  a  trampetar,  wba  blew  the  aignal
tr  bank,  mucked  at dnbcaak  trough  tha  middls
it  die  town.  It  wat  foUowad  by  wiggmu  loaded
with  njTtla  bo^bi  and  cbipleti,  bj  a  black  bull,
aad  bjr  frn  Tavlha  wfao  earned  the  Teneli  con-

pcTBitlad  Is  minuter  oo  thia  occaaioo.  At  the  end
it  tkii  pDCeaMon  Mlowed  the  aiT:hiHi  of  Plataeae,
whs  *>a  uM  aDowed  at  any  other  time,  dnmig  bii
tfficr,  to  tOQch  a  weapon,  or  to  weai  any  other  bat
white  gaimenta,  now  wearing  a  purple  tonic,  and
with  ■  awiifd  in  tiu  hand,  and  alio  bouing  an  um,
\,rf^  fur  thii  aolflnnil;  in  lh«  public  archiie  (ypai'-
jia^Xitriar).  Wben  the  pcocewion  came  to  the
pl»  wberc  the  Oreelu,  who  had  Men  at  Pla-
aae,  mn  bniied,  the  archon  fint  waihed  and
taoMUA  lbs  tombatonca,  and  then  led  the  boll  to
a  prre  and  tiifind  it,  pnjitig  to  Zeui  and  Her-
■lea  ChtltoDioi,  and  inTniiu  the  bnie  men  who
bd  Uloi  in  the  defence  of  Uieir  couoUy,  to  take
lart  in  the  buqaet  prefored  for  them.  Thi«  ac-
an*  tt  PlatMitb  (ArMd.  19  and  21)  agrea  with
t^afThw7didea(iiL56).  The  Utter,  howe'ei,
I  lyiaalj  alatea  that  dreaM*  farmed  a  ]ttrt  of  tha
'*  "'i'.  which  were  probabljr  couaiDed  on  the
fpa  wiUi  tha  TietiB.  Thia  part  of  the  ceremony
•Raa  to  bara  no  looget  eiiated  in  the  daj*  of  Ptu-
tanch,  wbo  doea  not  mentioa  it,  and  if  ao,  the  Pt»-
taeaa  bad  fcvbably  baoi  compelled  by  porertj  to
dnp  it  (S«e  Thirl«a11-a  Uiit.  o/Cnwe,  iL  p.  353,
ftb ;  BBckb,  £^  Paid.  p.  208,  and  ad  Corp.
ImmrifL  i.  f.  9(M.)

BleQtberia  waa  alaci  the  name  of  a  fcitiTa]  cele-
Imtcd  in  Samoa,  in  bononr  of  Eiua.  (Athen.  liii.
p.  46Z)  [L.  S.]

ELLIHTMION (JMWn»). [Pbnti-

ELLDTIA  or  HELLOTIA  (JUi^u  or  ix-
k^u),  a  featiTal  witb  ■  toieh  nee  celebated  at
Conuh  in  hcaonr  of  Athena  aa  a  goddeea  of  fire.
<ScU.  Piad.  Ot  liii.  £6  i  Athen.  it.  p.  67S  i
EljmoL  a  n  'EXAvrlt).

A  fcetiial  of  the  Mme  name  waa  celebratod  in
Cketa,  m  heoonr  of  Enrepe.  The  word  IXAwrli,
ban  whidi  the  leeliTal  denied  iti  name,  waa,
awocding  to  Selcucaa  (ap.  Alhtm.  Le^,  a  myrtle
gpHaiw^  twoity  yarda  in  ciRumference,  which
waa  eauied  ahaat  in  the  proceuion  at  the  feitiTa]
if  the  EUotia.  (Cranfsn  Hcaych,  and  EtnasL
JCaga.  a.  n.  'EMjtrk.)  [L.S.]

KLLY'CHNIUM  [Locona.]

EMANCIPATIO  waa  an  act  by  whieh  the
pairiB  potertH  waa  diaaalred  in  the  lifetime  of  tha
paven^  and  it  waa  ao  called  beanie  it  waa  in  the
fan  of  a  ala  (aaaan^gficX  By  the  Twelre
Tahlea  il  waa  ntceaaaiy  that  a  aon  ahoold  be  told
three  tjmra  in  order  to  be  relcaaed  fhnn  the  paternal
fowtt,  ar  to  be  nijuriM.  In  tha  caaa  of  danghtera
aod  grandctildim,  esa  Mle  wna  mlGcienL  The
' '  ' d  the  foo  bj  the  fonn  of  a  ula  to


EMANCIPATIO.  tt&

Bootha  petWHi  who  monmiited  him,  upon  which
be  returned  into  the  power  of  the  lather.  Thia
waa  repeated,  and  with  the  like  raault.  After  %
third  nle,  the  paternal  power  waa  eitinguiabed,
bnt  the  ion  waa  reaold  to  the  puent,  who  then
maDumitted  him,  and  ao  acquired  tiie  righta  of
a  pktron  orer  hia  enumcipaled  aon,  wbich  would
otherwiaa  have  belonged  to  Uie  purchaaer  who  gave

The  following  view  of  emaceipaUo  i*  giren  by  a
Oemuui  writer :  —  "  The  patria  poteataa  eoold  not
be  diuoWed  imniediately  by  mejiumiuia,  becauaa
the  patria  poteetaa  mutt  be  viewed  u  an  Imperimii,
and  not  aa  a  right  of  property  like  the  power  of  a
maaler  orer  hii  alaie.  Now  it  waa  a  fundamental
principle  that  the  patria  poteilaa  w


pater  EunHiaa  poaaeaaed  of  at
^  rather  ]dedgiiig  hIa  child.  ConfonnablT  to
thia  fandamental  prindpl^  the  tcleaae  of  a  child
(tmu  the  patria  potiatai  waa  clothed  with  the  fiimi
of  a  maneipalie,  efliected  once  at  throe  timea.  The
patria  poleitaa  waa  indeed  thua  diaaolTed,  thongh
the  child  waa  not  yet  bxt,  bnt  came  into  tha  con-
dition of  a  neiui.  Conaequcntly  amanniniaaio  waa
neceaaarily  connected  with  tha  mancipation  in  ordn
that  the  proper  abject  of  the  emancipatia  might  bo
attained.  Thia  manumiaaio  muat  lake  place  once
or  thrice,  according  to  drcumatancei.  In  the  caaa
when  the  manumiaiio  ma  not  fallowed  byaiMam
into  the  patria  petealaa,  tha  ■"""■"■""  waa  at-
tended with  importaiit  eonaeqDowea  to  the  maoa-
miuor,  wbich  conaeqaencea  oi4^ht  to  vff^j  to  tha
emancipatiDg  party.  Accordingly,  h  waa  nettaaaiy
to  provide  that  Ihu  deciain  manumieaion  ahould  ba
made  by  the  emancipating  party  ;  and  for  that
reaaon  a  remancipalio,  which  prcisded  the  final
manumiuio,  waa  a  part  of  the  fbnn  i^  emancipatio."
(UnKrhukner,  2l9(»ir^  vol.  ii.  p.  1 39  ;  Koar^

Esaadmtio.)

The  legal  effect  of  ei


icipated


ndpa^on


uijuria:  and  all


the  previoualy  exialing  rctationa  of  agnalio  belwe
the  parents  Emilia  and  the  emancipated  cbild
ccaaed  at  once.  But  a  rela^on  uudogoua  to  that  of
patjna  and  freedman  wai  formed  between  the  pe^
aon  who  gave  the  final  emandpatioD  and  the  child,
ao  that  if  the  child  died  without  children  or  legal
heira,or  If  he  required  a  tutor  or  cnialDT,  the  righta
which  would  have  belonged  to  the  bthet,  if  hehad
not  enumcipUed  the  child,  were  aecnred  to  him  aa
a  kind  of  patnnal  right,  in  caae  he  bad  taken  tha
preaulion  to  gccnre  la  hnntelf  tha  final  mannmia-
tion  of  the  child.  Acdudingly,  the  bther  would
alwajrt  ttipnlata  for  a  remandpatio  from  the  ptu^
chaaer :  thia  itipulatioa  waa  the  pactum  fiduciae.

The  emancipated  child  could  not  take  any  part
of  hia  parenfa  property  aa  heraa,  in  caaa  the  pacait
died  inleetate.  Thia  rigor  of  the  dvil  law  (niHa
taiyi'tolea,  Qaiua,  iiL  25)  waa  modified  by  the
praebff^  edict,  which  placed  emandpated  cbildrto,
and  tboaa  who  were  in  the  pannfa  power  at  the
time  of  hia  death,  oi  '' '' '


paroit^  Hsperty.
ona  introdnced  the  pi


„ . _  _, iperial  rL__,.,

when  the  partiea  were  not  preaeoL  (Cod.  8.  tit.  49.
a  S.)  Jnatniian  enacted  that  emandpation  could
be  efllKled  befue  a  magiatiate.  But  be  atill  al-
lowed, what  waa  pcobably  the  old  law,  a  &thet  to


.  Rounit  fail  vill,  Ihaugh  it  Kcma
ihl  be  Aaat  bj  the  old  law,  uid  tbat


ot  emaocipated,  prith  r»pect  to


4£6  EHBATETA.

emuicinte  a  gnndvm,  without  e

Aoo,  and  to  emancipalc  the  vm  without  eiuAncipHujEg

the  grandson,  or  to  emancLpat^  them  aLL Juotiniui

aUo  (iVoe.  S9.  c.  11)  did  not  sUav

emancifBte  a  child

that  tfaii  miglil  be  none  nj  ia«  oii

the  parent  mi^ht  jo  deitroy  all  ihi

child  againit  the  wiU  of  the  child  (IniU  1.  tit  11.
1.  3).  Ai  a  general  rule  the  (alher  could  not  be
compelled  to  emancipate  a  child  j  but  there  were
lome  caies  in  which  he  might  be  compelled.

The  emperoc  Anaitaiitu  allowed  an  emancipated
child  {under  certain  reitrictionB)  t»  mccecd  to  the
pmpert;  of  an  inteitate  bnthT  or  liiter,  which
the  piaetor  had  not  allowed  ;  and  Joitinian  put  on
emancipated  child  in  all  reipecti '  ' '

ing  Bi  one  not  emancipated,  wil

An  emancipalio  effected  a  capiti*  dhninutio
minima,  in  conHqnence  of  the  Mrrile  character  (ler-
viUi  eaiaa)  into  which  the  child  woe  brought  bj
mchact.  (Gaini,i.  132,&t;  Dig.Ltit  7;  Cod.  6.
tit.  67.  >.  IS;  8.  tit.  49;  /i«i.  1,  til.  19;  3.  tlL  S;
Dirkien,  Utbertidil,  &c  p.  27B;  Thituit,  SyUfln,
*c,  £  783,  &C,  9th  ed.)  [G.  L.]

EMANSOR. [DmraroR.]

EMBAS  (ifiXii),  a  ihoe  worn  b;  men  (Snidaa,
1.  e,),  frequently  mentioned  by  Ariatophanea
(Eqak.  32!,  869,  873,  Etc.  314.  BSD)  and  other
Qroelt  writers.  Thii  appean  to  hare  been  the
mnrt  common  kind  of  ahoe  worn  at  Athena  (»6-
■Tt\\t  isiSniia,  Pollux,  rii.  B£  ;  compare  Iiaeoi,
dt  Dieaeag.  Hrrid.  91).  Pollux  (t  u.)  aaya  that
it  wHi  invented  fay  the  Thmciana,  tmd  that  it  waa
like  the  low  eotliurnua  The  taAat  wat  alaa  worn
by  the  BoMtiani  (Herod.  L  195),  and  probably  in
other  parti  of  Greece.  (Becker,  CbiruUu,  10!.  iL
p.  S73.)

EMBATEIA  (*/rf<rr.l=>.  InAtlie  law  thi.
word  (like  the  cocreaponding  EiiRliah  one,  aikry),
wii  used  to  denote  a  fonual  taking  pDaaeuion  or
leal  proper^'.  Thu,  when  a  ton  entered  upon
the  land  left  him  by  hia  father,  he  waa  aaid
iieSmrtitir,  or  SciGlfor  tli  t^  nrp^  and  ihere-
npoTi  he  become  teited^  ch*  pou«5cd  of  bii  in-
heritance. If  any  one  diitnrbed  him  In  the  en-
joyment of  thi>  property,  with  an  intention  to
diapnle  the  title,  he  might  maintain  an  action  of
ejectment,  <£oiAiji  iW  Before  entry  be  coold
not  maintain  anch  action.  'EfodAq  ii  from  i$\.
A(ir,  an  old  word  ngnifying  10  eject.  The  enp.
poaed  ejectment,  for  which  £e  action  wai  brought,
wna  a  mere  formality.  The  defendant,  after  the
plainliff'a  entry,  came  and  bimed  him  off,  iiiry'
t«  T^(  -j-flr.  Tbii  proceeding  (called  i^ayiryit)
took  phteo  quietly,  and  in  the  preience  of  wit-
neetej  ;  the  defendant  then  became  a  wrong-doer,
and  the  pUinliff  wai  in  a  condiUon  to  try  the

AD  Ihia  wai  a  rdiet  of  ancient  timet,  when  be>
fore  wrila  and  ;deadiugt  and  other  regidar  procena
were  inrenled,  partiei  adopted  *  mder  method  and
took  the  lav  into  their  own  handL  There  wai
then  an  actual  onatei,  accompanied  often  with  vio-
lence and  breach  of  the  peace,  for  which  the  per-
•on  in  the  wrong  waa  not  only  reaponaiblo  to  the
party  injnied,  but  vsa  alao  puniahable  aa  a  public
offender.  Afterwarda,  in  the  ooune  of  ciTiliEBtion,
violent  nmediei  becsma  uaeleu  and  were  diieon-
tinned  ;  yet  the  ceremony  of  ejecting  wai  alill  kept


EMBLEMA.

np  a*  a  firm  of  law,  being  deemed  by  lawyen  a
neceasary  foundation  of  the  aubaequent  legal  pro-
cen.  Thus  at  Bxime,  in  the  eailiec  time*,  ana
party  nied  to  lummon  the  other  by  the  woida  "  ex
jure  t«  manum  coDiertmn  toco,"  to  go  with  him  to
the  land  in  dispute,  and  (in  the  proeace  of  the
praetor  and  othera)  lorn  bun  ont  by  ferce.  After-
wards this  WBS  changed  into  the  symbolical  act  of
brewing  a  clod  of  earth  npon  the  land,  by  which
the  person  who  broke  intimated  that  he  claimed  a
right  to  deal  with  the  land  aa  he  pleased.  Wa
may  obaerra  also,  that  the  Engliih  action  of
ejectment  in  this  reapect  reaembles  the  Athe-
nian, that,  although  anflsTi^  by  the  plaintiff  and  an
awter  of  him  by  the  defendant  are  lappoaed  to
hare  taken  place,  and  are  conaideted  ncccsary  lo
support  the  action,  yet  bodi  atfrj  and  oialer  an
mere  Aetiona  of  law.

These  proeeedinga  by  entry,  oniter,  Ac,  took
place  also  at  Athena  in  caae  of  resistance  to  an  exe-
cution ;  when  the  defendant,  refusing  to  gire  up
the  land  or  the  chattel  adjudged,  or  to  pay  th<
damngea  awarded  to  the  plaint!^  by  the  appointed
^me,  and  thus  being  ilir(|r4f<fpof,  l  b.  the  time
having  expired  by  which  he  waa  bound  to  aatia^
the  judgment,  the  plaintiff  proceeded  to  satisfy
himself  by  seizore  of  the  defendant's  lands.  This
he  certainly  might  do,  if  there  were  no  goods  to
levy  upon  ;  though,  whether  it  waa  lawM  id  all
cases,  does  not  appear.  The  Athenian  laws  had
made  no  proyiaion  for  putting  the  party,  who  soe-
ceedod,  in  poaaeasion  of  hit  righo  ;  he  was  there-
fore obliged  to  levy  execution  himself  without  the
aid  of  a  ministerial  officer,  or  any  other  penmL
If,  in  doing  so,  he  encountoed  oppodtion,  he  had
no  other  remedy  than  the  i^ihvit  Jlxq,  which  (if
the  subject-matter  wai  land)  must  Iutb  been
grounded  upon  hia  ownprevious  mtry,  Theaction
could  he  brought  against  any  one  who  impeded
him  in  his  cndearour  to  get  posaesaion,  as  well  aa
against  the  party  to  the  former  mil  The  cause  of
UemcBlhenea  againit  Onetor  waa  thia :  —  Demo-
sthenes having  recovered  a  judgment  gainst  Apho-
bus,  proceeded  to  take  hia  lands  in  execution.
Onetor  claimed  them  aa  mortgagee,  and  turned
him  out  {i^iiyiy),  whereupon  Demosthenea,  con-
tending that  the  mortsnge  was  cnUnsive  and  frau-
dulent, brought  the  iioiKtis  iSrri,  which  is  called
tiraj  rpbs  'Oy^opOy  because  the  pnKeeding  is  im
rem,  and  collateral  to  another  object,  rather  than  a
direct  controversj  between  the  parses  in  the  aaaa.
The  consequence  to  the  defendant,  if  he  fulcd  in
the  action  of  ejectment,  was,  that  (besides  hia  liabi-
lity to  the  plaintiff)  be  waa,  oa  a  public  o^nder.
condemned  to  pay  to  the  trroinry  a  sum  equal  to
the  damages,  or  to  the  value  of  the  prop^^  re-
covered in  the  first  action.  While  this  rvmained
unpaid  (and  we  may  prcsumo  it  could  not  be  paid
without  also  satisfying  the  party),  he  became,  aa  a
state  debtor,  subject  to  the  diobilittca  of  irt^ila.
(Meier, .irt.J'rmj.  pp.  372,460,7*8.)  IC.KK.]

E'MBATES. [Modulus.]

EMBLE'MA  (ffitAiifui,  IfiToio'^),  an  inlaid
omament.  The  art  ot  inlaying  (4  t'x")  ^nutf-
Turli,  Ath.  xi.  p.  488)  was  employed  in  producing
beantifiil  worta  of  two  deeeriptiona,  via. ;  —  lat.
Those  which  reaonbled  onr  mai^ueOy,  hnhl,  and
Florentine  mosaiu;  and  3dly,  thoac  in  which
(cnubu),  eiquitilely  wrought  in  relief  and
ciouB  mslals,  such  at  — '-*  -' —  — •'  — ' —
were  bitcned  upon  the  an


EHISSARIUH.
ticca  of  foiDinn. Work*  of  both  clauei,  whm
a  OKOl,  cdme  midtr  tbe  hcHd  of  Cau-atuha.

To  pcodDCtiou  of  the  tanaa  dut  m  maj  ntfr
■n  ittoiipH  to  mdon  the  mlla  ud  floon  of  bonis


■  of  flow


■  uid  ■


I  upnoed  upon  i
a  of  tarvnuly  «


bj  the  iuHTti.
wUa,*Uof
bnght  to  K  pli

bu  lUnde*  (tq).  Oic  dt  OraL  iiL  43),  wh<
oBfuei  ibe  weU-ooniKCted  wordi  of  a  uiimi
onUf  (0  the  VD*11  piec«<  (toKmZoa)  which  com-
poK  the  **  emfalnna  Tumiculmtiua  **  of  >a  otHA-
m  idil  pBTemenL  In  the  liine  of  Pliof  thcM  de-
emtioiB  for  the  nlli  of  q>aniiuinti  had  become
{H.  N.  xzxv.  1.)  Refracting
a  in  metal  ynrk,  lee  Cailituri  and
ITA.  It  may  here  be  addsd  that
in  docribing  two  Corintbian  mee  (t.
)L  199),  ^Mingniahs  between  the  smblemi  in
Iw-edkf  {npiOTuwa)  which  adorned  the  bodj
•nd  neck  aS  each  veael,  end  the  Ggum  in  high
i^f  {wfifar^  mtfmiUra  (iSa)  which  were
phetd  upon  iti  brim.  Ail  aitlit,  whoee  bujuoeu
it  n(  to  make  wo^  snamenled  with  emblenu,
■u  callol  entfarw. (Plin.  H.  N.  " '"

Lis  ;  Cic  VeiT.  it.  SB  ;  MutiiL  viii
L  7G.  T.  38  ;  Dig. ».  tit.  2.  •.  S3.  §  1 ;  Hejne,
AmU-,.  A^  ToL  L  p.  147.)  [J.  Y.I

EMISSA'HIUM  (hnt»fu)i),»  channel,  natni
iTUtifieial,  bjr  which  an  ODtlet  ia  fonned  to  can,
IS  tBj  alagDWit  bodj  of  water.  (Plin.  H.  ff.
>niii.  *.  i.21  (  Cit  arf  Foul.
ttamirii  may  be  either  open  oi  nndetgnxiiid  ;  bat
the  Butt  lanaikable  wo^  of  the  hmd  are  of  the
hoa  dnoiption,  a<  they  cany  off  the  watert  of
hkia  Hunianded  by  hiUi.  In  Greece,  the  ~  '
raaBtabte  ezamplB  ia  preeented  by  the  at
meoia  cbamiela  which  catry  off  the  watera  of  the
lake  Copaia  into  the  Cephinu,  which  were  partly
bcub]  and  paitly  artifidaL  (Stntb.  ii.  ~  '"'
Thimcb,  E-tal  admd  dt  la  Oria,  toL  ii.
UiUs,  OniomBm,  pp.  49,  &C.,  2nd  ed.)

Ainlher  apeeiiiien  of  aneb  woiki  ami  ^
Grerkt  at  an  early  period  ia  prtaented  by  the  lub-
temneoiia  channeli  conabncted  by  Pbaeax  at
Aj[rigoitaiti  in  Sicily,  to  drain  the  dty,  about  fi.c.
4*0 ;  which  wen  admired  for  their  magtijtade,
ahhoogh  the  mckmanahip  wm  Terj  rode. (Died.


EMISSAHIUM.  «7
Plin.  If.  AT.  mvi.  Ii.  a.24.  gll.)  For  man
than  a  mile  the  tunnel  ii  carried  nnder  a  moun.
tain,  of  which  the  higheat  part  ia  1000  feet  aboce
the  lerrl  of  tbe  lake,  and  throngh  a  itralum  of
RKkj  fbrmation  (cameliui)  u  hard  that  erery  inch
ed  to  be  worked  by  the  cbiiel.  The  remain-
ing portion  rana  tbroogh  a  lofler  aoil,  not  mnch
below  the  leiel  of  the  earth,  and  ia  rsulted  with
brick.  PerpendJctdar  openiiigi  (pila)  are  rank  at
niioni  ditlancea  into  the  tunnel,  through  which
the  enaia^ona  wore  partly  diacharged ;  and  a
niunber  of  lateral  ahafta  (chuw/i),  aome  of  which
aepuale  themielTea  into  two  bianchee,  one  above
Iher,  are  iikewiie  directed  into  it,  the  loweat
I  elcTatian  of  Etc  feet  from  the  bottom.
Throngh  theae  the  materiala  eieamted  were  al»
carried  ouL  Their  object  wai  to  enable  the  pn>-
digiou  multitude  of  3D,(H)0  men  to  cany  on  their


i.2&)


_..*  rf  tbii  kin

tsaaikablB  efiorta  of  Reman  ingenuity.  Remaina
•till  eiiat  to  ahow  that  the  lake*  Traainiene,
Albaia,  Kami,  and  Focmo,  were  all  drained  by
Maai  of  tmimiha,  the  laat  of  which  ia  atiU  marly
pnftet,  and  open  to  inapection,  having  been  par-
tially deand  by  the  preant  king  of  Naplei.
Jilin  Caem  »  «id  to  have  firrt  eonceiied  the
idf*  ef  ihii  ctupendona  undertaking  (Suet  JiL
44),  whicb  waa  carried  into  effect  by  the  Emperor

The  Ulowing  account  of  the  worki,  (nm
Bonueaia  oai  tlte  qiot,  will  giro  aome  idea  of  their
cilfBl  Bad  diScnllia.  The  cimunference  of  the
lake,  iaclBdinc  the  baya  and  promontoriea,  ii
ikifty  milea  m  extenL  The  length  of  tbe
aaiy,  which  lie*  Dfarly  in  a  dirrct  line  from  tbe
Ue  to  the  riTCT  Liria  (Oarigliano),  ia  aomelhing
mat  than  time  milea.  The  number  of  workmen
eapl^r*^  waa  80,000,  and  the  time  occupied  in
the  w«k  denn  yean.  <SoeL  Cfand.  20 )  compara


opa«tiona  at  the  aame  time,  without  ineonmuding
one  another.  The  immediate  mouth  of  the  tunnel
ia  aome  diitance  from  the  preaent  margin  of  the
lake,  which  ipace  ia  occupied  by  two  ample  rceer-
voiia,  intended  to  break  tne  niib  of  water  before  it
entered  the  emiuary,  connected  by  a  narrow  paa-
nge,  in  which  were  placed  the  einicea  (qnitoau).
Tbe  month  of  tbe  tuimel  itaelf  conaiaU  of  a  aplendid
archway  of  the  Doric  order,  nineteen  feet  high  and
nine  wide,  formed  out  of  large  blocha  of  atone,  re-
aemblmg  in  conalTUcIion  the  work)  of  tbe  Cbuidian
aqueduct.  That  through  which  the  waten  dia-
charted  themaelvea  into  the  Liria  waa  moie  limple,
and  ia  repreaented  in  the  preceding  woodcut.  The
river  lie*  in  a  ravine  between  the  arch  and  fcre-
ground,  at  a  depth  of  6^  feet  below,  and  conae.
quently  cannot  be  Been  in  the  cut.  The  amall
aperture  above  the  embouchure  ia  one  of  tbe  cuni-
eiili  above  mentioned.  Il  appear!  that  the  actual
drainage  vaa  relinquiahed  aoon  after  tbe  death  of
Claudina,  cither  fiom  the  perveraily  of  Nan,  aa  tbe


4M


EMPHYTEUSIS.

■  of  Pliii;(I.iL)  Konta  imply,  a


.  .."^  neglMt  i
tor  It  wu  nopened  b;  Hsdiiui.  (Sfut.  iladr.
122.)  Tat  further  mfannitjon  see  Hiit^  who  giTii
m  itfie*  oC  plaju  Ajid  B«ctjonA  of  the  worki  csn-
ii«eted  with  tbs  Laciu  Fuciniu  {GttSiida  d.
OriKk.  u.  Rim.  ^  371—376,  PL  £X£I.  fipu  U
—31).  [A.  R]

E'MBOLUU: [Navu.]

EME'aiTL [EiHcn'Ot.]

EUME'NI  DIEAE  {^imnH  Hxai\  uiti  in
tbt  Atbeaiui  eaiiit^  which  tnm  not  illowad  to
be  peDdiu  kboTe  a  month.  Thii  r^nhtiDii  wu
DM  introducBd  till  after  tha  due  of  Xnuphoo'i
D  the  reTenua,  in  which  it  wai  pnipoeed
ire  npid  iKiigt»  Bbould  be  aUowed  to


Fbilip.  (Or.  ife  Haiam.  p.  70.  33L)  It  ww  eon-
iioed  to  thoM  nibjcett  which  Rqnired  a  ipeedj
dedaion ;  and  nt  theu  the  mo«  impoitant  were
diiputfi  reapecting  commerce  (iitrapuai  Si'wu,  Pol-
lux, Tlii.  63,  101  ;  HupocrsL  and  Suid.  i.  c
'E^igriN  Mum),  wUch  were  heard  dming  the  t\x
wintAT  iDontlu  from  Bo^dromion  to  Mnnychioii,
10  that  tha  merchanCi  might  quicklj  obtain  their
righu  and  nil  awaj  (Dem.  s.  ApaL  p.  900.  3)  ;
b;  which  we  an  not  to  trndentaud,  4>  •ome  have
done,  that  a  mit  could  ba  pratracted  thningh  tbii
wbole  time,  but  it  wai  Daoeuuy  that  it  ihauld  be
dMided  within  a  month.  (Bikkh,  PubL  Bam.  of
Ati/mt,  p.  £0,  2Dd  ed.)

All  cauM*  rehiting  to  mhiH  O'n-KWml  lunu)
wen  alio  ^irrsi  Sficw  ( Dem.  c  Pmlaat.  p.  966.
17)  i  the  object,  aa  BBckb  nmacki  (On  tta  Stiver
Mina  </  Aoviim,  PmbL  Earn,  of  AOmt,  p.  667)
being  no  dmibl  that  the  mine  prDprialor  might
DOl  be  detained  too  long  from  liit  btuioeaL  The
nme  wu  the  caw  with  cauiea  ralating  to  tfani
(Pollux,  Tlii.  101  ;  HarpocnL  and  Snid.  j:  c.)
[Ebani]  1  and  Pollni  (Lc)  indudei  in  the  liet,
mita  ceipecting  dowry,  which  on  omilled  by  Har-
pocration  and  SoidaL

EMPHRU'RI  {tit^fottfni),  from  fp«^  the
name  given  to  the  Spoiias  dtiieni  during  the
period  in  whicb  they  wcie  liable  to  mililaiy  lei^
Ticov  (Xen.  Rtp.  Lao.  T.  7.)  Thii  period  laited  to
tha  Ibctiatb  yoc  from  manhood  (i^i  tfiiit),  that  ii
to  aay,  to  the  alitieth  year  from  lurth  ;  and  dtiring
■^'-  •'■ ould  not  go  out  of  the


withou


(Ik>


tir.  p.  225,  where  ^^^'i  according  to  MIULer,
/Mr.  iiL  1 3,  §  I,  ia  eridently  put  for  ffupfn^t.)

EMPHYTEUSIS  (iH^iiwii,  literally  la
"  in-planting  ")  ii  a  perpetual  light  in  a  piece
ef  land  that  ia  the  property  of  another :  the
right  conaiita  in  the  Uig^  power  to  cultiiate  it,
and  treat  it  aa  our  own,  on  condition  of  cultivating
it  preperiy,  and  paying  a  fixed  nun  (comm,  jsaiuio,
rvli^)totheawner(</oiwtw)alfi»dtimeB.  Tbe
right  ia  founded  on  cmlract  between  the  owner
(dominui  emphylenuoa)  and  the  leiiee  (emphy-
testa),  and  the  land  ia  called  agei  voctigalia  oi
•oiphytMiticaiiua.  It  wai  long  doubted  whetket
thia  wia  a  contract  of  buying  and  jelliog,  or  <d

i  hiring,  1
definite  character,  w
inctui  emphyleaCicarina.

The  Ager  Vectigalia  ia  firat  diatmrtly  mentumed
about  the  time  of  Hadrian,  and  the  lerm  i>  qiplied
to  linda  which  were  leaaed  by  the  Roman  atate,
bytowD^  by  ccdeaiaatkal  corpoiatiaiu,  and  by  the


ElfPHYTEUSIS.
Vaalal  Tiig^  Id  the  I^gelt  tamtita  only  k
made  of  l^da  of  towna  ao  let,  with  a  diitinetiai  vl
tbem  into  agri  teetigale*  and  nan  Tectigalea^  ac-
cording ai  &e  kaaa  «aa  patpttnal  w  not  i  bat  ia
«ther  caae  tho  Itiaaa  badarMlaelioa(ali{iaiBmi
aMt)  for  tbe  fdMoeUoai  of  bia  Dgbla,  erm  againit

The  term  Empbyteniia  fiiat  occnn  in  the  I^ett.
The  Prmedia  Emphyteutica  an  alao  freqamtjy  men-
tioned in  the  Theodoaian  and  Jnalinian  Codea,  bat
they  are  diitinguiahed  fhim  the agri  Teetinlea.


T,  put  the  cmpbyleufl


of  an  emphyieau*  (whether  the  leai
mimity  or  an  indiTidna!),  tha  law  w
be  the  Bme  aa  in  the  caae  Of  leuea
perty. Thia  anphytenaia  waa  not  o'

diitinguiahed  from  the  owner  (dmninaa).  Vet  the
occii[Her  of  tho  ager  Tectigalia  and  the  anphytcnta
had  a  jnriadca]  potMuioi  a  kind  of  inconaataicy,
which  ia  explained  by  Savigny,  hj  ahowing  that
tha  ager  vectigalia  waa  formed  on  the  analogy  of
the  agw  publicua,  and  thoo^  then  were  many
diSerencea  between  them,  then  waa  nothing  in-

the  public  land,  being  tranafeiied  U  the  ager  tk-
tigalii  aa  a  modrfied  brm  of  the  ager  pnblinia.
Thoogh  the  emphyteata  had  not  the  ownenh^

tha  enjoym«it  of  it,  unLeaa  there  were  ipedal
agreeraenta  limiting  hia  right  The  fruiia  belonged
to  him  aa  aoon  ai  they  were  icparated  from  the
" (Dig.  22.  bL  I.  a.  2S.  §  1.) He  eonid  aeQ


not  aell  hia  intereM  to  a  pereoo  who  waa  nnablo  to
maintain  the  property  m  good  amdition.  Tha
laaaoe  waa  boond  to  pay  all  the  pnblic  charge*  and
burdena  which  might  fall  on  the  land,  to  iinproTo
the  property,  or  at  leaat  not  to  deteriorate  it,  and
to  pay  the  lent  tegulaiiy.  In  caae  of  the  loaaee'a
intemi  being  tnuuferred  to  another,  a  fiftieth  part
of  tha  price,  or  of  the  value  of  the  property,  vheo
the  nature  of  tha  tranifet  did  not  teqoire  a  pice  to
be  fixed,  waa  payable  to  the  owner  on  the  admia-
aion  of  the  new  emphytcuta,  and  which,  aa  ageneral
rule,  waa  [dyahle  by  him.  Under  tbeia  limitationa
tbe  dominna  waa  bound  to  admit  the  new  emphj-
tenta  (in  poaaeaaioDein  auidpen.)  If  the  daiiiinia
refiiaed  Co  admit  him,  the  teller,  after  orrtain  fimBa-
litiet,  could  tranaler  all  hit  right  withoat  tba  con-
•enl  of  the  doniiuua.  Tha  beiedea  of  tka  emj^-
tenta  vera  not  liable  to  anch  nvmeiit.  T^
emphytcuta  could  diipoieof  hiirightby  teatanent:
in  caae  of  inteatacj  it  devolved  on  hiebendea.

The  origin  of  tha  empbylenaia,  aa  already  atated,
waa  by  contract  with  the  owner  and  by  tndilim  ;
or  the  owner  might  make  an  empbylenaia  by  bia
latt  wilL  It  might  alao  in  certain  eaaea  be  feundad
on  preactiption,

The  right  of  the  emphytcuta  night  niaaii  in
aovera]  waya  ;  by  ■urrcndcr  to  tha  daninaa,  or  hj


pnblic  butdena  to  w
waa  liable,  by  alienatioa  wilhoM  n
dDminna,  Ac In  anch  CMea  tbe  it


BimO  ET  TENDITia


0%  &  tH.  S,  Old  39.  tiL  4  i  Cod.  i.  tit  66
laA  a.  tit  34  (Si)  ;  Uflhlmbnieh,  DiKlraa  i^-
AiteMi ;  SkTJnr,  i)M  Aiatt  da  BaUm,  p.  99,
ftb^IM;  HMkdder,XaM»l,A£.gS9£,  &&
I  3S4,  13th  Id.)  [O.  L.]

ElIPO'RIUM(Ttffn^i'),ap]uefi>rvbolB-
■la  tnde  in  somnoditiei  aum<t  lij  hb.  Ths
i^u  B  tam^oet  mli«t  to  a  lea-patt  toint,  but
k  ^Mfutf  ngniSfa  oil  j  ■  puticolai  place  in  anch
■  tnm.  Thu  Am^teTD  nyi  (Pluit  Ampk.  it.
1.  4}  ttat  ba  loied  far  ■  pmon.


(Ci^BV  LJT.zxzT.  ID,  xa27.)  Tlie  mid  ii
4airad  bon  ftmpn,  whkh  vc^Eo  in  Honici  >
fifn  win  lafla  MBfaiiBaBrm  a^p  belonging
to  UBthK  paHo(tM:a.  srs^  HIT.  SCO)  )  but  in
iMR-wrilai  it  nsmAea  '* "^ ' '-

ftiiii<ii|ln,tliemril . . ,  _ _

l«*b  fan  tlie  ^inpM  Md  Rttlli  tbera  in  tba
■wkM-plne. (Pbt  Da  i{^  iL  p.  S71.)

Al  Alimt,  h  ■  aid  {Lan.  %.  &  308}  tbat
tko*  wa  tm  khidi  of  amporia,  oiw  nr  foragnen
«d  Ik  albs  Ibr  nKirca  ({om^  ud  itrrucA'}  ;
ta  tbk  ^pMn  doobdid.  (BMh,  AU  fin.  o/*
^A«i,p.ll),!tiid«d.)  TfaenDporhiniBtAlhnil
via  mitt  the  innctka  of  certain  officen,  wbo
WW  ckcMd  DnnJlj  (AtifuA^al  tbB  */iir^»I«).
[BnBHtSTii,  No,  a.]

KHPTI  KT  VETftWTI  A'CTIO.  The  idlsr
ka  ai  oetia  -Koditi,  and  tbe  bnrcr  hu  an  actio
«nti,^ai  tkaconlTactcfnIomapiinhue.  Bmh
•f  th^  afe  actioDea  dinebu,  and  iW  object  ia  to
I  of  the  oUindtM  nnlting
;DitlftatT> [O.L.I

BNor--"  — - -


laTa  aona  certain  tbing  bt  bit  moMj  ;  and  t)i(
taalnct  ia  ecmplele  u  loon  a*  both  urtita  hare
acned  aboat  the  ibing  that  ii  Id  bo  iM  and  about
lie  ^ise.  No  viitiiig  ii  reqnind,  nnlesi  H  be
part  of  tbe  ctotnct  that  it  ihill  not  bo  eomplele
no  il  ii  ndaced  to  writing.  (Dig.  44.  til.  7.  i.  2;
Ibm.  3i.  tit  31.)  Alba  the  agreement  ia  mad^  Ibe
bafo'  ia  bound  to  paj  hii  00007,  ***"  '^  *'"  (^iiV
vUcfa  ia  tW  object  of  poichwa  iboold  be  MoMciit-
dfdi^ivjvdbelinhiadelfTered;  andtbaaeUa
»«^TS  the  dm^witb  all  iti  inlennediala  in-
iiiaei  Tbii  |iibaa»r  ijnni  not  nhfain  thiiinimnililj|i
rf  tbe  tbJH  tiD  it  haa  been  detiTertd  to  bira,  and  till
bebaaliid '


be  pvidtue  nunn-,  onleN  tho  thing  i
. {]%lft.tit.l.e.ll,  gS.) ifh


doee  Mt  pa>r  the  ^nbaie  nHaHj-
it  '■  dae,  be  nut  p^  inleraM  on  it  The  tells
■■rt  alaa  wnaul  a  good  title  to  tho  porehaas
fEvKTio),  and  be  noM  alio nmnt  tbM  the


BNDEIXI&  4S9

Fill  to  infbcni  the  "bajn  af  lb*  daleeta  of
loSemdfbtial*:  "QniiaaBd^nDdint,
bciaut  emptore*  quod  moibl  ntiiqocs"  fta.
(Dig.  SI.  tit  ].}  In  nhraBcalo  tbii  ^oflla
law,  in  addittoD  to  the  umal  aetioi  anuns  finm
the  contmct,  tbe  bnTtr  had  Bgainit  tbo  BelleT,  ac-
cording to  the  ciictunnancea,  an  actio  a:  Mipniitu,
rodhibitoria,  and  qptuia  ninoria.  Honoe,  in  hi*
Satires  (ii  S.  3B6),  and  in  the  b^innbg  of  the
tecond  epiatle  of  the  tecond  book,  allndea  to  tho
— eeantiima  to  be  taken  bj  the  bojar  and  teller
a  (Uto.  [au]

ENCAU8TICA.  [Picnmi,  No.  7.]
ENCLB'MA  (f^Hfw).  [Uiai.]
ENCT£'818  (fywDMit),  the  right  of  poaaminB
ided  property  md  hooaaa  (F)irnhr'>  TVi  au
•bCas)  in  a  fereign  ooontry,  whidi  wai  ftcqaeotly
gnuled  b^  one  Oresk  Mate  to  another,  ot  to  le-
pantaindiiidnaliof  HnollieTitit&  (Dem.  Da  Cbr.
p.  36fi.  7  ;  BOckh,  Corjt.  Imeript.  toL  L  p.  72G.)
^rfKr^liarik  wne  nch  poteeaaioDi  in  a  fbnngn
eotmtr;,  and  are  o^ioied  hf  Demoathenea  (fim
Halm,  p.  87.  7)  to  irr^fian,  poaseanraia  in  one'a
own  county,  (Valcken.  ad  Htrod.  T.  23.)  The
term  tymriiiam  wa*  alao  applied  to  the  landed
fmpeitir  or  bonaea  which  an  Athenian  poMoaed
m  a  difliennl  t^iat  baa  that  to  which  ha  beloDged
bj  birth,  and  with  reapoet  to  aucb  pHnertf  ha
wBi  caUad  iyKaennUm :  whence  we  find  De-
nuatiiBnea  (a.  Peifd.  p.  120S.  37)  ipcakUB  of  of
fcyiirtti  ul  al  h/ioFnutim.  For  the  right  of
bidding  propeitj  in  a  Iq^r  to  which  be  £d  not
belong,  be  had  to  pay  anch  Kj^iot  a  tax,  which  ia
uumtioned  in  inacriptiona  under  the  name  of  47-
mradr. (BOckh,  iWf.  fix*.  o/.dltaaj,  p.  297,

anded.)

ENDBTXI3(Mfi{i(),pn>psl7da>Dma[nBe'
ODtioD  inatitBled  aguntt  nich  perama  aa  irere  al-
Ifgad  to  hare  Bxeroied  rightt  or  hdd  oOna  while
taAoniingunderapecaliaidiaqiiBliScatiocu  Araonf
tbete  are  to  be  reckoned  Mate  deblm^  who  during
ihnr  liability  aato  in  oonrt  aa  dieaala,  or  took  any
other  part  in  pnblk  lib  ;  eiilea,  who  had  retained
clandeatiDelj  to  Athena  ;  thoae  that  Tititod  holj
placet  afl«i  a  caDrinion  for  impietj  (JtvWiia)  1  1 '


all  anch  aa  having  inciured  a  partial  diaCmnchias-
ment  (irifJa  kbtiC  wpianioi)  pretumed  to  eierdae
idden  fiinctiona  aa  bcna«  tb


tion.  Beude*  thcK,  howerer,  tiie  lame  torn  of
action  waa  STailable  oosintt  the  chairman  of  the
pmadri  (4a'WTitnii),  who  wroDgl;  leiiuad  to  take
the  Totea  of  the  people  in  tbe  attemhlT  (Plat
ApoL  p.  32)  ;  againit  malabdon,  eapeciallj  niiir-
derera  (which  Schiimanu  tbinka  waa  piobaUf  the
comae  panned  when  the  tinM  foe  an  apagoge  had
been  mfiered  to  elapte)  ;  tiailora,  Bmbaitadora
aecDoed  of  malraiaaCian  (Itoaat  &  OalUm.  11)  ;
and  penona  who  futniahad  (oppliea  to  the  omj
during  war.  (Ariitopk.  Sgml.  S78  t  Andoc  Di
AaMa,  S3.)  The  fint  nop  taken  by  the  prote-
calor  waa  to  lay  hi*  infimiatkm  in  writing,  alto
called  aadniau^  belbte  tbe  proper  nu^ifDate,  who
might  be  the  aivhon  or  king  archcm,  or  caio  of  the
thetmothelaa,  according  to the  aubjoct-mattec  of

(KumifT/ot)  being  the  accnaed  ptnon,  the  Eleven
were  tha  offlean  applied  to.  It  then  became  the
datj  <rf  tin  ma^iaUate  to  aneit,  or  hold  to  bail,
tha  peraon  oiounated,  and  take  the  nanal  ttep*  for
bringing  him  to  trial  There  it  gnat  ob*cDn^  a*
to  Ihoien'- ' " - *


ENGYE.


di(  kind.  Henldui  (Jinudii.  in  Sahi.  it.  S.
B  1 0)  ridiciJM  thii  idea  that  it  wh  iuTKrUbl;'  a
<mpital  pocuhmsnt.  The  aceoMT,  if  nniuoecnfiil,
vu  napiHuible  iat  bringing  b.  nulicioo*  ehargc
(fntoEi  irtiltnH  hcti»ens).  (ScbUmuin,  De
Qm.  p.  17i,  ^tt.  Proc.  p.  239,  4c.)

Th«  oadniu,  afiagcige  (imywyift  and  gii^jesu
(J^^Tf'O  moit  be  csnfidly  dutizigtiiibed.  PdUoz
Mji  (viii.  19)  th«(  lh«  endaxit  wu  adopted  when
the  aoniMd  wu  nbtect ;  tlie  Cfgoge  when  he  wu
praont  i  tud  wa  knoir  tlist  tbe  afogoge  ni  ■
■UEnnuu;  prooeu,  in  which  the  defendant  wai  al-
lowed to  appofaend  a  culprit  caught  n  ipao  foeta
and  lead  bun  before  a  magiiOBte. In  case  tho


11  ill-fbonded,  the  complunant
liik  of  farjaitisc  1000  diachmae.  If  he  did  not
Kke  to  eipoaa  himielf  to  thii  ride,  be  might  bare
lecMUie  to  tha  i^tgmt  {i^^rneii),  in  which  be
Dwda  an  application  to  the  pnpei  megiitnte,
U,  tor  jnatance,  to  one  of  tha  EleTan,  if  it  were
acaae  of  bniglar^ombbtfjattsided  with  ninidei,
■nd  condnclcd  him  and  hia  offlcen  to  the  qwt
where  the  t^itura  waa  to  be  efiedsd.  (Comp.
I>em.s.4aifn>l.  [i601.)

The  caaei  m  which  the  api^egt  and  t^itgait  wore
moat  gantrallf  allowed,  were  thoaa  of  theft,  murder,
iU-nngv  of  parent*,  &c.  The  pnniihnuint  in  theis
cuea  wa*  genenlij  fixed  bj  law ;  and  if  the
accneed  confewed,  or  wai  prored  guilty,  the  mogii-
Inti  coold  execute  the  iisitaDCe  at  once,  vilbool
appealing  to  anv  of  the  juij-eonrti  \  otheiwiie,  it
wai  neaUBi7  that  the  oue  ihonld  be  tefened  to  a
higher  ttiboiial.  (Aeach.  s.  TVmanA,  c  37  ;  Dem.
D»  Fait.  Ltgat.  p.  431.}  The  magiitnlei  who
preeided  otct  the  apagogt  were  genemJij  the  Eleren
(of  Iraiica,  Dem.  c  Tmar.  p.  736  ;  Lpiat,  d.
Afforat,  c.  8S) )  aometiniea  the  chief  ardion  (AoacL
e.  TfaarA  c  64),  or  the  theamotbetaa  (Dem.  s.
^ririocr.  p.  630).  The  nunl  importaat  panage
with  regaid  to  the  apagcgi  (Ltdbs,  b.  Agorat.
S85,36)  ii  nnfortunatcly  corrupt  and  unintelligible.
(S«e  Slmtfr,  Ltei.  Andodd.  p.2£4,  &c)  Tha
complainant  waa  lud  iirJTiiv  rilf  imrfoylir :  tha
nagutratei,  whsi  they  allowed  it,  ira^^i-ro
TJjr  ixitytrr*!!/.  [J.  8.  M.J

E'NDROMlSCMfB^O.athickcoeree  blanket,
iiHUin&ctmed  in  Oaul,  and  called  "cndromii"  be-
cause thoae  who  had  been  exerciung  in  the  Bfadiiun
{ir  SpS/iv)  threw  it  orer  them  to  Dbliate  the  ef-
fect* of  tudden  cxpoflure  when  they  ware  healed.
Notwithitanding  ita  coane  and  thaggy  appearance,
it  waa  worn  on  other  occHBiont  a*  a  protection  &um
the  cold  by  rich  and  lathionable  penona  at  Rome.
<JuT.  iiL  103  ;  Mart  JT,  19,  lir.  126.)  Ladiea
ako  put  on  an  endromia  of  a  finer  deacHpIion  (n>-
dromidat  Tgriai,  Jot.  tL  2(6),  when  they  partook,
ai  they  iometimea  did,  of  ^e  eiendKS  of  the
palaeatra.  MoieoTer,  boot*  [CorauaNUs]  were
called  Mpa;uli(  on  account  of  the  uae  of  them  in
ninning.  (CBlltm.  //jmii.  b>  Diait.  16,  ta  iMm,
208  ;  Pollux,  iii.  155,  tiI  93  ;  Binnck,  Aivd.  ill
206.)  [J.  Y.l

ENBCHYRA  (tfixvpti)-  In  pri<reta  rain  at
Athena,  whether  tried  by  a  court  of  hiw,  or  before
■n  arbitnttoi,  whenerer  judgment  waagiTtnagaiuit
a  defendant,  a  certain  period  waa  at  the  nme  time
flied  (it  speSts^),  before  the  ei[Hralion  of  which

diet Id  default  of  doing  ao  ha  beeaine  tHp^jiot,

-  .1 '  y,  II  it  was  called,  and  the  [laintiff

I  ..  ..J.,  gpgg  (Sfiaffftii)  his  gooda


0m  the  day,  as
»  pfinleged  to


compliance.  (Dem.  e.  Mod.  p.  £40.  21  -,  Ulpian,
ad  (ac  ;  Arisloph.  JVatcr,  3j.)  The  property  thus
taken  was  called  Mx^fo,  and  alavea  woe  gene-
rally leized  before  anything  else.  (Atben.  xiiL
p^  612,  c)  Thii  ■'taking  in  ueeotion"  waa  nsn-
ally  left  to  the  part^  who  gained  the  suit,  and  who,


if  he  met  with  re


!,bad


his  remedy  in  a  Sin)  ^{a'Aiit :  if  with  p
violence,  in  a  lini  altlai.  (Don.  c.  Beers-  P>
1163.)  On  one  occaiion,  indeed,  we  nad  of  ■
public  ofiicer  (bmifini'  ""P*  ''^i  VxS')  Ij^ng
taken  to  aiust  in,  oc  perhaps  ta  be  a  witnoi  o^  a
seintre  ;  hot  this  was  in  a  case  where  public  in-
aned,and


treipaaa,"  commiCled  by  *i

fendaafi  honse,  tlioogh  tL.

which  had  been  given  (4  froraflfirq)  wis,  accordmg

to  agreement,  lying  at  the  bank  (M  t^  ^ftriif),

and  there  awaiting  their  receipt.

Itse  • ■ ■

[  _, , „ ..„

iblicly  sold,  and  that  the  party  from  whoa
they  wen  taken  could  sue  hii  opponent,  perhsfii  by
a  >Uti  SAiiAji,  for  any  snrplni  nhiah  might  remain
after  all  1^  domandi  vitte  satisfied.  No  acunn
of  this  sort  coidd  take  [dace  daring  sereiBl  of  the
religions  feauials  of  the  Athenian*,  sneh  mm  the
Dionyiia,  the  Lenaea,  Ac.  They  were:,  in  Ek^
'JiHuoain  Athenian  law.  (Dem.  cMmd.  p.  518;
Hudlwalcker,  Dion.  p.  132.)  [H.  W.]

ENGYE  (*V7*it),  bail  or  enretia,  were  in
Tcry  frequent  reijniiilion,  both  in  the  prirate  and
public  alEiin  of  the  Athenians.  Priiate  agree'
menti,  as,  for  initaoce,  to  abide  by  the  decision  of
arbitiatcn  (Dem.  c  ^}H«p.  pp.e92— a99),or  that
the  aridence  resulting  from  the  application  of  tor-
tare  to  a  slaTe  ibould  be  craKlnsJTe  (Don.  e.  Pam-
fost.  p.  978.  11),  were  comlxnted  by  the  pautics
reciprocally  giting  each  other  such  suretia ;  and
the  same  took  place  geoeially  in  all  money  loiditig
or  menaotile  Oansactiona,  and  ma  innriably  ne-
etasaiy  when  person*  nndertook  to  ttzta  tidli,  taxes,
M  Other  poblk  propers-
la  judicial  malten  bail  ts  soretias  were  provided
DpOD  two  occaiioni ;  fint,  when  it  was  leqniaite
that  it  should  be  gmuanteed  that  the  aocaae>d
ahould  bo  forthcoming  at  the  trial  ;  and  secoiMlly,
when  locurity  wai  demanded  fai  the  ntiabction
of  the  award  of  the  cooil  In  the  Gnl  case,  bail
was  Tcry  generally  required  when  the  accnied  was
other  than  an  Athenian  citiien,  whether  tbe  action
wen  public  or  priiate  ;  but  iif  of  that  uiTileged
clasa,  upon  no  other  occasion,  except  wban  pro-
ceeded  agunat  by  way  of  Apagoge,  Endeizia,
Epbegesi*,  or  Eiaangelia.  Upon  the  last-mentioned
form  being  adopted  in  a  ose  of  high  tnaaon  baO
was  not  icceptnl.  The  technical  word  fir  reqnirini;
bail  of  an  accuied  penon  is  jnoTfTTVOj',  that  for
becoming  surety  in  lach  one  i^rrumttL,  Sorct  j
of  the  other  kind  waa  demanded  at  the  beginnirw
of  a  suit  upon  two  ottaiioni  only ;  fint,  wfaeo  ■
citiicn  asserted  the  freedom  of  a  penon  detuned
in  ilarery  by  another  ;  and  seeoodly,  whai  a  lit»-
trnnt,  who  bad  su6ered  judgment  to  go  by  default
before  the  arbitrator  (SuunrHr),  bad  reoommenced
hii  action  wi^in  the  given  time  04  olva  Kiaii,
AAv  tha  judgment,  aacnrily  of  thii  kind  waa  i»>


KNOIKIOU  DIKE.

^lind  io  all  DKnantili  and  nne  olhci  prints
aoM* ;  ud  OmM  debton,  who  bad  boen  Hntenced
Is  nnun  in  fnoa  till  they  b*d  acquitted  them-
•dm  of  their  liabiUtk*,  were,  by  *  law  of  Timo-
oila  (Don.  e.  Thtaer.  pf.  713—716).  allowed  to
p  aX  lu^  if  they  could  provida  three  loretis
that  the  money  ihonld  be  [wd  wilhin  a  limited
foioL  Ktbe  principal  in  a  contract  made  debult
the  nretj  wbj  boand  to  make  it  good,  or  if  he  re-
facd  ta  do  »,  might  be  attacked  by  an  iyyiiii  Hkti,
if  Bch  actioii  wen  bimght  wilhin  »  twelTemonlh
•Act  the  obtigstioD  wu  undeitaken.  (Dem.  o,
■l^iinr.pfL  901,910.)  If,howeTer,apenonaccated
in  a  pablie  actioD  by  one  of  the  fiiRot  above  men-
limed  Uled  to  a]i]ieai  to  take  hit  trial,  fail  bail
basBe  liable  to  any  poaiibmetit  that  inch  penon
had  inaured  by  amlempt  of  court ;  and,  coniiitently
with  Ihia,  it  appean,  from  a  {■'Bga  in  Xenophon
{HilL  i.  7.  t  an),  tbM  the  law  alhiwed  the  bail  to
■Hue  tha  penco  of  the  accoied  by  primle  con-
faxncDL (^eier,  ^tt.i>«.p.516.) [J.  S.  M.]

ENOUE'Sia  (lyyivni). [HiTtmoutvu.]

E'NNATA  (frnm.). [Funub.]

ENOIKIOU  DIKE  {Jnuliw  li'm),  action
In^t  <lika  oar  trapau/br  hum  frofiu  after  a
■naifbl  action  of  ejectment)  to  recover  the  rent)
withheld  from  ihe  owner  during  the  period  of  hii
keipg  kept  oot  of  poaaeaaion.  If  the  property  m-
ovHed  were  Dot  a  faooK,  bat  Land  (in  the  more
on&wd  taae  of  the  word),  the  action  for  the
nnu  ud  profiti  waa  called  mipwaii  tliai.  It  aaemi
ina  the  laivna^  of  the  grunmariani,  that  theae
■ntm  coold  be  broogbt  to  try  the  title  to  the
fliUe,  a*  well  aa  tar  the  aboTe-mentioned  pnrpoae.
P«b^  both  the  tenement  and  the  intermediate
jnjti  might  be  recovered  by  one  tuit,  bnt  the  pro-
naliBg  would  be  more  baiudoaa,  beauue  a  lailnre
ia  one  |Bit  of  the  demand  would  involve  the  k
•f  Ike  wbole  ante.  Thni,  the  title  of  ■  party
tk  laod  itaelf  might  have  expired,  a*  for  initax
*Wc  he  held  under  a  leaw  for  a  term;  yet  he
mid  be  entitled  to  recover  certain  bygone  profit*
fro  ime  wbo  bad  ditpoaaeaaed  him.  Therefore  it
ii  Bs(  iBfRibable  tbat  the  tUai  n,  and  tap.  might
mfraeHet  be  eonfined  to  theae  ouea  when  the
rati  and  pofita  only  were  the  inbjec
We  are  told  llwt,  if  the  defendant,  after  a  judg-
mat  ia  ene  of  these  actiona,  (till  refuted  to  give
**'-*iftiitfi.  ID  <Aain  Sim)  might  be  commenced
t^at  him,  of  which  the  effect  waa,  that  '
pivntiff  obMinsd  a  right  to  indsnni^  him>elf
•f  the  wbole  cuuerly  of  the  defendant.  SchUmann
•Ucrrea,  that  ui)  waa  a  cirenitont  pioceeding,
wWa  the  plaiDttS  might  take  immediate  atepa  to

(Bajactote,  lioweTer.  that  the  ohrtiu
aBcimt  tine*  an  important  advantage,  when  ml
pifcRy  eoold  not  in  tha  £nt  initanc«  be  taken  in
emstiDii,  ia  |rolab1y  not  far  imn  the  truth,  and
it  tBffiwUA  by  analogy  to  the  lawt  of  other
naticni,  which,  being  (in  the  iabncy
tin)  &BHd  by  the  tandownera  only,  bear  marki
vt  a  vatckibJ  jcsloiuy  of  any  enooachment  upon
thdf  f^hti.  He  nmarki  alac^  that  tha  giving  to
Ihe  party  tha  choca  between  a  milder  and  a  more
attlaguit  raniBdy,  aceorda  with  tha  general  tenor
ad  ipirit  ef  tlie  Athentan  lavi.  We  may  add,
tkal  ear  own  lav  fiiniahea  an  iilnttmlioa  of  thii,
hl,  vben  tba  plaintiff  haa  obtained  a  judgment,
hi  Ua  the  optim  of  proceeding  at  oiKa  to  execn-
•ioD,  ar  tnogiDg  an  aMtoD on  the  jndgmcot ;


J  conaidered


ENTASIS,

though  with  nt  the  Utter  meamre
the  ruon  vexatioui,  aa  it  increatea  tt
rendered  Icaa  neceaaar;  by  tbe  facility  with  wbich
eiecutioni  can  be  levied.  At  Athent  the  l(fii\Tii
Bin),  aa  it  wai  the  ultimate  and  matt  eliicaciaai
remedy,  drew  with  il  alto  more  penal  contequencea,
at  ■■  explained  under  Ekbatua.  [Meier,  Att.
Froc  p.  749.)  [C.  R.  K.]

ENOHOTIA  (Iwaiurrla), [Exucrrut.]
ENSIS. [OLAMUt.]

E'NTASIS  (IWaaii).  The  m«t  anient  ■»•
o:iTiB  now  existing  are  remarkable  for  the  extreme
minntion  of  the  ihaft  between  iti  Iowa  and  uppa
extremity,  the  lidea  of  which,  like  thote  of  a  cme,
mverge  immediately  and  regulsriy  from  the  baae
I  the  neck,  to  that  tbe  edge  foTDt  a  ttraight  line —
mode  of  conttmctian  which  it  wanting  in  grace
ud  apparent  toliditj.  To  correct  tbia,  a  iwelliDg
outline,  odled  (nftuu  (Vitruv.  iiL  S,  iv.  3),  waa
to  Ihe  abaft,  which  teemi  to  have  be^  tbe
£iat  itep  towardi  eatnbiiuug  grace  and  grandeur  in
the  Doric  column.

The  original  form  ii  i^ireaeoled  by  the  figure  ea
the  left  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  ia  taken
&om  the  great  temple  at  Poaidonia  (Paettnm),
which  it  one  of  the  moat  ancient  templet  now  re-
maining I  that  on  the  right  tbowi  the  cwftwu,  and
it  boa  a  building  of  ratber  later  conatruction  in
tbe  «me  cily.  Two  other  example*  of  the  tame
atyle  are  itiU  to  be  leen  in  Italy,  me  belonging  to
an  aiwieut  temple  at  Alba  Fucinenti*  {Piraneti,
Magmf.  dt'  Sum.  tav.  31.  fig.  6},  and  the  other
at  R<mie,  on  the  tnnlGhM  ^  C  PsbUciu&  (A.


In  the  example  at  Paeitam  the  grtslait  devia-
UoB  which  the  coned  edge  of  the  column  makea
from  the  atraight  line  of  tha  cone  of  which  the
pillar  may  be  contidered  at  a  part,  it  at  about  the
middle  <^  the  height,  but  it  ilill  keepa  within  the
line  of  a  perpendicular  drawn  from  the  circumfer-
ence of  the  bate  ;  co',  in  other  word*,  the  column
ia  thickeit  at  tbe  bnie:  both  thete  propertiei  are
clearly  ihown  by  tbe  dotted  line*  in  the  woodcut.
(Comp.  Stiegliti,  ArtHiiL  d.  Oankuatl,  vol  i,
p.  161.)  [A.R.i


403


EPBUNACTAE.


ECyRA. [AioKA.]

EPANOE'LIA  {iwrrrtXU).  If  ■  dtiun  of
Athons  had  inccmd  irifiia^  tha  privilege  of  taking
jmil « ipeaking  ig  the  public  BBcmbly  <ru  Sat-
faited  [Atiuu].  BuI  u  it  lometimH  might
bappen  (hat  >  penon,  thonsb  not  fermallf  declared
trrifut,  had  commillcd  ludi  aimet  m  would,  od
•cctuation,  draw  apon  hint  thit  puniabinenl,  it  wu
of  ccuTM  deainbU  that  auch  individuala,  like  real
triiuii,  ahould  be  excluded  from  the  eierciH  ef  tht
lighti  of  citiient  WheneTer,  therefore.  Inch  e
penoa  TenttuwJ  to  »p<«k  in  the  ancmblj,  any
Acheniim  citiien  had  the  right  to  ctmie  lonrard  in
the  aHembly  itKlf  (Anchin.  o.  TlnorcA.  p.  1 04),
■od  demand  of  him  to  eslabliih  hi*  right  to  ipfak
bjr  a  trial  or  ""'™"'i— '  of  hii  mnduct  (Ssaifuola
■ni  Biou),  and  Ihii  demand,  daKoncemail,  o
tbnat,  ynt  called  Hwyyxla,  «r  inrryMa  (mi
fuo-lw.  Tha  impeacbad  iudindul  ma  than  com
pellcd  to  denM  fem  apcaking,  and  to  ubmit  to  i
•ontinf  iato  hb  condnct  (Pdhix,  iriiL  i3 ;  Suidai,
1.  e.  triFrft>Ja),  and  if  he  wsj  conrictad,  a  formal
declaratiaa  of  druila  followed.

Some  writoi  hare  confbimdfld  the  irryyr^Sa
with  SoKiftafla,  and  coniidarsd  tha  two  wordi  u
^tioijmi ;  but  &Qm  the  italemenla  mwle  aboTc,
b  it  eTidwt  that  the  imiiaaia  ii  tbe  actual  trial,
while  the  twar/yi^ia  it  ttHj  the  thnat  to  tahji  '
a  man  to  the  icnifiaffia:  hence  the  eipreaii
Jtv)74!XX«w  Soufuufor.  (Schflnumu,  Dt  Comil.
p.  933.  nota  8.  tnoil.}  Other  writm,  nieh  at  Har-
mntioD  and  Suidaf,  donot  iiiffieiently  dutin^uuh
batwHa  hrryytUa  and  Mtttii ;  tbe  latter  u  an
BccuBtion  ag>init  penona  who,  though  the;  had
been  dtdared  Sri/toi,  neTerthelcM  ventured  to
auume  the  righti  of  dtiiena  in  the  public  a«»eiii-
bl;  ;  wbereai  hwyyc\£B  applied  onlj  to  thoie  who
lad  not  yet  been  convlctel  of  the  crime  laid  to
their  chtne,  but  were  only  threatened  with  an  «-
cuvtion  for  the  £nt  time.  (Meier,  AO.  Proa.
p.  210  ;  Schilnuon,  De  Camit  p.  2SS,  note  7.
tnniL)  'V/*AnaMtii{Hdlim.AUer1hmak,i<>\.iL
p.  23fi,  2d  edit)  leemi  to  be  incUncd  to  consider
^0  |li)Tiipud)  Ypo^  to  be  connected  or  ideitJaJ
with  the  itaryXia,  but  the  former,  according  lo
the  deflDitkiiii  of  Photiui  and  Suidaa,  waa  in  reality
quite  a  dilfenait  thing,  inumuch  ai  it  waa  intended
to  prevent  oraton  fnm  aaying  or  doing  unlawful
thingi  in  the  aatembly  where  they  had  a  right  to
come  forwud. ;  whcreai  the  tutr/ytyM  wu


(tatemant  of  HaiporaatMn
)nbablf  nothing  but  a  ftli
that  yonng  HMD  Mbte  the


a  promi


It  the  (


bad  no  rightat  alltoipeakintheaoembly.  [L.S.]
EPARITI  (lini«irrai),thenaineofthe>tanding
army  in  Arcadia,  which  wu  firmed  to  preaerre
the  indepesdeace  of  the  Arcadian  towni,  when
they  becamo  united  u  one  ilate  after  the  defeat
of  the  Spaiteni  at  Leuctn.  They  were  6000  in
number,  and  ware  paid  by  tbe  atate.  {Xeo.  HeU.
TiL  4.  §  31,  viL  £.  *  3 ;  Died.  xv.  63,  67  i  Hetych.
a,  o.  tnpiirrai ;  Bejot,  in  MitK.  de  PAcad.  if
Raerip.  .TJi  p.  234  i  Kellennann,  Da  Rt  MiUlari
Areadam,  p.  41 ;  Waehimutb, .
Tol.  i  p.  28S,  3d  ed.)

EPAU'LIA.  [MimwoMnm.]
EPE[1NACTAE  (^wnwiwroO,  a  claM  «f
citiieni  at  Sparta  who  are  aid  to  have  br«n  tbe
(rflipring  of  ihiTea  and  the  wtdowa  of  Spartan
dtiaeni.  Theopampu  tclli  ui  {Athm.  Til  p.
STI,  d}  that  in  the  Meaiaiian  war,  in  couequaiaa
nf  tha  great  loaaea  whjeb  A»  Bpaitani  luitained,
tbaf  mainad  the  widom  of  thoie  who  ware  lUin


:  Id  belota,  and  that  theae  haloti  were  »^"'i"H  ta

tbe  citiienahip  under  the  name  of  AiraumirTmL
Diodonu  (Mai,  £ic  Pa(.  p.  10)  aim  calli  the  pai'
tiauu  of  Phalaolhat'nimucTiiJ.  [Pibtbkmiib.]
(ThiHwall,  /iitt  qfOnau,  voL  L  p.  353;  UOllcr.
Dor.  ill  3,  g  5.)

EPHEBE'UM. [OiicKASiuM.]

EPHE'BUS  (f^oi).  the  name  of  an  Atheoiao
youth  afLar  he  hadattained  thei^of  18.  (PoUnx,
■nil  lOfi  ;  HarpoOBl,  i.  «.  "EtiIH*™  'H<qff«).
The  itatc  of  Jfq«eia  luted  for  two  yeara,  m  the
jroung  men  had  attained  the  age  of  30,  when  they
became  men,  and  were  admitted  to  iharc  all  tha
light!  and  dutiea  of  a  ciliien,  fur  which  the  bv
did  not  preaaibe  a  uMre  advanced  age.  That  tbo
young  men,  when  they  became  lfvi€at,  did  not  re-
ceive oZ^  tbe  privilegea  of  foil  citixou,  ia  "^nilttrd
on  all  handii  bnttnun  theaatertjon  ofPollnxand
Harpocntion,  who  itate  that  their  name!  weia  not
entued  in  the  Icxiarchic  regiitan  nnUl  they  had
completed  their  30th  year,  that  ii  to  lay,  nntil  they
hod  gone  through  the  period  of  ^^ifCela,  it  would
Kern  that  they  were  not  looked  upon  u  dtiieni  aa
long  aa  they  were  Iftitai,  and  tnat  oonaequently
thej  enjoyed  none  <rf  tbe  piiiiltgea  of  fill)  citixaia.
But  WB  have  lufficient  groand  fur  believing,  that
the  name*  of  young  men  at  the  time  tbey  became
Ipyflat,  were  entered  u  ciCiieoi  in  theleiianhic
T^iaten,  for  Lycurgua  (a.  Lncrat.  p.  169)  oaea  the
axpnoiona  l^trCar  TtTfm^wand  di  t1  ft^iapxvi'

— -"  -  _*)7pd^a«*M  aa  tjamjioam. The

ton  and  Pbotina  ia  tben^Ha
ftlae  inference  ftom  the  fiict,
young  nten  befbte  the  completion  of  thnr  aOth
ware  not  allowed  to  lake  an  active  part  in  the
public  aaaembly ;  or  it  may  be,  that  it  anae  out  al
the  law  which,  u  Schfimam  (Dt  Oomit.  p.  71,
tranaL)  inteipreU  it,  pieacribed  that  no  Athenian
ahould  be  enrolled  in  the  leiiaiehic  regittcn  before
the  attunment  of  the  1 8th,  or  afto-  the  completion
of  the  SQth  year  [DocimjIbu.]  t^om  the  omtua
if  Demotthenea  againit  Aphobtu  (p.  814,  dtc  ;
nmpan  e.  Oatlor.  p.  8681,  we  tee  that  aome  of
the  privil^ea  of  citiaena  were  confened  upon  yaauig
on  becfHuing  t^qfoi :  Demoacheoea  himael^  at

Sof  IS,  entered  upon  hie  jaAinxiny,  «>d
an  action  againat  hia  goaidiana ;  one  Man-
titbeoi  (Uenonh.  s.  Boaot.  Di  Dott,  p.  1009)  nt-
iatea  that  he  married  at  the  ag«  of  IB  ;  and  tbrr
£iu:ta  ace  atated  in  tocb  (---■'

ordinary,  but  van  it


Bafim  a  youth  w»  anrollad  anMog  the  e^iebi,
he  had  to  undergo  a  flaci^iao'la,  the  object  of  wbieb
partly  to  aaeertain  whether  he  wu  the  acai  of
Athenian  dliaena,  or  adopted  by  a
partly  whether  hia  body  waa  luffiden  ,  ....__
and  itrong  to  undertake  tbe  dutiea  whtch  now  de-
volved upon  him.  (Ariatoph.  Ve^  533,  with  tba
;  Deraoath.  a.  Omtor.  p.  868  ;  Xeo.  Dill^
:.  a.  g  4;  Ptalo,  Orila,  p.  SI,  with  StaU-
baom^  note  ^  174.  Eng.tnHial)  SchBonMac)
beliena  that  tkia  tecvufffa  oDly  •ITI>'<I  M  efphani,
bnt  Artatophanea  aod  Plato  nrntka  it  in  BKb  a
genatal  way,  that  tbuB  trinn  to  be  m  gnmad  fla
aocb  a  lappcaitian.  After  tbe  tMOfuufa  tbe  jaai^
men  received  in  tbe  aMambly  a  thield  and  a  lana
( AriatoL  ap.  HarpoeroL  t,  V.  Aairf/iaoia)  {  bqt
thoae  whoae  hthen  had  Mm  in  tha  daftaoe  af
their  eoantry,  tsonred  •  oonvlat*  aait  of  anwut


with  tte  01


EPHETAB.
n&Bliif.tn.(\adm.e.CUt^p.7B,ta.Btspii.;
P]ato,Mma.  p-r* *" "■ ' '

!»«<«  t.

1  I06>,V  'r>>i^  tke;|ilcdg«d  ll


EPHETAB.


468


MMttoi


Tb


of  Attits,  ud
ligKO  of  their  (orebthen.
look  i^aaa  tomrdj  the  dnu  of  tfai


.. . ilmeia,Dajl}ioeod.c2B;

h.&£«aakir.  p.  1D»S.)  Ths  oKcniftl  du-
tactka  of  the  I^hIbi  BHuiited  in  the  x^^'''  u*^
thav^TMOi. (Heinterfaaii,<iif  i>ellKi.x.  164.)

Dnaif  ^  t«D  jttit  of  the  J^ifC'I',  irhich  may
bt  odniidefBd  1*  ■  kind  of  KjqventicMhip  in  tmu,
ad  ia  wUek  Iba  7001^  mco  prefaied  themnlTOi  for
the  b^W  doUca  of  fill  citiHDi,  they  wen  gen»-
nUj  Hat  into  the  cnmitiy.  nnder  the  Dune  of
nfire^di,  to  keep  mteh  in  the  towu  and  for-
Puata,  m  the  coaat  aod  froatier,  and  to  porfonn
Mba  dolie*  which  mi^t  be  neceeiarr  tor  the  pro-
tHtiiaorAHJca.  (Pollni,  TiiL  106;  Pholini,  ».  e.
Oiftwa/UH:  P]MtB,DeLiff.rL-p.760,K.)  (US.]
KPHEOE'SIS  C'*+r?»«)-  [B«D«iiis.]
EPHE'SIA  (i^^uii,  a  gnat  pBiieginii  of  the


great  Rntiqoltj,  to  much  la,  indeed,

(viiL  125),  ucrifaed  their  inititDtion  to

KOTer,  if  we  caa  depend  upon  the  rta-

thoril;  of  Flnlarch  {Soion,  c  19),  one  of  Solni>i

lawa  (I{Dr<t)  ipeski  of  the  courtt  of  the  Ephetaa

and  Aiammgat  at  co-exiitent  before  the  time  of

that  kfiihtor. Again, we  an  told  b;  Pdlui

(£  a.),  the  Epbetne  formerly  nt  in  one  01  other  of

the  fiia  OHUti,  aoording  to  the  Datora  of  the

■  they  had  to  trj. In  hiitotial  tiniee,  how-

thoy  lat  in^wr  only,  called  reipectiTely  the

by  the  PiUadiiun  (th  MniAXaSi^X  bj  the

Delphtnium  (rt  M  AiXifni(if\  bj  the  Prjtaneium

(t1  iti  ItfuraiiiUf),  and  the  court  at  Phreatto  or

Zea  (ri,  it  ^ftamiu). At  the  £nt  of  theee  courta

they  tried  caaei  of  musteiitioDal,  at  the  teouid,  of

intentional  bat  jtuliJUble  homicide,  each  a«  alay-

ing  another  in  folf^defonce,  taking  the  life  of  an

adulterer,  kiUIng  a  tymnt  or  a  nightly  robber.

(Piat.  Lig.  a.  p.  37i.) At  the  Prytaneinm,  by  a

1^  ctlatoffl,  ■onewhat  Boal<igoiu  to  the  iiDpoei-<

I  of  a  deodand,  they  jumnil  KnteBoe  npoi  tha

nuiiQit  of  murder  wnec  the  petpetiator  of  tha

wu  not  knowiL In  the  eoart  at  Fhicatto,  o)

rtried  neh  ys-

sal  hoDiicideii In


lod


I,  the  a


of  the


u  beld  ereiy  year,  and  had,
__  a  twofold  chuHcter,  that  ti  a

head  of 'politieal  union  among  the  Oreeke  of  the
liau  laec,  and  that  it  a  common  worehip  of  the
Flihieiaii  Aitenii.  (Dionyi.  HbL  Jatif.  Aon.  i*.
^  31»,  ed.  E^bmg  ;  Sttabo,  liT.  p.  63S.)  The
Ef^Mia  eontinaed  to  be  bdd  in  the  time  of  Thi-
^didea  and  StDbo,  and  the  fenner  oompacea  it
Cm.  104)  to  tba  ancient  paiMgyrii  of  Deloa
EDHja],  where  a  gnat  nombtr  of  the  looiaii*
aeamUed  widi  their  wire*  and  childmi.  Ee-
^■ectiag  the  paitiailari  of  ita  celebration,  we  odIt
kaaw  Unt  ft  wai  acwmpanied  with  mneh  uurth
«id  Inatfaig,  and  that  myatieal  McriGcei  were  of-
fcrid  Is  the  EpbMiBii  godde^  (Stnbo,  I. «.)  That
gMMB  atid  eonteati  fenoed  likewiee  a  chief  part  of
tli>  ■eltimitin  ie  clear fron  Heaychim  (t.e.),wlo
(di  Ibe  Epheaia  an  irfiii  iwi^ariii,  (Compare
Pna.  tiL  3. 1  4  ;  MUler,  Cor.  iL  9.  |  6  ;  Btckh,
Orf.  Imtaipt.  'i.  n.  2909.)

Fna  the  maniwr  in  which  Thncydidee  and
Bmha  qnk  of  tbe  Epheaia,  h  leemi  that  it  wni
mAj  a  |ueune  of  eone  Toniana,  perhapa  of  theee
who  Imd  m  Epheau  ilidf  and  iti  ticinity.
Tbacydidea  Mcm  to  indicate  thia  by  comparing  it
with  tbe  Detian  ponegyiii,  which  Hkewiw  con-
ntfd  only  of  the  loohuu  of  the  ielandi  Bear
Dde*  J  and  Btrabo,  who  alia  tbe  great  national
[■iiiiyi  I  ia  of  aH  the  loniani  in  the  Pauioaimn  the
m^-wwr^rrifa  Twr  "TAnmr,  qipliea  to  tbe  Epheaia
aimplj  tb«  tame  ■warff/vfu.  It  may,  bowerer,
ban  eiiitad  erer  linee  the  tinM  when  Ephtfni  wai
tkbend  of  the  Ionian  eoktiiea  in  Alia.  CL.&]
E'PHESIS  (l*«"t).  [APMn.LiTro.]
EPHE8TK18  ('♦"rpli).  [Auiorus.]
E'PHBTAE  li^'t),  the  tmrne  of  certain
Jndgea  at  Atbtoa.  They  wtte  Gfty^ne  in  number,
iekrted  ban  noUe  bmifiM  (ifurtl,^aif»tmt),
ndngnihaa  My  jim<rfiit; Tbej  fanned  a


to  the  eonit  of  the  Areiopagiu,  which  ie  mentioned
by  Demotthenee  {L  o.)  in  camactioD  with  the  foor
ta  in  which  the  Ephetae  eat.  Moreoier,  Dnco,
ie  7!la>iiii,  ipoke  of  the  Bfitbu  on/f,  though
joriidictiun  of  the  Areiopagna  in  caeea  of
ier  ie  admitted  to  have  been  of  great  intiqaiCy,
Hence  Millier  (flanaeiif.  g  6S)  eonjectuni  that
the  conn  of  the  Aniiqngiu  wai  audanlly  included
in  the  fiia  coniti  of  the  Ephetae,  and  infen,  nun*
orer,  the  early  exiitence  of  a  lenate  at  Athene,
rewmbling  the  Oeronna  at  Sparta,  and  inmted
with  the  joriKliition  in  cae«  of  homicide.  (Thiri-
wall,ff>i(.a/fir«ni,Tal.ii.  p.41.)  Tbe  name  of
Epbetoe  giTen  to  the  membeia  of  thii  eooacil  wai,
ai  he  conceiTca,  lather  derired  from  their  granting
a  licence  to  a>euge  blood  (ol  ifiSei  t^  irt/io^iiinf
rhr  lj4l|n)Ai'np')  than  their  being  appealed  til,  <x
from  the  tmntler  to  them  of  a  junidiclion  wluch
before  the  time  of  Dram  had  belonged  to  the
hingi.  (Pollux,  I.  s.)  Ifthithypotfaeaiibetnie,
it  becomee  a  quaticm,  why  end  when  wai  thia
■epsrstion  of  tbe  couru  made  ?  On  thk  inbjeet
Miiller  addi,  (hat  when  an  act  of  homicide  wai
not  punithed  1^  death  or  popetnal  hanUbment,
the  perpetratnr  had  lo  receive  eipioticHi.  [Exsi-
LiUH.]  Now  the  atonement  for  blood  end  the
poiification  of  a  ehedder  of  blood  camo  under  the
■oavd  iaw  of  Athena,  the  knowledge  of  which  waa
confined  to  the  old  nobility,  eien  after  they  had
loit  their  poli^cal  power.  [£xioitai.J  Con-
•equently  the  adminiittatian  of  the  rigbti  of  ci-
pialion  could  not  be  taken  away  (rmn  than,  and
none  bnt  an  ariatoeraticBl  conrt  like  that  of  the
Ephetae  would  be  competent  to  gnmt  pcemieiioEi
of  eTpiation  for  homicide,  and  to  preflide  orer  the
cetemoniea  connected  with  iL  Accordingly,  that
conrt  ntuaed  the  right  of  deciijixi  in  actlom  for
manilanghter,  in  which  a  temporary  flight  wai
fiJIowed  )rj  ex^ilion,  and  abo  m  «Mei  of  jutifi-


I  at  a.


EPHIPPIUM.


il  hon:


alike


eipiallon.  (Plat.  Z^.  ii.  pp.  B64,  87fi.)
acU  of  wilfiil  mnrder,  on  the  otiiet  hand,  llie
pimisIimeBt  wai  either  draith  or  i^t^ryia,  aod
tberefore  no  eipialimt  {KiBapait)  vu  connected
with  the  kdmiDiimtion  of  Janice  in  nich  cases,
BO  thnt  there  cotild  be  do  objection  againit  their
bein);  tried  hj  the  court  of  the  Arciopagoi,  thonsh
it!  member*  did  not  of  neceuitj  belong  to  the  old
ariitncnkcy.

Such  brieflf  are  the  reawni  vhicb  MiiUer
allege!  in  aapport  of  thii  hjpothaia,  and  if  thcj
an  nlid  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  lepan-
tion  alluded  to  wai  effected  when  the  Athenian
nobility  loit  their  tnpremacy  in  the  itale,  and  a
tunoeraey  or  aristocracy  of  wealth  was  aubitiCated
for  an  arialoeracy  of  birth.  Thii,  u  ii  well  known,
happened  in  the  time  of  Solnn.

Laatly,  we  may  remark,  that  the  compuntiTely
nn important  and  antiquated  datiea  ot  the  Epbctae
•uRicicntly  explain  the  itatement  in  Polloi  (_L  c),
that  their  court  )(raduBl1y  loit  all  napect,  and  be-
came at  lait  an  object  of  ridicule,  [R.  W.]

EPHI'PPmM((L(rrfKWi),^9ln-iDr,^irT(ifur),
a  uddle.  Although  the  Oreeki  occaiienally  rode
without  any  Mddle  (M  ifiAoS  fn-ou,  Xenaph.  Dt
Re  Eqim,  lii.  fi),  yet  they  commonly  uied  one,
and  from  them  the  name,  together  with  the  thing,
WM  boiTowed  by  the  Homani.  {Varr.ifefieflsji.
iLT;  CaeiB.  6.  it.  2;  Hot.  Bput.  i.  14,  43;
Gellici,  T.  6.)  It  hoi  indeed  been  oiierted,  that
the  uw  of  nddlei  vai  unknown  until  the  fourth
century  of  our  era.  But  Oinirot,  in  hit  Talnahle
work  on  the  biatory  of  corriagea  (vol,  iL  c  36),
hsi  ahown,  both  from  the  general  practice  of  the
£gyptiana  and  other  Oriental  nations,  from  the

CMiei  preierred  on  the  wulli  oF  houaei  at  Hercu-
eum,  and  fmm  the  eiprMtioDa  emphiyed  by  J,
Coeiar  and  other  aalhon,  that  the  torm  "  ephip.


EPHORI.

pium  "  denoted  not  a  mere  hone-doth,  a  ikin,  or
a  fieilble  covering  of  any  kind,  but  a  laddle-tire,
or  frame  of  wood,  which,  after  being  filled  with  a
Blulling  of  wool  or  clothl  wai  eoTeted  widi  lofler
materials,  and  fastened  by  meana  of  a  girth  (ct>^-

ancient  eaddlcs  ^jpear,  indeed,  to  haie  been  thua
(or  difierent  from  ours,  that  the  corer  alretched
upon  the  hard  frame  was  ptobably  of  stnfFed  or
padded  doth  rather  than  Icalher,  and  that  the
saddle  was,  as  it  were,  a  enihion  fitted  to  the
horse>  back.  Pendent  dottii  (orpsfuira,  ttniia.)
were  always  attached  to  it  so  as  to  corer  the  side*
of  the  animal ;  but  it  was  not  pnTided  with  stir-
rups. As  a  aubatitnte  for  the  use  of  siimpi  the
horses,  mora  pntienhrly  in  Spun,  were  taught  to
kneel  at  the  word  of  command,  when  their  riden
wished  to  mount  them.  See  die  preceding  figure
Irom  an  antique  kmp  found  at  Hercutaneum,  and
compare  Strabo,  iii.  1.  p.  436,  ed.  Sieb. ;  and  Rilim
Italic


The  term  "  Ephippium  "  was  in  later  times  in
part  supplanted  by  tlie  word  "  sella,"  and  the  mots
spcdfie  expression  ^  sella  equestris." [J.  Y.J

E'PHORI  Cejp«poi).  MagistiBtes  ailed  ^>40ri
or  "  Overseers "  were  eonmiDn  to  many  Dorian
constitutions  in  timo  of  remote  antiquity.  Cyrcne
azid  the  mother  stale  of  Thera  may  be  mentioned
aa  eiamplea ;  the  latter  cdoniaed  from  Loconia  in
early  ages,  and  when,  as  we  are  told,  the  ephon
were  ririni/wi,  t. «.  gaxe  their  name  to  their  year
of  office.  (HencL  Pont.  4.}  The  epboralty  at
Sparta  is  classed  by  Heradotus  (i.  65)  among  the
inititutiont  of  Lycurgut.  Sinoe,  howeier,  the
ephcri  are  not  mentioned  in  Che  oracle  which  cim-
tains  a  general  outline  of  the  constiCutioc  ascribed
to  him  (PluL  Lycary.  6),  we  may  infer  that  no
new  powen  were  given  to  them  by  that  legislator,
cr  in  the  age  of  which  he  may  be  consideied  the
representative.  Another  account  refers  the  inati-
tution  of  the  Spartan  nihoraliy  to  Thouwmpus
(B.C.  770—730),  who  u  said  to  have  founded
this  office  with  a  view  of  limiting  the  authority  of
the  kings,  and  to  have  justified  the  innovatioit  by
remarking  that  "  he  handed  down  the  roysl  power
to  his  descendanta  more  durable,  because  he  had
diminished  it."  (ArittoC  FoUl.  t.  9.)  The  in-
consistency  of  these  accounts  is  still  farther  com-
plicated by  a  speech  of  Qeomenes  III.,  who  Ii  re-
presented to  have  stated  (Pint.  Cltom.  10)  that  the
ephors  wen  originally  uipointcd  by  the  kings,  to
act  for  them  in  a  jndtcial  capacity  (irpiiri  (pinit)
during  their  absence  from  Sparta  in  the  £rst  M«-
tcnian  war,  and  that  it  was  only  by  gradual
usnrpationi  that  theae  new  msgistratet  bad  made
tlicmtelTes  paramount  even  over  the  kings  them-
selves. Now,  according  to  some  aulhoritiea  (Thiri-
woU,  HiiL  of  Ormx,  voL  L  p.  3G3),  Polydoms,  the
colleague  cf  Thcopompoi,  and  one  ot  the  kings
under  whom  the  first  Metsenian  war  (fc  c.  743-^
733)  wu  completed,  appropriated  a  part  of  tfaa


•f  tb*  uaber  of  poctions


EPHORI.

itBT  lo  tl>*  uigmenluion
of  W  '  ' -'


kod  pimmed  b
I  wbicli  impliet  ■;


atue  m  As  iminba  of  Sputaa  dtiuiu.  But  tha
trttn,  M  wc  lUl  He  iKfvtfai,  were  tiu  nm-
mUiTCi  tl  tit  wlule  ualiaii,  «nd  Ihccdbie,  if  m
iIk  ifigB  of  nMopcaipiu  tlH  baoehiM  at  Spaita
ni  uuadcd  to  a  new  clui  af  dtiieni  who  neTcr-
tUw  woe  not  plamd  od  an  equalitj  with  the
•111  tan  (infuWn),  the  ephon  would  thenecfbi-
nri  Mad  in  n  new  poatian  with  mpm  to  the
iap,  ud  the  eoancitWi  (si  -yiferm)  who  ven
cwMd  fitm  the  higher  deH.  HoreoTer,  it  ii
Ht  BpnbeUe  ikU,  dorii^  the  abeenee  of  the
hiaiti,  tbe  eplion  uuined,  or  had  confHied  DpOQ
Ika,  powen  which  did  Dot  oiiginaJl;  belong  to
l^a  I  B  that,  InD  both  theto  camel,  Uieir
aathmitjr  maj  liaTe  been  u  6a  altwed  M  to  lead
tu  the  efiinioB  that  the  enation  of  the  office,  and

duraijlhe  reign  of  Theopnnpiii.  Again,  ai  Thiil-
nll  obeErrea^  **  if  the  eilouioD  of  the  ephoraltj
■••  ttuDceted  with  the  admiiiiDii  of  an  Infeiior
dm  of  ciiiaeu  to  the  fmnchiie,  the  comparieoD
aUik  Cieero  (De  Z^.  iii.  7,  i>a  Fep.  u.  33)
^■1  between  the  ephnaltj  and  the  Roman
mbiiBte  wonld  be  mon  apjJiable  than  he  him-
kH  abetted,  and  would  thniw  a  light  on  the
raaiag  enrtiadictiDD  of  the  ephon  being  all-
fnwfil,  thoDgh  the  clan  which  th«  mma  enptr-
talll  nfneseiited  enjoyed  only  a  Umited  friii-
tiiifc"(ffii<.o/Cr«e,ToLi.p.8*e.)  But  afle
•11.  the  nriow  accoimu  which  we  haie  been  conii
■Iniai  OKidj  thow  how  diflaient  wcra  the  opi
■■n,  tad  how  little  hiilorical  the  itMemenU,
tlma  Ihe  ccinn  of  tlie  cpbotal^.  (MUUei
Dfimt,  iiL  c  7  I  and  le*  Clinton,  ^.  if.  ToL  :
Anadiie.)

ne  tbeMbre  pmecd  to  inm^ata  the  func
>ui  md  aBthorigr  of  theepbon  io  hiUnfaal  tiniei,


EPHORI.  465

■pedt  reiembled  the  PiTtaneinm  at  Atheni,  ai
'  '  jg  the  place  where  foreignen  and  ambaMadora
e  entertained,  and  where,  moreoier,  the  ephon
took  their  mceU  together.  (FauMO.  iil  U.  §2.)
The  ephori  alio  paeeetaed  judicial  authority,
I  which  lobject  Arialotle  iPalit.  iil  1}  lemarki
that  ihey  decided  in  civil  niiti  (Ificiu  jm  irufiCff-
Xofvr),  and  geneially  in  actioiii  of  gteat  im-
atanca  (itplr«n-  nrfiimr  KifVii,  PoUL  il  6):
hBRU  the  council  preaided  orer  coital  aiuiei
{Jliiai  forucaT).  In  thia  anangosent  we  iee  an
ciemplificiliDn  of  a  practiie  cominan  to  many  of
'eat  Greek  ilalea,  according  to  which  a
jotiadictiui  wat  giTen  to  conrti  of  arii-


eheerrins  tha
mMtatbeki


>e  kmgaaad
n^fctptcaliar  to  Spana  alone  of  the  Dorian  itatci,
nald  hare  been  allogethet  incouiMait  with  the
■■■oiHtiga  of  LycDigu,  and  that  their  gradual
OTpuiDBe  lad  cncroachmeDti  wcra  facilitated  by
Uk  tigue  and  indrfnita  nataia  of  their  dntici.
1  ^ir  naaiber,  6n,  appean  to  hare  be

■he  laaie,  and  waa  |ai>bably  connected — .

Ln  ditinaia  of  Ihe  town  of  Sparta,  namely,  the
faor  tiim,  Lininae,  Meeca,  Pitana,  C  jncaura,  and
the  tU^a  cr  dty  properly  ao  tailed,  around  which
the  tifu  lay.  (FUiaUig.  StMimK,  toI.  iL  p.  £2.)
They  were  elected  from  and  by  the  people  (J{
eaa^rw),  witlwat  any  qualification  of  age  or
■ "  ' ■  g  any  acnitiny  (ol


m  ia  the  higbeat  maciatiao;  of  tt

pedae  nsde  af  their  deetun  ia  »

-AriMotlc  ^Le.)  apeak*  of  it  aa  being  mr  poerile  j

•ad  Plaio  (£9.  iiL  p.  fiSS)  deactibca  Aeir  office

*>  tn^  ^1  MK^pirnfi  tm-ilfwwt,  woida  which

My  apply  to  ■  want  of  a  directiDg  and  diaerimin.

ftog  |>incipl«  in  the  deMon,  without  of  neoauily


*f  the  file  gare  hia  name  to  the  year, '
oBed  after  him  in  all  eiril  tianaactiona.

^^.iii.7. 17.) Their  maetiiiga  warn
P>Uie  baSding  ailed  Vx<i^.  »l>>ch  ii


cided  by  popular  tribnnali.  [Comjiue  Etuktam
end  ABBioPAOua.]  Bnt  with  thia  ciril  juriadictioa
waa  united  a  cenaorial  authority,  aoch  aa  waa  poe-
aeaaed  by  the  ephon  at  Cyiene.:  for  example  the
ephon  puniihed  a  nuo  for  bnnng  broaghl  money
into  tha  itate  (Plut.  Cjnm.  IS),  and  othen  for  in-
dolmce.  (SchoL  ad  TTiucvd.  L  64.)  We  are  told
alao,  that  tfaey  inepeOed  Uie  clothing  and  the  bed-
ding of  the  yoon^  meo.  (Athen.  ill  p.  £60.)
Monorer,  lomathing  like  a  auperinteDdence  oier
the  lawi  and  their  eiecutioD  ia  implied  in  the  lan-
guage of  the  edict,  which  they  published  on  entering
upon  their  office,  wdering  Ao  citiiena  "  lo  ahara
the  upper  lip  (jiitTTata),  1.  e.  to  be  tubmiaiive,  and
to  obey  the  lawa."  Now  the  tymboliod  and  archaic
cbancler  of  thli  aipreiiiim  aeema  (o  pioTe  that  tha
ephon  eierciied  tuch  a  general  auperinlendenca
fnim  very  early  Cimea,  and  there  tan  be  no  doubt
"  that  in  the  hinda  of  able  men,  it  would  ahma
proxe  an  inatrument  of  unlimited  power."  (Thirl-
wall,  HiM  ifGrteoe,  toL  L  p.  366.)

Their  juriadiction  and  power  were  atiU  brther
iucreaaed  by  the  ptivilego  <^  ioitituCing  acniliniea
(tHOiivai]  into  the  conduct  of  all  the  magialratca,
on  which  Aritlotle  {FciiL  ii.  &  g  17}  obaerrea  that
it  waa  a  Tery  Bleat  gift  la  the  .ephotalty  (rsirTii  Vk
1)7  iitof^t  l^r/a  Ximi  Ti  JSpoi').  Nor  were  they
obliged  to  wail  till  aratgiatrate  bad  completed  hia

they  might  eierciaa  the  privilege  of  depoaition
(Xen.  D»  St.  lac  Tiii.  4.)  Eren  the  king*  them-
aelrea  coold  be  brought  before  their  tribunal  (ai
Cleomenea  wai  for  bribery,  Svps&Kla,  HemL  Ti.
62),  though  they  were  not  obliged  lo  anawer  a
lummout  to  appear  there,  till  it  bod  been  repeated
Ihm  time*.  (Flat.  Gleom.  10.)  In  extreme  caaea,
the  ephon  were  alao  competent  to  lay  an  accuealion
Bgainat  Ihe  kinp  aa  well  aa  the  other  mogiatralea,
and  bring  them  to  a  capital  trial  before  the  great
court  of  jnalice.  (Sen.  L  c.  ;  Herod.  tL  65.)
If  they  aat  aa  judge*  thenueltoa,  they  were  only
able,  accordnu;  to  MUUer,  to  impoaa  a  fine,  and
compel  immediate  payment ;  but  Ih^  were  not  in
any  caae,  great  aa  waa  their  judicial  authority,
bound  by  a  written  coda  of  lawa.  (Aiiatot.  PoUt.
iL6.)

lu  later  time*  the  power  of  tha  ephon  waa

Clly  increaaed  ;  and  thia  iucreaae  a{nean  lo
I  bocn  niucipally  owing  to  the  fact,  that  they
put  themielfei  in  coimection  with  the  aatembly  of
the  pec^la,  coniened  it*  meetmgi,  hud  meaauiea
befiiic  it,  and  wen  ccnalituled  ita  agenla  and  ra-
tatirea.  Wbw  thia  connection  aroae  i*
of  conjecture  ;  aome  refer  the  origin  of  it  to
Aiterapna,  one  of  the  firat  ephon  to  whom  tha  ei-
Mntion  oF  the  powen  of  the  cpborahy  ia  aacribed.


U9  ElPBORL

uid  irho  ii  nid  to  hiTs  lind  mtnj  yean  afterlfas
time  of  Tbeopompiu  ;  protobly  *bont  B.  c.  560.
That  it  vu  not  known  in  early  Siinct  appeal*  from
the  cimuntliuice  that  th«  two  oidinancn  of  th<
onde  Ht  Delphi,  which  i^nlmled  ths  avembly  of
the  people,  nude  no  oientioa  v[  the  fouctioni  of  the
ephon.  (Thirlwall,  ToL  L  p.  356.)  It  ii  denr,
hoireTer,  that  the  power  which  (neb  s  comiectiiu:
gave,  WDuld,  moie  tbui  imj  thing  el«e,  enobli
them  to  eocnach  on  the  idjbI  uithority,  nnd  nwlii
tbenuelTei  Tirtiully  nipnme  in  the  itste.  Ac
sordingly,  we  find  that  they  tntmcted  buinai
with  forejgn  ■mbuMdon  (Herod,  ix.  8)  ;  dit-
miueddiemfrDmtheitaCe  (Xen.  AaHLii.  IS.  g  19);
decided  upOD  the  goTenunsit  of  dependent  citiee
(Xen.  HtlL  iil  4.  g  2}  ;  nib«ribed  in  the  pi
of  othoT  pfTKHu  to  b^fttioi  of  peocc  (Thucy^
■nd  in  the  time  of  war  eent  out  tiDOpi  wheD  they
thonght  neceury.  (Herod,  ix.  7.)  In  all  thcM
tapiicitiei  the  ephon  acted  u  the  repreientatirei  of
the  nation,  and  the  sgenU  of  the  pnblic  uiembly,
being  in  f^  the  eiecutire  of  the  itale.  Their  au-
thority in  thii  ropect  ii  farther  illiulnlsd  by  the
fittt,  thai  after  a  deckra^on  of  wm,  "  they  enlnat*d
the  army  to  the  king.  «-  some  other  genenl,  wt

back  to  them  for  freah  inttnietisiu,  were  reitraine
by  them  thnngfa  the  attendance  of  eitraixdinarr
plenipotentiariea,  were  recalled  by  meani  of  the
acyUUe,  «uminoned  before  a  judici^  tribonal,  and
their  fint  duty  after  return  wal  to  lii'
of  the  ephore."  (MUller,  Dor.  toL
Another  atriking  proof  of  thia  lepraenla^ve  cha.
tacter  ii  given  by  Xenopbon  {De  Rip.  Lot.  15],
wbo  infomu  ni,  that  the  ephora,  acting  on  behalf
of  the  itate  (ffnp  t^i  irii.»i),  receiied  fcom  the
kings  eTBiy  month  an  oath,  by  which  the  latter
bound  themselTee  to  rule  according  to  law ;  and
thai,  in  return  for  thia,  tho  atite  engaged,  through
the  ephora,  to  maintain  unahaken  the  anthority  of
the  ku^  if  they  adhered  to  their  oath.

Ithai  been  laid  that  the  ephon  enema
the  royal  anthority  ;  m  eoone  of  time  tie  king)
becnme  completely  under  their  contrel.  For  ei-
ample,  they  fined  Agcailana  (Pint.  Age*.  %  b)  on
the  ngue  cha>^  of  trying  to  make  himaelf  popular,
and  interfered  even  with  the  domcatic  arrangementa
of  other  kinga  ;  moreover,  aa  we  are  told  by
Thucydidea  (L  131),  they  could  even  impriaon  Ibi
kinga,  aa  they  did  Panaaniaa.  We  knc  '  '
-■-  the  field  tht  '  ■  .....  ^  .  -

a  belonted
who  remained  at  home
charge,  and  pud  it  into  t
under  the  auperintendenca  of  the  whole  College  of
Five,  But  the  ephon  had  itiU  another  pieroga-
tiie,  baaed  on  a  rdigiona  fbundatJon,  which  enabled
them  to  efTect  a  temporary  depneition  of  the  king*.
Once  in  eight  yeaie  (Bi'  irir  irria\  aa  we  are  tirid,
they  choae  a  calm  and  cloudleaa  night  to  obaerre
tike  heaveni,  and  if  there  waa  any  appeaiance  of  a
fiiUing  meteor,  it  waa  bcliocd  lo  be  a  lign  that  the
goda  wen  diapleaaed  with  the  kinga,  who  were  ac-
ootdingly  iuapeaded  from  their  function)  until  an
oiBcIe  allowed  of  Ibeu:  realoratian,  (Pint  AgU,
11.)  The  DOlward  aymbola  of  aupreme  authority
■las  were  iMmiKd  by  the  ephora  ;  and  they  alone
kept  their  aeata  while  the  king*  paiaed  ;  whenaa  it
waa  iiot  et«uideied  below  the  dignity  ef  the  kii^
te  File  in  honour  of  the  ephon.  (XeiL  D»  Bat.
I«%Ifi.>


EPIBATAfi.

The  poution  which,  aa  we  have  •hown,  the
ephora  oocapied  at  Sparta,  will  ei[Jain  and  Juatiiy
the  atatement  of  HUller,  "  that  the  aphcnltj  waa
the  moTing  etemraic,  the  pnadple  ol  change  m  the
Spartan  conatitntton,  and  in  the  end,  the  cauie  of
ita  diaaolution.^  In  eonfitnaticai  e£  thia  o^mtioD
we  may  dte  the  aulhori^  of  Arialotle,  who  ob-
aeme,  that  fiom  the  eieeeri>e  and  abai^Bte  power
(Jmn-Apomi )  of  the  ejdiofa,  the  kingi  wen  obliged
to  court  them  (Ii|>is]wy*iW),  and  erentually  the
govenunent  became  a  democracy  inauad  of  an
atiatocracy.  Their  reiaied  and  diaaolute  mode  of
liib  too  (JLHiri^  ilwTo),  he  adde,  waa  eoniiary  ta
the  ipitit  of  the  conatitalion  ;  and  we  may  remark
that  It  waa  one  of  the  ephon,  Kpitadeiui,  who  lint
carried  through  the  law  permictmg  a  free  inherit-
ance of  jHoperty  in  contraveoition  of  the  regnlatioa
of  Lyciuvua,  by  which  an  equal  ihaiB  in  tha  com-
mon lemtocy  wea  aecmed  lo  all  the  citiieua.

The  change,  indeed,  to  which  Arittoile  ailndet,
might  hare  been  detcribed  aa  a  tranaitioD  fnnn  an
ariaCocracy  to  an  oligarchy  ;  for  we  find  that  in
later  timo,  (he  ephott,  inateiul  of  being  dema-
gogue*, inrariably  aupportad  oligarchical  prindplea
and  priiilegea.  The  caae  of  Cinadon,  n.  c  399,  ia
an  initancs  of  thia  ;  and  the  fact  ia  aj^iarently  ao
inconiiiteut  with  thedr  being  R^oeutatiTea  of  tha
whole  community,  and  aa  much  >o  of  the  lower
(hrofuIoHr)  aa  of  the  higher  (Ji^uuH)  ciaaa  of
dtiaena,  thM  Wacbannith  auppeaea  the  liiuit,  bam
and  by  whom  the  ephon  <ren  cboaai,  to  raeao  the
whole  body  of  prialigid  at  patrician  citiiaii  only,
the  moat  eminent  (imiXal  ictfatat)  of  whom  wei«
elected  to  eoYe  aa  yiparrn.  Thii  mppoaitioa  ii
not  itaelf  improbable,  and  would  go  frr  to  explain
a  great  dilficolty  ;  but  any  analyaia  of  the  aigv-
menta  that  may  be  urged  for  and  againat  it  ia  we-
duded  by  our  limita.  (See  Thiilwall,  loL  iv.
a,  377.)  We  only  add  that  the  ^on  becanto  at
laat  Uionoghly  identified  with  all  oi^oaitton  to  the
eitemion  lu  pc^nlar  privilige*.

For  thia  and  other  reaaona,  when  Agii  aod
Cleranenea  undertook  to  naton  the  old  oooatita-
tioQ,  it  waa  neccaeary  fir  them  to  orerthiow  the
ephocally,  and  aceordii^Ir  Cleomeoee  mmdeted  the
iphoTi  for  the  time  being,  and  aboliabed  the  office
B.C.  2afi)  I  it  wai,  howerec, reatond  rader  the
lomana.  [R.  W.]

EPI'BATAB  {iri6iTM),  toldien  or  imrine*
appointed  to  defend  the  reaaela  in  the  Atbenuui
navy,  were  ratirely  diatinct  from  the  towera,  and
alao  from  the  land  aoldiet*,  (och  aa  hoplitae,  pel-
taita,  end  caraliy.  (Xen.  H^L  L  3.  §  7,  v.  1.
S  1 1  )  Harwsat.  and  Heaych.  i.  e.)  It  a}^>ean
tiiat  Uie  ordinary  number  of  epibatae  on  board  a
waa  tan.  Dr.  Arnold  (ad  TSh.  iiL  9d>
that  by  eompating  Thuc  iiL  95  with  cc  9 1 ,
94,  we  find  three  hnndred  epibatae  a*  tha  complc.
nmt  of  thirly  ahipa,  and  alw  by  oomparing  ii  93
with  c  102,  we  find  four  hundred  aa  the  complex
meot  of  forty  ahipa  ;  and  the  lame  pn^ortian  re-
lulta  from  a  compariaui  of  ir,  7S  with  e.  101.  In
Thucydidea  n.  4t^  we  tnd  aeno  hnndnd  epibuao
for  a  fleet  of  cue  hnndred  *hipa,nx^<ifwl>tdiw«ra
eqni[f)ed  in  tbe  oidinBry  w»  and  6rty  had  trm^

__  i.__i T -[nanca  of  tha  mmiMr  of  haaiTw

mraX^ya*  oD  (he  eipedhiaB,
ar  to  have  redueed  the  mnnber

of  forty  erabatae  to  a  ahip  moitioned  by  Hendoto*
'  '  15),  Dc.  inali  jaatly  reowka  (iL  c),  ^  ba^


BPIBOLB.
)»(■  to  Ik  tailkr  RM*  of  Omk  nan]  Uctici,
wka  TieUiT  dtpcoded  but*  on  the  number  and
pDvcM  (f  Ike  BMien on board than  on the

k  tk>  iBj  point  thnt  the  AUienBia  iviprDTad  tha
i)»W,  bj  iV  iiiMJiig  ttaa  muuber  of  iwitltnii,  and
rayiw  oa  As  nun  ikilM  mammmaot  of  Iheir

n*  (pibaliw  wen  niodlf  takan  frnn  th<
TbM, or tiQrtb cIm* of Athsniaii  dliiau

•(  tmaidfnHj  diager,  tlis  QlkaM  of  ^  hi^cr
ihMa  (Ai  umiMTH)  vera  ampalled  to  mttc  u
^iiiMw. (Thoa.  nii.  M.)

TW  IMB  k  vqietiiMS  aba  tpflM  by  tba  Ro~
■o  writm  la  Iba  mariM  (Hot.  dt  Bell,  Alem.
II,  it  aiB.Afiii.6S\  I  bu  thej  an  moi*  unally
"  milH—. Tba  latm  term,  bawertr,
\a  tho  nwn*  or  nilon  aa  wall  •*
iwtt,  Tae.  ^M.

EPIBLR'MA  (MtXnw). [Amktiib.]
EPI'BOLB  <JnAA4),  a  fina  impoaed  by  a
MBgiinat%  or  odm  cdHdal  peiwn  or  bodj^  ^  *

niiliBia Tba  Tariaoa  magiatiaica  at  AtKma

U  (taek  in  biaawn  depaitmait)  ■  iummacy  penal
jandictiai ;  La.  for  cartain  offinea  thtf  might
ialicl  a  pecDniair  Bulat  tr  fine,  not  axcvediog  a
iud  iMi^l ;  if  (bo  aflander  dcaarred  faithar
^■■hiai  lit,  it  wB(  their  datir  ta  bring  him  befbni
■  jiitii  bl  tribnnaL  Thoa,  in  cue  of  an  injiU7  done
*  'it  too  the

L (Dem.
e.  itmait.  p.  1074.) Upn  any  me  who  made  a
JiWiili^  or  othenrin  miabeb»Dd  himaelf
■  ■ ■  hi  impDaa  a  ;

be  nmdign  piiniib-
■OB  D^Biv  uifl  aenaie  ai  ovu,  or  the  next  aa-
mUy.  (Aoaeh.  a.  Tbur.  SS,  BAk.)  I^etenate
«f  M  nn  coo^etEM  la  fine  to  the  eitantof  500
ta^mm.  (Den.  e.  Bmis-  and  AfiML  p.  UM ;
K*  ik»  Den.  a  Mid.  p.  S73.)

Tbf  n^iMisla  wko  impoaed  the  flue  (^(oAiii
Mfalta)  kd  not  the  chaigeof  levTing  it,  bat  waa
•Uigad  ta  maka  a  reaun  thenof  to  the  treaaoiy
<Man  Itwrrpifw  «f  hlT^"'  ""  fi^ropair,
<*  t)-\rtt»'  ■'i  •wiaair),  whennpon,  like  all
•ikr  p"— »«— ■  and  ameniuwnta,  it  became  (u  ve
•knld  aay)  a  debt  of  recnd.  to  be  demanded  or
ncmicd  1^  the  colleeton. (Aeach.  e.  naur.  (.<


467


irwn,  the  aicboo  migfat  &
■e  miorf  wen  of  a  oermu  n
ra  An  emat  of  Heliaia. <


Dea.  c  Wcoat.  p.  1251.) If  it
■kle  to  the  fnwl  of  a  taule,  it

larie*  who  had  the  chaise  of  that  limd


ollecledlir


(T^Jm). ThctBBttht(H

tnm  tht  ttn^*"—  of  tha  m


<Hoi(T,  .^K  i^oo.  pp.  SS,  34,  «6fi;
.  ..fiA  /ar.  Fab.  OoK  pp.  343,  393.)
aailiit  rhnnlilBnaian  law  no  magiMiale  coald


I  Atheu, How  gnatly  they
li  (ai  money  becarae  more  plentifid,

bomeh  they  fanned  of  the  public  fennna,  may  be
m  frM  the  enoplei  coUeeted  by  Biii^  Pai.
Emm.  ^AOtm,  f.  178,  &&,  Snd  ed.

Tiim  ^tolmt  are  lo  be  diMiiigiiiahtd  fram  thi
poalliea  aaiaried  by  a  jury  «  c«irt  of  law  (Tifi4-
pri)  apon  a  facmal  proeecntim.  Tbera  the  ma-
fialBMe  tt  otho'  poaon  who  inetitated  tha  pro-


EPICLBRDS.
feeding  (for  any  one  might  pnaeei  ,
»ai  laid  Tffuifia  iiiypiiliaaeai,  ai  the  c
jury  vien  taid  riii^t,  "la  awcu  the  penalty,"
which  alwayt  doTiji«d  npon  them,  eicept  where
the  penalty  waa  me  fixed  by  l&w  (4k  tw  riiuni
twuntfUrt}  ^Tj^ua),  in  iriiich  caaa  it  could  not  be
altered.  (Aeach.  n>pl  ndfat,  14,  Bekh. ;  Dem.
a,  Tkeoar,  p.  1338 ;  Harpoon  t.  v.  'Arffiirroi
iyA'.)  [C.  R.  K.]

£FICHBIROTO'NIA(t«ix*>fwrona).  IChh-

EPICLK'RUS  (MaAqpot,  h^em),  the  nana
giToa  to  tha  donghtcr  of  an  Athenian  eitiimi,  who
had  no  Kn  to  inherit  hii  ealata. It  wai  deemed


nf  impntance  al
le  and  impsty


ftmiiy  name  and  [aujiBty  of  oTHy  eitiien.  Thii
vaa  eSeeled,  when  a  man  had  no  cEiild,  by  adop-
tion (itarelitvit)  ;  if  he  had  a  danghler,  the  in-
hentaneo  vat  iranamitted  thraogh  her  to  a  giand-
Bon,  who  would  take  the  name  of  the  maternal
ancealor.  If  the  fiuher  died  inteatate,  tbo  heireie
had  not  the  choiee  of  a  hnihand,  hat  wni  bound  la
many  her  neareat  relation,  not  in  the  uceDding
Une.  Upon  mch  penon  making  hii  claim  beFaco
the  archon,  whoae  duly  it  ivai  iiriia\turtm  tw
JviaMrw  Ml  ™r  a&uw  tAt  iit^imiiimr
(Dam.  e,  Macmt.  p.  1 076),  publio  notice  waa  giTsi
of  tha  claim  ;  and  if  no  one  appeared  to  dinnle  it,
the  aichou  adjudged  the  heireu  ta  him  {irttS*aaiii
airr^  -riit  hriir\iiper').  If  another  cUimant  ap-
peared (dfi^i«47rr*ii-  a^^  t^i  hruc.),  a  oonrt  waa
held  for  the  dediion  of  the  right  (iialucaina  rqi
^w.),  which  wai  deletmined  accoiding  to  the
Athenian  law  of  eoneanguinily  (yimiit  urn'  iry-
Xurrtiar.)  Eren  where  a  wranan  waa  already
maitied,  her  hiuband  wu  obliged  to  giro  her  np
to  a  man  with  a  belter  title ;  and  men  often  pat
away  their  fiinner  wirea  in  order  to  many  betr-
emca.  (Dem.  s.  Oaet:  argnm.,  a.  £aM:  p.  1 31 1 ;
Iiaea*,  D*  Arrr.  HtmL  p.  79.)

A  man  wiUiout  male  ianie  might  bequeath  hia
praperty ;  but  if  he  had  a  danghter,  the  denaee
waa  obliged  to  many  her.  (Iaaeai,f>>..lni<./fend.
p.  19.)  If  the  dangler  wai  poor,  and  the  neareat
cefaitire  did  not  chooae  to  marry  l>er,  he  waa  bound
to  gire  her  a  portion  comqimding  to  hii  own  £11-
tune, (Dem.c.  jVooarlp.  1067.)

The  huiband  of  an  heireai  took  her  property
nn^  ibe  bad  a  ion  of  full  age  (M  Iin^r  i^
nvra),  who  waa  unuJIy  adopted  into  hii  nnUnnal
gnnd&tbs'i  family,  and  took  poaKmion  of  the
eitate.  He  then  became  hii  mother'i  legal  pro-
tector (icipMt),  and  waa  bound  to  lind  her  main-
tenaoee  (ainr).  If  Uiere  were  more  iiHU,  they
■hared  tha  jrtipertj  equally.  (Iveui,  Da  Pgrr.
Htrti.  p.  &9,  Dt  dr.  Html.  p.  40  ;  Dem.  c  Stepi.
pp.  1134,  1135.)

Whan  there  waa  but  one  daughter,  ihe  waa
called  MaAiyor  i*I  whftI t#  (*cit  Iflherowere
mora  thej  inherited  equally,  like  our  co-parcencn  ;
and  wore  aennlly  married  to  relatirea,  the  neareat
haTing  theArKehoiee.  (Audoc  0e  3fjot.  p.  117,
Ac;  Ineui,i>>C&./f«nd:ni.S7,£S.)  Illesitimata
■OBI  did  not  ibaro  with  the  danghter,  liie  law
being  1^  1^  «bai  ^TXioTilav  fiV  lipif  ^iW
iairn:  (Don.  a,  jHooart  p.  1067;  ArittopL  jlea^
1663.)

The  htireai  waa  under  the  ipeeial  n
the  archon  ;  and  if  ihe  waa  injured  by  he
or  relatirea,  or  by  itrangen  ineeting  her  from  hpr
eatale,  tha  jnw  gsre  a  cnminal  pmaumtion  uaioal


166


EPIMELETAE.

tiif<iSeaier,aiilciKiuiivititileayytXia,  (Inens,
De  Pyrr.  Uend.  p.  76  ;  Meiei,  AH.  Pno.  yf.  268,
460,  *680  [C.  K.K.]

EPIDAU'RIA. [EiiiTsmii.]

EPIDICA'SIA  (JicSmwdi). [HiBu]

EPIDEMIURGL [Dkmiuiiol]

EPl'DOSEIS  (hiMfftit),  went  Tolontuy  coD-
tribuCiaDi,  either  in  nwne^.  umi,  at  ihipa,  which
wen  mada  bj  the  Athenian  dtiEenfl  in  order  to
''  ' Bnil) of  tko  Mats.


When  tbe  ezpcnces  <rf  iIm  bC

'■  - -il  fbrtli


man  an  umdiUj  of  lb*  pKfde,  md  lAet  ex-
plaining tlw  neccaitin  of  Uis  iMIe,  to  call  upon
the  ddiou  to  eontribnte  acoirdiDg  to  their  mesni.
TboM  who  were  willing  to  contribale  then  me
and  mentioBBd  what  the;  would  gi>e  ;  while  thcM,
who  wen  miwilling  to  pya  an;  thing,  remained
•ileat  or  retired  prinitdlj  from  the  aaaemblj.
(Plat.  AltA.  10,  Phoc  9  ;  Dem.  e.  Mad.  p.  S67  ;
Thcophna.  (Aar.  23  ;  Atben.  It,  p.  168,  e.)  The
namea  of  thoie  who  had  promiied  to  eontribnte,
legether  with  the  amonnt  of  their  contribationa,
were  writtea  on  tableli,  which  wen  placed  befon
the  Matuei  of  the  Bponjmi,  where  the;  nmained
till  Iha  amonnt  wu  uud.  (Iimdi,  D«  Dieaag.
p.111,  ed.  Reiak.)

Theaa  tpidotit,  or  nolimtaij  cmtribntiona,  wen
frequenll;  rei;  laige.  Sametimea  the  mon  wealth;
citiiena  Toluntaril;  nndeitook  a  tnamchj,  or  the
eipencei  of  npipping  a  tiirema.  (Dem.  •^  Mad.
p.  £66.  S3.)  We  read  that  Pauon  fumiahed
iOOO  ahielda,  together  with  fire  triiemea,  which  he
equipped  at  hia  own  eipeuce.  (Dem.  b.  SUfA.
p.  1127.  12:)  Chiyiippoi  preeetited  a  talent  to
tbe  atale,  when  Alexander  moTcd  againat  Thebei
(Dem.  B.  Piom.  p.  916.  SO) ;  AIiataphaIle^  the
.aou  of  Ntcophemm,  g^n  30,000  dnchmaa  fur  an
expedition  agalnat  Cyprna  (Ljuaa,  pro  ^tigtepJL
boiUi,  p.  644)  ;  Choridemua  and  Diotimui,  two
conunanden,  made  a  free  gift  of  80O  thtelda  (Dem..
pro  Conm.  p.  26£.  18)  ;  and  limilac  initancea  of
liberali^  an  mentioned  by  Bockh  (PiiiL  Ban.  a/
Jliemi,  pp.  £36,  £87,  2ad.  ed.),  bom  whom  the
Dreceding  eramplea  hare  been  taken.  (Compare
.SfJiSraann,  Di  ComitiU,  p.  292.)

BPIOA'HIA  (iwiya^).  [Cititab(Griik.}]

EPIORAPHEIS  (iwiyjKi^ui). [Eisphora.]

EPIHELE'TAE  {lii^iKitTal),  the  oamea  of
Tarimia  magiatratd  and  functionariea  at  Athena.

1.  ^LwifuAifTiit  T^j  irnr^T  wpoa6tov,  more  nan-
jdlf  called  To^ifoi,  the  treaaniw  or  manageT  of  the
.pablic  lerenue. [Tamiab.]

3.  'E1rl^A1r^al'ri»>f^lpw|l'E^a4Hr,wenpenDna
^ehoaen  from  among  the  Anopogitea  to  take  can  of
the  aacred olive tieea,  (L;Biaa,!irai:p^.p.384.5.)

3.  'E«i>uA.)fTiilTo5"E^irop(oii,wereth80Terieen
of  the  emporium.  [Eupokiuh.}  The;  were  ten
in  number,  and  were  elected  ;earl;  bj  lot.  (Har-
pocrat  (.*.)  The;  had  the  entire  monagemeotof
the  emporium,  and  had  jariadiction  in  all  bnachea
ofthecommerciallawi.  (Dem.s.£am(.  t^  941.  IS.
&  Tiaac  p.  1324  1  Dinarch.  ciHafi^.  pp.  81,  62.)
According  to  Ariitotle  (i^iud  IlarpaenU.  t.  K.),
it  waa  part  of  theii  duty  to  compel  the  merchant*  to
^bting  mto  the  city  two-thirda  of  the  com  which
had  been  bnught  b;  tea  into  the  Attic  emporiom  ;
by  which  we  lean  that  only  one-thiid  eoidd  be
carried  away  to  other  ccnnCriea  from  the  port  of
the  Pdraeeu*.  (Bddch,  PaU.  Bam.  of  A&an,
fp.  48,  81,  2ad  ed.  i  Meier,  AM.  Froe.  p.  66.)


EPISTATEa

\.  TrifuXwrol  rur  Hitarripldr,  were,  m


cheam  &an  the  general  body  of  dtixena,  o...
from  the  Etmtolpidae,  and  one  from  the  C^jn*.
(  Harpocn  t  and  ijvid.  a.  c ;  Doa.  e.  Af Mf .  PL  57  0. 6.)

£.  'EwifuAqrol  thv  rtuflar,  the  impeetora  of
the  dockysrda,  fanned  a  leplai  1^x4^  and  were
""•  —  ertnordinaiy  tt " — * — -


chiDa  (c  OmlpL  f.  419),  and  tl
pobliahed  by  BSckh  (Urbaidtm  iiber  aa»  owmaaa
■ ■ ■ • -  toUn,  1B40),  in  which  they


olSpx"-


sirr,


and  their  office  duignated  an  ifX^.
104,  &0. ;  No.  X.  c  IS£  ;  No.  ii>.  cI32.  ISa)
We  learn  from  the  Bune  inicriptKni  that  their  of-
fice waa  yearly,  and  that  they  were  ten  in  niunber.
It  aJao  appear*  that  the;  wen  elected  by  lot  from
thoee  penou  who  poaaMaed  a  knowledge  of  ahip-
ping.

The  principal  duty  of  the  inqwcton  ef  the  dock-
yard) waa  to  take  care  of  the  tbipe,  and  all  the
rigging,  tool*,  Ac.  (ffimflS)  belonging  to  them.
They  alao  had  to  aee  that  the  ahipa  were  aca-
wnruy  ;  and  for  thi>  purpoae  the;  aiailed  them-
■elie*  of  the  iertice*  of  a  Somfmarit,  who  waa
well  akilled  in  luch  mattera.  (Bockh,  lUd.  No.  iL
£6.)  The;  had  at  one  time  the  charge  of  Tarioiia
kinda  of  militar;  irictv^,  which  did  not  neceaaarily
belong  IoihipB,iuchaaengine>of  war(No.xi.  m),
which  were  afterwaida,  howeret,  entrniled  to  the
geneiala  by  a  decree  of  the  senate  and  people.
(No.  itL  o.  ISS.)  They  had  to  make  oat  a  liat  ■/
all  thoae  peraoni  who  owed  anything  to  the  docka
(Dem.  c  Etery.  et  Mmm.  p.  I14£),  and  also  to
get  in  what  waa  due.  (Id.  e.  Aiidnt,  p.  612.)
We  alao  fiad  that  ^ey  lold  the  rigging,  Ax.,  of
the  ihipt  and  porchaaad  new,  onder  Ue  direc-
tion of  the  aenUe,  but  not  on  their  own  n^orati-
bilicy.  (No.iiv.b.  ISO,  Ac.,eDmpared  with  Not.
liv,  iri.  n.)  They  had  vytiuidar  tucarrnptav  in
conjnnctjon  with  the  imoTo^th  in  all  matterv
connected  with  lh«r  own  departmenL  (Dem.  a.
Emtrg.  (N  Mim.  p.  1147.)  To  aailat  them  in  dia-
cha^Dg  their  dutiea  the;  had  a  aecrelaiy  {ypafL-
yarm.  No.  iri.  h.  1 65),  and  a  public  aervant  (S«-
liiam  ir  ^<^  ttti^a.  No.  xvlb.  1S£).  For  ■
further  account  <^  tbtae  jupeclora,  lee  BSckh,
UrhadM^  Ac  pp.  48—64.

6.  'EvifKA^al  tmr  ^vSAr,  the  inapecton  of  the
f  uAol  «-  tribw. [TniBUB.]

EPIRHE'DIUM. [Rhbda.]

EPISCETSIS  (AriffKtrt'.j). [HARTrHij.]

EPI'SCUPI  (frlnairiH),  inapecUn,  who  were
Bometime*  aent  by  the  Athenian*  to  tubjcct  atatra.
Horpocration  comparea  them  to  the  lAcedaemeaiiaii
harmoal*,  and  laya  that  the;  wen  also  called
f  AXaaii.  It  appear*  that  theae  Epiacopi  reeeived
a  oUary  at  the  coat  of  the  citiea  over  which  the;
preuded.  (Ariitoph.  j4  es,  1 032,  Ac.,  with  Schol.  [
KaipocHL  1.  e.  ;  Bilckh,  P<M.  Bam.  tf  Adnu,
pp.  ISS,  238,  2d  ed.;  Schdmann,  Atiq.  Jarit
Pub.  (TnHC  p.  433.  18.)

EPI  STATES  (J«<rriin|>),whiehmeaiia  a  pv
•on  pUced  over  an;  thing,  wa*  the  nanM  of  two
dittinct  claiam  of  functionariet  in  the  Atheniaa
atata  ;  namely,  of  the  chaimian  of  the  •enaia  and
aaaembl;  of  the  people,  respecting  whoaa  dntiea  ■««
theafticlei  OouLBwtd  Eccbuu ;  aftd  ■iw  of  tkn


EPISTTLIUM.

diiKtan  of  the  poblic  nrlu.  ('EmrraTol  Tar
tvit"  fyy^.)  Tbos  direclon  had  diflmnt
lum,  u  Ttixoniai,  tlis  Kpoinn  of  the  nlll  ;
rpc|p(nwi,ilietHiiMenDfthetrireiiia;Taf«i«nHoI,
itit  Rpwren  of  tha  trenchei,  && ;  all  o!  whom
wmdeoai  bjthe  tribes,  one  from  nch:  bin  the
mat  dmingniihed  of  thcH  wen  the  rnx^wooL
(Aachin.  «.  Ottipi.  pp.  100,  4S2,  42S.)  Over
oihcT  public  biuldingi  a  mumg^r  of  pablic  worki
hid  the  iDpenaleDdence ;  and  it  wu  in  tbii
apKitf  that  Perida,  ud  ■ubeeqnentlf  Ljcnrgiu,
adatcnk  »  ataj  woiki  of  mnhitectnre.  In  the
iiuiii|itkiDi  reUling  to  (he  building  of  the  temple
at  Alhsia  Poliai,  we  find  ^iOToTcil  mentioned
(BULh,  PM.  Eeom.  e/  Alkaa,  p.  203,  2Qd  ed.)
SjmilM  mnthoritia  wen  Appcunted  for  the  ove  of
ibc  nadt,  and  of  the  IU|^;  of  water  (MotoioI,
Anchin.  e.  CUtqA.  p.  41 9  ;  hivmol  t«v  tMrmr,
Plut  not.  31  i  SchHiDMUl,  Attiq.  JaHi  PtM.
(;Ta«.p.317).

The  ilirectora  nceiTsd  the  money  which  waa
""iiMij  for  theie  worki  from  tlie  pablic  Dcani7
(I*  th  tuaefiatMt,  Aewihin.  c  CMpk.  p.  425).

EPI'STOLA. [COHSTITBTIO.]

EPISTOLEUS  (,*w,OT>i\,ii),  wai  the  offioer
•mid  in  rank  in  the  Sportan  fleet,  and  (nceeeded
to  the  ewnmand  if  onj  thing  h^pened  to  the
K>^M  or  admiral  (Xeo.  HdL  L  1.  g  2S,  iv.
S-lll.  T.  1.  15,  6{  Stum,  IM.  Xaupi.  M.  V.)
Thu,  when  the  Chiani  and  the  other  alliei  of
Sfaiu  ID  the  Auatic  coul  Knt  to  Spvta  to  ce-
(jant  that  Lyiander  might  be  again  appointed  to

tide  of  tnart^iit,  becauM  the  Iiwi  of  Sparta  did
BM  psBit  tbe  aune  perion  to  hold  the  office  of
P-ifx^  twict (Xen.  /Wt  iL  1.  §  7.)

EPI3TY'LIUM  (h-wT^x™-),  ii  properly,  at
tbe  suae  isipliei,  the  archiliBTe,  or  lower  member
of  n  ctilablature,  which  lia  immediately  orer  the
akaaa.  (FlDt.i>«r.  13;  PasLixw.;  Van. A.A.
ill-  2  ;  Fntua,  i.  V. ;  camp.  Column^  p.  324,  a)
Tie  nla  |«rtbe  heightof  the  anhitraTe  are  giren
bj  Vitmiiui  (iil  3.  a  5,  ed.  Schn.).  In  the
W  eumplca  of  the  Doric  order,  the  frmt  of  the
■rdutrave  waa  a  {Jain  £at  sniiace,  with  no  carringa,
bai  Mawrliniea  otnameDted  with  metal  ahielda  af-
fiird  to  It  DTci  each  coin  mil,  at  in  the  FartbeDOo,
■ben  there  are  alio  inacriptiona  between  the
ibitldi. (See  Lncw*!  model) In  the  Ionic  and

Ihirt  Borfaee*  (/atdat},  projecting  beyond  one
■uxhv,  the  ed^  of  which  wen  afierwai^I
dccDnlid  with  moulding*.  (See  the  woodc
amltT  CuLUMNA.)  DrigioaUy  the  airhitraie  <
the  main  bom,  laid  along  the  top  of  the  cdIuquu
t*  Atppcrt  the  roof.  When  atjme  waa  nted,  a
aininl  limit  waa  act  to  the  length  of  the  piece*
if  [lie  anhitnTe,  and  couaeqaenlTy  the  diatance  of
iKe  eulamna,  by  the  inpoMibilily  of  oblaming
lili^  if  itmc  or  mutaie  bejond  a  ceruun  tiie.
In  the  iflUfie  of  Artemii  at  Ephenu  the  piecei  of
tie  anhitnfe  were  to  large  that  Fliny  wondera
bvv  ihey  could  hare  been  niied  to  their  placei.
W/r.  uxii  14.  1.21.)  When  an  intennlmn-
aiuiia  waa  of  the  kind  called  aneoatyle,  that  ia,
■ba  the  ariomna  wen  aioR  than  three  diametert
•(En,lbc  eiHityligm  wat  necetwiily  made  of  wood
iMod  of  BtoDC  (VrtruT.  iil  Z  a  3.  §  5.  ed.  Schn.) ;
loaatitietioa  eionpliGed  by  Uw  lealoialion  in  the
•neied  woodnit  (/■oa^wi,  toI  L  p.  143)  of  the
I'm  ponkdy  which  •srroiindt  three  aidea  of  the


EPITROPUS.
n  at  Pompeii The  holei  ac
9  fHeie  receired  the  beami  w
an  upper  galleiy.


The  word  ia  aometimca  alto  lued  for  the  whole
<^  the  entablature,  (P- S.1

EPITA'PHIUM. [Fund?.]
EPITHALA'MIUM. [MATaitfONiUM.]
EPITI'MIA  <^iT£,Jb). [Atimia.]
EPITRIERARCHE'MATOS  DIKE  (/tit^
ilpapxilutTtt  B(jn|). tTmiBARCH!*.]
EPITROPES  ORAPHE  ((wifpn^i  7pii*4).


]

EPI'TROPUS  iMrptni),  which  tignifiet
literally  a  peiaon  to  whom  any  thing  ia  girea  in
charge  (Dem.  a  Aplab.  L  p.  819.  18),  occnn,  faow-
eter,  much  more  Irequeutly  in  the  aenae  of  a  guar-
dian of  orphan  children.  Of  tuch  guardiant  there
were  at  Athent  three  kinda :  Grtt,  thoie  appointed
in  the  will  of  the  deceaied  lather  j  aecondly,  the
nc:xt  of  kin,  whom  the  law  deiignated  aa  tutorea
legitimi  io  debult  of  auch  appointment,  and  who
required  the  aathoritaliou  of  the  archon  to  enable
them  to  act ;  and  laatly,  neb  penont  at  the  archon
telecled  if  there  were  no  next  of  kin  Hying  to  un-
dertake the  office.  The  dutiei  of  the  guardian
compnhended  tbe  education,  maintenance,  and
pcDleclion  of  the  ward,  the  aiaerlion  of  bia  righta,
and  the  lafe  ciutody  and  pntlitable  diipoiitioQ  of
hia  inheritance  during  hit  minarity.beiidei  making
a  proper  provigion  for  the  widow  if  ahe  remained
in  the  houae  of  her  late  huaband.  In  accordancs
with  theae,  the  guardian  waa  bound  to  appear  in
court  in  all  aclioni  in  behalf  of  or  againat  hia  ward,
and  gi<e  in  an  account  of  tbe  taxable  capital
,  „ ,  Ml  tla^ofi

hich  orphani  were  liable)  i
the  pToportionale  payment  in  ine  mmori  name.
Witn  reference  lo  the  diipoaition  of  the  property,

if  the  deceaied  had  le(\  no  will,  or  no  apeci&c
directiooa  ai  to  iti  management,  lii.,  to  keep  it  in
hit  own  handi  and  employ  it  aa  be  beat  could  for
the  bcneBt  of  the  minor  {tiauaai),  at  let  it  out  to
faim  lo  the  higbeit  bidder  (juaSovr  tir  olcof).
In  the  fonner  caie  it  leemi  probable  (Dem.  e.
' p.B65.  17)  that  a  conalant  control  o'


money  belonging  to  a  minor  ahould  be  nattd  ii


no


EPOBELIA.


nturtgagci,  ind  apan  m  kccount  be  lent  out  npcm
the  mon  lacrBtiTs  but  hmrdotu  »8eiiritj  of  bot-
tomry. (SnitUtt,  ».  V.  'Kyyiuir.)

To  inaiiTe  the  perfoniuuiee  al  theH  dutin  the
Isw  permitted  any  free  ddien  to  inititole  ■  public
action,  u,  for  inatonce,  an  ajaffip  at  elMiigeliB
ngiintt  ■  nmidiao  who  tulcreated  hit  vud
<j[(witir>Ht  tp^iiriiu\  or  a  7pa^  ^irpmr^f  tot
neglect  or  injury  of  hit  penon  or  pnperty ;  and  the
puniihment,  npOQ  conTiction,  depended  entinly
Dpon  the  greater  or  \en  Mreri^  of  the  dicaili.
(Meier,  AIL  Fme.  p.294.)  If  tiie  guardian  pre-
ferred thU  the  ettale  ihould  be  brmed,  the  regular
method  of  accompliihicg  ihii  wu  by  niahiiig  an
application  to  the  archon,  vha  therenpon  let  the
inheritance  to  the  higheel  bidder,  and  look  can
that  the  fanner  ihonid  hypothecale  a  nfficient
piece  of  gnnmd  or  other  M  [onperty  to  guanatee
the  folfibient  of  the  contract  (AirsTl>ii|>ia).  In
aoine  caiei  the  goaidlan  might  be  compelled  to
adopt  thii  OODTW  or  be  puniihed,  if  the  leaie  vetc
irregularly  or  fraudulently  made,  by  a  pbaiii,
whieh,  upon  thii  occauon,  might  be  iuitttuted  by
any  bee  citizen.  The  guardianihip  expired  when
the  ward  had  attained  hii  eighleeclh  yeai,  and  if
tiie  state  had  been  leaied  out,  the  &imer  paid  in
the  market-place  the  capital  he  had  receiied  to
trade  with,  and  the  intereil  that  had  aectued
(Dem.  t.  ApM.  I  832.  1) ;  it,  howeier,  the  in-
heritance had  been  managed  by  the  guardian,  it
■wu  tram  him  that  the  heir  received  hii  property
and  the  account  of  hii  diibnraementa  during  the
minority.  In  cue  the  accoonta  were  nniatiifBctory,
the  heir  might  jnititute  an  action  Mrpoir^  agaioat
hii  kte  gnudian ;  thii,  howeTer,  waa  a  mere  pri-
Tnle  lawBuiC,  in  which  the  damagea  and  epobelia
orly  could  be  loat  by  the  defendant,  to  the  hitter
of  which  the  plaintiff  wai  equally  liable  npon  ftil-
faig  to  obtain  the  Totea  of  a  filVi  of  the  dicaeta.
Thii  action  wai  barred  br  the  lane  of  fire  yean
from  the  termination  of  the  gnardianihip ;  and,  if
the  defendant  in  it  died  before  that  time,  an  action
jSAaSitt  would  lie  aninit  hii  rtpreaentatiTet  to  re-
eoTer  what  wai  claimed  from  hii  eitate.  (Meier,
Att.  Pron.  p.  4M,  Ac)  [J.  3.  M.]

EPOBE'LIA  (AnrftXia),  na  ita  etymology  im-
pliea,  at  the  rale  of  one  obolui  fot  a  drachma,  or
one  in  lU,  wai  [ayable  on  the  aaaeument  (rffutfa)

of  phaiii,  by  the  litigant  thai  Kuled  to  obtain  the
TOtN  of  one-fifth  of  the  dicatti. (Dem.  e.  AjAat.

e834.  35,  c  Euer^.  d  Mnaib.  -a.  1158.  30.)  It
not,  however,  quite  eertwn  that  lueh  wai  in-
rarvbly  the  cSM  when  the  defeated  luilar  wai  the
defendant  in  the  canie  (Heier,  Aa.  Proe.  p.  730)  ;
though  in  two  great  cIubbi,  namely,  croH  luita
(dn-rypa^of),  and  those  in  which  a  preliminaiy
qneition  a*  to  the  admiuibiltly  of  the  original
came  of  action  wai  raiaed  {Trapar/fafal),  it  may  be
confidently  auerted.  Ai  die  object  of  the  legiila-
tion  mi  to  inSict  a  penalty  upon  liligioosneat,
and  leimbnree  the  pemn  that  wai  ouirieuly  at-
tacked fee  hii  trouble  and  anxiety,  the  fine  waa
paid  to  tba  aocceiifiil  luitot  in  priiate  eauea,  and
tboio  caMi  ofphaB*  in  which  a  priirala  etUien  wai
tba  party  immediately  aggrieved.  In  public  ae-
•matioui,  in  ganraal,  a  fine  of  a  thouaand  ■''"I""*,
payable  to  ua  pnUie  tnaiui^,  or  a  compete  or
p^tiai  diafranchuoment,  ni[^lied  the  plice  of  the
•pobalia  aa  a  poniahmoit  fir  bivoloDi  proiecu-
IMM.  [J.&H.]


Siiidai,  the  EtynHlogiemn  Magn^  and  other  gnm-
""■■■■■".  to  have  been  tar^,  likewiae  appliei  to  tba
chief^nhon  of  Atheng.  Every  Athauan  had  to
•crve  in  the  anny  fmm  hk  1 9th  to  fail  6flth  year,
1. 1.  during  the  archonship  of  forty  ardioua.  Now
ai  an  army  generallj  coniiited  of  men  fram  the
age  of  18  to  that  of  60,  the  finty  aichoni  under
whom  they  had  besi  enliitcd,  were  called  iwAin/-
liai  Tfi*  JtAmur,  in  onler  to  dntingniih  them  from
tbe  iw^niiai  rbi  ^XA/.  (Compare  Demonh.  ^
Harpocni.  as.  'Evdwfuii,  and  Bekker,  Amedola,
p.  243.)  At  Sparta  tba  6rat  of  the  five  ephon
gave  hii  name  to  tbe  year,  and  wai  thenfore  called
t^tfoi  triniun. (pBUbiiL  II.  |2.)

It  wBi  a  Tery  prevalent  tendenqr  among  the
ancient!  in  general  to  reler  the  inigD.  of  th«r  in-
nitutioni  to  lome  ancient  <a  fabuloui  hero  (dpxq-
ytnii,  DernoitL  c  Maarrt.  p.  1072),  ftom  whon,
in  moat  caaee,  the  inttitution  waa  alio  believed  to
have  derived  in  name,  »  that  the  hen  beonne  ill
ipXTy'ri)!  trAmiyei.  In  later  'ana*  new  inttita-
lioni  were  often  named  after  ancient  hemei,  on
seeoont  of  aome  bbnloDi  or  kgcndan  connecdon
which  wai  thought  to  eiitt  between  them  and  the
new  inititutioni,  and  the  beroea  thui  became,  ai  it
wezV|  their  patmn  er  tutelary  deities, A  atrtkiiig

Attic  Iribei  initituted  by  CleiiUienn,  all  of  whkh
were  named  after  lome  national  liero.  (Demoith.
Eialaph.  p.  1397,  ftc  ;  Paul.  L  G.)  Then  ten
heroei  who  were  at  A^eni,  genenjly  called  lb
^Tdru^iai,  or  Arrfru^i  tint  ^wUfr,  wen  Iionoorrd
with  atatius,  which  itood  in  the  Ceiamicui,  near
the  Thobi.  (Pani.  i.  5.  g  1 ;  Suidai  and  EwnoL
Hagn.  M,  e.  "EadnifiM.)  If  an  Athenian  atiien
wiiEed  to  make  pnpoaal*  Ibr  a  new  law,  be  ei-
hibited  them  fbr  public  inipeetion  in  feat  of  theae
itatnea  of  the  Ar^nfiai,  whence  the  expreaiioni
tHBtirai  npivttw  rir  imrtpiir,  or  vjptt  rait  in-
rJfunn.  (Aeidin.aCla^p.S9,edSt^  ;Wol(
Frelig.aii  DemiuA.Liipiai.p.liS.)  [L.S.]
EPOPTAE  (fcArrai).  lELaifarOT*,]
EPULO'N^  who  wen  oiiginallr  Ihne  in
number  (TWnnotn  Epuloiia),  were  fint  etrated
in  B.C  196,  to  attend  to  the  Epulom  joiia
(Valcr.  Max.  il  1.  S  2  ;  Liv.  izxL  4  ;  OcIL  lil
B),  and  the  banqncta  given  in  hononr  of  tbe  other
goda  {  which  duty  had  originally  belonged  to  the
Pontifieei.  (Liv.  ziiiiL  42  ;  Cic  C«  Orvt.  iiL
19,  Da  Hanup.  Regxyn.  10 ;  Featni,  a.  v.  Bpi*-
/oww.}  Their  nnmber  waa  afierwardi  incnurd
to  icven  (Oell.  L  12 ;  Lucan,  i.  60-2),  and  they
were  called  Septemviri  Epulonei  or  Septemviri
Epnlonnin ;  nnder  which  namea  they  are  frequently
mentioned  ia  inacrptioni.  (OnUi,  tnieh/i,  tin.
390,  77S,  2359,  S3G0,  2365.)  Julina  CttMr
added  thne  man  (Dion  C^aii.  iliiL  51),  bvt  after
hii  time  the  nnmber  appcari  to  have  been  again
limited  to  aeren.

The  Epulonea  fimned  a  eoQegiom,  azid  vrere  ena
of  the  four  great  religiaai  cerpontiona  at  Rome  ;

~ "  h*-


BQUITEs:
Mil  13;  PliD.  ^  X.  3  ;  Walter,  OtsUcUi  dM
AS>LAwbsSliI,3d«d.)
E'PULUM  JOVIS. [Epulomm.]
EQUl'RIA, hDne-raco.  wbich are Mid to
km  bsm  ionitoted  by  Bomului  in  honoDT  of
Hui,  aod  *Eie  oelebiaud  in  the  Campu*  Martioi.
(FnOt,  I.  T.  i  Vano,  Lug.  LaL -ri  13,  MUllu.)
Tbae  wcR  tva  fetljnlc  of  tbii  nuoe  ;  of  which
■c  wu  (dehmted  a.  d.  111.  C>L  Mart,  and  the
mIh  pid.  Id.  MuL (Olid,  i^Vut.  iL  359,  iiL
619.) If  iIh  Cunpoi  Martiiu  »ai  orerfloved  by
tW  Tiba,  the  nee*  took  place  on  a  lart  of  tbi
Hunt  Codiut,  which  wai  called  from  that  eimuii-
■tuce  the  Martialia  Campiu, (Featui,  l  v.  Mart.

E'QUITES.  The  Roman  Equitei  veie  origin-
ally the  hone-aaldieci  of  the  Roman  itate,  and  did
MI  fflfm  a  diitinct  dau  or  ordo  in  tha  cotomon-
naltb  till  the  time  of  the  OncchL  Their  initi-
aiioii  ii  kuribated  to  ficmtiliu,  who  earned  300
aiiiiM,  divided  into  three  eenturiea,  to  be  elected
br  tU  cnriae.  Each  of  ibe  old  Roman  tribei,  tb<
Sianu,  TUia,  and  Liuira  wai  npmentad  by
IW  opiitea,  and  enueqncntly  each  of  the  30
tame  by  10  equilea ;  and  each  of  the  three  cen-
taria  ban  tbe  name  of  the  tribe  vhich  it  repre-
niid.  The  tbiee  ceotnriea  were  divided  into  10
tnx,  tteh  eodviting  of  30  men ;  erery  tunna
mtaiud  10  Bamnea,  10  Titiea,  and  10  Lnceru  ;
■ad  (Bch  of  these  dscuriei  vat  commaodEd  by  a
dnrie.  Tbe  whtde  body  likfitiie  boc«  the  Dame
i(  Cdwet,  who  are  erroiKiDuily  resaided  by  aome
■tilcTt  limply  aa  the  body-gnaid  of  the  king.
Tke  eonmander  of  tbe  300  eqnitei  iru  tailed
TUmmi  Oeltmm.  (I^ooyt  iL  13;  Varr.  L.  L.  y.
91,  ed.  MUller ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiiL  9  ;  Featui,
ae.  Qkni,-  Li(.  L  13,  IS.) [Ciliru.]

T«  tbe  three  hundred  eqoite*  of  Homulna,  ten
Albn  tOTDMe  were  added  by  Tullui  HHtilioa.
(Lir.  L  30.)  There  were  caneqnently  now  £00
equiia  ;  hot  ai  the  Dumber  of  centiuica  wai  not
■tirwawd,  each  of  iheae  etotmie*  contained  300
aiea.  Tanpuniu  Priacca,  actwding  to  Liry  (i.
3G),  withed  to  eitabliih  aome  new  centniiea  of
hmeani,  and  to  call  them  by  hii  own  name,  but
pie  gp  hii  intentiou  in  conKqnence  of  the  oppoti-
tinB  ef  tbe  uignr  Attua  Naviua,  and  only  donbled
tke  naiber  of  the  centuriea.  The  three  centuriei
which  he  added  were  called  the  Ramnca,  Tilieniev
and  LiKerei  Pmbriont.  The  number  ought  thera-
l«  Mw  to  be  1200  in  all,  which  numbet  ii  giien
ia  nany  editiona  of  Livy  {L  c.\  but  ii  not  found  in
ny  nuaieripL  The  numbM  in  the  manntcripta
it  diflerent,  Imt  lome  of  the  beat  manuKripti  have
1800,  vhieh  haa  beoi  ad<^>ted  by  meet  modem
(diiiaa.  Thia  nomber,  however,  ii  ojipoaed  to
Livy^  previoiii  account,  and  cenoot  be  lupported
hf  the  lUlcnient  of  Plutareh  {Rom.  20),  that  after
Iht  miu)  with  tbe  Sabine^  the  equitei  were  in-
cnaied  to  GOO  i  becauie  the  original  300  are  apoken
of  ai  the  repreaentativei  of  the  ihrte  tribu ;  when-
ai,  acading  to  Plutarch')  account,  the  origkal  300
•(^1  only  to  rejveaait  the  Ramnea  If  therefore
we  adopt  Lirj'i  acaoont  that  then  wen  originally


300  ei,


lOby


Taihu  HoetiliH,  md  tlul  the  600  were  doubled
hy  Tanjainina  Priiciu,  there  were  ISOO  in  the
tiiae  i/tbe  laat-mentioiwd  king,  being  divided  into
three  eenlurwB  of  Aano;  7t(^  and  Jjunu^  each
cfBtoiy f~.  Lining  200 priant and  200  pot-


EQU1TE3.  47.

The  complete  orsantuitian  of  (he  equitee  Livy
(L  43)  atlributei  to  Serviu  TuUini.  He  uyi  that
thia  king  formed  (_KriptU)  13  centuriei  of  equitea
fiom  tha  leading  men  of  the  itate  (u  prmorAat
KOtatit)  \  and  u»t  he  alw  made  aii  centuriea  out
of  the  three  ettahliihed  b;  Romului.  Thui,  then
were  now  19  centuriea.  A<  each  of  tbe  13  new
centuriea  probably  contained  the  tfme  number  aa
the  lix  old  ceuturiee,  if  the  latter  contained  1200
men,  the  former  wouJd  have  contained  2400,  and
the  whole  number  of  the  equitei  would  have  been

3eoo.

Tbe  account,  however,  which  Cicsre  {De  R^
iL  30)  gim  ia  quite  di^rent.  He  attribute  the
complete  oiganiiation  of  the  equitea  to  Tarquinina
Priicna.  He  agreei  with  Livy  in  uying  that  TBt>
qumiui  Priacui  increaaed  the  number  of  the  Ram-
nea,  Titianiea,  and  Lucena,  by  adding  new  cen-
turiei under  the  name  of  Ramnea,  Titieniea,  and
Lucerei  tteumii  (not,  however,  poiUriom,  aa  Livy
itBtea  ;  compare  Feitui  t.  v.  £si  Fotoe)  ;  but  ha
diffeia  frem  him  in  atating,  that  thii  king  alio
doubled  their  number  after  the  conqueat  oF  tha
AequL  Sdpio,  who  ia  repreiented  by  Gicere  ai
giving  thil  account,  alu  layi  that  the  anangement
of  tha  cquitet,  which  wai  made  by  Tarquinina
Priicna,  continned  unchanged  (o  hia  day  (b.c.
129).  The  account,  which  Cicero  gave  of  the
equitei  in  the  cnutitution  of  Serviui  TuUiua,  ii
nufbrtnnittely  loit,  and  tbe  only  wordi  which  re-
main are  daoimigiiiii  eenw  tmxmo;  but  it  ii  di]£-
cult  to  conceive  in  what  way  he  repreiented  the
diviiion  of  tbe  Ifi  centuries  in  the  Servian  coneti-
tution,  after  he  had  ex|H¥u]y  laid  that  the  orgft-
niiation  of  the  body  by  Taniuiuiua  Prlacua  had
conunned  unchanged  to  the  time  of  Scipio.  Tha
nnmber  of  equitei  in  thil  paataga  of  Cicero  ia  open
to  much  doubt  and  diipute.  Scipio  itatea,  accord-
ing to  the  reading  adopted  in  all  ediuona  of  the
"  De  Republica,*^  that  Tarquiniui  Friicui  mcreaaed
the  origmal  number  of  the  equilei  to  1200,  and
that  he  lubtequentlr  doubled  thii  number  after
the  conqnat  of  the  Aequi ;  which  account  would
make  the  whole  number  3400,  which  number
cannot  be  cortHt,  lince  if  2400  be  divided  by  18
(the  number  of  the  centuriei),  the  quotient  ii
not  a  complete  number.  The  MS.,  however,  hai
00  ACCC,  which  ia  inteninted  to  mean  miUe  aa
ducaOct;  but  initesd  of  thii,  Zumpt  (Veber  dia
Romiidiai  RUter  whJ da Rittntiioid in Rom,


g,  that  luc)


Thu  reading  would  make  the  nnmlwr,
when  doubled,  3600,  which  agieei  with  Livy'a  view,
and  which  appean  to  have  been  the  regular  cumber
of  equitei  in  the  flouriihing  timei  of  the  republic
Both  Livy  and  Cicero  agree  in  itatmg  that  each
of  tha  equitei  received  a  hone  &am  the  ilate
(eguu  puiliaa),  or  money  to  purchaie  one,  ai  well
ai  a  lun  of  money  jor  iti  anniial  lupport ;  and  that
the  eipenie  cf  ita  aupport  waa  defnyed  by  the
orphana  and  unmarried  femalea  ;  lince,  Ktya  Nia-
buhr  {ffid.  s/AoBK,  voL  L  p.  461),  "  in  a  military
alata  it  could  not  be  Moemed  unjuit,  that  the
women  and  the  children  ven  to  contribute  largely
C<a  thou  who  Ibnght  in  behalf  of  them  and  of  the
commonwealth."  According  to  Oaiua  (iv.  27)  the
pnrcbaae'meney  for  a  knight'*  hone  wai  called  art
tqaaln,  and  ita  annual  proviaion  aa  lorrfaarnin.
[AiB  HoanBABtVU.]  The  fomMT  amoimted,  ao-
cording  lo  Liiy  (L 13),  to  10,000  auca,  u^  th^


472  EIJUITE8.

ktter  lo  2DaO :  Wt  (bets  mmw  ar*  M  lajge  h  to
be  slmott  incredible,  eip«iaU;  when  we  Uke  into
■Clomit  tbaC  136  jean  afterwardi  a  ihesp  wu  nnlf
reckoned  it  10,  and  in  ei  kt  100  ukh  in  the
t»bl«  dT penalties  (Oell.  XL  I.)  The  correcUni
of  theie  numben  bu  sccardJngly  been  queitioned
hy  lome  modem  *riten,  vhile  othen  hare  at-
tempted to  aecnnni  for  the  laigeneia  of  Iba  nun.
Niebuhr  (toI.  I  p.  <3S)  tnnaiki  tbat  the  mm  mt
doubtlcM  intended  not  onljfcr  the  purchue  of  the
hone,  bnt  bIh  fbi  it!  equipment,  which  vonld  be
incomplete  without  a  groom  or  elare,  who  had  to
be  bought  and  then  to  be  moonted.  BHckb  (Mi-
tnlog.  Umlxmek.  c  29)  lu^^iaKi  tbat  the  nuni  of
inooej  in  the  S«viaa  cennu  aie  not  given  in  aieee
of  a  pound  weight,  but  in  the  reduced  uaea  of  the
flnt  PmUE  war,  when  they  wen  gtmck  of  the  nine
weight  aa  the  lextani,  that  ia,  two  onncci,  or  one-
■iitb  of  the  ori^nal  wnght.  [As.]  Zumpt  eon-
iideri  that  lOOO  auea  of  the  old  weight  were
giren  for  the  purchaec  of  the  hone,  and  201}  for  it)
annual  pioriuon  ;  and  that  the  original  nun  hai
been  retained  in  a  p«Mige  of  Vanv  (oTnu*  fnUi'
am  miiU  lutariomBt,  L,  h.  riii.  71).

All  the  eqnitea,  of  wbom  we  haie  been  qxak-
Ing,  received  a  bone  bum  the  itale,  and  were  iu-
duded  in  the  1 3  equeitnan  centnria  of  the  Servian
eonititution ;  but  in  coom  of  tinie,  we  read  of
another  chua  of  equitea  in  Homan  hittory.


and  wet


ncluded  in  the  IS  ceDtnriea.  Thit  latterdaai
i>  liTil  mentioned  by  Li>y  (r.  7)  in  hie  account
of  the  Biege  of  Veil,  B.  c  403.  He  aayt  thai  dur-
ing the  liege,  when  the  Romani  had  at  one  time
mffered  grc&t  diBUtera,  all  thoie  citiEeni  who  had
an  squeatrian  fortune,  and  no  hone  allotted  to  ibem
(iftSai*  osuiu  tqaater  eral,  (fn  pmUid  Hon  erant),
Tdnnteered  to  lecre  with  their  own  honea  ;  end
he  addi,  that  Emm  tliti  time  equitea  fint  be^  to
aerre  with  their  own  bono  (boii  primam  efuit
be  itate  paid  them
ii  at  aaignalm)  aa  a  kind  of
n  for  lerving  with  their  own  honet.
The  foot  aoldien  hod  receiTcd  pay  a  few  yeai*
before  (Lit.  ir.  59)  i  and  two  yiaia  aflenrarfa,
B.  c-  401,  the  pay  of  the  eqnilea  waa  made  three-
fold that  of  the  in&ntiy.  (Liv.  T.  12 ;  a«  Niebuhr,
ToL  iL  p.  439.)

From  the  year  B.  c.  40S,  then  were  thenftre  two
chuaei  of  Boman  knighta :  one  who  receired  honea
ftom  the  atate,  end  are  therefore  frequently  called
tgmlt$tquopiJilia>  (Cie.^Ui.TL6),aDdaometim«
/Tsnnwut  orTVsm/i,  the  latterof  which,  accwding
lo  Oettling,  ii  an  ElruKon  word  (Plin.  //.  N.  iniii.
9  ;  FcRui,  (.  V. ;  QSttling,  GeuA.  dtr  Aon.  Sbuttm.
p.  Sra),  and  another  claia,  who  lerved,  when
the;  were  required,  with  ihcir  own  honee,  but  were
not  claiaed  among  the  Ifi  centufita.  Aatbeyierved
on  honeback  they  were  tailed  amCu;  and,  when
apoken  of  in  oppoaition  to  caTaliy,  which  did  not
coniitt  of  Roman  dtiicna,  they  were  oIk  called
eoBKi  Romani  1  but  they  had  no  legal  claim  to
the  name  of  equilca,  liuce  in  ancient  time*  thi>  title
wai  Btrictly  smfined'  to  thoee  who  receiTcd  boraee
fiom  the  Btate,  ai  Pliny  (ff.  JV.  iniii.  7)  eipre«ly
njB, "  Equitom nomen nbiialebat in  tunnii

But  bere  two  queBtinu  ariia.  Why  did  the
eqnitei,  who  belonged  to  the  eighteen  centuriea,


EQUITES.

apectirely  ?  Theaa  qaeationa  ha«e  eecBDoned  much
controTerty  among  modem  writin,  bat  the  fijlow-


In  the  .


among  modem  wntm,  b
ia  pcrhapa  the  moat  tatisl


■  ToIIhu  all the


according  to  the  amount  id  their  propeitj,  and  it
may  therefore  burly  be  [raiuned  that  a  place  in
the  centuriea  of  equitei  wu  determined  by  the
HUne  qualification.  Dionyinu  (iv.  16)  eipreasly
■eyi,  that  the  eqoitea  were  choaen  by  Sernui  out
of  the  richeit  and  man  illottnoui  bmiliea  }  and
Cicero  (Dt  Hup.  >l  22)  that  they  wen  of  the
highot  ceniui  («■>■  matima).  Livy  (L  43)  alio
■tatei  that  the  twelve  ccntoriee  formed  by  Seniua
TuUiui  coniisted  of  the  leading  men  of  the  itate.
None  of  theae  writeca,  howeier,  mentisi  the  pro-
perty which  wBi  neoeuoiy  to  entitle  a  penon  to  a
place  among  the  equitea ;  but  it  waa  probably  of
the  aame  amount  aa  in  the  latter  time*  of  the  Te-
^blie,  that  it,  fbor  timea  that  of  the  fint  clau.
'ery  one  iberefon  who  poaaeaeed  the  .


admiaaion  into  tt
the  atatement  of  Dionyaiua,  quoted  abore,  ODgbt
lo  be  confined  to  theae  centuttea,  and  not  apfJied
to  the  whole  eighteen.  He  Diaintaini  that  the
twelve  centuiiei  conaiated  eicluaivcly  of  plebeiam ;
aod  that  the  aix  old  eentariei  (that  ia,  the  three
double  centuriea  of  lUmnca,  Titia  and  Lucsm,
priont  and  pottenorei\  which  were  incorporated
by  Serviui  into  hia  couutia  under  the  title  at  the
at*  K^higiOt  compriaed  all  the  patrieiaiia,  inde-
pendent of  the  amount  of  property  whitji  they
poaaeaaed.  Thia  aocount,  however,  doea  not  aeem
to  reit  on  lufGcient  evidence  j  and  we  have,  on  the
contraiy,  an  eipteai  inatanee  of  a  patrician,  L.  Tar-
quitina,  b.  c  466,  who  wa*  compelled  on  accoanl
at  hii  poverty  lo  aerve  on  foot  (Liv.  iiL  37.)
Tbat  the  ail  old  centuiiea  amaialed  entiiclj  of
patrioana  ia  moat  probable,  Hncfl  the  jdebeiana
would  certainly  not  have  been  admiUed  antoDg  the
equitea  at  all  till  the  Servian  eonatitutian  ;  aod  aa
by  thia  conatitutian  new  eentuiiea  were  tjcatcd,  it
ia  Dot  likely  (hat  any  pleheiaai  woold  have  been
placed  among  the  ancient  aii.  Bat  we  have  no
luppaaing  tl "  "'


lined  U


e  body  of


<  contiited  enHrelf  of  plebeiana.  We  may
Buppoae  that  thoae  palriciana,  who  belonged  to  the
aix,  were  allowed  by  the  Servian  coaalituticm  to
continue  in  tbem,  if  they  poaaeaaed  the  reqqiute
property ;  and  that  all  other  peceona  in  the  atale,
vhethn  patriciana  or  plebeiana,  who  poeaeaaed  the
reqniiite  property,  were  admitted  into  the  13  new
cenluriea.  That  the  latter  were  not  confined  to
plebeiana  may  be  inferred  &om'Livy,  wbo  aava
that  they  coniiated  of  the  leading  men  in  the  atale
{pranom  dvitatu),  not  in  the  gjeba.

Ai  vBcanciea  ocenired  in  the  eigbleen  centoriea,
the  deacendnnta  of  thoee  who  were  originally  en-
rolled lucceeded  to  their  placc^  whether  jdebciani
provided they  had  not  diaajfated


•  O"


EQUrTES.

ttvii  Wf"^  >  '"'  Niebolu  goet  too  fiu  vkm'  lie
■am  tM  ill  nKUcicB  mn  filled  up  accordiiig
bi  binh,  indrpaidsit  of  any  pnpaRf  qualification.
Bat  ■  ame  of  dme,  ai  popilatiim  aod  woUth  in-
otHtid,  tka  umilMr  of  Hnrai,  who  powed  an
ngueMrka  Ibniiiia,  alao  uwRucd  gntlj  ;  and  ai


die  DBBbci  of  cqnilt*  n


tlw  T*mkge  of  tcnisg  with  their  i
Hngn  ibe  canby,  initead  of  the  in&nti;,  ai
ihn  neld  othenrUa  haxa  beea  obliged  to  bait
daw,  Thu  MDH  the  tvo  diitincl .  cliiaei  of
•IibM,  >hieh  h>Te  heeD  alnadf  mrotiofked.

The  inipeclioa  tl  the  eqnite*  who  nanred
hmei  bnthe  Mate,  belonged  U  the  oeiuDn.  who
had  the  power  of  depnviog  aD  equei  of  hii  hone,
ud  ndaong  him  to  (he  coiditiaii  of  an  aerarian
<  Lit.  nil.  43),  and  alao  of  jtiring  the  vacant
hoH  lo  ihi  ooM  diatiaaiutbed  of  the  cqaitea
■ki  hid  pnrioulj  aemd  at  Ihrtr  own  eipenie.'
F«  thew  poipoiia  they  nade  dnring  theii  teuor-
•h^  a  p«U)c  inflection,  in  Ihs  fonun,  of  all  the
ka^lhti  who  pc«eeeaed  public  honee  {eqiaiatitm  rp~

wfiiwl.  V^.  Max.  iL  ».  g  6).  The  tribei
•BI  tiko)  in  Oder,  and  (ach  knight  wm  etim-
•■ud  hf  nmai  Erer;  one,  a*  fail  name  wm
cafled,  walked  part  the  couoti,  leading  hii  hone.


If  Ik*  eeuon  hid  at  &nlt  to  find  eithei  with
dw  daractrr  ^  the  knight  or  the  eqnipineiita  of
hi<  hav,  (key  iwdoed  kirn  to  paM  on  (fradva
■Ian,  Vakr.  Hai.  IT.  I.|  10);  bntif  on  the  eon-
uiry  thej  cDuidered  him  nniTOCth;  of  hii  lank,
iScT  nfaeh  him  out  of  the  liit  of  kiugtita,  and  d»-
piindhimaf  hiibOT*e(lJT.  iziil.  44}  or  ordered
hn  le  rU  it  (Lit.  xiix.  37  ;  Valer.  Mm.  ii.  9.
i  SX  with  Ibe  inientiaD  no  doubt  that  the  pertmi
ilni  degnded  ihoald  nimid  to  the  >tal«  the
Batej  whieb  kad  keen  adTaneed  to  bnn  f«  iu
pirnbav.  <Kiebshi,  HiK.  </ Asm,  tbL  L  p.  433.)
Ai  the  aniw  retiew,  thaae  eqaita  who  had  eerred
the  ng^r  time,  and  wiihed  to  be  diachaiged,  wen

nnpavM  in  which  they  had  lened,  and  were
then  dinaiaed  with  boiwor  or  diegraee,  ai  they
UKhl  haTe  deaerred. (PIdL  Pomp.  32.}

Tha  twriew  of  the  eqniloa  by  the  cemoii  mast
an  be  «nfciinded  willi  the  £^ialaa  TVfuunErio,
■hick  vai  a  iDlemn  ]soce«ion  of  the  body  every
r<iroatkeIdeaafQDiDCilii(JulT}^  Tke  prooei-
m  Marled  fRn  the  temple  of  Man  ootaida  the
Dtj,  and  paiaad  thnn^  the  city  orer  the  f
iBil  t;r  ■katanpleof  the  Dioinui  Onthiioa
liw  eqniua  wen  alwaya  erowned  with  oli<e  chap-
Ira,  lod  von  tbdt  alate  dicM,  the  trabea,  with
dl  tke  hwtirwaM*  dntiDclkiH  wkkk  they  kad


EQUTTES.  478

ftained  (n  lattle.  (Dion  ja.  tI  1 3.)  According  lo
'  '  (iL.  46}  thii  annual  procenioD  wai  fint  eata-
'd  by  the  csiion  Q.  Fabiug  and  P.  Dedui,
ac304;  bat  according  to  Dioaytioi  {Le.)  it  was
inititnted  alW  the  defeat  of  the  Lacina  near  the
lake  Kegillni,  of  whwh  m  Bcconnt  wai  brou^t  to
"niMbylkeDiDBcnrL

It  may  be  aaked,  how  long  did  the  knigkt  ntain
hi)  publie  hone,  aod  a  rote  m  the  equeatrian  can-
tniy  tn  which  he  belcsigcd  ? On  thii  aabject  we


d  with  theii


liged  to  lerTS  Id


hoiaea,  were  only  ob-
(tt^tatdiOf  OTf»rt£ai)
e  age  of  46  (Poljb.  ri.  IS.  £  2},  we  may
that  the  nme  mle  extended  to  thote  who
KTTed  with  the  pnblic  honee,  imiTided  tbcy  vuiM
to  give  up  the  Hrrice.  For  it  ii  certain  that  in
the  ancient  timei  of  the  repnblic  a  knight  mwht
ittun  hi>  hone  ai  Ion;;  ai  he  pleaoed,  even  after
he  had  enCend  the  iemte,  prorided  he  contimied
able  to  diKharge  the  duiiei  of  a  knight.  Thui  the
two  caaon,  M.  Liriua  Salinstoc  and  C.  Claudiu
Nero,  in  n.  E.  204,  were  alao  equitei  (Lit.  iiijt.
37}  i  and  L.  Scipio  Aaiaticna,  who  was  deprived
of  bii  hone  by  the  anion  in  KClBS  (Liv.  mix.
44),hBdhinuelfbeenceni«inB.c.l9l.  Thii  is
also  ^ved  by  a  bagment  in  the  feorth  book  (c  2)
of  CiceiD'i  **  De  Repnblica,''  in  which  he  says,
apatatai,  m  quo  m^agia  tmU  etiam  Kmatm !  by
which  ha  eriJently  mana,  that  moat  of  the  eeniuon
1  to  Tote  at  the  (^ilia  Centnriata  in
of  their  belonging  to  the  eqnestrian
Jut  dming  the  later  tipiei  of  the  re-
public the  knight!  were  obliged  to  giTe  up  their
honei  on  entering  the  aenata,  add  consequently
ceased  to  belong  to  the  equeatrian  ccnturiea.  This
regnlation  i>  altaded  to  in  the  fragment  of  Cicero
already  refened  to,  m  which  Scipio  eayi  that  many
penoni  were  aniioni  that  a  plebisdtiun  ahonld  bo
paMed,  otduning  that  the  public  hone*  shoold  be
restored  to  the  itate,  which  decree  was  in  all  pro-
bability pasted  afterwards  ;  lince,  as  Niebnhr  ob-
serres  (toLL  p.  433,  note  1016),  "when  Cicero
makea  Scipio  speak  of  any  measure  at  intended,
we  are  to  suppose  that  it  had  actually  taken  place,
bDt,according  to  tbeinConnatianpoaseaied  by  Cicero,
later  than  the  date  he  aatigna  to  Scipio^  dii-
H."  That  the  greater  nombct  of  the  eqnitn
eqno  publico,  afta  the  eicluncn  i^  ieniton  fiwn
the  equestrian  centoriea,  were  young  men,  ia  prmed
by  a  passage  in  the  wo^  of  (i.  Ciceiey  D»  Pt*iti(ma
"ouafates  (e.  6).

The  equeatciaa  centunea,  of  which  we  kaTe
itheito  been  treating,  were  only  regarded  aa  a
diiiaion  of  the  army  ;  they  did  not  fium  a  distinct
cU«  or  ordo  in  the  conitilution.  The  community,
in  a  political  point  of  new,  was  only  divided  inlo
patriciana  and  plebeians  ;  and  the  equestrian  ccn-
turiea woe  compoied  of  both.  But  in  the  year
B.  c  133,  a  new  clai^  called  the  Ordo  Equeattis,
was  boied  in  the  state  by  the  Lei  Sempnmia,
which  was  introduced  by  C.  Otacchni.  "Bj  thia
law  all  the  judices  had  to  ba  chosen  from  those
citixens  who  poaaeaied  an  equestrian  fbrtnn^
(PIdL  a  OraaA.  &  ;  Appian,  De  BeO.  Oi«.  I  22  ;
Tac  .daiL  liL  60.)  We  know  Teiy  little  respecting
the  proTiaioni  of  M>  taw ;  but  it  appean  fnnn  the
Lex  Servilin  repetondanun,  peiied  eighteen  yean
sfterwardi,  that  eery  person  who  wai  to  be  choMa
j  udei  was  nquired  to  be  abore  thirty  and  un  der  sixty
yean  of  age,  to  kava  eitber  so  equi  pablieni  n  to


tji  EQUITEa.

be  qualified  by  hia  fixtane  to  jkhkb  one,  and  not
to  b<  B  •»>•(«. Tha  numbBT  of  judicca,  who  wen
required  yeail  j,  wi
pnetorarbaDU.  (]

Ai  the  aame  of  equitca  bad  bMD  origmall;  ei<
traded  from  thoia  wbD  poueued  the  public  honei
to  thoio  who  «r»ed  with  theic  own  buiei,  il  now
cana  ta  be  uiplied  to  all  Ihoa  psnoni  who  were
qualified  b j  their  fonune  to  act  ai  jndicei,  in  vhieb
HBie  the  word  ia  amallj  med  bj  Cioero.  Pliny
iH.ff.  xziiiL  7}  indeed  nyi  ttiat  ihoM  pennu
who  f  named  Un  eqneatrian  fbrtune,  bat  did  not
•ene  ai  equltei,  were  onlj  called  jadiai,  and  that
the  name  of  wMtei  wai  aJwaji  confined  to  the
poaaeaaini  of  the  eqni  publicL  Thii  may  haie
been  the  correct  aie  of  the  term  ;  but  nutom  Kon
f^ie  the  name  of  eqiiitea  to  the  judical  choaoi  in
accordance  irith  the  Lei  Sempronia.

After  the  lefonn  of  Sulla,  which  entirely  de-
priired  the  eqneatrian  order  irf  the  right  of  being
choaen  at  judicea,  and  the  paiiing  of  the  Lei  Au-
relia  (b.c.70)i  which  ordained  that  the  judicei
ihoald  be  choaen  from  the  aeniton,  equitei,  and
tribnoi  aeiarii,  the  influence  of  the  wder,  layi
Pliny,  wu  Blill  maintained  by  the  pnbliouii  (Plin.
^.MiiiiiL8),oi&rmenoftheputaUctaiea.  We
find  that  the  publieani  were  almoiC  alvay>  called
rquitea,  DDt  beouua  any  particular  rank  wu  necca-
nry  in  order  to  obtain  from  the  >(Ble  the  hrraing
of  the  laiei,  but  becanae  the  atate  naturally
voald  not  let  them  to  any  one  who  did  Dot  potaeaa
■  conaidanUe  fortmw.  Thua  the  pnblicani  an
fieqnenlty  ipidcen  of  by  Cicero  u  identical  with
tbe  equeatrian  order  (Ad  Atl.  iu  1.  g  B).  [PtiB-
tioi.Ni.1  Thc^onniUhip  of  Cicero  and  the  actiTB
part  which  the  luiighta  thm  took  in  lUj^ireiaing
the  eonapiracy  of  Catiline,  tended  iliU  farther  to
incroue  the  power  and  inflaena  of  the  equulriaa
order ;  and  "  from  that  time,"  Otjt  Pliny  (2.  o.),
"  it  bei>nie  a  third  body  (fcorjmt)  m  the  etale,  and,
to  the  title  of  Smatai  P-^mixapi*  Bumaua,  then
begui  to  be  added  El  Equgrii  Ordo."

In  B.  c.  63,  a  dialinction  waa  conferred  npon
then,  which  t«ided  to  aeparata  them  ttili  farther
from  the  pleba.  By  the  Lex  Roeeia  Otbonii,
paaacd  in  that  year,  the  Gnt  Ibnrteen  aeala  in  the
thcBtie  behind  the  oreheitra  were  giren  to  the
rqniiee(Li*.  £^99);  which,  according  to  Cicoo
(;in>  JVtf.lS)  and  Velieina  Patennloa  (ii.  S2),

which  ii  allodad  to  by  Liry  (L  SJS),  whim  he  layi
that  ipecial  aenta  wen  Hi  apart  in  the  Circui
Maiimna  for  the  lenalora  and  eqiitet.  They  alio
poaaeaaed  the  light  of  wearing  die  Clavni  Angna-
tiia  [Clivub]  ;  and  mbteqoantly  obtained  the
privily  of  wearing  a  gold  ring,  which  waa  origi-
naUy  confined  Co  the  eqnitea  squo  publico.

The  munbv  of  eqoitei  incnaaed  gratly  ODdti
the  earij  anperon,  and  all  penona  were  Mutted
into  the  order,  pcorided  they  pitrntd  the  MqniaiM
property,  without  any  bumry  into  their  chuaetai
or  into  the  free  birth  of  their  bthet  and  gtand-
fiilhtr,  which  bftd  alwaya  been  required  by  the
cenaoti  ander  tin  repabliCi  Property  became  now
the  only  qaalificaUan  g  (ud  the  order  in  conts-
qoeoee  giunally  began  to  loae  all  the  oamiderstioD
wtiieh  it  had  acquired  daring  the  lata'  timea  of  tht
lapablic  Thua  Honce  (^L  1.  SB)  aya,  with
"  ' H  of  contempt,  —


EQUITE3.
Angnitni  fanned  a  idect  data  of  eqnitea,  oan-
aiating  of  thoae  equitea  who  poairaied  the  praprttr
and  the  old  requirement  of  free  birth

'hther.  He  permitted  thia  claaa  to
cUkku  (Orid.  TriM.  n.  1 0.  35)  ;
id  the  tribunea  of  the  plebi  ta  be
m,  aa  well  aa  the  aenatora,  and  gare
^on  the  option  a(  the  le "


ai  anadring


,  <Saet.^>«r.  lOiDionCaabliT.  SO.)  Thu
of  knightt  waa  dUtingiiitbed  by  the  apecial
iUuitra  (aometimea  taai^iMa  BDd  ^imdidi)
iRomamL  (Tacit  ^wa.  id.  4,  with  the  nota
1^  Lipeiu.)

The  fbrmatiim  of  thia  diatinct  elaa  tended  to
iwer  the  othcn  Hill  mote  in  pnblic  eatimatjon.
n  the  ninth  year  of  the  rein  of  Tibenua  an  at~
mpl  vaa  made  to  imj^ore  the  order  by  reqairing-
the  old  qualificationa  of  fr«<  birth  np  to  the  gmnd-
&>ther,  and  by  itridly  fiwbidding  any  one  to  wear
the  gold  ring  unleaa  ha  poaaeaed  thia  qtmlifiestioii.
Thia  rqiulation,  howercr,  waa  of  little  arail,  aa  tho
emperon  frequently  admitted  ftsedrnm  into  iIib
^ueatrian  order.  (Plin. //.  A^.  iniii.  8.)  When
irirate  peraont  were  do  longer  appointed  jndicaa,
he  neceaiity  for  n  diatinct  elaat  in  the  commnnity,
ike  the  equeatrian  order,  ceaaed  entirely  ;  and  the
gold  ring  came  at  length  ta  be  won  1^  all  froe

allowed  to  wear  it  by  qiedal  pomiKiim  from
mperor,  which  ^ipeaia  to  hare  been  Banally
gmnted  proiided  the  pMioana  eenaailed.  (Dig.  40.
■ •l.a.S.) [AxNULDa.1

rmg  thua  traced  the  hittory  of  the  eqaeattiui
order  to  iti  final  extinction  aa  a  diatinct  claaa  in
ommuni^,  we  mual  now  retoni  to  the  equity
publico,  who  formed  the  eighteen  equeatrian
irifa. Thii  claaa  atQl  eiiited  during  tlie  latter
yeart  of  the  republic,  but  had  entirely  ceaaad  to
u  hone-Boldien  in  the  army. The  caTslry
1  Roman  legioni  no  longer  eoniialed,  oa  in  Che
of  PolybiuB,  of  Roman  equitei,  bnt  their  place
npplied  by  the  aralry  of  the  allied  Itatea.
. eiident that Caaai in hia Oallio wan
poaaeaaed  no  Roman  canlry. (Caet.  BM.  GalL
i.  U.) When  he went  to  an  iDterriew  with
ArioriaCna,  and  wu  obliged  to  take  cantry  with
"  I,  we  are  told  that  he  did  not  dan  to  tmat  hia
i\j  to  the  Qallic  cavalry,  and  thenfoM  mounted
legionary  aoldienupm  theiibonea. (Id.  L  43.)
The  Roman  equitei  are,  howerer,  freqaeully  men-
tioned in  the  Oollic  and  ai'\\  wara,  bnt  DOTer  aa
commoa  eiddien ;  they  were  officart  attached  to  the
ttaS  of  the  general,  or  commaaded  the  rardry  of
the  alliea,  or  lomedmee  the  l^ona. (Id.  TiL  70  j
Brft  CSd.  L  77,  iil  71,  tc.)

After  the  year  R.  c  £0,  theiv  were  no  canaori  in
the  atita,  and  it  would  thtnfon  fbllow  that  for  aooM)
yean  no  nriew  of  the  body  took  T^ace,  and  that
the  Tacartciea  wen  not  filled  up.  When  Angoatoa
howerei  took,  upoa  himaelf,  ia  a  c  39,  the  pcae-
fectnra  moium,  he  frequently  renewed  the  tnopa
of  eqnile^  and  natoted,  aceoidlng  to  9<ieMiiiBa
(^1^  S8),  the  long-iMglected  coitaBi  of  the  nlenu
proMiiioa  ((roBMVCfKi)  i  by  iriiicb  w«  are  probably
to  underatMid  that  Augoataa  oonacded  th»  leiiew
of  the  kni^ta  (neo^BttiB)  with  the  ananal  pneea-
aion  (tmnaelu)  li  the  15th  of  July.  From  thia
lime  theae  equitea  fanned  an  bHuorabte  oorpa,
from  which  all  tie  higher  officcra  in  the  lanoT
(Suet.  ^vU*  ClaadLU)  aod  the  f^ief  B^i^


tnrmlmi,  Ac  bj  tbe  empanr.  (Onlli,  Inienp,
Ka.3457,  3IS,1399.>  If  a  jonng  nun  m  not
-'■^iwH  into  tbii  body,  lia  ni  udnded  ^m  4II
aril  (tfMi  of  anj  impartaucB,  sitwt  in  uumicipal
■ ■ ' ■■  - '  in  Um  « -"^


1;  nd  bIb  froB  all  nok  m


Ik  eirqitioii  of  ee
All  iboM  eqntl


«  um;,  with


•  eqntlM  who  ven  not  eniplojDd  in
MtaJ  Mrrioa  ven  obliged  to  mida  at  Soma
(Dioa  Cwa.  lis.  9),  irhera  tbej  mu  allowod  to
ill  ik  lover  magiatiaoe^  which  antitled  k  penoo
t*  ihaiwliiii  iulD  tha  UDMa.  The;  wen  dirided
am  yi  tsmaa,  cad  of  wkkh  wu  cnmmandwi  bf
■" ' ■ •  fnqwntlj  .■■_-■


(TiDl.  ^aa.  L  S  i  HmnnCAncjr.),  it
wBm  ta  cimfcr  Ihia  title,  la  well  u  thftt  sf  Serii,
B|ico  the  pntaUe  maaaaiir  to  the  thnaie,  when
hi&Mcnlafd  mu  pDblk  life  and  waa  pnaented
wilkMaqatuniUiau.  (CafHolM.Anlfim.PiiL
1;  lo^ril  Oiiuwd.  1.)

Tk  inctice  of  fillii^  ail  the  bighdc  offin*  in
tk  Male  froB  theee  «qait««  appon  to  hsTs  eon-
liiwd  u  long  ai  Bone  ww  the  coitn  of  the
giBwtot  and  tlM  raidmce  of  the  enpraDr.
Tky  «e  maMkmed  in  the  time  of  Setooi  (Gn-
1a,  Iwmp.  f.  IDOI.  6  ;  PuHnian,  in  Dig.  SB.  tit.
l.t.UXiiHlofCan«lU(Oniter,  P.S79.  7};«nd
rnkf*  kMr.  Afta  tlte  time  of  Ditcfetian,  the
•qik*  heoiBe  aolf  ■  oi^  foard,  under  the  am
■aaloflhePiaeieetaViailuai;  but  the;  Mill  re-
njoad  ii  the  time  of  VUeBtinitDW  and  Valeni,
i-  D.  Ui,  the  •ceoid  lank  in  the  aXj,  snd  were
Mital)KtUcaipaBlpimUii>eBL  (Cod.Thecidoa.
ditW.) lt«nectingthe3f<vu(M'£}»lMn,>ee

(ZiBfl,  17<fcr  di*  JSaiaaka  mttf  wtd  dm
IBUK^md  im  Rim,  Beilin,  lUO  ;  Maiqnardt,
Hi^mat  E^ilam  Aaauwimi  iAri  lY.  Berlin,
I»M ;  HadTis,  Dt  Loa  Oemmu  it  lib.iT.  lU
PfUliiii,  in  OpmKitia,  toL  L  p.  73.  Ac  ;  Becker
flnaiUt  der  JUMntn  AOtrlUimtr,  Tol  ii.
p-tip.2S4,ftc.)

EQU  (JLEUS  or  ECULEUS,  an  inatniment  of
Mtan^  lAieh  ii  a^ipoaad  to  hn-e  beai  ao  called
UcMw  it  wai  in  the  Arm  of  a  hme.  We  hare
as  ilimiptiuu  «f  iia  bm  giren  hj  any  of  the  an-
«n  VTiien,  bat  it  appear*  Dot  to  haTo  differed
(KBtl;  fan  the  cnuc  <Cic  Pro  MO.  31,  com-
pned  with  ovta  91^  «.  22.)  It  anxan  to  bsie
k»*  caanHaly  need  at  Rome  in  taking  tbe  en-
denee  of  ala*(*.  (Sea  Sjgmiiu,  Di  JwUdU,
ni-  IT  :  Kigioa,  At  Sgmlta,  in  Salengra>  fion.
Tlamr.  At.  Ami.  tiJ.  ii  p.  1311,  Ac.)

EQOUS  OCTOBER. (P>i.iiai.l

JB'RANI  (^Pww),  wen  chik  or  aodetiei,  stab-
IMud  br  charitable  or  eoonriil  pupotea,  or  for
kth.  Tita;  wtn  lerr  oBDinra)  at  Athux,  and
mad  tha  t^^a  of  da  people^  wlw  wan  both

ndal  ud  g Ill The term tpant, in the

•faar  of  a  Mnrinal  paitj,  ia  of  ancient  dnte.
(HflB.  Oi.  L  326.)  It  reaembled  oar  picnica,  <r
'^Ommmifitnitt,  and  «a«  alao  called  (•(invr


ERANI,


47C


.  gllea'

deplUed  to  cater  tbi  the  mt,  and  was  aClervardi
Inlaid  by  conlribationi.  [Coini,  p.  304,  b.]  The
dnb*  that  were  farmed  at  Atbent  tued  to  dine  to-
gether at  itatad  peiiadt,  u  once  ■  month  j  and
erery  member  waa  bonnd  to  pay  hia  BubKriptioD,
which  (aa  well  ai  the  lodet;  iUelf )  wai  called
fpotut,  and  the  monben  tpanartJ,  If  an;  mem-
ber biled  to  pay,  tha  aiun  wu  made  up  by  tha
pnaidcot,  ipaitifxtii,  alio  called  rXitpafritt  ipirm,
who  aAerwardi  recorered  it,  if  be  conld,  frinn  the
deiiudter.  nXitpour  tpea/or  often  meazia  aimply,  to
tbaeriptHKi,  aa  A«f*vi^  dt  iitXtlrtv,  ta
alt.  (Dam.  c.  Aplub.  p.  631,  c  Mid.
p.  £47,  e.  Arutag.  p.  776.)

TEien  were  alao  awocJationi  under  thia  name,
for  the  pBTpaae  of  mutoai  nlief^  naembling  in
Bonu  dfgna  our  friendly  or  benefit  aooetiea  ;  but
with  thii  naeatial  diffsrenee,  that  the  relief  which
they  affiirdcd  wai  not  (at  it  ia  with  na)  baaed  ■agm


szns


of  it.  The  Athenian  aodetiea  do  not  op-
have  k^  up  a  craumon  fimd  by  ngilai
aubacriptiona,  though  it  it  probable  that  the  aun
which  each  membn  waa  eipedad  to  advance,  in
caae  of  need,  waa  pretty  well  mdentood.  If  a
nun  wai  reduced  to  poTerty,  m  in  diatnaa  for
money  for  any  canae,  he  applied  to  the  memben
of  hia  club  for  aiiitlaace ;  thia  waa  called  ruX.
Kfytir  Ipanr ;  tboae  who  adranced  it  were  nid
ipnlCta  airy :  the  relief  waa  conwdere d  aa  a
loan,  lefMyable  by  the  borrowai  when  in  better
ctrcumitancM.  laaent  {lit  Hagn.  Hend.  p.  394)
reckona  amoni  the  aaaeta  of  a  peraon,  J{  ifirm»
i^nXtiiara  tlmrprniin,  from  which  we  may
infer,  that  each  cootribator  waa  endtled  to  recover
the  aum  he  had  lent.  For  the  recovery  of  uch
loona,  and  for  the  deciaian  of  other  iitpau*,  there
were  iparutai  ilKtu,  in  which  a  aammaiy  and
equitable  kind  of  juatice  waa  adminialered.  Plats
{Lrg.  XL  p.  916)  diiap^ved  of  lawcuitt  in  nich
mattera,  and  vould  not  allow  them  in  hit  republic

tfoirvt  ia  ^iplied  to  an  ectahliahed  aocie^,  it  meana
only  a  cmnvial  dnb,  and  that  there  wen  no  re-
gular aaaocialiona  ht  the  purpoaea  of  charity  ;  bat
othen  have  held  a  di^rant  opmion.  (See  S^mai.
Da  Chtu,  cS,  06(.  ad  Jm  All.  it  Horn,  and
Herald.  Animadv,  n  Saimat.,  nferred  to  in  Meier'*
Aa.  Pne.  p.  UO.)  It  ia  not  pnhable  that  many
permanent  aodetiea  were  formed  with  the  aole
view  of  ieaiting.  We  know  that  at  Athoit,  >a
wall  aa  in  the  other  Oreeian  republica,  there  were
dnb*  for  vationi  porpoaea,  political  aa  well  u
aocial:  the  monben  of  which  would  naturally
certain  perioda.  3nch
(3Wo0.th.comm«.
cial  (iiaefUMi),  end  aonK  otheta.  (BOckh,  PbL
Earn,  ef  Alimt,  p.  345,  Znd  ed.)  XJnioiii  of  Ibia
kind  were  culled  by  tbe  general  name  of  ^oj^tai,
and  woo  often  converted  ta  miachievona  enda,
anch  aa  bribery,  overawing  the  public  aaiembly.


i*.  p.  36.)  In  the  daya  of  the  Roman  empire
friendly  eocietiea,  nnder  the  name  of  tfam,  were
frtquent  among  the  Greek  citiea,  but  were  looked


oeet,  and  dine  together  a


pcditical  ecmbinationa.  (FUa.  J^.  x


^WgTha


476  ESSEDA.

gUdt,  or  fratemitiGi  fu  mutml  nid,  unnng  tt
eienl  Suoni,  reiembled  ths  fyarai  of  lb«  OreokA.
(Turner-i  Hid.  ofOt  Angb^Sama,  ir.  10.) Ct
pare  bIh  tbe  ^ycnral,  or  love-feaaU  of  the  «il;
Chriatiuu.

The  word  fpoKij  u  oftoi  Died  metAphDric^ly,  to
ugnity  lov  mntiibnUoDi  ot  friendiT  advance  of
moDoj.  [C.  R  K.]

BROA'STULUH  wu  apriTste  {dtoo  attachi
to moit  Roman  fiunu,  called  earner  nultnit  I
JnrenaJ  (lir.  24),  where  the  ilaTei  were  made
work  ia  chaini. It  sppean  to  hare  been  anally
ander  groond,  and  according  to  Colomella  (I  "'
ought  to  be  lighted  by  narrow  window*,  wh
abould  be  too  tiieb  fiom  tbe  groimd  to  be  toucl
by  the  band. The  ilarei  confined  in  an  ergaa
Inm  were  alio  employed  to  cultiTate  the  fieldt
ihttint (Plin.  H.  N.  xriii.  7.  8  *  1  Flor.  iii,  1
Slavoi  who had diipleoaed  their  muten  w
punUhed  by  impruomnent  in  the  ergitatidain  ;  and
in  the  aume  place  all  >1avei  who  could  not  be  de-
pended upon  or  were  baibattHit  in  their  habits,  were
regularly  kept. A  tnulworthy  alsTe  had  the  aire
of  tbeerf^IiilDm,  and  wai  thiretbre  called  trpaitula-
riat. (Calnm.  L  8.) Aecocding  to  Plulanb  (7U.
Gracti.  3),  theu  priuna  aroie  in  conMquence  of
the  conquett of  Italy  by  the  Romaiu,  ant
great  number  of  borbaroiu  ilaTM  who  wsi
ployed  to  culdvale  the  conquered  bndi. In  the
time  of  Hadrian  and  Antoninns,  mBny  enactment
were  mode  to  araeliomte  the  condition  of  ilavea
and  amnng  ether  aaluliiy  meaiurea,  Hadrian  abo-
liahed  the  ergaitula,  which  mail  bare  been  liable
to  great  abuK  in  the  banda  of  tyroanical  maatera.
(Spart  Hadrian,  16,  compered  with  Oaiua,  I  53,)
For  further  information  on  the  aubject,  aee  Brit-
•oniut,  Antiq.  Set»tt.n.9  ; Lipaini,  Eltct.  ii.  IS,
Opera,  ToL  L  p.  317, kc  ;  Gottling,  OtMiA.  dtr
liliM.SIaatiB.'f.liS.

BRI'CIUS,  a  military  engine  fhll  of  aharp
■pikei,  which  wna  placed  by  the  gate  of  the  camp
to  preient  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  (Caoi.
B.  C.  iii.  67  ;  Salluat,  ap*d  Nan.  xriiL  16  i  Lipaiua,
PolioTcel.  V.  i.)

EROGAIIO, [AoiTiBDtrcTnd,  p.  IIS,  a.]

EHO'TIA  or  EKOTI'DIA  {ipirra  ot  fptnt-
iia),  tho  moat  ademn  of  all  the  featirala  celebrated
in  tbe  Boeotian  town  of  Thetpiae.  It  took  place
arery  lifth  year,  and  in  honour  of  Eroi,  the  prin-
cipal dirinity  of  the  Theipiani.  Regpecting  tbe
panicolart  nothing  it  known,  except  that  it  wai
ntemniaed  with  conteati  in  mniie  and  gymnaitica.
(PluC  Aoat.  1  i  Pana.  ii.  31.  3  3;  Athen.  liil
p.  A6 1 .)  Tbe  worahip  of  Eroi  aeema  to  baie  been
ealabliahed  at  Theipiaa  from  the  carliMt  iimei ;
and  the  ancient  ayinbolicrepreaentatiDnof  thegod,
a  rude  alone  (Vy^>  aJHoi),  continued  to  be  loijced
upon  with  particular  reTcrence  even  when  acnlp-
tnre  had  attained  the  bigbeat  degree  of  perfection
among  the  Oreeka.  (Paul.  ii.  27.  g  I  ;  compare
Schol.  ad  Find.  fHymp.  viL  1 54 ;  Ritw^l,  in  the
iOoi'fl.  Afu.  Tol.  ii.  p.  laS.)  [L,S.]

ERRHEPHCRIA  or  ERSEPHO'RIA  {if-
^^pia  or  ipmi^iiHa.) [AaaapHDiiiJ.]

ESCHARA  iirxipaX fFocua.]

E'SSEDA  or  E-SSEDUH  (bom  the  Celtic
Ea,  a  carriage,  Qinzrot,  Tol.  L  p.  377),  the  nunc
of  a  dtariot  uaed,  eqiecially  in  wu,  by  the  Dritma,
the  Oanli  and  Belgae  (Viig.  Gnrp.  iii.  204  ;  Ser-
vioi,  ad  loe.) ;  and  abo  by  tha  Qennani  (Pen.  vi.
IT).


According  to  the  account  giren  by  Caeor  (Be&
Gall,  IT.  33),  and  agreably  to  die  renuufci  of  Dio.
domi  Sicnlua  (t.  21,  29),  the  method  ofnnng  the
eaiedum  in  the  anuent  Briliah  army  wai  TOT
■imilar  to  the  practice  of  the  Oreeka  in  tbe  heroic
Bgea,  at  deacnbed  bj  Homer,  and  in  the  article
CuHitua.  The  principal  dlffneuce  aeemi  to  hmre
been  that  tha  eaaednm  wna  itrongcr  and  more
ponderoua  than  the  )l^>,  (hat  it  wai  (^ea  before
mjtead  of  behind  ;-  and  that  in  omacquenco  of
theae  ciramutaDcea  and  the  width  of  the  folt,  the
owner  wa>  able,  vheneTcr  he  pleaaed,  to  run
along  the  pole  (di)  tenow  Brilana  aadeL,  Jnv.  iv.
125),  and  oxen  to  isiae  himaelf  upon  the  yoke,
and  then  to  retreU  with  the  grcatett  nired  into
the  body  of  the  car,  which  he  drove  with  eitm-
ordinaiy  iwiftnea  and  akill.  From  the  eitremily
of  the  pole,  he  threw  fail  miatilea,  eipecially  the
eateia  (Val  Flacc  Arg-m.  n.  63).  It  appean
alao  that  these  cara  were  pnrpoariy  made  ai  noiay
a>  poMible,  probably  by  the  creaking  and  clanging
of  the  wheel)  {lirBpitii  rotorMit,  Caea.  L  e. ;  oom-
pare  Tadt.  A^ric.  35  ;  Eatda  midtitmcra,  Claud.
Epig.  iy,)  ;  and  that  thia  waa  done  in  onler  to
ttrike  diamay  into  the  enemy.  The  fbtmidable
Britiih  wanion  who  Anne  time  chartota,  tbe
"  car-boTDB "  of  Oaaiau,  were  called  in  Latin
EtMBiarii.  (Caei.  B.  G.  it.  24  ;  Cic  mf  Fam.  iii.
6.)  There  were  aboat  40OO  of  them  in  the  army
of  Caaiibelanniia.  (Caea.  AG.  t.  19.)  Hairing
been  captured,  they  were  aometimea  exhibited  in
the  gladiatorial  ifaowt  at  Rams,  and  aeem  to  haTc
been  great  fitTonritea  with  the  people.  (Sneton.
Cal^.  35,  Ctaud.  21.)  They  mutt  haTe  held  the
h^heat  imk  in  the  armiea  of  their  own  county  ;
and  TadtDt  {Agrie.  13)  ohaerrea  that  the  driver  of
tha  or  ranked  abore  bit  fighting  eompanioD,
which  wat  the  reretae  of  the  Greek  oaage.

The  easednm  wat  adopted  ibr  pnrpoaea  oT  cao-
Tenience  and  luxury  among  the  Romana.  (Propett.
iL  1.  76  1  Cie.  ad  Aa.  tL  1  i  Ovid.  ,^ai.  a.  1 6,
49.)  Cicero  (FULiL  34)  mention)  the  nae  of  it
on  oife  occation  by  the  tribnne  of  tbe  people  aa  a
piece  of  citTBTagance  ;  but  in  the  time  of  ScDcca,
It  ieema  to  have  been  much  more  commoa  ;  for
he  (^nrf.ST)  leckont  tbe  aound  of  the  "eaaedae
banacutrentci  "  among  tbote  noiiet  which  did  not
diatnet  him.  Aa  uoed  by  the  Romani,  the  raac
'  im  may  have  differed  from  the  ciiimn  in  thii  ;
mX  the  ciaium  wat  drawn  by  me  hone  (aee  wmd-
It,  p.  3S8),  the  etaedum  alwayi  by  a  paic  Tlia
aedom,  like  the  citinm,  appean  to  hava  been
kept  for  hire  at  tbe  poat-hontea  or  ttatioBa  (Salo-
n>  fiiuifa  MMJa  tnfaiii.  Hart,  1. 104.)  [MANSto.]
ie  eaaedum  mnat  hare  been  aimilaT  to  tha  Covi-
IS,  except  that  tbe  tatter  had  a  eoTcr.  [J.  Y.I
ESSEDA'RII.  [EraiDA,]
EVrtrriO.  if  the  pnrehaicr  of  a  tUng  waa
deprived  of  it  by  a  third  perton  by  l^al  piiint>
(micM),  the  aeller  waa  boond  to  make  good  the
ioaa  (anefuMM  pratilan).  If  the  aeUer  kneir
'  '  he  wat  telling  what  waa  not  hit  own,  thia
caae  of  doloa,  and  he  wat  boond  in  caa«  of
on  to  make  good  to  the  puichaier  all  Ioaa  and
damage  that  he  analaincd.  If  then  wat  tw  dolua
iflt  the  part  of  the  teller,  ha  wat  timply  boond  to
nuke  good  ta  the  pnrehaaer  the  nine  of  the  thing
at  the  time  of  eviction.  It  wat  neceoory  for  ths
pnrcbater  to  neglect  no  pinper  meant  of  defoKs,
when  an  attempt  vat  made  to  evict  him  ;  and  h
wat  hit  imy  ta  give  the  tdlai  Dslica  of  Iba  ad>


EUMOLPIDAE.

d  lo  pTBj  hia  aid
■dpulatio  dnplae
m  hhikI  unHi§  dla  Ronuui ;  ud,  in  BUch  case,
if  tbe  pBRbuet  wu  arictcd  from  the  whale  thing,
be  might  bf  Tirtiw  of  hia  rwnemait  demand  fn^
tlw  «UcT  doable  iti  nine.  (Dig.  21.  tit  2,  De
nictiDailiM  ct  dBploa  MipnktiDna ;  Hackclde^,
ZiMmI,  fte,  g  S70, 12th  «d.)  [O.  L.]

EUUCVLPIDAE  ((JifuArUU.},  th«  m«l  di*-
tiigikhad  and  nDciablt  amaog  the  prieatl;  ftmi-
l>M  in  Attics Tbey  were  deroted  to  the  Mrvica


Sic.  i.  39;  ApoUod.  iiL  l£.  g  4  ;  Denuath.  e.N»aar.
f.  1384.)  The  high  prist  of  the  Elaminian
yddi  (lifBfdwipt  oc  luvTir/iiyit),  who  eoo-
darted  tlw  edebcatioii  of  her  m/itcrie*  and  the  iu-
Jlkdon  of  the  mjMae,  na  alvaji  a  member  of  the
bwljof  tha  Eaiiiol|adae^  M  Ennudpiu  hinuelf  waa
brfjared  lo  bsTS  been  the  fint  biero^uiit.  (H^iJi.
a«.ltfMArila<:  TadtHuCiT.aS;  Aniob^T.35i
CV»Ba«  Alet.  Pnir^f.  IB,  Ac.)  In  hii  sitemal
•ffmnaet  the  hienphaat  wa*  dittingoiihed  b;  a
ptcaUar  cat  of  hia  bail,  a  kiod  (d  diadem  (rrpi.
f'ir),aDd  a  long  pmpla  nbe^  (Airian.  u  ^JwM.
m.3iinia.AliA2S.)  Id  hia  Taice  bo  eeans
alwa/i  lo  hare  aSxted  a  ideDui  tone  uited  to
Ibewndchaiactcrof  hiaeffioa,vhkbheheldlw

<PBsa.  iL  14. 1 1.)  The  hicM^nnt  wu  attcoded
ij  btr  hniuKfni,  (Be  of  whim  likewiee  belonged

BtiUm.  a, «.  'iwifiA^Tal  rmt  lairnifltir.)  Other
■tabaa  of  tbeir  &mily  do  not  leeoi  to  hare  had

iKf  andoabtedlj  took  wt  in  the  great  proceauon
10  OenaK  The  Eunujpidas  hod  on  certain  oeca-
itoBa  IS  oftt  ap  pn;Bi  for  the  velbre  of  the
aCale,  and  in  aae  M  aeglect  thej  might  be  taken
ta  acaoant  and  paniahed  i  for  the;  were,  like  all
other  pcieita  aod  magiatrMei,  rtapooaible  for  theii
"■JBCt,  and  lor  the  aacred  tieaanra  entnuted  to
their  am  (Aenhin.  e.  aa^nL  p^  £6,  Steph. ;
onnacB  Evththi.)

Tha  BoiMilptdae  had  alao  judicial  power  in  caa»
<riNn  nligioa  ww  vidaled  (Tt|>l  iaiStlat,  De-
■aatk  A  AmdnL  p.  enl).  This  power  probably
belot^wl  ta  thia  fimily  frnn  the  euiiett  iLmea,  and
Salon  aa  well  aa  Periclea  do  not  aeem  lo  haTs  made
aaj  alieralion  in  tfaia  napecL  Whether  thia  re-
hgioBa  oooit  acted  independent  of  the  aichon  king,
v  mder  hb  ruidauce,  ia  uncertain.  The  law
■ontding  to  which  they  pnmounced  their  aentence,
Bd  of  which  the;  lutd  the  excloaiie  poaataiioa,
waa  not  written,  bnt  handed  down  by  tradition  ;
aad  Ibe  Eamolpdae  alona  had  Ihe  right  to  inler-
(Rt  it,  whBiee.thej  on  aomeliniei  called  tiirrt^B^
[ExKOKTAB.]  Ia  cnaea  for  which  the  law  tud
■ade  nD  praniieoa,  tbey  acted  aocording  to  theii
own  diaentiao.  (Lyaiaa,  e.  AmLnwt,  p,  204  ;
Aa^eid.  D»  MgtL  f.  B7.)  Raipccting  the  mode
if  pw««*ding  in  Ibeae  rdigioiia  (oarta  nothing  ia
brnma.  (Ucffter,  Jd^  OaruUaii^.  p.  405,  Ac  ;
Phdncc^  Pncai,  iL  f,  147,  Ac)  la  aome  caaea.
when  ■  pen<*>  <*■■  cooTieted  td  greai


EUPATRIDAE.  4T7

Ak3i.  32  ;  Com.  Nep.  Altai.  *,  S.)  But  the
Eumolpidae  could  pronounce  auch  a  cone  only  at
the  Gonunand  of  tiw  people,  and  might  oflerwHjda
be  compelled  by  the  people  to  revoke  it  and  pnriTy


EVOCA'TI, .
who  hod  aerred  oat  theii  time  and  obtained  their
diachaige  (muno),  bat  had  Tolunlarily  enliated
' *  of  the  ooruul  or  olhei  com-

(Diim  Caa*.

eTocati  in  oTuy  army  of  importance  ;  and  when
the  geneial  waa  a  btoorite  amrx^  the  loldiera,  the
nnmber  of  reterana  who  joined  hu  atandard  would
of  eoniae  be  iacreaaed.  The  erocati  were,  doubb
leaa,  releaaod,  like  the  vezillarii,  fiom  the  common
militaiy  dutiea  of  foitifymg  the  camp,  making
toada,  Ac  (Tacit.  Jan.  L  36),  and  held  a  higher
rank  in  the  aimy  than  the  common  legionary
aoldiera.  They  are  aometimea  apokon  of  m  con-
junction irith  the  equitea  Romani  (Ctiet.  BelLOaU,
Tii.  65),  and  aometimea  claiaed  with  the  centurioni,
(Caea.SiJJ.CSo.  i.  17.)  They  appear  te  hare  been
frequently  ptomoted  to  the  rank  of  centuiiona.
Thni  Pompey  induced  a  ^reat  many  of  the  Tetemu,
who  had  aerred  onder  hmi  in  hnaa  yean,  to  join
hia  atondaid  at  the  bmking  out  of  the  dyil  war,
by  the  promiae  of  rewaidi  and  the  command  <^
eenluriea  (ordvuim,  Caea.  BtlL  Oa>.  I  3).  AU  the
erocati  could  not,  howerer,  have  held  the  lank  of
contnriona,  aa  we  read  of  two  thonaand  on  one
occaaion  (/i.  iii.  SB),  and  of  their  belonging  to
certain  cofaorta  in  the  aimy.  Cicero  (u'  Fam,
iiL  6.  g  6)  apeoki  of  a  Praefietia  noeatanm.
(3eoCie.ii<f/''«.ir.  4.  gSj  Caea. £ei:f. Oo. iiL
91  ;  Suet  J  V.  56  ;  Liptiua,  i>e  JIfiU.  Aosi.  i.  B.)

The  name  of  erocati  waa  alas  giron  lo  a  aelecC
body  of  young  men  of  the  equeattion  order,  who
were  appointed  by  Domition  to  guard  hia  bed-
ebamber.  (Suet.  Dam.  10.)  Thu  body  ia  iup-
poaed  by  wme  writara  to  hare  eiigted  under  the
eacceediug  empenn,  and  to  have  been  the  aome
aathoee  who  arecalledZTHoa'i.i^iijjBifi.  (Hyginua,
da  Lira.  p.  209  ;  Orelli,  /uvn.  No.  3495,  153.)

EUPATRIDAE  (eftrirrplki).  La.  defended
fnm  noble  onceitan,  ia  the  name  by  which  in  tally
timea  tfae  nobility  of  Attica  waa  deaJgnated.  Who
the  Eupatridae  originally  were  haa  been  the  aub-
jeet  of  much  diapula  ;  but  the  apiiuDn  now  almoit
uoi'enilly  adopted  ia,  that  they  were  the  noble
Ionic  or  Hellenic  famlliH  who  at  the  lime  of  the
Ionian  migration  aettled  in  Attica,  and  then  exer-
ciaed  tfae  power  and  influence  of  an  arlitoeracj  of
wairion  and  coaquertRo,  poeaeoaiog  the  beat  puts

nnmerona  claia  of  dependenta.  (Thirl  wall,  HiiL  if
Crww(,TaLLp.I15,&c;  Wachamuth,TaLLp.361,
Ac,  2d  ed.)  The  cbiefi  who  are  mentioned  aa
king!  of  the  aeieral  Attic  towni,  before  the  oigani-
aatioo  of  the  coontry  aacribed  to  Theaeua,  belonged
lo  the  higheat  or  ruling  cloaa  of  the  Eupatridae  j
and  when  Theaeua  mads  Athena  the  aeat  of  go-
lemment  for  the  whole  coonliy,  it  muat  hare  been
chiefly  thae  noblea  of  the  bigheal  rank,  that  left
their  Ibimer  raidencea  and  migrated  to  Atheni,
where,  after  Theeeoa  had  given  np  hia  royal  pre-
rogatirei  and  dirided  them  among  the  noblea,  they
occupied  a  atation  limOar  to  that  whicb  they  had
prenoualy  hdd  in  their  aereial  diaUicIa  of  Attica.
Other  Sapatiidae,  howerer,  who  eithu  were  not


m  EUTHYNE.

ef  the  lighwt  rmk,  or  wen  leu  deunoi
die  uif  diiecl  infiuence  upon  the  gmcnnnent,
mnsioed  in  their  iiiRoei  plaeea  of  residence.
(Thirlwmll,  ToL  JL  p.  8.)  In  tb«  diTinon  of  tha
inhsbilaiiti  of  Attica  into  th
ucribed  to  Theuiu,  the  EapnlridBe  wen  the  dm
dan  (Plat.  ThtM.  25),  ind  ^ui  foimed  a  compact
crder  of  noblea,  united  b;  their  interMta,  right*,
and  priyilegn.  The  fint,  or  &t  lout  the  nnat
amhitioui  among  thera,  nndDDbledly  raided  tt
Athens,  where  they  enjoyed  nearly  the  ame  privi-
lege* u  they  liad  before  the  DnioD  in  the  K[Mta
ttnntihipi  of  Attica.  Thejr  were  in  the  BidaiiTe
pouMaion  of  all  iho  ciTil  and  re)igi«u  office*  in
the  elate,  regulated  the  affiun  of  religion,  and  in-
lelpreted  the  Uwi  hnman  and  diriDe.  (MUller,
Dor.  iL  2.  §  IS.)  The  king  wai  thu  only  tlie
firtt  among  hi*  equals,  being  diitinguUhed  from
them  only  by  the  duration  of  hie  office  (SchSmann,
iDa  Catit.  p.  4,  traniL)  ;  and  the  four  kiogi  of  the
phylae  (^vAofuviXtii},  who  were  chaaai  front  (he

Eupatridae,  ""'" "  ""

(i'ollu.Tm.lli.
lie  of  jttaU  weakn

noblo,  0
band,  nataraUr  tended  grsd
•IttfMber,  and  to  eitabliih  a  _
goTenunent  in  ill  itead  (Hermann,  PU.  AnL  of
Omnt,  %  102),  it  produced,  on  the  other  band,
eSecta  which  threatened  it*  own  eiiRence,  and  at
hut  led  to  the  entire  overthrow  of  the  heredilaiy
ariatocracy  aa  an  order :  foe  tho  eonunonaln,
which  had  likewiee  gained  in  atrength  by  the
union  of  all  the  Attie  townahipt,  aoon  began  to
feel  the  opjuaoon  of  the  aiiilocTBcy,  which  in
AtCka  pTodnced  nearly  the  Kune  effect*  ai  that  of
the  patriciaiu  at  Rome.  The  legiilation  of  Draco
■eenu  to  bare  ariaen  out  of  the  growing  diicontent
of  the  connnonaltf  with  the  oppnaiiie  rule  of  the
noblea  (ThiHwall,  toL  ii.  p.  IS,  &c)  ;  but  bii  at-
tempt* to  remedy  the  evil  wen  mora  calcnlatsd  to
intimidate  the  people  than  to  nUefy  them,  and
could  cDiifeqnentfy  not  have  any  luting  remlti.
The  diitorbancM  which,  aome  yean  after,  aroaa
from  the  attempt  of  Cylon,  one  U  the  Eupatridae,
who  tried  to  onrthmwibe  aiiitocntical  goTero-
ment  and  eitabliih  himielf  a*  tjrtiai,  at  length  led
to  the  legiilation  of  Sobn,  by  which  the  political
paver  and  influenea  ef  the  Eupatridae  aa  an  order
vai  broken,  and  pnnerty  inilead  of  birth  wai
made  the  Kandard  of  political  righti.  (AriiloL
PaUt.  iL  9  \  DionyB.  HaL  Aia.  Rom.  ii.  8  ;  Aetian,
r.  H.  T.  13.)  But  ai  Soion,  like  ill  ancient
legiilnton,  abflained  from  sboliibing  any  of  the
nligioui  inrtitutioni,  thoie  fiunilin  of  the  Eopa-
tri£a  in  which  certain  prieatly  officii  and  fimc-
tioni  were  hereditary,  retained  thne  diitinctioni
down  to  a  rery  late  period  of  Oracian  binary.
(Compara  Schdmann,  Jntiq.  Jat.  pM  Oraea.  p,
167,  Ac,  and  p.  77,  Ac)  [L.  S.]

EURI'PUS. [AHFUiTHKATfttrN,  ^  B8,  b.]

EUSTYLOS. [TiMftnM,]

EUTHY'NB  and  ELrTHY'NI  («ft«*«i,
tOBvni).  An  public  offieen  at  Athena,  etpa-
cially  general*,  ambamdon,  the  archom  and  their


EUTHTNK


(AeKhin.  c  Cta>r>t.  p.  56.  Sleph.),  the

of  the  ilate  (Lyuai,  e.  Atmniaeil.),  the  raperin-

tendeat*  of  public  tnitdingi,  the  ttierarthi,  and


their  cmduct  and  the


h  tbeyac


theouelTel  of  tt
jndge*  in  the  popular  eourta  leem  to  haie  been
the  only  authoricie*  who  were  not  reiponiible
(AriMoph. Vap-  S*6 ; Hodtwalcka, Vam  dm

Diatlet,  p.  32)  ;  fw  they  wen

pmentatiTea  of  the  people,  aj


Thii  accoiint,  which  of
time  of  their  offiee  waa  OTct,  wa*  allied  f  *Mnf :
and  the  eScen  mbject  to  it,  hrtfteHu.  EToy
pnblic  officer  had  to  rendn  hi*  accoont  witfaia
thirty  dayi  after  the  eipincion  of  hi*  ottce
(HupodSL  PhoL  and  Said.  i.  e.  \ryiarmi  a>d
EtlAnnt)  ;  and  ai  lone  a*  thii  duty  waa  not  fuHilM,
the  whde  prt^erty  ef  the  ei-officcr  waa  m  boadaga
to  the  state  (Ae«bin.  e.  QmipiL  p.  56.  SUph.):
ha  waa  not  allowed  to  tnTsl  beyond  the  ftaaticn
of  Attica,  to  cmuecnte  ai^  part  of  hi*  ptopo^  aa
a  donaiiiim  to  tha  gndi,  la  make  hii  will,  er  ta
pan  from  one  bmity  into  another  by  adoption  ;
no  imblic  honcori  or  reward*,  and  no  new  o&o*
conM  be  giien  to  hun.  (Auehin.  and  Tliaimlji
ZtsCbnin.  and  c.  TVa.p.  747.)  tf  within  tha  Mated
period  an  (Acer  did  not  tend  in  bia  aBcennt,  an
ac^on,  called  i^ayleu  or  i»jrfUu  limi,  wa*  bnH4^
^CRinitbim.  (PeDu,  riiL  Gl ;  Heijch,  Soid.  E^^n.
Mag.  1.  V.  'AXayi'o  JwU.)  At  the  time  wbcM
an  officer  nibnitted  to  the  ttMrTi,  any  cilinn  had
the  right  tocomeforvaidand  impeach  him.  Thoaa
who,  after  baring  tcfuaed  to  lubaiit  to  the  (W&m,
alao  diaobeyed  the  nnmnco*  to  defend  (hemaelfea
befbn  a  court  of  juitice,  thereby  iarf«ted  tbmz
rigbli  aa  dtiaem. (Demoath.  e.  Mid.  p.  £42.)

It  will  ^ipcar  Gnm  the  liit  of  officsn  abject  t*
the  enthyne,  that  it  wai  not  confined  to  tbow
whoae  office  waa  cODueeted  with  the  adminiatratisa
ef  the  pDblic  money,  or  any  part  of  it ;  bnt  m  maay
oue*  It  vai  only  an  inquiry  into  the  nanaar  in
which  a  person  had  bahaTed  himielf  in  the  di^
charge  of  hi*  official  dntiea.  In  tha  fbnner  can
the  acrutiny  wai  cmdocted  with  great  iliii  laiaa.
u  the  Btata  had  Tarioni  nuani  to  check  Mtd  mat-
ml  the  pneaedinga  of  it*  offieen  ;  in  tba  latter,
the  enthyna  may  m  many  ilutancei  ban  been  na
mora  than  a  penonal  attendance  of  the  ei-offieec
before  the  repnannadtea  of  the  people,  to  aes
whether  any  charge  wu  brooght  igamit  hio.
When  ao  acctuer  appealed,  the  cfficer  waa  heaoai-
ably  diimiiied  (tiurruiairKrfm,  DonoMh.  Dm
CoTo*.p.illi).  AfteranoffieerhadgoDethroDahtlia
--■'■  ne,  he  beoune  iwWwoi. (Pollox,  Tiii  S4.)

giTen  wen  in  aome  place*  called  (Mnoi  cc  Aeyw:.

Ta£,  in  othai  /ffTooriii  or  nrirropBi, (Aiiatal

PoU.n.£.p.213,ed.  Goetlling.) AtAtbeuawa

with  the  GrH  two  of  tbeaa  namea,  and  both

ate  DHMtly  moitiowd  together ;  bat  bow  bi  ibdr

'  ~  'ion*  diftnd  Ii  -nrj  nnoMuL Son*  giam-

ma  (E^rmid.  MipL  and  Phot.  i.  v.  EMiMt)

that  xoTun-af  wa*  the  nana  of  tin  w»a  oA-

cer*  who  mm  formerly  called  «W>*»i. .


oompaie  the  WitdL  Afm.  11.

it  aeema,  monorei,  clear  that  the  ^oa  id  Hie

AoyuTal,  though  clsaely  connecud  with  that  «f

ilWvni,  wai  of  greater  extent  than  that  at


KXAIRK8E0S  DIKE.
MHaonot  the  lDniier,tbaii  «  totally  diatinetclnu
ofaffit«n,u  will  be  koi  hemfier.  All  Dcconnta
gf  tba«  officm  wbo  had  injlfaing  to  do  with  the
public  money  wen,  »Ra  tbe  elpintioD  of  their
office,  Sm  tail  in  to  the  \iiyumt,  who  examined
tbem,  nid  if  loy  diScnltj  ai  incomctoen  wu  di>-
ntrn-d,  (c  if  duugn  mi*  bm^t  inimt  mb  m-
tOeei  wilUn  the  period  if  30  diyi,  tbe  farther  In-
ipirj  denlnd  upon  the  iMmH,  before  vhoni  the
ofieer  ni  oUlged  to  tppeu  and  plead  his  canie.
(BBBBiia,A£t  ^at^o/eirH^g  154.  8.)  If
ibe  il>»iw  (rand  that  lb«  accotmta  were  imnti*-
fcttofj,  that  Ihe  aStts  had  embented  put  of  tbe
piUic  ■aaey,  that  he  bad  accepted  bribei,  or  that
ihuge*  bnngllt  againit  him  v«n  well  founded,
thry  refand  the  cBie  to  a  cooit  of  jnilice,  6>t
i4ich  tbe  Avyirral  anuinled  the  judge*  b;  lot,
■nd  ia  tbi*  emct  their  herald  pndauned  the  qnee-
tn  who  wvold  come  fonnud  ai  imnwc.  (AcKhin.
I.  Qt^  p.  A7,  ed.  Staph.  ;  EtymoL  Uagn.  ■;  e.
EWi*  ;  Bekker,  jMcdaf.  p.  245.  6.)  The  place
wktn  the  ctwrt  wai  held  wu  Ihe  Bme  aa  that  to
which  ev-offlcoi  nt  their  accninla  to  be  enmined
br  the  A«7iirriil,  sod  wai  called  Aryirr^fuv.
(.\adacid.  Da  MpL  p.  87  i  Lye.  c.  Potjttmt.  p.
C7'i.)  It  cat  acimely  be  donbted  that  the  dWvni
Ink  an  aetire  pan  in  the  triali  of  the  Xotiitt^
fm:  bot  whetber  they  acted  only  ai  tbe  anee-
«n  of  tbe  AvrwrDl,  or  whelhei  they,  ai  Pollni
iWa,  exacted  the  embenled  inmi  and  finea,  in-
Mead  of  tbe  piactoree,  it  nncertun.  The  number
a(thei*hn«i,aa  weU  ae  that  of  tbe  Xffrirral,  waa
tea,  MM  beiiK  ttdcen  frco)  erery  tribe.  (Phot  i.«.
EHtHt,  and  Ilaipooal.  i.  e.  AsTtarciJ.}  The
^rytrrtl  were  appointed  by  tbe  tenate,  and  cboien
by  lul ;  whether  the  rUtvm  were  likewi»a  choien
^7  lot  ia  aQctTtain,  iw  Photina  naea  an  expnaaion
'  '  "  m  itXiipin  Got),  while  Pollux  (nil  S9)
the  •Wmw  ■ynroipeSvrai,  letL  to!)
to  which  tbey  wan  like  tbe  at-
it,  howerer,
e  probable.

EmyiWwm  had  two  tmtmmt  (•dfwtpei).  <Bee
BSckh,  I'M.  Bam.  Lb.;  Titmann,  Onnl.  Staatre.
p.  S23,  &c  j  H  ennami, /Wil.  ^  abq.  i/Gnw,  i  1 M ;
ixMaun,  AmUq.  Jir.  (wUL  (fnte.  p,  2B9,  &b)

The  fini  trace*  li  thw  ttnlj  demooatic  inttila-
tioQ  are  gctterallj  fnmd  in  tbe  calabliihment  of
tk  anhoub^  (^PX^I  ^reMrrei)  inatad  of  the
kia^y  pewa-,  'bj  the  Attic  noblea  (Paiu.  ir.  E.  A).
ll  wM  fna  thia  Itate  of  dependencB  of  the  Gilt
— p-tT^t-t  apoD  the  order  of  the  Doble*  that,  in
the  coane  of  time,  the  n^nkr  enlhyne  anec  Simi-
lar matitatiiai*  woe  eawilitbed  in  Bereral  other
tepablicaofOTeeoe.  (Ariat.  Pofil.  tL  S  ;  Wacba-
xith.  MAm  AUidt.  I  p.  119,  &e.  2d.  ed.)  [L.S.]

EXAOCGES  DIKE-  (it*y«T?<  Wb,),  a  mit
•f  a  poUie  natme,  vhidi  might  be  ijiitiCDted
■gainet  ana,  who,  iiaiiiiiiH  ta  act  aa  tbe  protects
(tJfw)  ef  an  Athenian  woman,  mairied  h«  to  a
fiRiBwr  in  a  fbrogn  land.  Tl^  wu  Anliary  to
kw,  nttoDiaRi^e  arJth  alien*  being  (at  a  gtoenl
nde)  p«hibil«L  In  tbe  ipeeeh  of  Danottbene*
ipbat  TiDuKtaie*  (p.  TGS;^  he  ii  cbaiged  with
liana;  aoU  hi*  aiHa  to  a  Corcynan,  <m  pretence
gf  pmB  her  in  maniagtw  (Meier,  AH.  Fno.
>.U0.)  [CR.E.]

EXAIRE'SE03DIK£'(Jt<>V^™"  IM),  waa
t  dama^  for  the  et-


prqxx^  in  tlie


teiapt  to  depnTe  the  pbunttfF  ol
where  Aa  ikfaidant  dainwd  ■


KXAUaURATlO.


479


of  ilaTery  at  Athena  incapacitated
ly  1^1  ilep  in  hia  own  penon,  if
a  reputed  alare  wiahed  to  recoier  hii  righta  aa  ■
freeman,  he  could  only  do  it  by  (he  aaiiatance  of
" " '  He  then  pat


•oaght  to  reclaim  him,  he  Hocooded  to
potaeaiian,  iyir  eintr  tk  taBhthv.


alBTe  might  at  any  time  be  aeiied  by  hii  maater,
either  in  the  open  tireet  or  elaewbere,  except  in  a
aanctoary.  If  tiie  friend  or  penon  whe  hanamnd
the  alan  meant  to  contert  the  maatec'i  right,  the
proper  coune  waa  to  go  with  him  before  the  roa-
giatrale,  and  pie  lecnrity  Sot  the  ralue  of  the  ilsTe
and  coata,  in  caae  a  court  of  law  ehotild  decide
a^init  him.  The  magiitrato  who  took  eiigiiixance
of  the  caoae  waa  the  arcboo,  vhaa  a  man  claimed
to  be  a  citiiai ;  the  pdamaich,  where  he  claimed
to  be  an  alim  fteeman.  It  wa*  tbe  duty  of  the
archon  er  pdemarch  le  eat  the  man  at  liberty
omdmU  Gb.  In  tbe  mit  that  Mowed,  the  plaintiff
had  to  pcoTe  hi*  title  to  Ihe  ewnetihip  of  tho
ibie.  Hid,  if  ioeeeaafal,  obtained  nch  compesB-
tioD  aa  tbe  jury  choae  to  award  ;  liuB  being  a
Tiiarrht  irfiii,  and  half  of  the  tI^i)^  being  giren
to  the  tlate.  (Dem.  c  Tktocr.  p.  1328.)  A  Tsrdict
for  the  plaintiff  drew  with  it,  aa  a  iiiiimiij  can-
■eqaence,  the  adjudication  of  the  ownenhip,  and
he  would  bo  entitled  to  take  potieiainn  ^  hia
ilaTo  immediately ;  if^  howerer,  tiie  ilare  had
escaped  in  the  meantime,  and  oTidence  of  Rich
fact  were  produced,  lbs  jury  would  probably  take
thai  into  ooniideration  in  eathnating  tbe  damage).
If  the  friend,  in  retining  the  i^itnre  of  the
tlaTc,  had  ued  actoal  Tiolenee,  he  wa*  lubject  to
a  tiien  flufw.  Ami  if  the  ui-ditaid  mailer  had
Ulad  in  the  f(.  tuni,  the  injured  party  might
mHiwt*in  an  acticn  agmnat  him  for  the  attanpted
■eiiara.  (Lya.  a,/^inii.  p.7M,  &<^  with  Heiake'i
note  ;  Dem.  e.  Near.  p.  1358 )  Haipocr,  m.  v.
*£{aip^HM,  and 'A7«i ;  Meier..^&./V«L  p.  39i.)
ipeech  of  laociate*  (jyapae.  P.3S1),  the


sharged  with  baring  aM«ted
the  freedom  of  hia  own  ilare,  in  order  to  ra«Tent
hia  being  examined  by  torture  remcting  the  lura
of  moaef  depotited  in  hia  handi.  Thi*  ia  remaii-
able  on  two  accoimti :  firtt  (ai  Meier  obaerrea),
becauM  it  aeema  to  looTe  that  one  not  ttia  owner
of  the  alare  oould  bnng  the  i(.  Un),  if  he  had  aa

optional  with  a  man  lo  glTa  np  hia  alafe  to  the
torlnre  or  not,  the  refotal  bmng  only  mailer  of  ob-
•erration  to  Ihe  jury  ;  and,  thereiore,  it  qipeara
■tmage  that  any  one  ibould  baTe  recoune  to  a
tneoiure,  the  reaoll  of  which  {if  anoceaafu])  would
be,  to  depriie  bhu  of  hia  property.  [C  R.  K.l
EXAUCTORA'TIO.  [Eiaacrrus.]
BXAUOURATIO  I*  the  act  ef  changing  a
■acred  thisig  into  a  [onbne  one,  or  of  taking  away
from  it  the  Hcred  chaiacter  which  it  had  teeeiied
That


■neb  an  act  wu  performed  by  tha  angora,  and
nerer  wlthmt  couiuldng  the  pleaanre  of  the  goda
by  augnriuin,  ia  implied  in  the  name  itaeif.  (LIt.
1 55,  T.  54  ;  Dionya.  BaL  Amiiq.  Horn.  iiL  p.  203.
ed.  Sylbuig )  Calo.  qi.  FttL  i.  v.  tftqmtiam.')
Temple*,  ahapdi,  tad  otbar  eentecniUd  place*,  m


480  EXEOETAB.

well  M  prleiU,  were  onuidered  u  bdoi^ing  to  the
gaiM,  No  caOKcrHtsd  plao  whslercl  could  b«
applied  for  >a;  profane  pnipoie,  or  dedUatcd  to
MIT  other  diiiait;  ihui  that  to  which  it  origiiullf
bdonged,  without  being  pferiouily  eiugunled  ;
aod  prieiti  coold  not  gire  np  their  saood  fuoe-
tioEu,  or  (in  cue  they  wen  obliged  to  Ji
htcy)  enter  into  matiimonj,  without  tint  under-
going the  pcoceu  of  esuiguiMio.  (Oellini,  ri.  7.
4  ;  JdL  Capitol.  M.  Alton.  P/iiloi.  c  4.)  [L.S.]
KXCE'PTIO.  [Actio.]
EXCU'BIAE.  [Ci>TiiA,p.2S0.1
EXCUBITO'RES,  which  properljineanmlch-
men  or  lentineU  of  any  kind  (CacL  BttL  Oaii.  liL
69),  wad  the  name  more  particular!}  given  to  the
loldien  of  the  cahifft  whs  guarded  the  pahice  of
the  Roman  emperoi.  (Suet.  tfir.  8,  OA  6.)
Their  oommandiDg  otHcer  wu  called  Mhnw  u~
aiitar.  (SneL  OnoE.  42,  Ner.  9.)  When  thi
emperor  went  to  an  enteitainment  at  the  home  o
another  penon,  the  excuhiterea  appear  Ut  have  ac-
companied him,  and  to  hare  kept  guard  ai  in  hij
own  palace,  (Snet.  Otk.  4.)

KXEDRA  (t^).  wliich  [fDperiy  ligniGei  ■
•eat  out  of  doora,  came  to  be  uead  for  a  chambei
fumiihed  with  MBta,  and  opening  into  a  partial,
where  people  met  to  enjoy  conyerialion  ;  inch  aa
the  room  which  Vitruiiua  deacribei  aa  opening  on
to  the  periiljle  of  the  ^ynueaiiBtuofaOreekhDUBe
[DoHUs],  and  Bi  the  roomi  attached  to  a  gjmoa-
■ium,  which  were  Died  for  the  lecture*  and  dii-

EutaUoni  id  tho  rhetoricians  and  philaaophen.
avMNABiDM.]  The  former  clan  of  extdnu
I  indeed  csUa  hj  another  name,  namely
s  or  waimii,  bat  the  wotd  'fdpa  ocean

I  Euhpidei  {OreA  1449}  in  thli  eenae,  and
Pollux  mentioiu  the  wordi  J^^pcu  and  noriUft
ai  ^onfmoni  (viL  122).  In  thii  Kiue  the  word
might  he  tranilaled  parbar.

In  old  Oreek  the  word  A/ir^l  appein  to  haye
had  a  limilar  mpAning  ;  but  the  ordinary  nae  of
the  wold  ii  for  a  larger  and  mote  public  place  of
reiort  than  the  i(Jt^ [LucBi.]

Among  the  Romaiu  the  word  had  a  wider
meaning,  aniwerlng  to  both  the  Greek  lemu,  i^itpa
and  X^o^n.  Thue  it  a  not  only  used  to  iignify  a
chamber  for  ordinary  retort  and  convenation  in  a
private  hooae,  or  in  the  public  baths  and  gymnaiia
open  to  the  lun  and  air,  (VitiUT.  t.  11  ;  liL  9  ;
Cic  Oral.  m.S,Dt  NaLDtor.  i.  6  ;  Varro,  R.fL
iii.  5  ;  Ulguan,  Dig.  ii.  tit  3,  leg.  G)  ;  hul  the
word  ii  eren  applied  to  the  hall  attached  to  the
theatre  of  Pompey,  which  wai  nud  aa  a  place  of
meeting  hy  the  Hoate.  (PluL  BnO.  14,  17).
The  diminntive  aadriiun  liio  oocDia,  (Cic  ad
Fam.  Tii.  23-)  (P.  &]

EXEQETAE  (Jfirrrol,  interpreten  ;  on  thii
and  other  menningi  of  the  word  we  Rhonken,  ad
TYmau'  Gloaar.  p.  109,  &c),  ii  the  name  of  the
Eumolpidae,  by  which  they  wen  deiknated  a*
the  interpcelert  of  thelawi  relating  to  religion  and
of  the  aacred  ritea. (Demoith.  Euerg.  p.  1160.)


EXERCITORIA  AqriO.
I  accordance  with  the  elymolegical  meaning  of  the
word,  (tales,  that  it  wu  applied  to  any  inter^Kcter
of  lawa,  whether  jacced  or  proline  ;  but  we  know
that  at  Athena  the  name  wai  priocmaU J  applied  to
three  memben  of  the  family  of  Uie  Eomolpidae
(Suidat,  I.  v.),  whoae  province  it  wai  to  interpret
the  religioui  and  ceremonial  lawi,  the  ligni  in  iha
hearena,  and  the  ociclei ;  whence  Cicero  {Da  Ijg.

'■" '■-"  BBm  jnUrprtUf. (Compare

lPlati^£iiM;r>ir.p.4,d.)

expiatory  uctiGcei,  and  were  never  appoinlod
without  the  nuictioa  of  the  Delphic  oracle,  whenm
they  were  called  nu«^X/>Q<'^<-  (Timaeui,  fflbuar.
f.  e.  '£f ir/irroi :  compare  Meier,  Dt  Bom  Damnat.
p.  7  ;  MUller,  oJ  AualyL  A'linait.  p.  1 62,  &c)

J{iryvt^i  wai  al»  applied  to  those
■erred  aa  guidca  (ocernne)  to  the
e  molt  remaricabls  towni  and  place)
of  Qreece,  who  ihowed  to  itrangen  the  cnrioaitiei
of  a  place,  and  explained  to  them  it*  luatoiy  and
antiqoitiea. (Paui.  i.  41.  §  3.)

Hd^gpecting  the  i(,iryvril'  of  the  lawi  of  Lyeur-
jatSparta,ieeIi!UUer,  air.iiLll.2.  [K  S.J
EXERCITO'RIA ACTIO, wu an action

rted  by  the  edict  againit  the  exercimr  nitvii,
the term  navii  wai  uudentood  any  veaacl,
'  ilhcT  uud  for  the  navigation  of  rivers,  lakca,
he  leo. The  exereitor  navii  is  the  pcnon  to
im  all  the  ihip'i  gaint  and  earning!  (fAvtaiumct
el  reditui)  belong,  whether  he  ii  the  owner,  or  bu
hired  the  ubip  {per  amrnoitemj  from  the  owncf


bled  the  Roman  juiiiti ;  bat  the  lawi,  of
/{TTTirra'  were  the  interpreters,  were  not  wniien
but  handed  dawn  by  tradition. Plutarch  {Tiei,
25)  aj^ei  the  term  lo  the whole  order  of  the


e  dehnil


inile. The  i


it  he  who  has  the  care  and  managemeat  ot
the  (hip,  and  wai  appointed  {pra^miitiu)  by  tha

tor. The  exereitor  wu  bound  gmeially  by

niracta  of  the  magiiler,  who  wu  hii  agent,
ith  thii  lunitation.  Chat  the  tsntract  of  tha
xr  mmt  be  with  reference  to  furthering  tha
for  which  he  wai  appointed ;  as,  for  mitaoce,
if  he  punhaied  thtngi  ui^iil  for  the  navigatiiiii  of
the  (Mp,  or  entered  into  a  contract  or  inaured
iipenie  for  the  (hip's  repairs,  the  eienitor  waa
Hund  by  inch  contnct :  the  tcrmi  of  tha  maatcr^
appointment  {praepotitio)  accordingly  detemiina
the  right!  of  third  partiea  (gainit  the  axcrcitot.
If  the  magiitcr,  being  qipointed  lo  managa  tbo
'-'  and  to  UM  it  for  a  particular  purpoee,  uied  it
L  dil^erent  purpose,  nil  employer  wu  not  bound
by  the  contract  If  there  were  leveral  magisiji,
without  any  partition  of  their  diiliea  (aow  divitit
qffiiiat\  a  contract  with  one  wai  the  lame  aa  a
conHacI  with  alL  If  there  wen  Mveral  ezcr-
dlorei,  who  ^>poinlcd  a  mogiiter  either  oat  of
iwn  numbB-  or  not,  they  wen  acrerally  m.


It  the  a.


le  magiita  conti
light  have  an  ac


so  loi^  u  the  I

A  par^  might'kave  an  action  ex  deJida  agkiDit
.  exereitor  in  rnpect  of  tha  set  eitha  of  ths
igiiter  or  the  sailors,  but  not  on  the  eonliact  ol
the  lailon.  If  the  master  subititnted  a  peiam
'-  his  phtce,  though  he  wu  fbrhidden  to  do  so,  tlia
— -'--  would  (til!  be  bound  by  any  proper  am-


ladofm ^
The  term  Nanta


properly  a(


loallpi


BXERCITUS.
ai  As  /fmliiiam  piHiumIn  Oammat, ;  Abbott
m  Sa^mg,  UJea,  jjiiiinftiw  NtKU.) [Q.L.]

EXEItCITUS  (*r^i%),  Mmj.  L  Obue.
TV  tariiot  oaticca  which  ve  pousM  of  the  miti-
tVTHtaaaBg  the  Oreeki  an  thne  nnninsd  in
IbHawriepBenu.  Tbe  mualtled  alUa  of  Hoety
b  tb  bit  ^M  of  Omcc,  led  to  the  arij  and
nnl  cohiTUka  of  th*  ait  of  umt,  which  wen
hihitMlly  wGfs  ibr  defcDte,  ena  whea  agnrmtTe
mi&»  wM  Bot  isttadoL  (Tfauc  L  6.)  Bat  the
Hiric  {Menu  cmlaiD  an  exhibidnn  <X  combined
aOiluj  epeiBtioni  in  their  oailieat  •tage.  War-
tiha  ndmtkingi  beibn  the  time  dacribed  in
thai  on  ban  beat  little  ette  than  pcedatoty
ian^  (SenXulai,  IL  iL  667).  A  tollECtiim  of
vurion  eihihiting  IcM  of  organiaation  and  dia-
apliat  ihan  m  ace  depicted  in  the  Giecian  timpa
MOB  Traj,  woold  haidl;  dnarB  the  name  of  an
•niT'  The  "y  ■-"■""  which  we  ice  there,  inch
■•  it  •■■,  aroae,  not  from  ur  Hodied,  foRuatiTe
nitm,  but  ntunUj,  <rat  of  the  imperiect  con-
nBtko  <tf  aadety  in  that  igtL  EraiT  fraemM)  in
tbm  limea  waa  af  conne  ■  toUki ;  tot  when  all
ihi  ■onbeia  of  a  bnil;  wen  not  needed  to  go
^BB  m  expedition  nnder  the  coomund  of  tbeir
<wltain  iM  king,  tboae  who  woe  to  go  leem  to
hiTt  h«9  •Reeled  b;  lot  (/J.  z.  tlB).  Ai  the
onfedBaled  Matci,  which  an  lepneented  u
akag  fait  in  the  Trojan  war,  in  nnited  bj
KUaAy  taj  otb^  bond  than  tbmr  partiviEAtioa  in
a  fmmtfi  object,  the  dilTerent  bodiea  of  troopc,
led  hj  their  mpectire  chieftaini,  ai  '  '
beaig  Dited  b;  a  eommoD  diKiplini
f— ■and-Bi-thief  of  AgsmemDon.  Each  bodj
>^^  hi  own  Ifsder,  and  loUawa  him  to  (be  coD-
lici,  n  lemaini  inaetiTe,  according  ai  he  choOKi
to  anaglt  m  tbe  fight  or  not  Autboritj
•MicDce  an  ngnlated  mneh  mon  by  tbe  niton
rf  the  dmnutanna,  or  bj  the  nlatiTe  penona]
darinnian  of  tbe  chieltaini,  than  by  any  law  of
■ilittiT  di*ci[iliDe.  Agamemnoa  aometinKa  urge*
the  chiiAaina  to  engaoe,  net  by  eonmaoda,  but  by
■unti  (A  iT.  S3S,  &C.  SeS,  &e.).  Accordingly,
■Mhing  like  the  tactic*  or  ilratny  of  a  ngulariy
ifuplintd  army  i*  to  be  traced  in  tbe  Homeric
dacnptiDu  of  battle*.  Each  chidlaia  with  hii
kaly  tl  troof*  acta  fac  himiell^  without  idetaxa
le  Ihe  BorancDt*  of  tbe  re^  except  *•  the*e
haatk  oecuioD  ibr  a  TJgornii  attack,  or,  when
lanl  |«ea*ed,  (all  for  aauMance  trom  tbe  oomnun
Mi^efhnitberboodinaim*.  Tbe  wide  interral
■bich  in  the  Homeric  age  lepaiBted  tbe  noble  or
saimoll  freeman,  appean  in  a*


like  uodaea,  iiv  wbich  bii  itation  gBTe  him  the
lekme  and  tba  meaaa.  A  ungle  ban  i*  able  to
Ft  ta  Si^t  a  whole  tnop  of  cmnmoQ  loldiera.
The  acenant  of  a  battle  ccoaiila  afanoit  entirely  of
duiripljuia  of  tbe  lii^e  oombau  of  the  ehiefr  eo
ih  aidee  ;  and  the  fortone  of  the  day,  when  not


a  tbey
tagoiBta  wbdB  tbey  angkd  est


id  ^htinfl  c«
inmit  or  fligl


EXERcrnjs.  rti

ahting,  a*  they  dnw  nev,
ling  ue  of  the  chariot  for
ponmit  or  flight.  Tba  Onek*  did  not,  like  the
ancient  Briton*  and  leTeial  natiotu  of  the  Eatt,
n*e  the  chariot  itaelf  a*  an  initnunent  of  warfbre.
Caxalry  wae  unknown  at  that  time  to  tbe  Oreeki,
and  honemanihip  but  Tory  nrely  pnctiaad  ;  the
In^T  of  Homer  an  tbe  cbieflain*  who  ride  in
chariot*.  Then  cbie&  an  drawn  Dp  in  the  front
of  the  battle  array  (R  W.  297,  rpi/iax"!  ■*p«l^
X<ffftu)  ;  and  frBqaantly  the  fbot  loldien  •eem  to
have  done  nothing  bat  watch  the  aiiwle  oombati
of  their  leaden,  fuming,  in  two  oppoaite,  parallel
linea,  ■omethins  enawering  to  a  ring  (fpusi  naKi-
luia,  IL  IT.  299}  within  which  the  mote  unportant
■ingle  combat*  an  fought  How  they  got  the
chariot*  out  of  the  way  when  the  foot  toldlen
came  to  cloae  qnaHen  (aa  in  iL  ir.  437,  fa.)  ia
not  detcribed.

Thingh  to  little  icconnt  ia  unally  made  of  the
common  •oldier*  {wpvKt,,,  II  ri.  49,  liL  77),
Homer  occaaionally  Inji  coniidenble  atTEaa  on
their  orderiy  and  compact  amy  ;  Nentor  and  Me-
nenheu*  an hononrahly diatingoighed by  the

?>ithet  KiMridtTaft  Mm,  (IL  iL  SfiS,  it.  293,  &c).
be  tmopi  were  naturally  dmwn  np  in  *eparate
bodiea  according  to  their  different  nation*.  It
woold  appear  to  be  nther  a  reatoration  of  the  tdd
arrangement,  than  a  new  cbuuficatlon,  when
Neator  {B.  iL  362)  ncommenda  Agamemnoo  to
dnw  tbe  troopa  up  by  tribe*  and  phmtrie*.
Arranged  in  theae  natnrid  diTiaion*,  the  fool  lol-
dier*  wen  drawn  np  in  denaely  compacted  bodiei
(rwiiu)  fxUorTii)  (hield  clo*e  to  ahield, —  hel-

212,  &c).  In  th«e  maiaei,  though  not  nniaJly
commencing  tbe  attack,  they  frequently  offer  a
powerFul  tenalance,  eren  to  dtttinguiahed  heroea
(a*  Hector  IL  xiiL  US,  Ac,  camp.  iTii.  267,  354,
Jul,  liiL  339),  the  den*e  amy  of  their  apean
Ibnning  a  barrier  not  raaily  broken  through.  The
lignal  for  adTBnce  or  retreat  irai  not  giTcn  fay  in-
strument* of  any  kind,  fant  by  tbe  Toice  of  the
Ifader.  A  toad  roice  wu  conaeqnently  an  im-
portant matter,  and  tbe  epithet  |M'  craMi  ia
common.  Tbe  txnmpet,  bowerer,  wai  not  abio-
lalely  unknown  (IL  iviiL  SIS).  Reapeeting  tbe
arTDour,  offeniiye  ind  defcnuce,  lee  AnH«.

Under  the  king  or  chieftun  who  commandi  his
■epoisle  contingsnl  we  commooly  find  mbordinalo
chieft,  who  command  rauUer  diTiiion*.  It  ia
difficolt  to  lay  whether  it  ia  altogether  acddenlal
cr  not,  that  theae  an  frtqoently  Gre  in  number.
Thn*  tbe  Myrmidon*  of  Achille*  are  divided  into
fiTeffTtxK.eachofsaOmeo.  Fiie chieCl command
tbe  Boeotiani ;  and  the  whole  Tnian  anny  i*
formed  in  fiie  diTiaiona,  each  nnder  thrcB  laden.
(H  JT.  29S,  &c  xtL  171—197,  ii.  494,  *c,  xii.
87—104.) Tbe  term  fdAoTf  ii  applied  either  to


«  al*o  called


ly  (a*  il  Ti.  6),  ■
dJTiaiaD*  and  aabdiniion*,  whh

■IX'i  and  wipTCi.

When  an  enemy  waa  ilmi),  it  WM  tbe  muTeml

pcactin  to  atop  and  atrip  off  hia  arm*,  which  wen

tarefblly  preaemd  by  tbe  xictor  a*  trephie*. The

'iTiuon  of  the  booty  generally  mi  arranged  by  tbe

ader  of  tbe  troop,  ica  whom  a  portitn  waa  act  aaide
a*  an  honolary  present  (rW.  A  1-392,863,  il.
328,  iL  703).  The  rewitiy  of  the  dead  bodiea  of
the  ilain  wa*  b  the  Homeric  ap,  ■•  in  all  later
times,  a  point  of  the  gnalaat  inpintaiicc^  and  &»•


11


~  O"


ijnentl;  eiiher  led  to  a  £ace  (octnt,  or  wai  efleclrd
by  Ibefejmentof  nhesfy  niiiom<KII]le,£nan-
vam  der  Griadm  n  jicrnnloi  Ziilaiter;  Wlsb*-
ifiuth,  »(^i[in.  AUrr^mA.  tdL  iL  |  110  ;  Orole,

Aftei  iha  hfRHc  age  cmuidfnbla  impulaa  mi
|ivcn  to  UiB  ^tiration  of  the  mILituj  ut  bj  the
cooqnaU  rf  tlie  Tliiieliiiin  (the  &nt  Oneiai)
people,  ■ppeimllj,  that  emplayBd  OTilr; ,  to  tin
Via  of  whicli  their  coaqnali  were  probably  in
gtaX  part  owing)  and  Dariani,  araang  the  latter
of  nhom  the  art  of  mi&n  wa<  eariieR  ndaced  to
Bygtum,  The  difltiDction  of  hcaTj  and  L^ht  aimod
fool  loldieiB  of  ecFuiie  took  iu  tiie  with  tbo  be-
ginnii^  of  lailitaiy  terr ice,  the  poorar  due  bang
mable  to  pniida  tbemHlTei  with  tha  nuce  eS-
eicnl,  but  mon  coitlj  vo^iihii  o(  tboM  «bo  wem
better  off  thuthenuclTei.  Political  ooniidaatkiiia
leaded  to  make  the  diitinction  mora  miricsd  and
■yitemalic  The  ijttau  of  mititat;  outei  vaa
indeed  unkaowD  among  the  Orecki,  ibDugh  lonia-
thing  aiuwejiiig  tho  nme  porpoae  eiitted  in  the
euiieat  timea,  whoa  the  noblei  and  tbeir  man
iaanjediate  depoadanU  and  retainera,  having  gneter
loiaore  for  the  cnltivation  of  ikill  in  the  me  of
anna,  and  greater  meana  for  faocoring  them,  were
aepaiated  in  thai  reipect  bj  a  wide  nitcrral  izam
the  lower  cIbh  ;  while  mtiienel;,  mililuy  wipB-
ilontf  wBi  the  smt  dinot  mrani  of  aecunng
poiitinl  tUfsemaey.  Hence,  ai  aoon  aa  the  dii-
tinction  between  the  nohlee  (the  priTileged  daw)
and  the  commonalty  (deimu)  wai  eilabUahed,  it
berame  the  object  of  the  fbimer  to  prerent  the
bttei  iivm  plaong  themielTee  on  a  par  with  them
in  militaiT  Mrei^  and  >o  the  lue  of  the  fiill
■moor  of  the  heaiy-aimed  in&ntiy  waa  reaerved
W  tho  fanner  for  thenuelrei ;  and  whi
of  diitn^  it  WM  fnmd  neceuaiy  to  antniit  the
ddDua  with  toll  annoor,  the  reaidt  wai  not  mi-
commanl;  a  [evolution  (aa  woe  in  acme  d^jiree  the
oae  nC  Hjtilen^  Thac  ilL  27).  But  in  the  de-
mocraciei  thia  diitinction  at  rcgaidi  the  kindi  of
iernce  depended  merely  upon  the  gn&ter  or  leu
ability  of  the  ettiiena  to  ptoctm  anu.  In  the
Qreek  commoawcsltha  all  thoae  who  enjoyed  the
prinlegci  of  citiient  or  freemen  weie  held  bam
to  terre  u  toldien  when  tailed  npon,  and  wc
providec^  with  anna  and  tiained  in  mdilary  oti
^aea  u  a  matter  of  courae-  The  modeni  lyatem
of  itonding  arm^ea  waa  foreign  to  Grcdc
snd  would  hare  been  dangerooa  to  the  iibi
the  difiercot  comnionweallha,  though  Mtmething
of  tho  kind  may  be  Ken  in  the  body  goaida,
■atiaUj  of  mncenaiy  troopa,  kept  b}'  tyianta.
The  merDenariea  in  the  jay  of  Alexander  of
Pherae  formed  a  conaideiBhle  aimy.  Pnctically
too,  fmm  the  omliouity  of  the  wariike  operationt
in  which  they  were  engaged,  the  armie*  of  Philip
and  Alexander  of  Hacedcn,  and  their  gooceaMin
became  atanding  anniea.  The  thoniand  XryHt
at  Aigoa  (Thuc  v.  67)  and  the  aacnd  bund  at
Thebci  (Piut.  Fdop.  18 ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Gria*.
StaaUaiitrlk.  g  1B1  note  2)  wen  not  couidecable
enough  to  bo  called  armiei.  The  employment  of
mercenary  troopa  might  have  led  to  the
atanding  ormiei,  had  it  not  been  that  th(
them  chaiacteiiaed  the  decline  of  the  Oncion
ilatci,  »  thni  the  cimimitanoca  which  led
emptoymeot,  alto  rendered  it  impoaiiblo


!  imntadialtdy  needed. Stilt,


■nit;.  Tbe  ^arten  «ny,
ibon,  waa  prohuW  in  all  ita
a  that  it  waa  in  the  tinke  of


preride  the  n
ccpt  when  they  w


BXEBC1TU&
M  in  the  ate  of  the  Scythian  bowmoi  at  Athena,

individual  corpe  of  memnariea  might  be  rBgolarly  -
maintained.  Siani  wen  but  rarely  liaMed  with
arma,  and  wh<n  it  waa  tbe  eaae,  th^  were  nnatly
manmnitted. The  Greek  annia  aeacTdinriy  waa

the  r^olar  armiea  of  modem  timet.

In  all  the  atatei  of  Oroece,  in  the  eailieat  u  in

later  timai,  the  general  type  of  th«r  military  or-

nJMidon  waa  lie  jAakmK,  a  body  of  imrfm  in

•e  anay  with  a  long  ipear  at  tbaiT  frindul

Kpon. It  waaamoog  theUiiriBni,andeipe(3Uy

long  the  Spartana,  that  thia  type  waa  moat  rigidly

hered  to. The  nrnigth  of  their  military  anay

eenaiated  in  tbe  heavy-aimed  in&ntry  (IrArnu).

They  attached  compaiatiTely  aaull  miportaoee  to

tbeir  amdry,  wbidi  waa  alway*  inferioT  (Xen.

fMlM.  vi.  4.  S  10). Indeed,  tbe  Theeaaliana  and

Boaotiana  wen  the  only  Qreek  people  who  dia-

dngniahed themaeWea  mnch  Gir  tfadr  mr^ry  ;

acutely  any  other  atatea  had  teiTito~' "  ~ '  ~

for  the  eroliitiana  of  canity. Tbe  ^

aa  deaeribed  by  Xenopbon,  w *"

main  fBataiea  the  aame  that
Lycnrgua.  The  inatitotionB  of  that  lawgive:
verted  the  body  of  Spartan  citixena  into  a  kind  of
military  brotherhood,  whoie  almoat  lole  occupation
wa*  the  piaetke  of  warlike  and  athletic  ezeiciaea.
The  whole  life  cf  a  Spartan  waa  little  elie  than
either  the  piepontion  for  or  the  pcactice  of  war.
The  rendc  waa,  that  in  tbe  itrictaen  of  thrir  dia-
cipline,  the  preogioD  and  hdlity  with  which  they
perfonned  tbeir  military  eiotntiana,  nod  the  akill
and  power  wiih  which  they  naed  tbeir  weapooa,
tbe  Spartsna  woe  unrivalled  RDong  tfae  Oredt^
to  that  they  aeemed  :dka  real  maaUn  of  tbe  art  e(
war  (tixktoi  tSf  nAtfuKw),  while  in  eetn-
paiiton  with  them  othtf  ORskt  ^ipeand  mere
tiroi  (ahor;(iSiairTAf  rfir  (Prparivruwr,  Xen.
B^  Load.  liiL  g  6  ;  Plot  Ptlop.  S3).  The
heavy-armed  iii£anlry  of  tbe  Spartan  anniea  wna
oompoted  partly  of  gennine  ^lartan  dtiaeDt,  partly
of  Periooci  (e,g.  Thucyd.  iv,  8,  comp.  Orote,  t/itt.
qfOnem,  voL  tl  p.  493).  In  later  timea,  aa  tbe
nnmbor  i^  Spartan  citiaeni  decreaaed,  the  Perioeci
centtitnted  the  larger  pution,  a  fact  whidi  lendcra
nngatoy  all  attempt!  to  connect  the  numbai  of
the  divuioni  of  tke  ann^  with  tbe  political  divi-
aiooB  of  the  Spartan  atiieu.  Evoy  Spartan
dtiaen  ma  liable  to  military  lervice  (fr^fwpoi)
from  the  age  of  twenty  to  the  age  of  aucty  yearL
Thote  beymd  that  age  won,  however,  toBietiaiea
empiDjod  in  tbe  leta  ardnona  kinda  of  lervioe  —
aa  at  Msntlneia,  when  they  bad  obarge  of  the
biig|lBge  (Thuc  V.  72).  On  da  oceatioB  of  any
militaiy  expedition,  tfae  kingt  at  fint,  aad  afUn^
wBidt  the  ephota,  ikada  ptodamatiHi  what  ckaa,
accoiding  to  age,  wen  to  so  on  the  expedition
(tA  (n)  *Ii  i  tt?  oTpartiorAu,  Xcn.  A^  £an.  iL
§  2)  at,  for  example,  all  dtixena  between  twenty
and  thirty,  or  between  twenty  and  thiiW-fi«  &c,
(l^  S^  d^' tiCiji,  vil  nrrenBtm  o^' fCifi,  &c>.
When  in  the  field,  the  tnupa  wen  drawn  np  in
tome  manner  according  to  their  ^ea,  aa  that  tat
any  ^leciid  tervice,  thote  of  a  particular  age  mi^t
be  teparatad  and  employed  (Xol  HeUen.  iv.  4.
g  16,  £.8  IS,  16).  Ononeoceaaion  (n.c.4l8>,
on  a  ludden  emergency,  when  probably  there  waa
not  time  to  collect  the  PErioeei,  all  the  eitiaent  oF
the  militaty  a^  were  oiled  fbith  (Thoe.  v.  64).

»rj  diiiaun  vt  tfae-


nilitaty  age  w
10  foutical I


whole  life
ID  the  diadpliiie  of  a  kind
11  meaed  toother  id  ccm-
■  Kirt  of  baimoi.  It  appean
froB  XoiophaD  (A9;  Lea.  iL)  Ihst  the  whole
bodj  of  eitaeu  of  niUtair  b^  wu  diTided  into
■I  diniioai  called  ftifni  (nAjrunl  jiifn  he
ttnu  thenX  noder  the  anmiurad  or  nipenntend-
eoA  af  a  polemrch,  each  mora  being  aubdiTided
■tB  Smt  Mx""  (commanded  bj  >^%irfii\  each
Ux*i  into  two  »«iiTi)iDffTifi  (headed  by  ■wtrrn-
Mi  I  ifiii),  each  •OTHiioffTit  into  two  JMijiOTfiu
(keaded  by  etMmotarchi).  The  irw/wrlai  wen
M  ailed  Inm  the  men  compodng  them  being
>«ad  Ugedier  by  a  conmiao  oath  {yUa  Til  tii
FfoT^"'  'rtffWToi,  Heiych.  (.  fl.).  Theie  were
Hi  nerdy  dinaani  of  tn»p(  engnged  in  actual
aililaiy  eipedhi«iL  The  whole  body  of  citiieni
B  bH  timea  fbnned  m  army,  whether  they  were
coBflTqEated  at  head-qiuiTten  in  Sparta,  or  a
uniDB  of  them  wen  detached  on  foreign  aervice.
Ilaiidatai  (L  Sfi)  quake  of  cnomatiei,  triaoidea,
Bd  lystia  ai  miiitaiT  diTiiirau,  and  we  l«m  that
the  peleuai^  [redded  otb'  the  pablk  tablea
(PIaLl^l2>.  When  a  jnftisn  of  the  dtiuni
asa  lent  out  on  fbnign  Mmce,  the  army  that  they
ined  wai  ananged  in  dirinoDi  {erreeponding  to,
■ad  bearing  the  Mone  samee  ai  the  dtTiiiona  of
the  entin  Okilitaiy  force  of  Sparta,  i.  e.  of  the
eaizTC  body  of  otima  of  miEitaiy  ^e.  Aa  hai
abrady  bom  ronaiked,  an  anny  1011  on  foreign
a-rnee  ecnvfted  of  eitiiani  between  certain  nj^i,
drtanined  accoidiBg  to  the  nnmber  of  widien
wanted.  So  that,  aa  it  would  Kcn,  erery  eno-
BotM  of  the  geooal  body  eent  oat  a  certain  pi»-
periian  of  ita  nnmberi  En  the  eTpeditioa  in
qaeaion,  who  (with  •ome  Perioeci}  formed  on
cinaotia  ef  the  army  >o  Mnt ;  and  the  detach-
■ent  of  thaee  enomotiae  which  formed  a  non  of
^  «4iije  body  of  eitiieos,  fonaed  (apparently)  a
Bon  of  tke  amy  on  teceiet.  All  the  aoeoanti
Oal  we  hare  ef  Spartan  military  opentiDnf  indi-
cate that  the  Penoed  who  eerred  H  heary-armed
•aldiai,  fanned  integial  membeia  of  the  difierent
dtriMMia  10  whiii  they  woe  attadied  ;  »  that  m
enaneria,  peuleanlj  a,  &e,  in  the  field,  wcmld  con-
liia  a  Domher  of  aoldiert  who  did  not  belong  to
rhe  eenapoiHling  larger  diiuioni  of  the  whole
badyofcniiBiaofmibtarrue.  Thirlwalt  (/KaL
if  Gmtis,  tA.  L  app^  il)  lalki  of  thirty  &mi!ia
bemt  nfilailaf  M  (la  onay  by  thirty  uldien  ;
aa  ids  totally  at  Tariancs  with  all  the  acoomiU
that  we  have.  Snppeaing  a  funily  to  coniiit  of  a
father  and  three  loni,  tf  the  latter  were  above
twcoty,  and  the  bihet  not  atxire  liity  ytan  of
age,  ah  would  bo  loldiers,  liable  to  be  called  ont
far  letiTS  lo-Tice  at  any  time  ;  and  acconltilg  to
Ihe  Haula  of  tbe  age  proclumed  by  the  epbon,
IOC,  twn,  three,  iv  ul  of  them  might  be  called  ont
H  Eorb  The  itrenglh  of  a  mora  on  actual  •ertice,
af  usna,  Taried,  aceoiding  to  ciicnmatanees.  To
jadge  1^  Ihe  naaw  penleeDttyi,  the  ncsmsl  Dumber
af  a  BMCB  wooM  hara  been  400  ;  but  AOO,  AOO,
■id  900  are  aietttioDed  aathe  number  of  men  in  a
xn  oi  diScRnt  occvion*  (Pint  Pefap.  16  ;  Xen.
Mdba.  iT.  £.  f  II,  12,  tL  4.  S  12  ;  Schol.  od
Tlae.  >.  S6  ;  Died.  zr.  32,  bi  ;  MUQer,  Dorian,
iiLia.  12,  notet).  Thai  Aeae  Taiiatiora  aroae
frna  miatinu  in  the  nnmbei  of  Spartan
fBaae  m  BrKb  and  On' ' " '


EXEROTUS.  Wt

Plo&mr),  il  an  asntmption  which  leerea  out  of
light  the  propratioD  of  dtiaeDi  called  ont,  and  the
nombiff  of  Perioed  in  the  army.  (Of  the  292
heavy-armed  loldien  who  nurendered  at  Sphac-
teria,  120  were  Spailani,  Thnc  it.  39.  At  the
battle  of  PUtaene,  one  half  of  the  heary.armed
■oldien  of  the  Lacedaemoiiiaiii  were  Sparlant.}
When  in  the  Geld,  each  mora  of  inbntcy  wai  at-
tended bjB  monirf caralry, coniiiting  at  the  mutt
of  100  men,  and  commanded  by  an  hipparmoet
{hm^imi'ris,  Xen.  Hd)en.  it.  4.  %  10,  6.  %  12),
Plntnrch  (Zjc  23)  mcntioni  ■qnadnmi  (ofiAo^)
of  lifly,  which  may  pouibly  be  ihe  some  diviiioni.
It  ii  not  eaaj,  howerer,  to  nee  in  what  manner  the
caTalry  could  have  been  thus  apportioned,  or  how
each  mora  of  caTalir  conld  have  "  belonged  to  a
mora  of  in&ntiy  without  being  in  cioae  connection
with  it"  (ai  Mtlller  laye).  The  cavalry  leemi
merely  to  haye  been  empioyed  to  pxitect  the  lUnlca,
and  bnt  lilllo  regard  icai  paid  lo  it.  The  corps  of
BOO  imrtit  (Herod.  tUL  124)  fiirmed  a  sort  of
body-gnard  for  the  king,  and  coniined  of  Ihe
flower  of  the  young  goldien.  Though  called
*"  incBien,  titey  fought  ini  foot.  (Xen.  Rtp.  Lae.  rt.


8  3.)


it  of  the  battle  of  Han-


contouiing  lonr  '
pentecDityea,  and  each  peotecotlyi  four  anomotiac,  '
with  thirty-two  men  in  each  j  10  that  the  Whoa
here  is  a  body  of  512  men,  and  ia  commanded  by
a  polemareh.  It  ia  clear,  therefore,  that  the  Incbne
of  Thnndidef,  in  ihia  inalanc&  anawcra  to  the  ^
mora  of  Xenophiin.  Aa  on  tfaii  occanoD,  iho  '
penlecottya  enntuned  four  inatead  of  two  eno-
motiae, and  Oi  four  penteeoatyea  were  thrown  toge-
ther mto  one  diviaion,  Thncydidei  may  hare  been
led  to  call  thia  diviaion  a  lochm,  oa  being  next
aboTO  the  penteeostya,  though  it  waa,  in  fact,  a
mora  commanded  by  a  pulemarch  (Thirlwatl,  Lo.
p.  H6  ;  comp.  Araold  on  Thuc.  t.  G8),  Aristotle
appeara  to  uae  the  teimi  lochui  and  mora  india-
crirrmiHlely  (A«dmr  toaIt.  Ft.  6  and  6  ;  Photiua
s.  o.  \6xoi).  The  loggeation  of  Arnold  (f.  c)  that
one  of  the  aercn  lochi  apoken  of  consiated  of  the
Braaideau  Boldien  and  Neodamodeo,  who  would
not  be  taken  account  of  in  the  ordinary  diviajona
of  the  Spartan  lorcei,  it  not  unlikely,  and  would
explain  the  diacrepancy  between  the  nnmbLT  of
lodii  (or  morae)  here,  and  tbe  ordinaiy  number  of
ail  morae  ;  but  eTen  independently  of  it,  no  diffi-
culty need  be  fcit  with  reapect  to  that  particular
point,  as  the  whole  arrangement  of  the  tnopa  on
that  occasion  was  a  departure  from  the  ordmarjT
divinona.  It  waa  not  nniTeraally  the  case  that  an
army  was  mode  up  of  aix  moiae  and  twenQ'-fbat
ordinazy  lochi,  Oa  oub  ocoiaion,  we  hear  of
twelve  lochi  (Xen.  HMm.  vil  4,  §  20,  corap.
i  27),  each  of  about  100  men.  The  Ncodomodea
verc  not  uanolly  incoiponited  in  the  morae  (Xen,
fleant  iv.  3,  %  IB),

It  aeema  a  probable  c^inion  that  the  number  of
mocae  m  the  Spartan  miJilary  force  had  rcftrcneo
to  the  diatricta  into  which  Idconia  wne  divldcd.
These,  including  Spirta  and  the  districts  imme-
diately around  it,  were  tii  iu  number,  Perhapa,
aa  Thitlwalt  auggtals,  the  diviijon  of  tbe  oiiny
may  have  been  founded  on  the  fiction  that  one
mora  waa  assigned  for  the  protection  of  each
district.  The  some  writer  alao  anggcats  a  wry
probable  ciplanaUon  of the  Mx'! ILrftrfiTii


which  Hendotiu  (ii.  £3)  qxaki  o^  and  oCiriiich


each  mara  eociiated  of  Soia  lochi^  the  foot  lochi  of
the  mom  belonging  to  llie  diitnct  of  Sparta  maj
hare  been  diatcibuted  on  tha  ums  prisdjils  among
ths  fsur  ini^uu,  Limnae,  Cfootnnt,  Meioa,  and
Pilana,  of  which  Sparta  mu  compoud.*
A  Spartan  aimy,  divided  u  aboTe  i
wu  drawn  up  in  the  denae  airaj  of  the  pin
the  depth  of  which  depended  upon  anmmiU
An  imiurla  lometiniea  made  but  a  lingle  file,
lometimn  wh  diawa  op  in  three  or  >ii  £la  (fi^7>,
Xen.  Sup.  Zoo.  iL  g  4 ;  MlUler,  iii.  1 2.  §.  S,  note  a).
At  the  lattle  of  Mantineia  the  phalanx  w«  eight
deep,  10  that  each  enomotia  made  foor  fika  (That
■».6B;«nip.Xen./^«a«.iiL2.  g  16, -0.2. 1  21.)
At  the  battle  of  Leactia  il  wai  twelve  deep.
(Xen,  HtUai.  vL  4.  %  13.)  The  enomoWrch  .tood
M  the  head  of  hii  file  (TpHrooTitnii),  or  at  the
head  of  the  right-hand  file,  if  the  enomotia  wai
bnhen  np  into  more  than  one.  The  lait  man  vai
oiled  oupirj^t.  It  wae  a  matter  of  great  import-
ance that  he,  like  the  enomotarch,  ihoold  be  a  man
ef  itrength  and  ikill,  ai  in  certain  erolutiou  he
would  hare  to  lead  the  moremenl*.  (Xen.  Cj/rop,
iii.  3.  §  41,  &c)  The  commaiider-in-chief;  who
waininally  the  king  (after  the  aflairof  Demaiatui
and  Cleomeaei  it  wai  the  practice  not  to  lend  oat
both  king!  together,  Herod,  t.  7G  ;  but  coaip.
tL  73},  had  hi>  atation  Hmetimes  in  the  centre  (at
at  Maulineia,  Thue.  y.  72),  more  commonly  (at  at
Lcuctra)  on  the  right  wing.  The  deployment!  by
which  the  arrangementa  of  the  phalanx  wen  altered
took  place  under  the  direction  of  the  enomotarch.
When  the  troopa  were  drawn  np  in  a  line  in  the
ordinary  hattle  »n»y,  they  were  aaid  to  be  iii
^d^ayyot^  Snppoaing  on  enomotia  to  coniiit  of
twenty-fiire  men,  induding  ita  leader,  and  to  be
drawn  up  eight  deep,  the  front  line  of  the  army
would  conaiat  of  288.  In  an  ordinary  march  the
army  adTanced  '■)  nifMif  (or  Kari  xipas,  Xen.
I/die*.  TJL  *.  I  23),  the  fint  enomotia  of  the
right  win^  filing  ofi^  and  the  reit  in  auccetajon
following  It ;  lo  that  if  the  eoomotia  wai  drawn
up  in  three  or  two  Glea,  the  whole  army  would
march  in  tfam  or  two  file*.  The  moat  uaual  ar-
rangement wat  in  two  filea.  (Xen.  Hdlen.  iii.  4,
S  22,  iii.  1.  fi  23,  Poljiam.  ii.  1.  §  10.)  If  an
army  in  manjiing  order  had  lo  form  in  phalazix,
the  moTement  began  with  the  hindmoat  enomotia  of
the  column,  which  placed  ilaelf  on  the  left  of  {'ofi'
Itnriliu)  and  on  a  line  with  (i '
enomotia  before  it.  Thoe  twi
the  tame  eTolation  with  letpect  to  the  lait  bui
two,  and  (0  on,  till  all  were  in  a  line  with  thi


*  MUllcr  {.DoriaHt,  book  iiL  c  3.  i  7)  talkg  of
«  irdAis  dia^nct  from  theie  ita^h.  But  the  latter
were  certainly  not  mere  auburba,  but  component
parte  of  gparta  itaelf  (camp,  Paul.  iiL  16.  g  9).
Haaae  (I.  c)  apeaka  of  fire  dtriaiona  of  the  city  bc-
aidea  Pilana,  ao  that  the  lii  moroe  or  lochi  in  the
■enaa  of  Thucydidei  correaponded  to  theae  aix
dlTiaiona.  For  tbii  arrangement,  there  aeemi  no
Mlhority,  except  the  Malement  of  the  Kholiaat  on
Ariitoph.  (Lf.  4£3),  that  there  were  lii  lochi  at
Sparta,  five  of  which  he  natnee,  one  of  the  namet
bemg  coiTccted  eonjectumlly  by  Mliller  to  Mi»w-
ttnjT.  But  there  aeema  here  little  more  than  a  con-
luaed  Trauofi  oT^  diriuou  into  lii  moiae.


EXERCITU9.
firat  momotia,  which  now,  -with  tl
b-chief  at  iti  head,  occi^ied  the  extremis  of  tba
right  wing.  Thia  evolutHHi  waa  called  raforfirjii
(Xen.  Btp.  Lac  iL  g  6),  a  name  alio  given  to  the
revecae  movement,  when  a  phalanx  had  to  &11  rnto
marching  order,  and  W  nibonlinata  movementa  of
the  aame  kind  for  changing  the  depth  of  the
phalanx.  In  the  latter  the  eToIutiona  were  con-
ducted on  mnch  the  aauM  principle.  Thua,  if  the
depth  of  the  phalanx  wa>  to  be  diminiahed  by  hsl^
the  hinder  portion  of  each  eoomoty  marched  foi^
waida  and  placed  itulf  on  the  left  of  the  half  in
ftont  of  it.  Sunilorly,  if  the  depth  had  to  be  in-
creaaed,  the  teft-haod  portion  of  each  enomotia
faced  about  Mwarda  the  ri^  took  np  ita  atation  in
the  TCBT,  and  then,  being  to  the  left  again,  aa-
aumed  their  proper  poaition.  (Xen.  Btp.  Lot.  xi.
%  8.)  The  being  to  the  right  waa  alwaya  tba
oaage,  becauae  if  the  evolution  were  performed  id
the  &ce  of  an  enemy,  the  ihielded  aide  could  be
preasnted  toward)  him.  Modlficalioni  of  thii
evolution,  conducted  on  tha  nme  principle,  were
employed  if  the  depth  bad  to  be  inaeaaed  or
diminiahed  in  any  other  proportion  (oomp.  Xen.
Andi.  It.  S.  $28,  iv.  e.  I  6,  Cyop-  >>■  3.  §21}.
It  il  very  likely  that  at  thoae  pointa  of  the  filea
where  in  auch  evolutiona  they  would  have  to
lepatata,  there  were  placed  men  aoitable  fin'  taking
their  atation  in  the  front  rank,  when  it  waa  al-
wayi  an  object  to  get  the  beat  men.  Theae  tnmid
anawer  to  the  ttniiofx'"  and  mia^tafx"^  of
Xenophon.  (Curop.  ii.  1 ;  comp.  A^ppordL  ii.  S  6,
iv.  g  S.)  If  an  enemy  appeared  in  the  rrsr,  it  vtM
not  enough  that  the  aoldicia  ibould  bee  about  to-
watda  the  enemy.  The  Spartan  tactica  required
that  the  aloulcat  aoldier  ibould  be  oppoaed  to  the
enemy.  Tbia  waa  accompliahed  by  the  mancEuvra
termed  titXjyiiij.  Of  thia  there  were  xbne  v>-
rie^ee :  1 .  Tit  jVowdoiun.  In  thii  the  leader  of
each  file  kept  hia  place,  only  taming  towardi  the
enemy.  The  man  behind  him  {trurrinii)  re-
treating and  again  taking  np  hii  atation  behind
him,  and  h  on.  Id  thii  way  the  army  retreued
from  the  enemy  by  a  diitance  equal  to  ita  depth.
2.  lie  LaeoBian  (die  one  naually  adopted  by  the
Hacedonian  phalanx  of  Philip  and  Alexander).
Thii  wBi  the  revecae  of  the  preceding,  the  rear
man  remaining  ilationary  and  the  othen  adnu^infr
auueaiively  one  before  ua  other.  In  Lhii  way  of
course  the  army  advanced  agumt  the  enemy  bj  a
diitance  equal  to  ita  depth.  3.  Tii  Crtlam.  In
thii  the  leader  and  rearman,  the  aeeond  and  lait
but  two,  and  lo  on,  changed  placea,  ao  that  the
whole  army  mnained  at  the  aame  diatancq  from
the  enemy.  Thia  apeciea  waa  alio  called  xopttst
(Haate  ad  Xen. Rip. Lac.  jLiS.;  MUller,  iii.  IX
i  S I  Aelianu^  Tact  26,  27,  S3.)  TheM  evidu.
tioni  would  of  oonne  leave  the  general  on  the  left
wing.  If  it  waa  deemed  expedioit  that  he  ahould
bo  upoa  the  ri^t,  it  wai  not  enoogh  that  he  ihonld
aimply  remove  fnm  the  left  U  the  right,  tbe  whid*
army  had  to  reverae  iti  poaition,  lo  that  what  waa
tha  left  wing  ihonld  betonte  the  right.  Thia  waa
effected  by  an  eieligmm^  termed  (at  leaM  by  the
later  tacticiaua),  ^(Arf>tli  narit  fv>l,  ai  cm-
trajted  with  the  i^Xifiiii  Kori  rrlxw-  If  tlie
army  changed  ita  fnmt  by  wheeUng  rmmd  throosli
a  half  cirde,  round  one  comer  ai  a  pivot,  ttm
movement  aeernt  lo  have  been  expreaatj  bj
rmptrtdtffftuf  or  hmrriffnut.  One  mora  avaJn-^
tion  lemainf  to  be  noticed. So^wa  an  mmbj


Adicblc


imuid  Unr  Icaila',  u  od  a  piTot,  K>  tDat  the  aimy
pcHBled  twaitj-km  columiu  to  the  eoemj,  eon-
linii^  of  t«D  fila  CBch,  uid  leianted  b;  a  coo-
niaSbU  taUrni  baa  cmch  otbsr.  The  depth  of
the  vlule  bodj  «U  then  leneKd,  and  IhcM  in-
lonb  filM  up  l^  the  ordinary  pangoge,  and  hj
the  difrrmt  kiehi  ndbs  up  Dearer  to  each  other
ia  caae  the  intemli  itiU  remained  too  gnat.  ]f
it  n  um.—iT-  fbr  the  general  lo  take  ht>  itUioD
to  the  right,  thie  wonld  be  effected,  u  m  other
rwn,  bj  aa  '£cAi7fi^f.  Similar  mancennee  took
jiaet  i£  the  enemj  ajipeand  on  the  left,  thongh,
m  ihii  waa  ths  ikielded  nde  of  the  eoldiers,  and
the  danger  wai  coUKqnentlf  Jen,  it  vaa  frequentlf
thought  KffideDt  to  keep  the  enony  in  check  1^
■cam  ef  the  aialr;  ud  ligbt  tmopa.  (Xen.  A^
Lac  XL  I  ID.)  One  point  that  a  geiierslhad  to  be
SB  hit  gnaid  againit  waa  tha  tendency  of  an  ainiy,
vhen  ^TBDcing  M  ^i^er/yta,  to  ihaei  off  towarda
tke  ligbl,  each  man  jieiiing  cloier  to  hu  right-hand
nnghboor  in  order  to  protect  hi>  uuliielded  tid^
B  thai  the  right  wing  fRqaentl;  got  beyond  the
og  of  Uw  CDem;.  (S(«  eapecially  the  ac-
>f  the  bailie  of  Mantincia,  Thimd.  t.  7!.)
it  comidenlirai  will  thew  that  the  analogy
[  brlween  the  eiolulioni  of  an  array  and
thoae  of  a  cbonti  ii  by  no  meani  fancifbL  One
kind  at  H^Xeniii  wu  eTCn  called  xop*"'-  ^he
fanportanee  attached  to  the  war  dancea  among  the
Spoitan  u  a  meau  of  military  mining  wai  con-
etqaenlly  Tery  great. [Cbokub.]

Wben  an  army  waa  led  to  attack  a  height,  it
waa  anally  diawn  np  in  what  were  termed  f^x"
i^fcii,  a  lam  which  merely  impliea  that  tlie  lochi
lad  gieala  dnith  than  ueadtb  (irnpi^iKi  fi)v
Xryrrmi  tar  tinut  t  tf  ri  fiqioi  Ixf  nKtiar  Toti
f^ttn,  tftwn  (i  ft  b  rb  fiiBot  rev  /t^novi,  Aelian.
Tan.  c  29).  The  breadth  of  the  lochi  would,  of
came^  nry  actording  to  drcmnitancei.  They
■ac  drawn  up  with  coonderable  interroti  between
thcBL  Id  llua  way  the  amy  ptewnled  a  coi
^im\\tr>  front  to  the  enemy,  and  waa  lew  liable
be  thrown  into  cmfiiaioD  than  if  drawn  np  in  do
phabni,  while  at  the  lame  time  the  inlerrala  be-
twe^  tlM  lochi  were  not  left  >o  gnat  that  the
toarj  could  aafely  pna*  in  between  them.  (Xen.
JmA.  ir.  2.  i  11,  IS,  S.  e  10—19,  T.  4.  8  22,
C^nf.  iiL  2.  S  6,  Anab.  n.  3.  g  17  ;  Polyaen.
Slr^  T.  1 6.  fi  L)  There  ia  no  grtamd  for  affinning
ikat  a  A^XM  Ipfit  wai  drawn  np  in  two  Glea,  or
erea  tue,  m  Sun  (Lta^  Xdl)  aaja  Sach  on  ar-
oamenBa  wonld  ba  perfectly  meleaa  ibr  attack.
ThiB  iyilem  of  aitaDnmatli,  which  formed  mu
iflirniiiiMtiwr  to  the  Soman  tactic*,  waa  not,  hoi
cnr,  caiployed,  except  in  the  particnlar  caae  ma


g  Oredu  in  the  AnabiBii,  the  airange-
Bmt  m  a  hollow  iqiian  vaa  adopted,  the  tioopa
'bang  K  placed  that  by  umply  fitcing  aboat  tliey
pnnled  a  front  bt  battle  on  wbichever  nde  it  waa
■fcenary.  The  tmn  wAalmw  waa  applied  to  an
■By  an  anangtd,  whether  aqsan  or  oblong.
Atknaid*  the  lerm  vAolawr  waa  leitrict  '  '
tke  iqBare,  the  obteng  being  ailed  w}Jr»uir.

Thoagk  at  fint  ^ht  tbe  arrongeount  and  ma-
BMiTea  of  a  IjKedaeownian  army  aeem  exceed-
sq^ly  ■— p*f,  tlwf  **■■  i"  nali^  qnile  the


BXERcrrtJS.  4SS

r«Tcr>e,  owing  to  the  carefully  giadoatcd  lyitem
of  luboidinslion  which  prevailed  {irx'^i"'  Tof  toi

VX't'^""  »'"'■  Thut  T.  66),  The  comnumd*  of
the  general  were  itmed  in  tbe  £rat  place  to  the
ircha,  by  theie  to  tlie  locba^  by  thcie
to  tha  pentecoeteree,  by  the  latter  to  the
enomotarcha,  and  by  the«  laat  to  their  reipectiTa
dinaiona.  From  the  orderly  manner  in  which  thii
waa  done,  commands  were  tnnimitted  with  great
lidity:  erary  aoldier,  in  &ct,  regulating  tbe
Tementi  of  tlie  man  behind  him,  arety  two
h^ng  connected  together  aa  rptrrwrwinjs and

In  later  timea  the  king  woe  unuilly  accompanied
-  two  ephora,  aa  controllen  and  adriaen.  Theae,
ith  tha  polemarcba,  the  fonr  Pytbii,  three  peen
(Ifuw(),  who  had  to  prD*ide  ior  tbe  necenities  of
the  long  in  war,  the  Uphyn^laa  and  aome  other
officero,  conatituted  what  waa  called  the  damoBa
of  the  king.  (XeiL  fliip.  £ae.  liii.  §  I,  7,  XT.
§  U,  Haaoa.  U.  6.  §  8,  tL  *.  g  U  ;  Pint  Lm.
22.)  The  polemarcba  i^  had  aome  aort  of  amte
r  ataff  with  them,  called  fftiii^ofa  (PluL  Pdi^
7  i  Xen.  Helltit.  <ri.  1.  §  H).  With  the  eicep-
ion  of  the  enomotarcbe,  the  luperior  officen  and
thoae  immediately  about  them,  ore  not  to  be  reck-
oned with  the  diiiaion  which  tfiey  led.  They  atood
diatincl,  forming  what  was  colled  tbe  iytiiia.

The  Spartan  and  Perioecian  hoplitea  were  ac-
companied in  the  field  by  betoto,  partly  in  tbe
c&[Hcity  of  altendonta,  partly  to  aerre  aa  light-
armed  troops. The  number  attached  to  an  army
waa probably  not  uniform. At  Plataeoe  each
Spartan  waa  accompanied  by  leTen  helota  ]  but
that  waa  probably  an  eitiaordinary  ate. One
helot  in  paniculsr  of  thoae  attached  to  each  Spartan
I  called  bu^pirni;  end  performed  the  func-
la  of  an  armourer  or  thieldbearer  (Euatatb.  ad
rays.  Par.  633). Xenophon {Hellen.  ii. 5.
I,  B.  g  39)  calls  them  JiaoTurrBi.  (Canp.  Herod.
Ill  ;  MUiler,  Oor.  iii  3. | 2.) In eitra-
ordinary  caiea,  helots  asred  as  hoplitea,  and  in
that  case  it  wu  uanal  to  gire  them  their  liher^
(Thncyd.  TO.  18,  ix.  80,  t.  Si). Diatinct  corpa
were,  sometimea,  compoaed  entirely  of  these  Neo-
damodea. A  aeparate  troop  in  the  Lacedaemonian


In  battle,  they  occupied  the  extreme  left  of  the  Ime.
On  a  march,  thmr  formed  the  Tongvard,  and  were
uaoallj  employed  on  the  moat  dongerona  kinda  of
aerrice.  (Thnc.  t.  67,  with  Arnolds  note  ;  Xen.
Opvp.  iv.  2.  S  1  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  g  29,  note  13,
infeti  firom  thia  paaaage  that  they  were  esrelry,
an  inference  which  is  certainly  not  neceaaary,  and
ia  contTBdictcd  by  MBUer,  Monso,  Haoae,  Thirl-
wall,  Arnold,  &c)

The  arms  of  tbe  phalanx  eoniiited  of  the  long
apeu  and  a  short  awocd  ((uikii).  Tha  chief  part
of  the  defenslre  armour  waa  the  hirge  braiea
ahield,  which  coroed  the  body  from  the  shoulder
to  the  knee  (Tyrtaena,  b.  ii.  S3},  auapended,  oa  in
ancient  timea,  bj  a  thong  round  the  neck,  and
managed  by  a  aimple  handle  or  ring  {ripni(J.
The  improved  Carian  handle  (ix^'^)  waa  not  in-
troduced till  the  time  of  aeomenea  III.  BeaidM
thia,  they  had  the  ordinary  armour  of  the  hoplila
[AhmaJ.  The  heavy-armed  soldieri  won  k
acariet  nniform  (Xen.  Sep.  Lae,  il  g  3,  Ago.  iL
7), The  Spartan  cauampmcali  wers  cn^u;

■iis ^  --•  •  O"


jae  BXERaTua

Onlj  t)iB  bcBvy-Bimcd  wen  ilationad  wilhin  it,
the  cavalry  being  plued  10  look  out,  and  tba  lulota
being  kept  >■  mocb  4g  pouible  ouUide.  Ai
uioiLer  precaDtion  agftinit  tfae  latter,  erary  nldia
wu  obliged  alwaji  to  omj  bii  ipew  abont  with
liim. (XeD.  S^.  Lm.  lil) Thoagh  itiicC  diici-

Ce  was,  of  conns,  kept  np  ia  the  camp,  it  mu
rigDTDiu  than  in  the  dt;  itielf  (PluL  lAfn.  32,
comp^  Hend.  ni  308).  Prepaialory  to  a  battle
the  SfBrtan  uldier  dreued  hii  faair  and  crawued
himaelf  ai  othen  mmld  do  for  a  fcatt  The  tignal
tor  attack  in  ancient  limBs  wai  given  by  priettt  of
Am  (imp^Jfiiii),  who  thieir  lighted  torchet  inln
tbe  interval  between  tlw  two  onnics  (ScheL  ad
Eurlp.  Pjkwt.  11B6).  Aftemidi  it  ma  given
not  by  the  tnunpet,  hnl  by  the  mouc  of  flutea,
and  Mmetimea  w>  of  tl»  Ijre  and  dthars,  to
vhich  the  men  laag  the  battle  iODg  (roiit  i/jga-
rhpun).(Pnat.uH7.iB;Plu.t.La.)  The  object
of  tbe  moiic  mt  not  ao  mnci  to  uupirit  the  men,
aa  limplj  to  ngulate  the  maicli  of  the  phalanx
(Thuc.  1.  70).  Thii  ibjrtfamicaJ  regularity  of
moToment  waa  a  pomt  to  vrhich  tbe  Spartans  at-
tached fntt  impcolance.  A  aocrifica  na  ofFersd
to  the  Mowa  before  n  bottle,  aa  olao  to  Em  (Pint.
AruHd.  17).  To  prevent  the  rauka  being  broken
tho  aotdien  Vtfe  fbrbiddot  to  atop  in  order  to
atrip  t,  aloin  enemy  while  the  fight  laaled,  ni  to
pnnue  a  coated  enemy.  The  younger  hoplitea  or
the  cavalry  or  light«imed  tnopt  were  deapatched
fee  thii  pnipoM  (Xen.//iaaii.  iv.  4.  g  10,  v.  14.
§16).  All  the  hooty  tnllected  bad  to  be  handed
over  to  the  li^ynpolai  and  apluii%  bj  whom

The  lieid  infleiibility  of  the  Sfautan  tactica
tendered  utem  indupoaed  to  the  attack  of  fntified
plactt.  At  tbe  battle  of  Phtoue,  they  even  ai-
ligDed  to  the  Athniaiia  the  taak  of  atorming  the
p£indc  formed  by  the  yifi^  of  the  Pcniana.

In  Atheoi^  the  military  ayitem  woa  in  tta  lead-
ing principle!  the  aome  ti  among  the  Spartani,
though  differing  in  detul,  and  carried  out  with  Icn
exactnen ; maimuch aa when  Alhena bees
powerful,  greater  allenlion  waa  paid  to  the  na'
Of  the  tJnua  before  Solon,  we  have  bnt  littk
fbrroation. We  leam  that  there were twelve
phmtciao,  and  in  each  of  theae  four  nanoariae,
each  of  which  wu  boond  to  fucniah  two  horaenwn
and  tms  abip. Of  the  four  claasea  into  which  tbe
eitiiena  were  airanged  by  the  conititntion  of  Solon,
the  citixena  of  the  Brn  and  aecond  aerred  as
valry,  or  ai  conunondera  of  the  inbntiy  (atill
need  not  bo  aaannied  that  tbe  fnrtZi  never  sen
oa  heavy-annod  inbntry),  thoae  rf  the  third  daaa

(f<B7Erm)  formed  the  heai '  '-'--~- "*

Tbetea  a«Ted  either  aa  lig

oron board  the  ahipft The  mnagcDenJpriiKiplet

remiuncd  when  the  conatitut'

by  Cleialhenea. The  cavaliy

bo  Gompulioly  on  the  wealtUer  chua  (Xen.  Oaooa.

IL  6  ;  Lynug.ZKks-.  %  139). All  ciliiena  qoali-

fied  to  aervD  utber  aa  hortonen,  or  m  the  Fudu  of

tlie  heavy-aimed  in&ntiy,  wen  enrolled

ICiTALoam}. The  caae  of  Thetea  lerving  aa

beavy-armed  aoldien  ii  ^ken  of  a*  an  ercepdon

to  the  general  mle  ;  and  even '

caae,  they  were  not  enrolled

(Thoeyd.  vL  43.) Every  oitixen  waa  liable  to

aervire  from  hit  eighteenth  to  hia  aii^eth  year.


EXERCITUa

yfttiAtimiiar,  and  received  a  abield  and  apear  in  a
putdic  Bsaembly  of  the  people,  binding  themaelvi  a
by  eath  to  perform  rightly  tbe  dutiee  of  a  dtiaen
and  a  aoldier  (Ariitat.  ap.  Hatpoer.  p  241  ;  Her-
mann, Ic  ^  123).  During  the  fint  two  yean,
they  were  oniy  liable  to  aervioe  in  Attica  iiwll;
chieSy  aa  gairiaoa  aoidiera  in  the  diSetmt  Ibrtnaaea
in  the  conntiy.  Duting  thit  period,  they  were
called  Trpbrohoi,  (Harpocr,  i,  e,  t^itoXoi  ;
Pirilux,  viii.  lOG  ;  Lycorg.  Lnoer.  |  78.)  Aecord-
uig  to  aome  anthvilies,  thie  icrvica  vnia  alao  called
m-ficn-tlB  iw  Toa  fiiptvi  (Wacbamnlli,  L  c  vel.  L
9  S6,  note  4S).  The  leviea  were  made  nndet  (ho
direction  of  the  genetoli  [Stutmi].  The
■oldiera  were  aelected  either  according  to  age,  aa
among  (he  Sfartaai  (AiiatoL  up.  Kaipoer.  (.e.
BTpoTiia  and  Phot  t  o.  mpurta :  trai  ^Auttar

iwuvifiav  ^4xpt  rhor  Sfi  trrptrrvvtcr^  ;  the
archoTia  being,  of  conne,  thoae  in  whoae  year  of
office  th«  had  entered  the  military  aervice),  when
the  eipeditiona  were  ca]led  ffotoi  ir  ToTt  iwtnri.
fan,  oc  elae  according  to  a  oartain  ntatioa  (Arach.
P.L.f.MO,Tii  iK  SuJtBXV'  '£<»»().  Tfae  aer-
vicea  of  thoae  below  or  above  the  ordinary  mil  itaty
age,  were  only  called  for  on  emergenciea,  or  for
gneurding  the  walla.  (Cranp  Thnci.  105,  iL  13.)
idembot  of  the  aenate  daring  the  period  of  tfaeir
office,  bimera  of  the  revenae,  chotenlaa  at  the
Dionyiia  during  the  featival ;  in  later  timea,tiaden
by  aea  alao,  were  exempted  frcm  nililary  Mrrice.
(Lycur^  Zeair.  g]64;  Demoitb.  A^aaar.  p^  1 353,
Mtid.  p.  £16  1  Ariitoph.  ^wlaa.  1019,  with  the
SchoL)  Any  one  boond  to  aerve  who  attempted
to  avoid  doing  a(\  waa  liable  to  a  aeDtence  of
irtiiia.  The  reaident  aliens  commonly  lerved  aa
hfSTT-armed  aoldien.  emecially  lis'  the  pmpoae  of
■wan  prohibiK^  hvm
ing  as  cav>b7  (Thnc  iL  13,SI,iv.  90;  Xen.
da  VetL  iL  g  £,  HipparA.  ix.  g  6).  Slavea  were
only  employed  aa  aoidiera  in  caaea  of  gnat  neces-
aity,  oa  at  Maiathon  (according  to  Pans.  L  33.
g  3S),  and  ArffinuBO  (Xen.  HMm.i.  6.  £  17).

Of  the  delaila  of  the  Athenian  military  rnani-
aation,  we  have  no  diitiDct  accoimta  oa  we  have
of  thoae  of  Sparta.  The  heavy-armed  troopa,  aa
waa  the  muveraal  pmcUea  in  Qreeee,  fought  in
phalanx  order. They  were  arranged  in  bodlea  in


aeparste  body  in  tfae  anny,  alao  eaDed  a  tribe,  and
these  bodies  stood  in  aome  preomoerted  otdpr
(Herod.  vL  111 ;  Pint.  Arvi.  h  ;  Thoc  vl  98  j
Xta-HiOm.  iv.  %  g  1 S,  with  Schndder'a  notes).
It  aeema  ^t  the  name  of  one  division  waa  rdfii^
and  of  another  kSxoi,  but  in  what  relatioa*  these
alood  to  the  $iA4,  and  to  each  other,  we  do  not
leam,  imleaa  Xenophon'a  eijoeasiou  (Qvn).  ii.  1.
§  4)  may  be  looked  upon  at  inditating  that  the
Td{if  cootained  fear  loehi,  and  conaiated  of  ono
hundred  men.  (Camp.  Xeo.  Jtfaai.  iiL  4.  g  1  j
Pollux,  viiL  g  114  I  Ijyiiaa  pro  Hantilheo,  g  16,
ftc)  Every  hoplite  woa  accompanied  by  an  at-
tendant ((ntp^i,  Thuc  iii.  1 7\  to  lake  chaqje  of
hia  bes^ogc,  and  cairy  hia  shield  on  a  manh.
Each  horaeman  also  had  a  servant,  called'  fwwe.
KifuH,  to  attend  to  hit  hme  (Thnc  vii.  71,  7B  i
Xen.S'e2fai.iL4).

It  would  appear,  that  before  the  time  of  Solon
tbe  cavalry  whicb  the  Atheniant  could  mitater
VM  tutdsr  100. In  the  tino  of  Cimoa  it  wat


EXERCITU9.
300,  andnoD  sfter,  GOO  {Andoc  da /^IM,  p.  92  ;
ScboL  AiiitoiilL  £^.  577,  624}  ;  at  (he  b^iii-
Dipf  of  llie  PdopoDiieuui  war,  1 SOO,  of  wbom
3U0  Hein  to  ban  been  hind  Scjrthian  bownun
(Tkuc  iL  IS,  T.  84,  ti.  B*).  Beiid«i  the  light-
anud  aoldi^  dnwn  from  the  lanki  of  the
poonr  ciiixcni,  thf  nt  m>  it  Alheu  a  r^finient
«f  Tbndin  iUtc*,  armed  with  bowl.  The
mober  of  tbeM  mcreaaed  from  300,  who  wen
■wcbMdd  after  the  battle  of  Salamia,  to  1000  oi
1200  (Aetchin.  difiU.  Ltg.  p.  336,  336  ;  BiKlch,
PiUH£aM.«^^U.  book  U.  ell).  These,  bow-
•la,  wen  nnoall^  cmplojed  ai  a  Hit  of  pdice
ar  atj  gnud.  Beudei  tboe,  howeTst,  the  AUie-
■iapa  had  a  tniap  of  bowmen  of  ihair  own  citiieni,
■mamtiiig,  at  the  bedDning  of  the  Peloponnevan
wwr,lo  1600  (Tliae.  il  13;  BOcUi,  t«.  ii.  c21).
For  tbo  command  of  the  anny,  then  wen
chaacn  erer;  year  ten  geneiali  [Stkafioi],  and
Kb  taiianha  [Taxurchi],  and  for  the  caiali?,
two  hi^ardu  (Tinnvx")  '"^  t^  phjlarchi  {^i-
A^PXx)-  Reapecting  tha  mUitaiy  WDCtiDDH  of  the
ipX'"  vo\iiafxos,  see  the  article  ArcBoN.  The
uniibet  cf  itrMe^  lent  vitb  an  annj  va«  nr
miftni. Three  wu  ■  conuDon  niunber. Somi


EXERClTUa


iet


.by  0


t  (a.


1  tiia


SicOiaD  expedition).  (Xen.  Biffardi.
Demtlu/>U.L  g2G;  PoUui,iiiL  g  87
Baon,  it  Cam.  AA.  pp.  313— 31£.)

The  practice  of  facing  the  troopi  when  upon
■erriee  wai  £nt  intniduced  hj  Pondei  (Ulfnan.
■d  ZXanualh.  rtfi  avrri^.  p.  60,  a).  The  paj  con-
aaried  {lartlj  of  wagei  ()iiffMf>,  partly  (d  proti-
aiooa,  or,  nun  commonly,  ptDviaioo-mDnajr  ("rq-
fitiar). The  oidiuaiy  pirMt  of  a  boplite  vai

Ivo  aboil  a  day. The  arrnf4awr -' '-

two  obob  noTE.  Hmee,  the  life  of
oiled,  pcoveibially,  rtTpvC^Am  ^loi  (EoitatL  ad
Od.  p.  1405,  ad  JL  f.9Sl).  Higher  pay,  boi
cm,  wai  BomelinKa  given,  ai  al  the  tiege  oC  Pd
4afm  the  uldien  received  two  drachnae  apiece,
one  la-  tbemaelTea,  the  other  for  their  oUendanla.
Thii,  doabtlcu^  inclnded  the  proTiiion-money
(Thoc  iiL  17).  Officen  RcciTed  twice  aa  much  ;
boneswn,  three  timci ;  generali,  foiu  time*  ai
Bn>ck(eoDp.Xen.J<wi.TC.G.  91,3.  §9).  Tb.
honeawn  receiTed  pay  btod  is  time  of  peace,  that
tkcj  might  alwayi  be  in  rodineo,  and  bUd  a  Hun
•r  WBOKj  in  their  outfit  (■aribTao'ii,  Xen.  Hip-
^^vL  L  I  19  i  K.  F.  Hermann,  g  152,  note  18}.
Tbej  wen  reriewed  &om  time  to  time  by  the
->  (Xen.  Hippank.  iiL  g  9.  Omm.  ii.  15}.
n  and  hones

S  peace The  honea  of  the  hcaTj-armed

^radij  wen  prole<rtad  by  defeuiire  annour.

Aa  Rgardi  tbe  military  Mrength  of  the  Atbe-
BH^  we  find  10,000  heavy^anned  toldien  at
Ifa"'^— ,  8,000  hcAvy  armed,  and  aa  many  light
■nned  at  Plataeae  ;  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
Pckpnnviao  war  there  were  13,000
1^7  tat  fcnign  aerrice,  and  16,000  coniisting  of
ihiar  beyond  the  timiti  of  the  ordinary  mililsiy
age  aid  of  tbe  metoeci,  fiir  garrison  serrice.

It  waa  the  naRiral  remit  of  the  nalHnal  chano-
la-  of  the  Atbeniani  and  their  dcmoaatical  con-
HitUB^  that  nuliui;  djsqpline  ww  mudi  leM


stril^ORt  aiRong  them  than  among  t?ie  Spartans
(XoAemil  tip  ol  ifiirtfat  fimi  tpfai,  Thne.
liL  14),  and  after  defeat  eapecially  it  waa  often
fooiid  extremely  difficall  to  maintain  it.  The
genanli  had  some  power  of  poniihing  military
oSencea  on  the  ipot,  but  for  the  gmter  number  of
inch  oSeucei  a  apeciea  of  court-martial  was  held,
consisting  of  penons  wbo  had  serred  in  the  army
to  which  the  offender  belonged,  and  presided  oref
by  the  Btialegi  (Lyaiaa,  ^de.  .ifc.  §5,6;  Plato,
Lug.  ji\.2.^  943  ;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Lc  %  146^
153  j  Heier  and  SchUmann,  dtr  AUMit  Pnxm,
pp.  133,  363— 3«6}.  Vsrioiu  rewarda  also  werfl
held  Dot  for  tlioae  who  especially  djrtjjignished
■  for  their  camsge  or  condnet,  in  tbe
shape  of  ehurieta,  statnea,  Ac  In  connectioD  with
these  the  xfyit  Waiifiat,  spoken  oia  tboie  who
had  &tlen  \a  wsr,  mniC  not  be  omitted.  Reqiect-
ing  the  prorision  made  for  those  who  were  dis-
abled in  war,  aee  the  article  Aduniti.

The  Peltaslae  (■nXiaarai),  ao  called  from  the
kind  of  shield  which  they  wore  [Pilta],  wen  a
kind  of  troops  of  which  ve  htar  very  Itl^e  bdbre
the  end  of  tbe  Peloponnestan  war.  The  Grit  time
''  nany  menlioo  of  them  il  in  Thne.  ir.  Ill,
they  are  qaJun  of  aa  being  in  die  army  <^
Biasidaa.  With  tha  more  fraqnent  emjdoyment
of  metcsnarr  troops  a  grealar  il^gne  of  atlentioB
was  bestowed  upon  the  pellaslaa ;  and  the  Ath»-
genenl  Ijibiciatcs  iiitn)dnced  some  important


the  mode  of  aiming  them,  co  .
bining  aa  bi  aa  poaaibla  the  peculiar  advanlagca  of
hsary  (irxliat)  and  Hj^  armed  (fi^Lol)  troopa.
Ue  mbstitnted  a  linen  ctsilet  for  ths  coat  of  mail
worn  by  the  ha;dites,  and  lessened  the  shield,  while
be  donblsd  the  length  of  tha  igtti  «nd  sword.  He
eren  took  the  pnina  to  intndnce  for  them  an  im-
proved soft  of  ahoe,  called  afta  him  'I^parlSis
(PoUm,  fit.  89).  This  equipment  was  very  com-
monly adopted  by  mercensiy  troops,  and  [ffoveS


moraof  Laee
body  of  pellaatae  under  the  command  oflpfiicretei
waa  an  exploit  that  beoune  very  &DKnia,  (Xen,
HtUai.iy.6.  §11.)  Thepettwt  s^le  ef  aiming
was  general  among  ths  Achaean*  until  Philo-
poemea  again  mtioduoed  heavy  armour.  (Pint.
PUlop.  9  i  Lir.  itiL  G3.)

When  the  use  of  mereeiiary  tnopa  became
gesefal,  Atheoiaii  dtiaens  seldom  served  except  at
vohinleen,  and  then  in  but  small  numbers.  Thns
we  find  10,000  mercenariea  aoit  to  Olynthns  with
only  40O  Athenians  (Dsmosth.  de  fiJt.  ttg.
p.  425).  Widi  15,000  mscenaiies  sent  against
Philip  to  Chaeroneia,  there  wen  SOOO  citiieiu  (De-
moath.  da  Cor.  p,  S06).  It  became  not  uncemman
also  for  those  boond  to  serve  m  the  cavalry  to
commute  thnc  aervicea  for  those  of  bonemen  htied
in  thoc  stead,  and  the  dutiea  of  the  lrsvr;^o^
were  ill  executed.  The  employment  of  mer-
cenaries also  led  in  other  respects  to  contidenUe
alterationa  in  the  military  syatem  (rf  Oreeoe.  War
came  to  be  atndied  aa  an  art,  and  Qreek  generals,
riling  above  the  old  aimpie  ndea  of  warni^  be-
came tacticians.  The  old  method  of  amniring
tha  troops,  a  method  still  retained  by  Agesdaua
at  the  battle  of  CoioDea,  was  to  draw  up  (he
Imposing  armiea  in  two  parallel  lines  of  greater
or  less  depth,  acoordii^  to  the  atrength  oi  the
forces,  the  engsgement  commencmg  nsually  very
,  nearly  at  the  sanw  meusnt  in  aU  parts  of  tke  line,

■■•  — • o-


UtEnt,


43B  xxERcrrua.

The  geniua  of  EpauuDDndu  intrDdaocd  ■  ramiJeta  |
rerolDtion  in  xoe  nulitaiy  ■jitini.  He  mi  the
first  who  adapted  the  method  of  charging  in  co-
lumn, concentntiiig  hii  attack  npoa  ooa  point  of
the  hoetile  line,  n  ai  to  throw  the  whole  into  con-
fuiioB  hj  breaking  through  it.  For  minnle  detail*
the  reader  ii  referred  to  the  accoiint  of  tlie  batUe
of  Mantineia  (Xen.  HeOm.  ni.  5.  §  33 ;  oaaf,  n.
i.  §  12).  It  aeem*  torn  the  deacriptiou  tbattha
troope  were  drawn  up  in  a  {brm  tomewhat  like

Philip,  lung  of  Macedaoia,  ii  nanetimei  ipoken
of  bf  Qreek  writen  a)  the  inTentai  of  the  pbalBni.
It  11  probable  enongb  that  be  ni  the  £nt  to
introduce  that  mode  of  orgBniutioD  into  the  army
of  Macedonia,  and  that  be  made  leveral  improie-
raenU  in  ile  ansa  and  airangeinent,  but  the  pha-
lanx wai  certunlf  not  uvom^  by  him.  The
Ipeaj  (ffd^ffffo  or  nlpiira),  with  which  the  eoldieii
of  the  MBcedonlaa  phalani  were  aimed,  wat  ordi-
narily it  feet  Inig ;  but  the  ordinary  length  wu
21  feet  (Pcdyb.  iviiL  13  ;  Aelian.  Tact.  U),  and
the  linei  wens  arranged  at  nich  diitincei  that  the
n  of  the  fifth  nnk  piojected  three  feet  beyond
le  fint,  ■>  that  erery  man  in  the  &oot  rank  waa
rotected  b;  Eye  apeart.  The  men  m  the  nnlu
iuther  back  realed  theii  ipean  on  the  ibaulden
ef  tboee  in  btaX  at  them,  indining  them  upvardi,
in  which  potitioo  they,  to  lome  extent  at  lout,
arreated  the  minitca  tint  might  be  hurled  by  Che
enemy.  Beaide*  the  apeac  they  carried  a  ihort
•word.  The  aldeld  wai  Ttry  large  and  coTered
nearly  the  whole  body,  ao  that  on  bTooiable
ground  an  impenetrable  front  waa  [veiented  to  the
enemy.  The  aoldier*  were  alio  defeudsd  by  hei-
neU,  coati  of  mail,  and  greavei ;  >o  that  any
thing  like  rapid  morament  waa  impoaiible.  When
in  denH  battle  array  (■Wsxrit  or  njn>^i),
three  feet  were  allowed  for  each  man,  and  in  thit
poiilion  their  ibieldi  touched  (mirairwuriiis,  Polyb.
I.  c  i  Aelian,  JiicL  c  11.  girei  ui  feet  for  each
man  in  the  ordinary  amogement,  three  feet  for
the  T^nHTii  or  done  battle  airay,  and  one  and  ~
half  feet  for  the  avraawia^t).  On  a  march  li
feet  were  allowed  for  each  man.  The  ordinary  depth
of  the  phalani  wai  liiteen,  though  drptha  of  eight
and  of  ihiity-two  ate  alio  mratloned.  (Polyb.  I  s.
eomp.iii.  19— 21.)  Each  file  of  uiteen  wai  called
X^Di.  It  ii  diffioilt  to  nj  what  Teliams  ii
placed  npon  the  mbdiTinoDi  mantiofwd  by  the
tactidina  Aelian,  &e.  at  connected  with  the  pha-
laDZ  of  Philip^  thon^  tbi^  may  have  bam  nnnl
In  later  timei.  According  to  uiem  eaek  higher
diviiioD  wai  the  doable  of  the  one  below  it  Two
locbi  made  a  dUocUa;  tiro  dUochiae  made  a  Tt-
r|>ap;([ii,  contiiting  of  uity-finir  men ;  two  te-
trarchiea  mode  a  Tdfii;  two  ti((«i  a  virritfiui  or
iine/ln,  to  which  were  attached  G  n  mpeinnmeiaticii,
A  herald,  an  eniign,  a  trumpeter,  a  lenant,  and  an
officer  to  bring  np  the  rear  (aiptcrit);  two  eyntag-
mata  formed  a  pcntacoaianhia,  two  of  which  made
a  x'^HVX^  oontaining  1034  men  j  two  chi-
liarchica  made  a  tJaoi,  and  two  tMi)  made  a  nha-

word,  the  nennal  nmnbet  of  which  would  tbere-
fere  be  t99C.  It  waa  commanded  by  a  potenareh
or  ctiategHi;  Emu  meh  bodiea  formed  the  larger

Sfaalanz,  the  normal  nnmbei  of  which  woutd  be
6,3H4.  When  drawn  up,  (he  two  middle  ieetioni
eoDitituted  what  waa  termed  the  i/i^aXii,  the
stheri  beios  nllad  «4p>ra  oc  wii^a  Tha  philanx


EXERCITDS.

ibldien  in  the  army  of  Alexander  amonnted  H
18,000,  and  were  dlTided  not  into  finr,  bat  inU
lii  diviiioni,  each  aamcd  after  a  Macedonian  pn-

Th^ie  bodice  areofteneccalledTctttuthan^dikffrY"
by  the  hiitoriani,  and  their  leaden  taiianhi  ee
(Iiategi.  The  phalani  of  Aniiochui  eoniiited  of
16,000  men,  and  wai  formed  into  ten  diriiioni
O^)  of  1600  each,  aimnged  M  Inndand  32
deep  (Appian,  Sfr.  82  j  Lit.  xxxrii.  40).

In  the  genenl  principle!  of  iti  airangeiaent  and
the  modca  of  alteriia  in  form,  the  Uacedooiin
phalani  reienibled  uie  I«c«daenuaian,  though
'  '  -  -  icticiani  do  not  alwaji  detmbe  ue
by  the  ome  technical  tomi  Bi  Xene-
phon.  The  Hacedooian  phalanx,  howero-,  altered
ili  form  with  gnat  diScnlqr,  If  an  attack  on  the
Sanki  or  rtar  wu  uprehended,  a  lepanta  fhnt

—  I ]  i„  that  direction,  if  poanble  befbtie  the

lent  of  the  fight.  Such  a  donUa  pha-
lanx, with  two  fronta  in  oppoeite  diiectidba,  wai
called  ^iKcTj^  iti^ataiai.  To  guard  agaioit
being  taken  in  fluk,  ^  line  waa  bent  toond,
fbnnmg  what  wai  called  the  trmiii-wiat  rdjit.
The  csTaliy  or  light  troopi  were  not  un&ei}aeat]y
employed  Mr  thii  pnrpoae,  or  to  ravtect  Ihe  rear
(oomp.  Anian,  Avit.  iL  9,  iiL  12  ;  Polyb.  xii.
21).  Reapecting  the  relatiTa  adnntagei  and  dii-
advantagei  of  the  Bfflnan  legion  and  the  phalanx,
then  ii  an  initinctiTe  paai^e  in  Polybiui  (iviiL
13,  and  conp.  liL  19,  Ac).  The  phalanx,  of
ceoiw,  became  all  but  uieleia,  if  iti  ranki  were
broken.  It  required,  therefore,  leTcl  and  open
grennd,  ao  chat  iti  opeiationa  were  natrictcd  to
yery  narrow  limita  ;  and  being  incapable  of  rapid
moiement,  it  became  almoit  helplesi  in  the  bee  of
an  actiye  enemy,  nntcea  accompanied  by  a  Ba£-
dent  number  of  cayalry  and  tight  troopa.

The  Itght^rmed  troopi  were  arranged  m  file*
(^X")  <ig'''  ^<<P-  Poor  h>chi  formed  a  atrrairit,
and  then  larger  diviiioni  were  nuxonyel;  fmned,
mth  being  the  double  of  the  oie  below  it ;  the
largeit  (c^led  Mrcrrfw),  omiiiting  of  8193  men.
The  (syaliy  (according  to  Aelianiii),  were  ai-
langed  in  an  utalagont  manner,  the  lowett  diyiiion
or  iqiiadrai  (IXip),  eontuning  64  men,  and  the
tuceewire  larger  diriiioni  bema  each  the  double
of  that  below  it ;  th*  higfaed  (Mronia)  ccataio-
ing409fi.

Both  pyip  and  Alexandfi  attached  gnat  im-
portance to  the  cayalry,  whiefa,  in  th^  anniei^
coniiited  partly  of  Hacedmiaai,  and  partlj  of
TliiiMliaiii  The  Macedonian  honomen  were  the
flower  of  the  young  noblea.  They  amonnted  to
about  1200  in  nuinber,  forming  eight  equadront,
and,  tmder  the  name  (roipoi,  formed  a  lOit  of
body-gnard  for  the  king.  The  TheMalian  caraky
coniiited  chiefly  of  the  £ita  of  the  wealthier  daia
of  the  Tbettaluni,  but  included  alio  a  nnmbcr  of
Grecian  youth  ftom  other  itate*.  Tture  wai  bIm
a  guard  of  fbot-ioldien  (iViaownrrof),  whom  wo
find  greatly  diitinguiibing  themaelyea  in  the  cam-
paigni  of  Alexander,  lley  aeem  to  be  identical
wiui  the  n^fraipoi,  of  iriiom  we  find  mention.
They  amounted  to  about  3OD0  moi,  arranged  in
i!x  battationi  {nifnt}.  There  wai  itao  a  trow
oiled  Argyraipidi,  from  the  ulyei  with  which
their  ^eldi  were  ornamented.  [AndTkABFiDKA.]
Tb«y  teem  to  baye  been  a  ipedei  of  peltaatae,
Alexander  alio  organiied  a  kind  of  Irom*  caQrd


SXBRCITUS.

tw«M  Miaby  nd  b]!iatr7,1)ciDftdc^D«d  to  fight
«■  hotetid  w  on  hM,  u  ciRimuauicet  nqoind.

It  ii  u  iba  tinM  of  Alanoder  the  Qnat,  that
«•  Ent  meat  with  utitlaiy  in  (ha  train  of  >
Ontoa  unf.  Hii  JWhAm  and  Mifiatta*  vera
ficqvHitlj  tn^ajei  witli  great  effect,  u,  for  in-
ttnce,  m  tba  fBoiga  of  the  JaxBrtet  (Airiuip  It.
4.  I  7).  After  the  isniion  of  A^  alM  ele-
pluiiti  began  to  ba  onpkiyad  in  couiBCtiaii  with
OrcnaanniBi.  (M Olla,  i>irnu,  book  iiL  &  12  ;
Wt^mth,giiffwiw*»  AUtrHumtliwnit,  boalt  Ti  ;
K.  F.  Hcnwni,  BriKi.  Slaafalttrtk.  g  3S,  30,
ISS;  Hmw  in  Eneh  and  Gnibs^  Eaegelop.
■M.  Fi^amm;  Il«enn1  R^tMau,  &c  Jnctnl
C9(v«,c.iiL;  BCiU'iiUttifbnwBvar^Mau,
t.  xa.  uii.}  [C.  P.  M.]

2,  HoMAH.  Id  the  inaoit  anicle  ire  ihall
ittempt  to  pnaant  a  liev  of  the  congtitatiDn  of  a
RoBBB  ariB  J  at  terenl  nmaifcahla  epochi,  and  to
point  out  m  what  Teipeet  the  luagaa  of  ana  ^a
diSnd  naiit  SBipicsaiulir  tun  Ihiaa  at  uolbat,

MOUa  whteh  in  mnj  woAi  iipoa  ■ntiqnitiei  in
«B«»tial«i  bnndh',  without  ntaMDce  to  (Dj  apa-
dial  tiw^naif^er  w«e a^iodlle alike  lathe
of  Tai^Bin  and  to  the  rei^  of  Valentinian,
-■ '  ■ i....  ijBoa  within

Oar  auhfifkie*  will  enabla  n*  to  fonn  a  con-
eepciaB,  nore  ec  leai  cranplete,  of  the  oganivtioii
af  a  Rman  annj  at  fire  peiiodi ;  —

L  At  the ■■■  ■  '  ■


Rln  of  TaiV
their  wide  iwc


S:  About  a  etObaj  and  a  half  •Aer  the  expDl-
noD  of  the  king!.

3.  DmiDg  tho  wan  of  th«  jmmga  Scipja,  when
tfaa  diaci|line  of  the  IiaDpi  wai,  parh^a,  atore
•ctfecttluaBtanypreTira*  ai  nbiequentera  iind
bete,  ti*tanatel<r.  oar  indnnatiiHi  ia  moat  complete.

4,  la  the  tinea  of  Hanoi,  Solia,  and  Jotiui
Caev.

&  A  haudted  and  Gl^  yean  later,  when  the
(■apiB  had  naehed  itf  cnhDisaUng  point  nnder
ToqiB  and  Hadrian.

Bermd  tbii,  we  ahaU  not  weA.  to  adTanoe.
AAcrtbt  death  of  H.  AdmIju,  we  diaccni  nought
■ma  dinvda,  doajr,  and  diigiaoa  ;  while  an  m-
^|Bb;  into  the  complicated  anangemmti  intndnced
■hia  cfCfT  department  in  tba  Rate  wai  mmodil-
led  hf  Dwdetian  and  Conitaiitine,  would  de-
■MNl  l»aglho>fd  and  tedioni  inreiUntion,  and
■■■111  (ton  of  little  IV  no  aarriea  U  tha  chiirieil


The  nnmbcc  of  ancient  writen
■av  anaat,  who  mat  ptafEaaeilj  of  the  militai;
aCua  of  iba  Banana,  ii  not  itnat,  and  their  woAi
are,  with  ma  tt  two  exception*,  of  little  Talue.
IiiiMpaialilj  tba  moM  important  ii  Pah/biMM,
whs  B  a  '■'g"'*"'  praaccred  froni  hii  liith  book,
^e*(«a  a*  with  a  aketeh  of  a  Ronum  aim;  at
tha  tna  when  ita  danEler  Mood  higheat,  and  ia
diariflaa  waa  naat  patsL  Thia,  to  lar  at  it
liaihm.jiiililalTiilinl  iiifiiniinli  nr-nf-M  lii"
Tba  ttact  ■nfi  arpmr/w^  riiHtr  'EXXitruiur
af  .^^iaBM  who  floariihad  nader  Nora,  belong*,
■■  the  title  iBpliei,  to  Onek  tactica,  bat  cod-
taBM  aka  a  fane^  impai&et,  and  indiitioct  ao-
■o^  af  a  Boaan  armj.  The  t^x")  Toimr^  of
a,  goYHBOt  of  Gippadada  ondar  Hadrian,


minata  pnclkal  eipoiition  of  the  jnliminaiy
exerdiCl  by  whiob  the  Roman  caialiy  were
trained  ;  to  Anan,  likewlae,  we  aia  indebted  for
a  very  intenating  fragment  entitled  lierata  Kin'
'AAovM',  rappoaed  to  ba  a  portion  of  hii  lort
hiatoy,  which  bora  the  mune  'AAavurd,  condn-
ing  of  initmctioDi  for  the  order  of  march  to  ba
tduptei  by  the  force  despatched  againit  the  Scy-
thiana,  and  fbi  the  pncss^otu  to  be  obaerred  in
manballing  the  line  of  battle.  Thii  piece  taken
in  aonnection  with  the  eany  of  Hj/gimu,  of  which
wa  hare  apoken  nnder  CAVnUi,  will  aauit  ua
nuterially  when  we  «eek  to  form  a  diadact  idea
of  the  ccnttitotion  of  a  Roman  army  in  the  oirly
part  of  the  iccond  century.  It  remaini  for  tu  to
notice  the  L«tin  "Seriptarei  da  Re  MQitari,'*
Frxmtaua,  Modttut,  and  Fi^'ut.  Tbe  StroU-
gtmaSca  of  the  fint,  who  lived  raidfr  Veapaiian,
i*  merely  a  collection  of  anecdotei  com^nled  wilh-


the  ZiUfaa  it  VaeabtUt  Rti  MUUarit  a
lecood,  addreaaed  to  the  emperor  Taeitui,  aSbrdi  a
eonndsrabia  nmnber  of  teconical  termi,  bat  ia  in
(Doh  a  confiu^itatt^  and  >o  loaded  with  inlapoU-
tioai,  that  we  can  employ  it  with  little  confidnice  ;
the  An  MiOaru  laititata  of  tbe  third,  dedi-
cated to  the  younger  Valenliaian,  it  a  fiirmal  trealiae
drawn  np  in  an  age  when  tha  ancient  dianfdine  of
Rome  wu  no  hmger  known,  or  had,  at  lewt,  hllen
into  dcaoetude  ;  but  the  materiali,  we  are  aamrcd
by  the  anthor  hmiael^  were  deriVed  ftom  unrcea
the  moet  pore,  auch  aa  CUa  the  Ccoaor,  Cornelioa
Celaoi,  and  the  (Mcial  r^nlaCiona  of  tha  ouiier
empenn.  Milled  by  thae  ipedoua  profeaaioni,
and  by  the  r^nlarit^  diaplayed  in  the  diatribotioa
of  the  different  aectiona,  many  acholara  bare  been
induced  to  adopt  the  itatementa  here  embodied
without  heaitation,  witboat  even  atking  to  what
penod  they  applied.  But  when  the  book  ii  tub-
ject«d  to  critical  icratiny,  it  will  be  foimd  Xa  bo
full  of  incoDiiitenciei  and  contimdictioni,  to  mix
np  into  one  oaifbicd  and  heterogeneoui  man  tha
lyitemi  pncaoed  M  epocha  the  moat  remote  from
each  other,  and  to  eihibit  ■  italo  of  thinga  which
never  did  and  mtct  conld  baTe  eiiited.  Hence,
if  we  ate  to  make  any  uae  at  all  of  Ihii  &rniga,
we  moat  proceed  with  the  utmoit  cantiim,  and
ought  to  accept  the  noialtiea  which  it  Dfiiin,  merely
in  illuitration  cr  couGrmation  of  the  teatimony  ^
oihen,  withoat  ever  permitting  them  to  weigh
Bgajuit  more  tnitworthy  wiEneaaca.

Bat  while  the  number  of  direct  anthoritiei  ia
Tery  limited,  mach  knowledge  may  be  obtauied
thnngh  a  mnltitude  of  indirect  cfaanueU.  Not
only  do  the  namtiTet  of  the  hiitoriant  of  Roman
affiiin  abound  in  detaili  relating  to  military  opera-
tioDi,  bat  there  ia  uatoely  a  Latin  writer  upon
any  topic,  whether  in  proaa  or  Tone,  whoia  pagea
an  not  filled  with  aUanooa  to  the  tcience  of  war.
The  WTitinga  of  the  jurial*  alao, inacriptiona,

thai  ii  cuiioai  and  important ;  but  eren  after  wo
hare  brought  together  and  daanfied  all  theaa
•cattered  noticea,  we  iball  have  to  regret  that
tbve  are  many  ihingi  left  in  total  daricntaa,  and
many  npon  which  the  aitertioni  of  diSerent  wri-
ten cannot  by  any  dexterity  be  reconciled  in  a
■ati*hcl«7  manner.  We  aholl  endearoar  to  ei-
poond  in  each  ate  thcae  liewi  which  an  lop-

panadbjribagi


49S  EXERarUS.

witliDiit  attemptii^  ts  diwnu  tlrn  '
ifxm  which  a  ' ' '


I  vntiiiRB  of  KDodeni  Kholnim  w<
ought  to  natiet  ipeeuJly  ths  dislogoa  "  Ue  Mi-
lit*  Ronuma"  by  the  learned  and  indehliftable
Li/mmi,  in  wUcfa  the  text  of  Poljbiiu  (n.  19,
42),  and  a  chapter  in  IJT7  (riii.  S)  Krre  u  e
fijDndUion  fur  a  gnat  mpoiilnutun  of  iUuitntioo
and  aapplemflntHiy  matter ;  nor  mnat  m  forget  the
"Folidnatica"  of  tin  Bins  author,  vhich  ma;  be
Rgarded  ai  a  etotinnatiaD  of  ths  pncediug. The

Cthnmnu  dJMMtatJBn  ttSt^mati—  "  De  Ra  mi-
ri  Romaiieniii,"  whieh  dieplan  the  deep  lead-
iog,  mixad  ap  widi  not  a  litlla  of  tbe  nuhueo,  of
that  celebnied  oitk,  ii  wdl  mdhy  of  penual,
and  will  be  found  in  tho  "  Corpoa  Anttqaitatnm
Bnmiinarum  "  of  Oratdia,  tdL  i.  p.  1384.  Tba
aams  valume  iodudei  the  ■dmiiabia  ctmmsntaij
of  Seiali'iH  OB  Hj-fjinoi,  hii  note*  OD  Foljbi
u^ether  with  euayi  on  rarioiu  tafia  comeei
with  Aoraan  wai&ra  by  Amine,  AoAenMiu,
Srfom  PiilKatia.  M.A.  Oaanu  {De]aCii*aite),
P^nt  Ramm^  &&  A  meat  dabarate
men  b;  M.  £e  Beau  ia  printed  in  ^
fifth  and  i«nral  nuceeding  Tolume^  of  the  "  Mi<-
naini  da  I'AcadAnia  dei  Inaer^  '  -  —  »
Lettcea ;"  and  althoagh  we  an  &i  from  acqnieadng
fa  all  the  eondniioni  at  whieh  he  anirei,  it  ia  im-
jnuible  to  deiij  thU  in  ao  far  ■§  beta  are  eoo-
ccmed,  he  hae  nlmoet  erluuBted  ererj  topic  on
which  he  hu  entered,  and  we  cannot  bnt  lament
that  he  ihould  not  hsTs  csmpleled  the  denga
which  he  originall;  tketchcd  out.  We  may
contnll  with  profit  /WmTi  "  CoromenlairB,"  at-
tached to  the  Fieneh  tnuulation  of  Polybiui,  bj
tbe  Beoedictiiie  Vincent  Thnilliei,  6  torn.  4to,
Anuit  1729  ;  GWteiiird,  "  HAnoiree  MiliMiree
nr  lea  Oreca  et  lee  RtHnaiu,"  2  loin.  4to,  La
Hajp,  1757,  and  "  MAnoina  Critiquea  et  Hii-
toriqoea  mc  Pluiieon  Panti  el  Antiquity  Mili-
tuna,"  4  torn.  4tD,  Beiiia  et  Faria,  177S;
V/mdoKfmrl,  **  Hietoiie  del  Campagnei  d'Kan-
mbal  m  iu^ie,"  3  torn.  4ta,  Pari^  1812 ;  Rog,
"  Military  Antvqnitiee  of  the  Bomani  in  Britain,"
foL  Land.  1793  ;  ftait,  **  Rjjmieche  Kricgnlter-
thUmer,"  Svo,  HbIIa,  1783;  Liir,  "  Ueber  die
Tactik  und  dai  Kriegiweeen  der  Oriecfaon  nnd
Rtimer,'-  8>o.  Kempt.  1626  ;  Lehitr,  ■*  De  Riy
publica  Romana  aire  ei  Paljbii  Megalc^  lezta
HiltNia  Excerpla,"  Std.  Salib.  IS23.

Oaural  Rematiioa  lis  Legiai,
The  nana  Lepio  ia  coefal  with  the  fbnndatian
of  Rome,  and  alwaji  denoted  a  bod;  of  tnopa,
which,  although  lubdiTided  into  leTonl  nmller
bodieo,  waa  legaidod  ai  forming  an  oinniaed
whole.  It  ciumot  be  held  to  hsTe  beoi  eqniTalcnt
to  what  we  csU  a  r^'msaC,  iuumneh  aa  it  ooa-
taioed  ttoopi  of  all  ami,  iofiuitiy,  caTaliy,  and,
whea  military  enginea  were  eiteniivelj  employed,
artiUery  deo ;  it  might  Ihm,  M  hr,  be  cegaided  at
a  oomplete  army,  but  on  the  other  hand  tho  mmi'
bee  of  Boidien  ia  a  l^ou  woe  fired  within  certain
Kaito,  never  mach  exceeding  6000,  and  hence
when  war  vni  earned  on  upon  a  large  icale,  a
ringlo  amy,  nnda  tbe  command  of  one  general,
freqaaotlj  contained  twi^  lhi«e,  or  mc ' '


KXERCITDS.

buialated  by  battaUat,  Jivitum,  diiathaail,  nor
any  other  teim  in  oidinory  nae  among  models
"^■"*"*i  Ancient  e^mielogiata  igree  in  deririog
Ugio  bun  lagere  to  cbooae  (Vair.  L.  L.  J.  %  87,
tL  §  £6.  ed.  Htiller ;  PluL  Ran.  1 3 ;  Nan.  Mar-
celLi.  i.v.  l^ioiniat,-  Modeat.  de  FocatL  R.  M.  i
laJdor.  Ory.  ix.  3.  £  46),  and  the  immb  endured
ae  ioDg  01  the  thing  ila^  !«  Beau  and  other*
are  miilaken  when  theyeieert  that  in  Tadtoa,  and
the  wtilen  who  followed  him,  the  word  nawiii  i  a
frequently  lubetititled  tot  hj/io,  far  it  will  be  leen
from  the  ftitigat  to  which  we  giie  rcfereocci
behnr,  that  mauri  ii  lued  to  denote  either  the
diStoent  oorpa  of  vbich  a  1<^on  wae  compoeed,  oc
a  eorpa  generally,  without  any  ollmion  to  tbe
legion  (Toe.  HiiL  L  6,  87.  Agric  18,  conm.  An.
ii.  89,  HirLu.  SB;  Plin.  £^  iiL  8,  x. 3S ;  Vt^iac.
/Vol.  II  i  Ulpian.  m  Dig.  3.  lit.  3.  i.  a  S  2 ;  29;.
tit  t.  a  43,  &c  Ac  Set  below  the  mnaAa  oa
IheOilor)}.

In  tbe  Scriptnrea  of  lbs  I<


Greek  wiitan upon  Rcmoii  affiiiii  for

iplo;  lome  tetm  botrowed  from  their  0
le  aa  m  aqniraloDt ;  and  lince  each  o

lidend  himidf  at  liberty  to  eelect  th

' "-  propriate  or  which  N

.  witbwt  n

of  thoae  who  had  gone  before  him,  and  wiiboM


la  like  manner  the  legion  being
mmplete  within  itiel^  and  not  directly  or  noces-
■Mily  connected  with  any  other  coija^  cannot  be


the  bonndi  of  hii  own  wridngi,  we  not  only  find  a
ccuiideiable  Tariety  of  words  nied  indiacriminaldy
u  npreaentotiTea  of  Lfh,  bnt  we  Snd  the  lame
intboi  uaing  difierent  worda  in  different  paKagea,
md,  what  ii  itill  m«e  perplexing,  the  aune  word
which  ia  uied  by  one  anther  for  the  legion  ai  a
1  ia  need  by  othen  to  indicate  aome  ooe  or
of  the  tubdiviiioua.  Ths  temii  which  vo
with  moit  eommoniy  are,  Bvft^6iitSor,  ^-
^otJ,  -rirfna,  t(Aiu,  leea  fi^uently  rrpiTeu^m  and
Ttixof,  Polybina  in  thoae  chaplen  which  are  de-
TOted  excluoirdy  to  a  dea^iptian  of  the  legiou
— "--mlir  deglRuatei  it  by  ffrpatiwtlBr,  which  ha
imea  apptiea  to  an  aimy  in  genenl  (a,  g.  iL
73,  86),  while  by  othoi  it  ii  namllj  amplo^ed
to  denote  a  caoip  (mtfra).  Again  Polyblaa  giTea
ehoioa  of  three  name*  fin  tbe  maniple,  eii^a,
nlpo,  and  Tii)7ia,  but  of  tboe  tbe  Gnt  i*  Ibi  tha
moat  part  introdaced  by  othen  oa  the  tranelalion  id
the  uitin  CBritini,  the  aecond  olmoat  anifbnnlj  aa
eqniraicnt  toeciiora,  and  the  third,  although  of  wide
acceptation,  iicontlantlj  tfaerepreaeolatiiie  of  Jagaa.
Dimyiini  uie*  HBietime*,  ecpeoially  in  the  eaijier
booki  of  hie  hialory,  p^utyf  (e.  g.  t.  G7),  aome-
timea  Tdy^iBTB  (e.  g.  ri.  45,  ii.  10, 13),  ex  rrpa-
TWTiicJk  Tiffian  (tL  42),  and  hii  example  ia  fol-
lowed by  Joeepbni  (B.  J.  m.  S.  $6  ;  6.  i  2i  t
AppianadoptarlAet  (e.g.^wi.8,A.a  ii.  76,
79,  96,  iii.  4,B,  83,  93,  ir.  1 1£)  1  Plutanh  within
the  eompaai  of  a  lingle  MOteDCO  (M.  Aabm.  IS)
baa  both  riynaTa  and  T^Ai) ;  Dicn  Caaaini,  vken
■peaking  of  the  legioni  in  oniliBdiitiiHtioo  to  toa
boueehold  troopi,  colli  tbem  in  ona  n«nge  -rl
woXtTuti  rrpn^fta  (xxniii.  47),  in  anothet
■tfxnTwix  imriAiyau  OT^wrn^iAvir  0*.  24).
ind  where  no  particular  emphani  ia  teqailail,  »•
ind  TrpiTtiiiim  (ri  tixairor  nf^tifu,  zxxtiii.
17.  xL  6h\  tOixk  (rev  rrrifrtr  roS  Infcnv
-tiXOin^  liiix.  7),  npariwaeii  (xxxriii.  46,  xL
65,  66),  md  (TTpwrtfrfBov  U  aanA^Yw  (iL  37.


SXERCITtra.

ttitTiii  imrmXiyw  rrpiriniumn  (W.  34,  liL  22,
lix.  3),  «  ainply  Kmahrf6ittrin  (}iy.  25).

Neithet  LItj  Qar  Dicojiiia  imtjce  tbi  Gnt  <•-
tBblahnHnt  of  tbe  Imhu,  but  tbaf  both  take  fir
■notad  tbat  it  ejdftad  fron  the  Toy  ixuidttiMi  of
-' '^-■ta  V«nii  (t.  L.  T.  S  88)  •nd  Plotud.


(*


.  13)  >


Vtimatm. The  ktter  ifrBaki  of  Om  band  hd  k^


IcfBi  miuiite,  aod  tha  fiiBwr  datia  that  Ramnl
M  ambLiih  hia  lagion,  look  1000  nwn  from  ei


<f  Ihi  Ltgiam.  The  legion  for  maoj
«M  ennpuad  ezeloriTelr  of  Roman
citaHoa.  Bir  the  ocdiDmoea  of  Scrrina  Tultitia
theae  akiia  who  m«  annllsd  m  the  fire  eUaaea
wtn  riigible,  and  odb  of  the  greBtaat  changea  in-
kvdiKed  hj  Manila  nt  the  admiaikia  of  all
ardoa  of  cRbtoa,  iadndiiig  tbo  Wiat,  into  the
mka.  (Saa.J>9:8S;  PlnLMv.  9;  Fkc.iiL  Ig
QeU-  iri  10.) Up  to  the  jmc  B.  c  107  no  one


1  the  Roman mililarr ayiteio. The  Rnuuu)

liu  for  a  loDg  period  eonnited  entirely  of  what

migbt  teno  onVitfa. Ereiy  cititen  waa,  to  a

lain  extent,  trained  to  anna dnring  a  fixed

iod  of  hia  life  )  he  wai,  at  all  timra,  liable  (a

b«  called  npoo  to  aaTra  i  bat  the  legioo  in  vhidi

ha  ma  entailed  waa  diabanded  aa  aoon  aa  the

apecial  aarica  for  vbich  it  had  been  leriad,  «na

perloimed  ;  and  allhoogh  Iheaa  oUa  m


aa  who  was  ngaided  aa  poa-
waraiga  atioig  pownal  iBttcett  in  the  Mahili^  of
the  coaHoaiiraanh,  bM  tha  ptincijda  haring  baen
at  thia  poiod  abaDdoned,  the  priTil«e  waa  ai-
•taded  ^a  the  ekae  of  ^  Bodal  War  (B.  c  87)
to  warly  the  whole  of  tha  free  popalatioa  of  Italj,
■ad  hj  iba  bmona  edict  of  Caiaialla  (or  peih^ia
tt  H.  Aoroliua),  to  the  whole  Rffluon  world.  Loog
heftn  thia,  howerer,  the  legiona  were  laiaed  chiefly
H  the  poTtncea,  and  bcDce  are  ranked  by  Hjginui
■HHDf  the  prew'aafnfir  attAilaii  {Ugioim  qmrnian
wait  wtili&K  ffaaian'nti'i  fdtlim-ma).  Eten  under
Angaatia,  tbo  yaoth  of  Jjtinin,  Umbria,  Elinria,
and  the  ancient  colonia,  aerred  chiefl;  in  the
baneboU  troopt  (Tac  J«.  It.  6),  who  Ibr  thia
loaiai  are  eomplimcDted  by  Otho  aa  lUJiam  abmm
A  ten  Oimama  >Mirf»  (Tac  HitL  L  S4).  Bat
ahhosgfa  the  Wona  contained  cam^ointiTely  few
BiHin  llaliana,  it  doea  not  mppiBi  that  the  admia-
aion  flf  fcrcignen  not  mbjecta  wma  erer  pnctiaed
■pan  ■  kigB  Bcale  until  the  leign  of  the  aecond
Clasdiaa  (a.  d.  268 — 370),  who  incorporated  a
krgc  bodj  of  Tinqpiahed  Ootha,  and  of  Probui
(A.  D,  27S~282),  who  diitribnted  1 6,000  Qermaii*
anflog  legiaaaiy  and  frvntiet  battaJioni  (laaurit  tt
fiMifiiaiiii  abfilAw,  Vopiac  Proi.  11.).  From  Ihii
time  forward  what  had  originally  been  the  leading
characleiiBtic  of  the  legion  waa  npidly  abliteraled.
■D  that  mider  Diocletian,  Coutanline,  and


B  name  Legion  waa  >lill
tamed  in  the  Sflh  centary,  iDice  it  appean  in
edict  addnaed  by  the  emperon  Arcadina  and
Honvina  to  the  pnCact  Roniulianu  (Cod.  Jottin.
1-I.liL  36.  a.  13)  and  abo  in  the  Enct  known  aa
the  Nttma  Dumb^mm  Imperii  (c.  59).  It  pro-
hab^  ^  mit  Ul  into  total  diaoie  nntU  tht


neitfti  of  that  pnaa  with  regard  to  :
BOthiag  heaia  m  any  way  span  the


lilitary  aRaira


Thoe  ia  yet  aDothcr
with  the  ao^  poaition  of  the  loldiet  to  which  i
ia  mj  iwmaaij  lo  adfert,  if  we  dente  to  fom  i


it  id<


EXBRCITUS.

1  of  the  changea  gradually  intnjnccd


oanliii,
n  daya,B


r  the  BWt  of


at  the  galea,  ye
frequently,  a  few  wedti
dmde  tha  fortnuea  of  ^

that  a  Koman  army  had  nevar
wintered  in  the  field,  until  mon  than  three  cen-
aAer  the  tbnndalioi  of  the  ci^,  when  the
blockade  of  Veii  nqnirtd  the  eonttant  preienca  of
the  buiageia.  Aa  the  acene  of  action  became
by  degreea  &rther  lemored  from  J.
BODthem  Italy  and  Sidly  i
war  ~~  when  the  exialenoe  of  Rome  w
by  tha  Carthaginian  ioTanm  —  when  ho- anniea
~  "icRipaaed  Ueiieh  lesdera  aa  Pyirbna,  Hamilcar,
Haimihal  —  it  waa,  of  teana.  inwoauUe  to
leaTe  tha  foe  fir  a  moment  mwatebed  t  and  (ha
igtnciea  of  tba  atata  icndend  it  iiiii  lamij  tiiat
B  eame  legiooa  and  the  aame  aiddini  ahonU
nain  in  BctiTi^  for  aaTenl  yean  in  ancceaaion,
lit  ^fotiacted  Bsrice  became  inevitable  aa  the
minioa  of  Roue  aitnded  orer  Greece  Bid  Atia,
whan  tbe  diatancta  randered  finqneat  relief  im-
pncticaU*  ;  hot  down  to  the  reiy  termination  of
the  republic,  the  ancient  principle  waa  recegniaed,
''  '  '  ounpaign  waa  concluded,  tha  toldier
to  relorn  home  and  to  leanme  the
occupation  of  a  peaceful  citiaon.  It  waa  a  coo*
viction  that  their  leader  had  broken  &ith  with
them  by  commontdng  a  new  mr  againat  Tigianea,
after  the  defoit  of  Mithiidatca,  their  proper  and
legilimato  opponent,  which  induced  the  troopa  of
LocuIluB  to  mutiny,  and  compelled  their  leader  to
abandon  hit  Aimeiuan  conqucata.  Hence,  for  up-
wardt  of  aeren  centuriei,  there  waa  no  luch  thing
a  the  military  profeuion,  and  no  man  coniidered
linuelf  at  a  aoldier  in  contndiatinctiDn  to  other
alliogi.  Every  individual  knew  that  he  waa
bound  ai  a  member  of  the  body  politic  to  perform
certain  dntiei  \  but  these  dutiea  wen  pcHormed
wiiiiDUt  diitinction  by  all — at  leatt  by  all  whoae
■■-1-1  in  the  proapenly  of  their  country  waa  con-
ii  lufEcient  to  inauro  their  aeal  in  defending
nd  each  man,  when  hia  Bbare  of  thia  obiigntion
diachajgod,  returned  to  talce  hia  place  in
•ociety,  and  to  punue  hia  ordinary  avocationi.
The  adroiiaion  of  the  Cbfsle  Cam  into  the  lenka,
peraoni  who,  [ffobably,  found  their  condition  a>
loldien  much  luperiar  to  their  poaitioa  aa  citiliana,
and  who  could  now  chciiah  hopea  of  amaaaing
wealth  by  plunder,  or  of  liaing  to  honour  aa  officen,
tended  to  create  a  numerou  claai  diapoaed  to  de-
lote  themaelrea  permanently  to  a  military  life  ai
the  only  aource  from  whence  they  could  eecure
comfort  and  diatinc^on.  The  long-continued
opoationi  of  Caiaar  in  Oaol,  and  the  ueceui^
impoaed  open  Pompclns  of  keeping  up  a  large
fores  aa  a  check  an  hia  dreaded  livd,  contributed
ttionsly  to  nourish  thia  feeling,  which  waa,  at
length,  fully  developed  and  confimed  by  tbe  civil
bnuU  wbicll  laalod  fix  tareoty  jaan,  and  by  tht


493


KXEBCTTUS.


pnctice  fint  introdDnd  npra  x  luge  Kile,  kIUi
tbe  Hithridatu:  wan,  of  gnuti]^  pensioiu  for  loig
■erriu  in  the  ahape  of  donoUona  o!  land.  Hence,
vhea  Angofltoa  in  compliance,  aa  we  are  told  bj
IKou  Cuiiui  (lii.  27),  with  the  idrice  of  Hoeceoai,
determined  to  proiide  fbi  the  Kcuiit;  of  the
diitant  proriiicea,  and  fbi  tranquil  lohDiluian  aC
borne  hj  the  eitabLiihment  of  a  powerfol  itanding
arm^,  he  found  the  public  mind  in  a  gr«at  degree
Tfcpared  for  guch  a  meaiun,  and  the  dibtinction
between  loldieT  and  civilian  untcnown,  or  at  least
not  recDgniied  before,  became  fann  thia  time  for-
*iTard  aa  hrDadlj  marked  ai  in  the  m«t  imre  mili-
taiy  deapotiinu  of  ancient  or  modem  tune*.  In
tbii  place,  we  ue  nqnind  limtil;  to  call  attention
to  ths  bet  —  it  belong!  to  tha  philowphic  biitiniaa
to  tn«e  the  Temlta.

7h  mmbara^  af  Oi»  llgiimM  and  Oar  Hlla.
The  legioni  wen  originallyaDmbend  accoiding  to
the  order  in  which  the;  were  railed.  Thiu  in  the
eariy  part  of  tbe  Mcoad  Punic  war,  we  hear  of  (he
fborlh  legion  (t^i  rhvprm/  FrparAwtSw)^  being
bard  pnaed  by  the  Boii  (Poljh.  iiL  iO)  ;  the
toith  legion  plaja  a  conipicaona  pajt  ui  the  hlilor;
nl  Coesiir  ai  hit  bvourite  corpi  (Dion  CaM.
xnTJiL  1 7),  and  the  (abineta  of  nmniimatologiiCa

rent  Of  with  an  aasembiage  of  denarii  itruck  b  j
Antoniua  in  honour  of  the  iegioni  which  be
commanded,  eibibiting  a  regular  Kiiei  of  nmnben
from  1  up  to  30,  with  Dol;  fbni  blanki  (25,  27,
38,  29).  Ai  th«  le^one  bei
nue  nunben  renuuned  atli


EXERCITUa

corps,  wbteh  were  moraovsr  diitinguiahed  by  nriou
epitheta  of  which  we  have  eetjf  examidei  in  the
Legio  IHaiHa  (Cic.  Fiify.  t.  2  j  Veil.  Pat  ii.  61  ;
Dion  Can.  iIt.  13  ;  Appian,  B. C.  It.  llfi},  and  the
Z«ii  Quinta  Alaiuia. [Alauda.)

Dion  Casuui,  who  Souriibed  under  Alcaandtr
Seyema,  telli  ni  (It.  23)  that  the  military  eitab-
liihment  of  ADgoitaa  couuited  of  twenty-three  or
twcnly-fiTC  legiimi  (we  know  from  Tac  AmL  it.  5,
that  twenty-five  was  tbe  real  Dumber),  of  which
nineteen  atill  eiialed  when  he  vmle,  the  rest  bar-
ing been  deatroyed,  diapened,  or  incoipoiated  by
Augnatui  or  his  mcceiBcn  in  other  legionB.  He
gi<et  the  namet  of  nineteen,  and  tbe  localitiea
where  they  were  stationed  in  hit  own  day,  adding
the  deiignationi  of  those  which  had  been  railed  by
inbaeqnent  empemra.  Thii  list  baa  been  eonaider-
ably  enlarged  Etom  iaacriptioni  and  other  autbo-
ritiet,  which  inpply  also  Hreral  additional  titles.
We  give  the  catalogue  at  it  standi  in  tbe  pages  of
the  historian,  and  refer  those  who  desire  more
complete  information  to  the  collections  of  Roman
Inscription!  by  Oruter  and  Onlti,  to  the  Gith  book
of  the  CtmniaU,  Rtip.  Aon.  of  Wolfgang  lAatns,
fol.  Franct  1fi9S,  and  to  Eckhel,  Dodrim  ffmm.
VeU  Tol.  yi.  p.  BO,  tcJ.  viiL  p.  48a  In  the  foUow-
ing  table  an  atleriik  is  lul^ined  to  the  nineteo)
legiont  of  Aujcuatut,  to  tbe  remainder  the  name  of
the  prince  by  whom  they  were  fint  IcTicd ;  tiie
epitbeli  included  within  brackets  are  not  giren
1^  Dion,  but  hare  been derived  EnHn Tarioui


lU  e/Ot  Ltgieu  m  tie  IMg»  afAUtmdir  SmmtiL

Nombeioftbe
I-gion.

Title.

By  whom  raised.

Where  stationed  in  the  age  of
DionCassiua.

Prima

rtalica

Nero

Ilibema  in  Myaia  Inferiore.

Adjutrii

Oalba

Pannonia  Inferior.

Hinervia

Domitianua

Oermania  Infcri.o'.

Farthica

SeptSeTcru.

Secunda

Augnita

Hibema  in  Britannia  SuperioIE.

Adjutrii

Vexpatianui

Pannonia  Inferiot.


as-^""-

M.  Antoninus

<f^^>

Media  (Parthica)

Scpt-Serama

Italia.

Tertia

OiUiot

Numidia.

Phoenida.

Cyrenaio

Arabia.

Italica

M.  Antoninu.

Bhaelia.

Panbi(«

SeptSoTer™

Mesopotamia.

Quarta

Scythica

Sj™

Plavia(Felii)

Vespatumua

Si™

<}uint»

Seita

Vietrix

Dritonnia  Inferior.

Fernta

Judaea.

Seplim.

Chwdia

Mytia  SttperioT.

(Gemina)

Galba

Hi-Tonia.

Oclata

Augnita

Oermania  Snpoior.

Deeima

Oemina

Pannonia  Snperiot;

(Fretensis)

Jndaea.

Undeeima

Claudia

Mjiia  Inferior.

Dnodecima

Fulminatrii

Cappadocia.

Dccima  Tertia

Gemino

Dac^^

Decimn  Qnarta

Oemina '

Pannonia  Suporisr.

DecimaQuinta

Cappadocia.

Vigoiima

Valeria  Victrii

*

Bnlannia  Superior.
Hiberaa  in  Gennanla.
(Oermania  P).

^^^^

Ulpla(Victrii)

Trv«.™

BXBRC1TD8.

Oa  tUi  m  taaj  TenuA  —
1.  That  HTcnl  legioiii  bora  Um  BUne  Bm
tkH  thua  na  faaz  Ftr^  fin  SiecimU,  vu

nMb

3.  Tbe  thlM  woB  dnirad  from  nriau  ci
■■III  n  ;  miw  indicated  the  deity  ondcr  whoie
fa  the  Icgkni  wm  [Aaced,  neb  ai  JIf wrvn
raw  the  eaaaUj  ia  which  thej
«r  nctniled,  aa  /tojioa,  M<k»-
•  tba  ■oaae  of  tfaeit  nuxt  bril-


i^mr  under  vhom  thaj  bad  amed  or  by  -wbom
Ik^  had  ben  cnated,  M  J  ^jwta,  j'lanih  ^4*1 ;
■oa  ■  apnal  acrrkc^  a*  ClniifiiBM  i^  F«J(r,
ajiflied  to  the  7th  and  11th,  which  had  remalDed
ma  to  tbeir  alhgiaiKe  dnriiig  the  rebellion  of
CaaiDaa,  pndKt  of  Dalmatia,  in  tbe  reign  of
ClaadJna  (Dkn  CaM.  k.  15)  j  mme,  the  bet  that
aDothcT  lq;iaB  had  been  inoorpoiBled  with  tfaem  ;
at  leait,  uiia  ia  the  expUnation  giTen  by  Dion
Cuiaa  of  tite  nithat  Ciiao  (A[)vfU>)>  >»d  there
B(HH&ltk  doubt  that  he  iioBRcL  (See  Eekhel,
Tol  ir.  p.  472.)

i.  lie  atom  Icpon)  npear  in  eertun  catea  to
laTc  been  qoattered  in  tba  nme  diitncta  lor  cen-
tario.  Th(iatba&ieMifi(J^;w(ii,tha&aft>  Fio-
»ii,andtbe  Fiimima  VielriM,  which  were  itationed
m  Britain  when  Dion  drew  n^  Ua  Matenunt,  wen
tbac  in  tbe  nga  of  the  Antonmea,  ai  we  lean  (ran
Plolcn  (iL  31),  and  the  Gnl  of  them  ai  ouly  u
therein  of  Chodina. (Tae. /fta!.  ia  23.  24.)

t,  lie  liz  l^ioni  of  Angmto)  which  had  dia-
fpemi  wbea  Di™  wrote,  wen  pnbably  the  fbl-
kwii^  whoee  eiiaUDca  in  the  e«riy  jcara  of  the
topire  can  be  denMoataaled:  iVnaa  GtrmaiBea;
Qm»nMae^imiea;  (^AdaAbBida;  Noma  Hi-
rmt;  DWHM  5mCi  Oalliea!  Vipmma  Pri^a
Rafai:  b«idaa  thewi^  it  wooM  aaem  that  t]wn
*aa  a  lecnDd  fiftacnlb  and  a  twen^-aecond,  both
aanid /Vw^pnriii,  nid  ODB  of  theae  onght,  perhBM,
Id  be  nbnitttcd  for  the  aecund  twoitielh  in  the
alioK  table,  Bnce  the  wocdi  of  Dion  with  ngard  to
tk  hUa  aie  Teiy  obacnre  and  appatantjy  coimpt.

i.  Wa  find  iwticea  alio  of  a  Prima  Maenam
ZiicrMyw  TaJaed  in  Aftica,  after  the  death  of  Nero,
by  CIoUw  HaeiT ;  of  a  i^acBH  Snria  .flima /Vrnu
aacd  by  YtMfUpisa  ;  and  of  a  Yigmma  StamAa


Almda  of  Caevr,
friiilegea  of  a  Roman  legion.

&  It  win  be  aeen  ttiat  the  nniaben  XVIL,
XVIIL,  XIX.  an  aitogetber  wasting  in  the  above
HMa.  WekmvUBttbeXVIlI.BndXIX.were
two  of  tbe  Icgkiu  commanded  by  Varna,  and
bom  it  ■  probable  that  tbe  XVII.  wni  the  third
in  ibat  ill-bled  boat.

7.  Tbe  total  nmnber  of  legion  nnder  Angnatoi
wu  tweaty-6n,  snder  Alexander  SeTcma  thiinr.
twi^  bat  daring  tbe  citi)  wan  the  nmnber  vaa  &r


^  .  ...  Tbna,  when
ivsKd  the  btai  of  thi
httd  at  fiaty-lhiee  legimi,  which,  after  the  battle
of  Phili|ipi,  Iwd  dwindled  down  to  twenty-eigbt
{kfpmL,  B.  C.  T.  G)  ;  but  a  ftw  yraia  afterwardi,
T^  wai  betwem  OelaTiann*  and  H.  Anlodiu
■M  ianaiBent,  tbe  fotitur  alnia  bad  Bptnrda  of
tsty  legiooa,  and  hii  adTtnariea  neariy  the  nme.
(Appian,  B.  C.  ».  M.)  In  cader  that  we  may  be
aUc  to  (bna  acme  idn  of  tbe  najnitoda  of  tiieae


EXERCITUS.  493

Hit  wmli^tfjbel  toldUn  m  a  Romm  kgiom.—
Llthongh  we  can  deUnnine  with  talenUe  oertainty
L .._  .e  -  >-^,„,i^  m  different  poioda.


M  haie  varied  within  nt


lelim


pcnnanent  changea  may  be  referred  to  four  epocha.
1.  Pi.rf«r(*.fB^.— Vairo(i.i.T.  g89)and
PlDtarch  (Aon.  IS),  both  of  whom  deacribe  the
fiiit  eatabliibment  of  the  legion,  agree  that  nnder
Romolw  it  contained  3000  loot  aoldiera.  The
worda  of  Flutaich  indeed,  in  a  anbaeqnent  paawa
(Horn.  SO),  wtnild,  at  fint  ligbt,  ^ipeai  to  ini[iJy
that  after  the  junction  with  the  ^binea  the  nnin-
beTWB«iai*edtaSOOO  ;  bnl  he  mnat  be  undmlood
to  mean  two  legioni,  one  from  each  nation.  It  ia
highly  probable  that  eome  change  may  hare  been
inttodoced  by  Serrina  Tnllina,  bat,  in  ao  fat  aa
nnmben  are  cancemed,  we  hare  no  evidence.

3.  /VDMtfea^wMnii/UiiX'iB^iiaeU  difteaid
fsar  c^lie  ttamd  Pamo  War. — The  regnlarnnm-
ber  doling  thia  ipacaof  time  may  be  filed  at  4D0D
or  420C  inlantiy.  According  to  Dionyaiua  (ri.  42)
IL  Valerioa,  the  brother  irf  Pnblieola.  raiaed  two
le^iona  (n.  c  492),  each  conaiiting  of  4000,  and
LiTy,  in  the  fint  Dataage,  wbeie  he  ipedfiea  tbe
namben  in  the  legioiu  (rL  22,  B.  c  S7 B),  reckoni
them  at  4000,  and  a  few  yean  afterwarda  (viL  2£,
B.  c  S4S)  he  teSli  ni  that  l^ani  wen  tailed
Muh  containing  4200  foot  (oldi^  and  300  faoiae.
The  legion  vhich  poaaeaaed  ilielf  of  Bhegiiun
(b.  c.  261—271)  ii  deaoibed  (Lir.  nriii.  23)  aa
hanng  coiuitted  of  4000,  and  we  find  the  ouna
nmnber  in  the  fint  year  of  the  aecond  Pnnic  War
(UT.ni  17,  8.0.213).  Polybiui,  in  like  manner
(i.  IG),  fiica  the  number  at  4000  m  the  aecond
year  of  the  fint  Ponio  Wu  (b.  c  263),  and  again
m  the  fint  year  of  the  lecood  Punio  War  (iii  72,
B.  c  218).  In  tbe  war  ogaintt  Veil,  howeier,
when  the  Romana  pnt  Ibrth  all  their  energiea,  ac-
(nrdinit  to  Dionpiui  (ii.  13),  an  aimy  waa  raiaed
of  20,000  infantry  and  1200  canlij,  diridcd  into
legion)  ;  and,  according  to  Polybiiu  (iL  24),
M  war  againit  tbe  Oanlg,  which  preetded  the
tecond  Punic  War,  tiie  legioni  of  the  eooaula  csn-
tjflted  of  5200  in&ntry,  while  thoee  lervlng  in
Sidly  and  Tarentmn  contained  4200  only,  a  proof
that  tin  latter  waa  ttie  ordinary  nmnber.

S.  Fnm  tic  leamd  j/tar  o/ tin  mad  Paaia

•or  tans  tin  amtiJUip of  JVonai.  —  During

thia  interral  the  ordinary  number  may  be  fixed

at  finm 5000 to 5200. Folybini,  mdeed, ia

hie treatiae en Roman  waibre, lay* it  down

(tl  20)  that  the  l^on  conilata  of  4200  fiwt  aoU

dien,  and  in  caaea  of  pecnliar  danger  of  EOOO.

Howerer,  the  whole  of  the  apace  we  an  now  con-

'ng,  waa  in  fact  a  penod  of  extiaatdinaiy

Ion,  and  hence  bom  the  year  B.C.  21G,  ws

■hall  Bcanely  find  the  Dumber  itated  nnder  SODO

' F.  Polyb. iiL  107,  Lii. niL  33,  izri.  28,

IX.  SB),  and  af^  the  cccamencenent  of  the

irian  war  it  aeenu  to  bare  been  tailed  to

G200  (Lit.  zL  1.  IS,  33,  zli.  8,  but  in  zlL  21  it  ia

again  5000). The  two  legion*  which  paaKd  orer

into  Africa  under  Scipio  (&  c.  204)  contained  each

6200  (Lir.  rra.  24),  (hoae  which  aerred  aninat

Antiachui  64D0  (Lit.  xzxrii.  S3),  thoH  employed

' thela)(Macedonianwar6000(LiT.ilti.31,iliT.

21,  comp.  iliij.  12),  bnt  thaae  wan  apedal  caiea.


494  EXERCITUS.

i.  From  IjI*  fint  miiniU^  of  Mariat  (B.  C.
107)  UKta  At  extmMmii/- a»  Ii^im.  — For  »nia
eenturia  ftftcr  Muiot  iaa  nomben  varied  ittnu
fiOOO  to  6300,  ggaatHjtfpQviasig  to  the  h%lKr
limit FotDi  ((.  K  Mil  millimm  1  dmamti.

e^qnewlf  dcckcei  tint  C.  Huina  nind  Ae

ben  fnat  4000  to  4300,  bat  hii  mien  in  thk
^ .  .___^,.._.^  .dopted,  fof  to  th>


liii  ifnl,  tha  ail  complrtc  k^ani  (t{  riy/itiTt
WA«a)  anwmited  to  30,000  men  (PhiL  JU.  9,
Mar.  5£,  bDl  tba  ten  in  the  latter  pauMge  k
donblfiil).  Id  tbe  wv  igunit  Mithridat«a  agwn,
tha  30,000  man  o!  Lacnlliu  fiirmed  fire  Ifgicnu
(AppiaiL  Jtfittr.  7S).  Compuins  Flutuch  (Cfa.
86}  with  Cioero  (mi  AH.  t.  16),  we  eandade
that  the  two  Icftiou  eommanded  bj  tbe  latla
in  Cilieta  ODntuiied  each  6000.  Catmr  nmtr
iber  of  men
1  13ll """


infer  t


0  IB.  a  i  7),  whUfl
tile  twn  BMUtioned  in  the  fifth  bo^  of  tiie  Qillic
war  {e.  48,  49)  wen  eridentlj  incomplete.  In
Appian,  M.  AJitoniiu  ia  reprnented  h  calcn-
btiDg  tbe  MBoont  ef  38  Ugiooa  >t  npwardi  of
1 70,000  mo^thM  it  bmHt  6100  to  each  legion,
bnt  be  Mem*  to  btdoda  niKIariea  (rflr  nnas-
mfiAwi').  Dmiag  the  fint  eentmjr  tbe  Muidud
fane  «u  eaitaliil;  6000,  allboi^b  nbject  to  con-
itut  nuiMkraa  accordiog'  to  eiKanutaDcea,  and
the  caprice  of  the  reigning  prince.  The  legion  of
Hadrian,  if  we  cui  tnut  Hyginni,  wo  5280,  of
Alexander  BeTenu  5D00  (Lunprid.  Set.  SO),  thot
dcactibed  by  Vegetjoa  (iL  6),  to  whaterei  period
it  ma;  belong,  6100,  and  moM  of  the  gmimnaHuu
wree  upon  6000  (e.  %.  Serr.  aA  Virg.  Aat.  Til
974 ;  Iiidor.  Orig.  iz.  S.  g  46  ;  Snidu,  i.  e.
Ai7<ifo,  but  Heajchim  g^vea  6666).  The  Jon-
ana  and  Herenleana  of  Dtode^an  wd  Maiimian
fbnned  ach  ■  eorpa  of  6000  (Veget  L  1 7),  but
beyond  thit  we  hare  no  doe  to  guide  ua.  If  we
belioTe  tha  tirfiiaTa  of  Zoaimaa  and  the  dpiSfiof
•r  Sozomen  to  designate  tbo  lagiona  of  Honorina,
they  niDM  at  that  epoch  haie  been  rsdtKed  to  a
numbs  mying  (ran  1300  to  70O.

Mmiar  ^  Canalry  <maditii  io  Oa  Ugiom.—
Accordtog  to  Vano  and  tha  other  aathoritiea  iriio
deaoribe  the  original  conititolion  of  the  l^on,  it
eooiiated  of  SOW  bibntiy  and  300  canlry.  Tha
nmnber  <f  foot  aotdien  waa,  u  ve  hara  aeea
■bore,  gtadnallj  intrtaacd  nntil  it  amountod  to
SOOO,  bnt  the  nmnbet  of  honemcn  remained  ■]•
Waya  the  aame,  except  upon  particular  occaiiona.
In  thoae  poaauei  of  Livy  and  Dionyaiua,  where
the  munben  of  the  legim  are  ipedtied,  we  find
tncfannly.  amid  all  tha  nnationa  wich  regard  to
the  in&ntry,  300  hunemeD  act  down  ai  the  regnlar
complement  (jatt  afntoM)  of  tha  li^OD.

Polybim,  however,  a  at  nriuee  with  theaa  aa-
thoritiea, fbr  altbongh  in  hia  ch^ter  npon  Roman
war&re  (tL  30)  he  girea  300  ai  the  number,  yet
when  be  ii  deuDing  (iiL  107)  the  nilitaiy  pie-
pantioa  of  the  year  m.c  916,  aAac  baling  n-
narfcsd  that  CMh  legion  cartafawd  MOO  in&Btiy,
be  adda,  that  nnder  ordmaty  ejtmmatanfea  it  eon-
MuDcd  4000  tafimtiy  and  900  caTalry,  bnt  that
Bpon  praadng  emecgendea  it  waa  hurtaaid  to
fiOOO  faibntiy  and  300  caialiy,  and  thii  repm-
■cotation  ii  confirmed  by  hia  review  of  the  Rodbb
foneaat  the  time  of  the  war  againat  the  CiolpiBa
aBali(ilS4). It  ii  tave  that  when  nanatisg  dw


BIERCITD8.
erenti  of  the  fint  Fnnie  War,  he  in  ma  place
(L  IG)  makn  the  legiima  to  eooiat  af  4000  in-
&ntry  and  SOO  caraliy ;  and  in  the  paaa^e  n-
ferred  to  above  (iL  34)  the  -——I"  kgiina
anonnlcd  to  6300  bbntry  and  BOO  tavaliy,  bat
i.-i  ..  .!___ .__ — -^ijaneii^ Tha


bear  out  the  Qreek  (Liv.  ixiL  36,  iliL  31),  but
in  tha  fint  be  la  evidently  allodii^  to  the  aaacr*
tioni  of  Polybioa,  and  ii  "'  . -■ . . .-.


1  aaiee  in  cooudoing  the  text  connpt,  and  that  we
lould  (ubitttDta  dmmi  pcdUn  for  aaaaii  (qnlaa.
When  troopa  w '"*  ' ~  " ■"' '


qniied  ipedal  amngemanti^  tbe  mmber  of  horab-
moi  waa  lomeUmea  incnaasd  beyond  SOO.  Thna
tbe  legim  daapatcbed  to  Sardink  ina,c.  315  (Lit.
ixiiL  34)  coiaiated  of  5000  inlknity  and  400
cavalry,  the  aame  nnmber  of  hctacmen  waa  at-
tochtd  to  a  legion  aeni  to  Spun  in  B.  c.  I  BO  snd«
Tiberina  Sampronina  (Liv.  zL  36),  and  in  a.  c.
1 69  it  waa  naolvEd  that  the  bsioau  in  Spain  abonld
connM  of  5000  intuitiT  ai>d  330  eavaby  (Ut.
diiL  113),  bat  fat  the  war  ^aiut  Panen  when
the  inftntiy  of  tbe  l^iona  waa  raiaed  to  6000  tho
caTabyietainedthaanoientnamberof 3M.  (Liv.
iliLSl.)  ItmnetbeobaarTedthattheaeKiaBriu
with  regard  to  the  cavalry  sp[dy  odIt  to  tbe  period
befon  Hahoa ;  ^MOC  that  epoch  the  tjitau  tp-
pean  to  have  nndetgooe  a  very  natctial  dange,
which  will  be  adverted  to  in  the  pnqur  place.

We  now  proceed  to  ccmaidoT  the  onanintion  of
the  l^on  at  the  five  peiiodi  named  MOTe.

Fint  Pmriod.  Stnau  TWiiH— The  l^cn  of
Serrina  ia  ao  doaely  connected  with  the  Comitia
Centnriata  that  it  haa  already  boot  diioaned  in  a
focma'  article  [Comitu],  and  it  ia  only  nareatary
to  i^xal  haa  that  it  waa  a  pluif^i-'  eqniffmd  in
tha  Oietdi  bahieo,  the  fimt  nnka  being  fumiabed
with  a  complete  anit  «f  araioDr,  theit  we^nna
being  long  ipean,  and  their  chiafdeteDca  the  lamd
Aigdie  anidd  (tiijma^.

Smxmd  Ftritd.  Jtt  Ortat  ZoCaa  War,  B.  c
340.  —  Our  aola  aotbori^  ia  a  ein^  charter  in
Idvy  <Tiil  8),  bM  H  "  IB  eqoalled  by  fewotben  in


lalf  aoffleieally  intdligiUe,  althm^  tortnccd  and
alabmidy  comqited  ttj  Lipaina  and  othcca,  who
wan  detomtoid  ta  tene  it  into  hwmeoy  with  tba
woida  of  Polybiaa,  which  tmamiit,  it  ia  true,  moat
Bcenrately  the  atate  of  a  Komao  aimy,  but  of  a
RocDao  amy  at  it  eiitted  two  centoric*  afterwatda.
Aeoerding  to  the  plain  and  obTiona  acnaa  id  tha
paaaage  in  qaeation,  the  Icgim  in  the  year  B.  c
340  had  thrown  aatdo  tiie  anna  and  llooat  en-
"  loftbepl


X  pethua  weeught  to
an  of  the  fint  luie,  a


gai^>aii),a  modenta  qiacab^ng  le


id  aizty  prifBtia,  ti
d  a  Btandacd  beam


■a  (oaatorman),  and  a  atandacd  bcani(oa>ab-
i) ;  two  thiidi  was  heavily  atmed  and  bora
t  higB  oblong  ^lield,  tha  remainder


like  ■«■«  iMD  UtMB  iBDideiitdl  iMMily  >nud
(icaWi  amm),  nd  dktingmih»d  bjilia  tftmOaai
olAtk  tqupawh  jimi^mUuwHuimiarmU).  Tba
twolbm  of  th*J!hAi<i  tndiVK^takta  ngttba
■BDBrtei  M  Ikiitf  Biaiiiplei  utd  fbnnad  the  Aalf-
yil—f. Tlu  third  liiw,  ths  THaru,  onmpoHd  of


EXEItaTVS.  49S

aujoli,  18D  prrraUi,  6  ceo-

•,  and  3  Texilbiu. In  thw  triple  mauipiUi

I  fanned  the  ^nt


UndXiaiMi


at  m  eae  end  pcowea  (m

fiutuqm),  while  the  ^bwii  dc
lea tmKwnMhT'  thm either (i


battle  uaj  mej  ba  ^u*  te^teented .


nzj czn  izz]
Lin 1=1 1=1 1=1  1=1

1^3 CZI CZi =] 11=


IS  triple
tituiipuli  <rf


(htyw . .

tiled  tetw—  the  noki  of  the  priodpe^  who  now
edf^cad  aid  b«  Ihe  hnnt  of  the  eomhal,  np-
l»«>iil  lij  ihi  l^titi.-irhn  hofl  rilKut  iithrtJTinr
It  the  [Fiitr'j-**  ilnbilBd  Umeke  an  JBifwoiion,
thiy  ivtitad  thraogh  the  Dpeniugi  botwoen  the
i^ipi—  ef  tbo  trierii,  who  np  to  tliii  time  bed
Ub  ooaebed  m  the  gnoiid  (hcuca  called  mt-
miim  ii),  bat  naw  anoe  to  mdte  ths  Uit  efiort
(vkeaee  the  phwo  nm  ad  triark*  niitti).  No
lo^  i^un^  the  epcn  order  ^  the  tn  fint
Ubi^  iimj  doocd  np  thdr  — ' ■


_^ It  bearing  eTidmca

■  tat  tiw  [Tineiiile  of  the  pbalani,  and  ez-

WitJri-j  jBgt  ai  we  might  expect  at  that  period,
Ae  BesvB  t«tic*  in  theii  tnuuitiw  itUa  It
■Ht  b*  iiliai  ml  that  the  vordi  ordo,  nuBpahJ^
■■JihM.  allhoo^  gtovall;  kept  diitiucl,  an
ihn^teot  cba  M^Mt  need  ai  ejnonynani ;  and


,  l  20),  "1  i-i  ^itifot  Iko-

ir  fa^Uaw  Kol  T^|ia  ul  mCpv  ul  nuuiw.
lirj  iiitfiiidfi  bf  njing,  that  fbor  l^igoi  wen
-  '  '  '  each  conuitmg  of  fiOM  inbnb;
Ve  miut  Mippoee  that  ha  apealu
in  •■>  br  Bi  tba  in&ntiyaiB  odd-


15  I  GO  =900

ISxGO  °> 900

15xS»60 =3700

= 150

. . - 75

4736


peat  name,  we  eight  not  ta
t  Nirirahr  iHil.  y  Aena,
ToL  iiL  p.  97).  while  ha  admito  ibu  the  text  of
Utj  ii  MHiad  and  ooDutent  wHh  itnU;  afgiua,
ws  irenton  to  think,  aomewhat  mmaaonablr,  that
be  did  not  uudenlaiid  hit  ezoalleDt  matetiali,  and
allhiragb  dear  at  fint,  becBmo  erraitnaUjr  con^Msly


>f  alliia  («Mn>  unaUf  exoeeded  that
TW  wan,  Wevai^  kept  perfectly
I  in  tha  camp  and  in  tha  faitlla  field.
After  the  electica  of  eoDauIi  wai  conduded,
int  Mn  «H  to  cboaee  tha  twenty-four  chief
cfficati  of  the  legion^  named  fri&wi  mH/ituiK,  and
l^-  the  Oreek  writm  xiKiifxat,  Of  tbeae,  fbm-
teen  were  ielected  fraa  penoDi  who  had  lerred
fiie  cBinpiigni  of  one  year  (oaaiia  ttiptadia,  trati-
ffleui  oTpwriloi)  and  were  tanned  JMoont  (ol  ni-
Ttpet  lit  xAii^Tumi),  Che  reroaining  ten  (eniom,
■wfwtviifoi^y  bun  thoaa  who  had  Kired  for  ten
cmiBoigna  The  mamitf  of  theii  electioa  will  ba
azplafaied  below,  when  wa  tnal  moie  partiailaily
oftheUgiaDnyofficen. {Polyb.  n.  19.)

3.  All  Roman  ciUien*  wboae  fbitnna  wae  not
rated  ondar  4000  aawo  wen  digibla  for  mililaiy
•errioi  from  the  aga  of  maaboodi^ta  their  Ibr^-
lixth  year,  and  oonld  be  nqnind  lo  mtto  for
twenH  yean  if  in  the  infantry,  and  Sir  ten  yeuv,
if  in  tike  arahry.  ThoM  wboae  foRone  ww  below
the  ahore  nun  wen  reaerrad  for  naral  Hrric^
except  in  any  caia  of  gnat  neceaeity,  when  they
aln  might  be  called  upon  to  aarre  br  tha  Kgnlar
period  in  the  inbntiy.

Tha  conul)  hsTing  made  prodamaljon  of  a  day
npoD  which  all  Roman  dtiienfl  eligible  for  aerrico
mint  aaaenible  in  the  Capit<^  and  thoa  being  in
attendance  at  the  time  appointed  in  the  preaence  of
tba  conwk,  the  tribone*  ware  diiided  iato  fbtu


49S  EXERCITU3.

■PCtioiu,  Bceordin^  to  tlie  order  of  their  el<ct!ni,

in  tha  fallowing  manner:  —  The  (our

brniei  Rnt  elecwd,  and  the  (vd  lemar  Cr

elected  were  tunoned  to  tbe  flnt  legion,  the  three

jcmiors  vid  the  tnree  nation  next  in  order  to  the

(scoiid  ;  the  font  juaion  >nd  the  two

in  ordet  to  the  Uilid,  the  lut  thrse  jiuuon  Bod

the  lut  three  Mnion  to  the  Eniith  legiciL (P0I7L

rlH.)

Tha  tribnnea  being  thni  diatribnted  i
pnrtiefl  of  iit,  thoie  belonging  to  each  logic
thenuelTea  iputiand  the  tribei  wen  ninu
■Dcceuion  b;  loL The  tribe  whoM  lot  ctune
flnt  being  aiUed  ap,  they  picked  oat  fexn  it  <
TODthi  aa  nearly  matched  h  pouible  in  ago  j
form  ;  out  of  these  four,  the  tribonei  of  the  fint
legion  choae  ene,  the  tribunea  of  the  leamd  legioc
one  of  the  remaining  three ;  the  tribunea  of  th(
third  li^on,  one  of  tha  remaining  two,  and  the  lait
fell  to the  fbonh  legion. Upon  the  ne
being  called  Bp,  the  fint  choice  waa  girei
tribune!  of  the  Mcond  legion,  the  tecond  choice  to
thMe  of  the  third,  and  the  lait  man  fell  to  the  fint
legion. On  the  nert  tribe  being  oiled  op,  t
tribunea  of  tbe  third  legion  bad  the  fint  cboii
■nd  10  on  in  nuxeiaian,  the  object  in  view  be!
that  the  (bar  lisioni  ahould  be  u  nesriy  alike
poiaible,  not  in  the  number  onlj,  bnt  in  &e  quality
of  the  loldieii. Thia  proceaa  wu  continued  un^
the  nnk*  mte  complete,  the  regolar  nnmbet,  ac-
o  PolybiDi  in  thia  faille,  being  4300,
•n  any  danger  greater  than  uioal  waa  im-
pending, GOOO,

In  aneienl  times,  tha  caTalry  were  not  choaen
tmtil  after  the  inlhntiy  lery  waa  concluded,  bnt
when  Polybiua  wrote  the  caTulry  wa
the  lint  place  from  the  lirt  on  whici
enralted  by  the  cenioc  according  to  their  fintone,
mnd  SOO  woe  apportioned  to  each  legion.  (Pelyb,
tL20.)

8.  Tho  loTT  bring  oampleled  (iTiTi\nr9tIffT|>
T^i  icara]'pa^i),  tbe  tribonei  collected  the  men
belonging  to  their  reipectire  Icgioni,  and  making
otw  indlTidnal  aland  out  from  the  rest  adminiitered
tobim  an  oalh  (^gpnifoHTu-)  » that  ha  vonld  obey
orden  and  eiecnle  to  the  beat  of  hia  ability  the
command  of  hii  officii."  {SaeramealiiM  a.  Jatjw-
roKliiM  mHHart,  Cic.  d*Qf.lil;  Lir.  niL  36  ;

- ■■  •■ in  J


eofding  b


I  dictn,  FeiL
Can.  B.  a  1 23  1  Lir.  il  S4,  it.  63  ;  OeU.  iri.  4.}
The  reat  of  the  iiddien  then  came  forward  one  by
one,  and  avore  to  do  what  the  fint  bad  boand
hinuelf  to  pertorm.  They  were  then  diimiised,  a
day  and  place  baling  been  appointed  where  each
legion  waa  to  aaKmble  without  armi.  <Polyb.  tL
21  )  Caee.  B.  C  I  76.)  The  worda  uttered  by
each  loldicr  after  the  flnt  were  probably  limply
**  idem  in  me,"  (lee  Fett.  t.  n,  Prn^jaratkim),

4.  At  the  game  ^me  the  conauli  gara  notice  to
tha  m^iatralea  of  thcee  towni  in  Italy  in  alliance
with  Rome,  from  whom  they  dcaired  to  reeeire  a
conthigent,  of  the  nnmber  which  each  wonld  be
required  to  fnmiah,  and  of  the  day  and  place  of
gathering.  The  allied  dtiet  leriij  their  troopt
and  admmiitered  the  oath  much  in  the  lame  manner
■a  the  R«mani,  and  then  tent  them  forth  after
appointing  a  commanderand  a  pay-maater  {Bfix'"'
«il  liKtMimr). [Socit] (Polyb.  tI  31.)

6.  The  Mldien  baring  again  aaaembled,  the  men
h  itgum  woe  aepented  into  Cnr


EXERCITUS.

diTiuona  ;  and  here,  we  moat  reaiark  In  paiBtn|;
that  Polybini  haa  folleo  inla  a  ilight  inconiigtency,
for  while  in  tha  paaaage  quoted  abota  ho  6ia  tba
number  of  the  l^on  when  be  wrote,  und«  otdi-
-  - ■  at  4200,  in  deioribii^  the

flillow  he  anffnoM  it  to  con-
only  (tL  31).

(I)  One  thonaand  of  tbe  yomigeat  and  pMnrt
were  let  aput  to  fum  the  Felifoi  (rpov^tfiixi't
rpmr^it^ipiH),  or  akirmiiben  rS  the  legion,

<3)  Twelve  hundred  who  came  next  in  age  (or
who  were  of  the  lame  age  with  the  preceding  hut
more  wealthy — the  wordi  of  Polybioa  an  not  voj
diitinct)  formed  the  HaKaii  CAmfrw).

(3)  TwbItb  bundled,  eoiuiating  of  tbiwe  in  the
full  vigour of manhood,  formed  the  Prama

(4}  Six  hundred,  coniiating  of  the  oldert  ani
moat  BXperienced,  formed  the  THoriJ  (TphLhih).

Whoj  the  number  of  aoldien  in  tha  legion  ex-
ceeded 4000,  the  £tBt  three  diviatoni  wen  inoeaaed
pnportianally,  but  the  aambcp  of  the  Triaiii  te-
muned  alwaya  the  aame.

Tbe  eiguipment  of  theae  cona  waial  fbllowi: —

For  defaudve  armour  the  Velilea  wsa  fnmuhed
with  a  plain  head-^ace  (Anf  wipm^sAoIf),
lometimei  eorered  with  the  hide  of  a  wolf  (Av-
tular)  or  any  linular  material,  and  a  itnns  ciioilac
buckler  (pama  —  rApfoi),  three  feet  in  diameter.
Their  ofTeniiTa  weapon*  woe  a  aword  (jtix'Vit
and  the  light  jareUn  (ladit  veHtarit  —  yfia^i),
the  thaft  of  which  Hatila — ri  iiAjir)  waa  gena-
rally  two  cnbila  (S(inix>')i  that  ii,  about  thrM  fwt
in  length,  and  in  thicknea  a  finger^  bnadtli  (rf
a  viixti  SajcTuAuiibi'),  1.  e.  Bbont  '7934  of  an  inch :
the  iron  point  a  apan  in  length  (t^  U  Ktrrpar  on-
ta)iHuew\  i.  a.  abont  nine  inchea,  hamnund  mit  so
fine  that  it  waa  of  neceaai^  bent  at  the  Sitt  cast,
and  therefbte  could  not  be  buried  back  by  the

Tha  Haitati  wore  a  fiiU  nit  of  delenaive  amnnt
,  omrAla),  conaiating-  of  ihield,  hebnet,  I»«ut-
plate,  and  groiTe^  Their  ihield,  tenned  Semtam
(3ypn!i),  waa  formed  of  two  rectangular  boaidj


and  united  with  atning  glue  ;  the  onter
then  coTcred  with  eeane  caovai,  and  orer  thia  a
calfa  hide  waa  atretehed,  and  a  cunBtnre  waa
given  to  tha  whole,  tbe  conrexity  beini

itwarda. The ujqier and i

nmgthened  by  an  iron  rim  (n

r  fotmer,  that  it  might  teabt  the  downwaid

itiake  of  a  aword  ;  the  latter,  that  it  night  not  be

"  ijured  by  reating  upon  the  giamid. In  addition,

rat  atill  further  fortified  Irr  an  inm  boia  (ntqps


■c^oi),  which  11

againit  blowi  ban  itouea,  i^iiiat  thruti  fiooi  tha
long  pikea  of  tbe  [dialani,  and.  Id  goMnd,  front  an
hcsTy  mtvilea.  [See  a  Ggnre  M  tbe  Sodtvm
under  tint  Mticle.]  One  I^  waa  pntected  by  •
greave  (oem  —  wofiOKriiui),  and  the  bead  by  K
brooie  hebnet  (mtoo — ■'•pucv^oAaia  xaAicq),  whh
I  creat  oompoHd  of  three  icariet  or  blad  fntliini,
itanding  erect  to  the  height  of  about  eighle«a
ncbeo,  10  that  tho  caaqua  added  greatly  to  the
apparent  nature  and  impoaing  carriage  ef  the
•oldier.  Tbe  gmtei  number  at  the  Haitati  vnv
in  front  of  their  breaat  a  braia  plate  sine  iueha
aqnare,  which  waa  called  the  Htar1~pramtr  (mp-
luKpiXa^  ; but  thoaa  whoae fcitDM  exeaaded


EXERcrrus.

lOOJMtO  ana  bad  corDplcle  cninuMi  of  cbun-
tmaaa  (lorieai- — iXwritttriAt  ^^fttiKas).

Tbe  ofienilTB  waprati  of  the  Hastati  omnited
irf  ■  nnrd  md  heftTy  jftTclim.  The  iwoid,  which
■u  gilded  aa  the  right  aide,  had  a  itinng  itraiefat
btadc,  doable-edged,  and  thiirp-pnlnted,£itulhiu
alcnblHl  both  for  cutting  md  thnuting.  ft  waa
oiled  a  Sponiih  sword  (jidxvfn  'ltvpuc1t\  in  con-
Dadirtinction  to  the  Oauliih  iwofd,  which  wu  a
catttng  award  odIj.  Each  man  carried  in  hii
hand  Iwd  of  those  baij  mioile^,  oiled  pila  b;
the  t^riw^  inroi  by  tho  Qreelu,  which  maj  be
molded  ■•  the  chaiacleriitic  weapon  of  the  Roman
iobatiy.  The  ibaft  of  tboe  waa  in  tnaj  case
fim  oDd  a  half  foet  (three  cabita)  long,  aad  the
barbed  inn  head  was  of  the  mna  length,  bnt  thii
eitended  half  way  down  the  ibaft  to  which  it
waa  Btladied  with  eitieniB  care  (Poljh.  vi.  23),  »
that  the  whole  length  of  the  weapon  waa  about
■T  &M  tune  ioefaa. The  ahaft  Tuied  both  in


prtingw


cylindrica),  aometimea  qnadmngalAT  — ■  in  the
iManeit,  the  diameter  of  the  cylinder  or  the
bnadth  ^roa*  one  of  the  flat  lidea  waa  about  three
iacbM  (nkuffTiaio)'  Ixim"  ■ . .  tV  tidfirrfor).

The  equipment  of  tht  Prioeipei  and  the  Tiiarii
waa  ID  creiy  ropeet  the  nme  with  that  of  the
HaMUi,  occept  that  the  taller  carried  pikes  {hatlat
—  Ufurm.)  inatead  of  pifa,  (Polyb.  tI  21,  22,
33.  For  idEn  minnle  infbnaation  with  regaid  to
the  diffaent  part*  of  the  equinneDt,  conault  Qalea,
HaVTA,  LOKICA,  ScuTDM,  Fakk^  Sk.)

We  nay  mnufci  in  pusing,  that  in  additioi]  to
hk  amour  and  weapona  the  legiimaiy,  when  iit
iBichiiig  Oder,  uoaltj  carried  pronaions  tor  a
fatuigkt  at  leait,  uid  three  or  lour  atakea,  nied  in
fanamg  the  paliiade  of  the  camp,  beiidea  Tariona
tBok,  an  sianmadoD  of  which  will  be  found  in
JeaepkK  (B.  J.  m.  6.  %  i.)  The  Roman  writfra
itly  allude  with  pride  to  the  power*  of  en-
e  exhibited  by  their  eouutrymen  in  anp-
j  with  eaiB  and)  OTenrbelining  load*  ;  and
I'ejyhna  diawa  a  eontntat  between  the  Italian
and  the  Omk  aiJdier  in  thia  respect  little  bvour-
aUe  la  the  CHrgy  of  the  tatter.  (See  Cic.  J^ioL
a.  |g^  which  is  tl»  baa  damicmi:  Polyb.  iriiL
1  ;  taap.  V^el.  L  1 9  ;  from  IJT.  ^U.  IviL  it
affcBTB  that  Sci|na  tnined  hia  men  to  cany  food
lor  lUrW  daya,  and  aeren  atakea  each  — doulils
the  aaol  burden.)

S.  The  Hat'Tt^.  Pnncipei,  and  I^iarii  were  each
dirided  inta  loi  companits  tailed  Jlfm^vli,  to
which  Polylria*  gi>ea,  aa  equiralento,  the  three
lenH  rijiu,  rrSpa,  eniuda.  The  Velilea  were
not  dirided  into  companies,  but  were  distributed
equaUr  amo^  (he  Haatoti,  Prindpei,  and  Tiiotii.

7.  Betwe  tlie  dirision  of  the  thR«  clastei  into
■oaai^ea,  officen  were  appointed  inferior  to  the

fraa  the  Hastati,  toi  &am  the  Prindpes,  and  ten
bna  tlM  Triaiii  ;  and  this  £nt  choice  being  com-
pleted, tliirty  niiTe  in  like  manner.  These  aiity
aliiaaa.  (tf  wlum  twenty  were  aasigned  to  each  of
the  thin  ebssea,  and  distributed  equally  among
tlu  naaiptea,  ware  named  naterwnei^  or  oT^vnm
rfiapia  (nmiiiiini,  rofid^ai),  and  eseh  of  the
sixty  cbiM  tir  hinielf  a  lieutoiant  {oplk>\  who,
bei^g  Boated  in  the  rfar  of  the  oompwiy  while  the
ccBiiinaB  WM  at  the  head,  waa  named  otpcn^f
(I  a.  TByiimtor)  by  tin  Oreeko,


EXERCITtrS.  497

tionel.  FartlieT,  the  centnrioni  lelected  out  of  -
each  maniple  two  of  the  braTcal  and  most  vigunnu
men  oa  atandord  beonrs  {vBeSlarii,  tiguiji^  tn^
luua^pti).  The  fint  elected  centarion  of  the
whole  had  a  leat  in  the  military  council  ((mreitplw
KsiwHi),  and  in  each  maniijs  the  fint  chosen
commanded  the  right  diTiiion  of  the  maniple,  and
the  other  the  left.  Each  of  these  anbdiTiaiona  of
(he  maniple  waa  called,  as  we  ahall  see  hereafter,
cattvia,  but  it  ia  not  apeeiGodly  noticed  here  by
PolyhiuB. (Polyb.  TJ,  34.)

8.  The  caraliy  were  divided  into  ten  tniopa
{tuTvae,  IXw),  and  out  of  e«h  of  these  three  at-
ficon  were  choeen,  named  dtaavmea  (U^pxoj),
who  named  three  licatenanta  (pplkma,  otifr/el).
In  each  troop  the  decurio  fint  chosen  conmiandeil
the  whole  troop,  and  failing  him,  the  second.

The  equipment  of  the  carairy  waa  oriainally
adapted  lolely  to  secure  great  ease  and  rapidity  of
movement.  Hence  they  wore  no  breaatplale,  bat
were  clad  in  a  single  ganumt  girded  tight  round
their  bodies  ;  their  shields  were  liirmed  simply  of
on  ni's  hide,  were  incapnble  of  witbatandmg  a
atrong  blow,  and  were  nodily  damaged  by  wet  ;
their  lancea  (UrtpirrB)  were  so  light  and  the  ahaft
10  thin,  that  they  vibraled  from  the  action  of  the
horse  ;  could  not  be  directed  to  thdr  object  with  a
Btady  aim,  and  were  constantly  sniWKd  in  a
charge  merely  by  the  rapid  motion.  Moreover,
not  being  furnished  with  a  point  at  both  endo,
they  served  lor  one  thrait  only,  t>y  which  they
were  broken,  and  then  became  nielesa.  In  tha
time  of  Polybina,  however,  they  hod  adopted  the
Greek  equipment,  —  a  breastplate,  a  solid  buckler,
and  a  atrmgipear,  bshionedmauch  a  manner  that
the  end  by  which  it  was  held  vras  so  far  pointed
as  to  be  available  in  case  of  necessity.

9.  After  the  aoldiera  hod  been  thna  divided  and
officered,  the  tribimea  having  given  the  dilTervnt
claisea  inatmctiona  with  regard  to  the  onu  which
they  were  to  provide,  dismisied  them  to  their
home*,  having  Brat  bound  them  by  an  oath  to  as-
semble sgoin  on  a  day  and  in  a  place  fixed  l>y  tha
consul.  Then  and  there  accordingly  they  did  as-
semble, no  eicnse  fr»  absence  being  admitted  ex-
cept ineritablo  neeeanty  la  the  appearance  of  evU


10.  The  infantry  fiimiibed  liy  the  meU  waa  for
the  most  part  equal  in  number  to  the  Roman  )e-
gims,  the  oivilry  twice  or  thrice  as  numerous,  and
the  whole  were  divided  equally  twtween  the  two
consular  anuieo.  Each  consul  named  twelve  an-
perior  officers,  who  wrre  termed  Pm^tfii  Soeit/eiBn
(■ful^irrDi),  and  correaponded  to  the  legionary
tribunes.  A  selection  was  then  mode  of  the  beat
men,  to  the  extent  of  one  filth  of  the  infanUy  and
one  third  of  the  cavalry  ;  these  were  formed  into  a
seponto  coips  under  the  name  of  eafroonfiaaru,
and  on  the  match  and  in  the  camp  were  always
near  the  person  of  the  eonsoL  The  remainder
were  divided  into  two  eqnal  portions,  and  weiB
B^^led  re^ectively  the  DaltraAta  and  the  S»ttra
Ala  (xoAonri  -rl^v  ttf^  ''^  fsMn^v  '^pai)-

[ALi.]

It  will  be  observed  that  we  have  implied  a  daafat
irith  regard  to  the  nmnbei  of  cavalry  nmusbed  by

the  allfcs. Pd7'^-  >■•" ""' -*• '-=

sketch  rf  da  R


J98  EXGRCITU3.

.  culiir  diffimltj  ud  danga  it  ina  sngmanted
£000  in&atr;  and  300  canlrj,  miit  diitinctly
that  tb«  alliei  mpplied  h  Ibrce  of  io&inliy  equal  to
that  of  the  legion,  aod  geDcrslI;^  thrice  u  man;
cafmlry  (Ttiy  St  aviifii^vft  rh  /Uc  rwv  vf^i'
•wK^fivt  ripurov  T0IOLH7I  rats  'Pv^uufolr  urparo-

When  treating  more  foimally  of  the  nnu  luhject

£L  26)' he  lepeeti  the  obore  obKrvstion  inDeai-ly
e  ume  woMi,  but  when  ho  tame  lo  ri  S'  -"
trttdr  TfurKiawr,  many  of  the  MSS.  p
IiTXiiruv  ;  and  a  little  fdnhei  on  (n.  30),  i
pctH^B  where  he  explaiui  the  manner  in  which
the  troopi  wen  quaiterad  in  a  camp,  hit  eipni-
■iou,  vbeii  interpreted  according  lo  their  oatnral
mesning  and  theii  connection  wiUi  the  preceding
dauK,  mnil  ligni^  that  tlie  total  number  of  the
allied  canliy  wai  donble  thai  of  the  Romana,  and
not,  ai  the  Ladu  tnnilation  attached  to  the  editioi
of  Schwai^unuei  bai  it,  dtnihlB  that  of  thi
RoDiiii  0^  dadnding  one-third  for  the  extra-
odinuii  etnilaa.  Litj,  when  refeiring  to  tbt
pneitioo  of  ■fbin  between  the  Romani  and  theii
■Uiea  befbn  the  great  Ldtin  wu  of  B.  c  310,  aftei
■ped^ring  the  ordinarj  itrength  of  the  Raman
umin,  adda  (tIiL  6)  "  altsrum  taatojn  et  Latino
delecta  ■djidebatar."  When  recounting  the  pre-
farationi  for  the  campaign  of  Cannae,  although  be
mnaii  lo  allude  direcdy  to  the  nansdTe  S  Po-
lybiiu  and  to  copy  hia  words,  he  csnlndicli  hie
dii«ctly  with  i^rd  to  the  allied  avalry  (uii
36),  "  aoeii  dupFioeai  munenim  eqnitum  daroiL'
At  a  eomewhal  later  period  (b.  c.  IBS),  when  four

Bibule  1£,000  inbnlry  and  13D0  cavalry  (n
S5X  and  nine  year*  afterwardi  the  coniul)  were
ordered  to  levy  a  new  anoy  of  four  l^^i  "
MKium  Lalini  noniiDia,  juiutw  temptr  mD
quindecim  millia  peditum  et  octingcnti  eqnitea  "
(xL  36),  which  enctly  conespondi  with  what  we
lead  in  a  fonnei  chapter  (_iL.  18).  The  troth
•eemi  to  be,  (hat  although  the  contingent  which
each  itate  waa  bonnd  to  fumiah,  wu  fixed  by
tiea»j,  it  wat  iddom  neceuaiy  to  lax  all  the  al-
liei  to  the  full  extent,  and  hence  the  ecnale  need
their  diicntian  ai  to  the  predie  niunber  to  be
(upplied,  according  lo  the  circumitancci  of  the
CBia,  the  proportion  of  confederalci  to  Roman
dlizeni  bec«ning  of  coune  gndually  larger  *a
the  limili  of  the  Roman  iway  embnced  ■  greater
Dumber  of  dtiea  and  diitricta.  (See  LIk  i''
MUiL  Horn,  il  70

II.  Agnat  oiLiiitt/MarA. — The  Extnurdiuani
Peditea  led  the  ran  followed  by  the  right  wing  of
the  in&ntiy  of  the  alliei  and  the  baftgage  of  thoe
two  diviiiona  ;  nut  tame  one  of  the  Roman  legiona
with  ila  baggage  foUowing ;  next  the  other  Rranan
It^ico  with  ila  own  baggage,  and  that  of  the  left
wmg  of  the  slliei,  who  brought  np  the  reu. The


com  of  a

irbeluDd  ti


'  to  which  they  wen
1  the  flaslu  of  the
b«Mti  of  burden,  at  onee  protecting  them  and  pre-
TenUng  them  &om  struggling.  If  there  waj  any
upiebnii^im  of  an  attack  from  behind,  tho  only
change  in  the  above  order  coDiiited  in  making  the
Extnurdinaiii  bring  up  the  rear  inttead  of  leading
the  Tin.  Ai  fiu  aa  the  poeilion  of  the  two  legiona
with  regard  to  each  otber,  and  alio  of  the  two
wing!  of  the  alliei,  wai  concerned,  it  waa  nnder-
jb»d  tliat  the  legion  and  the  wing  which  took  the


BXERCITU&

1e«d  upon  one  day  aboald  bUbduitdmoDtluTitil
day,  in  oi^er  that  each  in  turn  might  have  the
advanlBge  of  arriving  £iiC  at  the  watering  placet
and  ftah  peiluiea.  'When  marching  m  opoi
ground  where  an  attack  on  the  flanhi  waa  antici-
pated, a  diSereitdiaposiliiiii  wu  aametimea  adopted.
The  Haitati,  Piindpea,  and  Triarii  manhed  in

of  the  fint  maniplet  took  the  lead,  the  baggage  of
the  wcond  manqtlei  waa  idacod  betweea  the  £m
and  Hcond  maniplea,  and  ao  on  ior  the  reet,  Ihe
baggage  in  each  caae  preceding  the  maniple  to
which  it  bdonged.  If  an  atta^  wai  made  then
Ihe  aoldien  wheeling  either  to  the  right  or  to  the
left,  according  to  drcunulancea,  and  advancing  at
the  lame  time  a  few  itepa,  l^  thia  ample  and
eaiily  executed  movement  preaented  at  once  aa
even  front  to  the  eoemy,  the  whole  of  the  baggage
being  now  in  the  tear.

Generally,  when  adTaneing  thnra^h  a  conntij
in  whicbitwaaneceaaarytoguardagamata  toddcn
oniet,  the  troapa,  initead  of  proceeding  in  a  looae
fltraggling  column,  were  kept  together  in  cloee
compact  bodiei  ready  to  act  in  any  directioa  at  a
moment')  warning,  and  hence  an  aimy  nnder  theae
circumitancea  waa  lud  ajmuw  gtiadralo  iMceden,
(a  g.  SbU.  Ji^.  105  ;  Senec  £^.  69  ;  camp.  Cic
PML  iL  42,  T.  7.)

It  ii  to  be  ohaerred  that  Polybia^  at  the  outlet,
promiiei  an  actnunt  of  the  order  of  match,  of  the
encamfoneiil,  and  of  the  battle  array  of  the  Roman
armici  (wofHlu,  OTparortflclai,  vapard^tts  ;  Aff-
ma,  Cmtra,  Aaut)  ;  but  that  while  he  baa  re-
deemed hia  pledge  with  regard  to  the  two  fomHf,
be  hot  left  the  lait  topic  unloached,  unleai,  indeed,
it  waa  induded  in  a  lection  now  loit.  It  ia,  more-
over,  companoivcly  ipeaking,  a  aubject  of  little
coniequence,  lor  while  we  know  that  a  ounp  waa
alwayi  the  tame  to  long  at  the  conttitutiaa  of  Ibe
army  remained  nnchanged,  and  while  the  or^cr  of
march  waa  lubject  to  few  modification!,  the  mar-
■balling  of  the  tniopa  for  an  engagement  muit  kaTe
— ^id  materially  in  almHt  every  conteat,  depend-


;  neceuarily  in  a  mat

',  and  on  the  aanect  atHmied  by
Some  dsDbt  eiiiti  with  iqaid  lo  the


the  gnmnd,  a


by  tbefoe.


term  Agnem  PUatiai  aa  diatinguiahed  from
AgmtH  Qaa^viim,  The  eiplanatiop  quoted  fron
Vanv  by  Serviua  (Ad  I'irg.  Aat.  lii.  121),  "QkhJ-

ubivii  poaait  conudere :  piiaam,  quod  aine  jn-
mentii  mcedit,  led  inter  te  denaum  cat,  qao  fiaci-
liui  per  iniqaiora  Iocs  tramittatui,"  bat  not  keen
coniidered  aatia&ctoiy,  although  it  it  difficult  to
undciitand  haw  Varro,  himadf  a  aoldier,  abould
have  been  inaccurate  upon  nich  a  poinL  WliMa
the  phraie  occnn  in  poetry  ai  in  the  paaage  in
Virgil  referred  to  above  (comp.  MaitiaL  i.  tS\  it
probably  denolet  meidy  **  coinnma  biiitliiig  with

Polybiui  brang  our  meal  c^uotu  and  pnie  iDarcv
of  information,  befiire  paaaiug  on  lo  the  fburtli
period,  it  may  be  fitting  to  enter  more  fully  upon
certain  topica  which  he  hat  dther  loncbeo  Tcjy
lightly  or  pat«!d  over  in  ailence.  We  ahall,  there-
fure,  make  a  few  nmaiki:  —  1.  On  the  levyttig
of  tohliert.  2.  On  the  diviuon  of  the  legion  m  a
body  into  coborta,  mani[Jet,  and  centuriea,  of
which  the  cohort  and  the  centnry  are  not  DBme^
by  Polybiui  in  the  above  dcwaiption.  3.  On  the
dutribntion  of  the  aoldien  into  TViorn,  iVtmsqii^


.  EXERCITU3.
Ua^tti,  Fn/iln,  AnlepSan,  AntaBgaami,  fte^  Bad
on  tke  original  impon  of  ihew  (eimi. 4.  On  the
sfficen  of  tb«  l^iDB,  the  tribanea,  the  ceaturiuna


held  in  the  Capitol  (Ut-utI  31)  b;  Ilie  coniuli
■emtad  en  their  choii*  of  state  {poBtii  teUit,  Liv.
iiL  11) ;  but  Hmetimei  in  the  Campui  Mortjui
(IKgnji.  TiiL  87),  which  wai  bejand  thi ' '


1  of  tllB  <


10  the  toindplet  <
Bono  wem  encoUsd  in  tha  legion,  except  freeboni
dtiacBi  (u«yMn\)  abore  &e  age  of  lerenteea,  and
ioAb  tb*  iga  of  G>mr-iii,  poMeuing  the  ttmouiit
el  fortoiM  ipMifiwI  itere  (OeU.  x.  2a) ;  but  in
tinea  af  pamliai  dilficnltr,  tbeae  conditiani  wera
not  jnaktird  npon.  Thui,  in  coiuequence  of  the
■aici^  of  iMa  daring  the  ieeond  Panic  wai^  it
■a*  at  one  dnw  ordained,  that  ladi  under  seien-
tea  ntigbt  be  adaiitud  into  the  nnki,  and  that
their  time  ihoold  be  allowed  lo  count  ju*t  u  if
tkej  had  attained  to  the  legal  age  (lir.  tit.  £),
and  OD  the  other  hand,  when  itrennDUi  eiertioni
*tre  Ikttde  for  the  ^unpaign  aaainit  Peneni,  the
male  deoeed  that  no  one  under  fifty  ihould  be
eieaaed  from  nditting  (Lir.  iliL  33).  Moieover,
aat  calf  veto  all  (nebom  citiieiu  vithmit  dii-
tinetiaa  of  fortone  called  ont  on  lucb  occaai


d  (Lir,


.21,1


i.ll):


ud  after  the  iattla  of  Cannae,  eight  thouaand
liaTca  lAo  had  deeland  thenueliei  willing  to
fight  far  Ibe  Rpoblie,  vera  pntchaaed  by  the  alate,
■ad  bmod  bio  two  legioiu,  who,  under  the  name
ft  Vabmtt,  da|ilned  gnat  bnverr,  and  erentnally
ranied  ibor  freedem  (LiT.iiii.  67).

In  ■oaMDt*  of  (ndden  panic  or  when  the  neoea-
iin  waa  io  pnsiing  aa  to  admit  of  not  a  momenta
dd^,  all  fatmalitia  wen  diipenicd  with,  and
em}-  Ban  c^iabla  of  beating  armi  waa  aummoned
to  jain  in  waiding  off  the  threatened  danger,  a
(me  used  mder  anch  circnnutancei  being  termed


-. a  between  tha  agea  of  aerenteen  and

firtr  BU  did  not  appear  and  aaiwer  to  their  namei
er  coBtavuKiouilj  refoaed  to  come  forward,  the;
B%hi  be  ptmiihed  in  variooa  wajB,  —  by  fine,
I7  npriamiDBot,  bj  atripe*,  by  couliicatiim  of
laeir  {OMietlj,  and  eren,  in  extreme  casea,  by
being  aold  aa  alana  (Diooya.  liiL  87  ;  Lir.  vii.  i, ;
Varr.  ap.  OdL  xL  1,  ^  Nan.  i.v.  TaKbrimem;
Val.  Max.  ri  3.  j  4).  At  the  lame  time,  cauaei
■i|^  be  alleged  which  were  recogniied  aa  fbnnmg
alcgrtiiDBte  gnnnd  int  exemption  (^cacrdio  jwda
miUiai).  Thna,  all  who  had  aerved  for  the  full
penod  of  twenty  yean  in  the  inbntry  or  ten  in
oTaliy,  were  reiieTed  fioni  further  aerrice,  nl-
tboogh  they  might  atiU  be  within  the  regular  age  ;
and  Bi^iD  like  manns,  when  they  were  afflicted  by
aar  pieTaDa  malady,  or  diiabled  by  any  penonal
Meet,  or  ragged  in  any  (acted  or  ciril  officea
•Ueh  iBjnired  theit  conalant  attendance ;  but
thfac  and  aioulaT  plaw,  alUuugh  inalained  under
acdiBBj  ciKBmalaBcei,  miglu  be  nndeted  loid  by


EXERCITUS.  499

a  decree  of  the  acnato  "ae  Tacationea  Tulerant,"


laMam


ine  uila  Tacatiooii  Tenia  "
I  of  the  meoauTBi  urged  by


(LiT.Tiii.2a),and  o
Cicero  upon  the  aenat
wai  "  delectom  haberi  aubiatii  Tacstionibua"
(PAffipp.  T.  12).  So,  alH,  if  the  aoldier,  after
being  eoralled,  biled  to  appear  at  the  place  of
muater  appointed  by  the  comul,  hii  abience  might
be  juatified  by  tbiious  "  eicuaationeij"  a  liat  of
which  will  be  found  in  Gelliui  (ivi.  4),  (he  moat
important  being  Bcvere  bodily  ailment  {nvviuM
Kmttou)  ;  the  death  of  a  near  relation  {/kam/a-
miliare)  ;  the  obligatian of  performing  a  alated

While  thoie  who  had  aerred  (or  the  (tipulated
period  were  entitled  lo  immuni^  for  the  future,
eren  although  within  the  legal  age,  and  were  atyled
Emariti,  K>  on  the  olhi^r  hand,  it  appean  from
aome  [saaBgea  in  the  claaiica,  that  penona  who  had
not  completed  their  regular  tetrn  within  the  usual
limita,  might  be  forced,  if  r^uired,  to  aerre  be-
tween  the  agei  of  forty-fire  and  fifty  ( liv.  xxTlL
l!,x1iL31)  Senec. da  im.FiL  tap.  nit ;  QiuntiL
ii.^.%  65).  Toivaida  the  cloae  of  the  republic,
and  under  the  empire,  when  tho  legioni  tHcame
permanent,  the  aoldier  who  had  served  hia  full
time  received  a  regular  discharge  (muta>]  together
with  a  boonty  ( pratmaim)  in  money  or  an  allol'
ment  of  land.  The  jutisti  diitinguiah  three  kinda
of  diicbitrge :  ^1 .  M'uim  Aonsifa,  gnmled  for  length
of  aerrice.  2.  Miaio  cauitaria,  in  coniequence  of
bad  health.  3.  Mittio  Iffiaminioiftt  when  a  man
waa  drummed  out  tor  bad  conduct  (Macer  in  Dig.
«.  tit.16.  a,  ISi  Ulpian  in  Dig,  3.  til.  2.  a  2,
comp.  Hirt.  B.A.  5i  ;  SueL  JuL  G9,  (Mim.  24).
El  frequently  happened  that  emeriti  were  induced
to  continue  in  the  raoki,  either  from  atlachmeat  to
the  person  of  tho  general  or  from  hopea  of  profit  or
promotion  (Appian.  B.  C,  v.  3),  and  were  then
called  oeirrani,  or  when  they  joined  an  army,  in
consequence  of  a  special  inritation  fKvati  {ira-
kA^oi,  Dion  Cass.  Ir.  24).  Dion  Caiaiui  statea
(/.c)  that  troops  hearing  this  hut  dcnominalian  were
first  employed  by  Octarianus,  when  he  called  out
(irtni^nrir)  the  reterons  of  Julius  Caesar  to  aid
him  against  Antonius,  but  we  rvd  of  them  at  an
culier  period.  (Caca.  B.  6.  rii.  66,  £.  C.  i.  17,
iii.  88.)  [ErocATLj  They  must  in  no  way
be  confoonded  with  the  volunteers  mentioned  by
Polybiua  in  hia  description  of  a  Roman  camp
{rtrit  rear  iBtKoyTyiibr  trrpartixttiitwf  r^  rSiv
iririH'  x^ri),  who  seem  to  haio  fbnned  part  of
what  may  be  termed  the  persona!  auitc  of  the
general  (Comp.  Salluit.  Jag.  84.)  We  shall
make  some  further  remarks  upon  the  Veterani  and
the  changea  uitrodticed  by  Augustus  with  regard
- '■- of  aerrice,  when  we speak  of  the


2.  We  neH
he leg]


who  belong  to  our  fifth  perod.


sionof


inlo Coiortei, Mttn^jsfi, Cwiarioe,


QAjrtea.— It  will  bo  obaerred  that  Polybina
tolcea  DO  notice  of  the  CoAori,  a  di'ision  of  the
If^on  mentioned  ao  often  in  the  Roman  writera.
Hence  Salmasiui  and  other  distinguished  scholars
hare  aupposed  that  the  cohort  had  no  exiatenoo
until  the  time  of  Manus,  and  although  named  by
Liry  alnuft  immediately  nftci  the  eipulaiMi  it
Kits ^ ^-^ '^O"  ■


500  EXERCITUa

tbe  kingi  (iL  1 1 ),  ud  repcstodl;  aftcnrardi  (c,  g.
zxriL  13, 11)  he  may  be  nippoied  to  ipeak  pni-
leptically.  But  in  a  quotatinn  preMrred  by  A.
Qelliu  (AT.  A.  xvi.  4)  from  tho  trcatUe  D«  lie
MiUfari  of  Cinclu,  vho  i*  gcncmlly  admitted  ta
be  Cibciui  Aliinentiu,  tho  Himaliit  crmtenipoTuiy
with  Hoonibml,  we  find  the  cohort  not  only  n
but  epecilicBlIy  defined,  /■  Itgune  laU  etm
teiagmta,  isiBapiUi  IrigiMa,  Bohorla  dtamt .
Folybiiu  himtelf  uk<  tbe  Lalin  word  «
twice  in  hii  hUtory  of  Scipio'i  Spuiith  campsigni
(iL  23,  33),  giring  in  the  firat  of  thcte  pouegea
an  explanation  of  the  term,  lul  tJsMftv  . .  .  TprTf

nafi  'Pofioioi)  >iBi{|iTii  . .  .  where  il  muit  he  biuiie
in  mind  that  Polybini  uiei  the  word*  t^^io,
o'Wala,  and  owilpii  indifferently,  to  denals  the
ituiii|de.  On  tho  other  hand,  the  later  Greek
wrilen  generally  deiignate  the  maniple  by  ^x"t
nod  aJmoat  innriably  employ  inrilpa  tu  the  rrpie  -
■entativa  olaion.  Hence  coniudcntble  confiuion
ia  apt  to  ariie ;  and  Liry  hu  rendered  hi>  de-
icription  of  the  order  in  which  Scipio  marahalled
liii  army  at  Zamamiintelligible  by  tranilating  tIh
vrttfBt  in  the  text  of  Polybiui  by  ooiorfu  initesd
ofm(n^>ii&H(Liv.i)Li.  33  1  Fdyb.  it.  9)  ;  while
Polybioi  hinuelf  ii  giulty  of  an  iuconiittency  in
the  nme  ehaptei  vben  he  utes  the  eiprewion  raTt
tSt  ypoapaiiix'"  imlpaii,  for  the  ypoa^[Ulx<"


t  divided  ii


aipK  ai


moat  diatinctly

When  the  aoldicn  of  the  l^on  were  claitified
a*  Velitea,  HutaU,  Prindpei  and  Triarii,  the  co-
hort contained  one  mtiniphi  of  each  of  the  three  latter
donominoliont,  together  with  their  complement  of
Velitea,  u  that  when  the  li^on  contained  1000,
each  cohort  would  coniitt  of  60  Triaiii,  120
Principea,  120  llaitati,  and  100  Velitef,  in  sU
400  men.

The  finmher  of  cohorta  in  a  l^on  being  alwaya
ten  (Cindua,  L  c  ;  Cic  PiSip.  iy.  27 ;  the  worda
of  laidor.  Ortg.  IL.  S.  %  47,  arc  evidently  corrupt),
nnd  Che  cohorta,  during  the  republic,  bemg  ell
equal  to  each  other,  the  atrengih  of  the  cohort
varisd  from  time  to  time  with  the  atrength  of  Iho
legion,  and  thus  at  difFerentperioda  ranged  between
the  limlu  of  300  and  SOO.  They  were  regularly
numbered  (nun  1  to  1 0,  the  cenlurion  of  the  firal
century  of  the  firat  maniple  of  the  £rat  cohort
ivai  the  guardian  of  the  eagle,  and  hence  the  firat
cohort  leenu  nlwaya  to  hare  been  r^arded  aa
•Dpcrior  in  dignity  to  the  reaL  (Caei.  &  C  iii.  64,
Cic,  ad  AU.  V.  20.)  From  aome  eipreaaiona  in  the
deicription  gircn  by  Caeaar  of  the  battle  of  Phar.-
aalia,  it  hai  been  inferred  that  oven  then  the  Gral
cohorta  in  the  legiona  were  more  numeroua  than
the  reat ;  and  thia  waa  certainty  the  oio  under  the
empire,  when  they  were  termed  eohortamiiiiariaa,
and  contained  twice  ai  many  aoldien  aa  the  othera.
Tbui  the  legiim  deacribed  by  Hyginna  amounted
to  £280  men,  divided  into  ten  cohortl ;  and  of
theae,  the  SraC,  which  had  the  charge  of  the  eagle,
cooaiated  of  960  men,  while  the  renuuning  nine
had  4B0  each.

The  word  cohort  laitfd  ai  long  ai  the  word  la-
non,  and  «Tsn  longer,  for  not  only  doea  Ammianua
<iii.  1 3,  xiiii.  5}  apeak  of  centoriea  and  cohorta
in  the  army  of  Julian,  but  ooiora,  at  a  military
term,  ia  met  with  in  authora  after  Juitinian. Bui


althongh  oiAorte  la  round  i
tera  of  ihe  later  etPjuN,  t


prefer  the  somewhat  rogue  term  imen^  which
appears  in  T^itua  and  Suetoniua,  and  perhipi
even  in  Cicero  {odFam.  li.  10,  liL  13).  A'awn
accmt  to  hare  tignilied  atrictly  the  master  rolli
whence  the  phiaaes  nfrm  in  nmKroa,  dulrSiKn
in  nmaerrn  (Plin.  Ep.  iii.  3,  I.  30,  31),  tad  thai
aerred  to  denote  any  body  of  legianarica.  In  llw
Digeat  nnd  Ihe  two  Codea  it  ii  naed  aometimM  kr
a  century,  Bometimea  for  a  cohort  ]  by  Stietnuoi
( Vapat.  S)  lor  a  detachment  aelecled  frora  thm
different  legioni. Nor  iait  abtolutely  mtrieted  to


legior


aipti«i


Sritoum  (OrelL  1627),  N<mtH  J
(OruL  diiriii,;  OrelL  5410),  while  Ammiamu
Bppliea  it  to  aralry  aa  well  oa  infan^,  ajid  to
auiiliariea  aa  well  aa  l^onariea  (iiiiL  2).  In
like  manner  the  later  Qiveka  introduced  ifitfial
or  raii^iul  for  ooiorjo,  the  former  being  the  ci-
planation  ginm  by  Sl  Chrysoatom  in  hii  eipoajtion
of  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Acta  for  the  word
mtlfMiT,  while  Suidaa  inleifteti  vrdftu  by  ni-

Whenerer  OAart  occnn  in  the  I«tin  dai^ta  in
connectian  with  the  legion,  it  alwaya  aigraifiei  a
ipedEc  diriaion  of  the  legion  ;  but  it  ia  Tciy  fre-
quently found,  in  the  general  aenae  of  baOaliot,  to
denote  troopi  altogether  diitinct  fi^nn  the  legi<m.
Thui  in  Liiy  (ir.  39)  it  ia  applied  to  a  bodv  of
diimaunted  cavalry,  to  the  force  of  the  afliea
iaktriae  eoiorta,  x.  40,  41  ;  oo&ort  PfHgmit  ^rr.
14  ;  coiorttM  Manonim,  iniiL  36,&c.),  to  tbe
tnwpa  of  an  enemy  (rii,  7,  i.  40,  ni.  36),  with
varioua  other  modifitatianj  [  and  we  ahall  be  called
npiHi  to  ipcak  under  our  fifth  period  tf  Ooliorlit
pra/ioTiaiiat,  Ooioria  pedHalae,  Cbiorttt  eqaHalat,
and  aeveral  othera.

Jlfaiii)iii/u. — The  original  meaning  of  thia  word,
hich  ta  clearly  deriTsd  from  inaaw,  wai  a  hmd-
Jid  or  viiap<^hag^ttrmB,ftm,  or  At  like,  and  thia,
according  to  Romnn  tradition,  affixed  to  tbe  nd  of
a  pole,  lormed  the  primitire  military  atondard  ia
the  daja  of  Romuiua  —

rtitt  Buapenaoa  portabat  longa  iMi^iploi
Undo  manjplana  nomina  milea  habet.


(Ovid.  Faii.  i


117;


I  applied  to


under  the  aamc  t


impue  Pint  Aml  6).
body  of  loldiera  aenriog
ptaeeVarr.  Z.Z.T.  8,  ri-SS,
lii  Miiae  directly  with  niaaiu);
arben  the  pomterooa  maaa  of  the  phalanx  wai  r»-
nWed  into  amall  compsniea  manhalled  in  open
jrder,  theae  were  termed  mafn/w/i,  and  down  to  a
very  Ute  period  the  common  aoldiHa  of  the  legion
were  deaignated  aa  mwtiptdaTra  or  maiBpularii,
termt  equiialent  to  jprparii  miliia.  By  whom
thia  momentooa  innocUinu  upon  the  tuctiet  of  a
Roman  army  wai  firit  introduced,  it  ia  impoaaible
to  determine  with  certainty  ;  but  bum  the  remark
of  Liry  (liii.  S),  that  a  change  in  the  eqsipment
led  aoldiery  took  plaoe  at  the
period  when  they  began  to  receira  pay,  compared
with  tbe  words  of  Plutarch  {OamilL  40),  -wc  may
conjecture  that  the  leTotulion  waa  brought  aboot
rt  at  least  by  the  greatest  genera]  of  whoa
ibnt  republic  codd  hoaat  —  Carailloa.
hen  the  phalanx  waa  iint  brnkn)  np,  it  ap-
pears (Lit.  TiiL  8)  that  ewh  of  the  three  danea
of  Haitati,  Principea,  and  Triarii,  sontained  fif-
teen moniplca  ;  but  before  the  aecend  Podk  war
(aee  Cinciui,  ai
berofm '-


ins,  as  quoted  by  Oell.  abon)  tlie  nun-
uiiflea  in  eacb  c^.lbMe  dMtea  wm»  le-


•  o"


EXERCITtra
daoed  Id  ten,  w  itiled  by  Poljbitu.  Hence  it
it  tatj  to  csknlate  the  nambei  rf  Kildien  in  each
—"iplr^  AesrdiDg  tq  the  TBTying  muDben  ia  the
legioD,  It  bsmg  almTm  boziie  in  mind  that  the
nkiii  ami  eiceedsd  600,  and  that  tha  Velitet
«sn  DM  diTided  iDio  muuplet,  but  diitribated
tqallj  BniMig  tlw  bt«TT-an>uid  cumpwiiet.

Soae  miloii  optcnJIr  I'  Beau,  in  bii  **  M^-
noini "  on  tba  Legion,  muntuD  that,  tRtr  the
dittiiietiiaia  between  the  Hulati,  Pimaget  and
Triuii  wen  abolkfaed,  and  the  \tpoa  vat  mar-
■halted  ID  eobvti,  tha  diriika  into  toaiiipli


le  mdentood  to  indicate
a  avail  mmibtt  af  men  indefinitely,  or  a  maia  of
ten  HMien  qnartered  in  the  nnw  toit.  No  one,
huaeiB',  vha  mda  withmt  [vejadiai  the  woidi  of


iidoa  afdinea,  matupoliqae  conitatent "  (B.  C
29,  amp.  B.G.U.  26,  vL33),  and  of  Tacitai,
"awiWmnin  concionem  quia,  pennixta  Tidebatnc
dietadtre  in  Banipnlaa  jnbet"  (Aim.i.  34),  to-
gether with  the  etiU  man  explicit  ezpnaiioni  of

'  '0  other

/lart  to
le  ef  the  Ivger  nbdiTiuant  of  the  l^ioa
Indeed,  the  whole  ■jateni  rf  daiu^mg  and  naming
■ '  --  -  '■■ '  a  Bean  himietf  be-

ii  nninlelligihle
neiiicD.  Jib  the  lama  time
tt  maiipsbu  mmt  aomctiniei
be  akea  in  a  gownl  kuc,  a*  when  Taeitvi  givea
lUi  none  to  the  delachmeDt  of  liity  iDeo,  tent
into  Alia  hf  Nero,  fee  th*  pnrpoae  of  putting  Plantu
ta  death. {Aim.  lir.  &8,  &9.) At  to  the  identity

ttatea  Toy  diatincllj  that  the  centaiie*  were  divided


an  ataertioii  pfocoeding
faev  aadi  a  anvce  it  at  woithleo  aa  the  etymology
by  which  it  it  followed  op^

" ' ' —  The  dittributioD  of  toldien  into


I  noticed  ahore,  ^>eakfl  of
the  bra  lad  by  Bomuiu  againit  Amnlini  aa
frniaed  of  eentojie* ;  and  from  the  cloae  connections
betwem  the  centojiea  of  Semu  TnUiui,  and  the
erf^niBtiaB  of  the  military  force,  we  cannot  bnl-

ic  tank*  of  the  phalanx. For  a  long  period  a&a
•'■'  '■'  ■ •  ■ oimhe


iaTaiiably  liity  centurie*,  and


we  ban  bo  R*od  cridance  to  prove  that  any
rhanp  loek  {Wce  in  Ihit  req>ect  except  we  ehooie


ttofVegetiiu.
. ■.—  There  it  much  doabt  with  regard  to
the  inut  of  tha  wnd  j^pm,  when  need  to  d
a  diritMti  ef  the  Itfpon,  in  ouh  phiatea  aa  i^m
■ettnyhta  tcabuJKml  (Lit,  in.  23)  ;  anipoiiera

Hi  e^  maa»  agn  atilitSmi ptrgit  vaadwritm.

(Lir.  »Tiiii.  1.)  The  qseitiaD  it,  whether  in
theaa  faigpe  we  are  to  nnderttaod  that  a  maniple
it  —at  cw  a  cestnty.  On  the  one  hand,  it  ii
aJwitled  that  after  this  tegion  waa  marahnllcd  by
wbiati,  each  cBitmr  had  ill  own  ttandatd,  and
IB  an  fi>  at  the  aailW  age*  are  eoncenied,  Poly-
Ibm  mwaalj  miiMtto  then  were  two  ttandard.


EXERCITUS.  £0t

bearen  (llrlpu  m^iau^povi)  in  each  maniple
(tee  alto  Lir.  Tiil  8).  On  the  other  hand,  one  oC
the  name*  giren  by  Polybiui  to  the  maniple  ia
irji/taia,  which  teema  to  correipond  exactly  with
li^Bsn,  and  Vairo  in  bi>  ^loaaary  of  military  lerma,

teqtnmlur  ■ignnm,"  to  which  we  may  add  Liv.  Tirii.

1 4.,  "  ni  C.  Decimiiit  Flavui ligno  odrepto

primi  baitott,  manipulum  eiot  ugni  te  seqiii  jua-
■iaaet,"  and  u  to  the  irSpaT  n|>uua^pout,  although
there  were  two  atandaid-bearen,  it  diwa  not  follow
that  there  were  two  itandardt.

Ordo  geneially  aigniGea  a  cenlmy,  and  onfLaaw
dadoT  ia  aynonjinoni  with  eatiaiB,  and  daetn
diwin  rneant  to  be  one  of  the  principal
ji  a  legion.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the
celebrated  chapter  in  Liiy  (viiL  S.),  diaciuaed
aboTe,  ordo  undoubtedly  denolet  one  of  the  ori-
ginal maniplei,  and  when  we  read  in  book  xliL  31.
^'  Mibi  T.  Quincthu  Flamininoa  decnmnm  ordinem
haatatnm  odiignavit,'*  the  apeaker  aeema  to  declare
that  he  had  been  raised  from  the  ranka  to  the  pott
of  a  centurion  in  the  10th  maniple  of  the  Haatati.
Thcae  must,  however,  be  regarded  as  eicepliont.
Thia  wai  the  name  gireu  under


leaa,  decamat  or  ifscHru^  ia  called  by  Vegetiu
caput  cumtnttnaif  and  Ammianua  designatea  tha
mess-matca  by  the  word  ancorjionJa.

3.  Haiiati,Priacip>t,  Triatii,  Pilami,  AaiipOaiii,
AoietignaiB,  Prineipia.  —  No  teatonible  doubt
can  eiitt  that  the  Haitati  were  to  called,  bum
having  been  armed  with  a  iatta  (Hastati  dieti
jai  primi  iaitu  pugHaltal,  Varr.  L.  L.  T.  SB),  the
PriH£^fe$  from  baring  occupied  tbe  front  line  (the
etymology  of  Varro,  i.  c  ia  here  not  dii^nct,  pRIN-
cjFics  qui  a  pfiactpio  gtadiii\  the  TWom,  others
wjse  named  Pitaniy  from  having  been  ranged  be*
bind  the  lint  two  linet  at  a  body  of  raaerre  and
armed  with  the  pilian  (Pilahi,  firi  pSit . .  .
Pi/aai  Triarii  fao^iHi  dicti  juod  ta  aeia  larlio  ordiai
;  qaod  ii  nbmletaiU,


ab  BO  aHbadittn  dittmHf  a  qao  I'latUitt^


Van,  L  c  ;  camp.  Lir.  viii.  a),  while  the  Gut  twi>
linea  were  termed  coUectirely  A^itrpilam,  fiom
ttonding  in  front  of  the  FUaaL  Tn  procna  of  time,
it  came  to  paaa,  that  these  deoignationt  no  longer
eipreued  the  actual  condition  of  the  troopt  to  which
Ihey  were  attached.  When  Polybina  wrote,  and
lone  before  that  period,  the  Haitali  wen  not  aimed
with  iaitae,  but  in  common  with  the  Primc^a  bore
die  heavy  Ultima .-  on  the  other  hand,  the  pUaiti
onied  Katlat  and  not ;itlii,  while  tbe  Prituiptt  were
not  drawn  up  in  the  front,  but  formed  tbe  aeoond
line.  The  origin  of  thia  diacrepamy  between  the
namet  and  tbe  objecta  which  they  rnUHented,  it
aomewhat  obacure,  but  p^hapi  not  altogether  be-
yond the  reach  of  a  very  umple  conjecture.  The
namea  were  first  bestowed  when  the  Roman  anay
waa  disciplined  according  to  the  tactics  of  tha
Orecion  phalanx.  At  tlut  time  the  bastati  weiw
tbe  ikiruuihert  armed  with  a  light  javelin  <lhe
ioita  xeUaru),  who  were  thrown  forward  in  ad-
vance of  the  main  body,  and  it  it  with  reference  ta
their  ancient  duty  that  Enniot  in  the  eighth  book
of  hia  annala  uiea  an  expieaion  no  longer  ^ipli.
cable  in  his  day.
"Haatati  ^argnnt  haalat,  fit  fenetu  imbei;''


IS  8


■  O"


SOQ  EXERCITUa

Id  corrobomtion  of  tfaii,  it  Till  bo  wen  from  thi


The  Prmcipu  wen  the  Enmt  laoka  of  the  phalimi,
men  in  tbe  full  rigoiji  of  their  jeait  uid  ilreDgth,
dad  in  complete  defentiie  armour,  and  hence  dis-
tinguiiheJ  by  Lit;  (L  d.)  u  "  iniignibiu  maiime
■Tmii.*'  The  Pilani  vere  in  the  rear  of  the  phn-
buuc,  uid  u  thfl  oppoiing  boelB  Bpproacbed  each
other,  before  they  were  rcqnind  to  give  weight
and  momenliim  to  the  mail,  threw  the  henvj-
[nlniD  over  the  headj  of  their  comndes,  in  order
to  break,  if  pouible,  the  eoDtinaitj  of  the  encmy'i


"  Pe«c"


'«  the  P
ind  it  ii
ichlhejBi


AniesigriaiB.—'Wkilff  the  Haitati  and  Principcs,
taken  together,  were  jometimei  termed  AntepUaxi,
in  contrBili*tinctii>n  to  the  Tiiuil,  is  the  Hulati
'  alone  were  Bometimea  tcnned  Anlesiffmajii,  in  con-
'  tndiidnction  to  the  Principu  and  Triarii  taken
Iwether.  That  the  Anleeignani  were  the  loldieri
who  fmighl  in  the  front  rankt,  i)  mnnifett  frooi
almott  evorjr  passage  in  which  the  word  is  fbnnd
(e.  g.  LiT.  ii.  20,  viL  33)  ;  that  the;  wen  k  called
from  being  plnced  befon  the  ilandards,  ii  pmred
by  the  di.'KripIion  of  the  confuetoti  which  prevniled
in  the  engagement  at  the  Thraiymcne  lake,  "  Nan
ilia  (k.  pKgsa)  otdinala  per  principu,  hoitatoaqae
ae  Iiiarioa,  nee  ut  pro  tignitanleaignani,  pott  tigoa
alia  pugnnret  acici"  {Lit.  iiiL  i)  ;  that  they
were  not  the  Velitea  ii  cleai  from  the  manhalllng
of  the  troopi  before  Zama,  **tfiai  palentea  inter
nunipuloi  anteiignannnim  lelitibiu  complevit"
(LiT.  III.  33,  who  here  tranalatei  Polybiua) ;
that  they  were  the  aoldiera  who  (ocmed  the  tint
line  ai  diiclnguiihed  from  the  lecond,  oppeara  froio
the  narrative!  of  the  baltlei  agnintl  the  Latina,
**caefloa  hajtalos  principoqu^?,  alngem  et  ante
aigna  et  poet  aigna  fiictam,  triariot  poatremo  rem
re>titui>H"<Liv.Tiii,  1 1  ], and agninii  theTucaaii,
"eadunt  antetignani,  et  no  nudentnc  propugna-
toribut  aigna,  fit  ei  aecnnda  prima  aciea" (Lit.

inrther  erident  thai  the  poaition  of  the  "  aigna  "
WBi  behind  the  haitaU  and  before  the  princijHX,
Thete  tigna  mint  have  been  the  ordinary  itoadards
ef  the  maniple*,  for  we  know  that  the  aquila  wat
Li  the  ctutody  of  the  Gnt  manipia  of  the  triarii.
The  term  Anto^giunU  baring  become  eBtabliahed
M  denoting  the  front  lanki  in  a  line  of  bttttlp,  wai
Rt^ned  in  thiinneralaeiue  long  after  the  Hailati,
Principal,  and  Triarii  had  diuppeared  (leo  Caet.
B-  C.liS,m.  S4,  where  they  are  the  oldest  and
heat  loldiora,  who  now  led  the  van.  Comp.  Vniro
ap.  Nan.  a  d.  AtUnigaoMoran.)

Another  term  emploved  to  denote  the  front
raska  of  an  aimy  in  battle  amy  la  /Vhc^imi,  and
in  thii  Hiue  mnat  be  orafnlly  diatinguiahed  from
the  PriM/apia  or  chief  atroet  in  the  camp,  and  irom
Priadpia,  which  in  the  later  writen,  auch  ai  Am-
miaaoi  and  Vt^ioi,  ia  eqnivalenl  to  prinn^ida
Miia—  (Lir.  ii.  GS,  iiL  3^  viii.  10 ;  Siaenn.  ^>.


EXERCITU3.
bra,-  San.  Jag.  Btj  Tat  Jliit.  jL


1.  OriLii


4  ;  Ten


Senrcda  yiLteat.lt).
PoiltigKaii  doet  not  occur  ic  any  author  eariier
than  Amniiannt  Hareeltinu)  (xviil  8.  g  7,  niv.  6.
g  9),  and  therefore  need  not  he  illnatrated  ha«  ;
the  SiAt^noMu  nilta  of  Tacitui  {HiA  L  70,  iv.
33)  aeenia  to  be  the  aame  with  the  Faillarii,  who
&11  under  our  next  period.
Rorarii,  Aeeoid,  Fertnlmiiy  Jaealalont,  VililtM,


Light-anned  troops  {Imit  (wwiafiim)  were,
from  the  lint,  asiocialed  with  the  hoplito,  bat
under  different  circnnutances  and  distent  namea,
at  different  periods.

When  the  Haitati  bad,  in  a  great  imwuro,  oeised
to  act  aa  tirailieura,  their  place  was  auDnlied  br
theAomnt  (Roharii  dicti  ai  rora,  }iiaoo


/..  i.  viL  B  5T),  whole  method  ot
deacribed  above  (p.  495).  The  Aanui,  a>  de-
acribfd  by  Livy  (viii.  8),  were  inferior  in  equip-
ment to  the  rorarii,  although  employed  in  a  iJiiuLar
manner,  and  aaem  to  faaia  been  camp  fbUnwen  v

Varm,  L  c.  and  ap.  Kon.  Harcell.  i,  v.  aeenuif,  and
hence  the  name  ia  given  to  thoie  alio  who  attended
upon  magiitiatei  ot  other  officiala  (a.^.  Cic.  itd
Fam.  iiL  7,  ad  Q.  Fr.  I  1.  %  i,  7).  At  ■  later
period  the  aeoHui  vrere  sapemnnieianea,  who
•erred  la  fill  up  any  vacancies  which  occoind  in
the  couree  of  a  campaign  (AccaNs


tMlHo


,,  ^ ....  VajTO  girea  the  name

of  adacripHpi  (faod  oiin  adMer^jtbaniiB'  imtf^me*,
-nvitia  milH&Ht  qui  tweeedemil,  L.L.  viL  J  &6)  ;
Id,  according  to  Feitui  (p.  196,  ed.  MUI1«X  <v-
rata  wai  the  mune  given,  originally,  to  the  qp«ia
'  lieutenant  of  the  centurion,  a  bet  to  irfaich
the  Pseudo-AKonius,  pcrhapi,  rcfen,  when  he  nya

' """,  "^ArtxMt  nomen  est  ordinii  et

lililia,  nt  nunc  dicitur  princepa,  ret

nomiua  dc  Icgionoria  militia  tnmpta  nmt"

Another  ancient  term  tor  light-armed  aoldien
11  Ffrmlani,  a  word  found  in  the  Trinummus  of
Plauloi  (ii.  4.  BSy,  vhae/enalariiaamiaiM  aigni-
1ea  a  friend  nimble  and  prompt  to  lend  aariitance  ;
a  Solluat  (CatiL  60),  "  PDitqoani  eo  reatnin  «t,
mde  Afirmlariia  proelium  conunitti  poaiet ; "  and
iren  in  Tacitui  (Aim.iu.  3G),  "  ferentariui  giaril-
|uo  miles."  The  term  ii  twice  eiplamed  by
Vnrro,  who,  ut  his  tnstiae  De  Vila  Popiili  Romaid,
tfui  defining  aenaui,  addi  (ap.  Nan.  MarcelL
Daatrio),  "  Eoadem  eliam  quidaca  roohsnt
/frcnlarioi  qui  depognabant  pngnis  el  Upidibua,

""" uao  femntv,  non  quae  tenerentur  ;"

I (£.  L.  viL S  fi7)i  "  Faatarvtm a

fireado'.  ...  ant  qnod  ferentaii!  eqnitei  hi  di^

ea  modo  habebant  arma  quae  fitmlmr,  ut

jaculum,"  whence  it  appears that  honemea  aa

" u  fbot-Baldi«i WB«  sometimei  known by

kppsllatian. RararU  and  aaMiii  aland  to-


EXBRCITUS.
cpMtln  (ruL  ^7\  dnm  m  ilhutnitian  frran  thii
•anrce  "tunquni  Wtu  iimUiuBa  milu  Boruioa

ne  FtlStt,  odled  aln  /VwnMon^  becauM
Ibcj  wen  anplnjed  on  onlpiNt  dal;  when  tho
BooHu  WBC  majapei  bdbn  as  nwmy  (Featna,
t,  kX  wob  finrt  fbrnied  into  a  (oip*  at  the  >i^e  of
^^iia,  K  c  311,  M  WB  an  infonncd  b;  Lirj
(nri  t,  camp.  xriTiiL  21,  and  Val.  Max.  IL  3 ;
Pimliii.  IT.  7),  who  girn  a  miaute  dcKripCiaa  of
tba  Luuiiuilaam  which  led  to  their  imtiEutioTi,
■Dd  of  the  matmet  in  which  (hey  win  aimed.
It  it  tnu  that  tba  hiMoRan  nae*  the  term  Vtlila
iAn  the  epoch  m  qoctUoD  (e.  g.  so.  SS,  hit.
S4)  ;  mod  Poljbiiii,  in  like  nuuuier,  ipaki  of
l^r^u^X"  fa™  the  thneofthefint  Panic  war  i
bat  tbive  BXIHeKiiml  mnrt  be  nnduilaod  to  in-
dicate the  light-anDcd  ttecpa  ai  they  then  eiiiled,
—  '—'■'-  -"  - -'  «  Rotarii  fell  into  diioM,
or  TtfaKorrumJ.  We
the  nanatire  of  lirv,  that
Kb  the  Vtlitei  to  moimt  behind


erlaBa,tbe  a


h  legion


,  ,  M  mlj  one  in  which  the;  are  repreaenled
H  mfhijti  in  thia  manner,  allbongh,  in  later
liaMa,  It  WH  b;  no  mesu  anoommon  for  light-
■tted  trot^  to  mii^le  with  the  hDnemen,  to  keep
pace  with  thss,  and  to  rapport  them  in  theii
iptntiiu  (CacBT,  B.  O.  L  18,  nlL  19,  B.a  iiL
S4  ;  eaU  Jtg.  91).

The  brtign  light-armed  trooja  will  b«  noticed
iBdn  ibe  next  epocb.

TIk  qfflan  ijflie  Z^lgiim.

TVAbl —  The  chief  officoi  of  the  legion  mn
Ac  Tribmm  MaHum,  rendered  hj  the  Oreeki
XiAi^XM.  TrUmmu  ii,  nnqneationahlf,  derired
btm  tribm:  and,  aoording  to  Vam  (£.  L.  t,
I  Bl),  in  ancient  timei  thiea  were  tent  to  the
vmj,  —  one  from  the  Ramnea ;  one  from  the
Laoen*  ;  one  from  the  Titiea,  —  who  vanld  then
be  the  commandHi  oftbe  originU  legion  of  3D00.
h  tbe  time  of  Poljbiiu,  the  number  in
«M  ail ;  but  who)  and  mider  what
lUa  incnMe  took  place,  ii  unknown.  Two  pai-
mga  from  lirj  (ra.  6,  rt.  30),  to  be  mora  [«■-
tienlailj  adreitid  to  hereafter,  bj  which  Sigoniui
endaTomed  to  throw  light  npon  the  qneiCion,
admit  of  an  interpretation  totally  diiltreDt  from
that  wkicji  he  hu  asigned  to  them,  and  they
lean  the  matls  altogether  in  donlit.  After  the
mmber  aii  vaa  once  ettabliihed,  it  doea  not
»^fietx  to  have  Taried  fbr  many  centuries  nor  do
se  knew  what  ehangea  were  introdnced,  in  thia
t^itet,  during  the  dedino  of  the  empin.  The
caae  in  LiTy  (iliL  SS\  when  fonr  military  tti-
bmea  an  repraented  to  hare  been  ehoaen  from
tfce  MOtle  to  command  fomr  tegioni,  nppoiiiw  the
text  to  be  baltleea,  ia  manifeiuy  qnite  tpeei^

It  mait  be  midentood  that  the  authority  of
rack  tcibimewaaiMit  confined  to  a  particulBr  portion
o(  the  \tpaa,  bat  eitended  eqasDy  oier  the  whole.
In  Older,  bcnrcTer,  to  preieat  amfiiiiao  and  colli-
DOD,  it  waa  the  ptactice  (Polyb.  ti.)  f«  the
tfibanea  te  diride  themielTea  into  three  aectiona  of
twD^  and  ndi  pair  undertook  the  rmitine  fimctionB
fbctWDBDMhiDiitcf  tbeiii;  dmiif  which  actife
-T***'*— *  in  the  6dA  nanafly  bated.  (Camp.
Lir.iL  41,  *'Stcaiidae  Ic^onia  FnlTJna  tribnnut


EXEIICITUS.  '«03

and  already  detaUed  ander  CastrA,  and  to  (be

general  anperintendence  which  ihej'  nmit  hare
eierciied,  we  perceiTe  that  they  noniinated  the
centoiiona,  and  aaaigned  to  each  the  company
which  ha  waa  to  command.  They  pieaided  alio  at
couita-martlal,  and  bad  the  power  of  awaiding  the
hiffheat  poniihnienta.

Up  to  the  year  a.  c,  SSI,  the  tribanea  wera
choeen  by  the  tommanden-in-chie^  that  ia,  by  the
kinga  in  the  Grtl  inatance,  and  afterward*  t^  the
cnnanli,  or  a  dictator,  ai  the  caaa  might  be.  In
the  year  aboie  named  the  people  aiiumed  to  tbem-
aelvea  the  right  of  elec^g  either  the  whole  or  a
certain  number,  it  ia  impotaible  to  lay  which  (Lit,
Tii.  5),  bnt  Ibey  Mem  to  hare  allowed  matter*  to
retuni  to  a  gnat  ertent  to  tbtdr  former  atale  until
B.  c.  31 1,  when  it  waa  ordained  that  they  ahonld
dioou  uiteen  for  the  four  legkma  (Lit.  ix.  30)  ;
but  wbelhet  thia  embracod  a  whole  or  a  part  only,
u  a  point  upon  which  we  are  again  left  in  doubt.
Flam  thia  time  fiHward,  in  rirtue  of  the  ngalioB
then  paiaed,  the  people  continued  to  elect  the
whole,  or,  at  all  erenla,  the  greater  nmnbei  until
B.  c  807,  when  the  connila,  Clandiua  Ken  and
Lirini  SaJinator,  appointed  the  tribnnea  to  nineteen
out  of  the  twenty-three  l^ona  of  that  year,  the
people  taking  to  tbemaelTea  the  nominatian  to  the
firat  Ibnr  only  (Lii.  xxrii.  SG).  When  war  waa
declared  EtgoioM  Peraeua  B.C.  171,  a  apedal  act
waa  jnaaed  that  the  militair  tribmea  fbr  that  year
ihonld  not  be  eleded  by  ue  Tolea  of  the  people,
but  iboold  be  nominated  by  the  conauu  and
praaton  (Lit.  xlii.  31.)  ;  the  aame  arcanaement
pmboblj'  waa  adapted  the  fbUswing  year,  6r  it  ia
particnlarly  mentioned  that  in  the  thitd  year  of
the  war  (B.C  1 G9),  the  people  named  the  tribunea
of  fbnr  h:giona,  which  were  kept  in  reaerre  (Lir.
xliii.  12)  ;  and,  finally,  in  the  fourth  and  lait  year
of  the  war  (b.c  168),  the  aenate  reaolvcd  thai
the  tribune*  for  the  eight  legion*  abonld  be  named
one  half  by  the  people  and  one  balf  by  the  canania,
Aemiliua  Paului  being  allowed  to  select  out  of  the
whole  body  thoae  whom  he  conaidered  beat  fitted
for  KTring  in  the  two  legiona  which  he  waa  about
tianaport  into  Macedonia.  Polybioi  (ri.  IS)
en  incidentally  to  the  &ct  that  aone  of  the
tribunea  wera  ehoaen  by  the  people,  and  iome  by
the  coDmla,  but  without  aped^ing  the  proportiona,
and  thia  diriiian  of  patronage  probably  anbaUted
ao  long  aa  the  fbnna  tiC  the  conatitution  were  main-
tained, for  OTcn  nndcr  Angnatua  the  people  re-
tuned  lome  power,  nomiully  at  leait,_m  the
military  electiot
theee  oScei  wi
prince  eioluiiTely.
ages  of  the  republic  the  nominaliDn  of  tribune*,
~  ~  t  elected  by  the  peoj^  vaa  rated  not  in  the
oaula  alone  but  In  piwraiaula  alao,  and  generally
thoae  who  held  the  chief  eommand  in  an  army.
ina  Cicero,  when  in  Cilieia,  offered,  at  the  re-
eal  of  Bnitna,  a  tribnneahip  to  Scaptiua  (Gib  ad
It.  tL  3)  1  and  the  orator,  at  another  time,  give*
hint  to  Caenu,  when  in  Oatil,  that  he  might
beataw  n  tribnneahip,  or  aome  loiji  office,  on  Tn-
(Cic.  ad  Fam.  rii.  A)  ;  while  Caeaar  hhnadf
fbund,  to  hit  coat,  that  he  had  attended  too  nnicb
to  the  daima  of  friendihip  in  granting  theaa  ap-
pointment!. {Caea.  B.  a.  \.  39.)  Thoie  tribune*
elected  by  the  Totea  of  the  people  were  tenned
Omiliati,  thoae  ehoaen  by  the  gtaiaal  Ai/bM,'  be-
aaya  Featna,  their  pririlegca  wen  fixed  by


e  held  t>


tM  GXERCITtrS.

•  hw  of  Rntilliiu  Rnfiu.  (Lir.  liL  S  ;  Piead.
Amw.  h  Vtrr.  Art.  i  30  ;  Fomu,  «.  e.  Rufi^)
That  ^  trtbtmei  wen  not  apon  an  eqnalitj  U
dm  from  the  eipreaian  of  Lity  (ili  " '  "  '
ACoip  trdimu  priiHK)  Mctmlaa  legiu:
ftom  the  ComdiBs  lav  quoted  by  Cicero  (Pro
Cbsit.  54),  where  the  tiibimea  of  the  Grat  foni
lei^oiu  are  eTidently  r^nrdcd  u  lupariiiT  to  othen;
How  thii  ptecedence  wai  rerukW,  whether  by
•eniority,  by  the  mods  of  elKtion,  or  bf  ume
othfr  principle  we  cannot  determine.

We  haTe  teen  from  Poljhiia  thnt  no  one  *»»
riigible  to  the  office  of  tribune  who  had  not  lerred
{at  ten  youi  in  the  inboliy  or  liie  in  the  cavalry.
This  rule  admitted  of  eicrpticm,  fiir  we  find  that
the  elder  Scipio  Afriouiiu  wm  tribune  of  the
loldien  at  the  battle  of  Cuinae  (Lit.  ixii.  53),  al-
though ceitunly  not  twenty  yean  old  ;  and  Hat-
teniiiu  roae  to  the  Hme  nok  in  hi>  lecood  cam-
paign. AoguitDi  introdnced  cert
■Uogether  new.  He  permitted  the
ta  wear  the  bmica  iaUelavia  u  loon  u  they  ai-
mmed  the  manly  gawn,  and  to  cemmenee  their
military  career  u  tiibnnei,  or  aa  commanden
(prat/iitl)  of  csTalry  (SneL  Oetav.  38).  Such
penona  wen  the  THJibh  Latidami  (Soeton.  Dem,
10),  whom  va  find  frequently  commemorated  in

theini "■

S379,

■llnrioni  in  Hence  (Sot  L  6.  35),  and  in  StaCiiu
(SflMi.  T.  I.  97).  We  find  ai»,  in  one  paauge  at
buC,lhephiBae  Tribwuii  Aw/iticlaviiu  (SueLCM.
10).  We  can  iCircely  luppoie  that  raw  yeathi
entering  the  army  for  the  fini  time  were  actually
sUowed  to  eiereiae  the  authority  which  the  name
implie*  ;  ud  hence  we  may  conijude  that  in  their
caie  it  wu  a  mere  honorary  title.  Bj  the  later
vmpeTora,  tribaneshipa  were  beatowed  without  re-
nud  to  the  birth  of  the  indiridual  j  and,  in  order
that  they  might  hare  an  opportunity  of  obliging  k
gceater  nunbei  of  applicant!,  the  psit  waa  fre-
qnsDtly  eonftrred  for  lii  monthi  only.  Hence,  we
lead  in  Pliny  (Q).  It.  *.  ]),  "  Hune  rogo  •ematri
tftjuaaai  iplendidiorem  faciaa,"  and  in  Jurenal,
"  Sanalri  latum  digilia  ciicumligat  aura,"  where
there  ii  an  alintion  to  the  gold  ring  which  formed
oae  of  their  inugnia.

Tribune*  were,  frinn  a  very  early  period,  diitlD-
guithed  by  their  dmi  from  the  common  aoldien
(Li*,  tii.  34),  and  their  eqaipmenta  and  tatirau
m  the  middle  of  the  third  century  may  be  leen
from  a  cniioiu  letter  written  by  Valerian,  when  he
bettawed  the  command  of  certain  battalicnt  of
Saniceni  on  Pnbui.  (Vopiic  Pnb,  4.)  Under
the  empire  they  were  attended  by  a  certain  nmo-
ber  of  i^iparitoni,  or  of  loldien  who  walked  be-
fine  diem  (Lampcid.  Alt*.  S*v.  53),  by  a  Ficariiu,
at  aide-d»<amp  (Vopiac  AmtluBi,  7.  10),  and  by
a  penoo  termed  Ckniaiiantu  Tribani  (VaL  Mai.
fl  1 )  Fiwtin.  iil  U  ;  Orelli,  Inicripp.  Lot.  3465),
who  wai  ]inbably  ■  sort  of  fijgle-man  who  gare
ceRun  liraiali  according  to  the  orden  which  the


with  the  Comiculaiini  of  a  centnriw  (VaL  Uai.
TL  1.  g  II),  of  a  propaetor  (OreU.  3486),  and
otheta.  (OrelL  8487,  353^  cgmp.  1351,  eomp.
Snet  Dom.  17.)

lySnmi  QiiortHim. — It  hai  been  m^tuned  by
■nne  critic^  that  in  addition  to  the  iii  trihunea  of
Ak  legimi  there  were  tea  inferior  tribunea,  each
af  whwi  <ommanded  a  cohort. We  bare  no  rea-


EXEECITUS.
ton  to  beliere  that  any  luch  tribmMe  aiiilcd  erea


to  late  a>  Hadrian

1  for  Hyginua,  in  hi.

ninute

d»cr

plion  of  a  coi

red  for  the  officeiB,  makei  no  mention  of  them.

true  ^t  we

read  in  Caeaar  (fl.  C.  ii.  20),

and

m  Pliny  {Ep.

ii.  9  1  comp.  Jut.  L  58

Slat.

S^v

T.  S6>  of  iribanet  who  commanded  cc

horls;

but  thoae  in  Caeiai

were  not  legionar,  but

iary

ich.  in  all  probability,  v

iTSo

cohort  alluded  to  by  Pliny.

1  rnd^r  Anni.tui  nnJ  h<>  •««»>«  7VA—

Under  Anguitut  and  bit  to
employed  wifli  reference  to  many  military  officea.
Thua  Vellciui  Patercului  telli  ui  (iL  i  04),  that  he
diftchaiged  the  dutiet  of  Tribtovn  Ctutronai,  and
in  intcripliona  we  meet  with  7K6«iu  /VcHtoruMi
(OreU.  1133),  TVihiau  Fabnat  A'amUm  (OtdL
3140),  and  many  othen.

CoUuriatet,  — <  Next  in  rank  to  the  Tribanua
waa  the  Ceaiario,  wbfi,  at  the  name  impliea,  com-
manded a  centuryi  and  the  century,  being  termed
aUoonfo,  the  centuriona  were  freiinently  detignated
ordaam  daclam  (hence,  adaun  orditit,  i^ffirn
*~  win^mre,  &c),  wordi  repreeented
biiloriana  by  iKtaarrifxti  or  tb-
(lapxBi,  and more rarely  by  tjijoh^'- The
lumber  of  cenlurioni  m  a  legion  waa  *ii^,  that
leing  at  all epocha the  numbf
(Dionya.  ii.  107  j  Tae.  A«k.  i  3!
The  moral  qualitiei  deiired  in
icribed  by  Polybiui  (yl  S4),  who  tella  na  that
te  t^aided  ai  bett  adapted  for  the  offici  were
torn  not  M  much  remarkable  for  daring  nlooi
for  calmneu  and  aagacity  ;  men  not  eager  to
b^in  a  battle  at  all  haiudi,  but  who  wonld  keep
their  ground  allhoogh  DTervhelDKd  by  a  mperier
force,  and  die  rather  than  quit  their  pMt. Their
chief  ordinary  dutiei  were  to  diiU  the  toldisa,  to
intpect  their  armi,  clothing,  and  food,  to  watch  the
execution  of  the  toilt  impoted,  to  vint  the  centinela,
and  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  their  men,  hoth  in
imp  and  in  the  field. They  aal  ta  jitdsei
m  minor  offencea,  and  had  the  power  of  u>-
ig  corporal  poniibment,  whence  their  badge
of  office  waa  a  Tine  lapling,  and  thua  nlcf  ia  fire^
qnently  uied  to  denote  the  office  ittel£  (Tae.  .^aa.
'  33 ;  PIui.  H.  N.  lir.  1  ;  Martial,  x.  S6  ;  campL
UT.  Tiii.  347,  xir.  193,  vAb*  pon  WMi  ;  Sper-
an.  Hadriam.  10.)
According  to  the  tyitem  dctcribcd  by  Polybioa,
le  centoriona  were  cboaon  according  to  merit  by  the
tribunea  ('E^ijav  Tafiipx""  ipurrMriry,  rabjeet,
'  ^ eTident,  to  the  control  of  the  cooaoU

33,  34)  ;  duiiiwihe  doclina  of  the  M~
public,  it  waa  notorioui  that  Ihete  potta  were  made
~~ rbject  of  mercenary  traffic  (gaan  aam  paaaaiaa

onju-iatiu  el  rtauriai  1  Cic.  pro  Leg,
MioaL  13.  <i<od  r  entanaHu  palam  ttuditoi  t  Cic.
'  I  Pimm.  36) ;  and  under  the  empini,  tbe  grealeat
irraptim  ^retailed  (Tae  HuL  L  53,  liL  49;
Plin.  Ep.  fi.  25),  although  many  Uwt,  aa  may  be
Been  upon  rclenince  to  the  codes,  wen;  promut-
gated  from  time  to  time  to  remedy  auch  diaordera.
Tbe  regnlat  pay  of  the  ccntnncma  it  eonridered
nnderanother  head  [8tifindi{;>i]  ;  hot,  in  additioii
to  thit,  their  income  wa*  increaaed  by  tbe  Butiey
which  they  reoehed  from  the  aoUien  lor  Ifars


aUe  duliei,  and  oUmi  iDdnlgenee*.  Thit  aboH,  to
tubrenire  of  all  ditci^line,  probably  oroae  dmuig
the  confiuioo  of  the  anl  war^  and  gtadiallf  ba-


EXBHCTTUS.
one  n  inhilaaUe  that  Otho,  to  mit^  all  pu-
tir*,  gnuted  to  tba  cmturiaiu  &  fixed  mm  ant  of
tbe  impcnil  eicheqner  M  a  compenuticni  lor  thew
nuliuiiaita ;  and  hit  gample,  m  thii  mpect,  mi
toliowrd.  bj  thfl  mat  worthy  of  hii  tocceHoti
(Tic  HitL  L  i6 ;  comp.  1 1 7.)  Eren  the  tribnna
■ppcw  to  bate  deriTed  purqaiiitei,  called  lUlla-
lirat,  ban  tbe  ntioiu  i^  the  loldien,  and  thew,
■Itkngh  for  •  ume  ttrictlr  prahihiled,  were
erestiHllj  recognUed  u  UwfiiL  (SftttMe.  Hadr.
10;  S|«niu.  i'tmn.  A'y.  3;  Lamprid.  Alex.
5».  Ifi  :  Cod.  13.  tit.  58.  a.  13 ;  Cod.  Theod.  7.
lit  4.  a.  29.)

It  will  be  M(o  from  Po1;Ihii*  tbat  of  tbe  two
wntnriniia  in  each  nuuif^e  tba  one  fint  cboaoo
kuL  tbm  eammaDd  of  the  right  dirisicn  (d  /iif
aywM  ol^tMl  i^rroi  tov  It(iov  fiipavt  r^t
mlpmai,  the  other  of  the  left.  The  century  to
"*"''""  ' ' 'a  the  firrt  ceotary  of  the


laUf  witb  the  title /Vior,
bciag  called  J'critn'iw,  tbe  jinom  in  each  of  the
ihiH  diTiaioDi  of  Tnaiii,  Priacipei,  and  Haitati
beiog  the  toi  centiiriou  fint  chseen.  (Pdyb.  tl
34.)  So  long  aa  theae  dinuoni  were  recognised,
■11  tke  ECOtDrku  of  the  Triatii  appear  to  hare
Boked  bcfbte  ihoae  of  tbe  Piiudpee,  and  all  the
amtariaaa  tf  the  Priodpea  beioie  tboee  of  the
ButMj.  JtoreoTcr,  aince  tbe  maniplea  were
■■■ibaed  Bi  (adi  diTuinn  Grom  1  to  10,  tbefe  wu
jcgtaUy  ■  iqalar  pngrwio  ftom  the  fint  cen-
nnkn  of  the  fint  maaiiJe  down  to  tbe  •econd
ewtnin  of  tba  lentb  maniple.

Tba  fint  cenlaricai  of  Uie  fint  manipk  of  tbe
l^iwii,  origioallf  named  (Lit.  tII.  41)  Ceattrio
rrimm,  aod  anerwardi  Onimia  Frimipili,  or
anplj  Frimipitm,  occnpied  a  rery  conipicaaii*
foUiai.  He  itaod  nerl  in  tank  to  the  tribimi
■lilitaa :  be  had  a  uat  in  the  military  conncil
committed  the
nelimea  ityled
JfwijAr  (Val.  Mai.  L  6.  g  11;  Tac /fiit  iiuSS;
Dnayi.  x.  SS),  and,  imds  the  emoin  at  leaal.  hii
office  waa  reiy  Inoatii


amiahed  hj  tl


seanange-

I  which  Sp.

LigoatiiiBa  givea  of  bit  own  career  in  the  34di

■dicpta  <rf  the  42d  Boole of  Liiy. Ho thni

ituLUmm  adngnavit ...  me  irapeiator  dignnm  ja-
dicaiit  tni  primMm  imlaliii  priorii  eentunaa  ad-
ligBBRt  ...  a  M'.  AcUio  mihi  pHmia  prinoepa


|ue«  Emai  pfiaum  pUiim  duB."  The  gtadoal
■■e^  hrma  the  lauka  beii^  to  the  pDit  of  ceo-
tnfiiB :  I.  In  the  Imtb  maniple  of  tbe  HaalatL  3.
la  the  fint  ceutnry  at  the  fint  maniple  of  the  Hay.
tae.  3.  In  the  fint  centnir  of  the  fint  maniple  of
(Iw  Principca.  4.  In  the  fint  century  of  the  first
■■niple  of  tbeTriarii

Bat  eroi  after  the  diatinctioa  between  Hoitati,
Prindp^  and  Triarii  wai  altogether  abolitbed,
■ad  tMf  wen  all  blended  together  in  the  cohorti,
the  B>Ba  nonwDdatare  with  r^nrd  to  the  centnriea
wai  Ibdt  conmaiideia  wu  tetaizieS,  ulthoagh  it  ii
^  BD  ncana  ouy  to  petcnTC  bow  it  wai  applied.
n*  cobalt*  being  ntimlMRd  from  1  to  10,  and
(ha  liat  cahott  latving;  unqneatiooBbly  tbe  piece-
ittfBt  oict  the  otbcn,  we  may  mppote  that  tb*


EXERCITUS.  fiOfi

reat  took  nnk  in  like  manner  in  r^pjlar  order,
each  coalaiiiing  three  maniple*.  The  fint  maniple
in  each  cohort  may  have  been  wmsidered  ai  repre-
•enting  Triarii  accordin);  to  the  ancient  arrange-
ment, the  lecsnd  maniple  in  each  cohort  m  repn-
•eating  Piincipei,  Che  third  ai  repicaenting  Hail


If  thii  hjpotbi


be  admitted,  the  Privdpilia,
oiled  down  to  a  Tery  late  date,
wu,  under  the  new  ayitem,  the  fint  centurion  of
the  fint  maniple  of  the  fint  cohort,  and  u  mch  had
a*  formerly  the  charge  of  tbe  eagle ;  thui  also,
when  Caeaat  layi  {B.  C.  iii.  64),  "  Hoc  cuu
aqniln  conacrratur  omnibu  primae  cohortii  centu-
rionibu  interfectia  practer  prvtcipent  priortm^  be
mutt  intend  to  deaignote  the  Unt  centnrion  of  the
•ecood  maniple  of  the  fint  cohort,  who  would  at
full  length  bare  been  denominated  primiu  prawepM
prior  J  m  like  manner,  "  Cretenii  bello  octovn
prHctpem  dutil  "  (jE^.  ad  Bnd,  I  8)  will  denote
tbe  aecond  maniple  of  the  eighth  cohort,  "  Q.
Fulginini  ex  primo  iailiUo  legionia  XIV.  qui
piopter  eiimiam  rirtulem  ex  Inferioribnt  ordinibut
in  eum  locum  perrenerat "  (Caca.  B.  C.  L  46),  and
"  Cum  ligniTer  firvni  iaitati  lignum  non  potaet
moTere  loco  **  (Cic  de  Die.  L  3£),  the  third  maniple
of  tbe  fint  cohort.

That  great  difieiencet  of  rank  eiiited  among  the
cenluriont  ja  eiident  from  the  phroaet  prmora
OBtftmomm  (LIt.  xitL  5),  primi  ordma  (*.  a.  chief
ccnturiont,  CaeL  B.  C.  tL  6),  at  DppoKd  to  u/e-
noTH  onJuKi  (C^et.  B.  C.  L  46),  and  iiffiiiii  ordina
(Ibid.  iL  35)  ;  and  that  promotion  from  a  lower
to  a  higher  grade  fieqaeally  took  place,  ia  evideat
from  the  career  of  Liguttinui  u  detailed  by  him-
lelf  (Lit.  xlii.  34),  of  Scaeva,  who  wu  laiKd  "  ab
DCtaTii  ordinibut  ad  primum  pilum  "  (Caei  B.  C


riora  araat  ordiatt  huint  legionia  ttaducti  ; "  but
we  are  ignoiant  whether  in  ordinary  casei  thia
promotion  proceeded  regularly,  or  waa  conducted
according  to  any  fixed  principle.  While  on  tba
one  hand  we  ibould  be  fed  to  infer  that  there  waa
■ome  regular  progTeaaioD,  from  inch  obaerralioni  ea
'^Erunt  in  ea  legione  fortitaimi  Tin  ccutunonet
gni  jam  prinuM  ordinibut  aj^mpin^iiarmt^  [Coea.
B.  G.  T.  14),  and  while  it  it  probable  that  lucb
wBt  actually  tbe  caie  when  the  legion  became  per-
manent, ao  on  tbe  other  hand  it  it  difficult  to  tee
how  promotion  could  have  been  ayitematic  dunng
tbe  long  period  when  the  legiont  were  dltbanded
ommally,  lince  the  choice  of  the  centurion  depended
entirely  npon  tbe  diicntion  of  the  tribmieB  tnbject
to  the  control  of  the  general,  who  wu  himailf
changed  from  yfsr  to  year,  eo  that  ihote  who  lerred
ti^lher  in  one  aeoton  might  be  in  different  legiont
and  different  countliei  the  next  Nor  wat  it  un-
conititutionol  for  a  centurion  who  had  commanded
one  of  the  higher  comfoniet  to  be  called  npon  lub-
leqnently  to  fill  lower  ttaliona :  tbit  wu  not
common,  at  we  perceive  fiom  a  cnae  in  which
atrenuoua  reaiitance  wu  offered  by  twenty-tbtee
centurioni  "  qui  primoi  pilot  daierant "  to  enrollii^
nnloH  their  fbmier  rank  wat  guaranteed  to  them
(LiT.ilil  32,33),  butthureuitancewuoveicome,
and  it  wu  held,  that  the  comul  ought  not  to  be
pterented  fiom  attigning  that  pott  to  any  indliidnal
.  in  which  Eiii  tcrvicei  were  likely  to  froTe  mott


106  EXERCITU3.

vilnaUa  ta  the  Mate.  It  wu  not  until  the  jar
B.  c.  Ml,  that  a  law  wu  paued  Mr  whieb  it  wu
crduned,  that  no  ods  wlio  bad  beSd  the  office  at
militar;  tribune  ibould  be  eligible  u  a  ceDlurion
(fu  gititt  nldtr^miaa  milUunJitateljpostea  ordinvm
isetar  taet,  Lir.  tii.  41),  and  at  that  time  the
regaUtion  vat  made  in  conKquence  oT  the  diililce
enterlaiiKd  by  the  eoldjen  to  a  particalsr  indiridiul
who  dnring  a  lacccuion  ef  joui  had  been  altei^
nately  a  Inbune  and  primipiluj.

Optioaa.  —  In  like  manner  u  the  trihnnei  naned
the  ceatuiioni,  le  mch  cenlunnn  named  hie  own
lieutenant,  who  ii  csUrd  by  Polybini  atipry6t,  be-
canH  hie  ttotion  wu  in  the  rew  of  the  company.
By  Liry  (viii.  B),  a  lubaltem  of  thii  Icind  ia  named
auiicaititriOj  but  the  indiTidual  there  mentioned  wai
selected  for  a  particalar  purpose,  and  it  leelDi  clear
from  VoiTo  aod  Faloi  that  the  regular  tcnn  wu
cplio,  which  ligniGci  b  general  a  penon  choien
(pptahu),  by  another  u  an  auittanL  They  agree
'a(  to  the  etymology,  but  the  former  (L,  L.  t.  SI)
confiaei  the  term  to  the  lieutenant  choHn  originally
by  the  decurio  in  a  troop  of  caraliy,  and  addi  that
the  tribune!  had  aunmed  to  themKlTea  the  patron-
age, "  Quoa  hi  (tc  (/ocanma)  prime  adminiitnn
ipii  libi  adoptabanC,  c^ona  Tocari  coepti,  quot
DUDC  propter  ambiliones  tribuni  faciunt,**  while  the
wordi  of  the  latter  (p,  198,  ed.  MUlIer),  although
Yery  corrupt,  teem  to  imply  that  they  had  been
oriffinally  appointed  bytbe  Qribunei,  and  the  nomi-
nation aiterwardi  Iranaferred  to  the  centuriona ;
'^Oplm  qui  none  dicitur,  antea  ^pcllabatur  Ae-
DCMxt,  hia  adjutot  dabatur  a  Trib.  Mjlitum,  qui
ei  eo  tempore, quern velint, centurionibua  per-

eat."  The  eiplonation  in  the  Eiceqita  of  Paolua
Diaconua,  it  aomewhat  ditTerent  &om  either :  "  Op-
'  optatio,  aed  in  re  militari  rtpiiQ  appcllatui


la,  quel


la  obeat  publics
officia"  (p.184,  ed.MUller).

Fonrli  Period.  Fron  Oe  timet  of  &»  Gracchi
until  On  downfaB  d/"  Ma  Repailie.  —  The  century
which  immediately  preceded  the  deitruction  of  the

of  mtlcu  excitement  and  reTolutien.  Avaat  num-
ber of  organic  changca  waa  introduced  into  the
smiy,  the  greater  number  of  which  are  eommoidy
aacribed  to  Mariiia,  but,  although  he  waa  nn-
doulitedly  the  author  of  many  moit  important
modification!,  othen  not  leia  lital  were  [he  remit
of  the  new  poaition  aaaamed  by  the  Italian  ttatea  j
and  aome  muit  hare  nquired  ao  much  time  for
their  fldl  development,  that  they  could  acarcely
hare  been  the  work  of  a  aingle  individual.  We
ahall  call  attention  very  briefly  to  the  leading
fijature*  of  the  new  lyilem,  m  lo  far  aa  they  can
be  gleaned  from  the  pegei  of  Salluit,  Cacior,  and
Plutarch,  who  muit  be  here  regarded  at  oui  chief
gnideo.

1.  In  the  lint  coniabhip  of  Marina,  the  legiona
vrere  thrown  open  to  citiieua  of  all  gtadca,  widiont
dialinction  of  fortune. (See  abore.)

2.  The  whole  of  the  legionoriea  wen  armed  and
equipped  in  the  aarae  manner,  all  being  now  for-
niahed  with  the  pilum  ;  and  hence  we  aec  in  Taci-
toa  (Awt.  liL  ZS)  the  pila  and  gladii  of  the  legioD-
ariea,  nipoaed  to  the  Ikutas  and  apudoa  of  the

3.  Tho  legionoriea  when  in  battle  order  were  no
limger  anangcd  in  thiee  line*,  each  conaiating  of


EXEHCITUS.
ten  mani^ef  with  on  open  apace  hctaeni  each  ma-
niple, but  in  two  lineo,  each  connBting  of  five  co-
horta  with  a  apace  between  eaeh  cohort.

i.  Tba  yoDUger  aotdiera  wen  no  longer  placed  in
the  front,  but  iu  reeerve,  the  Tan  bemg  compoiad
of  veterani  u  may  be  teen  from  varioua  ftittff*
inCaenu'.

5.  Aa  a  neceiaary  reaalt  of  the  above  tmage-
menti,  the  diitinction  between  Hutati,  Prinripei,
and  Triarii  ceased  to  eiiaC.  Tbeie  namee,  aa  qipiied
to  [articnlar  claiaea  of  aoldien,  are  not  fbond  ia
Caeni,  in  Tadtna,  in  the  treatiie  of  Hyginna  (a
culiametation,  nor  in  any  writer  npon  iiulilaiy  if-
Jairv  after  the  time  of  Maiina,  while  Tafflt  ezplBina
them  u  tenna  no  longer  in  nae.  The  wordi  Hu-
latua  and  Frincepa  occur  at  a  later  period,  in  con-
nection with  the  legion,  but  are  uaed  only  with
reference  to  the  precedence  of  the  cenMiiea  and  of
the  officera  by  whom  they  were  commanded,  u  we
have  pointed  out  when  trmting  of  the  flBtairJb»a.

6.  The  Velitfia  diaappeored.  The  ahirmiahera,
included  under  the  general  term  ^ani  ontatanx,
cnnaiated  for  the  moat  part  of  foreign  m


dartmen  (jaculaitina).  Troopi  of  thia  deacnptioa
had,  it  ia  tine,  been  employed  by  the  Ranaiu  even
bcrore  the  Kcood  Punic  war  (Lit.  ixiL  37),  and
lominated  levivm  amatorunt  (a.  amdnm)
Lit.  £.  e.  and  iliL  6fi,  where  they  an  die-
tinguiahed  Emm  the  Vdila),  but  no*  the  lent
'  rn  coniialed  eiduiirdy  of  fbreignen,  were  '
into  a  regular  coipa  mider  their  own  (Accra,
longer  entered  into  the  corutitntJOD  of  the
indeed,  the  terms  lagtrmariMt  and  Itri*
ra  became  oppoaed  to  each  other  in  the
Latin  writera,  juat  u  Bw\iraj  and  ^lAol  among
the  Greeka  (e.  g,  **  cecidemnt  er  levi  ainutnra
legionariia  curriii,"  Auct  rfe  B.ffia-


pia.


24, ,


L  16). The


nd  in  CadBT,  and  that  they  bad

Co  eiiit  when  Livy  wiote  ia  dear  bom  the

aion  in  hit  descHption  of  tbe  battle  of  Zama,

after  haTinp  uacd  the  word  "  velitibua,"  be

addi  the  explanation  "  eo  tone  lerit  armatnra  erat "

I.  33). When  opcrauont  requiring  great  ac-

7  were  undertaken,  luch  u  could  not  bo  per-

led  by  mere  akiimiahen,  detachmenU  of  le-

lariea were lightly equipped, and marched

lont  baggage,  for  theae  apecial  amvieea  ;  and

hence,  the  fiequent  occnntnte  of  inch  phraaea  aa

txptditi,  aptditi  miUta,  trptdHae  eokotUt,  and  evn

apediiat  ttgioBa.

7.  The  cavalry  of  the  legion  underwnt  a  change

every  reipect  analogous  to  that  which  toDk  plare

regard  of  the  light  armed  troops. WliorTcr

reads  with  attention  the  history  of  Caeaar^i  cam-

m^ns  in  Oaut,  will  perceive  that  the  number  of

Roman  equitci  attached  to  his  army  wuvery  anall,

and  that  they  were  chiefiy  employed  aa  aide-de-

ipa,Bnd  on  confidential  miisions. On  the  other

Id,  it  is  evident  that  the  bulk  of  hit  cavalry  oai-  '

siated  of  foreignera,  o  hct  which  becomea  strikingly

apparent when  we read  that  Ariovistas banng

stipulated  that»the  Komon  genoal  should  come  ta

their  toafereace  attended  by  avalry  atone,  Paiaai

feeling  no  confidence  in  hia  Oanlisll  bona, dia-

monnled  them  and  mpplied  th«t  place  by  aoldjen

oftfae  tenth  legion.  (,B.a.Hi.) In  tika  ntannef

thsy  ceased  to  fbm  part  of  tka  legioi^  and  Btam


BXBRCITU3.
tkk  time  ftrvard  ts  End  llie  le^am  and  the
anirf  quken  of  u  completely  dinuict  from  each
>ther(*.7.  CUBT,  S.C  T.  11,16;  Appian,  A  C.
T.  i). Whether  then  wu  not  ta  ■  ceiUin  extent


S.  When,  ifter  the


of  the  Social  War,


■  ktf«  nnpistion  of  the  inhabitant!  of  Italj-  were
tdmitted  to  the  priiil^  of  Roman  dtiieiu,  the


rf  rig)>t  iBB>p«ated  vilh  the  legiofua,  and  an
way  doting  ths  bit  jam  of  the  tnablic  and
■Bda  the  eariier  empenm  eoniiited  of  Soaumai
Ltfiimrt  tl  ArMHa  t.  AKrHiam,  the  latter  term
coBfreheDding  trouft  of  kU  hiadi,  except  the
legioDB  anl  the  imperial  goaidi,  whether  in&ntcy
<r  mralij,  light  anned  or  lifST;  armed,  merce-
Hrici  in  the  paj  of  the  state  or  contingeDte  fhr-
ntbed  U  the  com  of  kingi  and  citieg  in  aJliance
with  Rook.  The  inbntrr,  not  leoionarf,  vaa  far
the  BMt  put  organiied  in  bUttJioiis  railed  at-
tarUa,  the  sTal^  in  sqmuJron)  calted  aloe,  the
nmabcn  ia  Mch  ooiort  and  aia  Tuying  according

mrHiMjat  aatortiiiai  (Tacit.  Ann.  iv.  B) ;  offnua
tijimmi  elaeaiiirtttqm  prrmemivU.  (Tacit. /f.
£.  11.)  Wlwoerer  the  word  todi  ii  ap^ied  to
traD^  alter  the  date  of  the  Marne  war,  it  la  gene-
nUj  ta  be  regarded  as  eqn
■IthoBgli  ■  dntiactioD  ii  onaiionallf  dni
tveai  mma  m  the  leiue  of  the  ciTiliscd  alliei  or
■thjeeta  of  Rome,  and  the  barbarian  Oermuu,

u_..^]. a___!__j_ __j u(l,j„ „]jj| jjj m„^

B,PanL

Diat).  Id  the  deeeripdon  of  the  armj  of  Oerma-
BicM^  aa  BianhBlled  to  encoimter  Anninini,  tociae
tmiatta  ia  Died  in  the  most  extended  ngniAcation,
fcr  m  an  told  that  the  armj  wmt  compoaed  of
mmiHiara  OoOi  Otrmamigiu,  paUtet  nr/ittani,
jw^^m  le^HM);  dnaa  pratiaria*  oAorla  ae  ddeeti
vjmla,  ymatmir  ligiomt,  Itvit  armalura,  iqmlei
toffUlutii,  cTT^aAi  ■oetwam  crJurrUt,

9.  The  Damec  of  lerrinR  troopa  in  Italf  anat
Ben^arilj  baTe  liaagti  mth  tfau  change  of  dr-
iiianliiii  I  a  We  are  deatittite  of  any  definite  in-
iaiiMliiiii,  bnt,  in  all  probabilitj,  a  ajatem  of  con-
aaiplien  wai  eatabliabed  and  carried  ont  by  maui
of  Cbaoewftm*,  aneh  aa  were  Dccaiionally  appointed
Bi  metort  timei  whim  difficnlty  vai  experienced
ia  finding  men  (lee  Lir.  xiiL  1 1  ;  comp.  Cic.  ad
AIL  lii.  10;  Hirt,  B.  Ah*.  E) ;  and  ve  Snd  that
the  Knpmr  Tiberin*  waa  not  aatitfied  with  ob-
•~«ng  Tolimtetn,  whom  he  regarded  aa,  for  the

■I  part,  ai  indJi&nnt  elaai  of  loldieti,  and  in-
n  the  neceMity  of  reemitiag  the  legiona


■  I)


it.  The  naat  important  change  of  all,  in  .
w  ioeiety  at  hrge  waa  eoaceined,  waa  th
wftkli  we  haTt  already  adTerted,  the  ealahluhmenl
■aaaly  gf  the  auBtaiy  pro/euiim,  and  the  dialioc-
tisa  Mrw  ErM  introduced  between  the  ciTitiaa  and


wbicb  na  ene  could  hold  any  mBgiitraej'  (tbAi-
vnV  itfxV)  until  ha  bad  completed  ten  yean  of
■Bilary  aariee,  a  rale  which  had  &llen  ao  eom-
'it  conraa  of  aixtj  or


EXERCITUS.  to;

aerenlT  vean  afterwarda,  that  we  ace  Cicm  past-


lilitary  life  waa  limited  to  a  ain^e  campwgn  onder

'ompeina  Stiabo.
FyVi  Period.  PrcmOeatra/uhniaiit  of  lit  im-
perial ymennHtia  tiajtl  lit  ag)  of  Ae  AntomieM,
B.  c.  31— a.  n.  IfiC— We  ihaJl  be  enabled  to  form
a  correct  idea  of  the  maleriala  which  conatinited  an
imperial  aim;  duruig  the  fint  two  centuriea  of  our
era  by  paaalng  mider  rsiiew  the  rariooa  kinda  of
troopa  for  which  Hyginua  prcneaea  to  proride  ac-
conunodatioa  in  the  camp,  wAoae  conitractioa  he
dncn-bea  [Cabtiu].  We  ahall  not  take  theae
preciael;  in  the  tader  in  which  they  are  named  by
him,  but  ahall  eudeaTOar  to  arrange  them  aya-
tematically.

A  regular  army  during  tbii  period  conaiated  of
a  certain  number  of  lA^otta  and  of  Ai '
•<-••■• - ■ ■  ■ dirided  il


perial  guarda,  which  ^tpear  under  leTenl  diKsreiit
ftinni,  diatingniahed  1^  difioent  name*  ;  and  the
AuiciBa,  which  were  aabdivided  into  Soaat  Cb-
iotiet  and  NaUoat*,  the  hUler  betog  lor  the  mcM
part  barbariana.

I.  The  Lt^tmee,  aa  «s  hare  already  had  oeco-
aion  to  point  out,  although  atill  compoaed  of  per-
»n>  who  enjoyed  tlw  pnTilegea  of  Raman  dtiieoa,
were  now  laiaed  almoet  eidnvTely  in  the  pn>-
Tincea  ;  and  hence  Tiberina,  when  about  to  under*
take  hia  long  projected  progreaa  through  the  pn^
Tincea,  alleged  ai  one  of  hia  eicnaea  ^c  quitting
Italj,  the  neceaaity  of  recruiting  the  l^iona  1^
a  regular  levy  or  conaeriptian.  <Tac  .dm.  iT.
4.)  The  legion  vai  dirided  into  tea  cohorta,  and
each  cohort  into  aiz  cenloriea  ;  the  firtt  cohort,
which  had  the  cuatody  of  the  tagle,  waa  doable
the  aiae  of  the  othen,  and  contained  960  men,  Um
remaining  cohorla  contained  each  4B0  men ;  and
conacqucQlly  each  ordinary  century  BO  men,  the
total  nrength  of  the  legion  being  thm  G280  men.

%  Ltgioram  VexiUarii.  The  term  FsnUorn  or
Fealia,  which  i>  found  repeatedly  in  Tacitua,  hai
proTed  a  aource  of  the  greateat  embairaeament  to
eommentatora,  and  a  vaat  nomber  of  hjpothewa,
all  of  them  highly  nnaatia&ctory,  have  been  pro-
pounded in  order  to  reconcile  the  ttalemenli  of  the
hiatorian,  which  at  fint  light  appear  replete  with
contradictiona.  But  the  dilHcol^  baa  ariaen  en-
tirely from  almoet  all  ctitici  haiinir  entered  imon
a  wrong  path  from  the  rery  Gral,  at
auppoaidoa  that  Veiillarii,  in  otci,
trnm*  of  the  lame  kmd,  whereat,  in  reality^,  the

aigni&cation  in  each  particuhur  caae  &om  the  worda
with  which  it  ia  immediately  joined  or  the  general
context  of  the  paaaage.  FenUum  ii  uaid  in  ths
eadieat  account  of  the  manipolar  legion  (Lir.  Yiii,
8)  to  denote  the  alandard  of  the  ordo  or  maniple^
Texillariua  being  the  standard  bearer  ;  and  in  pco-
ceii  of  time,  leiiUom  waa  employed  to  denote  any
military  atandard  whataocTer,  except  the  aaocd
eagle  of  the  legion.  By  a  careful  examination  of
the  Turions  paiaagea  in  Tadtna  where  Vexillarii
are  meationed,  it  will  be  Been  that  he  deaignatea
by  thii  appeltatlon  any  body  of  loldien  aoring
apart  &om  the  legion  under  a  aeparate  enugn,  at
even  an  army  collectiTely.  In  thu  aoue  we  muit
nndentand  auch  expreenon*  aa  VtrOlmi  tiroHUm
(Aon.  iL  7a)  j  Gtrviamca  aetHllI  (HitL  L  SI)  ;
Garmam*  wsJ<n  {Hid.  L  70)  ;  vartUu  infiricrk


808  KXEBClTUa

Oamaiaae  proAmdu  at  (Hat.  i.  53)  ;  Emitu'ii
tealia  (Htat.  il.  11).  COTupiue,  MampuU  aula
eo^ilam  ledltiaBem  Naiqioriuin  miid  . .  .  rarilia
onnslfnl  {Aim.  L  SO).  But  when  VeinUaTJi  or
Vatiila  ore  Hccompanied  lij  aaj  word  which  de-
nobs  in  iminediiiU  conncctioD  with  a  legion,  ai
vaUlarii  ditairdiam  Ispoiam  (Ann.  L  3B)  ;  qaaria
dtdma  Ugio  aan  vBniUaria  victlimaiiu  (Ana,  iiT.
34)  ;  CM*  vailSl  fWiu«  iKtBidaeqiis  tt  aamaat
Britamiianat  hgiomtm  {Hit.  iil  22),  then  they
bear  a  specific  meaning  conaecled  with  c«rbvm
chaagei  ijitrt>daecd  by  AuguituL  We  have  ucn
that  under  the  npnUlc  d  citizen  miaht  be  called
npon  to  eeiYe  for  twenty  yean  in  too  iafontry ;
nen  the  legimu  b«tame  permanent  the  full  pe-
riod was  genenllj  exacted,  and  tboee  who  choM
to  lemain  aA«r  tbcii  time  wai  completed,  were
termed  mlaraiu.  Auguitui,  in  the  year  B.  c.  13,
limited  the  period  of  leryice  to  twdve  yean  for  the
pnetoriant,  and  uiteen  fgc  the  leglonoriea,  after
which  th^  were  to  be  eolitled  to  an  honoonble
dudurge  (imMia  lowtfn),  aod  t«  leceiTa  a  boonty
[praoKiam,  eoaanida  nuniDiuHs) ;  but  not  long
uterwardi,  a.  D.  S,  it  wai  found  neceaiary  to  m-
creaie  the  period  Xo  aiiteen  yean  fijr  the  praa-
torwoi,  and  twenty  Sac  the  li'gionariei.  At  thit
time  it  appean  wotmble  that  the  practice  vu  Ent
iaBroduccd  of  diicharging  the  »ldieia  from  the
l^ion  at  the  end  of  eixteen  yean,  and  kocping
ttum  together  under  a  Teiilluia  with  peculiar
priTJIt^ai  during  the  remaining  tour  j-eon  of  their
lervica.  Abuio,  hnwerer,  crept  in,  and  many
loldien,  imtead  of  being  penaioned  oS  at  the  end
of  twenty  yean,  were  tompelled  to  remain  for  a
much  longer  period,  and  the  diKoatenl  caiued  by
Inch  oppmiion  gave  liae  to  the  formidable  mutinio
in  Pannonia  and  Germany,  which  bant  fwth  im-
mediately after  the  aca»ion  of  Tiberiua. The


they  ibaold  receiTe  it  full  diichaige  and  the  bounty
at  the  end  of  ^xteen  yean;  while,  in  order  to
calm  their  wrath,  Gennanieui  propoaed  to  put  an
end  to  the  disorden  of  which  they  complained,
and  te  cany  honeilly  into  effect  the  aeeood  arrange-
meot  acccrding  to  which  they  were  to  aerve  in  the
le^on  fbi  (iiteen  yean,  and  then  being  embodied
Imder  a  Teiillum  by  themielTea  to  be  relieied
of  all  irkiome  laboura,  and  te  be  required  only  to
£ue  the  enemy  in  the  field.  (Dion  Caaa.  liv.  2S,
It.  33  ;  Suet.  Octav.  19  ;  Tacit.  Aim.  L  17,  36,  the
pcopoud  contained  in  the  Uit  pouage  being  in

riii4;  exatuUorari^qia  aenademajednentj  ae  ntiam
wA  vmiio^  ceteroram  immmna  ttiti  pr^fidttimdi
kottit}.  The  vexiUarii  or  vexiUa  ^niowm,  then,
wen  then  »1dien  wbi>,  after  having  •crved  in
"'e  legion  for  liiieen  yenra,  "" —


bat  CO


impanyw


under  a  Teiillum  of  their  own,  until  they  recsiTcd
their  fuU  diichaive.  Uyguiui  etatet  the  number
attached  te  each  legion  aa  nmaliy  about  fire  or  lix
hnndied.

3.  Etoeati  (iniaX^i).  Dion  Caaiiui  telli  ni
that  Auguitni  began  to  employ  troopi  bearing  thii
denomination  when  he  called  out  (ItnKiKfatr)  the
Teteniu  of  Juiiua  Caeiar  te  aid  hun  againit  An-
toniuB.  They  ttill,  nyi  Dion,  form  a  peeuliar
corpa  (o-imifui  Hiar),  And  carry  etlcki  m  their
handi  like  centurioni.  (Dion  Com.  iIt.  12,  It.  24).
Oalba  gare  the  muoe  of  Evooaii  to  a  body  of  life-


EXESCITUS^

fti»idi  uiilituced  by  himielf,  who  an  described  by
Suetooiua  {Gaib.  10),  ■*  Delegil  et  equeitrii  ordinit
juTenei,  qui,  manents  annuloruja  aureomm  uni,
EtaxOi  appellarentur,  eicublBiqua  circa  cvbieulnni


To then  b  lepuBts


4.  Coiorta  PraMoriae.
snicle  [>  devoted.

5.  Bipaitt  Pmaoritmi. [Pkaitobuhl]

G.  PrampSoTtt.  Theie,  accotdnig  to  the  anange-
menti  of  the  Hjginion  camp,  were  placed  cloae  Vt
the  penon  of  the  ecaperor,  and  mnit  haro  been  a
•mall  corpa,  coniiiting  of  pemni  who  had  die-
charged  the  office  of  legioDOiy  PnaafSuM,  and
who  now  acted  ai  goardi  or  aide-dscampa  to  tho
conunander-io-chieL  PriwivSaTtm  ii  met  with  fre-
quently in  Tacicui  and  in  micriptioai  (x.  g.  Tacit.
Ann.  ii  11,  iv.  73,  HM.  L  31,  B7,  iL  22,  iii.  70,
if.  16,  ^m.  nil  36  ;  OreUi,  No.  517, 748,  3568).

7.  O^idaUi.  Tbew  appiw  to  hare  been  puhlki
•erronte.  Thu»  wo  read  in  Appnleini  of  the  offi-
cialii  of  an  aedilc,aiid  inUlpian  of  the  officialia  of
a  praetect.  (Dig.  36.  tiL  4.  a.  S  ;  aunp.  Gruter,
Inter,  p.  ccccuii. ;  OreUi,  No.  29G3,  4013.)

0.  EqiBlii  Siiigataru  Impiralorii.  Theae  an
claaied  by  Hyginua  along  with  tha  Eqmta  Pnt-
ioriani,  were  like  them  quartered  in  the  iMttn
Praetoiii,  and  equalled  or  illghlly  erceeded  them
in  number.  The  only  claaaical  author  by  whom
they  are  noticed  is  Tadtua,  who,  in  that  pivtioa
of  hii  Hiitoriei  (it.  70)  where  he  is  dewnbirw  the
confiuion  that  aioae  npon  the  death  of  Vitdlin^
mentioni  among  the  treop*  "  aia  SagHlarimm  ei-
cita  olim  a  Vitellio,  deinde  in  partes  Veapaaiani
tiaasgreasa,"  but  they  are  very  fteqnenlly  cun-
memonted  in  inscriptiaai,  aa  Eqiala  Saigiiam  a.
Singalarii  ImptnUoru — Aagtuli — Qunrtt — Do-
Bun  ffoUri,  &c  (Orcll.  No.  3£2£,  Ac,  SIIM,
3496, 1 576),  and  on  one  stone  we  nad  T.  Fi.  avii;s.
QuiNTiNua  Eo.  Siva.  Ado.  Lscrua.  Ex.  Bxui-
ciTU.  RiiTico.  Ex.  Ala.  Fiivia.  Pi^  Fidbu.
MuLUBi^  (Orell.  Vo.  3409),  which  may  lead
us  to  suppose  that  they  received  th«i  appdlatiu
in  consequence  of  being  selected  individually  6xim
other  coqis,  and  thus  they  may  belong  to  the  Bnw
chiiswithtbe£^B£lei£i;Efi(Or^  3155)  and  ths
Ea.  Cvsv.  Ado.  (OreU.  4463).

9.  Statara. — Hyginns  ossigna  ■  place  for  two
"  Centuriae  Stotonun  "  immediately  ui  the  reu  iJ
the  Practoiium  which  they  pcotect«d,aDd  allot*  to
them,  OS  to  the  Piaetoriani,  twice  as  noch  apace,
in  proportion  to  then:  numb^  ai  to  the  tnajx  of
.1..  1^— Hence,  it  is  evident  that  thej  wen

mz  the  life-gnards,  although  memben  of
iBTe  been  employed  m  the  capad^
noiiE  bearing  the  some  deskgnation
aployed  both  under  the  reinblic
hy  those  invested  with  nulitarr
command.  (Clc  od  Fan.  ii.  17,  19  {  "  at  ad  ta
staforu  mna  tt  littora  cum  iitetis  mittcrem  ; "
comp.  X.  21  1  Vulcat.  Oalllc  AmL  Oat.  9  ;  Urn-
prid.  Ahr.  Sev.  62  i  Ulpian,  Dig.  1.  tit.  1&  a.  4.)
In  inscriptions  wo  find  Statdu.  AL'o.  (OrclL
3521),  Statos.  Civitatis.  VuNia.  (lb.  27BO),
and  once  STATottUM.  Evocatl  (lb.  3422.)

10.  SpKuUilont,  although  not  provided  foi  by
Hyginus,  ought  to  be  mencioned  here,  unce  ihry
alio  occupied  a  place  among  the  pcraonol  atteruhnu
of  the  eniperon  (J^mbri  Odaatm  niiaiWirwIiii
ipani/alanin  lata  mrpom,  TaciL  HiM.  n.  11,
camp.  L  34  g  Suet.  tUoti.  74.).  They  wen  the
eiecutionen  of  the  annj  (Senec  it  Iia,  L  16  j


their  body  may
of  couriers,  as  p
certainty  were  e


EXERCITU3.
ft.  Unk,  n.  27,  ind  ununcnL  of  Cbtjiitt, ;  eomp.
Snel.  Cal^  S3),  tod  leeiD  to  haTe  scled  u  toaiie
likewue. (Tuit.  Hid.  iL  73.) Thef  fbnned
ngakr  coipi  with  oSnm  of  theit  oim  (Ttwitni
■{«k>  of  an  ofrio  ^itcMlalenim,  H.  I  2S),  and


of  >  riith  toWt  of  apcculattHT*  (OnIL  351B)
*IUle  Inoi  wiotber  iuKriplion,  in  vhicb  B  ceitaii
L.  ^'eturio*  u  •tvled  Phaip.  Tusmai.  Spici;
LAr.,  rt  ii  olaniKat  that  thtre  matt  Jiare  b«en
uraontnl  ■pecnlatorciL  The  word  U  nted  also  by
Taeiid*  ta  denote  an  vdinaiy  leant.  (.<»■.  ii.  12.}

11.  The  KoutiihoveTeTtfonnedadiitinctbodj
under  tke  lame  of  JCijiiinifom,  and  Hjginni
qiocten  than  ■ppropriatdj-  it  the  eiuemity  d'  the
cuDp  Deanat  to  the  Pnelorim  gate,  and  doM  lo
the  Piineen.

12.  Aiat. —  Frcna  the  time  when  the  caTalry
they  were  fonned

■  called  o&K,  which  Taried  in  number
Hyginui  |mTidea  ac-
ii  camp  for  font  Aba  MUlianat,
■Dd  for  fire  Alat  (^Hugtmariat.

T1>c  Ala  lUUHaria  WM  dtrided  into  24  tnnnae,

eadi  of  which, according  to  the oonjectnre of

Schelioa, cooiialed  of  10  men  eicept  the  first

wbieh  had  80. The  commander  of  the  wbole  wai

^  the  inferior  ollicen  were  24

I,  24  iiqiliearii,  md  24  laipdjilarii,  that

a  dccario,  a  dupticarini,  and  a  leiquiplariui  for


The  Ala  tjgageaaria  waa  dtTided  into  1 6  tnnnae
with  a  decnne,  ■  dnplicariiu  and  leaqnJplaiiai  for
cath,  and  wa  may  suppote  that  each  tnniia  con-
Med  «f  30  men  except  the  fint,  wbieb  thm  would
kaieiO.

Eadi  demrio  had  three  horMa  allowed  to  him,
Bch  diqiliearina  and  each  Kiijniplarini  two  hraiea,
B  that  the  total  nnmber  of  bonei  in  the  Ala  Mil-
£bki  waa  lOSO,  and  in  the  Ala  t^imgaiaria  S04,
cufauire  of  thoie  belonging  to  the  Prtuftcfi.

It  ii  eridenl  that  the  i^i^airH  and  mtpiiplarn
Ibc  named  were  aubaltenu ;  according  to  the
aoeiait  aigniGcatJoo  of  dupluarim,  aa  ieurpreted
by  rHia  (I.  L.r.S  90),  it  denoted  a  ealdier  who
n  aBoOBnt  of  hia  lalonr  wu  allowed  donble  ra-
tin  (eomp.  Lit.  xrir.  47,  ii.  £9),  which  moat  of
cvQiae  hare  bem  conrertibie  into  inCToaaed  par.
(OrDi,  C.  /■  USfi.)  Such  penona  are  freqncnlly
frcaasted  to  na  in  inicriptioca  under  the  cognate
ftn-T  J-y'— J— ^  duplicariai,  and  dupiidariu*.  Thaa
wc  haTc  DuFL.  N.  Eiri-OB.  {DnpUtrii  mntri
mian^ormm,  OrdL  306)  ;  Ddflahio  hta.  L
Oh.  a&31)  ;  DuFLAHiue  Alakius  (lb.  2003)  j
IhiPUCABira  (lb.  3533);Diiflici*b.  (lb.  3534).
glipyitni  I'ai,  which  eridently  denotea  a  loldiec
vhe  leaJTed  •  ntion  and  a  half^  appeari  in  no
■Uhon  czcqil  Hyginna  and  Vegetim^  of  whom
^  latter  gire*  them  gold  eollaii  and  a^lo  them
TonftaU  implartM,  ionpoH  mtqnjilam  (il.  7),  bat
Ike  title  il  nwt  with  in  imcriptiooi.  (OnU.  S470.)

13.  Mam  Eqmie: Ptmxomi FmdariL  —


KXERCITUS.
named  altore  waa  guarding  the  pioni
ibnned  their  laboon  ' ~ '
lea  Tacitna  ipeaka


4  they


"  Alarea  Fannonioa,
'.  10)  he  mnat  mean
tarnliy  of  a  difiewnt  deicription  from  the  Paa-
momi  vandarii  of  Hyginua,  who,  pnhably,  r»-
aembled  the  Couaeki  of  modem  waibm.

14.  Cotmritt  ptdSalat,  were  batlaliona  niaed
chiefly  in  the  proTincei,  eompoeed  of  Roman  citi-
aeni,  of  mbj'ecta  and  aliiei,  OT  of  dtiiena,  alliea,
and  tubjecti  indiiciiminately.  They  wen^  it
wonld  appear,  not  bound  down  by  the  lame  atriet
mlea  with  regard  to  ttie  period  of  ternea  aa  the
legionariea,  not  aa  hearily  equipped,  and  nol  aab-
jectod  lo  (he  same  eihoniting  labonn.  Vi^iu,
in  the  chapter  where  he  endeavoan  to  aeeount  tat
the  decay  of  the  legionary  force  (iL  t\  thmwB
KHne  light  open  theie  pointa.  To  ihia  claaa  of
troop*  belonged  the  coiorlei  atailiam,  the  mun/ia
liorHiai,  and  the  todomm  coior1e$,  of  whom  wa
«d  in  Tacitiu,  together  with  a  multitode  <^
othen  recorded  in  inscriptlana  and  named  for  the
jortfrom  th^nationiof  which  they  were  com-
posed. The  exprcaaion  eoAortem  rfaetnonc  odavam
(Tacit.  H.  i.  64)  indialts  that  theac  coborta  wera
ibered  reguUrty  like  the  Irgioni.  Hyginua
idea  aicommodatioa  for  Oiioiia  ptdilatae  mil'


tiariaetn


Oohoriei  Eqailaiat  HSuni  from  the  Ptdi-
1  thil  only,  that  they  wen  made  up  of  in-
fantry combined  with  carnliy.  A  Cohort  EquUata
MilUaria  contained  760  foot  loldien  dinded  into
itnriea,  and  240  honemen  divided  into  10
I.  A  OolaiTt  Eqailaia  gtinigaiaria  conlained
380  foot-ioldiem  dirtded  into  air  (P)  centuriea  and
120  honemen.  divided  inlo£  tnnnae.  There  ii  an
inacription  in  the  coUectiona  of  Qniter  (p.  Mcvin.)
to  the  memory  of  L,  Flaiina,  who  among  other
military  tillei  il  ityled  Pkaif.  Cnn.  Pbimak
EqurriTAi.  CiT.  Roman,  in.  Qikiiah.  In-
lORB  ;  Pliny,  in  one  of  hii  epiiths  (x.  IDS),
Trajan  iu  hia  reply,  make  oae  of  the  ternu
Coiort  eqaalrU,  the  former  mentioning  a  centnrion
'o  connection  with  It,  which  proTG*  that  It  contained
nhntiy.  Tacitna  (fiiK.  ir.  19)  ipeaka  of  rohucto
if  the  BalBTi  and  Cannine&Ma,  who,  among  other
demanda,  iniiated  that  the  nnmber  of  horve  ahould
be  increased  (aufferi  maurvm  etpdlam)  ;  and
Jotephua,  in  deictibing  the  anny  of  Veipaaian,
notieo  1 0  coborta  (aw(i|xci)  of  600  infantry  and
1 20  tavalry,  a  aenei  of  paamgea  which  evidently
refer  to  Caiartei  Egmtatat.  The  Colntla  Pf
dHaiaa  are  not  mentioned  under  that  name  excqit
by  Hyginna,  but  are  indicated  by  Tadtna  in  the
vorda  (^an.  xiii.  35),  "  ex  Germania  l«io  cnnt
equitibui  alariia  et  ptditaH  eoAortium.^  Hyginua
allowi  apace  far  ChAorteM  egvitatae  mUUariae  daoe,
id  CaXorta  eqmiaiae  qmin^nariiu  gmatmor,
16.  ^oaiiia,  which  we  may  fiurty  render  Ma-
'nu,  were  employed,  according  to  Hyginna,  aa
_  ionaera.  They  corrcmondcd  to  the  Naiata  Seeii,
under  the  republic,  who  were  aliraya  r^aided  at
regular  loldieza,  and  were  recruited,  aa
Cram  Polybini,  among  thote  peraoni
whoaa  fortune  did  not  entitle  them  to  enliit  in  the
legiont.  Afta  the  eatabliahment  hy  Angnttna  of
i^ular  permanent  fleeta  at  Mieenum,  Ravenna,
and  on  the  cooit  of  Oanl,  a  lain  body  of  men
mnat  have  been  required  to  man  them,  who,  when
their  aerricci  ncre  not  required  afloat,  were  called
ipon,  al  Itaat  in  gnat  oueiamdei^  to  terre  aa


<I0


EXERCITU3.


nrdinuy  uldlen.  Taduu  mentiani  at  tha  com-
mencement of  hii  hittaty  (i.  6\  Ihat  GbIIa  TauDd
in  the  cily  ■  legion  "  qium  e  claue  Ncid  conimp-
KTRt  "  {eomp.  Dion  Cul  Izit.  3  ;  Suat  Galb.  12  ;
Plut  Ga!6. 15),  which  hs  xibicqaenUy  (i.  31,  3G)
teimi  "  legio  clawca  "  Bad  **  claoiconun  luio  "
(comp.iL  11,  H,  17,  22,  iii.  55),  mi  dtewhen
(jL  6?)  we  heai  of  tie  "prinui  duaioonim  logio."
In  the  AuTud)  tlaitiaraa  U  the  form  vhich  he
seneicUj  emplojA,  u  olauiariorvm  copia  {Ann,  iv,
§7),  and  ontwvw  dattmrio  {Am.  ziv.  8).

1 1.  Nationa.  —  Theie  occupied  Che  taaa  poii-
tioQ  with  legord  to  the  wau  anharUs,  thai  the
MomH  and  Paioionii  Va-edarii  did  with  regard  to
the  reffukr  Aloe  of  canlij.  They  were  bUtaliani
compoeed  enlireiy  of  borbaiiani,  or  of  the  moat
uncivilised  among  the  lubjecti  of  Rome,  and  were

Snhahly  chieBy employed  npoa  outpoil  dutiei.
ygiuni  allow!  apace  for  330O,  (oaiitting  of  Pai-
■i^mu  ,■  Oaelat ;  Dad ;  BrUmna  ;  Qntairii

DHa«»  Gilortn,  — We  may  take  oosjion  to
notin  in  thia  place  two  bodiea  of  men  ealahliihed
during  the  fint  yean  of  the  empire,  who  held  a
■tation  intcnnediato  between  reguloc  tnopa  and
im  aimed  police,  their  aerricei  being,  properly
apeaking,  confined  to  the  city.  Theas  were  the
Vihamtt  CoharUa  and  the  Coiorta  Vti/Uam.

Dion  Cauiui  (Iv.  24 )  informi  ui  dat  Augnatus,
in  addition  to  the  pmetorian  cohorta,  inititaled  h
force  of  city  guacdi,  amoimling  to  liz  ihouiand
men  divided  into  loar  battalion) ;  to  theae  be  elie-
wbere  givei  the  name  of  iffTinol  (lii.  3),  while,
by  the  Latin  writcn,  they  are  OAualiy  diitin-
gnithed  aa  Cokorla  Urtanao  of  Urbana  mUitia,
their  quarlen,  which  were  witbin  the  city,  being
the  Urtana  Qufro.  According  to  Tacitiu,  who
(latea  the  nimiber  of  cahoiti  at  three  only,  they,
like  the  praetoriaiit,were  levied  in  Latium,  Umbria,
Etnria,  and  the  ancient  Roman  coloniei  (Tacit.
^m-ir.  S\  and  were  under  the  immediate  com-
mand of  the  pracfect  of  the  city,  whence  it  waa
urged  upon  FUviiu  Sabinng  (Tacit  Hill.  iiL  64),
"  eue  itli  proprium  mililem  cohonium  urbanonun."

Cuhorta  VigSvn Auguttiu  organiied  s  Urge

body  of  niaht-walchen  alao,  whoae  chief  duty  waj
to  act  ai  UTtmen  i^Adutrsui  inandia  Arcubiat  noa-
turmat  vigiiaque  commentiti  at^  Suetou.  (}cUa.  30)-
They  were  divided  into  levcn  colioria,  in  the  pro-
portion of  one  cohort  to  each  two  HegioneM,  were
Mationed  in  fourteen  Dnardhoutu  {ticabiloria),
and  are  called  nurru^MaKf  j  by  the  Greek,  Co-
lorUt  r^iten  by  the  Latin  writers  Xbey  were
commanded  by  a  Prae/tetut  (Tacit.  Ann.  i\.  35),
vho  wa4  of  eqneitrian  rank  ;  but  the  corps,  in  con.
aeqnence  of  being  railed  amiuig  the  cLaaa  of  li-
bertini,  waa  regarded  ai  occupying  a  poaition  in-
ferior to  that  of  regular  loldicn  (Dion  dua-lr.  36,
lil.2).  In  Tadlui  (Atri.  iii.  £4),  they  are  termed
the  Knitia  of  the  anatocracy,  and  Suelcniui  (Octoo.
2£)  allude*  to  them  aa  "libeitino  mililc"  (Camp.
Dig.  1.  tit.  15.  a.  3-)

Egaipmeni  of  &»  Tnopt  aader  &e  Empire.

Joaephui  hiu  tnuumilted  to  ua  a  deacription  of
the  equipment  of  the  Roman  tiaopi,  and  hii  leili-
roony  i«  peculiarly  valuable,  proceediua,  si  it  doci,
ftom  a  oompelent  eye-witneai  {B.  J.  iil.  S.  g  fi).

The  infiiatry  wore  cuiraMca,  helmela,  and  two
aworda  {BApail  rf  irifp<ry)iiiioi  koI  Kpdriiri  mil
iiaxnifvfBpiiurTij  iii^orifti9ti'),  th&t  ia,  a  long
■weed  aa  tha  left,  and  a  ihort  dagger  (cnriAviqi


EXERcirua

ol  TXic»  Ix'i  pv"")  on  the  right  tide.  The  attect
infantry  in  attendance  upon  ue  general  orrii-d  a
long  Bpear  {Kiyxv,  kaiiun},  arid  a  nnmd  thield
(d<TTiia,  ofipeunt)  ;  the  Teat  of  the  legionariei  (jl
I)  Juia^  9^'urrf)  a  piUiii{?)  {ivirrir),  and  a
m/unt  {Sivpthy  irtfi^iKij).  In  addition,  each  man
had  a  law  and  a  baaket  (wpfora  KoI  Ki^rm),  a
mattock  and  a  hatchet  (^ir  nol  t  Atjcur),  a  leather
■trap,  a  hook  and  a  chain  {l/idrra  nil  Spirarar
■al  iKiuriy),  logelher  with  provibioni  for  three
daya,  —  to  that,  sayi  Joiephut,  the  Roman  in-
&ntry  differ  little  from  mulea  of  burden.

the  inbntry,  with  a  bimdawocd  at  their  right  lide
{/lAxaipn  luurpi),  and  carried  in  their  hand  a  long
pole  (larrbt  jri^^intt)  ;  a  buckler  iwuiu  at  their
honei'  flank  {ivptii  3)  t^  a-hivptr  TrroB
rkiyun),  and  they  wen  funiighed  with  a  qajrer
containing  three  or  more  javelini  (tn»Tn),  with
brood  point!,  and  aa  large  aa  ipean  (  obx  i.-*it94oi''
Tts  tl  Sapirar  niyt9oi).  Those  lelected  to  atUnd
the  general  differed,  in  DO  reapect,  in  theit  ^-

C.tmenta  from  the  r^nlai  cavalry  (tm*  Jk  rait
s  Irtiair).
The  Jewish  historian  has  moreover  given  an  ac-
count of  the  Agmat  or  line  of  march  in  which  the
army  of  Veapaiiun  entered  Qolilee  (£.  J.  iiL  6.  S  S),
thii  being,  he  addi,  the  regular  amngement  fol-
lowed by  the  Ronuma.  1.  The  light-armed  aux-
iliaries and  bowmen  (toiIi  )i.it  f*  ^i>jii«  ™»  ^t-
noJpoir  Koi  Tojiriu)  advanced  first  to  reconnoitre,
to  eiamine  woods  and  luipicioui  localities,  and  to
give  timely  notice  of  the  appnach  of  an  enemy.
2.  A  detachment  of  Roman  heavy-armed  troops
horse  and  foot  CPafioliir  iiAiruri)  fiorfo,  -n^of  ti
■ol  limrt).  3.  Ten  men  out  of  each  century  car-
camp  (ulrpa  rqt  Tiip(>iCeA^i).  4-  The  pioncen
{tSBToinl),  The  baggage  of  Vespauan  and  hii
legati  {Twr  in^  aijTtf  VYtfi&mtv)  guarded  by  a
glrong  body  of  hone  6.  VeapnAlan  himaelf  at-
tended by  Stiieli  Ptdiles,  Sfleai  Jijaila,  and  a  body
of  spearmen  (Kryx'^^P""')'  7-  The  peculiar
cavnln  of  the  legion  {ri  JSuni  roii  ^iyfurTOi  Ir-
Tunir),  for,  he  lubjoins,  each  legion  hai  12Q  hone
aUoched  to  iL  This  we  perceive  was  a  return,  to
a  certain  extent,  to  the  andent  system.  6.  The
artillery  dragged  by  mulea  {oi  r^s  iKtw6\tit  ^i-
porrms  iptlr  Kol  ra  \oiriL  ^ijxa^^^ara.)  9.  The
legati,  prnofecta  of  cohorts  and  tribunes  {tjytjiimt
Tt  Hal  rmipvv  trapx^i  ^v  X^^^'Vxo'^)  guarded
by  a  body  of  picked  soldiers.  10-  The  ilaodards
surrounding  the  eagle  {at  ffTjftnini  «tp<lff^ovcrai
TiviiiT6<iy  11.  The  trumpeleri  (dI  ffoAiti^KTal),
12.  The  mun  body  of  the  inliintry  (^  f^JurrO
six  abreast,  accompanied  by  a  centurion  {Ikbtoii-
Tipxri'),  whose  duly  it  was  to  see  that  the  nirn
kepi  their  ranks.  13.  The  whole  body  of  ^vea
attached  to  each  legion  {rh  olKtrutiif  Indmoti  riy-
ftaros\  driving  the  mules  and  bfaits  of  burden
loaded  with  the  baggage. 14.  Behind  all  the  Ic-

Sions  fbllowed  the  memnaries  {t  /JtrBioi  Sx*-oi).
5.  The  rear  was  brought  up  by  a  slmng  body  of
inlantiy  and  cataln.  Joscphus  seems  to  desig-
nate the  Itgati  by  the  word  i^^ulni,  the  Tribmrn
mililMin  by  knxar/tl  or  x'X'^X"y  the  aatarioma
by  TuiiifX"'  oc  InaTomipxai  ;  whether  he  means
by  obpayoi  (in  iii.  6.  §  2)  the  opiioiut  who  ar«  ao
designated  hj  Folyhius,  or  intends  to  compnhend
the  whole  mr-guard  under  the  appelladrai,  may
admit  of  doubt. Four  mtd*  si«  lued  to  denote


BXERCITUS.
wnpaoi  if  Oaipau  hinil, — iixnir  peb&bl;  in-
(oiM  to  repn*Bit  Ha  fiium,  for  which  iiradt  ii
gcBoaHjaophijHl ;  tmrlhsligbtjaielui;  A^TX^
ud  U^a,  pike*  of  dibmt  kindi.  It  would  ap-
pear fan  AtiMB  tliat  till  f^iyxt  *■* '


of  MMceb  (o  be  obaBTcd  bj  ttii  fbrea  detutehcd
■piiiBi  tha  Scfthba  Aluu,  pCMerred  in  tlie  &ig-
Boit  of  Ankn,  of  whkb  w*  Iwto  ipokcu  tbon,

Tb*  fi>M  ia  qaotion  wuriWad  of  the  fifteealli
kaioo,  vkkh  wa*  eo^ileia,  and  of  the  twelfth,
akick  ■p|ii«ii  to  hare  been  a  frigneDt  coif,  thete
kfivH  baring  both  »iali]r  and  ■kiimiihen  M-
«Kbed  tDtbon  ciaellj  ai  Dndei'  the  rqiublic—- of
KXial  oaAortaf  tquMat,  compOMd  of  ItRliani,
C^muBia,  Annouana,  and  othen,  «ch  of  the«e
'■™-"—  -—•*■■'"(;  heaTj  ud  light  in&ntr;  to-
feiber  vitk  aqoadraQ*  of  earali;

'"Wriim*  The  isder  in  which  the;  were  to  sd-
laaee  wat  ai  ibiiinn :  —

1.  Hew  acODta  (aaratfir^mvi  fmr/aj),  hone
BiAen  aad  IJhigen  (twwrraiirai  ml  rn-pofevi),
eoamoaaded  bjr  their  own  dBcnriom  (StKaUfx^).
X  Vanooi  cvpa  of  foreign  caTalry,  CTtmiani,
iianf  na,  C^b,  and  othn,  of  whom  the  name*
nc  daablfoL  1.  The  whole  of  the  iiihnli}  anh-
aa,  MIowcd  b;  IHtatat  bodki  of  heavy-anned
iabairj,  nut  tegitoariee,  Italiuu,  Cyrennni,  Boi-

Mi^  emaed  by  canlij.  4.  The  e^nita  Kleeti
aad  the  cqniu*  at  the  Ic^ioii  (si  dwi  nii  ^dXirfyBi
Jann).  fi.  The  anil]er)r  (■■ncr^TBi).  6.  The
ttandaid  (tnuituw)  of  the  fifUtnlh  legion,  and
■mmd  h  the  principal  officen,  namriy  the  com-
— a  ill  I  of  th*  Ifgiai  ittt't^  '^'  f^^^yV")i  ^e
b«abia  (?)  (tw^t),  the  tribona  (ol  X'WJ>xoi),
and  tbe  cratnrioni  of  the  Em  cohort  (iititT6rTapxi"
•J  Tiit  ap^nii  «vtl|n|t  JwumlTai).  Here,  it  will
b  rtmrfcfd,  we  Beet  with  bd  offica  called  tbe
^ijJr  r^i  ^iXcrrna  and  bii  deputy  or  h-iipxoi-
7.  Tbe  iubiiUJ  ot  tbe  legion,  fiwr  and  !oai,  pre-
ceded by  Aeir  own  ikinnUien  (ti^oI  iuamf-
tW).  8.  ForeigD  (t^  truiitiaxuiir)  infuitiy,  both
lifbt  and  heaTj'.  9.  The  baggage  (ri  mtHi^^dpii).
]6.  Tbe  nai  broooht  up  bj  an  ala  of  Oetae  under
tbeir  pnefectu  ((iAspxtt).  The  ccaturioni  voe
10  iwiili  on  the  flanlu  of  the  in&ntiy,  keeping  the
■ten  to  their  ranki :  for  the  uke  of  greater  Kcnrity
a  body  of  hoctemen  wn  to  ride  in  ungle  file  alimg
ibe  ^H^  length  of  the  line ;  the  comnunder-in-
chief^  X^nphm,  wai  to  mueb  in  front  of  the  in-
faalij  elaiiibi'lai  bat  to  mora  about  occaiionallj
fina  pfaee  to  plica,  watehiog  eiaything,  and  pn-
■o*^  etdcT  enrywbM*.  It  Hffn  that  of  the
esraky  kbw  wen  vebat*  Ownro^Tai),  lome
kB(s>(AwnC*f4«>,*i«MpilMneD(a«ao^^i),


i-nAmftfUt)  1  tbne  and  nwny  other  cnriou  par-
(kalaia  bi^  be  ertncted  frm  the  detailed  acoHint
af  tba  'ffawa,  and  fican  the  Ada  «  ichenie  of
telle  by  which  it  ii  fbllowsd  ;  but  unfortonalely
we  an  *D  moeh  embanaaaad  at  erery  Hep  by  the
a»i«Mn<ly  rf  the  text  that  it  ia  Maicel;  nfo  to


EXHIBENDUM,  ACTIO  AD. All

mneb  that  belmgt  to  the  cBxalry  ia  oeeeuaiily  in-
cluded under  EQun-is  g  the  potition  of  the  ^ie*
in  the  lerrice  under  Socii  i  the  life-guard*  nndar
pKAKTOBUNi  ; the pay of the itjdiec onder

and woqioDi under Gilia, Lobic^  Ocbka,

CiLIOA, HlBTA, PlLUH, OlaDIDS, SCtlTUH,

du.  ;  of  bii  dnH  Imder  Cblaht^  FaLODA-
HRNTUH,  Saqdii  ;  of  the  atandard*  under  SlONA
UiLiTAiu  i  of  military  ptDCenioni  under  Ova-
Tio,  Tmuwrliua  ;  of  pnnithmenta  uud«  Fusru-
AKitiH,  DaciKATIO  ;  of  milltaiy  rewaidt  undv
ToKauas,  Phalii^i,  CoaoHA  t  of  nulitary  es-
ginea  under  ToauiNTUU,  Ausa,  Vinbai,
Flutbi,  Hblkfolis,  Tuaaja,  &c. [W.  B.]

EXETASTAE  (jffratmil),  apeual  conuuia-
eionen  eent  ant  by  the  Athenian  people  to  inieati-
gate  any  matCen  that  might  claim  attention.  Thua
we  find  mention  of  Eielaatae  being  appointed  to
ascertain  whether  theie  were  aa  many  niereenariea
u  the  geumali  reported.  It  appear*  to  hare  becD  no
nnconunon  plan  for  the  conunanden,  who  recaiTed
pay  for  troopa,  to  report  a  greater  nnmber  than
they  pDMewed,  in  order  to  mcire  the  pay  them-
■elTei ;  in  which  caie  they  were  nid  "  to  draw


(juaea^opia-  h  Tv^oiny  Ktraa  x^o",  Aeacbin;
a.  Cbr.  p.  £36).  The  oonuniavoneri,  however,  who
were  leal  to  make  inqnltie*  into  the  matter,  ofMi
allowed  themaeliea  to  be  bribsd,  (Aeactun.  c
TimanJt.  p.  131,  Dt  FaU.  £9.  p.  339  j  BKckh.
PM.  Beam.  o/Alkua,  p.  292,  Sud  ed.)

EXHERES. [HiHW.)

EXHIBENDUM,  ACTIO  AD.  Thii  action
wai  introdoced  mainly  with  roipect  to  Tindica-
tionei  or  actiotu  about  property.  "Eihihera  "  ii
defined  to  be  "  bcere  in  pablico  poteilalem,  ut  ei


qui  agit  eiperiundi  li


copia.


thia


111  waa  a  per-


s  had  the  right  of  action  who


un  wai  againit  a  penon  who  waa  in
of  the  thing  in  qucAtion,  or  had  &aiida-
iently  parted  with  the  poMeuion  of  it ;  and  the
object  wai  the  pndnction  of  the  thing  lot  the  pur-
p(ue  of  it!  being  examined  by  the  piaiDtiS  Th*
thing,  which  waa  of  coons  a  motdile  thing,  wai
to  be  ptodoeed  at  tbe  place  where  it  waa  at  the
canunencemail  «f  the  legal  proeeediDgi  reapecting
it ;  but  it  wa*  to  be  taken  to  the  place  where  tha
action  wai  tried,  at  the  coat  and  eipenie  of  tbe
plainliS'.

The  action  wai  extended  to  other  caaea :  6it  in-
atance,  to  caiei  when  a  man  claimed  the  privilege
of  taking  hii  property  off  another  penon*!  land,
that  other  panon  not  being  legally  bound  to  reatora
tha  thing,  though  bound  by  thia  aetioii  to  allow
the  owner  lo  tdte  it ;  and  (0  Mne  laaea  when  a
man  had  in  hii  pmwioB  aomething  in  which  hia
own  and  the  plamtiff  ^  {n^Mrly  s«r*  oniud,  a*  a
jewel  Kt  in  the  defendants  gold,  in  which  caM
there  might  be  an  actio  ad  eihibendnm  fin  th*
porpoae  of  aepaiating  the  thing*  (nt  exclndatn  ad
eihibendum  agi  potest,  Dig.  10.  tit.<.  a,  6).

If  tb*  tUng  waa  iwt  prodocod  when  it  oogfat  ts
have  been,  tbe  plaintiff  might  have  damagn  for
Id**  canied  ty  tBch  non-pndDClian.  This  action
would  lie  to  prodoee  a  alan,  in  ocdei  that  he  might
be  put  to  the  torture  to  diacoier  hi*  confisderata.

The  ground  of  the  right  to  the  productiint  of  a
thing,  wai  either  property  m  tha  thmg  or  lome  bv-
tanat ;  and  it  was  the  bniinea*  el  Ua  jodez  I*


«12  BXODIA.

deetnr«  wlictbel  tlian  irai  lafGiHent  nswm  (tufa
«t  pnbaiilu  emua)  tor  pnductiaiL  The  vord
"  iDlemt "  VM  obvioujly  >  word  of  doubtful  Lm-

C  Accordingly,  il  wai  h  queAioii  if  a  man  could
J  tbia  action  for  tbe  pinlucljon  of  bis  ■dra'-
urj't  BccauDti,  thoagh  it  mu  n  genenl  role  of  law
that  tU  •^eaooB  mighl  hare  thia  actioD  wbo  had  an
inlcteat  in  ihs  thing  to  be  pnduced  (viionm  ia-
ImM)  ;  but  the  opinion  ai  giTcn  in  the  Digtat
(Dig.  10.  dt.  4.  >.  19)  it  not  bvonrable  to  tbe  pit>-
doction  OD  the  mengiDUDd  of  ita  being  for  tbe
plaintiffs  adnntagci  A  man  might  hai
- • hhehadBQ ■ '■ -


actio  though  he  1

if  he  had  a  iMa^  ^rai  to  him  of  luch  a  alaTe
Titina  might  ehooae.  In  had  a  right  to  the  pniduclii
of  the  tcilalor^  alaiea  in  order  that  Tititu  mighl
make  the  choice  ;  when  the  choice  waa  Diad*,thtn
the  plainiiff  mfght  claim  the  ahiTe  aa  hii  property,
though  he  had  no  power  to  make  the  choke.  If  a
man  wished  to  asHrt  the  freedom  of  a  ilave  (in
Ubvtaten  viadiean),  he  might  hare  thii  action.

Tbia  action  waa,  aa  it  appean,  generally  in  aid
of  another  action,  and  for  the  purpoae  of  obtaining
eridence  ;  in  which  retpect  it  bean  some  reaem-
bUnee  to  a  Bill  of  Diacovcry  in  Equity.

(HEihlenbruch,  Doctraa  Pamdectanat ;  Dig.  1 0.
tiL  4.)  [Q,  £.]

EXIT£'RIAarEPEX0'DIA(J{iT4pii>iffJir({-
Mm),  thensmei  of  tbe  Kicrificea  which  weraoflcred
by  generala  before  they  act  out  on  their  ezpeditiona.
(Xenoph.  AtuA.  vl  fi.  §  S.)  The  principal  object
of  theae  aacrificea  alwaya  waa  to  diBcover  from  the
accomjBujing  aigni  the  foToonble  or  un&Tonmble
iaane  of  the  andcrtakmg  on  which  they  were  about
to  enter.  According  to  Ilerfchiua,  ^ir^fui  waa
also  the  name  of  the  day  on  which  the  annnal
roagiitratea  hud  down  their  oSicei.  [I>.  S.]

EXO'DIA  {HauL,  from  '{  and  aii)  were
«Id-&ahioDed  and  langhable  inleilnde*  in  Tene*,
inaeRed  in  other  [Jaya,  lint  chiefly  in  the  Atcl-
lauae.  (LiT.  TiL  3.)  It  ii  diRicnlt  to  aacertaiu
the  real  chaiBcteraf  tbe  eiodia;  batfroui  the  wordi
of  Liiy  we  moat  infer  that,  although  diatinct  from
tbe  Atellanae,  they  were  cloaely  connected  with
them,  and  never  performed  alone. Hence  JuTeoal


< (*it  li.  71),  a


yponf


cnlli  1  ,.  . „

Suetonius  (7V&  45)  enodnn  AteBiadcam.  They
■were,  like  the  Atellanae  thcmaelTca,  played  by
ong  and  well-born  Homana,  and  not  by  the
L  Since  the  lime  of  Joa.  Scaliirer  and
1,  the  erodia  have  almoat  generally  been
ccmaideTed  aa  short  comediea  or  faicea  which
wen  perfonned  after  the  Atellanae  ;  and  thia
opinion  ii  founded  upon  the  vague  and  ineorrpct
atatement  of  the  Scboliaat  on  JuTenal  \SaL  ilL
174).  Bat  the  wcsdi  of  Liiy,  eiodia  cauerta
JbitUit,  aecm  rather  to  indicate  interlndea,  which,
however,  must  not  be  undoialood  as  if  they  had
been  |day«d  between  the  acts  of  the  Atellaiue,
which  would  lo^at  a  false  idea  of  the  Atellanae
themselTea.  Bat  as  several  Atelianas  were  per-
iormed  on  the  same  day,  it  is  probable  that  the
exodia  were  played  between  them.  Thia  supposi-
tion is  also  supported  by  the  etymology  of  the
word  itself^  which  signilbea  aomething  ii  Hav,
eitra  vism,  or  something  not  belonging  to  the
main  subject,  and  tbne  is  synonymous  with  jnir-
iiitr.  Tie  play,  as  well  as  the  name  of  emdium,
•eema  to  hCTe  been  introduced  among  the  Romans
Cnim  Italian  Oivece  ;  but  after  its  inliodnction  it
•ppean  to  han  baooma  very  popular  among  tlM


EXOMOSIA.

Romans,  and  continued  to  be  played  down  to  a
very  lale  period.  (Soeton.  Domit.  10.) [L.  S.]

EXCKHI3  (t^nM'),  a  diw  which  had  only  a
lleere  for  the  left  arm,  lesTing  the  right  with  the
shoulder  and  a  part  of  the  tamtt  Cne,  and  was  (or
this  reason  called  aromit.  It'  ia  alao  frequeatly
called  x^^  trtpo/idrx^^''  (Phot  and  Hesych.
a.e.  'Ertpofu:  Helioi.  Aeduiip.  iii.  1  ;  Paoa.  t.  IG.
3  S.)  The  eiomis,  bowerO',  was  not  only  a  chiton
[TuNici],  but  also  an  I^tiw  or  r^fit\t|fus.
[PALtiUM.]  According  to  Hesjchiui  {s.  o.  "Efs.-
fili),  and  Aeliu)  Dionyaius  (op.  EtMUk.  ad  IL
lYiii.  59fi),  it  served  at  the  ame  time  both  the
purposes  of  a  chiton  and  an  himatiou  ;  but  PoUoi
(ril  48)  speaks  of  two  different  kinds  of  eiomis,
one  of  which  was  a  -npiSXinui  and  the  other  a
X<T&v  frs^/ids'XaAAr.  His  account  is  "  '
by  eiiiting  woriu  of  art.  Thus  we  G
Mas.  Pio-Clemcnt  (vol.  iv.  pLlJ),  I ,

lis,  wbich  is  an  himatian  thrown
body  in  the  way  iu  which  this  gument
always  worn,  and  which  dothee  the  body  like
an  eiomis  when  it  is  girded  round  the  waist.  The
fallowing  fignre  of  Chann,  on  the  coutniy  (taken
from  StBckelbeig,  Du  Oriibr  dtr  Htt/tmm,  pL  47),
represents  tbe  pnqier  x"^  trtpaiidax't-ot,  aiid
we  see  a  aimitar  dresa  in  the  fignro  of  Ulyma
repteaented  in  the  artide  PiLltrt.


onnd  ibe  b<


Tbe  eiomis  waa  usually  vom  by  ilaviii  and
working  peo^e  (Phot  a  o.  ;  SchoL  ad  Arutapi.
Equit.  879),  whence  we  find  Hephaeatoa,  the
working  deity,  frequently  nptesealed  with  this
garment  in  woiiti  of  art.  (MUtlcf,  AniUoI,  litr
KtmM,  i  366.  G.)  The  chen*  of  eld  men  in  the
Lysistiata  of  Arislophanea  (L  662)  wear  tbe
eiimiis ;  which  is  in  accordauot  with  the  ilate-
ment  of  Pollux  (iv.  1 18),  who  Bys  that  it  was  the
dress  of  old  men  in  craajc  playa.  According  to
Oeltius  (vii.  12),  the  eiomis  was  the  aaaie  aa  tha
cnmmon  tunic  without  sleeves  (otra  Usiui'nia  de-

counta  of  all  the  Oteek  gramfflariaoa,  and  is  without
doubt  eminooua. (Becker,  OonUia^  vol,  iL  p.
112,  &c)
EXOHO'SIA (iiiiMHrU). Any Athenian


EXStLIUU.
>  trait  «f  jmtica  (tXifTiiiir  or  ^niAifrtftu-,  Fol-
lu,  nu.37  ;  Auchin.  c  TimanA.  p.  71],  wu
«bi))|«l  b;  lav  to  obey  the  nunmoog,  unlw  be
crnld  atibluli  bj  oUh  that  he  wu  tuucquainted
*ith  ihe  cue  in  quotiui.  (Donnlli.  Dt  Fall,
Ug.  p.  S96,  e.  Niatr.  p.  13£4,  e.  AjiluJi.  p.  a£(l ;
Sudu.  K  V.  'EteiiiAnwAiu.)  Tbii  Dath  wu  called
tufurfo,  and  the  act  of  taking  it  wai  eipmasd
ij  ^fimrfoi.  (DemnMk  a  ^•Sa^il.  L  p  1119  ;
c.£UW^p^lSl7i  UaipaentLK.)  Tbou  who
RfoKfl  \o  obeir  tbe  nnmoiu  witlunit  being  able
to  like  tbe  i^9}iotx'm^  incoired  a  fine  of  one  tbonvnd
dnchmae  ;  and  if  a  penoo,  after  pjomiaing  to  give
liii  fridaiec,  did  ueTerthelae*  not  ippcai  when
laDed  upon,  an  actiott  called  ^.tfoiiapTvplaii,  or
MA(t  Slot,  Slight  be  brought  sgatnit  hon  b^tho
Miiica  wtwt  tbooghl  tbenuelTeA  injured  by  hii
niiig  wHhbeld  faia  evidence.  (Demoith.  e.  Timoik.
pIlM;  Meier,  ^M.  iVw.  p. 3fi7,  &c)

WbtQ  the  people  in  tliMr  iMembty  ajqiointed  a
Ban  to  a  uagiitranr  or  uj  otlwr  |ablie  office,  hs
*u  at  libeTtjr,  benn  tba  lecifiairla  took,  place,
t*  deelioe  tbe  office,  if  be  toold  take  an  oath  that
the  ate  of  hit  beahb  «  otber  cinanulaocei  ren-
imi  it  impoanble  ibr  him  to  folfil  the  dutie*
BnaMed  with  it  {Ifiiiraceai  t^k  ifx>V,  ot  ^r
X>V*n*((v) :  and  tbji  oath  wae  Ukewiia  called
WwU.  or  Mroetiine*  ibrtfruKrU.  (Dcmatth.Zii
FA.  Ug.  f.  379,  a.  mulk.  p.  1301 ;  Aeicbin.
ft  IVi.  Lag.  n  271  i  PoUqi,  TiiL  55  j  EtymoL

Mw  I.  e.)  [L.  a.]

EXOSTRA  iHtiirrpa,  bom  i(meif>\  wu  otie
tl  ibe  many  fciada  of  machines  uied  in  the  iheatret
ef  the  ucieiit*.  Cicero  (i>a  Pvm.  Cant.  B),  in
Ipiakilf  of  a  Diaa  who  formerly  cenoealed  hit
no*,  exprcax*  tbii  wntimEnt  1^  poll  Bpariam
UaAUar  ;  and  then  stating  that  be  now  ifaame-
ifaly  indolged  ia  bit  Ticiou  pncticei  in  public,
wjyfoi  ta  ecutm  keluatar.  From  an  attentivo
nrnridfiatimi  of  thia  punge,  it  it  nideat  Ibat
liie  exoetiB  wu  a  machine  by  meant  of  which
Ibingt  which  had  been  conceiied  behind  tbe  tipa-
rioBi,  were  poabed  or  railed  forward  from  behind
h,  lad  tfau  bacame  Tislile  to  tbe  ipectauin.  Tbii
Mcbine  wat  theretve  my  much  like  tbe  iaii-
i^Va,  with  this  diitiDction,  that  Ihe  latter  wai
Toni  en  vheela,  while  the  exnitra  wu  pubed
bwBd  npoo  lollen.  (PoUnx,  iv.  128;  SchoL
>d  Aiin^  jtdarm.  375.)  Bnt  both  Mem  to
hare  been  need  for  the  tame  purpose  ;  namely,  to
(ibitnt  to  the  eyes  of  the  ipeclatais  the  resulle  or
cBoteqaencetof  such  tbii^ — t.^.  murd^ortoicide

—  as  could  not  cauisteotly  take  pUce  in  the  pro-
•cBiimi,  and  were  therefore  described  u  baling
•cnund  behind  the  nparimn  or  in  Ihe  scene.

The  Dane  eiotra  was  also  qiplied  to  a  pemliar
bind  d  bridge,  which  was  thrown  fiom  a  tower  of
the  boHC^OB  upon  tbe  wnlii  of  the  besieged  town,
ind  amm  which  the  ■■■llniili  muihed  to  attack
these  of  tbe  besieged  who  were  stationed  on  the
meputiU  defend  tbe  town.  <VegeL  Z)a  Aa  Jtf i^
it.Sl.>  [L.S.J

EXOULES DIKE (^to^nt  IlntV [Em-

EXPLORATOHEa  [ExBRcnus,  p.  509,1.1

EX8EQUIAE. [FuNua-l

EXSl'LIUM  {«w>4),  baniihment. 1.  Obok.

—  BtdiihmBit  among  the  Oreelc  states  seldom,  if


EX51LIUM.  ei3

hide'pendent  states  would  neithci  admit  of  the  cs-
tahllahment  of  penal  colonies,  u  amongst  us,  nor
of  the  Tsrious  kinds  of  eiile  which  wn  read  of
nnder  tbe  Roman  etnperon.  The  genera]  term
tvyii  (flight)  xru  liir  the  matt  part  applied  in  tbe
case  <^  those  who,  in  order  to  avoid  tome  punish-
ment or  danger,  removed  from  Cbeir  own  country
to  another.  Pn»f  of  this  is  Ibund  in  the  records  of
the  heroic  ages,  and  chiefly  where  homicide  had  been
committed,  whether  with  or  without  malice  afbre-
thosght.  Tbui  (71.  xxiiL  SB)  Patroclu  appeani  u
a  fogiUve  for  life,  in  conieqnence  of  muislaaghter
{irBpoKTatlii)  committed  by  him  when  ■  boj,  and
in  anger.  In  the  same  manner  (Horn.  Od.  xt.
375)  Theoclymenit  it  represented  u  a  fugitive
and  wanderer  over  the  earth,  and  even  in  foieigii
lands  bannted  by  tbe  fear  of  vengeance,  from  the  nu-
merous kinsmen  of  tbe  man  whom  he  had  sUiti.  The
duty  of  taking  vengeance  wu  in  cues  of  this  kind
considered  sacred,  though  the  penalty  of  exile  was
sometimes  remitted,  and  the  homicide  allowed  to
remain  in  his  country  on  payment  of  a  Toirf,  the
price  of  blood,  or  wehrgetd  of  the  Oermans  (Tacit.
Germ.  21),  which  was  made  to  the  iclativei  or
nearest  connectiont  of  the  slain.  (H.  a.  630.)
Even  tboi^b  there  were  no  relatives  to  succonr  tbe
tUiin  man,  ttiU  deference  to  public  opinion  imposed
on  the  homicide  a  temporary  absence  {Od.  iiiiL
1 1 9,  and  ScboL),  until  be  had  obtained  eipiation
at  the  bands  of  another,  who  seems  to  have  been
called  the  iyrlrrii  or  purifier.  For  an  illaitndoa
of  thit,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  story  of
Adnutot  and  CiDeaos. (Herod,  i.  35.)

In  tho  later  (dmci  of  Athenian  history,  ^vyi,  or
banishment,  partook  of.the  same  nature,  snd  wu
practised  neatly  in  the  tame  oises,  u  in  the  hecoto
ages,  with  thit  ditlerence,  that  the  laws  more  strictly
defined  its  lunils,  its  legal  consequences,  and  dua-
tum.  Thussn  actiim  for  wilful  murderwas  brought
before  tbe  AreiopBrus,  and  for  nuuislaughier  be^re
tbe  conn  of  tbe  Ephetaa.  The  accused  might,  in
either  case,  withdraw  himself  (fno^Tf)  before  sen-
tence ms  passed  ;  but  when  a  criminal  evaded  the
ptmishment  to  which  an  act  of  murder  would  have
erposed  him  bad  he  remained  in  his  own  load,  be
wutbeilbanishedfbtever($ilV)vi  lui^Hrffar),  and

were  lestored  apoa  a  general  amnesty,  since  on
luch  occasions  a  special  exception  wu  nuide  against
criminals  banished  by  tbe  Areiopagns  (ol  i^  ^Apsfot
*((-)w  ^i^prit).  A  convicted  murderer,  if  found
within  tbe  limits  of  the  slate,  might  be  seiied  and

Cat  to  death  (Dem.  c.  Arii.  p.  629),  uid  whoever
arbonred  or  entertained  (ti-fB^aTo)  any  one  who
bad  fled  &Dm  bit  country  to  avoid  a  capital  punish-
ment, wu  liable  to  the  tame  penalties  at  ibe  fugi-
tive himself. (Dem.  e.  Po/ycL  p.  1232.  2.)

Demosthenes  (c  Aril.  p.  634)  says,  that  the  wotd
^^ly  wsl  propetiy  applied  to  the  exile  of  those
who  committed  murder,  with  malice  aibrethought,
whereu  the  term  ft*6iaTaff6iu^  wu  used  where  ibe
act  was  not  intentional.  The  property  also  wu
coofiBcated  in  the  former  case,  but  not  in  the  latter.
When  a  verdict  of  manslaughter  wu  relumed,
it  wu  usual  Air  tbe  convicted  party  to  leave  ( jf^x^)
bis  country  by  a  certmn  road,  and  to  remam  in
exile  till  be  induced  some  one  of  tbe  relatives  of
the  slain  man  to  take  compessian  on  him.  During
his  absence,  his  poseesaions  were  Mti^a,  that  is,
not  conflscsted  ;  bnl  if  he  remained  at  home  or
returned  before  tbe  requinments  of  the  la*  wer*


BH  EXSlLIIjIiC.

(atiafied,  hs  ma  liable  lo  be  drivea  or  euiud  Oat
of  ihe  ctKiDtiy  b;  feme.  (Jkm.  e,  ArU.  pp.  634
And  SH.)  It  Hmetimei  happened  that  ■  fogitiie
for  maa^aaghter  ww  cbvged  with  mardcr ;  is
that  case  lie  pladed  on  haiii  ihip,  befon  a  coart
which  lit  at  Phnatlo,  in  Ihe  Fdneeni.  (Dem.  it.
^rii.{k6(&)  WeuenotinfbniMd  whitwcn  tlw
conngimua  if  the  idatiTti  of  the  liain  mas  re-
fiued  lo  makes  Rcoiiciliation;  mppiMing  that  there
woi  BO  nmpulnon,  it  i*  rauiaiable  to  eonchide  that
the  exile  wa>  alloved  to  letum  after  a  fiied  time,
la  caaea  of  maniUiighter,  bal  not  of  murder,  thia
oeenu  to  han  besa  utool  in  other  porta  of  Qreece
u  wall  tu  al  Alheni.  (Menniui,  ad  Lyoop.  283 ;
Biirip.  Hiff.  97,  and  Sdulia.)  PLalo  {Lig.  ix.
p.  SS5),  who  ii  beliared  lo  hare  copied  man;  of
his  lavi  from  the  eaniUtotion  of  Atheni,  £:iea  the
period  of  baaiihmeat  for  momlaughter  el  one  jear,
sod  the  word  i-nrunn-iBfuli,  explained  to  mean  a
ytn"*  exile  for  the  ocmmiMion  of  homicide  (nu
^in*  Spdnm}  oeemi  to  implj  that  the  cmtom  wo*

Ktj  generoL  We  haTS  indeed  the  atilhaiity  of
iopbon(AiKit.  ir.S.  |16)topn*e  thatatS|nrta
hanohnKnt  wai  the  coaaei|iunce  af  inroluDtaiy
homicide,  though  he  doe*  not  tell  na  iti  dnialiim.

HeceoTer,  not  only  vu  an  actual  murder
pnniihed  with  Iwnitbiiient  and  coniucation,  but
alto  a  TpaSfia  in  Tporotai,  or  waundiiig  with  intiait
to  lull,  though  death  might  not  eame.  (Lyiia>,c
Smon.  p.  100  ;  Dem.  o.  BaioL  p.  1013.  10.)  The
nine  poniihment  woa  inSicted  on  penona  who
rooted  ap  Ihe  lacred  oliiea  at  Athsia  (Lyiiaa,
'Xnp  iijnau  ^AraXayia\  and  bj  the  lawa  of  Solon
every  ou  voi  liable  to  it  who  remained  neater
daring  political  contentiona.  (PlaL  SoL  SO  ;  6eU.
ii.13.)

Under  fvy^  or  hooiihrnent,  oa  a  general  tenn,
II  comprehended  (Utradim  {tirTfiiaiiir/iii)  ;  the
difference  between  the  two  it  aanOlj  ataled  by
Suidaei  ind  the  Scholioat  on  Ariataphasea  (Equil.
861),  if  wc  are  lo  liderjland  by  the  former  4.i*i^
yia,  or  l»niitinienl  for  lite,  "tirjdl  (lay  they)
differs  from  ootnciam,  inaamiich  aa  th«e  who  an
ban  iohed  loae  their  property  by  confucation,  whercea
the  oatrociied  do  not;  the  former  olio  have  no  fixed
place  of  abode,  no  time  of  rotam  onigned,  but  the
latter  haie."  Tbii  oHradim  woa  initituted  by
Cleiathenei,  after  [he  eipuUion  of  the  Peiiiitra-
tidae ;  ita  nature  and  objecta  are  thua  explained
by  Arialotle  (Pol,  iil  8)  i  —  "  Democratic^  alatea
(he  obecrrei)  uied  to  oaliaciie,  and  remove  fitini
the  city  lor  e  definite  time,  those  who  appeared  to
be  pre-eminent  above  their  Jellov-dtioenii  by  Ra-
oon  of  their  wealth,  the  number  of  their  fineudi,  or
any  other  meana  of  influence."  It  ia  well  knowik,
aud  implied  in  the  qnotation  jaat  given,  that  oetra-
ciun  wai  not  a  nuniahment  for  any  crime,  bat
novol  of  thoee  who  pos-
it power  in  the  ilate  to  excite  eilher
envyorlew.  ThoiPlnlwch  (^rtX.  10)  auyailwaa
agood-nalond  wayofalhij-ingenTy  (^4^atiTa|M-
fuinafiAi>4pvn>t),  br  the  homlliodgnof  ■uperior
digaity  and  power.  Mr.  Orote  (HitiaiyqfGmoe,
viJ.  iv.  p.  200,  4c.)  haa  eome  very  ingenioui  re-
marlu  in  defence  of  oatmciim,  which  he  maintaina
wa>  a  wiae  pncaution  for  mainloining  the  demo-
cntical  eonatitulioo  ntablkhed  by  Clejathenca.
He  obaerrea  that  "  Cleiithenaa,  by  the  apiiit  of
hia  tefoima,  aeciired  the  heany  aUoefanMiit  of  the
body  of  citiaou ;  bat  ttota  the  fint  genoratton  of


t  a  preouti
daumcient }


body  of  citiaou ;  b
Inuiig  iiMm,  niide


then;


BXSILIUH.

with  anch  prMedenti  aa  they  had  to  look  back
upon,  no  aelf-impseed  limita  to  ambition  could  be
expected  ;  and  the  problem  rsqaircd  waa  to  elimi-
nate betbrehsud  any  one  about  to  tranigrcaa  theaa
limita,  ao  ai  to  OKOpe  the  neceeiity  of  putting  him
down  afterwanU,  with  all  that  bloodahed  and  n
tioD,  in  the  midit  of  wf ' ' ' '


Be  working  of  the
It  Icaat,  iTnet  ir-


levacBhly  extingniahed.


public,  ao  aa  to  afford  aome  reaaonablo  meana  of
judging  of  hia  character  and  parpoaea ;  and  the
aecority  which  Cleiathenea  provided  waa,  to  all  in
the  poaitive  judgment  of  the  citiiena  reapteting  hia
future  pnaniae  ponly  oad  (imply,  m  that  they
miifht  not  remam  too  long  nentnl  between  two
politiml  livala.  He  incorporated  in  the  eonadln-
tion  itaelf  the  pnnciple  of  prwikgium  <ta  employ
the  Roram  phnae,  whidi  wnifica,  not  a  p— i^lJ^^
htva  granted  to  any  one,  bat  a  pecoliar  iueoito
veuience  impoaed),  yet  col^  Dndei  drcnnitancca
aolemn  and  wdl  defiiiad,  with  [iUl  notice  and  dio-
ciuuou  befiirehand,  and  by  the  poaitiTe  aeeret  vote
of  a  large  proportion  of  the  eiliaena.  *  No  lair
ahall  be  made  agoinat  any  oingle  dliien,  witbont
the  aame  being  made  agamat  oZf  Athenian  chaioiia;
tmleH  it  ahall  ao  aecm  good  to  BOOtt  dtiieDa  votii^
aecretlv '  (Andoc  da  Mgd.  p.  1 2).  Soch  waa  that
general  principle  of  the  cimatitutitai,  under  which  tka
oatrociim  was  a  particular  coae."  Mr.  Orote  farther
obiervea,  — "  Core  waa  taken  to  diveat  the  ostra-
ciam  of  ail  painfol  eonaequenee,  except  what  waa
inseparable  mnn  exile  ;  and  thia  ia  not  ocbe  ef  the
least  proob  of  the  wisdom  with  which  it  waa  d^
vised.  Moet  certainly  it  never  dsprired  the  pnblia
of  caiididataa  for  political  inflneace ;  aad  when  wa
coniider  the  aaiali  amount  of  individual  evil  which
it  inflicted,  two  i«maika  will  be  quite  taficieot  to
otTer  in  the  way  of  inatifieatian.  PJra^  it  enn-
pletely  produced  ita  mtended  aSect ;  Ibr  the  de-
mocracy grew  up  from  in&n^  (a  manhood  whtnot
a  single  attempt  to  overthrow  it  by  ficca :  next,
Ihraugh  auch  Danqnil  working  i^  the  damocratical
forms,  a  coDatitulional  oiorality  <^la  aoSciiaitly
complete,  waa  produced  amoag  the  leading  Athe-
nians, 10  enable  the  pflo[de  after  a  certain  tune  to
dispense  with  that  eiccpIioDol  aecority  which  the
ostraciain  eflered.  To  the  nascent  deoooacy,  it
waa  abeolutely  indiapaaiaable  ;  to  the  growing,  yet
militaiy  democracy  it  was  aetpwasry  ;  bat  the  fnll-
growa  democracy  both  could  aod  did  stand  withoat
it."  The  manner  of  effbctii^  it  was  aafidlawi: —
Before  the  vote  of  Dstmdam  could  be  tak^  the
senate  and  the  eedcsia  had  to  ditemuDt  in  tbo
sixth  prytanj  of  the  year  whether  nch  a  atepwaa
neceaaar}-.  If  they  decided  in  the  afBrnHUira,  m
day  wits  fixed,  and  the  f^rt,  wH  mdosed  l^  hn-
Tim,  with  ten  entnncca  bm  the  ten  tribes.  By
these  the  Cribemen  enlared,  each  with  hia  toTfm
Kor,  or  piece  of  tile,  OD  which  wai  wiittan  the
name  of  the  individual  whom  he  wiabed  la  ba
ostracisod.  The  nine  anhima  aad  llie  (CnBte,  Lt.
the  preeidenta  of  that  body,  annerinleoded  tka
procMdiogi,  and  the  [«rty  who  had  Ihe  gnMeat

nmnber  amonntad  to  SOOQ,  wai^%eS  to  wtlb-
dniw  (/uTaffTfvai)  fata  the  ci^  witlun  lim  dayi  t
if  the  number  et  votea  did  not  amoant  to  6W0,
nothing  wai  done.  (SchoL  ail.dru<<^  £^  8&1|
PoUoj^  viiL  19.) Phitamh  (.dnat  c  7}  diSoc


EXSILIUM.

»  in  itatiDg,  lint  for  an  ex-
pnliiDo  of  tUs  Mat  it  wu  not  aecaary  that  the
mtM  gins  igaiiut  any  indiiidual  ahauld  amoimt
to  SOSO,  bat  onlr  tbM  ths  turn  total  (houid  not  be
lea  than  tbM  mnaber.  Bitekli  and  Wachunalli
■n  In  IkTOa  et  fialaiA  i  but  Mr.  Giote,  who
■mioiM  (ho  MImt  opiaion,  jutlf  remarks,  "  that


=lt:!?-S?


"7"  ,

■e  the  niaiiUluliMi,  vbicli  im  by

tha  fuijfum  of  CleiitliaDai,  or  the  weH-andeBtood
(fntkn  fif  the  octiacisn,  n  liHig  a>  it  eoDtinaed
ta  be  a  t'olitj."  AH,  howerer,  igtw  that  the
patty  thai  eipelled  »■■  Dot  deprived  of  hU  fro-
fo^.  TIm  period  of  hii  buithment  va«  ten
jvaii.  Tbc  oMneiua  mu  olio  called  the  Ktpafuicii
lidrTit,  <r  eartbcamre  foooige,  baa  the  material
(f  tbe  trr^annv  on  »hi^  the  umea  tren  written.

Sue  af  the  «*t  dktii^BUiod  men  at  Atheni
«en  nam  1 1  it  by  oWiadiiB,  bat  recalled  when  the
dqr  knmd  tbdi  aenion  ioditpennOiU.  Amongn
IMM  wen  Tbenklodo,  Amteideo,  Chnon,  and
Alcibadaa;  of  the  fiM  or  whom  Thnejdidee  (L
13&>  atatt^  thtt  hia  n«da>ce  during  utradnu
na  at  Aifoa,  though  be  «m  not  confined  to  that
dty,  bat  nailed  other  paiti  of  Peloponneani.  The
kM  netiOD  agaiDit  whom  it  wa*  naed  at  Atbeni
n  Uyfvbewa,  a  demagogne  of  low  birtb  and
TfcaiacMT,  vbom  Nkiai  and  Alcibiada  conipiced
togftho'  ta  intTarJHi,  vhm  tha  baniihmeiit  tlutat-
eaed  eadi  al  theuiotlrei ;  bat  the  AthcDiam
thaaght  ttwb  owD  di(pily  compniiiiwd,  and  oa-
tBOMB  drgiaded  bj  meh  an  a]iplicalioii  of  it,  and
aeeoidingly  ditcontiiiaed  the  pnctice.  (Pint.  Nio.
t.  II,  AlaLe.  13,  Aritt-e.  7  t  Thno.  nit.  73.)

OimdBB  pvniled  in  other  demiKiatical  ■tatct
aawdaaAtbaPij  namely,  at  Arnii,  Miletiu,  and
Migaia.  bat  wo  han  no  partieaian  of  the  way
IB  wU<A  it  waa  odminiatcTed  in  thne  itales.
AriaMle  aty>  IPal,  liL  8)  that  it  wni  abowd  tar

TiBm  Ute  eatneinn  of  Alhou  wb>  copied  the
P^rfi'iii  (nraAifffi^)  of  the  Byncuaiu,  lO  called
froa  tha  airoAs,  at  laana  of  the  olive,  on  which
■■a  VEiltai  the  name  of  the  penon  whom  they
widwd  to  teowTB  from  the  ei^.  Tiie  remoW,
bawem,  waa  oidy  for  five  yean  ;  a  nffirient  time,
m  the;  ihooght,  to  hnmble  the  pride  and  hope*  of
lb  eaila.  Bat  pctaiiim  did  not  lait  long ;  hr  the
fear  of  Iha  "  hmnbliiig,"  delened  the  beat  qnali-
fied  aaaoigat  the  eitkeni  from  taldng  any  part  in
poblie  tfun,  and  the  d^ponacy  and  had  gorem-
^iM  ^bkh  Uh>ved,  icon  led  to  a  repeal  of  the
law  jt.  c  452.  (Mod.  xi.  S7.)

In  j™n«»<lii«i  with  petaliaai  It  laay  be  lamaded
tbrt  if  a^  cna  wo*  &lidy  rqwteted  in  ■  demna,
ar  vari,  at  Alh<ai^  hia  aipolnon  waa  ailed
faf  hH  tn«if  III,  fiam  tbr  Tntia  biingipTtin  hjlnnrri
iUnet,aiM.Jark.AIL  83 f  Lyi.  c  WoDia.  p.  S44.)

TW  nadet  of  Qredt  hiatoy  win  remember^  that
btaillaa  Ikaa  tiiled  by  law,  or  oitndaed,  then
waa  fcauBWIly  agitat  namber  of  polilifal  eiileiin
OnecB ;  man  whi^  harii^  djatiogniihed  thenuel<ea
M  th  a  liml  Wi  «f  ene  par^.  were  e^ieUed,  or  obliged
la  maara,  fraoi  Ibrit  nrtiie  elty  »h(o  the  oppoiite
factaM  bicme  predooiinant.  They  ore  ipoken  o<
■a  al  ^o^wnt,  oc  ol  fanaJarn,  and  aa  ol  nn-eA-


EXSILIUM.  5t£

In-tt  after  tbeir  retain  (4  KoStSti),  the  word
rriytw  being  applied  to  thoao  who  were  initni-
enul  in  effecting  It.  tR.  W.J

2.  BoKAH.  In  the  later  imperial  period,  tai-
un  wai  a  general  term  uaed  to  exjtfca  a  puniab'
roent,  of  which  there  wen  levetal  ipecieo.  Panlua
(Dig.  48.  tit  1.  a  2),  when  ipeoking  of  thoie
judicia  publico,  which  are  capilalia,  deflnea  them
bj  the  eooaequenl  pontibment,  which  ii  death,  or
"'iom;  and  eiulium  he  de^nea  to  htaqmae  et
alerdif^ioy  by  wbich  the  eapiU  or  citixenihip
of  the  criminal  inu  taken  away.  Olbei  kinda  of
niliiun  be  aayt  were  pnpeny  called  n^^gofw,
id  the  leli^tni  retained  nie  citlzenihip.  The
distinction  l>etwefln  nlegatio  and  evilinm  exilted
republic.  (LIt,  iii.  10,  iv.  4  j  Cic  /^
P.  Sat.  ci2.)  OTidalio(T>u(.T.ll)dacrib»
'  inuell,  not  oi  aiw^  which  he  conuden  a  term  of
iproach,  but  Bi  rel^/abu.  Speaking  of  the  em-
peror, he  nji, —

opea,  oecjoi  mihiciriaademil;''
and  a  little  fiirther  on,

"  Nil  niii  me  patriie  jnaeil  abire  fode."
Com^nn  alu  TriOia,  il  1 27,  Ac

Marcianui  (  Dig,  4B.  tit.  S3,  a  S)  makei  three
riiiona  of  exoiliinn  ^  it  waa  either  on  interdiction
im  certain  plocee  named,  and  woi  then  called  laia
/vga  (a  term  equiialent  to  (he  JiAero  Jvga  or
iihenai  amlitan  of  toma  writen)  ;  or  it  wai  an  in-
terdiction of  all  placea,  except  eome  plaoe  named ;
or  it  waa  the  Btaatraiiii  of  on  ialnnd  (u  oppoaed  to
bdajiiga).*

Of  rdigatio  there  were  two  kmdi :  a  pernn
ight  be  fivhiddeu  to  lire  in  a  particalar  [itnnDci!,
:  in  Rome,  and  either  Iot  an  mdefinite  or  a  deii-
ite  time ;  or  an  iitand  might  Im  asiigned  to  the
^legnCui  for  hia  reudence.  Relegatio  wai  not  fol-
wed  by  loM  of  eitiienabip  or  property,  except  >o
&raa  the  aenCence  of  relegatio  might  extend  to  port
of  the  penon^  property. The  relegotoi  retained


definite  oi  an  indefinite  time.  The  nlegatio,  in
feet,  merely  confined  the  peraon  within,  or  excluded
him  &om,  pnrticolar  plocco,  which  ia  occordbg
to  the  definition  of  Aelial  Galliu  (Featni,  i.  Sdi-
gatCti  who  layi  that  the  poniihrnent  woi  impoaed
by  a  lex,  aenatua-conialtam,  or  the  edictum  of  a
magiatmliu^  The  woida  of  Orid  expreu  the  legal
eSect  d  relegatio  in  a  manner  liteially  and  tecbni-


•  Noodt  {Op.  Oan.  i  58)  cociecu  the  eiltact
from  Marcianii  thua: — "Exailiumrfaplsicit:  ant
certorum  locomm  interdictio,  nt  lota  fnga ;  ant
omnium  locorvm  ptuter  certom  locum,  nt  in^nlaa
Tinculnm,"  Ac

The  poiaage  ii  evidently  corrupt  in  aome  editiona
of  the  Digeat,  and  the  correction  oF  Noodt  ii  lup-

Ci  by  good  leaion*.  It  leemt  Ihst  Morcian  ia
■peaking  of  the  (wo  kinda  of  rdtgatio  (com-
pare Uliuan,  Dig.  4S.  tiL  32.  a.  7),  and  he  doei
not  include  the  eiiUJnm,  which  waa  accompanied
with  the  Lou  of  (he  eirniat ;  for  if  hii  definiCiDn
ia  intended  to  include  all  the  kinda  of  exailiiun,  i(
ia  manifeatly  incomplete  ;  and  if  it  indodei  only
relegatio,  oa  it  luuit  do  Emm  the  tenna  of  it,  the
definiUan  it  wrong,  inaamuch  ai  there  are  only
two  kindi  of  relegate.  The  eonduaion  ia,  that  the
text  of  Hardanua  ii  either  coirupt,  oi  baa  been
•llal«d  by  the  eompileia  of  the  DigeaL


SI6


EXSILIUM.


call;  cotrecL  {Itiitiuiixi  of  rclcgntia  «ciir  ill  At
tMoiriaa  pmaga-.—Saet.  Aiig.  clE,  Tib.  c 60
TwBt  J— .  iiu  17,  68  I  SceL  Clamd.  e.  23,  whid
loK,  u  (he  hutoriui  nmarki,  wu  a  new  kind  of
Rlegalio.}  Thg  lermnlegatioil  applied  by  Ciceni
<(ie  Of.  iiL  31)  (o  the  cau  of  T.  Manliui,  who
bad  b«en  compelled  bj  bit  &Iber  to  live  in  nlitnde
in  the  CDOntiy.

Deporlatio  m  HUKfan,  or  daportatio  limply,  waa
introduced  under  the  empeton  in  place  of  the
■quae  et  igiua  inleidictla.  (Ulpian,  Dig.  4S.  til.
13.  >.  3;  tik  19.  •.  S.)  The  goTemor  of  a  pro-
Tiiice  (pntta)  had  not  the  paver  ot  proDmDein);
the  aentenefl  of  deporatio ;  but  thii  paver  vai
given  lo  the  praeleclui  nibi  by  a  reacript  of  the
emperor  Sevenu.  The  conieqnence  of  deportatio
wai  loii  ofjnopaty  and  cititmihip,  but  not  of
freedom.  Though  the  dEportanu  cetkied  to  be  a
Boman  citiien,  he  had  the  oqiffiity  to  buy  and
■e]],  and  do  other  acta  which  might  be  done  ac-
cording  to  the  jua  gentiom,  Deportatio  differed
from  rclegatiOf  aa  already  Bhovn,  and  aJio  in  being
alwayi  be  an  indefinita  time.  The  lelcgstua  vent
inM  baniihioent ;  the  deportatoi  waa  conducled  to
bit  place  of  bonithment,  lametiniei  in  chatni.

Ai  the  euiUum  in  the  apecial  lenie,  and  the
deportatio  look  away  a  penon*!  ciiiOi,  it  followi
that  if  he  wai  a  father,  hia  children  ceaapd  lo  be
in  hi)  power ;  and  if  be  wat  a  loa,  he  ceaicd  to  be
in  hia  father^  paver  ^  for  the  relationihip  ei-
|veued  by  the  terma  pairia  pattMfU  could  not
exiit  when  either  party  had  ceaaed  to  be  a  Roman
citizen.  (Gaioi,  i.  128.)  Releplia  of  a  father  or
of  a  un,  of  courae,  had  not  thii  eSecL  But  the
interdict  and  the  deparlatie  did  not  diiaolre  mar-
riage. (Cod.  S.  tiL  16.  1.  24  ;  tit  17.  >.  1 ;  com-
pare Oaiiu,  L  126,  vith  the  Jngtitute^  L  tit.  12,
in  vhich  tho  deportfttio  itands  in  the  place  of  the
aqoac  ct  ignii  interdictio  of  Gains.)

When  a  penon,  either  parent  or  child,  vaa  can-
demaed  to  tbe  minea  or  to  light  with  wild  beaati,
the  ivlalion  of  the  prOria  jnlaiai  waa  dinolvcd.
Thii,  though  not  reclconed  a  tpeciet  of  euilium,
mcmbled  deportatio  in  ita  coniequt-ncea.

It  remaina  to  ecunine  the  meaning  of  the  term
(he  republiotn  period,  and  to


fhr


c34)af


hi>


ir  hii  freedom  by  a  lei. [


^Vl.flo«o(c.ie,17)

but  in  a  qualified  way;  he  aari  that  no  ipccial
lex,  that  is,  no  primieffiuaiy  could  be  paoacd  agninit
the  caput  of  a  Ranmn  ctliien,  nnleai  he  waa  firat
condemned  in  a  judicium.  It  vsa,  uccrding  to
Cicero,  a  fundamental  principle  of  Roman  ]t.w  {Pro
Domo,  c  S9),  that  no  Roman  citizen  conid  loae
hk  freedom  or  hid  dtiacnship  vithout  his  consent
He  addi,  that  Roman  citiioni  who  went  out  ai
Latin  cotoniatt,  eonld  net  become  Latin,  unleaa
they  vent  Tolnntarily  and  registered  their  names :


not  \iy  depriTing  them  of  theii  civitas  (odeniptu
oeitMu),  but  by  the  interdictio  tecti  aquae  et
igniL  The  aame  thing  is  staled  in  the  oration
Pn  Cmcina  (e.  34),  vith  tbe  addition,  that  a
Roman  cititen,  when  he  was  receiycd  into  another
alBle,  loat  his  eitiienahip  at  Borne,  because  by  the
Roman  law  a  man  coold  not  be  a  citizen  of  two
atate*. Thia  rtaaon,  bowcrer,  Tuold  be  eqiallj


EXSILIUM.
good  for  showing  that  a  Roman  citiaen  could  not
becumo  a  ciliien  of  another  conununitr.  tn  the
omtion  Pro  Balbo  (c  11)  the  proposiiion  is  pat
rather  in  this  fonn  ;  that  s  Roman  vbo  tiecaiae  a
dtiien  of  another  slate,  Aenbg  ceaaed  to  be  a  Ro-
man citizen.  Il  must  not  be  fiHgatten  that  in  tho
omtiui  Pm  Oudmi,  it  ii  one  of  Cicen'a  objeetato
pmre  that  his  client  had  the  rights  of  a  Rcsnan
dtisen ;  and  in  the  oration  Pro  Domo,  to  proic
tikat  he  himself  had  not  been  an  exaul,  though  he
was  interdicted  from  fits  and  water  within  4(HJ
milcaofRome.  (,C]c  Ad  AISc.  iu.  i.)  New,  aa
Cicero  bad  been  mterdicted  bom  fire  and  vater,
and  as  he  eraded  the  penalty,  to  use  his  own  words
(Pro  Gucita  c  34),  by  going  beyond  tho  liraita,
he  could  only  ocape  tho  cmaequencei,  namelv,
eisilimn,  either  by  relying  on  the  StcX  of  hia  not
bein^  received  aa  a  cttisen  into  another  slate,  or  by
alleging  the  illegality  of  tbe  proceedings  against
hitn.  But  the  latter  is  the  gnmnd  oc  vhich  he
seems  to  maintain  hit  case  in  tbe  Pn  Domo :  he
allegea  thu  he  vaa  made  the  .
leginm,  viiboul  having  been  firat  a
jndiciam  (t  17).

In  the  earlier  repoblican  period,  a  Roman
citiien  might  have  a  right  to  go  into  eisilium  to
another  atate,  or  a  citiien  of  another  atate  might
have  a  right  to  go  into  exailium  at  Rome,  by  virtue
of  certain  itopoliiical  relationi  ecitting  betveen
inch  slate  and  Rom&  This  right  vas  called  jits
emlandi  vith  reference  tn  the  state  to  vhich  the

Gcson  came ;  vith  respect  to  his  ovn  state  which
left,  ho  vai  eiul,  and  his  conditioa  waa  ei-
silium ;  with  raped  to  tbe  state  which  he  en-
tered, he  was  in^uZinxt*,'  and  at  Rome  ha  might
atlsch  himself  (applicar»  a>)  to  a  qmui  patnmua,  a
relationihtp  which  gave  rite  tn  qneatieot  involving
application  it.


le  joj  appi
The aei


of  aquae  et  ignis,  to  which
icero  adds  {Pro  Domo,  c  30)  tecti  interdictio
nmp.  Plot.  Afanm,  c  39),  waa  equivnlent  to
le  deprivatioQ  of  the  chief  neeeaaarioi  of  life,  and
s  c9ecl  was  to  imapocttate  a  person  ftam  exer-
cising the  rights  of  a  citizen  withm  the  limita  which
the  sentence  comprised.  Supposing  it  to  be  true,
that  no  Roman  citizen  could  in  direct  teima  be  ir-
prived  of  his  ctviias,  it  reqaire*  but  little  know-
ledge of  the  history  of  Roman  jnriiprndence  to
perceive  that  a  way  would  readily  be  diaoovrted
of  doing  that  indirectly  which  conld  not  be  dona
directiy ;  and  such,  in  fiut,  was  the  aquae  et  ignis
intenliclio.  The  meaning  of  the  sentenoa  nf  aquae
et  ignis  interdictio  is  clear  when  we  omaider  the
symbolical  meaning  of  the  aqua  et  ignia.  The
bride,  on  the  day  of  her  mattiagr,  waa  nceived  by
hei  husband  with  fin  and  water  (Dig.  24.  dt.  1.
i.  G6),  which  were  symbnlicsJ  of  his  taking  her
under  his  prolection  and  tnstentation.  Vmo  (/>>
Lhff.  Lot.  iv.)  givca  a  different  explanation  of
the  symbolical  meaning  of  aquae  ot  iguia  in  the
mamogB  ceremmy : — A^tneri  igmit  (actfiading  to
ipreaaion  of  Pettot)  mat  dm


*  Thia  word  ^ipcors,  b]
to  denolea  person  who  waa  me  of  a  ctaia,  like  tbo
word  ISitrlimit,  The  prefix  a  aj^iean  to  be  the
comlative  of  (c  in  enii^  and  the  remaining  |arl
jml,  ia  probabij  related  to  Bof  in  aeeU  «ad  cAiim.


The  Lci  Julia  de  ei


VABKL
mi  inflicted  lot  nirioDa  crir


uj  penoo  fin'  fanyerit,  islHrenf,  fnii«n!,  the  inter-
dieted  ptnoD  (Pulu,  SmL  Rbo^.  ei.  ScbnlUng) ;
tad  there  w«  a  claiue  to  thii  eSbct  in  the  lei  of
Clodiiu,  faj  which  Cicem  wna  buiiihed.

The  >«ii«ice  of  the  iotetdict,  which  in  the
time  of  the  Antoninn  vu  accompaaied  with  the
Iw  of  ciliiHiahip  (Gaiu,  L  9D),  could  hardlj-  hare
had  an;  other  eflect  in  the  time  of  Cicero.  It
maf  be  true  that  enilium,  that  it,  the  chang«  of
mJaai,  m-  gnmnd,  mu  not  in  direct  tenni  inciuded
li  the  Knteace  of  agwii  et  ii/mt  HUerdicUo .'  the
pt^fnon  InigHt  stay  if  be  lihed,  and  Bubmit  to  the
penaltj  of  being  oooatcaet,  and  being  in^pftcitat^
frvtn  doil^  any  legal  acL  lodoed,  it  ii  not  «aaj
to  ooneeiTe  that  bamilaiail  can  exiit  in  anr  ilatc,
encpt  aucli  itate  hu  diiBnt  pOMeiuoni  of  it*  own
Id  which  (he  offender  can  be  aent.  Thiu  baniih-
BKBl  u  a  pnialtr  did  not  exiit  in  the  old  Engliih
law.  Wbsi  iMpoZitical  relation!  exiited  between
Bone  and  another  Mate,  eiiilhnn  might  be  the
prink^  of  an  oflender.  Cicero  might  then  tiulj
>t  a  pusiibnient,  bat  a

_. .  _  mt  (/Vo  Oiittm)  J  and

thii  ia  qniu  connilent  with  the  interdict  being  a
pmiahiBeDt,  and  baTing  far  ita  object  the  enilium.

Accdrdii^  In  Niehnhr,  the  interdict  wai  intended
ta  ptment  a  penoo,  who  bad  becoms  an  exiul,  Stom
T^MTMiag  to  Roue
aid  the  interdict  wai
recalled.  Farther,  Niebuhr  ouota,  that  they  wh
settled  in  an  nnpriTileged  place  (one  that  wai  nt
in  an  iacnil>t>c>l  connection  with  Rotne)  needed
deetce  of  the  people,  declaring  that  their  teltle-
Dvot  aheaJd  operate  aa  a  legal  exiiliiim.  And
tbk  aaaettion  is  saj^rted  b^  a  single  pasasgo
Liij  (xiTi.  3),  &Dm  which  it  i^pean  that  it  wat
declared  bj  a  plebitcitum,  that  C.  Fabiut,  by
going  into  ej:ile  (emiuiam)  to  Taiqninii,  which
na  ■  munidpium  IPrn  Caeda.  c  4),  was  legally
ineiile,

Nielnhr  asserts  (hat  Cicero  bad  not  loat  the
diitM  b7  the  interdict ;  but  Cicero  {Ad  Attie,
33)  by  impliouiiH)  admit)  that  he  had  lost  his
civitas  and  his  ordc^  though  in  the  Ontio  Pro
Doma  he  de^  that  he  hod  lost  his  ciiitai. And


FALSUM.  617

belong  to  any  of  the  fire  ebuus  into  which  Serriu*


Liry  <L  t3)  and  Dionyiiui  (ril  6S)
name  both  the  centuriea  together:  the  former  says
that  (hey  voted  with  the  6nt  class  ;-the  latter,
that  the;  Toted  with  the  second.  Cicero  {Di  Rip.
"^'  les  only  one  century  of  hbri,  wbich  he
with  (he  firM  clau  i  bat  as  he  adds  (ha
recognised  (ha


faiteidkted,  i


abet  n


altogether  imgitlar.

CoitnriatL  {Ad  Ame.  it.  i,
EXTISPEX.  [HiRUBP
EXTBAOUDINA'aiL

497,  h.]


I  was  reatored  by  a  le
I.)  [G.  I-.]


PABRI,  are  wwkmen  who  nialfe  any  thing  out
of  hard  nMeiiala,  as  /abri  tigaani,  carpenters,
/i^ri  tMrarii,  snitfas,  Ac  The  different  ti  '
were  dirided  by  Noiaa  (Pint.  Nvma,  17)
nine  callqia,  which  oormpond  to  our  companies
•K  guilds.  In  the  constitution  of  Serriui  Tullius,
the  fiibri  tigmarU  {timnm,  Orelli,  /nscn
41i.3«9a,l0Be,4088,lie4}Bndtbe/iiin.
m  fimni  {x"^*"^"")  were  fiimud  in
eentoiies,  which  were  colled  (he  ec3i(uriae./^iiriini,
■tid  aot/Unrsga.  (Cie.  OrK.  46.) The;  did  not


Gessi,  dtr  Rant.  Slaaitv.  p.  249.)

The  bbri  in  the  army  wen  tuider  the  oominand.

of  an  officer  called  proi^etia  fcdirim. (Cae*.  ap.

Oc  od  AIL  ix.  i,  BM.  Of.  L  24j  Vc^et.  ii  11.)

It  baa  been  auppMed  by  some  modem  writers  that

there  was  a  praefectns  fabr{Lra  attached  to  each

'  this  ni^haTe  been  the  case.  No  genuine

inscrip^ons  howeTer,  contain  (he  title  of  praeieetua

fabrm  with  the  name  of  a  legion  added  to  it.

There  were  also  ciiil  mngiitratet  at  Rome  and  in

manidpsl  lovni,  called  proefecti  bbrflm ;  but

know  nothing  respecting  them  beyond  their

le. Thus  we  find  in  Gmter,  Phaip.  Fabb.

RovAi  (467.  7),  PBAxricTUB Fabh. Cabb.

(S3S.  9.) The  nibject  of  the  praefecti  bbrtkni  ii.

dlscnned  with  great  accvracy  in  a  letter  of  Hagen-

buchini, pubU&ed  by Oielli {Itacrip.  tdI.  iL

95,  St).

FA'BULA. [Coiiobdia.]
FACTIO'NES  AUHIQA'RUM. [Cibcub,
p.  287.]
FALA'RICA. [Hi"*.]
FALSA'RIUS. [Famum.]
FALSUM. The  oldeit  legitlaliTe  proTiiion  at
Rome  against Falanm  was  that  of  the  Twelve
Tables  against  false  testimony  (OelL  ii.  1)  ;  but
there  were  trials  for  giving  false  testimony  before
the  enactment  of  the  Twelye  Tables. (Liy.  ill.'
24,  &e.) The  neit  legislation  on  Falnim,  so  br
ai  we  know,  was  a  Lei  Cornelia,  (sssed  in  the
time  of  the  Dictator  Sulla,  which  Ciceio  also  calls
testamentaria  and  numorin  (/h Vtrr. ii.  lib.  1.
c.  42},  with  reference  to  the  crimes  wbich  it  waa
the  object  of  the  law  to  punisL The  oflence  waa
a  Crimen  PublieanL The  proritioni  of  this  lex
are  stated  by  Panlus  (.Sod.  RteipL  v.  2.^  ed.
Beti), who  also  entitles  it  L>ei  Cornelia  testa-
mentaria, to  ^iply  to  any  persim  "  qui  testamenlnm
1 falsnm  sciec '  '


recitaveric,  nibjecerit,  luppTesteril,
amoverit,  retignaverit,  deleverit,"  Ac.  The  pnuisb-
ment  was  deporUtio  in  insulam  (at  least  when
Pautus  wrote)  for  the  "  boneatiores ;"  ani  the  mines
or  cmciiixian  for  the  "  humilines."  In  place  of
deportntio,  the  law  probably  contained  the  punish-
ment of  the  utcrdietia  aquae  et  ignis.  According
to  Paolu*  the  law  applied  to  any  initnunrat  aa
well  as  a  will,  and  to  the  adulteration  of  gold  and
silver  coin,  or  refusing  to  accept  in  payment  ge*
nnine  coin  stamped  with  the  head  of  the  princeps.
But  it  appears  from  Ulpian  (tub  titulo  de  poena
legis  Conteliae  teitomentariae)  that  these  were
■ubseqnent  additions  made  to  the  Lex  Conelia
(Mai.  el  Rom.  Leg.  CoB.  tiL  S.  a.  7)  by  varioua
senatus-consnlta.  (TaciL  Atm,  liv.  40,  41.)  By
a  senatni-conniltmn,  in  the  consulship  of  Statiliua
and  Taurus,  Che  peiialtie*  nC  the  law  were  extended
to  the  case  of  other  than  teatamentoiy  initmmentb
I  Itia  coiQectured  that,  for  the  contulafaip  o[  Statiliui

lis ■ O"


il8  PALX.

and  Taurui,  aa  it  Btandi  in  tbe  teit  of  Ulpiim,  wa
sbonld  nod  Statiliu*  Touru,  and  that  tha  roninl-
thip  o(  T.  Statiliui  Taunia  and  L.  Scriboniui  Libo
(a.  D.  IC)  ii  meaoL  A  subieqaBTit  leniitai-can-
■ulEuin,  in  tlw  foorteentli  year  of  Tibtriat,  extended
tha  pi^naltiei  of  the  lav  to  thow  whs  Sat  monaj
undertook  the  defence  of  ■  (crininal  ?)  cauae,  or  to
procure  teBtimonT ;  and  hj  a  KnatTU-mamltuin,
puaed  betireen  tha  dal«i  of  thoaa  jual  mentioaed,
coiiipiracieB  for  the  ruin  of  innocent  p«TSoni  were
CompriBed  within  the  proTiiion)  of  the  lav.  An-
other «enatn>-CDnsu1Cuni,  paaaed  a.  ik  26,  extended
the  law  to  thoae  who  received  money  for  aelling,
or  giring,  or  not  pnag  tcatimany.  There  were
probably  olher  legielatiie  prorition)  (rr  the  pnr-
poac  of  checking  troud.  In  the  time  of  Nero  it
wBi  enacted  agamat  fiaudnlent  perioni  {faiiarii),
that  tabulae  or  wnCten  omtncti  ahodd  be  pierced
with  holei,  and  a  triple  thivad  paued  through  the
holei,  in  addition  to  the  signature.  (3aet.  Nen>,
c  17;  compare  Pauloa,  Saa.  Rmpl. T. tiL  25.


Jl  the  firtt  two  parM  (auran)  of  a
have  only  tha  teetatorV  aignaturOf  and  the  rtm
jDfi  one  that  of  the  witneaaea  :  it  «a>  aLio  proi
tiiat  DO  man  who  wnite  the  will  ihoutd  give  himself
a  legacy  in  it.  The  provitiona,  aa  to  adultenuing
money  and  reltising  (o  take  legal  coin  in  payment,
were  al>D  made  by  aenatua-conanlta  ot  imperial
conatitutiont.  AUuiion  ia  made  to  the  latter  law
by  Arrian  (Epict.
ana  paaaagei  in  the  Roman  writeri  dint  the  crime


of  fiilaum  ii


:h  legia-


willa,  Bgainat '
feeble  lecurity. ^nemccc.
„ ^ ;  Rein,  Dai  Criminalrtdit  der  Homer,
where  the  anbject  ia  fuUy  diacnased.) [O.  L.]

FALX,  dim.  FALCULA  (ifnn),  tfinro,,
pod.  tpnimi,  dim.  Sfmiriar) ,  a  lickle  ;  a  acjlhe ;
a  pninmg-knife,  or  jauning-hook ;  a  bill;  a  &1-
chion ;  a  halbert.

Aa  CuLTia  denoted  a  knife  with  one  atmight
edge,  "  fiUi "  signified  any  aimilar  inatrument,  the
aingle  edge  of  which  wai  cnrrcd.  {Aptrarof  li-
ira^wh,  Hom.  Od.  xviii.  887  ;  OB-vat/hlra,  Virg.
Gaora.  i.  50G  ;  curwrniu/^  aeaat,  Orid,  MH.
YiL  227  ;  adumoajabe,  liy.  62B.)  By  additional
epitheta  the  Torioni  naea  of  tho  bdx  were  indicated,
and  iCa  correaponding  varictiet  in  form  and  aii^
Thna  the  lickle,  beoose  it  wai  Died  by  reopen,
waa  called  fidx  Jmtoria  ;  tha  leythe,  which  wai
employed  in  mowing  hay,  waa  called  ^lir^aiiorla;
the  pnuiin^knife  and  the  bill,  on  account  of  their
lue  in  dreuing  rinea,  ai  well  ai  in  hedging  and  in
cutting  off  the  ahoota  and  branchei  of  tre«,  were
dialingniehed  by  the  appellation  of  Jiilx  jntatonOy
twutono,  oi^ormw,  or  tthutua  (Cato,  Z)a  ifa  Aiuf.
10,  11  ;  Pallad.  L  43  ;  Colnm.  it.  21),  or  by  the
diminutive /iZcKEa. (Cotom.  lii.  18.)

A  mre  coin  publlahedby  Fellerin  (Afcrf.ibRou,
Par.  1763.  p.  208)  ahowa  the  head  of  one  of  the
Lngidac,  kinga  of  Egypt,  wearing  tha  DuniHiL,
and  on  the  i«Ter«e  a  man  cutting  down  corn  with
a  lickle. (See  woodcnt.)

The  lower  figure  in  tho  nrae  woodcnt  ia  taken
from  the  MSS.  of  Colomella,  and  illuilratea  hii
deacriplion  of  the  TarJDaapaTtaof  thejWvcnn'torio.
(fti««ftw«.i..26.  p.Bie,cd.Geaner.)[CuiTiii,]
The  curratare  in  tha  ton  part  of  the  blade  ia  ei-
preaaed  by  Virgil  in  tho  phraM  pmatna  JaLr.
ifhvrg,  ii,  431.) After  the  mnonl  of  a  bnocb


by  the  pmnlng-hook,  it  waa  often  amootfaed,  aa
in  modem  gardening,  by  the  chiaeL  (Colum.
DeArUn-.  10.)  [DaLABRA.]  Tha  edgn  of  tho
lali  WB4  often  toothed  or  lerrated  (i^nii/  na^
Xtfitarra,  Hciiod,  Tktofi.  Mi,  17S  ;  daokulata,
Colum.  De  Rt  Run.  iL  21).  The  indiipennble
proceaa  of  aharpening  these  inatmmenta  (jpnyr
Xopoiriri/i/nu,  Heaiod,  Op.  S?3  ;  ifirv  tdnfiwf
notfirWa,  Apoll.  Rhod.  iti.  ISS8)  waa  eSvted  by
whetatonea  which  the  Romani  obtained  from
Crete  and  other  diatant  placet,  with  the  addition
of  oil  or  water  which  the  mower  (/ioniM)  car-
ried mahonapon  hia  thigh.  (Plin.if.M  iviii.
67.)

Numeroni  at  were  the  uaea  to  which  tha  Uk
waa  applied  in  agriculture  and  horticultim,  ita
employment  in  battle  waa  almott  eqaally  wied,
though  not  BO  frequent  The  Oeloni  were  noted
forilsuae.  (Claudian,  i)a£aii>f.  JWf.  L  110.)  It
waa  tha  weapon  with  which  Jupiter  wounded
Typhon  (Apollod.  i.  8)  j  with  which  Hercnlea
alew  the  Lemaean  Hydra  (Enrip.  /at,  191)  ;  and
with  which  Mercury  cut  off  tho  head  of  Argna
(Jitlcato  mm,Ov\i,  Met.  \.7\e  itarpemOgOaada,
Lucan,  it  662—667).  Pefaena,  baring  rec«iTed
the  same  wiApon  from  Mercury,  or,  according  to
oth»  authontice,  from  Vulcan,  uted  it  to  decspi-
late  Meduaa  and  to  ilay  the  aea-monaler.  (Apollod.
iL  4  ;  Erotoath,  CalaMtr.  22  ;  Orid,  MM.  n.  666,
720,  727,  T.  69  !  Bmock,  Jiwi.  iii  li7.)  From
the  paiaagea  now  reEeired  to,  we  nay  conclude  that
the  falchion  waa  a  weapon  of  the  moat  rtmeta
antiquity  ;  that  it  wat  girt  Uke  a  dag)|er  upon  the
waiat ;  that  it  waa  held  m  the  band  by  a  ahort
hilt ;  and  that,  aa  it  waa  in  bet  a  dagger  or  tharp-
pointed  blade,  with  a  proper  &]jr  projacting  fiwn
one  aide,  it  waa  thmat  into  the  fleah  Dp  to  thit
lateral  curvature  (cunn  laaa  aididit  tama).  In
ig  woodcnt,  four  eiamplea  an  aelected
rroDi  work)  of  ancient  art  to  iiloitrato  ita  form.
e  four  cnmeoa  here  copied  lepnaenta
ith  tbc  &Icbion  in  hia  nght  hand,  and
the  head  of  Meduaa  in  hia  left.  The  two  ainallei
fignrea  are  hendi  of  Saturn  with  the  iaii  in  itt
original  form  ;  and  the  fourth  cameo,  representing
tbe  aame  divinity  at  full  length,  waa  probably  en-
graved in  Italy  at  a  later  period  than  the  otberi,
but  early  enough  to  pnie  tbat  the  acythe  wsa  in
e  ntnong  tho  Romana,  wbilat  it  illnitratea  tha
aptation  of  the  tymbole  of  SaMn  (Kpirot :
or  faidftr,  Ovid,  Fail.  v.  627,  fa  /in,  316>
for  the  purpoae  of  powHiifying  Time  (Xp^t),

' igina  the  wtqioo  whkli  hai  M<r  baaa


jacnbcd  to  be  atUcliHl  ta  tlia  end  of  &  pole,  it
■mild  wnme  tba  form  ud  be  appticsble  to  til  the
pupoHi  of  the  modcni  hilbert.  Such  mugl  hare
Wtbe  a— em  fiilcaH  lued  b;  tjie  Homsni  M
1^  vtft  of  AmbnciK.  (Lit.  niviii.  S  ;  nmparc
Cm,  B^  OnlL  yiL  22,  86  ;  Q.  Curt  i*.  19.)
SoietiDH*  the  inm  h«d  wu  10  large  lu  to  tie
bxcned,  instead  of  the  nim'i  head,  to  a  wooden
bniD. and worked by  men under a teitudo.


(Veg


,.  H.)


Lutlj,  the  AufTiBiii,  tba  Peniuit,  the  Medea,
•Bd  the  SjiiwH  in  Aiis  (Xen.  Q-rop.  vi.  1,  2,
..liHl.  i.  B  ;  Diod.  ii.  6,  ziii.  j3  j  Pdjh.  t.
U :  Q.  Cdk.  it.  9, 12, 13  ;  OelL  t.  5  ;  2  Macx.
Tan.  3  ;  VegeL  Ui,  21 ;  Li*.  xzniL  41),  and  the
Gagli  wd  Britoiu  in  Enn^  [CoriNua],  made
ihemKlrei  fonnidable  on  the  field  of  battle  b;  the
oe  of  ehaiioti  vilh  Kjthea,  filed  at  right  anglet
(•II  TAifiov)  to  the  vile  and  turned  downwards ;
w  inMn«d  fttrallel  to  the  axle  into  the  fell;  of  Ihc
wlwd,  to  u  to  revolve,  when  the  ehadot  was
pat  in  uHHioii,  with  more  than  thrice  the  Telocity
•f  tke  ebariol  itielf ;  and  Mineliiiie*  abo  projecting
bn  the  eitronitie*  of  the  aile.  [J.  Y.]

FAMI'LIA.  Thii  wotd  conlaini  the  nme
tlcBBit  aa  "  frmutiu,''  which  ii  sud  to  be  the
•ur  aa  the  Oaom/innW  ot^hhI,  which  aignified
"■sTDi."  The  conjectnra  that  il  conlaini  Iht>
>ae  element  aa  the  Oreek  JfiAln,  and  it  the
■ame  at  4^  cr  Ivs  ia  ipecions,  bnl  Knaewhat  daubC-
fiL  In  ita  widest  aenae  Familia  compreheuda  all
■lot  n  tnbjected  to  the  will  of  an  individual,  who
ii  Hi  jaria,  both  bee  penont,  ilaTea,  and  object!
«(  pnipeitj-.  In  thia  aeiue  it  correipondi  to  the
tiiMk  aboi  and  olcio.  But  the  word  haa  Tariout
rarrover  Dgnificatioo*  (Guniliae  —  appellatio  et  in
na  e(  is  pcnotiu  didueiluf ,  Dig.  HL  tiL  16.  a.I9fi,
i  I),  Id  the  third  kind  of  tealamenlarr  diapoai-
lin  mmlioiied  by  Oahia  (ii.  102),  the  ward
"  iDBilia  "  il  BXplwried  by  the  equiTalent  "  patri-
lafloinin  \"  and  the  pervm  who  received  the  fiimiZia
final  the  t«lator  (qui  a  lotaton  familiani  ac-
ciptehai  maucipio)  n-aa  called  "  funiljae  anptor."
Aad  in  tlie  fonaula  adopted  by  the  "  taniitiae
v^  when  ha  took  the  taatator^  &iniiia  by
hia  woida  were; "  "


FAMILIA.  SIS

clang  that  in  debatt  of  any  faerea  «nii%  the  pro-
perty of  the  inteatate  ahall  go  to  the  next  agnatni,
the  word  "  &milia  "  ligniGea  the  property  only :
~  Aguatui  pcoiimiB  ftmiliam  habeto."  In  Ihs
aamo  lectiDn  in  which  Ulpian  {Frag.  tit.  26.  1)
qootea  thit  paatagv  from  the  Twelve  Tahla,  he
explaina  agnati  to  be  ^  eognati  viiilii  lexoa  per
ntam  descendentea  ejnidem  ftmiliae,"  where  the
word  "  fcmilia  "  comprehend!  only  pereoia.  (Dig.
60.tit.l6.t.l9£iI0.tit.2.)

The  word  **  binilia  "  aometinea  aignifiei  only
"  peraona,"  that  ii,  all  thoaa  who  an  in  the  power
of  a  paterfaniliaa,  nch  ■■  hit  aou  (ft^fimHiat),
dangbten,graiidchildm,  and  alavea,  wboare  atiiclty
objectfof  dominium,  but  an  aba  in  a  aenae  objecta
of  potealaa.  In  another  amae  "  bmilia  "  ngniliei
only  (he  &M  persona  who  are  in  the  power  of  a
pa(a£uniliaa ;  and,  in  a  more  extended  lenae  of
thii  kind,  all  thoaa  who  are  agnati,  that  ii,  all
who  are  ipmng  fium  n  ounmon  ancator,  and
wonld  be  in  hia  power  if  he  were  living.  With
thia  aenae  of  fiunilia  il  connected  the  ilatni  &mi-
liae,  by  virtue  of  which  ■  penon  belonged  to  a
paiticniar  bmilia,  and  thereby  had  a  capacity  for
certain  righti  which  only  the  membere  of  tho
&milia  could  claim.  A  peraou  who  changed  thia
■tatua,  ceoaed  to  heloDg  to  the  fimulia,  and  lui-

CAruT.]  Memben  of  the  nioe  fimiily  were
'^femiliarea;"  and  hence  &milianB  came  to  fiignify
an  inlimale  friend.  Slavea  who  belonged  to  the
■ame  funilia  were  called,  with  reapect  to  thia  re-
lation, fiunilinret.  Generally,  "  biniliaria  "  might
aignify  any  thins  relating  to  a  fiitnilia.

Sometime!  "  bmtlia  "  la  need  to  tignily  only  the
■lavei  belonging  to  a  penrai  (Cic  oA  Fam.  iiv.  4,
ad  ^aKt.  Ft.  ii.  6J  ;  or  to  a  body  of  penona
(wcHtoa),  in  which  aenae  they  an  Knnetimea  op-
poaed  to  libetti  (Cic  BnL  22),  where  the  true
reading  ia  "  libertL'^ (Cic  ad  l-\m.  L  3.)

The  word  ftraiUa  ia  alao  applied  (improperly)  to
aeeta  of  philoaophera,  and  to  a  body  of  gUdiaton ;  in


imprapnely.
■  tometjmea  apphed  to  aignify  a
Diofiubaineiue.  (Ter.Aaaatoti,


■till  leaa  exact,  it
living,  a  nmn'i  me
T.  1.  36.)

A  pateifanuliaa  and  a  materfiunilia*  were  re-
epectiveiy  a  Roman  citizen  who  waa  aui  juria,  and
hia  wile  in  mann.  (Cic  TV^.  3  ;  eomp.  Ulp.  Fra^.
' 1,  and  Backing,  IwtiL  \.  pp.  217,  229.) A


a  filial


danghter  in  the  power  of  a  paterbmiliaa.  The
bmiiia  of  a  palcrfamiliaa,  in  ita  wideat  aenae,
oBaprehended  all  hia  agnati ;  the  extent  of  which
term,  and  ita  legal  import,  are  eiphiined  nnder
CooNATi.  The  relation  of  bmilia  and  gena  ia
ex^ained  under  Obns.

The  notion  of  Familia  oa  a  notnral  nlation  cai-
aiata  of  Marriage,  the  Palria  Poteatai,  and  Cognatio
(kinihip).  But  Foaitiva  Law  can  laahion  other
telalioni  after  the  »pe  of  these  natural  relatione.
Of  theae  artificial  family  relationi  the  Roman  law
had  £ve,  which  an  aa  follow:  —  (1)  Manus,  or
the  itrict  marriwe  lelaliDn  between  the  hnaband
and  wife  ;  (2)  Serfitua,  or  the  relation  of  maater
and  ilaTc )  (3)  PalTonatns,  or  (he  rehiliDu  of
fbtmer  maitec to  former alave  ; (4)  Hancipii


and  libertai,  which  chaiacleiiied  a  child  who  was
mandpated  by  hia  father  [Euakcifitio]  ;  (A)
Tulcla  and  Cumtio,  the  origin  of  which  uaat  b^


520  FARTOR.

tnixd  to  the  pBtria  Potcttu.  Iheae  rebtioni  tat
mated  under  their  apprnpriate  h«di.

The  doctrine  of  repreacDlBtioD,  Hi  applied  to  the
acquisition  of  property,  ii  connected  with  the  doc-
trine  of  (he  lelationi  of  binilis  ;  bat  being  limited
with  Tcference  to  poteaUi,  manui,  and  mancipiDm,
it  is  not  co-erteniiTe  nor  identical  with  the  rela-
tion! of  familia.  Legal  eapaei^  ii  aim  connected
with  the  relalioni  of  bmilia,  though  not  identical
with,  but  isther  diitinct  from  them.  The  notiona
of  liberi  and  ecrvi,  mi  jurii  and  alieni,  are  com-
priied  in  the  above-mentioned  relationa  of  familia.
The  diitinotioni  of  Civei,  Latini,  Pcrogrini,  are
entirely  uncunnected  with  the  relation!  of  faoiilia.
Some  of  the  nlationi  of  bmilia  have  no  effect  on
lefial  apacitj,  for  initance,  marriage  ai  auch.  That
family  relaiionihip  which  ha«  sn  influence  on  1^^
capacity,  a  Iho  Patria  PotMtai,  in  connection
with  which  the  legal  incapacitiei  of  filiugfomiliii,
filialamiliai,  and  a  wife  in  manu,  may  be  moit
opproptiately  considered.  (Sarigny,  Sydim  det
haitigcn  Ram.  Rechit,  vol  L  pp.  345,  Ac,  356,  &c
vol.  iL  Berlin,  ItllO  ;  BOcking,  latlatkma,  Tol.  L
p.  2l3,&e.)  [O.L.]

FAMI'LIAE  ERCISCUNDAE  ACTIO.
Every  here*,  who  had  full  power  of  diipoiition
over  his  property,  wai  entitled  to  a  diviuon  of  the
heredila«,  unleu  the  tcitator  bad  declared,  or  the
co-heredea  had  agreed,  that  it  ihould  remain  in
common  for  a  Hied  time.  The  diriaion  could  be
made  by  agreement  among  the  co-hercdea  ;  hnt  in
taie  they  could  not  agree,  the  diviaion  waa  made  by
a  judex.  For  thia  purpose  every  here*  had  against
each  of  hit  co-heredea  an  nclio  familiae  erciacundae,
which,  like  the  actioncs  communi  dividundo,  and
iiniuni  regnndotum,  was  of  the  class  of  Miilae
Actianes,  or,  as  they  were  sometimes  called,  Du-
plicia  Judicia,  bccauae,  as  in  the  brail  iae  erciscundae
judicium,  each  heres  was  both  plaintiif  and  defend-
FLiLt  (actor  and  reus) ;  though  he  who  brought  the
actio  and  claimed  a  judicium  (ad  Judicium  provo-
oaoil)  was  properly  the  actor.  A  heret,  either  ci
tcstamenio  or  ab  intestato,  might  bring  this  action.
All  the  hercdei  were  liable  to  the  bonorum  collalio
{RoNonuH  Coll  AT  JO  I,  that  is,  bound  to  allow,  in
taking  the  account  of  the  properly,  what  tbey  had
received  from  the  testator  in  bia  lifetime,  as  part  of
their  share  of  the  hereditas,  at  leaat  ao  &r  at  they
had  been  enriched  by  auch  donations.

This  action  was  given  by  the  Twelve  Tables.
The  ward  Familia  here  a^ifiea  the  "  property,"
as  eiphiined  in  the  preiioui  article,  and  is  eqmva-


Thel


nof  tl;


uiuig.
nr  here,  uoert.  hi

pute.  It  is,  howeier,  certam  tnai  ine  wora  mtflnt
"diviaioQ."  (Dig.  10.  til.  2;  Cic.  J>e  Orat.  L
£6,  Pro  Oieciiia,  c7j  ApuL  Met.  ii.  p.210,
Bipont)  [G.L.]

FAMO'SI  LIBELLI. [LiBiLtUB,]
FANUM. [TiMFLUH.]
FA'RREUM. [Mathihoniui..]
FAKTOR  {aiTrvT^s),  was  a  akve  who  fattened
poultry. (Colum.  viil  7 ;  Hit.  SaL  ii. 3.  228  ;
PlauL  Thu!.  i.  3.  11.) DonaCus  (ad  Ten*L  Em.
iL  2.  26) lays that the  name  waa Riven to  a
maker  of  aauiagea ;  but  compare  Becker,  OaUiu,
lol.  ii.  p.  1 90.

The  name  of  fartorcB  or  eramnurt  waa  alto
given  to  the  nonicnclatores,  who  aceompauicd  the
candidates  for  the  public  oliiMi  M  Kraue,  and  gave


FASCES.

1 the  natnei  of  anch  peraoru  as  thej  might


FAS. [F

iSTi ;  Jus.]

FASCES,

were  rods  bound  in  the  fbrm  of  a

bundle,  and

iron  of  wWch  pr

a  (j«»h)  in  the

middle,  the

ejected  from  them.

These  rod.  w

ere  carried  by  lid

ors  before  the  supe-

rioc  magistrate*  at  Rome,  and

on  the reve

»e of  consular

oina (Spanh.  /*.

Praea.tt  t7fl

Nu^inH.  vol.

L  pp.  88,  91.) The

following  woodcuts  gire  the  r

^er«i  of  [bur  eon-

sular  coma  ;  i

the  first  of  whi

h  we  aee  the  lictnn

carrying  the

lascoa on their

shouldeia  ; in  the

second, two

feacet.  and bet

ircen  them a sella

eurulii ;  in  t

e  third,  two  fiucea  crowned,  with

the  consul  standing  between

them  j and  in  the

fourth,  the  aanu,  oniy  with  no

crowns  around  tba

The  ftsccB  appear  to  ha've  been  uanally  made  of
birch  {bihdla,  p\ia.If.N.  xvL  30),  but  aoneiiinfs
alto  of  the  twigs  of  the  elm.  (Plant.  Ai/m.  iiL  2.
29,  iL  S.  74.)  They  are  said  to  have  been  de-
rinMl  from  Vetulonia,  a  city  of  Etmria.  (Sil.  ImL
viii.  486  ;  comi«UT;  Liv.  L  8.)  Twelve  werenuried
before  each  of  Ae  kings  by  twelve  licton  ;  and
on  the  expulsion  of  the  Tarquma.  one  of  the  con-
suls was  preceded  by  twelve  lietots  with  the  faeees
and  aecurce,  and  the  other  by  the  vine  nomber
of  licton  with  the  bsces  only,  or,  according  to
some  aecomit*,  with  oowim  noDd  them.  (Dionya.
v.  2.)  But  P.  Valeriua  PnblJmla,  who  gave  to
the  people  the  light  of  {Irorocatio,  enUined  tbat


FASCIA.
ttt  nana  iliaild  be  maored  bom  the  fiuco,  and
iBowid  oilj  aw  of  th«  coDfiil*  to  b«  preceded  by
the  liefan  vhiJe  they  wen  at  Home.  (Cie.  dt
Jtip.iLH  ;  Viler.  Max.  ir.  1.  g  1.}  Tbe  other
eoul  mi  attended  oulj  by  a  aingle  accennu
(AicufiDs].  What  tbey  were  onta(  Rome,  and
■t  the  hod  of  tlie  iniy,  euh  of  tbe  eantnli  le-
niaed  Ibeaiein  the  fieiie.  nnii  waa  pnceded  by
ha  on  lieton. (Diooy^  T,  J9  ;  Lit.  xqt.  9,

WbsD  Uia  deoamTui  were  fint  t^ipoinCed,  the
biDS  wnv  only  ranied  before  tbe  orw  wbo  pre-
■M  hr  the  day  (Lit.  ilL  33)  ;  and  it  ni  ust
till  tke  BMond  deconTinue,  when  tbej  b«gu]  Co
ad  in  a  tyraimical  manner,  that  the  bto*  with
the  axe  were  ouritd  before  each  of  the  ten.  (LiT.
iil  34.)  The  baeea  and  MCDrea  were,  however,
eariMd  befdn  tbe  dictator  even  in  tbe  city  (Lie.
ii.  IB);  be  «aa  pteceded  by  24  liclcn, and  the
tiller  cqaitam  by  lii.

Tbe  pneton  were  preceded  in  the  dty  by  two
lieton  with  the  bieea  (Cennrin.  Dt  Dit  Natal.
3t ;  Cie.  Agrar.  iL  34)  ;  bat  out  of  Rome  and  al
the  head  of  an  aimy  by  ni,  with  the  fiueei  and
•cnro,  whence  they  ate  called  by  tbe  Oieek
wrilen  rrfoniyoi  ilartKiiats.  (Ap|dan,  5^.  1 5  j
Pidjb.  ii.  34.  £  6,  iiL  40.  g  9,  106.  |  6.)  The
inmoiDli  alio  were  allowed,  in  the  time  of  Ulpian,
liibKta.  (Dig.  I.  tit  16.1.14.)  Tbe  tribnnea
of  the  pleba,  the  aedilea  and  qoaeitnn,  had  no
lieton  in  the  dty  (Plat  ^uot  Adm.  HI  ;  Gell.
lilL  I!)  ;  but  in  the  prmiiieea  the  quaeatoii  were
ponitud  In  ban  the  &aeea.  (Cie  Pro  PUme.
4J.)


bigha  ni  raak,  tbe  lictui  lowered  their  bacea  to
m.  TUa  waa  done  by  Valerioi  Pnblieola,  when
Iw  tiixtmA  the  pMnle  (Cie  dt  Rep.  il  3\  ;  Uv.
ii.T;  Va)<r.  Hu.  it.  1.  g  1)  ;  and  he
the  eqraaioo  aaiaBtlen /wH  '
yidd,  la  natiw  one^  lelf  iuieiii

Whn  a  geoeial  had  gained  a  tmIoit,  and  had
hwB  idated  ai  Impenuor  by  hi*  iMdien,  hii
bni  wen  alwayi  crowned  with  laurel  (Cie.  ad
■iltL  till  M  A,  A  iNn  i.  28  ;  Ciea.  BM.  Cit.

iii.;i.)

FASCIA  (Twfa),  Jim.  FASCIOLA,  a  hand
«  iUet  of  doth,  worn,  1.  roond  tbe  bod  u  an
tOifB  td  tnyaJty  (Sueton.  Jtd.  79]  [DiADBHi  I
""dwt  ID  Fai.xJ  :  2.  by  women  oyer  tbe  bresit
lOiid,  Di  Art.  AuaL  m.  622  ;  Vrofrn.  ir.  ID.
49;  A«a  Fatonlu,  Hart  li*.  134)  [Stho-
ninm] :  3.  imnd  the  legi  and  feet,  etpecially
V  nraen  (lee  the  woodcut  under  the  article
liHu).  CieOD  lepnached  C^bidini  for  wearing
fine  upon  hi*  feet,  and  the  Calantica,  a  female
onamm,  npm  hi*  bead  (i^  Norn.  Marc.  xir.  3).
■UlQwafda,  when  the  toga  had  filten  into  diniic,
a«l  (be  tiatta  palliuin  wa*  worn  in  it*  iteod,
Biiatthe  kg*  wece  naked  and  eipoied,/uKuu
ewnJn  became  common  ereii  with  the  male  tei.
(line  iw.  iL  3.  2^  ;  Val.  Max.  ti.  2.  g  7  i  OraL
f'jif.  338.)  Tbe  emperor  Alexander  Scverui
iLufirid.  Aiti.  Sev.  40)  alwayi  u*ed  them,  even
althoiigb,  wb«i  in  town,  he  wore  the  toga.  Qnin-
■^Ikn.  BerortheJeia,  aiaerta  that  the  adoption  of
thai  (sald  only  be  exciued  on  the  plea  of  infinn
health, ilmit.  Or.  n  3.) While  baciao,  won


PASTI.  «ai

l^  men  (Vil  Hot.  L  &  ;  Phaed.  T.  7.  37),  wan  a
■ign  of  extraordinary  refinement  in  dieea:  the
mode  of  cleamng  them  waa  by  rubbii^  them  with
a  while  tenadoui  earth,  reHmbZing  our  pipe-clay
{fiuaat  entaUt,  Cie.  tid  Att.  it  3).  Tbe  finer
laadae,  worn  by  ladie*,  were  pniple.  (Cie.  da
Uan^  Bap.  21.)  Tbe  bandage*  woond  about
the  leg*,  a*  ihotni  m  the  iUummatiim*  of  ancient
MSS.,  prove  that  the  Roman  usage  waa  generally
adopted  in  Europe  during  the  middle  age*.

Oa  tbe  a*e  of  badae  in  tbe  nuning  of  children
(Plant  Tna.  v.  13)  aee  Incunabula. [J.  Y.]

FA'SCIA  (Tairfa),  m  uchitectnn,  dgi^  (by
an  obvicu*  analogy  with  the  <irdin*ry  meaning  of
tbe  word)  any  long  flat  mr&ce  of  wood,  ttone,  or
marble,  luch  aa  tba  band  which  divide*  the  archt-
trave  ftom  the  frieie  in  tbe  Doric  order,  and  the
inr&ee*  into  which  the  architrave  ilielt  !•  divided
in  tbe  Ionic  and  Corinthian  oiden.  (See  Efirtv-
LIUU,  and  tbe  cnti  under  Columna.) [P.  S.]

FA'SCINUH  (Awinwia),  baeination,  enchant-
ment. The  belief  that  lome  pencni  had  tbe
power  of  injuring  other*  by  their  looki,  wai  ai
prevalent  among  the  Greek*  and  KoDUUU  aa  it  ii
among  the  lupendtiou*  in  modern  time*.  The
h^tiO^t  Biamirts,  or  eetf  gv,  ia  frequently  men-
tioned by  audmt  writera.  (Aldphr.  Ep.  L  \S  ;
Udiod.  .dttiiDp.  iii.  7 :  compare  Plin.  H.  N.  viL  2.)
PluUuch,  in  hit  Sympoiinm  (v.  7).  ha*  a  (eparata
chapter  w*pl  tAv  (nnntfairintlrnr  \rfiitiim,  vol
fidanaiv)'  fx'"  ifOaX^r.  The  evil  eye  <na>  rap-
po«ed  to  mjiire  childim  particularly,  bat  Kime-
time*  cattle  alao ;  whence  Virgil  (£k  iii.  103)
Bya,
"  Netdo  qni*  teneroi  eculo*  mihi  faicinat  agnnm.'*

Varioui  amulela  were  naed  to  arert  the  inflnence
of  the  evil  eye.  The  moat  commoi  of  theae  sp-
ptan  In  have  been  the  phallui,  called  by  the
Roman*  fucinnm,  which  wa*  hitng  round  the
necki  of  children  (ftirpiaila  m,  Varr.  Dt  Laig.  Lai.
ViL  97,  ed.  MOIler).  Pliny  (i/.  a:  lii.  19.  g  I)
al*o  nyi  that  Sa^^ioa  (^^fih,  by  which  he  nteani
the  phallui,  were  placed  in  gaidetti  and  oa  heartlu
aa  a  pntection  againtt  tbe  fascination*  of  the
enTioni;  and  we  leam  &om  Pollux  (viiL  118)
that  ioiitba  ^ere  accustomed  to  place  the  same


I  said  to  bave  hung  tt
uhopper  before  the  Acn>-


1.  (Heiych.


figure  of  a  1

polii  aa  a  preservative  against  mi

Another  ccenmoa  mod*  of  averting  fiudnation
wa*  by  spitting  into  tbe  fold*  of  csie**  own  dress,
(Theoer.  vi.  39 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xiviii.  7  ;  Lucian,
A^oe^  Ifi.  voL  iii.  p.  2SS,  ed.  Reitx.)

According  to  Plmy  (//.  ff.  ixviii.  7),  Fascinu*
waa  tbe  name  of  agod,whowasvronhippedamang
the  Roman  sscra  by  the  Vestal  virgins,  and  was
placed  under  the  chariot  of  thoae  who  triumphed
as  a  protection  againtt  bt^natlon  ;  by  which  be
means  in  all  prDbahility  that  the  phallus  iraa
Idsced  nnder  the  chariot  (Miiller,  ArtiaoL  dtr
Ktmt,  g  43G.  1,  2 ;  Bdniger,  KUa.  Sdtr.  iii.
p.ni  ;  Becker,  Caoritiu,  ToL  it  pp.  109,  391.)

FASTI.  Fas  signifies  dmM  law:  the  epithet
JiutuM  is  ptoperiy  applied  to  anything  in  accordance
with  divine  law,  and  benca  those  days  upon  which
legal  bDainesB  might,  wilhoot  impiety  (inef>ueiija),
he  tianncled  befine  tbe  pneliir,  were  technically


Jt32  FASTI.

draoninated  fiaS  ditt,  L  e.  bnc/U  dayt.  Vina
sod  Featiu  derive /hOm  diiecll;  frDin,^iri  (Vhtt.
(<■  £t^.  £a(.  tL  3  ;  Fstu,  i.  «.  /Wfi),  while
Ovid  (,FaiL  L  47)  imj  b«  quoted  in  (itpport  af
cither  e^mologf.

The  nend  bada  in  which  Ihe/utf  din  of  the
jeM  wtn  Duked,  wen  tbenuelm  deaiimiau«d
fiuH;  the  term,  hoWemr,  wu  entplojed  in  wi  ex-
tended amie  to  denote  ra^iiten  of  variocu  damp-
tioDi,  nnd  manjr  miRake*  haie  uiien  unong  ma-
nentMon  from  eoDfamding'  fiati  of  difbnat  kindi.
It  will  be  ONfiil,  Ihoefgni,  to  ecnuider  lepantely
the  two  great  ditiaiaiu,  which  h>Te  been  dittin-
gniihed  u  AM<  Saari  or  FiuU  Kalmdam,  uid
FaMi  Amalet  at  FaiH  HiUoncL

I.  F^STi  Sacbi  or  Kai-indaru.  For  ceuif
four  eeoturie*  and  a  half  after  the  fcmndalioa  of
the  citf  a  knowledge  of  the  calendar  wa>  poweued
eiclosTelf  by  the  printc.  One  of  the  pontificefl
re^latjy  piwlaimed  the  appeaiance  ot  the  new
moon,  and  at  the  nma  tioie  aononnoed  the  period
which  would  inlerrene  between  the  Kalenda  and
tie  Nonei.  On  tie  Nonea  the  eonntiy  people
aaeeinbled  for  the  poipoae  of  learning  from  the  K&r
Haeromm  the  lanoui  feitinli  to  be  oelebntcd
duiog  the  month,  and  the  dayi  on  which  they
would  &1L  (Macnb.  L  1£.)  In  like  manner  til
who  wiehed  to  go  to  law  were  obliged  to  inquire  of
tbe  priTilcged  few  on  what  day  tbey  might  bring
their  tnit,  and  reecired  the  reply  aa  if  from  the  lipi
ofan  utrdoger.  (Cic.  Pm  Af ami.  1 1 .)  Thewhole
of  thii  lore,  lo  long  a  (onrce  of  power  and  proHt,
and  tberofbre  jpsloualy  enTeJoped  in  mnterir,  waa
at  length  made  public  by  a  certain  On,  Eiariua,
•cribe  to  App.  Clandiui  Caecui  (Lir.  ii.  iS  ;
Ptin,  H.  y.  xxiiiL  1  ;  GeU.  ri.  9 ;  VaL  Mai.  ii.
fi),  who,  having  gained  acceai  to  the  pontiiical
boolci,  mpied  out  all  the  reqaints  information,  and
eihibitcd  it  in  the  fmnm  for  tbe  nae  of  the  people
at  large.  From  this  time  fbrwaid  aucb  tablee  be-
came commnn,  and  were  known  by  the  name  of
Fit^.  Tbtj  uually  contained  an  enumeialion  of
themonthtand  daja  of  the  year;  the  Nonn,  Idea,
Nundinae,  Die*  Faati,  Nebati,  Comitialn,  Atri,
Ac  [CiiiNDiHUHl.  together  with  the  different
featiTali,  were  marked  in  their  pnpcr  place)  ;  at-
(Tonomioil  obaerrBtianl  OD  the  riiingi  and  letlingi
i^  the  fixed  itart,  and  the  tcniinencenicnt  of  the

brief  notice*  annexed  regarding  the  intrednctioD
and  ligiiifiation  of  certain  rites,  the  dedication  of
templea,  glorioOL  Ticloriea,  and  tcirible  diiaiten,
In  later  timei  it  became  common  to  pay  homage
to  the  member)  of  the  imperial  family  by  noting
down  their  exploit)  and  honooD  iu  the  calendar,  a
^icciei  of  flattery  with  wliich  Antotiiua  i)  charged
by  Cicero  (PUlipp.  ii.  Si,  See  al)o  Tacit,  ^m.
LIS).

It  will  be  aeen  from  the  above  deacnption  that
tbeeo  /iaU  doaely  reaembled  a  modom  almanac
(/lutonm  libri  appeOnfar  tatiia  aaa  deteripHo.
Futui)  ;  luid  the  celebrated  work  of  Orid  may  be
Mniidered  ai  a  poetical  Fonr-iooi  or  Oomjxauim
ta  On  AltnamoB,  having  been  compoted  to  illulrate
the  Faati  puhli)bed  by  Julina  Caenu',  who  i«.
modelled  tbe  Roman  year.  All  the  more  remork-
ah]e  epoch)  are  examined  in  mccHnon,  the  origin
of  the  different  leatital)  explained,  the  variou)
cercmoniet  deaciibed,  the  legend)  connected  with
the  principal  comtellalibn)  nanslod,  and  many
cnrioaj  di«ca«BOiu  intarverai  opon  rabjacta  likely


FASTI,
ta  prore  intetcating  to  hi)  coontiymen  )  the  whole
being Huoned with frequent  allnninu  to  the
gloria  of  the  Julian  line.

Several  ipecimea)  cS/Mi,  mora  or  leaa  perfect,
on  atone  and  marble,  have  baao  diacOTcred  at  dif-
ferent time*  in  diffennt  [daco,  wne  of  them,  how.
ever,  older  than  iha  age  of  Augmtos.  The  most
remaikable,  ihongh  one  of  the  lean  entire,  it  that
known  a)  the  Kaindarimtt  Pmrnnhmim  or  FaM
FtrrioKi.  Sue toniu),  in  hi)  abort  treatiie  m  dia-
tingoitbed  grammariana,  lella  D)  that  a  atane  of
Vemni  Flaccoi,  pieeeplor  M  tha  gtmdaooa  of
Augnnns,  stood  in  tha  bwor  part  o£  the  beam
of  hi)  nntiTe  town,  Piamaat^  oppoaita  ta  the
Hrmucyeliiim,  on  which  ha  had  exUbilad  to  pnUie
riev  the  ftMli,  anai^sd  by  himael^  and  engiand
on  marble  alab*.  In  the  year  1770  the  ramaio)
of  a  circolar  building  woe  diacorered  in  the  im-
mediate vicinity  of  tbe  modern  Paleatrina,  to-
gether with  )cveial  bagmenta  of  marble  tablata,
which  were  soan  i«egni)ed  aa  [camiug  pait  oT  an
ancient  calendar  i  and  upon  further  eraminatinn
no  doubt  waa  entertained  by  tb*  leaned  tliat
Ibate  wen  die  Tory  Isati  of  Venina  dcacribed  by
Soetoaiu).  An  Italian  antiquary,  named  Foggini,
continued  the  excantiona,  collected  and  arraDged
the  acallered  moiael)  with  great  patiana  and
akitl ;  and  in  thia  manner  tha  maoths  of  January,
March,  April,  and  Deccnber,  to  which  a  very
amall  portfoo  of  Fabinaiy  waa  afterwarda  addi^i,
wets  recsfered  ;  and,  although  much  debced  and
mutilated,  f«tn  a  very  eorioiu  and  oaefiil  moon-
ment.  Tbey  ^ipear  to  have  emfacaced  laaeh  in-
fonnation  concerning  the  feitivala,  and  a  caielul
detail  of  the  honour)  be)towed  apeo,  and  the
triumph)  achieved  by,  Jolina,  Aoguatua,  and  Ti-
beriu);  The  publication  of  Foggini  contain)  not
only  an  account  of  Ihi)  particular  diaoorery,  but
alao  the  complete  hiti  of  the  Bomaa  ytar,  ao  &r
a)  nicb  a  oomjulation  can  be  aitracted  team  the
anrieut  ealoidait  now  extant.  Of  these  be  enu-
mciatee  eleven,  the  name)  being  derived  either
fnim  the  place)  wluse  they  wen  found,  or  froo
the  fiimily  who  pouiHed  them  when  they  firat  be-
came known  to  tbe  lileiaiy  world ;  —

I.  Calesdar^at  MagUartm,  which  eaibniia  Iht
twelre  month*  eemplcKk


i.  CUL  ylHiCaniwM,  tngmenla  of  the  month
bvo  May  to  Decern  ber,

5.  Od,  AntiaHiuiat,  bmgaaaAt  of  tha  aiy  lut
month).

6.  GaL  EapiSuaim,  fiagmenta  of  May  and  Jont,

7.  OtL  Fanumaium,  a  few  daji  of  Pobniaiy
and  March.

8.  (hL  PiaeiaaaBi,  fragmentt  (tf  Jnly,  Augnil,
and  September.

9.  CaL FauniMBi,  May  and  June  oonpletc

10.  Oat.  PoMsawa),  a  law  dna  of  Haich  and
AprJL

11.  Coi.  AUtfamaL,  a  fbw  dayi  of  Joly  aad

Some  id  the  abora,  with  other)  of  mora  icccot
date,  are  given  in  the  Oorfm  haenfUaum  of
Ontlar,  in  tha  Mth  voL  of  tbe  TSoaann  Aaai.
Anlbtq.  of  Oiaeviu),  and  in  other  work)  of  a  umi-
lar  deacription  ;  but  the  fhlleit  infonnatiai  upsn
all  matlen  connected  with  the  Faati  Sacri  ia  em-
bodiad  in  Iba  woric  of  Foggini,  antilbd  F^i^onm


•  o"


J779;  mdmJiKL  Fm  Vaa-m  Am-
id /Mm  Am.  Saem  fiagmmla,  Tnj.
795:  towlikh>dd  IddnVHs " '


Bedd^]83e.

Brfbn  qnhttiig  thii  [art  of  out  nbject,  vs  ma  j
Bike  wntkn  of  i  cnrioiu  nlic,  the  sntiquitj  of
*tick  ba  becB  called  in  qiuition  irilbont  good


Tin  Rnd  AbnuH  ii  cut  npon  fbnr  lidei  of  ■
nh^  ndi  bea  bcma  diridfld  into  thne  columni,
Bd  txl  cohan  inchidtng  ■  month.  At  ths  top
of  Ik  cahnn  li  tarred  the  appnpriate  >ign  of  tha
alac ;  Dmo  ddlein  the  lame  of  the  month,  the
Bnba  d  Ihc  daji,  the  poeitioa  of  the  nana,  the
knpk  <f  the  d^  Mid  night,  the  mme  of  the  lign
>n>i^  »Ud  the  tan  futa, the  god  under


(Snthe


of  Morcell! ii


Chtoniclei


IL  tun  AHNAI.U
>^  w  the  jIibiiIm  Mmam,  containing  the  naniM
■  thtttirfigiiliirie  t»  «ch  year,  and  a  thort
■Bwurftba  nnt  tOBHkaUs  enati  noted  doim
W'""  te  the  daje  on  which  thej-  occaired,
^tK,  b^  Ae  reeembUnce  which  thej  bars  in
■"■IIKIWII  !•  the  Mend  (alcodan,  danoniiiBted

r;  *ad  hnee  thia  word  it  usod,  eapecially
'^  pMi,  k  the  gmcnl  wnee  of  ilufoniuJ
""*.  (Hml.  jU.  i  3.  112,  Can*,  it,  13.
13.  i^  17.7.)

u  pnae  imuajiub  if  eommonlj  emidofed  u
Ac  la^oiol  term  ior  ths  regiilai  of  coouli,
"■^•n,  caBon,  and  other  magutnto,  which
"Bed  put  of  the  poblic  anhivM.  (LiY.ii.ie;
\f  Pn  ShL  14 ,  eomiwe  Cie.  PUUj^.  liil
■^iTuh.  An.  iii.  1 7,  1 8.)  Again,  when  Cicero
ntntki  n  the  bnuui  epiitle  to  Lnerxine  {Ad
^1. 13),  "-Klenm  ndo  iUe  amalhun  medio-
e  Cutonun,**
on  of  nenta
,■  -J  I  m  ebroakla  Aied  the  aMention

™  fcehl;,  tad  waa  little  more  intenaUiig  than  a
■n lalikgBe of  Bamea.  <Cailinan.drfjlKiT.  B.)
A  MM  im|iuUii(  epadmen  tkfiuH  belonging  to
|™  ^-^  OKMad  inbaUy  at  the  beginning  of
{*"V  •<  nbcrini,  haa  been  nutiallj  pmerred.
J'„"'  ^ea  IU7,  Mvecal  fiagmenta  of  marble

*'  '  'a  (manUBg  Ike  BmMD


FASTIGIUM.  ^33

f  nun,  and  were  fonnd  to  contain  a  lift  of  omnia
dictator!  with  their  maatetl  of  hone,  oenton  with
the  iuatis  which  thejr  doaed,  triumphi  and  ot&-
tioni,  all  arranged  in  legnlar  fueeeauon  acemding
to  the  y«ua  of  the  Catoman  era.  Theae  had  en-
dently  extended  from  the  expulu'on  of  the  kinga
to  tha  dnlh  of  Augnitni,  and  although  defective
in  manj  plocea,  haie  piored  of  the  greatett  value
in  chronDlogT'.  The  dificreat  piecea  were  coSeeted
and  arranged  nndtc  the  inapectiou  of  CardiDal
Alexander  Panieae,  and  depotited  in  the  Capitol,
when  the;  (till  remain,  Vraa.  thia  ciretmutance
ihej  are  generally  diatingoiihed  ai  the  FatU
aipUoam,  In  the  jean  1817  and  1B16,  two
other  Eiagmenti  of  the  aome  marble  tableta  were
diicotered  in  the  coaive  of  a  new  eicaTatifm  in
the  Fonun.  A  &c-«imile  of  them  wa<  pnbliihed
at  Milan,  by  Borgheei,  in  181 8.  [W.  R.1

FASTl'OIUM (itrit, iirm^X  literallf,  a

SH,  in  architecture  a  pnHnunl,  ii  the  triangle
ich  nmoounta  each  cod  of  B  rectaognlar  build-
ing, and  which,  in  bet,  repieaenta  the  gable  end  of
the  roof.  <Seo  woodcut,  p.  97.)  It  i«  compoeed
of  three  utt  of  monldinga  (fanning  napectirely  the
horiaonlal  baae  and  the  ilopiiiK  lidea  of  the  triangle,
and  rvprcKoting  the  timber  naming  of  the  loof),
and  of  a  flat  inr&ce  endoaed  b;  them,  which  covera
the  vacant  apace  of  the  roof,  aad  which,  from  ita
reaemblanca  to  a  membrane  itreltbed  upon  the
triangnlai  frame,  ia  called  ^mpmani.  (VitruT.
iii.  ii.)  Thia  flat  aur&ee  wai  generaUj  ornamented
with  Knlplure  ;  origiaalljr,  in  the  early  templea  of
Zena,  wilh  a  aimple  eagle  at  a  lymbd  of  the  god
<Pind.  Olymp.  liiL  29,  and  Scbol.  ad  he.),  » '


p.  6\  whence  the  Greek  name  drr^t  which  waa  nt
firat  applied  to  the  tfmpantm  and  afterwarda  to
the  whole  pediment;  and  in  after  timet  with  elnbo-
nte  ■culptorei  in  high  relief  lach  oi  thote  in  the
pedimentt  of  the  Parthenon,  the  &agmeiiti  of  which
areomoogthe  Elgin  morblei  in  thcDritiib  Muieom;

pediment!  of  the  temple  of  Zeua  Panhallenioi,  at
A^na,  with  caala  of  ^e  Matnet  in  them,  Teelored.
Hoat  of  the  celebrated  Oreek  templet  were  limi-
larir  adorned.  (See  Paaii.  i.  24.  g  S,  ii.  7.  S  3.
T.  10.  §2,  ii.  11,  54  ;  Aiialaph.  Avn,  1110.)
Terra-cotta  figurei  were  applied  ta  a  aimilar  manner
by  the  Romnna  ul  the  nriy  sget.  (Cic  IhtaH.
I  10  J  VitniT.  iiL2i  Piin.  /f.  A^.  xirr.  12,  a43,
46,  ixrrL  2.)

The  dwelling-honaea  of  the  Itomani  bad  no  gable
endi ;  coniequently,  when  the  word  it  applied  to
them  (Cic,  ijiut  ad  Q.  Pr.  iiL  1.  i  ;  Wag.  Aa,
viii,  491),  it  ii  not  in  iu  itrictly  technical  lenie,
but  dcaignatea  the  roof  limply,  and  tt  to  be  under-
itood  of  me  which  liaei  loanqieiaBdiitingiuibed


H«»


preuign  of  Pivpntiui  (iv.  12.  46),  "  ViTinna  in-
ii)ni«*  inter  utmnqae  lu«m."  Tbe  Mrch-brarer
turned  sway  bit  &ce  from  tba  pile  in  tetUng  it  on
firr. (VirR.  ^«..  tL  224.)  [J.  Y.]

FEBRUUM.  [LUFBRCALU.]
FECIA'LES.  [FiTiALM.}
FEMINA'LIA,  were  WDiD  in  winter  bf  Anpi«-
lu(  CaeMi,  who  vu  tcij  nuceptible  of  cold.
[SueUn.  Aug.  B'2.)  Cuanbon  luppowi  them  to
hHTC  been  buidmg«i  or  filleli  [Fabcia}  woond
iboDl  tfae  tbighi ;  it  Kcmi  more  probable  that  Ihey
vere  bmchei  tnenbling  osn,  Base  fpinntiHt  f<»
the  thighs  {rtpiniiinB.)  were  won  br  the  Roman
bonemen  (Arrian,  T^uL  p.  J4,  ed.  Blanc.)  ;  and
the  coltunn  af  Trajan,  the  arch  of  Conituitine,  and
'^  Kiuments  of  tho  luoe  period,  prfsent  no-

enrnplu  of  both b<WKind  foot  lolilien
II  breechei,  cloeelf  fitted  to  the  body,  and
aching  much  below  the  kned.  (See  wood-
cut., pp.  2,  117.  136.)  [J.  Y.J
FENESTRA. [Doiii;B,p.432.I
FENUS{Ti)mO>te«.l  of  money.  1.  GaSBK.
At  Athena,  Solon,  among  oths  rcfbnni,  aboliabed
'  e  law  by  which  a  creditor  waa  empowered  to
II  ot  enijaie  a  debtor,  and  proliibitcd  the  lending
money  npoD  a  person'^  own  body (^1  reii
ifiaat  /LTiiin  SrutiCti*.  Flat.  Sol.  c  15). No
other  rewrierion,  we  are  told,  waa  iolrodnced  by
nd  the  nie  of  intenat  waa  left  to  the  dia-

I  of  the  lender  (ri  ifyifian  atiei^utr  Urn

i^'  ir6eif  tir  So^Xirru  i  toyti^vr,  Lya.  in  nurm.
p.  117).  The  only  caaa  in  which  the  rate  was
preacribed  bylaw,  waa  in  the  event  of  a  man  tena-
nting fnnn  hia  laivftil  wife,  and  not  refunding  the
dowij  be  had  received  with  ber.  Her  tniiteei  or
guardiana  (el  icipiat)  could  In  that  caae  procerd
agunat  him  for  the  princi|ial.  with  lawful  inteieiE
, at  the  rale  of  IS  per  cent. [Dob(Or»e).]

Any  rate  might  be  cxpreiaed  or  rcpmented  in
two  diffennt  wayi ;  (1.)  by  the  number  of  oboli
or  drachmae  pwd  by  tho  numlA  for  eteiy  mtiu  ,-
(2)  by  (he  part  of  tbe  principal  (t^  ipx'i^  or
Ktfikajof)  paid  a*  intereat  either  annually  or  for
the  whole  period  of  the  loan. According  to  the
' former  method,  which  waa  generally  uaed  when
noney  waa  lent  upon  real  accujity  (Tifjtoi  ^TTtBt
ir  Pyytioi),  different  ratea  were  eipnaKd  aa  fill-
Dwa:— lU per  cenL  by  ^1  w^tra  Mr>\eTt,  t.  s.
i  oboli  per  month  (br  every  mina,  or  60  oboli  a
. year^lO  drachniae='^  of  aminb Similarly,
12  per  cent by M  IpaxfP  pet  month.

IfipiTcenC.  „  4i' irri  Uii\o7t  „
IS  per  cent.  „  ^  in-(it  HoAe?i  „
34  per  cent.  „  trl  Thuri  tpaxp^s  „
36  per  cent,  „  4ri  rpiirl  ipajQiolf  „
5  pel  ccnL „ ^1  tpirif  iauoSiikuf,  probably.

Another  method  waa  genfially  adopted  in
f^aea  of  bottomry,  when  money  waa  lent  upon  tbe
ahip'a  cargo  or  freightage  (m  T^  vouXqi)  or  the
-'-'7  ilieli^  for  a  apecified  time,  commcmly  that  of
" tbii  method  the  foDowing  nlea


L  by  riuti  HitiKam,  i.  t.  inlenat  at
the  rate  of  a  tenth  ;  iS^  16},  20.  33)>  by  r^oi


rl  tpaxtm nearfy.


FENUS.
the  »*»t  MylaBt =lhB  M  .^-^.,
„ „ tfntrn —  „ At"  irri  WoAoTi „

That  ncadj  cwmpDndiug  expnuioiu  are  not
to  be  oniideRd  h  identkal,  howerer  cImcI;  the
tmtaa  indieated  bj  them  maj  appnuh  evch  otfaer
in  nJne  ;  ■hbough  in  the  age  of  Jnitiaiui,  &■
Sabanui  {d*  M.  fT.)  obKrra,  the  rdicat  ^ Jt&iiij
or  12^  per  cent  mo  confbmided  with  the  »■-
liBwni',  which  i>  exactly  eqnkl  to  the  intetett  at  a
dnrfuna  or  12  per  cent.

The  latei,  above  eipEaiDed,  frequently  occur  in
the  Qfaton  ;  the  lowest  in  ordinary  uae  et  Atheni
kn^  the  Tjaoi  ^itiUiiitu  or  10  per  cent.,  the
hi^Kit  the  riiat  MTfXTDt  or  33)^  per  cent.  The
lalter,  beweTer,  wai  chiefly  confioiBd  ta  ouee  of
bottianfy,  and  denote*  nuxe  than  it  appeara  Co  do,
u  the  tine  aC  a  ihip'i  Toyage  wat  geneially  leu
thao  a  year.  It>  near  eqniTalent,  the  M  rfurl
ifrnxt^MAS  or  36  per  cenl,  wae  •ometintea  exacted
1^  luken  at  Atheni.  (Lyi.  Prag.  B.)  The
M  Ifiix/^,  c  late  of  IS  per  eent,  «u  common
B  Iba  time  of  Demorthctiei  <a  JpA.'^.  020.  16),
but  appeui  to  biTs  boea  thooght  low.  The  interett
•f  e^t  oboli  or  16  per  cent,  occnn  in  that  oiatoc
le.  A'kh  p.  12£0.  18)  ;  and  CTen  in  the  age  of
Lyiiu  (b.  c  440)  and  loeu  (&  c.  400),  nine
«bi>li  lor  ibenihia,  or  18  per  cent,  appean  to  hare
been  a  comman  rate.  (Iiaeni,  ii  I/agm.  Hand.
P.3SS.)  Aeachinea  alio  (cTVntaroi.  p.l£)>peaki
of  moDej  being  bnrowed  on  the  nine  tennt ;  bo
that  CD  the  whole  we  may  eoncludo,  tliat  the  nenal
lalea  of  intereit  at  Atbeni  about  the  time  of  De-
northenea  nried  liDTn  12  to  16  per  cent.  That
tbry  were  oesdj  the  nine  in  range,  and  limilaily
exptmed,  thtuaghout  the  reM  of  Greece,  ap-
pean frwn  the  aathorlliea  quoted  by  Biickh.  No
egocluion*  on  the  lubject  of  the  general  late  of
iplcreat  can  be  drawn  from  what  we  are  told  of
e  exorbitant  rate*  exacted  by
wio&i


{■tmcrjXi^uL,  lociiBiim


iTTal). Some


of  ttxae  (Tbet^hi.  tiharacL  6]  exacted  aa  much
■B  obohu  and  a  half  per  day  for  each  drachma  ;
and  monej-leiiden  and  banken  in  general,  &am
llw  high  profiU  which  they  realued,  and  ^e  k-
Terity  with  which  ihcy  exacted  their  dnee,  eeem
"" *■" "  ■■ —  la  unpopular  amongst  their  fellow-

lenei  (c  >".  _
inlimatea  ibat'tbe  fiurt  of  a  man  being
lender  waa  enough  to  prejudice  him,  eren  in  a
«nrt  of  law,  amongit  the  Atheniani.  (Mitnv'
nv  ol  ^AtfYPOAOi  robf  tanti^mt.)  It  ii  curioui
■laa  to  obaerre  that  Ariitotle  (Poj,  i.  3.  g  S3)
object!,  on  principle,  to  puttint  money  out  at
inlerat  (eiA^y^ora  laairriu  H  MoXrHraniri)),
ai  being  a  perrenion  of  it  from  ita  proper  nae,  ai
a  medium  of  exchange,  to  an  unnatural  pnrpote,
Tii.  the  reprodnctioa  or  incrtaie  of  itself ;  whEUce,
he  add*,  cornel  the  name  of  iotereat  or  Tilicai,  ai
beb^  the  oBipring  (t&  yryriixtmr)  of  a  parent
lik«it*elt

The  amngtiKnt  of  a  loan  wonld  of  courte  do-
peod  apoD  \&  rebtion  between  the  bomwer  and
ibe  lenileT,  and  the  eooiidence  placed  by  one  in  the
otbcT'  Sanetime*  money  wai  lent,  «.  g,  by  the
tanker  Paaitn  at  Atbeui,  withont  a  aecurity,  oi
wTinen  bead,  or  wilnenei.  (Dcm.  e.  T^huU.
V.  1185.)  BMECiurally  either  a  limple  acknow-
iedtnmt  (x-thf^or)  wai  gireo  by  the  bor-


I,  wa<  depoaited
mker.  (Dem.  c
!3.) Witr


PENUS.
'  to the lende
regular  Inalniment  (mrrrpaipli),  e
'  «  and  atteatcd  by  witneeee
1  tbird  party,  uaually  a  hi
ioBT.  p.  927,  ft  Ptorm.  p.  908.  :

s  misbl  expect,  were  alao  weaont  at  the  pay-

of  the  money  bDiTowed.  (rd-cvPfcrm.  p.91S.
27.)  The  lecurily  for  a  loan  waa  either  a  indiicq
or  an  irtxopor :  the  latter  waa  put  into  the  poa-
aeanon  of  the  lender,  the  former  wai  merely  auured
to  him,  and  generally,  though  not  alwaya,  con-
lUted  of  real  or  immovable  property.  The  ir4.
Xyp^  on  the  contrary,  generally  counted  of
luotable  property,  mch  aa  good*  or  ilaTea.
(BOckh,  ItM.  p.  12a.)  At  Athena,  when  land
wBi  given  aa  aeenrity,  or  mortgaged  (guirfa  Inci.
Xptfi),  pillare  (Bpoi  or  trni>ju)  were  let  npoa
it,  with  the  debt  and  the  mortgagee^  name  in-
icribed.  Hence  an  unincumbered  ettate  waa
called  an  Jtorucror  yttpUir,  (Harpocrat.  i.  e.)
t  rett  of  Greece  then  were  public  booki  ^
debt,  like  the  German  and  Scotch  regitterg  of
mor^agei ;  but  Ihey  are  not  mentioned  aa  haTing
eiialed  at  Athena-
Bottomry  (i&  IWTK^v,  tcImi  nvTianl,  or
(>c<k»-ii)  waa  conitdenid  a  matter  of  ao  much  im-
fnrlance  at  Athens,  that  &aud  or  breach  of  contract
■■■  tnniactioni  connected  with  ft  wai  »metime>
liahed  with  death.  (Dem.  c  Phom.  p.  922.  3.)
these  cases  the  loans  were  generally  made  npoo
the  cargo  shipped,  lome^es  on  the  vessel  itself
and  Kinietimes  on  the  money  received  or  due  for
pauengers  and  freuhtife  (^1  rf  raiKf).  The
[vincipal  (Culorit,  aiai>(r({s  i6aa,  Harpocrat.)  aa
well  as  the  interest,  could  (mly  be  recovertd  in  case
the  ship  met  with  no  disaster  in  her  voyage  (m*-
B'tiriTiT^i  H^T,  Dem.  c  Zwtl  p.  883. 1 6);  a  ctansa
to  this  eftect  being  generally  inserted  in  all  agree-
ments of  bottomry  or  ramutal  nryypatptil.  The
additional  risk  incurred  fn  loana  of  this  description
was  compensated  for  by  a  high  rate  of  interest,
and  the  lenders  took  every  precaution  against
negligence  or  deception  on  the  part  of  the  bor-
n>wera  ;  Ibe  hitter  also  were  careftd  to  have  wit-
nesses present  when  the  cargo  waa  put  on  board,
for  the  purpose  of  depoeing,  if  necessary,  to  a
bonajide  shipping  of  the  required  amount  of  goods.
(Dem.  c.  Ptorm.  p.  91&  IS).  The  loan  itself
was  either  a  Mmg-fia  trtpiwkBUr,  i,  e.  for  a  voyage
out,  or  it  was  a  tdnur/ia  d/ifmip^^our,  J.  &  for
a  voyage  ont  and  home.  In  the  former  case  the
princijol  and  interest  were  paid  at  the  pbca  of
destination,  either  to  the  creditor  himself,  if  ho
suled  in  the  ship,  or  to  an  authorised  agent.  (Dem.
c  Pioni.  p.  909.  24,  and  p.  914.  SS.)  In  the
latter  can  the  payment  was  made  on  the  return  of
the  ship,  and  it  was  speuallf  provided  in  the
agreement  between  the  contracting  parties,  thai
she  should  sail  to  rome  specified  places  ouly,  A
deviation  from  the  terms  of  tbe  agreement,  m  this
or  other  respects,  was,  according  to  a  clause  itsnally
inserted  in  the  agreement,  punishable  by  a  fine  of
twice  the  amount  of  the  money  lent  (Dem.  e.
DUngt.  p.  IE94.)  Moreover,  if  the  goods  which
formed  tbe  original  security  wa«  sold,  Iresh
articles  of  the  same  valoe  were  to  be  shipped  in
theirplacc.  (Dem.  c.Phom.f.  909.26.)  Some-
times also  the  trader  {i  tiaapm)  was  himself  the
owner  of  the  vessel  (i  raiuXTifaj),  which  in  that
case  might  serve  as  a  seciirily  for  the  money  bor-
rowed. (Id.  c  Diem^  p.  1SS4.  11.)


Thei


PENU3.
iD  of  iutemt  WDu!d  of  come  nuy  with


the  riilu  and  daration  of  the  myage,  ud  thereforo
we  cannot  upcct  to  find  UibE  it  wu  Bt  oU  fixed.
Xenophon  (J.  Taitt^.  iil  7—1*)  »peak»  of  the  fifth
and  inird  poru  of  the  capital  lent  u  being  com-
monly given  ia  bottomtj,  Tcfeiring  of  ojuth  to
Tr^Bsei  oat  and  home.  Tb«  inlenat  of  an  eightli
DC  13}  per  cant^  meatianed  b;  DemM^eDM  {t
PoigcL  p.  1212},  wot  fur  monej  tent  on  a  trireme,
during  a  pauage  from  SetV*  to  Atheni,  but  upon
condition  (hat  >he  ilicKild  fint  go  to  Hierum  to
conroj  Teucla  laden  with  com  [  the  principoL  and
interert  Wan  to  ba  paid  at  AtlMU  od  hei  aniral
thelft

The  beat  iDnitntion  of  tlie  beta  mentioned
above,  i>  found  in  a  rovrud)  oiryypa^  giien  in
the  ipeech  of  Denwthenei  agoinil  Locritua. It

Two  Athenianl  lent  two  PhaKtitaol  3000
dnchmae  npon  a  eaigo  of  3000  oiki  of  Mendean
-wine,  on  wikk  the  lattw  were  Dot  to  owe  ui  jthing
die,  DTiaiie  an;  additional  loan  (aij*  {witariiimr-
roi).  Thej  wen  to  nil  from  Athnig  to  Mcnde  or
Scione,  when  the  wine  wai  to  be  ihipped,  and
tbenoe  to  the  Boeponu,  with  liberty,  if  they  pre-
ferred it,  to  continue  their  yoyage  nn  the  left  lide
o{  the  Block  Sea  ai  [ar  oi  do  Botysthenea,  and
then  to  letoiu  to  Alheni ;  the  lale  of  iutowt
being  filed  at  925  diachmae  in  1000,  or  25  pet
cent,  fbc  the  whole  time  of  abaenoe.  If^  havcTer,
they  did  not  return  to  Hieium,  a  port  in  Blthynia
doK  to  the  Thiacian  Boqnnu  (Wolf;  ad  l^  p.
359),  hefore  the  early  riling  of  Aictimii,  Le.be-
f«e  the  SOth  of  September  or  thereaboutt,  when
DBTigation  bqan  to  be  dongcnHU,  they  had  to  pay
a  higher  lala  of  SO  pet  cent,  on  accoant  of  the  ad-
di^HuI  riak.  The  agreemciit  further  apecilied
that  there  ihoold  be  no  cbanifo  of  veaael  fur  the
retam  cargo,  and  that  if  it  luriied  aife  at  Atheoi,
the  loan  waa  to  be  repaid  within  tproity  daya
abfteTw■^dJ^  without  any  deductiona  except  for  loaa
by  paymcnla  made  to  enemiet,  and  for  jettiaoni
(rCrrfAii  «A.)|r  JkCoAqt.  i.  t.  A.)  made  with  the
cauienC  of  all  on  bnard  (oi  ai^iiyju)  ;  that  till  the
money  wat  repaid,  the  Roodi  pledged  (t1  bm-
nl^itra)  thould  be  nnder  the  contnl  of  tbe
lenden,  and  be  lold  by  them,  if  payment  waa  not
made  within  the  appointed  time  ;  that  if  the  aale
of  the  aaoAA  did  not  realiae  the  required  amount,
the  lender  might  ruiio  the  remainder  by  making  a
IcTy  {upSiti)  upon  the  property  of  both  or  eidiei
of  the  tiadara,  jut  aa  if  they  bad  been  caic  in  a
anit,  and  became  Irwtpiiiu^ot,  i.e.  hod  not  complied
with  a  judgment  giTen  agsinat  them  within  the


proridei  for  the  o


L^gency  of  their  not  f
if  July,  for  b


the  Helleipont,  at  the  end  of  July,  tor  ten  daya
after  the  early  riaing  of  the  deg-itai  (^il  kw!),
diacharge  their  cargo  {Hi^taBai)  in  lome  place
w4icn  the  Atbcniana  had  no  right  of  repHoli
(fiirov  ^  liii  oiKoi  &at  roit  'A^hjvoioJi),  (which
might  be  executed  unfoiriy,  and  would  lead  to
letaliationi,)  aud  then,  on  their  return  to  Athena,
they  wen  to  pay  the  lower  rate  of  interest,  or  2fi
per  cent  I^atly,  if  the  veuel  wen  to  bo  wncked,
the  cargo  waa,  if  poaaible,  to  be  nved  ;  and  the
agreement  waa  to  be  ooncluiin  cai  all  pointi.

Fnm  the  prec«ding  inTeatigntioo,  it  appean  that
the  rote  of  intercot  amoogat  the  ancient  Greeks  waa
higher  than  in  modem  Eun^,  and  at  Rome  in  the


FENUS.
age  of  Cicoo.  Thla  high  nte  doe*  not  appear  fci
have  been  caotad  by  any  icanity  of  money,  rtu-  tbe
rent  of  land  and  hotuea  in  Atheni  and  its  noigb-
boorbood  waa  not  at  al]  pcoponJoool  to  it.  Tbua
leaeua  (de  ffagiL  H*r»d.  p.  SB)  aaya  that  a  home
at  Thriae  waa  let  for  only  8  per  cent,  of  ita  value,
and  ume  houici  at  Melila  and  Elcoiia  for  a  frac-
tion more.  We  ihonld  thenlbrs  rather  ttler  it  to
a  low  atate  of  credit,  occaiioned  by  a  rariety  of
cauiea,  nch  aa  the  diviiion  of  Greece  into  n  number
if  petty  itatea,  and  the  canatitutum  and  regulation


of  thee


I  of  law.


lich  do  DC


at  all  &TDiusble  to  money-lesdera  in  oolbrcing  their
righta.  Bdckh  aadgni  ai  an  additional  canie  **  the
want  of  moral  principle*. "  <Btf(^  Ibid.  ■pp.  123
— 139,  Snded.)

2.  BoM^h;  Tbe  Latin  word  fir  inteTeet,;«>«a
or/baou,  originally  meant  any  inoeoae,  and  waa
thence  qiplied,  like  the  Greek  fins,  to  det»lB  the
intereat  or  increaae  of  money.  *^  Femia,"  ^ya
Viiro  (j^mdGdLxn.  IS),  "dictnm  afetn  etqnaii
a  fetnni  quadam  pecnniao  parkoCit  atqoe  jncrea-
centii."  The  vune  not  i*  finmd  in  fcctindtiB.
Fenui  waa  glao  nied  for  the  pnDcipal  aa  well  aa  the
inlemL  (Tacit.  ^in.Ti.  17,  or.  £&.)  Anotbci
tsnn  for  intereat  woi  aoinii,  generally  fbond  ia
the  plural,  and  alio  uipaKliaiii,  on  which  Varro
(i^  Liv.  Lot  T.  1S3,  MUUer)  rema^  "a  quo
{pauUrt)  nanra  quod  in  aortc  aecedebat,  Impeu-
diun  ifipellatum."

Tomrda  the  clcae  of  tbe  repoblic,  the  intereat
of  money  became  due  on  the  fint  of  arery  mouth :
hence  the  phraael  trittea  or  alsnt  eaitmdag  and
eobniiariBfa,  the  latter  meaning  a  debt-book  or  book


table ;  ~

AjMa  nanrae,  or  one  ai  per  mmth

for  the  niB  of  one  hundred ie  IS  per  cant.

Deuncea  unuae II  „

Deitantea „ 10  „

Dodnntea „ 9  „

Bcia« „ 8  „

Septunoei „ 7  «

Quinconcei  „,.■... 5 „

Trientei „ 4 .

Quodrantea ....... 3 „

Sextwtei „ 3 „

Unciae  „ 1 »

Inatcad  of  the  phraie  omm  aiarae,  a  aynonyon
waa  naed,  no.  waAiiuKta  txiinx,  inaonueh  aa  at
thia  nte  of  intereat  tba«  waa  pud  in  a  hundred
montha  a  lum  equal  to  the  whole  principaL  Hence
boat  cataimat  •=>  34  pel  cent.,  and  fHtannw
OMteftniag  —  4B  per  cent  So  alao  in  the  line  of
HoiBce  {Sat.  L  2. 1 4), "  Quinaa  hie  capili  merecdea
eiKcat,"  we  muit  ondentaod  jUMaa  uiiiIih'hui,
or  60  per  cent,  ai  the  turn  tidien  from  the  capitBL
Niebiilu(/Ai(.o^Am.  Ttd.  m.  p.  67)  iiof  opiuoa
that  the  monthly  rate  of  the  eenteiimaa  wn  of
foreign  origin,  and  fint  adopted  at  Rona  in  the
time  of  Sulla.  The  old  funis  nte  eatablialied  by
the  Twelie  Tablet  <&  c;  iSO)  waa  the  maiariiim
Jaea.  Thia  h*i  been  Tarionaly  intopnled  to
mean,  (1)  one.twalflh  of  the  (anleiima  paid
monthly,  i.  a.  one  per  cent,  per  annum  ;  and  (2)
one-twelfth  of  the  priocipal  paid  monthly,  or  a
hundred  per  cent,  per  ananm. Niebnhr  (f.  &)  n-


FENUa.
faltitf  leogtb  llw  two  opiuinii


;  bat  it


o  abaerre  that  oca  ii  incoDiiglelit  with
"-""K"  Kug,  and  the  otliBr  with  th<  an]]  bittory
sf  ths  npoblic  A  third  ud  ali>&ctoi7  opinJDD
ii  u  fbUowt : — The  nnd>  wu  the  twdfUi  pul  of
the  u,  and  liaee  the  full  (13  ob.}  nppa  coinags
wn  RiH  is  ue  at  Srane  when  the  Twel(s  Table*
becBHw  lav,  the  phnia  nDdariam  ienai  woold  be
a  iBianl  gpwion  fa  iutereit  of  one  onoce  in
the  poBiid  i  i.  (L  a  twelfUi  pact  of  the  nun  b«-
nw  ed,  er  S)  pet  «nL,  out  pei  imnth,  bat  per  feai.
Thk  nte,  if  caknlated  for  th«  old  Roman  jear  of
lea  -"— '^,  mnld  gin  10  ur  ccDk  for  the  diil
ns  of  twdn  nmaliie,  which  mi  in  oommon  dm
» the  time  of  the  deeanrin.  The  analogy  of  the
Graek  tenu  T&ni,  ^Irpmi,  &c^  conSrnu  thii
new,  which,  a)  NiebabrnbaerTea,iaiuttinviklidatod
bj  the  admiaiaa,  that  it  mppoaca  a  yearly  and  not
■  Bunthlj  payment  of  inlemt ;  lor  thoagh  m  the
ktcr  timea  of  the  npablio  inleieat  beoune  due
rmy  oiiaith,  there  ia  do  tiace  of  thii  bariiig  been
the  can  Csiineriy.  (Rein,  AmuEia  Fm^radtt,
f.  304.)  Nor  a  it  diffientt  to  accsanl  fiv  the
changa  :  it  probably  waa  ciHmecIad  wilk  the  modi-
fialagna  niBde  baa  tone  to  thna  in  the  RomaD
law  of  dsblir  and  cnditai  (nicb  at  tbe  abolitiiHi  of
poamal  ilatery  fix  debt),  the  natnral  effect  of
whidi  woold  be  to  maJce  crediton  more  acrupuloDB


If  a


■tdue


CMud  not  pay  the  principal  and  ii


.  .  -jt  at  the  end  of  the  year,  he  oied
neatey  from  a  freeh  crodilor,  to  piy  off  hia  old
debt.  Thia  proceeding  waa  Toy  bcquent,  and
aDed  a  aamrn  (campara  To.  Fiorm.  T.  2.  16),
a  wwd  lAiiA  FaMaa(Lni)  thiu  aiptaini: "  Venu-
nai  EKen,  mwtnam  peenniani  anmere,  ex  eo  dio-
toB  ft,  qood  initio  qui  natnabanlnr  ab  aliia,  nt
alia  (olnnot,  lelnt  Tertoent  creditorem."  It
0  little  ihort  of  paying  compound  in-


K  nmivatnt  ia  twdie  pet  cent, compound
t,  to  which  Cieera  (01^,^0.  t.  SI)  oppoaea


■lalgauii hoiee  the  pan  in  Canlliu  {Oar.

"  Pari,  nlhila  a«tn  nan  ad  Auttri

FktDi  onioiita  eat,  nee  ad  Favani :

Tenm  ad  millia  qnindecim  eC  dacei

O  lantms  hcaribilem  atqng  peatilenl

Tho  word  aoBMi  i*  alao  of  exteanve  nae  i

Properly  it  denoted  the  na

■  banker'a  or  any  0

le  to  aigni^  tbe  article*
a  debt  itaelf.  Thua  we
faarc  toBBM  miaii,  a  good  debt :  »»»  facm,
to  lead  moiiiia  (Cic  ad  Fam.  liL  33),  and  also  to
bannr  moDey  (Id.  i*  Qf:  iiL  14).  Moreoret,  the
TTiMiana  gaietaUy  diaehaiged  debta  tbrDugb  the
■yatj'  tt  a  banket  fi»foro  it  i*  mmkh  acripbini)
iMbcr  Aan  by  a  direct  penonal  jsyioent  {a  ana
iamtiqm);  aiulaian  order  or  nndertakinglbtpay-
Bmt  waa  gim  by  writing  down  the  tiun  to  be


FENDS.  S27

tide  it  (eee  Den,  c  OiJJip.  pi  123B),  hence  camo
the  pbraae*  McriAere  muamoM  atiad^  to  promiae  to
pay  (Plant.  Ada.  iL  4.  34)  ;  rexrilKre,  to  pay  back,
'  debtor  (Ter.  Phom.  f.  1.  29).  So  alao  per-
m,  to  give  a  bill  or  draft  Ijiaiar^itio)  on  a
:«■  for  [•yment,  in  oppoailion  to  payment  by
readymoney.  (Cic  ikJ  JO.  liL  £1,  itL 'i.)

The  Roman  law  of  debtor  and  oeditor  ia  given
luidarNsxDH.  It  ii  tuScient  to  nmaric  here  that
the  Liciniau  lawi  [Lioas  Licinui],  by  which
the  grienncea  of  debton  woe  to  a  certain  extent
iBdrEaaed,  did  not  lay  mrj  reilricCion  on  the  late  of
inteitat  Uiat  migbt  be  legally  demanded ;  and  it  ii
cleat  from  *aiioni  dreimntancet  that  the  acarci^  of
money  at  Rome  after  the  taking  of  the  city  by  the
Qaola  bad  eithn'  led  to  the  acMal  abolition  a(  tbe
mt  famt)  of  the  Twelve
Tablea,  or  canaed  it  to  &U  into  diauae.  Nine  yean,
however,  af^  tbe  paaiing  of  theae  law*  (Liv.  vil,
16)  the  late  of  the  Twelve  Tablea  in»  re-e»-
tabliibed,  and  anj  higher  rate  prohibited  by  the
bill  (ngatia)  of  the  tribnnea  iWini  and  MaeniniL
Still  thia  limitatini  of  the  late  of  inleraat  did  not
enable  debtora  to  pay  the  principal,  and  what  Tacitm
(^«.Ti  16)  mlJa  tbe  >ac6reBuJ«a*  became  at  latt
'  thegDTemmeM  thovgbt  it  neeetMiy-


)  interfere,  and  i^tedy,  if  poaibf^  an  evil  ao  great

nd  inveterate. Acooningly,  fomteen  yr °—

I  of  tha  Lidnian  lawi  *


n  yean  aAer


were  a^^KUnted  for  thia  porpoae  ondet  the  title  ef
moDjarii  or  banken.  Theae  opened  Ihdr  banka  in
the  fbnim,  and  in  the  name  of  the  treaaory  ofieied
raady  money  to  any  debtor  who  could  give  aecuri^
(a»an)  to  the  atate  ba  it  1  moreover,  they  oideRd
that  land  and  cattle  aboold  be  received  in  [aiyment
of  debta  at  a  bir  valnatioo,  a  regulation  which
Caeaar  lAaffUA  far  a  umilar  purpoae.  (Suet  J»L
Cm,.  42.)  By  theaa  meana  Livy  (viL  21)  telti
oi  that  a  great  amoont  of  debt  waa  aatiafaetority
liqnidated.  Fire  yean  aflerwaidi,  the  legal  nte
of  intenat  waa  atJU  further  lowered  to  the  awiai
curtsm  faat,  at  the  twenty-fbnrth  part  of  the

vi,  16);  and  in  B.C.34G  we  read  of  eeveral  Ufuren
being  pnniahed  for  a  violstion  of  the  law  (Liv.  viL
28),  by  which  they  vat  aobjected  to  a  penal^  of
four  tlmei  the  amount  of  the  loon.  (Cato,  de  Re
Rait.  iniL)  Bnt  all  th«M  enaclnienti  were  merely
pJlialivei  j  the  terminatimi  and  core  of  the  evil
waa  aomething  more  deciiive— -neither  more  nor
Itai  than  a  apecie*  of  national  bankruptcy  ^— a
genemi  abolition  of  debta  at  xpw'  iiwcorii.  Tbi*
happened  in  B.  c.  341,  a  yeaa  tenmrkable  fbr  po-
liliul  change*  of  gmt  importance,  and  iraa  fol-
lowed up  by  the  paaaing  of  tbe  Oenncian  lawa,
which  forbade  the  takingofnaury  altogether.  (Liv.
viL  42.)  A  law  like  thia,  however,  waa  aore  to  b«
evaded,  and  there  wai  a  very  aimple  wbt  of  doing
•o  ;  it  only  affected  Roman  citixena,  an  J  therefon
the  nanren  granted  loanf,  not  in  the  name  of  them-
■elvea,  bat  of  the  Latin*  and  allie*  who  were  not
bonodbyit  (Liv.  niv.  7.)  To  prevent  thia  evw-
fioD  the  Semproaian  hiw  wat  paaaed  {B.C.  194),
which  placed  the  Latini  and  allie*  01 '


»tuig  m  reapect


of  len


Roman  ciliiena.  At  Uat,  after  many  futile  a^
tempt*  to  prevent  the  exaction  of  interect  at  any
rate,  and  in  any  ahape,  the  idea  waa  abandoned
altogether,  and  the  centeuma  or  12  per  cent  pet
annum  became  the  l^al  and  recwniaed  rate.
Ntebohr,  at  we  have  akcady  ohacircd,  i*  of  opt-


£28


FERIAE.
u  flnt  adopted  at  Rome


of  SuUs  ;  but  vbether  it  baonia  Ifae  legal  ale  by
«ji;  ipecial  auctnieiit,  dt  {ran  getwnl  caueat,  dona
tut  appear.  Soma  writan  hava  initned  (Heinecc
iiL  15)  that  it  vai  fini  legaliwd  by  the  edict*  of
the  city  pncton,  an  isfeicno  dnwn  from  the
general  memblanea  bettreen  the  pneloriiu  ud
ptocoDiulor  sdicti,  coupled  with  the  Act  that  Mme
pracoDflular  adicti  ara  extant,  by  "which  the  ceiite-
aitna  ii  fixed  oi  the  legal  Tato  in  piocoruular  pn>-
Tince*.  {l*  tdido  tralalicio  cmlaimas  me  cbKr-
vattnim  iabm,  Cit  ud  AU.  t.  21.)  Whether  thij
Buppoiitimi  ii  true  or  not,  it  ii  admitted  that  the
ccateiima  or  IS  per  cent,  wai  Ihc  li^  rata  lowaidi
the  cloM  of  the  repoblic,  and  alio  andec  the  en-
peron.  Joitiiiiaa  rednc«d  it  to  S  per  oent.  (Heinec.

h.  II)

ai  the  liik  wai  the  money  leadei'i,  he  might  de-
mand any  iateieM  ha  liked  while  the  Tauel  on
which  the  moDey  wai  lent  wu  at  Ma ;  bat  afiei  she
nsched  harbour,  and  while  aha  waa  there,  no  men
than  the  oxnal  rate  of  12  pff  cent,  on  the  *■*"'■■■'"»
could  he  demanded.

Juituiian  made  It  the  legal  rale  for  fonia  oauti-
cnm  under  all  ciicumatanMa.(Huiuc^c.}  (a.W.J

FERA'LIA. [FuNUB.]

FE'RCULUM  (from  ftr-a),  li  afplied  la  any
kind  of  tiay  or  platform  naed  fof  canymg  anything.
Thui  it  ii  Died  to  ligni^  the  tiay  or  frame  on  which
aeteral  diahea  wete  broaght  in  at  onoe  at  dinner
<l>eliDD.  35  ;  Flio.  H.  N.  xxriiL  2)  ;  and  hence
Jimtla  came to  maui  the  nomber  of  counei  at


131.)


c82,


I  alio  tuad  lor  earryii^  the
imagea  of  the  godi  in  the  proceaaion  of  the  circui
(Suet  Jd.  76)  [Cucua,  p.  387,  a],  the  aihea  of
the  dead  in  a  funeral  (Suet.  Gd.  15),  and  the  ^Ua
in  a  triumph  (SueL  Ji^  37  ;  Llr.  L  10)  ;  ia  all
which  coiei  it  appean  to  have  been  cairied  on  the
ahouldf  n  or  in  the  handa  of  men.  The  moat  illui-
tiioui  cnp^rea  were  aometunei  placed  on  a  fer-
culum  in  a  Inainphf  in  order  thni  they  roight  be
better  »en. (Seoec  //etr.  Oet.  109.)

FERENTA'RII. [Exihcituii,  p.£D2,b.l

FERETRUM. [FuNU&J

FR'RIAE,  holidaya,  were,  genetally  apeakmg,
days,  or  acaaona  during  which  free-bom  Ronuuii
nupended  their  political  traoiBcliona  and  their
law-iuil*,  and  dunng  which  ilarcs  enjoyed  a  ceaao-
lion  fhim  labour.  (Cic  dt  Ltg.  a.  S.  12,  lie  Div.
i  iS.)  All  fariae  were  thua  diei  ne&itL  The
feriae  included  all  daya  conaecrated  to  any  deity  ;
conaequendj  all  dayi  on  which  public  festivals
wera  celebrated  wera  feriae  or  diei  feriati.  But
aome  of  them,  mch  ai  the  feria  TUidemialia,  and
the  ferine  aaalivas,  aeem  to  ha*e  had  no  direct  con-
neclion  with  the  wonhip  of  the  godi.  The  nun-
dinae,  howrret,  daring  the  time  of  iheJiiugi  and
the  ouHy  period  of  the  lepublic,  were  feriae  only
lor  the  pqmliii,  and  diyi  of  boaincM  for  the  ple-
beiani,  until,  by  the  Horteoaian  law,  they  became
laili  or  dayi  of  htuineu  Ibr  both  oiden.  (Hacrob.
Sat  i.  16;  GomparB  Niebuhr,  Hiit.r^Romi,^o\.n.
p.213,&C]  Walter,  OeiUdiU  d.  RSm.  RteUi,
p-lSd.)

All  leriae  went  divided  mto  two  elaiaei,  /enat
.fuitim  miAfariat  fmatae. The  latt«  were  ooly


FERIAE.
ofuerred  by  alngle  familiea  or  individuBli,  in  coni>
mcmocation  of  aome  particItlBr  CTent  which  had
been  of  importance  b>  them  or  their  anceetors.  Aa
family  ferine,  are  mentioned  the  Jitiat  tSaaiiiar,
AemHiae^  Jutiae,  COntdiae^  &c,  and  we  muit  aup-
poie  thai  all  the  gnat  Roman  bmiliea  had  their
paiticukr  feriae,  aa  they  had  their  prime  aacia.
Among  the  ^unily-bolidaya  we  may  alao  mentira
the^rvu  deateaiet,  i-  e,  the  day  on  which  abmily,
aflsr  haring  loat  one  of  iti  menibera  by  deaUi,
underwent  a  piurificatiotL  ( Feet  a.  v. ;  Cic  da
£^.  u.  S3  ;  Colmnell.  ii.  23.>  Individnala  kept
fenae  on  their  bifthday^  and  other  occaaiom  which
marked  any  mamanble  eient  of  their  liio.  During
the  time  of  the  empire  the  birthday  of  an  emperw
lometimea  aaaumed  the  character  of  a  public  hgiiday,
and  waa  celebrated  by  the  whole  nation  with  gamea
and  lacrififca.  Thus  the  birthday  of  Augoatna,
called  Auguatalia,  waa  celebrated  with  gnat  ^en-
dour  even  in  the  tune  of  Dion  Caiiiua  (li^-  ^i
Wi.  46).  The  day  ca  which  Auguitiu  had  re-
turned from  hia  wan  waa  lihewiae  tor  a  long  time
made  ■  holiday  o£  (TadL  AtaaL  L  !£,  with  the
note  of  Lipnna  ;  Dion  Coil  liv.  10.)  The  die*
hatalidi  of  the  cities  of  Rome  and  ConitaDtinoplo
were  at  a  atill  lata  period  likewiie  reckooed  amois
the  feriae. (Cod.  3.  tit  12.  a  6.)


Mlfi


which  were  ob-


aened  by  the  whole  nation,  was  divided  ii
Jiriae  iiatiBat,/enae  amc^vat,  tadfiriiu  taipeni-
titaa.  Feriae  sta^vae  or  alntao  were  those  which
were  held  regularly,  and  cm  certain  daya  marked
in  the  calendar.  (Feit  a  d.  ;  Macrob.  f.c)  To
these  belonged  some  of  the  girat  feslirali,  inch  ni
the  AgonaliB,  Camentalia,  Lupercalia,  &c  Feriae
conceptivae  or  conceptae  were  held  eveir  vear,  but
not  on  certam  or  £xed  daja,  the  time  bemg  eieiy
year  appointed  by  the  magiatrstei  or  prieiEs  (jwof-
omtu  a  vuiffutrat&UM  vd  taardetiita  BomdpiioUitr^
Mncnb.  1.0, ;  Vairo,  dt  Lmg.  Lot.  fi.  35,  Ac;
Fest  I.  e.).  Among  theae  we  may  mention  the
feriae  Latiuae,  feriae  Semantivae,  Paganalia,  and
Compitalia.  /Viae  imparatim  an  thne  which
were  held  on  certain  emergencies  at  the  command
ofthe  a)niula,pfaeton,ori>f  a  dictakr.  The  books
of  Livy  record  many  feriae  imperatiTae,  which
were  chiefly  held  in  order  to  avert  the  dangera
which  aome  extracffdinary  prodigy  seemed  tn  fore-
bode, but  alao  afler  great  victories.  (Liv.  L  31,
iiL  a,  viL  28,  iiiv.  40,  xUL  3  ;  Polyb.  ud.  I.)
They  frequently  lasted  for  several  days,  the  noniba'
of  which  depended  upor ■'■- = ■ -'  -'■-


of  their  (
laheliei


vent  V
But  wh<

happened,  the  anger  of  the  goda  waa  appcaaed  by
a  ucrwa  mntmdk^  or  /eriaa  per  aoenas  diet.
This  number  of  days  had  been  Gied  at  the  time
when  thia  prodigy  had  Snt  been  obierved.  (Livt
i  SI.)  Respecting  the  Iwilimate  form*  in  irhidi
the  feriae  conccpUvae  and  imperativaa  wera  an-
nounced and  appointed,  aee  Briaun.  dt  Form.  p.
107,  dx.

The  manner  in  which  all  public  feriae  were  kept
bean  great  analogy  to  our  Sunday.  The  people
genenSy  vlaitcd  the  templea  of  the  R"la,  and
offEied  up  their  piayeri  and  lacrificei.  The  moit
aecious  and  ulemn  leem  lo  have  booi  the  ferias
impenUivae,  but  all  the  olhera  wen  gcnecaQy  at-
tended by  rejoieingi  and  fcaating.  All  kindi  of
bnunen,  eapecialty  law-euita,  were  anipended  dur-
iog  the  pablic  ferwe,  u  the;  wen  oonaideied  la


FKRIAE.

. ;  ttw  m  BUTonim
n  ■Jlmred  to  heboid
vflrit  TwiBg  doOB  doling  tta  feriad  ',  hfluce,  n

'  oat,  they  were  pnc«ded  by  their  hemldi


368  ,  Pint.  Woto,  e.  14.) Thou  wba  ncslacted
■•  ^ '  4  cn]j  linble  to  &  fine,  bat

OCA  wu  intCDtJCKulf  thait
D  ba  bdjond  the  power  of


whkt  kind*  of  woil  might  be  done  it
]Miblic  fnw  were  sot  unfteqnest,  uid  Ke  pouen
KHBo  cnnoiu  end  iateretting  dcL^ioni  given  by
RoDaB  piaiti&  Ml  thi»  nibiect.  Odb  Umbm  de-
dmd  h  to  bft  Qo  vidation  of  the  ferue,  if  n  penoo
hi  Mch  work  u  hod  nrerean  to  the  godi,  or  wu
oMDeeled  with  the  offeiin!;  of  ncrificei ;  all  work,
b  aveoTBr  declared,  irei  allowed  which  vai  ne-
inMij  to  aiipiJ?  the  urgent  wuU  of  hnnuui  life.
Tbe  poMifF  Soerola,  whcD  uked  what  kind  of
work  aight  be  done  on  a  din  feriatiu,  aniwered
that  any  wvk  might  be  done,  tf  any  niSeriQg  oi
injury  ibonid  be  the  roult  of  Deflect  or  delay,  e.  a.
if  an  ax  abotlld  &1I  into  *  pit,  the  owner  might
tnplaf  workmen  u  lift  it  ont ;  or  if  a  houu
thrtatoKd  to  bit  down,  the  inhabiOnta  might  lake
atk  Willi  !■  ai  would  p»Tent  iti  Ming,  without
■sUating  the  feriae.  (Hkcrab.  i,  e.  and  iiL  3  ;
Viig.  aiory.L270,  with  the  mnarkgof  J.H.Vou;
Cuo,  da  Re  RiuL  3 ;  Colnmclla,  iL  22  ;  compue
Kath.  siL  II  ;  Luke  nr,  S.)  H«peetingthe  va-
rienkindi  of  l^al  a^un  which  might  he  brought
hrftn  the  pnetor  on  daya  o  psblic  ieriae,  ice
Dvnt.  Z  tit.  12.  •.  2.

ll  ■  I  iin  to  hare  beo)  owing  to  the  iromenie  In-
eceae  of  the  Roman  republic  and  of  the  accumnla-
tioa  of  bvuiiiev  atiih^  there&om,  that  lome  of  the
fcnaa  meh  aa  the  Conpitalia  and  Lapeicalia,  in
the  eeorae  of  time  ceued  to  be  obKned,  until  they
wen  leatwed  \ij  AngniUia,  who  rerived  many  of

Aa^  31.)  Marcua  Antiminui  again  incrcaaed  tbe
nmnbs  of  dayi  of  boaineu  {dm/aiH)  to  230,  and
the  remaining  daji  were  feriae.  (Capitol  Af.^nlon.
itite.  10.)  After  the  introduction  of  Chriiti-
amty  in  tJie  Boman  empire,  the  old  feriae  were
ahjiabed,  and  the  Sabbath,  together  with  tbe
niililhii  feitinla,  were  tDbalitated  ;  but  the  loan-
■cr  in  which  they  were  kept  wna  nearly  (ha  Bune
■i  that  in  wfatch  the  feriae  bad  been  ohoerred.
L^w-^uita  were  lecordingly  illegal  on  Sund^i  and
hotidf^a,  thoogh  a  maater  mi^fat  emancipBCa  hia
■hn  if  be  liked.  (Cod.  3.  tit.  IS.)  All  work
and  bH  political  at  well  aa  judicial  proceeding*,
wm  napended  ;  bnt  the  country  people  were  al-
lowed Bmy  and  onreatrainedly  to  apply  thcm-
aeiTea  ta  tlMir  agncoltural  labonn,  which  aaem  at
all  tBK*  to  hare  been  dittingaiahed  Erom  and
ttongfal  Hqierior  to  all  odier  kindt  of  work  ;  tor,  aa
tiitiiined  below,  (crtain  feriae  were  iniliiuted
■ody  kr  tbe  ptnpoia  of  enabling  the  country
people  IB  fellow  Ihnr  rural  occupationa  without
beiag  imtmpui  by  law-aoili  and  other  pablic


FERIAE.  £39

■hall  proceed  to  give  a  short  actomit  of  thoae  (eati-
laJa  and  holiday*  which  were  detignated  by  the

FeriM  Latimt,  or  limply  Latuuu  (the  original
name  wu  lAtiar,  Macrob.  L  c. ;  Cic  ad  QiiiBi.
Prat.  ii.  4),  hod,  according  to  tbe  Roman  legend*,
been  initilated  by  the  hut  Tarquut  in  commemo-
ration of  the  alluuce  between  the  Roman*  Mul
Latin*.  (Dtonyi.  HaL  iy.  p.  2S0.  Syih.)  But
Niebuhr  (Hill.  tfRimt,  ii.  p.  34)  haa  ihownthat
tbe  featival,  which  wai  originally  a  panegyria  of
the  LaUna,  ii  of  much  higher  antiquity  ;  for  we
find  it  aUted  that  the  town*  of  the  Priscan*  and
Lntina  reeeired  their  tbarea  of  the  aacrifice  on  Che
Alban  mount — which  wa*  the  place  of  ttaeelebmtion
—  along  with  the  Albani  and  the  thirty  town*  of
the  Alban  commonwealth.  All  that  the  last
Tarqnin  did  wa*  to  conTcit  the  original  I^titi
feitinl  into  a  Roman  one,  and  to  iiiako  it  the
I  of  hallowing  and cemen^ng the  alliance


^on,  which  gnbaequeally,  after  the  deetni


chief


It  Icsat  a*  Xaag


magiitiatei  of  Ronu
of  thi*  panrgyria  o
wonhip  of  Jupiter  Lntiaria,  a
oi  the  Latin  republic  eiieted,  to  aeiiDenu  and
itedenuy,  and  to  aettle
any  diipatea  which  might  have  ariaen  among  ita
memben.  A*  the  feriae  Latinae  belonged  to  the
eonceptirae,  the  ^rae  of  their  celebration  graCly

1 1.. ._  jji^  |(jj^  ^  affilin  at  Rome,  aa  the

neTec  allowed  to  take  the  field  uMll
they  had  held  the  Lalina&  (Lit.  xiL63,  iiiL  I,
xiT.  13.)  Thi*  featival  waa  a  great  engine  in  the
hand*  of  tbe  tnagiiUstca,  who  had  to  appoint  ttie
time  of  ita  cdebrotLon  (oonci^wre,  nfuvrv,  or  ndioert
Lotfuut);  aa  it  might  often  luit  their  purpoia
ther  to  hold  the  feitiial  at  a  pBiticnlai  time  or
delay  it.  in  order  to  prevent  or  delay  auch  pub-
;  proceedings  aa  pecmcd  injoriooi  and  pemicioua,
id  to  prnmoie  other*  to  which  they  ware  liivaar-
ily  diiposed. Thii  feature,  however,  the  feriao

plirac Whenever  any of  the form*  or  cere-

Dolei  cutomary  at  the  Latinao  had  been  neglected,

the  conmla  had  the  r^ht  to  Hopoee  to  the  aenate,

IT  the  collie  of  pontitf*.  that  their  celebration

ihould be  repeated (intfanrari,  Cic-  ad  QwnL

JVof.  ii.  6  ; Lit.  UJL  1, xlL  16). Reipecting

the  duration  of  the  feriae  La^nae,  the  common

opinion  formerly  was,  that  at  first  they  only  luted

fer  one  day,  to  whicb  lubaequently  a  aecond,  a

third,  and  a  fbnilh  were  added  (Dionyi.  HaL  tL

p.  415.  Sylb.)  i bnt it  ii  clear  that  thii  luppo-

■ilion  wa*  fennded  on  a  confnaion  of  the  feriae

lAtinae  with  the  Ludi  Maiimi,  and that  tbey

lasted  tot  lii  day! ;  one  foe  each  decnry  of  the

Alban  and  Latin  towni. (Niebuhr,  HiA  o/Romt,

iL  p.  35  ; comp.  Liv.  vi. 42  ; Plut  OhwJL  13.)

Tbe  feative  *euaD  waa  attended  by  a  laeied  Cmce,

and  no  battle  wai  allowed  to  he  feiuht  during  thoae

day*. (Dionyi.  Hal.  Iv.  ^  260,  Sylb.  [  Maiaob.

'  c.) In  early  time*,  dnrins  the  uliance  of  the

omani  and  I^tini,  the  chief  magiatraCe*  of  both

itioD*  met  on  the  Alban  mount,  and  conducted

e  *olemnitiea,  at  which  the  Roman*,  however,

id  the  pRiidency. But  afterward*  the  Roman*

alrau  csnductod  th«  ocletaatiMi,  uA  ofiend  iha


B30  FB5CENNTNA.

comnion  lacrifico  of  an  or  ta  Jupiter  Latuiri^  in
the  name  and  on  behalf  of  nil  who  took  part  in  iL
Ibe  Btih  of  the  viclin  wai  diitributed  ammg  the
nTenl  tawat  wfaou  eotnmon  nmctnaij  itood  on
the  Alban  moiuit.  (Dionja,  Hal.  L  e,  ;  Vaira*  dg
Limg.  LaLTLiB;  SchoL  Bobieai.  n  O'c  Orat.
pro  FloM.  p.  2fi6,  Slc  OrellL)  Beiidea  the  com-
man  noilico  of  an  ox,  the  Mieral  tavn*  ofiered
each  lepantaly  Uinbt,  cheeiei,  or  a  certain  quan-
tity of  milk  (Cie.  •Je  ilt'e.  i.  11),  or  cska.  Mul-
tjtudea  Socked  to  the  Albon  mount  on  the  occaiiou,
and  the  Maaon  vtu  one  of  grrat  rejoicing)  and
feasting.  VBiiooi  kindi  of  game*  were  not  irnnt-
ing,  among  which  maj  be  mentioned  the  OKiiiatio
(twinging.  FeeL  i.  e.  OtdUsm).  It  wai  a  ijiii-
bolic  game,  and  the  legend  reipecting  ita  orupn
■hova  that  it  waa  deriv^  bum  tie  Latuu.  PI1D7
(H.  N.  ixviL  2)  mentioni  that  during  the  Utin
bolidajt  a  race  of  four-hone  chariots  {quadrigae
ceHaai)  look  place  on  the  Capitol,  in  which  the
TKtor  receired  a  draught  of  abnntbinia.

Although  the  Roaun  ooniuU  wen  alwcji  pi«-
«ent  on  the  Alban  mount,  and  coDducted  the
aolemn  lacrifice  of  an  OT,  jet  we  nod  that  the
■uperinteadence  of  the  lAtinae,  like  that  of  other
featirali,  wai  given  bj  the  lenate  to  the  Aediles,
who,  therefore,  probabl;  conducted  the  minor  is-
oiiicea,  the  varioui  gamea,  and  other  aelcmnitiea
<Dion)mHal.Yi.p.4lS,>  While  the  coneul,
eogagod  on  the  Alban  mount,  tht
waa  filled  bj  the  pnetectoi  urbi.
U«Bi.]

The  two  daji  fbllowing  the  eelebration  of  the
lAtin  holiday)  were  coniidered  aa  dia  niigioti,  ao
that  no  tnarriagca  oonld  be  contiacted.  (Cic.  ad
Qual,  FraL  n.  i.)  From  Dion  Caaaiui  we  ne
Ant  in  hie  timea  the  Feriao  Latlnaa  w«re  itill
ftrictly  obMned  hf  tho  Roman*,  whctta*  the
Latin  town*  had,  at  the  time  of  Ciiwro,  almoit  en-
tirely ^ven  up  taking  any  |Brt  in  them.  The
Roiwiiu  Hcmed  to  hiTe  continued  to  keep  them
down  to  the  fourth  ccntuiy  of  our  en.  (Laetant.
Intlibd.  i.  21.)

Firiat  Smm^iiat,  or  Stamitiaa  din,  waa  kept
in  aeed-time  for  the  pnrpoae  of  praying  for  a  good
CK^  ;  it  laited  only  for  one  day,  which  waa  fixed
bj  the  pon^Sa.  (Vano,  dt  Lag.  Lot.  tL  26,
da  Rt  Run.  L  2,  init  :  Ond,  Fait  L  66S,  Ac.)

Ffria  vmdtmialii  latted  from  the  22<1  of  Aoguat
to  the  15th  of  October,  and  wai  inatituled  for  the
parpcee  of  enabling  the  counttr-people  to  get  in
the  &uit>  of  the  field  and  to  hold  the  Tiutage.
(Codei,  3.  lit.  13.)

Feriod  aatitat  were  holhlaya  kept  during  the
botteat  KBion  of  aummer,  when  many  of  the  weal-
thier Romana  lefi  the  dty  and  went  into  the
countrr.  (Oellioa,  ix.  IS.  §  1.)  They  aeem  to  hare
been  the  aanw  a*  the  aumu  flria  (Cod.  3.  til.  12.
I.  3,  6),  and  hated  bom  the  24th  of  Jods  till  the
latof  Angutt

Firiat  pratddamai  an  laid  to  have  been  pre-
paratoiy  dayi,  or  asch  ai  preceded  the  ordinary
teriae  ;  although  they  did  not  belong  to  the  feriae,
and  often  eren  were  ^et  atri,  they  were  on  certain
occaaiooi  inaugurated  by  the  chief  ponti^  and  thn*
made  ferne. (Oelliui,  It.  6.)  [L.  3.]

FESCENNfNA,  KiL  caimina,  one  of  the
earlieat  kind*  of  Italian  poetry,  whkh  eonaiited  of
nde  and  joeote  Terae*,  or  nUhar  dialngnea  m  ez-
teiapore  Tcne*  (LiT.  TiI.2X  in  which  the  meiry
eainli7  Ibllu  mnIM  and  ndicnled  ana  amtbM'.


FETIALBS.

(Hoist.  EpiA  iL  1.  145.)  Thia  amumiSit  *een
originally  to  have  been  peculiar  to  coontry  peofde,
but  H  wai  alio  introduced  into  the  lowna  of  I^y
and  at  Rome,  where  we  find  it  mentioned  a*  one
of  thoee  in  whicb  young  people  indulged  at  ved-
dingi.  (Sery.  ad  AtiL  rii.  695  ;  Seneca,  Cbirinv.
21  ;  Plin.  H.  N-  it.  22.)  The  fewiamina  woe
one  of  the  popular  amnaementt  at  nrioua  fotiTala,
—  '  --  many  other  owa*ioiia,  hot  eapeciaily  after


the  horreit  a


1  they  B


After  their  ii


their  original  r

modified  by  the  influene*  of  (heek  k
Vii;g.  Otorg.  a.  Sas.ae.  i  TibnIL  ii.  I.  55 ;  CatolL
61.  27)  ;  they  icnmined,  hmRra-,  in  lo  br  the
•ame,  a*  they  were  at  alt  timei  inqnlar,  and
moitly  eitatBpon  doggerel  Tcrae*.  Sometime^
howerer.  Tern*  faKennini  were  al*o  written  aa
latirea  upon  peiaona.  (Maerob.  fUara.  il  4.)  That
thcae  raillenea  bad  no  maliciooa  ehaiactei,  and
were  not  intended  to  hurt  or  injun,  may  be  in-
ferred fiom  the  circumatance  that  one  person  often
called  upon  another  to  inawer  and  retort  in  a  aimi-
iar  itrain.  The  feaoennina  are  generally  b^ered
to  have  bera)  introduced  amouA  the  Romana  from
Etruria,  and  to  hare  denied  their  name  Etwu  Fei-
cennia,  a  town  of  that  country.  But,  in  the  fint
place,  Feacennia  waa  not  an  Etmican  but  a  Falii-
can  town  (Niebuhr,  Hit.  ofRaae,  ip.  136),  and,
in  the  tecond,  thia  kind  of  amniement  bai  at  all
time*  been,  and  ia  itill.  aa  popular  in  Italy,  that  it
an  Karcely  be  contidcred  a*  pecnUar  to  any  par-
ticnlar  place.  The  deriTOiion  of  a  nuna  of  thia
kind  from  that  of  aome  particular  place  waa  for-
merly a  bTourito  cuitom,  na  may  be  leen  in  the
deriiation  of  caciimonia  from  Oaei^  Festui  (i.  •.)
endeavoun  to  aolve  the  queation  by  auppoaiDg  jea-
cennina  to  be  derived  from  fiudnom,  either  beiaoie
they  were  thoisbt  to  be  a  protection  againtt  Nr-
ceren  and  witches,  or  befsose  fMcinun  (  fiaUat),
the  aymbol  of  fer^lity,  bad  in  early  times,  <a  in
mrg]  diitricti,  been  connected  with  the  amnaemoit*
of  the  feaeennina.  Bat  whatsTer  may  be  thought
of  thi*  etymology,  it  ii  of  importanse  not  (o  be


were  of  Etniaon  origin.  [L.  &]

FESTl  DIES. [DiiB.]

FESTU'CA. (MiNUMiisio.1

FBTIA'LES,  a  edlcge  (LIt.  znvi  S)  ef  Ra-
man prieits  who  acted  a*  the  guardian*  of  the
pnblic  faith.  It  waa  their  [COTince,  rtm  any
diaput*  atoae  with  a  foreign  at  '

bction, to determine the c
which  hostilities  might  be  oc
the  rarioua  religion*  rite*  attendant  on  th
I...  .- ^^  ^ij  ^  fftnia  at  tl

aco. These  fpncticns  ai


tat.  T.  SG,ed  MUUer),  ■•  Fetialea. . .  Gdai  jMbli
inter  popoloi  praeerant:  nam  pai  he*  fieb^  nt
jnslmn  condperetar  bellom  et  mda  dssitiBn,  M
fbedere  fidei  pacia  cmatitixntnt.  Ex  hia  nit-
tebantnr,  antequam  conciperetor,  qui  na  npeterent,
et  per  ho*  etiam  none  fit  fbedoa,"  to  vhidi  va
may  add  the  old  law  quoted  by  Gam  (Dt  Lif,
iL  9),  "  FoiDiBuii,  racii,  bklli,  11


obMrred  by  the  Roman*  in  the  earlier  acta,  wha
they  felt  thouehea  ^griand  hj  •  aoghbooiiog


FKTIALES.

tut  tfaM  when  an  iojoiy  hud  hetrx
__ . ,  fcliJt* (Vwro,  ap.  Nat.) yrae

dtpulnl  to  Hck  ndnu,  who  agun  elecUd  one  of
tli«r  DBinbet  to  ut  u  their  repmanlmtiTe.  Tbii
tDdindial  wu  njled  ths  pOia-  pairtMhu  ptfiUi
ffiwiM  A  Gllel  of  while  irool  wu  bound  nunil
lui  bewl,  toecther  with  ft  wreMli  of  Bcred  faecln
pthcndwiuiu  the  inclotDn  of  the  Capiloliiie  hill
[hi  I  JImih,  lagmaia)  [SiOiiiHi),  whcDca  he  wu
•omMimo  nuned  Ftrjeun'u.  (Plin.  H.  ^r.  nil
2.)  Thoi  cqnipiKd  he  pnoceded  to  the  confinei
■f  the  oSiuiding  tribe,  where  he  balled  and  ad-
dnsed  a  iV^Ter  to  Jupiter,  calling  the  god  to  wit-
MW,  with  bcBTj  iaipEcalknu,  that  hii  compUiute
vuB  well  fbondad  aid  hia  d£DUUidi  naxmahle.
He  tlwii  criiw«d  the  border,  and  the  ume  fonn
>■■  itii—led  in  itearl;  the  mat  wordi  to  the  Gr«t
DAtn«  oi  the  aoil  vbom  he  might  chance  to  meet ;
■gaia  K  third  time  to  the  leutinel  or  any  citiieu
when  be  encanntered  at  the  gate  of  the  chief
Inm ;  and  a  ibaith  time  to  the  mngiatiBtei  io  the
fcnBB  in  praence  ef  the  people.  If  a  ntii&ctor;
OHwer  WM  ml  retunwd  within  ihirt;  dsji,  after
faUid;  delitering  atolemn  deiuuciatiDn,— in  which

HiTvked, — of  what  might  be  expected  to  follow,  be
prtaatd  to  Rome,  kuL,  acnHnpanied  b^  the  leM
tl  the  btialo,  maide  a  report  of  hii  miuion  to  the
KBaie,  U the  people  (Ln.i. 46),  ai  well  ai  the
■Slate,  decoded  for  war,  the  pater  patratua  again
let  forth  to  the  border  of  the  hoilile  territory,  and
bmcbed  a  ipear  tipped  with  iron,  or  chaired  at
At  txtmnin  and  ■moired  with  bhnd  (emblematic
danbUeaa  ol  fire  and  alanghter)  acnai  the  boun-
dary, pruDouDcing  at  the  ome  time  a  K>lemn
dcdaiBtiMi  of  war.  The  demand  for  rednn  and
the  pcDcUmation  of  hoalilitica  were  alike  termed
tbr^alia,  which  word  the  Romaiu  in  Uter  timoi
opkined  by  otor*  rtpeter*  (Fits.  //.  N.  nil  S  ;
Sot.  ad  Firs.  Am.  a.  £3}  ;  bat  GtitlliDx  (Gf
^^ilt  dtrKm,  StaiUtBtrf.  p.  19fi}  and  other  mo-
don  wtitera,  connect  it  with  the  Doric  form  of

Bcreral  of  the  fonnnlas  emplo^  on  thete  occa-
nva  hare  bMn  prcHTred  by  Utj  (L  21, 32),  and
Anfaia  Oellini  (ivL  4),  forming  a  portion  of  the
Jai  FeUala  bj  which  the  college  wae  r^:iilated.
The  aerricei  oT  the  tetialei  were  coniide red  ab«>-
btdj  eMcutial  in  eoncluding  a  treatj  (Lit.  ix.  £) ;
■ad  w«  read  that  at  the  tctmmaticn  of  the  Meond
Panic  war  felialea  were  aent  oier  to  Africa,  who
tarried  with  them  their  own  Terbenae  and  their
•wa  liM  tUma  for  muting  the  nctim.  Hen  alio
the  chief  WM  termed  pattr  fOtnti*.  (Li>.  zxj.
41.>

The  intitDtioa  of  thew  prieata  waa  aacnbed  b;

Hdod  with  r^igicB,  to  Noma  (Dioirra.  ii-  71)  ;
aid  altbingh  larj  (L  32)  iptska  ai  if  he  attri-
bMed  their  introdnctioa  to  Annu  Ifartiiu,  ;et  in
aa  earlia-  eh^itet  (i.  S4)  he  loppoiea  them  to  hare
oiited  in  the  reign  d'  HoMiliui.  The  whole
niua  i*  Mid  to  hare  been  bomwed  Erom  the
Aeqwicelae  at  theArdeate*  (LiT.aodDunjre.lLc.),
aad  aimilar  MW^a  nndonbtedlj  jHerailed  among
the  Latin  atate*  ;  for  it  ii  dear  that  the  formula
pnaemd  by  lA-rj  (L  12),  miut  hare  been  em-
flajed  wbsi  the  [uter  patratni  of  the  Romaiu


FIBULA.  531

with  certainty,  but  lome  have  infemd  from  a  pat-
nge  qnotf  d  Stara  Vaim  by  Noniui  (lii  43)  that
'  amounted  to  twent;r ;  of  whom  Niebuhi  nip-
pom  ten  were  elected  from  the  Bamnea  and
from  the  TitienKi ;  but  GOttling  {Gadudikdtr
RSm.  Siaattveif.  p.  19S)  thinki  it  mon  probable
that  they  were  at  fint  all  choien  firom  the  Ranine^
I  Sabinei  were  originally  unacquainted  with
le  of  felialea  They  were  originnlly  lelected
&Dm  the  meat  noble  bmilie*  ;  iheir  office  lailed  for
life  (DionyB.  iL  72)  ;  and  it  teemi  probable  that
Tacanciei  were  filled  up  by  the  colle^  {cDi^tatirmi}
until  thepaiung  of  the  Lei  Donutia,  wheninccan-
mon  with  moat  other  prieita  they  would  be  nomi-
nated in  the  comitia  tribula.  Thia,  however,  ia
iwhere  eipreuly  Mated.

The  etymology  aC  fitiaiii  ii  uncertain.  Vano
would  connect  it  wiu  Jidut  and  fi^ut ;  Feelua
tith  ftrio  or  fada :  while  lome  modem  Kholars
luppDSe  it  to  be  allied  to  ^id,  and  ihiia  fniridXHt
Tould  be  araUmt,  ^itaien.  In  inKriptioni  ws
find  hoth/OiaJit  Kaifrdatii:  but  (ince  in  Greek
MSSk  the  word  alwayt  appear*  under  lome  one  of
the  fbrmi  fntrniVm  ^ufAtii,  frndAHi,  the
orthography  we  haie  adopted  in  thU  article  u
probably  correct.

""  s  explanation  giren  by  Liry  (L  34)  of  the

origin  of  the  term  Pater  Patratni  i*  latii&ctory : —

"  Pater  Patmtui  ad  juajurandnm  patiaudom,  id

ert,  lanciendun)  fit  foediu  ;  "  and  we  may  at  once

- -  the  ipeculationa  of  Serrin*  (ad  Ahl  ix.  £3,

,iiL2a6)aiid Plutanb (Q.  A.  p.  127,  ed.

Reiake)  ;  the  foimerof  whomiuppuKaUialhe  wni

ao  called  becauae  it  wu  necewary  thai  hi>  father

ihooid  be  aliire,  the  latter  that  the  name  indicated

lii  father  wai  living,  and  that  he  hinuelf  waa

the  bther  »f  children.  [W.  R]

FI'BULA(i'«p^n|,"poi^i,w>/iorrrTpit:  riprti,

isopirli; Ivtrii),  a,  bnwch  coniiiting  of  a  pia

cat),  and  ofacum^d  portion  fumiihed  with  a

ok  ((Atfi,  Ham.  Od.  xiili.  293). The  curved

portion  wat  lometimei  a  circular  ring  or  disc,  the

pauii^  ocTDai  it!  centre  (woodcut,  figa.  I, "'


arc,  the  pin  being  aj
(fig.  3).  The  furma  of  hroochei,  which
nmonly  of  gold  or  bienie,  and  more  rarely
(Aeliau,  V.  H.  i.  18),  were,  however,  u
in  ancient  ai  in  modem  timea  ;  for  the
fibula  lerved  in  dreu  not  merely  u  a  bitening,
but  alio  ai  an  ornament.  (Hom.  Od,  liz.  256,
aS7;  Kurip./^ica.  821.)


Women  were  the  fibula  both  with  the  Akictub
and  the  iWntiii,'  men  wore  it  with  the  amictua
only.  Itt  moat  frequent  nae  waa  to  pin  together
two  partt  of  the  mA.  ihawl  or  doak  [Cbla-

HVB  I PlFLDK  ; PlLLlUK], whlch COUbtUted

the  amidoa,  u a) to  fiuten it  ova  the  right
,  ihoiUdcr. (Soph.  TVoeL  923  ;  Thao«rib  zir.  66  |


Grid,  M/t.  T
cut.,  pp.  2
OTU  tU b


FIBULA.
ilB;  TaciLC«™.17).  [Wood-
117,213.1  Mora  Tiatiy  we  •«  il
uL  [Woodcut,  p.  21H.J  Tbe  epi-
lD«i  rrtpoTopros  wu  applied  to  ft  penon  vear-
ing  tbe  fibnlii  on  one  liiDulder  onl)-  (Scbol.  in
£^np.  Ha.  933,  934)  ;  foi  vomen  often  won  it
on  both  iboulden.  [Woodoit^  pp.  13S,  243,
257.]  In  conteqaence  of  tbe  habit  of  potting  on
the  unictDi  with  the  aid  of  a  fibula,  it  wu  called
■Wfforiiim  or  iitrfpir^im  (Tbeocrit.  Adon.  34.  79),
ra|Fw^Ula  (Eurip.  EbcL  B20),  or  i(iwixini  npo-
rtrm  (Branck,  AmiL  iL  2B).  Tbe  iplendid  >hawl
of  Ulj-ue*,  datribEd  in  Ibe  Oayjwy  (lit  235—
231),  wBi  provided  with  two  nnall  pipet  for  ad-
mitting the  pin  of  the  golden  brOMh  ;  thi*  contri-
■nnce  wauld  lecore  ibt  cloth  from  being  ton.  The
l^heat  degrei  of  ornament  wai  be*towed  npon
bnochn  aAa  tbe  fitll  of  the  wettem  empire.
Jnilin  II.  (Corippiu,  ii.  122).  and  many  of  the
empeiDn  who  preceded  him,  ai  we  pei«i«  from
the  portiaili  on  ttieir  medali,  wore  upon  their
right  ihoulden  Bbulac,  from  which  jeweli,  at-
tached b;  three  imall  ehaiiu,  depended.  (Beger,
THei.  PaL  p.  407,  406,  &c)

It  haj  l>Hn  already  itated  that  women  often
won  the  fibula  on  both  ahoulden.  In  addition  to
thii,  a  lad;  umetunei  diipUyed  an  client  row  of
brwcba  down  each  ana  upon  the  ileerei  of  her
tonic  (Aelian.  V.  H.  I  18),  ei»nple>  of  which  an
■e«n  in  manj  ancient  ilatnei.  Itwaialiofaghioa-
sble  to  wear  them  on  the  brrut  (Iiid.  Orig.  lix.
30)  {  and  another  ocruional  diltinction  of  female
altiie,  in  later  timca.  wa<  the  ok  of  Che  Gbnia  in
tacking  up  the  tonicabove  the  knee.

Not  only  might  slight  accident*  to  lie  peiaon
arise  from  waring  bnochea  (Horn.  IL  t,  426),  but
they  were  lometimce  mod,  eipeciaily  by  femaiea,  to
inSict  Kruni  injuriea.  Tbe  pin  of  the  fibula  i>  the
initrumcnt,  which  tbe  Phrygian  women  employ  to
depriTe  Polymncator  of  hii  sight  by  piercing  hie
pupili  (Enrip.  IIk.  1170),  and  ndth  which  the
Athenian  women,  baring  firat  blinded  a  man,  then
diipatch  him.  (Herod.  •.  97  ;  Schol.ta£;iinp..^«.
934).  Oedipiu  itrikci  the  pupils  of  hii  dwo  eye-
ball! with  a  brooch  taken  Irimi  the  dreu  of  Jocaata
(Soph.  OaL  Tgr.  1269  ;  Eurip.  Phoa.  62). For

pierce,  aince  vtp6nt  wai  properiy  Che  pin  of  the
brooch  (np(Sn)«t,  "  [uniud  him,"  Horn.  IL  lii.
145 ;  liiL  397).

Broochea  wer«  racceeded  by  bncklea,  npecially
among  the  lUmant,  who  called  Ihem  t^  the  nme
name.  The  preceding  woodcnl  ibow<  on  the  right
liand  thefiimu  of  four  bnmie  bucklei  (4,  £,  6, 7)  from
the  collection  jn  the  Briliab  Mnjeom.  Thii  article
of  dreu  wu  chiefly  nted  to  futan  the  belt  [B<L-
Tlus],  and  the  girdle  (Zona].  (Virg.  Am.  oL
274  1  Lydna,  D*  Mag.  Ram.  iL  13).  It  appom
to  hare  been  in  genenl  much  more  richly  oma-
msited  than  the  brooch  ;  for,  although  Hadrian
«a>  limple  and  uneipcniiTe  in  ^ii  ai  well  ai  in
other  matten  of  coatnme  (Spartian.  Hadr.  10),
jot  many  of  hit  ncceaion  were  exceedingly
'o  diipby  bncklet  aet  with  jewola  (_fiUiia*


10  Died  to  denote


la  which  ham
amlied  to  articlea  of  irru,

pirn  nrimily  inCrodueed  u.  ,_,/vu_j  ,  _  j.  »,7
lineh-piniDfactuiriot(Partben.6)ithe  noodenpini
inaerted  thiongh  the  aidei  of  a  boat,  to  which  tbe
■ailora  bitco  theii  linei  or  ropea  (ApoU.  lUod,  i.


FICTILE.

S67)  t  the  tienaila  which  unite  the  pnala  and
ptankt  of  a  wooden  bridge  (Cbsbt,  B.  G.  it.  1 7)  ;
and  the  pina  fixed  into  tbe  top  (j'awooda  tri-
angle uied  aa  a  mechanical  engine  (Vitmi.  z.  2).

The  practice  of  infibulating  lingera,  alluded  to
by  JnTena!  and  Martial,  ia  deHnW  in  Rhodina
Dt  Ada  and  PiliKU.  [J.  Y.J

FI'CTILE  {ntfiiuii,  Kipifuar,  tffrpmcar,
iarpimror),  earthenwan,  a  leasel  or  other  article
made  of  baked  clay.

The  inilTumenti  need  in  pottery  (nr»jtya(mo)
were  the  following: — I.  The  wheel  (Tpoxi'.oriit,
rvta,  "rota  figularia,"  Plant  i>J.  iil  2,  35),
which  ii  mentioned  by  Hamer  (/J,  iriiL  600),  and
ii  among  tbe  moat  ancient  of  all  hnnian  inToiticau.
According  to  the  repreientalioni  of  it  on  tbe  walla
of  Egyptian  lanba  (Wilkinaon,  Jlfannera  omd  Ckt-
iami,  iii.p.  163),  it  wai  a  circular  table,  placed  on
a  cylindrical  pedeital,  and  turning  freely  ca  a
point  The  workman,  baring  placed  a  lamp  of
clay  upon  it  whirled  it  iwiftly  with  hii  left  hand.


daughter  of  the  wheel"  (rpoxtl^irai  nipri,  Xcnar-
chnt,  ap.  Atioi,  EL  p.  64).  2L  Piece*  of  wood  or
bone,  which  the  potter  lKffatuis,fyiilia)  held  in
hia  right  hand,  azid  applied  oocaalonally  to  the
rtr1ae«  of  the  clay  during  ita  revolutiau,  A  pointed
•tick,  touching  the  clay,  would  inicribe  a  circle
upon  it  i  and  cirdci  wete  in  tbii  manner  diapoaed
parallel  to  one  another,  and  in  any  nnmber,  ac-
cording to  the  fancy  of  the  artiit  B^  having  the
end  of  the  itick  currcd  orindented,  and  by  turning'
it  in  different  directiotu,  he  woold  impreai  many
beantlfiil  varietiei  of  form  and  outline  upon  hii
TBiei.  3.  Mouldi  {/armae,  rirai,  Scbol.  n  .^riit.
Rxla.  1),  tued  either  to  decorate  with  figorea  in
relief  {wpiama)  Tcoell  which  had  been  thrown
on  the  wheel,  or  to  produce  foliage,  animala,  or
any  other  appeamnee^  on  Aktstixa,  on  comicta
of  IMTB  cotu,  and  imitalira  or  onuunenlal  pottery
of  all  other  kinda,  in  which  the  wheel  waa  not
adapted  to  give  die  Grit  ihape.  The  auneied
woodcut  ihowa  three  mouldi,  which  woe  found
near  Rome  by  M.  Seroui  d'Agincoott.  {RacaeU  da
Fragmau,  p.  BB— 92.)  They  are  cut  in  ((one.
One  of  Ihem  wni  probably  uicd  for  making  ante-
Hia,  and  the  other  two  tot  making  hnrti  and
leg),  deaigned  to  be  luapended  by  poor  penona

N^BU.) CopieaoTthe  ome  ntject,  which  might


in  thia  manner  bo  multiplied  to  any  extent,  wera
called  "  ectypa."  4.  CbaTera  or  HAlpeli,  uaed  by
akilfol  modeller!  in  giving  to  Ggurei  of  all  kindi  a
more  perfect  fiuiih  and  a  higher  relief  than  couhl
be  produced  by  tbe  uie  of  mouldi,  Theie  inatra-
neoii,  eiceediogly  umpla  in  (hoBsdTe^  and  da-


PICTILE.
rirng  their  tlBaaej  ilUgetbcr  ftnin  the  ■hilitf
Mid  Bila  of  the  KiJptoT,  would  nat  only  conlri-
boie  td  the  pure  exqitiiita  deconliou  of  eonlien
tokIi,  bnt  would  be  almoit  tbe  onl;  twli  appli-
cmbte  fbr  makiiig  "  Dii  fictile*,"  or  godi  of  baked
tatth,  and  other  entire  Ggoro.  (Pnpert.  ii.  S.  2S,
n.  1.5;  Plio.H.A'.  HIT.  4fi,46|  Sea.aiiu.ad
AA.  10  1  tyi^taera  U  wijAoS,  irnit  7S1,  Paul.
L  2. 1  *,  1.8.  9  1,  TiL  22.  I  6.)  TheH  were
uaong  the  eariieat  eflicU  of  the  pUatic  art,  and
em  in  timca  of  tbe  gnateal  refinemeDt  and
Vasrj  iSiftj  emtiinud  to  be  ngaided  with  rexe-

Vi  tTi  of  aQ  kind*  woe  veiy  freqoently  fbr-
■iihed  witii  at  leait  one  handle  (am,  oEsf,  ii).
The  Amphou  *m  called  Diota,  beouue  it  hod
two.  The  laaw  of  tbe  potter  wna  comnuolj
^•—j^  npod  tbe  handle  tbe  tia,  01  lome  othi^
part.  Of  ihii  we  hare  an  example  in  the  ampboia,
adaiMd  for  holding  grain  or  froiU,  oil  or  wiae,
which  ii  h«>e  introdarad  from  tbe  work  of  Seroui
d'Agnnooft  The  fi^nie  oa  the  right  band  ahowi
Art  aane  in  the  genitiTB  nae  "  Maturi,*'  im-
d  on  u  oblmg  anr&oe  which  ii  leen  on  tbe


PICTILE.


533


•  makmg  pottaiT  {ntfiiuiai
11  conunonlj'  reo,  and  often
a  eolonr  ai  to  reaemble  coral.  Van-
I,  bj  analjiia,  that  a  piece  of  ECrtucan
I  contaiiied  tbe  folio  whig  iiigredienta; —
Stlio,  53  ;  alununa,  1 5  ;  lime,  8  ;  oxide  of  inn,
24.  To  tbe  great  alxindaiice  of  tbe  lait  eonatitu-
(■t  the  deep  red  colour  it  to  be  attiibnted.  Other
pater;  ia  brown  or  cream-coloured,  and  ■ometime*
white.  Tbe  pipe-daj,  wbitb  miut  have  been  nied
tit  white  ware,  it  caUed  "  figlina  creto."  (Vam,
At  RaM.  vL  9.)  Some  of  the  ancient  earthenware
'  *  oibetaaca  black,  ^  effect  pro-
g  the  earth  with  comminated  at-
B  ( jBj)ii<a),  at  with  tome  other  bitnmiDoiu


liaai  wbid  are  now  to  higbl;  admired.  (Plin.  H.
N.  xxzri.  34.)  Bat  the  ooaner  Teaeli,  deiigned
W  a^aaoD  porpoett,  woe  alto  imcared  with
pilch,  and  had  it  bnml  into  them,  becaote  bj-  this
hind  of  cDcaDitic  tbej  becaino  more  imperTioua  to
MiMBCe  and  \tm  liabla  to  dKay. (Hot.  Cant.  i.


20.  3  1  Plin.  ff.  N.  liT.  25,  27.)  Hence  a
"  dolium  picstum  fictile  "  wai  used,  ai  well  ai  n
glau  jnr  to  bold  picklea. '  (Colam.  R»  Riut.  liL  1 8,
64.)  Alto  the  year  of  the  Tialagc  wat  inicribed
by  tbe  me  of  pitch,  either  upon  tbe  amphorae
themKlvea  or  opon  tbe  labels  {pittaoia^  jabcrfu),
wbicb  were  tied  roond  thcii  tiecka.  (Hor.  Carm,
iiL  21.  1 — £.)  Allhcugh  oil;  or  bituminotu  aub-
tlanoa  were  moat  commonl;  employed  in  pottery
to  produce  by  the  aid  of  fire  ((il  8i  fuAar4<rcr,
Horn.  Epig.  lir.  3)  the  Tariona  ahadei  of  black
and  brown,  the  '


e  [Fob


.1],  .


a  freih  0


„.  ..._, ,, principally  employed for

tbia  purpoae.  (Suidaa,  a.  v.  KoiAiJAar  Cfpq^^tt.)
To  produce  a  further  rariely  in  the  paintiogi  Qpon
vaaca  tbe  artitt*  employed  a  tew  brightly  coloured
eartbt  and  metallic  wet [PKrrtiRi,  No.  9.]

Aa  wo  might  eipect  concerning  an  art  to  india-
penmble  aa  that  of  the  potter,  it  waa  practited  to
a  great  extent  in  erery  ancient  nation  ;  eren  the
meet  uncirilued  not  being  ttmngert  to  it,  and
aometimet  ditptaying  a  turpriaing  degree  of  dexte-
rity. Tba  remaina  of  in  ancient  pottery  bare  been
found  in  Britain,  and  aome  of  the  pottera'  namea
wHcrrcd  on  their  woriu,  are  probably  Britiih.
We  are  told  of  ■  place  called  the  Potteriet  {Pig-


Uiw}hi


OauL  Numa  inttituled  a  corpontion  of
pettera  at  Borne.  (Plin.  H.  N.  hit.  46.)  Men-
tion baa  already  been  made  of  £gyp^  and  there
are  frequent  alluiiona  to  the  art  in  the  ancient
writingi  of  the  Jewa  We  alto  read  of  itt  pro-
dnctiont  in  Ttallet,  Petgamut,  Cnidoa,  Chiot,
Scyou,  Corinth,  Comae,  Adria,  Modaia,  and
Nola,  Erraa  which  city  the  eiportt  of  cBrthenware
were  contiderable,  and  where  loine  of  tbe  moit  ei-
quinte  tpecimena  are  a^l  diacoTered.  But  three
placet  were  dialingaiihed  aboTo  all  otben  for  the
eitcnt  and  excellence  of  thia  beautifiil  manu&c-
tore.

1 .  Samoa,  to  which  the  Romani  retorted  for  the
articin  of  earthenware  necettary  at  msali,  and
inlcnded  fbr  ute  ratber  than  diaplay.  (Plant
BaaA.  ii.  2.  24,  Sttck.  t.  4.  12  ;  TibolL  il  3.  51  ;
Cic  pro  Miaim.  36  j  Plin.  H.  N.  iht.  46  ;
Tertull  Ap-i.  2fi.)

2.  Atbena,  a  conaiderabla  put  of  which  waa
called  Cerameicoi,  becaute  it  wu  inhabited  by
pott^i.  In  thia  quarter  of  tbe  city  were  leraplca
dedicated  to  Athena,  aa  preiiding  otct  ereir  kind
of  handicraft,  and  to  tbe  two  fire-Kodi,  Hephaeatoa
and  Pmmetheni,  the  latter  of  whom  wat  flao  the
mytbicalinTenloraftheartofmodelling.  Vnriout
tiaditioni  reapecling  Ceroebna  and  otben  point  to
the  early  effbrtt  of  tbe  Athenian  pollen  (Plin. //.  A'.
Til  &T,  ixxt.  45  i  Critiaa  1^.  Atlm.  L  p.  30) ;
and  it  it  a  remerkablc  circuiuaDuice  that  the  enemiea
of  free  trade,  and  eipeciallyaf  Athenian  influence  at
Aegina  and  Argoi,  injpoeed  rotrictJoni  on  the  uae
of  theae  pmdnctioiu.  (Herod,  t.  BB.) The  Atho-

piecet were publicly eihibited at the Pana-
THsNiEA,  and  were  pren,  Giied  with  oil,  to  tbe


now  read  on  tome  of  them,  in

and  other  colloetioni,  the  inacription  TS^  'KUtnfitr

(U^vr  or  other  eqniralent  eipreatiool.  (Pind.  Ntm.


Mi  FICTILE.

X  96  ;  SchoL  ond  BSekb,  ad  loe. ;  B^ckl^  Ootp-

J— -"il-L] ■■

laJ^i  uid  KoMt
■tance  whicli  contributed  U  Ui«  aucceu  of  the  Altie-
nioiu  in  tfati  muiu&cCnic,  wu  L  mine  of  fine  pot-
ter'i  da;  in  the  Colian  Fioraaatoiy,  near  Phalenim.
(Suidw,  L  e. ;  Athen.  zL  {l  1S2.)  The  utidia
made  JTom  it  became  >o  Etihioiutble,  that  Plutarcb
(Z>a  Atkill.)  dncribing  u  wt  of  extreme  follj,
compBTH  it  to  that  of  the  man  who,  hmring  twaJ-
lowed  poiton,  lefoioi  to  taka  tha  antidote  nnlcat  it
Iw adnimttered  to  him  in  amp  made itfColIaaclaj.
Some  of  (he  "  PsnathcDaic"  vatei,  at  thej  veie
called,  an  two  feet  in  height,  which  aMord*  with

■iu  (Atheo.  iL  p.  iSS ;  Biickh,  ta  Pmd.  Fng.  No.
89.)  A  diota  *aa  oflen  itamped  nprai  the  coin)
of  Athcn*,  in  alliuioa  to  the  lacta  whuh  haie  now
been  explained.

3,  Etmrio,  eapeciall;  the  citi4  of  Aretiom  and
Tidquinii.  Whilit  the  Athenian  potten  excelled
all  othen  in  the  maoofiutun  of  Tciieli,  the  Tuicani,
besidei  exeiciiiiig  thii  branch  of  indiutr;  to  a  gnat
extent  thongh in  a  leu taiteful  and elahoiate


were  adorned,  both  within  and  without,  b;  the
aid  of  these  produetiona.  The  nioit  diitbiguiihed
among  them  waa  on  entin  f^uadriga,  made  at  V^
which  iDimounted  the  pediment  of  the  tempi*  of
Jupiter  CapitolinDB.  (Plin.  H.  N.  zxTJiL  i,  hit.
*fi,  rixri.  3  ;  K.  O.  MUller.  fifriufar,  ir.  S,  1,  2.)
The  Elniriana  alae  manifeated  their  partiality  to
thii  branch  of  art  by  recurring  to  it  for  the  piirpoie
of  interment  ]  for  whilat  Pliny  mentioni  {H.  N.
xxxT.  46),  that  mBnypenoni  preferred  to  be  buried
in  earthen  jan,  and  iu  other  pacta  of  Italy  tha
booei  of  the  dead  haia  been  found  preaerred  in
araphomr,  Etruria  alone  hat  alforded  example*,
aome  of  Chem  now  depoaited  in  the  Britiih  Muacnia,
of  large  BLTCopbagi  made  wholly  of  temL  colta,  and
omRmenled  with  figurea  in  baa-relief  and  with  re-
cumbent ataluet  of  the  deeeated.

Among  many  qualitiea  which  we  admire  in  the
Greek  pottery,  nut  the  leoat  wonderful  ia  ita  thin-
neu  (Xtx-rd)  and  conaeqacnt  lighlneai,  notwith-
alanding  the  great  aize  of  the  vetaela  and  tho  ftx-
feet  regularity  and  el^nce  of  their  Ibrm*.  That  it
waa  nn  afa)ecl  of  ambition  lo  excel  in  thia  reapect
wc  leom  &om  the  itory  of  a  maater  and  hia  pupil,
who  contended  which  could  throw  the  thinncit  clay,
and  whoaa  two  amphorae,  the  reaolt  of  the  trial,
were  pyeened  in  the  temple  at  Erythrae.  (Plin.
H.  N.  HIT.  <6.)  The  well-known  paaaage  rf
Ufaiod  (Kal  Kipofitin  xtpatai  KorttT,  &c  Op.  ei
DUt,  25)  deacribei  the  emulation,  which  incited
■  well  at  acehilectt  and


The  Oreelti  and  Romani  cooleoted

with  nnng  earthenware  on  all  occaaiona  undl  the
time  of  Alexander  the  Great:  ^la  Macedonian
conqneata  introduced  from  the  Eaat  a  laite  for  leBaeli
of  gold  and  tilTer,  in  which,  howeTer,  the  Spartana
nftasd  to  indnlge  themedvea.  The  Peniana,  on  the
contrary,  held  earthenware  in  ao  low  catimation,
that  they  condemned  penoni  to  drink  out  of  fictile
Tsaaela  aa  a  pnnithnicaC.  (Athen.  ri.  p.  229,  c,  xL
p.iG4,  a,p.43S,c,d.} Bvt  althoogb  the  Eonuuia,


Ficno

ai  they  deriated  £ram  the  andoit  ahnplieity,  made
a  groat  diipiay  of  the  more  aplendid  kind  of
veiaela,  yet  they  continued  to  lodE  npon  pottery  not
only  with  reapect  but  eroi  with  TencmtifHi.  (Ovid,
MrL  viiL  690 ;  Cic  ad  Alt.  -nA;  Juv,  iii.  168,
I.  25.)  They  called  to  mind  the  magnaDimitj  of
the  Canaul  Cnriua,  who  preferTed  the  lue  rf  hii  own
earthenware  to  the  gold  of  the  Samnitea  (Flortia,  i.
18)  ;  they  reckoned  aome  of  their  conaecraled
lena-eottai,  and  etpecially  the  aboiB-men^oned
qoadriga,  among  the  aafeenarda  of  their  impenal
city  (8erT.odFas,^«fcTii.  188);  and,  booed  by
old  Biaociationi  and  the  traditona  of  their  esriiett
biatory,  they  conaidered  earthen  Teaaela  proper  for
religioua  ceremoniea,  although  gold  and  ulier  might
be  admitted  in  Cheii  private  entertabunoit*  (Tet-
tull.  ;.  c)  ;  fatPlinTaBya(fr.  M  zht.  46),tliBt
the  productiona  of  thia  ciaaa,  **  both  in  Rgvd  to
their  akilfiil  fabrication  and  thnr  high  antiqni^,
were  more  lacred,  and  certainly  more  ioDoeent,  thm
gold."

Another  term,  often  uaed  aa  lynonymoa  with
fictUe  waa  UMa. tDoLiUH  ;  Latik  ;  PaTxaa  ;

PiTINA  ; TbOULA.]  [J. Y.]

Fl'CTIO.  FictiCBia  in  Roman  law  an  like  fie-
tiona  in  Engtiih  law,  of  which  it  haabeenaaid  that
they  are  "  tboae  thinga  (hat  hare  no  real  eaaence
in  their  own  bodji  but  are  ao  acknowledged  and
accepted  in  law  for  aome  eapecial  pi  -- —


u  pnnnac."  The
T  apparently  had  their
,  and  they  were  deriaed


for  the  purpose  of  providing  for  caaea  where  there
waa  no  legialatiTe  proriaion, A  fiction  auppoa
aomething  to  be  which  waa  not ;  but  the  thing  ai


penon  a  dnn.  Varioua  inatoacea  it  fio-
tiona  are  mentioned  by  Gaina.  One  inttBDce  ia
that  of  a  penim  who  had  obtained  the  bonornM
poeaeaaio  ex  edicte.  Aa  he  waa  not  herea,  he  had
no  direct  action :  he  could  neither  claim  the  ^a-
perty  of  the  defunct  aa  fail  (legal)  property,  nor
could  he  claim  a  debt  due  to  the  defunct  oa  hia
(legal)  debt.  He  therefore  brought  hia  auit  (»■
tatdit)  (u  hUH  (Jicfa  »  liertde),  and  the  fnnnuta
waa  accordingly  adapted  to  the  fiction.  In  the
Publiciana  Aclui,  the  fiction  waa  that  tha  potieaaoc
had  obtained  hy  uaucapioa  the  ownenhip  of  the
thing  of  which  he  had  loit  the  peaeaaua.  A
wcman  by  coemptio,  and  a  male  by  being  adro-
gated,  oeoaed,  according  to  the  cinl  law,  ta  b«
debtMS,  if  they  were  debtoia  befon ;  lor  by  tha
coempuo  and  adrwatio  they  had  aoatamed  a  capitis
diminutio,  and  there  could  be  no  direct  action
Bgainit  them.  But  ai  this  oipilia  diminntia  might
be  made  avulahle  for  fraudulent  purpoaea.  an  actio
niilli  waa  atill  allowed  againit  lueh  penoni,  tha
fiction  being  that  they  had  auatained  no  capitis
diminutio.  The  formula  did  not  (aa  it  apptars
from  Qaint)  express  the  fiction  aa  a  bet,  but  it  nn
thus :  —  If  it  shall  aweai  that  aueh  and  auefa  an
the  facta  (the  bcti  in  latue),  and  that  the  party,
plaintiff  oi  defendant,  would  hare  aach  and  SDch  a
right,  or  be  liable  to  loch  and  lueh  a  duty,  if  aach
and  such  other  facts  (the  hcta  supposed)  wen  tins;
el  reliqua.  (Qaiua,  ir.  10.  32,  &e.  -,  Ulp.  /Viy.
xxTiiLia.)

It  wai  by  a  ficticm  that  the  aodiM  of  legal  ca-
pacity was  extended  lo  artifidal  persma.  [CoLLI-
omif  ;  Fiacus.J  Inatanoei  of  ficlicn  occur  in  tha
cbafiler  intitled  JmiituAi  Pirmtm  in  SaTignj^


PIDBIC0MM1S3UU.
Ai*Mdtebpl.iI.ATiiLiL,  ud  in  Pnchu'i /■-
itiMiMa,  i.  g  80,  ii.  i  16i.)  [Q.  L.]

FIDEICOUMISSUM  ia  ■  taHaiaiiotaij  dii-
poMtion^  bj  which  n  penob  wbo  gita  Aomething
to  ■aotbcT  impoiM  m  him  the  obligation  of  tnuu-
fenu>g  it  to  ■  third  ixncin.  Ths  obligation  vat
Mt  (Tcated  by  wordi  of  legal  binding  fane  (cinUa
wrAaX  but  by  wocda  of  lequeal  (pncalivi),  nich
■a  "^  Bdeicanmitto,'*  "  peto,"  *^  volo  dari^"  aoi  the
; which irtn ths o[«atiTe wodi [vtria


Tha  oblioliMi  to  nnifer  a  Gdekommaauia  hera-
ditaa  soJd  rally  b«  inipoaed  on  tha  berea  ;  ths  ob-
ligaiin  of  tniulerTing  a  lingle  thing  might  be
impoaed  on  a  legatee.

By  the  legialatim  of  JnitiniaD  a  fideieommia-

bu  befbn  hu  tin»  tha  penon  entilled  ta  it  vni
■MBetime*  "  boedii  loco,"  and  aometimet  "  lua-
•ahi  laoo."  The  herea  itill  imnained  bene  after
ha  had  patted  with  the  henditaa. Thoogh  the


fidn


aibled


.  —  in  the  caa*  of  a  Tulgar
I,  the  rabalitnted  penon  only  beame
Wea  when  tha  fint  panto,  nunad  herea,  &iled  to
beeooM  nd  ;  in  the  caaa  of  the  fideicommiuum,
tha  aecend  beret  had  only  a  claim  on  the  inberic-
iiwe  when  the  peMoo,  named  hena,  hid  actually
becone  neh.  Then  could  b«  no  fideicommiaaiim
■aliM  thice  wai  a  hena.

Tba  pefam  who  created  the  Edeicommianim
MBBt  ba  a  pencra  wbo  wai  capable  of  making  a
win ;  bat  he  might  create  a  Gdeicommianm  orally
without  baring  made  a  wilL  The  peraon  who
ma  to  facmre  the  benefit  ot  the  fideicommiinzm
vaa  tba  Gdeieommiaiaiiui ;  and  a  penm  m^ht  be
a  fritii  iiii^iiiii  who  conld  take  a  l^acy  (U1p>
fnf.  XIT.  6) ;  the  Petion  on  whom  the  obligation
waa  laid  *■■  the  ndnciariaa.  The  Gdeicomnii*-
Hrina  himadf  might  be  bonnd  to  gire  the  Gdeiconi-
mimun  la  a  aecood  fideJcommiairiiia.  Otignially
the  fidekonniiaHiiiia  WBi  conrideied  aa  apnrchaaer
{m^larit  Lieo)  ;  and  when  the  herea  tranafcned  to
hin  tba  hcieditai,  mntnal  corcnanta  (aMffeaea)
WBO  (Dtved  into  by  which  tba  beret  voa  not  to
be  aoawoaUe  for  any  thing  which  he  had  been
boDid  to  do  aa  herea,  nor  for  what  he  had  given
baoa  Ue,  and  if  an  action  waa  brought  againat
him  aa  hacea,  he  wag  to  be  defended.  On  the
mbei  band  the  Edeicomminariua  (gtU  ndpieiat
itrtdilattm)  wai  to  baTo  whaleTcr  {Bit  of  the
boadiBa  m^ht  atill  come  to  the  Wida  of  tha


which  the  boea  miriit  haTi
J  tbe  aenatna-conanuum  Ti


d  to  nqnire  Bon  tha  fidaicomniiBnuiiii
auUa  which  ha  had  fbrmerly  taken  m
aeesii^  asaiaat  hia  genenl  liabilitii

tbe  ban*  wtald  not  atoept  tha  in


FIDEICOMMISSUM.
«iaded  by  the  lenatui-coaaa
the  tltae  of  Vnpuian,  that  the  fiduciarina  might
lelain  ons  fourth  of  the  hercditaa,  and  the  aams
power  of  retainer  waa  allowed  bim  in  the  cnie  of
■ingle  thiDgi.  In  thia  caie  the  herea  wu  liable  to
all  dehta  and  chargea  (eiii!m  hendilaria}  ;  bnt


a  fideic


nhim


the  beret  and  the  l^atiu  partiariua,  that  it,  the
proBt  or  loaa  of  iba  inherilonce  waa  ihared  be-
tween [hem  according  to  their  abana  {pro  rata
parlai.  Accordingly,  if  tbe  bene  waa  reqnired
to  Raton  not  more  than  thiee-fouitht  of  the  here-
diuta,  the  aenatua-ccmaulCuni  TrebalLlanum  took
eflect,  and  any  loaa  waa  brana  by  him  and  tb«
fideicomniiaiarina  in  |»<^ttian  to  their  ihatea.
If  the  herea  waa  reqaited  to  mton  mora  thas
three-fbanha  or  tha  whole,  the  aenataa-conaaltum
Pegaiianum  applied.  If  the  herea  refiiaed  to
laka  poaieaaion  of  (adin)  the  herediai,  tbe
"'  '  ~  could  eompel  him,  by  ^>plica-

-,  to  take  poaaeauan  of  it  and  to


natora  it  to  him  ;  bat  all  the  coaU  and

Whether  the  beret  wm  aote  hair  (a  ou
requited  lo realore  the whole  or  a  part
hereditaa,  ot  whether  he  wai  not  lolc
parli)  and  wni  laqDitcd  to  rotore  the  w
inch  mrt,  or  a  port  of  luch  part,  wai  imm
in  all  catea  the S.  C.  Pegaiianum gaye

tx

.),  and
of  the

lole  of
ateriali
him  a

By  the  l^ialation  of  Juatiojan  tbe  lenatua-uiD-
tntta  Trabellianum  and  Pegaaianum  were  contoli-
dated,  and  tha  following  inlei  were  catabliahed :  —
The  beret  who  waa  chtvged  with  annlTenal  fidei-
conuDitaom  iJwayi  retained  one-fourth  part  of  thu
hereditaa  (which  wat  called  limply  Qnarla,  or
Falddia,  or  commodum  Legii  Falcidiae),  and  all
clainiB  on  behal!  of  oi  agninat  ths  hereditaa  were
aharedbstweenthefiduciaiiuiandfideiconuuiiiajiua
wbo  wai  coniideredheitdii  loco.  If  tbe  iiduciariua
lu^rsd  hinuclf  to  be  compelled  to  take  the  iDhcril-
nnce,  he  Icat  hit  Quatta,  and  any  other  idrantage
that  he  might  baTO  bom  tha  hereditaa.  If  the  fidn-
eiarina  wBainpcaaeiaNHi,thefid^commiiiuin<hBd
a  psnonal  actio  ex  teatamento  againat  him  for  tha
hereditaa.  If  not  in  peaiwion,  hs  mnat  at  leait
Terballyaiiant  to  ^  claim  of  the  fideicommiaiaiiu^
who  hod  then  thehnsdiutiajietiliofideicomniUsaria
againat  any  penon  who  waa  in  pooeuion  of  the
property.

The  Quarts  ii  in  fact  tbe  Falcidia,  applied  tc


B  herea  oulj  w


I  entitled  to  it,  and  not


Aomrdingly,


chuged  with  fideicommian,  each  waa  entitled
to  a  quarta  of  hti  portion  of  the  hereditaa.  Tha
heiea  was  entitled  to  nlain  a  finirtb  out  of  the
hereditaa,  not  indndii^  therein  what  ha  took  aa

The  fiducioriiiB  waa  bound  to  teatore  the  bera-*
ditai  at  the  time  named  by  the  taatalor,  or,  if  no
time  wai  named,  immedinlely  after  takin;;  ponea-
aion  of  it.  He  waa  entilled  lo  be  indeninilied  for
all  proper  cnala  and  charge*  which  he  had  aniCained
with  reipocC  Co  the  hereditaa  ;  but  be  wai  anawer-
able  for  any  damage  or  loaa  which  it  bad  ■uatnined
thnni^  hii  cnlpa.

Rca  aingulae,  aa  already  obaemd,  might  aba


■  O"


iSS  FIDEIC0MMI5SUM.

IS  the  objeeti  of  a  Sdeicominiuam,  u  a  puticnl


the  fideii


I  of  ID


might  1«  ij


t  legatee.  In  tfaii  way  a  >Ut«
bIio  might  receive  hit  liberty,  and  the  reqneet  to
manumit  might  he  addreiaed  either  to  the  heret  oi
the  legBtariu.  Th«  ilaie  when  manumitted  irai
the  iibertus  of  the  peraon  wba  manumitled  him.
There  wen  many  difierencea  Iwtveen  fideicDm-
miasa  of  aingle  thingi  and  legaciea.  A  penon
nlwut  to  die  inteilate  might  cliarge  hii  heKa  with
B  fideicommiuimi,  whenaa  >  legacy  could  only  be
giTCn  by  a  totoment,  or  by  a  codicil  which  was
cenfirmed  by  a  proper  declantion  of  the  teatator  in
a  will  ;  but  a  ndeicomminum  could  be  given  by
a  iimple  codicil  not  »  confirmed.  A  hclea  ijlsti-
tuled  by  a  wit)  might  be  ceqitetMd  by  a  codicil,
not  (D  cMiGrmed  u  i^re,  to  tnmiTei  the  whole
heieditM,  or  a  part,  to  a  thiid  penon.  A  woman
who  waa  prevented  by  the  proviaiona  of  the
Voconia  lei  ftma  mking  a  certain  hcndilai,  might
take  it  u  a  fideicomminum.  The  Latini,  aJao,
who  wen  prohibited  by  the  Lei  Junia  fmm
taking  hcreditatea  and  legnciei  by  direct  gift
^direetojun^  could  take  by  fidcicommiiaa.  It  was
not  li^  to  nsme  a  penon  as  herei,  and  alio  to
name  another  who  ajUr  the  death  of  the  herein
■hould  become  hersa  ;  but  it  waa  lawful  to  requcat
the  beret  on  his  death  to  tiander  the  whole  or  a
part  of  the  hercditaa  to  another.  In  thia  way  a
teitator  indirectly  elerciaad  a  teitamentary  power
oTcr  hia  property  for  a  longer  period  than  the  law
allowed  him  to  do  directly.  A  man  tned  lor  a
legacy  per  furmulam  ;  but  he  aued  fnt  a  Gdeicnm-
miaanm  before  the  conaul  or  praetor  for  fidoi


IB  before


praeace.  A  fidi
the  Greek  language,  but  a  legacy  wai  not,  until  a
Isle  period.  Juatininn  finally  aaaimilated  Icgacia
and  aingular  Edeicommjata.  [Lioatuv  ;  lnM,2,
tit  20.  §  3  ;  Cod.  6.  tit  43.  a  2.]

It  appear*  that  there  were  no  legal  meana  of  en-
forcing the  due  diachargo  of  the  tnat  called  lidei.
comniiuum  ^1  the  timo  of  Augnaliu,  who  gave
the  conaula  jurisdiction  in  fideicommiBa.  In  the
lime  of  Claudiui  praetorei  fideieonuniaiarii  wen
appointed:  in  the  proTincci  the  praeaidei  took  cog-
nizance of  fideicommiau-  The  coniula  itill  retained
their  juriidiclion,  but  only  eierciaed  it  in  import
tont  coaea.  (QuinliL  InA  ilL  G.)  The  proceeding
■wai  alwBj.  e.tra  ordincm.  (Oaio^  iL  2i8  i  Ulp.
J^Wjr.  tit  as,  a.  12.)


.1  1b<


re  the  hcrcdiuu,  or  a  legacy,
who  waa  either  incapacitated  from  taking  directly,
or  who  could  not  lake  a>  much  aa  the  donor  wiahed
to  give.  Gaiut,  when  obMrving  that  peiegiint  conld
take  fideicommiasa,  olweneB  ibut  "  thia "  {the  ob-
ject of  evading  the  law)  "  waa  probably  the  origin
of  fide>ciHmiuaia;''biitbyaMiianu-eimin1tmnmade
in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  aucb  fideidnnmisaa  tren
dumed  by  tbe  fiacna.  They  are  mppoaed  to  be
the  coDinieDdatione*  mortnorum  men^oned  by
Cicero  (di  Fi*.  iiL  20).  There  ia  the  caaa  of
Q.  Pompeiua  Ruflu  (VaL  Hac  iv.  2.  7),  who,
being  in  eiile,  waa  legally  incapacitated  from
taking  any  thing  under  the  will  of  a  Roman  eili-
aen,  but  could  claim  it  from  hia  mother,  who  waa
the  heiea  fiduuarini.  They  were  alao  adopted  in
the  CBM  of  giCli  to  womcD,  in  order  to  evade  ttie


FIDnCIA.
Lei  Voconia  [Lbi  Voconu]  i  and
of  pnucribed  peraona,  incertae  perac
peregrini,  caelibei,  orbi.  But  the
•ultum  P»aiianum  deatrojed  tbe  capacity  of
caelibe*  and  orbi  to  take  Sdeicommiua,  and  gavs
tbem  to  tboae  perwma  mentioned  in  the  will  who
had  children,  and  in  defiiult  of  auch  to  the  popu-
lua,  aa  in  ^e  caae  of  heiedilatea  and  legata.
[Bona  Cadik:a.]  Municipia  could  not  take  Ba
heredea  [Cor-LiaiUH]  ;  hut  by  the  aenatUKon-
aultum  Apronlanum,  which  waa  pntbably  paased
in  tbe  time  of  Ha^ian,  they  could  lake  a  fidei-
commiuB  hereditai.  (Ulp.  Frag,  tit  22.  a.  A ;
Plin.  Bp.  T.  7.)  [HiRU  (RoHan).]  (Oaiui,
ii.  247—289  ;  Ulp.  Ftag.  tit  25 :  Inat  2.  tit.  23,
24  )  Dig.  36.  tit  1  j  Cod.  6.  tit  49  ;  Hackeldey,
Liiriuci,  &.C.,  12th  ed.  g73e,  &c;  Vangerow,
Lal/aJea  fir  PamdeUea  Vortaaiiffin,  rd.  ti.  f.
661.)  [G.  L,]

FIDEJUSSOR. [iNTiBcisaiD.I

FIDEPROMISSOR. [iNTaRCKsaio.]

FIDES. (Ltki.]

FIDI'CULA  ii  laid  to  hare  beai  an  inalni-
ment  of  torture,  oonaiatini  of  s  number  of  attinga.
According  to  aome  modem  writerai  it  wni  the
Bame  aa  the  equuleua,  cff  at  all  evenla  formed  port
ofit  [EauuLius.]  The  term,  however,  appnra
to  be  applied  to  any  strings,  whether  forming  part
of  the  equuleua  or  not,  by  which  the  limb*  or  ci-
tisraitiea  of  individual*  were  tied  tightly.  (Sneton.
7i6.  62,  CW.  33  ;  Cod.  Theod.  9.  tit  }£.  a.  i  ;
Sigoniua,  De  Jud.  iii.  17.)

FIDU'CIA.  If  a  man  trantferted  hia  property
lo  another,  on  condition  that  it  thould  be  mtored
to  him,  thit  contract  was  (ailed  Fiduda,  and  the
peraon  to  whom  the  property  was  to  tranifctred  waa
mH  fidaciam  acdpere,  (Cic.  Top.  c  1 0.)  A  man
might  tianafer  hia  property  to  nnother  tor  (he  aako
of  greater  iccurity  in  time  of  danger,  or  for  other
■uflicient  renaon.  <Galua,  it  60.)  The  oontmet  of
fiducia  or  pactum  fiduclae  alto  eiiatad  in  the  caae
of  pignut  I  and  in  the  cate  of  mancipation.  [Eman-
crPATiQ.]  The  hecedituitielf  might  bo  an  object
of  fiducia.  [FiDiiooMirtaauH.]  The  truttw  wu
bound  to  ditchargc  hia  tiuat  bjreatoring  tbetbing  t

tiduciaria,  which  waa  an  actio  bouae  fideL  (Cic
dt  Of.  iii.  15,  ad  Pm.  Tii.  13 ;  nt  inter  bono*
bene  ngier  cportet)  If  tbe  trultee  waa  con-
demned in  the  action,  the  coniequence  waa  ia-
lamia.  Cicero  enumeratea  the  judicium  fiduciaa
with  that  tutdae  and  aocielatia  as  "  jndicia  ann-
mae  eiiatimationii  et  paene  cspilia"  (Cic  im
Roi.  Com.  c.  6),  when  he  ia  evidently  alluding  to
the  conaequcnce  of  inbmia.  (Ccmpara  Sarigny,
Sflm,  die  lol.  iL  p.  176.)

When  the  objeot  fat  which  a  thing  wat  Uin»-
ferred  to  anotber  waa  atbirred,  a  remandpatia  of
thoee  thing*  which  required  to  be  tnuufenvd  by
manciinlio  or  in  jure  oaaia  waa  neewtar; ;  and
a  particular  euitract  (poeAmjUit-


rith  thii
>»)waai


If

took  place,  but  only  a  lunple  n-
ttitntia,  UNicapio  waa  neceeaary  to  reatrae  ths  Qniri-
tarian  ownerthip,  and  thii  waa  called  Btorec^tio.
The  contract  of  fidneia  might  be  accompanied  wiUi
a  condition,  by  virtue  of  wbieh  the  Gducia  might
eeaae  in  a  given  ate,  and  tbn*  the  fiducia  wbj  ccn-
nectad  wiU  the  Commiaaoria  I«i,  at  we  tee  in
Paulua  (Sou.  SmpL  ii.  tit  IS),  and  in  Cic  ;>ro
flacat,  c  21,  "  Sducia  committa,"  which  D^  be


FIMBRIAE.
RpUiird  hjitbraux  to  CoMniaaiu.  (Oaljo,  ii.
to,  iiL  SOI  ; RcHhin,  OmnBimt,  Ac  g  99  ;
Ban,  Dai  SSm.  PtnalrtM;  Heincea  ^fiUagna.
ti.  Hubotd.)  [G.  U]

MDUCIA'RIA  ACTIO.  [Acno.]

FrOLI'NA  AR3. [Fictili.]

FIOLINAE. [FicTii.1.]

FTOULtJS. [FicTitRj

nLIUSFAHILlAS. [Fahilia.]

PI'HBRIAE  (jvnnnrl ;  Icmut,  ditnrm,  Ong.
Cinnlh.},  llinmu  ;  tuicli  ;  >  llitlge.

Whai  ths  wt*nt  had  Gnithtd  any  pnoent  on
tlK  lorn  [Tila],  xha  thrumi,  i.  a.  tlie  eitmnilin
•(  llw  tbnad*  of  the  mif,  hiug  in  ■  nw  at  the
bsnoD.  In  thii  Bale  tbey  Hers  fivqaentlj  lafL,
bong  BBudiRd  onuunrDOL  Often  alto,  la  pn-
nu  iltm  from  nnlliiig,  and  la  give  ■  itill  morp
anifidd  and  otumneDlal  sppeanmoe,  tha;  wen
KfuUti  into  bnndlet,  taeh  if  which  wai  twiited
<«T^nTaii  AunEmi,  Bnmck,  AmaLL  US),  and
iM  b  DOC  «  mon  knots.  The  ihrnini  were  thu,
ij  a  Tsj  umple  pnc«ts,  tranafbnned  into  B  row  of
liiiili.  The  Imen  ihiita,  f«md  in  Egyptian  tomba,

(dp,  tui  iUnftnle,  in  a  raj  iatenatina  manner,
lb  dueriptiiMi  of  thtae  garmeota  by  Herodotiu
{ii.  tl).  Anm^  the  On«k(  and  Romani  ftiugei
nm  iddom  worn  except  by  femalei  {xpoanrrif
X^ran,  Bran^  iL  SZS  ;  Jacobi,  Ac  ad  foe. ;
PtUai,  nL  S*  i  Soeton.  JuL  iS>  Of  their  mam
of  dii|ik;in(  tfainn  the  beat  idea  ma;  be  fbnned
the  iiiBectica  of  the  aonend  weodcot,  taken  btim


Dationi  the  aniklni  waa  oflen

with  a  frinRB,  *«  u  •""  *efj  «"-

gTCQp  vf  SarmatiaoA  at  p.  213


p(»"«ily  in  the  „.— ,  -  -
°T  a<Mig the bondlca  of  tbrnmi, and
tin  n  the  point!  of  in(en«Iio^  a  kind  of  ne
*°tk  Mu  jmdmd,  and  we  an  informed  of


i  golden


which  t\


411  )ApaU.RhDd.  ii
ing  Bj ■


reoDded  the  rajthlcal  Aield  ot  Jupiter,  ll
dvow^rffo,  and  which  depended  from  the  girdle
of  Jono.  (Mom.  IL  iL  41S,  t.  7S6,  xiv.  181,
xriu  S9S.)

In  conueqoenco  of  the  tendency  of  wool  to  form
iuelf  mlo  Hporate  handle*  like  taaMla  {Amranitir,
Aeliau,  H.  A.  rri.  11),  the  poets  ipcak  of  the
solden  fleece  aa  crauiitiW  of  them  (Find.  P^,  ir.
■  1 U6)  I  and  Ciceio,  decl^ro-
inacy  of  Oabinini,  applin  Ihe
■ame  expreaiion  to  hii  curling  locki of  hair  («

Pit.u).  [J.  y.]

FINITO'HES.  [AamiiaHBORis.]
FI'NIUM  REOUNDO'RUM  ACTIO.  If  the
boDndariei  of  cootiguaui  eatalea  were  accidentally
confined,  each  of  the  [artiea  intere»led  in  the  ro-
eatabliihment  of  the  boondarieB  might  haTe  an
action  againit  the  other  for  that  purpose.  Thii
action  belonged  to  the  dau  of  duplicia  judicin.
[Familui  EnciscuNnAi  Actio.]  In  this  action
each  party  was  bound  to  account  for  the  fruits  and

Clits  which  he  had  receircd  fiom  any  part  of  the
d  which  did  not  belong  to  him,  and  also  to
Bcconnt  for  any  injniy  which  it  had  luituncd
through  his  culp^  Each  party  was  also  entitled
to  compeniaticin  file  improremenls  made  in  the  por-
tion of  land  which  didnot  belong  to  him.  (Dig.  10.
tit.  1.)  There  is  an  article  entitled  '  Ucbec  die
Qiilniacheidnngiklage  ■  by  Rudorff  in  the  Zal-
uArift  /(ir  Gadadiitidit  SaAlmuMaucia/i,  Tsl.  x.
[AG.B.]  [Q.  L.]

FISCA'LES. COLADUTOBI8.]

FISCUS.  The  foUowinB  is  SsTignyri  acconnt
of  the  oiigin  and  mtsniog  of  this  term:  —

In  the  republican  period,  the  ilate  wai  desig-
nated hy  the  term  Aerarium,  in  so  for  as  it  was
Tiewed  with  respect  to  its  having  property,  which
ultimately  lesolied  itself  into  receipts  into,  and
payments  made  ont  a^  the  public  cliest.  Oit  the
eetsbliihinent  of  the  imperial  power,  there  was  ft

the  repesentative  of  the  old  repDblic,  and  the
Caesar ;  and  there  was  eanseqocDlJy  a  diTiiion  ot
the  moat  important  biancbe*  of  public  income  and
Bipendilare.  The  property  of  the  lenate  reBined
the  name  of  Aeranum,  and  that  of  the  Caeiar,  as
such,  receiTed  the  name  of  Fiicus.  The  private
property  of  the  Caeiat  (nu  primia  rrineipii,  ratio
Caesaris)  was  quite  distinct  &om  tliat  of  the  Fiscus.
The  word  Fiscus  signified  a  wiciter-baiket,  or  pan-
nier, in  which  the  Romans  were  accnstomed  to
keep  and  cbtit  aboot  large  sums  of  money  (Cic
Kerr.  L  8  ;  Phaedr.  f^.  iL  7)  ;  and  hence  Fis-
cna  came  to  signily  any  person's  treasure  or  money
chest  The  importance  of  the  imperial  Fiscus  soon
led  to  the  practice  of  nppmpriaUng  the  name  to
that  property  which  the  Caeiai  ctauned  as  Caesnr,
and  the  word  Fiacni,  without  any  adjunct,  was
used  in  this  sense  (rti/ud  at.  Jut.  Sat.  It.  64).
Ultimately  the  word  came  to  lignih  generally  the
property  of  the  state,  the  Caesar  hating  concen-
trated in  himself  all  the  sovereign  power,  and  thus
the  word  Fiscii*  finally  had  the  same  signification
Its  Aerarium  in  the  republican  period.  It  does  not
appeor  at  what  time  the  Aeranom  was  merged  in
the  Fiscus,  though  the  distinction  of  name  and  of
thing  continaed  at  least  to  the  time  of  Hadrian.
In  Uie  later  perioda  the  word*  Aeiarinmand  Fit-


ic  cheat.  So  long  a>  Ihe  diiliuclioa
eiuted  belnetu  the  Mnrium  sod  the  £kui,  the
[■w  ivlnting  lo  th«m  htcibIIj  might  b«  expmacd
b;  ths  lenn*  jiu  populi  nod  jiu  ud,  ai  in  Psuliu
{Sent.  Rtcept.  t.  12),  though  there  ii  do  naion  for
^iplying  the  distioctiai  to  tb«  tina  when  PbuIiu
wrote  ;  Jor,  u  ainady  obMrrad,  it  Iwd  tlwD  toog

Ths  Fiiciii  hid  ■  legal  pcnooal  mHcoce  ;  thct
ii,  u  ths  nibJKt  of  ccTtaio  righti,  it  WM  IrgiUl;  a
pemm,  bj  TirtDs  of  tha  mat  fiction  of  law  which
gaiB  a  penooal  eiiitcnc*  to  caipontiana,  and  tha
conunanitica  of  citiea  and  villagea.  Unl  the  Fikoi
differed  in  many  rapecta  from  other  penooi  ixiit-
ing  bj  fiction  of  law ;  and,  a>  as  inatazice,  it  wai
□eTer  undo  any  incapaci^  ai  to  taking  an  hcre-
diloa,  which,  (at  a  long  time,  wai  the  au«  with
eoT»ralioiu,  for  the  noion  given  by  Ulpiao.  [CoL-
X-aaiuuJ.  These  resiOQi  would  alao  applj  lo  the
Populua,  a*  well  ai  to  a  HonicipiuDi,  and  yet  the
popnlut  i<  ncTer  alludad  to  aa  being  under  mch
diiability ;  and  in  fact  it  could  not,  coniistaitly
with  beui^  the  •ourcs  of  all  righu,  be  undei  any
legal  dinbUitie*.

Variou  officefi,  a«  Procoiatacet,  AdiocMi  [Ad-
TOCATVi],  Palmni,  and  Pnefecti  wen  einidoyed
in  the  adminiltratioD  of  Uie  Fiaeua.  Nerra  aa-
Uiihed  a  Piaetor  Fiicali)  to  adminiiter  the  law  in
mattari  relating  to  the  Fi*ca&  Tha  pntrimoiiiam
or  prinUe  properly  of  the  (^enr  wai  adminiitercd
by  Proeniatona  Casaaiii.  The  privilegea  of  the
t^u>  wne,  howeTer,  extended  to  the  piinta
piDpcrty  (nitta)  of  the  Caeor,  and  of  hii  wife  the
Aaguila.  (Dig.  49.  tit.  U.  (.  6.)

Property  wui  acquired  by  the  Fiaena  in  Tarioua
wHji,  enumerated  in  the  Digeat  (49.  tit  1 4.  a,  1 },
many  of  which  nuy  be  ananged  under  the  head
of  penaltiei  and  fwfeitnrea.  Thus,  if  a  man  was
led  to  canunit  auieide  in  conaeqacnce  of  having
done  some  criminal  act  (_fiagititm),  or  if  a  man
made  counterfeit  coin,  hii  property  was  Ibtfeited  to
thefiscus.  (Paulu,£.A.T.lS.)  TheoScenof the
FiKui  generally  received  informalic
of  auch  oecumncot  from  private  indlvidnala,
^ere  rewarded  for  their  paini.  Treason  (fjloaaru)
which  wat  found  in  certain  ptacea  was  dso  subject
to  a  daim  on  the  pert  of  the  Fiscua.  To  explain
the  rights  and  privilrgea  of  the  Ftscua,  and  its  ad~
miniitrations,  would  nquira  a  long  ditcuuion.  (I>ig.
49.  tit.  1£.  (f>  Jun  Piaa:  Cod.  10.  tit  1  ;  Cod.
Thcod.  iO.  tiL  1  i  Paulua,  Stut.  Rmpt.
Savigny,5yrtiind*iini(.Rim.  JJ.voLiL;/'  _
fiiia  ixtcri*  jurw-«nttMlti  tU  Jmre  Fitcij  fffinled  in
Ooescheii't  edition  of  Gniiu  :  Savigny,  iVn  otdMUs
Qad!cndaBSm.ll.,ZtiHdirift,to].ili.) [G.L.]

FISTU'CA,  sn  initiuracnt  used  for  ramming
down  pavements  and  threshing  floors,  and  the
jbnndatiansofbuildiDgB(Cnta,A.7t  18,  S8  ;  Plin.
/i.  N.  znvi.  25.  a.  61  1  Vitnv.  iiL  9.  a  4,  §  I,  x.
3.  1.  2.  S  3}  t  and  alao  for  driving  piles  (Csea.
B.O.  JT.  17).  When  used  tm  the  former  pmrpoae,
that  of  "'■^f''g  earth  solid,  it  wat  no  donbt  a  merv
log  of  wood  (shod  perhaps  with  iron),  with  handles
to  lift  it  up  ;  just  like  a  paviiwr's  rampier.  But
in  the  case  cited  from  Coenr,  where  it  wai  used
for  driving  the  piles  of  his  bridge  orer  the  Rhine,
it  11  almost  evident  that  it  most  have  been  a  ma-
cbine,  loniethin
moDki^),  by  i


FISTULA.
with  inm,  was  lifted  up  to  a  eenadeiable  Imght

and  then  let  bll  on  the  head  of  the  pile. [P.  S.1

Fl'STULA  ((ToA^v),  a  water-iHpe.  Vitnvias
(viiL  7.  i-H.  S.  >•  ed.  Schn.)  diatingnithes  thne
model  of  conveying  water ;  by  channdi  of  maaoniy
(per  amoZu  itrMdiltt),  by  leaden  pipei  (fiibilit
piumijeit),  and  by  earthen  pipes  {tab^^  fi^ibut) ;
hut  of  these  two  sorts  of  pipes  the  leadm  were  the
more  commo^y  used.*  [Ahuaiddctcb.]  They
were  made  by  botding  up  out  platei  ti  lead  into  ■
form  not  perfoctly  cylmdhcal,  but  having  a  toR  of
ridge  at  the  jonetioo  of  the  edges  of  the  plate,  ai
represBited  in  the  following  aigravin^  taken  from
antique  specimens.  (tVmtln.  ifl  A^matd.  p.  73.
£g.  lS,16,ed.F(ilai.;  Uirt,£<ib<i  A  C^6iiiHfa,pL
uudL  fig.  6.)


In  the  manufacture  of  then  pipes,  jorticdLir  at-
tention was  paid  to  the  bote,  and  to  the  thicknesa.
The  accounla  of  Vitruvius,  Froolinus,  and  other
writers,  are  not  in  perfect  accordance  ;  but  it  ap-
pears, from  a  compamon  of  them,  that  tvro  differmt
■jateras  of  moisurement  were  adopted,  namdr.
cither  by  the  width  of  the  plate  of  lead  {famima  or
lanaa)  before  it  was  bent  into  the  shape  of  a  pipe,
or  by  the  internal  diameter  or  bore  (fanea)  of  the
pipe  when  formed.  The  fmmer  is  the  syilem
adapted  by  Vitruvioi  (l.c.%4);  according  to  hinl
the  leaden  plates  were  caitof  a  length  not  less  than
ten  feet,  and  of  a  width  containing  an  exact  number
ofif^fiiiteenlhs  of  afoot),  which  number  was  of
nmrie  different  for  di^rent  sued  pipe*  ;  and  then
tho  liies  of  the  pipes  wen  named  fnnn  die  number
of  digits  in  the  width  of  the  platei,  at  in  the  fol-
lowing table,  where  the  numbers  on  the  right  hand
indicate  the  number  of  pounds  which  Vitiuvius  aa-
ligni  to  each  ten.feet  length  oC  pipe  :  —
&ntCDaria,franaplate  100  digilawide:  1200  Ifaa.
Oetogenaria  —  80  —
Quiiu]nagenaria —  fiO —


*  The  etymological  diatioctua  betweea  fiitJa
and  lilmi  aeems  to  be  that  (he  fotmei,  which  ori-
ginally signified  afittt,  wai  a  imall  ymc,  the  ktla
a  large  one  ;  but,  in  uiage,  at  least  lo  fat  a*  water-
pipe!  an  concerned,  it  sccmi  tba>;!Ma  is  applied
to  a  leaden  pipe,  (■&■■  and  talmJia  to  one  ii  any
other  maleriiU,  eipecially  of  teoa^otla,  oi  in  tM
obore  and  the  following  paiauca.  {Vami,  A.  H.
L  a  ;  Colmn.  L  6  ;  Plin.  i.  31.  a.  34,  ivL ~


ai,i


r.  12.  &  48  i


,w.)


FLABELLUM.


8  —  t  96*  —
S  —  :  60  —
ii  STidant,  b1  a  men  gtanee,  that
Ike  thicknm  of  the  plMc*  wai  llie  Bine  for  fifet  at
■U  *ue«,  mnKlf ,  isch  that  each  itiip  of  lead,  ten
tin  long  and  me  digit  wide, weighed  twelve  poimdi.
Tfce  Kxaniil  of  VitmTiu  ii  foUowed  by  Pliaj
{KMziiLe.L31)u>dPii1Udiiu(ixl3:  comp.
ike  oota  of  Schneider  ud  Osncr).

FwntjnnF,  who  enlere  into  the  nhject  much  more
BBdilelf,  objocte  to  the  ijitem  of  VitruTiui  ai  too
mdefiaile,  on  ■ccoUDt  of  the  ranstion  which  ii
Bade  in  tbe  ih^H  of  the  pipe  in  bending  up  the
fbitt  ct  lead  ;  wd  he  thinki  it  more  prohnbla  that
the  BWiHs  were  derired  from  the  length  of  the  in-
tfnal  diameter^  rccJtoned  in  gitadroiija  {the  unit
being  the  digit),  that  il,  n  qaartert  of  a  digit  s
B  t^  the  Qmtria  hud  s  diameter  of  Sve  foorlfai
of adi^t^ialidigitgandMOiiitiptothe  Vvxnaria,
abon  which  the  notation  waa  altered,  and  the  uamei
wen  no  longer  taken  from  the  niunbei  of  Unear
rt  of  a  digit  in  the  diamiUr  of  the  pipe,  hut

B  the  BUBiber  of  igaore  ijiartert  of  a  dtgil  in  iti
K^  and  thil  ejitem  preTailed  up  to  the  Cntent-

i^aiuria  wsa  the  nnnlleat :  the  latter  ii  adopted
ij  Fimtinai  a>  the  Itandard  mfonue  {modiilat)  of
the  whi4e  ajvlam.  (For  farther  detail*  He  Fcon-
^iaaM,dt  Aipati.  30— 63,  pp.  70— US,  vkh  the
Nmb  at  PoleoBi.)  Another  mode  of  explaining
the  imaiiiiilaliim  mi  by  the  atorj  that  when
Agrippa  nodertook  the  orenight  of  the  aquaedoda,


lodmlM


entl;  a


it  IojSm  timei  ita  diameter,  and  hence  the
vigin  of  IbejMifa  ipataria.  (Fnmlin.  26,  pp.  80,
ai.)  Of  tbeae  amoiDiti  thai  of  VitniTiui  appean
U  mee  the  moat  umple  and  the  moat  correct :  in-
deed it  would  aeem  that  the  plan  of  meaiorement
waa  Teij  isubably  the  inTention  of  VitruTiai  him-
•elf.  {Fraotin.  f.B.)  Reipecting  the  dhb  of  pipci
ia  the  aqacdncta,  m«  Aqu-iiDUCTUB.

Of  the  earthen  (terra-cotta)  pipe*  we  know  yaj
litde.  PUnj  ny*  Chat  they  are  beat  when  their
thi^Deaa  ia  two  digita  (1}  inch),  and  that  each
{ape  ibonld  haTe  ita  end  inaerted  in  the  next,  and
tae  joint!  ahooJd  be  conentcd  ;  bnt  that  leaden
ppea  ahonld  be  nied  whcie  the  water  riaw.  The
BTthen  pipea  were  thoogbt  more  wholeume  than
the  leaden.  (Plin.  H.  N.  niL  6.  k  31  ;  VitruT.
(cflO;  Pallad.iz.ll.)  Water  pipei  were  alto
Bade  of  IcMherfPlin./f.A'.T.Sl.  B.34;  Vilniv.
t  A  1 8}  ;  and  of  wood  (Pallad.  I  c),  eipecially  of
the  hollowed  tninki  of  the  pine,  fir,  and  alder.
{Plia.  H.  N.xn.t2.  t.  81.)  [P.  9.]

FLABBLLU^  dim.  FLABELLULUM,
Oiaii, /nurrV,  •'mi.  ^\iiat), aba.  "The  ei-
BOB  of  the  fin,"  n  wittily  deacribed  hyAddiaon
{SfKt.  Ha.  102),  waa  wholly  nnknown  to  the
•■-~— *■ Ndlher  were  their  fiuu  ao  conatructed


*  Pliny  and Fallodiaa,  and  eren the  an
MSS,  of  VitroTina,  giie  here  C,  which,  bowBT
deariy  an  error  of  a  transcriber  who  did  not  pei
the  law  of  the  proportion,  but  who  had  A  bncy  for
It*  nud  DBober.


FLAOHUM.  sag

that  they  might  be  foiled,  unforced,  and  fluttered,
nor  were  they  even  eaitied  by  the  ladiea  themHlvea.
They  were,  it  ia  true,  of  elegant  fomii,  of  delicate
'  ■t{praiaioflabdlo.  Mart  iiL  40),  and  aoma-
of  Goitly  and  (pleidid  materiab,  luch  u  pea-
cock'! ftathen  (Pnipert  ii.  IS)  }  but  they  were
■tiff  and  of  a  fixed  ihape,  and  were  held  hj  female
■liTei  IfiAiilifarat,  Philemon,  u  tnuullted  1^
Plant.  TVw.  ii.  1.  22),  by  beautifiil  boyi  (Strata,
Bpig.  22),  or  by  eunnctu  (Euri|.  OreiL  U0&—
1412  ;  Henander,  p.  175,  ed.  Meineke  ;  and  oa
trsnalatad  by  Teioice,  Bam.  iil  fi.  i6—5i),  wh«a
du^  it  waa  to  ware  ^em  lo  aa  to  prodnce  a  cod-
ing breoe^  (Bmnck,  ^BoiiL  92.)  A  gentleman
might,  neTcrtheleaa,  take  the  bn  into  hia  own
band  and  nn  it  in  tJuming  a  lady  a<  a  compliment.
(Oyid,  An  Awl.  L  161,  Amor.  iiL  2.  38.)  The
woodcntat  p. 257  ibowi  a  female  bntowing  thia
-"^ndance  upon  her  miitrcB.  The  &n  which  ahe
Id)  ia  apparently  made  of  Kpaiale  fnthen  ioined
the  baas,  and  aba  united  both  by  a  thread  pan-
ing  along  ^e  tipi  and  by  another  itrunmr  thi^ad
tied  to  the  middle  of  die  abaft  of  eadi  featiier.
Another  uae  of  the  &n  waa  to  drive  awar  fliea
from  living  penona,  and  &am  articlea  of  food
which  were  either  pkced  upon  the  table  or  offered
In  BoiGce.  When  intended  for  a  fiy-flapper  it
wai  leB  itiff,  and  waa  called  ButmruD*  (Matt  tit.
67),  and  fixxunWn  (Menander,  p.  176  ;  Aeiian,
H.  A.  XT.  14  ;  Bjnmck,  Anal.  ii.  388,  iii.  92).  In
•hart,  the  manner  of  uaing  &ni  wu  pieciaely  that
which  ia  itiU  practtied  in  Chma,  India,  and  other
porta  of  the  Eaat ;  and  Euripide*  {I.  c)  Byi  that
the  Oreeka  derived  their  knowledge  of  them  from
**  barboroue "  conntnB.  The  emperor  Anguatna
had  a  tiave  to  fan  him  daring  hia  aleop  (Sueton.
Avg.  82}  ;  for  the  aie  of  &na  waa  not  confined  to

Beaidai  aqiarate  feathera  the  ancient  bn  waa
aometimea  made  of  linen,  extended  npon  a  light
faune.  (Strata,  (.  «.)  Pram  the  aboie-cited  paa-
Bge  of  Euiipidea  and  the  ancient  Scholia  upon  it,
compared  with  repreaenlationi  of  the  flabellnm  in
ancient  paintinga,  it  alio  appean  to  have  been
made  by  placing  the  two  winn  of  a  bird  back  to
back,  fattening  them  toother  in  thia  poiition,  and
attaching  a  buidle  at  toe  baaa.  (See  also  Bmnck,
AmL  u.  268,  n-rtflnr  ^irSo.)

A  man  homely  application  of  the  fan  waa  it*  nie
in  cookery  [Poena].  In  a  painting  which  repre-
■enti  a  Bciifice  to  laii  {Atit.  d'  Bralatto,  ii.  60),  a
^)ri«t  ia  teen  &uuiing  the  fire  upon  the  altar  with
a  triangular  flabellum,  nich  at  ia  itiil  used  in  Italy.
Thia  practice  gate  ari)(in  among  claatical  wrilen  to
erpnuioni  corretpondmg  to  aort,  meaning  to  &n
the  flame  of  hope  (Alcipb.  iii.  47),  (cT  love  {pni'i(ta',
Biunck,  iL  306),  or  of  aedition  (Ariataph.  Ra».
360  ;  Cic.  pro  F^acc.  23).  [J.  Y.]

FLAORUM,  din.  FLAQELLUM  CudoriJ),
a  whip,  a  scourge,  to  the  handle  of  which  waa
Ried  a  huh  made  of  eorda  (Jkmiut,  Urn.  Epod.
iv.  3 ;  John,  iL  IS),  or  tliongt  of  leather  (lorit,
Hor.  Epiil.  L  16.  47  i  mnrrl™,  Anac  p.  367,  ed.
Fiacber],  especially  thongs  made  from  the  ox's
hide  (ImitUii  enmi3,  Ptaut  Mait.  iv.  I.  26).  The
Jiugellam  properly  so  called  was  a  dreadful  mttni-


wo  FLAMEN.

wu  knotted  with  booei  or  hoiTy  iadentcd  eirclo
of  bnncc  or  tennitisted  bf  faooki,  in  which  oua  it
wu  ipiij  denominated  a  worpuo.  The  nit  below
reprMcnti  a  Kooive  taken  from  a  baa-r?lief  of  the
■latne  of  Cjbels  In  the  Hnienm  oC  the  Capitol  at
Rome,  and  fully  juatifie*  the  epithet  of  lEoiace
(L  e.),  horriiUjiJIaganait.  The  infliction  ofpaniih-
ment  with  it  npon  the  naked  back  of  the  laffcier
(Jut.  li.  363)  wu  tomrlbiei  fatal  (Her.  SaL  L
2.  41),  and  wai  rarried  into  tiecntiim  b^  a  cUia
of  pcnona,  tbemielTei  ilavei,  wbo  were  called
iorariL  A  ilnve  who  had  been  flogged  *raa  caJIcd
JIaffrio  (fiaariflaSf  Pbilemnn,  p.415.  ed.  Mein.  ;
Aiiitoph.  Ran.  502,  E^.  1225,  Ly.  1243  )
mutigia,  Plautua,  pusm/  Ter.  AddjA.  t.  S.  6),
which  of  CDUiVfl  became  a  tenn  of  modfeij  an'
contempL  Quring  tbe  Saturnalia  the  scourge  w1
deposited  under  the  leal  of  tfao  muter.  We  lik>
wiic  End  that  Mone  giadiaton  fought  with  tli
fiagella  (TertntL  ^po/.  21),  ai  in  the  coin  hei
tatrodueed.  The  fligellum  here  hai  two  laahe
(See  alw  cut,  p.  101.)  [J.  Y.]


FLAMEN, the
who  wu  doToted  to  the  Hrrica  of  oDe  partinitar

god  (DlVINDI  ALUS  ALII  SaCERIKITU,  OMNIBtlB
FONTiriCBB,  aiNODLU  rLAVIMU  SUNTO, Cic  Da

epithet  from  the  deitj  (o  whom  he  miniitered.
(/form,  K.  flaminnm,  imgjiii  oo^wmwt  luAmt
ai  to  dto  mm  lacra/acniiil,  Varro,  Ot  Ling.  L/tt.
T.  e-(.)  The  moat  diciu£ed  were  thoie  attached
to  Diierii,  Han,  and  Quirinna,  the  ^mngi  Diaiit,
Flamtu  Martiaiii,  and  t1ama  QiUruo/u.  The
two  fint  are  (aid  by  Plutttnh  (A'lim.  c  7)  to  hare
been  eitabliihed  by  Romuliu  ;  but  the  greater  nnm-
bei  of  authoritiea  agree  in  reTemng  the  inititution
of the  whale  three, in  common  with all othec


religion.

(Lit.  i.  20 ;  Dionys.  iL  Gi.  &c)  The  number  wu
BTenlnally  JncreaMd  to  filteen  (FeiL  i.  e.  Maaaiae
dignaiionu):  the  three  original  Samcni  werealwayi
choMa  from  among  the  patriciaoi,  and  itfled
Migom  (Oaioa,i.  112)  ;  tbereit&am  the  plcbciana,
with  the  epithet  Minora  (FeiL  Mufont  F^amiaaiX
Two  rude  linca  of  Enniui  {Varro,  rfa  Lug.  Lai.  nL
44)  prcierrethe  namet  of  tix  of  thcao,  appointed,
«ays  the  poet,  by  Ntuna, — ■

Fallmaitm,  Paiatialm,  AnWent,
Ftoraltmjiit,  Falaemn  tt  Pomtmaltm  fiat


Hie  id


to  whkh  we  nuy  add  the  Flaatn  Folermaiit
(Varro,  Dt  Ling.  Lot.  t.  B4),  and  the  FUnta
CarmtnlalU  (Cic  BruL  U).  We  find  in  booki  of
■utiquitie*  mention  made  of  the  Kir&toJu,  Lammi.
Ualit,  Lonnalit,  and  Lucaliani,  which  would  coiU'


PLAHBM.

pletfl  the  tilt ;  but  thert!  ia  nothing  to  prove  that
thne  fbor  wore  Roman  and  not  merely  prorinda]

It  in  eenenlly  itated,  npon  the  latlmity  of
Aului  Gelliui  (tt.  27),  that  the  flameu  wen
elected  at  the  Comitia  Curiala,  and  thii  wat  doubt'
I  in  the  eaiiier  limei ;  but  upon  ei-
pauage  in  qucation,  it  will  be  aeen
grammarian  apeoki  of  Ill«r  induc-
tion into  office  only,  and  therefore  ve  may  coti'
elude  that  Bubsequently  to  the  pauing  of  the  Xa*
Domitia  they  were  chogen  In  the  Comitia  Tribula,
capceially  lince  »  many  of  ihem  were  plebeiana.
AfEer  being  nominated  by  the  people,  they  were
lied  {capHy  and  inalalled  (iwuipiiratiflitifr)  bj


imuiing  the
hat the f


the  Pon


. (LiY.


L  9.  S  3),  to  whoH  authority  they  were
1  ail  umee  .ulijed.  (LIt.  Epil.  lii.,  nirii.  51  ;
'aL  Max.  L  1.  §  2.)

The  office  wai  undentood  to  lut  for  lilo  ;  but  •
amen  might  be  compelled  to  retign  (Jhminio
are)  fbr  a  bieach  of  duty,  or  eren  on  aecount  of
he  occutrence  of  an  ill-omened  acctdeal  while  dii-
honrinc  hii  fimctiooi. (Vat.  Mu.  i.  1.  g  4.)

cbaraeteriitie  drei*  wu  the  apex  [Apax],


a  [Lai


ealh. The


name,  according  to  Varro  and  Feitui,  wu  derlTed
fnnn  the  baud  of  white  wool  [filam,  filamem,Jla-
Bm)  which  wu  wrapped  Tound  the  apei,  and
which  they  wore,  without  the  apei,  when  the  heat
wai  oppreuiTe.  (Serr.  Virp.  ^ea-Tiii  €64.)  Thii
etymology  ia  men  reaionaUe  thou  the  tmufbnna-
tion  of  pVifmriaei  (fnmpHni)  jatojlamimtt.  (PId-
lanh,  Mux.  7.)  The  moti  diatinguiahed  of  all  ths
flamena  waa  the  Diaiit;  the  loweat  in  rank  tha
PonondUi.  (Feitoa,  i.  e.  Maximae  digmationit.)
The  former enjoyed many  peculiar  h


3«],  wen


T  the  Comitia,  a


,  of


augarabaliir)  by  tbe  Fontifejc  Maiimn*.  (Tacit.
Ann.  IT.  16  ;  Lit.  xiriL  B.)  from  that  time  for-
ward he  woa  emancipated  &om  the  eontrd  of  hit
&ther,  and  became  lui  ^iria.  (Ouni,  L  1 30 1  Ulpiiin,
Frj^.i.Bi  TacAmi.  if.  16.)  He  alone  o!  all
prieita  wore  the  aiiagaiana  [Aral]  (Varm,  ^>,
CtO.  I.  IS) ;  be  had  a  right  to  a  aXar  (Plut.
Q.  B.  p.  119,  ed.  Reiake),  to  the  li»apRuilu«a,
the  isUa  airilii,  and  to  a  leal  in  the  acnUe  la
Tirtac  of  hii  office.  Thii  tut  prinlege,  after  having
been  nfibn^l  to  &11  into  dlante  for  a  hng  perio^
u  auerted  by  C.  Vateriua  Flaccu  (a.  c  20S\
id  the  claim  allowed,  more,  howerer,  laya  Litt,
.  deference  to  hia  high  pcnmial  chaiacter  lluui
om  a  eonTiclion  of  the  joitice  of  the  demand.
(Lit.  UTlL  Bj  compare  L  20.)  TheR/KSatrifiim.
Iia  alone  wu  entitled  to  recline  aboTo  hun  at  m
mquet :  if  one  in  bondi  took  lefnge  in  hia  houae,
le  chaini  were  immediately  itruck  off  and  con-
!yed  throngh  the  implnniuM  to  the  niot|  and
(henoe  caat  down  into  the  itiect  (AuL  OelL  x.  15> :
criminal  on  hit  way  to  puniihmait  met  him,
fell  luppliant  at  hii  feet,  he  wu  Kspiled  tor
that  day  (Aul  Oeli.  i.  IS  ;  Pint  Q.  A.  p.  1G6)  ;
uaagea  which  remind  ua  of  the  right  of  ■aDctoarj
attached  to  tbe  penoua  and  dwelling!  of  the  ftfal


FLAMSH.
prrntHBit  >  loig  CDtalogo*  of  wlaA  liai  beta  com-  {
piled  bj  Anltu  OaUim  (i.  I S)  (nim  lbs  wotIii  of
FiibiiB  Pidoc  uid  Mamriiu  Sabinni,  whils  Plu-
Bnh,  in  bii  Somaa  Quotioni,  endgavoiui  to
cxptain  th«r  import. AJanog  tbeso  were  thfl  fbl'

It  m*  imUwfiil  fin  liiin  to  ba  oat  of  tha  eitj  !at
a  angle  night  (Lit.  t.  53)  ;  ■  ncnlitioii  whicb
MODI  ta  ban  been  modifiHi  hj  Angitatiu,  in  (o
br  that  ■»  •taom  of  two  Digbu  wu  pennittad
(Tacit.  jIhl  iiL  ^  71)  i  and  be  wai  traiiidden  to
deep  aolaf  hie  own  bad  for  Ihiee  iii([bu  ooDiecu-
tjtdj.  Tine,  it  ««•  impoanble  for  him  (o  lodei-
nlw  Ike  gnrcnupcDt  of  a  pniinoe.  He  might  not
Boant  open  bomba^  nor  eran  loach  a  bone,  dot
look  apes  aa  amy  raanballad  irilhoM  the  ponioe-
riam,  and  boice  wai  eeldooi  elected  to  the  connJ-
•b^  lBdeed,it  woDldiaem  thattriginaUyhama
aiURtha  (neladcd  bom  leAing  or  acceptinB  an;
dni  iMMtiae;  <Phit  Q.  A  p.  169)  ;  bot  thulait
inbibithjii  irae  certainij'  not  enforced  kn  later
tiBca.  The  object  of  the  abore  mlei  va<  mani-
fotlj  to  make  bim  liteiall}  Joci  adnJiauii  laoer-
I  km  !  to  compel eoiMaDt attention  to  tha dntiei  of
the  (rieatbood  ;  to  lesra  bim  in  a  great  meafure
vitboBt  an]'  teraptatioo  to  neglect  them.  Tlie
vigin  of  the  mpentitioni  which  we (ball  nert

abndanceof  ■peenlatin  i^  PIntaccb  (Q.  R.  pp.  lU,
118,164—170),  F«tni  (a.  D.  fdem  and  £>»),
Hd  PliD7  (H.  N.  iiiiLSO,  xxriiL  40).  He  wa*
Bo(  allowed  to  iwear  an  c«th  (Lir.  iiiL  SO),  nor
to  WMT  a  ring  " aw  pensio  tf  eaaaa"  that  ii,  ai
tlief  explain  it,  nnlcH  plain  and  without  itonei
(KinfaamDO,  D*  ^aaalu,  p.  U)  ;  nor  to  atrip
biaiaeifiiakad  in  the  cqienMT,  nor  to  go  ont  witfaoDt
bia  {aoper  bead'dnaa,  nor  to  biTe  a  knot  in  anj
pan  of  bit  attire,  not  to  walk  along  a  path  orei-
cmspied  by  rido.  Ha  migbt  not  loach  floor,  no
Icann,  not  katened  bnad,  nor  a  dead  body :  he
aai  [Fuhob],  but  wai  not


which.


pevented  b
bidden  dth>


mu  m^iht  cut  _. .  •^. ^

tagelher  willi  the  pacii^  of  hii  naiU,  were  bar
boieatk  »ft/i*  ariar. So  one  might  aleep  m
bad,  tbe  lep  of  which  woe  imeand  with  fin*
day ;  ^h1  it  WBi  nnlawfol  to  place  a  box  eon-
"  '  ' ' 1  in  BOBlact  with  tbe  bml-


or  mw  fleib. Non
a  bail ;  the  dippingi  o


le  gita>  to  tha  wifo  of  the
fiatia  He  WM  raqouM  to  wad  a  virgin  accord-
ii^  M  tha  cenmoniet  of  am/amalio,  which  regu-
Uan  alao  applied  to  the  two  other  flaminea
M^oaea  (Sert.  ad  nrg.  Am.  it.  104,  374 ;
G^a,L  112)  i  and  he  eonld  not  many  a  accond
time.  Hence,  iince  her  aaaiilance  wat  eaaentul
ia  tha  ptifonnance  of  certain  ordinance*,  a  diTorca
VM  net  pamitted,  and  if  ahe  died  the  dialii  waa
abUged  to  KKgn.  The  reeliictiiHU  impotad  nun
.. la — !_! --— Bat  to  thoM  b»  which  her

(Anl  QelL  i.  15.) Her

id  of  a  dyad  robe  (enoaaio  ojiantar)  ;

ha  bair  waa  plaited  np  with  a  purple  band  in  a
caical  fona  (ttbiba)  ;  and  >he  wcse  a  imall
K[mr»  daak  with  a  border  (nu).  to  which  waa
aUachi^  a  flip  cat  from  a  /iiix  arbor.  (FeaL
t.  a.  Tutuhm,  Sim;  Varro,  D*  ting.  Lot.  tii.  44.)
It  ii  dilBeolt  to  delenniaa  what  the  riea  really
«m;  vtebec  a  ihort  dcak,  aiappean  mail  pro -


FLORALlA.  S41

hahle,  or  a  napkin  thrown  otst  the  head.  She
wu  pnhibited  from  mounting  a  iturcaie  coiuial-
ing  of  mors  than  three  itep*  (the  text  of  Anliu
Gellitn  ia  uncertain,  bat  tbe  object  moat  haTe  been
to  prevail  her  aodei  from  being  aeen) ;  and  when
aba  vent  to  tbe  ami  [Aiuju  j  ihe  neither  combed
nor  arranged  her  hair.  On  each  of  the  nnndinae
a  mn  wai  ncriGced  to  Jupiter  in  the  regia  by  tbe
flaminiea. (Hairob.  L  16.)

After  tha  death  of  tbe  fiamen  Mmla,  who  wai
choeen  connil  •uEectai  on  the  expoliion  of  Cinna
(Veil  Pat.  a  SO  i  Val.  Mai.  ii.  13.  g  5),  and  who,
npon  tbe  reetoiatian  of  the  Marian  foctiou,  abed  hii
own  blood  in  tbe  aanctmry  (b.  c  87),  calling
down  cnraea  on  hii  ensnie*  with  bia  dying  brcaU
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  33),  tha  pneatbood  lemained  Ticant
until  the  eonKcration  of  Serrloi  Halngineniii
(b.  c.  1 1 )  by  Anguatua,  then  Ponlifoi  Haiimaa.
Jolina  Quaai  had  indeed  been  nominated  in  hii
17th  year,  but  waa  nerer  initalled  ;  anddnringtbe
whole  oF  the  above  period  the  dntiea  of  the  office
were  diaebarged  by  the  Pontifox  Maximuk  (Soot.
JtU.  c  1,  compared  with  VelL  Pat  ii.  4S,  and  the
CommenlatorB.  See  alao  Snet  OtIaB.  31  ;  Dion
Can.  IJT.  36  ;  TadL  Amu  iiL  £6.  Tbe  laat  quoted
hialorian,  if  the  text  ba  correct.  Mate*  the  inleimp-
laated  for  72  yeui  only.)
he  municipal  towna  alio  had  their  flameni.
Thill  the  celebrated  aAay  batween  Hilo  and
Clodini  took  pUce  irbQe  the  former  waa  on  hia  way
to  LnnnTiun,  of  which  he  wai  then  dictator,  to
declare  the  election  of  a  flamen  (fiA  fianmtm  pro-
demdiiBi).  After  ths  deification  of  the  emperon,
flomeni  were  appointed  lo  nparintend  their  wor-
ihip  in  Rome  and  in  all  the  pnvincea  ;  and  we  find
conitantly  in  inicriptioni  lueh  titlai  u  Flambn
AuauBi'ALU ;  FLAxaN  TiBian  Caisibu  iFla-
■■N  D.  JuLii,  &C.,  and  aometime*  Flamin  Di-
VOBUM  Omnium  (bc.  impeiatornm).

Ftamnaa,  according  to  Feama  and  Anlni  Qel-
lini  (i.  1 S),  wai  the  home  of  the  Flamen  Dialii,
bom  which  it  waa  snlawfhl  to  carry  out  £re  except
for  ncred  puipoaca.

dmg  to  Featni,  wai  alio  a  namo
little  prieatea  (lODanJatala),  who  aaiiated
ue.niuii«iai  in  her  dutiei.  [W.  R.]

FLA'MMEUM. IMatpjmonhjm.]

FLEXU'MINES. [Eauirw.]

FLORA'LIA,  or  Flonlea  Lndi,  a  fta^Tal
whicb  wai  celebnted  at  Rome  in  bonoar  of  Flora
or  Chlotia.  It  wai  aolemjiiied  durii^  Gtb  davi,
beginning  on  the  28tb  of  April  and  ending  on  the
2d  of  May,  (Olid,  FoA  t.  1B5  ;  Plin.  ff,  tf.
iTiiL  69.)  It  wai  nid  to  have  been  initimted  at
Rome  in  338  >.  c,  at  the  command  of  an  uade
in  the  Sibylline  booki^  for  the  pnrpon  of  obtain-
ing &om  the  goddeil  tha  protection  of  tha  bloa-
Mmi  (el  OBBU  btm  d^lortmmi,  Plin.  L  c ;  com-
pare VeU.  Pat.  I  14  i  Varro,  fl.  A*  Rnl.  L  1).


celebration  wai  diicontinaed ;  but  in  tbe  coninl-
ihip  of  L.  Putumia*  Albinni  and  M.  Popilini
Laenai  (173  B.  c\  it  waa  reitored,  at  tbe  com-
mand of  the  lemile,  by  the  aedile  C.  Serrilioa
(Eckhel,  D*  Num.  VtL  t.  p.  308  ;  compare  Oid,
Fan.  T.  329,  &c),  aa  the  bloawmi  in  that  year
had  leTerely  auffeied  from  wind^  bail,  and  rain.
The  celebration  wu,  aa  unal,  conducted  by  the
oednei  (Cic  nrerr.  t.  14  ;  Valcr.  Max.  iL  ID.g  B;
Eckbel,  L  0.),  and  wai  carried  on  with  exceaiirs
menimenl,  drinking,  and  kadTiou  gomei.  (Mart


i  3;  SoKc;  SpitL  96.)  From  Vilcriiu  Muimni
we  1t*m  tbal  ibeatricBl  and  mimic  repTMentatirau
formed  ■  {nndpal  pan  of  tha  Tahoiu  uniufmenU,
■ad  thti  it  wai  auioaaij  for  the  uMmhled  people

iffeu  naked ea  tha  itige,  and  la  ainia  tba

multitiide  with  th«ir  iDdeeent  getturet  and  dineei.
Tbii  indecenc;  it  pnttubl^  the  aolf  gimind  on
which  the  abenrd  itorj  of  iti  origin,  related  hj
lActaotiDi  (/■!<((■(.  L  SO),  ii  linmded.  Similar
feitiTali,  chieflj  in  ipiiDg  and  asDunn,  an  ii
Matheni  eanntnet  Maami  for  Rjoicinjf,  and,  ai  ii
were,  called  farth  by  the  WMon  of  the  ycai  itielf^
withoat  any  diitinct  conneclion  with  anj  puticu-
lar  diTinitj  ^  thej  are  to  thia  day  very  popular  in
Italy  (VoH.arf  Tiiy.  Cen^  iL  3S5),  aod  in  aiKienl
time*  we  find  them  celcbnted  from  the  louthem  tc


originall;  featiiiJi  of  the  eonntty  people,  which
were  afterward),  in  Italy  a«  in  Greece,  introduced
into  the  towna,  where  they  natnr^y  aanimed  a
more  dimlnta  and  licendoua  chaiacter,  while  the
country  people  coatinDcd  to  celebrate  them  in  th«r
rdd  and  mertv  but  innocent  manner.  And  it  ii
big^y  piobabla  that  inch  feitinil*  did  not  beeonM
connected  with  the  vmihip  of  any  particular  deity
nntil  a  compaiatiTely  late  period.  (Bnttmann,
MgHalog.  iL  p.£l.)  Thii  wonld  acsoont  foe  the
late  introduction  of  the  Fioralia  at  Home,  aa  well
ai  for  the  manner  in  which  we  find  them  celebrated
there.  (SeeSpaiihdm,£i(/>niEit.e«r»Aranisa.
ii.p.Ut,&c)  (L.S.]

FOCA'LE,  a  cnrering  for  the  san  and  ncek,
laade  of  wool  and  warn  by  infiim  and  delifMe
penona.  (Uor.  Sat.  ii.  3.  2£«  ;  Senec.  Qa.  NaL
IV.  13  i  QointU.  iL  S.  141 ;  Han.  L  131,  xir.
1*2.)  (J.  Y.J

FOCUS,  dim.  FO'CULUS  (Jmla:  iirxifa,
iaxapit,  dim.  iirxipv),  a  firo-plaee  ;  a  hearth  ;  a
bnuier.  The  En-place,  coniidered  aa  the  higheat
member  of  an  alter,  i>  dNcribed  under  Aba,  p.  US.
Ueed  by  itseli^  it  poneued  the  eame  lacied  cha-
raclec,  being,  imaiig  the  Bonuou,  dedicated  to  the
Lam  of  each  funily.  (Plant,  ^v^  il8. 16  ;  Calo,
DeReBmit.lSi  Ond,i^iK.  ii.£S9,  611,  iii.  423;
Jni.iiL  85—95.)  Itwu,neTertheleu,madeiub-
•errienl  to  all  the  ttqalreraenta  of  (H^tnaiy  life.
<Hor.  Epod.  ii.  43,  Epiit.  i.  5.  7  j  Ovid,  Met  nlL
67S;  Sea.  Da  Cbm.ed  Alb.  \.)  It  wai  aometimei
mutmcted  of  itone  or  brick,  in  which  caie  it  wai
demled  only  a  few  inchee  above  the  ground,  and
remained  on  the  aame  q»t ;  hot  it  wu  aln  fre-
quently made  of  tot»ie,  and  it  wat  then  Tariouly
emameiHed,  Bod  wai  carried  continnally  ftom  place
to  plaee.  Thii  morable-hearth,  or  btauer,  wa*
prepcriy  caDadybeabt  and  Jr^dpo.  One  iiihown
M  p.  190.  AnMber,  found  at  Caen  in  Etraria,
[1  the  Briliih  Moieum,  ii  rcpre-
A  woodcut.


FOEDERATAE  CIVITATKS.

accordance  with  Che  laitimBiti  of  Tenentiea

which  tha  domettie  fire-place  wai  regarded,

Ind  that the eierdae  of hoapitality wai

at the Bme  time  an  act of  religieu  wotah^

lianta,  lUangen,  all who  (oi^t  for  meny

&TDUC,  had  reconne  tn  the  domeitie  bearth  ai

to  an  a}tn. (Horn.  CM.  ni  15}— 16K ; ApolL

Rhod.  It.  693.) The  phisa  ■■  fn  adi  e(  fbdi "


Snppliai


meat  dear  and  Tcnerabla.  (Cie.  dtNoL  Dor.  iiL
40  }  Flcr.  iiL  13.)  Among  the  RimaBi  the  fbcn*
wsa  placed  in  tha  Atbiuh,  which,  ia  primitiTa
limea,  wai  their  kitchen  and  dining-room.  (Virg.
Atn.L  7Se;  Sernii«,ad^)  There  it  remaiDod.
ai  we  we  in  numeroui  example*  at  Pompeii,  ereo
after  the  progreai  of  reGnemenl  had  led  to  the  naa
of  another  part  of  the  hooie  for  coljnaiy  porpoaei.
On  fetttTali  the  home-wife  decorated  tha  h«rth
with  gariande  (Calo,  D>  Si  Suit.  143  ;  Ojid,
THii.  T.  Sl  10)  i  a  woollen  £Ual  wai  lODuitiniei
added. {Propert  It.  6.  1—6).  JJ.  Y.l

FOEDEbA'TAE  CIVlTA'TEa,  FOEDE-
HA'TI,  SO'CII.  In  the  eerenth  century  of  Rome
theee  Damei  eipieued  thoie  Italian  Hate*  whiefa
.  d  with  Rome  by  a  tnaty  {/btdia).
Theae  namei  did  not  ineloda  Roman  colonic*  or
any  place  which  had  obtained
Among  the  foederati  were  the
nearly  related  In  the
:id  were  detignated  by  thii  diitinctiva
ame;  ue  reit  of  the  foederati  vsie  compriaed
nder  the  name  of  Socii  or  Foederati.  They  were
idc^tendent  ilatei,  yet  under  a  gencial  liability  to
fnmnh  a  contingent  to  the  Roman  amy.  Thua
they  contributed  la  inot— a  the  power  of  Rome,
but  they  bad  not  the  piinlafea  of  Rcoon  dtiKai.
The  idatioDi  of  any  particiiki  fedmta  itata  to
Roma  mightbaTeionMpeciiliaritiea,bBtAegHieml
relation  wni  that  aipceiwd  aboia  ;  a  kind  of  n»-
dition,  incomiitent  with  the  •overaignly  of  the
federataa,  and  the  tint  ilage  towardi  unconditional
iubmltiion.  The  diioontcnt  amcog  the  foederati,
and  their  daima  to  be  admitted  to  the  jannlegea  of
Koman  citiieni,  led  to  the  Social  War.  The  Julia
Lei  (b.  c  90)  fltTO  the  eititai  to  the  Socii  and
Latini ;  and  a  lex  of  tha  following  yeareontuned,
amow  other  pariiianj,  one  for  the  admiiaieD  to
the  Roman  civitaa  of  thoae  peregrini  who  wov
entered  on  the  lilt!  of  the  eitiieni  el  federate  itatec,
and  who  complied  with  the  ptoTiiini*  of  tb*  lex.
[CiTiTia.]  It  ^ipean,  howaier,  that  tbe  Lex
Julia,  and  pnibably  alki  tbe  Lex  of  the  fbllowing


or, aa  it wBi  tachnkally  eipnaaad, ''papalni
Gcrat." (Cic  pro  BiAb,  c  8.) Tba«  wl


fandi  pttnli  did  not  al
client  of  Cieera,  waaa


wbo  did


Cieera,  waaa  dtiien  of  Qadea,
n  federate  town  in  Spain.  Co.  PompetiH  Hagnm
had  conferred  the  Roman  dritai  en  Balboa,  by
Tirtne  of  certain  poweta  giren  to  hkn  by  a  lex.
It  waa  objected  to  Balbni  that  be  could  not  hare
the  cifitai,  unleai  the  nate  to  which  he  belonged
"  fimdui  bctni  eiaet ;  which  waa  a  cooipJele  rab-
apprehemion.  Aw  the  term  fundni,  in  thii  Knae,
applied  to  a  totsb  Bate  or  commonity,  whether
fedeiate  or  other  free  itata,  which  aarptad  what
wa>  offered,  and  not  to  an  indiiidiul  of  tnch  ttate
or  community,  for  ha  might  accept  tbe  Hmnaa
ciTilBi  witboDt  aikbig  tbe  conaent  of  hii  Mlow
citiiaof  at  tuna,  or  without  all  of  tbim  rvainng


FOLLIS.
Ae  MB*  prinlega  that  wM  offend  to  himiel/.  The
prspls  of  &  itale  irLicb  bod  ucented  the  Roman
ciritM  (JimdiH  Jiictia  ft),  were  called,  in  refennce
to  ibeir  Bndilioa  after  inch  acc^Mnce,  "fnndanL"
Thu  wntd  oqI;  ocean  in  the  La^  inKiiptiaD  <lhs
Lci  RaniBa)at  die  tabkt  rf  Hindea,  L  Sfi,  and
|VDTca  liM  tbe  i— uiutign  if  pocterior  la  the  Lex
JalH  de  Cintate.  It  bai  indeed  bean  inpip«ed
t^t  the  word  wj  leier  to  the  acceptuce  1^  the
nate  of  HohJih  of  tbii  lu  which  ii  oi the  tablet;
but  tlwn  ii  DO  d<mU  that  it  rafen  to  the  ^ioc  lex
•bkfc  gare  the  ciifitat [PoNDna.]

It  But  be  obesTod  that  the  accnitaiice  of  the
tm  L^ea  abore  menticned  could  col;  lefat  to  the
fcdcfate  ftalH,  and  the  few  old  I^tin  itatea.  The
latinan  eoloniae  al»  teeeived  the  drilaa  hj  the
JbIb  Lex  ;  bat  aa  they  wcce  onda  the  •oTerelgn^

;  of  the  Julia  Lei,  it  wai  not
— ~o— 1  Ibr  the  Socii  and  Latbii  to  adcfit  Rdmaa
Irgn  into  thdt  own  lyiteDI,  u  eiunplei  of  which
Cicero  BKDtioni  the  Lei  Foria  de  Teitamen^  and
tlie  Liex  Vocmia  de  Mnlienun  Heredilaubnt ;  and
br  add*  thai  then  were  other  initaiicea.  {Pm
BiJba,  C.B.)  Id  ineh  caiei,  the  ttate  which
■lopted  a  Roman  lea  waa  taid  '  in  eain  legem
Ibiidna  fieri."  It  hardly  needa  remark  that  the
■tate  which  adopted  a  Roman  lei,  did  not  therehj
obtain  for  ita  dtixcna  anjr  pririlegea  with  respect
to  the  Ranan  Rate :  the  fedeiale  ilale  merelj
d  the  pniiiioni  of  the  Roman  lex  ai  being


PONS.  JM3

The  tertefiSU  a  al»  applied  to  a  lestbar  puna
OI  beg  (PlauL  Attl.  iL  4.  23  )  Jut.  zir.  281)  ;  and
the  diminutire  fulliadai  to  the  iwoUen  OLpiule  of
phut,  the  hoik  of  a  aeed,  or  anything  of  aimilai
ppeaiBnce.  (Sowe.  JVo^  Qwwf.  T.  IB;  TcrtoIL
De  Rat.  Can.  £Q.>

Two  inflated  ikina  (B^  ^iaiu,  Herod,  i.  68  j
C^npa,  Ephor.  f^vg.  p.  188  i  v^erqpci,  Apoll.
Ehod.iv.  768,777),  conatittttingopoiro/iKttiiea,
id  hsTuig  Talvei  adjutted  to  the  natoral  aperturea
one  pait  lor  admiliing  the  air,  and  a  pipe  in-
■etted  into  another  part  for  iti  emiuim,  weie  an
cMcntial  piece  offiimiture  Inererjfbige  and  loun-
diy.  (JL  iriiL  372—170  j  Virg.  Aim.  TtiL  449.}
ding  to  the  nature  and  aiteiit  of  the  work
done  the  bellows  were  made  of  the  hidea  of
{lauriiM  filMut,  Virg.  Otorg.  Et.  171),  or  of
goati  (linniu,  Uor.  Sat.  L  i.  19),  and  other
■mailer  animak.  The  nonle  of  the  bellowa  waa
tailed  ijcpof  ArTiof  or  inpovriitiar  (Tbncjd.  it.
100  ;  EuL  in  n.  XTiiL  470).  In  bellowa  made
after  the  fuhion  of  thoee  exhibited  in  the  lamp
heieintn>dncedfiiRnBartoli(jl>t  Z^aww,  ilL  21),
e  the  (kin  to  bare  been  placed  be-
boaidi  10  aa  to  produce  a  machins
like  that  which  we  now  employ.  [J.  Y.J


'  An  ^iparent  difficulty  ia  isnied  by  the  nndouhted
bet,  tl^  the  proTiiioni  of  the  l^x  Julia  leqnired
that  the  itatea  which  wiihed  to  avail  themielTel
gf  ita  bcnefita,  lEunld


tbefci


.  order


a,  it  may  be  aaked  why  waa
giTfli  to  toem  m  the  condition  of  becoming  ''fun-
dna?"  In  addition  to  the  reaaona  for  lach  eon-
dilim,  which  are  luggeatsd  by  Sarignj,  it  may  be
gbaeTTed  that  the  tei  only  eipreaaed  in  term)  what
weald  pecenarily  haie  been  implied,  if  il  had  not
been  eipieaied :  a  federate  atate  muit  of  neceiaity
dedare  by  a  public


ootamed  m  the  Lex  Julia. Il


zrzl


p.4«.)

FOEDUS. [F(

POGNUSl [Pntira.]

FOLLIS,  ««.  FOLLI'CULUS,  an  inflated
hall  af  leather,  perbap*  origioally  the  ikin  of  a
qaadiaped  filled  with  air:  Martial  (it.  19)  catli
it  *  li^  aa  a  fcatha."  Boys  and  eld  men  among
tbe  Bomaoi  threw  it  from  one  to  another  wi^
Acs  ana*  and  baoda  aa  a  gentle  eierciu  of  the
body,  BnaWemirt  with  da^er.  (Hart.  Tii.  SI,
xn.  45,  47  ;  Athen.  L  2£.)  The  emperor  Au-
goam  (Swt,  ^ly.  S3)  became  fiaid  of  the  eierciie
M  be  gnui  old. (See  Backer,  Oallm,  loL  '


FONS  (np^rn),  aigniSea  origioally  a  natural
apiing  of  water,  but  both  the  Oneki  and  Romana
had  artificial  £)untaina,  made  either  by  covering
and  decorating  a  apring  with  buildinga  and  uulp-
tnre,  or  by  making  a  jet  or  atmm  of  water,  aup-
plied  by  an  elevated  culern,  play  into  an  HrtlBcial
baain.  Such  fountaina  lerved  the  double  purpoae
of  nae  and  omameul  Among  the  Greeka,  they
formed  the  only  public  supply  of  water  except  the
— i.  — ler  which  waa  collected  in  ciatenii  [AafiE-

SJ;  and  at  Rome,  the  poorer  people,  who

could  not  aflbrd  to  have  water  laid  on  to  thor
houaea,  no  doubt  procured  it  from  the  public  foim-

Several  examples  of  natural  springs  conterted
into  ornamented  fountain!,  in  the  citiea  of  Greece,
tatebeen  mentioned  under  AttUABDUiTrDS.  They
were  covered  to  keep  them  pure  and  cool,  and  tlia
cDveiing  waa  frequently  in  the  fiuin  of  a  monoptend
temple;  there  were  also  ilatnea,  the  aubjecta  of
which  were  auggeated  by  *the  circumatance  that
every  fountain  waa  aacred  to  aomc  divinity,  or  they
were  taken  fnta  the  whole  range  of  mnhological


Icgenda  That  at  Megan,  erected  by  tha
ia  deacribed  by  Pauaaniai  aa  worth  aeeing
uie,  ita  beauty,  and  Che  number  of  ita  colni


LcBgHiea,


B44  FONS.

ontof  whitli  Iha  walcr  flowed  into  Iho  open  sir
ud  with  a  Mfltue  of  Apolio,  and  wm  «icloi*d  will
a  wait,  on  which  wiu  painL«d  the  ilailghlci  of  th(
■niton  bv  UljsKS.  (PsuL  iL  3.  3  3 ;  kd  it  paper
bj  06UtiDf(,  on  the  pTcecnt  itue  of  thia  foontiiin,
and  at  the  Ofoi^ioHy  with  on  engraring  of  the  Boumt
of  the  Peirene,  in  Gerhnrd'i  AnASolofacit  Zcit*m/
for  1844,  [ip.  336.  328 1  the  cngniTinK  i)  givea  be-
low.) Corinth  ooalaiiied  DumaouB  other  loimtaiiii ;


oTer  one  or  which  wu  *  ilatiie  of  Brtlorophon  and
Pepuui,  with  the  water  flowing  out  of  ihe  hone'i
hoob  (Ti.  I  5) ;  over  anoLhcr,  tlial  of  QUuce,  wu
tbe  Odeium  (lb.%6):  and  another  wai  adorned
with  a  bionie  atatue  of  Pneidon,  with  a  dolphin  at
hia  feet,  out  of  ihe  mouth  of  which  the  water  flawed.
:L  2.  a  7.  a  B.)


I  foDI


iidllgi


iracale;


tWatofLenia,  which  Vila  luiToundedb;  a  colonni
with  leiti  fui  thoK  who  deaired  B  cool  retreat
■ummer  ;  the  water  wai  no  donbt  collected  i:

rioua  baain  in  the  centre. (_IL  4.  §  fi.  a  G  ;
i.  S  I.) Sereral  other  foun '


kindlo


mbedoi


efeiTed  to  h;  Pau


I  <iL27,  ii.  31,  33,  34,  yii.  S,  21,
among  which  two  detcrre  apecial  mention,  aa  the;
were  withm  temple*  j  namelj-,  that  in  the  lempla
of  Erechthcui  at  Atheni,  and  of  Poieidon  at  Man.
lineia,  which  were  aalt-water  ppringa  (L  26.  g  5,
viii.  10.  %  4).  VilRiriui  moLtiona  tbe  fouotaiii  of
Salmacit  aa  among  the  admirable  work*  of  art  at
Halicamawiua.  (iu  8.  §  12.)

The  Romani  also  erected  edifices  of  Tviooi  do-
greei  of  Bplendour  over  natnial  iprmga,  loch  aa  the
well-known  grolla  of  Egcria,  Dear  Rome,  where
the  natural  care  la  converted  by  the  architect  into
B  aort  of  lemiJe  {comp,  Plin.  H.  N.  iiitL  21.
a.<2),  and  the  baptiilerium  of  Conilantinc.  A
aimplc  mode  of  decoialing  leu  coniiderable  apringi
waa  by  covering  Ihcm  with  a  ivult,  in  the  top  of
which  wu  an  opening,  aurrounded  bya  baluatmde,
or  by  a  low  wall  adnrned  with  marble  baa  reliefc,

reliefrepreaenting  the  twclvegoda,nowin  theCapi-
toline  Muaeum.  In  all  caaea,  a  ciatera  waa  con-
itructed  to  contain  the  water,  either  bj  cultitig  it
out  of  the  living  rock,  or  {if  the  apring  did  not  riee
out  of  rock)  bjboilding  itof  maaoniy,  Vilruviua
diacnaaea  at  length  the  diflerent  lorla  of  ipringa,
and  givca  minute  rulea  for  testing  the  gondneaa  of
the  apring,  and  for  the  conatnictiou  of  tbe  datema
(viiL  3,  7).  The  ohiervationi  of  Vitrnvina  apply
chiefly  to  Ihoae  tpringa  and  cialem*  which  formed
the  aourni  of  tbe  aijncduct).

At  Home,  a  very  la'ge  proportion  of  the  im-
■Denae  aniqil;  of  wster  brought  to  lbs  city  by  the
Bqaedncta,  wot  dsTolcd  to  the  public  ioDstoiai,


PONS.

which '  were  divided  into  two  iliiaaiii ;  naToelir,
Zama,  ponda  or  reaervoira,  and  mdieula,  jela  of
water,  beaidei  which  many  of  the  caatelia  were
ao  conatrncted  at  to  be  also  fonntaina.  (See  Aqdah-
DUCrllB,  p.  114,  h,  and  the  woodcuL)  Agrippa,
who  during  hia  oedllflahip  (bkL  apecial  nttentiob  to
the  reatoratiou  of  the  Roman  waterworka,  it  aaid  to
have  Hinatructed  700  loau,  105  uUnfaa,  Bsd  130
rxuMio,  of  which  very  many  were  magnificently
adorned  ;  they  were  decorated  with  300  broiue
or  marble  atatnea,  and  400  marble  colnuuu.  (Plin.
H.  N.  xiivi.  IS.  a.  24.  %  9.)  There  were  alao
manv  amall  private  fountaina  in  the  hooaea  and
villaa  of  the  wealthy.  (Plin.  Epitt.  t.  6.)  At
Pompeii,  the  fountaina  are  extremely  numerona,
and  that  not  only  in  tho  abveta  and  pablk  placu,
eapecially  at  the  junctioua  of  atreeta  (in  itnua,  na
(rniu)  ;  but  alio  in  private  hooaci.  The  engnring
ot;  p.  109  repreaenta  a  aection  of  one  of  llwaa  (aaa-
tajna,  in  which  the  water  poun  into  a  baain ;  thst
now  given,  in  which  tbe  water  ia  thrown  up  in  a
jet,  ia  lakoa  ftoin  an  arabeaque  painting  on  the  wall


of  a  home  at  Pompeii :  in  the  (Binting,  the  vue  and
padealal  riaa  out  of  a  aheet  of  Rater,  which  may
Lppoaed  to  repnaent  the  iaipjiinna  in  the
]  of  a  houae.  (lUapecting  the  fountaina  of
Pompeii,  aee  Pantpeii,  vol.  i.  p.  131,  vol.  iL  pp.  71,
78,  and  Sir  W.  Oell'i  Pompeiama,  voL  L  pp.  390,
39i,  platei  60,  S3.)  Tbe  ^n»f  which  theac  foun-
tain! afford,  of  the  aoquamtance  of  the  ancienia
with  the  chief  law  of  bydroatatica  ia  noticed  under
AttUABDUCTOa,  p.  109.

The  fimni  given  to  fcmntaina  were  aa  nomerDui
the  Tarietiea  of  toate  and  fitnc)-.  The  large  flat
ilea  were  a  commoii  form,  and  they  are  found,  of
e,  iO,  20,  and  30  feet  in  diameter,  cut  cut  <^  a
■ingle  piece  of  aome  hard  alone,  aach  aa  porphyry,
nnit^  taaauile,  breccia,alabaaterandmarble.  An
igeniout  and  elegant  variety,  of  which  there  ii  a
»cimen  in  theCapitoline  Muaeum,  ia  a  tripod,  tip
1C  centre  of  which  the  jet  paiaei,  the  Icgi  being
hollow  to  carry  off  the  water  again.  Very  oft4.n
'Se  water  waa  mode  to  flow  out  of  hronae  ituaea,
ipedally  of  bnya,  and  of  Tritona,  Nereidi,  Satyra.
and auch  being! ;  aeveralof  theaeatatnea  have  bepn
found  at  Pompeii  ;  and  four  of  them  are  engraved
v^'i,  voL  L  p.  1 04,  one  of  which  ia  given  be-
On  tbe  Monte  Cavollo,  at  Rome,  ia  a  colounl
itatne  of  a  river  god,  probably  the  Rhine,  which
wai  formerly  in  the  forum  of  Anguatna,  which  it
refrcahei  with  a  ilraam  of  wat^^  pouring  con-
tinually into  a  baain  of  granite  twenty-ievea  {net
in  diameter.  The  celebrated  grm;^  known  oa
the  Toro  Fatnaae,  originally,  in  Hiit^  opinian,
adorned  a  fbuntain. Mythological  tabjecti  w«n


of  Gujiaedcaad  PnniMlwm,md  tfas  NyniphaRim
ofJupilec  <StiegliH,ilrBUaf.<I.AHjl»rt,niLu.
pL  I.  pp.  76,  7B  ;  Hilt, XalrxfarGMoKfs,  pp.399,

*oa-)  [P.  S.]

FORCEPS  (npiffa),  tongi  or  fmcen,  need
H  fnithB  expluBtion  here,  ai  thirr  wen  Dwd  in
■n^iiitf  for  the  ame  puipoa  h  thef  ue  in
Bodifn  tins.  Thej-  wen  inTented,  m  tha  etf-
nirfj  bdiatci,  tat  bking  bold  of  whst  ii  bot
{fi™m,  Fstda,  i.  b.  ;  Serrini,  ad  Fuy.  Oeory.
)•.  17^  .^ai.  Tiii.  4S3,  lii.  i04),  usd  by  imithi,
ad  IkmfjtB  attribntid  to  Vulcaii  ind  (lie  Of-
**»?«.  (Viig.  a.  cc.  i  Horn.  IL  rriiL  477,  Orf.
<<L4U;  Cilfia.n£W:Wl;/ira>«an<a,OTid,
*it  «iL  277.) [IiWUB  ;  Mallbus.]

FOREa [JiNUA.]

PORFEX,  dim.  FORncULA  (fiXfi,  £■>.

W^**),  »ho«m  (Serr,  n  i^- ■* "■ '">

iKd,  I.  ia  ih Turing  iheep,  n
mnaed  WDodcnt,  which  u  ta


inlht  StOKb  eoflcetion  of  antiqas  genu  >t  Berlin  ;
ZbemtiDgbair(Bnrip.  Oral.  964  ;  SchoL  n /oe. ;
ftsodt,  4m1.  iiL  9  !  Virg.  Orfot  TiL  9  jyerm
Ua<i.aru,213);  8.  in  dipping  hedges  m^ea,
ud  other  aknba  (^oAuml  foi^amnt,  Hierociea,


III


>.«£.)


Ia  bed;,  called  >  Cimeni.  (Oel.  z.  9  ;  Amni.


FOBNACALIA.  W5

■o  ■■  to  fonn  ui  acuta  angle  orerlieod,  u  it  leen
in  the  entrance  to  tha  ppamid  of  Cheopa  «ad  in
the  rnina  of  Hycenie ;  and  gndoallj  brooght  neanx
to  tha  forma  which  «a  now  emploj.  (See  woodcut,
p.  IS6.)  (Plat.  Ca  £^.  ziL  p.  292.  ed.  Bekker  ;
Died.  Sic.  ii.  fl.)  [J,  Y.l

FORI.  [Nivia  [  Cttcvi,  p.  283,  b.]
FORMA,  dm.  FORMULA,  meomt  dim.  FOR-
MELLA  (T^rsf),  ft  pautem,  a  mDuld  ;  any  con-
trivance adapted  to  convey  ila  own  ihipe  to  emne
piaatic  or  flexible  material,  including  moulda  tor
mahing  pottery,  pattiy,  cheeie,  bricka,  and  coim.
The  mould)  fivcoint  wen  made  of  alcind  of  alone,
which  waa  indeitnictihla  by  heaC  (Plio.  H.  N.
ixxri.  49.)  Tha  mode  of  pouring  into  them  the
melted  metal  for  caating  tha  coina  will  be  beat
ondentood  &am  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  r^
preeenta  one  aide  of  a  mould,  angrared  by  Serou


1(  were  alao  employed  in  making
if  the  kind,  now  called  fui,  which  were
n  Africa,  in  Spain,  and  about  Tanntum.
(Vaini,  Dt  Rt  RnL  L  14  ;  Pallad.  L  34  ;  fariHa
fi/rmaca,  Plin.  H.  N.  xxn.  43.)  The  •hoc-
maker'*  laat  waa  alee  called  jfima  (Hot.  Sat.  iL  S.
ID6}  and  brntipdOm  (Featua,  >.  v.),  in  Greek
KoKirmt. (Plato,  Oamin.  p.  404,  ed.  Bckhcc.)

The  apouta  and  channela  of  aqua>edncta  ate  called
Jbrmae,  pcrbapa  bora  tbeir  reaemblance  to  iome  of
tha  moulda  included  in  the  abora  enumeration.
(Frontin.  Dt  Aimatdpa.  IS,  13G.)  [J.  Y.]

FO'RMULA. [AcTja]

FORNACA'LIA,  a  featiTal  in  honour  of
Fcmaz,  the  goddaaa  of  fiimacea.  in  order  tbat  the
com  might  be  properly  baked.  (Featua,  t.  v.)  Tbia
'  '  '  ttiral  it  aaid  to  hare  been  inatitttted  by
(Plin.  H.  N.  iriii.  2.)  The  time  for  its
celebration  wai  praclaimed  every  yeer  by  the  Curio
Marimua,  who  annonnced  in  tablela,  wbicb  were
placed  in  the  fbrum,  the  dilfrrent  part  which  each
curia  had  to  take  in  the  celebration  of  tbo  leiti>sL
Thoaa  peraoni  who  did  not  know  to  what  curia
they  belonged,  perfomied  tha  ncred  ritei  on  tbs
QH'rwitia,  called  frran  this  rinumstance  the  Sbtf-
torant  firiae,  wbicb  fell  on  the  laat  day  of  the
Fomaealia.  (Ovid,  Fiati,  ii  £27  ;  Vano,  Di  U»g.


MS  FORNAX.

LaL  li. 13.  with MUller"!  aole  ;  Fertni,  ».  v.

(tmrimlia,  Stallor.  firiae.)

The  Fonunlia  mntinued  to  b«  celebmted  is
the  time  sf  Lacluilia*.  (Idctant  L  20.)

FORNAX,  din.  FORNA'CULA  (mWroi,
dim.  Kofliiiaur),  a  kiln  i  «  fiirnmce.  The  conitroc-
tion  of  the  kilni  utei  for  taking  earthenware
[FiCTiLi]  nMj  be  iten  in  the  uineied  woodeuU
which  repreeenU  part  of  a  Roman  pottery  diwwvered
at  Cmtor,  in  Northamptonihnt  (Aitis'i  Dnro-
brivM.  Lend.  1828.)  The  dome- ihapcd  roof  haa
been  detUo  jed  ;  hul  the  flat  circular  floor  on  which
the  earthenware  wai  let  to  be  baked  u  pi«epred
entire. The  middle  of  (hi*  floor  ii  anpponed  b j  a


FORUM

FORNIX,  in  it«  priniaty  sense,  a  lynonjinona
rith  Arcub  (Senet  Ep.  90),  but  more  commonly
mpliet  an  arched  vault,  conititoting  both  roof  and
:eiluig  to  the  apartment  which  it  encloaei.  (Cic.
rop,  4.)  It  i>  compeaed  of  a  icmtcjlindrica]  and
iblong  Kth  like  the  Qimra,  but  diffen  from  it  in
conitniction,  couiiiing  entirely  of  ilone  or  brick,
iheiMu  iho  other  wai  formed  npon  a  frame-work
if  wood,  like  the  ikeleton  of  a  ihip  (Sallurt,
J«ffurH,.  IB  ;  SueL  Nero,  34  ;  CAXaaA)  ;  boih  of
which  melhodt  appair  to have  been  eometimea

ittd,  Bi  in  the  root  of  the  Tollianum,  dewriWd
bj  Salloit  (at.  65),  where  the  ribi  of  the  Camera
ven  atrcngthened  by  allcmate  coonei of  (tone

From  the  roof  alone,  the  «ame  word  tome  to
Hgnily  the  chamber  ittelf,  in  which  icnte  tt  de-
lignalet  a  long  narrow  vault,  covered  by  an  arch
of  brick  or  maionry  ((ochmi/ir'rica'iini'


thick  column  of  brick-work,  which  ia  encircled  by
the  oven  (/iniu,  KXftovat)-  The  enltanca  U  "
oven  ( pratjunaam)  ii  teta  ia  front. The  li

Crt  of  a  smelting-fumace,  thaped  like  an  invened
II,  and  »unk  into  the  enrth,  with  an  opening  and
a  channel  at  the  bottom  for  the  diicharge  of  the
melted  metal,  hai  been  discovered  near  Arlet.
(Ftorencourt,  eber  die  JtayioerlB  dtr  AtUn,  p.  30.)
In  Spam  thcK  fumacea  were  raiMd  to  a  greal
height,  in  order  thai  the  noiioui  fumei  might  be
carried  bS.  (Strabo,  iil  2.  p.  391,  ed.  Sieb.)  They
were  also  provided  with  long  fluei  (foi^iiijiiu*_i&r-
■ocu  owirafc,  Plin.  //.  M  it  62),  and  with  chara-
bera  (camenie)  for  the  purpose  of  collecting  mon
plentifully  the  oiidea  and  other  matten  by  anbli-
ntatioa  (Ibid.  uiiv.  22.  33—41).  Homer  de-
■cribci  a  bhul-fumace  with  Iwen^  cmciblei
(Xoonl,  IL  xiiiL  470).  Meltrng-poti  or  cmciblei
have  been  found  at  Castor  (Anii,  pi.  33),  and  at
dilTerent  [dacci  in  Egypt,  in  Ibnn  and  material
*erj  tike  thoie  which  we  now  employ.  (Wilkin-
•an,i>fu>i.a»lCWvol.iiLp.324.>  A  glaiB-hnuK,
or  furnace  for  making  glau,  waa  called  ii^upytlav,
<Dioscor.  v.  18Z)


erected  for  casting  la^  statues  of  bronze  (Claud.
/Ik  LaKd.SliL  il  176],  and  for  making  Ump-black.
<Viiruv.  vil  10.)  [ATRAmNTua.]  The  lime-
kiln {Jonat  ajairia)  is  described  by  Calo.
<Oe  Rt  Hust.  38  )  see  alio  Plin.  II.  N.  irii.  6
Vilruv.  viL  3.)  On  the  mode  of  heatmg  baih
aee  p.  193.

The  early  Romana  tocogniied,  under  the  nan
of  Fomai,  a  divimty  who  presided  over  oveni  ai
furnace*  [FuRNj^ALia].  \,J.  Y.]


I  of the  m


entt'd


the  annexed  woodcut,  Emm  the  i
lla  at  Mela  di  Oaiela,  which  [uses  for  the  Par-
ian Villa  of  Cicero.  They  are  covered  internally
ith  a  coaling  id  sEdcco,  ladily  otnanented,  and
inted  in  slceaka  of  aiure,  pink,  and  yellow.


Sat.  12.30;  Juy.SoLiii.  156;
iL  171  :  compare  Suet.  JtL  49),  whence  cornea
the  meaning  of  the  word  Jbnmaiio  in  the  ecele-
liitstical  writers,  ajld  its  English  dcrivatian.

Fomii  is  alio  a  aaltypoR  in  the  walls  <Liv.
mvi.  S3  ;  compare  xliv.  II)  ;  a  triumphal  arch
(Cic.  De  Oral.  ii.  66)  :  and  a  street  hi  Rome,  which
led  to  the  Campus  Martins,  was  called  Via  For-
nicata  (Liv.  xiii.  36),  probably  on  aj^suni  of  the
triumphal  arches  buQt  ocnns  jt.  [A.  R.]

FORUM.  As  the  plan  of  the  prcsenl  work
does  not  include  a  topographical  description  of  the
various  foia  at  Rome,  the  followmg  article  ouIt
cnntaina  a  brief  statement  of  the  porpoaea  which
they  aerred.

Forum,  origmally,  signifies  an  open  place  (ama)
bffiwe  any  building,  especi-iUy  before  a  lepulenira
(FeaUu,  ».B.  ;  Cic.  Di  Ltg.  iL  34),  and  setmi,
therefore,  etymologically  to  be  connected  with  the
adverb  ,^nu.  The  characleriatic  features  of  a  Ro-
man forum  were,  that  it  was  a  levelled  apace  of


"Tnlliar


niunt  nndiqae  parieiet,
ideii  for. - ■ - -


alqna  iniuper  (  , ,

If  the  stone  ehamber  now  seen  at  Rome  ouder  the
MammertJne  prisons  was  really  the  TnUianam,  aa
eommohly  lupposed,  it  is  not  conatractcd  in  th«

foniealMm,  but  coniistmg  of  a  circular  dome,  formed
by  projecting  one  course  of  stcsiea  beyond  ths
course  below  It,  like  the  treasury  of  AtJvas  at
Mycenae,  deacribed  at  p.  Ub. IAbcus.]


FORUU.
gmmd  «r  m  oblong  ibmi.  mnd  wnaimdci]  ij  build-

ioj(,tio«KC,tRnplei,builicae(irponico«.  (VilniT.
T.  I,  2.)  it  ni  ongiui]];  ued  u  ft  pUce  wbere
jiuLia  ni  aduuuuleied,  wd  when  goodi  were
tihibited  Ebr  nie.  (Vun,  Ai  Li-g.  Lai.  ■•.  14£,
dL  MUtlo.) Wc  b»Te  aoxirdiiiglT  to  diatinguiih

uttouvelj  deroted  to  comJoarciHl  purposH,  and
■en  ml  muket-pUcei,  while  othen  wen  pUcd
of  meeling  liir  the  popaUr  UKmbljr,  ind  (or  t)ie
eaarlM  of  juitice.  McRsatile  buiineu,  howerer.
Til  not  aJt^ether  uclnded  from  the  latter,  &zid  it
■14  Mfcullj  the  buikeii  end  nioicn  who  kept
Itmr  (bop*  in  the  building!  ud  poRJcoee  bf  which
liff  wcR  HiiTiHiiid«d.  The  lattei  kindg  of  form
■en  nmetiiiK*  aHiA/imiJiidinalia,  to  diatijiguiih
then  ban  the  men  i^ilet-plua.

Among  the  ttm  JBdicialn  the  matt  imponaot
wu  the  fbrvn  Apuum,  wliich  wh  limpl^  called
<>n,  ■■  long  H  it  wna  the  on!;  one  of  iti  kind
■fcicfa  eikted  at  Rome.  At  a  late  peiiod  of  the
npoblic,  and  dniing  the  empin,  when  other  tan
jodidalia  wen  buHt,  the  Forum  Romaoum  wm
dioingiiithed  from  them  by  the  epithet!  eetui  or
M^oa.  It  w*!  lUnaled  between  the  Palatine
BDd  the  CapitolLne  hilla,  and  it!  exLfnl  wai  HTon
jaima,  whence  Vam  (Z*i<  Aa  Rmt.  L  2)  talli  it
the  "  Sqitem  jogera  foreoiia."  It  *ai  odgitutllj
ii>Biot>  ormar^  botwai  Bid  to  baTe  been  filled
■p  bj  RmbdIbi  and  Tatiui,  and  to  hare  bc«n  let
■put  «•  a  place  for  (he  admiiiiitiatian  of  jiuliee,
fir  holding  the  auembliei  of  the  people,  and  for
o  gf  other  kinda  of  public  buiineu


ll3.S;lburgO  In  thii
included  the  oomitiiun,  or  the  place  of  aaacmbJr
fw  the  cnrae  (Vam,  i^  Zu^.  £«'.  T.  1 55,  MUllecJ,
which  w«i  iqiaialed  {mm  the  torvm  in  iti  namwec
Mue.  or  the  place  of  aJMcmbly  for  the  coinitia  tri-
bna,  b;  the  Roitn.  (Nicbohr, /fiit.  (/Aone,  i.
p.3i>l.  nob!  716,  and  p.  126.  note  990  ;  Waller,
(M«l.iianM>.A<uki,p.83;  Gijltliog,  Cusl.  i&r
l&m.  itaaimerf.  p.  1S5.)  Theae  ancient  roMn
■en  an  cleraled  ipace  oi  ground  or  a  lUge  (tug-
>]>!4ib),  from  whicb  the  omwn  addreued  the  peo-
iue,  and  which  denied  theii  name  from  the  ciicum-
icaoce  that,  after  the  mbjugalion  of  Latium,  it!
•idea  wen  adorned  with  the  beaki  (roitra)  of  the
■hip  gf  the  Anlialei.  <Liv.  TiiL  UO  In  lubte-
qoeat  time*,  when  the  cuiiae  bad  loat  Uieic  import-

aod  6*nDi  likewiie  eca«ed,  and  the  comitia  uibuta
*m  icoetBiKa  held  in  the  Cinnu  Plaminiai ;  but
lovaida  the  end  of  the  npoblic  the  Ibmin  teenu  to
ban  been  chieSj  oaed  br  jadiciil  proceediog!,  and
aia  sBoeT  market ;  hence  Cicen  (/>•  OraL  L  36)
liiningni.W  between  a  ipeaker  in  the  popular
aamnblj  {anior}  and  the  mere  pleade


di^BM  potarim."  The  n
the  pec^  6om  the  natia,
tl  the  peofile  in  the  (srij  tii


ton  when  addnaiing
mi  even  the  tribonei
ei  of  the  npnblic,  used

. __. . .  le  enria  J  bul  C.  Orao-

cbai  (Pint  C.  GraedL  6),  m,  according  to  Vairo
(ft  Ac  ^hL  L  3)  and  Cicero  (D)  AmiciL2S),  C.
Ilfinii*^^  mtrodnced  the  eualam  of  £uing  the
bnm,  tbmb;  ackaowledoing  the  aoreingn^  of
the  pegple^  In  308  M.C.  ue  Roman!  adorned  It  -
fimao,  oc  ratba  tlw  bviken'  !hopi  (/Bngailaria
annad,  with  gih  ilueldi  which  they  had  taki
frjiB  the  Saouite*  j  and  thia  ciutom  of  adoniing


FRAMEA.
the  fbnim  with  these  ihieldi  and  other
waa  lubaequently  alwayi  obterred  during  the  tii


mU


..24,x:


of  the  Ludi  Roituuii,  i

their  ebarioU  (fsaae)  in  aolemn  pnceuion  arotind
the  fonim.  (Lir.  ix.  10  ;  Cic  m  Far.  L  IH,  and
'  After  the  victory  of  C.  Duiliua  oTer  the
Carthaginiana  the  fonini  WBt  adorned  with  the
celebrated  columns  niitrata  fCoLUHNl].  In  (Le
, .  pan  of  the  fomm,  or  tilt  comitlum,  the  lawa
of  the  Twelre  Tablea  wen  eihibiied  ibc  public
inapection,  and  it  wai  probably  in  the  aame  pott
"  -  'n  304  B.  c^  Cn.  FlaTina  exhibited  the  Faiti,
n  on  white  loblei  (n  ofto),  thai  every  citiien
„  be  able  to  know  the  dsyi  on  which  the  law
alloned  the  administration  of  jualice.  (Lit.  li.  1G.)
Beaidei  the  ordinaiy  buaineu  which  WBa  carried
~~  in  the  fonim,  we  read  that  giadialorial  gamea
re  held  in  it  (VimiT.  1. 1, 2),  and  that  priaonen
war  and  &ithlMa  coloniili  or  lefponar—  -"'•-

A  aeeond  fonun  judiciarium  waa  built  by  J.
lesar,  and  wai  called  Fanai  OaaarU  at  JuUL
The  levelling  of  the  ground  alone  coat  him  aboie
million  of  aeatereea,  and  he  adorned  it  beaidea
ith  a  magnificent  temple  of  Veniu  Oenilrii^
(Suet.  J.  Cam.  26  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xuiT.  16  i  Dion
"  w.  iliiL  22.)

A  third  forum  waa  built  by  Anguitui  and  ailed
Fonat  Aiytati,  becauio  the  [wo  eiirting  onea
were  not  fonnd  tuflicieDt  for  the  great  increaae  of
buaineaawhichhad  takenplace.  Auguitni  adorned
hii  forum  with  a  temnle  of  Man  and  the  itatura
of  the  moat  diitinguidhed  men  of  the  republic,  and
iuued  a  decree  tlial  only  the  jtdida  pablica  and
the  torHtiaia  jariiaim  ihould  lake  place  in  iL
(Suet  OdaB.  29  and  31 }  conpan  Dion  Caia.  hi
27  1  Plin.  H.  ,V.  t  ft  ;  Veil.  Pat  iL  39  ;  Ovid,  £»
Font.  IT.  15,  16  i  Martial,  iii,  3B.  3;  Seneca,  Dt
Ira,iL9i  Stat.  jUo. i*.  9.  1 5.)  ARertheFonim
Aognati  had  lererely  luflered  by  fire,  it  waa  re-
ttored  by  Hadrianna.  (AeL  Sport.  Hadr.  c
19.)

The  three  fora  which  bare  been  mentioned  seem
to  huTB  been  the  only  oun  that  were  destined  for
the  tramaction  of  public  buaineia.  All  the  others,
which  were  aubaoquenlly  built  by  the  empfrora,
inch  aa  the  Fonun  Tnjmi  or  Ulpiam,  the  Fonm
SaJlxatii,  fbnun  Dioditiani,  Fanan  ABnJiaiu,  &c,
were  probably  luore  intended  at  embellish


Differa


lupply  ai


ncCna)  w


:  from  theae  tors  were the c


the  porticnlar  kindi  of
them,  «.s./Dnniioiiriam,  according  10  Feilui,  [ho
catlie-market ;  according  to  othera,  i[  derived  the
name  boaiium  from  [he  atatue  of  an  ox  which  atood
there  (Plin. /f. /^.  iniir.  2  ;  Ovid,  J'oitTl477);
fonm  olUoTiim,  the  yegetable  market  (Varro,  Dt
La^.  Lot.  r,  1 16) ;  fonan  piacarism^  fiih-ma^iet  i
fimn  eupeiiiiHt,  market  for  daintiea  ;  /orum  oo-
fiuumi,  a  market  in  which  cooked  and  prepared
diabea  were  to  be  had,  Ac.

(Respecting  the  fora  in  the  pnrincea,  tea  the
article!  Couinia  and  CoNVBrrrua ;  compan
Sigonica,  Dt  AnH^.  Jv.  IluL  iL  16,  and  Watt^,
GacA.  da  ^m.  RuMt,  p.  206.)  f  L.  %.\

FOSSA [Cabth*.]

FRAMEA. IHabt*.]  ^., , ^.^

MS  2  '^^


FRATKES  ABVA'LES. [Abvalib  F*i-

FRAUS. [Po«Ni.l

FRENUM  ix-^yii),  B  bridle.  Th^it  Belle-
nphon  might  be  enabled  la  peifmn  the  eiploiti
required  of  him  by  the  kinjtof  Lycia,  be  mt  pre-
sented bj  Athena  with  a  bridle  aj  (he  meags  of
•ubdaing  thx  winged  Jiane  Pcgain>,who  submitted

rouQtain  Fcirene. See  tha  aunoxed  woodcut,  &om


an  antique  irbich  reprcMnti  Ihii  event,  and  .. ..
para  Pindar,  Olgn^.  liii.  85—115.  Such  wai  the
Orcclan  account  of  the  inTention  of  tlie  bridle,  and
in  ri'ferencQ  to  it  Athena  waa  wonliipped  at
Coriiith  under  the  tilla  'In-ui  and  XaXithit.
(Pana  ii.  4.  §§1,  i.)  The  •CToml  parte  of  the
bridle,  more  eipecially  the  bit,  an  engiaved  from
ancient  aulhoritiee  in  tbe  tiealiaea  of  InTemiii
(DeFrtaii),  Qinmt  (P/ier  Wiigat),  and  Bracr
Ckik  (CialiaJogj,  Lond.  1835}.

The  bit  (am,  Feilui,  i.  n.  ;  tvTI^  Bmnck,
JmiL  ii.  237  1  iTTiffuw,  Ae«hyL  Pnm.  10*5)
ivae  comnuHilj'  made  of  eeYeml  piecei,  and  flexible,
■0  aa  not  to  hurt  the  horse  *■  mouth  ;  for  tbe  Greeki
conudercd  a  kind  and  gentle  treatment  the  bat
diacipllne,  although,  when  the  hone  waa  intract-
able, they  taught  it  lubmiuioa  bj  the  uie  of  a  bit
which  waa  armed  with  protuberanciii  rciemhling
woKel'-teeth,  and  therefore  called /Mpaftmi,  (Xcn.
Dt  Ri  Eg.  Ti.  IS,  I.  B;  Virg.  (?«»».  iiL  20fl  ;  Hor.
tJirm.  i.  8.  7  i  0»id,  Amor.  L  2.  IS.)  The  bit
wae  held  in  iti  place  by  a  lenthem  itrap  pateing
under  ibe  chin,  and  called  ^0;ciiAiri9ia,  for  which
a  chain  (^vAlsi')  waa  often  lUbRituted  ;  a  rope  or
thong,  diitinct  from  the  reuia,  waa  Kmetimei  faat-
ened  to  thii  chain  or  (trap  by  meani  of  a  ring,  and
w'lu  need  to  lead  the  horee  (pmarifirylii,  Xen.  L  c.
vii.  I  I  Ariitoph.  Pae,  154).  The  upper  part  of
the  bridle,  by  which  it  was  fixed  round  tbe  ean,  ia
called  by  Xenophon  Kopaipala  (iiL  2),  and  it  in-
elnded  the  Autvx,  which  waa  often  omameotnL
I'be  cbcek.piec«  (np^EoK,  Horn.  IL  ir.  U2  j
wafiayraBlSim;  EniUth.  ad  loc),  which  joined  thii
upper  portion  to  tha  bit,  were  alio  in  eome  caiea
richly  adorned,  especially  an)ang  tbe  nationi  of
Alia.  Those  who  toolt  delight  in  horsemanthip
bestowed,  indeed,  the  bighcat  degree  of  iplendour
and  elrgHDce  upon  eveij  part  of  the  bridle,  not  ex-
cepting tbe  bit,  which,  thollgh  commonly  vS  brrmie
—  —  saVet  or  gold  {/WtFuiii

-m,Vitg.Aem.Tu.279}.
e  also  either  embossed
S  Apul.  Di  Dto  Soe-y  or  set  with
>ewcls.  (CUnd.  Bpig.  34.  3G.J


FRUHENTARIAE  LEGES.
Not  only  ma  tbe  bridle  dispensed  with  in  the
management  of  cnaluna  invented  by  the  imagi-
nation of  the  poet  (AeechyL  ProsL  294),  bat  <i
some  which  were  actnally  tniDed  by  man  to  go
without  it  Thus  tbe  Nmnidian  uisultor  guided
hii  two  horses  by  the  whip,  and  tho  Oailic  bssx-
nARius.  on  the  hanks  of  the  Rhone,  directed  and
animated  hia  mules  entirely  by  tbe  voice.'  (Claud.
Bpilf.  *■)  [J.  Y.]

FRiaiDA'RIUM.  [Balnbai,  pp.  189,190.]
FRITILLUS  (fi/i^T),  a  dice-box  of  a  cylin-
drical ftnn,  and  tberefine  called  alao  tuniaila
(Mart.  liv.  16),  Olpyrgia  (Sidon.  ^iM.  n\l  12X
and  formed  with  [onllel  indentations  (gmbu)  on
the  iniide,  so  as  to  moke  a  tattling  nolie  when  the
dice  was  shaken  it  (Mart.  iv.  11,  liv.  1  ;  Hot.
Sat  iL  7.  17,  who  nses  tho  Greek  fonn  piimai.)
{Becker.  Oall-,  vol.  ii.  p.  232.)  [J.  Y.J

FRONTA'LE.  [Aunx.]
FRUCTUS.  [UauHFaOGTna.]
FRIIMENTA'RIAB  LEGE3.  Fnnn  tbe
earliest  times  the  supply  of  corn  at  Rome  was  con-
sidered one  of  tha  duties  of  the  goTemment,  Not
only  was  it  expected  thai  the  government  abonld
take  care  that  the  corn-market  (immma)  was  pro-
perly supplied,  hut  likewise  that  in  all  acuons  of
scarcity,  they  ihaold  purchase  aim  in  the  sur-
rounding cotmtriea,  and  sell  it  to  the  people  at  a
moderate  price  (Liv.  ii.  9,  34,  iv.  12,  62,  x.  II,
dtcxivL  40;  Cie.proi)om.5.)  This  price,  which
ii  spoken  of  as  anioma  atiu  (Lir-  ii.  34),  eoold
not  rise  much,  without  exciting  formidable  discoi-
tent ;  and  the  administration  was  in  all  each  cases
considered  to  have  neglected  ana  of  its  meat  im-
portant duties.  Tha  superintendence  of  the  (am-
market  behinged  in  radinarj  timea  to  the  aedilr*,
hot  when  great  scarcity  prevailed,  an  extraordi-
nary officer  was  appointed  far  the  purpose  under
the  title  of  Prtufidut  AmtDoat  (I.iv.  ir.  13).
With  the  decay  of  igriculture  in  Italy,  which  fol-
lowed tho  importation  of  earn  finm  the  provincea,
and  the  deonsa  of  the  free  population,  the  gorem-
ment  had  to  pay  still  fiuther  attention  to  tha  aupply
of  eacn  for  the  city.  In  addition  to  this,  an  in-
digent population  gradually  incnstsed  in  Rome,
-'-ich  could  noteven  puicbaaccom  atthemodente
»  at  whkh  it  was  uinaliy  sold,  aad  who  de-
manded to  he  led  at  tho  expence  of  the  slate.
Even  in  early  times  it  had  been  usual  for  the  state  on
certain  occasions,  and  for  wealthy  individuals  wbo
wished  to  obtnin  popularity  and  mfliuoce,  to  make
occaaignal  donations  of  com  to  the  people  {Jomatio,
0,  diVuio ,-  (Dluequenlly  called  frmottuio).
loh  dona  tiooi  were  onlyasual ;  and  it  was  not
till  the  year  B.  c  133,  that  the  fint  legal  [roviiion
nade  for  supplying  tbe  poor  at  Rone  with
It  a  price  much  below  its  market  Yalne.  In
that  year  C-  Sempronius  Oiaccbni  brought  fbrward
the  fint  £ain«nai<aria,  by  which  each  citiKn  was
entitled  to  receive  every  month  a  certain  quantity  of
beat  ((riMcm)  at  tbe  price  of  6^  asiea  fee  the  mo-
ins,  which  was  equal  to  1  gallon  and  neoriy  8  pints
En^iib.* (Liv.  EpiL  60  ;  Appisn,  B.C.  i.  21  i


•  Theprieeofejaai
IU1  in  the  ScboL  Bob.  ad  Oe.  SexL  e.  3B.  p^  3D0.
.  4S,p.3D0i  bntintheeditioosDfUv7(^6l)X

lat  is,  at  (ths  of  an  aa.  But  inMead  of  s—fiir,
le  manoacripls  have  leiini,  saiis,  issis,  eridentlj  for
miM,  and  thetefon  thete  on  be  Utile  doubt  thai


FRDHENTARIAE  LEGES.
PIeI.  C  ffronhu,  5 ;  VeB.  TA  ii.  S  ;  Ciit.  pro
A^  48.)  Tfaia  wu  ool;  ■  trifla  nun  than  Wf
th*  Darket  pnne,  ibiGe  in  the  tima  of  Cieao  S  tei-
tcma  =  13  un  <nn  coniidend  ■  low  lum  for  ■
Bodioi  «r  liKat  (BDckh,  MtlnL  nmenck.  p.  4SS.)
It  Hiiiat  not  be  nipiKa«l  ^t  eacli  pmin  mi
•Osind  to  nccin  ■■  nnch  u  fan  pleued  ttBj
nooth ;  llu  qimiti^  miiit  of  eoniw  hara  baoi
Cnd,  tad  «■■  pnbablf  fira  modii  mcoth]]',  u
ni  bin  tinui.  Tbii  qnutitf  wu  oolj  giTcn  Co
fcthni  of  funDia  ;  bat  it  ma  not  confinad  to  tlie
pn,  ■•  Phituch  (l.<0  maid  imply,  lor  eTeiy
citiiBi  had  a  ririit  to  it,  wliethtt  hs  «a«  rich  or
pair  {4airrf>  mw  Siutmii^,  *n""i  '■  <^  >  <vi^'>i"i
Cic  TWk  ZKip.  iil  20)  ;  and  avsn  Pin,  vho  lud
bna  eoaaal,  appliad  te  hit  ihaiii  at  tbe  diftribution
(Cie.  L  c)  It  mean,  hamro:^  fron  the  anecdote
wlikfc  Ckan  rAUa  aboU  Pim,  that  tub  citiien
bad  to  npljr  in  panto,  a  nnlatioB  vhich  would
if  itadrdMaBertaftbericlu The


el  It  Graceha*  waa  leo  Umpting
ba  Ulnwed,  allbaorii  the  HamqaaBUM  ti  neb  a
■LaiiuL  woe  eqi^r  pnjudidal  to  tha  public
intnaea  and  the  poblte  mcnlitj.  It  entptUd  tbe
irmuf/,  and  at  the  mna  time  taught  tbe  pour  to
tmreat  Mati-paupen  inatead  of  depending  npon
Ibeir  own  oiertiaa*  fcr  obtaining  a  liring.

The  demagone  Appdniiu  Satnraiuaa  went
Mill  fbitbtf.  Id  b.c  IDO  he  brought  foiwatd
hk  £sr  AppmbiOf  bf  which  the  atBle  wu  to  aell
eocn  at  ftu  <^  an  u  for  the  madiu.  The  cit;
laaeMcr  Q.  Caepo  pointed  ont  that  the  Iieanuj
taaU  not  bear  null  an  enioiae,  and  the  in«C
Tialeat  ■TTr™'™'  wai  oSeied  to  the  UKanin.  It
■  ^obifiii  whether  it  em  paved  into  t,  law ;
and  it  IB  at  all  eranti  eotain  that  it  waa  nerer
■anicd  inta  exeentioa  (Anetoc,  orf  Amin.  L  12  i
■iHp,  Ci&  JtLif.u._6,)  The  £«■  £«)>r^  which
wai  ^apoUBi  in  the  tribone,  U.  Linua  Dmaua,
ia  a.  c  91,  waa  likawiae  nerer  onied  into  eSeO,
■a  it  waa  nmaaled  by  the  eaiuta,  tagethet  with  all
im  al^r  bwa  ai  paaaed  in  oppoaidoa  to  tbe
aaapiocA  OftbepmriaionaofthiaLaiFiumeiitaria
>■  ban  DO  asoDDnt  (Lir.  Epii.  71).  About  the
aaae  tone,  eilW  ahictt;  bdora  oi  ibortlj  after
the  Lea  Utia,  the  tribune  M.  Octanna,  aapported
bj  1^  ariatooacj,  brooght  forward  the  Lom  Ob-
laaia,  which  modified  the  law  of  Qracchui  to  aome
EBcB^  ao  that  tbe  poblie  traaaurr  did  not  aofler
B>  BadL  Ha  iBiiliBblf  either  nuied  the  price  of
lheeitii,ei  dimmiihid  the  nomber  of  modii  which
each  dtixBi  wai  tatHM  to  nceiTa.  (Cic  Bml.
22,  ^  ty  iL  21.)  SiiHa  want  Mill  fiirtber,  and
bjha£4»a>rariia,B.c.e2,  did  awaj  altc^ether
w^  tfcaaa  diattibiiticaa  of  oom,  ao  that  m  the
leii|wgii  which  Salloat  pota  fate  the  month  of
l«piiia^  yepwh)  Kamamu — in  ktv^  fmdtm

■la fijaii  lifif (fiaa.Bvl.isiOTaL  Lipid.

p.9as.  ed-Coct)  Bat  tbe  lanala  loon  found  il
iaeipediBDt  to  dqwire  the  people  of  thaii  coa-
tiHai;  huyaee^  aa  the  popdar  pait^  began  to
iamaae  in  power  ;  and  it  waa  accordingtr  at  die
^edre  gf  the  amate,  tlM  tbe  conaula  of&c  73
hn^ht  fimmd  the  Ln  Ttrmtin  Oada,  which
waafnteUy  nAj  aioiewalof  theLeiSamptonia,
with  le  <g  twn  additicaia  reapecdng  the  mannar  in


aai,  a>  JiSaiaoUa  TWhia,  p.  179.)


FBUMENTARIAE  LEGES. M9
modii  a  montb  at  ths  {cica  of  6^  aiaca  Icr  neb

modiiiL  It  appean  frooi  tho  Taiiona  natlooa  of
Cicero,  that  1^  Ihia  law  tbe  provincea  were
-iblifred  to  fmniih  the  gnater  part  of  the  c
which  waa  paid  br  the  Horn
lat  the  govemon  d  the  prorii.—.  __
that  the  proper  quaoti^  of  com  wu
aoppUed.  (Cit  rorr,  iii.  7a».  2i,  (iriDSm!.25j
AacoTL  n  PtM.  i,  p.  9,  ed.  Orelll)  Occeaioually
eitraoTtluurj  diatnbutiona  c^  com  woia  made  in
viitno  of  decreea  of  the  aanata,  (Cic  Far.  I  a. ;
Plut.  OaL  SUB.  26,  Can.  B.)

All  the  Legca  Fniraentariae,  that  haie  been
hitherto  maotiwed,  had  kM  nam  to  the  people,
although  Bt  a  fnoe  tODch  below  what  the  tialo
bad  paid  for  il ;  but  u  the  gieat  party-leaden  to-
wardi  the  clme  of  tbe  repabUc  were  rtadj  to  por-
chaae  tbe  anpport  of  the  people  at  any  aacrifice  to
the  itate,  the  diitrilmiioo  of  con  became  at  length
quite  gratuitooL  Caeiar,  in  hia  conanlibip,  &o.  59,
hsd  threatened  to  make  it  as  (Cic  ad  AU.  ii.  IS  t
Gcmp.  pn>  Dom.  10)  (  and  thii  threat  waa  oiriod
mto  eTBcution  in  the  following  Tear,  b.  c  £6,  by
the  La  Clodia  at  tbe  tribune  Clodina.  The  com
waa  thai  in  fdtnn  dittrihuled  without  any  pay-
ment ;  and  the  abolition  of  the  payment  oott  the
Itate  a  fifth  part  of  iti  lerenueL  (Cie.  pn  Sui.
25  ;  ScboL  Bob.  ad  SoiL  26,  p.  301,  ed.  Orelli ;
Akoo.  in  Fit.*,  p.  9  I  Dion  Cbh.  ixniii.  13.)
In  B.  c  G7,  Pompey  receiTcd  by  ths  Lex  Cornelia
Caedlia  the  iup«intendence  aC  the  com-mariiot

alteralion  vaa  made  in  the  diitribntion  of  com  by
lirtue  of  thii  meaaure.  Tbe  only  exteniion  which
he  gave  to  tbe  diatribution  wai  by  allowing  thoae
dtiieni,  nhoie  namea  had  not  hitherto  b«en  en-
tered in  tbe  liati  of  the  cenion,  to  ihare  in  the
bounty  of  the  atate. (Dion  Com.  inii.  24.)

The  dangenni  coniequencea  of  inch  a  lyilem
did  not  eacape  the  penetntion  of  Casnr  ;  and  ao-
mdingly,  iihen  he  became  muter  of  tbe  Rooiau
world,  be  reeolved  (o  remedy  tbe  evila  attending
it,  u  &r  aa  he  wu  ahle.  He  did  not  venture  to
aboliih  altogether  tbeie  diatributiou  of  com,  but
ha  did  the  next  beat  thing  in  hia  power,  which
wuredocing  the  number  of  the  reeipienti.  During
tbe  dTil  wan  DUinben  of  peiarau,  who  had  no
claim  to  the  RoDun  fnuKbiie,  had  acttled  at  Roma
b  order  to  obtain  a  ihare  in  the  dittributiona  of
mm.  The  fint  thing,  thenfbit,  that  Caettr  did
waa  to  bane  an  accunle  Uit  made  out  of  all  tbe
com-reeeiven,  and  to  exclude  fridn  thia  privQege
erery  peiaon  who  could  not  proTe  that  he  wm  a
Roniui  dtiien.  By  thia  meaiure  the  320,000
pewna,  who  had  prerionaly  receiTed  the  con,
waa  at  onc«  reduced  to  UI^OOO.*  Haring  thua
isdnced  the  number  of  oan-RcaiTon  to  160,000,
ha  enacted  that  thia  number  itaould  not  be  exceeded
for  the  futon,  and  that  Tncaiciea  that  oixuiied  by
death,  abould  be  filled  up  ereiy  year  by  lot  by  the
praetor  urbanua.  (Suat.  Oaa,  56 ;  Dion  Caai.  iliji.
21.)  It  ia  further  exceedingly  probable  that  u  a
gensal  rule,  the  com  wu  not  fpren  eren  to  ^leae
160,000,  bat  lold  at  a  low  pries,  ai  had  been  the
caie  at  an  tarliei  period  t  and  that  it  wu  only  to
the  uReriy  deatituta  that  the  com  waa  nppiiad

*  It  mnit  be  botne  in  mind  that  thia  waa  not  a
cenana,  aa  Plutarch  (Ow.  65)  and  Appian  (B.  C
ii.  102)  itale,  bat  limply  an  enumatalMni  of  the


es« FRUMENTARIAE  LEQEa
gntnitmuly ;  the  btter  cIsM  of  poHni  wets  fbi-

,^iiiiuRlnruw.  ThizB  wv  find  it  italed  (Suet  OdoB.
(1)  tbst  Augnitui,  on  DtiB  occanon,  doubled  t)iB
iratnb«TDf  ihetaBvnH^fKRnfaniM.  I ^  therefore,
the  com  was,  ai  a  general  rule,  not  giTen,  but  lald,
WB  may  oracliide  that  ererj  eitiien  tu  entilled  la
be  enrolled  in  the  ISD.OOO  cocn-receiTen,  iode-

C'ent  of  hii  fortune.  The  oppoiita  opintOD  hu
Duuutaincd  b;  muj  modim  wriCen  ;  but  the
ugmnenU,  vhieh  hare  been  bronghl  fbrwaid  bj
Uomnuen  (.Dit  R'amnAai  2Vihu,  p.  187)  and
othen,  but  into  which  our  ipue  will  not  tUaw  ui
lo  eoter,  render  the  above  luppomlioii  eiceedingl;
[ODbuhle.

The  uufol  i^uluioni  of  Cae«r  fell  into  ii«lect
after  hii  death,  and  the  ntunber  of  eom-receiTen
ma  loon  increuad  beyond  the  limita  oF  lfiD,DaO,
which  bad  been  fixed  bj  the  dutator.  Thii  we
loan  bom  (be  Mmnmennun  Ancjranuni,  in  which
Aoguitni  enumerutee  the  nombcr  of  ptnoiti  to
whom  he  bad  given  congiaria  at  difiigrent  limee  ;
and  there  can  b«  no  doubt  that  ths  recciven  of  the
ungiaria  and  of  the  public  cam  wer«  the  laine.
Thus,  in  B.  c  44,  and  on  the  three  fblloinng  occa-
■ioni,  he  diitribated  the  congiaria  la  250,000  per-
■oni ;  and  in  B.  a  S,  the  number  of  recipient!  had
■moontcd  to  320,000.  At  length,  in  B.  c  2,
Augiutui  reduced  tho  nmnber  of  teci|Henti  ta
SOO.OOO,  and  lenawed  many  of  Caenr'e  reguta-
tioDi.  (Snet.  OfttiB.  40  ;  Dion  CaiL  Iv.  10.)  He
bad,  indeed,  thonght  of  aboliihing  the  lyitem  of
cran-dittributioni  altogether  on  account  of  their
injurioni  influence  upon  Italian  agricalnuc,  but
bad  not  peneiered  in  hii  intention  Cnia  (he  con-
TJction  that  the  pracUce  would  agun  be  introduced
by  hia  luccawn.  (SueL  Odm.  43.)  The  chief
iwulationi  of  Auguitui  Kent  to  have  been:  1.
That  every  eitiien  should  receiTo  monthly  a  cer-
tain quantity  of  com  (probably  5  modii)  on  the
payrnent  of  a  certain  snail  lum.  A#  the  number
of  recipient!  wvi  fixed  by  Anguitu!  at


r  in  order  to  contt
Augu^oi  nude
toui :  they  then
2.  That  tho(a  who  were  completely  indigent  should
receive  the  com  graCaitouily,  ai  Juliui  Caesar  had
determined,  and  ihould  be  fumiihed  for  the  por-

enlitled  them  to  the  com  witbout  pkyment.  (Suet.
(Mm.  410

Tho  tyttem,  which  had  been  ectahliihed  by
Angnatus,  worn  fijlewed  by  hi!  mcceieon  ;  but  a!
it  WH«  always  one  of  the  But  maxim!  of  the  Hate
policy  of  the  Roman  emperon  to  prevent  any  dia-
torbance  in  the  oipital,  they  frequently  lowered
the  price  of  the  public  com,  and  Ireqnently  dii-
tribuled  it  gratuiUHuly  at  a  rmajnorusi.  Hence,
the  cry  of  the  populace  paHaa  et  dmafer.  No
emperor  ventured  to  aholiih  the  public  diitributioo!
of  con :  the  moat  that  bo  dated  do,  waa  Co  raiie
the  price  at  which  it  wat  lold.  When,  therefore,
we  find  it  itatcd  in  Dion  Cauiu!  (liiL  10),  that
Nero  did  away  with  the  diitrihotioni  of  com  after
tbe  buniing  of  Rome,  we  cannut  undentand  thi!
literally,  but  mutt  tuppoae  that  be  either  nited  the
price  of  the  commodity  or,  what  ii  more  probable,
'  obliged  tbon  poor  to  pqr  lie  it,  who  bad  previooily
tecatTOd  it  glatoilonily. The  car^  which  llie


FRUMENTARIAE  LEaES.
emperrai  took  to  keep  Rome  well  mpplied  wiA
com,  ia  frequently  referred  lo  in  their  coina  by  the
l^enda,  Anatma,  f  Jierliu,  AtimJamlia,  Libiraiilat,
&c  We  find  in  a  coin  of  Nerra  the  legend  pbU
mriimae  frmia^  BHuHtida,  (Bckhel,  toL  vi.
p.  406.)

In  courae  of  time,  the  eale  of  the  com  by  the
ante  aeema  to  have  eowed  altogether,  and  the
diatnbntion  became  altogether  gntnitHU.  ETery
com-recciirer  wae  therefore  now  ]HDTided  with  a
taaera,  and  Ibis  tcflaerm,  when  once  granted  to  him,
became  hit  property.  Heiw^  it  dime  lo  pais,  that
he  wai  not  only  allowed  to  keep  the  ICMen  for
life,  but  even  to  diipoee  of  H  by  aale,  and  bequealb
it  by  will.  (Dlg.&tiLl.  a.53i3S.titl.a.49;  39.
til.  1.  1.  87.)  Every  citizen  waa  eompetint  to
teaaera wiUi the eicaption  of  ■


tribe*  Into  which  tbey  weni  divided,  the  c
receiven  in  each  tribe  fanned  a  kind  of  earpofatian,
which  came  eventually  to  be  looked  npOD  aa  the
tribe,  when  the  tribea  bad  loat  all  political  oigni'
ficmee.  Hence,  tbe  porcbaie  of  ■  tenen  became
equivalent  to  the  porclMae  of  a  place  in  a  tribe  ;
id,  aocordingly,  we  find  ii '


before  the  tetgn  of  Anre-

lian  (a.  d,  270 — 276),  at  it  ia  related  of  thia  em-

CDT  that  on  hii  return  from  hit  Eaiton  eipeditimi,
diatribuCed  among  the  pce^tle  a  lareer  quantitr  of
bread,  and  of  a  diSbient  fonn  bom  that  which  had
been  nanally given.  (Vopiac^araLU;  Zoaim.  L6I.)
The  bread  waa  baked  by  the  Piatorea,  who  delivered
it  lo  the  varioDi  depota  in  tbe  dty,  fron  whjcb  it  was
fetched  away  rai  certain  daya  by  the  holdera  of  tbe
(On!lli,/«m>..No.S3M.)  Tbw  depota
had  itepa  (jrradiu)  leadteg  to  ibeo,  whence  ibc
"  '  diSt,-  and  then  were

(he  bnad  aboald  ooly
be  diitribnted  froni  theae  ftepa,  and  ahodd  aeva
'  obtained  at  tbe  haken.  (Cod.  Theod.  14.  lit.
BL  3,  4.)  When  Conatantine  traaifored  tba
Beat  of  government  to  Conatantinc^c^  the  lyatem
of  gratuitooa  diatribution  of  bnad  waa  bIbd  tiana-
ferred  to  that  city  ;  and  in  order  to  eocooiage  the
building  of  houiea,  all  boikaeholden  wcie  entilled
to  a  ihare  of  the  impersl  bounty.  (ZoeioL  ii.  82 ;
Socral.  ff.  E.  il  13  ;  Soiom.  iiL  7 ;  Cod.  Theod.
17.)  The  diuribnticB  of  bread  at  Roma
vat,  boWEier,  itilt  eonlinued  ;  and  the  care  whicb
ipcron  tacdc  tbal  both  Rome  and  Cm-


tii,  -


inbytb


fct/rtuOaBtfuM


10  luperintcndrace  cf  tike  co
iperora,  belonged  to  tbe  PraflMm  Jmmmm.
Many  pointa  connected  with  thia  aab}eet  baTo
en  neiTiaarily  omitted  in  camMpmiee  tf  aw
Qita The  reader  who  wlihea  tor  fimber  in-
formation ia  nfernd to : Contaraii,  Dt nam.
Rom.  LargHkm,  in  the  Tbaeauraa  of  Ondviaa,
Tol.  Tiii.  f.  933  I  Didctei^  OaOM.  .dM—lh^aia.


FUCU3
Tol.  iL  p.  1 63,  Ac ;  MammBen,  Dia  Aamuoini
TVitw,  AtMn,  1B44,  whicb  work  coaUini  the
Imt  (cMont  of  Ibe  Dbject;  Knlm,  (TiAv  iJm  f ors-
rnMr  n  Horn  im  AUaAum,  in  the  Zeiiicirift
fit  dii  AltertiamiaitiBuiAaft,  1845,  pp.  993—
1008,  1073—1084  ;  Rein,  in  (lie  Heal-^Kfdo-
piidie  drr  diuatdieii  AUerllBaimimemiAi^i,  ait,
lAMw^iOo  ;  HHFkh,  Aanuais  GttdaeUt,  loL  L  part
ii.  p.  138,  &c^  PL  364,  &c  ;  Waller,  GaeiiJUe  dtt
AMiunkni  RaiU.  %%  376—278. 360,  361,  and  «L

FRUMENTA'RII,  olGc«n  ondei  the  Romaa
nopin,  who  uled  u  apio  in  the  proTinceg,  luid
irported  to  the  empaan  anrthing  which  ibey
nntidcTed  of  imponance.  (Aural.  Vict  De  Caei,
39.  hAJSm.  ;  Sputisn.  Hadriaa.  1 1  ;  CapitoL  Ma-
erim.  1^  GwasA  4.)  Tiaj  appear  to  haie  heen
called  Prmma^mi  becanie  it  wu  their  dutj  to
eillect  infonmiion  in  the  nme  waf  u  it  waa  the
daij  of  other  cdEcer^  called  by  the  nms  name,  to
collect  com.  They  vera  accnalomed  to  accoia
pmona  £al«dj,  and  their  office  waa  at  length
ihDiiahed  by  Diocletian.  We  frequently  find  in
iitcriptioiu  mention  made  of /VnniAtCarH  belong-
in;  la  puticoiai  legiona  (Orelll,  liter.  74,  3491,
49-22),  from  vhich  il  hai  been  anppowd  that  the
frmBcntarii,  who  acted  u  apiei,  were  aoldiera
utaehed  to  the  Icgiona  m  the  provincea  ;  they  may,
knterer,  hare  been  different  [>fficeii,  whoie  duty  it
«a*  ta  diaoibnte  the  com  to  the  I(f[ioni.

FBUMENTA'TIO. ["

FUCUS  (fSnt),  vai  the  gei

u^  the  jBuit  which  the  Greek  and  Roman


the  bee  waa  Tery  general  among  the  Greek  ladjei,
•od  probably  cams  iato  &ihion  in  conKqnenca  of
thfir  iBdentai?  mode  of  life,  which  robbed  their
acnpleiiona  of  their  natural  freahDaa,  and  induced
tb«a  to  ban  leeouraa  to  artificial  mesna  for  re-
lUnof  the  red  and  while  of  nature.  Thia  at  the
Icaat  B  the  rcstoa  giien  by  lome  of  the  aodenl
writtn  thenuelTu.  (Xeii.  Okor.  10.  g  10;
Pkinni,  op.  Stotaaat,  tit  Izxir.  61.)  The  prac-
tiee,  howeTcr,  waa  of  great  antiquity  among  the
Greeka.  and  waa  prvbably  first  introduced  among
theAtiiiticIaaiani&oai  theEoit,  nheie  tbecnatom
h«  proaiied  from  the  earlieat  timea. That  it  waa


II  the  til


of  Hon


a  hiX^vra  jraptii,  (Od.  lyiiL  172),
bol  this  ia  perhaps  hnidly  lufficient  to  prove  that
the  chedu  vera  faaied. The  ladiea  at  Atheni,  ai
■aigbt  bare  been  expected,  did  not  alwaya
ibeir  btxM  when  at  home,  bui  DD^y  had  recou
ibia  adotimieiit  when  they  went  abroad  or  wiibed
to  appear  beutiful  oi  capliTaling. Of  ihii  we  hare
a  nnking  examine  in  the  speech  of  Lyiiaa  aa  ■'-  -
■roider of  Eratoitbaiea, in  which  it  ia  reli
(p.  93.  20.  ei.  Sleph.)  that  the  wife,  after  leai
ba  hnaband  to  Tijit  her  pBiaraonr.  painted  hen
wbkh the hnalwiid  obaerved on  tile fblloii
Dming,  remaiking, IBo^f  01  futt  rit  rpAau
iiitui»iiv9tu, (Camp.  An»\ofh.  l^/tutr.  HS,EecL
878,  PbU.  1064  ;  PluL  Alab.  39.) In  order
fire  a  bboming  coloor  to  the  cheeu,  tyxofa
rnC"™!  >  red,  obtained  from  the  root  of  a  plant,
«B*  matt  frequently  employed  (Xen.  Otecn. 10.
i  2) ;  ntd  the  lollawing  painta  vme  alio  oi
fcodoce  the  aame  coloDr,  namely,  vaiJ^psi,  i
ngoable  dye  neaembling  the  nay  hue  o
dueka  of  yonm  ehildran  (Alexia,  tgi.  Atie*


FULLO.  6S1

p.  5fiS,  c), avKinanr  (Enbdia,  op.  Alioi.  nu.

p.  £57,  f),  and  ipiKos,  which  waa  probably  a  red

Ct,  though  uaed  to  aiguify  paint  in  geneml,  aa
been  already  remarked.  Id  order  to  pn>duca
a  fail  complexion,  ifi^iMior,  ccraaa,  white  lead
waa  employed.  (Alexia,  ap.  Aihat.  I.  c. ;  Xen.
Oaam.  10.  §  2  ;  Aiiitoph.  EcA.  878,  929.)  The
eye-browa  and  eye-lida  were  atained  black  with
irri/i/u  or  irrlfi^ui,  a  lulphutel  of  auIimDny,  which
ia  atiU  employed  by  the  Ttu-kiih  ladiea  for  the
■amepoipaae.  (Pollux,  t.  101.)  The  eye-browa
were  likewise  atained  with  Artfo^s,  a  preparatian
ofK««.  Thoa  Alexia  iaj.(i.  a),
ria  tppttt  iruji^  fx«  rir  for/pa^oi!iTv  tiotixif.
(Camp  Jut.  ii.  93.)  Ladiea,  who  mad  paint,  vm
occBiiooBlly  betrayed  by  penpiration,  lam,  Ac,  of
which  a  hmnorou*  pictura  ia  gireo  by  the  comic  poet
Eubulna  (<^  Alittt,  1. 1).  and  by  Xenspbon  {OtBoa.
lO.gS).  ItwatlldappearfromXenophon(Ibid.g£)

in  later  timea  it  may  have  been  atill  more  common:
Ikmetriu  Pbalereua  ia  expreuly  uid  lo  hare
done  ao. (Durii,  op.^fAaL  lii.  p.  542,d.)

Among  the  Rornoni  the  art  of  painting  the  cem-
pleiim  waa  carried  to  a  alill  greater  exlent  than
among  theOraeka  ;  and  even  Ovid  did  not  diidain
to  write  apoem  on  (he  aubject,  which  be(sl]a(ifeAr<.
Aa.  iii.  206)  "pamia,  scd  cura  giande,  lihellna,
opni ;"  though  thegenuineuHi  of  the fiugmentor  the
Midicamiiuifaaei,  aactibed  to  thia  poet,  ia  doubt-
^iL  The  Roman  ladiea  even  went  ao  &r  oa  to
punt  with  blue  the  veina  on  the  tonplei,  aa  we
may  infer  from  Propertina  (iL  14. 27),  "  ai  caeraleo
quaedam  ana  tempoia  fnco  linxeriL"  The  ri-
diculoua  uae  of  patchea  (apiniii),  which  were
common  among  the  Engliah  ladiea  in  the  reign  ot
Qoesn  Anne  and  the  GntQeorgea,iraB  not  unknown
to  the  Roman  ladiea.  (Mart  ii.  29.  9,  i-  ^9  >
Plin.  ^  vi.  2.) Themon " '


(«  PiKm. 11) of  it .
oiemy,  the  conimi  Piio.

On  a  Greek  laae  (Tiachbein,  Engmimgt,  ii.  £3)
we  aee  the  figure  of  a  female  engaged  in  potting
the  paint  upon  her  five  with  a  inull  bniib.  This
figore  ia  copied  in  Bjitliger'i  Saltim  (pi.  ii.),
(Corap.  Beckd,  CharilUn,  voL  iL  p.  232,  Slc  j
BSttiger,  SiiiMO.  vol.  I  p.  24,  tos,  p.  51,  &c.)

FUOA  LATA. [ExeiLlVH.J

FUOA  LIBERA. [Exbilium,]

FUOITIVA'HIUS. rSanvuB.1

FUOITI'VUS. [SinvDS.]

FULCRUM. [LxcTtra.]

FULLO  (mn-ptis,  TH^flit),  olao  caUed
NACCA  (Feetoi,  t  r.  j  ApuL  MeL  ix.  p.  206,
BiponI),  a  fuller,  a  woaher  or  tconrer  of  cloth  and
lituuL  The  fallanea  not  only  received  the  cloth  aa
it  came  from  Ibe  loom  in  tsia  to  Koor  and
amootb  it,  but  alao  waihed  and  cleaoaed  gaimenta
which  had  been  already  warn.  Ai  the  Romana
genenJlv  wore  woollen  dieiaes,  whicb  ware  oflen
of  ■  light  colour,  they  frequently  needed,  in  the
hot  cliniau  of  Italy,  a,  thonofh  pnrifiatioa  The
way  in  which  thia  waa  done  baa  been  dewzibed  by
Pliny  and  other  anoieut  writeta,  bat  is  moat
clearly  explained  by  tome  painlingi  which  have  beat
foundm  the  waUiofafiiUomcaat  PompeiL  Two
of  thete  paintiogi  are  given  by  Qell  [Poa^eiajta,
voLiL  pL5l,  52),  and  the  whole  of  them  in  the
Muaeo  BorUmko  (vd.  iv.  pi.  49, 50) ;  bam  tiis


t52  FULLO.

IsttcT  of  wbieh  mAt  lbs  (blloiring  entt  bare  1>eai

The  clot)i«i  wen  fint  wuhed,  vliich  mi  dons
in  tnb*  or  vui,  when  the;  wen  bodden  upon  lud
itBinped  b;  the  feet  of  ths  fidlonefc  whence
Seneca  (,Ep.  15}  <peaka  of  taltiu  fiMtniau.  The
fbllowiug  woodcut  repreienla  four  pononi  tbnt  em-
ployed, of  wfaom  three  ue  bop,  probably  midsr
the  auperintendence  of  the  nuui.  Their  dreu  ii
tucked  up,  leKTing  the  Ic^  bare  (  the  boji  Keni  to
haTe  done  their  work,  and  to  be  wringiiig  tba
article)  on  which  they  bod  been  emiilaTed.


Ths  ondenU  were  not  acquainted  with  uap,  bal
the;  Died  in  iu  itead  different  kind*  of  alkali,  by
wtuch  the  dirt  wai  mon  (aijl;  MpBratod  from  the
dothei.  Of  theie,  Inr  fiir  the  nuMt  commm  wu
the  urine  of  men  and  aoimali,  which  wai  miied
with  the  water  in  which  ths  clothei  wsrs  waihed.
(Plin.  H.  M  xxTiu.  IS.  26  ;  Athsu.  li.  p.  484.)
To  procus  ■  infficient  lapp!;  of  it,  the  ftillonei
were  sccuitained  to  place  at  the  coraen  of  the
nreeta  leuek,  which  they  mried  away  after  they
had  been  filled  by  the  pauougsn.  (Monial,  tL  93  ;
Macrob.&i(iinLiL  12.)  We  are  told  by  Suotoniiu
(  Vap.  23)  that  Vegpailan  impoeed  aarwu  vtetiffal,
which  ii  nippoied  by  Caianbon  and  otben  to  Iskie
been  a  tai  paid  by  the  fullenea.  Nitium,  of  which
Pliny  (H.  M  ii.L  *6)  gire.  an  account,  wu  alio
mixed  with  the  water  by  the  Kouren.  Fnllen"
earth  (cnHa  fiiiioaia,  Plin.  II.  N.  iriiL  1).  of  which
there  were  many  kiudi,  wni  employed  for  tbe
vune  porpoee.  We  do  not  know  tbe  exact  uatnte
of  tbij  earth,  but  it  appeart  (o  hsie  acted  in  the
■ame  way  at  our  fblleri'  earth,  namely,  partly  in
•couring  and  partly  in  abaorbing  the  greaiy  dirt.
Pliaj  (H.N.  Tiir.6T}>afithBCtheclDthei>hDuld
bewaahed  with  tbeSardiman  earth.

After  ths  dotbea  had  been  waihed,  they  were
hong  out  to  dry,  and  were  allowed  lo  be  placed  in
the  itreet  before  the  doon  of  the  fullonica.  (Dig.
43.  Ut.  10.  lb  1.  S  4.)  When  dry,  tbe  wool  wai
bmihed  and  cardoj  to  raiae  tbe  nap,  aometimei
with  ths  ikin  of  a  hedgehof;,  and  •omctinieB  with
■ome  plaoti  of  the  thiiUe  kind.  Tbe  clothei  were
then  hung  on  a  veaael  at  baiket-work  (cinuaa
oHJoa),  under  which  aulphur  wa»  placed  in  order  to
wbiien  the  cloth  ;  for  the  ancient  fiilleii  appear  to
hare  known  that  many  coloun  were  deitroyed  by
the  Toluils  iteam  of  inlphur.  (ApuL  MtL  Lx.
p.  208,  Bipont ;  Plin.  H.  ff.  xxxo.  £0,  67  (  Pol-
lux, vii  41.)  A  fine  while  earth,  called  Cimotian
by  Pliny,  «aa  e^oi  mbbed  into  the  cloth  to  in-
enaae  iu  whiteneaa;  (Tbeophr.  Our.  10  ;  Plant
^aW.iT.9,  6;  Plin.«.MxixT.  fi7.)  The  pre-
ceding account  ia  well  iltnilnted  by  the  Ibllawing

On  the  Isft  we  tee  a  folio  broahing  or  carding  a
'  ' et  •  tapt,  with  a  card  or


bnub,  which  boui  ccondenbta  reaemblanea  ts  a
modern  bone-bruah.  On  the  right,  auatber  man
carrin  a  frame  of  wicker-work,  which  wna  wjihoot
doubt  intended  &r  the  purpoee  deacribed  abore ;
"■■  "■—  -'--  apol  in  hii  hand,perhapi  intended  for


.olding  the  n


On  hii  head  1»  wean  a  kind


repreaenled  litting.  It  ia
tfaougbl  that  tbe  olire  garland  and  the  owl  indiate
that  the  eatabliibmenl  wu  under  the  patnmaee  of
Minerra,  the  tutelary  goddeia  of  tbe  loon.  Sir  W.
Cell  imiginea  that  the  owl  ii  pmbably  the  pidnre
of  a  bird  which  really  eiiited  in  tbe  bauly.  On
the  left,  a  well-dreiaed  female  i*  litting,  eiaminii^
a  piece  of  woik  which  a  younger  gill  bimg*  to  her.
A  nftaihm  [*ae  p.  329,  a]  upon  her  head,  a  dkJe-
hice,  and  bnceleta  denot«  a  panca  of  bighar  tank
than  one  of  the  ordinary  woA^ieople  ^  the  ea-
labliahment.

In  the  following  woodcut  we  aee  a  yonng  man
in  a  green  tunic  giying  a  piece  of  cloth,  which  ap-
pean  to  be  linithed,  to  a  woman,  who  wean  a
green  nnder-lunic,  and  OTei  it  a  yellow  tonic  with


-tfinr


red  itripe*. On  the  right  ii  anotber  feiiale  in  a

white  tunic,  who  apptan  to  be  engaged  in  cleaning
one  of  the  card)  or  bruihei.  Among  thau  paint-
ingi  there  wu  a  preia,  worked  by  two  upright
Kiewi,  in  which  the  cloth  waa  placed  to  ba
sDoothened.  A  drawing  of  thii  jaeai  i>  giTm  on
p.  300.


FUKAMBULTJS.
rDig.7.  tiL  L  «.  13.  g  8),  or  FnOmaim  (Amm.
UtK.  lir.  11.  p.  44,  Biptiat)  Of  nich  eittbluli-
ooiti  tliai  wen  gnat  nnmben  in  Rome,  lia'  the
Hi»Mn.  do  not  appear  to  barB  vaihtd  at  home
eraitlKirlmeDdDtha.  (Martial,  n'-^l-)  The
tiade  of  the  fnlkn  vi*  cotuidered  •»  impinlant
that  the  oauny  C  FlamiDhu  and  L.  AnniliiB,
•.  c.  320,  DtncribBd  the  mode  in  which  the  dretm
woetBlwwaahed.  (Plin.  A.Miht.  £7.)  Like
th*  otha  principal  tndea  in  Rome,  the  Fnllonei
"  otluiom.  (Fabrotti,  Inur.  p.  278.)  To
I  a  rallaniia  waa  mtaetimea  attached,  in
wnk  ni  petfbimed  b;  the  ilaTet  wl


lar^b


W.)


(Vam,  Jt.  R.  i


nni  to  haTe  ai
vkieb  ha*  be«n  di


Tti^  ad  Rhen.


fba  falla  waa  auTenible  fbc  the  fnfotj  while
il  «H  in  hii  poaaenian  ;  and  if  he  letunied  bf  mit-
lake  a  ditfennt  nnnent  fiom  the  one  he  had  re-
aand,  ho  waa  liaUe  to  an  artico  «c  UkoIo  :  to
which  adion  he  wai  alao  mbject  if  the  garment
WHiiqiDvd.  <Dig.  I9.tit.2.1.13.§6;i.60.  gS)
I3tit.7.h2.)  Woollen  gannenti,  which  had  been
dm  waahed,  wen  comideTed  to  be  ien  raliiable
thaa  thej  were  p»Tionil;  (Petnn.  30;  Lamprid.
HiUagah.  3«)  1  ham  Martial  <jl  U)  ipcaki  of  a
taga  Ml  (ornw  faoterwe  ai  a  pool  preaent

The  Ore^  wen  alao  aceoMomed  to  land  their
gaimoita  to  iolleca  to  he  waahed  and  acoored,  who
f  to  have  adopted  a  armilar  method  to  that
~ ' en  deiciibed  above. (Theophr.  Char.

_.. L  p.fi83,d.;  Pol]Bi,nL  39,  40,41.)

The  word  iKimai  denoted  the  waahing  of  linen,
aad  icra^ritir  or  Tro^t^iv  the  waahing  of  woallen,
dodwi.  (EoitatL  oif  (U.  ZCT.  148.  p.  1956.  41.)
AnliamlaUi  Trilnrat  tt  fUIoBH,
1.  1727  ;  Becknuum,  HiA  nfln«m-
Ktria,  tdL  iii.  p.  366,  Ac,  tnniL  :
neeur,  (awh,  toI.  iL  p.  100,  &C.,  CtanUtt,
ToLii.  0.401)

FULWyNICA. fFuLLa]

FUNA'LE  (.nMjii,  Idd.  Mg.  zx.  10),  a  lin]^
■Kd  in  tho  aame  maniMr  aa  a  tenh  [Fax],  but
■ade  ef  papjnu  and  other  fibrona  plants,  Iwiited
like  a  tnpe,  and  nnared  with  pitch  and  wax,
(Viiv.  Am.  i  727  ;  Serriiu,  ad  loc.;  Hoi.  Cam.
iiL  26.  7%  VaL  Mar.  iiL  6.  g  4.)  It  waj  indeed,
aa  AotipUer  deambei  it,  "a  lif[ht  c«ted  witb
•ax"  <A^Tdt  mfHxfTM',  Branch,  jKiZ-ii.  112  {
JaeoU,  ai  loc).  For  thii  rsaKm  it  wai  alw  called
onaBL  Fonalia  are  K^ptnred  upon  a  moanment
of  emndtnble  ■ntiqaitj'  pnanred  at  Padua,
(Pignor.  Dm  Servo,  p.  259.)  At  the  Saturnalia
Ihej  mrt  pnsented  by  climta  to  their  nperiora,
■id  were  lighted  in  honour  of  Saturn.  (AnlJpter,
Lc:  Hacnb.  Sot.  i.  6.)  [J.  Y.]

FUNA'LIS  EQUUS. [CcRima,  p.S79,b.]

FUNA'MBOLUS  (itaVrfin,.  (r;x«<»«dniO,
a  npe-daoos'.  The  art  of  dancing  on  the  tight
npe  wa*  earned  to  aa  gnat  perfection  amoDg  tho
Roma  ai  it  ii  with  UL  (Hoc.  BpiM.  ii.  1. 210;
Tool  Hecgr.  PnL  4. 34  ;  Jdt.  iiL  SO;  Bnlenger,
i€  71ea<LL43.) If  we  nmy  jadge  from  a  aeriea  of

<M{AtiLieEnoL


1  eodloM  TuietT  of  giacefbl
and  reproBoited  the  chafae-


ten  vt  bacdianal^  mXja,  and  other  imaghiary
liaiii  Three  of  the  pnoni  ben  eihibited  hold
the  u jnoa,  which  axj  haTe  lerred  for  a  balanebig
|de:  tw» Me pcrfaming  en  the  donble  pipe, and


one  on  the  Ijre :  two  othan  are  ponring  wine  into
Teiaeli  of  diSennt  Ibnni.  They  all  have  their
beada  enidoped  in  akint  or  c^ta,  pmbably  intended
aa  a  prolaction  in  caia  of  blling.  The  emperor
Antoninci,  in  eoniequence  of  the  fall  of  a  boy,
canaed  (other-bed*  ipnieitrai)  to  be  lud  under  the
rope  to  obnatfl  the  danger  of  fuch  accidents
(DuiitoL  M.  Atiim.  1 2.)  One  of  the  moM  difficult
eiploitt  wat  running  down  the  rope  (Siietoo.  Nero,
11)  at  the  conclnaiDn  of  the  perfiinnance.  It  waa
a  itrangv  attempt  of  Oeimanicui  and  of  the  eni-
peror  Galba  to  exhibit  elephanti  walking  on  tho
rope.  (Plin.  ff.  M  riiL  2  ;  Snaton.  Q<M.  6 ;  S«u
Si^  Be.)  [J.  Y.]

FUMA'HIUM. [TiNiTii.]


part  of  alingtn  (  iWUotm,  a^tioHir'')-
earlieit  timea,  however,  the  aling  appeara  not  to
have  been  nied  bj  the  Greefca.  It  la  not  mcao-
tloned  in  the  Iliad  i  (or  in  the  only  paatage  (R.
xtii  699)  in  which  the  word  fftMyii  occnn,  it  ia
naed  in  ita  original  aignification  of  a  bandage.  But
in  the  timea  olf  the  Penian  wara  ilingen  bod  come
into  uie  ;  for  among  the  other  troopa  which  Oelon
oflered  to  Knd  to  the  auiManoe  of  the  Oreeka
anunat  Xenca,  mentiim  ia  made  of  2000  ilingera
(Herod.  Til  16S) ;  and  that  the  aling  waa  Oicn
known  among  the  Qreeka  ia  alto  evident  from  the
allurion  to  it  by  Aeachjlu  (Affam.  982).  At
the  lame  tnne  it  moat  be  ftated  that  we  rarely  read
of  iliaaaa  in  theie  waia.  AmDi%  the  Qreeka  the
in  eari;  timea  aUained  to  the  giealaat
the  nae  of  thia  weapon  (Thuc  il  81);
hUet  tma  the  Achaeana,  eapeoally  the  in-
halntaata  of  Aginm,  Patiae,  and  Djmae,  woe  ede-
taatada*  aKpatalingoa,  lite  alii^  of  tbeaa  Achae-
ana ware  made  of  thraa  thonga  of  leather,  and  not  of
onoodTilQuthoaeoColbsnatioaa.  (Lir.  xxxriii.
29.)  TtMpe«>le,howeTel,whaeaJ07edtheraeateat
Celebris  aa  tUnnta  wen  the  natiTca  of  the  Balevis
iilanda.  Their  ikill  in  the  nie  of  tbia  weapon  ia  wd
to  have  Biiaa]  from  the  circomitance,  that,  when
thejr  were  children,  their  molhen  obliged  them  to
dbtaintheicfoodbTatrikisgilwilliailing.  (Vegat.


•odata  hUei


5St  FONDU3.

^eRc3/iLL  l6;Strab.iiLpJ6B.)  M«t ilmgi creie
made  of  leather,  liut  the  Balearic  ones  were  manu-
fecmred  out  of  a  kind  Df  ru«h. {Snab.Lc.) Thf

in  tU  anneied  fignre{Biirtoli,  Oi  rrojl  I.  *6)  of  B


■oldifr  with  a  promion  of  atania  in  the  dDtu  of  his
pallium,  and  with  hit  arm  eilcnded  in  order  to  whirl
th«  alio);  about  bit  head.  (Virg.  Aen.  ix.  £67, 588,
xi.  S79.)  Beiidea  atonu,  plummeti,  called  glaiida
(jui\iMlSu).  of  a  form  bdwcen  aconii  and  al-
mondi,  were  cait  in  numldi  la  be  threwn  with
(lingt.  (LocreL  Ti.  176  ;  Ovii,  Met.  ii.  729,  vii.
778,  liT.  625,  836.)  They  haie  been  found  on
the  phiin  of  MaiBlhon,  and  in  other  paiU  of  Greece,
and  arc  remarkable  for  the  inKriptioni  and  device*
which  they  exhibit,  auch  at  thunderbolu,  Iheiuunea
of  penoDi,  and  the  word  AEBAt,  meaning  "  Talie
tliia."  (Dodwell-a  Tnmr,  vol.  ii.  pp.  169—161  i
Bflekh,  Corp.  /m.  vol  i.  p.  311  ;  MommMii,  in
ZeiUdirift  fiir  du  AUerlJtmiiaiueiudii^l,  1846,
p.  782.)  [J.  Y.]

While  the  itinf  was  ■  very  efGcacioni  and  im-
portant inatrument  of  ancient  warfare,  atonea  thrown
with  the  hand  alone  were  alio  much  in  uie  both
among  the  Romans  (VegeL  1 16,  ii.  33)  and  with
other  nation!  (ol  rtT/ntSXiH,  Xen.  HcSni.  ii.  4.
§  12).  The  Libyans  carried  no  other  armt  than
three  apean  and  a  bag  fiill  of  aloneL  (Diod.  Sic
iii.  49.  f

FUNDITORES. [FuNn*.]

FUNDUS.  The  primaiy  signification  of  thia
word  appears  to  be  the  bottom  or  foundation  of  a
thing  ;  and  its  elemental?  part  (fud),  seems  to  be
the  same  a<  that  of  3i>e,r>t  and  i>f>»i',  the  ■  in
fiindui  being  used  lo  ittenfctheo  the  syllablo.  The
cnnjecturei  of  the  Latin  vriters  as  lo  the  etymo-
logy of  fundus  may  be  safely  neglected.

Fundus  is  often  used  as  applied  to  land,  the
solid  substiatDm  of  all  msn^s  labauts.  According  to
Fiorentinus  (Dig.  50.  tit.  1 6.  s.  2in  the  term  fundus

liiage  had  restricted  ihfl  name  of  oajei  to  city
houses,  vHIae  to  niml  houses,  area  to  ■  plot  of
ground  in  a  city  not  built  npon,  aper  to  a  plot  of
ground  in  the  country,  and  fitmdut  to  ager  aim
tudifieuM.  This  definition  of  fimdus  may  be  com'
pared  with  the  uses  of  that  word  by  Horace,  and
other  writris.  In  one  passage  (Ep,  i.  2. 47),
HoracQ  places  domns  and  fundua  in  oppotilion  to
one  another,  domns  being  appnntly  there  used  aa

. The  term  fnudua  often  ocnuTod  in  Romm  willa,


FUNUS.  ■
and  the  teitator  frequently  indicated  the  fiindui,  la
which  his  but  diipoiitioni  lefemd,  by  some  tuune,
such  as  Sempronianua,  Seianns;  somelima  alio,
with  reference  to  a  [articular  tract  of  conntiy,  aa
Fundus  TiebaliBnns  qui  est  in  regione  Alellana.
(Brissmius,  de  FonniLlii,  vii.  80.) A  fimdus  was

stock  and  implements  of  husbandry. Occasionally


riied  their  claim  &om  a  teitstor.  (Dig.  31  [IL  17.
a.  12.)

Fundua  haa  a  derived  sense  which  flows  eaii!?
enough  fi-om  its  pritoary  meaning,  "Fundus,**
saysFestus,  "diciturpopulusesse  rei,quamoJienal,
hoc  eat  auclor."  [AucroR.]  Compare  PUutus,
TriHum,  v.  i.  7  (>ikJw  potior). In this sen«i

and  in  Gellius  (lii.  8)  there  is  the  eipreuloil
"  senlentiae  legisque  fundus  suhscriptonjue  fieri."
[Fo<dsr*tl3  [O.L.I

FUNES. [Navu.]

FUNUS.  It  ia  propoaed  in  the  following  article
to  give  a  brief  actonnt  of  Greek  and  Roman
funcrala,  and  of  the  diSerent  rites  and  ceremoniea

1.  Gheik.  Tbo  Greeks  attached  great  import-
ance to  the  hutial  of  the  dead.  They  believed
that  souls  could  not  enter  the  Klysian  fields  till
their  bodies  had  been  buried  !  and  acconlingly  we
find  the  shade  of  Elpenor  in  the  Odyssey  (li.  36.
&C.)  earnestly  imploring  Ulysses  to  hury  his  body.
Ulvsaesalso,  when  in  danger  of  shipwreck,  deplores
that  he  had  not  fallen  before  Troy,  as  he  should  in
that  case  have  obtained  an  honouiablc  burial.  (Od.
V.  311.)  So  strong  was  this  feeling  among  the
Greeks,  that  it  was  cenaidered  a  religions  duty  to
Ihnw  earth  npon  a  dead  body,  which  a  person
might  happen  to  find  unbnried  (ArL  For.  /lot.  t.
1 4 } !  and  among  the  Athenians,  those  children  who
were  released  &om  all  other  obligations  to  onworth  j
parents,  were  nevertheless  bound  to  bury  them  by
one  of  Salon's  laws.  (Aescb.  c.  TTinarr.  p.  40.)
The  neglect  of  burying  one's  relatives  is  irequeiitly
mentioned  by  the  orators  as  a  grave  charge  against
the  mora]  character  of  a  man  (Dem.  e.  An^t^
i.  p,7B7.g  J  Lys.e.  Piip.  883,  c  Alab.  jt.  &:iit\
since  the  burial  of  the  body  by  the  relations  of  the
dead  was  considered  a  religious  duty  by  the  iini.-
yersal  biw  of  the  Oreeka  Sophodca  reprcscnta
Antigone  as  disregarding  all  consequences  jji  order
to  bury  the  dead  body  of  her  brother  Potj-neicea,
which  Creon,  the  king  of  Thebes,  had  comnunded
to  be  left  unhuried.  The  common  eipreaiions  for
the  fimeral  rites,  ri  Sficoia,  i'6fuftA  nr  rofu^d^rn,
trptxr^Drra,  show  that  the  dead  bad,  as  it  were,  a
legnl  and  moral  claim  to  burial

The  cnmoion  customs  connected  with  a  Gnwk
fnneral  arc  described  by  Lucian  in  bis  treatise  d*
L<ui»  (c  10,  &C.,  vol  iL  p.  926.  ed.  Keiti)  ;  suid
there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  that  they  differ
much  from  those  which  were  practised  in  earlier
times.  AfUT  a  person  was  dead,  it  was  the  nu.
torn  first  to  place  in  his  mouth  an  oholus,  ^led
ianiiat  [Danaci],  with  which  he  might  pay  the
ferryman  in  Hades.  The  body  was  then  washed
and  anointed  with  perfumed  oil,  and  the  head  waa
crowned  with  the  flowers  which  happened  lo  be  in
season.  The  dceeated  ■'M  next  dressed  in  aa
handsome  a  robe  as  th*  family  could  aflocd,  in
order,  according  U  Lucian,  that  he  might  not  b*


FUNU3.

tM  Dd  the  puoge  to  Haitt,  nor  be  lecn  naked
br  Crrixnu :  thii  gsrment  appears  to  bate  twea
nnallj  vbilc  {IL  xiiiL  353  ;  Artemiod.  Oamr.
U.  3.)  Tfatte  dntiei  wwo  not  perfanned  by  hired
pcmna,  like  the  poOimiom  among  the  Romuu,
but  hj  thfl  women  of  the  iamilj,  opon  whom  the  core
oftheeorpKilwajideTolTed.  (iHeui,  de  Pkiloct.
itr.  f.  U3,  da  anm.  ier.  p.  2D9.)

The  «vpK  wat  Ihca  bid  out  (TfMtaa,  Tporl-
ttrtmi )  on  a  bsd  (kXiV))),  which  appoui  to  have
bren  of  the  odinarr  kind,  with  b  piJiow  (rpoirct-
^^Afliw)  iaz  KipporUng  the  krad  and  back.  ( Lya,
&  fntCoA  p.  39G.)  Jt  ii  uid  that  the  bed  on
«hich  the  arpK  wai  lud  oat  vai  originaJIj  pUced
cHtaiile  Ibe  hoiue  (9choL  ad  ArMoph,  l^tittr.
611)  ;  but  at  Athena  we  know  it  wai  idaced  in-
■de.  by  aoe  of  SoloD^  lawa.  (Dem.  c.  Maatrt.
p.  1071.)  The  object  of  th[>  fonml  wpiSvitt  wu
that  it  might  be  leen  that  the  deceaied  had  died
natnrallj,  and  that  no  Tiolence  had  been  done  to
him.  [Pollui,  Tiii  eS.)  Plato  (£«.  xiL  9.  p.  9f  9}
Biiign*  another  raun,  namelf,  that  there  might
be  BO  dosbt  that  the  penon  waa  dead,  and  nyi,
that  the  bodj  ought  rally  to  be  kept  in  the  houae
ao  laigaa  itmay  benecrawry  to  aacatain  that  bet.
By  tlw  aide  of  Ibe  bed  there  vera  placed  painted
earthen  veoela,  odled  A^ktAm  (AriMopk,  £iKf.
1032,  998),  which  wen ' ■


1^  theae  jniated
km  found  in  modem  timei ;  and  they  hare  been
of  great  nae  in  explaining  many  matten  connected
with  aatiqnity.  A  honey-cake,  called  luXtrrovra,
vhich  appcan  to  have  bem  intended  tot  Cerbenu,
vaialaoplaoedWiheiideoftherorpae.  (Ariilaph.
LfB^r.  601,  wiu  SchoL  ;  compare  Virg,  ^sl  ri.
419.)  Bdbn  the  door  a  Teaiel  of  water  woi  placed,
aned  tarfoMM,  j^Uuar  or  VhErwr,  in  older  that
penooa  wb)  had  beco  in  the  houae  might  pnri^


, .  _  ,  .  He^h.

(.  V.  'l^)  Tkreiatirea  itood  around  the  bed,  the
weaun  Mtaring  great  lamentation!,  rending  their
garatnta  aDd  tearing  their  hair.  (Lncian.  A.  13.)
Selm  atlanpted  to  bM  a  atop  to  thia  (Pint.  Sol.
I2.3l),bathiaregiaationaoii  the  lubject  do  not
appar  to  hare  been  generally  obaened.  It  waa
hnuerly  the  pnctia  to  lacnfice  lictinu  before
carryiag  out  ue  dead  ;  bnt  thia  cuitom  ma  not
alaerTedinthetimeaf  PUlo.  (jtf».p.31£.)  No
Iniaka  imder  GO  y«n  of  age,  eieept  the  luareat
iriatkiu  (Jhnh}  In^iolw),  wen  allowed  to  be
{naeni  while  the  corpaa  waa  in  the  houa«i  (Don.
c  .Vaesr^  p.  1071.)

On  the  day  aAer  the  vpMnru,  or  the  third  day
after  death,  the  cotpae  waa  carried  oat  (Jc^aiid,
fu*fut4}  Ibr  burisl,  eariy  in  the  motniog  and  be-
(ite  iDnrve,  by  a  law  of  Solon,  vhich  Law  appean
to  hare  been  rerived  by  Demetriui  Pbalerent.
tDem.i.&; Antiph.de Onr.  p.  782  j Cic  de


£«^  a  26.) A  burial  a


>(Au


tbTS^


a  Srri  rdx"*"!  ''Aof  iAoe  npiSo'o.

Xen.  Meat  L  3.  g  fiS.)  In  aone  placea
__  to  have  been  naral  to  bury  tie  dad  on
MIowii^deatL  (Callim.£p^.  1£  iDiog.
' 122.) The  naa  walked  befote  the


FUNUS.  US

corpae  and  the  women  behind.  (Dem.  I.  e.)  The
funeral  proceaiion  wu  preceded  1^  followed  by
hired  mouraeni  (b^riftol),  who  appear  to  have
been  naually  Cirikn  women,  thongh  Ptato  tpeaka
of  men  engaged  in  thia  office.  They  played  mourn-
ful tunei  OD  tiie  flute.  (Plat  Leg.  tH  9.  f.  SDO  ;
Heiych.  i.  e.  Kaplnu  ;  Pollni,  It.  7£.)

The  body  vaa  either  buried  or  buruL  Lncian
(,1b.  21)  layi  that  the  Qieeki  ban  and  the  Per-
aiana  bury  their  dead ;  hut  modem  vriten  an
greatly  dirided  in  opinion  aa  to  which  vaa  the
uinal  practice.  Wacumuth  siyi  that  in  hiitorical
timea  the  dead  were  olwayi  buried  ;  but  tbiaatatC'
meat  ii  not  ^ctly  correct.  Thui  we  find  that
Socrates  speaks  of  his  body  being  either  burnt  or
buried(PlBtP*aait.p.ll5)  j  thabodyofTimoleoa
was  bnint  (Plut.  TTbk^  39),  and  so  was  that  of
PhilopMmen.  (Id.  Pii6ip.2L)  The  word Mrrtiv
ia  used  in  oonnectico  with  either  mode  ;  it  ii  applied
to  the  collection  of  the  sahea  nf^  burning,  and  ac-
cordingly we  find  the  wordi  nleiir  and  3ilirT<ir
need  together.  (Konys.  Anl.  Sum.  t.  48.)  Ths
propw  eipreauoo  for  interment  in  the  earth  ia
■nrTsp^TTeu',  whence  va  find  Socratea  apeaking  of
tb  oAfia  4  KoAfuvor  9f  KeerofntTr6fitiiov.  In  Homer
the  bodies  of  the  dead  arc  burnt  (A  iiiiL  127,
ftc,  iiir.  787,  4t)  !  bntinlennentwM  alio  need
in  ym  ancient  times.  Cicero  (de  Leg.  iL  25)  aaya
that  the  dead  were  boiied  at  Athena  In  the  time
of  Ceeropa ;  and  we  alio  read  of  the  bones  of  Ores-
tea  being  Ibnnd  in  a  coSn  at  Tegea.  (Herod,  i.  68;
compare  Pint  SU.  1 0.)  The  dead  were  commonly
buried  among  the  Spsrtana  (Pint  Lye  27  ;  com-
pare Thacyd.L  I34)andtheSicyonialii(Pauail7.
g  3)  ;  and  the  prevalence  of  thu  practice  it  prorod
by  the  great  nnmber  of  skeletons  fbnnd  in  coifina
m  modern  times,  vhich  hare  eridoitly  not  been
exposed  to  the  actiim  of  fint  Both  burning  and
bniying  appear  to  hare  been  alwayi  used  to  a
grealer  orleaa  extent  at  diflerent  penoda  ;  till  the
s]Head  of  Chriatianity  at  length  pnt  an  end  to  the
former  practice.

The  dead  bodies  were  nsoally  burnt  on  piles  of
wood,  called  rvpoL  The  body  was  placed  on  the
top  ;  and  in  the  heroic  tunes  it  was  customary  to
bum  with  the  erapse  animals  and  eren  captives  or
slaves.  Thtis  at  the  funeral  of  Patroclos,  Achilles
killed  many  abeep,  oien,  horaea,  and  dogs,  and
also  twelve  captive  Trojans,  whosa  bodies  he  burnt
with  those  ofhis  friend.  (IL  uiii.  1«£,  &c)  Uils
and  perfiunes  were  also  thiowD  into  the  flames
When  the  pyn  vat  burnt  down,  the  remains  of
the  fire  were  quenched  with  wine,  and  the  relatives
and  friends  collected  the  bone*  {IL  ixU.  791.)
The  boon  were  then  washed  with  vine  and  oil,
.laced  in  urns,  which  were  sometimes  made  of
gold. (Od.  niv.  71,&c)

The  corpses,  vhich  were  lial  burnt,  vera  buried
in  cotfine,  which  were  called  by  larioua  names,  as
trvfoi^  TPtXoi,  AijfDl,  AdpfBjrss,  ipdhoi^  though
some  of  tbese  names  ore  also  applied  to  the  urns
in  which  the  bones  were  collected.  They  were
made  of  (orious  materials,  bat  vere  usually  of
baked  day  or  earthenvara  Their  forins  an  very
Tarioua,  aa  may  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  Blackel-
beig(i>HCriii«'<i«rA>lbam,pL7,e). The  pre-


66B  FONUS.

ceding  woodcnt  contaim  two  of  tho  Tanti  ancient
Icicd  ;  the  figure  in  the  middle  \t  the  sectirai  of  one.
The  dead  were  nnially  buried  oiitiide  the  town,
u  it  wu  thought  that  tbeii  pm«ce  in  the  city
brought  pollution  to  the  liiing.  At  Athens  the
dead  were  fonnerlj  buried  la  their  own  houiei
(Plat.  Afn.  L  c),  but  in  biitoriial  timet  none  were
allowed  to  be  buried  within  the  city. (Cic  ad


>a  nf  burial  ia  Sparta  (Plat.  lyo.  27);  and
at  Megan  aleo  the  d^  were  buried  within  the
town. (Paul.  I  *3.  S  2.)

Penona  who  poueued  laoda  In  Attia  were  fre-
quently buried  in  them,  and  WB  therefsie  t«d  of
tomba  in  the  lieldi.  (Dora.  c.  Eaer^.  p.  11S9 ;
Donat  ad  Ttr.  Em.  ProL  10.}  TotnU,  bowerer,
were  moat  {nqaently  built  by  the  aide  of  roadt  and
nc«r  the  gatea  of  the  dly.  Thni  the  tomb  of  Thu-
cydidee  wsi  near  the  Melition  gate  (Pane.  I  33.
§11)^  but  the  moet  conunon  place  c^  burial  wae
outiide  of  the  Itonian  gate,  near  the  road  leading  to
the  PeiiaeeuB,  wliich  gals  wat  (or  that  reaun  called
the  burial  gate.  {'Hplai  riXoi,  Etyni.  Mag.  and
Harpocr.  t.r.,-  Thea[^.  Clar.  14.)  Thoae  who
had  bllen  in  battle  were  buried  at  the  public  ei-
pense  in  the  outer  Genmeicua,  on  the  road  leadiog
to the Academia. (Thuc  ii.  S4  ;  Pans,  i.  29.

The  tombi  wer«  regaided  aa  private  property,
and  belonged  eidueively  to  the  funiliea  wh»e  re-
lalirn  had  been  buried  in  thcni.  (Dem.  e.  EubitL
f.  1307.  e.Maatrt.p.m'!  i  Cic.  dt  1^.0^26.)

Tomb*  were  tailed  ifiiiiu,  Tii^oij  /u^/mto,
/irttfuta,  d^^urro.  Many  of  theae  were  only
mounda  of  earth  or  Monei  (x^fuera,  Ka\£>w,
T^^afoi).  Othen  ware  hui]toriI«Hie,Bnd  frequently
ornamented  prith  great  taite.  Some  of  the  moflt
remarkable  Oreek  lombl  are  thoH  which  hare
beendiKoyeredinLyciabySirC.  Feltowt.  In  the
ueighbonrhond  of  Aaliphellut  the  lombi  are  rerr
numeroua.  They  althaveOreck  inscripliona, which
are  generally  much  deiDoyed  by  the  damp  m
air.  The  tallowing  woodcut,  taken  finm  Fellowi'i
wark  (EzsuTMiim  ia  Alia  JUmor,  p.  21 9),  connina
one  of  theae  tombe,  and  will  give  an  idea  of  the
Seneml  ■ppeaiance  of  the  whole.


They  are  cut  into,  or  are  formed  by  cutting  away,
the  rock,  leaving  the  tomba  etandii^  like  worlu  of
Kulpture.  (lb,  p.  236.)  The  nine  it  the  caie  at
Telmeiaua,  where  they  are  cut  oat  of  the  rock  in
the  form  of  temple*.  They  are  generally  appmched
by  (tepi,  and  the  oolumnt  of  the  portico  itand  out
about  ail  feet  from  the  entrance  to  the  cella  )  the
interiora  vary  bnt  little  j  they  are  uaually  about
•ii  feet  in  height  and  nine  feet  by  Iwdve  in  iii&
One  aide  i*  occupied  by  the  door,  and  the  other


:h  the  CO


(ft.  P.24B.)
Some  Greek  tomha  were  built  ui  .  ^
tailed  kfpoffea  (Aa^Twa  or  ariym).  They  cor-
reipond  to  the  Roman  amdiloria.  (Petton.  c  1 1 1.)
At  Athena  the  dead  appear  to  have  been  uaually
bnried  in  the  earth ;  and  originally  the  place  of  their
interment  was  not  marited  by  any  monument.  (Cic
da  Lip.  ii,  25.) Afterwards,  howerer,  ao much

to  the  deceased,  that  it  waa  provided  by  one  ol
Solon'a  lawi,  that  no  one  ahould  erect  a  monument
which  could  not  be  completed  by  ten  men  in  the
eouno  of  three  dayi.  (W.  ii.  36.)  This  law,  how-
ever,  doea  not  seem  Ia  have  been  aCrictly  obecrred.
We  read  of  one  monument  which  coat  twenty-five
minae  (Lys.  c,  Diag.^  90S),  and  of  another  which
coat  more  than  two  talents.  (Dem.  c.  SbyL  i.
p.  1125.  15.)  Demelriui  Phalcreua  olio  attempted
to  put  a  stop  to  thia  expense  by  forbidding  the
erection  of  any  funeral  monumtfxt  more  than  ihne
cubita  in  heigk (Cic  I.e.)

The  monuments  erected  orer  the  gravel  of  wr-
Muu  were  nmally  of  (bui  kinda  :  1.  irr^Xju,  piUan
or  upright  atone  tablet!  ;  2.  alorai,  columna  ;  S.
ralita  ot  ilp$a,  (mall  buildinga  in  the  form  of  tem-

?Iei ;  and  4.  T|idn£iu,  flat  aqnaie  atonos,  called  by
:iceiD  {i  e.)  nAUos.  The  term  irnj\Bi  is  aome-
timet  applied  to  all  kinds  of  funeral  monamcnta,
but  properly  designates  upright  atone  tablsta,  which
were  usually  terminated  with  an  oval  betiding,
(ailed  jvlAifio.  These  iriHuMTa  were  frequently
ornamented  with  a  kind  of  aisbetqne  woiIk,  at  in
I3m  two  following  tpecimenj  taken  fiom  Stackel-
becg  (pi.  3).  The  tiu^e  of  the  iwUtiiia,  howew,
difiered ;  anung  the  Sicyouiana  it  waa


inthe  ahapeofthe  irrJicr/ii

which  ia  placed  over  the  eilremity  of  a  tem|jB.


Tin  thae  in  tke  foUawing  voodcnt  ue'takea  from
Sadielbirg  (pI.H  16)wd  Millin (PUbik  raw
^■LniLu.)j.SI.)


Tbe  bllDwiDg  example  of  uit^rw,  which  iiil»
tikni  liDm  Su^dbei^  (pL  I }  Will  gire  a  gcneial
idtm  of  monumentt  of  tfau  kind.  Another  iifV'"
ii  giien  io  the  conne  of  thii  (rticlo  (p.  ££6,  >.).


(Hecfcb.  (,  v.  /  Pint.  QiaaL  Rotn.  5. ,
After  the  fbneral  wai  over  the  nlalirei  partook
>  fcait,  irbich  wu  called  •wtflSnimw  or  mp6-
nmr.  (LiHuan,  i&.  c  2i  ;  Cie.  ila  Lt^.  u.  25.)
Thii  fout  wia  BlwaTa  giTen  at  the  houH  of  tha
iHUHt  relatiTe  of  the  deoBied.  Thua  the  relatJTea
if  thoie  whs  had  bilea  at  the  haltle  of  Chaeroneia
partook  of  the  nplStiimu'  at  the  houn  of  Demo-
(thenea,  ai  if  he  were  the  neoieat  lelatiTe  to  them
all.  (Dem.  preOmn.  p.321.  IS.)  Th«e  ftaiu
are  frequently  leprewnted  on  fonenl  moDmneiiti.
I  comer  a  hone*!  bead  it  nmolly  ptaeed,  which
ilended  to  represent  death  a<  ji  jonrnoT.  The
foIlDwinE  vDodcDt,  which  repreaenU  anpHfinw
'w9ror,  ia  taken  from  the  Marmora  Own,  L
No.  ]  35.  A  similar  example  of  a  rtptStamHi
I  at  the  beginning  of  Hahhonie^  lYaviii.
(Compare  MiUter,  AniiioL  da-  Kmt,  %  428. 2.)


n  theae  fbnenl  monunen
unalN'  connm  the  name  of  the  deceaied  pern
and  ifaat  of  the  demni  to  which  he  belonged, .
vdt  a*  fnqaentl;  aome  sctoont  of  hia  life,
weak  OB  anch  monomenta,  entitled  Ilapl  Mrti/iin
wai  written  b;I>iodwnaPeriegete«. (Pint  7)em.

sa.)

OatioDc  in  ptuae  of  the  dead  '
fauueUKcd ;  bnt  Soton  ordained  lli
ibenld  be  confined  to  penoni  who  wen  honoored
with  a  poUic  fdneraL  (Cic  de  Up.  ii.  36.)  I
the  heroic  agea  gamti  were  telebrated  at  the  Ami
nl  of  a  great  man,  aa  in  the  caaa  of  Patniclni  {II
ixiii-)  ;  bnt  thii  pimctice  doea  Dot  aeem  to  havf
ban  oaoal  ia  the  hiatoriol  timet.

All  peteooa  who  bad  been  engaged  in  Amerali
■ve  cmMderei  polluted,  and  oowl  mt  enter  the
■mplea  of  the  oodi  Mil  they  had  been  pnriGed.
Tbiae  penooa  who  were  reported  to  hare  died  in
fai«gn  eoonlriea,  and  wkoaa  fimeia]  rilei  had  been
pofarmed  in  their  own  dttea,  were  called  iarfi-
fTpM  and  BfUHpixoT/ioi  if  they  were  alire.  Such
pRaaaa  wete  ctaiudered  bnpnie,  and  could  onl;  be
Uirand  faia  Iheii  imporitj  by  h  '


FUNUa
lling  clothe*,  and  treated  like  ni


6S7


On  the  aecond  day  after  the  ftanecal  a  tacrifice
to  tbe  dead  waa  offitied,  called  Tpfrn.  PoUui  (riii.
U6)  enomeratei,  in  order,  all  the  ncrificei  and
CEremoiuei  which  followed  the  fmieral, — rplro,
Imn-o,  Tpiudtet,  imrjiaiurra,  xoA  Aiittophanea
(Lftiitr.  611,  with  Schol.)  alladet  to  the  rpWa.
The  principal  aacrilrcc,  however,  to  the  dead  waa
on  the  ninth  day,  colled  tyrara  or  Irara.  (Aeichin.
0.  Ctu^^.  617;  Iiaeiu,<faC\'nn.i(emJ.p224,j
The  maammg  for  the  dead  appean  to  have  laited
till  the  thirtieth  day  after  the  ftinemi  (Ljs.i'e  coed.
EraL  p.  1 6),  on  which  day  aacrilicee  were  again
offered. (HarpocTat.  a.  e.  T^iofKU.) At  Sparta  the

(Plat.  L^  27.)  During  the  time  of  mooraing'  it
waa  coDiidered  iodeconnu  for  the  telati*ee  of  the
deceaacd  to  appear  m  public  (AeachJn.  e.  QfiplL
pp<61l,i69);  they  were  accnitomed  to  wear  a
bbck  dreaa  (Enrip.  Hdim.  1097,  Ipiig-  Aul.  1438;
laaeus,  dt  Nioolr,  Aw.  p.  71  ;  Pint,  FnicL  38X
and  in  ancient  timea  cot  off  their  hair  aa  a  tign  Ol
grief.  (IIAjiiivioi»rArn)|>uiT,AeichvLCSbi^7.)
The  tomba  were  pieserred  by  the  family  to
which  they  belonged  with  the  greateat  care,  and
were  regarded  aa  among  the  ■tii>ngeat  ties  which
attached  a  man  to  hia  natire  land.  (AeachyL  Pert.
40G;  Lycnrg.  c  £fl«r.  p.  141.)  In  the Docimaaia
of  the  Athenian  arcKona  it  waa  alwayi  ■  aubject
of  inqoiry  whether  they  had  kept  in  proper  repair
the  toml»  of  their  ancealon.  ( Xen.  Afara.  ii.  3,
g  1 3.)  On  certain  dayi  the  tomba  were  crowned
with  flowen,  and  o^ringi  wen  made  to  the  dead,
conaiatmg  of  goriandi  of  floweii  and  •oriooa  other
thmga;  for  on  acconnt  of  which  fee  AsKhyL  i'ci'L


S58  ruNua

609,  &c^  Cha^.  86,  &c  The  act  of  nOcrin;
thnc  pmeDti  «u  aUl«d  irayiCi"',  and  the  oBa-
iogi  tbenuelTM  Irarfbr/uera,  or  more  commonly
XOoL  Soch  oScriiig*  Bt  Uie  tombs  an  repcnented
upon  many  \1imiAqi,  or  painted  vaaoa ;  of  which  an
cxamplo  i)  giren  in  the  fblloving  woodcut.  (MiUin,
Ptai.  dt  Vamt,  vol.  iL  pL  27.)  The  tomb  it  built
in  the  form  of  a  templp  {fipv")-,  ""^  "P^"  it  i>  ■
lepreientatioD  of  the  deceased.  (See  alu  Stockel-
lieiy,  pi.  44 — 16,  uid  Miliin,  vol.  il  pL  32.  38,  for
further  examplei.)


The  ftrlaia  mentioned  hy  Herodotui  {ic.  36)
appear  \o  have  coniiated  in  eflcringi  of  the  lame
kind,  which  were  pretenled  on  the  ounivenarj  of
the  binh-da;  of  the  dcceaud.  The  rucwia  were
probably  otfiringi  on  the  aniUTenaiy  of  the  dny  of
the  death  ;  though,  according  to  Hme  writers,  the

I.e.  Ttriain:  OiamniM.  Bekk.  p.  231.)  Mealt
were  also  prciented  to  the  dead  and  burnt.  (Luciui,
Coaltapl.  22.  ToL  i  p^  519,  ed.  Reitt  ;  de  Mtrt.
Omd.aB.  pi6B7  J  Artemiod.  OMt'nwr.  it.  81.)

Certain  criminala,  who  were  put  to  death  by  the
itate,  wore  also  deprived  of  the  righta  of  birrml,
which  wu  conudered  u  an  addilionol  puniih-
mcnt.  There  were  ptacee,  both  at  Atheni  and
Spirla,  where  the  dead  bodiet  of  luch  criminnli
were  cut  (Pint  Tiem.  22  j  Thnc.  L  134.)  A
pcr«on  who  bad  committed  tuicide  «H  not  deprired
of  burial,  but  the  band  with  which  he  had  killed
himself  wai  cut  olf  and  buried  by  itaelt  (Actchin.
c.  Oct.  pp.  636,  637.)  The  bodic*  of  thote  per-
■ong  who  had  been  ttruck  by  lightning  were  le-
oarded  as  lacred  ('<pol  nitpol)  i  (hey  were  never
buried  with  othera  (Burip.  Si^.  935),  but  unully
on  ihc  gpot  wbero  they  had  been  itnick.  (Arte-
miod.  Oneiroa-.  ii,  9.  p.  146  ;  BininriL.)

2.  RoMAH.  When  a  Ronuu  waa  at  the  point
of  dcfith,  hii  nearest  itlation  present  endeAvoured
to  catch  the  lait  breath  with  his  month.  (Viig.
Atn.  IT.  684  ;  Cie.  Vcrr.  v.  ^i.)  The  ring  ww
taken  off  the  finger  of  the  dying  pcnon  (SueL  Hb.
73)  ;  and  H  toon  u  ha  wai  dead  hli  eyci  and
month  were  doied  by  the  nearest  reUtion  (Viijj.
;.  487 ;  Lucan,  iiL  740),  who  called  npon


dbyni


e(..,


prn^  (Ovid,  TriiL  iiL  3.  43,  MH.
G'i.FM.it.  853;  Calull.  cL  10.)  The  ccfpu
■  dien  washed,  and  anointed  with  oil  and  per-
nes  by  ilavei,  cmlled  PoUimdiiru,  who  belonged
the  iitomorri,  or  undertakers,  odled  by  the
ciikB.  I'KjMflirrfu. (Dig.  U.  tiU3.>.  5.  98.)


FUNUS.
Tbe  Libi^naiii  appear  to  have  befn  to  called  be-
cause tbey  dwelt  near  the  temple  of  Venni  Libitina,
where  all  things  requiiito  for  funerals  were  sold.
(Scnec  de  Baif.  tL  38  ;  Flut.  Qwmt.  Rom.  21 ;
Liv.  ilL  21  ;  Flut  N<m.  12)  Hence  we  find  the
eipreuioni  -nUan  LiHtiiKM  and  tnadtrt  LUitniam
used  in  the  sense  of  esraping  death,  (Hot,  Cam,
ill  30.  G  I  Juv.  lii.  122.)  At  this  temple  an  sc.
count  (rado^  ^jAgBterU)  was  kept  of  those  who  died«


their  names. (SueL  ffer.  39  ;  Dionya.  AaL  R
i..  16.)

A  imall  coin  wai  then  placed  in  the  month  of
the  corpse,  in  order  to  pay  the  feriTman  in  Hades
(Juv.  m  -267),  and  the  body  was  laid  not  on  a
eooeh  in  the  vestibule  of  the  house,  with  its  feet
tuvrardi  the  door,  and  dresKd  in  the  best  robe
which  the  deceased  had  worn  when  alive.  Oidi-
nary  citiiens  werv  dressed  En  a  white  toga,  and
magistrates  in  their  official  robes.  (Juv.  iii.  172  ;
Liv.  luiv.  7  i  Suet,  Nor.  50.)  If  the  deceued
had  received  a  crown  while  alive  as  a  reward  fw
his  bravery,  it  was  now  placed  on  bis  bad  (Cic.
de  Leg.  ii.  24)  ;  and  the  couch  on  which  he  wu
laid  was  sometimes  covered  with  leaves  and  flowen.
A  bnncb  of  cypress  was  also  moatly  placed  at  the
door  of  the  house,  if  be  waa  a  pcrton  of  cimse-
quflnce. (Lnean.  iiL  442  j  Ilor.  CdmLii.  U.  33.)

Funerals  were  usually  called  fumnt  jaila  a
eaw^uioe  ;  the  latter  t«rm  was  generally  applied  to
the  funeral  procession  (pompa  ^fiaebria).  Tbers
were  two  kinds  of  fimemis,  public  and  private  ;  of
which  the  former  was  cahnd/ttioH  ptMiciim  (Tacit,
■'"■■"'" '  the  peot^e  vm

IB,;  Cic*
(Ovid,  Trial.
,tr<Bulaiitimn  {Satt  NB:iS\<apirieaim.
I  appean  to  have  nsnally  left  a  certain  sDni
ui  luvn^j  m  his  will  to  pay  the  expenses  of  his
funeral  ;  bat  if  he  did  not  do  so,  nor  appoint  any
one  to  bury  him,  diis  duty  devolved  upon  the  per-
sons  to  whom  the  jsoperty  was  left,  and  if  he  diod
without  a  will,  upon  his  relations  according  to  their
order  of  succession  to  the  property.  (Dig,  11.  tit.
7.  s.  12.)  The  eipcnsei  of  the  fimeral  were  in
>Dch  cttset  decided  by  an  arbiter  according  to  tbe
property  and  rank  of  the  deceased  (Dig.  I.  tX
whence  or^Uria  is  used  to  signify  the  funezat  ex-
penses. {Cic,pn<  Doma,  37,  poet  Red.  n  iSo.  7,  bs
Fit.  9.)  The  following  description  of  the  mode  in
which  a  fiineial  was  conducted  applies  strictly  only
to  the  funerals  of  the  great ;  the  SBine  pomp  knd
ceremony  could  not  of  coarse  be  observed  in  tbe
COM  of  persons  in  ordinary  circumstances.

AU  funetali  in  ancient  times  wer«  perfbmed  at
night  {Serv.  ad  Virg.  Am.  v.  143  ;  Isidw.  zL  2,
Ti,  10),  but  afterwards  the  poor  only  were  bnried
at  night,  because  they  could  not  afford  to  have  any
funeml  procession.  (Festus,  j;  s.  Peipat;  Suet.
Dom.  17;  Dionys.  iv.  40.)  The  corpse  was  usually
carried  out  of  the  house  (fffinbalv)  on  tbe  eighth
day  alter  dealL  (Serr.  ad  Virg.  Ae».  v.  64.)
The  order  of  the  funeral  pracassion  was  rrtrulatcd


k,^


who  was  attended  by  licton  dressed  in  black.
(Donatod  Ter.  Adelpli.i.2.1;  GcieLig.  ii.24:
Hot.  Bp.  L  7.  6.)  It  was  headed  by  musicians  of
various  kinds  (coniciiHit,  tttiamm),  who  played
monndul  atraios  (Cic  BM.  iL  23  ;  OelL  ii.  1\
and  neit  came  monming  women,  called  Pmrficae
(FesluijS.  v.),  who  were  bind.to  lun^nt  jtnd  sii^


PONUS.
the  fbnenl  img  (mumia  or  laiw)  in  piuie  of  tbe
dnxucd.  TbcM  wen  KiDHtiiiiM  foUowcd  by
pltjo*  and  buftoni  itaarat,  lUifruiHa},  of  whoni
«K,  atttd  Ardiimimia,  tcpmeiited  the  chuactei
of  the  iliiiiaii  l\_  tdd  imltaleil  hia  words  ud  (Ctioni.
(SoM.  reqi.19.)  Thou  cuue  the  lUTe*  whom  the
ilRCUcd  tad  libeialed,  weariiig  the  «p  of  liberty
ifikati)  ;  the  nombei  of  whom  wh  orouinniilly
Tuj  gnat,  lioee  •  muter  (Dmetimei  libented  >U
hii  lUvee,  in  hii  will,  in  order  to  add  to  the  pomp
<i  hi*  fiiiienL  (Dionyi.  it.  S4  ;  eompare  Lit.
iiXTiiL  £5.)  B^bre  ^e  corpae  penoni  walked
vnring  waxen  muka  [Imjoo],  repreKnliiig  the
inceMon  of  the  deecand,  and  clothed  in  the  official
driNea  of  thoae  whom  the;  rspieaented  (Folyh.
ii£3  ;  Plin.i/.M  ixiT.  2);  and  then  wen  alao
cuiied  bef«e  the  eoipae  the  cnwiu  oi  sulitary  ra-
vardi  wkich  the  deeeaaed  had  gained. (Cic.  da

The  ourpae  wai  canied  co  ■  eoncli  (Udioa),  to
which  the  BBDW  of  Fattram  (Vairo,  Ja  Ling.  Lot.
T.16E)aTGip*i«<F«lai,J:ii.)  wainiBRUygiren;
Wt  the  bodia  of  poor  ciiiaeni  and  of  alaTea  were
viied  on  a  oimnion  kind  of  biei  or  coffin,  called
Simdapila.  (Ntrt  iL  61,  viii  75.  U  ;  Jdt.  Tiii.
ITJi  nruana,Har.  5al.l6.  9.)  The  Siadafila
*ai  carried  by  beaiera,  call«l  Vapao  or  Vt^tUltmoa
(Soet  Dam.  17  ;  Mart.  L  31.  4B),  becaiiae,  Bo-
acSiDg  la  Featua  (a.  v.),  they  carried  out  the
oirpaa  in  (he  CTening  (w^vrtno  ta»pan).  The
(oscbea  cm  which  the  eorpaei  of  the  neh  were  car-
' %  made  of  ivory,  and


often  rarried
tioBtof  lhedK»Kd(VHler.Mu.TiLl.SI  ;  Hor
liaLa.9.  56),  andaometimeaon  thoaeof  bii&ced-
aeo.  (Pen.  iiL  106.)  Julius  Coeear  waa  carried
hT  the  magiitislea  (Suet.  Jul.  81),  and  Auguttut
V  the  aenatara.  (Id.  A<^  100  ;  Tacit.  Aia.  L  6.)

Tie  relaiiDDa  of  the  deecaaed  walked  behind  the
canae  in  vKmming  i  hia  aona  irith  their  headi
•riled,  and  hia  duighten  with  their  heada  bare
aad  their  hair  diahevelled,  amtrary  to  the  ordinary
pactice  of  both.  (PtuLQweif.  AOia.  14.)  They
olten  nuered  loud  lainentstiona,  and  the  womec  beat
their  hreaaU  and  tore  their  cheeka,  though  tbi*  waa
^bidden  by  the  TweWe  Tublea.  iMuliem  ^eaut
■a  "uimmto,  Cic  da  Leg.  iL  S3.)  If  the  deceaaed
W  of  illDflrioua  rank,  the  funeral  proceaaion  went
thnnrii  the  fonuu  (Diouya.  ii.  40),  and  tlaffoi  be-
ftn  the  mtra,  where  a  funeral  oration  (inudatHi)
in  pniae  of  the  deceaaed  waa  deliTered.  (Dionya.
T.  17  ;  Cic  ;>n>  M^  13,  de  Orat.  il  34  ;  Suet  J*L
U,  Awg.  too.)  Thia  practice  waa  of  great  an-
tiquity among  the  Romnna,  and  ia  aaid  by  lome
writera  to  hsTe  been  Slat  inDvduced  by  Publicola,
who  insnonnced  a  funeral  mtion  in  honour  of  hia
(olk^goe  Ktitoa.  (Plut. /Vfic  9  j  DioiiyLT.  17.)
Woneti  alia  were  hoDoured  by  funeml  orabona.
(Cic.  dt  OnU.  ii.  11  j  Suet  JmL  26,  OU.  10.)
Fnm  the  fbmm  the  corpae  waa  airried  to  the  place
af  burning  or  borial,  which,  according  to  a  law  of
the  TwelTc  TaUea,  waa  obliged  to  be  outaids  the
thy. (Cic.  dt  Ltg.  ii.

The  Komaoi  in  the
their  di^  (Flin.  H.  N.  lii.  hh\  though  Ihey  also
early  adopted,  to  aome  extent  the  cuitom  of  bura-
iBK.  which  ia  mentioned in the  Twelvo  Tablea.


FUNU8.


ua


of  (he  Cornelian  g^na  whoae  body  waa  burned..
(Cic  ii.  iL  22.)  Under  the  eDi|Hre  bnnuDg  waa
almmt  univenally  practiaed,  but  na  gndnallj  dU-
continued  ai  Chriatianity  aproid  (Minuc  Felix,  p.
327,  ed.  OuieL  1672),  ao  that  it  had  bllen  into
diauao  in  the  fourth  century.  (Macrob.TiL  7.)  Per-
■ona  atrock  by  lightning  were  not  burnt,  but  buried
on  the  tpot,  which  waa  called  BidutaL,  and  wsj
eonaidercd  aaersd.  [Bidintal.]  Children  slao,
who  had  not  cut  their  teeth,  were  not  burnt  but
buried  in  a  place  called  SugffnatdarxuaL,  (Plin,
H.  iV.  TiL  15  ;  Jut.  xt.  140  ;  Fulgent  de  priic
Smn.  7.)  Thoae  who  were  buried  were  placed  in
a  coffin  (an»  or  loatbu),  which  waa  fretiae»tly
niadBofBtone(Valer.  Max.Ll.  |12i  AureLVict
d*  Vir,  fU.  42),  and  uoietinieB  of  the  Aaatau
atone,  which  came  (torn  Ataoa  in  Troaa,and  which
conaumed  all  the  body,  with  the  exception  of  the
teelh,  in  40  daya  (Plin.  H.  N.  iL  9S,  iiitL  27),
whence  It  waa  oJled  San^jiagiu.  Thia  name  waa
in  couraa  of  time  applied  to  any  kind  of  coffin  or
tomb.  (Jut.  x.  172  ;  Dig.  34.  tit  1.  a.  13.  g  S  ;
OrelU,  /aasr.  No.  194,  4432,  4554.)

The  corpee  Tvaa  bunt  on  a  pile  of  wood  (pjm
or  rpjTHf).  Serriui  (of  Virg.  Am.  il  1 3£)  dina
definea  the  difference  betareen  pf^  and  n^^aa,
*^  lym  eat  lignomm  oongeriea  j  rc^aj,  cum  jam
ardere  comrit,  dicitur."  Thia  pile  waa  built  in
the  form  of  on  altar,  with  fimr  equal  aidea,  whence
we  find  it  called  am  MpHhri  (Vice.  An.  ri.  177}
ard/ioiiiruoro,  (Otid,  7V«t  iiL  13.  21.)  The
aidea  of  the  pile  were,  according  to  the  Twelre
Tablea,  to  be  left  rough  and  nnpolitbed  (Cic.  da
Lag.  iL  23) ;  but  were  frequently  eoTered  with  dark
leaTca.  (Virg.  Am.  Ti.  215.)  Cynnw  treea  wers
Bometimeaplacedbcforethepile.  (Virg.OTid,f.D.,-
Sil.  Itol.  I.  535.)  On  the  top  of  the  pile  the  corpao
waa  placed,  with  the  couch  on  whidi  it  had  be«i
carried  (Tibuil.  i.  1.  61),  and  the  near«t  relation
then  act  fire  to  the  pile  with  hit  iace  turned  away.
[Fax.]  When  the  flamea  began  to  riae,  varioua
perfiunea  were  tbruim into  lie fire  (railed  by


(Cic  L  e.)


0  (£  a)


15  ;  Stat  n>b.  ti


practice  waa  forbidden  by  the  Twelve  Tablet ;
cupt  of  oil,  omameuta,  cloUiea,  diahea  of  food,  and
other  thioga,  which  were  bUppoacd  to  be  agreeable

to  the  deceaaed,  \ *""  ■'*---  -  -- .» «

(Virg.  .4™.  tL  2
ix.  175.)

The  place  where  a  peraon  iraa  burnt  wai  called
Siirivni,  if  ha  waa  afterwarda  buried  on  the  larao
apol,  and  Uttriiia  or  Uttrimim  if  he  waa  buried  at
a  different  place.  (Feacua,  a.  c,  iiiffiiin.)  Peraona
of  property  frequently  aet  apart  a  apace,  aurrounded
by  a  wall,  near  their  aepulchrea,  tor  the  purpoae  of
burning  the  dead  ;  but  thoae  who  could  not  afford
tho  apace  appear  to  have  aometimei  placed  the
funeral  pyret  againtt  the  monnmenta  of  othera,
which  wai  frequently  (brbiddeu  iu  inicriptiona  on
moauiDeDta.  (Aiue  noMawaito  ■sfrnsm  ofgilicm
mm  Hat,  Qrvter,  755.  i.  656.  3  ;  Onlli,  4334,
4386.)

If  thedeteaaed  wai  an  emperor,  or  an  iilnatriona
general,  the  aoldien  marched  (daenrrcAanJ)  three
timet  poond  the  pile  (Virg.  Jai.  xL  I8B  ;  Tacit
Ann,  iL  7),  which  cuatom  waa  obaorred  annually
at  a  monument  built  by  the  aoldien  In  honour  of
Druaus.  (Suet  CUtud.  I.)  Sometimea  animala
were  alanghlered  at  the  pile,  and  in  ancient  timea
capliret  and  alave",  aince  the  Moaea  were  auppoaed
to  be  luiul  of  bloodj  twt  o^waida  ^ft^Uoit,


560  FUNUS.

e&ned Hataarii,  vcre  bind  ta  figlit  tddiu

buTDing  [nle. (Setr.  ad  Vag,  Am.  x.  619;  comp.
Hot.  &rt.  ii.  3.  86.)

Wfaen  ths  pile  wai  tmcnt  down,  tha  a
were  moked  with  wine,  and  tha  bona  and
of  the  deoeased  ware  gathered  tij  tha  nfsnct
dt«  (ViiK.  .il«.  vl  32&-32a  -,  Tibull.  i.  3.  6,  iii.
2.  10;  SueL  Aug.  100),  who  ipriokled  them  with
perfiunH,  and  placed  them  in  &  Teaet  oUled  ima
(OTid,  Amt.  iiL  9.  39  :/>ni/u  wriH,  Tudt  ^n.
iiL  1 ),  which  wu  made  of  variona  m&teriaU,  ac-
cordinjt  to  the  circumituicea  of  indiTidaala.  Hoit
of  the  funenl  urng  in  tha  Britiah  MuKDin  an  mads
of  marble,  alabaiter,  or  baked  claj.  Thej  aie  of
TBrioua  thuei,but  moatcomniDiiljiquara  or  round;
and  upon  Uiem  there  a  anially  an  inacriptJim  or
epitaph  {tit^u  at  efHlajAniBi),  beginning  with  the
Ictten  D.  M.  S.  or  00!;  D.  M.,  that  u,  DiS  Man-
iBua  Sacrdh,  followed  by  Ihe  name  of  the  de-
ceaaed,  with  tha  length  of  bii  life,  its,  and  alu  by
the  name  of  the  person  who  hod  the  um  made.
The  following  examplei,  taken  from  nma  in  the
liritiBh  MuKum,  will  give  a  general  knowledge  of
■uch  inwripliona.  The  lint  ii  to  Semllia  Zoaimenea,
who  lived  26  yeaca,  and  ii  dedicated  by  her  ion
ProadeciiU  [—

D.H.
Sbuvllui  Zosimbhi


0  lired  13  yean  one  month  and  19  i
It  nzihappy  porenta,  Comicua  and  Au
Die,  Mam,

COMWVS. IT
AVRIOLA. PlRINTM


LiCIHIO  SVCCISBO.


height  ii  twen^-oi
baie,  fonrteea  inchea  ux-eighiha.  Below  (he  in-
acription  an  in&nt  genina  ia  repreieDted  driiing  a
car  dnwn  by  fbor  horaea.

After  the  bona  and  aihea  of  the  deeeaaed  bad
been  placed  in  the  am,  the  penons  pnaant  wen
thhce  nirinkled  by  a  prieat  with  pure  water  from
■  biancn  of  olire  or  lanrel  for  the  purpoae  of  purifi-
cation (Virg.  Am.  tL  229  ;  Serr.  ad  loc)  ;  after
which  they  vere  diamiaKd  by  the  pra^uja.^  vt  aoma
other  penon,  by  the  aalemn  word  JHctt,  that  ia,
in  liaL  (Serr.  /.  c.)  At  their  departon  Uiey  wen
accnatomed  Co  bid  hrewell  to  Che  deceoaed  by  pr<K
nonncing  the  word  Vaie. (Sen.  L  a)

The  umi  were  placed  in  acptilchrea,  which,  *■

alrouly  listed,  were  outude  the  city,  thongb  in  a

' aaea  we  read  of  the  dead  being  buried  withjn

it^. Thui  Valerioa,  Pnblicol^  Tubertna,  and

Fabricioa  wen  buried  m  the  dty ;  which  right


;Cic.  de  Leg.  iL  23.)  The  veatal  Ti^ini  and  the
■mperon  were  bnried  in  the  city.aBmding  to  Ser-
riua  (ad  Virg.  Am.  li.  2DS),  becauae  Chey  wen
lot  bound  by  the  lawi.  By  a  nacript  of  Hadrian,
ihoae  who  buried  a  peraon  in  Che  ciCy  were  liable  tu
I  penalty  of  40  aurei,  which  waa  to  be  paid  to  tha
tiacm ;  and  the  tpot  where  the  bnrial  had  taken
place  waa  conSacated.  (Dig,  47.  tic  12.  a.  3  i  6.)
The  prmctica  waa  alao  fbrbidden  by  Antoninni  Piua
(CapitoL  AHbm.  Pat,  12),  and  Thcodoaiui  II.
(CodTheod.  9.  tit.  17.  a  6.)

The  Tcrb  a^ire,  like  the  Greek  Sdrrin',  wa*
applied  to  eTery  mode  of  diapoaing  of  the  dead
(Plin.  H.  N.  til.  66)  1  and  upmlenm  lignified  any
kind  of  tomb  in  which  the  body  or  bonct  of  a  man
placed.  (iSijniAnaii  ert,  nii  earpat  oaantia
jtDmtau(»MJi'fanuil,I>ig.  11.  tiC.7.  a.2.S5;colII-
Hre  47.  tit.  12.  a  3.  S  2.)  The  term  haman  waa
iriginally  nied  ba  burial  ui  the  earth  (Plin.  L  c),
but  waa  afCerwardi  applied  like  updirt  to  any  mods
of  diipoaing  of  Che  dead  ;  aince  it  appean  to  hara
'  wn  tha  cuatom,  after  the  body  waa  bnrat,  to
irow  aome  aarlh  npoD  tha  bcmea.  (Cic  de  Leg,
,23.)

The  placei  for  burial  were  eitha  public  or  pri-
Tate.  The  pnbHc  phuet  of  burial  were  of  two
kindj  ;  one  for  iUoatrioui  citiaena,  who  were  buried
at  the  public  eipenae,  and  the  other  for  poor  ojti-
aena,  who  could  not  affi>rd  to  purchaae  ground  for
'  purpoie.  The  former  waa  in  the  Campos  Mar-
,  which  «■■  omamcnCed  with  the  lombe  of  the
itriooi  dead,  and  in  Che  Compua  Kaquilinua
.  :.  PUL  ii.  7)  ;  the  Utter  waa  alao  in  the  Cam-
pui  Eaquilinui,  and  coniiated  of  amall  piu  w
STema,  lyUMApntiaiJi  ot puticulae  (Varr.  de  Limg.
Lai,  V.  25.  ed.  Miiller  1  Feslul,  i.  e.  ;  Hor.  SaL
\.  B.  10)  ;  but  aa  thia  place  rendered  the  neigh-
bourhood unhealthy,  iC  waa  giTen  to  Maeeenaa,
who  converted  it  mto  gardena,  and  built  a  mag-
nificent houae  upon  it.  Private  placea  fer  bnrial
were  oaually  by  the  aides  of  the  mada  leading  la
Rama  ;  and  on  aome  of  theae  nada,  inch  aa  tbs
Via  Appia,  the  tombi  formed  an  almoM  unin-
errupted  street  for  many  Diilei  from  the  gatea  of
the  city.  They  were  fieqnenlly  built  by  indivi-
duala  during  their  life-time  (S<^ec  de  Brtv.  Vii.
20)  ;  thui  AuguaCna,  in  tua  lixlh  canaulship,  built
tho  Mauaoleoni  for  hia  aepulchra  between  tha  Via


FUNUS.
Flaminui  mi  the  Tiber,  uid  pluited  lound  ii
mod*  ud  walki  for  public  hm.  (SucL^ih.  100.)
Tbs  hcin  Ten  often  ordered  bj  the  will  of  the
denued  to  bnild  a  tomb  for  him  (Hor.  Sai.  iL  3.
Si  ;  PliD.  £^.  Ti.  10)  ;  and  the;  tometiinei  did
■o),  which  i«  not  nn-
.  tho  inKiiption  on  funenl
B  follmiing  example  token
n  u  nm  in  the  Britkh  Miueiim :  —
Dm  Mjnibvb

L  LsriDI  ErAFBKAM

PiTKti  OrriHi
L.  Lir:Dtv(

JdAXlMVt  F.

DiSvo.

ed  iaih  (Fntiu,
u  aftemnJa  em-
plojed  in  tbe  manna  mentioned  above  (p.  G£9,  b.).
Sepnlchre*  wen  alu  Inqoently  caiied  MimameiUa
Cic.  ad  FoM.  iT.  IZ  S  3  ;  Ovid,  Mit.  xiiL  £24},

amed  to  the  memotj  of  a  penoa  in  a  different
flttt  Ima  where  he  wai  boiied.  (Feitu,  i. «. ;
Cit.  pn>  Sm.  67  1  camp.  Dig.  1 1 .  tit.  8.}  Coadi-
lona  at  eaidiliva  were  wpulchrei  under  groiuid,
in  which  dead  bodiei  were  placed  entire,  in  con-
tndiicincIioD  to  thoee  lepolchrea  whieb  contained
the  bona  and  aihci  only.  Thej  amwered  to  the
Creek  awiyuiir  or  Jiiynuw.

Tha  bjinba  of  the  rich  wen  commonly  built  of
maiUe,  and  the  gnnind  endoKd  with  an  iron
railing  or  wall,  and  planted  round  witbtreea.  (Cic.
orf  Fam.  iT.  12.  j  3  ;  TihulL  iiL  3. 22  j  Suet.  Xer.
33.  £0  ;  Martial,  L  lid.)  Tbe  extent  of  the  bury-
ing ground  wa*  marked  by  Cippi  [Cippus].  The
name  of  Mauaoleitm,  which  wai  originally  the  nan
ef  the  magnificeni  Kpulcbra  erected  by  Aitemii
to  tbe  memory  of  Maniolui  king  of  Caria  (Pli
H.ff.  ixXTi.  4.  I  9,  UKT.  49  ;  QelL  i.  16
■aa  ntnetiDiet  given  to  anyiplendid  lomb.  (Sue
Atg.  100  ;  Paul.  viii.  IG.  g  3.)  The  open  apo.
htfan  a  ■epalchn  wai  called  fnuin  [FoauK],  u


FUNUS.  661

Boitber  tliii  ipoce  nor  tbe  Kpulchre  itaelf  could
become  the  pmpcrty  of  a  perioa  by  mocapion,
(Cic  d,  Ltg.  il  24.)

Private  tombt  were  either  built  by  an  individual
for  bimieifaadthemembcn  of  bii  family  (jepulcra
/amiiiana),  or  for  hinuelf  and  hit  heln  Itepatcra
lieredilaria.  Dig.  1 1.  tit.  7. 1.  S).  A  Viaib,  which
wu  fitted  np  with  niche*  to  receive  the  Auieral
umi,  wu  called  on/iuniaritHii,  on  acconnt  of  the
retemhianco  of  ths»  nicbei  to  the  bolea  of  a
pigeon-bouse.  In  (heae  tomba  the  aihea  of  (be
frecdmen  and  ilavei  of  gnat  bmiliea  wen  fre-
qnently  placed  in  vcueLi  made  of  baked  clay,
called  nBae,  which  were  let  into  the  thicknesi  of
the  wall  within  tbeao  nichei,  the  lid*  only  Ijeing
•een,  and  the  inKriptiona  placed  in  front.  Severd
of  thcae  columbaria  are  atill  to  be  leen  at  Rome^
One  of  the  moat  perfect  of  them,  which  wai  die-
covered  in  the  year  1 B22,  at  die  villa  Rufini,  about


Tomha  were  of  varioui  nt«  and  fiiimi,  according
to  the  wealth  and  taale  of  the  owner.  Tha  fal-
lowiog  woodcut,  which  repreientapart  oCthe  nreet
of  tomb)  at  Pompeii,  la  taken  from  Uaaoit,  Pom-
peiaiu,  put  i.  pL  18.


e  railed  on  a  platform  of
iinmij  above  tbe  level  of  the  footway.  The  Gnt
huildiag  Da  tbe  light  band  ii  a  funenl  triclinium,
■hich  laeeeDt*  to  the  ilnel  a  plain  front  about
Iwmtj  feet  in  lenirlh.  Tha  nut  ii  the  fuuily
taab  of  Naef  oleia  Tyche  ;  it  eoniiita  of  a  square

level  of  the  ontei  wall  atept  riu,  which  inpport  a
mariJa  cippni  richly  ornamented.  The  bniial-
pomidofNeitacidiui  followi  cut,  which  ii  lur-
inmdrd  by  a  low  wall ;  neit  to  which  cornea  a
■numnait  erected  to  the  memory  of  C.  Calventina
Qnielst,  Tha  building  ia  solid,  and  wu  not
then&re  a  place  of  burial,  but  only  an  honorary
laab.  The  wall  in  front  is  scarcely  four  feet
Ugh,  bom  which  three  steps  lead  up  to  a  dppua.
Tm  back  rises  into  a  pediment ;  and  the  extreme
hnght  of  tbe  whole  frnrn  the  footway  ia  about
KvcaMcn  letL An  muccupied  ^ace  intervenes


between  this  tomb  and  the  next,  which  bean  no
imcrip^on.  The  hut  building  on  the  left  ii  the
tomb  of  Scsnrus,  which  is  ornamented  with  bas-
relieb  representing  gladiatorial  combats  and  the
hunting  cf  wild  beoita.

The  tombs  of  tbe  Bcmana  wen  ornamented
in  various  ways,  but  they  seldom  npresented  death
in  a  direct  manner.  (Mliller,  Ani&i.  der
Kmut,  1 131  ;  Lesiing,  Wit  dit  AUn  dea  Tod
gtbildtt  hahm  t)  A  horsed  head  wu  one  of  tha
most  common  lepreientatinns  of  death,  as  it  ligni-
ficd  depailun  ;  but  we  niely  meet  with  ikeleloos
upon  tomb*.  The  foUowing  woodcut,  however,
which  is  taken  from  a  bas-relief  upon  one  of  the
toroba  of  Pompeii,  nprescnls  the  skeleton  of  a
child  lying  on  a  heap  of  stones.  The  drees  of  the
female,  who  is  itooping  orer  it,  ia  remarkable,  and
ia  alill  preserved,  aecorduig  to  Muoia,  in  the
country  around  Sora. (Hazois,  Pomp.  L  pL  29.)


A  gepulcbre,  or  any  place  in  which  >  person
vaa  bnned,  was  reiiijioaiu ;  fUl  thin^  which  "
left  Of  belonjied  to  the  Oil  Mnnea  were  rtUip
thou  coiuecratal  ta  the  Dii  Supcii  were  called
Sairae.  (Gaiui,  JL  46.)  Even  the  pkce  in  '  "
a  ihiie  wu  buried  wu  cooiidered  religion!  ■.  (Dig.
11.  tit.  7.  <.  2.)  Whoever  .iolaled  a  Kpulchi
WM  mhject  to  an  action  termed  Hfvicri  viola
adia.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  13  ;  compare  Cic.  Tiae.  L  V.
dtLeg.^  22.)  ThoH  who  lemDied  the  Wit
or  bonei  from  the  lepnlchre  were  puniihed  by  de&th
or  deportBtio  in  innilom,  according  to  their  rank
if  the  Mpulchre  wai  violated  in  nnj  other  ws;
thej  were  puniihed  by  deportatio,  or  condenina
doD  b>  the  mince.  (Dig.  47.  tiL  12.  l  11.)  Th<
title  in  the  Digeit  (11.  tit.  7),  "  De  Rellgioai*  e
Somtihut  Funerum,"  ftc,  alto  containi  ninch  euri
oiu  infonnatian  on  the  labjetl,  and  ii  well  worth

ARer  the  beaei  bad  been  placed  in  the  u
the  funeral,  the  fiiendi  returned  home. They

which  ccnBiited  in  being  iprinkled  with  wate
iti'pping  over  8  fire.  (Featui,  i.  c.  Aaua  it  igni.)
The  houK  itwlf  vat  alio  iwcpt  with  a  certain
kind  of  broora  ;  which  iweeping  or  purilicatian  waa
called  artemK,  and  the  person  whe  did  it  ojerria-
lor.  (FatuM,  i.  r.)  The  Dtaicaltt  Feriae  were
alio  daya  let  apait  for  the  purification  of  the
family.  (FoWiia,*.  o.  ;  Cic.  ifc  Leg.  ii.  22.)  The
moiiming  and  aolcmnitiei  connected  with  the  <l(«d
laited  tor  nine  daya  ailer  the  funeml,  at  the  end  of
which  time  a  lacrifice  wai  performed,  otlled  Novm-
diale. (Porphyr.orf  Horat.  Epod.  iriL  4S.)


^  feai


u  given


a  honour


what  day .

to  have  been  given  at  the  time  of  the  funeral,  aomc-
timct  on  the  Novendiale,  and  lomctimea  later.
The  name  of  S3keniam  waa  given  to  thia  feait
(FeiCua,  I.  e.)  ;  of  which  the  etymology  ii  im-
known.  Among  the  tomba  at  Pompeii  there  i>  a
funeral  tridmium  for  the  celebration  of  theie  fisati,
which  ia  repreacnted  in  the  annexed  woodcnt
(Mamii,  Ponip.  i.  pi.  II.)  It  il  open  to  the  afcy,
and  the  walli  are  omnmented  by  painliniji  of  ani-
mala  in  the  centre  of  compartmenli,  which  have
borden  of  flnwera.  The  triclinium  ia  mode  of  atone,
with  a  pcdettal  in  the  umUc  to  recciie  the  tohle.

After  the  funeral  of  gnst  men,  there  wu,  in  ad-
dition to  the  fcaat  for  the  fiiendi  of  the  deceued,
a  diatrihulion  of  raw  meat  to  the  people,  called
riwwTrfid  (Liv.  liii.  22),  and  lometimei  a  poblic
banquet  (SueL  Jal.  26.)  Combati  of  gladiaton
Hid  otfaet  gainn  were  alio  frequently  ciUbited  in


bated  to  the  people,  a
bundled  and  twenty  gladiaton  fought,  and  funent
gamei  wei«  ceiebrated  for  three  dayi ;  at  the  end
of  which  a  public  banquet  waa  given  in  the  Ibrum.
(Liv.  mil.  46.)  Public  feaiu  and  funeral  garnet
were  (omelimeg  given  on  the  anniveraary  of  futie-
rala.  Fauatnl^  the  ion  of  Sulla,  exhibited  in
honour  of  hil  father  a  ahow  of  gladiaton  aevenl
yeajg  after  his  dealb,  and  gave  a  feait  to  the
people,  accorduig  to  fail  Either*!  tcstanjent.  (Dion
Cnu.  iiivii.  SI ;  Cic  pro  SS.  19.)  Atall  ban-
quet! in  honanraf  the  dead,  the  gneati  were  dresaed
in  while. (Cic.  e.  Vatio.  13.)

The  Romani,  like  the  Oreeka,  were  accustomed
to  villi  the  tomba  of  their  rehilivca  at  certain
perioda,  and  to  offer  to  them  iscrificea  and  Tarioui
gifta,  which  were  called  hfiriae  and  Parailalia.
The  Romona  appear  to  have  regarded  the  Mann  or
departed  nula  of  their  anccatora  aa  goda  ;  whenn
arose  the  practice  of  prt-aenting  to  Ihem  oblations,
which  consisted  of  victims^  wine,  milk,  garlands  of
flowers,  and  other  things.  (Virg.  An.  v.  77,  ii.
215,  I.  619  ;  Tndt.  HiiL  ii.  95  -,  Suet.  CaL  15 ,
Ner.  67  i  Cic  PhU.  L  6.)  The  tomba  were  totne-
timca  illuminated  on  tbeae  ouaaions  witb  tamps.
(Dig.  40.  tit.  4.  a.  44.)  In  the  latter  end  of  the
month  of  Fehmaiy  there  was  a  frati™!,  cal!«d
Feraiia^  in  which  Uie  TWmana  were  accustomed  to
carry  foodlo  the  sepidchrca  for  the  use  of  the  dead.
(Feslus,  I.e.  ;  Vnrra,  de  Lag.  £o(.  vi.  13  i  Ovid,
Fail,  il  665—570  ;  Cic  ad  Alt.  viu.  14.)

The  Roniani,  like  ourseliea,  were  ucniitamed  to
wear  mourning  for  their  deceased  friends,  which
l^>pcan  to  have  been  black  or  dark^blue  (u/m)
uoder  the  republic  for  both  sciei.  (Sen.  ad  Virg.
Aen.  iL  287.)  Under  the  empire  the  mco  con-
tinned  to  wear  block  m  mooming  (Jut.  x.  245).
hut  the  women  wore  while.  (Heroiian.  ii.  2.)
They  hid  aside  all  kinds  of  oniaments  (Ilerodian.
I  e. ;  Terenl.  lltiBU.  ii.  3.  47),  and  did  not  cut
either  their  hmr  or  btard.  (Suet.  Jui  67,  ..4iij.  23,
Oal.  24.)  Men  appear  to  have  usually  wom  their
mourning  for  only  a  few  days  (Dion  Caaa.  IvL  43),
but  women  for  a  year  when  they  Inst  a  husband  or
parent.  (Ovid,  Fiiat.  iiL  134;  Scnec  £>h>L  63,
GfuoL  ad  Ilelv.  16.)

public  mourning  on  accoont  of  some  signal
y,  as  liir  inatance  the  Inu  of  a  bailie  or  the
death  of  an  emperor,  ihera  waa  a  total  ceisation
n  business,  called  ^ui^'uiji.  [Justitium.]  In
fjhhc  mourning  the  icnaton  did  not  wear  the
II  clavus  and  Ihcir  rings  (IJt.  ii.  7),  nor  tbs
{istrales  their  badges of  office (Tacit.  Aaa.

Mcur(ius,rfi!  J^niere;  Stackelberg. Dni  (^rifi**-
//cf/™™,  Berlin,  1B37[  Kirehmann,*  ^tater.'-
hu  flommti;  Becker,  ChariVet,  T<d.  iL  pp.  166 —
0.  (/nZ/iif,  vol. il  pp.271 — 301.)
FURCA,  ichich  p^ieriy  tnMBH  ■  fbA,wni  alia


kpneaf  madin  the  fixiD  ot  the  letter  A,  which
ira«  placed  Dpoutbe  dloiiJden  of  thtt  ofieadcr,  wboH
buxU  WBB  tied  to  it  SlSTci  wcie  treqneali;
r-"~>-J  in  thii  wij.  Mid  van  obliged  tg  tarr;
■bool  the  tiuca  wbererer  the;  went  (Donat.  otJ
Trr.  Awtr.  m.  5.  12  ;  Plut  OrrioL  24  ;  Plant.
Co.  iL  6.  37)  :  Thence  the  appellation  of  Jitrdfir
wta  applird  to  a  man  ai  a  tenn  of  repnaclL  {Cid
n  VaU*.  6.)  The  fom  wai  ued  in  the  ancient
mde  of  euital  punithment  among  the  Roman*  ;
tke  criminl  wa<  tied  to  it,  and  then  Kooi^ed  to
dartk. (LiT.iaSj  Snet.JVn-.49.) TbepoftWiim

the  hna  ;  it  appeal)  to  bare  been  in  the  form  of
thelettKll  <PUatM^.iLl.7,J>/Dite&L  1.53.)
BmK  tbe  forca  and  patibnlum  vera  alto  eaiplored
M  iraaea,  to  irbicb  enminaii  were  nailed  (injurta
m^mdm*,  D«.  48.  tit.  13.  a.  6  ;  tiL  IS.  i.  1&.
S  15  ;  tit.  19.  a  33). S«  Lipiini,  de  Cna.

FU'RCIKER. [FuRca.]

FURIU'SUS. [Ci/aaTOiL]

FUBNUS. [Fo«Nii.1

fX'ROR. [CoaiToa.]

FORTI  ACTIO. [FuaTUK.]

FURTUU,  "  theft,"  ii  one  cf  the  foor  kindi  of
Uictt  which  were  the  fouadatioa  of  obligatione) ;
it  ■  aba  called  "  crimen."  MotmUs  thingi  onlj
«ndd  be  the  object)  of  fnrtnrn  ;  ht  the  fraudulent
handling  {crmirrtialio  Jrnadniotti)  cf  a  thing  waa
fiitnA^  and  contiectatio  ii delined  to  be  **  loco

canjing  off  another  penon*!  praoatj.  Thu  it
mi  li^tiuD  to  nae  a  thing  which  wai  deposited
(.irfomhimy.  It  vat  alto  flirtuni  to  uw  a  thing
rbich  bad  been  tent  for  uic,  in  a  vt.j  difenmt
frn  that  which  the  lender  had  igrevd  Id  ;  but
with  thii  (|aalifi<atiiin,  that  the  bonawer  mut  be-
liere  that  he  wai  doing  it  againit  the  ownei'i  con-
mt,  and  that  tlie  owner  wonld  not  snuent  lo  nich
aie  if  be  vai  awaie  of  it  ;  for  dolni  malm  wat  an
<sential  ingredient  in  fnrtnm.  Another  reqniaite
ofhrtm  (lJig.47.tit.2.s.l)tithe'*lncri&cicndi
'"tmofappropriattng  the  property,
[weaied  bjnying  thstfurtum
an  {fmrtim  a  a/Ma  emittil;
«,iMq^Kte;%niK'i<KMa>>>n»tt>fiir,tiun^ii.  60),
It  wai  Dot  neoeuar;,  in  order  to  conititnie  tonam,
^t  the  tUrfahoald  know  whoie  prt^ert;  the  thing
wiL  A  person  who  wu  in  the  power  of  another
Bight  be  the  object  of  foitom.  (IniL  4.  tit.  I.  |9,)
A  debtir  might  commit  fnitum  b;  taking  a  thing
whidi  he  had  given  u  a  pledge  (^wnori)  to  a  cn-
ditor ;  o>  b;  taking  hie  propertj  when  in  the  po«-
nmiiia  of  ■  bona  fide  poneuor.  Thiu  there  nught
be  fBiton  either  of  a  morfflble  thing  itself  or  of
the  Be  at  a  thing,  or  of  the  poaieviDn,  a)  it  it  ex-
F<nwL (IniL  4.  tit.  1.  g  1.)

The  definitioD  of  fiirlam  in  the  Institntei  ii  tei
nalwctido  Enodnlow,  withmitthe  addition  of  the
witd  **  alieoac"  Aoordinglj  the  definition  com-
!«•(■  both  the  caM  of  a  man  >teeling  the  propertf
rf  Miotber,  and  also  the  (aae  of  a  mnn  staling  hi)
•WB  pnpertj,  ai  when  a  man  Etaudnlently  taka  a
Mneable  tU^  which  ii  hii  pinpeity,  from  a  per-
MD  wb«  haa  the  legal  pOMCMion  of  JL  Thii  btter
aae  ■•  tba  "  firtui  poueuionia."  The  de&nition
>  the  Imtitnlei  if  not  intended  a>  a  claiaificatian
*(  tMi  inlo  thiee  diitinct  kindi,  but  only  to  thaw
br  wt)  <rf  aample  Ibe  extent  of  the  meaning  of  the
lBM:ftrt— ,  ThJiiiwelleiiplMiwdbrTangeiDw,


FURTUK  i63

Paitddttn,' &C.  iiL  p.S50.  See  alio  Rem,  Dam
CrinuMairedU  drr  RviAfTi  jx  3(M.

A  penon  might  commit  furtnm  by  aiding  in  a
fnitomf  ai  if  a  man  ahould  jofltlo  yon  in  cmer  to
giro  another  the  app<vtnnity  of  taking  your  money )
or  drice  nway  joor  aheep  or  tattle  in  order  that
another  might  get  poueoion  of  them :  but  if  it
wen  done  merely  in  a  aportiva  waj,  and  not  with
a  new  of  aiding  in  a  thefi,  it  waa  not  turttun,
though  there  might  be  in  inch  caie  an  actio  ntilia
nnder  the  Lex  Aquilia,  which  gare  nicb  an  acthm
even  in  the  CAM  of  culpa. [Damnum.]

Furtnm  wu  either  Manifeitum  or  Nee  Manifea-
tnm. It  waa  clearly  mnnifeatum  when  the  penon

there  waa  a  difference  of  opinion  aa  to  whether  the
furtnm  wai  manifeitum  or  not.  Some  wen  of
opinion  that  it  wai  furtom  maniiettum  ao  long  aa
the  thief  waa  engaged  in  carrying  the  thing  to  the
place  to  which  he  deiigned  to  earry  it ;  and  othert
moltitained  that  it  wu  furtnm  minifedom  if  the
thioT  waa  ever  fotmd  with  the  ctolen  thing  in  his
poiieHioa ;  but  thia  opinion  did  not  preraiL
(Gaiu^iii.l34:  InBt.4.titl.  §3.)  That  which
WBi  not  manifeatnm  waa  nee  nianifestnm.  Fiirtnm
of  thett,
^iea  of  action. It  waa  called  n


when  a  itiJen  thing  waa  aooght  and  ^tind.


poueuion,  iHlher  than  i  n
hia,  thia  waa  called  Fnnum  Oblatnm,  and  yon  had
an  action  Fnrti  Oblati  agauist  htin,  ercn  if  he  waa
not  the  thief  There  waa  alio  the  action  Prohibiti
Furti  sgiunit  him  who  preienled  a  peraon  from
■earching  for  a  atolen  thing  (Jarium)  j  fiir  tb«
word  funum  lignifiea  both  the  act  of  theft  and  the
thing  itolcn.

The  puniihmcnt  for  fiutom  manifeitum  by  ths
law  of  the  TweWe  Tablci  wai  cspiliUii,  that  ia,  it
affected  the  penon*!  caput :  a  freeman  who  had
conunilled  ihefl  waa  flogged  and  coniigned  (adi/ic-
Mt)  to  ths  injured  penon  ;  hot  whether  the  thief
became  a  alave  in  conaequence  of  thii  addietio,  or

ancient  Romans  The  Edict  inbaequentiy  changed
tile  penalty  into  an  actio  qnadmpli,  both  m  the  caie
of  a  ibve  and  a  freedmin.  Tbe  penalty  of  the
Twelre  Tables,  in  the  cane  of  a  fultum  nee  mani-
featum,  wai  duplom,  and  thii  was  retained  in  the
Edict :  in  the  cue  of  the  conceptnm  and  ablatmn
it  waa  triplnm,  and  thii  alio  waa  retained  in  tbe
Edict  In  thecaaeof  Piohibitnm,  the  penally  waa
qnadroplnm,  according  to  the  proriaioni  ol'  the
Edict ;  for  the  law  of  the  Twelre  Tablei  had  af-
fixed no  ponal^  in  thia  caie,  bnt  merely  enacted
that  if  a  man  would  aearch  fei  atolen  property,  he
mult  be  naked  all  but  a  cloth  round  hii  middle,
and  muBt  hold  a  diah  in  hia  band.  If  be  Ibund
any  thing,  it  waa  furtum  minifntum.  The  ab-
atmji^  of  the  law,  layi  Oaiui,  ia  apparent ;  for  if
a  man  would  not  let  a  penon  aearch  in  hia  oidinary
dreu,  much  leai  would  he  allow  him  to  aearch  nn-
drened,  when  the  penally  would  be  ao  much  mora
iciere  if  any  thing  waa  found.  (Compare  Orimm,
Voit  dar  Fotiit  in  ftedii,  Zeiluhrift,  Tol.  ii.  p.  »l.)
The  actio  furti  wai  given  to  all  penonl  who  had
an  intercit  in  the  pmerration  of  the  thing  atolen
(opu  nUmd  ran  nrfmw  («ag),Md  the  ^vwi  <4


£64  FURTUM,

■  tbing,  therefcm,  bad  net  nNcuarily  thu  action.
A  enditor  miglit  hare  this  action  cTcn  HgHiiiit  tk«
owner  of  a  thing  pledged,  if  tha  owner  ma  the
thief,  A  penon  to  whom  a  thing  wat  delivered  in
order  to  woA  upon  it,  u  in  the  caia  of  clothci
giTen  to  a  tiulor  to  mend,  couid  bring  thii  aclton
sgainit  ths  tiiet,  and  the  owner  could  not,  for  the
owner  had  an  action  (heati)  againit  the  tailor.
Bnt  if  the  tailor  wa«  not  a  »ol¥entperion,lhe  owner
had  hii  action  againit  the  thie^  for  in  luch  cue  the
owner  had  an  inteiut  in  the  praaralion  of  the
thing.  The  mis  wu  the  lama  m  tbe  oua  of  cam-
nodattmi  [Cohhodatux].  But  in  a  caie  of  de-
podtum,  the  depoiitee  waa  nnder  no  obligation  for
tbe  safe  cnttodj  of  the  tiling  (csMlodiam  praatim),
and  be  wu  nnder  no  liability  except  in  the  caae  of
dolui  ;  conoequenllj,  if  the  depoaited  thing  wai
Molen,  the  owner  alone  had  the  actio  furtL  A
bona  fids  pnrchaKT  might  have  the  actio  fnrtl,
eren  if  the  thing  bad  not  been  delirend  to  bim,
and  be  were  contaqnenll;  not  dominni.

An  impubei  might  conunit  theft  {oUigatur  orhuk
Jitrti)^  if  he  wai  bordering  on  the  age  of  puberty,
and  conieqnently  of  anfRcient  capacity  to  onder-
■tond  what  he  wai  doing.  IF  a  penon  who  wat
'  in  the  power  of  another  eommitted  furlnm,  the
actio  foTti  wu  againal  the  latler.

The  nght  of  anion  died  with  the  offending  per-
■on.  If  a  peregrinuA  committed  fbrtum,  he  wai
made  liable  to  an  action  by  the  Eclion  of  hii  being
a  Roman  citizen  (Qaini,  it.  37) ;  and  by  the  eame
fiction  he  had  a  right  of  action,  if  hu  [soperty

He  who  took  the  property  of  another  by  fbico
vai  guilty  of  theft ;  but  in  tbe  caae  of  thia  delict,
the  praetor  gare  a  apedil  action  Vi  bonorum  raf-
tonun.  The  origin  of  the  action  Vi  bonomm  a^
tornm  ja  leferred  by  Cicero  to  the  time  of  the  ciyil
wara,  when  men  had  become  accoitomed  to  acta  of
lioleim  and  to  the  nae  of  armi  againit  one  another,
Aecotdinily,  the  Edict  waa  originally  directed
■minat  uoie  who  with  bodica  of  aimed  men
(imairBiM  arnaUt  eaaetinpi^  did  injury  to  the
property  of  another  or  carried  it  off  (faiif  aal
ranMnai  out  daaai  dederiul).  With  the  eilsb-
Uahment  of  order  under  the  empire  the  prohibition
■giunit  the  oie  o(  unu  waa  1»8  needed,  and  the
word  armalii  it  not  obtained  in  the  Edict  ai  cited
in  tbe  Digeit  (47.  tit  8).  The  application  of  the
Edict  would  howeTer  hare  itill  been  leiy  limited,
if  it  had  been  confiosd  to  caiea  where  ntunbera
w«rti  engaged  in  the  nolenee  or  robbery  ;  and  ac-
cudingly  tbe  juriita  diacoTered  that  tbe  Edict,
whan  preperiy  undentood,  applied  nleo  to  the  case
of  a  UDf^e  penon  committing  damnom  or  canying
off  giropetty.  Originally  the  Edict  comprehended
Iwtb  dummn  and  bona  rapta,  and,  indeed,  H*n.nnTn
which  waa  e%ct«d  n  homninitina  armatia  coac-
tieque,  waa  that  kind  of  Tiolenee  to  tbe  repreaiion
of  which  the  Edict  wae  at  firtt  nukly  directed.
Under  the  emigre  the  reaeoni  for  thia  part  of  tbe
Edict  ceaaed,  and  thni  we  lee  that  in  Ulpian'i
tina  the  action  wai  iimply  called  **  ri  booonun
nptomm."  In  tbe  Inatitntea  and  Code  the  action
a[^1]ef  to  robbery  only,  and  there  la  no  trace  of  the
other  part  of  tbe  Edict.  Thia  iuatructlfs  illuetration
of  the  gradual  adaptation,  eren  of  tbe  Edietal  law,
to  ciioimatance*  ii  giren  by  Sangny  (Zaiietri/l,
Tol.  r.  Ueber  Cicero  Pre  Tiillia  nnd  die  Actio  Ti  bo-
DomB  Rutonun),  who  haa  alio  giren  tbe  maiterly
' ')llofDv.47.  tits.  a.3.3  7,brHeiBe.


FUSTUABIUM.

The  abject  of  tbe  fiirti  actio  waa  to  get  a  penally;
ai  to  the  thing  atolen  the  owner  coold  iccoier  it
either  by  a  lindicatio,  which  waa  atailable  againit
any  poaaeiaor,  whether  the  thief  or  another,  or  by
a  condictio,  which  wu  available  againat  the  thief
or  hia  beree,  though  he  had  not  the  poaKaaioik,
(In>t4.  tiL  1.  §  19.)

The  atrictneia  of  the  old  law  in  the  caae  of
actioni  of  theft  wu  gradually  modified,  u  already
ahown.  By  the  law  of  tbe  T«<e]ie  Tablei,  if
theft  (fiirtam)  wu  committed  in  the  night,  the
thief;  if  caught  in  the  act,  might  be  killed  :  and
he  might  alio  be  killed  in  the  daytime,  if  he  waa
oiughl  in  the  act  and  defended  hinuetf  witb  any
kind  of  a  weapon  (It/am) ;  if  he  did  not  ao  defend
bimael^  he  wat  whipped  and  became  addictua,  if
a  freeman  (u  abore  elated)  ;  and  if  a  alave,  be
wai  whipped  and  thrown  down  a  precipice.

The  Allowing  are  peculiar  Idnda  of  adioiiei
fbrti :  ( 1 }  Actio  de  tiguo  jnncto,  againit  a  peraon
who  employed  another  penon^  timber  in  hia
bnilding ;  (2)  Actio  arbormn  fuitim  caeaarnm,
againat  a  penon  who  lecretiy  cat  wood  on  another
penon'a  ground  ;  (S)  Actio  fiirti  adrenu  Dantai
et  caupcaiea,  againat  nautae  and  caupooca  [Exkr-
citor],  who  were  liable  for  the  acta  of  tbe  men  in
their  employment.

There  wen  two  oiaei  in  which  a  bona  Gde  pea-
aeaaor  of  another  peraon'i  property  ccmld  not  obtain
tbe  ownenhip  by  nsnc^ion  ;  and  one  of  them  waa
tbe  caae  of  a  re*  furtiia,  which  wu  ptOTidod  for
in  tbe  Twelre  Tablca.  The  Roman  Law  ai  to
Furtam  nnderwent  ehangea,  aa  appean  fram  what
hu  been  nid ;  and  the  inbjeet  requiroi  to  be
treaud  biitoiically  in  order  to  be  tnlly  iuiderBt4iod.
The  work  of  Rein  (Ou  CHmwofrwiU  <ttr  Aanur)

(Oaioa,  iiL  183—209,  It.  1 ,  Uellina,  A  IG  ;
Vuf.  17.  tiL  2  :  Iuit.4.  lit.  1  ;  Dirkaen,  Uttar-
tida,  &e.  pp.  £61 — 591 ;  Heiaec.  Sfmlag.  ed.  Hau-
bold  ;  Hon,  Dot  Kin.  PrhatrmU,  p.  US  ;  Rein,
Dai  Crmmabrda  der  Komer,  p,  293.) [O,  L.]

FU'SCINA{TpI(u«),atridenl!  more  commonly
called  tridfiM^  meaning  tridnu  Mtimidia,  becanae  it
waa  originally  a  thm-ptonged  goad,  saed  to  iocita
boreet  to  greater  iwifuen.  Neptune  waa  mppoeed
to  be  armed  with  it  when  be  drore  bia  ehariot,  and
it  thua  became  hii  uual  attribnte,  perhapi  with  an
alluiian  alao  to  the  nae  of  the  nine  inatnunait  in
harpooning  fieL  It  ia  repnaented  in  the  eat  u
p.  376.  (Horn.  IL  xiL  27,  Od.  ir.  fiOG,  t.  393  ;
Virg.  Otorg.  i.  13,  Jmi.  L  ISB,  US,  iL  610  ;
Cie.  de  NaL  Dtor.  i.  36  ;  PhihiaL  Im^  ii.  U.)
The  trident  waa  Ato  attributed  to  Nemu  (ViiK.
Am.  ii.  41S)  and  to  the  Triton*.  (Cic  da  Nat,
Dtor.  a  85  ■,  Mart.  ^w*.  mi.  3.)

In  the  conlHl*  of  gtadiaton  the  ArianrMt  waa
armed  with  a  trident  (Jut,  ii,  148,  TiiL  203.)
[aL..DiiToa.]  [J.  Y.]

FUSTUA'RIUU  (t>Ag«Tb)  waa  a  im|MtaI
pnniibmenl  inflicted  i^ion  the  Roman  eoldiera  for
deaertion,  theft,  and  aimilar  criine*.  It  *u  ad-
miniitered  in  tbe  following  maimer:--.-  When  a
aoldier  waa  condemned,  the  tribnoa  toncbed  Lim
■lightly  with  a  atick,tipan  which  all  the  aoldtera  of
the  legion  fell  Dpon  him  with  aticka  and  atom,
and  veneratly  killed  him  npon  the  apoL  If  how-
ever be  etcaped,fiir  be  wai  allowed  te  fly,  hecoald
not  retnm  to  hie  natire  conntry,  nor  did-anr  of  hia
lelativee  dare  to  receiTe  him  into  their  Bonaea.
(Polj'b.Tl37:eoDfanLiT..*.fi.> TUapaai^


FU8U8.
■unt  CDntinDed  to  be  inflicted  in  the  lata  lunu  of
the  TFpablic  (Cic  PUIip.  iii.  6),  mi  onder  the
CDpin.  (TidL  Akl  iil  21.)

PiffcRDt  from  llie  fuitiuiiiun  wu  the  uiniBd'
TetuB  futiiuQ,  which  wu  b  mponl  puniihrnent
itdictid  under  the  emperon  upon  free  men,  bnt
(dj  ihDH  of  tbg  loWEi  otden  (tnnibm.  Dig.  i8.
til.  19.  1.28.  £3).  It  wu  ■  leu  MTera  puiuh-
aan  ibtD  the  flogging  with  flagella,  which  pniiiib-
BHitwM  cmiiDed  la  ilaTes.  (Dig.  4S.  tit.  19.
110(47.  tiu  10.  ..4S.) [Flaokum.]

FITSUS  (ftrpnirroi),  the  ipindle,  iraa  alwBfay
■hoi  in  Die,  mcBtmpanied  by  the  diitaff  (cd^
it^oi^),  ei  mn  mdiiputable  part  of  the  itme
■Ptntni.  (Orid,  itfet  it.  230—2^9.)  The  wool,
lu,  or  other  material,  having  been  pretend  hi
■pionfaig,  lad  hating  Bonelimet  be«n  djed  ('oSn-
f«i  iljwf  rxonro,  Horn.  Od,  It.  135),  wm  rolled
iou&ball  (ToAirii, p/offlu,  Hor.  EpUl.  i.  13. 14  )
Oni,Mtf.Ti.  19),  which  wai,  howSTer,  nfficientlj
lam  to  iSow  the  fibrea  to  be  euily  dnwn  out  bj
tke  hud  of  the  ipinnei.  The  vppei  part  of  the
iiaa  wi*  then  iuietted  into  thii  nwM  of  flax  or
won)  <Bte  mifii,  Plin.  ff.  M  Tiii.  74),  and  the
Imr  part  wm  held  in  the  left  hand  onder  the  left
ina  m  Mch  ■  poeition  ■«  wni  moat  amlenient  tor
cmdactiDg  the  opcntion.  The  flbrei  were  drawn
ta^  and  at  the  nine  time  ipinlly  twitted,  chieflj
V  the  oie  of  the  fbtB-Gnger  and  thumb  of  the  right
inii(tmirriKaii  bjnrt,aimp.  OmL  HI*ipolliet
ipUt,  dami  (b  PtvL  Con*.  177)  ;  and  the  thread
(jEbwi,  itoaii,  rfi/ia)  w  prodnced  waa  woond  npon
the  qmdla  aatil  the  quantity  wai  aa  gnat  M  it
vnld  can;.

The  ([Hndle  waa  a  itick,  10  or  IS  ioche*  long,
btinc  at  the  top  B  ilil  or  catch  (ilm,  tyniaTpor)
in  which  the  thread  waa  fixed,  w  that  the  ireigbt
tf  the  apindle  might  contiDiuUlf  carry  down  the
thnad  aa  it  waa  formed.  lt»  lower  extremity  wai
noted  mto  a  amall  wheel  called  the  whorl  (jrm-
liabiiX  made  of  wood,  alone,  «  metal  (lee  wood-
ni),  tbe  oie  of  which  waa  to  keep  the  ipindla
---  '--ion:  for  the


■pims,  who  waa  eomraonly
ui  thm  twilled  nicind  the  ipindle  with  her  right
had  (Hend.  t.  12  ;  Orid.  M*.  tL  22),  »  aa  to
twbt  the  Ihroid  itill  men  (smpletely  ;  and  when-
■nr,  by  iti  cmitinBal  pmloDgation,  it  let  down  the
■fiidle  to  the  gnmnd,  >ha  to(^  it  out  of  the  alit,
nand  it  apoi  the  t|niid]e,  ud,  haying  replaced  it
ia  the  ilit,  dcew  oot  and  twiitad  another  length.
AH  thne  tiiaiaianaoei  ace  maticoied  in  detaiiby
GaOflM  (bit.  3W— 3la). The  MWuianj'iDg


GALEA.  £GS

woodcut  is  taken  from  a  leiiei  of  baa-reliefi  repre-


haa  drawn  ont  a  anfficient  length  of  yam  ta  twiat
it  by  whirling  the  ipindle  with  ber  right  thumb  and
fore-finger,  and  prefiouaty  to  the  act  of  taking  it
out  of  Uie  ilit  to  wind  it  Dpon  the  bobbin  (r^rur)
ainady  fcnned.

The  diataff  waa  about  Ihrea  timea  the  length  of
the  ipindle,  atrong  and  thick  in  prDportion,  com-
monly eitber  a  alick  or  a  reed,  with  an  expanaion
near  the  top  (or  haldiw  the  balL  It  waa  aome-
timei  of  richer  materiidi  and  ornamented.  Theo'
crilua  baa  left  a  poem  (/I'yiJL  zxriiL)  written  on
■ending  an  iiory  diitaff  to  the  wife  of  a  friend.
Oolden  aoiudlet  were  tent  aa  preaenti  to  ladiea  of
[  (Horn.  Od.  iv.  131  ;  Herod,  ir.  162)  ;


able  dignity,  who  are  called  xf^^^'""''!'-

It  wai  uaual  to  bale  a  baiket  to  hold  the  dU-
tnfF  and  ipindle,  with  the  balli  of  wool  prepared
far  apinning,  and  the  bohbini  already  ipun.  (Bmnck,
AnaL  iL  12  ;  Ovid,  Mtt.  It,  10.)  [CjLiTHUB.]

In  the  rural  diitricta  of  Italy  women  were  for-
bidden to  ipin  when  they  were  bavelling  on  foot,
the  act  being  conaidered  of  eril  omen.  (^PUn. H.N.
ixviiL  5.)  The  diitaEf  and  ipindle,  with  the  wool
and  thread  upon  them,  were  earned  in  bridal  pro.
ceaaioni ;  and,  without  the  wool  and  thread,  tkey
were  often  mapended  by  femalea  aa  offeringa  of  re-
ligioua  gratitude,  eepecioUy  in  old  age,  or  on  relin-.
quiahing  the  conilant  ue  of  them.  (Plin.  H.  JV.
viiL74.)  [DoNABix.]  They  wetemoat  frequently
dedicated  to  PaUaa,  the  patroneai  of  spinning,  u


of  the  ana  comiected  with  it.  Thia  goddeii
betielf  mdely  iculptured  with  a  dIalaS  and  apindle
in  the  Tr(>jan  Palladimn.  (Apollod.  iiL  12.  3.)
They  were  alao  exhibited  in  the  representationa  of
the  three  Fate*,  who  wets  conceived,  by  their  spin-
ning, to  determine  the  life  of  every  man ;  and  at
llie  aame  time  by  linaing,  aa  femalea  nanally  did
whilat  ther  aat  together  at  thur  work,  to  predict
hu  future  lot. (CatoU.  I,  &)  [J.  ¥.]


GABINUS  CINCTU8. [Toe*.]

GABSUM. [HAWi.]

GA'LEA  {Ki>im,pinK.  tiipiu,  irtSAi){),  a  hehnet;
a  caaqne.  The  helmet  waa  acigiaolly  made  of  akin
or  leather,  whence  ia  auppoaed  to  have  ariaen  ita
appellation,  frvr^,  meaning  properly  a  helmet  of
dog-akin,  but  applied  to  capa  or  helmeta  made  of
the  kide  of  other  aniniala  (rauptit),  jetiS^,  Horn.
IL  X.  258,  33S  ;  aiyln,  Od.  xnt.  230  ;  Uend.
vii.  77  ;  compare  "pirri  atOraia,  Xea.  Anab.  t.  4.
g  13  ;  sdasA^ina,  Frap.iv.  11.  I»),aiidetenla
thoae  which  were  entirely  of  bnnie  or  iron  (wiy.
XaA«",  (XL  iriil  377).  The  leathern  batia  of
the  helmet  waa  alao  vary  commonly  atrengthened
and  adorned  by  the  addition  of  either  bronie  or
gold,  which  ii  eirpreued  by  inch  epilheta  ai  X"^-
Kiptjt,  itxiAjias,  xp''"ilt  Helmeti  which  had  a
metallic  baaia  (vpdni  X«^^  ^en.  Altai,  L  2;  g
16)  were  in  Latin  properly  called  mtada  (laid.
Orig.  iviii.  U  :  Tacit.  Otmt.  6  ;  Caeaar,  D.  G.  iii.
45),  althougk  ^e  tsnai  gaita  and  eaaiu  are  often

tha  collection  at  QDodrich  Conr^


OQ  8


•  o"


see  GALEA.

HeiefbT^Iiire.  (SkFlton,  Enffraeed  iUuH.  i.  pL  44.;
The  perfontioiu  for  the  linuig  and  exterior  borde
■re  Tiaibla  along  ita  edge.  A  aide  and  a  Avd
view  of  it  UB  preieated  in  ttc  anaeicd  woodcut


GALLI.

worn  in  the  middle  agi%  hare  berai  fonud  at  Vaa^
peii. See  (be  wood-cut  to  U  labia  to  me.

The  fire  following  hebncta  ore  elected  friHii  *D-
(iqne  genu,  nnd  cm  cngnred  of  the  nte  of  tbt
[J.  Y.J


(iqne  genu,  n
origimui.


Twoouquea  ler;  like  tbii  werefiibcd  up  from  the
bed  of  the  AJpheoi,  nmi  Olympin,  and  ire  in  (he
poueHion  of  Mr.  HaJnllloB.  (Dodwell,  Timr,
voL  ii.  p,  330.)  Among  the  maierinli  lued  fur
(he  lining  of  helmeU  were  felt  (iTAot,  Horn.  /(.
I.  365)  and  iponge. (Ariitot.  H.  A.  t.  16.)

The  helmet,  eepecisllj  that  of  akin  oi  leather,
WM  Kmelhnei  a  mere  cap  totifimned  to  the  ahape
of  the  head,  without  either  ereit  or  any  other  om^-
ment  (i^oA^  T<  Kol  bofiav, //.  I.  3JS).  In  Ibia
■tal«  it  wai  probably  used  in  bunting  Ipaiea  vena-
toHa,  C.  Nep.  Dal.  iii.  2.),  and  mu  called  nnrat
TvE  (Hero.  IL  I  e.\  in  Latin  Cudo.  The  pre-
ceding weodeut  ahowa  an  example  of  it  aa  worn  by
Diomede  in  a  amall  OreL-k  bnnie,  which  ia  sIbo  in
the  collection  at  Ooodrich  Court.  (Skeiton.  L  c)
The  addilioDB  by  which  the  eitemal  appcunnce  of
the  helmet  wai  varied,  and  which  aerved  bath  for
ornament  and  protaclion,  were  the  fgllowitig :  —

1.  Boeiei  OF  ptatea,  proceeding  either  from  the
top  <«<Uoi,  Horn.  JL  liL  362)  or  the  aidca,  and
Tnrying  in  number  from  one  to  four  ((^^i^a\aT,
tifidAiit,  Horn. /iLv.  743,ii.41;  Euitath.  iki  bf.  ;
T*Tf>d4«Aoi,  /;.  lii.  3H4).  It  ii  however  leiy
doubtful  what  part  of  the  helmet  the  ^lUiit  wai.
Buttmann  thought  that  it  wai  what  wai  afler-
warda  called  the  iBroi,  that  is,  a  melal  ridge  in
which  the  pliinie  wii  iiied  ;  but  Liddell  and  Scolt
(£ez.  I.  n.)  maintain  with  men  probability  that
the  ^(UjKwaalhe  ahade  or  fore-piece  of  the  helmet;
and  that  an  iit^i^aX.et  lielmet  ivai  one  that  had  a
tike  projection  behind  aa  well  B>  before,  inch  ai
may  be  Beam  in  the  repreaentaticmt  of  many  ancient
helinetB,

2.  The  helmet  thui  adorned  waa  lery  commonly
aumiDunled  by  the  creat  (cruta,  Xd^t,  Horn.  IL
ixii.  31 6),  which  ww  oftenVif  hanc-hair  (Iinro«,»i,
InmJiiirda,  Hom.  IL  cc  ;  \A^iar  Uitpai,  Theocr.
ixii.  186  ;  kifBita  >iu,  Pnpert.  It.  U.  19),  and
mode  to  aa  to  look  impoaing  and  terrible  (Horn.  II.
iil  337  ;  Virg.  An.  viii.  610),  aa  well  oa  band-
aome.  {Ih.  ii.  365  ;  t6\afo,,  Heliod.  AiO.  lii.)
The  hebnct  often  had  two  or  even  three  cretta.
(Aeuh.  Sqi.  c.  Theb.  3B4,)  In  the  Roman  army
oflstertimea  the  cnat  aerved  not  oiity  Ua  orna-
ment, but  abo  to  diatinguiah  the  difl^nt  centn-
riona,  each  of  whom  wore  s  caaqne  of  a  peculiar
tana  and  appearaneev (Veget  ii.  1 3.)

3.  The  two  cheek-pieeea  {bueoAu,  Jut.  i.
w^mrraef**!,  Eualuh.  «  7t  t.  743),  which  were
attached  to  the  h^met  by  hingea,  ao  aa  to  be  Uftcd
up  and  down.  They  bad  builona  or  tiea  at
eitremitiea  for  ftiatening  the  hebnet  on  the  bead.
(VbL  Flaee.  vi.  626.)

4.  The  beaver,  or  viaor,  a  peculiar  form  of  which
ia  anppceed  to  have  been  the  aA^Ahnt  rpv^^fiB,
L  A  tile  perfbnted  bfaier.  (Hom.  K  li.  353.)
The  ghidialora  won  helmet*  of  thia  kind  (Jut.
riii.  SOS),  and  apeciDcna  of  Ihem,  not  onlike  tboae


GALERI'CULUM.  fQiiBnus.]
GALE'RUS  or  OALE'RUM,  waa  originally
covering  for  the  head  worn  by  prieata,  capo-
cially  by  the  Jhnai  dioi'u  (Oell.  i.  1 5  ;  Sen.  ai
Virg.  Aat.  ii  663).  It  appenn  to  have  been  a
round  cap  made  of  leather,  with  ita  top  ending  in
.  I  or  point  [Seecut  on  p.lOS.J  The  word  ia
probably  connected  wilh^aba,abelnjet  In  courae
if  time  the  name  wai  applied  to  any  kind  of  09
itting  close  to  the  head  like  a  hebnct.  (Virg.  Am.
rii.  GH8;  Virg.  MoreA  131 ;  Suet  iVer.  26.)  (AiJent
knd  ita  diminutive  G^iUriathun  are  alio  uaed  10
ligntly  n  covering  hz  the  head  made  of  hair,  and
lence  a  wig.  (Juv.  Sat.  vi  120,  witii  the  Scbd.;
iuetOU.12;  Martiiv.  60.)

GALLI,  the  prieita  of  Cybele,  'riioio  wenhip
waa  inlrodueed  nt  Rome  from  Phjygia,  in  B.C.  204.
(Li>.  ixii.  10,  14,  xixtL  36.)  The  OaUi  were,
according  to  an  ancient  cuitom,  alwsya  eaatraled

and  it  would  aoem  that  impelled  by  lelioiooi  &na-
ticiam  they  performed  tbia  operation  on  themaclvea.
(Jut.  Ti.  512,  &c. ;  Ovid,  FatL  it.  23T(  Maitild,
iiL  81,  li.  74  ;  Plin.  H.  M  xi.  49.)  In  their
wild,  enthaaiaatic,  and  boiitcruua  ritci,  they  n-
tembled  the  Cocybantei  (Lucan.  L  6G5,  &c. ;
compare  Hi  la  HI  a),  and  even  went  further,  in  oi
much,  a*  in  their  fiiry,  they  motilaled  their  own
bodies  (Propert  ii.  18.  15.) They  aeem  tc


iZi  Jd.uae  nalrii)  1
rtain  daya.  (Cic.  da  Lrg.  iL


isedclan
lloBcd  to
re  aUowcd


9  and
16.)  The  chief  pcicit  among  them  waicalled  ar-
chigallua.  (SerTiui,a<J  ..In.  ix.  116.)  Thcorigiu
of  the  name  of  Galli  ia  uncertain :  according  to
Fcatua  (i.  v.\  Ovid  {Fad.  iv.  363),  and  othen,  il
waa  denied  firom  the  river  Gallui  in  Phijgia,
which  flowed  near  the  temple  of  Cybclc,  and  the
water  of  which  wna  fiibled  to  put  theae  pcruna
who  diank  of  it  mto  auch  a  alate  of  madnen,  thai
they  caatrated  tbemaelTea  (Compare  Plin.  H.  S.
T.  32,  iL  40,  mi.  2  ;  Herodian.  11.)  The  aup.
poaition  of  Hicionvmna  (C^.  Omh,  4)  that  Galli
waa  the  name  of  the  Gauia,  which  bad  been  given
to  theie  pricata  by  the  Romana  ia  ocder  to  ihaw
their  conlempt  of  that  nation,  ia  nnfoonded,  aa  the
Bxinuuia  muat  have  receired  the  name  bom  Asia,
or  from  the  Oreeka,  by  whom,  ai  Soidai  (t  b.)  in-
fbrraa  oa,  OaUui  waa  DHd  aa  a  conunoD  aoun  in
the  aenia  of  eunuch.  Then  einta  a  Terb  gaitart^
which  agnifiei  to  laga  (iiuBMfK, .  tiwakin),  and


OENIUS.
*hkk  Becan  m  os«  of  the  fingnunlt  of  Vam
<]L373,*d.BJp.)ud  in  tiit  Anliolog.  Lot  iiA.1
p,  34,  ed.  BmmDB.  [L.  S.J

OAHE'LIA  (TofniXla).  The  damM  ud  phro-
Iriii  <rf'  Anin  ponnod  Tuinu  mouu  to  pnTcnl
mtndcn  fian  »Mniiiiiig  tbe  righu  of  citiiem.
Amoogotba  regnlatwu  it  wu  aidaiitcd  that  evary
Iride,  pferuxi*  to  her  mofnoge,  ihould  be  inim-
diKnt  bj  h^  pumtB  or  giiardioiu  to  the  phrtttria
of  bs  hnibwul  (TarnlAiar  v>)f>  TunuJiot  <ia^^|HU>,
lmeaM,^PfrTi.Haavd.fp.62,Si,&e.;>haron.
Hand.  p.  208  ;  DemHth.  c.  EmbmL  p.  iSlS  and
1S20).  Thi*  uitrndactioa  d(  the  young  women
WMBcomiirakd  b7  pmenti  to  their  now  phntorei,
which  woe  oiled  -taini>Sa.  (Saidu,  t.  v. }  SchoL
mi  Dim.  e.  EAd.  p.  ]3120  The  womeu  were
Tnrtllfid  ID  the  li«ti  of  the  phntriet,  and  Ihii  enrol-
■eol  v«  (leo  called  yaiAj^a.  The  preMDIi  Kem
to  hiT*  comiMed  in  a  frut  pita  to  the  phrMom,
mi  the  phialian  in  letora  mada  loma  offerinn  to
the  goda  oB  behalf  of  the  yonog  trida.  (Pollux,
ill  S,nu.  9,28.) Theaeceptanesofthspreienta


a  tnw  ciUxai,  and  that
qicDtly  her  cbildnn  would  bwo  Intimate  doima
to  all  the  Tight*  and  fciTilegeB  of  cituena.  (Hctm.
Liir.  d.  gr^  StaafaU.  g  100.  n.  1.)

Talalgia  waa  alaij  the  name  of  a  taetifica  offered
to  Athena  «  the  day  prerioiu  to  the  marriage  of  a
pA.  She  waa  taken  by  her  parent*  la  the  temple
af  the  goddeaa  in  the  AcTDpolia,  where  the  offering!
WBcmadeonhetbehaU:  (Ssidu,  «.e.npoT<A<u,)
The  plural,  foioildia,  waa  naed  to  eipreaa  wed-
dag  aoiemnhiea  ingeociaL  (Lycophnm,ap.  fi^m.
Jf.aO  [I' a-]

GAMOS  (Tdpx).  [Mjltbimonium.]
OA'MORI.  [OsoHOBL]
OA'NEA.  [CadpoNa,  p.  259,  a.]
GAUSAPA,  OAUSAPE,  or  GAUSAPUM,
a  kbd  of  thick  doth,  which  waa  on  one  dde  very
wBdly,  and  wm  naed  to  carer  lablea  (HocaL  SaL
'i.  11  ;  LociL  1^.  /Vinos,  ii.  870},  beda  (Hart,
xir.  147),  and  by  penooa  to  wr^  thenuelvea  up
aftB  tiking  a  bath  (Petron.  SS),  oi'in  general  to
potect  themaelTea  againat  lain  and  cold.  (Seneca,
EpuL  53.)  It  waa  worn  by  men  ai  well  aa  women.
(0<id,  Art  AmaL  ii.  300.)  It  came  in  out  among
the  Roman*  aboot  the  time  of  Angualna  (Plin.
ttN.ynL  48),  and  the  wealthier  Romaoa  had  it
>ade  of  the  fineat  wool,  and  moatl;  of  a  porple
cotottr.  The  guuapom  aeema,  however,  lometimea
IB  )ia(e  been  made  of  linen,  but  il*  peculiarity  of
having  otw  aide  mon  woolly  than  the  other  alwaja
renined  the «me.  (Mart  liv.  136.)  AiMartiB]
(m.  153)  call*  it  gaatapa  quadmta,  we  have
naani  to  anppoae  that,  like  the  Scotch  plud,  it  waa
■Iwaya,  fir  whatever  pnipoae  it  might  be  naed,  a
aqnn  or  oldong  piece  of  cloth.  (See  Bdtciger,
"-'  ■  1,  iL  p.  loa.)


Thew


wotd  ganaapa  u  al
rinale  a  thidc  wig,  avch  i
of  Gentani,  and  worn  by  the  &*hionabIe  people


la  made  of  the  hur


a  fiommtive  aenae  to  a  full  heard.  [L  S.J

0ELE0NTE3. [TaiBii\  Oatlit.]
OKLOTOPOIl  (yfurrtnul) [PiBioaT.!
OENE'SIA. IVvnvs,  p.  S38,  a.]
OB'NIUS. See  DitL  tf  Or.  ard  Hon.  Bio-


GENS.  m

QEN08  (•)*">)-  [TBiBu^GaMK.]-
0£NS.  Thi*  word  contain*  the  aune  element
a*  the  Latin  pM,nf,  and  gi^A  '"^  aa  the  Greek
tiriit,  yLyr^^iiAai,  &C.,  and  it  primarily  aignifiea
hn.  But  the  word  baa  numerou*  aigolfication*,
which  have  either  a  very  remote  connection  with
thi*  it!  primary  notion,  or  perhap*  none  at  aU.

Gen*  lometimea  ligiiifiea  a  whole  political  com-
munity, aa  Oena  Latlnorum,  Gen*  Campanonun,
&C.  (Jnv.  Sat.  viiL  239,  and  Heinrich'i  note)  ;
though  it  ia  probable  that  in  thia  application  of  tho
term,  the  notion  of  a  dlMioc^u  of  race  or  atodc
it  implied,  or  at  leait  the  notion  of  a  totality  of
penona  diitinguitbed  fnm  other  totalitiea  hv  aama-
neai  of  Ungnage,  community  of  law,  and  a


if  their


unbena


(p»  Ba^  c  1 3J  qxskt  of  "  Oentet  univeraae  in
civitatem  receptae,  ul  Sabinorum,  Volaconua,  Her-
nicorum,"  Il  i*  a  con*ei)n«ice  of  inch  meaning  of
Oeua,  rather  than  an  iiui^teadent  meaning,  that
the  word  ia  aometimea  uaed  to  exprcs*  a  people
aimply  with  refeienco  lo  their  tetritoiial  limit*.

Tho  mrazilng  of  the  word  in  the  exjHe**ion  Jo*
Gentium  it  explained  under  Joi.

The  word*  Gent  and  Qentilet  have  a  apecial
meaning  in  the  tyatem  of  the  Roman  law  and  in
the  Roman  coottiulion.  Cicero  (Top.  6)  hat  pR-
aerved  a  definition  of  Gentile*  which  waa  given  by
Scaevota,  the  pontifcx,  and  which,  with  reference
■ ■' ■  ■  '^  idered  complete. Thoae


slave,  and  (4)  who  had  anffered  no  capitia  dimino-
tio^ Thia  definJtJiHi  conain*  nothing  which  ihewa

«wa  ut  gtolileB,  if  tha  threa
other  coD^tico*,  contained  in  thi*  definitim,  we
not  applicable  to  theia.  There  i*  al*o  a  definition
of  gentilia  by  Feitu* :— "  That  ia  called  Geo*


Aelia


1 (00.


familiaa.  Oenlili*  i*  both  one  who  ia  of  the  mnw
atock  (^anu),  and  one  who  ia  called  by  the  laaie
name  (m»(i  Bontna)  *,  at  Cinciu*  tayi,  thoae  are
my  gentilea  who  are  e^led  by  my  nama."

We  cannot  conclude  any  thing  more  from  the
atsficHttr  of  Featua  than  that  a  Oena  contained
leverat  lamiliae,  or  that  aevoal  familiae  were  com-
prehended under  one  Oen*.  '  Accwding  to  the
defini^on,  perHnt  of  the  eame  gaau  (tun)  weis
gentile*,  and  alto  pereon*  of  the  tame  name  were
gcmtile*.  If  Fettn*  momt  lo  ay  that  oU  penon*
of  the  auae  genu*  and  all  peieoni  of  the  Mune
name  were  gentilea,  hi*  ttatemer'  "


*  "  Gentilia  dicitnr  et  ex  eodem  scnere  ortu^ef
ia  qui  aimili  nomine  appellatur."  The  (ocond  tt  ia
tomctunei  read  M,  which  it  manilettly  not  tha  right
reading,  a*  the  conleil  ihow*.  Beiide*,  if  tha
word*  "  M  i)  qui  limili  nomine  appellatur,"  are  to
be  taken  a*  an  illuttration  of  *^  ox  eodem  genero
oitn*,"  a*  they  mntl  h«  if  ■<  i*  the  true  raiding,
then  the  notion  of  a  comnum  Hamt  i*  viewed  u  of
neceaii^  being  contained  in  the  notion  of  BoetmoH
kin,  whercea  there  may  be  common  kin  without
common  name,  and  common  name  without  common
kin.  Thua  neither  doea  common  name  include  all
common  kin,  nor  doe*  conmiaa  kin  include  all  com'
mon  name  t  yet  each  include*  umething  that  tha
other  include*.


£6S  GENSw

vith  the  dcGnition  of  the  Pontifei ;  for  penona
night  be  of  the  umB  geniu,  uid  might  have  nu-
tained  n  cspitia  dimmutio  eith«  bj  adoptiDn  or
adrogHtioii,  or  by  emoncipAtum ;  in  all  theH  aue«
the  gmoA  would  Tcmoin,  far  the  Tutnr^  relatioa^
■hip  vol  not  ftfFected  by  uiy  change  in  the  jurift-
tical  condition  of  ■  ftaon  ;  in  (he  cuei  of  adoptioD
and  adrooKtion  the  nana  woold  be  lotl :  in  the  tue
of  emancipation  it  would  be  letalned.  If  the  deS-
nitioTt  of  Fettiu  mean*  that  among  thaw  of  the
Bame  genus  theiv  may  bo  genulea ;  and  among

eluded,  hii  definition  iiUue;  but  neither  iiatt  of
the  definition  ia  abiolutely  true,  nor,  if  both  parti
are  taken  together,  i>  the  whije  definition  abso-
lutely  trie.  It  leema  ai  if  the  definition  of  gentilet
waa  a  matter  of  some  difficulty ;  for  while  the  poi-

characteristic  of  gentllitaa,  there  were  other  condi-
tion! which  were  equally  ewential.

The  naoie  of  the  gem  was  generally  eharacteriied
by  the  teniiii>Bti(«i  «>a  or  to,  as  Julia,  Cornelia,
Valeria.

When  a  man  died  intotate  and  withont  agnaU,
hii  fiunilla  [Fauilia]  by  the  law  ef  the  Twdn
Tables  came  to  the  gentilet ;  and  in  the  case  of  a
lunatic  (/vrionH)  who  had  no  guardians,  thegnai-
dianahip  of  the  liuuUii;  and  his  pn^)erty  belonged
to  the  agnati  and  to  the  gentiles ;  to  the  latter,  wo
may  presome,  in  case  the  former  did  not  exisL

Accordingly,  one  part  of  the  jiu  geD^lltiDin  ar
jus  gcntllitatis  related  to  niccestlons  to  the  pro-
perty of  inteitala,  who  bad  no  Bsna^  A  notable
example  of  a  dispute  on  this  subject  between  the
Claudii  and  Mareelil  is  mentioned  in  a  difficult
possoge  of  Cicem  (de  Oral.  i.  S9).  The  Marcelli
claimed  the  inheritance  of  an  inteatato  son  of  one
of  the  liberti  or  tnedmen  of  their  Eiunilia  {itirpe) ;
the  Clandii  claimed  the  same  by  the  gentile  rights
igmbi),  The  Marcelli  were  plebeians  and  be-
longed to  the  patrician  Chwdia  gens  Niebuhr
obMiTcs  that  this  claim  of  the  Cloodli  is  incon-
siatent  with  Cicero^  definitiod,  according  to  which
no  descendant  of  a  &eedman  could  be  a  gentilis  ;
and  hn  conclndet  that  Cicero  (that  ia  Scaarola)
must  have  been  mistaksn  in  this  part  of  hi*  defi-
nition. BdI  it  must  be  obserred  though  the
deecendaati  of  freedmen  might  have  no  claim  at
gentilet,  the  memben  of  a  gens  mi^ht  as  such
have  claims  sgunit  them  ;  and  in  tbu  sense  the
descendants  of  freedmen  might  be  genres.  It
would  seem  as  if  the  Marcelli  onited  to  defend
their  luppoeed  patronal  rights  to  the  uiheritance
of  the  sona  of  fnedmen  against  the  claims  of  the
^t ;  for  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tables  gare  the
mherilance  of  a  freedmao  only,  who  died  intsstate
and  without  hein,  to  his  patron,  and  not  the  in-
heritance of  the  son  of  a  fnedmaiL  The  question
might  be  (his :  whether  the  law,  in  the  case  sup-
posed, gave  the  hareditai  to  the  ^;ens  as  baling  a
right  nsrsmount  to  the  patnmal  right.  It  may  be
that  toe  Marcelli,  as  being  included  in  the  Claudia


ibur  patnmal

« in  dispnta)


rights  (if  they  really  eztitad  in  the  ca*e
in  those  of  the  nu. Whetlier  as  nMndmi  u  the
gene,  the  plebeian  ManeUi  wovld  lake  as  gentOea
what  they  lost  as  pumU,  may  be  doubted.

It  is  generally  laid  or  tniqnsed  that  the  here-
ditas  wluch  came  to  a  gens  wat  diridad  ammic  the
gentilea,  which  mut  mean  the  heads  of  ftmillia,
This  may  be  10  J  at  least  we  moat  coDcaire  that


OEN&
the  heredilas,  at  one  period  at  least,  mutt  hanlieai
a  benefit  to  the  membert  of  the  gena:  Caessr  ii
said  (Snelon.  JiJ,  1)  to  bare  betsi  deprired  of  hii


ttermining  that  the  property  of  intestate!
should  ultimately  belimg  to  the  gena,  the  law  of
the  Twdie  Tablea  vat  only  providing  for  a  case
which  in  efery  ciTiliied  eount^  is  prorided  for  by
tome  positive  law  ;  that  Is,  the  law  finds  some  role  as
totbedisposi^n  of  the  property  of  a  pawn  who  did
without  hating  disposed  of  il  or  ItaTinc  those  whan
the  law  mtmgniifa  ai  immedjalaly  mtnled  to  it  in
case  there  ia  lu  diapontioiL  The  loti  had  that  a
rektioD  to  the  gentilei,  umibr  to  uat  whiA  nb-
sisti  in  Bodem  states  between  the  soieieign  power
and  persons  dying  intestate  and  without  lieirs  or

was  applied  by  the  gens  was  [ttohably  not  deter-
mined by  law ;  and  at  the  goia  wat  a  kind  of
jiuiatical  person,  annlogovs  to  the  commnnitr  of  a
civitas,  it  teems  not  nnhlcely  that  originally  inhcnt-
ances  accrued  to  the  gens  «  mck,  and  were  com-
mon property.  The  gats  must  hare  liod  soma
common  property,  tuch  at  sacdla,  ftc  It  would
be  no  difflodt  tronsitian  lo  imagine,  that  what
originally  belonged  to  the  gens  as  such,  was  in  the
course  ii  time  distributed  among  the  metaben,
which  would  easQy  take  place  when  the  Ihmiliaa
included  in  a  gens  wre  reduced  to  a  smoli  number.
There  wen  certain  aacnd  rites  (tOfTa  gemSiitiay
which  belonged  to  a  gms,  to  the  obaertance  al
which  all  the  memben  of  a  gens,  as  waA,  wen
bound,  whether  they  were  memben  by  birtl^
adoptim,  or  adrogation.  A  person  was  freed  bam
the  observance  of  such  sacra,  and  loot  the  privil^fea
connected  with  his  gentile  rights,  when  he  lost  oil
gena,  that  ia,  when  he  was  adrogated,  adopted^  or
oren  emancipated  ;  for  adrogation,  adoptiim,  and
emancipation  wen accompanied by  a  diminutis

When  the  adoption  was  from  onefiuoflia  into
another  of  the  same  gens,  the  name  of  the  gens  waa
■till  retained ;  and  when  a  an  was  emancipated,
the  name  of  the  gens  was  still  retained  ;  and  jet
in  both  these  cases,  if  we  adopt  the  deGnitiOD  of
Scoerola,  the  adopted  and  emandpated  penooa  loat
the  gentile  riglits,  though  they  ven  also  freed  frnia
the  gentile  buident  (taen).  In  the  case  of  adop-
tion and  adrogaUon,  the  adopted  and  adngated
person  who  pasted  into  a  familim  of  another  gen^
must  have  passed  into  the  gens  of  such  faftiitjt^
and  so  must  have  acqdrcd  the  rigbti  of  that  gens.
Such  a  person  hod  ixiiUtiDed  a  capitis  diminutio,
and  its  effect  was  to  deatcoy  hit  former  gentilo
rights,  together  with  the  rights  of  sgnaticn. Tha


1  the  righia  of


gentle  nghts  were  in  bet  imiJied
agnation,  if  the  pater-^mQias  had  a  gens,  uonae-
quently  he  who  obtained  by  adrogation  or  adoption
the  tights  of  agnation,  obtained  also  the  gentile
rights  of  hit  adapted  fiUher.  In  the  case  of  sdro-
gation,  the  adrogated  penon  nmouDced  his  nis  at
the  Comitia  Curlata,  which  solemnity  might  alao
be  expressed  by  the  term  "  ncn  deteitari,'"  for
snoa  and  gena  are  often  lynonyaioos.  Tho^  ia
nch  lase,  adrogatio,  on  Ibe  part  ef  the  adopti*a
fiuher,  eomaponded  to  detcatatio  aacnnm  on  tlM
part  ef  the  idn«ated  son. This  deteMatto  mcn>-

alienatio  mentioned  by  Cicero  (OnMar,  e,  43).  It
waa  the  duty  of  the  pantificas  to  look  after  the  dna
obwrvatiaa  of  the  gentile  sacra,  and  ta  ate  that


OENS.

' "tt  peenliar  plus  (neoUui)
'  M  gHitilitiB,  which

,  TbBBcmgenti-
utB,  •■  almdj  abierTMl,  mn  >  boiden  on  ihe
nnbaa  of  ■  gau  at  mdt.  Tie  ncn  priiaa  wan
a  dnrga  «  tha  [ciqialy  of  m  indiTidiud  ;  the  two
kinila  of  aAerk  wffA  ihna  ouito  diMancL

A»biL7),tlu


OENS.


£69


^


Bid  NialiBhi  u^nM  Um  DccadM  Old  QflDteo  wen
ibe  mat.  AmxHoglj  <Kh  of  tha  thne  tribM
onluiHd  tm  cnriso  lad  100  goilei ;  md  iba
thno  triba  contiifwd  SOO  ftmlci.  Now  if  then
■  mf  tnth  in  the  tndilioD  of  Ihii  raigin*!  dii-
Dibntioa  af  ibe  pnnlalkn  iDla  tribes,  coriu  lod
gala,  H  Ibllowi  that  Ihon  wm  no  iiKeamrj  kin-


We  know  nothing  hiitoriallj'  of  the  organin-
tiia  rf  dnl  ODcie^,  but  va  know  that  many  new
pditicy  bodica  haTs  been  nganiMd  out  of  the
natetial*  of  Biiatiiig  political  t


Wo  mut  take  the  mditkm  ai
it  has  oaa*  down  toil.  lie  ttadition  >•  Dot,  that
boifia*  idatad  bf  blood  wen  finrned  into  gentea,
that  ihno  geote*  wen  fbtmad  bio  curiae,  that  tbeu
raria*  were  (bnaed  iota  tribea.  Such  a  Qadition
wiald  centain  iti  own  nhtstion,  for  it  inTolTce
the  mtun  *f  tha  oaatnetio)  of  a  bod;  politio
tf  t^  aggrmtim  of  bmitiel  lata  miittea,  aad  bf
Amber oombmatioiit of theae new nniliea,  Theln-
dttion  if  of  thraa  fondamenlal  putt  (in  whatorer
aw  mil  fonned),  and  of  the  diviaioDi  of  them  into
•^ler  parte.  Tin  ■□Bllnl  political  diriiian  ie  geoi.
Ho  fjntUr  drriaicn  ia  made,  and  tbua  of  neoewit;,
■ha  w«  oaaa  to  cODudet  the  component  parte  of
pn,  «■  aoaa  to  eoaaidei  the  indiiiduJa  eein-
fntei  in  it  or  tha  heada  of  fiuniliea.  Accoidiug  to
tltt  fbndjaMmtal  principlea  of  Roman  law,  the  in.
diridaali  anaigo  theinaelTe*  into  t*"''!"  under
th^  napeetiTO  patna-bmiliaa.  It  followi,  that  if
the  diatfibotian  et  the  peopla  waa  efieded  by  a
dinaiaB  tf  tha  lai|er  into  niaUer  pam,  then  (oold
beaanenaMiy  km  anumg  tbeiamiliae  of  a  gena  ;
fw  kmaUp  amcog  all  the  membo*  of  a  gcoi  sould
■^  ha  cdeelad  bj  Mlec^  kindled  &miliaa,
ma.  If  tha  gcmi  wa*
a  kinihip  of  the  original
aemlioa  oi  eacli  goi^  whansrei  it  exiited,  mut

Thn  ii  no  pnof  that  the  Bomani  conaidand
that  tha«  wai  lunahip  among  the  bmiliae  origin-
all;  inal^ed  ia  a  gate.  Yet  aa  kmahip  waa  eri-
dcaee  if  tha  rigbta  of  agnatio,  and  eoniaqaeall^
of  gtmila  lighte,  whoi  Chen  had  hem  no  capitu
■'■—■Titkv  it  ia  eai;  to  aee  how  that  which  wa*
rridocB  of  the  right*  of  agnatia,  and  conaequently
ef  gi  III  ilii  righta,  might  ba  viewed  at  part  of  the
dcfaiiliga  of  gmtilia,  and  ba  eo  extended  la  Co
iii«ii|«i  hill  a  aappoaed  kinahip  among  the  original
■ODben  sf  tha  gena.  The  wvdjou  ilaelf  would
aba  hioar  aoeh  a  lappacitian,  eapeoall;  ai  the
rad  gmMM  aeaaa  to  b«  oftea  nied  in  the  lama
KBse.  (Cit.  pnBaOo,  e.  U.)  Thia  notion  of
kinah^  appean  alao  to  ba  confirmed  by  the  &ct  of
tie  Bambai  of  the  gent  being  diatin^oithed  b;  a
(oonaa  name,  aa  Ctnwlia,  Jniia,  fte.  But  many
caoMMaBte^  baaite  that  of  a  commoD  origin.


ma;  iiaTe  giren  a  common  name  to  toe  genlilea  :
and  indeed  then  aaenia  nothing  man  ttiange  in  all
the  gentiles  haiing  a  common  name,  thu  then
being  a  common  name  for  all  the  membeif  rf  a
coria  and  a  tribe.

Aa  the  gentea  waa  anbdiTiuana  of  tha  thne
aaci«it  tribea,  Ihe  popaliu  (ia  tha  ancient  aeoae)
alooa  had  genlaa,  io  uiat  to  be  a  patridau  and  tS
b«Ts  a  gana  wen  ^nooymoni  i  and  thui  we  find


appeara,  aa  in  the  caie  already  cited,  that
ionia  ^lee  cantaiaed  plebeian  baiiiiae,  which  it
ia  cwjertond  had  their  origin  in  mairiagea  be-
tween patriciani  and  pMieiani  befan  then  waa
emrnnbiam  between  them.  When  the  iex  was
carried  which  eKablithod  connubinm  between  the
pleba  and  the  patna,  it  wu  alleged  that  thia
woold  CHifiHind  Iba  gentile  righia  {.^iira

shildiea  coold  not
yet  they  might  retain  tha  gentile
name,  and  thoi,  in  a  aenie,  the  fiunily  might
be  gentilet  without  the  gentile  [viiUegei.  Such
marriagci  would  in  eSect  intruloee  coDfusion  ;
and  it  dcee  not  appear  how  this  would  be  incrouea
bj  giving  to  a  marriage  between  a  gentile  nun,
and  a  woman  not  genlilii,  the  legal  character  of
connubiiun  ;  the  effect  of  the  leml  change  waa  Io
give  the  children  the  gcntititai  of  their  l^er.  It
IS  atVMliinte  nid  that  the  caect  of  this  lex  waa  to
give  the  genlile  rigbta  to  the  pleba,  which  ii  an
abanidi^ ;  for,  acc(*ding  to  the  ei;seBaicra  of  Lit;
(ir.  1),  which  ia  coniiumable  to  a  strict  principle
of  Roman  law,  "  palnm  MfauntDi  liberi,"  and  the
childnm  of  a  plebeian  man  could  only  be  plebeian.
Before  the  pawing  of  this  isi,  it  may  be  inferred
(bat  if  a  patririao  woman  married  oat  of  her  gena
(e  gente,  e  patribni  enupail)  it  waa  no  marriage  at
alt,  and  that  the  children  of  lacb  marriage  wen


■r  of  their  father,  a


- The

effect  would  be  the  aame,  according  to  tbe  itrict
principlet  of  Roman  law,  if  a  plebean  married  a
patrician  woman,  before  there  waa  connubium  be-
tweoi  them  ;  for  if  Ifapre  was  no  connubituu,  then
waa  no  legal  marriage,  and  the  oKpring  wen  not
CLtisena,  which  ia  the  thing  oomplaincd  cf  by
Caauleiuf.  (Liv.  ir.  i.)  It  doea  not  appear  then
how  such  mairiagea  will  account  for  plebeian  &mi-
liaa  being  contained  in  patrician  gentea,  nnlew  we
■nppoae  that  when  the  children  of  a  gentile  man
and  a  plebeian  wunan  took  the  name  of  the  bthe^
and  foUawed  the  condition  of  the  mother,  thej
or  other,  not  eaiy  to  exphun,
emuidered  ai  citixens  and  plebeiaaa.  But  if  thia
be  BO,  what  would  be  the  itatua  of  the  children  of
a  patrician  woman  by  a  plebeian  man  ?

Nichvlir  asnunei  that  (be  members  of  the  gena
(gen^ei)  wen  bound  to  asaiat  their  indigent
fellows  in  bearing  exbaordinary  burdens  i  but  thia
aaaertion  ia  founded  on  the  interpretation  giTcn  to
the  words  robt  yivti  TpM^jtewoi  of  DioBjtiua
(iL  10),  which  hare  a  limpler  and  more  obriona
meaning.  Whaterer  probabiliqr  then  may  be  in
the  auumption  of  Niebohr,  as  founded  on  the
pataage  aWe  cited,  and  one  at  two  other  paa-
asgea,  it  cannot  be  considend  aa  a  thing  damon-
BliBled.

A  hnndred  new  msnben  wen  added  to  the
■csaU  by  tbe  £iM  laignin. TheM  wm  the  la-


670  GEN3.

{rascDlntiTei  oS  ihe  Lacem,  the  third  ud  !af
tribe  r  and  they  wen  called  Pntiea  Minonira
tinm  (  Lit,  i.  3£). See  the  ctuioiu  letlei  of  Cicara
to  Pwtiu  {ad  Fam.  ii.  21).

If  the  gcntea  were  such  eubdiriuaiu  of  a  c
u  already  ilated,  it  mBy  b«  Baked  what  ii  m
bj  new  gentea  being  intjodueed  among  the  en
fw  tbia  undoubtedly  took  place. Tullua  Hoil
incorporated  the  Julil,  Servilii,  and  olhen,  bd
the  Pstricii,  and  conieiiuently  ammg  the  cu
The  Claudii  were  a  Sabine  gem,  who,  it  vai
(Lit.  It.  S),  were  receiTed  among  Iho  patricii  aftpr
the  baniahment  of  the  kinga. A  recent  writer
(Goettling)  attempt!  to  remore  thia  difficulty  by
aaauming,  according  to  hia  inleqiretatioa  of  Diony-
lina  <iL  7)>  a  diiiiioD  of  the  curiae  into  ten  decuriae,
and  by  the  further  asaumption  of  an  indefinite
number  of  gentea  in  each  decuria. Conaiatcntly
with  thta,  he  asaumeB  a  kinahip  among  the  tnem-
bera  of  the  lame  gena,  according  (o  which  hrpo-

Iheaia  the  aei '  '

haiedeai


nded,  or  claimed  di


Thua  the  gentea  would  be  nothing
than  aggregates  of  kindred  fomiliea,  and  it
have  been  coalrired  in  making  the  diTiiion
dccnrioe,  that  aJl  the  members  of  a  geni  (thua
uudentood)  must  have  been  included  in  the  tame
decnria.  But  to  aumne  thia,  it  nothing  more  than
to  aay  that  the  political  ayatem  waa  formed  by  be-
ginning with  aggregationa  of  Aimiiiea  ^  for  if  the
ultimato  political  diviiion,  the  decuriae,  woa  to
oonsiit  of  aggregatea  of  gcnlea  (thua  ondcntood),
BDch  arrangemeDt  could  only  be  effected  by  making
B^regslion  of  fiunilice  the  bniii  of  the  political
■jttem,  and  then  ascending  from  them  to  decuriae,
fomi  decuriae  to  curiae,  and  from  curiae  to  tribea  ;
a  proceeding  which  i>  ioconaiatcnt  with  aaying  thnt
tile  cnriB*  were  anbdivided  into  dccurUe,  for  Ihii
mode  of  exprcaaian  impliea  that  the  curiae  were
fbtmed  before  the  decuriae.  But  the  introducticm
of  new  gentea  ii  conceintble  even  on  the  hypo,
theaia  of  the  gens  beiiuf  a  mere  political  diviaion.
If  the  number  vna  originally  limiled,  it  ii  perfectly
coiuiitent  with  what  we  know  of  the  Roinaii  eon-
atitution,  which  WB»  alwaya  in  a  atate  of  progrca-
aive  change,  to  auppoae  that  the  atrict  rule  of  limi-
tation waa  loon  neglected.  Now  if  a  new  vena  wai
intrsduced,  il  mnat  have  bee
old  gentce  by  haiing  a  diitint
nnmbcr  of  foreigners  wero  admitted  as  a  gena,  it  is
conceivable  that  they  wavid  take  the  name  of  some
dlatinguished  person  among  them,  who  migit  be
the  head  of  a  family  consisting  of  many  branchei,
each  with  a  numeroua  body  of  retainens.  And  this
ia  the  better  Iradition  as  to  the  patrician  Ciondii,
who  came  to  Rome  with  Alia  Claudina,  their  head
{gaitit  pruuepi),  after  the  eipulaion  of  the  kingi,
KoA  were  co^optated  (fiooptati)  by  the  patree  among
the  patricii ;  which  it  the  tame  thing  sa  saying  that
thia  immigrating  body  wat  recognised  aa  a  Roman
gena.  (Sueton.  Tib.  1 ;  Lir.  iL  16.)  According  to
the  tradition,  A  tta  Clatidins  received  a  tract  of  laud
for  hia  clionts  on  the  Anio.  and  a  piece  of  bnryiDg-
gronnd,  under  the  Capitol,  wat  given  to  him  by
the  atate  (juAUbh).  According  to  the  original  con-
ititation  of  a  gona,  the  posseasion  of  a  common
bnrying-place,  and  the  gentile  right  to  interment
therein,  were  a  part  of  the  gen&o  taera.  (Cio.
Z^.  ii.22  ;  Veil  PatiL  1 1 9  i  Fenns,  i.  c.  CXnaa  ,-
LiT.  iv.  S,  Ti.  40  ;  Virgil,  Aot.  vii.  700.  At  la
the  Qau  Odavia,  tee  Suetonina,  Aag.  3.)


OEOMORI.

It  il  probable  that  eten  in  the  tdme  rf  Cicen
the  proper  notion  of  a  gaia  and  itt  righti  were  ill
onderttood ;  and  ftiU  later,  owing  to  the  gnU
change!  in  the  conatitotion,  aikl  the  extincticD  of
10  many  ancient  geotei,  the  tnwet  cf  the  jaa  gm-
tilitinm  were  neuly  efiaced.  Thua  we  find  that
the  words  gena  and  familia  aie  osed  indiffemtly
by  later  writers,  though  Livy  careiiilly  distin-
guithet  them.  The  "  elder  Pliny  apeaka  tS  the
tacn  Serviliae  fiuniiiae ;  Macrobias  of  the  sioi
bmiliiiB  Claudiae,  AemiUoe,  Jnliae,  Comeliae ;  ud
an  ancient  inicriptim  mec^ni  HI  Aedituiu  and  a
Saeerdoi  Sergiae  familia^  thoogh  thete  w««  ill
well  known  ancient  gentea,  aod  these  ncca,  in  the
more  correct  language  of  the  older  writwi,  would
certunly  have  been  called  sacis  gentilitja."  (Sa-
vigny,  ZtOilirift,  iCa,  vol.  iL  p  SBS.)

in  the  time  of  Oains  (the  aga  of  the  Antoninii),
the  jna  gentiliUnm  had  entirely  ftllen  bto  disuse.
(Oaiua,  iiL  17.)  Thus  an  ondent  inatitution,
which  formed  an  int^ral  part  of  the  old  ctmttitn'
tion,  and  wai  long  hdd  together  by  the  con-
servatiTe  power  of  religions  rights,  gradually  k«t  iu
prunitive  ehaiactcr  in  the  cfaazwi  which  dnnm-
ttancei  impresaed  on  the  form  of  the  Rcanan  itat^
and  wat  finalhr  extinguiihed.

The  word  Qeni  hu  recently  been  reodaed  in
English  by  the  word  Home,  a  t^m  which  liai  hm
bc«a  purposely  not  nsed,  as  it  it  not  aoctawTj,
and  can  only  lead  to  miaconGeptian.

Tho  aabjoct  of  the  gena  ia  discussed  with  gnat
acuteneu  both  by  Niehuhr  (Asm.  HiiL  toL  L}  and
by  Maiden  (,HitL  of  Roma,  published  by  the  So-
cle^ for  the  DifFusion  of  Uteful  Enowled«e).

The  views  of  Goettling  ore  eontBined  in  hia
OadiiiAte  dor  Rom,  ^aaUoar/dttiHis,  Halle,  IS40,


GENTILES.

OENTIL'ITAS: [Gin

OEO'HORI  (7«M"< ;  I><>no,  7<^uv>m)  ia  the

ime  of  the  second  of  the  three  clasaet  into  which
Theseus  ia  aaid  to  have  divided  the  inhabitants  of
Attica.  (PluL  Tha.  15  ;  Pollui,  viiL  111.)  Thii
'm  was,  together  with  the  third,  the  S^iuoufnitt,

[eluded  from  the  great  invil  and  pricatlj  offices
which  belonged  eiduaiyely  to  the  eopatridi,  se
that  there  woa  a  great  diatinetioa  between  the  fint


0  inferi.


. Wei


any  pinieulara  retpect-
ie  fviitipcH  atood  to  the
sme  may  Mtfcer  signify
.  or  peasants  who  colii-
Toted  tho  hudt  of  others  at  tenants.  The  ytuftipm
have,  aocordii^ly,  b;  tome  writers  been  thooght  to
be  free  land-ownen,  while  othen  have  conoeiTed
haTo  been  a  claaa  of  tenant*.  It  seema,
however,  inconsistent  with  the  (tale  of  afiun  ia
Attica,  as  well  at  with  the  manner  in  which  the
ither  Greek  B'


ipoae  that  the  whole  dati  cuniisted  of  the  latter
y ;  there  wen  undoubtedly  amiwg  them  a  con-
siderable nnmbcr  of  fnenuat  who  ctutivaLed  tlieir


sunpo


lands  (Timaens,  Oloaar.  t.  e
Valckanacr  ad  Ilerod.  v.  77),  but  had  by  their
birth  DO  claims  to  liie  rightt  and  privilegea  of  ih*
noble*.  Wa  do  not  hear  of  any  politioiil  diatioo-
tioni  between  the  ytuiiipoi  and  tU  (wuawpyel  ■
and  it  imy  alhei  be  that  then  oiiitMl  none  «t  alW


OEROUSLA.

t>  if  Am  wtn  anj  ongiiullf ,  ihU  tliey  gndually
noiahcd.  Tka  would  Kxtmiit  fbr  the  hct  that
Dnifwiii  (iL  8)  m]j  Duatioiu  two  dwa  a[  At-

ibe  Nhar  tQ  tha  [S^nus.  (ThirlwiU,  Nubtrj  of
"  -  ' L  p.  U  ; Wulumuth. HtUatiiclit

'I,  nL  i.  p.  361, 2d  edit. ;  Platoei,
1.  19  ;  Titmwut,  GrieA.  Sloalmtr-


^  il  TKrtf>  omvBttDg  of  the  wealthy  and

powcifcL  (Tkuerd.  Tiii  31  ;  Plut.  QgaoL  Horn.
f.  303 ;  Mllllcr,  Dar.  iiL  1.  S  *■}  In  SjiscUM  tha
amtooatitml  party  waa  likewite  called  yttaiiipoi
«r  Tfii^t,  in  appoaition  to  tha  t^iup.  (Herod,  vii.
\Si  i  Heajch.  t.  «.  rd«up«  i  UOller,  Dor.  ill  1.
|4i  a(iUcr,.bJlteiHOr^.jyratL  p.9.> [L.S.]

aERAER.4E  orOERARAE  ifffiufai  or  ytfn-
r-r [D.<im™iA,a412,..]

OERANOS  (VpcvDi). [Hvpoac8BN4.]

QERMA'NI. [CooKATL)

OEROU'SIA  {ytfuiKM),  tha  oxmcil  af  ddcn
iyifirrts),  waa  the  naioB  of  tha  Senate  ia  moat
Doric  itate*,  and  waa  eapecioll;  naed  to  ligni^  the
6>aal«  ml  Sputa.  Id  taonection  with  ihia  auhjecc
it  it  pnpoaed  to  gire  ■  gmenl  view  of  the  Spartan
oBitiCQiic^  tBA  to  expjnin  tha  fiuictiaiu  of  ill
IfgialatiTC  and  adminiitiBLiTD  elemenla,  Tn  thi
kia  agea  of  SpaRan  hiitor;  one  of  tha  moti
tdmiiiBit  of  Ihoa  wai  the  eall^  of  the  £ve
qtuai;  bat  ai  an  aeoxuit  of  tba  Ephoralty  it
giien  ia  a  ae|iarale  article  [EraoKi],  ve  iliall
Bo&H  oar  iaqairiea  Ui  the  kings,  tba  lifams  la
coDdlkn,  and  the  iaikitiila  or  awembly  of  Spor-

L  n*  Kiagt. Tba  kinglr  anUiority  at  Sparta
>a>,  aa  it  ia  well  known,  eeeral  with  the  aettle-
■at  of  the  Donaoi in  the  Pelapo
caofiDed  to  the  deacendonta  of  Aiist
ef  tW  HeiBcleid  luadoi,  ondai  whom,  ocoirding
ta  (he  Spaitan  leg«ld,  the  eooqueat a''  '  ~
■M ariilBTsd. To  him  vera  bom t
Eiujathowa  and  Procia ; and boat ttia taiue
■naa  the  diarchy,  or  dirided  rojallj,  the  mi
nipitj  being  alvaja  ihand  by  the  lepreeentotii
•f  tha  two  fiunilieB  which  clainied  docent  frc
thea  (Herod-  li  £2)  ;  the  pncedenca  in  point
r,  granted  to  the  old* '


li  of  the  twin  brothera.  (Niebohr,  HiiL
tf  Ahl  toL  i  p.  3fi6.)  Sub  wai  the  national
l^end  I  bat  ai  we  read  that  the  nnnion  of  Ihi
Pjthkn  oaacle  waa  proeored  for  tha  amogemea
rf  tha  dianh  J  (Hnnd.  (.  c),  we  ma;  conclude  that
it  ana  not  altogether  fortnitoui,  but
nik  of  poticy  and  deaign  ;  nor  indeed  ia  it  impio-
bbie  that  tba  noblet  voiild  gladly  aTiil  (hem-
arlna  if  an  opportunity  to  woiken  the  royal  bd-
Iherity  by  dividing  it

The  deaeent  of  the  Spartaa  kingi  from  the  no-
tanal  benicB  and  leaden  couttihnled  in  no  biiibII
drgiee  to  mpport  lh«r  dignity  and  honoui;  and  it
11,  pohapa,  fnon  tbii  circuoitlance  partly  that  thoy
wBe  eomidcTed  a*  heme*,  and  enjoyed  a  eenaii
nJipooa  Mpecl.  (Xen.  D«R«p.  ioc  c.  16.)  Thi
houara  paid  to  them  were,  boweTer,  of  a  umpli
—iL.- 1  nch  aa  a  Spartan  might  giv4

an  hii  own  dimity  or  foi


OEROUSIA.  S71

the  prioatboodi  of  Zeiu  Uraniiu  (Herod.  Vi.  £6)  and
the  Lacedaemonian  Zeiu  being  filled  by  them ;  and
that,  in  theii  c^Acity  of  national  high  prieeta,  they
officiated  at  all  the  pablic  lacnGce*  ofiered  on  be-
half of  the  itate.  {Xea.  De  Bip.  Lac.  15.)  HoRnrer
thqr  were  amply  prOTided  with  the  meana  for  ei-
ercuing  the  heroic  virtue  of  hoapitolity;  for  thii
purpoK,  public  DT  domain  landa  were  auigned  to
them  in  the  diatricl  of  the  perioed,  or  pnTincial
lubjecto,  and  certain  peiquiiitei  belonged  to  them
whenerer  any  animal  wai  ilain  in  nuiBce.  Be-
lidea  thio,  the  kingi  were  entitled  to  varioua  pay-
ment! in  kind  (xnr£*  lAy  oWr  iib  tiimi  xoV'"),
that  they  might  aerer  be  in  wont  of  rictimi  to
ncriiice ;  la  addition  1o  which  they  received,  twice
a  month  Inm  the  itate,  an  lirijlov  riAiuif,  to  be
offered  at  a  ncrifice  to  ApoUo,  and  then  terved  np
at  the  reyxl  table.  Whenever  also  any  of  tha
citiiena  made  a  public  ucrifice  tA  the  gods,  the
kiuga  were  invited  to  the  fcait,  and  bcmoiired  above
the  other  gneeta :  a  double  portion  of  food  wu  given
to  them,  and  they  commenced  the  liba^oni  to  the
godi.  (Herod,  il  67.)  All  iheie  diilinctioni  on
of  a  simple  and  antiquated  character,  and,  lo  fiu  ai
they  go,  prove  that  the  Spartan  sovereignty  was  a
continuation  of  the  heroic  or  Homeric,  The  dia-
tinctiona  and  privil^ea  granted  to  the  king  aa
commEuider  of  the  forcei  in  war,  lead  to  the  lamo
conclusion.  Theie  wore  gteatci  than  he  enjoyed
at  home.  He  was  goaided  by  a  body  of  100
chosen  men,  and  his  table  was  maintained  at  the
public  expense :  he  might  sacrifice  in  his  Hcerdotal
capacity  a*  many  victims  as  he  cboie  ;  the  ikina
and  backs  of  which  were  his  perquisites,  and  ha
was  aiiiited  by  so  many  subordinate  oScers,  that
he  had  nothing  else  to  ia,  except  to  act  as  priest


la  diaraetar  of  pciast  and  king.


i.fiS.)
Theai


I.  {Xtn.  ntHtp.  Lao.  it,  IS;  Herod,
n  and  demise  of  the  Spartan  kings


were  marked  by  al
ter.  (Herod.  vL  £8.)  The  former  event  was  sig-
nalised by  a  remission  of  all  debia  due  from  piivnta
iadividuajB  to  the  state  or  the  king ;  and  on  the
death  of  a  king,  the  tunetol  solenuutiet  were  cele-
brated by  the  whole  community.  There  was  a
general  monming  lor  ten  days,  during  which  all
public  busineu  was  suspended  ^  horsemen  went
rotind  the  country  to  carry  the  tidinn,  and  a  fixed
number  of  the  perioeci,  or  proiinciak,  was  obliged
to  come  bum  all  parti  of  the  country  to  the  city,
when,  with  the  Spartans  and  Helots,  and  their
wivci,  to  the  number  of  many  thousands,  they
made  loud  lamentationa,  and  proclaimed  the  virtues
of  the  deceased  king  aa  superior  to  those  of  all  bis
predecessors. (Herod.  /.  a.)

In  eompoiison  with  their  dignity  and  houotin,
(he  constitntiDQal  powers  of  the  kings  were  veiy
limited.  In  fact  they  can  scarcely  be  said  to  have
poasesaed  any  ;  for  Uiough  they  presided  over  the
council  of  yipoTTtr  or  ipxvjiriUf  or  priit^pot
and  the  king  of  the  elder  house  pmbably


hada


still  tb


moro  than  that  of  any  other  senator  ;  when
absent,  their  place  wot  supplied  and  their  proxies
tendered  by  the  conndllon  who  were  most  nearly
related  to  them,  and  therefore  of  an  Heradeid
family. Still  the  kings  had  some  important  prero-


*  Dr.  Thirlwall  observes  that  this  supposition
may  perhaps  reconcile  the  diffenncs  betnean  Il«od.
vi.  67.  and  Thneyd.  i,  20.


<72  OEKOUBIA.

gBtiTM ;  tliui  tbe;  liad  in  common  inih  othn
iiiagutnt««  the  r^U  of  Addnning  the  pablic
anemblj ;  beiidai  thii,  they  ut  in  a  Hponte  mart
cf  their  own,  where  they  aaie  judgment  inallcaan
of  heii-Mia  claimed  by  dificnnt  paitiei ;  \  fimctian
forraerty  Biei™ed  by  the  kingi  at  Athoiu,  but
•fterwaJdi  traiaferTBi  to  the  Archon  Epooymiu.
(Herod.  t1  S7.)  Tbey  alio  appointed  Iho  four
jyUoM  (nMiai),  whciH  duty  It  waa  to  go  u  mea-
Kngenlo  coainltthegadBtDelpbi.  AdoptimuaUo
took  plac«  in  their  pr«Kiice,  and  Ihey  held  a  court
in  all  Quea  connected  with  the  mainlenance  of  the
public  roodi ;  probably  in  their  capacity  of  geneiali,
and  ■>  luperintendenU  of  the  intereoune  with
foreign  laliont  (MUIler,  Ihr.  iiL  6.  §  T.)  In
foreign  a&ire,  indeed,  their  prerogatiTei  were  con-
lideiable :  thni  they  were  the  commttndera  of  the
Spaitaa  fbrcee,  ud  had  the  priTilege  of  aomioBt-
Ing  &Dm  amcngit  the  ciliieni,  pecaoni  to  act  ai
**  proieni  "  or  protecton  and  enterlainen  of  fomign-
«n  Tiaitisg  SfBTta.  But  their  chief  power  wm  in
war  ;  for  after  they  hod  once  eroued  the  borden
of  Laconia,  in  eamraand  of  troopi,  their  authority
becamo  nnlimited.  They  could  lead  out  and  b4-
■embla  armies,  despatch  ambassadors  to  collect
nKHioy,  and  refer  thosB  who  applied  to  therneelTea
fi>I  justice  to  the  proper  officen  ^pointed  for  thai
pnrpof&  (Xen.  De  S^  Lac.  13  ;  Thuc  t.  60,
Tiii.  5.)  Two  eph»s,  indeed,  accompanied  the
kings  on  their  eipeditions,  but  thote  roagislrates
hid  no  authority  to  interfere  with  the  king's  opera-
tions: they  limply  watched  orer  the  proceedings
of  the  army,  (Xen.  i  c)  Moreover,  there  can  be
no  doubt  that  the  kings  were,  on  their  retnm  bome^
accountable  for  their  conduct  ss  generals  (TlincTd.T.
63),  and  moia  especially  after  the  increase  rf  the
ephoial  authority.  Their  military  power  also  was
not  connected  with  any  political  fiinctions,  for  the
kings  were  not  allowed  to  conclude  treaties  or  to
decide  the  fate  of  cities,  without  commtmicating
with  the  authorities  at  home.  (Xen./fs^iL  2.  §  1^
T.  3.  £  21.)  In  former  times  the  two  kings  had  a
joint  command  ;  this,  howeier,  led  to  inconveni-
ences, and  a  law  was  in  conieqnencs  passed  that
for  the  lutme  one  only  of  the  two  kings  should
luTe  the  command  of  tho  aimy  on  foreign  expedi-
tions. (Herod.  T.  (?.)

II.  71*  yifovala,  or  nnesesf  ^  eUtrt.  This
body  was  the  aristocratic  element  of  the  Spartan
polity,  and  not  peculiar  to  Sparta  only,  but  found,
as  has  been  already  obserred,  in  other  Dorian
Males,  just  as  a  fieukii  or  democratical  council  w»t
an  element  of  most  Ionian  constiCnltoog.

The  ytpowla  oi  ftpurliL  at  Spirla  included  the
two  kings,  its  presidents,  and  eonsiated  of  thirty
members  :  a  nnmbec  which  seems  connected  with
the  dirisiont  of  the  Spartan  people.  Every  Dorian
■tate,  in  hct,  was  divided. into  three  trihea;  the
Hylleia,  the  Dymanes,  and  tho  Pampb^li,  whence
the  Dorians  ale  called  rpixiltft,  or  three  divided.
(Od.  lii.  174.)  The  tribes  at  Sparta  were  ngun
subdivided  into  Mai,  aUo  tailed  ippsTpuii  (MUIler,
Dor.  iii.  fi.  g  S),  a  word  which  signifies  a  union  of
families,  whether  fotmded  upon  ties  of  relationship,
or  formed  for  political  purposes,  irtespectivc  of  any
■uch  connection.  The  obaa  were  like  the  yiparm,
thirW  in  nmnber,  so  that  each  oba  vat  represented
ly  Its  coancilliff:  an  inference  which  leads  to
tlie  conclusion  that  two  obae  at  least,  of  the  Hjl-
lean  tribe,  must  haTe  belonged  to  the  royal  house
c(  the  Hendudi. No  one  wai  cligiUe  to  the


annioed  In  voti
u  ranaritMila  ft


OEROUSIA.
conncil  till  ha  irai  sixty  yean  of  age  (I^nt.  Zftaij,
26),  and  the  additional  iinalilicatiDns  were  strictly
of  on  aristocratic  nature.  We  are  told,  ftr  in-
stance, that  the  office  of  a  eonncillDT  was  the  re-
ward and  priie  of  Tirtne  (AristoLi^iKr.  ii  6.{15i
Demosth.  e.  Lepl.  p.  iS9),  and  that  it  was  confintd
to  men  of  distinguished  chaiaclac  and  station
(ica\sl  itjLtbM).

The  election  was  detannioed  h
mode  of  conducti  „

fashioned  simplidly.  The  oompetitoci  presented
themseliea  one  after  another  to  the  assonUy  of
electors  {P]vl.  Lgaay.  26);  tho latter t(ati£ed that
esteem  by  acclamations,  which  varied  in  inlcasi^
according  to  the  popularity  of  the  eandidalet  foe
whom  they  were  given.  These  luanifeitatioBS  of
esteem  were  noted  by  persons  in  an  adjoining
building,  who  could  judge  of  Che  shoutings  hot
could  not  tell  in  whose  &Tonr  it  was  given.  The
person  vhun  these  judges  thought  to  have  bMn
most  applauded  wtu  declared  the  successful  candi-
dal&  The  diSerent  competiton  for  a  vacant  plsn
offered themselves upon their own judgment

{ArisloiPoatiLfi.  gir -

the  Hi,  to  which  the  a
vacant  had  belonfted ;  and  as  the  office  was  tor  life,
and  therefore  only  one  vacancy  could  (in  ordinarr
cases)  happen  at  a  time,  the  attention  of  the  whole
slate  would  be  fixed  on  the  choice  of  the  electors.
The  office  of  a  councillor,  however,  «aa  not  only
for  life,  but  also  irresponsible  (Aristot.  PolU.  H  6>,
as  if  a  previous  reputation,  and  the  near  ippiscli
of  death,  were  considered  a  Bofficient  guarantee  tot
integrity  and  moderation.  Bat  the  coDncJUon  did
not  always  prove  an,  for  Arislotle  (L  o.)  tells  us
that  the  members  of  the  TtpsvowreoeiTed  bribes,
and  firequenlly  showed  partiality  in  theii  deeisiouk

The  fonctioiu  of  the  councillon  ware  partly  de-
liberatiie,  [«rtiy  judicial,and  partly  eiecnlive.  In
the  disebaige  of  the  first  they  prepared  meisum
and  passed  piclinunary  decrees  (Pint,  .^ps,  H)
which  were  to  be  laid  hefon  the  popnlat  assembly,
so  that  the  important  privilege  (a  initiatiiig  all
changes  in  the  gorermnent  or  laws  wai  rcated  in
them.  As  a  criminal  court  they  could  punish  with
dtath  and  ciril  degmdation  (JTi/cfa,  Xen.  Ds
Aip.  Lae.lO.S^;  AHst.  PoliL  ill  ij,  and  thai,
too,  without  being  restrained  by  any  code  of  writ-
ten laws  (Aristot.  PaHi.  ii.  6),  fbr  which  lutioDal
feeling  and  recognised  usages  would  Ibtm  a  loffi-
dent  substitute.  They  alio  appear  to  hare  exer-
cised, like  the  Areiopagus  at  Athens,  a  general
superintendence  and  inspection  over  the  lives  and
manners  of  the  citiiens  (artiiri  it  nagiMln  diidpli-
mujmbliaat,  AuL  OelL  iriii.  3),  and  pnbaUy  were
allowed  "  a  kind  of  patrianhil  authmity  to  enfbtce
the  observance  of  ancient  usage  and  discipline.''
(Thirlwall,  HiML  o/OnsM,  Tol.  i  p.  Sla)  It  is
not,  however,  can  to  deline  with  exactness  the
originsl  extent  of  their  fnncti«ts ;  especially  aa
respects  the  last-mentioned  duty,  sinoa  the  ephoit
not  only  encnnched  upoD  the  prctwativea  of  the
king  and  conncn,  bat  aiso  poesessed,  m  Terr  eariy
times,  a  craisorial  power,  and  wero  not  lualj  to


extort.
ilu  AcaAirirfa, or  a-miif  tf  S^mtam

fittmen.  This  aasemUy  pctsessei,  io  tkeny  at
least,  the  supreme  authori^  in  all  natteia  aSecting
the  general  interests  of  the  slat&  tta  orwin^
position  at  Sparta  is  shortly  eiplained  b*  a  rtietia
or  ndinaine  of  Lycmgns,  which,  ia  (be  iona  of  an


OEROtlSIA.

aide,  eiLilnti  llie  [sineipBl  leBtun*  of  iLe  Spartan
pdlij:  — "  Baild  a  lemple,"  >n;i  the  Fylbian
pxl,  "  Id  Hdlanina  Zeot  uid  HelUiuan  A^ena  ;
diiidt  tba  tribet,  ud  uutitnte  lliirt;  obu  ;  iip-
paini  a  conncQ  with  iu  priocei ;  call  ui  uienihlf
|i¥tU^(ir)  beCTCen  Babjca  ind  Knakion,  then
mke  B  motian  and  deport ;  aod  let  there  hv  a
nihl  of  deeiiion  and  power  to  the  people  "  (t(^
!•  n^  Vi»>  vpdTU,  PIdL  Zfary.  6  ;  MUIW,
ftr.iiLi.S8).

Sj  ihii  ordinanM  foil  pever  mi  giT«n  (o  the
pnpie  to  adopt  or  reject  whalcrec  waa  ptopoied
to  tlirB  b;  uic  king  and  other  inagiitmua.  It
■n,  howeirer,  fbnnd  neceaaoiy  to  deline  thia  povor
s»R  enctlj,  and  the  followini;  dooie,  aieriMd  to
the  king!  Thcopompni  and  Polydonii,  vai  added
to  llie  DiigiDal  riietn,  **  but  if  the  people  ihonld
follow  a  sDoked  opinion  the  elders  and  the  princei
■hall  wUhdmr "  (robi  vftatvytvits  fcol  Vxa-
7^1  kaaararnpai  ^fuv).  Plotarch  (1  c)  in-
Mpreti  thtM  vocdt  to  mean  ■*  That  in  caaa  the
pn^  doet  not  either  nject  or  appnne  in  tola  a
BOiare  proQuaed  to  them,  the  kinga  and  eooncil-
kn  ihoold  AbdItb  the  aBembl;,  and  declare  the
jnpoaal  decres  to  bo  iavalid."  According  to  thii
mlspntalion,  whieb  ii  coniinned  by  lome  venea
it  ihe  Kunomi^  of  Tyrtaem,  the  aHcmbly  wa*  not
ooipetHit  to  oiiginale  anj  aieaium,  but  onlf  to
)■«  or  reject,  vithoal  nwdifiaitian,  the  lawi  and
dHta  propoaed  bj  the  proper  anthontie* :  a  limi-
lUHa  of  ita  power,  which  almoit  detciniined  the
cfannfr  of  the  Spartan  conalitulion,  and  joitiliet
Ife  wvdi  of  Demoathenei,  who  obaerred  («.  Lep.
^  489.  30),  tliat  the  ytpmiif*  at  Sparta  waa  in
nanj  Rmecti  wipaat — Amw  jriji  ^I  rfir  woX-
^w.  AU  dtiasia  abort  the  age  of  thirty,  who
WHO  lot  hbominf  under  any  Ion  of  franehiae,
vere  admiaaihla  to  the  general  aaaemblj  or  StiAAii
(Plat  Lfcary.  S5),  u  it  wai  called  in  Ike  old  Spai-
ID  dialect ;  bat  no  one  except  public  magialntet,
■ad  dieflr  the  ephon  and  kingi,  addmted  the
pople  witboat  bemg  nedally  called  upon.  (MUl-
in;a)r.iii.4.ill.)  fbu lame public foncliDnariei
■lapiittbeqiHatitmtothBroto.  (Thnc  L  90.  S7.)
Hrue,  aa  the  magialntea  only  (rd  rtkii  ot  ifX''i'}
wcR  Ike  leaden  and  apeoken  of  the  aiaanhly,
d'lTm  of  tha  whi^e  people  are  of^an  ipoken  of  aa
the  dceinoa  of  the  aathoritiea  only,  eipecially  in
■atttta  idatiDg  to  foreign  a&urs.  The  intimate
(Hmtctkn  of  the  ephon  with  the  awembl;  i*
•kiwii  by  a  phraK  of  Teiy  frcqaont  occuncnce  in
itpnt  {ttoft  -raa  ifiptu  ml  t$  iKuKna'uf).
Toe  ™^hiHl  of  voting  waa  by  acdamation ;  the
jlme  of  nweting  between  the  bnnk  Knakion  and
the  bridge  Babjca,  to  the  weat  of  the  city,  and  en-
doatd.  (Pbit.  Ifcarg.  6.)  The  regular  aaiembliei
WBv  held  ererr  full  moon  ;  and  on  oecaaions  of
nnggtm,!  exttaordinatj  meetinga  ware  conTened.
(Hood.  TiL  tM.)

1^  wliola  pet^e  ahne  could  proclaim  "  a  war,
*^*HBifn  a  peace,  «]ter  into  an  armiatice  for  any
Inglh  of  time  ;  and  all  n^otiatioai  with  fc  ~


■0  affitin,  the  higbeat  officea,

I  and  prieathoBda,  wen  filled  '

H  of  tba  peofle  ;  a  diipnted  aocceaiio

■•  decidiBd  Qpon  by  them  ;  changti  in
re  propoaed  and  aipl^ned,  and


GEBOUSIA.  BIS

,,iean,  therefore,  to  me  the  worda  of  Millier,
that  the  popular  aiaembly  realty  potseaied  the
luproie  political  and  legialatiie  authority  at  Sparta,
but  it  waa  ao  hampered  and  checked  by  the  t^urit
of  the  Gonatitution,  that  it  eonld  only  exert  ila  au-
thority within  certain  pretcribed  limiti ;  ao  that
the  goiemment  of  the  atate  ii  often  ipoken  of  aa


ths  txi^iiata  which  we  have  juit  de-
re  nad  in  later  timea  of  another
caUed  the  tm^  aaiembly  <Xan.  /faU.  iii.  3.  E  lit),
hich  appcan  to  baie  been  conrened  m  occa-
oni  of  emerganey,  or  which  were  not  of  auScient
importance  to  require  the  deciaion  of  the  endrs
body  of  dtixeni.  lUa  mora  aelect  aaiembly  waa
probably  compoaed  of  the  Jjuiidi,  ts  auperior  citl-
Eena,  or  of  aome  claia  enjoying  a  limilar  prece-
dence, together  with  aome  of  the  magittratea  of
the  itale  [EccLiTi],  and  il^  aa  appear!  to  hays
been  ths  caae,  it  waa  conrened  more  frequently
than  the  greater  awembly,  it  ia  oident  that  an  ad-


byit.

The  preceding  remarki  will  enable  ua  to  decide
a  queation  which  haa  been  railed,  what  waa  the

the  eipnuion)  of  Greek  wrilcn,  ereiy  one  would
at  once  anawer  that  it  waa  ariatocratic  ;  but  it  bai
been  aiaerted  that  the  ariitocracy  at  Sparta  waa  an
ariitooacy  of  unqucat,  in  which  the  conquering
people,  or  Doiiani,  atood  towaidi  the  conquered,
or  Achuani,  in  the  relation  of  noblea  to  commona,
and  that  it  waa  prindpally  in  thia  aenie  tbat  the
coQititution  of  Sparta  waa  ao  completely  anti-popu-
hu  or  oligarchical.  (Arnold,  lime.  AppavL  iL)
Now  thia  indeed  ii  true  ;  but  it  aeeml  no  leia  true
that  the  Spartan  soTemmeut  would  bare  been
equally  called  an  oliganhy  or  ariatocracy  eveu  if
there  bad  been  no  aubject  chu>  at  all,  on  account
of  the  diipoaition  and  adminittraticn  of  the  loie-
i«ign  power  within  the  Spartan  body  alone.  The
bet  il,  that  in  theocy  at  leaat,  the  Spartan  conatito-
tion,  ai  settled  by  Lycnrgua,  wai  a  decided  demo-
cracy, with  two  hereditary  oflicera,  the  generala  of
the  commonwnltb,  at  ill  head  ;  but  in  prac^ce  (at
leait  before  the  encnnchmenti  of  the  ephon)  it
waa  a  limited  arittociacj  \  that  ia,  it  worked  aa  if
the  auprema  authority  wai  aettled  in  the  handi  of
a  minority.  The  principal  drcumalancei  which
juatify  ua  in  conaidering  it  ai  auch,  are  briefly  ^  the
reatninta  impoaed  upon  the  aaiembly,  the  exten-
nie  powen  of  the  councillort,  their  election  for
life,  their  irresponiihiUty,  the  abaenco  of  written
lawa,  of  paid  officei,  of  offieei  determined  by  lot,"
and  other  thingi  thought  by  the  Oreeki  character-
iatii  of  a  democracy.  Independent  of  which  wo
mnit  remember  that  Sparta  wai  at  the  head  of  the
oligarchial  intereit  in  Qreece,  and  alwsyi  anp-
ported,  aa  at  Corcyra  and  Argoa,  tba  oligarchial
party,  in  oppoution  to  the  demociatic,  which  wai
aidi^  by  Athena.  In  bet  Dr.  Arnold  binuelf  ob-
aervea,  that  even  in  the  relationi  of  the  conquering
people  among  thenuelrea  the  conalilotion  wui  fiir
feai  popular  Uian  at  Athena  We  muit,  however,
bear  in  mind  that  the  eouititution,  ai  aettled  by
Lycurgua,  waa  eompietely  altered  in  cbaracter  by
the  uaurpation  of  the  ephora.  To  anch  an  extent
waa  Ihii  the  caie,  that  Plato  (£*.  i<.  p.  7 1 3)
doubted  whether  the  ganrnment  at  Sparta  plight


S74  OLADIAT0RG9.

nal  be  railed  a  "  lynuiny,"  in  comeqnence  of  the
extensive jnwen  of  the  ephoralty,  though  it  wns
u  much  like  ■  democracy  M  any  form  of  goTetmnent
could  well  be  ;  and  yet,  he  addi,  not  to  call  it  an
arJBtaaHcj  (t.  a.  a  govemnjenl  of  the  ^jotoi),  is
qaits  abiurd.  MoiwiTer,  Analotle  (PaliL  n.  R),
vhen  be  eniunerata  the  resmni  irhy  the  SjiartaD
gOTeminent  waaciiled  an  oligmhyimako  no  men-
tion of  the  relation!  between  Che  Spartang  uid  their
conquered  inbjecli,  but  oheerrei  that  it  received
thig  name  because  it  had  many  oliganhical  inati-
tntioni,  Buch  as  that  none  of  the  m^iitiatcB  were
choaen  by  lot  ^  that  a  few  penons  were  competent
to  inflict  banishment  and  death.

Perhaps  the  >hDn«st  and  mut  accurate  descrip-
tion of  the  conilitntion  of  Sparta  ii  eontained  in
the  following  obaervations  oE  AritMtle  { Po/^.  iL  6)  :
—  Some  affirm  that  the  best  form  of  goiemmcnt
is  one  mired  of  all  the  forms,  wherefore  they  praise
the  Spartan  conslilutian :  for  some  ny  that  it  is
composed  of  sn  oligarchy,  and  a  monarchy,  and  a
domocmcy — a  mananhy  on  account  of  the  kings,
■nnliKarchy  on  account  oF  the  councillors,  and  a
democniey  on  account  of  the  ephors  ;  but  others
ny  that  the  ephoralty  is  a  ^  tyranny;  **  whereas,  on
the  other  band,  it  may  be  affirmed  that  the  public
tables,  and  the  regubtioiu  of  daily  life,  are  of  a
democmtic  tendency.  [R.  W.]

OERRHA  (y^),  in  Latin,  Gtntu,  properly
signilied  any  thing  made  of  wicker-work,  and  was
especially  used  as  the  name  of  the  Persian  shields,
which  were  made  of  wicker-work,  and  were  smaller
and  shorter  than  the  Greek  shields  (irrl  itrritm;
y^a,Herad.YiL61,ii.  61;Xcn.^iiai.iLl,  96  i
Feslus,  1.  OP.  cermtu-i,  geme).

GLADIATO'RES  {^m^x"'),  were  men  who
foDght  with  swords  in  the  amphitheatre  and  other
places  fur  the  amiisenient  of  the  Roman  people.
(fiihdiator  ttty  ipii  in  flrtna,  pojn^  tpefiante,  pnff-
Norif,  Quinlil.  De^am.  302,)  They  are  said  to
liave  been  firel  exliihited  by  the  Etruscans,  and  to
have  had  their  origin  from  the  custom  of  killing
staves  and  captiircs  at  the  funeral  pyres  of  the  de.
ceased.  (TortuU.  dt  Spedac.  12  ;  'Scrv.  ad  Virg.
Am.  I.  519.)  [FiiNUN,  p.  ££9,  a.]  A  show  of
gbdialon  was  called  mionu,  and  ihe  person  who
eililbited  {edebat)  it,  tdilar,  onaerabir,  ardoaima,
who  was  honoured  during  the  day  oF  eihibilion,  if
a  private  person,  with  tiio  oflicini  signs  of  a  mngifl-
tmte.  (CapiloL  M.  Avion.  PhUoi.  33  ;  Flor.  iii.
20;  C\e.adAa.i\.  !i).  g  3.)

aiadialoTs  were  first  eihibited  at  Roma  in  K  c.
264,  in  the  Fornra  Boaiiom,  by  Marcus  and  D«i-
mui  Bmtus,  at  the  funeral  of  their  father.  (Valer.
Max.  iu  4.  §  7  ;  Lir.  Kpit.  16.)  They  «ore  at
first  confined  to  public  foncials,  but  afterwards
foujzbt  at  the  tiinends  of  moM  persons  of  conse-
quence, and  even  at  those  of  women.  (Suet  Jid.
3t> ;  Spartan.  Hadr.  9.)  Private  persons  some-
times left  a  turn  of  money  in  their  will  to  pay  the
expenses  of  cuch  an  exhibition  at  their  funemla.
(Sen.  de  Bm.  ViL  30.)  Combats  of  ghidiatoti
were  also  exhibited  at  en(ert»nments  (AtheiL  iv.
p.  IS3  j  Sil.  Ital.  XL  el),  and  especially  at  public
festivals  by  the  aediles  and  other  magisUates,  who
sometimes  eihibited  immense  munbers  with  Iha
viev  of  pleasing  the  people.  (Cic  pro  Mitr^  18  ;
dtOf.xi.  16.)  [AiDiLsa.]  Under  iho  emnirs
the  passion  of  the  Romans  for
rose  to  its  Kreniest  height,  and
glndinton  who  fought  on  whim  <


OLADIATORES.


(Dior


ally


-IS.)


Oladiators  cousiitod  eilhw  of  eaptirej  (Vopisb
Prob.  19),  slaves  (Suet  ViUL  IS),  and  condemn-
ed molebctors,  or  of  freebom  ciliieiu  who  fougbt
Tolunlarily,  Of  those  who  were  condemDed,  some
were  nid  to  be  condemned  ad  ffiadimm,  in  which
case  they  were  obliged  to  be  killed  al  least  wiihin
a  year  ;  and  others  ad  Ittdum,  who  might  obtain
their  discharge  at  the  end  of  three  years.  ( Ulpisn,
CaUoL  Mot.  d  Rom.  I^r.  tit  ii.  t.  7.  S  4.) Fr»-


Tib.  7  ;  Liv.  xliv.  31.)  They  also  took  a
on  entering  upon  the  service,  which  is  preserred
by  Petnmius(I17).  — '*lnverbaEnmolpi  neia-
mentum  juranmos,  uri,  tinciri,  verberari,  baroque
necari,  et  qutcquid  alioj  Eumolpos  jussisset,  tarn-
qnam  legitimi  gladiatorei  domino  corpora  aninuu-
quc  religioiiasime  addicunua."  (Compare  Sencc
Epiat.  7.)  Even  under  the  republic  froc.born
citiicns  fought  as  gladiaton  (Liv.  xxviii,  -I),  but
they  ^psar  to  have  bclmged  only  to  the  lover
orders.  Under  the  empire,  however,  both  equites
and  senators  fought  in  the  arena  (Dion  Cass.  Ii.  22  ;
Ivi  25  ;  Suet  JuL  39  ,  >i^.  43  ;  Ncr.  12),  and
even  women  (Tacit  Ann.  xr.  33  ;  Suet  Dam.  *  i
Juv.  vi.  250,  4c.  i  Slat  SUr.  i.  vl  63)  ;  which
practice  whs  at  length  forbidden  in  the  dua  of
Sevcnis.  (Dion  Cass.  luv.  16.)

OL&diAUin  were  kept  in  schools  (ludi),  where
they  were  trained  by  penons  called  laairias.
(Suet  J>^.  26  ;  Cic  pro  Aosc  Aawr.  40  ;  Juv.  vi.
216,  xL  e.)  The  whole  body  of  gladiators  unds
one  lanitta  was  &cquent]y  called /avifio.  (ijoet
Aug.  42.)  They  somdiniea  were  tho  pnpnty  of
the  huiiitae,  who  let  them  out  to  penoas  who
wished  to  eihibiC  a  show  of  gladiators ;  but  at
other  times  lielongr^d  to  ciiiiens,  who  krpt  them
for  the  purpose  of  exhibition,  and  engaged  Lmiitae
to  iiiilruci  ihcm.  Thus  we  read  of  the  ludus
Acmilius  at  Rome  (Hor.  dt  ATt.poal.  32),  md  of
Cnesar'l  Indus  at  Capon.  (Cues.  Bdl.  Civ.  i.  It.)
The  superintendence  of  the  ludi,  which  belongi^
to  the  emperors,  was  entrusted  to  a  pervm  of  high
rank,  called  curator  at  procurator.  (Tacit  Am.  xi,
35  i  liii.  22  ;  Suet  CW,  27  i  CJiuter.  /mt.  p.
4119.)  The  gladiaton  fought  in  Ihe«  ludi  with
wooden  iwords,  called  ruda.  (Suet  Col.  32,  54.)
Great  atlention  was  paid  to  their  diet  in  order  to
increase  the  strength  of  their  bodies,  whence  Cieere
{i'hil.  ii.  25}  speaks  of  "  gladialoria  totioa  cor-
potis  firmitas."  They  were  fed  with  nourishing
food,  calledfi^iaAiru  tagina,  (Tacit  Ilitl.  ii.  SH.>
A  great  number  of  gladiaton  were  tnined  at
Ravenna  on  account  of  the  salubrity  of  the  place.
(Strabo,  V.  p.  213.)


Gladiators
fiineral  pyre,  and  sor
more  frequently  in  tl
•x.\ Th.


exhibited  at  tha
net  in  the  famn,  but
tmphitheatre^ [AsiFHi-

le  dayi  before  the


tha  name*  of  those  who  were  ta
fight  (Cic.  ad  Paai.  ii.  8  ;  Suet  Can.  26.)
When  the  day  came,  they  were  led  along  the
arena  in  procession,  and  matched  by  psin  (Hor.
Sal.  I  7-  20)  ;  and  their  iwordi  were  eiaiDined
b;  tha  editor  ts  an  if  the;  vera  aoficieMly  ibMtp,


(Dl.


OLADIATORES.
I Cm».  Iiriii.  3  [ Suet, TO, 9  ; Lijuiii


Cnn.  ad  Tac.  Am.  iii.  37.)  At  fint
1  kiitd  of  ibam  batlJc,  ^led  praeiatiOf  in  vhich
ther  haghi  wiib  wooden  inaid^  or  the  like  (Cic
A-  (j™t  ii.  78.  80  ;  Ovid,  Art  Amat.  iii.  SIfi  i
S^et  ijMit.  117),  and  aftcnmrdi  at  the  Mund  of
the  intEapM  the  real  hattie  began.  When  a  jfladW
■loi  mu  iroanded,  Ihe  penple  called  oat  Aabrl  or
ioc  ial^  ;  and  (he  one  who  wai  lanquilhcd  Io«-
emi  hii  amu  in  Inkcn  of  Bubmigiian.  Hit  <alf,
to«eicr,  depended  opon  ihn  people,  who  preaied
dom  theif  thumbs  if  thi^v  wiihed  him  to  be
■nfd,  but  tnmed  them  up  if  tbej  wiihed  him  to
be  kiUed  (Hor.  Ep.  i.  IB.  BE  ;  Jai.  HI  36),  and
driiTtd  him  to  recsi?o  the  iword  (firrmn  nci-
fm\  which  giadinlon  unally  did  with  the
er.'Ual  firmneu.  (Cic.  Tmc  li.  17,  prv  Sari,
37.  pro  MiL  H.)  If  (he  life  of  a  nnquitbed
llidiiior  WM  lured,  be  obtained  bit  diachaige  for
Ihu  daj,  which  wu  called  miuio  (Mart,  iii  29.
i  I :  and  hence  in  an  eihibition  of  gladioton  ivu
•citikmt  (Lit.  iIL  20),  the  livci  of  the  conqnercd
><re  DcTer  apiind.  Thii  kind  of  eihibition.
bowerer,  wa>  forbidden  bj  Angiutiu.  (Suet.
Am.  IS.)

Pahna  were  nmallj  given  to  the  Tictonous
fMiai««(Suct.Oiil32>;  and  hence,  a  gladiator,
■fan  had  freqaenilr  cDnquend,  ii  called  "  pluri-
mnm  |]alnnnim  gladiator"  (Cic.  pro  RoK.  Amer.
i) :  witDtj  alto  wu  Mmelime)  given.  (Jui.  tIL
2(1 :  Suet  Oami.  SI.)  Old  gladiator),  and  aome-
noKi  tboM  who  had  onlf  fought  for  a  abort  time,
w.-re  diacharged  from  the  aervice  bj  the  editor  at
the  Rqaeat  of  the  people,  who  preaentcd  each  of
ttipia  with  >  mdii  or  wooden  iword  ;  vbencs
tboM  who  wen  diicbaiged  were  called  Badinrii,
a'ic  PUIip.  iL  29  ;  Hor.  Ep.  11,3;  Suet.  lib.
!  ;  ()iunt.  Lei  If  a  perMn  wu  free  before  ha
enioid  the  ludua,  he  betame  on  hii  dlieharge  free
.;  and  if  he  had  been  a  .lave,  he  relumed  to


r^.


a  gladiator  wai  alwa^B  considered  lo
htTe  diignced  himiell^  and  conKqnentlj  it  ap-
Vn  that  he  could  not  obtain  the  equeaUian  nuik
if  he  aflerwardt  aeqnired  tuHicient  property  lo
eiiiile  him  to  it  {(Joint.  /.  c.)  ' '


a  Indni


md  then


'tlhet  W  hi)  then  oi

aeioired Ibe atilui of  a pcregriniu  dediticiua.

<GuDi,L  13.) [DiDiTicii.]

Sbowi  of  gladiaton  were  aboliihed  by  Conitsn-
liae  (Cbl  II.  tit.  43),  but  appear  notwithitanding
U  hare  been  generally  eihihited  till  the  time  ^
Hdurioa,  by  whom  they  were  finally  auppreaacd.
(Theodccet.  Hiti.  Eoda.  t.  20.)

Gladiaton  were  dirided  into  different  claiaet,
Harding  to  their  armi  and  different  mode  of
Eghting,  or  other  circnmitaneea.  Tbs  iiamea  of
lu  met  important  of  theie  cluiet  is  given  in
alphabnia]  order :  —

A,JJataB  (Cic.  ad  Fam.  viL  10),  wore  belmete
viilmi  an;  ajicrtuiB  fiir  the  eyea,  ao  thai  they
were  obliged  to  light  blindfold,  and  thua  excited
the  mirth  of  the  ipedalora.  9oRie  modem  nrilen
•af  that  they  fought  on  hoTMback,  but  thii  ia
ilaiied  by  OrellL  (fiucr.  2577.)

•hen  they  did  not  fight  m  pain,  but  when  aevenl
fai^t  together. (Saeu  Aug.  45  ;  grtgatim  dimi-
■*a,a>i.M.>
ftwaahn'  ^pew  to  haie  been  lo  called,  be-


OLADIATORES.  S75

cauie  they  fonght  with  tno  aworda.  (Aitemiod.  ii.

33  ;  Orelli,  Inicr.  2584.)

EquHa  were  those  who  fought  on  honebaek.
(Orelli,  2569.  2S77.)

Essatani  fought  from  ehaiiota  like  the  Oaula
and  Brilous.  [Erbida.]  They  are  frequentlymen-
tioucd  in  inKiiptions.  (Orelli,  2566.  S53J,  &c)

FimaJa  were  ihoM  under  the  empire,  who  were
trained  nod  suppoited  tiom  the  iitcus.  (Capitol.
Gord.  33.)

Hopictnada  appear  to  have  been  thoae  who
fought  in  a  complete  suit  of  anuoni.  (Suet.  CaL
35  ;  Maitial,  yiii.  74  ;  Orelli,  2566.)  Lipaiuicon-
siden  them  to  hnve  been  the  lame  with  the  Sam-
nites,  and  that  thii  name  was  disused  under  the
emperors,  and  hoplomachi  subsliluled  for  it.

Laijutalartt  were  those  who  used  a  noon  to
catch  their  advenariea.  (I.iod.  i.iiL  SS.)

Aftridiam  were  those  who  fought  in  the  middle
of  the  day,  after  combeli  with  wild  bnisia  bad
taken  place  in  the  momirg.  These  gladiaton  were
very  slightly  nmcd.  (Senet  Epiit.7  ;Sael.  Claad.

34  ;  Orelli,  2SB7.)

Mimilliinei  are  said  lo  have  been  to  called  from
ifaeir  having  the  image  of  a  Jish  (montiyr^  fija^
liipoi)  on  their  helroela.  (Festus,  l  e.  HcHario.)
Their  arms  were  like  thoae  of  the  Oauli,  whence  we
find  that  they  were  nlso  called  GallL  They  were
osaallj  matched  with  ihe  rctiarii  or  Thraciana.
(Cic  Pkil.  iii.  12,  vii.  6  1  Juv.  viiL  200  ;  SueL
C<d.  33  ;  Orelli,  2566,  S580.)

Ordinarii  wu  the  name  applied  to  all  the  reffn'tr
ghidinlors,  who  fought  in  pairs,  in  the  ordinary
wny,  (Scnec.  Epid.  7  ;  Suet.  Aaj.  45,  Cal  2fi.)

Paitvlalicii  were  inch  na  were  denuindcd  by
the  people  from  the  editor,  in  addition  to  thoae  who
were  eihibited.  (Senee.  I.  c.)

./Voeoai/Drei  fought  wiLh  the  SamniLea  (Cic.  pro
Sat.  64),  but  we  do  not  know  any  thing  respecl-
ing  ihcra  eiccpt  their  name. They  are  mentioned

mentioned  by  Arteraiodorus  (iL  32)  appears  lo  bo

««(ia™caiTied  only  a  ihrec-pointed  lance,  called
(rTVfciuor/iuB'M[FLRCi.'*i],andB  net  (rrto),  which
they  endeavoured  lo  throw  over  their  adversoiies,
and  then  to  attack  them  with  the  fuscina  while  they
were  entangled.  The  reliarius  waadreuedinashort
tunic,  and  wore  nothing  on  bit  heiid.  If  he  miued
hia  aim  in  throwing  Ihe  net,  he  betook  hinuelf  to
flight,  and  endeavoured  to  prepare  his  net  for  a
second  cast,  while  his  adverean'  followed  him  nund
the  anna  in  oidcr  to  kill  him  before  he  could  make
a  second  attempt.  His  adversary  was  uguollv  a
secutor  or  a  mirmillo.  (Juv.  ii.  I43,viii  203;  Suet.
CaL  30  i  Oaai.  34  ;  Orelli,  2578.)  In  the  ftllow-
ing  woodcuti  taken  from  Winckolmann  (Jlfoawn.


byGooglc


57S  OLADTATORES.

Imi.  pi  197),  a  combBt  ia  repreMnted  helm


GLADUTORBSL


lIiB  fomcr  bu  Ibrown
liller,  and  i<  proaed-
f^ucbi. Thelaniila


hia  net  over  the  bead  of '
ing  to  Httnck  £iim  witb
Mandi  behind  tbe  rc^ariui.

Sanmila  wets  10  called,  becaoM  ibej  were
■tmed  in  the  iiime  ws;  ai  that  people,  and  were
pnnicularly  diitinguiihed  b;  the  oblong  Kulam.
(Lit.  ix.  40  ;  Cu:.  pro  Strl.  64.)

fivH^orai  ftre  tuppoKd  by  Mine  writen  to  be  lo
tailed  becauK  tbe  (ecntor  ia  bii  combat  witb  the
reliaritu  pariued  the  Utter  when  he  feiled  in  ae-
ciiring  him  by  bia  net.  Other  writen  think  that
they  were  the  uune  ai  tbe  nppotiiHa,  mentioned  by
Martial  (t.  24),  who  were  gladiaton  aabitilnlcd  in
the  place  of  tha»  who  were  wearied  or  were  killed.
(Suet.  Col  30  ;  Jdt.  viiL  210.)  If  the  old  reading
in  a  leller  of  CicerCi  (ad  AO.  vii.  14)  ii  correct,
Juliui  Cacar  had  ns  leH  than  SW  lecutarea  in  hia
Indus  at  Capua  ;  but  it  appeara  probable  that  we
ought  to  read  tculontm  initead  of  lecutoram.

Sappo^m. See  Stadani.

Tliraea  or  Vatca  were  aimed  like  the  Thia-
eian>  with  a  nond  shield  or  buckler  (Fcitus,  t.  v.
Thraeeti),  and  a  short  iwoid  or  dagger  ((ion,  SueL
CU.  3-2),  which  is  called  >lc  ti^'iia  by  Juvenal
(Tiii.SDl).  Theywereiuuallymatched,ua1re>dy
atated,  with  the  rairmillanea.  Tbe  woodcut  in  the
next  eolnmn.  taken  fi™n  Winckelmann  (L  c. ),  re-
pre«enta  a  combat  between  two  Thiaciana.  A
laniflta  atandi  behind  each.

Paintinga  of  gladiatorial  combats,  as  well  aa  of
the  other  aporla  of  the  amphitheatre,  were  hinorile
mbjecta  with  the  Roman  artiati.  (Plin.  //.  N.
xiiv.  33  ;  Capitol  Oord.  3  ;  Vopisc  Car«t.  16.)
Several  atatoai  of  gladiatora  have  come  down  to
US,  which  ar«  high^  admired  ai  ymikt  of  art:  of
these  the  most  celebrated  is  tbe  gladiator  of  tbe


Borghcse  collection,  now  in  the  Muieimi  of  the
Louvre,  and  the  dying  gladiator,  as  it  is  called,  in
the  Capitol ine  Muaeum,  Oladiatorial  combatiare
represented  io  the  bas-relieft  on  the  tomb  of  Scan-
rna  at  Pompeii,  and  iltustnite  in  many  [Brticolara
the  brief  account  which  has  been  given  in  this
article  of  tho  several  classes  of  gladialora.  These
bas-reliefs  are  represented  in  the  following  wnod-
niti  fnm  Maiois  {Pontp.  L  pL  33).  The  figniet
are  made  of  stucco,  and  appear  to  have  been  mould-
ed sepanteiy,  and  attached  to  the  plaster  by  pegs
of  bmnie  oi  iron.  In  vsiioua  parte  of  the  Erieie
are  written  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom  the
gladiators  belonged,  and  also  the  names  of  tbe  gla-
diaton  themselves,  and  the  number  of  their  vie.
torics.  The  first  pail  of  gladiators  on  the  left  hand
represents  an  equestrian  combat.  Doth  wear
helmets  with  liiori,  which  cover  tbe  whole  bee,
and  are  armed  with  apeiia  and  round  bncklm.
In  the  second  pair  the  gladiator  on  the  left  haa
been  wounded  )  he  has  let  Ul  hia  shield,  and  i>
imploring  tbe  mercy  of  the  people  by  raising  hia
hand  towards  them.  Hia  antagonist  atandj  be-
hind htm  wai^g  the  aignal  of  the  people. Like


all  the  other  gladiatoti  repmented  on  the  tneie,
they  wear  the  niligaaiUm  or  short  apron  £ied
above  the  hipi.  Tbe  one  on  the  left  appears  ts  be
a  minaillo,  and  tbe  one  oa  the  right,  with  an  ob-
long ihield  ((ndwii),  a  Samnite.  The  third  pair
consists  of  B  Thracian  and  a  mirmiUo,  the  latter  of


whom  ia  defeated.  Tbe  fbnrth  groap  cansiBta  of
fonr  figure!  ;  two  are  aeentores  and  two  retijirii.
The  secntar  on  his  knee  appears  to  have  been  de>
foited  by  the  retiahus  behind  him,  but  aa  tbe
fuscina  is  not  adapted  for  [Todacing  certain  denth,
the  other  secutor  is  called  npon  to  do  iL The


byGooglc


ORADUS.
ntiuin  in  tbe  duunee  u  probably  deMined  to
fiflbl  in  hi*  Inrn  vith  tbo  inninng  ucutor. The
lul  jTinp  oHubu  or  a  miniullD  and  s  Sunoitc  ;
Iltt  lUliT  i>  itSnied.

In  thfl  laMt  woodcat  two  comlaU  tn  rcpn-
imted.  Id  tb«  fint  a  Saomile  hoi  been  onqaered
bj  ■  niimillo  ;  the  romicc  ii  huldiug  up  hi>  haad
k  the  inople  to  imploro  mercy,  wUle  the  latter
•ffunliy  iti»l)e»  lo  botome  hii  eiwmy'i  btbcu-
tUKT  befim  roceiTing  the  ^gnal  from  the  people  ;
bat  the  luiitB  boldi  him  buk.  In  the  nhcr
nmbu  a mitmlTln ii  mortally wounded by  a

It  viD  be  obwrred  that  the  right  ixm  of  erery
£(iw  ii  protected  by  armmir,  which  the  left  doa
DM  injiiire  on  account  of  the  ahieid.  [Bmuui ;
ViSitio,] (Lipaiui,  &far«otti,)

(iL-UlIUS  WP",  poet.  &Bf,  •piayovat),  a
F*wd  IT  glaive,  by  the  Latin  poeta  called  mlil.
Tbf  meient  iword  had  geneiallya  Mraight  two-
Mpi  bkde  liH^">  &'>ii>'  Jl-  X.  3JS),  rather
Wd,  ud  nearly  of  equal  width  ftom  hilt  to  point.
Gtidiaun,  bowfErer,  need  a  iword  which  woi
nncdiateaKinuIar.  (Harietle,  Jjeno^  Na.92.)
la  timi  of  the  renwteat  antiquity  Aworda  were
Milt  of  bronxe,  but  afterwirdi  of  inm.  (Eurip.
PioiM.  87,529,1*38;  Viig.^a.iv.£79,Ti.  260,
lii.  3M.)  The  Oreeki  and  Romani  wore  thetn
« ihe  left  lUe  (Sid.  ApoUin.  Obttm.  2),  »  ai  to
dnv  them  oat  o(  the  thEsth  (n^mo,  Ktktis)  by

Caf  the  right  hand  in  front  of  the  body  to  take
of  dtt  hilt  with  the  thnmb  neit  to  the  bbde,
Uma  Aeecbyln*  diitingniihei  the  army  of  Xenei
bv  ibe  dFDomicatioD  of  fuixiiip«^p<ir  bm  [Pen.
Ml,  illading  to  the  obtntu  diSereote  in  their  ap-
pamne  in  conaeqnoMe  of  the  lue  of  the  AciNacis
imradef  the  awmd.

Tbe  (ally  Oreeki  naed  a  Teiy  ibort  iwDrd.
Ipbiciale*,  wbo  made  Tariona  impniTementi  in
■raoBT  about  400  B.  c,  doubled  it(  lenf^  (Diod.
n.  U),  an  that  an  iron  iwocd,  foond  in  a  tomb
■t  .Atheni,  and  npmented  by  Dodwell  (Tbw,  [.
P-441),wa>  two  feel  file  inchc*  long,  ineluding
ibr  baadle,  which  wu  alto  of  iron.  The  Konian
with  tbeir  other


r^.niiic  weMDa.  wa«  larger,
liiniidaUe  than  the  Qreck.  (Flomi,  ii.  7.)  Ili
li'u.'tfi  gafr  occaaton  to  the  joke  of  Lentului  upon
ki<  oMn-law,  who  wai  of  Tely  low  italDie,
*■  Who  tied  my  iou-in-!aw  to  hi*  iword?"  (Ma-
cnih.  Sutmni.  ii.)  To  thii  Ramaa  (word  the
tirrekM  apfdied  the  tenn  trwiBii  (Arrian,  Tact.\
vbich  mt  tbe  oanxe  of  a  piece  of  wood  of  the  aame
tnt  ued  m  weKTing  [TklaJ.  The  Britiih  glsive
■u  Kill  luger  than  the  Roman.  (Tac.  J^.  36.)
Ja  a  monimufit  foond  in  London,  and  preaerred
I  ii  repreacnled  between  thiee
(U(Hitliui9aii,  A^jpina.  iv.


»  to  inelide  Puoio. (A.  QelL  ii.  13.) [J.  Y.]

OLANDES. [FuNDi.]

GNOUON  (yrApMr). [HoROLOOitrv.]

liOMPHL [Via.]

WSGYRA  (yerrripa). [CAHcait.]

QKADUS  Owu),  a  tfep,a>  a  mauiire  oFlength,
■u  half  a  pact  (pat-a)  and  eonlained  3|  feet,
(inA  and  Rtaaan  ie*p«tiTety,  and  theiefore  the
Cnck  fwta  ««a  ntber  mote,  and  '' " ~


GRAMMATEUa  877

ffradui  iBther  lea^  than  S}  feet  Eugliab. (See  the
Tablet.)  [P.S.]

ORADUS  COONATIONIS.  [Coonati.)
0RAEC0STASI5,  a  place  in  the  Roman
forum,  on  the  light  of  the  (Jonuiinm,  wa>  lo  calhd
because  the  Oieek  ambaiaadon,  and  perhapi  alao
depuiiei  from  other  foreign  or  allied  itatei,  were
allowed  to  atasd  there  to  hear  the  debatei.  The
Graecutaiii  waa,  aa  N  iebnhc  nnuu-ka,  like  priii-
leged  aeali  in  the  ball  of  a  perliamentaiy  aiaem-
bly.  The  ^tsttoaei  Muadpianm,  of  which  Pliny
■peak*  (H.  N.  ni.  44.  a.  86),  offoa  to  hare  been
ptacea  allotted  to  munidpak  for  the  aame  purpoae.
When  the  mn  wai  teen  firom  the  Curia  coming
out  between  the  Ruitra  and  the  Oraaoilaaia,  it
waa  mid-day  ;  and  an  accentua  of  the  coniul  ai


with  a  clear  loud  v


(Plin.


Roma,  ToL  u.  note  1 16.)
ORAUMATEUS (yp-^i^uatit),  a  deik  or
Among  the  great  Dumber  of  acribea  em-


ployed by
Athcni,  the


the  magtalratea and |


were  real  nate-officen,  (Suidaa,  t
fimetiona  are  deaciibed  by  Pollux  (viil  SB).  Oua
of  them  waa  appointed  by  lot,  by  the  aenate,  to  tervo
the  time  of  the  adminiattatlon  of  each  prytany,
though  he  alwayi  belonged  to  a  different  prytany
from  that  which  waa  in  power.  He  waa  therefore
called  ypanturrtis  aoii rpurarutti/. (Demoith.


made  during  the  time  of  hii  office,  and  to  de-
iiTer  to  the  theamotbelaa  the  decreea  of  the  lenate.
(Demoath.  L  e.)  Demoithenea  in  another  peaaaga
iitFal$.  Ltg.  p.  381)  autea  that  the  public  docii-
menta,  which  were  depoaited  in  the  Metman,  wen
in  the  keepim;  of  a  public  alare  ;  whence  we  mnit
Buppoae  with  Schiimann  {dt  OrnuJ.  p.  302,  transl.)
that  thiiBcrvant,vhoae  office  waa  probably  far  life,
waa  under  the  ffati^umin,  and  waa  hia  aaaiitanL
Previoui  to  the  archcnabip  of  Eucleidea,  the  name
of  thia  acribe  waa  attached  to  the  banning  of
every  decree  of  the  people  (SchSmann,  p.  132,  &c.;
compare  BouLl)  ;  and  the  name  of  the  ^pa^i^niit
wbo  olficinted  during  the  adminiatiation  of  tbe
Srst  prytany  in  a  year  wai,  like  that  of  tlie  archon
eponymna,  tiled  to  deaignate  tbe  year.

The  aecond  7pafv">''<^<  waa  elected  by  the
aenate,  by  x'V"''"''"i  and  waa  entnated  with
the  cnitody  of  the  lawi  (M  Toiii  v^unri,  Pollux,
I.  c  ;  Demoath.  e.  Tiaocrat.  p.  713  :  dc  (hron.  p.
338).  Higuaualnamewaa'):pa^i/un'(bt  T^t  0011^^1,
but  in  inacriptioni  he  ia  alto  called  yfaftiiviiin  Tvr
BavKimSa,  (BSckh,  FmU.  Earn.  p.  185,  2d  edit.).
Further  particulaia  concemiog  hia  office  are  not

A  third  ypaiiiUtrtit  waa  called  Tpofifurtli  t^i
xdAtwi  (Thuqyd.  TU.  10),  or  ypatifiaTAt  rqi
PmKnt  'ol  Tou  Uuiav. He  waa  appomtcd  by  tbe

Eple,  by  x<>p°">''a,  and  tbe  prmeipal  port  of
office  waa  to  r«d  any  lawi  oi  docnmenta  which
were  required  to  be  read  in  the  aaaembly  or  in  tbe
aenate.  (Pollux,  (.  c  ;  Demoath.  de  Fall.  Ltg,  p.
419  ;  B.  Zepris.  p.  49£  ;  Suidaa,  i.  c.)

A  claai  of  acnbea,  inferior  to  thcte,  were  tboae
penoui  who  were  appointed  clerka  to  tbe  aeveral
qtH  or  military  officin  of  the  atate,  or  wbo  lervcd
any  of  the  three  Tjiq/i^nJi  mentioned  above  aa
I  imaer-clcrki  (CirirypivifuTrtii,  Demoath.  i»  FaU.


578  GHAFHE.

Lrg.  p.  419  ;  da  Cbm.  p.  314  ;  Antipbon.
doftMl.  p.  792  i  hjaat,  e.  f/immaci.  p.  S
Theia  peiwms  ven  eithcT  pnblic  tIavH  or  citJ
of  tfaa  lowcT  ord«n,  u  sppun  from  the  mumi
wbich  DemalhcDei  ipe&ki  of  them,  ind  wen
sllowcd  to  hold  their  oSi
yson.  (Lygiaa,  e.  MiuBiaai.  p.  864,  Mcording
to  the  inUvpretatiDD  of  thii  pasraac  br  BOckh,
raU.  Econ.  p.  1H3,  note  I6S.)

Different  from  Ihue  common  clerki  wen  the
iirrypH^iiI,  check  ing-deriH  or  couiUr-icribei,  who
moM  likewiH  be  diyided  into  twa  cU»«,  a  lawtr
and  >  higher  one.  Tbs  fbnner  comprised  thoae
who  accompsoied  the  genenJi  and  fafhien  of  the
Ktmiet  (Dtmont.  <ie  C^trnm.  p.  101),  who  kept
the  control  of  the  eipenditnre  of  the  ncnd  money,
b.  <Bbckh,/ViJ.£osa.p.l87).  The  higher  clan
of  irTiypa^7s,  aa  the  other  hand,  wen  public
oSicen.  Theii  niimber  waa,  accoi^ug  to  Harpo-
ciBtion  (».  «.),  onlj  two,  the  irriypa^is  rfli
Siiiui4"»i,  and  the  arTcypiuptb!  t^i  ffcuX^t,  The
office  of  the  fonner  waa  to  nwtrol  tie  eipendinire
of  the  public  tnaaoi;  (Siofniini)  ;  the  latter  wai
alvaji  nraent  aX  the  meetinjfs  of  the  lenatc,  and
tecordca  the  aceotuiti  of  monej  which  wai  paid
into  the  aenale.  (Compare  Polloi,  TiiL  98  ;  Snidsa,
a.  e.) He bad  alto  to lay  the  ■cconnti  of  the

.»P"l'

H  a  check  upon
mi  at  Gnt  elected  by  the  people  by  x<'P<"'oi>lii,
but  mi  aftetwaidi  appointed  by  lot.  (AeKhin.  s.
Ctuipil.p.417  ;  PaUuE,J.&)

The  gnat  number  of  deiki  and  coBBler-cIeib
U  Athena  wu  a  neceaaaiy  conaeqaeoce  of  the  in-
MiluEion  of  the  titini,  which  eoiild  not  othetwite
haie  been  carried  into  eSeti.  (See  Schiimann,  dt
Omit.  p.  302,  Ac  ;  Bilckh,  L  c  ;  Hennatm,
PelilAnllq.  g  127.  n.  17  and  IB.)  [L.  S,]

GRAMMATOPHYLACIUM. [TiBtiL*-


proaeeutiona  whatever  in  the  Attie  courta  ;  but  m
iti  more  limited  tenae,  thoae  only  which  were  not
ditlinguiihed  aa  the  lUini,  Mki^a,  <W77(A,(a
by  a  ipedal  name  and  a  peculiar  conduct  of  tlie
pTDceedinga,  The  principal  characteriitic  di^r.
encei  between  publie  and  priiate  aetiona  are  cqu-
mcruted  imder  DiEi,  and  tba  pecaliac  fomu  of
public  proaecntioni,  inch  aa  thoae  aboTO  men-
tioned, are  aepamtely  noticed.  Of  theae  forma,
together  with  that  of  the  Gropte,  ptopeHy  ao
" ' t  frequently  hi^ipened  that  two  oi


■  ^ppli™


of  X


the  diictetion  of  the  pnaeculor  in  aeteding  the
moat  preferable  of  hia  available  lemediea  wat  at-
tended by  result!  of  great  traportance  to  himself
and  the  accused.  If  the  prosecutor^  speech
(icaniTflpio),  and  the  evidence  adduced  by  him,
wen  inaoffident  to  establish  the  aggraiated  cha.
lactcr  of  the  wnng  in  question,  a*  inditated  by
tbe  form  of  action  he  had  chosen,  hia  ill-judged
rigour  might  be  alleged  in  mitigaUon  of  thepnniah-
ment  by  the  defendant  in  hia  reply  {S»oAo7Ib),  or
upon  the  asteaiment  of  the  penalty  after  judgment
given  [  and  if  the  case  were  one  of  those  in  which
tbe  dicaats  had  no  power  of  asseiaing  (drlfifrrot
rpB^),  it  might  cause  a  total  bilun  Ol  justice,
and  even  render  the  proseentot  liable  to  a  fine  or
other  puniahment.  (Dcm.  e.  AndrnL  p.  601,  a.
Mad.  p.  S33.]


GRAPQE.

Tbe  courts  befiire  which  publie  (saset  could  be
tried  were  very  various ;  and,  bendvs  the  ordinary
Heliaatic  bodies  under  the  control  of  the  nine
BTcbons  or  the  gonciala  m  toginae,  tbe  ronnci]  and
even  the  assembly  of  the  people  ocEaaionally  be-
came judicial  bodiea  tiic  tiiat  purpose,  as  in  the  case
of  certain  Docimasiae  and  Bisaogeliac  (Heicr,
Aa.  Pfoe,  pp.  206.  268.)  Tha  proper  court  in
which  to  bring  a  particular  action  waa  Jbr  the  most
part  determined  by  the  subject -mailer  of  the  hc-
ciisation.  In  the  tiial  of  atate  oSeneet  it  wai  in
general  requisite  that  the  ostensible  proaocutor
should  be  an  Athenian  citizen  in  the  full  poasea-
aion  of  his  franchise  f  but  on  scnue  particular  oc(B'
sions  (Thuc  vl  28  ;  Lyi.  pro  CUiL  p.  186)  twa
Blares  and  resident  aliens  vcre  invited  to  come
forward  and  lay  informations.  In  such  caaea,  and
in  some  Eisangeliae  and  other  special  proceedings,
tbe  ptosecutian  and  condiict  of  the  cause  in  court
traa  earned  on  by  advocates  nlained  by  the  stale
(EufATOpei)  for  the  occsHon  ;  but  with  Iho  eicep-
'sitmoDts,  the  protec-
seems  to  havq  boot


nosecntion  i
ducted  by  the  Kipuit  in  behalf  of  tha  a^^,
woman,  mini^,  or  slave  ;  his  ii;p«rTiin|i  probably
gave  some  auittanee  to  the  resident  alien  in  tbe
commencement  of  proceedings,  though  tha  nccnsa-
tion  was  in  the  name  of  the  person  aagriered,  who
also  made  his  appearance  at  Ibe  tiiu  without  the
intervention  of  the  patton  (Meier,  AO.  Proe.
p.  661)  ;  and  a  complete  foreigner  would  bpod
this  occasion  reqnin  the  same  or  a  still  fiirlliet


Epbi^esis  Endeiiia,  or  Eisiuigelia  were  adopted,
in  the  three  fint  of  which  an  arreat  actnally  did
and  in  the  last  might  take  place,  ai '  -  -
at  the  Euthynae  and  Docimaaia^  tf  he
cff  was  suf^wscd  by  the


conmieDced  Uke  as


of  the'


irdinary  law-su

fon  the  proper  ntagiitiBte  do  a  liisd  day. (Plato,

Btm^fph. Liit.) The anacrisis then followed

called  a  7pa^,  or  ^dffiT,  aa  the  case  might  be,  and
not  an  fjwAq^ia  or  A^ii,  as  in  pivate  artMuM  i
neither  could  a  psblie  pmecutiou  be  reftan-d  to
an  arbitrator  [Diabtktab],  and  if  it  irere  con-
promised,  wotdd  in  many  cases  render  the  nccoser
liable  to  an  acUon  naAi^ifffaii,  It  not  ipto  beta  ta
a  line  of  a  thougond  dnduuoe.  (Meter,  AtL.  Proc
p.  35.^)  The  same  sum  waa  also  forfeited  when
^led  to  obtain  the  voices  of  m.  fifth
dicBsts  in  all  cases  except  thoaa  brought
before  tbe  archon  that  had  nference  to  injury
(iriijiaiirii)  done  to  women  at  orphans ;  and  beside*
this  pcn^ty,  a  modified  disfnujcbiseiiKnt,  aa,  foe
lilat  accusa-
lona. Upon

death,  the  prssidiug  magistrate  of  the  conrt  deli-
vered the  prisoner,  who  remained  in  tha  custody
of  tba  Scythaa  during  the  trial,  to  tha  Eleven,
whose  bnsmess  it  was  to  eueote  jodgmmt  upoa
him.  If  the  punishment  wen  cosiftBcatian  of  pro-
per^, the  demawihs  made  an  invenlarf  of  tba
eSbcis  of  the  crimina],  which  was  read  ia  the  aa-
ieoibly  of  tbe  pMpl^  and  delivered  to  Uw  poletar,
that  Ucy  might  make  a  aal«  if  tba  Modi^  aod  fKj


OYMNASIUM.
'in  tbe  prooedi  to  the  public  treaiuiy.  (Meier,  AH.
/Wi  p.  7*0,  At)  [J.S.M.]

GRAPHIA'RIUM. [Stilus.]

GRAPHIS. [PjCTUBi,No.VI.]

ORAPHIUM. f  Stilus.]

OREOORIA'NUS  CODEX. [Codk  Ofti-

GRIPH08(')i«*ot). [Abnioka-I

GROMA. {AomiMBNSOSBR ; CitTRA, p.

lil,«.]

GROSPHOS  (7P<{<r4«ii> [Habta.]
GUDERNA'CULUM. [Navis.]
GUSTATIO, [CoiMA,  p.  307,1.]
OUTTUS,  m  tukI,  Willi  m  Domw  maulli  ai
Mck,  ftom  which  iha  liquid  wu  pound  in  drops :
hnce  it*  uuDa  "  Qui  Tinum  dabaut  ut  minataliia
fondcrait,  aganiipcfAffltAppellaruDt." (Voir.  £.
£.  1. 12«,  ed.  MUIIer.) It  wu  npeciBlly  lucd  in
BojAce*  (Plio.  H.  N.  xvL  38.  >.  73),  lud  henco
v«  fiod  It  refreteatfd  on  th«  Kaauo  coim  ttnick
bj  penoBM  who  held  unj  of  the  prieatlj  office*  ;

^itt  aninnponrr  of  Anguitm,  where  it  bppean,
i^ongh  ia  diflenat  (aims,  bolh  od  the  obicrH  and
Knot. Tb*  gnttui  wu  alio  lued  for  keeping


the  oH,  with  which  pcnoiu  were  anointed  in  the
Utht.  (Jut.  liL  263,  iL  I5S.)  A  gottoi  of  thi<
Usd  ii  fiffored  on  p.  193.
GVMNASt  ARCHES.  [OmNAaiDH.]
OYMNA'SIUMlr-M"!""').  Thewholeedo-
tujat  of  a  Ureek  youth  wu  diTided  into  three
fnxu ;  RaramAT,  mneic,  and  gjmiuAtia  (ypififiata^
fMnrJ,  and  -rvfuvartrfi,  Plato,  Titag.  p.  1-23  ;
PIU.  ^^  AadU.  e.  17  i  Clitoph.  p.  197),  to  whkh
AiiHade  <rf*  AqwU.  liiL  3}  add*  a  fourth,  the
>it  gf  drawing  at  [siotin^.  Oymnutlo,  boweTer,
rat  ihongbt  bj  the  ancient*  a  matter  of  lueh  im-
pvtace,  that  ihi*  part  of  education  alone  occupied
u  Bach  time  and  attention  u  all  the  other*  put
■<igeth(t;  and  while  the  Intler  neceHBiil;  ceased
u  ■  eenain  petiod  of  life,  gjinnailici  continued  to
he  cultiiated  by  penon*  of  &11  agei,  though  Uia*e
<if  *n  adniDced  age  naturally  took  lighter  and  leu
fitiguiig  tietatf  than  boy*  and  youth*.  (Xen.
^>V"».  L  7  ;  Lwiaa,  LetipL  6.)  The  ancient*,
ajid  man  eapecially  the  Greelu,  *eem  to  have  been
IhsroDghlj  eooTinced  that  the  mind  could  not  po*-
•ibJj  be  m  a  healthr  ilata,  nnles  the  body  waa
likewiic  in  pecfsct  health,  and  do  mean*  were
tkoogiit,  cither  by  philMOphen,  or  pby«cian*,  to  be
owe  coododTe  to  pre»erTe  or  restore  bodily  health
t^  well-rtgvlated  eierciie.  Tbe  word  gynmu-
tic(  IM  deriTed  from  yvfv6t  (naked),  becaiue  the
pcncBi  who  perfrnmed  their  cxerciiiu  in  public  or
jtrnte  gjiniiuiA  wen  either  entirely  naked,  or
BaelycoTcredby  (fae*hortx<T^.  (See  the  autho-
mie*  iaWaebomitb,  Htiita.  AUerlA.  vol  ii.  p.  3£4.
3d  ediL,  and  BMker,  dariUii,  ToL  L  p.  316.)

n«  f^at  partiality  of  the  Qieeki  for  gyranaitic
^riiiiii  vaa  pnidnctiTe  of  infinite  good :  they
pit  la  tk*  body  that  bcaJtiiT  and  beautiful  dere-


OYMNASIUM.  S79

lopmcnt  by  which  tbe  Qrecki  excelled  all  other
natioiu,  and  which  at  the  same  time  imparled  to
their  mind*  that  power  end  elasticity  which  will
ever  be  admired  in  all  their  productions.  (Lucian,
de  GjnnMut,  \B.)  The  plajlic  art  m  particular
muit  hate  found  it*  firtt  and  chief  nouriihrnent  in
the  gjmnaitic  and  athletic  perfurmancet,  and  it
may  be  Justly  obserred  that  the  Greeks  would
never  have  attained  their  preeminence  in  (culpture
had  not  their  gynuuutic  and  athletic  eihibitiou
made  the  artiste  familiar  with  the  bnutiful  ibiini
of  the  human  body  and  its  Tarious  attitudes.  R».
specting  the  advantage*  of  gyniuutica  in  a  mediod
point  of  view,  some  remark*  are  mode  al  the  end
of  this  article.  But  we  must  at  tbe  same  time
confess,  that  at  a  later  period  of  Greek  hiitory;
when  the  gyntnasia  had  become  places  of  resort  hr
idle  lottugers,  their  evil  efiecti  were  no  less  strik-
ing. The  ehiaf  objects  for  which  they  had  origi-
nally been  inttilated  were  gradually  lost  light  oi^
and  instead  of  being  place*  of  education  and  train-
ing they  be<»me  mere  places  if  amusement ;  and
among  other  injurious  practicei  to  which  they  gava
rise,  ue  gymnasia  were  charged,  eren  by  the  an-
cients themaelvea,  with  having  produced  and  fo*-
teied  tbat  most  odious  vice  of  the  Qreehs,  tbe
woiJifHurrla.  (Plut  Quaeit.  Rom.  40.  toI.  S,
122.  ed.  Wyltcnb. ;  compare  AristoL  dtlb^M.


4;  Plut.  i'ii


Gym,


p.  3.)


of  the  word.


^  ided  also  the  agonistic  and  athletic  ai ._
(iYwri«-rui4  and  UAiirucif),  that  ia,  the  art  of  those
who  contended  for  the  priui  at  the  great  public
games  in  Greece,  and  of  those  who  made  gymnas-
tic perfonmmcet  their  profession  [Athlitab  and
AaoKOTHBTAs].  Both  originated  hi  the  gynma-
siB,  in  as  &r  as  the  athletae,  a*  well  u  the  agouis-
tac  were  originally  trained  in  them.  The  athlelae,
however,  afterwards  formed  a  distinct  class  n£  per-
sons imconnected  with  the  gymnasia  ;  while  the
gymnasia,  at  the  time  when  they  hud  degenerated,
were  in  reality  little  more  than  agonistic  schools,
attended  by  numbers  of  spectators.  On  certain
occasions  the  mast  dittinguithed  pupils  of  the  gym-
naaia  were  selected  for  the  exhibition  of  public
contest*  [Lampadifhobia],  io  that  on  the  whole
there  wu  alw^-s  a  closer  conncc^on  between  the
gymnastic  and  agonistic  than  between  the  gym-
nastic and  athletic  arts.  In  a  narrower  sense,  haw-
ever,  the  gymnasia  had,  with  very  lew  eiceptions,
nothing  to  do  with  the  public  contests,  and  were
place*  of  exercise  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening
and  improving  the  body,  or  in  other  words,  places
ht  physical  education  and  training ;  and  it  i*
chiefly  in  this  point  of  view  that  we  shall  consider

Gymnastic  exercises  among  the  Greeks  seen  to
have  been  as  old  a*  the  Greek  nation  itietf,  a*
may  be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  gymnastic  con-
tests are  mentioned  in  many  of  the  eorhest  legends
of  Grecian  story  ;  but  tht^  were,  u  might  be  sup-
posed, of  a  nde  and  niosUy  of  a  warlike  character.
They  were  generally  held  in  the  open  air,  and  in

Slains  near  a  riicr,  which  afforded  an  oppcrtnnity
ic  swimming  and  bathing.  The  Attic  I^ndi
indeed  referred  the  regulation  of  gymnastics  to
Theseus  (Patu.  L  39.  §  3),  but  according  to  Galen
it  seems  to  have  been  about  the  time  of  Cleislhenes
that  gymnaitic*  were  nduced  to  a  regular  and  com-
plete system.  Great  pragreis,  however,  must  have
been  made  as  early  a*  the  timeof  Solon,aii^peBn


fiSO  GYMNASIUM,

frnm  mne  of  his  l-ivi  vfaich  sie  niHitioned  belav.
It  nraa  about  the  same  period  thai  the  Qreck  tonmi
began  to  hoild  their  rpgnlar  gymimaia  sa  places  of
eiertiw  for  lbs  joung,  with  balhs,  and  other  con-
venience! for  philowphen  and  all  penom  who
might  intellectual  amuiemculi.  Thero  wai  pm-
bablf  DO  Greek  town  of  uij  importance  which  did
not  posKH  [to  g^nuiam.  In  man^  places,  such
ai  EpheiiiB,  Hiempoli),  and  AlciiuidrtB  in  Troas,


the  n


gf  the


I gymna.


discovered  in  modem  times.  Athens  alone  pos-
sessed three  grvat  gymnasia,  the  Lyorum  {AiiKfiov\
Cynosarges  (Ku»iio'a(r]^i),andlbcAnidemia<'Ajca-
Sij/Ja);  to  which,  in  hilcr  timet,  seireml  smaller  ones
were  added.  Ail  places  of  ihii  kind  were,  on
the  whole,  built  on  the  sune  plan,  though,  from


the  I


L  infer  that  then
r  detail. The  n


agymnaj


many  di


gircn  by  Vitrayiiui  (t.  U),  which,  however,  u
very  obscure,  and  at  the  Mme  time  defective,  in  as
&r  u  many  patta  which  seem  to  have  been  essen-
tial U)  B  gymnasium,  are  not  mentioned  in  it.
Among  the  numerous  plans  which  hare  been  diawn,
accordmg  to  the  description  of  Vitruvius,  that  of
W.  Newton,  in  his  translation  ofVitravius.  vol.  L
fig.  £2,  descries  the  preference.  Tho  following
uuodcDl  is  a  ccpy  of  it,  with  a  few  altcnUions.


The  petistylia  (D)  in  a  gymnasium,  which  Vi-
tmrius  mcotrectly  c^  nlaeatin,  are  placed  in  the
form  of  n  square  or  oblong,  and  have  two  slndia
( I SOO  feet)  in  circumference.  They  coniiit  of  four
porticoes.  In  three  of  them  (A  B  C)  spacious  eie-
drae  with  seats  were  erected,  in  which  philoso-
phers, rhetoricians,  and  others,  who  delighted  in
intellcctDol  conversation  might  assemble.  A  fourth
portico  (E),  towards  the  south,  was  double,  so  that
the  interior  walk  was  nn(  eipiwd  to  bad  weather.
The  double  portico  conlalucd  the  following  apart-
ments:—The  Ephebenm(F),  a  spacious  hall  with
scots,  in  the  middle,  and  by  one-third  longer
than  brood.  On  the  right  is  the  Carjceam  (U),
perhaps  the  «ime  room  which  in  other  coses  was


GYMNASIUM.

called  Apodytctium  ;  then  came  theConisteriuni(H}
adjoining  :  and  next  to  the  Conisteriutn,  in  the  re.
turns  of  the  portico,  is  the  cold  bath,  AoDTfKn(I).
On  the  left  of  the  Ephebeum  is  the  Elaeolhegium.
where  persons  were  anointed  by  the  aliptae  (K).
Adjoining  the  Elaeotheaium  is  the  Frigidsnom
(L),  the  object  of  which  is  unknown.  From  thence
is  the  entrance  to  the  Propnigemn  (M),  on  the  le-
tums  of  the  portico  ;  neaiwhich,  butmoreininiri,
behind  the  (dace  of  the  frlgidarium,  is  (he  vaulled
■udatciy  (N),  in  length  twice  its  breadth,  which
has  on  the  letnmt  the  laccnicnm  (O)  on  one  lidc.
and  opposite  the  Laconicum,  the  hot-bath  (P).
Olt  the  outside  three  porticors  arc  built;  one(Q),
in  pouing  out  from  the  peristyle,  and,  on  the  right
and  left,  the  two  stadial  porticoes  (R  S),  of  which,
the  cue  (S)  that  then  the  north,  ii  made  double
and  of  great  breadth,  the  other  (R)  is  single,  and
so  designed  that  in  the  parts  which  eneirtle  the
walls,  and  which  adjoin  to  the  columns,  there  may
be  margin!  for  [Bths,  not  less  than  tea  feet ;  and
the  middle  is  so  eicavaled,  that  there  may  be  toe
steps,  a  foot  and  a  half  in  detcenC,  to  go  from  the
margin  to  the  plane  (R),  which  (jane  should  not
be  less  in  breadth  thsji  12  feet;  by  this  meani
those  who  walk  about  the  margins  in  their  appurtl
will  not  be  annoyed  by  those  who  are  eiercisin^
themselves.  This  portico  is  tailed  by  the  Grecki
Imrrii,  because  in  the  winter  tessaii  the  athleiae
exercised  themselves  in  these  covered  etadia.  The
{uittcIt  had  groves  or  plantstioni  between  the  tso
porticoes,  and  walks  between  the  trees,  with  scsu
of  signine  work.  Adjoining  to  the  (timSi  (R)  anil
double  portico  (3),  arc  the  uncovered  walks  (U),
which  io  Greek  are  called  nopoJIpo^ilItF,  to  which
the  athletae,  in  fair  weather,  go  from  the  winler-
xystus,  to  exercise.  Beyond  the  lystus  it  the
stadium  (W),  to  large  that  a  multituile  of  people
may  have  auificient  room  to  behold  the  contests  of
the  athletae.

It  ia  genei^ly  believed  that  Vitnivioa  in  thii
'  '  ■  iium  took  that  of  Naplei

irapnrtant  parts  of  other
Greek  gymnasia,  the  apndj-terium  and  the  sphwrit-
terium,  arc  not  mentioned  by  him.  The  Grecka
bestowed  great  care  upon  the  outward  and  inii-srd
Bplcirdour  of  their  gymnasia,  and  adorned  them
with  the  statues  of  gods,  heroes,  victors  in  the
public  games,  and  of  eminent  men  of  every  cists.
llcrmes  was  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  g;
and  his  statue  was  cansequently  «  '
them


□  most  of


The  earliest  regulations  which  wo  possess  cod-
ceniing  the  gymnasia  arc  cmtained  in  the  laws  of
Solon.  One  of  these  Uws  forbade  all  adults  to
enter  a  gymnasitun  during  the  time  that  hmt  were
tnking  their  eiercises,  and  at  the  fctliral  ot  the
Mermaea.  The  gymnasia  were,  according  Io  the
same  law,  not  i^owed  to  be  opened  berav  son-
riie,  and  were  to  be  shut  at  sunset.  (Aesclun.
c.  TInardA.  p.3<l.)  Another  law  of  Soton  ex-
cluded slaves  from  gymnastic  eiercisa.  (Aeschiu,
c.  TinanA.  p.  U7  ;  Plot  Saion,  1  ;  Demoith.  e.
TimocrtU.  p.  736.)  Boys,  who  were  ehildrm  of
an  Athenian  citiien  and  a  foreign  mother  {»Wiw>,
were  not  admitted  to  any  other  gymnasium  but  the
Cynowges.  (Plut  Tim.  I.)  Some  of  the  hiws
of  Solon  relating  to  the  managoneat  and  the  snpsc-
intendcnce  of  the  gymnasia,  show  that  he  wai
aware  of  the  evil  consequence*  which  these  initi-
lutbni  might  produce,  unloi  they  were  reguhted


GYMNASIUM,
br  ibe  (tricttst  ntlct. Ai  we,  hovncr,  find  tint
■dull*  litD  krqaaitfd  the  gynmuia,  we  miut  Hip-
poe  that,  ml  Imt  u  lung  u  the  l&wi  of  StJan


n.  246  ud  32U.) Tbe  education  of  boyi  up
tbe  age  of  lineeo  mi  dindcd  into  the  three  part*
nwatiooed  abore,  »  that  gjnmaitica  formed  only
«w of  them ; but  diuiDg  the period from  the
■iiteenth  to  the  nghteenth  f«u  the  inilnietian


GYMNASIUM.


6S1


)iynina«lici  wcra  eicliui'ely  punued.  In  the  time
of  Plato  the  Blalory  regulalioni  of  Saloo  appear
to  liaTe  been  no  httgri  obiened,  and  we  lind  pei-
■Dii)  of  all  afH  (igiling  the  grmaaue.  (Plat.  Ot
Ar^>.  P.4.V2:  Xea.A>ia^.iilS.) Alhc


srgjinnaaia.


called  palaatiae,  in  which  petioni  of  ftll


mbic,  a


BRir  thia


eelebntied  by  the  boyi,  while  fo
■  HiUmiiJl]-  had  been  kept  only  in  the
grrai  grnuiuiB,  and  to  tbe  exdiuion  of  all  adnlta.
( PLaL  tfM.  f.  206.)  Theae  changea,  and  the  laii-
tnde  in  the  •npcrintendence  of  theae  nablic  placea,
caneed  the  gymnniia  to  differ  Teiy  little  iiom  the
Khtnla  of  tbe  athlclae ;  and  it  ia  perbua  partly
ewing  to  thii  ciRnunitanee  that  vrilen  of  thi)  and
•iba«iiiait  timea  nee  the  vordi  gymnaainin  and
palaeetia  indiaaimmatelf .  (Becker,  daritlet,  vol.
Lp.Ml.)

Harried  aa  well  Ba  munamed  wonra  were,  at
Atheoa,  and  in  oil  the  Ionian  italo,  excluded  from
flu  gjmiaMia  ;  but  at  SjATta,  and  in  Mme  other
Uoric  Matea,  maideni,  drewed  in  the  abort  x"<^'t
wen  Dot  only  adniilled  ai  ipeetatora,  bat  b!k  took
pnil  in  tbe  eacniaea  of  the  youihi.  Married
wonen,  howeto',  did  net  frequent  the  gymnaiia.
<Plat.  De  Ltg.  Tli.  p.  806.)

Rc^KCting  the  auperiotendence  and  admiaiatia-
tina  of  tbe  gjnuuuia  at  Athena,  we  know  that
Seloo  in  bia  legiilation  thooght  them  worth;  of
neat  attention  ;  and  the  tmnigrcuion  of  )omo  of
bia  Ian  relating  to  the  gymnoela  wna  pnnithed
with  death.  Ili(1awimFnlionamagiiInile,callcd
the  Oymnaaiarih  (Yu^voaiiifixe'  or  yvfmurKlpx^r)
who  waa  entmated  with  the  whole  maaagem^nt
pf  1^  gynujaaia,  and  with  every  thing  connected
therewith.  Uia  office  waa  one  of  the  Tegnlsr  litur-
gin  like  tba  chorcgia  and  trierachy  (Itacui,  Dt
PUknirm.  litT.  p.  \H),  ud  waa  attended  with
cnDHderabLe  eipenac.  He  had  to  maintain  and
pay  tbe  peixai*  who  wen  preparing  IhenueWei  for
the  game*  and  cooteali  in  the  public  feitiiali,  to
ptnnde  dwm  .with  nil,  and  perb^a  with  the
wreatlen'  dnat.  It  alu  detoWed  upon  him  to
■dam  tbe  gymnaaiam  or  the  place  when  the  agonea
took  pbKe.  (Xeu.£>e  Eep.AOtii.  i.  13.)  The
gynuHtnarch  waa  ■  leal  magiatrate,  and  inTcaled
with  a  kind  of  jariadiction  over  all  thoae  who  frc-
i|Dent«d  or  were  connected  with  the  gymnaaia  ;
and  hia  power  amaa  eren  to  have  extended  beyond
tbe  gynuHwa,  li^  Plntateh  {Amator.  c  9,  &c)
atalea  tint  he  watched  md  eoatnitled  tbe  conduct
of  tbe  cpbebi  in  genenL  He  had  alao  tbe  power
ta  tODDTelroin  theg]rmnaaiateachen,philoaaphcia,
and  aopUata,  wheoerer  he  concciied  that  they
txfmv^  an  injorioua  infloence  npoa  the  young.
( .ieiebin.  e.  TTnuroL)  Another  part  of  hit  SM\tt
waa  IB  cgndact  the  iDUmJi  game*  at  certain  great


fcatiTuIa,  npecially  tha  torch-race  (Xi^^iralij^ii^),
for  which  he  lelected  the  moat  diatingnialied  amcog
tbe  ephebi  of  the  gymnaua.  The  number  of  gym-
naaiarcha  wai,  according  to  Libanius  on  Demoa'
Ihenea  (c  Mid.  p.  610)  ten,  one  from  every  tribe.
(Compare  Demoatb.  e.  PkU^.  p.  £0,  c  BaeoL  p.
996  ;  laaeoa,  Dt  MaueL  c;4S.)  They  aeem  to
have  undertaken  their  official  dutiei  in  tniu,  but
in  what  manner  ia  unknown.  Among  tbe  eiteiDa]
di«tinetioua  of  a  gymnaaiaich,  were  a  paiT|le  cloak
and  white  ihocL  (Plut.  Antam.  33.)  In  early
timea  the  office  of  gymnaaiaich  lailod  for  a  year,
but  under  the  Roman  emperon  we  Jind  that  acnne-
timei  they  held  it  only  far  a  month,  to  that  there
werel2or  ISgymuaaiarchainooeyear.  Thiioffice
aeema  to  hare  been  couaidcrcd  ao  great  an  ho&onr,
that  eien  Roman  geaenla  and  emperora  wen  Bm-
bitiou*  toboldit.  OtherOteekIowna,L~keAthent,
had  theii  own  gymnaaiarcha,  but  we  do  not  know
wbether,  or  to  what  extent  their  dniiea  differed
from  the  Athenian  gymnauaieha.  In  Cyrene  the
office  waa  aometimea  held  by  womeiL  (Kimuie,
OymiiaMtaiaadAffoniitiid.iriileiUM,f.l79,At.)

Another  office  which  waa  foimeriy  beliered  to
be  coDuected  with  tbe  anpeiinlendence  of  the  gym-
naaia, ia  that  of  Xjatarchoa  {iacrdifxas).  ftit  it
ia  not  mentioned  previoua  to  the  tune  of  the  &0-
man  emperon,  and  then  only  in  Italy  and  Crate.
KiBute  (76.  p.  206,  &c)  baa  ahown  ^t  thia  office
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  gymnaaia  pnronlj  ao
called,  but  waa  only  eonoevted  with  the  adioo^  <^
the  athletie.

An  office  which  ia  likewiaa  not  moitiaiMd  helm
the  time  of  the  Roman  empema,  but  waa  nererthe-
leaa  decidedly  cotmectad  with  tbe  gymnaaia,  ia  that
of  Coometea.  He  had  to  unnge  certain  gomea,  to
regiiter  the  uamei  and  keep  the  lisla  of  the  ephebi,
and  to  maintain  order  and  diacipUne  among  them.
He  waa  aaaiated  by  an  Anticoametea  and  two  Hy-
pocoametae. (Etanie,  li,  p.  21 1,  &c)

An  office  of  very  gnat  importiuice,  in  an  educa-
tional point  of  view,  waa  that  of  Che  Saphroniatae
{amftpariirriu).  Their  prmince  waa  to  inapin  the
youtfia  with  a  lore  of  aiHppoaini,  and  to  protect
thia  rirtue  againat  all  injurioua  infiuencea.  lu  early
timet  thcii  nmnber  at  Athena  waa  ten,  one  from
ereiy  tribe,  with  a  aalary  of  one  drachma  per  day.
{EtjaoL  Mag.  t.  v.)  Their  duty  not  only  re-
quired them  to  be  pretent  at  all  the  gamea  of  the
ephebi,  but  to  watch  and  torrcct  Ueir  conduct
whcrerer  they  might  meet  ihem,  both  within  and
without  the  gymnaiinm.  At  the  time  of  the  em-
peror Uarena  Aureliui  only  aix  Sophroninae,  aa-
Bitted  by  u  many  Hypoiophroniitae,  are  mentiimed.
(ErBnBe,A.p.  314,  &c)

The  inatructiona  in  the  {mnnuia  were  girai  by
[he  Gymnaalae  {■yoitraarS)  and  the  Paedotribae
(roiSorpifaf)  ;  at  a  later  period  Hypopaedotribae
were  added.  The  Paedoiribca  waa  required  to
poiteti  a  knowledge  of  all  the  larioua  eiereiiaa
which  were  performed  in  the  gymnaaia  ;  the  Gym-
nastet  waa  the  practical  teacher,  and  waa  expected
to  know  tbe  phyiiological  effecta  and  influeocet
on  the  cautitution  of  tbe  yontht,  and  thenfon
aiaigned  to  each  of  them  thoae  eicrciaee  which  he
thought  moat  luilable.  (Qalen.  De  Valet,  tuetd.  u,
9.  ]  I  i  AriatoL  PoUL  TiiL  3.  2.)  Theae  teachen
were  uiually  athlelao,  who  bad  left  their  profej-
aion,  or  could  not  aoecced  in  it.  (Aelian,  V.  H,  a.
6;  Oalen,ie.  iL3.&c.)

The  anointing  of  tbe  bodiea  of  the  youtha,  and


OYMNASIUlt.


cular  gmacM  ma;  li>n  been tingbt  bj  leparate


Th.i


lit  tho  vhalBt  to  hATe  been
tbe  umc  throvi^hont  Qrecce.  Among  tbeDoriuu,
hoveTCr,  they  were  regarded  cbieflj  oi  iOBtitutJonB
fnr  hardening  the  body  nnd  for  militaiy  traming  ;
among  tbe  lorians,  vid  e^peclaQy  the  Atheniani,
they  Tad  an  addldonal  and  higher  object,  namely,
to  gire  to  the  body-  and  iu  noTemenu  gnus  and
beauty,  and  to  make  it  the  baiii  of  n  healthy  and
nuni!  mind.  Bat  among  all  the  diltereat  tribea  of
the  Qreeka  the  eiercUea  which  weie  carried  on  in
a  Greek  gyninaiiun]  were  eithei


le  more  important  execcisea  which  the  gyn
"■■_■■■_ in  the


a  wHh  the  public  agonei


Among  the  former  ve  may  tnention,  I.  The  ball
(afalpiirii,  a^aipa/iaxii,  &c.),  which  mt  in  uni-
venal  (aToni  with  the  Oreeki,  and  wai  here,  ni  at
Rome,  played  in  a  Tariflly  D(irayii,aa  appear)  from
the  vonli  iirif^aiis,  irlamiKH,  ipurlvSo  or  ipwaa-
T6r,  ftc  {Ptat.  IM  Ltgg.  -m.  f.  797  ;  eompre
OionoT.  ad  Plaul.  CuraU.  iL  3.  17,  and  Becker.
Gailm,  L  p.  270.)  Every  gynmBiinm  contained
one  large  roam  for  the  purpoie  of  playing  at  ball  in
it  {iKpaipiirriipnir).  2.  Tiid(tir  tSxurniiSa,  Sii\-
Kwrtiita^or  iii  ypam'Sis,  wu  a  game  in  which  one
boy,  holding  one  end  of  a  rope,  tried  to  pull  the
boy  who  heia  it*  other  end,  acrtiaa  a  lino  marked
between  them  cm  the  ground.  3.  The  top  (fl'M'nl,
PiffSii,  fiftBaj,  irrpiSiXiii),  which  wai  a>  commnn
an  amuiement  with  Greek  boy>  a)  in  our  own
dayi.  4.  Tho  TtrriXiSas,  which  wa«  a  game  with  fire
ilonei,  which  were  thrown  up  from  the  upper  part
of  tho  hand  and  caught  in  the  palm.  5.  XiinJ^a,
which  wa>  a  game  in  which  a  rope  was  drawn
through  the  upper  part  of  a  tree  ot  a  poit.  Two
hoys,  one  on  each  lide  of  the  pott,  turning  their
backi  lowaM)  one  another,  took  hold  of  the  endi
of  the  rope  and  tried  to  pull  each  other  up.  Thii
■port  wai  alio  one  of  the  amnicmenta  at  the  Attic
Uionyiia.  (Heiycb.  i.  r.)  Theae  few  gamM  will
■allies  to  ihow  the  eharaoter  of  the  gymnottic

The  moro  important  games,  mch  h  runnfaig
(tpSfias\  throwing  of  the  9iaKos  and  the  'bwr,
iumpuig  and  leaping  Cb^ui,  with  and  without
aATjjfKi),  wrcnling  (itiUti),  boring  (ivyfi^),  the
pancratium  (nynpiiTior),  mirraS^i,  Xa^mJh)^
^o,  dancing  (ipxt!'"),  Ac,  are  deioibed  iu  Hps'

A  gymnatiom  waa,  a>  TitruTini  ohaerrca,  not  a
Roman  Initiiution,  and  Dionjiiui  of  llaticamaaiiii
(Ant.  Aon.  TIL  70—72),  exprenly  ilatci  that  the
whole  l-jniRimin)  of  the  Romana,  Ihongh  it  wai
pncllwd  at  an  nrly  period  in  the  Ludi  Msxinii,
wai  introduced  among  the  Romana  from  Greece.
Their  attention,  however,  to  dctcloping  and
itrcngthening  the  body  by  eierciioi  wai  conaider-
able,  thouah  only  for  mintaiy  porpoaes.  The  re-
gidar  training  of  boyt  in  the  Greek  gymnaaCici  waa
Ibnign  to  RuuD  mannera,  and  area  h«U  in


GYMNASIUM.


Bcqhired  a  taite  for  Greek  mannera,  nied  to  at
'  eir  filial  imall  placet  for  bodily  e
.imei  ealled  gymnaaia,  aometimi  *
and  to  adorn  them  with  baniifnl  «
(Cic  ad  AH.  i.  4,  e.  Vtrr.  iii.  G.)  Tha  cnpeiw
waa  the  fint  who  built  a  poblie  gymnadiua
me  (Suetoa  Ner.  12)  j  ■noth«'  waaereeted  by
Commodua.  (Herod,  i.12.  4.)  But  ahhoogfa  thcM
'  itiona  were  intended  to  intndaca  Greek
^  aitici  among  the  Romani,  yet  they  never
gained  any  great  importance,  as  the  maontiicent
iheimae,  amphitheatrei,  and  other  coIom!  tniitd-
ingi  had  alwayi  greater  charmi  for  the  Bomana
than  the  gymnasia.

Far  a  fuller  acconnt  of  (his  important  aobjec^
which  hai  been  necoanriiy  treated  with  brevity  in
this  article,  the  reader  ia  referred  to  Hienxiymni
Mercurialii,  De  ArU  OunauaSen,  Libri  vi.  lat  ed.
Venice,  lfi73,  4th  ibid.  1601  ;  Burette,  Itutan
da  AVdiict^  in  tho  M^.  de  TAcad.  dea  TnacripL
i.  3  I  G.  Ubkor, />i'a  Glfiniuufrl  (Jsr  ^(jfoKB,  MUs-
ater,  183.^1  Wachamuth,  Hdia.  AlleftL  voL  ii.
p.  S44,  Ac  2d.  edit.  ;  MUller,  Dor.  iv.  6.  g  4,&c ;
Becker,  G'<iUiu,Tol.lp.  270,  &c;  Qtoritiu,  vol.  i
pp.  309 — S45  ;  and  eapecinlly  J.  fl.  Kniiie,  Dit
Gymnajiik  lad  Agonttik  der  Hditmetf  Leipiig,
IHJl  1  Olyn^ia,  Wien,  1838  ;  Dit  P^Aiat,  Vi-
meth  Ac,  Leipzig,  1841.  The  hiatoriea  of  eda-
cation  among  the  andenta,  anch  aa  thow  of  Hoch-
heimer,  Schwan,  Cramer,  and  othert,  likewiae  con-
tain much  uacful  information  on  the  anbject  [L.S.]
HeRtlaiianii/OpiiiuUiatalitAttdiealArt. —
The  garnet  of  the  Greek*  had  an  immediate  icdn-
ence  upon  tho  ut  of  healing,  bwanse  they  conii-
dered  gymnastlci  to  be  almost  a*  neceaaary  for  the
-vatioD  of  health,  aa  medicine  ia  for  the  care
eaae*.  (Uifpomtei,  DtLoai  in  lf<mnie,^rL
lSS,ed.KUhn  iTimaeuiLocrenaia,  Ot  .^iiiiiH
Mindi,  p.  864,  in  GaU'i  OpoK.  AfytioL)  It  -a*
for  thii  reaion  that  the  gymniuia  were  dedicated
to  Apollo,  the  god  of  phyticiana.  (PluL  .^iip.  viu.
4.  §  4.)  The  dircctort  of  thew!  establithmenth  a*
well  aa  the  pemni  employed  under  their  orders
the  bathera  or  aliptar,  poued  for  phyalciiuu,  and
wen  called  ao,  on  account  of  the  uill  which  long
eiperlence  had  given  them.  The  directora,  calk'd
xaXaiffTpo^fiXKei,  legulated  the  diet  of  the
young  men  brought  up  in  the  gymnaaia  ;  the
lub-directon  or  ffjomuAic,  presmbed  for  their
diiciuici  (Plat.  iULaf.ii.p.9\e)i  and  the  n/en^n
or  bathcn,  aliptac,  iatrallptae,  practited  blood-
lettiug,  adminiaterod  clyttcre,  and  dreaed  iraunda,
ulcere,  and  fracturei.  (Plat  Di  lAg.  ir.  p.  720  ;
Ccliu*,  <fe  Midit.  I  1  J  Plln.  B.  N.  nit  2.)
Two  of  theae  directora.  Icon*,  of  Tarvntnm,  and
Herodicn*,  of  Selymhria,  a  town  of  Thrace,  de-
aerve  particular  notice  for  bavii^  contribated  to
imite  more  cloaely  medicine  and  gymna*tic*.  Iccn*,
who  appeaju  to  havB  lived  before  Heredicoi  (Ofynji.
luviL  Stephen.  ByauiL  1.  r.  Ttipii,  n.  693  ;  com-
pare Pan*,  vi.  10.  S  2),  gave  hi*  chief  attenUon
to  oorrccting  the  diet  cf  the  wmtlera,  and  to  >o-
ciiatoming  tiiem  to  greater  moderation  and  aliatcmi-
oumeu,  of  which  lirtuet  he  waa  himielf  a  perfect
model  (Pint,  dt  Ltg.  viiL  p.  840  ;  Aelian,  I'ar.
Hilt.  xL  3  1  Id.  Ilitt.  A»m^  vL  1.)  Plato  eon-
ildcrt  him,  at  well  oi  Ilerodicns,  to  have  been  one
of  the  invcntort  of  medico]  gymnastici.  (PIsL
PnHaga-.i  ^.f.i\6i  Ludin,  D*  CbatmL  HiA


OYMNASIUU.
|3S.p,6S6.)  Hccodicu,  who  iiionudniet  called  I
Pndieu  (Plin.  H.  ff.  uii.  2),  lived  at  Atheoi
a  ilurt  tioM  before  the  Peloponiunui  vu.  Plsla
Bji  that  he  mi  oat  oaljr  a  wpbiat  (Plat
Pnlag.  L  «.),  but  aim  a  mMttr  of  the  gynmaiium
(Id.  Hijt.  iiL  p.  406),  and  phjiiciui  (Id.  Gars.
{  Z  p.  448},  and  in  &ct  he  ouiled  in  hit  own
penoo  Ihcae  thiee  qoolitiea.  He  wai  troubled,
■ji  tlic  nune  antbor,  with  very  weak  health,
tiid  tried  if  gymnailic  exnciio  would  not  help
ta  impnie  it ;  and  baving  peifectly  luccseded,
\t  iniDuIed  hii  method  to  otfaen.  Before  him
■edical  dietetic!  had  been  eatiie);  neglected,  etpe-
diilt;  by  the  AKlepiadae.  (Id.  Rtp.  iii.  p.  406.)
If  PUtoH  account  may  be  Ink™  literally  (Id.
Piatdr.  p.  S-JS),  be  mucb  abuted  Ihe  execute  of
gpiukMtka,  ■•  be  recomraended  hit  patienti  to
valk  from  Atbeui  (a  Uegeia  and  to  letum  ai
KKu  ai  thej  had  reached  the  valli  of  the  latter
lawn.*  Tlie  aothor  of  the  aith  book  Dt  Morh.
Vilfir. (Hippocr. Byidan. tL c 3. ToL liL

ti99)  agreea  with  Plato :  "  Ueiodicue,"  nf)
"  csoKd  prople,  attacked  with  ferer,  to  die
bom  walking  aad  too  hard  eiarciie,  and  man;
(f  bii  pKtieati  ufTered  much  from  d^  rubbing."
A  •beet  dnM  after  w*  find,  aja  Fuller  {Mtdi-
tha  Cgmunitica,  Jcc  Lmd.  17119,  6to),  that  Hip-
paata  {Dt  t'iet  RaL  iil  vol.  L  p.  716),  with
nne  aorl  of  gloiy,  aitumet  to  hinuelf  the  ho-
Booc  of  biingiog  that  method  to  a  psfectiou,

rorki  rcamunending  KTeial  lorte  of  eicrciiea
i^im  proper  ocauioni ;  ai  firit,  friction  oc  cbaSng,
tbeeffecuofwbichha  txf]aiat  {IM  Vict.  Rat.  ii.
a.  701),  and  telle  lu,  that  in  Kuiie  OMCt  it  will
Ini^  down  tfae  btoatedneii  of  the  eolid  part«,  m
Mhoa it will incarn  and caius  an incresae  of
fleik,  and make the  port  thrive. He  *di
(AMI  p.  700) walking,  of  which  they  bad
■cct^  Ukeir  round  and  ilraigbt  coutk*. He  girea
hie  «|niiian  iHiid.  p.  701)  of  the  'AroKiriuuna,
|]R(aiatoi;  eieniie*,  which  lerTed  to  warm  aj
fit  the  wreallera  for  the  more  Tehement  onea.
miie  I  mil  he  adtiKe  the  naAit,  or  common  wiei
ling  (iUdSi,  and  the  'Atimxtifia,  or  wreitling  by  the
baoli only,  without  comini;  cloae,  and  alio  the
"  - '  - ir  the  ezerciu  of  the  Corycta,


n  of  the  hj


KTii,  or  rojliiig  in  land  ;  end  on


ArUGym^  p.  133)

lenw  and  irguiai  a

fsM  of  the  body,  w

as  ;  the  'AiMtin  .

{lUd,  p.  700) we  find  moitioiied,  with  ums  ap-

jntrnttaa,  iho  "Hwupw  'imi,  Eqid  Imd^fimiti,  by

■bieh  ia  probably  meant  galloping  long  cotuiei  in

tlw  opao  field.

Ai  (or  Oakn,  he  followi  Hippncntea  in  thu,  a>
doedy  a*  in  other  thioft^  and  dedarea  bia  opinion
rf  tke  benefit  of  eierotei  in  Kreral  place*  ;  hii
Maul  boik  "  De  &uitala  Tuenda,"  ii  wholly
■poa  tba  D*t  of  die  ifr^  or  the  adfaatage  of

*■*  ThB  dutance  from  Atbena  to  Megan  waa  21 0
■tadia,  aa  we  lean  froia  Frocopiui.  {BtIL  Vamd.
L  I.)  Dion  CbiyHatom  calli  It  a  day'i  jotuncy.
I'froL  ri.)  Uodsn  tnielleTi  reckon  eight  houia.
(Uedwell.  OoB.  rov,foLii.p.  177.)"  Cramer,
Jme.  Onatt,  nL  ii.  tBcL  13^  p.  430.


OYMNASIUM.  MS

regular  chafing:  be  Itai  written  a  littla  tract,
n^  Toir  Bii  Hmplis  i^ipas  Tviiroiriov^  wheTfr
in  he  reeommenda  an  eierciee,  by  wUch  tbe
body  and  mind  an  both  at  the  nme  time
affected.  In  hii  diacouna  to  Thraiybulue,  n^
'larpiiciti  (  ruiirtarant  #»Ti  t4  Tyaa^,
BigbiagaiDit  the  athletic  and  otliet  Tiolent
piacticei  of  the  gfmnanmn,  bnt  appront  of  tbe
more  moderate  txtmiatt,  m  nbeenriant  to  the
endi  of  a  phy■iciaI^  and  comiefDaitly  part  of  that
— '  The  other  Greek  wtiloa  expicn  a  unular
m  ;  and  the  lente  of  most  of  them  in  thii
matter  ii  collected  in  Oribanui'B  "Collecla  Medi-
einalta."  In  th«e  remain)  which  are  pieaaied
of  the  writing!  of  Antyllui,  we  read  of  eonw  eorta
of  eieRisea  that  an  not  mentioned  by  Galea  or
any  Ibnner  aathor  ;  among  tbe  leet  Ihe  Crieiliaia
n  the  tnuulalon  by  miilaka  toll  it,  initcad  of
CWrweWo.  Thia,  aa  it  hod  lor  many  ag«  bean
diinaed,  Mennjrialia  hinuelf,  who  had  imde  the
It  judicioua  inquiriei  into  thia  nibject  {OtArtt
mitutiat,  4to.  AmateL  1672),  doca  not  pntotd
siplain  1  and  I  beliere,  wyi  Freiud  (JliiU  ^
P^nc,  ToL  L),  though  we  hare  the  dcaaiptioi  of
it  est  down  hi  Oribaiiiu  {ColL  Mtdie.  tl  2S\  it
'ill  be  bard  to  form  any  idfs  of  what  it  waa.
The  ancient  phyiiciani  reljed  much  on  siereiM
in  the  cure  of  the  dropty  (compare  Hor.  BpitL  i,
"  I  lanni,  rurrea  hydronwu!"),
totally  n^lect  it  (Alexander
Tndlianui,  Dt  Mtdic  ii.  3.  p.  £24,  ed.  BaaiL)
Hippocialei  (De  /nferni  Afftctiim.  eect  2B.  ToL
ii.  p.  618)  preacribei  for  one  that  hot  a  draw
-o^mr^pfoi,  or  _^jtftjm*f -ezerdjei,  and  he  nuUtea
lie  of  the  Mime  word  in  hii  Epidemica,  and  abnoit
alwayi  when  he  ipcaki  of  the  regimen  of  a  diopti-
cal  penon,  implying,  that  thoogh  it  be  a  labonr
'  people  to  moTo,  yel  tiey  moit  nndeigo
thia  ii  M  much  the  leaie  of  Hippsoatei,
that  Spon  haa  collected  it  into  one  of  the  new  Aplu-
riama,  which  he  hai  drawn  out  of  hii  woriia.  Celaua
aajiof'thiacwe  (Da  dfaifta.  iil  SL.  p.  lS2,ed.  Ar-
gent.), "Concutiendnm  mulla  geetatinne  Goipui  eit."
Tbe  Roman!  placed  great  reliance  upon  exociMt
for  the  cure  of  diaeaaei  i  and  Aaclepiadei,  who
lived  io  the  tune  of  Pompey  the  Great,  bnaght
thia  mode  of  treatment  into  gnat  reqnoit.  He
called  exercite*  At  eomiKm  aidi  c^  flv'^  Bnd
wrote  a  treotiee  <a  the  tnbject,  which  ia  mentioned
by  (^eliua  in  bia  chapter  "  De  Friclione  "  (A
Medie.  ii.  1 4.  p  82),  but  the  book  ii  loiL  He  curied
tbeae  notion!  ao  far,  that  he  inrented  the  Lmti
PmiOa  (Plin,  H.  AT.  uri.  8)  or  hanging  bedi,
that  theaick  might  be  rocked  to  ile«i ;  which  loidc
ao  mucb  at  that  time,  that  iheycameaAawarditobe
made  of  lilier,  and  were  a  great  part  ef  tbe  lunuy
of  that  people  ;  he  bod  M  many  particular  wayi  Id
make  phyaie  agreeable,  and  wai  to  eiquiaita  in  tin
inrentum  of  eierciaea  to  auppty  tbe  place  of  medi-
■'  ' '"  ly  age  over  had  iho


ilightofniBJikind.Abonllhia  time  the  Ko-
man  phyaiciaot  lent  their  coniumptiTe  patienti  to
Aleundria,  and  with  very  good  iucceaa,  aa  we  find
by  both  Ihe  Plinyi ;  thia  wai  done  partly  for  the
change  of  air,  but  chiefly  for  the  nke  of  the  eier-
eiae  t^  the  motion  of  the  ihip ;  and  therefore  Celnii
aayi  (Di  Mtdia.  iiL  22.  p  1S6),  "  Si  ma  Pblhiiia
eit,  i^ne  eet  longa  naiigiaione  ;"  and  a  link  after
he  makea  CalHaifn  and  NatU  la  ba  two  of  tha


su


OYMNOPAEDIA.


chief  remodiH.  Ai  Tor  the  other  mora  common
ererciKBf  tiiej  were  daiLy  pmctiBed,  u  ii  monifeit
from  Celtiu,  Caeliu  Anrclianni,  Theodonu  Priici-
aaat,  uidlheratof  the  Latin  phyticiaiu.  Andvs
do  not  want  icMancea  of  corea  wrought  hy  theie
maun.  Sneloniiu  {Calig.  t  S)  UUi  in  ili«  Oei-
muiinu  wu  cured  of  m  '^  cnimm  giviilitBa,*'  u  he
erpnuei  it  (by  vbicli  he  probiiblTmeaniaft^frD-
piy),  by  riding  ;  luid  Plutanb,  in  hii  life  of  Cicero,
giTei  HI  >n  ucoiuit  of  hia  wakneu,  and  that  he  re-
coieied  hii  health  bytiKTelliiig,  andeiecuircdili-
jtvncc  ia  rubbing  and  chafing  bii  body.  (Compare
Cic.  Bnrf.  t  91.)  Pliny  (H.  AC.  «il  33)  tclli
UK  AnnaeuA  Q^lio,  who  had  been  coniul,  ni  cured
of  a  coniumptJim  by  a  lea  Toyagu  ;  and  Oslen  givi'i
m  inch  Bcconnti  of  the  gold  efieeti  of  particular
exercitea,  and  they  wen  praetited  u  onireiully
by  all  claaiei,  that  it  cannot  be  inppnaed  but  they
muit  hare  been  able  to  produce  great  and  good
oflecU.  MowaTcr,  from  an  attentive  penual  of
what  wa  Rod  on  tbia  inhjsct  in  the  cluaica]  aa-
Ihoca,  the  leader  can  hardly  &il  of  being  convinced
that  the  ancienta  eateemed  gyBmaatici  too  highly,
jnaC  aa  the  modenu  too  mnch  neglect  them  ;  and
that  in  thia,  a«  in  many  other  laatten,  both  in
medicine  and  phDataphy,  truth  liei  between  Che
Iwoeitnmea.  [W.  A.  O.]

OYMNASTES.  [OvKMiSiUn,  p,  M],  b.]
OYMNE'SIIotOYMNE'TES(>t./u*rioi,<ir
TVfu^ai),  were  a  elau  of  bond-alavea  at  Argoa,
who  may  be  compared  with  the  Helota  at  SiBrta.
(St^h.  Byi.  I.  V.  XJ..:  Poilni,  iiL  83.)  Their
name  ahova  that  they  attended  thnr  maatera  on
military  aervice  in  ^e  capacity  of  lighl-umed
troopi.  MUller  (Dor.  iiL  1.  g  2}  remarlu  that  it
ia  to  theao  gymneaii  that  the  account  of  Hemdotoi
(vi.  63)  refen,  that  6000  of  the  citiiena  of  Argoa
having  been  ilain  in  battle  by  Cleotnenea,  king  of
Sparta  (Id.  viL  U8>,  the  ilavei  got  the  goicm-
ment  into  their  own  handi,  and  retained  poaninDn
of  it  until  the  aoni  of  thoae  who  had  bllen  had
grown  to  manhood,  Aflerwaida,  when  the  young
cititent  had  grown  up,  the  alavei  were  compelled
by  them  to  retire  to  Tiryni,  and  then  after  a  long
war,  aa  it  appcan,  vets  either  driven  &om  the
territory,  or  again  inbdued.

OYMNOPAETJIA  (rvimnuBCa),  the  feati-
val  of  ■'  naked  youtha,"  waa  celebrated  at  Sparta
every  year  in  honour  of  Apollo  Pythaeui,  Artemia,
and  Leto.  The  ataluea  of  theae  dcitiea  itoud  in  a
part  of  the  Agois  called  X'V^'t  "^  it  vaa  around
IheH  itatoe*  that,  at  the  gymnopaedia,  Sjortan

ioulha  performed  their  choruiea  and  daneei  in
onour  of  Ap(^a.  (Paua  iiL  1 1.  g  7.)  The  fealival
lasted  for  aaveral,  perhapa  for  ten,  dayi,  and  on
the  lait  day  men  alio  peribrmed  chonuti  and
daocea  in  tbe  tbcatn  ;  and  during  theae  gymnaatic
•ihibitiani  they  aang  the  tonga  of  Thiuelaa  and
AkmBO,  and  the  paeant  of  Dionytodotui.  The
leader  of  the  cbonia  (wpao^Tiii  or  xipo""^')
wore  a  kiikd  of  cbaplet,  called  ari^arai  dupHTimoI,
in  commemoration  of  the  rictory  of  the  Spartnna
at  Thyrea.  Thia  event  aecma  to  have  been  dnely
connected  with  the  gymnopaedia,  forlhote  Spartani
wbo  had  &Ilen  on  that  occaiion  ware  alvaya
praited  in  longt  at  thia  (cttivaL  (Athen.  iv.
p.  67a  J  f\M.AgM.i9i  Xfln.»'«Zba.vL4.|16i
Betycb.  Suid.  Etym.  Mag.  and  Timaeua,  Olataar.
(.  V,  TtiiHKtwaiUa.)  The  boya  in  their  dancci  per-
Amned  mch  rhyUmiical  movementa  aa  reaembled
til*  axeniae*  of  ilw  pakeaRa  tod  tb«  pancration.


QYNAECONOMI.

and  alio  imitntcd  the  wildgcatureiofthe  wonhipof
Dionyaua.{Atbcn.iiv.  p.  631.)  MUller  (//»<. o/'^'r.
lAt.  vol.  i.  p.  161)  Bupposca,  with  great  probabiiily,
that  the  dancra  of  the  gynmopaedia  panly  cooiiil-
ed  of  mimic  repreacntatjoni,  aa  the  eatabliahment
of  tho  dancea  a


fcBlical  V
of  whom


cribed  to  the  m^ucian^  at  the  hrad
u  Thaletaa. (PluL  da  Jlfaa  c  9.)  The


Sparta  waa  viailed  by  neat  numbera  of  itiangen,
wsa  ana  of  great  memmenl  and  lejolcingi  (Xen.
Sttmor.  i.  2.  £61  ;  PluL  AgaiL  S9  ;  Pollux,  ir.
M.  101),  and  old  bachelora  alone  teem  to  have
been  excluded  bom  the  feativitiei.  (Oiann.  i/t
OotlAim  afnd  Vt^jm  Pofrntot  Qmiilkme  Com-
Kualat.  p.  7.  &c)  The  inlniductiQn  of  the  gynmo-
poedia,  which  lubiequently  beeame  of  auch  import-
ance aa  an  inatitution  for  gymnaatic  and  onheaiic
peiformancet,  and  for  the  cultivation  of  the  poetic
and  muairal  art*  at  Sparta,  it  generally  aaaigned  to
the  year  B6S  B.  c  (Compnre  Meuniua,  Orotofru,
p.  12,  Ac;  Creuier,  OmuuHIW. //enxl  i.  p.  230 ;
Milller,  Dor.  vol.  iL  p.  350,  &c)  [L.  S.]

OYNAECONITIS.  [Domdh,  pp.  12»—
425,]

GYNAECO'NOMl  or  QYNAECOCOSMI
(yvrauioriiioi  or  yuniMOiiivtiai),  wen  magiatiatea
at  Athena,  wbo  avperjnlended  the  eoadiKl  of  Alhe-
aian  women.  (Pollm,  riiL  1 1 2.)  We  know  little
of  the  dutin  of  iheae  officera,  and  even  the  tune
wben  they  were  inatituted  ia  not  quite  certain,
tlifckh  <d>  PiSoeL  p.  34)  baa  endfavoiued  to
ahov  Chat  they  did  not  exist  until  the  time  of  De-
metriua  Phalcreua,  wheima,  according  to  othera,
they  were  initituted  by  Solon,  whoac  tcgulatioiia
concerning  the  female  tax  certainly  CEDdrnd  tomo
■pecial  officer!  neccaaary  for  their  maintenance.
(Plut  SoL  21  ;  camp.  Thirlwall,  HuL  if  Grrnt,
vol.  iL  p.  £1.)  Their  name  it  alio  mentioned  by
Ariatotle  (/"oi.  iv.  12.  p.  144,  and  vL  S.  p.  214.
ed.  GSttling)  aa  lamething  which  he  auppoan
to  be  well  known  to  hia  nsden.  Thnc  cinum-
atuncea  induce  ui  to  think  that  the  yvrtuxarifini^
aa  the  luperintcudenta  of  the  conduct  of  women,
eiiitcd  ever  aince  the  time  of  Solon,  but  that  iUoii
power  waa  afterwacdi  extended  in  mcb  a  mannre
that  they  became  a  kind  of  police  for  the  parpnto
of  preventing  any  eic«aea  or  indeceneita,  whclhei
committed  by  m«i  or  by  women.  ( See  the  Fnuim.
of  Timoclet  and  Menander,  op,  A&ol  tl  p.  245.
where  a  icaii^i  ri/ioi  ia  mentioocd  aa  the  aoum
from  which  they  derived  their  mcmaed  powrr ;
compare  Plut.  Sol.  21.  «;(-.)  In  their  &nt  and
original  capacity,  therefore,  they  bad  to  aee  that
the  regnlatbna  concerning  the  conduct  of  Athe-
nian women  were  obaerved,  and  to  nnniah  any
tranagTcaaiona  of  them  (Haipoerat  i.  e,  Orix'Ji'u:
Haych.  1.  c.  IIAdTUDt) ;  in  tbe  latter  ctL|ncicy
they  teem  to  have  acted  at  miaiitcfa  of  the  anw-
pogua,  and  aa  aneh  had  to  lake  care  that  decency
and  modeiBtion  weis  abtervcd  in  private  aa  well
aa  in  public  Hence  they  anperintoided  even  the
meetinga  of  frienda  in  their  private  honaea,  t.  jf.  at
weddii^  and  on  achor  bative  oetaiioni.  (Philoch.
ap.  Atkai.  Tl.  p.  245.)  Heetingi  of  thia  kind  were
not  allowed  to  eontiat  of  more  than  thirty  peraoiu,
and  tbe  yvroAKoi'ifwt  had  the  right  to  ent^r  any
faoiUfl  and  Bead  away  all  the  gueata  abor«  Chat
number  j  and  that  they  might  be  able,  pnTkma  to
entering  a  boutc,  to  form  an  eitimats  of  the  num-
ber of  pertona  eatembled  in  i!,  cb«  cook*  wbo  wen


HALTERES.
nigigcd  fin'  tlig  oeoukm  lad  to  gire  in  their  mines
to  lbs  Tsvuicnnjfui.  (Athen.  L  e.)  Thaj  h*d
■1b  to  ptmi^  those  men  irho  showed  their  eSe-
BiMte  cDHBCter  hj  bwntic  or  inuDodenls  wiling
m  tbeir  own  or  other  penms'  aisAtftanBL  (Plut.
Lt.)  The  nimiber  of  tiuaa  officer*  is  nuknowiL
Heier  (AH,  Pne.  p.  97)  thiiiki  tlwt  the;  were
sBninted  bj  tot ;  but  Hennaon  {PotU.  Ant.
1 150.  D.G),  rFfeimg  to  Menuder  (Sitt.  da
Eamm.  bl  lOfi,  td.  HeemuX  reckon!  than  smong


H.

HABE'NAE  (4)'^  wen,  RenenU;  ipesking,
IcsllKm  iboDgs,  b;  meani  of  whkh  things  were
held  sod  mtiwged.  Hence  the  word  vai  in  nr-
liolsr^plied— I.Td  the  T«na  bjinmns  of  vhich
boies  were  gnided  and  musgcd.  (Virg.  Aen.  x.
i76,  li.  G7D,  765,  lil  S27.}  The  habense  were,
■i  »ith  m,  fixed  to  the  bit  or  bridls  (^^uavra).
!.  To  tlw  thongs  sUoched  to  >  bmca,  1^  which  it
vit  Iwld  and  wielded.  (Lnoui.  tL  221.)  [Com-
nnHA>T',p>£i8,s.]  3.  To  tbs  thoDg  which  was
bnwd  JDtD  B  iliag,  b;  meani  of  whicli  stones  were
Ihnvn.  (LuuLiiu  710  ;  Valer.  Flicc  t.  609.)
[Femda.]  4.  To  thongs  bj  means  of  which  the
■mdab  won  bitened  to  the  feet  (Qellios,  liiL
31.4.)  FreiD  thiapusBgeit  is  also  dear  Ehnt  the
hsbofts  in  this  case  ve»  not  slwajs  made  of
liatber,  bat  of  stiingi  or  chords,  whmcs  Gellias
raUi  ibem  (antes  laiaua.  6.  To  the  thoogt  formed
into  a  somrge  with  which  young  slaiei  were  chas-
listd.  (HonL  J^hK.  iL  3. 15.)  The  comnwata-
Imtsi  this  passage,  indeed,  differ  about  the  meaning
<i  haboiae  ;  bnt  if  wa  consider  the  expirasioos  of
I'lpian  (Dig.  S9.  tit,  5.  s.  33),  tn^nbru  serri
Imrri  batmim  tdad,  el  hAma  vilfirila  eatdi,  it  ii
ritarthil  the  habenaistlie  scomgeitselt  (Comp.
U>.  Heroid.  ii.  81  ;  Virg.  Aai.  TiL  380.)  [L.  S.J

HABITATIO. [SaaviTDTma.]

HAERBS. [Hnia.]

HALIA  (iAta). [AooBi.]

UAtMA  (SX/u). [FinraTULON.]

HALO-A  (iAia). [AloI.]

HALTBUBS  (iAnipit)  were  c«t»n  masses
•f  (Uue  or  melal,  which  were  nsed  in  the  gymnastic


R«cii«  of  the  Greeka  and  Romimi.  Penoni
whs  [iBctised  leaping  often  performed  their
cist*  vilii  balteit*  in  both  bands  ;  but  ibcj  were
also  biqiwDtlj  used  merely  to  exetiase  the  body


HARMAMAXA.  68S

the  Kune  manner  as  oar  dumb-bcUs.
(Martial,  xir.  *9,  Tii.  67.  6  j  Pollui,  iiL  15B,  i.
64  [  graett  buhkh.  Jot.  rii.  421 ;  Senec.  Ep.  16,
S6.)  PnOBniss  (t.  28.  §  3,  t,  27,  g  8,  vi,  S.  %  4)
■peaks  of  ceitam  statues  of  athletes  who  were  n~
prasanted  witli  halteres.  They  appear  to  have
been  mads  of  rariooi  fbms  and  hhs.  Tbo  pre-
coding  voodcnt  is  taken  from  Tsssie,  OUoJimwi,
&c  pL  46,  No.  7978.  (Mercurialis,  Di  Arit
Ofmiaitiea,  iL  19  ;  Becker,  QnflM,  roL  i  p.  277 ;
Kane,  Die  OymKuliiiaidAgomtiiidtrlliUaam,
ToL  i.  p.  i9S.)

HAHAXA(a^a).  [HAauAmiA  j  Plaub-

HAHAXO'PODES  (ii^o*6Sf!),  in  Uttn,
ARBUSCULAE,  appear  to  haye  been  cylindrical
pieeei  of  wood,  placed  rertically,  and  with  a  socket
cut  in  the  lower  end,  to  receive  the  nprigbt  pivot
fixed  above  a  wheel  or  above  the  middle  of  the
Bii^  of  a  pair  of  wheels,  which  could  thus  tnm
horiioDUlly  in  every  direction.  One  nse  of  this
sort  of  sodcBt  was  to  unite  the  oiii  of  the  fim-
wheels  of  a  chariot  to  the  body  (Follai,  L  144,
263;  Hesych.(.D.iMfTo3<i)i  another  useofil
ittach  the  wheels  of  a  lestndo  to  the  Eraming
a  manner,  that  the  machine  might  eotily
li  in  any  direction :  in  bet,  the  artHtaJa
and  the  wheel  together  formed  a  castor  or  univeraal
joint  (Vitniv.  X.  SO.  s.  14.  g  I,  ed.  Schneid.)
Newton  (ad  ioe.)  (npposea  that,  for  the  latter  pur-
poie,  a  smgle  piece  of  limber  would  be  both  clumiy
and  insufficient,  and  that  the  arbrntcmia  must  have
been  a  sort  i^  framing.  (See  hli  figure.  No.
114.)  [P.S.]

HARHA  (Sfiia).  [CcmBUB  ;  Hakmahaxa.]
HARHAMAXA  (if>>c<lp>t«)  ii  evidentt;  com-
pounded of  fyfULj  a  geneml  term,  including  not
only  the  Latin  Cnaaus,  but  other  deicriptiona  of
carriagcB  for  peraons ;  and  ^afo,  which  meant  a
cart,  baving  eomiuonly  four  wheels,  and  used  to
cany  loadi  or  burthens  as  well  a^  penwni.  (Hes.
■^  ^  Dia,  6B2  ;  Horn.  11  viL  426,  iiiv.  782.)
imamaxa  wbs  a  carriage  for  pertoDS,  in  its
ction  very  simihilo  the  Cahfxntuh,  being.
coreied  overhead  and  inclosed  with  curtains  (Died.
XL  66  j  Charito,  v.  2,  3),  so  as  to  be  used  at  night
ai  well  at  by  da;  (Xen.  (yvp.  iv.  2.  g  16)  ;  but
it  was  in  general  tat^,  often  dtawn  by  four  horses,
or  other  luitabte quadrupeds,  and attired  with

■ive,  and  in  the  Oriental  ilyle,  (Diod.  xvii.  3a  ;
AriltopL  Ackar.  70.)  It  occupied  among  the
Peniana  (Mai.  1^.  34)  the  ■■me  place  which  the
caipcntom  did  among  the  Romana,  being  used,
especially  upon  itala  occsuons,  for  the  conveyance
of  women  and  ehildren,Df  emi>icha,Bnd  of  the  aons
of  tfao  king  vhh  their  tntors.  (Herod,  vii,  83,  ix.
76iIen.Q(rop.iiLl.g8,  iv.  3.  S  1,  vi.  4.  g  llj
g.  Curt  iil  3.  3  23.)  Also,  as  peraona  might  lis
in  it  at  length,  and  it  was  made  as  commodtoiu  as
poeaible,  it  was  used  by  the  kings  of  Perain,  [ind
by  men  of  high  rank  in  travelling  by  night,  or  in
any  other  circumstances  when  they  wished  to  con-
sult their  ease  and  their  nleainrt^  (Herod,  rii.  41 ;
Xen.  CyTop.  iiL  1.  g  40.)

The  bod;  of  Alexander  the  Great  waa  trans-
ported from  B«b;lon  to  Alexandria  in  a  magnifi-
cent barmamaxB,  the  oonstruction  of  which  occupied
two  yean,  and  the  description  of  which,  with  its
^nCinga  and  ornaments  in  gold,  ailver,  and  ivory,
cDipIo^  the  poi  of  note  tlwn  <ne  hiatorian.


iBS  HARPAGINETULI,

(Diod.  rriii.  26—28  j  Athen.  t,  p.  208,  e ;  Aelian

y.  H.  iIL  04.)

The  hunuinuuB  wu  ocatimally  med  bf  thi
ladie)  of  Greece.  A  prietten  of  Diuia  ii  rsprs-
■ented  u  riding  in  one  which  •n  dnwn  by  twc
while  cowi  (Heliod,  A€&.  iii.  p.  138,  ed.  Com-
melini),  and  the  coini  of  Ephenu  ihoir,  th»t  thii
carriags,  probably  nmluniiig  alw  symboli  of  the
■ttributet  and  wonhip  of  Diuu,  added  to  tbe
iplendoui  of  th«  reUgimu  ptrxXBiiooi  in  that
city.  [J.  Y,]

HARMOSTAE  {from  »pid{ii,  to  fit  or  join  to-
wther)  waa  tha  nama  of  the  pkTemon  wham  tbe
LacedaoinoniBQi,  after  tb«  Peloponneiian  wu,  aent
into  tbeir  subject  ot  conqneied  towni,  partly  lo
keep  them  in  rabminian,  and  partly  to  aboliah  the
demoeratital  fbtni  of  goTarament,  and  eimbliih  in
ita  itead  one  fimilar  to  their  own.  (Diod.  Sic
Zir.  10  I  Xen.  Ildln.  \i.  S.  §  £  ;  laocrat.  Pmag.
p.  92  j  Suidai,  Heaych.  t,v.!  EtymoL  Mag.  i;  c.
£t-i(rra0^i.)  Although  in  many  caaea  tbey  wara
Ditenaibly  aent  for  tbe  porpoae  of  aboliibing  the
tyrannical  goTemnieiit  of  a  town,  and  to  leatwa
the  people  to  freedom,  yet  tfaey  tbemaelTaa  acted
like  kingi  or  tjiaata,  whence  Dionysiui  (.JaAi;,
Sum.  T.  p,  837.  Sylburg)  thinki  that  harinoalae
WBi  mecdy  another  name  bi  kin^  How  little
■incere  the  Lacedaemoniua  were  in  their  profea-
aiona  to  rutore  their  (abject  towni  to  freedom  wu
manifert  lAer  the  peace  of  Antalcidaa  1  for  although
thry  had  pledged  thenuelTci  lo  re-eitablisb  free
gavermuMita  in  the  varioua  towni,  yet  they  left
them  in  the  handi  of  the  hannotua.  (Polyb.  it.
27.)  The  character  of  their  rule  ia  lufficietitly  de-
■cribed  by  the  word  ««r<x"',  which  Iweratei  (t  e.)
and  Demoathene*  (Dt  Com».  p.  3S8>  uae  in  apeak-
ing  of  tha  hBrmoatae.  (CampBre  Demotth.  a.  Tlno-
(Tot  p.  740  ;  Plot  Namt.  Anat.  c  3.)  Even
Xenophon  (Di  Btp.  Lot.  c  14)  could  not  help  cen-
auring  the  Lacsdauoooiani  for  the  manoer  in  which
they  allowed  their  hanuoatae  to  gorem.

It  it  uncertain  how  long  tbe  office  of  an  har-
mottea  laated  ;  but  coniidetHng  that  a  goTcnior  of
the  aame  kind,  who  wu  appunled  bj  tha  Lacedae-
moniani  in  CytheiB,  with  the  tide  of  Cytherodicea,
held  bia  office  only  hr  one  year  (Thncyd.  it.  G3),
it  ii  not  improbable  that  the  office  of  baimoBtea  waa
of  the  Huue  dunUioa.  [L.  S.]

HARP  AGES  QRAPHB  (.kpinrfit  yr^).
Thia  action  aeema,  according  to  Looan  {Jvd.  Foe
c  1 .  tdI.  L  p.  82,  ed.  HemataEh.),  to  haie  been
applicable  to  ouea  of  open  robbery,  attended  with
violence.  Under  thete  circnmitaiicea  the  ofienden
would  be  included  in  tha  claat  of  Kiuiavfr/ai,  and
ai  aucb  be  tried  bef«e  a  conrt  under  the  con-
trol and  mutagement  of  the  Eleven.  With  reaped
10  the  pnniihment  upon  conTietion,  we  hare  no
certain  infbmiatiDn,  bat  theie  aeema  no  reaaon  to
doubt  that  H  waa  c&pilal,  aa  in  caaea  id  boiglaiy
and  Bleating  from  the  paraon.  (Xen.  Mam.  i.  2.
I  S-1.)  [J.  8.  M.]

IIARPAOINE'TULI,  a  lort  of  decwation  for
the  walla  and  ceilinga  of  Tooma,  tbua  mentioned  by
VitTUTiuB,  in  a  paiaaga  when  he  ia  Kptakmf  al
irregular  and  fimtaatic  oniamenla  (viL  6.  %  3),
'^jrra  eohuminfim  ttaduatMr  oiifmi^  pro  Joitigai
iarpagintiiili  ilriati  ava  crapit/oliittt  mbitu  tait-
tit,"  The  commanlama  bare  laboured  in  vain  lo
eipbun  the  term ;  and  it  ii  even  Teiy  doubtful
whether  the  rending  ii  correct.  Aa  the  word
■tandl,  it  aeema  to  nEtr  to  aome  lort  of  acroll-


HARUSPICES.
patl«m. (See  Schneider,  Newton,  and  the  other
commentatora  and  tiMtilatora,  I.  o.,  and  an  addition
by  BulcT  to  the  vtide  in  Foreellini) [P.  S.]

HA'RPAGO  (V»*)^:  >-™>:  ■v'ti™.  '«■».
Kptdypis)^  a  giappling-iron,  a  diag,  a  fleab-bool^
(£>.iiriL3;  I  SaTa.ii.  13,  U.  Sept.;  Ariatopb.
F*^.  1152;  Anaiippoa,iq>...4f'l«.iv.  p.  IG9.  b.)
The  iron-fingered  flwi-hook  (KfxJ'rpa  iriJii/ieSairru.
;^oi,  Bmn'^And.  iL  216)  ia  deKribedby  the  Scho-
liaat  on  Arialophanea  (£^  T68X  «  an  inatra-
niflnt  need  in  cookery,  reaembling  a  bond  with  the
Sngen  bent  inwaida,  uaed  te  take  boiled  meat  out
of  the  caldron,"  Four  apecimena  of  it,  in  bronze,
are  in  the  Britiah  Muaeum.  One  of  them  ia  here
tvpreaenled.  Into  ita  hollow  extremity  a  wooden
handle  wu  inKTled.


A  timilar  initmment,  or  eren  the  fleab-boak  it-

aclf  (Ariatopb.  Ealei.  994)  waa  uaed  to  dnw  op

paJI,  or  to  lecover  any  thing  which  had  fidlen

ito  a  well. (Heaychiua,  a.  vs.  Afiyq,  Kpniyfa,

In  war  the  grappling-iron,  thrown  al  an  menj'a
ahip,  leiaed  tbe  ngging,  and  waa  then  uaed  to  dn(
the  ihip  within  reach,  lo  that  it  might  be  eu)y
boarded  or  deetmyed.  (*A^a{,Allien.T.p.20a,d.)
Theag  inatrunieuu  appear  to  hare  been  much  the
he  nuMu/irmu  (mamafimaa  ajjwe  br-
,  .  .  Caea.  B.  C.  i.  S7;  Q.  Curt  ir.  9  ;  Dion
Cau.  xlii.  S,  t.  32,  34).  The  mauafimat  wen
impkyed  by  the  CoDaul  Dnilina  agaioat  ths  Car-
^h^iniana  ( Flor.  ii.  2  ;  Front.  Slrr^.  il  3.  S  24),
md  were  laid  to  baie  been  inroited  by  Peridcft,
(Piin.ff.A'.rii.ST.)  [J.Y.J

HARPASTUM  lapwertir  from  a^iiiim) waa

ball,  uaed  in  a  game  of  which  we  hsTe  do  ac-
irate  occonnt ;  but  it  appean  both  from  the  ety-
mology of  the  word  and  the  alatement  of  Oaten
(nefTfuitpai  SfoIfKU,  c.  3.  p.  903,  ed.  Kiifan),
II  waa  thrown  amonf  the  playen,  each  of
idearouied  to  obtain  poaif  ion  of  it.
(Comp.  Pollux,  iz.  10£,  106  ;  Atben.  i.  p.  14,  1)
Hrnce  MRrlial  (It.  19.  6)  apeaki  of  the  harpaila
piUvmdnda.  Tha  KSme  rsquind  a  gnat  deal  of
bodily  eiertioD.  (Martial,  liL  67.  4  ;  cranp.  xii,
4S.)  (See  Becker,  Gall*!,  ToL  L  p.  27S  ;  Kiaoaai.
Gftuiaitit  tuut  JgamtHi  d»r  HtUtmmt,  toL  i.  pa.
307,  30B.)

HARU  SPICES,  or  ABU'SPICES.  -wm
Boothaayen  or  diiineta,  who  interpreted  the  wit]
□F  tbe  goda.  They  ori^nally  came  to  Krana  fireia
Etruria,  whence  bunepicei  were  often  aent  for  by


n  important  a


the  Komoni  oi
3i  1  Cic.  a*  ii
the  hanupjcea  reaembled  in  many  re^acta  that  of
the  aogura  ;  bat  they  never  acquired  that  political
importance  which  the  latter  pcaaeaaed,  and  vpre
r^nrded  rather  aa  meant  for  aacerlainiug  the  will
of  the  goda  than  aa  poaaeaaing  any  rrligiaaa  autbo-
rity.  They  did  not  in  bet  form  any  part  of  the
eecleaiaitical  polity  of  the  Roman  atate  during  iha
republic  ;  tbey  are  never  called  ncerdotn,  ihej
did  not  fbnn  a  colli^um,  and  had  no  magialer  at
their  head. The  Mcounl  of  l>i(«ifiini  (ii,  23^


HAST  A.
tbH  tlu  himapice*  wen  invtitnted  bj  Rofnidnt,
lad  ibat  ■»  wbi  o1ioa«]  from  each  tribCt  ii  op<
poHd  Id  all  the  olJwr  uithoridca,  ud  ii  maoifefltij
unmet.  In  tfae  tune  of  iht  empenin,  we  nad
al  1  eoUegiDD  a  aider  <il  lizt]'  huiupicet  (Tkcit.
Aw^^lS;  OceUi,  /wr.  L  p.  399)  ;  but  the  lime
■rf  iu  isMitutiutt  ii  nDcenua.  It  haa  be«n  np-
fganl  timt  sieh  ■  colleginm  uuted  in  Ihe  time  of
Cinn,  lince  Tia  ipeKki  tj  a  nmuu  mapuier  {de
Dh.  iL  34)  ;  bat  b;  Ihia  wo  ue  Trobabl;  to  nn-
doitknd  not  s  magi^tr  aiUtgii,  bat  merely  the
BOM  tmiDBil  of  the  hunnicei  U  the  time.

Tb«  >H  of  the  hutiipieei,  which  wu  called
liifiifiii'iMri,  cRBiMed  in  exiduiiing  ind  interprel-
isg  the  will  of  the  goda  from  the  ^ipeanuca  <d'  the
amili  {iota)  of  umiuli  offered  in  niaificc,  whence
the^  ire  MoietinMa  otled  tttitpiea,  and  their  ut
ttfi'yiaM  (Cic  de  Du.  il  1 1  ;  Suet.  Ner.  £6) ;
ad  also  from  lightning,  eazthqiuke^  and  nil
eitnoidiDaiJ  pbenomena  in  nntur^  to  which  the
Jtotnl  ume  of  portmta  wai  giTen.  (V&ler.  Uu.
L  1. 1  1 .)  Their  ut  ii  nid  to  bare  been  iorented
k)>  Iht  Etnucan  Taget  (Cic.  iJa  i)^.  ii.  23  1  FeMni,
a  b  Tagm),  and  waa  coanined  in  csitain  boolu
called  libri  iiBnufMni,  fiilgvtiet,  and  tomibTuJit.
(Cit  dt  Div.  L  33  ;  oanpare  Uaciob.  SaiMm,  iii.

Thit  art  waa  coniidered  by  the  Romana  »  im-
pBtaal  at  one  time,  that  the  Mnate  decreed  that  a
tCTtaio  Dombtf  of  yoong  EOoacani,  bdonging  to
the  frindpal  bmiliei  us  the  itali,  ihoold  alwan
be  BBtmcted  in  it  {(Se.  dt  Die.  I  41.)  Nkbubr
fftta  to  be  miitalieD  in  mppoaing  the  pnew^  in

(Sea  Otelli,  ad  Iol)  The  aenBle  aometime*  con-
allrd  the  hamipicea  (Cic  da  Dh.  L  43,  ii.  35  ;
Uf.  xiiiL  37),  aa  did  alas  prints  pencma.  (Cic
^  Ab.  iL  29.)  In  taler  timei,  bowcTer,  their  art
Ul  lata  diirejiate  amcng  well-edncBled  Rotaaui ;
Bi4  Cian  <ib  Div.  iL  24)  lelatei  a  laTing  of
<^lgi  that  he  woodend  that  one  banupei  did  not
iHgh  when  be  aaw  another.  The  Empecoc  CUn-
^  attempted  to  renrs  the  itndj  of  the  art,
■hick  had  tboi  become  n^lected ;  and  Ihe  aenate.


what  paM  of  it  ahotdd

be  retuaed  and  eMabliahed  (TaciL  Aim,  a.  16) ;
^  n  do  Dot  know  what  e&et  Ihia  daoee  pn>-


The  name  of  bamvper _  _ ..

•Bf  kind  <k  BooChaajer  or  prophet  (Prop.  m.  li

"'--^-TB  Jnronal  (tLMO)  apoii  of


The  biier  part  of  the  word  hamapex  contaiiu
the  real  ifm:  and  Donatoa  (ad  Ttr.  Pkorm.  n.
*■  19)  dmrea  the  fonner  part  fnm  ianga,  a
'Kna.  Qmpaie  Feanu,  t.  r.  Haniga,  end  Varro,
^Z^£a<.T.  SB,ed.HUlltr.  (CJOttling,  OmiL
dtlt^.  Stantai.  p.213i  Walter,  Owl.  i<u  Aml
A>4^H143,770,2Dded.i  Bneooiua,  £■ /b)^
■*.  L  as,  Ac)

HASTA  (trxet,  ■wtKrit),  a  ipear.  The  ipear
■  defiDcd  b;  Homer,  Upr  x<iiu^t,  "  a  pole  fitted
•U  tooDM "  (A  (L  3),  and  Upv  %aXiv>tiftl,
'•palehaBT7withbr«naB-(M.iL  631).  The
InuE,  Cn  wbieh  iron  waa  aftcrwardi  anbiliuied,
*ia  iodiepeaaable  to  bsm  ths  poinl  (a/xfi4,  iimtcii,
"'■•'  i  *^Wti  Xanophon  ;  aciu,  empit,  tpicr-
W,  (hid,  MtL  TiiL  373)  of  the  apeat  Each  of
thoe  two  aaaunliiil  parta  ia  often  pnt  far  the  whole,
K  Ite  a  qear  M  tailed  ><^  and  tapilTw,  <il»4.


HASTA.  387

and  A^yxw-  E?en  the  more  ecpecial  term  fttXCo,
\  an  aah-trea,  ia  need  in  the  lome  manner,
the  pole  of  the  apear  waa  of^  the  alem  of  a
yoimg  aah,  tthpt  of  ita  bark  and  poliahad.  (/L  liz.
390,  zx.  377,  xiiL  S2S,  Od.  uiL  259  ;  Flin.
H.  jV.  ZTi.  24  J  Orid,  MtL  xii  369.)  Id  like
apeai  ia  deaignated  by  the  terra  in[fia(
(Aeich.  Ag.  65  ;  Enrip.  flea.  11S6,  Plaai.  1421  j
Brunck,.aiuJ:  i.  191.  32«  ;  Ant  Sid.  34),  meuiing
properly  the  itrong  (all  reed  of  the  aonth  of  Eunme,
which  tcrved  both  for  ipeara  and  for  Taiiooa  othef
)  SchoL  imloB.;  Xen.  d*  St


L12.)_


1  often  indoeed  i:i


Tbe  bottom  of  the  apear  wi
a  pointed  cap  of  btonie,  called  by  me  irauc  wnuin
•raoiwrvf  (Horn.  IL  z.  153  ;  Herod,  vii.  40,  41 ;
alio  Polyb.  iL  23),  and  oip(axu  (IL  liii.  443.
iii  612,  irii.  52S),  and  in  Attic  or  mmiian  Greek
■rrfiK-  (Xen.  Hdim.  tL  2.  |  IB  j  Athen.  liL  p.
514,  b  ;  -rrBfidjiuiy,  Thnc  iL  4  ;  Aan.  Tact  18.)'
By  ibrcin^  thii  into  the  gmimd  the  ipear  wai  Sied
erect.  (Vug.  An.  liL  130.)  Many  of  the  lancen
(Sopv^poi,  alji^iof-jfui,  ^Ay^n^pDi,  woodcut,  p.
237),  who  accompanied  the  king  of  Penio,  had,
inalead  of  tbia  apike  at  the  bottom  nf  their  apeara,
an  apple  or  a  pom^ranate,  either  gilt  or  ailiered,
(Herod. ;  Athen. ;  IL  tc)  With  thia,  or  a  limilar
ornament,  the  apear  i>  oflai  terminated  both  on
Pcraian  and  Egyptian  moniunenla.  Fig.  1.  in  the
annexed  woodcut  ahowa  the  lop  and  bottom  of  a
ipcar,  which  i>  held  by  ana  of  the  king*!  guardi  in
the  acolptnrea  at  Feraepolia.  (Sir  R.  K.  Porter's
TVonfi,  T(J.  i.  p.  601.)  It  may  be  compared  with
thoae  in  tbe  band  of  tbe  Qreek  warrior  at  p.  135,
which  hare  the  apike  at  the  bottom.  The  apike  at
the  bottom  of  Ihe  apear  wai  naed  in  fighting  by
the  Oreekt  and  Bomani,  when  the  bead  waa
broken  off. (Polyb.  ii.  26.)

A  well-finiahed  apear  waa  kept  in  a  caie  (topo-
reHini),  which,  cn  account  of  ita  form,  ia  tailed
by  Homer  a  pipe  (ffiprrf.  IL  lii.  387).

The  ijwar  wai  naed  aa  a  weapon  of  attack  in
three  different  waya :  —  1.  It  waa  thrown  fromcata-
pnlta  and  other  enginea  [TaBMiNTUH].  2.1twaa
throat  fonratdu  a  pike. In  thii  manner  Achillea


533  IIASTA.

wera  particularly  celebrated  ai  pihcmcn.  (Horn.
IL  ii.  543.)  3.  It  VM  eomnmnlj  Ihtown  by  the
hand.  The  Homeric  btto  generally  went  to  the
Md  witb  two  ipcon.  (Horn.  II.  uL  la,  x.  76,
lil  398  ;  Piad.  fyh.  W.  139.)  On  appnnching
ths  enemy  he  first  threw  either  one  ipear  or  both,
and  then  on  coming  to  doie  quaitera  drew  Mi
»«ard.  (Horn.  //.  iiL  340,  iviL  530,  a.  273—
281.)  The  ipeiiT  frequently  had  a  Icathenl  thong
tied  to  the  middle  of  tho  ibafl,  which  wu  called
iyic6\n  by  the  Oreeka,  and  anenliiiH  by  the
Romana,  and  which  wai  of  auittonce  in  throwing
theapear.  (Pollux,  L  13S;  SciitsL  ad  Earip,  Omt,
1477  !  Xen.  Jmi.  iy.  2.  §  28 ;  Virg.  Am.  it  S66  ;
Ov.  MiL  liL  331 ;  Cic  da  Orat  I  57.)  The  an-
nexed figure,  taken  IJam  Sir  W,  Hamiltan'a  Etrua-
ein  Vuet  (liL  pL  33),  repTetenU  the  amentum
allached  to  the  tpun  at  Ihe  centre  of  grBvitj,  a
little  abore  the  middle.


We  are  not  infirmed  hnw  tho  amentum  added
to  the  effecl  dF  throwing  the  lance  j  perhapa  it  K-ni
by  giving  it  rotation,  and  hence  a  greater  decree  of
Bicadineai  and  directneea  in  ita  Sight,  aa  m  the
wsc  of  a  ball,  abet  from  a  rifle-grin.  This  auppoai-
tion  both  niiti  the  expreuion*  relative  to  the  in-
arnion  of  the  Gngen,  and  accounU  for  the  frequent
me  of  the  Terb  (orjuero,  to  whirl,  or  twiat,  in  con-
nection with  thia  lubjeot.  Wo  also  find  mention
in  the  Latin  granimariaui  of  ffotfoe  otuoAie,  and
Enniua  apeoka  of  Aniaiii  concamua  mdiipic  lelit
(Macrob.  &it  vL  1).  The  an*,  was  ptnbably  the
Hime  HA  the  amentum,  and  was  so  called  oa  being
the  part  which  the  aoldier  kid  hold  of  in  bulling

Under  the  genera]  tcrma  iaila  and  (yx"'  ""^
included  Tarioua  kindi  of  miaaile^  of  which  the
principal  were  as  follow  ;  —

LoBcea  (AiSyXI,  h'cBttu,  i.  o.  Lancm),  the  lance,
a  compaiatiTely  slender  apeai  commonly  need  by
the  Greeks.  Iphicrates,  who  doubled  the  lengih
of  the  award  [Otinius],  aim  added  greailj  to  the
dimcuaiani  of  the  lance, (Uiod.  it.  4J  ;  Nep.


HASTA.
iL  1.  3.)  This  weapon  was  used  by  the  Greeba
honemon  (Polyh.  li.  23)  ;  and  by  means  of  in
appendage  to  it,  which  is  auppoed  by  Stoait  (Ail.
of  AOiaa,  vol  iii.  p.  47  \  troodcnt,  fig.  3)  to  be  ex-
hibited on  the  ihafta  of  three  apean  in  an  ancient
bas-relief,  they  mounted  their  horaca  with  gr-«ler
facility. (Xen.  it  Re  Eqiutt.  viL  lii.)

Hlun  {ixiai)\  the  javelin,  much  thicker  and
stronger  than  the  Orenan  lanes  (Flor.  iL  7),  as
may  be  aeen  on  comparing  the  woodcuts  at  pp.  135
and  J36.  Ita  shift,  often  made  of  cornel  (Vine.
Aea.  ii.  69S  ;  Ovid,  Mel.  Tiii  408),  waa  lour  stid
a  half  feet  (thiec  cubits)  long,  and  the  barbed  inm
head  waa  of  the  same  length,  but  this  extended
half  way  down  the  shaft,  to  which  it  was  altached
with  extreme  cart,  ao  that  the  whole  length  of
the  weapon  was  about  six  feet  nine  inches.  Each
soldier  carried  two.  (Polyb.  tL  23.)  [Exbrcituk,
p.  497,  a.]  It  wat  nsod  either  to  throw  or  to
thmst  with  ;  ic  was  peculiar  to  the  Ranmna,  and
gaio  the  name  of /nlon  to  the  diridon  of  the  amy
by  which  it  was  adopted.  When  Marina  fought
against  the  Cimbri,  he  ordered  that  of  the  two  noils
or  pina  {rtp6vat)  by  which  the  head  was  fastened
to  the  ata^  one  shoiild  be  of  iron  and  the  other  of
wood.  The  ctrascqnence  wai,  that,  when  the  pilum
struck  the  shielda  of  the  enemy,  the  wooden  nsit
broke,  and  as  the  inn  head  wat  thai  bent,  the  spenr,
owing  to  tho  twist  in  the  metal  part,  still  held  to  the
shield  and  ao  dragged  along  the  ground.  (PIuL
Mot.  2S.)

Whilat  the  heavy-armed  Roman  nldiera  bore
the  long  huice  and  the  thick  and  poodenus  javelin,
the  light-armed  used  amaller  misaiUa,  which,
though  of  diSbrenl  kinds,  were  included  ondei  ihe
gen^  term  liaitM  vttilara  (hiv.  xxxviiL  30;
Plin.  If.  N.  iiviiL  6).  From  -MJio^ioi,  the  tor-
responding  Greek  term  (Polyb.  i.  40  ;  Stnho,  it.
4.  g  3),  Ihe  vtlilet,  or  bgbt-armed,  are  called  br
Polybius  ifiir^iiixoi  ('i.  IS,  20).  According  lo
his  description  the  fpiaiiat  was  a  dart,  with  a
shaft  about  three  feet  long  and  an  inch  in  thick.
nras  ;  the  iron  head  was  a  span  long,  and  ao  thin
and  acuminated  as  to  be  bent  by  striking  againit
any  thing,  and  Ihua  rendered  unfit  Is  be  tent  back
against  the  enemy.  Fig.  3.  in  the  preceding  wood-
cut, shows  one  which  was  found,  with  nearlv  four
hundred  others,  in  a  Roman  entrenchment  at
Mean  Hill,  in  Qlouceslenhire.  (Skelton's  fi^rami
Ilhatmtiotii,  roL  L  pL  45.)

The  light  infantiy  of  the  Roman  army  asrd  a
similar  weapon,  colled  a  tpU  («ni,  rantew,  Lii.
xxi.  55  j  aaimor.  Died.  Sit  liv.  27  i  Featna,  m.  r.
tS(Biautei}.  It  waa  adopted  by  them  from  the
Samniles  (Vir^.  Aoi.  viL  G65),  and  the  Vol*:i
(Cnn?.  ii.  HJU)-  It>  abaft  was  3}  f^  long,  its
point  five  inches.  (Vegct  ii.  15.)  Fiff.  4,  in  the
preceding  woodcut,  represents  the  head  of  a  dart
in  tbeRoyalCollectionat  Naples  jit  may  be  taken
as  a  specimen  of  the  venitiiia,  and  may  be  con-
tiBsled  with  fig.  5,  which  is  the  head  of  a  lance  in
the  same  collection.  The  Romaua  adopted  in  tike
manner  the  gaattou,  which  was  properly  a  Celtic
weapon  (Liv.  ixviiL  45)  ;  it  was  given  as  a  reward
to  any  soldier  who  wounded  an  enemy.  (Polyb.
vi.  37.)  Spam  is  evidently  the  same  word  with
the  Engliib  spar  and  spear.  It  was  the  rudest
missile  of  the  whole  cjaas,  and  only  oied  wbra
better  coold  not  be  obtained.  (Virg.  Aai.  x\.  6«2  ,
Sen.  w  loc. !  Nepoi,  it.  ».  g  1  ;  tiallutt,  CW.  Ali ;
OelL  X  26.)


HASTA.

Ikndea  tbe  tenu  Jimhin  tnd  ^uk^os  (Imv,
irJrrur),  which  pnbably  deaolcd  daru,  nietn-
htiiift  in  form  the  lance  and  jaTelin,  but  moch
Bultcr,  adaptrd  eooKquentlf  to  the  light-ttnncd
(Jatmlalora),  and  nwd  in  hDnting  u  wait  aa  in
buile  (ThiKjd.  ii.  i ;  Vii^,  Aat,  ii.  53 ;  Serr.  in
he.;  OTid,  JtfutTiiL  411  ;  Cic  aJ  Fam.  t.  12;
Flor.  iL  7),  we  find  in  clauical  anthon  the  name*
tt  nrioiu  other  tpnra,  which  wore  characteiiiEic
tf  [urtknlBr  Datioui.  Thii>,8er<iiuMatei  (n^ei.
'ii.  66-4 ),  (hat,  at  the  pSum  wu  proper  to  tbe
Kmouu,  and  the  gaetum  to  the  Oada,  ao  the
Rrina  va*  the  ipear  peculiar  to  the  Hacedoniaiu.
Thia  wu  oied  both  to  throw  and  u  a  pike.  It
Finnled  in  length  all  other  mianlo.  [See  p.
188,  a.]  It  wai  made  of  cornel,  the  tall  denae
ttrm  of  which  alio  aerred  to  make  Bpwi  of  other
kinda.  (Theoph.  /f.  P.  iii.  IS.  2  ;  irdpHira,  Arrinn,
Ta^;icparitni,XeD.iilRiE^val.B.]A2.)  The
Tbiacian  rom;)^  whkh  bod  a  Teiy  long  point,
hkt  the  blade  of  ■  aword  (VaL  Flac  tL  98 ;
niapa,  GeO.  J.  e.;  ^sfifaJo,  Apoe.  i.  16),  WM  pro-
baUr  Dot  unlike  the  nriaia ;  unce  Utj  asaerta
(inii.  39),  that  in  a  eonntiy  partly  corered  with
*nd  the  Macedonian  phalaoi  waa  ineffectiTe  on
■rcoaot  of  their  praolomgae  iattat^  and  that  the
nnnphaeA  of  the  Thradaoi  »aa  a  hindrance  for  tbe
BBw  maon.  With  theaa  vcapeni  we  ma;  alio
cW  the  111  jrian  niora,  whicb  reaembled  a  banting-
pole,  (Feslua,  av. ;  riHRDr,  Pol;b.Tl  2li  «it«,
GtlL  L  e. :  Ant.  Sid.  1 3.)

The  ina  bead  of  the  Oeiman  apear,  called
Jnme\  wva  short  and  narrow,  hat  verj  iharp.
Tbe  German!  lued  it  with  gtcat  effect  nthcr  aa
■  lance  or  ■  pike :  the;  gave  to  each  jouth  a
hiDraandaabicldon  coining  of  age.  Cl^dC  Otmi.
K,  IS,  18,  24  i  Jut,  liii.  79.)  The  Falarua  or
Fhnlariat  waa  the  apcar  oFthe  Saguntinca,  and  was
impelled  bj  the  aid  of  twiited  npca  ;  it  wai  lane
and  pcodeToua,  baring  a  hcud  ofirco  a  cubit  in
Inigth,  and  a  ball  of  lad  at  ita  other  end  ;  it  aome-
tinn  carried  flaming  pitch  and  tow.  (Liv.  xii.  G,
luiT.  IS;  V[ig.^».Li.r06iLncaii,Tl  198;  Sil
lul  i  351  ;  Gell,  L  e. ;  Itid.  Orig.  iriii,  7  j  Grot.
Tti^  Cgmg.  H2.)  The  moAiri  and  (n^a^  were
chieflj  nacd  in  Qau3  and  Spain :  the  tiagnia  was
ptBhabl  J  barbed,  a*  it  required  to  be  cat  out  of  the
weond.  (Plaut  Cat.  a.  4.  18,  ^M.  T.  S.  25  ;
Caia.  B.  a.  i.  26,  y.  36  ;  GelL  L  c)  The  Ada
aal  Calria  were  much  imaller  miwilei.  (Viig,
Jn.  Tii.730,741,)

Ammg  the  dnsratiimj  which  the  Roman  gene-
■all  bealowed  on  their  •oldiera,  more  eipecially  for
MTiBg  the  life  tt  a  feliow-eiii^en,  wai  a  ipear
vittMit  a  bead,  tailed  fcutupuni.  {Vir^.  Aai.  vi.
760  ;  ScTT.  U  tec  ;  FeKna,  t.  v.  Halta  .-  Sueton.
'T™t  28  ;  Tacit  J«.  iiL  21.)  The  gifl  of  it  i*
■metiinea  recorded  in  funeml  inacnptiona.

The  edSbarit  hatla  (Feitiii,  a  e.),  haiiofi  been
filed  into  the  body  of  a  gladiator  Ijing  dead  OD
the  areua,  wai  ni^  at  marTia|:|n  to  part  tho  hair
of  the  bride. (Orid, /'cut.  iL  £60.)

A  Ipear  waa  erected  a>  aoctioni  [AVCTIO],  and
■hen  teoden  were  reeeired  for  public  offices  (ikn-
(uaa).  It  asred  both  to  anaimnce,  by  a  conven-
tiaaa]  dgn  conipicuoui  at  a  diilance,  that  a  lalo
area  ginn^  on,  and  to  ihow  that  it  waa  conducted
aider  the  aothoritT  of  the  public  functionariei.
(Cic  Ogie.  il  8  ;  Nep<M,  AtSo.  6  ;  Fettui,  a  c.
Haila.)  Hence  an  aoctioii  waa  called  iatla,  and
an  netka-room  kulariuM. (Tertull.  ApoL  13.)


HECTE.  £89

It  wni  ales  the  pnctice  to  aet  np  a  tpear  in  the
court  of  the  Cintumviiu.

The  tfanwing  of  ipeon  (htarrtffp^t)  wai  one  of
le  fymnaitic  ezereiKa  of  the  Oreekt,  and  ii  de-
■cribed  at  length  by  Ktauia  {Gymmutik  tmd  Ayim-
imidtr  HeUaum,  tdL  L  p.  46G,  Ac).  [J.  Y.]

HASTA'TL  [E^«I^c^rD^pp.494— 496,501,
SOS.)

HECATOMBAEA. [H»*«*.]

UECATOHBAEON.  [CaimMDAfeiDM,

Qbsis.]

HECATOMBE. [SACBincimi.l

HECATOMPEDON. [Pm  ;  Tmnpii.]

HECATOSTE  ((mtoottS). [FiNTB»n^1

HECTE  or  HECTEUS  (Ian),  limi,),  and
iti  haU^  /foBKidDa  or  /leniitcSerm  {iifdiKtor,  %»•*-
T4ot\  are  tenna  which  occur,  in  mora  than  one
leote,  in  the  Greek  metrical  tyitem,  and  are  intei-
tniag  DU  account  of  the  eumptea  they  famiab  of
the  duodecimal  diviiiDiL

1.  In  dry  meaauret,  the  iactau  waa  tbe  aiith
part  of  tbe  medam**,  and  tbe  iAataateat,  of  couree,
the  twelfth  jart  (Ariltnpfa.  EecL  547,  ffab.  63B,
645.)  The  tecfou  waa  eqnal  to  the  Roman  laodta^
Bi  each  contained  16  {^o-riu  or  nxtaiii.  (Bfickh,
MelTvl.  UiUenuoh.  pp.  33,  200.)

S.  The  Hecte  or  Htdtui  and  Ha
the  namei  of  coina,  but  the  accoimta  we  hare  of
their  ralna  are  lery  Tariona.  The  only  conaiiteDt
eipbmation  ia,  that  there  were  difleiest  itgcAie,  de-
rived from  diSerent  muM  ;  in  fact,  that  theae  coina

fftnnau  of  the  recognia

Tiew  ia  confirmed  by  the  itateinen

that  the  wordi  lier^,  fflrTi,  and  rrtifm)  w

plied  to  coina  of  gold,  lilver,  and  copper ;  that  i%

were  ■ubdinded  for  eonTenienca  into  thirdi,  (aarthi,
and  iLxthi,  which  would  be  of  gold,  ailTer,  and
copper,  according  to  the  Tahie  of  th^  leapeetiTe
imlti.  (Heajrclut.e.  fmi.)  Now,aincatbednchma
wai  the  unit  of  the  lOier  eainagea,  which  chiefly
prevailed  in  Greece,  we  micht  e^«ct,  d  priori^
that  the  common  ItBtau  would  be  the  tixth  of  a
dmchma,  that  ia,  an  obol ;  and  that  there  wai
luch  a  iiclau,  ii  oxpreuly  itated  by  Heaychiua,
whogivee  ^^ittf /\(co' ai  the  equiralent  t^iffiiturar
(f.t^).  But  then  from  a  paiaage  of  the  comic  poet
Ctalee  (Pollux,  ix.  374),  we  learn  that  the
Aemiedim  of  gold  waa  eight  obola,  the  natural  in-
terpretation of  which  ia,  diat  it  «aa  mai  ta  valaa
to  tijfil  liher  obol$  or  (aeomdins  to  Mr.  Huaiey'a
computation  of  the  drachma),  a  little  more  than  ISd^
which  ii  cratainly  a  Tery  imaU  value  tia  a  gtdd
coin.  Thii  abjection  BSckh  meet*  by  luppaiing
that  the  gold  had  a  Tery  la^re  mixtore  of  alloy  ;
and  the  probability  of  thia  will  appor  fartherpn-
aently.  Thii  itatet  conld  not  have  been  an  AUio
coin,  for  at  that  time  Athena  had  no  gold  money :
the  queitiou  therefore  ariiet,  to  what  foreign  ttate
did  it  belong  ?  Now,  among  the  foreign  ttalera,
which  were  current  at  Atbeui  in  tbe  iiftb  century
B.  c.,  that  of  Pbocsfs  ia  freqaently  mentioDed,  and
an  inecriptioD  eiitti  (found  in  Uie  Acropalii)  iif
which,  amonr  certain  ofieringi,  we  find  Pioeataa
laUn,  and  Ixrw  *<Mia»<i  (Btlckh,  Carp.  Ivor.
No.  150,  lina  41,  43,  vol  L  pp.231,  336.  g$  19,
2S:  the  haitf  conjecture  that  theae  irroi  muat  bare
been  of  n^orr,  ii  corrected  by  Bikkb  himaelf^  in
hit  MarologitcAe  UnlamdLum/at,  p.  1 36).  Litde
doubt  can  reraaiu  that  tbcM  licrai  were  the  axlk.


£90  HELEPOLIS.

ud  the  kstiecla  of  Cimle*  the  tiail/Si  of  tfae  Pho-
cHHiitatac.  Tbe  weight  of  the  ik«>i«taiwait!d  be
a  little  tea  than  thmt  of  the  Attie  oW  ;  end  their
value  would  ibenlbn  giro  b  nlio  of  gold  to  oItb,
M  8  to  1,  a  low  nJiia  for  gold,  it  ii  true,  but  oue
ottilf  explained  by  tbe  &ct,  ccnjectond  bjBtfckh,
•nd  diituKtlj  Mated  by  H»jdiia«  ($.  v.  ^Mcaft),
that  the  Phocaeui  goldmiHiey  wu  Tcry  bate  :  Ibii
bet  alio  will  explain  the  light  weight  of  the  coin
at  compand  with  the  Attic  oboL  The  leinlt  of
this  lomewhat  intciale  diacuuioo  Kemi  to  di  both
clear  and  cotuiitcut:  nuoel}-,  that  the  iludard
vm^  tk*  itp«j-Kin»^  wu  diiidod,  on  the  duodeci-
mal  (jaUm,  iuto  tiMi  {irriu  di  MoAoi),  and
beelfUi,  ili^irra :  that  Atheni  had  a/vcr  coin*  of
them  weighti :  aod  that,  in  thoe  itatei  which
Died  a  gold  minage,  of  which  the  nnh  waa  a  Motir
eqaal  (generally)  «  aaffkl  to  too  ^malntH  and  h
value  to  tumdy^  Qom  Itatar  wai  lubjected  to  a  limi-
lar  daodecimal  diniion,  by  which  the  lixlk  (Ikti)
or  ficnut)  became  »  m^it  a  piece  of  too  oAu^
and  the  ta^ik  (^filwrn')  a  pwea  of  one  oio^
The  vabm  of  theie  coin*  (a(n>r£ng  to  the  aftnos
ratio  of  the  value  of  gold  to  that  A  ail  far,  namely
10  :  1)  would  have  been  20  oAo^  and  10  oMt  re-
ipectirely  \  bnt  thoie  of  Phooea  were  lo  light  and
debawd,  llul  Ihar  wen  onlj  wotth  16  and  8  reqiec-
tirelf  of  the  oboli  of  Athedi,  whole  coinage  w»
pnTctbially  pun.  [P-S-I

HECT£U^0'R1I  (tKTiipifioi),  a  name  girea
to  tbe  poo  citiuna  sf  Anica  bofoie  the  lima  of
Solon,  who  enltlTatcd  the  fieldi  of  tba  lioh  and
leoeiTed  only  a  «uii  pait  (hcooe  tbelr  name)  of
the  jvodnee.  (Heiych.  ac.  limiftipM  ;  Eiuiath.
adjoin.  Od.  xii.  28.  p.  G80. 4»,  ed.  Baail.  p.  ISU,
ed.  Rom.)  Platarah  (Jbioa,  13)  •eeini  to  have
made  a  miitake  in  ata^ng  that  they  paid  a  uith
pifftion  to  their  maiten,  and  retaiiied  five-iia^
themielTeft.  (Comp.  SchUoiann,  Da  Camitiia^
p.  3G-2,  Aatiti.  Jur.  PiM.  Oraee.  ^  169  ;  Heimuin,
Ukrbiui  i.  Griach.  Staaiialltrtli.  S  101,  n.  10.)

HEDNA(ti™). [Dob.]

HEOEMO'NIADICASTK'RIOU  (irrv^ria
tiniiTTt)pIin>). [Eiiaoooiik}

HEOETO'RIA. [Pltntibia.]

HEIROHOU  ORAPHE'  {ilpriuS  ypapi).
Tbi*  wan  an  action  for  fitlie  impriaonment  of  a  free
dtiun  or  Mianger,  and  keeping  nieh  penon  in
private  cnstody.  There  are  no  otatioDi  upon  thii
Rubject  enant,  nor  indeed  any  direct  alliuimu  to
it  by  name  j  but  it  ia  hinted  at  ai  a  nmedy  that
might  have  been  adapted by  Agatliaichui, the

Eiinter,  for  the  natiaint  pat  upon  hii  peivmil
betty  by  Alubiadei  (Aodoc  c^ib.  p.  119) ;  and
in  a  paiBga  of  Deinaichui  (n.  Dim.  17),  where  a
miller  ii  mentioned  to  have  incnired  apital  pnuiib'
iDCnt  Ibr  a  like  ofiimce.  The  theamotbetae  pre-
bably  prcaided  in  the  contt  before  which  oBenden
of  thii  kind  wen  brought  to  tttaL  (Meier,  Ati.
Pnie.p.832.)  [J.S.M.]

HELlfPOLIS  (b4n\u). When  Demetriui
Potiorcetta  beeieged  Sahunit,  in  Cypnu,  be  earned
"  le  to  be  eaulrueted,  which  he  called  "  the


luC:


a  that  of  a


tower,  eacb  lide  being  90  cobiti  high  and  4fi  wide.
It  relied  on  ioDr  wheels  each  eight  oibile  high.
It  wu  divided  into  nine  itariei,  the  lower  of
which  contained  machinet  for  thrawini  gnat
atonei,  the  middle  Urge  cat^mlla  for  Uirowing
■pcaia,  and  the  bigheat,  other  machine*  for  throwing
•inalier  (tones,  togatbw  witk  amallar  calapalla


HELLENOTAMIAE.
It  waa  manned  with  200  aoldien,  beaidta  tlieae
who  moved  it  by  puahing  the  panllel  beama  at  ilw
bottom. (Mod.  II.  *8.)

At  tba  ueae  of  Rfaodeo,  B.  c.  SOfi,  Demetrina
employed  an  Wepolia  id  atill  greater  dimenaiona
and  mere  eomfdicated  cmatnictjaa.  Btiidaa  wbeela
it  bad  aatoia  (dfrHTrp^irTa),  ao  aa  to  admit  of
being  moved  laterally  aa  wdl  aa  directly.  Ita
hnn  waa  pynmidaL  The  three  aides  wbica  wei«
expoaed  to  attack,  were  rendend  Gre-praof  17
being  cava«d  wiUi  imn  platei.  In  front  eat^
itoiy  hod  port-bdca,  whicli  wen  adapted  to  the
KT«al  kindi  of  miiailtt,  and  wei*  luiTiialiad  with
ahotteii  that  amid  be  opened  or  daaed  at  pleaanre,
and  were  made  of  ikmi  ataffed  with  woot  Each
Btary  had  two  broad  Sighia  of  tiepi,  the  me  In
aacending,  the  othti  for  dcacending.  (Diod.  n.  9 1  ;
compare  Vitniv.  x.  2S.)  Tbia  helepolii  waa  coo-
•tnicied  by  Epunachoi  the  Athenian  ;  and  a  much
eateoned  deaoiption  of  it  wu  written  by  Dioeclidca
ofAbdeia.  (Atheo.  v.  p.  206,  d.}  It  nine  doubt
^le  gnateit  and  meat  lemaifcable  mgineof  the  kind
that  wu  ever  encted.  In  aubaeqnent  agea  we
find  tbe  name  of  "  helepaiia  "  applied  to  moving
towera  which  canied  battering  rama,  u  wpll  aa
mochinea  tar  throwing  Mften  and  itonei.  (Amm.
MaicdL  uiiL  ;  Agathiaa,  i.  18.  p.  30,  ed.  Ven.  ;
Nicet  CboD.  Jo.  Oommtma,  p.  U,  b.)  Towna
of  thii  deaoiptioa  were  noed  to  desttoy  the  walla
of  Jenulem,  when  it  wu  taken  tn  the  Roman*.
(Joa  £.  ^.  IL  19. 1  9,  iii.  6. 1  2.)  [AktM  ;  Tob<

VINTUM.]  (J.  Y.)

HELIAEA. [DiuanaiOH.]
HKLIOCAHI'NUS. [DoMim,  p  433,  k]
HELIX  (tAi{),  anything  of  a  apiial  fiinn,  whether

in  one  plane,  u  the  apinl  cnne,  oc  in  difioicnt

planeo,  aa  tba  aoew.

1 .  In  anhitectnre,  the  aiHial  vololea  of  the  lonie
and  Corinthian  capitala.  The  Roman  aiehilecta,
while  they  ued  the  word  minioB  for  the  angular
apirala,  ntained  the  tenn  tdiea  fbr  ^e  amaller
■pinli  in  tbe  middle  of  each  &ce  uf  the  Corinthian
capital (Vitniv.  It.  I.  g  IS.)

2.  In  mechaniei,  the  word  dcugnatet  the  soew
in  ita  varioua  appliotiona  (  but  iu  chief  nae  waa
to  deaccibe  a  machine  oaed  for  pnabin^  ot  dnwlng
abipa  in  the  water  from  the  baaeh,  which  wa*  Hid
to  have  been  invented  by  Archimedea  (Aihen.  v.
p.  207,  a,  with  Caaanbon^  NoIm.)  [P.  8.]

HELLANO'DICAE  ('EAXanKcw),tbeJQdgca
in  the  Olympic  gnmei,  of  whom  on  acoaunt  ia
given  under  Olvmpu.  The  mat  name  waa  alao
given  to  the  judga  01  eouit-martial  ia  the  Lace-
daemonian anny  (Xen.  Bip.  Lac  liii.  II)  ;  and
they  were  prebabl;  fiiat  tailed  by  thia  imme
when  Spuia  «u  at  the  head  of  the  Qreek  oon-

HELLENOTA'MIAE  (X<LAi(»nvJ<u},  «
tieaaurtra  of  the  Greeka,  wers  magialiatea  ap-
pointed by  the  Atheniana  to  receive  the  cvotriha-
tiona  of  the  allied  ilates.  They  were  fint  onMinted
B.  c.  477,  when  Athena,  in  cenie<)uimca  of  the
conduct  of  Paoianiaa,  had  obtained  the  (Dmcnand
of  the  allied  itatea.  The  money  faid  by  tbe  dif-
ferent itatea,  which  wu  crigiiully  fixed  at  460
talentt,  wu  depealled  in  IMoa,  which  waa  the
place  of  meeting  for  tbe  diacnaaiNi  of  all  commoo
inlertata ;  and  thne  out  be  no  doubt  that  the
hellenotamiae  not  only  received,  bnt  were  aim  the
guardiana  of  theie  moniea,  which  were  called  by
Xenophon  (A  Vk^.  v.  S)  '£AAwvv<¥^ (Thoc-


HELOTES.
i.Mi  PliiuJ™(ii24j  Aiidot(fcPo»,p.i07.)
Tbfl  office  wu  ntained  oAer  the  tnaBuiT  wu
trudemd  to  Athsni  od  the  proponl  of  the  Sa-
nkiii  (Pint.  Arilid.  25  ;  Diod.  lil  38),  but
wu  «f  caniH  abaliihed  on  ihg  conqocat  ol  Athou
b;  (be  LandBOiKiiiiuii.  Ths  HellniDtwniu  wen
kot  Tam>Miii*d  ■Act  Ik*  totCDtiaii  of  the  damo-
aacy ;  nr  whicb  mwa  the  grmmunBiii  aSori
u  littb  inlDniwtion  rapectia^  tbeir  dulisi.
BSckk,  bowcTcr,  eonclndei  from  iiiKnptuuu  that
thfT  wFn  {Bvhiblj  ten  in  aninber,  choMn  b;  tot,
like  ibemamnnof  thegodi,  Du^ofthe  Pentaco-
■ioDedimiii,  and  Ibat  they  did  not  erler  npon  their
iffiM  at  tbe  beginniiig  of  the  jear,  but  after  the
Puuhtoara  and  the  Bin  Pijlaneia.  Witbrqtard
toth^  dntiea,  BSckh  mppoaea  tiut  thef  remimrd
tnamren  of  the  moniei  collected  fiom  the  aUiei,
ud  that  payment!  for  certain  objecti  wen  awigned
ta  ikem.  In  the  fint  place  the;  would  of  conna
fay  tke  eipcnaea  of  wan  in  the  common  caoie,  bi
thtcontiihiitkiiu  wen  (viginally  deaigned  for  that
pDfow  ;  but  ai  the  Atheaiani  in  conne  of  tiraa
DBidcfed  tbe  money  aa  their  own  property,  the


...  ,  ,  the  Theonca  and  mill
tBT  expenaea  not  caaaecled  with  wan  on  behal
te  the  ceoimm  canaa.  (B«cUi.  PM.  Beam.  (jT
dUni,  p.  1 76,  Sod  ed. ;  Corp.  Inter^.  No.  147.)

HELLOTIA. (ELUma.]

HBLO'TES  (ESuiTf  I,  the  I^tia  form  Ilotaa  ii
•Us  ned.  Lit.  xxxir.  37),  were  a  claaa  of  bond*-
ma  lahject  to  Sparta.  The  whole  of  the  inhabit-
■Dtt  if  Idccoia  were  ioelnded  in  the  three  clanaa
•f  ^aitma,  Perioeci,  and  Helota,  of  whom  the
Hik»M  wen  tbe  loweet  They  ^raitA  tbe  nutic
pcfolatioo,  aa  diilLnguiahed  both  from  the  inhabit-
BU  of  Snrta  itael^  and  iroin  the  Perioeci  who
dwdt  in  tha  laigB  towna.  (Lit.  L  a.)  Their  con-
diiian  waa  that  of  Mtb  attached  to  the  land,  ad-
KrifiligUat  J  and  they  appear  to  hsTe  been  the  only
daaofitaTcaanMOi^thol^cadaenKnuani.  DitTbrent
ttynokgiaa  an  pvan  of  their  uaioe.  The  eommim
■anmt  i^  that  they  were  oitginally  the  Aehanut
iihalnliata  of  the  town  of  Heloi  in  Laconia,  who,
baling  been  the  laitto  mtHaitlo  the  Dorian  inTadeia,
anl  that  only  aftera  de^erate  ttmggle,  were  redoced
bjtheTictintoBbTery.  (PBni.iii.2a.g  6,  Harpocr.
Lo.  tlXirrtitir,  who  eltei  Hellamcoa  aa  hit  autho-
rity). Aanths  acemuit,  preaerred.  by  Athemeiu
bug  Tbeopompoa,  lepiaenta  diem  aa  the  geneal
body  of  the  aoeient  Achaean popolatigD  of  lAcenia,
ndaoed  to  alBTeiy  ^  ^  Denana,  like  tlw  Peneatae
JaTbMlj.  (Ath.n.p.2Se,c>  Theitatement
il  Ephorui,  apun,  prtaerred  by  Stmbo,  haa  aome-
thhf  in  coDUiun  with  both  the  other  itoriei ;  for,
acoadiiu  to  it,  tbe  origiml  inhubitanta  of  the
aamtiy,  when  inbdued  by  the  Dorians,  were  at
finl  permitted  to  enjoy  an  eqnality  of  citil  and
palittBl  rigfata  with  their  cmqneion,  aad  uvra
aWW  £M^ ;  bat  they  wen  depared  of  their
f^aal  dataa  by  Agia,  the  khi  of  Eitryithenea,  who
Bade  than  [sy  tribnte :  thia  decree  waa  reaiited
mly  by  the  people  of  Haloa  CE^*i«  <>'  (x"""  ^^
"EhM),  who  rebelled  and  were  reduced  to  ihiTery
Bater  certain  ciniditiona.  (Stmb.  liiL  f.  36£.)
Mow,  aU  theie  theuita  (for  tuch  they  are)  reat  on
tbe  donbtfid  (bandatian  i^  the  historical  truth  of  the
dnanataikcea  attending  the  Dorian  inToaioD,  and
the  "-fTlwn  of  the  name  with  Heloa  ia  not  only
a  »■— ti^Tt  ioTcntisn,  afoettd  to  the  beat  autho-
—  "ph.  U.  «,),  but  ia otjmolo-


nties  (Theopomp.  Eph.  U.  oc),  bnl
giodly  Eanl^,  for  ue  pooplo  of  *f


591

called  ElXirru,  bat  'BJctTw  <Strab.  le.)  or  'EAaiL
r«  (Athen.  Ti  p.  371).  The  name  haa  been
alia  deriTcd  btaa  tXq,  Ka'riaa,  aa  if  it  aignified
Mabilix^  if  tit  laalamli.  Bot  Uiiller  aeema  to
b«  nearer  the  maA  in  eiplajning  cI>Art  j  ai  mean-
ing pritomen,  from  the  root  of  IxtTr,  to  leit,  like
i/wti  from  the  root  of  taiiiit.  He  aappoaea  that
they  were  an  abcriginal  race,  who  were  lubdned  at
a  Teiy  early  period,  and  who  naturally  paaied  oret
aa  alaTCB  to  the  Doric  conqoerora.  It  ia  objected
by  Thirlwall  that  thii  theory  doea  not  account  for
the  hereditary  emuitf  between  them  and  dieii
msttera  ;  for  unleaa  they  toat  thrir  liberty  by  the
Dorian  oonqoeit,  (here  ia  no  probability  tlwt  it
placed  them  in  B  wette  condition  than  ba^ice.  But
to  thii  objection,  wo  may  miaaa  the  acute  obaerr-
Btiou  of  Qnte,  that  thoae  dangen  fkvn  tbo  aenile
popolatiaD,  the  dread  of  which  ia  the  <aily  pfobabie
canae  that  can  be  aaaigned  for  the  ovdty  of  dis
Spartana,  and  the  consequent  reaentmeDt  of  the
Helota,  "did  not  became  aerioua  until  after  the
MeaaeniBo  war — nor  indeed  until  afta  the  gradual
diminution  of  the  number  of  Spartan  ciUaena  had
made  itself  felL"

At  the  end  ef  the  aecond  MeaMnian  war  (n,  c
666),  the  conquered  Heanniana  were  redoced  to
alaTery,  and  included  onder  the  denomination  of  *
Helota.  Their  condition  appcora  to  hare  been  the
■me,  with  some  slight  diSerences,  as  that  of  the
othet  Hehita  Bnt,  in  addition  to  that  remem-
brance of  their  freedom,  which  made  not  only  them,
bat,  through  their  influence,  the  whole  dasa  of
Helota  more  and  more  dangerous  to  their  nuatera,
they  preaerred  the  recollection  of  their  nadonal  ex-
istence, and  were  ready  b>  aeiie  any  opportunity  of
regaining  it ;  until,  at  length,  the  policy  of  Epami-
nondaa,  after  the  battle  of  Leuctia,  reatoted  the
main  body  of  tbeae  Mesaenian  Helots  to  their
coimtiy,  where  they  no  doubt  formed  the  chief  part
of  the  pnnilation  of  the  new  ci^  of  Menene.
(Thirlwall, /rti<.o/C«aii!,ToLT.  pp.  104,  105.)

Tho  Helots  were  regarded  as  the  property  of  the
state,  which,  while  it  gaTe  their  iemcea  to  indiTi-
doals,  reserred  to  itself  the  power  of  emancipatii^
ihem.  (Ephonia,flp.*(ra4.£e.iPana.i.c.j  They
were  attached  to  the  land,  and  could  not  be  aold
away  &<Ean  it.  BeTeral  famiiiaj^  as  many  periiapa
aa  aiz  or  aaren,  resided  on  each  nA^poi,  in  dweu-
ings  of  their  own,  either  in  detached  fiirms  or  in
TiUagea.  They  cultiiated  the  Imd  and  paid  to
their  msatera  ai  rent  a  fixed  meoimiv  of  comi  the
exact  amount  of  which  had  been  fixed  at  a  Tery
early  period,  the  raising  of  that  amount  being  for-
biddeu  under  heaTyimpracatione.  {2ha.  IumL  Lae.
p.  256.)  The  annual  rent  paid  for  each  cAn^i
was  eighty-two  medinmi  of  barley,  and  a  [sopor-
tiooate  quantity  of  oil  and  wine.  (Pint.  Lgo.  6.
24.).  The  domestic  aenanu  of  the  Spartana  wen
all  Helota.  Theyattended  on  their  tnaateraat  tbe
public  meal ;  and  many  of  them  wen  no  doubt
employed  by  the  atate  in  public  works.

in  war  Uie  Helots  served  at  light-armed  troopa
(^lAiH),  a  certain  number  of  them  at(ending  every
heavy-armed  Spartan  to  the  field  }  at  the  tattle  i^
Plalaeae,  then  were  seven  Helota  to  each  Spar-
tan, and  one  fa>  every  hoplile  of  the  Perioeci,
(Herod,  ii.  10.  28.)  These  attendaats  wen  pro-
b^y  called  i^itlTK^i  (L  t,  i^lrmu-rit,  Heaych.
(.  «.),  and  one  of  them  in  particular,  the  AfpiTm,
or  lenamt  (Herod.  >iL  229  j  Sturr,  Ltie.  Xen.  a.  v.) ;
though  ftip^rar  was  alio  Died  bv  the  Dmu  as


692  HELOTES.

I  general  name  for  Bimed  ilsTes.  The  HcldM  onl;
fterT«d  tu  boplitei  in  particular  emergenciej  ;  and
on  tuch  occoiioni  they  prere  generally  emoacipated,
if  they  (hawed  diitiiiKDiihcd  biBTery.  The  £nt
initoice  of  thia  kind  woi  in  the  expedition  of  Bia-
iidM,B,c.424. (ThoCTd.  IT.  80,  T.  S4,  Til  19.)

The  treatment  to  which  the  Helota  were  BuV
jocled,  u  denTibed  by  the  later  Greek  writers,  ii
marked  by  the  m«l  mnton  cruelty.  Thai  Myron
■lata  that  "  the  Spartan*  impoie  upon  them  ereiy
ignDrainionl  tervice,  for  they  compel  them  to  weir
B  cap  of  dog*!  ikin,  and  to  be  clothed  with  a  gar-
ment of  iheep't  akin,  and  to  hare  Mripei  indicted
upon  them  erery  year  for  no  fonlt,  that  they  may
ncTFr  forget  that  they  an  ilarei.  And  hetidot  all
thii,  if  any  riw  by  their  qnalitiei  aboTs  the  condi-
tion of  ■  ilare,  they  BjRminl  death  la  the  penalty,
and  their  maiterg  ore  liable  to  puniihraenC  if  they
do  not  deitroy  the  moit  excellent."  (Athen.  lir.
p.  657.)  And  Plutarch  {Lfc.  2B)  itatu  that  He-
loU  were  forced  to  intoiicate  thcmielTei,  and  per-
form indecent  doocei  ai  ■  warning  to  Iho  Spartan
youth.  Theia  italctoeali  miut  be  received  with
•ome  caulioo.  There  ii  no  eridence  that  they  are
true  of  the  period  before  the  Meiaenian  van  ;  nor
can  we  belicre  that  nch  wanton  and  impolitic  op-
preMioM,  provDca^ona,  and  deitmction  of  a  Talu-
able  Krrile  population  formed  any  port  of  the  ori-
ginal iy»tom  of  Lycurgus.  What  hai  been  Bid
aboTe,  reipecting  the  legal  condition  of  the  Helota,
indicate!  a  Tory  different  Btate  of  thingi  ;  and  their
real  condition  ii  probably  not  miircpreiented  by
Orotr,  when  he  nyi: — "The  Heloti  wen  a  part
of  the  atate,  hating  theur  domeitic  and  toctal  tym-
pnthiea  developed,  a  certain  power  of  acquiring
property  (PluL  tSaom.  23),  and  the  eonxnaumcu
of  Qrctian  lineage  and  dialect  —  all  point*  of
marked  auperSotity  orer  the  fbreignen  who  fanned
the  alaTe  populauon  of  Athena  or  Chioa.  They
•eem  to  have  been  no  way  inferior  to  any  TJUnge
papulation  of  Greece.*^  Aa  ia  uaual  with  aerfa,
every  meana  waa  token  to  mark  the  diatinction  be-
tween tbcm  and  their  moalen ;  they  wer«  obliged
to  wear  the  ruatic  garb  dcKribed  above,  and  they
were  not  permitted  to  suig  one  of  the  Spartan  aongs.
(PluL  Lge.  28.)  But  the  ttate  of  Ihioga  dncribed
in  the  above  qootatiDnt  helongi  to  a  period  when
the  fear  of  a  lervile  inaurtection  had  produced  the
natural  remit  of  cruel  oppreaaion  on  the  one  part
and  rebcUioua  hatred  on  the  other.  That  the
cmelty  of  their  maaten  knew  no  reitriunt  when  it
waa  thua  etimulatcd  by  icar,  ii  manifeat  enough
from  the  inttitution  of  the  o^vmla  {Crvftsia],
How  br  the  atalementa  of  ancient  writen  leapect-
ing  the  ajjttaa  are  to  be  believed,  ii  aamewhat
doubtfiil ;  but  there  can  be  no  dgubt  of  the  &et
related  by  Thucydidei,  that  on  one  occaaion  two
thonjond  of  the  HeloU  who  bad  rendered  the
grcoteit  Mrvice  to  the  atate  in  war,  were  inducAl
to  tome  forward  bj  the  offer  of  emancipation,  and
then  were  put  to  death. (Tbuc.  ir.  80.)

The  Helota  might  be  emancipated,  but  in  that
cnae,  initeod  of  paiaing  mto  the  dau  of  Ferioeci,
they  formed  a  diatinct  body  in  the  atate,  known,  al
the  time  of  the  Peloponneiian  war,  by  the  general
term  of  ruAafiMut,  but  aubdirided  into  aeverol
claaacL  Myron  of  Priene  (i^.  Athet.  vl  p.  371,  f.),
enumeratea  the  following  cUaaoa  of  emancipated
Jlclota: — AffTof,  U^trwoTot, ^pi/irT%rf r, Bfo^otTfo-
n^oi,  and  natofiMta.  Of  theae  the  (kfrrol
wen  probably  raleaiwl  fnon  all  aervia  ;  the  if»K-


TVjpltWI


HEMINA.

thoae  employed  m  war ;  the  itawoinoni^
Toi  lerveo  on  beard  the  fleet ;  and  the  Vf oSo^uilfii
were  thoae  who  had  been  pooeaaed  of  fteedain  for
■ome  Ihne.  Bctidea  then  there  were  the  )iibtmt
or  liieoKfS,  who  were  domeitic  ilavei,  bronghl  np
with  the  young  Spartani,  asd  then  emaocipated.
Upon  being  emancipated  they  received  pfamiaaim
to  dwell  where  they  viahed.  [Comporg  CiTma
(Greek),  p.  390.]

(Miiller,  Doriaut,  ill  3 ;  Hermann,  PeliHaJ
AKli^iBtiti  i^Gma,  IS  1 9, 34,  28, 30, 43 ;  Wacba-
muth,  HeBt».  AHertk.  2d  ed.  aee  Index  ;  Hanao,
Sparla,  aee  Index  )  Thiriwali'a  Hid.  >f  Gmtr,
vol.  L  pp.  309— 313  ;  Otste,  ffiil  i/&n»(e,  vcd.  IL
pp,-494_^99.)  [P.  S.]

HE'MERA(4m^P«)-  [Diu]

HEMEHODROMI  (qfupolpj^),  wer«  coB-
rien  in  the  Oreek  Mateo,  who  could  keep  on
running  all  day,  and  were  of^  employed  to  cany
new!  of  imparOml  eienta.  Aa  the  Oreeki  had  Jto
ayatem  of  poeto,  and  but  few  roada,  ancfa  meaaett-
have  been  of  great  aervice. They  wera


tined  for the


jrarpoae.


and  could  p


iraeji  m  an  almoat  incredibly  abort  apace
of  time.  (Herod.  n.lO£;  Com.  Nep.jUiCI.4;  Plat.
AriiL  20  ;  Paoi.  -n.  1&  |S.}  Such  caurioa  ap-
pear to  have  been  kept  by  moat  of  the  Occck
atateo,  and  were  in  timea  of  danger  itadotied  on
aome  eminence  in  order  to  obaerva  any  thin^  of
importance  that  might  bi^ipen,  and  eaiT]r  tha
intelligence  with  noed  to  the  proper  qoairtei.
Hence,  we  &equ^tly  find  them  called  ^miefB-
Kiopi  (AiafaaKivn,  Herod.  viL  IBS,  192  ;  Xeii.
HML  L  1.  e  2 ;  Aeneaa  Tact  c  6.)  That  tho
Htmtrtueapi  were  the  nme  at  the  HantTodromi
appean  not  only  from  the  panago  of  Aeneai  Tac-
ticua  juat  referred  to,  but  alao  &om  the  worda  tt
Livy  (xxxL  24)  "  ni  apeculaloi  (hemerudrotnn*
vocant  Oraed,  ingena  die  nno  cunu  emelicniea
ipatium),  contemplant  regium  agmen  e  *pecul>
quadam,  proi^gTeaina  nocte  media  Athenaa  per-
veniuet."  (See  I>uker.  ad  Lm.Lc)  The  He-
mcrodromi  were  alao  called  Dnmol
IpuiEir,  Horpooat.  and  HeoycL  l
IlEMEROMCOPI.  [HBMiBas
HEMICHRYSUS.  [Aubum  j  Statkr.]
UEMIC0'N01US.(CoNaiuBiandlheTBbl«.]
HBMICY'CLIUM  (iinuiiK>.,»),  a  aemicir^
W  aeat,  fiir  the  accommodation  (J  peraooa  en-
gaged in  convenalion,  either  in  private  hotuea  at
in  placea  of  public  teoort ;  and  alao  the  aemieircular
aeat  toond  the  tribunal  in  a  boailica.  (Pint.  AlcA.
17,  Nic.  12;  Cic  LaeL  1  ;  Viltuv.  v.  1.  S  8«
oomp.  Schncider'a  Note.)  [P.  S.l

HEMIECTKON,  HEMIECTTON.  [Uws
TBua.]
HEMILITRON.  [Lrrrn.]
UE'MINA  (4/Jh),  the  name  of  a  Greek  and
Roman  meaiuie,  aeenu  to  be  nothing  men  than
the  dinlectic  form  uacd  by  the  Sicilian  and  Italian
Gneka  fw  i/ilw.  (See  the  quotationi  fiom  Eni.
iharmua  and  Sophron,  ap.  Ath.  xL  p.  479,  a,  b.,
liv.  p.  648,  d^  and  Heiych.  a.  c.  Ir  Wf,  which
ke  eiptaisi  at  Jv  ^ffoii.)  It  wai  therefore  natunllj

S plied  to  the  half  of  the  standoid  fluid  neanire,
B  f^ffrqi,  which  the  other  Gneka  called  mr^q,
and  the  word  patted  into  the  Roman  metrical
■yalcm,  where  it  ia  naed  with  exactly  the  aante
force,  namely  for  a  mouurc  which  it  half  of  the
aaiarimt,  and  equal  to  the  Greek  <o^  (Bitekit
MdnL  UMtwjmA.  pp.  17, 300, 203.) (P.  S.]


HENDELA.
UBUIOBO'UON.HEMIO'BOLUS.  [Oso-

LD.I.

JlEUIP<yD10N. [Pu].

HBHISTATEH. [Statbr].

IIEMI2CEST0N. {Sbxtarius].

DE'NDECA,  UOI,  (ol  frttici^)  lie  Eimm,
wtrt  nafftumtBi  Bt  Athtni  of  coniideiable  im-
pOTluca.  Thcj  ue  ilnjg  oiled  by  thi«  Dsme  in
iht  Wiitifil  wrilcn  ;  biit  in  th«  timfl  of  Demetiiiu
PUonii,  their  nune  >  laid  lo  hire  been  ehuiged
bta  tliM  of  HfiafdAoiiti'  (Pollux,  viiL  102),  vha
wm,  iowtjei,  daring  tbe  democtacj  diilinct  fiuic-
iHouia.  [NovorBYLiicia.]  Th«  gnuoniariBni
■Ih  jire  other  nunc*  to  th«  Eleven,  u  Ita/ioipi-
>Mai,  ^a/jo^iKaicti,  &e. (SchoL  ad  Atiitiipi.

i'it.-m,  Top.  77*,  lioa.)

The  time  at  which  the  office  of  the  Elf^ren  va*
iutiluled  it  diipatcd.  Ullrich  coniiden  the  office
In  hare  been  of  an  iriitocratical  chuader,  and
DUHluda  from  ■  puiage  in  Henclidci  Ponticui
iL  910)  that  it  wai  eatahliihed  b;  Ariiteidet.
lltirr,  OB  the  other  huid,  Duintoiu  that  the  Dfflc«
'lined  not  onlj  before  the  time  of  Cleuthenea,
hit  ptnlablj  before  the  legidatiim  of  Solon ;  but  it
■RDit  imponible  to  come  to  an;  wtiibctoi;  con-
iluin  on  the  rabjeet.  The;  were  unnolly  cho«n
b;  IdI,  one  from  each  of  the  ten  tribei,  and  a
■fcntuj  (7pc^f/iAT4^))  who  mnit  pn>perLj  be  Tfr-
jnrded  u  their  (errant  (h-upJnii),  though  he
lomei  me  of  their  number.  (Pollux,  viiL  1U2.}

The  inndp^  dnt;  of  the  Elcren  mi  the  care
tnil  nuBgement  of  die  public  pri>oii(t«riiiT4|>u»>)
[Ciacuj,  which  wBi  eDtirel}  under  ^eir  juris-
infOBB.  Tbe  priion,  howeier,  wa«  leMom  uied
hj  the  Albeniaiu  ■■  a  mere  jjace  of  confinement,
UTTing  generaUj  Icr  punlihmenta  and  executioiu.
Who  a  penoD  wai  condemned  to  death  he  wai
innediatelj  giren  into  the  euitody  of  the  Eleven,
■ho  were  then  bound  to  canj  the  lentence  into
oKOaat  according  to  the  lawi.  (Xen.  HtO.
il3.{M.)  The  mott  common  mode  of  exeeutiou
■*■  bj  hemlock  juice  (ii^iar),  which  u-aa  drunk
•Ita  nnaet  (Plat.  Flaed.  cc.  65,  66.)  The
BcTHi  had  ondcr  them  jailcn,  executionerg,  and
IdrtDtn,  who  were  called  bj  Tsriou*  namei  (ai
nrarrirn,  Bekkcr,  Aiuxd.  p.  296.  32 ;  d  rw'
Mua  irnfinii,  Xeo.  HttL  u.3.%b\;i  itllii-
mm,  Anti^  D»  Vnrf.  6U  ;  t  Stiiiiauis,  or
Muu^  &E.).  When  loitnre  wu  indicted  in
■XUB  aSecUog  the  Mate,  it  wu  either  done  in
(he  immediate  preunce  of  the  Eleven  (Uem.  c
A'ira*  p.  1354,  2)  or  by  their  Mrrant  (*  B*mioi),

The  Eleven  naaajlj  on];  lud  to  cany  into
etnqtiiiD  the  aentence  paued  in  the  courti  of  law
ud  the  public  auenibtiea ;  but  in  Hiiiie  inilancei
iWj  pooneed  an  ^7<FUtla  Suciurnipiau.  Thii  wBi
tlw  cue  in  tboae  nimmarj  piwaedingt  called  dn-
1*A  ifkrvit,  aod  Mitiit,  in  which  the  penalty
nt  fixed  bj  law,  and  might  be  inflicted  by  the
(im  DB  the  confiMion  or  eoDviction  d  the  accuied
g  to  any  of  the  jury  courtL They


any  of  the  jurj
d  BumcrriffHov


toMoifyu^  becaou  the  lummary  proceediugi  men-
iHiKd  above  were  chiefly  adopted  in  the  caie  of  luch
penou:  hcDca  Anliphon  ((JbOwjeffennLp.  713]
talb  them  ht^Aifral  rar  uaxaipyta.  The
woed  Kaniiifyai  pivpeily  meant  any  kind  of  mole-
bcKo,  bat  it  only  applied  in  Athenian  lav  to
tkieree  (nknTai),  houw-bieaken  (,Titx<tpOx«\
■aa-alealera  (AA^parodurra/),  and  other  criminala
ifaaiiilackiBd. l}it)a,AU.Pne-fg.n,11.)


HERAEA.  593

The  Eleven  ore  alw  Kiid  to  have  poucued  ^t-
/lavia  Smaimiplau  in  the  cato  of  conGicated  pro-
perly (ElgmoL  Mag.  p.  330.  35),  which  itatemenl
It  conirmed  by  an  intcription  publiibed  by  BSckh
i^Uthind^  vber  diit  Swiwtw  del  Attitchtn  Staaiet^
p.  £35).  (Ullrich,  UAer  dia  Ey  Mmmr,  ap-
pended to  hit  tianilation  of  Plalo'i  Meno,  Crito,
and  the  lint  and  aecond  Alcibiadei,  Beriin,  1 821  ;
T,  Z«t>'onia..1nt&»id.pp.  256— 361  :  Meier,
AU.  Prve.  pp.  68—77  j  Schubert,  dt  AtdSibta,
pp.  93—96  ;  Hermann,  Ltlah.  dtr  Grieck.  StaaU-
allerlk.  %  139.)
HEPHAESTAEA.  rL*HPinapHOBii.]
UERAEA  ('Hpaja)  ii  the  name  of  fotinda
lebiated  in  honour  of  Hen  in  ali  the  towna  ot
Oreece  wheie  the  wonhip  of  thii  divinity  wai  in-
xd.  The  original  teal  of  her  wonhip,  ftom
I  il  ■pnsd  over  the  other  porta  of  Oreece,  wai
Argot ;  vbenca  her  feitivali  in  other  plucei  wert,
more  or  leu,  imilationi  of  thcae  which  were  cele-
brated at  Argot.  (Mlitler,  Z>ar.  ii,  la.  g  1.)  The
Argivet  had  three  templet  of  Heia  ;  one  Lay  be-
'  'een  Argot  and  Mycemie,  45  itndia  from  Argot  j
B  aecond  lay  on  the  road  to  the  acropolit,  and  near
waa  tbe  itadium  in  which  the  garnet  and  con-
■ti  at  Iho  Hcnea  were  held  (Paut.  S.  24.  g  2] ;
e  third  wai  in  the  city  iltelf  [Ham.  ii.  22.  %  1).
or  lenice  wai  performed  by  the  matt  diitln-
gaiihed  prjetteitci  of  the  place  }  one  of  them  wat
the  high-prietteia,  and  the  Aigivea  counted  their
yean  by  the  date  of  hei  office.  (Thucyd.  ii.  2.)
The  Hernea  of  Argot  were  celebiated  every  fifth
and,  according  to  the  calculation  of  Biickh
{AiiaiidL  da-  BcrL  Akad.  vm  1818-19,  p.  92,
&c)  in  the  middle  of  Ihc  tecond  year  of  every
Olympiad.  One  of  the  gnat  tolemnitiet  which
took  place  on  the  occaiiou,  wai  a  magnificent  pro-
cession to  the  great  temple  of  Hera,  between  Argvt
and  Mycenae.  A  vatt  number  of  young  men  ^ — for
the  fettital  ii  called  a  panegyrii  — ■  auembled  at
Argot,  and  marched  in  armour  to  the  temple  of  the
goddeiL  They  were  preceded  by  one  hundred
oxen  (,U<n6iitii,  whence  the  festival  it  alto  caUed
iKarJ/tftua).  The  high-priestesa  accompanied  thii
piwctiion,  riding  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  two  white
oxen,  at  we  see  from  the  ttory  of  Cleobia  and
Biton  nlated  by  Herodotut  (I  31)  and  Cicero
(Tnad.  i.  47).  The  hundred  oxen  were  tacrificed,
and  their  Seih  diaiributcd  among  all  the  dtiient.
(Schol.  ad  Find.  01.  vii.  152,  and  ad  Nan.  i.  39.)
The  surifice  itielf  waa  called  Mx^fn  (Heaych.
1,  r.)  or  "  the  bed  of  Iwiga."  (Comp.  Welckcr
on  ^otuwaofs  ElgmalagiKht  AodaUiaigai,  p.  268.)
The  gamea  and  cintett*  of  the  Heraea  toijc  place  in
the  itadinm,  nesr  the  temple  on  the  road  to  the
BOopolis.  A  briien  shield  wai  fixed  in  a  niace
above  the  theatre,  which  wai  icarcely  u
any  one,  and  the  young  man  who  lu
polling  it  down  received  the  ihield  and  a  garland
of  myrtle  ai  a  priie.  Hence  Pindar  (Nan.  i.
41)cB]litheconteit<l->^X>iAii»(.  ItKcnuthnt
thii  contest  took  phtce  before  the  proeession  went
out  to  the  Ueraeon,  for  Strabo  (viii.  p.  556)  itatea
that  the  victor  went  with  hii  priiei  in  tolemn  pro-


.53.)

The  Heraoi  or  Healombaoi  of  Aegtna  were
celebiated  in  the  Hue  rawmer  at  thoM  of  Aigoa


Mi


HERES.


<5m  ScbuL  ad  Find.  IiOm.  Tiii.  lU;  MUIlei,
Aiqinet.  p.  U9.)

The  Heiuea  DrSunu,  whicli  iiknd bIsi  deriTed
the  wonhip  of  Hern  from  Argi»  (Pm*.  yiL  i.  g  4),
■mat  peib^i*  the  moat  brilliaal  of  all  ths  featirali  of
thU  diTicityp  A  mognifiont  piuMujon,  cousiBting
of  maideoi  uid  manied  nomBQ  m  iplcndid  altite,
■nd  with  floiiting  hail  (Aiiiu,  ap.  AAol  lii.  p.
hl&X  logelhei  with  men  and  yanthi  in  umour
<Po]y>eiL  StraL  I  23,  Ti.  45),  w*nt  to  ths  temple
ofHenL  Afl«c  they  airired  within  the  laciod
preclnctj,  the  men  depoaited  their  armoui ;  and
pmyen  uid  tdwi  were  ofleRd  up  to  the  goddeu.
Her  attu  eonuiled  of  the  uh«  of  the  rictinu
which  had  been  burnt  to  her. (Pani.  t.  13.  |  6.)

The  Ileraea  of  £lu  vera  eelebiated  erery  fifth
year,  or  in  the  foarth  year  of  ereiy  Olympiad.
(Conini,  Ditiert  iil  30.)  The  fertiTal  wm  chiedy
cdebialed  by  Duideni,  and  conducted  by  liiteen
matnmi  who  wore  the  ncnd  peplna  for  tho  gnddeu.
Bnt  belbre  ths  utemnitiei  oomraenoed,  then  ma-
trons ncrificed  a  pig,  and  ponfied  themielvei  in
the  well  Pien.  (Paiu.  t.  IS.  9  £.)  One  of  the
principal  ulsnnitiei  wai  a  tao  of  Iha  maideoa  iu
ths  (Udinm,  fiir  which  pnipnae  thi^  were  divided
into  IhtM  ilaiira.  acnodLog  to  ihsic  ags.  The
yoongett  lan  fint  and  the  oldeat  lait.  Their  only
drMa  on  thii  occaiian  wai  a  %i-'ri*,  which  cune  down
ta  the  knee,  and  thair  baic  wni  floating.  She  who
won  ths  priie,  receired  a  gailnnd  of  olire  bonghi,
together  with  a  port  of  a  cow  which  wu  lacrificed
to  Hera,  and  might  dedicate  her  own  painted  like-
DBH  in  the  t..-mp]e  of  the  goddeu.  The  liileen
matiDDi  were  attended  by  la  man;  female  attend-
nntc,  and  peHbnned  two  dancsi  ;  the  ooe  culled
the  dance  of  Phyicoa,  the  other  the  dance  of  Hip-
podameia.  Reapeeting  fuilher  pBiticulai-i,  and  the
hiatory  of  diia  aolemnily,  lee  Paua.  T.  16.  9  2,  Ac.

Heraea  wen  celebrated  iu  tariotu  other  pUi:ea  ;
*.g.  in  Coi  (Athen.  xiv.  f.  639,  vL  p.  262),  at
Corinth  (Enrip.  Med.  1378  j  PhiloatiBt.  /ftr.  x\i.
It),  at  Athena  (P!ut  i^aet.  Rom.  rii.  16B),  at
Cnuaana  in  Crete  (Died.  r.  72),  &c [L.  8.]

UERE'DITAS. [Hms.]

HEKES.  1.  Obbik.  The  Alhenian  lawi  of
inheritance  are  to  be  explained  under  thii  title.
The  aubject  may  be  divided  into  Are  parta,  of
which  ws  aball  ipeak :  Ut,  of  peraonal  capacity
to  inhsrit ;  2dly,  of  the  rolea  of  deacent  and  suc-
ecaaioa  ;  3diy,  of  the  power  of  deriaing  \  ithly,
of  the  remediea  of  the  beir  for  tecoTering  hii
lighti  1  Glhly,  of  the  obligatioua  to  which  he  nic-

I.  OfPtTtanal  Capae!^  to  JmheriL^Ta  ohUin
the  right  of  inheritance  aa  well  as  dtiieDthip
{irfxiimiu  and  iniAiT(la\  legitimacy  wna  a  necei-
aary  qnalifieation.  Thoae  children  wen  lesitinuito
who  were  bora  in  lawful  wedlock.  (Dem.  e.
Ntaar.  p.  ISSfi.)  The  Tslidity  of  a  mamage  de-
pended portly  on  the  capad^  of  the  nmtncting
paitiei,  partly  oa  the  DRture  of  the  contnct.  On
the  fint  point  little  needt  to  be  noticed  here,  ex-
cept that  brother  and  liater  by  the  lanie  mother
were  forbidden  to  many  ;  but  conaanguinity  in
general  waa  ao  tu  from  being  deemed  an  c^jection,
that  mairiage  between  nJlUctal  relltiona  waa  en-
coviaged*  in  ordef  to  keep  the  |vopetty  in  the
family,  (Andoc  it  MgiL  gllS,  a  Alaib.  J  33,
cd.  Bekk.  )  Lya.  C:  Jk  £41,  ed.  Bckk.  ;  Dora.
c  IamI.  p.  loss,  0.  Eabtd.  p.  1305  ;  PlaL  Cfaun,
4,  Jiamiit.  32.) The  toBtaet  waa  mad*  b;  llw


HERBS.

hniband  wllh  the  bther,  Imther,  or  Hher  ^al
guardian  (niptos)  of  tbe  intended  wife:  then  only
the  properly  betrothed  (iyyinrrli).  An
It,  howerer,  waa  aaaigned,  or  adjudged,  to
ext  of  kin  {iiiitiiaatiiira)  by  pnieeaa  of  taw,
aa  expUioed  lutder  EpiCLiRoa;  (Itaeoa,  dt  Gr.
htr.  §  26,  it  PkilocL  tar.  9  19,  ed.  Bokk.  i  Dnn.
pro  Piom.  p.  954,  a.  St^  p.  1134.)  No  cere-
aiony  waa  neceaanry  to  ratify  tho  contract :  bol  it
waa  uaual  to  betroth  the  bride  in  the  preaoice  of
witaesao,  and  lo  giro  a  marriage  feast,  and  invite
the  frienda  and  rehitioiia,  for  the  aake  of  pablicily.
[lueua,  rfeO'r.  ibr.  9  18;  Dem.  &  OmI.  Pl869,
cEitbiU.  pp.  1311,  131S.)  A  marriige  without
proper  ea^uialt  wat  irregiUar  ;  but  the  iaane  lost
their  heritable  rights  only,  not  their  fnoehiie ;
and  the  fennel',  it  aeenu,  might  be  reatond,  if  the
raembcra  of  theii  hther*!  clan  wodU  eonaent  to
theii  being  regiatered. (laaena,  di  PkHoit.  lur.

99  29—33.) As  it  waa  iiaij  fir  enry  man

to  be  enrolled  in  bia  dan,  in  mder  to  obtun  hia
i>il  righta,  BO  waa  the  regiatratton  the  heat  eri-
dence  of  legitimacy,  and  the  ^fi/rafn  and  nyve-
\ii  were  uiually  oiled  to  prore  it  in  eonrti  of  jaa-
ce.  (Andoc  dt  Mgd.  9  137,  ed.  Bekk. ;  laaeua,
>ar.iB:.%7S,dt PkilocL  S  13  i  Dem.  o.  fibM.
p.  1305,  &c)  For  farther  particulan  aee  Plainer,
Beitrage,  p.  104,  ^c  ;  Scbiimann,  Amtiq.  juru
pablim  Qraeeonm,  lib.  t.  §g  19,  31,  88.

11.  Of  On  Ruta  y  Dmoad  and  Saecaaiom.^
ere  we  woold  premiae,  that,  aa  the  Athenian  law
made  no  difietence  iu  thia  reqiect  betweoi  nai  and
peraonal  eatate,  tbe  wotda  heir,  inWal,  fee.,  will  be
ipplied  indiwriminstety  to  both.  Whan  an  Athe-
lian  died  leaTing  aona,  they  shared  the  inberil-
iQC«,  like  our  heirs  in  gaielkind,  and  aa  they  now
do  in  Fnuice(Iaaeua,dePjl>{oc<.to-.  |32):alaw
DO  len  &Toanible  to  that  balance  of  property  rtieh
Solon  meant  to  estahliah,  than  the  law  of  prinm.
geciture  wu  suited  lo  the  military  aristocoeica
created  in  the  feudal  timet.  The  only  sdianlaga
poaaesaed  by  the  eldnl  aon  waa  the  fint  choice  ia
thsdiriaion.  (Dem.prsi'lorBi.  p.  947.)  Utheie
waa  bnt  one  son,  he  took  the  whole  esUla  ;  bat  if
he  had  aiatan,  it  waa  iacnmbent  on  bim  to  pnnde
for  them,  and  gite  them  suitable  maniaga  portKiBa  ;
they  were  then  called  Mrjiami.  (Haipoa.  *.  e.
'EwiSiKoi.)  There  was  no  poaitite  law,  making  it
imperative  on  a  brathv  to  give  his  siattr  a  portion
of  a  certain  amount ;  but  the  mcnl  obligalioa,  to
aaaign  her  a  fortune  eorreapanding  to  hia  own  rank,
waa  atrcngtheDod  by  cnalom  and  pablic  opinivi,
insomuch  that  if  she  was  gireu  in  marriage  poi-
tiooleaa,  it  waa  deemed  a  dut  upon  htj  chanctar,
and  might  even  raise  a  doubt  of  her  legitimacy.
(laaeus,  d«  Pfrr.  W.  940  ;  Lya.  d»AriaL  to*.
9  16,  ed.  BeUc  ;  Dem.  e.  Bmet  tU  dett,  ^  1014.)
On  failure  of  ams  and  their  issna,  oangbtan
and  daughters*  children  succeeded  (aa  U>  the  law
eodceming  heireaaea,  see  Epux«Rua)  j  and  then

the  deseeodiog  line.  (lMeut,deO>r.  jl*r.  9939—48.
d*/>r.  W.  969,((,/>W«*  BSS8,67(  Dem.  a
Maart  ff.  1057,  lOfS.)  If  the  deoasMd  left
gnmdaona  by  different  sons,  it  is  clear  that  they
woold  take  the  abarva  of  their  respectiva  latben.
So  if  be  bad  a  grmnddanjihter  by  ens  acoi,  and  a
grandaon  by  another,  the  latter  would  not  ojcelade
the  former,  aa  a  brother  would  a  aislar,  bnt  both
would  than  alike.  Of  this  tbeiB  ia  no  direct  eri-
dence  (  bnt  it  faUowi  In


HEItES.
if  wUeh,  OD  the  tnitli  »f  a  Km,  liu  title  to  iie
hlhttt  iohtrituice,  at  to  &  ibtn  UttTeot,  iinms-
diUdf  actxuri  ;  if  tbea  he  died  before  bi«  fiilher,
hut  loiiring  ione,  thej  claimed  their  gnod&thet'i
inherituice  u  tv[Efl«cnling  him.  It  wu  otherwiie
with  daughlen.  Their  title  did  not  thiu  accnie  ;
Ind  therefwe  it  wai  the  [sKlice  for  the  Ron  of  an
heima  to  be  adopted  into  his  matemil  gnmd-
&lber^  hooie,  tad  to  beeoine  hii  UD  in  poiDl  of
b».  Fnither  (at  will  iffettntljr  be  ahawn)  the
pnenl  prefereDce  af  male*  [o  femalea  did  not  com-
mcDce  till  the  deeeued^  &ther'i  deiceadiuiU  were

Od  &Oiif«  of  lineal  deecendanti  the  coUateml
laancbea  ware  naortcd  tcL  And  fint  came  the
iuoB  of  the  laine  biher  villi  the  deceued  ;  liz.
bncheia  and  hrotlken'  ehildien,  the  children  of  a
diceaisd  bniths  takioe  the  ihan  of  their  father
{laesa,  A  Hagm.  iv.  IS  1,  3  ;  Dem.  e.  M<KiarL
f.  V067,  t.Lto<i.  p.  1083}  ;  and  after  than,  uiCen

'  '  xi'  childreo,  ammg  whom  the  prindpli
ravuled  (lucui,  dt  AfoU
r  liaten'  children  lo^  /w
mrpm  or  fr  eofna,  ooei  not  appear.

Next  eeOM  ^  dewwidanta  of  the  lame  gnnd-
bths  vith  the  decewad ;  codmu  and  couiini'
children.  Here  the  law  declared,  that  make  and
the  BBBc  af  malea  aboald  be  pretened  to  femalea
and  their  iwie.  <lae(u,  dt  Hagm.  jUr.  §i  1,  3  i
Dun.  c  Maart  p.  1067.)  Thiu,  the  aon  of  an
ucls  would  eulude  the  ton  of  an  onnt,  while  the
•on  of  IB  asDt  would  eiduda  the  danghler  of  an
ancle.  On  the  wme  [«iDciple  lueni  (d*  AjalL
far.  M  25, 2a)  rontendi  that  the  um  of  a  female  fint
conuD  verenled  hii  niather'4  liitrr  fntin  inherit-
m^  although  he  wai  further  removed  Irom  the  de-
ceaeed  {ymi  hnirrifit)  bj  one  degree. Thi«  pre-


id  from  the  lame  conunon  ancellor,  that  ii
to  mj,  from  the  grand&ther  of  the  deceaied  ;  for
the  wwdi  iK  T*r  a±Tu>  in  Demoathenei  an  to  be
eiplaiaed  bj  the  i^tif  yirti  of  Iiseui.  Therefore
a  fint  emiin  ooee  nmoTed,  claiming  thiuugh  »
faoale,  had  a  better  title  than  a  wcond  cou*in
'^'•—'-g  thrmgh  make  ;  for  a  aecond  coniin  it  de-
■rradiij  not  from  the  grandiather,  but  onl;  frtim
the  gnM.^rand  father  of  the  dectued,  and  u  ia
bejind  the  legal  degree*  of  mcceHion  (((a  rqi
tyjtrrtimt  or  avyyfrrfai).  On  thia,  Enbnlidei
finndi  hit  preteuioo  to  the  eiCateof  Higniai ;  ba-
caaie  be  elainu  a*  repneenlalive  <ion  by  adoption)
vi  hi*  DJAtenal  grand^ther,  who  waa  fint  coucin
U  Hngoitt  i  wbereei  the  biber  of  hia  opponent,
Maimrtatiii,  wai  •ecood  couiin  to  Hagnit*,  and  (ai
DeBoatlwiiH  eipreaiea  it)  wna  not  in  die  nme
tranek  of  the  bmil j  (euir  in  roB  sfem  rev  'Ayriau,
e.  Macari.  p,  1070).

On  fulnn  of  first  caniina  aid  their  iMoe,  the  in-
hfriiBKe  wait  to  the  half-blood  by  tbe  mother'i
nde ;  hrolba*  and  liHen,  nepbewi  and  niecea,
UMina  and  tbm  chQdtcn,  »  bdbre.  But  if  there
wtn  n*  DBlainal  kiunwn  within  the  le^  degree,
ilretUDed  to  the  aifwijt,  or  next  of  kin  on  the^
tmial  aide  (jait  rpii  nrpdi),  whole  proiimitj
wat  traced  hj  anntiog  the  degree!  from  tbe  com-
mon aneeatoL  (Iiaeiu,  da  Ha^  tar.  gg  1—18  ;
Uea.  a  MatoH.  p.  1067.)

Tb«  — ewnon  of  parmu  to  tbrnr  ctildroi  ii
wmtttt  at  di^mlB  an»n^  the  teamed.  From  the
■liiifr  of  tbe  nalon,  the  abtence  of  ao;  example,
mi  tk*  txfjom  declniatiwi  of  Ineu  {it  Hi^n.


HESES.  B9S

itr.  §  S6)  mpecting  the  mother,  it  ma;f  beinfiored
that  parent*  conld  not  inherit  at  Athena.  At
Athena  the  maxim,  itrtditai  mmfiuin  oioaKfi^
held  onlT  of  lineal,  not  of  collateral  aicent-  For
example,  an  uncle  might  inherit.  lleaent,il4(Xeoii,
lur.  §  Sfi.)  So  alto  he  might  mainr  the  beiiew,  at
next  of  kin.  (Dt  Pyrr.  iar.  g  90.)  On  thii  part
of  the  nihject  the  rtader  it  referred  to  Bnuen,  ifa
jmreiend.  Alhan. ;  SirWiUiam  Jonea^t  COmmamtary
annexed  to  the  Inntlalion  of  Iiaeua ;  and  a  ih«t
aununary  of  Che  law  by  Schumann,  /LnLj.  p.  Gr.
lib.T.  gSO.  Thete  and  other  writen  are  not  agreed
on  many  of  the  fortgrnng  pointi,  which  are  left  in
much  obicujity,  owing  to  the  mutilated  atate  in
which  the  lawv  hare  nached  ua,  and  the  artificea
uted  by  the  oiaton  to  miarepreaent  the  truth.

It  will  aiaiat  the  atndent  to  be  informed,  that
im^i^iBtgnifieaafintniuain.  'Art^'utout  ia  a  fint
couain't  ton  ;  fonned  in  the  aame  manner  aa  iZt\-
f  iSoSi  from  Ui\^t,  and  AirynTfutout  from  dvyo-
Ttf.  Thut,  my  fint  couain'a  ton  ii  ifd^iateur  to
me  ;  but  not  eonienely.  Again,  though  it  it  tme
that  two  or  taaie  aecond  couiioa  may  be  ipehoi  of
cdleetirely  at  irrfiolo?  (Dem.  dSIepL  p.  1117),
yet  one  of  them  cannot  betiud  to  be  dmfioSoiii  to
another.  Herein  conuat*  the  fallacy  of  th«e  who
m»in(»m  that  (eciHid  couain*  oune  within  the  legal

KA%w(  it  the  lubject-matter  of  inheritance,  or
(inane  lenae  of  the  word)  the  inheritanoe  ;  ii\t)pa~
rifUH  the  heir.  'Ayxiffrtla,  [areximity  of  blood  in
leferenee  to  tuceeeaion,  and  tometimei  light  of  aac-
ceaiion.  Sirrrinia,  natural  eontanguinity.  Svy-
yi'fii,  collateral  reiatioDi,  are  oppoaed  to  (rrom,
lineal  deacendanCa.

III.  0/a«/»tt«r  qf  DmaH^.— Thai  the  owner
had  power  to  alienate  hia  property  dnring  hia  life.-
time,  and  that  aueh  alienation  wai  valid  in  point
of  law,  both  u  igainat  the  heir  and  all  th;  reat  of
lhe«arld,iabeyondBdDubL  There wta, however,
an  ancient  la*  which  puniehed  with  degradation
(ifiiila)  a  man  who  had  n-aaled  hit  patrimony  (ji
warpys  KartlhiSeKii).  He  wai  contidered  an
ofieudeT  againtt  the  ilate,  beconae  he  diisbled  him-
■elf  irom  contribating  to  tbe  public  terviee.  Pro-
aecutiona  foraueh  an  offence  were  rare  ;  bnttbe  re-
fHitation  of  a  tpendthrift  waa  alwaya  prejudicial  to
a  man  in  a  Court  of  juatice.  (Diog,  Laiirt.  Soltn,
6S  :  Aeichin.  c  Timank,  £g  67— lOfi,  154,  ed.
Bekk.)

Every  man  of  full  age  and  lomid  mind,  net  nnder
durance  or  improper  mSiwDce,  waa  competent  la
make  a  will  t  but  if  be  bad  a  ion,  he  could  not
ditinheril  him  (  although  bit  will  might  lake  eSect
on  tbe  contingency  of  the  aou  not  completing  hia
teranteenth  year.  (laaeua,  (fa  Jriit.  itr.  §  U,  dt
Fhilaa.iSlO;Deni.e.Sltpk.pp.ni3,HSe.)  The
bulk  of  the  eatate  being  left  to  the  Dm,  legaciei
might  be  given  to  friendi  and  relatioit,  eepe-
cially  to  thoie  who  performed  the  office  of  our  exe-
cutor or  tettamentary  guardian.  (Dem.  e.  Afiai.
pp.  6M,  837.)  And  in  the  diviiion  of  pn^erty
among  aoni,  the  recommendBliima  of  the  &uher
would  be  attended  to.  (Dem.  c.  MatarL  p.  105S,
pro  Plartn.  p.  9£fi.)  Alio  a  poiiatoli,  nut  ex-
ceeding a  choiuand  dracbmaa,  might  be  aaawned  to
an  illegitimate  child. (Harpocr.  t.  v.  No^ul)

A  dangbter  could  not  be  diiinberited,  though
the  eitale  might  be  devited  to  any  peraoD  on  con-
dition of  bit  marTTing  her.  (baeiu,  da  Parr,  iar,
H  82-84.)


It  wu  only  when  a  mnn  had  no  isnie  thAt  he
Wfu  at  full  liberty-  to  appoint  an  heir.  Ilia  haUK
and  heritage  were  then  eonaidered  deiolfLto  [tpiinoi
Jrai  ii/^wvfxor)^  a  great  mufortune  in  the  eyes  of
mR  Athenian  ;  for  every  head  of  a  &imly  wd3
■nxionf  to  tioniniit  his  name  and  rehgioui  luagei
to  poRteritj»  The  tame  feeling  prevailed  among
thearwki  in  more  ancient  limei.  We  Iconi  fiom
Heijchini  and  the  EtjmoL  Mag.  that  diilant  re-
lation! wire  called  x'lp""'ij,  became,  when  thej
inherited,  the  home  WM  x'!!"^""""^  fptixot.  {Set
Horn.  n.  T.  158 ;  Hes.  7W.  607.)  To  obmte
this  miifortnne,  an  Alhenisn  had  two  ttrarBM  open
to  him.  Either  he  might  bequeath  hii  property
by  will,  or  he  might  adopt  ■  lan  in  hi*  lifetime,
[AdoptiO,  Gb»ik.]

Willa  were  in  writing,  and  ninilly  hod  one  or
mora  attesting  witneuei,  whoie  namei  were  ouper-
KTibed,  bat  who  did  not  know  the  conlenU.  They
were  often  depoiiled  with  firiendi,  or  other  tnut~
worthy  penono,  nich  ai  a  magiitrata.  It  wai  con-
iidrred  a  badge  of  baud  if  they  were  mode  Mcretly
or  in  the  jruHnee  of  itnnnn.  (Ineua,  d*  Pkihet.
irr.  i  6,  d»  At^pk.  her.  ^  B—il  i  'Oem.  e.  Sttf*.
p,  1137.)  A  will  wa>  ambulatory  until  the  death
of  the  maker,  and  might  be  revoked  wholly  or  par-
tially, by  a  new  one.  It  leemi  alio  that  there
might  bo  a  parol  rerocatian,  (Imeoi,  dt  PJaioei,
»er.%i0,iieaam.ia:%32.)  Thedienlof  Itaeoo,
in  the  laat^ited  cBoie,  contend!,  that  the  toitator
■ent  for  the  depoiita^  of  bii  will,  with  an  inlea-
tion  to  cancel  it,  bat  died  before  he  got  it  into  hii
pMHuion  ;  thii  (be  layi)  wai  a  virtual  lemcatien.
He  mill  witnenei  to  prove  the  teitator'i  oSection
for  himself  and  dislike  of  his  opponmta,  and  thenoe
infers  that  the  Till  was  unnatunl,  and  a  proof  of
innni^.  Similar  arguments  were  often  used.
(Ineus,  (fa  NieotL  i«r.  g  S3,  dt  AHyph.  lur.  S  21.)

With  respect  to  the  proceeding  by  which  a
father  publicly  renounced  bis  patema!  oalhority
o»er  his  wn,  see  Afok«huxis.  Plato  {Ltg.  zi.
9.  p.  92S)  refen  to  it,  and  mcommeads  that  a
bther  shonld  not  take  such  a  step  alone,  bat  in
conjunction  with  the  other  members  of  the  lamily.
At  Athens  the  paternal  authority  ceased  altogether
after  the  son  had  completed  his  nineteenth  jear  ;
he  was  then  considmd  to  belong  leu  Co  his  bther
than  to  the  state,  (Vatckenocr,  ad  Ammomam,
I.  o,  'Kntri)p\tieiB! :  Meier,  dt  Bona  Danm.  p.
26.)

IV.  Of  Oa  Eemedia  o/  iht  Heir  Jar  Rcamraiff
kit  Rigliti.  —  A  son  or  other  male  descendant  might
enter  and  take  poasewion  of  the  estate  immediately
a(W  the  owner's  death,  (liaens,  dt  Pjrr.  for.
S72,  •ieav.  in-.  |47.)  If  he  was  prevented  from
io  doing,  he  might  faring  an  aclien  of  ejectment
againit  the  itilruder.  [Embatbia.]  Anyone  who
duturbed  a  minor  in  the  enjoyment  of  hit  patrimony
was  liable  lo  a  criminal  prosecution  {KiutAaHti
ttairrttKia,  Iracas,  de  Pfrr.  her,  %  7fi). At  to

Other  hein  at  law  and  clnimants  by  adoption  or
devise  were  not  at  liberty  to  ent<'r.  until  the  ostate
VIS  foimally  adjudged  to  them.  The  proper  course
Was,  to  make  ^ipiication  to  the  ajchon,  who  attended
at  his  office  forthatpnrpoieeveiy  month  in  the  year
eicepl  the  last  (Scirophocion).  Tho  parly  who
applied  wot  regarded  as  a  suitor,  and  (nii  obtaining
a  hearing)  was  said  AOTX^*"' '^^i' '^^'^P"^"'  (Isaeus,
i*  Hagm.  Iigr.  $3  23,  ID,  rf*  Ppr.  hur.  \  74,  de
Ai^pk.  jkr.  3  4  >  Oem,  e.  Sfe/*.  p.  1136.)


At  the  first  n?gnltr  assembly  (levjda  JncXiffls),
held  after  he  had  received  notice,  the  archon  lanKd
prorlaneliDn  to  be  made,  that  such  a  penoc  bad
died  without  iiiae,  and  tbat  such  and  such  penaat
claimed  to  be  his  hein.  The  herald  then  siked
>f  Tii  iiutiurSvrta'  %  irafxivaTaSdXAiu'  PeiXnai
Tov  itAlipoif  [  these  vtordt  are  variontly  iatHpreied.
Perhaps  t be  best  eiplanalion  it  this:  —  "Afi^-


nother,  and  would  ID


I  of  g.
who  dispute  the  tit!

dude  those  who  claimeu  a  moieiy  or  oiner  lEmre
of  the  estate.  IlapiuiwriiSclXXfif  signifin  to  me^e
a  deposit  by  way  of  securily  for  costs,  which  wss
required  of  thoee  who  maintained  their  eiduiirs
title  to  the  whole  inheritance.  Pertii^s,  howersr,
the  paymenl  in  this  case  wat  optjonal,  and  miglil
be  intended  for  the  mere  pnrpote  of  compelling  lb«
other  parties  to  do  the  same.  The  deposit  time
paid  was  a  tenth  port  of  the  value  of  the  properly
in  diipate,  and  was  returned  to  the  party  if  uc-
cetsfnJ.  (Pollui,  viiL  33,  95  ;  Isaeos  de  Niatl.
itr.  g  1 3,  da  Hagn.  her.  %  3D  ;  Dem.  a.  ^IfiiBirt
p.  1051,  0.  Ltotk.  pp.  1090— 1D93.]

If  no  other  daunant  appeared  the  anhon  ad-
judged the  estate  to  the  first  tnitor  (tuMtaarr
cJrr^  rhr  Khnpor),  If.  however,  there  were  ad-
Terse  claims,  he  proceeded  to  prepare  the  cause  for
trial  (Sioduiiurfa).  First  come  the  iriicpiins,  in
the  usual  way,  except  that  no  party  was  considered
at  plaintiff  or  defendant ;  and  the  bills  in  which
they  set  forth  their  respective  titlei,  were  called
imypaitiai,  (Harpocr.  t.v. ;  Dem.  e.  OUpup.  pp.
1173,  1175.) The  dicattt  were  then  to  be  tum-


0  attend  on  the  appcunted


court  wat  beld
If  any  one  neglected

day,  aad  had  no  good  excuse  to  oner,  nis  cuum  wu
struck  out  of  the  relXlti{tltypi^i|i|up^at^rntta),
and  the  contett  wot  carried  on  batneon  the  remain-
ing parties,  or,  if  but  one,  the  estate  wat  awarded
tohun.  (Dem.o.O(yHip.p.  1174.)  Thetriolwai
that  maziaged.  The  dicasti  hod  to  give  their
verdict  either  fiir  one  pencm  proving  r  title  Co  the
whole,  or  for  several  persons  coming  in  under  the
tame  title,  as  (Ibr  instance)  twi>  brothers  entitled
each  lo  a  moieiy.  One  ballntling  box  therefin
was  provided  for  every  paily  who  appeared  in  a
distinct  intereit.  The  speecDe*  were  meaaund  hj
the  clepsydriu  Each  party  hail  an  Jifi^tftii  of
water  for  his  first  speech,  snd  half  tliat,  or  three
XK'i  for  the  second.  (Isaent,  de  Hngm.  *er.  g  3D,
&C. ;  Dem.  c  Maeart  p.  I0&2.)  That  tbeae  ar-
rangements gave  rise  to  fiand  and oollnaioil,  it

The  verdict,  if  birly  obtamed,  waa  futal  aRainst
the  parties  to  the  cause.  But  an;  other  penon,
who  by  absence  or  unaviHdahle  accrdont  vaa  nce-
vented  from  being  a  party,  might  af
an  action  against  the  uioeotihil  eai
cover  the  estate.  He  wat  ibeo  obiisod  to  pay  bit
deposit  (jafOKafraSoKii),  anmnon  A«  dejeadaot,
and  proceed  in  other  rccpectt  at  in  ao  ordinary
suit.  This  he  might  do  at  any  time  dnring  the
life  of  the  person  in  possession,  and  iriiluii  five
y«n  after  his  death.  (Itseus,  if(i>vT-.  Aer.  g  TO;
DeuLc.  Of^n/i.  P.1I7G,  tiVfomrt.  p.  lO&l.)

It  has  hitherto  been  suppoasd  that  a  simple  issue
wat  raised  between  the  litigant  paitiea,Yi^  who  vi-as
entitled  to  possess  the  estate  ;  and  that  they  pro-
ceeded at  once  to  the  trial  of  such  inne:.  This  was
called  (Mvlutif tif-tAw. The  ouua,  boweveiv


I  mora  (omplioited,  if  ong  of  tbe
D  make  eTception  to  the  right  of  any
le  hii  title  :  this  wu  dono  bj  teodcr-
iaf  in  iffidaTit  flufuipTupia)  twoin  either  b;  him-
■if  <r  bf  aaother,  wbeniii  he  declued  that  the
sua  m  not  the  tubjact  af  litigiulan  04  fafiiMi),
ud  lUtfied  HUM  mstlec  of  &ct  or  Uw  to  luppart
Idi  iifrtiriB.  Sona,  adopted  iod*,  and  peraont  in
Iqt^  poaiUiiiio,  wva  iillawed  thii  advantage.
tit  euBnle,  a  witneaa  migbt  depoia  thu  the  lut
ttopet  had  left  male  inue  HirTiTiiig  hhn,  and
thnefore  the  ucu[ialj  could  on  be  clainiBd  by  mj
aUurnl  nlatin  or  dSTiKe :  or  that  tha  title  bail
•Inadj  been  legally  detenmDed.  and  that  the  new
dunanti  sere  not  at  liber^  to  reopen  Ihe  ijuee-
■in.  Thii  hsd  the  effect  of  a  dilatoij  plea,  and
■tajtd  farther  pnceedingi  in  the  cooie.  {Emeiu,
ADimeog.  liar,  g  30,  ij<  ApaU.  9  3,  de  PUIod.  g§  4.
i2,  dt  /yr.  ;  3  ;  Data,  c  Lioei.  p.  1097.)  If
thai  the  niilor  wa*  reaolved  to  pmaecuta  hia  cUini,
he  had  do  other  cenrae  bnt  to  procure  a  coniictii^
■f  Um  iriOwM  (vho  had  iinnn  the  affidavit)  in  an
mica  far  falae  teatinumj  (licit  ifivtufiapnipuir).
Knaplei  of  loch  actiona  an  the  came*  in  which
DoBaMbBiea  waa  ta^gei  againit  Leocbarta,  and
I«eni  tar  Ihe  eatata  of  PbOocteman.  On  tbe  trial
of  the  vitneaa  tha  qtuatioiu  were,  tirat,  the  truth
•fthebetadepoacdto;  aecondly,  their  lenl  effect,
if  nu. Witt  reapect  to  the  witneei,  the  conae-

[MAKTvau.] With  reapect  to

., u  nothing  further  vat  determined,

than  tMl  it  could  ot  cotild  not  be  entertained  ;  the
liDiafni|gla  in  thia  paiticulai  reaembliDg  dia  npa-
Wafi  If  tha  tenn  decided  that  the  auil  could
be  enttftaiaed,  tha  paitieapioeaeded  to  trial  in  tha
■anser  bcfen  explained.

Aa  to  tbe  fnitbet  ramediea  to  be  nmied  by  the
■Kceaaflil  pailj,  in  order  lo  obtain  the  fmita  of  hia
jadgiaeat,  aee  EasATiU  and  Exodlu  Dikm.
Andoo  thiapart  of  the  nb}ectiee  Meier,  ^fL/Voa
p|LU9,61^e3S;Flatner,^tf./>nnToLLp.  leS,
n>L  iL  p.  309.

V.OfduOtligaliemitovAHitiaffrirneettdtd.
—The  firat  dntj  of  an  heir,  aa  with  ni  of  an  eie-
BXo',  wai,  to  buy  the  dead  and  perfDim  the  cna-
Majj  flmeml  rite*  (ri  Hiu(iittra  niiir).  It  ia
wdl  kmwn  vhat  importance  voi  attached  to  thii
by  the  ancieata.  The  Athenian  law  ngilated  the
ume  of  burial,  and  the  order  in  which  the  female
niatigat  abauld  attend.  If  no  moiK;  wat  left  to
(•T  the  eipenaea  of  burial,  atilt  the  DcanM  tela-
liiea  wen  bonnd  to  deEray  them  ;  and  LE  they
tirgleeled  to  perform  their  daty,  the  chief  magia-
IiMe  (IHjiapyw)  of  tbe  deinua,  in  which  the  death
>"°k  place,  after  wanting  them  by  public  notice
{.itimiftai  nl  Mttiu',  iciJ  mtalpiir  Thr  tjtiuni),
f*  the  work  done  by  contract,  paid  for  it  binuelf,
■od  «a*  then  empowaed  to  lue  them  for  double
the  aOHiint.  When  a  rich  man  died,  there  waj
ia  badwudncea  about  hia  funeral.  It  ia  rather
■miiiig  to  aee  how  eagerly  ific  relaCioDa  haatened
ta  ihsw  Rapeet  to  hia  memoT;,  aa  if  to  laiae  a  pm-
anoption  of  their  being  the  hnra.  (Iiaeua,  da
Affi.  far.  i  to,  de  Or.  ttr.  g§  29—33,  dt  A'i-
bK  jiff.  IS  9,  35  1  Dem.  o.  ifacart  pp.  1069,
1071.)

Cbildiin,  who  neglected  to  bmy  their  paienta,
wen  liable  to  a  crimmal  nntealMa  (Tpo^  xainr-
*aM  yerfciy),  jnat  aa  they  were  til  lefbaing  to
Mfyial  m  Maiat  tkem  in  tliair  ''*""" The  woid


UERES.  6»7

•forti!  in  tbii  caae  ineladea  all  anceaton;  (Meier,
lU  Baa.  DaiM. -p.  126.)

Among  heritable  obligationa  may  be  reckoned
that  of  marrying  a  poor  heireaa  (dijara),  «■  giving
her  in  Bocna^  with  a  snitable  portion.  (See
Efici.i»U8,  and  Menn.  T^isB.  Alt.  i  13.)

That  the  faeic  wai  bound  to  pay  the  debta  of  the
deceaaed,  aa  &r  aa  the  aiaeU  would  extend,  cannot
bedimbted.  Five  jaat  teem  to  have  been  the
period  for  the  limitation  of  actiona  againat  him
(wpoawfifn).  In  caae  oif  a  mortgage,  he  wu  en-
titled only  to  the  auiplua  of  the  mortgaged  property,
remaining  after  payment  of  the  debt  charged
thereon.  (Lya.  •!«  Bam.  PM.  99  4.  ^  ;  laaeua,
d»  AriM.  t«r.  g  33  j  DcmoatL  c.  Oal^.  p.  1240,
e.  Spud.  p.  1030,  c  Natuim.  pp.  988,  989.)

State  debtora,  auch  aa  fennera  of  tbo  public  re-
venue who  hail  made  de&ult,  or  penoni  con-
demned to  pay  a  fine  or  penalty,  were  dia&an-
:hiied  (Sti/um)  until  they  had  aettjed  tbo  debt ;
md  the  di^iiace  extended  lo  their  poeterity.  Thus
Ciraon,  aon  of  Miltiadet,  waa  compelled  lo  pay  a
fine  of  fifty  talenta  which  had  been  impoaed  on  hia
bther ;  and  the  itory  ii,  that  Calliai  advanced
him  tha  looney,  in  return  for  the  hand  of  hia  liiler
Elpinice.  (llem.  c  Andnii.  p.  603,  a.  Tkaic.
pp.  1332, 1337,  e.  Apieb.  p.  836,  ^iro  Cor.  p.  329,
e.  Macart  p.  1069.)  When  the  whole  of  a  man-a
proper^  waa  confiacaled,  of  coune  nothing  could
deacend  to  hia  heir.  It  aeema  to  have  been  a  com-
mon practice,  in  luch  a  coae,  for  the  relationi  of
the  deceaaed  to  conceal  hia  effecta,  or  to  lay  iJaini
to  them  by  pretended  mortgagee.  Agoiatt  theaa
frandi  there  were  aerere  penalliea,  oa  may  be  >een
from  the  apeechea  of  Lyiiai,  c  PUlocr,  and  da  boa.
AritL (Meier,  d»  Bon.  DauiM.  p.  212.)

The  paalerity  of  thoaa  who  were  put  to  death
by  the  people,  oi  were  smvicted  of  certain  in-
fiunoni  Crimea,  auch  aa  thefl,  inherited  the  kriiiia
of  their  ancealon,  a  danaou  hertditat,  which  they
could  not  decline  or  escape  from.  It  may  be  com-
pored  to  tbe  corruption  of  blood  following  upon
attainder  in  the  feudal  law.  The  legialator  leema
to  have  thought  that  auch  children  muat  be  the
natural  enemiea  of  their  country,  and  ought  to  bo
diBarmed  of  all  power  to  do  miachiefi  We  cannot
wonder  at  lliia,  when  we  conaider,  that  with  re-
apect to  jirivate  lenda,  it  waa  deemed  honouisble


of  the  &ther  ;  and  we  find  public  prou
in  the  opening  of  tbe  ipcKh  of  Lyaiaa  a^nit
Aoonitui,  of  Demathene*  ogauiat  Theocrinea),
teUing  the  dicaata,  that  they  had  been  induced  to
come  forward  by  a  deaire  to  avenge  the  wronga  of
their  bmily.  In  the  lonie  apirit  the  Athenian  law
required,  that  men,  guilty  of  unlntentiooikl  homi-
cide, ihould  remain  in  exile,  until  they  had  ap-
peaaed  the  ncareat  relativei  of  Ihe  deceaicd,  to
whom  it  more  aipecially  belonged  to  rcacot  ajid
forgive  tha  injury.  (Dcm.  e.  Mid.  p.  fiSl.  c.
AriibK.  pp  640,  843,  c.  ArMog.  p.  7S0,  c.  Mo-
cart,  p.  1069  i  Meier,  dt  Bon.  Damn,  pp,  106,
136.)

laaeua  tetia  na,  that  porenta,  who  apprehended
their  own  iniolvency,  uaed  to  get  their  children
adopted  into  other  liuniliea,  that  Ihey  misht  eacspa
thaconaequencca.  (i>>  ^riil.  iier.g34.)  Thiihow-
ever  could  not  be  done,  after  the  iufiuny  had  once
nUached.  (Meier.  <fa  Bim.  Damu  p.  136  ;  AeacL
c  Oa.  9  21,  cd.  BeU.)

W«  find  no  mention  of  proper^  ea


G98


HERES.


tiie  itile  of  Athcni  fin  *uit  ot  hein.  Thii  pn>-
hably  iriiK  from  b  principle  of  Athenian  law,  ae-
coniing  to  which  no  livie  fiunily  wu  mffered  to
eipin  ;  and  Ihereftpre  the  prop^y  of  an  intnLat«
wai  alwftTB  auigned  to  ncfa  pemm  aa  wba  moat
iit  to  be  nis  bugcchot  and  repnaentatiTe.  With
alieni,  and  those  illcgithnats  children  who  were
regarded  at  alien*,  it  wai  no  doubt  othrrwige.
(Meier,  dt  Boa.  Damn.  p.  1*8.) [C.  R.  K.]

2.  ROHAN.  When  ■  man  died,  a  certain
person  or  certain  personi  auceeedcd  to  all  hie
property,  under  the  name  of  kena  er  ienia:
this  was  B  nniTenal  anccesaion,  the  whole  proper^
being  cnniidercd  >  oniTenilas.  [UHirinaiTAs].
Such  B  luccession  comprehended  all  the  right!  and
lialiilltieB  of  the  petboa  deceaaed,  and  wai  ex-
pressed by  the  term  Heredilai.  The  word  here-
ditai  ia  saordinsly  defined  to  be  ■  anttetuoa  to
all  the  rights  of  the  deceased  (Dig.  «0.  tiL  IS.
g.  34.)  ;  and  somBtimei  it  U  nsed  to  ei^sa  the
properly  which  is  the  object  of  the  snccession.
The  terra  pecunia  is  sometimea  used  to  eTpresi  the
whole  piDperty  of  a  testator  or  intestate  (Cic.  tit
Imeid.  ilSl  ;  Gains,  iL  104)  ;  hot  it  only  »-
presses  it  as  property,  and  therefore  the  definition  of
hercditas  by  pecunia  would  be  incomplete.  Cicero
{Top.  6)  completes  the  definition  thiu  :  —  "  Ilere-
ditai  est  pecunia  quae  loone  alicujus  ad  quempiam
perrenit  jure,  nee  ea  aut  legaia  toUunento  ant
poMeesione  retmta."  The  nejpitive  part  of  the
definition  eieludes  legacies,  and  property  of  the  de-
ceased, the  ownership  of  which  is  acquired  by  a  suf-
ficient possession  of  iL  The  word  "jure"  excludes
the  "  bonorum  possesaio,"  in  opposition  to  which
the  hereditaa  is  appropriately  called  "justa."  The
Aerar  was  die  pentm  who  acquired  all  that  had  be-
longed to  aztother,  morte  and  jnre  ;  the  etymolo-
^cal  relation  of  the  word  to  ktna  seeuu  probable.

A  person  might  become  a  heres  by  being  named
as  such  (uuethinu,  iripttu,  faeha)  in  a  will,  exe-
cuted by  a  competent  penon,  according  to  thefiomg
required  by  law  [TEBTAMaNTCMj.  If  a  person
died  intestate  (infrsdidu),  or  bating  made  a  will
which  iiat  not  valid,  the  inheritance  tame  to  those

called  imdilat  l^Hima  or  r^  imtabOo.  But  a
man  could  not  die  testate  as  to  part  of  his  proper^
and  intestate  ii  to  another  part,  except  he  were  a
soldier  (cnjus  sola  Toluntas  in  tatando  speetatur).
Accordingly,  if  a  man  gaTe  a  part  of  the  het^ilas
to  one  beies  or  more,  and  did  not  dispose  of  the
test,  the  heres  or  hsrcdes  took  the  whole.  (Inst
iL  tit  U.  §  G  ;  Cic  di  hvoU.  il  21  ;  Vangerow,
Pamiciiai,  Sec.  Tol.  iL  p.  A.)

■ ■  ■ sbonld


'h  rights


lake  place,  the  person  dying  mut  haTe
ai  are  capable  of  being  transmitted  to  mouier ;
consequently  neither  a  slave,  nor  a  filins-hmiliaB,
according  lo  the  old  Roman  law,  could  make  a
heres.  Also,  the  p«son  who  is  made  hem  most
have  a  legal  edacity  to  be  heivt.

The  institution  of  a  heres  was  that  tnmali^
ih  in  a  will IE

plied  with  all  the  other  le^  Sarna.  still  his  dispo-
sition of  hii  property  wa*  not  a  wilL  The  hem
called  herei  aiiecta*,  or  simply  heres,  represented


irius.  [FnuoOUiiiSBTiM.J  The  tes-
tator might  either  name  one  person  as  herct,  ot
ho  might  nam*  tennl  heitdea  {eolunJa),  and  he


HERES.

might  divide  the  hereditas  amon
pleased.  The  shares  of  the  heredes
expressed  by  reference  to  the  divis'


pertyj '
fburthi ;


to  the  whole  pn>-
[Ts  ex  dodiante,"  herca  to  thiee*
s  "  ex  semuncia,"  heir  to  me  twenty-
,  ad  Att.  liiL  48,  riL  S  j  Cie.  />ra
.  Inst.  a.  tit  14.  5  «0  If  there  wer*
several  beredet  named,  withoat  any  dcfiniu  aharei
being  given  to  them,  the  property  belonged  to
then]  in  eqnaJ  sharea.  A  heres  might  be  insli-
tnted  dther  miaioditionBily  (  pan),  or  conditianBlly
(nA  amditiait).

If  the  testator  had  a  legal  capacity  to  dispoae,
and  if  bis  will  wu  made  in  doe  form,  the  firac  in-
quiry a*  lo  the  here*  waa,  whether  he  had  a  legal
capudty  to  take  what  wai  given  lo  him.  He  out
have  this  capacity  at  Ibe  tune  of  the  inalitutioii,  or
the  institution  is  null ;  and  in  taia  to  take  ha
moit  have  the  i^iacity  to  take  (InstS.  tit  19.
g  4),  at  the  time  of  the  testator's  death,  and  at
the  time  of  accepting  the  inheiilBOce.  Thia  capwdnr
might  be  expressed  by  the  word  "  Icstanienti-
lactio,"  an  ciprettion  which  had  refereoca  not
only  to  the  legid  capacity  of  the  tealataT,  bat  aln
to  the  l^el  capacity  of  the  penon  named  hevesL
At  a  general  rule,  only  Homan  citixou  cetild  be
named  as  faeiedea  in  the  will  of  a  Roman  dtiaen  j
bnt  a  slave  could  alao  be  named  bona,  thougii  ha
had  no  power  to  make  a  will,  and  a  filiua-bmiliaa
coutd  also  be  named  hetes,  though  he  waa  under
the  same  incapacity  ;  for  the  slave,  if  he  belcoged
to  [he  teattlor,  could,  by  hi*  maiter'*  testament,
receive  hja  freedom  and  become  here*  ;  and  if  ha
belonged  to  another,  he  look  the  inheritanee  br
the  Imielil  of  hii  matter :  the  filiut-fiuniliat  in  like
maimer  acquired  il  for  hit  &ther.  Pertona,  not
Roman  citisent,  who  had  received  the  eommerdum,
cduld  take  hereditatea,  legata  and  fideicommis^
by  tcitament.  (Cic  pro  Oaten.  7,  S2  ;  Savigny,
Zatxirifi,  vol  v,  p.  229,  SfHant,  &c  vol.  ii.  p.  27.)
Ksredes  were  either  NeoBBrii,  Bui  et  Necsa-
*arU,  or  ExttaneL  The  herea  uecesiariuB  waa  «
slaTB  of  the  ttatator,  v^  mt  mode  a  herea  and
and  ha  waa  called  Bocea-
sarioa,  becaue  of  the  iwceitity  that  ha  wai  anda
tpting  tbo  hereditaa.  A  ^v*  was  ■ontetimaa
lied  herea,  if  the  tcMBtoc  thoaght  that  he  «aa


aolvent,  for  the  pi


inaeqaaice  of  a  penoo^  wrtf
petty  being  told  to  pay  hia  debts,  ai  expluned  by
Oaina  (iL  lAl,  &c).  The  herudeeni  elneceaauu
tons  and  daogbters,  and  the  aeaa  and  dan^-
at  a  son,  who  vara  in  the  power  of  a  lealalsr  t
1  grandson  or  granddanghtar  oo«td  not  bn  >
herea,  inleia  uie  teatalor^  ton  bad  laaaiJ  ta
aoua  herea  in  tha  leatalor%  UfetiDe,  uthei-  by


neeeasi^  that  Ibey  w
'  il  law,  of  taki^  the  hondika  with  ita  isenm-
neea.  But  Ibe  pfaotat  penaitted  audi  pnona  to
isa  the  herediua  (aUnm  ■  at  fanriJtMs),
and  to  allow  tha  ptcfierty  to  be  told  lo  pay  tba
teatator^  debts  (an  isatanoe  ia  mentianad  by  Cic
PkU.  a.  16)  ;  and  he  gave  the  aame  friWLege  to  ■
mancipated  son  (fxi  n  aaua  maiteifii  ttt).  All
other  heredea  are  called  eitranei,  and  eomprehend
~  penon*  who  ar*  not  in  tha  power  of  a  leatalor,
SDch  aa  emancipated  children.  As  a  nolher  had
I  ber  duldio^  tbay  wan  axtmnai


HERES.
lundn  what  naniod  heredet  in  hei  vilL  Eilnnei
iKivda  IomI  the  potalaa  or  jot  deliberandi  (Dig.
28.  lit.  8.  •.  I),  or  privilege  of  coiuidering  whe-
iLer  ibej  mold  mecepC  the  hereditai  m  not :  bnt
if  eilbet  extnnei  hendn,  or  tbew  vJiD  had  the
itntiiinidi  potalBi,  meddled  with  the  teitatni't
fropCTlj.  the;  could  oot  aftermrda  diiclaim  the
lahaiUiHX,  nuka  the  penoii  who  had  n  meddled
■M  BDdtr  twailj-G>e  jean  of  age,  and  ao  be-
Iniged  la  a  dot  who  vera  relierid  by  the  praetor
ia  ill  caK*  wliere  thaj  wen  Drermched  [CuBi-
TOi),  and  aba  in  caie*  when  they  had  accepted
ao  iuolTtnt  hereditai  (diaatoia  iertdilai).  The
mperer  Hadrian  gsie  thii  relief  to  a  penou
ahoie  twenty-Eye  yean  of  a^  who  bnd  iccepled
■n  hendilaa,  and  afierwarda  ducoTered  that  it  waa
incamhered  with  a  heary  tlebt.  (Guui,ii.  163.)

bHb  imdilatii,  that  ia,  for  them  te  d(
vbeUxr  thcT  inwld  take  the  heredttaa
hmn  the  phnae  "cenae  hereditatan."  (Cic
°d^a.xL  IQ.)  Thai,  if  the  teatalor  had  written
in  hU  will  "  Here*  Titim  eito,"  he  ought  to  add,
'  Ceraitoqne  in  centum  diebui  pmimnia  qnibni
■da  poteriaqoa :  quod  ni  hacnvenaexhtna  eilo."
(Ouu,ii.  16A;  Cic.  4tOrrX.L22.}  Iftheex-
tnaeoa  wiibed  la  tika  the  heraditu,  he  waa  re-
quired Is  mafce  a  fbonal  declantioo  of  hia  intention
viihin  the  time  named  (Ura  diirn  er^imU).  Tbe
binal  worda  of  aetion  wen  "  eam  heredilatem
kdn  cermqiie."  Unleii  he  did  thii,  he  loit  the
Ixndita^  and  he  could  net  obtain  it  menly  by
actii^  aa  here*  (pro  iertd*  gtrtado).  If  a  penon
wu  named  hen*  withcnt  any  time  of  crelion  being
tied,  DT  if  be  nieeeedcd  [ligitimo  jart)  to  the
(nptny  ctf  an  inlalate,  he  might  become  here*
.  wiiboDt  anj  formal  dectaration  of  hit  intention,
■od  might  take  pcmeMion  of  the  hereditai  when
he  pleaied  :  bat  tnc  praetor  waa  accuitomed,  upon
(he  demand  of  the  oediton  of  the  teatalor  or  in-
Intate,  to  name  a  time  wilbia  which  the  hena
•hoold  take  paaBOBen,  and  in  deEiidt  of  hia  doing
la,  be  gare  tbe  creditort  permiuion  to  sell  tbe
property .  The  comnuHi  form  of  oetion  in  the  will
Inlforit  tr^ie)  baa  been  already  mentioned-
Eooietime*  tho  wurda  ^  qaibiti  aciet  poteritqiie  *^
were  omitted,  and  it  waa  then  apeciallT  called
"tntio  eertorom  dienim,"  which  «■•  the  more
daadnrntageoaa  to  tbe  heni,  ai  the  d^i  b^an  to
be  nckoDed,  or,  a*  we  lay,  the  time  began  to  nm
iaiBiediatelf',  and  it  waa  not  reckoned  tinm  the
tiae  wbco  tbe  herea  knew  that  ha  waa  named
hena,  and  had  no  impediment  to  hii  cretion.

It  waa  not  imuiual  to  make  aoTerat  d^reea  of
heredei  m  a  will,  which  waa  called  mMLMio.
(Idm.  2.  tiL  IS.)  That  in  tbe  formnla  beginning
"  Hatt  Tilhi*,"  Ac,  after  the  word*  "  oxhere*
aHa,"  the  toatabs'  might  add,  "Tom  MaeTiui
herea  eato  oemitoqae  m  diebu  centom,^^  &c.  ;  and
he  might  go  on  aabatitnting  aa  f*r  ai  be  plcaied.
The  peraon  fint  named  ai  here*  (priao  i/miii)
WooBe  ben*  by  the  act  of  cretion ;  and  tbe
■obMitnlQa  (ftemtbu  ttrtt,  Cic  T<ip.  10  ;  Her.
SaLu.B.i»i  Tadt.  Ann.  19)  wai  then  entinly
euhdad.  If  Ibe  imda  "  li  nan  crcTaria  "  wen
nM  IbUoired  by  wMda  of  eihendatioo,  tbii  gave
nae  adTBatage  to  the  fint  here* ;  for  ioitince,  if
hiBt^ected  ue  fermality  of  CTOticra,  and  only  acted
•a  hena,  be  did  not  lute  ^  but  thoied  the  hereditai
eqaallr  with  Huff  aabatitnled  penon.  Thii  wa*  the
•Uid*)  but  a  (ODitilatiMi  ^  M.  AatoDiDiii  made


acting  aa  heiea  eqaivalent  to  cretion,  prerided
tuch  acting  took  place  within  the  time  of  cretion.
(Compare  Oaini,  iL  177,  Ac.,  with  Ulpiao,  Frag.

be  caae  of  liberi  impabrrea,  who  were  in  the

of  a  teatator,  there  might  be  not  only  the

f  nibititntian  juit  mentioned  (ai^arii  tat-

ititutio),  bat  the  teatatar  mi^t  doclan  that  if  auoh

cbildrm  iboold  lire  to  became  hi*  heredea,  and

lold  die  impabena,  Mae  other  peraon,  whom  he

named,  ibould  be  hia  h^ea. Tbii  waa  eipreiaed

'  11,  "  li  prim  moriatar  qoam  in  ioam  tulelam

lerit" (Cic.  dt  Lnml.  ii.  43,  Top.  10  ;  Oaiui,

179),  Im  the  termioatim  irf'  impnberty  and  of

I  tuteU  were  coincident. {CunaTOH.] Thiu,

aa  Oaiua  remacki,  one  tealamentaiy  diipoaition

-— ■  ' ■ "■■ "■ j«-

itution  waa  conlained  in  a  chuue  by  itaalf^  and

aepante  part  of  the  will,  which  ni  lecured

by  the  teitator'*  own  thread  and  Mai,  with  a  pro-

Tiaion  in  the  fint  part  of  tbe  will  that  thit  aecoDd

part  ahould  not  be  opened  ao  loag  ai  the  eon  litcd

and  wai  impubea. A  lobititntian  conld  alto  be

e  case  of  children  being  exheffedated

(dkinhcTJIed)  by  the  paroifa  will,  and  the  inb-

aUtuted  penon  then  took  ti\  that  the  papilloa  ao-

qnind  tiy  heroditaa, legMom (legacy)  or  gift

(Jaina  ofaaarat  (iL  1S3)  that  all  hii  remarki  with

reference  to  inbatitntiHi  for  children  impaberea,

when  mad*  heiedea  at  exheredatsd,  apply  to  pott-

hnmona  (^offtan)  childieu,  of  which  there  i*  an

example  dtad  by  Cicero  (Tbp.  10, Si  filina  nato*

"let  in  deoem  muuibna,  Stc).

If  an  eitranen*  waa  made  bete*,  there  eoold  be

I  aubatitution  to  tbe  eSut,  that  if  he  died  •rilhia

certain  lime,  anothei  petton  ahould  be  lum  :  fbt

though  a  teatalor  coald  attach  a  conditjon  to  be

performed  bdbn  a  penon  could  take  the  hereditaa,

a  pertoD  whsi  he  bad  once  become  hen*  coatimwd

auch. The  caae  of  a  popillaria  nbatitntio,  which

exoeptioo  to  thi*  gcaieial  rnle,  wai  [Vobably

fbmided  OD  the  patris  poteataa. The  hena  migh^

'ei,  be  charged  with  a  fideicommiaanm,  in

caae  bo  waa  hero*  Gdociaria*. [Fiducoh-

m.]

to  conditiona  which  the  herea  waa  bomid  to
perlann,  ihiry  might  be  any  that  were  not  contrary
to  poaitiTc  law  or  poeitive  monlity  ;  inch  aa  the
■eiting  np  of  ltatae^  ftc  (Cic.  Kerr,  ii  8,  9,  U),
or  changing  the  name  (od  AH.  liL  8).  Impoa-
■ihle  condition*  wen  treated  aa  if  there  were  no
conditiom  mentioned  (pro  ocoi  acriplo,  IniL  2.  tiL
14.  a  10).

If  a  inan%  own  ilaTe  wa*  made  here*  by  hi*
will,  it  waa  n  r  r  r  imj  that  he  ahould  be  made  free
aiio  by  tbe  will :  the  wocdi  were  **  Stichua  ler-
TU  meua  liber  hereeqne  eito."  If  the  (lave  wen
not  made  bee  by  the  teatament,  he  could  not  take
midet  it,  even  if  be  wen  manumitted  by  hi*
matter,  and  of  conne  he  could  not  if  he  wen  told  (
and  the  naaon  ia,  that  tbe  inUitutiaa  waa  not
valid.  If  be  wai  inatitnted  fne  aa  well  aa  hena,
ha  became  both  a  freeman  and  beret  neceiaariua  by
the  death  of  hia  maater;  if  he  waa  mannmitled  by
hii  maater  in  hit  lifetime,  he  might  aerept  the  in-
heritance or  refute  iL  If  be  waa  aold  by  hit  mat-
ter in  hi*  lifetime,  he  could  take  potaeaaion  of  tha
inheritance  with  the  penoiaaion  of  hia  new  matter,
who  thua  became  here*  through  the  medinm  of  hia
alaTc.  If  the  ihiTi  who  wa*  made  hosi  wa*  at
««  4  •  o"~


eOO  HERES.

tliM  time  tbe  prapertj  of  &natber  pcnon,  mi  not

vtihout  the  cooKnt  oF  hia  nuutn,  tbr  if  he  look  it
hii  muler  bfcaine  herd :  if  auch  iIbtb  wh>  mnnu-
mitled  bcfbn  taking  ponaaion  of  the  inheiitann,
he  niiglil  accept  it  or  refuK  it  bi  he  pimed.

If  ut  Ingenaug  died  ioleitnts,  either  from  not
luiTing  muia  n  will,  or  bayiiif;  made  a  will  bnt  not
in  due  fonn,  la  having  made  a  will  in  dua  form
which  afterward!  became  in'raiid  (npten,  ircihini),
or  if  there  wai  no  hecet-nnder  the  will,  Che  hen-
dilai,  according  to  the  law  of  the  Twelve  Tsblci,
came  lo  the  herede*  nii,  and  wu  then  called  It-
gilitna  ienditai,  (Oaini,  iii.  2.)  The  hereda  aui
were  "  liberi  "  in  Ihe  power  of  the  tdtator  at  the
time  of  hit  death  ;  the  terra  liberi  comprehended
not  onlj  children,  but  the  children  of  the  teatator^
male  children,  and  the  children  of  a  •on'i  ion.
Adopted  childnn  were  coniidered  the  lanw  aa
other  children.  Bnt  grandchildren  could  not  be
heredet  lui,  unlcu  their  bther  had  ceaaed  to  be
in  the  power  of  the  inleilatf ,  either  by  death  or  in
ani^  other  waj,  ai  hj  emancipation.  A  wife  in
manu  being  cnnaidered  ai  a  daughter,  and  a
dangfaler.  in-law  <>wrtu)  in  maun  Alii  being  con-
liderrd  a  gtanddaughler,  were  >ui  heredea ;  but
the  latter  onlf  when  her  bnaband  wai  not  in  the
power  of  the  inteitate  at  the  time  of  bii  death.
PoMbumotii  children,  who  would  haxe  been  in  (he
power  of  the  inlcitate  if  he  wen  liiiug,  were  alio
aui  heredea.  The  aui  herodei  took  the  faereditai
in  equal  ahars.  If  them  wai  a  ion  or  daughter,
and  children  of  a  son  deceaaed,  the  children  of  the
dcceaaed  aoa  tooh  the  portion  which  their  parent
would  haVB  taken.  But  the  diitiibution  waa  ta
tlirjiei,  that  Ii,  amang  the  ttocka  or  atema  aprung
from  the  anceator,  and  not  m  a^pHa,  or  among  the
indicidoalt:  thui,if  there  were  a  >on,and  the  lona
of  a  decHiaed  aon,  the  aon  would  take  half  of  the
heredilai,  and  the  aona  of  the  deciaaed  aon  would
take  the  other  bolf^  in  equal  aharea.

If  an  inlotaCe  had  no  ani  heredea,  (he  Twelre
Tablet  gave  the  berediiat  to  the  agnati.  (Oaiua,
iii,  9.)  It  ii  itBted  under  Coqnati,  who  are  agnati.
The  hereditaa  did  not  belong  to  all  the  agnati,  but
only  to  thoac  who  were  ncateat  at  the  time  when
it  wna  aacerCained  that  a  person  had  died  inteatate.
If  ^e  nearot  agnilua  either  neftteded  to  take  the
inheriomce  or  died  betray  he  had  taken  poaaeaaion
of  iL  in  neither  caie  did  the  nei


Hei


ather


I  of  which  ai


at  the

had  died  intewatc,  and
t  the  time  of  the  death  ;
that  the  heredi


e  the  {soperty  of  the  inteatate
until  bi*  heir  waa  aieertaiDBd,  and  hia  heir  could
not  be  aacertained  until  it  waa  certun  that  he  had
left  no  will  ;  and  aa  Oaiua  obaervea,  if  he  had  left
a  will,  atill  it  might  happen  that  no  penon  would
be  hcrca  under  that  will ;  and  accordingly  it  leemed
better,  aa  he  obaerret,  to  look  out  for  the  Dearest
aguatni  at  the  time  when  it  ii  aacertained  that
then  ii  no  hero  under  the  wilL  If  there  were
ieveral  sgnad  in  the  nne  deftiee,  and  any  one
refuaed  to  take  hia  dure  or  died  before  be  had
naaentad  to  take  it,  anch  abare  acerned  (aderVBH)
to  thoae  who  coiaanted  to  take  the  hereditaa.

In  the  caie  of  women,  there  were  ume  peeuli-
aritiea  whicb  anae  from  their  legal  eondition
(Oama,  iii.  U). Ths  hcca£Mn  of  wuowa  iatg*-


IIBRE3.
tale  aunc  lo  their  agnnti  juat  aa  the  inheritancei
of  mnlea ;  bnt  women  who  were  beyond  (he  degrc*
of  conaanguinei  (a  term  which  legally  meani  bro-
then  and  aiaton)  could  not  take  hereditatea  ab
inlealalcL  Thui,  aaiiter  might  lake  from  a  brother
01  liatcr  aa  legitima  hcrca  ;  but  en  aunt  or  a
brother'!  daughter  could  not  be  a  legitima  berca.
The  principle  of  Roman  law  which  garc  to  thota
who  came  into  the  poteataa  or  manua  thf  quality
of  children  of  the  blood,  waa  followed  out  in  (hia
caae  alao ;  a  mother  or  a  alepmolher  who  had  come
M  mamm  viri  [hereby  obtained  the  aUOu  of  a
daughter  ;  and,  conicquentlj,  aa  to  legilimite  anc-
ceaaiou,  there  were  the  aame  relation!  between  auch
mother  or  atepniDtlier  and  the  buiband"!  children,
aa  there  were  among  the  huatond"!  children  them-
aelvea.  By  the  Tweivo  Tablea  the  hereditaa  of  an
inteatate  mother  could  not  come  to  her  children,
becauae  women  have  no  aui  heredea  ;  but  by  a
SCtum  Orphitianum  of  M.Antoninna  and  Com-
madiu,thc  sona  of  a  wife,  not  in  manu,  mmfat  taka
aa  her  l^ticni  heredea,  to  (he  exeio^on  of  eonaon-
guinei  and  other  agnatL  (Ulp.  firig.  zxvl  g  7  t
comp.  Inat.3.  tiL4.)

If  a  peraon  died  Icoring  no  mi  heredea,  but  only
a  brother  and  another  brother'i  childnn,  the  hn-
thrr  took  all  aa  the  nesreat  agnatni.  If  there  waa
no  brother  surviving,  and  only  children  of  brethren,
the  hereditaa  waa  divided  among  all  the  children
in  (upato,  that  ia,  (he  whole  waa  eqneJIy  ditided
among  all  the  children.

If  tb«e  were  no  agnati,  the  Twelve  Tablea  gan
the  hereditaa  to  the  gentilea. [GaHa.]

Oaiua  (iiL  1 B,  &c.)  briefly  recapitnlalea  the  tlrict
law  of  the  Twelve  Tabtei  aa  to  the  hereditntea  of
inteatatea  : — emancipated  children  could  claim  no-
thing, aa  they  had  ceaied  to  be  lui  heredea :  the
tame  waa  the  cnaa  if  a  man  and  hia  children  were
at  the  aamc  time  made  Roman  citiacna,  nnleaa  the
impentor  reduced  the  children  into  the  power  of
the  bthrr;  agnati  vbo  had  tnituned  a  capi(ia
diminutio  were  excluded,  and  consequently  «  aon
who  bad  been  given  in  adoption,  and  a  daughter
who  waa  married  and  in  manu  viri ;  if  (he  next
agaB(ua  did  not  take  poascauon,  he  who  was  next
in  order  could  Eiot  for  that  reason  make  any  claim ;
feminae  agnatae  who  were  beyond  the  degree  of
cansanguinel  bad  no  claim :  cognati,  wfaoae  kin-
ahip  depended  on  a  female,  bad  no  mutual  righta
aa  to  their  hereditntea,  nnd  conteqnently  there  were
no  such  mntnol  righta  between  a  moUier  and  bet
children,  onleai  the  mother  had  come  in  mannm
viri,  and  ao  the  righta  of  consanguinity  had  been
establiahed  between  them.

Gaiu!  Dnxceds  to  ahow  (iii  2S,  Sec)  how  theaa
inequilable  mlea  of  the  civil  Liw  were  modified  by
the  praetor's  edict,  Ai  to  the  auoceaaion  of  cwnati
under  the  Imperial  legislation,  tee  Inat  3.  tit.  S,
DtSCta  Ter-hdl.;  Cod.  6.  lit  68 ;  Not,  lia.

If  a  man  hod  a  ton  in  his  power,  be  waa  bonnd
either  to  make  him  bcree,  or  to  exheiedate  (eailere-
Ainc)  him  expreaaly  {lontiiatim).  If  he  paaard
him  over  in  alienee  (alniio  praiitrimt),  the  will
wBi  altoeethcr  void  (tnriib,  mm  jun  /actitm).
Some  junata  were  of  opinion  that  even  if  the  arm,
H  ptuKd  ova,  died  in  the  fttber'a  liretime,  there

ltd  be  no  heret  under  that  will. (Gains,  iL  1-23,


BSRE3.
Fa  imtmcB,  if  tlu  hendci  iDititnti  vrtn  mi,  the
pmoii  or  pomii  pinnl  orer  look  Alt  equal  ibaTe
■ith  llwm.  If  the  bende*  iutitnti  wsre  extnmi,
■he  pman  or  ptnooi  paued  om  took  a  half  oj'
iIk  whole  henditai ;  and  ai  the  |>BtIor  garc  the
cmtn  Eabnlai  booorum  poueuio  to  the  peiwni  »

iwndilai.  A  nacript  of  the  empenr  M.  Antcninut
Umtei  tit  muHiiil  wfaich  vomcn  codM  lake  bj  the
o  to  that  which  the;  eoold  tale


Itm*
dr  IB  eikcndMe  ,

,  which  waj  originally  nlid,
bcama  inivlid  (nptaoif ;  and  lbs  will  became
anlid  h;  the  birth  eitbei  of  a  poMhi
duighler,  «v  ■<  the  pfaiaae  wma,  adgni
pinr  IstaraentoiiL  (Ck.  deOr.i.  57.)  PoMmni
nre  Dot  only  thoae  who  wots  bam  aEier  ihe  lo-
tnor^  win  WM  made,  and  came  into  hii  powei  or
nold  hare  cone  into  hit  paver  if  he  bad  lired,
bet  alao  thoae  who  might  become  the  ni  berodei
il  the  ledator  by  the  death  of  laine  other  pcnon
in  Ibe  talator^  lifetime.  Thu,  if  a  tealalor^  Km,
vho  «u  in  hii  power,  had  children,  and  the  kd
M  in  the  teetatoi'i  lifetime,  the  grandchildren
btoBie  nti  hendei,  and  the  teatament  became
return  by  tbia  qaaci  Dgnatio  ^  it  waa  therefon  a
"TFwaiy  precaatirai  to  inititule  ai  heiedei  or  to
nhovdite  oKh  giaiidchildreiL  It  follawi  that  if
Uw  leetaBMot  could  be  made  innlid  by  ihii  quaai
•mtto,  it  mint  liaTe  betmne  inialid  by  a  md
Img  born  in  the  lifetime  of  the  testator,  unleu
the  will  had  ptorided  for  the  caie  ;  fw  it  became
inibd  if  the  teilalai  adopted  a  hhi  or  a  danghter
(Uljiiui)  either  by  adrogatioa  or  adoption  prt^ierly


Thect


Mif  he  tookawifs  in  manum  afUr  the  dale
•(  Ihe  will

The  wEcd  PoaliUDna  baa  clearly  Ihe  10x10  ligni-
iolioB  ai  Poattemni,  and  literally  meani  a  child
btnlaat.  The  pavage  of  Qainiia  defectiTe  where
he  trtati  of  Poatumi  -,  but  the  defiDition  of  Poatumi,
M  inaored  in  the  BreTioiium,  appean  lo  he
enct:  **  PoatimMVam  dno  genera  rant:  qoia
pMBDi  adpeOantar  hi,  qui  poet  martem  patri>  de
uore  nati  fberint,  et  illi  qui  pott  teotamentum
brxam  Baaetmtnr*"  Sometime!  Uie  word  pottnmna
>•  defioed  loly  ai  a  child  bom  after  a  btber'i
dnth,  ai  we  aee  in  tome  of  the  OIoHBe,  and  in
Plutarch  {SaBa,  37) !  but  there  it  no  pnof  that
Ike  miaung  waa  limited  lo  each  children  ;  and  the
^■■^el  BmetimM  citid  aa  t>eing  to  that  eltect
(Dig.M.tiL  16.  i.lM;36.1it.S.i.3)UTebeen

li  alieni,  aee  Gaini,  i.  U7,  il  243  j

icitea,  &c  ToL  ii.  p.  90.
in which a  ralid


. M  of  the  <Jd  civil  law  waa

by  the  ptaelorian  law,  whifh  gare  the  booomm
piiFwit  to  thoae  who  coold  not  take  Ihe  hereditai
hf  iha  nilea  of  the  dril  law. [BoNOBUH  Poa-

The  brna  repreaenled  the  tcatatoc  and  intealate
Kie.d4Ut>.  iL  14),  and  had  not  only  a  claim  to  all
liit  pnpR^  and  all  tlMl  wh  due  Id  him,  but
Wmidbyall"" "


BERES.  601

hat  iHily  in  reipert  of  iha  property,  fiir  the  obliga-
tion of  the  laoa  priiata  wai  attached  lo  property
and  tg  the  herei  only  at  the  ovner  nf  it  Hence
the  expreaiioa  "  tine  lacris  heredilai "  meant  an
hereditat  nneneombered  with  aacia.  (Plaut  CipL
ir.  1.  8,  7>Maiii.a4.  83;  Featoa,  1.  o.  5iK«  werii
litniiUai.)

The  le^laticm  of  Joitinian  relented  the  herei,
who  accepted  an  hereditat,  from  all  the  debti  and
obtigatioiu  of  the  tetlator  or  intenale,  beyond
what  the  proper^  would  ptiify,  prorided  he  made

a  certain  form  and  withui  B  given  time.  (Cod.  6.
tiL  30. 1.  23.)  It  alto  allowed  the  uulilutiaD  of
a  man't  own  tlave  at  heret  without  giving  him  hit
freedom. (Intl.  2.  til.  14  ;  camp.  Oaiut,  ii.  1G5.)

The  beret  conid  claim  any  property  which  be-
longed to  hia  tettalor  or  intntate  by  the  heredita-
lii  petitio  (Dig.  S.  tit.  3.  s.  30),  which  wai  an  actio
in  rem,  and  properly  belmgod  to  a  herei  only,
though  it  wai  nfterwardt  giien  to  the  bouomm
pnttftior.  Each  herea  claimed  only  hit  thore.
(Cit  Pro  fiow.  Qna.  e.  18.)

Theeoherede*  ihared  among  tfaemaelTei  the  pro-
perty, and  bore  their  thare  of  Qie  debta  in  the  lame
ptoportioni.  For  the  purpoaa  of  diviaion  and  ael-
tling  the  aflairt  nf  tu  teatator,  a  tale  waa  often
neceiaary.  (Cic.aJ^{l.ii.  Ifi.)  If  thepartict  could
not  agree  about  the  diriiion  of  the  poperly,  any

[Fauiliai  Ebc  Ac]

The  hereditat  might  be  alienated  by  the  form  of
in  jura  cetaio.  The  here*  legitimu  might  alienate
the  hereditat  before  be  took  poiKuion  of  it,  and
the  purehaaer  then  became  herea,  jutt  at  if  he  had
been  the  legitimu)  herea.  The  acriptni  here*  could
only  alienate  it  after  the  adi^o:  niter  inch  aliena-
tion by  him,  or  by  the  herei  legitimni  nfter  aditio,
both  of  them  atill  remained  heredea,  and  eonae-
quenily  aiuwetabie  to  cieditan,  but  all  debti  due
to  them  at  faendet  were  eitinguiihed.

The  hcreditatei  of  freedmen  are  more  pnqierly
coniidered  under  LtBiRTi  and  PATnoNi.

fielbre  il  wM  determined  who  wat  hent,  the
hereditai  wai  without  an  owner,  and  waa  taid
"jacere."  When  a  herea  wai  aicertained,  tuch
perton  waa  coniidend  to  poateu  all  the  lighti  in-
cident to  the  hereditat  from  the  time  of  the  death
of  the  tettator  or  inlatate.  But  thia  doei  not  ex-
plain how  we  are  to  view  the  hereditat  in  the  in.
tenal  between  the  death  of  the  former  owner  and
the  time  when  the  hcrei  is  aicettained.  During
■oeh  interral,  according  to  one  form  of  eipreiiioa
need  by  the  Roman  juriati,  the  hereditai  it  a  jurii-
tical  pcnon  (cue  pertoKU  fitttgitur)^  and  it  the
domina,  that  ii,  the  dominn  of  itaelf ;  according  to
another  focm  of  expreaiion,  it  lepreienta  the  de-
funct, and  not  the  penon  of  the  future  herea.
Theae  two  fbimi  aro  the  tame  in  meaning,  and
they  eiprcu  a  fiction  which  baa  rehttion  to  the
legal  capacity  of  the  defunct,  and  not  that  of  the
future  herea,  and  which  doea  not  iuTolve  the  no-
tion of  any  juriitical  penonolity  of  the  hereditai.
The  relation  to  the  lual  capacity  of  the  defunct  ia
thit :  —  SUret  generally  belonaed  to  an  hereditat.
A  tlaTo,  at  is  well  known,  could  ocquin  properly
for  hii  living  muter,  even  without  hii  knowledge  ;
but  the  validity  of  the  act  of  acquitition,  in  lome
caiei,  depended  on  the  legal  cn[scity  of  bii  nuuter
to  acquire.  Now,  while  the  herediui  waa  without
an  atoertaJned  owner,  many  acta  of  a  tinve  bj


603  HEKMAE.

whiclt  the  hrrediUt  migbt  receiTu  additioiu,  wen
atricllj  void,  and  null  acU  ranld  onlj  liare  ibeir
legal  eSect  cm  Ihe  ■uppoHtton  that  Ue  iIstc  bad
an  owner  of  a  mSicient  legal  capacity  ;  and  accotd-
inglf,  the  ficUon  oF  law  gare  ralidirr  to  tbe  act  of
the  aiiiTe  by  relatioD  to  the  koown  legal  cspiuitf
of  tiiB  lat«  owner,  and  not  by  relation  to  Ihe  y< '

legal  capacity.  The  fallowing  are  (XHopln:-
'^Wbeti  a  Roman,  wbo  bad  a  legal  capacity  t
roalcB  a  will,  died  inleilale,  and  another  peraou

rint«d  aa  hit  hem  a  ilaie,  who  belonged  ~~
herediWa  which  wa»  1^1  wiihontan  owner,  in
inititution  of  a  here)  would  he  ralid  by  virtue
thifl  fiction,  became  it  had  reference  to  the  legal
capacity  of  the  defonct. If  then  bad  beei
fiction,  the  Talidity  of  tbe  inititution  woi
been  doublfal,  for  the  nnaiceitauiedlegitiniDihem
might  be  an  inteitabilia,  who  (at  lean  accoidiitf;
the  old  law)  eould  not  be  inililu led  here*.  —  If
•oldiep  died  and  left  a  will,  which  waa  not  ?

■hlTe  belonging  Is  the  ■oldier'i  hereditai,  liecan
(be  inititution,  according  to  thia  fiction,  had  refe
enee  to  the  deceaied  ;  but  if  there  were  not  th
fiction,  the  inilitution  might  be


kadn.


»  teitamentibctki  with  thta
It  wu  to  provide  for  eueh  casei  M  these  only,  that
thb  fiction  wai  introduced  ;  and  it  had  no  other
object  than to facilitate certain  acquiaitioni  hy

Thi*  DUuleily  elpoiition  ii  by  Saiigny  (Syitent
4a  hMt.  R.  R.  Tol.  iL  p.  363).

(Otuut,  2.  99—190,  S.  1—34  ;  Ulpian,  Frag.
xiil.  Dig.  Se,  29  ; Inat.  2,  S  ; Rein,  Dot  Ro-


chieSyin  the  Latin  cUuici;  Vangerow. /"aiBi-ttm,
Ac,  Erbrecht,  vol,  il  The  chapter  on  Brhrechi  in
Pachta^i  liatitMiumeMf  &c.  iii.  p.  21£,  &c  ra  concise
and  Teiy  clear.)  [O.  L.]

HERHAE  (Jfi/uir),  and  the  diminutive  Hcrmnll
Offiii-a),  itatacs  ounpucd  of  a  head,  niually  that  of
the  god  Hermei,  placed  on  a  qnadrangular  piUnr,
the  height  of  which  correipDndi  to  tbe  italure  of
the  hnman  body  {fi  TiTpdiy<*m  ip-foela,  Thuc  tL
27  ;  t4  oxfif"  T*  Ttrpi-fumr,  Pam.  iv.  S3.  §  i,
1,3).  Some  dttficultiea  are  involved  in  the  quel-
tion  of  their  or^in,  and  of  their  meaning  aaiymboli
of  Hermea.  One  of  the  most  important  featurei
in  the  mythology  of  Hennei  ii  hit  preiidence  over
the  comnian  intercouraa  of  lifi-,  traffic,  joumeyt,
roada, boiuidariea,  and  aofbitb,  and  there  can  bene
doubt  that  it  wai  chiefly  in  anch  relatiana  ai  theae
that  hs  waa  intended  to  be  reprefented  by  the
Htrmat  of  the  Oreeka  and  fay  the  Ttmrni  of  the
Homani,  when  the  latter  were  identified  with  the
Hermae.  It  ia  therefore  mitnral  that  we  should
look  for  the  exiatence  of  thia  aymbol  in  the  very
esilieat  tima  la  which  the  uib  of  boundary-mariii
was  required  ;  and  in  toch  timca  the  aymbol*
would  be  of  theaimpleatchartictcr,  a  heapof  atonea
or  an  unhewn  block  of  marble.  Now  we  find  that
there  were  in  many  parts  of  Oreece  heaps  of  itonei
by  the  Bidea  of  rends,  capecially  at  their  crosslp^
and  on  the  bonndariea  of  landa,  which  wen  called
fp^iau  or tfliiit*, ipfmhi \i^  and Ipitami'


HERMAE.
{Heayeh.  t. »»,).  An  iptuiht  ^iftt  near  Ithact
is  mentioned  in  the  Odyaioy  (ivi.  i71)  ;  Stnht
noticed  many  Ipiuia  on  the  roadi  in  Elis  (viiL
p,  343)  ;  and  even  now  an  ancient  heap  of  Moiei
may  be  aeen  on  the  boundary  of  Laconia  (Rom,
Pdop.  vol.  L  [^  IB,  174).  The  religioaa  nipeet
]Aid  to  auch  heaps  of  stonea,  eapecially  at  the  meet-
inga  of  roads,  is  shown  by  the  cuilom  of  each  |iBistc
by  throwing  a  atone  on  to  the  heap  (Nliand.  TTUr.
150)  }  thia  cualom  wai  alao  oUernid  with  lefer-
ence  to  the  Bermae  of  later  emes,  at  le«t  to  thoee
which  atood  where  roads  met  {Jmlk  Gram.  lot.
u/ra  dl.)  Such  hespa  of  itonea  were  alao  aeen  by
Slrabo  on  the  roads  in  Egypt  (ivii.  p.  SIB).
Another  loode  of  narkbg  a  boundary  or  other  de-
finite locality  waa  by  a  pillar  of  stone,  origimlly
unhewn,  the  aacred  diaiaclei  of  which  waa  marked
byponring  oil  upon  it  and  adorning  il  (Tbeophrait,
16,  comp.  Gmtia  xxriii.  18,  22,  xjrri,  43—48,
where  both  the  pillar  and  the  heap  of  atonea  an
let  up  for  1  wilneo,  xiiv.  14).  The  Egyptiaa
obeli^  probably  bdoaga  to  the  same  claa  of  manfr

Referring  the  reader,  for  the  further  exarainaden
of  Ihete  matlEn,  to  worka  ia  which  thay  an  dis-
cuoed  at  length  (Zoega,  da  Or^.  tt  Ut.  Obdiin,
Romae,  1797,  p.  217;  Oerhud,  d»  Ril^iai*
Hermanan,  Berol,  1S45, 4[o.  ;  Otto,  dt  Dit  Tis-
libta,  c  7  ;  MUller,  AnMiii.  d.  Kmt,  §  fifi  :
Preller,  in  Pauly<s  Rial-Emye.  d.  Oatt.  AlUrlk.

of  these  heaps  of  atonea  and  pillart,  those  which
marked  bonndariea  wen  either  cdgiiially  symbols
0^  or  were  afterwardi  coniscratnl  to,  the  god
Hermee.  It  ii  not  denied  thai  inch  rude  memo-
rialawere  at  lirat  lymboliof  the  varioni  godi  alike,
but  at  a  very  cariy  period  they  came  to  be  men
especiatly  ataocialed  with  the  wonhip  of  Hemiea,

The  &>t  attempt  at  the  artiatie  develapmoil  of
the  blocks  of  atone  and  wood,  by  whicb,  in  the
"lieat  period  of  idol-worahip,  all  the  divinitiea
re  represented,  waa  by  adding  to  them  a  head,
the  featuiea  of  which  the  chaiactetistica  of  the
god  were  auppoaed  to  be  eipreased  ;  and  mftswaida
other  membera  of  the  body  wen  added,  at  first
with  a  symbolical  meaning.  These  ehanns  pro-
duced the  Hermae,  such  as  they  an  deaenbed  by
the  inei«it  authors,  and  ai  we  now  bave  tbetn.
The  phallua  fbnned  an  eaaential  part  of  th«  symbol,
ptubably  because  the  divinity  represented  by  it
was  in  tbe  earliest  times,  before  the  worship  cf
Dionyiua  was  imported  &om  the  East,  tbe  pe>
sonification  of  the  reproductive  powen  of  nature.
So  the  symbol  is  deacribed  by  Hendotos,  who
Bscrihe*  the  origm  of  it  to  the  Pelaagisna,  who
communicated  it  to  the  Athenians,  and  they  to
the  other  Oreeka.  (Herod.  Ii,  £1  ;  Pint.  «  Smi  ut
Heap.  ger.  Ii.  p,  797,  f. ;  Cie.  d*  NaL  Dear.  iiL
2-2  ;  comp.  Creuser'a  Note,  in  Baeh^a  edition  of  He-
matter  (L  34.  3  3,  iv.  33.  g  3.  s.  4),  and  ■]«>  atalea
that  the  Arcadians  wen  partieulariy  {and  et  the
tye^Liia  TtrpAytBrtii  (viiL  48.  g  4,  a.  6  j  when
tatue  nferred  to  ii  ene  of  Zens),  wbieh  ia


&om


lultmann,  fanZ,  T>p.  302,


I  are  in  aome  way  isnnacted  ;  thangh  the
qneelion,  whether  the  god  look  hit  name  fna  tha
aymboU  or  the  symbM  fnm  the  god,  ouuiot  bo
entered  into  her*.


HERMAB.

KOM  cmfimation  nf  (he  tnid[tian  wMeh  curied
Uck  Oe  ioTHitiDa  to  tha  Pelaigic  ^nua.

In  lliB  kisloriekl  time*  of  Oreeoe,  too,  it  WBi  ■!
Atliau  lint  tbe  Htnnie  were  moM  Dnmemns
ud  Biat  Tiwnted.  So  gnat  na  tha  demand
t*  tbcM  woriu  that  tha  wordi  l^/'iryki^i,  ifia-
T^'^wJt  T^X*^  lod  JpfwrAvfttar,  were  uin]  u
Ht  tmenc  (OBM  for  *  wnlplor,  bii  ut,  and  hi>
itndM  (Plot.  ^mp.  p^  216,  a. ;  Lucian,  <£<  ^bnu.
17,  toLLp|i.9,4,10,U  ;  uid  tha  Lezicoiu).

Uonia  in  Atbani  had  one  of  thcM  aUtuet
pliiadat  the  done  called  ipM'  mpo^uti  oi  arpo-
♦«*»(Th»cTd.  TL  27  (  Aelian.  V.  H.  iL  41  j  3uid.
•.r.;  Pi>Uu,nJi72;  Atb.  i.  p.497,b.)l  mne-
lioKt  iln  ID  the  periitjle  (Lucian,  Niaig.  30,
■li.  iii.  p^  263X  'Sieh  wen  wotihipped  bf  the
*mtn  H  inMnuaratal  to  feconditr  (m  baa-relief
a  BuMrJn,  ^aAif.  Ammui.  put  1),  and  the  neat
Rnnoa  atCacbed  to  them  U  ahoim  b;  the  darm
aad  iadignalian  which  wae  felt  at  Athani  in  can-
■qience  i£  tha  mntilalion  of  the  whole  nmober  in
1  Hiiiie  li^t,  jnat  befbn  ihe  niling  of  the  Sicilian
(^itico.  (Tha<7d.  vi.  27,  with  Poppo*!  note  ;
Afldot  it.  Mja. ;  Ariitoph.  Zynit.  1093,  1094,
■od  SAaL  \  Ahitaphaua  spplic*  tha  tenn  Jpfwco-
■Au  to  Iha  mntiUton  ;  lae  alao  Phot  i.  v.  tpiia-
dtOol)

Thqt  wm  llkawiH  placsd  in  front  of  teniplei,
■tar  la  tmba,  in  the  gymnaun,  palaeatiae,  librarief,
pniooa,  and  pablic  place%  at  die  comen  of  itraeU,
(D  high  nadi  u  aisn-poMa,  vilh  distancai  inicribed
npiiB  thm  (BeekK  Corp.  Imicr.  No.  12  i  Epigr.
ItBt.  No,  234,  Bmndi,  AmaL  voL  liL  p.  197,
ittL  Plamd.  i<r.  iSi  ;  the  other  eljij;iaiiu  on
UaiaM,  Noa.  255,  256.  deKire  nobce)  ;  and
MDt  m  ttill  to  b«  KSD  at  Atheoi  with  the  namai
fi  ticUca  in  tlw  gjmnaitic  coDteeU  ioicribed  upon
Hko.  (Leake,^da»,p.l7,n.  I.)  The;  weie
'■n  BoAe  Tehicica  of  pnbiie  iniliuction,  a^iording
totkewthv  of  ths  /A^iponAiu  f  &liel;  aKribe d  ID
Flilo,  Ik  229),  who  aaj-i  that  Uio  niant  Hippat-
c^  pbocd  HeiiBU  in  the  atneti  of  tha  eily  and
ia  nada  thiaugboiu  Attica,  inacribed  with  moial
ntici,  Bcli  M  tha  following :
Hrvia  ^tt  "Xnifxtir  ffrtiX'  Slnun  ^porir.
K^IB  T^  'I«df>x«v  itii  ^Uor  ^ardra.
{Cran.  Barpocnt.  i.  v.  'E^fuu  ;  Heiych.  i.  v,
'Iriifxim  Ep^  with  Alberti'a  note).  Thoae
■Idcb  atood  at  soh  iwda  had  ofien  three  or  four
hada  (PhilBeh.  p.  45,  ed.  Siebelii ;  Hoipocr.  and
£^  Af.  (.nrpic^^oAat'Efifiqt  iPhot.  Heajreh.
tr.  TwTfmUmXoi  'Eniijt ;  EoaWh.  ad  Horn.  p.
mi  1).

•ths  wtiun  of  their  bcug  placed  on  the  bouu-
dnic*  sf  Imda  and  atale*  and  at  the  gatet  of
tioa  <«fi&i  rg  nAiSi,  rpnuAauT,  Pane.  viii.  34.
fa-a.G,  iT.33.|3.a.4,cfciiii.;  Haipocr.)  Small
Honaa  vioia  alio  need  aa  pilaaten,  and  aa  aap-
pm>  far  faminue  and  uteniila  (Pollux,  tIL  15,
73 ;  MBller,  Arc*.  |  379,  n.  2.)  Retpeding  the
av  <<  the  Htnmat  and  //armali  in  the  Cucua,
»tpp.28i,^286,fc

*  A  tfped  to  the  fim  of  theae  worka,  the  ea-
xatial  pane  haTe  been  already  mentioned.  A
pialad  beard  (fffqmrdTw)  belonged  to  the  ancient
tn>(Aiuoaid.  iL37).  A  mantle  ({/liruiv)  waa  fre-
IDiBllj  hm^  a*ei  the  ahonldera  (PaoL  liiL  39. 1 4  1
Uog.  Id&t.  *.  82).  Originally  the  lega  and  unu
—  "  « (Fauaniaa  ealla  Unm  JUw-


HERMAE  603

Aai,L  24.  §  3),  and,  in  place  of  the  arma,  then  wen
oflen  projectiona  to  hang  gailanda  upon  ;  but,  when
the  reverence  attached  to  the  ancient  type  became
len,  (Uid  iha  loTe  of  norelty  greater,  the  whole
torao  waa  placed  apon  a  quadrangular  pillar,  which
laaaened  towarda  the  baae,  and  liually  the  pillar
itaelf  waa  aomctimea  chiaellad  to  indicate  the  aep^
ration  of  tha  legi,  aa  may  be  aeen  in  a  tetiugonat
female  atatua  in  the  Villa  Albani.  (Winkelm.
Storia  diU»  AtU,  vol.  L  tai.  1.)  Sometlmei,  aa
abore  atated,  tha  head  mu  double,  triple,  and  even
Iboilbld.  The  wbota  figure  waa  geneially  of  itono
or  marble  ;  but  Cicero  (ad  Aa.  i.  H)  menliona
■otne  which  were  of  Pentelic  marble,  with  broniie
heada.  (UUUar,  ArciiiaL  d.  StmH,  %  67.)

Many  itatuca  eiiated  of  other  deitica,  of  tha
aame  fbim  aa  the  Hermae  ;  which  no  doubt  ori-
ginated in  the  aame  manner  ;  and  which  were  ilill
called  by  the  generic  name  <^  ffernoa,  e*en  though
the  bual  upon  them  vaa  that  of  another  deity.
Several  imagea  of  tbia  kind  are  detcribed  by  Pau-
aaniai ;  one  of  Poieidon  ut  Tricoloni  in  Anadia
(Tiii  35.  S  6),  another  of  Zeui  Teleioa  at  Tcgea
(>e.  4R.  e  4),  and  another  of  AphRidite  Unmia
at  Athena  (J.  19.  g  2).  The  rcaaon  why  the
alBtnea  of  the  other  deitiea  were  developed  into
perfect  formi,  while  thoea  of  Ilermea  ao  gene,
rally  (by  no  mcana  nniTer«a)ly)  retained  their
ancient  fitafaion,  ii  obvionaly  on  account  of  the  re-
ligioua  aignificancE  attached  to  tha  aymbol  of  the
pillar,  u  a  boundary  mark.  Where  Ihia  motive
waa  not  celled  into  action,  Hermea  himielf  wna
repreaented  in  the  complete  human  form  with  all
the  perfection  of  Oreeic  art,  aa,  for  example,  in  hia
Btatnea  in  the  palaeiirae,  and  in  those  which  em-
bodied Dthen  of  hia  attribnte&  (See  Milller,
Arciiiol.  d.  Smut,  |g  380,  SSI.)

Some  atatuea  of  thia  kind  are  deacribed  by  a
name  compounded  of  that  of  Hertnea  and  another
divinity;  thua  we  have  tltmaiaibU,  Hemara,
Jltnaaiitma  (Cic.  ad  Alt.  i.  4),  Hermtracla  (Cic.
ad  Att.  L  10),  Htrmena  (Plin.  H.  N.  uiti,  5,
a.  4.  g  ID),  Htrmopan.  It  haa  been  mnch  die-
puted  whetfier  tuch  figarei  were  compoeed  of  Ihe
Hjnare  pillar,  aa  the  emblem  of  Hermea,  aurmonnted
by  tha  boat  of  the  other  divinity ;  or,  aacondly,
whether  Ihe  heada  of  Hermei  and  the  other  god
were  united,  aa  in  the  huit  of  Janua  ;  or,  laatly,
whether  tha  lymbolical  ciiamcteriilica  of  the  two
dettica  were  combuied  in  Ihe  lame  atalue.  Aa  to
the  firat  explanation,  it  aeema  hardly  probable  that,
aa  late  oa  the  time  of  Cicero,  the  mere  pillar  ihould
have  been  conaidered  u  adequate  a  repreaontation
of  Hermea  ua  the  buit  waa  of  the  other  deity :  the
wcund  ia  aupported  by  many  eiiatuig  terminal
double  bulla:  the  third  can  only  be  regnrded
u  an  ingeniona  conjecture,  which  may  be  true  of
iome  worka  of  a  late  period  of  art.  We  think
that  the  lecond  ia  the  true  eiplanation  in  the
poiaagca  from  Cicero.  (Comp.  Ulillar,  ATuUioL  d.
K<aul,  %  346,  n.  2.)

There  ia  aiill  uiather  claaa  of  theae  worka,  in
which  the  butt  repreaented  no  deity  at  all,  but  waa
umply  the  portrait  of  a  man,  and  m  which  Ihe
pillar  loaea  all  ita  aymbollcal  meanitig,  and  hecrdnca
a  mere  pedeataL  Evan  theae  atatuea,  honever,  re-
tained the  name*  of  Hermit  and  Ttrmim.  Tha
eiamplea  of  them  are  very  numeroua  A  liai  of
tbege  and  of  the  other  Hermae  ia  given  by  C  W-
Milller. (Erach  and  Gieht^  Emiyid^^adio,  arL


601  HEItMAK.'

The  Hemiiie  of  all  kindi  were  in  great  refjDejt
among  Uie  wcallhf  Romaiu,  for  the  decomtion  ( '
^eir  hoou*  and  lillai.  It  ii  also  ilaled  that  the
DKd  thciQ  as  poiti  for  onuunentBl  lailin^  la
guilen,  in  which  oue  the;  wen  commsnlji  de«
rated  with  the  hvtU  of  philoaophcn  and  eminer
men,  tome  o(  which  ma;  be  teen  u  the  Valica

' ■ '  mt,  with  Uie  >qiiara  hole*  ' ' '


shou


■erted. Thil  Iquoie  hoi
Hemiae of  old Qreek workmanihip, in
CSKI  thej  wars  prolmbly  the  BockeU  of  the  pn>-
jectiong,  abore  mentioned,  for  hanging  garlandi  on.
The  eiinting  remains  of  ancient  att  are  rich  in
terminal  itatnei  of  nil  the  claiaea  which  hare  been
deicribed ;  and  ipecimeni  of  nearly  all  may  be
•een  in  the  Britiih  Miueum,  and  in  engraving!  i
Miiller'i  Denhniller  dtr  aliai  Kimit  (vol,  1.  pi.
Not  3,  4,  S,  voL  iL  pL  iiviiL  Not  299, 300, 303,
pi.  ixii.  No.  311,  pi.  iiiiii.  Not.  37G,  336,  337,
pL  iii'i.  Noi.  428,  429,  pi.  ilii.  No.  526). The
lirtt  two  etampleg  in  Alliller  an  Teiy  interea^
the  one  ia  ■  baa-relief,  cihibiling  ■  Herniei  d
istfd  with  garlandi  and  aumunded  with  the
plcmenta  of  fata  wonhip,  aa  ihown  in  the  (bllowing
aognTing  ;  the  other  u  also  a  bai-tetie^  id  whici


we  Kc  a  lerminal  buil  of  Dlonyaua  waahed  and  da-
eomtcd  by  a  man  and  three  women.  Reapecting  the
Hcrmae  on  coina,  aee  Roicbe,  Lei  Vniv.  Sa  Nam.
».  re.  Henna,  Htniuithtne,  Hermet.  [P.  S.J

HERMAEA  ('EpM<"<'),  feiCiva]!  of  Hemei,
celebrated  in  rarions  parts  of  Orecce,  As  Hermea
waa  the  tutelary  deity  of  the  Kj-mnasia  and  palaes.
trne,  the  hoys  at  Athena  celebrated  the  Hermnea
in  the  gymnnsia.  They  were  on  this  occasion
dressed  in  iheir  best,  offered  ascrificea  to  the  god,
sTid  amused  themielvcs  with  rarious  gHnies  and
■porta,  which  were  probably  of  a  more  free  and  un
restrsined  chamcter  than  usual  Hence  the  gym-
nnsinrcb  waa  prohibited  by  alawof  Solon(Aescbin.

c.  Timarth.  p.  33)  from  admitting  any  adulta  on
the  occaaion.  This  law,  however,  was  afterwards
neglecled,  and  in  the  time  of  PUlo  {£yjw.  p.  206,

d.  &c.)  wi  find  the  boya  celchrnting  the  Hermaea
in  a  palaestra,  and  in  the  presence  of  persons  of  all
ages.  {Becl[er,CianfJsi,yo!.  i.  p.335,&c;  com-
pare OvHNiaiUH,  p.  ASn,  b.)

llcrmaea  were  also  celebmtcd  in  Crete,  where,
on  this  occasion,  ^e  same  custom  prevailed  which
was  observed  at  Rome  during  the  Saturnalia  ;  for
the  day  was  a  aeoaon  of  freedntu  and  enjoyment
for  the  slaves,  and  their  masters  waited  upon  (hem
at  their  reputt (Atheu.  xiv.  p.  G39.)


HETAERAE.

The  town  of  Pheneos,  in  Arcadia,  af  vhick
Hermes  waa  the  principal  divinity,  likewise  tele-
bmled  Hermaea  with  games  and  conleits.  (Pau
viii.  14.  S  7.)  A  festival  of  th«  same  kiid  inis
celebTHlcd  at  Pelloie.  (SchoL  ad  Piml.  01.  ni.  U(,
and  yen.  i.  82.)  Tamtgia,  in  Boeotia  (Pans.  Ii.
22.  S  2),  and  some  other  places,  likewise  lele-
hmt«d  fetlivalj  of  Hermes,  but  portkulan  are  not
known.  [L.&]

HERMATHENA. [HiRiiiB.]

HERMERACLAE. [Hirhas.]

HERO'NES.  baskets  or  cnles  of  sedge,  which
were  employed,  when  filled  with  chalk,  f«  makinj
a  foundation  in  the  water  (VitniT.  t.  12.  £  5).
Pliny  Slates  that  the  architect  of  the  temple  sC
Diana,  at  Epheaus,  raised  to  their  phcea  inmenae
blocks,  which  formed  the  architrave,  by  dmus
of  an  inclined  plane,  constnieted  of  henma  tUlel
with  aand  {H.  N.  uivi.  14.  a.  21),  In  lb™
and  the  few  other  passagea  when  it  occms,  the
readinga  of  the  word  are  very  vsriona.  Diflerml
raodem  scholar*  have  adopted  one  of  the  thm
forms,  oerofKs,  amasf,  or  Wnsst;  (See  Schneider,
ad  Vitrm.lc.)  [P.S.]

HEROON  (Ww)  [Apothkoeis;  Fcnl'^
pp.  556,  b.,  657,0.]

IIESTIA  (*irTla)  [Poena.]

HESTIA5IS  (J(rrW.f),  was  a  specia  of  li-
Cnrgy,  and  consisted  in  giving  a  feast  to  one  of  ihe
tribes  at  Athens  (tV  <pa\tir  iiniir,  Dem.  e.  Miid.
p.  565.  10  ;  Pollui,  ill  67.)  It  waa  provided  fi*
each  tribe  at  the  expense  of  a  person  beloD^g
to  that  tribe,  who  waa  called  jorutrisp.  (t>enL
0.  BoKtl.  p.  996,  24.)  Harpoctation  (s.t).  'Ziniinif)
states  on  the  authority  of  the  apeech  of  Demos-
thenea  against  Meidiaa,  that  thia  fenat  was  Boaw-
times  provided  by  persona  voluntarily^  Bnd  at  other
times  by  persona  appointed  by  lot  ;  bnt  as  B^h
remarks,  nothing  of  this  kind  occurs  in  the  speech,
and  no  burthen  of  this  description  could  have  hem
imposed  upon  a  ciliien  by  lot.  The  ia-riir<ifit
were  doubtless  appohited,  tike  all  persons  serving
liturgies,  according  lo  the  amonnl  of  their  properly
in  some  regular  luccearion.  These  banqneta  of  iha
tribes,  called  ^uAeriici  itiwra  by  Athenaeus  (v.
p.  135,  d),  were  introduced  for  sacred  purposes, and
for  keeping  up  a  friendly  intercourse  between  per'
sons  of  the  same  tribe,  and  must  be  diatingnishc^
from  the  great  feastings  of  the  people,  which  wen
defrayed  bum  the  Theorica.  (BiicVh,  PaU.  Etfm.
of  Allumi,  p.  452,  2nd.  ed.  ;  Wolf;  Pnteg.  ai
Dem.  Lejitin.  p.  Inxvii.  note  60.)

HETAERAE  (^af|»i).  The  votd  jm^  ori-
ginallj  signified  a  friend  or  companion,  but  at
Athens,  and  in  other  towns  of  Greece,  it  was  afier-
wards  nsed  as  a  euphemistic  name  for  wdprq,  that
ia,  a  prostitute,  or  miatreaa.  (Plat.  SobM,  c  IS  ;
Alhen.  liii.  p.  571.)  As  persons  of  this  clos)
acted  a  much  more  promini


of  the  Qceck  si


of  tha


demoraliied  capitals  of  moderr
I  avoid  in  this  work  stating  their  position  and
relations  to  other  classes  of  aociety .  Bnl  as
conduct,  manners,  ensnaring  artifices,  and  im-
ins,have  at  alt  timea  and  in  all  countriee  been
jne,  we  ahall  confine  ounetves  to  those  points
L  were  peculiar  lo  the  helaerae  in  Greece.
it  we  may  mensem  that  the  yrtang  men  at
Athena,  previous  to  thctr  msirioge,  ^lent  a  frreat
port  of  their  time  in  the  company  of  het>er»e  with-
'ta  being  thought  blomahle  in  anj  raapect


HETAEBAE.


ew


whole  a  chftiure in  tbia
men,  bat  ii


linoed  their  intercoOM  vith  heUetae,
irilfaoai  diBving  apon  theniMlTe*  the  cennue  of
pnblie  Dpinioa  ;  it  nenu,  on  the  contnuy,  erident
&im  the  Ruumer  in  which  Demoalhenes  (c.  JVeoer.
p.  1351,  ftc)  relate!  the  bialory  nf  Lyiiai  the
tnphiit,  that  meb  eonncctiani  after  mBiriagii  were
nM  looked  apon  ai  anything  extnordinaiy  or  in-
cDfBiitmt.  pnTided  a  man  did  not  oSend  DHSinit
public  decencT,  or  altof^het  neglect  hja  legiti-
nnte  wifb  aod  the  aftin  of  hi>  hotnehold,  si
WB*  the  nw  with  Alcihiadea.  (Andoc.  e.  >4(aA.  p.
iii^)  Thil  irr^alar  conditioQ  of  faiTate  life
ainonfr  the  Onekii  leemi  to  tUTB  ariaai  chiedj
Irnm  two  (aiuo  ;  finl  From  thu  gnat  hn  of  kd-
■oal  pleamrei,  which  tfa«  Oreelu  appear  to  haTe
posoaed  in  at  high  a  degree  a*  moat  other
■Hithem  nation!  ;  and,  Mcinidly,  from  the  gena-
rallj  pnraSing  indiSeniice  between  hnibanda  and
wiiei.  Ai  rejtardi  the  latter  point,  matrimo-
nUt  life  in  the  biitorieal  timea  of  Qreeos  vat  very
diftmat  (nm  that  which  we  find  dfwribed  in  the
heroic  af^.  How  thie  change  wai  brought  about
ia  not  dear  ;  but  it  can  tcanely  be  doubted
that,  gcneiallf  ipeaking,  tbe  Onelu  looked  upon
KBrriage  merelj  ai  a  meani  of  pTodacing  eitizeni
IbrtbeitBle.  (Dem.s.  A^eaor.  p.l386;  Becker,Cta-
nUa,Tri.ii.p.215,&c.)  The  edncation  of  women
wai  alnHiat  entinslj  neglected  ;  iiiej  were  thought
a  kind  of  iirferioT  beings,  leai  endowed  by  nature,
md  irKSipable  of  takiiw  any  part  in  public  afiain
and  of  ^mpathitii^  with  their  husbandi.  In  an
■nteUectnal  point  of  view,  therefore,  they  were  not
£l  IB  be  agreeable  companioiu  to  tbeii  hoibsodi,
who  conaeqiimtly  loaght  eltewhen  that  which
Ike;  did  not  find  at  home.  It  is  Inu  the  hiitory
•(  Greece  tnmiihes  many  pleasing  eiamplea  of  do-
ntadc  happiness,  and  well-edncated  women,  bnl
these  an  exceptions,  and  only  confirm  the  general
mje.  A  conaeqaaiee  of  all  this  was,  that  women
were  bound  down  by  mlea  which  men  might  vio-
late with  impaaity  1  and  a  wife  appears  to  haie  had
no  rigfat  to  ivoceed  against  her  husband,  sTen  if
■he  amid  proTe  that  he  was  nniailhftil  (Plaut.  ^ftr.
at.  IT.  6.  3),  allhoogh  the  betseif  was  aabject  to
sercn  panishment  if  she  was  detected.  The
isolaled  tattinuny  of  a  late  writer  like  Aleiphron
(^jiiL  L  6),  who  represents  a  wife  threatening
her  hasband,  that  unless  he  vonld  giro  up  his  dis-
solate  mode  of  living,  she  would  indnce  her  father
brii^  a  charge  n^ainit  him,  can,  as


t  ngainit  him,  c
(flariUa,  vol.  Cp.  112;  obserres,  pra


:h  as  a  ne^Ht  of  family  a&irs  mlglit,
tba  case,  haie  been  the  gtound  Sa  aecusaUon.

Bat  to  TCtoni  to  tbe  hetaene ;  the  state  not
inly  tolerated,  bat  protected  them,  and  obtained
fn£t  fina  them.  Soloa  ia  nid  to  hare  established
a  rs^'ijjr  (also  called  TaitirKiar,  ipyairrfipuni
IT  iCntfia),  in  which  ptostitulea  were  kept  (Athen.
iJii.  p,  569),  and  tobavebnilt  the  temple  of  Aphro-
dite Pandentos  witb  the  profit  which  had  been
ebtajned  from  them.  At  a  later  period  the  num-
ber el  socfa  hooMi  at  Athens  was  increased,  and
the  perms  who  kept  them  were  called  wapttator-
at,  li  nMH  The  conduct  of  the  betaeiae  in  these
hsoM  M  d<«ribed  in  Athenaeas  (riiL  p.  56B).
AD  the  betanae  of  soch  hotiset.  as  well  as  indiri-
dnls  who  liTed  by  themselTe*  and  gsined  their
■ '  to  pay  to  the  state


a  tax  (vo^ui^  rikot,  Aesch.  e.  T^mank.  p.  134,
dec),  and  the  collecting  of  this  tax  was  every  year
let  by  the  senate  to  such  persons  (riAvmi,  or
ropmrriXmoi,  Philonides,  op,  PolUc.  TiL  203)
as  wen  best  acquainted  with  those  who  had  to  pay
it  The  hetaenie  were  under  the  superintendence
of  the  iiyopar6fui  (Suidus,  w.  v,  Aut^pofi^),  and
their  places  of  abode  were  chiefiy  in  the  Ceramei-
cus. (Hesych.  i.  o.  Ki^cV'tiit.)

The  number  of  ptivots  hetaerae,  at  lach  as  did
not  live  in  a  ropnuir,  was  very  great  at  Athens.
They  wece,  kowever,  genenlly  not  mere  prosti-
tutes, but  acted  at  the  same  time  as  flute  or  cithara
players,  and  as  danceia,  and  were  as  soch  fre-
quently engaged  to  odd  to  the  splendoor  of
fiimily  sacrifices  (Plout  Epid,  iii.  4.  G4X  or  to  en-
liven and  heighten  the  pleasures  of  men  at  their
ijmposia.  Their  private  abodes,  where  often  two^
threa,  and  tncHuHved  together,  wore  also  frequoitlj
places  of  resort  lor  yoimg  men.  (Isocrat.  Artapag.
p  303,  Bekker.)  Most  of  these  hetaerae  lut  on^
t«ik  the  greatest  care  to  preserve  their  physical
beauty,  and  to  acquire  such  aceomplishmenls  as  we
jost  mentioned,  but  also  paid  considerable  attention
to  the  cultivation  of  their  minds.  Tbns  the  Arca-
dian Lastheneia  was  a  disciple  of  Plato  (Atheu.
zii.p.  546),  and  Leontion  a  disciple  of  Epicoms
(Atben.  liiL  p.5Sll)  \  Asnisia  is  evensud  to  have
instmcted  Socrates  and  Pericl»  Whstaver  we
may  think  of  the  bittorical  truth  of  these  and  simi-
lar reporia,  they  are  of  importance  to  the  historian,
inasmuch  as  they  ibow  in  what  light  these  hetae-
rae woe  looked  upon  by  the  ancients.  It  seems
to  have  been  owiug,  especifllly  to  their  superiwity
in  intellectual  cultivotiDn  over  the  female  citisens,
that  men  preferred  their  society  and  conversation
to  those  of  eitiicni  and  wives,  and  that  some
hetaerae,  such  as  Aspasia,  Lais,  Phryne^  and
others,  fonned  connections  with  the  most  eminent
men  i^  tbeir  age,  and  acquired  considerable  infiu-
ence  over  their  contempiaaries.  The  iree  and  uu-
restrsinsd  condtict  and  coDvamtion,  which  were
not  subject  to  the  strict  conventional  rules  which
honest  women  had  to  obterrei  their  wit  and
humour,  of  which  so  many  instance*  are  recorded  ;
were  well  calculated  to  ensnare  young  men,  and  to
draw  the  attention  of  koihandt  away  from  their
wivea.  Women,  however,  of  the  intellect  and
character  of  A^Msia  were  eiceptions :  and  even
Athenian  alliens  did  not  scruple  to  jntroduca
their  wives  and  daughters  to  her  circles,  that  they
might  learn  there  the  secrets  by  which  they  might
gain  and  preserve  the  affections  of  tbeir  hosband*.
The  disorderly  life  of  the  majmity  of  Greek  hetaerae
is  nowhere  set  forth  in  better  cidoun  than  in  tho
wDi^s  of  tba  writers  who  belong  to  the  so-called
school  of  the  middle  comady,  and  in  the  plays  of
Plaotus  and  Tereiue  ;  with  which  may  be  eonipared
Demosth.  o.  Naatr.  p.  13SS,  &c,  and  Athen.  book
ziiL  It  was  ftnmeily  supposed  that  at  Athens
a  peculiar  dress  was  by  law  prescribed  to  the
hetaerae,  hut  this  opinion  is  without  any  fbondo-
tion. (Becker,  OanUa,  vol  i.  p.  126,  Ac)

The  town  most  notorious  in  Oreeee  lor  the  num-
ber of  its  hetaerae,  as  well  as  for  their  rt£ued  maa-
nen  and  beauty,  was  Corinth.  (Plato,  Da  Rep.
iii.  p.  404  i  Dio  Chrysost  OnL  luvll  n.  119,
Relike  ;  Aristoph.  Pht.  149,  with  the  ^hol. ;
and  Schol.  ad  LgoKr.  90  ;  Atheit.  liii.  p.  573,  &c  ;
MUller,  Dor.  n.  10.  g  7.)  Strabo  (vill.  p.  37H I
states  tbU  the  ton^e  of  Aphrodite  in  this  town


609  HETAIBESE08  GRAPHE.
poamed  mon  thaa  ono  thoannd  hEtuime,  vto
were  called  UfSlav^ai,  and
many  a  «tT»oger  who  vUited  Corinth.  (Wachi-
mniii,  titlltH.  Altertk.  tdL  iL  p.  392.)  Hence  tbe
nam«  Viopiviia  xApTj  wai  used  ai  lyncai^nioai  with
^alpa,  nnd  KBpirtiii{taSai  wai  eqninlent  to  trai-
ptZr.  (Eiutath.  ad  Iliad.  iL  £70.)  At  Sputa,
and  in  m«l  othu  Doric  ■tain,  the  hetaene  Kcm
nerer  to  hate  acquired  that  importaoce  which  Ihej
.had  ia  other  parti  of  Onece,  and  amm^  the  Qreeki
of  Am  Minor.

An  important  queitioD  ii  who  tb«  LetaeiM  gene-
rally wen?  The  hpfflaiitjii  of  Corinth  were,  ai
tfaeii  name  indiiatet,  penrau  who  had  dedicated
tfaemielTct  ai  ilarei  to  Aphrodite ;  and  Iheic
WMCimiion  wai  a  kind  of  MryicB  to  the  goddess.
[HiBBODULi.]  Tho«  nipnu  who  were  licpl  at
Athena  in  pubiic  hiotheli  bj  the  ^aprotaaitel,  wen
generally  ilaTA  belonging  to  the«  ■dpraCotrKo^  who
compelled  them  to  proatitute  their  pCTHiu  foe  the
puipoie  of  eniiching  ihenueliret.  The  owoen  of
tbcM  tifrai  were  juitly  held  in  greater
than  the  imhappy  TictimithemielTea.  Sc
however,  they  were  roU  pnutitutei,  who  Tolontarily
enlend  into  a  contnct  with  a  -wtpratMltit :  othcn
again  were  fcmalea  who  had  boea  educated  in
better  cimmulancei  and  for  abetter  fate,  but  had
by  miifivtune*  lint  their  libett;,  and  were  compelled
by  want  to  take  to  Ihii  mode  of  liring.  Among
tbia  latt  claM  we  may  alio  reckon  thoee  giiii  who
bad  been  picked  up  ai  young  children,  and  bnmgbt
up  by  nftnioeKoi  for  the  purpoee  of  piutitution.
An  initanca  of  thli  kind  ii  Nicarete,  a  freed
woman,  who  had  contnred  to  procore  leven
yoong  children,  and  afterwardi  compelled  them  to


f  uld  them


n  who  wiahed  to
(Dem


p.  lasi,  &C.) othi

■ame  kind  are  oientioacd  in  the  comediet  of  Phtn-
tUL  (Coiapan  lueiu,  Lh  PUiattm.  iend.  p.
143.)  Thtuall  pmtiuteikeptinpublic  orraivate
boutei  were  cither  r.'al  ilaiei  or  at  Icait  looked
Dpon  and  treated  ai  inch.  ThoK  hctaerae,  on  the
otber  hand,  who  lired  aione  either  ai  miatRUCl  of
certain  indiriduali  or  ■■  coumion  helaeiae,  were
almost  isTBtiably  itiaogen  or  alien),  or  freed-
womeD.  The  caiea  in  which  daughter!  of  Athe-
nian citiieni  adopted  the  lift  of  an  helaera,  hi
limia,  the  daughter  of  Cleanor  (Athen,  liiL  p.
£77),  seem  to  have  occurred  tctv  uldom  ;  and
whenever  such  a  case  happened,  the  woman  was
by  law  excluded  from  all  public  aacrificn  and  offices,
sank  down  to  the  nink  of  an  alien,  and  as  inch  bo-
came  inbject  to  the  rop/uihr  rJhai :  she  generally
alto  changed  her  name.  The  >ame  degradation
took  place  when  an  Athenian  citixen  kept  a  wsp-
niw,  which  leemt  to  have  happened  xery  teldom,
(BOckh,  iVJ.  Eaan.  a/AHat,,  p.  333,  2nd  ed.)

(Fr.  Jacobs,  Batrdgi  Zar  Gack.  da  WtHlich.
GtmilKiti,  in  hii  Vermuc/iU  SiAn/lm,  Tol.  It.  ;
Becker,  Ouirikla,  tdI.  i.  p.  109— I'iU,  and  lol.  ii.
p.  <K^-*89  i  Limburg-Brouwer,  liiiloirt  dt  la
CnyitiaatioH  Mt/ft^t  et  Rfligiaittt  da  Greet ;  Wachi-
muih,  MeUm.  AlUrli.  nl.  ii.  p.  SS2,  &c) [L.  S.'j

HETAERI {Irdpoi). [ExiKCiTua,  p.  4B«,

IIETAIRESEOS


HIERODULL

fitnchise,  and  aapin  to  bear  office  in  the  tlite.
From  the  law,  wbich  ii  recited  bj  Anchinet
(c  TVooraL  p.  17).  we  leam  that  uieb  offwdoi
were  capitally  puci^ied.  The  caoM  WH  tned  if
the  court  of  the  theunothotae.  (Heiar,  Alt  Pne.
p.  334.)  lJ.S.lLi

HETAIRIAE  (troipdu). [EaiHoa.]

HEXA'FHORUM. [Lictku.]

HEXA'STYLOS. [TutnaiL]
. HEXE'RES. [NiVia.]

HIEREION  (l^tii*).  [Sicuncim]
'  HIEREISTON  80TER0N  (Vri ™» mw*-
p«v],  priests  of  the  Savioois,  that  is,  of  Anligcus
and  Demetrius,  who  were  leceived  by  the  Aibe-
niana,  in  b.  c  307,  aa  their  Hberaton  with  hoaoon
and  flatteriei  of  every  aort.  They  even  went  w
fiu-  at  to  pay  divine  honourt  to  thete  prince*  imdcr
the  title  of  Savioutj  (m^rSp*!),  and  to  aangn  afuiat
(hpiCt)  to  attend  to  their  worahip,  who  was  (o  be
elected  annoally  and  to  give  his  name  to  the  jrar  ia
place  of  the  first  archon.  This  coatinned  fiv  Ima^
years  till  the  conqaeil  of  Demetrius  bj  Pynhai  b
B.  c  287,  when  the  office  was  abolished  and  the
first  archon  reatored  to  his  former  position  b  the
itate.  (PlukZlsnitr.  10,  46.)  The  migiamloa
of  these  twenty  yeare  were  in  later  timei  allnl
archoo,  aa,  for  inatsnoe,  by  Diodoru  and  Diony-
lios  of  Halicunassus,  since  the  Athoniaal,  as
Clinton  remarki,  would  not  leara  apon  their  Faali
thismaikoftheirhomilinlion.  (Droysen, asokUtt
da  /fMeminiu,  vol.  L  p.  439 ;  Clinton,  F.H.
vol  iL  p.  380,  3d  ed. ;  Hermann,  LJbiack  d.
GritdLSIaatmJtBULS  ^76,a.^i  ScbSnaaii,Aiitiri.
Jut.  PM.  Grate,  p.  360.)

HIERODU'LI  lltfiSoiAat),  wen  pnou  <f
both  icxea,  who  were  devoted  like  sUtm  to  tha
wonhlp  of  the  gods.  They  were  of  Eastam  origin,
and  are  most  Irequently  met  with  in  eoBDediai
with  the  worshipof  the  dntiea  of  Syria,  Phacnieis,
and  Asia  Miner.  They  cootiated  of  two  daoca ;
one  composed  of  slave*  pmcerly  so  called,  who  at-
tended to  all  the  lower  duties  connected  with  the
[p  of  the  gods,  cnltivated  the  aacred  laodi.


led  in


scirile  condition  ;  and  the  other,  comprising  per-
loni,  who  were  pcnonaliy  frat,  but  had  dediotcd
themselves  as  slave*  to  the  gods,  and  who  vnc
either  attached  to  the  temples,  »  were  di>perB«I
Ihioaghout  the  country  and  brought  to  the  godi
the  money  they  had  gained.  To  the  latter  clasi
belonged  the  women,  who  poatiluled  their  peiioni
and  presented  to  the  godi  the  money  th^  bad  ob-
tained by  this  menu*.  The  pomp  with  which  reli-
gious worship  wu  celebrated  in  the  Eaal,  and  the
vast  domains  which  many  of  the  temple
required  a  great  number  of  servants  .
Thus,  the  great  temple  at  the  Cappadoc
pouiased  as  many  as  6000  hieroduli  (Sirab.  xiL
p.  £35],  and  that  at  Morunene  had  3000  of  the
■ame  claaa  of  persons.  (Sirab.  xiL  p.  S37.)  So
numeroua  were  the  hieroduli  at  Tyre,  that  the
high-priest  by  tiieir  lopport  frequently  obtained
the  regal  dignity.  (Joseph,  c  Jpiem.  I  18,  31.)
Thcte  Urge  nnmbeis  arose  from  the  idea,  paevaleal
in  the  Eut,  that  the  deity  must  have  a  certain
claaa  of  perun*  apecially  dedicated  to  his  service
and  sepoiated  from  the  ordinarr  dnCiea  of  life,  and
that  it  waa  the  duty  of  all  who  had  the  power  la
aupply  as  many  persons  as  they  could  tat  their  *er-
vice.  Thiia,kings  dedicated  as  sacred  slave*  the  pri-
sonen  whom  they  took  in  ww^pannti  tbeii  children.


HIEROMNEMONES.

mi  ens  penons  of  the  highcat  bmilin  sent  their
duthlen  ta  the  leraplea  to  Aurifice  their  chastity
Id  the  goAA^  It  le&at  till  the  time  of  their  nurriaffe.


]  of  female!  offering  their  ehutitj  I


wigm


1  the  i


■eemi  to  hnve  ariern  from  the  notiOD  that  the  goAt
aof  ht  to  ban  the  fint-fniiu  oF  everj  thing.  The
nuloD  imniiJedBl  Bafafltm  (Herod.  1 199;  Smb.
xn.  p.  745),  u  Tell  aa  in  manj  other  plaeea.
(Comp-  Hejne,  Dt  Bt^yimtiorum  imttitiUa  rtHgioao,
kcin  OommHt.  Sodit.  GoOiitg. -nX.  rn.  p.SO,&c)
The  Oieek  templei  had  of  caane  iIstm  to  pnftmi
the  loweat  •errin*  (Puis.  x.  33L  g  S)  ;  hut  we
■!»  find  menliigi  b  Katie  Oreek  temples  of  free
penctM  of  both  mim,  who  had  dediisted  them-
•etn*  idnntarQf  to  the  •erriee*  of  aome  god,  and
to  «b<np  the  Ion  of  hieroduU  mu  generally  ap-
piM.  HaMen,  who  withed  to  gixe  ilaTca  their
frecdso^  bat  were  preT«ited by  i

them,  preienleiJ

H  onder  the  foi

ired  for  them  liberty  in  reality.

_  .  u  troqaently  occor  in  in-

Kflptioaa,  and  tie  eiplained  al  length  b;  Curtiui
(A  Maimmimim\i  ttera  OrnaeornBi,  in  iiiAwalata
MMca,  Beritn,  1643,  p.  10,  &e.  ;  comp.  Pint
Am^  c  31,  TW  lAAatF  tirwvrAr  iral  ifixi"'*'
fttMi^ii  col  ipTTBi  taSAwf  t'p6tnKti  lucTEXoii-
rv).  The  tsnale  hieioduli,  who  pmlitated  their
psaiBB,  an  «ly  found  in  Onees  crainDctcd  with
the  wnahip  of  dirinitie*  who  were  of  Butern  origin,
v  Bany  gf  whoM  nligioiu  ritei  were  borrowed  fram
tha  Bwt.  Thii  wa«  the  cue  with  Aphrodite,  who
waa  origiinJIy  an  Oriental  goddna.  At  her  temple
at  Cinirth  there  were  a  thouiand  iip^t


Coinlli,  and  there  wj


iaited
u  aJeo  a  large  number  of  the

Sicily.  (Stiab-TiiL  p.  378,  li.  p.  2?2,  comp-'iiL
f.iSt.)  iHin,  Dit  Hitrodaim,  with  appendicei
by  Bitckh  and  BoltniUD,  Berlin,  1818  ;  Kceaier,
Dm-  Hdiaum  PriaHtrMaat,  mil  vonii^iiieT  R^ck-
lictt  a^di»  Hitndtim,  Haini,  1824  i  Moren,

^. ..  --B,&e.i  Hecmann,Z;«ir«aolrf,

«,  §  20.  n.


HIEROHK'NIA  (i>pofuf  (a),  WM  the  time  of
tkt  oaatli  at  which  the  lacred  feitiTali  of  tha
fliriti  began,  and  ia  conaeqaeacB  of  which  the
whole  Bath  receiTed  the  namo  of  fi^v  Itpit.  It
waa  ■  pan  of  the  interaUkmal  law  of  Greece  that
■U  ^*aitMi  ihmdd  ceMS  for  the  time  between
lOMi  wbo  took  BMt  in  tbcM  featiTBlt,  so  that  the
inksbittnM  ef  we  difirent  itatei  might  go  and
msn  ni  mAXj.  Tbe  lUmnuuna  of  the  four
grot  Batkoal  foitiTali  woe  of  coune  of  the  moat
iai|halmDca;  tbey  were  proclaimed  by  heralda
(mviej^pH),  wbD  Tinted  the  diSerenl  itate*  of
Oraeca  tot  tbe  Hnuaa.  The  RUpeiuioD  of  hoiti-
liliea  wh  calM  itax'V^  (Pii^  '•<*»  ii.  23  i
StraL  Tiii  p.  343  ;  Eraiue,  Ofp^u,  p.  40,  &e. ;
wtA  the  irtye  Olthpia.)

HIEROUNE'MONBS  (ftpeMf»ni)<  *m
ibt  man  buHWiable  of  the  two  ciaiiea  of  repre-
d  the  Amphictytmie  council.

s  in  Oneian  Mate*,

B  tbe  Amphictyimie  repnacotitiTci  of

Thai  the  prieilB  of  PouidoD,  at


HIER0SYL1A3  ORAPHE.  807
HcQBrB,  were  called  hieromnemone*  (Pint  Sgmp.
TiiL  B.  §  4)  J  and  U  Byrantimn,  which  w«  a
colony  of  Megara,  tha  chief  nagiatnte  in  the  alate
nppean  to  have  been  oUled  by  thii  name.  In  a
decree  of  Bv^Lntiam,  quoted  by  Demoethenea  (pro
CorxM.  p.  2&&.  20  ;  compon  Polyb.  iv.  62.  g  4),
an  hieromnecDon  ie  mentioned,  who  girea  hii  namo
to  tha  year  ;  and  we  b1»  find  the  vme  word  oo
the  ooina  of  thia  city.  (Ickhel,  Bortr.  Nm,
Tol.ii.  p.  31, Ac)  AcCbatDedon.anDthercolony  of
Megan,  an  hienmnemon  alto  eiiit»d,  aa  i*  prored
byadeoeewhich  taitilleitwit  (MtUl«,£Kir.  iiL
9.gla.)  AninKZiptioafoandinThaaoaaliODieii-
tiooa  an  hieiomtiemDn  who  preiided  over  the  tn^
vav. (BSckh,av7i./HBr^TDLiLpp.]63,184.)

HIERONI'CAE. [Atblitax.]

HIEROPUANXES (lepof-imti). [Eliu-

HIEROPOn  (Iipomof),  wen  ncrificen  at
Atheni,  of  whom  ten  were  ^ipointed  ereiy  yev,
and  oondaclcd  all  the  naual  aoerificea,  aa  well  a*
thoee  belonging  to  the  qainqnennia]  feitinli,  with
theeiceplionofthoaeofthePanathenua.  (Pollui,
riii.  107;  PholittB,  fco.  'I.fKnroiol.)  They  are
ftequently  mentioned  m  iiucriptiiuu.  (Btickh,
Owp.  /air.  ToL  L  p.  250.)  The  moM  honoDiatits
of  theae  ufficen  were  the  aemficen  foe  the  revered

KddcKKa  or  Eumenidea  (UpowouA  itCs  tn/vaSt
alt),  who  weiB  choien  by  optji  vote,  and  jm-
bably  only  perlomied  the  commencement  of  the
BscriSce,  and  did  not  kill  the  victim  themielvea^
(Dem.  e.  Maid.  p.  fij2.  6  ;  BSckh,  FubL  Earn,  w
.^UoM,  p.316.)

HIBHOSYLIAS  ORAPHE  (:t|»<nAfaf  -»n.
1^).  Tbe  action  for  aujilcge  ii  diatingniabed
from  tha  j(AorSi  I'lpw  xp^/iirmii  Ypn^,  in  that
it  waa  directed  agaioat  the  oflence  i^  robbery,
aggravated  bv  violence  and  deaccialion,  to  which
the  penally  of  dtsth  waa  awarded.  In  the  latter
action,  on  the  conlnuy,  tha  theft  or  embeBlement,
and  it!  lubject-matlei,  only  were  taken  into  con-
tidention,  and  the  dicaili  had  a  power  of  aaaeaaing
the  penalty  upon  the  convictian  of  the  offender.
With  retpect  Co  the  tribunal  before  which  a  cue
of  aacrilege  might  have  been  tried,  lome  circuni-
atancea  aeem  to  hnve  produced  coniidembla  dif-
ferences. The  7pBf4  might  be  preferred  to  the
king  archon,  who  wonid  thereupon  assemble  tbe
areiopagos  and  preside  at  the  trial,  or  to  one  of  tha
thesmnuetaa  in  his  chancter  of  chief  of  an  ordi-
nary U  el  iaatie  body  ;  or,  if  the  mnecution  aiBiuned
the  form  of  an  apagoge  or  eph^esis,  would  Ul
within  the  jnriadielion  of  the  Eleven.  Befon  the
first-mentioned  court  it  is  craijeoturtd  (Meier,  AU.
Proe.^  P.S07)  that  the  aacrilege  of  the  alleged
spoliation,  as  well  as  the  hct  itael^  came  in  quea-


ihoee  cases  in  which  the  sacnlego  waa  obviona  If
tha  fact  were  eslsblishtd  ;  and  that  the  Eleven  had
jurisdiction  when  the  criminal  appeared  in  the
character  of  a  common  robber  or  bu^lar,  mrprised
in  the  commiiaion  of  the  offence.  In  all  these
caaea  tha  conriet  was  pot  to  death,  bis  [Hvperty
confiscated,  and  bis  body  denied  burial  within  the
Attic  territray.  There  is  a  speech  of  Lysias  (firo
Caiiui)  ertant  upon  thia  subject,  but  it  adds
little  lo  our  knowledge ;  except  that  slaves  were
allowed  upon  that  occaaon  to  appear  aa  infonnen
iwninst  their  maater  —  a  resident  alien  —  and  an-
ticipated their  emaneipatian  in  tbe  event  of  hia
[J.S.H.]


6DB


HIPPODAMEIA.
IIILA'RIA  (ixifm)


iginally  t,


any  day
■on  of  KJDicing. The  hiloiu  were,  thcrel
cordiDg  Bo  Maiimui  Monjichiii  {ScAoi.  ad  Dionyt,
Areopag.  EpitL  8)  either  priTnUi  or  publifi Amwg
the  foriDer  he  reckont  the  daj  on  which  a  penon
married,  and  on  which  a  ion  wai  bom  ;  unong  the
latter,  Ihoae  diyi  of  public  rejaieingi  appointed  '
a  new  emperor. 3ncn  dayt  were  deioted  to  gei
lal  rcjoicingB  and  public  laczificeB,  and  no  one  n
allowed  to  ihow  any  lymptomi  of  grief  or  urrDV

Bat  the  Romani  id»  cclebialed  hilaria,  ai
feria  ttotink,  on  the  S5th  of  March,  in  honoor
Crbele,  the  mother  of  the  godi  (Macrob.  Sai.
SI)  ;  and  it  ig  probably  to  diitinguiah  thete  hilaria
from  thou  mentioned  abore,  that  Idmpridttit
iAltsaaid,  Secer.  c  37)  olli  them  Hilaria  Matrit
Drum.  The  day  of  ita  celebiation  wai  the  firat
af^  the  Temal  equinoz,  or  the  fint  day  of  the
Tear  which  waa  longer  than  the  nighL  The  winter
with  ita  gloom  had  poued  away,  and  the  fint  day
of  a  better  actuaa  wai  ipent  in  rrjoicingi.  (Fhii.
Vopiac.  Aimlian.  c  1.)  The  manner  of  ita  cele-
biBtion  during  the  timeof  tberennblic  isonknown,
except  that  ValFriu*  Maiimut  (iL  i.  %  3]  mentioni
gamo  in  honoar  of  tho  mother  of  the  godt.  Re-
ipecting  Iti  celebration  at  the  lime  of  the  empire,
ire  learn  from  Kerodian  (i.  10,  11)  that,  among
other  thinga,  there  waa  a  aolemn  proceaiion,  in
vbich  the  itatae  of  the  goddeaa  waa  carried,  and
hefore  thU  ataCne  were  carried  the  moat  coatty
apecimeni  of  plate  and  woiki  of  art  bdonging
either  to  wealthy  Romaoi  or  to  the  empeiora  them-
loUea.  All  kindi  of  gODiei  and  amuicmenli  wen-
allowed  on  thia  day  ;  maaqueradei  were  the  moat
pominent  among  them,  and  crery  one  might,  in
nil  diigaiie,  imitate  whomaoeTer  be  liked,  and
ann  magiimtea.

The  hilaria  were  in  reality  only  the  laal  da;  of
a  fcjtiral  of  Cybele,  which  eonimenced  on  the  22d
of  Murh,  and  waa  aoleniniied  by  the  Oalli  with
Tarioua  myatcrioua  rita.  (Oyid,^oit  ir.  337,  &c.)
It  mnat,  however,  bo  obgerred  that  the  hilana  are
neither  mentioned  in  the  Roman  calendar  nor  in
OTid-i  FatiL  (L.  S.]

HILAROTRAOOE'DIA. [TaxooiDU.]
HIMATION  (^«It»0- [Palmum.]
HIPPARCHUS. [EssRciTna,  p.  487.  a.1
UrpPARMOSTES. [Ejhrcitus,  p.  483,  b.]
HI'FPICON  {Wwigit,  tc  <rr<lt.or),  a  Greek
meainre  of  diitance,  equal  to  four  atadia. Accord-
ing to  Plulareh  it  waa  mentioned  in  the  Uw>  of
Solon  (PIdL  JM.  23). Heaychitta  alto  mentiona
it  mider  the  name  of  Iinrrioi  Spd^i. (Comp.
HiPPODRomra;  STintuii.)  [P.  S.]

HIPPO'BOTAE  (IxxoSirm),  the  feeden  of
hones,  waa  the  name  of  the  nobility  of  Chalcii  in
Eubo^  corresponding  to  the  Iniit  in  other  Greek
alatei.  On  the  mnigueit  of  the  Chalcidiani  by  the
Athcniana  in  B.  c  506,  theie  Hippobatae  were
dopriied  of  their  liuidi,  and  4  UOO  Atlieoian  cleruchi
tent  to  take  poiieigiDn  of  them,  (llprod.  t.  77,
Ti.  100  ;  Stiab.  I.  p,  447  i  Plot,  /•met  33  ;
Aelian,  V.  H.  tL  I.) [CoLONia,  p.  314,  a.]

HIPPODAMEIA  ((«<AV«.  k.  *(0«).  «  an
adicctiie  derired  from  tho  name  of  tho  architect
Ilippodanina  of  Miletua,  who  ia  aaid  to  have  been
the  Grit  of  the  Gmlti  who  bnilt  whole  dtiea  on  a
regular  architectural  plan  i  and  hence  the  word  ii
applied  to  taeh  cidca,  and  to  the  nublie  placea  and
l^lldingl  in  them. Peiraecua,  va  eiBm|Je,  vaa


HIPPODROMUS.
dcaigned  by  Ilippodamoa,  and  ill  matkel-[jia
waa  ailed  'Inul^uia  irfafi,  (Haipocr.  *.  a),
flippodamoa  flourithed  daring  the  aecond  half  d(
the  fifUi  centaOT  a  C  (See  Diti.  of  Bug.  art
Hippodtaaa; MlUler, Artiaii. d. Stan, f

ni.)  [P.S.]

HIPPO'DROMUS  (I>wi»pofU)0  waa  the  mme
by  which  the  Greeks  detignaled  the  place  Bppco
priated  to  the  hone-races,  both  of  charioli  and  of
■ingle  honea,  which  formed  a  part  of  their  gamo.
The  word  waa  alao  applied  to  UM  racea  ihemielro.

The  mode  of  fightuig  baa  eharioti,  at  detcribed
by  Homer,  involvea  the  neccnity  of  much  preriDoi
practice  ;  and  the  fimeimi  gamca  in  honour  of
Patroclnt  pretent  tu  with  an  example  of  the
cbariot.raee,  occupying  the  fan  and  moat  imponajit
;Jac<  in  thote  gajnei.  (A  uiiL  262^650. )  In
thii  ririd  detcription  the  nature  of  the  conlctt  awl
the  amngementi  for  it  are  ntj  clearly  indicateil
There  it  no  artilicialty  conitncted  hippodroRK;
Ig  land-mark  or  monument  (o^fo.


the  chariota  had  to  paia,  IcaTing  it  on  the  left  band
(336),  and  ao  returning  to  the  Greek  aUpa  oi  the
)«a-ihore,  from  which  they  bad  itartod  (365).
The  conrte  thai  marked  ant  waa  n  long,  that  the
goal,  which  waa  the  itump  of  a  tree,  eonld  only  he

■gainit  it  {i1i7—339\  and  that,  aa  the  charioa
retam,  the  apeetaton  are  uncertain  which  it  fint
(430,  && :  the  paiaage  fumiahea  a  precedent  for
betting  at  a  h«ae-nice,  4fi£).  The  gnond  it  a
leiel  plain  (330),  bat  with  iu  natnial  inequalitiei,
which  are  mfRcient  to  make  the  light  eharioti  loqi
ftDcn  the  ground  (369,  370),  and  to  tbrfatio  an
orerthrow  where  the  earth  waa  broksn  bj  ■
winter  tomnt,  or  a  colllgion  in  the  narrow  hollow
way  thui  formed  (419—447).  The  chariota  wm
fire  in  number,  each  with  two  honea  and  a  linjile
driver  (2fiH.  &c)*i  who  atood  upright  in  hit
chariot  (370).

In  a  race  of  thit  natnie,  aucceai  would  DbnooilT

the  driver  aa  on  the  qwed  ol
which  Homer  reprcasila  Neitor  aa  impreatmg  npaa
bit  ten  Antilochui  in  a  ■pecch  which  fully  ex-
plain) the  chief  ■tratagemt  and  -dangen  of  the
conteat,  and  it  nearly  at  applicable  to  the  chariot
tscet  irf'  later  timet  at  to  the  one  deacribed  by
Homer  (305— 3J8), At  itarting,  it  waa  neasmrr

the  loii  of  time  by  driving  wide  of  the  atraighleit
count,  and  on  the  other  not  to  incur  the  riak  of  a
nllition  in  the  crowd  of  chariota,  nor  to  make  ig
ilraight  lor  the  goal  aa  to  leave  ioaitfficient  room  to
Lam  it.  Here  waa  the  critical  point  of  the  n«,
to  tnm  the  goal  aa  ahorp  aa  poatible,  with  the  nave
jf  the  neer  wheel  atmoit  graaing  it,  and  to  da  this
tafdy :  very  often  the  driver  waa  here  thrown  oat,
and  the  chariot  broken  in  piecet  (334-^3,  463
— 168).  There  wat  another  danger  at  thia  point,
which  deicrvei  particular  Dotice  aa  connected  with
the  arrangcmentt  of  the  hippodrome  of  later  tiraea.
Aa  the  horae  ia  a  very  timid  animal,  it  oui  eaailj
Ldentood  that  Uie  noiae  and  cruth  of  many
chariota  tummg  the  goal  b^thc,  with  tbe  addi-

But  Neater  eonplaini  of  harmg  been  once
beaten  by  two  brDlhoa  driving  at  once,  the  one
managing  the  rcina  and  tha  other  plying  the  whip
(638-«42).


HIPPODROMUa


Rfcmd  to  bj  Hom«  (468)

■ir  IttfATiaar,  trti  nirts  tWaSt  ftv^i^r.
Aaopf  tba  t&a  diMMcn,  to  which  th«  eompeti-
tan  nn  Mile  wen  th«  Iom  of  the  whip  (384) ;
tbt  niw  tuipirg  from  the  hwidi  (465)  ;  tiis
ln)iki!qoftliepaf«(39a};  the  light  chariaC  being
i>nnanwd,  u  the  irirei  thnwn  oat  of  it,  thnnigh
Ibe  mgluiBu  of  tha  ground,  or  b;  neglioting  to
kliue  the  body  pnpeily  in  nmiing  ths  goal  (368,
1S9,  41|~-12S,  33S):  tad  tho  being  compelled
to  jiw  w»j  to  a  bolder  driver,  for  fear  of  ■  colli-
■iia  (lS6-~437)  ;  but  it  va*  eoniideied  foul  play
liiBk.ioeh«nndTBaUigo(439— 441.666— 611).
Tbr<e  tnd  umilar  diiuten  wevK  no  doubt  frequent
■xd,  in  uacdanoe  with  the  nligioui  chaiacter  of
■^  pott,  tlwj  wen  aicribed  to  tho  intenenlkai


HIPPODROMUa  G09

of  the  deitiei,  whom  tho  tofrercr  bod  neglected  to
pupitiate  (3B3— 393,  £46,  547).  Tha  priiei,  u
in  the  other  Homeric  gunei,  were  of  lubstantial
ralne,  and  one  for  each  competiWr  (262—270).
Tha  charioteer  accnied  of  foul  play  wai  required
to  la;  Lii  h&nd  upon  hii  honei,  uid  to  iweu  by
Poaeidoo,  the  petroa  deity  of  tha  race,  that  he  w«
gniltleu  (581— G8£].

Thii  deecription  may  be  illnitratad  by  tha  fol-
lowing engraving  from  an  an^que  Greek  taaa  ;  in
which  we  lee  the  goal  ai  a  men  itone  pott,  with
B  fiUet  wDiud  round  it:  the  fonn  of  the  chanola
an  well  iliowii,  and  the  attitttde  of  the  drircn  |
each  ha)  four  hortei,  ai  in  the  earliest  Olympic
chariot  race  ;  and  the  rividneu  of  the  repreaenla-
tion  it  increaied  by  the  introduction  of  the  incident
of  a  horac  having  got  looae  &om  the  Gnt  chariot,
the  driTsr  of  which  itnTei  to  retain  hii  place  with
the  other.  (Panofka,  Bildar  Ant&a  Ltbau,  pL
iiL  No,  10.)


Fer  other  rppreaentationi  of  the  lace  and  ita
iiBMai,  we  CiiuDSt  p.  285,  CCRRirg,  p.  379.

In  no  other  writer,  not  oTen  in  Pmdar,  ban  we
a  deimptian  at  once  eo  Tiiid  and  lo  minnte,  of
t^  Oitdc  chariot  nee  Bi  tbii  of  Homcr't ;  but  tt
Bay  be  aalety  aaaumed  diit,  with  a  few  pointa  of
diBoraer,  it  wi!l  giro  lu  an  equally  good  idea  of
a  EUriot  race  at  Olympia  or  any  other  of  tho  great
pnti  of  later  timea.  The  chief  pointa  of  differ-
BM  wite  the  greater  compectncia  of  the  courae,
in  wder  that  a  large  body  of  apectaton  might  view
Ih  ua  with  coQTenieDce,  and  the  greater  naniber
if  chariota.  The  lint  of  Iheae  condiliona  invotied
ilu  neceaaily  of  making  the  race  contiat  of  aevenl
dcnble  lengtha  of  the  couric,  initcad  of  only  one  ;


the  chariola  might  atart  without  confnaion  and  on
equal  leima  ft  ii  now  to  be  aeen  how  theae
conditiont  were  aatiified  Eu  the  hippodrome  at
Olympia ;  of  which  the  only  deacription  wo  poaaeti
ii  in  two  paisagei  of  Pacsaniai  (tL  SO,  t.  15.  g  4).
Very  di<!erent  eiplanationi  hare  been  prapoaed  of
aome  important  pointa  in  thoae  detcriptiona  \  but,
6om  want  of  apace,  and  from  a  atrong  conTiction
of  what  the  correct  explanation  i\  we  paaa  over
the  dijcuuion,  and  give  only  the  reault  of  it,  ac-
cording (o  (ha  view  of  Alexandre  de  ta  Borde,
which  ii  adopted  by  Hir(  (Zailris  d.  Gtbiade,  pp.
147—160).  The  following  it  the  ground-plan,
which  Hirt  (pL  n.  flg.  8)  hat  drawn  ont  from  the


teriptiin  of  Panaasiia.  A,  B,  tha  aide%  C,  the
Bid  of  the  hippodrome,  with  i^ied  leola  for  the
^itttaton  (the  dotted  line  D  d  ii  the  azia  of  the
%iire).  a.  Place  of  honour  for  (he  mogiatratea  and
DDiiciaiit ;  ft,  if.  gatewaya  ;  D,  tha  alaiting-place ;
(,  ita  apex  j  X  ?■  >(*  cnrred  ddet ;  i,  >,  &e.,  up  (o
K  Halimi  of  the  chariota,  their  directioui  con-
vnging  towarda  the  point  K  F,  O,  the  fcoala,  or
' '' *~  ;  ii,  tha  ipiiia  ;  pp,  jniall  mtarrala


between  the  ifuna  and  the  goali ;  q,  the  winning
line  ;  m,  dolphin  need  aa  a  aignal ;  s,  altar,  wi^
eagle  for  tigial ;  o  o  o,  portico  of  Agnamptua,

The  general  form  of  the  hippodrome  wai  an
oblong,  with  a  lemicinular  end,  and  with  the  right
aide.  A,  aomewbal  longer  than  the  left,  B,  for  a
reaion  to  be  ttated  pmently.  The  right  aide.  A,
waa  fbnned  by  an  artiiicial  mound ;  (he  left,  B,  by
the  mtunl  alope  of  a  hQL Then  wen  (bctldn


eio  HippoDROMua.

the  ilutinit-plAai)  two  entmicei  to  the  ucn,  h  snd
ri,  of  which  the  fanner  whs  probably  for  (he  exit
of  dinbled  chuiott  tai  honea,  and  the  latter  ap-
pean  to  have  been  for  llie  «une  purpose  ss  the
porta  Iriumphalis  in  the  Bomui  circus.  The  base
of  the  fonilh  side,  D,  was  formed  hj  the  portico  of
AgnunplDs,  so  called  bom  its  builder.  At  ibis
end  of  the  hippodrome  was  the  itarting-plaee
(Kf  Hif),  in  the  farm  of  the  proir  of  a  ship,  with
its  apex,  I,  towarda  the  uea,  and  each  of  Its  sides
more  than  400  feet  long.  Along  both  Ibese  sides
were  sUdli  (alictiiaTa)  for  the  chariots  abmit  to
■tart,  like  the  careera  in  the  Roman  ciicni ;  and
it  wu  in  the  ananj^ment  of  these  ttalli  that  the
peculiarity  ef  tho  Or.-wk  starthig-plaee  consisted^
According  te  the  Yiev  which  we  follow,  the  stalls
were  so  armnged,  a>  that  the  pole  of  (Bch  chariot,
while  standing  in  ita  stall,  was  directed  to  a  normal
poini,  E,  at  which,  as  nearly  as  possible,  each
chariot  ought  Id  filll  into  iu  proper  coune.  Ai
this  point,  £,  wu  necessarily  oa  the  riftht  lidc  of
the  area  (in  order  to  turn  the  god  on  the  left  hand),

required  to  be  equidislant  from  the  apex,  e  (as  will
presently  be  seen)  and  of  course  also  fnim  the
point  E,  it  follows  that  itio  base  of  the  aphtsit
mast  have  been  pnpcndiculax  to  the  line  E  t,  and
therefore  oblique  to  the  lali  D  d  j  and  this  is  the
leasoa  whj  the  tide  A  was  longer  than  the  side
B.  The  curratnre  of  the  sides  of  the  aphesis,/  g,
ia  a  conjectural  arrangement,  assumed  as  that
which  was  probably  adopted  to  give  more  space  to
each  chariot  at  itartmg.  Tho  [mat  of  each  stall
had  a  cord  drawn  acrots  it,  and  the  neceuary
Birangements  were  made  for  letting  these  cords  bll
It  the  right  niDnicnti.  On  the  tignal  beuig  gireit
'  -  -'-  . ■ ■ .■  ' ■ ' -  ,f  the  twi


for  the  mce  to  b^in,  the  cords  in  front  of  U


s,  ji,  '


■X  fkll  si


I  started  ;  then  tboso  of
neit  pair  ;  atid  lo  on,  each  pair  of  chariots  being
liberated  at  the  precise  Diomcnt  whea  those  which
had  already  started  came  abreast  of  their  positioD  ;

abreast  of  the  apei  of  the  ajJieta,  a,  it  was  a  &i[
alsrt. This  arrangement  of  the  aplietii  was  the


of  the


yCleoi


proved  by  Ariiteides  (perhaps  the  bmous  pauiter ;
see  Hirt,  L  c). Cleoetaa  celebrated  hia  invantion
in  an  epigram,  which  be  inscribed  on  the  base  of
s  tlattie  made  by  him  at  Athens :
*0t  Tiir  Irrdftirir  iv  'OXu/arlif  tE^poTa  TpBTor

Ttvif  lii  KAtialTai,  viii  'ApioTOKA&uj.
Precilcly  the  same  arrangements  were  made  for
the  start  ui  the  race  of  single  horses  (riKw),
and  in  both  cases,  as  in  the  race  described  by
Homer,  the  italls  were  assigned  to  the  competitors
by  loL  How  many  chanDli  usually  itarted,
not  ba  deterraiiMd ;  bat  that  the  Dumber


HIPPODROMUS.

large  ia  proved  by  the  well-laiown  itny,  that  Alci-

phoclc*  {EiicL  70 1 — 708)  mentiaos  ten  chariot]  ss
running  at  once  in  the  Pythian  games  ;  and  the
number  at  Oljmpia  was  no  doubt  greater  thaji  st
any  of  the  other  games.  Thia  ia  pmbably  the
reatoa  why  the  arrungemenli  of  a  sEaiting-place
were  so  much  more  complivted  in  the  Greek  hip-
poditimus  than  they  were  in  the  Roman  circu
[CiHctta].  About  the  centra  of  the  triangular
area  of  the  apitMu  there  was  an  altar,  «,  of  rD«f;h
brick,  wliich  was  plastered  afresh  before  coch
feitiial,  surmounted  by  a  brooie  eagle  with  «t-
atretched  wings ;  and  above  the  apex  of  ibe
aphesit  was  a  bronsa  dolphin,  m.  As  tha  signal
for  the  nee  to  begin,  the  eagja  was  mads  to  loir
aloft,  so  as  to  be  seen  by  iJl  the  ^aclalon,  aad
the  dolphin  sank  to  the  groond.

The  charioti,  thiu  started,  bad  lo  pui  KTcral
net  round  two  goals  (riaiTai),  tbe  distinction
between  which  ia  one  of  the  difficult  pomta  in  the
iption  of  Pausanias.  On  the  whole  it  seems
probable  that  the  one  which  he  deacriba  ai
having  upon  it  a  bronze  statae  of  Ilippodamwa,
holding  oat  the  ricior'i  fillet,  oa  if  aboat  to  crown
"elopa  with  it,  woa  the  one  nearer  lo  the  apheiit,
id  abreast  of  tbe  winning  Ihi^  F  ;  and  that  the
her,  Q,  round  which  the  chariota  made  Ihcir  iirst
m,  was  that  which  PauDnias  alta  "  Taraiippua,
.e  lemr  of  the  hones."  This  waa  a  round  altar,
dedicated  to  Taraiippns,  who  wot  aupposed  to
alrike  a  aapcmatDial  tcrrer  into  the  horses  oa  they
pasted  the  spot,  and  whom,  therefore,  the  chariui-
cers  sought  to  propitiate,  before  the  race  bc^szi,  by
offering  sacrifices  and  in*lc"ig  vows  at  this  altar.
Pausanias  gives  varietis  accounts  as  to  who  this
Taraiippus  was :  some  modem  schohirs  take  the
word  for  an  apnellatioQ  of  Poseidon  llijipiaB.  He
was  aimilarly  hnnoured  in  the  lathmian  hippo-
drome. At  Nemea  there  was  no  lucb  hero,  bat
it  of  the  course  there  was  a
bright  red  rock,  which  was  anppused  to  frighten
the  horses.  He  adda  the  remark  that,  the  Olym-
pian Toraxippus  had  by  Sar  the  moat  powerful
effect  upon  the  horses  ;  and  considi'ring  that  the
numbiH'  of  chariots  which  joined  in  tbe  race  there  ,
was  greater  than  at  any  of  tbe  other  ganici,  that
remark  aflbrda  a  pretty  clear  proof  tbil  tbe  ex-
planation of  the  tnppoted  anpematutal  temr  ia  that
which  has  been  given  above  in  describing  the
race. There  are  several  >ase  paintiopi.


which  c


eihibiled


turning  the  goal,  which  is  represented  as  a  Doric
or  Ionic  column.  (See  Panofka,  Bildtr  Amtiirn
Ltbau,  pL  iii.)  One  of  these  is  shown  in  the  fol-
lowing engraving,  which  exhibits  a  vivid  pictur..-  of
a  race  of  aingle  honet :  the  lost  rider  hat  been
unlucky  in  turning  the  ^oaL
There  ia  no  authority  in  the  aeeoimt  of  PaiuBniH


HISTltlO.

6t  Oe  eoDwetiiig  wall,  H,  between  tho  gooli,
DDT  dcffl  he  ttate  thai  the  vinning  tioe,  q,  wbm
muled  out  u  &  white  line ;  bat  thue  deLaiJa  an
ioKncd  Fnm  tbe  BoelDgy  of  the  Roman  cimiB.
So  din  is  tlie  oblique  position  of  the  line  of  the
giali,  *•  compared  with  the  uda  of  the  fi)tuie :  of
cDone  tbe  gneteit  ipaca  wu  required  at  E,  where
the  chuiou  wer«  all  neailj  abreiut  of  each  other.
Reepecting  die  dtmenuani  of  the  Olfmpii:  Hip-

fruo  the  length  of  tbe  measure  colled  HirpicoN,
■sd  ai  other  greundi,  it  seems  probable  tliat  the
lisanee  boas  xLe  itartiDg-place  to  the  goal,  or
p(As|a  ruhet  bum  one  guil  to  the  other,  was  two
Mdii,  se  that  one  donble  conrK  was  four  iiadio.
Uotr  Danj  aach  double  courses  luaile  up  tbe  whale
BKfWs  ara  not  iufbrmed.  The  width  must  baio
Wen,  at  least,  as  great  ae  tbe  length  of  each  side
•f  the  ^Jent,  namely,  more  than  400  feet.  There
dees  net  appear  to  hare  been  mach  oichitecturul
diipkj  in  tbe  structure,  and  not  many  slatuci.
The  inlimBl  aira  of  the  aphesU,  D,  contained
Mnnlalura.

The  chief  points  of  difference  between  tbe  Greek
liqipudruffie  and  tbe  Uuman  circus  are  the  sinaller
indih  of  the  latter,  as  only  four  chariots  ran  at
one,  and  tbe  different  amuigeoient  of  the  coram.
Tbe  period*  at  which  the  Olympic  hone-ruces  were
iBsiiiaud  are  mentioned  under  OLyHFi*.

A  lew  other  hippodrontn  in  Oreece,  Syria,  and
Efjpt,  are  mentioccd  by  Pausanias  and  other
writers ;  but  they  deaerre  dd  special  mention.
(Coop.  Ktauac,  tijjWK.  ■HHJ  .^^os.  voL  L  pp.  151,
kt.) Sec  aU)  HoKTua.  [P.  S.]

KIPPUPG'RAE  (IrroiV"),  uddlc-bags.
This  appendage  to  the  saddle  [Epuiffiuu]  u-as
■sde  of  leather  (naW^  tcortti,  Feslus,  a  r.  Bui-
f),  and  doe*  not  appear  e|er  to  have  changed  its
fans  and  appearvica.  Its  proper  Latui  name  was
li'tiimM  (Petnm.  SaL  31),  which  ga's  origin  to
Itmrria  in  Italian  and  Aesocc  in  French.  By  the
Gsals,  saddle-bags  were  called  Aii2ifaa(Festus,  Lc  ;
Omma^  Gr.  Lai.),  becauie  they  bulge  or  swell
ntwMda  ;  this  signiliomt  appellation  is  still  re-
taiaedin  the  Welsh  lo^/ait  or  bulgaii.  The  more
•legant  term  Uppapanu  it  adopted  by  Seneca
(*>^  88).  [J.  Y.]

HISTION and UISTOS (I<nr(w,  Urr6t).

HI'STRIO  {*ir«vnJlt).  an  actor.  I.Ohbbk.
It  is  skown  in  the  aniclea  Chorits  and  DioNvsu
thai  the  Greek  drama  originated  in  the  cborui
which  at  the  festivals  of  Dionysus  danced  annuid
kis  altar,  and  thnt  at  first  one  person  detached
himaclf  Inm  the  choRia,  and,  with  mimic  gesticn-
latisB,  related  hii  itory  either  to  the  chorus  or  in

__._  -.L ■.  Jf jJij iji^ ^^ ^jgj j^

■  ywereaUrepre-
10  by  tbe  same  actor,  and  them
le  penon  on  the  stage  at
1  time.  This  custom  wss  retained  by  Theipis  and
Phrjukhus.  Bot  it  was  clear  that  if  the  chorus
tock  an  aeliTe  and  indepeodenl  yon  in  such  a  play,
i>  weald  haTB  been  obliged  to  leave  its  original
"i  diaiaeteriitic  sphere.  Auchylus  tbeiefon
■  ■  0  that  tbe  action  and  the
t  of  the  chorus,  and  the
St  at  the  same  time  bad  an  opportunity  of
I  cDntiast  with  each  other
..  (AristaLP(ii<.iL  U.)  Towards  the
■  MRei^  Aeichylui  loaai  it  neceuaiy


HISTRIO.  611

to  intnduca  a  third  Bi:tar,  aa  ii  the  case  in  the

Agamemnon,  Chofphori,  and  Eumcnides.  (Pollui,
W.  110.)  This  number  of  three  acton  was  also
adopted  by  Sophodea  and  Euripides,  and  was  but
seldom  ciceeded  in  any  Greek  dnuna.  In  tbe
Oedipus  in  Calonos,  however,  which  was  performed
after  the  death  of  Sophocles,  four  actors  appeared
on  the  stage  at  once,  and  this  deviation  fmm  the
general  rule  was  tailed  irapoxof+i^fM,  (Pollui,
I.  a)  The  three  regular  actors  were  distinguished
by  the  technical  names  of  wpvrerjwrifm^i,  fti^tpa-
')wrurH)i,  and  TptToytewurris  (Sujdoi,  i.  c.  TfiiTa.
■ytmirHis:  DemostL  dt  Corm.  p.  315,  de  Fait.
Leg.  p.  344  and  403),  which  indicated  the  more  or
leas  prvminent  part  which  on  actor  bad  to  perfnrm
in  the  dnuna.  Certain  conventional  meajis  were
also  devised,  by  which  the  ipeclaton,  at  the  mo-
ment an  actor  appeared  on  the  stage,  were  enabled
to  judge  which  part  ha  was  going  to  perform  ;  thus,
the  prologoniiles  always  came  on  the  tlsge  from  a
door  In  the  centre,  the  deuterogonistea  Bvm  one  on
the  right,  and  the  tritagonistes  from  a  door  on  the
left  hand  side.  (PQllai,iv.  124.)  The  pmlagonislca
was  the  principal  hero  or  heroine  i^  a  pby,  in
whom  all  the  power  and  energy  of  the  drama  wen
conccnUated ;  and  whenever  a  Greek  drama  it
called  after  the  name  of  one  of  its  personoe,  it  is
always  the  name  of  tho  character  which  was  per-
fonncd  by  tbe  protagonlstes.  The  deuteraganlstee,
in  the  pieces  of  Aeschylus  for  two  actors,  calls

either  by  friendly  sympathy  or  by  painful  tidings,
:  &c^  The  port  <^  a  tritagoniatet  is  represented  by
•ome  eiteniol  and  invisible  power,  by  which  the
hero  is  actiuitcd  or  caused  to  suffer.  When  a
.  tritagoniitei  wus  added,  tbe  (sart  assigned  to  him
'  was  genemlly  that  of  an  instigator  who  was  the
cause  of  the  sufferings  of  the  protogoniitcs,  while
he  himself  was  the  kasl  capable  of  depth  of  feeling
or  sympathy.  The  deuteragoniatca  in  tbe  dramas
for  three  acton  is  generally  distinguished  by  lofti-
ness and  warmth  of  fecUi^i,  but  has  not  iu  depth
and  vehemence  peculiar  to  tbe  protagonistei,  and
thus  serves  as  a  foil  to  set  (ortb  tbe  chaructrr  of
the  chief  heroin  its  most  striking  and  vivid  cotouriL
(MUller,  Hilt  ofOnekLU.  I  p.  305,  Su. ;  compare
Bijtiiger,  Dt  Adaribiu  Priaanai,  Staud.  et  Tat
Parlam.)

The  female  choncten  of  a  play  were  alwaya
performed  by  young  men.  A  dutinct  class  of
persons,  who  made  acting  on  the  stage  their  pro-
fession, was  imknown  to  tbe  Oreelu  during  the
period  of  their  great  dramatists.  The  earliest  and
greatest  dnunatic  poets,  Thespis,  Melonlhius,  So-
phocles, and  proljably  Aeschylus  also,  acted  in
their  own  plaj-a,  and  in  all  probability  as  protago-
nistae.  We  also  know  of  several  instaocea  in
which  distinguished  Athenian  citiiens  appeared  on
the  st^e,  and  Aeschines,  the  orator,  did  not  scruple
to  act  the  port  of  tritagonislES.  (DemostL  L  0.)
These  circumstances  show  that  it  was  by  no  mouts
thought  di^radmg  in  Greece  to  perform  as  on
actor,  and  that  no  stigma  whatever  was  attached


IS  appearing  on  tbe

to  whatever  station

at,  on  that  account,

of  showing  dis-


in  Tifo  they  belonged,  n
spared ;  and  the  general  mode
pleasure  on  tbe  part  of  the  ipectatcn  seems  to  bate
been  by  whistling.  (D.;mDath.  Dt  Oanm.  p.  31 S.)
It  appears  that  when  the  spectators  showed  thoii
1  ofFensive  or  insulting  a


B&  2


■  O"


612  HTSTBIO.

the  Bcton  would  lometimca  attack  the  m«t  forwHrd
of  the  audience,  and  quarreli  of  Ihii  kind  <
not  un&eqaentlj  in  blows  and  wounds.  (Der
dt  Coron.  p.  314,  dtFal:  Leg.  p.  449;  An<
e.AUiib.  p.  121  ;  Athen.  ii.  p.  406.)  At  n  later
period,  baweva-,  pcnam  h«fpu  to  deiote  tbem-
•flTei  eictuiiTulj  to  (he  profcuion  of  acton,  and
di»lingui«hed  indi'iduaU  received  eten  at  eariy  u
tbe  time  of  Demoathonei  exorbitant  snnii  for  theiT
bcrfonnancea^  Varioui  inatancea  are  mentioned  in
BSciil't  Pabl.  EfB».  of  Aihaa,  p.  120,  &c  Al
tbe  time  when  Orccc  had  loat  hei  iiidependeno!,
we  find  tignlat  tn»pi  of  acton,  who  were  eilhei
Mntionsrr  in  paniculir  town*  of  Greece,  ac  wan-
dered Iran  phice  to  place,  and  engaged  tbemaelTet
wherever  tbej  found  it  moet  printable.  Tbe;
fonncd  re^lar  compaiiiea  or  guildi,  with  thei
own  internal  nrganiiotiDn,  wiib  their  common  offi
cen,  property,  and  aacra.  Wo  poiaeai  a  numbe
of  inscriptions  belonging  to  aoch  companiei,  wit]

gtstilude  to  ume  king  by  whom  thej  bad  been  en-
gaged. But  these  acton  ai«  eenerallj  ipoken  of
m  very  contempRions  tcimi ;  they  were  perhapi  in
■ome  caws  ilavei  or  freedmen,  and  their  ordinary
pay  teemi  to  bate  been  hvcd  dnicbroac  for  every
perfannuic«.  (Lucian,  leanynim.  29,  dt  Merted.
CovL  a  i  Theopbrast  Ckaratt.  6.)

(Compare  Mlillcr,  HiH.  o/  Grrdt  TM.  t  p,  fl04,
ftc  ;  Becker,  dariOts,  iL  p  274  ;  Bode,  GetiA.
der  Dram.  Didtbaat  der  HtUeneti,  2  voli,  1S39
ud  1840.)

2.  Rohan.  The  word  iutriom,  by  which  tbe
Baman  acton  were  called,  \i  uid  to  have  been
formed  from  tbe  Einucan  hitter  which  aignificd  a
India  or  dancer.  (LIt.  riL  2  ;  VaL  Mai,  iL  4.  §  4  ;
compare  Pint  QwmL  Aon.  p.  2S9,  c.)  In  tbe
jear  364  B.  c  Rome  wna  viilted  by  a  pingne,  and

•aid  to  hare  tried  to  aiert  the  anger  of  the  oodi
by  icenic  ]Jayi  (^i  Kxmd),  which,  TUitil  then,
nid  been  unknown  to  them  ;  and  aa  ibere  were  no
persona  at  Rome  premied  for  inch  perfirmancn,
the  Romani  >ent  to  Etnirin  for  them.  The  tirM
liLAtriones  who  were  thui  introduced  from  Etroria,
wen  dancen,  and  performed  their  moTomenU  to
tbe  accompaniment  of  a  flute.  That  the  ait  of
dancing  to  thia  accompaniment  should  hare  been
altogether  unknown  lo  theRomani  ii  hardly  credi-
ble ;  the  real  secret  muit  have  been  in  the  mode
of  dancing,  that  it,  in  tbe  mimic  repreaentaliang  of
tbe  dsHcers,  >nch  at  they  arc  described  by  Diony-
tina  Wl«}-  flom.  vil  72)  and  Appian  (riiL  66).
That  the  Etruacant  &r  eicelled  the  Romani  in
tiieae  mimic  dancea,  it  more  than  probable  ;  and
we  find  that  in  tnhsequent  timea  alao,  a  fi^eah  anp-
ply  of  Elmican  dancen  (iufrwnet)  came  to  Rome.
(MUllcr,  Etntk.  ir.  1.  6.)  Roman  youtht  after-
warda  not  onlf  fmftaled  theae  dancera,  bat  alto
recited  rtido  and  jocoto  ver»s,  adapted  to  the
movementa  of  the  dance  and  the  melody  of  the  flute.
Thia  kind  of  amutement,  which  wai  the  bnaia  of
tbe  Roman  drama,  remained  unaltered  until  the
time  of  Liviua  Andronicus,  who  inlmdiiced  a  alave
npon  the  itngefbrtbe  purpote  of  tinging  or  renting
the  recilaliTe,  while  ha  himaelf  performed  the  ap-
prmrit.te  dance  and  getticulalion.  [Canticiih.]
A  further  itep  in  the  derelopmenC  of  the  drama,
vhicb  la  likewiee  aicribed  to  Livius,  was,  that  tbe
dancer  and  iccittr  tairied  on  a  dialogue,  and  acted
a  Mocy  with  Iha  acMmpminwnt  of  tha  Bute, (3m


HISTRIO.
QroDOT.  ad  Liv.  L  o.)  Tbe  name  hiitrio,  whic^
originally  si^ificd  a  danixr,  was  Dow  applied  U
the  acton  m  the  drama.  The  alellanae  rett
played  by  frceborn  Romana,  wbDe  the  regular
drama  waa  left  to  the  hiilrionea  who  liinMd  a
diacinct  dau  of  pertoni.  Il  it  clear  from  the  wvdi
of  Liry,  that  the  hiatiionoa  were  not  dliimi ;  Ihu
(hey  were  not  contained  in  the  tttbea,  mi  allowni
to  be  enlitted  at  aoldien  in  the  Homin  legiait ;
■nd  that  if  any  citiiKn  entered  tha  profeaita  oF
histrio,  he,  on  tbia  accoimt,  waa  exfdnded  fnno  hit
tribe.  Niebuhr  (//itt  of  Home,  i.  p.G2a,  note
1 1  £0)  thinki  diflerently,  but  doea  not  ataiga  any
reason  for  hit  opinion.  The  hialrionea  were  there-
fore atwHji  either  freedmen,  atranget*,  (*  ilan*.
and  many  puaagei  of  Roman  wrilen  ibow  thai  ttiej
were  genemily  held  in  great  contempt  (Cic.  pro
ArcA.S  i  Com.  Htp-Prae/aL  6;  Soeton.  Ttt.  35.)
Towardt  the  clote  of  the  republic  it  waj  only  inch
men  at  Cicero,  who,  by  their  Greek  ednotion,
raiaed  themtelret  abore  the  pnjudieet  of  their
countrymen,  and  Talued  the  peraoo  no  Icat  than
the  talent]  of  an  Aeiopnt  and  Rotcina.  (Macnb.
Sal.  ii.  10.}  But  not  with  itanding  thia  low  nti-
mation  in  which  acton  wen  generally  held,  dii-
tinguiahed  indiridnala  among  tbam  attracted  im-
mrnte  crowds  to  the  thcattci,  and  were  eiivbiumtly
"it  e.  Verr.  iy.  16.)  Rotcina  alone  re-
ery  day  that  he  performed  one  thooiand
denarii,  and  Aetopna  left  hit  ton  a  fiirtiine  of
200,000  teatercet,  whidi  be  had  acquired  solely
by  hia  profeaaion.  (Maovb.  /,  c)  The  poaitica  of
the  histrionn  wai  in  tome  reapecti  altered  during
lient  tawtfao  Roman  m^it-
tralet  were  empowered  to  coerce  the  hittrioiwi  at
ly  time  and  in  any  place,  and  the  pnetor  bad  the
right  to  tcou^  them  (jai  dr;i^niai  ta  JMrHmet).
Thia  hiw  waa  pnrtly  atioliahcd  by  Auguttna,  in  at
'  lid  entirely  away  with  the  jut  virganun,
led  the  inlerfrrence  of  the  magittialet  lo
rhen,  and  the  plate  when  [IvU  tl  inw)
tbe  acton  peribrmed.  (TaciC  AbuL  i  77.)  But
"^  ~"  ■'  '  '  iflicted  very  tevere  pnniahmentt
who,  either  in  ihoir  print*  hie
their  conduct  on  the  alage,  eonmitted  any


It  could  be  inflicted  upon  aeton  ka  im^per
iduct,  aeem  to  have  been  impaiafmrnent  and
lie.  (Tacit  Amai.  W.  14,  lill  3B.)  The  jus
virganun  it  indeed  aaid  to  hare  been  restot«d  to
the  praetor  by  a  law  of  Auguitua  himaelf  (PaulL
SeKL  T.  tit  26),  not  eipreaaly,  bat  by  tha  inter-
pretation put  upon  this  law  by  the  juristt.  But
thia  interpretation  ouinot  hart  beconie  nJid  till
after  the  reign  of  Tiberioa,  of  whom  it  la  eleariy
staled  that  he  refuted  to  restore  the  jut  Tirgamm,
because  it  had  been  abolithed  by  bit  predeeeaaor.
'T.^-,  A„Kd.  L  77.)  Thete  ciraunatanoea.  and
'our  of  tbe  emperora,  incieaied  tha  airoganca
and  the  loose  conduct  of  the  hiitnonea,  and  the
thealret  were  not  seldom  the  tcanea  of  bloody
fights.  Heiioe  Tiberint  on  one  oecat)<m  found  him-
self obliged  to  erpel  al!  btitrionea  hvm  Italy
(Tadt  Am«iL  it.  14  ;  Dion  Caas.  lii.  3)  ;  but
they  wers  readied  and  patronised  by  hia  toccnaoi'.
lie  p.  738.)  Rome  of  the  Utcr  em-
penn  were  ex^cdingly  fond  of  biattiooea,  and
kept  them  for  their  prirate  amutement  (btfruMt
asliei,  Spartian.  [ladHax.  e.  19  ;  JuL  C^tol,
rma,  cB). They  perforaud  al  Ike  nyutt  of


nOMOBI.
Ibi  wptfon  (Sueton.  ^i^  7t\  ud  weta  ocoi-

•imtl;  (Uovcd  «Im  to  play  in  the  theiCKS  before
llitfnfie(.jmblieJiamha-).  In  the  Digut  <3.  tiL2.
lI)  wensd  that  allBcUm  wen  iobmoui,  Fn>m
the  liBH  of  Tuitua  the  word  histiio  wu  n*ed  u
•ji.aBjoioiu  with  [UihHniioua.  (BStticber,  Leu.
Tiri.  p.  233.)

Jti'^tcUDg  the  cnlinaj^  pay  which  cammiin
•ctora  recfiied  during  the  tune  of  the  republic  no-
ihicig  if  kncim.  The  pay  ilielf  wtiM  m]le6  luoar
(TKiL  AiaaL  L  77  ;  Plul.  QmwhL  Rom.  p.  2»5,  c.  j
Fnuu,  •.  m.  liar  ud  jmmia)  ;  vhich  wind  waa
pcrbap*  coifined  arigiDaU;  (o  the  pBjmeDt  nude  ta
ili»e  vba  took  laut  in  the  nligioui  lervicei  cele-
bruql  in  grorea.  la  tba  tinwi  of  the  empire  it
WBu  thil  Gto  denarii  (Seoec  EpitL  80),  or,  ac-
cwding  lo  otben  (Lucion.  loaroma.  c  29),  ufeD
■inthniac,  wai  the  comioaii  pa;  for  a  biitrio  fbc

•aij  Is  Rsttiel  the  piactice  cf  giving  iramodeiate
HOU  ta  aclon.  (Tacit.  L  e. ;  Suet.  T&.  U.)  The
tnprtH-  M.  Antoninui,  who  wai  food  of  alt  bi>-
iriraic  atta,  ordained  that  trnty  ecloc  ahould  re-
Riie  £te  Boni,  and  (hot  no  one  who  rave  or  con-
diicltd  thcstiiixl  Rproentationi  ihooM  exceed  the
•an  of  t(Q  tutcL  (Jul.  CapitoL  M.  Anion,  b  1 1  ;
ompan  ScboL  ad  JuhkU.  viL  243.)  Bat  it  i*
lot  deal  whether  in  thii  regohition  the  pa; mcnt
b  me  or  man  peifonnancei  !■  to  be  underitood.
Ttiae  mnia  wen  either  [«id  by  Ibaia  who  en.
Pgti  the  acton  to  sla;  for  the  nmuaemenl  of  the
P»pl^  or  ftnm  tho  liKiu.  (Liptiui,  Excan.  tf.  ad
Tool  Anal.  L)  Beaidea  their  regular  pay,  how-
tvn,  (kilfiil  hiatrionea  icceivrd  boia  Ibe  people
|vld  lad  ailTer  nnwna  which  were  given  or  thrown
u>  ihcm  apon  the  atage.  (Phaedr.  Fat.  T.  7.  36  ;
Plia.  H.  N.  «xi.  3.)  tL.  S.]

HODOPOEI  (UoiroioO,  publio  officen  at
Athena,  who  had  to  take  cats  of  the  nada  (ol
lM»fci;MA,|Ta£,PboL  £<».».».)  They  are  men-
timed  in  the  fngment  of  a  comic  poet  of  the  time
«f  Pmelea  (Plut.  Fraac  /W.  c.  15)  ;  but  in  the
tine  «[  Aeachioea  their  daliei  wen  diacbat^ged  by
the  nnaann  of  the  Thcoric  fund.  (Aeicb.  e.
(lo.  p.  i19,  Reiilie  ;  <omp.  BBckh,  Ptli.  Earn,  of
AOai,  f.  303,  2nd  ed.)

HOLOSE'RICA  VESTIS.  [Siaicnii.]

HOLOSPHY'RATON,  HOLOSPHYEE'-
LATA. [M^ixat,-!  ;  Mitill^.]

HOHOEI  (I/uio(),  the  Equate,  were  thou
Spanana  who  poaaeucd  the  full  richU  of  citiien-
liiif,  and  an  oppoRd  lo  the  bwoiuiovft,  or  thoae
vte  bad  DDdei;^ne  aome  kind  of  civil  degtnda-
tion.  (X«L  ite  Rtp.  Laced.  1. 1.  a.  7,  Ildlm.  iiL
S-|S  t  AnaL/^iLG.  S^l.)  Thu  diituictiDn
htlween  the  citiieni  waa  no  put  of  the  ancient
^(■nao  cDDatitation,  and  la  not  montioned  by  any
niier  bebre  Xcnophon;  and  Aiiitotle  aimply
makej  ■  later  inttitution  applicable  to  an  early
time,  when  be  nenki  of  the  Pattbeniae  ai  beloug-
■il{  lo  the  Hamoei  {FoL  t.  6.  %  1).  In  the  in-
itilDlkai  aaBibed  to  Lycoi^ua,  every  citizen  hid  a
BTtain  poniim  of  land ;  but  aa  in  coune  of  time
naay  atiieiu  toct  tbeir  Unda  thioogh  varioui
aata,  they  vera  voable  to  contribate  to  the  ex-
prue*  of  the  ajaaitia,  and  therefbte  coned  to
pnaaraa  the  fnll  lighu  of  Spartan  dtiteni.  Hence
tilt  diadnction  appean  to  haie  uueo  between  the
IfHw  and  ftvayuloHT,  the  fomur  being  thoae  who
were  in  the  poacaiion  of  tbeir  land,  and  conie-
ftotlj  able  M  contribate  to  the  ajuilin,  the


HONOltES.  BIS

latter  tboM  who  tbnnigh  having  no  land  wen  nn-
able  todoio.  (Comp.  AriiL  i^  ii.  6.  S2I,  iL
7.  §4.)  Those  penona  likewiie,  who  did  not
adopt  the  Spartan  mode  of  life  or  had  ditgnced
tbemacUet  by  any  baae  act,  wen  alio  reduced  b>
the  condition  of  Inmialovtt,  even  if  they  poaaeaied
the  requiiite  landed  property  (Xen.  lU  Rep.  hoe.
X.  4.  a.  7  i  Plut.  InL  Lao.  21  ;  Telea.  ^i,  Stob.
F!oril.  xL  p.  233)  ;  but  u  the  aeverity  of  the  an-
dent  SparUn  mannen  decayed,  the  posieMioa  of
property  became  the  chief  teat  tA  a  place  among
the  HomoeL  The  llomoei  were  the  ruling  clnaa
in  the  ttate,  aad  tbey  obtained  posaeiaion  of
loat  all  the  privilege!  and  eicluaive  righta  which


Spartan  citizena.
of  the  atate  with  the  exception  of  the  Ephontlly,
and  ibcy  probably  met  together  to  dctemuDo  upon
public  affiiin  under  the  name  of  ItaXirtoi  in  an
aiiembl^  of  their  own,  which  la  c&Ued  q  /uipA
iKnAjitia,  to  diatinguith  it  from  the  aaaembly  of
the  whole  body  of  Spartan  citiiena.  Oletmann,
leiri.  d.  GntcL  StatmUtrth.  %il  ;  U.dt  Cu>-
ditioit0  atrpte  Origine  eorum  qui  Homoei  op.  Load.
-"laltatar, Muburg, 1U32 ; SchdmBiin, Aiitiq.

ir.PM  Grate,  p.  119.)

HONOOA'RIA  ACTIO, [Actio,]

HONORA'RII  LUDI, [Ludl]

HONORA'RIUM. [Anvocifua ; Lnx

CiNClJ.]

HONORA'RIUM  JUS. [Edictuic.]
UONO'RES. Cicero  (ri^c  20)  apeaka  of  tin
tionorea popnli," and Horace  (Sana.  I  6.  S)
tpeaka  of  the  populoa

**  qui  atnltni  honcnt
Saepe  dat  indignia."

D  both  paaaagea  the  word  **  honorea  "  meona  the
igh  office!  of  the  atate  to  which  qualified  indi-
iduals  were  called  by  the  TOtet  of  the  Roman
itiiena.  Cicero  calla  the  qnaeatorihip  "honor"
leo  alao  Liv.  vi.  39)  ;  and  the  worda  "magiatratua  ^*
nd  "  hooorea  ''^  are  aometimn  coupled  together.
The  capacity  of  enjoying  the  honorca  waa  one  of  the
dia^nguiihing  morkt  of  citiienahip.  [CivnAS.}
^n  Sulla-a  preacriplion  (VelL  Pat.  ii.  28),  there
vaa  a  clauae  thai  the  children  of  the  proacribed
^pctendorum  honorum  jure  prohiberentur.*^

There  ^tpcara  to  be  no  exact  definition  of  honor
earlier  tbim  m  the  juriata  whooa  writinga  are  ei-
erpted  in  the  Digeit.  "  nonor  munlcipalia''  ia
ieEned  to  be  "  admiuiatisUo  reipuUiaic  cum  dig.
lilalia  giodu,  aire  cum  lumptu,  Bive  line  cn^-
ione  conlingena.^*  Munua  waa  either  publicum
<r  privatuio.  A  pablicuiu  luunua  waa  concerned
.boiit  adniiniitralion  (m  odnimMtTruida  npnUioa),
and  wBi  attended  with  cost  (isinpfu)  but  not
rank  (digailiu).  "  Honor  "  waa  properly  laid
*  deferri,"  "dari;"  munui  was  laid  "imponi."
Cicero  {de  Or.  L  45)  uaea  the  phnae  **  bonoriboa
et  reipublicaa  muncribua  pcrfunctmn,**  to  aigniff
one  wno  bat  attained  all  the  honoun  that  his  atate
can  giie,  and  ditcharged  all  the  dulica  which  can
be  required  from  a  citiaen.  A  peraon  who  held  a
magiatmtai  might  be  aaid  to  diacharge  munera,
but  only  aa  incident  te  the  office  {Kaffnifla^Umivto
nmiun  aedililaHi  prrfimeliu.  Civ.  ad Fam.  li.  17),
for  the  office  itacIF  waa  the  boDor.  Such  muneni
as  these  were  public  aamea  and  other  thinga  of
the  kind. (Dig.  £0.  tiL  4.  De  MmeHbt  »  Bo-


lU  HORA.

HOPLI'TAE <irA?rai). [AxHJk ; KiSK-

HOPLOHACHL [aLADiATORES,p.  57G,b,]

HORA  (Spa),  in  the  aigniliciition  of  hoiir,  that

IB,  the  13th  pnrt  of  the  natural  dav,  did  nol  come

intogenenl  nie  among  the  aocienti  until  about  tbe

middle  of  the  aeoHid  centurj  n.  c. The  eqoinoc-

used  in  the  ft^irt  of  common  life  till  townrda  tbe
end  of  the  fbmth  century  of  the  Chriattan  eriL
Ai  the  diviiion  of  the  iDitural  daj  into  twelve
equal  pArti,  both  In  gummer  and  nnnter,  rendered
(he  duration  of  the  houn  longer  or  ihorler  accord-
ing to  the  diSerent  aeaioni  of  the  fear,  it  ii  not
aaj,  vith  accuracy,  to  compare  or  reduce  the  boun
of  the  andenti  to  our  equinoctial  boun.  The
houTt  of  an  ancient  day  would  only  comcido  with
the  houn  of  our  diy  at  the  two  cqutnoiei.  [Dibh
and  HoaoLiHSinM.J  A>  the  dnratioa  of  the  natural
da)-,  moreover,  depend*  on  the  polar  altitude  of  a
place,  our  natural  dayi  Trontd  not  coincide  with
the  nalnnil  daja  in  Italy  or  Greece.  Helcr,  in  hit
IIOH^Mch  der  Ckrtmo/ijgi«t  ham  given  the  following
Bpproiimate  dnradoR  of  Ae  imtural  dayi  at  Rome,
in  the  year  45  B.  c,  which  wu  the  Gnt  af^  the
new  tcgulation  of  the  calendar  by  J.  Caeiar  ;  the
IcngLh  of  the  dsya  ii  only  marked  at  the  eight
principal  |MinU  in  the  apparent  coune  of  the  lun.
Dafi  o/liegear,  Tlieir  duratam  n

45  B.  (X  tqmMoctial  hourt,

Dec.  23 8  houn  £4  minntei.

Feb.  6 9 „ SO „

March  33 ....  12 „ 0 „

May  9 14 „ 10 „

June  25  ....  IS  „  6  „
Auguit  10  ....  14  „  10  „
Sept.  25  ....  12  „  0  „
Not.  9 9 „ £0 „

The  following  table  containa  a  comparinnof  the
boun  of  a  Roman  natural  day,  at  the  aununerand
winter  lolitice,  with  the  honra  of  our  day.


mffonn.


Modam  Himrt.


Itt  hour . 4  o'clock,  27  ininlitei (


HORI.
lama  Hom.  Afodmn  Houn.

tlthhour , 3  o^Jock,  £a  minutei Oan


End  of  the  day


27


The  eutt'im  of  dividing  the  oataial  day  into
twelve  equal  parte  or  houn  laited,  ai  we  hare  ob-
•erved,  till  a  ver^  late  period.  The  fint  caltuda-
rium  in  which  we  find  the  dniatlon  of  day  and
night  mnHied  nceording  to  equinoctial  honra,  ia  Uie
calendariuin  rualicum  Kameiisnnm.  (Ideler,  Hiuuf-
bmA  der  Cknm.  ii.  p.  139,  &c  ;  Oraev.  Tiauitr.
Ant.  Ram.  vJiL)

Another  quation  which  haa  oEten  been  ditcnsHd,
ia  whether  in  nich  eipreagioni  ai  prima,  dleia,
tenia,  bora,  Ac,  we  have  to  nndcntand  the  hour
which  iapsating,  or  that  which  hoi  ihrcndy  elapied.
Fnam  the  conttruction  of  ancient  aun-dial>  on  which
the  houn  are  marked  by  clewn  line*,  Bo  that  the
firat  hour  had  clapaed  when  the  ahaJow  of  the
gnomon  lell  npon  the  fint  line,  it  might  <eem  a*  if
hora  prima  meant  after  the  Iipae  of  the  firit  hour.
Bnt  the  manner  in  wbich  Martial  (iv.  s\  when
deicribing  the  vsrions  purpoaei  to  which  the  honn
of  the  day  were  devoted  by  the  Rflmons,  ipeaki  of
the  houn,  Imvea  no  doubt  that  the  ei^eHioni
prima,  altera,  tertin  hora,  4c,,  mean  the  hour  which
ia  pnsiing,  and  nol  that  which  has  alreadv  ekpsed.
{Becker,  GaUaa,  vol.  i.  p.  1B4,  4e.)  [L,  S.]
MORCUS  {ipKos).  [JuRirnAtJDi'M.]
HORDEA'RIUMAES.  [Ak» HOBDEAltirM.]
HORI  (Ipoi),  were  ilone  tahleti  or  pillara  plnced
on  mortgaged  hoUKs  and  landi  nt  Athena,  upon
which  the  debt  and  the  creditor'!  name  were  in-
icribed,  and  alao  the  name  of  the  archon  epony-
mua  in  whose  year  the  mortage  had  been  Toadc,
(Ilarpocrat  j.p.  'Ofoa  and^oriirrai'L  Polliut.iiL
US,  It.  9. )  The  following  inicription  upon  an
l!|ioi,  found  at  Acbamac.iitaiLcnfiom  BHckh  {Carp,
latcrip.  L  p.  48+): —  "EtI  eH^pJoYOii  ifx""",
Spot  x"?'""  Ti^Si  im^eiXo/iinji  ^omirrpiT^
naiav  (ifT)  II,  that  is,  9irr):iAluv  ipaxt^ar.  It  ap-
pean  that  the  estate  bad  been  bought  of  Pfaam-
purchase-money,  inatcnd t£


gpaid,  w


cato a  BufGcie


ailowe


IS  let  w


obliged  to  hrpothe-


propertj-,  which  ii-aa  called  iTorifii
thii  an  Spot  waa  placed,  bmring  a  , .  .  _

thai  effect,  at  in  the  follpwiog  enimple,  which  ji
taken  from  an  tpot  found  upon  the  plain  of  Mara-
thon (BSckh,  p.  485): — ^Opor  xop^o"  ax'  owiai,
kmnliaifia,  iraitl  jpfmrji  AiOTciTDrer  npoCa-
(Mrrfou).  (Compare  Isacua,  Philoft.  irrfd.  p^  141.)
*Opoi  were  alio  placed  upon  housei  and  lands  on
acconnt  of  money  due  to  a  husband  for  the  dowir
of  hia  wife  (Dem.  e.  ^md.  p.  !029.  31),  and  also
upon  the  property  which  a  husband  n-as  obliged  to
giie  ai  a  security  for  the  dowry  which  he  rcceiied
with  hia  wife. <Dem. «.  Ontlor.  iL  p.  877.)

The  pnftice  of  placing  these  ipot  upon  prapertT
waa  ofgrent  ontiquilyBtAtheni:  it  existed  beforo
the  time  of  Solon,  wbo  removed  all  atone*  itanding
upon  cstatei,  when  he  relsised  or  relieved  tha
debtort.  (Plut.su:  IS.)

(.Wkk.h,P<ii.Eca,.>^AO<aa,  p.  129,  Snd  rf.
Corp.  Itittrip.  i. p.  4S4  ;  Mumun  Criticum,  Nn.


HOROLOGIUM.
BOROLO'OIUM  (V^»)  wu  thB  lu

■ftbenriraa  inatnuiwiU)  bf  mewii  of  vhtch
aaaeatt  mcMand  tha  tune  of  the  Amj  ud  iu|
The  ewtieM  aiul  timplnt  hamlagik  of  which  n
twi  1*  nude,  WHV  called  wiXjit  mnd  fT^f
(iL  109)  11


'  *od  'A»iifl(iii*-
^>  Id  AwuuBMndiir ;  and  Plinf  (/f.  N.  ii.  76)
W  hu  dUcipte  AiuuuiwiKt.  HerodotiB  menttmi
Iht  WA«  Md  -rr^iatr  m  two  dininct  initruraenU.
Both,  ^werer,  divided  the  d>^  into  Ivelre  eqiuj
JMP>,  wot  wen  m  kind  <rf'  nn-^.  The  yriiatr,
wludi  wa*  klm  imlled  irr«x''i"'i  *<>*  the  more
im|ile  of  tbe  two,  and  pnbabl;  the  mora  ancient.
It  coDiialKd  of  a  ataff  tr  pillar  itanding  perpsn-
dicnhr,  in  a  plao*  expoacd  ta  the  nin  (iriciwi||>Bi'),
m  that  the  laigth  of  iti  ahodaw  might  be  eaaily
aKxttaiiied.  The  )had(iw  of  the  gnamon  «M
BHantred  bj  feet,  which  were  probably  mailed  on
the  plaM  when  the  ihadow  kO.  (Hnjch.  i.  r.
'Errdnn  tria  and  tmitKiraStt :  Pollux,  L  72.}
The  gDomon  ii  dm«t  without  axeeptirm  mentioned
b  tnmection  with  Iho  BifrRii'  or  the  bath  ;  and
the  lime  fiir  the  ibmtec  wai  toward)  imuet,  or
at  the  time  when  the  ihadow  of  tbe  gnomon  mea-
med  tenor  twclre  feet.  lAralopb. Jiedti.  fiS2,with
the  Sebol.  i  Pollni,!.'.  ;  htenandei,  op.^tiM.  tl
B.  243  i  He^th.  t  e.  AtKctinw  Irotx*""'-)  The
Mvett  ahadow  of  the  gnomon,  at  AUntiie  acid  >uii-
Kt,  wa*  nmenll;  13  feet,  but  inaome  cue*  24
feet,  Ki  that  at  the  lima  of  the  Strn«'  it  wu  20
feeL  (Enbolidea,  >^^<faK  i  p.S.)  The  time
ht  b-'''i"g  waa  whoi  the  gnomon  threw  a  ihadow
ef  Bx  ket.  (Lacian,  Ohku.  e.  17,  Sobih.  t.  Gall.
e.  9.)  In  later  timet  the  name  gnomon  waa  applied
la  anj  kind  of  nm-dial,  eepeciall;  it*  finger,  which
thnw  the  ahadow,  and  thaa  pointed  to  the  hoar.
Eim  the  elepcfdra  ii  KmminKi  oiled  gnomon.
(Athen.  iL  p.  43.)

The  gDomoa  waa  eridenllf  a  reiy  imperfect  in-
ammient,  and  it  waa  imponible  to  dirids  the  day
into  tweln  equal  ipacei  by  it. Thi*  may  be  the


A  that  we  find  it  only  lued  for  rach

•tart  mcBtiiiaed  abore.  The  wi'
WHT,  vD  the  othet  hand,  aacm*  to  b
Bofect  kind  of  am-dial ;  but  it  ap]
lem,  iMt  (0  havatwen  nnch  naed,  u
HientiDned. (Ariataph.  op.  Ptllue,  ii


ilX2ffTp6-


n  the  middle  of  which


tbe popfodicolaT  itaff  or  finger (ynifiar)
enxted,  and  in  it  the  twelve  parti  of  the  day
maricfd  by  linea.  (Aldphmn,  £^tuL  iiL  4 ;  Lacian,
£a.i>i.e,4.)

Anotbei  kmd  of  honlcgiiuii  waa  tha  dtp^r
{lAt^iSpcii.  It  derived  ila  name  from  lA^irrd
and  Baap,  Bi  in  ita  oigiaal  and  limple  form  it  toi
aiiled  of  ■  leaeel  with  Hreisl  little  openinga
{lymifwra)  at  the  bottom,  through  trUeb  the
....■_. a t.. fj  neaped, u  it  were,  by

g  the


ben  naed  only  for  tl
tau  dming  which  pe


le  dming  which  periona  wen  alli
m  the  oomt*  of  juDee  at  Athena.  Tne  timi
inTentia)  m  intradnelioa  ia  not  known  j  but
^fc  of  Ariatophann  (lee  Atiarn.  653,  Vap.  93
nd  8*^7)  it  appcan  to  have  beco  in  common  nae.
Ita  farm  and  mutnetion  may  be  aeen  very  clearly
fian  a  paaa^  of  Aiittotle  {PrMaa.  ivL  B).  The
depajdrB  waa  a  hollow  globes  probably  aome-
«krt  flat  at  the  top  pai^  whan  it  had  a  ahort.


HOROLOGIUM.  61S

neck  (aiXit),  like  that  of  ■  bottle,  through  which
the  water  wu  poared  into  it.  Thu  opeoing  might
be  doaed  by  a  tid  or  (t«per  (wfifu),  to  prevent
the  water  running  oat  at  the  bottom.  The  clepty-
dra  which  Ariitotle  had  in  view  waa  probably  not
of  glaaa  or  of  any  tramparent  material,  but  of
bronae  or  braas,  an  that  it  could  not  be  seen  in
the  depeydca  itself  what  quintilj  of  water  had
A, A*  the  time  for  ipeoking  in  the  Athenian

freqaently  nae  the  term  IStip  initead  of  the  tina
allowed  to  them  (/r  t^  ifif  Hon,  Demoath.  dt
Cbnm.  p.  274  ;  tir  hX"^  t&  Slap,  e.  Ltoei.  p.
1094).  Anchinei  (s.  Ctaiph.  p.  &B7),  when  de-
Boibkg  the  c^der  in  which  the  several  partita
wen  allowed  to  apeak,  aayi  that  the  fint  water
given  to  the  acetiacr,  the  aecocd  to  the  accused,
and  the  third  to  the  judges.  An  eapecial  officer
{i  i^'  SiKfi)  vraa  appointed  in  the  tourta  for  the
parpooB  of  watching  the  clepaydra,  and  stopping  it
when  any  docameiili  wen  nad,  whereby  tha
neaker  waa  interrupted  ;  and  it  ia  to  tfai*  officer
that  Demoalhenea  (e.  SI>i>L  I  p.  1 103)  colli  out  i
ab  ii  iwlXatt  ih  SS^ji. The  time,  and  conse-

Sthe  quantity  of  water  allowed  to  a  ipeaker
id  upcm  tbe  importance  of  the  caao ;  and  we
are  informed  that  in  a  ypa^  wapsrpiffSiias  tha
waiei  allowed  to  each  party  amounted  to  eleven
vnphoraa  (Aewhtn.  d*  Fall.  Leg.  g  136),  whereaa

trialt  cooceming  tbe  right  of  inheritance  only

e  amphora  was  allowed. (Demoath.  c  Macart.

f.  IfiOS.) Thowi  aetiona  in  whkh  the  time  waa

neainred  to  the  apeakera  are  tailed  by  Pollux

113) Okm  spli  Maip:  othera  m  termed

Sbcoi  6m  ettrriit,  and  hi  then  the  apeskoa  were

tied  down  to  a  cer^n  apace  of  time. Tha

,'  initance  of  thii  kind  of  actions  of  which  we
know,  ia  the  ?p<#4  aoJc^ffaiH  (Horpocrat.  t.  v,
ffdxoirit).

The  depaydra  need  in  the  courtj  of  justice  how-
ever waa,  properly  apeaking,  no  honlogium ;  but
imalleroDei,  made  of  glaji,and  of  the  aame  simple
itructnre,  wen  undoubtedly  uied  very  earl;  in
tamllies  fer  the  purposea  of  ordlnaiy  life,  and  for
dividing  the  day  into  twelve  eqnal  parti.  In  these
llau-cleptydrue  the  division  into  twelve  patli  must
have  been  visible,  either  on  the  glasi-globe  itself,  or
in  the  basin  into  which  the  water  flowed.  Th»s
instrumento,  however,  did  not  show  the  time  quite
correctly  all  the  year  round  ;  first,  becatise  tha
water  ran  oat  of  the  depsydra  sometimes  quicker
and  aoraetunca  slower,  uccording  to  the  different
temperature  of  the  water  (Athen.  ii.  p.  43 ;  Pint.
QiHUit.  Natar.  c  7) ;  and  aecondly,  because  the
length  of  the  boun  varied  in  the  difterent  Masons
of  the  year.  To  remove  tha  aeoind  of  ihne  de-
fcela  the  inaide  of  the  clepsydra  waa  covered  with
a  coat  of  wax  during  the  shorter  days,  nnd  when
they  became  longer  the  wax  was  grsdnally  taken
away  again.  (Aen.  Tact,  c  23.)  Plslo  is  said  to
have  used  a  i/vifrfpir6r  itfoKiryiinf  m  the  shape  of  a
hir)te  depgydra,  which  indicated  the  hours  of  the
night,  and  scemi  to  hare  been  of  a  complicated
atrocture.  (Athen.  iv.  p.  174.)  This  uutancs
ahowa  that  at  on  early  period  improvements  wen
mode  on  the  old  and  simple  clepsydra.  But  oil
these  imptovemcnla  were  excelled  by  the  ingeni-
ous invention  of  Ctctibioi,  a  celebrated  rondienia-
tician  of  Alexandria  (about  1 3£  B.  c).  It  ia  tailed
iifBKirguir  UpauAmbf,  and  ia  described  by  Vitn-
vioi  (ix.  S  t  compare  Athen.  i.  c). Water  waa


816  HOROLOOIUM.

mads  to  drop  upon  wliccli  whicli  irm  thcrebj
turaed.  Tha  regular  moTement  of  these  wheeli
WM  comnunitstM  to  a  amall  itatne,  which,  gis
duall;  riling,  pointed  with  ■  little  itick  to  thi
houn  marked  on  a  pillar  whioh  was  attached  tc
ths  mechaniim.  It  indicated  tha  houn  legnlarly
throaibout  [be  year,  but  ilill  reqaind  lo  b«  often
attended  to  and  regulated.  Tliii  complicated  clep-
ijdra  teema  nocr  to  have  eotne  into  geoenl  uae,
and  vu  prgbablj  only  found  in  the  hooiei  of  Tcry
wealthy  peraona.  The  lun-dial  or  (jnomon,  [-  *  -
limpler  kind  of  clepaydis,  on  the  other  hand,
much  lued  down  to  k  vecy  late  period.  The  twelTe
parta  of  the  day  were  not  duienaled  by  the
Ofa  until  the  lima  of  the  Alexandrian  aai
men,  and  eien  then  the  old  and  nga»  diTJaJODa,
described  in  the  article  Diis,  wctc  prefemd  in  thi
■ffiura  of  cotnmOD  life.  At  the  lime  of  tho  geo-
gmphcr  Hippuchua,  however  (abotit  ISO  ikc.),  it
aeema  to  hare  been  <ery  common  to  reckon  by  ho
(Comp.  Becker,  CkarikU*.  toI  ii.  p.  490,  Ac.)
There  ii  itill  eiiiting,  Ihongb  in  luin*,  a  horo-


BOROLOQIDU.

logical  bnilding,  which  ii  one  of  the  mort  intereit-
ing  monument!  at  Athena.  It  ii  the  atniclDn
formeiiy  called  the  Tawtr  if  tit  Wmdi,  bnt  now
known  ai  tho  I/oro/ogicai  MontaiaU  o/ Atidfonialt
C^TTiairi  (lee  Dicl.  of  Bit^.  a.  v.).  It  ia  ri-
preial;  cnlled  hupA^mx  by  Vatro  (R.  A.  iii  h.
9  17).  Thit  building  is  folly  deseribed  by  Vitm-
•ioi  (i.  6.  g  4),  and  the  preeediDg  voodcala  ibow
ita  elevation  and  groond  plan,  as  nstored  b;  Stoaft,
(Antiq.  rfA&aa,  toL  L  c.  3.)

The  BlmcEon  ii  octagonal ;  with  its  feces  to  the
poinu  of  tho  compaia.  On  the  N.K  and  N.W.
(idea  are  dittyle  Corinthian  porticoea,  ginng  acceti
to  the  iDterior  ;  and  to  the  aonth  wall  ii  affixed  a
■ort  of  tumt,  farming  three  quarters  of  n  cirdn,  to
contain  the  cistern  which  supplied  water  lo  the
clepsydra  in  the  interior.  On  the  aimunit  of  the
building  was  a  hronie  ligort  of  a  Triton,  holding  «
wand  in  his  hand ;  and  this  figure  turned  on  a
pivot,  so  that  the  wand  always  pointed  above  tliat
aide  of  the  building  which  &ced  the  wind  then
blowing.  '  The  directions  of  the  several  lacea  wero
indicated  by  fgnrea  of  the  eight  winds  on  the  Iricn
of  the  entablatore.  On  the  plain  wall  below  tha
entablature  of  each  &ce,  linci  are  still  visible,
which,  with  the  onomons  that  stood  ont  abofs
them,  Ibmied  a  aenei  of  sun-dials.  In  the  centra
of  the  interior  of  the  building  was  a  clcpsydnt,  tba
remains  of  which  are  still  visible,  and  are  ^own
on  the  plsn,  where  the  dark  lines  nprcaeni  the
'U  for  the  water,  which  was  supplied  fima


the  n


The  first  horologiom  with  which  the  Kontana  be-
came acquainted  was  Baun-dial  (sa^mna,  or  Aonv
%i'Hn  sciotierimm),  and  was,  according  to  aoma
wrilfr^,  brought  to  Rome  by  Papirius  Cursor  twelvo
yeara  before  the  war  with  Pyrrbus, and  placed  bcfora
the  temple  of  Quirinoi  (Plin.  II.N.  vii.  60)  ;  othen
staled  that  it  was  brought  to  Rome  at  the  time  of  the
fint  Punic  war,  by  the  consul  M.ValerioaMesaala,
and  erected  on  a  eolnmo  behind  the  Rostra.  But
this  solnrium  being  mode  for  a  dtflerenl  laliiude
did  not  show  the  time  at  Rome  correctly.  Ninely-
nine  years  afterwards,  the  censor  Q.  Marcius  Philip-
pus  emted  by  the  side  of  the  old  solarium  a  new
one,  which  was  more  carefully  regulated  occDrdtng
to  the  latitude  ofRome.  Dotoi  sun-dials,  however
perfect  they  might  be,  were  Dsdeas  when  the  sky
was  cloudy,  P.  Scipio  Naiioh  in  his  cmsonhi|:^
159  B.C.,  ealablithed  a  public  clrpeydra,  which  in-
dicated the  houn  both  of  day  and  ni^t.  Thia
dra  was  in  aftertimes  gencnlly  oiled  aols-
(Plin.  U.  N.  vii.  60 ;  Ceniorin.  A  Die  A'at
c  23.)  The  word  hon  for  hour  was  inHndQced
Rome  at  the  time  when  the  Romans  became  tx-
ainted  with  the  Qreek  horologia,  and  was  in  tliii
unification  well  known  at  the  time  of  Plautiu.
(PimJal.  T,  2.  10.)  After  the  time  of  Sd[rio
Nasica  several  horologia,  chiefly  solaria,  seem  to
hava  been  erected  in  various  public  places  at  Roma,
A  magnificent  horologium  was  erected  by  Anguatna
in  the  Campus  Martins.  It  ml  a  gnomon  in  tba
shape  of  an  obelisk;  but  Plmy  (tf.  M  nivL  10)
compluni  that  in  the  coune  of  time  it  had  becoma
incorreet.  Another  honiiogium  stood  in  the  Circoi
FbuniDioa.  (Vinnv.  iz.  9.  1.)  Sometimes  solans
were  attached  to  the  {rant~ude  of  temples  and  baari-
licae.  (VaiTO,  rf«  £611;^  Lot.  vi.  4  ;  Oniter,  Imtcript.
vi.  6.)  The  old  aolanum  which  had  been  erected
behind  tha  Boatn  aeema  to  have  existed  oi  that


HOROLOaiUM.
■pol  litt  1  •itrj  U(«  Mriod,  and  it  would  K«in  tliat
ihc  piMe  wu  called  ail  Salarutm,  >•>  that  Cicero
un  chit  expnuion  m  ijnonynioiu  with  Rottn
Di  Fnnmi  {pn  QwiKf.  18.  od  Heraai.  It.  10).
HoroLogia  cpf  Tmrioiu  dacriptioiu  Hem  alio  to  fauTe
bsa  aninuiilj  kept  bj  private  iudiTiduala  (Cic
i>'/'«.  iTi.l8);andat  thetimeoriheemperon,
Ibc  vcaltbj-  Ranau  Died  to  keep  tlaiea  trbote
ipecuJ  dot  J  it  wai  to  annomice  tlie  bonn  of  tbe  day
IS  tlidr  DWMcn.  (Jutui.  i.  SI5  j  Mart  riii.  67  i
Prtron-ae.)

FnD  the  nmnber  of  wlHiia  which  hare  been
diKOrmd  in  maian  timea  in  Ital^r,  ve  jnoat  infer

It  ibfj  wei«  *err  genaall;  nied  amgng  the

—..  . •  11 -  ^  woodmt  reprettuti  one

which  have  been  di>-


uKicnti, The  fbllowins  wood
tl  the  limpkat  honlogia  whi<


iht  imealioa  of  which  VitniTiui  aicribei  to
Brronu.  Itwa*  diKOTcrcd  in  1711,  on  Chs  hilj
<(  TaicBliim,  among  the  lutnt  of  an  ancient  rilla,
ud  ii  dacribcd  bj  Oio,  Ltica  Zuneri,  in  a  work
niiilrd  D'ama  antiea  atla  mapeiM  ail  daaa  dd
Tixale,  t  <fiiM  cnfKs  oroA^  a  tok, VeneiiB,


174e,  and  by  G.  H.  Martini,  in  bii  JUaadlnHg

p.  tS,  At
The  fallowins  woodcnt  ihowi  tba  nitu  •olariiun


The  breadth  at  w<Jl  at  the  height  (A  0,
P  A)  arr  Knaewhat  more  than  eight  inchei ;
the  length  (A  B)  a  little  mora  than  iiileen  inches.
Tlia  imiace  (A  O  R  B)  it  borizonUl.  S  P  Q  T
it  the  huii  of  the  tolaiium,  which,  originallj,
*a  inbahlf  emcted  apon  n  pillar.  Ita  tide,
A8TB,  inclinea  lomewhBl  lowordt  the  baaii.
Tka  indipation  wai  called  lyii\iiui,  or  inclinitir
•abrn  and  enduiw  •acdinm  (Vitmr.  L  c),  and


H0R0SC0PU3.  6IT

owi  the  latitode  oi  polar  altitude  at  the  place
r  which  ths  Klaiiom  wai  made.  The  angle  of
e  enclima  it  about  40''  43*,  which  coincides
ith  the  latitude  of  Tiuculuui.  la  ihs  bodr  of
e  tolarinm  it  the  almoil  ipherical  excavation,
HK  D  M  I  F  N,  which  roimia  donbls  hemicyclium
ifumieydimn enavaiittn em qmadrala, VitniT.),

marked  which  |»h  throogh  three  lemicirclo,
H  L  N,  K  £  F,  and  D  M  J.  Ths  middle  one,
KEF,  repreteott  the  equator,  the  two  otben  the
tropic  line*  of  winter  and  inmmer.  The  cnrte  re-
tting the  numner  tropic  It  aomewhat  more
1  lemidrcle,  the  other  two  cnrrea  lomewhnt
!t.  The  ten  middle  porti  or  honn  in  each  of
the  three  currei  an  all  equal  to  one  another  ;  but
le  two  extreme  ouet,  though  equal  to  each  other,
'e  b<r  one-rourth  unaller  than  the  rett.  In  the
Jddle,  O,  ot  the  curve  D  K  H  N  IJ,  there  ia
little  tquare  hole,  in  which  the  gnomon  or  pointer
Loit  have  been  filed,  and  a  trace  of  it  ii  ttill
iiible  in  the  lead  by  meant  of  which  it  wai  hied,
t  mutt  have  itood  in  a  peqwndicular  poiition
pon  the  lurbce  A  B  R  O,  and  al  n  cerlsili  dit-
tnce  from  the  aurbce  it  muit  have  turned  in  a
right  angle  above  the  iphcrjc  eicavatinn,  to  that
itt  end  (C)  extended  as  &r  at  the  middle  of  the

See  tlie  devxiptioa  of  another  lolarium  in  O.  H.
Martini'i  .iliifMfiionini  AfaaunEfltorwH  SgUogB,  p.
05,  &c

Cleptjdcae  were  uied  bj  the  Roroant  in  their
campi,  chietlj  for  the  pnrpoio  ot  meaiuring  accu-
ntely  the  four  vigiliae  into  which  the  night  wat
divided.  (Coct.  de  Belt.  Gall  v.  13  ;  VcgcL  da
Re  Milii.  iii.  a  i  Aen.  Tact.  c.  2i)

The  ciittom  of  uting  cleptydme  at  a  check  upon
the  ipeaken  in  the  count  of  Juilice  al  Rome  was
introduced  bv  a  law  of  Cn.  Pompeiui,  in  hit  third
coniulship.  (TaciLi;<if^iir.OniJ.  38.)  Before  that
time  the  ipeaken  had  been  under  no  reitrictioui,
but  ipoke  at  long  at  the;'  deemed  proper.  At
Rome,  at  at  Alhent,  the  time  aUowcd  to  the
ipfakert  depended  upon  the  importance  of  the
cate.  Plinj  (ZJiirf.  ii.  1 1)  tlatei  that  on  one  im-
portant ocouion  ho  ipoke  for  nearly  five  boura,
ten  large  clepajdrae  having  been  granted  to  him
b;  ihc  judlcei,  but  the  rate  nai  to  important  that
four  otben  were  added.  (Compare  Plin.  £ptrt.  vL
3 !  Jliirtial,  vL  35,  viiL  7.)  i-ompcikii,  in  his  law,
it  laid  to  have  lunited  the  lime  during  which  the
occutei  wot  allowed  to  apeak  to  tno  haun,  while
the  accuied  wai  allowed  three  hour*.  (Aacon.  u
Atilon.  p.  37,  ed.  Orelli.)  Thit,  however,  at  it
dear  from  tbe  cate  of  Pliny  and  otlien,  wot  not
obtervcd  on  all  ocrsaiont,  and  we  mutt  luppoie
that  it  wat  merely  the  intention  of  Pompciui  to  fix
the  proponioni  of  the  time  to  be  allowed  to  each
party,  that  it,  thai  in  all  caiei  the  accuter  ihould
onlif  have  two-thirdt  of  the  time  allowed  to  tbe
anuted.  Thit  auppoiilion  it  tupported  b;  a  cue
mentioned  by  Pliny  (P/nrt.  iv,  9),  where,  accord-
ing to  law  (a  Irgi)  the  accuser  had  >ix  hour^
while  the  accuied  had  nine.  An  especial  officer
wa»  at  Rome  at  well  as  at  Athens  appointed  to
Itop  the  clefaydn  during  tho  time  when  doco-
menti  were  read.  (Apnl.  Apolog.  i  and  ii. ;  com-
pare Emetii,  de  SolaHii,  in  bis  Ojmiad.  FiUotag.
KCHt  pp.  21— 31  i  Becker,  Coflaj,  ToL  L  p.  186,
it)  [L.S.]

HOROSCOPUS, [AsTKOLOOU,  p.  144,b.]


61S


H0KTU3.


HOBREAItll. [HoKBKvu.]

HORHEUM  (■bptur,  rirof  vAiwiiot,  iTMim)
vu,  accordinff  to  ita  etymological  lignifica^n,  n
place  in  wbicE  ripe  frniti,  and  specially  oun,  were
kept,  uid  thm  aniirered  to  our  Rianuy.  (Viiv.
Otart).  L  49  ;  Tibull.  iL  S.  84  ;  Hnat.  Ciim.  i.  I.
7  j  Cic  <J*  li^.  Agr.  li.  63.)  During  the  empire
the  naiDe  bonemn  wna  giren  to  aaj  place  dettincd
for  the  nfe  prev'Tvatioi  of  thiaH  of  uif  kind.
Thui  we  find  it  ipplied  to  a  place  in  which  beauti-
fy woib  of  art  were  kcpC  tPlia.  ^Hi<.  viii.  13);
to  cdlan  (jlomu  nZtferrojiai,  d&oma  rrvrin,  Di|r.
IB.  Iit.1.1.  ;G);Iadepduroriiien)iandi<e.sndal]


9. 1.  3). Seneca  (£pK.  4£)  e>en  calll  hi
a  hoiream. But  the  more  geneiBl  nppli

piece)  for  keeping  fr


the  word  horrclun  vai  to  pli
Bsd  com ;  and  ai  iDine  kindi
kept  inon  diy  then  olbetit  the  oncienU  hod  be-
■idee  the  hDITca  luhlensncn,  or  cellan,  tvo  other
kinda,  one  of  which  wai  huilt  like  ereiy  other
houae  upon  the  HTcund  ;  bnt  otbon  (larrea  penai-
lia  oc  nblimia)  were  erected  above  the  gtound,  and
reeled  upon  pn>ts  or  atone  pilkn.  that  the  fruita
kqit  in  tbem  might  remain  diy.  (Colum.  lii.  SO,
L6;  Vitrov.  ri.  6.  i.)

From  about  the  year  140  after  C  brut,  Rome  poi-
■eued  two  kindg  of  public  banu.  The  one  dui
contiated  of  building!  in  which  the  Roman*  might
deposit  theirg<iod«,iind  even  the Irmoney.aeeuritifa,
■nd  other  valkiable.  (Cod.  4.  lit.  24.  a.  9),  for  which
they  had  no  aafe  place  in  their  orni  hooiei.  Thia
kind  of  public  horrea  ia  mentioned  aa  early  aa  the
time  of  Antoninue  Piu.  (Dig.  1.  tiL  IS.  a.  3),
though  Lnmpridiua  (Alex.  Sep.  c  39)  anigni  their
inaUlntim  to  Aleionder  Sevcnia.  (Compare  Dig.
10.  tit  4.  t  6.)  The  officora  who  hwl  the  mpcc-
iDtfndence  of  theie  eatabliabmenu  wen  called  hor-
rearii.  The  aecond  and  more  important  claia  of
horrea,  which  may  be  t«rmed  public  granaries,  weie
buildingi  in  which  a  plentiful  tuj^ly  of  com  waa
CDnitantlykeptatthe  eiprnK  of  the  aiate,  end  front
which,  ia  nasona  vf  aoireiiy,  the  corn  wu  dittri-
biited  among  the  poor,  op  aold  at  a  moderate  price.
The  fint  ides  of  building  inch  a  public  granary
amtc  with  C.  Serapnniua  Grucchui  (leji  Semprouia
Jr^ntentarid)  ;  and  the  luini  of  the  great  gmnory
{hvrta  prgM  Kamanij  which  ha  buHt  were  seen
down  to  the  aixtcenth  century  between  the  Atch-
tine  and  the  Monte  Teeiocea.  (Appian,  de  Bdi.
tSe.  i.  31  ;  Plut,  C.  Gnedi.  S  ;  Ut.  Epii.  60  j
Veil.  Pat  iL  6  j  Cie.  pro  SetL  24.)

The  pi -  '.  " .

the  emperora  i  and  dnrina  the  empire  wethua  find
a  great  Durnber  of  public  hormt  which  were  railed
after  Che  naniee  of  their  founden,  e.  g.,  horrea  Ani-
eeti,  Vaignnteii,  Seiani,  Aiignsti,  Domitiuii,  &c
The  manner  in  which  com  fmm  Iheao  granariea
vfli  given  to  the  people  differed  at  different  timea
[Comp.  Frvukntarub  T.aoxs.]  [L.  S.]

HORTUS  (iriTnu).  garden.  1.  Ohebs.  Out
knowledge  of  the  horticulture  of  the  Oreeka  ia  tci;
limited.  We  muat  not  Imk  Sot  informatioD  re-
tprcting  their  gaidena  to  the  aceounti  which  we
find  in  Greek  writen  of  the  gaidena  of  AlcinoUo,
filled  with  all  nuuineioftreeaand  fruit  and  flowefa,
■ndadomed  with  fonntaina  (O/^k  Tii.  112—1.10),
or  of  ihoM  of  the  Heaperidea  (Heeiod.  Titoff  35),
or  of  the  parodiie*  of  the  Pcnion  utrnpi,  which
naembledoaT|>uka(XBii..4i<il.L  3.  £  7,  Occe-


HOKTUS.
■Hi.  h.  26,  27  1  Pint  JbA  24)  ;  f<>  the  foraur
gardena  an  only  imaginary,  and  the  manner  in
which  the  pamdiaeaare  apoken  of  by  Greek  writen
ahowa  that  they  were  not  &miliar  with  anythir^
of  the  kind  in their  own  coontiy. In  bet  the


Oreeka  aeem  to  htn

had  no

gnat  taale

for  land-

sr

beau^  and  the  imal

"number

f  flowen

which  they

vm  tat

loinled  ailbHed  but

Uttle

al  hartindti

The  lacied  gniea  were  cullivotsd  with  apniid
care.  They  conloincd  omamenta]  and  odoriftroui
planta  and  fruit  treei,  particularly  diret  and  Tina.
(Soph.Oec/.CU16i  Xen..4Mi.T.3.gl2.)  Some-
timea  they  were  without  frnit  tree*.  (Pau.  L  SI.
§9.)

The  only  paamga  in  the  eariier  Greek  writen,
in  which  flower-gaidena  appear  to  be  mmtiaBed,
ia  me  in  Ariatophonea,  who  apeokl  of  c^vsw
lidSta  (Avet,  t.  IOGH).  At  Athena  the  flowen
moat  culliiated  were  probably  thoae  naed  tat
making  gaiionda,  mch  aa  Tiolet*  and  rmol  Ib
the  ^me  of  the  Piolemiea  the  art  of  gordenkg
■eema  to  hats  advanced  in  the  faniunUc  climate
of  Egypt  to  br,  that  a  njcceaaion  of  iowcn  wia
obtained  all  the  TCarroiiad.  (CalliiKntii,  i^.  AlL
T.  p.  196.)  I.ongiu  (Pad.  iL  p.  36)  deacribea  a
garden  containing  every  production  of  each  m-
nn.a,  lilica,  hyacintha,  and  rio-
,  poppiei,  wild.peara  ^Ayp^tt),
and  al]  fruit ;  in  autumn,  vinea  and  tiga,  and  pDmc-
^nalci  and  myrtlea."  That  the  Greek  idea  af
)iorticulluinl  beauty  wai  not  quite  the  aame  ai
oun,  ma;  be  inferred  Ennn  a  pounge  in  Plutnith,
where  he  ipcaka  of  the  practice  of  aetling  off  the
beautiet  of  maet  and  violeta,  by  planting  them  aide
bj  aide  with  Iccki  and  onioni  (De  capiauLi  «i
'  'miat  utitiiale,  c  10).  Becker  conaideri  lhi«
taoge  a  proof  that  flowera  were  cultivated  mat
be  uted  for  gailanda  than  to  beaotif;  the  garden.
(Becker,  Charik^a,  vol.  iL  p.  403—1115.)

2.  Rohan. The Romana, like the Oreeka,
laboured  under  the  diaadvontage  of  a  verr  limited
Thia  disadvantage  they  endeavonred  to  over-
come, by  arranging  the  materiala  they  did  po»e^
inch a  way  a>  to  produce  a  atriking  efikt
e  have  a  very  full  description  of  a  Roman  gaidtn
a  letter  of  the  younger  Pliny,  in  whicb  bede-
ribe*  hia  TuHan  villa. (Plin.  BpiM.  v.  6.) In
int  of  tho  porticia  there  waa  generally  a  ryda.
Rat  piece  of  ground,  divided  into  flower-bedi  of
Cerent  ahapea  by  borderv  of  box. Thcie  were
Mj  auch  dower-bed^  in  ether  porta  of  the  garden.
Somctimei  the;  wen  laiied  ao  as  to  fnm  terraces,
id  (heir  sloping  sides  planted  with  evergirvns  or
creepera. The  most  atriking  features  of  a  Roman
pirden  were  linei  of  large  trcei,  among  which  the
slane  appears  to  have  been  a  great  favourite,  planted
in  I«gulai  order  ;  alleyi  or  wnlka (amMafmn)
[brmcd  by  clcacly  dipt  hedges  of  box,  yew,  cypresa,
and  other  evei^gnena  ;  beds  of  aconthua,  rows  of
fruit-trees,  eapcclolly  of  vines,  with  statue*,  pyia-
mida,  rcunloini,  and  eummer-bonie*  (iJ^iiMae).  The
trunka  of  the  trees  and  tlio  parts  of  the  bauae  er
any  other  buildings  which  were  viaible  fnun  the
garden,  welB  often  covered  with  ivy. (Plin.Le.;
Cic  ad  Q.  F.  iiL  1,  2.) In  one  rcipect  tbe  RoDn
taale  dificred  moat  materially  frain  that  of  the
present  day,  namely,  in  their  foodneas  for  the  ors
tapiaria,  which consisted  in lying,  twiitmg,  er
cutting  trees  and  ahmba  (eapeemlly  the  boi)  into
■ "  ,letten,&tt. Th«  i»-


HOSPITIUM,

jmoaa  kUuhed  to  thu  part  of  horticnltiire  ii
Wt'ti  not  only  by  the  dwcription  of  Pliny,  uid
ik  Dorimrf  otirr  writ™  (Plin.  H.  ff.  IrL  33.
■.liO,  iiL  II.  1.99,  Tiii.  2-1  ■.34;  MtmiR),  iiL
1 9),  Lot  *]m  by  the  flict  ibtt  lopiarint  it  the  only
iinF  iwd  in  pwd  Liitm  writen  fin'  the  oma-
■FDtil  ^enn.  Ciccrn  {Parad.  T.  S)  mmlioiu
ibc  Icfirinu  unong  the  hightr  cloM  of  aliTei.
Aiathrf  lo  the  garden  were  f^"*™  for  *ierci»,

■m  of  ATenurj  thfljl^  by  trees,  for  the  pDTpoee  of

(Plhi.  Bpiii.  r.  6,  ii.  17.>  The  iipjwrfrtwiM  (not,
u  one  rotitina  girea  ^e  word  in  Pliny,  hjipodm-
■n)  wu  >  pbce  for  noining  or  hone  eierdie,  in
the  (cnn  of  a  circin,  conaiiting  of  Mveral  pstha
dtiidrd  by  hedges  of  boi,  omiunmted  with  topi-
■raa  nil,  and  nirTmiided  by  large  lr«ea.  (Plin.
Lt.;  Uaniil,  lii.  S0,lTiL23.)

TbefloweTi  which  the  Romans  poeiened,  though
(tir  in  conipariaon  with  the  tpociee  known  ta  ci,
*i»  note  nnmrroui  than  lome  writcn  hace  m.
ptnenttd  ;  hut  the  inhject  itiil  reqoire*  inreiiign-
tim.  Their  principal  garden-floweia  leem  to  have
hm  ndeti  and  roses,  and  they  alio  had  the  cro-
nu,  Ducioiu,  lily,  gbdiolus,  iria,  poppy,  amaranth,

CMBenatorica  and  bot-honiet  are  not  mentioned
ij  my  writer  eariier  than  the  finl  century  of  our
en.  They  are  freqnentlj  referred  to  by  Martial
(TiL  14,  68,  IT.  19,  jiiL  12T).  They  wen  uacd
l»lh  to  preaerre  forrign  plnnta  and  la  produce
ftnrci)  and  &nit  oat  of  leason.  Columella  (li.  3.
15il,  52)  and  Pliny  (H.  JV.  lii.  S.  a.  23)  apenk
»f  drnng-lnttaea  for  giapea,  meloni,  it  In  every
^den  tboe  waa  a  apace  let  apart  for  Tegetablea
I'M).

Flowcn  and  planta  were  alaa  kept  in  (he  central
fa  of  the  periatyle  [Dohob],  on  the  roofi,  and
ID  ibe  windowa  of  the  homes.  Sometimes,  in  a
Mwn,  whnc  Iho  garden  wna  very  luiall,  it*  walit
■ere  [aiiitcd  in  imitation  of  a  real  garden,  with
irres,  Ibuntaina,  birdi,  At,  and  the  trnaJl  am  waa
nuvnenied  with  floven  in  mea.  A  heantiful
nample  of  anch  a  garden  wu  fennd  at  Pompeiu
(GeU'i  PoBipBana,  iL  4.)

An  nnumental  garden  wa«  aI«o  called  midariuni
(Kg.  33.  tit  7.  a.  8),  and  the  ganlencr  lupiariui


The  I


a  garden


is  nWnu  or  esi/tor  iortomn.  We  find
ipccial  names  Rflifcr,  atitur.  The  word  horlulanus
'»  wily  of  late  fbmmlion.  The  arpmrivi  bad
charge  of  the  fonncaina  both  in  the  garden  and
ia  the  hooie.  (Becker,  Galiui,  vol.  L  p.  2(!3,
Ac. ;  Bettiger,  ibegnojionea  nr  Garlai-Kvntt
iitAriBi.)  [P.  S.]

IHISPES. [HospiTluir.]

HOBPITIUM  C5«Wa,  nfol^Au).  Hoipitalitv
i«  one  of  the  characteriatic  fcatnrea  of  almost  ail
uiinoi  preriooa  to  their  attaining  a  certain  d^ree
"f  ririliialioo.  In  ciTilised  countriea  the  neccsiity
of  gcRaal  boapitililj  t>  not  ■»  much  felt ;  but  at
•  time  when  the  state  or  the  lawa  of  nati^na  afforded
•eately  any  aecorih,  and  when  the  traveller  on
kil  jotuney  did  not  meet  with  any  places  destined
&t  his  reeeplion  and  accommodation,  the  eicrciac
d/  hupiialiiy  was  absolutely  necessary.  Among
the  nationi  of  antiquity,  with  whom  tho  right  of
loapitality  waa  hallowed  by  religion,  it  was  lo
■ome  d^^ree  observed  to  the  latest  period  of  their
nittence,  and  acquired  a  political  importance  which


HOSPITIUM.  61*

<t  has  nerer  had  in  any  other  itate.  Tt  waa  in
Greece,  aa  well  aa  at  Rsme,  of  a  twofold  nature,
either  priyate  or  public,  in  aa  £u  as  it  was  either
ealabliahed  between  individuals,  or  between  two
atatea.  ^Hatpitam  privaiam  and  io^ittuta  puUi-
<»m,  (erta  and  wpott^la.)

1.  Qrssk.  In  ancient  Greece  the  atiaiger,
as  aoeh  (E^Fei  and  ioslis),  waa  looked  upon  aa  an
enemy  (Cie.  dtOf-lM;  Herod,  tx.  1 1  ;  Plut,
Arittid.  10);  but  whenever  he  ^>pi«red  among
another  tribe  or  nation  without  any  aign  of  hostile
intentions,  he  waa  conaideied  not  only  aa  one  who
required  aid,  but  a*  a  iuppliant,  and  Zeua  waa  the
protecting  deity  of  atrangen  and  aoppliants.  {Ztit
iirwj  and  iKrrhmiis:  Horn.  Od.  liv.  57,  Ac.  283,
it  278,  xiii.  213,  viL  164:  compare  Apoilon.
Argaiai.  ii.  1 1 84  ■,  Aelian.  V.HAv.l.)  Thia
religious  feeling  waa  strengthened  by  the  belief
that  the  atranger  might  poasihiy  be  a  god  in  dis-
guise.  (Odyss.  ivii.  484. 1  On  his  arrival  there-
fore,  the  stranger,  of  whatever  station  in  life  he
might  be,  was  kindly  received,  and  provided  with
everything  neeesiary  to  make  him  comfortable,
and  to  sntisfr  his  immediate  want*.  The  boat  did
not  inquire  who  tho  atranger  was,  or  what  had  led
him  to  hia  house,  until  the  duties  of  hospitality
were  fulfilled.  During  hia  ata^',  it  was  a  sacred
duty  of  hia  boat  to  protect  him  against  any  per-
seintion,  even  if  he  helong,d  lo  a  polititallj  hostile
race,  so  that  the  hoal'a  house  was  a  perfect  asylum
to  him.  On  hia  departnre  he  was  dismissed  with
presenli  and  good  wishes.  {Od^.  iv.  37,  &c.,
Nitzch*)  note. )  It  seems  to  hare  been  customary
for  the  host,  on  the  departure  of  the  stranger,
to  break  a  die  (itoTpd-yaAoi)  in  two,  one  half  ot
Vfhich  hs  himself  retained,  while  tho  other  half
was  given  to  the  stranger  ;  and  when  at  any  fu-
ture time  they  or  their  descendants  met,  they  had
a  means  of  recngaising  each  other,  and  the  hospi-
table connection  was  renewed.  (SchoL  ad  Eariji.
Med.  613.)  Iloipitalily  thus  not  only  eiiated
between  the  persons  who  had  originally  farmed  it,
but  was  tnmsfcrred  as  an  inheritance  fi?oni  blher
to  son.  To  violate  the  hiwa  of  hospitality  was  a
great  crime  and  act  of  impiety,  and  was  ptmished
by  men  as  well  as  gods  (Sfitiii  iraiteJtrlBi,  Aelian,
(.  c. ;  PauB.  Til.  25).  TratonccB  of  auch  hereditary
connections  of  hospitality  an  mentioned  down  to  a
very  late  period  of  Greek  history ;  and  many
towns,  such  as  Athens,  Corinth,  Byiantium,  Phasis,
and  others,  were  celebrated  for  tho  hospitablo
characterof  their  citizens.  (Il.rod.vi.  35  ;  Thucyd,
ii.  13  1  Plato,  CH(o,  p.4S,c.  i  Stobneua,  Fhriltg.
tit  iliv.  40,  Ac.)  But  when  a  more  regular  and
frequent  inlercouise  among  the  Greeks  began  to
be  established,  it  was  impassible  to  receive  all  these
strangers  in  private  houaea.  Thii  natunUIy  led  to
the  establishment  of  maiifartaKfior,


'„),  h


vhieh  such  St

us  found  accommodati


aa  had  no  hos-


pitable c

particular  place  for  the  purpose  of  cclcbmting  one
of  the  gteat  or  nationaJ  festivals,  the  slate  or  th«
temple  provided  for  the  accomniodatinn  of  the  visitors
either  in  tenta  or  temporary  inns  erected  about  tho
temple. (Aelian, V.  H.  iv.  3  ;  Schol.  ad  Find.


. 952;


12:  Thuc;


8.)


id  of  hospitality  which  waa  eierciscd  by
ivatc  individuals  on  such  festive  ocoisioni  pro-
ibly  differed  vot7  little  Inm  that  ^hjoh  ii^cui-


690


HOSPITIUU.


in  and  merit,
Thon  preoencv  wna  oa  honaor  to  the  hoiue  wherein
they  itajed.  (Xen.  Otam.  2.  5  ;  Plato,  Fniag.
p.  31G  )  Becker,  CluviMtt,  vgL  i.  p.  131.)  In  t&«
funiMi  of  the  wolthier  Oreeka  a  gepamle  put  {kot-
piSam  or  impilaiia  and  (criirti}  with  B  gepante
entiBDce,  wai  dutiDed  for  the  reception  and  habi-
tatioti  of  itiangQfB,  and  was  prorided  with  all  the
neseaitif  cumfbrti  !a\t  the  temponuy  occapuita.
On  the  £r)t  dajafUr  their  urii^  tbef  were  gene-
rally inrited  to  the  table  of  their  hot ;  but  after-
vardi  their  piDviAJoas  {{JfiaJ,  coniiiting  of  fowl,
^gB,  and  fruit,  were  either  lent  to  them,  ra*  they
had  lo  punhaae  ibem  ihemBclvei.  (Vitruv.  li.  7.
4  ;  Apul.  Mdojn.  )i.  p.  19-)

What  hai  been  laid  hitherto,  only  refen  to  hoc-

E';ium  priiatum,  that  ii,  the  boapitality  eiiiting
tween  two  individuali  or  Aimiliei  of  difierent
Itatea-  Of  iar  greater  impoitance,  however,  va«
the  hoipitium  publicum  (t^^iriay  some  time*
■iinpl^  {•via),  or  public  hoipilality  which  eiiited
between  two  itotH,  or  between  an  individual  or  a
family  oa  the  one  hand,  and  a  wboU  itate  on  the
other. Of  the  laUec  kind of  public  hoapitality

the  Peiiiitratidi  and  Sparta,  in  which  the  people
of  Atheni  had  no  ehare.  The  hoipitium  publicuoi
among  the  Oneki  anno  undenbledly  from  the  hni-
pitium  privatum,  and  it  may  have  originated  in  two
ways.  When  the  Greek  iribei  were  govemed  by
chieRaiDA  or  kinga,  the  private  hoipitality  eiiating
between  the  ruling  fajniliei  of  two  tribea  may  have
produced  limilai  relation!  between  their  tubjecU,
which  after  the  abolition  otthe  kingly  power,  con-
tinued to  eiiat  between  the  new  republic!  as  a
kind  of  political  inheritance  of  fomier  times.  Or  a
penon  belonging  to  one  state  might  have  either


with  t1


nolher


stale,  or  entertain  great  partiality  for  thi
state  itulf,  and  thui  offer  to  rcceira  all  those  who
came  from  that  state  cither  on  privnto  or  public
busineas,  and act  as  their patron ' ^ '


city. This


i  pnTOi


dividual,

■ervice  would  naturally  soon  recoghise  and  reward
him  for  it.  When  two  itate*  established  public
hospitality,  and  no  individuals  came  forward  to
act  as  the  represontativea  of  their  slate,  it  was  ne-
cessniy  that  in  each  slate  persons  sbould  be  ap-
pointed lo  show  hogpilality  to,  and  watch  over  the
interests  of,  all  penoni  who  came  from  the  state
connected  by  hospitality. The  persons  who  were

S pointed  to  this  office  as  Ike  recognised  agents  of
;  state  for  which  thoy  acted  were  called  »pJ-
{(VDifbut  those  wfaa  undertook  it  voluntarily  tStha-
npi^tmi.  (Pollui, ill  £9  1  compare  Thucjd.  ii.  29
with  Arnold's  note,  and  iii.  70  with  Giiller's.}

The  office  of  proicnns.  which  bean  great  re-
semblance to  (hat  of  a  modem  consul  or  minister-
rewdent,  irai  in  some  cases  hereditary  in  a  parti-
cular fiuiily. When  a  state  appointed  a  proieaus,

in  the  other  itats,  or  it  selected  one  of  the  citizens
of  this  state,  and  conferred  upon  him  the  honour  of
proienua.  The  fanner  WHi,  in  early  times,  the
custom  of  Sparta,  where  the  kin^  had  Che  right  to
select  from  among  the  Spartan  citizens  those  whom
they  wUhed  lo  send  out  as  pnieni  to  other  states.
(Herod.  tL  £7.)  But  in  subsequent  timet  this
cusUm  soms  to  bava  been  given  up,  for  we  find


HOSPITIUU,

that  at  Athens  the  bmily  of  Callias  ware  the  pn>>
leni  of  Sparta  (Xen.  Hiilm.  v.  4.  §  22,  vi.  S.  i  4,
&e.)  i  at  Ells,  the  Kleen  Xenias  (Paus.  iii.  8.^2) ;
and  at  Acgos,  the  Argive  Alciphron.  (Thucyd.  <.
S9.)  A  Spartan  sent  out  as  proxenui  wu  seoe-
times  also  entrusted  with  the  power  of  harmoslei,
as  Qearchua  at  Byxantinm.  (Xen.  A^in.  i.  1. 1
35,  i.  3.  g  li.)

The  custom  of  confoiing  the  honour  of  proUBUi
upon  a  citizen  of  the  state  with  which  pub^c  hoi{n-
lality  eiiated,  teems  in  later  times  to  have  beni
universally  adopted  by  the  Greeks.  Thus  wefiad
besides  the  instaneee  of  Spartan  proieni  mentioned
above,  Nicias  the  Athenian,  as  proienus  of  Sjn-
cuie  at  Athens  (Diodor.  liiL  27),  and  Aithmios,
of  Zeleia,  as  the  proienns  of  Athens  at  Zelcit.
(Aeschin.  c.  Claifk.  p.  647 :  compare  Plato,  it
Leg,  i.  p.  €42.)  Tbe  common  mode  of  appointing
a  proxenus  was,  with  the  exception  of  S[Bna,  by
showofhands.  ( Ulpion, oif Zlemoill. JIM. p. 374.)
The  principal  duties  of  a  proxenus  were  to  receive
those  penons,  especially  amhauadon,  who  cams
from  the  stale  which  he  re^aeaented  ;  to  procme  for
them  the  admission  to  the  assembly,  and  sails  ia
the  theatre  (Pollux,  Lc);  to  act  as  the  patron  of
the  itrongeri,  and  to  mediate  between  the  two
states  if  any  disputes  arose.  (Xen.  Hdit%.  vi.  I.  §
4.)  If  a  stranger  died  in  the  state,  the  pnuemis
of  his  cotmtry  had  Lo  take  care  of  tbe  property  of
the  deceased. (Dcmosth.  e.  Caltip.  p.  1337,  &c)

Kegarding  the  bonours  and  privilege  which  s
proxenus  enjoyed  from  tbe  tiate  which  he  repte-
sented,  the  various  Greek  tlatei  followed  diSetent
principles :  some  honoured  their  proxenus  wilb  the
M\  civic  franchise,  and  other  distioctians  betidci.
(BSckh,  Corp.  laaripl.  n,  IGSl— 93,  and  iL  p.  79;
Demotth.  dt  Cor.  p.  256  j


But  the  r^ht  of  acquiring  property  in  the  state  of
which  he  thus  became  a  ciiiien  seems  not  to  hsve
been  included  in  his  privileges;  for  we  find  that  whrie
this  right  WHS  granted,  it  was  done  by  an  especisl
document.  (Bdckh./'HM.fan.p.UU.}  Afbnignct
who  was  appointed  in  his  own  country  as  prsienus
of  Athens,  enjoyed  for  bis  own  person  the  right  of
hospitality  at  Athens  whenever  he  visited  this
city,  and  all  the  other  privileges  that  a  ftireignrr
could  poeaess  without  becoming  a  r«l  AlheiiiM
citizen.  Among  these  privileges,  though  they  were
not  necessarily  included  in  the  proxeny,  but  were
granted  by  special  decreet,  we  may  mention,  1.
ExiTii^'ii,  which,  in  ouea  when  it  was  granted
by  the  more  powerful  state,  generally  became  ma-
tual  (Plalner-B  Proaiss,  ii.  p.  73  ;  Xen.  Hdla.  t.  2.
S  19);  3.  The  right  to  acquire  property  at  Alhpns
(lyifTtiffit,  ^^itiKrii,  SrsTurii)  j  3.  The  exempli-.n
from  paying  taxes  (Irr4\iia  or  triAttii  arirriti',
Demosth.  e.  Leptn.  p.  475,  compsire  p.  498)  ;  and
4.  Inviolability  in  timet  of  peace  and  war,  both  by
tea  and  by  land,  (tlitckb.  Corp.  Jatcrip.  j.  p.  72.^.)
Some  of  these  privileges  vers  granted  to  indivi-
duals as  well  as  to  whole  states  ;  but  we  have  no
instance  of  a  whole  state  having  received  all  of  them,
with  the  exeeption  of  those  cssrs  where  the  civic
franchise  or  iiopality  was  granted  toa  whole  stale  ;
and  in  this  t^ise  the  practical  consequences  could
not  become  manifeit,  unless  a  citisen  of  the  pri-
vileged slate  actually  look  up  his  residence  at
Athens.  (Compnre  R  W.  Ullrich,  die  /'n>n»ci,
Berlin,  1 822  ;  Wachsmulh,  HtUen.  Jlixrii.  vol.  L
p.  168,  &c.  J  Hermann,  Paiil.  A<d.  g  HE.)
2.  ItoxAN.  ThehospitalityofUieHaouiu  was.


HOSPITIDM.
H  itORM^nlhs  hcHpitima  priiatnm,  or  publiciUD.
Prinla  boqiittlilj  with  tbe  KamoDi,  however,
•Hiai  M  hira  been  more  leenntelf  utd  Irgallf
drfiaid  iban  m  Oteeoe.  The  chancier  of  ■  h«pe),
L  (.  ■  Hnm  eonnected  with  ■  Romui  bj  tie*  of
bttpiliilitj',  wu  deemed  CTea  more  Bcnd.  uid  to
kirc  grtAia  clumi  upon  Ihe  hoet,  than  that  of  m
psmainnected  byblaodoraffinil;.  The  relation
nFi  bapia  to  hii  Romfin  friend  wu  next  in  im-
pintiKt  to  ihst  of  a  clieiu.  (Gelttm,  t.  13.)  Ac-
wding  10  MaMuriua  Sabinni  (op.  UdBai,  Lc),»
iutfet  htA  even  liighei  clAuni  than  a  cLiena.  The
•t'liptiam  which  the  connection  of  hoipitalily  with
JL  [atciguer  impoied  upon  A  Roman  wen  to  receive
ID  kit  bsuK  bij  li«pea  when  traielling  (Lii.  xliu
I),  ud  to  ptvtect,  and,  in  caac  of  need,  to  repre-
■nt  him  u  hii  patron  in  the  conru  of  jonice,
{Ge.  H  Q.  Catdl.  Dhim.  e.  20.)  PiiTote  ho«n-
tililj  thu  gare  to  the  hoapea  tbe  claima  npon  hit
i/M  whi^  the  cHent  bad  on  hia  patron,  but  witb-
nit  irtj  degree  of  tbe  dependence  implied  in  the
dinleb.  Pritale  hoepililitj  wu  eitsbliahed  be-
ttKE  isdiTiduali  b;  mnUial  preaenta,  or  by  the
DrdktitHi  of  a  third  penon  (Serv.  ad  An.  ix.
3£0),aiid  hallowed  b;  religion  ;  Ibr  Jupiter  hoapi-
ala  wu  ihot^ht  to  watch  over  the  jot  hoapitii,  aa
Zeu  xcDioa  did  with  the  Oieeka  (Cic.  e.  Vtr.  iv.
ti,  ^  Qnt.  fiat.  ii.  12,  pro  Dtktar.  6\  and
U*  Tioktim  of  it  waa  aa  gnat  a  crime  and  impie^
It  Know  aa  in  Gniece.  When  hotpitalit;  wai
fcnged,  the  two  fiiendi  uied  to  divide  belweoa
IknelniB  t«Biera  hoapilaUi  (Plant  Pom.  T.  2. 87,
tie,),  hj  which,  afierwatda,  they  ihemaelTe*  or  their
dneendanli — for  the  connection  waa  bereditar;  aa
■a  Uretc*  —  night  recogniae  one  onolhs'.  From
■a  eipretaMm  in  Plautna  {dtmm  hoapiialtn  ae  tam-
nm  •««■  fin,  I-om.  f.  i.  35)  it  haa  been  con-
ArsAti  that  thia  tcaaera  bore  the  image  of  Jupiter
Iwpitalii.  Honritality,  when  tbaa  once  eatabliihed,
sudd  not  be  duaolved  except  b;  a  formal  deda-
niioD  (mdiatM,  Liv.  uT.  IB  ;  Cic  »  Vtrr.
ii.  36X  aul  in  thia  caia  tbe  tcaaera  hoapitolit  waa
k^en  (0  piece*.  (PlauLCuteU.  ii.  1.27.)  Hoc
)iialilj  waa  at  Rome  neT«r  eierciaed  in  that  in-
dacrinunata  manner  la  in  the  heroic  age  of  Onece,
hot  the  nutom  oE  obacrring  the  lawa  of  hnipilalitj
■u  pnbabl J  oommon  to  all  the
(4di*n.  V.  H.  IT.  1  i  Lit.  L  1.)
it  via  euniaed  without  anj  formal  agreement  be'
tnra  the  partiea,  and  it  wa*  deemed  an  hmour-
aUt  diitj  to  leeeive  dialmguiahed  gneita  into  the
honn. (Cic.  <1(  Q^  iL  IB,  pro  Rote.  Aitt.  6.)

PibHc  luqntBlilj  leBmi  likewiao  to  h*Te  ei-
iKcd  at  a  Terj  earij^  period  among  the  nationi  of
Ital;,  and  the  fbedo*  hoapitii  mentioned  in  Livj
(i.  S)  E«n  Bcamlr  be  looked  npon  in  any  other
ligkt  than  that  of  hoapitinm  publicum.  But  the
fint  direct  mention  of  public  hoapitality  being  eat
hliahed  between  Rome  and  anotfaer  city,  ia  aft
the  Oaola  bad  departed  frcHu  Rome,  whoi  it  waa
dfoted  tkat  C^  >baiild  be  rewarded  for  iu  good
■Erncea  br  the  tatabliafament  of  public  hoapitality
Wtnao  tha  tiro  dtie*.  (Liv.  t.  JO.)  The  pnblii
haapitality  after  the  war  with  tbe  Oaula  gave  V.
Oe  CiB^  tbe  right  of  iaopolitj  with  Rome,  ibac
ii,  the  ciTilaa  witbaat  the  aafl^aghun  and  the  ho-
J.]  In  the  later  time*  of
L  public  boapitali^  a
a  bnign  atate  i  but


BINtecad  in  it*  itead,  that  ii^  town*  «


HTACINTHIA.  G21

■o  the  tank  of  municipia  (LiT.  viii  14),  and  thn*
ibtained  the  dritas  without  the  laKagiumand  the
honorei  \  and  when  a  town  waa  deairoui  of  (orm-
limilai  relation  with  Rome,  it  entered  into
ia.  to  aome  diitinauiahed  Roman,  who  then
acted  as  patrim  of  the  dienl-IowiL  But  the  cuilom
of  granting  tho  honour  of  boapea  pnl>licaa  to  a  dia-
tiugniahed  foreigner  bj  a  decree  of  the  aeaate,
aeem*  to  have  eiiited  down  to  the  end  of  the  re-
public (LiT.  L  4£,  T.  2S,  xxirii.  64.)  Whether
inch  a  public  boapea  undertook  the  lame  dutiei  to-
raida  Roman  citiiena,  a*  the  Greek  proxenoi,  ia
mcorlDin  ;  but  hi*  priiilegea  were  the  tame  aa
thoae  of  a  municepi,  that  i*,  he  bad  Ihe  civitaa,  but
le  (ufiragium  nor  the  honore*.  Public  hoa-
pitality  wu,  like  the  boapitium  priiaimn,  becedituy
m  tbe  fiunily  of  the  peraoa  to  whom  it  had  been
granted.  (Diod.  Sic.  xir.  83.)  The  honoor  of
public  hfupea  waa  aometiniet  alao  conferred  upon  ■
dia^nguiahed  Roman  by  a  foreign  atate.  (Btfckh,
OiTji.  Iraenp.  voL  I  n.  1331  -,  Cic  pro  IMb.  18,  e,
Verr.  iv.  6£.  Compare  Niebnbr,  Hitt.  i/  Rami,
'ol.ii.  p.  fitii  Walter,C«iQL<^Aiim.An^p.54,
&c  ;  Utitding,  GetA.  dtr  RUm.  ^Utotnt.  p.  216,
°--.)  [L.S.]

HO'STIA. [S^cniFiciirii.]

HOSTIS. [HOHFITIUH ; PogrLlMINIUH.]

HYACI'NXUIA  (Twclreia),  a  groit  national
fealiral, celebrated every year  at Amydaa  by

mention  thii  featival  do  not  agree  in  the
of  tbe  divinity  in  whoae  honour  it  wa*  held :
■aj  that  it  waa  tbe  Atnydaean  or  the  Car-
ApoUo,  othen  that  it  waa  the  Amyclaeon
hero,  Hyacinthua :  a  third  and  more  probable
■tatement  auigni  the  fotiral  to  the  Amydacan
Apollo  and  Hyacinthui  together.  Thi*  Amyciaesn,
Apollo,  however,  with  whom  Hyacinthui  waa
Bubnilated  in  later  time*,  mint  not  be  confounded
Lth  Apollo,  the  national  divinity  of  the  Dorians.
.  duller,  Oroiom.  p.  327,  Oor.  iL  8.  5  IS.)  The
feitivsl  waa  called  after  the  youthful  hero  Ilyacin-
Jiiu,  who  evidently  derived  hia  name  from  Che
lower  hyacinth  (Che  emblem  of  death  among  the
mdent  Greek*),  and  whom  Apollo  acddentally
itruck  deed  with  a  qooit  Tbe  Hyacinthia  laated
or  three  daya,  and  began  on  tbe  loogeet  day  of
tbe  Spartan  month  Mecalombea*  (the  AtUc  Ileal-
tombaeon,  Hetych.  a.  v.  'EaorofiCftii :  Manao,
Sparia,  uL2.  p.  201),  at  the  time  when  the  tender
n  oppreHcd  by  the  heat  of  the  lun,  dnraped
languid  head*.  On  tbe  £rat  and  lost  day  of
the  Hyacinthia  ncrificea  were  ofiered  to  the  dead,
and  tbe  deith  of  Hyaduthui  waa  lamented.
During  theae  two  da;*  nobody  wore  any  garland*
at  the  lepaata,  nor  took  bread,  but  only  cakica  and


Tbia  aehoui  and  melancholy  character  waa
toreign  la  all  the  other  feativala  of  Apollo.  The
■ecoad  day,  however,  waa  wholly  ipent  in  public
rejoidngg  and  amumnent*.  Amyclae  waa  Tiutad
by  Humbert  of  atiangen  (vovlirvp"  iiii>J>y<is  aal
lityitLti),  and  boyi  played  tbe  citbaia  or  aang  to
the  accompuumeiil  of  tbe  flute,  and  cdebrated  in
anapeeatic  metrea  tbe  praiae  of  ApoUo,  while  othen.
Id  aplendid  attire,  perfermed  a  horae-race  ui  the
theatre.  Thia  boiae-iace  i*  probably  the  iyir
m«DtioiMidbyStrBbo(Ti.p.278}.  After  thia  race
there  followed  ft  nmnber  of  choniae*  of  youthtf


HYBREOS  ORAPHR

by  a  Ko,wir«rfi  (Xen.  ^j«a.  2.  17),  in
■whieh  »tiine  of  their  luilional  songi  (^ix'^f"
ni^pn-s)  w«re  lung.  During  lbs  songt  of  IheM
cbonues  daacen  performed  iDtne  of  the  aacieal
end  siniple  msvemeDU  with  thn  BCcDmptuiimCDt  ol
the  Sate  and  ths  long.  The  SpBrtan  md  Amy-
eUean  maideni,  after  thii,  riding  in  dnirinti  made
of  vivker-woik  (ntratfpa),  Bjid  iplendidlj  adcmed,


. Nnn


ficei  were  aljo  offered  on  tbii  day,
liept  open  boiuefortlieir  Eriendiuid  relation!;  i
even  itBrei  wera  allowed  to  enjoy  themseh
(Didymus,  ap.  Atiat,  U.  p.  139.) Ooe  of  (be  fti-

■nd  )8  dceribed  by  Molpi«  (ap,  Alha.  \t.  p.  UO)
tu  coTiftiAting  of  cake,  bread,  m
fi(|»,  deewri,  and  the  leedi  of
Wliteri,  when  speaking  of  tbe  Hyocintbia,  apply
to  the  whole  festiTal  luch  epilbeta  as  tan  only  be
vied  in  regard  to  ihe  lecond  day  ;  for  instaO'
when  they  chU  it  a  merry  or  ioyfol  lolemni
Macnbiui  (&tfuni.  i.  11)  itatea  tbuthe  Amydi
■HI  wore  cbaplets  of  ivy  at  Ibe  Hyacinthia,  vrhi
can  only  be  true  if  it  be  undentood  of  the  second
day.  The  ineor
ever  in  lome  degree  eiciued  by  the  fact,  that  the
aecond  day  formed  the  principal  part  of  die  feitive
ieawn,  tt  appeara  from  the  deicriplion  of  Didy-
mLU,  and  as  may  alu  be  infertcd  from  Xenophon
{Hdiai.  iv.  fi.  3  1 1  ;  compare  A^tU.  2.  17),  who
makee  the  paean  the  principal  pari  of  the  Hto-
cinthiB,  Tha  great  importance  attached  to  thii
feilJTal  by  the  Aiciyclaean*  and  Uicedaemonlani
u  leen  from  the  foci,  that  the  Amyclaeani,  evcD
when  they  had  taken  the  field  againit  an  enemy,
always  returned  homo  on  the  approach  of  the
KBson  of  the  Ilyacinthio,  that  they  might  not  be
obliged  to  neglect  itl  celebration  (Xen.  HeUtn,  iv,
«.  §  1 1  ;  Pan..  itL  10.  g  1),  and  that  the  Lacedae-

dayi  with  the  town  of  Eira,  merely  to  be  able  to
retnm  home  and  celebrate  the  national  feitival
<Paiu.  iv.  19.  %  9)  ;  and  that  in  a  treaty  with
Sparta,  s,  c  421,  tha  Athenian!,  in  order  to  ahow
their  good-will  towordi  Sparta,  promiaed  every
year  to  attend  the  celebration  of  the  Hyaeinthia.
(Thuci'iT.  23.)  IL.S.]

HY'ALUS. [VrrnDii,]

HYBRE09  0RAPHB  (fW(<««7Po**)-  Thii
aelion  wai  the  principal  remedy  preKrihcd  by  the
Attic  law  for  wanton  and  contrnnelioua  injury  to
the  peraon,  whether  in  the  nstore  of  indecent  (Si*
alaxptupTiai)  or  other  auaults  {tA  'w\tryar).  If
the  o^nce  wer«  of  the  former  kmd,  it  would  al-
ways be  available  when  the  inficrer  waa  a  minor
of  cither  aex  (for  the  eoiumt  of  the  infant  waa
immalnial),  or  whi
TiolatB" " ■■

Meid.  p.529. 16.)  The  legal rcpte!entatiTe(i[i/««),
however,  of  anch  person  might,  if  he  pleaied,  COD-
uder  the  injury  aa  a  private  rather  than  a  pnblic
wrong,  and  aue  for  damoget  in  a  civil  action.
lUiAiON  DiKi.]  With  reipect  to  common  ai-
leulti,  a  pmccution  of  this  kind  seems  to  have
been  sllnwnble  only  when  the  object  of  a  wanton
Httnek  was  a  free  person  (Aristot.  ItM.  ii.  2t),  a>
tbe  ewence  lay  in  ita  eontamely,  and  a  slave  could
incur  no  degradation  by  receiving  a  blow,  though
the  injury,  if  slight,  might  entitle  the  mastei  to
neovat  dam^ei  for  the  bittary  <aUIa),  or,  if


HYDRADLA.

serioiu,  for  the  iou  of  hit  service!  [Blabks  Dm]
in  a  private  iawinit  (Meier,  Att.  Pne.  p.  336.)
Those  two  last-mentioned  actions  miriit  alto  be  re-
sorted lo  by  a  free  citizen  when  simuariy  ogtrsMd
in  his  own  person,  if  he  were  moce  desimis  of  ob-
taining compenaation  for  the  wnrng,  thin  tbe  nun
punishment  of  the  wrongdoer,  as  the  penalty  iit-
curied  by  the  defendant  m  tha  pablic  praseeutiiui
accrued  to  the  state  and  not  to  tbe  plaintiE  A
fine  alto  of  a  throsond  dmcbmoe,  forieited  by  (he
prosecutor  upon  his  relinquitbing  his  rait  or  failmv
to  obtain  the  votci  of  a  fifth  of  the  diocts,  may
have  contributed  to  render  csotes  of  thii  kind  leN
Ireqaent,  and  partly  account  for  tbe  circDmitaDca
that  there  are  no  ipeeehea  extant  npon  this  subject.

Strang  and  clear,  the  redress  effitrded  by  tbe  public
action  wot  prompt  and  efficient.  Beaidei  tha  1^-
lunate  protectors  of  women  and  children,  any
Athenian  citizen  in  tbe  enjoyment  of  his  iuU  frsn-

ation  was  laid  before  the  tbesmotbetae,  who,  ex-
cept it  were  hindered  by  extrmordinorv  pablic  bau-
neu,  were  boond  not  to  defer  the  tri^  before  the
Heliaca  beyond  a  month.  Tha  severity  of  the
sentence  extended  to  confiieatioo  or  death  ;  and  if
the  latter  were  awarded,  the  criminal  was  executed
on  the  tame  day :  if  a  fine  were  impoaed  npon  him
he  was  allowed  but  eteveo  days  for  its  payment,
and,  if  the  object  of  his  ostanlt  vers  a  fi«  pfnon,
he  was  imprisoned  till  tbe  claim  of  the  state  was
liquidated.  (Dem.  I.  e.  ;  Aeschin.  e.  TimarrL  p,
41.)  [J.&M.]

HYDRA'LETA. [Mola.]
IIYDRAULA  (ifyetkn!),  an organist. Ac-
cording to  an  author  qooted  l^  Athenoens  (iv.  7J> ;
compore  Plin.  IT.  A'.  viL  SB),  tbe first  organin
was  Cteiibius  of  Alexandria,  who  lived  about  B.  c
200. He  evidently  took  iht  idea  of  his  oijian
"  'iiiNi  or Pandean  pipes, a  mosraU
if  the higbcit antiquity  aniong  tha
Greeks. His object  being  to  emrloy  a  nw  of
pipes  of  great  siia,  and  capable  of  emitting  the
'  pownful  at  well  as  the  softest  sounds,  be  con-
i the  means  of  adapting  keys  with  leven
MrlffKoi),  and  with  perforated  tliden  (wA^wra),
rn  and  shut  the  months  of  the  pipes  (^hkiire'^
),  a  rapply  of  wind  being  obtained,  without
nission,  by  bellows,  in  which  the  prearare  of
[  performed  the  tBHie  port  which  it  follilled  in
the  modem  organ  by  a  weight. On  this  ascmnt
the  initroment  invented  by  Closibius  wu  eallnl
the  water-organ  (WpauXis,  Athen.  L  c  ; MponAj-
Khr  ipyiiioir.  Hero,  Spirit. ;  bfiraubea wni-Jiiaii.
'"  ;  Schneider,  od  loo.;  Drieberg,  dit
pMurn.  Erfiitdvigm  der GritAf, pp.  £5-^1  •
....._.,  ,_  ■eX\n.H.N.  ii.  Bj  Cie.  Tna.  iii.  IB).
(  were  pBrtly  of  bronze  (;:(aAi<fi4  '^■fn,
1.  in  Bninck'a  AmaL  ii.  403  ;  H^HoiH,
Claud,  it  M<dL  Tiead.  Otiu.  31 6),  and  partly  <£
reed.  The  number  of  ita  ab^  and  consequently  of
pipes,  varied  from  one  to  eight  (Vitrav.
/.c),  ao  that  Tertullian  (lie  ^(isao.  U)  deMiriba
iceedingly  complicated  in-


Itce


»  late  at  the  oiolh


century  of  ou

wot  erected  by  a  Venetian  'in  the  church  rf  Aqnw-

granum,  the modem Aix-la-Cbapelle. (Qoix,

Mitulxr-Unit  ts  .4adi«,  p.  14.)
Tbe  oigu  was  well  adapted  lo  gnti^  the  Ro-
an people  in  ^  ^leodid  entcMiiDiBBils  ;iond*d


HYLORI.

fcr  ibm  V  lh«  emperon  and  other  opulent  per-
»n>.  N«o  wu  vrty  curioui  itbout  OTj^nt,  both
in  iFgird  to  tbeir  muilcal  effect  and  their  mecha*
nijm.  {Satlon.A'*r.  *I.B4.)  A  contomiale  coin
«f  ibii  enperor,  id  the  Itritiih  MuKum  [let  wood-
nil),  thgwi  4a  otgBB  with  a  iprig  of  laurel  on  one


iidr.nid  ■  DUD  itandiDfE  on  tba  othor,  «ho  ma
luv!  brm  Tiet«io(u  in  Ihe  eihibttion)  of  tho  cii
na  cf  the  amphltbeatie.  It  i>  prohable  that  tha
m^U  were  bcatowed  npon  luch  vinon,  and  ihl
iIk  wgan  waa  imprcued  n


,.  (HaT,


bj  Poblilim  Horphyriu  Optatiaiiua,  deiciibingt]
mnnnnent,  and  compoaed  of  venea  lo  conltnicU
)•  to  itiow  both  the  lower  part  which  containi
Uc  bcllowa,  the  wind-chni  which  la;  npon  it,  ai
unr  ihia  the  row  of  26  pipei.  Theie  are  repr
Hitd  bf  26  lino,  which  incrcAM  in  length  eoi
bj  ow  letter,  nntil  the  lait  line  u  twice  ai  loi
ulbtGtU. iW aaiAmi,  Potlat  laL  Min.  Tol

n-m-tia.)  [j.y.]

HYbRAU'LICA MA'CHINA. [H

HyDRAULUS  [HvDSiDL*.]

HY'DRIA  (»plB). [SrtiFLA.]

HYDRIAPH0'RlA(»pHi4»f>l<i)wBioneiift
tTTka  which  aliena  (m^"«oO  rending  at  Athe
bad  ta  peribnD  to  the  Athenian!  al  the  FanHlbenv
■nd  bj  which  it  wu  prvbabi;  a^;  intended  lo  ii
fnai  npoi  them  the  rccallectiun  that  they  wc
Btteabeu  and  not  dtiieni.  The  hydriaphDris  n-aa
psfanned  odI^  br  the  wivea  of  alieni  (PdUu,  iii
Si);  wlkcrou  their  daugbl —  ^-'  —  '^


la  (the  c


puaeuli)  to  the  Athenian  maidens,  and  their  hiu-
Uadi  the  aKo^itpapla  (the  carrying  of  Tcuela,
n  Aeliaa,  V,  If,  tL  1,  with  Penioniut ;  Harpa-
<raL  t  «.  3*0^4^0^01).  It  it  clear  from  the  wordi
of  Acliu  that  theae  homiliating  lerricei  were  uol
demanded  of  the  alicni  hj  the  Ibwi  of  Solon,  but
thai  they  were  introduced  at  a  later  period.  (Pe-
^itm,  Lti,.  AU.  f.  S5.>  The  hjdriaphoria  waa
Ibe  nnjing  of  a  Teaiel  with  water  {iSpia.  Ari-
tUfk.  Eaia.  73B),  which  lerrice  the marxiednlien
woDoi  had  to  perfonu  to  the  marrird  pan  of  the
linaleeitiienaof  Alhena,whenlhejvalkcd  lo  the
templa  of  Athena  in  the  great  pioceNion  at  (he
PtnUhfiMM.  (Compare  Meuraiua,  Ftuatititata,
'-21.>  [L.S.]

HYDROMELI. [Vwuk.]

H  YL(y  HI  or  H  YLEO'KI  {iXfipal,  iWtpal),  b
lid  bj  Uei^cliiu  (».«.)  to  hiTa  bcra  offinn  who


HYP0B0LE3  GRAPHE.  62S

had  the  nperintendence  of fbreiti  (JtA,i)v  ^aKdiram;
compare  Suidaa,  t.  r.).  Arialotle  (/■oUf.  ri.  5),
who  dividcB  all  public  offlcera  into  three  claaiei
{Vx«l.  iwi/iiAijToJ,  BDd  imipfTiu),  reckon!  the
t^impel  among  the  hi/ifAitraf,  and  IB71  that  by
■ome  they  were  called  ^ypoviiia.  They  leem  to
have  been  a  kind  of  police  for  the  protection  of
the  fareata,  limilar  to  the  0«rman  fonUr.  Bat
Ihe  eiacl  nature  of  their  office,  or  the  Greek
■lata  where  it  eiialed,  are  nnknown. [L.  S.]

HYPAETHRU3. [Tehfluh.]

HYPASPISTAE  (Anurwiirrai).  [ExuiciTua,
p.48fl,b.]

IIYPE'RETES  (iSnw-^i).  Thii  word  ia  de-
rited  from  ipiram,  ^p^i.and  therefore  originally
lignifiea  a  tower  1  but  in  latettimea  the  wordwni,
with  the  eiception  of  the  loldien  or  marinei,  ap-
plied to  the  whale  body  of  pertoiu  who  prrformed
aiiY  •ervice  in  a  veaiel  (Thuq'd.  ri  31,  with
aaller-.  Dole  ;  DeraMlh.  c.  Polyd.  pp.  1214, 1216,
&c.;  Polyb.  V.  109.)  In  aitiU  wider  KnM  hnifF-
«Ti|r  wai  applied  lo  any  person  who  aeied  ai  lbs
aasiglaiil  of  another,  and  performed  manual  labour
fjr  him,  whether  in  lacred  or  profane  thing*  (Pol-


lux, L  1,  16,  r


.  10),  '


lynonyraoui  wiihilflve.  (Clilarchua,
ap.  Alien.  Ti,  p.  267  ;  compare  PoUui,  vil  ti.  2  ;
lletych.  t.  r.)  Hence  also  the  name  huprrtu  wot
Bometimei  given  to  those  men  by  whom  the  hopli-
tae  were  accampatilcd  when  they  took  Ihc  field,
and  who  carried  the  luggage,  the  ptoiiiioni,  and
the  ihield  of  the  hoplilea.  (Xen-t^n,,.  ii.  1.  g  31.)
The  more  common  name  far  thia  aetvant  of  the
lioplltet  was  ffKtv6tpopos,

At  Atheni  the  name  iwTj))fr?ji,  or  the  abalracl
irnjptffiii,  leemi  to  have  been  applied  to  a  whole
clau  of  officera.  Ariitotle  (J'alil.  vu  S )  dividn  all
Ihree  clnaiea,  ^X'^  01


Now  all


publi


lionji,  and  inrttptaiai


of  the


It  Athen.,


aa  &r  M  ihcy  were  the  reprei
people,  or  the  eiecuton  of  ili  will,  were  appointca
by  the  people  itaelf  or  by  the  (ennle  ;  and  with
the  eieeption  of  aome  lubaliem  military  ofScers,
we  never  find  thai  one  puilic  officer  waa  appoinled
by  another.  A  pnblic  officer,  therefore,  when  he
appointed  another  pennn  to  perform  the  lower  or
mon:  mechanical  paiti  of  hit  office,  could  not  ralae
him  In  the  rank  of  a  public  officer,  but  mereir
engaged  him  aa  a  lervant  {iriipir-iis),  and  on  hia
own  reiponaibility.  These  inipirai,  therefore,
were  not  public  officeia.  properly  speaking,  but
only  in  aa  for  ai  they  took  a  pan  in  the  fiindioni
of  such  officen.  Tho  original  and  chsracterlstic
difference  between  them  and  real  public  officeta
was,  that  ibe  former  leccived  lalariei,  while  the
Utter  had  nolle.  Among  the  ^n^peToiwerereckoned
the  lower  etasiea  of  scribe*  [GbauuatiusJ,  ho-


ald^


loftb


Elei<


Thia  claas  of  prnons,  aa  might  be  >np-
poaed,  did  not  enjoy  any  high  degree  (d  eilimatioa
at  Atheni  (Pollux,  ri.  31 ),  and  from  Arislotle
(Poit.  iy.  12)  it  is  dear  that  they  were  nolalwaya
Athenian  ciliiens,  but  aomelimes  slave*.  [L.  S.J
HYPEROON  {inr.pi=v).  [UoHL'a,p.426,a.]
HYPOB0LE9  GRAPHE  (J»oeo*.Si  Tpof*).
Of  this  action  we  Icam  from  l)ie  Lei  Rbct.  that
it  waa  one  of  the  many  inelitulioni  calcubiied  to
preserve  the  purity  gf  Allic  descent,  and  preferred
against  poraong  tuipected  of  hiiving  been  cttpposi-
titioDs  children. If  thia  &cl  was  etiabliah  dallhe


634


HYSPLENX.


trial,  the  pNtcnded  citiicn  vu  rednced  to  lUvny,
and  hi>  propeny  confiicsled.  [J.  S.  H.]

HYPOCAUSTUM.  [Balniai,  p.  192,  b.]
IiyPOCOSME'T  AE  ( iirOKOff,nfTqi),  frequently
occur  in  Athenian  in jcriptioni  of  the  time  c'  '
Roman  empire,  aa  auigtiuiti  of  the  noiriiiiTfis
M  that  period  was  the  chief  officer  who  Tegulated
the  cierciMa  of  the  Qjnniiaainin,  (Krauae,  Gj/n-
Bratik  md  Ag-midik,  Tol.  i.  p.  212,  &c)

HYPO'CRITES  (fniutpmSO' [Hisraio.]
HYPODE'MA  (iitoS^fu.). [Calcbus.]
IIYPOOE'UM, [FDNtis,p.  661,a.]
HYPOQRAMMATBUS (Jmoypt^yartit).


[Or.


la.]


HYPO'ORAPHIS.  [PicTDRA,  No.  VI.]
IIYPOMErONES(i>*o^fbr»).  (Hohobi
HYPOMO'SIA  <*«;«wJa). [DiABT«TA«j

DlKB.]

HYPO'NOMUS.  [EMrasARHKi.]
IIYPURCHE'MA  {Mpxm^),  wu  a  tjiel;
kind  of  mimic  dance  which  accompanied  the  aongi
lued  in  the  wonhip  of  Apollo,  rapecially  among  the
Doriana.  It  vat  peribmied  b;  men  and  women.
<Alhcn.  lix.  p.  631.)  A  chorui  of  lingen  at  the
fntivnla  of  Apollo  uauallj  daiiced  around  the  altar,
while  leTcral  other  penoni  were  appointed  to  ac-
company the  action  of  the  long  with  an  appropriate
mimic  performance  {^opxfiaia').  The  hrpor-
cbems  wu  thai  a  lyric  dance,  and  often  poued
into  tbe  playful  and  comic,  whence  Athenaeut
(lir.  p.  630,  &c}  eomporci  it  with  the  cordax  of
comedy.  It  had,  according  to  the  lappoaition  of
MUller,  like  all  the  mutic  and  poetry  of  the  Doriani,
oriRinaled  in  Crete,  but  waa  at  an  earl?  period  in-
troduced in  the  itiand  of  Deloa,  where  it  teemi  to
have  continued  to  be  performed  down  to  the  time
of  Lucian.  (Athen.  L  p.  IS  ;  Lueian,  di  SaUal.
- IL  8.  §  li.) Auimilar


16  ;  compare  Muller,  Dor.  iL  8.  {
kind  of  dance  waa  the  T^pvoi,  n


:b  The«


in  Deloa,  and
ai  tale  at  the  time  of  Plutarch.  (Tlia.  21.)  Tbe
leader  of  thii  ditnc«  wai  called  yifWBuXtiis.
(lleiych.  1.  e.)  It  wat  perfonned  nidi  blowi,  nnd
with  variouB  lumines  and  windiaga  {if  t"^i^
■wtpuhiita  mol  4f  lAltm  (fx""').  ""d  -mt  laid  to
be  an  imitation  of  the  windingt  of  the  Cretan
labyrinth.  When  the  chonuwai  at reit,  it  formed
a  tcmicirele,  with  leaden  at  the  two  winga.  (Pol-
Ini,  ii.  101.)

The  poem*  or  tonga  which  were  aeeompanied  by
the  bjporcbem  were  likewiae  called  hypoccheniata.
The  ^rst  poet  to  whom  inch  poemi  are  aicribed
wai  Thaletaa :  their  character  inuit  have  been  in
accordancs  with  the  playfulnnt  of  the  dance  which
bote  the  Knns  name,  and  by  which  they  wem  ac-
companied. The  fiagmenti  of  the  hyporchemala
of  Pindar  eonfino  thlaBuppoutioBfiif  their  rhylhmi
are  peculiarly  light,  and  have  a  very  imitatire
and  graphic  chancter.  (Bikkh,  d»  Mntr.  Find.
p.201,  &cBnd  p.270.)  Tbcie  characteriitio
moat  have  exitted  in  a  much  higher  degree  in  the
byporchematic  uingi  of  Thaletaa.  (Miiller,  HaL
of  Ortek  Ltt.  L  p.  23,  &x.  ;  compare  with  p.  1 60,
&e.)  [LS.]

HYPOSCE'NIUM. [Tbbatbuw.]

HYPOTHECA. [PioN-ja.]

HYPOTHECA'RIA  ACTIO. [PlOMoa.]

IIYPOTRACHE'LIUM. [Column*, p.

325,  a.]

HYSPLENX  <?<rwKvrQ. [Srioiirii.]


JACULATOHES.  rEii«CTrw,p.50J,a.l
JA'CULUM. [HiBTi.]

JA'NITOR. [jANtFA.]

JA'NUA  (ftt^o),  a  door. Baaidea  being  appli-
cable to  the  doon  of  apartmenti  in  the  bteiiur  of
a  houie,  which  were  [Huporly  called  oiAa  (Itld.
Orig.  r».  7  ;  Viig.  Ana.  tLW.  81),  thiitecm  n»re
eipecially  denoted  the  £nt  entnnce  into  the  home.
i.  B.  the  front  or  itreet  door,  which  wat  bIw  called
antiaim  {  Fettnt,  (.  c),  and  in  Greek  SApsoiAfiat,
o6a.(h,  HiAloi,  obKu  (fld.  iriii.  IS  ;  Pind.  Km.
i.  19 ;  Menand.  p.  S7,  ed.  Mein. ;  Kaipocntion,
».  0. ; Theophr. Oar. IB; Theocrit.  xt. 13:
Chant,  i.  2  ;  Heimlian,  ii.  1). The  boum  of  tlie
Romana  commonly  had  a  back-door,  oiled  pati-
aiis,patlica,otpialiaila  (Feetui,  i; «. ;  Hor.f^.
- ' 31  1 Plant  Afoit.  iii.  3.  27  ; Suetoo.  OoW.
and in  Greek TofulBupB  dim.  mfoBiftar.
ro  (pait.  Red.  E) alio  calli  it  yMwU^m,
"  the  bliB  door,"  in  eontra^atincdim  lo  janna,  the
mt  door ; and,  becaute  it  often  led  into  the
rdeu  of  the  houae  (Plant.  Stick.  iiL  I.  40—44),
wat  called  the  garden-door  (jnprol^  Heniup.  up.
lia.  XY.  6).

The  door-way,  when  cdmplete,  conaitted  of  four
diipennhle  parti, tho threabold,  or  liQj  the
lintel ;  and  the  two  jambt.

The  thishold  tfimm,  ^qhhi,  aHoi)  wat  the  ob-
ject of  lupentitioua  reverence,  and  it  waa  ihooght
unfortunate  to  tread  on  it  with  the  left  loot  On
,  eading  into  a  tefnple  were
of  an  nneven  nombrr,  bccante  the  wonhipper,
after  placing  hii  right  foot  on  the  bottom  itep,
Duld  then  place  the  lame  foot  on  the  thmhoid
KL  (VilruT.  ill  4.)  Uf  thii  an  example  ii  pre-
nted  in  the  woodcut  p-  97.
The  lintel  (jugtnMmbm,  CaLde  Rt  Rad.  14  ;
tuptrvHiam,  Vicruv.  if.  6)  was  alio  called  Ujoe*
( Juv.  yi.  227),  and  mora  ipeclEcally  {■'•»■  ncprrM,
to  diatinf^ib  it  from  the  till,  which  wat  called
a^Hi.  (Plant  Afeni.T.  1.1.)  Bemg  de-
l  to  tupport  a  Buperincumbent  weigbt,  it  waa
ally  a  linglo  piece,  either  of  wood  or  ilODr.
e  thoae  lintela,  which  ilill  tcmain  in  aiicieni
buildinga,  aatonith  ut  by  their  gRM  length.  la
large  and  iplendid  edificei  the  jamha  or  dioer-potta
( piatet,  rr(tfl/«i)  were  made  lo  eanTecgs  towaida
the  top,  according  to  certain  rulea,  which  an  ^Ttn
by  Vitmviui  (/.  d.).  In  deKiibing  tbe  mnitnc-
tion  of  templea  be  ealla  them  imfapqjniAiAi,  tbe
propriety  of  which  term  may  be  uwlanaod  fraa
the  ground-plan  of  the  door  at  p.  241,  where  tbe
Ungea  are  leen  to  be  behind  the  jambs.  Thii
plan  nny  alio  lerre  to  ahov  wluu  Theocntai
meani  by  the  ilo&w  door-po«tt  (rro^fiA  nixa
hupiur,  IdjU.  xaj.  1  £}.  In  the  Angnttan  ago
it  wu  liuhiannble  to  inlay  tho  poatt  with  tntoiie-
ibell.  (Virg.  Gears-  ><•  463.) Althongh  the  jamb

lintel,  it  was  made  of  a  tingle  atone  even  in  the
largeat  edificei.  A  very  atriking  effect  wat  pro-
duced by  tbe  height  of  tbeia  door-wayt,  ai  well  u
by  their  costly  decoratima,  heaulifii]  materiali,  and
taatefiil  proportiona.

Tbe  door  in  the  frcot  of  a  temple,  ai  it  itacbed
nearly  to  tbe  ceiling,  allowed  tbe  wonbincrs  lo
■■' "" BtiKrtatMottbediiin'tir,


JANUA.

md  to  obsene  the  rite*  pcrformBd  before  it  AIk
Ike  wbola  Ughl  of  the  biuldmg  wa<  commonly  od
mined  thnvgh  the  suae  aperture.  These  clrciim
uucs  m  illoMrated  ia  the  sccompanyin^  wood
(tUitluwiiigtiMfraitof  s  unall  t«mple  of  Jujntec.


laiea  from  B  hM-relief.  (Mat.  Mail.  toL  JiL  Tai.
'if.)  The  term  a-fgujTisaiteM,  which  hu  been
ilnidy  eijJuned,  and  which  wai  a)iptied  to  the  lin-
t'i  u  well  BM  the  jambi  (mf^jo^Affliiim  a/vnru,
Viiror.  if.  6.  g  1),  impliei,  that  the  doon  opened  in-
nrdi.  Tiiii  ia  clearly  leen  in  the  ume  woodcut,
•nil  ii  faimd  to  be  the  conitniclion  of  al!  ancient
boildii^  at  Pompeii  and  other  placet.  In  ume
"I  ttiFte  buildings,  a>  for  example,  in  thai  called
"  tic  hooie  of  the  Ingic  poet,"  eren  ths  marble
ihrabcikl  riKi  about  an  inch  higher  than  the  bot-
Un>  of  the  door  (Ocll'i  Panpcuu,  2nd  Ser.  vol.  i.
|t  U4),  io  that  the  door  wu  in  every  part  behind
^  dooT-OM.  After  t}ie  time  of  Hippiai  the
Kreet-doon  weie  not  permitted  to  open  outwardly
uAlhFtii(Becker,  ClonJabi,  voLLpp.139,  200);
ud  henee  irSaSnu  meant  to  open  the  door  on
ccnbig  in,  and  irurt^ffotrOai  or  i^t^x6ffair6tu  to

vrn  the  doon  aUowed  to  open  oatwardly  at  Rome ;
u  (ictplion  wa>  made  ai  a  ipecial  piivilege  in
hmoni  of  H.  Valerioi  Poblicola.  (Schneider,  w
r<ln,v.  iT.  6.  S  6.)

Tbe  lintel  of  .(he  oblong  door-cau  wai  in  all
l>^  and  iplendid  bnildingi,  tuch  ai  the  great
irmplea,  nnnomited  either  by  an  architiavo  and
nnice,  or  by  a  camice  only.  Ai  thli  ii  not
•howD  in  the  bai-relief  above  introdoced,  an  actual
dmc-way,  tb^  that  of  the  temple  of  Herculea  at
*^an,  ii  here  added.  Above  the  lintel  ii  an  arahi-
Iran  viih  a,  Latin  tnicriptiaa  upon  it,  and  nbave
thii  a  projecting  cornice  nipported  on  each  aide  by
a  coDnle,  which  reachei  te  a  level  with  the  bottom
•flhelintcL  The  top  ef  the  cornice  (cDroiuniniHia,
Vimiv.  IT.  6.  g  I)  coincided  in  heigbt  with  the  lapi
cf  the  ca[Ntali  of  Ihe  column!  of  the  pronaoa,  >a
Ibu  tbe  door-way,  with  ila  tupentncture,  woi
cnctly  e^nal  in  t^igbt  to  the  colomni  and  the


AuTiE.  Tbii  lupcntruclion  wnj  the  ij/pertJijirara
of  Vitruviu*  (/.  c),  and  of  the  Greek  archilecl,
whom  ha  followed.  The  nerl  woodcut  ahowa  one  of
the  twoconsilei  which  aupport  the  cornice  of  a  beau-
tiful Ionic  door- way  in  the  temple  of  Minerva  Poliaj
at  Athens.  In  the  inacription  relating  to  the  build-
ing of  tbai  temple,  which  it  now  in  the  Elgin  col-
lection of  the  Bdtiih  MuMum,  the  objecl  hem
delineated  i*  called  silt  rf  iripllipif.  Other
Greek  namea  for  it,  u»ed  by  Vilruviuj  (iv,  6.  %  4),
are  pirofu  and  anoiR,  literally  a  "lide-ear"  and
"an  elbow."  The  uae  of  conaolei,  or  tranea,  in
Ihia  aituation  tvat  chaiacteristic  of  the  Ionic  style
of  architecture,  being  never  admitted  in  the  Doric.
It  is  to  be  cbaerved  that  Homer  (Ckt.  viL  SO),
Heiiod  {Sou.  271),  and  Herodotoi  (i.  179).  nwi
the  term  iripSuptr,  or  its  diminutive  iirifSiiuar,
to  include  the  lintel.  Upon  lome  part  of  Ihe  byper-
ihynun  there  waa  often  an  intcription,  recording
the  data  and  occasion  of  the  erection,  at  In  the
of  the  temple  of  Hercules  alMve  repreaentrd,
or  elae  tnerely  expreating  a  moral  lentiment,  like
the  celebrated  "KnowthtrBeU"  upon  the  temple  at
Delphi

The  door  itaelt  waa  called /om  or  valra,  and  in
Greek  <rarls,  icAiiriai,  or  Aiptrpor.  These  words
are  commonly  found  in  the  plural,  because  the  door-
way of  every  bulldinft  of  tho  least  importance  con-
tained two  doors  folding  together,  as  in  all  the
inatancet  already  referred  to.  When  forii  ia  used
in  the  tinaubu,  we  may  obserre  thai  it  dcnotei  one
of  the  fbldinK-doors  only,  ai  in  the  phrase  firii
ertpnUf  which  occurs  repeatedly  in  Plaulua,  and
de«ribea  the  creaking  of  a  single  ralve,  opened
alone  and  turning  on  ila  pivota.  Even  the  internal
doors  of  houses  were  bivalve  (Oill'i  Pomptiana,
Snd  Ser.  vol  i.  p.  166)  ;  hence  we  read  of  "  Iho
folding-doora  of  a  bed-chamber^  (^fora  aJicuii,
Suet  Aug.  82  ;  Q.  Curt.  v.  6  ;  na/ltts  tl Ipapv'iat,
Horn.  Od.  iiiii-  42  ;  *iKai  Srw\iu,  Soph.  Otd.
Tyr.  1261).  But  in  every  case  each  of  Ihg  two
valves  wa>  wide  enough  to  allow  peraon*  to  pau
IhroDgb  withoDl  opening the  i4bET  ntm  ■In.


826  JANUA.

Etmi  each  valve  vas  aoiDetimn  double,  to  ai  to
fold  like  our  wijidDW-bhulten  {dvplim  cnmiiliia-
b^rtque,  liii  Orig.  i».  7).  The  mode  of  aitnch-
inj;  doora  to  the  doorway  u  eipUined  imder  the
Bi^le  CaHdo.

The  remaining  Rpecinieni  of  ancient  doora  ate
b]1  of  maiblfl  or  of  bronze  ;  lbo«  mnde  of  wood,
which  wai  bj-  for  the  nioit  common  malerial,  haic
perisbed.  The  door  of  a  tomb  at  Pompeii  (MoEoii,
/faiBM  de  PompH,  vol  i.  pL  lit.  fig.  i)  U  made
of  a  linglc  [necc  of  marble,  including  the  pivoti,
which  were  enoued  in  hronie,  and  turned  in
■ockcti  of  the  nme  metal  It  ii  3  feel  high,  2  leet
9  inchei  wide,  4^  iiichei  thick.  It  ii  cut  in  fionl
to  reiembte  paneli,  and  thui  to  approach  nearer
to  the  appearance  of  a  commoD  wooden  door,  and
it  WB>  bilcned  b;  a  lock,  tracei  of  which  remain.
The beoulifullj  wrought tomha of  Aii« Minor


made  either  t


bj  ancient  writers  (Herod.  L  179  ;  PIUL  H.  f!.
xxiir.  7.)  The  dooti  of  a  luppOMd  temple  of
Rcnitu,  illll  eiigtuig  a(  Rome,  and  tiov  occupied
«>  a  Chriitian  chun\  arc  of  thU  material  Mr.
I>onaId»on  {CoUeriioa  of  Doot-vatf  from  Aadent
AuiWnnt,  London,  1833,p1.21)  haa  repieaented
them  filling  up  the  lower  part  of  the  door-waj-  of
the  temple  at  Cora,  oi  ibown  in  the  last  woodcut,
which  ii  token  {ram  him.  The  four  panels  are
(urrounded  bj  rowa  of  imall  cirdci,  marking  the
tfdlt  on  which  were  fixed  rosetto  or  bouei,  limi-
larto  thote  which  are  docribed  and  figured  in  the
article  Bulla,  and  which  4erTed  both  to  strengthen
and  to  adora  the  doora.  The  leaves  of  the  doora
were  lometime*  overlaid  with  gold,  which  was  an
Eastern  practice,  as  we  lee  from  the  doora  in  the
temple  of  Siolomon  at  Jenualem  (1  Singi,  vi.  32 —
3o)  i  at  other  timet  they  were  enriched  with  the
moat  exquisite  carving.  (Ovid.  Afet  viiL  705  ;  Virg.
Grtirg.ni.26,Aat.  11.20— 33.}  Those  in  the  temple
of  Mhicrva,  at  Syraciue,  at«  laid  by  Cicclo  (  rerr.
i>.  56)  to  have  exceeded  all  olhera  in  the  curious
and  beautiful  workmanship  eiecntcd  upon  ihem  in
gold  and  ivorj.  "  It  is  incredible,"  Bij>  be,  "  how
many  Qreeka  have  left  writings  descriptive  of  the
elegance  of  these  valves."  One  of  the  omamcnls
was  "  a  most  beautiful  Qorgon's  head  with  tresses
of  snakes,'^  probably  occupying  the  centre  of  a
pnncL  In  addition  to  the  iculpturea  upon  the
valves  themselves,  the  finest  alataes  were  some-
times placed  beside  them,  probably  at  the  base  of
the  aatepngmenla,  as  in  the  magnificent  lem^e  of
Juno  in  Same*.  (Cic.  Kwv.  i.  23.)  In  the
ihncied  pabce  of  Alcinoni  (Od.  vii.  B3— 84)  the
door-case,  which  waa  of  silver  with  a  threshold  of
hronzc,  included  folding-doora  of  gold  ;  whilat  dogs,
wrought  in  gold  and  silver,  guarded  the  approach,
probably  disposed  like  (he  avenac  of  sphinxes  be-
fore an  Egyptian  temple.  As  luiury  advanced
among  the  Kumana  metal  took  the  place  of  wood,
even  m  the  doora  of  the  interior  of  a  houae.  Hence
the  Quaeator  Sp.  Carviliua  reproved  Comillua  for
having  hia  chamber  doora  covered  with  bronxe
(aerata  oitia,  Plin.  L  c).

A  lattice-work  is  to  be  observed  above  the
bronic  doori  in  the  hut  woodcut,  Mr.  Dooaldson
havuig  introduced  it  oD  the  authority  more  e«pe-
dally  of  the  Pantheon  at  Rome,  where  the  upper
part  of  the  door-way  ia  filled  with  a  window  such
as  that  here  represented.  Vitruviui  (i*.  6.  91)calli


JANUA.
it  the  ij/patlrHm,  and  his  language  implies  that  it
was  commonly  used  in  temples.

The  folding-doon  eihibtled  ui  the  last  v.-oodcut.
inateod  oF  a  rebate  aucfa  as  we  employ,  have  an  up-
right bronu  pilaster  standing  in  the  middle  of  the
door-way,  so  as  to  cover  the  joining  of  the  valves.
The  Jasleuings  of  the  door  (datatra,  Ovid.  Jmor.
i.  6. 17  1  obioer)  commonly  consisted  in  a  bott
(pagulia  I  fAitrfloXoi,  jroTOx'^r,  K^tTBpQe,  Ati-
K\Sipor,  Soph. Ord. TfT-  1262, 1287, 1394)

C'  ccd  at  the  base  of  each  foru,  so  aa  to  admit  of
ng  pushed  into  a  socket  made  in  the  till  to  re.
ccive  it  (iruMi',  Soph.  Oaf.  Tirr.  126!).  The
Pompeiau  door-waya  show  two  bolea  command-
ing 10  the  bolts  of  the  two  fores  (Qell,  Pompaaia,
2nd  Ser.  vol.  i.  p.  167)  ;  and  they  agree  wilh
numerous  passages  which  mention  in  the  plunJ
number  "  the  bolts,"  or, "  both  the  bolta  "  of  a  door-
(Plaul-  AidvLl  2.  36,  Cure  i.  2.  60—70  i  Sopb.
«.  oc. ;  Callim.  (a  Apoll.  6.)

The  annexed  woodcut  shows  an  ancient  bolt
preserved  in  the  Musenin  at  Naplea.  (Maioii,
Aanet  dt  Pompii,  vol.  L  part.  2.  pi.  viL)


By  night,  the  front-door  of  the  home  wi
secured  by  means  of  a  wooden  and  tonu
iron  bar  (sera,  rfpagvia,  tiox^')  placed  oova  it,
and  inserted  into  sockets,  on  each  sideof  tbe  door-
way. (Fcstn^  I.E.  Adunrt;  Ovid- Jnur.  I  6.
24^56.)  Hence  it  waa  necessary  to  mnoie  the
bar(vbv  ^X^^'^apf'^'^^.^'V^X'^^'^,  Eunp.
Med.  13U9)  in  order  to  open  the  dooi  (n«nirv).
(TheophrosL  dor.  1 8  i  Plutarch,  Ftlop.  p.  5 1 7,
ed.  Sleph. ;  PlauL  Ost.  iJL  1 B  ;  Ovid.  MiL  v.  1 20.)
Even  chamber-doors  were  secured  in  the  tacue
manner  (Heliodor.  vL  p.  281,  ed.  Comra.  j  cMaili
obteratU  fbrUmty  ApuL  Mel.  ix.)  i  and  berv  also,
in  case  of  need,  the  bur  was  employed  as  a  Rirtbcr
tecuriCf  in  addition  to  the  two  dotts  (lA^Spa  ru/L-
tripainrrtt  fi^x^ii,  Euiip.  Oral.  1546,  156li,
Ipi.  JuL  34S,  Aadnm.  952).  To  batcn  the
door  with  the  bolt  wasjitaaos  peaabun  sUsre,  with
the  bar^HHKiia  obmrart  (Ter.  Eka.  iiL  5.  55.  iv.
6.  26,  //»■(.  iL  3.  37).  At  Athens  >  jealous
husband  sometimes  even  proceeded  tost^  the  do»r
of  the  women's  iiiannMiiL (Arittoiih.  7%am.


JANU^


627


[VlLUKl.

In  lln  OdjHc;  (I  442,  ir.  802,  ui.  G,  46—
JO)  wefiudmsitkKiofacDntrimicefocbolLiiigor
uMdag  a  doot  fnim  Ih«  autiide,  wtuch  coniiited
in  ■  InUtm  thong  (^uii)  uuerted  thnngb  ■  holt
in  the  ita,  and  by  mesni  of  a  loop,  ring,  or  hook
(i^ili,  lAiiti),  which  tnt  the  origin  of  keyi,  otpa-
blc  of  liTiog  hold  of  the  bolt  >o  u  to  moTe  it  in
lie  muiiicT  nqniivd.  The  bolt  b;  the  pngreu  of
iainTBiiciit  vu  (nuufonned  into  a  luck,  and  the
Irtfi  Inmd  at  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii  and
Huh  attacind  to  ringi  (Oorlaei,  Dadflwa.  43,
IO&--309)  -^n,  that  among  tho  palithed  Greeki
ud  Konaoa,  the  art  of  tho  lockimith  (icAtiSairaiii)
•ffimclKd  Turf  iuatl3r  to  it*  pieaent  atale.  (Achill.
Tit.  ii  19.)

The  docc  rejnMTitod  in  tko  fint  woodcut  to  thia
irlade  hai  a  ring  upon  mck  Talra,  which  waa  oaed
U  iknt  the  door,  and  IhersfiKv  called  iho  ^unra-
rnjf.  HsndotDj  (tL  91)  Idli  a  i\Btj  ofacaptivo
>k  kariig  escaped  U  a  tempio  of  Cena,  clnsg  to
Ike  ting)  on  the  doon  vrith  both  hii  hand*.  Thlt
•fpcndagg  la  the  door,  which  wm  lonietiinei  gilt
Bit  TBj  haodaoma,  waa  aln  called,  on  araount  of
IB  linii,  lEpUst  and  iaifir%  L  s.  a  **  circle  "  or
-crown  -  (Horn.  Od.  L  441,  *iL  90)  ;  and,  be-
<UK  it  waa  oaed  aometimei  aa  a  knndcet,  it  waa
BOed  ^nfitr  (Haipocnt,  j;  v. ;  Xen.  HeOm.  vi
*-\X).  The  tenaiulfiii{,  "a  cnv"  (BniDck,
AmiL  iiL  166),  pnbaU;  denoted  a  knocker  more
■xarif  tqiproacbing  Ike  hna  of  that  bird,  or  pe>
^a  of  iti  neck  aod  he«d.  The  loweK  figure  in
tie  lut  woodcut  ihovi  m  [icUj  omanuDted  epi-
ipula,  (hm  the  eollntion  at  Naplci.  That  with
1  lim'i  had  ia  taken  from  t,  ba*-re1ief^  repment-
>°g  tie  doon  irf  a  temple,  in  the  callectioa  at  Incs-
Blsndell,  near  LiTorpooL  The  third  Ggora  ii  from
the  Nc^oUtan  MnaenziL

Beibn  the  door  of  a  palace,  or  of  aoy  printe  honae
•f  a  Bpenac  deacriplioo,  (here  waa  a  [aaaige  Icnd-
iv  to  the  door  from  the  pnbtie  rcwt,  which  wat
caJled  nttibulmm  (laid.  Orig.  it.  7  ;  Plant.  MoA
iii.  2.  132  ;  OelL  itL  6)  and  wf69«p»r  (VitruT.
^l.h;  Hom.M.  iviiLlO— 100;  Herod. iiL  3i,
'40).  It  wa*  proyided  with  Hati  (Herod,  ii.  33).
I>  »ai  Kmetimei  co'eted  bj  aa  arch  [Cahika],
*bich  waa  lupported  h;  two  pilUi*  (Serr.  ad
' Viy.  An.  \i.  4S9)  ;  aod  lametime*  adorned  with
KDlptBies  (Virg.  Aat,  Tti.  ISl  ; Jut.  lii.  ]2E}.

PJ"  their  reapecla  to  the  occupier  of  the  houi&
tGelL  it.  1.)  la  the  Tntlbule  wat  placed  the
demotic  altar  [Aba],  The  Alheniaiu  alao
jdaoled  a  bnrel  m  the  aarae  lituatiim,  beaida  a
^pie  deaigned  to  repreaent  Apollo  (Ariatoph.
nan.  496  ;  FUuL  Mere.  It.  1.  II,  12)  ;  and
•Utoei  oT  Mercai7  wera  MOI  Taan  frequent  (Tfau-
<jd.  tL  27),  bemg  erected  there  on  the  principle
of  •citing  a  thief  to  catch  a  ihiet  (3choL  ad  Atu-
Ifi-J'taL  1155.)

The  DoNARiA  offered  to  the  godi  were  impended
ml  only  frimi  the  Ahtai,  but  likewiae  from  the
door-paila  and  linteli  of  tlnir  templee  (Virg.
■4a.  iiL  2B7,  V.  360  ;  OTid.  Triit.  iii.  1.  34  ;  Hor.
Orm.  n.  15.  8,  ^il.  i  1.  5,  L  lB,5fi;  Pen.
■S^  tL  45  :  Plhi.  tf.  JV.  HIT.  4),  aa  well  ai  ol
palacti,  which  in  ancient  tunea  partook  of  thi
■ancti^of  lemplea.  (Virg.  ..In.  ii.  603,  vii.  183.)
VicMn  ic  the  guoca  stupeuded  their  crawiu


the  door  of  a  temple.  (Pind.  Neat.  t.  G3.)  In
like  manner  penona  fixed  to  the  junb*  and  linleli
of  their  own  doon  the  ipoila  which  they  had  taken
in  balde.  (Featna,  a.  o.  RaUjiian  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
XHT.  2.)  Slag'a  hoina  and  boai'a  tnaka  wera  on
the  nme  principle  oaed  to  decorate  the  doora  of
the  tem[dea  of  Diana,  and  of  the  private  indiri-
duola  who  had  taken  theae  animali  in  tho  chaee.
Owli  and  other  nocturnal  birdi  were  niuled  upon
the  doora  w  in  modem  timea.  (Pallad.  dt  Re  Ibat.
i.  35.)  Alio  gBilanda  and  wrealha  of  flowera  wera
BUApendod  OTer  the  doora  of  templea  in  connection
with  the  peffbnnanca  of  religiouj  ritea,  or  the  tx-
pmeiaa  of  pnblic  ^ankigiiing,  being  compoied  in
nch  eaae  of  productiooi  luited  to  ^e  particular
divinity  whom  they  were  mtended  to  honour.  In
thia  manner  the  aorma  ^laea  waa  nupendcd  in
honour  of  Cerea  (Tib.  i.  1.  21  ;  tee  alto  Viig.
Cirw,  05—98).  Laurel  waa  to  nied  in  token  of
Tictory,  eipeaally  at  Ktme  (OTid.  MA  i  6G3),

CivicA  on  the  dooia  of  the  imperial  palace.  (OTidl
TritL  iiL  1,  35—49 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  ii.  30  ;  laanatie
/bribuM,  Sen.  OmKiL  ad  Pol^.  35  ;  VaL  Max.  iL
B.  %  7.)  The  doon  of  private  honaei  were  orna-
mented in  n  aimilar  way,  and  with  different  planta
according  to  the  occaaion.  More  eipeciaUy.  in  cele-
bration of  a  marriage  either  laurel  or  myrtle  waa
Jlacod  about  the  door  of  the  bridegrwmi.  (Jur.  li.
9,  22S ;  Qaud.  de  Nigil.  Hon.  et  Mar.  208.)
Catnllot,  in  deicribing  an  imaginary  matriage,  tup-
poa«*  the  whole  letlibulum  to  have  been  taitefully
oTcrarched  with  the  branchei  of  ^eea.  i^EpitAoL
Pel.  et  nn.  278—293.)  The  birth  of  a  child
waa  alto  annonnced  by  a  chaplet  upon  the  door
(Jut.  ii.  84),  imd  a  death  waa  indicated  by  ey-
preiaea,  probably  in  poti,  placed  in  the  Teatibulum.
(Plin.  H.  N.  itL  CO  ;  Serr.  n  Virg.  Aen.  iii.  64.)
la  addi^n  to  treei,  bnnctiei,  gailandi,  and
wrealha  of  flowen,  the  Romana  aometimei  dii-
plajed  lampt  and  lorchea  before  the  doort  of  their
linujet  for  the  pnrpote  of  erpretaing  gnlitude  and
joy,  (Juv.  iii.  82.)  Mniic,  both  TOfal  and  inatra-
menCol,  waa  aometimei  perfbnned  in  the  Teatibulum,

honour  to  the  matter  of  the  hooie,  or  to  one  of  hia
arailj.  (Pind.  iVom.  L  19,  20,  IttL  tii.  3.)

It  wai  contidercd  improper  to  cater  a  houte
without  giving  notice  ts  iti  inmatct.  Thii  notieo
the  SportarugaTe  byahonting  ;  the  Athenianaand
all  other  naliona  by  UBOg  the  knocker  alreadr  dc-
icribed,  but  more  commonly  by  rapping  viU  the
knucklet  or  with  a  atick  (Kpoiifir,  tirrtiii,  Becker,
Caont  ToL  L  pp.  230— 234;  PhtL /'rob^.  pp.  151,
159,  ed.  Bekker.)  In  the  houiea  of  the  rich  a
porter  (^xilor,  catta,  Svp»p6!)  wai  alwaya  in  at-
tendance to  open  the  door.  (TibnlL  i.  J.  56.)  He
waa  commonly  a  aunnch  or  a  alare  (Plat.  L  t),
and  waa  chained  to  hia  poaL  (Ovid.  Aniar.  i  6  ;
Sueton.  de  Oar.  RieL  3.)  To  aaiitt  him  in  guaid-
ing  the  entrance,  a  dog  wat  uniienally  kept  sear
it,  being  alto  attached  by  a  chain  to  the  wall  (Theo-
criL  XT.  43  1  ApoUodor.  ap.  Alien.  L  4  ;  Arisloph.
nem.  423,  lyiil.  1217  ;  TibulL  ii.  4.  32—36)  ;
and  in  reference  to  thli  practice,  the  warning  CbM
Canam,  tiAaSoi  riir  nira,  waa  tomelimee  written
nesi  the  door.  Of  thia  a  remarkable  eiamfde  oc
cun  in  "  Ihc  haute  of  the  tragic  poet "  at  Pompeii,
where  it  ia  accompanied  by  the  figure  of  a  fieica
dog,  wrought  in  moanic  en  the  pavement,  (Oell'a
Pomp.  2nd  Ser.  tol.  L  pp.  142, 145.) Initeul

es3


638  ILLUSTBES.

of  tliii  hanh  admonition,  Mme  waits  or  p&ramenti
eihib[lcd  Iho  mon  gmuoiii  SALVE  or  XAIPE.
(Pint.  Ciirrm.  p.  9i,  ed.  HeindoK)  Ths  appn-
priale  nainea  foe  the  poRion  of  Ihs  boiiM  iminedi-
»Kly  behind  the  door  {SvpJf,  Soph.  Omi.  ly-.
124%  Elm.  S2a),  denotet  that  it  wu  a  kind  of
epoTtment ;  it  comfiponded  to  the  halt  or  lohhf  of
our  houKi. Immpdiatelf  adjoining  it,  and  doie

■mall  mom  for  the  portor  (ptUa,  or  ntStiajcmHoru,
Siieton.  VUdl.  16  ;  Vuro,  dt  St  RvM.  I  13  ;
dvp^lar,  Pollux,  i  77).  [J.  Y.J

lATRALIPTA,  IATRALIPTE3,  or  lA-
TBOALIPTES  (iorfwAtwnjt),  Ihs  name  giTHi
hj  ths  nndcnti  lo  a  phyiician  who  paid  patticular
atteniion  to  that  port  of  medical  icience  called
Jatraliptia.  The  name  !■  componnded  of  larfiit
and  it\(l^  and  ligniJia  literally  a  phyikim  ttuf
cam  bf  onoHrfn^.  Acearding  to  Flinj  ( jf.  ff.
-rrJT  2),  the;  were  at  fint  only  the  ilaTtt  of  phy-
*>cian>,butafteTWBrd(niKta  the  rank  of  phjaiciana
theraielvei,  and  were  therefore  luperioc  to  the
ktiptae.  [AllM**.]  The  word  occun  in  Panlo.
Aegtneta  {Di  Ri  Afed.  iii.  47),  Celiui  (Di  Madia.
L  !)  and  other  medical  writen. [W.A.O.]

lATRUH  (laT^i). [Mbdicub]

lATROSOPHISTA  (iarpoaafurrl\s\  an  an-
cient mrdical  title,  tigaifying  apparently  (according
to  Dd  Cange,  Oloaar.  Mrd.  H.  Inf.  Gneeit.)  one
who  both  taught  medidne  and  alu  pisctiiad  it
himKlf ;  u  the  ancienti  mada  a  diitiDclion  be-
tween Siflao'iraAjje^  and  tpyara^  the  aft  and  the
science  of  medkine,  the  theory  and  the  practice.
(Damatcina  »  eiia  Inderi.)  Eunnpiaa  Sardianua
{De  VU.PiiiaKifA.etSoptiat.f,  168,  ed.  Antwerp.
1468)  caili  them  ilnainiixJniut  Kiyfir  t.  kbI
mtitbi  larrpuefir.  The  word  i>  iomewhat  Taried  in
different  authon.  Socialca  (Hal.  Ecda.  vii.  13)
calli  Adaman^ni  Uprputuv  \6yaif  ^o^tirrift, Ste-

C'  iniig  Byiantinoi  (t.  v.  Via)  mentioni  tm>
par  irofurrit ;  CalliitbeDn  (quoted  in  Dn
Cange),  iarjiii  aa^urrlit  -,  and  Theophanea  (itid.)
m^rrTts  T^f  larpiK^s  tirtarltfirjt.  Several  ancient
phjiiciana  an  called  by  thii  title,  a.  g.  Magnea
(Theoph.  Protoipath.  De  Urttdt),  Cnuiua,  the
nuthor  of  >•  Quoeitionea  Mediw  el  NatnMlei,"
andolhen.  [W.A.G.]

IDUS.  [Calindahiuh,  Rohan.]
JENTA'CULUIL [Cobnj,  p.  S06,  a.]
IGNO'BILES. [NoHiLM.]
IGNOMI'NIA. [lNyAiiii.1
ILE  (Ui,), [ExanciTDB,  p.  488,  b.]
ILLUSTRES. When  Conalantina  the  Great
re-OTganiied  the  Roman  adminiitintlon,  he  divided
the  principal  magiatintfa  and  officiala  into  three
cliujiea:--l.  The/^fHtrsi,  who  held  the  Gntrank;
2.  The  SpetiiAUa  ;  and  3.  The  Oaritrimi. The
litlo  of  lUiatra  belonged  only  to  tha  Coninlei,  the
Patricii,  the  Piaelectua  ^aaetorio,  the  Pracfectui
tirbi,  the  Pran»>itu>  nuri  cubicnli,  the  Mogiitri
militum,  (he  Magirter  ctfeionim,  the  Qnaeaior  aacrj
palatii,  the  Cornea  ncnrum  lorgitionum,  and  the
Cnnw* ternm  pnntanira.  Evenamong  thelllnitna
there  wu  a  gradation  of  nnk«  ^e  Conanla  and
Patricii  being  i^;atded  aa  higher  in  dignity  than  the
olheiL Thetitlea  J'BUiiiiunni,£;Kig{/fli(unnu,and
Magidfia  tm  vaei  aa  iTnonymoua  wUh  lllnalrEa.
j\moTig  the  priTileget  of  the  lUoMni  we  read  that
in  criminal  caaea  they  eonld  only  be  tried  by  the
emperor  hnnielt  or  by eji imperial commiuion,
•nd  that  they  coold  appear  befora  tbe  conrB  by


IMPEItlUM.
meant  of  procalatara.  (Cod.  Theod.  6.  tiU  8,  Ac,
with  the  commentary  of  Gothofred  ;  Waltor,  GtgcA-
ioUedeiK'6iiaitim  lieiiu,i3S0,2niei.  ;  Oibboii,
Dediia  and  jpati,  c  17.  ToL  iii.  p.  34,  London,
17S7.)

IMA'OINUM  JUS. [NoBiiM.]

I  HA'GO,  the  repreaentation  or  likeneaa  of  any
object,  IB  derived  from  the  root  im  or  nn,  which
appeare  in  im-Uari  and  lim-i^  and  Uk^wue  in
the  Greek  6n-ii.  ("  Imago  ab  imitatione  dicta,"
Featna,  a.  e.  ;  **  Imago  dicitur  qoaai  imiloffa^^  Por-
phjT.  ad  Hot.  Cam.  L  12.  4.)  It  wu  npecially
^plied  among  the  Romau  to  indicate  the  wsxen
bnita  of  deoeaaed  ancealon,  which  diitingoiahed
Romaoi  kept  in  ths  atria  of  their  hoiuea,  and  of
which  an  account  ia  given  in  tha  aniclo  Nobilks.
The  word  ia  alio  naed  in  gcnoal  to  aignify  a  poi-
tiait  or  alalue  of  a  pereon  ;  on  boU  of  which
aome  remarka  are  made  under  Pttrroaj.,  No.  XV.
and  STAriiARiA,  No.  II.

I'MBRICEa [Thjui-a.]

IMMUM'TAS  (bma  n  and  nwHi),  aigniJiea,
1 .  A  freedom  fmm  tsiea.  3.  A  freedom  fivin  aer-
vieea  which  other  citiieni  had  to  diachargs.  With
reapect  to  the  fint  kind  of  immunitaa  v*  find  tbU
the  emperon  frequently  granted  it  la  aepsrmta
peraona  (Suet  Aag.  40),  ea  to  certain  daaaea  of
penona,  or  to  whole  itatea.  When  granted  to
mdividiuila  the  immunitaa  ceaaed  with  their
death,  but  in  the  caae  of  atatea  the  piivilegr  axt-
tinned  to  Bnbaeqnent  generation!.  {Dig.  50.  tit.
15.  t.  4.  §  3.)  Thna  we  find  that  certun  people
in  Illyria  had  inunnniOa  from  taiea  (Liv.  idv.
S6),  and  that  the  emperor  Claudius  granlod  freedom
friun  taxation  in  perjKhaim  to  the  inhahitanta  Ol
Ilium.  (Suet.  CSond.  25.)  The  Roman  aoldin
from  the  time  of  Nero  wen  exempt  frnn  alt  dutiea
on  goods  which  they  might  csny  into  the  pn-
lincea  for  their  own  Dae  or  might  purchaae  in  any
place.  {Tac.^<n.  liiL  61 ;  Coi  4.  tit  61.  a.  3.)

The  aeeond  kind  of  immunitaa  wa>  granted  to  ajl
peraona  who  had  a  valid  excnie  (eiaunlw)  ta  be
released  from  such  aervicei,  and  also  to  other  per-
sona as  a  apecial  bvour.  Uoder  the  republic,  public
offices  were  object!  of  ambition,  and  conseqntQtIj
there  wus  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  peraona  to  dis-
charge Ihera  even  when  they  were  attended  with
expense  to  tho  individual  who  held  them.  Bat
under  the  empire  (he  case  became  different  Many
offices  which  CDlailed  expenses,  aoch,  Iw  inttnocev
as  that  of  the  deciunonei  in  the  municipia,  were
avoided  ratherthansDoghlalWr  ;  and  hmcevBriona
cegulaliona  were  made  at  different  timea  to  define
the  daasea  of  persons  who  wen  entitled  to  ex-
emption. (Comp.  Dig.  SO.  til.  6  ;  Cod.  10.  tit  47
and  43.)  The  dcftnition  of  immunitas  in  this  aenaa
is  given  by  Paulna  (Dig,  60.  tit.  16.  a.  18)  :  —
"  Manna  —  onus,  quod  cum  remittalor,  vacationcm
militiae  mtmcrisqae  praeatat,  inde  iamaaifiillmi  ap-
pellari."  The  inuannilas  might  be  either  ^nenl,
from  all  aervicea  which  a  dtixen  owed  to  the  state,
orapecial,  suchaa  from  mnitary  service  [ExKacrrt-n,
p.  499],  from  takmg  the  office  of  tutor  or  gtiardiui
[TuTon],  and  the  like.

IMPE'NDIUlrf, [Fastin,  p.  528,  b.]

IMPBRATI'VAE  FEKIAB. [Fuuifcl

IMPERATOR. [I1IP1RII.-M.]

LMPE'RIUM.  aaiuB(iv.  103).  when  uakiiig
a  division  of  jndicia  into  thoae  (juae  Legitimo
jure  eonaiatont,  and  those  Quae  Imprrio  conti-
nentur,  obanrta  that  the  l^tw  are lo  called


lUPEKIUM.
btoms  tlitj  continue  id  fores  darii^  lbs  Impc-
riua  of  biin  who  bu  grauled  them.  Legilima
jndkia  wen  Ihoas  vhich  ureie  proMcutcd  in  Romn
or  wilhb  the  fint  milisrium,  between  RoDuu
tUtatt,  Mid  before  *  ci^Ie  judex.  Bt  ■  Lei
Julia  Jndicura,  loch  judicia  eipind,  unleu  ibtj


1  tingle  judex,  when
w  of  the  litigut  p«tie*  wu
1  raodncted  bejond  the  Gnt
n  nther  between  Rooun  citiiena  or  pen-
grim.  FnHn  till*  {MigB  it  foUowi  thit  then
iroe  jidieii  qua  Imperia  eoutimbuitiu',  wbich
■Re  panted  in  Rime  t  vbicb  ii  made  clewei  bj
■hat  Iblbwa.  Then  wa*  a  diMinetion  between  a
JBdidiuu  ex  lege,  that  ia,  a  jndieiora  founded  on  a
lanicnlu  lex,  asd  ■  judjdnm  legitimum  ;  for
unlance,  if  %  man  cued  in  the  pnmncea  under  a
lei.  the  Aqnilia  far  example,  the  judicium  wu  cot
kgiliEuii),  but  wu  Bid  Imperia  conlineri,  thai  ii,
^i  li^ierinm  of  the  pnoea  or  pncoiinil,  wbo
ftn  the  jndiciunL  The  aame  wai  the  cue  if  a
nuB  nsd  at  Rome  ai  lege,  and  the  jndidiua  waa
'  '  I,  or  there  vm  a  peregrinna

D  ned  under  the prmelor^j
'  'X  lege,  and  a  judi.

nom  wii  giuini  m  luniM  and  the  Bme  wai  be-
ibrt  oie  judex  and  no  foreigner  wai  coDcemed,  it
wit  legiumnm.  The  judicia  legidma  are  men-
liued  bj  Cicero  {Fm  SoK.  Com.  5  ;  Or.  FarL
1  -) ;  but  it  mmy  peihapt  be  doubted  if  be  utet
the  t«m  in  the  teoje  in  which  Gaiui  doei.
Jl  tpfn  then,  that  in  the  time  of  Ouu,  n  long
u  i  man  had  juritdidio^  lo  Img  wu  he  nid  to
hare  Imperinnu  Imperinm  it  defined  b7  Ul;HBn
(Dig.  2.  tit.  i.  a.  3)  to  be  either  merum  or
niitnni.  To  have  the  menim  Impoium  ia  to
haie  ■*  gladii  ptrteilslera  ad  tnimadTettendum  in
fadnonaH  homiDra,"  a  power  that  bad  no  cod-
neOioD  with  juriadictia;  the  miitum  Imperinm  ia
d(£nedby  hinattbat  "cuietiamjuriidictioiiieit,''
B  ihe  power  which  s  magiiuate  had  for  the  por-
poiei  of  Biirir"'"""g  the  eiril  (mt  eriminal)  part
of  the  law.  It  afiptau  then  that  there  wu  an
iDferinm  which  wu  incident  to  jnritdiclio  ;  but
ibe  iBeniin  or  pure  Imperinm  wu  eonfenvd  b;  a
ki  (Dig,  1.  tit.  31.  i.  1).  The  mixtum  Imperium
*■>  BCtking  men  then  the  power  Dece>tU7  for
P'ing  effect  to  the  JuriedictioL  There  might
ibneCm  be  Impoium  vithoat  Jnriidictio,  but
then  could  be  no  Jnritdictio  without  Imperium.
Aasedinglf,  Imperinm  ii  Mfnetimei  nied  to  eipreu
the  anthority  of  a  DMgittianu,  of  which  hit  Jorit-
dictio  i*  m.  lait  (Fuebta,  ZtUichift  Jiir  GaA
/tirfliMMirtFiA  ToL  I.  p.  201.)

■ 1  it  defined  bjCieero  (PiiT.  16)  to
quo na militarit adminiatiari,


lex  CntinIB,  which  it  exprcucd  l^  Lirj  (t.  H)


incdbj  tiu  *l


it  the  power  which  wu  eon-
pon  an  individual  wbo  wu
)d  an  umy.  The  phnmet
Cooialatie  Poceetu  and  Cociulars  Imperium  might
budi  be  praperij  need  j  but  the  expreuion  Tri-
hButm  Polectu  mlj  doold  be  oied,  u  the  Tribuni
nnoracciTed  the  Imperium.  (LiT.Ti.3Tj  in  VelL
Palm.  iL  2,  Imperinm  ii  improperl;  lued.)  A  con-
^ "  ~  u  commander  of  an  anny  iaitim-


IMPER1UM.

thu: — **  Coniitta  Curia'.a  rem  militaram  .
Though  coniuli  were  elected  at  the  Co:
turiala,  the  Cooiitia  Cnriata  onlj  could  gire  them
Imperimn.  (Lir.  t.  £2.)  Thia  wu  in  confonnity
with  the  aaeient  coutitution,  according  to  which
the  Imperinm  wu  confened  m  the  kingi  after
Ihej  had  been  elected :  "  On  the  death  of  King
Pompiliui,  the  populu*  in  the  CMnilia  Cnriata
eleclod  Tnllui  Hoitiliui  king,  upon  the  rogation
"'  '"  ' and  the  king,  following  the  ei


ample  of  Po-npUiui,  took  the  vote*  of  the  populue

'- —  to  their  curiu  on  the  qneilion '  ' '

<Clc.  Op.  ii._,17.) Both  Wun


according  U


13),  and  Ancnt  Mardui  (iL  III),  the  *i
Tullai,  aflH  their  appunlmait  u  Reget,  are
levenJl;  lud  ■*  De  Inperio  tno  legem  curiatam
InliiK.''  Ita^eart  then  that,  from  the  kingly
period  to  the  time  of  Cicero,  the  Imperium,  n


Alunkihiur,  ToL  i.  put  iL  ^  3li,  &c

The  Imperium  of  the  kingi  ii  not  defined  by
Ciecm.  It  it  deUarcd  by  tome  modem  writen  to
have  been  the  mililaiy  and  the  judicial  power ;
and  it  ie  ujd  that  the  eonnilt  alia  received  Iho
Imperinm  in  the  tame  tenu  ;  and  the  leaion  why
lbs  Lex  Curiata  it  qieeiall;  laid  to  confer  tiui
Imperium  Uilitare,  it  that  it  ipecially  refamd  to
the  contuli,  and  by  the  eetablithment  of  the  prae-
tonhip  the  juritdictio  ww  tepaialed  from  the  con-
lulebip.  It  may  be  conjectored  that  the  diviuon
of  Imperium,  made  by  the  jnriatt,  wu  in  occcid-
anoe  with  the  practice  of  the  republican  period :  then
wot  during  the  republican  period  an  Imperium
within  the  wallt  which  wu  incident  to  juritdictio,
and  an  Imperium  without  the  walla  vhich  wu
confemd  by  a  lex  cnriata.  There  are  no  trace*  of
thit  aeiaiBtion  in  the  kingly  period,  and  it  it  pro-
bable that  the  kmg  receiied  the  Lnperium  in  ilt
full  import,  and  that  iCt  aepamticn  into  two  parlt
belong!  to  the  republican  period.  The  Imperium,
which  wu  eonfeired  by  a  lex  nnder  the  iwiublic,
wu  limited,  if  not  by  the  termi  m  which  it  wat
conferred,  at  leatt  by  mage  ;  it  conld  not  be  held
or  exerciied  within  the  city.  It  wu  ■omctime*
ipecially  conferred  on  an  mdiTidiial  for  tlie  day  of
hit  triumph  within  the  city  ;  and,  at  Inttt  in  lome
ciuei,  by  a  [debiwiluni.  (Lit.  ziri.  21,  xl(.
M.)

The  Imperium  wu  u  nmnnary  for  the  go-
TMiior  of  a  pnTincc,  u  for  a  general  who  merely
commanded  the  annie*  of  the  npnblic,  u  he  could
not  without  it  Bienite  milita^  authority  (mn
•niiOana,  attugen).  (See  Caea.  A.  C.  L  6.)  So  br
u  we  can  trace  the  itrict  practice  of  the  Roman
conititutioo,  military  command  wu  given  by  a
■pecial  lex,  and  wa*  not  inddeul  to  any  office,  and
might  be  held  without  any  other  office  than  that  of
impcrator.  It  appcan  that  in  the  time  of  Cicero
there  wen  doubu  u  to  the  neceaity  of  the  lex  in
■ome  cnta,  which  may  have  gradually  ariaen  from
the  iiregutar  prsclicet  of  the  ciril  wan,  and  from
the  gradual  decay  of  the  old  inttitutiona.  Cicen,
in  a  pataage  which  ia  not  very  elear  lAdFiaa.L9),
refera  to  a  Comelia  Lex  according  to  which  an  in-
dividual who  had  received  a  Province  ex  Senatot-
eooinllo  thereby  acquired  the  Imperium,  without
the  formality  of  a  Lex  Curiala.

The  Imperium  (nenwi)  of  the  republic  qipnn
to  have  been  (1),  a  power  which  wu  only  eio
cited  ant  of  the  dt;  ;  (2)  ■  power  whick  w»
mMi . --- -  ,•,■-■


•38  IMPUBES.

specially  conferred  by  &  Lex  Cunatii,  and  wu  not
inddenl  to  any  alS«  ;  (3)  a  power'  withant  which
no  mllituy  opemtion  could  be  coniidered  u  done
in  the  same  fad  oa  lbs  behalf  of  (he  ilati.  Oflhii
a  noMble  enunpla  ig  recorded  in  Lit;  (ixvL  2),
where  the  tenate  retuKd  to  lecogniM  a  Ronsn  u
B  coDunander  becaiua  ha  had  Dot  leceiTed  the
Impeiinm  in  due  fbrn.

In  nipect  of  bi«  Iraperiam^  he  who  receiTed  it
wu  Atyled  imperatoT  (cwrocpcCTotp) ;  hemigbtbea


iL  7i),  fop
u  gaioal  to  nlnta  him  by  the  Utle  of
;  bat  in  the  itutance  referred  to  bj
Tacitiu,  the  Emperoi  Tiberiui  alloved  the  >o1dien
to  confer  the  title  on  an  indiiidual  who  hsd  it  not
already,  while  noder  the  republic  the  title  u  a
matter  of  conrte  wu  given  with  the  Inipecinm  ;
and  every  general  wha  received  the  Impennm  wai
tntiiied  to  the  name  of  imperator.  After  a  Ticlory
it  wai  oiual  for  the  loldien  to  lalule  their  com-
mander ai  imperalar,  but  thii  lalDtation  neither
(lave  nor  confinned  the  title.  Under  the  republic,
obeertei  Tacitiu,  there  were  teTcral  imperatoree
at  a  time :  Augn»u  granted  the  title  to  ume ;
but  the  laaC  iniuncc,  he  adda,  of  the  title  Mng
conferred  waa  in  the  fAae  of  Blaeaui,  under
'nberiui.  There  were,  however,  hitet  inatancce.
The  BHOmptian  of  the  praenomen  of  imperator  by
Juliui  Caeiar<Suet.  Oua.  c76)  wai  a  luurpalion;
or  it  may  have  been  conferred  by  the  wnate  (Dion
Casiiua,  iliii.  44).  Under  the  republic  the  tjlle
came  properly  after  the  name  ;  thu>  Cicero,  when
he  wai  proconiul  in  CUieia,  could  properly  ityle
hinuelFH.  Tulliua  Cicero  Imperslor,  for  the  term
merely  eipnated  that  he  had  the  Imperinm,  Ti-
berius and  Claudiua  refused  to  auume  the  prae-
nomen of  Imperator,  but  the  nse  of  it  ua  a  prae-
nomen became  eitabliahed  among  their  lUceeaaon,
aa  we  Bee  from  the  imperial  coina.  The  title  Im-
perator aometimea  appeara  on  the  imperial  medala,
followed  by  a  numeral  (VI.  fbr  inatance),  which
indicalca  that  it  waa  apecially  aaaumed  by  them  on
' ' le  ptu  victory  ;  fur  though  thi


vktoT  m


The  term  Imperitmi  waa  applied  in  the  republi-
can period  to  exproaa  the  aovereignty  of  the  Ro-
DHtn  atala.  Thua  Oaul  ia  aaid  liy  Cicero  (Pn>
/bat.  1)  to  have  eome  under  the  Imperium  and
Ditto  ef  the  Fopulni  Romaoua  ;  and  the  notioii  of
the  Majeataa  Fopuli  Homani  ia  said  te  be  "  in
Imperii  atqae  in  nominii  populi  Ronuni  dignitata."
(Cic.  Or.  Part  30.)  Compare  the  i»e  of  Impe-
rium in  Horace,  Od.  L  S7,  liL  9.  (0.  h.]

IMPLU'VIUM. [Do«o«,p.i27,b.]

IMPU'BES.  An  inbia  [iNPiNs]  waa  in-
capable of  doing  any  l^al  act.  An  impubca,  who
bad  piaaed  the  liinita  of  inbntia,  coiJd  do  any
legal  act  with  the  auetaritaa  of  hia  tutor  ;  witbont
nuh  anctorilaa  ho  could  only  do  thoae  acta  which
WSB  for  hii  benafit  Ac^rdingly  inch  an  im-
pubei  could  atipulato  (iliptduri\  but  not  pramite
(pnMuUn*) ;  in  other  wordi,  M  Oajtu  <iiL  107}
BXfn—tt  ii,  a  pupillna  could  only  be  boimd  by  the
Mutorilai  of  hu  tulw,  but  he  could  bind  another
vitiuut  aiuh  auctocitaa. [Infaks]

Bat  dii*  remark  ai  to  pupilli  only  appliea  to
tboas  who  bad  imdentanding  enough  to  know  what
4bay  wen  doing  (gai  jam  ott^wai  altlltctMm  io-


mPCBES.
iat),  and  not  to  Ihoae  who  wtn  in&ntc*  or  £iliuili
proiimi,  though  in  the  cate  of  the  in&nti  poiiiii
a  liberal  interpretation  was  ginn  to  the  rule  of  law
(btmgmor  jtrii  inteipratoto),  by  TirtDB  e(  which  a
pupiilua,  who  m '  ' ''  ' '

on  the  nme  too
proKimna,  but  thia

W'r  to  a  caae

(Compare  Inat

An  impubea '

could  not  bii

hi*  bther  ;  for  in  the  caae  of  a  pitpillna,  the  aae-

totitu  of  the  tutor  waa  only  allowed,  bi  reniut  of

the  pupiltua  havi;^  property  of  his  own,  irtiii^  a

Ban  in  the  power  of  his  fatha  oeuld  not  hare.

In  the  case  of  obligatione*  ei  delicto,  the  notini
of  the  auctoritaa  of  a  tutor  waa  of  conrai  excluded,
aa  auch  aacloritaa  waa  only  i«qniails  for  the  pur
polo  of  giving  effect  to  rig)iliul  acta.  If  the  im-
pubea waa  of  aofllcieiit  capacity  to  undentand  the
nature  of  hii  delict,  he  waa  bound  by  it ;  ethers
wise,  he  was  not.  In  the  case  of  a  piaian  «ba
waa  Pubcrtati  i^oiirauj,  there  vaa  a  legal  pre-
aumption  of  nch  tspedty  ;  but  sUll  this  prHUmp-
tion  did  not  exclude  a  conatderatian  of  the  degree
of  imderalanding  of  the  impubea  and  the  nature  of
the  act,  for  the  act  might  b«  anch  as  either  to  be
perfectly  intelligible,  aa  theft,  or  it  might  be  en
act  which  an  impnbei  imperfectly  undentood,  ss
when  he  was  made  the  innmment  of  fraud.  These
principles  were  applicable  to  eaaea  •£  fiirtuin,  dam-
num injuria  datum,  mjuria,  and  othen  ;  and  b1»>
to  Crimea,  in  which  th«  nature  of  the  act  mainly
deteimined  whetbei  or  not  guilt  (hoDld  be  im-

An  impnbes  coQld  enter  inloaeontiBetl^whid
he  waa  raleaaed  from  a  debt,  but  ha  could  not  »■

lease  a  debt  without  the  auctoritas  of  his  tutor.
Ho  could  not  pay  money  witiont  his  tutD  ;  «r
could  he  receive  money  without  his  tatv,  at  l«>t
avalid  payment,  beisuse  such  paymmt


debtor. But  ai


fbllow


ID  the


the  rule  aa  to  the  incapacity  rf
on  impnbes  was  made  only  to  save  him  from  Icaa,
he  could  not  retain  both  the  money  and  the  daim.

An  impubea  could  not  be  a  plaintiS'  or  a  defend-
ant in  a  auit  without  his  tutor.  He  eonld  aequin
the  ownenhi^  of  property  alone,  but  he  eonld  net
alienate  it  without  the  consent  of  hia  tnlor,  nor
could  he  manumit  a  alave  witboat  anch  cuiaent.
He  could  contract  aponaalia  alone,  because  the
auctoritas  of  the  tutor  baa  raferaiee  oiIt  to  fav-
perty :  if  he  waa  in  his  father^  power,  oa  was  of
course  entirely  under  bis  btber'a  contniL

An  impubM  could  aequin  an  hereditaa  with  the
consent  of  bit  tutor,  which  couBsnt  waa  necessary,
because  an  heieditas  was  accompanied  with  obt^-
tioni.  But  as  the  act  of  cretioD  waa  an  act  that  moat
be  done  by  the  hem  himself  neither  hia  totor  nor
a  alave  could  take  the  bereditaa  for  a  pnpDlua,  and
ho  waa  in  conaeqnenceirfhia  age  incapable  of  taking
it  himaelf.  This  difficulty  was  got  over  by  the
doctrine  of  pn  hende  gealio;  the  tutor  might  per-
mit the  pupillua  to  act  aa  hena,  which  iAd  the
effect  of  cretion :  and  this  doctrine  would  apply
even  in  tlie  caae  of  inbntei,  for  no  expreaaian  of
words  was  necesnrir  in  order  to  the  pro  htocde
geetio.  In  the  ease  of  the  bonorum  poiacamo,  tba
&lber  eonld  w>ly  for  it  on  behalf  of  hia  cbiM,  and
the  tiLtor.onbdudf  af  hiapujuUii^  widwManyact


IMPUBE&
tang  done  lij  tha  impube*.  By  the  ImperiB]  Icgi*-
lilko,  «  tatot  vu  KlkKrcd  to  acqajn  tha  henditu
Ibr  hii  popUlni,  ud  s  hiker  for  iit  ma,  iriio  wu
b  hk  power ;  ud  thni  the  dectriae  of  ths  pro
hend*  gt«tio  wu  nndeted  uuieceMu;.

A  papiUin  coold  Dot  put  will  a  poumion
witlHDt  the  HutaiiM  of  ■  talar,  tm  thmigh  poi-
iiwinn  of  ileelf  wu  do  legil  right,  legal  adrantagn
wen  Btlkched  to  it  Ae  to  ths  acquiution  of  poe-
■  ■liai,  juimiilni  in  iUelf  being  a  bare  fact,  and
the  tfadameutal  owdltjotl  of  it  being  the  animofl
poiiideiidi,  eraueqaentl}  the  papillui  could  onlj
tcfiin  poMenion  by  hinucl^  and  when  he  bed
etfkatj  to  nndenUiid  the  Datnie  of  the  act  But
wuh  the  ancbvitu  of  hii  tuloi  be  eontd  acquire
fiWLMioo  CTOi  when  he  wu  on  infiuu,  and  thu
the  icqpiUitiDD  oF  pooMeioD  b  j  a  popilltu  wu  !aci-
litalf^  ttiiitatSt  aaaa.  Then  wu  no  fermal  diffi-
cdI^  io  anch  jbhuhIiiii  any  more  than  in  the  can
of  {IB  ba«dB  gealio,  for  in  neither  iulazice  wu  it
niiiamj  liir  wcnda  to  be  nied.  Subieqaenllj  tha
kgal  dactiiDa  vai  catahliahcd  that  a  tutor  could
Kqaiie  uawiiiiMi  bihu  papiUna.  (Dig.  11.  tit.  Z
a  1. 120.)

With  t)M  aUsiDnwDt  of  pnbeitai,  a  penon  ob-
lUDed  the  fiiU  power  of  hie  property,  and  the
tueh  ceased :  he  could  alu  diipo«e  of  hii  property
by  will ;  and  he  could  nnitiact  raairiage.  Accord-
Of  to  the  legiilation  of  Juitinian  (Init  L  tit  22),
pubcTtae,  in  tbe  caie  of  a  male,  wu  attained  with
the  cnnptetion  id  the  fourteenth,  and,  in  a  female,
with  the  csmpleliou  of  the  twelfth  year.  In  the
wc  of  a  female,  it  leemi  that  there  nerer  bad
been  any  doubt  at  to  the  period  of  the  twelre
Itan,  but  a  diipuca  aroae  among  the  juiiiti  u  to
the  period  of  fourteen  yean.  The  SabiiuBni  moin-
taincd  that  the  age  of  puberlu  wu  to  be  deter-
uiued  hj  pbjiical  capacity  {le^tita  eorjiorit\  to

nneiaij  ;  the  Proculiani  fiied  the  age  of  fourteen
nrnpletB,  aa  that  which  abaolntely  determined  the
utainment  of  puberty.  (Gaiui,  L 1 96  i  Ulp.  Frag.
iL  20.)  It  affiear*,  tbereCare,  that  m^er  the
caHicr  emperon  theiv  wu  aome  doubl  Bi  to  the
time  when  pabcrtaa  waa  attn  intuit  though  there
■a*  no  donbt  that  with  tha  attainment  of  puberty,
whaterer  that  lima  might  be,  full  legal  a4Bcity
wuacqaired.

UatS  a  Raman  youth  aanimed  the  toga  lirilia,
he  wgic  tbe  toga  joaeteila,  tbe  bread  purple  hem
<if  which  (priMfata)  at  once  diatingniahed  him
frna  other  paaima. The'

n  poutiTcly
it  probably  look  place  a*  a  geneial
nde  on  tbe  faat  which  neil  followed  the  eomple-


•Iwayi  the  tune  abierred.  gtill,
vara  the  pfaetexta,  he  waa  Impubea,  and  when  be
awiimd  tlie  toga  virilii,  be  wu  Pubei.  Accord-
ngly,  Veaticepa  (Fntoi,  (.b)  wu  the  ame  u
Piibet,  and  Invcaiii  or  praetcitani  the  una  aa
Inpobn  (OelLT.  19.  roliaqiit)  After  the  aNiniB-
■ioa  of  the  toga  ririlia,  tbe  loa  who  waa  io  tba
peWB  (f  biafiuherhadaeaiad^tocailnutdebtii
•ad  a  pnpjlliu  wu  released  than  the  tDtela.  But
if  Qcdiher  the  pupillua  wished  Io  get  rid  of  bis  tutor,
an  the  tntor  to  ba  rdeaaed  &om  the  reaponiibility
•(  Ua  uiiice  (fv  which  he  leceiTed  no  emolament),
(he  ptnad  of  aMsnung  tbe  t«g*  Titili*  might  be


INAUOURATIO.  631

deferred.  If  the  pnpillni  and  the  tutor  could  not
,  it  might  be  Decenary  that  there  should  be  a
judicial  deciuon.  In  nich  mie  the  Proculiani
maintained  u  a  tbeoRtical  qneitioD,  that  the  age
of  fbuiteen  should  be  taken  a*  abnlntely  deter-
mining the  qneiuon,  fourteen  being  the  age  after
the  attainment  of  which  the  piaetexta  had  been
generally  laid  aside.  Tbe  Sabmisni  maintained
bat  aa  tha  Ume  of  puberty  had  never  be«i  abao-
utaly  Gied,  but  bad  depended  on  fite  choica,  some
ithec  mode  of  deciding  the  qneition  must  be
adopted,  when  free  choice  waa  oat  of  the  qaeatioo,
and  iheiefbn  they  adopted  that  of  the  phytical  de-
Tciopment  {haJntui  eorporu).  But  though  there
are  alluiioni  U  this  matter  (QuincI,  /oK.  Or.  ir.  2),
there  is  ua  eridcnce  (o  show  that  inspectisn  of
tbe  person  wu  ever  actually  lesoited  to  in  order
to  detennine  the  e«s  of  puberty.  It  ^)pean  that
the  completion  of  nurteen  yean  wu  established  ai


91  and  the  twelve  reai


of  tha  rule  u  to
appears  tn  be,  that  in
puberty  was,  as  a  general  rule  in  Italy,  attained
about  these  ages.  In  the  case  of  females,  tbe  time
bad  been  fixed  abaolalely  at  twelve  by  immcmo-
lial  custom,  and  had  no  rafareoce  to  any  nactiee
lirailar  to  that  among  males  of  adopting  the  toga
ilis,  for  women  wore  the  toga  ptaetoMa  till  tbtr
re  married. And  further,  though  the  papiQans


of  lutela.

A  m^e  had  a  capad^  to  make  a  will  npon
completing  his  fourteenth,  and  a  female  upon  com-
pletmg  her  twelfth  year  ((Jaiu,  ii.  1  ]  3  j  Paiilns,
&  R.  iii.  tit,  4.  a.}  ;  and  the  same  ages,  u  already
obaelred,  determined  the  capacity,  in  the  two  sexes,
for  contracting  a  legal  mairiage.  The  dispute  be-
tween the  two  schoolt  u  to  the  time  when  ths
male  attained  the  age  of  puberty,  appean  to  ha<e  had
reference  to  the  lerminalion  of  the  tutela,  and  hia
general  capacity  to  do  legal  acta  ;  fa  the  test  of
the  personal  eiaminotion  could  hardly,  &om  tha
Datun  of  tbe  cose,  apply  to  the  capacity  to  maka
a  will  or  contract  a  marriage,  u  Satigny  shows.

Spadones  (males  who  could  nerer  attain  physi-
cal pabertu)  might  make  a  testament  aft«  attain-
ing the  age  of  eighteeiL  (SaTigny,^|at>niiais(^
AiMt.  An^Tol  iiLiLGS,&c)  10.  L.}

INAUOURA'TIO  was  in  general  the  ceremony
by  which  the  aogun  obtained,  or  endeannred  to
obtain,  the  sanction  of  the  gods  to  something
which  had  been  decreed  by  man  t  in  particular,
however,  it  wu  the  ceremony  by  which  things
or  pereoDt  were  consecrated  to  tha  gods,  whenca
the  terms  dedimtio  and  amteralio  were  mmetimes
used  u  iynonyraoas  with  inaugnntioL  (Liv.  L  44,
S5  ;  Flor-i.  7,  8  ;  Plin.  Ep.  'a.  39, 1 58,  69,  76  i
Cic  n  CaHL  iv.  1.)  The  ceremony  of  inai^ratio
wuu  follows:  — Afkeiit  had  been  deoeed  that
something  should  be  set  apart  for  the  service  of  tha
gods,  or  Uiat  a  certain  person  should  be  appointed
priest,  a  pnjer  waa  addresaed  to  tha  gods  by  tha
aogun  or  oUer  prieata,  aolidliDg  them  to  dedara
by  signs  whetha  tbe  deerea  of  men  wis  igiaesbU
to  the  will  of  the  goda.  (Uv.  i.  IS.)  Iflbei^s
ahaared  by  the  inaugmating  priest  wen  thought
&vaunble,  the  dema  of  men  had  the  nnction  of
ths  goda,  and  the  inanniralio  wu  completed.  Tha
inauguratio  waa,  in  ea^y  timea,  atwayi  performed
b;  Ue  augun ;  but  luhtaqneotiy  wi  find  that  tha


6i2


INAURia

Mpecially  Ihat  of  the  rer  i


.|f*rfo


rificnliu
. (GdL


inaugitreti  . ,

nnd  of  the  tliuninei,  wu  tom^imi
the  college  of  pontifFii  in  the  comiti
XT.  27.)  But  all  other  priaU,  si  weii  u  new
memben  of  the  college  of  Buguii,  continued  to  be
inaugurated  by  the  augnn,  or  Bometimei  by  the
augun  in  conjunction  vilh  tamt  of  the  ponti%
(l.iv,  xiTii.  8,  il,  42) ;  the  chief  ponUff  hid  the
right  to  enforce  the  incvgniatio,  if  it  wu  n^futed
by  the  augun,  and  if  he  coniideied  that  there  wai
no  lufficient  gronnd  tbr  refuiing  it  Somelimci
one  an^iur  alone  performed  the  rile  of  iniuguratio,
Bi  in  the  cs«e  of  Niuna  Pompilini  (Lit.I  IB  ;
compare  Cic.  Bnt.  1  ;  Macrob,  Sai.  iL  9)  ;  and  il
wauld  aeem  Ihat  in  •ome  ouei  a  nevly  appointed
prieit  might  himKlfnat  onlyGi  upon  the  day,  but
also  upon  the  particular  augur  by  whom  he  deiired
to  be  inaugniated.  (Cic  Lc  ;  sai  Philip.  iL  43.)
During  the  kingly  period  of  Rome  the  inaugura-
tion of  peraoni  wni  not  confined  to  actual  pHeiti ;
but  the  kuigi,  after  their  election  by  the  popului,
were  inaugnmled  by  the  augurs,  and  thai  became
the  high-piieili  of  their  people.  After  the  civil
and  military  povcr  of  the  kingi  had  been  conferred
upon  the  coiunli,  and  lbs  office  of  high-prieat  wai


a  dlitini
wai,  01  Btsted  ab


iTe,  inaugurated  by  the  pontifli
m  tne  tnmiua  caiata,  in  which  the  chief  pontiff
prcBided.  But  the  high  republican  magiitralci,
neTerthelcai,  likewise  continued  to  be  inaugurated
(Dionyi.  ii.  6),  and  for  Ihii  pnrpow  they  were
iummoucd  br  the  augura  {coviieliOf  dnnmeiatio)
to  appear  on  the  cqiilol  on  the  third  da;  after  their
election.  (Serr.  ad  Pirg.  Aat.  iii.  117.)  Thii
inaoguntio  conferred  no  prieatly  dignity  npon  the
magittralea,  but  wai  merely  a  melhcid  of  obtaining
the  aanction  of  the  goda  to  their  election,  and  gave
them  the  right  to  take  the  aoapicia  ;  and  on  im-
portant emer^nciea  it  Tni  ^cir  duly  to  moke  use  of
ihii  privilrge.  At  tho  time  of  Cicero,  however,  ihii
duty  wai  tcarcely  ever  obtened.  (Cic  de  Di™,
iL  36.)  Ai  nothing  of  any  importance  woa  ever
introduced  or  initltnted  at  Rome  without  coniull-
ing  the  plcature  of  the  godi  by  augury,  we  read  of
the  inauguratio  of  the  tribei,  &c.  [L,  S,]

INAORIS,  an  ear-ring  ;  called  in  Greek  ir-i-
Tur,  becnuie  it  wai  worn  in  the  ear  (oli),  and
iUiitar.  becsaie  it  vaa  inaetted  into  the  lobe  of
the  ear  (\aeit),  which  wai  bored  for  the  pni
(Horn.  n.  xW.  162,  /fyrna.  iL  »  fan.  9  ;
H.  M  xiL  1.)

£ar-ringi  were  worn  by  both  aeica  in  oriental
countriei  (Plin.  H.  ff.  xL  SO)  ;  eapecially  by  the
Lydiani  (Xen.  Anat.  JiL  1.  g  31),  the  Periiau
(Diod.  Sic  T.  IG),  the  Babyloniani  (Jui.  L  104).
and  alao  by  the  Libyani  (Macrob.  Sat,  liL  3),  and
theCarlhaginiana(Plant./'oeii.T.2.21).  Amonj
the  Oreeka  and  Romani  they  were  worn  only  by

Thii  ornament  conaiited  of  the  ring  (Kpdcoi.
I>iod.  Sic.  Lc)  and  of  the  dropa  (ila/a^ia,  Featna,
Lv. ;  PiauLJWex.  iiL  S.  IB.)  The  ring  waa
lally  of  gold,  although  the  common  people  alio
wore  eor-ringi  of  hnmni.  See  Nol  1,4,  from  the
EgyptiancoUectionin  theBridihMueum.  lRit(*d
of  a  ring  a  hook  waa  often  uaed,  ai  ihown  ii
6,  3.  The  women  of  Italy  atill  continn
lame  practice,  pawing  the  hook  throngh  thi
of  the  en  without  any  other  bitaning.  The
were  umetimei  of  gold,  Tciy  finely  wrough
«oi.  2, 7,  e),  and  KaneUmci  ofpeails  (Plio.  U-'a:, )


Sen.  fb  fiM.  viL  9  ;  OiA  Mai.  x.  265  ;  Clnud.ifo
VI.  Om*.  floHor.  928  ;  Sen.  ftlppoL  iu  1.  S3),  and
precioui  aionea  (Noa.  3,  ft,  6).  The  pcarii  wen
valued  for  being  exactly  ipherical  (Her.  £>nJ.  Tiii
13),  ai  well  aa  for  their  great  iiie  and  delicAle
whiteneaa  ;  but  thoM  of  an  elongated  form,  called
efayoii,  were  alio  mucb  eiteemcd,  being  addled  to
terminate  the  drop,  and  being  aometimea  placed
two  01  ihreetoge^er  forthiipurpcue.  (Plin. //.  A',
k.  S6  ;  Jut.  n.  361.)  In  the  Iliad  (liv.  1S2, 183),
Hera,  adorning  heraelf  in  the  mod  ciptjirating
manner,  pull  on  ear-ringa  mode  with  three  dropi
reaemblingmulberrio.  (bceEuttath.ailbic.)  Pliny
obierrea  (xL  £0)  that  greater  eipenaa  waa  laciahed
on  no  favt  of  Ihe  drcaa  than  on  the  ear-ring^
According  to  Seneca  (L  eS}  the  eai-ring.  No.  3,  in
the  preceding  woodcut,  in  which  a  couple  of  peoria
an  abuDg  both  aboTe  and  below  the  pncimu  itme,
waa  worth  a  patrimony.  (See  aUo  IM  Fila  Brata,
17.)  All  the  ear-ringa  above  engraved  belong  to
the  Hamilton  collection  in  Ihe  Britiih  Mnieom.

In  opulent  fnmilia  the  care  of  the  car-ringi  waa
the  builnoa  of  a  female  ilave,  who  wai  caiird
.^*n:a^On«tfru(Otuler, /ucTip.).  The  Venoi
de'  Medici,  and  other  female  alatuea,  have  the  eiua

f'erced,  and  probehly  once  had  tar-risgi  in  them.
he  itatuo  of  Achillea  at  Sigeum,  nprtaenling  him
in  female  attire,  likewiie  had  thiaomamenL  (Serr.
ia  Virs.  Am.  L  30  ;  TertulL  da  PaiL  4.)  (].  Y.]
INCE'NDIUH,  the  crime  of  aeltiog  any  obiect
on  fire,  by  which  the  property  of  a  man  ia  cnoao-
gered.  It  wu  thoa  a  more  general  term  than
the  modem  Artau,  which  ia  limited  to  the  act  of
Triifully  and  maliciouily  burning  the  property  of
another.  The  crime  of  incendium  wa>  the  inbject
of  one  of  the  lawi  of  tho  Twelve  Tablo,  which  in-
flicted a  icvere  puniihmcnl  on  the  peraon  who  art
fire  to  property  niolicioualy  (inau,  prmdatt) ;  bnt  if
it  waa  done  by  accident  (eoH,  id  tii,itylyBilia),  the
law  obliged  the  o^nder  to  repair  the  injury  be
had  committed.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  9.  a  9.)  The  pon-
iibment,  howerer,  of  burning  aliTe,  whicb  ia  men-
tioned in  the  iittasge  of  the  Digetl  referred  to,  ia
auppoied  by  modem  ronimeotatora  not  to  have  b«n
contained  in  the  Twelve  Tablea,  but  to  hare  bem
tIaniliaTed  &om  the  imperial  period  to  earlier  lime*.
In  the  accotd  Pmio  war  a  gnat  fire  htnfce  ost  at


IHCESTUM.

!,  ainch  ni  eridentlj  a


sned  i


iv«red  Bud  pan'
in  tMt),  but  Livf  unfortomlelf
dm  int  lULa  (nri.  27)  in  wbat  nuuuiei.  Tba
crime  of  imndhun  wu  (he  nibject  of  TBriDiu
timmata  in  the  lut  century  of  the  republic
EoUi,  'm)M Ltx Cbn^ia  dt  Siairm,  pimiihsdina-
Kt™  (iMi  wofa)  mtendinm,  but  only  in  the  city,
vvithuiatbouuid  pace*  of  it,  with  Bquaa  et  ignii
biodietif^  lince  it  vai  fRqaenllj'  miployed  u  a
Bern  lir  the  peqwtnliDn  of  murder,  which  wu
•ftailr  the  mbjeet  of  thii  lav.  (Dig.  43.  tit  B.
1. 1.)  CiL  Pampeicu,  in  B.  c  £2,  msdo  incendiom
1  crime  of  Fu  b;  hii  £«  Pompaa  iUn,m  cfoia-
qatUB  of  the  buning  of  tlia  Curis  and  ths  Porcia
Bulica  mthe  burial  of  Clodiui ;  and  Jnliui  Cam
■Ib  iadiided  it  in  hie  £«  Jidia  de  Vi,  which  eo-
•rtnl  that  anj  act  of  inccndioni  comntilted  by
lup  nomben  of  men,  eien  if  the  object  of  thalr
•NCmbSag  together  waa  noC  incandinin,  ihould  be
Imted  u  Via,  and  puniibed  irith  aquae  et  ignia
inerdictio.  <Cic  PUL  L  9 ;  comp.  Parad.  4.)  The
anncenl  Lei  Julia  de  Vi  aeemi  to  hara  been
lea  vtiwtf  but  tt  ie  uicertun  what  pmuihmcnt  it
"daistd.  (FuUL  T.  Se.  g  8.)  Beiidei  tha  two
■rinuDal  pnaeentiau  given  by  the  Lex  Conielia
fi  lex  Jnlia,  a  poxm  could  ilao  bring
rmni  anapeniBtion  fiir  the  injury  doi


niitted


e  of  a  penoD  who had  c
injnry i


ilwn  vai  ■  loaetorian
Kfopellcd  him  to  reatore  fourfold  the
*•■  lit  S,  B.  1, 5.)  In  the  ifupetial  ]«ricid  Tuions
dittinctioua  were  made  in  the  crime.  Firat,  a  dii.
ImaioD  wai  made  according  to  the  greater  or  naaller
daagaoflhe  incendiom  to  the  couligiiDU*  objecta
IliDi  incoidinni  in  tha  d^  wai  puniihed  with  lea
*Taitf  than  incendium  in  tha  country.  Secondly,
>  diriactkn  wna  made  according  aa  the  ai  '
IvBi  perfamad  dolo,  aJpa,  or  eetu.  If  the
dioD  wai  not  malidooa,  but  aCill  might  have  been
••nided  by  ordinary  eare,  a  peraon  had  to  make
coapaaatioa  ;  bat  if  the  incendiom  waa  purely  ao-
odoital,  no  eompenaatioa  waa  neceaaary.  The
"■■ifD  mt  ttiraordiaana  and  belonged  to  the
pnefcetu  nriii,  who  could  mflict  vhalerar  pun-
»knan  be  pleaaed,  for  it  appean  that  there  wat
u^aiahmait  fixed  by  law.  Wa  aecordinglyfind
"■nilioB  of  ezecntioD  by  the  iword,  burning  alife,
cMdimntinn  to  the  minea  and  to  public  wn^
''epcttaiio,  relegalio,  fioggina,  Ac,  aa  pnniahmenta
ialicttd  en  aceoont  of  incendiom.  (Dig,  48.  tit  1 9,
■■M.  1 12;  9,  tit  2.  a  SO.  g  3  ;  47.  til.  B.  g  1  ;
PaalLT.  SO.  §  I.  V.  3.  g  6  ;  ColL  Leg.  tit  12.)
^  frecedinft  account  ia  U^cn  froni  Rein,  Dot
r  Samr,  pp.  7Gt — 774,  where  all

IXCBNSUS.  ^irtrT;Cvinua,p.26S,t.J
1KCE3TUM  or  INCB3TUS.  lucattnm  ii
■m  aKmn,  and  aunifiea  geneially  all  immoral
ud  indi^ooa  acta.' In  aoanower  aenie  it  denotea
■he  aachaatity  of  a  Veatal,  and  aexoal  interconiae
*l  ptnm  vithta  certain  dcgreea  of  consanguinity.
If  a  Baa  married  a  woman  whom  it  waa  for-
hidden  tsa  him  to  marry  by  poei^Te  monlity
(montaa),  he  waa  nid  to  coannit  inceattim.  (Dig^
31  tit  3.  ai  3S.)  Socb  a  narnag*  waa  in  bet  do
marriage  tcr  the  n lanij connnbium  between


INCTTEOA.  833

sexunl  connection  of  a  mule  and  a  female,
whelhec  under  the  Ibrm  of  marriage  arnot,ifauch
11  cannot  marry  by  reaaon  of  coimmgninity.
;re  saa  no  connubiam between  peraona  re-
lated  by  blood  in  ths  direct  line,  aa  parenta  and
children. If  tnch  peraona  contiscted  a  matrii^  it
Ne&riae  et  Incaitaa  nuptiae. There  waa  no
ubium  between  pencma  who  atood  in  the  Tela*
of  parent  and  child  by  adoption, not  even
after  the  adapted  child  waa  emancipated. There
were  alan  reatrictiona  as  to  connnbium  between
eollatenl  kinffolk  (ar  tnatuMnosradu  cusnationu):
there  waa  no  connnbium  between  brothert  and
uataca,  either  of  the  whole  «  of  the  half  blood  ;
ncT  between  children  of  the  blood  and  children  by
adoption,  10  long  a*  the  adoption  continued,  or  ao
i<  the  children  of  the  blood  remained  in  the
'  of  their  ftther. There  waa  connubium  be-
.  an  uncle  and  hia  brother^  daaghter,  after
the  emperor  Claudina  had  tet  the  example  by
tarrying  Agrippina  ',  but  ihere  waa  none  belweui
n  urda  and  a  aiiter'a  daughter. There  waa  no
onnnbium  between  a  man  and  hia  amita  or  mater-
sm.  [CooNiTi]  J nor  between  a  man and hii
DCTUfl,  nuTua,  ptivigna  or  uoYerca. Id  all  auch
■aea  when  there  vai  no  connubium,  the  cbildrea
had  a  mother,  but  so  legal  father.
Incett  between  person*  in  the  direct  line  waa
iniibable  in  both  paitiea  ; in  other  casea  only  in
e  man. The  puniahment  waa  Belegatio,  ai  in
e  caaa  of  adultery. Concubinage  between  near
nafolk  waa  put  on  the  lame  footing  aa  marriage.
(Dig,  23.  tit  2.  1. 66.) In  the  caie  of  adulterium
and  atDprum  between  penona  who  had  no  connu-
bium, there  was  a  doablo  oITcnce:  ihe  man  waa
puniihed  with  depoitalio,  and  the  woman  was  anb-
ject  to  the  penaltiea  of  tha  Lei  Julia. (Dig.  48.
tit  IS.  >.  S.) Among  alaTca  there  waa  no  incei'
turn,  but  afier  they  became  tree  their  mairiagoa
were  regulated  according  to  the  analogy  of  the


ing  &ee  peraona.

ledge  of  a  vealal  nrgin,  and  both

iniahed  with  death.


anilho


to  have  kno'
partiea  were  pni
That  which  i
turn  when  tbt


itupmm,  aggraTated  b;

of  mairiage  between
loni  that  coaatituted  the  incestnm  ;  fur  the  r
were  inceatae,  and  therefore  no  marriage,  a
inceatuona  act  waa  the  aexnal  connection  of  the
partiet.  Sometimea  inccatum  ia  laid  to  be  contra
&a,  that  ia,  an  act  in  violation  of  religion.  The
rulei  aa  to  InccMnm  were  founded  partly  on  tha
Jua  Oentium  and  portiy  on  the  Jna  ClTile  ;  but
tha  diatiuctiou  did  not  eliit  in  the  early  periodi,
and  the  rulei  aa  to  Inceatmn  were  only  auch  aa
were  recognized  by  the  Ju>  Oentium.  Though
the  mlea  aa  to  Inceslum  were  afterwardi  more
eiactly  determmed  by  the  Jna  Civile,  there  doea
not  aeem  to  have  been  any  complete  lex  on  the
matter.  The  Lex  Julia  de  adulteriia  only  treated
Inceatmn  incidentally,  or  ao  far  aa  it  waa  also
adultery:  but  the  juriata  connected  all  the  im-
perial l^ialation  on  thia  nutter  and  their  own  inte>
pretation  with  the  Lei  Julia.  (Reia,  Dai  Crinii-
aalnM  dar  fOatr,  p.  8g9,  &c}  [0.  L.]

INCITE'OA,  a  coiraption  of  the  Greek
irT°*4*4  or  iyyMtiKri,  a  teim  need  to  denote  a
piece  of  domcatic  fiiroitnre,  rorioualj  formed  ac-


■  O"


B34  INCUNABULA.

(NH^ing  to  the  pnrticular  oeauion  intoided  ;  miide
of  ailTei,  bnmze,  Clair,  Mone,  or  wood,  BccordiDg  to
ths  ciminuamcci  of  the  poueaui ;  ■ometima
adoraid  with  figurei ;  uid  emplt^ed  to  hold
ampborac,  bonlei,  skbutis,  «  aaj  other  tukIi
irhich  were  romid  or  poioted  ol  lae  bottom,  and
tlierefore  reqoired  a  lepanite  cODtrivancc  to  keep
themerect.  {Fntiu,i.v.LKilrifa;  Bekiei,  Ateal.
315  ;  Wilkinion,  JVim.  ani  Outrnot,  toL  ii  pp.  1  fiS,
160,216,217.)  SorneorthoieuiedBtAIeiBiidila.
vera  tnangular.  (Athen.  t.  45.)  We  often  iM
Ibem  rBpteientad  in  uicienl  EgrptiBU  paintingi.
The  anaeied  troodeut  ihovi  three  S,yyi>$iiKai,
vhich  are  preMrrcd  in  the  Bri^h  Miueum.  Thaw
on  the  right  and  left  hand  are  of  wood,  the  one
having  foor  feet,  the  other  ux  ;  tbe^  were  found
m  Egyptian  tomU.  The  third  ■•  a  broad  earth-
enwBn  ring,  which  ii  used  to  lupport  a  Grecian
amphon.  [J.  Y.j


INCDNA'BULAorCUNA'flULA  (i
H}v),  BWEiddling-clothca

The  fint  thing  done  oflcr  Ilie  birth  of  a  child

dling  clotbea,  and  the  rank  of  the  child  wai  indi-
cated by  the  (plendour  and  coillineu  of  thit,  il>
lint  attire.  Sometimt*  a  £no  white  ahawl,  tied
with  a  gotd  band,  wsi  uied  for  the  purpose  (Horn.
Hymn.  inApolL  121, 122)  ;  at  other  time*  a  small
purple  lairf;  &itaned  with  a  brooch.  (Find.  PfA,
IT.  Hi  ;  x^'V"*""',  Longus,  L  1.  p.  14,  2li,  ed.
Baden.)  Xbepoorusedhroadfillets  ofcomnumcloth
(pwin,  Luke,  iL  7, 12  i  Eiek.  ici.  i.  Vtlg.  ;  com-
pare Iloni.  Ilgnm.  M  Mtrc  151,  306;  Apollod.
Bitl.  iii.  iO.S'ii  Aelian,  r.  H.  iL  7  ;  Enrip.  fon,
33  ;  Uion  ChryiotL  n.  p.  203,  ed.  Reiake  ;  Plant


INFAMIA.

Aa/J^l.  T.  1.  63,  Thic  t.  13).  The  precedins
woodcut,  taken  from  a  beautiful  bai-relief  at  Raiu,
which  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the  birth  of  Telephui.
■hcwi  the  i4>peannce  of  a  child  so  clothed,  ud
renders  in  some  degree  more  intelligible  the  fible
of  the  deception  practised  by  Rhea  upon  Saturn  "Si
saving  the  life  of  Jupiter  by  prtssenting  a  bUiip,
enveloped  m  iwaddling-dalbec,  to  be  devonred  by
Saturn  instead  of  his  new-bom  child.  (Hes.  Tlni.
48S.)  It  wu  one  of  the  pecniiari ties  of  the  Lice-
daeraaman  education  to  dispense  with  the  ma  of
incunabnlB,  and  to  allow  children  to  enjoy  iht  [tee
use  of  their  limbs.  (Pint  Lymty.  p.  90.  ed.
Steph.)  [J.  Y.]

INCUS  (Snimr),  an  anvil  Tha  leprewnu-
tions  of  Vultan  and  the  Cyclopes  on  variom  worhi
of  art,  show  that  the  ancient  anvil  was  ftinned  like
that  of  modem  times.  When  the  smith  wanted  1o
make  use  of  it,  he  placed  it  on  a  taige  block  af
wood  (iiqiiaTor,  Horn.  IL  ivtil  41D,  476,  Od.
Till  374  :  poiiHi  iaevdibiu,  Virg.  Aca.  viL  629  ;
viii.  4G1) ;  and  when  he  made  the  link  of  a  chain,
or  any  olhei  object  which  was  round  or  hollow,  be
beat  it  upon  a  pomt  projecting  imm  one  side  of
the  anvil.  The  annexed  woodcut,  reprcaenling
Vulcan  folding  a  thunderbolt  for  Jupiter,  illiu-
Irates  these  eircunutmices  ;  it  is  taken  from  a  gem
in  the  Royal  Cabinet  at  Paris. It  appean  thai  in


the  "  brazen  age,"  not  only  the  thingi  made  npoo
the  anvil,  bnt  the  anvil  iiseli;  vrith  the  hammer
and  the  tonin,  were  made  of  bronie.  (Horn.  OJ.
iiL  433,  -(34;  ApoUon.  Bhod.  iv.  761,  76-i)
[Mallbuh.]  rj.  y.l

INDEX, [LiaaB-l
INDIOITAMENTA. [Poktifii.]
INDU'SIUM. [T[;NiCi.l
I'NDUTUS. [AMKTrua  i  Tdhica.1
INFA'MIA. TheptDviiioiuuin  inArni.  .•
they  appear  in  the  legiuition


3.  De  his  qui  notuniui
lamia,  and  in  Cod.  2,  lit  12.  £i  qnibus  causi
bmia  irmgatur.  The  Digest  contains  <s.  I
caies  of  Infamia  as  enmnerated  m  the  Fn


any  Judicium  Fuhlicim,  of  ignoo


In-


0  eipultion  from  the  army  (Tab.  HsbcL  t.

., of  a  woman  being  detected in  adnltcir,

thoBgh  she  might  not  have  been  ondemiied  in'a

Juduiuoi  FBblicuII^  Ac ;  of  ondawMM  tar  Pur;


IN7AHTA.

tan,  RapM,  iBJuiu,  ud  Udm  Hiliu,  ptorided
the  oflcDda  m*  craidBinwd  in  hii  om  name,  or
jmridod  in  lui  own  nuu  hs  |iaid  ft  nun  Df  mooflj

tin  Pn  Socio,  Tulelae,  Mandatnm,  Depotitnm  n
Fidads  (cnapan  lbs  Edict  with  C)c.  pro  Rme,
Om.  6,  jm  Rote.  Awur.  S8,  38,  pro  OuoiM,
S,  ny.  clO;  TbIl  HotcI.  L  111),  provided
th«  <iaandeT  ma  coDdeiDnod  in  bit  own  name.
In&WH  odIj  felLoired  for  a condomiiatio  in  ■


n  mnny  cBiet,


Inna  jndiein,  imleiB  the  psnon  amdemusd  tiu
pilt;  ofsomeipecialduhoDMt;.  Infiuma  wu  alio
>  BneqotiKS  of  intdveocj',  vhen  >  man'i  bum
■tn  PoHem,  ProMripM,  VoidiU  (Cic  pn
Qiid.  15  :  Tak  UtncL  1.  US— 117  ;  Oaiai,  iL
IM)  ;  of  a  widow  manring  within  the  time  ap-
rooUd  tar  DunmiDg,  bnt  the  Infcmb  attached  to
tbc  Mcond  boiband,  H  he  ma  a  pUerfuniliaa,  and
if  ha  wa*  not,  tbsi  to  hJa  {uher,  and  to  the  bther
tf  tbe  widow  if  the  waa  in  hi>  power  ;  the  Edict
dm  not  apeah  of  the  Inbinia  of  tht  widow,  bat  it
' idcd  to  ber. Inhnia  waa


the  lelatiDn  rf  a  doable  marriage  or  donblp  aponaa-
Ib  ;  the  Jnfamia  attached  to  ^e  man  if  he  waa  a
DBtafaiailiaa,  and  if  be  wai  mit,  to  hia  &lber  ;  the
Edict  here  alio  apcaki  onlj  of  tbe  man,  hut  the
Infjaiia  wa*  aubacqacntlf  extended  to  tho  woman.
li&aiia  waa  a  cDnaeqneiioe  of  proatitntioD  in  the
*  limilor  coiduet  in  a  man  (^in


LJTing bj  aiding  ii


««().  of  L


□  proatitudon  (Tab.  UcracI  L
J  OD  a  public  Btage  Ba  an  actor,
°f  oi^iging  for  mooej  to  appesi  in  ths  fighti  of  the
villi  bnata,  even  if  a  man  did  not  appear,  and  of
tT**'Tig  ther^  though  not  6m  amatj.

It  ntdta  {rtaa  thii  enomeralion  ^lat  Inlamia
via  snlj-  the  cooiMpicnce  of  an  act  committed  b;
the  peion  who  be<sme  In&mii,  and  waa  not  the
nuacquBMB  of  an;  pimiibnieDt  ibr  aoch  acb In


It  baa  aianetinKa  been  iBppoaed  Ibat  the  Piae-
1m  (itahliahed  the  Inbmia  aa  a  rule  of  law,  which
bewe*a  waa  Dot  the  eaae.  The  Piaetoc  made  cer-
tun  ryei  oa  to  Pcatnhtio  (Dig.  3.  tit.  1.  a.l),fbt


■faiBia  DMantaT,"  and  vera  Dot  alrcadT  cm
■aled  in  the Mcmid  daaa. Aecordinglv  it
•eoaaaiT  (or  the  Pmttor  to  enomerale  all  thi
f^m  who  were  not  included  in  the  accond  elaaa,
■ad  iha  he  did  in  the  Edict  aa  quoted.  (Dig.  3.
tit  2,  a.  1.)  Conatateotly  with  thia,  Inlamia  waa  a'
ndjr  an  eatablUied  l«a]  condition  i  and  the  Pn
Ik  in  hia  edicia  on  Poctuhrtian  did  Dot  make
ciaaa  gf  pavna  called  Iii&niea,  bnt  he  ennmeratcd
■a  pmsnt  in  be  eiduded  frinn  certBio  righta  of
Ptnlatitti,  thcie who wen  Inbmea. Conae-
itaeatljibe  legal  notion  of  Infamia  waa  fixed  befbie


il  bj  written  law,  but  to  bne


INFAMTA.

been  an  eld  Roman  inititation.
longh  not  in  all,  it  waa  a  conaet
ial  deciaion.  The  power  of  the  Cenaon  waa  in  ita
effect!  analogona  to  the  In&mia,  but  different  frran
't  in  manf  respecta.  The  CenaorB  could  at  their
ileaiure  nnnove  a  man  froni  the  Senate  or  the
iqnitea,  lenove  hnn  into  a  lower  tribe,  or  remove
lim  ont  of  all  the  tribea,  and  ao  deprive  him  of  hit
mffiaginm,  bj  reducing  him  to  the  condition  of  an
irariua.  (Cic.  pro  Of*™*.  43,  4fi.)  They  eonld
ao  affix  a  ma^  of  ignominj  or  coiaare  oppoute

'  mbKiiptio  (Cic  prri  OuaiL  42,  43,  44,  46,
7)  ;  and  in  doing  thii,  tbey  war*  not  bonnd  to
malie  anj  ivecial  inqniiy,  bnt  migbt  follow  general
qpinioD.  Thia  arUlm;  mode  at  prgceeding  waa
howerer  partly  lemeditd  by  the  fict  that  inch  s

ian  notamiriitlw  oppoaed  bjra  coQiagnt,  or

ed  by  the  Allowing  oanitn,  or  by  a  judicial
deciaion,  or  by  a  lei.  Accordingly  the  cemocian
waa  not  perpetual,  and  therein  it  difered
caaentially  &om  Inbmia,  which  waa  perpetual
""  B  consequencet  of  Infamia  were  the  Iobi  of
n  polilical  righta,  bnt  not  all  It  waa  not  a
tspitit  deminntio,  bnt  it  retembled  it.  The  In-
femit  became  an  Aerariua,  and  loat  the  anflraginra
and  honona  ;  that  ii,  he  loat  the  c^iacity  for  cer-
n  Bo.^led  public  righta,  bnt  not  the  cuucity  for
prirata  righta.  Under  the  empire,  the  Idunia  loat
itt  effect  aa  to  public  rights  ba  nich  tigfati  beoune
nnimpotlant.

It  might  be  doubted  whatber  tbe  loat  of  the
tnf&igiDra  n-Bt  a  conaequencs  of  Infiunta,  but  the
iffirmatire aide  ia  maintained  by  Savigny  with

^Inaive.  It  aj^>ean  fromLivy  (vii,2j  and  Volerina
hfaximua  (iL  4.  %  i\  that  the  Actorea  Atellanamm
were  not  either  remoTod  from  their  tribe  (nea  irtba
RonwAtr),  nor  incapable  of  aerring  in  the  army :  in
other  wotda  anch  actora  did  not  become  Infamea,
like  other  actora.  The  phnue  **  tribn  moTuti "  ia
ibiguona,  and  may  mean  either  to  remove  from
one  tribe  to  a  lovrer,  or  to  move  from  all  the  tribea,
ad  to  moke  a  man  an  aenrius.  Now  the  mere  re-
loving  from  one  tribe  to  another  muat  have  been
an  act  of  the  Cenaon  only,  for  it  woi  neeeoBaiy  to
fii  the  tribe  into  which  ^o  removal  waa  made:
but  thia  could  not  be  the  caae  in  a  matter  of  lii-
bmia,  which  waa  the  effect  of  a  general  mle,  and
a  general  rule  could  only  operate  in  a  general  way  j
that  it,  **  tribn  moveri,**  aa  a  conaeqnerue  of  In-
bmio,  mnat  have  been  a  removal  from  oil  the
tribea,  and  a  d^iadation  to  the  fltale  of  an  Aera-
riua. (Compare  Liv.  xlv.  1£.)

The  Lai  Jnlia  Muniripalia  doea  not  coBlain  the
word  Inbmia,  bnt  it  menliona  nearly  the  aanw
caacB  aa  thote  which  the  Edict  nuntiooa  aa  tma
of  Injunia.  The  Lei  sicludea  peraona  who  &U
within  ita  tema,  fram  being  Senatorea,  Decnrienea,
Cwttcripti  of  their  cttv,  from  giving  their  tote  in
the  Bcnala  of  their  city,  and  Emm  magitttaciet
which  gave  a  man  Bcceai  to  the  aeoate  :  bat  it  aaya
nothing  uf  the  right  of  voting  being  taken  away.
Savigny  obtervet  that  there  would  be  no  ineon-
aiitency  in  ia[^ioting  that  the  lei  reluBed  only
the  Honorea  in  the  municipal  towna,  while  it  ttill
allowed  Inbmet  to  retain  the  auffragium  in  aoch
towna,  though  the  pnctice  waa  diffiaiisnt  in  Rone,
if  wa  coonder  that  the  anfingium  m  the  Roman
Coodtia  waa  a  high  {sivilege,  while  in  the  mnniei*
pal  towna  it  waa  om^aiatirely  oninipaltanL  _


638  INFANS,  INFANTIA.

CKcn  (pro  Jtmc  Com.  6)  ipmlu  of  (he  jndicia '

Fidueiu,  Tutelu,  aod  SuseUtii  u  "  luidmu
eTutimHtionu  et  peoe  capiiiL"  Td  uiother  oration
(jm  Qniri.  8,9,13,  15,22)  he  ipeaki  at  the  ex
edicto  p«aeti]D  boneimn  oi  ft  capitii  cum,  tmA  ta
bcl  tM  identical  vilh  lafuiia  (c  1 5,  enjui  bom
ei  edieto  pDwideDtnr,  hujiu  omnii  liuiia  et  eiii-
tiiuatiD  cnin  bonii  limol  poeiidetui).  Tliii  cipilii
t,  hevflTer,  u  Blicady  obwrred,  affected


onlT  tl


!  pablic  light!  of  a


■  the


imperial  petiod  Bad  the
eipicnion  capilalii  causa,  app);  U  thn  cwnplele
lou  of  eiliieiithip.  Thi>  ehuige  manifeidj  aruae
ftnm  the  lircunutanee  of  the  public  righti  of  the
citiaeni  under  the  empirs  haTing  become  alto-
gether animportaDt,  and  thai  the  phraie  c^idi
aominntio,  under  the  empre,  appliH  wlelj  to  tlia
iiidiT!dnal>  capacity  for  j^Tats  nghu.

In  hi)  private  risliti  the  Inbmii  waa  under
■«ne  incapacitiei.  Ho  could  onlj  poitnlato  beG>re
the  Praetor  on  hia  ova  behali^  and  on  behalf  of
certain  pcrtoni  who  were  Tciy  nearly  related  to
him,  but  not  generally  on  behalf  of  all  penona.
Consequently  he  coold  not  generally  be  a  Cognilor
or  a  ProcoratoT,  Nor  could  a  cauae  of  action  b
aaugned  to  him,  for  by  the  old  law  he  mott  sue  a
the  cognitor  or  procurator  of  the  aisignor  (Ooiai
iL  39)  ;  bat  tbii  ioc^iacity  became  nnunportanl
wben  die  Ceuio  waa  etiected  by  the  ntilei  actionet
withsut  the  inteiveiition  of  a  Cognilor  or  Procu-
lator.  Tbe  Intamit  could  not  suttain  a  Popularit
Actio,  for  in  auch  caw  be  muit  be  csniidcied  aa  a
procurator  of  the  ataCe-  The  In&mii  ivaa  also
liutited  aato  hij  capacity  for  marriage,  an  incapa-
dty  which  originated  in  the  Lei  Julio.  {Vlp-Fri^.
xiil)  Tbii  lei  prohibited  Knaton,  and  the  chil-
dren of  ienaloia,  &iun  contracting  marriaffe  with
libertini  and  Libertinae,  and  alio  with  other  dis-
nputable  penon*  ennmeraled  in  thelcZT  it  aisc
fiit^iade  all  freemen  from  marrying  with  certain
dittcpntable  wcmen.  The  Jniitti  made  the  fol-
kwing  change: — they  made  the  two  ctauei  ol
^arcputable  peivang  the  lame,  which  were  not
the  uune  before,  and  they  eitended  the  prohibition,
both  for  aenatoia  and  othera,  to  oil  thoie  whom  th«
Edict  enumerated  ai  Inbme*.  The  proviiJoiu  a]
the  Lei  Julia  did  not  render  tbe  marriage  null,  but
it  deprived  the  parties  to  such  majxiage  of  theprjTJ-
leges  conferred  by  the  lei ;  that  ii,  tuch  a  marriage
did  not  release  them  from  the  penalties  of  celibacy.
A  icnatus^oiuultum,  under  M.  Auralini,  howcTer,
made  such  mairiage  null  in  certain  casea.  (Saviguy,
^Utai,  &c^  ToL  ii.)  [0.  L.]

INFA'MIS. [INFAUIA.]

INFAN8,  INFA'NTIA.  In  the  Roman  U<
there  woe  several  dialinctioni  of  age  which  wet
made  with  reference  to  the  capacity  for  doing  legal
acts :  —  1.  The  first  period  was  from  birth  to  tl
end  of  the  HTentb  year,  duriiw  which  time  pe
ions  mn  called  Inbotea,  or  Qui  (an  nan  poasm
2.  The  aeeond  period  was  from  the  end  of  sere
years  to  the  end  of  fourteen  or  twelre  years,  a
carding  as  the  person  was  a  male  or  a  female,
during  which  penons  were  defined  as  thoi  '^
bri  posannb  The  penons  included  in  tbca
im>  classes  were  Impuberta.  3.  The  third  period
waa  from  the  end  of  the  twelfth  or  fourteenth  to
the  end  of  the  twenty-fifth  yoir,  during  which
period  pcrsMif  were  Adoletceoles,  Adulti.  The
penou included in tbeaa tlirce claiin  were


INFANS,  INFANTIA.
ta«vily*s  Mke,  called  ninores  only  [CiniaTOIt}  ;
and  the  penons  included  in  the  ^ird  and  foanh
daa  were  Paberes.  4.  The  fbuth  period  wma  from
the  age  of  twenty-fiTe,  during  which  persona  wen
Majerei.
~'  m  Impube*  comprehends  In&na,  an  all
■e  Impuberea  ;  but  all  Impnberes  <tre  not
Thus  the  Impnbfres  were  divided  into
two  ctsssea ;  In&ntes  4ff  tbcafl  nnder  seven  years  of
Age,  and  those  above  seven,  who  are  generally  un-
dcrnood  bj  the  term  Impsberes.  Pupillua  is  a
eneral  name  for  ail  Impaberes  not  m  the  power  of
father.  (1%.  50.  tit  16.  a  S39.)
The  oomioencement  of  Pubcrtas  vu  the  cmn-
lencement  of  tiiU  c«[>city  to  do  legal  acts.  Be-
fore the  commencement  of  PnberUti,  a  peraon,
according  to  the  old  civil  taw,  cotUd  do  no  Icjjal
act  withoot  the  auetoritas  of  a  tutor.  This  rule
was  made  fcr  those  Impnbena  who  had  property
of  their  own  ;  for  it  could  hare  no  ap^ication  to
a  wen-  -  •'■- -'  -

n"°the

competent  to  nndentaad  the  nature  of  their  acts,
and  the  sge  of  twelve  or  fourteen  was  only  fiipd
because  it  waa  necessary  to  fii  somo  limit  which
might  apply  to  all  cawa ;  but  it  was  obvioua  that  in
many  case*  when  a  person  boidenid  on  the  age  of
Puberty  (pubertati  proiimui),  and  had  not  yet
attained  it,  be  might  have  snfflcieot  andoMauding
to  do  many  legal  acta.  Accordingly,  a  penon  who
was  proiimus  pubertal  wis  in  ooone  c4  lime  ua-
udered  competent  to  do  certain  Ic^al  acta  withonl


Ibeai


fraud  or  mistake,  he  could  only  do  such  acta  aa
were  for  hii  own  advantage.  This  relaxatian  rf
the  old  law  was  beneficiJ  both  to  the  Inpnbea
and  to  others,  hot  owing  to  its  being  confined  la
■ach  narrow  limits  of  time,  it  waa  af  bltle  practical
use,  and  acccrdingly  it  was  extended  as  ■  poaiiive
rale  to  a  longer  praiod  below  tbe  age  of  pnbertj  ;
but  still  wiU  the  tame  limitation ;  the  Impubn
could do  no  act  to  his  {vejudice witbont the


determined  that  luch  limited  capacity  to  do  legal

infanlia,  which,  legally  defined,  is  that  period  after
which  a  peraon,  either  sJono  or  with  a  tutor,  is
capable  of  doing  legal  uts.

Infani  property  means  Qui  fiiri  noa  potest ;  and
be  of  whom  could  be  predicated,  Fari  poteat,
was  not  Inbna,  and  was  apable  oF  doing  certain
legal  acta.  The  phrase  Qui  &ri  poten  i*  itself
ambiguous  ;  but  the  Romans,  in  a  Irgal  senate  did
not  limit  it  (o  the  mere  capadly  of  nttering  words,
which  a  child  of  two  or  three  yean  generally  pa*.
seasei,  but  they  undmlood  by  it  a  certun  drjcree
of  intellectual  develDpcment ;  and,  aceonlinglj,  the
expression  Qui  lah  potest  eipressed  not  only  that
degree  of  iniellectual  development  which  is  shown
by  tbe  nse  of  intelligible  speech,  but  alao  a
capacity  for  legal  acts  in  which  speedi  vaa  re-
fjnired.  Thus  the  period  of  inbntia  wsa  extended
beyond  that  which  the  ilnet  etymological  meaning
of  the  word  rignifiet,  and  its  tanunatini  ««•  6iea
by  a  potiti>e  rule  at  the  end  of  the  aevvBdi  year,
as  appears  by  numerous  passana.  (Wg.  36.  tit  7.
a.  1 ;  33.  tit  L  a  It ;  (M.  «.  Ut  30.  a  IB ;
Quintilian,  fasL  Or.  L  1 ;  Isidoraa,  Orif.  i


INFULA.
Mm  bGutiae  or  in&nli  (Oaiua,  iil  109),  are  aieS
br  At  Boman  jariiu  to  (ignifj  mpectiicl;  one
^w  it  Dou  WtMTiing  PuberUu,  and  one  who  hu
jot  ptMted  tbe  limit  (^  Inbntia.  (Saiigaf ,  ^ptem
ibfioil.  AAnliii.)  [JupuBis.]  [O.L.]
INFE'RIAK  [Fvm*,  p.  fie3,  b.]
J'NFULA,  >  Boi^  of  white  tod  nd  wool,  which
«u  •lightl;  twiMed,  dnwn  into  tha  finia  of  ■
WRUh  or  mlM,  and  uad  by  Iha  Romaiu  Jbr  omit-
Bcnt  oa  fcMiTO  and  aolcmn  oecuioiu.  In  Mwri-
fidw  it  wu  tisd  with  a  whits  bmd  [Vitta]  to
the  head  of  tha  ndini  (Viig.  Gtorg.  iil  iS7  i
Lnoet.  L  BB  ;  Snclon.  Calip.  27),  and  alu  of  lbs
print,  mon  eapeciaUy  in  tho  wonhip  of  Apollo
and  Dana.  (Viig.  Am.  ij.  430,  x.  638 ;  Seivini,
■■  be.  :  laid.  OHg.  ax.  30  ;  FettQi,  i;  «.  Injwlae.)
Tbc  ■*  IMU  infiila  "  wai  worn  alio  bj  the  Veilal


B  [Fmra],  fin
Bpoa  tha  doia>-iaaa  of  her  IbtDn  huaband  on  enter-
ing tha  hooae.  (Lucan,  iL  355  ;  Flin.  H.N.  nix.
3;  Serrina,  >'■  Virff.  Am.  i>.  iG3.)  [J.  Y.J

INGE'KUI,  INOENUaTAS,  Freemen  {(i-
iai)  woe  either  ingtniu  or  libeitinL  Ingenni  ue
thoM  free  idhi  who  are  born  free.  (Oaiui,  i.  11.)
Libotini  are  tbMe  who  an  mannniitted  tivm  legal
■laTerj,  Though  freedmen  (^t&erfn)  were  not
iagouii,  the  aoni  of  iibcrtini  were  ingennL  A
Hbertinna  eoold  not  bj  adoptioti  become  ingennni.
(Cell.  t.  19.}  If  a  femaU  ilaTs  (owriOi)  vai
•Mnaiit,  and  waa  manumitted  before  ibe  gare
Wu  to  a  child,  moh  child  waa  bom  free,  and
tbefelare  vai  ii^eoDoa.  In  other  caiea,  also,  the
hw  faromed  the  claim  of  bee  birth,  and  conie-
qaently  of  ingenoila*.  (Patdoi,  Sai.  Btcept.  uL
3J,  aad  T.  1.  i>«  libni/i  coaM.)  If  a  maul  b-
gennitaa  wat  a  matter  in  diipute,  thera  wai  a
jodidoBt  ingenaitatii.  (Tuit.  Amt.  liii.  27  ;
Panfau,  S.B.1.  1.)

The  worda  inger
•fi^nBed  to  one  another  ;  and  the  title  of  ireeman
(6Aer),  which  would  comprehend  libertiana,  is
MOwtiniea  liiti,iM<  bj  the  additim  of  ingennue
(liber  et  ingtnimi,  Hor.  At.  P.  383).  Acording
to  Cineiii^  in  hit  work  on  Comilia,  quoted  by
Ftstsa  (a.  e.  Patridoi),  thoae  who,  in  hii  time,
wsv  called  ingenni,  were  oiiginallf  called  {otticii,
which  ia  inlcrpnted  by  OoettHi^  to  mean  that
GentileB wen  originailj  called  Ingenni  alao :


Dot  eiiit,  but  the
i  iuffieient  to  eiprcaa  a  Roman
outen"  hy  birth.  Thii  remark  then  refen  to  a
tiaie  wboi  there  were  an  Saaan  citiieni  except
liaaieU  ;  and  the  definitiDn  of  ingeniuu,  if  it  had
tha  bacn  in  ma,  would  have  been  a  inSicient  de-
biitiga  of  a  palritiiii.  But  the  word  ingennui  wai
iundBetd,  in  the  aeni*  hen  tlated,  at  a  later  time,
and  when  it  wa<  wanted  lor  the  psrpoae  of  indicat-
iag  ■  citixen  hj  birth,  merely  aa  nieh,  Tbua,  in
the  neech  of  Appini  Claudim  Cnaana  (LIt.  tL
40),  ae  GocliBita  with  penou  cJ  patrician  deacent,
"  Vam  Qoititimn  quilibet,  dnobn*  mgenuia  or-
taa."  Farther  the  d(£nitiaD  of  Oeniilia  by
Staeitda  [OiHi,  p.  567],  ibowi  that  a  man  might
be  iflgcnBBi  aod  yet  not  gentilia,  for  he  might  be
ihcHasfafieadnaBi  and  Uua  ii  centttteiit  with


INJURIA.  63?

Llvy  (x.  S). If  Cineini  meant  hi*  propoutioa  to
be  aa  compnheniive  at  the  teimi  will  allow  u<  lu
take  it,  the  propoiition  ia  thie : — -All  (now)  ingenui
compiehend  all  (then)  patrlcii  ;  whidi  i>  untrue.
Under  the  empire,  Ingenuitsa,  or  the  Jnia  In-

CuitatiK,  might  be  acquired  by  the  imperial
mr ;  that  ii,  a  peram,  not  ingennui  by  birth,
waa  made  so  by  the  aorereign  power.  A  frecdmau
who  had  obtajued  the  Jni  Auaalorum  Aoreomm,
wu  conaidered  ingenuni ;  but  thii  did  not  inter-
fen  with  the  patniiBJ  ri^hta.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  10.  a.
5  and  S.)  By  the  natahbna  reatitutio  the  princepi
g^ya  to  a  1ib«tinua  the  character  of  ingennua  j  a
form  of  proceeding  which  ioToWed  the  theor^  tj
tha  original  freedom  of  all  mankind,  for  the  liber-
tinna  waa  reatored,  not  tc  the  itate  in  which  he
had  been  bom,  bat  to  hii  nqipoiad  original  itate  of
Ireedom.  Id  thii  caae  the  fatioD  loil  hit  jntninal
right*  by  a  neeeaaacy  conaequence,  if  the  fiction
wentohareitafuUeffkL  (Dig.40.  tit.  11.)  It
leema  that  qneationi  aa  to  a  man'i  ingenoitaa  were
common  at  Rome  ;  which  it  cot  wrpriaing,  when
wa  coniider  that  patronal  lighta  wen  iDTolved  in
them.  [O.  L.J

INORATUS. [PiTROBUH.]

II^JU'RIA.  Injuria,  in  ^e  general  lenie,  ia
oppoaed  to  Jut.  In  a  ipedal  lenn  injuria  waa
done  by  itriking  or  beaUng  a  man  either  with  the
hand  or  with  any  thing  ;  by  abnaira  wordi  (aia-
■ietua)  I  by  the  pnttcriptio  boiiKuni,  when  tha
claimant  knew  that  the  allcgad  debtor  waa  not
really  indebted  to  him,  for  the  bononun  pjoacriptio
waa  accompanied  with  in&mia  to  the  debtor  (Cic^
pro  ^tud.  €,  15,  16);  hy  libelloua  writinga  or
Tenet ;  by  aoliciting  a  mater  &miliaa  or  a  prae-
teitattta  [Impdbeb]  ;  and  by  Tariout  other  acta.


might  II


nbii


power  or  in  manu.  No  injuria  could  be  done  to  a
lUve,  but  certain  acta  done  to  a  ilave  wen  an  in-
juria to  hia  maater,  when  the  acta  were  inch  at
appeared  from  ^eir  nature  to  be  iniulting  to  the
maater;  at,  for  initance,  if  a  man  ihould  flog
another  man't  tlare,  the  matter  had  a  nmedy
againit  the  wrong-doer,  which  waa  giren  fatm  by
the  pcsetw'i  ionnnla.  But  in  nunj  other  caiei  of
a  ilavB  being  maltreated,  then  wat  no  tegular
formula  by  which  the  maiter  could  have  a  remedy,
and  it  wat  not  eaty  to  obtain  one  frnm  the  ptaetoL
The  Twelie  Tablet  bad  Tarioni  pmntimi  on
the  lubjeet  of  Injnria.  Libelloni  longi  or  Tenet
wen  fallowed  by  cafHtal  pimiihment,  that  it,
death,  ai  it  i^pean  (Cic.  Rep.  it.  10,  and  the
notet  in  Mai'a  edition).  In  the  caae  of  a  limb
being  matilaled  the  punithment  waa  TaUo  (Feitui,
Tbiio). In  the  ate  of  a  broken  bone,  the


a  if  tbe


njnry-


fieeman,  and  i£0  if  it  waa  done  to  a  alaTe.  In
other  caia  the  Tablet  fixed  the  penalty  at  25  aiiei.
(Gellioa,  iri.  10,  IX.  I ;  Dirkien,  UdiemU,  &c.)
Theie  penaltici  which  wen  eouajdered  tnfficient
at  the  time  when  they  wen  fixed,  wen  aflerwarda
coniidered  to  be  intnfiicient ;  and  the  injued  per-
ton  wat  a]h>wed  hy  tha  piaetor  to  claim  anch
dunaget  aa  he  thought  that  he  wat  entitled  to,  and
the  judex  might  gire  the  full  amount  or  leaa.  Bat
in  the  caae  of  a  lely  leriout  injury  (a*ro«  it^aria),
when  the  praetor  requited  aecurif^  for  the  defend-
ant'! appearance  to  be  giien  in  a  particular  anm,
it  wai  niDal  to  claim  tach  Hun  aa  the  damagea  in
the  plamtiff^  dedantian«and  though  the  radax


63B  IN6IGNE.

ma  not  bound  to  gire  daamgci  to  (liat  nni<Hmt,  he
wtdom  giiTe  less.  An  injuria  had  the  chancier
of  atmi,  Hther  trom  the  act  itself  or  the  place
when  it  WM  dons,  u  for  instance,  ■  theatre  or
fctum,  or  fhun  the  conditioD  of  the  penon  injured,
as  if  he  were  a  magiiliBEui,  or  if  he  were  a  senator
And  the  wrojig'doer  vere  a  peivon  of  Idt  coDdition.

A  hex  Cortielia  ipcdally  provided  for  oies  of
mlMtio,  Terberotio,  and  forcible  entiy  into  a  nmn'i
houH  (domat).  The  juriits  who  conmented  on
thu  lex  defined  the  1(^  meaning  of  pulsatio,  tbt-
boBtio,  and  domni. (Dig.  47.  tit  10.  s.  6.)

The  ■ctJOda  f«'  Injuria  were  gradoallj  much  er-
tended,  and  the  piaetor  would,  according  to  the
circamstanoM  of  the  case  (outn  cognibi),  gire  a
penon  an  action  ia  respect  of  an;  act  or  condoct
of  another,  which  tended,  in  the  jndgmsnl  of  the
tmetor,  to  do  him  injury  in  reputation  or  to  wound
hi*  feelings.  (Dig.  47.  tit.  10.  s.  1£,  22,  2S,  SI,
ftc.}  Manj  cases  af  Injuria  were  nbject  to  a
special  punishment  (Dig,  47.  tit  11)  as  deportatio;
and  this  proceeding  eitin  ordinem  was  often
adoptedinsteadoflheciTilacticn.  Various  imperial
GODstitutlOQS  affiled  the  punishment  of  death  to
libcllaos  wntings  (Jaimm  lOillt). [Libull]


an  actio  Injuriarum  {InritHuJ.  Ha  who  brought
inch  an  action  per  columniam  wu  liable  to  be
punished  eiba  ordinem.  (Ouus,  iiL  220—225  ;
Hor.  5it.  L  1.  80  I  Dig.  47.  tit.  10  ;  Cod.  Theod.
iz.  tiL  34  ;  Cod.  ii.  tit  36  ;  Paulas,  Snf.  Aeop.
T.  tiL  4  ;  Rein,  Dot  CnmiitatnfAt  der  Rnmtr^
p.  SS,  &C.)  [G.  L.]

INJURIA'RUM  ACTIO.  [Injuki*.]
INOA('Ii^),  fcstinls  cdebiuted  in  sereinl
ports  of  Oreeee,  in  honoor  of  the  ancient  heroine
luo.  At  MegaiB  sho  was  honoured  with  an  annual
sacrifice,  because  the  Megarians  belisTed  that  her
body  had  been  cast  bj  the  waTce  upon  their  ccsst,
and  that  it  had  been  foond  and  buried  then  by
Cleso  and  Tanropolis.  (Pans.  i.  42.  S  B.)  Another
fcstiTu]  of  Ino  was  cetebraCed  at  Epidaiinit  Limem,
in  Lsconia.  In  the  ueighbourhosd  of  this  town
there  was  a  small  bnC  reiy  deep  lake,  called  the
water  of  Ino,  and  at  the  festiTal  of  the  heroine  the
people  threw  barley-cakes  into  the  water,  When
the  cakei  sank  it  was  considered  a  propitious  sign,
but  when  they  swam  on  the  iutfiu»  il  was  an  evil
sign.  (Paus.  iil  23.  g  5.)  An  annual  festival,
with  contests  and  sacrifices,  in  hononr  of  Ino,  was


D  held  OD


leCorin


s.  (Tsetses,
[L.S.]
TiSTAME'NTUM.


m  institnted  by  king  Sisyphc
ad  Lwx/phr^)
INOFFICICSUM

[TMTAHINTI7M.]

INQUILVNUS.  [ExBiutw,  p.  £lfi,  b,]
INSA-NIA,  mSA'NUS.  [Cub-itoil]
IN  SIGNS  (iniiMiv,  Iwiiniiia,  tuiiniiuir,  •nfi.
Tiiitor),  a  ladge,  an  ensign,  a  mark  of  distinction.
Thus  the  Bull*  worn  by  a  Roman  boy  was  one
of  the  insignia  of  his  rank.  (Cie.  Verr.  ii.  S8.)
Five  classes  of  insignia  mon  especially  deserre

I.  Those  belonging  to  ofHcers  of  state  or  civil
fDnctionaries  of  all  descriptions,  such  as  the  FjIhcbs
eairied  before  the  Consul  at  Rome,  the  lattckTC
and  shoca  worn  by  senaton  [Calcivb  ;  CLavue],
the  carpenEum  and  the  sword  bestowed  by  the
emperar  upon  the  praaiect  of  the  piaatorinra.
(Lydos,  it  Mag.  u.  i.  9.)  The  Rnnuui  Kauirzs
wen  diitingnisLsd  by  the  **  equi*  pabliciu,"  ifn


INSIONE
golden  ring,  the  angnstns  davua  [p^  291],  and  the
seat  provided  (at  them  in  the  theatre  and  the  circus.
(C.O.Schwarti;,/XH.iU«(as,pf^84— 101.)  The
insignia  of  the  kings  of  Hone,  via.  the  tiabea,  tbe
toga-pnetezia,  the  cmwn  of  gold,  the  ivofy  sceptre,
the  sella  corulia,  and  the  twelve  iictna  with  &ac«,
all  of  which  eicept  the  cmwn  and  sceptn  were
transfettsd  to  subseqocal  denominatiiais  of  magia-
sltatei,  were  copied  Ersm  the  usage*  of  the  Etraa-
om*  imd  olhtt  [kations  of  early  antiquity.  (Flor.
LG;  Sa11nst,S.atf.Gli  Virg.  jjeo.  vil  IS8,  612,
il  334 ;  Lydns,  da  Mag.  i  7,  H,  37.)

II.  Badge*  won  by  scddiera.  The  seatnriois
in  the  Roosn  army  wen  known  by  the  cnM>  of
their  helmets  [Oalba],  and  the  common  men  bj
their  shields,  each  coboit  having  then  painted  in  a
manner  peculiar  to  ilselC  (Veget.  ii.  18 ;  compare
Caea.  BtlL  OalL  vii  4S.} [CLiraca] AnviK


and  ai  badge*  of  distiuctica,  em-
toyed  the  bzicy  of  poet*  and  of  artist*  of  every
esojption  from the earliest times. Thua the

who  fought  against  T
'^ '  <m  tfieir  shie


cept  Amphistana,  had  tn  tbeir  shidd*  erpressiv*
figures  and  motloeo,  diAerenlly  desaibed,  however,
by  diflennt  author*.  (AeachyL  Sift.  t.  net.  3B3
— fi46;  Enrip.  Pluai.  1125— 11G«;  ApoUodor.
BOL  iil  6.  §  I.)  Aleibiadea,  agreeably  to  his
geneni  character,  wore  a  ihi^  richly  deeoiatcd
with  ivcay  and  gold,  and  exhibiting  a  repnaenta-
tion  of  Cupid  brandishii^  a  thanderbolU  (Athen.
ziL  p.  534,  e.)  TheGnlneeoftheeeemUenuon
shields  is  attributed  to  the  Caiian*  (HeIDd.i.  171);
and  the  fictitioua  employment  of  them  to  deceit*
and  mtslMd  an  enemy  was  among  the  stral^;rmi
otwar.  (Pans,iv.28.S3i  Virg.jlea.ii.389— 39a)

III.  Family  bodge*.  Among  the  iadignitiea
practised  by  the  EmpetiH'  CUigula,  it  ia  related
that  hs  abolished  the  ancient  insignia  of  the
noblest  bmiliea,  tit.  the  tongues,  the  dncimii,  and
the  cognomen  "  Magnua." (Sueton.  tWw.  35.)

IV.  Signs  placed  on  tbe  &ant  of  buildinga.  A
figura  of  Mercury  was  the  common  sign  of  a
OVUKAUOM;  hnt  Cicero  had  a  Statue  of  MilisTB
to  fidfil  the  nme  purpose.  (Ad  AU.  i.  4.)  Citice
had  their  emblems  as  well  as  separata  editices ;
and  the  officer  of  a  city  sometime*  affiled  the
emblem  to  public  documents  as  we  do  the  anl  of  a
municipal  corpamtion. (Andgonus  Caryst.  1 5.)

V.  The  fignre-hndi  of  ships;  The  inwgne  of  a
ship  was  an  image  placed  on  the  fffow,  and  givii^
Its  name  to  the  vesseL  (Tacit,  ^aa.  vL  34  ;  Coca.
B.  av.  ii.  6.)  Paul  sailed  from  Halite  to  I^ileoli
in  the  Dioscuri,  a  vessel  which  traded  between
that  (dty  and  Alaiandria.  (Atlit  xxviii.  II.)
Enschedd  has  drawn  out  a  list  of  one  hondrnl
names  of  ships,  which  occor  dther  in  clasaical
aatbors  or  in  ancient  inscriptiona.  (Diss;  dt  7W.
s<  IntiffidlMt  Naaum,  reprinted  in  Rnhnken,
Opasc  pp.  2E7~S0fi.)  The  names  wers  tbose  i>F
gods  and  hemes,  together  with  thur  attxibutea,
such  as  the  helmet  of  Minerva,  painted  on  the
prow  of  the  ship  which  conveyed  Ovid  to  Pgotna
(a  pida  auMt  mamm  iota,  THiC  i.  ».  2}  ;  of
virtues  and  aflisctions,  as  Hope,  Ceneoid,  Victor; ;
of  canatrica,  ciliea,  and  rivers,  a*  die  Po,  tbe  Hin-
cios  (Virg.  Am.  x.  206),  the  Delia,  tlic  Syracuw!,
the Alexandria (Athou  v.  43)  i  and of  men,

the  booc^  head,  which


•  o"


INSTITOBTA  ACTIO.
Chwrilu,  PL  IBS,  ed.  Naeke  ;  Heard).  >.  v.  2a-
fuufa  Tp^f :  Euat.  n  HonL  Od.xm,  p.  625),
the  inn,  ths  tiger  (Virg.  Aai.  i.  166),  the
Inlt  (TprrnftV  Tuipav,  Schol.  n  jf^citf.  Afaxi.
ii.  168).  PIntinb  menEioiii  ■  Ljobd  tumI  with
the  Bga  of  the  lioa  on  ila  prow,  and  that  of
Of  Kipait  nn  ila  poop,  muiifatlf  intended  to
tqjM  the  ibriD  of  the  cfaimaoa.  (Da  Mtd.
I'lrt,  p.  141,  «d.  SlqjL)  After  tn  engigement  >t
■a,  t£*  indgne  of  >  conqnerad  Teuel,  sb  well  m
iU  ^oMre,  wu  often  taken  bam  it  ud  xupended
id  BotDe  trmple  u  an  offering  to  the  god.  (Plut.
TtcuB^  p.317.}  Fign».headi  wete  pmlmhl  J  uied
frqu  the  firvt  origin  of  navigation.  On  the  nr-
jtiUe^a  of  the  Fhoentciuu,  who  called  them,  aa


iongpa,'  they  had  tometimea  a  my  gnteaqne

B«ud«a  the  badge  which  diitingnitlied  eadi
indiTiditai  abip,  and  which  wai  eilhei  an  engnied
and  p*i'**iH  wooden  image  forming  part  af  the
prow,  or  a  figure  often  accompanied  by  a  name
and  punted  oo  both  the  bowi  of  the  Te»el,  other
baignia,  which  could  be  elerated  or  lowered  at
pltaaure,  were  tcqniaite  in  naval  engagomenta.
TlKae  wcfs  pcotably  flagi  or  atandaida,  filed  to
the  aplnatre  or  to  the  top  of  the  nuet,  and  aRving
ta  mark  all  thoae  Ttneta  which  belonged  to  the
wne  fleet  or  (o  the  omenatiDn.  Bncb  were  "  the
Attk^and  "the  Perwe  lignali"  {ih 'KniKby ryf-
pmar,  Pol;aeB.  iii.  11.  g  11,  viiL  SS.  g  1 ;  Becker,
CiatiUa,  toL  ii.  p,  G3).  A  purple  lail  inditsted
the  admital'i  ihip  among  the  Kooiaju,  and  flaga  of
diOnoit  cdlsaua  were  need  inthefleetof  Alexrader
the  Onat. (PlbL  H.  N.  xiz.  £.)  [J.  Y.]

I'NSTITA  (■iptrMuv),  a  flounce ;  a  flilet.
The  Ramaii  matroni  HiDetimei  wore  a  broad  fillet
with  ample  fiilda,  aewed  to  the  boCtmi  of  the  tunic
and  iiihiin  to  the  inatep.  The  nie  of  it  indi-
cated a  mperior  i^ard  to  decency  and  propriety  of
nmaen.  (Hot.  Sat.  i.  2.  29;  Ovid,  An  AtaaL  i,
32.)  It  mntt  have  reaanbled  a  modem  floonce.
By  ibe  additioti  of  gold  and  jewellu;  it  look  the
fvm  of  tbe  more  ipkndid  and  eipenaiie  CycLab.

When  thia  term  denoted  a  Allet,  whbh  wai
■eed  by  itaeli^  aa  in  the  decoration  of  a  TBTnaus
<Stat.  TtA.  Til  654),  it  wai  eqoiTalent  to  Vim
wFiKK*. ITOBRi.]  [J.Y.]

I'NSTITOE. [Inotttoua  Actio.]
IKSTITO'RLA  ACTIO. Thii  actia  wia  a).
loured  againit  a  man  who  had  appointed  either


■an^  ilaTe,  01


a  m»  pencm,

lineia  for  him.
■Dch  nBbagCT,  in  reapect  of  the  tabcma  or  other
hiwiaMa,  were  conaidered  to  be  contract!  with  the
pnotipaL  The  formola  wai  oiled  Inititoria,  be-
caaae  be  who  wai  appointed  to  manage  a  tabema
waa  called  an  Imtilor.  And  the  inatilor,  it  la  nid,
wai  IB  called,  "  quod  uegotio  gersndo  initet  aiTe
"-'-'*'  "  If  MiTeral  peraona  appointed  an  inatitor,
vrj  aua  of  them  might  be  >ned  for  the  whole
«»iiaiil  fill  which  the  penoni  were  liable  on  the
eiDliact  of  their  inatitor  ;  and  if  one  pud  the  de-
mnd,  be  had  bii  tedreaa  over  againBt  the  othen

greaCdealof  bouneaiwudoiietbrongb  tbemedmni
ofiiiilitona,a)idtb«  Bamaua  thna  mnied  on  varioiu
boatite  occnpationa  in  the  name  of  their  elsTei,
which  tbvjcoold  not  or  would  t»t  hare  carried  on
liaai— Hj lualitaraan  coupled  with  Maotae  by


INSTITUTIONES.  639

Hence  (^.  iTiL20),  and  with  the  Magiiter  Navia
(Oina.  iiL  6.  30)-  (Gaiui,  iv..71  ;  Iiistit.  it.
tit  7  ;  Dig.  14,  tit.  3.)  [Q.  L.]

INSTITUTIO'NES.  It  waa  tho  object  of
Jiutinian  to  comprite  in  hia  Code  and  l>igeit  or
Pandect,  ■  complete  body  of  law.  Bnt  tbeae  worka
were  not  adapted  Co  elementary  inatruclion,  and
the  writingi  of  the  ancient  jnri«ta  were  no  longer
allowed  to  baie  any  authority,  eicept  ao  <n  M
they  had  been  incorporated  in  tbe  Digeit  It  wai,
thereibre,  necnaary  to  prepare  an  el«nenlary  tno-


elementa  of  the  lav  (Itgam  eamA^),  and  ahonld
not  be  encimibered  with  naaleia  matter  {Prooim.
lad.). Accordingly, the^  pradnced  a  trotiae.


M  and  of  a  limi-


of  Inntitutionei,  (n
Jmp*  docatdi  RaiioHe\  which  wa
clemsntaiy  werka  of  the  lame  na
lar  character,  bat  chiefly  on  th
Caiua  or  Ovine,  hia  Rea  Qnotidianae,  and  Tarinu
other  CommentariL  The  Inititndoiiei  were  pub-
Itahed  with  the  imperial  aanction,  at  the  cloie  of
the  year  A.  D.  £33,  at  the  aame  time  ai  the  Digeat.
The  Inatitutionei  conaiat  of  four  bsoka,  which  are
divided  into  titlai.  They  treat  only  of  Privatum
Jua  ;  but  then  it  a  title  on  Jndicia  Publi«  at  the
end  of  the  fourth  book.  The  jndidapublica  an  not
treated  of  by  Oaiua  in  hia  Commeutariei.  Hein-
ecciui,  in  fail  Antiqnitatnm  Romanamm  Juriapm-
dentiam  illnatrantium  Syntagma,  hai  followed  tho
order  of  the  Inatitutionei,  Theophilua,  generally
Gonaidered  to  be  oneof  thecompilenof  the  Inititu-
tioica,  wrote  a  Qreek  paraphraae  upon  tfaem,  which
ii  itill  ertant,  and  ii  oceaiionally  naefuL  l^e  beat
edition  of  the  paraphraaa  of  Theopbiloa  ia  that  of
W.  O.Reitz,HaBg,  175l,2TolL4ta  Thereare
numeroDi  editiotia  of  the  Latia  text  of  the  luititn-
tionei.  The  editioptincepaia  that  of  Haini,  1468,
fol. ;  that  of  Klenie  and  Boeeking,  Berlin,  1839,
4ta,  contaiua  both  the  Inatitntionea  and  the  Com-

of  Scbiader,  Bslin,  1 H32  and  1 836.

Thtre  were  Tarieui  inatitutional  woAi  written
by  the

under  Septiraini  Severua  an
wrote  three  booka  of  Inatitntionea.  Aeliua  Mar-
cianni  wrote  aiiteen  booka  of  Inatitntionea  under
Antoninui  Caracalla.  Florentinua,  who  lived  under
Alexander  SeTerui,  wmte  twelve  bcoka  of  Inatitn-
tionea, from  which  there  are  forty-two  eicerpta  in
the  Digeit  Paidni  alio  wrote  two  booka  of  Inati-
lutionea.  There  atill  remain  fiigmenta  of  the
Inititutiotiea  of  Ulpian,  which  ^ipear  to  have  con-
aiated  of  two  bocka.  But  the  firat  tnatiae  of  thia
kind  that  we  know  of  waa  the  Inalitutionee  of
Ount  in  four  booki.  They  wen  fiitmeiiy  only
known  from  a  few  eicerpta  in  the  Digeal,  from  the
Epitome  contained  in  the  Breviarimn,  fixim  the
Collatio,  and  a  few  quotanoni  in  the  Commentary
«f  Boethiua  on  theTopicaofCicen^andin  Priacian.

The  MS.  of  Oaiua  waa  diacovered  in  the  library
of  the  Chapter  of  Verona,  hj  Niebuhr,  in  1HI6.
It  was  fint  copied  by  Ooetcben  and  Bethman-
Hallweg,  and  an  edition  irai  pnblilbsd  by  Goe-
achen  in  1820.  The  deciphering  of  tba  MS.  waa
a  work  of  great  labour,  aa  it  ia  a  palimpeeit,  the
writing  on  which  haa  been  waahed  out,  and  in
aome  place*  eraa?d  with  •  knife,  in  order  t>  adqit


»0  INSTlTUTlONEa

tho  pnrchmcat  for  the  purpoHs  of  the  Inutieribcr.
The  parchment,  after  being  tbm  treated,  wu  tued
for  InDKribing  upoQ  it  wme  workt  oif  Jerome,
chieflf  bis  eputlei.  The  old  vriUjig  ws*  w  ob-
•cura  tluit  it  coold  only  bo  aeen  by  ^jplying  to  it
oa  infiuioD  of  gaU-auU.  A  f»b  wnniiniition  of
the  MS.  wu  mode  by  Blmne,  but  with  little  ti-
ditiooal  profit,  owing  to  the  amdi^on  of  the  muui-
■cript,  A  Hcond  edition  of  Oaiui  wu  pabliihed
by  Qoucben  in  1 821,  vilh  Taluable  DOt^  and  in
Index  Sigluum  uwd  in  the  MSl  The  picba  to
the  £nt  edition  conttini  the  oimpletfl  demonitn-
tioo  that  the  MS.  of  Verona  i>  the  genuine  Com-
mantarii  of  Qaiua,  though  the  MS.  itielf  hai  no
title.  An  impiDTed  edition  of  Ooeicheii'i  by  Lsch-
-  -  ■  ^nieia.


t  appean
le  that  *<


ffom  tba  Iiulitntioiiei  that  Oaini
mric  mtder  Antsmniii  Pim  and  M.


Many  pauagea  id  the  Fragmenti  of  Ulpian  ,an
the  nine  ai  paaaagei  in  Qaiua,  which  may  be  ei-
[dained  by  aicnming  that  both  the»  writer*  copied
■ach  parti  frtm  tho  Mune  original  Thongh  the
Inititutionei  of  Jiutinian  were  nuunl;  Ixuied  on
thoie  of  Oaini  the  compiler)  of  the  luitituticoei  of
Juitinian  lometiniet  foUuwed  other  worki :  Ihu
the  pauage  in  the  Inilitutei  (iL  tit  17.  |  2,  "  ai
qoit  priori  **)  ii  from  the  fourth  book  of  Marcianui^
Inalitute*  (Dig.  36.  tit.  1.  a.  39)  ;  and,  in  Hme  in-
ataneea,  the  Inatitutionta  of  Joatinian  are  more
dear  and  explicit  than  thou  of  Oaiui.  An  iu-
■lance  of  thii  occsn  in  Oaioi  (iil  109)  and  the
Inililutionu  of  Juitinian  (iti,  tit.  19.  *.  10).

Oaiui  belonged  to  the  uhool  of  the  Sabiniani
{JuRiBCONBULrtJ.  The  JuiiiU  whom  he  cite*  in
the  Inititationei,  are  Cauiua,  Fuddiua,  JaToienua,
Julianua,  Labeo,  Maximo*,  Q.  Mnciui,  OGlina,
Pncului,  Sabinua,  Serriua,  Serriua  Sulpiciui,  Sex-
Mi,  Tubero.

The  arrangement  of  the  Inalitutei  of  Jualiniau
ii  the  nine  a*  that  of  the  work  of  Oaiui ;  what.
erer  difference  there  ii  between  them  in  thii  re-
apect,  it  lolely  owing  to  the  changes  in  the  Roman
iaw,  which  had  been  made  between  the  time  of  Oaius
and  that  of  Juitinian.  There  bai  been  considenible
diffennce  of  opinioil  u  to  the  nature  of  the  ar-
rangement of  Oaios ;  and  it  is  obrioiii  that  moat
penoni  ha<e  miitmderWood  it.  According  to  Oaiui :

"(i.8). r

a  (the  fint

treats  of  Fenrau  comprehendi  the  itatus  or  con-
dition of  penons  ai  the  lubjects  of  rights  ;  othcrt
oRinn  that  it  treats  of  lof^  oapeeity,  or  of  the
three  conditions  which  correspond  to  the  threefold
capitii  demiuutio.  But  the  £nt  book  of  Oatm
which  treats  of  Person*  containi  both  matter  which
has  nothing  to  do  with  legal  capaci^,  and  it  doei
not  contain  all  that  lelata  to  1^^  capacity,  for  it
does  not  treat  of  one  of  three  chief  diniioni  which
relate  to  legal  capacity,  that  ofCirei,  Latini,  Pere-
grmL  It  tr«Ii  in  bet  oily  of  Marriage,  Pauia
Potestaa,  Manns,  Slavery,  INitronatus  with  respect
to  the  ^flerent  elossn  cj  freed  men,  Mancipium
Bod  T^tela.  AccoTdingly,  this  port  of  the  vak
treats  only  of  pennu  ao  br  as  they  belong  to
Fanilia,  m  tbe  wideit  and  Roman  acceptation  of
that  larm.  The  part  which  treats  of  res  com-
prehend* the  I'w  of  ownmhip,  dee.  and  Law  of
OblipUiones,  which  two  ditiiions  occupy  the  *e-
cood  and  third  boolcL Tha  fonrtb,  book  treat*  of


INTBRCE3SI0.

Actionea,  which  it  the  third  of  the  three  di*Iwon«
of  Oaius.  The  diiision  of  Oaiui  ia  bulty  in  aoTeral
reipecC* ;  but  thii  does  not  detract  from  tho  merit
of  the  work,  which  is  penpicooui  and  aboniida  in
Talnable  matter.  Thii  new  of  the  nature  <rf  the
diTiiion  of  Qaiui  ii  [nun  Sarigny.  (£jal«M,  &c,
Tol.Lp.393,&c.)  [O.  L.3

INSTITCTO'RIA  ACTIO. [ImrucBssia.l

I'NSULA [DoMUS,  p.130.a.]

I'NTEGRUM RESTITUTIO,  IN. [iU-

INTE'NTIO. [ACTIO.1

INTERCE'SSIO.  It  is  a  case  of  Inten^saio
when  a  man  takea  upon  himielf  tha  debt  of  analhcr
by  virtue  of  lome  dealing  with  the  cnditor.  Thia
may  be  in  either  of  tha  following  ways  :  he  who
inlercadca  may  take  upon  himself  the  debt  of
another,  and  may  become  debtor  in  plaoe  of  that
other:  si  tho  intoeedeat  may  beooma  deblorwhile
tho  debtor  still  eontinuN  debtor  (Vaugemv,
PaadtJOcn,  Ac  ToL  iii.  p.  133,  &c)

To  the  first  claai  belong  (1)  the  case  of  a  man
undertaking  an  already  existing  obligatiot  aa  aa  to
exclude  the  existing  debtor  ;  (2.)  And  thacaae  ofa
man  taking  an  obtigatio  on  hinuell,  which  doe*
not  already  exist  in  the  person  ofanothei^  but  which
withoat  such  interrention  would  exist.

To  the  aecond  clan  belong  (1),  the  caae  when
the  creditor  ma;  oonuder  either  iheniginal  debtor
or  the  intercedent  a*  his  principal  debtor,  or  when,
in  other  words,  the  intercedent  is  correoa  dcbcndi
(Inst  iil  tit  16.  De  duobu*  nis  itipnlaodi  rt
promittendi)  ;  (2)  When  the  credibv  can  comsider
the  intercedent  inily  as  liable  to  pay,  when  the
principal  debtor  does  not  pay,  or  when  in  oibc«
words,  the  intercedent  is  a  ddejuisor,  (Inat  iii.
tit  20,  da  Fidejuiiotibus.)

The  Tiews  of  Puchta  as  to  the  Interceasio  are
contiuaed  in  his  Initihriicmmi,  vol.  iii.  p.  48,  Act

In  tho  Institute*  of  Oaiiu,  a  diitindioa  is  made
between sponsore(andSdepn>mi]sare*,on  one  aide;
and  fideju*sor«  on  the  other. With  respect  to  cmt


LI?.)


.  (Cic


Spousorei  and  lidcpromiiauea  eonld  only  become
parties  to  an  obligatio  verbonua,  though  in  ■ome
cases  they  might  be  bound,  when  their  prindpal
(qui  prmiimrU)  wa*  not,  as  in  the  case  of  a  papilla*
who  promised  without  the  aocttrita*  of  hi*  tnlor,
or  of  a  man  who  promiaed  Kmelhing  after  hia
death.  A  fidejumir  might  becene  a  party  to  all
obligationi,  whether  contracted  re,  verbis,  Utteria,  cc
consensu.  In  the  case  of  a  ^nsor  the  inlerrogatio
wai.  Idem  dari  ipondn  F  in  the  sse  of  a  fidepro-
missor,  it  wa*.  Idem  fidqtromittis  ?  in  the  caae  of
afidejussor,  itwas,  Idemfidetuaessc  JBbca?  The
object  of  having  a  sponsor,  fidepmniiaeir,  or  Gde-
jnuor,  WHS  greater  security  to  the  stipulator.  On
the  other  huid,  the  itipuiatrr  had  an  adit^Mlator
only  when  the  promiie  was  to  pay  aomething  afler
the  stipulator^  death.  Sat  if  then  was  no  adstipu.
ktor  the  stipolatio  was  inutilis  or  void.  (Gaiu^
iii  100, 1170  1'1»  aditipulator  was  the  proper
party  to  me  after  the  stipulator's  death,  and  he  could
be  compelled  by  a  mandati  judicium  to  [ay  ta  tha
be  res  whatever  he  recovered.

The  heres  of  a  sponsor  and  fldepnmiaaoc  n-oa
not  bound,  noleai  thefidt
grinw,  wboae  it*


~  O"


INTBRCBSSia

vMn ;  but  tbe  Iieni  of  a  Edejonor  mu  bound,
fir  Uw  Lci  FdiU,  i.  ipontor  uid  GdcpcoDiiMoi
w«e  frM  from  all  liability  alUr  two  jan,  which
tppan  to  Dwan  two  ycsn  afier  the  obligation  bad
i)«n»  a  pcewDt  demand  ;  but  the  Lex  Foria  only
■Pliiicd  to  Italy.  Ali  of  them  who  wen  alivs  at
1^  Ibne  whm  the  moiey  became  due  coold  be
Bid,  bat  each  only  for  hia  Ehare  {i»7ii^'  arila
TBI").  FidejuBareawennererreleuedfroin their
cbliiitim  W  length  of  time,  and  each  wai  liable
fw  ibe  whole  Hnn  (limgiili  w  nlidm*  obUgaKtv)  ;
Inl  bj  a  TMcript  (tpittaia)  of  Hadrian,  the  cndilor
••  mpired  to  Rie '


Imrdai  to  As  reaL

A  L«  Apoleia,  whieb  «m  paned  bafiira  the
I^i  Foiii,  gara  one  of  aeTaal  iponiiitM  or  fide-
(noiiiieRi,  who  had  paid  more  than  bi4  ihare,  an
•Bin  igiinit  the  reat  for  eontribation.  Betbn
tir  JHBSf  of  tbii  Lei  Apuleia,  any  one  ■ponira'  or
fid(|tiiBtNor  might  be  lucd  for  the  whole  araoimt ;
lal  diii  lax  wai  obnoojly  rendered  qkIbh  by  the
aibnqiol  Lex  Faria,  at  leoit  in  Italy,  to  which
nwuy  lime,  Bi  alr«dy  obterved,  the  Lex  Fnria
■ft^ied.  while  the  Lei  Apoleia  extended  to  plaeeg
■n  o(  Italy  1  yet  not  to  tidejuMwek

A  fidejiMor,  who  had  been  compelled  to  pay
toe  vbolri  amonnt,  bad  no  redreu  if  hia  principal
m  iMolTait  ;  ihoagh,  ai  already  obaerred,  he
mid  by  the  rescript  of  Hadtian  compel  the  credi-
ts to  Inait  hii  demand  againat  him  to  hia  ihire.

A  otdiior  wai  obUgtd  fijrmally  to  dedira  hii
•"Jiliiim  of  the  iponaoTH  or  fidqtrominorei  who
*Bt  (Afcd  to  biiD,  and  alio  to  daclm  what  wai
t^  ebJKt  aa  to  wbieh  thay  wen  aeeiiri^  i  if  he
^  an  «m^T  with  thii  legal  leqiuiition,  the
■P^ama  aad  fidepronunoni  might,  within  thirqr
uyt  (it  ii  not  nid  what  thirty  dayi,  bvt  probabl;
wy  dayi  from  the  time  of  the  aiiretin  being
"^ifrdX  denand  a  praejodicinm  (  pm^miieaaa  pot-
^'n),  and  if  Ifacy  prored  that  the  creditor  had
"*  ccoplied  with  the  reqaintionl  of  the  law,  they
■n  ideaaed. (Oaioi,  iiL  123.)

A  Lex  Cornelia  limited  the  amonnt  Ibr  which
■ay  pnoQ  could  be  a  •ecBrity  for  the  ume  person
t°  the  Mme  penoD  within  the  nune  ynr,  bnt  with
B  of  which  wat  a  •etnrity
m  eonld  be  botrnd  in  a
ncipal,  bnt  he  might  be
eaa  ;  and  ereiy  enrety  could  recover  on
^ndiciom  from  bia  principal  whatever  he
lad  been  compdled  to  pn;  on  hia  account.  By  a
I'l  Pahlilia  qnnaocei  bad  a  ipetiol  action  in
''I'bim,  which  wu  called  an  actio  depenil

There  ii  ■  pauage  in  the  Epitome  of  Oaini  in
the  Bnriariinn  (iL  9.  §  S),  which  i>  not  taken
WOahB;  it  ia  to  [hia  effect: — The  creditor  may
■Knlherthc  debtor  or  hii  fidejom;  bnt  afts  he
hai  theacn  to  me  one  of  them,  he  cannot  >ne  the
■xba. — Cicero  appean  (o  allude  to  the  nme  doe-


L  15)  ic


*bii  obicDre,  and  ia  vuiouly  eiplwned.  The
nhjcFt  of  the  ^cniia  often  oeain  in  Ctcero'i
'Etten  ;  and  in  one  eaae  he  wai  callod  upon  in  re-
'fvct  of  a  ipomia  alleged  to  have  been  giTon  by
^  twoity-fiTe  yean  before  {ad  AO.  lii  IT).
Cioto  nxa  the  eiprenion  "  ^ipeliare  "  to  eipreii
aUbg  (o  a  lorety  to  pay  {ad  Aa.  L  B).

(Gaiai,  iu.  1  Ifi— 127  ;  Init.  ilL  tit.  20  ;  Uig.  H.
liL7;4G.ta.l.)


INTERCESSIO.  «1

Woinen  generally  were  incapacitated  faun  doing
many  leti  on  account  of  the  inakneM  of  the  lex.
It  wBi  a  general  rule  that  any  peraon  might  "  in-
teiiedera,"  who  wai  craopetont  to  craitract  and  to
diipoie  of  bii  pmpertj ;  bnt  minorei  xxt  and  wo-
men had  only  a  limited  capacity  in  reaped  of  their
contracti  and  the  diipoiition  li  their  nlfltei.  In
the  early  part  of  the  reign  of  Angnitni  and  in  that
of  Clandiui,  it  wai  declared  by  the  Edict  that  wo-
men thonld  not  "  iutercedere  "  for  their  huibanda.
Subaeqaently  the  SenatoKonniltnin  Velleianum
[Sbnatubconbdltuk  VaLi.tiiNcJi]  abeolutely
prohibited  all  Interceeno  by  women  ;  and  the
Norella  1 3i.  c  S,  had  for  iU  ipedal  abject  to  make
nnll  all  Intereeoio  of  a  wife  for  her  hoiband.  A
woman  who  wai  ned  in  reapect  other  Inleraenio,
or  her  hem,  might  ploul  the  Senatnicoiunltum,
and  iho  might  recorer  anything  that  ifae  bad  paid
inrecpeclofherlnlercenio.  TheSenatniconinltnm,
thongh  it  made  null  the  interceMio  of  a  woman,
protected  the  creditor  h  &r  ai  to  rettore  to  him  a
former  right  of  action  againit  hia  debtor  and  Ude-
joMoiei:  thii  action  waa  called  Reatitutoria  or
Reacinoria.  In  the  eaae  of  a  new  contract,  to
which  the  woman  wai  a  party,  the  Interceuio  woi
null  by  the  Senatuconiultiua,  and  the  creditor  had
the  nme  action  ogunit  the  penon  tat  whom  the
~ " ■  -  ■  ■" a» he would hare hod


t(  the  w

:t  had  no  reference


L  right  ariiing  oi


of  the  I


I  a  farmer  right,  but  to


noonee  the  benefit  of  the  Scnatuiconinltum  ;  and
then  wu  a  coniidenbia  numba  d  eiceptioii  to
the  nile  that  a  woman  coold  plead  the  Moatoa-
conaultmn.

(Die.  16.  tit  1.  ad  S-CVdMam;  Paulni,
&  A.  ii.  tiL  1 1  ;  Vangerow,  PamUHtm,  Ac.  iii.
p.  US.)  [O,  L.]

INTERCE-SSIO  wu  the  interfennce  of  a  ma-
giniBtui  to  whom  an  appeal  [ArrcLLaTio]  wu
made.  The  object  of  the  InterceBiJO  wu  to  put  a
it(^  to  pioceedingi,  on  the  gronnd  of  informalitj
or  other  Bofficiant  came.  Any  magiitratui  might
"inteteedere,"  who  wu  of  equal  rank  with  or  of
rank  nipE'iiai  to  the  magiitiatui  fnnn  or  againit
whom  the  ujpellUio  wai. Caaet  occur  in  which


■  Verr.


6-)


refetenca  to  the  Tribnnea  who  originallr  had  not
juriidictio,  bnt  uted  the  Interceuio  for  the  purpsie
of  prevenUng  wrong  which  wu  offend  to  a  penon
in  their  pretence  (GelL  liii.  12),  The  Intemaiio
of  iha  Tribune!  of  the  Plebi,  wu  Auidlium  (Liv.
Ti.  38  ;  Cic.  pro  QmMio,  1, 2D)  ;  and  it  might  be
oiorciied  either  in  jnre  or  in  jadicio.  The  tribune
qui  intoeaiil  could  prevent  a  jndicioa  from  being
inititated.  That  there  could  be  an  Inlereeauo
after  the  Litii  Conlcatatio  appean  from  Cicero
{pro  TtJUo,  38).  The  tribuDU  coold  alio  u»
the  Intecceaiio  to  prercnt  execution  of  a  judicial
•entenca.  (Liv.  vL  37.)  T.  Qracchna  interfered
(tndnxnil)  againit  the  praetor  Terentini,  who  wu
going  to  order  executirai,  in  the  roie  of  L.  Scipio
who  wu  condemned  for  pecnlation  (Liv.  xxxviiL
60  ;  Oell.  vii.  19),  and  he  prereated  Scipio  being
lent  to  priaon,  but  he  did  not  interfere  to  prevent
execution  bcir^  had  on  hii  property,  A  lingle
tribune  could  eftct  thli,  and  againtt  Uie  ^iniinof


tt


"O"


649  INTERDICTUU.

IiB  csllngnfs,  whicii  waa  tbs  CSM  in


INTEHDICTUU.


The


II  iDtcn
I  applied  to  ihe  I


and  the  Terb intarcedo


k.deOrai.  11.4'.) [G.  L.]
IKTERCl'Sl  DIES. [Dies.)
INTERCOLU'MNIA. [Tsuphtm.]
INTERBI'CTIO  AQUAE  ET  IGNIS.  [Ei-
BlLItlM,  p,  516.  b.]

INTERDICTUM.  "  In  certain  owti  (<««i
ex  causa)  the  pnetor  or  proconml,  in  the  tint  in-
ataJice  {pradpalifer)^  eTsrcuei  hu  aathority  for
the  lenninalion  of  d^tcL  Thii  he  chiffiy  do«
vhea  the  dupate  ii  iboiit  Posieuion  «  Qnaai-
poaaeanaa  ;  and  At  eiereiw  of  fail  aathont;  con-
liatt  in  ordering  •oroclhing  to  be  done,  or  forbidding
•ometliiiiE  to  ba  dime.  Tbe  fbrmahie  and  the
tcnna,  which  bo  nui  on  mcli  occaaioni,  are  nJled
either  Inlerdictn  or  Decrets.  Tbej  an  called  De-
creta  when  he  orden  lemetbing  te  be  done,  ai
■when  he  orderi  lomething  to  be  produced  {etHbrri)
or  1^3  be  Kfltored :  they  are  cslled  Interdicta  when
he  fbrhidi  iomething  to  be  done^u  when  be  ordera
tliat  force  ihall  not  be  used  againil  a  penon  who
is  in  jwiniirm  r^htfdly  (ah  vitio  \  or  that  no-
thing fhall  be  done  on  a  piecs  of  lacred  gronnd-
Aecordmgl;  all  latodiclaant  either  R«tiIuloiia,(n-
ExbiUtiota,  or  Prahibiloria."  (Oaiui,iv.  139, 140.)
Thti  pauage  ceataint  tlie  esential  diatinetion
betwecD  an  Actio  and  an  Inierdicltun,  u  fiur  u
tbe  praeloi  or  proooninl  ii  eoneenied.  In  tfao  caie
of  an  Actio,  tbe  pmetor  pronooncet  no  dooee,  but
be  gixei  a  Judex,  whote  bntioeit  it  ii  to  inietti-
gate  the  matter  in  diipute,  and  to  pronounce  a
aantence  conalitantlj  with  the  formula,  which  li
hii  aulborilj  foi  acting.  In  the  caie  of  aa  Actio,
tberelbr^  ihe  praetor  neither  order*  nor  tbrbidfl  a
tbin^  to  be  doae,  bat  be  laji  Judiciiun  dnbo.  In
Ihe  cats  of  aa  latcidict,  tbs  [Oaetor  makea  an
order  that  eomething  ihall  be  done  or  ihall  not  be
done,  and  bii  worda  are  accoidiLglj  wordi  of  com-
mand: Ilatiluaa,  Eihibeaa,  Vim  fieri  Teto.  Thia
tmiiitdiaU  inler)ioaition  at  die  praetor  ia  appropri-
ately erpremed  by  tbe  word "  principal iler,"  the


I  effect  of  wl


uiilyae


Savif[ii]f  obif  rve*  (hat  it  laty  be  objected  to  tbit
cipoaition,  that  in  one  of  the  moat  impottaut  In-
terdicta, that  DeVi,  (he  fomnla  ia.  Judicium  dabo.
(Dig.43.  tit.  16.  a.l.)  But,  aa  he  obaervei,  the
old  genuine  formula  waa,  Rettiluaa  (Cic  pro
Catcin.  8,  SO)  ;  and  the  "  Judicium  dabo  "  muat
hare  be«i  iutrsduced  when  tbe  foimolae  of  tbe
two  old  Interdicta  (De  Vi  Armala  and  Dt  Vi
^latidiamd)  wen  bleaded  tr^thcr,  and  at  a  tune
when  the  diadnctiona  betneen  the  old  fbcmnlae
had  beooma  a  matter  of  indiSereuce.

The  mode  of  proceeding  aa  to  the  Interdict  wai
ai  follow!  1  —  The  party  aogriered  ataled  hii  caaa
to  tbe  pnetor,  which  waa  the  foundation  of  bii  de-
mand of  an  Interdict,  and  waa  therefore  analogoua
to  the  Poalolatia  actionia.  If  the  praetor  n«
aafficient  reaaon,  he  might  giant  the  Interdict,
which  waa  often  nothiiw  more  than  the  worda  of
the  Edict  addretsed  to  the  litigant  partiea  ;  and  in
doing  (0,  he  oied  hia  "auctoritaa  finiendii  contra-
Teraiia  "  in  the  firat  inMance,  or  immcdiatclj,  and
without  the  inlerTention  of  a  judex  (prmeipidittT\
udalao''(«itiaeicau*ia,*' tbKi^  in  caaet  already


provided  for  by  the  Edict  Iftbei.
admitted  the  plaiuliff'a  <Ma  befiirB  the  iawnliet
waa  granted,  and  complied  with  ila  terma,oraBk
mitted  to  the  interdict  after  it  waa  ^^"i,  ^
diapute  waa  of  conne  at  ac  end.  Thii  ia  nM
alBled  by  Gaiua,  but  tbllowi  of  neceatity  ftom  the
nature  of  the  ea« ;  and  when  he  soea  on  to  «;
"  (hat  when  (he  praelor  ha*  ordered  any  thing  M
be  done  or  brbidden  anything  to  be  dooc,  the
matter  je  not  tben  ended,  but  the  portiet  go  belbre
a  judex  or  rccupemtorea,"  he  mean*  that  tbii  fur-
ther proceeding  take*  place,  if  the  praetor^  luln-
dict  doea  not  aeUle  the  matter.  The  whole  fena
of  proceeding  ii  not  clearly  atated  by  aome  modal
writera,  but  UM  folloviDg  u  conuHent  with  Oiiuk
The  complainant  cither  obtained  (he  Intodict
or  he  did  not,  which  would  depend  on  Ihe  oae
that  he  made  oat  before  the  praetor.  If  ha  lailed,
of  couree  the  litigation  waa  at  end  ;  and  if  he  ob-
tained the  interdict,  and  the  defendant  e»iiil^«*

an  end.  If  the  defendant  aimply  did  Dot  obey  the
termi  of  the  Interdict,  it  would  ba  neeenaiy  b*
the  complainant  again  to  apply  to  the  ftaetor,  in
order  that  thta  bet  might  be  aaccitained,  and  thai
the  plaintiff  might  giio  lull  aaliafactian.  If  (he
'  ifendant  wna  diaaaliafied  with  the  Interdict,  h*
igbl  alao  apply  to  the  praetor  fin-  an  inTotipliMi
to  the  facta  of  the  ouc :  bii  allegatitm  might  h*
that  there  watoriRinally  no  ground  for  tbe  Inteidid*
He  might  alao  apply  to  tbe  pmetor  on  Ihe  gnand
that  he  had  HiluJied  the  termi  of  the  Inlodict,
though  the  phiintiff  waa  not  aatiafied,  or  cai  Ihe
ground  thai  be  waa  unable  to  do  more  than  he  bad
In  all  tbeae  caaea,  when  the  piaetor'a  order
lot  terminate  the  diipute,  he  directed  an  v-
qtiiry  by  certain  formulae,  which  were  the  inatrae- '
(ion  of  tbe  judex,  recuperatorea,  or  arbiter.  A^
cordingly,  the  proceaa  of  tbe  Interdict  brlangra
to  the  ordo  judicionim  privatorum,  but  the  judi-
cium waa  conalitated  by  the  jwculiar  proceaa  of
the  Interdict.  The  inquiry  would  be,  Wheiha
anything  had  been  done  contrary  to  the  Piaeter^
Edict* ;  or.  Whether  that  had  been  done,  whkh
ho  bad  ordered  to  be  done :  tbe  (bnner  inqairt
would  bo  made  in  (he  taae  of  a  Prabibi(o(T  lalA*
diet ;  and  the  latter  in  the  cbm  of  an  ExhibitaiT
or  Rcatitutoiy  InterdicC

In  the  oue  of  Interdicta  Prohibilotia  tben  «u
elwaya  >  aponiio  ;  that  u,  the  partial  woe  »•
quired  to  deiMtit  a  aire  aecurity  br  a  torn  it
money,  the  loai  of  which  wa*  in  (ba  natan  of  a
penally  (potna)  to  the  party  who  fiuled  hefsre  tha
jadei :  thii  aponaio  waa  jniibablj  reqaited  by  tbe
praetor.  In  the  c*ae  of  Intadiela  Reatitatoria
and  Prohibitoria,  tbe  proceediu  wa«  aoowtimn
per  iponiioneni,  and  therefore  befare  a  judex  or  ifr
cnperatorea,  and  aomeliniea,  without  any  ipoaaio,
per  fbimiilam  arbitrariam,  that  ja,  before  an  arbiter.
In  the  cate  of  theae  two  latter  Interdicts,  it  icemi
to  bare  depended  on  tbe  party  who  daimcd  tbe
inquiry  whether  there  ahould  be  a  aponaio  or  not :
if  auch  parly  made  a  ^nno,  that  la,  pnffntd  U
pay  a  anm  of  money,  if  he  did  not  mi^e  oat  lua

*  "  Edict "  ia  tbe  word  naed  by  Gaioi,  bot  h*
mean*  Interdict  He  naea  Edict,  becauie  tbe  In-
terdict would  only  be  granted  in  ancb  caaaa  ai
were  nrorided  &r  by  the  Edict  (ceitM  •■  email).
and  ttiua  an  Interdict  waa  Dnly  an  ^fdkmtioD  of
the  Edict  to  a  lacticnlai  caae.


INTERDICT  UM.
OM,  Ik  mBBla  put;  nu  required  to  moke  ons
•ki.  In  tbi  OH  of  Caecitia  (Ck.  pro  Caaaa.  8)
a  qmno  bad  bsRi  made :  Ciscni  taji,  uddreBing
Utc  neapenbiRa,  **  ipoittio  &Lt*  e*t :  hu  da  ipon-
■inKTplua  jndkandnm  ut"  la  (act,  Thsn  the
■Utv  CUM  Man  %  jodex  «  ubiler,  the  form  of
fnc«diu  mi  nnulv  to  the  ndiiiBry  jodidiun,

Th>ehKfdJii*ionaf  Interdicti  hu  bean  atated.
T)m  Tarina  juapaum  to  which  they  wot  appli'
aUt  tffetr  frem  tha  titJea ;  u,  lutcidictiim  ds
Aqgt,  da  Arixsibua  caedmdii,  da  Libaria  exhi-
tndia,  da  Ririi,  da  SaparfieiabBa,  &c

Amhs  diTiatoD  oT  iDtaidida  via  into  than  fin
■he  pHfoaa  of  ■cqniiiiig  Poaataaion,  retMning  poa-


TbalMa


7.  144.)


in™  »  am  n  vuom  tha  BoBonmi  powaaaio
IBaiimcM  PonBuio]  ma  gi>aii,M>d  h  i*  lafancd
K  b^  tta  initial  vtoda  QQamm  bononuD.  <D)g-
<1  tit  1  a,  1.)  Ita  opraukm  ww  to  compal  a
ftn,  vho  had  poaaeaaion  of  tha  pnipertj  of
'bich  tha  BonoTtun  pwatMJo  ma  gnmlad  to  an-
Mbo^  ts  gm  it  np  to  mch  pBn«i,  whelhtc  tha
poni  is  puaeaaira  of  mch  fsopeit;  poaaeaaed  it
in  bcrtda  or  |hv  poueaaon.  Tha  Bonoram  Emtar
[Bdjwiuh  EhtioJ  waa  alvi  entitled  la  tbia  Ia-
in^ vhith  na  adaatimei  called  PoantMrium.
1>  nt  alas  granted  to  hita  who  bought  gooda  it
faUic  aactioo,  and  in  ancti  cata  iraa  caUed  Sacto-
liam,  lit  name  "  Seetotea  "  being  applied  to  -pa-
"B  'be  booght  prepartj  in  luch  manner.  (Cib
fntbtcAm.  36.)

Tbe  Interdietain  Salriannin  ma  gtajiledtotha
<*w  «f  land,  and  enablad  him  to  take  puaaeaaion
°f  the  gooda  of  the  odcmua,  who  had  i^rnd  that
kapiodi  ahould  ba  a  McnritT  for  hia  re  '  '"'
Ulit.1)

TUa  latCTdiet  VM  not  atrictl;^  a  Pi
Iitodict,  aa  Savignj  baa  akown  (Dot  Rteii  da
A«i«,  p.  410 ,  Puebla,  Inititmtiimn,  dLc  ii.
i2U.)  It  did  not,  like  die  two  other  Intardicta,
[>'ia|iiML  a  lawful  paaaeMion,  that  ia,  a  Jm  poa-
d  bj  tbe  bet  of  a  righthl  poaaea-


The


»^poa.


pawn  who  had  a  lightful

I  intitled  to  it  in  reapect  of

baing  diatorbed

of  anlkipated  diatuib

in  tbe  caae  of  a  diapnte  a


andintii. Ill  ef
Gaisa  itatea,  to

partiea  aboold  pn
d  which  ahoDblba

den  ef  proof.  Then  wen  two  InterdicU
daaa  named  re^KctiTslj  Uti  Poaaidetii  and
,  fitan  the  initial  worda  of  the  Edict  Tha
Uti  Poaaidetb  applied  to  land  or
^■"aa,  Bad  the  other  to  movtablea.  The  Uti
Pwideda  pnteelad  the  peraon  who  at  tha  time  of
•■MariBg  dw  iMerdict  waa  in  actnal  peaaHilon,
Pa*>dad  ha  had  not  obtainad  tba  pnaaaarion  againit
t^  Mhcf  partf  (mhtrtanai)  vi,  clam,  or  precario,
*U:k  waa  tha  tktea  ritia  poaacaaionia.  ( Featu,
L  <L  Ptmaio  :  Oaiua.  it.  1 60.)  In  the  caie  of  the
Uunbi,  the  poaaeaiion  of  the  mombh
b;  the  Interdict  dedand  to  batoDg  ti
ad  iiiiwiaaiil  tha  thing  agaiuat  tbe  other
tg  vutgMta  {art  of  tbM  jea^  "


(«'  dtJKtiu)  from  hia  poaaaauon  of  ai
-hing,  ,'■■"-


INTEKDICTUM.  648

«  dam  nee  pieeario." Than  mm  aoma  pecnii-
itiea  at  lo  poaaeaaio  of  moveable  tbingi. (Gaiua,

Tbe  Interdietiun  rMUpcrandae  poaaHtioni*  might
be  claimed  by  hira  who  had  been  ibrciblf  ejected
'  m  of  an  inunoTabls
compel  the  wnng-
s  the  poaieaaian,  and  to  make  gvod  all
10  initial  worda  of  the  Intatdict  were.
Undo  ta  illnm  vi  dejedati ;  and  tha  worda  of  eom-
mand  were,  Eo  natitoaa.  (Cic  pro  Catm.  SO,
pro  7VL  4,  89,  44  ;  Oaina,  iT.  1S4  ;  Dig.  43.
Utl6.  a.1.)  Than  wen  two  caaeaofVia:  one  of
Via  aimtJ^jto  which  the  ix-dbiary  Interdict  applied,
which  Cicero  callt  Qootidianum  ;  the  other  of  Via
Aimata,  which  had  bean  obtained  bf  Caecina
againM  Aebstiiia.  Ths  plaintiff  had  to  pcore  that
ha  waa  in  pewaaaion  of  tha  pcamiaea,  and  had  been
ejected  bj  tha  defendant  <n  hia  agenti  (fiimilia  or
rncBiRitor,  Cic  pro  liiU.  ^9.)  If  tbe  matter  cams
befon  a  jodei  the  defendant  might  allege  that  he
bad  complied  with  the  Interdict,  "  reatiloiaae,"
though  he  had  not  done  eo  in  fact ;  hot  thia  waa
tha  form  of  tbe  aponaio,  and  the  ddendant  would
ancceed  befbn  tbe  jndei  if  be  could  ihow  that  ha
waa  not  bound  to  naton  the  plaintiff  lo  hia  poa-
aeaiiixi. {Pm  Catem.  B,  32.)

The  defendant  might  pat  in  an  anawer  (aicaf^)
lo  tba  plaintiff 'a  dum  for  rettitntion :  he  might
■how  that  tbe  plaintiff 'a  poaaeaaiLin  commenced
eilhM'  Ti,  clam,  or  pracario  with  retpect  to  tha
defendant  (pro  Caeeui,  SS,  pro  7VL  44)  ;  but
thii  eiceptio  waa  not  allowed  in  the  oue  of  via
aimata.  {Pro  Oaedn.  S,  S2.)  The  defendant
might  alio  plead  that  a  year  had  el^aad  ainee  tha
Tidence  oHnplained  o^  and  thii  waa  geaerally  a
good  plea  ;  for  the  Interdict  oaitained  the  worda
"in  hoc  anno."  Bat  it  the  defendant  waa  alill  in
poaaeaiion  after  the  year,  ha  could  not  make  thia
pin  ;  nor  eoald  he  arail  hiniaelf  of  it  in  a  caae  of
Via  Annata.  (Cic;  od  Pam.  ir.  1 G.)

A  dandeatioa  poaaeaiio  ii  a  poaaeaaio  in  which
the  psaieiaar  tahei  a  thing  (which  mnit  of  contaa
ba  a  monble  thing)  aecretij  (fitrliee)  and  without
the  knowledge  of  Iha  peraun  whoae  adTeiae  claim
to  the  poeaeaaion  be  feara.  Such  a  poaaeaaio,  when
it  wna  a  diatarbanee  of  a  rightful  poaaeaaio,  gave
the  rightful  poaeeaior  a  tjtle  to  have  the  Interdict
de  clandeatina  poaaeaaione  for  tha  reeoTcry  of  hia
poaaeeaiw.  All  tiacea  of  thia  mterdict  are  nearly
loet ;  but  ila  exiatence  leema  pmbabie,  and  it  mnat
have  bad  aome  rraemblance  to  the  Intecdictmn  de
ti  The  aiceplio  clandeatinaa  potaeaaionia  waa
qnite  a  different  thing,  inaamoeh  aa  a  dandeatim
poaviaro  did  not  neeeiaaiily  anppoae  tha  lawful
poaaeaaion  of  anotbar  party.

Tbe  Interdictum  de  Preeoria  poaaeaaime  or  da
Precario  applied  to  a  caae  of  Piecartnm.  It  ii  Pre-
carium  when  a  nun  pennita  another  to  oierciae
ownenbip  oTer  hia  property,  but  letaina  the  right
of  demanding  the  [nfierty  back  when  he  plceaea.
It  ia  called  Precarinm  beiwua  the  paraon  who
TBceiTed  anrJi  permiaaion  uanaJly  obtained  it  by
raqneat  (pma)  ;  though  reqneat  woi  not  necca-
mij  to  conititate  Fnorium,  for  it  might  arise
by  tadt  permiaaion.  (Panlna,  S.  It.  t.  tit  &  a.
II.)  The  peraon  who  received  the  detraition  of
the  thing,  obtained  at  the  aarae  time  a  legal  poaaM
uon,  unleu  proriaiioi  to  the  eonttnt;  waa  made  by
agreement  In  either  caae  tha  permiaaion  could  at
anj  (inw  be  ncallad,  and  the  iifiaaaiiii^  which  in


6U  INTERDICTUM.

iM  origin  vna  juts,  Ixcsme  injiuta,  viUoift,  m
■oon  at  rcilitution  wu  refused.  RMUtution  coald
be  cUumed  by  the  Inlcrdictmn  de  Preouio,  pre-
oeely  u  La  the  cvc  of  Vit ;  and  the  lole  founda  ■
tioD  of  the  light  Co  thia  Interdict  wu  a  vitiuu
pasKuio,  u  jiut  BxpLaioed.  The  Pncaiiuni  vu
nerer  lieired  u  &  matter  of  cnntiaet  The  luter-
dictom  do  ptccaiio  luigiiially  applied  to  land  oolj,


but  i'


Table


thing!.  The  obligation  impotsd  by  the  Edict
to  reiun  ths  thing,  bal  net  ite  vilnt,  in  oat  n
mu  loat,  unlet*  dolui  or  lata  cnlpa  could  be  proTcd
againit  Ihs  defendant  But  flram  the  time  thai
the  denuud  ia  made  againat  Che  defenduit,  he  ii
n  mora,  and,  u  in  the  ca»  of  the  other  Intcrdicta,
he  ie  aiuweisble  foi  ^1  culpa,  and  for  the  frniti  or
profits  of  the  thing  ;  and  generally,  he  ia  bound  to
place  the  plaintiff  in  the  condition  in  irhich  he
miuld  hare  been,  if  then  had  been  no  refuial.
No  eiceptiont  ws«  allatred  in  tlH  caae  of  a  Pre-

Tha  origin  of  the  Pnorian  ii  teferred  by
Sarignj  to  the  ntaliaD  which  labDtUd  betreen  a
patnniu  and  hia  diau,  to  whom  the  pattwnu  gaTa
the  uia  of  a  portion  of  the  ager  publicua.  If  the
eliena  rcfuaed  to  reatoro  the  laod  upim  demand,  the
patronni  ma  entitled  to  the  Inteidietum  de  pn-
eario.  Aa  the  idation  between  the  patrenoi  and
the  cliene  waa  analogoua  to  that  belween  a  parent
and  hu  shild,  it  followed  that  then  wu  no  contract
between  them,  and  the  patron^  right  to  demand  the
land  haekwnaaneeeanryctoeeqnenee  of  the  relation
between  him  and  hu  client.  (Feitu,  lb.  Fatra.)
The  prccarinm  did  not  &11  into  dilute  when  the
old  tffcr  puhlicnt  ceaied  to  eiitt,  and  in  thii  reipect
it  fslloRed  the  doctrine  of  poaaeaiio  generally.
[Abhabia*  LiQia.]  It  WBB  in  &ct  extended
and  npi^d  to  other  thinga,  and,  among  them,  to
the  oue  of  pledge. fPionui.]

Gaiua  (it.  156)  malice  a  thnd  diTitlon  of  In-
terdiela  into  Sinplicia  and  Duplicia.  Simplicia
■re  thoee  in  which  one  peraon  it  the  ]Jalnti<F
(aelar),  and  the  other  it  ths  defendant  (mu) :  all
Heititutoria  and  Eihibitotia  Intcrdicta  are  of  thia
kind.  Pmhibitorin  Intcrdicta  are  cither  Simplicia
or  Duplicia ;  they  are  Simplicia  in  inch  cato  aa
thoae,  i^en  the  praetor  forbidt  any  thing  to  be
done  in  a  lociu  ncer,  in  a  flumcn  publicum,  v  on
a  ripiL  They  are  Duplicia  aa  in  the  caaa  of  the
Int^iUctom  uti  Poatidetia  and  Ulnbi ;  and  thvy
are  ao  c&lled,  taya  Qoina,  becauie  each  of  the  liti-
gant partial  may  be  indilf^nntly  conaidend  aa
actor  or  reui,  at  ^ipenn  from  the  tcrmt  of  the
Interdict (Gaiua,  i».  160.)

Intcrdicta  asem  to  hare  been  alao  called  Diqilieia
in  reapect  of  their  being  applicable  both  to  the  ac-
qeiiitian  of  a  poueiBion  wiuch  had  not  been  had
belbre,  and  alio  to  the  leooTety  of  a  poaaeetion,
An  Interdict  of  thia  data  waa  granted  m  the  cue
of  a  lindicatio,  or  action  aa  to  a  piece  of  land
Bgalnat  a  poiaeeaor  who  did  not  defend  hia  poa-
aeauon,  aa,  for  hutasce,  when  he  did  not  tutaait
to  a  judicium  and  giro  the  proper  iponaionei  re
aotiado^onaa,  A  aimilar  interdict  waa  granted  in
the  caie  of  a  rindicatio  of  on  henditaa  and  a
nauafructuB.  Proper  eecnrity  waa  alwaya  reqoired
ftom  the  peraan  in  pnmeieien,  in  the  caae  of  an  in
ram  actio,  in  order  to  aecon  the  plaintiff  agunat
■ny  leaa  or  injury  that  the  property  might  eualain
wbile  it  waa  in  the  potacetun  of  the  defendant
If  the  deleDdant  refwed  to  gin  fodi  Mcori^  ha  .


INTERREZ.

loat  the  poaacaaiey  which  asa  tranafined  te  the
plaintifr  Ipttiior).  (Rudoff,  Uatar  d«  /attrdd
Quern  ^Wwa,  &e^  ZsHidrifi,  loL  iz.)

"  By  all  theae  Inladicta  Poeaotaiim  it  pelected,
and  poatettion  in  iteelf^  in  itt  immediate  bna  ■
power,  in  &et,  orar  a  thing.  Pmeemicp  thit  A-
laini  a  legal  eiiatcnce,  wbuh  ia  ain^Iy  cemwrlrd
with  that  bet  Thia  pure  reception  cd  pe
among  Rigfatt  ia  not  pn]daied  by  the  et
of  tile  rightful  or  wrongful  origin  of  the  pnatenMa,
which  origin  hai  no  e&ct  with  icapeet  to  tbe  pa-
tection  giren  to  poBieaaion.  The  Injuata  PoHano,
that  ia,  the  poatettion  which  baa  bMn  acquired  ri,
or  dam  or  precario,  it  certainly  not  pnlectid
igainrt  the  pcraou  fnna  whom  it  haa  beco  acqiurcd
by  the  poaKuot  by  any  one  of  theee  three  ritii
pouciaionia  ;  but  apart  from  thia  caae,  the  Iiijuita
Poaieatia  fprca  the  lame  daim  to  [sotectian  at  the
Jutta.  (Dig.  4S.  tit  17.  i.  2.)  The  Intoriicli
arite  out  of  PoeMtaio,  and  indifferently  whether  it
ia  Juata  or  Icjntta  ;  only,  if  two  p  pea  mm  dum
BgsintI  one  another,  a  fbnner  and  B  preaeM  pea-
teaior,  of  whom  Che  one  hat  obtuoea  pctafwl
Erom  the  other  Titioae,  the  fbmter  it  not  [ntecud
againtt  the  latter.  (Dig.  43.  tit  17.  a.  1.  {  9.)"
Puchta,  /luUBfBHs  ^  it  J  22a.

(For  other  matten  relating  to  the  Interdict  ace
Oaiua,iT.  133—170;  Paulua,  &  £.  <r.  tit  fi  i  Dig;
43;  Safigny,  Dot  B»cU  da  BailOM,  ni.  401—
516;  Sarigny  and  Haabdl  Zafekrifl,  vol  iiL  |f.
305,  bSe,  431  1  Kdler,  Uiitr  die  £W-i<»  fV
morilmi  fit  tni  Da4  iMterdicbtm  Vti  pomMu,
ZeilKknfi,  ToL  il ;  RndoiS,  Bimtrkmgr*  Oa
daaelbt  Inlenliel,  ZtOiir^t,  toL  li. ;  Puchla,  ia-
itiMiovin,  &c,  ii.  H  169,  33£.)  [O.  L.|

INTEEPRES,  an  interpreter.  Thit  cbti  of
penont  became  very  numerooa  and  neeeaatry  to
the  Romant  at  their  ammre  extended.  Bmh*"**
btim  fbnign  natimt  to  Rome,  and  Irom  R^ne  to
other  itatet,  wen  generally  accompanied  by  ialtf-
prelen  to  ex[Jaia  the  objectt  of  the  emlw^  >
the  nipectiie  authoritiea.  (Cic  da  Onaaot.  it
H  it  Pmb.  t.  28  ;  Plin.  //.  N.  at.  2 ;  OriL
xTiL  17.  2  ;  Lit.  KXTii.  43.)  In  larn  meriantib
towna  the  interpreteri,  who  formed  a  kind  of
agenta  through  whan  buainea*  waa  done,  win
tometimea  Tery  nuniHoni,  and  Pliny  (ff.  JV-  li.
5)  Itatet  that  at  Dio«niriai  m  Colchu,  then  were
at  one  time  no  leat  than  1  SO  pertoni  who  acted  M
interpntert  to  the  Roman  meiehaat^  and  throi^
whom  all  the  buineti  wai  cairiad  on.

All  Romai


pnKonanlt,
ith  the  adm


pniTince,  had  to  airj  on  all  thdr  oAeiat  pneeed-
mgt  in  the  Latin  lai^u^  (VaL  Haz.  il  Z  1  3).
and  a*  they  could  not  be  expected  to  be  acquainted
with  the  langfunga  of  the  pronnciala,  they  bad
alwaya  among  their  aerranti  [ArrxuToaBsj  me
or  more  interpreten,  who  wen  gaieially  Ronau,
bnt  in  moat  caaca  undoubtedly  ftnedmen.  (Cic.  /n
Sojj.  11.)  Theae  intopnlen  had  not  only  »
offiuale  at  the  cooTentni  [CoNvaNTua],  bat  aln
explained  to  the  RamBn  ■Dremaretaytking  which
tbe  prOTinciBlt  might  with  to  be  laid  brfbra  him.
(CE.C.  r<rr.  iiL37,  odAH-xiiL  44)CBea.S<U.
GalL  i.  19  ;  oompan  DiAaen,  CML  AUmdl.  L  p.
16,  &c)  IL.S.]

INTERREX,  INTERREGNUM  (called  by
the  Oreek  writera  ;u«ta«iAat^  iiefafariXaui
Vx^FunfonAila).  The  office  of /■Mrtwt  ia  laid
to  baf*  been  inUUnlod  w  tln.dt^^  BMtafaM,


INTERREX.
m  mata  wfilted  to  ihan  ths  (orcnigD


nm  *Bia(  themidivf  inMead  of  eltctiog  ■  Icing.
For  ^  poipoi^  aceording  to  Liir  (i.  17),  thB
•eiHtB,  vhkli  dwn  wmiitou  of  one  faimdr«d  mem-
bo^  wu  drrided  into  ten  decoris  ;  uiil  &wn  each
iftbtHdiEiirieiowrwnatdTniiioniiiiited.  Thaw
logMte  liniwd  B  board  oT  tea,  with  ths  title  of
l^mga,  each  of  whom  enjoyed  in  nicceaHoa  the
npi  ftnra  aad  ila  badn  for  Atb  daji ;  and  if  as
king  ■■  tffabstei  at  tbe  expmiou  of  Mtj  daji,
ihe  nMtioa  b^an  anaw.  The  period  daring
■Ucb  thgf  axnoMd  their  power  wm  called  an
l^mtgmmk.  DioBTriui  (h.  G7)  and  Plutarch
(A'ana,  9)  gire  B  diSerent  accoont  of  the  matler ;
hi  that  of  Ut7  ^pcan  dw  moat  probable^
Niibidi  (ffic  n'  JioMd,  ToL  L  PL  S34,  toL  iL  p.
Ill)  MBoaa*  that  tko  fint  intanvge*  wen  ex-
doanlr  Kmn^  nd  that  they  were  the  DecNo
Pnni,  or  Ub  loadmg  lenaton,  of  whom  the  fint
mdiief  of  tba  whole  (enate.  (Compare  Wallet,
ChL^Aobi.  R»bi,  |3l,2[id«L>

The  iMcn^ca  agned  among  themielTet  who
•kwld  be  [n^coed  ai  king  <I>ioii;L  It.  10,  80),
ud  if  the  tonala  ^prored  rf  their  ehirice,  the;
amacsed  the  aatemhlf  of  the  curiae,  and  pH>-
Jand  Aa  peraom  wbom  thej  had  pieTioait;  agreed
■{■a ;  the  power  of  the  coriae  waa  confined  to  ac-
vfif  «  rejecting  him.  The  deaeo  of  the  mriaa,
bj  viaA  they  BKcptcd  the  king,  wn  called  jiufW
^p4  (Lit.  i.  22;  ac>feR^.ii.  13,21.)  After
IM  king  had  been  elected,  the  enriae  conferred
Ik  iiapeiinm  opoa  him  by  a  ipecud  law,  Icr  airiala
d-it^pio. (Cie.  >b  A7>.  iL  13,  17,  IB,  20,31.)

lalorcgta  were  appointed  ncder  the  republic  for
Uiiag  the  comitia  for  the  election  of  the  onnU,
■ben  (be  conmla,  throogb  ciril  camntoCiana  or
<*W  catnea,  had  been  unable  to  do  ao  in  theii
.nar  tCaOa.  (reonyi.  yiiL  90  i  Lit.  It,  43,  Ac)
Each  held  the  office  for  onlj  Sve  daja,  aa  under
Ibe  kioga.  The  comitia  wer^  aa  a  general  rule,
»ol  held  bj  the  fint  intwrei ;  more  uaaall;  by  the
•waid  or  third  <LiT.  ii.  7,  i.  11,  T.  31) ;  but  in
lae  iiMBDce  we  read  of  an  eleienth,  and  in  another
•f  a  faarteenth  inter™.  (Lir.  til  23,  riii.  23.)
The  eanitia  tet  decting  the  firM  conanli  were  held
hy  SfL  Looetina  aa  int«rrei  (Dionya.  It,  E4),
*hoia  Liry  (L  60]  ealb  alao  pn^fiBbu  iiriu.  The
ioluiigea  trader  the  republic,  at  leait  firm
k  <^  482,  woB  elected  by  the  aenata  bom  the
a^^  bodjp  and  were  not  confined  to  the  decern
I*uni  or  tea  chief  lenaton  aa  under  tbe  kinga.
(Diooja.  TiiL  90.)  Piebeiana,  howefer,  were  not
■doiniUa  to  thia  office  }  and  conaequently  when
plebama  were  admitted  into  the  aeiute,  the  palri-
t  together  (oDima)  vithoat  the


M,iT.7,43,


(Lir.


41 ',  Cicpro  Dono,  14;  Niebubr,
■<-.  11.  p.  riv  ; Walter,  gS  £5,  131.) For  thia
xitoDiaB  well  aa  on  acooonl  of  die  infloence  which
iha  iotenez  exerted  In  the  election  of  the  magia-
baM,  we  find  that  the  tribonea  of  the  plebo  i
■Vndy  appeatid  u  the  appointment  of  an  intei
(Li..  IT.  Mr^  S4.) fi»  inlerrex  had  ji
dMio. (U*.  z.  41  i  Niebuhr,  toL  iil  p.  24.)

laltttMia  eooliDned  to  ba  upointed  oceaaionally
ti3  the  titoa  of  the  aecond  Pmue  war  (Lit.  iziL  33,
U)  i  hat  afkor  that  time  we  md  of  no  interrex,
tS  the  acBMc,  tn  eommaud  of  SnUa,  created  an
Mora  to  hold  the  cmaitia  for  hia  election  aa  Die-
Ma,  a  &  82.  (Appaa,  Bt/LOv-i.  9S.)  In  b.  o.
U  uatfaer  iounei  wa*  ai^ointed  to  bold  the


1STHMU.  645

comitia,  in  whtch  Pompey  and  Cranna  wne
elected  connla  (Dion  Coo.  Tiiir.  27,  31)  |  and
we  alao  mad  of  interregea  in  a.  c.  53  and  £2,  in  the
latter  of  which  yeara  an  intenei  held  the  comitia,
■jieh  Pompey  waa  appointed  aole  conauL
Caaa.  iL  45  ;  Aicon.  ad  CXa.  MiL  iniL  p.  32,
Orslli ;  Plat.  Pimp.  64 ;  comp.  Becker,  HaaiBmek
d»r  Romiwitti  AlttrlUlntr,  loL  iL  part  L  p.  2^
fte.)

INTE'RULA. [Tnwici.]

INTESTA'BILIS.  In  the  TweWa  TaUei  it
waa  declared  "  qni  ae  aierit  teatarier  libripenaie
fnerit,  ni  teatimoniom  tariatnr,  improbna  inleala-
biliaque  eata"  (Dirkaen,  UttartieU,  dec.  i^  607  ;
coopare  OeUina,  n.  7,  it.  13.)  According  to
theas  paaBgea,  a  poaim  who  had  been  a  witneaa
iy  eolemn  octaaion,  anch  aa  tbe  making  of  a
,  and  afkerwarda  refoaed  to  giro  hia  teatimony,
waa  **  inteatabiiia,^  that  ie,  diaqualified  Irom  cTer
being  a  wilneaa  on  any  other  occaaion.  The  word
afterwarda  aeema  to  hare  had  ila  meaning  extended,
ixpreaa  one  who  could
not  make  a  will,  and  who  labiHircd  under  a  general
eiril  uM^iMily.  (Uor.  &it  ii.  3.  181 ;  I^.  28.
tiL  1.  i.  18.26;  loatiLliL  10.)  [0.  L.]

INTESTA'TO,  HEREDITATES  AB.
[HiBiB,  p.  eSB,  a.]

INTESTA'TUS. [HuiM,p.G8S,a.]

INTESTl'NUM  OPUS,  joiner-i  work,  i*  re-
fened  to  in  aoms  paaaagea  of  Vitraviua  aa  need  in
the  interior  of  baildinga  ;  hut  there  ia  nothing  in
hia  alluaiona  to  it  that  req^uiiea  explanation  (Vitni>.
. '  [P.3.J


INVESTIS.  [lui
IREN  (fpur).  [EiMN.]"
IRPEX,  HIKPEX,  or  URPEX  (Cato,daRa
Rati.  10),  a  haiTow,  uaed  to  dear  Ibe  fielda  of
weedo  and  to  level  and  break  down  tbe  aoil.
(FcBtu,  •.  r. ;  Scrrioa,  n  Virg.  Gtorr/.  i.  9£.)  The
faanov  of  the  aocienti,  like  oora,  had  iron  teeth,
and  waa  drawn  by  oien.  (Var.  de  Ling.  Lai.  v.
31,  ed.  SpengcL)  [J.  Y.]

ISELA'STICI  LUDI [Athlxtib.]
ISO'UOMUM  0PU8. {Mdrus.]
ISOPOHTEIA  {iaoTtiMrra). [Civitab,  p.
289,  b.]

ISOTELEIS  (liroT,A.r.).  tCivjTAg,  0.289,  b.]
ISTHMIA  C^-rliua),  one  of  the  four  great
national  featiTata  of  the  Oieeka.  Thii  featiial  de-
riTed  ita  luune  hma  the  Corinthian  iaibmua,  where
it  waa  held  in  honoar  of  Poaeidon.  Where  the
iathmiu  ia  narcoweat,  between  the  coaet  of  the
Sannic  gulf  and  the  weatem  foot  of  the  Oenean
hilla,  waa  the  temple  of  Poaeidon,  and  near  it  waa  a
theatre  and  a  atadiom  of  white  marble,  the  Kcne  of
theltthmiangamea.  (Pane.  iL  1 .  g  7 1  Strab.  viiL  6.
p.  360.) The  entrance  to  the  tem[Je  waa  adonied

Tbeae  gamea  were  aald  originalij  to  haie  been
inatitoled  by  Siiyphaa  m  honour  of  Melicertea,
who  waa  alio  called  Palaeraon.  (Apollod.  iii.  4.
S  3  ;  Faiia.iL  1.  g  3.)  Their  original  mode  of
celebration  partook,  as  Plularch  (I^lei.25)  ranarka,
more  of  tbe  character  of  myateriea,  than  of  a  great
and  national  aaaemhly  with  ilaTariouaamnaementa,
and  waa  performed  at  night.  SubBefjaent  to  tbe
age  of  Theaeui  the  lathmia  were  celebialad  in
honour  of  Poieldan ;  und  thia  iuooTBtiaa  ia  aacribed

TT  3


846  ISTHMIA.

ta  Thaeii*  luiueli;  who,  actording  to  mnie  legend*,

of  tha  new  Iithmiui  •olnnnitiu,  it  aid  to  hare
imitated  Henulm,  ths  fonnder  of  the  Oljmpiaii
nnic*.  The  cilebnUina  gf  the  Iithminwu  hence-
forth conducted  bj  the  Corinlhiuii,  but  TbtMUs
had  leteireil  tor  hii  Atheniuu  some  honounibla
dittinctiona ;  thoia  Alheniani  who  ittoided  the
Jilhmia  lulcd  acrou  the  Saronic  p;u1f  in  a  iiured
Yenel  (Sitwpij^  and  an  honorary  place  [wpotipta),
■1  lugs  u  the  lUl  of  their  vrisel,  was  assigned  to
tbam  during  the  celebntion  of  the  gunea.  <Plut.
Le.)  In  times  of  war  between  tbe  two  states  a
■Rcnd  tnice  was  condudrd,  and  the  Athenians
were  invited  Co  atleodMthetolenmiiin.  (Thucyd.
TuL  10.) The  Eleams  did  not  take  part  in  the

res,  and  Tsriooa  tloriet  wers  rehited  to  s«»imt
thii  su^Iar  eirmmitanc*.  (Paoi.  t.  3.  g  S.)
It  is  a  Tery  [Huhablo  CDnjeftQT«  of  Wachsmnth
{ffetlam.  AUerlk.  Tol.  i.  p.  1551,  that  Mit  Isthmia,
after  the  changes  aicrib»l  to  Theseas,  were  merel;
a  panafiTrit  ot  the  loniins  of  PelopoiaHaDs  and
tboaa  of  Attica ;  for  it  should  be  obserred,  that
Poseidon  wu  ha  Ionian  deitf,  whnte  warship
appears  orinnally  to  have  been  unVnown  to  the
Dnrisiu.  During  the  reijpi  of  the  Cypselids  at
Corinth,  the  celebration  of  the  Iithmisn  games  was
suspended  for  seventy  years.  (SoHn.  c  13.)  But
after  that  time  they  gndually  rue  to  the  rank  of  a
national  festival  of  all  the  Greeks.  In  Olymp.  49
they  became  periodical,  and  were  henceforth  cete-
bnled  reguiariy  every  third  year,  twice  in  evory
Olympiad,  that  is,  in  the  fint  and  third  year  of
every  Olympiad.  The  Isthmia  held  in  Ue  first
year  of  an  Olympiad  fell  in  the  Corinthian  month
Panemu)  (the  Attic  Ilecatombaeoa) ;  and  those
which  were  held  m  the  third  year  of  an  Olympiad,
fell  either  in  the  month  of  Munychion  or  Tharmi-
lion.  <Corsini,  Diatrt.  Agon.  4  ;  compare  Qoeller
ad  nsefd.  vlii.  9.)  Pliny  (_H.  !f.  iv.  S)  and  So-
linus  (c  9)  erroneously  state  that  the  Uthmia  wen
eelebrated  every  fifth  year.  With  this  regularity
the  solemnities  continued  to  be  held  by  the  Greeks
down  to  a  very  late  period.  In  228  B.  c  the
Romans  were  allowed  the  privilege  of  taking  pert
in  the  Isthmia  (Polyb.  il  13)  ;  and  it  was  at  thii
•olemnily  that,  in  s-n.  196  Flamininiu  proclainud
before  an  innumerable  oiscmbly  the  independence
of  Greece  (Polyb.  ivii. -29).  After  the  fall  of
Corinth,  in  b.  c  US,  the  Sicyoniana  were  honoured
with  the  privilege  of  conducting  the  Isthmian
games  ;  but  when  the  town  of  Corinth  wns  rebuilt
by  Julius  CaeHir  (Paus.  ii.  1.  g  2,  iL  2.  §  2),  the
right  of  conducting  the  solemnities  waa  rettored  to
tho  Corinlhiaas,  and  it  seoma  that  they  henceforth
continued  to  be  cclebiated  till  Christianity  became
ike  stBle-nligion  of  the  Roman  empire.  (Suelon.
tftm,  2«  ;  Julian  Imperet.  Bpid.  35.)

Tha  season  of  the  lathmion  lolemnitiea  was,  like
that  of  all  the  greet  national  testivi]*,  distinguished
bj  general  RJoicingi  and  (easting.  The  canl«sts
UiA  game*  of  the  Isthmia  were  ue  same  as  those
at  Olympia,  and  embraced  all  the  Tarietiea  of
■thlettc  per^tmancea,  audi  as  wrtatling,  tha  pan-
cratium, together  with  horse  and  chanot  racing.
(Paus.  T.  3.  g  4  ;  Polyb.  I.  c)  Musical  and  poeti-
cal contesti  were  likewise  carried  on,  and  in  Che
btter  wiHneD  also  were  aJlowed  to  lake  part,  b*
we  must  inlet  (torn  Plutarch  (Sytipot.  v.  3),  who,
on  the  authority  of  Polemo,  atales  that  in  the  trca-
Hiy  at  Sicym  then  was  a  golden  book  which  hod


JUDEX,  JODICIUM.

ntsd  t
ihe  had  gi

At  a  late  period  of  the  Rimum  empire  the  charac-
ter of  the  games  at  the  Isthmia  ^ipeaiB  V^>^7
^tered ;  fbc  in  the  letter  of  the  empem  Julian,
above  referred  to,  it  is  stated  that  the  Coriatfaianf
puit^hased  bean  and  panthers  for  tbe  purpose  nf
eihibiting  their  fights  at  the  Isthmia,  and  it  ia  not
improbable  that  the  custom  of  inOodndng  fights  ef
animals  on  this  occaaion  commenced  aoon  afctc  the
time  of  Caesar.

The  prise  of  a  licta-  in  the  Isthmian  gamta  eta-
aisted  at  first  of  a  garland  of  pins-leavea,  and  aAo-
wtuils  of  a  wreath  of  ivy ;  but  in  the  end  tlw  ivy
waa  again  superseded  by  a  pioe-garbod.  (PlnL
Sgmpot.  T.  3.)  Simple  aa  such  a  reward  waa,  a
victor  in  tbeie  games  gained  the  greateat  diitinc.
tion  and  honour  among  hia  oountrymeQ ;  and  a
victory  not  only  rendered  the  individwll  vbo  ob-
tained it,  a  subject  of  admiration,  but  shed  Insln

to  which  he  belonged.  Hmce  Solon  ealabiiahtd
b^  a  law  that  every  Athenian  who  gained  the
TKtory  at  the  Isthmian  gantes,  ahonld  reeehe  from
the  public  treeisary  a  reward  of  me  bandied
drachmae.  (Pint  Sg/.  23.)  His  victory  waagene-
rally  celebrated  in  lofty  odea,  called  Epinikia,  or  tri-
umphal odes,  of  which  we  still  juaaiaa  some  beaa-
tiful  specimens  among  the  poems  of  Pindar.  (Sea
Maasiea  in  the  JIfen.  <U  CAoad.  da  Iiucr^  rf
BM.  IM.  V.  p.  214,  Ax. ;  Disseo,  Da  AsttsH
PattiM  tbniinitBs  PHdanamm,  prefixed  to  tha
fint  Tolume  of  his  editiot  of  Pindar ;  MOlter,
HiiL  a/  Onei  IM.  f.  320,  ftc  ;  Knutao,  Dit
i-yUin,A'n>wahi>r(d/iUMi'«,p.165,&c) [US.]

ITA'LIA. [Colonia;  PaoriNciA.]

ITEH. [ViAK.]

ITINERI9  SERVITUS. [SmviTiTrBtl

JUDEX,  JUDrCIUU.  A  Roman  nagu-
tratus  generally  did  not  invettigate  tbe  bets  in
dispute  in  such  matten  aa  wen  brought  bafi>«
him  ;  he  appointed  a  Judex  for  that  purpoa^  and
gave  him  instruotiona.  [AcTiOj  Intkiuhctum.]
Accordingly,  the  whole  of  Civil  procedure  waa  ei-
prtased  by  the  two  phnsea  Jo*  and  Jodicioio,  of
whicli  the  former  comprehended  alt  that  took  plaoa
before  the  ma^stnilus  (imJHrr),  and  the  btter  all
that  took  place  before  the  judex  {in  JmUda).  Tha
meaning  of  the  term  Jadlcea  in  a  passage  of  Livy
(iii.  SG)  ia  uncertabi.  In  the  Theodoaian  Code  the
term  Jndei  designate*  the  governor  of  a  province.
From  the  earlier  periods  to  Ihe  time  aS  Cooatan-
tine  it  deiignated  a  peiaon,  nhoaa  flmetioaa  naj
be  generally  understood  from  what  fidlowa.

In  many  caaea  a  single  Jodez  waa  appointed :
in  olhere,  several  were  ajqmnted,  and  uh^  snini


opposed  to  Ihe  ainj^e  Judei.  (Qaios,  iv.  104 —
109.)  Under  certam  circnmstsDoea  the  Judex  ma
calli^  Arbiter :  thus  Judex  and  Arbiter  on  nanwd
together  in  the  Twelve  Tables.  (Diikaen,  Uettr-
sia4t,  &e.  p.  725.)

A  Judex  when  aj^Kunted  was  boond  In  dia-
charge  the  funeliona  of  the  office,  nnlcai  he  bad
tome  valid  eictiae  (aieMstio).  A  penoa  might
alio  be  disqualified  from  being  a  Judex.  Ths*
were  certain  eeasons  of  the  year  when  It^al  buai-
nesa  waa  dona  at  Rome  (cass  nt  agtiaUtr,  Oaiua,
iu  279),  and  at  these  times  tha  terticaa  of  tin
judicss  were  required.  Theae  legal  tennt  wne
regulated  occsidiiw  lo  lbs  muodlm  that  tlina


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.
a  periodi  oC  Tustion  (Cic.  ad  AU.  i


a  jtdida  Jvnat  refti
naco,  the  teniu  depended  on  the  ConTcntiu,  A
Jndeji  wu  lUble  to  *■  fine  if  he  whi  not  in  attend-
■DOS  when  be  wu  reqaired.  In  in;  giwn  case,
the  litinnt  pulin  iigreed  upon  x  judu  at  accepted
bin  wbooi  the  nagiilntui  pnipoied.  A  [Mil;
bad  tbe  pow^  of  rejecting  A  proposed  judu,
Ihoogb  then  moit  haie  beni  unie  limit  to  thii
pnwcT. (Cic  pro  Cbof.  43.1 In  caKi  where  one


(Cic


litimut  paxtki  wu  a  peicgrinni,  a  peie-

Biigbt  be  judex. (Gaiue,  if.  IDS.) Tbe

D  ditebuge  bia  dulj  tutbfullj.


L39.)


When  Italy  bad  reeeived  iti  oTganintion  from
the  Romani,  the  magietntiii  of  the  menl  citiea
bad  juriadiclio,  and  appointed  a  Judex  ai  the
pcaatar  did  at  Rome  {La  Rtibfia  tU  Gallia
CSmlfian).  In  the  proTincci,  the  goTHnon  ap-
pooited  a  JedeK  or  Rccupeiatom,  ai  the  taH
B^ht  be,  at  the  Coniealui  which  the;  held  (bt
the  admiaiatratiaii  of  joiilce ;  and  the  Judex  «
Beenpeiauaea  weta aelectod both from  Konian

Wben  iLa  Judex  waa  appmnled,  tbe  pieceed-
bn  aejiv*  01  befera  tbe  piaetat  wen  terminated,
which  waa  aanetimea  aipnaaed  bj  tbe  term  Lilit
OimMilHia,  tbe  phnuealuOmtuCala  and  J'ujin'im
a\Mfiam  n  onJtaoAiai,  being  eqninlent  in  the
duatcal  jnriila.  [LiTia  CaNTadTiTiD.]  The
partica  appealed  beiore  the  Judex  on  the  ihitd  da;
(awynTiMrfiaohn),  nnleii  the  praetor  had  deferted
tbe  jndieima  for  lome  tuSdent  reston.  The  Jndei
wa«  generall;  aided  ij  adriaen  (jHruoouiuU)
Iianied  in  tbe  law,  who  were  mid  "  in  conailio
adeaae  "  (Cic  pro  P.  QmnSe,  2.  6,  Top.  17)  i  but
the  Judex  aUme  waa  empowered  to  gi>e  judgment.
Tba  matter  waa  Bnt  brieS;  itated  la  the  Judex
(toMMot  euffKlie,  talUdio),  and  the  omtorei  or
paovci  ef  ocb  part;  iupportrd  hii  cauia  in  a
i|ii  1 1  h  The  eridence  (esni  to  hace  been  giren
at  the  Mme  time  that  the  ipeechei  were  made,
and  not  to  hare  been  heard  bcfon  the  patroni
BDade  thcjr  addieai.  {Gc  pro  Aob.  Com,  1 4,  pro
P.  qaiariii,  18.)  Bnt  it  ii  probiibtc  that  tbe  pnic-
tiee  ID  <iu»  reelect  might  vai;  in-  different  caaet.
Witoeaaea  woe  pndiiMd  on  both  tidet  and  ex-
■niped  otall;  ;  tbe  witneuea  an  one  aide  were  alao
iirm  I  uniinrrl  h;  the  other.  (Cic.  pro  Caedaa,
10,  pra  FUeeo,  10.)  Written  docunienti,  luch
aa  initrttDienta  aid  booki  of  account,  were  aJu
pvot  in  eridence ;  and  lOCDetimea  the  depoaition
el  an  abeewt  wiUiCM  «a>  read,  when  it  waa  cen.
firmed  b;  an  mb.  (Cic^irs  Rott.  Com.  15,  Cic
W.i((t.iL12,xiT.  15.)  There  were  no  direct  nieui
of  compdlins  a  penon  to  gire  evidence  befbre  the
IcgidHim  M  Jnalinian,  unleta  the;  were  ilaiei,
win  in  aonM  caaea  might  be  put  t»  the  toituie.
Aa  to  the  application  of  the  oath  in  jndicuv  aee

JusinANtm.

After  all  the  erideoce  waa  gim  and  the  patroni
bad  fioiibed,  the  judex  gare  lentencs :  if  there
weM  aeracal  jodicea,  a  majoril;  decided.  If  the
nattB  wa  one  of  difficult;,  tbe  hearing  mixht  he
■djonmed  aa  often  aa  wa*  Deteaiai;  (owpZuUio) ;
■td  if  the  index  tould  not  coma  to  a  ntit&ctor;
MwdBaioB,  be  might  declare  Ihit  upon  oath  and  to
iiiliaar  biDueir  from  the  difficult;.  Tbie  waa  done
lTthetenofwoida'*aonliqitere'-(N.L.).  (Oell.
A.  2.)  Tba  lentBace  waa  pnnouncBd  oral!;,  and
wm  BOMtiiae*  GtM  written  oa  a  tablet. "  ''


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.  64T

defendant  did  not  make  bia  uipearanee  after  being
dul;  Himmoned,  judgment  might  be  giien  againit
him  (^uJicJuH  datrium,  eranndidaHt),  according  to
the  proof  which  tbe  plaintiff  had  made-  If  tba
pliunUff  did  not  appear,  the  defendant  could  de-*
mund  an  acquittal  (Dig.  40.  HS.  1%  a.  Q7.  §  I,
4a.  til.  l.«.28,pr.)

The  lenience  wai  eilherof  Alnohilia  orCondem-
nalio.  That  pail  of  the  fonuula  which  waa  called
iho  Condemnatio  [Actio,  p.  12.  b],  empoweitd
the  Judex  to  condemn  or  acquit  (conienuion^
aiiolvert,  Oaiui,  iv.  43).  The  defendant  might
itigf;  the  plaintiff  after  the  judicium  had  been
mtlituted  by  the  lilia  conteatatio  (paii  accepbim
jmduiam,  Oiiiu,  iiL ISO, It. 114),  and bcfbra


1  giTc:


diiputed  queetion  between  tbe  twf  tchoolt  whethel
the  judex  ahouid  acquit,  or  whether  be  ahonld
condemn  en  the  ground  that  at  the  time  when  tba
judicium  waa  ccnattluted,  the  defendant  waa  liable
to  be  condemned  and  it  worn  the  boaineaa  of  tba
judex  mercl;  lo  follow  hi>  initnicliona.  The  dia-
pute  BccordingI;  inTolrcd  one  of  thoee  [ffinciptea
aa  which  the  achooli  were  theorelicall;  dicided,
—  the  following  oat  of  a  legal  ptinciplG  to  all  ita
logical  conaeqDencea  ;  but,  like  man;  other  qnt«-
tioni  between  the  achoola,  thii  qneetion  waa  prac
ticall;  of  do  importance,  aa  the  plaiotiff  woutd  not
be  allowed  Uf  have  latiabction  twice.

While  (he  Legu  aclionea  were  in  ferce,  tbe  judg-
ment woi  for  the  reatitution  cf  a  thing,  if  a  giTea
thing  (eorpaf  J  wai  the  object  of  the  action ;  bat
under  the  pioceai  of  the  formula,  the  Judex  gaTe
judgment,  pnniamt  to  the  formula,  iu  a  aum  ol
mane;,  even  when  a  piece  ef  ptopert;  vai  the  ab-
ject ef  diapute.  The  lam  of  mono;  waa  either
fixed  or  not  fixed  in  tba  formula.  If  the  claim
waa  for  a  certain  itua  af  mon^,  tba  amount  waa
iuierted  in  the  condemnatio,  and  tbe  judex  waa
bound  to  give  that  or  nothing  to  the  plaintiff.  If
the  chum  waa  far  damagea  or  aalisbcUou,  the
amount  of  which  wai  not  aacertained,  the  con-
demnatio waa  either  limited  to  a  aum  named  in
tbe  formula,  and  which  the  judex  could  not  exceed
except  at  hii  own  peril  {tittm  maam/iiatndo) ;  01^
if  the  action  waa  for  tbe  recoier;  of  propert;  from
the  poueiBor,  or  if  it  waa  an  actio  ad  exhibnidmii,
the  eondenuiatio  empowered  the  judex  to  condemn
the  defendant  in  the  Tolue  of  the  thing.  Oene-
lall;,  the  term  in  (he  formula  which  eipreaaed  ths
value  which  waa  the  object  of  tbe  demand  wol,
"  quanli  rea  eat."  Rei  may  mean  either  a  thing
in  the  limited  acnae  of  the  word,  or  generull;  the
claim  or  demand,  and  the  fixing  thia  at  a  mane;
Talue,wasequiTalcnttDltti>aealimalia  Thejudex
wag  ^»a;i  bound  to  coudenin  m  aome  definite  anm,
eren  tbangh  the  formula  did  not  contain  a  definite
lum :  the  reoion  of  which  ia  obrioui,  for,  unleaa
iie  candemnatia  waa  definite,  there  would  be  no
judtjment, (Gaiua,  i».  48— S'2.)

The  following  ii  the  dittinetion  between  an
Arhilrinm  and  Judicium,  according  to  Cicero  (j>ro
RoK.  Qvm.  4)  :  —  In  a  judicium  the  demand  waa
of  a  certoui  lusi  oi  definite  amount  (fwcnws
ixriiui)  ;  in  an  arbitrium,  tbe  amount  waa  not  de-
termined (inctrta).  In  a  judicium  the  plaintiff
obtained  all  that  he  claimed  or  nothing,  aa  the
WDida  of  the  formula  abow :  "  Si  paret  R.  S.  aoa
dari  oporterF."  (C^pore  Oaiua,  ii.  £0.)  Tha  cor-
reipimding  worda  in  the  formula  aiiiitraria  weta:


2:


ditl  JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

•qainlenli  wen,  "  Ex  fide  bona,  Ut  inter  Ixuih
bene  agier."  (Tbn.  17.)  Id  ■  (tiipnle  thaat  in*,
ubich  Cieero  oUlg  "  irbilrinra  nd  oioriM,"  tho
wordi  "  Quod  «equim,  meliiu,"'  were  addtd.  {Com-
jare  Oiiiu,  ir.  47,  63.)  If  the  matter  wai  brwight
before  a  judex,  propeiij  aa  called,  Ibe  jadiciiim
W1U  conitituted  with  a  poena,  that  ii,  per  ipon-
■icRiem  ;  there  woi  no  poena,  when  an  ubiCer  wat
demanded,  and  the  proceeding  wai  b;  the  formula
aibilmrU.  The  ptDceeding  by  the  aponaio  then
wu  the  «trict  one  (os^iutunnia  formuia  ipomiaiit,
Cic.  pro  HoK.  Com.  U>:  thai  of  tie  aibilrium
•rai  ei  fide  bona,  and  the  arbiter,  though  he  vai
bound  bj  the  initnictioni  of  the  fbnnula,  wsi  al-
loired  a  greater  latitude  by  ita  tenna  The  engage-
ment  between  the  partJN  vho  accepted  an  arbiter,
bj  which  they  bouad  themi^Ta  to  abide  bj  hia
arbitrium,  wai  Compromitiam  (pro  Rote  Ctan.  4.
4) ;  but  thii  term  wai  alu  employed,  it  it  appean,
to  flipreu  the  engagement  by  which  parties  agreed
to  Kttle  their  difference!  by  athitration,  without
the  interrcntion  of  the  pmctor.  Cieero  appCBn  to
allude  to  Ihii  arbitratiDii.  {Prv  P.  QhuKni,  6  ;
compare  Senec  dt  Bate/,  iii.  7.)

In  the  diviaion  of  jndinal  function)  between  the
MagUtratus  and  Judex  coniiited  what  ii  called
the  Ordo  Judiciorum  Privalomm,  which  eiiited  in
the  eariy  pwiodl  of  Borne,  and  continued  till  the
^e  of  Conitanline.  At  the  ume  time  with  the
Ordo  Judiciorum  PriTatonim  eiiited  the  proceed'
tra  ordinem  or  eilraordinaria  cognitio,  in
the  magiittatui  made  a  decition  by  a  de-
creium,  without  letting  the  matter  come  to  a  judex.
Finally,  under  the  later  empire  the  eitraordmaria
cognitio  inppUnted  the  old  mode  of  proceeding.

According  to  Cicero  (jm  Catami,  2)  all  Judicla
had  for  their  object,  either  the  aetllemcnl  of  dii-
putee  between  inditidual*  (ctmtroBertiae),  or  tba
punuhment  of  Crimea  (ma/d/Ecta).  This  panage
refer*  to  adiviaionof  Judicia,  which  appean  in  the
Jurist!,  into  Puhlira  and  Prirata.  The  term  Pri-
TBta  Judicia  occun  in  Ciceco  (Top.  17),  where  it
nfen  to  the  clan  of  Judicia  which  he  Indicate*  in
the  Carcina  by  the  term  Cantroicniite.  Tbe  tenn
Publics  Judicia  might  not  then  be  in  iiie,  but  the
term  FublicB  Caun  it  u>od  by  Cicero  (pm  Rmc,
^mCT.  c.  21)  with  reference  to  a  Judicium,  which
by  tbe  Juriiti  would  be  ailed  Publicum.  In  the
I%eit  (40.  tit.  1.  a  1 )  it  ii  atnted  that  all  Judicia
afc  not  Publitn  in  which  a  crimen  wai  the  matter
in  qoeition,  but  ofdy  thoHi  in  which  the  offence
wu  pcoKcuted  undM  lome  lei,  luch  at  the  Julia
M^ettatii,  Cometia  de  Sicariii,  and  otbert  thve
enumerated.  The  Judicia  PopuUria  or  Popukrc*
Aclionei  at  they  are  called  (Dig.  47.  lit  23.  i.  1)
ire  defined  to  be  thoie  by  which  "  mum  jut
populut  tnetur  ;"  and  they  agreed  with  the  Pub-
lica  Judicia  in  thii,  that  any  penon  might  be
the  pnaccutor,  who  wai  not  under  lome  legal  dii-
qnaliiication.  The  Judicia  Poputi  (Cic.  DnL  27)
were  thoae  in  which  the  populut  ai^cd  at  judicei ;
and  accordingly  Cieero  enumerate*  the  Popnli  Ju-
dicia among  othen  wbeu  be  eayi  (pro  Ahbd,  c
1 3)  that  "  Dihil  de  capite  cin*,  ant  de  bonii,  line
Jndicio  tcnatnt  ant  popnli  aut  eorum  qui  de  quaque
re  conitJtnti  judice*  lint,  debahi  poue,"  At  the
Judicia  Publica  an  defined  b^  the  juriiU  to  be
thoae  in  which  crimina  were  Ined  by  a  ipecial  lai,
it  appean  that  the  Judida  Populi,  itrictly  to
called,  mutt  haie  Ulen  iuta  dlntte  or  haie  gradu-
•Uj  l)eectM  mniccnary  after  tlu  Indicia  Pubtica


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

were  iwilated  by  iperial  lege*  ;  and  tlma  the
Judicia  Publica  of  the  later  republican  period  re-
proent  the  JodiciaPopDliof  theeaitiertimea.  The
Judicia  Populi  were  originally  held  in  the  Cmnitia
Curiala  and  tubtequently  in  tbe  Centnriata  and
Tribula.  A  lex  of  P.  Valerint  Pnblicnla  (Lit.  ii.
8  i  Cic  Rap,  iL  31)  gare  an  appeal  (pmeeeatiif)  to
the  popniui  from  the  magiitratu* ;  and  a  law  of
C.  Semproniut  Qncchui  (Cic  pro  Babir.  4)  de-
clared to  the  ome  effect :  "  Ne  de  capita  dTium
Romanorum  injuuu  populi  jadicoretur."

The  kingi  preiided  in  the  Judicia  Pqmll,  and
the  connili  luceceded  to  their  antheri^.  Bnt
after  the  paiaing  of  the  Lei  Valeria  de  Proroca-
tione  (b.  c  508)  penon*  were  appointed  to  pretide
at  inch  trial*  ai  affected  a  dtuen^  capDt,  iDd
they  were  accordingly  called  Qnaentorea  or  Qtiae-
■toreiParricidiiornenimCapiUlium.  Tnaomeeaiet
(Lir.  It.  fil)  a  ptebiKitnm  wu  paated,  by  which  a
magittrate  wai  appointed  to  preiide  at  the  judtdal
the  cooTve  of  time,  at  fain  wrrr


itralei  were  appointed  for  the  pnrpcae.  In  the
year  149  b.  c  the  tribune  L.  Calparoin*  Piio
Frugl  carried  a  Lex  De  Pecnniit  Repetundia,  by
which  a  Praetor  pretided  at  all  luch  trial*  daring
hia  year  of  office,  from  which  time  the  QoaeatiD
RepetundflTum  became  Perpetua.  L.  Sulla  gaTo
to  one  praetor  the  Quaettionee  da  Majeatate,  and
to  othen  thoH  sf  Peculatui  and  AmbiDu  ;  and
he  alio  added  fotit  other  Quaeitione*  Perpetnae.
Thui  he  carried  out  the  principle  of  the  Lei  Cal-
pumia,  by  eilabliihing  permaneat  ecmrta  for  the
trial  of  varioui  ipceiSed  oCfencet,  and  the  pcaeton
determined  among  themtelvet  in  which  of  th*te  new
court]  they  ihould  lererally  pretide.  The  ordinary
functiont  of  the  praetor  irbanui  and  peregrinaa
were  not  interiered  with  by  thete  new  artange-
ment*.  The  QuieMione*  of  Sulla  were,  De  Rape.
tundii,  Majciutia,  De  Sicariii  et  Veiiefiaa,  Da
Parricidio,  Peculatui,  Ambitsi,  De  Nnmmia  Adul-
terinii,  De  Filaii  or  Teilamentaria,  and  De  Vi
Publia.  But  in  ipedal  aiei  the  icnate  atill  taav-
timca  by  a  deeretunt  appointed  the  cDnanla  a*
quanitom,  of  which  an  eaample  occur*  in  Cicero.
(BnU.  22.)
Any  penon,  not  legally  diaqnalified,  might  be

On  luch  an  oocaiion  a  piaetoc  gnierally  prewded
at  quaetitoT,  awiited  by  a  jadei  qoaeationit  and  a
body  of  jndicet  called  hii  conrilium.  The  judex
quuHtionii  wat  a  kind  of  atutant  to  tbe  preiidiag

magiitratui,  according  to  -  ^ - ■ - -■


qnaeiitar,  who  waa  ■>
ipecially  appointed  to  preiide  on  the  ocntion  of  a
qoaeitio. (Walter, OetUeUt  iet Rom. flteitfc,

tSCl.)  The  judiee*  were  generally  choaen  hj
t  out  of  thoMi  who  were  quilified  to  acL  BoUi
the  accuiator  and  the  rent  had  the  pririlegv  ut
rejecting  or  challaiging  (rvpsan)  inch  jndicea  aa
they  did  not  like.  (Cic  ad  Att.  i.  1«.)  Tbe  ja-
dicei  af^ninted  accetding  to  the  prntitiaiu  of  the
Lei  Liciaia  de  Ambitn,  a.  c  65,  ware  called
edititii,  and  Atte  were  jndicea  turned  by  tbe  ae-
cuter,  whom  the  aecuied  (nut)  could  not  ebal-
lenge.  (Cic  pro  CW.  Platao,  IS,  17,  ed.  Wan-
der,/VDi^oa.  p.  luri.)  TbejudiceiwnccaUed
ediii,  when  they  could  be  challmged  by  the  r«&
In  many  caiea  a  lei  wat  patied  fiir  the  purpcae  of
regnlatiiiB  the  nod*  of  pneedvM. In  »e  patter


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

rf  Cbdiu  md  tlie  Boca  Dot,  the  Koate  atteinpled
to  cuTj  a  lex  bj  which  tb«  praelor  who  wa4  to
pnode  at  tha  liial  ihoold  be  empowered  to  §e]ect
the  jadicei,  tile  eSect  of  which  would  hare  been  to
pRTCBt  their  being  cballenged  by  Clodiiu.  After
I  nolest  (tnggle,  a  l«x  for  tho  rtgulatioD  of  the
trial  wu  popoHd  hy  tlie  tribone  Fnfim  and  cai-
risl :  it  ocilj  diSnd  Innn  the  lei  recommended
hj  the  Koate  in  the  node  of  detennining  who
ilMnld  be  the  jadioei  (Jmdiann  fferau) :  t,  differ-
n«  bowerer  iriiich  waa  not  UDimporlarit,  aa
il  KCised  the  ac^ltal  of  Clodiiut  The  judicea
nxed  bf  ballot,  and  a  majoritj  determined  the
Kqiittal  or  eoademnalioo  of  the  accnied.  If  the
mil  were  eqnal,  there  waa  an  acqiuttal  (Plat.
Mmia,  S).  Each  jndex  wai  [oofided  with  three
tibleta  (taUrM),  go  <nie  of  which  wai  marked
A,  AbaolTD  ;  on  a  aecond  C,  Condemno  ;  and  on  a
Iliid  N.  L,  Hon  liquet.  The  judicea  Tottd  b;
pbcmi  eoa  et  IhcM  taUeU  in  the  um  <knia,
Jqk.  M,  t.  i%  which  ma  then  examined  for  the
f(ir]iMe  of  aacartaining  the  Totai.  It  wai  the  dutj
of  lie  - ■  - ■ ■


>  a  ontici,  that  he  would  on  a  certain  da;
a  cmain  ptnoo,  whoto  h«  named,  of  tome  offence,
widdi  Ih  alM  ipeeiGed.  Thii  wa>  erpreaaed  b;
tkephriae  "diem  dieere"  (Fnyinaa  Catumi  capi-
iu^>aHrfu{,LiT.iiLll).  If  the  offeader  heldan;
higk  efflca,  it  waa  new  nary  to  wwt  lit]  bit  titne  of
■"ice  had  eipired,  before  proeeedinge  could  he
that  teaaaauxd  a^rat  him.  The  iccnied  waa
l*qailed  lo  gJTe  tecnritj  for  hii  appearance  on  the
iij  of  trial ;  tha  lecorilr  wai  called  tadet  in  a
ia>  cBjatalia,  and  ptaedei  when  the  peoallj  for
t|»  alleged  offence  wu  pecuniarj.  If  nich  lecn-
ntj  wat  not  giren,  the  aceneed  waa  kept  in  con-
Snnanrt.  {Ur.  a  1 S.)  If  nothing  prerented  the
loqiii^  from  taking  place  at  the  time  fixed  for  it,
t^  trail  proceeded,  and  the  accuier  had  to  pcore
l>s  caae  by  eridtnce.  The  mTeatigation  <^  (he
btu  wai  oiled  Anqniiitio  with  reference  to  the
If^voaed  pmal^  ;  accordingl j,  the  phnaei  pecnnia,
<apite or  capitk anqtunts,  are nied.  {Li*.  iiTi.3.)
Wbn  Ibe  inrEitigatica  wu  conclnded,  the  mafcii-
tntai  [mnilgated  a  nwatio,  which  comptehended
tbt  tliaige  and  the  pimuhment  or  fine.  It  wu  a
nle  gf  law  that  a  fine  ihoald  not  be  impoaed  toge-
ther with  adiithtf  pcmiabnient  in  the  lame  ragatio.
(Cic  pro  £tom.  c  17.)  The  rogalio  wai  made
fablic  dniing  three  nmidinae,  like  an;  other  lex  ;
and^  popoaed  at  the  camitia  for  adoption  at  re-
]«ti«L  The  fium  of  the  logatio,  the  ofiecl  of
vhidi  waa  to  drire  Cicen  into  baniahment,  it
rrm  in  the  Oration  Fro  Dome,  c  18.  The  ac-
owd  Knietima  withdrew  into  exile  before  tha
mti  were  taksi ;  or  he  m^ht  make  hii  defence,
I*  whiA  va  have  an  initance  in  the  oration  of
Ckso  fix  Babitim.  Though  thrie  were  called
Jadick  Populi,  and  pmperiy  lo  in  the  earl;  agei
of  the  atale,  the  legia  pUBd  in  luefa  judicia  in  the
htter  period  of  the  republic  were  often  PlebiKrita.
The  oSeoeei  which  were  the  chief  inhject  of
JadiiiPopnliandPoblica


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.  S49

teria  and  Slnpia,  Paniddimn,  RJaam,  Via  Pab-
licB  and  Printa,  Pecnlatni,  Rqictnndae,  Ambitui,
which  am  lieated  under  their  aeveial  heads.

With  tha  paMing  of  special  enactment*  fbi  the
pnniihniait  at  paitioilar  offencea,  wai  introduced
the  piaetice  of  Arming  a  bodj  of  Jadtcei  for  the
trial  of  Buch  o^ncei  ai  the  enactmenta  were  di-
rected asainiL  Thui  it  ii  nid  that  the  Lex  Cal-
pomia  De  Peconiii  Rqienmdii  establiihed  tha
Album  Jodicum  Selectormu,  at  the  bodj  out  of
which  Judicei  were  (o  be  cfaoeen.  It  ii  not  known
what  waa  the  number  of  the  bod;  w  eonitituted,
hut  il  has  been  eonjecCnred  that  the  number  wai
5£0,  and  that  ten  were  chosen  from  each  tribe,
and  thui  the  origin  of  the  phnae  Decuriae  Jodi-
cum il  explained.  It  is  easj  to  conceive  that  the
Jndicia  Fopuli,  pniperl;  «>  called,  would  be  leas
frequent  ai  tpccial  legei  were  framed  for  particular
offencea,  the  drcnnutancei  of  which  could  be
better  iuTcatigated  by  a  smaller  body  of  Judices
than  by  the  aasemblKl  people,  It  ii  ^nned  that
up  lo  the  paaiing  of  the  Calpumia  Lex,  the
Judicet  were  chosen  from  the  lenatan  only,  but
after  Ihia  time  they  were  not  taken  Ehan  that  body
exelntiTely ;  and  further,  that  not  only  the  Ju-
dicea in  the  Quaeationes  de  Repetnndii,  but  also
the  Judicei  in  private  matten  were  from  tha  data
of  this  lex  taken  ftom  the  Albnm  Judicimi  which
was  annuaUy  made  {Oaettling,  GewAicUe  dtr  Rom,
-  '  may,  p.  iSfi)  ;  for  which  there  appears
ui  m  no  ETidencc.  Sraie  modem  writers  affirm
that  by  the  Lex  Calpumia  the  Judices  were  chosen
by  the  Plaetor  annually  out  of  the  body  of  leoa-
tors,  and  arranged  accwding  to  their  tribes  ;  and
that  the  necesiary  number  fi}r  each  trial  waa
chosen  <mt  ti!  this  body  by  lot.

Ai  many  of  those  who  were  tried  in  the  quaes-
tionea  peipetuae  belonged  to  the  ctan  of  the  Op-
timalea,  it  often  happened  that  the  Jndices  sc-
quilled  those  members  of  their  own  body,  who
would  have  been  convicted  by  impartial  judicei.
Aecordinaly  a  itruggle  arose  between  the  popular
party  and  the  Optunatet,  whom  the  populai;  party
withcd  to  exclude  from  the  office  of  Jndex.  The
laws  which  relate  to  the  conititntioo  of  the  body
of  Judicei  Bj«  called  Judiciariae,  whether  these  laws
related  only  to  thia  matter,  or  made  rules  about
it  and  other  things  also.  The  fint  lex  which  ei'
eluded  the  Senators  from  the  Album  judicum
selectt^um  vai  a  Lex  Sempronia  of  C.  Qracibui,
B.I1  125,  in  accordance  with  which  the  judicei
wore  taken  only  from  the  Equite*.  This  airange-
ment  laited  above  forty  years,  and  gave  saliibc-
tion  to  the  populai  party  ;  but  il  did  not  work
well  in  ell  ceipecta,  because  the  magiatratei  in  the
provmeei  favoured  the  rapacity  of  the  PoUicani,  in
order  to  keep  an  good  terms  with  the  Hquites,
to  which  ekiss  the  Puhlicani  belonged.  (Cic  Vtrr.
m.  41.)  A  Lex  Servilia  Csepionii  B.  c  106  is
•aid  to  have  repealed  the  Sempronia  Lex  ;  but
this  Lex  Serrilia  was  itself  repmled  by  a  Lex
3ervilia  Olauciae  repetundorum,  probably  in  B.  &
101.  This  Lex  is  said  to  have  given  the  Judicia
to  the  Equites,  and  consequently  it  either  repealinl
the  Lei  of  b.  c  1 06  indirectly,  or  it  may  merely
have  confirmed  the  Lex  Sempronia ;  for  the  real
nature  of  tha  Lex  of  ac.  106  is  hardly  ascer-
tunable.  There  ii  a  passage  in  Tacitni  {Amal.
xu.  60)  in  which  he  ipeaks  of  the  Sireiliat  legea
reatoring  the  Judicia  to  the  lenate.  The  Lex
,  Servilia  of  B.  c.  1 04  excluded  IiMn  tha  fiinctionef


6£0  JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

Jndkca  nay  ftnaa  who  hid  been  tiibuniu
|i}aliii,  qnaeaur,  triumvir  capiulia,  tribuna)  mili-
inm  in  ods  of  tb«  Rnt  Soni  Ugiona,  liiuniTir  Bgiii
dandii  uugDOodu,  who  mi  or  hud  been  in  the
■eutc,  who  vu  iniiinii,  erei;  penon  who  wu
under  thirty  or  ibore  eiitj  jaan  of  age,  vnrj
penon  who  did  not  liie  in  Rome  or  in  the  immo-
diate  neighbourhood,  ereij  &tlier,  brother,  oi  ion
of  t,  penon  who  wai  oc  had  b«eD  in  the  leiute,
■nd  eieiy  penon  who  ma  bejond  ku.  The
Praetor  who  pTuided  in  thit  Quaeitio,  wu  to
choixe  45Q  judicet,  fnnn  whom  the  Judicei  foi
the  {articuUi  caw  wen  to  be  taken  bj  lot
(Fngmenta  Legii  Serviliae  Repetundanun,  &c
C.  A.  C  Rlenie,  Bedin,  IS2£,  4ta)

The  Bttempta  of  the  tribune  M.  Liviu  Dru-
lui  the  younget  had  BO  i«*ult  [Liau  LiTiab].
A  Lei  PUntia  B.  c  69  enuted,  that  the  Jndice*
ibould  bs  choMn  by  the  tiihei,  Sve  by  each
tribe,  without  any  diitioction  of  clan.  The  Op-
timatei  trinmphed  ondei  L.  Comeliiu  Sulk,  who
by  a  Lei  Cinnelik  B.  c  80  eoaclod  Ihut  the  Ju-
dicei ihould  be  taken  exdnuiely  fiom  the  Sena-
ton.  But  a  Lex  Aorelia  (b.  c.  70)  enoctedthat  the
Judicei  thould  be  choun  from  the  tbiee  claaiei  —
of  Senaton,  Equitei,  and  Tribuni  Aeiaiii  ( VelL  ii.
32.)  The  Tribuni  Aeraiii  were  taken  from  the
rot  of  the  dtiieni,  and  were,  or  ought  to  ha>e
been,  peraoni  ofaome  property.  Tliua  tho  three
decuriie  of  Judicei  were  formed  ;  and  it  vai  either
in  aaueqDeoce  of  the  I^x  Anrelia  or  lome  other
lei  that,  instead  of  one  nm  for  all  the  tubleU,
the  decurias  had  eeierally  tbeii  balloting  nm,  lo
that  tbe  TOtei  of  the  three  clauei  were  known.
Dion  Caaiini  (iiiiiii.  3)  aicribei  ihii  regulation  to
B  Lex  Fufia,  and  he  Myi  that  the  object  waa  that
the  voM  of  the  decurme  ((h|i],  y4ni)  might  bo
known,  though  thoH  of  indiTidnali  coutd  not,
owing  i/t  tho  voting  being  Ncret.  It  [>  not  known
if  the  Lei  Amelia  detennined  Che  nunber  of  Ju-


n  anygiie;


A  Lci  Pompeia  paiaed


in  the  lecond  i-oniukla  of  Pompoy  (l
■eenu  to  haie  nude  eome  modificntiDUe  in  the  Lei
Aorclia,  at  to  tbe  qualification  af  the  Judicei ;  but
the  new  proviiioni  of  thii  lex  are  only  known
from  Aaconiui,  who  eiplaini  them  in  termi  which
are  very  fer  from  being  clear.  The  Lei  Pompeia
do  Vi,  and  De  Ambitn  (s.  c  52}  determined  that
eighty  judicea  were  to  be  (elected  by  lot,  out  of


whoin  tbe  a


r  and  tbe  accuaod  m


li  Judicet.


er  of  the  Bona  Dea,  tht
It  ii  conjectured  that  the  number  lixed  foi
caie,  by  the  Lci  Anrelia,  wsi  eeventy  judicet.

A  Lex  Jndiciaria  of  Joliua  Caesar  (Sneton.  Jid.
41  ;  Cic  Piilip.  i.  8)  took  away  the  decuiia  of
the  Tribuni  Aenrii,  and  thai  reduced  the  judicei
U>  two  claiHS  (iHMro,  the  -yirn  e(  Dion  Cauiua).
A  Lei  Jndiciaria,  paaied  aAer  hli  death  by  M.
Antonini,  reitored  the  decoria  of  the  Tribuni
Aemrii,  but  required  no  pecuataiy  qualiikstion
from  them :  the  only  qaaliBcoiion  which  ihii  lex
leqnind  wae,  that  a  penon  >hnuld  have  been  a
cedtorion  oi  have  letred  in  the  legions.  It  appeon
that  the  pcevioui  Lex  Pam{>eia,  Lei  Aurclia,  and
a  Lei  of  Caenr,  had  given  to  thoee  who  had  been
centorion*  (gu  ortlau*  diutniM)  the  privilege  of
being  jndicea  Oi/iorUu),  but  >till  they  required  a
peenmarr  qualification  (ooww).  The  Lex  of  An-
toniui,  beiidea  taking  away  the  peeuniiuy  qualifi-
cation, opoDod  the  judioja  to  tbe  •oldien (Cie.


JUDEX,  JUDICIUM.

FkiL  L  8,  V.  S  ;  gaeton.  J.  dm.  c  41.)  It  Kemi
probable  that  tbe  eipreuion  «f  ceatuniA,  which  ii
uied  by  Aoconiua  in  apeoking  of  the  change  intro-
duced by  Ihii  Lex  Pompeia,  had  reference  to  the
admiuion  of  the  centurioni  into  the  third  clau  of

Aoguatni,  who  altered  the  whole  conititoUoD  at
the  body  of  judicei  by  hi*  lege*  jndiciorum  pub-
licorum  et  privotoruni,  added  Id  the  exiiting
three  Decuriac  Jndicum,  a  fourth  Decnria,  called
that  of  the  Ducenojii,  who  had  a  lower  pecuniary
^nalifiiation,  and  only  decided  in  imallcr  matt«i
(di  lenwribut  taiivmi,  Suetoo.  Ai^.  32).  Cali-
gula (Sueton.  Cal^.  16)  added  a  fifth  Decuria,
m  order  to  diminish  the  laboun  of  the  judicei.
Augostus  liad  already  allowed  each  Decnria,  in  iti
turn,  an  exemption  for  one  year,  and  had  rcliered
them  from  littmg  in  the  months  of  November  and
December.  The  whole  number  of  jodiccs  wai
raised  by  Aoguitns  to  near  4000  [Plin.  Hut.
NaL  niiiL  7) ;  and  the  judicei  in  civil  cue*
were  taken  out  of  thit  body.  They  were  ehoien
by  the  Piaeton  out  of  the  penoiu  who  had  the
property  quali£cBtion,  and  tbe  dnly  of  lerrii^
aa  a  judex  thua  became  one  of  the  boidens  to
which  citizens  were  liaUle.

At  to  the  whole  number  of  Judicei,  included  si
any  given  time  in  the  Album  Judicum,  it  leemi
almost  impoaaible  to  ilate  any  thing  with  [voci'
lion  ;  but  it  is  obvloui  from  what  baa  been  mid,
that  the  number  must  have  varied  with  tho  vari-
Dua  changes  already  meti^ncd.  After  the  time  of
Auguttua  the  number  was  about  four  thouiand,
and  from  thia  period,  at  leatt,  there  is  no  doubt  that
the  Album  Jndjcnm  contained  the  whole  nimiber
of  Hiaoni  who  were  qualified  to  act  aa  judicei,
both  in  Judicia  Privala  and  JudicU  Publica.  The
fsorth  Decuria  of  Augustus  was  limited  in  its  fimc-

ditpnte  was  of  tmall  value.  It  ii  often  atated
by  modem  writers,  without  any  qnalification,  (hat
the  varioui  changci  in  the  jadiclary  body  fram  the
time  of  the  Lei  Calpumia  to  the  end  of  the  re-
public had  reference  both  to  the  Judicia  Public*
and  Privata  ;  though  it  is  also  stated  that  tbe  ob-
jects of  these  lariout  cnnrlmenli  were  to  elevaco
or  dcprets  one  of  tbe  great  parties  in  the  itate,  hy
extending  or  lioiiiing  the  body  out  of  which  the
judieei  in  any  given  cue  were  to  be  choeen.  But
it  is  obvious  that  these  reasons  da  not  apf^y  to  the
matter  of  Judicia  PrivBla,  in  which  a  single  jadex
generally  acted,  and  which  mostly  concerned  mat-
teri  of  propern  and  contiaet.  AccOTdlngly,  ■  re-
cent writer  (Walter,  GeuAidat  dtt  Aw.  Retitt,
p.  716)  has  chaerved  with  more  caution  than  loma
of  hii  predeceaton,  that  "  then  it  no  donbt  that
from  the  time  of  Auguitu  the  Album  Jndinim
had  reference  to  the  judicea  in  civil  molten,  but
that  ai  to  earlier  timei  a  difficulty  ariiea  from
the  fact  that  while  tbe  Lex  Saupnmia  wsi  in
force,  by  which  the  tenaton  were  excluded  frooi
the  Allium  JodicDm,  a  Conaularit  ti  mentioiMid  aa
a  judex  (Cic  d»  Qf.  iii.  19)  ;  and,  on  the  other
band,  an  Equei  is  mentioned  aa  ■  jndei  al  a  tinM
when  tbe  Lci  of  Sulla  mt  in  foice,  and  coiue-
quentlyieuaton  only  could  be  judicei.  (Cic.  /Va
Bate  Om.  c  U.}"  Theie  insunccs  certainly  tn
inconsiitent  with  the  &ct  of  the  Judicia  Privata
being  regulated  by  the  various  Legii  Judiekriae  ;
but  Ihey  are  of  email  weight,  coiBpaied  with  th«
reawHia  derivable  frtm  the  chaauta  of  tbo  tw»


JUDEX  PEDANEUS.
kindi  of  Jadicis  and  the  diScrenee  in  iha  mode  of
pfondnre,  vbicb  Tender  it  alnint  ■  matter  of  de
BHSfltntusi  that  the  Tuinu  changei  in  the  jadi'
eiary  bodj  had  reference  to  the  Qoaeationefl  ant
JndKn  Poblica. It  ii  trae  that  lome  of  the*


Jndieia  Priiata,  fat  maor  of  the  Roman  legea  con-
lained  a  gnU  Tacietj  of  legulatire  ptoTiiiona,  and
it  ia  alio  tme  that  we  are  very  imwrfeeUf  ac-
qaaiuted  with  the  proriiiona  of  tkeia  Legee  Jodi-
ariae ;  bnt  that  the  ngnlation  of  the  Jndicia
PtiivlB  mu  inclnded  in  their  piuiuiona,  in  the
ame  Ibnn  and  to  the  aame  eiteut  a*  that  of  tbe
Jndicia  PabUca,  ia  an  aeaeTtioii  totaJly  nniopported
by  orideDce,  and  one  which  leodi  to  abfQi4  con.
doaiont.  Two  Legei  Jnliac  together  with  a  Lei
Aebotia  pot  an  end  to  the  l^)  Aetione*  (Oaiua,
IT.  SO) ;  ud  a  Lei  Jutia  Jndidaiia  limited  the
tbneafthe  JndieiaLegitinia  (Ooina,  i>.  104):  but
it  does  not  appear  whether  tbeta  lege*  were  paued
Mdelj  fortLeie  objecta,  or  whether  their  proYuioni
were  part  of  ume  other  legta.

Bethmann-HoUweg  {HamSiudidti  CXvilpnietet,

L13)  ohefTTea;  ^  the  establiahment  of  a  more
lited  bodj  of  jndieei  out  of  the  lenatorial  bodj
(album  jndiemn  aelectonun),  ^  v.  c  6DS,  the
tiands  of  tbii  pririlege  to  the  equSto,  b;  C.
Omcehn^  the  diiiuon  of  it  between  both  tIaiM
■fiec  loo;  atng^ea  and  ehangta,  and  otsd  the
tMif  it  to  tiM  third  elaaa,  wberebj  three  rlaxea


*t»Mg»a,  wUch  were  ao  impoitaDt  in  acanatitntional
-  pOBI  id  Tiew,  nfarrad  eapeeiBllj  to  the  criminal
jimn  iliiyi  whkh  were  politicallf  u  important."
Tloagl  the  general  chaioeter  of  the  Rinian
Jodida,  aod  tbe  ODdet  of  pncedore  hotb  in  diil
and  crimmol  matten,  are  capable  of  m  nffieieiitlr
ckar  eipOBtion,  there  ii  much  Dnsertajnty  ai  to
aanr  detail*,  and  tbe  whole mbject  lequirei  a

with  a  competant  knowledge  of  tbe  origiiiBl  aatbO'
litiM,  an  atamle  acqiuuBtaiMO  wiUi  toe  nature  of
Icfial  pncednte.

Tfce  follawing  worfu  may  be  refened  to :  —
Waller,  GadrnUn  da  Ron.  ReAtt ;  Ooettling,
Gmddddt  der  Bm.  Staattetrfiaiia^ ;  Heineo-
nOf  Sjfidagma^  &ii  \  Tigentrom,  De  Judiabms
^md  AoMowH,  Beii  1B2S,  TalmbM  onlj  ht  the
ajlsetian  of  tbe  original  aDtboritic* :  Kellej;  Uittr
Uta  CemttHathm  <mi  UtUkS,  Ac  Zliiich,  1837  ;
Bethntann-  Hollw^,  Handlmci  da  Cirilpnaaat,
Boon,  IHS*;  P.  loninaii,  IM  P*ilieuttCriim-
omUb*  Judiaii  Ramanonat,  Libri  Tret,  Xieipiig,
1(46  ;  Pnckta,  /hM.  i.  §  71,  iL  g  l&l,  ftc  ;
Ooiua.  i*.  ;  Dig- i.  liL  1.  Zla  .Aidictu ,-  Dig.  48.
Dt  JadtaU  PMieiM  ;  In>L  It.  tit  1 8.) [G.  L.]

JUDEX  ORDINA'RIUS. [Judex  Pbda-

JUDEX  PBDA'NEUS.  The  origin  and  mean-
iog  of  (hii  lenn  teem  to  be  mknown.  It  i*  not
■led  bj  tbe  dowcal  Roman  wrilcn. Hw  jodieea


n  tbepnetoror  piac
■  with  the  nodal  ii


nitraetifflu,  were  irane-
omea  aDed  PedatKL  (TbeophiL  ir.  15  ;  Cod.  3.
lit.  3.)  SobaMfnenlly  the  pracaei,  wbo  wat  now
•OBetiiiws  deaignated  Jndei  Ordinahni  or  Judex
•iapir  (airf.Ili»d.l.  tit  7),  decided  moat  matter*
witbo^  tbe  intcrrention  of  a  Jodei ;  but  itiU  he
woe  evipowered  to  appoint  a  permanent  body  of
jwdicaa  bt  tbe  deetakin  of  leia  important  matten,
laA  tbcM  nUo  were  called  Jodioet  Pedanei,  "  hoc


JUOERUM.  651

ert  qni  negotia  hnmiliora  diiceptent*'  (Cod.  3.
tit.  3, 1,  5.)  The  proceeding*  be^ire  diii  new  kind
of  Jadicc*  Pedanei  were  the  aame  u  before  tbe
proeiei.  Some  modem  writer*  ata  of  opinirai  that
tbeu  new  pedanei  jndicea  did  not  foaa  a  perma-
nent ooort,  Imt  only  decided  on  mMteta  which  were
referred  to  tiiem  l^  a  aipenar  solboii^.  (Cod.  3.
tit3.)  Tbe reaton  of  tbMe  jndicea  reodiing a dii-
tinetiTe  nana  ii  eonjectaied  to  be  thi*,  that  the


The  Oreck  tnnilatioa  of  Pedaneni  i*  xaful'-
Humji  (Theophil.  ir.  16.  pr.)  [Q.  L.)

JUDEX  QUAESTIO'NIS.  [Junnz,  p.  648.1

JUDICA'TI  ACTIO.  A  thing  wat  a  Re*
jodicntai,  when  the  matter  in  diipnte  bod  been  de-
termined by  a  judicial  lentence  )  and  the  actio
jodicati  waa  a  mode  which  the  ■Doeenfol  par^
might  adopt,  fat  obtaining  a  decree  of  the  magia-
tnttot  by  which  he  could  take  poueuion  of  the
oroperty  of  the  permm  who  had  loat  the  cau»  and
Iiod  not  latiified  the  judgment  The  plaintiff  in
the  actio  judicati  wot  alio  protected  in  hi*  pos*e»-
Bon  of  the  defendant 'b  [Snpeny  by  a  *pecial  inter-
din,  and  he  wti  empowered  to  *ell  it  The  party
condemned  wo*  limited  at  to  hi*  defence.  Origin-
all;  the  judiatui  wa*  obliged  to  find  a  tindez
ivvtdicern  dare)  ;  bnt  in  the  time  of  Gaina  it  hod
become  the  ptactice  for  him  to  give  tecurity  to
the  amoont  of  the  judgment  (jadkataii  tola  tatu-
dart).  If  tbe  defiindBnt  pleaded  that  there  wa«
no  re*  judicata,  ha  wa*  mnicled  in  double  tbe
amount  of  the  judgment,  if  bit  plea  wa>  folaa.

The  actio  jndicati,  a*  a  peculiar  obligatien,  ia
merely  tbe  derelopmeot  uid  completion  of  the
obligatiD  which  it  founded  on  tbs  Liti*  Conte*-
tatio  ;  but  tbi*  peculiar  obligatio  i*  merely  another
form  of  eiecution,  and  it  panidpalei  in  the  general
nature  of  tbe  proceoi  of  execution.  The  Eennal
nature  of  the  actio  jndicati  appear*  from  Uie  kl-
lowing  poiEtge*.  (Dig,  43.  tit  ].  (.4,  £,  6,  7,  41.
§2,43,44,  6I> SaTigny,  j^nAnK,dtcvLp.4ll.

(Gaiii»,i».  9.25,  171, 103  j  Cic.  ^jroJ^Yrwe,  21  j
Panliu,  S.  R.  1.  lit.  IS.)  [Q.  L.]

JU'DICES  EDITl,  EDITI'TIL  [Junii,
p.  646.]

JUDI'CIA  DUPLI'CIA. [Puiu.ua  Ebcib-

JUDI'CIA  LEOl'TIMA.  ilunutiM,  a.
628,  b.,  p.  629,  a.]

JUDI'CIA  QUAE  IMPE'RIO.  [Impuium.
p.62B,b,  p.  629,*.]

JUDI'CIUM. [JODWt.]

JUDI'CIUM  PO'PULl. [Junix,  p.  648.]

JUDI'CIUM  PRIVATUM,  PU'BLICUM.


[Jul


18.]


JU'GERUM  at  JUQUS  (the  latter  Ebnn,  a*  a
nenter  notm  of  the  third  dedeniion,  ia  Tery  com-
miHi  in  the  obliqne  cate*  and  in  tbe  plunl),  *
Biman  mcainre  of  tor&ee,  240  feet  in  length  and
120  in  breadth,  ccntaining  therefor*  38,800  aquoie
feet  (Colnm.  AaT.l.|6;Quintil.  L  18.)  H
wai  the  donble  of  the  Aftia  ^ndratm,  and  from

derived  it*  name.  (Vano,  L.  L.  t.  35,  Millie^
A.A.L10).  [AcTua.)  It  aeemt  [ffobable  that,
a*  the  word  wu  evidently  originally  tbe  aame  aa
'  aiocftu,  in  ila  original
ough  to  drlTe  a  imgle
iiuii  jmywm  originally  meant  a  patb
fh  for  a  yoke  of  oxen,  namely,  tbe

le  aiAw  in  width ;  and  ibat  whtai  otflit


a,  a  yoki


GG2  JtiaUM.

wu  Hied  lor  ■  aqnan  meuim  of  mrbee,  thej'i
gemmybj  a  nataml  uialagy,  b«wiie  the  doable  of
the  actus  quadratMt ;  and  that  this  new  mfwiing
of  il  anpuwded  iu  old  um  u  the  double  of  the
single  actfiu-  The  oncial  divinon  [Ah]  waA  ap-
plied to  the  ^r*?""!"!,  it>  Roalleit  put  being  the
tcngmltm  of  10  feet  >qu«re,=10l)  iqaani  feet.
Thui  the  japnvn  coDtuned  388  KTUpuli.  (Vairo,
R.  H.  L  e.)  The  jugenim  vw  the  common  me»-
lure  of  load  UDoag  the  Rohbiii.  Two  ji^era
{onnni  ui  invdnm,  ■  hondred  kmdn  n  uia<rria,
aad  four  etiiiuriae  a  miiv.  Then  diTiiioni  vers
derived  from  the  original  uaignmeDt  of  bmded
pn^jerty,  in  which  two  jugera  were  fpTen  to  «ch
citiien  aa  heritable  property.  (Vuro,  It,-  Nie-
buhr,  HuL  i^Boit,  toI.  ii.  pp.  IfiG,  Ac.,  and  Ap-
pcndiiiL)  [P.S.]

JUOUM  (C"7*t,  (<^*\  lignified  in  general
that  which  joined  two  thing!  together. It  denoted

1.  In  architectun)  any  crou  beam  (Vltm*.  x  8.
19).

3.  The  ttamvena  beam  which  miiled  the  np-
righl  pom  of  a  loom,  and  to  which  the  waip  waa
Bltoehed.  (Olid.  MtL  tL  £5.) [Tila]

3.  The  tranrrene  tail  of  a  trellie  (Vun,  dtR»
Aw(.  LG  ;  Col.  d»  Ht  RtHL  W.  17,  '20,  zii.  16,
Otopon.  T.  29),  joituag  the  npri^ht  polei  (ptrlieaa,
XV'"")  loi  Clie  lupport  of  Tinei  or  other  treei.
M.] Hence  by ' '


17,  ii


S.)


4.  The  croM-bai  ofa  lyre.  (Horn.  II.  ix.  187.)

5.  A  icale-beani,  and  hence  a  pair  of  aalea
[LwRil].  The  eonitellatioo  Libn  waa  eanMe-
qnentlj  olw  called  JogunL  (Cie.  ZNc  iL  47.)

6.  The  tianiTcru  Mat  of  a  boat  (AeacfajL
.rf^on.  1608  ;  Soph.  Ajax,  247  ;  Virg.  Ati.  iL
411.)  Thii  gave  origin  to  the  term  fvyln)!,  u
applied  to  a  Tower.  A  Tcuel  witb  miiny  bencbei
or  banki  fnc  the  rowen  wm  called  iTjCi  wtKutAyoi
or  iKflTif.^..  (Horn.  JL  iiL  293,  «.  347.)

7.  The  yoke  by  which  ploughi  and  cairiagei
were  dr»wa.  The  yoke  wag  in  many  caiei  ■
■tniight  woodan  plank  or  pole  laid  npoc  the
honea'  necki ;  bal  it  wu  commonly  bent  to-
wardi  each  eiUemity,  lo  M  to  be  acconunodoted
to  Aa  port  of  the  animal  which  it  touched  (earva

jsga.  Olid.  Fad.  iv.  21fi,  lYil.  h.  6.  2),  The
following  woodcut  «haw«  two  exampln  of  the
yoke,  the  upper  fnm  a  MS.  of  Heiiad^  Worki
and  Dayt,  pvKrred  at  Florence,  the  lower  from  a
MS.  of  Terence  belonging  to  the  Vatican  library.
Theie  may  be  compared  witb  the  itill  ruder  forms
of  the  yoke  ai  now  tued  in  Alia  Minor,  which  are
mtroduced  in  the  article  AxatRIIII.  The  practice
of  baring  the  yoke  tied  to  the  homa  and  preeiuig
npOD  the  foreheadi  of  the  oien  {afiiU,  noa  aervict

jimctit,  Plin.  IT.  N.  xiiL  70).  which  it  now  com-
mon  on  the  continent  of  Eoiope,  and  eapecially  in
France,  ia  itrongly  condemned  by  Columella  on
ground!  of  economy  at  well  aa  of  humanity,  (fit
Re  RaiL  ii.  2.)  He  recommend*  that  their  hewla
ihmild  be  left  free,  lo  that  they  may  raiie  them
aloft  and  thai  make  a  much  hondiomer  appntanse.
(Cic  Nat.  Dm.  ii.  68;  O'id.  Mtl.  viL  311.)
All  thi!  wmi  effected  by  the  nae  either  of  the  two
collan  {ntji^ia,  Vitn*.  x.  S.  6  ;  luaita,  Uesiod.
Op.  A  Dia,  469  \  Proelni,  ad  he. ;  C'h^  Horn.
II.  ax.  406  i SchoL  ad  ApaU.  Bind.  iiL  232)


JUOUM.
ihown  in  Iha  npper  Ggnm  of  the  woodcat,  or  of  the

excavation!  (yAiiifKu)  cat  in  the  yoke,  witii  the
bond!  of  leather  (JoTaj  Tmola.  Tib.  ii.  1.  7  ;  tov-
ptSttir  fiifcar  ^auxwliir,  ^unck,  ^nol.  iii.  44,
XtwiZm),  which  an  uen  in  the  Iowa  figure.


Thi*  flgme  alas  ibow*  tha  n«UMd  of  Qring  the

a  to  the  pcie  Haa,  fiinit)  by  meana  of  a
em  (trap  (XvyUiriJar,  Horn.  IL  r.  730,  zxir.
368—274),  which  wai  laibed  fiom  the  two  op-
potite  aidea  otct  the  jnnclico  of  the  pole  and  yoke.
Theae  two  port*  woe  itiU  more  fiimly  coojiecled
by  meana  of  a  pin  (l/itefjis,  SchoL  w  ifurQX  Hip-
}xiL  666  j  HTTvp,  Hom.  L  a. ;  Airiin.  Erftd,
Ala.  iL  p.  85,  ed.  Blan.  ;  fyMimir,  H(&  L  e.\
which  fitted  a  circnlm  cavity  in  the  middle  at  the
yoke  (ift^o^tt,  Horn.  f.  «.)■  Homccrepnaeirtalba
leathern  bond  ai  turned  over  the  batening  thrice
in  each  directioiL  But  the  futeainB  *n*  aane-
timei  much  more  compliealed,  eq)eciaUy  in  tbe  aaa
of  tbe  celebrated  Oordian  knot,  which  tied  tli*
yoke  of  a  common  cart,  and  eomiitad  ooly  of  flexi-
ble twig!  or  bari[,  but  in  which  tbe  <D(b  were  ao
concealed  by  b«ng  inoeitcd  withiu  the  knot,  that
the  only  way  of  d^oching  the  yoke  «at  that  which
Alexander  adopted.  (Atiian,  L  c;  Q.  CurL  iii.  2 1
Schd.  in  Bur^.  L  c)

Beaidea  being  variegated  with  pcedoui  materiak
and  wilh  carving,  the  yoke,  eapeuaUy  Bnong  the
Peciiona,  waa  decorated  with  elevMed  plume*  and
figure!.  Of  thia  on  examjde  ia  presented  in  a
hu-rvlief  &nm  Penepolii,  maierTed  in  the  Brftiah
Muienm.  The  ebarut  (^  Danini  wa>  mnaAsbU
for  the  goldoi  italoa*  of  Belu  and  Ninna,  aboid
eighleai  inehea  high,  which  were  fixed  to  the  yoke
over  the  necks  of  tha  honaa,  a  ifMiad  lagle,  alas
WTMigfat  in  gold,  being  placed  between  tbra.  (Q.
Curt.  iiL  S.)  The  pamgea  above  dted  ahow  that
when  the  carriage  wi*  prepand  for  uae,  tha  yoke
which  had  been  laid  aside,  waa  fint  ftataned  to
the  pole,  and  the  hoTMS  were  then  led  under  it.
Either  above  them,  or  at  tbe  two  eada  of  the
yoke,  ring!  were  often  fixed,  thnngh  wUeh  the
reins  pasaed.  These  frequently  appear  in  wndts  of
ancient  art,  repreaenting  chariota.

Homing  and  evening  are  often  dcaignated  in
poetry  by  the  act  of  putting  the  yoke  on  the  oxan
(Heo.  Op.  ti  Ditt,  Sel)  and  taking  it  off.  (Hot.
Oarm.  iiL  6.  43 ;  Vii^  £U.  iL  66  ;  Ovid.  FatL
1.  497  i  0oit>Mfis,  0wAvT&f,  Anian,  Le. ;  Hon.
it  itL  779  ;  Cic  oi  .<«.  XT.  37  ;  ^hAIvwi  C^.
Aiat  ZMg*.  Se7.)


JURQIUH.
Bf  uittoijmy  jnyiim  moDl  tlie  qnutitj  of
Imd  wbkfa  ft  joke  of  tava  cooJd  plough  in  a  dfty.
(Vun\  dt  Bt  Rmt.  L  10.)  It  wu  tued  «i  eqai-
nknt  to  tba  L^tin  par  ud  111*  Greek  fiio«i,  u
hi  afaOarmm  jagmm.  {^0.  If.  N.  X.  t,  S.)  Bj
UMtbei  flgnn  the  joka  meant  f&nxrjr,  or  the  cod-
di'lioi  m  nhiek  ■»■  no  onnpclled  agunft  their
win,  like  oitn  or  bonea,  to  labour  Gir  otban.
(AMtkjUgam.Sn ;  Flinu,iL  14  i  Tadt-Agrie.
tl  i  Her.  Sat.  iL  7.  SI.)  Henn,  to  expRM  ijid-
balkaUj  the  nilqnftticai  of  eonquend  natjooa,  tlio
Riwiai  made  their  eaptheapaMttnierayak*  (mi
jjpan  hiiTm  ■),  whk^  howerar,  m  tana  aod  tar
the  ake  of  Bnxniaia,  ma  Kanetimcl  nada,  not
like  iba  Joke  oaed  in  diawiDg  cairilgea  oc  ploogha,
bal  ntker  like  Ibe  jnfom  dnoibed  under  the  two
Sat  tl  tba  |«eeding  hnda ;  6a  it  nmaiited  of  a
pear  aoi^ertod  taDarenelr  by  two  otben  placed
apri|ht  [J.  v.]

JUOUMBNTUM. [J«nva,  p.  624,  b.]
JUNIO'RES. [CoHmj.ii.SSS.]
JURA  IN  RE. [DamifiDii.]
JURE  ACTIO,  IN. [JnnUDlcTio.]
JURE  CESSIO,  IN,  itM  a  mode  of  tnm.
fcnipg  ovnenkip  bj  meaDi  of  a  fietitiou  rait,  and
■o  far  RfenUed  tha  fenna  of  eooTeyanoe  bj  fine
and  by  emuMP  nooroy,  wbieb,  till  lately,  wcrs
bawioEn^nd. The  InJanCeaaiama  appli-
aU*  to  tbingB  Handpi  and  Nu  Handin,  and
■Im  to  R(«  Ineoiponlea,  wbicb,  fnm  their  natoie,
wm  ia^fsUa  of  traditim. The  pattiea  to  thii
tiMMttiMi  «(nthaoinim(<faaHiaitfirfa«li(),  the
pcooa  M  when  it  me  intesded  to  tcanalci  the
eBsoddp  (wmdiami,  ad  e>iiiln'),and  the  magie-
bataa,  qoi  addidL Tba  peiaon  to  whom  the
ewnmhip  wat  to  be  Innaicmd,  claimed  the  thing

■  Uiown  in  ptaaanea  of  the  manMiat '  ''

nalewnar;  the magiitntsB called  npoi


id  npoQ  theD*


ID  aiake,  or  nnaining  dlent,
dfcnnl  (oiMMr)  the  thin^  to  the  cloimaiit. Thii
pvceeding  waaaksia  aetu.

An  benditM  eoidd  be  lianifened  by  thii  pm-
am  [Hius,  p.  601,  b.]  ;  and  the  rea  oonionilea,
■hid)  bebwed  to  tba  bmditaa,  panad  in  toil  my
JDM  Be  if  tbey  had  aareiaUy  been  tnuuferred  1^
the  Id  Jnre  CeaeioL

The  In  Jure  Ccano  m*  an  old  Roman  initito-
tioo,  and  there  mn  proriuone  '■■[■*^'"^g  it  in  the
Twdre  Tables (Png.  VaL  t.  60.)

(Oun*.  ii.  34;  U1p.^Vi^.  tit  19.  a.  9.) [Q.  L.]

JU'ROIUH  ia  apparently  ■  contncted  (bim  &i
Jnridianm.  The  wdi  had  a  special  legal  mean-
iairi  aa  ^pcnn  from  a  pmapga  of  Cicero,  Di  Rt-
jaiUiaa,  qooted  by  Nonina : **  Si  jmgant,  inqnit,

didlar.  Kl  in  aeqnanti :  Jnisaie  igitm  I«  pout
inter  aa  Ticjnoe,  nan  Utuan."  Rodorff  atataa  that
the  iDall  diapolea  wUch  aioaa  betreai  ownari  c
(eo^oooa  landa  within  Ike  "qnlnqiu  pedca
<Cie.  d^  i^.  i.  18)  wan  eomprehended  radar  >h


(Rndotfi;  ZelltAnft,ie.nLx.f,3*e,Utterdia


JURISCONSULTI.  663

JURI'DICL Undd  Hadrian,  Italy  waa  di.

Tided  into  five  dietricti,  one  of  which  contained

Rome,  and  continued  in  the  aame  relation  to  the

Roman  fnetor  that  it  liad  been  before  tba  diTiaion

of  Hndnan. Each  of  the  other  fbnr  diatricta  re-

caired  a  magiatntu  with  the  title  of  cimauliria,

igjier  Jnriadlnion,  wbicli  waa  taken

ictpal  magiatntea. We  may  alao

eoort  of  the  eonaokrii  wai  a  court  of

ippeal  from  the  inftrior  cmuta  in  the  nattera  which

wanlefttotbeir  juriadiction.  (Spart  ffoifruii.  32  t

CapltoL  PiuM,-!.) Tbia  unnpemoil  of  Hadrian

waa  an  adrautagn  to  tba  Italiani,  for  before  thia

the inhabitanto  had  to  go  to  the Roman

paotor^  eoort  for  all  mattera which wera  not

within  the  juriadiction  of  the  dmunTiri  ;  Ibr  we

mnat  aaaume  that  the  eonaolarea  leaided  in  their

diatricta. ii.  Aoielina  jdacsd  fonetioDariee  with

the  title  of  Jnridid  in  the  place  of  the  Conauluo*

(Pnchta,  limit,  i.  §  92  ;  and  note  (m)  on  the  paaa-

age  of  Appioo,  Bill.  CXb.  i.  88).  [O.  L.]

JURl-DICl  CONVENTUS  [Paonwcul.

JORISCONSULTI or  JURECONSULTI.

The  origin  among  the  Romana  of  a  body  of  men,

who  were  eipomideii  of  the  law,  may  be  referred

to  the  aqnratioD  of  the  Jna  Cirile  &om  the  Jna

PonlafidBiiL [Jds  Ctvtts  Flatiauvm.'J Snch

~  kK^  Golainly  exialad  befbra  the  time  of  Cioera,

id  tbe  penona  wbo  proteaaed  to  eiporad  the  Uw

wen  called  by  tbe  TBiiona  namea  of  jnriiperiti,

nilti,  or  conanlti  aimply, Tber  were  alao

deaignated  by  otbK  namea,  aa  joriapindentaa,  pin-

dentioree,  peridona,  and  jnrii  anctona. The  word

which  Plntarch  niea  ia  Kvuttlrrqf  (Tib.  OraeA.

and  m^uiiJi  (^Oo,  36.) Cicero  (Tbf).  A)  eun-

ntee  the  juriiperitonmi  anetoritaa  amn^  the

iponent  puta  of  tbe  Jna  Cirila. The  definition

I  inriacauultna,  aa  giren  by  Cicero  (D*  Or.  i.

,1,  la,  "a  penon  who  baa  rack  a  knowledge  of

the  lawa  (^^ea)  and  coatoma  (iimmaftiifii)  i^iicb

pnnail  in  a  alaU  aa  to  be  able  to  adriae  (reapoia.


Campare  alao  Cioan^  d*  LigAmM,  ii  8. "  Periia
jogia  ■mamnto :"  and  Facciolati,  £a*toa, :


rt(«.


-).»


hiadealinga  (enoeaiAm) :  Saztni  Aelina  Catua  [Jot
AaLuKDM],  H*.  HamlinB,  and  P.  Hacina  are  ez-
iplea."  In  the  ecation  Pro  AAavao,  Cicers  naea
iciibere  "  in  the  place  of  "  agere."  The  tnaiiiaaB
the  aaiiy  jnriac^iealti  conaarled  both  in  adriainK
and  acting  on  behalf  of  th^  dlanM  (ilaainfliiiiaj
gratniloaaly.  Thn  gave  then  adrin  at  anaweia
(mpoaai)  either  in  public  ptacea  which  they  al-
-— ■-!]  It  certain  time*,  or  at  thor  own  bonaea
d(  O.  iil  33)  I  and  not  onl^  on  nutlen  of
law,  bat  on  any  thing  elae  that  nugbt  bo  relerred
to  them.  Tbe  wwda  "  acribere  "  and  '**  caren  "
leCnred  to  thsir  eajdoymenl  in  drawing  np  fbnnal
inatrmnents,  each  ai  contracta  or  willa,  &.t.  At  a
lata  period,  many  of  theae  fhnctkoa  were  per-
femed  by  penona  who  were  paid  bj  a  fee,  and
Ihna  then  aroao  a  body  of  pnetitionan  diatinct
from  theae  wbo  mre  rawnn  Kid  who  were  wrilen
and  teacheii.  llu  earlier  jnriacolmlli  cwmot  ba
■id  to  ha  the  aame  kind  of  panoa*  aa  thoee  of  •
later  period.  I^w  had  not  then  aaaiiini  il  a  ad-
enliflc  ftnn.  The  ftrat  whom  Pompaaiaa  menticna
waa  PaphioB,  who  ii  aud  to  hare  made  a  coQaction
of  tbe  Lena  Regiae.  l^berina  Cenmcaoina,  a
plebeian,  wIid  waa  eonnl  e.  C  3S1,  and  dao  the
lint  plebeian  PrntLTei  M*'™"",  ia  numtiooed  aa
the  nnt  who  pablidy  pofeaaed  (piAliiH  pnt-
ynar  «§(),  and  he  waa  diaCiDgniahed  both  for  hi*

knowUdga  of  the  kw  and  hit  doqneaeet Ua  left


eS4  JORISCONSULTt.

no  writing!.  It  mut  not,  honcver,  be  uitiined
that  ConucBniiu  wbi  a  ptvleHor  of  kw  in  tKa
ciodem  Mnia  of  the  tarn ;  dot  (tor  oitia  of  ths
jurUtt  sftcT  hin  wbo  m  ammented  by  Pomponioi.
Before  ttu  tims  of  Cicem  the  itad;  sf  the  lav
bad  become  a  dia^ct  hnuich  from  the  Kadf  of
Dtaloij,  and  a  man  might  raise  bimflelf  to  auinence
in  Ibe  itala  \r}  hit  repulatbn  as  B  l>«rjer,  u  wfU
ai  by  hii  csaloricai  power  or  militarj  akiU.  There
■ymt  many  dininguiihed  juriiti  in  (he  but  tvn
centuriea  of  the  repubiioui  period,  unong  whom
are  H'.  Maniliui :  P.  Hucini  Scaeiola,  Pontifei
llfaiimiu  (b.  c.  131)  ;  Q.  Mncim  Scaelola,  the
BDgur  I  and  Q.  Mnciiu  ScaeTola,  the  tea  of  PubUoi,
who  wai  conaiil  B.  c.  95,  and  iiAamTdi  Pontifei
Maiimui,  and  one  of  the  maiten  of  CIcen  (j'rit-


ptnlc


aaJHTuptnii


I,  Cic.  dtOr.L  39,  fintai,
vnla  the  Pontifei,  wa>  coniidend  to  hare  been  the
iirtt  who  gave  the  Jui  Civile  a  cyitematic  fonn,  by
a  trentiie  in  eighteen  booka  (Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  a.  2.
g41.}  There  are  foni  eicerpti  in  the  Digeat  fnim
a  work  of  hii  in  one  book,  on  Definitiona  Servioi
Sulpichu  Roflii,  the  friend  and  canlemparBrr  of
Ciooro,  and  comul  B.  c  61  (firW.  7,  40),  was  aa
great  an  oiator  u  the  Pontifei  SotevoU,  and  more
diatinguiahad  a*  a  jniitt.  Many  nenoni,  both  bia
predrraaaan  and  cDntemponriea,  had  a  good  prao-
tio^  knowledge  of  the  Uw,  but  he  waa  the  Snt
wbo  handled  il  in  a  icisntific  manner,  and  aa  he
had  both  nmnersua  bearera  and  wai  a  TDluniaoua
writer,  we  may  new  him  ai  the  founder  of  that
nclhodicsl  treatment  of  de  matter  of  law  which
chuBcteriied  the  lubiaquent  [loiiiuui  jnriaU  (Cic
BrvL  11 ;  Dig.  1.  ^L  2. 1.  S.  g  43),  and  in  which
they  ban  been  seldom  atupasaed.

The  joriils  of  the  imperial  time*  are  dialin-
gniahed  from  thoM  of  the  republican  period  by  two
cireamatancei,  the  Jna  Reapondendi,  and  the  rise
of  two  SchiMla  of  Law.

It  is  said  that  AognatDa  determined  that  the
Jarisconauiti  should  gire  their  mponia  under  his
sanction  (a*  ouOoritete  tjia  mpondirBa).  The
jurists  who  bad  not  nceived  lhi>  miak  of  imperial
fsTDiir,  were  not  excluded  from  giring  opinions ;
but  the  opiniona  of  aach  juriata  would  ha>e  little
weight  in  cDmpsriscin  with  those  of  the  pririlegcd
clui.  Those  who  obtained  the  Jna  Beipondendi
bma  the  PrincefA,  would  &om  tbia  circumstance
alone  bare  a  greater  antbority,  for  formally  their
Responn  were  founded  on  the  authority  of  the
Princepa  These  reiponsa  were  giren  seided  (,iig-
Roto),  appaiently  to  pi«Tent  blgificatioD.  The
matter  proposed  for  the  opinion  of  the  JuriKDnaulti
waa  aoDKtimea  stated  in  the  Reiponium,  either
fully  or  briefly ;  and  the  Reaponaum  itself  was
Bometimea  ahort,  aonietimcs  long  ;  sometime*  it
contained  the  gronnda  of  the  opinion,  and  some-
times it  did  not  (Urinoo.  dc  Form.  iiL  e.  6£ —
87.)

The  reapoDsa  of  a  priritegted  juriaamaultna  would
be  an  authority  lor  the  deciaion  of  a  judex  ;  if
there  were  condicting  rcsponsa  given,  the  judex
would  of  course  decide  as  be  best  could.  But,
besides  the  direct  leiponsi,  which  wen  giien  in
particular  oises,  then  wu  the  intbority  of  the
wrilinm  of  the  priiilqfed  juriat*.  Aa  befere  the
time  of  AogMtui,  pnblle  opinion  only  gave  eutho^
Tity  la  a  jurist^  responsa  and  writings,  ao  from  the
time  of  Augustas  this  authority  wu  fpiea  by  the
Jus  RMpM^endi  to  the  mpnia*  ud  writii^  of


JUIUSCX)NSULTI.

B  jnrtat.  This  pririlegs  gave  to  a  jurist  the  Mn-
diiion  of  a  Juris  snctor,  and  to  bis  writings  iegal
anthority,  oeither  of  which  belonged  to  a  juriat
who  had  not  received  the  pririlege.  Aecgrdingly,
the  writings  of  inch  privil^d  jnriats  receiied  IM
aamo  anthority  aa  their  reaponaa ;  and  if  the
opioioDa  of  the  Juris  auctona,  aa  expressed  in
(heir  writiiig^  did  not  aam,  the  Judex  wus  left
to  decide  at  he  beet  eoald.  This  cxplanatioa  of
the  nature  of  the  Jut  Reapondendi,  which  ia  bj
Puchta  (Inatit  L  §  117).  is  af^ed  by  him  ts  tlie
elucidation  of  the  paiaege  in  (Hios  (i  7.  B<apoDsa
prudentimu  sunt  sententiae  et  opinionca,  &c.),  lie
anppoaea  that  ihia  interpretation  of  the  passage  it
atncUy  coafnrmabla  to  what  hai  been  said  of  Ibe  an-
thority of  the  writing!  of  the  jurists.  If  we  leave
out  of  conaideiatioD  the  technical  expression  Rea-
ponsa,  with  which  the  painge  begios,  then  ia  no
difficulty  at  all  in  applying  the  words  of  Qaim  totl»


I  of  the


ulenllo

in  tbia

passage

m»widM>

n«,and

The  term

DriRitiMU  Ii

a  time

when  responsa,  in

he  aimpl

sense  of  the

term.

rero  the

only  form

a  jurist  wu  manifealsd  t
whereas  in  the  time  of  Gains,  the  writings  of  tbe
jurists  had  become  a  very  important  legal  authority,
and  consequently  they  must  be  inelnded  by  Oaiui
in  the  term  Responsa  Pnidentinm,  for  otberwiaa
be  would  not  hare  mentioned  at  all  the  AnctoHlaa
Pmdentium,  to  which  he  so  ofien  refen  in  Taiions
parts  of  hia  work.  Puchta^  eiplaualioa  of  this
passage,  which  beara  the  atamp  of  great  probability,
may  be  compared  with  that  of  SaTigny  (g^rtsi,
&c  vol,  Lp.  155).

In  the  lima  of  Augnatua  there  iroia  two  tchooU
(ictaiis)  of  Jorisl*,  iho  hcsda  of  which  were  re-
spectively Ateiua  Opito  and  Antistius  Labea  Tba
followen  of  labeo,  whom  we  know  with  certain^
to  have  been  such,  were  Nena,  Proculus,  Hem
the  Bon,  Pegasus,  Celtua,  Celsut  the  sou,  and
Neiatiiu  Priscua  The  followen  of  Capito  were
Massuriut  Sabinnt,  C.  Castius  Louginus,  Coeliua
Sabuius,  Priacni  Javolenttt,  Aburaus  ValeiiB  Tna-
ciaous,  Oniua,  and  probably  Pompooiu.  But  the
schools  did  not  take  their  nsmea  bom  lAbeo  and
Capita.  The  followen  cf  Labeo  wen  named  Pre-
culiani,  from  Praculus.  The  followen  of  Capita
derived  their  name  of  Sabiniani  from  Massorina
Sabinns,  who  lived  under  Tiberius,  and  aa  late  a<
tbe  reign  of  Nero :  they  were  aometimca  also  tailed
Caasiaoi,  hom  C  Castiui  Lmguma.  It  it  not
easy  to  state  with  precition  the  di8i?rencea  which
cbaracteriaed  the  two  achooia.  Whatever  maj
have  been  tba  origin  of  these  diSerenoea,  whii^
may  perhaps  be  partly  refsred  to  tbe  peraooa)
character  of  Capita  and  Labeo,  the  schoola  wer*
anhssqnenltj  distinguished  by  a  dllTerence  in  their
manner  of  handling  the  mallts  of  the  law.  Th*
school  of  Capito  adhered  more  cloeely  to  what  waa
utablished,  and  Is  the  letter  of  what  waa  written.
Labeo  was  a  man  of  greater  acquirementa  than
Capito,  and  bis  school  looked  more  to  the  intonal
meaning  than  to  the  enemal  fbim,  and  thus,  white
apparently  deriatuig  troni  the  letter,  they  ap-
proached neaier  to  tme  reaolta  ;  thoogh  tbe  strict
logic  of  this  school  might  sometiniea  f^odoce  a  re-
sult less  aduted  to  general  convBiienoe  than  tb«
conclusions  of  the  SaUniani,  which  were  baaed  on
the  prerailins  notions  af  equity.  Mncb  has  b««n
written  no  tile  chaneterittict  at  th*  twf  Khool^


JURI3DICTI0.
hm  to  TCTj  littls  poTpoac The  inattec  i*  tnieflj
tnated  by  Pnchta. (/iiXit  I  %  98.)

Tbe  wrilingi  of  the  jnriKonnUi  conaiated  of
cffiDmimtuii  on  the  Tvdtt  Tablet,  on  Ihc  Edict.
on  (Hiticnlar  1eg«i,  more  eapeciall;  on  lome  of  the
Jnliu  Legtti  uid  on  other  mRtten.  Ths  later
joriiM  *lia  ranunented  on  thewritingi  of  theeBrlier
jorin*. They  bJm  wrote  elementary  t»Btiwa  (_elt-

Oaiu,  which  ii  the  CBrlinl  work  o(  the  kind  Ihal
iro  know  to  have  been  written  ;  booki  called
Regatae,  and  Definilioneii,  which  probably  were
eolbctkini  of  ntaiimi  uid  legal  principle  ;  collec-
tiom  of  cue*  «nd  aniwen,  under  tbe  Tariona  naroei
of  re*p<m«B,  epijtolae,  lententiae,  and  opinionei ;
■yitenu  of  law  ;  and  Tarioui  worki  of  a  miuella-
DOOOl  ehaiaeter,  with  a  great  Tariety  of  namea,
sncli  aa  di^ntalionea,  qnaectionei,  enchiridia,  refl
qnoddianae,  ud  Tarioiu  other  tillei.

The  jniiitical  wiitcrt  were  very  numerooi :  they
ibniKd  a  aeriet,  beginning  with  Q.  Huciui  Sou-
Tola,  the  Pontifei,  and  ending  about  the  time  of
Aleiaiider  Sereraa,  with  Hodeitinna  who  wai  a


litnalDtc  ii  nearly  loiC [Pi

Tbe  mode  of  teaching  law  at  Rome  wu  oT  a
pnctieal  nature.  Prefeunn  of  law  in  the  modem
aoiae  did  qdI  eiut  till  the  Imperial  periods.  Ul-
pujn  ealU  them  Joria  civilia  profeBBorca  (Dig.  50.
Ik.  IS.  al.  §  J)  1  hot  there  ianoindiialionlhalhe
omaideivd  himaelf  aa  one  of  the  clan  ;  nor  can  we
CBiaida'  tbal  nich  men  at  Julian,  Fapbiiau  or
Pladna  erer  followed  the  oecD[«tion  of  teacher  of
law.  The  initinction  which  waa  given  in  the  re-
Bablkan  period  camiated  in  the  JntiaconiDlti  al-
iBwing  young  men  to  be  preaent  aa  amiilom,  when
they  ddiTwed  their  legal  opiniraia,  and  to  lee  how
tbey  eondocted  their  buainiw.  (Cic.  Orml.  89,
Tnri'^',  1.)  PreTioua,  howeTcr,  to  altoiding  to
thia  pemctiod  inatiMction,  yoojig  men  wera  taoght
the  elcBWnti  of  taw,  which  wot  sipiesied  by  the
Ion  mitilmi,  whence  probably  the  name  fnati-
tobonea  wa«  giren  to  dementary  trcstiaea  like
ihoae  of  Gaiu.  Acmrdingly,  imtitMi  and  awiin,
eifwcMed  the  two  parCi  of  a  legal  edneation  ;  and
iiaa  mode  of  inalnction  continued  (ffobably  till
■ear  tbe  time  of  Conalanline.  In  the  Imperial
HTiod,  prtfhably  young  men  demt^d  themaelvea
far  »  itill  longer  perii^  to  attcndancs  on  thoae
JBiiatB,  who  had  ibe  Jna  RcapradendL  Theae
JOBBg  men  are  ibe  jnria  itndioai,  who  are  men-
tisDcd  by  Ulpian  and  olhera.  Tboa  Ulpian  calla
Ifodatimia,  **  atndioani  mena,"  Aa  already  ob-
ttmd,  tha  daaa  nlled  Jmia  Civilia  Proreaaorea
■nae  wnder  the  empire,  and  they  teceiTed  from
tkaae  who  attended  them  an  Honorarium,  or  fee.
(VMmn,  Dig.  SO.  tit  13.  ».  1.  g  6.)

(Pomponina,  0»  Origine  Jurii,  Dig,  1.  tiL  S.
t,  3  ;  Zimmem,  GarUdU  da  Rimadm  PrrMt-
nokto.)  [G.  L.]

JURISDl'CTIO,  The  "offldnm"  of  bim
"qu  JDi  dicit "  ia  defined  aa  tidlowa  (Dig.  2.  tit.  ] .
DrJwiidi^iame):  —  "  BoDortun  poaaeaionem  dare
pateat,  et  id  pomiiioDem  mittete,  pnjuUia  non
kaboitibni  tilmea  eonatitaere,  jodjcea  littgandbna
dare."  Thia  ia  the  gatrat  fignification  of  the
*«d  Joriadictio,  which  axpieaaea  the  whale  "  offi-
ehm  jna  dieentia"  The  fnnctiont  which  are  in-
etwled  in  tha  **  offlcinm  jni  dicenlia  "  belmig  either
M  (in  ill  ^mU  aHwe),  or  to  tha


JUS.


ess


Imperiam  Uiitom,  or  thej  on  those  which  ara
eierciaed  by  nirtue  of  lome  lei,  acnatnaconiultam,
or  anthmity  delqiated  by  the  t^cepi,  ai  the
"Tntoria  datio."  (Dig.  36.  tit  1. 1.  6.)  The  Jnria-
dictio  of  thoae  magiatiatni  who  hul  no  Imperium,
waa  limited  in  coniequenee  of  not  haTing  the  Im-
periam, and  therefore  waa  not  Jnriadictio  in  tha
fall  meaning  of  that  term.  [InpaRiim  ;  Haois-
TR1TIIR.J  Iniamnch  aa  Jnriadictio  in  ita  apeclal
Miiie,  and  the  Imperium  Hiitnm,  are  component
parti  of  Jnriadiclio  in  ita  wider  aenie,  Imperium
may  be  eaid  to  be  contained  in  or  incident  to
Junadietio  {atperiim  ^mid  jariidlctiom  aiairfl.


Dig.  I.  tit  2i
riewed  aj  the  t(
of  the  magiitrati
conaidereo  ai  eq


ienae,or


•.')■

Tu  which  deiignatea  the  full  power
a ;  and  when  ao  viewed,  it  may  b<
livnlent  lo  Jnriadictio,  in  ita  wider
;  Jnriadictio  ii


Imperium  may  be  cc
aa  containing  or a>  contained  in  Jnriadictii^accnding
a*  we  giie  to  each  term  reapectively  it*  wider  or  ita
narrower  meaning  (Pnchta,  Uttir  den  miait  i/tr
Laliairia,ZatKliriJi,T6\.i.f.l9&.)  TheJnria-
dictiowaieitherVolnntariaorContentiou.  <Dig.  I.
tit.  1.  6.  a.  2.)  The  Jnriadictio  Voluntaria  rendered
Talid  certain  acta  done  before  the  magiatiatui,  for
which  certain  forma  were  required,  aa  adoption
and  manDmiaaion.  Thna  adoption,  properly  ao
called,  conld  take  place  before  the  praeaea  of  a  pro-
Tincia  (Oaina,  i.  100)  ;  but  in  Rome  it  took  place
befon  the  praetor,  and  was  taid  to  be  effected
"  imperio  magiatralua."  Tbe  Juriadictic  CoRlen-
tion  had  reference  to  legal  proceedingi  before  a
magiitratna,  which  wen  aald  to  be  w  jart  aa  op-
poied  to  tha  proceedinga  before  a  judex,  which
were  laid  lo  be  na  Judido.  The  portiea  were  aeid
**  Lege  agere : "  the  magittistua  waa  raid  jna  dicara
or  reddere.  Accordingly  "  magiitiatna  "  and  "  qni
Romae  jna  didfara  equlTalenl.  (Cic  mf  f  am,
mii.  14.)  The  functioni  included  in  Juriadictio
in  thia,  ita  apecial  acnae,  wcta  the  addictio  in  tbe
l^|ii  actionea,  the  giring  of  the  formula  in  proceed-
ing* conducted  according  to  the  newer  preceta,  and
tbe  appointment  of  a  jndei.  The  appointing  of  a
judex,  "  judicii  datio,"  waa  for  the  purpoie  of  in-
the  &cta  in  diapute  between  the  par'


Thai


lofth


r.  47)  ;  and  the  termi  of  the  edict  in
which  the  praetor  declare!  (hat  he  will  gite  a  judex,
(hat  ia,  will  recognise  a  right  of  action,  are  "  Judi-
cinm  dabo."  (Cic.  jiro  Kaon.  Si.)  Addictio  be-
longa  to  thaturtof  juriadietia  by  which  the  magie-
Ontua  himaelf  makea  a  deoee  or  givea  a  judgment;
thui  in  the  caae  of  ths  In  Jure  Ceiiio,  he  11  aaid
"ramaddicera."  (Gaiua,  ii.  34.)  Addicere  ia  to
adjudge  a  thing  or  the  poaaeaaion  of  a  thing  to  <»e
of  the  litigant  partiea.  In  the  caae  of  furtmn
manifeitnm,  inaimuch  aa  the  &cU  would  be  certain,
then  wai  an  addictio. (Oaing,  ir.  IB9.)

Other  nae*  of  the  word  addictio  are  collected  in
Facciolati.

It  ia  with  reference  to  the  three  terma,  Do,  Dieo^
Addico,  that  Vam  (Ha  Lu^.  Lot  n.  30)  remarkf
that  the  praetor  muat  nae  one  of  these  votda  "  cum
lege  quid  peragitUT."  Accordinglv,  thoee  day*
wen  tailed  Nefatti  on  which  no  legal  busineaa
could  be  doney  became  the  worda  of  legal  force
could  not  be  naed.  (Compare  Odd.  Fail.  I  47  g
Macrobiui,  Satant.  i.  16.)  [Q.  L.]

JU8.  "Mpeople,"  aaya  GmBi(i.I),  "wha
an  goranMd  by  Ltgea  and  iiottt,  on  pwtly  their


GGS


jua.


awD  l>ir  (jut),  putlj  tha  la«  (Jut)  tbat  it  com-
mon  to  nil  muikind  ;  for  the  law  (jat)  wkich  a
itata  eatabluhci  for  itself  it  peculiar  to  nich  atato,
and  ii  called  Jui  Cjiile,  at  the  peculiar  lav  [jm)
d(  Ihit  iIbUl  Bat  the  lav  (ju)  which  natnnl
Ttoaan  {ttaturalu  m^)  hai  rata.b]iihed  among  at]
dankini  ii  equally  ohierred  by  all  people^  and  it
called  Joi  Gectianlf  ai  being  thai  law  (ju)  which
all  naljooi  fallow.  The  Roman  populni  thenfore
foUom  paitly  ill  own  pacnliar  law  (nauii  propriaM
jat),  partly  the  sommim  law  (ooiaiiaiM  jm)  of  all
Bumkind."

According  to  thii  Tiew,  all  Lav  (jia)  ii  distri-
hnted  into  two  partt,  Jiu  Qentiuni  and  Ju  CiTile,
and  the  whole  bodj  of  Uwpeculiar  to  anjilale  i»
ita  Ju»  CiTile,  (Cic  dt  Oral.  i.  44.)  The  Romwi
law,  therefore,  which  ii  pecnliar  to  the  Roman
atate,  li  itt  Joi  Cirile,  lometime*  called  Jul  Ciiile
Romanonun,  but  more  frequently  deaignaled  by  the
term  Jul  Cirile  ooly,  by  which  i*  iiie«at  the  Ju
Cirile  of  the  Romaiii.

Tha  Jui  Oantinn  ia  hara  Tieved  by  Ouna  ai
■priniting  out  of  tbe  Natnrulii  Ratio  common  to  all
minkia^  which  ii  atill  more  clearly  aipraaacd  in  an-
other pataage  (i.  199)  whara  he  uaet  tha  exprea-
aion  "  omnium  ciritatium  jog"  aa  eqniralent  to
the  Jua  Oentinni,  and  aa  founded  m  the  Naturalii
Ratio,  In  other  paiaagea  he  fonndi  the  acqoiii-
tion  of  property,  which  waa  not  regulated  by  Ro-
man law,  on  the  natuialii  ratio  and  on  the  nalurale
jui  indifierently,  that  maluDg  naturalii  latio  and
naluiale  ju  equiialsnt  (ii.  GG,  66,  69,  73,  79}.
Ue  fbondi  Cognatio  on  Naturalii  Ratio,  ai  being
coiDDion  to  all  manlcind,  and  Agnatic  on  Cirilu
Ratio,  ai  bung  purely  a  Roman  inititution  (i.  I  £S).
In  two  sainaea  in  tiie  Digeit  (1.  tit  9)  ha  calli
aame  thing  Naturals  Jni  in  a.  2,  and  Jus  Qentium
in  a.  3,  S.  (Compare  Oaini,  iiL  132.)  The  Nalu-
rale Jus  and  the  Jui  Gentium  are  therefore  iden-
tical. (Sarigny,  ^|itfaisftc.,ToLi.p.  Ill)  Cicero
(lie  Q^.  iiL  £)  oppooei  Naluia  to  Leges,  where  he
eiplaioi  Natun  by  the  term  Ju  Oanlium,  and
mokei  L^ei  eqairalent  to  Ju  CiTile.  In  the
Pattilionea  (c  37}  ha  also  diridei  Jui  into  Natun
and  Lox.

There  is  a  threefold  dirision  of  Jns  made  by
Ulpian  and  others,  which  is  as  Jbllows  :  Jus  Civile ;
Ju  Qentium,  or  that  which  ii  common  to  all  man-
kind ;  and  Jus  Naturale  which  ii  comnxou  to  man
and  beaiti.  Tha  fbuodatioa  of  this  diviiion  aeemi
to  hare  been  a  thoot?  of  the  progivu  of  mankind
from  what  ii  commonlj'  termed  a  utate  of  nature,  first
to  n  itBte  of  lodoty,  and  then  to  a  condition  of  inde-
pendent stales.  Tiiis  division  bad,  however,  no
practical  qipliattion,  and  mtist  be  viewed  merely
as  a  cnrious  theory.  Absurd  as  it  appeals  at  Snt
sight,  this  theory  is  capable  of  a  reasonable  expla-

ny  that  beasts  have  law,  but  only  the  matter  of
law ;  that  is,  soma  of  thoaa  natural  relations  on
which  legal  ntations  are  foondad,  exist  among
beasts  as  well  at  men.  Such  natural  relation!  are
those  by  which  the  species  is  propagBted.  (See
alto  Puchta't  remaits,  Iiutii.  i  g  9,  note  a.)  In
the  Institutes  the  two  diviiions  are  coofouoded
(i.  tit  2.  De  Jura  Natnisli,  Oentinm  et  Civil!)  ;
for  tlio  eipIonatioD  of  Ju  Natuiale  it  fitit  taken
from  tha  threefold  division  of  Ulpian,  and  thai
tbe  Jnt  aantinm  and  Civile  are  eiplainad  accord-
ing to  the  twofold  divition  of  Oaius  ^ready  quoted,
fp  that  we  hnvo  in  the  tarns  taction  the  Jus  Na-


taiala  explained  in  tha  taise  of  Ulpian,  and  the
Jtit  Oeaitium  cxpbined  in  tha  tense  of  Ouua,  as
derived  faom  tbe  Natjralii  RatioL  Further,  in  the
second  book  (tit  1.  s.  II)  the  Jut  Naturals  is  ex-
plained to  be  the  lame  as  Jns  Gentium,  and  tbe
Jul  Natunle  is  said  to  be  coeval  with  the  human
tace.  Notwithstanding  this  confiision  in  the  In-
ititutea,  theia  ia  no  doubt  that  the  two-fold  divi-
sion of  Gaius  waa  that  which  prevailed  in  Romnn
juristrudance.  (SaTigny,^a<Sii,&cvoLL  p.413.)
This  two-fold  diviiion  appeait  clearly  in  Cicuo,
who  says  that  tha  old  Runaas  sepaiated  tbe  Jus
Civile  from  the  Jus  Gentium ;  and  he  addi  that
the  Jut  Civile  (of  any  state]  is  not  thenfiKe  Jus
Gentinm,  but  that  what  it  Ju  Genliitm  vonht  to
be  Ju  Civile  (rf.  OjK  iii.  17).

Those  rules  which  regulated  the  declaration  nf
war  and  the  conduct  of  war  are  comprehended
under  the  tenn  Jua  Feeiala.  Some  modem  writers
give  to  the  term  a  wider  ligniliiatioo  ;  and  othrn
limit  it  man  closely.  Ownbraeggen  (Dt  Jm
BtOi  1  Paeu  AwMorvn,  p.  20.  LipL  1836)
defines  tha  Jus  Fedale  to  be  that  which  pre-
scribed tha  ibnnnlae,  solemnities  and  earcnuHiia]
observed  in  the  declaring,  carrying  on,  and  ter-
minating a  war,  and  in  the  matter  of  trealiee.
The  Rranans  often  used  the  axpreition  Jas  Grn-
tiom  in  a  sense  which  nearly  conesponds  to  the
pbnia  Law  of  Nations,  or,  ai  lome  call  it,
tional  Law.  (Livy,  iu  14,  vL  1,  quod  1«-
gatus  in  Oallos,  ad  quot  mitsos  aiat,  contrm  jus
gentinm  pngnuset ;  xnviiL  4  H  ;  Sallut  Ji^
22.)  The  term  Ju  BeUi  (Cic  <lt  £^  ii.  14)
is  used  in  the  same  sense.

The  origin  of  the  opposition  betweeo  Jns  Gm-
tlum  and  Ju  Civile  was  not  a  ipeeulatiTe  notico,
nor  did  it  originate  with  the  Junsti,  tbengh  they
gave  it  a  theoretical  him,  Tbe  Jut  OentintB  m
its  origin  was  the  general  law  of  Peiqrini,  ac-
cording to  which  the  Rranans  determined  the  legal
relations  among  Pere^riui,  a  dan  of  persona  to
whom  tha  Jui  Civile  wai  not  appliabla.  Con-
sequently, the  foundation  of  the  Ju  was  fac^n
law,  modified  by  the  nomans  accerdinn  to  their
own  notions,  so  as  to  be  capable  of  genival  appli-
catim.  This  ia  one  side  of  the  oriainal  Jut  Gen-
tium, The  other  it  that  Law  which  owed  iu
origin  to  the  more  enlarged  views  of  the  nsitore
of  law  among  tha  Roman  people,  and  waa  the
development  of  tha  national  cbamcter.  The  twe
notions,  however,  are  clcaelv  eonneelad,  for  the  law
of  Per^rini  was  that  which  fint  presented  tbe
Romans  with  the  notion  of  the  Jut  Oentitun,  and
it  waa  fonncd  into  a  body  of  l4w,  independent
of  the  Ju  Civile,  and  not  intcrfoing  with  it.
But  the  geuenl  l^w  of  Peregtini  alw  obtained
among  the  Romans,  as  Law,  and  not  considered
merely  with  reference  to  their  inlercoune  wiih
Per^iinL  '  The  Law  of  Peregnni  and  Koima
Iaw,  ditencumbend  of  all  psculiari^  <tf  indi-
vidual nationa,  are  the  two  sidee  of  the  same  na-
tion, which  tha  Romaai  eipreaa  by  tha  term  Jaa
Gentium."  (Pocbla,  ImtHl.  L  |  B4>.  The  Jaa
Gentium  was  chiefiy  intndueed  bj  the  Edietmn, —
St  the  Law  of  Peregrini  Iry  the  Edict  of  tba  Piae-
tor  Peregrinus  and  the  Edicta  Provkcialia,  and  a*
Law  for  the  Rmnans  by  tba  Edieton  of  tha  Pne-
t<»'  Urhanus.

The  Jus  Civila  of  the  Ronant  is  diviiibia  into
Jns  Civile  in  tha  namwer  tenae,  mi
xaia,  or  tha  law  of  nUgiata,


twoparta,
jMPontifi


jua.

Thii  c^ipwtioD  u  >amciJmt?s  eipreucd  by  the
wotda  Jul  and  Fu  <.Fat  el  jura  liiaiil,  V'aif.
Gaarg.  i.  269) ;  uid  ^  law  of  thing!  not  perutia-
ing  to  religicm  and  of  Ihiugi  pertainuig  Xo  it,  an
mim  napectiTclj  oppooed  to  caie  another  bj  th«
tmu  Ra  Jniii  Hnmaiii  et  Dirini.  (Initit  2.
lit.  1.)  [DoHiHiuH.]  Thai  the  Pontificn  Hai-
imi,  P.  Ctunu,  wd  T.  Garuncsniiia,  are  lud  to
hara  girea  RcHWim  da  omnibiu  dinnii  et  hu-
lunia  rebu.  (Cic  <U  OraL  iii.  33.)

Tha  Law  of  Religicm,  or  ths  Jiu  Pontifichim,
VM  onder  tha  smtnl  of  the  FonUGceil,  wlio  in  fact
originallj  had  tha  coDtnil  of  the  whole  mau  of  the
law,  and  it  wu  onlf  after  tha  lepuation  of  the  Jni
Cinle  in  ita  vider  taam  iota  the  two  [orli  of  the
Joa  CiTile,initiiiuna'er<enN,uidthe  Jua  Ponti-
ficiDin,  that  Mcb  part  bad  iti  proper  and  pecoliai
iimita.  But  after  tbia  lejantioa  wu  fully  made
the  Auitivilaa  PmtiSciun  had  the  nme  operation
and  rffcrt  with  reipeet  to  the  I«w  of  Religinn  that
the  AoctivTtai  PrvdeDtiuiH  had  aa  the  Jus  Civile.
<Cie.  dt  tag.  ii.  19,  20.)  Still  eTCn  aftci  the  Kpn-
taiion  then  wai  a  mutual  relatieii  between  theee
two  bzsncbia  of  lav  ;  tta  liDUuice.  an  Adn^tio
WB  not  valid  by  the  Jui  Ciiile  unlew  it  wai
talid  by  the  Ju  PflntiGciom.  {Cic  de  OraL  iiL
33,  BrwL  42  ;  AnoM'io.)  Again,  Jiii  Pontifi-
riiUB,  in  ita  wider  ienae,ai  the  law  of  leligiati,  bad
iu  (sbdiTiiiona,  a*  into  Jot  Angunua,  PwitiEnun,
&e. (Cibia&wxi.  11.)

"  Law,"  tkjt  Oaiiu  (L  2),  meaning  the  Soman
(hil  law  (jwTi),  "  ii  compoied  of  legea,  pUbiicIta,
aenanu-aaxulta,  conititntionca  Principom,  the
Edicts  of  thoae  who  hare  the  .tni  Edicendi,  and
tbe  BcapoDB  PmdailiunL''  Thi>  ii  a  divition  of
law  mcrelj  according  to  iti  formal  origii^  Tbe
diTirion* enmneialed  bjCice»(rqp.  S)  are  "lego
(whicli  include  plebiacita),  Hnanu-ctnuulta,  ret
judicHtBc,  joiiiperitorum  anctntitai,  edicta  magia-
tntanm,  moa,  aequitas."  A  conaidention  irf  the
diflerent  tpocbi  at  which  thsM  writen  lived,  will
aecniDt  for  put  of  tbe  diacrepoiKy  ;  bat  the  addi-
tuo  of  Mot  in  CiceroV  cnnmemlioa  la  importmit.

Jn  Civile  ii  oppoaed  to  (he  Joa  Piaetorioni  or
Hoammrinm [Edictuh]  y and the eppoaition

which  tbe  two  •everaUy  obtained  an  eiiitence  ;
whenai  the  Dentition  of  Jua  Civile  and  Gentinm
ia  fbaoded  on  tbe  internal  ebaiBcter  of  the  two
kinda,  and  the  extent  of  their  application.

T^i  and  Moa  an  aometimea  oppoaed  1o  one  on-
BthR-,  aa  parta  component  of  the  Jul  Civile,  but
diAnnt  fai  their  origin.  Honufl  (Carm.  i
■praka  of  "  Mot  et  Lei : "  Juvenal  (viiL  60)  oppoiei
*■  Jorii  Dodo*  et  iegmn  acnigmala ; "  Jua  Civilo
ii  of^Kwd  to  I.egei  (Cic  de  OraL  L  13),  to  Lei
(■U  qf.  iii.  1 7),  and  to  Senanu-coniollum  (Oaiui,
iL  197).  Aa  Oten  oppoaed  to  Lt^a,  Jul  Civile
appsia  to  be  c^italent  to  Moi.  In  fan  tha  op-
f  •ition  between  Lex  and  Moa  followt  the  analogy
of  thai  between  jua  icriptmn  and  non  aoiplum.
"  Urbea  there  ore  no  aaiptae  legea  we  mnit  follow
that  which  haa  b«n  intn>dacGd  by  morvi  and  con-
BD?tDda.  —  Immemorial  (aneltrata)  coniuetudo  i<
propnly  oboervcd  at  a  lex  {pro  tepe),  and  thii  ia
the  joa  which  ia  nud  to  be  '  moribua  conaiitntum.' "
<Jnliaa,  Dig.  1.  tic.  3.  a.  32.)  Thua  immemorial
onge  waa  the  foondatioD  of  the  "  jua  Moribui
cooicitiitnn.*'  (See  the  article  iHrjiuiA  ai  I
ocigiii  of  Inbmia.)  Tbe  oltimate  toHgin  of  ct
k  tbe  cgOBioa  conicioiBDeu  of  i3u  people  among


JUS.


657


peat«d  aod  contlaued  uie :  it  ia  law  when  recog-
nized hy  a  competent  antbority.  There  ia  a  pna-
nge  of  Ulpiau  (Dig.  1.  tit.  3.  a  31)  in  which  ho
diitlnctly  ipeaki  of  confirming  a  coniuetudo  in  a
judidam,  whicli  am  have  no  other  meaning  than
that  ita  taix  aa  law  depended  on  a  deciaioD  in  a
judicium. And  the  meaning  ii  clear,  whether  *


read  omtiadicto  or  ctmtradicta  i
referred  to.


the  pa


gejuit


TheR


d  frequently  refer  to


large  part  af  their  law  ai  founded  a
the  Mot  Majonun  and  not  on  Legea  (QuintiL/aiftr.
OruL  V.  10.)  That  Ulpian  (Dig.  1.  tit  6.  a  6)
aaya  that  the  Jua  Patriae  Potestalii  it  moribua
reeeptum.  But  moa  contained  matten  relating  to
religion  u  well  aa  to  the  ordinary  offoin  of  life  ;
md  therefore  we  may  alio  view  Met  and  Lei,  when
ippoicd,  aa  component  porta  of  the  Jua  Civile  in
ta  wider  lenie,  but  not  aa  nuking  up  the  whole  of
.t.  Moret  in  tim  Kutc  of  immordity,  thai  which
Kiitiva  morality  dinpproTei  of^  mutt  not  be  con-
founded with  ju>  founded  on  morel :  the  fbnncr  ia
morea  in  reaped  of  which  there  wat  oflen  n
,  .  loribua  conititutum.  Tbnt  in  the  matter  of
the  doa  then  waa  a  retcntk  in  tv^ed  of  ths  morea
gravioret  or  majore^  nbkh  waa  adultery.  (Utp>
Fmg.  tit  6.)

The  tenni  Jni  Scriptnin  and  Non  Scriptnm,  a*  ex-
plained in  Ihe  Inatitutei  (i.  tit  2),  comprehended
the  whole  of  the  Jut  Civile  ;  for  it  wai  all
cither  Soiplum  or  Non  Scriptnm,  whatever  other
diviaiona  there  might  be.  (UIp.  Dig.  1.  ^L  1. 1. 6.)
JuiScriptum  comprehended  evety  thing  eicf^t  that
"■  quod  niui  approbaviL"  Thia  diviiioa  of  Jua
Scriptiun  and  Noa  Scriptum  deea  not  appear
in  Oaint.  Il  wai  borrowed  from  the  Greek  writen,
and  aeema  to  have  little  or  no  practical  applicstioD
amoTu  tbe  Itomana  Tha  aenae  in  which  Wrinen
and  Unwritten  Uv  haa  been  uied  by  Eugliab  writf  n
ia  hardly  tbe  tame  aa  tbe  Roman  aeuie.  Hale
■ys  iffiMt  of  On  Cbmnoa  jtour.p.  2).  ■*  Thoae  lawa
that  I  call  ligiM  Mcriptat  (be  ihould  hare  uied  tha
eipraiion  j«f  acrfptan,  though  Cicero  uki  the
eipreuion  Lex  Scripla}  are  tucb  at  are  originally
reduced  into  writing  before  they  ore  enacteil."
Hale  appliethiideiimtiDD  only  toatatntea  or  acta  of
parliament ;  but  it  ia  equally  applicable  to  any  rules
which  are  promulgated  in  writing  and  have  tha
force  of  Law  or  of  a  law,  by  virtue  of  authority
delegated  to  thoie  who  m^e  auch  rule^

Jut  wot  bIm  divided  into  Publicum  and  Priva-
tum by  the  Bonian  joriiti.  (Dig.  1.  tit  1.  a.  1.)
Publicum  Jua  ia  defined  to  be  that  which  relatct
to  the  Statu!  Rei  Romanae,  or  to  the  Romana  aa  a
State  ;  Privatum  Jua  ia  defined  to  be  that  which
nlalea  "ad  lingulonim  ulilitalem."  The  Publi-
aaa  Jut  iafdrtbernid  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  1.  tit  l.t.l)
"  in  laerla,  in  lacerdotibus,  in  mngietratibii*  con-
aiilere."  According  to  thit  view,  it  conrprehcndi
the  Law  of  Religion  and  all  the  rcit  of  the  Jua
Civile,  which  it  not  Pnvatnm :  and  the  matter
which  ia  comprehended  in  Jua  Priiatum  ia  that
which  ia  coutuned  in  the  Inatitutei  of  Oajni  and
Juilinian.  Tbe  elementary  licatiie  of  Oaiui  doea
not  mention  tbii  diviainn,  and  it  ia  limited  to  the
Jut  Privatum.  Joatinian,  in  hia  Inititutei,  ailer
making  tbia  diviaion  of  Jua  into  Publicum  and
Privatum,  aaya,  **  we  muit  therefore  treat  of  Jua


contemplate  treating  of


ra  that  he  did  ni


htha


663  JUS.

Ian  title  of  tba  fourth  book  ii  Da  Jadicili  Puli-
licii.  The  RomaD  term  Jui  Pablicum.  alio  com-
prehended Ciimiual  Iaw  ind  Criminal  Procedure,
and  Procedure  in  Cini  Actioni.  It  ia  nid  by  Papi-
nian  (Dig.  28.  tiL  1.  l  3)  that  the  Teitamenli-
faclio  belonged  to  Publltiim  Jos.  Now  the  Tetla-
mentiiactio  wu  included  in  Comraerehiin,  snd
only  RoinBix  dtizena  and  Latini  had  Commer-
diuD.  Thii  ii  in  initance  of  the  applicitioa  of
the  term  Pablicum  Jni.  All  Jui  ii  b  a  Knie
Publicum,  and  all  Jui  ia  in  a  khh  Priratum  :
bat  the  Roman  Publicum  Jui  direcllf  concerned
the  conititudon  of  the  atate  and  the  functioni  of
goTemment  and  adniiniatratinn ;  the  PricBtum
Ju«  directly  cnacemed  the  intcreata  of  individuda.
The  oppoaition  between  these
and  oa  well  marlced  aa  the  natun  of  auch  ibinga
onnd  &ult  with,  the


JUS.

■  adopting  the  Jui  Oenti


tTiR  In  bonia  ii


r  of  the  I


u  of  a  defence.


The  eipreaaion  Populua  Romanua  Quiritei  haa
siven  riie  to  much  diacoaaion.  Becker  {Hcoidli,  der
SomiKhai  AUxrihUmer,  voL  ii.  p.  3t]  condndei
that  Romani  and  Quiritca  are  an  iu  oppoaed  that
Romani  ia  the  hiatoricBj  and  political  name  riewed
vith  mpect  to  foreign  alatca,  and  Quiritca  the
political  name  aa  Tlewed  with  reference  to  Rome.
Accordingly  QairiCea  ia  rquiTslcnt  to  CiT«.
(Sueton.  Caa.  70  ;  PluL  Caa.  51  ;  Lit.  iW.
37.)  It  doe*  not  leem  eaa;  to  explain  the  dif-
ference between  Civitai  Romana  and  the  Juj
Quiritinm,  yet  ao  much  teenu  clev  that  Civitai
Bomana  wai  a  term  large  enough  to  comprehend
all  who  were  Citc*  in  any  aenac.  But  the  Jul
Quiritium  in  iU  later  aenae  aeemi  to  be  the
Privatum  Jua  aa  oppoaed  to  the  Pablicum  Ju  ,
thua  it  diSeri  from  Jui  Cinte  viewed  oi  the  whole
Roman  law,  or  aa  oppoaed  to  the  law  of  othe
people.  He  who  claimed  d  thing  exduaively  aa  hi
own  claimed  it  to  be  hiaeiJarcQuiritium.  {Qaiui,
iL  40,  &c.)  Accordingly  wc  lind  the  eiprei
Bominua  and  Dominium  £i  Jure  Quiriiiui
conlraited  with  In  bonia  [Dumimuh],
part  of  the  Roman  law,  in  ita  widett  icnie,  ai
related  to  buying,  lelling,  letting,  hiring,  and  nich
ohiigntiona  aa  were  not  ibunded  on  the  Jui  Civile,
weie  coniidcred  to  belong  to  the  Jus  Gentium  {Dig.
I.  tit.  1.  a.  i\  (hut  ii,  the  Jiia  Natnrale.  (Qoiue,
lL  65.)  Accordingly  when  ownerahip  could  be
acquired  by  Cradicion,  occupation,  or  in  any  other
wuv,  not  apccially  provided  for  by  the  Jua  Civile,
eucb  oivnerahip  waa  acquired  by  the  Jua  Gentium.
When  the  Jua  Civile  ptcKnhed  certain  forms  by
which  ownership  was  to  be  trantfemd,  and  luch
(brma  were  not  obiertcd,  there  waa  no  ownership
Jure  Civili  or  Jure  Quiritium,  but  there  woa  that
intcrcat  which  waa  odlcd  In  bonia.  It  is  not  aaid
by  Oaiui  (iL  40,  &c.)  that  the  In  bonia  aroso  by
virtue  of  the  Jua  Gentium,  and  it  may  pcrhapa  be
concluded  that  he  did  not  ao  view  it  ^  for  in  another
poasage  (ii.  65),  he  apenks  of  alienation  or  change
at  ownL'Tahip  being  effected  either  by  the  Jua
Nntntole,  oa  in  the  case  of  tradition,  or  by  the  Jus
Civile,  aa  in  the  case  of  manci^Btii^  in  jure  coasio,
and  uaucapion.  In  thia  psasage  he  ia  speaking  of
alienation,  which  ia  completely  effected  by  tra-
dition, io  that  then  ia  a  legal  change  of  ownoahip
rccogniced  by  Roman  law ;  not  by  Roman  law,
ipecially  Ba  auch,  but  by  Roman  law  ai  adopliim
or  derived  from  the  Jut  OeDtium.  In  the  other
caae  (ii.  10)  there  ii  no  ownership  either  aa  re-
cegniwd  by  Itoman  taw  ai  auch,  or  by  Roman  law


merely  reconniied  by  the  Piactorian
division  it  iherefoie  belonga.  So  fer  ai
of  the  praetor  may  be  aa
Gentium,  ao  for  may  the  In  bonia  be  aaid  to  bo
founded  on  it  alao.  Properly  speaking,  the  Jul
Gentium  was  only  received  oa  Roman  hiw,  when
it  did  not  contradict  the  Jus  Civile ;  that  ii,  it
could  only  hare  its  full  effect  aa  the  Jiu  Gentium
when  it  waa  not  contradicted  or  limited  by  the
Jua  Civile.  When  it  waa  ao  contiadicted  or
limited,  the  praetor  could  only  give  it  a  partial
effi'ct,  hut  in  ao  doings  it  ia  obvioua  that  he  wna
endeavouring  to  nullify  the  Jua  Civile  and  ao  to
moke  the  Jua  Oentium  as  extensive  in  ita  opeim-
tion,  OS  il  would  lave  been  but  for  the  limitation
of  the  Jua  Civile.  The  bound*  that  were  {Jaced
to  thia  power  of  the  praetor  were  not  veiy  defioite.
Still  he  generally  laihioned  hii  Jm  PraetortDin
after  the  analogy  of  the  Jus  Civile,  and  though  be
made  il  of  no  effect  aa  agunal  his  Jui  Pnetorinm,
he  maintained  ita  form  and  left  it  to  ita  full  ope-
ration, except  BO  &r  aa  he  neceaaarily  limited  ita
operation  by  hii  own  Jna  Praetorium.

Jua  used  absolutely  ia  defined  to  bo  "  ata  bmii
et  aequi"  (Dig.  1,  tit  1.  a.  1),  which  i*  an  abmrd
definition.  What  it  really  ia,  may  be  collcctHl
from  the  above  enumeration  of  iu  porta  or  divi-
aiona.  Ita  general  signification  is  law,  and  in  thia
aenae  it  ia  opposed  to  Lex  or  a  Law.  Lex,  how-
ever, aa  already  ahown,  ia  aometimea  need  geiiemllj
tor  Law,  as  in  the  instance  from  Ciceni  where  K  it
opposed  to  Nalura.  Lex  therefore  in  thia  geneml
scnie  comprchendi  legea  and  nil  the  other  pan*  of
the  Jna  Civile.  In  ita  apecinl  aenae  of  a  law,  it
ii  included  iu  Jus.  Jul  is  alio  naed  in  the  pliua]
number  (Jura)  apparently  in  the  aenae  of  tho
component  porta  of  Jua,  aa  in  (jaiua  (i.  S),  wheiv
he  laya  "  Conitant  aulem  jura  ex  lembua,"  ic  ;
and  in  another  pasmgo  (i,  158),  where  he  aaja  wii}i
reference  to  the  Agnationia  Jus  or  Law  of  Agnatjo^
andtheCognationiiJnsoiLawofCoguatio,  "civilia
ratio  civilia  quidem  jura  conumpere  poteM."  In-
deed in  thia  passage  Agnationia  Jua  and  CognatioQil
Jus  are  two  of  the  Jura  or  porta  of  Jus,  which
with  other  Jun  make  up  the  whole  of  Jna.  Again
(Ooius,  ii.  62],  tluu  proviilon  of  the  Lex  Julia  da
Adulteriia,  which  forbade  the  alicnaiioa  of  the
Fundui  Dotalii,  ia  referred  to  thua — "  quod  quidem
jua,"  "  which  nile  of  law"  or  "  which  law" — it
being  a  law  comprehended  in  another  law,  which
contained  thii  and  many  other  pravisiona,  Thua
though  Lex  in  i(j  strict  aenae  of  a  Law  is  differeoL
fiom  Jus  in  its  large  sense,  and  though  Jua,  in  it*
mrrower  aenae,  ia  perh^  never  nacd  loc  a  Lrx,
itill  Jna,  in  thia  ita  narrower  aenae,  is  n*ed  to  cz-
preai  a  rule  of  law.  Thua  Gaioa  (I  47)  ipeaki  of
the  jura  or  1(^1  pmvisions  comprited  in  the  Lrx
AeliuSentia;  nnd  of  jura  oi  based  on  thcItetpMiBa
Prudcn^um(*^reaponsaprudnnr' .-—--_..-


.opuu


,  Gaiui,  i.  7  ;
Jul  has  also  the  meaning  of  a  (acuity  or  )t|:A|
iht  Thua  Guui  aaya,  "  il  is  an  actio  in  rem,
hen  we  clum  a  corporeal  thing  ai  our  own,  or
um  Bome  ^  aa  out  own,  auch  ai  a  jni  ntaidi,
cundi,  agcndL"  The  nroital  power  la  called  a^
"  Jus  proprium  civium  Romononun."  The  mcKit-
'  ig  of  iaa  generally,  and  of  a  fe^if  n^,  are  ap~


JUS  AELIANUH.
Bwintun  mj  ligbt  (nnun  jui)  bj  the  Inleidi
(  Pro  Catenta,  e.  1 1.) Ai  the  Hnial  nil«  of
wbirK  ATB  often  nnDprised  in  Due  lex,  or  vl
mako  ap  tbe  vhols  bod;  of  Jni  (Law),  maj  be
called  jnia  irith  tebrence  to  thsir  object,  lo  (ho
Tariou  legal  righU  which  tn  Hvenlly  cijled  jus
with  nSaatee  to  Kims  pulicnlar  aabjeeC,  ma;  be
cDllectiielj  allad  jtm. Tfau  m  find  tbe  pbraie
Jmrn  Puentit  to  eipreu  all  the  righta  that  flaw
fima  the  &et  of  Isgal  pat«iiitj.

The  phnM  Jnn  Pimediomiii,  which  i*  vwd  b;
tbe  RsDMi  JnriM,  ia  moewhal  peculiai,  and  open
to  objcctink [SuiviTua.]

Tke  poteatBi  which  a  Roman  father  had  otct  hia
dtidrcDaiuiahiiabaiidoTDT  hiB  wife  in  majiu,  being
a  jua  or  le^  Tight,  ther«  hence  aroec  the  diatinc-
ti«  at  peiaona  into  thoie  wha  are  nu*  and  those

Alllheiightiof  tuchpencau

_  the  phnu*  "  Jui  Pcr-
liTiiion  of  the  whole  mUtec  of
Joa  whidi  tnau  of  tha  oonditioD  of  penoiu  ai
■Muben  efa  FamiliiL [Familii.1

TUt  lead!  la  the  mention  of  anoUW'  diniioa  of
the  matto'  of  lav  which  appean  among  the  Roman
Juiat*,  namely,  the  I^w  oT  Poasna  j  the  Idw  of
ThJDgi,  which  ii  expreaed  br  tha  phiaae  **  jna
' '  "  and  the  I^w  of  Action*,

pol^iet."  (Gaiua,  i.  U.)
nati  of  tbe  Law  of  Per-
il the  BTtide  Insti-
TvTKima,  in  tha  inrth  he  ticate  of  tbe  I«w  of
Aetiona ;  and  aeeoidingt;  the  ncond  and  third
cantsin  tha  I«w  of  Thu^  to  erpreaa  which  he
doea  mt  naa  a  plinueelaey  aaalogoiu  to  that  of
**  Jaa  Penmanini ;"  bat  ha  nf*  be  will  treat  Do
Bebu. [iNmrrcTiONM.]

Tbe  adjectiie  JuttDm  often  ocean  in  the  Latio
wrilcn,  m  tha  aeoM  of  that  which  i*  conaiatent
with  Jm  or  Law,  or  ii  not  cmtiaij  to  law.  Thua
il  ia  a  juMum  (1^)  matrimoniuin,  it  there  ii  con-
■abinm  between  tha  two  partiea  to  the  maniage.
The  word  Jutum  hai  nuny  varieliei  of  meaning,
whicb  ma]'  goienllr  ba  derived,  witbixit  much
difficaJ^,  fniii  the  meaning  of  Jni :  aa  jiula
aerritiu,  jnatuoi  concilium,  juitum  iter,  juilui  ox-

Joa  ia  oppoaed  to  Jndidnm,  and  a  thing  wa«  nid
to  ha  done  in  jam  or  in  judicio,  aocciding  ai  it  wai
imie  biAnu  tbe  magiatratua  or  befon  a  index.
IJctuanu.)  Tfaoa  all  matten  of  legal
wvre  laid  to  be  dnia  "  aut  ad  popalam,  an'
BBt  ad  jndieem."  (PlatiL  Menatak.  ir.
Jna,  ia  tbe  Nnae  of  the  place  "  in  quo
ditur"  (Dig.  I.  tit.  I.e.  1 1 ),  ia  only  as  a{
of  tbe  name  of  what  ii  dene  to  tha  place
TheaxpRBionJniDioen  ' ~


quod  ad  re*  peninet ;''


tin  jore,
2.  IB.)
in.  red-


The  taaguaug  esplaiatiai  of  Jaa  may  not  be
antwel;  Eiee  bma  tmr,  nor  would  it  be  ea*y  to
■■ke  it  ao,  ai  ariU  appear  from  campaiing  the
■iewB  of  Tariou*  modem  wiiten.  [O.  L.]

JUSAEDILITIUM.  (Asbilm;  Ebictiim.]
JUS  AEJJA'NUH  wai  a  compiiation  by
Sextoi  Aelia*  {Setoi,  anmamed  Cato,  who  waa
oHol  m.  e.  19B  (Lir.  xxiiL  7),  and  who  ia  called
by  Ui  eoDlBapotaiy  Ennhu,  "  ^ngia  cordatui
liianii*"  H«  i*  alao  freqiuntly  mentioned  with
pniae  by  Cieen  (cb  Ap.  i  16,  <ta  Or.  I  4S,
iiL*)).  The  Jni  Aeliannm,  alao  called  Tripeitita,
iiiiraiaiH  tha  Law  <rf  the  Twelv*  Tables  an  in-
(npcctatks  aod  tlw  Le^  Aetiooet Thi*  WMk


JUSJURANDUM.  efi9

exiMed  in  the  time  of  Pomponina.  (Dig.  3.  tit  2.
a  2.  g  3S.}  Cicero  alio  ipeaka  of  lomB  commen-
tarii  by  Actina.  (lie  Oni.  L  SG,  Tap.  2.) [Q.  U]

JUS  ANNULO'RUM; [Annulu*.]

JUS  APPLICATIO'NIS.  [EisiuuM,  p.
516,  b.]

JUS  CIVI'LE. [Job.]

JUS  CIVI'LE  PLAVIA'NUH.  Appini
Clondiua  Caecua,  who  wat  canaor  b.  c  812,  ia
■aid  lo  have  drawn  np  a  book  of  Actionei  or  fonni
of  procedure,  which  hu  detk  Cn.  Flaviui  made
public  (Cic.  deOr.l  41.)  Accordiag  to  one
atory  (Dig.  1.  tie  2.  a.  7)  Flaviua  autreplilioualy
obtained  poiaFoim  of  the  book  of  Appiua,  and
waa  nwnrded  by  tbe  peopi*  far  hia  aervicei  by
being  made  Tribuniu  Plebii  and  Ciuule  Aadile.
The  effect  of  ihia  publication  wa*  to  extend  tha
knowledge  and  the  practice  of  the  lav  tn  the  pla-
beiana,  and  la  aepante  the  Jot  Ciiile  bma  the
Ju  Pontificinm.  (Lir.  ix.  ib  ;  Qellina,  tL  9  g
Cic  prv  AfuTwia,  11.)  [O.  L.]

JUS CIVILE PAPIRIA'NUM or PA-

PISIA'NUM waa  a  oompila^on  of  the  Li«a

Regiae  or  hiwi  paiaed  in  the  kingly  period  of

Rome. They  are  mcntiinied  by  Liry  (vL  1). Thia

ilation  waa  comaiented  on  by  Oraniui  Flared*

of  Julio*  Caesar  (Dig.  £0.  tit.  16.  a.


").


which


preaerration  of  exiating  fragment*  of  the  Leg«
Kegiae.  There  ii  great  doubt  a*  to  tlie  exact
character  of  thia  compilation  of  Papiiiui,  and  aa  to
the  time  when  it  waa  made. Even  tlie  name  of

called  Cuui,  Sextua,  and  Pnbliui. The  beat  no-
tice of  the  fragmenis  of  the  Li^e*  Regiae  i*  by
Dirkaen,  in  hia  "  Vaiucben  nir  Kritik  und  an*-
legung  dcr  Quellen  del  RomiiKheQ  Rccbta." Se«
'ioZunaKm,Qaii.daR'6m.Priiialniiiit.  [O.  L.]
JUS  CIVITA'IIS. [CiviTA8,p.291,b.]
JUS  COMME'HCIL [Civitas,  p.  281,  b.]
JUS  CONNU'BII. [Cimas,  p.  291,  b ;

M.ITRIUUMUM.]

JUS  EDICENDL [Edictum.]
JUS  OENTILI'TIUM. [GiKS.]
JUS  OE'NTIUM. [Jus.]
JUS  HONORA'RIUM. [Edictum.I
JUS  IIONO'RUM. [CivjTAS,  p.  2!
JUS  IMA'GINUM. [NoBiii '
JUS  ITA'LICUM. [CoMjNiA
JUS  LATH. (CiviiiS  (  Li-
JUS  LIBERO'RUM. £Lbi  .
rii  PorfAB*.]
JUS  NATURALE. [Jus.]
JUS  PONTIFI'CIUM. [Jus
JUS  POSTLIMI'NII. [Pos
JUS  PRAEDIATO'RIUM. ['''"■"■J
JUS  PU'BLICUM,  PBIVA'TUM. [Jna.]
JUS  QUIRI'TIUM. [CmrAs  i  Jna.]
JUS  RELATIO'NIS. [Sbnateis.]
JUS  RESPONDENDL [Jubjjkonbdltl]
JUS  SCRIPTUM. [Jim.]
JUS  SUFFRA'Gn. [Cititah,  p.  291,  b.l
JUS  VOCATIO,  IN.  [Acno.] •
JUSJURANDUM {Spuot), an eath. 1.
Okebk. An  oath  ia  an  appeal  to  aome  aupMiv
being,  calling  on  him  to  bear  witncH  that  tha
awoarer  apei^  the  tmth,  or  intaada  to  peifeni
the  promiie  whicb  he  makea Hence  the  eiprea-
aiona  Tirru  Zths^  ^hv  iio^ipoftat,  and  other*  of
the  bome  import,  ao  frequently  uacd  in  th*  l^ng
of  eatha. (Soph.  TVuoL  399,  ArOig.  lU_i  St.


J91,b.]


*]


eeo  JUSJURANDUM.

Panl,  Glial,  i.  20.)  It  ia  abviaiu  that  inch  iin
■ppeal  implid  a  belief  not  onlf  in  the  eiuteiice
of  tho  being  »  callnl  upon,  bnt  b1»  in  iiia  power
and  tndiiuitian  to  puniih  the  hlac  iwrirt  ;  niid
the  fbreo  of  Ml  «th  i*  fonnded  on  thi«  beliet
Hence  an  oath  it  called  Atim  IpKoi.  (Horn.  Hym,
ad  Mm.  27Z  Sli  ;  Find.  Ot  Til.  119.)  Z>bt
ZpKios  (Sopfa.  Philoct,  1324)  il  the  god  who  has
regard  to  oatha,  and  pmiBha  thob  Tiolation.  Z^f*
txm  iiriiuiTer  (Soph.  TVaek,  1190)  means  (ac-
cording lo  Suidag)  SpKtu  4yyirrfTiiii.

Wt  find  early  mention  in  the  Oieek  vriten  of
oathi  being  takeo  on  lolemn  and  important  oc-
(aaimu,  aa  tnatiet,  oUioncea,  Tova,  compacts,  and
ngraementi,  both  betiT«n  nationi  and  iadividualt.
Thaa,  when  (lie  Oceeka  and  Tnjaiu  agi


cide  the  bte  of  tho  w


,.,!..


'between  Croeaua  and  the  Lacedaemonian!  ia  con-
firmed by  oath.  (Hend.  L  69.)  So  illhe  treaty
between  the  Medea  and  Lydiana,  whose  ritei  in
aweoiing  (aa  Herodotu*  tella  ua,  i.  74)  wore  tbe
nuno  aa  thoae  of  tbe  Oreelu,  with  thii  addition,
that  they  made  an  indaion  in  their  arms  and  Uated
each  others  blood.  Wo  may  farther  notioa  the
treaty  of  peace  between  the  Ath^iiani  and  Pelo-
ponneuana,  upon  which  every  state  was  lo  swear
irix-ipiar  tfKor  rbr  /liyvrray  (Thucyd.  v.  17),
the  vow  of  the  Ionian  women  (Heiod.  i.  1  iS),  that
of  the  Phocaeana  (Id.  165),  and  tha  pnmiaa  of
CbrcetoUIyuea{Od.i.  345).  Thei«1ianM|ilaced
in  an  oath  ia  ipecially  ahown  in  the  dialogne  be-
tween Aegcoa  and  Medea  in  Enrip.  M^.  736 —
761) ;  and  tho  apeech  oC  Athena  in  Enrip.  SigipL
1196.  For  other  eiamploa  we  icfer  the  raadet  lo
Soph.  (M.  Tgr.  647,  Otd.  OS,  1637,  Tratlm.
1183;  Herod.  Ti.  74  ;  Ham.  Jtix.  132,

That  the  Oreeka  (as  a  nation)  were  deeply  im-
bued with  religions  feeling,  and  paid  high  regard
to  the  sanctity  of  catha,  may  he  gathered  &om  the
whole  tenor  of  their  early  history,  and  especially
flam  the  writinga  of  the  poets.  Homer,  Aeschylus,
and  Pindar.  (SeoThir1wBlJ,Hu(.q^Gr»a),TaL  L
e.  Ti.  S  3.)  They  prided  themselTes  «i  being  su-
perior in  this  respect  to  the  barbnriana.  (ADlian.
x\i.  3.)  Tha  treacheroua  equivocation  practised
by  the  Perslaoa  at  the  ait^  of  Baroi  (Herod,  iv.
sol)  would  have  been  repugnant  to  the  feelings  of
B  people,  whose  greatest  hen  declared  that  he
haled  like  hell  one


The  poets  frequently  allade  1


le  ptuiithmcnt


nl  jods  or  furies  (Horn.  IL  iv.  1 57,  _  _
Fini.  Olgmp.  a.  HB;  Aristc^h.  flOfc  274),  and
we  find  many  proob  of  a  pniauaaion  that  perjurers
would  not  proapei  in  this  world.  (Horn.  It.  iv.
67,  370,  TiL  Sfil  ;  Hesiod.  Op.  il  DUi,  2SD  ;
ThuCi  vil  18.)  One  of  the  most  striking  is  the
story  told  by  Leatychidea  to  tho  Atbcnians,  of
Olsueua  the  Spartan,  who  consulted  tha  Pythian
oracle  whether  he  shonld  restore  a  deposit,  or  deny
on  oath  that  he  had  ever  received  it ;  and  who,  for
merely  deliberating  upon  such  a  question,  was  ent
off  with  his  whole  bmily.  <Henid.Ti.  86;  Pansan.
il  18,  Tiii.  7  ;  Jut.  Sat  Eii.  2U2.)

Anciently  tlie  person  who  took  an  oath  stood
'  11(1,  and  lifted  his  hands  to  bea<reii,as  h*  woold  in


JUSJURANDUM.  '
pmyer  ;  ftir  nn  oath  was  a  apecica  of  pn^^^',  and
required  the  aame  sort  of  ceremoDj.  (Hon.  iL
lii.  176,  2fi4j  Pind,C«.vii  119.)  Oalhs  wen
frequency  accompanied  with  sacrifice  or  libation.
(Horn.  IL  ir.  1 58  ;  Aristoph.  AAarw.  148,  Te^
1048.)  Both  ncrifice  and  libatiDo  are  used  in  the
ipKl  of  the  Greeks  and  Trojsna  in  IL  iiL  276.


Thei


ificed  by  the  people  of  the
buried  in  the  ground ;  if  by  strangers,  wse  thrawn
mlo  the  sea  or  river. (//.  iiL  310,  lii.  267.)

The  portiaa  used  also  to  lay  their  hands  upon
the  tictuoa,  or  on  the  altar  or  some  other  sacrod
thing,  as  if  by  so  doing  they  brought  befiMre  tfii.-ni
the  deity  by  whom  the  mth  was  swosn,  and  mads


as  of  the  <


,ony. Ho-i


ins  vpbi  rbr  fftrftir  i^opKl^tty,
lipir,  (Se«  Hcisko,  /mla  ad  ZJen.  a  a.  'O/iriinu  :
Harpacr.s.e.A/e<n;ThDc.T.47i  Ge^kl,  ad  toe;
Jnv.  Sa4.  liv.  219  ;  Ovid.  Epiit.  Dido  ad  Atm.
129.)  In  Homer  (IL  it*.  270),  Jaaa.  making  «
solemn  promise  to  bleep,  takea  die  Earth  in  ana
liand  and  Hmen  in  the  other,  and  sirean  by-
Styx  and  the  sabtraronesn  goda.  To  touch  tha
hold,  liand,  or  other  part  of  the  body,  of  the  per-

custom.  The  hand  especially  was  regnrded  aa  m
pledge  of  fidelity,  and  the  allusions  to  the  jonctiofl
of  hands  in  making  oonbaets  and  agreementa
abound  in  the  ancient  writera  (Enrip.  jVa/cu^
496  ;  Soph.  PUioct.  812,  TVueL  1183  ;  Ovid.  £>>.
Ph^liiad  Demopli.21,  Brittii  adAii.l07;W<m.
Hyn.  ad  Fas.  26.)  Other  supentjtious  rites  wen
ofteD  superadded,  to  give  greater  aolenmity  to  iIm
eereni0D7[Aaach.^)pLa  TM.4S  ;  Sa^Amtiff.
261]  DeinoalLci.aw.1369),  whichi^peartabo
ndienled  by  Ariatn^ant*  (l^ntL  ISB).

Tha  different  nation*  of  Oreeee  awora  by  thnr
own  peculiar  gods  and  heroea  ;  as  the  Tbe^i  by
Hercules, loUua,  &a., Uia  LagedaemoDians Itj


place,  01


of  the  party,  or  tha

Thus,  Iphlgeneiatl»  priesleas  sweau*
Artemis  in  Eurip.  Ipi,  n  Tamrii.  Ueaielan
s  Antilochus  swcsr  by  Poseidon  (the  equesDiaii
.),  the  subject  being  on  hoisea.  ( A  ziiii.  585.)
Philippides,  in  Ariat.  NiA  83,  ia  mads  ridi-
culously to  swear  i^  Thr  IIiHraitii  rbr  Imar.
Achilles  swears  by  his  scqitre  (/L  i.  234),  Tele-
machuahytho  so[TOWBofhu&thei(Oil.  ix.339).
Hence  the  prt^ety  of  the  bmoos  oath  in  Demo-
sthenes, by  the  warriors  who  fought  at  MarattMo^
&C.  Here  we  may  observe,  that  as  swroriog  ba-
Qun«  a  common  pradjoe  with  men  apcn  tririal
occasions,  and  in  ordinary  eonT»tatico,  they  nsed
to  take  oaths  by  any  god,  poam,  or  thing,  aa  tbeir
peculiar  habita  or  pretulecliona,  or  the  bncy  of  tba
moment,  dictated.  Pyttuj[otsa  on  this  —-^M
Bwon  by  the  number  Fonr.  (Lscian,  PjUof.  4  {
Pint.  ^/>/cu./-M.  13. 1616.)  Socntca  naed  to
swear  rii  rbr  K&m,  in  which  he  was  abaonUj  im-
itated by  others.  (Athen.  ii.  p.  370.)  Aristo-
phanes, so  keenly  alive  to  all  the  fbiUH  of  kk
countrymen,  takea  notice  of  this  custom,  andtnrns
it  into  ridicule  Hence  he  makes  tha  nmft^j
dealer  twctir  >nt  t^»  'Ewiv  1^.knf^m.iBftiL


JUSJURANDUM.
S97),  Soenta  M  -^  'AnnmV.  &c.  (ffiA.  627.)
<Se«fiirtba  Fi^.  OS,  Jwt,  fi4,  lEI],  A<m  "'"
Il«9.)

WBDen  alio  lutd  thsit  &T<innu  oatlti.  Ai  the
no  pn&tnd  (WBuing  by  Hmalui,  Apollcs  &e^
■■>  Ike  oikar  k  nied  to  iweai  by  Aphriidite,  De-
uMer,  ud  Peneptione,  Hen,  HeaU«,  Artniiia  ;
■nd  Ath«nan  vamcii  br  AeUutm.  Pindronu,  &c


JUSJURANDUM.


en


ir.h,:


a.  Men


is.gi


Tht  m


anfet  indoeed  die  Oredu,  H  it  hu  fcoflis  d[  uid-
dem  tiBW*,  ta  impw*  it  M  an  obligaliou  upoc  per-
aooB  innitcd  vilh  anthoritj,  or  intnulad  with  the
diwkaigaaf  rvpaMhledDtiH,  {P]ata,d«Lts-iu.
f.  948.)  The  Athoiiaiu,  with  whom  tha  JCJence
of  legiiktian  wu  cutisd  to  the  greatMt  perfection,
wwr^  of  all  the  Ottek  ttat«*,  the  moM  pnnctilioiu
BtbwnqMet.  The  yonlh,  entering  upon  hiiSOth
jear,  wm  DOtpennitled  touiome  thepriTitegeaot
■  citiun,  Di  U  be  ngittered  io  the  Aqjufixw^'
ff  iijijiii  uTiii ,  vitliocit  taking  a  Bolenm  oath  in  the
temple  of  Aglanna  to  obe^  the  lavi  and  defend
hia  coimDy.  (The  form  of  fail  oatfa  it  prcaened  in
PoUaxiTiiLlOA.)  The  archou,  tha  judge,  and  the
■tbitiatoc,  *en  tequind  Io  bindthenuelie*  by  an
■ath  to  pnfbtm  th«r  nqKctin  dntiei.  (See  Pol-
hu,  Le. ;  IlDdlwateker,  iiitrdi*  Diat.  p.  10 ;  and
Dkastu.)  Ai  te  the  oath  taken  by  the  Senate
id  FiTe  Unndied,  lee  DeDotth.  c  Ttmoo.  745.
Aa  Id  the  oath  of  the  witneM,  and  the  loluntary
iBth  of  paitiea  to  an  actioa,He  MiKrvRiA.  The
inporlaiire,  at  leait  ^parcally,  attached  to  oatha
in  conrta  of  jnitice,  ii  prored  by  larioui  paBUgea
in  the  oatoia.  (Audoe.  d»  Myd.  B  ;  Lyrarg.  c.
Lmr.  157.  ed.  Staph. ;  Aatiph.  da  n.  Herod.  I3S,
UO.edBleplLjDeiaa*th.a  ><;4oi.e60.}  I>emM.
thcnea  eonatandy  lenuDdi  hit  Judge*  that  they  an
m  tbeic  oatha,  and  Lyatrgoi  (fL&)  decUrei  that
tI  nv^jcsr  lif  lyiai^Brliw  Spaa  imUi.

The  ei:peneiKe  of  all  natkmi  faai  piDved  the
ilaiigi  mm  imitttct  tit  making  oathi  too  commDn.
Tha  hjatoaj  of  AtktM  and  of  Qrecce  in  geoeml
rmniahia  no  eicaptiso  ta  the  obapnatioo.  While
ia  the  popnlaj  belief  and  in  eoraniDU  [orlaDce  oathi
cflBlBBed  to  be  highly  eiteemed,  they  had  eeaud
lobe  of  mnch  nal  wealth  cr  raloe.  It  i«  impoa-
vble  Io  read  the  play*  of  Ariitophanci,  the  maton,
■rd  otba  wiiten  of  that  penod,  without  leeing
that  pexjurj  had  become  a  practice  of  ordinary
ocmrence.  The  poet  who  wmtc  that  vena  which
JDcmred  the  cennin  of  the  comedian,  4  f^^ir'
tfi^aji,  4  U  ^r  ixifutu  (Eur.  H^qvL  613;
Antopfa.  Tkam.  275),  waa  cot  tha  only  peiion
who  woald  thill  TcGne.  The  bold  profligaey  do-
•oibed  by  AriMophanea  (A^hA.  1232—1241,
Enfiii.  298)  wsi  too  often  coliied  in  action.  To
mo  tlw  d^eneney  of  the  Greek  character  bc-
Jm^  notts  thii  plaoe.  Wo  cooclude  by  reminding
■or  mdcn  that  in  a  later  age  the  Oreelu  became
a  In-word  anong  the  RnnBna  br  lying  and  bad
bitk  (Cicfvo  >I>ioeo,  4 1  Jdt.  Sat.  iii.  60,  &c.]


The  iJd  btm  of  i
by  iIm  atber  Oiveka,  and  lued  by  Xenophm,  wai
nlfii.  <Xeu.  3f«a>.  iL  7.  %  14,  AjxA.  Soer.  20.)
H  ia  nothing  non  than  another  finm  ofHl,  uaed
with  an  aonuatire  caae,  |iA  being  omitted,  ai  it
lAtn  u  in  ncsnlivs  obUu. (Soph.  Otd.  7)r.  6G0.


IOCS,  Ekd.  75B,  I0G3.)  Kh,  howeiw,  it  ncrer
used  by  the  tngedioni,  who  eJwaye  employ  npaia-
phiaie  in  affirmntJTD  oatha,  such  aa  dc&i* /Uf^r^etr-
Sai.  'I.roiariyai  la  uicd  affiimatiTely,  iro/iyirai
n^Btively,  according  to  Euatathiua.  (Horn.  Od.
ii.  377.)  &i6iiyuaeai  ia  to  awcai  atnsgly,  to
proteat.  (Soph.  Thuh.  S78.)  'Opmar,  though
often  aied  aynonymoualy  vith  fpioi,  ligni^
more  atriclly  a  compact  ratified  by  oalh ;  tpKUt
Td^mv  ia  to  make  a  compact  with  oatha  and
aacrifice  ;  and  Chrongh  the  &egnent  pnctice  of
iscriGcing  on  loch  occaiiona,  it  came  that  S^ior
waa  somedmea  Died  for  the  victim  jtaelf.  (Horn.
IL  iiL  245.)  In  the  phiaec  i/irirai  ko?  ttp^,  the
original  meaning  of  «»&  was,  that  the  party  laid
hia  hand  upon  the  Tictima ;  but  the  aune  phtaie
ia  nied  meUphorimlly  in  other  caaei,  where  there
could  be  no  luch  ceiemony.  Thoi  mrik  x'^"*
(BX**  Toiaiurtai  xWp"  (AriaL  Eomt.  660)  ia
to  moke  a  vow  to  oSbt  a  thoiuond  kida  )  at  lltia^
lie  parif  vmiag  layai  Ut  HomJe  ■/«■  (^  tidt  at
Oe  liiM,ai  a  hada/gaie.  The  aama  obaorvaUon
opplicfl  to  Af/jiira  jcot'  ilohtiai,  (Comp.  La-
nnli,  UdKrdaiEidbeideiiariiidiai.'WatAaiK,
1844.)

2.  RoUAN.  The  aabject  of  Roman  oathi  may
be  treated  under  foni  diffenot  heada,  tU.  :  —  1,
Oniha  taken  by  migiitrMca  and  other  poiaoni  who
entered  the  aerrics  of  the  republic  2.  Oatha
taken  in  traniactiona  with  foreign  nationa  in  the
name  of  the  republic*  3.  Oatha,  or  Tariooi  modea
of  BWearing  in  common  life.  4.  Oatha  token  be-
fore the  praetor  or  in  courta  of  joatica.

L  Oaiht  taken  Iff  moffulraieM  and  otAgr  pertora
icio  ffltomf  lie  unue  of  lie  Tepublic. — After  the
i^tabliahment  of  the  repnbUc  thecDnauU,uidiub.
aequently  all  the  other  magialiatei,  were  obliged,
dthin  Gtb  daya  after  their  appointment,  to  pro-
Liie  on  oeth  that  they  would  protect  and  observe
the  lam  of  the  republic  (in  kgajunm,  Liv.  iiiL
50  ;  compare  Dionya.  t.  1.).  Veatal  riigina  and
the  damen  diaiia  were  not  allowed  to  awcar
on  any  occaiion  (Liv.  t  e.  j  Feat.!.*.  Jurarei
PluL  Qmeri.  Aoil  p.  275),  but  whether  they  alao
entered  upon  their  lacrcd  officea  without  taking  an
oath  analogoui  to  that  of  magiatratea  ia  unknown.
When  a  flamen  dialii  waa  elected  to  a  maeialracy,
might  eithd  petition  for  an  eipecial  diapenaa-


ome  one  to  lake  the  oath  for  him.  Bnt  thia  could

he  people. The  £nt  Roman  coniula  leem  only

0  have  iwom  that  they  would  not  reatore  the

■0  (Liv.  iL  1  ;  Dionya.  L  a),  and  Ihia  may  hate
been  the  caie  till  idl  fean  of  inch  a  reatomtion

having  vaniahed,  the  oath  waa  changed  into  a

I.  64.)


During  the  later  period  of  the  republic  we  alao
find  that  magiatratea,  when  the  time  of  their  office
had  expired,  addreiaed  the  people  and  awore  that
during  their  office  they  had  nndeitaken  nothing
Bgainat  the  republic,  bnt  had  done  their  utmoat  to
promote  iti  wel&re.  (Cic.  ad  Fiat.  T.  2.  g  7,  pro
"  "-  n,imPiion.i,proDnm.  35;  Dion  Caia.
i.  p.52,  uiviiL  p  72,  liil  p  fi6B,ed.  Steph-j
aoi.  37.)  In  uma  cuei  a  tribune  of  the
people  night  compel  ihe  wholo  lenata  to  promiie
on  oath  U»t  they  would  obielTO  s  plebu^tum.


4G2  JtJSJUnANDUM.

and  nllnw  it  to  be  carried  into  HTect,  na  tphs  the
one  «ilh  the  lei  aamria  of  Saturniniu,  The
cenior  Q.  Metellm,  wlo  refined  lo  iwear,  wsi  lent
into  exile,  (A-ppias,  B.  C.  i.  29  ;Cic  pro  Sat.  47;
Plut  Mar.  29.)  During  the  time  of  the  empire
all  mngiitiBiteB  on  entering  their  office  were  obliged
to  ple^  themselTea  b;  in  oath  that  thej  irould
obierre  the  ruta  Csennim  (  rarart  in  aela  Caa-
Hrwn,  Saet.  Tiier.  67  ;  Tacit  AnruiL  I  72,  liii.
26,  i<i.  32  ;  Dion  Can.  xWil  p.  364,  ftc),  nud
the  Kniiton  had  to  da  the  tiune  r^nluly  ereiy
year  do  the  fint  of  Jmnary.  (Dion  Caa.  IriiL
p,724;  compan  Lipiin^  E^^rt.  A.  ad  Toot,
AimJ.  ivi.  22.)

All  Roman  ■oldien  after  they  were  enllilcd  far
■  campaign,  hod  to  take  the  military  otth  (laera-
mealum),  which  vai  adminiitend  in  the  folloning
manner :  —  Each  tnbonui  militam  uaembled  hii
regiment,  and  picked  out  one  of  the  men  to  wham
be  put  the  oath,  that  he  wonld  obey  the  com-
niandi  of  hii  general!  and  execute  them  punctually.
The  other  men  then  came  forward  one  after  an-
other nnd  repaatcd  the  aome  csth,  mying  that  they
mmU  do  like  the  first  (Hem  in  mi,  Polyb.  vi.
21  ;  FmU  ».  o.  Pra^rationa).  Liiy  (nii.  3B)
•ayi  that  until  the  year  216  B.C.  the  military
oath  wai  only  aacnuncntum,  i.  0.  the  ooldien
took  it  voluntarily,  and  promiaed  (with  impreoi-
tioni)  that  they  would  not  desert  ftom  the  army,
And  not  leBTG  the  nuiki  except  to  light  uaintt
the  enemy  or  la  nve  a  Roman  citiien.  Bat  in
the  year  216  B.  c.  the  aoldien  were  compelled  by
the  tribanei  to  take  the  oath,  which  the  tribunes
put  to  them,  that  they  would  meet  at  the  comoiand
of  the  coniula  and  not  leave  the  atandsrda  without
their  orden,  10  that  in  thii  caie  the  military  oath
became  a  juijurandum.  But  Livybereforgotathat
long  before  that  time  he  hoi  represented  (iii.  20)
the  loldien  lakuig  tho  nme  juijutandum.  A  per-
fect formula  of  n  military  oath  ii  preKrrtd  in  Qel-


«(iT


jmpaic  Dionyo.  vL  33.)


renuuked  that  any  oath  might
be  taken  in  two  wnyi ;  the  person  who  took  it,
either  framed  it  hiinielf,  or  it  was  put  to  him  in
a  set  form,  and  in  thii  caie  he  waa  nid  ■■  vrrfa
Jtiran,titjuranivetta  aatctjilis,  Polybiui{n.  33)
■peoki  of  a  lecnnd  oath  which  wa»  pt  to  all  who
•erred  in  the  army,  whether  freemen  or  ilavca,  at
toon  as  the  caitrametatio  had  taken  place,  and  by
which  all  promiied  that  they  would  itcal  nothing
from  iho  camp,  and  that  they  would  take  lo  the
trihuno  whatever  they  might  happen  to  find.  The
military  oath  was,  according  to  Dionyiioi  {il
43),  the  moat  locRd  of  all,  and  the  law  allowed
a  gcneml  t4>  put  to  death  without  a  formal  trial  any
aoldicr  who  Tentnred  to  act  conliHTy  lo  hit  OBtiC
Tt  wai  taken  upon  the  ligna,  which  were  them-
■elve*  considered  laocd.  In  the  time  of  tbo  em-
ptio  a  clauie  wai  added  to  the  mililaiy  oath,  in
which  the  (oldien  dedand  that  they  would  con-
aider  the  eafety  of  the  emperor  more  important  than
anything  else,  and  that  they  loved  neither  them-
■elvea  nor  their  children  more  than  their  aoveroign.
(Arrian,  Epict.  iii.  14  i  Suet.  CaHg.  i  5 ;  Ammian.
Hnrc  iiL  S.)  On  the  military  oath  in  geneivl,
compare  Briaaoniui,  De  FormaL  iv.  c  I — B.

II.  OaOutaiaiatraiaaetidmmlk/irragKni^
tiauialitnameofaar^iaUic  ThemMtancient
form  of  an  oath  of  thii  kind  ii  recorded  by  Livy
<1 24),ina  treaty  between  the  Ramaoiand  Albant.
The  fstat  petntni  praoounced  the  oath  in  the


JUSJUBANDUlt

name  of  hli  eouotry,  and  Mmck  the  Tktin  with  a
flint-itone,  call  ing  on  Jupiter  lo  dettny  the  Roman
nation  in  like  manner,  ai  he  (the  pater  patiatut)
destroyed  the  animal,  if  the  poople  thould  violate
thooalh.  ThechieraorprioitioftheatberiiBtiaii
then  iwore  in  ■  aimihr  manner  by  thnr  awn  goda.
The  ceremony  wbb  aomeliniM  diflcrcnt,  inumneh
aa  the  fetialis  cait  away  the  itoiiefraai  hii  handa,
aaying.  Si  la^a/aUo,  turn  mt  Diajatir taka  mrha
araqut  bemii  igieiat,  uli  ^  imie  bptdaak  (Pest.
1,  D.  Lapidta.)  Owing  ta  the  pnminent  put
which  tho  atone  (/optt  (iZax)  played  in  thii  act,
Jupiter  himself  was  called  Jnpita  L^  (PolybL
iiL  2S\  and  hence  it  was  ia  aflertimea  not
uncommon  among  tho  Romani  in  ordinan  con-
versation to  iwoar  by  Jupiter  La^  (Oeilina,  L
21  ;  Cic.  oil  Ptm.  viL  1, 12  ;  Plut  SuBa,  10.)
In  awearing  to  a  trsaty  with  a  fareigD  natico,  a
victim  (a  pig  or  a  lamb)  waa  in  tbo  early  times  ■)-
wBja  sacrificed  by  the  ^tialis  {whence  dwaipna*
siona^^Mrfitf  iare,  tptaa  Tifi3f*in\  and  tba  priat
while  pnmouncing  the  wth  probably  taoebad  the
victim  or  the  dtar.  (Vilg.  Atm.  xiL  301,  *t ;
Liv.  uL  t&  ;  compare  FtTIALU.)  This  mode  of
BWeoring  to  a  treaty  through  the  saoed  perscQ  of
a  fetialis,  was  observed  for  a  long  time,  and  after
the  second  Punic  war  the  ielialea  even  ttavellod  ta
Africa  to  perform  the  ancient  ccmuonies.  (Lif.
III.  43.)  The  ju*  fetiale,  however,  fell  into  dis-
use aa  the  Romaoi  extended  their  conqueata  ;  and
as  in  moat  cases  of  tieatia  with  foreign  natloDi,  the
Romans  were  not  the  party  that  chase  to  pnmiss
anything  on  oath,  wo  bear  no  more  of  oaths  an
their  part ;  but  tho  foreign  nation  or  cesu|iiwed
party  was  umetimes  obliged  to  promise  with  a  ao-
lemn  oath  {lacrwneaitim)  tooboerve  thaceodl  '
prescribed  by  the  Romans,  and  docummts  re
ing  such  premises  wen  kept  in  the  i^itoL  (Lit.
xivL  24.)  But  in  cases  when  the  Romans  had
reason  to  mistrnat,  they  demanded  hooO^ea  aa
being  a  better  security  than  sn  oath,  and  this  waa
the  practice  which  in  later  tunea  they  adopted
matt  generally.  At  fiist  the  Romans  wen  vhj
scrupuloua  in  obterriBg  their  oaths  in  eontracta  or
Ircstiet  with  foreigner*,  and  even  with  enemies  i
but  attempts  were  soou  made  by  individaals  to
interpret  an  oath  aopbistiailly  and  explain  away
its  binding  character  (GelUus,  viL  IS  ;  Liv.  iit
20,  nii.  61  ;  Cic.  fta  QT.  iii.  27,  &c),  and  fnta.
the  third  Punic  war  to  the  end  of  ^e  repnblic,
perjuiy  w  .. ^  - . .

dealings  1
•civet.
III.  Oi


iH>n  life  c

convenationt,  was  as  common  anung  the  Remana
as  among  the  Greeks.  The  vaiiDoa  fbnns  laed  in
awearing  may  be  divided  into  three  rlaiari :  —

1.  Sunple  invocations  of  one  ist  more  gods,  >■
fferde  01  MAerde,  that  it,  itame  Henniies  jovct,
amet,orterTet(Pettf.c.ArenHtor);  Pol,P*tpol
or  Aedrpol,  that  is,  per  Pidluctni ;  ptr  Jottm  Lit.
piden  at  simply  par  Jomw;  pirt<iptm;pvd&et
immorlaltt  s  mediui  fida»,  Uiat  it,  tta  me  Din*
(Algi)  filiuB  juvet  (Pe>t.(.e.)  Vano,  rft  Li^.
£<(t  ir.  p.  20,  Bip.) ;  fts  ««  <<au  omC,  or iti'i*


S.  51  1  Terwt  Ai^.  B.  VU.) . Tha^tnui  of


jySJURANDUH.
mta  wFTe  n^uded  h  divme  bcingi,  and  pcnKU
omd  to  mmr  by  thoir  own  genioB,  or  by  Lhat  of
■  friend,  and  doHng  tha  Bmpire  bj  that  of  on
mpMor.  (Horat  Epiit,  L  7,  91  ;  Suet,  Caiig.
37.)  Women  ai  veil  ai  men  ivon  b;  moat  of
tlw  |p>d*  ;  but  •oms  of  them  were  peeuliat  to  one
of  ihe  Kiea.  Thu)  wranen  nevei  iwore  hy  Her-
cules, and  aMS  nerer  by  Caator ;  Vairn,  moreoTer,
■aid  (hat  b  ancient  lima  women  only  iwrae  by
Caalsr  and  Pollux,  while  in  the  eilant  wiilenwe
find  men  frequently  (wearing  by  Pollux.  (Oelliui,
li.  6.)  Juno  and  Ventu  were  mottly  jnroked  by
women,  bat  alu  by  loren  and  eSeminate  men  in
general.  (PlauL^n/tii/.  a  2.210;  Tibu11.iT.  13.
li  :  Jut.  iL  98  ;  Orid.  A«u>r.  iL  7,  27,  il  8. 18.)

2.  InTDcatioDi  of  the  godi,  ti^bcf  with  an
eieoation,  in  caie  like  awearer  wai  atating  a  Dilae-
hood.  Ezetrntiotu  of  thii  kind  are,  Dii  nu  jier-
damt  (Plaut.  MU.  Olor.  iiL  2.20,  CiiteU.  iL  1.  31);
Jii  me  ijUerfiaoMt  (PlauC.  MotteO.  l.  3.  35)  ;  dit-
prnam  (iloisL  Sot  i.  9.  47)  ;  «  viean  (Cic  ad
FoM.  TiL  33  ;  Man.  i.  12.  3);  M  talmi  nai  (Cic
ad  Alt.  in.  13),  &c

3l  Petaoni  alio  uaed  to  awisr  by  the  indi-
tidnab  or  thmgi  mott  dear  to  them.  Thus  we
Laie  inatancea  of  a  penon  iwearine  by  hii  own  or
another  nuui'a  head  (Dig.  12.  tit.  2.  a.  3.  §4;
Chfid.  TriA  t.  4.  45  ;  HtrM.  iii.  107  i  Jut.  tL
16),  by  hia  eyei  (Fhtot  Maaad^  t.  9. 1(  OiiA,
Amor.a.  16.44),  by  hii  own  wellaroor  that  of  hit
ehildini(l>ig.  12.  tiLZa,£;  Plin.  £pu(.  ii.  20),
by  tin  ird&n  of  an  empent  (Cod.  2.  lit  4.  ).  41),

Rcapacting  the  Tarioui  form*  of  oethi  and
■wearing  aee  BaiaKoiiua,  da  Formii.  tIiL  ce^  1 —
IB.  [L.  S.]

IV.  Oatla  (dial  htfim  Aa  pmtlor  or  n  cotni»  o/"
■oris*.  Then  might  be  a  jnnuiBDdnni  either  in  jore
•r  in  jndicia  The  joijnranduni  injure  had  a  like
dftct  to  the  conjeiuo  in  jure,  and  it  Mood  in  the
plaoB  of  the  LiTia  CoNTistitio  (Dig.  &.  tit  1.
a.  38.  B  2).  The  juijurandum  in  jure  il  the  oath
mbitb  one  party  propoied  to  hie  advetiary  (detulit)
that  he  should  inake  about  the  matter  in  dispute ;
and  the  effect  of  the  oath  being  token  or  refused
wit  etjuiialent  to  a  iadiciom.  If  the  defendant
ta^  the  oath,  he  had  in  answer  to  the  actio  an
eiceptio  (pica)  juritjuiandi,  analogous


. The


of  the  Juajoiandum  haiing  tl
eiplaioed  (Dig.  44.  tit.fi.  a.  1)  to  b^  that  a  party
to  a  cause  makes  his  adversary  the  judex  by  pn>-
posing  to  bim  to  take  the  nth  (deferendo  ei  ju*-
juasdiun)-  This  jusjurandum  which  is  proposed
( delaiam)  in  jure,  lb  mllcd  aecessoriaiR,  because  he
to  whoiB  it  is  pTDpoaed  cuinot  simply  refuse  it ;
he  nuiit  either  lake  the  oath,  or,  in  nit  turn,  pro-
ne {r^em)  that  the  pn^oser  thall  take  it
Sini[de  refiua)  was  equinlent  to  confeasio  (con-
^— y""  est  nolle  nee  juiare  nee  juijurandum  re-
frtn  ;  Dig.  12.  lit.  2.  s.  38).  Inthe  Edicl(I>ig.  12.
tiL  2.  a.  34.  g  6),  the  praetor  sayi  that  he  will
cno^  the  peraon  from  whom  the  (eth  it  demanded
Id  pay  or  to  take  the  oath.  A  pnpillus,  a  prDcurator,
or  dMbnsor,  a  Vestal,  and  a  flamen  diolil  could  not
be  ampehed  to  twev  (Qea  i.  15).

The  jusjarandum  in  judicio  (jusjurandum  judi-
eaile)  ii  required  by  the  judex,  aod  not  by  either
<f  the  partica,  though  either  ^  tha  pailie*  may


JCVENALU.

This  juijurandum  has  not  the  ef


,  M„


in  give  it  such  nrobalive  force  at
It Such  an  oath  is  only  wanted

when  other  eiidenee  fa" "

particularly  anjlicsble  i


.idicialos..  _
^  which  the  judex

determme  tha  value  of  the  matter  in  dis-
pute. At  a  geaeoJ  role,  the  aeitimatio  or  esti-
mate of  tbIuo  or  damages  wat  to  be  made  by  the
judex  conformably  to  the  eridence  funiihM  by
tbepluntiff;  but  if  the  defendant  by  hia  dotut
or  contumaciu  preveuted  the  plaintiff  from  rccoTcr-
ing  the  apeciiic  thing,  which  wat  the  object  of  tha
action,  and  consequently  the  pUintilf  mltit  hare
the  Talue  of  it,  the  judex  could  put  the  plaintiS  to
his  oath  aa  to  the  Talue  of  tha  Ihiis  ;  but  ho
could  also  fix  a  limit  (.laiatjo)  which  ^  plaintiff
mast  not  exceed  in  the  amount  that  he  declared
upon  DBth.  This  ia  called  jusjurandum  in  litem
(Dig.  12.  tit.  3).  This  oath  is  merely  eTidence  ;
the  judex  may  atQl  either  acquit  the  defei|daut  or
coudenm  him  in  a  lest  mm  (Dig.  22.  tit  S  ;  Da
probationihus  et  pmetumptionibus).

As  to  the  Jusjurandum  Columniae,  aee  Calitm-
Nii  ;  and  tee  JuDix,  Jumciirii,  [O.  L.]

JUS5U,  QUOD,  ACTIO,  is  a  Pnetorian
actio  which  a  man  had  against  a  &ther  or  maslw
of  a  tlaTe  (lioiHiBiit),  if  a  fiUutfamiliat  or  a  slave
had  entered  into  any  conliact  at  the  bidding
(Jmm)  at  the  father  or  master,  for  the  full  amount
of  the  matter  in  diqinle.  He  who  thus  contncted
with  a  filiusfauiOias  or  a  tlaie,  was  not  considered
to  deal  with  them  on  their  awn  credit,  but  on  that
of  the  father  or  master.  Thii  Actio  it  elaaied  by
Gaiut  with  the  Exerciloria  and  Int^toria,  (Oaius,
IT.  70  J  Dig.  15.  tit  4.)  10.  L.]

JUSTA  FUNERA. [^1"^"*.  F- 558.  h.]

JUSTINIANE'US  CODEX. [Cooai  Jua-

JUSTI'TIUM,  probably  signified  originally  a
cessation  of  judicial  business  {jurii  qitan  iatentitu>
ijmedam  «t  ocssrtfw,  QelL  xx.  1 ),  hut  is  always  used
to  indiaiteatime  in  which  public  business  of  eieiy
kind  wot  intpended.  Thus  the  murtt  of  law  and
the  Irensuiy  were  shut  up,  no  ambaaiadors  were
received  in  the  senate,  and  no  auctions  look  place
{juriadutionan  imtemUti,  dtadi  pergnaia,  judida
loUi,  Cic  da  Hot.  Rap.  36  ;  pro  Ptaim.  14,  with
Wunder't  note).  The  Jtatitnm  wat  prDclaimsd
{tdiom,  imdicen)  hy  the  aenate  and  the  msgit'
Irates  m  timet  of  public  alarm  Bud  danger ;  and
after  confidence  and  tiunquilli^  had  been  lestoied,
the  Juslitium  was  removed  (reniUerie,  emsn)  by
the  some  authorities.  (Liv.  tL  7,  ix.  7,  x.  21  j
Plut  S<Ul.  a.  Mar.  iS.)  At  lueh  timet  of  alarm
are  usually  accompanied  with  general  toirow,  a
i/uUiui  come  in  course  of  time  to  bo  ofdamed  aa
a  mark  of  public  mournings  and  under  the  empire
"y  empleyed  for  this  reason.  Thua  wo  find
ly  proclaimed  on  the  death  of  an  empercv
or  01  a  member  of  tha  imperial  &mily.  It  was
obeerved  in  tha  proTincei  at  veil  at  at  Rome,  and
during  itt  continuance  the  toldiers  were  released
from  their  ordinaiy  military  dutiea,  (Toe  Aim.  L
16.  ii.  82  ;  Suet  716.  52,  CaL  24,  Odt.  10.)

JUVENA'LIA,  or  JUVENA'LES  LUDl
(^loutffvdAia  fiorep  tu^  riaviffjii^^uiTa),  were
scenic  games  initiCnted  hy  Nero  in  a.  d.  5S,  in
commemoration  of  his  shaving  hit  beard  for  tho
first  time,  thus  intimating  that  be  had  passed
from  youth  to  manhood. He  wai  then  in  Vm


S'J


em  LABTmNTirua.

twenty-Becond  v«ir  ot  hii  nge.  Th;M  gomci  were
not  celebiBled  in  [fae  cinus,  bnt  in  a  prirate
thentra  enctrd  in  a  pl«aguR-gniDnd  {vnm),  and
coiuiited  of  vtctj  kim  of  Ihcnlrical  perfbimaoce,
Qiv«k  and  Romaa  playi,  inimelic  piecM,  ud  the
liko.  Tbe  nrntt  diatin^ihcd  penoat  in  the  itate,
old  and  yonns,  mole  and  female,  vera  expected  to
take  part  in  Oicm.  The  etupenr  Kt  the  example
b;  appearing  in  penon  OD  the  itage  ;  and  Dioa
Caum)  mentioni  a  diitingniahed  Roman  matTon,
npwanU  of  eighty  yetn  of  age,  who  danced  in  the
gnmei.  It  was  one  of  the  olfencet  giien  by  PsFtna
Thrniea  that  he  had  not  acquitted  himielf  with
mill  at  thi»  fesliraL  (Dion  CtWH.  liL  19  ;  Tik,
Awm.  D*.  15,  XT.  33,  xvi.  Bl.)  Snelonina  (Km:
12)  conToimdi  thii  fcitivil  with  the  QaiDquennalia,
wtucb  wu  inatituted  in  the  fiillDwing  jeia,  A.  D.
60.  [QuiNOuaNNiLiA.]  Tho  Jnvetiali*  con-
tinued to  be  celebnU«d  by  anbieqnent  emperon,
but  not  on  the  lame  ociaiion.  The  name  waa
glren  A  tboH  fpunea  which  were  exhibited  by  the
emporoB  on  tho  lit  of  Januery  in  each  year.
They  on  longer  coniiited  of  Kenic  npreieataliDn),
but  of  chariot  nicei  and  cambali  of  wild  b«ut>.
(Dion  Cau.  lirii.  U  ;  Sidon.  ApoU.  Cb™,  xxiii.
307,  4SB;  CapitoL  Oord,  4;  comp.  Lipaina,  ad
Tac.  Jku.  vy.l5.)


LA'BAROM. (SiDNi  Militihia.]

LABRUM. [BAr,NiAi,p.  191.]

LAflYRlMHUS  (Jurf«(>il*.i),  Thil  word
appean  to  be  of  Greek  origui,  and  not  of  Egyptian
a>  hai  generally  been  nppoaed  ;  it  ii  prolnhly  a
deriiatire  tarm  of  AiUipsi,  and  etymolnfricnlly
connected  with  XovfUu.  Accordingly,  the  proper
definition  of  labjiinth  it  a  targe  and  complicated
aubterraneoua  cavem  with  nmnerom  and  intricate
puaagei,  aimilar  to  those  of  a  minis.  (Welcker,
Aa^yl.  Trilag.  p.  31-2,  Ac)  Henca  the  niTem*
near  Nanplia  in  Argolii  wen  called  Inbyrintha.
(Strabo,  viiL  6  .  p.  369.)  And  thii  ii  indeed  tho
chamcleriitie  featnie  of  all  the  itmctarei  to  which
the  ancient!  apply  the  name  labyrinth,  for  they  are
alwayi  dncribed  ai  cithu  entirely  or  partially
under  ground.

The  enrlieit  and  moat  renowned  labyrinth  wai
that  of  ^ypt,  which  lay  beyond  lake  Mocrii,  at  a
abort  diitance  from  the  eity  of  CrDCodilea  (ArnnoI!)i
in  the  pTOvince  now  called  Faioum.  HeradolDa
(ii.  U3)  BKribs  ill  conitruction  to  the  dodccarcht
(about  650  B.  c),  and  Mrla(l  9)  to  Piamnielichni
alone.  But  other  and  more  prohahlo  accoonta  rcfcr
it!  conitrucUon  to  a  much  enriier  age.  (Flin./f.A'.
iiiTi.  13;  Diod.  Sic  i.  61,  89;  Strabo,  ivil
p.  811.)  Thi«  edifice,  which  in  grandeur  eren  ex-
celled the  pyiamidi,  ii  deicribed  by  Herodotui  and
Pliny  (H  ce.)  It  Lad  3000  apartmenla,  ISOO
under  gramd,  and  the  nme  number  abnre  it,  and
the  whole  wai  nuramded  by  a  wall  It  waa  di-
vided into  oiiirta,  nch  of  which  waa  antniundcd
hj  colonnadea  of  white  marble.  At  the  tima  of
Diodonia  and  of  Pliny  the  Egyptian  labyrinth  waa
itill  cxianl.  Bat  the  ruina  which  modem  tiBTel-
\"n  deKtibe  aa  relica  of  the  ancient  labyrinth,  ai
wall  aa  the  pbu»  when  tbuy  aaw  them,  do  not


LABYRINTnua

agree  with  what  we  know  ftom  the  beat  sncirnt
aulhoritiei  reipecting  iti  arcbitectare  and  ita  aite.
(Britiih  Mug.  S^yplian  Aidiq.  toL  L  p.  54,  and
more  eapecially  Bnnaen,  Aegiplait  Stella  w  dier
HWfeMOi.  ToL  it  p.  324, 4c.)  The  pnrpoae  whitfc
thia  labyrinth  waa  intended  to  lerre,  can  only  ba
matter  of  conji^tnr^  It  faaa  been  nppoaed  by
■ome  writen  that  the  whole  atrangcnwat  of  the
edifice  waa  a  aymbolical  irpreaentation  of  the
(odiac  and  the  aolar  ayalem.  Hemdotiu,  who  nv
the  upper  part  of  tbit  labyrinth,  and  went  through
it,  waj  not  permitted  by  the  keepera  to  enta  the
auiHciraneouA  part,  and  he  waa  told  by  them  that
here  wei«  buried  the  kingi  by  whom  the  labyrintk
bad  been  built,  and  the  ncred  crocodilea.

The  ■eoHid  bibyiioth  msntioned  by  tho  ancient*
waa  that  of  Crete,  in  the  neighbonriiood  of  Cnna-
" ■  ■  ■  ■ " ■ e  built  it  after  the


model  of  the  Ejtrptian,  and  al
king  Mino*.  (Plin.  Diod.  0.  ee.)  Thii  labyrinth
ia  aaid  to  have  been  only  one  htmdredth  part  the
aixe  of  the  Egyptian,  and  to  hare  been  tho  habit-
ation of  the  monatec  Minotanma.  Although  the
n  labyrinth  ii  Tery  frequently  mentioned  by
nt  Buthon,  yet  none  of  them  apMki  of  it  a*
an  eyawinwas ;  and  Diodonu  and  Pliny  eipivnly

d^a.  Theae  cireumataoeei,  tagetbts  irilb  the
impoaibility  of  acconntiDg  tor  the  objecti  which  a
Cretan  king  could  bare  had  in  riew  in  niaiii{(  nidi
a  building,  have  induced  almoat  aU  ptodern  writert
to  deny  altogether  the  eiiitenca  of  the  Cretan
labyrinth.  Thii  opinion  ii  not  only  mppoctcd  by
•ome  teatimoniea  of  the  aucienti  themaelTea,  but
by  the  pecnlkr  nature  of  aoms  parta  of  the  island
of  Crete.  The  author  of  the  Etymologicnm  Magn.
calli  the  Crclnn  labTrinth  "a  mountain  with  a  ca-
vern," and  EuitatJiiui  (ad  Odj/a.  xl  p.  1688)
callt  it  "a  aublerraneoui  caiem  ;**  and  limilar
atatemrnU  are  made  by  leTeral  other  writcta
quoted  byMeunini(0<ta,  pp.  67and6g).  Such
large  cavema  actually  exiit  in  lome  parti  of  Crete,
eapecially  in  the  neifthbonrhood  of  the  ancient
town  of  Gortya ;  and  it  wai  probably  Bome  and!
csTem  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Cnoaiua  that  gave
riie  to  the  itory  of  a  labyrinth  built  in  the  reign
of  Minoa,  (See  Walpdel  TnteU,  p.  403,  &.c  ;
HOckh,  Krtta,  L  p.  56,  ftc,  and  p.  447,  Ac)

A  third  labynnth,  the  conitruction  of  which
brlonga  to  a  mora  hiitoricaJ  afce,  wai  that  in  the
iaiand  of  Lenmoa.  It  waa  oommenccd  by  Smilia,
an  Aeginetan  architect,  and  completed  by  Khowui
and  Diodorui  of  Samoa,  about  the  tinM  of  the  fini
Oympiad.  (Plin.  /.  o.)  It  wai  in  ita  conitruetion
aimilar  to  the  Egyptian,  and  wai  only  dittiuguiih-
ed  from  it  by  a  greater  number  of  columni.  Ite-
maina  ot  it  were  atill  extant  in  the  time  of  Pliny.
It  ia  imcertain  whether  thii  labyrinth  wu  in-
tended aa  a  tenqtle  of  the  Cabeiri,  or  wbethn-  it  bad
any  connection  with  the  art  of  miniiu.  (Welcker,
AadyL  TriLLe.)

Samoa  had  likewiae  a  labyrinth,  which  waa  bull
by  Theodonu,  the  nine  who  aidited  in  building
that  of  Lemnoa ; but  no  paitieulm  ar«  kiMwrb

(Plin.  rr.  y.  xhIt.  b.)

Laitly,  we  hare  to  metitiaa  a  &bnlaiii  edificr  in
Etmria,  to  which  Pliny  appliea  Che  name  of  lahv-
rinth.  It  is  deacribed  ai  being  in  the  i»ighbOfir-
hood  of  Cluiium,  and  aa  the  tomb  of  Lar  Ponena.
But  no  writer  tap  that  he  eier  aw  it.  er  reraaiiu
of  it;  and  Pliny,  who  thought  th '


UCTNIAE.

he  foond  of  it  too  bboloiu,  did  Dot  vcnlnni  to  girt
it  ID  ha  mm  wordi^  bat  qaoted  those  of  VArrOf
who  had  ptolttblT  token  the  acanuit  bum  Hm  po-
pahr  Mone*  of  the  Etnucani  ifienuelna.  It  wu
nid  to  ban  been  built  putlj  onder  tmd  paitly
MboTo  gmind,  wbcoee  the  nune  Ubfricth  i«  cm-
ir«lj  applied  to  it.  But  b  buildiiig  like  thii,  n; •
Niebohr  {HiiHiry  of  Ramt,  toL  L  p,  130.  note
405),  ia  kbadBieij  iiopawiblB,  ud  bdangi  to  the
Arabiui  Nighto.  <Comp,  Abakm,  Mitt^italitn,
p.  243.)  IL.S.]

LACERNA  OiorSiu,  luoiii,),  ■  cloak  worn
bjr  the  *t™™™  orer  the  toga,  whoMM  it  ia  called


by  J


It


a  open  gn-
■  oiF  a  bockle  (fiiula).


■nt  Uke  tlw  Qn^
Tight  (hoaJdar  by  r
wbenaa  tlw  |BeimlB  wai  wl
toi  ijjaaew  with  an  openii^  for  tbe  hMuL  [Pai-
KULi.]  The  Lacema  appean  to  Kits  b««n  csio-
iinil7  lued  in  the  tmj  (VdL  Pat  ii.  70,  60 ;
Urid,  FatL  iL  746 ;  Pn^  ir.  3.  IS^  bat  in  the
tine  oT  Cicero  mu  not  nnallT  wom  in  the  dtjr
<Ci(^  PUi^.  iL  80.)  Je  «na  aRerwardi,  howcTcr,
hecanw  quite  ecnmon  at  Rome,  a*  we  liam  from
Soetaoiiia,  who  ttji  (Av-  ^^)  *^*  Augiutua,
ageing  ene  day  a  gieM  nmber  of  dtiieiu  befoie
hi>  tribimal  dreaed  ia  the  laeena,  which  wna
ammoolj'  of  a  daik  aUxa  (puBaU),  nptatedwitfa
-■■ -nthelineof  ViigiL


MoU  pcnoDi  Hem  to  ba*e  carried  a  lacoma  or
paenok  with  them,  when  tfaey  attended  the  poblio
inuea,  to  protect  them  from  the  cold  at  tain  (Dion
Cttt.  IriL  13)  ;andthiii  wean  told  that  the  eqnitc*
aicd  to  Maod  np  at  the  eotranee  of  Claadiui  and
hj  Mide  their  Luenae.  (Soet  Cbmi.  6.)

The  huenia  waa  nmallj,  ai  already  remarked,
afa(taikB)loiir(yiiB'go&nHvMBn.lS7.  9),Bnd
•a*  fteqiuntlj  i^^  of  the  daik  wool  of  the
Baetic  ■h«p(<Bcii«iciaiIsMriHii,iiT.  133).  Itwai,
howerer,  aomedmea  dyed  with  the  Tyrian  pnrplp,
and  with  other  teloora.  (Jni.  i.  37  ;  Mart  L  67-)
Uaitia]  (tiiL  10)  Bpeaki  of  lareenae  of  the  fcsmcr
kind,  which  coW  ai  much  t*  10,000  Matercet
When  tbe  emperar  waa  eipected  at  the  pafalic
ftaoiea,  it  waa  the  pnctice  ia  wemr  white  iBcenme
only. (Mait,i».2,iiT.137.)

The  lacona  waa  aometiniee  thrown  erer  the
head  fat  the  purpoae  of  conceahnenl  (Hot.  Sal.  iL
7.  &t>) ;  but  a  aicmllia  or  cowl  waa  genendly  nwd
fir  tlmt  porpaee,  which  appeal*  to  hare  been  fre-
^nestly  attached  to  tbe  lacemae.  and  to  have
funned  a  put  of  the  dreaa  (HaR.  sir.  130,
133.)  Sea  Becker,  GaiUM,  nl.  ii.  p^  9A,  Ac
[Cc>cnu.ra.]

I^CI'NIAB,  the  aiunlar  extramitiea  ot  the

...... .^ -owthelefl

to  the  girdle^


LAENA.  fieo

cording  to  Serrini  (ad  Viry.  Aai.  vii.  6I2),  the
Cinctiu  Oabinoi  wsi  formed  by  girding  the  tt^
ttg-ht  round  the  body  by  one  of  iti  laciniaB  or  too»
endi.  These  exproiiani  are  quite  ineconcileable
with  the  opinion  of  Femtrim  and  othen,  that  the
ladnia  waa  the  lower  border  or  ikiit  of  the  toga,
white  all  the  pauagM  adduced  by  them  admit  of
caiy  explanation  acouding  to  die  aboTc  riew.
"^ '  -  ■  - - ondonbledly  permitted  by  tome


I  aweep  the  gRmnd,  eepecially  by  ■■

^mHj,  TlniHaoiAiai

t  n  Cicen>  vittidami,  **  Jocatu*


their  gumentalooa^,  1


(iW.iL  8)


m  Caoiarem  quia  il
laciniam  Telnt  raollia
with  the  well-known  aution  of  Sulta  addreiaed
to  Ponpey,  "  Care  tibi  illnia  poenm  mala  piao-
onctom  ;~  and  Sueloniui  IclU  bow  the  emperoi
Caiua.  being  filled  with  jealauiy  en  acconnt  of  thr
pUoditi  hniihed  on  a  gladiator,  bnmed  out  of  the
theatre  in  lucb  haile  "  nt  calcala  lacinia  togae
pmeeepa  pa  grado*  iret"  HoreOTer.  the  laam^ry
and  fignraCiTe  momuigi  of  the  word,  namely,  a  ny
(Plin.  H.  N.  xii.  7),  a  Mrrm  Met  of  land  (Id.
y.  32),  III  pouu  of  a  l»af  (Id.  xr.  SO),  Ma  «-
cracnoBtsMai  iaiig  down  Jnm  iieneck  qfa  (i«-
goat  (Id.  fiiL  60),  Ac,  aeeocd  perfectly  with  the
idea  a/U«  amgidar  tmtrtaatf  of  a  puet  ofdoA,  bat
can  Bcarccl?  be  coimacted  naliually  with  the  ootiaa
'  ~  (order  or  atari.


Theu


r  (PoUu


■ynwynuHa) )  and  aoceriio^y  Phlaroh  (flnoA.
19)ai>d  Appiaii  (S.  C.  i.16)  en^oy  the  femwr
in  nanatfaig  the  at(B7  of  Sdpio  alluded  to  abore,
with  thia  difbavnce,  howerer,  that  they  da-
acfibe  him  aa  throwing  ri  KfiarAor  roii  I^ariav
oTer  hia  head  ^"f**"^  of  twiating  it  round  bla
ann.  [W.  R.]

LAC(yNICUH.  [BALNiAa,p.ie4,b.  190,b.]

LACU'NAR. (DoMua,  p.  432,  a.]

LACUS. [FoNa,  p.  544,  b.]

LAENA,  the  aaine  word  with  the  Greek
X^oiro,  and  radically  comiecled  with  f^X"^  ''■■'•

It  lignifiea,  pnpirly,  a  woollen  doak,  the
cloth  of  which  waa  Ivica  the  ordinaiy  thiekneti
(rJvanm  togantm  autar,  Vbitd,  da  iAug,  Lot,  T.
133,  ed.  MUller),  and  therefore  tenned  dapba
(Feetui,  a  v.  Laina/  Bat.  ad  FiVy.  Am.  it.
2G3),  ahiggy  upon  both  aidea  (SchoL  ad  Jmi.  ill.
2113),  wom  oTsr  the  pallinm  or  the  ton  for  the
lake  of  wannth.  (Mart  zIt.  1 3G.)  Hence  per-
■ona  carried  a  bona  with  them  when  they  went
outtoaopper  (Matt,  liiL  59);  and  tbe  rich  man  in
JuTcnal,  who  walka  home  at  night  eacoiled  by  a
train  of  alaTei  and  lighted  on  bia  way  by  Sam-
beaoi,  ia  wnwed  in  a  scarlet  laana.  (Jut.  iiL
383.)

2.  A  robe  of  atste,  forming,  it  ia  nud,  b  ancient
timea,  part  of  the  kingly  inm. (Plut  Nam.  7.)

3.  The  flamines  oOered  uoifice  in  a  Uena
which  waa  faaleDed  round  the  throat  by  a  daip,
and  in  the  esse  of  the  dialia  waa  woTen  by  tha
handa  of  the  flaminica,  (Serr.  ad  Virg.  Atn.  ir.
2tl2 ;  Cic  Brat.  £7.)

4.  In  later  timea  the  laena  leona,  to  a  certain
extent,  to  hare  been  wom  aa  a  aubatiUU  for  tho
Ic^  Thai  the  courtly  bard  in  Peniu*  (i.  32)  is
intredocod  reciting  hii  faibionable  lay*  with  a
(iolet^DorFd  Inaia  orcr  his  abonldeis ;  and  we
gather  fnwi  Jarenal  (v.  130,  liL  79)  that  it  waa


I!G6  LAMPADEPHORIA.

nn  ordinary  article  of  irtu  among  the  paora
clasan. (Ileclcer,  Cofru,  vol.  iL  p.  99.)

5.  Naniut  delinet  it  to  be  "  lailimfntuin
mililare  qnod  nipra  omnia  rettimenta  lumitor,"
but  qiiotca  DO  BUthnritj  except  Vug.  Atit.  it.
2«2.  [W.B.]

LAGE'NA. [ViNDM.]

LAMPADA'RCHIA. [Liupadiphorta.]

LAMi-ADEPHO'RIA  (An^nSq^o^),  torri-
tearu^  (at  HeiDdotiu  cbIIi  it),  oi  \ii^ralh)Spii^ii,
tonA-ToM  (a*  taae  leiicographeii),  alio  Aw'so-
■duxoi  i^iiv,  and  ofttn  limply  Xaiaris,  wu  a,
gnme  common  no  doubt  throURtumt  Oretce ;  foi
tiiDugh  all  we  knov  coneominj;  it  b«lapj{i  to
Athens,  yet  we  heBr  of  it  al  Connth,  Pergamui,
and  Zorintbni  (Bbckb,  Putt  JCam.  of  Aliau,  p.
*63,  2nd  ed.  ;  MliUer,  Maerv.  Palia.,  p.  fi)  i  nnd
B  coin  in  Minnnet,  with  a  Aa^nli  on  it,  which  ii
copied  belotf*,  bears  the  legend  *Afupiro*jTir.

At  Athene  wo  know  of  Atb  ceiebnilioM  of  thie
game:  one  to  Pmrnetheiu  at  the  Pnunelheia
(Schol.  od  Arulopi.  Rao.  131  ;  liter,  op.  Harpocr.
(.  e.)  ;  a  second  to  Alh«ia  at  the  Panatbcnaea  *
(Herod.  li.  tU5,  and  U.  cc}  ;  a  third  to  Hephueitoi
at  the  Hephaeateiaf  (Herod.  liii.  9,  and  0.  cc.)  ;  a
fimrth  toPaii(Herad.  T.  10a);afifth  totheThra-
ciuiArtemisorBendia.  {PhL  dt  Hep.  p.  3'i8,ii.)
The  three  former  are  of  nnknown  anilqoity ;  the
tbnrth  wna  introduced  loon  after  the  haltle  of  Ma-
rathon ;  the  lait  in  the  time  of  Soeiat«L

Tho  raco  wae  amally  run  on  foot,  honei  being
lint  nicd  in  the  time  of  Somtes  (Plat.  L  c)  ;
•ometime*  aleo  at  night  (Inlsrp.  vetuj  ad  Lucret.
ii.  77.  ap.  Wakef.)  The  prepantioo  for  il  wu  a
principal  brandi  of  the  fniunffiofx^  »  mnch  »
indeed  in  hitcr  times,  that  AefiWB&vx'a  leemi  to
have  boen  pKCCy  mncb  cqaivolent  to  tho  yvfu/9Si-
i^TlSa.  (Ariitot.  Pat.  t.  %.  20.)  The  gynuiuiircb
hud  to  provide  the  Acvinti,  which  wu  a  candle-
stick with  a  hind  of  shield  set  at  the  bottom  of
the  socket,  so  ss  to  shelter  the  Same  of  (he  (aadte  ;
as  is  seen  in  the  following  woodcut,  taken  from  a
coin  in  Mionnet  (pi.  19.
6.)  He  had  olio  to  pro.
ling  of  the


nner^  w


lof  n>


toph.  Vap.  1203,  Ro».
lOeS),  with  other  ci-
peniei,  which  on  the  whole
were  verj-  besTy.  so  that

Iioeus  (lU  PkUocL  Haend.  p.  62.  20)  classes
this  ofliis  with  the  xfVt^'  and  rfiiipapx^<  "nd
reckons  that  it  had  cost  bim  12  minae.  The  dis-
chaii;e  of  ibis  office  was  called  •fuiwaatofX'*''
Xofiitdit  (Isacns,  t.  f.),  or  if  fatt  Ao^-r^i  yu/uq-
mapx'i'ii"  (Xen.  lit  Vatig.  iv.  52).  Tho  ricto-
rious  gymnasisTch  preiontod  his  \apMdt  as  a  TotiTC
offering  (hiiitiiut,  BSckh,  /««■,  No.  343,  250).
A)  to  the  numna-  of  Iho  XcviraJqfiopia,  there
" Fi  difHcult  to  understand. The  cnae


Wei


HKutedasai


■  Probably  tho  greater  Paoathcnaea.  (BJkkh,
■Usiipr.)

f  The  ceremony  at  the  Apatiuia  was  diffcrenL
[Apatubia.]


LAMPADEPHORIA.

another  by  a  cbaia  of  runncn,  each  of  whom
formed  a  saixeesiTo  link.  The  Gist,  after  nicninc
a  certun  dittanee,  handed  it  to  the  second,  the
second  in  like  manner  to  the  third,  and  so  on,  till
it  reached  the  point  proposed.  Hence  the  game  is
used  by  Herodotus  (viii.  S8)  as  a  compacisco
whereby  to  illustrate  tho  Peisian  (L')'7f^^r,  by
Plato  {Leff.  p.  77ti,  b.)  ss  a  living  image  of  sdc-
cessire  generations  of  men,  OS  olio  in  tbe  veU-
kaown  tuie  of  Luoetius  (ii.  77.)

*  Et  qnasi  cursores  Titoi  lampada  tiadnnt."
{Compare  also  Auctor,  oif  Htram.  tv.  46.)  And
it  it  said  that  the  art  coniiited  in  the  seTeral  niu-
nen  carrying  the  torch  unextinguisbed  throngh
their  reipectiie  distances,  those  who  lot  it  go  oul
losuig  all  share  of  bonoui.  Now,  if  this  were  aU,
inch  explanation  might  content  us.  Bat,  secondly,
we  are  plouily  told  that  it  was  an  iyAi,  the  nm-
nen are  said  atuXXitreai  (Plat  Sip.  Lc);  some  an
said  to  hare  wen  (nnoir  Xatuiiti,  Andoc.  in  Aldb.
ad  Jin. ,-  compare  Dockh,  Imc  No.  243,  244}  ;  the
Sebol.  on  Arittoph.  Ran.  {L  o.)  Ulks  of  rait
ioTdTDui  Tpt^oirai,  which  shows  that  it  must  have


bich  ihowa  that  a
ipiiiliam. Bat


This  lecond
in  a  chain  of  ninncn,  eacb  of
torch  tn  the  neit  man  Macaeaicelf,  where  could  the
competition  be?  One  runner  might  be  said  lo
loM —  he  who  let  the  torch  out ;  but  who  could  be

We  offer  the  fallowing  hypotbeiit  in  anawer  to
this  question.  Suppose  that  there  were  semuJ
ottaiu  of  runners,  each  of  which  had  to  carry  the
torch  the  given  distance.  Then  both  eonditions
would  be  fulfilled.  The  torch  would  be  handed
along  each  chain,  —  which  would  answer  to  the
first  condition  of  lutee-ive  delivery.  That  chain
in  which  it  travelled  most  quickly  and  aoonett
reached  its  deatinition  would  be  the  winner,  —
which  would  anawer  to  the  second  couditicn,  il
being  a  race  between  competitors.

In  confirmation  of  this  hypothesii  we  obsHre
aa  follows;  — The  inscription  in  Bdckh,  Na243,
consltU  of  the  following  lines  ;  --^

Ao^irdii  rrirfiira.t  air  ti^Soii  ri/r  i*  irit^ta
EiiTuxiiv^  waTt  if  Efrnixliwi  "Aflfios'e*!.

This  Eutvcbidei  wu  no  doubt  the  |
who  won  with  the  tv^lot  he  had  tia
Andocides  (_L  n.)  talks  of  his  nfuniii^'ai  Ai^irJIi
as  gyninasianli ;  so  too  Inui,  No.  3&0  records  a
like  victory  of  the  tribe  Cecropis.*  Now  we  know
that  the  gymnasioichs  were  chosen  one  from  esich
tribe.  If  then  eoch  furnished  a  chain  of  Ao/mSq^^
(HI,  there  would  have  been  ten  (in  lalcrtimei  twelve)
chains  of  runners.  Perhaps,  however,  the  grn-
nasiarcfas  were  not  all  called  ou  to  perform  this  ser-
vice, but  each  once  only  in  the  year,  which  would
allow  us  for  each  of  the  throe  greater  celebtatioos


*  No.  314  give*  a  lilt  of  «(  Hurtltartn  r9)v
Anfiwiiq,  lit  inmers  m  £U  iDret-maa,  fourteen  in
number.  Who  wei«  these  ?  If  the  sevenl  linka
of  the  winning  chain,  it  is  rather  against  analepy
that  they  should  be  named.  No  one  ever  beuil
the  name*  of  a  chorus;  yst  they  can  hsidly  tw
Gnuteeii  winning  gymnasiatthk


LANX.

(the  Pmaellieia,  Piuathenaea,  and  Hepbautcia)
three  <K  fbur  chaioa  of  compeliton.

The  plaai  oF  rmmiiig  waa,  is  these  gnat  eelebra-
tioDi,  Erran  the  allu  of  the  Three  Oodi  (Prome-
(beu,  Athena,  and  HephaeitM)  in  the  outer
CCnuuekiii  to  ^eAeropdia,B  diatance  of  near  half
amile^  (Panaan.  L  30.  |2i  SchoLorfAiH.  lOSfi.)
That  in  honour  of  Bendii  wai  ran  in  the  Pein«

The  pnpH  of  theae  |ames  mnit  be  Mnght,
think,  in  the  wonhip  of  the  Titan  Pranethena.
The  action  of  auTjiDg  aa  nnextinguiihed  light
troin  the  Coameiena  to  the  Acropolu  i>  a  liielf
■jmbol  of  the  boiefit  mnfeiTed  by  the  Titan  spon
■an,  when  lio  bore  fire  from  the  habitationi  of
the  pwl^  and  beatoved  it  upon  man.

tr  wlXf  rif6t\iit.  (Heaiod.  Hieog.  666.  Oaiif.)
But  the  gratitodo  to  the  giver  of  fire  loan  paaaed
U  the  Olympian  godi  who  preaided  dtst  ita  nae,
—  Hephuatos,  vho  taught  men  to  apply  it  to  the
melting  and  moulding  of  metal,  and  Athena,  vho
airied  it  thnugh  the  irhola  circle  of  lueful  and

iheae  gamea  at  fint  dcroled,  aa  the  patrana  of  fire.
And  IwkiBg  to  the  placo  it  waa  lun  in — the
Ctnmeicna  or  Potteta'  quarter —  ve  are  much  in-
clined t0  adopt  Welcker^a  laggeation  (.lociyZueie
Twikv»,  p.  i^l).  viz.  that  it  waa  the  npa^uli  or
poUcn  vbo  inititnted  the  Aa^TaSrr^oplcL  Athena
(aa  Te  learn  from  the  Krpa^)  vaa  their  patron
goddesa  ;  and  who  more  than  the;  would  hare
naaon  to  be  tbuikfiil  for  the  ^ft  and  uao  of  fire  F
Potteiy  would  be  oae  of  the  fint  mode*  in  which
it  would  be  tnado  aeniceible  in  promating  the  aiti
af  life.  In  later  timea  the  eiune  houDsc  waa  paid  to
■11  goda  who  were  in  aaj  way  connected  with  Gic,
>•  to  Pan,  to  whom  a  perpetuid  fin  waa  kept  up  in
hia  gntlo  nndei  the  Acropolia,  and  who  waa  in
thia  ispacity  called  by  the  Oreeki  Phanctea,  by
(be  Romam  Luddna ;  ao  alio  to  Anemia,  called
by  Sot^iaclea  'Afif  Impoi,  and  worahipped  na  the
mwD.  (Crenier,  Sgtiioliqiu,  toI.  il  pp.  752,  764,
pROch  tnuuL) At  fint,  howeier,  it  leona to


if  momUifff  iit  ((dirrtxMV  Tup,  Sildo'i
**X>^'>  ^  Aetcbylua  caJli  it,  Pnm.  7.  110),
ihotiirii  thia  apecial  aignifiiatiiiD  waa  l«t  light  of
in  later  time*.  Other  wrilen,  in  their  anxiety  to
get  a  conuaon  lignificatioD  fijr  all  the  timca  and
nodes  of  the  XoftToi^fiafifa,  have  endeaTOUted  to
prore  that  all  who  were  honoured  by  it  were  con-
nected with  the  hearcnly  hodiea,  Aiv"fwt  iuvoimil,
(•a  Ciwiaer,  L  c  ;  MUlW,  Minena  Folia,,  p.  6)  ;
athen  that  it  alwayi  hod  an  inner  aigniEoitiDn,
alluding  to  the  inwanl  fire  by  which  Prometheua
pot  life  into  nun  (ao  Brjinited,  Vcyaga,  tqL  iL
p.  S8G,  note  3).  But  Ou  legend  of  Pnmetheui
waa  a  later  interprttalion  of  tho  earlier  one,  aa  may
be  aeen  by  comparing  PUt  Pntag.  p.  321,  d,  widi
HeaiwL  TSas-Sei.&c.  [H.G.L.]

UUIPAS. {LjMPiDiPHoau.]

LANA'BIUS. [PiLKUt]

LA'KCEA. [Hjaii.  p.  fiS8  a.]

LANJFI'CIUM. ITiL*.]

LANISTA. [QLASUToaia.]

LANTEBNA. (LjTiBNi]

LANX,  •<«.  LANCULA,  a  large  diah,  made


LAHABIUM.
boned,  naed  at  a)Jendid  e
meal  or  fruit  (Cio.  adAa.TL\;  Hot.  Sat.  iLa
4,  iL  4. 11  ;  Orid.  d»  Pcnlo,  iii  S.  20  ;  Pelmn.
31)  !  and  eonaeqnently  at  lacrificca  (Virg.  Gtont.
tL  134,  394,  Am.  Tiii.  284,  la  215  i  Oiid.  dt
Ponki,  IT.  6.  40)  and  funerel  banqneta  (Proper^
ii.  13.  33).  The  ailrer  diahee,  uied  by  the  Ro-
man* at  their  grand  dinneia,  were  of  a  Taat  aiae,
so  thala  boar,  for  example,  might  be  bnught  whole
to  table.  (H«.  L  e.)  They  often  weighed  turn
100  to  SOO  ponnda. (Plin.  ff.  Af.  uiiil  5Z)

Tho  bahmBt  (LiBHi.  biima.  Mart.  Cap.  ii.  180)
waa  10  called,  becanaa  it  had  two  metallic  diahee
(Cic  Acad.  IT.  12.  Tiiie.  T.  17  ;  Virg.  At^  xLl
726  i  Pen.  It.  10.)  [J,  Y.]

LA'PHRIA  (Ao^ia),  an  annnal  featiTal,  cele-
brated at  Patne  in  Aehaia,  in  honour  of  Aitemia,
lumamed  Laphria.  The  peculiai  manner  in  which
It  waa  aolenmiied  daring  the  time  of  the  Rnaan
empiie  (for  the  worahip  of  Artemia  Laphria  waa
not  introdnced  at  Patrae  till  the  time  of  Auguatui),
i*  deacribod  by  Pauaaniai  (viiL  18.  %  7).  On  the
^iproach  of  the  featiTal  the  PatroeBui  jjaced  in  a
circle,  around  the  altar  of  the  goddeai,  large  piece*
of  ((TBon  wood,  each  being  aiiteen  yarda  in  lengthj
within  the  altar  they  placed  dry  wood.  Theythen
£)RDed  an  approach  to  the  altar  in  the  ihape  of
ilapa,  which  wera  alightly  ooTcred  wilt  earth.
On  the  fint  day  of  the  feiUTal  a  inoit  magnifi-
cent procetaion  went  to  the  temple  of  Artemia,  and
at  the  end  of  it  there  followed  a  maiden  who  bad
to  perform  the  fimctiona  of  pricateaa  ou  the  occa-
aion,  and  who  code  in  a  ch;mat  drawn  by  etaga.
On  the  lecoDd  day  the  goddeaa  waa  honoured  inth
niunennu  lacrificea,  offered  by  tho  alate  aa  well  aa
by  priiate  indiTiduaU.  Theaa  lacrificca  coniiited
of  eatable  hirdi,  boon,  ilagi,  goati,
tbe  cube  of  wolTca  and  bean,  and  Bom
old  aniicali  themaelTei.  All  these  annnala  wera
thrown  upon  the  altar  alira  at  the  moment  when
the  dry  wood  waa  let  on  fin.  Paoianiaa  ny*  that
he  often  aaw  a  bear,  or  some  other  of  tbe  animola,
when  seiied  hj  the  flamea,  leap  from  the  allar  and
eaeape  acrraa  the  bairicade  of  green  wood.  Those
peraona  who  had  thrown  them  npon  the  altar,
caught  the  deroted  Tictima  again,  and  threw  them
back  into  the  flamei.  The  Patiaeani  did  not  re-
member that  a  penon  bad  erer  been  injured  by
-ny  of  the  onimali  on  tbii  occaiion.  (Comp.  Pan*.
r.31.g6;  Schol.od£unp.OTW(.108r.)  {h.&.^
LAPICIDINAE.  [LiUTUMUi.]
LAPIS  MILLIA-RIUS.  [Hillusiuu  1
LAPIS  SPECULATIIS.  [Domus,  &  433a.l
LA'tJUEAR.  [DoMua,  p.  432,  a.]
LA'tJUEUS,  a  rope,  wai  naed  to  lignify  tha
Thia  mode  ihF
-  ,  iblic,  bnl  only
priion  and  generally  in  the  Tullianum.  Hence
we  find  the  worda  oancr  and  hufmaa  fi^qneotly
"  toother  (lee  ».g.  Tac.  Atm.  iiL  60).  Per-
niicted  of  treaaon  were  moat  frequently  put  to
death  by  itrangling,  aa  for  inatanc*  tho  Catilinorian
conipiialon  {laqitito  galam  frtgtn.  Sail.  OH.  65),
Thia  puniahment  waa  frequently  inflicted  in  tbe
reign  of  Tiberiua  (Tac  Ami.  t.  B,  ti.  39,  40  ;
Suet.  TU.  61),  but  WIS  aboliabed  soon  afkerwarda
'Tac  Am.  liT.  48),
LAQUEATOTIES. [OiiniaTOBM,  p.  675,


GCB  .  LATER.

and  in  irbich  tlicii  imagea  irera  lept  Biid
■hipped.  It  aeemi  U  have  b«en  cnitomar;  (i:
ligiooi  RumaDi  in  the  mnming,  inunFdiBlflf  after
they  rcBC,  to  perfoim  their  prayere  in  the  lEiirinra.
This  custom  i>  sud  at  leael  to  have  heen  o1»ervFd
by  the  emperor  Alexander  Sevens  (Lamprii
Sts.  29,  31),  vhn  had  among  the  atatnea  c
Laret  ihoM  of  CbrUt,  Abraham,  Orpheni,  and
Alexander  the  Great  Thi«  emperor  had  a  iccond
lararium,  from  irhieh  the  fint  a  diilinguiilied  by
the  epithet  nf^^u,  ftnd  the  imagci  of  his  second  or
Icuer  lanuinm  were  repreaenlationi  of  great  and
dia^guiihed  men,  among  whom  are  mentioned
VirgiC  CicNo,  and  Achillea  That  these  imngea
nere  aometimei  of  gold,  it  stated  by  Suetoniut
(  VilelL  S).  We  do  not  know  whether  i  I  was  cus-
tomary 10  hare  more  than  one  lararinm  in  a  house,
or  whether  the  case  of  Aleiander  SeTerus  is  merely
to  be  looked  upon  as  an  eTception.  [U  S.]

LAHENTA'LIA,  eonetime.  written  LAREN-
TINA'LIA  and  LAUHENTA'LIA,  was  a  Ro-
Dian  festival  in  honour  of  Acta  Laienlia,  the  wife
of  FauatuluB  and  the  nuiae  of  Romulus  and  Rcmua
It  was  celebrated  in  December  on  the  10th  befon
theCalendsof  January.  (Feitus,  >.  o. ;  Macrob.L
10  t  Ovid,  Fat.  iii.  S7.)  The  sacrifice  in  this
hstiTal  was  performed  in  the  Vekbrum  at  the
place  which  led  into  the  Noya  Via,  which  was
outside  of  the  old  city  not  Sti  from  the  porta
Romanula.  At  this  place  Aces  was  nid  to  have
been  buried.  (Macnb.  L  e. ;  Van.  de  Ling,  LaL
V.  23, 24.)  This  fntind  appears  not  to  have  been
confined  to  Acea  Lnrentii,  but  to  have  been  sacred
to  all  the  LarsL  (iitnang,Di»ltdyioiideTRaaeT,
Tol.  iLp.  U6.)

LARES.  See  Did.  o/Gr.  and  Rom.  Btograpig
and  MgUahgg.

LARGITIO. [AKBITUB! FHUMBNTiRUE

LARNACE3  (XtipnuHi).  [FuNU8,p.6SB,b.]
LATER,  dim.  LATEBCULUS  (-rxfyflos,  dim.
wAiv«lt,  irMr«lav,)  a  brick.  Besides  the  Oreekl
and  Romans  other  ancient  nalioiu  employed  brick
lor  building  to  a  great  extent,  especially  the  Baby-
lonians (Herod.  179  ;  Xen.  AmJi.  iii.  4.  SS  7,  11  ;
Nahom,  iiL  U)  and  Egyptians.  In  the  latter
couutry  a  painting  on  the  nail)  of  a  tomb  at  Thebes
(Wiikinaon-i  Afonm  a»f  CWtani),  vol  ii.  p-SS)
exhibits  ihives,  in  one  pan  employed  in  procuring
water,  in  mixing,  tempering,  and  carrying  the  clay,
or  iu  taming  the  bricks  out  of  the  mould  [FaRHA],
and  oiTOnging  them  in  order  on  the  ground  to  be
dried  by  the  inn,  and  in  another  part  carrying  the
dried  bricks  by  means  of  the  yoke  [Ar"  -  ■ ' '"


e  annexed  woodcut  we  i


n  with  three
d  of  the  ynlie,  and
IS  &om  having  de-


Theae  figmn  are  selected  from  the  aborc-men-
tioned  painting,  being  in  lact  original  portraits  of
two  'Ktybmtot  wXaSa^iifti,  girt  with  linen  nmnd
the  loins  In  exact  aeeordanee  with  the  deKription
given  of  them  by  Aristophanes,  who  at  the  same
time  alludes  to  lUl  the  operations  in  the  ptocesa  of
brick-making  (irfcii*nrorfa,  SchoL  n  Piud  OL  r.
SO),  which  are  exhibited  in  the  Theban  poindng.
{^w»,1132— 11S2;  SchoLodlffi)

The  Romans  distinguished  between  those  bricks
which  were  merely  dned  by  the  sun  and  air  (la-
iira  cradi,  Plin.  ff.  N.  xixv.  48  ;  Varro,  de  Re
Ban,  i.  14  i  CoL  deBt  Rutl.  ix.  I  j  itXStSot  ayii.


Pans.  rilL  S.  g  5).  and  those  which  were  bonit  in
the  kiln  (eodi  or  catilfi ;  inal,  Xen.  ^iia6.  iL  4.
S  12  ;  Ilerod.  L  c).  They  preferred  £ir  the  por-
pose  day  which  was  either  whitish  or  decidedly
red.  Thqr  considered  spring  the  best  tone  for
brick-making,  and  kept  the  bncks  two  years  brAiie
they  were  used.  (Paliad.  d«flM(.  vi.  13).  Th^
made  them  principally  of  three  shapes ;  the  Zy-
dlan,  which  was  a  foot  hroad,  1^  feet  long ;  lie
tttradoroL,  which  was  four  palms  square,  i.  t-
1  foot ;  and  the  petdadorom^  which  was  five  pshnj
square.  They  used  them  smaller  in  private  than
in  public  edifices.  Of  this  an  example  ii  pre-
sented m  the  great  building  at  Tnrra,  calltd  the
palace  of  Consmntine,  which  is  built  of  "  bon>
bricks,  each  of  a  square  form,  Rfleen  inchn  in
diameter,  and  an  inch  and  a  qnarter  thick."  (Wjt-
tenboch^  Guide  to  the  Romax  Antiipntia  ofT^frrt.


bricks  were  made  so  pomns  a
and  Ihcae  were  probably  used  in  the  constmclion
of  airhcB,  in  which  their  lightness  would  bo  a  great
advantage.  (Plin,  H.  JV.  ixiv.  49  ;  Vimtv.  iiS.)
It  was  usual  to  mix  straw  with  the  day.  (Vilmv.
L  e.  ;  Pnllod.  d»  Re  Auf.vi.  13  ;  Eiod.  t.  7.)  h
builiUng  a  brick  wall,  at  least  emdo  latiTt,i.t.
with  unbnmt  bricks,  the  interstices  were  liUed
with  clay  or  mud  (fslo,  OA.  L  c),  bnt  the  bricks
were  also  somelimet  cemented  with  mortar.
(Wyttenbach,  p.  G£,  66.)  For  as  acmnnt  of  the
mode  of  armngmg  the  bricks,  see  MuHua.  The
Babylonians  used  asphaltom  as  the  cement.  (Hemd-
(.  c.) Pliny  (vii.  B7)  calls  the  brickfield  h


to  the  Greek  irUt«ovt  JXxtai  or  Ipvtir.  (Herod.  L
173,  ii.  136.)

lie  Greeks  considered  perpendicalar  brick  walls
more  durable  than  stone,  and  inOndnced  them  in
their  greatest  public  edifices.  Brick  was  so  ono-
mon  at  Rome  a*  to  giro  occasion  to  the  remorit  of
the  emperor  Augustus  in  reference  lo  his  improve-
ments, that,  having  found  it  brick  (luteritiamX  ha
had  left  it  marble.  (Sueton. ^  19. 29.)  TheBaby-
Ionian  bricks  aiv  commonly  fbond  in«mbed  with
the  characters  colled  from  their  appearance  arrow-
headed  or  cuneiform.  It  is  probable  that  thi-se  in-
scriptions recorded  the  time  and  placs  where  the
bricks  were  made.  The  same  pncticA  was  enjoined
by  law  upon  the  Roman  hrickmakera.  Each  bad
his  mark,  such  as  Ihe  figure  of  a  god,  a  {Jant,  or

the  name  of  the  place,  of  the  conxilatr,  or  of  Ihe
owner  of  die  kiln  or  the  bhdtfield. (Seroux


LATERNA.
('ABincomt,  Rfe.  de  Prai/menM,  pp.  82—08.)  It
hu  beni  nbKiTcd  by  Micral  uitiqiunM,  that  thsM
imprinu  upon  bridu  might  [tinv  coiuidembis
Ii)lkt  upon  the  hiitory  uid  sndent  geognphj  of
tbe  places  whera  they  are  fboitd.  Mr.  P,  K.
Wieiier  bu  aotirdiu^jF  traced  the  23iid  legisD
throDgb  B  gml  port  of  OenoBDy  by  the  bncki
which  bear  iti  name.  (Di  Ltg.  Sont.  tie,  oc,
0,  p.  106—137.)  InBritunmany
n  bticki  han  been  fbnnd  in  the  coontiy  of
lb«  Silum,  eipeciall;  at  Caer-lean,  with  the  in-
KTtptiMi  LEO.  II.  AVO.  itamped  spun  Ihein.
{Aniaeoliigia,  t.  p.3£.)  Tbe  bricka,  fiequentlj
dueoTend  M  Yak,  attnt  the  pnnmce  there  of  the
Gth  and  9tb  legioitt.  (Wellbdored'a  Ebmraeam,
pp.  15,  34,  US).

Tba  tcmi  Zntemi&u  «M  applied  to  Tuioii*  fm-
doetioni  of  tbe  ih^ie  tf  bricka,  nich  u  pailiy  a
confeetionerj  (PlauL  Poai.  I  3.  116  ;  Cato,  da
Bt  Bum.  109)  1  and  f»  tbe  mma  leMon  iugoti  of
ftU  and  (ilTCi  ace  tailed  bMm.  (Plin.  H.  N.
™iiL  17.)  [J.  Y.]

LATEKNA  or  LANTBRNA  (I>nfi,ATuioph.
Par^  841  ;  Phenentn,  p.  36.  «d.  Rimkel ;  Av
XivvXM,  Pbijnichna,  Edog.  p.  69  j  id  later
(inek,  ^vii,  Athoi.  IT.  £8  ;  Pbiloi.  Gloa.),  a
lantcnL  Two  bronie  laatenH,  anutructed  with
nieeff  and  ikill,  have  heal  Ibiiiid  in  the  tuiiu  of
UtKnlaiKimi  aod  Pompeii.  One  of  them  u  le-
preaeotcd  in  the  annexed  woodcat.  lU  form  ii
ejlindrkaL  At  the  bottom  it  a  dicnUr  plate  of
metal.  Rating  oo  thne  belli.  Within  ia  ■  bronae
lamp  attached  to  tbe  centra  of  the  ba*o  and  pra-
■nird  with  an  eitingiiithcr,  ihown  on  the  right
hand  of  tbe  bmtem.  The  plata  of  tianitucent
h(ni.fonniiiK  the  lide^  prabMlj  had  no  qwRnre  j
but  tba  bcmupherical  coyot  may  be  laiKd  w  u  to
■dout  tba  band  and  to  Mrra  initead  of  «  door,  and
it  ii  abo  pcrinaled  with  bolt*  tbroagb  which  the
noaka  might  eacape.  To  the  two  npcight  pillan
■appBRing  the  fratne-work,  ■  front  new  of  one  of
vhieb  ii  ihowii  on  the  left  band  of  the  lantern,
(haina  are  attached  fiir  carrying  the  lauteni  by
nvana  of  tbe  handle  at  tbe  u^


a  later  glaai  was  slao  aubnitnted.
le  iDoat  tranaparent  horn
n  Carthage,  (PlauL  AW.
i.  e.  30.)  When  the  lantem  waa  required  for
•r,  tbe  lasip  wai  lighted  and  placed  within  it.


LATINITA3.  6C9

(Pherocmtei,  p.  21.)  It  wa»  canicd  by  a  elate
(PlauL  AapiilT.  FrO.  149,  i.  1.  JB6  j  Val.  Max.
vi  8.  g  1),  who  wu  called  the  tabmariia.  (Cic
w«t9.)  [J.Y,]

LATICLA'Vn.  [CtivuB.]
LATI'NAE  FBTUAE.  [FKitiAa.]
LATI-NITAS,  LATIUM,  JUS  LA'TII  (t*
ffaADi:V''>'o>' AoTtiav,  SCrab.  p.  186,  CasBub.  ;Aot1w
Sdcoun',  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  'IS.)  All  theic  eicpreiiion*
tie  nied  after  die  Social  war  to  ligni^  a  eennin
itntDj  intecmedista  between  that  of  Civei  and
PffivgrinL  The  word  **  Latinitaa"  occun  in  Cicero
{ad  AIL  XIT.  13),  when  be  is  apcoking  of  the  U-
tinitai  bemg  given  to  the  Siculi  after  Caeaar'i
death.  Before  the  pauin^  of  the  Lex  Julia  de
Civitate,  Latini  were  the  citUena  of  the  old  town*
of  t\a  I^tin  nation,  with  the  exception  of  those
which  wera  luaed  (o  the  tank  of  municipiH :  it
alio  comprehended  the  cohisiae  lAtinoe.  There
were  before  tbe  Lex  Jutia  only  two  clasaes,  Civea
and  Perfgrini  ;  and  Pere^ni  GamprcbeDdcd  the
T^tini^  Socil,  and  the  Provmciales,  or  the  free  anb-
jecta  of  tbe  Romans  beyond  the  limits  of  Italy.
AboaC  the  year  n.c.  89,  a  Lei  Pompeia  gate  the
Jos  Latii  to  all  tbe  Tianipadaui,  and  the  privilege
'  ^taining  the  Roman  dtitaa  by  having  filled  a
._...  ■.  .,  .J  ^^1^  jjjj^  j^  denote  the
inapadani,  the  inird  Lalinilaa
wu  need,  which  since  the  paiaing  of  the  Lex  Julia
had  loat  ita  pRq>ei  signification  ;  and  thia  wu  the
origin  of  that  lAtioitu  which  thenceforth  ejlated
to  the  time  of  Jnitinian.  This  new  Ijitinitaa  or
Jus  Lalii  was  given  to  whole  towns  and  countries ;
as  for  instance  by  Veapasian  to  tho  whole  of  Spain
(Plio.  HiiL  NaL  ilL  1) ;  and  to  certain  Alpine
tribes  [Lalio  domati.  Id.  iil  20).  Hadrianna  gave
the  Idtium  (Lotiom  dedit)  to  many  ciUei.  (SparL
Hadrian.  21).

Thia  new  LaUnitai  wai  given  not  only  to  tovat
already  existing,  but  to  towna  which  were  founded
Mibaequently  to  tbe  Lex  Fompeia,  u  Latioae  Co-
lonise I  fiir  instance  Novum-Comum,  which  waa
foonded  B.C  59  by  Caeaat  (Appian,  B.  C.  iL
2G,)  Several  Latin  towns  of  tbii  clois  are  men-
tioned by  Pliny,  especially  in  Spain.

Though  the  origui  of  thia  Latinitas,  which  makes
so  pcominent  a  figun  in  the  Roman  Juiista,  ia  cer-
tain, it  ia  not  certain  wherein  It  difiued  from  that
Laliaitu  which  wu  the  cboracterlitic  of  tbe  Latini
before  the  [oaiQg  of  tbe  Julia  Lex.  It  ia  bowerer
clear  that  all  the  old  Latini  hod  not  tbe  aame
rights,  with  respect  to  Rome  ;  and  that  they  could
acquire  the  civitaa  on  easier  terms  than  those  by
wluch  the  new  Lalinitaa  waa  acquired.  (Liv.  ili,
12.)  Accocdin^y  the  righta  of  the  old  Latini
might  be  exj^eued  by  tba  teem  Majoa  Latiom,
and  those  of^  the  new  latini  by  the  term  Minus
Latium,  according  to  Niebuhr'a  ingcnioua  emenda'
tion  of  Oaius  (L  96).  The  Majna  Latium  might
be  considered  to  be  equivalent  to  tbe  Idtium  An-
tiquum and  Vetua  of  Pliny  (iv.  23)  ;  for  Pliny,  in
deeeribing  tbe  towns  of  Spain,  alwnyi  describes
the  [Ooper  caloujei  as  conauttng  *'  Civimn  Romo-
nonuo,^  while  he  describes  other  towna  as  consiat-
Latmonun  "  aimply,  and  eometimca
veteram,"  or  >a  conaisling  of  oppidBoi
"Latii  veteria  ;"  Arim  which  an  onwaitioa  be-
tween Latini  Veterca  and  lAtini  aimiily  might  bo
inferred.  But  a  careful  examination  of  Pliny
rather  leads  to  the  concluiion  that  bis  Latuii  Ve-
tcn:a  uid  Lnliui  arc  the  lamc,  and  that  by  tliuie


670  LATINITAS.

tenru  he  merely  detignates  the  Lntini  Colo
hereafter  racnligned. Tim  emendation  of  Uiebuhr
ii  therefore  not  atipported  by  then  pusogo  of
Pliny,  snd  tbocgb  ingenioni,  it  oiigbt  pcrbapi
be  rejected  i  not  for  the  refl»on«  anigned  by  Ha
vig,  which  Sariftny  bu  anawered,  but  becaiue
does  not  appeal  to  be  canntteDt  with  tha  whole
conleit  of  Qaiai.

The  new  Lntini  had  not  the  eonnabiuni ;  and
ii  ■  doubtful  quHlion  whether  the  old  Latuii  had
it. The  new  Latjni  had  the  commeicinoi.

Tbia  new  Latinitoa,  which  waa  given  to  the
Tnnapndani,  wa«  that  legal  atatua  which  the  Lex
Junm  NorbBlul  gave  to  a  numoona  clau  of  fieed-
iDon,  hence  called  Latini  Juniani.  (Oaiui,  L  2-2,
iii.  56;  Ulp.*Vq?.  titi.)  Thedalaoflhialc  ■
Dot  ucertaiued ;  but  it  ia  fiied  wilb  Kime
bability  at  A.  U.  C.  772.  iLatim  Jimiami,  by
C.  A.  Von  Vangemw,  Marbutg,  1833.)

The  Latini  Coloniarii,  who  ire  mentioned  by
Illpian  (fVi^,  III.  i.4),aretheinha))itantgoftowm
beyond  Italy,  to  whom  the  Latinilai  waa  giien.
I'liese  are  the  towna  which  Pliny  calla  "  oppida
LiiiinomRiTclenuQ,''andenunientet  with  the  "op-
pida ciiiiun  Ronuuionini  **  (iii.  3),  which  were
military  coloniei  of  Roman  eitiiena.  The  paeugea
in  which  the  Latini  Cobniarii  are  meouoned,  aa  ■
clau  then  eiiiling,  mnat  hare  been  written  betbrs
Catacalla  gate  the  Civitaa  la  the  whole  empire.

Tbnc,  which  are  the  viewa  of  SaTigny  on  thia
difficult  lubject,  are  contained  in  the  J&tdatn/),  Tot.
ix.  Der  R'6m.  FaliaeAl*!!  dar  Ta/H  vm  Heracita,

The  Latini  could  acquire  tbe  Joi  Qairitium,  ac-
cording to  Ulpian  {Frag,  tit,  iii.  De  iMtinii),  in
the  following  waya:  —  Bj  the  Beneficinm  Princi-
pate,  Liberi,  Iteratio,  Militia,  Navia,  Aediiiciuin,
Piatrinnm ;  and  by  a  Senatua-conaultum  it  wui
given  toa  female  ^valgoquae  ait  tercnixiL'^  Thete
variaua  modea  of  acquiring  the  civitaa  are  treated
in  detail  by  Ulpian,  from  which,  aa  well  aa  the
connection  of  thia  title  "  De  Latinia"  with  the
Ent  tide  which  i>  "  De  Libertia,"  it  appean  that
he  only  treated  of  the  modea  in  which  the  civitm
might  be  acquired  by  thoae  latini  who  were  Li-
betti.  The  aame  remark  appliea  to  the  obaerva-
tiona  of  Oaina  <L  QB)  on  tbe  aame  tubject  (Qufu
tHor/ii  Latini  ad  Civitaiem  Honamtm  ptrremaid).
In  apeaking  of  the  mnde  of  aeqnirina  the  civitaa
by  meana  of  Liberi,  Oaioa  apeaki  of  a  Latinua,  that
ia,  a  Liberma  latinua,  maitying  a  Roman  citiien,
or  a  lAtina  Coloniana,  or  a  woman  of  bia  ows  eon-
dition,  from  which  it  ia  clear  that  all  faia  reraariia
under  tbia  bead  apply  to  Liherti  Latini ;  and  it
alao  appcara  that  Oaiui  apeaka  of  the  Latini  Colo-
niaiii  ai  a  claia  eiisting  in  hia  time.  Neither
Ulpian  Dor  Oaiua  aayi  any  thing  on  the  mode  b^
which  a  Latinua  Colonioriua  might  otitain  the  Cin-

Savigny^  opiniona  on  the  nature  of  the  la-
^nitai  are  further  eiphiined  in  the  derentb
number  of  the  Ztiltdtri/t  {NaMr'd^  m  im
./HUenn  Aririln).  Richard  of  Cirencealer,  in
hi)  work  Dt  Silu  Brilaaniae,  apeaki  of  ten  citiea
in  Britain,  which  were  LaHo  jure  domaiati  and
Ibis  ia  a  complets  proof,  independent  of  other
proofa,  that  Richard  compiled  hia  work  from
grnnlne  materiala.  The  eipreeaion  "  Latium  Joa^
could  not  be  invented  by  a  monk,  and  he  here
lued  a  genniuB  term,  the  full  import  of  which
be  certainly  could  not  undentand.  See  alio  Civig,
LiBiaTua,  Manumimio.  [0.  L.]


LATBUNCULI.

LATROCI'NIUM,  LATHO'NES.  Anncd
penoni,  who  rebbed  othera  ubroad  on  tbe  public
roodi,  or  elaewhere,  wtn  called  Latrtmea,  and  their
crime  Latrocuwat.  Murder  waa  not  aa  eaaential
part  of  the  crime,  though  it  waa  frequently  an  a^
tompaniment.  (Sen.  deSsLT.  11 ;  Fealna,  p.  IIS,
ed.  Miiller  ;  Dig.  49.  tiL  15.  a  24,  SO.  tit.  16.
1. 118.)  Under  the  republic,  LatnHiea  were  appre-
hended by  the  public  ma^attntea,  auch  aa  coniuli
andpnetora,  and  fi>rthwiUi  executed  (Lit.  iixii.
29,41).  By  the  Ho  Conubi  gl<  A'tcoma  of  Iha
dictator  Snlla,  they  woe  chiued  with  aicarii,  and
pnniahed  with  dmth,  and  thii  law  eoatinued  in
force  in  the  imperial  period  (Panlua,  t.  23  ;  Dig.
46.  tit.  19.  •.2U.  3  15;  Sea.^£:(e«.a  ],  SpiM.
7  ;  Petron.  91).  The  Graaalora  wem  another
kind  of  rebbaia,  who  robbed  people  in  the  atreeli
cr  tcoda.  The  name  aeemt  to  have  been  originaUy
applied  to  thoae  robben,  who  did  not  carry  armt,
and  who  followed  th«r  trade  aluie.  Tbey  appear
lo  hare  been  daaaed  with  the  aicarii  by  tbe  Lei
Clomelia  ;  and  if  they  uaed  anni  or  were  onited
with  othera  in  committing  the  robbery,  they  wen
pnniihed  in  the  tame  manner  aa  lalmnci  (Cic.  d*
Falo,  16  ;  Suet.  Oct  32  ;  Dig.  46.  'at.  19.  i.  38.
9  10).  Comp.  Rein,  Bat  Crimmalnek  da  BiiKr,
pp.  424—426.

LATRU'NCULI  («*«(,  +*♦«),  dianghti.

le  invention  of  a  game  reannbling  diaaglita  waa

libuted  by  the  Greek*  to  Paiamedei  (Atucus,
gS).  ThegamatacertainlymentionedbyHDmer,
who  rvpreacnta  the  niton  of  Penelope  anuuiw
thenuelvea  with  it.  iOd.  L  107.)  Othen  ucribed
the  invention  to  the  Efcyptian  Theuth  (Plat.
Pkaedr.  a.  274  d.)  ;  and  the  paintingi  in  Egyptian
lombi,  which  are  rj'  ftr  higher  antiquity  ttum  any
Grecian  monumenta,  not  on&equcntlf  rrpreeeat
penona  employed  in  thia  recreatioo.  The  point-
ing, fiom  which  the  accempanying  woodcnt  ii
taken,  ta  on  a  papynu  preaened  in  the  Uaaenm
of  Antiquitiea  at  Leydan,  and  via  probaUy  made
'  1700  yewaB.c  It  ia  renaridiile  that  a
ii  here  repreaented  playing  aliwe  ;  wheieaa
oly  in  worka  of  Egyptian  art,  but  alao  on
Greek  pauited  vaica,  we  commonly  obaerTo  two
penooi  playing  together. For  thia  porpoae  than


two  acta  of  men,  one  eet  being  black,  the
white  or  red.  Being  intended  to  nprcaeat
liature  combat  between  two  armiea,  tbey  wen
called  Hldicn  (niUa,  Ovid.  Tn.1.  ii.  477),  («•
(toiici),  and  marauder)  (Intmaa,  dim.  Jufi'iitnii',
Orid.  AH.  AmaL  ii.  20S,  iiL  S57  ;  Mart  xiv.


LAUTUMIAE.
20 ;  Sen.  EpitL  107)  ;  mbo  CALCULI,  becanie
ilonc*  vera  ikvia  emplojad  (at  Ifaa  purpoae.  (Gell.
jcit.  I .}  Sonuitima  thej  wera  made  of  msMl  or
JTdC7,  v1m<  or  eKrltaiwart,  And  tbejr  were  vari-
Odt  «t>d  oftoQ  bnciCiil  in  tfaeir  foniu.  The  object
of  emit  plajn  wu  to  ffel  on*  of  hu  ■drenaiyH
mm  between  tiro  of  hu  own,  in  which  (bk  he
vBi  cnlitled  to  take  the  mu  kept  in  check  (Ovid,
IL  ee.;  Mait.  xir.  17),  or,  u  the  phnH  wu,  aBi-
pi^wM  {Sai.EpiiL  118),  Some  of  the  men  wen
obliged  to  be  mored  in  >  eertaia  dinctian  (ordaw),
'  end  were  ihetefotB  odled  oHi*arii;  othen  might
oTed  Kif  way,  and  were  ailed  ragi  (laid.


LECTICA.


671


Orip.i


1.67);


ehewL  which  i>  ceilainl;  a  game  of  great

Seneca  calb  the  boaid  <n  wkich  the  Bomani
pUjed  at  dnnghti,  taimla  latnaailaHa  (^piil.
118).  The  ipaca  into  which  the  b<wd  wai
diTided  wen  called  iwBidnu.  (HutTiL  71.)  The
ahncni,  npnaeated  at  me  1,  ia  oxMied  ^  fiie
line*.  Ai  five  men  were  ulowed  im  each  lide,  we
mj  Mipyoat  one  pUjer  to  anange  hi*  fiye  men  on
the  line*  at  the  bottom  of  the  ahunt,  and  the  other
to  place  hie  fin  moi  on  the  lame  lines  at  the  top,
*Bd  wo  ahall  ban  than  diipoMd  according  lo  the

Jhnti :  Pcdloz,  ii.  37 :  Eutath,  nt  Horn.  L  «.),
who  Hj  that  the  middle  line  of  the  £Te  wu  called
Ufk  yfyt/iin.  Bat  initead  of  five,  the  Qreeki  uid
RcoiBni  often  had  twelre  line*  on  the  board,
whence  the  game  m  played  wu  called  duodtem
■T^ita.  (Cic.<feO™t.i.«0!QuinliLiL2;  Ovid,
ArtAmaLw.  363.)  Indeed  there  can  be  little
doabt  that  Ihe  Utruncuti  mn  atni^ed  and  played
io  a  osnndnsble  miet;  of  mji,  u  ii  now  the
oeo  b  EgTpt  and  other  Uriental  coontrieL  (Kie-
hnhr,  AwAeMlr.  noot  Arabian,  toL  L  p.  1 12.)

Benda  pUjiitg  with  dianghtimen  only,  when

Ike  pma  mi  altogether  one  of  ikill,  the  ancienta

need  dice  (TneiKiB,  icvCbI)  at  the  aame  time,  ao

aa  to  combme  ehance  with  ■kill,  ai  we  do  in  back-

fwaiKia  or  tric-tnc (Ter,  JMpk.  W.  7.  23  ;

lud.  Orig.  zriii.  60  i  &unck.  An.  iiL  60  ;  Ikckei,

GW)w,*DLu.p.33S,&c)  (J.Y.]

LATOS  CLAVUS. [CLivuB  LiTiia.)

LAUDA'TIO  FUNEBRIS.  [FuNiia,p,M9«.]

LAURENTA'LIA. [LiMimi.u.J

LAUTIA. [LKtjiriig.]

LAUTU'MIAE, LAUTO'MIAE, LATO'-

MIAE,  or  LATC'HIAE  (beoTOf(i«  or  Xwrofilai,

IjU.  lapiddvtat),  ue  literally  niacea  when  Elraiei

are  cat,  or  qnarrieB ;  and  in  thii  lenje  the  word

AKrafiiai  ma  naed  by  the  Sicilian  Oieeki.  (Paendo.

Ahb.  aiCice.  Verr.  n. 1.  p.  161,  ed.  Orelli ;

coDiBe  Diodor.  Sic  iL  3fi  ;  Plant.  Pomd.  it.  2.

5,  OapL  iii.  fi.  6A  ;  Feitoa,  i,  e.  Latamiat.) Ia

IBTtieiilar,  howero',  the  uanM  lanlniDiae  wai  giren

to  the  paUio  (ciiou  of  SynenM^ It  lay  in  the


Dioaynoi  thetynnl.  (Aelian.  T.  f.
c  Verr.  t.  5i.)  Cieero,  who  had  ondoabtedly
•nn  it  himadf,  deienbti  it  (c  Verr.  t.  27)  at  an
imooiae  and  magnificent  work,  worthy  of  kioffi
■sd  tytanta.  It  wai  cot  to  an  immenae  depth  into
the  nUd  nek,  »  that  nothing  coutd  be  imagined
to  te  a  aafcr  or  atnnger  priaon  than  thia,  thoogh  it
had  BO  root  and  thai  left  the  priaonera  erpoaed  to
(he  heat  of  the  aon,  (he  rain,  and  the  coldnen  of
tba  Bigbli. ^Compare  Thacyd.  Tii.  87.) The


whole  waa  a  atadiun  in  length,  and  two  {dethra  in
widtL  (Aelian.  Ic)  It  wu  not  only  oard  u  B
priaon  for  Syiaciuan  criminala,  bat  other  Sicilian
towna  alao  had  their  criminala  often  ccmoTcd  to  it

The  Tullianum  at  Rome  wu  alao  aomelime*
tailed  Uutmniae.  [CARcaa.]  [L.8.]

LGCTI'CA  (iEAJi^,itAii-f3iw,or9opiuii>)  wua
kind  of  couch  or  litter,  in  which  peraons,  in  a  lying
poaition,  wen  tarried  &om  one  place  to  another.
They  may  be  divided  into  two  dauee,  tIx.,  thn«
which  were  naed  for  carrying  the  dead,  and  tfaoae
which  aerved  at  conTeniencei  for  the  living.

The  former  of  these  two  kinda  of  leclicae  (alao
called  lectka  iiuiebria,  lecticula,  lectna  funebria,
fentnun  or  capulom),  in  which  the  dead  were  car-
tied  to  the  giaie,  aeema  to  haTe  been  nied  among
the  Oreeka  and  Romani  ftom  ytrj  eariy  timet.  In
the  bcBD^  and  cealluieai  of  their  onamenla  theaa
leeticaa  rariod  aooordiog  to  the  rank  and  circmn-
atanceaoftbedeooued.  (Fl;Ktra,  p.  fi5S  a.  ]  The
lectica  oa  which  tho  body  of  Angoatiu  wu  caitied
to  the  giBTe,  wu  made  of  ivory  and  gold,  and  wu
covered  irith  coatly  dnpety  worked  of  purple  and
gold.  (Dion  Caaa.  Ivi  34  ;  compare  Dionya.  ^of.
Aon.  iv.  76 ;  Corn.  Nepoa,  Att.n.%i;  Taoit.
HuL  iil  67.)  Dnring  the  latter  period  of  the
empire  public  acmuita  (ftetiearii}  vren  appointed
for  the  porpoae  of  carrying  the  dead  to  the  gnve
without  any  eipente  to  £e  bmily  to  whom  the
'  bdooged. (Novell.  43  and  E9.) Itnn-


(Compare  Lipuna,  EbxL  i.  19  ;  Scheffcr,  Db  R§
FMailari,  il  6.  p.  89  i  Orater,  Iiacripl.  p.  954.
8  ;  BSttiger,  Sabima,  ToL  ii.  p,  200  ;  Agyablva,
Wandenagtn  durci  Pompla,)

Lecticae  lor  tick  peraona  and  invslidi  teem  like-
wiae  to  hate  been  in  nae  ia  Oreece  and  at  Rome
from  very  taily  timea,  and  their  conatniction  pro-
bably differed  ve^  little  from  that  of  a  lectica
fimelwia.  (Lii.  il  86  j  AonL  Vict  Dt  Fir.  lU.  e.
34.)  We  ^ao  frequently  read  that  generala  in
their  eampa,  when  they  had  reeeivcd  a  aerere
wound,  (E  when  they  woe  anfiering  from  ill  health,
made  nae  of  a  leotiai  to  be  carried  from  oaie  pbce
to  aootber.  (Lit.  xziv.  43  ;  VaL  Max.  il  8.  g  2  [
L7(  Sneton.  ^1^.91.)

Down  to  the  time  of  the  Chaoehi  we  do  not  hear
that  lectifae  wen  nud  at  Rome  fin-  any  other  par-
poeea  than  Ihoie  mentioned  above.  The  Oreeka,
however,  bed  lonj(  been  bmiliar  with  a  different
kind  of  lectica  (K\fni  or  i^opiuir),  which  waa  in-
troduced among  them  frera  Asia,  and  which  wu
more  an  article  of  luznry  than  anything  to  lupplj
an  actoal  want.  It  conaiated  of  a  bed  or  mattreat
and  a  pillow  to  aapport  the  head,  placed  upon  a
kind  of  bedBtesd  or  couch.  It  had  a  roof  -  conaiil-
ing  of  the  akin  of  an  ox,  ertendtng  over  the  couch
and  letting  on  four  po^  The  aidea  of  thu  lec-
tica waie  eoTared  «i^  cnrtaint  (ofiAofai). It  ap-


672


LECTICA.


peon  to  !iuT«  b«n  chitfly  used  by  wonien  (Suii
$4  n  ^puoy),  and  bj  men  onlj  wbcn  thpy  were
inillhcallli.  (Asiajx.  ap  Attea.  lu.  p.£33,  &c;
Plut.  PericL  27  ;  Lyiioi,  Ite  Vula.  Fratn.  p.  1 72  ;
Andocid.  DeMyiL  p.  30  ;  PluLfJanoi.  14.)  If
K  mmi  •rithoot  any  pajtiial  neoeuitjr  made  me  of
a  iNtica,  ha  draw  upon  hinueli  ihe  cennue  o(  hia
canntiymen  u  a  ■genua  of  cftEmuiata  ehaincter.
(OinBjrcb.  e.  DamMk.  p.  29.)  But  in  tke  time
■DbtequecC  ta  the  MACodonian  ccnqueita  in  Aua,
Jecticae  irero  not  only  moTe  genaially  med  in
Greece,  bnt  wete  a]»  more  mBgnlficenlly  adorned.
(Plut.  AraL  17.) Tfae  pcmtu  or  (Uiea  vbo  cai~

called  popta^pot  (Diofl.  Laert  t.  4.  §  73),  and
their  nnmbec  nai  generally  two  or  (our.  (Luciau,
Epiil.  SaturH.  28  ;  .Sbwi.  t.  GalL  10  ;  C>M.  9  ;
compate  Becker,  doriUei,  iL  p.71.  &c.) When


Tery  leldom  in  the  city  of  Rome  itKlt  The  fint
trace  of  inch  a  lecticB  u  in  a  fragment  of  a  apeech
of  C.  Qracchiu,  qooted  b^  Oelliua  (i.  3).  From
thit  pouage  it  Kcmi  endenl  ihat  thit  attida  of
lujniiy  wu  intndnced  into  Italy  hvm  Alia,  and
that  at  the  time  Kaieely  any  oihei  lectica  than  the
lectica  fimebrii  wai  knam  to  the  countiy  people
about  Rone.  It  alio  ^ipean  from  thii  pataage
that  the  lecUca  then  ipolien  of  wai  corered  ;  other-
wiie  the  countiTman  conld  not  have  aiked  whether
they  were  canying  ■  dead  body.  {Cfflnpare  Cic
ehiUp.  iL  iS  ;  Plut.  Cic  46  ;  Dion  Cait.  zlviL  10.)
The  n«emb!aiiee  of  gnch  a  lectica  uied  b^  the  Ro-
man* to  that  which  tb«  Orceki  had  rcceired  fhini
Alia  i>  monifeat  from  the  wordi  of  Martial  (xL
9G) :  lectita  tula  peila  tuloaie.  It  had  a  loof  eoD-
aiating  of  a  large  piece  of  uln  or  leather  expanded
over  It  and  Ripporled  by  four  poita,  and  the  aides
■lu  were  covered  with  eurtaiiu  {irla,  f/aga*,  at
pf«7^  ;  compare  Senec  ^Mt  i.  G  ;  Soet  TVt  1 0).
During  the  time  of  the  empire,  however,  the  cur-
tnini  were  not  thought  a  nifEcient  protection  for  a
lectica  ;  and,  crauequentlj,  we  End  that  lecticae  uicd
by  men  as  well  ai  women,  were  eloied  on  the  aidei
with  windows  made  of  trajuparent  stone  {tofnr
tpaxlarit),  whence  Juienal  (ir.  20)  calls  nich  a

paie  Jut.  iiL  239.)  We  iraaetimes  and  menUon
Bf  a.  lectin  aperta  (Cic  PIA.  il  24),  bnt  we  have
no  reuon  to  suppou  that  in  Ihii  ease  it  had  no
nof^  fiir  the  adjective  aperta  prabably  means  no-
thing more  than  that  the  curtains  were  remored,
i.  «■  either  ihnwn  aside  or  drawn  ap.  The
whole  lectica  was  of  an  oblong  form,  and  the  pei-
>on  conreyed  in  it  lay  on  a  btd,  and  tho  head
was  sapported  by  a  pillow,  so  that  he  might
Tead  and  write  in  it  with  ease.  To  what  eiteni
the  luxury  of  baring  a  soft  and  pleasant  bed  in  a
lectica  was  cairied,  as  cariy  as  the  tima  of  Cicero,
may  be  seen  bom  one  of  his  oiatioai  ngainsl
Veirei  (v.  11).  Feathei-b^ds  seem  to  ban  been
Tcry  common.  (Ja*.  1.  159,  &c)  The  bame.
work,  ai  welt  as  the  other  appmlenances,  were,
with  wealthy  persons,  piobabty  of  the  mnat  coillj
deecription.  The  lecUca,  when  standing,  rested  on
four  feel,  gmerally  made  of  wood.  Ponona  were
canied  in  a  lectica  by  ilarea  {Itcticaru)  by  means
of  poles  (awm)  attached  to  it,  but  not  fixed,  so
that  they  might  easily  be  taken  off  when  neces-
nry.  <gueton.C<i%.58  ;  Juv.iiL  123,  iii.  2U  i
Miinial,ix.23.9;> There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the


LECTICA.

ouerea  Tested  m  the  shoulders  of  the  lec^carii,  and
not  on  thong*  which  passed  round  the  necki  of  these
slaTea  and  bung  down  £nm  their  shoulders,  as
some  modem  writers  have  thought.  (Soiec.  .Z^AitL
eO.  110  ;  TertulL  ad  Vior.  I  4  ;  Clem.  Alex.
Fatdag.  iii.  i  ;  Jat.  iiL  240,  ix.  142.)  The  act
of  taking  the  lectica  upon  the  ihootders  was  called
aumllan  {Plai.H.N.  ixiT.  lOj  Sueton.  Oluwl.
10),  and  the  penons  who  wcse  carried  in  thii
manner  wen  said  luaxJlari  (Sueton.  Otim,  6).
Flom  this  paisase  we  also  torn  that  the  name
rectly  applied  to  tboav
sella  01


dapcnon
BTof  lecUcai


chair.  The  number  of  lec^carii  employed  in  carry'
ing  one  lectica  varied  according  (o  it*  tiie,  and  the
display  of  wealth  which  a  person  might  wish  ta
make.  The  ordinary  nnmbct  was  probably  two
(Petn>n.&K.S6(JuT.  ix.  142);  but  itiariedfrom
two  to  eight,  and  the  lectica  is  called  hex^ili<aun
or  octopboron,  accordingly  as  it  was  carried  by  six
or  eight  penoni,  (Jut.  L  G4  ;  Marl  iL  8t,  tL  77;
Cicc.  ViTT.  T.  11,  adQumt  iL  10.)  Wealthy
Romans  kept  certojn  slaTH  solely  ai  Uieir  lecticarii
(Cic  ad  Fam.  IT.  12)  ;  and  fiir  this  purpose  they
generally  selected  the  tallast,  stnngeit,  and  moat
handsome  men,  and  had  than  alarays  well  dnawd.
In  the  time  of  Martial  it  seems  to  hare  been  cns-
tomaiy  for  tin  lecCicarii  to  waai  beautiiid  red  live-
liea.  The  lecticswiageneiaUy  preceded  byaslare
called  anteombulo,  whose  office  was  to  make  room
for  it.  (Martial,  iiL  46  ;  Piin.  EpiMt,  iii.  U  ;  com-
pire  Becker,  Oi/f  as,;,  p.213,  &c>

Shortly  after  the  iotroductioii  of  these  lecticaa
among  tho  Etnmani,and  during  the  latter  period  of
the  republic,  they  ^ipear  to  hsTa  been  very  com-
mon, though  they  were  chiefly  used  iji  joumeyt,  and
in  the  dtj  of  Rome  itielf  only  by  ladies  and  in-
Talids.  (Dion  Caas.  IviL  17.)  But  the  love  of  this
as  well  as  of  othn  kinds  of  luxury  increased  so
rapidly,  that  Julius  Caesai  thought  it  neceaiaiy  (a
reitisin  the  use  of  lecUcaa,  and  to  confine  the  pri-
vilege ctf  using  them  to  certain  pcnous  of  a  certain
age,  and  to  certain  days  of  the  yeai.  (SueCoo.
010.43.)

In  the  reign  oftHnudius  we  End  that  the  piinjc^
of  using  a  lectica  in  the  city  was  still  a  pvat  dis-
tinction, which  was  only  granted  by  the  empcra
to  hi*  eipeeial  favoaritet.  (SuaL  OibkI  28.)  But
what  until  then  bad  been  a  privilege  became  gra-
dually a  right  aasumed  by  all,  luid  every  wealthy
Roman  kept  one  or  more  lectise,  with  the  reqai*ite
number  of  lecticarii.  The  emperor  Domilian,  how-
ever, forboda  praatitutei  the  uH  of  lecticae,  (SueL
Domii.  e.)  Entecprising  individuals  gradually  be-
gan to  form  compauicj  {corprnt  lecHfarhrva),  and
to  establish  public  lecticae,  which  had  their  ataods
(autnt  hdicanonm)  in  the  regio  tianatiberiria,
and  probably  in  olha  parta  also,  where  an;  one
might  take  a  lectica  on  hire.  (Victor,  £>  Jti,gioaA.
Urb.  Rum.  in  OiaeTii  TheMur.  iiL  p.  49  ;  Martial,
iii.  4G.)  The  perKins  of  wbom  these  campoica
consisted,  were  piobabty  of  Iha  lower  ordien  a
fteedmen.  (Compare  Qmiar,  /hv^  599.  11,
600.  1.)

The  lecticae  of  which  ■•  have  Ulbeito  speken,
were  all  portable,  i. «.  (Iiay  were  eonstnMed  in
such  a  manner  that  the  assarts  might  easily  be
bstened  to  thetn  whenever  it  was  naceoary  to
carry  a  person  in  them  bma  one  place  to  anothec.


mA,  itIikIi  «m  dm  atrni  out  af  tbe  honu.
On  it  tha  Romaiu  £r«qDeiitly  ndiued  fbi  the  pur-
pow  if  raading  or  miting,  lor  the  ■ncisnti  when
"m  «t  St  ■  taUe  a*  WB  do,butgenenlI)-
■  coach ;  in  thii  pDMuio  th^  niied
>d  jiHO  it  thej  pliiced  the  pMchment
vfaidi  they  wrote.  From  thii  kind  of
D  thfl  •opha  WBi  called  iHttcula  lucuhn-

■  (SiwL  Aiiff.  78),  or  nwn  commoulj  lectuhu.
(Plm..^iu(.*.  5;  Orid,7Hi(.  L  1).  M  ;  a>m|Bn
AJrtorph,  Di  Ltticu  Fcfanm  Diatriba,  Amrtei-
dun,  17CM.>  [L.S.]

LECTICA-RIL [L«ctic*.]

LECTlSTEltNIUM.  SacrifioM  being  of  tlie
naiQiie  of  leaata,  the  Oneki  and  Romani  on  occa-
■ioa  of  BitiaonliDarjr  tolemnjtiea  placed  imi^ea  t>f
the  god*  Rdinbg  on  concha^  with  tablet  and
Tknda  beKm  them,  u  if  tiwy  mre  ttallj  partaking
(f  the  Ilimg*  oBicnd  in  woifice^  Thit  ceronHm;
V**  called  ■  bttukrmiim.  Three  ^lecinieaa  of
lb*  cooekw  <a|l1or«d  lot  the  pnipoee  ue  in  the
Glfptotek  at  Monkh.  The  woodcut  hen  intn-
diced  •xhiUb  CM  tt  them,  which  i*  lepneented
with  a  aabioli  eoncrad  b;  >  cloth  bulging  in
aaple  fald*  down  each  tide.  Thii  bcaotiAil  jhU-
tmar  (Soefaio.  JtL  76 ;  Otm.  Nep.  Timcdi.  "'  '
wnof  ht  altogether  in  while  mirble,  and  ii  i


wfca  toon  thu  two  feet  in  faeigbt.  At  the
Efiimm  Jmiit,  which  wu  the  aotl  noted  lecti-
MmuBB  at  Baue,  and  which  wu  celebrated  in  the
C^lat,the  rtatne  of  Jupilerwaa  laid  in  a  reclining
PMua  on  a  conch,  while  thoH  of  Jono  and
Hiaerra  vet«  acated  on  chain  bj  bii  lide  ;  and
Ihii  diatinction  wu  oheenred  in  allmion  to  the
laeient  caihni,  acoKding  to  which  ixAj  men  re-
dined  and  wooiai  nt  at  table.  (VaLMax.iil.
I  2.)  NentthelcH  it  ii  probable  that  at  a  btar
poiod  both  godi  and  goddeaiea  were  repmented
in  the  HSM  pDdtiini :  at  Icaat  bur  of  them,  til
JapilCT  Smpii  RDd  Jnno  or  liii,  tDvether  with
Apalla  and  ffiwu,  are  to  exhibited  with  a  table
bttea  tbem  on  the  lundlo  of  a  Roman  Ump  en-
pared  bf  Bkiti^  {Lac  AnLiLi*.)  LiTj(v.  13}
gini  m  accODDt  of  a  Tcry  ^itendid  lectiiteminm,
which  ha  atacrta  to  haTo  been  the  origin  of  the

LECTUS  (*^x«.  **f*>r,  •M),  a  bed.  '  Jn  the
bemie  wea  of  Oreeca  bedi  were  t«j  limple  j  the
bfdetntdji,  bowerei,  are  •mnetimea  re|vewilad  aa
iraiwmttd  (Tpirri  \4xfa,  IL  Hi.  448 ;  compaie
O^  xiiii.219,  &£.).  The  principal  potU  of  a
bed  were  the  xAium  and  Mt"  iOdfu.  xix.  S37);
the  ftnner  were  a  kind  of  thick  woollen  elnk,
»— etiaiea  adanred,  which  waa  in  bad  weatbei
wiD  by  mn  orer  their  x"-*-,  and  wai  wmetimea
^■(■d  ant  •  chair  to  imtdar  the  hM  ioft. That


LECTUS.  e7S

tbeie  x^iuVu  acTTcd  ai  blanket!  for  panooi  m
their  ilecp,  i>  aeen  htm  Odyn.  lir.  4B8,  600,  604,
£1 3,  A29,  u.  4.  The  Mt«i,  on  the  other  hand,
were  probably  a  aofler  and  more  eoitly  kind  of
woollen  doth,  and  were  used  chiefly  by  peraont  of
high  ninli.  They  were,  like  Uie  x*^'*^  tome-
timei  need  to  cover  the  Hat  of  ebain  when  pereone
wanted  lo  ait  down.  ((Ujh.  i.  352.)  Torendei
thia  thick  woollen  itnif  leat  diufmsble,  a  linen
cloth  waa  aemetimei  ^read  orei  it.  {Odgtt.  liii.
73.)  It  ha*  been  luppoHd  that  tbe  Jrinta  wen
pillow*  or  boUtert ;  bat  thii  opinion  aecou  to  be
lefiited  fay  tbe  cimmiitancB  that,  in  Odfa.  V\.
38,  ihey  are  deacribed  oa  being  washed  without
uijthii»  being  (aid  aa  to  any  opeistiDn  which
would  Eaie  neceuanty  preceded  the  waihii^  had
Ihey  been  pillowa  Beyond  thii  tappoutiou  re-
ipecting  the  Myn,  we  have  no  tracea  of  piUowi
IS  bolater*  being  Died  in  the  Homeric  agcv  The
bedil«d  {Kix't,  Xl/ctpor,  U/irutr)  of  peraona  of
hub  rank  wa*  coTcrcd  with  ikini  («i«i)  npcm
which  tbe  ^fiytn  were  placed,  and  orer  theee  linen
iheela  or  caipeta  were  aprcad  ;  tho  ^cAtuvo,  laitly,
•erred  aa  a  corer  or  blanket  for  the  ileeper.  {Oifya.
It.  298,  &t  :  IL  iiIt.  643,  Ac.  ;  ii.  660,  &c.)
Poor  peraona  alept  on  ikini  or  bedt  of  dry  herlia
ipread  on  tbe  ground.  (Odytt.  in.  519  ;  u.  13S,
&c  ;  li.  laS,  &c  ;  compare  Nituch,  tw  Odfu.
ToLi.a310.)  Tbeieaimplebedi,  to  which  iboitly
after  Uie  Homeiie  age  a  pillow  for  the  head  wai
added,  continued  to  be  need  by  the  poorer  chiMca
aoiDDg  the  Orecki  at  all  limea.  Thua  (he  bed  of
the  orator  Lycurgni  ii  nid  to  have  coniiited  of
one  ihaep-ikin  (irMwv)  and  a  piUow.  (PlaL  Vtf.
Die.  Om.  Ljcarg.  p.  842.  c)  But  the  cBmpleta
bed  (i^) of  a  wealthy  Qieek  in  later  timeo,

Setally  coniitled  of  the  following  parti :  K>dnt,
ronu,  TuAiiiv  or  itv4^a\or,  rpoffaf^dAeior,  and


fitted  inui  one  another  and  retting  u.
At  the  bind  part  alone  there  wai  a  board  {ii^Au^
rptr  or  HatXirtftii)  to  inpporl  the  pillow  and  pre-
Tcnt  it!  &lling  ouL  Sometimea  the  ikviKKirrpov
vu  wanting,  aa  we  lee  in  diawingi  on  ancient
Tatet.  (PoUui,  I.  34,  tL  9.)  Sometimea,  however,
the  bottom  part  of  a  beditead  waa  likewiia  pro-
tected by  the  board,  to  that  in  tbli  com  a  Greek
bedatad  reiembled  a  modem  ao-called  French  bed-
Mead.  Tbe  IhW  wai  generally  made  of  wood,
which  in  quality  varied  according  to  tbo  meant  of
the  peraona  tor  whoio  dh  it  waa  deitined  ;  for  in
Mune  caaea  we  find  that  it  wai  made  of  tolid
maple  or  boi-wood,  or  veneered  with  a  coatina  of
theae  more  eipenaive  wood).  At  a  later  penod,
bedateoda  were  not  only  made  of  Mild  ivory  or
Teneend  with  tortoiaeahell,  bnC  aometimea  had
iil*er  feet.  (PoUui,  I  c  ;  Aelian,  F.H.  lii.  29  ;
Atheo.  li.  p.  USS.)

Tbe  bedilead  wai  pnnided  with  girtha  (tJ»i,

hlTafH, Mtifla)  on  which  tbe  bed  or  matlreaa

(uri^akar,  Tii\iiai>,  icoiMf  or  rikii)  retted  ;  in-

itead  of  theae  girtha  poorer  people  naed  ttringi.

CAriatopL  Av.  1114,  with  the  Schd.) Tbe  cover

or  ticking  of  a  mattreai  waa  made  of  linen  or  wocl-

dolh,  or  of  leafier,  and  the  nana!  material  witn

ich  it  wat  filled  {rh  iiitaXt^iunr,  ir>Jifiii/ia,

yrd^aXim)  waa  dther  wool  or  dried  weeda. At

I  head  part  of  the  bed,  and  lupporled  by  the

iwtx/jrrpm',  hj  a  nmnd  {uUow  (vpocuffdMur}


GT4  LECTUS.

to  nippart  the  bead  ;  uid  in  Mma  ancient  pictum
two  other  iqusrc  pillowi  am  twn,  which  wore  in-
tended to  tnpport  tba  baik. The  conn  of  luch

wen  tbetefbre  probsbl;  of  nrioui  coIddii.  The;
wen  DndoBbledl;  filled  with  tha  itiue  mataialt
u  tbe  bedi  and  mattrewn.

The  bed-coTem,  which  may  be  termed  blanketa
or  couiiterfancs,  were  called  by  a  TBiiety  of  noma,
■uch  a*  mptffrptitum^  virm^pfipvra,  ivtS\4i}urra^
iprifTpiifs,  ^uATtu,  d^jftfTpiVtfr,  inSi^aui^  Bd-

or  i»ii(iiTiiri|T(f ,  The  comtoon  name,  howcTer,  wai
ffT/xijuiTii.  Tbey  were  generally  made  of  cloth,
which  wx  Tcry  thick  and  woolly  either  on  one
or  on  both  lidet  (Polliii,  Ti,  S,)  'it  ii  not
always  HAy  to  dlitinguiih  whether  the  anctenti,
when  ipeaking  of  tAftu,  mean  bi'di  in  our  trnu
of  the  word,  or  the  coucheB  aa  which  they  lay  at
meal  timet.  We  conKqnenlly  do  nol  know  whe-
ther  the  demiptiTs  epithet!  of  K\irai,  enmneialed
by  Pollui,  belong  to  Wi  or  to  couchei.  But  thi>
mallen  little,  ai  there  waa  Karcdy  any  difference
between  iha  bedi  of  the  ancienla  and  theii  couchea,
with  tbii  eicepliim,  that  the  latter  being  made  for
appeanuce  ai  well  at  for  comCbrt,  were,  on  the
whole,  undoubtedly  more  ndendid  and  coally  than
the  former.  Conaidenng,  however,  that  bedateadt
wen  often  made  of  the  moat  coally  materiala,  we
may  naaonably  infer  that  the  coTeringi  and  other
ocnamenu  of  hedi  were  little  inferior  to  thoM  of
couchet.  Nolwithitanding  the  aplendour  and  com-
fort of  many  Greek  bedi,  the  Aiialiet,  who  have
at  all  tunea  excelled  the  Europeana  in  tbeac  kindi
of  Iniuriea,  laid  that  the  Oreeli)  did  not  ondcr-
aland  how  to  make  a  comfortable  bed.  (Athen.  U.
n.  IB  i  PluL  Ptlt^.  SO.)  The  placet  moat  cele-
brated for  tha  manubctore  of  iplcndid  bed-coTen
wrtB  Miletus,  Corinth,  and  Carthage.  (Ariatoph.
Aw.  110,  £12,  with  theSchoL;  Lyiitlr.  732;
Cit  e.  Vtrr.  I  34  ;  Athen.  i.  op.  27,  28.)  It  ap-
peal! that  the  Oraek^  thougb  they  wore  night-
gown!, did  not  aimplf  cover  thcnuelTet  with  the
irrp^lfurra,  but  wrapt  themielTei  op  in  then.  Leaa
wealthy  pawna  eondnued,  according  to  the  ancient
cnttom,  to  uae  ikini  of  sbeep  and  other  Bnimali,
etpocially  in  winter,  ■!  blankett.  (Pollux,  x.  123  ;
AriitopL  Nui.  10.)

The  bedaieada  of  tha  poorer  claawi  an  de-
algnated  by  the  namca  oKtftxovt,  inritiirrjjs,  and
KpdtSoTos,  and  an  eiaggented  desmption  of  anch

' ' ' ' 1 by  AriatophaneL "*'  ■ • '"
' «tr.  916.) The
lich  origtnatly  lignified  a  bed  of


X.  Ij/cmy.  16),  were
plien  to  a  twd  which  wat  only  near  toe  gimnii,
to  diatingniih  it  from  the  iMnt  which  waa  gene-
lally  a  high  bedatoid.  Xi^w^u  wen  the  lUuBi
bedi  Ibr  iUto,  toldiert  in  lbs  field,  and  poor
ciliitut,  and  the  mattrsiaea  lued  in  them  wers  mare
matt  mode  of  niihet  or  batb  (PoUni,  L  o.,  and
ii.  11(  Becker,  Olariifat,  tiliL  fp.  114—123  ;
Pollux,  I.  c.  7,  a,  tI  1.)

The  beda  of  the  Romana  (UtH  eabiadani)  m  the
earlier  pcriodi  of  the  repnblic  were  probably  of  the
Bltne  description  at  thoae  uaed  in  Orecce  ;  but  to-
ward! the  end  of  the  republic  and  during  the
|iire, when  Aiiatie  luiuriai  were  import^


I  ire, when Aiiatie  luiu
tdy,  tbe  lichiMM  and  mi


LECTUa.

the  wealthy  Romans  fin  nrpam
find  dcacribed  in  Greece.  The  bedstead  WM  ge-
nerally rather  high,  lo  that  penoni  aDterad  tba
bed  (HowJcre,  aieamlirt)  by  means  of  atcpi  |daeed
beside  it  (mnuiMi,  Varro,  Jt  Lhff.  LaLr.  IBS,
MUUer  ;  O'id.  Fat.  iL  MS,  &c.).  It  was  aome-
tiuiet  nude  of  metal,  and  lometinna  of  coatly  kinda
of  wood  OTTenaeted  with  loTloiae-shell  or  iroiy  ;  ita
feel  (JUera)  were  freqaeolly  of  ailver  or  gidd.
(Plin-  ivi.  43  J  Mart.  liL  67  ;  Jut.  iL  94.)  The
bed  or  mattnia  (oi/nbi  and  fanit)  rested  upon
ginha  or  strings  (rss^^^jcne,  tiriftie,  oryisics)
which  connected  the  two  horiniDU  lide-posts  of
the  bed.  (Cic.  lU  Div.  n.  6&  ;  Mart  t.  63  ;
Petnn.  S7  ;  companllont  S^iod.  jjL  13  ;  Cats,
dt  HtRuiL  c.  10.)  In  beds  dettined  fir  two
penona,  the  two  lidea  an  diatinguiihed  bydiflenot
names  {  the  sidn  at  which  peraooa  aitaed  waa
open,  and  boto  the  nameof  qwai&i/  theotber  ade,
which  wat  protected  by  a  beard,  wat  called  plmltm.
(liider.  ii.ll.p.  6'29,  ed.  Liitdemaim.)  The  two
sides  of  such  a  bed  an  also  dittiagBJahed  l^  the
names  torus  alirwr  and  tana  mtonor,  or  tptmda
Arfrnor  and  tpanta  Htorior  (Grid.  Amor,  iii.  14.
32  ;  Sneton.  Can.  49)  ;  and  firom  theae  expna-
sionsititnotimprobablelbiitnichlceti  had  two  beds
or  mattrettet,  one  for  each  perton.  Hattiaaea  were
in  the  earlier  lime*  filled  with  dry  herta  (Vano,
Ic;  Orid./^>uf.i.200and30fi),oratraw(Hatat.
&ilii  3.  117;  Mart.  tit.  ISO;  Senee.  Da  FH.
Btat.  c  25],  and  luch  beds  contmned  to  be  naed
by  tbe  poor.  Bnt  in  SDbaeqnoit  timei  wool,  and
at  a  itill  later  period,  fcathen  wen  uaed  hy  tbe
wedtbyferlhebediaswellaitbepiUowB.  (Plin.
H.N.  Tiii.  48,  1.  22  ;  Plaut.  MiL  Olor.  it.  (.
42  i  Cic.  TbiD.  iii.  19  ;  Mart.  lit.  161  and  159.)


waa  called  tDral,lorale,linteum,OTKge*tre.  (Hotat.
Sat.  ii.  4,  84,  Epitt  L  fi.  21  ;  Vano,  te.)  The
blankets  or  counterponea  (hi^sj  tCra^alae,  ttrng^iiLt
ptrittrvmata^  peripetatmata)  wen  in  the  honaea  of
wealthy  Romans  of  the  moat  cottl;  deaenptioo,
and  generally  of  a  purple  colour  {ibvgmla  rtmtijilia


ibroidered  with  bnutiful  fignrea  ro  gM.
uoTen  of  this  !ort  wen  called  peripetaanata
Atlalica,  becanaa  tbey  wen  lud  to  bare  beea
fir!t  tiled  at  the  conrt  of  Attaha.  (Plin.  H.  K.
Le. ;  Cic  cKerr.  it.  12,  26,  Piiif.  ii.  27  ;  Mart.
iL  16.)  The  pillow!  wen  Ukewiae  corned  wiib
magnificant  catinfca  Whether  tbe  ancianta  bad
curtains  to  their  bedi  is  not  mcDtiDfied  aay-
when  1  but  a!  cuTtaina,  or  talber  a  kind  at  cmapf
((ujueii),  wen  uaed  in  the  leenu  tiietiniaiiB  (HonL
OartH.  iii.  S9.  If,  JU.  ii.  &  M)  for  tha  pmpoM

lying  on  it,  it  ia  not  inprobabls  ttiU  tbe  siSBe  cc


was  the  bridal

tbe  atiiuDi,  opposite  tbe  janoa,
c  oenTed  tha  epithet  adTcnna.  <Horu.
.  1,  87  ;  Festna,  s.  e.  ;  camp.  Dotsra,
.)  It  was  genaally  high,  with  iWpa  by
and  in  later  timet  beautifully  adcned.
356  ;  Cic  fn  Chml.


The  Mh  gaiiilit
bed  which  ttcod  ' '
whenco
Spill, i

(Gellius,
ci.)


I  phca  vbioh  tad  gnut  dccopied,  i>  giran
tfticLlinuv. (Becker,  Oalbu,  tdL  L  p.  42,


Ac)  [LS.]

LEfTTTB  US  (A4n#a>),a  fmsU  miiow-inoathed
TtMel,  tit*  piiDcipil  DM  of  which  «u  to  hold  o  ~
for  aiKHiitiBp  after  the  tatli,  uid  in  tho  palmeiti
It  mi  Muetinm  of  leather,  but  more  oflen
caTtben-ww& NnnoniH  lem-cottB  Teneli
thn  ■oti  (xu^  of  SB  on]  ihspe,  holding  about
pint,  gmenllj  painted  a  plain  daik  breirn  or  black,
bat  (onietinia  a  bright  odour,  while  a  fsw  ex-
BB|^  are  adonied  with  beantifiilt?  eiMnt«<t  paint-
inpra. Moit  of  them  are  the  prodneticni  of  tbg
Atbenkn  potteiMa. {Hum.  Od.  ri-TS; Kmnie,
Gjmm. M.  Ago*.  toI.  i.  p.  189, and in Panlj>i
Xtd-RKytiirS^'-'')  [PS.)

LEGATIO  LI'BERA.  [Lmatcs,  p.  678,  b,]
LEGATUM  ii  defined  (Dig.  SO.  a.  116}  to  be
*^  deUbatio  bereditatii  qua  teitatar  ex  eo  qnod  nni-
Tenani  heredii  font  aiieui  quid  collanim  Telit,"
Tbi*  lingiilar  imxeaiifHi  pRauppuet  a  oniienal
•Deeeaaisn.  fm  if  then  ii  no  hena  ex  tettsmento
or  poaon  loco  hendii,  then  can  be  no  legacj.  A
LegaliUB  then  ii  a  part  of  the  beredilu  which  a
tcatal'V  gi*e*  odt  of  it,  fnnn  the  berea  {ab  Afredg)  •
■hat  it,  It  ia  a  ^(i  to  a  penni  ont  of  that  whole
(naiBgraaat)  wbicb  ia  diminiahed  to  the  herea  by
•od  gift.  Afcordinglj  the  phnw  **  ab  beiede
teftte  "  thna  becomea  intelligible.  (Dig.  30.
t.  lis  ;  **ei  (eataniento  legU  gnuidem  peciuiiam  a
filio,"  Cic  pn  OmaiL  12.)  A  legatee  eoQld  Dot
be  charged  with  the  payment  of  a  legacy  out  of
what  waa  giieo  to  hint,  a  mle  of  law  which  wiu
Ifau  ciprtaaed,  "  A  legatario  legnri  non  poleal."
A  hialiiiii  WBB  Hunething  giren  according  to  the
Jna  ClTile,  and  therefore  could  onl^  ba  giTpn  in
diilia  Terba,  and  in  latin.  [Tmtxiiiniitm,]
The  word  **  Legatum,"  Enm  the  THb  liffo,  con-

■mat  of  qipointing  or  ditpoaiDg  of  ■  matter,  u  in
the  pbiaae  "  kfatom  negnliom  "  (FlonL  Ca$.  L  1.
IS)  ;  aod  it  it  need  in  the  Twetre  Tablea  to  ei-
prcM  gentiallj  a  teatator*!  diapoailion  of  hia  pn-
ptltj  0^  legaml,  Ac).  IJlpiBn  accordingly
eipUu  tha  wiHrd  Legatom  by  nfening  to  iti
Myanloity,  and  likenirg  a  Legatum  (o  a  Lei  pro-
pR^y  BO  called.  "  A  Legatom,"  he  n;i,  "  ii  that
wbicb  ia  left  by  a  tcMantent,  If^  modo,  that  ia,
imptrulkt;  for  Choae  things  which  are  left  ;>r«-
roCiiao  modOf  are  called  Fideicommiiaa.**  {Prttg.
tit  84.)  A  legatee  wai  named  Irgatariia:  thoae
to  whom  a  thing  was  given  jointly  {amjmdim)
w^re  cdlegatariL  A  l^cy  which  wu  legally
Taiid  or  good,  waa  hgatiim  utilt;  a  void  legacy  waa
A  legacy  which  waa  given  abaoliilely  or
■""■"""  ,  waa  nid  to  be  giien  para,-  one
n  coodilionaltj  waa  nid  to  be  gi*en
juA  LmiftViaiii.  The  eipreteion  panoa  lit^odun,  an
■noaoditiana]  lepey,  alao  occnia.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  2.
a.  6.)

Obiu  apolognea  tbt  treating  of  Legala  in  that
patt  of  hia  Inatitutional  work  in  which  he  hni
placed  them.  In  the  fint  ninetjr-six  ehaplenof  hia
■ccdod  book  he  treat!  of  the  aeqaiiitiiin  of  property
b  lb*  BBgnlae,  to  which  claaa  legaciea  belong.
Bat  H  the  matter  of  legaciea  ii  not  intelligible

aorroaal  aoceeiHOn,  he  plncea  the  law  of  legaciea
(ita«  jmtii  MaltHa) immediately  atker  tlut  of


LEOATUU.  erS

eaaSi  bo  left:  Per  Vindicalionen,  Per  Damna<
tionem,  Sinendi  modo,  Per  Pneceptienem.

A  legatom  per  lindicationem  waa  given  in  theae
word*:  "Honiinem  Stichum  Do,  Lego  ;"  or  the
words  mifht  be  with  reference  to  the  legatee,
"Capiat  Somilo,  Sihi  Habeto."  A  legatnm  per
lindicationem  waa  lo  called  with  refcrence  lo  the
legal  meana  by  which  the  legatee  aaeerted  hii  right
to  tho  legacy  againit  the  here*  or  any  pnaaeuor,
which  wai  by  a  lindicatio  or  an  Actio  in  rem  ;  for
as  aoon  aa  the  Hereditaba  aditio  had  taken  place,
the  legatee  had  the  Quiritarian  {ex  jure  Qantiiait)
iwnerahip  of  the  legacy.  The  two  ichoola  rHieed
1  qnettion  aa  lo  ihii,  Whether  mider  ancb  cireum.
atancet,  the  legatee  obtained  the  Quiritarian  cwner-
thip  of  the  thing  before  he  had  contented  to  take
it.  The  opinion  of  the  Proculiani  who  contended
for  mch  conKut,  trai  confirmed  by  a  Conititntion
of  Antoninoa  Pim  (Oaiua,  ii,  195).  It  wai  coa-
tiatenl  with  the  nature  of  the  Per  Vindicationem,
that  thoM  tbingi  only  conM  be  ao  given,  in  which
tho  teatalor  had  Quiritarian  ownerahip:  and  it  waa
neceuary  that  he  thonld  have  auch  owner-
bath  at  the  time  of  makmg  bit  will  and  at
time  of  hia  death  ;  otherwite  the  legacy  waa
Toid  (iaa(i&).  But  there  wna  an  exception  in
reapect  of  thingi  "  qnao  pondrre,  numero,  men-
~ara  constant,"  as  wine,  oil,  com,  and  the  pre-
iooa  metals  in  the  farm '  -  ■ '


Tkat  «<n  Gmt  I^tfl  (drm  ia  which  a  legacy


in  regard
T  had  th<


which  il  waa  sulGcie


tho Quiritarian  ownership  at  the
I  of  hi*  death. By  a  senatusconaulnnn  of  the
boe  of  Nero,  It  was  enacted  that  if  a  testatcr  left
thing  ai  s  legacy,  which  had  nerec  been  his,  tba
^gacy  ibonld  be  equally  good  aa  if  it  had  been
left  in  the  fc^m  roost  advantageoni  to  the  legatee
'■ftimo  jsn),  which  form  was  the  Legatnm  pet
mnationem.  But  if  a  testator  gave  athingofhia
m  bya  testament,  which  he  aflerwardt  alienated,
waa  the  best  opinion  that  the  legacy  was  inutile
'  the  Jus  Civile,  and  that  the  Seoatiuconsultani
did  not  make  it  good. If  the  nine  thing  waa
^ven  to  more  than  one  person  either  jomtly  (ods-
}iBniim)  sa  as  to  make  them  collegatnrii,  ta  se-
verally {di^jamtim),  each  took  an  equal  share. A
legatnm  wai  given  enqTinKft'n  thua :  *'Titio  et  Seio
'ominem  Sliebnm  do,  legos" rfi^B«<i"in, thus;
Titio  homincm  Stichum  do,  lego ;  Seio  enndem
ominem  do,  lego." If  one  collegatarini  Iniled  to
take,  hit  portion  went  to  the  othera. In  the  case
of  a  condttional  legacy  left  per  vindicationeTn,  the
achoola  were  divided  in  opinion: the  Sabtniinl
said  that  it  was  the  property  of  the  hcrea  during
the  pendency  of  the  condition ;  the  Proculiani  taid
that  it  waa  "  res  nnllin*."

The  fonn  of  the  Per  danmationem  waa  this :
Herea  mena  Stichum  tcmm  meom  dare  damnaa
eato  ;  bat  the  word  Dato  waa  equally  eSectiie.  A
bich  belonged  to  another  {aliaia  ret)  could
lefl,  and  the  beret  waa  bound  to  procure
the  thing  lot  the  legatee  or  to  pay  him  the  value

' ig  not  in  eiislence  at  Ihe  date  of  the

leftb; "" "


<of  a


^  by  this  fiitm,  aa  the  futoro  pn^


(redilalis  aditio:  the  thinj,
remained  the  property  of  the  here*,  but  the  eilect
if  the  iegaiimi  wns  to  ealabliih  an  obligalio  be-
ween  the  hem  and  the  legatee,  who  could  ant
or  it  by  an  Actio  in  personam.  If  it  waa  a  thing
Honcipi,  the  legatee  csuld  only  *;qnir9  the  Qpin-


6TS  LEQATUM.

tariin  owDenliip  of  it  b;  MsneipatiD  or  In  jure
ceiuo  from  tfae  hecet :  if  it  wu  merely  delireced,
the  legaUuiiu  only  acquired  the  complete  ovaer-
■faip  (ftman  jat)  by  luampiaii.  If  the  uune
thing  w  leLl  to  two  or  more  aa^jmctim,  each
hod  Hn  equal  ihHre ;  if  di^jtacHn^  the  hem  wai
bound  to  giifl  the  thing  to  one  and  itt  value  to  th<
leaL  la  tfae  caio  of  a  gift  ciii[inii(iiit  the  ihBre  of
the  legatee  who  failed  to  t^e  belonged  to  the
lieredita«  ;  but  the  X^x  Pnpu  nude  it  caducum,
and  gave  it  fint  to  a  collegataiiua  wfao  had
children,  then  to  the  heredei  who  had  children,
and  then  ta  tfae  etfaei  luateea  who  had  children
(Ugaiarii),  a  prifilege  wiiich  Jurenal  ■llnde*  to
(dulae  eadnami,  ir.  60).

The  L<^tnin  Sinendi  mudo  wii  tfaui  gi«en :
**  Heree  meut  flmm"  eito  linere  Lociuia  Titian!
bomiiiem  Stichom  lumcre  libique  habere  j"  by
which  form  a  tatator  could  give  either  hi>  own

iperty  or  thai  which  wu  tbe  property  of  hii
'  *  of  the  death,  Ai  in  the  ca»  of
a  legatum  per  danmationem,  the  legatee  proiecnted
hu  claim  by  an  Actio  in  pemmam.  It  wai
doubted  whether  the  herai  wai  bound  to  Innifcr
tfae  pnipeny,  in  tfae  caie  ef  a  tea  roancipi,  by  man-
dpatio  or  in  jure  cewio,  or,  in  the  cue  of  a  thing
'  tiaditio  or  deliTery,  for  the  wordi
limtotakp."  Iftheume
I  conjimctim,  they  took  il
in  common,  but  without  any  jui  acCTescendi  if  one
of  them  failed  to  take.  It  wai  a  Btill  mon  doubtful ;
queition  (in  the  time  of  Oaiui),  whether,  if  the
nine  thing  nu  giiea  in  thii  way  to  two  teTerally
idi^watiin),  the  whole  wu  due  to  each,  or  if  the
heree  wai  rcleaaed  from  oil  fiirther  claim,  when
either  of  them  had  obtained  poueuion  of  the  whole
with  fail  permiuion.

The  Legntiun  per  praeceptionem  waa  in  thia
manner;  "Lnciiia  Titiui  hcminem  Stichmn  Prae-
dpito  ;**  where  "pnecipito,"  in  the  opinion  of  tbe
Sahini ■ ■ ■


C


nee  moncipi,  by  tn
of  tbe  giA  are  **  pe


"lake  fint."  The  Sabiniaiu  accordingly
opinion  thai  a  legacy  could  only  thui  be  left  to
one  wba  wu  alto  made  a  herei ;  but  a  Senatca-
coniultum  Neronianum  made  the  legacy  good,  even

other  than  the  heret,  piaiided  the  legatee  wai  a
penon  to  whom  a  l^;scy  could  bo  left  in  any  of
the  three  other  modeii.  For  the  Senatuecouultum
made  thoee  legociei  valid  which  were  not  valid  by
the  Jiu  Civile  on  nccount  of  the  worda  of  the  gift
(cffbonun  u/ild),  but  not  tfaoie  legaciei  which
were  invalid  on  account  of  the  incapacity  of  the
legatee  (otfio  peTtoaae),  which  wai  the  one  with  a
pen^nnua.  The  Sabiniani  alao  maintuned  that  a
man  could  leave  in  thii  manner  only  what  wu  hi)
own,  for  the  only  way  in  which  the  Itgatee  could
enforce  hi<  right  wai  by  a  judicinm  familiae  ercii>
cundae,'  in  which  judicium  il  wai  neceaiaiy  that
the  judex  ihould  adjudicate  that  which  wai  given
per  praeceptionem,  and  he'  conld  adjudicate  en
nothmg  elte  than  the  ret  beredilana. But  the

wu  given  in  thii  form,  even  if  the  thing  did
belong  to  tfae  tcMatot.  The  Pneuliani  conten
that  a  legacy  coutd  be  friven  to  an  eimneui
pneceptionem  ;  and  further  that  if  the  thing
tbe  tcitater^  ei  jure  Qui  riiium,  itcenld  be  nied
(oindioorO  by  the  '^tce,  whether  be  wat  a  heret
0(  not  (dafroaou)  ;  if  it  waa  the  leatator'a  '  '
!t  WH  a  Qlile  If^tDoi  to  the  ertnnnu  by  the


r  lewSea


LEOATUH.

tenatntcontnltnm  ;  and  the  ben«,  if  he  iraa  (ha
legatee,  could  obtwn  il  in  a  jndiciam  familiae  cr-
ciicnndaa.  If  il  did  not  belong  to  the  leatalar  in
either  way,  ilill  the  legatom  wai  made  nlila  botli
to  the  heiea  and  the  eitraneoi  by  the  aenatua-
eonmltum.  If  the  lame  thing  wu  thnt  left  le
more  than  one  either  d^jyetim  or  epajietciim,
each  had  cmly  bit  thare.  In  all  tbe  three  forma,
except  the  per  damaationem,  only  Thingi  and
Jura  in  re  could  be  the  obiecti  of  fegala :  but  bj
tfae  per  damnationem  any  thing  eould  be  made  the
object  of  a  l^tnm  which  coidd  be  made  tlie  ob-
ject of  an  obligado.

By  tfae  Law  of  tbe  Twdve  Tablet  a  man  coold
diipoea  of  hii  pioperty  ai  he  pleaied,  and  be  might

exhauat  (eroTon)  the  whiJe  heieditaa  b~  '

and  bequeili  of  freedom  to  alavea,  lo  ■

the  herei  nothing. The  conaeqaeooe  wu  mat  la

■uch  cue*  the  Kripti  hertdea  refilled  to  take  the

The  fint  legialative  m«inre  on  thii  tul^t  wna
the  Lex  Fiuia,  called  Tetlamentatia,  which  did
not  allow  a  teitator  to  give  at  a  dixiatiD  nurtia
caun  er  u  a  legacy  more  than  a  thoiuand  astei
to  one  pcnon,  certain  kintfoUt  eioepled.  (Oaina,
iii.  22i  1  Ulp.  Frta.  L  2,  uriii.  7.)  But  thia
meaiare  wat  a  failure,  f«  it  did  not  ]revent
a  man  from  giving  u  many  Beverai  tfaoOBiida  to
u  many  persona  at  be  pleated,  and  to  cxhaoating
fail  eatate.  The  Lex  Vocoaia  (B.C.  16S)  afler-
wardi  enacted  that  no  pcrton  ihonld  take  by  way
of  legacy  or  donatio  mi>rtia  csiua  mue  than  the
heredei  (teverally,  at  it  ieemi) ;  but  thia  lex
wat  ineffectual,  for  by  the  tettator  dittribnting
bit  property  among  nnmereu  l^;ateea,  the  here*
might  have  ao  nnall  a  portion  at  not  to  make  it
worth  hit  while  to  aunme  thebuident  attached  to
the  hcreditat.  (Ount,  il  36  ;  Cic  at  Tier.  i.
43.)  The  Lex  Falcidia  (a.  c  40)  at  laat  took
away  all  meant  of  ovation  by  declaring  that  a  tet-
tator ihonid  not  give  more  than  three-fouitba  in
legaciei,  and  that  a  fourth  wat  tcenreii  la  the
herea  ;  and  "  thia  law,"  layt  Oaiua,  "  it  now  in
force."  The  Senatutconiul  turn  Pegatianion  extended
the  tame  rule  of  law  to  fideicommitia  [FiDUOOs-
ii'iBaun]  ;  and  the  Emperor  AntoninDt  i^iplied  it
lo  the  eate  of  fideicommitia,  when  there  waa  an
intealBcy.  (Dig.  35.  tiL  2.  I.  la.)  Tbe  Lex  Fal-
cidia applied  to  the  Willi  of  peneni  who  died  in
captivity  (apud  iatiti),  for  a  praviout  Lex  Cor-
nelia had  given  lo  tbe  willt  of  tucb  pelaona  tlie
tame  force  u  if  they  had  died  cmh  (n  dritale.
Dig.  36.  tiL  2.  1.  1).

Legala  were  mutilla  or  void,  if  they  wne  gina
before  a  heret  wai  inatituted  by  tbe  will,  for  the
will  dcriied  all  itt  legal  efficacy  &wn  inch  inttitD-
tbo  ;  there  wu  the  tame  rule  u  to  a  gifl  of  free-
dom. Tt  wat  an  inutile  legatum,  if  in  form  tbe
gift  wu  given  after  the  death  of  the  hoet,  but  it
might  be  given  on  the  event  of  bit  death  ;  it  waa
alto  iumile  if  giren  in  form  on  the  day  before  the
death  of  the  tettator,  for  which  rule  of  law,  isya
Gaint,  there  teemt  to  be  no  good  rcaiea  {pntioam
ratio),  A  legalum  could  not  be  loft  in  tfae  way  at
a  penalty  (  poflui  iHiinai),  that  it,  for  the  pDrpoaa
of  compelling  the  heret  to  do  cc  rettninii^  nioi
fi^<m  doing  any  jarticular  act:  bnl  Juiinian  mado
all  luch  Irgala  good,  except  thoae  which  tim  im-
poetible,  or  forbidden  by  law  or  againat  boui
morei  (pnbioia)  (IniL  S.  tit.  2.  >  36).  A  legacy
eoold  not  be  Idt  bi  m


fKna^.  Tit  Dotbn  of  m  imcataia  p«nm  wm
not  of  a  poum  who  could  mrcr  be  aiceiMuKd,
<br  fa  omnl  t>l  tlia  imMncca  ncnCiciDed  bj  Oaim,


lignill  tnmt ")  ;  bat  ttui  ni


«  of  (he  imcerniotj
the  latiilor  it  the
AtmrdiDg);  tlie
pencma  wu  nM  caiuider«d  inoerla,  where  be  wn
«tie  of  a  cotMn  dui,  nich  tu  oogniti,  tboogh  th>
indiiidml  of  th«  clan  migbl  be  uDcertuD  till  tbe


<if  tba  dui  ni  intended  bj  the  teitator.  Snch  a
Ann  at  bequcM  WM  called  a  carta  demoiMtratio
BBitBa  penoua.  (Oiioi,  ii.  238.)  A  legBlariiu
maat  ban  the  teatunniti  &ctio,  and  be  nnder  do
legal  uxapacitj.  'A  lega^  canld  not  be  left  to  ■
puatnnaa  aliemo,  nor  eodd  neb  ■  penoo  be  a
berea  huUtDtiu,  fcr  be  wu  an  inceria  perwna.  Il
baa  been  explained  who  a  a  ponamiu  [Hbais,  p.
C01,b]  ;  apoitamDaBlienOB  ig  one  who  when  bora
cannot  be  imiHig  the  lui  heiede*  of  the  tiatstor.

It  wu  a  qneatien  whether  ■  legacy  eoiild  \k
legally  (rattt)  left  to  a  pertoo,  who  waa  in  tbe
power  of  another  panoa  who  wu  made  berea  b;
tbe  MDe  will.  Tbe  Pmcnliani  denied  that  inch  ■
len^  coold  be  left  either  pore  or  iub  conditicine.
(Oeina,  iL  2«0  But  if  a  penon  who  wu  in  Oie
power  rf  another  wu  taade  here*,  i  Icncj  might
be  left  (at  a  l^ori)  to  the  penoa  in  whnae  power
he  wu  ;  fcf  if  and)  latter  peraon  beoune  here*
tbetebjr  [ptr  ewa),  the  legacj  waa  ntmgniatied,
becauaa  a  man  cannot  owe  a  thing  to  bimielf ;  hut


Not  onl;  Rei  lingnlae  could  be  given  u  a
legaej,  but  alao  a  part  of  a  imiTertitu  of  thiogi
(aaktiaii  aw  rwini)  could  be  ao  jpTen  ;  thu
the  berea  might  be  directed  to  ahan  a  half  or
any  other  part  of  tbe  hereditaa  with  another,
which  wu  called  paititio,  {Cic  dt  Ltg.  u.  26,  pro
OnoM.  *  ;  [Jlp.  Fmg.  tit.  2i.  1.  2G.)  By  (he  jni
cinle  tbete  mieht  b<  a  legacy  of  a  nantftuctni  of
thoae  thing*  which  were  capable  of  being  uied  and
enjoyed  without  detriment  to  the  thing*.  ,  By  a
" '" —  '*" —  might  he  a  legacy  of  Cha


"^L-'V


•ftuu  of  th<

tbe  nae,  u  money,  wioe,  oil,  wheat,  but  the  lega-

tarina  had  to  gire  aecnrity  for  the  reatontion  of

ri){bl  to  the  enjoyment  oeaaed,  Thii  technical
■waning  ol  aianu,  that  ja,  the  uae  of  thing*  which
are  efaunmed  in  the  nae,  ii  contraated  with  uui-
Avctu  by  Cicero  (7^.  3 ;  Uaitr  dot  ajitr  da
«m»ii  mmtfimtat.  tod  Pncbta,  Riamtiin  Mui.
■ii.  IL  82,  and  Pncbta,  IiutU.  il  9  ^S).

A.  legacy  ni^t  he  banaferred  to  another  per-
am,  «r  taken  sway  (adma)  by  another  will  or
codidlH  (onAmwd  by  a  wilt  ;  it  might  alio  be
likan  away  by  anante  rf  the  gift  Innn  the  will.
Soch  a  lerocatwa  <4  Inadaa  (odampfio  Itgatonon)
BBOM  to  bare  been  oidy  eiected  in  the  way  men-
tioaed.  The  ejprnaioa  ademption  of  legiciee  in
Ffigliah  law  hu  a  diSaent  meaning,  and  in  the
oaa  ef  a  apedfic  thing  coneapoad*  to  the  Romas
atinetkn  of  l^Kiea,  whtcb  took  place  if  the  taa-
utoc  diapoaed  of  the  thmg  in  hi*  lifetune.

If  a  kprtee  died  after  tbe  day  n  which  tlie


LKOATUS-  67T

legatnn  bad  become  hia  {poit  dtrn  trgati  eedealan),
it  paated  to  hit  berea  i  or  to  uae  a  phraae  of  Eog-
liah  law,  the  legacy  waa  seated  The  phraia
"  diei  legati  cedit  '^  accordingly  raeana  **  the  time
i*  come  at  which  the  legncy  belongs  to  the  legatee,"
thnugh  the  time  may  not  hare  come  when  be  ia
entitled  to  receive  it ;  and  "  die*  Tenil "  denote*  the
arrival  of  tho  day  on  which  it  can  be  demanded.
(Dig.SO.  title.  1.213.)  If  Ihelt^ywuleftcoa-
ditionall;  there  wu  no  Teatine  till  the  condition
wu  Mfilled.  By  the  old  law,  legaciei  which  were
lefl  Dnconditionally  or  from  a  time  named  (m  diem
arimn)  wen  leiled  fenn  the  time  of  the  teatator'a
death  ;  bat  by  the  Lex  Papia  they  veated  froni  the
lime  of  opening  tbe  will.  The  legacy  might  Y»t
immediately  on  tbe  death  of  the  leitator  aai  yet
the  tettatot  might  defer  tbe  thne  of  payment  (Di^
36.  tit  2.  *.  21.)  A  legKj  might  alao  bo  left  on  a
condition  of  time  only,  u  a  legacy  to  Tithia  vtkrnt
or  if  he  abould  attain  the  age  ef  fourteen  yeara,  in
which  case  the  worde  ra&en  and  if  were  ooniidned
equivalent,  a  deciBion  which  hu  been  adopted  in
English  Uw,  in  casea  in  which  there  ii  nothing  in
tbe  will  which  givea  the  worda  "  when  "  or  "  if"
a  difierent  aignifitation.  (Dig.  36.  tit  2.  ^  £,  22  ;
Hanion  K  Qraham,  6  Veo.  p.  S43.>

{Gaiua,iL  191— 2*5  ;  UIp./V.y.  tit  xxW.&c  ;
Dig.  30—32,  Ac  )  Inat  iL  tit  20—22  ;  Paulna,
&A.  iiLtit  6.)  [FiDiicONMiaauif.] [0.  L.] -

LEOA'TUS.  Legati  may  be  diridcd  into  three
clatae*;  1.  Legati  or  ambuaadora  aent  to  Rome
by  foreign  natioo* }  2.  Iicgati  or  ambaaadon  lent
from  Rome  to  foreign  nations  and  into  the  pro-
vince* ;  3.  Legati  who  accompanied  the  Roman
generala  into  the  field,  or  the  prwonanla  and  piae-*
lot*  into  the  provincca.

I.  Foreign  legati  at  Rome,  from  whalerer  coun-
try they  came,  tiad  to  go  to  the  temple  of  Sntum
and  deunit  their  name  with  the  qoaeatara,  which
Platnrch  {Quaat  Ram.  p.  275,  b.)  explain*  aa  a
remnant  of  an  ancient  cutom  ;  for  formeriy,  aayi
he,  the  qnaeitora  lent  pieient*  to  all  legati,  which
were  called  lautia,  and  if  any  amboBaador  fta*  taken
ill  at  Rome,  he  wa*  in  the  care  of  the  gnacston,
who,  if  he  died,  bad  alio  to  pay  the  eipenaca  of
hit  burial  from  the  pablic  treaauiy.  When  aflcr-
wanl*  the  nnmber  of  foreign  ambaandsn  increaicd
in  propor^on  u  the  republic  became  extended,  the

formality  of  depoaiting  the  name  with  tbe  keeper*
of  the  public  tresanry.  PrerioDi  to  their  admi*.
aion  into  the  city,  foreign  anibaaaador*  lecni  to
have  been  obliged  to  give  notice  from  what  nation
they  came  and  for  what  purpoae ;  for  aevcral  in-
atancet  are  mentioned  in  which  ambsaiadan  were
prohibited  from  enloing  the  city,  eipecially  in  coie
of  a  war  between  Rome  and  the  state  from  which
they  come.  (Liv.  iii.  21,  iliL  S6,  ilv.  22.)  In
*ach  casoi  the  ambaisadon  were  either  not  heard
at  all.  and  obliged  to  quit  Italy  (Liv.  xliL  36),  ta
an  audience  waa  given  to  them  by  the  aenate  (Mmrw
Irgalit  ddter)  outaida  the  city,  in  the  temple  of
Bellona.  (Liv.^a;iii.2l.)  This  wu  evidently
a  sign  of  mistmsl,  but  the  ambaasador*  were  never-
Iheleu  treated  a*  pablic  guests,  and  aome  public
villa  outside  the  city  wu  lomeCimea  saaigned  for
their  reception.  In  other  caaea,  however,  a*  loon
0*  the  report  oF  the  landing  of  foreign  ambaata-
dofs  on  the  Gout  of  Italy  wa*  brought  to  Rome,
especially  if  they  were  peraona  of  great  distinction,
M  the  aoB  of  Mawnijaa  (Liv.  ilv.  13),  at  if  they
x»8 -  O"


C78


LEOATUa.


(sme  Enm  an  allj  of  the  Rumui  people,  khim  one
sf  (lie  inferior  magiitrates,  or  u  legKtiu  of  a  corn  '
ni  deijatoheil  h;  the  lenato  to  receive  and  c
duct  them  to  the  cilj  at  the  eipenae  of  the
public When Ihe; were introduced  into 1
■eiute  h]r  the  prnelor  oi  coniul, thej  £nt  i
plained  what  the;  had  to  communicate,  and  then
the  prueUr  inrited  the  (ennton  to  put  their  qnei-
Uoni  to  the  ambauadoF). (Lit.  iu.  S2.) The
manner  in  which  thia  qucttioning  wai  fnsquently
owried  on,  wpeciallj  when  the  envoyi  came  from

■embled  mon  (he  eroH-queationing  of  a  wilneu
in  a  court  of  jiutice,  than  an  inquiry  made  with  a
new  to  gain  a  eloir  nndentanding  of  what  wag
propoiod.  (Lit.  L  e.  with  Gronov^  note.)  The
whole  tnuiHction  w«  curied  on  hf  interpretera,
and  in  the  Latin  language.  [iNTKapaas.]  Vule-
riui  Haiimui  (iL  2.  §  »)  atalei  thai  the  Oreek
rhetorician  Molo,  a  teachet  of  Cicero,  waa  the  first
foreigner  who  ever  addreaaed  the  Roman  annate  in
hie  own  tongue.  After  the  unbaiaadon  had  thni
been  eiamiued,  the;  were  requeited  to  leave  the
■Hemb];  of  the  aenate,  who  now  began  to  dijcuu
the  lubject  brought  before  them.  The  re>ult  waa
commitnicated  to  the  amhaaaadon  by  the  piaetor.

received  rich  pieaenti  on  their  dejiartute,  but  were
al  the  command  of  the  lenate  conducted  by  a
inBgutiate,  and  at  the  public  expeote,  to  the  fron-
tier of  Ilaly,  and  eien  further.  (Liv.  tU.  14.)  By
Ibe  Lex  Qabinin  it  waa  decreed  that  tram  the  Erat
of  FebniBiy  to  the  firat  of  March,  the  Knale  ihould
•lery  day  gixe  audience  la  foreign  ambaandon.
(Cic.  ad  Quint.  Prai.  iL  II,  12,  ad  Ftm.  i.  4.)
There  was  al  Rome,  ai  Vairo  {Di  iiw.  Lot.  t.
155,  MUllci)  eipreawi  il,  a  place  on  die  right-
hand  aide  of  the  aenita-honie  called  Gmecosiaiii,
in  which  foreign  ambaaiadora  wailed.

All  unbaasadon,  wheneeaoeTer  they  came,  were
eoniidered  bj  the  Romiuis  throughont  the  whole
period  of  their  eiiilcnce  a>  lacred  ant  inrudable.
(Cic  c  Fen-,  i.  33  ;  Dlanye.  HaL  JvL  Rati.  a.
25 ;  Tacit.  Am.  i.  12 ;  Lir.  xv.  10 ;  Dig.  £0.
tit.  7.  a.  17.)

II.  Legati  to  foreign  nationi  in  the  name  of  the
Roman  repoblic  were  alwayi  acnt  by  the  aenate
(Cic  c  VatiH.  15)  I  and  to  be  appointed  to  auoh  a
miaaion  waa  cuuidered  a  gnat  honour  which  waa
confeired  only  on  men  of  high  rank  or  eminence  ;
lor  a  Roman  ambaundor.  eccording  to  Dionyaiua,
had  the  powers  ii^ouata  jcoJ  ivratus)  of  a  magia-
tiale  and  ihe  venerable  chaineter  of  a  prieit.  If
a  Roman  dunng  the  pcrfonnauce  of  hii  miuion  ai
ambaaiador  died  or  waa  killed,  hit  memory  wai
honoured  by  the  republic  wilh  a  puUic  Kpidchn
and  a  tlalue  in  the  Roatra.  (Lit.  ii.  17  ;  Cic
PUlip.  iz.  2.)  The  eipenaea  during  the  journey
of  an  ambBiHtdor  were,  of  courae,  paid  by  the  re-
public ;  and  when  he  tjavelled  through  a  province,
the  provinciala  had  to  aupply  him  with  evrrything
ke  wanted.

III,  The  third  dan  of  legati,  to  whom  the
"  ' ^^ied,  were  per-

..  -^f^


ompanied  the  Ronmn  generala  on

and  in  later  timet  toe  goveinr

liegfiti,  *a  aerring  undf


wi^  the  tribune*  at  a  very  eeily  peiiad.  (Lii.  ii.
£9,  iv.  IT.)  Theie  legati  weta  nominated  (/tga-
ioalBr)  bj  the  connil  M  the  dktator  under  whom


without  which  no  one  could  be
legally  conaidered  a  legatu*  (Cic  c.  Fatim.  L  c,
pro  Sett,  14)  ;  and  from  Livy  (ilvii.  1  j  comime
xlii.  18)  it  appean  that  the  nomination  hi-  Iba
magiimte*  (coniul,  piaelof,  or  dictator)  did  not
take  place  nntil  they  had  beoi  anlhotiaed  by  a
decna  of  the  aenate.  The  perioni  tffoiaui  to
this  office  were  niually  men  of  great  mililaiy
talcnti,  and  it  wai  their  duty  to  aditae  and  aatiit
their  aopeiior  in  all  hit  nndertakinga,  aad  lo  act
in  hit  ttead  both  in  civil  and  military  a^tt.
(VaiTO,  de  Ling.  LaL  t.  87,  MUUer.)  The  Iqati
were  thna  alwayt  men  in  whom  the  oonaol  plaixd
great  confidence,  and  were  fre^nenlly  hi  ' '  '  -
relatirau  j  but  they  had  oo  power  utdi ,
the  command  of  their  genend.  (Caea.  d(  Sw.  uk
ii.  17,  iiL  51 ;  Appiwi,  di  BtlL  do.  i.  3».)  Tbdr
number  varied  according  to  the  grastneai  or  im-
portance of  the  war,  or  Uie  extent  of  the  provim:
three  ia  the  imalleit  number  we  know  o(  hut
Fompey,  when  in  Aaia,  had  fifteen  legali.  Who-
ever Ihs  conaula  were  abaent  fioni  Ua  aimy,  «
when  a  pracaniul  left  hii  province,  the  \esUi  <t
one  of  them  look  hia  place,  and  then  had  the  ia-
lignia  u  well  aa  the  power  of  hia  inpeiior.  Ua
waa  in  thia  caia  called  l^atna  pro  praetore  (liv.
nil.  9 ;  Lydui,  da  Magilr.  iii.  3 ;  Caeat  <f>  BA
GalL  L  31),  and  hence  we  Hme^mei  read  that  a
man  ^vetned  s  prolines  at  a  I^atiu  wilhool  any
mention  being  made  of  the  tmoonaol  vhoea  vice-
gerent be  waa.  (Sallnit.  Cat.  42.)  Doling  Iha
mtter  period  of  the  republic,  it  aometioua  h^>-
pened  that  a  cimiui  carried  on  a  war,  or  a  pro-
maul  governed  hit  prorince  through  hit  lejad,
LJT.  i-_  L:_._,r :..:,  _.  j(„„^  ^  otmductad


le  hinuelf  re


When  the  provincei  wsi«  divided  at  the  tin*
of  the  empire  [Pbdvincli],  thoae  of  the  Hmaa
people  were  governed  by  men  who  had  eitha  been
aeiora,  and  the  fanner  were  alwwra
by  three  l^ti,  the  latla  by  mk-
rion  i,ais.  liii.  18;  Dig,  1.  tit.  16.) The  po-
icet  of  the  emperor,  who  wai  himaelf  the  pio-
luul, were govemed  by peraont whoa  tba
iparor  himaelf  appointed,  and  who  had  bem  con-
la  or  praetora,  or  were  at  least  lenaloca. Thtta
vicegerent!  of  the  emperor  were  called  Ugali  Jm-
praelort,  t^/aH  praetnni,  ligali  taw
imply  ^a^ofi,  and  they,  like  the  goTtnoca
of  the  ptovinciae  popnli  Romani,  had  one  or  three
legati  at  their  otiittsnti.  (SOalu,  iiL  p.  853 1  can-
pore  Dig.  1.  lit.  13.  a  7; Tacit.  Ami.  tA.  H,
Agrieol.  e.  7  ;  Spanhaim,  i*  Un  tl  pruaL  A'ltwiM
ii.  p.  595.)

During  the  latter  period  of  the  republic  it  had
become  cuitomvy  for  aenaton  to  obtain  from  the
toiale  the  permiaaion  to  travd  throo^  nr  aPty  m
any  {fforince  at  the  expaiae  of  the  pnvinciaK
merely  for  ihe  pnnoae  of  managing  and  cooduiiBg
Iheir  own  penonal  a&irt. Then  waa  iw  natnhit

to  avail  themaelvea  of  thia  privilege,  which  waa  a
heavy  burden  upon  the  ivevinciali.  Thia  mode  of
lojouming  in  a  pnvina  wai  called  legatia  likn,
becauaa  Utoaa  who  availed  tbemaelva  of  jl  e>-
joyed  all  the  privilf^ea  of  a  public  loatna  or
amlianiador,  without  harinit  any  of  bit  dotiei  to
per&na. At  the  time  at  Cicae  the  privilefr  rf


LETTUROIA.


to  (he  I


pal  u  en  j  to  it,  but  OWIDg

tribune,  lie  odIj  nitCMded  in  timitiug  ihe  timo  a!
itt  doniicm  to  odb  yeaz.  (Cic  de  Leg.  iji.  G,
A  Ug.  Ayr.  i.  S,  pro  Fhec.  Zi,  PMlip.  i.  2.)
Jiliu  Cwnr  aftcrinrdi  eiteuded  the  time  dniing
vbicb  a  Rmtor  migbt  iTul  hinuelf  of  l^stio  libeia
V,lnjaa{Cv:.  ad  AU.XW.  1 1 ),  imd  Ihii  l&w  dT
Cuu  (Lex  Julit)  Meiiu  to  hsvo  nmained  in
fnte  itara  to  a  taj  late  period.  (Soet.  T^tr.
il;Di|[.  S0.tit7.».H.)  [US.]

LEGEg. [LmJt.]

LEfQIO. [Exutcrrcta.]

LK0I3  ACTIO. [Actio.]
LEOIS  AQUl'LIAE  ACTIO. [Dahhi  In-
ilmu  Actio.]
LEOITIMA  ACTIO. [Actio.]
LEOITIMA  HERE'DITAS. [Hbem.]
LEIPOMARTYRIOU DIKE (XmrojuipTv.

pl-lln,). [MiBTTBU.)

LEIPONAUTIOU  ORAPHB  (Atnronwrliw
ipeft).  The  indtctmeirt  for  deiertioa  frgm  the
Iwl  «M  prefeiTed  before  the  tribunal  at  the  itnt-
tiji ;  ud  the  oonrt  which  imdcr  their  ivptrintciid-
Ba  nt  fiir  the  trial  of  thji  and  limilu  militsrjr
ofieDort  wu  compoeed  of  citizenfl  who  had  been
ngigtd  in  the  expedition  in  queition.  {Ke\ti,AtL
frue.  pp.  108, 133.)  The  penuln  upon  coniictioa
Knu  ta  have  been  a  fine,  and  uie  complele  dii-
fiudiiiaiient  of  the  offender  and  hit  deecendants.
(PetiL  Lig.  AH.  pp,  401,  687.)  [J.  S.  M.]

LEIPOSTRATIOU  ORAPHE  (hfiwiMTpa-
Tl»7paf().  The  circaniitancei  of  the  trial  for
datrtion  from  the  annj  and  the  pennltiei  inflicted
npn  ccnnctum  were  the  tame  u  in  the  cam  of  de-
icitioD  from  the  fleet  (LaiMiNiUTion  OniPHi],
■ad  the  i^encti  waa  alto  pmuibable  by  an  eisan-
p!i»,  wMrfi,  Heialdna  "  ' "

- • ■ ■ ■ ,  t

a  pdilkal  opponent  by  pro-
cunsg  ma  oiatniicnuement,  u  thii  wai  ■  necenar;
■nucquence  of  judgment  bdng  given  tgainit  the
ddradintf  and  prevented  hia  ipetGimg  or  appearing
in  public.  The  eiiangelia  in  nich  caie  vonld  be
tninred  before  tho  aiaembly  of  the  people,  by
vhich,  if  naaonable  came  appeared,  it  would  be
nhnitled  to  the  decirion  of  one  of  the  orfinaiy
"i^  UibmMla.  (Herald.  Atiimad.  n  &(/naf.
f.2*r)  [J.S.M.]

LEIPOTAXIOU GRAPHE (Atmn-afbu


[A»T


:'-J


LEITU-RGIA  {\irrmpyla,  from  Xuror,  Ion.
X^flv,  C  ■,  trf/iAffioff  or,  according  to  ether^
*^i  oniW),  B  the  name  of  certain  penonal  icr-
■Ko  which  at  Athena  and  in  lomD  other  Greek
"^oblii^  rrerr  citizen,  who  poueMed  a  urtain
■moint  of  pmperly,  had  to  prifmrn  towardi  the
uue.  Theae  peraonaj  aerrieet,  which  in  all  ouea
■ere  connected  with  considerable  eipenie,  occur
■»  the  kiftoty  of  Attica  a>  (orly  ai  the  lime  of  the
PoEnralidt  (Arinot.  OeniHin.  ii.  5),  and  were
Wiablj,  if  Dol  intnidnced,  at  leait  lanetioned  by
the  lenlaiieo  of  Solon.  They  were  st  £nt  a
Wnral  onaeqnencs  of  the  greater  political  prii-i-
Ifgei  enjoyed  by  the  wealthy,  who,  m  return,  had
<1»  to  perform  hcaiicr  dotiee  lowardi  the  re-
f«hlk  ;  bnt  when  the  Athenian  democracjrwaa  at
<l>  height,  the  original  chamcter  of  theie  litar^ct
h«ai»e  chn^^,  for  aa  eveij  citizen  now  enjojed
the  ■>(  lighti  and  priiili^  m  the  wealuiuot,


LEiTUBOiA.  era

they  were  limply  a  tai  upon  property  conneeted
with  penonal  labonr  and  exertifci  (toTj  xp^item
jcal  t^  tr^nirrt  Xtnovffytir).  Notwitbitonding
this  altered  character  of  the  liturgiea,  we  aoircely
ever  And  that  complainta  were  made  by  penona
nibjeet  to  them  ;  many  wealthy  AtheniauB,  on  the
conUnry,  rained  their  ettatei  by  their  ambitioaa
eiHtiona,  and  by  the  desiie  to  gain  tbe  titTour  of
the  people. (Xen.  de  Etp.  AO.  i.  13  ;  Demoilh.

0.  Eitergd.  p.  115fi  \  eompnre  Lyk  pft>  ban.  Atdb.
p.  64S  and  fi57  ;  liocnt.  de  Big.  IS  ;  Ariatot,
P-JiL  T.  7.  p.  173,  ed.  Oottling.)  To  do  no  mom
than  the  hiw  required  (i^offiavirAai,  Itaeoa,  da
ApoUod,  e.  3S)  wae  at  Athem  comidered  ai  a  die-
grace,  and  in  lome  caees  a  wealthy  Athenian,
eien  when  it  waa  not  hii  turn,  wonld  Tolunteer
to  perform  a  lituiyr.  (Demoath.  c.  Mid.  p.  £19,
GG6,  Ac.  ;  compare' Back h,  Ftb.  Eeon.  of  Alluau,
p.  US,  Slc„  Sd  cd.)

AI!  littu^ea  maybe  djtided  into  two  clauei:

1.  ordinary  or  encyclic  liturgiea  (tyitiiiXioi  Ktetavp-
yliu,  Demoith.  e.  Ltj*-  f.  *e3),  and  2.  extraordi-
nary litnrgici  The  former  were  called  encyclic,
beeauae  they  rectirted  erery  year  at  certain  f^tire
•eaaona,  and  compriaed  the  X'Vrr'"^  ■yvityaamfxia,
)taiiiraSapx^'<  «PX<^«>^o,  >nd  Icm'airii,  which
are  all  described  in  leporaie  artidci.  [Chorioi>s  ;

GVMNASIHH  ; LAUPiDKl^OBli  ; ThSORIJ  (

HasTiisia.]  Eyciy  Athenian  who  poaaeaaed  three
talenta  and  above,  wna  subject  to  thera  (Dcmoilh.
0.  Aphob.  p.  833  ;  Iiaeua,  d»  Pyrrk.  ierad.  c  80),
and  (hey  were  imdertakea  in  tunia  by  the  mem-
bers of  every  tribe  who  poaieised  the  property
qualification  just  mentioned,  nnleai  aome  one  to-
luntecrcd  to  imdertake  a  litnrgy  for  another  per-
lon.  But  the  biw  did  not  allow  any  one  to  be
compelled  to  ondertahe  more  than  one  liturgy  at
a  lime  (Demoath.  e.  LejU.  p.  AS2,  e.  Potydet.  p.
1209),  and  he  who  had  in  one  year  perfonoed  a
liturgy,  waa  free  for  the  next  {iymvrhr  SioAnr^
Jkbotoi  A«iToupT*r,  Demoath,  c.  Lept.  p.  459),  ao
that  legally  a  peraon  had  to  petfomi  a  liturgy  only
etery  other  year.  Thoae  whoae  turn  it  wua  to
undertake  any  of  the  ordinary  litnrgiea,  were  b1>
way*  appointed  by  their  own  tribe  (Demoith.
e.  Mid.  pp.  SIO,  SIS),  or  in  other  wordi,  by  the
inintXirrti  T£y  f  uAS*  (Tittmann,  Orieti.  Staatn.
p.  296,  &c.),  and  the  tribe  ibared  pruue  oa  well
as  blame  with  ita  XttTtntprjit.

The  penons  who  were  exempt  from  all  kinda  of
Htut^es  were  the  nine  archona,  hsireaaeB,  and  or-
phans until  after  the  commencement  of  the  aecond
year  of  their  coming  of  age.  (Lyaioi,  c.  IXogat.
p.  908  ;  Demoath.  de  Symmor.  p.  !82.}  Somc-
timea  the  exemption  from  liturgies  (irrXefa)  was
grunted  to  penons  for  especial  merits  towards  the
republic. (Demoath.  c  Lrpt,  p.  466,  &c)

The  only  kind  of  extraoidinary  liturgy  to  which
Ihe  name  ia  propcriy  applied,  ia  the  triernrchj
{rpiJipnpx^) ;  in  the  earlier  limes,  iiowever,  the
service  in  the  arniiei  was  in  reality  no  more  than
nu  eitiaordinoiy  liturgy.  [See  EiaPHOBA  and
TaiiBARCEiiA.]  In  later  timca,  during  and  aftec
the  Pcloponneiian  n-ar,  when  the  eipensea  of  a
litnnry  were  fonnd  too  heavy  for  one  peraon,  we
find  that  in  many  initancea  two  persona  combined
to  defray  the  expenses  of  a  litnrgy  (rtaTiXfla).
Such  was  the  case  with  the  choregia  and  the
iricrortby. (Hermann,  Polil.  AnL  j  161.  n.  12


680  LEMNISCna.

the;  ven  perfonned  were  alio  dirided  into  Xii
•flai  -roAiTPtal,  luch  u  win  incnmbent
eiliieni,  and  Xtirovpylai  riir  utroiair,
Dioath.  e.  Ltpt,  p.  162.)  Tfae  only  litnrgid  1
are  mentioned  ha  having  heen  perfonned  bj  the
fi^DWm,  are  ibe  choregia  at  the  fratinJ  of  tbe
LcDaea  (Schol.  ad  Ar^topk.  PlxU.  954),  and  the
JaTlmrii  (Ulpian,  ad  DtmotUi  Upl.  I  \b),  to
which  maj  be  added  the  bjdiiaphoria  and  ikiade-


. [HVE


-»■]


Tbal  litoi^u  wen  not  peculiar  to  Atbeoa,  ha<
U«n  ihown  bj  BSckh  i,P<A.  Eeau.  A.c.  p.  299),
for  chorcgia  and  other  litnrgiee  ore  menlionad  at
Siphno«  (Iiocrat.  Aeginel.  c  17);  cboregia  in
AegiiB  iTen  before  the  Penian  wan  (llenid.  >.
S3)  ;  in  Mjtilene  i^it'mg  the  Feiopannaian  war
(Anliph.  de  Catd.  Herod,  p.  744) ;  at  Thfbea  in
the  time  of  Epaminondu  (Plul.  JriMtld.  I)  ;  at
Orehomenot,  in  Rhodea,  and  in  Myerol  towni  of
Aua  Minor.  (Compon  Wolf,  Pnltgon.  n  De-
moid.  LepL  p.  Uiivl  &c  ;  Wachimuth,  toI.  ii.  p,
92,  Ac)  [I.S.]

LEHBUS,  a  ilciff  or  imall  boat,  nied  for  dairy-
ing a  penon  lioin  a  ahip  lo  the  ahorr^  (PlauC
Mfn.  L  2.  61.  iL  I.  3fi.)  The  lome  wu  aL»
giren  to  the  light  boati  which  wen  tent  ahead  of
a  fleet  to  obtain  information  of  the  enemy't  move-
ment!. (Iiidor.  Or^.  xix.  1  ;  Liv.  mi.  45,  xlv.
10.)  Pirn;  (//.  N.  WL  56.  a  57)  attributea  (heir
inventtnn  to  the  inhabitantB  of  Cyrcna

LEMNISCUS  (ATF/u-ltrmi)-  Thii  word  ia  wid
to  have  originalSy  been  uied  only  by  the  Symcn-
iona.  (Heiych.  t.  v.)  It  lignified  a  kind  of  co-
loured ribbon  which  hung  down  from  crowna  or
diadsmi  at  the  back  part  of  the  head.  (Feit.  l  t.)
The  earlieat  crowni  are  aud  to  baie  coniiated  i^
wool,  to  that  we  bate  to  cunceire  the  lemnimu  aa
a  ribbon  wound  nroond  tbe  wool  in  anch  a  nuuuicr
that  the  (wo  endi  of  the  ribbon,  where  they  met,
wen  allowed  to  hong  down.  See  the  lepretcnta-
tioni  of  tbe  corona  obtidionalia  and  civica  in  p.
359,  where  the  lenmiici  not  only  appear  ai  a  meani
to  keep  [he  little  biancbea  of  the  crowoi  together,
bat  alio  terre  oi  an  amament  From  the  remark
of  Serriui  (ad  Am.  f,  2G9)  it  appear!  that  connae
odomed  with  lemniaci  were  a  greater  distinction
than  thow  without  ihem.  Thii  leiTci  to  explain
an  CTpreauon  of  Cicero  {paima  lenmiaeaiiti  pro
Itaic.  Am.  35)  when  palma  mcaiii  a  victory,  and
the  e{Htbat  leraniacnta  indicate*  the  contmry  of
in&mia,  and  at  tbe  ume  Ume  implica  an  honour-
able aa  well  aa  luamtiTe  victory.  (Comp.  Aulas.
Bpi,!.  II.  6.)

It  ■ecmi  that  lemniin  were  alao  worn  alone  and
without  being  connected  with  crowna,  eapecially  by
ladiea,  aa  an  omamenc  for  the  head.  (Flin.  If.N,  iii.

flowera,  gailonda,  and  lemniaci  were  aometima
■howerod  upon  him  while  he  walked  in  public
(Caaaub.  ad  SaeL  Ner.  25  ;  Lir.  uiiii.  19.)

LemniKi  aeem  originally  to  have  been  made  of
wool,  and  afterwardi  of  me  finert  kinda  of  boat
(pUlynu,  Plin.  H.  !f.  iv.  U)  ;  but  during  the
jjatter  period  of  the  republic  the  wealthy  CraMni
not  only  made  the  foliage  or  Itavea  of  crowna  of
thin  ahceU  of  gold  and  lilver,  but  the  lemniaci
likewiae ;  and  P.  Clandiua  Fulcher  embclliihcd  the
metal  lemniaci  with  worha  of  art  in  relief  and  with
inicripliaua. (Plin.  H.  K.  iil  3.)

The  word  lemniaca*  it  uaed  by  medical  writen
in  the  aigni£c*tion  of  a  kind  of  linimenl  applied  to


LBNO.

wotmda  (Celtoi,  vii.  23 ;  Veget  de  Se  Vtlir.  u.
Uand4B,  iiLla.)  [L.S.1

LEMURA'LIA  or  LEMUOIIA,  a  Saliiai  iat
the  Boula  of  the  deported,  which  wai  c^ebratcd  at
Home  every  yev  m  the  uionlh  of  May.  It  ni
•aid  to  have  been  inetitnted  by  Romului  to  ip-
peaae  the  ipril  of  Remua  whom  he  had  iltin
(Ovid.  Fan.  V.  473,  it),  and  to  hare  been  tailed
originally  Remurio.  It  waa  celebrated  at  night
and  in  silence,  and  during  throe  alternate  dnyt,
that  it,  an  the  ninth,  eleventh,  and  thirleenlh  of
May.  During  thia  Hsaon  the  tflnplea  of  [he  godi
were  rloifld,  and  it  woa  thought  unlucky  for  woni«n
to  niatry  al  thii  time  and  during  the  whole  month
of  May,  and  ihoae  who  ventured  to  marry  sere
believed  to  die  eoon  after,  whence  the  proverb,
man  Maio  ouJok  iaJml.  Thoae  who  celebnted
the  Lemuialia,  walked  bare£»ted,  waahed  tbrir
handt  three  timee,  and  thnw  nine  timca  hladc
brant  behind  their  backt,  bdieving  by  Ihii  CEte-
mony  to  gecnre  thenuelrei  againiC  the  Lenurct.
(VaiTo,  Vila  pop.  /iom,  Fragm.  p.  241,  ed.
Bipont ;  Serviua,  ad  Am.  L  276.)  Aa  regatdt
the  aolemnitiei  on  each  of  the  three  daya,  we  nlj
know  that  on  the  second  then  irere  gamei  in  the
circui  in  honour  of  Man  (Ovid.  Fait.  t.  537),  and
thai  on  the  third  day  the  imagea  of  the  diiny
'  — ■  made  of  ruthee,  were  thrown  from  the  pool
ua  intn  the  Tiber  by  the  Veatal  virgini.
(Ovid.  Fail.  1.  C21  ;  Feat.  (.  e.  Dijxmlmi;  tm-
pare  Asqil)  On  the  nme  day  there  waa  a  fct-
livil  of  the  metchauta  (y«ten  mtrvatonem,  Ovid.
,  670,  &c),  probably  became  on  thia  day
Lple  of  Mercury  had  been  dedicated  in  [ha


year  4!


a.  (Liv.  iL  21.) On  thii


in  [he


mtRbont)  ofiered  up  inccote,  and  by  n
*  '-bninch  sprinkled  [hcmaelvci  aiid  tneir  goooi
water  from  the  well  of  Mervnty  at  the  Porta
Capcna,  ho|Hog  thereby  to  maka  their  buiintat
proaper.  [L.  S.]

LEUURES. See  Din.  </ Gr.  aad  Sam.  Bio-
jDiuiijr  nd  Mgliolojti.

LENAEA. [DiuHTau.p.4n,b.]
LEND, LENOCI'NIUM. LenociniBni ii
fined  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  S.  tit.  2.  a.  4)  to  be  the
icping  of  fi;niaie  alavea  for  proatiiution  and  the

u  made  iu  the  like  way  by  meaniof  free  women,
ime  lenonci  kept  bretheli  (Jnquniaria'i  or  open
houiet  for  proetiuitiDn.  Thii  trade  woi  not  for.
'  iddeo,  but  the  praetor's  edict  attached  in&mia  to
ich  persons  [InfamiaJ.  In  the  time  of  Caligula
iuelon.  Col.  40,  and  the  notes  in  Burmana^
1.),  a  tai  wot  laid  on  lenonei.  Theodoaiua  and
alentinian  endeavoured  to  prevent  parents  from
restituting  their  children  and  masteis  tbeir  female
Bvea  by  aev.ere  penalties  ;  and  they  forbad  the
pioctice  of  Icnoanium  under  pain  of  oHpoial
punishment,  and  baniibinent  from  the  city,  and  so
forth.  Justinian  (Not.  14)  also  attempted  to  put
lown  atl  lenocininm  by  bonisbing  Icnonca  bom  Ha
rity,  and  by  making  the  owner*  of  honsca,  who
dlnwed  proatitnlion  to  be  carried  on  in  them,
liable  to  ftirfeit  the  hoatet  and  to  pay  ten  ponnda
if  gold ;  these  who  by  trickeiy  or  {one  got  girls
nto  their  possession  slid  gave  them  up  to  pcoaCltu-
Jon  were  punished  with  the  "  eitrcne  penalties  ; "
lut  it  is  not  said  what  tbeae  extreme  pmallita
itn. Thia  Novella  contains  cnrions  natter.

The  Lei  Julia  de  Adultcriis  ddincd  the  teno-
daiam  which  that  lei  prohibilcd  (Dig.  48.  tit.  5.


LE8CHE.
A.  3-  5  2%  It  wBi  lifnocimum,  if  a  hntbtnd  nJ-
loTfld  fail  ir!£fl  to  commit  adLlteiy  in  order  to  ihora
thi  gain.  The  IcguUlion  of  Jiutinmii  (Not.  1 1 7.
t  9.  §  3)  allowed  a  wife  s  diiorre,  if  her  hmbuid
had  attempted  to  nuke  her  piMtitute  henelf  ;  and
o  could  reeorei  the  dot  and  the  donatio


ulen.


n  the  bnaband


uopterni.

if  he  kept  «  took  buk  (camp.  Saeton.  Domit.  B)
a  vife  wbom  he  had  detected  in  an  act  of  adultery  ;
or  if  he  1st  the  adalterer  who  mi  detected  in  the


act,  Mcape  ;«  if  he  did

With  n^wct  to  other  piooni  than  the  huihand,
Tl  w  Isnocmium  b;  the  lex  Julia^  if  a  mao  mar-
ried a  woman  who  wai  coudeoined  loi  adulteiy  ;
if  a  penon  who  had  detected  othen  in  adulter;,
hrid  hii  peace  for  a  nim  of  rnonej  ;  if  a  loan  com-
menad  a  pnaecutioa  for  adulter;  and  discontinued
it ;  and  if  s  penon  lent  bia  hoiue  or  chamber  for
adnltcriniD  or  itnpnun.  la  all  thcM  cuee,  the
penaltf  of  the  lei  Julia  wu  the  nme  aa  for  adulte-
riom  and  atupmm.  The  lex  in  thi<  aa  in  other
like  initancea  of  l^ei,  wai  the  gimuidwork  of  all
nhaeqacat  l^fiilatioa  cm  lenociniom.  Probably
DO  part  of  the  lex  Jolta  da  adulleriii  wai  fonnally
lepealed,  but  it  reeeired  addition!,  and  the  penal-
tia  wen  iDdeaaed.  (Rein,  CVnuHa/recU  der
Rimer,  p,  BBS.)  Aa  to  the  tuea  of  the  wordg
l^QO,  Lenocininm,  in  the  clauical  writen,  lee  the
puMM  cited  in  FacciolaU,  La.  [Q.  L.]

LKNITS  (Av^i). IToBCDiiB.]

LEONIDEIA  (Xtoviku),  were  KJemnitiei
eelebnted .  sreij  year  at  Sparta  in  hsnoor  of
Leeoidaa,  who,  with  hia  300  Spartan*,  had  fallen
at  ThannoprlMi.  Oppoaite  the  theatre  at  Sparta
then  were  two  Mpolchr^  monument*,  one  of  Pon-
■niaa  aikd  auotfaer  of  Leonidaa,  and  here  a  funeral
ontioo  waa  noken  cTsry  jtei,  and  a  contett  waa
bdd,  in  which  none  but  Sputaoi  wen  allowed  to
takemrt. (Paoa.  iii  U.  §  1.)  [L.  S.]

LEPTON. [CHALcoua ,  Oboloi]

LEPTUROl  (AtTTOi'fTgl),  a  gIbm  of  HrtificeTa,
le^eetii^  whom  tlieie  ii  lome  doubt. Thej
eammoDly  luppoied  to  be  carren  of  fine  war
wood  ; but, on the  aalfaonl; of  two  pen
(Plol.  AtmU.  PamL  37  ;  Died.  xrii.  115),  it
bma  of  which raptiia koI Ximoiipytai
ncDOoned  together,  Raoul-Rochette  aappoaet
the  i^Auyi  wve  thoaa  who  beat  out  gold
vltti  in  tUu  leaTo  to  coiei  atatnea  and  fumit
and  that  they  carreapanded  to  the  BrmUarii  Arti-
JSoa among  the  Romaua. (LtUra  a  M.  SAorn,
pp.189,  191.)  IP.  8.]

LE'RIA. [LutBca ;  TuNicj..]

LERNAEA(\vraJ<i),  wen  myrteriei  («Mt^)
celcbialed  at  Lema  in  Aigolia,  in  honour  of  De-
■elir.  (Pwia  iL  S6.  g  7.)  Tbey  were  nid  to
have  beai  ioititated  by  Philammoa.  (Paua  iL  37.
I  3.)  Id  ancieul  tinKa  the  Argirei  carried  the  fire
btKB  the  taunle  of  Artcmii  Pjronia,  on  Mount
Cralhii,  to  the  LdData.  (Paul.  viiL  15.  |  4.)
T^ett  myttaia  were  probaUy  a  remnant  of  the
axKieat  religion  of  the  Pelaftgiani,  bnt  further
paitienUri  are  not  known.  [L.SO

LBSCHE  (A^trxnX  i*  an  Ionic  word,  ligniff-
u^evmmiiii  or  comanatiom,  and  apiaeajbr  cowwil

of  poUic  mort,  in  the  -Oreek  ctliei,  by  the  name
of  Ai^xa*!  ""Be  ■*>  apart  for  the  piupoie,  and
•then  ■>  aOed  became  they  were  k  oied  by
t«iigi  11  i  to  the  latter  dait  belong  the  i^om  and
ka  ponicpai,  the  gjmiuii^  a/iA  the  ihopi  of  wi-


especially


thou  of  the  1


.ith^


which,  for  the  latne  reaion,
the  poor  lougbt  uheller  for  the  night  (Horn.  Od.
—*"  329  i  He*.  Op.  491,  499.)  In  theae  pei-
howeier,  in  which  are  the  eailieat  example!
i  UH  of  the  word,  it  leemi  to  refer  to  placei
ct  from  the  amithi'  wotlubopa,  though  re-
torted to  in  the  bume  manner;  and  we  may  gather
from  the  giBimoanana,  that  there  were  m  the
Greek  dtiei  nurucTOUi  imall  building!  erpndcoei,
fumiihcd  with  aentt,  and  expeeed  to  the  eon,  to
which  the  idle  reiorted  to  enjoy  convenutian,  and
the  poor  to  obtain  warmth  and  ihelter,  and  which

!  called  Kfexoi;  at  Athena  alone  there  were

each.  (Eoitath.  ad  Horn.  L  d.  ;  Pniclua,  ad
Ha.  1 0. ;  Heiych.,  Etrm.  Mag.,  i,  o. ;  Kiihn,  ad
AA.  F.H.  iL  34.)  Suidai,  referring  to  the  paa-
■age  in  Heuod,  explaioi  Kiaxit  by  (d^urgr.

By  AcKihylua  (£«».  366)  and  Sopboela  {Aid.
IGO)  the  word  ii  uicd  for  a  eolemn  council ;  but
eltewhere  the  uma  writen,  aa  well  u  Herodoloi,
employ  it  to  ugnify  commoa  cooTemtion.

' the Dinun itatei  the  word  retained  the
ng  of  a  plan  of  meeting  for  delibetatioa  i


At


rla  erery  ph^t  bad  ita  ladit,  in  which  and  in
gymnaiium  the  elden  poaaed  the  greater
part  of  the  day  in  lerioui  and  apoTtiTe  conTow-
tion,  and  in  which  the  naw-bom  children  wen
preaented  for  the  deciaion  of  the  elden  aa  to
whether  they  ihould  be  brought  up  or  deatroyed.
(Plot.  £je.  1  e,  2fi  ;  Miiller,  Dor.  iii.  10.  I  2,  ir.
9.  %  1.)  Some  of  theie  Spartan  letda*  loem  to
have  been  halla  of  iome  architectural  pretenaiona :
Paunniui  mentioni  two  of  them,  the  Kiaxt  Kfw-
Torar,  and  the  Kitxt  nwUi)  (iii  14.  g  Q,  1£.
g  fi).  They  were  alio  ujcd  for  other  puipoiea.
(Alh.  ii.  P.13H,  e.)

There  were  generally  chamben  for  council  and
convenation,  called  by  tbii  name,  attached  to
tbe  temple!  of  Apollo,  one  of  wboae  epithet*  waa
Acrxi'^'ot  (H&rpocraL  >.  e. ;  PloL  dt  EI  ap.
Ddpk.  D.  365,  b.  J  MiUlei,  Dor.  ii.  2.  g  1£,  note).
Of  luch  UnAat  the  chief  waa  that  which  waa
erected  at  Delphi  by  Che  Cnidiona,  and  which  waa
celebmted  throughout  Greece,  eTcn  leaa  for  ita  own
mngnificence,  than  for  the  paintiugi  with  which  it
waa  adorned  by  Pelygaotui.  (Paua  x.  25;  Bfit-
tiger,  Arduiii.  d.  Midsra,  p.  296,  &c  ;  Did.  o/
Biog.  I.  V.  Fal^iuifui.)  {P.S.J

LEUCA  or  tEUGA. [Paal

LEX.  Lex  ia  defined  by  Papinian  (Dig.  1.
tit.  3.  a.  1):-"  ■


iponto

munii  Ripublicae  iponiiD."  Cicero  {dt  Ltg.  L  n)
define!  it  thai :  —  ~  Quae  icripto  lancit  quod  lult,
ant  jubendo,  ant  Tetaiido."  (See  alio  dt  Leg.  ii.
16.)  A  Law  ii  properly  a  rule  or  command  of  the
•oreraen  power  in  a  itate,  pnbliahed  in  writing,
and  arretted  to  and  enforced  upon  the  memben
of  lUch  Itate  \  and  thii  ii  the  proper  lenae  of  Lex

In  the  Inadtatei  (1.  lit.  3. 1.  4)  then  ia  a  defi-
ni^on  of  a  Lex,  which  haa  a  more  direct  reference
to  that  power  which  ii  the  lource  of  law; — "  Lex
ett  quod  Populua  Ronutno*  aenatorio  nugiitrata
intemgante,  lelali  Conaule,  conatitnebal.''  The
defiuition  of  C^Io  (Oell.  x.  30)  ii  "  Oenerale
juHUm  popnli  ant  plebii  rogante  magiitmtii ;"


632  LEX.

but  ih.il  dafioitim,  u  Oelliiu  oUerrei,  will  not
nppi;  to  auch  caiea  u  the  Lei  about  the  Impe-
rmm  o(  Pomp«iua,  or  that  about  the  return  of
Cicero,  which  reUted  odIj  to  IndiTiduala,  and  were
properlj  called  PrivilegiL

Of  Roman  Legei,  liewed  with  reference  lo  the
mode  of  enactment,  there  were  pioperly  two  kinda,
Legea  CuriuUte  and  Lege*  Centumtae. FlebiKita


the  Comitia  CeDtoriktR,  tbe  Comitin  Curiata  fell
aliniiet  into  dilUM  ;  but  lo  long  at  the  Republic
luted,  uid  even  under  Auf^^utua,  s  ihadaw  of  the
c^d  cmatitulion  woi  preserved  in  the  formal  cdd-
ferring  of  the  Imperinin  h;  a  Lei  Curiata  onl}',
and  in  the  ceremoo;  of  adrogation  being  efiecled
tmlj  in  thcH  Comitia. [Adoftio.]

ThuM  Legei,  properly  ao  allied,  with  which  we
are  acquainted,  were  (oiaed  in  the  Comitia  Centn-
riiLta,  and  were  propoaed  (roffabtntur)  bj  a  ma-
giatiatui  of  venntorial  rank.  Such  a  Lex  wal  al»
designated  by  the  name  Popnti  Sdltm.  (FeRoi,
1.  V.  Sckan  Pop.)  Ab  to  the  functiona  of  the
Senate  in  legiilation,  aee  Auctor  and  Sinatus.

A  Plebiacitum  wu  a  law  made  in  the  Comitia
Tribula,  on  the  r<^tion  of  a  Tribune :  "  Plebii-
citnm  eat  quod  pleba  plebeio  magiitratn  interro-
gante,  valnti  Tribuno,  conadtuebal."  (Init  1.
tiL  2^  a,  4.)  "  Accordingly,^  aaya  Guu4  (i.  3),
"  formerly  the  patricii  uied  to  say  that  they  were
not  bound  by  PlebiKila,  becauia  they  were  made
without  their  lAncliini  (n'nc  aaclorUaU  lomm)  ;
but  afterward!  the  Lei  Horteoaia  wai  carried
(b.  c  383),  which  proyided  that  PlebiKita  should
bind  tbe  whole  popului  (in  the  larger  aeuie  of  the
word),  and  thua  they  were  made  of  equal  force
with  L^ei."  <LiT.  vUL  12 1  OelL  it.  27  ;  Liau

PI7BLII.UB.)

When  the  Comilift  Tributa  were  put  on  the
aame  fasting  aa  the  Centoriata,  the  nume  Lei  wai
applied  alao  to  Picbliicila,  und  thua  Lei  became  a
generic  term,  to  which  waa  aometimei  added  the
■pcciHc  deaignalion,  at  Lei  Flebeiveacitum,  Lei
tive  Plebitdtum  cat  [PLEBiscrruu].

Cicero,  in  hia  enumeratioa  of  the  toUTeea  of
Bomin  law  (Top.  b),  doee  not  mention  Flebit-
cila,  which  he  undoubtedly  comprehended  under
**  iegefl.^  Vnrioui  Plebiicita  are  quoted  aa  leget,
auch  at  the  Lei  Faleidia  (Gaius,  iL  227)  and  Lei
AqnUia.  (Cicpni  7U/ta,  e.  11.)  In  the  Table  of
Heraclea  the  wordi  ''lege  plcbiaveacito "  appear
to  refer  to  the  tame  enactment ;  and  in  the  Lei
Rubria  there  ocean  the  phiaae  "  ex  lege  Rubria
■ire  id  ptebiai^tuni  eat"  (Savigny,  Zatmirift,  &c
Tol.  ii.p.3S6.)

The  word  Rogutio  (from  the  verb  i^o)  properly
meant  any  mcaa<ire  proposed  to  the  legitlatiTe
body,  and  therefore  it  equally  applicable  to  a  pro-
poaed Lei  and  a  pcopoeed  Plebiicitmu.  Accord-
mgly  there  omu:  tbe  eipreiaioni  "  popnlum  to-
gare,"  to  propoae  a  tei  to  the  populua ;  and  "  li^tem
rogore,"  to  propoae  a  lei.  (Fettni,  t.  v.  Rogi^.)
A  Rogalio  then  it  properly  a  pnipaeed  lei  or  a
propoaed  plebiacitom.  The  terma  Hogaic,  Rogatio
alto  apply  to  a  penon  being  propoaed  for  a  magia-
tratnt  at  (he  Comitia.  (Sail  ^i^.  29.)  The  (btm
of  a  Bogatia,  in  the  com  of  Adivgatio,  which  wM


LGX.
'  el!ee(ed  at  the  Comitia  Cnriata  (pw  pqptili  ngx-
tiotum),  it  pmerved  by  Oelliut  (t.  19)  ;  it  be^na
with  the  wordi  "  Veli^  jubealii.  At,"  and  endi
with  the  wotda  "  iu  voi  Quiritea  rage"  Tim
correaponding  expreatlou  of  aiaent  to  the  Roga^o
on  the  ]tirt  of  the  aorereini  asiemhly  wai,  Uti
Rngiia.  Tho  rejection  of  a  Rogatio  it  azpreaaed  bj
Antiqnaie  Rogationom.  (Li*.  xiiLS.)  The  (eim
Rogalio  thei«<are  included  enry  i^opoaed  Lex,
Plebiicitum,  and  PriTilegium.  for  without  a  Rogatio
there  could  be  no  command  (Jmim)  of  tbe  Popo-
lua  or  PleU.  But  the  wordi  Lei,  Plebitcitiim,
and  Privilegium  weT«  oftoi  improperly  utod  to  ei-
preit  lawt  (OelL  i.  20) ;  and  RogMiooee,  afUi  ther
bad  become  lawt,  were  itill  tamctiine*  called  Roga-
tionet.  The  term  RogatioDet  it  oH«n  qiplied  ta
meaiurei  pmpoeed  by  the  Tribune*,  and  aftanrarda
made  PleWita ;  hence  tome  wriloa  (impniiMrij)
Tiew  Rogatio  aa  aimply  equiialent  to  PlebiidlaB.
Beiidea  the  pbraie  "  n^are  Itsem,"  then  *I«  tiw
phiaica  "  l^em  fene,"  10  propote  a  Lei,  and  "  ra-
gationem  promulgate,"  to  give  public  ootice  of  tbe
conlenti  of  a  Lex  which  it  waa  intended  to  |8i>-
pOM ;  the  phrase  "  rogationem  accipere  "  appliea  Id
the  enacting  body.  "  Lei  Rogata  "  ia  equi™loit
to  "  Liei  Lata."  Legem  petfore  and  Lex  pcriata
apply  to  a  Rogatio  when  it  haa  became  a  L*x.
(Dig.  3a.  tit.2.  t.  l..^df«Ml/liZi»dtaat.)  Tb*
terma  relating  to  legiilation  are  thai  eipluned  ^
Ulpian  (tit.  1.  L  3):— "  A  Lei  ia  taid  eftber
Toffari  or  /erri;  it  ia  aaid  lAngan,  when  it  ia  re-
pealed ;  it  it  taid  dtngari,  when  a  part  it  ic-
peaJed  i  it  is  taid  nArogari,  when  tome  additioQ
It  made  to  it ;  and  it  it  said  oAru^an,  wben  MMaa
part  oF  it  it  cbangsd."  A  tabteqaent  lex  repaalsd
or  altered  a  prior  lei  which  wai  inconnttent  with
it,  II  appeara  to  hare  been  also  a  piind^e  aoMdg
the  Roi^a  that  ■  Imm  by  long  detoetada  becana
of  no  eSect.  (Comp-  Lit.  xzL  63,  and  Cic  At
Verr.  v.  18.)

Aa  to  their  fiirm,  va  can  jni^  rf  the  Roman
ityle  of  legiilation  by  the  fragment*  which  exiab
The  Romani  leem  to  bare  alwaja  adhered  to  tba
old  eipreuioiu,  and  to  hare  uied  few  anperflniraa
wordi.  Great  care  wai  taken  with  such  dansea  aa
were  proposed  to  alter  a  former  [ei,  and  great  eara
was  alio  used  to  aioid  all  interference  with  ■
fonnei  lei,  when  no  change  in  it  vat  intended,
The  Leges  were  often  diiided  into  cbapten  (capita).
(See  the  tablet  of  the  I^x  de  Oallia  Citaipiua ;
and  Cic  ad  Att.  'vi.  23.)  The  L«i  wat  ent
on  bronie  (aet)  and  depoaited  on  the  Aaarinm.
(Sueton,  OM».28iPlntarch,Cbt.WBL  17.)  Pl»-
bably  the  filing  of  a  Lei  in  a  public  place  ma
generally  only  for  a  time.  (Cic  ad  Au.  xir.
13.)  The  title  of  the  lei  wat  generally  detiTwd
from  tbe  gentile  name  of  the  magiitratm  vbo  {BV-
poted  it,  ai  the  Lex  Honcniia  from  the  dictator
Hortenitiis.  Sometime*  the  lex  took  it*  nam*
from  the  two  eonnit  or  other  mogiitiatei,  ai  th*
Acilia  C^pnmia,  Aelia  or  Aelia  Santia,  PafuB  or
Papia  Poppaca,  and  otberi-  It  laemi  to  hat*  been
the  faihion  to  omit  the  wold  tf  batween  tb«  two
names,  though  inibmcea  occur  in  which  it  waa
usad-  [Julia  Lix  it  Titia.]  A  lei  wat  tli*
often  deiignaled,  with  reference  to  ita  object,  aa
the  Lex  Cineia  de  Donis  et  Uuneiibaa,  Lex
Furia  TcitamenBris,  Lei  Julia  Mtmicipdja,  bdI
many  others.  Legea  which  related  to  a  commoai
object,  were  often  designated  by  a  coUectin  nana,
at  Xiegea  Agtatiatv  Jodickriae,  and  othen.  9«n>e'


timet  ■  ebaptv  of  ■  Ici  vu  refetred  to  under  the  '
title  of  ths  lei,  with  the  addition  of  a  nifeteiice
ta  the  contenli  of  the  chipter,  u  Lex  Julia  At
Fnndo  Dotoli,  which  wu  a  chapter  of  the  Lei
Julia  de  Adoheriit.  A  lex  wnnetiniei  look  ita
mme  from  the  cbiaf  omtent*  n  ita  Ent  chapter,  at
Lex  JiUw  de  Huitukdia  Ordiniboa.  Somelimea  h
Uk  compned  Teiy  Tuiona  proriaiona,  nteting  to
■■tten  eaeiitial];  difictmt,  knd  in  that  caae  it
w>a  tailed  Lex  3Mun. {Lu  CaKUaa  Uidu,

LiX  JULU  MuNICirALIB.]

The  lenu  in  which  ■  Lu  na  eipreiKd  were


ta  tcqiuinled  vith
lugian-  A  Lex  wia  piopoted  to  the  Comitia  in
ila  estin  form  for  Kcceptanca  or  njectioD:  thera
vu  DO  diactuiioa  on  the  cUuaea,  and  no  alteration
of  Hum  in  the  Comitiai^  and  indeed  diacuaaioa
of  dMaila  and  alteiadon  went  impouible.  Tho
Euelio  of  ■  Lex  (Riet.  ad  Herm.  n.  10  ;  Paiii-
niBi.IKg.  4G.  tiL  19.  >.  II)  made  a  Lex  whKb
the  Romui*  call  Perfecta.  In  a  Lex  Peifecta,  the
act  which  ia  done  conCrarj  to  Che  proTiiiona  of
tU  Lex,  ia  declared  bj  the  Lei  to  be  niilL If  a

Ihia  Sanctio,  it  waa  called

Taa  called  minui  qnam  per-
fccta,  when  the  act  which  wai  done  contiary  to  it*
wai  not  decland  null,  bnt  the  Lei  im-

, , :,.  ,1.  „.,,  !i

M9.*c) Thia  diTiiion  of
he  it  obrifinalj  onlj  applicable  to  rnch  Lcgea
Rfemd  to  what  the  Romana  called  the  depanmam
of  Priratam  Jna,

The  nmnba  of  Legta  waa  greatly  incieaiad  in
the  blcrpait  of  the  republican  period  (Tatit  Jml


LEX.


683


paaed,  which  an  known  under  the  geneml  name
<jf  Jahae  Lego.  [JuLua  Laoaa.1  It  ia  oftea
Mated  that  do  Legca,  properl;  to  called,  oi  Plebia-
dta,  were  puaed  after^Eha  timo  of  Aogiutui ;  bat
thi)  ia  a  miatakp.  Though  the  Toting  might  be  a
Bcra  Sinn,  atill  the  foim  waa  kept ;  and  if  thii
were  not  ao,  the  paange  of  Oaicj  (L  2,  Ac),  in
which  he  apeak*  of  lege*  and  plebiacila  aa  f«nii
tl  lenlatioa  itill  in  oae,  would  not  be  coirect
Boide*,  varioni  Iqea  am  mentioned  a*  haiing
beea  paaaed  ondar  the  Empire,  auch  aa  the  Lex
ViteOia,  a  I>ei  Agiaiia  undra-  Caligula,  and  a  Lex
Claadia  v  the  tnlela  of  women.  (Oaiui,  i.  157,
171.)  It  doea  not  appear  whtu  the  ancient  fbmu
tl  IcgiaiatiDD  vera  laid  aaide,  but  the;  certajnl;
hog  antrircd  the  popnlai  electirau  to  which  alone
the  paaage  of  Taatu  {Amx.  L  la)  refen.

In  the  Digeat  a  Senatnaconaultum  ia  aonetimea
te&rred  to  aa  a  Lex  (14.  tiL  G.  >.  9.  S  4  i  i-  U)  1
in  which  then  wai  do  gnat  improprietf  if  we
bare  t^ard  to  tha  dme,  lor  SeaatuBconinlla  were
thru  lawa.  Still  ■  SeDatoaconauItum,  properly  u
oiled,  mait  not  be  cmibnnded  with  a  Lex  properlj
■s  oiled ;  and  then  ia  no  renaon  for  tnppoiing
that  the  Lex  Claudia  of  Oaiui  wai  a  Senatuacon-
•altam,  fix  when  he  ipealu  of  a  8enatDtoonaultnni
of  the  time  of  Claudiui,  he  call*  it  anch  (1 84,  SI).
Hawarer  then  ia  no  mention  of  any  Lei  being
OBCtid  later  than  the  tune  of  Nena.  (Dig.  47.
tit  SL  a.  3.11.)

It  KDiaina  fiiithCT  to  eiplvn  the  woida  Begntio


Hogatio  i*  defined  by  Featn*  to  be^  a  command
of  the  Populua  nlsting  to  one  or  more  penoni,  but
not  to  all  penooi ;  or  nlatiag  to  one  or  mora
thing),  but  not  Co  all  That  which  the  Populua
baa  commanded  {temt)  with  reapect  to  all  per-
aona  or  thing!  ia  a  Lei ;  and  AeUna  Qallu*  Ntya,
Rogntio  ia  a  genoa  legia  ;  that  which  ia  Lex  ia  not
conaequentlj  (amtiimo)  Hogatio ;  but  Rogatio  muit
be  I-ex,  if  it  bai  been  proposed  {ngala)  at  legal
comitia  (J<"iii  ooniilui).  According  to  this  defini-
lion  a  rogatio,  when  enacted,  ia  Lei ;  then  ii  also
Lex  which  ia  not  logatio ;  thenfon  we  mnat
aaaume  a  general  name  Lex,  comprehending  Lex
Proper  and  Rogatio.  The  paaaage  of  Aeliui  Gul-
lua  11  eamiiM  by  Ooettling  (OtniMU  der  Sam.
Staativ.  &c  p.  310) ;  but  hit  emendation  ii  founded
on  mistalcing  Uie  lenee  of  the  paeiage,  and  it  con-
According  to  the  definition  of  Q&Uua,  Rogado  wo*
eqaivalent  to  PriTilegium,  a  tetm  which  cccuired
intheTwd<eTBblea<Cicd>£v.iiL  19);  and  it
aignified,  according  to  Oallu*  (Feitiii,  t.  f.  Rogado)
on  enactment  that  bad  for  it*  object  a  *ingle  pei<
mm,  which  ii  indicated  by  the  form  of  the  wa:d
iprm-Iepiiim\  **  privaa  ree  "  being  the  aame  oa
"  aingulaa  its."  The  word  priTilegiiun,  according
to  the  explana^on  of  Oallos,  did  not  coorey  any
notion  of  the  character  of  the  legialatite  meaanrei :
■  ;ht  be  beneficial  to  the  party  to  whom  it  re-
it  might  noL  Jt  ia  genemlly  used  by
UiceiD  m  the  m^Tounble  sense  (pre  Domo,  17  ;
pro  Settio,  Ad  ;  rOffationem  prwUegU  aisufna.  Bruit
33).  Accordingly  in  the  Republican  period  Priri-
legia  were  oot  general  Lawi  or  parts  of  the  general
Law;  they  bear  the  chanicter  of  an  exception  to  the
geneiBl  rule.  In  the  Corpni  Juris  Privilegium  t*
the  common  name  for  a  Jut  Singnlsre,  the  mean-
ing of  which  ii  explained  by  SaTipiy  {SgUem,  &c.
I  p  61).

Tbe  meaning  of  Lei,  a*  eontiatled  with  Jvt,  it
stated  in  the  article  JuB.

Some  other  siguificaUont  of  Lex,  which  an  not
it*  proper  signification*,  an  easily  explained  ;  for
inetance.  Lex  i*  u*ed  to  expreu  the  tenni  or  eon-
didon*  of  a  contract,  apparently  with  reference  to
force  of  all  legal  contract*. In  Engliih


it™ght


eipresied  that  it  shall  be  "  lawful "
mon  of  the  parties  to  do  a  certain  ad
is  simply  meant  that  the  partiea  agree  about  *ome-
thing,  which  is  legal,  and  which  tbeiefiire  make*
a  Tslid  agrennent.  The  work  of  Majcus  Maniliu*
(Cos.  B.  a  149)  on  sales  ii  quoted  by  Cicero  (<is
Or.  i.  £8)  aa  "  Manilianai  renalium  Tendendonun
leges."  (See  Dig.  18.  tit.  1.  i.  40,  where  Lax
mean*  conditious  of  nle.)  Accordingiy  we  find
the  exprenion  Legei  Cenioriao  to  express  the  eon-
ditiona  on  which  the  censors  let  the  public  pn>-
per^  to  &Tm  ;  and  perhaps  the  leim  also  signified
certain  standing  regulations  for  sach  matters,  which
the  ceaaon  were  empowerad  to  moke.  {Fni/.  dt
jmFiid,  1.  IB  ;  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  i.  303.)  In  both
the  csie*  jnit  referred  to,  the  phraee  Lex  Cen-
•oria  is  used  (in  the  KingnUr  number)  ;  and  thi*


whether


1  ftofa  or  no^  K


been  diiided  into  cbapten.

. Lex  limply  eome^me*  lignifie*  tha  laws  of  tha

Twelve  Table*.

The  extant  nuthoritie*  for  the  Roman  Lege*  an
Ihs  works  of  the  cluneal  Romsii  writers,  of  the
Roman  Jurist*,  and  inicriptiona. The  mMt  uafdl


6U  LEX  AELIA  SENTIA.

mtidcrn  collection  ii  th*t  in
Onlliui,  inlilled  "  Index  Lrgmn  Roman&nun  qna-
luin  Hptid  Cicennem,  sjuiquo  Scholuuttu,  item
spud  UTimo,  Velletom  Fatereulum,  A.  OeUicm  no-
ainatim  menUo  fit."  There  are  »l»o  extant  fisg-
roend  of  ieTenl  lawi  on  brona  tablet!,  inch  u
the  Lex  Thoria,  ttliich  ia  a  Lex  Agnna,  and  ii
cut  on  the  back  of  the  mne  tablet  which  containi
the  Lex  Servilia  ;  the  Lex  Rabria  ;  and  Mine  few
other  moniunenta.


z»iL  39).

ACI'LIA TRi

ACI'LIA  CALPU'RNIA.'  rAwBirus.]

AEDUTIA,  of  nncenaia  date,  which  with  two
Jnline  Legea  put  an  end  to  the  Ltg^  Actionei,
except  in  certain  cain. [JuDix  ;  Actio.]

Another  Lex  of  the  time  name  prohibited  the
propoiet  of  a  lex,  which  created  an;  officeor  power
(Mi-otio  ac  pBltttru),  from  hating  inch  office  or
power,  and  eren  excluded  hia  collegoe,  co|{iiui  and
alliiieL  (Cic  «  Rail  ii.  S,  when  he  mentitoi*  alw
a  Lex  Licinia,  and  in  the  pro  Domo,  20.)

AE'LIA  Thia  Lex  and  a  Fulia  Lex  paued
about  the  end  of  the  ajxth  centur;  of  the  city,  gaie
to  all  the  magiitratea  the  obnonciatiD  nr  power  of
pnTenting  or  diaaolting  the  comiiia,  by  obaerrinj;
the  omnu  and  declaring  them  to  be  un&ionisble.
(Cic.  Plu!.  iL  32,  pro  Salio,  \S,  ad  AH.  iL  9.)

There  ia  aome  dilGcultj  in  ataling  the  preciae
natntn  of  theae  two  Ltga ;  for  it  ia  nunt  probable
that  then  were  two.  The  paMogea  in  which  the;
■re  mentioned  are  collected  in  Orellii  OnomaiticoD,
Index  Legum.

AE'LJA  Dk  Colohus  DuiDciNDia.  (Ut.
xiiiT.  53.)

AE^IA  SE'NTIA.  Thia  taw  which  wai
paaacd  in  the  time  of  Angnatna  (about  A.  D.  3),
chiefly  related  the  manumiaiioa  of  alaie* ;  ■
natter  that  baa  been  put  nndei  cartaiii  reftriclion*
in  modem  ilava  itatee  aleoL

Bj  one  proilaioD  of  thia  law  aUrea  who  had
been  pot  in  chsbu  by  their  tnaaten  aa  a  pnniah-
nient,  or  bmnded,  or  lubjeeted  to  the  other  puniih-
meata  mentioned  in  the  law  (Oaiua,  i.  13),iftbcy
were  afterwnrda  manumitted  either  hj  the  aame
maitcr  or  another,  did  not  become  Roman  citiiena
or  eyen  Laiini,  but  were  ia  the  claaa  of  Peregrini
dediticii.  [Uionicii.]  The  law alao made regnla-
tiona  ai  to  the  age  of  ilaTO  who  might  be  mann-
mitted.  It  enacted  that  alxTca  under  thirty  yam
of  age  who  were  manumitted,  only  became  Roman
cttiieni  when  they  were  manumitted  by  the  Vin-
dicta,  and  after  a  leosl  cauie  for  manuminion  had
been  eitabliahed  before  a  caDiiliam.  What  waa
a  legal  canae  (cann  juMa),  and  hew  the  cotui-
lium  wai  conatitutcd,  are  explained  by  Gaioa  (i.
19,  30).  Theae  conailia  for  the  manomiadon  of
ilaTct  were  held  at  atated  time*  in  the  prorincef,
and  in  Rome.  A  lUre  under  thirty  yeara  of  age
could  become  a  Roman  citizen  if  he  waa  made
&ec  and  hem  by  the  teatament  of  a  maatcr,  who
waa  not  aolTcnL  (Oaina,  L  21.)  The  law  alu
oontained  ptoTiaiona  by  which  thoae  who  were
under  thirty  yean  of  age  at  the  time  of  menuini*-
lion,  and  had  become  Latini  m  mnaequence  of
manumiiaian,  might  acquire  the  Roman  dtiaenabip
on  certain  conditiona,  which  wens  theae.  They
muat  hare  taken  to  wife  a  Roman  citizen,  or  a
Latiita  oidoniaria  or  a  woman  of  the  aanw  daaa  a*


LEOES  ANNALES.
themaelrei,  and  mnat  ha<ra  had  ai  eridence  of  Aat
bet  the  pretence  of  fix  Roman  utiieoa  i^  full
age,  and  bate  b^^ten  ■  aoD  who  had  attained  the
age  of  one  year.  On  ahowing  theae  &cla  to  Iha
praetor  at  Rome,  or  to  the  goTemor  in  a  itfD-
lince,  and  the  magiatiata  dedating  that  the  mcta
were  prered,  the  man,  bta  wife,  and  hiichild  be~
ouno  Roman  citiiena.  If  the  fother  died  before
he  had  proved  hie  cue  before  the  m
mother  could  do  it,  and  the  k^  e


de&Bnd  hia

creditor!,  oito  de&aod  >  pattoD  of  hit  patrooBl
righta,  the  ad  of  mannmiaaioQ  waa  made  innlid
by  thia  law.  A  pemn  vaia  the  age  i^  twenty
yean  waa  alao  prereoted  &om  manumitting  mj
alaie,  except  by  the  prooM  of  Vindiclai,  and  aft^
eatabliahing  a  legal  ame  bef<ffe  a  conailiiini.
The  Gooscqaesce  waa  that  though  a  male,  whs
had  completed  hia  fourteenth  year,  coold  make  a
will,  he  contd  not  by  hit  will  manumit  a  aUve
(Oaina,  L  37—4(1).  A  nule  imder  the  age  al
twenty  conld  manumit  hia  alaTe  ao  aa  to  make  him
a  LatiuUB,  but  tbia  alao  ifiqnircd  a  legal  cause  to  be
affirmed  by  a  conailium.  The  proiiaioni  of  the  L«i
Aelia  Sentia,  aa  to  manumitting  alarea  for  the  pai^
poae  of  debaadingcrediton,  did  not  apply  to  Petc-

C'  \L,  nnCil  the  preTiiion  waa  extended  for  their
ofil  by  a  Sctum  in  the  time  of  Hadriui,  The
other  ptoTiaiona  of  the  Lex  did  not  apply  to  Pere-
gnaL  The  application  of  the  prineiplea  of  the
Law  ia  ahown  in  other  paaaagei  of  Qaiua  (L  fid,
ea,  70,  71,  80,  139,  iiL  6,  73,  7i).  In  a  fin
itate,  when  maLomiuion  mtut  chwge  tile  condi-
tion of  alBTei  into  that  of  citiiena,  the  importance
imiting  and  r^ulatuH  the  mammuttiiu;  power
brioua. Under  the  later  Empire  (ueh  ttga>


if  Auguitm,  when  the  atalua  of  a  Ciria

not  yet  loet  ita  value,  and  the  aamblaoce  ol

the  old  conititutioo  atill  existed (Ulnian,  fyag,

til.i.1  Dig.SS.  tit.G.  1.67,60;  3S,  Dt.  Z  ilSS;

"icit.  Amal,  IT.  Si.)

AEMI'LIA  ni  CiN»oliiBtf&  A  Lex  paHed
the  Dictatorahip  of  Mamerou  Aemilina  (b.  c
433),  by  .which  the  Cenaora  were  elected  for  a
year  and  a  half,  inat^wd  of  a  whole  luatrunL  (Lit.
IT.  24,  ix.  33.)  After  thia  Lei  they  had  accord-
iiuly  only  a  year  and  a  half  allowed  than  fix
hol^g  the  cenaui  and  letUig  out  the  public  workj

AEHI'LIA  SAE'UIA  [CoaNKi.M  BiiaiA.]

AEMI'LIA  LE'PIDI,  AEMI'LIA  SCAURL
[Sdhtuakiai  LiGZl.]

AORA'RIAE.  [AdBARiAiLiouiandLmi
AFtrtaiA  ;  Cassia  ;  Cohnxlia  ;  FlaNixia  ;
FlaVIA  1 JUMA  ; LiCIHIA  J Uahilu  ; Skn-

tONIA  ; SlBVlMA  J  ThorIA.]

A'MBITUS. [AMBiTua.]

A'MFIA,  a  Lei  propoaed  by  T.Anpioa  and
T.  Uhienui,  tr.  pL  b.  c  64.  by  wtieh  Cn,  Ptan-

iai  wot  allowed  to  wear  a  cnwn  of  hay  at  tlie

idi  Circenaca,  and  the  tike. (VdL  Pat.  ii.  40  ;

ianCaiB.xxxTii.21.)

ANNA'LES  LEOESinn  thoae  Legri  which
determined  at  what  age  a  man  might  be  a  candi-
^  -fortheaeTeralmagiatratua.  (Cit PM^i t.  1 7.)
he  £rat  Lex  which  particniaily  detemined
the  age  at  which  a  man  might  be  a  andidale  for
the  aeveial  m^istiatn*  waa  the  ViUi). ii  irai


LEX  BABBIA  CORNBLIA.

pnpiMd  by  L.  Villiiu,  It.  nl.  b.  c  180  (LW.  xxt.

£,  iL  U.) According  to  UB  Lex  a  man  might

be  dccwd  qiuHlor  al  lbs  igt  af  thirty-one,  and

Duuol  (t  fbrtj-lhice. [Vulia.]

Then  11  mill  to  hne  been  alio  ■  Lex  Pinaria

oa  thii  HibjecL  (Cic  dt  OraL  iL  65.)
A'NTIA.  [SuKTUiBiiB  Liau.]
ANTO'NIA  DB  TBiBKiKHiBDa,  ahont  B-c.

72,  bj  vhich  Theimeuu  in  Piiidia  wai  reecg-

niHd *• Libem. (Pochta,  fail.  toL  i. g  69 ;

Diriuen, SMurfaovaa  lUn-  dm  PUbiaibBn  da


.)

ANTO'NIAE,  tb»
pmpaatd  af  pawed  fay  the  infineDMof  M.  Astanini,
aiier  the  death  of  the  DictatOF  J.  Caeaar,  nch  a*
the  Jndieiari&.  [JuDix.p.6S0,  a.]  Another  lei
•bat  vaa  pnmulnatad  altowed  an  apjimlto  thepopu-
h*  afker  conTJCttoa  for  Via  or  Uajeitaa.  (Cic  PkO.
L  9.)  Varimi  other  meamrea  propoied  by  M.
Aaloniiu  an  mentioned  b;  Cicero  [PIdL  L  1,
iL  43,  T.  S,  S),  DiDU  CaMiiu  (ilit.  51,  il*.  9, 20,
%\,  M,  ziTi.  93,  34),  and  Appiui  (ZMt  Civ.  iil
37.30.)

APULE1A,  gaie  a  lurtty  an  action  aganut
hii  a>-«iretie*  for  whattTcr  be  bad  paid  aboTe  bii
.hare.  [lNT«I.ca«.10.1

APULE'IA  AORATIIA,  pmpOHd  bj  the  tii-
hane  L.  Apoleina  Satuminaa,  B-C  101.  (LiT.
fyd.  69 ;  Aifian,  BdL  Cn.  i.  29 ;  Cic  pro  Sedio,
H,47.)

APULE'IA  Da  CoLoims  DBDrcBHou  (Cic
fn  BtiBio,  31).

APULE'IA  FRUHENTARIA,  propnacd
■bmt  the  HniB  timo  b;f  the  nine  tribune.  (ArtcL
at  Htnm.  L  12.) [FairXBHTAtiui  LiqkkJ

APULE'IA  MAJE8TAT1S. [M^JBetid.]

AQHI'LIA [Dahni  Inidku  Actio.]

ATB'RNIATARPEIA.B.cWB.  Thii  Lei


■Ned  tbeir  anthoiity ;  bat  it  Bled  the  highott  fine
at  two  aheep  and  thiitf  aieD,  or  two  oxen  and
tkiitj  ihimi,  Ibr  the  aatharitiet  nrj  in  thii.  (Cie.
dt  R^  iL  36 ;  Dioayi.  i.  60  ;  OelL  iL  I  ;  Fettiu,
J.  n.  JfaltiM,  Ombmi,  Paalatm,  Niebubr,  HiH.
€fRom»,  ToL  iL  p.  300.)

ATIA  DE  8ACERD0T1IS  (I.C.  63),  pre-
poaed  bj  iha  tiibiiiie  T.  Atiu  Labienni,  re-
poded  tlw  Lex  Conwlia  da  SacetdoUii.  (DioD
Can.  xnriL  37.)

ATIXIA  MA'RCIA,  ei


[Eua


(QelL  I
«t]


l2.)


ATI'NIA,  of  unctftain  dale,  waa  a  idebbdtmn
wbidi  gan  the  rank  of  laailor  to  a  tribiuw.  (OelL
DT.  81) Iha  mnaan  imhatit;  originated  with  C
Atistai,  who  mi  tribune  B.C.  ISO. (Plin.  0.  M
Tii  46 ;  Cic  Bro  Dome,  41.)
A  IJFI'DI  A.(  AitBmja ;  SBNAToacoKauLTnii.]
AURE'LU JUDICIA'RIA. [Jddiz, p.
«S«,«.J
AURE'LIA  TRIBUNICIA. [TribiinlJ
BAE'BtA  (b.  c  193),  which  eoKted  that  tbnr
pnwteci  and  til  pfBdoia  iboald  be  chosen  in  al-
Kraste  Teaif  (Lit.  tL  44) ;  hot  the  law  «u  not
•tacTTcd. (HoTfT,  Oralor.  Anua.  Fn^m.  p.  90,
Znded.)

BAE'BIA  CORNS'LU. [Aiuirvg.]


LBX  CINCIA.  68S

CAECI'LIA  DE  CENSOTtlBUS  a  CEN-
SORIA  (B.C.  M),  ptopued  bjr  Metellui  Scipii^
repealed  a  Clodia  L<i  <B.c.  5B),  wbich  had  prs-
•ctibed  certain  regular  fonni  of  proceeding  for  Iha
CeDMOn  in  eieiciaing  their  tiinctiont  Bi  inipecton
of  Morel,  and  had  reqoired  the  concurrence  of  both
Cenjorg  to  inflict  the  Dota  cenirav.  When  a
iHiBlor  had  been  already  coDTicted  before  an  ordi-
naiy  coort,  the  lex  permitted  the  Ceniora  to  re-

(Dion  Ciua.  iL  57,  iiirilL  13;  Cic  jn  SMo,
25  1  Dig.  SO.  tiL  16.  a.  203.  Dt  Portono.)

CAECI'LIA  DB  VECTIOA'LIBUS  (b.  c
6S),  releaaed  landi  and  harboun  in  Italy  from  the
payment  of  taita  and  dnei  (/ortoru).  The  only
vecti|^  nmuning  afteT  the  paating  uf  thia  lex  irat
the  Vicfwma.  (Dion  C^aiL  xxivU  51 ;  Cic  oif  Jtt.
iL16.  otfQantLlO.)

CAECI'LIA  DI-DIA  (b.  a  9B).  forbade  tlw
pnipoiing  of  a  Lex  Satnni,  on  the  grennd  that  tba
people  night  be  compelled  either  to  ToCe  for  tome-
thmg  which  they  did  not  approve,  c^  to  reject  •omo-
thing  which  they  did  approre,  it  it  waa  pcopoaed
to  liiera  in  Ibii  manner.  Thii  lex  waa  not  alwaya
opeiBliTe.  It  alas  contained  K  pitmiion  that  Legei
mnit  be  promulgated  "  trinii  nundinii  "  before
they  were  propoKd.  (Cic.  PUL  ».  3,  pro  Zlknu,
16,  20,  <KtJtl.iL  9.)  [L»  and  LiciNiA  JfNU.]

CAECI'LIA  Di  P.  SuLLi  n  P.  Adtbonio
(Onllii  Ononuitleou').

CAE'LIA  TABELLA'RIA. [Tabrlkarub

CALI'OULAE lex AORA'RIA. [Ha>

CALPU'BNIA  DE  A-MBITU.  [AmnTS.]
CALPU'RNIADECONDICTIO'NK.  IPbb

COMDICTIONXM.]

CALPU'RNIADEREPETUNDIS.  [Rbpb-

CANULE'IA  (B.a  445),  etiabliahed  eonnn-
biom  between  the  Patra  and  Plebi,  vhich  bad
been  nkon  away  by  the  hiw  of  the  Twdre  Tablca.
(LiT.  It.  1,  4  ;  Cic  ^  A9>.  iL  37.)

CA'SSIA  (B.C.  104),  propoaed  by  the  tribmis
L.  Canini  Longinu,  did  not  allow  a  perton  to  re*
nuun  s  Knator  who  had  been  oonTicted  in  a  Judi-
cium Popnli,  or  whose  Imperimn  had  been  abro-
gated by  tba  popnlui.  (Aacoo.  »  Ok.  Cbrs«L
p.  78,  ei  Orolli.)

CA'SSIA  (Tacit.  Jm.  xL  95),  which  empowered
the  Dictator  Caeaar  to  add  to  the  inunber  of  tba
Patiicii,  to  pnrait  their  extinction.  (Compare
Suelon.  Caa.  41.)  C.  Octatini  waa  made  •  pa-
trician W  thii  lei. (Soeton.  A^.  3.)

CA'SaiA  AORA'RIA,  propMed  hv  At  taad
Sp.  Cajtiu,  B.  0.  486.  (Ut.  u.  41  ;  Dionyi.  nii
76.)

CA'SSIA  TABELLA'RIA. .  [Tabillabub

CA'SSIA  TERE-NTIA  FRUMENTA-RIA
(a.  c.  73)  foe  the  diitribntion  of  eom  among  the
poor  citiieni  and  the  purebaiing  of  it  (Cic  Vtrr.
iiL  70,  T.  31.) [FacuBNTAiuAB  L«o«a]

CIN'CIA  LEX,  or  MUNERA'LIS.  Thiilex
waa  a  plebiacitom  puaed  in  the  time  of  the  tribnne
M.  Cincioi  Alimentu)  (b.  c  204),  and  entitled  Dt
Datu  tt  MtBurthif  (Cic  dt  Orat  IL  71,  ad  AH.
L  20 ;  LtT.  nxiT.  1.)  One  prorition  of  thi>  law,
which  fbtbode  a  pcnon  to  take  anything  for  hii
paini  in  pleading  a  cooie,  ii  recorded  by  Tacilai
{Ami,  n  6),  Na  jnu  06  amtau  anndaa  ptamiaM


886  LEX  CINCIA.

ifnawM  aeeipiaL  In  the  ttnio  of  Auglmtiu,  tbe
lex  Cincn  wu  confirmed  bj  a  Kiutuuonnilntin
<pion  Cm.  liv.  IB),  and  >  penalty  of  fooi  tim«
the  4iun  receiTed  waa  impoicd  on  tha  Advocste.
Thii  fact  of  coofiimation  will  eiplaia  a  puaafte  ia
Tiatut<,Aim.a]H2).  The  law  oni  ao  iu  modi.
Gcd  in  the  tune  of  Claudina,  that  an  advocate  wa*
allovod  to  rtceiie  ten  leatertia ;  if  he  took  anj
■am  beyond  that,  he  wa*  liable  to  be  pnaecnUd
fbi ropetundaa  (rrpdundammtemfbatmr^'IaaX^  Aim.
xi  7 )  lee  slao  Sucton.  Ntro,  17,  and  tbe  note  in
Bunnasu'i  edition).  [Ripbtdndai.]  Itappean
that  thl>  pcnniuion  wu  n  far  rtetncted  in  Tra-
jan *•  time,  that  tbe  fee  could  not  be  [Aid  till  the
work  wa«  done. (Plin.  £>.  t.  21).

So  fill  the  Cincian  law  preienU  no  difficulty ;
but  it  appau*  that  tbe  proiiaioni  of  the  law  were
not  limited  to  tbe  caae  already  lUUed.  They  ap-
plied alas  to  ^fti  in  (general :  oi,  at  leatt,  there
were  eoactmentt  which  did  limit  the  amount  of
what  a  penon  could  ritb,  and  bIh  required  gifia


any  other  than  tbe  Cincian  law.  The  nomerotu
Gontiadictioni  and  diflicultiea  which  perplex  tbit
(abject,  BIS  pcrhi^  laliihclorily  reconciled  and
remoTed  by  the  fbllowing  conjectore  of  SaTignj
<F(*er  die  La  Cmaa,  ZeiiMirift,  &c.  ii.) : —
"  Gitu  which  exweded  a  certain  amount  were  only
Talid  when  mndo  hy  mancipatio,  in  jnie  cosnio,  nt
by  traditkia :  imoii  gif^  conaeqaently  were  lefi  to
■  perfon*!  free  choice  ai  before  ;  but  Urge  giftt
(except  in  the  caia  of  near  relation*)  were  to  be
accompanied  with  ccrUun  fbnnalitie*."  The  object
of  the  lav,  according  lo  Savigny,  wu  to  prevent
fboliih  and  haaty  pfta  to  a  la^  amount ;  and
conaequendy  waa  intended  among  other  thlngi  to
prevent  fraod.  Thii  wai  effected  by  dectuing
that  certain  fomu  were  ncceuary  to  nmlio  the  gin
T^id,  nich  a  maneipatio  and  in  jure  ceuio,  both
of  which  required  Bome  lime  and  ceremoay,  and  so
allowed  the  giTcr  opportunity  to  reflect  on  what
ha  wna  doing.  Tbeaa  fotmi  abo  could  not  he  ob-
•etred,  except  in  the  praeeDca  of  other  penoni,
which  waa  an  additional  Kcurity  againit  fnuid.
It  ii  true  that  thii  advantage  wai  not  Kcured  by
the  law  in  tbe  eaae  of  the  moat  valuable  things
ntc  maadpi,  namely,  money,  for  the  trantfening  of
which  bare  liadition  wBi  tnfficient ;  but,  on  the
other  band,  a  gift  of  a  bu(^  anm  of  rndy  money  it
one  that  people  of  oU  gitu  are  ieatt  likely  to  make.

Saiigny  condudei,  and  principally  from  a  pa>-
nge  in  Flinyl  Utten  (x.  3),  that  the  Cincian  law
originally  contained  no  exception  ui  bvour  of  rela-
tive! J  but  that  all  gifb  above  a  oerlain  amount
required  the  fbnnalitiea  already  mentioDed.  The
enipemr  Antoninni  Pirn  introduced  an  exception  in
favour  of  parenti  and  children,  and  alao  of  near
collatenl  kinimen.  It  npp«n  that  thii  exception
wu  lubaeqnenlly  aboliihed  (Cod.  Hennog.  vl  1),
but  wu  reilotcd  by  Conitantma  (a.  n.  3 1 9)  ao  far
at  it  wu  in  hvoor  of  parenla  and  children ;  and  lo
it  continued  ai  long  u  the  pcDtiiioni  of  the  Cincian
law  were  in  foiee.

A(  to  the  amount  beyond  which  tha  taw  ibchade
a  gift  to  be  made,  except  in  confotmity  to  ita  pn-
Tuiona,  lee  Savigny,  .StJUcir^  &c  iv.  p.  36.

The  matter  of  the  lex  Cindn  ia  alio  ducuued  in
■n  elaborate  cway  by  Haue  (ftWwtoia  Matum,
lS27},andit  ii  diacoaKd  by  Pnchta, /ul.  voL  ii.
I  20S. Theie  aiaminationi  of  t^>  rabjec^  Ugo-


LEGES  CORNELIAE.
Cher  with  the  eatiy  of  Saiigny.  will  furniih  tba
render  with  all  the  neceamy  nferaucea  and  noi-
terialt  for  inveitigaung  thU  labjeet

CI'AU'DIA,  a  Lex  jaoed  in  tiie  tme  i<  tho
emperor  Clan^ua,  took  awny  tbe  agnatORim  tulcla
in  the  caae  of  women, (aaina,  1171.)

CLAU'OIADiSaNAToaiB[is,B.c2la  Tba
proviiioD*  of  thii  Lex  are  itated  by  Livy  (xxi.
63),  and  alluded  to  by  Cicero  (h  Terr.  t.  IS)  u
antiquated  and  dnd.

CLAU'DIADiSociM,a.c.l77.  (LiT.ili.8,9.)

CLAU'DIA  Di  SiNATtT  coonANDO  Hale-
nnoRtiH  (Clc  M  Vtrr.  ii.  €9).

CLO'DIAE,  the  name  of  vanoni  plebiicila,  pn-
poied  by  Clodiui  when  tribune,  B.C.  £8.

CLoniA  ni  Auspiciia,  pcevenled  the  nagia-
tntui  from  diBolving  the  Comitia  Tributa,  by
drclaiing  that  the  auipicea  were  un&voarHble.
Thii  tec  therefore  lepcaled  the  Adia  and  Fufia.
It  alio  enacted  that  a  lex  might  be  paaaed  on  the
Diea  FutL  (Dion  Cau.  xxxviil  13;  Cic  a
Vatm.  U,  m  PiKm.  t.  &.) [Aklia  Lbi.]

CLoniA  DI  Ci.vsomBus. [Cabcilia.]

ClODIA DB  CiVIBUB  RoKANIS iKTBKBIIpnE,

to  the  effect  that  "  qui  ciiem  Romanum  indeinoa-
tum  interemiuet  ti  aqoa  et  igni  inteidiceretor."
(Veil.  Pat.  ii.  i&.)  Il  wai  in  conieqnence  of  tbia
lex  that  the  interdict  wu  pronounced  againat  Ci-
cero, who  eonaiden  the  whole  pioceeding  aa  a
privilcgium.  (/^  Dona,  18,  Ac,  PoM  As£(.u
.Sn.  2.  S,  &e.  1  Dion  Can-zixviiL  14.)

Clouia  Frumintaria,  by  which  the  tnnt,
which  had  focmerly  been  lold  to  tha  poof  citiaeni


a  Ion


. (Dion


Cic  pro  Amjio,  10.)  [Fkumbntabiai  Lbobs.]
Clodca  dx  Son  a  lit  ambus  or  OB  Cof-LBOiis
reitored  tbe  Sodalitia  which  had  been  aboliihed  by
a  ■fxintniconuiltnm  of  the  year  B.  c  80,  and  per-
mitted the  fonnatian  b(  new  aodalitia.  (Cie.  m
Pit.  i,  pro  Sal.  26,  ad  AO.  iii.  1&  ;  Dion  Cbm.
ixxviiL  13.)

C1.ODIA  DM  LiBntTINOBDH  SvyTRA.aU» ((^

pro  Mil.  12,  33).

ClODIA  DB RkOB PTOLBVAm BT DB KXBU-

LIBI7S  BvZANTims  (VclL  PaL  ii.  H;  Cie.  pn
£ki>a.  8,  20,  pm  Sad.  26  ;  Dion  Cau.  xxxriii,  30  ;
FluL  OU.  Min.  Si).

There  wen  other  n-caUed  Legca  Clodiae,  whick'
were  bowever  Privil^ia.

COE'LIA [Cabua.]

COMUISSO'RIA LEX. I:Cdiijiibw>ua

LBIt.]

CORNE'LIAE.  Variooi  Icgei  paned  in  ilia
dictalonhip  of  Sulla  and  by  h>i  inSnaDce,  am  ao
called. (Liv.  EpH.  89.)

AoRARiA,  by  which  many  of  the  inbaUlaDla  of
Elmtia  and  lotioni  woe  deprived  of  the  eomphts
civitu  and  retained  only  the  comBuniaBi,  and  a
huge  part  of  their  land*  vera  made  PnUieion  uri
given  to  military  ooleiufta.  (Cio.  mAcB.  u.  38,
iii.  2,  3.)

Db  Cititatx.  (Uv.  Epit  86  ;  Cie;  pra  Damt.
30,  ;in)  Caieim.  33,  35  ;  SalL  Ifiit.  f^.  lib.  I.
OraC.  LepidL)

Da  FALHii. [FAi,nn>.]


[INJ


X]


,  p.  6S0,  a.]

Db  Haoibtbatibus  (Ap{HaB,  BiO.  OJn.  i.
too,  101),partl;aran*WBtofoldPlehiM!ia(LJT.
Tii.  i2.  X.  18).

Majibtatu [lLuam»,1 '


LEOES  CORNELIAE.
NnimABiA. [Faibum.]

Dl  PkOSCBlFTlONB IT  PrOSCHIPTU. [Pll(


I SlCA-


]

De  pKonNcnB  Okdinindis  (Ci
9,  iu.  6,  8,  10).
D«  Pahkidio. [See  balnw,  L

Db  Rbjictionb  Jddicuu  (Cic  Vtrr.  ii.  SI  ;
ud  Onllii  MimHuMxn).

Db  RiriTUNDiB  (Cicpn  AoWr.  4).

Db  Suehdotiu. [Sjlcibdotu.)

Db  Sbntbntia  Fbebnua  (Cic  pro  (Sumt.
ce.30,  27).  Thii  wh  probablf  odIj  ■  cbiptei  Id
>  li»  Jadiciuia.

Db  Skakiii  it  ViNirms.  A  lair  of  the
Twfln  Tablet  eontiuned  mM  pTDTiiion  u  to
bomirida  (Plin.  H.  N.  iiiiL  3),  bat  lliii  ia
■U  that  wc  know.  It  ii  gencnll;  umuned
ihat  tba  law  of  Nama  Ponpiliot,  quoted  \y  Fes-
toi  ((.  c  /'ons  Qwwjtoro),  "  Si  qui*  bamiiMm
libcRun  dola  Kient  DMrti  duit  paricidB  nto,"  WBi
iDcorpantcd  in  the  Tvelre  Tablin,  and  i>  die  law
of  homudde  to  vbieb  Plinj  refen  ;  but  thie  can-
not be  proTed.  It  i<  f^enlly  inppoied  that  the
hn  ik  the  TireWe  Tablet  contained  piDViiione
a^unat  incantatioiu  {vabta^  earmm)  and  poinon-
isg,  both  of  which  oBenee*  were  >1m  included
■ader  pamcidiuni :  the  murdeier  of  a  parent  waa
■eved  np  in  a  nch  (mImh  or  aJUia)  and  thnim
inta  B  liTcr.  It  wat  under  the  jHvniiiHia  of  eome
eld  law  that  the  lenBle  b;  a  conenltum  ordered  the
ajDnle  P.  Scipio  and  D.  Brntui  (a.  c  I$e)tain-
qnira  into  the  moider  in  the  Silva  Scantia  tSUBa
aOa,  Cic  finfu,  23}.  The  lex  Conelia  de  li-
carik  et  Teneficii  va*  puicd  in  the  tina  of  the
diclBlor  Sulla,  B.  c  83.  The  lei  contained  prDvi-
■oot  •■  to  death  or  fin  auied  b;  dolna  matoa,
and  againit  penoni  going  aboal  armed  with  the
iateotiiBi  of  killing  or  thieiing.  The  law  not  onl;
inrided  fcr  cuei  of  poitouing,  bnt  contained  pni.
•iuaoa  agaiuit  thoM  who  nude,  Kitd,  bought,
iiiniiMiiit,  or  g>Te  poiion  for  the  puipoee  of  poiion-
mg  ;  also  agauut  a  magiiliatua  or  aenator  whs
eacii|iitvd  in  order  that  a  peceon  might  be  con-
demnad  in  a  judicium  pnbucam,  &c  (Compere
Cic;  pn>  OmimL  c  M,  with  Dig.  t9.  tiL  8.)  To
the  pnmuiHii  of  thii  U«  wu  lubiaquentl;  added
a  ieostnaeofmltain  agalntt  mala  ncrificia,  olher-
wiee  called  impia  ucri£ck,  the  agenti  in  which
wa«  bnMght  within  the  proritione  of  thii  lex.
The  pdniumtnt  inflicted  1^  the  law  wai  the  in-
tecdictia  aqi«*  et  ignii,  uxording  to  ioi
wrilcn.  Haician  (Dig.  49.  tit.  8.  a  8}
thii  puaiahnieDt  waa  depoitatio  in  ii
Iwmitiuu  adeotio.  Theae  itatamenu  an  recon-
cilable whoi  we  comider  that  the  deportatlo  under
the  (BipeRm  took  the  place  of  the  interdictio,  and
the  cx]reaBDO  in  the  Dlgtat  wu  luited  to  the
tiBta  Mf  the  writcn  or  toe  compilan,  Beaidee,
it  appean  that  the  lex  waa  modified  by  Tariona
■enataacaiinlEa  and  imperial  reacripta.

Thit  Lax  Pompeia  de  Panicidili,  puaed  in  the
tine  ef  Cn.  Pompeiua,  extended  the  crime  of  par-
ricide to  the  killing  (dole  malo)  of  a  bfolbn,  titter,
Bnde,  aunt,  ud  many  oAd  lelationt  eunmerated
bf  JlaniaaDi  (Dig.  19.  tit.  9.  a.  1 ) ;  thia  enumera-
tiim  alao  caofnice  titricua,  noTena,  ]^>ignua,  pri-
?igiM,  jMionna,  patrona,  an  arna  who  killed  a
BCpoe,  and  a  mother  who  killed  a  filina  or  iilla  ,-
hot  it  did  not  extend  to  a  biher.  All  pririei  to
A*  criiDi  weM  abo  pouiiUd  br  the  law,  md


LEOES  CORNELIAE.  G87

attonpti  Bl  the  crime  alio  came  within  iti  pn>-
Titioua.  The  pnniahment  wat  the  ums  as  that
affixed  by  the  lex  Cornelia  de  ticariU  (Dig.  L  a),
by  which  innit  be'  meant  the  aanie  puniahment
that  the  lex  Cornelia  affixed  to  Crimea  of  the  nuno
kind.  He  who  killed  a  fiither  or  mother,  gmnd-
&thcr  or  grandmoths,  waa  puniahed  (more  majiH
mm)  by  being  whipped  till  he  bled,  town  op  in  a
■lek  with  a  dr^,  cock,  riper,  and  ape,  and  thrown
into  the  KA,  if  the  sea  waa  at  hand,  uid  if  not,  by
a  conalitutiaa  ef  Hadrian,  he  waa  eipoaed  to  wild
beaata,  cr,  in  the  time  of  Panloa,  to  be  burnt.  The
ape  woald  appear  to  be  a  late  addition.  The  mar-
dertn  of  a  mther,  mother,  grand&ther,  gtsnd-
mother  only  were  poniihad  in  thia  roamDer  (Mo-
deri.  Dig.  19.  tit.  9.  a.  9)  1  other  parrjeidea  were
■imply  put  to  death.  From  thia  it  ia  clear  that  the'
lex  Cornelia  eonUlned  a  proriaion  aoainit  parri<
cide,  if  we  are  rightly  informed  at  to  tne  pcoriaiont
de  licarili  et  Teneficie,  anlen  then  wui  a  lepatate
CoTHlia  lex  de  panicidiii.  At  already  obterred,
the  ptoiiiioni  of  thoae  two  legea  ware  modified  in
TBrioni  wnyt  under  the  emperora.

It  appeon  fnm  the  taw  of  Numa,  quoted  by
Pettui  (a  V.  Porta  Quaetlam),  that  a  pairidda
waa  any  one  who  killed  another  dole  malo.  Cicero
ipro  Ran.  An.  c  26)  appesn  to  nie  the  word  in
ita  limited  aenee,  aa  he  ipeaki  <rf  the  puniahment
of  the  culleuB.  In  thii  limited  lenia  there  teem*
no  impropriety  in  Catiline  being  odled  parricide,
with  refennce  to  hit  country  ;  and  the  day  of
the  dictator  Caetar'a  death  might  be  callrd  a  parri-
eidium,  eonaidering  the  circnmatancei  under  which
tbe  name  wu  given.  (Snet.  Ctw,  c.  S8.)  If  the
original  meaning  of  porricida  be  what  Feabii  aaya,  it
may  be  doubted  if  the  etymology  of  Uie  word  (pater
and  caado)  ia  correct ;  finitappearathatiaricidaor
perricida  meant  murderer  generally,  and  ofterwardi


tain  pent


IT  lelati


ahip.  If  the  word  was  originally  patricida,  the  law
intended  to  make  all  malicious  killing  at  great  an
oilenca  aa  parricide,  though  it  nould  appear  that
parricide,  properly  to  callel,  wat,  Irom  the  time  of
the  Twelve  Tables  at  1ea•^  apecialty  punished  with
the  eulleua,  and  other  murden  wen  noL  (Dig.
*».  tit.  8,  9  ;  pBolus,  Jiaxpt.  SiKtatf.  t.  tit.
24  1  Dirkaeu,  UtbtniAt,  ie.  dtr  ZuOftafilgaitit,


[3d,


«■]

TiSTAMINTAILU. [FaLBUU.]

Thib'jnicia,  which  dimiuiibed  the  power  of  tha
Tribuni  Plebis.  (Veil  Pat  ii.  30;  Appian,  £^
£XB.iL29-,  Caea  flifl:  Ob.  I  r.)

Unciahia,  appean  lo  hare  been  a  lax  which
bwered  the  rate  of  inlereat,  and  to  have  been
paaaed  about  tha  Mme  time  with  tha  Legea  8um-
tuariae  of  Sulla. (Featu,  i.  v.  UmHana.}

Di  Vadihonio. [Vadinonium.J

IDl  Vl  PUBLIOA. [Via  PUBLIOA.]

There  were  other  Legea  Coneliae,  anch  aa  that
de  Spoutoribna  [Intkrckmu}],  which  may  be
Legea  of  L.  Comelina  Sulla.

Then  wen  also  Legea  Comeliae  which  were
prapoaed  by  the  Tribune  C  Comelint  about  B,  c
67,  and  luniled  the  Edictal  power  by  compelling
the  Praetora  Jus  diceie  ex  edictit  suit  perpetuia.
(Aacon.  ■■  (Xe.  OanuL  p.  &B  ;  Dion  Caas.  xxxtL
23.) [EOICTDK.]

Another  Lex  of  the  aame  Tribune  enacted  that

WH  agreed  rai  in  •  meetliig  of  Um  SwMa  at  wbicb


688  LEX  DUODECIM  TA8ULARUM.
tim  bundled  mMnben  van  prewnt  and  mfter-
vard*  ipprored  by  tha  peopls  ;  and  it  enacted  that
no  Tribune  •faouU  put  bii  reU  on  locb  ■  Seot-
tamiuultDm.  (Aton.  in  CSc  Oarad.  pp.  67,  GB.)
Then  wu  alw  a  Lez  Cornelia  concetning  the
vQk  of  thoH  Roman  dtiieiu  who  died  in  aip-
tiTiij {opwj iotfn).  [LaaATuif,p.676,bi  Foer-

CORNE'LTA  Di  Novib  Tabkllu,  ptopoeed
by  the  Tribune  P.  Coinelini  Dalabella,  B-c  47,  and
oppoaed  iij  H.  Antaniiu,  Mogiiter  Eqnitimi.  (Li>.
HpiL  113;  Dion  Can.  ilii.  33;  Flat.  Aiilai.9.)

CORNE'LIA  ET  CAECI'LIA  Dt  Cn.  Pom-
PKio,  B.  c  57,  itaTe  Cn.  Pompeiui  the  aaperinteDd-
ence  D>er  the  Uisi  Fnuonilaria  foi  fiie  jfm,  with
eitrsordiuuy  powen.  (Cic  ad  AH.  it.  1 ;  Liv.
Epit.  104  :  Dion  Cue.  xxiix  9  ;  Plut.  Foap.
49.) [FnryMiNTAHiAX  Liau.]

CUBIATA LEX D« lapaiuo. [Imps-

CURIATA  LEX  Di  Adoptionb.  [Adop-
Tio;  indOell.  T.  19;  Cic  ad  AO.  iL  7  ;  SuetoiL
Av  BS  ;  Torit.  HiiL  L  16.]

CORNE'LIA  BAE-BIA  DE  AMDITU,  pro-

rd  bf  the  raiuuli  P.  Comeliu  Celhegue  uid
Baebini  Twnphilnt,  B.C.  181.  (Lit.  t1.  19  ;
Sctial.  Bob.  H  Oic.  pro  Silia,  p.  361,  ed.  OnillL)
Thia  law  u  eometiniea,  but  errtmeeiulj',  attributed
to  tbe  oininli  of  the  preceding  ;eai,  L.  Aemiltoi
and  Cn.  Baebiua. [Aubitus.]

DECEMVIRA'LIS. [Lu  Ddddbcui  Ta-

DECIA  DB  DUDIIVIBIB  Navilibus  (LIt.  iz.
so  ;  lee  Atilu  Mahcia).

Dl'DIA. [SUMTDAMAI  Lioia.]

DOHI'TIA  DE  aACERDUTlIS. [Sacsk-
:a.]


e  enouet,  terga  ac  cspite  panii.tur."
(LiT.iii.  SS.)

DUI'LIA  HAE^IA  Dk  Unciabio  Foinobb
B.c3i7. (Lit.  ii.  16,  19.)

The  aune  tribnnea  Duiliui  and  Hoeniut  coiried
a  meaaure  vbich  na  intended  in  flllnie  to  preienl
■uch  unanutitational  proceedinge  aa  the  cnnctioeal
of  a  Lei  bj  the  aoldiera  out  of  Rome,  on  tbe  pn>-
noai  of  theConaoL (Lit.  til  16.)

DUO'DECIM  TABULA'RUM.  In  the  yeac
B.C  462  the  Tribmia  C.  Teicneilioa  Ana  pco-
poacd  a  logatioD  that  fiTe  men  ahanld  be  ap-
pointi'd  for  the  pnrpoae  of  pretBrinn  a  let  of  Inwi
to  limit  the  Impenum  of  tbe  nmanli.  (LiT.  iiL  9.)
The  PaCrieiana  oppoaed  the  meaanie,  bnt  it  oaa
brought  forward  bj  the  tribnnea  in  the  (iillawing
year  with  aome  modification! :  the  new  roiration
propoaed  (hat  ten  men  ahould  be  appointed  (^<!7Hni
lalorei)  from  the  plebi  and  the  patricji,  who  were
to  make  lawa  for  uo  adiantage  of  buth  duaea,  and
fiir  the  "  eqoaliiing  of  liberty,"'  «  phraae  the  im-
port of  which  can  only  be  nndemtood  by  reference
to  tbe  diapute*  between  the  two  elaan.  (Lir.  iL
10  ;  Dionya.  x.  3.)  Anording  to  Dionyaiu  (x.
52,  54)  in  the  year  &c  454  the  Senate  aatcnted
to  a  Plcbiacitiun,  punnant  to  which  commiaiionen
wen  lo  be  aent  to  Athena  and  the  Greek  citica
generally,  in  order  (o  ntahe  themielTea  acquainted
with  their  lawa.  Three  cammiaaionera  were  ap-
pointed  for  the  purpoie.  On  the  ntum  of  the
(,  a  t;  45^  it  WH  qread  (hat  petMU


LEX  DUODBCIH  TABULARUH.
ahenld  be  appointed  te  dnw  up  the  code  of  lawa
(decemTiri  L^bua  loibundia),  fant  they  were  to
be  choecn  only  from  the  Patriciana,  with  a  proTi-
aion  that  the  righu  of  the  Plebeiaaa  ahould  ba
refpected  by  the  decemTiri  in  drawing  up  the
lawa.  (LiT.  iiL  33,  ic.)  In  the  fiillowing  ymt
(B.C.  451)  the  Decemriri  were  appointed  in  the
Comitia  Centurialo,  and  during  the  lime  of  their
office  no  olher  magutrattu  were  choaen.  The  body
conaiated  of  ten  Patriciana,  including  the  three
commiaaionsn  who  bad  been  aent  abrrad :  Appiu*
Claudina,  Conaul  deaignatui,  waa  at  the  head  of  the
body.  The  Ten  took  the  adminiatration  of  afbire
in  turn,  and  the  Iniignia  of  office  wen  only  lued
by  him  who  for  the  tjme  being  directed  the  ad-
miniitration.  (LiT.  iiL  33.)  Ten  Toblea  of  Lawi
were  prepared  during  the  year,  and  after  being
apfHnred  by  the  Senate  wen  caofirmed  by  the
Comitia  Coitsriata.  Aa  it  waa  conaidered  that
aome  fiirther  l^w*  were  wanted,  DecflniTiri  were
a«ain  elected  B.C.  450,  onaijciug  <^  Applua  Clao~
dioi  and  hia  fHenda :  but  the  aeeond  body  of
Decemriri  compriied  three  plebeiana,  according  to
Dionyaina  (i.  56),  but  Liry  (ir.  3)  apeaka  onlj  of
Patriciana.  Two  mora  Tablea  were  added  by
than  DecemTiri,  which  Cicen  (da  Repmi.  ii.  37)
calla  "  Dnee  tabcdae  iniquonun  legtim."  The  pni-
Tiaion  which  allowed  no  counDbiuia  between  the
Pslrea  and  the  Pleba  ia  nfensd  to  the  EliTeath
Table.  (DirkHm,  UtbirnM,  &c  p.  710.)  The
whiJe  Twelre  Tablea  were  Srat  publiihed  in  the
consnlahip  of  L.  Valerioa  and  M.  Hormriua  after
the  downbll  of  the  DecemTiri,  B.  c.  449.  (Lir.  iiL
54,  57.)  Thii  the  firat  attempt  to  make  a  code
remained  alao  the  only  attempt  for  near  one  than.
Hind  yean,  until  the  legiilatioa  of  Juatinioii.  Tha
Twelve  Tablet  are  mentioned  by  the  BcoMn
writera  under  a  (treat  variety  of  name* ;  Zapti  De-
iviiitiraiti,LtxDefVnn!ira!it,Ltget  XH.,Leii  XII.
loZoiJuniiK  or  D*odtean,  and  aometimea  they  an
refemd  to  under  the  names  of  Lrga  and  £«■
aimply,  aa  being  pn.eminectly  The  Law.

The  Lawa  were  cut  on  bronin  tsbleta  and  put
up  in  a  public  place.  (Lit.  iiL  57  i  Died.  xiL  5&>
Pamponiua  (Dig.  L  tit.  2.  a.  2.  §  4)  atatet  that  the
flrit  Ten  Tablea  wae  Du  iiory  {UJmlae  atwieac):
a  note  of  Zimmcm  {GoA.  da  Awa.  PrifatntiU,
Tol.L  p.  101)  containt  referencea  to  Toriona  antho-
ritiei  which  treat  of  thia  diipnted  matter.  After
the  bnming  of  the  city  by  the  Qauli  (LiT.  tL  1),
an  order  wai  made  to  collect  the  ohl  foeden  and
legea  ;  for,  ai  it  ha*  been  wd[  remarked,  Liry'i
word*,  which  an  annpeacd  lo  imply  that  th«
TwelTe  Tablea  wen  lot,  and  reMNod  er  reeon-
atructcd,  may  joat  aa  well  mean  that  they  wero
notlott  Indeed,  the  juttf  interpretation  of  tha
poaaoge  ia,  that  they  wen  hjoked  for  and  w«n
found.  However  thii  may  be,  Deiiher  tha  Rnnaoi
af  the  age  of  Cicero  nor  at  any  time  aftet  had
any  doubt  at  to  the  genuinencei  of  the  eidlectioa
which  then  eiiaCed.

The  legialation  of  the  Tweln  Tablea  hat  been  a
fmitfnl  matter  of  Bpecubtion  and  mquin  to  utoden
hiatoriont  and  jurutt,  who  have  often  handled  tha
(ubject  in  the  meet  uncritical  manna  and  with
utter  ditregard  to  tbe  eridence.  Aa  to  the  mia~
aion  \a  the  Greek  ritiea,  the  fact  rata  on  aa  much
and  oa  good  evidence  aa  meat  other  facta  of  the
aome  age,  and  then  ia  nothing  in  it  impnbalile,
ihongh  we  do  net  know  what  the  ooiomiBianera
bnnght  Im^  iritti  thoL It  m  (atOnec  aaid  that


LEX  DUODECIM  TABULARUJt
Homodom  nt  fipbetisn  eiila  aided  tho  Decem-
viri in  dnwinf!  Dp  thn  TweWfl  Tables,  though  hii
■■iilMiee  would  ptnbabl;  be  confioed  to  the  intei-
pretMioo  of  Oroek  lawi,  u  it  hu  b«ai  niggeited
(Smbo,  p.  6i%  Cuanb. ;  Pompon.  <U  Orig.  Jam,
D%.  1.  tit.  a.  1.  Z  I  4).  Thi«  tiaditioa  vaa  con-
fiiioed  b;  tbe  &ct  of  a  itatoe  baling  be«  erected
in  the  Cnmitiiini  at  Rome  in  memny  of  Hermo-
dona :  bat  it  did  not  eiiit  in  the  lime  of  Ptiny.
lPlhi.H.ff.iiiir.B.)

The  TiretiE  Tables  coDtained  matten  lelating
boUi  to  the  Ju  PubHoim  sod  the  Ju  PiivatoRi
(JbuM  putUoi  fritatuftt  jiait.  Lit.  iiL  34).  The
Joa  Pnblinun  ondenrent  great  change*  in  ll
eoone  of  jem,  boi  the  Joa  PriTolnm  of  the  Tweli
Tablaa  rmlinued  la  be  the  fundamental  lav  of  the
Honttn  Stale.  Ciceni  ipcoki  of  teaming  the  lavs
of  ike  Twelve  Tablo  (■(  canKOt  ma»aariim)  vhen
■  boy  (ife  Lis.  ii.  4,  83)  i  but  he  adds  that  thia
ptactice  had  fiillcn  intu  diinae  vhm  he  wrote,  t
Edict  haTiug  then  become  of  more  importanc
Dot  thia  doea  not  mean  that  the  fbndamentAl  pri
ciplea  of  the  TwelTe  Tables  woe  erer  fonoall;
rqiealed,  but  thai  the  Jul  Honoraiium  grew  np
by  the  side  of  theni  uid  mitigsted  their  ligour  oi
snpplied  their  defects.  There  is  indeed  an  inilnnco
in  which  positiTo  legislation  interfered  with  them,
by  the  aboliiion  of  the  Legis  actiones ;  but  the
Twdre  Tables  themielTes  were  neier  repealed.
They  became  the  foundation  of  the  Ju  Civile  ;
and  ihey  continued  to  exist  together  with  the  un-
written L*w.  The  Law  which  grew  np  in  the
eoone  of  time  existed  in  harmony  with  the  TwelTe
Tables,  and  was  a  derelopmenl  of  their  fiindamental
pnnciples^  It  is  a  remarkable  ciravtutance  in  the
taistoiy  of  Ronum  Law  and  a  proof  of  the  pnctical
skill  of  the  Romans,  chat  long  before  JuiispnidenM
wu  a  leienn,  the  doctrine  of  Snctessio

in  the  Imw  of  the  TweWe  Tables,  that  the  JurisU
of  the  best  period  could  find  nothing  to  improTc.
{Cod.  3.  IiL  3C.  B.  6  ;  10.  tit,  2.  ■.25.  §  S.  13  ;  i.
tlL  16.  s.  7  ;  2.  lit.  3.  a  26  ;  Sangny^  Syiimt,
kc.  L  p.  383.)  The  Roman  wiitera  speak  in  high
teimi  <rf  the  precision  of  the — '


;  Diodor.  xu.  2fi.)  that  many  of
s  should  baTo  become  obscnre  in
ring  to  the  change  which
I  DOthing  lurprisuig ;  nor
T  if  the  itrictnees  of  the  old  law
shtmld  of^  haTe  seemed  nnneceaaarily  harsh  in  a
later  ^e.  (QeD.  itl  10.)  So  &[  as  we  can  tbini
a  jadgment  by  the  few  fngmeati  which  remain,
the  ettaetnienti  were  expressed  with  gnait  brnnty
and  archaic  >ini|dicity.

SciUu  Aeiiua  Psetni  Calni  in  his  Tripartita
cemmented  on  the  Twelve  Tabirs,  and  the  work
enated  in  the  time  of  Pomponiiu,  [Jus  Aahn-
MjK.j  AntistioB  Labco  also  wntla  a  comment  on
the  TaUea,  which  is  meationed  sereral  limes  by
Gdlins.  <L  13,  riL  16,  xi^  I.)  Guns  also  wrote
a  Gmment  on  the  Tables  in  lii  hooks  fad  itifem
XIL  ^jWdnm),  twQtty  fragments  of  which  ore
coDtuned  in  the  Digest,  and  collected  by  Hom-
melias  in  hi*  Falingcnesia.  (L  117.)  There  were
also  other  commeDtariea  or  exptinationa  of  ^e
Uwi  of  the  TirelTe  Table*.  («c  de  £9.  a  23,
25.)
1^  n


and  thcii


LEX  DUODECIM  TABULARUM.  CM

'  taincd  that  the  Twelro  Tables  contained  a  body
of  rules  of  law  eutirely  new,  is  not  supported  by
any  endence,  and  is  inconsistent  with  nil  that  we
know  of  them  and  of  Roman  institution*.  It  is
more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they  fixed  in  a
written  form  a  large  bcdy  of  customary  law,  which
would  be  a  benefit  to  the  Plebeians,  inasmuch  as
the  Patriciaas  were  the  eipoundera  of  tho  law ;
and  it  would  be  to  the  Patrician*  a  better  security
for  their  privilege*.  One  of  the  two  last  labl«  con-
tained a  pnciiion  which  allowed  no  Connubiiun  be-
twerai  Patricians  and  Plebeians ;  but  it  is  nncertoin
whether  this  was  a  new  rule  of  hiw,or  a  confimutiou
of  an  old  rule.  The  latter  seems  the  mon  probable
*appo*itioD  i  but  in  either  ose  it  is  clear  that  it
vraa  not  one  of  the  objects  of  this  l^pslation  to
put  the  two  daases  on  the  same  fooCiug.  Idodcm
writen  often  speak  inaccunlely  of  the  Decemviial
legislation,  and  of  the  Decemviri  as  enacting  Laws,
as  if  the  Decemviri  had  exercised  sovereign  power ;
but  they  did  not  even  affect  to  legible  abso-
lutely, for  the  Ten  Table*  wen  confirmed  by  the
Comitia  Centuriata,  or  the  sovereign  people,  or,  as
Niebuhr  expresses  it,  "  when  the  Decemiiri  had
satisfied  every  objection  they  deemed  reasonable,
i  their  work  was  approred  by  tho  Senate,  they
inght  it  before  the  Centories,  whose  assent  was
ratified  by  the  Curiea,  tinder  the  presidency  of
the  collies  of  priesU  and  the  sanctioo  of  happy
aospice*."  (Vol  iL  p.  313.)  Tho  two  new  Tables
were  confirmed  in  the  same  way,  as  we  may  safely
condndo  torn  the  drcumstaucea  of  the  ca*&  (Liv.
iL  37,  67.)  It  moke*  no  diSgrence  that  Uio
Soiereign  people  did  not  vote  on  the  wftaA
law*  included  in  the  Tables ;  *uch  a  mode  of  le-
gislation weuld  have  heen  impiaelicable,  and,
a*  Niebuhr  otwerres,  wo*  not  conformable  to  the
usage  of  ancient  Commonwealth*.  How  br  the
De^mtiri  nally  were  able,  by  intrigue  01  elher-
iriie,  to  tarry  such  particular  meosurcs  a*  they
wished  to  in*ert  in  the  Tables,  is  a  different  ques-
tion ;  but  in  form  their  lo-otllcd  legislation  was
confirmed,  a*  a  whole,  by  the  sovereign,  that  is,
the  Roman  people,  and  consequently  the  DecemTiri
are  improperiy  called  L^laton:  they  might  be
oiled  code-maker*.

It  is  conuateut  with  tho  aasumptiou  that  tho
nelTe  Tables  hod  muoly  for  their  object  the  em-
bodying of  the  customary  Uw  in  writing,  to  admit
that  some  provisions  were  also  introduced  Innu
the  laws  of  other  states.  Indeed,  where  the  Roman
law  was  imperfect,  the  readiest  mode  of  supplying
the  defects  wontd  be  by  adopting  the  rules  of  law
that  had  been  approved  by  experience  anmug  other
people,  and  were  capable  of  iRtIng  easily  adi^ited  to
the  Roman  system.  Oaius,  in  his  Commentary  on
the  Twelve  Tables,  where  he  is  speaking  of  Colie^
(Dig.  47.  tit.  22.  s.  4),  says,  that  the  member*  of
Collegia  may  nuke  what  letms  they  please  among
Chemselrea,  if  they  thereby  violate  no  Publica  Lex ;
and  he  adds,  this  Lex  seems  to  be  taken  from  ono
>%  which  he  quotes.  And  in  another  pas-
sage, when  he  is  speaking  of  the  Acuo  fininm  re.
gundorum  (Dig.  10.  tit  1.  a  13),  he  refers  to  a  law
)r  Solon  as  the  source  of  oeitun  rule*  as  to  boun-
laries. (See  also  Cicero,  di  L^.  JL  26.) It  is  a

Cuible  case  that  the  RiimBni  had  no  written  law
Ibre  the  enactment  of  theTwdve  Tables,  except
I  few  Leges,  and  if  this  is  so,  the  prudence  of
ipplying  to  those  alalei  which  had  bodies  of
nitten  law,  if  it  were  only  a*  mn^tca  and  pat-

■TT ^ --• • 0--


could  not  be  m


)  LEX  OABINIA.

u  oftliefami  of  written  Uw,ii  obfiatu.  Hav-
what  WB>  Bcnuilly  receiied  of  furngn  law
btm  a  lew  rnlu  ot  to  tAitmy
0  way  depend  on  the  pecoliir
Bjitem  of  law  of  any  comitry,  Tbe  Jui  Pri™-
tum  waA  hardly  and  indeed  coald  hardly  be  affected
by  any  ruin  o(  foreign  lav  ;  and  u  to  reeemblanoe
beCweiMi  Roman  Law  and  the  Law  of  any  Greek
ilatei,  that  !■  uo  gntuid  loi  a  coucluiion  that  the
Roman  nilei  ace  defived  from  the  Oreek.

The  fraffmento  of  the  Twelve  Tablet  haT«  often
been  collected,  bat  the  moit  mmpleU  eiay  on  their
hutoiy,  and  on  the  aitiml  laboun  of  ichoUn  and
juriita,  ii  by  Dirkien,  Vtherwidt  dur  biikmgni  Ver-
lucie  lur  Kritik  wf  H>Titdl<Biff  dft  Tata  da-
Zu>^f-Tafd-FToffmeitUi,\jt\fr:\V^,\i1i.  Zimmeni'i
GadadiU,  &c.  containi  rcferencea  to  all  tbe  sa-
tboritiei  on  thit  lubject ;  and  Pucbta*!  ttatituHoiuii,
&c.  L  g  G4,  £5,  73,  73,  Hme  caluable  remariu  on

FA'BIA  DE  PLA'GIO. [Plaoium.]
FA'BIA  Db  Ndhibo  Sktatoidk  (Ck.}m)
Muntn,  34).
FALCroiA. [LwATijM.]
FA'NNIA. [BnMTUiRiii  Lmib.]
FA'NNIA. [JuNU  DS  PiniaiiiNlB.]
FLAMIfflA,  waa  an  Agraria Ux  for  the
diitribation  cf  tandi  in  Picenum,  propoaed  by  the
tribune  C.  Flaminini, ut u.  c  328  according  to
Cicero,  or  in  B.  c.  S3'2  according  to  PolybiuL The
latter  date  it  tbe  more  proljahle. (Cic,  Acad.  ii.  S,
dtSaaa.*;  Polyh.ii.  21.)

FLA'VIA  AORA'RIA,  B.  c  60,  for  tbe  dii-
tribulion  of  landi  among  Pompeios'  aoldien,  pro-
posed by  the  Tribune  L.  Flaiiui,  who  committed
the  Conml  Caecilini  Metellui  to  prinn  for  op-
posing it  (Cib  ad  AtU-L.  IS,  19  ;  Dion  Caia.
xinli.  SO.)

FRUMENTA'RIAE.  [FaimENTiRiiE
LsniB.]

FU'FIA. [AiLiA.]

FU'FIA  DB  RELIGIOTJE,  ».c  61,  wa«  a
privilcgium  which  nslated  to  the  trial  of  Godini.
{Ck.adAlL\.  13,16.)

FU'FIA  JUDICIA'RIA.  [JnnBi,  p.  BiO,  a.,
and  the  remarlu  in  Orellii  OnomatHconJ\

FlTRIAnr  FU'SIA  CANl'NIA,  limited  tbe
IT  of  ilavea  to  be  manumitted  by


[Mj


FU'RIA  or  FU3IA  TESTAMENTAltlA.
[Lbgatdv.]
GABI'NIA TABELLA'RIA. [Tabill*-

RIA1.I

There  were  tbtoiu  Oabiniae  Legei,  tome  of
which  were  PriTitagia,  ai  that  (b.  c.  61)  for  con-
ferrinft  extraordinary  powet  on  Cn.  Pompeini  for


1-.  8:  Plutf


P.S6.)


A  Oabinia  Lex,  b.  c  SH,  forbade  nil  loam  of
money  al  Rome  to  legalionei  boay  fbreign  parta

fnterant,  qmd  Lea  CoMflKt  nftiMf,  Cic  nd  AH,  T.
31,  TL  1,  2).  The  object  at  the  lex  waa  to  pre-
vent money  being  borrowed  for  the  pnrpote  of
bribing  the  nrntort  at  Rome^  There  wa*  a  Lei
Oabinia  intitled  De  Senatu  legalU  dando  (Cic.  ad
Q.  fV.il  11).


LEOES  JULIAE.
I GET-LIA  CORNE-LIA,  a.  c  72,  which  gara

to  Cd.  Pompeiui  tbe  extrao.rdinary  power  of  coo-
ferring  the  Ronuui  cifilai  on  Speuiardi  in  ^taiii,
with  the  adrice  of  hii  contilium  {dt  eauSa  loia-
tatia,  Cic  pn  B<^.  B,  14).

GENU'CIA,  B.C  341,  forbade  altc^ber  ths

taking  of  intereit  for  tbe  sk  of  money. (Lir.  tIL

42.) It  i*  conjectured  that  Appian  (BdLCiB,  L

54) allnde*  to thia  Uw (OreUu  C  ' '

Other  Plebiaota  of  the  tamt  year  ai

bj  Liiy  <Tii.  42).

OALLIAE  CISALPWAE. [RpBEt*.]

HIERO'NICA wai  not  a  Lei  properiy so

called. Before  the  Roman  conqueM  of  Sicily,  ths

payment  of  the  tenth*  of  wine,  oil,  and  other  pn>-

duce  had  been  fixed  by  Hlero,  and  the  Roman

quaeiton,  in  lel^g  theae  t«itht  to  fam,  followed

the  pnietioe  which  they  found  eatabliahed. (Cic

Vtrr.  Ii.  13,26,60,  iii.  6,  At)

HI'RTIA  Db  PoHPiiANiB  (Cic  PiU.  xiiL  16.)

HORATIA,  propiaed  by  M.  Horatiua,  nade

the  penona  of  the  Tribunes,  the  Aedilea,  and  olhrra

ncrouncti. (LIt.  iu.  5£.) [Valbuak  rr  Ho-

Anotber  Lex  Hontia  mentioned  by  Otlliui
(tl  7)  waa  a  priiileginm.
HORTE'NSIA  DB  PLEBISaTlS. [Plb-

Another  Lai  Hortenaia  enacted  that  the  DQQ-
dinae,  which  had  hitherto  been  Feriae,  ahoutd  be
Diea  FiutL  Thii  waa  done  iiir  the  porpoae  of  ae-
ccmmodatinit  tbe  inhabitant*  of  the  comitij.
(Macreb.  i,  16  i  Plin.  H.  N.  rriiL  S.)

HOSTI'LIA  DE  f  URTIS  i*  mailioocd  only
in  the  IniEitutea  of  Jnttiniaa  (ir.  tit  1 0).

ICI'LIA,  intidod  by  Livy,  De  Avcntino  Pub-
licando,  waa  propoaed  by  L.  Icillna,  tr.  pi.  B.  c
A&€.  A*  to  the  objectof  thia  Lex,  lee  the  paamgea
which  ar«  here  referred  to  ;  and  particnlariy  Dio-
ayuui,  and  the  article  SursaFiciBG.  (Lit.  iii.  31,
32  ;  Dionya.  i.  32,  33  ;  Niebuhr,  ^Tiil.  ^  Rome,

Puchia, /«(.  it  8  244.)

-  -  ■  -  _  a  "  ■'
c.  471,  bad  for  itt
interruption  to  the  Tribune*  wliile  they  were  ad-
drea*ing  the  Pleb*.  In  nHne  oiaea  the  penalty
wa*  death.  (Dionrc  lit.  17  ;  Cic  pn  Satia^
37;  Niobohr,ii.p.23l.)

JU'LIAG,  leget,  moat  of  which  were  paaaod  in
the  time  of  C.  Jidiui  Cae*ar  and  AngBstw
Di  Adultirus.  [Adulteiuum.]
Agraria  ia  lefcrnd  to  by  Suetoniiu  {Jul,
Caaar,  c  20),  and  in  tbe  Digett,  Dt  Trrwtima
Moto(47.  Ut21).  But  the  lei  of  C  Caciar,  re-
ferred to  in  the  Digett,  ii  piobably  a  lei  of  Cali-
gnla.  Tbe  Agrarin  lei  of  the  dictator  Cvmtr  waa
paaaed  B,  c  59,  when  he  waa  conniL  (Dioa  Cats.
iinilL  1—7,  &C.  1  Appian,  Be/i  OH  il  10  j
Veil.  Pat  iL  44  ;  Cic  PUL  i\.  39,  ai  Alt.  iL
16,  18  )  Rodor^  La  Munlu  d(  CUotma,  2Uf-
»oSn/i,  ToL  il.)

Db  Ahbitu.  [Ahbttub.]
Db  Ahnqha.  (Dig.  4S.  til  1.  1. 1.)
Db  BoKia  CiDBNnia.  Thii  lex  pronded  that
a  debtor  might  etcape  all  perianal  mueatation  from
hia  creditor!  by  giving  up  hia  property  to  thtm  for
the  porpote  of  tola  and  diitaibutum.  (Gain*,  ijL
7S.)  It  it  doabtfii]  if  thi*  lei  wai  paaaed  in  the
time  of  Jnliiu  Caeaar  or  of  Augnitna,  tfaoogh  pro-
bably of  the  former.  (Cauar,  BtlL  On.  iiL  1
Sueton.  Om. 42 ; Tacit Aim.  ri. 16 1 Dion


LEORS  JULIAE.
Cum.  Ifiii.  31.) Thu  bendtcium  of  the  Ui  vu
extended  to  the  prgTinces  b;  the  imperisl  couiti-
tduoiu. (Cod.  7.  tit.71.  1.4.)

Cadcuua  ii  ths  uzn>  m  the  L»  JcLU  Da

Piiru  POPFAU.

Da Cabdb rr TaNancio (Sueton.  tfero,
e.  33),  ptfh^M  the  nme  u  the  Iiei  De  Vi  Pub-
Da  ClviTATl,  wu  pMaed  in  the  coiuiililiip  of
L.  Juliui  Caetai  ud P.  Ratiliiu  Lupui,  B.  c.

90. [CiVlTiB  J Fo.D«.*T*a  CiVIIATES.]

Da  FaHoas,  or  tather  De  Peamiii  Muluia  or
Cicditii  (8.C  17),  jAHcd  in  iho  time  of  Jnliui
Cunr  (Sneton.  Can.  c  12  ;  Caew,  -it  UtO.  CivU.
iiL  1 ).  Tbe  object  of  it  itm  to  nuke  an  uiBiige-
nicnt  between  debton  and  erediton,  for  tbe  nlii-
betim  of  the  latter.  The  poneuionei  ud  nt
vere  to  be  estinmCed  at  the  vmlue  vfaich  ihey  had
befinv  the  ciiil  war,  and  to  be  nurcndeied  to  lbs
irediton  atthatraloe;  irhalster  had  been  paid
for  inlereit  vai  to  be  deducted  from  the  principaL
Tbe  retalt  WM  that  the  creditor  loit  abont  one-
fnrtb  of  hi*  debt ;  but  he  escaped  the  Iom,
Qmalljr  cnnieqnent  on  dril  diitur^ance,  which
w«aJd  haTsbeencaiuedbr  NoTaaTabola?.  (Com-
pw*  Caear,  dt  Brll.  Civ.  ilL  I,  with  Suelon.
CUtt.c.42.)  Apauage  of  Tacitni  (^n.  vL  IG)
ia  umetisK*  eoniidertd  at  refdnna'  ta  thia  lei,  and
■metinies  ta  the  Lex  de  Boni*  Cedendu  ;  bat  it
doea  act  Kem  to  refer  to  either  of  them.  The
{■aiage  of  Dira  Cauiu  (Wiii.  21.  Iltpl  tw
nfi<»Aafa>r}  wemi  to  refel  to  thi*  Lex  de  Mntuii

Da  FirNDO  Dotall  The  pnTitlinu  ai  to  the
Fandna  Dutalii  were  contained  in  Iho  Lex  Julia
de  Adnlteriii.  (Gaiiu,  ii.  63  ;  Pauloi,  S.  R.  a.
tic  31.  •.  3  ;  Kg.  Oe  Fando  Dalali,  23.  tit.  6.
a  I,  2,  13.)  Thii  Jolia  Lex  wai  coniinented  on  bj
" *iuaii,  UlpBn,  and  PauIuL  (Adultkuuh,]

jDicuaiAB.  The  lex  referred  to  in  the  Dtgot
(4.  tit.  8.  •.41}  hj  which  a  peiion  under  twenty
Jtan  of  age  via  not  compeUed  to  be  a  jadei,  it
probably  one  of  the  L^ea  Juliae  JudicLatioe,
(GdL  xiT.  e.  Z) Aa  to  the  other  Juliae  Lego


Dk  I


a  LioATioNiBDa.  (Ck.  ad  Jtt.  n


(Cic  FM.  L  91.)  The  Lex
Majeftati*  of  the  Digeit  (4S.  tiL  i)  a  probably  a
Iciof  Angiutoa.  [Hajutab.]

Da MAHiTANDia OaniNiBDB. [JvLU  rr
Pafia  Poppaxa.]

Mi^nictPALiti,  cominaiil^  called  the  Table  of
Hcndes.  In  the  jar  1733  there  wen  foaod
mr  the  Oulf  of  Tarenloni  and  in  the  neightwui-
bond  of  the  ancient  cit;  of  Heraclca,  Uirge  liag-
nmu  of  a  hnoza  tablet  which  ccnlsined  on  one
■ide  a  Roman  lex  and  on  the  other  a  Greek  in-
•diptioo.  Tbe  whole  ii  now  in  tbe  Muko  Bot'
bomcD  at  Najilca.  The  lei  conlaini  laiioui  pro-
Tidona  aa  10  Uie  {lolicc  of  the  cit;  of  Rome,  and  ft!
'  mmunilict  of  Roman  citi-
f,  prarfidtna,  /bra,  osn-
nm).  It  waa  aceardingly
a  lex  of  that  kind  which  i*  otUod  Satnia.

It  ii  •ontewbat  difficult  to  detetmine  the  data
of  thia  lex,  but  there  leem  to  be  only
which  can  be  aMmned  ai  probable ;  one  ii  the  time


mnwd  ai  probable ;  one  ii  the  time

..  sr  tbe  Social  War,  ot  ahortlj  after

c  B9  ;  (be  Diber  it  that  which  iheitlj  followed

' 'a>orthaTraD>padanitotheciTilai(B.c


bauudjate^  aflr


LEOES  JULIAE.  em

:9).  Thit  Utter  date,  in  &Tonr  of  which  Tariout
Diieidemtiana  prepoudemte,  teeDK  to  be  fixed
.boul  the  year  b.  c,  45  by  a  letter  of  Cicero  (ad
l-\m.  ii.  IS).  Compare  the  tablet  1.  94,  104.  aa
,  aona  whom  the  lex  excluded  fiom  the  office
of  decntio.

teema  that  the  lei  of  the  ^ear  B.  c.  49,  which
BBTe  the  eivitaa  to  the  Tnmapadani,  enacted  that  a
ikoman  eomniauoner  abould  be  tent  to  all  the
I  for  the  purpose  of  framing  regulationa  for
municipal  organiiation.  The  Lex  Julia
empowered  the  commiitionen  1a  continue  their
laboun  for  one  year  bum  the  date  of  the  lex,  the
tenna  of  which  were  to  extended  aa  to  compriao
le  whale  of  Italy.  The  lex  wu  thenfbre  uppn-
rialely  called  Municipalit,  aa  beuig  one  wliicb
ilabliahed  certain  regulationa  For  all  municipia  ;
nd  thii  ienae  of  tbe  term  jnuntci[«lii  muat  be  dia-
tinguiihed  &i>m  that  which  merely  refera  to  the
iDOtl  uaa([ci  or  to  tbe  poutire  lawa  of  any  given
place,  and  which  ia  expreaied  by'aucli  terma  at
Lex  Municipii,  Lex  Ciritalia,  and  other  equinlent

e  name  Loi  Julia  reata  mainly  on  tbe  fiict
(ouumed  (o  be  demonalruted)  that  ihii  lex  waa
patted  when  Juliui  Caeior  waa  in  the  potaeition  of
full  power,  that  it  ia  the  lex  referred  to  by  Cicero,
End  that  it  it  improbable  that  it  would  have  been
called  by  any  other  penmal  appellation  than  that  of
Julia.  It  ia  further  {vored  by  a  ahoit  imcription
found  at  Padua  in  1696,  that  there  wai  a  Lex
Julia  Municipalit ;  and  the  contentt  of  the  inacriit.
tioa  (nil  til  aedilieiae.  potettat.  e  lege.  Julia
Municipali)  compared  with  Cicero  (eintque  rumor
da  Tnmspadanii  ecu  juau*  mi  Tiroa  creare,  ad
Aa.  ».  3)  render  it  eiceedinglj  probable  that  the
Lex  Julia  Municipolii  of  the  inscription  ia  tbe  lex
of  the  1'able  of  Heiadea,  and  the  Lex  Monicipalia
of  the  Digeat  (fiO.  lit.  9.  a  3  ,  Cod.  7.  tit  9.  a.  1  ;
and  Diff.  50.  tit  1.  Ad  MusicipJem  at  de  IkUw).
(Savigny,  VoUuOimH  der  7b/el  eoa  fieradiia,
ZdlKArijt,  io\.  ii.  p.  300,  and  vol.  xL  p.  50,  ai  to
the  pauage  of  Sueton.  Caaar.  41.  The  labiet  it
pinted  ia  tbe  work  of  Maiochi,  Ctowm.  M  aaieai
Tab.  Hend.  p.  1,  2.  Neap.  1754,  1755,  fol.,  with
a  commcmary  which  contoini  much  learning,  but

Julia  xr  Papia  PoprAXA.  The  bialoiy  of
thia  lex  ia  not  quite  clear.  Auguitua  appcon
to  haie  cauted  a  lex  to  Le  enacted  about  B.  i^  19,
which  ia  cited  aa  the  Lex  Julia  de  Matitandia
Ordinibui  (Dig.  3S.  tiL  II  ;  23.  tit,  2),  aod  i>  ro-
fcTTcd  to  in  the  Cormen  Srenlaro  of  Horace,  which
wat  written  in  the  vcar  a.  a  17.  The  oljjett  of
thia  lex  wat  to  n^guute  mairiagct  at  to  which  it
contained  numcroui  proTiaiont ;  but  it  appeara  not
to  ha™  come  into  operation  till  the  jeac  B,  c.  13.
Some  wiiien  conclndo  &om  the  paatage  in  Suelo-
niui  {Aagnt.  34J  that  thia  lex  wat  rejected;
and  add  that  it  wet  not  enacted  until  a.  D.  4.
In  tbe  year  a.  d.  9,  and  in  the  coniulihip  of  M.
Papina  Mulilui  and  Q.  Foppaeua  Secundui  («■-
aia  ti^Mi),  another  lex  wat  paued  aa  a  kind  of
amendment  and  aupplcment  to  the  former  lex,  and
hence  anac  the  ti^e  of  Lex  Julia  et  Fapia  Pop-
paea  by  which  tfaeae  two  legea  are  often  quoted  ;
for  it  baa  been  infcired  from  the  two  Legot  being
•eporately  cited  that  they  were  not  made  into  one,
Vaiiou*  tillei  are  uaed  occorduig  aa  reference  ia
made  to  the  Tariout  proTiaiona  ;  aometitnei  the  re-
feitnce  it  to  the  Lex  Julia,  tometimet  Piw*  Fop-

t»  a - "  ■  ■  o  ~


G92  LE0E3  JULIAE.

ri,  gamctimca  Lex  Jnlia  et  Papia,  aametmm  Lex
MuiUsdia  Oidinibiu,  trom  the  chapter  which
treated  of  the  muriagei  of  the  aenabira  (Otum,  i.
178  ;  Ulp.  Fng.  x\.  aO ;  Lex  Marita,  Hor.  Cam.
Sec.)\  Bumetimci  Lex  Q^ncaria,  Decimoiia,  &.c.
[roil)  the  vsHoiu  chapten.  (Ulp.  F^ag.  iiriiL  liL
7  ;  Di«ii  Can.  Ur.  IS,  Itl  1,  &c  ;  Tacit.  Ami.  m.

as.)

Then  ince  many  eommentanea  on  thew  legea
or  on  chii  lex  hy  the  Homaa  jnriitt,  of  which  con-
uderable  fngmenti  are  prewned  in  the  Dignit:
Oaiua  mote  16  boolu,  Uiptaii.SO,  and  Paalu  ID
hooks  U  leait  on  thii  lei.  The  lei  contuned  et
le«l  as  chapten  (Dig.  23.  ^L  S.  a.  19) ;  bat  it  u
inpoHible  ta  ta;  to  which  of  the  two  legea  in-
duded  imdErthe  genen]  title  of  Lex  Jallaet  Papia
f  oppaea,  the  terenl  pimiiiDna  a*  now  known  to
HI,  bBlai]|.  Allempti  Dare  been  made  both  bv  J.
Ootho&ednj  and  Heioeccini  to  natoce  the  Ici,
on  the  ajiuioption  that  iti  proriuoni  are  rediLcible
to  the  two  geitenl  headi  of  a  Iiex  Maritolii  and
Ijci  Caducaria.

The  piaviuoni  of  thli  Lex  er  of  theie  L^ei
forbade  the  marriage  of  a  aenator  or  a  eenstor'a
children  with  a  tibcrUna,  with  a  woman  whoio
father  or  mother  had  followed  an  An  Ludicra,
and  with  a  pcoatilate  (  and  slao  the  marriage  of
a  libertinna  with  a  lenalor'i  daughter.  If  an
hcrcdilai  or  a  legstom  wu  left  to  a  penon  on
condition  of  not  niarrying,  or  on  conditiani  which
in  effect  preieiited  marriage,  the  cooditioiv  were
illegal,  and  the  gift  waa  uDConditionaL  The  con-
dition, however,  might  he  not  to  many  a  certain
apecified  peiaon  or  certain  ipecified  peraona  ;  or  it
might  be,  to  many  a  particolar  pcnon  ;  but  then
the  peraon  moat  iw  luch  a  one  aa  would  be  a
auitable  match,  otherwiie  the  condition  would  be
in  efibct  a  condition  not  to  many,  and  therefore


L  (Dig.


t.I.«.e3.)


e  mamige,  tanotu  pcDaltie*
vera  impaled  on  thoee  who  lired  in  a  itate  of  celi-
hacy  {mdibaba)  after  a  certain  age.  Caelibci
eonld  not  take  an  hereditaa  or  a  legacy  {Uga-
fwn)  ;  bat  if  a  peraon  wai  eaelebs  at  the  time  of
the  teatatoCi  death,  and  win  not  otherwiae  dia-
qnalified  (jure  ijivilC),  he  might  taie  the  hereditaa
or  legalnni,  if  he  obeyed  the  lei  within  one  hun-
dred daya,  that  ia,  if  he  married  within  that  time.
(Clip.  Frag.  iviL  1.)  If  he  did  not  comply  with
the  lei,  the  ^ft  became  caducom.  ICadvca.]
The  Lei  Julia  allowed  widowi  a  term  of  one  year
(Bocatio)  from  the  death  of  a  hiutnnd,  and  di-
Torced  women  a  term  (nvofio)  of  air  montbi  frnn
the  time  of  the  divorce,  within  which  perioda  they
were  not  lubject  to  the  penaltiea  of  the  lei;  the
Lex  Papia  extended  thetc  pciiodi  reapeclively  to
1,  and  a  year  and  aix C ' ""


0 yean,  ai
iv.)


c montha. (Ulp.


when  he  attained  the  ago  of  liily  and


(Ulpian,  Pnig,  xvL)  ;  hut  if  they  had  not  obeyed
the  lex  before  attaJning  thoae  reapective  agea,  they
were  perpetnally  bound  by  iti  penalliei  by  a  S»-
natua^tmaulium  PemiciaDum.  A  Scnatni-coniul-
tum  Claudianum  lo  br  modiiied  the  itrictneii  of
the  new  rule  ai  to  give  to  a  man  who  manied  above
■illy  the  eame  advantage  that  he  would  have  had
If  he  bad  married  under  sixty,  provided  he  mar-
ried a  woman  who  waa  under  fifty  j  the  ground
of  which  rule  wB)  the  legal  uotiiHi  that  a  woman


LEGES  JULI.\E.
Undia  fifty  waa  alill  capable  of  having  childiFn.
(Ulp.  Fr^.  xtL  i  Suelon.  Oaiu/.  23.)  If  the
woman  waa  above  fifty  and  the  man  undH-  >iity,
thia  wai  called  Impar  Matiimonium,  and  fay  ■
Senatua-coniultura  Calvitianum  it  waa  entirely
without  cflect  ai  to  releating  from  iocapacily  to
tahe  legata  and  dotea.  On  the  death  of  the  wiman,
therefore,  the  doa  be^une  caduca.

By  the  I.ex  Papia  Poppaca  a  candidate  who  had
aeveial  children  waa  preferred  to  oce  who  had
fewer.  {Taeit  Jn  iv.  19;  Plin.  ij;,  vii.  16.)
Freedmen  who  had  a  certain  number  of  chltdmi
were  freed  "  operanim  obligatione  "  (Dig.  58.  tit

1.  De  Opmt  Zri^ertonm)  ;  and  libertae,  who  had
four  children,  were  releaaed  from  the  tutela  of  th«r
palrona.  (Ulp.  f^^,  tiL  29.)  ThoBo  who  bad
three  children  living  at  Rome,  four  in  Italy,  and
five  in  the  provinccB,  were  cicuacd  &f>m  the  t&cB
of  tutor  oreurator,  (IniL  1.  tit.26;  Dig.27.  tit.  !.>
After  the  paaaing  of  thia  lei,  it  became  usnal  for
the  senate,  and  afterword!  the  emperor  (pruspa)
to  g^ve  octaiionally,  aa  a  privilt^,  to  certain  pet^
aona  who  had  not  children,  the  aame  advantam
that  the  lex  secoced  to  thoK  who  had  childicn.
This  waa  called  the  Jua  Liberorom.  FtinyiaTa
(_Ep.^  13)  that  ha  had  Uitoly  obta^ed  from  tbe
emperor,  for  Kfriradof  hii,  the  JaaTrinm  LiliOQ.
rum.  (See  alio  Ep.  i.  96,  96  ;  and  Dion  Can.  Iv,

2,  and  the  note  of  Reimanu.)  Thia  privilege  ii
mentioned  in  lome  inioriptiona,  on  which  the  ab-
bceviatiaii  I,  L.  H.  (Jmi  liieninim  iahemt)  wttaa-
timea  occnra,  which  is  equivalent  to  '*}or%  pareetia
habere."  The  emperor  H.  Antoninua  provided
that  cbQdren  shonld  be  regiateied  by  name  within
thirty  daya  after  then-  birth  with  Uie  PneEKta*
Aeiarii  Satoml  (CapitoL  M,  Aid.  c  9  ;  cgmian
Juvenal,  Sat.  ix.  G4.)

The  lei  also  impoaed  penaltiea  on  oiii,  that  ia,
married  persona  who  had  no  children  {tpa  HUro*
HOD  iahnt,  Gaiua,  ii  1 11)  from  the  age  c^  twenty-
five  to  liity  in  a  nan,  and  from  the  age  of  twenty
to  fifty  in  a  woman.  By  the  Lex  Pi4iia,  mU
could  only  take  one  half  of  an  hereditai  or  le^tmn
which  was  lell  to  them,  (Gaius,il  2Q6.)  It  seenv
that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to  evade  thia  part
of  the  lei  by  adcptioni,  which  a  Seoatuiconiniltniii
NeroDiannm  declared  to  be  ineScctoal  for  the  par-
pose  of  relieving  a  person  from  the  penalties  of  tha
lex.  (TaciL,^aii.iv.  19.)

As  a  general  rule  a  husband  and  wife  could  enly
leave  to  one  another  a  tenth  put  of  their  pn^rty  ;
but  there  wen  eiceptioos  in  respect  of  clmdnm
Lther  horn  of  the  marriage  or  by  another  manisfp)
ties,  t»hich  allow' ''  -*■- '-


■  of  the  parties,  w


allowed  of  the  Eln


also  he  acquired  by  obtaining  the  Ji
(Ulp.  Frag,  tit  xv.  xvL) .

Alto  some  provisioas  of  this  Lex,  sea  pATKOtccs.

PXCULATUB. [PacDlATUS,]

Jt'LiA  BT  Plautia,  which  enacted  that  tha«
could  he  no  nsncapion  ia  things  obtained  by  robbery
(riponswu).  The  Twelve  Tables  had  alrsdj
provided  that  there  could  be  ne  naucapioo  io  ttolea
things.  (Oaiua,  iL  45  ;  In»L  2.  tit.  6.)  Thia  lei
was  prabahly  paaacd  a.  c  89.

[Pafibia.]

(Dion  Caas.  xliiL  2S ;  Orelli.

o  thia  l<ei  Jnlia  da  Repe.
tundis  the  regiilatiooi  de  Provincialibos  Somptihua,
which  Enieati  considers  to  behing  to  tbe  Lex
Julia  de  Ropotuodis.) [Pkovikcuj^}


DiPi


LEX  JUNIA  VELLEIA.

Dm  PDBLICAHM  (Cie.  ad  AlHe.  u.  16,  pro  Qi.

FtaaeiOf  c  11,  ed.  WoDder;  Appjaii,  SdL  On.  ii


[B.PXT


i.fi.)


15.)
Rbpbtiikdahi
Di  RniDDiK.
Db  SukiiiKiTua.  (Cic.  Bp.  ail

Dl  SACKILKOra. [PaCULAT[IB.J

SOKTUAKU,  puKd  in  tbo  tiine  oF  Jdjiu  Cbgoit
(Dim  Can.  iliii.  35)  uid  one  nnder  AugiuCm.
(OeILii.S4.) [Sithtuarui  Lbqu]

Trkitbalis  (Suetan.  .ii^.  40 ;  Plin.  iiiiiL
2\  which  parniitt«d  Roman  equite«,  in  oh  the  j  or
their  parent!  had  ever  had  ■  ccnnu  equeatris,  to
mx  in  the  fouiteen  rowi  {quataordidm  ordiitet)
fixed  by  the  Lei  RoKia  Theatiaiit,  B.  c  67.

JcLU  KT  TrriA  (IiuL  1.  til.  30)  empowend
tbe  pnan  of  B  pnmnco  to  appoint  &  tulor  for
women  and  popilli  who  hod  none.  (Ulp.  Frag.  b.
IS.)  A  Lei  AlUia  of  eailier  but  nnoenain  date
had  gmn  the  isiiie  power  at  Kome  to  Iho  praetor
ubanu  and  the  majority  of  the  tiibtmi  plebii ;  and
iha  new  lex  wai  paued  in  order  to  extend  the
Bme  adTantagei  to  tbe  prarincea.  There  ue  Nme
teaioin  for  nippanng  that  there  were  two  If^ea,  a
Julia  and  a  Tltia ;  and  among  thoee  retttoni,  ii  tbe
drcnnulaiMe  that  it  i>  not  uiual  to  unite  b;  tbe
word  tt  the  two  nomei  which  belong  to  one  lex,
though  tbia  ii  done  b;  Cicero  (_Snt.  c  IS,  Pro
Ba/io,  t.  31)  in  ipeoking  of  (he  Lex  Liciuia  and
llscia.

D«  Ti  pDuic*  wi  PnivATA. [Via.]

ViCKBIIUUA. [ViCUIMA.]

JU'NIA  DE  PKREGRI'NIS  propoMd  B.  c
126  by  3C  Jnniu  Pennos  a  tribnnc,  baniahed
pecegrini  from  tbe  citj.

A  lex  of  C  Paonitu,  conml  b.  C  122,  contained


LEX  LICIIltA.  693

waa  In  the  womb,  and  who,  whan  bom,  would  be
'  B  tealBloc'a  niDs  hem,  to  be  inatitaled  herei,
eu  if  be  abonld  be  bom  ia  the  lifetime  of  the
It  also  10  &r  modified  the  old  law.


biwk  the  will,
inalituled  hers.  (Quui^  ii.  134  ;  Ulp.
Frvg.  nil  19,  ed  Backing)

LAETO'BIA. [CuRAToa.]

Sometimea  tbe  lex  prouaed  by  Volero  for  sleeting
plebeian  magialratea  at  the  Comitia  Tributa  ia  cited
aa  o  Lex  Lneloria. (Liv.  iu  £6,  A7.>

LICITJIA. [AiBUTiA.]

LICl'NIA  DE  LUDIS  APOLLINA'EIBUS
(LiT.  iniL  33).

LICl'NIA  DE  8ACERDOTI13  (Cic  Z«JL
26).

LICl'NIA  DE  SODALITIia. [AKBirua.]

LICl'NIA  JU'NIA,  or,  aa  it  ia  Mmetimn
called,  Junia  et  Licinia,  paaud  in  the  comulahip  i^
L.  Liciniua  Hurcna  and  Joniua  Silonoa,  B.  c.  62,
enforced  the  Caecilia  Didia,  in  connectioD  with


e  that  tben  wai  a  Lex
(PtoLC.  GraoiUa,  12);  and  a  lex  of  C.  Paphia,
po^ap*  B.  c  65,  contained  the  nme  reipecting  all
perMxu  who  were  not  domiciled  in  Italf .  (Cic  Dt
Of.  iii.  11,  BnL  26,  38,  da  Leg.  Agr.  I  i;
Featna,  i.  v.  RtfiMioM:  Mejrcr,  Orat.  Rom.
Pr^m.  p.  229,  2nd  ed.)

JU'NIA  LICl'NIA. [LiaNU  Junia.]

JU'NIA  NOBBA-NA  of  nncerlain  data,
pnbablj  abool  A.  n.  19,  enacted  Ibal  when  a  Ro-
man cituen  had  mannmitted  a  iIbtb  without  tbe
nqniaitB  fbrmalitiea,  the  manmniuirai  thonld  not
all  irma  be  inefiectual,  but  the  maniunitted  peraon
ahonld  haTe  the  atotu*  of  a  Ixtinna.  (Omina,  i
17,22,*ciii-  56;  Ulp.  Frag,  i  n.  S,  nil  3.)
[I^TiitiTAS  ;  LiaaRTUS  ;  Manuuiksio.]

A  ^eoal  daoae  in  the  Lex  took  awaj
thtae  udni  Joniani,  aa  the;  were  called,  Che
(•podtj  of  making  a  teatoment,  taking  nn
letfiBiBit,  and  being  appointed  tntcra  b;  a
■aent.  Yet  they  had  the  other  part*  of  the
Bsti  bctio  (Ulp.  Fng.  XX.  S).  The  condition  of
the  l^tini  Jimiani  ia  the  aubject  of  an  aaay  by
C.  A.T0aVaiOgenw,  Marburg,  1833;  aee  also  the
re>a^>  of  Pnchta,  Imd.  iL  §  213,  on  the  dote  of
Ike  Lci  Jnnia  ;  and  also  IS  217,  318.

Db  LiBBaTiHOBirn  SurrKAQiu.  [Clodia  ;
Manumimk).]

JU'NIA  PETRO'NIA  or  PATBOT«IA(DiB,
40.  tit.  1.  a.  24).  It  ia  donbtfol  whether  thia  la
the  Bme  oa  Pbtbonia,  or  ia  another  Lex.

JU'NIA  BEPETUNDA'RUM. [Rbpttuu-'

DAB.]

JUIIIA  VELLSaA,  illowed  a  diild  who


rhich  it  ia  aouetune*  mentioned. (Cic  j>n>  Salia,
64,^  put.  y.  3,  ad  Att.  iL  9,  iv.  16,  t>  VatM.

rICI'NIA  MU'CJA  DE  CIVIBUS  BE-
0UNDI3  (probably  lUniouNnia),  pancd  m  tbe
eoDanlihip  A  L.  Licinna  Craaaua  the  orator,  and
Q.  Muctui  Scaevola  Ponlifei  Moiimua,  B.  c.  95,
which  enacted  a  itrict  examination  aa  to  the  titia
to  citiienihip,  and  deprired  of  the  excrciae  of
ciiic  rigbta  all  thoae  who  orald  not  make  ont  a
good  title  to  them.  Thia  meamie  {Brtly  led  to
the  Manic  war.  (Cic  dt  C^.  iii.  11,  Srut.  16,
pro  Baih.  31,  24,  pro  SeiL  13  ;  Aacon.  n  Cbme^
p.  67.)

LICl'NIA  SUMTUA'BIA. [Shmtuarub

LICl'NIA.  Id  the  year  B.C  375  C.  Licinioi
Stolo  and L.  Sextiui  being  elected  two  of  the


for  the  benefit  of  the  PUba.
One  Rogatio  related  to  tbe  debti,  with  which  the
Pleba  waa  incumbered  (Lir.  ti.  S4):  and  it  pKH
Tided  that  all  the  money  which  hod  been  pud  ai
intenat  shoold  be  dedncted  &am  the  principal
aum,  and  the  remainder  •honld  be  paid  in  tbreo
yeara  by  equal  paymenla.  The  Second  related
to  the  Ager  Publicna,  and  enacted  that  no  penon
abonld  occupy  {poaulani)  mcae  than  500  jugen.
Tbe  Third  waa  to  the  effect  that  no  more  Tribuni
militum  abonld  be  elected,  but  that  conaola  should
be  elected  and  one  of  them  aboold  be  a  Ptebeim.
Tbe  Fatriciam  prevented  these  Rogatimet  from
bung  carried  by  inducing  the  other  tribnna  to
oppoae  their  interccMio.  C  Lidnios  Stolo  and
L.  Seitins  retaliated  in  tlia  nme  way,  and  would
not  allow  any  comitia  to  be  held  except  those  foi
the  election  of  Aediles  and  Tribuni  Plebia.  They
vrere  also  re-elected  Tribuni  Plebia,  end  they
peracreied  for  five  yean  in  pterenting  the  olection
of  any  Cumla  MagiaUatni.

In  tbe  year  363,  tiie  two  tribnnea  vrera  stilt
elected,  for  the  ughth  time,  and  they  felt  their
power  incraaaing  with  tlie  diminution  of  the  op-
poaitim  of  their  eoUeasDea,  and  by  having  the  aid

I  of  one  of  the  Tribnni  Militum,  M.  Fabrua,  tho
btber-in-law  of  C  Lidnina  StolA Aftw  violent

I  aptition,  a  saw  Beptico


69*  LEX  LICINIA.

effect  that  instead  of  Dnumviri  neria  ftciundis.
Decemviri  ihonld  be  elected,  uid  ihsC  half  of  Ihem
ifaould  be  Plcbeiaiu.  In  the  year  a.  c  366,  when
Liciniui  uid  Seniul  faod  been  elected  Triboni  fbl
the  tealli  time,  tbe  lav  woi  passed  ai  to  the  De-
cemviri, and  Sve  plebeisna  and  fin  palriclang  were
elected,  a  meamire  which  prepated  the  way  fct  the
plebeiazu  participating  in  the  honoim  of  the  con-
inljihip.  Tbe  Rogatieoet  of  Lirimua  mre  finally
carried,  and  in  the  year  B.  c  36&  L.  Seitiiu  wai
elected  coniol,  bebig  the  fine  Plebeian  who  at-
tained that  digniU.  Tbe  Patriciona  wen  cDm-
peniated  for  their  lnu  of  the  eicluaiie  right  to  the
coniulahip  by  tbe  creation  of  the  office  of  Cnrnle
Aedile  and  of  Pmetor,

The  taw  «*  to  the  aettleraenl  between  debtor
and  cieditor  waa,  if  Livj'a  teit  ii  to  be  literally
nndentood,  an  inTauon  cF  the  ritablishcd  rights
of  property.  Niebubi'i  explanation  of  Ihii  lav  ia
tuntauied  in  hi>  third  rolujnr,  pp.  33,  &c

Beiidei  the  limitation  fiied  by  the  aecond  Lei
to  tha  number  of  jiigtra  which  an  jndiTldual  might
pBoest  in  the  public  land,  it  declared  that  no  in-
dividual  ahould have  above  100  large ' "'


la  the  fint  n


of  hU
own  law.  The  italemenl  ia  that  "  be,  together
with  hla  Bon,  posiesacd  a  thousand  jiiKcra  of  the
ager  (publicui),  and  by  cnuinci  paling  bii  ion  bad
acted  in  fraud  of  the  law."  (Lit.  vii.  16.)  From
thU  Atory  it  appears  that  the  Pletfeiana  coald  now
pouess  the  public  land,  a  right  which  they  may
nave  scanired  by  the  Law  of  Licinius,  but  there
is  no  evidence  on  this  matter.  The  ilorj  ia  told
alto  by  Columella  (i.  3).  PHnv  (Hul.  Nai.  iviii.
3),  and  ValerioB  Maiimua  (^iii.  6.  S  3).  The
last  writer  not  undemanding  what  he  waa  record-
ing, saya  that  in  order  to  conceal  bii  linlation  of
tbe  law,  Liciniug  tauotdpalid  part  of  tbi:  land  to
hU  son.  The  beta  a>  stated  by  Livy  are  not  put
in  the  cleoreit  light.  The  son  when  enuincipated
wcuid  be  aa  much  intitled  to  posaeis  500  jugem  n«
the  &lher,  and  if  he  bona  fide  pngtetied  that
quantity  of  the  Ager  pabticua,  there  ma  no  ftaud
on  tRe  law.  From  tbe  erpresaion  of  Pliny  {mi-
tHtnla  JUii  pfftona)  the  fraud  appears  to  have  con-
■isced  in  the  emancipation  of  the  son  being  effected
■olely  that  he  might  in  hia  own  name  poaacas  500
jngeia  while  his  father  had  the  sctoal  enjoyment
But  the  details  of  this  Lex  are  too  impnlectly
known  to  enable  ni  to  gire  more  than  a  probable
loltitioQ  of  the  matter.  Aa  the  object  of  the  Lex
was  Co  dhninlsh  tbe  poaseoiones  of  the  patriciona^
it  may  be  aMumed  that  the  surplus  land  thus
•tiaing  waa  diatributed  {attignalia)  among  tbe
plebeiana,  who  otherwise  would  have  gained  no-
tbing  by  the  change  ;  and  mch  a  dUtributlon  of
land  is  stated  to  have  been  [srt  of  the  Lei  of
Udnins  by  Vano  (cb  Rt  Rtut.  l  2)  and  Colo-
melta  (L  S).

Aceordiiig  to  LiTy  (vi.  43)  the  Rogatie  da
DecemTiri)  sacrorum  waa  carried  firat,  B.  c.  366.
The  three  other  rogatlone*  were  included  in  one
Lci,  which  waa  a  Lex  Satura.  (Lii.  Til  39  ;
Dien  CaM.  Fng.  33.)

Bcudes  the  pauages  refemd  to,  the  reader  may
ne  Niebnhr,  toI.  iiL  pp.  1—36,  for  his  new  of  the
Licinian  Regationa ;  and  Ooellling,  GadUAtt  der
.Ron.  jSAuftMrf^ufwtjr,  p.  354,  and  the  note  on
the  paaage  of  Varro  (de  JRe  Rial.  L  2).  The
Udiiiaa  Bogatiooi  hire  been  tha  (ubjecLof  miwh


LEX  MANLIA.

.  le  the  Claaaical  Mosenm,  No.  V.
on  the  Ucinion  Rogation  i>a  Modo  Agri itioyi.,
UrAer  die  SlelU  da  I'arrv,  &c,  IM  He  R,uL  i.  2.
§  9  J  and  No.  VII,,  Rcmarka  on  Profeasor  I^ngla
Paper  on  the  Licinian  Law  De  lUodo  Agri,  by
Profeaaor  Puchta  \  and  on  the  jBaaage  in  Appian'a
Civil  War^  i.  fi,  which  relates  to  the  Liciniim
Idw  by  Profeaaor  Long.

LICl'NIA  DE  CREANDIS  TRIU'MVIRIS
EFULO'NIBUS  (Lir.xxxilL  42  ;  OnUii  Ono-
maitiam),

LI'Vi.^E  were  Tariona  enactmeoti  ptopoMd  by
the  Tribune  M.  Liviua  Druoia,  ac  91,  for  eMa-
bliahing  colonic*  in  Italy  and  Sicily,  diitribntiag


admitting  the  fbeienitBe  civitaCea  to  the  Romaa


Hei


:t  by  micBK  with  it


an  eighth  part  of  bfaaa.  (Plin.  H.N.  xExiiL  3.)
Dmius  wBi  Buaaainaled,  and  the  Senate  declared
that  all  hi*  Lega  were  (Boed  contra  auspicia,  and
were  therefore  not  Lege*.  (Cie.  Leg.  iL  6, 12,  pm
Domo,  16  ;  Liv.  .^.  71  ;  Appian,  Belt.  CTv.  i.3j;
AieDn.iiiOc.  Cortai.  p.  62.)

LUTA'TIA  DE  VL [Via.]

MAK'NIA  LEX  is  only  mentioned  by  Ciofo
(fimftu,  14),  who  aaya  that  M'.  Curiiu  cwnpcllc-d
the  Patiea  "  ante  auctorea  fieri  "  in  the  case  of  the
election  of  a  plebeian  conaul,  "  which,*^  adds  Cicero,
**  n-ai  a  great  thing  to  accomplish,  aa  tbe  Lex
Maenia  was  not  yet  passed.'  Tbe  Lex  therefore
required  the  Patrcs  to  give  their  consent  at  lesit
to  tha  election  of  a  magiatmtna,  or  in  other  wwd)
to  confer  oi  agree  to  confer  the  Imperium  on  the
person  whom  the  coniitia  should  elect  Livy  (i.
17)  appears  In  refer  to  thia  tow.  It  was  probably
proposed  bytheTribnneMaeniiu,ac287.  [Auc-

DE  MAGI8TRIS  AQUARUM.  CHauhold,
Spiuigenbcrg,  Man.  Leg.  p.  177.)

MAJESTATIS. [Majkbtas.]

MAMI'LIA  DB  COLO'NIIS,  The  subject
of  this  iei  and  its  dale  are  folly  diacuiacd  by  Ru-
dorif  {ZeUKirlft,  toI.  ir.),  who  shows  that  the  Lex
Mamilia,  Roscia,  Peducoea,  Allicna,  Fabia  ia  tbe
nme  aa  the  "  Lex  Agraiia  quam  Gaini  Caesar
tulit"  (Dig.  47.  lit.  21.  a  3),  and  that  tbia  Oaiu
Caesar  ia  ^e  Emperor  Caligula.

MAMI'LIA  DE  JUOURTHAE  FAUTC-
RIDUS. (SbL  Jag.  c.  40  ;  Onllii  OkhoiMih.)

MAMI'LIA  VI-NIUM  REOUNDCRUM,
enacted  in  B.  c  239,  ot  according  to  anochtr  anp-
poiilion,  in  B.  c.  16S,  Bxed  at  five  or  six  feet  the
width  of  the  bonndaiy  tpaoea  wbteh  were  not  sub-
ject  to  Usucapio.  (RudorS^  Zeiltelirlfl,  tdL  x.
p.  342,  4c)

MANIliIA,  [ropoaed  by  the  tribona  C  Mani-
lius  B.C.  66,  was  a  priTilegium  by  which  waa  cdd-
femd  on  Pompey  the  sammand  id  the  war  minat
MitbridatSB.  The  lex  waa  supported  by  Cicers
whenpaetor.  (i>ii£^  Afoutia/ Pint  Pba^  30;
Dion  Can.  xextL  25.)

The  Lege*  Manilianae,  mentioned  by  Getn>  (Oa
Or.  L  53),  were  eridently  not  Lege*  Propw,  but
probably  forms  which  it  was  prudent  for  parties  to
observe  in  buying  and  lelUntt-

MANI'LIA  DE  LIBERTINtKRUM  SUF-
FRA'OIIS  (DionCa«nxxTL25;  Ktiica.n(y»^
lai.  pp.  64,  6S),  is  apparently  tha  same  aa  tho
Manlia  De  Lib.  Suff.

MA'NLIA,  abo  adkd  LjCI^OAi^iv  IS«.


LEX  PAPIEIA.


i.43i


ohUhI  the  tniiati

Cic  ^  Or.  iiL  19.)  [Liginu.]

MATiLIA  DK  LIBERTINCKUM  8UF-
FRA-OIIS  (B.  c58  ;  Amok,  in  MiL  f.  46.)

MA'NLIA  DE  VICE'SIMA  MANUMIS-
SO'RUM. [Handhusio.]

UA'RCIA  proUbly  about  iha  yew  at  3fi2
"■dicmu  ttnenlORa." (Oaiiu,  iv.  23  ;  Lit.  vii.


22.)


21.)

MATICIA  DE  LIGUTUBUS.  (Li

MAIICIA  ta  (grmriui  law  pnnnKd  by  ihi
tribuHi  L.  Uwdni  PhUippu,  B.C.  104.  (Cic  <lt
Of.  il  31.)

HA'HIA  pnpoicd  by  Muiiu  when  tribune
B.  c.  1 1 9,  foe  DOITDwing  the  ponla  at  electianL
(Cii^  it  Leq.  Jii.  17 1  PluL  Mar.  4.)

Mki'MHIA  or  RE'MMIA. [CiLOiiMi.]

ME'NSI  A  Thii  lei  eiuuted  that  if  B  wDman
wbo  *sa  >  Ranun  citiiea  (iniu  Ramamd)  nuuned
a  pcRgrioiu,  the  ofiipling  wu  a  peregnnuh  If
there  wu  coimubium  between  the  percgruiui  and
ths  womao,  the  children,  araordinK  to  Ihe  principle
of  caonubiuni,  were  peregrini,  ai  the  legal  eflWct  of
CDnnabium  wu  that  children  followed  the  conditii^
of  their  bther  i}Siai  matprr  patrtn  Kqimiitiir'}.
If  there  were  no  conoubium,  the  childien,  ae-
^rtrJing  to  aoothcr  rule  of  law,  by  which  Ihe^  fbl.
)«w«il  the  oondition  of  the  motber,  would  haie
been  RonuD  dtiieni;  and  it  wai  the  object  of  Che
ki  to  prereDt  thu. <Oaiu>,  L  78  ;  Ulp.  Frag.  t.  8.)

ME-SSIA. (Cic.  orf  .^«.  iv.  1.)

UETI'LIA.  (LiY.  uiL  1h  ;  Plot  Faibu,
C.9.)

MINU'CIA.  B.C.  21fi,  crested  the  IriumTiri


(Li..


i.  21.)


NERVAE  AORA'RIA  (Dig.47.  tit  SI.  i.  3.
{  1).  the  lairit  known  initaiice  ofs  Lex.
OCTA'VIA,  [FBLTiiENTjitui  LaOM.]
OOU'LNi A  propoied  by  the  Iriboncj  a.  c,  300,
iacRunl  the  nnnibcc  of  Ponlifica  to  eight  and
thai  of  the  aufpin  to  nine ;  it  alto  enacted  that
bar  of  the  Pontificei  and  fire  of  the  augun  thoald
be  Ukn  from  the  plebeL (Lit.  x.  6—9.)

CPPIA. [SUMTUABUa  LMM.J

OUCHIA.  [SuHTUABiii  LiGia.]
OVI'NIA,  of  uncertain  dale,  wai  a  plebiacitnin
which  nTe  the  eeuon  ceitain  powen  in  regn-
lating  Ute  liiU  of  the  eenaton  (otffo  miaUtriai):
the  main  object  teemi  to  hare  been  to  exclude  all
impnipK  pcnoni  from  Ihe  lenate,  and  to  pre>«nl
tbeir  admiaiion,  if  in  other  reipect*  qualified.
(FatOM,  I.  e.  Praettriti  Saniamj  Cic  dt  Ltg.  iii.
13.)  Tho  Lei  Oiioia  of  Ouua  (ir.  lOS),  if  the
If  iliiig  ii  right,  WM  a  dillerent  lex.
PA'PIA DE  PEREGRI'NIS. [Juhi*  dx

PSBBOUNtS.]

PA'PIA  POPPAEA. [Juiiix]

A  Lex  Papia  on  the  manner  of  chootiog  the
VeMl  Viigiu  li  mentioned  by  Oelliui  (i.  IS)  ;  bnt
tk  reading  appeari  to  be  doubtful,  and  perhapi  it
ouAt  to  be  oiled  Lei  Popilia.

PAPI'BIA,  ot  JU'LIA  PAPITtlA  DE
MtlLCTA'RUM  AKSTIMATIO-NE  (s.c,  430)
fixed  a  mooey  value  accoidinff  to  which  finea  were
paid,  which  formerly  were  paid  in  iheep  and  cattle.
<LiT.  ir.  SOiCicibA^.  iL  3£.)  ael1iui{iLi)
and  Featni  (i  v.  Putiif)  make  thig  Talnstion
put  of  Ihe  Aleniian  bw  [Atshnta  Tahfkia],
bot  in  thii  they  appear  to  hare  been  miitahen
nmodiiw  to  Niebuhr.  (HaL  ofRomfC,  ii.  p.  300.)

PApTltlA,  by  which  the  ai  wa«  made  lemun-


LEX  PLAUTIA.  691

oalii  (Plm.  //.  N.  niiiL  3),  one  of  the  nriona
enactment!  which  tampered  with  the  coinage,

PAPralA,  B.C  332,  prapoKd  by  (he  Piaetor
Papiriua,  gaie  the  Acemai  the  drilai  wilhoit  the
lunrsgiiiRi.  It  wai  properly  a  PriTilegium,  bnt  la
nwful  u  illuitia^g  the  hittory  of  the  extanuou  of
Ihe  Ciyitu  Romana. (Liv.  Tin.  17.)

PAPI'RIA,  of  nnceiUm  date,  enuted  that  no
aedee  ihould  be  declared  comeoatae  without  a
Plebiw:itura  <ninu»  PMu,  Cic  pro  Dom.  49).

PAPt'RIA  PLAU'TIA,  a  FlebiHjitimi  of  the
year  B.  c  66,  propowd  by  the  tribtmei  C  Papiriu
Carbo  and  H.  Plautiu*  SilTanna,  in  the  contulihip
of  Cn.  Pompeini  Stiabo  and  L.  Porciut  Cato,  i<
called  by  Cicero  (pro  Ankia,  4)  a  lei  of  Silraniu
and  Carbo.  (See  Civitas  ;  FobdKbatab  Civi-
TATie  ;  and  SsTigny,  Voliacklaa  der  Taftl  eos
Hmdea,  Zatiekrifi,  ix.)

PAPI'RIA  POETE'LIA. [Pobtblia.]

PAPI'RIA  DE  SACR.4MENT0  (Featux,
I.  c.  jS^TvuRflthcm},  propoied  by  L.  P^iriua,  Trt-
bunut  Flebit.  probauy  enacted  that  in  the  cate  of
the  Legii  actio  ucramento,  the  money  ihould  not
be  actually  depoiited,  but  Kcority  ihould  be  giTon
for  it  (Puehta,/aK.  ii.  161,  note  101.)

PAPI'RIA  TABELLA'RIA.  [Tabbllakiab
LxoM.]

PE'DIA,  related  to  the  tnutdecen  of  the  Dic-
tator Caaar. (VelL  Pat.  ii.  69.)

PEDUCAEA,  B.C.  113,  a  Plebiuitmn,  leemi
to  have  been  merely  a  Privileginm  and  not  a  ge-
neral law  againit  Inceilum.  (Cic.  dt  ffal.  ZJmt.
iii.  30  1  Akoh.  n  CXc  Mil  p.  46.)

PESULA'NIA  prorided  that  if  an  animal  did
any  damage,  the  owner  ihould  make  it  good  or
giTeuptheanimal.  (PaulS'.A.  l.lit  15.1.1.3.)
There  wu  a  genenj  prOTinon  to  ihii  effect  in  the
Twelre  Tables  {Diritien,  UiieniM,  &.c  p.  532,
&C.),  and  it  might  be  inferred  from  Panlui  that
thia  Lex  extetided  the  proTiAions  of  the  old  law
to  dogt.  The  name  of  the  lex  may  be  onoctlain.
See  the  note  in  ATadfi  edition  of  Paului.

PETI'LLIA  DE  PECU'NLA  REGIS  AN-
TlOCin. (LiT.  imiii.  S4.)

PETRE'IA,  a  Lei  under  Chit  ^tle,  de  deciaa-
tione  miiitum,  in  cue  of  mutiny,  ii  mentioued  by
Appian  {de  BtlL  dv.  ii.  47),  according  to  the  old
editioni. But  the  tme  reading  ii  'bt^  njfi^.

PETRCNIA,  probably  paoed  in  the  time  of
Anguatiu,  and  aubiequen^y  amended  by  Tariout
lenatuKontulta,  forbade  a  muta-  to  deliver  Dp  hie
■lare  to  fight  with  wild  beutL  If,  howeier,  the
maiter  thought  that  hi*  ilare  deeerred  inch  a
pDuiibmetit,  he  might  take  him  beibre  the  autho-
rise! Utda)  who  might  condemn  him  to  fight  if
he  appeared  to  deierre  it.  (Dig.  48,  tit  S,  i.  11.
18.  tit  1,  1.  42 ;  Qelt.  t,  14  ;  Puchia,  /a4,  L  §  107,
note  101  ;  SaTigny,  ZtUielnifl,  ix.  p.  S74,  on  the
inicription  found  on  a  wall  of  Uie  amphitheatre  of
PompeiL)

PINAKIA  (Oahii,  It.  16)  related  to  the  ginng
of  a  Judex  within  a  limited  time.  (See  Puchta,
ImL  i.  i  53.)

PINA'RIA. [Anhaim  LiBia.]

PLAETO'RIA. [CnBATOB.]

PLAETO'HIA  DE  PRAETCRE  UR-
"BKtiO.  (VarTo,  dt  Limg.  Lot,  n.  S  ;  Cenmiiiui,
d4  Dia  Nabdi,  c.  24.)

PLAUTIA  or  PLOTIA  DE  VL (Vis.!

PLAU'TIA  or  PLO'TIA  JUDICUTIIA  >■
by  AKoniui  (»  Oe.  ConKl.  g.  79)  ai


■  O"


696  LEX  PUULILIA.

baving  enacted  that  ddaen  penotu  alumld  be  sn-
naally  elected  bj  eaeb  tribe  out  of  itd  omi  body
10  be  placed  in  tho  Album  Judicum.

PLAUTIA  or  PLOTIA  DK  RE'DITU  LE-
PIDANCaUM.  (Sueton.O««.fi;Oi:1liii»,iiiL3,)

PLAUTIA  PAPmiA, [PAPDui  Ptiu-


A.]


uthe


POETE'LIA,  B.C.  _M8,  >  PlebiKitom,
finl  Lei  ii^nt  Ambitni. (Liy.  Tii.  1 6.)

POETE'LIA  PAPI'RIA,  ac  326,  made  an
important  cbsnge  in  tho  liabilitiet  of  Ibe  Neii.
{Liv.  Tiii.  SB.) [Nail..]

POMPEIAK  There  were  -rarioill  Lege)  »
called.

PoMFiiA,  propoied  hj  Co.  Pompcini  SCrebo,
the  father  of  Oi,  Pompcini  Mngnui,  ijrohably  in  hii
coninlifaip  B.c  89,  gare  the  Ju>  Latii  or  I^tinitaa
to  all  the  towni  of  the  Ttanspadnni,  Rnd  probablf
tiieCmtulatheCiipBdimi.  (Savigny,  VoUokMioi
der  Tafd  kub  Hemita,  ZMtArift,  ii.)


[Ai.1


-8.]


€  (Sue


OuH.  38  ;  DioD  Can.  xL  i .

3}  forbade  a  pcmm  to  be  a  candidate  for  public
aflim  (ptHlio  Aoiionnii)  irho  wai  net  at  Konu  ;  but
a  JuUni  CaMar  wai  excepted.  ThU  wae  doubt-
len  the  old  law,  but  it  had  apparentlj  bccouM  ob-
aolate.

D> FARtticmns. [Cohnslu di

SKARiia.]

TBiBtmrn*  (b,  c  70)  natored  tho

old  Tribunitin  Potertai  which  Sulla  had  nenrlj
deitroyed.  (Sueton.  Can.  6  ;  VeU.  Pat  iL  30  ;
Cic  de  Lrg.  ill  9,  II,  ja  Vtrr.  Act.  L  15  ;  IJT.
EpL91.) [Tbibuni.]

DB  VI  wai  a  Piiiile^aifi,  and  only

nfeired  to  the  (sue  of  Mile.  (Cic  PUL  II  9  ;
Aacon.  and  Schnl  Bob.  in  Argam.  Afilbii.)

POPI'LIA, [Pama.]

PO'RCIAE  DE  CA'PITE  CIVIUM  or  DE
PROVOCATIO'NE  enacted  that  a  Roman  citUsa
■hould  not  be  Koni^d  or  put  to  death.  (LIt,  x.  9 ;
Cic  de Rep.  \i.S\,  pro  RiMr.Z,i;Siia.CaliLbl.)

PO'RCIA  DE  PROVPNCIIS  (about  B,c.
198).  The  poiSBge  in  Liry  (iiiii.  27.  "  Snratut
quoi  ID  cultnm  proeloram,"  6ic.)  it  inppnsed  to
refer  to  a  Porda  Lei,  to  which  the  Plebiicituni  de
ThermenHbui  lofen ;  aod  the  wordi  qnotod  by
Cicera  {Verr.n.  4,5.  "No quia  emnt mancipium'^
are  taken,  ai  it  u  CDDJectured,  &Dm  tbii  Forcia
Lei.

PUBLI'CTA  pennitted  betting  at  c«rtam  gBme4
which  nqnired  atrength,  u  running  and  leaping.
(Dig.  II,  tit  S.)

PUBLI'LIA  DE  SPONSO'RIBUS.  [Intbb-

PUBLI'LIA  LEX  vaa  prapoMid  by  Publilini
Valero,  a  triboniu  plebif,  and  enacted  &  c.  471.
The  tenna  of  the  Rogatio  were  "  nt  ptebeii  magia-
tialni  tribulii  comitii*  Bercnt"  (Lii.  ii.  £6).  The
object  of  the  I^ei  waa  to  lake  theu  electioni  from
the  Comitia  Centnriata,  in  which  the  patticiani
eoold  determine  the  niull  of  tho  electioni  by  the
Totea  of  their  iJieali.  The  It(«atio  beoune  a  Lei
after  much  oppoaition,  tho  butory  of  vhich  it
giTOn  is  LiTT.  According  (a  aome  anthotiliea,  the
number  of  tnhunea  wni  alio  iocnued  from  two  to
fin  (Ut.  ii  68)  i  and  tbii  mntt  thereloTe  hiTo


LEGES  PUBLILIAE.
been  prorided  by  the  Lei. In  B.  c  117  (Lit.  iu.

3D)  ten  tribniieg,  two  &am  each  claaa,  were  dwted

legialatiTe  proTiiion.  Dionyatui  {Antiq.  Ram,  it.
13)  girea  a  more  complete  account  of  thii  Lex.
After  Publilini  biled  in  hia  (int  attempt  to  cany
'  hia  Rogalio,  he  added  a  new  chapter,  which  pave
the  election  of  the  aedilea  (plebeian)  to  the  Comitia
Tributa,  and  enabled  the  Tdbnta  Co  delibemte  and
decide  upon  any  matter  which  could  be  delibcraled
and  decided  uponin  the  Comitia  Centoriala.  From
the  time  of  the  enactment  of  tbia  Loi,  ^i  Dio-
njiiu.  (ii.  49)  "up  to  my  tim^  tho  election  of
Iribunci  and  oedilt*  wai  made  vithoat  biids  (au-
gural cercnionio),  and  all  the  reat  of  the  relJ^rwi
forma  in  the  Comitia  Tribntn."  DJonyiina  nja
nothing  hero  of  the  other  matter  irtiieh  the  addi-
tional chapter  contained  (ii.  43).

PURLI'LIAE  LEQES  of  the  IMclater  Q.
Publiliua  Phila,  which  he  propoied  and  earned  K.C
S39  (LiT.  Tiii.  V2\  The  purport  of  theae  Legei
it  tbui  eipresaed  by  Liry  :  "  \nt  legea  aeeanilii-
aimaa  plcboi,  adversaa  nobilitati  tolit:  imiia  ut
plebiacita  omnea  Quirite*  tenerent:  alteram,  ut
lepim  quae  coraitiis  centurialii  fiarmtiir,  anie
inilum  au^agium  Patrea  auctoiea  Berent :  tertiun
ut  alter  ntique  ci  plebe,  qaum  eo  renCnm  uE  ut
utrumque  plcbcium  coniulem  fieri  lieere^  renw
crearetur."  Tho  laoriiian  of  the  lirat  lei  ■P«ci  u
be  the  game  aa  that  of  the  Lex  Hortenaia,  a.  c.
26S  "nt  plebiacita  imiTenam  populom  teniiicnt'
(Oaiol,  i.  3).  Some  critica  anppoM  that  the  lint
Lei  enacted  that  a  Flcbiacitum  ahoold  be  *  Lrl
without  being  confirmed  by  the  Comitia  Centuiiila,
but  that  it  would  itill  require  tho  confirmation  nf
the  Senate,  or,  aa  anmc  tuppnae,  of  the  Cemilia
Ciuiala.  The  Lei  Hortenaia,  it  ia  further  inp-
poicd,  did  away  with  the  confirmation  of  the
Curiae,  or,  at  tome  luppoee,  of  the  Senate.  But
the  eipreuion  "oiiniw  Qairitea"  of  LiTy  cleartj
hai  tome  reference,  and,  accordmg  to  conrvt  ia-
terpiclalian,  mnat  be  taken  to  baie  lome  nfetOKe,
Co  the  Mfm(  of  the  eflecl  of  a  Plebiadtam.  Thrie
ia  no  difficult  in  giving  a  coniiitent  meaaing  to
Lirj^  wordj.  The  fint  Lei  enacted  that  Flebii-
cita  ihonld  bbd  ait  the  Qniritea  )  which  mam
nothing  elte  than  that  a  Plebiidtura  iboold  bin
the  e^ct  of  a  Lex  paiiod  at  the  Comitia  Centn-
riata. It  ia  not  hero  aaid  whether  the  Coaitia
Tributa  conld  legialate  on  all  matten  on  which  the
" ■  ■ " ■ .  eouij  [PuBMLiA  Lbx)  !  md


with  at


for  the  confirming  of  a  Lex  paaaed  a
mitia.  Aod  that  LItj  did  not  nippaae  ItuI  the
firat  Lex  contained  any  Rgulaliona  at  to  maltrr
of  fonn,  it  made  dear  by  what  he  aayi  of  the
•eeond  Lex,  which  did  regulate  the  fsm  of  1e-
giibition.  Tbia  it  the  dear  meaning  of  Litt^
worda  ;  it  may  not  be  tho  tme  import  of  the  fiiM
Lci ;  but  it  it  Botnewbat  difficult  to  prore  any
thing  about  a  matter  bejcod  what  the  eridente
ihowi. [Plxbiscituh.]

The  timplrtt  meaning  of  the  aeoood  Lei.  ac-
irding  to  the  wordi,  ia,  that  do  Rogatio  ihould  be
propoaed  at  the  Comitia  Centuriata,  until  the
Patrea  bad  ^proved  of  it,  and  bad  gifen  it  their
auctorilaa.  If  wo  knew  who  were  meant  by  ihe
Patrea,  the  meaning  of  the  Lei  woold  be  tdenbly
dear.  It  ia  now  generally  nppoaed  that  Li'y
meant  the  Comitia  Curiato,  and  that  their  Tcti
M  tlw  PMHurM  o((1m  ConitiB  Ceotariatt  wai


LEX  BEOIA.
takm  mrwj.  If  Pam*  metm  the  Senate,  (hen
the  porpiitt  OC  the  Lei  ii  thii,  that  no  nua-
■nre  uniit  be  ptopaeed  M  the  Ceotnriat*  Comitia,
witbodt  a  SCtom  fint  anthoriaiDg  it.  (Conip.  Lit.
Jt.  21.)

Tb>  meuiing  of  tits  thiid  Lex  ii  plun  enough.
pKhtB  ihow*  oc  trie*  to  ihow  that  the  fint  Lei
PnUilk  nmpl;  nodered  umteeemry  the  cod-
finnatioo  of  a  Plebaotum  b;  the  Comitia  Centa-
liata  ;  and  thenfive  then  ranoiiied  onij  the  om-
fimatiiin  of  the  Saute.  Accordingly,  the  efiect
of  the  fint  L«i  ni  (o  make  the  Conitia  Tribula
ceoH  to  have  uierelj  the  iuitiatiTD  in  legulation  ;
henadarth,  Ptebiicita  did  not  raqmie  the  ccin£nn-
atioo  of  a  Lex  CentnriMa,  bnt  00)7  that  of  the
S«wte  ;  and  ve  nuj,  pnb^ly,  from  thii  time  data
the  naa  of  the  expieHiop :  "  Lei  n


He  nBHidtn  the  ncoDd  Lex  le  baia  nmjdir
dedated  the  old  {tactics,  that  the  Comida  Centn-
riataehoald  paii  no  BogMion  without  (he  authority
of  a  pnrioai  SenataMonialtnm.  The  two  L«gea
then  bad  thii  rehUioa  to  one  another :  the  £rrt
hex  fcorided,  that  a  Ler  paned  at  the  Comitia
TtibolB,  which  bdbn  thii  time  wai  coitfinaed  by
a  SenBtnmuultam,  and  finally  rati&ed  by  the
Comitia  Centoriala,  ihonld  nnt  require  the  latiG-
tatinn  of  the  Comitia  Centuriala ;  the  ucond  Lex
dtdared  that  the  old  pmctiee  ae  to  the  Comitia
CeDtociala  ihould  be  maintained,  that  the  Legea
paeaed  there  ihould  have  the  preriooa  anthoiin-
tim  (anetorilBi)  of  the  Senato.

On  ibe  aabject  of  theaa  Legea,  aee  ^-«^*"""
SmOa,  i.  p.  36,  note  ;  Puehta,  Init.  i.  iS9;  and
Niebnbr,  <rol.  iii.  p.  117,  tt,  EugL  7>. ;  and  He
Valsbias  Lbqib.

PU'PIA,  mentiated  by  Cicoo  («d  QnML  iL
IS,  ad  Phm.  L  4)  ntna  to  bare  enacted  that  the
atnate  cnold  not  meet  on  C(anitiale*  Die*.

gUI'NTIA  wo»  B  lei  proposed  by  T.  Qnintiui
Crininna,  can«nlH.&  9,  and  enacted  by  the  Popnlui
foe  the  pi uiii  lotion  of  the  Aquaeductofl.  The  Lei
ii  [ausitied  by  Prontinni  (de  Aqwudiiti  Roman,),

RE'OIA,  properly  LEX  DE  IMPE'RIU
PRI'NCIPIS.  The  natnra  of  the  Jmpeiimn  and
the  mode  of  eoniaring  it  have  beoi  eigdained
mder  Iwraiiiuif,  Augnituo,  by  rirtus  of  uniting
in  bis  own  pcnrai  t}ie  Imperium,  the  ^bonitia
Potestai,  the  Ceniotian  power,  tad  the  office  of
Pimtifei,  waa  in  bet  many  magiatratei  in  one ;
and  his  title  wae  Prtocept.  Theee  nriooi  powera
were  eonfeiTed  on  the  nrlieat  Principcs  (em-
pcroia)  by  Tarioui  legea ;  but  finally  the  whole
of  tfci*  combined  anthotity  «ai  conCnnd  l^  a
Lex  Impeiu  or  Lex  de  Impeiio.  (DioD  '^'™",
liii.  18  (  hii  mna^  on  the  power  ef  Annutna,
and  the  naleaof  Reimania.)  By  this  Lex  the  Im-
paial  aMbcci^,  aa  we  may  call  it,  wai  oonfened
in  the  Piincepa  (cum  ipso  Jmpenitn  per  legem
Imperima  accipiat,  Qaine,  L  5),  and  legialatiTe
power.  By  thie  Lex  the  Princepi  was  alio  made
"  Blntna  ^gibm,"  that  in,  many  teMiictiie  enact-
mtnta  were  declared  not  to  apply  to  him,  either
in  hia  prime  «  bii  magiit^ul  capacity  (Dion
aaa.ltii.  18,  2S};  for  inKanee,  Cal^pUa  wu  re-
lemed  by  a  Senatnacouflittum,  which  wue  prtK
bably  IbilawBd  by  a  Lei  aa  a  matter  of  form,
ban  the  Lei  Julia  et  P^a.  (Dim  Can.  liz.  15  ;
ompare  Ulptoo,  Dig.  1,  tit  3.  *.  31.)  This  Lex
De  Iniptno  WM  aeceded  by  a  Senatuaconinltum.
ChciL£rii<.i,4;,iT.3,fi.J ' ---.-...■--


S.) A  cwuidorabb  Aag-


LEX  RUBKIA.  SST

toent  of  the  Lex  De  Tmpeiio  Veapaaiani  is  etiU
preierred  at  Rome.  (Haubold,  Spaxgenbeig,  Afa-
asM.  £11^  p.  221.)  It  is  sometiniea  inconnlly
called  a  SeMtneconniltuni,  but  on  the  fngtnent
itself  it  ii  called  a  Lex.  It  is  tine  that  b  Senatus-
coninltnm  preceded  the  Lei,  and  the  enactment
of  the  Lei  was  a  mere  form.  This  Lei  empower*
Vespanan  to  make  tnadea,  to  mginate  Senatni-
conruJta,  to  propose  penoni  to  the  people  and  the
Senate  to  be  elected  to  maffistradea,  to  ertend  the
Fomoerinm,  to  moke  conatitntioui  or  edicts  which
ihould  haTB  the  force  of  law,  and  to  be  releesed
from  the  same  laws  from  which  Angnstus,  Tibe-
rius, and  Clandiui  were  releesed  ;  and  all  that  he
had  dme  before  the  enactment  of  this  lei  (ants
legem  logatam)  was  to  baTo  the  same  effect  at  if
it  nad  been  done  by  the  eammand  of  the  people.

This  Lfli  de  Imperio  Principii  it  serctal  times
named  Lei  Regia  in  the  Ci^ns  Juris  (InsL  1.
tit  2.  «.  6. ;  Dig.  1.  tit  4.  s.  1,  J  Cod.  1.  tit  17.
187).  There  ii  no  evidence  that  the  Lei  de  Im-
perio Principia  was  erer  called  Lei  Regis  under
the  early  emperorai  Under  the  later  emperors
then  is  nothing  inipriiing  in  the  name  Regia
beii^  adopted  as  a  cmnmon  exjoeauon.  When
the  empeior  was  called  Dominns,  a  title  which  wa*
given  even  to  Trajan,  the  Lei  de  Imperio  might
well  be  called  Hegia.  To  deny  the  existence  of
a  Lex  de  Imperio  would  show  a  very  imperfect
knowledge  of  the  history  aitd  OMUtitntieo  of  Romc^
soda  want  of  critical  judgment  (Pnchta, /wt  1.
S88.)

RE'aiAK [Jus  CiviLK  PArimuHDii.}

RE'HHIA. [C1LUHMIA.J

KEPETUNDA'RUM. [HKPBTUN»*n.]

RHCVDIA.  The  Rhodions  hod  a  marituna
code  which  wu  highly  esteemed.  Some  of  its
provisians  were  adopted  by  the  Remans,  and  bars
thus  been  incorpomled  into  the  maritime  law  of
Enn^xan  slatea,  Stnbo  (p.  66Z  Casaub.)  ipetdii
of  the  wise  laws  of  Rbodea  and  their  admuabia
policy,  eqiedally  in  naval  matters ;  and  Cicero
(pro  Ltg.  Mani.  t  18)  to  the  nme  effect  The
Digest  (U.  tit  a)  contains  so  much  of  the  Lex
Rhcdioimn  aa  lelatca  to  jactus  or  the  throwing
is  in  order  to  nve  the  vessel  or
mrgo.  Thia  Lex  Rhodioium  de
Jietn,  ia  not  a  Lei  in  the  proper  aente  of  the  term.

KCSCIA  THEATRA'LIS,  propoeed  by  the
tribune  U  Roiciu  Otho,  B.C.  67,  which  gave  the
Equitee  a  special  place  at  the  poblic  ^>e«tac]ei  in
fiiutteen  rows  or  seats  (ta  qaattardtam  graditui
MB»  ordnUmi)  Deit  to  the  place  of  the  senalon,
which  wn>  in  the  orchestra.  This  Lex  also  aaugncd
a  certain  place  to  apaidtbiifla  ideaxlom,  Cie.
Pid.  iL  18).  The  phtase  "  sed«e  in  qnatnor-
decim  ordliubue,"  [1  equivalent  to  having  the
proper  Censua  Equeatrit  which  wis  reqnirA  by
the  Ld.  There  are  numerous  allusions  to  Ibis  Lex
(Dion.  mvi.  2S ;  Veil  Fat  iL  32 ;  Liv.  ^nt.  93  ;
Cic  pro  Munaa,  1 9),  which  is  aranetimea  simply
called  the  Lex  of  Otho  (Jut.  liv.  324),  or  rcfeinid
to  by  hii  name.  (Hor.  Epod.  iv.  IB.)  This  bw
caused  some  popalar  disturbance  in  the  consulship
of  CicBo,  Ki  c  63,  wbiob  ha  checked  by  a  speech.
(Cic  ad  AtL  ii.  I  i  Plut  Cie.  c  13.)  [Julia
Thiatkalu.]

RU'BBIA.  The  province  of  Qallia  Cisalpins
ceased  to  be  a  Pcovincia,  and  became  a  part  of
Italia  about  Uie  year  B.C.  43.  When  thu  Gk-uiga
took  [Jace,  it  vat  necMvirj'  10  proride  fitr  tlio


eibaatd  of  gi


698  LEX  SATURA.

adminutration  of  jutice,  ai  the  turol  modet  of

proTiiiciiil  idminiitralioi]  vonld  ceaas  vilh  the  de-
tenninBUon  of  tile  pioTinciitl  Ibrm  al  gorernmeDt
Thii  wu  effected  bj  a  Lei,  the  nune  of  irtuch  ii
unkuDini,  but  ■  iarge  put  of  it,  on  a  bronie  tab-
let, it  pnserred  in  the  Muieum  at  Parma.  This
LeT  uraDged  the  judicialy  eatabliahinenl  of  the
formflr  provincia,  and  appointed  ii.  Tin  Hnd  iv.
Tin  jiui  dicundo :  a  Piaefeci
mcntioacd  in  tha  lex.  Id  tvo
Lex  (c  XX.  L  29.  3S)  a  Lei  Rubi
vhicli,  aeoording  to  loaa,  it  an  corliei  lex  hj  vhich
Mntma  iva«  made  a  PiaeCectuia ;  and  accMdiog  to
otbere,  the  Lex  Rubria  ii  thii  Tory  Lei  de  Oillia
CinlpinB.  Thii  mbject  u  dlKoned  bj  Safi^y
(Zei^airifl,  ii.)  and  b;  Pnchta  {ZtUtArift,  i.  Ueber
in  hki^l  der  Lu  RAria  dt  Gallia  Cualpma).

Thii  Lei  hai  beta  publiihed  Krenl  limei ;  ths
lalcil  edition  il  "Tavola  legiilatin  della  Gallia
Ciialpina  ritiDrata  in  Veleia  ct  teitituila  alia  lua
*em  leiione  da  D.  Ftetts  de  Lama,  Pumft  L  B30."
We  an\j  poiMw  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  chapter
of  thia  Lei,  which  tieati  of  the  Nun  Operii
Nunliatio  ;  the  Iwentietb  chapter  on  the  Damnam
Infectum  il  complete:  the  trentf-fiiit  treat!  of
Pecunia  Certa  Cndita,  but  only  of  Eiecntion ;
the  tveaty-iecond  treati  in  like  manner  of  lunilar
Bctiona ;  there  ii  only  the  bi^oning  of  the  twenty-
third,  which  treati  of  the  diTiiion  of  an  beieditaa
(fMi  d*  Jhmilia  ameiicHaiia  daviditmla  iBdiavn
tSmi  darti  rtddtmy  dtc  potbdantTint,  &c)>  The
melicr  of  thii  lei  therefore,  to  far  ai  we  know  it,
porel'  concern*  ptDCednre,  u  Fuchta  nmarki.

RUPI'LIAE  (at  131),  were  the  regulation,
setahliihed  by  P.  liupitiui,  and  ten  legali,  fui  the
adminiilration  of  the  proTinee  of  Sicily,  after  the
doae  of  the  £nt  eernte  war.  They  were  made
in  punnance  of  a  coruultum  of  tha  lenate.  CiceiD
(in  Verr.  iL  13,  15,  18,  37)  ipeaki  of  theae  re-
gnlatioiu  a»  a  Decielnm  of  Rnpiliui  [iftod  U  ik
dacem  It^orum  untaitia  italait},  which  he  saya
they  call  Lex  Rapilia;  but  it  wa*  not  a  Lci
proper.  The  powen  given  to  the  commiuionon
by  the  Lax  Julia  Muntcipalii  were  of  a  limilar
kind.  There  wa*  alio  a  Lex  Rupilia  de  Cooplando
Seostn  Heruieiolanun  (/■  Ftrr.  iL  fit)} ;  and
Do  Re  Fmmenteria  {/■  Verr.  iii,  40).

SACRA'TAE,  mentioned  by  Uyj  {iL  fii)  and
by  Cieero  (de  C^.  vl  83),  Legei  were  properiy
io  celled  which  had  for  their  object  to  make  a.
thing  or  penon  aoder,  H  in  hlvj  (ii.  8,  de  tacfOKdo
aim  ioni  capita  g*t  fw,  Ac).  The  oonKcnCio
wBi  in  ha  the  unction  by  which  a  Lex  was  to  be
enfcirMd.  (Lit.  iiL  fi*.)  In  the  latter  caie  it  wai
the  opinion  of  the  jnriMonanlti  (Jtnrit  iiOtrpnla)
thai  the  Lex  did  not  make  "  lacroaancti "  the
petwni  for  whcie  protection  it  waa  deiigned,  but
that  it  made  "laeer"  (Merwi*  tamia^  tai^  one
who  injured  them ;  and  thii  interpretation  la  cer-
tainly conuitent  with  the  termi  of  the  Lei.
(Fettni,  >.  v.  Saeroliu  ItgcC)  C<nnpare  Lir.  iL
S3  ;  Dion  Hal  Rom.  AiOiq.  tL  89  ;  and  the  pM-
lage  referred  Co  in  Orellii  OaaiaaNiaoii.

A  Lei  Saentta  Militaiii  ii  alao  mentioned  by
UTy  (riL  41) ;  hot  the  Bnetkm  of  the  Lax  ii  not

SAE'NIA  Da  Patbiciokuk  Numbho  Ao-
OINDD,  enacted  in  the  fifth  coniulihip  of  An-
guinu.  (Tacit.  Ami.  li.  3A;  Afoik  Aacgr.  Pitu
piiorii  Tab.  2  ;  aee  CaMIa.]

SA'TURA. [Lu,p.6B3,a.]


LEGES  SBHFRONIAa

SCAKTI'NTA,pR>pOMd  bja  trihusa:  ihedMc
and  contcnta  are  not  knomi,  but  ila  objact  wai  to
euppreu  unniUnnI  crimei.  It  exiated  in  tlie  tima
of  Cicero.  (Anion.  .£^  S9(  JuT.  ii  44  ;  Ck:.  ad
Fam.  TiiL  13,  14.)  The  hei  Julia  de  Adulteriia
coniidaed  thii  offence  ai  included  in  Stopram
and  it  wai  puniibahla  with  a  fine ;  bnt  by  the  later


(Sueton.  Dam.  B  ;  Padm,  &  A.  iL  tiL  26.  il  13.)
SCRIBO'NIA.  The  date  and  whole  impott  of
thia  Lex  are  not  known ;  bnt  it  cnieted  that  a
right  to  lerTitutes  ihould  not  be  acquired  bj  nati-
cnpian  (Dig.  11.  tiL  S.  a.4.  |29),  from  wbich  it
appean  that  the  law  waa  once  different  a*  to  car-
tain  lenitudea  at  leaat :  and  theie  ^ipear  to  be
the  aerritntea  naediomm  urhanpitmi,  which,  ac-
cording to  thii  Lex,  conLl  not  be  aequiicd  by  un-
ction. In  the  caae  of  lerTitutea  praedionub  niati-
conmi,  Biul  of  penonal  aerritudei,  the  impoaMbilitj
of  uiucapion  aioK  out  of  the  natnn  of  the  thi^.
A  "  hbertai  lerritutinm  ^  could  be  gained  by  xiau-
capion  or  lather  diniK,  fiir  the  Lex  only  applied
to  that  usacapion  which  eitahlithed  a  lemtni
{ttreitatcm  owalitiitM)  and  rut  to  that  lo-cBlled
uiucapion  which  took  away  the  right  {tmttidit
aervituteai).  It  ii  perhipi  douhtfiil  if  the  pMaage
of  Cicuro  (pn  Cbena.  2S)  ihonld  ba  alleged  ID
proof  ef  thia  uim^ion  fbnnerty  exiitioff.

SCRIBON[A VlAfllA OT Dl Vllg  UuNIBNDIS,

propoacd  by  C.  Scribonin*  Cario,  Ir.  pleb.  H.C.  61.
(Orellii  OnoiHUlinni.)

SKMPnO'NlAE  LEQES,  were  legea  pn^nied
by  Ttberiui  and  C.  Otacchoa  inpectiFely,  while
they  were  tiibuni  plebi^

AoaAKiAof  Tib.  Oracchia  wai  propcaed  by  hta
during  bii  irlhunale  B.  c  133.  The  nature  of  thii
meoiuie  il  explained  by  Appian.  (BilLOiv.i.  10,
&c)  It  wai  an  Agraria  Lex,  the  object  of  which
wai  the  diilribudon  of  the  Public  Land  among  the
poorercitiicnB.  [AoHAHUiLioaa.]  Tib.  Unccbui
with  the  adiice  of  P.  Liciniua  Cnaoa,  Pontifri
Maiimui,  P.  Mncioi  ScacTola.  afierwardt  Pooti-
fet  Maiitoni,  and  Appiiia  Clandiua  (PluL  7U..
OracdHU,  9),  pnpaaed  that  no  penon  ahould  hold
mora  of  the  Ager  Publicaa  than  500  Jo^ttm
(comp,  LiciNUa  Lioia),  but  that  far  ereiy  aon
he  might  hold  250  mora.  The  poor  who  were  to
be  pnnided  with  laud  out  of  what  remaioed  after
the  laije  puetiioD*  were  reduced,  were  nut  to
have  the  power  of  alienating  tbeii  own  lota  ;  and
they  ware  to  pay  the  tenlha.  The  law  waa  enartiid
and  the  execution  of  it  waa  introited  to  three  p^r-
■ana  (tree  viri),  who  wen  Tiberina  huui^  bii
brother  Caiui,  and  Appina  Clandiua.  The  ei«en-
tion  of  the  law  wa*  alleodad  with  Ricat  diArahy,
became  the  pablic  land  which  had  bean  held  &gr
many  gcneratiaDi  by  piiTale  petKBi,  had  htm
dealt  with  like  private  propeTty,had  oftiehmged
bandi  Inr  lale,  and  had  been  im|ai>Ted  and  built


when  they  a

pnnoaal  wu  withdrawn.

Other  meaaurea  were  dedgned  by  Tiberina,  bat
bii  premature  death  itopped  them.  The  eiecotioQ
of  the  Agraria  Lex  of  Tiberini  waa  impeded  by  a
ganatmconmltum,  which  put  an  end  to  the  hbb-
miwon.  The  Lex  wa*  relived  by  Caini  Orac-
cfaui,  irib.  pi.  in  B.  c.  1  S3.  The  lenate  ruined  the
eanae  of  Oracchna  by  engaging  the  tfibnne  U.
LiTiw  Unma  to  propoae  nuanna  of  a  ehanctet


LEX  SILIA.
pren  mors  popolv  than  ihsce  of  Qnccliiu. Ths
Icculktioo  abcnt  the  Honuii  Pnblic  lAnd  nqairei
a  hiiUuT  in  ilKlf.

D>  CAPm  CiTiuii,  piDpoud  bf  C,  Qmnhiu
B.C  IS3,  BiBcted  Ih&l  thi  caput  or  condition  of
a  Human  dliien  could  not  1»  ofTecled  without  a
trial  and  rata  of  the  people.  (Cic.  pro  Rabir.  c  i  i
■nd  CiwTo^  diuagenuoai  eipoiition,  /■  Cat.  it,  £).
PliEuch  {C.  Oraalut,  4)  appnn  to  alluda  to  thii
' ■"  ■ ■ mistaken  it>  purport.


[Fi


JvDicuBUpiopagedbfC.  Oracchni,  had  for  it»
•bjeet  to  dcprira  the  oenale  of  the  power  which
tbej  derired  from  nii^jing  the  Jndicei  in  Jndicia
Pablica  from  their  bodj  (PIuL  C.  GnmdHU,  &).
Plotanh^  account  of  thii  Lei  ia  probably  iiico>
ncL  Compue  Appian(S>&ClitF.LS3);  aodJc-
DU,  p.649,b.

Da  PioviNcns  CoNSULmtBua  pnpoBed  by  C.
Onechna,  a,  c  133,  enacted,  tiiat  in  orery  year,
bnbn  tlui  Comitia  for  electing  llie  connili!,  the
ieoato  abonld  detennine  tha  two  proTincei  wbich
the  traunli  ahonid  haie  ;  and  tha  eoniula  were  to
•ettle  between  themieIrM  by  lot,  or  otherwite,
which  pn^cc  each  ihonld  bate.  (SallofC,  Jig.
c.  37,  and  thanotcofCortiiu;  Cic  da  Pro).  Can.

There  m^  Imts  been  oIIht  meuzret  propoaed
and  carried  hy  C.  Qiacehni ;  hnl  it  ii  not  caiy  to
dulinfrauh  between  all  that  waa  propoaed  and
carried,  and  what  waa  limply  propoaed-  The
Liiei  of  Tiberius  and  C.  Qracchui  by  Plntarch,
tnnalated  with  notei  by  O.  Lnng,  ^n  Kme  in-
formation on  ibo  legUlation  of  the  Gncchi,  wliich
abonld  b»  compared  with  Appian. [BilL  Cie,  I

SEMPRCyNIA  DE  FE'NORE,  b.c  193,
waa  a  Plrbucitum  proposed  by  a  tribune  M.  Sem-
pRniiu  (LiT.  iht.  7),  which  enacted  that  Iho  law
(Ji)  about  money  lent  (peaaiia  cndita)  should
be  the  tame  for  tha  Socii  and  Latini  {Soeii  ae
Kome»  Latamm)  as  for  Roman  citiuna.  The
object  of  the  Lex  wai  to  prevent  Komani  (ran
lending  moDiej  in  the  name  of  the  Socii  who  wen
not  bmind  by  the  Feoebiei  Leges.  The  Lei
coold  obTioouy  only  apply  within  tha  jurisdiction

SERVI'LTjI  AORA'RIA,  propowd  by  the
tribune  P.  Secriliui  RuUui  in  the  coniutship  of
CiceTD,  B.  c  63,  was  a  lery  eitenaiie  Agmria  Ro-
liatio.  It  waa  lacceatfiitty  oppoied  by  Ciceiu  (/a
RaBrnM) ;  but  it  was  in  snbatance  carried  by  Julius
Caeaar  a.cB9  [Julu  Lax  Aaauu],  and  it
the  Lei  oiled  by  Cicero  Lei  Campana  {odAU,  iL
IS),  from  the  public  land  culled  Aga  Campanna
hemir  BBiimed  onder  thii  Lex.

SERVT'LIA  GLAU'CIA  DE  REPETUN-
DIS. (RaparnNDia-J

SERVI'LIA  JUDICIA'RIA,  jnipoaed  by
the  caoaal  Q.  Serrilins  Caepio,  B.  c  106.  Sro
the  article  Junaz,  pL  649,  b,  and  the  -varioua  paa-
Bgea  in  Cicen  (Sraf.  43,  44,  63,  86).  It  ia
aiaamed  by  bodw  wrilera  that  ■  Lei  of  the  Mbune
Serriliaa  Olaocia  repealed  the  Sertilia  Judieiaria
two  jaa»  after  ita  enactment.  (Cic  Bni.  62 ;
OrUu  OwMsosticm.)

31'LIA.  <G«iiia,  It.  19.)  The  Legis  Actio
called  Coodietio  waa  ettabliahed  by  thia  Lex  in
the  aae  when  the  demand  waa  a  determinate  mm
tf  moDey  (atria  ptciaaa).

Sl'LlA,  a  ^abJMtam  (npaaed  by  P.  and  H.


LEX  THORIA.  69S

SiDii  tribnni  plcbia  related  to  Pobliea  Poodeis.
(Feitna,  PMka  Pomdera,  where  the  Lei  ia
giTen ;  and  the  notea  in  the  Detgjiin  edition.)

SILVA'Nl  ET  CARBO'NIS,  [P^iPiau,
Plaut.^.]

SULPI'CIAE,  pupoasd  by  the  tribune  P.
Sulpiciua  Ruliia,  a  lupporter  of  Morius,  a.  c.  B8,
enacted  the  leeal  oF  the  eiiles,  tha  diatribution  of
the  new  citiiena  and  (he  liberlini  among  the  thirty-
die  trihea,  that  the  command  in  the  Michridatie
war  ihould  ba  taken  from  Solla  and  giren  to
Marina,  and  that  a  Senator  abonld  not  conlnct
debt  to  the  amount  of  more  than  SOOO  denarii,
(PIuL  Sail.  S.)  Tho  laat  enactment  may  halt
been  intended  to  expel  pction*  &om  the  tenata
who  should  get  in  debU  All  these  LegM  wen
repealed  by  Sulla.  (App.  Bell.  Civ.  I  55,  69 1
Li7.  Epil.  77;  Veil.  Pat  ii.  IB.)

SULPI'CIA  SEMPRO'NIA,  at  S04.  No
name  is  given  to  this  Lex  by  Livy  (ii.  46),  but  it
wai  probably  proposed  hy  the cooiula.  ItpreTenlcd
the  dedicatio  of  a  temfjom  or  altar  witbont  the
cooaent  of  the  sonata  or  a  majority  of  the  tribimea,
(CompuB  Oaiue,  iL  G — 7.)

SIJMTUA'RIAE. [SuxTnABMa  Laoea.]

TABELLA'RIAE. [TiBiLLAHUiLaeas.]

TARPE'IA  ATE'RNIA.  [AnaNii  T*b-
aiA.]

TERENTI'LIA,  propoaed  by  the  tribune  C.
TtrtDtQius,  a.  c.  462,  but  not  carried,  waa  a  n>.
galio  which  had  l«  ita  object  an  amendment  of  the
oonatitntion,  though  in  form  it  only  attempted  a
limitation  of  the  ImperiumConanlare.  (Lit.  iiL  9,
10,  31;  Dionya.  AoiL  Aati^.  i.  I,  &c)  Thia
[ogBtio  probably  led  to  tha  subsequent  legiilatioa
of  the  Decemviri.

TESTAMENTA'RIAE.  Varioua  leges,  such
aa  the  Cornelia,  Falcidia,  Furia,  and  Veconia,  re-
gulated teatamentary  dispotitiona.

THO'RIA.  Thia  Agraria  Lei  ia  the  rabjcd
of  a  very  elaborate  esuy  by  RudorS^  "  Oaa
Ackergtaeta dee Spuriua Thorini, Zeitachrift,

Thia  Lei  waa  engraved  on  the  back  part  of  tha
me  bronze  tablet  which  contained  the  Servilia
!i  which  applied  to  the  Judicia  de  Rep^tundis.
The  tablet  waa  broken  at  some  unknown  time,
and  tho  lower  which  waa  perb^  the  larger  port
loaL  Seven  fragments  of  the  upper  part
reaerred,  which  as  the  tablet  ia  written  on
idea,  make  fourteen  inscriptiona,  wbkh
ubliihed  by  Fulvica  Undnua :  the  first  Bva
of  the  iascriptioas,  as  they  are  numbered  by  htm,
belong  to  the  Lei  Thoria,  and  the  seven  last  (•
the  Lei  Servjlja.  The  lai^t  and  ntcat  impottoot
of  the  fmgmenta  an  now  in  the  Moieo  Bta-bonico.
Their  hialory  ia  traced  and  their  present  condition
described  by  Rudocff  with  great  minuteneaa.  Two
of  the  fragments  were  oopied  by  ^tauna  when
they  wen  in  the  Unaeuni  of  (bdual  Bembo;
and  the  copy  of  the  two  frwienta  of  tha  Lex
Tlinria,  and  also  the  copy  of  tne  two  fragmenta  of
the  Lex  Servilia,  are  printed  in  the  worii  of  Sigo-
niua,  Dt  Anliipio  J<m  PopiJi  Romam  Libri  Un-
daeinif  Bonoaiae,  lfi74.

The  title  of  this  L«  doei  not  appear  from  the
mntilUed  inieription,  but  Kndi^  shows  that  the
Lei  belong!  to  the  poiod  between  the  consulship  of
P.  Cornelius  Scipio  Nasica  and  L.  Calpumioa  Piio
Bestia,  B.  c.  Ill,  and  that  of  L.  Jiilina  Caesar,
a.  c.  90,  within  which  qaca  ti  twis^-two  yeav


700


LEX  TIIORIA.


fin  Agmian  lim  wen  macdd,  Borla,  ThoHa,
Morcia,  Apulcia,  md  Titia.  It  further  Bppeori
fnin  comiariiig  two  [auaget  of  Cicero  (da  Or.  it
70  i  and  Bnttit,  36),  in  which  he  ipealu  of  tfai
Lci  Thoria,  with  the  bagmenti  itf  thii  Lei  who«
title  ii  Inat,  that  the  fngioQiti  kre  ihole  of  (hi
Lei  Thoiia.  Now  the  date  of  the  L«i  Thoris  ij
fixed  b;  Rndorff  at  the  jeac  of  the  dty  613  or
».c  111,  which  ii  coDNquGDlly  the  data  of  the
LcT  on  the  bronie  tablet,  that  idoitified  with
the  Lox  Thnia.  Proceeding  on  the  annizlptioa
'' '  ^'«  ^agmentaiT  Lei  wu  the  PlebiBciCum,


Plebi«ila :  Sp.  Thorivs  ,  . .  F.  Tr,  PL  Plobcm  im
mp.  Plebesqii*  irre  icirit  Tribvi ....  Piiicipirai
f  Ht  pro  Iribv  Q.  Fabivt  Q.  F.  prim™  KiriL

The  hiatDT7  of  thii  inKiiptioQ  ii  coriou.  It
wu  not  cat  on  the  nugh  back  of  the  bronie  tablet
^U  after  the  other  lidc,  which  ia  amoath,  bad  beeo
occupied  b;  the  So^ilia  La.  The  Serrilia  Lei
if  certainty  not  of  earlier  data  than  the  ynr  of  the
city  64S,or  b.c  106, and  eonioinenlly  thaTboiia
could  net  havo  been  cut  on  this  tablet  befbra  the
year  648.  It  Kemi  that  the  tablet  wia  lu^c
eaoagh  far  the  L>ei  Serrilia,  for  which  il  wai  in-
tended, bat  much  too  mudl  for  the  Agrarian  Lav :
"  cnoaeqaently,  the  charactert  of  the  Agrarian  lide
of  the  tablet  are  tetnarkably  imall,  the  line*  nar-
row, [he  abbrevintiDiu  nomeriiai,  and  the  chapten
only  aeparatfid  by  two  or  three  poinla^  whereat  en
the  other  aide  the  letteri  are  Dnifbim,  large,  and
well  made,  the  linea  wide,  the  wordi  written  at


Agratiiui  Lei)  aia  often  lo  obliqne  that  they  cii


raigbt  lu


e  aide,  which  k


enl  Tei;  deep  and  conieguently  are  Tiiihlt  —  — .
■ide  on  which  the  Agrarian  Lei  ii  cnt."  (RadorC)
Theaubjeet-matter  of  thii  Lei  cannot  be  Rated
without  entering  into  detail:  the  whole  ii  eiamined
by  Rudorff  with  great  care.  The  mun  nibject  of
the  Lei  to  which  the  fint  eighteen  chapti^n  or
fbr^-three  linea  rdec,  it  the  Public  land  in  Italy
■i  &r  aa  the  riven  Rubico  and  Mun,  The  iccond
patt  of  the  Lex  begin*  with  the  oineteenth  chap-
tv  and  the  toity-foirth  line,  and  eiteada  to  tho
fiftieth  chapter  and  the  ninely-nitb  line: thii

Ct  o(  the  Lex  relatea  to  the  Public  and  Ptiiate
d  in  the  PranDca  of  AEriOL  The  third  and
lait  part  of  the  Lex,  bma  tho  fiftieth  chapter  and
the  ninetj-iiith  llae  to  the  end  of  the  iaicription,
relatci  to  the  Roman  Public  land  in  the  temtory
of  Corinth.

Rudorff  ocDclndei  tba  the  Lei  ^iptied  to  other
land  alio  (  and  for  two  ntuoiu.  Fint,  the  Roman
Agrarian  Lew*  of  the  terenth  centaiy  of  the  city,
related  tn  all  the  proTincea  of  the  empire,  of  which
we  baTs  an  example  in  the  ea*e  of  the  Lci  Servilia
of  Rullul.  Socotid); ,  the  &agmeat  of  the  Lei
Thoria,  which  ii  {XCMiied,  i«  lo  brood  compared
with  the  hught  that  we  may  coaclude  that  the
oomplete  (ablet  contained  three  timea  aa  much  u
it  duel  DOW  ;  for  nearly  all  the  bmnie  tabtcti  on
which  Roman  lawi  are  cat,  ore  of  an  oblong  form,
with  the  height  tnitch  greater  than  their  width.
or  the  twe-^itda  of  the  tablet  which  it  ii  Don-
eluded  have  been  loet,  not  a  dace  hai  yet  been
diMoreied.

The  eanr  of  Rudorff  eontaina  a  copy  of  the  in-
«criptiD4  wilh  tho  Bwtawtionrftlw  paNqct  that


LEOia  VALERIAS.
are  defaced. The  tsIho  of  thii  attempt  can  gdy
be  euimaled  by  an  inTeatigalion  a*  complete  aa
that  of  the  Bothor.

TJ'TIA,  aimitnr  la  ita  proTiiian*  to  the  lici
Pnblicia. (Dig.  1 1.  tit  fi.  a.  3.)

TI'TIA  DE  TUTO'RIBUS  (lee  Julia  Lix
IT  Tmi,  and  Oaina  L  195).

TREBO'NLA,  a  plebiacitom  pnpoMd  by  L.
Trebonnia,  B.C.  US,  which  enacted  that  if  the  ten
tribimei  wen  not  chosen  before  the  Comitia  wen
diatolred,  those  who  were  elected  ahoold  not  l!U
up  the  number  (so-optan),  bnt  that  the  Comitia
ibould  be  continoed  till  the  tm  were  elected.  (Lit.
iiL  6S.  y.  10.)

TREflCyNIA  DE  PROVIUCIIS  CONSU-
LA'RIQUS.  (Pliit.ail.Afia.43iLiT..^i4  105;
Dion  Casa.  mii.  33.)

TRIBUNI'TIA. (TmHtiNPt]

TU'LLIA  DE  A'MBITU. [AMBirm-l

TU'LLIA  DE  LFXIATIO'NK  LI'BERA.
[Lao Area,  p.  67B,  a.]

VALE'RIAE  LEOES.  In  a.  c.  608,  tlw  ««>-
ml  P.  Valeriui  propoaed  and  carried  nrioai  lege^
the  porpoae  of  which  waa  to  lelleTe  huaself  from
the  auapiciiv  of  aiming  at  kingly  power,  and  to
increase  hi>  popularity.  The  chief  were  a  Lex
which  gave  an  appeal  (ptoiocslio)  to  the  popolns
agauul  magiitrataa,  and  one  which  declared  to  ba
accursed,  and  derated  the  man  and  hi*  properft-,
who  ahould  form  a  design  to  aeixe  the  kio^y  powrr
(Lit.  iL  3).  Owing  to  theae  populai  iDeaaiirea,
the  conaul  received  uie  cogaomen  of  Pnhlicola,  by
which  he  i*  gBienlly  known.  This  itatameot  of
tho  law  on  Pnvocatio  by  Liry  ia  mry  brief  aad
uiuatisbctoiy.  Cicero  (da  Bep.  iL  31)  sta(«
more  dialinctly  that  this  Lex  waa  the  first  that  wm
1  at  the  Comitia  Centuriata,  and  that  tho
Jen*  wen  "  no  qui*  magiatratua  civem  Roma-


nrct." The  Lex,  thetelbre,  secored  the  right  of
appeal  to  all  Roman  civea  ;  and  it  ia  conaiitmt
with  thii,  Ihat  anne  of  the  Roman  eiiea,  the  pnlii-
aa  Niebuhr  itata,  had  already  the  provo-
lo  their  curiae. Thia  right  of  provocatio  only
t^^lied  to  Rome  and  a  mile  round  the  city,  lor
the  Imperinm  of  the  consuls  beyond  thia  boundary
—  mlimited  (Lir.  iiL  30,  neqne  snim  proToaUii>-
esae  loi^ui  ah  urbe  miJJe  panunm). Con-
ibly  to  thia,  the  Judicla  qiue  Impetio  continen-
jmi^iicd  among  other  caaea  those  when  tha
riiun  WILS  beyond  the  limits  of  the  mille  pa^
The  aubetaiice  of  the  two  Leges  is  stated  by
Dionysiu*  [Ai&i.  Rom.  ■).  19,70)  with  more  pro-
'  ion  and  ap[iarently  in  accordance  with  the  tcrroa
the  Legea. The  right  of  praiDoalie  was  in-
tended  to  protect  persaaa  sgvnat  the  mnun&ry
juriadietioD  of  the  oonnila,  by  giving  them  an  ap-
-"'  *o  the  I^r,  and  until  tho  wX^fci  dnided
eit  csae,  no  pnniihinent  could  be  mfiicted.
(c  70.) In^c  19  it  it  said  that  tha  auMl  vu
also  to  the  Iq/iei ;  and  thia  meanue  made  PnUi-
oola  popaLar  with  the  fi^wTiiro^  whom  wo  muat
ake  lobe  the  P!ebs(comp.Dionys.ii.  39). Dio-
lysina  generally  use*  t^^t  to  signify  Pleb*  ;  Imt
ie  alto  uaea  sAiifei  in  the  ame  lenia  (nl  ti5-
riiu  70,  71, 1.  40).

VALE'RIAE  ET  HORATIAK  LEOES  wn»
piDpated  by  the  consuls  L.  Valerina  and  M.  Ho-
latnu  B.C  149.  (Liv.  iiL  &S.)  One  of  th«aft
Legei  which  wai  nsaed  at  the  Comitia  Centnriats
m  "  Dt  qiwd  tnbnlioi  plebea  jmaiMot  pnfnlum


LEX  VICESIMARIA.
ttnaet,"  the  bnport  of  vhii^  ii  not  earf  to  dii-
tinguuh  fnm  thf  later  PabliliaLii  (Lir.viiL  12),
"nt  plebiieitB  omim  Quirites  tenerent.'' [Pli-
bisothm  ;  P  cbi.il  u  L>z.]

A  Kcoud  Lnt  wu  intended  to  wcim  tbs  pnn-
cijJe  of  the  Lei  V»Ieria  De  ProroeationB  ;  "tluil  if
■n;  pcnco  ifqiointed  (creuiet)  ■  magiitratiii  vich-
aat  aiqwal,  it  wai  lawful  to  kill  nuh  ponoa."
Omutit  hi*  hen  ■  t«liaicsl  meaning.  (Lir.  iii.
&S,  IT.  J3  ;  Cic  I'll  A9>.iL  31 ;  "ne  qui  magiatrs-

cnaeted  uain  a.  c  300  (Lit.  x,  9)  on  the  prupoAil
nf  H.  Vilaiiu,  conaal  ;  (od  tb«  mitrtion  of  the
Les  w»  mon  anfiijly  exptened  (dilinntiiu
■uKtMn).  Tbii,  nj>  Uiy,  iru  the  thira  time
that  thi*  L»  w«  enacted  lioee  tlie  eipuliion  of
ihe  king! :  "  the  caoae  of  iti  bea^  enacted  wreral
tinei  1  take  to  be  no  other  than  thii,  tkat  the
pDWfT  of  a  few  irai  greater  than  the  liberty  of
the^eba."  Thia  ia  a  plahi  and  intelligible  accamit
of  the  matter,  and  niaj  be  toMy  acnpted.  The
GicBl  Charter  of  England  wai  nitified  more  than
■nee.  A  Lex  Dnitii  (Lit.  iiL  BS)  which  inune-
diatdf  foUowad  thewVsleriae,  again  enacted,  am  ong
Mhn  thing!,  MTei«  penaltie*  againiE  bun  **  qni
magiMiBtnm  line  proTocatione  croiueC."  The  pleba
thongbt  ther  were  never  lafe  enough


I  they  bad  good  grodnda  to


A  third  Lex  of  theM  cotmls  wai  to  pnteet  the
psHiu  of  the  triboni  plrbii,  aedilei,  judice«,  de-
ceiDTiri.  Anj- pennn  who  TiaUted  cbeir  peraooalitf
vaa  Mcer,*'d(TDted,''iind  his  fiun  ilia,  liheri  iiberse-

Thect

plebeian  dut  or  in  the  plebeian  interat.  Niebnhi'i
aojectaTe  that  the  jndiaa  maj  be  the  CenbunTiri
ii  bigenioQa  and  probablct  All  GDnjectum  about
the  deoemnri  are  Tegne.

VALE'RIA  HORA'TIA, [Plbbmoituii.]

VA'RIA. [Majistas.]

VATI'NIA  DB  PROVI'NCHa  wai  the  en-
aetmait  b;  which  Juliua  Caeeai  obtained  the  pro-
Tince  of  Oallia  Ciaalpina  with  IllTricnm  for  6n
yean,  to  which  the  leitBle  added  Oallia  Trannl-

CThia  Plebiacitnm  wai  piopoaed  bj  the  tri-
P.  Vatiniui,  B.  c.  59.  (Dion  Cam.  xnriiL  8  ;
Appian.A2.ae.ii.  13;  Sueton-Om  22;  Vdl.
Pat.  iL  44.)  A  Treboi^  Lex  mbeequentlj  pco-
loDged  Caesir'i  Imperium  for  five  Teon,

VATI'NIA. [RiFBTDNniB.]

VATI'NIA  DE  COLO'NIS,  under  which  the
iMina Colonia  [LATIHITxB^of  Nomm.Comom  in
Gallia  CtMlpina  wai  planted  B.  c  £9.  (Sueton.
Cm  28.)

VATrNIA  DE  REJECTKVNE  JUTJICUM
(Cic  «  Vatm.  ell;  SdioL  Bob.  321,  333.)

LEGES  DB  VI. [Vis.]

VIA'RIA.  A  Lex  that  wu  talked  of  (Cic
aJ  Ah.  TiiL  6)  ia  onJj  worth  Dwntian  on  account
Such  a Lex  might  be  De  Viia


BoiDe  modem  wrilen  fpeak  of  Leges  Viariae,
bM  there  do  not  tppaz  to  be  ray  Leg«s  properi;
n  called.  The  preTirioni  ai  to  roada  (Viae)  in
many  of  the  Agrarian  lawi  were  paiti  of  ench
Iq^n,  and  had  no  special  reference  to  road^
(Frantinna,  or,  ai  he  ia  often  called,  Paeodo-Fron-
Hjiat.  De  Colomiu  LUtBiu.)

VICSSIHA'aiA. [Viouuu.]


LEX  VOCONIA.  701

VI'LLIA  ANNA'LTS.  [ANHALB.sp.6S4,b.
and  the  &aaj  of  Wcx  on  the  Lrgea  Annalet
of  the  Romans,  tiaoalaCed  in  the  Cluidcal  Ma>
■enm.  No.  X.]

VISE'LLIA  made  a  man  liable  to  a  erlminal
proeecntion  who,  being  a  Latinua,  aaanmed  to  ex-
erciaetherightaofanlngennns.  (Cod.  ii.  tit  21.)

VOCO'KIA,  waa  enacted  on  the  propml  of
Q.  Voconina  Bam,  a  Tribnnna  Plebii.  In  the
"  De  Senectule  "  of  Cicero,  Cato  the  elder  ia  in-
troduced ai  MTing  that  he  apoke  in  &TDnr  of  the
l^ex  when  he  waa  sixtj-fivo  jeon  of  age,  and  m
the  conanlihtp  of  Caepio  and  Philippua.  (B.e.
169.)  GellioB  alao  speoki  of  the  oiBtion  in  which
Onto  recommended  thia  Lex.  (Cic  pro  fidtto.  8,
CatoJUitJiiT,6-,  Qellini,TiLlS,iTii.  6.)

One  [OMviaion  of  the  Lex  waa  that  no  penon
who  ahoiild  be  included  in  the  cenaoi,  after  the
cenaoa  of  that  }rear  (r»af  ttu  rnusm  ;  the  Cenicn
of  that  year  were  A,  Poitiuniiii  and  Q.  Fnlriua),
ahmld  make  any  female  (vtrgiatm  nne  aatitmn)
biihueK  (CK.HFimn,i.41,42;)  CJcerodoea
not  atato  that  the  Lex  fixed  the  cenani  at  any
■um  ;  but  it  appeara  from  Oaiui  (il  274)  that  a
woman  conld  not  be  made  hem  by  any  penm
who  waa  mted  in  the  cenaua  at  100^000  aaaet  or
□pWBida  (ooaAm  oHlUa  omt),  though  the  could
take  the  hereditoa  per  fidfflcommiBaam.  Dion  Caa-
■ioa  On.  10)  namea  the  nmi  aa  2S,000  drai^imae,
whidi  ia  100,000  aMtertii.  The  lex  flowed  no
eiceptinii  eiren  in  bmnr  of  an  only  daughter.
(AnjpiatiD.  dt  OMT.  Dei,  iii.  31.)  The  Lex  on!^
^iplwd  to  Icataments,  and  thnefore  a  daughter
or  other  female  conld  inherit  ab  inteitato  to  any
amount.  The  Veata]  Virgina  conld  make  women
their  beredes  in  all  csiea,  which  wai  the  only
exception  to  the  proriaioiii  of  the  Lex,  (Cic  da
A7).  iii.  ID  ;  Gea  i  12.)

If  Ihe  tenna  of  the  Lex  are  ccnectly  reported
by  Cicero,  a  penrai  who  waa  not  ceiuaa  might
make  a  wunan  hii  herei,  whatever  waa  the  amount
of  hia  property,  and  n  Cicen  ondoitandi  the  Lex
(m  rerr.ii.41).  Still  there  ia  a  difficnlty  abont
meaning  of  (maul. If  it  ia  taken  to  mean  that

naon  whcae  property  waa  above  100,000,  and
Liuuded  in  the  cenao^  could  diapoaa


(lHBM«I

cording  to


fnruier  "the  not  being  laclnded  in  the  coma  "
lu  ait)  aeema  rather  vagne.  Still,  ae-
the  tenna  of  Che  Lex,  any  peraon  who
leen  included  iu  the  ceniua,  iroald  be
affected  by  thia  le«al  incapacity.  Sometime*  it  ia
aaaumed  that  the  lut  cenaua  ia  meant.  The  Edict
extended  the  ruta  of  the  Voeonia  Lex  to  the  Bo-
ncaum  Poaaeaiia. (Dig.  S7.  tit.  1. 1. 12.)

Another  praviaiDo  of  the  Lex  forbade  a  peraon,
who  waa  cenaua,  to  give  more  in  amount  in  the
form  of  a  legacy  or  a  donatio  mortia  cauia,  to  any
pcTKHi  than  the  ban  or  boiedei  ahould  take^
Thia  proviaiDn  ■ecnted  lomething  to  the  herea  or
heradea,  bat  atill  the  praTiaJon  waa  ineffectual,  uid
the  object  of  thia  lex  waa  only  accoinplithed  Int
thoLexFalcidia.  [LaOATUM.]  Gaina(a236),
in  quotiiv  thia  proviaion  of  the  Lex,  does  not
mention  Ue  coaditim  of  being  craiaui,  but  this  ia
Btatcd  by  Cicero  (m  Vtn.  L  43).

Some  writen  snppoae  that  thia  Lex  alao  con-
tained a  proTiwDn  by  which  a  teatater  waa  fbrbid-
d^  to  give  a  woman  mon  than  half  of  hia  proper^
by  way  of  legacy ;  and  it  i^ipcan  &an  Cicero  Aiix


TVS  LEX  VOCONIA.

the  Lex  applied  to  legacka  (d»  ny/umn  Icgatii  el
imdilaOme,  Cic.  lU  Rtjudi.  i±  10).  But  thii
proiirion  U  not  »llowed  by  mine  of  the  be«t  orilia
to  hBTe  been  ■  pait  of  the  Lei.  Quintiliui
{Dttiam.  264}  ilate*  thu  by  the  Lex  (Vocanis)  n
womui  amid  Dot  lake  by  latament  more  thui  fafdf
of  >  penoa^  property  ;  but  QulntilUn  nyi  notfaiog
of  the  jaoriiiKU  of  tliia  Lei,  which  iDcapecitnted
women  altogelher  from  toting  under  a  will  in
cerUin  riiri.  and  in  the  {ajngo  refemd  to  he
u  ipeoliing  of  two  women  being  made  hrrtda  of
a  pnperiy  in  equal  eham.  Tbe  dupDle  between
the  cognati  and  ttie  two  women  tntned  on  the
wordi  of  the  Lex,  "dc  liceit  mnlieri  pliuquam
dimidiam  partem  bonomm  monun  relinqneie,''  the
cognati  coDtending  that  the  liei  did  not  allow  the
whole  pco|Mit*  to  be  thoi  given  to  two  women  in
equal  iW«t,  Uoogli  it  wai  admitted  that  if  half  of
(be  pooert?  had  been  giveu  to  ene  woman,  there
would  hare  been  no  gronnd  for  diipute.  It  ia
qnite  coniiitent  that  the  I>ei  might  have  allowed  b
woman  to  take  half  of  a  mu*!  property  in  certain
easel,  and  in  Dthen  to  take  none,  th<iHf[h  the  object
of  the  Lei,  which  wai  to  prexent  lai^  propertiee
from  coming  into  women*!  handi,  would  naire  beta
better  lecured  by  other  piDTiiioni  than  thoie  of
the  Lei  ai  they  an  knovn  to  nt  j  be  it  t^ifan
tnaa  Qnintiliau,  that  a  woman  might  take  by  will
one  h^  of  aa  many  pmpertie*  u  there  wen  lee-
taton.  It  miiht  be  conjectured  that  the  claoie  of  .
the  Lex  which InWaawonianbeingmade here*,
(ignified  Mile  heret,  and  then  the  clauM  which
forbade  her  taking  more  than  half  would  be  fitly
fnmed  to  pwent  an  eiaaion  of  the  law  by  ouAing
a  woman  herea  ei  deunce,  for  inalance,  and  giring
the  reat  to  another  peraoo.  And  thia  conjecture
derivea  lome  aupport  fiom  the  pfoviaian  of  the  Lex
Voeonia  which  pravented  the  giving  nearly  all  the
pnnsty  in  legaciea  tn  the  detriment  of  the  herea ;
which  poTiaion,  however,  it  muit  be  obaerred,
doei  not  apply  to  women  only  (Oaiui.  IL  226).
The  caM  oi  f  adia,  mentioned  by  Cicero  (da  Fm.
iL  17),  ahowi  that  there  wai  a  proriaioD  in  the
Lei  b;  which,  in  certun  caiei  at  leaat,  a  woman
might  take  aomething  ;  and  it  olao  ihowi  that  the
Lei  prerented  a  man  from  making  even  hii  own
daoghter  aob  hatt.

According  to  Oniua  and  Pliny  {Piatg.  42),  the
pniviaiona  rf  the  Voctaiia  Lei  were  in  force  at  the
time  when  thejr  were  writing,  though  Oelliua  (ii.
I)  apeaka  of  them  ai  being  either  obtolcie  or  re-
pealed. The  proviaioni  of  the  Lex  Julis  et  Papia
Poppaea  may  Have  repealed  aoma  of  the  chiuiea  of
tbe  Voeonia  Lex.

The  tabject  of  the  Voeonia  Lex  ia  one  of  con-
■idemble  ditHcultj,  owing  to  the  imperfect  atate-
menta  that  remain  of  iti  conlenta  and  proiisioni,
which  weiepiobublynumeroua.  The  chief  modem
Buthocilics  on  the  matter  are  referred  to  by  Itdn
(.Dm  Ram.  PrirxiL  lixlU,  p.  367,  &c.),  and  in
Urtllil  Onomattiaim.  The  lalfat  eaaay  on  it  iJiBt
tho  writer  ha»  aeen  ia  "  Die  Lei  Voeonia  Ac."
hj  Dr.  J.  J.  Bachofcn,  Baipl,  1 043  ;  but  tho  caaay
doea  not  letlle  all  the  dilQculliea.

Thia  liat  of  Lege*  may  not  be  qnite  complete,

of  their  purport  may  not  be  perfectly  accurate.
Sbll  it  crailaint  all  the  L^ei  that  are  of  any  im-
portance for  the  undetitanding  of  Roman  Hiatoiy
■nd  Jotiapnidenca.  Tboie  which  an  not  ipecially
nodced  ben,  mo  ivftrred  to  Ibait  proper  beada.


LIBELLU3.

panienlaily  when  thoa  are  many  Leg«a  [elating
to  one  asbject,  oa  Arabitna,  Repetundae,  ftc
Several  of  the  Roman  Lege*  were  modified  bj
SenBtuBconanlta.  Tbe  SenatuacMunlta,  which  an
properiy  lawa,  are  enuraented  under  Sinatus-
.NBULTUK.  [O.  L.]

LGXIAKCHI  {A«t[ivx«}.  [EccLuu,  p.
441,  a.]

LEXIARCHICON  {Ki^iafx'»i*)-  [D«mus.1
LEXIS  (h^fii).  [Diu]
LIIlELLA,inatruD>eiita.  [LibHa.]
LIllELLA,  a  nnaU  Raman  lilver  coin,  which
ia  mentioned  by  Vairo  (£.  i.  t.  36,  p.  68,  MUI-
la)  ai  having  exiated  in  the  early  age  of  tho  dty,
but  which  in  hia  time,  and  apparently  for  a  con-
aiderable  petiod  before,  waa  no  longer  coined.
The  oaDJe,  however,  waa  retained  opecially  aa  a
proverbial  exprtaaion  for  a  very  snail  value.  (PLaat.
Pteud.  ii.  2.  34,  OofL  ».  ].  27  ;  Cie.  Terr.  iL  2,
pro  Rinc.  GwL  4.)  It  waa  equal  in  value  to  the
oi  (whence  ita  name),  and,  in  the  ayatem  of
ailver  money,  it  VFua  the  tenth  port  of  the  lUmtrxiu,
(Van-.  /.  0. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  mill  3.  i  13.)  Tbe
wotda  of  Vano  and  Pliny  clearly  imply  that  the
tiMIa  vaa  equal  tn  value  to  the  old  full-weight
at;  and  it  aeema  moat  probable  that  the  eom
eeaaod  being  airtick  at  the  tuoe  of  the  reduction
of  the  o^  on  account  of  the  inconveniently  in»U

'hich  it  wonld  have  aaaumed. The  liUUa

ibdivided  into  the  maMla,  iu  half,  and  thi
wa,  ita  quarter.  Cicaro  (ad  Alt.  viL  12)  uira
worda  to  eifffcaa  &actioaa  of  an  eatate,  vith
icference  to  the  i^saiuTBi  aa  the  unit,  the  libdl*
aignilying  I-lOth,  and  the  lenmdiu  l-4Dth  gf
the  whole (Btkkh, Matrol. UittermA. p.  4fi3,

■t).  [P.  a  J

LIBELLUS,  ia  the  diminutive  fbnn  of  liber,  and
tignifiea  properly  a  little  book.  A  llbellua  waa
diatmguialied  &om  other  kbidaof  writingi,  by  b^ing
— ritten  like  our  bookj  by  pagea,  wheieu  other
riting*  wen  written  tnaintrta  tiarta.  (Suet.
uj.  56.)  A  libellua,  however,  did  not  meeiaaiTly
naiit  of  acveial  pngea.  It  waa  uMd  by  the  Ro-
ma u  n  technical  term  in  the  fothiwicg  caaet :  —

1.  Lifteiii  cunuoionim  or  aoaoatarii  were the

alter  having  received  the  permiaaion  to  bring  an

dty  to  tba

9.  tit.  2.  a.  B  ;  Dig.  48.  til.  S.  a.  2.  17,  29  ;  47.
tit.  2.  a.  74  1  compare  Actio.)  The  form  in
which  a  libellua  accuaatoriua  waa  to  be  written,  ia
deacribed  by  Ulpian  in  a  caaa  of  adolteiT.  (Dig.
48.  tit.  2.  a.  3.)  The  occuaor  had  to  tign  the  libd-
lui,  und  if  he  could  not  write,  he  vaa  obliged  W
get  aomebody  clae  to  do  it  for  Van.  If  the  libel-
lua waa  not  wiitlen  in  the  proper  legal  fbcm,  it
waa  invalid,  bnt  the  plaintiff  haid  atill  the  right  Id
bring  the  aame  action  again  m  ita  legal  fonii.
(Juv.vi.244,&e.  i  Tacit  .^MLiii.  44  ;P]in.  EpitL
viL  27  {  compare  BriaioD.  da  Form.  y.  c  1 S7,  ftc)

2.  LiieUi  Jamoa  were  what  w«  call  lihcti  sr
paaqoinadei,  intended  to  injure  the  chamctor  ot
penona.  A  law  of  the  Twelve  Tablea  inflicted
very  aevere  puniahmenta  on  thoae  who  camjiiiaej
deEanutory  writiDga  againal  any  peraoai.  (fiit.  da
St  Pti&.  iv.  10  ;  Amob.  if.  p.  151.)  During  tba
Litter  port  of  the  npublic  tlua  law  ^ipeon  to  hav«
been  in  abci-ance,  fiw  Tocitni  (AtM.  I  73}  aaya  thM
praviooa  to  the  time  of  Angualai  libd*  bad  nevw


Iputus, irlio 1


^  ^  tlie  •iiUion  of  libelli

~  I  to  trial  On  this  Kxaiion  Au-
.  _i  informed  of  the  exutence  of
urki,  bad  a  H«rcti  Dude  U  Rome  b}'
the  Bfdiki,  ud  in  Dthn  places  by  the  local  magu-
tnlH^  ud  isdmd  the  libeU  M  be  biiiDt ;  Kiine  of
tbf  authnn  vere  nbjectfd  Id  punubment  (Dion
Can.  In.  27.)  Al>«  quoted  bj- Ulpian  (Dig.  47.
tjt,10.  i.fi)  ordained  tbit  the  author  of  a  libellu
<•■—"■  ahonld  be  mteatabilii,  aod  domig  the  later
period  of  the  empiie  we  find  that  capital  punuh-
ment  wai  not  onl;  infiicted  npoa  the  author,  bat
npaa  Ibsea  penoni  in  whoea  poaicaioa  a  Ubdha
f"-—"'  wai  foaai,  or  vho  did  not  dertnj  it  ai
Boon  Bi  it  cane  into  their  handa.  (Cod.  9.  tit.  36.)
For  further  inftnuation  on  tbia  Mihject  lee  Rain,
i)u  Orimmainda  dar  Aoimr,  pp.  378,  Ac.  531.

3.  libJttt  mtmorialu,  spodet  «  nMtmorandnm
hvA.  (Soet.  CW.  S6.)  "Da  iibelliia,  from  which
Occn  WJCbTil.  gfi)c<nmmilcataiamemo-
random  of  Bnitni,  appear*  to  ban  bees  a  beiA  of


"1

6.  The  word  libelliu  waa  alio  applied  to  a
TariMj  of  writingi,  whkh  in  moat  raini  probably
eaoaialed  of  ona  page  only :  —

«.  To  ahort  lMt«a  ad^caaed  to  a  penon  for  the
pnrpoae  of  caatuning  him  againat  lome  danger
which  thnatened  bb  life  (Soeton.  Caa.  81,  C^.
\&)  ;  and  lo  any  ahort  letten  or  teporti  nddreated
ta  tbe  aenate  or  priTste  indiridnala.  (Suet.  Caa.
K.  AagmtL^i  i  Cie.  ad FOm-iL  11.)

h.  To  tbe  biUi  called  fii^yoiiMitorii,  IV  ■»«-
rarii,  which  perMiu  who  )n>e  gladiator^  eihibi-
tiona  diatriboted  among  the  people.  [OLADUToaia,
p.574.b.]

c  To  pMitiona  to  the  emperora.  (Snel  Aug.  63  \
llart.  Tiii.  31.  3,  82.  I.)  The  eraperrai  had  their
eipeeiaJ  officen  or  aecretariea  who  attended  to  all
pctitioo*  {OtHii  prat/atiu.  Dig.  SO.  tit.  B),  and
who  read  and  anawend  them  in  the  name  of  the
emperor.  (Soet.  Damil.  14.)  Such  a  libellna  ia
Mil]  ulant. See  Onter,  Imaipl.  p.  dcvil  1 .

d.  To  the  bill  of  appeal  called  tihelbu  t^ifulla-
lanu,  which  a  penon  who  did  not  aeqoieace  in  a
jndieial  MnleDce,  had  to  >end  in  after  the  Upee  of
two  or  three  dayi.  (Dig.  40.  tit.  1.)

a.  To  the  billi  stock  up  in  the  moat  fnqoanted
paita  of  the  city,  in  caae  of  a  debtor  having  ab-
acooded.  (Cib  pro  Qnaf.  6, 15,  19  ;  Kcin.  Itot*.
Pritiatr.  p.  499.)  Such  bills
the  eatatet  of  such  a  debtor,
widked  to  pay  for  him  somelimei  polled  down  mch
bUla.  (Senetd*  &«/:  i..  12.)

/.  To  bills  in  which  perwni

Chlie  that  they  had  found  things  which  had  bctn
t,  and  in  winch  they  innted  die  owner  tn  claim
Um  proper^.  (Plant.  RmL  t.  2.  7>  &g.  ;  Dig.  47.
Ih.  2.  a.  44.)  The  owner  grne  to  the  finder  a  re-
ward (ifyTpu)  and  received  big  properly  back.
SometimeB  ibe  owner  also  made  knovn  to  the
pvblie  by  a  libcUiu  what  he  bad  lost,  gtated  his


LIBER.  703

LIBER  Oi«Xior)  a  book. The  nou  common

itecial on which  booki wen  written by  tbe

Oneki  and  Romana,  was  the  thin  cesti  or  rind

iliber,  whence  tbe  Latin  name  for  a  book)  of  the

Egyptian  paprms. Tbia  plant  waa  called  by  tbe

Egyptians  lylilot(Bieki,i),  whence  tbe  Oteeki  de-

'  'ed  their  name  lor  a  book  (BtSfJar). It  formed

L  Biticlc  of  omunerce  long  befbiB  the  time  of

Herodotus  (v.  5]t),  and  wai  extanaiirely  used  hi

the  western  part  of  Europe,  aa  ii  jHOred  by  the

nomber  of  rolls  of  papyri  found  at  Herculanenm.

In  the  lixth  centuty  of  the  Chrittian  aeia  the

'-^  on  imported  papyrus  was  abolished  by  Theo-

' "  ■  '  h occasion  CWiodonia

which  he  coiwimtulaCea

of  a  tax  so  nnnsvonnihla

progress  of  learning  and  of  commene. The

papyrtu-tree  grows in  ewampi to  the  height  of


Gnat,

wrote  a  letter  (li.  38),
the  world  on  tht


the  followiiu;  manr
23): — The  di&rentp
the  torbidNilei
oiu  ftopoty.  A  Uyer  of  papyina  (aoMs  w
fii^fm)  wai  laid  flat  on  a  board,  and  a  ooas  laya
I. ^Qj  bdng  thoa  pnpand,  the  layen


aheeta.  There  woo  never  mora  than  twenty  in  a
■  or  rolL  The  papyri  fbnnd  in  Egyptian
tombi  diSer  very  much  in  length,  but  not  mnch  in
breadth,  ai  the  breadth  was  pobably  determined
by  tlie  nsoai  length  of  the  ilripi  t^sn  fram  the
plant.  The  length  might  be  carried  to  almoM  any
extent  by  &Mening  one  sheet  to  another.  The
writing  na>  in  columns  with  a  blank  slip  betwem
them.  (EgjfjMiaa  AiOiqiatitt,  ToL  iL  eh.  7.  Lood.
1836,)  The  form  and  general  appearance  of  the
papyri  rolls  will  be  nndetitood  tma  the  following
woodcut  taken  fram  t«intings  (bond  at  Pompeii.
(OelL  Fomgi.  ToL  i  p.  187.)


The  paper  (akir^)  made  from  the  paOTHU  waa  of
differeiit  qnalitiea.  Tbe  best  was  called  after  Au-
gnitiu,  the  second  after  Liria,  the  third,  which  was
originally  the  best,  was  named  Hiemiiea,  because
it  was  apfRoprlated  to  the  lacred  hooka.  The
finest  paper  was  subsequently  called  Claudia,  from
the  emperor  Claudius.  The  inferiiK'  kinds  were
called  A  mphOieatnca,  Sivtiea,  LentoHaa,  from  tho
places  in  Egypt  where  it  wu  made,  and  alio
Famiatta,  from  oneFBQniiu,who  had  a  celebrated
mannbctory  at  Rome.  The  kind  called  Eaporttiea
was  not  St  for  writing,  and  was  chiefly  nsed  by
merchants  for  packing  their  goods,  from  which  cir-
nimstance  it  obtained  it*  name.  (PUn.  liii.  23,
24.)


7(M


LIBER.


king  of  PfirgHniiu,  in  coniequence  of  the  pmhlbt-
tion  of  the  export  of  pspynit  from  Efmit,  by
Plolemj  Epiphuiec.  (Plin.  xiiL  21.}  ll  i«  jro-
YuMe,  hoveTCT,  that  Enmeiies  intndnnd  onlj
■ome  improvement  in  the  tn»nufiu!torc  of  parch-
ment, ■•  Hendotiu  mentioni  wri^g  on  ikini  u
common  in  hii  tima,  and  «;■  tbat  (he  loniuu  Lnd
been  ucuBt<nned  to  giTe  the  bmne  of  «kuiB  [Si^iSi-
pai)  to  booka  (r.  £8).  Other  materiala  ue  aim
mentiDned  u  nied  for  writing  on,  but  book*  appear

npon  fepynu  or  parchmenL

The  aodenli  wrote  aaaallr  OD  mij  ons  dde  of
tho  paps'  or  purchiiicnt,  whenee  JnTenal  (L  5)
■peak!  of  u  extranelf  long  tcagedr  «•

"  Snmmi  plena  jam  margina  Ubri

Scriptoi  el  ta  Ursa  necduiB  finitui  Oreatea."


ii.  6),  .


. (M


12.)


lie  friend


The  back  of  the  paper,
npno,  wu  nmnllj  nained  with  uffnn  colour  or
the  cednu,  (Lucian,  •pit  iraii.  16.  vol  iiL  p.
113;  eromat  menArmatabiSat,  Jut.  v^  23  i  Pat.
iii.  10.)  Wo  lunt  from  Orid  that  the  ctdnii
pndnced  a  <rello<r  colour. (Grid,  THM.iiL  1.  13.)

A*  fUfK  and  paiEhmcnt  was  deal,  it  waa  lie-
qoentl;  tho  cnitom  to  erua  or  waih  out  writing  of
little  importance,  and  to  write  npon  the  paper  or
parchment  again,  which  wai  then  colled  Palim-
ptaf  (saXi^if^irroi).  ThJB  practice  ii  mentioned
by  Cieera  (arf  Pom.  viL  1 8),  who  pruMi "
l^batius  for  baring  been  M  economical  i
upon  a  palimpKtt,  but  wonden  what  tiiuH  wnv
ingi  conld  haTo  been  which  were  conaidered  of  leaa  '
impoilanc*  than  a  letter.  (Compam  CatuJL  xrii.
6  i  Martial,  nr.  7.)

The  paper  or  [srchment  wat  joined  together  in
aa  to  form  one  jheel ;  and  when  the  vsrk  waa
finiihed,  it  wai  loIled  on  a  itK^  whenee  it  wu
called  a  mJamm ;  and  hence  we  have  the  eiprea-
eion  evelixn  iOnvm.  (Cic  odAILii.  10.)  When
an  Bulhor  dirided  a  work  into  lererBl  booka,  it
wu  ntnal  to  incloda  only  one  hook  in  a  volume  or
roll,  10  that  there  were  geneiallj  (he  iBme  nmnbec
of  volnuiM  aa  of  hooka.  Thua  Orid  (TWrf,  i.  1.
117)  calla  hii  fifteen  booka  of  Melamoiphoaea
"mslalae  ter  qninqne  TOlnmina  (brmae."  (Com-
pare Cic  Ttac  iiL  3,  ad  Fam.  ivil  17.)  When
a  boc^  waa  hmg,  it  waa  aometimca  dirided  into
two  ({Jumea  ;  thiu  Pliny  {Ep.  iiL  £)  ipHki  of  a
walk  m  three  booka  "  in  sex  volumina  propter
ampUtndnwm  diviaL"

In  the  papyri  ivUt  fiitind  at  Henalanenm,  the
■tick  on  which  the  papyraa  ii  loUed  doei  not  pro-
ject frran  the  pepyma,  but  ii  eoncotled  by  it.
Uanally,  however,  there  were  balla  or  bone*,
ornamented  or  painted,  oiled  uabOid  or  eonma,
which  were  batencd  at  each  end  of  the  itick  and
ptojected  from  the  papynu.  {Martial,  iiL  2,  v.  G,
1 S  :  TibnlL  ill  1.  U  ;  Ovid.  TWri.  I  1.  8.)  The
enda  of  the  roll  were  arefnily  cut,  poliahed  with
pnmice-itone  and  coloured  bla^  ;  diey  were  called
the  ^esuaoi  ,;4mlA (Orid./.e.)

To  pRttect  the  roll  ftom  injury  it  waa  frequently
pat  in  a  patthnient  caae,  which  wa*  itained  with  a
pniple  colour  or  with  the  jeQow  of  the  Lutnm.
Mutial  (i.  93)  calEa  nch  a  (evering  a  parjmiva
Iqga. Bomelliuig  of  tlu  Mnu  kind  ia  matnt  by


LIDERALITA3.
the  Oredc  tittsiae  (nrrMn,  Cic.  ad  Aa.
which  Hnychiaa  o^laina  by  itpfiirirai  ara^ai.


•IX


The  title  of  the  book  (fita^  wJiu)  waa  w
on  a  malt  atrip  of  papyma  or  parebnwnt  will]  a
light  ted  colour  (oxxmoTBUMi).  Winkdmann
■nppoeed  that  the  title  wai  on  a  kind  of  ticket
mapended  to  the  coll,  aa  ia  aetm  in  tha  [amtinp
at  Hercnlanenm  (aee  woodcot),  but  it  waa  moat
pcnbably  aluck  on  the  papynu  itaelf.  (Compara
TibnlL  ^c)  Wa  learn  from  Seneca  (_de  Tnma.
Ak9)  and  Martial  (xiv.  136)  that  the  partnid  of
the  BDthota  were  often  placed  on  the  iiiat  page  itf

Aa  the  d^nand  for  took*  iixnaaed  toward*  tha
end  of  tho  Roman  republic,  and  it  became  tks
bahion  for  the  Roman  noblea  to  have  a  Iihraiy,
the  trade  of  bookidlen  natnially  aioaa.  Thej
weia  called  lArarii  (Cic  de  Lig.  iiL  20),  BibUo-
polai  (Mart  iv.  71,  liii.  3),  and  by  the  Greek
wrilen  B'f)dmrKdr/iKai  or  i3iSAuK(fan)Aoi.  Their
ahnp  wai  called  tii6en»  libraria  (Cic  PUi.  iL  9).
Theae  ahopa  were  chiefly  in  the  Argiletnm  (Mart.
L  1),  and  in  the  Victu  SoiidiOariu  (Qell  xviiL  4).
On  the  ihop  door,  or  the  pillar,  aa  tho  caae  night
be,  thete  waa  a  liat  of  the  titla  oC  booka  on  aale:
alluiion  i>  made  to  thii  by  Horace  (Sat  i.  4.  71,
ATt.Paet.a72)  and  Martial  (I  113).  Tbe  pice
at  which  booka  woe  told,  aoemi  to  have  been  mode-
rate. Martial  aayi  fj.  e.)  that  a  good  copy  of  tha
fint  book  of  hii  epigrama  might  be  had  for  five
denatiL  In  the  time  of  Angnatui,  tbe  Soni  aRxar
to  hsTO  been  the  great  bookidUcCT  at  Rone.  (Ho'.
lip.lW.  2.ATtPo£l.  SiS  ;  leeabo  BwkaiOalb^
vol  L  p.  163,  Ac) Camfaxt  the  aitide*  Atbi-

VINTUM,  BlBLIDTHKl,  C^LAXirS,  CAnu,  STT-

U  BE  R,  LI  BERT  AS.  TheRofaanvritendi-
ride  all  men  into  Liberi  and  Serri  [SsRVtv]  •  and
men  were  either  b«n  LJberi,  in  which  nae  th^
were  called  by  thoRomana  Ingonm  [iNoaNuit,  at
they  became  Liberi  after  being  Serri,  in  wUcb
caae  they  were  called  Libertmi  [LibkbtiisJ.
Libertna  ii  defined  in  the  Inititutaa  of  Juatinian
(l.tit.  1),  to  be  "tho  natural  Guulty  to  do  that
which  B  man  ploaei,  ercepi  he  lie  in  auj  thii^
hindered  by  force  or  law."  Accoidin^y  the  Ro-
mani  eooiideced  Libertaa  ai  the  natural  itate  oc
condition  of  men  [Sviivtia].  A  man  might  citkv
be  b«n  a  ilave,  or  be  might  become  a  ilare  by  loaa
of  freedom.  Libertai  waa  tba  firat  eaaentJal  of  the
three  which  determined  atatu  or  condi^on:  tha
other  two  were  Civiiaa  and  FUnilia.  Witboat
Libertaa  there  cwld  be  naitatua.  Ciritu  implied
Ltbertai ;  but  Libertaa  did  not  nicaarily  implj
Ciritaa,  for  a  man  might  be  Liber  without  beiw
Clvia  [Cirii.]  Famllia  implin  both  LibeitM
and  Ciritaa,  and  he  oidy  who  ii  Ciria  hai  Familia.
[FiMiLiA.]  Thni,  Fomilia  necuaarihr  inciodf*
but  Ciritaa  doea  not  neceaaaiay  indnda
t_-i- ^y  ^  changed.


lam  (ate  ca;^^  diminntioaem  ooBMat:  Dig.4.
its.  all).  ButCiritaaaohrneceaarilyiinpliMl
'omilio,  that  no  Civil  Romanui  waa  permaaeratij
rilhout  Familia.  [Q.  t^l

LIOIERA  FOOA. [Eziilium.)
LIBERA'LIA. (DiuNrau,  p.  414,  a.]
LIBERA'LIS  CAUSA. [AatnroO
LIBERA'LIS  NANUS. {tijMVt.1
UBERA'LITAS. [Ambitiu.]


,;lc


UBEBTDS.
LIBEROHUH JUS.  [LuJoLunPAnA

LIBERTUS  (&nAtMipgi)>  >  beeinam.  1.
Obike.  It  WW  not  nnbrquent  for  &  mailer  U
Athou  to  R*tan  m  ■!>»  Id  freedom.  A  priTsIe
pemn,  it  wean,  might  libciste  bii  ilatB  withoat
■07  [anicdar  fbnnalitir  ;  tometiioa  tha  ttUa
vonld  emaiicipftte  a  dare,  but  then  the  purchaw
mniej  tod  Id  be  realomd  lo  hi>  maatec.  (Plot.
rft  £^.  xL  p.  9U.)  The  alote  into  which  a  iUtb
thni  tntcicd  wai  called  ln\Ri0«pia,  and  ha  wai
nid  to  be  mf  imrrii.  (Demoiih.  jm  Phorm.
p,  9iS.)  It  ii  not  quite  certain  whether  thoM  per-
■ona  who  an  tctmed  alxifi'  ebcavyTit  (DemMth.
PhSip.  L  p.  SO)  were  Ukcwiw  freedmen,  aa  the
gramlmriaiii  aMCTt,  or  whether  the;  wen  pemiu
yet  ia  lUvery,  bat  living  aepaiated  from  their  mia-
tm'  hooMhiilii }  but  in  Demoatheaei  (a  Emtr^.  it
MatA.  p.  1161)  the  eipreatioD  x°^t  4""  >■  "i-
dentl;  uied  a*  ■jnoayiniini  vith  **  ha  hai  been
emanQpated."  A  bUts  when  mannmilted  enteied
inlo  the  Matui  at  a  f^aiicis  [Mrroicits],  and
M  inch  he  had  not  onlj  lo  jkj  the  ^Tolcior,  but
a  trioboloD  in  addition  to  it.  Thii  Ihoboloii  wai
proboibl;  the  tax  which  ilaTe-hoIden  had  \o  faj  to
the  republic  for  each  ilaie  the;  kept,  M  lluil  the
trioboloa  paid  by  ftcedmen  wai  intended  to  in-
demni^  the  Itate,  which  would  otherwiae  hare
loit  bj  tfOJ  mannniiwion  of  a  ilaTe,  (Biickh,
i>aU.  £[iM.q/'<tljbw,p.331,  fcc,2dedit.)  The
eotmectirai  of  a  frcedmin  with  hia  former  maiter
WM  bowBTS  Dot  biokeu  off  eutirelj  on  hia  manu-
miidon,  for  be  had  thioughaat  hii  lils  to  regatd
hini  u  hii  patron  (wpurrdr^i),  and  to  fiilBl  certain
datiaa  towardi  hint.  In  what  theae  dutiet  can-
Kited  bejrond  the  obligatian  of  Bbowing  gistitude
and  leqiecl  towaidi  bii  deliTerer,  and  St  taking
bim  for  bii  patron  in  all  bia  a&in,  ia  unceilain,
though  the;  aeem  to  have  been  Axed  b;  the  luwi
af  Athena.  (Meierand  Sch(iin.^tf.i>n».  p.473,
fte. ;  Petit.  Ltg.  Alt.  iL  6.  p.  361  ;  coiDpaie  Plata,
i4L^.^  P.91S.)  Wbelhci  the  relation  eiiat-
B^  between  a  penon  and  hia  freednun  deacended
to  the  children  of  the  latter,  ia  liVewiae  unknown.
That  a  nuwter,  in  caae  hia  frvedmin  died,  had  aome
rlaima  ta  hii  pnpert;,  ii  clear  frnm  laaeoa  {da
KiOKtnit.  kind,  c  9  ;  Rhetor,  ad  Alex.  i.  16  ;
tanifaieB>iaia>,DiJMr.lKn<ii.Ali.p.5l).  The
neglect  of  an;  of  the  dntiea  which  a  freedman  had
lowaFda  hii  fbnnei  maiter,  waa  pniiecated  bj  the

bvVTBfflw  )W [ApoatASIOU DiKI.]

The  S|iutani  likewiae  lealond  their  alarei  aome-
tiiana  ta  beedom,  bat  ia  what  degree  luch  freed-
men  panink  of  the  ciiic  francbiae  ii  not  known.
That  the;  coold  never  reaeiTe  the  fidl  Spartan
fraaehin  ii  exprtitl;  ataled  b;  Dion  Chi;aoato-
mu  (OnX.  ZXITi.  p.  448,  h\  but  MUller  (Dor.
m.  X  i  6)  entertain*  tha  opinion  that  Spanaii
freedmen,  after  paadng  through  acreral  etsgei,
might  in  the  end  obtain  the  Ml  francbiae ;  thia
EfHnioa  howerer  ia  men  than  doubtful.  Spartan
ftccidineii  were  fr«quent1;  uaed  in  the  aimiea  and
in  tfaa  fleet,  and  were,  according  to  Mj-ro  <ap.
n.  p.  2T1),  deaignolcd b;  the  name* *

.  [I..S.J

2.  BouiN.  Freemen  (fUtn)  were  either  In-
icniu  [IxaBHUi]  or  Libortinl  Libenini  were
thiae  peiaani  wtu  bad  been  relsied  from  legal
aenitadB  (^  m  jtata  aaretMs  nuwunuii  ami,
(Mm,  i.  11). A  maoiimitted  al*Te  «u  Libertni


***'«.


LIBERTU3.  7(»

(that  ii,  llbentna)  with  reference  to  bii  maiter  1

ith  referotce  lo  the  elaaa  to  which  be  belonged
ter  mauvmiaiion,  he  waa  Libertinui.  According
Suelonini,  libertinua  waa  the  aon  of  a  libertue
the  time  of  tha  cenaor  Applui  Claudiui,  and
riome  time  after  lOand.  c24)i  but  thii  ia  not
the  meaning  of  the  word  in  th«  sitant  Roman

There  were  three  model  of  Legilima  maonmii-
o,  the  TindJcta,  the  ceniui.  and  the  tectamentiun  :
if  the  manamitted  ilave  waa  abore  thirt;  ;«n  of
if  he  waa  the  Quiritarian  propert;  of  hia
r,  and  if  be  ifaa  nuuuunitled  in  proper  form
{l»gilime,jiutael  ligiliaa  unBiwmiMtiomi)  he  beainie
a  CiTii  Romanui :  if  an;  of  theae  couditioni  wer*
"anting,  he  beeiina  a  lAtinua  j  and  in  lome  caae*
onl;  a  Deditieiui.  [MinuuimicxJ  Thui  there
were,  ai  Ulpian  ebaerret,  three  kindi  of  Libarti :
CiTCa  Romini,  I^ini  Juniani,  and  DeditJciL

The  Statoa  of  a  Cirii  Romanai  and  that  of  a
Deditieiui,  have  been  already  dCKribed.  [Civrr^a;
DiDITici!.]  Ai  to  the  political  condition  of  Liber-
tint  under  the  republic,  who  were  CiTea  Romoai,

Originally  ilarea  who  were  ao  manumitted  aa
not  lo  becoue  CItbi  Bomani,  were  itill  ilaTei ;  but
the  Praelor  took  Ihem  under  hia  protecttini,  and
maintained  their  freedom,  though  he  could  not
make  them  Civei  RonuuiL  The  Lex  Junia  gave
them  a  certain  ii&tui,  which  waa  eipreaeed  h;  tha
phiaae  Latini  Juniani :  they  vera  called  Latin!,
•ayi  Oaiui  (i.  22,  iii.  £61  beeaoia  the;  were  put
CQ  the  aame  footing  aa  the  Latini  Coloniarii,  and
Juniani  becauae  the  Junia  Lex  gare  tbem  freedom,
whereaa  before  they  ware  by  itrict  hiw  (a  Jura
QmriliMm)  lUrea.  Oaiua  [iil  56)  nyi  that  tha
Lex  Junia  d»Iared  nieh  manumitted  peiaona  lo  be
ai  free  aa  if  they  had  been  Roman  ciliiena  b;
birth  idea  Raaaai  ti«MiiM7,  who  had  gone  out
from  Rome  lo  join  a  Latin  colony,  and  Ihenb;
had  become  Lalini  Coloniarii ;  Ihii  paaiage,  which
ia  not  free  from  difiicully,  ia  remarked  do  by
SsTign;  (ZttUolrifl,  ii.  p.  320).

A  Lalinui  could  attain  the  CiTiBa  in  aereral
wayl. (Oaiua,  I  26,  &c. ;  Ulp.  Frag.


liar  to


18.) A.  I

ie(Ronu


he  hod  married  eilheral^tinaandhad
begotten  a  child,  who  wonld  of  conrie  be  a  L^tinuB,
or  had  nurried  a  Roman  ciria,  and  had  b^otlen
a  child,  which,  by  a  aenatuaconiuitmn  of  Hadrian,
would  be  a  Roiaauui  Cirii,  he  migbt,  by  complying
with  the  pmiiiona  of  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia,  in  ihs
farmer  caae  obtain  the  ciTiiaafor  bimielf,lua  wile,
and  child,  and  in  both  oaet  aequtce  ^  patria
poleitaa  over  hia  child  Juit  11  if  the  child  had  been
bom  in  jnalae  nuptiae. (Oaiua,  i.  30.  66.)

In  coniidering  the  legij  condilion  of  Libertini,
it  ii  ncceaiar;  lo  remember  that  eren  tboaa  who
lot  Ingenni,  and  that
in  righta  with  reaped
iani  were  under  arana
ipecial  incapacitiei ;  for  the  Lex  Junia  which  de-
termined their  alatut,  neitlier  gave  them  the  power
of  making  a  will,  nor  of  taking  prepay  undn  a
will,  nor  of  being  named  Tulorei  m  a  will.  They
could  not  therefora  take  either  a*  heredei  or  Uga-
tarii,  but  they  could  take  by  way  of  Gdei-ooni-
miiHim.  (Oaini,  L  24.)  The  aooi  of  libotini
were  ingenni,  but  the;  ccnild  not  ban  gaotil*  lighla  J


their  palroni  had  at


706  LIBRA.

■nd  tha  doKOidanlJ  of  Ubettiiu  wtn  •ametlmei

laontvd  witb  their  mttiIc  ongin. (liar.  Strm.i.

6,46.)

The  Uw  which  concenu  tbs  property  (boaa)  of

Liberlini  may  be  coniidercd  under  P^tbqnub  ;

KC  alio  IHOINUI  RDd  Lbx  JUNIl.  [O.  L.]

LIBITINA'RII. [FuNVB,  p.W8,  «.]
LIBRA  or  AS,  »  pounii,  th*  unit  of  weight

among  Ihs  Romuii  uid  Italiuu. Many  •ncienl

qxcimnu  of  ihii  weight,  iti  puti  *nd  nivltlplet,

perfect,  and  the  reil  differ  »  mnch  in  weight  lh»t

The  difference  between  lome  of  theu  ipeeiDieDi
it  u  much  u  two  ounce*.  An  Bccoont  of  •erne  of
the  moit  remarkahle  of  them  ii  given  hj  HuiMj
(AKioU  Wiigitt,  &c  ix.  §  3),  and  Bfickh  (Afettv-
%.  UnUrtMdi.  p.  170).  Thii  variety  U  to  be  ac-
counted for  partly  by  the  well-known  tweleMneii
of  the  Romani  in  keeping  to  their  ttandardi  of
weight,  and  pwtly  by  the  &ct  (hat  many  of  the
eilaiit  weighu  are  from  proiincial  towni,  in  which
thi*  careleuneB  wai  notoriouily  grtatcc  than  in
the  metropolii.

The  compaUtxHi  of  the  weight  of  the  I3ira  hai
been  attempted  in  two  wayi,  which  an  more  fully
ducuued  under  PoHniRA.  The  method  which  baa
been  followtd  by  maU  wiileti  ii  that  of  deducing
it  from  llie  weight!  of  the  lilver  coini^-a  proceu
which  give«,  according  to  Huuey,  iO*0  graini,
and  according  to  Wunn  and  Bflekh,  a  little  more
than  was.  The  other  plan  ii  that  of  weighing
the  quantity  of  water  hetd  by  the  Congiue  of
Veipaiian,  which  oliginally  contained  10  Roman
poundi.  which  jp'et  a  reiull  of  about  5200  graini.
According  to  the  former  computation,  it  wu  Mme-
wfaal  le«  than  1 1  i,  according  to  the  latter,  tome-
whal  more  than  11}  ouncei  amiidupoii ;  and,
according  to  either,  iu  value  may  bo  roughly
atated  at  a  little  leM  than  S-4lh  of  a  pound
aToiidupoii.

The  undal  dinaion,  which  hat  been  noticed  in
tpeaking  of  the  coin  Aa,  waa  alto  applied  to  the
weighL  (See  the  Tablei.)  The  di.iiima  of  the
onnce  are  given  under  Unuia. Where  the  word


Then.


ie[»m  w


hmn  dirided  into  twelve  equal  parti  (B«ine)  by
Imei  marked  m  it,  and  uKd  for  meaturing  oil.
(Suet.  Caei.  e.  SB  ;  Oalen,  da  Camp.  Med.  Oat.  i.
17,  Ti.  8  ;  Horat.  AW.  iu  3.  ifl— 61.) [P.S.]

LIBRA,  dim.  L1BELLA  (<rra«^i)i  n  balance,
s  pair  of  mlet.  The  principal  parti  of  Ihiiinitm-
ment  wen,  1.  The  beam  [Juouu],  whence  anr-
thing  wbieb  ii  to  be  weighed  ii  uid  brh  iirjir
ira(A4>)|Hi,  liteiaily,  **  to  bo  thrown  under  the
beam,"  (Aelian,  V.  H.x.6.)  2.  The  two  tcalei,
called  in  Greek  TdXarra  (Horn.  H  liii.  69,  liL
4SS,  in  S&9,  lii.  223,  xxii.  309  ;  Ariitoph.
Rmiat,  809)  and  wkda^lYH  (Ariitoph.  Aaacw,
U'lb),  and  in  Latin  lament  (Virg.  An.  lii.  725 ;
Pen.  iv.  lOi  Cic. -Imrf.i'.  12).  [Liux.]  Hence
the  verb  ToAwTfia  it  employed  ai  equivalent  to
rrnS/idti,  and  to  the  Latin  libro,  and  it  applied  at
detcriplive  of  an  eagle  balancing  hit  wing*  in  the
air.  (Fhiloilrat.  Juo.  Imy.  6  ;  Welcker,  ad  loe.)
The  beam  wai  made  without  a  tongue,  being  held
by  a  ring  or  other  appendage  (Ugula,  ^i'IIb),  Sied
in  the  centre. (See  tb*  woodoot.) Specimen)  of


LIBRARIL

bnnue  halancM  may  be  teeo  in  the  Britiib  HumD
and  in  other  collections  of  anliquiiiet,  and  alu  of
the  iteel-yard  [Statira],  which  wu  ued  Corthe
tame  purpotet  u  the  libra.  The  woodcut  to  tht
article  Catina  thowi  lomeof  the  chaiai  by  which
the  ecalea  are  tutpended  from  the  beam.  In  the
workt  of  ancient  vt,the  bahuice  ti  alio  intnidncrd
emblematically  in  a  great  variety  of  waji.  Tht
annexed  woodcut  it  taken  from  a  beaullfnl  Ivonie
ig  Mercury  and  Apollo  engaf  i-d
■  ■  '  Ue.  and  M
ki  of  thet


that  of  the  Bther.  (Wlnckelnunn,  JVm.  fwd.  131;
Millin,  Pamtva  d*  F<uii  AA  i.  pL  19.  p.  S9.)
A  talance  it  often  represented  on  the  rev rne  erf
the  Roman  imperial  coini ;  and  to  indicate  more
dittinctly  iti  iignificalion,  it  it  frequently  held  by
a  female  ia  ber  right  hand,  while  the  rappeni
a  cornucopia  in  her  left,  the  woida  AntriTAi
AVOVgTi  being  intcribed  on  the  margin,  ao  at  U
denote  the  justice  and  unpartlalitj  with  which  the
emperon  ditpented  their  bounty.

The  cDnttellation  Libra  ia  placed  in  the  Zodiac
at  the  equinox,  hecauae  ii  ia  the  period  of  the  year
at  which  day  and  night  are  equally  balanced.
(Virg.  Gtorg.  I  208 1  Plin.  U.  N.  iriiL  69  ;  Schol.
n  Arat.  89.)

The  maion't  or  carpentei't  level  wai  called  Hm
or  IHeUa  (whence  tha  Englith  name),  on  accsnnl
of  itt  retemblanee  in  many  re^iectt  to  a  balance.
(Varro,  d»  Ri  R<ul.  I  S;  Oilumella,  iil  13;  Plin.
ff.A'.ixxTLSa.) Hence  the  T.  ■ ■-


level  a


well  a


nigh. The  woodcu


article  CiKCiNUS  ihowi  a  liitlla/abnlit  having  the
fonn  of  the  letter  A  (Veget  iii.  20),  and  the  lino
and  plummet  iptrpaicUcmam)  depending  froin  the
apex.  [J.  T.)

LIBRAMENTUM,  LIBRATIO  A(JUA-
RUM. [AaD*«DticTui,p.  113,h.]

LIBRA'RII,  the  name  of  ilaTei,  who  wen  em.
ployad  by  their  mailen  in  writing  or  copying  in
any  way.  They  muat  be  diitinguiihed  mmi  ttw
Scribae  publki,  who  were  freemen  [ScBiaaa],
and  alto  from  the  bookaellen  (Libxr],  la  botli
'  inally  applied.  Tba
t  libiani  wu  giieo.


lay  b


lo  whom  the  i
ivided  i


lolhre.


1 c^iyins


1.  Librarii who wen employed i

hooka,  called  Scnri(an«  Liirarii  by  Hon

Pail.  354).  Tbeie  librarii  were  called  in  hier
timee  aUiparii.  (Cod.  12.  tit.  19.  a  10;  Cnd.
Thood.  t.  tit.  S.  a3;  Itid.  Orif.  ti.  H.) laidcm


LICTOB.
(t  ft.)  Mji  HuX  thB  libnrii  copied  both  old  and
DBir  booki,  vhile  ths  kntiqmrii  copied  oal;  old
bookL  Bcdwr  (iTai&M,  tdL  L  p.  164),  howtTei,
lUnki  that,  vhsn  ths  cuniTe  chmder  eama  into
goiEnl  ut,  the  HHns  of  uitiqiiuii  mi  ipplUd  to
the  copjutaobo  tnnMribal  booki  in  thsaldnncis]


TlBl


leoflibi


r.  *).  >


2.  LAmrii  a  itadat  were  iUtm  who  wen  em-
plojed  bj  tbdr  nwlen  when  itudviog  to  Toikt
ettncU  frombo(Ik^&c  (OrelL/ucr.  719]  Suet.
OwoL  2S  ;  Cic  o^  /bm.  itl  21.)  To  thii  cIh
(be  Mtam,  or  ■hut-band  wiit^n,  belonged,  who

dictated  to  tfaem. (Plin.  Ep.  iiL  &;  Maitial,  lir.

S.  JJbrarU  ab  tpi^aliM,  wbdse  principal  doty
■wtt  to  write  lelten  from  thcdr  mulef'i  dictation.
(Ocelli,  /Hsr.  2437,  S9S7,  Acj  Becker,  OaJJM,
vol  L  p.  ISO.) To  thia  cUh  belonged  the '


paiticolw,  applied  to  two  kindt  of  pcnoni.

>  ...I — .._  --1,^  ,  penoa  whoie  knowledge
B  in  the  conitnictien  of  aqnae-
• '  M  for  the


n  (/ibni  at


, _  ■  fluid  &om  one  place  to  another. He

id  by  a  hjdfMlitic
the  nlaliTC  beighli  of  the  piacei  mm  ana  lo  wnicn
the  water  wb>  to  be  condvcted.  Some  penoni  nt
Roma  made  thl«  occupation  their  buiineia,  and
were  engaged  nnder  the  enratom  aquanmi,  thoagh
anbiteett  were  alio  expected  to  be  able  to  act  oi
k  (PliB..^BH*.i.fi0  5Frontin,d!.^yKi»d.


1.1.)


L  6;  Cod.  la  1


la  aimie*  were  pnbiblf  sol-
dien  who  attacked  the  eDemj  b;  narllog  with
tbatrown  handi  (iibraudo)  lancei  or  apeart  againit
than.  (Tacit.  Ann.  u.  20.  liil  SKi  in  both  theae
paaaagea  lomB  HSS.  have  UbritArea.)  Lipaini  {ad
TaeU,  Amm.  L  c)  thitika  that  the  libntorea  were
Ben  who  threw  dart*  ra  ilonei  againit  the  enemy
by  meaas  of  machinei,  toniHata  (compare  bia  Po-
taonA  it.  3)*  Bat  thii  nppoinian  can  Karcelj
be  BDnwrted  by  any  good  Bntbori^.  Daring  the
tinM  M  tbs  mpDblic  libtatorei  are  not  raentionad
in  the  RiBiian  aimiBB.  (L.  &]

LI'BRIPENS. (MAiccirATio.]
LIBURNA,  LIBU'RNICA, [NiVia.]
LICHAS  (Aixdi). [P.H.]
LI'CIA,  LICIATO-RIUM. [Tila.]
LJCTOK,  a  pabtic  officer,  who  attended  on  tls
Aiet  Banan miglatiatei. Tha  number whicb
wailed  nn  iha  difisent  migiitratei  ii  ititi>d  in  tha


The


eflJce  of  liclor  it  >aid  to  have  been  derlTed
11  Irnm  the  Etniaauia.  (Liv.  I  S.)  The
of  the  name  ia  doabtful ;  Qetlioi  (liu
uiecta  it  with  the  Terb  iijian,  be<auH  tha
,  bad  to  bind  the  handa  and  feet  cf  cruaiuali
I  they  were  pimiahed.  The  lictisa  went  ba-
le magiattatea,  one  by  one  in  a  line  i  be  who
last  or  next  lo  the  niBgiatrate  waa  called
•mMUelor,  to  whom  the  magiitiate  gare  hia
audi  <Li*.  xst.  44;  Sail  Jtip.  IS  ;  Cic.
T.  64,  /U  Dia.  L  2B  ;  OnJIi,  /■»■.  S21S),
a  lU*  licttv  waa  alwaja  Iha  principal  one,  we


LIHBU3.  707

alio  find  him  called  primia  liclor  (Cic  ad  Qpiat,  i.
I.  fi  7),  which  eEpreuion  lome  modem  WTtt«ra
have  emuieouily  njppoied  to  lelbr  to  the  lidor  who
went  lint.

The  lictofi  had  to  inflict  pnniihment  «■  thow
wlio  were  condemned,  eipeeially  in  the  caie  itf
Roman  eitiieni  (Liv.ii.  6,  Tiii.  7);  for  fbreigaen
and  ilarei  were  punlilied  by  the  cacnifex  j  and
they  alio  probably  hid  to  mist  in  aoine  riaea  in
the  eiccutirai  of  a  decree  or  judgment  in  a  civil
mit.  The  licton  alio  commanded  [aniaadBoitnmty
peraona  to  pay  proper  tvepect  to  a  migiatrata
pBBing  by,  which  conaliled  in  dinnoonling  from
horuback,  nacOTCring  the  head,  atanding  oat  of  tha
way,  &e.  (Lit.  rxiv,  44 ;  Sen,  Ep.  64.)

The  Itcton  were  originally  choien  from  the  plebi
(Lit.  ii.  S£),  bnt  afterWarda  appear  to  have  been
generally  freedmen,  probably  of  the  magJitiale  on
whom  they  attended.  (Onap.  Tacit,  ^n.  xiiL
87.)

Licti^i  wen  pn^iecly  only  granted  to  thoee  ma-
gialratei  who  had  the  Impcrium.  Coiueqnently
ihe  tribonea  of  tha  plebi  netei  had  licton  (Pint.
Quaat.  Rom.  81),  nor  levetai  of  the  other  migii.
tratea  Sometimei,  bowerer,  lietora  were  granted
to  penona  ai  a  mark  of  leipect  or  for  the  lake  of
pmtection.  Tbui  by  a  law  of  the  TriumTira  every
Veital  Ti^in  wai  accompanied  by  a  lictor,  when*

hanoui  of  one  or  two  licton  vol  usually  granted
to  the  wirei  and  other  female  memben  of  the  Im-
perial fsmily. (Tccit  Anji.  L  U,  liii.  2.)

There  were  alio  thirty  Hctora  called  Lkloni
Cariati,  whose  duly  it  waa  lo  munmon  the  curiae
lo  the  comitia  cnriaCa  ;  and  when  tbeee  meetinga
became  little  more  than  a  form,  their  BuRragci
were  rcpreaented  by  the  thirty  liciora.  [(JelL  xv.
27  ;  Cic.  Agr.  iL  12  ;  Orelli,  l«Kr.  2176,  2922,
3240.)

LiaO  (tlictXAa  or  /idxiWa)  was  a  hatchet
formed  either  of  one  bread  iron  or  of  two  curved
iron  pnufgi,  wbich  wai'uied  by  the  aacient  hua-
bandmen  lo  clear  the  Reldi  from  weedi.  (Oiid.aa
Post.  L  8.  6S  ;  Mart  It.  64  ;  Stat.  Thii.  iii.  £69 ;
Colum.  X.  69.)  The  ligo  leemi  alio  to  have  been
aied  in  digguig  the  uil  and  breaking  Ihe  cloda.
(Hor.  Cbrtfl.  iii.  6,  38,  EpiA  I  14.  27  [  OTid,
Amcr.  iii.  10.  SI  ;  compare  Dichion,  On  Ht  Hia-
bandryo/Oie  AieiaUi,i.  p.  41.6.)  [L.  S.]

LI'QULA,  a  Roman  rneanre  of  floid  capacity,
containing  one-fourth  of  the  CvaTHUB.  ((^jlnmella,
R.  R.  IiL  21  1  Plin.  H.  N.  It.  B.  a  18.)

It  aignifiea  a  ipoaafid,  like  cohUhp  ;  miy  the
iiifuia  WBi  larger  than  the  eocAUar.  The  apoon
which  wai  called  Sgula,  or  Unguiii  (dim.  <k  (u-
'  fftia)  froin  it!  ibape,  wai  aied  for  varima  purpoiea,
especially  to  clean  oat  iraall  and  narrow  Tcueli,
and  to  eat  jelliea  and  anch  thinga  (Cato,  B.  R.
84  ;  Colum.  it.  B  ;  Pljn.  H.  ff.  ni.  14.  i.  49  ;
Martial,  viiL  33.  33.  71.  9,  xit.  120;  Becker,.
Galiia,  il  j>.  156.)  The  word  ii  alao  need  for  the
leather  tongue  of  a  (boo  (Pallui,  ii,  109,  viL  80)
FeilnaaB.).  [P.&)

LIMA,  a  file,  wai  nude  of  iron  or  iteel,  tor  the
pnrpoae  of  poliihing  metal  or  ilone,  and  appean  to
have  been  of  the  nme  form  a*  the  initrumenla
Died  for  lunilai  purpoaea  in  modem  timea-  (Plin.
«.;V.ixiviL  B.  1.32,  ir.3i.a.S4,  XCTiii.  9.».41(
Plant.  MnatA.  i.  1.  9.)  [L.  S.]

LIMBUS  (ropv^),  Iha  border  of  a  tnniif
{CanppBM,d»  Ija^.jiid.  ii.  117)o(aacaiL.(Virgi


708  LITIS  CONTESTATIO.

Atu.  if.  137  ;  Sen.  in  loc)  Thii  onumifnt,  when
displayed  upoa  th«  tunic,  was  of  a  limiloi  kind
with  tha  Cyclas  ud  Institi  (Seniui  in  Viry.
An,  il  G16),  but  much  leu  eiperuiTe,  mora  cmn-
mon  and  more  timple.  It  nu  genenillj  voTen  in
tbfl  vune  piece  wiu  the  entire  gument  of  wfaich  it
formed  n  pert,  end  it  hnd  tometimea  the  appear-
ance of  a  Kariet  or  paipLo  band  upon  a  white
giannd;  in  other  initancea  it  reaembled  foliage
(ViivL  Am.  L  649 ;  Ovid,  MA  TJ.  127),  or  the
•cnl^  and  meaaden  introdnced  in  sithitcctai&
A  letj  elegant  eSect  waa  prodnced  by  bandi  cf
gold  thread  inteiwoTon  in  doth  of  Tjrian  pnrple
(O'id,  MA  1.  fil),  and  called  Aufwi  or  leria.
(Feitiu,  1.  v. ;  Bninck,  Awd.  L  483.)  Demetiiai
Poliiwcelef  wai  arrayed  in  thit  manner  (xpi**-
wapipaii  JAovprlo'i,  Plat  Demee.  41).  Vii^
{Atn.  T.  251)  mentiiiiii  a  Korf  enriched  with  gold,
the  border  of  which  waa  in  the  fonu  of  a  double
meander.  In  illuitratian  of  ihia  account  eiamplM
ef  both  the  tingle  and  the  double  mednder  are  ia-
tnduced  at  the  lop  of  tb
other  eight  ipecimeni  cf


SLGt.syeiSy.V'^


EMDMD


The  lua  of  the  linbui  wu  almoM  confined  to
tbe  lemale  aei  among  the  Oreeki  and  Romani  j
but  in  other  nation!  it  wai  admitted  into  the  dreia
of  men  likewuc

An  ornamental  band,  when  uied  by  itaelf  m  a
fillet  to  luiTDund  tbe  templea  or  the  waiat,  waa  alae
called  limbui.  {Slat.  TTUb-ii.  36J,  AiAUL  u.  176;
Chai.deCtiiu.MaOiiTImd.na.)  Probably  the
UmMarii  mentioned  by  Plaului  (AaluL  iii.  S.  45),
wen  penona  employed  in  roaldng  band*  of  thii
deicrlption.  [J.  Y.]

LIMEN. [Jawd*.]

LINTEA'MEN,  LI'NTEUM. [P*llid¥.]

LITHOSTKOTA.  [Douua ;  Picruai,  -b
>.)

LITIS  CONTESTA'TIO.  "  Coalcatari  "  ii
when  each  party  to  a  init  (ateyae  mu)  ayi,
"Ttetu  ettole."  Two  or  more  partiei  to  a  niit
(adnrrtarii)  ara  nid  eonteatari  litem,  becauw  when
the  Judicinm  ifl  arranged  (ordiaato  jmdieia)  each
party  ia  accnitomed  to  My,  "  Teitea  eatote."
(Feitui,  1.  e.  Cotiettan.)  The  Litii  Conteatatio
waa  thenfiire  to  ailed  beanie  peraoni  wen  called
on  by  the  partie*  to  the  luit  to  "  bear  witncaa,"
"  to  be  witneMc*."  It  it  not  here  told  what  the;
WN«  to  be  wiUwHei  a^  but  il  m»y  be  inferred


IITIS  CONTESTATIO

from  the  uie  (^  the  wnili  cootertati*  and  teatatM
in  a  limilar  >en>e  in  other  paiaigea  (Dig.  28.  tit.  1-

1.20; Ulp./Vo^.  II.L9)thBttbiiODDt(Mat>l>WU

the  formal  termination  of  cenam  act*  of  which  tlie
peraoni  called  to  be  witneaaei  wa<e  at  aome  futore
time  to  hew  recotd.  Accoidiugly  the  CeoteMatia,
■poken  cf  in  the  paange  of  Paatoa,  moat  nta  ta
the  wordi  arduiato  jndieio^  that  it,  to  the  w)wlo
buiineu  that  hs*  taken  place  In  Jnn  and  wliicli  il
cow  completed.  Thii  inteipRmtlea  teema  ta  be
eonfinncd  by  the  following  eonitdeiatiaaa.

When  the  Legii  Actionea  wbd  in  foree,  the
procedure  eoniialed  of  a  aeries  of  oial  acta  md
pleadinga.  The  whole  pocednre,  ai  waa  the  case
after  the  iuCroduction  of  the  Foromlaa,  waa  divided
into  two  parta,  that  hefim  the  Uagistnttni  «r  In
Jure,  and  that  before  the  Judex  or  In  JndidaL
That  beton  the  Higitfcataa  eonaitad  of  aeta  and
wordi  by  the  ivutiH,  and  by  tbe  UagJatiatBa,  tha
rtault  of  which  waa  the  detenninatioB  of  llie  ibno
and  manner  of  the  fntnn  proeee^ngi  In  Jodicia.
When  the  parties  appeared  before  tike  Judex,  it
would  be  Decsssaiy  for  him  to  be  fiilly  infbnned  of
nil  the  proceedings  In  Jure:  this  wu  effected  in
later  time*  br  the  Formula,  a  written  inalnnmnt
under  the  antbority  of  the  Praetor,  which  csntained
the  reanlt  of  all  tha  trannctioDi  In  Jnm  in  tbe
form  of  instiuctioiu  foe  the  Judex.  Bnt  there  ii
no  oideuce  of  any  inch  written  inttmctiona  hanng
been  used  in  the  time  of  the  Legit  Actimiet ;
and  this  must  therefore  hare  been  fueled  in  acna
other  way.  Tha  Litis  C«it«Iatio  then  may  be
thni  explained :  the  whde  ptnceedinga  In  Jon
took  pliice  befrire  witneaaea,  and  tbe  &mteatatio
waa  the  conelnrien  of  tbeae  prticeedinga  j  and  it
wu  tiie  act  hj  which  tha  liti^nt  paitiea  oUled  cai
the  witneiaea  to  bear  tmi^  before  the  Jodaz  of
what  had  takm  place  In  Jon.

This,  which  wenii  s  probable  explauatiim  of  tba
original  meaning  of  LitU  ContoslBtio,  may  be  com-
pered to  some  extent  with  the  appxttnt^  tnginal
sense  of  Recorder  and  Recording  in  English  inw.
(Pvmy  C^fdt^xudia,  wst,  Rteonitr.')

When  the  Fommia  waa  introdnced,  tba  Liln
Contettatio  would  be  onneeeaiBry,  and  thera  «p-
pean  no  trace  of  it  in  itt  cnginal  sense  in  tha  du-
tiol  jnritti.  Still  the  eipremioi  ■  -'  "
and  Lit  Conlettala  fi«qnent]y  oc
but  only  in  the  lenia  of  tbe  completio
piacaedingi  In  Jure,  end  this  il  the  mwnmg  of
tha  phmiei,  Ante  litem  contestatara.  Peat  litem
eoDtestatam.  (Oains,  iiL  180,  ir.  lU.)  The  ex-
prenion  Lit  Contealata  in  a  pasdra  senae  ii  used
by  Cicero  {pro  RrmCbm.  c  It,  12,  pre  Ftatm,
e.  1 1 ,  and  in  the  Lex  Ruhria  of  Gallia  Ciialpma,
co1.ll.  48,"  qoM  inter  id  judicium  aeeipietit  leia**
conleitabitur  ").  At  the  LJtii  Coateamtio  wu  «i>
Jly  and  piopeily  the  termination  of  the  pio-
lingi  In  Jure,  it  ii  euQ^  conceifable  that  after
form  had  &llen  into  disuse,  the  nwne  ihonld
ttiU  be  retained  to  eijnns  the  conclusion  of  aodi
roceedinga.  When  the  phrase  Liton  Conteetarl
Ecun  in  the  claitiatl  jariatt,  it  an  mean  aatbing
ion  than  the  proeeedingi  by  which  tba  pwtif
sminate  tbe  procedure  In  Jnre  and  to  piepnte  tin
latter  in  diipute  for  the  inreatigatiai  of  the  JodeK,
It  appear!  from  the  paaaaga  in  FeMu  that  tba


tha  Dttcring  of  the  wotda  **TnM  «


eDi—t,
ja  of  the


LITHA.
jpin  riie  lo  the  phrs»  Litii  Canl«statia  ■.  but  (his
doc*  aoE  infiinn  ni  what  tbe  Lilii  Contatatio
prnperiy  mi.  Still  u  thanaine  of  »  Ibing  is  dt-
liTcd  from  that  which  connituta  iu  OKtice,  it
nuj  be  thai  the  name  hat  exfnaut  the  thing,  thnt
n,  that  the  Litii  Contettatio  wbi  »  colled,  f«  ths
namn  which  Fotni  givei,  and  that  it  alto  coniiiled
111  the  litigant  pojtiea  coUisg  on  the  witneaacfl  to
bear  reord.  Bat  ai  it  is  iiiual  lot  the  whole  of
a  thing  to  take  iti  name  from  (otne  t^ial  ftit,  m
it  IM^  be  that  the  Litit  Contfttatio,  in  the  time  of
the  Ij^i*  Actiooea,  wai  eqm>alent  to  the  whole
pcwecding)  in  Jure,  and  that  the  whole  wai  »
called  from  that  yart  which  completed  iL

The  time  when  the  pnper  Litis  Coatolatia  fell
into  dime  cannot  be  detenuned,  though  it  wonld
•eon  that  thia  muit  hkTe  taken  phwe  with  the
jwniim  of  the  Aebotia  Lex  and  the  (ws  Leget
JoliBe  which  did  away  with  the  Legii  Actionea,
ntept  in  certain  catea.  It  ia  al»  unceitain  if  the
ptofMt  litii  Cntettatio  still  existed  in  those  Legia
Actimea,  which  were  not  inlerlefed  with  by  the
L^ta  abore  mentioned  ;  and  if  so,  wbather  it  ai-
isted  in  the  old  brm  ee  iu  a  modified  shape.

Thii  new  of  the  matter  is  by  Keller,  in  his
ti«tiis  "  Ueber  Litis  Contatation  nnd  Urthei!
Bach  ClamKheu  RihniHhen  Recht,"  ZUiich,  1B27.
Other  apiniobs  am  uoticed  in  his  work.  The
BQtbcr  labours  particolarij  to  ahow  that  the  tx-
jaiasiiiii  Litii  Contestatio  ilwaji  refen  to  the  pro-
(cedinga  In  Juie  and  nerer  to  thoee  In  Judicio.

Sar^j  {Sfttmt,  &c  <L  g  S56— 379}  hat  alM
(nil J  eaamincd  the  LitiaConteslatio.Hr '-  —


LITUUS.


709


JndicL


[Jt.1


which  exiit«d  at  the  same  time
the  ioRnnlB,  and  in  which  tbeie  was  neither  Judex
nor  fonnula.  and  in  whicli  the  whole  legal  dispute
waa  ooadncted  beliire  a  magistiatsi,  the  Litia  Con-
teatatio  mean*  the  time  when  the  paitiei  bad  fulijr
dedand  Umr  serenl  claims  and  answen  to  such
daims  before  the  magistratua.  This  waa  sobitan-
tially  the  Bme  aa  the  Litii  Conlcatatio,  and  the
diffennce  lay  ihuplj-in  the  eitemal  form.  {Comp.
Cod.  3.  tit.  9.  1.  ] ,  Rescript  of  Serenu  and  Anlo-
oiiuia.)  AI  a  later  period,  when  all  actions  had
became  changed  into  extnerdinaria  jndicia,  tltal
which  was  belcre  the  exception  now  became  the
nUe,  Bod  Li*  Contestala  in  the  sjRem  of  Jua-
tinian  cnosisted  iu  the  statements  made  by  the
partica  to  a  suit  befbn  the  magiitiate  respecting
the  claim  or  demand,  aud  the  answer  or  defence  to
iL  When  this  was  done,  the  cause  was  reedy  for
btariog.  [O.  L.]

LITRA  (Airpa),  a  word  which  wa*  <ued  by
tbe  Oieelu  of  Sicily  m  their  tyitem  of  weight*
and  Douey,  and  which  occurs  a*  ouly  as  in  the
fra^menla  of  Shnonidea  and  Epicharmua,  ia  ctI-
deotly  another  form  of  the  Italian  word  libra,  aa
we  are  told  by  Pestua  (s.o./.i«a,  "Atrfn  enim
Kbca  eat  ">.  It  wu  the  unit  of  an  unci^  ayitem
similar  to  that  ned  is  the  Roman  and  Italian
waigbts  and  moon  [As  ;  Lraaa],  it*  twelfth  ^airt
being  (slled  iyKUi  (the  Roman  ihcu),  and  six,
fire,  toot,  three,  and  (wo  of  these  twelfth  parts
being  denominated  reapeetiTdy  titdXtrpor,  wirntT-
■Hw,  T*Tp«,  Tpios,  and  !{«,  Aaacoin,the  Airpa
waaaqoal  in  T^ne  to  the  Aqinelan  obol ;  and  hence


pacing  that  the  Oroeks  of , ,

Willi  than  the  AeginMan  obol,  ofterwaidi  ammi-

Iata4  tbair  ayitm  of  eutaige  (0  Ihot  mad  by  Iheir


Itatian  neighbonn,  making  their  otwl  to  answer  to
the  libra,  under  the  name  of  Alrpo.  In  the  seme
way  a  Corinthian  stater  of  ten  ob<d>  was  called  iu
Syracuje  a  HtKiiAiTpor,  or  piece  of  ten  litraa.
(Aristot  op.  Pallia,  iv.  24,  173,  ii.  6, 80  j  MiiUer,
Dor.  iii.  10.  g  12.) See  Numhub  and  PoNOiBa.

The  Bolyla,  used  for  mcaiuiing  oil,  which  i*
mentioned  by  Galen  [Cottla],  is  also  called  by
bim  Airpo.  Here  the  word  ia  only  a  Greek  form
oHilm. [See  LiBRa,s>ii ;!>>.]  [P.  8.]

LlTUUa  MiUler  {Dit  Emahar,  iv.  ].  5)
auppoeea  thia  to  be  an  Etruscan  vari  aignifying
crooked. In  the  Latin  writers  it  ia  used  to  denote

1.  The  crooked  staff  borne  by  the  ougun,  with
which  they  divided  the  expanse  of  heaven  when
viewed  with  reference  to  divination  (fanpbm),
into  regions  (n^uiisf) ;  the  nmnber  of  these  ac-
cordiiw  to  the  Etniscaa  disei[dine,  being  sixteen,


inflexum  bacillum  ;"  and  Livy  (L  !8)  aa''hacn-
lum  sine  nodo  aduncum."  It  ia  rely  frequently  ex-
hibited upon  woiks  of  ait.  The  figiuv  in  the
middle  of  the  following  illuslratioiti  ia  &om  a  most
ancient  specimen  of  Etruaan  aculptuce  in  the  pos-
session of  Inghirami  {Mmamnti  EInuAi,  torn.
Ti.  taT.  P.  G.  1),  npieienting  an  augur  ;  the  Iwft
othen  are  Ronton  denariL


3.  A  sort  of  tmmpet  slightly  cnrred  at  the  ei'
tremity.  (Featuo,  i.e.;  Gell.y.  8.)  It  differed  both
from  the  (ufia  and  tbe  «onni(Hor.Cii™.  li.  i.  17  i
Lucan,  L  237),  the  former  braig  atnight  while  the
latter  waa  bent  round  into  a  apiral  ahape.  Lydua  id6
Men.  i*.  GO)  calla  the  lituua  the  aacerdotal  trumpet
{lifoTui^r  aixitrf/a'),  and  aays  that  it  waa  em-
ployed by  Romulus  when  he  proclaimed  the  title
of  hi*  city.  Aero  {ad  HoraL  Oarm.  L  I.  S3)  as-
sert* that  il  was  pecntiar  to  caialrf,  while  the
tuba  belonged  (0  in&ntry.  It*  tones  arc  usually
choiBcteriaed  la  harah  and  ahnll  (dridor  Jthnm,
Lucan,  L  237  ;  ssRifiH  acitiot,  Enniua,  cipwf  FaL
I.  V. ;  Stat.  Thei.  li  226,  &c).  See  Miiller,  Dia
Etnukcr,  iv.  I.  5.  The  fidlowing  reptesenlatioii
is  from  Fabretti.  [W.  R.]


J3


710  LODIX.

LIXAE. tC^LONis.]
LOCATI  ET  CONDUCTI ACTIO. [Lo-

Lo'cA'TIO,  CONDU'CTIO,  a  one  ot  IboM
eontzsrU  which  »re  made  niertlj  by  coiumt,  with-
out thfl  ohKTTBtion  of  uy  peculiar  fbnn.  The  con-
tract might  be  either  m  locatio  conductio  nnun,  or

ductio  rcnim,  be  wba  promiaci  the  ii»  of  the  thing,
ii  locBtor,  be  who  protDiici  to  give  a  lum  of  monc;
for  the  me  ia  conductor:  if  (he  thing  b  a  dwellini;-
bouie,  the  condnctor  ia  called  inqmliiiua  ;  if  it  it
cnltinble  bind,  he  ii  called  cslonm.  The  loatio
condnctio  openuum  coniiata  either  hi  giiing  certain
■eiricei  foe  a  liicd  price,  «  giving  that  vhich  ii
the  muh  of  libour,  ut  an  lUticle  of  fumilure,  or  i
haute.  He  for  whom  the  icTvics  ia  done,  or  the
thing  ii  made,  ia  called  loctitor:  he  who  undet-
takei  to  produce  the  thing  it  conductor  or  redemp-
tor. (Hor.  Carm.  m.  1.)

The  determination  of  a  fixed  price  or  anni  o1
monej  {mtfot,  pernio)  ia  an  eiaeniial  part  of  the
contract.  When  landa  were  let,  the  menea  i  '  '
coniiat  in  a  put  of  the  produce.  (Dig.  4.  ti
1.21.)  When  tbeparliei  have  agreed  abou
object  and  the  price,  the  contiact  ii  coinplctod  ;  and
ihepnrtiei  have  aereiall}-  the  aclionet  locati  et  con-
ducti  for  onfbccing  the  obli^tio. (Dij(.  IS.  (it.  2,]

Thii  being  the  nature  of  the  contract  of  locatit
et  conductio,  it  wai  a  mniter  of  doubt  aometimei
whether  a  contract  wai  lotatio  et  conductio  oi
lomething  else :  when  a  man  mnde  a  pair  of  >hoet
orauitofclothea  for  another,  it  waadoubli:d  whctbei


cnditio.


doclio.  The  better  opini
formable  to  the  natnre  of  the  lhing,iraithitif  aman
fumiahed  the  malerida  (D  the  tailor  or  ahoemaker,
it  wai  a  cnDlract  of  localioet  conductio:  if  the  tailor
or  ahoemaket  furoiihed  the  materioli,  it  was  n  con-
tract of  emtio  ei  Fenditio.  (Gaiua,  iii.  142,  &c  ;
Inat  3.  lit.  24.  u  3,  4.)  A  doubt  alio  aroie  u  to
Iho  natnre  of  the  contract  when  a  thing  waa  given
to  a  man  to  be  uied,  and  he  gave  the  lender  another
thing  to  be  uied.  Somctimn  it  wai  doubted
whether  the  contract  wai  Locatio  et  Conductio
or  Emtio  et  Vcndilio ;  ai  in  the  caie  where  a
thing  WBi  let  (footifa)  for  ever,  aa  wai  duns  with
landi  belonging  to  municipia,  which  were  let  on
the  condition  that  to  long  ai  the  rent  (eect^o/)
waa  paid,  neillicr  the  conductor  nor  bia  berei
could  be  turned  out  oE  the  land;  but  the  better


sf  thii


Bing  a


Locatio  et  Conductio. [Emphytivsib.] [O.  L.]

LOCHUS  (Kix'i). 1.  Spanaa  [aee  p.  4S3].

2.  Athenian  [p.  486.1. S-  Macedonian  [p.  4(lt)J.

LO'CULUa. IFuNus,  p.  5S9,  b.]

LOCUPLE'TES or ASSl'DUI, wa. the

name  oi'  the  Roman  citiieiia  who  were  included  in

the  £iB  clauet  of  the  Servian  conitilutiiin,  and

wai  oppoaed  to  the Prolttarix. The  term  aiii-

dui  leeou  to  have  been  the  older  appellation  ;  but

the  etymology  of  both  worda  ia  very  uncertain.

(Cie.  Top.  2,  da  Rip.  iL  23  ;  Plm.i/.  M  iriiL  Si

Fealui,  M.  m.  A  aidaia,  Loaipliitt ;  Becker,  Am.

Altertk.  T»L  ii  pi.  i.  m.  211,  212.)

LODIX,  dim.  LODI'CULA  (irifTw),  a  imall
ibaggy  blanket.  (Jot.  vii.  £6.)  Sometimei  two
lodicei  lewed  together  were  uied  ai  the  eoverlet  of
■  bed.  (Mail.  lir.  14H.}  The  Emperor  Auguatna
occaiionally  wrapt  himielf  in  a  blanket  of  thia  de-
•eriptim  on  acemurt  of  iti  wannth, (Snatoo.  Aug.


LOPK.

SS.)  It  waa  alio  nied  ai  a  carpet  (oaaSa  ladiem.
lam  tn  pavimtJiio  ditigaiier  atendil,  Petnnu  SaL
'20}.  The  Honuna  obtained  theie  blankeu  from
Verona.  (Martiiv.  1S2).  Their  lodii  wai  neariv,
if  not  altngether,  the  nne  ai  the  taguim  worn  bv
the  Qennana  (Tic.  Gem.  6.)  [Sagcw.]  [J.  Y.]
LOOISTAE  {\ojiirral).  (EuTHrNK.]
LOOOGRAPHI  {tjrjvypipaiX  ii  a  naioa  ap-
plied by  the  Giceki  to  two  diitinct  daiiei  of

1.  To  the  earlier  Greek  biitoriani  prerioni  to
Herodotui.  though  Thucydidei  {i  21)  appliea  tha

lelf,  and  thus  inclndei  Herodotui  among  the  num-
ber. The  loniatu  wen  the  tint  of  the  Oreeki
who  cultivated  hiitorr ;  and  the  firat  logngrapher,
who  lired  about  Oljmp.  60,  waa  Codmns,  a  tuitiva
of  Mitetui,  who  wrote  a  hiatory  of  the  foaudalion
of  bii  native  city.  The  ehancteriitie  teatnre  of  aU
the  logographeri  previoui  to  Herodotna  ia,  titM
they  lecm  to  have  aimed  more  at  amuaing  tbrir
beaten  or  readen  than  at  imparting  wicarau
hiilorical  knowle^e.  They  deioibed  in  proae  the
raylhological  atibjecta  and  traditioni  which  had
previouily  been  treated  of  by  the  epic  and  eipe-
cially  by  the  cyclic  poeta.  The  omiwioniia  the  nar-
rativM  of  their  predece«ior»  wer«  prohnbly  filled  up
by  traditioni  derived  from  other  quarter*,  in  order
to  produci,at  lent  inform,  acmlnecledhiitory.  Ia
many  caiei  they  were  mere  colleetioni  of  local  and
genialoiiiol  tfsditHHU.  iThaiwt^Hiit.ofGneia,
iL  p.  Ill',  fte. ;  Mailer,  Ilitt  ^  Ondi  JM.Lf.
306,  &c  i  Wachamnth,  Hallm.  AUailL  ii.  2.  p.
443.  Ac)

2.  To  pervna  who  wroto  jodicial  qweche*  ta
[deadinga  and  told  them  to  iIum  who  wen  in
want  of  them.  Theie  peraoos  ureni  caUad  Ae-
yrroioi  aa  well  ai  krfvfpi^oi,  Aniiphon,  As
orator,  waa  the  fint  who  practiied  tfaia  art  at
Atheni,  towajdi  the  cbva  of  the  Pelopoimaiiaii
war.  (Plut.  VH.  Deo.  Orat.  p.  S32,  ed.  Frak£ ;
AriitoL  Hht.  I  33.)  After  thii  time  the  cnitam
of  making  and  sellmg  ipeechei  bocama  very  geneia^
and  though  the  penoni  who  practiied  it  were  not
very  highly  thought  of  end  placed  ro  ■  par  with
lheHphiita(I>emofth.i£i/Vi^L9.  pp.417,  420;
Plat,  /'ioafr.  p.  2S7,  e  ;  Anaiim.  iUel,  luvL  22
and  24  ;  compare  PlaL  Eatigitm.  p.  272,  a,  389,
d,  305,  a),  yet  we  find  that  oratora  of  giiu  stent
did  not  leruple  t«  writs  apeechet  of  varioui  kindi
for  other  peraona  Thm  Lyiiai  wrote  for  otlien
nnmeroua  X^yoot  iU  ffuaurr^pid  va  nl  fievhit  iral
Trpbf  iKKKitirlai  tiiQirovf,  and  bciidei  TOfn^eft
fro^j,  iprvtKoi/t^  and  iirturoKmoitj.  (DJonyL  Hal.
Lfi.  p.  B2,  ed.  Sylborg ;  coBpaie  Meier  and  ScMb.

Att.p™.p.-,iii.)  [ua]

LOIDORIAS  DIKE  (JUiSoffan  fini)  [Ka-
Klaoai.tB  DiKi.}

LONCHB  (Air«).  [Hisra.]

LOPE  (Adri),  aUo  Ahoi,  diwu  XAnar),  tba
ancient  Greek  name  of  the  AkictDS,  wbetber
conaiiliDB  <£  the  bide  of  U  animal  or  of  dotk.
Having  ^en  into  diun  aa  a  cdloquial  or  promio
term  (Phiyn.  £U.  p.  461,*d.  Lobet^),  it  wai  i>-
tainad,  though  smployed  vsy  qiaiBgly,  by  tha
pcetL  (Horn.  fM.  liii  224  i  ApolL  lUnd.  ii  32  |
Schol,  ta  job,-  AnacreoD,  nvg.  79  t  Tbescnt.
liv.  66  i  Bnindc,  Amii.  L  230,  iL  185.)  Wa
alio  Imd  it  mained  in  AjioWnp,  Ijtmll^  am
uie  put*  on  tilt  amietat,  a  term  property  applicabla


•  o"


LORICA.
iwia  to  Btol  tlie  datbei  of  Ibe  badien  (Schol.  bi
Jlom.  L  e.),  but  lucd  Jo  ■  mofe  geneml  icnH  to
dtuMe  thiiTci  uid  bighmfiDan  of  kll  tluK*.
>'rDin  the  ume  root  wu  formed  the  Teib  ^iiAviti-
C'v,  moiniiig,  to  take  off  the  amictni,  (o  denude.
{Soph.  TVoalB.  925.)  [J.  Y.]

LOPHOS  (\i^.)- (0*iBA.l

LORA-RII. [Pliqbuu.]

LORI'CA  rft^),  a  cuinu.  Th«  iipitliet
AmMpift,  applied  la  two  light-anned  wBtrion  in
the  Iliad  (iL  629,  830  ;  SchoL  ad  inc.),  and  op-
p«rd  to  x'^'"X^'"t  the  conunon  epithet  of  the
Grecian  toldien,  indicate! the ewly  nte  of  the

lateT  tiiDa  amonf;  the  Aualic^  eapcciallr  the  Per-
abuu(XeiL(>nf).vi4.  £2  ;  P]al.Jla.p.  1S64,
cd.  Stcph.),  the  Egjptlaiu  (Herod.  iL  18S,  iii.
*7\  the  Ptaoenieiaoi  (Pana.  ti.  19.  g  i),  and  the
Chaljbc*.  (XiB.  Aiai.  it.  7.  g  IS.)  Iphicrata
cndeaToiued  to  rettore  the  nae  of  it  among  the
Oneka  (Nepoa,  IpUc.  L  4),  and  it  «>■  eccaiion-
all^  adopted  hj  the  Romani,  Choagh  conaidend  a
miKlt  leaa  effectDal  defence  iban  a  cuitaa  of  metoL
(Soeton.  Galba,  IS  ;  Airian,  Tad.  p.  U,  ed.
Btaocaidi.)

A  niaeh  itron^  mnterinl  fai  cnirauei  wu  ham,
which  wia  applied  to  thia  ok  more  eipeciallj  bj
the  Sannatae  and  Qiudi,  being  cnE  itito  small
piecea,  which  wers  planed  and  poliihed  and  fiu-
tened,  like  fealhen,  upon  linen  ihirta.  (Amnt.
HamlL  irii.  12.  ed.  Werner.)  Uoofi  wen  em-
ptojed  (or  the  Kuoe  purpoae.  Panaatiiaa  (i.  21.
I  S)  having  made  meniion  of  a  tbom  preaerted
in  the  temple  of  Aeaculapini  at  Atheni,  gire)  the
fcUoving  aeeonnt  of  the  Sannatiani :  —  HaTing
Taat  lieida  of  honea,  which  thoj  iometimea  kill
ftr  Cud  or  fiit  nvifice,  they  collect  their  hoaft,
lliMiiaii  and  diride  them,  and  ihape  them  like  the
•calsa  of  a  KiptBit  (^Uvu') ;  thej  then  bora  them
■id  lew  Ihem  logelher,  aa  that  the  tcalea  oTeriap
am  anotho-,  and  in  getictal  appeaiaoce  the/  re-
aembla  the  aaibca  of  a  green  fir-cone.  Thia  aathor
•dda,  that  the  toriate  imda  of  theae  homj  icdea
■»  moch  more  ttiang  and  impenetrable  than
linen  rniriiafa.  which  are  naeful  to  hunten,  bnt
Bot  adapted  for  fighting.  The  annexed  weodcnt,
taken  from  Hejiick'a  Ctitical  Inquiry  into  Ancient
AnDooi  (plate  Iii.)  exhibita  an  Atiatic  cuiiaai  ex-
aalj  eotTCtponding  to  thia  detcrption.  It  conuala
of  alien  of  aoma  animal'*  hoof^  which  are  atitched
togitticr,  OTorlapfiiiig  each  other  in  perpendieolar


LORICA.


711


The  piojection  neaieat  the  middle  i


IT  gar-


■uppoied  Co  hare  been  worn  orer  the  bicait,  and
the  other  orer  the  back,  go  aa  to  leave  two  lacant
■pacei  for  the  amu.

Thii  uiventioii  no  doubt  preceded  the  metnllia
icale  annour.  The  Rhoxokni,  a  trihe  allied  to
the  Sannatiani,  defended  ihemHlres  by  wearing  a
dreu  conaiating  of  thin  pUtei  of  iron  and  herd
leather.  (Tacit  Ilitl.  L  79.)  The  Peniani  wore  a
tonic  of  the  oame  deacription,  the  icaJei  being
tometimei  of  gold  (Herod,  vii.  61  i  ^HfntKii  xpv-
•rior  KmSirTiv,  ix.  22)  ;  hot  they  were  commonly
of  bronii]  (fjonnu  imiiif u  acsu  (fwunu,  Virg.  A  m,
li.  4B;).  The  hosia  of  the  cuirau  waa  eametimea
a  akin,  or  a  piece  of  atrong  linen  to  which  the
njelollic  icalei,  or  ^feathera,"  aa  they  ore  also
called,  wen.  lewed.  (ViiB-  Aai.  li.  770  j  Serr.
in  tot  ;  Juslb,  ilL  2.  10.)

The  epithet  Xtriisrris,  aa  applied  to  a  thorax,
ia  oppoacd  to  the  epithet  ^hiBomlt.  (Arrion,
Tad.  p.  13,  14.)  The  former  deaotea  a  uiailituda
to  the  iralca  of  fiah  (fceirleiy),  the  latter  to  lbs
scalcB  of  aeipcnta  (^Alo'ir),  The  leiemblance  b>
the  Kslca  of  eerpenla,  which  aie  long  and  narrow,
ii  exhibited  on  ihe  ahonlden  of  the  Roman  loldier
m  the  woodcut  at  page  136.  Theu  ecales  wen
imilBled  by  long  flexible  bands  of  tteel,  made  to
Ibid  one  oiei  another  awording  to  tho  contraction
of  the  body.  They  appear  very  frequently  on  the
Roman  tnonDmenla  of  the  tunea  of  the  emperon,
and  the  foUowing  wooden  phices  in  immediate
contraaE  a  biipai  ktwiHarrit  on  the  right  and
4«\itvrdi  on  the  left,  both  taken  liom  Barloli'i
I  JVianiphala.


The  Boman  haatati  won  cninaiea  of  ch
{.  A  hauberka  or  habeiseons  (ixvo-ilirroit  Mpo-
aai,  Polyh.  n.  21  ;  Alhen.  T.  22  g  Arrian,  L  c).
ViipX  several  time*  mentiont  banberka  m  which
At  rings,  linked  or  hooked  into  one  anotbor,  were
of  gold  (foricam  eoMrrftun  tamii,  aurofai  Irilutm,
Virg.>ea.  iii.  467,  T.S59,  vii.  fiS9).

In  contradietinciion  to  the  flexible  cniiaoaes,  or
coals  of  mnil,  which  have  new  been  described,  that
commonly  worn  by  the  Oieeks  and  Romana,  mon
eapecially  in  the  earlier  age*,  was  called  Itifoi
irriSios,  or  rurJi,  betsnacv  when  placed  upon  tho
on  ilflower  edge,  it  atood  erert.  In  con-
finnneM  it  wai  erm  naed  a>  a  Ktt
to  "real  upon.  (Paua.  x  27,  ga.)  It  consirt«d
principally  of  the  two  yia\a,  lic  the  breatt-pUte
\pedoraU)  made  af  hard  leather  or  of  bronae,  iron,
or  •ometimec  the  more  precious  nwtala,  which
coTend  the  breast  and  abdomen  (Horn.  /L  t.  9B,
xiiL  607,  £87,  iviL  3U) ;  and  af  Ibe  ctneapiHid-


ground  or


ing  pble  which  eoracd  the  hack.  (Puu.  i.  2S.  S  ;  earci  in  the  i«pn««itat'H>ii  of  tlinn  in  the  wood-
Ham.  IL  IT.  £30.)  fiolh  of  thcM  pi««  were  call  nt  pogn  135,  196.  The  two  figom  bae
adapted  to  the  laim  of  the  bodjr,  u  aaj  be  per-  j  burodaced  ue  duigned  la  ihow  th« tunal  &■


fn«ncs  of  Girni  and  sppeanncc  between  tha  an-
tique Oreek  thorn  and  that  worn  hj  the  Roman
emperon  and  genuilL  The  righthaDd  figure
ii  from  DDe  of  Mr.  Hope*!  lictile  lua  (Ooituiaa
of  tie  Aadenit,  L  102),  and  bora  a  ytrj  Kroog
naernhlanca  to  a  Greek  wuTuw  painted  on  one  ^
Sir  W.  Hamilton-*  (L  4).  The  iigiirs  on  tbe  left
hand  ii  taken  kwn  a  marbte  italae  of  Caligula
found  at  Qahii.  (Viwmti,  JVoa.  Gab.  No.  38.)
Tbc  gDrgDn*!  head  orer  the  brcait,and  the  two
griihn*  undemcalh  it,  illuitcate  Ae  tlyle  of  oma-
nieot  whii:h  wu  conunon  in  Uie  ume  ciimm-
■tiuicet, (Mart.  Tii.  1.  1—4.)  [Amoig.] Tbeei-

eip^ciatlr  the  wmk  of  the  Corinthiang.  (Cic  Ilnr.
n.  tl.)

T.ie  two  platei  were  onited  on  the  right  aide  of
the  body  by  two  hingea,  ai  aeen  in  the  equettriaa
ataue  of  (he  joungei  Balbui  at  Napla,  and  in
Tsnoui  poitiont  of  bTDnie  euiiaua  ilill  in  ti-
iitence.  On  the  other  aide,  and  sometimei  on
both  lidei,  they  were  iutened  hj  mfWK  of  buckle!
(«p<i«u,  Paua.  L  «.).  [FiBiiLi.]  In  Roman
■tBiuea  we  often  obierre  a  band  loiTODDding  the
waitt  and  tied  before^  The  breaat-plate  and  the
backplata  wen  farther  connected  logethei  by
lealhem  itiapa  paaaing  orer  the  ahoulden,  and  bit-
ened  in  &ont  bj  nieaav  of  bottom  ta  of  ribaada
tied  ia  a  bow.  la  the  lait  woodcut  both  of  the
connecting  ribandi  in  the  righl-IwBd  figure  are
tied  to  a  ring  orer  the  nareL  The  breait-plate  of
Caligula  boa  a  ring  orer  each  braat,  doigoed  to
fulfil  Iha  aame  pnrpoaH.

Bandi  of  metal  often  lupplied  the  place  of  the
Inlhem  atrafia,  or  elie  eoTerod  them  *o  aa  to  be-
come lerj  ornamental,  being  terminaled  by  a  tioD'i
head,  or  lome  other  nitaoie  figure  ai^iearing  on


each  tide  of  the  breait.  The  matt  beantlfnl  tpa-
cimen*  of  enriched  bronie  shoulder-banda  now  in
elijtence  are  thou  which  were  fbnod  A*  H.  1830,
near  the  river  Sirii  in  S.  Italy,  and  which  are  pt»-
•erred  in  the  Briiiih  Muieom.  They  wen  origia-
ally  silt,  and  repment  in  t^  nlieut  relief  two
Grecian  heneg  combating  two  Amaioni.  Tbey  an
•errn  iochei  in  length,  and  belong  to  the  deaoip-
tion  of  hnmus  <^led  tpja  r^vp^iXmra^  having  bcea
beaten  into  form  with  wonderfnl  tkill  by  the  hsm-
mer,  Bitnidtted  (Brous  ifSirit,  London,  IS3G)
hai  illuitrated  the  putpoM  which  they  aerred,  bj
■bowing  them  in  connecticm  with  a  portion  of  an-
other loricB,  which  lay  upon  the  ibcnilderB  behml
the  neck.  Thii  fragment  waa  finnd  in  Oraeca.
Ill  bingeg  are  nifScientiy  pnaerred  to  ibow  moat
diitinclTy  the  manner  in  which  the  ibODlder-baada


**  Around  the  lowec  ejge  of  tba  coinM,**  ob-
aerre*  Brijadited,  "  were  attached  (tnfa,  fcur  ar
tn  inche*  loi^  of  Iralbet,  or  psba^  ol  Ut,  aad


nnred  with  BUill  plat«  of  mctil.  Tbeu  Htapt
Kned  in  piut  foe  omunent,  asd  panly  iil»  to  pro-
tect the  loirer  n^on  of  the  body  in  concert  with
Iht  belt  {ifirri)  and  the  basd  {j^^fa).  Ttasy  an
well  •hovn  in  ths  preceding  figare  of  Ctlieula.

luUad  of  the  fotft  bete  deiaibed,  wbich  the
GtccIu  called  nifvyts  (Xeo.  do  A<  flprK.  xiL
4),  the  Chalfbea,  who  vne  enconntered  by  Xano-
pbin  (O  hi)  letnat  Uaoi.  it.  7.  §  Ifi),  had  in  tha
mne  nlnUiiin  a  kind  of  cordage.  Appendage*  a!
a  jimHr  kind  vera  tametimea  &ctened  by  bingea
la  the  kiica  at  tha  right  ihonlder,  for  the  ptupOM
of  ptotecting  iIib  part  of  tha  body  which  waa  ex-
poard  by  lifting  np  the  arm  in  throwing  the  ipeai
ornuDg  tbeaword. (Xen.  d«  A(  £fiMt(.  iii.6.)

Of  Gredan  euiraatea  the  Attic  vers  acconntad
tlie  be«  and  moat  beantifoL  (Aelian,  V.  H.  iii.
24).  The  cnitaai  waa  worn  nniTenalJy  by  the
hcBTy-aniKd  in&ntiy  and  bj  the  honamen,  ei-
eept  thai  Alaiandei  the  Onat  gare  ' ''^


decRU*  their  pmpeniity  to  flight.  (Polyaen.
iT.  3.  13.)  Tbne  van  called  half-cuirauei  (^uBm.
^■iiRB).  The  tiiDTBi  waa  aoawtimea  bond  to  bo
nnrenreaHTa  and  cumbenoma. (Tac.  Am.  I

64.)  [j-y.]

LORI'CA,  LORICATIO,  in  anbitectora.
[HnBua ;  Tktouum  Ofus.]

LOUTRON  (Kunpir). [Bilnub.]

LUCAR. [UiiiTBio,p.61S,a.]

LU'CERES. [Pmicit.]

LUCERNA(Ux<vi),ai>oUlalDp.  The.Oreeki
and  fionana  originally  naed  omdlca  ;  bat  in  later
timra  caudle*  vere  chiefly  eanfined  to  the  hooiea
of  the  iover  cluaea.  {Candila-J  A  great
mmbei  of  aucjent  lamp*  baa  come  down  to  lu ;
the  greater  part  of  vbich  are  made  of  lem  cotta
(Tfoxi^f^  Arialoph.  EecL  1),  bat  alto  a  con-
wiermbla  anmber  of  broiue.  Moat  of  the  lamp*
are  of  an  oral  form,  and  &Bt  apon  the  top,  on  vhich
tltae  are  iieqnenlly  fignrea  in  rolitil  (See  the
woodcnta,  pp.  143,  395,  461.)  In  the  lompa  there
are  coe  or  more  round  bole*  according  to  the  nnm-
bet  of  vicki  (tl^/daia)  burnt  in  it ;  and  ai  theie
bolea  verB  called  froia  an  obTioni  analogy,  fui-
aiiyn  or  I'if^',  litenlly  noitrilj  or  nonle*,  the
lamp  vaa  ako  oUled  MonomjooM,  Dimfiot,  TYi-
■jaiia,  or  Ptlgmfiioi,  according  as  it  conlained
ooe,  tvo,  three,  or  a  greater  namber  of  noulea  or
bolea  for  the  vick*.  The  following  example  of  a
^wH  buuna,  apon  which  there  i*  a  winged  boy
vita  a  gooae,  ii  taken  bant  tha  Miato  Bortatieo,
ToL  W.  pL  14.


Tlte  next  woodcnt,  taken  from  tbe  Bune  vark
{nL  i.  pL  10),  repnenl*  one  of  the  moat  beaalifnl
braiae  Eantp*  which  haa  yet  been  fbond.  Upon  it
i*  the  figare  of  a  ■'■"^■"ij  Sileou*.


(Viig.
726  ;  Petron.  30),
but  generally  itood  upon  a

■tand. [CaNDILABBDH.]

Sometime*  a  figure  hold*
the  lamp,  a*  in  the  an-
neied  woodcnt  (Afuao
Borion.  vol  (ii.  pL  Ifi),
which  al*o  eihibit*  tha
needle  or  initranient  which
0  trim  the  wick,
attached  to  tha
^nre  by  meau  of  a  chun.
(Comp.  Virg.  MartL  1].
"  £t  produdl  oat  atapaa
homore  careutea.")

We  read  of  teoiriHM  «-
biaUarti,  iabuaru,  bic/i-
niam,Kp<ilcTiiltt,&Ci  but

, name* vere only

I  (0  the  lamp*  on  ac-

I  of  the  purpoH  to  which  they  vere  applied,

lot  oa  acconQt  of  a  diifcrence  in  ah^ie.  Tba
laeeniat  atiailara  were  hunit  in  bed-cbambera
all  night (Mart.  lir.  3U,  i.  36.)

Perfiuned  oil  waa  aometimea  burnt  in  the  lampa^
(Petnn.  70 ;  Mart  z.  36.  9.)

(Paaieri,  Luetrwufietiia;  BUttiger  Dit  Sileimr-
lampm,  Anmlth.  toL  iiL  p.  166,  &c ;  Becker,
CbmUsi,  roL  ii.  Ik  215,  ftc,  (hUut,  vol  ii.  p,
2Dl,&e.)

LUCTA,  LUCTATIO  (wi\^  kUioutm,
waAaiir/uirfcTi,  or  nirfaiXiiTOt^),  wreatling.  The
word  wiUi)  ig  aometitne*  naed  in  a  wider  aenie,
embiBcing  all  gjmnaatic  eietidaea  with  the  excep-
tion of  dancing,  whence  the  achools  of  tha  athletae
were  called  palaeilnui,  that  ia,  achoola  in  vhich
the  nbi)  in  ila  wideat  lenje  waa  tanghb  (Plat  lU
Itg.  TiL  p.  79fi  J  Herod,  ijt  33.)  [PutisTBi.]
There  are  alao  many  posaag^  in  ancient  writera  in
which  irdAif  and  TaAaltiv  are  uacd  to  deeignate
any  oarticalar  apeciea  of  atbletio  game*  beaide*
wreaUiDgjoracombinaliou  of  federal  game*.  (See
Kmue,  p.  400.  note  2.)

The  Oreeka  aacribed  tha  inTsntion  of  wieitling
to  mythical  peraonogei,  loch  a*  Palaettta,  the
danghter  of  Hennea  (Apolhid.  ii.  4.  §  9),  Antaeua
and  Cercyon  (Plat  dt  Lrg.  fii.  -p.  796),  Phorba*
of  Athena,  or  TheaeiUL  (SchoL  ad  Fad.  Nem.  r.
49.) ilennea,  the  god  of  ail  gymnaitic  eiarGi«B%


7U  LUCTA.

alu  preiided  orer  Ibe  iriAn.  Thi>)i
Panwniai  (i.  39.  §  3)  to  have  bfea
reduced  the  eanie  of  wrestling  to
mi  to  tuTB  thiu  raiud  it  to  the  dl


whicb  bodily  iL


ide  fight,  in
nd  itrength  bIqiis  decided  the
t  ceiebiBled  ¥ireitkr  in  the
iscleo.  In  the  Hotneric  age
wnatliitg  wu  macli  pnctlied,  and  a  beautiful  de-
amptiim  of  a  wmtling  match  ii  giren  in  the  Iliad
(ixlli.  710,  &c  ;  compua  Od.  tin.  103,  126,346  ;
Heiiod,  Scat.  Hen.  302,  when  ftdxtir  iAn^iir
■ignifiet  the  irdAi)).  During  thia  period  wiestlen
contended  naked,  with  the  exception  of  the  loini,
which  were  coirerad  with  the  ripliuya  (!/.  niii.
700),  uid  this  euitom  remained  throughout  QiHce
until  OL  1 6,  &om  which  time  the  periioma  wu  no
longer  uied,  and  wrettlen  fought  entirely  naked.
(Thucyd.  i.  6,  with  the  Schol. ;  Paui.  L  H.  g  I ;
DionyLTii.  72.)  In  the  Homeric  age  tbecuilom  of
anointing  the  body  for  the  purpoeeof  wreitling  di>e9
not  appear  to  have  been  known,  but  in  the  lime  of
Solon  it  WBi  qaite  geneial,  and  wui  >aid  to  have
been  adopted  by  the  Cretan!  and  Ivtcedsononiant
at  a  vety  early  period.  (Thaeyd.  I.  a. ;  Plat.  d<  R»
PiU.  t.  p.  4S2.)  After  the  body  was  anointed,  it
wsi  itrewed  over  with  luid  or  dust,  hi  order  to
eoabte  the  wreatlera  (o  take  a  firm  hold  of  each
other.  At  the  feitlTal  of  the  9lhenia  in  Arffai  the
wiUT|wai««oinpanied  byflutfrjniuic.  [Stuhni*.]
When  two  athletae  began  their  eonteat,  each
might  use  a  mriety  of  meaua  to  leiEo  hia  antagonist
in  the  moat  adTanCageoua  manner,  and  to  throw
him  down  withoat 'expoaing  hinuelf  (Ovid.  Met.
ii.  3S,  &c  ;  Stat  7^6.  vi  8S1,  &c  ;  Heliodor.
AetAiop.  t  p.  235)  ;  but  one  of  the  great  object*
waa  to  make  everr  attack  with  elegance  and
beauty,  and  the  fight  wh  (or  thia  as  well  as  for
other  purposes  regulated  by  certain  law*.  (PlaL  ifi
Leg.  Tiii.  p.  834  ;  Cic.  OrmL  6S  ;  Lttcian,  Aiaili.
24  ;  Aelian.  F.  H.  li.  1.)  Striking,  for  initanee,
wai  not  allowed,  but  puihuig  an  antagonist  back-
ward {Uariiit)  was  freqoenily  rewirted  to.  (Pint.
Sjfmp.  iL  S ;  Lucian,  AnaiA.  1.  34.)  It  i*  pro-
bably on  aecatuit  of  the  laws  by  which  this  game
was  regulated,  and  the  great  art  which  it  la-
qaired  in  onseqnenee,  that  Plutarch  ISymp.  iL  4)
culU  it  the  TexyiKArnroy  Ktd  rarovpyirarev  rdj*
iSKiuiirur.  But  notwithatanding  theie  laws,
wreetlinit  admitted  of  greater  cunning  and  more
tricks  and  atratagemi  than  any  other  game,  with
the  exceptioTi  of  the  pancratiuni  (Xen.  Cymp,  \,  6.
g  33)  I  and  the  Greeks  had  a  great  many  technical
terms  to  eTpnas  the  rariona  stratagems,  peattiops,
and  attitudes  in  which  wreatlera  might  be  placed.
Numerous  acenea  of  wrestlers  are  represented  on
ancient  work*  of  art (Krauee,  p.  412,  At  j  tea

The  contest  in  wrestling  was  divided  by  the  an-
cients into  two  pans,  m.  the  vciAii  ifOif  or  iptia
{i(ii09Tityiv  waAojeiv),  that  is,  the  fight  of  the
athletae  as  loni;  as  they  stood  upright,  and  the
&Aliit))trif  or  Ki\uni  (iwfa  M/afiUorvi),  in  which
the  athletae  struggled  with  each  other  whits  lying
en  the  ground.  Unless  they  cuitrired  to  liso  again,
the  htSrtriait  was  the  last  stage  of  the  contest,
which  continued  until  one  of  them  acknowledged
himself  to  be  conquered.  The  »-{U?i  o/j##  appears
to  have  been  the  only  one  which  was  fought  in  the
times  of  Homer,  as  well  as  afterwarda  in  the  gr^t
■uUienal  games  irf  the  Qneks ;  and  ■■  aoon  as  one


LUDI.  ,

athlete  feU,  the  other  allowad  him  to  rise  and  am-
tinne  the  conteat  if  he  aUU  felt  inclined.  (Plat  d*
Le^.  vii.  p.  796 ;  Com.  Ncp.  Epaa^  2 ;  Ladaa,
ZartpA.  S.)  But  if  the  satne  athlete  lel]  thrice,  the
victory  was  decided,  and  be  was  not  allowed  to  go
on.  (Senea  dt  Btn^,  T.  3  ;  Aeacbyl.  Agam.  171  ;
AMkoL  Gr.  vol.  iL  p.  40«,  ed.  Jacobs.)  The
&Airh|o-u  was  only  fbnght  in  later  times,  at  ^»
smaller  games,  and  especially  in  lbs  paDctatinin.
The  place,  when  the  wrestlers  contended,  was  gs-
noaliy  soft  ground,  and  covered  with  Muid.  (Sea
Anak.  iv.  S.  §  2S I  Lncian,  Aaadt.  2.)  Efieminala
petuna  sometime*  ajHead  large  and  magnificent
carpeta  on  the  place  where  they  wrvatled.  (AtheiL
lii.  p.  £39,)  Kach  of  the  various  tribes  at  ii—
Greeks  aeem  to  have  shown  its  peculiai  and  na-
tional character  in  the  game  of  wtHlUng  in  sodm
particular  trick  or  stratagem,  by  which  it  excelled
the  other*.

In  a  diaetelic  pomt  of  view  the  JAbftt*u  was
considered  beneficial  to  the  interior  puts  of  the
body,  the  loins,  and  the  lowac  parts  fai  genecal,
but  injurioua  to  the  head  ;  whereas  the  wiAif  tf^
waa  believed  to  act  benefioallj  opoa  tba  a^iei:
parts  of  the  body.  It  was  owing  ta  these  salMaiy
effects  that  wrestling  was  pnctised  in  all  the  gyn-
nasia  ai  well  as  in  the  palaestrae,  and  that  in  OL
S7  vrrestling  for  boys  whs  introdileed  at  tb*
Olympio  games,  and  soon  afbei  in  tb«  othel
great  games,  and  at  Athena  In  the  Elemniia*  aod
Thesea  also.  (Pans.  v.  B.  g  3,  iU.  11.  g  6  ;  Find.
Ot  viii.  68  ;  GelL  iv,  20  j  Plut  Syn^.  iL  i)  Tba
most  renowned  of  all  the  Greek  wmtleis  in  the
histmcal  age  waa  Milon  of  Croton,  wboao  nam*
was  known  throngfaout  the  andent  wetld.  <H«nid.
uL  1S7  ;  Sirab.  -n.  p.  2fi3,  Ac. ;  Diadtr.  xiL  9.)
Other  dittingniihed  wiestlen  are  (tmmecaud  \j
Krauae  (p.  135,  Ac),  who  baa  also  prtfi  •  Tvy
minute  Bceonnt  of  the  game  of  wrestling  aad  •foy
thing  connected  with  it,  in  hia  OfwaattSi  mrf  Agem.
d.  Hdl.  pp.  400—439.  [U  8.]

LUDI  ialhecommon  name  fortbewbolen  '
of  theatrical  exhibltiooa,  game
were  held  at  Home  on  vnriona  occaaloos,  bnt  ^Maj
at  the  festival  of  the  gods  ;  and  as  the  ludi  at  cer-
tain leitivata  formed  the  principal  part  of  llie  ao-
lemnities,  these  featiTala  themaelvea  are  called  IndL
Semetimea,  however,  ludi  were  alao  held  in  honmr
of  a  magiitrale  or  of  a  deceased  persoo,  and  in  tbis
idered  ae  ludi  privwi.


<b^^


ue  the  game*  '
hongh  all  the  [


classes,  vis.  btdi  dreaua  md  ttii  tenia  (Cic  its
Leg.  iL  1 6),  aceoidingly  as  tbey  were  beld  m  tbe
circa*  or  in  the  tbeatie ;  in  the  lattM  cue  tbey
were  mostly  theatrical  repraaenlatioos  with  tbnr
mriou*  modifications  g  in  the  fbnier  tbey  eonsiated
of  oil  or  of  a  part  of  the  games  ennmoated  in  the
articles  Cincus  and  OLiDiAroaU.  Amlhrr  di-
vision of  the  ludi  uito  (tttfi,  imperatni,  and  kuVf',
was  nude  only  with  regard  to  religions  ftstivali,
and  is  analogons  to  the  divisioo  of  the  feiiae.
[Fmia«.]

The  anperintendenee  of  the  gunet  and  the  ai^
temnities  connected  with  then  was  in  most  casta
intrusted  to  the  aedilea.  tAlDU-m.]  If  the  law-
ful rites  irere  not  observed  in  the  celebntion  of  tba
tadi,  it  dnwnded  upon  the  decision  of  the  pontic
whether  they  were  Id  be  held  again  (taMnmn)  or
not.  An  alpbabetieal  list  of  tLe  prirtdpal  Indi  ia
subjoined.  [I^S']


LUDI  CAPITOUNI.
LUDI  AP0LL1NA11ES  wen  imlitaled  at
Hmm  during  the  teeond  Punic  war,  tbur  jwi  iflcr
the  built  of  CwuM  (B.C  212),  U  the  cgminai^of
«a  ancle  amtBined  in  tie  booki  of  the  uicicnt
KU  Ulrciu  (arniHH  Maraama,  Liv.IIT.  13  ;
Mienb-AK-l  17).  ItWBiiUtadbfUDieaf  the
■Dcient  uDilini  UibC  thse  ludi  «era  iiiililut«d  for
the  puipoae  of  Dblaining  from  Apollo  the  pnteetion
of  hBtBU  life  dniiflg  the  hottest  ■euon  of  iimuner  ;
but  Livy  and  Hactobiui  adopt  the  ■cconnt  feiuded
UDOB  the  mott  aathentic  docummt,  the  earmiiia
iaoa  themielTea,  that  the  Apollinarian  j(iun«
inHitated  pvttj  to  obtain  tna  aid  of  Apollo
ut  expdling  the  CortJiaffiDiana  fivm  Itaij,  and
partlj  to  preeerre,  through  the  broor  of  the  god,
Ibe  rqnibtie  fram  all  '  *"'  - -  •


I  ihould  peribnn  the  lacrificei  accord'
lag  to  Gnek  ritai.  The  Mnnte  inmpljHng  with
the  adriea  of  the  omcle  made  two  KnatuKon-
nlla ;  one  that,  at  the  end  of  the  game*,  the
pnctor  ahould  receive  12,000  oisca  to  be  expended
CO  the  Kdenmitiea  and  tacrificea,  and  ano^r  that
the  ten  men  ibontd  tacrifice  to  Apollo,  according  to
Onek  ritea,  a  hull  with  gilt  bomi  and  two  while
goata  alao  with  gilt  homi,  and  to  T^tnn^  a  heifer
with  giJt  homi.  The  gamea  tbenudvei  were  held
in  Iha  Cimu  Uaiimai,  the  apectaton  weie  adorned
wiib  chapleta,  and  each  dtiien  gaie  a  Mmtiibntion
lowmrda  deftajing  the  eipeDaea.  (Featot,  •.  v.
J/nUiaara,)  The  Roman  matnna  perfiinned  mp>
plicaliooa,  the  peopJe  took  their  meala  in  the  pni-
ft"^™'  with  open  doon,  ajid  the  whole  day-
tor  the  f«ti*al  luted  only  one  day  —  waa  filled  np
with  coeiaaniea  and  Tanoiu  other  ritea.  At  thia
bat  cafebcatinn  of  the  ludi  Apollinarea  no  decree
waa  mada  napecting  the  aonuai  repetition  ing-
gnlad  by  the  oiacle,  ao  that  in  the  6nt  year  they
wen  aimply  ludi  lotiTi  or  indiclili.  Tho  year
afttrr  (B.C  211)  thc>ei>te,«i  the  praponlofthe
innsr  Calpumio*,  decreed  that  they  ihoald  be  ra-
peated,  and  duu  in  fiiMire  they  ihould  be  lowed
aiieah  CTeiy  yt«r.  (Liv.  xxtL  23.)  The  day  ea
which  Ihey  weM  held  varied  every  year  according

208),  wlvn  Rome  and  iti  Tidnity  were  TiiiEed  bj
a  i^agae,  Uie  praetor  uibanoa^  P.  Licinina  Varna,
biuDght  a  bill  before  the  people  to  ordaia  that  the
Apdlinatiao  gamea  ihonld  in  future  alwayi  be
Towed  and  held  on  a  ecftoin  day  (rftu  itatut),  via.
■a  llw  fllh  of  July,  vhich  day  henceforiraid  is-
mined  a  dka  lolaDnla.  <Li?.  urii,  23.)  The
gasM*  thca  becaoM  rolivi  et  ttativi,  and  continued
to  ba  condacted  by  the  praetor  nrbanua.  (Cie.
/'U.ii.13.)  But  during  the  empire  the  da;  of  thete
aolennitiea  appenn  again  to  lui<e  been  changed,
for  Juliua  C^itolinui  (jtf<u».  «t  BalbiM.  1 1)  at-
aigna  tbem  la  the  26lh  of  May.  [  L.  S.]

LUDI  AUGUSTAT-ES.  [Adoii»tjlis.]
LUUI  CAPlTOLl'Nl  were  said  to  have  been
fautitaicd  by  the  aenate,  on  the  ptopoaal  of  the
dictator  VL  Fariui  Camilliu,  in  the  year  b.c  387,
after  tk*  departure  of  the  Gaub  from  Rome,  aa  a
lohcB  of  gnlitude  lowardi  Jupiter  Capitolintu,
who  had  aared  tbs  Capitol  in  the  hour  of  danger.
The  decree  of  (he  aenate  at  the  lame  time  intruited
tbe  aoperintendeDce  and  managemeat  of  the  Capi-
tolbw  gamaa  to  a  college  of  piieili  to  be  choaen  by
the  dictator  fnm  among  ihoae  who  reiided  on  the
CafitolsHlin  tlieeitadBl  (n  one),  which  sui  only


LUDI  FUNEBRES.  71B

mean  that  they  wen  to  be  patriciani.  (Ut.  t.  BO,
32.)  These  prieita  were  called  Cqiitolinl  (Cie.
ad  QmL  FrvL  a.  S.)  One  of  the  amuementi  at
the  Capitoline  gamei,  a  aolemntty  which  wei  ob-
ierred  a>  late  aa  tbe  time  of  Platareb,  waa  that  a
bcmld  ofiered  tbe  Sardiani  for  public  lale,  and
that  (ome  old  man  waa  led  about,  who,  ui  order  to
produce  laughter,  wore  a  toga  piaetexta,  and  B
bulla  puerilia  which  hung  down  &om  hia  neck.
(Pint.  Qaaal.  Rom.  p.  277  ;  Feat-  t.  v.  Sardi
tno/ev,  dec)  According  to  lome  of  the  anctenta
thii  ceremony  woi  intended  to  ridicule  the  Veien-
tinea,  who  were  subdued,  after  long  wan  with
Home,  and  nnmben  of  whom  vers  loid  ai  ilaTet,
while  their  king,  repreaented  by  tbe  old  man  with
tbe  bulla  (nch  woi  laid  to  have  been  the  coalume
of  the  Etmican  kinga),  woi  led  through  the  city
aa  an  object  of  ridicule.

Tbe  Veientinea,  it  ia  further  aaid,  were  deeig-
naled  by  tha  name  Saidiani  or  Sardi,  becauae  they
were  believed  to  have  come  from  Lydia,  the  capital
of  which  WDB  Sardei.  Thij  ipecimen  of  ancient  ety-
mology, however,  ia  oppoaed  by  another  interpretation
of  the  origin  of  the  ceremony  given  by  SinniniCapito.
According  to  thii  author,  the  mune  Sardiani  or
Sardi  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  Veientinea,  but
referred  to  tbe  inhahitanti  of  Sardinia.  Vfhen
their  ialond  wai  lubdued  by  the  Boraani  in  B.  c
238,  no  ipoila  were  found,  but  a  great  number  of
Sardiniana  were  brought  to  Rome  and  aold  aa
ilavca,  and  these  proved  to  be  alavet  of  the  worat
kind.  (PeiL  Le.;  Aurel.  Vict,  d*  Fir.  IU%ar.
e.er.)  Hence  onne  the  proverb,  SonJi  eno/n  ;
aUia  alio  nqnor  (Cie.  ad  Fam.  vii.  24),  and  hence
alu  tha  eenmony  at  the  Capitoline  gamea.  At
what  time  or  at  what  iutarvoli  theae  Indi  were
celebrated  ii  not  mentioned.  During  the  time  of
the  empire  they  teem  to  have  &llen  into  oblivion,
but  Ihej  were  reatored  by  Domilian,  and  were
henceforth  celebrated  every  fifth  year  under  tho
name  of  agonei  Capitoliiu.  {See  Jeo.  Scaliger,
AatoH.  Ltd.  I  10.)  [LS.]

LUDI  CIRCENSE3  ROMA-NI  or  MAONI,
wore  eelebisted  every  year  during  ieveral  daya,
&om  the  fourth  to  tbe  twelfth  of  September,  in
honour  of  the  three  great  divinitiea,  Jupiter,  Juno,
and  Minerva  (Cie  c.  I'lrr.  v.  14),  or  according  to
othen,  in  honour  of  JO[Htar,  Conaoa,  and  Neptuuua
Equeitiiai  They  were  nperinlended  by  the  curul*
aedilea.  For  mrther  particulna  ne  Ciacos,  p.
286,  &e.  [L.8.]

LUDI  COMPITALI'CII. {CoicmiLii.]

LUDI  FLORA'LES. [FtoRAUA.!

LUDI  FUNEBRES  were  gamee  celebrated  at
the  funeral  pyre  of  illuitrioua  peraona.  Such  gamea
are  mentioned  in  tbe  very  early  legendi  of  tbe
hialory  of  Greece  and  Rone,  and  they  contioned
with  vationa  modificatione  until  the  introduction  of
ChriMianity.  It  waa  at  auch  a  ludna  funebris  that
in  the  year  B.  c  264  giadialorial  fight!  were  ex-
hibited at  Rome  for  the  first  ^me,  which  hence-
fiirward  icmained  the  moat  eaiential  part  in  all
Indi  fonebrei.  [GLaDiATOUR,  p.  £74,  a.j  The
duration  of  theae  garnet  varied  according  to  eir-
eumatancta.  They  laated  aometimea  for  three  and
•ometimet  for  four  dayi,  though  it  may  be  snppoeed
that  in  the  majority  of  caaet  they  did  not  laai  more
than  one  day.  On  one  occuion  ISO  gladiatoia
(bnghc  in  tbe  ceutae  of  three  daya,  arul  the  whole


71S  LUDI  PLEBEIL

60,  mil.  t6  ;  Plin.  H.ff.  xnr,  7.) It  m

tbonght  diggracefal  for  women  to  be  pment  st
tbcu  iiiBom,  and  Pnblinj  S^mproniiu  wpaisted
hinnelf  from  hig  wifebecKUO  «he  hud  been  prwenl
without  hii  knowledge  at  Indi  funebtn.  <Pli]L
Qiucit.  Rim.  p.  267,  B  ;  Vol.  Mu.  ri.  3.  §  12  j
compan  Suet.  Aug.  41.}  The*e  ludi,  ihongb  <xi
■oma  ouaaioni  tlie  whole  people  took  port  ill  them,
wera  not  lodi  poblid,  properly  apenkine,  m  thej
were  giien  b;  private  indiridnaU  in  dodoui  of
their  relatiou  or  fiiendi. Compere  Fimva,  p.

sea.  [ua]

LUDI  HONORA'RIItMej^eiJrmentioaed
only  by  Saetoniui  lAug.  33),  who  itatc*  tlwt
Angnitiu  deToted  thirty  dayi,  which  hod  been
occupied  till  that  time  by  ludi  hononhi,  to  tbe
tnoHclion  of  legal  bunncH.  What  i>  meant  by
ladi  hoDomiii,  ii  mit  quite  certiua.  Accoiding  to
FeMni  (i.  D.  Himorarioi  ladoi)  ihey  were  the  nme
ai  the  Libecalia.  Scaliger,  however,  in  hi)  note
on  Suetonioi,  bai  made  it  appear  very  probable
that  they  wen  the  uune  aa  thoie  which  TeituUian
{Da  SpM.  c.  31)  layi  were  given  for  the  purpoM
of  gfliamg  hoDonit  and  popularity,  in  contradia-
tinction  to  other  ludi  which  were  intended  either
aa  an  honour  to  the  goda,  or  aa  dtrfa  for  the  dead.
At  the  time  of  Auguatni  thii  kind  of  ludi  which
Tacitui  (Agrie.  6)  leemi  to  deaignale  by  the  name
mania  ioitom,  were  ao  common  that  no  one  ob-
tained any  pnblic  office  witbont  hniahing  a  con-
tiderabls  portian  of  hit  properq'  OD  the  exhibition
of  gameg.  Augnitui  therefore  witely  aaiigncd
thirty  of  the  day!  of  the  yfar,  on  which  inch
■pectadei  had  been  exhibited  previooaly,  to  the
tianaaction  of  buainett,  i.  *.  he  loade  cheae  30  dayi
bitl (Compan  Emeiti and F.  A.  Wolf,  ad


[L.a.]


_ i.  te.)
LUDI  JUVENA'LES. [J'
LUDI  LIBERA'LES. [DioNTBii,  p,  *!*.]
LUDI  MARTIA'LES  were  celebrated  every
Tear  aa  tbe  £nt  of  Aoguit,  in  tbe  Circoi,  and  in
honour  of  Man,  becauae  the  tem^Je  of  Man  bad
been  dedicated  on  thia  day. (Dion  Cau.  Ix.  5 ;
Saeton.  OoW.  i.) The  ancient  calendaria  men-
tion alio  other  ludi  maitialei  which  were  held  in
the  Ciicoa  on  the  12t}i  of  iinj.  [L.  S.J

LUDI  MEOALENSE3. [MaoALxat*.]
LUDI  NATALITII  are  tbe  garnet  with  which
the  birth-day  of  an  empena'  wat  generally  cele-
brated. They  were  held  in  the  Circna,  whence

tona.  Fiat,  6  i  Spartian.  lladrian,  1.)  They  con-
litted  genenlly  of  6ghti  of  gladiaton  and  wild
bcniCa.  On  one  occanon  of  thii  kind  Hadrian
exhibited  gladiatorial  combatifbriix  dayB,andone
thouiand  wild  beaata.  [L.  9.]

LUDI  FALATI'NI  were  hutitated  by  Llvia
in  hononr  of  Augiulua,  and  wera  held  on  the  Pala-
tine. <Dion  Caaa.  IvL  uijai.)  According  to  Dion
Caitiui  they  ware  cdebraled  during  three  dayi,
bat  according  to  Jotephnt  (AnUq.  tfud.  xii.  1 )  they
laited  eight  dayi,  and  commenced  on  the  S7th  of
December.  (Saa  Soet.  Oly.  £6,  irith  Scaligerl
note.)  [L.  S.]

LUDI  PISCATOmi  wet«  held  every  j—r  on
tin  nxth  of  Jmie,  in  the  plain  on  the  r^ht  bank
of  the  Tiber,  and  were  conducted  by  the  praetor
nrbannt  on  behalf  of  tbe  fiihermen  of  the  Tiber,
whomadflthedayaholiday.  (Ovid. fliif.  vi  335,
&c  ;  Feet.  (.  e.  Pitaa.  liidi.)  [L.  S.]

LUDI PLEBE'lI


a[^ilted


LUDT  SAEGULASEa.

Paendo-Aiconini  (ad  Vtrr.  l  pL  143,  Orelli),  the
gnmea  which  had  been  hutitaled  in  cnnmemoratian
of  the  freedom  of  the  plebeiani  afler  the  baniih-
ment  of  the  kinga,  or  after  the  leceaiton  of  the
plebei  to  the  Aventine.  The  £rtt  of  then  ac-
connti  it  not  borae  ont  by  the  hittoiy  of  the  ple-
beian order,  and  it  ie  mom  pmhable  that  tbeta
garnet  mre  initituled  in  commemoiation  of  the
reeoDciliatwn  between  the  patriciBiu  and  plebetani
after  the  firtt  aeeeiiian  to  the  mom  tncer,  or,  ac-
cording to  othert,  Co  the  Aventine. Tbey  wen

16th,  17th,  and  I6th  of  Novembo,

iducted  by  the  plebeian  aedilea.  (  Liv,
iiix.  7.)  It  it  infGcienlly  clear  frnu
odendaria  that  the  ludi  plebeii  weta
not,  at  tome  have  tuppoaed,  tbe  nune  aa,  or  ■  part
of,  tbe  ludi  Roinani.  [L.  3.]

LUDI  PONTIFICA'LES  were  pnlsUy  DO-
thliig  but  a  patticubir  kind  of  the  ludi  htmorarii
mentioned  above.  They  wen  for  the  firat  time
by  Au^itoi,  when,  after  the  death  of  Lepi-
dui,  he  obtained  the  office  of  pontirei  maximum
lueton,  Aog.  44.)  [K  S.]

LUDI  QUAESTCRII  were  of  the  nine  chi-
cter  ai  the  preceding  gamei.  They  were  insli-
tuled  by  the  emperor  Claudiut  (Suet.  C&n^  34  ;
TaciL  Am.  ii.  33),  who  decreed  that  all  who  ob-
tamed  the  office  of  quaeator  ahould,  at  their  own
expenie,  give  gladjatsial  ezhibitioni.  Nero  did
\ih  thli  obligation  for  new'
I  (Tadt.  Atm.  xiii.  6),  but  it
by  Domitian.  {Saeton.  DtnmL  c  4.)  [L.  S.]
LUDIROMANIorMAONL  [&In}ai.Kau.l
LUDI  SAKCULA'RES.  If  we  were  to  jodge
from  their  name,  theae  gamea  woutd  have  been
celebrated  once  in  every  centDiy  or  aaecnlmn  ;  bol
we  do  not  find  that  they  were  eelebtated  with  thit
regnlarity  at  any  period  of  Roman  hiatory,  and  tba
name  ludi  necularet  itaelf  waa  nam  naed  dDring
the  time  of  the  npuhlic.  In  order  to  nndeixtmd
their  real  cbaiacter  we  mnildiiUngnith  betwera  the
time  of  tbe  repnhlic  and  of  tbe  empire,  tince  at
theae  two  petiodi  theae  Indi  wera  ik  an  eatitely
diflerent  cbaiacter.

Dniiug  the  time  of  the  iepvbl!c  they  wen  called
ladi  JhnttBii,  Tcraitmi,  or  T^mrii,  while  during
the  empire  they  bore  the  name  of  bidi  taeemlara.
(Feat  a.  e.  Saead.  Ivli  and  Taarii  ladi,-  VaL  Max.
il  4.  §  S.)  Their  origin  it  deactibed  by  Valeriui
MaximuB,  who  altributea  their  inititutioa  to  tlia
miraculout  reoovery  of  three  ehildien  of  one  Vale-
rioa,  who  had  been  attacked  bya  plaffue  raging  at  tfaa
time  in  Rome,  and  were  reatored  to  health  I7  drink-
ing tome  water  warmed  at  a  place  in  the  Campoa
" ■  ■■ ■ -•  ^aJeriut afterward*

m  to  Dit  and  Pr»-
tcrpina,  to  whom  the  rocovejy  of  hia  children  w«a
tuppoeed  to  ha  owing,  ipnad  leetiatBnia  for  tho
goda,  and  held  fetlivo  gamea  fiir  three  ncmaivw
nighia,  became  hia  three  cbiidroi  had  been  nved.
The  account  of  Valetina  Uaximot  agteei  in  the
munwith  thoteofCeDaorinDt  (DtOvArotcI?)
and  of  Zoainma  (iL  3),  and  all  appear  to  hare  dfvi*cd
their  information  frum  the  ancient  annalitt.  Vale-
rim  Antiaa.  While  according  to  thia  atoooBt  tbe
Taientino  garnet  were  Grit  celelnted  by  Taleiiua,
another  legend  teemt  to  oonaider  the  ^ht  of  Um
HoTMiaiu  and  Curialiana  aa  oomeeted  with  their
fint  celebmtion.  A  thud  aoemit  (FeMoa,  a-  n.
Tbiini  ludii ;  Serv.  ad  Am.  iL  140)  aacribei  their
fiat  inttitution  to  the  t«^  of  TUgauM  ~


LUDI  SAECULARES.

A  fcatfol  |d<giiB  brake  oM,  lij  vhkb  >U  prqpuit
WDiDm  ven  B&ccted  in  nich  B  maunei  tbtl  lh<
childnn  died  in  the  iromb.  Oamea  were  (hen  in-
ititnled  to  pnpitisle  the  infenud  diTinities,  and
BoiBca  of  iterile  cewa  ((amw)  -wen  offered  up
to  than,  wbeiKe  the  g>met  wen  called  Indi  Tuiiii.
Tbcw  gum*  and  ncriiicei  took  place  in  the  Cirou
Flurainitu,  thai  the  internal  diiiniliei  might  not
enter  the  citj.  Fertoa  (i.e.  Sate,  ladi)  and  Cen-
■  aiiTibe  the  Gnt  cdebiation


Valerini  Poplicola.  Thii  aeeount  admit)  that  the
■nttapina  had  eiitted  long
t  the  game*  and  Berificea


r  Dii  and


wm  aoir  pnfamied  6w  the  fini
plagae,  tai  in  (hat  part  of  the  Campoi  Martiui
which  had  belonged  to  (he  lait  king  Tatquiniiu,
fna  wbam  the  place  derired  ite  name  TarenCam.
Valerin*  Haiimiu  and  Zotimai,  who  knew  of  the
celebiation  of  lhe«e  ganei  b;  Valerini  PopUeola,
mdeBToar  la  Rconcile  their  two  acomnti  by  lepre-
•enting  the  celebration  of  PoptiecJa  u  the  leeond
ia  ehnnuibgical  order.  Other  leu  important  Cndi-
lion*  are  nieiitioaed  b;  Serrin*  (ad  Am,  ii.  140)
■ml  by  Varro  (<9  OuHirm.).

Airegariilbenani«Tarenti  or  Taorii,  they  ate
peritapa  nothing  but  different  fonna  ot  the  latne
wwd,  and  of  the  mme  not  ai  Toirguiniui.  All  the
aeooimU  mentioned  aboie,  thongh  differing  ai  ta
the  time  at  which  and  the  penoni  by  whom  the
Taiaitine  gamea  wets  linl  celebrated,  yet  agree  in
atacii^  that  they  wen  celebrated  for  the  purpose
of  BTOtiiv  fnm  the  itate  lome  great  odamity  by
which  it  had  been  atllicted,  and  that  they  were
hdd  in  honour  of  Dit  and  Pnuerpina.  Fiom
the  tima  af  the  conanl  Val^u  Poplicola  down  to
that  1^  Angnitna,  the  Taientina  gamea  were  only
Wd  thne  limea,  and  again  only  on  certain  emer-
gnciea,  and  not  at  any  fixed  time,  to  that  we
Biut  cOTKlnde  that  their  celebiation  waa  in  no  way
onnectcd  with  certain  cydea  of  time  (laeaila).
The  deiliea  in  whoee  hononc  they  were  held  di


the:


oDii  ai


Aa  to  the  time*  at  which  theu  three
took  place,  the  cenunentatii  of  the
qtrindecimTiri  and  tkt  aoonnti  of  the  annaliitt  did
not  i^rea  (Ceiuarin.  L  e.),  and  tfae  diKreponey  of
the  atalenMiita  (till  extant  ahowi  the  Tain  attempta
which  wet*  niado  in  later  time*  to  praTe  that
daring  the  repablie  the  game*  had  been  celebrated
aneo  in  every  aaecnlnnu  All  these  niimpieaenta-
tiona  sad  diatortioni  anae  in  (he  time  of  Angnatoa.
Nut  kag  after  he  had  ammed  the  anpreme  power
in  the  repablie,  the  qnindedmTiri  anncnnced  that
•eeerdii^  to  their  books  ludi  taecnlorf*  ought  to
he  held,  and  at  Uia  aame  time  tried  to  pnre  from
hiatorj-  that  in  foimec  time*  they  bad  not  imly
beoi  edehraled  repeatedly,  but  aJmoit  runlaHy
•nee  ID  ersry  centniy.  The  games  of  which  the
qaindcdmrin  made  thii  *Mertien,  were  the  Indi


The  eetabnled  jnriat  and  antiqtnry  Atelni  Capito
Meetnd  frani  the  empcnr  the  command  to  deter-
mat  tke  cncnoniei,  and  Horace  wai  requested  to
eompeaa  tba  fistiie  bymn  for  the  ocouian  ieartun
mi  Wilis),  which  f*  atni  extant  (Zoaim.  iL  *.).
Bat  the  CutiTal  which  was  now  held,  waa  in
nali^  Terr  different  ban  the  ancient  Tarenline
gamea  ;  Ibr  IKs  and  Pmeipnka,  to  whom  formerly
the  lotital  belonged  eTclnsiTely,  were  now  the  last
>i  the  liat  of  the  dirinitie*  in  honotir  of  whom  the

A  daactiptiaa  id


LUDUS.  717

ii  gtren  by  Zosinnu.  Sonis
dayi  before  they  eammenced,  heraldi  wen  sent
abont  (0  inrite  Uie  people  to  a  ipectode  which  no
beheld,  and  which  no  one  would  eier
behold  again. Hereupon  (he  qoindecimriri  dia-
Iribuled,  upon  the  Capitol  and  the  Pelatine,  among
the  Roman  citixeni,  torches,  sulphnr,  and  bitnmen,
by  which  they  wen  to  purify  themselres. In  the
nine  places,  and  on  the  Aientine  in  the  temple
of  Diana,  the  pMqile  nxeired  wheat,  bar1i?y,  and
beana,  which  wen  to  be  oSend  at  night-time  to
tfae  Panae,  or,  according  to  others,  wen  girei  a*
—  ■-  ■^-  -----  ~  (lie  dramatic  repieseutationa

,  .  .  ed  daring  the  fotiTo  days.
The  fettiral  took  place  in  mmmcT,  and  lasted  for
three  days  and  three  nights.  On  tie  firit  day  the
games  commenced  in  the  Tarentura,  and  VKnAce*
wen  offered  to  Jupiter,  Juno,  Neptune,  Minerra,
Venni,  Apollo,  Menuty,  Ceres,  Vutcan,  Man,
Diana,  Vesta,  Hercule*,  Latona,  the  Puoke,  and
to  Die  and  Pitnerpino.  The  solemnities  bqan  at
the  second  hour  of  the  night,  and  the  emperor
ipened  them  by  the  rirer  side  with  the  sacrifice  of
three  hunha  to  the  Parcae  upon  three  altars  erected
for  the  purpose,  and  which  were  aprinkled  with
the  blood  of  the  rictinu.  The  lamba  themaelvea
wcra  burnt.  A  temporary  scene  like  that  of  a
theatre  wai  erected  in  the  Tarentum,  and  illumi-
nated with  lights  and  fires.

In  thi*  scene  festive  hjmna  were  sang  by  a
chociii,  and  Taiiooa  other  ceienoniea,  together
with  theatrical  pcrjbrmances,  took  place.  During
the  morning  of  the  first  day  the  people  went  to
the  Capitol  to  offer  solemn  ncrifioei  la  Jupiter ;
thence  they  returned  to  the  Tarenttun  to  ting
chonucs  in  honour  of  Apollo  and  IKana.  On  the
second  day  the  noblest  matrona,  at  an  hour  fixed
by  an  oracle,  assembled  on  the  Capitol,  perfonned
supplicB^oui,  sang  hynmt  to  the  godi,  and  alao
Tiailed  the  altar  of  Juno.  The  emperor  and  the
gnindecimnri  offered  sacrifices  which  bad  been
TOn-ed  before,  to  all  the  great  diTinities.  On  the
third  day  Orisek  snd  Latm  choruses  wen  sung  in
the  mnclnary  of  Apolta  by  three  time*  nine  boys
and  maidens  of  gnat  beaoty  whose  parents  vrcn
atiU  alive.  The  object  of  these  hymn*  wa*  to
implore  the  protection  of  the  gods  for  all  cities,
towns,  and  (^cera  of  the  empire.  One  of  these
hymns  was  the  ormen  iBeculaie  by  Horace,  which
was  especially  composed  lor  the  oocasion,  and
adapted  to  the  diumitanccs  of  the  time.  During
the  whole  of  the  three  days  and  nights,  gsmcs  of
OTCry  deMTiption  wen  carried  on  m  all  the  cii-
ensea  and  theatre^  and  sacnfices  woe  offend  bi
all  the  temples.

The  first  celebration  of  the  Indi  aaecnlare*  in  the
reign  of  Augnstus  took  place  in  (ha  aorumer  of  the
year  ac  17  (Tadt.  Amt.  xi.  11.)  ;  the  second
took  place  in  the  reign  of  Clandius,  a.  n.  47  (Suet.
Ctaad.  31)  ;  the  third  in  the  reign  of  Domilian,
A.D.  8B  (Snet.  OomU.  1,  with  Emeali^a  note) ;  and
the  last  in  the  reign  of  Philippus  i.D,  34B,  and,
ai  waa  generally  bcliercd.  just  I  ODD  years  after
the  bnUding  of  tbv  city.  (Jul.  Capitol.  Qord,  Ttrt.
c  33 ;  com;sra  Scaliger,  De  Emtud.  Tampor.  f,
466 ;  Hartong,  Dit  Rt/igiim  der  Eomtr,  voL  ii.
p.  92,  Ac,  and  the  commentatora  ad  HoraU
Cam.  Sbcb.)  [1-S.J

LUDUS. [Gr.AiiuT0B«8,  p.  S74,  b.]
LUDUS DUODECIM SCRIPTO'RUM.

[LATBirilCtllit.]


71(1


LUPERCALIA.


LUDUSLATRUNCULO-BUM.  [Latoun-

LUDUS  TROJAE. rCracua,  p,  S88,».J
LU'MINA. [SsRViTUTia]
LUPA'NAR. (CAUFONA,p,25S,b.]

LUPATUM. [Fhbnum.]

LUPERCA'LIA,  one  of  ths  matt  uicitnt  Ra-
man fmciTRlt,  which  wu  celebisled  tjoj  jtM  in
bonoor  of  Lupercut,  the  god  of  fcrtilitf .  All  the
teremoniw  with  which  it  wat  held,  and  all  we
koov  of  its  history,  Hhovi  that  it  wu  originally  &
ibepherd-fntivHl. [Pint  Oui.  61.) Hence  it*  in-

nulus  and  Remiu,  thi

Greek

mam  repnient  it  oi  a  latiTal  of  Pan,  and  aicribc
iu  inttodnctioa  lo  the  Arcadian  Eronder.  Thii
miirepmentation  arose  feiliy  from  the  deiin  of
thcie  writen  to  identify  the  Roman  diTuiitie*  with
thoM  of  Greece,  and  [«rtly  Smn  iU  rude  oad
almott  MiTage  cerenionie*,  which  ccrCninlj  an  a
proof  that  the  fettiTal  ninat  have  oH^naCed  in  the
Tcmoteil  an^ni^.  The  (eitiTal  waa  held  smy
year,  on  ibe  ISth  of  Febiuaiy,  in  the  Lnpeical,
where  Romuloi  and  Remna  wen  uid  to  hare  been
nnrtmed  by  the  ihe-wolf ;  the  place  contained  an
altar  and  a  gmve  aacred  to  the  god  Lapetcna.
(AonL  VicL  de  Orig.  GtnL  Rom.  S2  ;  Ovid.  Fad.
a.  S67.)  Here  the  Lnperci  aaiembled  on  the  day
of  the  Lnpercalia,  and  aacnficed  lo  the  god  goats
and  yoong  dogt,  which  animala  are  iema»able  for
their  itrong  uiual  ini^ct,  and  Ihiu  were  appro-
priate Bacri£cci  to  the  god  of  fertility.  (Plut  Saa,
21  i  Serriui  ad  Ait.  »iii.  343.)  Two  joiitha  of
noble  birth  we™  then  led  to  the  Luperei,  azid  one
of  the  latter  tooched  their  fbreheadj  with  a  award
dipped  in  the  blood  of  the  lictima  ;  other  Loperci
immediately  after  wiped  oET  the  bloody  apata
with  wool  dipped  in  milk. Hereupon  ths  two

Citha  were  obliged  to  break  out  into  a  about  of
ghter.  Thia  ceremony  waa  probably  a  aym-
bolical  purification  of  the  ihepberda.  After  the
ttcrifioe  waa  orer,  the  Luperei  partook  of  a  meat,
at  which  they  were  plentifully  aupplied  with  wine.
<VaL  Max.  it  2.  fi.)  They  then  cut  the  ikini
of  the  goata  which  they  had  aacriliced,  into  piccet ;
with  aome  of  which  they  eoiered  perta  of  their
body  in  imitation  of  the  god  Lupcrcus,  who  waa
lepteeenied  half  naked  and  half  covered  with  goal-
ikin.  The  other  piecea  of  (he  ikina  they  cut  into
thonga,  and  holding  them  in  their  handa  they  nin
through  the  itreela  of  the  city,  touching  or  atrik-
ing  with  them  all  peraons  whom  tbcy  met  in  thcii
way,  and  eapeciajly  women,  who  even  utcd  ta
come  forward  ToliuilBrily  for  the  purpoae,  lince
they  beliered  that  thia  ceremony  rendered  them
fmitihl,  and  pnicund  them  an  eaay  deliiery  in
childbouing. Thi*  act  of  running  about  with


I,  for  the  wordt  by  which  thia  act
deaignated  *ztfibrwiTt  and  luiirarti.  (Orid.  FaH.
U  31 ;  Feit.  t.  e.  Fiirmriui.)  The  goat-ikin  itaelf
waa  called  _^!ifiiiBB,  the  fritive  day  diet  /Artaia,
the  month  iJi  which  it  occurred  Fiimtarius,  and
the  aod  himielf  J^^riratii.

The  act  of  purifying  and  fertiliiing,  which,  aa
wo  hate  aeen,  waa  applied  lo  women,  waa  without
donht  originally  applied  to  the  flock*,  and  lo  the
pe<^e  of  the  city  on  the  Palatine.  (Vairo,  (fa  liitg.
Lot,  T.  p.  60,  Dip.) Featna  (i.  c,  Ck^kx)  tari


LUPERCL

that  the  Luperei  wets  alao  called  cnpi  ar  cr^gps
from  their  atriking  with  gootakin*  (a  cnpilup^id'
ca^n»),  but  it  ia  more  probable  that  the  nama
depi  waa  derived  from  cTcpo,  which  wa*  tka
ancient  name  for  goat. (Fe*L  >.  o.  Capraa.}

The  feetival  of  the  Lnpercalia,  though  it  nacea-
aarilf  lo*l  it*  original  import  at  the  time  when  tba
Roman*  were  no  longer  a  nation  of  shepheri*,  wma
yet  always  obterred  in  wnunCTioratJon  of  tha
founden  of  the  city.  Antonina,  in  hia  eonmUhip,
waa  one  of  the  Luperei,  and  not  only  ran  with
ihem  half-naked  and  covered  with  fuecea  of  goat-
skin through  the  city,  but  eien  addieaaed  the
people  in  the  fbmm  in  thi*  rude  attire.  (PluLGia.
61.)  After  Ibe  tike  of  Caoor,  howecer,  the  Lu-
peicalia  *eem  to  have  been  neglected,  for  AngsitDa
ii  mid  to  ha'e  reiloied  it  (SoeL  Jiki.  31),  but
he  forbade  youth*  (inieriti)  to  take  part  in  the
running.  The  festiv^  wag  henceforth  celebrated
regulnily  down  lo  the  umo  of  the  emperor  Aoaa-
taaiui.  Lupercalia  were  also  celebrated  in  othw
towna  of  Italy  and  Qaul,  for  Lnpoci  are  mentioned
in  inacriptiona  of  VeliOme,  Praeneate,  Nemaoaoa,
and  other  placea.  (Orelli.  Itucr.  n.  3351,  &e.>
((Compare  Lufbrci  ;  and  Hutung,  Die  Rttip.  dtr
Hinitr,  vol.  ii.  p.  176,  &c)  [L.Sl]

LUPERCI,  were  the  jviaU  of  the  god  Luper-
cu*.  They  formed  acdllcge  (aadaUuihiupIa),  tha
membera  of  which  were  oiigiually  youth*  of  patri-
cian bmilies,  azid  which  wa*  stud  la  hare  been  in-
■fluted  by  Romolu*  and  Remus.  (Plot  Rom.  21.)
The  college  waa  divided  into  two  daaaes,  the  OM
called  Fabii  or  Fabioiii,  and  the  other  Quiactilii  or
QuinclilianL  (FetL  a.  «.  QaiHcMioai  Lupird  and
Fahiani.')  Theae  namea,  which  are  the  nme  ai
thow  with  which  the  follower*  of  Ronuhu  and
Remoi  were  deaignaCcd  in  the  eaiiy  Rmaan  1a-
gendi,  aeem  to  show  that  the  priesthood  waa
originally  confined  to  certain  gentes. (Oiid.  fait


.  378,  who,  hi


confoui


a  the


Fabii.)  But  if  aoch
actually  o-aa  the  coae,  thia  limilatiao  doe*  not  aeam
to  have  existed  for  a  reiy  long  time,  though  tha
two  dasse*  tcloined  thcii  origiial  namea,  for  Featna
■aya,  that  in  cenrse  of  time  the  number  of  Lnpeni
increased,  "  Quia  honoris  grolia  multi  in  Lupercia
adicribehantur."  What  wa*  the  eriginal  nnmbo
of  Luperei,  and  how  long  Ifaeir  offic*  lasted,  ii
unknown  ;  but  it  ia  slated  in  inacriptiona  (Orelli,
u.  3256  and  n.  4930)  that  a  peraon  held  the  oDioa
of  Lupercus  twice,  and  ano^er  three  limes,  and
Uiia  fact  shows  at  letal  thai  the  priests  wen  sot
appointed  for  life.  Julius  Caesar  added  to  the  twn
cIhws  of  the  collate  a  third  with  the  name  of  Julu
or  Jutiani  (Dion  Case.  zliT.  6  (  Suet.  Ctm.  76),«nd
nude  Aotonios  their  high  prieaL  Ha  also  asiigiwd
to  them  certain  levenoei  lv»eHgaIia\  which  wera
afterward*  withdrawn  from  them.  ((^.  FkiUp.  iij<
15,  with  the  note  of  P.  Manutiua.)  Bnt  it  ia  dk
ccitnin  whether  (^sot  aaaigncd  these  reTannea  to
the  whole  college,  or  merely  lo  the  Julii.  fma
thia  time  the  two  ancient  claaset  of  the  Laptni  are
Bomelimea  distingaiihed  from  the  new  one  by  tha
nameefLnpeiciceterea.  (Orel]i,n.32S3.)  Allhoogh
in  early  times  the  Luperei  were  taken  only  fnaa
noble  funiliei,  their  itnngc  and  indecent  andiwt
at  the  Lupercalia  waa  offenaire  to  the  more  re-
fined Roman*  of  a  later  age  (Ck-PUtip.  il  34),
and  Cicero  (pro  CaaL  1 1 )  cbaraeteriaes  the  coHqta
a*  a  "  Feia  qoaedam  todalitas  et  plana  fasMiicia
atqua  i^rcatia,  loanm  mtioJUa  m1t«iIIu  uM  «(


LUSTRATIO.
hwtitlta  tpant  hanuailM  atqua  leget" Refpect-
ing  tlie  rits  with  which  they  iiilBiimiied  the  La-
pcnalia  iH  LuFiacALu.  [^&]

LUPUS  PE'RHEUS,  thn  iwm  wolt  vxi  bj
th«  bauagad  in  repalling  tlie  allacki  of  ths  b«-
■ienn,  md  oqwciallT  ia  niziag  th«  battering-nm
■ad  diTertiiig  iu  blowt  [Abibs.)  (Lit.  imiiL
5 ;  Vrget  lUStMiLiL  35,  ir.  2S.) [J.  Y.^

LUSTRATIO  (jciUafwu),  wu  origiii^lj  a
puiificatiaa  bj  nbtution  in  water.  Bat  the  W
DBtiDiu,  of  which  w«  poncu  direct  knowltdge,
U9  aJ«a]ra  ooimected  with  ucri&ca  uid  other
KligioBi  ritM,  bihI  cmuiited  ia  the  aprinUing  of
wmCer  b;  meaiH  oF  i  bniuh  of  laurel  or  oliTe,  and
at  Rome  lODietiniea  bj  meant  of  tlie  Mpeigilluin
(x^junf),  and  in  the  boming  of  certain  raata-
riala,  the  nuke  of  vhich  vu  thought  to  hitTe  a
pnifyiDg  efleeL  Whenorei  lacTificea  went  offend.
It  iMaia  t<r  bava  bem  ciutnmBiy  to  carry  them
aronod  the  peraon  or  thing  to  bo  purified.  Luatnt'
timu  wan  made  in  ancient  Oniece,Mid  probabl;  at
Roma  alas,  bf  prirals  individual)  Then  Ihej  had
polluted  thmtaitlica  with  any  criminal  action.
Wbols  citiai  and  alatea  aln  •ometimei  nnderwent
pnriftcatiotii  to  expiate  the


dbr>


'  of  the  cDmmimity.


Them


cetcbnlwi  purificalioo  of  thii  kind  wu  that  of'
Atbsna,  perbmied  bj  Epiiatoldei  of  Crete,  after
the  C:^ian  matMsn.  (I»og.  I^ert.  i.  10.  i  3.)
Poiifieatioiii  alaa  look  place  when  a  laixed  ipot  had
bem  unhallowed  by  profana  nae,  aa  by  burying
d(^  bodiea  in  it,  rack  ai  ini  tho  cate  with  the
Uand  of  Ddoa. (Thucyd.  L  8,  ilL  104.)

The  Ronuuii  pciformcd  tunrationi  on  many
oauiou,  on  which  Uw  Oieekt  did  not  think  of
tham ;  and  the  object  of  moit  Roman  luitiationi
*ai  not  to  atone  for  the  ooDmuiaian  of  crime,  bnt
to  obtain  the  bleuing  of  the  gnde  upon  the  penoni
or  thing!  whkh  were  luitmted.  Thua  fieldi  were
paiiled  after  the  buaineH  of  lowing  wsa  oier
(Ond.  FotL  I  669).  and  before  the  gickle  wu
pBt  to  the  earn.  [Abvilu  Fratbbs.]  The
manner  in  which  ahecp  were  lustrated  eieij  year
■t  the  feiliTal  of  the  Pnlilla,  ii  deacribed  by  Orid
<Au(.  IT.  73£,  &c).  The  tbephBrdlownrd.  even-
ing ^nkled  hi«  flock  with  water,  adatnod  the
fbid  with  bnncbea  and  foliage,  burnt  pure  auJphur
and  Tariona  herba,  and  offered  aacrificei  to  Palo.
The  object  of  thii  Initm^on  wai  to  fmiene  the
flock  Com  diaeoae,  contagion,  and  othei  eTil*.
iaaa,4iBt  RhiL  cUl.)  AU  Roman  anniei
belbce  tbey  took  the  field  were  lailniled  (Dion
CtML  iljii.  3B  ;  Aniian,  //iip.  c  1 9,  CieiL  it.  S9.
at  paaaim),  and  ai  thii  aolcmnity  was  probably  ol-
vaya  anmected  with  a  review  of  the  troopi,  the
void  tuatiatio  ii  alio  nied  m  the  iciue  of  the  mo-
don  ttview.  (,Cic  ad  AtL  v. 'iO.%%)  The  ritei
cuttamary  on  auch  occuicni  are  not  mentioned,
bnt  they  probably  reaenbled  tboie  with  which  a
fleet  waa  fniliHted  before  it  let  nil,  and  which  are
dcKribcd  bT  Appian  (CivU.  r,  96).  Allan  were
erected  cc  iLe  abore,  and  the  tcsicIi  manned  with
their  troi^  aiiembled  in  order  cloae  to  the  coait.
Eieij  body  kept  profound  aitence,  and  pricita
atandtng  doae  by  the  water  killed  the  victima,  and
carried  the  purifying  (accificet  (icaMpe-ia)  In  onall
boati  three  timea  around  the  fleet-  On  theae  rounds
they  were  accompanied  by  the  geneiala,  who
prayed  to  the  godi  lo  pieaeiTe  the  armament  from
all  dangen.  Hereupon  the priaitidiTidedtheiacri-
fieea  into  two  patta,  one  of  which  waa  thrown  into


LUSTRUM.  719

the  aea,  and  the  other  burnt  upon  tho  allara,  wbile
the  multitude  around  ptayed  to  the  goda.  (Cam-
pan  Lit.  xiiri.  12,  and  xiix.  27,  whore  al»  k
prayer  i>  recorded  auch  aa  gcnerata  uted  to  olfer
on  thua  occaaiona.)  When  a  Macedonian  array
waa  Initiated,  a  dog  waa  cut  in  two  piecei  in  tha
place  where  the  army  waa  to  auemble,  and  ona
half  of  the  dog  wna  thrown  at  a  diitance  on  the
light  and  the  other  to  the  left.  The  army  then  aa-
aembled  in  the  pkce  between  the  ipcla  where  tha
piecet  had  fidlen.  (Lir.  il.  S,  Curt.  i.  9.  g  12.)
But  to  return  to  the  Romana  The  eatabliibment
of  a  new  colony  was  alwayi  preceded  by  a  lualra-
tio  with  lolemn  tacrifcei.  (Cic  dt  Diim.  i.  45  |
Barth,  ad  Stat.  Thib.  it.  p.  1073.)  The  city  of
Rome  ilielt,  aa  well  aa  other  towm  within  ita  do-
minion, alwayi  nnderwent  a  luatratio,  after  they
had  been  visited  by  lome  great  calamity,  inch  aa
civil  bloodahcd^  awful  prodigiea,  and  the  like.
(Appian,  CivL  i  26  ;  Liv.  mv.  9,  ilil  20.)  A
regijai  and  general  luioatio  of  tha  whole  Roman
people  took  place  afler  the  completion  of  every  lua-
tnim,  when  Ibe  cenaor  had  Eiuthed  hii  c^uus  and
befbre  he  laid  down  bii  office.  The  luitratio  (alio
called  luatrum.  Feat.  a.  c.)  waa  conducted  by  one  of
the  cen»ira  (Cic  de  Dntm. !.  45),  and  held  with
■acrificea  called  Suovetaurilia  (Liv.  L  44;  Varro,
de  Ra  Rati.  ii.  1),  becauao  tbe  aacrificee  coniiited
of  a  pig  (or  ram),  a  theep,  and  an  oi.  Thia  lua-
tratio, which  continued  to  be  obaerved  in  tbe  day*
of  Dionyiina,  tock  place  in  the  Campui  Hartiua,
where  the  people  aiaembled  for  the  porpoie.  The
aacrifice*  were  carried  three  timea  around  the  aa-
■cmbled  multitude-  (Dionya.  Asl.  Rom.  iv.  22.)
Another  regular  luitration  which  waa  obferved
every  yoar  in  the  month  of  February,  Waa  aud
to  have  been  instituted  becauae  the  god  Febniua
waa  believed  to  bo  jx^au  luntratioaian,  and  be-
came in  thia  month  tho  lolemnitiea  in  honour  of
the  dii  manei  took  place.  (Macrob.  SaL  L  13\
compare  Hartnng,  dU  Religioa  der  Rimer,  i.  p,
198,  &C-)  [US-]

LUSTRUM  (from  luo,  Gr.  \<ilm\  ia  pnipnly
apeaking  a  lualratioa  or  purification  of  the  whole
Roman  people  performed  by  one  of  tho  cenaon  in
tbe  Campui  Martina,  after  the  buaineaa  of  the  centne
waa  over.  [CaNSOB;  LusTBaTio.]  A»  thia  purifi-
cation took  place  only  once  in  five  yean,  tbe  woid
luatrum  waa  alio  uaed  to  dcaignata  the  time  between
twolualra.  VBnD(di£iiu.£aJ.vL  ll,cd.Mim.)
enoneously  deri'ea  the  worf  luitrum  from  luo  (I
pay),  becauae  tbe  voctigolia  and  tributa  wore  paid
every  five  yeara  to  (he  eeniort  The  iirel  luetrum
wai  performed  in  b.  c  566  by  king  Serriai,  after
he  had  compkiled  bia  oenina  (Liv.  L  44  ;  Dionya,
iv-  22),  and  afterward*  it  ia  said  to  hare  taken
place  regularly  every  five  yean  after  tho  eenau*
waa  OTer.  In  the  earliett  period  of  tbe  republic
the  buaineu  of  the  ceniua  and  the  aolemnitiea  of
the  luitrum  were  performed  by  tbe  coniula.  The
fint  ceniors  wen  appointed  in  B.  c  443,  and  from
thii  year  down  to  a  o.  294  there  had,  awording  to
LJTy  (i.  47),  only  been  26  pain  of  ceniora,  and
only  21  luttn,  or  general  pnnficationi,  although  if
all  had  been  regular,  there  would  have  been  30
pain  of  eenun  and  30  lusUa.  We  must  therefore
conclude,  that  semetimea  the  ceniua  wai  not  held
at  all,  or  at  least  not  by  the  cenaora.  Wo  al»
learn  fiam  this  itatement  that  the  censoi  miglit
take  phice  without  tbe  lustrum,  and  indeed  two
caset  of  this  kind  ace  ncordt^.djy,  ijL  3S,  xuTa


7m  LYRA.

4S)  whicb  happened  in  B.  c.  489  and  314. In


Ths  tiins  when  the  lutnim  took  place  liu  been
Teiy  ingcnioiulj  defined  b;  Niebnlu  {Hitl.  of  Rom.
L  p.  277>  Six  ancient  Ratnuliaa  ;earg  of  304
dnyi  each  wen,  with  the  difierenee  o(  ose  dnj,
eqnal  to  Stb  aoUr  yean  of  36G  daji  each,  or  the
ail  indent  yeara  made  1824  dap,  while  the  fiTe
aolor  yean  contained  182S  daya.  The  loatnun,  oc
the  great  yeu  of  the  ancient  Roman!  (Ceniorin.
dt  Du  Nat.  18),  vsi  tlioa  a  cycle,  at  the  end  of
which,  ike  beginning  of  the  ancient  year  nearly
coincided  with  that  of  the  •olsi  year,  Aa  the  eo-
inddcnce  howenT  wai  not  perfect,  a  month  of  24
d«yi  wai  intercalated  in  erery  elerenth  luatmm.
Now  it  ii  highly  probable  that  the  recurrence'  of
neb  a  cjtle  or  jjieat  year  waa,  from  the  (nrlieit
timea,  aolemnixeo  with  aacrificea  and  purificatima,
and  that  Serriiu  Tullini  did  not  introduce  thei
but  menly  connected  them  with  hii  cenaoi,  ai
thna  let  the  example  for  luhaeqaent  ago,  whii
howerer,  aa  wo  hare  teen,  waa  not  obieiced  with
regalarity.  At  lirM  the  irregularity  may  have
b^n  (suaed  by  the  itrugglea  Between  the  fetci-
ciana  and  plebeiaiu,  when  the  appointment  of  cen-
*f>rg  waa  porpoaely  neglected  to  increase  the  di>-
raden  ;  hnt  we  aUo  find  that  aimilar  neglect*  took
place  at  a  later  period,  when  no  anch  canie  ex-
lated.  (Suelon.  Aug.  37,  OaiL  16.)  The  iait
Itutrum  waa  aolemniced  at  Rome,  in  A.  n.  74,  in
the  reign  of  ye^Baian. (Ceniorin.  L  e.)

Many  writan  of  the  latter  period  of  the  repablic
and  during  the  empire,  UK  the  word  luitrom  6tr
any  tpace  of  liie  yean,  and  wilhont  any  regard  to
tbecenaui  (Orii.  FaU.  ii.  183,  It.  701,  Jmor.
iiL  6.  37  ;  Marat.  Oarm.  iL  4.  24,  W.  1.  6\  whUo
otheri  even  apply  it  in  the  >en>e  of  the  Oreok  pen-
taeterii  or  an  Olympiad,  which  only  contained  (bur
yean^  (Ovid,  u  PotU.  it.  fi.  S,  &c  ;  Man.  it.
45.)  Martial  alio  uiea  the  eipreoion  Initmm
ingeoi  tor  aaecnlum.

(Compare  Scaligcr,  da  EmaKl.  nntpor,  p.  1 83  j
Ideler,  f/andi.  darCiroiuL  ii,  p.  77,  Ac) [L.  S.]

LrCAEA(M«ata),ab3tiTllI  wilh  conleat^  ce-
lebnted  by  the  Aicadiani  in  bonour  of  Zeui  luc-
named AiwiuM.  It  waaaud  tohavebecninttituled
In  the  ancient  hero  Lycaon,  the  aon  of  Pelaigua.
(Paul.  TiiL 2.  1 1  1  Stiah, liii.  p.  3S8.)  Heiialao
aaid,  inatead  of  the  cakei  which  bad  formerly  been
offered  to  the  god,  to  hare  ucrificed  a  child  to  Zeua,
and  to  hoTe  aprinklod  the  altar  with  ita  blood.  Il  ia
not  improbable  that  human  aacrificea  were  offered
in  Arcadia  to  Zeiu  Lycaona  down  to  a  very  late
period  in  Grecian  hiilory,  (Potphyi.  d»  Ab-
^OL  ii.  27.)  No  further  paiticnlara  reapecting  the
CelehiBtiQii  of  the  Lycaea  are  known,  with  the  ex-
eoplion  of  the  atatement  of  Plutarch  (Can.  61),
tlmt  the  celebration  of  the  Lycacs  in  aome  degree
leaembled  that  of  the  Roman  Lupercalia. [L.S.]

LYCHNU'CHUS. [C*HDBL*BBtrH.]

LYRA  (\ipa,  Lat  fiJa),  a  lyre,  one  of  the
moat  ancient  muiical  initnnnenla  of  the  ttringed
kind.  There  can  acanely  be  any  doubt  that  thii
•nd  aimilar  inatramimtt  were  need  by  the  Eaatem
Cationa  and  by  the  Egyptians,  long  before  the
Greeka  became  acquainted  with  them,  and  that
they  were  introdnced  among  the  Oreeha  from  Aaia
Minor.  (Wilkinton'aAfaMnaBiICteiC.o/eAi.lM.

^m)l.  il  pp.  372, 388,  &c.) Tba  Onokj  tbem-


LYRA.

ael*ea  howeTCr  attributed  the  mTCntion  e  the  lyia
to  Hermea,  who  ia  aaid  to  hare  formed  the  instm-
ment  of  a  tortoiae-ihell,  oier  which  be  placed  gut-
itringi.  (HtHn,  //jmi.»Afcn!.;Apallod.iiL  10.  g  2;
Diodor.  T.  76  ;  Serr.  ad  Fiiy.  Gtors-  ir.  484.)  Aa
regard*  the  original  number  of  the  itiingi  of  a  lyrc^
the  aoconnt*  of  the  ancienti  di^  *o  widely,  that
it  il  alnmt  irapoaible  to  aiiiTe  at  any  d^nit«
concluaion.  Diodonu  (i  16)  slatei  that  Heimei
gave  hia  lyre  three  itringa,  one  with  an  acute,  tbo
other  with  a  giaTe,  and  the  third  with  a  middl*
aonnd.  HacrDbini  (SoL  i.  IS)  nyi  that  the  lyia
of  Mercury  had  four  atringa,  which  aymbolioJIy
repreaented  the  four  aeaaont  of  the  year ;  whiJa
Luciao  (Dior.  DiaL  7),  Grid  {FaiL  t.  106),  and
othera,  aainme  that  the  lyn  tttxa  the  firat  bad
acven  atrin^  All  ancient  writen  who  mcndoa
thii  inrention  of  Hermei,  apply  it  to  the  namo
lyra,  though  ita  ihapa  in  thia  deacnption  of  Apol-
lodoruB  and  Serriai  niber  leaemblca  that  of  the
inatrument  which  in  aabaeqaent  time*  was  de-
ugnaled  by  the  name  cithais  (nMopa  or  nWopu),
and  in  tome  degree  reiembled  a  modern  gidlw,  in
ai  &r  as  in  the  tatterthe  atiingi  were  drawn  acne*
the  aonnding  bottom,  wheraa  in  the  lyia  of  kta
timea  they  were  &ee  on  bodi  lidea.  In  the  H<k-
meric  poema  the  name  Itipa  doia  not  oeeur,  witk
the  exception  of  the  Homeric  hymn  to  Honiea  ;
and  JfoiD  the  exprenion  which  occur*  in  tbi*  hynm
(4S3},  X%  KiSat>fC«r,  it  i^pean  that  origiuLUy
there  waa  leiy  littia  or  no  difference  betwt
two  inatrunents,  thai  ia  to  ai
formerly  used  waa  a  cithara  in
'eword.

The  instrmnents  which  Homer  mention*  as  used
accompany  aoagi  are  the  ^ifjuyi  and  dtapa,
.  1 1  60S,  (U.  TiiL  248  and  261.)  Now  that
the  tpifiHTfi  and  the  nitapit  were  tin  nine  iaatm-
ment,  appean  to  be  clear  from  the  eipreaaion  ^ip-
iuyynci6api(iiy,  ai\A  KteofH  pai>iiiCtii:  (OdilSS,
&c)  The  lyn  il  also  caUed  x'^'^  <"  X'*^'^
and  in  Latin  It^ado,  becanie  it  waa  made  of  a
loftoiie-ihell.

The  obtcurity  which  bang*  orer  the  original
imnbCT  of  string*  of  the  lyre,  i*  somewhat  remored
by  the  statement  made  by  seienl  ancient  wriiera,
thai  Terpander  of  Antina  (about  B.  c  650)  added
to  the  original  number  of  fenr  strings  three  new
ouca,  and  Ihsa  changed  ths  tetrachord  into  a  hepta-
chord. (Euclid.  Intrad.  Harm.  p.  19 ;  Strab.  liii.
618  i  Clem.Alez.£Bkni.ilp.814,ed.PotlerX


Ditnment


LTRA.
ttinngfa  il  oumot  be  denied  Ihat  thera  eiuted  Tyrci
with  galj  tbree  gtringt.  (BUnchioi,  Dt  Trihut
Omenlwt  Imdnaumtonim  Mniieat  Vettrvm  Or-
gmiaat  Di—trtaOo,  tab.  iv.)  Tha  jKKrding  re-
pnacDtation  of  a  tetncbofd  and  the  following  oD«
of  >  hepUcboid  ut  both  taken  from  the  trak.  of


Tb«  heptacbold  imndnead  tij  Terpondet  hence-
fbrth  onituraed  to  bs  nutt  commonly  uaed  hj  the
Greeki  aa  wall  at  fubnqnently  by  the  Romani,
though  in  the  conne  of  time  many  addition!  and
improTemenli woe ~


othcf  in  the  nlatioa
of  a  fimth  (U  Ttff-

viifMHi),  vA  the  lower
■tnng  made  three
Tibi^oiu  in  the
time  that  the  upper
one  made  fcnr.  In
the  mnt  ancient
anangement  of  the

called  the  diatonic,


tfrmli  brtweoi  tha
four  Mringi  [ooduc-
ed twice a  whole


tone.  Topinder  in
forming  bit  heptachord,  in  reality  added  a  new
tetracfaord  to  the  ancient  one,  hut  left  out  the
third  itrii^  of  the  latter,  ai  then  waa  between
it  and  the  foartti  only  an  interval  of  a  Kmi-Ione.
The  heptachod  tbui  had  the  eompaa  of  an  octaTc,
or, aa  the  aneientt  called  it,adiapa«ui  (S>i  murnv).
The  interrali  between  the  teven  itringi  in  the
diaUmie  tcale  were  ai  follow :  —  between  one  and
two  ■  whole  tone,  between  two  and  three  a  whole
tone,  between  three  and  four  a  whole  tone  and  a
■emi-tone  ;  between  finir  and  fire  and  five  and  lii
a  whole  tone  each,  between  lii  and  Kren  a  lemi-
tone.  The  KTcn  itiingi  thenuelvet  wen  called,
be^nnuig  hma  the  higheat,  F^n;,  r^hxp^ni,
■wafaiiiai),  fiimi,  Aixant,  tafmini,  Inirti.
(BSckb,ifaAriAu  /Wiwi,  p.2U5,  &c)  Ptndor
hiniKlf  made  SM  of  the  heptachord,  though  in
bit  lime  an  eighth  itring  hid  been  added.  In
the  time  of  Philip  and  Alexander  the  number  of
■tringi  wat  incrcaaed  to  eleren  by  Tunotheua  of
Miletiu  (Sddai,  a.  e.  Ti^toi ;  MlUler,  Dor.  ir.
6.  §  3),  an  inoDration  which  wai  Kxecety  cen-
mred  by  the  Spartaoa,  who  lefiued  to  go  beyond
the  number  of  (aren  itringi.  (Cic  deLeg,  iL  15  ;
Athoi.  iiT.  p.  636.)  It  la  however  dear  that  the
ancient!  made  lUe  of  a  variety  of  lyree,  and  in  the
reptEMDtatianl  which  we  Itill  poueiB,  the  niunba
of  Itringi  variei  from  three  to  eleven.  About  the
time  of  Sappho  and  Anaoreon  leveial  itringed  in-
atnimenta,  aneb  u  aiagailu,  larHioHf  and  othen,
wen  nied  in  Gieece,  and  eipedally  in  Leiboa.
They  had  been  intiodmxd  bmn  Alia  Minw,  and
their  nmnbet  of  alringt  fu-  exceeded  that  of  the
lyre,  in  >a  know  tbu  ndm  bad  a  cmnpaM  a!


iTRA.

two  octavea,  and  othen  had


721


Even  twen^  ■t"ng)^
■o  iiiai  inoy  muii  nave  more  reaenibled  a  modpra
harp  than  a  lyre.  <Bade,  GeiA.  dtrLj/riici.  Dieit-
kinal  da  Hdlrniai,  voL  L  p.  382,  &c. ;  oomtBre
QiiinctiLiii.10.)

It  bu  been  remiriced  above  that  the  name  lyn
occun  very  leldom  in  the  earlieat  Greek  write™,
and  (hat  originally  thia  initrument  and  the  cithoia
were  the  aame.  But  about  the  time  of  Pindar  in-
□Dvatiaat  teem  to  have  been  introduced  by  which
the  lym  became  diitinct  from  the  cilhani,  the  in-
vention of  which  wia  aicribed  lo  Apollo,  and  hencs
the  name  of  the  fonnct  now  oecnra  more  frequently.
(Pind.  OL  r.  113,  Nm.  iiL  19,  li.  8,  i>tt.
viii.  42,  et  paastm.)  Both  however  had  in  moat
CBiet  no  more  than  aeven  nringi.  The  difisence
between  the  two  inatnunenU  u  dCKribed  above  ;
the  lyre  had  a  great  and  fnll-ionnding  bottom,
which  continued  ai  before  to  be  made  generally  of
a  tortoiae-ahell,  (iom  which,  aa  Lncian  \lHiU.  Mot.
1)  eipceeaet  it,  thebomi  loie  aa  from  the  head  of  a
■tag.  A  trantrene  piece  of  wood  connecting  the
two  homa  at  or  near  their  top^ndi  Krved  to  balen
the  atringi,  and  waa  called  iiyr,  and  in  Latin
trajutiUum.  The  homa  were  called  ir^x"'  nr
Buwo.  (SchoLVenetarf/aaJ.  u.3B3(  HeaycL
I.  V.  Ziya  ;  Cic  de  Nat.  Dnr.  iL  69.)  Tbeea  in-
■tmmenta  were  often  adorned  in  the  moit  coatly
manner  with  gold  and  ivory.  <Cic.  ad  Hma.  iv.
47;  Ovid.  Jlf<<.ii.  167.)  The  lyre  waa  coniideied
aa  a  more  manly  inatmment  than  the  cithata,
iller-aonndbg  bottom,
deep  tonet

when  played  atood  in  an  upright  poeition  between
the  kneea,  while  the  cithaia  itood  upon  the  kneea
of  the  player.  Both  inatrumeuta  were  held  with
the  left  lund,  and  played  with  the  righL  (Ovid.
Matm.lL  IE8.) It  hai  generally  been  niMKiMd

touched  with  a  liule  alaff  oiled  plectrtun  (wAq-
frrpoj')  (see  woodcut  onder  MfeMsA),  but  amoDff
the  painting!  diicorercd  at  Herculaneum  we  find
aevoal  inatancee  where  tha  penona  pl^  the  lyre
with  their  fingera.  (See  alio  Ovid.  Heroid.  ili.
IIB.)  The  lyre  waa  at  all  timea  only  played
aa  an  accompaniment  to  longa.

The  Latin  oKiatfida,  which  waa  uied  for  a  tyre
aa  well  at  a  cilhani,  ii  probably  the  aame  aa  the
Greek  (rfrfe«,  which,  according  to  Ileajchiua  (a.  o.),
aignifies  gnt-itiing  ;  but  Featua  (k  e.)  taket  it  to
be  the  aame  ai  fidei  (&ith),  becauie  the  lyre  waa
the  aymbol  of  harmony  and  unity  among  men.

The  lyre  (cilbara  or  phormini)  waa  at  Rrat
naed  in  the  redtationa  of  epic  poetry,  though  it  wa*

Erobably  not  played  during  the  recitation  itielf^
ut  only  aa  a  prelude  iMdore  the  minaDel  com-
menced hia  atory,  and  in  the  inlervalt  or  pauaea
between  the  aeveial  parts.  The  lyre  haa  given  ita
name  to  a  apeciea  of  poetry  c^ed  lyric  ;  thia  kind
of  poetry  wai  originally  never  teeit^  or  lung  with-
out the  accompaniment  of  the  lyre,  and  Hanetimea
alio  of  an  appropriate  danee.  (Compare  the  article
MBSioi!Plutarch,<f(;ifa»Kn,-  B6ckb,  do  Afcftx!
Pmtati;  Drieberg,  MiaUniuiAt  Wiattutia/lm
dtrGriaiai;  and  by  the  same  author  .^aftcUiitta
iber  die  MtaUc  dtr  OrietAai ;  Buney,  Ifiitory  of
Mmio;  Hawkini,  HMory  a/Mmic;  Krllger,  Dt
Mmidi  Graec  Or^anit  ana  Piwlari  temporafio-
rmOm,  GattinEen,  1840 ;  Mliller,  HitL  <^  Gnek

w.  p.  UB,  die.)  ....  n*a]


MACELLUM<i<f<m>Ma,AlhGn.L9i  bfma.
Xiior,  lcpt(lI^tg^<»>r),  a  pmviaion-nurket,  &eqneiit-
ed  by  cooki,  fiifaennen,  poulteren,  cnnfecticnen,
bulchen,  and  men  of  nmilHr  acca[j>Cioiu.  (Vam,
da  Ita  Kud.  iiL  2A7,di  Ling.  iyU;  t.  33.  pp.  UT,
148.  ed.  Spengel  ;  Plsut  A<JmI.  ilK.  3;  T«.
Cn.il.  3.24j  Hor.  Att  ikS.  229,  .B^iK.  L  15.
31  ;  Seneo,  EpiM.  IB.)  [For'im.]  Fram  ro-
wilvm,  a  provision-mejehBDt  vu  called  macd-
laTTMt  (aifvinfAiTi.  ■p<oxi(\ni).  (SuetoD.  JaL  36.
rajiat.  19  ;  VaiiQ,  de  Rt  RuiL  IiL  2,  4.)  Tbe
Atheniani  oiled  their  macellum  th  reiifor,  jnat  aa
Ibey  called  their  ilaye-inaikew  «(i  ri  bl^vii3a,
their  wino-market  tts  -rht  obot,  and  Dthei  nuu^eli
hy  the  name  of  the  commoditin  aold  in  thrm.
(PoU.ii.47:i.l9;Harpoci.ni.Aii7Hii.)  [J.Y.]

MA'CHINAE  (jifixarat),  and  O'ROANA
(tpyara).  The  abject  d(  thi>  article  is  to  gire  a
brief  general  aeconal  of  thoae  cootriTancei  for  the
GoncentTBtioD  and  application  of  force,  which  are
known  hj  the  oamei  of  nj^retnaifi,  TRedtaaical
poteert^  huoIumi,  atginet^  and  ao  forth,  ai  tbej
were  in  uae  among  Iho  Oreeki  and  Romant,  eipc-
ciall;  in  Iha  time  of  Vitnivini,  to  wh<iM  tsnth
bnok  the  reader  ii  raffned  kx  tha  delaili  of  the
aubject.

The  general,  but  hrase,  deSnilion  which  Vitm-
Tiui  girci  of  a  macUiM  (i.  I.  9  IXia  >  wooden
ctmcture,  haring  the  Tiitne  of  moiing  TS7  gnat
wejghca.  A  imuiiaa  diffvn  imta  an  of^^onan,  in-
aimuch  as  the  fonnoc  ii  more  cmiplei  and  pcadncei
)([eata  aSccti  of  povu  thas  ths  latter:  perbapa
the  diitinctiDn  may  bo  beat  eipnaud  b;  tnnalat'
ing  tbe  Mm»  reapectiieljr  mactau  or  aignit  and
ininimniL  VaAet  the  latter  elau,  beadea  com-
mon taoU  and  timph  in^rwniftdt,  aa  the  plough  for
example,  VitniTiiia  ^ipeara  to  include  the  timplt
mecAanieai  powm^  wtuch,  however,  when  oaed  in
combuiBtion,  aa  in  the  cn»  and  other  nutchinei,
become  madBnae.  Thua  Horace  ute*  the  word  for
the  machinea  uHd  to  launch  leiaeli  (Oann,  i.  4. 2),
wbich  iqipean  to  Lktb  been  effected  by  the  joint
force  of  ropM  and  pulleja  drawing  the  ihip,  and
a  Bcrew  puihing  it  fbrwardj^  aided  by  rollera
(fiturrrft)  beneath  '  "'
also  mcd  '


[SeeH


The  Qreek  wnlen,  whom  VitmTini  raUnwed,
diTided  machinea  into  three  claiMi,  the  (jwiai)
(RUHonain  or  iupBlarttit  (reapectinj;  which  lee
Viiniiiui  and  hia  commenlaton),  the  ipiriiale  or
TnrtuiugriKiy  [Htdbauli],  and  the  Iraetoriinn  or
PafioiKsoi'  (or  pdnaiMTor  according  to  the  reading
nf  the  old  editioDi)  for  moving  faeavy  weighta.  The
iufomution  which  he  givoi  na  may  perhaps,  how-
eier,  be  eihibitfd  batter  nnder  another  clauiG-


1.  7%a  Saitple  Attduniad  Pcmen  ««n  knonm
to  the  Qteek  mechaniciani  from  a  period  earlier
Iban  can  be  aaugned,  and  their  tluorica  were  com-
pletely demonatnted  b<r  Archimedea.  Vilniviot
(x.  3.  •.  B)  diaoounei  of  tha  two  modea  of  isieiog
b«ny  weighia,  by  rKtHaiar  (liAitaii)  and  emai/or
(■iwXuri)!')  motion.  He  eTplsina  the  action  of
the  Imtr  (farau  eeetu),  and  ita  three  dNferoit
■orta,  according  to  the  poaition  of  the  fuimim
(^o>iJx^><")> "id aomo  of  itaBpplicationa,aimthe


MACHTNAB.

itedyard  [tmliaa,  ttatar^fiaii  the  mra  and  redder-
oan  of  a  ahip;  and  alludei  to  the  principle  of
tvUiai  wlodtiet.  The  wiiiud  piaat  ii  not  spokea
of  by  yitiuviua  ai  a  mcUaa,  but  iti  pcopertica
aa  an  aid  in  the  elevation  of  weight*  are  often
nfeiTed  to  by  him  and  other  writQi ;  and  in  earl  j
timea  it  wu,  doubtleai,  the  lole  meana  by  which
the  great  blocki  of  itono  in  the  upper  paita  of
bnildinga  could  be  raited  to  their  jJacea.
Under  the  head  of  eirailar  n  "' "''


ig  aUuiio


0  the  T


whcela  and  icrewj,  plaailTa,  rhedat,  tgatpami,  rvtan,
cooUahe,  toorpiones,  baiiita^  P*^^  about  which  aee
the  reapcctive  artidea,  Tt  ia  worth  while,  alao,  to
notice  the  methods  adopted  by  CheniphiDc  and  hia
eon  Metagenet,  the  architects  of  the  temple  of
Artemis  at  Ephesua,  and  by  later  architects,  to
convey  large  blocks  of  marble  &om  the  qnarriea,  bj
supporting  them  in  a  cradle  between  wheels,  «
encloaing  ihem  in  a  n'lindriol  fiune-woik  of
wood  {VitruT.  z.  6.  a.  2) ;  and  alio  the  acnnnt
which  VitmTini  gives  of  tha  mode  of  measning
the  distance  paaied  over  by  a  carriige  or  a  ahip,
by  an  instrument  attached  lo  the  wheel  erf  tbe
former,  or  to  a  sort  of  paddle-wheel  projecting  frvn
the  aide  of  the  latter  (c  9.  a  14).  What  he  nja
of  the  piUlty  will  be  more  conveniently  staled  imdei
the  next  h^d.

2.  CompoHBd  Mtakimual  Powen,  or  Macilmm
for  Taitiag  itiKS  vtightt  (mooiBim  frndoriOc).
Of  these  Vitruvius  describes  three  principal  *«ta,
all  of  them  consisting  of  a  proper  erect  frame-work
(either  three  bcazns,  or  one  aupported  by  lopes)  ;
from  which  hong  pidlia,  the  rope  of  which  ia
worked  either  by  a  camber  of  men,  or  by  a  wind-
lass (sws£a),  or  by  a  large  drum  i^tympoHai,  ^if/^i-
(Kucrit,  ttpttpix'Bii')  moved  as  a  tread-wheel,  onij
Emm  within.  He  deicribea  the  diflennl  sort  of
pnliiea,  according  to  tba  number  of  ttoKief  (orii-
eafi)  in  each  block  (trocUsu  or  raotoHu),  whence
ah)o  the  machine  received  special  nancs,  inch  u
fni^n^ot,  when  thei«  wero  tlwrt  sheaves,  one  in
the  lower  block  and  tv^  in  the  uf^ier ;  and  poata^
ipaMotj  when  there  were  fist  aheaviea,  two  in  tbe
lower  block,  and  three  in  the  upper  (x.  S— £).

II.  MSilaiy  Erngmet.  (Vilnv.  i.  IA— 23  ;
Vegetiui  and  the  other  writ^a  da  Re  MHilan  ;
Aaiag  ;  HiLiroLia  ;  Ti8TUi>o  ;  Tosmintum  ;
TuaajB,  ftc.)

III.  ntatnml  AfadHan. [Tbutbi;h.]

IV.  HydnuHo  E-gi-ui.

1.  QmHymics  amd  deimrj  o/vOUrtkriHigkpip^
and  damub.  [AnVAaimcrva  ;  EHisaARiDsi ;
Fistula  ;  Foni.]  It  haa  been  shown,  nnda  tha
articles  refemd  to,  that  the  ancienti  well  knew,  and
that  they  qiplied  in  pnctioe,  the  hydraatatic  Uw,
that  water  cndoaed  in  a  bmt  pipe  ritea  to  the
■una  level  in  both  arms.  It  alto  qiptara,  fma
the  woric  of  Frontinus,  that  they  were  aoiuainted
with  the  law  of  hydiaulies,  that  tbe  qnanti^  of
water  delivered  by  an  taifire  in  a  given  time  4ft-
penda  on  the  aiie  of  the  orifice  and  on  the  height
of  the  water  in  tha  retetvoir  ;  and  alvi,  that  it  ii


2.  MadoMt  for  raimg  icnMr.  The  aocienls
did  not  know  enough  of  die  bws  of  atmeapberte
preaanie  to  be  acquainted  with  the  comnrai  iiidciiw
but  they  had  a  tort  of  forcing  pomp,  whicb
ibed  by  Vitmviaa  (i.  13),  whoMcdbM  tlM
ivcotion  to  CleiibiiiB. For  labing  widd  •  imal]


MAOISTER.
htiAi  mI;  tlwy  had  tbe  well-known  Krcw  at
ARhimedei,  an  uutnunsit  which,  for  thu  porti-
enlir  prnpoM,  hu  iwTer  been  luipiuied.  (ViOmf.
z.  1 1 )  CixuLiA.)  Bat  theii  puaipi  were  chiefly
on  tbe  prindpla  of  thoie  in  which  the  water  it
lifted  in  bockeli,  phued  either  at  the  eitieDiil;  of
B  lerer,  or  on  th«  rim  of  s  wheel,  or  on  ■  chain
wooing  bMwoen  two  whodi.  (VilniT.  i.  9 ;
Aktlu  ;  Ty«PAHtiM.)

3.  JUaMut  M  nUoi  voter  ii  He  lUnjy  foaer.
(Vitniv.  I.  10  ;  Mqli.)

1.  Other  qiplicalioiia  of  water,  ■•  to  the  mea-
mrement  of  time,  ud  the  prodiKtion  i>f  muiical
■unnde,  in  the  cbftjidm  and  Ibe  lijiilnulie  organ.
(VitroT.  ix.  5,  6,  X.  13;  HoMLoOitw  ;  Uv-
Bfctui*.)  [P.8.)

HAKNIA-NUH,  signified,  oiginall;,  a  pn-
jecting  balcony,  which  wai  erected  nond  the  Ra^
man  forum,  in  ordei  to  gire  man  aceommoda^oa
to  the  ipectaton  of  the  gladiatorial  combali,  by  the
cenMir,  CHaeniu,  b.c  S13  (Fettne,  kd.  p.  135,
cd.  HOUer ;  Iiidor.  Or^.  it.  3.  §  11 );  and  hence
haloiuiet  in  geaeral  cune  to  be  calW  Hoauaan.
Many  alluiooi  to  nch  ttmctnrca,  and  to  the  r^u-
lalioni  which  were  tbnnd  neceaary  to  keep  them
within  doe  hoondi,  are  fbond  in  the  ancient
writRB  (Cic.  Joad.  ii.  22  ;  Nan.  p.  83.  •.6fi,
UOIL;  BoBtoo.  Cli%  18;  VitruT.  T.  1;  Plin.
//.  X.mT.  10.  I.  37;  VaL  Mai.ijc.  12.  £7;
Cod.  JnM.  TiiL  2.  20,  10.  II,  iliiL  8.  S.  S  6,
L  16.  242.  S  1  i  Amm.  Hare,  xzrii  9,  10  ;  aee
alio  AMniTBUTRUli,  p.  88,  and  Ctacua,  p.
286,  a.)  [P.S.]

MAQADIS. [LTBi,  p.  721,  a. ;  MtieiCi.]

MAOIST'ER,  which  contain!  the  lame  root  aa
maff-it  and  iia^-inK,  WB*  applied  at  Rome  to  per-
aou  pimiiiiiiii  variuiu  Itinde  of  officei,  and  ii  ttni
eipluned  by  FeWui  (t  e.  Magiiitran)  :  —  "  Ma-
giitnare,  modenri.  VaSt  no^utri  noa  ulum
dDctorn  aitiiim,  led  eiiam  pagonmi,  aocietatiun,
Ticorom,  eoUegiomm,  eqaitmn  dicontor  ;  qoia
emnea  hi  maoii  ceterii  pseannL"  Panhu  (Dig.  £0.
tit.  16.  a  £7)  thu  de&iei  the  word:  —  "Qnibui
pcaeeipoa  cars  rerum  incmnbit,  et  qni  magit  quam
eeteri  diligeotiam  et  Mdljcitudinem  rehiu,  quibug
pfaesmt,  debent,  hi  tDSgietri  appellantuc.''  The
filbwii^  i*  a  lilt  of  the  principal  magiitri :  —

Mikoumt  ADHieeioNtiH.  [Adiiissionilbb.]

HAOiarsa  Abmoxuii  iq>pean  to  haTs  been  the
nme  officer  aa  the  MagiKecMilitaiiL  (Amm.  Hare.


«<17,  1


.9.)


B  AucTioNia. {BonoB.iw  Exma.]
HAOisma  BiBBNDI. [Stuposium.]
MikOisTBa  CoLLBOii  wu  the  [niideDt  of  a  col-
legium or  ecrporslioo. [Collbqium.]

HaoiStbb  EFieroLABUH  aniwared  letten  on
behalf  of  the  empenr.  (Orelli, /»Dr.  2352.)
MioiarBB  EQurrUM.  [Dictator,  p.  407,  h.J
Haqistbb  hathiMKiiu  waa  an  officer  oriecre-
tary  who  read  and  anawaed  petitioia  addreaaed  to
the  empenai.  [LiBBLLUB,  4.  e.]  Eeia  called  in
an  inactiplion  "  Magiiter  Lihellonim  et  Cogni-
tioDum  Saaamm." (Orelli,  L  e.)

Maomt«R  Mbmobiab,  an  officer  whoae  doty  it
waa  to  receiTB  the  deciiiDn  of  the  emperor  on  any
ntheet  and  commaniotte  it  to  the  public  ttr  the
pcnou  coDcaned.  (Amm.  Male.  XT.  6,  xirii.  6.)
HAflWTBB  HiLrruU,  the  ^tla  of  the  two  offl-
cen,  to  wttooi  ConHantiDe  intraated  the  command
«f  all  tlu  aniiea  of  the  emmte.  One  waa  placed
OTS'  the  tSTili7,  and  the  otbar  orer  the  amorj.


MAGISTRATUa  723

On  the  diviaiona  of  the  empire  their  nnmbcr  waa
incrcaacd,  and  each  of  t}iem  had  both  cavalry  and
Uibutry  under  faia  oommand.  Tn  addiuon  to  the
tilleof.Afiii/iiMiiit/ifu)t,welindthem  called  Mu^l-
iri  armoram^  aptUum  rt  pecJifvn,  viriuaqtu  tmliiiae
(Zoaim.  ii.  33,  iv.  27 ;  Valet,  ad  Atm.  Man.
irl  7.)  In  ibt  fifth  century,  there  were  in  the
Eaatem  empire  two  of  thete  oScen  at  court,  and
thtee  in  theprovincei ;  in  the  vetturn  empire,  two
at  court,  and  one  in  OauL  Under  Juttinian,  a
new  magialsr  militom  waa  ^ipointed  for  Armenia
and  Pontna.  (Walter,  QaoUoUi  da  SSmiteien
StdUi,  g  342,  2d  ed.)
Uaoistbr  Nav)&  [E^BHCiToniA  Actio.]
Maoistbh  OrricioaitK,  wot  an  officer  of  high
link  at  tho  imperial  court,  who  had  the  aaperin-
tendence  of  all  audiencea  with  the  emperor,  and
alto  had  eitenaiTs  juiiadictioa  oTer  both  dvil  and
military  Dfficen.  (Cod.  1.  tiL31 ;  12.  tit.l6i  Cod.
Theod.  1.  tic  9  ; 6.  ^t.  9  ; Amm.  Marc  zv.  5  ;


'i.  3  ;  Cottiod.  Van


■i.6.)


Popuii. (Dim

Mabistbr  BcaiNioBUM,  had  the  mreof  allthe
papen  and  documenU  belonging  to  the  emperor.
(Cod.  13;  tit.  9  ,  Spartian.  AtL  Ver.  i  ;  Lamprid.
jlla.Sm.1i6.)

Maoistui  Socibtatib.  The  equitei,  who
brmed  the  taiei  at  Rome,  were  dirided  into  com-
paniee  or  [urtnerihipa ;  uid  be  who  pretided  in
such  a  company  waa  colled  Magiiter  Socielatia.
(Cic.  Firr.iL  74,orf/'a»t.iiiL  3,  pro Plaado,13.)

Hagibtsb  VicOTtuu.  Anguatua  divided  Rome
into  certain  r^ionea  and  Tici,  and  commanded  that
the  people  of  each  TJcua  ahoutd  chooH  magiatri  to
manage  iuaaaira.  (8u«t.J«j.  30,  TVi.  76;  Orelli,
/■ucr.£,ai3,1530.)  From  an  inacription  on  an
ancient  twaic  referred  to  by  Piiitciu  (Zemioa,  i.  o.)
itBppean  that  there  were  fonriuchniBKiBtrito  each
Ticui.  They  were  accuatomed  to  exhibit  tho  Ludi
Compitalitii  dreated  in  the  praeteito.  (Atccn.  ia
Cic  riton.  p.  7,  ed.  OrellL)

MAQISTRA'TUS.  A  definition  of  Uagittn-
tua  may  be  collected  from  Pomponiua,  Dt  Origint
Jurii  (Dig.  1.  tit  2).  Magutrstua  are  thoae  "  qui
Jori  dicuudo  nraeaunC"  The  King  waa  originally
the  aole  Magiatratua ;  he  had  al!  the  Potettai.  On
the  expuliion  of  tbe  Kings,  two  CanMli  were  an-
nually ^>pointed  and  they  were  Magittratut.  In
coune  of  time  other  Magiatratui  were  ^pointed,
ao  that  Pomponiua  eoumetatet  as  the  Magittratut
of  his  time  "  qui  in  civitate  jura  leddebant,"  ten
triboni  plebia,  two  connlt,  eighteen  praelon,  and
eii  aedilet.  He  adds  that  the  Pnefecti  Annonae
et  Vigilom  were  not  M^patratut.  The  Dictator
was  alao  a  Magittretua ;  and  the  Cenaon ;  and  tho
Decemriri  litibut  judicandis.  The  goremort  of
ProTincaa  with  the  title  of  Propraetor  or  Proconad
were  alio  Magiatratua.  Qaiut  attributea  tbe  Jna
Ediceudi  to  the  Magiatjatna  Popnli  Ronuini,  with-
out any  rcatriction  ;  but  he  aayi  that  the  chief
edictal  power  waa  potteiied  by  the  Praetor  Urbanni
and  the  Praetor  Pcregrinua,  whote  jnriadictio  in
the  proTincea  waa  eiercited  by  the  Praeiidn  of
Prorincet;  and  alto  by  the  Ciu^e  Ardilet  whoie
jaritdiction  in  the  Provinciae  Popnli  Bomani  wai
eieruaed  by  the  Quaestorg  of  thoae  Proiincea.

The  word  Mugiatratus  content  the  same  element
aa  rUBg(ister)  and  mag(nua)  ;  and  it  aignifiea  both
the  pemna  and  the  oflicp,  aa  we  tee  in  the  phrase


m  MAOrSTRATUS.

Qipini.  (On  the  sbdicBlio,  gee  Riibina,  SSmiidie
SUialtmrfataiig,  p.  118  ;  nnd  PJut.  dc.  19).  (Li
vi.  1,  xiiiL  33.)  According  lo  FestDB,  >  uugi
Matui  WBS  one  wfao  had  "judicium  suipiciumque

According  lo  M.  Mesuln  th<  angur,  quoted  hj
Oillini  (liii.  15],  the  Aupicia  Uaiiiiia  belonged
tu  the  Coniul), Pmeton,  uid  Cenion,  ind  the
Minora  nmpicifl  to  the  other  Magiatiatui ;  accord-
inizlj  the Conauli,  Praeton, and  Ceiuon were
called  Majorca,  and  the;  were  elected  aC  the  Co-
mitia  Ceuturiala ;  llie  other  MBgiilntni  were  oJled
Minmt. The  Magiitratui  were  aJto  divided
Curulea  and  thoH  who  were  not  Cnndei;
Magiitratoi  Cumlei  were the  dictator,  com
praclorj,  centort,  sod  the  cunile  aedilei,  who  i
■o  called,  becsnse  the;  had  the  Jui  Sellae  Cundie.
The  uugiatratea  were  choaea  onlj  &om  the  Patri-
ciana  in  the  earl;  Republic,  but  in  courK  of  lime
the Plebeian! iha^d these honour*, with  the
exception  of  that  of  the  Interrex :  (he  Plebeian
Miffiitisnii  properl]'  n  railed  were  the  Plebeian
Aedila  and  the  Tribuni  Plebia.

The  diatinciion  of  MaftUlralus  into  Majorei
who  had  the  Imperiuin,  and  the  Mioorea  who  had
not,  had  a  refcrenc^e  to  Joriidlction  also,
former  lenn  conipriBed  Praetors  and  j^vemota  of
Prorincea ;  the  latter,  in  the  Kcpublican  time,
compiiaed  Aedilea  and  Quaeiton,  and,  under  the
fSmpire,  the  numerooa  bod;  of  Municipal  MagU-
ttolo.  The  want  of  the  Imperiuni  limited  the
power  of  the  Magiatratoi  Minoreg  in  Tarioui  mat-
ter! which  came  under  their  cogniiance,  and  the
want  of  it  alw  remoied  other  maltera  entirely  from
th«r  juriadictio  (taking  the  word  in  ita  general
aenae).  Thoae  matterg  which  belonged  to  Juria-
dictio in  itg  limited  genge  were  within  the  com-
petence of  the  M^ItnCus  Minoiea  [JuRTSuICTlo] ;

were  for  that  reason  not  within  the  competeuco  of
the  Moipatratoa  Minorea.  Aa  proceeding  irum  the
Imperium  we  find  enomerated  the  praetociae  atipu-
lalionea,  tuch  ai  the  caulio  damni  infccti,  and
CI  novi  Dperig  nnnciatione  ;  and  alio  the  Migaio
in  poigeuionem,  and  the  In  integrant  regtitutio.
Thug  it  appean  that  the  limited  juriadictio  wai
confined  to  the  Ordo  judicinrum  pnTatonim,  and
all  ^e  proceedings  Ettra  ordinem  were  baaed  on
the  Imperiiun '.  conacquently  a  Minor  Magialjstus
could  not  exercise  Cognitio,  praperlj  io  cailed,  and
coald  not  make  a  Decretum.  This  coniidecation
eipUiina  the  fact  of  two  Praelon  for  questiong  as
to  fideicommisia  benig  appointed  mider  Clandiug :
thej  had  10  decide  guch  matterg  for  all  Italj,
inagmnch  ag  auch  matters  were  not  within  the
competence  of  the  ninnidpal  mapstratea.  The
junadiction  of  the  municipal  magiitiatet  of  Cinl-

aum  of  money;  and  thia  limitation  was  alWwarda
extended  to  all  Italy.  Added  to  thig,  theae  magii-
tratea  had  not  the  Imperium,  which,  aa  alraady
obsened,  limited  their  Juriidiclia.

The  Magislratag  Minorea  could  take  cos^innco
of  maltera  which  wers  not  within  their  jurigdictio,
by  delegation  fnm  a  gupeiior  Manglratut.  Thug
in  the  cage  of  Damnum  Infcctnm,  inumuch  ag  de-
lay might  cauH  irreparable  migchie^  the  Praetor
could  delegate  to  the  Municipal  Magigtratns,  who
wera  under  him,  the  power  of  requiring  the  Caution
(Difl.  39,  tit.  2. 1.  4.)

It  became  necesaaiy  to  rs-organks  the  admini-
MnlioD  of  Oollia  CUalpinft,  on  iti  ceaaiiig  (o  b«  a


MAJESTAS.
Proiince  ;  and  sg  the  Juriadictio  wag  placed  in  the
hands  of  Municipal  Hagieoatiu,  who  had  do  Im-
perium, it  was  further  nectBary  to  determine  what
ahould  be  the  form  of  pnicedure  before  thege  Ma-

that  is,  in  such  mattan  aa  did  not  belong  lo  their
competence  bocauie  they  were  MagialjatuB  Minoreg,
but  wera  apecially  giien  to  them  by  a  Lex.  The
determining  of  this  form  of  pnceduni  wag  the  ob-
ject of  the  Lei  Rubno.  [LsiRuBHiA.]  (Puchto,


B*Wrt,X.


15.)


if  Adoption  (properiy  so  called)  illua-
the  distinction  of  Msgistratua  into  Majoca
linorea,  aa  fdunded  on  the  posseniug  or  not
iperium.  (Gaiua,  L  9S.)  Thig
adoption  wag  eflecled  "  Imperio  Ma^lratos,"  as
for  inmme«  before  tho  Fractal  at  Rome:  intha
Provinciae  the  game  thing  was  effected  before  a
Proconsul  or  Legatus,  both  of  whom  therefore  had
the  Imperium.  The  Munici|^  Magistiatua,  am
they  had  not  the  Imperium,  conld  not  give  ralidity
toBuch  an  act  of  adoption.  [O.  L.J

HAJESTAS  u  defined  by  Ulpian  (Dig.  48.
tit.  4.  a.  1)  to  be  "  crim«i  tllud  quod  adrenua
Populum  Romanum  rel  adiersus  securintem  ejus
committitur,"  He  then  gire*  larions  instmce*  of
the  Clime  of  Uajestu,  some  of  which  pretty  nearly
cDtreapond  to  treason  in  English  law  ;  but  all  ihc
otTences  included  under  Majeatag  comprehend  mofo
than  the  English  treason.  One  of  the  offence*  in-
cluded in  Majeslaa  was  the  effecting,  aiding  in,  or
planning  the  death  of  a  magiatiauis  Populi  Ro-

Thongh  the  phraac  **  crimen  majestatis"  waa  used,
the  complete  oipreasicn  was  "  crimen  laeaae,  im-
minutae,  diminutae,  minnlae,  majeatatiB.''

The  word  Majeslaa  consistently  with  itg  relatiDn
to  mag  (nui)  signihea  the  magnitude  or  grcatneaa
of  a  thing. **  Majestas,"  lajs  Cicero  (/"art  30)
"  est  quaedam  magnitudo  Populi  Romani ;"  "  Ma<
jeatas  est  in  Imperii  atque  in  nominig  Populi  Ro-
mani dignitite." Accordingly  the  phrases  "  Ma-
jeitaa  Populi  Romani,"  **  Imperii  Majestas^*  (Hor.
QfVL  iv.  Ifi)  signify  the  whole  of  that  which
Gonstiluted  the  Roman  State  ;  in  other  words  tho
vereign  power  of  the  RiHoan  SlaU. The  expra-
:in  ^  luinu^e  majestatem  **  consequently  siguiBea
ly  act  by  which  thii  tnajestat  is  impttind  ;  and
is  thus  defined by  Cicero  (dt  InixmL  ii  17),
"  Majestatem  minuere  eft  de  dignilaM,  aut  ampli-
tudinc,  aut  potestate Populi aut eorum quibs*
Populus  poteitatem  dedit,  aliqnid  dezogaie."  (Sec
Cic  ad  Film.  iii.  11. ■*  Hajeatalem  auiisti.'*)
The phrase  Majeatna Publica  in  the  Digest  is
equivalent  to  the  Majcstaa  Populi  RonwnL In
the  Republican  period  the  tcnn  Majealaa  Laeaa  or
Minuta  waa  most  commonly  applied  lo  oaea  of  a
general  betraying  or  surrendering  his  amy  to  the
~~  ^my,  exciting  sedition,  and  generally  by  hia  had
iduct  in  adminiatration  impairing  the  MajeMaa
of  the  State. (Tacit.  Ana.  i  72.)

Tho  Laws  of  the  Twelve  Tablea  punished  with
death  a  penon  who  slirrad  np  an  (oemy  against
Rome  or  sutnndered  a  R«nan  citiien  to  an  enemy.
3.)  The  L^e*  Hajestatta  weai
L  the  offence  of  Hajegtaa  gtne-
which  impaired  the  MsjeMas
Pablica ;  and  Mveial  of  the  special  proriaiona  of
the  Lei  Julia  are  enumcnted  in  the  paange  jan
referred  to.

Like  many  oliierl^lluLaiJiUiBWM  modified


L


MAJESTAS.

id  Imperial  Coil


bjSeraltiu

ve  mmt  not  omdade  from  the  title  in  the  Digf
"  Ad  Legem  Jnliim  MijeMatii,"  that  all  the  proyi-
■iotnauumetaled  nitdsrtiiat  title  wen  comprehended
in  the  origiiM]  Lei  Jnlia.  ItiiMatedbyHarciuna,
>•  then  died,  Out  it  waa  not  Msjettu  to  repoii  the
MMne*  of  the  Cunu  which  were  going  to  decay  ;
■nd  a  Reifiipt  of  ScTenu  Bud  hii  Ha  Antoiiiniii
Cuwalla  dcclaied  that  if  a  none  vol  thrown  aad
accidentallf  ittuck  a  ilatae  of  the  Empeior,  that
alio  wai  not  Majeitai ;  and  they  bIm  gnciouilf
declared  that  it  wai  not  Majettaa  to  fell  the
fMIoet  of  the  Csetar  before  they  were  conieciated.
H^re  then  it  an  inatance  nnder  the  title  ad  Legem
Joliam  Mijertalii  of  the  Imperial  reioipti  de-
daring  what  wu  not  Hajeatat.  Then  ii  alu  an
extraet  from  Satominiu  De  Jndiciii,  who  laji
that  if  a  penon  melted  down  the  itatuea  or  irk-
yiaei  of  the  Impeiator  which  were  already  con-
Hcnted,  or  did  any  limilar  act,  he  wu  liable  to
the  penalliea  of  the  Lex  Julia  Majeatatii.  Bat
even  thit  alto  ioti  not  prote  that  thii  proviiiou
vat  a  part  of  the  Julia  Lex,  at  originally  patted,  for
a  Lex  after  being  amended  hj  Senatatcouiulta  or
Imperial  Conititationi  itill  retained  iU  """"*  In
the  lime  of  Tiberiua  it  wai  a  matter  of  charge
■gainil  a  man  that  in  Belling  a  garden  he  had  in-
doded  a  ttalne  of  Anguitui ;  which  Tiberina  de-
dand  to  be  no  ofienee. (Tacit.  Am.  I  73.)

The  old  piniihment  of  Mqettoa  was  perpetnal
Inlitdietiim  froDi  fire  and  water ;  but  now,  layi
Paalna  (S.  A  t.  39),  that  ia,  in  the  later  Imperial
period,  pertont  of  low  condition  an  thrown  lo
wild  bcattt,  or  bomt  alive  ;  penona  of  better  oon-
dition  are  limply  put  to  death.  The  property  of
the  offender  wat  confitcated  and  hit  memoiy  waa

In  the  early  timet  of  the  RepnhlJc  eveij  act  of
■  dtiien  which  wat  injm^na  to  the  State  or  itt
peace  wat  called  Ferdaellio,  and  the  oSender  (per-
dmtUa)  wat  tried  before  the  popolna  l^popali  juili-
(»),  and,  if  convicted,  put  to  death.  (Lir.  iL  41,
•i  20.)  The  tailiett  trial  and  form  of  procednre
M  that  which  ia  given  by  Livy  (I  36)  ;  after  the
overthrow  of  the  kingly  power  the  notion  of  Fer-
daellio and  the  proceii  were  in  tome  degree
changed.  Numcnnu  offencee  agtunit  the  ttate
ven  comprehended  under  Ferdnellla.  For  in-
Itance  Cn.  Fnlciua  (LIr.  xivL  c  3.)  wat  charged
with  the  oSence  of  perduellio  for  lotins  a  Roman
army  ;  but  in  couTftfi  of  time,  and  probably  after
the  puiing  of  the  Lex  Porcia,  Iboogh  it  doeg  not
appear  that  thia  Lex  applied  to  Perduellio,  the
poniafament  was  aquae  et  iguit  interdicUo.  Ac-
cording ts  OuuB  "  peidnellii "  origioally  aignified
"  hntit"  (Dig.  SO.  tit  16.  a.  234)  ;  and  thus  the
eld  offence  of  perduellio  wat  equivalent  to  making
war  CHI  the  Roinan  State.  The  trial  for  perduellio
(  ptrda^imit  jadidtait)  exitled  to  the  later  times
of  the  Republic  ;  but  the  name  teemt  to  have
aluuat  fallen  into  diioie,  and  variona  tegea  were
piaaed  for  the  porpaac  of  determining  more  accu-
rately what  thould  be  Majeataa.

Thete  Leget  were  a  Lex  Apuleia,  piolxihly
fMKd  in  the  fifth  coniulthip  of  Mariut,  the  exact
CDDtoit*  of  which  are  unknown  (Cic  iJ«  Or.  iL  25,
49),  a  Lex  Vaiia  B.C  91  (Appian,  BtU.  Or.  L
37  :  Cic  Bmt.  83  ;  Valer.  Maxim,  viii.  g.  §  4),  a
Lex  Cornelia  pasted  by  L.  Comeliut  Sulla  (Cic.
i»  Pit.  21,  pro  CbuKl.  35),  and  the  Lex  Julia
alnadj  mentioned,  sod  which  continoed  under


MAJESTAS.  725

the  Empire  to  be  the  fundmncDtal  enactment  on
thii  tubject.  Thia  Lex  Julia  ie  by  tome  attributed
lo  C.  Jidius  (^aeiar,  and  assigned  to  the  year  a.  c
48,  and  thia  may  be  the  Lex  referred  to  in  the
Digett ;  tome  attume  a  lecond  I.ex  Julio,  nnder
Anguaraa.  That  a  Lei  de  Majealate  was  paued
in  Caetar's  time  appear*  from  Cicero. (Fhitifp.


.9.)

Under  the  Empire  the  term  Majettaa  wat  qiplied
to  the  penon  of  the  reigning  (^aetar,  and  we  find
the  phrases  Majettat  Augntia,  Imperatoria,  and
Eegia.  It  wsa  bowerer  nothing  new  to  apply  the
term  to  the  Emperor,  eoniidered  in  tome  of  hii
cnpacitiet,  tor  it  wu  a[^ied  to  the  magittratua
under  the  Kepublie,  aa  to  the  oontul  and  pnetor.
(Cic  PkO^.  xiil  9,  t'a  J>MtHem,  II.)  Honce
even  addruaet  Auguttna  (£J).  ii.  ].  388)  in  the
tennt  "  majettat  tua,**  but  thia  con  hardly  be
viewed  otherwise  than  aa  a  pertonal  compliment,
and  not  aa  said  with  reference  to  any  of  the  officei
which  he  held.  The  eiteniion  of  the  penaltiea
lo  TBrioni  new  offences  againil  the  perton  of  the
Emperor  belongs  of  courts  to  the  Imperial  period.
AugusLut  availed  himtelf  o1  the  Lex  for  protecut.
ing  the  authon  of  bmoii  libelli  {tCffxt^onaa  dm
fimotit  IZdUt,  ipadt  Itgii  gia,  tradarU,  TaciL
Am.  i.  73 ;  Dion  Cats.  Ivl  27  ;  Sueton.  Odav.
6S) :  the  proper  inference  from  the  [utage  of
Tacitua  ia  that  the  Lcgea  Majestatit  (for  the;  all
'"  '"" '"-'  under  the  term  "Legem


of  Cieere  C<^  Fan.  iiu  11)  ia  manifeatly
cormpt,  and  at  il  ttandi,  incDuiittent  with  the
context  1  it  cannot  be  taken  at  evidence  that  the
Lpk  Majestatit  of  Sulla  contained  any  provisions
01  to  libelloua  words,  aa  to  which  there  were
other  lufiicient  proviticnt.  [iNJuau.]  Sigoniua
haa  attempted  to  collect  the  capita  of  the  Lez
Majestatit  of  SuUo.  Under  Tiberint  the  oSence
of  Majettaa  waa  extended  to  aU  acta  and  woriis
which  might  appear  to  be  ditreapectFul  to  the
Princepi,  at  appean  from  variont  passages  m  Ta-
citua {Am.  L  73,  74,  iL  60,  iii.  SB,  6S,  67,  *e.).
The  term  Perduellio  was  still  in  use  under  the
Empire,  and  acema  to  hare  been  eqi-ivalent  to
Majeataa  at  that  period.

An  inquiry  might  be  mode  into  an  act  of  Majet-
taa againat  the  Imperator  even  after  the  death  of
the  otfender  ;  a  rule  which  waa  ealabliahad  (aa  we
aio  inibimed  by  PbuIub)  by  M.  Aureliua  in  the
cate  of  Dnincianni  or  Diuncanius,  a  senator  who
had  taken  part  in  the  outbreak  of  Caiiiui,  and
whose  property  waa  claimed  by  ths  ftKut  after  hit
death.  (Peihapi  ths  account  of  Capstolinui,  M.
AkI.  Fill.  c.  26,  and  of  Vulcatiut  Oallicaous.  Am-
cfiuCon'tu,  c.  9,  ianotinconaittentwiUi  the  ttate.
ment  of  Paulut ;  on  the  cate  of  Diundanua,  tee
Tillemonl,  Hiitoin  da  Empemirt,  vol.  ii.  p.  SS2.)
A  conttitution  of  S.  Severut  and  Antoninui  Cara.
calla  declared  that  from  the  lime  that  an  act  of
Majeetoa  wat  oommitted,  a  man  could  not  aliriate
hit  property  or  manumit  a  alave,  to  which  the
gnat  {magma)  Antouinu  (probably  CanuaHa  it
alill  meant),  added  that  a  debtor  rauld  not  a'Vr
that  time  lawfully  make  a  payment  to  him-  In
the  matter  of  Majettaa  slaves  could  alto  be  ex-
amined by  torture  in  order  to  give  evidence  againit
their  maater:  thia  provision,  though  comprehend^
in  ths  Code  undsr  the  title  Ad  Legem  Julim
Majcitatis,  waa  periiapa  not  contained  in  the  ori-


Si  8


•  o"


726  MALLEUS.

gimil  Uw,  fbi  Tibcrinii  lold  a  nutn'ii  ilaveg  (o  the
actor  publicni  (^n.  iiL  67)  in  nrder  that  iher
migM  give  eridsice  agaitut  tbeii  muter,  nho  waa
occuicd of Rapetundae and  alao nC Majettoa.

Idcn  MajntBi,  and  the  caae  of  FuWia  U  cited  ai
an  instance. (Dig.  4B.  tii.  4  i  Cod.  ii.  tit.  B.)

Ai  to  tbe  phiuc  Paliia  MBJeilai,i«  P.iTitu
PoTISTAS.  (Tbu  hiitory  of  Majeatat  it  gi'en
intli  gnatminutenm  bj  Rein,  Dm  OinwJrvoU
drr  Homtr.  A  brief  view  of  tho  mbjeet  ia  Tery
difliroll  to  gire.)  [G.  L.]

MAJO'RES. [iNPANfl.]

MA'LLEUS,  dm.  MALLE'OLUS  (/kuimip :
aifipa,  dim.  a^vflar),  a  homnicr,  a  mallet,  waa
lued  mueh  for  tho  nme  pnrpoui  in  ancient  oa  in
modem  timea.  When  Kveral  men  were  striking
witb  their  hammen  on  the  game  anril,  it  wai  a
maltei  of  neceuity  tbat  tbej  aliould  alriko  in  lime,
and  Virgil  acconlinKlj  »ayi  of  the  Cyclopes,  "Inter
te  brochia  lollunt  m  nuTMnm."  (Gmg.  iv.  174  ;
Am.  viii.  452.)  The  tame  which  he  detcribei  ii
reprasented  in  the  anneied  woodcut,  laken  from  an
aocient  baj-relief^  in  which  Vulfan,  Brontea,  and
Steropes,  are  leen  forging  the  metal,  while  the
third  C;clapii,PriHcmon,falDwiChebellowB.  {Am.
viti.  425.)  Betide  the  anTil-itond  [Inccs]  ii  aeen
the  Teaael  of  water,  in  wbich  the  hot  iron  or  bronie
waaimmened.  (/i.  t.  ISO,  461.)


But  beaidea  the  emplAjrment  of  the  bammer
npon  the  anvil  for  making  all  ordinary  ntentilt,
the  imith  {xa>Jitii)  wionaht  with  thit  lattrument
£){urct  called  tfrya  tr^n/prtXafrrt  (or  AXovpipTtrity
Branch,  Anal,  il  222),  which  wen  either  imall
and  line,  tome  of  their  parti  being  beaten  ai  tl^in
aa  paper  and  being  in  Teiy  high  relief^  oi  in  Uie
broniea  of  Sirii  [Lorica],  or  cf  coloaio]  propor-
tiona,  being  compoied  of  tepoiale  plalea,  rivetted
together:  of  thii  the  most  remarkable  example
waa  the  itatne  of  the  atm  of  wqiught  bronie  (ir^
p^AoToi  KoAmirii,  Thoocrit.  ixiL  47  ;  ^onjfw-
itmrfa,  Pbilo,  dt  7  »«*«).  4.  p.  14,  eA  OrelL),
■oenly  cubita  high,  which  waa  erected  in  Rbodci.
Another  remarkable  production  of  the  aame  kind
waa  the  golden  itaCue  of  Jupiter  (Stnbo,  TiiL  6.
20  ;  Plat.  Phtudr.  p.  232,  Hcindorf),  which  waa
erected  at  Olympia  by  the  soni  of  Cypaclui.

By  other  attiliceia  the  hammer  wai  uaed  in  con-
jnnction  with  the  chisel  [Ddlaihia],  aa  hj  the
carpenter  (paiioiu  malleia,  Coripp,  de  Laud.  JuiHiii,
IT.  47  i  woodcut,  p.  98)  and  tho  aculpton

The  term  malliolai  denoted  a  faBnuoer,  the
traoiVene  hod  of  wliich  im  fbnned  fiw  bidding


MANCIPII  CAUSA.

pitch  and  tow ;  which,  hariog  been  lel  on  fin%  wn
projected  ilowly,  so  that  it  might  net  be  extin-
guished during  ita  flight,  upon  hootea  and  other
bnildingi  in  order  to  >c(  them  on  lire  ;  and  which
wu  therefore  commonly  uaed  in  aieges  tagether
witb  torches  and  fidoricae.  (Liv.  xiiriiL  6  ;  Non.
Marcellua,  p.  656,  ed.  Lipa ;  Featua,  «.  e.  t  Cic
pro  MU.H;  Vegtt.  dt  Re  AfiL  n.  Ii  ;  VitniT.x.
16.  9.  ed.  Schneider.)
MALUS.  [Natik.]
MALUS  0CULU3.  [FASctNon.]
HANCEPS  haa  the  aame  relation  to  Mattcipiom
that  Anipex  has  to  AnapciDm.  It  i*  pweriy  qni
mann  capiL  But  the  word  hat  lemM  tpedal
lignificationi.  Mancipei  were  they  who  bid  at  the
public  lettingi  of  the  cenion  for  the  pnrpoae  at
fiumlng  any  part  of  the  public  property.  (Featna,
1-  tL  Mancepr  ;  Maocepi  dicitor  qui  quid  a  papula
emit  condicitie,  quia,  Ac  ;  Cic  jm  Pbna.  c  26,
ed.  Wunder.)  Somettmea  the  chief  of  the  PnUi-
cani  genemlly  are  meant  by  thii  term,  aa  they  were
no  donbl  tho  bidders  and  gave  the  lecnrity,  and
then  they  ihsred  the  andertaking  with  othen  or
underlet  it,  (Aicon.  n  Dm.  Verr.  c  10.)  The
Mancipei  would  accordingly  have  dittinctiTe  name*
according  to  the  kind  of  rerenue  which  they  tsok
on  leaac,  at  Decunumi,  Poctitores,  PacnariL  Siiela~
luni  ( flip,  1,  and  the  note  in  Bunnaui's  editian)
sayt  that  the  bther  of  Petro  waa  a  mancepa  ik
labonrera  (oparoe)  who  went  yearly  from  L'mbrift
to  Sabinnm  to  cultiTit«  the  hmd  ;  that  ia,  he  hired
them  fiwn  their  matten  and  paid  so  much  for  tlra
use  of  them  ;  aa  ii  now  often  done  in  alave  codB'
triea.  The  lermt  Mancipea  Thermanmi  et  Sali~
naium  occur  in  ths  Theodoaian  Code  (14.  tit.fi.
a.!).  tG.L.]

MANCIPA'TIO.  [Mancipium.]
MA'NCIPI  RES.  [DoHiNiuH.l
MANCITII  CAUSA.  Thethreeej,
by  which  the  Romans  indicated  the  al
which  a  bee  pertoa  might  be  with  reapect  to  an-
other, were  In  PoteatUe,  In  Mann,  and  In  Man-
cipio  ejtu  eue.  (Ooina,  L  49.)
of  bit  Poteataa  ■  father  could  ie
to  anether  person,  for  in  the  old  timet  of  the  t««
public  his  Patria  Poteilai  wat  hardly  diilingniihed
&om  property.  A  husband  had  tho  some  ]
ovR  B  wife  In  Manu,  for  the  wat  "
Accordingly  a  child  in  Potestate  and  a
Manu  were  properly  Rea  Honcipi ;  and  they  wnra
said  to  be  la  Mancipio.  Stili  aoch  penoai,  when
mancipalcd,  were  not  exactly  in  the  lelatim  of
slaves  to  the  persons  to  whom  thty  wen  maneipMed  ;
bnt  they  occupied  a  status  between  fi«e  poiiMii  and
slavei,  which  waa  expressed  by  the  wndi  Maoditti
causa.  Snch  persons  aa  were  in  Mandpii  cnw
were  not Sui  juris (Oaiut,i.tS— GO);  andaU  tlttt
they  acquired,  wat  acquired  lor  the  pertmt  to  whota
they  were  mancipated.  Bat  they  dtflered  ftnn
slaves  in  not  being  poatCMed  ;  they  mtghtalao  have
an  injurianun  actio  for  ill-treatment  irtHn  thoae  who
had  Oiem  In  Mancipio,  and  ^ej  did  not  k«  the
rights  of  Ingenni,  but  these  rights  woe  only  itta-
pended.  As  to  contncta,  the  penan  with  whnn
they  conCmcIed  might  obtain  the  ait  of  such  pro-
perty {bona)  as  would  bare  been  thein,  if  ther  had
not  been  in  mancipii  causa  ;  at  Gaiua  eifrewea  it
(iv.  60).  Pertont  In  mancipii  causa  might  ba
manumitted  in  the  tame  way  aa  ilavea,  and  the
limitBtiont  of  the  I.ex  Aclia  Sentia  and  Fntia  Cani-
nia  did  not  lyplj  to  inch  nananiiMinw. Thapw-


HANCIPIUM.

taa  who  sflcctad  tbe  nuninDiuiini  thereby  acquu«d
k  kind  of  [atnnul  right,  which  wu  of  ume  im-
poctanee  in  the  matten  of  heredilu  ani  tuleU.
(Sangny,  SfHam,  &c  L  360.)

Tha  itricl  [KBctice  of  Jllancipatio,  at  applied  to
cbildroi,  had  Ulea  into  dinue  in  thetimaol  Oaiui,
>nd  pmbaUT  atill  eariia,  and  it  bad  then  become
K  oat  iMal  fbnn  by  which  the  Patria  Potcetu
wai  diMelVed  [EhahcifjtioJ  ;  eicept  a  penaa
«■<  maneipited  01  DoxaU  cwua.  In  caee  of  delicti
by  th*  no,  the  &ther  Muld  manaiate  him  (u  ouu/i
MIB  noHC^io  dan),  and  one  act  of  mancipado
wai  conaideied  nffieient  (Qaiui,  it.  7S — 78  ;
Ut.  TJiL  28  ;  but  ths  wn  had  a  lishl  of  action  for
reeoTecing  hia  frasdom,  when  he  had  worked  out
the  amoont  of  the  dam^a.  {Moa.etRom.Leg.CoU.
ii,  3.)  Jiutinian  pot  an  end  to  the  noxae  dalio
in  the  caie  of  childieu,  which  bdeed  before  hia
tune  had  Uien  into  dinue.  (laiL  i.  tit.  B.  a.  7.)

in  hii  time,  Oaiu  remariu  (L  lil ),  that  men
vm  not  kept  in  mancipii  csnaa  (ia  « jitre)  for
any  long  time,  (he  <brm  of  maocipatiD  being  only
■aed  (eieept  in  the  caw  of  a  noialii  caizm)  for  the
porpoie  of^  emancipation.  But  queilioni  of  law
Mill  aroaa  out  of  tlu*  f«m ;  for  the  three  maucipa-
iiaaea,  vUch  were  noccaMrj  m  the  caie  of  a  eon,
L  Aceord-
_  _  B  who  had been

i,  bnt  bom  after  the  third  muci-
patio  of  hti  &thei,  wa*  itiU  in  tbe  power  of  hia
nandbther.  A  child  begotten  by  a  eon  wh
mhk  thiid  rosocipatio,came  into  hia  father*B  power
if  he  waa  manomitted  afler  that  mancipsti'
it  the  GUber  died  m  maDcipio,  the  child
ini  jnria.  (Qaiua,  L  135.)

Coemptio,  h;  which  a  woman  came  in
wai  effected  by  mancipatio,  and  the  caemptiD  might
be  eilhermatrimonii  eania,orGduciaa  eauM.  The
fidnciBe  cania  eoomptia  *
■eceeaaiy  when  a  worn
tntona,  and  abo  when  abe  wiihed  to  make  a  wiU  ;
bat  a  aenataaoonaaltan  of  Hadrian  diqwnaed  with
the  oenmony  in  the  latter  <«&  (Gaini, '  ■ '  - ■ '

Dim  Caninidlriil  44)  laya  that  Til
InDttfared  or  gave  ('{Aih<)  hii  wife  to  OctBTianoi,
aa  a  father  would  do  ;  and  the  tranafcr  of  hia  wife
Ednreia  by  the  younger  Calo  to  Qointua  Hoftenaim
(PhifcCSK.JWui.c.25)iaaweU-konwnatory.  If
both  th«e  caiea  the  wife  waa  In  Mann,  the  mu
ban  been  mancipated.  Maoeipatio  in  anch  cai
would  be  equinlent  to  a  diTorce  ;  at  any  rate,
both  the  eaiea  which  haie  been  mentioned,  the
■econd  marriage  mut  have  been  pufceded  by  a
CDoaent  to  di^olve  the  marriage,  which  would  be
■nfficieut  if  the  wife  waa  not  in  manu,  and  would
nqnire  the  form  of  mancipalio  if  the  wai  in
(Oaiiii,L]S7,)

The  aitnadon  of  a  debtor  who
to  hi*  creditor  naembled  that  of  a  peraon  who  irai
In  mancipii  cauaa.  [O.  L.)

HANCI'PIUM.  Tbe  etymology  of  thia  word
ia  the  aane  aa  that  of  tbe  word  Mandpatio,  of
which  Oaiu  (l  131)  rayi,  "Hancipatio  dicilui
quia  maini  rea  ^litur."  The  term  HandpimD
Uh  ia  derived  £nim  the  act  of  corporeal  appiS'


iioa  ia  with  reference

ahip  of  a  thing. It  waa  m

i^pnbenrion,  but  one  which


i  iimple  corporeaJ

accompanied  with

denribed  br Oaiut  (L  119):~

~  ~  .  the  pceaence  of  w '


MANCIPIUM.  737

KB,  who  muat  be  Roman  eitizcua
and  of  the  age  of  puberty  ^^paAnvt),  and  alao  in
lother  penon  of  tbe  aame  condition,
who  holdi  a  pair  of  brazen  acalea  and  hence  ia
cabled  Libripeni.  The  porchaacr  (qmi  nuncipu  a^
apil)t  taking  hold  of  the  thing,  laya :  I  affirm  that
thia  ^Te  (iomo)  a  mine  Ex  Jure  Quiritium,  and
he  ia  pnrcbaied  by  me  with  thia  piece  of  money
ei)  and  bmen  acalea.  He  then  atrikei  the  icalea
ith  the  piece  of  money,  and  giTsi  it  to  the  icller
aa  a  aymbol  of  the  price  (jyoii  pntU  loco).'  The
Hunt  of  (he  matter  ia  giren  more  biiefly  by
(/Voj.  lii.).  Thii  mode  of  tianifei  ap-
plied (o  all  R»  Mancipi  whether  free  peraraia  or
tlavei,  animaia  or  landa.  Landi  (praitia)  might
tianiferred,  though  tbe  partiee  lo  the
,  0  were  not  on  the  landa  ;  bnt  all  other
thinga,  which  were  objccta  of  mancipatio,  were  only
tnnafenble  in  the  pmenca  of  the  portiea,  becaoae
icporeal  apprebenaion  waa  a  neceaaary  part  of  the
^remooy.  The  puichaaer  er  penon  to  whom  the
lancipotio  waa  made  did  no(  acquire  (he  poiaeaaion
of  (he  mancipatio  ;  for  the  aequiiition  of  pooHaaiiHi
tpaiaie  act.  (Ouui,  ir.  131).  Gaiua  caili
Hancipatio  "  imaginaria  qoaedam  renditia,"  Ibr
though  the  law  required  thii  fonn  for  tbe  tnuufer
of  tbe  Qtiiritanaii  ownenhip,  tbe  real  contract  of
■ale  conaiated  in  the  agreement  of  tbe  partita  aa  to
the  price.  Tbe  party  who  tramferred  the  owner-
■hip  of  a  thing  pnnoant  to  theae  fisma  waa  aid
"  mandpio  dare  i "  he  who  dint  acquired  the
ownerahip  waa  aaid  "niancipio  acdpere."  (Plant
TVwm.  ii.  4.  IS.)  The  ferb  "maocipare"  ia
lometimei  uied  aa  equivalent  to  "  mancipio  dare."
Horace  (£p.  ii  2.  159}  oietthe  phraae  "mancipat
uaui,"  which  ia  not  an  unreaaonable  licence :  be
meani  to  lay  that  "nana'  or  tuoc^iion  baa  the
tame  efiect  aa  mancipatio,  which  ia  true  ;  hat  utnt
only  had  ita  eiri»t  in  the  caae  of  Ret  Mancipi,
when  there  had  been  r»  Manei[aitio  or  In  Jura
CeetiD.  Both  Mandpado  and  In  Jnce  Ceeaio
eiiated  before  the  Twelve  Tablai  iFn^.  Vat.  SO).
Mandpatio  ia  uaed  by  Qaina  to  eipreia  (he  wet
of  tianafer,  bat  in  Cicero  the  word  Mancipiura  it
nied  in  thia  aenae.  (Cic  da  Q^  iiL  16,  de  Orat
L39.)

The  diviaion  of  thingt  into  Rea  Uancipi  and
Nee  Handpi,  had  reference  to  tbe  (brmalities  re-
qniaita  lo  be  obaerred  in  the  tranafer  of  ownership.
It  ia  ttoted  in  the  article  Dominiuh,  what  thingi
were  thinga  MancipL  To  thia  liat  may  be  added
children  of  Roman  porend,  who  were  according  to
the  rid  law  Rea  MuicipL  [Mancipu  Ciuba.]
The  Quiiitarian  ownenhip  of  Rib  Mandpi  could
only  he  immediately  tranaferred  by  Mancipatio  or
In  Jore  Cetaio ;  tnnafer  by  tradition  only  made
each  thingt  In  bonia.  The  Qniritarian  ownenhip
of  Ret  nee  mandju  waa  acquired  by  tradition  only,
when  there  waa  a  jutla  cauaa.  Qniritarian  owner-
ahip  ia  called  mancipiom  by  the  earlier  Roman
writen:  the  word  dominiom  ia  fint  oied  by  latet
wiilen,  aa  for  inatance  Oaiai.  Mancipatio  conld
only  take  place  between  Roman  dtiient  or  thoia
who  had  the  Commerciom  ;  which  indeed  appcan
from  the  worda  uaed  by  the  purchaier.  (Oaius,  i>
119;  m^  Frag.  lix.  S.)

The  only  word  then  by  which  thii  forma]  tianifer
of  ownei^ip  waa  made  wai  Mancipinm,  which
occnis  in  tbe  Twelve  Tablea.  (Dirkaen,  rekrnaU;
&c  p.  39&.)  The  wcod  neium  or  nema  ia  aim
'  in  the  aame  aente, Cicero  (Tlifih


5)  d


MANDATI  ACTIO.

9  "  Abalieniitio  "  to  ba  "  ejni


and  Ihii  it  effected  ei
ditia  (ilteri  neia  sal  in  jure  canio  inter  i
jure  cItUI  Eeri  posgnnL"  AccDrdiiig  to  chii
tioa  "  AboIiemtiD  "  ii  of  a  Ra  Mincipi,  a
thing!  deterniimite  ;  v)d  the  mods  of  tn


either  b;  "tnditii
Thou -


" ntancipsIiD  "  tai  "la  jure  ccuis"  of  Oaiu)  (ii.
4 1 },  and  accordiiifil?  manciiialiD  or  the  older  term
mandpiuni  ii  eqoivalenl  to "trsditio  nem:"  in

Cicero  (0a  Hara^  mpau.  c  7)  an*  both  wordi
in  the  lanie  tenlencc,  where  ho  ipeaki  of  Tarioiu
titlet  to  property,  and  (unotig  them  he  mentiona
the  Jiu  mancipii  end  Jul  nexi.  He  may  mean
hen  to  ipeak  of  the  Jut  mancipii  in  iu  ipacial
■enu  sa  conUoitfd  with  the  Joa  ncii  which  had  a
wider  meaning  |  in  another  inetance  he  iiaea  both
wordi  to  cipre«  one  thing.  (Ad  Pam.iT.3ll.)  Ac-
cording to  Aeliui  Oalltu,  eoeiything  vtu  "  nexum*
^  quodcunj^ue  per  aeg  e(  Librora  geritur  i""  and  mm
numcipatio  was  effected  per  ae«  et  libiam,  it  waa

by  the  >c*  and  libn  continued  probably  till  Jul-
tinian  abaliihed  the  diitinction  between  Ra  Uan-
dpi  and  Ret  Nee  MancipL  It  ii  alluded  to  hj
HoTBce  (Ep.  iL  %  16S),  and  the  libra,  wyi  Pliny
(iiiiii.  3),  ii  atill  uied  in  inch  lormi  of  transfer.

When  ihinga  were  tranRferred  by  mandpatio
ondci  a  contract  of  lalc,  the  vendor  wal  bound  to
warranty  in  double  of  the  amount  of  the  thing  lold.
(FauL  S.  R.  ii.  i.  IE.)  A  Teodor  therefore  who
had  *  doubirol  title  would  not  k11  by  mancipium,
but  would  iDet«ly  Iraiuler  by  deliTeiy,  and  leare
the  pnrchaMt  to  obtain  the  Qniritarian  ownenhip
of  tEie  thinK  by  unicajuoo.  (PlauL  Oav.  h.  2. 9,
y^BTU,  iv.  S.  fiS.)  Accordingly  Vairo  obaerrei
(De  lit  RuMtiiia,  ii.  10)  that  if  a  ilare  wai  Dot
trstulenvd  by  mandpium,  the  idler  entered  ioto  a
■tipulatio  dupli  to  be  eufbned  by  the  buyer  in  ttie
CBK  of  eiiction  ;  when  ths  tranafet  vu  by  mand-
pium, thii  nipuUtioa  wai  not  neceuiiy.  The
"  ^^  «  called  Lei  Mancipii,


infer  fiui


ro  (Da  Or.  i.  39),  that  the  Lei  or  («im>  con-
tained the  penaltj,  but  merely  that  it  contained
what  the  uller  warranted.  (See  Pro  Mamta,  a.  2.)

Aa  to  the  application  of  Mancipalio  to  Tcalamenti,
lee  Tksta  HINT  [Tie.

ll  appean  &om  what  hai  been  nid  that  manci-
pimn  may  be  uied  a>  equivalent  to  complete  owner-
ahip,  and  may  thua  be  opposed  to  tuua  aa  in  a  pai-
•age  of  Lucretina  that  bai  been  often  quoted  (iiL
DBS),  and  to  Fnictni  (Cie.  o<f  Faa.  vii.  29.  30).
Somolimet  the  word  mdndpinm  ligniliei  a  akve,
ai  being  one  of  the  Bei  mancipi :  thii  ii  laobably
the  icnae  of  the  word  m  Cicero  (Top.  5)  and
certainly  in  Horwe  (Up.  L  6.  39).  Sometimea
maneipia  ig  uied  generally  for  Ret  mandpi  (Uln.
^t.  li.  27),  unleii  Kem  mandpi  ia  the  right  read-
ing in  that  pauage.  Mandpation  no  longer  ei-
iated  in  the  code  of  Juatinian,  who  took  away  all
diatinction  between  Ha  Mandpi  and  Nic  Man-
dpi. The  ownerahip  of  all  corpona!  thingi  wu
made  tianafembla  by  Tradllio  with  a  juata  canaa.

The  labjcct  of  Mancipium  and  Mandpatio  ii
dlKUwed  by  Com.  Van  Bynkerahoek,  Opmcuhim
tie  Rthm  Mamipi  tt  NatMancgii;  and  Puchia,
/w(.ii.  8238.  [O.L.]

MANDA'TI  ACH'IO. [M.aHDATDii.]


HANDATUH.
MANDA'TUM. It  ia  a  conttnet  of  roaodatma

when  one  penon  comzniaaiona  another  to  do  amae-
Ihing  wilhoBt  rewaid,  and  that  other  penon  imdrr*
takes  to  do  il ;  and  generally  it  may  be  itated  that
whenever  a  man  oommiuiooa  another  to  do  aaine-
Ihing  without  pay,  which,  if  the  thing  were  to  ba
done  lor  ftj  (nerca),  wonld  make  tho  traniaecion
a  contract  of  locatio  and  eondactiD,  the  contract  of
mandatnm  eiiiM ;  ai  t(  a  man  givet  clothea  to  m
fullo  la  be  forbiahed  up  and  cleaned,  or  to  a  tailor
(taraiutor)  to  mend. The  penon  who  gave  tba

received  It,  VB>  the  maadalariaa.  The  mandatnm
might  be  either  on  the  »le  acconnt  of  the  man-
dator, or  on  another  penon'i  aecoont,  or  on  the
sccounL  of  the  mandator  and  aoDtker  pcncai,  or  nn
account  of  the  mandator  and  mandatarioa  or  on  llie
account  of  the  mandatariua  and  another  peiaoKi.
But  there  could  be  no  m»nil.tnm  on  the  account
(graiia)  of  the  mandatariua  only ;  ai  if  a  man
were  to  adviaa  another  to  pal  hia  aiooey  tat  ta  in.
tereit,  and  it  were  lott,  the  loaar  would  hare  no
mandati  actio  againal  hia  adviaer. If  the  advica

had  the  like  reault,  il  waa  a  queition  whether  thia
waa  a  oue  of  mandatum  ;  but  the  cqiinion  of  Sa-
binui  prevailed,  that  it  mu,  and  the  mandoot  thna
became  lenuity  forTitiut.  It  waa  not  mandatODi
if  the  thing  waa  contra  boaoa  moret,  or  in  otho'
worda,  if  the  object  of  the  mandntumiraianillefial
act.  A  """'*«'""'  might  bo  genenl  or  ipedal  ;
and  the  mandatariua  wai  bound  to  keep  within
the  limita  of  the  mandatum.  The  mandatir  had
an  utilii  actio  againit  inch  penona  aa  the  mandata-
riua  contacted  with  ;  and  luch  pcnoni  had  tha
like  action  againgi  the  mandator ;  and  a  directa
The  mandator  and


agauut  one  another  ia  ttipecl  of  the  maudatnin :
the  actio  of  the  mandatariua  might  be  for  in-
demnity geoenlly  in  reaped  of  wliat  he  had  dtma
bona  fide. If  the  mandatariua  exceeded  bia  com-


■eing  reacinde
he  death  of  i


e  had  n.


the  amount  of  damage  tuttained  hj  (he  i
tion  of  the  mandatnm,  provided  it  oould  have  been
eiecutrd.  The  mandatum  might  be  recalled  by
the  mandana,  or  renounced  by  the  mandalanua,
"  dum  sdbuc  Integra  m  lit,"  that  it,  no  loai  mnal
accme  to  either  party  in  coniequence  of  the  tontmet
reacinded.  The  contract  wat  dinolved  by
porty  I  bnt  if  the  mandatariua
ited  the  mandatum  after  the  death  of  the
inandaloc,  in  ignorance  of  lut  death,  he  had  bia
action  againit  the  hem,  which  waa  allowed  "utiji-
tatii  auua.**  According  to  Ciceio  a  mandati  jndi-
dnin  waa  "  non  minua  torpa  quam  fnrti "  (/*ro
RoK.  A  mer.  c  38)  ;  which  however  would  ob-
viouily  depend  on  dicumtlancea. [InfaiHa.]

Mandatum  ii  aometimea  uaed  io  the  aenae  of  a
command  from  a  anperior  to  an  inlerioT.  Under
the  empire  the  Mandatn  Prindpum  were  the  com-
mandi  and  initnctioni  given  to  govemort  of  pro-
vincei  and  othen.  (See  the  letter  of  Pliniut  to
Trajanue,  and  the  emperor'a  aniwer,  Plin.  Ep.  i.
1U,1]2.)  Fnntinua  (Zle  .JfWHfae/.)  elaiKi  the
Mandata  Prindpum  with  liei  aod  3ai>atnacoD<
lullB.  (See  Puchia,  Arf.  L  110.)

(Oaiui,  iiL  155-162,  iv.  83.  84;  InaL  3.
tIbSS;  D^.  17.tit.l{C^4  til.  35  ;  Vangeronr,
Famtetlim,  Ik.  m.i63.)  10.  U]


MANDRAE. [Latbdncdll]

MANES. See  Diet  qf  Oreei  and  Sam.  Bio-


MANOONES. (SiRTira.]

aU'NICA,ftil«TB.  Boidca  the  nu  of  deera
Kwad  to  the  tmiic,  vhich,  when  w  maim&ctared,
WM  (mlled  MrHata  or  MoauaM  Haica  (CorL  iii.
7.  p.  12,  >d.  Ztnnpt),  (Imtm  tb»  oIb  worn  u  s
■cpuate  put  of  the  dm*.  Pilladiiu  (ds  ib  Aut
LIS)  Dwntiaiu  the  pcapricl;  of  providing  oatat
mameatfu  dt  feSSmi,  i.  i.  leggiat  and  ilaeva
■ade  of  hida,  u  nieful  both  In  the  hnntamao  imd
to  tin  ■gricDltund  labonrer.  The  Roman  ^odiatun
wen,  logctber  with  gresTct,  a  ileere  of  an  a^^iro-
pnala  kind  on  the  lighl  arm  taA  hand  (Jr  -*
'iSB),  ai  ii  exhibited  ti  the  woodcnti  at  p.  S

TheM  parte  of  diets  are  mentioned  together
•Ten  at  eait;  u  the  Hameric  age  (>ee  Od.  iiIt.
2^  229).  In  ihii  pauage  the  manicae  (xtv«ii)
Kcm  to  be  milleoi,  vorn  on  the  hands  to  protect
them  from  briara  and  thonu  i  and  Euitalhioa,  '
liu  eommentary  on  the  pauage,  dutinguiihei  b
tween  aiiiiple  miUeoa,  nub  ai  our  labouren  UM
hedging,  and  glorea,  which  ha  call*  x'V^"  ^
nkArat  (p  I960,  inf.).

0]oTmvi<hBiigtn{dlgilalia,Vaira,deJttRaM.
I  55)  wera  worn  among  the  Romani  for  the  pe>
fornBDce  of  ccrtun  manoal  opemtiani.  Pliny  the
joonger  rden  alio  to  theufl  of  manicae  in  winter
u  pnlaet  the  haoda  fivm  eotd  {Eput.  iii.  6).
Thne  ued  by  the  Feniaiu  were  probably  made
of  for,  peihua  membliiM;  mafia :  the  Penioni  bIw
wore  poTea  n  winlar  (Serrvkitpax,  Xen,  Q/rop.
Tiii.  3.  B  17)-  1»  ■»  enumeration  of  the  initni-
menta  of  tcvtnn  died  in  the  fourth  centuiy  of  the
ChriUian  efa  we  obaene  "  the  glove "  (Synea.
Epul.  S8) ;  bnl  lU  cooitractioD  or  mateiial  it  not

UaadenOa  were  called  nunaH.  (Virg.  Georg.  it.
439,  Atm.  ii.  H6  ;  FUnl.  Aiiit.  iL  2.  36,  Cbpt.
iiJ.  &  I,  AfoK.  V.  1.  17  ;  Non.  Maiwllua,  lr
i/inw.)  [J.  Y.]

MANI'PULUS;  MANIPULA'RES !  MA-
NIPULA'RIf. [EKB«aT«R,p.fi(IO,b.]

HA'NSIO  {trTaSiiit),  a  poet-ilation  at  the  end
of  a  d»y"«  joumey. The  great  roada,  which  weni
touttneted  fint  by  thp  Unga  of  Penia  and  after-
warda  by  the  Romans,  wciq  pmvided,  at  interraJa
cwreapoaduig  to  the  length  of  ■  day's  journey,  with
eatablubmisili  of  the  same  kind  vrith  the  khaiu
or  cBiBTanseraa  which  are  ttill  Coond  in  the  Eut
There  were  111 such  Btatii
Sndes  to  Sua  (Herod,  v.
av«ra^  distance  from  one  another  being  something
leai  Usn  20  Ensliih  miles. The  khan,  erected  al
the  nation  fbi  the  acconuniidiilian  of  ttarelleis,  ii
called by Uerodoliis  KsriiAi'irit  and  Kanr/ayt),
To  stop  hr  the  night  was  KutaXiiir.  (Xen.  Antdi.
L  8  ;.  Aelian,  V.  II.  i.  32.) Ai  the  ancient  r '
made  by  the  kings  of  Persia  an  sljll  followed
eeoaidtrable  extent  (Heeren,  Idem,  toL  i.  p
pp.  193—203, 7 1 3—720),  so  also  there  is  reasi
belieTa  that  the  modem  khan,  which  is  a  sq
hoitding,  enclosing  a  lafge  open  cour^  anirounded
In  balconies  with  a  aeries  of  doon  entering'  '


nniotemipted  cnttom  from  the  Pi

and  that,  whether  on  saasion  of  Lbe  airival  of

Mmiea  or  of  caaTau^  they  have  alwayi  aencd  to


MANSIO.  729

afford  a  shelter  daring  the  night  both  b>  man  and

beast.

The  Latin  term  m


the  same  distance  fnm  ooe  another  as  on  those  of
the  Persian  empire.  They  were  originally  called
autro,  being  probably  mere  places  of  encampment

»ed  by  making  earthen  enbenchments.  In
prooeu  of  time  tiiey  indaded,  not  only  barracks
and  msgaiines  of  pniiticnB  {ioma)  for  the  tioope,
'  '  lodioua  buildingtadaptedforthe  reception
era  of  all  ranks,  and  even  of  the  emperor
if  be  shoold  hare  occasion  to  visit  them.
At  those  stations  the  cisiarii  kept  gigs  for  hire  and

conveying  goiemmenl  despatches.  [ClsIDM  ;
EasiDDU.] The  vuamo  was  under  the  superin-

Beside*  the  post-stations  at  the  end  of  each
day's  journey,  there  were  on  ^e  Roman  military
i  at  convenienc  intervals,  which  were
J  to  change  horses  or  to  take  refresh-
ment, and  which  were  called  nuCotiaissi  (dXAiryiLl).
There  were  four  or  five  mutaliones  to  one  mansio.
The  Itmtrarian  a  Bwdigala  HiemaUm  wipu,
ich  ii  a  road-book  drawn  up  about  the  time  of
Craistantine,  mentions  in  order  the  mansiones  Irom
"  '  c  to  Jerusalem  with  the  intervening
,  and  other  more  considerable  places,
I  tailed  either  crnlofss,  oto,  at  aattUa.
laof  leaEiiet{fa9a<)orof  miles  between
one  place  and  another  is  also  set  down. [J.  Y.]

MANTE'LE  {x"P^I""P"<  X"IV'<^'°''),  >
napkin.  The  circumstance,  tliat  foriu  were  not
invented  in  ancient  times,  gave  occasion  to  the  use
of  napkins  at  meais  to  wipe  thefiDgen(XeiLQni;i.
i.  3.  S  51 ) ;  also  when  the  meal  was  finished,  and
even  before  it  commenced,  an  apparatus  was  car-
ried round  for  washing  the  bands.  A  basin,  called
in  Lnlin  ina^&iniin  (Festiis,  i. «),  and  in  Greek
X^pvii^,  x^P"^"',  or  xtvivn^por,  was  held  under
the  hands  to  receive  the  wate^  which  was  poured
npon  them  out  of  a  ewer  {uraJiu).  Thus  Homer
describes  the  practice,  and  according  to  the  ac-
count of  a  recent  traveller,  it  continoes  imehanged
in  the  conntriei  to  which  his  description  referred.
(FcUow'i  Jorrml,  1638,  p.  1£3.)  The  boy  or
slave  wfao  poured  out  the  water,  alio  held  the
napkin  or  towel  (or  wiping  the  hands  dry.  The
word  mappa,  said  to  be  of  Carthaginian  origiii
(QuintU.  I  5.  g  57),  denoted  a  smaller  kind  oT
n^kin,  or  a  handkerchief,  which  the  gaests  car-
ried with  them  to  table.  (Hor.  Sat.  Ii.  4.  81,  ii.
8.  as.)  The  mantele,  as  it  vraa  larger  than  the
n^fu,  was  sometimes  lued  aa  a  table-cloth.
(Martial,  iii.  29,  xir.  138.)

The  napkins  thus  used  at  table  were  commonly
made  of  coama  unbleached  linen  {i/uAlnf,  Atben.
ii.  79).  Sometimes,  however,  they  were  of  fine
lizien  (JiCT|iifi/iata  Aofivpi  airSorvf^,  Philoienns,
<^.  AUiai.  ii.  77).  Sometimes  they  were  woollen
with  a  soft  and  even  ntqi  (toufi  uuaiUlia  vUta,
Virg.  OtOfy.  U.  377,  Atn.  L  702).  Those  made
of  Asbestos  must  have  been  rare.  The  Bonuuis
in  the  time  ef  the  emperors  used  linen  napfcioa
embroidered  or  interwoven  with  gold  (L«nprid.
IltHogab.  27,  AL  Seoaai,  37, 40),  and  the  traveller
already  quoted  informs  us  that  this  lumry  still
continues  in  the  EasL  Napkins  were  also  worn
by  vromcn  as  a  head-dress,  in  which  isse  they
were  of  fine  moterhls  and  gay  coleun.  (Athen.  ii^


730  MANUMISSIO.

73.) Thew  wera  no  doubt  pat  on

elegant  wayi,  rwembling  Ihoie  wtich

uaDng  the females  of  It&lj, Greece,  and  Atia

Mimu;  At  the  present  dsT.

MANTIKE  iiarruci) [Divjnatio.]

MANU'BIAK [SroLii.]

MANUM, CONVENTIO IN, [Matbi-

HAN  UMI'SSIO  arai  tha  fonn  fay  whicb  alaiei
sod  penoni  Id  Mandpii  oiun  woe  relctued  fnm
thoee  coaditioQs  mpectivel}'.

There  wen  thne  modsa  of  efiectmg  &  Jiutt  et
Legitima  UanumiMio,  nunelTi  VindicU,  Ceims,
and  Tettsmentum,  which  are  oimnented  both  b;
Omu*  and  Ulpian  (Frag.  L)  as  eiiitiag  in  their
time.  (Compare  Cic  7^  S,  sad  Flautui,  Cat.  il
R.  68.)  Of  thae  the  Uummisiio  bj  Vindkta  ii
probsblj  the  oldegC,  and  perh^Mvaa  once  the  only
mode  of  muiunuision.  It  it  mentiDned  bj  Livj'
01  in  on  at  an  eariy  penod  (iL  S\  and  indeed  be
■lata  that  some  prnioDs  i^er  ^e  origin  of  the
Viodicta  to  the  sreot  then  related,  and  derive  its
name  from  Vindiciiii ;  tha  latter  [art,  at  least,  of
the  lappontioQ  i>  of  no  value.

The  eenaunrf  of  tha  Mannmioio  by  the  Vin-
dtela  was  ai  followi: — The  niaater  brought  liii
aUve  b«r<>re  the  magiitratui,  and  itated  Ilie  groimdi
(scum}  of  the  intended  mamuniuion.  The  lictor
of  the  ma^tranu  laid  a  rod  (ft^uca)  on  the  bead
of  the  ilave,  aeeompanied  with  certain  Gmial  wordi,
in  which  ha  decliu«d  that  he  wu  a  free  man  ex
Jure  Quiritium,  that  i«,  "  Tindicarit  in  libertalcm."
The  matter  in  the  meantime  held  the  ilaye,  and
after  he  had  pronounced  tbe  words  **  hone  ho-
minem  libenun  Tola,"  be  toned  him  round  (mo-
tutaio  turbitiii  ait  Marau  Damn,  Penioi,  Sal.  T.
79)  and  !el  him  go  (anuif  a  mom,  or  mini  naw,
FlnnC.  Capl.  il  3.  48),  whence  the  general  name  of
the  act  of  manumiinan.  The  magiitratui  then
declared  bim  to  ba  free,  in  referoKe  to  which
Cicero  {ad  JO.  vii.  2)  leemi  to  me  the  word
"addicere."  The  word  Vindieta  iteel^  which  it
properly  tbe  lea  vMiaia,  a  uaed  for  fatuca  by
Horace  (Sat.  iL  7.  76}.  Plantna  (MU.  CHor.  iv.  1 .
IB)  oet  featum.

It  aaemi  highly  prolahle  that  this  fomi  of  Msnu-
nissio  was  frained  after  the  analogy  of  Ihe  In  jure
Tindiiatianfs  (Oaina,  it.  1 6)  ;  and  that  the  lictor
in  the  cate  of  manumitaion  represented  the  opposite
claimant  in  the  Tindifatio.  (Uateiholzner,  Vmt
dot  /braum  dtr  MoMtmuKO  ptr  Vindiclam  ntd
ipott),  aidoSWrt,  Tol.  iL  p.  139.)
ir  tbe  eiplaoation  of  tbe  wold  Vindieta  Ke
ViNniciAi  and  Vindicatio.

The  Monumiirio  by  the  Cenni  ii  thOB  blieHj
described  by  Ulpian :  **  Slarei  wire  fbrm^y
manuiniltod  by  cennu,  when  at  (he  lintial  centut
(tiutrali  eema)  at  Rone  they  gave  in  their  cennu
(tone  lead  sonKH  inttead  of  cenms)  at  the  bidding
of  their  moAteri."  Personi  la  mancipio  might  alio
obtain  ttieir  manumittion  in  this  way.  ((iaiua,  i
)40.)  The  tlave  mnM  of  couth  haTe  had  a  mffi-
cienl  Peculium,  or  tha  master  mutt  haTe  giTen  him
property.

In  the  abaenm  of  deciure  tetdmonj  a*  to  tfao
origin  of  theie  two  modes  of  manamiiaio,  modem
writer!  indulge  themtelTei  in  a  variety  <^  conjee-
tnnt.  It  may  be  me  that  originallj  the  mana-
miuion  by  Vindieta  only  gave  libeiias  and  not
civitas  ;  but  thit  opioiou  it  not  jaobable.  It  may
easily  be  allomd  dut  in  the  eaiUe«t  petiod  the


MANUMISSIO.

tat  could  only  he  eonfurted  by  the
itr,  and  that  meiefore  there  coold  be
Kept  by  the


power.  Btit
form  of  the  Vindieta  itself  nipposea,  not  tliat
the  pcnon  matiiuuitled  was  a  alaTe,  bat  that  he
wu  a  free  penon,  against  whose  freedom  bia
matter  made  a  clahn.  Tbe  [(oceeding  before  tha
magiitnUai  was  in  form  an  asieitiai  of  the  aliTe^
freedom  (wnni  aiiertn  Simli  eamtn.  Plant.  Paeu.
iv.  2.  83,  &C.),  to  which  the  own^  made  no  de-
fence, b«t  he  let  him  go  at  a  free  man.  Tba
pnceeding  then  letemblet  the  In  Jure  Cesaio,
and  was  m  fact  a  Sections  suit  in  which  IneAom
{iOertai)  was  the  matter  in  iwne.  It  fbllowed  ■■
a  CMUequence  of  tbe  fiction,  that  when  tbe  magia-
tratui  proDOnnced  in  fiivonr  of  freedom  £i  Jon
Qniriliimi,  thera  conld  be  no  diapvte  about  tiw
Civitas.

In  the  case  of  the  Censni  the  jlave  was  legit-
lered  at  a  citizen  with  bis  master's  cousenL  Tba
aanimption  that  the  Vindieta  must  hare  original^
preceded  the  Census,  for  which  thm  it  no  evi-
dence at  al),  it  incoDiistent  with  the  nature  of  tha
proceeding,  which  was  a  r^istration  of  the  dBTc,
with  hit  matter's  consent,  as  a  dtiieii.  A  quealida
might  arise  whether  he  ihonld  be  ooondocd  ftce
iminediotely  on  being  entered  <m  tba  canaoi^  nH,
or  not  until  tbe  luitrum  wai  ealabnled  (Cic.  de  Or.
to)  ;  and  this  wat  a  matter  of  wow  impartuK^


for  hi


lit  acquuitiont  i
when  he  b<


e  only  hit  oi


of  die  Twelve  Tablea  confinsed  frae-

dom  which  was  given  by  win  (faiAiiBeMfBM}.  Fre^
dom  (tiderfof)  might  be  given  either  dimio,  that
is,  as  a  legacy,  or  by  way  of  fidrioommisaam.  Tlie
ilare  who  was  made  free  directo,  wat  called  onanoa
libstua  (or  borcinus,  as  in  Ulp.  I^ag,),  for  the
some  reason  perhaps  that  certain  senaton  wero
called  Orcini.  (Sueton.  Ortan.  35.)  He  who  ro-
ceived  bis  libertas  by  way  of  ftdcioommiisuni,  wai
not  tbe  libeitus  of  the  testator,  £nt  of  the  pcnoa

if  Ihe  heies,  who  wat  requested  to  manumit,  re-
fused, be  might  be  compelled  to  maniimit  on  appli-
cation being  made  to  the  proper  aulhorilv.  Liber-
taa  might  be  given  by  fideicommisenra  to  a  ilaTe  at
the  testator,  of  bit  beres,  or  of  bit  legatee,  and  atao
to  the  slave  of  any  other  person  (ajfmwai).  In
cate  of  libertas  being  tbna  giTen  to  tbe  alavo  of
any  other  penon,  the  gift  of  libertas  was  eitir^

ehed,  if  the  owner  would  not  tell  the  slave  at  s
price.  A  tUie  who  wat  made  conditionally
free  by  teitament,  wot  called  Statu  liber,  and  ha
wat  the  tlave  of  tbe  hcret  until  the  conditioQ  waa
fiUfiUed.  If  a  Statn  liber  was  aold  by  the  hrtca,
or  if  the  ownertbip  of  him  wat  acquired  by  nm-
csfrion,  he  had  ttill  the  benefit  of  tbe  conditioii :  this
proviiioti  wat  contained  in  the  I*w  of  tbe  TuvcItb
Tablea.  If  a  slave  was  made  free  and  here*  by
tbe  teatator's  will,  on  tbe  deoib  of  the  testator  1m
becune  both  free  and  bettia,  whether  he  wished  it
or  rot (Gains,  ii.  153  i Ulp.  FVe^  niL  11.)


[Han


9.1


thing  it  known  of  it.
1.12.}

The  Lei  Aelia  Senda  lud  n
manumission  [  Li:i  AKLuSiNTiA],part)cnlariy  ma
to  slaves  under  thirty  yean  of  age.  Theceranonj
of  manumilljng  tiaret  above  thirtyyeartof  age  had
beconu  TSty  luaple  in  the  time  of  Oahii  ^  20) :  H


MANUMISSIO.
mij^lit  be  m  the  paUic  mad  (n  tnauiln),  «  vhen
the  pn«toc  or  )avccaual  vu  going  to  tlw  bath  oi
ths  thntra  It  wu  not  tlie  pUce  which  detemiined
the  Tuliditf  of  inch  an  act,  hot  it  wxi  the  or-
enmatvice  of  it*  being  done  befise  ■  cxxnpetenl
■UUborily.

The  Lei  Fnria  or  Fniis  Ctainik  flzed  limhi  to
the  nmnber  of  ilaiee  who  eetdd  be  numumiUed  br
wilL  The  number  allnred  mi  «  hat^  one  third,
vat  hanh,  and  one  fifth  of  the  vhide  nmnba  that
the  ttttator  poeMised,  according  to  •  leale  fixed  by
the  lei:  Ai  it*  proriuom  oDJf  applied  to  caM
wh«e  A  man  had  nxore  than  two  ilaTei,  the  ewner
of  one  daTB  or  of  two  ilaTei  wu  not  alfected  b;
tbii  lex.  II  alia  jKorided  that  the  ilaiet  to  whom
freedom  wu  giren,  ihoold  be  named.  Thii  lex
onlf  applied  to  manmnioioD  by  teatamect.  It
w«  paned  about  a.  d.  7,  and  tcTcnl  ienatowm-
anlca  were  made  to  preTent  evaiinu  of  it.  (Snetoo.
Ortar.  40  !  Omim,  L  *2— «6,>  Thi*  lex  wu  re-
pealed by  Jutiniaii.  (Cod.  fi.  tit.  S.  Delig*  Put.
Ca».  toUatda.)

A  fdrm  uf  manamiMion  "  inter  amicoa  "  ii  Bl-
inded to  by  Oaiu. Thii wat  id  bet  no  legal

matter*)  wiib,  which  vonld  hare  been  mffleiont  in
the  abaenca  of  tSi  ponlJTe  law.  Thii  might  be
doDe  by  inriling  the  ilare  to  table,  writing  him  a
letter,  or  in  any  other  leu  foroMl  way.  It  ii
Mated  that  origioalW  nuh  a  gift  of  freedcan  coald
be  iMalled,  at  to  which  then  can  be  no  doabt,  aa
it  waa  Dot  legal  fteetjom  g  bnt  ultimately  the  pna-
tor  took  persnit  who  had  been  made  free  in  thii
manner  onder  hii  protection,  and  the  Lei  Junia
Nochana  pm  thm  the  itatu  called  lAIiniCai.
(Lbx  Jtrau  NoKBiNA ;  Latihl]

£bit  rather  to  the  gtuandl
fbnn  might  be  the  luoal
lonL  (Feetoa,  t.  e.  Mntmdtti,  Puri;  Sttigiij,
ZtktM/t,  ToL  iiL  p.  402.)

Beaidet  the  due  obaetvann  of  the  ]ffK[  feimi,
it  waa  neceanry  in  older  to  effect  a  complete  manu-
ntMian  thM  the  mannmiaMT  ahoold  hare  the  Qui-
ritortan  ewnenhip  of  the  ilare.  If  the  ilaTe  wu
nerclj  In  bonia,  he  only  beiaine  a  lAtinu  by


kemldni


A  won


If  K


a  ilaTe,  and  sne  of  them
nanmniUed  the  alate  in  nich  form  u  would  hare
eflected  complete  mannmiubn,  if  (he  ilaTe  had
bHn  Ibe  nle  propoljr  oS  the  nuuiiuniwor,  inch
BanumiMiH'  lost  lui  >han  in  the  ilare  which  ac-
oned  to  the  ether  joint  owner  w  joint  owners,
Jutinian  enacted  that  if  only  one  joint  owner  wai
witling  to  monomit  a  ilare,  the  othen  might  be
eempelled  to  manumit  cm  receiring  the  prioe  fixed
by  kw  for  their  iharea.  If  <nie  penon  had  the
nKitfnietnl  and  another  the  piDpeity  of  a  ilaTe,
and  the  tlare  waa  manumitted  by  him  who  had
Ae  property,  he  did  not  become  free  till  the  uiui-
friKtu  had  expired ;  in  the  meantime,  howe>er,  he
had  DO  legal  owner  (iJantinu}.

The  act  of  minamiHion  eitabliahtd  the  relation
sf  Pationu  and  Libeitu  between  the  manominor
and  tin  manimitted.  [LiBX»nta.J  When  mann-
mitled  by  a  eiturat,  the  Libertoi  took  the  pneno-
men  and  the  gentile  name  of  the  manmninor,  and
' of  the  Qeni  of  hii


MANU8  INJECTia  TSl

niune  u  a  i:ognomeii,  either  loine  name  by  which
he  wu  prerioaaly  known,  or  lome  Dame  anmned
on  the  occsiifm :  chm  we  find  the  namea  L.  Come-
lioa  Chrymgonni,  M.Tulliu*  Tiro,  P.Tetentiui
Afer,  and  other  like  namoL  If  he  wu  minumitttd
by  the  itate  u  a  Serru  pcbiicni,  he  received  the
ciTitai  and  a  praenomen  and  gentile  name,  or  ha
took  thM  of  the  magtnnnii  before  whom  he  wat
mannmicted.  The  ihrre  alio  oteamed  the  tc^  or
diBfi  of  a  Roman  dtiien,  ihaved  hit  head  and  put
~  -  fdruti  thii  lut  drcnnutance  exploina  the

Sa'},  which  meant  to  inrile  the  ilarea  to  join  iil
lome  civil  dittnrbance  by  {Kumiiing  them  Uberty.
The  relation  between  *  I^tronui  and  Libtftoi  it
Mated  imder  PATBOlftra.

At  the  time  when  Oaiut  wrote,  the  peealiar
right!  of  Roman  oitiune  were  of  teat  importance
''  "I  they  had  been  under  Iharepoblic.  Heitataa
oU  uana  who  were  manumitted  in  the  proper


But  thii  coold  not  have
iget. The  liberti  of  the


tained  the  honono,  could  nt


[INI


It  be  in  a  better  cco-
mittfd  them,  and  thev
iten  hud  not  then  the  complete  dvitab Tba
It  of  ingenaitu  alto  affected  their  itatui ;  but
'  Lo  be  the  caai  even  midec  the  onpire.


ILj


axirding  to  Dionyaiu  (It.  22),  Serrini
'd  the  libeitini  m  the  four  Urbanae  '


Tullim


Tiibut,

A[^Qa  Ciandiu  gaTe  the

Itbenini  a  place  in  all  the  tribea. (Pint,  PtrpluriL  1 ;

the  year  B.CS04,

they  were  igun  placed  in  the  four  tribiu  nrbanaa

(Lir.  ix.  46)  ;  bat  it  aeemi  that  the  libertiiu  did

not  keep  to  their  tribu,  for  in  B.  o.  220  they  were

again  placed  in  the  four  urbanae  tribal.  lUt-KpiL

n.) In  the  cenionhip of Tiberiua  Qiaochui,

they  were  placed  in  one  of  the  tribu

;termiosd  by  IM  (Liv.  xIt.  ]  &  ;  compare

Dionya.  iv.  22),  or  u  Cicov  {d*  Or.  L  9)  expreatea

it,  the  fikther  of  Tiberioi  and  Caiui Sempronii

tranaferred  the  llbcrtini  (sate  aiqua  uttlxi)  into  the

nurbanae, Subaequently  bjalaw  of  Aemilint

no,  about  B.  c  1 1 B,  they  wen  leetoied  to  the

city  tribei,  and  tbli  remained  their  condition

e  end  of  the  republic,  thoi^h  lariooi  ottemptt

I  made  to  sire  them  a  better  aullnge. Ai  to

ittempt  otthe  tribune,  C.  Mtnilint a c.  SS,  to

the  libertini  votea  in  ail  the  tribea,  tee  Dion

Cauitu  (xzxri.  25),  and  the  note  of  Reimania. Aa

to  the  didtribnticm  of  the  libertini  in  the  tnbni,

lee  Becker,  /fasdiKiil  da-  R«L  AUtrdAnmr.

Hanlia.  B.C.S57:  it  conaiited  of  the  twoiUeth
part  of  the  value  of  the  ilave,  hence  called  Viceai-
ma.  (Liv.  viL  lG,iitii.  10;  OcfHt^ttiL  16.)
At  to  ManmniBlo,  tee  Becker,  HamUmck  der
Rom.  AUerlUimtr,  Sto  Th.  ItU  Abth.;


Ll.  Ce


[O.


I%.40.


NANUS.  {Am  HAKUARtOH.]
MANUS  FGRREA.  [H»iipaoo.j
MAN  US  INJE'CTIO  it  one  of  the  five  modi
or  fenni  of  the  I^egii  Actio  acoordingto  Qaiaa  (ir.
12).  It  wu  in  effect  in  »me  euet  a  kind  of
eiecntiiHi.  The  judicati  manu  injectiD  ww  given
by  the  Twelve  Tablea.  The  plomtiff  (actor)  laid
hold  of  the  defendant,  naing  the  formal  worda
"Qnod  tB  mihi  jndicMw  tiT«_dKiil»tDa  M  tetter-


732  MARIS,

tinm  I  nilia  quae  data  nulla  non  lolviiti  ob
rem  «go  ^bi  lotcrtiuiii  x  mills  judiati  mi
injicio." Th<  defendant  who  hsd  been  condca
LD  ft  certain  mni,  hod  thirty  da^  allowed  biT
make  payment  in,  and  after  that  time  he  waa  IL
to  the  manoi  injectio. The defendant  wa*
permitted  to  make  anj  reaiitance,  and hit  only
mode  of  defence  wai  to  £nd  lonie  mponilble  pet-
son  {viada)  who  would  undertake  hie  defence  (pro
to  Itge  agtrt). If  he  found  no  lindei,  the  pUintiff
mjgbt  (^ny  the  defendant  to  hia  honae  and  keep
him  in  canfinement  for  lirty  daja,  dnring  vh'
time  hii  name  and  the  amoant  of  hia  debt  w
proclaimed  at  three  lueceaaiTe  uundinap. If
one  pud  the  debt,  the  delsidaiit  might  be  put  to
death  or  lold. (OelLxi.  1.) According  I '
WDida  of  the  Twelve  Table),  the  perun  mu
btonghl  befcin  the  Fiaetor  (in  Jum),  which  of  cuune
meani  (hat be  inuit  be aeiied lirat: if  when
brought  before  the  praetor,  he  did  not  pay  the
money  (ai  judieaium  toivil)  or  find  a  rindei,  he
might  be  carried  off  and  pat  in  cbaini,  apparently
without  the  formalily  of  an  addicUo. The  Lei
Publilia,  eiidenlty  fallowing  the  analogy  of  the
Twelve  Tablea,  allowed  the  monua  injectio  in  the
oue  of  money  [aid  by  a  iponior,  if  the  ipontor  wai
not  repaid  in lii  monlhi. The  Ler Furia do
Sponiu  allowed  it  against  him  wbo  had  exacted
from a  aponsor  mom than hia jnvt  proportion
imriiiipari). Theie  and  ether  lega  sUowcd  the
Duuiui  injectio  pro  judicata,  becaoM  in  Ihete  cata
the  claim  of  ibe  plaintiff  waa  equivalent  to  a  claim
of  a  KB  jodicsta. Other  leges  granted  the  manui
injectio  para,  that  is,  nan  pro  judicata,  aa  the  Lex
Furia Tcitamentaria and the Marcia  adyemu
ftneratoros. Butintbeeecaieithedefendantmight

t&i  dtpdiere),  and  defend  hii  cauie  ;  but  it  wooid
appear  that  he  could  only  reliere  hinuelf  from  thii
aeiiure,  by  actually  undertaking  to  defend  himself
by  legal  means.  Accordingly,  if  we  Gillow  the
analogy  of  the  old  law,  it  was  in  these  casea  an
eiecutiou  if  the  defendant  chose  to  let  it  be  so  j
if  be  did  not,  it  waa  the  lame  as  serving  him
with  proceta  to  appear  befora  the  Praetor.  A  lex,
the  name  of  which  is  obliteislad  in  Ouut,  allawed
the  person  seized  to  defend  hit  own  cause  except
in  the  case  of  a  "jadimtna,"  and  "  is  pro  quo
depensum  est ; "  and  consequently  in  the  two  latter
cases  even  after  the  passing  of  this  lex,  a  man  was
bound  to  Gad  a  Tindei.  This  continnod  the  pmctica
so  long  ai  tbe  Legis  Aclionca  were  in  use  ;
"  whence,"  says  Gains  (iv.  2S),  "in  our  time  a
man  '  cum  quo  judicali  depeaiive  agitur '  it  com-
pelled to  give  security  'jadicatsm  solvi.'"  From
this  we  may  conclude  that  the  vindex  in  the  old
time  was  liable  to  pay,  if  be  could  find  no  good  de-
fence to  the  plaintiff's  claim ;  for  as  the  vindei
could  **  legeagere,"  though  tbe  defendant  could  not,
ve  tanat  assume  that  he  might  show,  if  he  could,
that  tbe  plaintiff  had  no  ground  of  complainC  ;  aa,
for  instance,  that  he  bad  been  paid  ;  mA  thai  if
he  hnd  no  good  defence,  he  mutt  pay  the  debt
hiiDtelt  The  subject  ot  the  manus  injecuo  la
discussed  by  Fuchta,  Iiut.  u.  g  160, 162,  179,  iil
S269.  [G-J-]

MAPPA, [MiNTiLtl

MARIS  (lOfa,  itdfTit,  HesycL  iidpurror),  a
Oreek  measure  of  capacity,  which,  according  to
Pollux  (z.  184)  and  Aristotie  (Jiitl.  An.  viii.  9\
containNl  6  cotyloe,  or  nearly  3  pints. Polyaomu


MARTTRIA.

(Iv.  S.  S  32)  mentions  a  much  larger  meatuie  of
the  same  name,  couluoing  10  eoDgii,  or  nearly  8
gallona.  tP.S.]

MARSU'PIUM  (juipiriwiar,  fiaXArriar),  a
pnrse.  (Nm.  Marcellns,  (.o.  i  Varn>,ifeAi  AW.
iiL  17  ;  Plant  Men.  ii.  1.  29,  iL  3.  33,  35,  v.  7.
47,  ftiBi.  iii.  S.  37,  Rud.  t,  2. 26  ;  "
i..  S.)

Tbe  purse  used  by  the  an-
cients was  GOmmanly  a  small
leathern  bog,  and  was  afien
doted  by  being  drawn  together
at  the  mouth  {aioTnumi  0a-  J
XdiTio,  Plat.  Cbniti.  p.  40i,  ed.
Bekker).  Mereory  ia  com.  '
manly  represented  holding  onr
in  his  hand,  of  which  the  an-
nexed woodcut  fnm  an  intag.
lis  in  the  Stoicb  eollection  at
Berlin,  presents  an  example.

MA'KTIA  LE'OIO. [F.x

MARTIA'LIS  FLAM  EN.

MARTIA'LES  LUDl. [Lti

MARTY 'RIA  l/iaprifia),  ligniSn  strictly  tl
depotition  of  a  witness  in  a  court  of  jutUce,  though
the  word  it  applied  metapbortcally  to  all  kinds  of
testimony.  We  shall  here  explain— I,  what  per*
sons  were  competent  to  be  witnesses  at  Athens  ;
2,  what  was  the  nature  of  their  obligation  ;  S,  in
what  manner  their  evidence  was  given  ;  t,  what
was  the  pmusbment  £>r  giving  Eslse  evidence.

None  but  Eteemen  co^d  be  wimeatea.  The  in-
capacity of  women  may  be  iufened  &om  the  gene-
ral policy  of  the  Athenian  law,  and  the  abaoDce  of
lample  in  tbe  Distort  where  a  womao'i  cvi-
is  produced. The  same  obwrvatioD  ^ipliea

vcs  were  not  allowed  to  give  erideiice,tinl(a
examination  by  torture  {Biffaros).  There
rt  to  have  been  one  exception  to  this  mle,
hat  a  slave  might  be  a  wilnest  aguntt  a  free-
in  case  of  a  charge  of  muidcr  (AnlipL  dt
I  Mir.  728),  though  Plainer  (Aa.  Pnc  p.
215)  thinks  this  only  applied  to  the  giving  irdbr-
aatian.  The  party  who  wished  to  obOiin  the  evi-
lence  of  a  slave  belonging  to  his  opponent  cha^
.enged  him  to  give  up  the  slave  to  be  examined
(4(JTii  T^  StvKaii).  The  challenge  wa*  called
tpiKKjiais.  The  owner,  if  he  nve  hini  up,  was
laid  isSovi/iu  or  wapatQwai,  Btit  he  waa  net
ibliged  so  to  do,  and  the  general  practice  was  to
tfusc  to  give  up  slaves,  which  perhaps  arose  fnm
himianity,  Ihcuah  tbe  opponent  always  ascribed  it
o  a  tear  lest  the  truth  should  be  elicited.  The
initon  affecti^  to  coniider  the  evidence  of  thitea,
vTutig  from  them  by  torture,  more  valuable  and
rustworthy  than  that  of  freemen  ^  but  it  muat  be
ihserved,  they  always  use  this  argument  when  the
lave  had  not  been  examined.  (Demosth.  c^  AfJat,
148,  0.  Onei.  874  ;  Hodtwalcker,  Utier  dia  IXH.
eten,  p.  44,  &c)

Citiient  who  had  been  dttfranchised  (^rifus-
liirai)  could  not  appear  at  witnesses  (any  mora
than  lU  jurors  or  plamtifft)  in  a  coort  of  justice  ;
'  ~  ''ey  had  lost  all  honeonble  rights  and  pri-
a.  (Demosth.  c  Ntaer.  1353;  Wachsmuth,
■  pt  i.  p.  344.)  But  there  was  no  ohjectica
™  freemen.  (Dcmotth.  c.  Laer.  927,  939  i
tin.  dt  Pall.  Ltg.  49,  ed.  Steph.)  We  team
from  llarpocration  (i.  v.  AHvupnyla)  that  in  a^
tionf  agauwl  fievnai  (or  neglect  of  dnl;  to  theii


pelted  to  uu


MAETTHIA.
tttitici  (iroFTorlov  Sutat)  foreigoen  were  not  Al-
lowed to  put  in  (in  affidaTiC,  that  Iho  action  wu
not  nuuntainahle  (j^ii  tiairyA-ritior  *Iku).  But  Ihia
am  hsrdly  be  lOMiflered  an  eiception,  foe  luch
■ffidiiita  gave  an  midae  adiautiige  to  the  put;
for  whom  the;  wffs  made.

Neither  of  ths  partiM  to  ■  aiue  WH  competent

iTidence  for  hinuelf,  though  och  vu  cam-

■I  the  qneitiona  pat  b;  ths  other.

^bo  1«*  deekrod  to*  irriiiKoui  twvnyutt  *lriu

ti/ti.  (DeiaiMiLe.SlijA.USl.)  That  the  friendi
ol  the  part;,  who  pleaded  for  him  (called  avtiryn-
fin\  were  not  incompslent  to  giia  evidence,  sp-
peaiB  &om  the  Eragment  ii!Itaea»,proMiqiiH.,vid
alio  tram  Aschinea,  who,  an  hi>  trial  for  miicon-
doct  in  the  embasej,  call)  Phocion  to  aniit  him
both  ai  a  witneu  and  an  advocate.  (Cs  FoIm.  Ltg.
pp.£1,  e3,ed.S(eph.}

The  obligation  to  attend  u  a  witneai,  both  fai
CLTil  and  criminal  prvceediuAB,  and  to  give  aoch
eiideDce  ai  he  ii  able  to  give,  ariiei  out  of  the
dot;  which  eiei;  man  own  to  the  atale  ;  and
there  ii  no  naioa  to  believe  that  any  penon*  fei-
cqit  the  pattiea  thenuelvea)  wen  exempted  from
tbii  oU^tion.  The  peanga  which  Flatnec  {Att.
Prtx.  p.  217)  and  SchBmann  {AU.  Proc.  p.  671)
rite  in  nipport  of  the  ccntiai;  view,  pro>e  nothing
more  than  that  the  neai  leiatiooa  of  a  paiiy  were
nJKtoW  to  give  evidcncs  agaiut  him  ;  whenu  the
&ct  that  the;  were  botmd  b;  law  to  giro  evidence
ma;  be  infened  from  Demoethenea  (a.  Apitit,  H49,
SJO,  8£5).

The  piny  who  derired  the  eridenc*  of  a  wit-
ncH,  mmmoned  him  to  attend  for  that  pmrpose.
The  nimmonB  wai  called  rpiaicXrim.  (Demaith.
e.  TImotk.  1194.)  If  the  wilneu  promiied  to
attend  and  fojled  to  do  u,  ha  wBi  liable  to  an
actioD  called  tlicq  Ajm^M^mpfDu,  Whether  he
promiied  or  not,  he  vai  bound  to  attend,  and  if
bii  abunce  oiued  injur;  to  the  port;,  he  wu
liable  to  an  action  (iiin,  Bfjeris).  Thia  ii  the
pmbable  diftinction  between  theie  fonni  of  action,
at  to  which  there  hai  been  much  doubt  (Ueier
and  Schijmann,  All.  Prae.  p.  3H7  ;  Platner,  All.
iV»tp.221.)

The  attendance  of  the  witneM  wu  firat  mqnired
at  the  irixpivii,  where  he  waa  to  make  hia  dcpoai-
tion  before  the  inperintending  ma^itiata  {fiyi^r
lummgplini}.  The  [art;  in  whoie  &>oar  be  ap-
peared, geneimll;  wrote  the  depoeitlon  at  home
npou  a  whitened  bcoid  or  tablet  (KiXcuKiaiiiyor
Tpnfi^iaTiibv),  which  he  brought  with  him  to  the
m^ialrate'a  c^ce,  and,  when  tbe  witneaa  had  de-
pOKd  thereto,  put  into  the  box  (Jx"*')  "  which
all  the  docmnaiti  in  the  canae  were  depoaited.  If
the  depoaition  were  not  prepared  beforehand,  aa
mut  ^wa;i  have  been  ijie  caae  when  the  part;
wai  cot  eiaetl;  aware  what  evidence  would  be
given,  or  when  an;  thing  bwk  place  before  the
magialiate  which  could  not  be  fbreieen,  ai  for  in-
Btincfl  a  challenge,  or  qneation  and  anawer  b;  ihe
paniei ;  in  inch  a  caae  it  waa  nmal  to  write  down
tbe  eridenea  upon  a  waieu  tablet.  Tbe  diflerence
between  tbeie  methodi  wu  much  tbe  nme  aa  be-
IWEen  writing  with  a  pen  on  paper,  and  with  a
pencil  on  a  ilate ;  the  Utter  conld  eaail;  be  nibbed
GDt  and  written  oreraaBin  if  ncceaaaiy.  (Demoith.
c.  Slepi.  1132.)  If  the  witneu  dicl  not  attend,
hia  evidence  wu  nevertheleaa  put  into  the  boi,
that  i^  iBcb  eridcDce  aa  the  part;  intended  bim


MARTYRTA.  73S

to  give,  or  thought  he  might  give,  at  the  trial.  For
all  teatimonia!  evidence  wu  required  to  be  in  writ-
ing, in  order  that  there  might  be  no  miitake  abont
the  leima,  and  the  witneai  mi^ht  leave  no  mbter-
fuge  for  himaelf  when  connoted  of  falaehood.
(DemoatL  o.  1^^  1 1  If,  1 130.)  The  dnfcpiifu
might  laat  leveral  da;a,  and,  ao  long  u  it  lasted,
&eah  evidence  might  be  farougbt,  but  none  conld
be  brought  after  the  lut  da;,  when  tbe  box  wu
aealed  b;  tbe  magiatiate,  and  kept  10  b;  him  till
Ihe  da;  of  trial  (Demoeth.  c  AfAoi,  836,  c  Botal.
d*  Norn.  999,  e.  Eaers.  a  Mna.  lui,  e.  Comm.
126S.)

The  form  of  a  depoaition  wu  n'mjja.  The  fol-
lowing example  !a  from  Demoathenei  (o.  Lacr,
927):  — "  Arcbenomidea  aoa  of  Archedamu  of
Anagjnia  teauliea,  that  articlea  of  agreement  were
dcpoaited  with  him  b;  Androclea  of  Sphettua,
Nauaicratea  of  Caj;atna,  Artemon  and  Apcjlodonta
both  of  Fhaaelua,  and  that  the  agreemenl  ii  alii)  in
hi>  bonde."  Here  we  muit  obaerve  that  wben-
eio;  a  doctunent  wu  pat  in  evidence  at  the  trial,
u  an  agreement,  a  will,  the  evidence  of  a  ilave,  a
challenge,  or  an  auwec  given  b;  either  part;  at
the  <b^pi<r(i,  it  waa  certiBed  by  a  witneaa,  whoaa
depoiidon  wu  at  the  asme  time  produced  and
read.  (Demoith.  pn  Fiona.  S46,  949,  957,  b.
i'too^.  1046,  c.  Slept.  1120.)

The  vrilneai,  whether  he  had  attended  before
the  magiatrate  or  not,  vu  obliged  to  be  preaent  at
the  trial,  in  order  to  eonflmi  hii  teatimon;.  The
onl;  exception  waa,  when  be  wu  ill  or  out  of  the
counti;,  in  which  caae  a  comniiBaian  misht  be  aent
to  examine  him.  [EckaxtvullJ  All  evidence
waa  produced  b;  the  part;  during  hu  own  apeech,
the  lA^iSpa  being  atqjped  for  that  purpoae.
(laaeua,  dt  Parr.  liar.  39,  ed.  Steph. ;  Donoath.  c;
£i>M  130£.)  The  witneaa  wu  called  b;  an
officer  of  the  court,  and  mninted  on  the  raised
platfotm  (Snfo)  of  the  ipeelier,  while  hia  depoai-
tion wu  read  over  to  hun  b;  the  cleric  ;  he  then
ligniEed  hii  auent,  either  b;  expreii  words,  or
bowing  hit  bead  in  ailence.  (Lyi.  da  Eralot.  MorL
94,  ed.  Stepb.  iAeach.<ia/bb.2;^49,  ed.Stepb.;
Demoatb.  B.  niid.5BQ,  a.  Fiami.  913,  a.  S^.
1109.  c  thii^  130fi.)  In  Ihe  editioni  that  we
have  of  the  oraton  we  aee  lometlmei  MtipTiipfs
written  (when  evidence  ia  produced)  and  lonte-
timea  Uifrapts.  The  atadent  muat  not  be  de-
ceived bj  ihii,  and  anppoie  that  aometimei  the
depoaition  onl;  wu  read,  aometimei  the  witneaaea
thenuelvea  were  pretent.  The  old  editora  merel;
followed  the  language  of  the  oraton,  who  lud
^  call  the  witneaaea,^*  or  "  mount  up  wiOieaiea,^*  or
"  the  clerk  ahall  read  ;ou  tbe  evidence  "  or  aome-
Ihing  to  the  lame  effect,  varying  the  expreaaion
according  to  their  fane;.  (See  Lyi.  jiro  Maatili,
147,  ed.  StepL  ;  Iiaeui,  dt  Pyrr.  ier.  45,  ed.
StepLj  Demoith.  c  OiUipp.  123G,  c.  Kmr.
1353.)

If  Ihe  witneaa  wu  hntile,  he  wu  required
either  to  depoie  to  the  itatement  read  over  to  ban,
or  to  take  an  oath  that  he  knew  nothing  about  it
{/ioinvptlr  tl  i^oiarina).  One  or  the  other  be
wu  compelled  to  do,  »-  if  be  refiiaed.  he  waa  iCD-
tenced  to  pa;  a  fine  of  a  thouiand  dncbma  to  the
atate,  which  sentence  wu  immediately  proclaimed
h;  the  officer  of  the  court,  who  waa  commanded
KXttrtlmr  or  litiiKyrTiitiy  sirrhr,  i.  a.  to  give  him
notice  that  he  wu  in  contempt  and  hod  incurred
the  fine.  (Demoitb.  c  Jptok  8fi0,e.A'eaa-.  1373,


734  MARTTRIA.

cn«(r.  1321;  AncLc7Vnan:l.ia,ed.  Stcpb.;
Inciu,  ie  Aitjipi,  IW.  76,  ed.  Steph.,  e,  Leaa:
150,  «d.  Steph. ;  Meier  and  SchBinami,  AU.  Froa.
p.  672  ;  Plato.  Att.  Pvoc  p.  219.)

An  catL  vu  uinilly  teken  bj  thi  vitneu  at
tb«  dftUpco'if ,  when  he  xrat  flwom  hj  the  opposite
party  at  an  altM  (irpii  rbr  fluj/ii*  ifttpmlffftr).  If
he  hai  Twt  attended  at  the  irittptffis,  he  might  be
iwoTD  aflerwaidi  in  conrl }  ai  wsi  alwaj*  the  oue
vhen  a  witneu  tooic  tile  eslh  of  denial  (iiiiuxri).
In  the  paHSffe  jut  cited  from  Ljcuigus,  the  ex-
preaion  ^atinia  ri  Itpi  meani  Datbing  more
than  touching  the  altar  or  ili  oppiirtenaiuxi,  and
liaa  no  crferoica  to  yictinti.  (Vslckenaer,  Opuic
PhOoL  toL  L  pp.  87—39,)  Whslher  the  witncH
wai  alwajra  boimd  to  take  an  oath,  i>  a  donbtful
pmnt.  (See  Demoitll.  a  Oorm.  1265,  k  Sttpi.
Ills,  cEabnl.  1309;  Aeuh.  da  IWi.  L^.  *9,
ed.  Steph. ;  Schflmann,  AU.  Froc.  p.  675.)

The  oath  of  the  witncu  (the  ordinary  tiiAiiua
SpKei)  miut  not  be  confounded  with  the  oath
taken  b;  one  of  the  partiea,  a  by  aotne  liiend  or
other  person  out  of  eonrt,  with  a  view  to  decide
the  caiue  or  Kme  particckr  point  in  ditpnte.  Thi>
waa  taken  by  the  cwuent  of  the  adienary,  upon  a
challenge  given  and  accepted  ;  it  waa  an  r«th  of  a
more  Holsnn  kiDd,flvoni  by  (ornpon  thefafsda  ef)
^he  children  of  the  party  awearing  (inrrih  fuv
raiSttr\  or  by  perfect  or  foil-grown  Tictima  (leaf
UpAv  nKflttr),  and  often  with  cona  apon  biioKlf
or  bii  fkmily  (Kar*  /fuXflat),  and  M)meIiDKia  wai
accompanied  with  peculiar  ritea,  tuch  aa  paodng
throng^  lire  (tii  raii  aupiti).  The  mother,  or
other  female  relation  of  the  party  (who  eonld  not
bo  a  witneu)  vaa  at  lilierty  to  take  thii  ootL
(Demoatli.  e.  AjAab.  652,  e.  Botot.  de  Dele,  1(111,
e.  Tiaadi.  1203,  e.  Otllipp.  1210,  e.  Conim.  1269,
B.  Ntatr.  1365;  Wochimutb,  toI.  il  pt.  i.  p.  335  ;
Uudtwalckei,  pp.  53—57.)


On  w


e  by  a  apecial  de-
cree of  the  pec^a  or  the  aenate ;  aa  on  the  occa-
sion of  the  mutilated  Hennea  bnfta  (Thiriwall,
HitL<ifGmiee,t.2t>.^  S93)  ;  and  they  were  !eu
acrupuloui  about  aliens  than  about  citlzeni ;  but
(aa  a  geoenl  rule)  it  ii  certain  that  frectuea  could
not  be  tortured  in  court!  of  jnitice,  and  eren  an
emancipated  ilaTc,  Demoithenea  aaT'  it  would  be
an  act  of  impiety  (aliS  iatot)  to  giie  np  for  such
a  purpoK.  (Demoatfa.  o.  ApM.  S6G,  e.  TioiolA.
1200  ;  Meier,  Alt.  Prve.  p.  684.)

With  lupecl  to  heariay  evidence  lee  Ecjiak-
TVBiA :  and  with  retpect  to  the  affidavit  called
tiafuxfTvpla,  ace  H^Rxa,  p,  597,  a.

We  have  hitherto  spoken  only  of  cnuet  which
come  before  the  dicasta  in  the  ordinaiy  way,  and
have  said  nothii^  of  those  which  were  decided  by
the  pnblic  ubitralors.  The  abnTo  remarks,  how-
ever, will  equally  apply  to  the  Utter,  if  the  reader
will  bear  in  mind  that  the  arbitrator  performed  the
dutica  of  the  magiitrato  at  the  irinfmi  as  well  aa
those  of  the  tunurrnl  at  the  trial.  He  heard  the
witnettci  and  reeeived  the  depoaiUoni  Cnm  day  to
day,  aa  long  as  he  sat,  and  kept  the  ixirot  open
until  the  la>t  day  (■vplor  iuiipar).  (See  Demosth.
cMid.  541,  c.  TimoA.  1199;  Heiw  and  Schu-
mann, AH.  Proc  p.  676.)

If  the  witness  in  a  came  gave  blse  evidence,
the  injured  party  waa  at  liberty  t '  '
against  him  (tbnj  ^mta/uipnifiiui
petuation. The  ptoeaeding  wm


MARTTRIA.
Mirmifii,  and  the  plaintiff  was  said  triricfprTta.
iai  rp  iMfTupUi  or  t^  fidprupi  (Isaeus,  de  Pjrr.
htr.  39,  di  Bwmog.  ker.  52,  ed.  Steph. ;  Dsnotih.
tt  AfJiob.  846,  856  ;  Harpoor.  r.  v.  'Eninr4<faTs),
This  muse  was  pnbsbly  tried  before  the  nme  jrv-
siding  magistrate  as  the  otw  in  which  the  evidenoa
waa  given.  (Meier,  AU.  Proc  p.  45.)  The  form
of  the  pUinti3'*B  bill,  and  of  the  def^dant's  pica
in  denial,  will  be  found  in  Demoithena  (e.  Strpk.
11 1 G). From  the  tame  paasage  we  also  loan  that


in  which  the  plaintiff  laid  bia  own  damagea  in  tha
bill ;  and  &iHn  Demosthenes  (e.  Apioi.  849,  059),
it  appean  that  the  dicasta  had  power  not  onlj
to  give  damages  to  the  plainti^  but  also  ta  inflict
the  penalty  <rf'  i^i/iia  by  a  rps^rlfiita-u.  (See  alaa
liaeus,  de  Dicaeog.  her.  GZ)  A  witness  who  had
been  a  third  time  convicted  of  giving  &]sa  toati-
mony  waa  ipm  jare  diifimchised.  (Mder,  AU.
Prae.  p.  383.)  The  mam  question  to  be  tried  in
the  cause  against  tha  witness  was,  whether  hia
evidence  was  true  or  blse ;  but  another  qneatim
commonly  raised  was,  whether  his  evidence  was
material  to  the  decision  of  the  pieviaos  causa.  (De-
mosth. c.  Bturg.  H  Mitet.  1139,  1161,  c  Aplni.
853—856,  e.  Sleplt.  1117;  PUtner.  Att.  Pro:.


..  1.  p.


400,  J


When  a  wituess,  by  giving  Use  evidenca  against
a  mas  upon  a  criminal  trial,  had  procared  hit  eou-
viction,  and  the  convict  was  sentsnced  to  such  a
punishment  (for  instance,  death  <x  banishmeDt)  aa
rendered  it  impoaaibte  for  him  to  bring  an  action,
any  other  person  waa  allowed  to  institate  a  poblie
prosecution  against  the  wiDiess,  either  by  a  Tpn^,
or  perhaps  by  on  fttroy/tX/a  or  itpaiOMt,  (Ando^
de  Myit.  4  ;  Platner,  Alt.  Pnx.  p.  411 ;  Meier,
AIL  Proc  p.  3B2.)

After  the  conviction  of  the  witneia,  an  action
might  be  maintained  against  the  party  who  sab-
omed  bim  to  give  folss  evidence,  called  Itint
KoicaTixriir,  (Demosth.  c.  TTsuAL  1301,  o.A«^
el  Mom.  1 139.)  And  it  is  not  improbable  that  a
simibir  action  might  be  brought  agaiArt  a  persoD,
who  had  procured  ftlu  evidence  to  be  given  of  a
defendant  having  been  lummoDod,  after  the  coo-
viction  of  the  witness  in  a  7pa^  ^rttAmXifrtiea,
(Meier,  Att.  Proc  p.  759.)

It  appears  that  in  certain  caaea  a  man  who  had
loat  a  came  was  enabled  to  obtain  a  levanal  of  tba
judgment  (ting  JMSunt),  by  convicting  a  eertaiD
number  of  the  adverse  witneites  of  lislsa  tiatiiBOiiy.
Thm  in  inheritance  caosea.  the  law  ascted  *ir
iA#  Til  TW  ^H^napTofimg,  wdAi*  ^  ikpxf'
•Iku  Tfpt  atr&r  riti  AAt«i.  (loeus,  de  Haf/m.
<kr.  88,  ed.  Steph.,  de  Dkang.  tv.  SO,  Gl.)  This
wot  the  more  neceaaaiy,  on  account  of  tha  btjlity
aSisded  to  (he  partiea  to  stop  the  progreat  of  these
causes  by  affidavits,  and  alaa  because  no  moDey
could  compemate  an  Athenian  for  the  loas  of  ao
inheritance.  The  same  temedy  was  given  by  tba
law  to  those  who  had  been  convicted  in  a  Sunt
in  a  rp"^  (irlot.  In  the  last
coavicted  poion,  who  prrxxeded  against
uie  wisiesi,  was  compelled  to  ranaiii  in  priaoa
nntil  the  datenninatioa  of  hit  tuiL  (Deaioatb.
c  Timoer.  711.)  We  are  informed  that  these  an
the  only  cases  in  which  a  judgment  was  allowad
to  be  reversed  in  this  way ;  bat  whedier  thera
were  not  more  cases  than  these  has  been  jusUy'
doubted  by  Sehiiniann  {AU-  Pme.  761),  The
Scbdiasi  on  Kato  (£^.  zi.  li^is  avidMCyjsroif


UATRALIA.

m  impoiitf  thU  it  wu  nenuary  under  [Ii«  Athe-
DiBolHW  la  coBiict  nuwe  tbin  hiilf  tbs  aumber  of
the  vitaeiKi.  This  ^peui  bom  the  pUMgci  abOTS
cited  bom  laeoM  on  ths  CBlats  of  Hsgiuu.

We  conclude  hj  uolicii^  >  few  exproMinu.
Mafruptui  Tin  ii  la  taitif;  in  &Taar  OC  ■  nun,
gmatuifnipia'  TiHi  to  totiff  (gsinit.  Hair^
fatal  to  oil  to  witnen  (k  word  mad  paeticail;),
tamafriftaiai  and  MOietiiDea  iw^tofrifoSax,
▼alii  nfArrat,  to  cali  npoD  tboH  who  an  pment
10  tdis  notice  at  irhat  puH,  vilh  b  view  tc  give
eridence,  (Desuwth.  c  £Wy,  tt  Moo.  IISO.)
▼•vSo^u^mipaLv  ud  Hmftiii/  an  nerer  n«d  in-
diSeRDtly,  which  affiitdi  tataa  proof  that  Ita^
moD;  mu  not  neceonrilj  on  o*UL  The  iiiprm
{wilneu  in  the  caiue)  is  to  be  didingiiubeil  from
the  icXirr^  oc  iiA^iap,  who  meiel;  gave  evidence
ef  the  mmmoitt  to  appeal.  [C.  R.  K.}

MASTE'RES  OaorSim).  VZ.rrrtA*.']
MASXrOIA.  [ri.*o»t7ii.]
UASTIGOTHORI  or  MASTIGO'NOMI
(jiaarrf^ipK  vr  /hmtitw^/ui),  the  neme  of  the
lower  police  oSIcen  m  the  Qteek  atatei,  who  ear-
ned into  execntl<m  the  corpraal  pnniahmenti  in-
flicted by  the  higher  magiitratei.  Thm  Ljcnrgiu
•lugDed  mutigophori  to  the  Paedimoiniii  at  Sparta,
who  had  the  geneivl  ftnperinteDdence  of  the  edu-
catj<Hi  of  the  hajm,  (Xen-  Rep.  Lac^  iL  2,  iv.  6  ;
PluL  LjK.  17.)  In  the  theatn  the  mutigophoii
praervcd  onier,  and  veie  itstioiKd  for  thii  por-
p«e  in  the  orchntia,  near  the  thjmele.  (SdioL
ad  PlaL  p.  99,  Ruhnken  ;  Loeian,  Pitc.  33.)  In
the  Olympic  gunei  the  patSovxoi  perfonned  the
mne  duties  At  Athent  they  were  diichaiged  by
tbe  pablio  ilarea,  called  bowinen  (Tefdrni),  or
Scjthiaiu  (JiMu).  [Dihobil]
MATARA.  [Ha»ta,  p.  589,  ■.]
MATERFAMI'LIAS.  [M*tihiionick.}
MATHEMATJCI.  [Abtiioloou.]
MATRA'LIA,  a  feitival  celehialed  at  Romt
evei;  yeai  on  the  1 1th  ef  June,  in  honour  of  thi
gnddeM  Hater  Hatuta,  whoie  temple  Mood  in  tbi
Foimn  Bcatinm.  Il  wai  celebtnled  only  by  Ro-
man BBUma,  and  the  lacriflcei  offered  to  the  god-
dea  '"""'-'  of  cake*  baked  in  pou  of  earthen-
ware.  (VarTO,ifa  Uiy.  Lai.  jv.  p.  SI,  Bip. ;  Ovid.
FaAti.47i,  &c)  Slavea  were  not  allowed  ta
take  part  in  the  lalernnitiei,  or  to  entei  the  temple
of  the  goddesi.  One  itave,  bmrerer,  waa  admitted
bj  the  nutrotu,  but  only  to  be  eipoeed  to  a  bmni-
liadng  treatment,  tu  one  of  the  matrons  gave  her
a  blow  on  the  cheek  and  then  sent  her  away  fr«n
the  temple.  The  matrons  on  this  occasion  took
with  them  the  cbDdren  of  their  liBIen,  bnt  not
their  own,  held  than  in  their  umi,  and  prayed  for
their  wel&n.  (PlnL  CavaL  6,  QyaaL  Ron.  p.
267.)  Thestatueofthegoddeuwaa  thenoowned
with  A  nriand,  by  one  of  the  matTDna  who  had
not  yttlottahDiband.  (Tertutl.  Afoni^UM.  e.  17.)
The  Greek  writ*™  and  their  Roman  followers,
who  identify  the  Mala  Matnta  with  Lencothea  or
Ino,  eiplain  the  ceremonies  of  the  Hatnlia  by
Meana  of  the  mytbological  itcriea  which  relate  to
these  Onek  goddesses.  But  the  real  impart  of
the  wiRship  of  the  Mater  Hatuta  appeaii  to  bav
been  ta  menlata  upon  motheti  the  priDci[dc,  Ihi
they  en^t  to  take  tare  of  die  children  of  their
,  linen  as  much  as  of  their  own,  and  that  they
riwnld  not  loiva  them  to  carelcu  skvea,  the  coa-
tBBst  tor  wiuta  wai  lymbolicaUy  eijvetted  by
the  inSictiai)  of  a  blow  on  the  cheek  of  the  one


MATBIMONIUM.  735

If

MATRIHO'NIUM, '  NU'PTIAE  (7<^>}i
marriage.  1.  Okxik.  The  ancient  Oceek  legii-
Uton  conudered  the  lehMion  of  marriage  ai  a
tter  not  merely  of  peltate,  but  olio  of  public  or
Kial  isleiett.  This  waa  particularly  the  OM
Sparta,  where  the  suboidinatiNi  of  private  in-
eita  and  h^pineaa  to  the  real  or  suppoaed  eii-
icies  of  the  state  was  stimgly  exemplified  id  the
jolationa  on  this  nibject.  For  instance,  Iw  the
laws  of  Lvcnrfpii,  criminal  procsedingi  might  be
taken  agamH  thoae  who  muiied  too  late  (ypBi^
Unyniiiai)  or  nimilably  ("rpoM  KaKoyaiiiau),  tt
well  as  against  thoee  who  did  not  many  at  all
{■KM^  trfttiiioB).  <Pollui,  viii.  40  ;  Pint  Lycury.
IB.)  These  regnlstions  were  fonnded  on  the
genenlly  re«^ised  principle,  that  il  was  the  duty
of  every  citizen  to  raise  np  a  strong  and  healthy
progeny  of  legitimate  children  to  the  state.  (Miil-
ler,  Ooriou,  it.  i.  g  S.)  So  entirely,  in  bet,  did
the  Spartans  conndet  the  rutnnmita,  or  the  pro-
duction of  children,  as  the  mun  object  of  martiage,
and  an  object  which  the  itate  was  bound  to  xm-
mote,  that  whenever  a  woman  had  no  children  by
her  own  husband,  she  waa  not  only  allowed,  but
even  required  by  the  laws,  ta  cohabit  with  another
man.  (Xen.  dt  Rep.  Lao.  L  8.)  On  the  same
pindple,  and  for  tbe  purpose  of  preventing
the  eitinetion  of  his  fiunjjy.  the  Spartan  king,
Anaxandridet,  was  allowed  to  cohabit  with  two
wives,  fcs  whom  be  kept  two  separate  establish-
ments :  a  case  of  bigamy,  which,  as  Hetodolni
(tL  39,  40)  observes,  ws*  not  at  all  ccoiaiatent
with  SpaitBD  nor  indeed  with  Hellenic  cnatoma.
Thus  the  heroes  of  Homer  appear  nerei  to  have
had  mora  than  one  nupiifti  bax*!  (Bnttmann,
i^sHlD^Bs,  73)  ;  though  they  ai«  frequently  repre-
sented as  living  in  ooDcubiiiage  with  one  or  mora
woAAomJ.  Suon  also  seenu  to  have  viewed  mar-
riage as  a  matter  in  which  tbe  state  had  a  right  to
interfere,  for  we  an  told  that  hii  laws  allowed  of  a
yfo^  Ajyof^ou,  though  the  regulation  seema  to
have  grown  obsolete  in  later  times ;  at  any  rate
there  is  no  instance  on  record  of  its  application.
<Platuer,  Ptocob,  &c  toL  ii.  p.  248.)  Plato  too
may  be  quoted  ta  prove  how  geoeml  was  this  fad-
ing, for  acoording  to  his  laws  {£«.  iv.  p.  721),
any  one  who  did  not  marry  befbn  he  was  thir^-
tiie  was  ponitbable  not  only  -with  irifiJo,  but  bIm
with  pecuniary  penaltiei :  and  he  eipraily  slatea
that  in  chooaing  a  wife  every  one  ought  to  conault
the  intecesta  of  the  state,  and  not  nia  own  plea-
rare. Cii,.vi.p.773.)

But  independent  of  any  public  conrideiBtient
there  were  also  private  or  penmial  teaaona  (peculiar
to  the  ancients)  which  made  marrisga  an  obliga-
tion.  Plato  (L  c)  tnmtiona  one  of  these,  vib
the  duty  iocumbeot  upon  every  individoal  to  pro-
vide  fcir  a  continuance  ofrewTsentativeaCa  sncceed
hinuelf  aa  ministera  of  the  Divinity  (t^  e<f  i^nt-
p^oi  iff  aini  w^oSiUhi).  Another  was  the
deurs  Mt  by  abnoat  avan  one,  not  merely  to  p«<-
peCaale  bia  own  name,  but  alao  to  ]>e*ent  h!i
"  heritage  being  deaohte,  and  bia  name  being  cut
off"  (SvM  nil  ^f n»ui«0B«i  rofa  rfcr^pw  ^rir
abDm),  and  to  lAve  some  one  who  m^ht  maka
the  cuatoraary  offeringi  at  hia  grave  (iM.'  larct
Tit  cal  i  tnrpiv,  Isaeui  da  AjtoU.  Htnd.  p,  66.
Bek,).  We  are  told  that  with  this  view  childleaB
persona  aometimea  adopted  children.


T3S

Thech


MATMMONItJM.


nrelj  grounded  npon  afiection,  and  acBTcetj  ert
could  hkie  been  the  remit  of  previaai  uquainUni
or  fiuniliarity.  In  mtm;  cawa  a  father  ebote  for
hii  (on  a  bride  whom  the  latter  had  iwTer  leen,  or
compelted  him  to  murr  for  the  ake  of  checking
hii  ertiBTagance*.  Terence  (Aadria,  L  5}  thai
illutntea  the  pnctice ;  — ■

"  Pater  praeterit
Mihi  ipud  fonun,  uxor  tibi  dncenda  eat,  FatophQe,
bodie  inqnit ;  parL**


"  Ego  dnoun,  pater:  etiain  li  qnam  aliam  jnbchia."
RapreientaCioni  of  tlut  lort  may  indeed  be  con-
aidered  as  eraggeratiDna,  but  there  miiat  haFe  been
acenea  in  real  life  to  which  they  in  some  meE
cormpond. Nor  waa  the  conacnt  of  a  female
Toatch  pmpoaed  fet  her  generally  thoaght  m
■ary  ;  ihe  wu  obliged  to  lubmit  to  the  with
her  pannU,  and  ceceiTe  from  them,  it  might
■trangpi for  her hutband and lord. Sophodea
thui  deicribeathe  tol  of  women  in  thii  reipml:  —
"  When  we  are  grown  up  (he  makei  a  female  My)
wa  are  diiTen  away  from  our  poreDti  and  paternal
god*."

■a)  Tiur',  ^vtiSiv  tii^iuiHt  Cti(V  *^<>i
jlpiint  iwrnHUi,  Kal  tiwtiV  koAmi  f^tix.

fhig.  Ttma.
So  alao  in  Earipidei  (^ndnm.  951)  Hennieiw  de-
clare! that  il  it  her  hther*!  bugineu  la  provide  a
huaband  for  her.  The  rsault  of  marriages  con-
tiacted  in  Ifaii  manner  would  natomlly  be  a  want
of  confidence  and  mntnal  nudentanding  between
hniband  and^rife,  until  they  became  better  ac-
quainted with,  and  accuitomed  to,  each  other.
Xenophon  {Omxm.1.  g  10.)  illuitiatea  thia  with  ranch
»avell  in  the  penon  of  iBchomacbua,  who  layt  of
hit  newly  married  wife :  —  "  When  at  lait  ihe  waa
nanagesble  (jffipo^Ari),  and  getting  lame  lo  that
I  eould  talk  with  bcr,  I  atkedlicr,"  &c,  &c  By
Ihe  Athenian  lawi  a  citiien  va>  not  allowed  lo
marry  with  a  foreign  woman,  nor  coUTeraely,  under
Teiyaeyerepenalliea  (Demoath.  e.iVeoer.  p.  13i0);
but  promiiitj  by  blood  (iyx«^<'a)5  er  conian-
Ruinily  (rvfyirtm),  wai  not,  with  aone  fewex-
ceptioni,  a  bar  to  maniage  in  any  part  of  Qreoce  ;
direct  lineal  deKratwaa.  (Iiaeua,  dt  Cinm.  htr.
p.  72.)  Thnt  hrolhen  were  penoitted  lo  many
with  liateit  even,  if  not  d»u/i^pui,  or  bom  from
the  aame  mother,  ai  Chnon  did  with  Elpinice,
though  a  connection  of  thli  Krt  appeara  to  hare
been  looked  on  with  abhorrence.  (Becker,  Ckori-
Ua,  Tol.  ii.  p.  446.)  In  tbe  earlier  perioda  of
aociety,  indeed,  we  can  eaiily  conceive  that  a  apirit
of  caate  or  bmily  pride,  and  other  cauaea  auch  aa
thedifficoltieainthewayofiodalintercoune  would
lend  to  nuke  matriagn  frequent  amonint  near
nlatioDi  and  connec^oni.  (Compare  A'ant^en^
c;  xxiri.)  At  Athena,  however,  in  the  caae  of  a
father  dying  inteatate,  and  wilhont  male  children,
hia  beiresa  bad  no  choice  in  rjarriage  ;  ahe  wai
compelled  by  law  to  many  her  neareat  kinaman
not  in  the  aicending  line  ;  and  if  the  heireia  were
poor  [hriaaa)  the  neareat  unmarried  klDiman
eitber  married  her  or  portioned  her  luiuibly  lo  tier  i
rank.  When  there  were  teveral  coheireaeea,  they
were  napectivcly  married  to  their  kinimco,  the
neareat  tuviogtba  fint  choice.  [EFKXUtUS.]  Th«  |


HATBIUOHIUM.

with  her


Koma  lo  have  belonged  f
family,  ao  that  in  early  tim
gire  hia  daughter  (if  an  '


a  father


a  of  the
ould  not


marriage  witli-
(MlUlel,  borimi,  iL  10.  S  ^)
But  thia  vat  not  the  eaae  according  lo  the  later
Athenian  law  (DemoMh.  &  SIrpk.  p.  1134),  by-
which  a  father  wai  empowered  V>  ditpoee  of  hia
daughter  by  will  or  otherwiw  ;  juat  aa  widowa
alio  were  dinoaed  of  in  maniage,  by  the  will  of
Iheir  huabanda,  who  were  conaidered  their  right-
fal guardiana (ic^ei). (Demoath. c; Afiob.

,,■]<.)

Tho  aame  practice  of  nuurymg  in  tbe  family
(oTjtoi),  eipecially  in  tbe  caae  of  heimaea,  preTailed
at  Bpartaj  thni  Leonidaa  married  the  heirc«  of
Cleamenea,aa  being  heriTx""'''^  or  next  of  kin,
and  Anaxandridea  hia  own  aiatei^  dnugfater-
HoreoTcr,  if  a  father  had  jiot  delemincd  himielf
concerning  hia  daughter,  il  wu  decided  by  Ibe
king'i  conn,  who  among  the  privileged  pcnoni  or
memben  of  the  lamc  family  ahonid  marry  the  heireia.
(Herod,  vi.  il ;  MUller,  le.)  A  atiikina  re*cin~
blance  to  the  Athenian  law  respecting  heireaaea
!■  alio  found  in  the  Jewiih  code,  aa  detailed  in
NunAen  (c.  nvii.  1—11),  and  eiempUSed  in
RaA  <c.  i..)-

But  matcb-maling  among  the  ancienti  wu  not,
in  default  of  any  le^  reguladcais,  entiiet;  lefl  to
tba  care  and  Ibrelhought  of  parents,  fi>r  we  nad  of
women  who  made  a  pmfeaiion  of  it,  and  who  waa
therefore  called  wpoju^rrpini  or  ir(»)infaT(i(Ier,
(PoUui,  iiL  31.)  The  prafeiaion,  bowever,  doe*
not  aeem  to  hare  been  thought  Tety  bonouraUe
nor  to  bare  been  held  in  repule,  u  betni  too
nearly  eonnecled  with,  or  likely  to  be  proMitnted
to,  rparrv^tla.  (Plato,  ITieatt.  2.  p.  150.)

Particular  daya  and  aeaaoni  of  Ihe  year  wov
thought  auaplcioua  and  fayoniable  for  marriage
amongit  the  Oreeka.  Aristotle  (PoUL  vii.  15)
ipeaka  of  the  winter  generally  aa  being  io  eonii-
dercd,  and  at  Athena  the  month  r^niAiir,  putiy
conoaponding  lo  our  Jannnry,  received  ila  nama
fnim  maniagei  being  frequently  celebiatod  in  iL
Heilod  (Oper.  800)  ncommenda  manying  nn  tha
founh  day  of  the  month,
'Er  Bl  TiTii(>r|i  laivtt  iytrfoi  it  ohu  ScofTir,
hul  whether  he  mcana  the  fonrth  faon  the  begia-
ig  or  end  of  the  month  ia  douhtfiiL  Euripidta
(/pA»7.  n  AiiL  707)  ipenka  u  if  the  dme  of  tlia
fidi  moon  ware  thought  hvouiable,

(ror  o-tX^n)!  itnjctit  (XSp  nitkat,
which  be  ii  confirmed  by  the  eipceaiioD  lix*-
. .WSr  Impai,  or  the  fbU-mooo  nighla  io  Pm-
dor.  (/att.  vu.  4A.) That  thia  prepoewasion,  how-
ever, wBi  not  general  and  permanent  apnata  fran
Proclna  (mf  IJetiod.  Optr.  782),  who  mform)  ni
that  tbeAtheniana  aelected  far  marnageathe  timea
of  new  moon  (ris  a-p&t vumteir  ^fiipu),  f.  a.
when  the  ann  and  moon  wen  in  exjunction.
There  wu  alio  Hmo  diflereoce  of  oiunion,  on
hlch  il  ia  not  worth  while  to  dilate,  about  tin
proper  age  flir  marrying  ;  bnt  genetally  ^>cakiiig
n  were  expected  lo  many  between  30  and  U,
I  women  about  20  or  rather  befare^  (Plato,  Leg.
VL  p.  785.)

We  proceed  now  to  erplain  tbe  lunal  prellmi-
nariea  and  accompanimenta  of  marriage  in
paiti  ot  Qrcece. The  moat  imnrtaol  f(d


iiuik«f  it  pnbBWi


JdATRIMONIUU.

mt  Atfaon  WM  tha  .£%(Mtu  (iyr^itvii)  or  betro-
th*], which  WH  in  &ct  isdiipciuable  to  Ihs  com-
pIcMTalidi^afamain^  contnct.  It  mi  made
by  tha  nstunl  a  legal  guardian  (A  KijHoi}  of  the
iride  elfct,  ud  atloided  bj  the  nlatirei  of  both
psniei  at  wibKnei,  The  law  of  Atheui  oidained,
that  all  childien  bom  bum  a  maniage  lepillj  cou-
toEtedin  thii  mpect  ihould  bc^i^rriai  (DeiDanli.
c  5fipi.  p.  1134),  and  ooniequaitl]-,  if  lont,
lai/iaifot,  or  intitled  U>  inherit  equally  or  in  gavel-
kind. It  would  Mem,  therefore,  that  the  iuue  of
■  mairiaga  without  eapooiala  would  loie  their
hehtahle  righti,  which  depended  an  theii  being
bon  it  At^v  ul  ^yyvrrriiT  yvxtuKot ;  i.e.  from  a
dtiun  nod  ■  legollT  betrothed  wife.  The  wifc'i
dowry  wa*  al»  tetUed  at  the  eBpoiuali.  (Meier
and  Schthun,  p.  415.)

But  there  wen  alio  eeienl  ceremadiei  obterred
Hther  on  or  bnmediatel;  before  the  day  of  mar-
tiage.  The  tint  of  Iheie  were  the  wpari^iia  yi-
furr  or  Tf»T<^ia  (Polloi,  iJL  38),  and  contiited
of  •Bciifice*  oroSeringi  made  to  the  diol  to/i^Mdi
or  diiinitiea  who  preiided  Dvei  rnaniage.  They
■re  generally  BUppo*ed  to  hare  been  made  on  the
da;  before  the  yiius  or  marriage  i  but  there  it  a
■a  Eoripidet  (fp%.  u  Aal.  642)  which
bable  that  thii  wai  not  alwayi  the
■  the  &lher  of  the  bride
efeet ;  the  diTmitiea  to  whom  the  offering  wai  nuida
were,  aecocdiDg  to  PoUni  (iii.  SUl),  Hera  and
Artemia,  and  the  Fates,  to  whom  the  brides  elect
thm  dedicated  the  iwnp\iu  of  their  hair.  Accord-
ing to  Diodoini  Siculm  (v.  73)  they  were  Zeui
and  Hera  rt\tia  (Juno  pronuba)  ;  but  they  pro-
bably varied  in  different  conntriei,  and  were  tome-
thses  the  Sfol  tyx^f'"  ot  local  deil^ei.  The
irfferii^  to  Artemia  wen  probably  made  with  a
new  of  i^opitiating  her,  ai  the  km  iuppD(ed  to
be  STeiae  to  marriage.  [BlIAUBOHLk.]  We
Bay  alao  obaerre  that  Polliu  me*  trpoyitiiia  aa
■ynonymmu  with  wporJ^iui,  making  yiiiei  idcn-
tiol  with  tJXoi,  ai  if  mariUge  were  the  r^i  or
perfecticn  of  man*!  being:  whence  tj\«ui  con-
nected with  or  preriding  oier  marriage  or  a  mar-
had  pcnoD,  and  Ufur  iiiiert\T}i  a  houie  withoat
a  baiband  or  incomplete.  (Horn.  IL  iL  701.)
Another  ceronony  of  almoit  general  obienance  on
the  wedding  day,  wai  the  bathing  of  both  the
bride  and  bridegroom  in  water  fetched  from  aome
particnlar  fountain,  whence,  na  aome  think,  the
naloni  cf  placing  the  figure  of  a  Xompaiiiipot  or
"  water-carrier  "  over  the  lombl  of  Ihoae  who  died
mmaiTied.  [BlLKBAK,  p.  165,  h.]  At  Athena
the  water  was  fetched  from  the  fountain  CallirrhoK,
at  the  loot  of  the  AcmpolU  (Thne.  iL  15.).  After
these  ptelhninariee  the  bride  waa  generally  con-
doned ftom  her  bther'a  to  the  honaa  of  the  bride-
grocm  at  nightUl,  in  a  chariot  C^'  i^ulfii)  drawn
by  a  pair  of  mnle*  or  oien,  and  furnished  with  a
lOurif  at  kind  of  a  conch  aa  a  seat.  On  either  aide
of  her  aat  the  br:de(;Taoni,  and  one  of  his  moat  in-
timate friends  or  relations,  who  from  his  office  waa
called  np6niiifos  or  nti^vrtii ;  but  aa  he  rode
in  the  carriage  (Ixflf )  with  the  bride  and  bride-
gnom,  he  waa  aomelimes  called  the  nlwxoi
{t  it  rptmi  t  rapax"^"""  ^^X"  'i^^^,
Harpoer.  s.  v.).  Hence  Ariatophane*  {Avt*,  17SS)
ipeaka  of  the  "blooming  Lore  guidiiu  the  (uppte
nina,"  wheo  Zeoi  waa  wedded  to  Hera,  a*  the
Zifi^i  wifoxn  fiv"  ''^t  t*  •Maipirai  'Hpot.

The  unptial  ptoeeauoa  wsa  [sobably  accom-


MATBIMONIUM.  737

panied,  accordirg  to  liicuraatancea,  byannmber  of
persona,  aome  of  whom  carried  the  nuptial  torchea
(t^»  ni^tfiiicBf,  AdstopL  Pcuc,  I31S)  )  and  in
some  places,  aa  in  Boeotia,  it  waa  cualomary  to
bam  the  axle  of  the  ouriage  on  ila  arriral  at  the
bridegroom's  house,  a>  a  symbol  that  the  bride  was
to  remain  at  home  and  not  go  abroad.  (Pint.
Qsoeil  Rom.  p.  1 1 1 .)  If  the  bridegroom  had  been
married  before,  the  bride  was  not  conducted  to
hit  bouse  by  himself^  but  by  one  of  hli  friends,
who  waa  therefore  called  rvtu^vftetis.  (Hesych.
a-o. ;  PoUui,  liL  40.)

Both  bride  and  bridegroom  (the  former  relied)
were  of  couna  decked  out  in  their  beat  attiie,  with
chapleU  on  their  head*  (Becker,  aariUa,  col.  ii.
p.  467),  and  the  door*  of  their  houses  were  hung
with  festoons  of  iry  and  bay.  (PluL  AvuA  10.
p.  27.)  At  the  bridal  proceasion  moved  alcaig,  the
Hymenaean  song  waa  anng  to  the  *c<am[aninient
of  Lydion  Qntea,  even  in  olden  limes,  oa  beautifullr
de«jibed  by  Homer  (IL  iiiil  490  j  Hea.  SM.
Hen.  S7S),  and  the  married  pair  received  the
greeting*  mi  eongratnlaliona  of  those  who  met
them.  (Ariatoph.  Pat,  1316.)  After  entering
the  brid^TDom't  house,  into  which  the  bride  waa
probably  condactcd  by  hit  mother  bearing  a  lighted
toreh  (Eurip.  Flaen.  t.  311),  i" -" "


shoo


m  («Tax*ffp


■»)  a


emblemt of  plenty  and  prosperity, (SchoL  a
AriHop/L  PliU.168.)

After  this  came  the  yifM  or  nuptial  feut,  the
Siiirii  TOfuc^,  which  was  generally  (Becker,  C^ori.
Ua,  vol.  ii.  p.  469)  given  in  the  hosse  of  the  bride,
groom  or  hi*  porenla  ;  and  betides  being  a  feativa
meeting,  terved  other  and  more  important  purposes.
There  waa  nopubljcriftht  whether  civil  or  religiouj
connected  with  the  celebration  of  marriage  amongst
the  ancient  Oreeka,  and  therefore  no  public  iHord
of  iu  salemnitatlon.  Thl*  deficiency  then  was  sup-
plied by  the  marriage  feiut,  fat  the  guests  were  of
course  competent  to  prove  Che  bet  of  n  marriage
having  taken  place  ;  and  DemoDthenei  (e.  OiL
p.  869)  rayt  they  were  invited  partly  with  anch
viewL  To  this  ienat,  contrary  to  the  usual  prac-
tice amongst  the  Greeks,  women  were  invited  aa
well  as  men  ;  but  they  seem  to  have  sat  at  a  separate
table,  with  the  bride  ttill  veiled  amongat  them.
(Lucion,  Cbmn.  8  ;  Athen.  liT.  p.  644.)  At  the
conclualon  of  thia  feaat  she  wot  conducted  by
her  hnabtind  Into  the  bridal  chamber  i  and  a  law
of  Solon  (Plut  JWOK,  C.20)  required  tl


indica


it  they  thould  ei
I  that  their


aquu


"tn^t  to"i.


agreeable.  ^

(JsiBoAdpoi',  ac  /itf-oiy  wo*  then  rang  bejbre  the
doon  of  the  bridal  chamber,  aa  represented  by
Theociilns  in  his  18th  Idyl,  where,  qieaking  it
the  mairiage  of  Helen,  he  aap —

Twelve  Spartan  virgins,  the  Laconian  bloom,
Choir-d  beforv  fair  Helen's  bridal  room-
To  the  some  time  with  ndenoe  true  they  beat
The  rapid  round  of  many  twinkling  feet.
One  measure  tript,  one  song  together  sung.
Their  hymenean  all  the  palace  rung.

Chapman.
:  the  Scholiaat  remarka  that  Epi-


softi


I  kinds


ing,  and  called  Kq/roKtifi-iiruid,  and  othara  in  ths
morning  (ppBpia),  and  called  tirytfrraii.

The  day  after  Uia  marriage,  Uu  fint  ot  the


78B  MATRIMONIUM.

bride^  mideDce  in  ber  new  abode,  wu  called  tht
Jro^Aia:  oa  which  theirfriendiieDt  the  cuitoiiuii^
preienti  to  the  nevlj  niBIiied  couple.  Oa  imolhei
dsj,  the  icoiiAui,  pcrliBpi  the  Bccond  iifler  nut-
ria^, Ihi  bridegroom  left  bii  house  la  lodge  apart
from  hii  wife  M  bit  htber'i-in-taw,  uid  the  brids
prsKtited  him  with  a  giirraent  called  fhrsuAumipla,
m  eoniiection  with  which,  Pollur  (iii,  39)  oUervei,
that  the  gifta  made  to  the  bride  after  Che  marriage
were  called  iani6\ta.  Some  of  the  preHnti  made
to  the  bride  bj  ber  buihud  and  hienit  wen
called  iraxttXvjrT^piOj  at  being  giiea  on  the  ocob-
sion  sf  the  bride  Gnt  appearing  imTeiled  (Harpocr.
(.  V.)  ;  thej  were  probablj  given  on  the  iniXia,  or
day  after  the  marriage.

Another  ceremony  obaerred  after  marriage  wai
the  mcrifice  which  the  bnibMid  offered  up  on  the
oecaoion  of  hU  bride  being  registered  amongBt  hia
oprn  pbratorea  (yofniXlw^  kIL  ^vtrioj'  Totr  ^pdrop-
<rir  (MireYim,  Demoalh.  c  CbM.  pp.  I31S,  1320;
Tiaeu),  de  Pyrr.  her.  p.  ■IS).

The  ilatement  above  made  of  the  (olemnities
connected  with  nutrriage  cannot  of  courae  be  con-
lidcred  ai  applioiblo  to  all  agea  and  circtunttancei,
bnt  rathti  a*  a  leproentation  of  the  cnatomi  gene-
rally  obaerred  at  Atheni  in  Utcr  time*.

Ac  Sparta  the  betrothal  of  the bride by  her

liminary  ri'  marriage,  at  well  al  at  Athma.  (HUl.
ler,  Doriatu,  ii.  4.  %  2.)  Anotbei  cnitom  pecu-
liar to  the  Sparlana,  and  a  lelic  of  andent  tiinei,
wai  the  aeiiure  of  the  bride  by  ha  intended
htubuid  (lee  Herod.  vL  Si),  but  of  conras  with
the  nnction  of  her  parenta  or  gnardiana.  (Pint.
l,ge>ir.  \&  ;  Xen.  da  Hip.  lae,  \.  &.)  She  waa
not,  howercr,  immediately  domidled  in  ber  bua-
hand"!  bonae,  but  cohabited  with  bini  for  aome
time  clandeB^nely,  till  be  brought  her,  and  fre-
quently her  mother  rIk,  to  hii  borne.  (Miiller,
Doriaiu,  L  e.)  A  atmilar  cuitom  appean  to  have
prevailed  in  Crete,  where,  aiwe  are  told  (Sirabo,
X.  p.  482),  the  yoang  men  when  diamiutd  Irom
the  l^tx^  of  tbfir  fellowi,  were  immedlatety  mar-
ried, but  did  net  take  their  wiiea  home  till  aome
time  afterwarda,  MliUer  niggeRa  that  the  chil-
dren of  thia  furtiTe  kind  of  intercoune  were  called

We  mbjoin  aome  particulan  cooceming  the  re-
lation between  man  and  wife  amongit  the  ancient
Oreeki,  ptcfocing  them  with  a  deteription  of  do-
meetic  married  life,  from  Lyiiaa  (dt  Chti*  Eraba.
p.  ST).  The  apeaker  there  laya,  "  t  have  a  amall
two-ttory  bouae,  of  equal  dimenaioni  on  the  baae-
menl  and  finC  floor,  both  in  the  mala  and  female
apartmenta  (ictrrl  Hjp  ytffvxMvittv  ff.  t.  A.).  Nov
after  oar  little  boy  waa  bom,  hii  mother  oaed  to
anckl*  it,  and  that  ahe  might  not  meet  with  any
accident  in  going  down  the  ladder  (A  aXlfuif),
whenever  the  wanted  to  waih,  I  lived  up  itain,
and  the  women  beloiv.  And  it  waa  niual  for  my
wife  to  leave  me  very  frequently  and  aleep  down
itaira  with  the  child,  to  give  it  the  brout  and  keep
it  from  crying.  And  one  day  after  dinner  the
little  fallow  cried  and  fretted,  and  I  told  my  wife
to  go  and  luckie  it ;  now  at  firat  ahe  would  not,
but  at  laat  I  get  angry  with  her,  and  ordered  bee
to  go  :  *  yea,'  aid  ahe,  '  that  yon  may  play  with

Now,  thongb  the  wife,  aa  appeui  by  thia  tale,
ninaJly  took  ber  meala  with  her  hnahand,  ahe  did
nMgogmwitllhiB  tadiniKl^iiarnlU  laUawitli


MATRIHONiml

hia  gneata  when  he  had  company. (Tannia,  3»


■ofutla,  btpttwiia,  and  iraiS<n-p«^  The  firW  of
theae  included  the  domeitic  amngeoteuta  sf  tha
home  and  luperintendence  of  the  fiunicnt^  provi-
■iona,  cookeiy,  and  lervanta  ;  in  bet  erenr  ikimg
that  came  under  the  nameofhouaekeeping.  (Becker,
CtolijtiM,  ToL  iLp.476.)  Bnt  a  truatof  tkiakiDd
waa  not  lepoaed  in  a  young  iriie  till  ibe  had  gained
aome  experience  ;  frxwbat,iay>  XaiopboD(0*aia.
7.  S  4),  could  a  wile,  mairied  at  fifteen,  be  likdy
to  know,  who  bad  lived  in  cnmplete  aectsiion,  and
had  only  been  taught  by  her  mother  to  conduct
henetf  virtuouily  (av^ponv)?  The  depaanls  in-
cluded the  attendance  upon  the  lick  inmate*  of  the
houie,  whether  free  or llavc*.  (Xen.CWaa.  7.  £37.)
The  mtorpofla  wai  the  phyiical  edna^on  of  the
children,  on  which  Plutarch  (ifa  Bduaat,  Paer.  S.
p.  9)  obserrea  that  motben  ought  themaelvea  to
nnrturcand  nckle  their  childreit,thongh  frequei '


cEubid.  p.  1309.)  The  Spartan  nuraea  were  lo
lamoui,  that  they  were  engaged  even  in  fbteifiB
Btatea  ;  tbui  Alcibiadea  we  are  tidd  waa  aa^ed  by
B  Laconiao nuiae.  (Flut.£jcBrjr.  16.)  Itisacarecty
necewary  to  remark  that  we  have  been  apcakingof

to  which  only  our  obacrvationa  can  apply.

The  coniideralion  in  which  women  wve  bdd  by
their  hnabanda,  and  Ibe  rspect  paid  to  Lbdn  m  an-
cient Oreece,  wonld  naturally  depend,  in  aome  d«-
gree,  on  their  intellectual  and  moral  character  ;  bat
generally  apeaking  tha  Oreekientertaioed  compara-
tively little  regard  (or  the  female  character.  They
coniidered  women,  m  &ct,  ai  deddedly  inferior  to
men,  qualified  to  diecharge  only  the  aobordinate
function!  in  life,  and  rauer  necetaary  aa  belp-
nialea,  than  agreeable  oa  compmimia.  To  thtse
notion!  female  education  for  the  moat  part  colte-
Aponded,  and  in  fact  confirmed  them ;  it  did  not
aupply  the  elegant  accompliahmenta  and  ntjoemaut
of  mannen  which  permanently  engage  the  aSec-
lion!,  whea  other  altractiooi  have  pawed  away.
Ariitotle  (<1«  Afp.  L  2)  italea,  that  tha  relatiim  of
man  to  woman  ia  that  of  the  g
jarti  ■ ■

virtue  may  be  anmmed  up  in  a  tew  wocda,  for  aha
baa  only  to  manage  the  honio  well,  keeping  what
there  ii  in  it,  and  obeying  her  huibood.  Nor  ia  it
unimportant  to  temaik,  that  Athenian!,  in  ipeakin^
of  their  wivca  and  childtrn,  geuorally  laid  tim
Kal  Twoikai,  patting  their  wiiea  lait:  a  ptuaae
which  indicBtea  vary  dearly  what  waa  the  tooa  of
feeling  on  thia  tubjecL  Moreover,  before  narriaft*
Orecian  women  were  kept  in  a  atatc  of  oanGnaneut,
which  amonnted  to  little  abort  of  a  deprivatioQ  of
liberty,  ao  that  they  are  eves  eaid  to  have  been
watched  and  gnaided  in  itnmg  apartuienti,
ijpipiwi  woflinici  ^povpoM-nu  nAAt
(Enrip.  IpUff.  B  Aalid.),  nor  waa  it  thnght  be-
coming in  them  to  ha  aeaa  m  public  (Euri^  Onac
108},  ait^  on  aome  paitimlar  ocaaioDi,  when
they  appeared  aa  apectaton  o^  or  partkdpatot*  in
religioni  proceaaioni ;  of  which,  young  SMO  d»-
■iroua  of  being  married  wonld  naturally  avail  Iban-
lelvea  to  determine  the  object  of  theiT  duucai.
Even  after  marriage  the  rcalrictiona  iiiniaaiil  opwk
joung  women  of  tha  middle  and  ItidMr  rhmtm


HATRncONIOU.

«(«  oft  joj  jtalani  Ind  almixt  Oriental  chuae-
ter.  Tb»j  oecoiried,
put  of  the  hooK,  sDi
band  it  wm  thoughl  highly  impropCT  for  a  man
eren  to  enter  where  they  wen.  {Dtmrnlii,  e.  Entry .
pp.  1157,  ItSO.)  From  varioiu  panBgo  of  the
Attk  camediani  it  vould  aln  teem  that  married
women  were  required  to  keep  at  home  (odtoufnui),
and  not  allowed  to  go  oat  of  doon  wilhoat  the
m  of  their  hivhondc  Thai,  in  a  fragment
(Meineke,  p.  87),  we  an  totd  that
mained  women  are  not  allowed  to  put  the  gale  of
the  conrt- jsid  of  the  home,

and  Ariatimhanea  (Tlian,  p.  790)  (pcaki  of  ^oir
hnibandi  ftirbidding  them  to  go  out.  Again,  on
gcauioni  of  girst  public  alarm  (iL^,  when  the
newi  of  the  defcsl  at  Chaenmeia  reached  Athem),
tbs  wtimen  are  BpoktD  at,  not  u  InTing  their
boDKa,  but  (tanding  si  iheir  doors  and  inqniiing
■ft«t  the  &Ie  of  their  hnabandi,  a  circumMonce
which  ia  dcaeribed  at  being  diicredilable  to  them-
■drea  and  tht  city  (iraiiar  mlrrmv  Kt^  ritfikms,
Lyeurg.  e.  Jieoa.  p  63,  Bek.),  From  a  paaaage  in
PIntaRh  {dt  Gem.  Soar.  33)  it  ap^ean  tliat  on  thii
■abject  there  waa  the  Hnis  feelmg  at  Tfaebe*  at
well  aaat  Athena  ;  andthtame  nriter(Sa/a<i,  21)
informi  na  that  one  of  Solon*!  Uwi  ipeciGed  the
which  women  were


to  be  allowed  to  leace  their  he
there  woe  magiatratee  at  Athena  (the  yvnuKtmi-
fw),  charaed,  ai  their  name  dmotea,  with  the
■nperintradenc*  of  the  behaiiom  of  women. [Qr-

Bat  w«  inut  obeerre  that  the  deKriptisn  giren
■ban  of  (he  aocnl  condition  and  eatimation  of
women  in  Greece,  doea  not  apply  to  the  Heroic
timee  aa  deecribed  bj  Homer,  not  to  the  Dorian
Hate  of  Sparta.  With  reapeet  to  the  former,  we
have  only  apace  to  remai^,  that  the  women  of  the
Heowric  time*  enjoyed  moch  more  freedom  and
conaideration  than  Ihoae  of  later  agee,  and  that  the
comeetion  between  the  leie*  wai  then  of  a  more
generoni  and  afiectionate  character  than  after-
warda.  Fat  another  iniponanl  diitinetion  aee  Doa
(Obbik). (Becker,  (UariUn,  Tol.  iL  p.415.)

Among  the  Doriani  generally,  and  in  Sparta
a|wciallf ,  the  relation  of  the  wife  to  the  hnaband,
aiki  titt  regard  paid  to  women,  waa  for  the  moat

Cthe  tame  aa  that  repreaeuted  by  Homer  to
I  preniled  uniienally  (unongsl  the  ancient
Oreelu  ;  and  aa  nich,  preiented  a  atrong  contratt
to  the  habita  and  principle)  of  the  Ionic  Athenian),
with  whom  the  ancient  ctutoni  of  Qreeo,  in  thit
teapect,  waa  in  a  great  measure  lupphinted  by  that
of  the  Eaat.  At  Sparta,  for  inatance,  the  wife  waa
haooored  with  the  title  of  Bi'trroiM -  "— --■ "


lingJT  or  m


cally.


■Dd  other  na^ona  of  nHthnr
4.  I  4.) Moroorer,  the  pi
■itied by  the  Doriana between tbe  text*
(eoDpantiTely  at  leait)  of io  free and  i
Mrieted  a  ehoiaeter,  ai  to have  giren  oca
for  Ue  wtU known chargta  of licentiani
(bwnf) againat  the Spartan  women. (Eurip.
Amltvm.  (86.) The  inBnence, too, which the
ODcn  enjoyed  waa  to  great  that
•  Uanad  fir  lobinitting  to  ti»


HATBlMONIUBt  7SS

^oke  of  thor  wire* ;  and  eren  Ariatofle  (/>oJL
iL  6)  thought  it  neceaiBiy  to  accoimt  for  the  cir-
cumitance,  by  the  auppoaiticn  that  Lyctu'gna  bad
biled  in  hit  attempt  to  tegulala  the  life  and  con-
duct of  the  Spartan  woDKn  aa  be  had  wiahed.  In
iborl  there  wai  a  great  conmat and  diffrrenea

and  Ionian  natst  of  Greece,  which  ii  well  de-
icribedb7MUller[:.c)  in  the  Mowing  wotdai  —
"  Aroongit  tbe  loniana  women  were  merely  con-
lidered  in  an  interior  and  aeniual  light,  and  though
the  Aeolian)  allowed  their  feelinga  a  more  eialled
tone,  at  ia  proTed  by  the  amatory  poateaaet  of
Leaboa,  the  Dorian),  at  well  at  Sparta  aa  in  tbe
Kiuth  of  Italy,  were  almott  tbs  only  nation  who
conaidered  tbe  higher  atCrihutea  of  the  female  mind
a)  cabbie  of  cuItiTBtion."  In  Sparta,  loo,  the  un-
mamed  women  lirod  more  in  public  than  the  mar*
ried.  The  former  appeared  with  their  beet  no-
coTered,  ibe  latter  leifed  ;  and  at  Sparta,  in  Crete,
and  at  Oljmpia,  virgina  were  permitted  to  be  ipec-
tatcn  of  the  gymnaitic  conteeli,  and  married
women  only  wen  eiduded.  The  reTer>a  of  thit
wa*  the  caae  in  Ionia.  (MiUler,  ii.  S.  §  2.)

The  preceding  inTettigation  will  have  prepared
tbe  reader  for  uie  fact,  that  the  atricteit  conjugal
fidelity  wu  reiguirid  unda  very  aevere  penaltiea
from  the  wife  [AddltuhuhJ,  while  great  laxity
wu  allowed  to  de  htuband. The  general  practice
ia  thui  illuttrated  by  Plantut  (Mmat.  i>.  G.  2) :  —
"  Nam  >i  vir  tcortmn  dniit  clam  uiwem  iuaiD,
Id  oi  retcivit  niot,  impnne  eat  Tiro.
Uxor  Tiro  ai  dam  dome  egretn  eat  fbna.
Vim  fit  eanaa,  eiigitm  matrimonio."
In  catei  of  adultery  by  the  wife,  the  Athenian
law  fubjaeted  the  hnaband  to  irifJo,  if  he  con-
tmued  to  cohabit  with  her  ;  ao  that  the  waa  ipio
/idodiTorced.  (Dcmonh.o.A'eair.  p.1374.} But
a  aeparaljon  might  be etfected in  two  diSercnt
ways :  by  the  wile  Icaiing  tho  huiband,  or  the
buiband  diunioing  the  wife. If  the  latter  aup
poaed  her  huiband  te  bare  acted  withoat  aulficieat
jnalilicatiim  in  luch  a  courae,  it  waa  competent  fin
her  after  diimi)Bal,  or  rather  for  her  guardiana,
in  action  for  diimianl  (Iwi)  iwmri/utimt
^  ii-^t}^  the  cKTeaponding  action,  if  breogbt
by  the  huaband, waa  a  Iuc4 AmAiIiffBt. If,
woTBr,  a  wife  were  iU-nied  in  any  iway  by  her
ibvid,  he  wo  liable  to  an  action  called  a  Suci
lArevi,  ao  that  the  wife  waa  not  entirely  un-
itecled  by  the  lawi:  a  concloaisn  juatiGed  by  a
fragment  in Athenaetu (liiL  p.  659)  in which
married  women  are  apoken  of  aa relying  on  iit
protection. Bnt  a  >e|Bratian,  whether  it  origi-
nated &om  the  hatband  or  wife,  waa  conaidered  to
reflect  diacredit  on  the  latter  {i  yif  llauKis  iarir
alffxiyni-  tx'".  Fray-  op"*  -Stoi.  p.  67,  Oaiiford)
' lendcnt  of  tbe  difficultie)  and  ineonTeniencet
hich  ahe  waa  lubjecled  by  iL At Sparta
in  the  part  of  a  wife  teemt  to  bare
been  a  ground lor diamiaotl by  the huthand
(Herod,  ti.  61) ;  and  from  a  paaaage  in  Dion  Chry-
(OnX.  XT.  p.  447)  il  hat  been  inferred  that
were  in  the  habit  of  impoaing  aupporititiaai
children  with  s  new  of  keeping {Kmurx'Tr)
their  huaband) :  not  but  that  the  wotd  admita  of,
indeed  it  doea  not  {{ram  tbe  teote)  require,  a
flerent  interpretatko.

Thit  article  bat  beat  mainly  cmipated  froa
Beckar^OloftHw(TOLap.«i). Tbdntieiar


J.Y"


•  o"


740


MATRIMONIUM.

dated  Knneivlist  in  detail  b  j


an  Atlmuaii

Xcnophon  (OsnuMt.  ad  in/.).  [R.  W.]

2.  RuMAN. A  Roman  marriiigs waa called
Jiutne  Naptiae,  Jnatnni  Matrunonimn,  LegiEimi
MatriiDoniDni,  ai  being  confeimable  to  Jua  Ci'
or  to  Roman  Law.  •> -


1  thig  a


abotli  □


partio,  and  <
male  miut  aln  be  pubet,  and  tbe
poleiu.  Tlie  legal  conaeqaencea  as  t
of  the  lalhet  oier  bii  ihildion  were
bath.  Oppoaed  to  the  Ugilimua
waa  the  Matrimoniuni  Joria  Gentii

A  R<iman  mamaga  maj  be  riewed,  Firat  with
reference  to  the  conditiani  required  for  a  Jiutum
Matrimonium ;  Secondly,  wiOi  rererence  la  the
forma  of  the  maniage  ;  Thirdly,  with  releieitce  to
ita  legal  conaequencea.

Unleu  there  waa  amnBbiiint  there  could  be  no
Roman  tnarriage,  Cnnnribium  ia  defined  by  Ul-
ptan  (fyag.  t.  3)  to  be  "  oioria  jure  duccndae
facaltBa,"  oi  the  bicolly  by  whicfa  a  man  may  maki


dcfinitic


B  bia  la¥ifiil  wife.


n  truth  ihu
'e  any  information.
i.oiiRuDiniD  la  merely  a  term  which  comprehenda
all  the  conditiont  of  a  legal  nurrisge.  Accordingly,
the  term  ia  eiplained  by  pnrticulai  inatancea :
"  Roman  men  ciliiena,"  aayj  Ulpian,  "  have  coa-

a«t)  j  but  with  Latinae  and  Peregriaae  only  in
thoae  caaea  where  it  baa  been  permitted.  With
alavea  there  ia  no  connubiam.*'

Sometimea  coQnnbium,  that  ia  the  faculty  of
eontiacting  a  Roman  nmrriage,  ia  viewed  with  re-
fennca  to  one  of  ila  moat  important  conaeqnencea,
namely,  the  PaCria  Poteatai :  "  for,"  aaya  Oaiua,
"  luice  it  ia  tbe  ei!tMt  of  Connubium  that  the
children  follow  the  condition  of  thaii  fiilhei,  it
reiulu  that  when  Comnbiuni  eiiata,  the  children
are  not  only  Roman  eitiiena,  but  are  alao  in  the
power  of  tieir  father."  Generally,  it  may  be
atated  that  there  waa  only  connubinm  between
Roman  citiiona :  the  caaea  in  which  it  at  any  time
eiiated  between  partiea,  net  both  Roman  dtiiena,
were  eiceptiona  to  the  general  mle.  Originally,
or  at  leaat  at  ods  period  of  the  Republic,  there
waa  no  Connubium  betwoea  the  Patiiciana  and
the  Plebeiana  j  but  thil  waa  altered  by  the  Lei
Canuleia  which  aUowed  Connubium  between  par-
iona  of  thoae  two  claaaea.

There  waa  no  oonncbiiun  between  nuny  peraona
with  reapect  to  one  another,  who  had  aererally
coimubium  with  reapect  to  other  peraona.  Tbna
tbere  were  larioua  degnea  of  conaatuiiinity  within
which  there  waa  no  connubinm.  There  waa  no
connnbium  between  parent  and  chiid,  whether  the
relation  wna  nalnral  or  by  adoption ;  and  a  man
could  not  marry  an  adopted  daughter  or  nand-
daughter,  eren  after  ha  had  emancipated  her.
There  waa  no  connnbium  between  brathen  and
aiaten,  whether  of  the  whole  or  of  tbe  half  blood :
but  a  man  might  many  a  aialer  by  adoption  after
her  emancipatian,  or  after  hia  own  emancipation.
It  beiame  legal  to  marry  a  brother'a  daughter
afker  Claudiua  had  aet  the  example  by  marryizig
Agiipnina ;  but  tbe  rule  waa  not  carried  fnrther
tlun  tbe  eiamole,  and  in  the  time  of  Oaiua  it  re-
mained unlawful  for  a  man  to  marry  hia  aiiter'a
daughler.  (Oaina;  I  62 ;  TaeiL  Ana.  lii.  £  ;
SnetioL  dowi.  2G.J


HATRIMONIUH.

There  waa  no  eonnnbinm  alao  between  pcnoaa
within  certain  reladona  of  oflinity,  as  between  a
man  and  bii  aocrua,  nurai,  privigna,  and  noverco.

Any  illegal  union  of  a  male  and  female,  though
affecting  to  be,  waa  not  a  mamage ;  the  nun  had
no  legal  wife,  and  the  children  had  no  legal  (atfaei;
conaeqnently  they  were  not  in  the  power  of  thdr
reputed  bther.  Theae  reatrictiona  aa  to  marriaga
were  not  founded  on  any  enactmenta:  they  wer*
a  part  of  that  large  mau  of  Konun  law  which  b»-
longa  to  Jua  Morihua  Conatitutnm.

Tbe  nurriage  of  Drani^ua,  afterwards  the  cam^
peror  Nero,  with  Octaria  the  daughter  of  Clandina,
aecmi  at  Gnl  aight  aomcwhat  iitegular.  Nero  ma
adopted  by  Chudiua  by  a  Lei  Curiala  (Tadt.
Ann.  liL  2fi),  but  he  waa  already  hia  aon-in-la<r;
at  Icaat  the  tponaalia  are  mentioned  beliire  tha
adoption.  (Tacit.  Atm.  ziL  9.)  There  aeema  to  ha
no  rule  of  Uw  which  would  prevent  a  man  from
adopting  hia  aon-in-law  ;  though  if  the  adoption
tuok  place  before  the  mamage,  it  would  be  iUcg^
Bi  ataled  by  Gaiua,

Penon*  who  had  certain  bodily  imperfxtiona,
aa  eunocba,  and  othen  who  &om  any  canas  could
never  attain  to  puberty,  could  not  contract  mar-
riage j  for  tbough  pQberlaa  waa  in  conne  of  tins
filed  at  a  poaiiiva  age  [Imfubm],  yet  aa  t)w
foundation  of  the  notion  of  pubertaa  waa  phyainl
capacity  for  aeiual  intercourae,  there  could  be  no
pubertaa  if  there  waa  a  phyaieal  incapacity.

The  eaaence  of  marriage  waa  canaeat,  and  tbe
conaent,  nya  Ulpian,  "  both  of  thoae  who  come
together,  and  of  thoae  in  whoao  power  they  arc  ;"
and  "  marriage  it  not  effected  by  aeinal  union,  but
by  conient."  Tbote  then  who  were  not  aui  jurt^
had  not,  itrictly  tpeaking,  cotmubinin,  or  ths
"  nioria  jura  ducendae  bcultaa  ;"  though  in  an-
other aenae,  they  had  connubium  by  virtue  of  tbe
conaent  of  thoae  in  whoae  power  they  were,  if
there  waa  no  other  impediment.  (Dig.  23.  tit.  1.
a.  11—13.)

The  Lex  Julia  el  Papia  Pofnaea  placed  certain
reatrictiona  on  maniage  aa  to  the  paitiea  between
whom  it  could  lalte  pbue.  [JuLU  bt  Pjpia
PorPAii ;  IsrxHuJ]

A  man  could  only  have  one  lawful  wife  at  A
time ;  and  conaeqnently  if  ho  were  married,  and
divorced  bia  wile,  a  aecond  marriage  wonld  be  no
marriige,  nnleaa  ibe  divorce  were  effectnaL

The  mairiage  Cam  eonventione  in  mannm  dif-
fered &om  that  Sine  conventime,  in  the  telatian-
ahip  which  it  effected  between  tbe  hnaband  and
the  wife  I  the  marriaga  Cum  conFcntione  waa  k
necoaary  condition  to  make  a  woman  a  mater-
femiliaa.  By  the  marriage  Cam  eonventione,  (he
wife  paaied  into  the  familia  of  her  huiband,  and
wai  to  him  in  the  relatifHi  of  a  daughter,  or  at  it
waa  expretaed,  "  in  manum  convenit-"  (Cic.  Tip.
3  ;  Gliae  loco  eat,  Gaiua,  ii.  iS9,)  In  the  marriasw
Sine  eonventione.  the  wife't  relation  lo  her  own
familia  remained  oa  before,  and  ahe  waa  merely
Uior.  "  Uior,"  aaya  Cicero  {Top.  3),  "  ia  a  gcnna
of  which  there  an  two  ^eciea  i  one  ia  mater-
iamiliaa,  ' quae  in  manum  conveuit;'  the  other  ia
uxor  only."  Accordingly  a  mater£uni1iaa  ia  a  wifo
who  ia  m  manu,  and  in  the  bmilia  of  her  hna-
band, and  oonaequcntly  one  of  hia  aui  herede*  ;  or
in  the  manna  of  liim  in  whoae  power  her  hnaband
ia.  A  wife  not  in  manu  waa  not  a  member  of  her
huaband'a  lamitia,  and  tbenfore  the  term  could  not
api^y  10  her.  GcUiui  (xriii.  6}  alio  (tatc*  that  Ihia


MATRIMONIUM.

WM  the  dM  meaning  nf  miUibmiliia.  Matrons
ma  properly  •  wiTc  not  in  idbiiu,  uid  vquivi
to  Ciceni't  '  Untanunodo  aior  ;"  sid  the
called  raatrona  befcn  abi  had  enj  children.
thus  nmrdi  ace  not  Blwaya  used  in  thebs  '
nrigina]  and  proper  meanings.  (3ee  Ulp.  Fif^,

No  formi  wen  reqniBite  ia  miuTiage  ;  tbe  beat
BTidence  of  tnozriage  vol

b;  ntioai  kinda  oX  eTidence.  A  marrii
conTentioiM  might  b«  effected  \tj  Uaaa, .
and  CoemptkiL

ir  a  voaian  lived  with  a  roan  for  a  whole  year

■  i*  wife,  ihe  beama  in


. The.


^^;and


together  aa  man  and  w

BBiia  ibr  a  year  hod  thi

thia  woi  by  analogy  to  Uiucapion  of

generally,  in  which  nana  for  one  year  gsi

(hip. Tba  Idw  of  the  Tu'elve  Tublea  prarided


t  if  a


n  dMn


0  the 1


manna  of  her.  huiband  in  thli  manner,  ahe  ihoald
abaent  henelf  from  bim  azmnalLy  for  three  ni^ta
(frwMfMi)  and  K>  break  the  una  of  Ihe  year.
(aelLuL2iGaina,i.  111.)  Tba  Tweire  Tablei
infaably  did  not  intiodace  the  naoa  in  (he  caae  d[
a  woman  cohabiting  with  a  man  matrimonii  tanao,
any  mora  than  they  prabably  did  in  the  case  of
atbar  thinga ;  bnt  aa  in  the  taae  of  other  thinn
they  filed  the  time  within  which  the  una  ahouTd
bare  ill  foil  effect,  ao  they  eaCabliahed  a  positive
mle  aa  to  what  time  ahoald  be  a  aufficient  inter-
niptiDD  of  nana  in  the  caae  of  matrimonial  cohabil-
BOim,  and  aacb  a  positive  mle  waa  obviously
Mceaoty  in  order  to  detcnnina  what  should  be


MATRIHONIUM.  741

roman  and  a  man  not  bei  husband,  ia  conaidcred
indet  Tkbtaukntum  and  Tutki.*.  If,  how-
ver,  on  nior  made  a  coemplio  with  her  hnsbond,

eqneoce  woi  that  she  was  in  monu,  and  thereby
acquired  the  rights  of  a  daughter.  It  ia  slated  by
a  modern  writer,  that  the  reason  why  a  woman
did  not  come  in  manicipinm  by  the  coemptio,  bat
only  in  mannm,  is  this.  Chat  ihe  waa  not  nuuieipated,
bnl  mancifsled  hene^  under  the  aDtbocity  of  her
father  if  she  was  in  bis  power,  and  that  of  her
tutors,  if  abe  vai  not  in  the  power  of  her  bther ;
the  abaurdiiy  of  which  iaobiions,  if  we  haye  regard
ifatio  aa  described  br  Gains  (L
1 1  a),  who  also  speaks  (i  1 1 8,  a)  of  mancipatio  a*
being  the  form  by  which  a  parent  releated  hi*
daughter  from  the  patria  poteatas  (e  tw>  jfrt^
vhich  be  did  when  be  gave  hia  daoghler  in  manura
'in.  Tbe  mancipatio  muit  in  all  caaea  bare  been
onsidered  oa  le^y  eSected  by  the  btbei  or  the

In  the  coune  of  time,  marriage  withont  tba
nanus  became  the  naual  marriage-  The  manna
by  usns  fell  into  desuetude.  (Gains,  i.  1 1 1.)

Spomalia  were  not  on  nnusoal  preliminary  of

mairiage,  bnt  they  were  not  necessary. **  Span-

■alia,"  according  lo  Plorentinnt  (Dig.  23.  lit.  I.

1)  "  sunt  menlio  et  repromiaaio  nuptiaram  futn-

rum." aelhuB  has  pntserved  (iv.  4)  an  extract

im tho work of  Servius  Sn^icius Rnfiis  Da

Doliboa,  which,  from  the  authority  of  that  great

jurist, may  be considered  aa uonceplionable.

(Compare  Vatro,  dt  Ling.  lM.-n.  70.) Sponsalia,

"ing  to  Serrio*,  waa  a  contract  by  atipnia-


woidsw


m  waa  a  form  of  marriage,  in  which  «
e  used  in  the  pt


lea  Slid  apontione*,  Ihe  ftnneTonlhe  paitiu  tha
irc  busbond,  the  latter  on  the  part  of  him  who
e  the  womim  in  inarnage. The  w(


i>esaea,tml  were  accompanied  by  a  certain  religious
eemnony  in  which  pania  farrtiu  waa  employed  ;
and  henn  tbia  form  of  marriage  waa  alio  called
ConhtroiUo.  Tbia  form  of  marriage  muit  have
bllen  generally  into  diause  in  the  lime  of  Guns,
whoreanrka  (I  112)  thai  Ihia  legal  form  of  mar-

narxi^tes  rd  the  Flaminea  Majorca  and  some  others.
This  puaage  of  Geioa  ia  dclrctiTe  in  tbe  MS.,  but
its  gBierol  aenae  may  be  collected  frnm  comparing
it  with  Tadtns  {^ais,  jr.  16)  and  Servius  (mi
Armeid.  iv,  104,  374),  It  appears  thai  certain
priestly  offices,  such  as  thai  of  Flamen  Dialis,  could
only  be  held  by  thoea  who  were  bom  of  parents
who  had  been  married  by  this  ceremony  {confir-
natipamtla).  Even  in  the  lime  of  Tiberiua,  the
eeremony  of  eonbrreatio  was  only  observed  by  a
Aa  to  divorce  between  persona  married  by
■matio,  see  DiTaKTiusi.

The  conbrreatio  is  supposed  to  have  been  the
mode  of  contractmg  marriage  among  the  patncians,
and  it  waa  a  rellgiona  eeremony  whicli  pnl  the
wife  in  maun  viri.

Coemptio  waa  eflected  by  Mancipatio,  and
teqaetitW  tile  wife  wot  to  mancipio.  (Oaiua,  L  1
A  wamm  who  was  cobabicing  with  a  man  as  i
night  ecnne  into  bia  nmnns  by  Ibis  ceremon,
which  case  tbe  coemptio  was  Biid  to  be  matriu
csnsa,  and  aba  who  waa  formerly  uxor  betame
apod  inaritnm  Gliae  looo. If  the  coemplio  was  ('
6cled  at  the  time  of  the  marriage,  it  waa  still
aepBote  acL The  other  coemptio  which  wi
called  fidndaa  cauaa  and  which  wa*  between


pnnnlied  in  mnrriBge  vas  accoidingly  called

inio,  which  is  equivalent  to  Promitaa  ;  the  man

0  enaoged  to  many  waa  called  Spcmsni, Th»

Sponsalia  then  were  an  agreement  to  marry,  made

if  non-performance,  and  Ihe  offending  pnrty
idemnoi  in  such  damages  aa  to  ths  Jade£
seemed  just.  Thia  waa  the  law  (.jn)  of  Sponsalia,
adds  Serviua,  to  tbe  time  when  the  hei  Julia
gave  the  Civitsa  to  all  Latinm  ;  whence  we  may
1.1. .L_.  _i. — .:. — afterwards  made


The  Sponsalia  were  of  coi
the  parties  consented  to  ^
and  cither  party  could  diaac
ilher  could  diiaolve  a  mar
was  in  the  relation  of  doni


A.]


t  binding,  if


[iNF*.
IS  made  by  the


fature  husband  to  the  future  wife  h_

•ha,  arria  ipmuditia),  or  as  it  wis  called
propter  nnplias  donatio.  (Cod.  6.  tit.  S.)  Sponaalia
might  be  contracted  by  thne  who  were  not  under
seven  yean  of  age.  The  regulation  of  Augustus,
which  vas  Bp^suently  comprised  in  the  Lea  Julia
et  Fnpia,  which  dechu^  that  no  sponsalia  should
be  valid  if  tbe  marriage  did  not  follow  within
two  years,  was  not  always  observed.  (Suetoru
Aug.  c.  31  ;  Dion  Cosa.  liv.  IE,  and  the  note  of
Reimorus.)  [iNfANs  ;  Ikpi/bis.]
The  conieqnences  of  marriage  were  —
1.  The  power  of  the  bther  over  the  children  of
the  tnnrriage,  which  waa  a  completely  new  relation,
an  aSect  indeed  of  marriage,  but  one  which  bad  us


743  UATRIMONIUH.

inflnsDce  nrer  tha  nlitiDii  of  the  bnaband  and  i

[Patbu  FOTiaTAB,]

3.  Ths  liahilitiea  of  either  of  the  pvtin  Eo
pnniflhrneDtH  affixed  to  the  Tiolation  of  ths  ii
liage  uniaD. [Adultihiuk  \  Ditoktiuh.]

3.  The  reUtiaii  of  huibtuid  tut  wife  with  letpect
tc  pnpertj',  to  which  hesd  belong  the  raattcrt  of
Dos,  DoiuUio  intsr  rirum  et  uiorem,  Donstio  propter
Duptiu,  &c  Many  of  theK  mstten,  however,  ire
not  aeeamj  coiuequencet  of  nuurii)^  but  the
eoluequmce  of  Dcrtain  acu  which  tie  Tsadend  pos-
tible  by  muriige.

In  ths  Inter  ftoman  history  we  often  read  of
nuimage  contracts  which  have  Inference  to  Dos,
■nd  gencially  to  the  relalian  of  hnsbuid  and  wife
viewed  with  lefennce  to  pTDpettr.  A  title  i^  the
Digest  (S3,  (it.  «)  treati  De  FactiB  Dotaliboi,
w)uch  might  be  made  eidier  befon  or  after  mar-
riane.

The  Roman  notion  of  maiiiage  was  this: — it  ia
the  union  of  male  and  remale,  a  wniortship  for  the
whole  of  life,  (he  intepanble  consuetude  of  life,
an  inlercommuaion  of  law,  sacred  and  not  mcrcd.
(Dig.  as.  tit  2.  s.  1-)  But  it  is  not  maint  that
tnajringe  was  to  this  extent  regulated  by  law,  for
marriage  is  a  tbing  which  il,  to  a  great  extent,
beyond  the  domain  of  law. The  definition  or  de-

'  ''  n  tneani  that  there  is  no  It^  separation  of


I  of  h


in  which  the  sepantien

notion  of  marriage.  Thus  tne  wile  nan  tne  sscra,
the  daiuicilc,and  the  nnk  of  the  husband.  Marriage
was  established  by  consent,  and  continued  by  dis-
sent ;  Ibr  the  dissent  of  either  party,  when  fbrmoUy
ecpressed,  could  dissolve  the  relation. [Divob-

Neither  in  the  old  Ronmn  law  not  in  iti  later
modificatians,  was  a  comrauaity  of  property  an
essential  port  of  the  notion  of  marriage  ;  uuless  we
assume  tbat  originally  all  mairiages  were  accom-
panied with  the  conientio  in  manum,  for  in  that
case,  as  already  observed,  the  wife  became  filiae-
iiunilias  loco,  and  passed  into  the  &mi1ia  of  her

his  hthcr,  she  became  to  her  liusband's  father  in
the  relation  of  a  gtand daughter.  All  ber  property
passed  to  her  husband  by  a  muicrsnl  succession
(OaiuN  ii.  96,  98),  and  she  could  not  thenceforward
acquire  property  for  herself.  Thus  she  was  en-
tirety removed  from  her  fonner  &mily  as  to  her
iegal  status  and  become  as  the  sister  to  her  hus-
band's children.  In  other  words,  when  a  woman
came  in  maniim,  there  was  a  blending  of  the  nm-
Irimonlal  and  the  filial  relation.  It  was  a  good
marriage  without  the  relation  expressed  by  in
manu,  which  was  a  relation  of  parent  and  child
superadded  to  that  of  husband  and  wife.  The
■nanus  was  terminated  by  death,  leas  of  Civitas,
by  DiEHueatio,  and  we  may  assume  by  Mandpatio.
It  ii  a  legiUmate  conBcqueoce  that  the  wife
could  not  divorce  her  husband,  though  her  bus-
band  might  divorce  her,  and  if  we  assume  that  the
marriage  accompanied  by  the  cum  conventione  was
origimUly  the  only  form  of  marriage  (of  which,
however,  we  believe,  there  is  no  proof)  the  state-
ment of  Plutarch  [DivoaTiuii]  that  the  husband
alraie  had  originally  the  power  of  effecting  a  di-
VI^CB,  will  consist  with  this  strict  legal  deduction.
It  ii  poMible,  however,  that,  even  if  the  mamage
enm  conventione  was  does  the  aalj  maniage,  then
mi^  have  been  legal  mean*  by  which  a  wife  in


HATRIMONIUU.
mann  eonU  be  released  Ann  tha  manna  ;  for  Aa
will  alone  would  be  sufficioit  to  release  ber  from
the  marriage.  In  the  time  of  Oains  (L  137),  a
woman,  after  ths  repudinm  was  sent,  ooold  de-
mand a  remancipatio-

muned  a  member  of  her  own  &milia ;  she  mi  to
her  husband  in  the  same  rela^on  as  mar  otker
Roman  citiien,  diSering  only  in  this  that  her  sez
enabled  her  to  become  the  mother  of  children  who
were  the  husbond^s  children  and  citioens  of  ibo
stale,  and  that  she  owed  fidelity  to  him  so  lung  aa
the  matrimonial  cohabitation  eantinned  by  matnal
consent.  But  her  legal  statns  contjnued  as  it  wai
before  ;  if  she  was  not  in  the  power  of  her  bthet,
she  had  for  all  purpoMi  a  Ic^  persmsl  exisleoca
mdependently  of  bar  husband,  and  conaequcnlly'
her  property  was  distinct  from  bii.  It  must  have
been  with  respect  to  such  marriagea  as  Ibcao,  that
a  great  part  at  least  of  the  niles  of  law  relating  la
Doi  were  established  ;  and  to  such  maniages  all
the  rulea  of  law  iSjhitlng  to  marriage  eontiacta  must
have  refemd,  at  lenst  so  loeg  at  the  mamage  cum
conventione  existed  and  retained  ita  iCrict  character.
When  moiriaga  was  dissolved,  the  parties  to  it
might  marry  agam  ;  but  opinion  considered  it  man
decent  for  a  woman  not  to  many  again.  A  womaa
was  required  by  usage  (not)  to  wait  a  year  befora
she  contracted  a  second  marriage,  on  the  pain  of

At  Rome,  the  matrimoniiun  juris  dvilia  was
originally  the  only  marriage.  But  under  the  [n.
flueni«  of  the  Jus  Gentium,  a  cohabitBtifln  bo-
tween  Peregrini,  or  between  Latini,  or  between
Per^rini  and  Latini  and  Romani,  which,  in  ita
eosentiali,  was  a  marriage,  a  coniortinm  eninia
vitae  with  the  affectio  maritalis,  was  reoigniaed  at
such  I  and  though  such  maniage  could  not  have
all  the  effect  of  a  Roman  marriage,  it  had  ita
general  e&ct  in  this,  thai  ths  ehildim  of  ncli
marriage  had  a  father.  Thus  was  established  the
notion  of  a  valid  marriage  generally,  which  mar-
riago  might  be  either  Juris  Civilis  or  Juris  Oentiiun.
CerOin  conditions  were  requisite  for  a  valid  mar^
riage  generally,  and  particular  conditions  were  na-
cesaary  for  a  Roman  marriage.  In  the  systam  of
Justinian,  the  dislinction  ceased,  and  tliare  n-
mained  only  the  notion  of  a  valid  maniage  gene-
rally ;  which  is  the  sense  of  Jusbie  nupliae  in  (ha
Justinian  system.  This  valid  or  legal  martiage  ia
opposed  to  all  cohabitation  which  is  not  niairi^e  ;
and  the  children  of  such  cohabituisn  have  tw
Either. (Puchta,/M(.iii.ga87.) [iKPiiiri.]

The  above  is  only  sn  outline  of  the  Law  of
MoiriagE,  but  it  is  sufficient  to  enable  a  student  la
cnrry  his  investigations  Euther.  [O.  L.]

It  remains  to  describe  the  cuitoms  and  rilca
which  were  observed  by  the  Romans  at  marriagea
(WfM  Huptiala  or  ai^iilianm  mJemaia  jHto,  ri
ro/uiiiitra  r»r  yiiiar).  After  the  partica  had
agreed  to  marry  and  the  persons  in  whose  potaitaa
they  were  had  consented,  a  meeting  of  friends  waa
sometimes  held  at  the  house  of  the  maiden  fiir  tha
purpose  of  settling  the  marriage-contract,  whick
was  called  tpontalia,  and  written  on  tobleta  ((ain.
las  teffilima*),  and  signed  by  both  parties  (Jnvsoi.
jilt.  iL  119,  ft(^vi.a«,SOOlaellius,iv.l.)  Ths
woman  after  she  had  promised  to  becotne  the  wife
of  a  man  was  called  ^onsa,  pacta,  dicta,  or  ipoata.
(OelL  L  e. ;  Plant  Trvam.  ii.  4.  99  i  Nooiut,  iv.
f.  213.) From  Juvenal  (.SAn.  37)  it  appeui


lUTRIHONIUBI.

thai,  It  Imt  during  the  impAnal  period,  the  a


■II  ringa  mt  thii  time,  wam  an  ths  left  hiud,  ind
on  the  finger  neamt  to  the niMlleM.  (MKnb..5at
lii.  13.)  The  lut  point  to  be  fixed  wn  the  1U7
on  which  the  maniage  wu  to  take  place.  To-
varda  the  cloM  of  the  lepubiie  it  had  become  cui-
tomai;  to  betnlh  jovng  giili  whea  thej  wen  jet
childien  ;  Aogulni  UereToie  limited  the  time
dming  vhich  a  man  wai  aliowed  to  continue  be-
tntbol  to  a  gill  (Soet  Aiu,  34),  and  forbade  men
to  be  betrothed  to  girli  before  the  latter  had  com-
pleted their  tenth  ifear,  (o  that  the  age  of  pubertal
being  twelve  yean,  a  girl  might  not  be  compelled
to  ba  bettDChed  longer  than  two  jeart.  (Dion
CaaaliT.  p.6a9,  Steph.)

The  Romani  bdiered  that  cettain  daji  were
imfbrtuiato  Gar  the  perfbnnance  of  the  marriage
rilea,  either  on  accoont  of  the  religioui  character  of
thoae  daji  thcmaelTei,  or  on  aonunt  of  the  dayi
bj  which  thej  wen  followed,  aa  tiie  woman  had
to  perfonn  certain  religJDiii  ritei  on  the  daj  after
ker  wedding,  which  could  not  take  place  on  a  diet
ster.  Daji  not  niitable  for  entering  upon  matri-
moof  were  the  Calenda,  Nonci,  and  Idea  of  every
month,  all  die*  atri,  the  whole  monthi  of  May
(Grid.  PaiL  T.  i90  ;  PlaL  QtaoL  Son.  p.  284)
and  Febmaiy,  and  a  giest  niunber  of  fettivali.
<Maerob.SitLlSiOTid.Foitii.iS7.)  Widowa,
to  the  other  band,  might  marry  on  day*  which
were  inaoipicioua  for  maidena.  (Macroh^  SaL  L  c  i
Plat.  QaattL  Rawi.  p.  389.)

On  the  wedding-day,  which  in  the  tariy  timea
waa  nerer  fixed  upon  without  conaulting  the  au-
apicea  (Cic;  <U  Div.  i.  16  1  VaL  Mai.  ii.  I.  S  1).
the  bride  waa  dieaaed  in  a  long  whito  robe  with  a
porpla  fringe  or  adoised  with  ribanda.  (Jut.  ii.
124.)  Thia  dieM  waa  called  tnnioi  recta  (Flin.
H.  y.  tin.  4S),  and  wu  boond  round  the  waiat
with  a  giidle  (oomo,  eagalmni,  or  «dki,  Feit.  1.  c
a^yo),  which  the  huaband  had  to  untie  in  the
erening.  The  bridal  reil,  called  Sautmenm,  waa
of  a  bright-yellow  colour  (Plln.  H.  tf.  xiL  8  ;
SchoL  oJ^ae.  Ti.  Vi6),  and  her  ahoea  likewiie.
(CatnlL  liil  10.)  Her  hair  waa  divided  on  Ihia
Dceaaioa  with  the  punt  of  a  ^eor.  (Ovid.  Faii.  iL
sea  ;  Amob.  adv.  GmL  iL  p.  81  ;  PhiL  Qtaat.
Am.  p.  283.)

The  only  form  of  marriage  which  waa  eelebntted
with  toleain  rdigiona  rilea,  waa  that  ^  cantarrea-
lio;  the  nthei  loima  being  mere  diU  acta,  were
fiohaibly  aolemniied  without  any  religiona  cere-
mony. In  the  cue  of  a  marriage  by  conbrreatio,
a  (heep  waa  aacriBced,  and  iu  akin  wu  spread
OTet  two  chaira,  opon  which  the  bride  and  bride-
groom tat  down  with  their  heada  covered. (Serr.
ai  Aa. W. 374.) Hereupon  the  marriage  waa
comfJeted  fay  proiKnuicing  a  lolemn  formula
player,  after  which  another  aaeriiica  ira*  ofTc
A  cake  waa  made  of  /or  and  the  ruita  lalMa
paced  by  the  Vealal  virgina  (Serr.  ad  Vir^  Ei
viiL  82),  and  carried  before  the  bride  when
waacoiklDcted  to  the  reaidence  of  her  hnaband.
ia  uncertain  whether  thia  cake  ii  the  aame  aa
which  ia  aOed  matlaoam  (Jav.  SaL  n.  201),  and
which  waa  in  the  ereuing  diatribnted  among  the
gneau  aaaembled  at  the  hoaae  o(  the  young  hua-


HATAIHONIUU.  74S

forent  violraiee  from  the  aima  of  her  niotli^,  or
of  the  penon  who  had  to  give  her  any.  On  her
way  ahe  waa  accoin[<iuied  by  three  boya  dieaaed  in
the  [neteita,  and  whoie  &ilhen  and  mothera  were
itill  alive  {patrini  <t  nafrtni).  One  of  them  car-
ied  before  her  a  torch  of  white  thorn  (ipmo)  or,
iccording  to  oLhen,  of  pine  wood  ;  the  (wo  other*
walked  by  her  aide  lupporting  her  by  the  arm.
(Feat.  (.  o.  Patrimi  tt  matrimi  ;  Tarro,  op.  Cutri-
im,  L  p.  117  ;  Pliu.  H.  N.  ivL  13.)  The  brida
lenelf  earned  a  diitaff  and  a  ipindle  irith  wooL
Flin.  H.  N.  viiL  48  j  Plot  QuaeiLIlom.  p.  271.)
A  hoy  called  camillua  carried  in  a  corered  vaia
(aawm,  aanerum,  or  camillun)  the  M  called
itenaila  of  the  bride  and  plaything!  for  children
(crejmadia.  Felt  i.  o.  OnuTTua;  Plant.  GileL  iii.
'  ''  Beaidea  these  penont  who  officiated  on  (be
ooaiion,  the  proceaiion  waa  attended  by  a  nnme-
kin  of  friendi  both  of  the  bride  and  the  bride-
wboie  attendance  waa  called  qfficmi  and
,  i*m  vadrt.  (SaeL.  C(dig.  2S,  OamL  26.)
Plutarch  (QuaeM.  Aon.  init)  apeaJca  of  Ere  wai-
eandlea  which  were  naed  at  marriagea  ;  if  theae
were  borne  in  the  proceaaion,  it  muat  ha  to  been  to
light  the  company  which  followed  the  bride  ;  but

may  alio  be  that  they  were  lighted  during  the
marriage  ceremony  in  the  houie  of  the  bride.

'  >ii  arrived  at  the  houie  of  tba

of  which  waa  adorned  witi
garlandi  and  fiowera,  the  bride  waa  carried  acroM
the  threabold  by  praahi,  i,  a.  men  who  had  only
been  married  to  one  woman,  that  abe  might  not
knock  againat  it  with  her  foot,  which  vonld  have
(Pint.  Qaael.  Aoiit.  p.  271,  e;
Plaut.  Cat.  n.  4.  1.)  Befora  ihe  entered  ths
houae,  ahe  wound  wool  amund  the  door-potta  ^
her  new  reaidence,  and  anointed  them  with  tard
(_adipi  Muiliai)  or  wolfi  &I  (adepi  lupinni,  Serv.

■  ■  iT.  19  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxriiL  8).  The
received  her  with  file  and  water,  which
tan  had  to  touch.  Thia  wai  either  a
ayinbolic  purification  (for  Serv.  od  Aim.  n.  104,
aaya  that  the  newly  married  conpls  waahed  th^
feet  in  thia  water),  or  it  waa  a  aymbelic  expreaaion
of  welcome,  aa  the  inlerdicere  aqua  et  igni  waa  the
foimula  far  baniahment  The  bride  aalnted  her
huiband  with  the  worda  :  M  iu  Gu'aa,  e^  CtOA.
(Plut.  Qaaat.  Aon.  I.  c.)  Altec  ahe  had  entered
the  houae  with  dialaff  and  ipiudic,  >he  waa  placed
itpoa  a  aheep-alun,  and  here  the  keya  of  the  home
were  deliTend  into  her  handa.  (Feat.  1.  v.  davii.)
A  repeat  (ama  KgaiaUi)  given  by  the  hnaband  to
the  whole  train  of  relativea  and  frienda  who  ac-
companied the  bride,  gencially  concluded  the  so-
lemnity of  the  day.  {PUul.(W  v.2.61  J  Suel.
Cbllff.  25.)  Many  ancient  writen  mention  a  vety
papular  acmg,  Talaiiui  or  Takaiio,  which  ma  anng
at  wedding!  (Ptut.  QiiaaL  Ron.  Ic;  Liv.  L  9  ;
Dionya.  .Int.  AuH.  iL  31;  Feat.  i.  o.  TUoiauiHin) ;
but  whether  it  waa  aung  during  the  repait  or
during  the  pioceaaion  ia  not  quite  dear,  though  ws
may  infer  from  the  atory  respecting  the  origin  of
tho  Bong,  that  it  wna  aung  while  the  proceaaioD
waa  advancing  toward*  the  houae  of  the  huaband.
It  may  eatily  be  imagined  that  a  aolemnity  lika
thai  of  marriage  did  not  take  place  among  the
merry  and  humoroua  Italiana  without  a  lariety  *
jeaU  and  lailleriea,  and  Ovid  [FaiL  iii
tiona  obacene  aonoa  which  were


rietyof


icene  aonoa  which  were  snng  before  the
the  bridal  apartment  by  giru,  after  the
had  left. Theae  aooga  wore  [cobably  the


744  MAUSOLEUM,

old  Fucenninn  [Fkecknkina],  uid  srerreqnmllf
called  Epilhidnmia. Al  the  rnd  at  thn  rrpait '
bride  whi  conducted  by  mBlnns  nho  had  not  1
more  than  one  huib&nd  (pnmiiliac),  ta  the  ]n
geniolii  la  the  itiiuin,  which  vm  on  tbi'i  accai
niBgnifiisntly  adorned  and  itrewed  with  floweii.
On  the  following  day  the  husband  «omEtiniM  gart
another  entertainment  to  hii  friend*,  which  wai
caUed  repotia  (Fesl.  i.  o. ;  HoraL  Sot.  ii.  2.  60),
and  the  woman  who  on  thii  day  anderlpok  the
management  of  the  houie  of  her  huaband,  had  In
perform  certain  religioui  ritea  (MarTob.Sirf.  i,  13),
on  which  accnnnt,  as  wm  obKrved  above,  it  wai

waa  not  followed  by  a  die.  atcr, Theie  rit .
bably  consiiled  of  lacrificei  to  the  dii  Pcnaica.
— cdi  R/jn^.T.  fi.)


Thet
tinned  abnk


-ebeeni


(ho


they  look  place,

'ly  Tipon  conjecbiri. Nor  ii  it,  on  the  o
I,  clear  which  of  the  ntei  belonged  to  each  of
of  Tnarrisf^e. Thu)  mnch  only


1,  that  the  I


Btaolem


on&rreatio.


of  a  rellginuB  nature  belonged

The  poiiiinn  of  a  Roman  woman  atter  mamaga
wai  icry  diflerent  from  that  ot  a  Greek  woman.
The  Roman  prciided  over  the  whole  houiehold ;
she  educated  her  children,  watched  over  and  pre-
■erved  the  honour  of  the  house,  and  as  the  malfr-
familias  she  shared  tho  honours  and  respect  shown
to  her  husband.  Far  from  beuig  confined  like  the
Greek  women  to  a  distinct  apartment,  the  Roman
matron,  at  least  during  the  better  centuries  of  the
republic,  occupied  the  inoet  importiuit  part  of  the
house,  the  atrium.  (Compare  Lipslus,  Eled.  I  17  ;
BStliger,  AbM/randin.  Hodaat,  p.  124,  &c;  Uris-
ionius,  Di  Situ  NaptUtmm,  dt  Jure  CoanaUi,
Paris,  1664.  ISmo.)  [L.S.]

MATRO'NA. [MATtttHONitiv,  p.741,a.)
MATRONA'LIA, also called MATRO-
NA'LES  FERIAE,  a  fcstiTul  celebrated  by  the
Roman  matrons  on  the  1st  of  March  in  honour  of
Jima  Lucina. From  the  many  naaons  which  Ovid
why  the  festival  was  kept  on  this  day.


gives  why  tl
evident  that


It  the


subject,

been  that  it  was  instituted  in  mrmory  of
between  the  Romans  and  Sahinei,  which  was
bronghl  about  by  means  of  the  Sabine  women.  At
this  festival  wives  used  to  ri-ceive  presents  from
their  husbands,  and  at  a  later  tune  girls  from  their
lorers ;  mistresses  also  were  accostomed  to  feast
their  female  slaves.  Henc«  we  End  the  festival
called  by  Martial  the  Saturnalia  of  womai.  (Ov.
Fan.  iii.  229,  Ac  ;  Plaut.  Afil.  Hi.  1.  97  ;  Tibull.
iii.  1  ;  Hot,  Cam.  iii.  6  ;  Mart  v.  84.  11  ;  SueL
Veip.  19  ;  TertDlL  IdoL  14  ;  eonnp.  Hartung,  Dit
R^ffum  dcT  KomtT,  vol.  ii.  p.  6£.)

MAUSOLE'UM  (Kaimktior),  wliich  iig.
piGed  originally  <is  lepakhrt  of  Mwuolui,  was
used  by  the  Romans  as  a  generic  name  for  any
magniEcent  sepulchral  edifice.  (Pans,  viil  1 6.  g  3.
I,  B,  and  the  Latin  I.eiicona.)

The  original  building  was  the  productioo  of
tha  [uety  of  a  wealthy  queen,  and  the  skill  of
tho  great  artists  of  the  later  Ionian  and  Attic
schools  of  architecture  and  sculpturi'.  Mauio-
Ids,  the  dynast  of  Cana,  having  died  in  B.  C.
as,  bit  queca  Aitcnusia  ctioced  hoc  sorrow  by


MAUSOLEUM.'

obierving  his  funeral  rites  with  tho  most  t:


sepulchral  monument
which  should  su


at  Halioima*-
_  the  worid  bad
yet  seen.  (See  Diet,  of  Biog.  arts.  Artaratia^
Maatobu.)  She  entrusted  lis  erection  to  tbe
architects  Philens  (or  Phiteiu,  or  Pythens)  and
Satyrus,  who  wrote  an  account  of  thewoi^  and  iti
tculpturaj  decorations ;  and  to  four  of  tbe  gieatat
artists  of  the  new  Attic  school,  Sco]»s,  Btyaxii,
Leochare*,  and  either  Timotheus  or  Proiitclea,  tat
respecting  this  name,  Vitruvius  tells  us,  the  sn-
thorities  varied.  These  artists  wraked  in  emu-
lalion  with  one  another,  each  upon  one  face  of  tha
building,  and,  upon  the  death  of  Artemisia,  who
only  survived  her  husband  two  yeara,  they  con*
tinned  their  worii  as  a  labotu  of  love.  Pliny  men-
tions a  fifth  artist,  Pythii,  who  made  the  marbta
quadriga  on  the  sutnmit  of  the  building.  (Vitrrrr.
vii.  Pracf.  §  12  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iiivi.  5.  a  4.  fi  9  ;
Diet,  of  Biog.  under  the  names  of  the  artists.)

It  was  chiefly,  Pliny  tells  us,  on  account  ot  tlw
works  of  these  artists  that  the  Mausoleum  beeama
celebrated  as  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of  the  worid.
Unfartuiutely,  however,  the  socieDt  aathora,  wfao
have  ceiibrated  its  magniEcence,  have  famisbed
OS  with  such  sauty  details  of  Its  coDStnictiosi,
that  tho  restoration  of  its  plan  is  almoct  hopeina.
(Strabo,  liv.  p.  636  ;  CIc  Taic  Diip.  iii  31  t
OeU.  t  IB;  Val  Mai.  iv.  6.  ext  1  ;  Propert  iii,
2.  1 9  J  Said.  Harpocr.  ».  re.  'A^t^ffCa,  Kaimt.
\ai.)  There  are,  indeed,  coina  which  give  a  re-
presentation  of  it ;  but  they  are  modem  forgeric*.
(Hasche,  ..  o.  j  F^khel,  voL  ii.  p.  SS7,)  The  edi-
ficc  has  so  entirely  vanished,  that  even  its  cito
is  doubttiil,  although  some  predons  fragments  of
its  sculptures  turrive,  and  are  now  in  oar  own

Pliny  is  tho  only  writer  who  gives  any  tbin^
like  a  complete  descripuon  of  the  edifice  ; bat

culties.  The  building,  he  tells  ua,  eitcndcd  63
feet  from  north  to  south,  being-  shorter  on  the
fronts,  and  its  whole  circuit  was  411  feet  (or,  ac-
carding  to  the  Damberg  MS.  440)  ;  it  rose  to  the
height  of  25  cubits  (.17^  feet) ;  and  was  snrrouDded
by  36  columns.  This  part  of  the  building  waa
culled  Pitnm.  It  was  adorned  with  sculptures  in
relief,  on  its  eastern  ftce  by  Scopas,  on  tha
northern  by  Bryaxis,  on  the  sou^eru  by  T]m<^
theus,  on  the  western  by  Leoehares.  Above  this
pieron  was  a  pyramid  equal  to  it  in  height,  dimi-
nishing by  24  steps  to  its  summit,  which  was  sur-
mounted by  the  marble  quadriga  made  by  Pythii.
The  total  height,  including  this  ornament,  ww
'40  feet

The  limits  of  this  article  do  not  admit  of  a  di>-
ussion  of  the  various  propoard  restorations  of  tbg
plan  of  the  edifice.  Thej  will  be  Ibtind  eminw-
lated  and  carefully  eiamined  by  Mr.  Charles
Newton,  in  a  very  valuable  essay  On  Us  Scmb-
tureM  /iron  the  Maiuoiatm  at  tlaUcaraatsut  m  tha
OaaioJ  Afumn  for  July,  1647,  vol.  v.  pp.  170.
vith  a  chart  of  Halicamassus,  a  restoration
Mausoleum,  and  other  illustiationa
is  much  is  clear  enough  from  Ptiny^  a^
:  that  the  edifice  was  cnmposed  of  an  oblong


BIADSOLEUM.
Raneninc  tba  diKnauter  bclwwn  (lie  tntel  and
putal  keiffauX  irkidi  ptenm  wu  mimimnted  hj
the  pynmid  ;  the  Kalptam  wers  of  codtk  cm  the
frioe  of  ths  order.  The  olher  mppaniil  diKre-
pmrjr  bMwnn  [hs  lenglbi  of  the  aides  and  fnmti
■nd  the  total  circail  of  the  buQdiiiK  cau  ool;
bo  iMiifiKloriiT  eipUuned  bf  aupponiig  that  it
■lood  within  an  endonTe,  or  npoQ  a  platform  of
tbo  luser  dbnonaicni,  nunelj,  440  f«l  in  peri-
BMer.  Wben  ws  csme  to  the  detaili  of  Ihs
anaiigemflDt  of  the  parti,  vo  find  moot  writers
ptinft  the  limpls  eiidaiiBtion,  vliich  moat  readeta
•f  Ptiaj  would  probably  adopt  al  Gnt  nglit,  that
the  86  oohraiDt,  of  which  Pliof  apeaki,  termed  a
dnghi  periityle  all  Tonnd  the  building.  (See,  for
•Wnple,  the  reiloiMien  in  Hirfi  Getek  d.  Ban-
baut,  PI.  i:  fif;.  14,  PI  xii.  Eg.  14.)  To  thie
view  there  are  Terj  fonnidable  ohjectioni  ]  and
■notber,  which  hai  not  onlj  the  merit  of  being
cxeeedingtf  incenioiu,  bat  the  anthnrit;  of  a
s«M  aceenpliibad  anhilei*,  i>  propoaed  bj  Mr.
Co^aell,  in  Mr.  Nawtonl  Enaj.  Talcing  on
the  OS  brad  Plinj*!  83  feet  u  the  length  of  the
Innaer  aide  a/*  lie  Kirit^/U,  and  on  the  other  hand,
Tiiiona  of  ths  order  &om  the
jmeDta  of  the  friexa  (which,  in  the
I  toIc  of  that  period  of  Ortek  art,  an
uciuiKi  can  do  with  at  mneh  certaintj  u  that
with  a-faich  PiDfenoc  Owen  am  contEmet  a  di-
•orau  bum  a  alngle  thigh-bone),  Ifr.  Cockentll
urifea  at  the  andniion  that  the  S6  pillan  were
united,  in  a  lingle  row  of  lii  ^lunma  on  each
front,  and  in  a  daiblt  row  of  eight  an  each  aide,
at  intereolnmniatioaa  of  6  feet  3  inehea,  aroond  a
long  narrow  uOa,  eotmponding  in  length


Tha


".tt)


width  I


It  tiaTellen  fiimiih  i


tUoog  hope  thai  ODod  dementi  for  reconitructing
lb*  rian  of  the  Hanaotenm  maj  be  foond  among
the  Bngmenla  of  colnmna  which  are  KSltered  abont
the  d^  rf  Budnm,  and  wcsked  into  ita  walli.

The  bnilding  wai  atiU  (tandinfi  in  the  latter
But  of  the  fbiirth  centoiy  after  Chriat  (Qir^.
Nas.J^i^.  ciTiiL),anderenailalou  the  tenth  ;
bu  itahuvd  at  len([th,  with  Halicamaanu  itaelf^in
tbealmoat  total  deitmction  which  feU  upon  the  cilie*
of  Aaia  Minor.  For  ita  nbaeqaent  hiitarr,  the
qaeatiati  of  iti  (ite,  and  the  chain  of  eiidence
whicb  jmnta  that  the  marblet  now  in  the  Britiih
Moanim  an  the  Ter7  reliefi  with  which  Sanaa
■nd  hia  rivals  adorned  the  aepolchre  of  Maoiomi,
the  reader  it  referred  to  the  <err  interet^ng  ac-
eoont  of  thoa  matten  giTm  in  Mi.  Newton*!
EMar.  All  that  can  hoe  be  atated  i*,  that  when
the  knight)  of  Rhode*  bnilt  the  citadel  of  Hali-
cainaiina  (Bmdnai),  in  the  fifteenth  centur}',  la
mora  pmboblT  when  thej  strengthened  ita  Ibr-
tificatioo*  in  1533,  they  used  material*  obtained
baa  the  ruini  of  the  Mausolcnm,  and,  among  the
rat,  they  worked  into  the  inner  wall  of  their  for-
te of  the  iculptnred  *lab*  which  had  fc *


Iten,  from  Theci


deacribed thcie  marble*,

Supp.  PL  ii.).


preaent  lime,

which  there  ia  a  sketch  m  me

•f  the  Dillettonti Society  (tdI.

At  length  our  am  be  tw  dor  at  Conitanttnopie,  sir

Sinttbnl  Canning,  obtained  the  permission  of  the

Pert*  for  their  remonl,  and  in  February,  1)146,

tbej  wen  taluo  down  and  canreyed  to  England,


MEDICIKA:  745

and  are  now  deposited  in  the  British  Uoaeum,
nnder  the  name  of  the  Budnm  Mariki.  Th^
consist  of  thirteen  slabs,  of  the  nnifbrm  height  al
S  feet  including  the  mouldings,  or  3  feet  6i  inctfea
withont  them,  and  varying  in  length  from  2  feet
8  incbei  to  6  feet  11  inche*.  Their  total  length  M
64  feet  II  inehea,  which  i*  neariy  the  same  ai
that  of  each  longer  side  of  ths  bnilding  |  bat
they  ang  evidently  bom  diSemt  &cei  of  it,  aa
they  cannot  all  be  arranged  in  one  conlinnaoi
Gomposition,  thongb  KMna  of  them  aro  continnoiu,
and  they  show  trace*  of  the  hands  of  rarioni
aniata.  Their  subject  i*  the  battle  of  Greek
wanion  with  Amaions,  which  vu  as  favonrita
a  mjith  in  Ionia  and  Caiia  as  it  wa*  in  Attica.
Their  ityle  ii  considered  by  compelent  jadgoi
to  be  inferior  to  what  we  might  have  expected
from  artial*  of  ths  tchool  of  Scopaa  and  I^ai-
itelea ;  hot  their  cloae  reaemblanoe  to  another
baa-ielief  of  the  lame  school,  that  of  the  choragic

point*  in  which  they  an  alleged  to  be  deficient
an  jnit  Ihon  in  which  wa  rcec^iis  the  inferiority
of  the  later  Attic  Khool  to  the  perfect  art  of
Pheidias,  The  nggeation  of  Mr,  Newton,  that
acddent  may  hare  pmsnd  to  na,  out  of  the
whole  Erioa,  tba  inferior  works  of  Bryaiia,  Leo-
charea,  and  Timolbeoi,  and  not  the  belter  produc-
tions of  Seopa*cwPTBxitelei,ia  not  only  inooiuisteDt,
as  he  hiniaelf  remaika,  with  Pliny's  statement  that
the  aeolptnms  wen  regarded  aa  of  equal  merit ;
but  alto^  it  ii  coe  of  those  gratuitous  suppositions
'  to  esope  from  a  difficnlty,  which  canuot  be
ted  without  iome  positive  proof,
the  Roman  Mmuolta  the  lana  chiefly  em-
ployed was  that  of  a  anccesiion  of  terraces  in
imitation  of  the  ni^M.  OftheMthemoMcelebiated
were  those  of  Augustni  and  of  Hadrian  i  the  latter
of  which,  stripped  of  ita  ornaments,  sliU  form*  the
Ibrtren  of  niodeiu  Rome  (the  Castle  of  S.  Angelo);
Vt  of  the  other,  which  was  on  a  itiU  larger  scale,
md  which  was  considered  a>  one  of  the  most
nagnificent  buildings  of  Augustus,  there  are  only
iome  insignificant  ruins.  (Stiubo,  v.  p.  336  ;  Suet.
Aiiff.  100  I  Nardiui,  Aoitii  Jnlisi,  vol.  iii.  p.  75,
ed.  Nibby ;  Hirt,  Lckrt  d.  Qtbdndt,  pp.  349—
351,  and  reatoialion  of  the  monnmenta  in  PI.  m.
fig.21,23.)  [P.a]

MAZO'NOMUS  (/wfoi^t,  din.  lutCati^ar,
Athen.  T.  30,  34),  bam  liiia,  a  laa£,  or  a  cake ;
properly  a  diih  lor  diitributing  bread :  but  the
term  is  applied  also  to  any  large  dish  used  for
bringing  meat  to  table.  (Vaixo,  <U  As  RiaL  iii.  4.)
These  disfaea  wen  made  either  of  wood  (Pollui,
liL  87),  of  bronie  (Athen.  ir.  31),  or  of  gold
(Athen.  T.  27).  [J.  Y.J

MEDIASTI'NI,  the  name  given  to  sUve*,  used
for  any  common  purpose,  and  are  said  by  the
Scholiast  upon  Horace  (Ep.  L  M.  14)  Is  be  those
"  qui  in  medio  etant  ad  quaeiis  impeiala  poratL"
The  name  is  chiefly  given  to  certain  slates  belong-
ing to  the  timilia  rustia  (Cic.  CU.  iL  3 ;  Colum.

staves  m  the  otf.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  ».  a.  1.  j  6,  7.  ^t.
7.  s.  6.)

MEDICI'NA  (toTfiiir^),  the  name  of  tbat
science  which,  a*  Celsu*  nys  (da  Mtdie,  lib.  i
Praeiftt.),  "  Sanilatem  aegrii  pramiltit,"  and  whose
object  Hippocrates  define*  {de  AHty  voL  i.  p..  7,
ed.  Kiihn)  to  be  "  the  delinring  sick  persons  irtaa
their  diseaie,  and  the  diminirting  Ma  fMC« of


748  HEDICINA.

lickneMM,  and  tlis  not  usdsrMkiitg  the  tnalmest
of  thus  wfaa  UB  quits  overconw  b;  lickneM,  u
we  kimw  that  mtdictne  ii  ien  of  no  sTuL"  Fnr
otho'  definitioni  of  the  ut  and  idsiHS  of  Medi-
cine i^Tsii  by  the  ancienti,  Ke  PKoda-Oalrn  (I*-
indiKt.  Set  Mtdiau,  c  S.  rol.  lii.  pp.  6BB--8,
ed.  Elihn).  The  inienticin  of  medicina  wu  almon
nDiTenallj  attribsted  h;  the  andenta  to  the  gvdi.
(HippocT.  da  Praaa  Mtdic  vol.  I  p.  99 ;  PHad»-
Oalcn,  Intmd.  cap.  I  p.  674  ;  Cic  TVk.  £».  iii.
]  ■  PliiL  H.  ff.  xiit  I.)  Another  MUree  of  in.
(bnnation  waa  the  Dbaerring  ths  mean*  naorted  to
bj  aidmalt  when  lalwnring  undei  diaeue.  Plin;
(ff.  N.  Tiii.  *1)  givei  man;  inatuMe.  in  whicfi
these  inatinGtiTe  eflbrta  taught  mankind  the  piu-
pertieg  of  TarioDi  plaiila,  and  the  more  liinple  lur-
gieal  opsraCioni.  The  wild  goata  of  Crete  painted
oDt  the  nae  of  ths  Dictanuin)  and  Tohierai;  berba;
dogi  when  icdlapoaed  fought  Ihs  Tritiam  fl^MU,
and  ths  mac  anima]  tanght  to  the  Kgyptiani  the
me  of  purgative,  constitnltng  the  ti-pstment  caJled
Syimaum.  The  hippopotamui  introduced  the  prac-
tice of  bleeding,  and  it  i>  afRrmed  that  ths  em-
ployment of  cljBtcn  wai  shown  by  the  ibii.
(Compare  Paendo-Oalen,  tiOnd.  c  I,  p.  675.)
Sheep  with  wonna  in  their  liver  were  asen  aeeking
nline  auhalance*,  and  cattle  a^cted  with  drapiy
aniioualy  looked  for  chalybeats  walera.  We  are
told  {Herod,  i,  197  i  Strab,  ivi  1 1,  ed.  Taochn.  i
Paendo-Galen,  Imtroi.  I.  a.)  that  the  Babylonian*
and  Chaldaeana  had  no  pbyaiciani,  and  in  caaea  of
lichneai  the  patient  waa  earned  out  and  eipoaed
on  the  highway,  that  any  penona  paaibg  by  who
had  been  affected  in  a  aimilar  manner,  might  give
aome  information  reapecting  the  meana  that  had
nflbrded  them  nlie£  Shortly  aflerwarda,  theae  ob-
aerrationi  of  curea  wen  auipended  in  the  temptea
of  the  godi,  and  we  lind  that  in  EfQ^t  the  itilla
of  their  aaueluaiiea  were  covered  with  reeorda  of
thla  deacriplion.  The  prieata  of  Greece  adopted
the  aame  practice,  end  aome  of  the  tablela  >ua-
pended  in  their  templea  are  of  »  cnriooa  character,
which  will  fllajtrate  the  cuitom.  The  following
Totire  memoriola  aje  given  by  Hieron.  Sifercnri-
aIia(rfeJn<Tr:>i»uf.Amitel.4ta.  1672,  pp.  S,  3);
—  **  Some  dayi  back  a  certain  Caiua,  who  waa
blind,  learned  from  an  orncle  that  he  ihould  lepair
to  the  temple,  put  up  hi>  ferrent  praycn,  croia  the
aancluary  fnim  right  to  left,  place  nii  fire  finger)
on  the  altar,  then  rwac  bit  band  and  coier  hi*  eyea.
He  obeyed,  and  initantly  hli  eight  wu  reitOTed
amidat  the  loud  acclamation!  of  the  multitude.
Theae  aigna  of  the  omnipotence  of  the  god*  were
shown  in  the  reign  of  AntonmnB."  "  A  blind
soldier  named  Vaierioa  Apea,  having  conauUed  the
oracle,  waa  informed  that  he  ahould  mix  the  blood
of  a  white  cock  with  honey,  to  make  up  an  oint-
ment to  be  applied  to  bia  eyei,  for  three  conae-
cutlredayi:  he  received  hii  aight,  and  retnined
public  thanki  to  the  goda."  "  Jnlian  appeared
loat  beyond  all  hope  from  a  apitting  of  blood.  The
god  ordered  him  to  take  from  the  altar  aome  aeeda
of  the  pine,  and  to  mil  Ibem  with  honey,  of  which
miitnre  he  waa  to  est  for  thm  dayi.  He  waa
taved,  and  came  to  thank  the  gods  m  presence  of
the  people."

With  regard  to  the  medical  literstuie  of  the
ancienta,  "When"  (aayi  Littr^  Oarvnt  Com-
pMftt  d'HippoaraU,  toL  i.  Inlnd.  ch.  L  p.  S)
**  coe  tearchea  into  the  hiatoiy  of  medicine  and  the
commencement  of  tlie  icience,  tbc  fiirt  body  of


HEDiaNA.

doctrine  Ibat  one  mesta  with  ia  tba  tnlleetioa  of
writingi  known  under  the  name  of  the  wuka  of
Hippocratea.  The  adeice  monnta  up  directly  to
that  origin  and  there  atopa.  Not  that  it  had  not
been  cultivated  earlier,  and  had  not  given  rise  to
even  numerous  prodnedonii  but  ever;  tiling  that
had  been  made  befon  tbe  physician  of  C^  ha*
periahed.  We  bavs  only  lauining  of  them  atM-
tared  and  uncimnected  fiagmants ;  tbe  wocka  sf
HippocnUe*  have  alone  escaped  destmctioo;  and
by  a  lingular  dicnmatauee  there  eziata  a  great  n^
after  them,  aa  well  as  before  them.  The  medical
works  bam  Hippoostea  Id  the  eatabliahmeot  of
the  school  of  Aieiandria,  and  those  of  thait  school
itael^  are  completely  lost,  eicept  some  qnotaujona
and  passagea  presecved  in  the  later  wiitaa  ;  so  that
the  writings  of  Hippocrates  remain  alone  amongai
the  mina  of  ancient  medical  litoature.''  TIm
Aactepiadae,  to  which  family  Hippocratea  belonged,
were  the  auppoaad  descendants  of  Aesculapina
[' tLirK\ifw\Bi),  and  were  in  a  mannn  the  heredi-
tary phyaiciins  of  Greece.  They  pmfesaed  to  hav*
among  them  certiun  secrets  of  the  medical  art,
which  had  beei  handed  down  to  them  fpHn  their
great  progenitor,  and  founded  aeveial  medical
achoota  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  Galen
mentiona  (Di  MiA.  Med.  L  1 .  voL  i.  pp.  S,  6)  three,
via.,  Rhodes,  Cnidos,  and  Cos.  The  Gial  of  theM
appears  soon  to  have  become  extinct,  and  has  left
no  tracei  of  ita  existence  behind.  Frooi  the  aecond
proceeded  a  collection  of  observationa  called  KW-
«w  Tnifuu,  "Cnidian  Sentences,"  a  woikof  mudt
reputation  in  early  timet,  which  is  often  mentioned
by  Hippocratea  (da  RaL  ViaL  w  Mai.  Aeia.\Kiii
which  appeaia  to  have  exiated  in  the  time  of
Galen.  {OomMO^mH^focr.Ub.at.vi.ty.f.iil.')
The  school  of  Cos,  however,  it  by  tar  the  meat
celebrated,  on  account  of  the  greater  number  MC
aminwt  phyaiciani  that  aprang  from  it,  and  eqie~
cially  from  having  been  the  birth-place  of  the  great
Hippocratea.  We  leam  from  Herodotus  (iii.  I3l>
that  there  were  alao  two  celebrated  ntedical  acboida
at  Crotona  in  Magna  Oiaecia,  and  at  Cyrene  in
Africa,  of  which  he  aays  that  the  fbnner  waa  in
his  time  more  esteemed  in  Qrecoo  than  any  other,
and  in  the  next  place  <ame  that  of  Cyiene^  In
mbsequent  timca  die  medical  {cofeaaien  waa  di-
vided into  dlSerent  ihIs  ;  but  a  detailed  aeeoant
of  their  optntona  is  foreign  to  the  abject  of  tha
present  work.  The  oldest,  and  peihapa  the  mort
influential  of  theae  sects  was  that  of  the  Dagaaiieiy
founded  sboat  s.  c  iOO  by  Thessalos,  the  son,  and
Polybua,  the  aon-in-law  of  Himociates,  and  tbsico
called  also  the  Hippoeralid.  Theae  retained  their
mfluence  till  the  rise  of  the  Ett^rid,  founded  by
Scrapionof  AlexBndria,and  Philinua  of  Coa,in  tha
third  century  B.C,  and  10  called,  becauae  they
profcsaed  to  derive  their  knowledge  fnm  expe-
rience only ;  after  which  time  every  mtmber  of  the
Toedical  profeaaion  during  a  hmg  poiod  ranged
himself  in  one  of  theae  two  facta.  In  the  GrM
century  B.C.,  Tbemison  founded  the  sect  of  tha
MeOmdid,  who  held  doctrines  Dearly  intermediata
between  those  of  the  two  aeeta  already  tnentiooFd.
About  two  cantniiea  later  the  Methodic!  wera
divided  into  numerous  sects,  as  the  doctrines  of
particular  phyaiciana  became  more  gCDrnlly  re>
ceived.  The  chief  of  these  aeeta  were  the  P*n~
and  the  Edeetid;  tha  (bnner  founded  by
-  Hid  of  the  liiat


Atbenaeua  about  the  n


e  latlet  aboit  the  •


•  o"


HEDICUS.
vitbat  bj  AgtOamM  al  Sputi,  i*  Ui  popl  Anlu-

It  odI;  RnHiu  to  mentim  the  prindp*]  iDe^ol
•Dihon  arter  Hifmnixt  wbow  woHu  an  Mill
eztut,  Rfenrb^  fat  mors  puticnlan  napectiog
their  writiogi  to  tb«  anidet  ia  the  Dktiimory  ^
Biografkf.  Cdmi  i*  mppml  to  have  lired  id  tbs
AngnMm  age,  ud  deeenea  to  be  meiiUxied  mote
fat  the  d^ance  at  hn  M]^le,  and  the  neatiwM  and
Jadiciaiuncn  of  hit  conpilatioa,  thm  fat  any
oiigiial  coatribnBiana  to  the  tdeDce  of  H«licinfl.
l>ioH»nde*  of  AnauHia,  who  lired  in  the  finl
cenUiiy  after  Chiii^  wai  for  many  cmtonei  tho
greateet  amfaority  in  Materia  Medica,  and  wai
•booit  ai  much  eeteemed  aa  Oalen  in  Medicine
and  Fb;iiobigir,  or  Anitotle  in  Philneaphy.  Aro-
taeiu,  vho  pnbably  lived  m  the  time  of  Kero,  ii
BB  isteraMing  and  strikiiig  vritei,  both  from  the
beanty  of  hU  langoage,  aiu  from  the  originalitj  of
hie  opinioiii,  The  next  in  chronoJogicai  order,  and
perfaapi  the  moit  talnable,  ai  he  ii  ceilainlv  the
moM  Tolainiaoiu,  of  all  the  medial  wrilcn  nf  anli-
qnhy,  \»  Oalen,  who  reigned  lucnme  in  aU  mat-
ten  relatiiig  to  hit  ait  tilt  the  eommenoement  of
BHidan  time*.  He  wu  bom  at  Pergamui  i.  D.
Ill,  ame  eeriy  in  life  to  Rome,  whore  be  lired  in
gtcAt  hfflioiir,  and  paaied  great  part  of  hii  dayi,
and  died  A.  D.  301.  After  him  tbe  onlj  writcn
deaerting  partimlar  notice  are  Oribaiini  of  Per-
Itnnaa,  phjiidan  to  the  emperor  Julian  in  the
fonith  coitiLrj  aftei  Chiiat ;  Attiu  of  Amida,
who  lired  probably  in  the  iiith  eentui;  ;  Alei-
andrr  TnlbaoDi,  who  lired  aomething  later  i  and
PanhH  Aagtoeta  who  belong*  to  the  end  of  the
Betenlh,  [W.A.O.]

HEDICDS  (brfiJi),  the  name  girai  by  the
aneioiU  to  eTcry  (aoIcMfs  of  the  healing  art,
wbotber  pbyiieian  or  nugeon,  and  auordmgly  bath
diTiaknB  of  the  mediear  i«ofeiaion  will  here  be
inchided  voAm  thai  term.  In  Oreeco  and  Aiia
Miliar  phyncianl  mm  to  bare  been  held  JB  high

Aeacul^rioi,  who  waj  contideied  u  toe  father  of
it,  then  wu  a  la*  al  Atheni  that  no  female  at


amoog  tbe  Epixephjiian  Lomnu,  by  which  it  wai
•rdeicd  that  if  any  one  during  hii  illneu  ihould
driok  wine  cantrary  to  the  orderi  of  hii  phyucian,
enan  if  he  ihoold  recoTcr,  he  ihonld  be  put  to
death  fbr  hia  diaobedienee  {Far./rU.  iL  37}  i
a>d,  according  to  Mead,  there  an  eitant  MTeral
medal*  emick  by  tbe  people  of  Smyrna  in  hanoni
ef  different  penona  belonging  to  the  medical  pro-
fcaooB.  (iXoBriafn  it  N<aam»  ^aiiiudatii  a
Sajiaiiaj  n  MfdicoruM  Hoaoren  ptraatii,  iXo,
Lend.  1/24.)  If  the  decree  of  tho  Athenian*
(pablialiHl  among  tho  letters  of  Hippocratei)  be
gennise,  and  if  Sorsnn*  (»  Vita  Hippocr.)  can  be
depended  on,  the  ome  hononn  wen  conferred
apoa  that  phyilcian  aa  had  belon  been  giien  to
Hetcnlei ;  be  wai  voted  a  golden  dovn,  publicly
initiated  ioU  tbs  Eleunnian  myttetic*,  and  mun-
tained  in  the  Frytanenm  at  the  Mate**  expi^nae.
(Comfue  Plin.  N.  ff.  to.  37.)

Ai  then  were  no  haepttal*  among  the  ancicnta,
tile  chief  place!  nf  ilndy  for  medical  papil*  were
the  'AjncAirrjfJB,  or  lemplei  of  AcKnlapioi,  where
■ ' ' ■  ■ ■ '  - ' collection


MEDICUS.  747

obaiactet  and  conduct  of  their  jnpOi,  and  the
fuDon*  Hii^ooatic  oath  (which,  if  not  drawn  np
by  Hippocrale*  himjclf,  ii  certainly  almoit  a*
ancient)  requiioi  to  be  inierled  hers  aa  beuig  th*

awear  bj;  ApoUo  the  [ibyBician,  by  Aeiculapiiu,
by  Hygeia,  and  Panaceia,  and  all  the  god*  and
goddeoea,  calling  them  to  witneaa  that  1  will  fulfil
raligiouilj,  according  to  the  bett  of  my  power  and
judgment,  the  aolinin  pramiw  and  the  writtoa
bond  which  I  now  do  make.  I  will  honour  aa
my  pannti,  the  maiter  who  baa  taught  me  thia
ait,  and  endeamnr  to  minieter  to  all  hi*  necea-
■itiei.  I  will  coniider  hi*  children  a*  my  own  bro-
ther*, and  will  teach  them  my  prafeuion,  ahould
they  exueu  a  deiite  to  foUaw  it.  withoat  le-
mnntntion  or  written  bead.  I  will  admit  to
my  leooD*,  my  diacourte*,  and  all  my  other
method*  of  teaching,  my  own  Ktia,  and  those  of
my  tutor,  and  thoae  who  bars  been  in*ctibed  aa
pupil*  and  haTo  taken  the  medical  oath  ;  but  no
one  elae.  I  will  prescribe  neb  a  course  of  regimen
aa  may  be  best  suited  to  the  condition  of  my
patienU,  according  to  the  best  of  my  power  and
judgment,  aeeking  to  preaene  them  boas  any-
thing that  might  proTO  injui^on*.  No  induce-
ment ihal!  ever  lead  me  to  adminiitet  poison,  not
will  I  erer  be  iha  aotbor  of  *nch  adrice:  neither
will  I  contribou  to  an  abortion.  I  will  maintam
leligiotuly  the  parity  and  integrity  both  of  my
conduct  and  of  my  art.  I  will  not  cut  any  on*
for  the  atone,  but  will  leare  that  operatim  to
those  who  CBllivato  it  Into  wbalerer  dwellings  I
may  go,  I  will  enter  them  with  the  sole  view  of
succouring  the  nek,  abstaining  from  al!  injnrioua
view*  and  comptian,  especially  &om  any  immodest
action,  toward*  women  ot  men,  freemen  or  alaTcs.
If  during  my  attendance,  or  eien  unprofestionBlly
in  cranmon  life,  1  haffwn  to  see  or  hear  of  any
arcumstoncc*  which  *huuld  not  be  revealed,  I  will
coniider  them  a  prefound  •eciel,  and  observe  on
the  nibject  a  religions  silence.  May  I,  if  I
rigidly  obaervs  this  my  oalh,  and  do  not  break  it,
enjoy  good  sncceat  in  life,  and  in  [the  pnctica  of  }
my  art,  and  oblun  general  esteem  for  ever ;  ahoutd
andbcceme  a  peijurei,  may  the  reverao


The AKlcpiadaa [Mir


<A] *


veij  Mrid  in  cxaminiDg  into  and  orolookiDg  tbe


Seme  idea  of  the  mcrano  of  a  phyiician  in  tfaeas
^e*  may  be  farmed  from  the  &ct  mentioned  by
Herudolo*  (iil  131)  that  the  Acginetajia  (about
the  year  b.  c  £33)  paid  Democedea  from  ika
public  treasury  one  talent  per  annum  for  hi*  ter-
vice*,  <.e.  (if  we  teckon,  wilb  Huisey,  ^aeieiit
Wagili  tmd  Monet/,  itc,  the  Aeginetan  drachma
to  be  worth  U  3j<f.)  not  quite  3HL  ;  be  after-
warda  received  finm  the  Athenians  one  hundred
minae,  l  i.  (nekcning,  wiih  IIuucj,  tbe  Attie
dmchma  to  ha  worth  Sjd.)  rather  mure  than  406/.,
and  he  waa  finally  attracted  to  Samoa  by  being
offued  by  Polyciatea  a  taluy  of  two  talenta,  i.  e.
(if  the  Attic  slandard  be  meant)  4871.  10*.  It
should  however  be  added,  that  Valckenaer  doubt*
the  actnracy  of  thi*  atatement  of  Herodotua  with
respect  to  the  Aeginetan*  and  Athenians  (and  ap-
parently with  reason)  on  the  ground  that  the  latter
people,  at  the  time  of  their  gieateat  wealth,  only
allowed  their  ambastadon  two  drachmae  (or
li.  7fi.)  per  da;,  i.e.  somewhat  leu  than  thirty
ponnda  per  ennnm.  (AriatopL  AAam.  v.  fiG.)  A
phyaician,  called  by  Pliny  both  Eiaaiatiatna  (ff.  A'.
ixii.  S)  and  Cleombrotiu  (H.  M  vii.  37),  ia  *ud


74S  MEDICOS.

by  him  to  ham  Mceived  one  hundred  tftlerU  ftr
mring  king  Antiochui,  which  {if  wo  »nppo»e  the
Attic  taJenU  of  the  landBrd  of  Alexander'!  coin-
age to  bs  ineuit,  which,  according  to  Btaaej,  wu
worth  243^.  lit)  wouM  amoimt  to  24,37SL*  II
Menu  to  hiTS  been  ddE  nneooiman  among  the
Oreeki  in  thaw  timei  (a*  afterwardi  in  the  Iat«r
Roman  empire,  leo  Archutih)  for  itatei  t
maintain  phpidana,  who  wen  paid  at  the  pnbii
COM  <Xeo.  Mm.  iy.  2.%S;  Plato,  Goiy.  %  SS
Stiabo,  IT.  p.  )2Sj  Diod.  Sic  xii.  13);  and  thew
again  had  attendanU,  for  the  moit  part  aUrei,  who
oxcrciaed  their  calling  among  people  of  low  condi-
tion. (Plato,  De  Lis.  it.  d.  720,  ed.  Sleph.)

The  Romani  dariicd  their  kuowledgo  of  me-
dicine at  fint  from  the  Etniicana,  and  afterwardi
from  the  Gre«k>. One  of  the  mott  ancient
lomi  at  Rome  in  order  to  ward  off  epidemic
eaiea,  and  to  appeaae  the  anger  of  the  goda,
the  interrogating  the  hwki  bought  by  Tarquin  of
the  Sibyl In  the  earlier  times  of  the  Roman
lepnblic  phyaiciana  are  laid  hy  Pliny  to  hare
■mknown  {H.  N,  iiii.  fi)  \  and  for  aome
afterward)  the  eierciae  of  the  profeaooa  waa

rl  moiure  confined  to  pcr»on«  of  aervile  rank ;
the  richer  &mi]iei  having  ilaToa  who  were
skilled  in  all  lorti  of  tiadea,  &c.,  generaUy  poa-
aeiaed  one  or  more  (hat  undentood  medicine  and
anr^ry.  (Middlcton's  Euay,  Dt  Mtdicorvm  apad
AonuuKW  dtgaitiim  Condiiioae,  Cantab.  1726,  llo.
and  the  varioua  anawera  to  it  that  appeared  on  ila
publication.)  To  thii  practice,  howcTer,  thei«
were  many  eiceptiona,  :g,  the  physician  who  wai
taken  priioner  with  Jnlhia  Caeaar  by  the  piratea
at  the  lihmd  of  Phaimacnm  (SaeUn.  J.  Oaf.  i),
and  who  ii  called  hia  friend  by  Flularch  (aee
Caaanban'i  note  on  Sneton.) ;  Aichagathia,  who
being  the  fint  foreign  anigeon  that  aettled  at
Rome,  had  a  ahop  bought  for  him  at  the  public
eipenae,  and  waa  praenled  with  the  Jui  Qniiitium
B.  c.  219  (Caarina  Hemina,  op.  Pla.  H.  N.  nii.
6) ;  Artoriua,  who  i>  known  to  ha<e  been  a  phy-
aician  (CaeL  AureL  Di  Mofi.  AaU.  iiL  U.  p.  234),
and  who  ii  (ailed  the  biend  of  Anguatoa  (Plut.
BniL  41),  whare,  howerer,  it  ahonld  he  noticed
that  aome  editiona  read  'Arr^yiox  inaCead  of
'A^T^CBi) ;  Aaclapo,  whom  CiciTo  calla  hia  friend
{ad  /bn.  liiu  20)  ;  Aiclepiadca,  the  friend  of
Cmuui  the  orator  (Cic  <h  Oral.  L  U);  Eude-
niui,  who  ia  called  by  Tacitui  {Amal.  if.  3)  the
friend  and  phyiician  of  Liiiai  and  otherL  The
hfitred  borne  by  Gato  the  Cenaor  ngainaC  the  Gnek
phyaiciana  aa  well  at  tho  Greek  philoaophen


well  k


cauacd  them  to  be  expelled  from  Rome.  (See
Sprenget,  Hiil.  dt  la  Mid.)  With  reapect  to  the
income  made  by  eminent  phyiiciana  in  the  early
timet  of  Rome,  the  writer  u  not  aware  of  any
data  for  aaccrtaining  it ;  at  the  begmning  of  the
empire,  we  leam  bom  Pliny  {H.  N.  nil.  i)  that
Albntiua,  Airuntiui,  Calpelanui,  Caaiina,  and  Rn-
briui  gained  250,000  leitercei  per  annum,  i.  t.
(reckoning  with  Iluaiey  the  milla  niunnii  (aerier-
li'an)  to  be  worth,  after  the  reign  of  Anguatua,
1L  16(.  3d.)  \9&ZL  2t.  M. ;  that  Q.  Stcitiniua
made  it  a  brour  that  he  waa  content  to  recdxe

*  11^  hoverer,  the  AlexaDdrian  alandaid,  which
ia  found  in  the  coina  of  the  Ptolemiea,  be  meant,  it
would  amount  (reckoning  the  drachma  aa  Ii^  3]^}
to  3S,31U.  i  an  almsit  incndible  anm.


MEDIX  TUTICUa.


aarae  aimnal  income  frum  the  onpanr  Clamdioa,
left  between  them  at  their  drath,  notwithitaDding
large  amna  that  they  had  ipent  in  beanti^ins  tha
city  of  Napte^  the  amn  of  tbir^  miHioin  i£  aes-
leiccB  (or  23*,37«.).

Of  the  preTioua  medical  education  neceaoiy  to
qtudify  a  phyaician  at  Rome  for  the  legal  practice
of  hia  pn^eatipn  in  tha  early  timea,  we  kiwir  do-
thing ;  afterwardi,  howcTcr,  thia  waa  nndec  tlta
luperintendeace  of  the  archiabi [AncHLaTSH.]

Two  other  medical  titla  that  we  meet  wiA
under  tha  emperraa  wan  latrotofAula  (aee  tha
word)  and  Acbarvu,  'Airov^iot.  The  latter  waa
a  title  at  the  etaat  of  (^anitantinople,  ^ven  aaia-
rently  only  to  phyiidana,  and  <jnit«  dutinet  bom
the  uie  of  tha  word  fbond  in  the  eariiei  Latin
aathoia.  (See  Dn  Cange,  GVoo.  Gmto.  toL  i.
p.  46,  and  Poaaini,  Gloa.  ad  Padafmtr.  HiiL  Ait-
droiuci,TDL  i.  p.  36S,  &C.  and  ToL  iL  pp.  468,  469.)
Beaidea  Joanoea  the  aoa  of  Zachariaa,  who  >*  better
known  hy  hia  title  of  Actnarina  than  hy  hit  n^


r phyaici.
At  ^ia  dignity.


t,  I2it


.«(»a


The  A


ledimnui  waa  equal  to  lix  Roman  modii,  or  tva

mpborse  (Nepoa,  AU.  it  Cic  >■  Vtrr.  iiL  43,  16,

9  ;  Soidat,  (.  V. ;  Rhenm.  Fann.  <r.  64.)

Suidai  makei  the  inedjnmua=  108  litraa^  con-

lunding  it  apparently  with  the  metntea,  the  chief

Greek  fluid  meaaure,  which  waa  three  quartan  of

aedimnuL The  medimnua  contained  nearly

ipeiial  gaQona,  or  11^  boihtl. Thi>  was  tb*

Attic  ntedimnui ;  the  Aeguietan  and  Ptolentaic  WH

a  much  again,  or  in  the  ratio  of  3  :  2  to  tha

Allic For  the  valnei  of  the  aubdiTiabna  of  iha

medimnna  lee  the  Table*. (B6ckh,  MetroL  Citlit-

A.  pp.  202—204.)  (P.  S.]

HEDITRINA'LIA  waa one  of  the  f^stivab

nnected  with  the  cnlliTation  of  nneyarda. It

took  place  on  the  elereulh  of  October,  on  which

day  the  people  of  Latinm  U^an  to  tatte  their  nair

wine  (auttam),  and  to  ofier  libatiou  of  it  to  tlkn

goda. In  drinking  the  new  wine  it  waa  cuatomaij

'>  pronoimce tha  wcidi; "retua  noTom  Tiniun

iho,  noTO  Tetcri  morbo  medeor.^  (Vaitu,  d*  Lutff^

at.  *i.  21  ;  Fcttua,  i.  c  MediMmalia.) Vam

deiiiea  the  name  of  the  Ctatinl  from  the  healing

power  oF  At  new  wine,  bat  Feitiu  ipcakt  of  %

gnddeaa  Meditrina.  [L.  S.]

MEDIX  TUTICUS,  the  name  oC the  aopceow

igialials  among  the  Otcan  people. AMu  wf-

■11  to  have  lignified  a  magialiate  of  any  kind

(auddd  apud  Onot  mna  nugulratia  td,  Feato^

(.  v.  p.  123,  cd.  Mailer),  and  tmlicaM  to  ban  been

equivalent  to  magitat  or  hbumiu. Liiy,  t

callmg  the  medii  t '

itut^  gi^ea  a  literal  tn

a  time  of  the  Kcond  P

?re  goTemed  by  the  medix  tuticoi,  wbo  a*

have  been  elected  annually  (Lit.  niii.  35,  ndr.

^  ixii  6)  1  and  wo  may  in(^  boa  a  Una  of

Enniua  (ofad  Fat.  t.v.\  "Summna  ibi  cantor


MENELAEIA.

Dia(n)tnit8 eC  tha mnc nuns  under  him.


thkt  of  Lirr,  which  u  placed  st  the  head  of  thi)
•rticle.  <Lepaiu,  /uer.  UnJir.  H  0«u.)

MEQALE'SIA,  MEQALENSIA,  or  MEQA-
LENSES  LUDl.B  feitiTal  withganieB  celebntcd
U  Itoioe  in  ihs  monlb  of  April  and  in  honour  of
the  gnst  olDiha  af  ifae  godi  (Cybele,  iiryi^ii  diis,
whence  the  Ceatitat  derired  iu  name). The  ilatue

in  the  yeu  203  B.  c^  and  the  day  of - ' '


n,  led


alemia,  and  gamu,  and  gnat  numbeti  of  people
cairied  pmcati  to  tha  goddeu  on  the  Capitol.
(Vanes'^  H-ff-LoL-tl  15  iLir.xiix  H.)  The
rrgnlar  celebration  of  the  Megaletia,  however,  did
D«  begin  till  Hrelve  yean  later  (191  at),  when
the  temple  which  had  been  Towed  and  orde nd  to  be
buill  in  203  B.  IL,  wai  completed  and  dedicated  bj
11.  Jnaioi  Bntui.  (Lit.  uivi.  36.)  Bat  from
another  pauage  or  Lir;  (ixxIt.  G1)  it  appean
that  the  Mcgaletia  had  aliead;  been  celebrated
in  193  B.C  The  featiral  laited  tat  lix  daji,  be-
EiDoiDg  on  the  4th  of  April  The  waion  of  ihia
iotinE,  like  that  of  the  whole  month  in  which  it
look  place,  wai  fuU  of  general  rejoicings  and  feaet-
in^  It  wafl  cuatomary  for  the  wealthy  Romana
oa  ihii  DccadoD  to  invila  one  another  mutually  to
their  Rpaala,  and  the  eitiavagsnt  habili  and  the
good  liTing  diuing  thete  fettive  day*  were  pro-
bably earned  to  a  lary  high  degree,  whence  a
aeoatuconmiltmn  vu  latued  in  161  o.  c,  pre-
acribing  that  no  one  thoold  go  beyond  a  tertnin
eilent  of  eipenditui&  (Oelliu,  iL  24  ;  <omfere
r.iii.  a.)

Tin  gamea  which  were  held  at  the  Megaletia
were  punlj  iccnic,  and  not  circeniea.  They  were
at  Gnt  held  on  tha  Palatine  in  front  of  the  temple
of  tile  goddeu,  but  aftecwaidi  aln  in  the  theatrci.
(Cic  di  Hamp.  Rap.  1),  &c.)  The  tint  ludi
acenici  at  Rome  were,  according  to  Valeriui  An-
tiaa,  introduced  at  the  M^eaia,i.e.  either  in  193
ar  191ac  The  day  which  waa  eipecially  act
anrt  for  the  performance  of  icenic  playi  waa  the
third  of  the  featinL  (OHd.  Fad.  ir.  377  ;  Ael.
Spaitian.  AwtomiM.  Carae.  c  6.)  Slavea  were  not
pennitted  to  be  preaenc  at  the  gamei,  and  the  ma-
giimta  appeared  dretaed  in  a  purple  toga  and

Sncteita,  whence  the  proTerh,  ;iar7nirii  Mi^alauiM.
be  gamei  were  under  the  iupcrintendence  of  the
carule  aedilei  (Lir.  iiiIt.  i!4),and  we  know  that
fcni  of  the  extant  playi  of  Terence  were  performed
at  the  Megalena.  Cicero  (da  Hanap.  Rap.  12),
probably  oontiaiting  the  gamei  of  the  Megaleaia
with  the  more  mde  and  barbaroni  gamei  and  ex-
hibiiioua  of  the  eircua,  ealli  them  man'ne  eatli,
tBlemma,  nUgim.  (See  Ofid.  Fad.  iv.  1 79—372  ;
P.}tMaatia*,aitCu.  ad  Faaiii.  ii.11.} [L.S.]

MELLEIREN  CmXA.W). [JUaiw.]

MEMBHA'NA. [LiBiR.]

UENELAEI A  (fu»\<f*ia},BfettiTa1  celebrated
alTheiBpnaein  Laconia,  in  honour  of  Menelaiu  and
Melena,  who  were  belieied  to  be  buried  there.
(Paoa.  iiL19.  §9.)  Menelaua  wai  to  the  I^cedae-
miMiianawhatNMtorwa«totheMwaeniana,amodei
of  a  wiaeandjuit  king,  and  hence  Ihey  raiaed  him  (o
the  nuk  of  one  of  the  great  godi  (Itocrak  PanalL


2fi.  p.l2S,  ed.  Spengel:Hor.  SW.  L!.  13;  Orid.
MH.  riii.  6G3>,  and  in  Greek  ■tf.lwws.  (Xen.
A«ai.  vii.  3.  g  lOi  Athen.  i<.  21.  36,  T.SO.)  It
ii  ihown  in  the  drinking-icene  painted  on  the  wall
of  a  wine-ihop  at  PompeiL  (GelU  Fompeiaxa,
1832,Tol.iLp.  n.)  (See  woodcuL)  The  term  ,
Tfirt(o,  though  commonly  uied  in  Greek  for  a
table  of  any  kind,  mnit,  accoiding  to  iti  etymology,
hare  denoted  originally  a  four-legged  table.  Ac-
cordingly, in  pntnlingi  on  vasei,  the  tnblri  are
ally  reprciented  with  fattr  legs,  of  which  an
mple  u  given  in  the  annexed  cut. (Miliin,


HENSA.  749

p.  247,  B.),' and  honoured  him  and  Helena  with
annual  and  lolemn  ucrilicei  at  Thempnae,  which
continued  to  be  olfered  in  the  daya  of  liociBlei.
(flela^  Enam.  p.  218,  d.)  TheH  aolemnitiei  are
aametimei  called  'EA^ru.  (See  Creuier,  SpnboL
iii.  p.38.)  [US.]

MEKSA  (TfHi*tfa),  a  table.  The  limplest
kind  of  table  wat  one  with  threo  legi,  round,
called  ciUila  (Featna,*.  v.;  Vnrn>,<fs  Liaff,  ZuL  t.


/'eufarcf  d>  ra«a.4ii<ifBei,ToLi  pl.69.)  Honca
oied  at  Rome  a  dining-table  of  while  marble,  thus
combining  nealneia  with  economy.  (Sol.  I  6. 1 1 6.)
For  the  houia  of  the  opulent,  tablei  were  made  of
the  moat  valuable  and  beautiful  kindi  of  wood,
eipecially  of  maple  (ai'irSifu'in),  Athen.  ii.  32  ;
aarna.  Hoi.  Sai.  11  B.  10)  Mart.  iit.  90),  or  of
the  citrua  of  Africa,  which  waa  a  ipecie*  of  cy-
preai  or  juniper.  (Citrra,  Cic.  Terr.  ir.  17  ;  Mart.
iL  43,  liv.  89  ;  Plin.  ff.  ff.  liiL  29.)  For  th>a
purpoae  the  Romani  made  tue  of  the  roou  and
tubeii  of  the  tree,  which,  when  cut,  diiplayed  the


adorned  were  aold  for  many  thonaand  pounds
{Plin.  //.  N.  liil  29,  itL  26,  84  i  TerwIL  rfe
Faliio,  ntb  fit.  /  A.  Aikin,  On  OmamaUtU  Wtjtidt^
pp.  23,  24.)  Beiida  the  beauty  of  the  board*
(iiiWI^uirii)  the  tcgi  of  thete  tablea  were  often
Tety  tailefuJ,  being  otrred  in  imitation  of  lion'i  oi
tiger'a  feet,  and  made  of  irory.  (Athen.  L  c. ;
Mart.  iL  43.  9.)
One  of  the  piind[al  improremenU  wa*  the  in-


•  o"


7S0  MENSARII.

mention  of  thi  menopodiam,  >  ronnd  table  (orbii)
nippoTlcd  by  a,  gingle  foot ;  tbii,  witb  otber
elegant  kindi  of  turnitnre,  wbj  introduced  into
Home  faun  Alia  Minor  by  Cn.  Manlioi.  {Plin.
H.X.  iixW.  B.)  Under  the  Romui  emperon  Kmi-
circnlar  tables  trore  introduced,  called  nimtaa
bnatae  from  comparing  them  to  the  half-moon,  and
$igniata,  becauH  they  had  the  farm  of  that  letter,
C,  (limprid.  Hd.  26.  29.)  Thi»  Innate  table
wiu  lurroiLoded  by  a  B0&  of  the  same  fonn,  called
itibaditim,  which  wai  adapted  to  hold  leieii  oi
eight  penoni. ( Mart  i.  48,  lir.  87.)

Ai  the  table  waa  not  veiy  large,  at  ire  aee  froni
the  preceding  cat,  it  was  uinal  Id  place  the  diihet
and  the  various  kindi  of  meat  upon  it,  and  then  to
bring  it  thus  furnished  to  the  place  whore  the
guests  were  reclining :  hence  such  phrases  as  mea-
au»  apftomn  at  opponere  (PlauL  Aan.  v.  1.  2,
MoH.  L  3.  ISO  ;  Cic.  ad.  Alt.  iir.21  ;  Ovid, Met.
viiL  670).  and  tHnsjon.  ai/erre  or  rtmtmn.  (PlauL
Ampiit.  ii.  2.  \15;  Wag.  Aat.\.2\G.)  At  the
board  of  the  (able  ii  c^led  by  a  distinct  name
iwii^lta  (AdieD.  1.  e. ;  Pollni,  i.  SI),  it  appears
that  it  wBi  very  frequently  made  separate  from  the
tripod  or  other  stand  (kiAAISot)  oq  which  it  was
fixed.
•  Among  the  Qreeks  the  tablea  were  not  covered
with  cloths  at  meals,  but  were  cleaoied  by  the
use  of  wet  sponges  (Horn.  Od.  L  111,  n.  161  ;
MarLxiT.  U4),DroffrBgtaiitherba.  (Orid.McL
-viii.  G$6.)  The  Romani  used  for  the  same  pur-
pose a  thick  doth  with  a  long  woolly  nap  (gaa-
iupe,  Hd.  1. 1.  ;  Helndurf  u  loc)

Under  the  infinence  of  the  ideas  of  faeapitality,
which  hare  prerailed  nniTenally  in  the  primilire
states  in  society,  the  table  was  considered  lacrcd.
(Jqt.  ii.  110.)  Small  statues  of  the  gods  were
placed  upon  it.  (Amah,  ccmira  Genta,  lib.  iL)  On
this  account  Horculcs  was  irorihipped  under  the
title  tpariitoj  and  iniTpirwiiiBs.  The  Cretans
ate  in  public )  and  hi  the  upper  pan  of  theii
iiAptior,  at  public  dining-room,  there  was  a  cen-
stant  table  set  a[«rt  tor  stiangmi,  and  mother
aacred  to  Jupiter,  called  Tf>a»*fo  {frla,  or  Alai
Jtrleu.  (Athen.  it.  22  ;  Hikk's  irrfo,  vol.  iii.
pp.  120— ]3S.)

The  two  principal  counet  of  a  tt'wuoti  and  coena,
or  a  Orcek  and  Roman  dinner,  wen  called  teipecl'
irely  wpdini  riiiirtCa,  Je^ffia  rpdrtfa,  and  noua
prtnu,  mcRsa  Mcvnda. [CoiTiA.]

The  name  of  rpiwtia  or  innua  was  given  to  a
square  tomb-stane  (Becker,  Charilda,  vcL  ii.
pp.191,  193)  [FUNUB,  p.  656,  b.J  ;  and  the  same
name  was  also  given  to  square  altars.  Every  curia
at  Rome  had  an  altar,  called  ntsun,  which  was
sacred  to  Juno  Curitis.  (Dionjrs.  iL  60  ;  Feitus,
pp.  49,64,  15G,  edMiilleri  Maoob.  &(.  iiL  II  ;
Becker,  Ran.  AUerth.  vol.  iL  pL  i.  p.  34.)  [J.  Y.]

MENSA'RII,  MENSULA'RU,  or  NUMU-
LA'RIl,  wen  a  kind  of  public  bankers  at  Rome
who  were  appointed  by  the  state  ;  they  were  dis-
tinct from  the  argentarii,  who  were  common
bankers  and  did  business  on  their  own  account
(Dig.  2.  tit.  13.  s.  6.)  The  mentarii  had  their
banks  {mental)  like  ordinary  banken  around  the
forum,  and  in  the  name  of  the  aeraiium  they  of-
fered ready  money  to  debtors  who  could  give  se-
curity to  the  state  for  it.  Such  an  expediency
was  devised  by  the  state  only  in  times  of  great
distress.  The  first  time  thai  meniarii  {qamqumri
mauarii)  wen  appolnled  was  is  3£2  B.  c,  at  tlu


MENSUtlA.
time  when  the  plebeians  were  so  deeply  involved
in  debt,  that  they  were  obliged  to  borrow  mone;
from  new  creditor!  in  order  to  pay  the  old  onea,
and  thus  ruined  tfaemaelva  completely.  (Liv.  vii.
21  ;  compaiB  Fbnub  (Rosian)  and  AsaiN-
TAKiL)  On  thia  occasion  they  were  also  Butho-
riied  to  ordain  that  cattle  or  land  should  be  re-
ceived ai  payment  at  a  &ir  valuation.  Sui^  banken
were  appointed  at  Home  at  various  times  and
whenever  debts  weighed  heavily  upon  the  peoid^
but  with  the  exception  of  ^e  first  time  they  ap-
peai  during  the  time  of  the  republic  f "  * '


.  (Liv.


?->


One  class  of  mensarii,  however  (perhapi  an  inferior
order),  the  nuiuitlaro  or  jtasn/orn,  seem  to  havo
been  permanently  employed  by  the  slate,  and
these  must  be  meant  when  we  read  that  not  only
the  aemrium  but  also  private  individuals  deposited
in  tbeir  hands  sums  of  money  which  they  had  to
dispose  ot  (Tacit  .^aanJ:  vi  17  t  Dig.  IS.  tit  3.
a  7  ;  42.  lit  6.  a.  24.)  At  Rome  must  have  oftm
been  visited  by  great  nnmben  of  strangers,  thesa
public  bankers  had  als^  iot  a  certain  percentage^
to  exchange  foreign  money  and  give  Ronian  coinaga
instead,  and  alto  to  examine  all  kinds  of  coini
whether  they  were  of  the  proper  metal  and  ge-
nuine or  not  (Dig,  46.  tit  S.  s.  39.)  During  the
time  of  the  empire  such  permanent  mensarii  woe
under  the  control  of  the  {vaefectus  urbi  and  fbrraed
a  distinct  corporation.  (Dig.  1.  tit  IS.  a  1 ;  Cod.
Theod.  16.  tit4.  S.5.)

Bankers  appointed  by  the  state  alas  existed  in
other  ancient  towns,  and  Cieeio  (pro  Mace  19)
mentions  mensarii  at  Tcmnu  in  Alia  Miner  wba
were  appointed  by  the  people.  {L.  S.]

MENSIS. [CiLiNnuiuM.]

MENSO'RES,  measurers  or  lurreyoit. Thii
name  was applied  to  varioai datiea  of  p
whose  occupation  wot  the  me

1.  It  was  applied  to  land-surveyors  who  mea-
sured and  defined  the  extent  of  fields,  and  appear
to  have  been  the  same  as  the  agiimensom.  (Colnm.
V.  1  ;  compare  ApHiHSHSoiixa.)

2.  To  persons  who  measured  in  the  Roman
camps  the  space  to  be  occupied  by  the  tenta.  Thej
must  be  distinguished  &am  the  metatom,  who
selected  tho  place  for  a  camp.  (Vtset  da  Re  Mitil.
1L7.)

3.  To  a  class  of  officers  during  the  time  of  tbe
empire  who  provided  qusrten  fa:  the  soldien  in
the  towns  through  which  they  passed  and  when
they  made  a  temporary  slay.  They  not  only  aa-
signed  to  each  soldier  the  bouse  in  which  be  waa
to  be  quartraed,  but  also  wrote  the  name  of  the  oc-
cupant upon  the  door-poat,  and  he  who  eflaced  or
deatjuyed  this  name  was  pmiisbed  as  a  £alii  AUt,
(Cod.Theod.7.fct8.  S.4.)

4.  Mcnsor  nedificionmi  is  sometiinei  ap^ied  t«
architects,  or  mora  especialty  to  such  architects  ta
conducted  the  erection  of  public  btiildingi,  th«
plant  of  which  had  been  drawn  op  hj  other  archi-
tects. (Plin.  Bpi^.  z.  Sa  and  39.)

6.  Mensores  frumentarii  was  the  name  of  officCT
who  had  to  measure  the  com  which  was  conveyed
up  the  Tiber  for  the  public  gtanariei.  (Dig.  27.
tit  1.  a.  26  ;  Cod.  Theod.  14.  tit  9.  a.  9  ;  and
tit  16.  s.  1.)  They  were  stationed  in  the  pmt
near  Oa^  and  were  employed  imder  the  ptadcetii*
annonac  Their  name  is  mcntianed  in  Tarion*
anriant  inscriptions.  (L.  8.]

U£NBU'RA  (jtirfoi},  mtaian,  'a  ita  mdeit


HENSURA.
veiiMi  ligmfiM  the  api^ication  of  namlHr  to  qnU'
titj  ;  or,  to  spenk  iDore  ipeciGcallj,  tbe  comnuiioi
of  dit&RDt  quantitiei  bj  mouu  of  the  Mandaid  ir
DDmbei.  So  long  u  we  regud  quamit^  opait
from  number,  ire  can  onlj  compre  tvo  qutm^tiei
bj  tht  leM  oi  coincidenre,  bj  which  re  uceRein
whether  thej  are  equal  or  mtequal,  and,  if  the
latter,  which  of  the  two  ii  the  gtHl«  ;  ai,  for  in-


'0  lini


Thai


the  nmpariion  of  one  magniCDdc
finite  pin*,  at  mnl^plei,  i^  ths  other,
doubl^  third  or  triplit,  and  u  forth.  The  hut
■tep,  b;  whieb  ws  attain  to  a  complete  method  of
expnaaing  ma^itade  naniEricalijf  ia  tita  eAoia  t^
Kum  fmti  vagm^ti*,  or  Unit,  with  which  we
ma;  compaie  all  other  magnitudM  of  Qia KBiu}iiid,
■0  ai  to  aacenain  what  lu^Cip/fE,  p^  or  jimtt
ef  tie  wBt  each  of  them  ii,  if  they  are  commeD'
■arable,  and,  if  not,  aa  nnri;  aa  we  plaue.  Tbiu
the  unit,  in  itael^  or  in  it>  parti,  formi  a  Mtamn  of
all  BBgnitndea  of  the  nine  kind  aa  itielt  A  Kt
of  find  ntuorei,  ddb  for  each  kind  of  qnantitj,
with  their  ■Dbdiviiiom,  (omu  a  Mttria^  Sflam.

The  Dotiou  which  lie  at  the  fbundalion  of  ma-
theroatkal  and  mechanic)]  (cienee  determme  of
themaeliet  the  foiuidatinn  of  ererj  metrical  lyitem.
Thoae  notioDi  are  Extfntiom  and  ^rf*  ;  the  former
in  iti  TBriooi  kindi,  the  fuH,  Che  tiafiia^  the  (oM,
and  the  oa^  ;  tbe  latter  in  that  manifettatton  of
it  which  we  call  nn^d.  Now,  lince  ertention,
whetha  Imear,  lupei^cial,  or  Klid,  can  bo  eiti-
Bialed  by  meant  of  one  itraight  line ;  or  bj-  meani
of  two  ntajgbl  line*  which  form  a  liied  angle  with
ooe  another,  and  which,  tof[ether  with  two  other
Jaiei  drawn  parallel  to  iJiem,  endoee  a  lurtace  ;  or
by  ineui  af  three  atialght  line*,  the  planet  pawing
thrdogh  which  form  a  fixed  lolid  angle,  and,  lo-
Htber  with  three  other  plane*  drawn  parallel  to
Ibem,  form  a  lolid ; —it  bUowi  that  alt  the*e  three
kind*  of  magnitode  may  be  eitimated  nwn^ricoUy
bj  fixing  opoa  tmit*  which  are  reapectiTety  a
Miaight  line,  a  parallelogram  haling  two  adjacent
aidr*  and  an  angle  filed,  and  a  paisllelopiped
having  three  adjacent  edge*  and  an  angle  fixed  ;
or,  aimplifying  the  two  latter  ca*ca  bj  making  tbe
fixed  iide*  equal  end  the  fixed  angle*  right  angln,
the  onil*  an  (t)  a  itraigil  lint  of  find  latgO,
(2)  ele  j^Kira  o/  wttok  Aai  itra^  late  it  a  tide,
and  <3)  dc  oii*  o/  iciicli  Oat  line  it  lit  edge.
ThiBwe  obtain  a  mthicnl  tgitem  fir  leagA,  mrfian.

For  the  mamrement  of  atgalar  magmbidt,  or,
which  if  the  aame  thing,  of  diitance  Rckoned  along
the  eiicnmference  of  a  circle,  one  tmit  ii  lUfRcient,
namely,  a  fixed  angle,  which  wilt  exBCtly  meainre
tbe  nin  of  four  tight  angle*,  or  a  &IM  arc  of  a
filed  circle,  wbich  will  exactly  meaiore  the  eir-
cnmrerenee  of  the  circle.  Thni  we  abtoJn  a  nu-
trical  ^tltfujar  all  aagnlor  nv^niladet,  itduduig
TbH.

Agwn,  with  rapect  to  Forte,  of  which  the  ten
ii  ttaigli,  mna  all  fone*  may  be  compared,  either
direc^,  or  thronah  the  olculatiai  of  the  relocilie*
which  they  (xidnee,  with  the  force  of  graTily.
Then  are  two  way*  of  eitiiuating  weight.  Kither
it*  moiiin  may  be  deduced  finni  tbe  meoaure  of
tapac)^  ;  foe,  a*  the  weight  of  a  body  depend*  on
the  qnantity  of  matter  in  a  girea  ipace,  eitimatod
by  the  e&el  which  the  force  of  gnriw  eierti  upon
i^  m  ma;  take  tbe  quantity  (^  a  Axed  kind  of
KaHer  (w»uc  fix  exampb)  which  will  aueO;  fill


HENSURA.  7SI

the  nnit  of  copadly,  a*  the  unit  cf  weight.  Or
we  may  take  a  bulk  of  any  aabilance,  without
meroiring  it,  ai  the  unit  of  weight.  In  the  Utter
caae  it  ii  erident  that,  by  meaaniing  the  loIid  eon-
tent  either  of  the  unit  of  weight,  or  of  an  equal
weight  of  tome  other  nhataiice,  we  might  deriTs
from  our  lyitom  of  weight*  a  *y»tem  of  meanrai,
firat,  of  mpuity,  and  thence  of  lui&ee,  and  thence
of  linear  diitance  ;  jnat  ai  b;  tbe  apponto  jToceai
we  pa*>  from  the  tne  to  the  mrloce,  thence  to
cafBcity,  and  thenee  to  w^bt

The  atatement  of  theaa  dementaiy  principleL  in
a*  brief  «  fonn  a*  ii  eouiitent  with  dMmei^hM
appeared  neceaaaly,  in  order  to  the  eemplete  nn-
derstandhig  of  the  loetrieal  lyitenu  of  the  Oreeki
and  Rranani,  the  explanation  of  wbich  ii  the  object
of  Ihii  article.

I,  Ot^  of  Meaturtl.

1.  O/Zn^.— The  fint  >tep  !n  the  eonitiuelion
ofametrical  >y*tem  i(  obrionilythat  of  fixing  upon
the  nnit  of  length  ;  and  nature  itaelf  ivggota  the
choice,  for  thii  purpose,  of  ttime  familiar  object,  of
nearly  uniform  length,  and  which  ii  conitanlly  at
handtoberefivred  to.  TheHconditionaarefiilfilled
by  TarioQ*  part*  of  tbe  htmian  body  ;  titna  which
accordingly  we  find  that  not  only  th*  unit  of
lengd,  but  all  tbe  nieaturei  of  length,  except
iV„^  TiVii-k  .-.  i™  — 11  —  1^,  j,^  ta\K


id  liy  port*  of  the  body,  are  denyed  in  evety
metrical  lyitem,  except  the  laleet  farmed  of  al^
the  modem  French  ijiiem,  which  ii  foimded  on  the
meaiurement  of  the  earth.  In  inpport  of  the
general  atatement  now  made  we  have,  be*idet  the
ntecedeni  aigumcnt  fi^im  tbe  nature  of  the  cai^
be  tea^ony  of  all  writen,  the  namci  of  the
leaiurei,  and  the  general  agreement  of  their
mgth*  with  the  port*  af  the  body  wlio*e  namca
la;  bear.  (Horn.  IL  tL  819,  it.  678,  Od.  li
10  i  Vilm».  iii.  I,  §  2—9,  with  Schneider'a
Notoi ;  Hero,  Oaom.  in  AnaL  Oraec  Parii,  1688,
.  pp.  308—315,  388  ;  Ding.  La&t  ii.  SI  j
Ukett,  Geog.  d.  CMeiA.  ■.  fli'm.  toI.  i.  pt.  2,
p.  5i.)  The  chief  of  tuch  meaanrei,  with  their
Oroek  and  Roman  name*,  are  the  following ;  the
breadth  of  Kfiitger  {Sofm/Aar,  digitut)  or  Ikua^
(poUet):  tbe  breadth  oftheiowf,  or^n  (tb-
Ajuot^,  palmai) ;  the  ^m,  that  ia.  On  diRance
'  1  the  tip  of  the  thumb  U  the  tip  of  the  little
er,  when  >preed  out  a*  wide  a*  poMible
,  leani)*;  the  length  of  tiitjbot  (iroBi,  po)  ;
the  cBiLe,  at  di*tance  tium  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of
the  middle  finger  {iflx",  cubHui)  ;  a  ilep  (flw^
gradni)  J  a  donble  ilep,  or  poos  (,paitin)  i  and  the
diitance  from  eitiemity  to  extremity  of  the  out-
ilrptched  arm*  {ipyuiS).  With  reference  to  the
loit  two  meaiurea,  it  will  bo  obaerred  that  the
Etoman*  derived  them  from  the  leg*,  the  Greek*
from  the  arm*,  the  paaai  being  one  foot  aht«a<
than  the  if-fwi  of  the  other,  and  the  Ibnner  (6  feet)
belonging  to  the  decimal  lyatem,  the  latter(6feet)
to  the  duodecimal.  The  higher  meaiurea  t^
length  will  be  referred  to  preecntly,  Comp.  Pol-
'ni,  ii.  157,  1G8  ;  who  alao  mention*  some  leat
mportant  meaanrei ;  namely,  the  toXM^  at  Swc-
uXoi^Xfl  or  Sfipw,  which  wai  the  aame  a*  the
roAofrni  ;  the  ipBaSSptr,  or  the  length  of  the
*  Thii  meaiure  wo*  not  in  the  Roman  ajatem.
When  the;  wiihed  to  exprea*  tbe  Greek  apan,
the  piapa  word  wii  dodtrmt,  that  i«,  three  qoal-
ten  (of  the  foot).


7S3  HENSUIU.

whole  band  from  tbc  wt'iK  la  the  tip*  of  the  iin-
wa  ;  the  Xix<ii  or  dtitancE  (ntm  the  lip  of  Ihc
tfiucub  to  the  lip  of  the  rarefingrr  (Xixaris)  when
extended,  the  trtaer  rpan  ;  the  "rirjvpi  and  iru7/i4
wen  inadi£c)i^oui  of  the  r^xur,  tlie  XIJ71W  being
the  diatuioe  from  the  elboir  to  the  fingen  tn^
iotf,  that  ii,  to  tlie  knuckle  joints,  (he  tltym^  from
the  fingen  vUta  Aut,  that  ia,  to  the  joint*  at  their
hue.  Other  wiilen  mention  the  icrMvAsi,  laaeUt,
■*  equal  to  <m  ^ixTu\v\.

In  practical  iik,  inch  ■  ijilam  a*  thii  \%  taSi-
eient  fiir  man;  ordinary  pDiposea,  and  everj  one  ii
fiuniliar  with  eiunplea  of  the  ma  of  mch  mea-
auna  in  their  plain  phjiiral  aenie.  Bat,  to  make
kiyatem  definite,  two  Ihingi  arereqnirtd  ;  namely,
to  fix  npoa  a  preciae  invariable  alandaid  for  die
unit,  or  principal  meoaorc  in  the  ayfttem,  for  which
the  foot  waa  naturally  cboten ;  and,  aciondly,  to
detertnine  the  preciio  relatioo*  whicb  the  leveral
meaaure*  bear  to  the  rout  and  to  one  another.  The
fanner  of  theao  pointi  we  raaerve  for  the  preaent,
merely  obierring  that  the  foot  in  each  lyatem  wa*
not  Denryi"' from  oura  ;  the  latter  waa  actampliahcd
aecording  to  the  following  afateni,  which  will  be
found  to  eipreia,  not  only  the  relatioai  actually
adopted  by  tbe  Greeiia  and  Roman*,  but  aUo  very
nearly  thoae  which  really  exiat  between  the  porta
in  a  well-made  man,  eapecially  according  to  the
ataodard  of  the  Koman  foot  It  ia  worth  while
■lao  to  obterte  the  general  aeovdance,  which  re-
fulta  from  this  method  of  inTenttoD,  between  the
metrical  aystema  of  all


their  modea  of  connec^g  J
common  to  the  ti


yiterns  are  idenUeal  ii


■n  exhibited  lepanitely.

1.  In  the  Ore

ss  ■.

m^e .

apahn.
a  span.

4pahns .

afbot.

liapans  .

afooL

Sspana .

aeubiL

U  feet .

a  cubit.

SllMt .

a  step.

4  cubits .
6  feet .

1 ;

se".«=:

2.  In  the  Ttonui  system

iX

. milk

: :  :£r

Ii6-t

. . acabiL

Sifeet

. . astep.

5leet

"

. . apace.

It  will  be  obterred  that  in  this  acconnt  of  the
Greek  and  Roman  syatcma  nothing  haa  been  aaid
of  the  oA.  It  waa  not  a  meaaure  derired  from
the  human  body,  but  a  aubdiviaion  which  the
Bomana  made  of  their  foot,  as  they  were  aceua-
lomed  to  subdiride  any  tmit  wbatsoeier,  according
to  the  analog  of  (he  uncial  diviiion  of  the  As.
A  more  coinpleM  view  of  the  Orcek  and  Roman
measures  of  length,  with  their  values,  reduced  to
our  ayatem,  will  be  found  in  the  Tables  Bj^ended
to  thu  work.

2.  /tfmnwj  Afsomntf.  —  For  the  higher  mea-
sures of  length,  although  the  continuity  of  de
system  was  preserred  by  making  them  exact  Diul-


*  This  word  is  used  w  beinR  about  the  doJ
the  measorc,  for  want  of  ui  English  woid  U
press  its  aWHuy;


JIENSURA.
tiples  of  a  foot,  yet  it  is  abiious  that
nience  would  demand  higher  denomiuatioi
of  which  would  be  rr^aided  as  a  nei
Nay,  Iheia  higha  meunres  ma;  be  i
with  reepeet  to  their  origin,  a*  in  lome  sci
dependent  of  thoae  smaller  mea&ms,  with  whick
they  were  afterwards  made  to  agree.  For,  joal  aa
we  hare  seen  that  the  smaller  meaaorea  of  leiwth
are  taken  from  catnral  objecta,  so  we  shall  &id
that,  at  an  ear^y  period,  the  larger  mcasurea  wen
not  derived  artificially  &om  (he  smaller,  but  vera
taken  from  dialaneea  which  occnr  in  nature  and  in
ordinary  liiev  Thus,  Homer  expresK*  diitaocea
by  the  east  of  a  itone  (IL  iL  12  ;  and  so  evcD  in
hUer  times,  Thnc  t.  65,  Polyb.  t.  6).  of  a  quoit
(IL  ixiiL  431),  and  of  a  near  {}L  x:  3£7,  it.  358,
viiiL  529),  and  by  the  atiilmore  indefinite  deaerip-
tion,  "as  fiu  as  a  man  ia  hesrd  clearly  when  he
about*  "  {Oi.  VL  294,  t.  400,  ^  aiit.),  and  again
by  a  standard  derived  from  agrieulEure,  which  it  is
important  to  notice  in  compansim  with  the  Roimui
scfiif  (//.  X.  3£2  ( see  below.)  Of  still  longer  distancca
time  waa  made  the  measure ;  the  journey  of  a  day,
or  of  a  day  and  night,  on  foot,  vrith  a  horse,  or  with
a  ship  \  a  system  loo  frequently  employed  DOW,  ai
well  as  in  ancient  times,  le  need  theeiiatioa  of  ex-
aniplea  for  its  illnatration.  (Comp.  Ukert,  G«og.
d.  Grieck.  u.  Aon.  vol  L  pt.  2,  pp.  £4,  Si.)  Tha
lyatem  of  meaaurement  by  Adiont  or  pntU  ahonld
ptobablT  be  referred  to  this  head,  as  it  ia  moat
likely  that  such  distance*  would  be  fixed  according
to  the  strengib  of  man  or  bone  before  the  tnnble
wB*  taken  actually  to  measure  them  out.  ArMthet
pkn  was  that  which  Herodotus  several  time*  adopts
and  which  i*  alee  fsmiliar  to  ail  agea,  the  deaerip-
tioa  of  one  diitance  by  comparing  it  with  another,
which  was  well  known.  It  i*  true  that  in  many
ease*  this  method  ia  etidently  only  general  and  in-
definite, aa  when  Herodotus  dcseribei  the  loiglli
of  the  Nile  aa  equal  to  thai  of  the  Dwrabe,  bnt
there  an  other  caaea  in  which  the  method  wa*
definite ;  and  especially  one  ease,  in  which  it
actually  farmed  the  taundation  of  the  cumnon  sys-
tem of  itinerary  measure*  among  the  Oreeka.  We
refer,  of  ceune,  to  (As  Itngtk  of  Us  (Mgrnvic  fiat-
rtu»4oins,  or  Stadium,  after  which  aU  the  other
Oredc  stadia  were  racaanred  out,  and  which  (hua
formed  a  UDJiersall]'  fimuliai  standard  of  referenc*
for  itinerary  meaanrement*.  Whether  the  Olympic
stadium  wis  originally  neasured  out  precisely  equal
to  600  feet,  or  whelhcr,  having  been  accidentally
(or  at  least  looaely)  asaumed,  it  iraa  found  to  be  aa
neariy  equal  to  600  feet,  that  the  ineaaoro  detiied
from  it  was  taken  at  mdSg  600  feet,  it  i*  now  iin~
possible  to  determine.  We  think  the  latter  mavt
prabable ;  but,  whichever  may  be  the  truth,  th«
point  now  insiited  upon  ia  not  afieetcd,  namely,
that  whan  an  early  Greek  writer  expressed  a  die-
tance  in  aladia,  he  did  not  mean  to  Soneat  to  his
readers  the  idea  of  so  many  time*  600fcet,bnt  of
so  many  times  the  length  of  tha  actual  objective
Olympic  stadium,  with  which  they  wenall  buniliar.
The  corTcaponding  feature  in  the  Boman  ayaterri
fumisheian  intereiting  illustrationof  thediffcrencea
of  DitiDnal  character.  The  military  notioaa,  which
lie  at  (he  basis  of  >o  many  of  their  in*liwtians,  am
at  once  recognised  in  their  milt,  the  liaaami  poem
of  a  fool-march.

3.  Land  Mmara.  —  Another  diatinet  senrca
of  ^e  greater  measuiea  of  length  is  to  be  found
in  the  saceHi^  whidi  aiitci  at  an  sariy  fviod  ia


MBNSURA.'

eroT  dvilueil cammiinitj Ibr  dfttinnuung the
tMondarin  of  land. HerDdotiu (iL 109) m«i-


Kgjyt

tiaditioo  u  no*  n&md  to  mcretf  M  an  illaitra-
tim,  not  u  cipmaing  an  hiftorical  &et  Ai  hi
the  otber  catct,  the  origin  of  the  «j>tem  tin  £u
htdc  bejond  the  nach  of  hUtoc;  ;  ud  tH  that  ran
be  dcoe  ij  to  tzBce,  with  Bnifl  pmbabLli^,  ia  lae^
cfMJTe  nq*,  u  indicBtud  bj  the  nature  of  the
CUB,  hj  the  ninia  of  the  mmaiin*,  and  bf  the

ittooiij  diitaucea,  the  original  unit  of  the  tyttem
na  pmbobl;  not  a  ipeeific  niunbei  of  feet,  but
•mne  oatoial  quantity,  which  wu  oftenraidi  bnnght
into  accordance  with  the  itandard  of  the  DnalLer
nKanma. AJao  it  ii  to  be  obiened,  that  theie

of  lurface,  nlthoDgh  in  practice  the^  were  often
need  merdy  u  meamna  of  length.  The  preciie
bet  •Demi  to  be  that  the  fint  naltuvl  meaaun  of
the  KKt  wai  one  of  a  orautderabte  length  and  a  TCij
moderate  breadth  ;  that  thsi,  thia  meonire  came
to  be  nacd  ft  ■  mounre  of  length  ilone  j  and  then,
hr  the  maunre  of  anr&ce  crainected  with  it,  they
did  pot  nrert  to  the  originBl  narrow  itiip,  bat  took
the  iqiuTe  of  iti  length.  Thii  Memi  to  follow
rnm  wbu  the  ancient  writen  tell  tu  of  the  ochu,
which  wu  the  bsH  of  the  Roman  rrttem  of  land
meanim,  and  which  ia  thna  defined  by  Pliny:
Aftut  tnatoftir  in  fHO  iartt  agenatitr  cum  onitro
no  impelu  JaM  {H.  N.  xriii.  3)  ;  by  which  he
■eenii  to  nuan  the  dinance  which  b  yoke  of  oien
coold  draw  a  ploogli  at  one  eSiin,  that  ii,  a  a'ajr^a
ftmm :  thia,  he  addi,  ia  130  feet  in  length.  So
■iM  Homer  (A  z.  3S1,  ttS)  deacrihe*  a  diitance
u  being  **  aa  &r  aa  arc  the  mrrowi  of  mule*."  We
haTs,  aa  analwooa  neeinm,  the  nmu,  or  length
vf  a  farrow  before  the  plongh  wu  tamed,  by  which,
Varro  teili  ni  (A  A.  i.  1 0),  they  ineaiuted  in  Cam-
pania, the^^^m  (yoke  of  oien)  by  which,  he  nya,
ihej  meanind  in  fiirthrr  Spaun,  and  the  Orcek
IfMtfH,  B  ftrrotc  :  though  the  .^i;iini  vai  perhwa
nerer  any  thing  elie  bnt  a  meaiure  of  lorBce,  fot
il  ia  defined  aa  the  quantity  of  land  which  a  yoke
of  OTen  conld  plough  ia  a  day. Even  with  teapect


liticlf,  a


QuhtBI


mated  by  the  oie  of  the  word  in  Roman  law  for
the  right  of  diiiing  cattle  throogh  a  field  (Cic  p.
<1ii  ■  !■  36),  and  b^  for  the  path  referred  between
tidda  fw  the  jamage  of  cattle  (JUg-)  juaC  u  ve
alao  nae  the  word  iJnnH.  Poeaibly,  in  the  acha,  aa
determined  in  length  at  120  feet,  and  in  width  at
4,  we  may  have  both  aenaea  of  the  word  combined.
lie  length  of  thia  actat,  (quared,  sBTe  the  ocdit
fufroteiof  U,40*)  »van  feet,  which,  with  ita
doable,  the  jmgmm  of  3S,800  iquaie  feet,  (ormed
the  baie  of  the  Roman  ayitem  of  land  mcaaDrea.
T-mojugera,  which,  according  to  Varm  {L  c),  formed
(riginalty  the  birth-iight  of  mtTj  Roman  eitiien,
were  thoice  called  jlerajiim  ,-  100  ItertHa  made  a
tmluTia  tit  £,760,000  aqnare  feet,  or  the  aqnare  of
2400  [  4  eodnnof,  arraiiged  aa  a  aqnare,  made  a
•oAa).  In  thia  ayitem,  the  amaneal  anhdiTiiion,
■id  that  which  eonitected  the  lyatem  with  the
foot,  waa  theareaoflO0iqnan(eet,O(  theaquare
oftoi  feet,  which  «H  the  length  of  the  pole  [Dl-

.;  PiRTiu]  naedinmeaaarisgland. To

m,  which  gndnalW  (

it  of  Iha  mton,  Ike


mensoba:  m

applied,  the  xpiate  of  the  dteempeda  (or  100
■qnore  feet)  being  ita  tcmpidtm  or  2SBth  pert.
Alao  36  ten^mla  made  one  dima,  and  4  climala
one  adui  juadratrnt.  In  the  locgilndina]  nctiM  of
120  feet,  the  oUong  aitiu  of  120  M  4  (or  480),
■quan  fee^  and  the  utfw  gmadratut,  with  it!
donble  the  jwgenan,  we  olio  lee  the  connection  of
the  dnodecunal  iyitem  with  the  decimal.

In  the  corresponding  part  of  the  Oie^  iratem,  .
the  r\Upar  anaweri  to  the  ocftw,  hnt  with  juit
the  difference  between  the  dedmal  and  dnodecd-
mal  lyalem).  Aa  a  mcsaure  of  logth,  it  ia  100
feet(10xlOinneadof  12x10)  ;  and  u  a  mea-
aore  cf  nir£u»,  it  ia  the  equnre  of  100,  or  10,000
aqnare  feet  The  Spoupa  wu  the  quarter  of  it,
that  ia,  2jOO  aquare  feet,  or  the  aqnare  of  SO
(eeL  A  meaanring  rod  (^  10  feet,  naXapat,  ap-
peal* alio  in  the,  Orcdt  ayitem,  and  of  thia  Iha
T^iiSfor  vaa  the  aquare.  Alio,  6  xatji/uil  or  10
ipymai  or  40  rtix'i'  made  one  Sfiiia  or  daiM,
Thii  ayitem  wu  connected  with  the  itznenuy
meanrea  by  reckoning  6  pUira  or  100  ifyviai
to  the  ttadiim. (Herod,  ii.  US.) Fa  a  com-

Elcte  TJew  of  the  Oreek  and  Roman  meainm  of
^ngth  and  nii&ce,  aee  the  Table*  ;  and,  reipect-
ing  the  Roman  land  meaanrea,  compare  AcTfs,

AOKtHINSOUa, DKCaHFIDl, '


Mtatant  of  C(^Kitiiy.  —  'rhe  n


\°L


thoae  already  noticed ;  that  ia,  thej
were  not  deriTed  by  a  definite  ptocea  of  csleo-
Intion  from  the  meaaura  of  length,  but  were  ori-
ginally nothing  more  than  the  nanea  of  diferent
liied  TCMela  of  no  Tery  definite  capacity,  which,
when  the  metrical  ayitem  came  to  be  definilirely
conatituted,  were  brought  into  harmony,  on  the
one  hand  with  the  meaanrea  of  length,  on  the
other  with  thcie  of  weight.

The  igneitiDo  itill  rcmaina,  which  of  the  three
kinda  of  meamrea  waa  the  one  lint  cODBtrueted,
and  the  one  from  which  the  othera  were  denied.
II.  Wiem*  mn  lie  GrtA  md  Samai  Mtamm


In  all  that  n


nor  implied  that  thoH  meamrei,  «  definitely  fittd
by  He  preeiti  detensinaUm  of  tieir  unit,  were  nb-
lained  in  the  numner  and  order  that  haa  been  de-
■cribed.  All  that  haa  been  nid  may  be  true,  aa
we  believe  il  it,  and  yet  the  queation.  What  ipot
Aefoot,  tad  WHiNCE  vtat  it  derived^  atill  remaina
urnniwered. To  thii  qnestion  we  now  proceed.

Oar  limiti  quite  forbid  the  hU  diicnnian  of  the
Torioui  opiniona  which  have  been  pat  forward  on
thia  aabject,  or  even  the  elaborate  development
of  that  view  which  we  belieie  to  be  the  correct
one  1  and  which  ta,  in  the  nuun,  that  which  haa
been  put  Ibrward  by  BBckh  in  hia  very  carefiil
and  leaned  work  oitilled,  Metniogiede  ETatn-n-
ck<aigm  tiier  OeaiMe,  Mlinifiuie  nf  Jtfofia  da
AOertknu  Mttmn^baaMmniai^  Berlin,  1B36,
Svo.,  and  to  the  principal  pointa  in  which  Hr.
Grote  Biaenta,  in  his  review  of  BOckb'a  work  in
the  diuneol  JVtiMnt  for  1S44,  Tol.i.  p.  1.  The
two  chief  qneitiona  involved  in  the  diacuation  aia
Uieae:  —  1.  Whence  were  the  Greek  and  Roman
metrical  iratema  derived  F 2.  In  each  of  thoaa


761


HBNSURA.


■jitcDu,  which  of  the  three  Itindi  of  ncMme
(Lumed  tbe  fbimdBtion,  from  irhich  the  other  tm
were  deduced,  length,  aipKJty,  or  weight  ?

On  the  fine  of  Iheae  qneitiom  our  ipue  tlh-n
oa  b>  do  little  mare  thu  refer  the  reader  to  Dodth*!
elaboiBts  eipgeition  of  the  opinion,  in  n^iich  few
competent  readefs  of  hi»  woA  will  fiul  to  coin-
cide, that  lii  biuii  of  lit  Gmk  and  Bonuim  vu-
triotd  tsstms  wot  Uuit  vAieh  kad  pntaiied  Jron
very  Hoig  lima  among  Uc  Chiddatata  at  Daighm,
from  which  or  trom  tama  conunon  otiginal  tlie
EgTpIiaof  deriTed  their  inetiicsl  i}item ;  and
vhich  wu  allied  h;  the  commerce  of  the  Phoe-
njciani  into  Onece,  whence  it  paued  oTer  into
Italy.  Od  the  lecond  qoettion,  hij  teeaicliei,  u
well  B»  the  aigumsnti  of  other  wiiten,  nuj  nftlj
be  Mid  (a  hiTS  ettabliibed  the  ponliott  that
aaigliU  tcurs  dtlerauaid  bffbrt  inaaiargt,  oad  tkU
sfflofirref  wen  derived  fion  vn^AC^

It  wilt  be  coiKeaient  hen  to  giro  BBckli^  own
compendiom  of  the  main  remltt  which  he  onder-
takee  to  eatabliih,  with  Mr.  Grole'i  Btatemenl  of
the  point!  in  wliich  he  differi  froia  Bilckh.  We
adapt  Mr.  Oiote'e  tiaiulittion  of  the  punge,  only
(ubttJtuliDg.i4;nietoa  fat  Aegaaiaii.  "If  "(BUckli
■■f ■,  iiL  4.  p.2S)''weregiud  Ihiirelationof  the
weights  and  meaauna*,  baaed  npoa  a  giien  weight
of  water,  which  ii  the  kejr-ttone  of  the  Romao
■jnem  —  and  if  we  cany  tlie  application  of  thia
water-weight  backwatdi  to  the  chief  meaaom  of
the  aodent  world  —  we  ihalt  find  a  coimection
really  and  truly  organic  between  the  lyitani  of
the  different  people  of  antiqaity,  and  we  ihall
airive  at  laat  at  the  fimdamenia]  nnity  (unit)  of
weight  and  meaiure  in  the  Babylooian  lygtem  ;
■0  that  thii  mppoailian  i*  found  to  be  venfied  in
all  ill  cODeeqnencei  and  detaiU.  To  gire  •ome
preliminorj  intimation  of  thii  —  I  ihall  (how  that
the  Grecian  (or,  mora  accurately,  the  Aegioetan)
and  the  Roman  pound  are  in  the  ratio  of  10  ;  9  ;
the  Acginelan  poood  ii  half  the  Aeginetao  ntina  ;
but  the  cuhicil  meaiurca  itood  nonnal]}'  in  the
ratio  of  the  weighta ;  and  therefore  the  Oreciiin
cable  foot  WM  to  the  Roman  u  10  ;  9,  and,  aa  the
Boman  cubic  Gut  weight  80  ponndi  of  rain-water,
■o  alas  the  Onciaa  cubic  foot  weighs  80  Orecian
or  Aeginetan  peondi,  equal  to  40  Aeginelan  minae.
The  unity  (unit)  of  weight  (in  Oreece)  howexet
ia,  not  40  minac^  but  60  minae,  or  t,  talent  In
the  original  mititationi  of  the  people  of  antiquity
BTerything  haa  ili  reann,  and  we  find  ecarcely
anything  purely  arhitmy :  nerertheleai,  thii  unin
(unit)  of  weight,  the  talent,  doea  not  coincide  with
the  unity  of  meaiure — neither  with  the  cubic  foot,
DOT  with  any  other  ipecific  cubical  denoounation.
But  the  coincidence  lereali  itielf  at  cnee,  ai  aooa
M  we  diicoTer  that  the  Babylonian  cubic  foot,
atiuiding  aa  it  doea  in  the  ratio  of  3  :  2  to  the
Orecian  +  cubic  foot,  weighs  60  Amne'
■  "  bjloni


MENSURA.
and  imtiMilf  tiadlar  in  Aua,  in  Egy;^  and  tn
Onece.  But  lie  Iva  nat,\  think,  made  out  tin
like  with  i«gard  to  the  Orecian  meuam,  eilb^
of  length  or  oipacity,  and  Ui  prcof  of  tie  ratio
0/  t  :2  ittartu  tit  Ba^lomaa  and  tit  Ortxia*
fiet  aiU  UJbK^  aUcptiier  d^tetht.  Nor  haa  be
produced  adequate  evidence  to  dancoatnla,  oither
the  ratio  of  10  :  9  between  the  Ortdan  ar  A^~
netan  pound  and  the  Roman  poond,  or  that  of  1 :  3
between  the  Aeginetan  ponnd  and  the  Aegmttan
mina  ;  tit  ratio  hetaea  tit  Grtdan  cmiie  fiat  aiti
tie  Somoa  cvbie  font,  too,  ai  alao  tint  hfteen  Am
Gredan  calm  foot  and  aaj'  gim  Ortdaa  f^jlUt
ti,  aa  be  {Hupoeei  it,  mmfiiuMtUe.  In  iiact,  tho*
ii  no  aucb  toiug  (pcoperiy  apeaking),  aa  an  Aegi-
netan pound  weight:  nor  it  tiers  toB/fiMdaormal
rtlaHan  betiue*  GntiainBeigU  and  Otweimmn'
(WW,  tilier  ofltngtiorii^eafaei^,  though  Am  it
afitad  nonaal  ntoun  MuM  Ba&gAwiaa  wtigU
lad  BaifiiiiaaM  nuonfrM,  aa  alio  ittaacm  Bomam
loei^  amd  Samau  meatartt.^  (lbid,pp.*,&:  ««
have  intndnead  the  iMli<s  to  call  the  nadec'a  at-
tention to  the  chief  pmatt  in  which  hicOrala
agree*  with,  and  diffen  from,  H.  Btickh).

Theae  eitntcta  bniih  a  pret^  good  idea  of  tk*
preaant  podUon  <d  ancient  metrical  ideiics.  It  ia
unpoatiUe  hen  to  diaenaa  the  pnnta  at  MiM  be-
tween theae  two  gnat  idwian  ;  btit  we  nniat  le-
mnrk  that,  if  Backh  baa  BGOietiiiHi  failed  to  obMn*
hii  own  diatinction  between  t*acl  and  ajyiiaiiaiMta
ratioi  (lee  OrDte,p.2),and  if  he  haa  erred  tfarougb
attempting  to  eRabliih  tome  latica  which  an  either
fanciful  or  mere  reaulti  of  an  orei-itnined  caltnla-
tion,  or  which  are  too  atnnge  to  be  Inie,  —  Ut.
□rote  baa  alao  preaaed  the  odier  aide  of  the  aigs-
menl  in  a  manner  which,  if  aoond,  would  ^ereat
the  eatabUthment  of  any  exact  ratio  between  anj
two  lyitema,  and,  in  atating  that  tiere  it  m^eit
namal  rtlalicm  ttlaiBi  Oreciaii  w*^  oai  Oncna
mcsMnu^he  haa  put  fimard  a  pnpoaitiani  —'---*
he  doei  not  mfflcumtlj  tualain  by  pnmC  w
Tery  impmbabl*  in  itaeU^  and  which  i*  Wd


>n  talent)


Babjl
of  rain-water." (Gate.  Mm.  toL  L  p.  4.)

Upon  thii  Mr.  Orota  rcznaiki :  "  M.  Bdckh  here
promwa  man  than  hii  volume  will  be  found  to
realtte. He  doet,  indeed,  latifflutDr^  aiow  that


tit


'  Namely,  that  between  the  Roman  pound  and
tha  Roman  onipWii  oi  ouadranlaL
t  ^y  aciiiiouamiipnntiMi.aiolelwuCInMB.


aiatfot  with  the  acknowledged  deiintion  <d  tin
Greek  wughta  from  the  Babylonian ;  liar  Itli  mf

unlikely  that  the  Qieeki  ihinJd  hare  taken  Itmr
iwi^iUi  and  not  tieir  taeonra  bom  the  Babylo-
niaai,  eapocially  when  it  ia  lemembcted  that  tha
Roman  ayitem,  which  wai  probably  derived  frtaa
the  Greek,  agreed  with  the  Babylonian  UA  aa
ueir^  aid  mnmrei,  and  not  only  lo,  but  alao
bore,  in  iti  meaium  of  capacity,  a  definite  rativ
to  the  Greek  ;  and,  moteorer,  then  ag^ieara  to  ba
the  aame  inconaiitency  in  the  attempt  to  diaconneet
the  Onek  and  Rotnin  weigbli,  while  admittiay
the  derlration  of  both  from  tlM  Babylonian.  Ba
thii  u  it  may,  we  bais  no  hesitation  in  affiming
that  the  iteearchea  of  BOckh  ere  aa  impoftant,  that
they  muit  be  regarded  aa  the  itarting^poiot  of  bQ
futun  inieatigatiimi  into  the  mbject  The  fact
alao  daaenea  notico,  that  aeTenl  of  Bddib'B  c«fk-
cluaiona,  which  Mr.  Giote  questiooa  u  enet  and
deaigned  ratioe,  un  adaiitted  by  htm  to  be  Tely
near  the  tnth  ;  and  they  may  thenfbn,  at  aU
erenta,  be  useful  to  ua  for  the  porpoae  of  ntiirting
the  memory.  The  rcat  of  thia  part  of  the  aabjeati
ao  &r  at  least  ai  oui  ipace  permiti  na  to  notice  it,
will  bo  found  under  PoNDani.

The  question  still  remains,  iat  to  diHrmiai  Aa
(/reek  tutd  Raman  wai— iii  in  termicf  our  own,
which  can  be  done,  without  reference  to  the  doub4-
fill  pMnli  iniolTed  in  the  f^tgoii^  dwciMtioB.


IIL

I.  MBMnnq^&i^  — Bdbnwecuistto
Id  Gz  lh«4}r»k  and  Roman  foal,  we  mmt  em
the  qnntioii,  whether  the  fbimer  people  (fci  „,
OK  preteodi  it  of  the  Jattei)  had  dtlTetent  rtandoidt
of  length. We  think  that  Ukert  luu  wliifectorilj
■hown  tiai  Ika,  kad  Kl  dt/finiiit  ttondarxU,  but

-L ^^j  OlmiB!  ttadiam  and  At  fiat  cor-

- f.  (Ukert,  f/aiwdii^rldfl-Onaabai
" "  " 7«  jn  badmmai^  towf
',  181S,  Btd.;  Gtog.d.
UT-O.  a.  Romer,  toL  L  pL  2,  pp.  6S,  Ac.) It  i»
imly  powible  hen  to  gi*e  a  brief  itatement  of  the


trial SlaiaaL,  Wehnu,  181


It  hat  been  nppaeed  bj  tome  anthon  that  there
wen  other  Madia  in  nae  in  Oieece  beaides  the
01fn|u&  The  moat  iDdent  writen  nerer  either
mj  at  hint  at  inch  a  Ihinr :  bnt  when  we  onnpare
the  ^ttaacM  between  pWn,  aa  alaled  by  dem
in  (tedia,  with  the  real  diitucea,  thef  are  foUQd
•Imoat  inTariablj  too  great  if  eatimated  bj  the
OlympiG  atadinm,  nerer  toe  tumiL  Hence  the
aaelniioD  haa  been  diawn,  that  Uie  Oreeka  Died
for  idneraiT  meaanietnenta  a  Made  much  nnoiler
than  the  Olympic  Major  Rerneil,  whe  aiial;Ks
aerent  ef  iheie  ilatementa,  giTu  £05^  lent  Cor  the
nine  of  the  ilinsary  Made.  {Oeiyraplig  if  Hen-
AHUM,  aee.  2.)  It  it,  howeier,  acanely  credible
that  theae  autbon,  lonie  of  whom  eipreaily  inform
oa  that  the  itade  cHiIained  600  feet,  ahoold  reckon
dialaaeec  by  anolhei  itade,  without  giTing  any  in-
tJoauiai  of  the  fact ;  ea^eialljr  aa  they  nmially
warn  their  leadoa  when  Ihej  iprak  of  mstiirei
^fifcting  from  the  common  Mandaid.  (Hetod.il  8,
J7,  89,  9S;  P!Jii./r.A^.  Ti.96.  ».30.)  The  rea]
eauaa  of  the  eiceai  in  the  itineiaiy  diatancei  of
the  Oreeka  ia  ei^dained  by  Ukert  in  a  way  which
■aema  dedaire  of  the  queMion.  The  moat  ancient
mode  of  reckoning  diatancea  aMong  the  Greeka,  aa
amoigmoat  other  natiimi,  waa  by  the  number  of
daja  [Hjoiped  to  petfonn  the  journey.  When  the
atadinm  waa  bconght  mto  uae,  the  diatancea  weie
at]]]  computed  by  daye' joumeya,  bnt  tnuirferTed
into  atadiB  by  reckoning  a  certain  number  of  Madia
to  a  dayH  joomey.  (Herod,  ir,  85,  86.)  It  ii
cTidsit  that  neariy  all  the  diMaocea  ginn  by  the
■adart  Oreak  writera  were  eompaled,  nol  nuantrttf .
The  DDccrtaintiea  attendiis  thi*  mode  of  compo>
tatiun  oia  obriou,  and  it  u  eqnally  ohvioEi  that,
aa  a  gsnal  rale,  the  reinlta  would  be  abore  the
tenth.  At  aea  the  calcnlation  waa  made  according
to  the  nnmber  of  atadia  which  could  he  lailed  orer
IB  a  i^r  by  a  good  ihip,  in  good  order,  and  with  a
fait  wind.  Any  fiulure  in  the«  ccoditioni  (and
■ome  inch  thsn  mnR  alwaji  hare  been)  would
incnaie  the  nnmber  of  di^'  nil,  and  thcfefbra  ^e
oUcalated  diatauee  whai  radnced  to  itadja.  8i-
mihriy  by  land  a  day^  journey  waa  reckoned
eqnal  to  the  nnmber  of  atadia  which  a  good  tra-
-nllB'  (ir^  ■flavor)  could  perform  in  a  day,  which
bw  Dbriana  Tcaicna wonld  generally  eiowd  the


t^  miBibar  of  Madia  in  a  day*!  journey. Hen>-
dotaa  (IT.  8S)  gi*ea  700  atadia  for  the  voyage  of


•nciMy'500  wem  pcribrmad. (Marin,  Tyr.  op.


MENSURA.  rsS

Ptnlem.  Oaeg.  i.  U.)  AUowance  mnM  alao  be
made  for  the  windingi  of  the  eoaat,  the  difEcnl-
tiei  of  the  navigBlion,  the  cutrenti  of  the  xa,
the  varying  ikill  of  the  acamoi,  and  other  circnin-

A  day^  jonmey  by  land  wai  reckoned  at  300
or  180  Madia  (Hemd.  ir.  101  f  Panaan.  i.  SS ;
Ftol.  i.  9),  or  lor  en  anny  150  atadia.  (Herod,  v.
£3,  £4.)  And  here  also  delayi  would  often  occur.
The  ancionU  thenuelTea  differ  widely  in  their  ac-
connta  of  diitancea,  not  only  aa  compared  with  the
true  diatancei,  but  with  one  another,  a  &ct  which
the  theory  of  a  le^Htate  itinerary  Made  cannot  ac-
count for,  bnt  which  ii  a  natiual  remit  of  their
mode  of  reckoning,  a>  explained  abore.

The  following  teatlmonio  are  advanced  in  inp-
port  of  the  view  of  different  Madia.  Onioriniu,
who  lived  in  the  time  of  Alexander  Seremi,  after
apeakiug  of  the  aatroncanical  meamrementg  of
Erataathmea  and  Pythagoraa,  nyi  that  by  the
itadhun  uaed  in  them  we  muM  undetMond  "  the
atadinm  which  ii  called  Italic,  of  G3£  feet,  fbr
there  are  othen  beaidei  this,  of  diERsrent  lengthi,
aa  the  Olympic,  which  conilMa  of  600  (ect,  and
the  Pythian,  of  lOOO."  (Oe  Die  Nati^  c.  13.)
Thii  paaiBge  ii  eridently  a  complication  of  hlnu-
dert.  The  **  Italic  Madium,"  unknown  eliewhere,
it  manifeatly  the  lame  aa  the  Olympic,  but  reckoned
in  Roman  feet,  of  which  it  contained  626.  The
"  Olympic  of  600  feet "  i>  the  lame  in  Orcek  feet.
The  Tnlne  given  for  the  Pythian  atadinm  ii  dearly
wrong,  for  the  Olympic  race.conne  wai  the  longeat
in  Oreece  (at  appean  from  the  pasa^e  af  Oeltiua
quoted  below),  and  beaidci  Cennrinui  obvionily
confound!  the  eitieme  length  of  At  mce-eonrgea
with  the  portion  of  them  meainred  out  for  the
race,  the  larae  name,  itadiwrn,  being  applied  to
both  ;  for  it  ■■  very  potaible  that  the  former
were  of  diffsnint  lengtha,  though  the  latter  never

Aulna  OelliuB  (L  1 )  qnotea  from  Plutarch  to  the
efiect  that  Hercnlet  meainred  out  the  Madium  at
Olympia  with  bit  own  feet,  making  it  600  feet
long ;  and  that  when  afterworda  other  Madia  wen
eatabliahed  in  Greece,  contaim'ng  the  tame  number
of  feet,  theae  were  ihortcr  than  the  Olympic  in  the
proportion  by  which  the  foot  of  Hcrculea  exceeded
that  of  other  men.  Bnt  whatever  there  i>  of  trnth
in  thia  atory  it  probably  the  obacDie  remnant  of
an  ancient  tradition  retpecting  the  eiiitence  of  a
atandard  of  length  gmter  than  the  common  one,
nt  lome  diilant  period :  a  matter  which  will  be
preaently  refund  to.

Attempti  have  been  made,  eipecially  by  Romtf
de  I'lile  and  QoiMlin,  to  prove  the  emtcnce  and
to  determine  the  lengthe  of  diffitrent  Madia  from
tlie  different  lengtha  aaaigned  by  ancient  writen  to
a  great  circle  of  the  outb.  Bat  nrely  it  it  fiu
more  jntt  and  reaaonable  to  lake  theae  different
value*  aa  a  proof  (among  variout  othen)  that  the
ancientt  did  not  know  Uie  real  length  of  a  great
circle,  than,  fint  aaauming  that  tbey  had  auch
knowledge  to  ezpl^  them  aa  refpTring  to  diffenot
itandarda.

On  the  whole,  therefore,  then  aeemi  no  rcaion
to  nippoae  that  different  Madia  eiJMed  before  the
third  century  of  the  Chrittian  aera.

From  thii  period,  however,  va  do  find  varietie*
of  the  Itade,  the  chief  of  which  are  theae  of  7  and
71  to  the  Roman  mile. (Wiuin,  it  PomL  dtb

Sc  3  t^^


Yute

Feat

103

1

IfiS

1

202

0

31S

2

2S1

0

8-IM


Sludfl  migud  to  Ariito- '


Stade  of  7i  to  tbe  Bo-l

Stads  of  7  to  tha  Bomuii

milo ■ - i

But,  although  the  lUuUum  ind  tho  foot  connected
with  it  WHO  ilngle  definite  mounrei  tlmw^hont
Oreece,  j-el  wa  find,  in  tha  Eutun  counEriei,
Babylon,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  and  in  lome  neigh-
lioumig  Omsk  itata,  feet  liniger  than  the  Olympic
(not  liorttr,  ai  Rimnell't  itinenry  itadium  would
requice),  the  origin  of  which  ii  to  be  explained  by
the  co-eiiitance,  in  the  Babylonian  lyium,  of  a
royal  or  murtd  and  a  eoMBum  foot  and  cubit,  which
wen  ao  related  to  one  another  that  lit  rafat  «W
leoi  tint  finffsr-bnuJdu  longtr  lka»  At  commim.
(IlciDd.  L  ITS  :  •«  iarther  under  Pu.)

In  proeeeding  to  delennine  tha  Qreek  and  Roman
foot,  the  moat  conTcnient  plan  it  fiixt  to  fix  the
latter,  and  then  to  derite  the  formtt  iraia  it,

I.  Tilt  Raman  fiat.  Then  an  fire  difierant
wayi  of  detennining  the  length  of  ihi
TheH  are,  1.  From  ancient  meanirc
iilence,  including  feet  lud  dawn  on  iepnlchnl
manumanU,  and  foot  rnlea  found  in  the  mini  of
varioni  citiea  of  the  Roman  empire ;  2.  From
meuoramenti  of  known  diilanm  along  roada,  botb
betveen  mile  itonei  and  between  placei ;  9.  From
meiuuramenta  of  bniliUngt  and  obeliaka  ;  4.  From
the  contenta  of


BB  of  cesaeity


MEKSflRA.

2.  The  itineraiy  meaiuremenla  are  of  two  kinda,
XDiding  aa  they  are  obtained  by  monring  tha
ittance  &om  one  place  to  another,  or  the  diatanea
Dm  one  mile-alooe  to  another  oi  a  Rranan  nad.
■oth  nelhoda  have  the  adnntage  of  tho  dimma-
on  of  Bimr  which  al  -  -  ■--  ' '  —■

mbjeet  tc  ,

and  from  the  imfnibabiUty  ctf  tl
having  been  kid  down  with  Dunale  acauacy  i  and
two  oLher  terioni  otnecUona  aj^y  to  the  fimnat
mode,  namely,  the  diScnlty  of  detenainiig  tb*
pointa  where  tha  meamrement  began  and  ended,
and  the  changea  which  may  have  taken  place  in
the  dinclion  of  the  read.  Both  methoda,  how-
aver,  have  been  tried ;  the  farmer  by  Caaiiu,  wha
mMaured  the  diatanea  Cxaa  Nimei  to  Narbcone,
and  by  RiccioU  and  Grimaldi,  who  mtaaored  that
between  Modena  and  Bologna,  and  tha  latter  by


Bologna,  ai
id  Aria.


mibeiof


face. (For  a  full  hiatorical  account  of  theaeiyatenu,
■ea  the  traatiaei  of  Wum,  Hniiey,  and  Bdckh.)

1.  It  might  afipear,  al  £rat  thoughU,  that  an.
cient  raeaaurei  in  acbial  eiiatenee  would  at  once
give  the  required  information.  But  theae  mea-
BUroB  are  found  to  diSer  among  themfelvea.  They
ace  of  two  kiuda,  foot-meaaurei  cut  upon  grave-
itooea,  and  braia  or  iron  mouurei  intended  in
all  pcobabilitj  lor  actual  uae.  From  the  nature
of  the  caaa  the  latter  would  probably  be  more
c:iact  than  tho  form^,  and  in  bet  the  meainrea  on
(he  graTe-alonea  are  mdily  cut,  and  their  anb-
diviaiDua  are  of  unequal  length,  lo  that  they  have
□a  preleniiouB  to  nmate  accuracy ;  but  on  the
□chec  hand,  il  would  be  abeurd  to  luppoaa  that
they  would  have  been  made  very  be  wrong.  We
may  Bafely  conclude  that  they  would  bare  about
aa  much  accuracy  aa  a  meainre  baatily  cot  on
itime  by  a  nuaon  Erom  the  Awt^ula  naed  by  him
in  working.  Four  luch  meaaurea  are  pnaerTed  ia
the  capitol  at  Rome. They  ue  called  tho  Slatilian,


the  different  meoinrementi  nve  diSerenl  leaulta.
The  brata  and  iron  fbot-mlea,  of  which  lereral
exiat,  do  not  precisely  agree  in  length.  There  waa
onncntly a  llandard  foat-mcaaoiB  kej '

uutol,  called  the  dm  mimtlaiu,  which
babty  loit  ai  the  l
VitdUniorTitni.


3.  The  meaiurement  of  buildinga  i*  ndier  a
verification  of  the  vaJnc  of  tha  foot  a*  obtained  from
other  aaurcea  than  an  indepmdent  evidsice.  It
vtry  aeldom  hnppena  that  we  know  the  ni — *"
ancient  feet  contuned  in  the  building  n
We  have  one  mch  example  in  the  PaitheiMni,
which  waa  called  Hecatompedon  (hnndred-Ctoted,
Plnlarcb, FerwL  13, Oata,  £) fi«n the  widtli


jbeliik  in  the  Fiana'del  PopcJo  at  Itoaie,aDd  the
Flaminian  obetiik,  the  heighta  of  wluch  are  givoi
by  Pliny  (/T.  M  mvi.  9.  a  U).  But  the  actaal
height!  of  theia  obeliaka,  ai  compared  vidi  Pliny,
would  give  a  value  for  the  foot  allogether  differrnt
from  that  obtained  fnnn  other  aounea.  Indeed
the  Qiunben  in  Pliny  are  midoiibtadlj  cocmp*,  and,
u  they  atand,  it  ia  only  the  d^Krmm  of  height
between  the  (wo  that  can  be  of  any  aervioe,  and

An  ingenioua  emendation  by  Stuart  would  nmon
the  diSculc; ;  but  it  ia  ohvioui  thai  a  pa^ajta
which  rBqoirti  a  conjectunl  emendalinn  cannot  be
taken  aa  an  independent  authority.  There  ia
another  mode  of  deducing  the  value  of  the  fijot  from
building!,  of  the  dimfliaiona  <£  which  ve  have  no
infonnation.  The  building  ia  mtaaured,  and  tha
length  tbni  obtained  ia  divided  by  the  anppoatd
lue  of  the  ancient  foot  (a*  derived  from  other
ideuce),  and  if  a  remainder  be  left,  thii  value  or
the  foot  ia  oorreeted  ao  that  there  may  be  no  ie~
maindar.  It  ia  BMsmed  in  thb  |nccaa  that  no
fraclioaa  of  fnt  vera  allowed  in  tha  dimanaioDa
of  tha  biilding,  and  alao  that  the  irian  weta  weiked
out  with  the  meat  miiHUe  rmcitrtt,  both  of  iriiieh
aMm^ticni  are  net  loy  ptobeble.  In  bet  theae
DxamiaBient)  hare  pvm  difliaaDt  nlota  tat  the
foot,  **  Modem  anlulecta,"  a^  Hr.  Hniaay,  **  do
not  allow  that  mah  calenlatiaii  seold  be  depcDded
on  in  medcin  building!,  tat  datatnining  the  true
Imgth  of  the  meanua  hj  which  they  wanplaanad.
Nor  are  the  dimeuriona  of  the  parta  of  boildinfta
of  the  middle  agee  in  our  own  country,  at  Qothic
ehurchea  and  cathedrala,  found  to  agree  aiaetly,  aa
aa  to  give  whde  nnmbBi  of  the  ataodaid  UBBaiK.''
On  the  other  hand,  tbeae  meaanrementa,  like  ^oaa
on  roada,  have  the  advantage  of  inrelviig^  in  aU
probabili^,  very  snail  en«r^  and  of  the  dimina-
tkn  of  the  arror  b;  diiiuoa.


HBNSURA.


7S7


s  ImoUl  of  iba  Roman  foot  from  th«
asUd  ODtcM  of  t£*  congint  of  Veipatun.  [Coh-
siuB.]  Sisca  tbs  eoiqihi*  wm  tbe  oightli  of  the
■mphon,  and  iba  enlent  of  the  amphon  wu  a
mine  foot  [Quidkantai.},  tie  rraceo  ii  to  mul-
tiplj  tbfl  ctmtQit  of  the  coDgiiu  bj  6,  uid  nxtract
tlio  Cuba  root  of  tSm  product.  Bat  tiiii  pnxsM  ia
TBj  imcartaiB.  Fbit,  then  ii  a  doubt  about  the
eonUnt  irftbicoi^iiiittelf  [PoHraiiA],thenitu
Wdl;  to  be  lappMed  that  the  content  oiF  tbe  eon-
Ipna  mu  actnaUf  adsptsd  with  perfect  aecnru?  to
the  length  of  tbe  foot,  and  lulif,  the  re  U  a  tbRhs-
riik  cf  anoT  in  nrenuig  thia  pnceii,

A.  Santo  French  geogniph«a,  and  eq«eii]l;  M.
Ooawlin,  have  nppoeed  uiM  the  andeat  aitnmo-
mer*  vere  acqnaiBted  with  the  dimauiimi  of  a
ICteat  circle  of  tbe  earth,  and  that  the;  founded
their  whole  ayilem  of  mcaaima  on  Iho  nibdioUion)
of  nch  a  cinle.  Tho  rentlti  of  M.  Ooiteliii'l  cal-
cslationa  tfcnt  vdl  with  thoee  deriTed  from  other
■ouna.  Bnt  wo  med  better  eridenoe  than  thn
■ffncDMOl  to  eonriDca  u  that  both  the  Oneki  and
Romani,  at  a  itrj  eari;  period,  fcinwd  a  tjttea
■  of  Hieainree  en  nch  identiiic  pfinciplet ;  BDd  it  ii
inaudible  that,  if  nch  a  (yitem  had  really  eiiited,
thoe  dioald  he  no  sUiuion  to  it  in  anjr  o[  the  an-
'*''*  seugiaphen,

The  aniage  nlua  of  the  Roman  foot,  obtained
fnu  theu  lariou  Miiircet,  in  lenni  of  the  Engliib
hoi,  an  tbe  fbUowing:  —

3.  Fnini  itiziemry  Dieainiemeiita . .  '97092

3.  Fnm  meaiuKiaenti  of  building! .  '9ESS4

4.  Fran  the  amgiu -9832

&.  From  the  length  of  a  degree  . . .  -9724

«f  which  tbe  fint  three  are  the  moat  to  be  depended
(O  ;  and  of  thoee  three  the  averBge  it  -9706,  or
ll'S496  inchei  or  lli-USS  inchea  ;  which  we
ma  J  take  u  tbe  pnbible  Talne  of  the  Roman  foot.

Cignani,  whoaa  reeeBTchei  are  ud  bj  Niebohr
to  bare  placed  the  true  Talne  of  the  Roman  foot
beyond  a  doubt  (/Tut  (/Ana^  iL  p.407),{p*e*  it
a  gRBter  length  than  the  above,  namely  '29624  of
a  >iwtR  ~  -9722  of  a  foot :  but  thii  ealcniaticm  ii
•bjeeted  to  b;  BOckh,  ai  being  deriTcd,  by  a  pro-
niaiKrtpeiieetly  tne,  from  the  Tolne  of  the  ponnd,
and  a*  being  coofinned  only  by  one  eiiRing  mea-
•are,  and  al*o  ■•  being  at  Tarianee  with  the  nlue
of  die  OitA  ibot,  obliged  from  indej
aoorcea^  (Mttnlif.  Uatmui.  y.  197.)  1
own  alenlatian,  iriiicb  iigi«i  with  that  of  Wurm,
who  followi  R^ier,  girn  a  nine  Ter;  little  leu
than  the  ibme,  namelT  ISl'IS  Pnrii  linear
-9704S49  of  the  Ensliib  foot>=  I1-64S6  inehca.
Aa  the  Rnenl  ntnlt  we  may  take  the  Roman
foot  at  1 1 '65  incbea,  Engliih,  or,  nther  more  than
^  of  an  inch  leai  than  onn.  (The  writer  of  oi
excellent  artule  Wa^Ut  a»d  Mmiurei  in  tht
/ViMjr  C^/nlopatdia,  givea  11-62  incbea  for  th<
rahe  of  the  Roman  foot.  He  aleo  givea  the  fol'
lowing  nile  aa  repnaenling  the  ratio  &T  within  the
Hmita  of  probafale  emv:  —  61  Engluh  feet  maki
63  Raman  teeL}  For  the  other  meanuea  of  length
■eethflTaUM.

Some  han  conehided  tma


by  Domitlan  fai  a  careleia  manner.  Both  the  &ct
and  the  ex^aoatioa,  howerer,  appear  to  be  verf
doubtful.

II.  Tie  Gvut  foot.  We  have  no  ancient  mea-
iui«i  by  which  to  delenuine  the  length  of  the
Orcek  feat ;  bnt  wo  hare  the  general  teatiiiiony  of
— ^-itwritenthatitwaatotheRomanin  theialia
:  24.  The  Greek  itadinm,  which  cnttained
GOO  Oieek  feet,  ii  aud  by  Roman  wrilen  to  con-
'\^h  Roman  feet ;  and  alao  a  Roman  mile,  or
feet,  waa  reckoned  equal  to  8  Ors^  atadia,
or  4800  f^ ;  both  of  theae  calculationi  give  the
above  ratio  of  as  :  24.  (Plin.  fllA'.  a  Bi  a.  21,
108.  a.  112  ;  Colmn,  t.1  ;  Polyb.  iii  39  ;  Strab.
"  p.  322,)  If  thenfen  the  Roman  fcot  waa
D8  of  the  Engliah,  the  Greek  foot  wa«  equal  to
1-01125  Engliah  feet,  or  12-136  incbea.

Thia  Talue  ia  confirmed  by  the  meaiurement  of

the  Parthenon. "Stnart"  (Aii&^  AA.  iL  p,3>,

■ayi  Hr.Hiuae;,  "meaanicd  the  nppcr  aten  of  the

haaemaDt  of  the  ItetheDoi,  which  la  the  platfbnn

which  tho  pillan  atand,  and  k  exactly  that  part


tompedcm  waa  really  giTca  it  oi
dimenaiona. He  fliand  the  widtl


e  of  Domitian,  which


deatrojtd  in  tbe  Ere  imdet  Titua,  i


idth  of  the  front  lo
101  feat  1-7  inchea,  the  length  of  the  aide  227
feet  7'Ofi  inchea  ;  and  aince  theae  two  quimtiliei
■TB  very  ncsi^y  in  the  ratio  of  100  to  225,  he  in-
ferred that  the  two  lidea  really  contained  these
imbera  of  feet.  From  thia  ha  calcnUled  the
of  the  foot,  from  the  finnt  12-137  inchea,
from  tbe  aide  12'138  inchn;  of  which  the  greateat
eiceeda  the  Talne  giren  aboTo  by  only  -003  of  an
inch."  Other  meaauremcnta  of  the  Parthenon
and  of  other  boildinga  at  Athma  tend  to  the  wmfl

Strabo,  however  (t  b.) qnotea  from Polybioa

calcolatjon  which  would  make  the  Greek  and

Oman  foot  equal,  but  it  ia  perfectly^  clear  that

there  ia  a  mialake  in thia  atalemcnt Plutnnh

■gain  {C.  Oraak.  7)  nyt  aipreaalj  that  the  mils

LI  a  Ste*  bn  tton  B  atadia,  which  wonld  give  a

ratheriniBlleciBCiothanthatof  24  :  2S  for  the  ratio

of  the  Roman  to  the  Oreek  foot. It  it  on  the  autho-

ri^  of  this  paaoge  that  BJjckh  gires  the  Talue  above

entioned  for  the  Roman  foot If^  according  to

e  anppontion  already  noticed,  a  alight  diminu-

m took  place  in tbe Roman  foot,  this  wonld

count  for  the  diBerence. But  perhapa  we  ooght

it  to  CDDiider  thia  lolitary  puoge  of  anScient

eight  to  inSnence  the  calcnlation.

Aa  the  geneiul  reanll,  we  may  tuke  the  Greek

footat  12-135  Engliah  inchea,  that  ii,  rather  more

than  l-10th  of  an  inch  greater  than  the  Eugliab

at. For  the  other  meaiura  aee  the  Tablea.

2.  JVmnrci  o/Surfaee.  —  Theae  an  cBa3y  do-
lived  from  the  meaaure*  of  length.  See  the  Tablea.

3.  AfeaiKTii  of  Capadli/,  —  Tbe  determination
of  the  meaiurei  of  cspad^  ii  ao  inae^arabiy  con-
nected with  the  qneation  of  the  lettlement  of  the
Greek  and  Roman  wnghta,  that  it  ia  better  to

ri  of  than  under  Pondira,  to  which  article
tbe  reader  ia  rafaiTed  for  the  literatnra  of  the
whole  anbjecL

4.  Aiiipilar  and  drtalar  Mtaitrt$, — The  chief,
and  almoat  the  only  importance  of  thia  part  of  the

of  cindea  and  degreea  on  the  earths  aur&ce,  and
to  the  mcuurea  of  time.  The  former  claaa  of
meoaurea  will  be  treated  of  in  Uie  pidia^r]/  ef


IBi


MBSCEHARII.


Grant  and  Roman  Gtogmphy.  Retpecting  ths  me>-
•uin  of  lime,  les  Annub,  EIoaA,  &c  [P.  S.]
ME'NSTRUUM.  [S»Rvu».]
METJUSES  (u^niffii).  [Eoclmia,  p,  443,  a.]
MERCENA'RII  (juoferi-ol,  luaBo^ifn,  tDore
CDTnmonlj  £Jim»},  merc^iiary  troops  At  liD  mrlj
prriod  then  wai  do  iDcb  thing  m  a  itaadiiig  um  j,
or  merceuaij  forco,  in  the  (hvek  npnblicB.  The
ionnei  would  have  eicilad  jealouij',  lot  it  ahoold
oppreu  the  people,  u  the  choten  boiid  did  U  Argoa
(Psuran.  il  20.  g  3  ;  Thiurd.  v.  SI)  ;  and  for  the
latter  there  wm  rapdy  any  wcaiion.  The  citiieni
of  ever;  itate  formed  a  nstioaal  militia  for  Ihe
defence  of  their  counti;,  and  were  bonnd  to  letro
for  a  certain  period  at  their  own  expeiue,  the
higher  clanei  oiiull;  KmDg  is  ths  csvaliy,  or
heaTj-aimad  ia&ntiy,  the  lower  duaa  u  light-
amed  tmopi.  PoreigDei*  were  nnlj  employed  ;
the  Catiui,  Cretani,  and  Arcadiani,  who  Krred
ai  meneiutnee  (Herod.  I  171  ;  Paniao.  ir.  8.  §  3,
10.  §  1,  19.  g  4  ;  Wachnoulh,  HdL  AUmk.
ToL  L  pt.  I  p.  SO  ;  SchOmaim,  AnL  jur.  judi.
Or.  p.  1S9),  an  m  exception  to  the  geaeral  rule.
In  Uie  Fenian  war  wa  find  a  imaU  number  of
Aitadiant  offering  to  tent  under  Xeriea  (Herod,
liii.  26)  ;  and  ther  Kcmed  to  hare  uied  them-
aeliei  to  luch  employinent  down  to  ■  moch  later
period.  (  Xenoph.  fMiw.  liL  1 .  3  23  ;  SchOmann,
Id.  p.  409.)  The  practice  of  maintaioim  a  itand-
ing  force  wai  intindnced  by  the  tyrant!,  who  kept
guBrdi  and  (oldien  in  their  pay  (fiopa^pBt,  lua.
Bo^fai)  to  laeient  iniDrrectioni  of  the  poopla,
and  praerre  their  mSnence  abroad.  Am  it  wai
umafe  to  trust  amu  in  the  hand)  of  their  own  inb-
jecla,  thej  uinally  employed  foreignem.  (Thu-
CTd.  tL  iS  !  Died,  il  G7,  72  J  Xenoph.  Hitr.  V.
3.) Hence,  and  became  ciliien  loldicn  nud  to

(Harpoc  i.  e.  StriTivaiiiram.)  Ws  muit  dittin-
Eoiih,  however,  between  those  who  fought  ai  auxi-
hariei,  whether  tor  pay  or  otherwiie,  andercom-
mijiion  from  their  own  coontiy,  and  thoio  who
did  not  The  former  were  hinovpoi,  not  {'nil.
(Hmkl.  i.  64,  iii,  4S,  y.  63  ;  Thncjd.  L  60,  iL
70,  iiL  34,  it.  80.)  The  teimi  (imi  and  imtS,
implied  Ihiu  the  troop*  were  independent  of,  or
•cTered  iioin,  tbeir  own  coonliy.

The  fint  Grecian  people  who  eommcneed  the
employment  of  mercenaries  on  a  laige  Kale,  wen
the  Alheniani.  While  the  tribute  which  they  n-
ceiled  from  the  alliea  placed  a  conaiderable  reTenas
at  their  diapowd,  the  wan  which  their  ambition
led  theiD  into  compelled  them  to  maintain  a  large
force,  naval  and  military,  which  their  own  popola-
tion  wai  unable  to  tupply.  Hence  they  iwclled
their  Brmiea  with  fonignera.  Thncydidei  makee
the  Corinthian  amhauador  at  Sparta  ny,  iimrrti


irrlce,  for  which  from  habit  they
were  belt  qualified  ;  aa,forin>tazice,  Cratauarchen
and  ilingtra,  Thradan  peltattae.  (Thucyd.  vL  25,
vii.  27  ;  Ariitoph.  Adani,  ISS.)  At  the  lame
time  the  practice  of  paying  tho  citiieni  wai  Intro,
daced  i  a  meainre  of  Peticle*,  which  wai  indeed
both  jual  and  unavoidable  (for  no  man  wat  bound
by  law,  or  could  be  expected,  to  maintain  himielf
fir  a  laiiff  oampragu)  ;  but  which  tended  to  e&cs
the  diitincticn  between  the  native  loldier  and  the
foreigner.  Other  Qreek  nationi  uon  imitated  the
'  -' '  u  (TInuTd.  IT.  76),  «ad  the  appetjta  (or


UEBCENAML

pay  wat  gnatlj  promoted  by  the  djiliibnlian  of
Peraian  money  among  the  bclligereala.  (Thucyd.
viiL  £,  29,  4fi  ;  Xanoph.  HtUat.  L  6.  §  3.)  At
the  doie  of  the  Pelopomxeian  war,  laim  iramben
of  men  who  had  been  accoxtoned  to  liva  bj  mi
wen  thrown  oat  of  employmeot ;  numy  wen  B
exile  or  diacontented  with  the  dalB  of  thing*  at
home  ;  all  inch  pereani  wen  eager  to  engags  in  a
foreign  iervice.  llenee  there  arote  in  Oiaeee  ■  body
of  men  who  made  anna  their  profeMiat,  and  cared
little  on  which  tide  they  fonght,  [CDTided  that
were  a  laitabte  pioapect  of  gaining  diltJDctian  or
emolument.  Canon  engaged  mercenanea  with
Penian  money.  Ageailaoi  encaongedthepnKtkx,
and  the  Spaitani  allowed  the  memben  of  their
confederacy  to  fumiih  money  inttead  of  moi  fin
the  lame  porpoie.  (Xentfih.  BdL  iii  (.  {  IS,  i*.
3.  3  15,  V.  2.  §  31.)  The  Gre^  who  fiiUowed
Cyiua  in  hit  eipedition  agwoit  Artaxorxei,  ware
mereenariea.  (Xenoph.  Aaab.  L  3.  8  21-)  So  wera
the  funooa  peltaitae  of  Ghabriat  and  I|diiaKte&
(llarpocr.  i.  v.  Htrur^i'  iv  Koplr^y :  Aiiatofdi,
rial.  173.)  The  Phociani,  nnder  Philouda*.
Onomarahna,  and  Phayllui,  carried  on  the  lacied
war  by  tho  aid  of  mecceaariei,  paid  oat  et  the  tn*-
mni  of  the  Delphian  temple.  (Diod.  ivi.  30,  ttc)
But  hi^er  pay  and  richer  plunder  wen  in  gencnl
to  be  found  in  Alio,  where  the  diittubed  ilBta  tC
the  empire  created  omtinaed  oocattoni  for  the  aeF-
vice*  of  Oreck  auxiliaHea,  whoee  superior  dijci[dinB
and  courage  vren  felt  and  acknowledged  by  the
Barbanant.  Even  the  Spartani  lent  their  kinjt
Ageiilaui  into  Egypt,  for  the  lake  of  obtaining
Penian  gold.  Aftenrarda  we  lind  a  large  body  id
Oreeka  icrving  nnder  Dariui  againrt  Alenodff.
It  ii  pimer  here  to  notice  the  evil  conaequenoH
that  reaulled  from  this  employment  of  mefnenariei,
npecially  to  Athena,  which  «nplayed  then  mora
tlian  any  ethet  Greek  itate.  It  might  be  sxpecled
that  the  bdlity  of  haing  trained  Hidicti,  whoaa
Bxpurience  gave  them  great  advaalagei,  woidd  Ind
to  the  diuie  of  miliauy  mttic*  bj  the  dtiaeni.
Such  wai  the  caH.  The  Athenian  citiuDi  Maycd
at  home  and  became  enervated  and  cumpted  by
the  love  of  eaie  and  pleanire  ;  while  the  amdoct
of  wan,  carried  on  fbi  their  beiiefil,  wsi  eotnuted
to  men  over  whom  they  had  little  cmtraL  Evan
the  generel,  though  commonly  an  Atheui«i,  wi«
couipelled  freqaeutly  to  comply  with  the  h
or  follow  the  example  of  hit  tnopa.  To  en
them,  or  to  pay  them  their  aircaia,  ho  migbt  In
driven  to  comnut  acti  of  plunder  and  oaMge  npm
the  frienda  and  alliea  of  Athena,  which  that  fboad
enemies  where  ahe  Icatt  expected.  It  was  not  bd-
oaual  for  the  generali  to  engage  in  enteipriwi
foreign  to  the  purpotet  for  which  thej  wov  sent
out,  and  unconnected  with  the  inteittti  of  thdr
country,  whoie  reaaureat  they  watted,  iriiila  they
aonght  their  own  advaol^e.  The  eipcditioDB  at
Chabrias  and  Iphicntet  to  Egypt  are  aiamidei  of
this.  But  Ihe  most  aignal  example  ii  tlM  coadoet
of  the  adventurer  Charidemna.  Upon  all  thcM
matlen  we  may  refer  the  reader  more  paiticulattf
to  DcmosthoieB,  whole  conmumti  upon  tho  diM^
trotii  policy  purwed  by  hit  ooonliymen  w»«  w
tea  juit  than  they  wan  wiae  and  statomanUke.
(Demottfa.  PUiip.  L  p.  4G,  c  ArvtBcr.  pp.  66S,
671  i  «pl  ToS  rr.fr  Tfli  Tfn».  p.  1232,  fte.  [
Athen.  liL  43  ;  Thiiiwall,  IfiM.  t/  Gftuat,  vd.  t.
il21D;  Wachcmuth,  voLi.  ptii.  p.309.>  Tb*
HMnaoi  at  a  conpintiTaly  eorij  tim<  '  - ■


METALLUM.
tbe  naetiea  of  pujing  ibtii  ows  citiiRU  for  (tieii
•emte  in  the  army  [SriPiKDirx],  but  merce-
tarf  tnwpi,  in  the  nml  mcceptitton  of  tbe  term,
vcn  unknoini  omoDg  them  till  >t  s  lec;  late
ptriod.  (C.  R.K.]

HERENDA. [Cobna,  p.  306,  b.}

HERIDIA'NI. [GLADi&TD&xa,  p.  G7fi,  b.]

HETAK [CoiCiiS,  p.  2S4,  ■.]

MBTAGKITNIA  (junrftlma),  k  fctUral
edtbnted  bj  the  Attic  demu  Melite,  in  bnnoni
of  Apollo  Ueti^tnioe.  Tlie  chief  galenmitiea
ooniined  in  oflcnng  tocriGcei,  mi  the  folirsl  vaa
believed  to  COTnmemomte  the  emigration  (yiervior-
ffu  Tpit  hipinn)  of  the  inhabitanta  of  Melite  to
Diomii.  (PlnLd<£n!J^p.601,b. ;  comp.  Snidas,
and  Haipooat.  l  r.  MrticjiitmAr.) [L.  3.]

HETALLUH  (jitntAer).  The  Greek  word
niginallj  ngniSed  a  pit  oi  ton,  when  anything
it  eoaght  for  by  Egging,  bence  a  shh,  and  hence
any  mineral  found  in  a  mine,  eipecially  mttoL la


•l^eet  of  thia  article  it  to  giTo  a  brief  general  tie<
of  tba  acqnaintanoo  which  the  Greeks  and  Aomani
W  with  the  metal*,  and  the  nteg  to  which  the;
^iplied  than.


.  _ .  thi*  work,  may  be  read  in  Bedt-

■unn'i  Hiilarf  ^  Imtutuau,  by  Johniton,  vol  ii.
pp.  23,  ftc  4th  ed.)  If  to  thii  liit  we  add  the
compoond  of  gold  and  lilier  tailed  vJwfniH,  the
Gomponnd  of  copper  and  tin  called  xa^^'  and  <iet
(broue),  and  iteel,  we  have,  in  all  protability,  a
omi^te  lilt  of  the  metalf  known  to  the  Qreeki
and  Roman*,  with  the  eicepdon  of  dnc,  which
tb^  do  iHt  teem  to  have  known  aa  a  metal,  but
only  in  in  ant,  and  of  braia,  which  they  legirded
at  a  KCt  of  bronie. (Bee  below).

Th*  eariy  Greeki  were  no  donbt  chiefly  in-
debted Gv  a  lupply  of  the  Tarioas  metali  to  the
eoomirata  of  the  Phoeniciani,  who  procored  them
piiocfpally  from  Arabia  and  Spain,  and  tin  &xim
oar  own  iiland  and  the  EatL  In  the  Homf  '
poana  we  find  an  alhiuon  to  tbU  traffic  ai  one
which  tbeOredt  oftbawotem  coait  were  already
engaged  ;  when  Athena  penonatea  If  entea,  the
raler  of  the  Ti^iana,  canying  thining  inn  to
Temeaa  in  C^prna,  to  exchann  it  for  copper.  {Od.
i.  184,  comp.  NilBch^  note.)  The  Homeric  poema
tbmiah  am^e  proob  of  how  mach  more  plentiful
copper  wat  than  iron.  The  former  it  the  common
material  of  anna,  madmieDta,  and  veeadt  of  Tarioiu
torti  lAis]  ;  the  latter  ii  mentioned  much  more
rarely,  and  ia  diatiaguiabed  by  an  epithet  implying
the  diScaltf  of  worbi«  it<irsA^f»rroi,  H.  n.  48),
and  ill  adjectire  ia  frequently  need  metaphorically
to  eiprett  the  gresteat  ttobhrnmeti  (Od.  y.  191,
fte. :  tea  Seller  and  Jacobita,  (.  rv.  o-Ititpof  and
ndipcei).  Heaiod  carried  nt  back  to  a  period
when  inn  VM  nnknown  (C^  a(  ^%  ISO,  ISl):

XaXcf  V  AyjiComr  itiKas  V  nine  Ian*  aC


»^  that  Itm  had  bem  the  W  ditconndof  alt


METALLUH.  7S9

the  metala.  (See  HBckh,  CMo,  nil  pL  260  ;
Uillm,  Mairalcgia  Ihalrvjiu.)  The  importance
of  hatdeninE  the  copper  naed  for  armt  and  annour,
and  to  fbrtti,  ia  a  preanmption  in  bvour  of  the
knowledge  arid  ute  of  fH  ;  hnt  we  have  alto  de-
finite mention  of  thia  metal  (icairirfTtpiii)  aerenl
the  Iliad  ;  and  it  leemi  not  tm[iDbab1e
•jiy  aa  now,  it  wat  generully  plated  on
another  metaL  (See  Liddell  and  Scotland  Seller
id  Jacobita, I.e. ;  Beckmann,  ToLiL  p.206,  foil)
he  art  of  hardening  copper  by  the  admiitore  of
II  wui  known  before  the  hiitoricaJ  period.  (Camp.
Aes.)  With  Mipect  to  tieti,  it  ia  a  much  ditpnted
point  whether  thia  metal  it  the  proper  aenae  of  the
word  Kitttai  ui  Homer  (II.  xi.  24,  36,  Od.  til  87)
id  Hesiod  {Sou.  143),  but  at  al!  e*enta  it  ii
highly  t^bable  that  thia  ia  the  meanmg  of  Udiiai
m  Heiiod  (Soil  231,  Tieog.  161  (  tee  the  leil-
eogiaphen,  i.  vn.,  the  commentatora  on  Homer  and
Heaiod,  in  ZL,  and  Beckmann,  loL  ii.  p.  324).  It
would  appear  from  the  rnanner  in  which  Aetchylua
refers  to  the  Chalybet,  taken  ia  cotmection  with
the  tradttiDni  retpecting  the  enrly  intercoutte  of  the
Qtieekt  with  Iheihorea  of  the  Baltic,  diat  the  iron
and  ateel  worka  of  that  people  were  known  at  a
rety  early  period,  and  that  it  waa  bom  them  chiefl*
that  the  Oreeka  procured  their  iron  and  ated,
(Aeich.  Pnm.  720  ;  Apollon.  Rhod.  ii.  1000  ;
Xen.  A<ab.  T.  G.  §  I ;  Ritter,  Erdindt,  nl  !L
p.776{  Hackh,<>«(a,TDLip.294.)  Enoughbaa
already  been  said  reapecdng  the  early  knowledge
of  the  predoui  metala,  lepuatcly  and  in  combina-
tion. Dndei  AsQiNTuH,  AuHtiH,  and  ELicra  uu.
iiiferencea,  howATer,  from  Homer's  ol-
icte  and  the  other  maleriala  of  the  uaefiU
and  fine  artt,  we  mutt  bo  on  our  guard  not  to  mako
the  poet^  ima^nation  onr  itandard  of  their  actnal
abundance.  (Sea  farther,  concening  the  real  or
inppoted  knowledge  of  metali  and  metalluray  in  the
— '-"—  -^--  Plin.  H.  ff.  rii  86.  a.  S7.)

bam  the  metala  themielrea  to  the
art  of  wooing  them,  aCill  taking  the  poenii  of
Homer  and  Heaiod  for  our  guide,  we  find  the
Oreeka  of  that  early  period  perfectly  Doqualnted
with  the  pnxetaea  of  imelting  the  metal  &om  the
ore  and  of  forging  heated  maitei  mlo  the  reijiiired
ihapei,  by  the  aid  of  the  hammer  and  tonga.  It
may,  indeed,  be  donbted  whether  the  x^a'oi,  into
which  Hnihaettna  throwa  the  matenala  of  tbe
ihield  of  Acliillei,  and  which  are  worked  by  the
blattof  twan^  poira  of  bellowi  (f  Citw)  are  tmelt-
ii^fumacM  oiniere  imitli^  forget  (R  iiiii.  470),
hot  the  fiKmer  tenK  ttont  to  be  required  in  the
paange  of  Heaiod.  (Tton.  863.)  Both  HoiDcr
and  He8iodrefertathetmith'tworkahop(xaAintlM
t4fiotf  xiitXicrfoi  Hkos)  aa  a  common  lounge  and
ai  a  place  of  ihelter  to  which  the  poor  reaorted  for
iti  warmth,  (OiiriiL  328,  Op.  «  Z)i'.49l.)  The
whole  of  Homers  deicription  of  the  workihop  of
Hephaeatut  determ  carehil  atndy  (H.  iriiL  3C9,
Ac).  The  tmith's  inttnmientt  were  the  aniil
(tj^Hir)  with  the  block  on  which  it  retted  (tji/ii-
0rrov),  the  tongi  (wvpd^fnj),  and  the  hammer
(^mtV,  <r1,ipe,  n.  le.,  Od.m.  4S3— 435).
{iNctie,  Foacxrs,  M^LLSua.]  The  arta  of  catting
metala  into  moulds,  and  of  welding,  or  even  of  lol-
deling  piecea  of  metol  together,  ware  a*  yet  unknown.
In  large  worka,  hammered  platet  were  united  by
mechanical  &ataningB,  naila,  pint,  riveta,  crampo,
or  doretaili  (Borfu^  l^Xoi,  irfp^Hi,  c^pa),  and

— of  thi*  tort  of  wotfc  in  the  braiH  intiua


Imwing  id


3c4  .


•  o"


760 METALLUM.

METALLUM.

f  ihe  eniliect  period  were  ttiU  ta  t*  moi  b  tb.
timD  of  Pausmiu  (H  li.  634,  iviii.  379 ;  Paul.  i.

gold,  inrer.  iron,  and  copper  from  their  uh,  were
weU  known  wb™  thit  book  <nu  compomi. The

ilal  on  to  the  luibce  of  another  (i.

ndlT^X't.  i>  cefsmd  to  acTeral  timet  in  Homer

" ■  ?4,  3S;  Lobeck,arf  Sopt^jL  846,  4e.).

wa»  oommonly  pmctiied :  one  interesting

ia  the  gliding  of  thi  '  '  "" '


(II


connected  with  x"^*^'  f"'  working  in  an;  kind  of
metn] ;  thu,  the  artificer  ii  odled  b;  the  generic
term,  x»*J"*'  {<32)i  "  i™'!  "  by  the  ipedfic
name,  xpaaoxios  <435X  and  big  tooli  are  the
Sir\a  xufcK^^a,  oTfflr  T.  xpvir'ir  tlfyiirra  (tt,
433,4351.  Lutlf,  the  image  med  lodeKrihethe
liiuing  of  the  binning  atake  when  plungtd  in  the
eje  of  Polyphemui,  ihowi  ui  acquainMnce  with  the
procou  of  dipping  led-hot  inn  in  water  to  harden
It {Od.  iL  391,  comp.  Soph,  Ai.  720.)

The  advancea  mode  in  the  an  oF  metoIlDiay  in
inbuquent  tiniea  are  chieS;  oinnected  with  the
improvementa  in  the  art  of  itatuarr.  The  method
of  working,  ai  dncribed  in  llomer,  ieemi  to  haie
long  prerailed,  namel;  b;  beating  oat  lumpa  cf  the
material  mto  the  farm  prDpoaed,  and  afierwudl
fitting  the  piecea  together  by  means  of  pina  or
keyi.  It  wai  called  otpufiif^irToif,  from  c^vpo,  a
hammer.  Pauianiai  (iii.  17.  i  fi)  deKriba  thii
pTDceu  in  ipenking  of  a  vety  ancient  itatoe  of
Jupiter  at  Sparia,  the  work  of  Lcsrchui  of  Rhegium.
With  leapecl  to  iti  lappoiad  antiquity,  Pauianiai
can  only  mean  thai  it  wu  Teiy  ancient,  and  of  the
archfticnyleofart.  Thelermofup^AaTorijuicdby
Diodomi  (li.  9)  In  doBcriblng  a  very  ancient  golden
table  which  woi  uid  to  hare  dcconted  the  celo-


itBabjl<  . .

^oni  a  golden  itatuc  i^  Diana  Anaitii  worked  in  the
time  way,  which  he  <alli  iMo^jrnitot.  A  itatue
of  Dionyiioa  by  Onuiinieda,  of  ulid  bromc,  ii
mentioned  by  Piuuaniu  (ii.  IZ  §  3}  u  eiiiting
at  Thebei  in  hia  tunc.  The  next  mode,  among  the
Onpki,  of  executing  melal  worki  leemi  to  bBTe
been  by  plating  upon  a  nocleni,  or  general  form,
of  wood  ^ —  a  practice  which  wna  employed  nlu
by  the  Egyptiani,  ai  ia  proved  by  a  tpecimen  of
theii  art  preietred  in  th<  Dritiih  Mtuemn.  The
anbjecl  ii  a  amall  head  of  Oiiria,  and  the  wood  It
•till  lemaining  within  Iho  metal.  It  ia  pmbable
that  the  tcrnia  halotphyrattm  and  gpkyrfstom  wen
intended  to  derignnto  the  two  model  of  hammer-
work  ;  the  fint  on  a  ulid  mail,  and  the  other  ham-
mering out  plalet. (Comp.  Mallius.)

It  ii  eitremel?  difficult  to  determine  at  what
date  the  caMing  of  metal  was  introduced  That  it
wad  known  at  a  very  early  period  there  can  be  no
doubt,  although  it  may  not  have  been  eierciicd  by
atntnariei  in  European  Oreece  till  a  comparatively
late  date.  The  art  of  founding  may  be  divided
into  three  claaKi  ar  itagci.  Tlie  firat  lithe  ilmplc
melting  of  metala  either  from  the  lolid  form,  or
from  ue  ore  ;  the  lecond,  casting  the  faied  metaJa
into  prepared  farmi  or  monldi ;  and  the  third,
(Siting  mto  a  mould,  with  a  core  (x  latetnal
nucleni,  by  which  the  motai  may  be  preier<ed  of
n  deteimlned  thicknen.  The  Grit  itoge  muat  hare
been  known  at  a  period  cf  which  we  have  no  re-
cord beyond  a  pBHflge  in  the  book  of  Job  (xxvin.
I,  2),  which  eitabliihei  the  fact  that  aomc  of  the
procaui  of  metallurgy,  locb  a*  the  nductioa  of


caiting  of  metal  into  mouldi  muit  alio  bare  been
practiaodTery  eariy.  There  are  nomeani  of  know-
ing of  what  material  or  compoil^on  the  tonna
or  mouldi  were  made,  bat  in  all  prababHity  claj
(dried,  and  then  perimpa  baked)  waa  empkiyed  for
the  pnrpoie.  The  circumitance  of  a  apot  where  clay
abounded  having  been  choiea  for  the  founding  of
the  bronu  worki  for  the  temple  of  Solomon  lup-
p«ta  thiaauppoaition.  (1  Kuigi,Tii.  46).  Ofconna
all  the  esiiieat  worki  uodnced  in  thii  ilage  of  th«
an  moit  hare  been  aolid.  The  thitd  proca^  that
of  caiting  into  a  mould  with  a  core,  waa  aa  im-
portant *t«p  in  the  ■taluoiy'i  ait,  UnfMtanately
there  ia  no  better  record  of  the  time,  nor  of  the
mode  in  which  thii  wo*  efiected  by  the  ancicBIa,
than  the  atalementa  of  Pauioniai  and  Pirn;,  ao-
coiding  t«  whom  the  art  of  caiting  in  bronze  and  in
irao  wai  inrenled  by  Rhoecoa  and  Theodorui  of
Samoa,  who  probably  lived  in  the  aixth  and  fifih
turit*  befon  our  ei^  (Paua  iil  12.  g  B,  riiL
I  5;  ma.  H.N.  hit.  lZi4S;  Did.  tf
g.  I.  m.  Skuau,  Timlonu.)


poie  of  a  ulder  for  faatct^In^
otetal together ;  but  il  ia  difficult
'bether  Uie  term  KifAAqirii  meani  a  loldei  or  c
■pedei  of  glue. Pauianiai  diitinctly  apeaka
thing  ditfcRDt  from  salli  or


of

it  ai  lometbing  ditfeRct  from  salli  or  cnumM,  and
giiei  ui  the  nameof  iti  lurcntor,  Ohmcua  of  Chioi,
who  qipeon  to  baTc  lived  earlier  than  the  SuniBn
ortisti  juit  icfiiiTed  to  (Herod,  i.  2S  ;  Pauci.  16.
g  1  ;  Pint,  dt  Drf.  Or.  47,  p.  436  ;  Diet.  ofBiag.
-  v.). Pliuf  in  like  manner  ipeaki  of  ■  lolda

ider  the  title  of  fbaatmia  layeatarvim  {H.  ,V.

cay.  17.  1.  48).  Many  of  the  worki  in  'ths
Britiah  Muieiun,  ai  well  a*  In  other  coHectiona,
are  compoaed  of  piecei  of  metal  which  ha<e  been
joined  together,  bat  whether  by  dampa,  riiela,  ec
•cJdering,  it  ia  now  impoiilble  to  determine  accu-
rately, on  account  of  the  ruit  about  the  edge*  of  tbe
platei.  The  modeni  practice  of  welding  piece*  of
metal  together  leenia  to  hare  been  altogether  an-
kuown  to  the  ancienti.

Reapecting  the  mpply  and  uae  of  metali  in  the
hiatorical  period,  little  remaiui  to  be  added  to  what
'  been  aaid  under  Aia,  AaaaNruH,  AoKt'ii,
LiTuiLi,  ELn7rai;H,  Statuabia,  dec  Iron
found  chiefly  in  Laconia  and  on  the  ahom  of
the  Block  Sea,  and  waa  brought  eipeciallj  fnun
Sinope.  Stephanui  Byian^ua,  who  mentJOQa
Ihia  lact,  italea  the  puipoiei  for  which  the  two
irta  of  ir  . - -


rely  better
jilted  (a.  d.  AoictSaf/uu').  The  whole  aoliiect  of
melali  and  melol-work  ii  ttnlcd  of  by  Pliny  in
the  thiity-tbird  and  Ihirty-fourlh  booki  of  his
Ilitioria  Nabtroiu,

One  point  notyet  noticed  it  the  qnaticn,  wbeth^r

the  ancienta  poiicued  a  knowledge  of  line. That

they  rarely  if  ever  uied  it  ai  an  alloy  of  copper  ia

proved  by  the  analyiia  of  exiiting  qiecinicna  of

''-—-  bronio  [Aas]  \  but  that  they  ware  abaolately

ant  of  II  can  eniily  bo  diaprored. Qne  oi  tba

important  poangea  on  the  lubject  ia  in  Stnbv

p.  610).  who  nyi  that  "  in  the  neighbourk

hood  of  Andcira  (in  the  Troni)  there  ia  a  ecrtmn

ilone  which,  on  being  burnt,  become*  iron  ;  th^i^

m  being  ameltrd  with  a  certain  eaith,  it  dijtila

^fMfrfvpos,  and  with  the  addition  of  copper  it

becomca  vrhAt  ii  called  (fu^ui  (which  may  nean


■  O"


.MBTOECI.
uthct  in  tUay  ia  ganeial,  or  >  parUenlu  kind  o(
allof),  which  tame  call  iptlxatJiBt ;  and  ^ttvUf.
■jvfH  it  ■!»  ftond  sboat  Tmoliu."  In  all  pm-
habilit;  the  itow  ho*  mmlioDiHl  ii  the  qbiuddu
DDE  an  oiled  calamine,  irhich  Plinj'  md  othar
writen  caQ  aadnnnu  1[  ao,  ifwUdpyvpu  muiI  be
meMllk  iiDc,  and  jptlxo^'i"  braM.  Foe  a  fnrtiuu
'  in  of  thi*  fobject,  into  which  we  haie  Dot


-  METOPA.


761


NUHI

Onlf  •  bur  wardi  are  pecMeiry  on  the  word
mttalium  in  iu  other  teme.  Ntariy  all  that  i>
known  on  the  lubject  of  the  Onek  minea,  the
mads  ol  wniUiig  Ihein,  and  ths  rormoM  derired
from  them  ii  oontained  in  Bikkh'a  Buoji  an  Oe
Sivtr  Mam  0/  Lauriai  appended  to  hii  FiJiHe
Bcaaomg  o/Adtau.  Reapecling  the  Banuut  minei,
tm  VacTioALiA.  [P.  S.]

UETATO^ES.  [C^snu,  p.  24E,  a.]
METOECI  (fUrauH),  i>  ths  nams  bj  which,  at
Alheni  and  in  otbei  Onek  atatca,  the  reiident
alieoi  wen  deaignated,  and  iheie  mnM  be  diilin-
piithed  from  inch  itnagan  ai  made  only  a  tmui-
tof;  ilaj  in  a  place,  foe  HupocistiDn  (t.  e.)  ei-
[Hwly  mentioiu  aa  a  charaeteriitic  of  a  ^^oiui,
that  he  teaided  pemanently  in  the  place.  No  ci^
«f  Oncce  pethspt  had  mch  a  nninbei  of  resident
aliein  aa  Athena,  aa  boob  aSbided  to  atiaogeit
greater  adTantagei  and  conTenieDcei,  or  a  more
agneabk  nwde  of  linug.  In  the  Ixnina  inatituted
by  Demetritu  Fhaleieua  (S09  B,  c),  the  nomber  of
rcaidtait  alieni  at  Alheni  wu  10,000,  in  which
Dunber  women  and  children  were  probably  Dot
indoded.  (Athen.  ii.  p.  272.)  Thew  alieni  wen
peitooa  fioin  all  )aiti  of  Oneee,  aa  well  at  Inta
barfauatu  coonlriei,  lach  aa  Lydiaai,  Pbrygiani,
and  Sjriani,  or  Attic  freednien  {LutKKTDS
(Okibk)],  and  thene  people  had  chosen  Athena
aa  their  adopUTc  caimtrj,  either  on  accoont  of  ita


coaal  of  the  &cilitiea  it  afiorded  ior  carrying  on
nercantilB  buainees. The  Utter  dan  of  petwna

The  Jealmay  with  which  the  oitiaana  i^  tiia  ancient
Cheek  republic*  kept  their  body  clear  of  inlndera,


Athoia,  they  wtce  wwaji  n^arded
wboKe  th^  are  •omctiraea  called  ^iiw,
lemind  them  of  (heir  poaition  they  had  on  »

Athenian  dtiiena.  TheaeKivicea  [Hi
were  however  in  all  raobabili^  not  intended  to
but  the  feelingi  of  the  aliena,  but  were  lim^y
acta  lymbolicBl  of  their  relation  to  the  citiiena.

Alien*  were  not  allowed  to  acquire  landed  pro-
peity  in  the  alcte  they  had  choaen  lot  their  leai-
deIta^  and  were  consequently  obliged  to  lire  in
hired  houaei  or  apirtnienit  (DemoMh.  prv  i'tom.
p.  946  I  Xeiu  da  Vect^.  ii.  2  ;  Ariatot,  Oscdb.  ii
Z,  3  ;  compere  Bikkh-a  />aU.  Eeom.  i.  g  24),  and
boKC  the  jetting  of  booacs  was  a  aubject  of  ninch
apecntation  and  profit  at  Atbctii.  Aa  tho  aliena
i\d  not  csnatitule  a  pan  of  tho  atate,  and  were  yet
in  eonalanl  intvrmune  and  conunerce  with  ita
membcia,  e<ery  alien  wu  obliged  to  select  a  citizen
for  hii  paliDD  (TpooTitnji),  who  was  not  only  the
mediator  between  them  and  the  state,  through
whom  alcne  the;  codd  tcwsnct  any  legal  buaincu


whether  [riTBte  or  pablic,  but  waa  at  the  uma
time  answerable  (iyyvriTiit)  to  the  Mate  fbr  the
conduct  of  his  client.  (EtymoL  If.  (•  e.  'Awpovra.
trial.)  On  the  other  hand,  howerci,  the  itala
allowed  the  aliens  to  catry  on  all  kinds  of  indnitiy
and  commerce  imder  the  protection  of  the  law  ;  in
&ot  at  Atheru  neariy  all  boiinesa  was  iu  the  buds
of  aliens,  who  on.  thii  seeoant  lind  for  the  most
pwtinthePeimeeniL  iXta.dtV»etig.t.2,deRip.

1tt.L  12.)
Each  ftiDily  of  aliena,  whether  they  sTailed  them-

tlTca  ofthepriTileR*  of  carrying  on  any  mereantile

nsmeu  or  not,  had  to  pay  an  aimnal  tax  (iimi.

ur  or  {(rwt)  of  twelve  dtachmae,  or  if  the  head
of  the  family  was  a  widow,  of  only  tax  drachoiaa.
(Bflckh,  PubL  EaoK.  iii.  S  7  ;  Isaeni  up.  Hara>-
avL  i.  e.  Mtraliiuui.)  If  aliens  did  not  pay  this
tar,  or  if  they  atanmed  the  right  of  dtiiens,  and
pnbably  alu  in  caia  tkay  refbsed  to  select  a  pa-
tron, they  not  only  brftited  the  pioteetion  ol  the
state,  but  were  sold  n  slana.  {Afbostaiiod
DiEi.]  In  some  oaea,  however,  thongh  they
an  of  rare  oceuimice,  aliens  withont  having  tha
isopolity,  might  become  exempt  from  the  ^MnSiuw
( iiTikiia  litroaclou)  aa  well  aa  Emm  other  oUifia-
tiona.  (Demosth,  ft  AriitoeraL  p.  691  ;  PlnL  Vit.
dee.  Oni.  p.  842  ;  Demosth.  a.  AriHoff.  p.  787  j
Suidoa,  r.  cL  Vltrolmor.)  Extraordinary  taxea  and
UlUTgiei  (ilaifopai  and  Xmimpyiiu)  devolved  upon
aliena  do  leu  than  apon  citiiens  (Demoith.  0.
Androl.  p.  612),  thoogb  there  must  have  been  a
diffenncD  between  tha  lilnrgiet  perlbimed  by  citi-
iena and  those  peifonned  by  aliais.  In  what  this
differ^ice  conaisted  is  nowhere  expreesiy  mentioned,
but  wa  have  teaioa  to  believe  that  with  the  ei-
ceplion  of  the  trienrehy  and  gymnaiiaichy,  all
other  litnrgiea  might  devolve  upon  aliens,  tbongh
perhapi  only  on  certain  occaaiona,  as  the  choregia
at  the  festiral  of  the  Lenaca.  (Schol.  ad  AridtjA.
Pint.  96*  ;  compare  BSekh,  PM.  Earn.  iv.  §  10.)
'^' aisaordiuary  taxes  {tlapopal)  which  %'


had  t


P«yT»


re  dif-


fered liom  these  paid  by  citiiens  ;  and  it  la  dear
from  Demoilheiie*  (c.  Amhvi.  p.  609  and  612),
that  they  wen  taxed  hi^er  than  d^xena  of  the
cenaua.  The  oliecs  wen  also  obliged,  like
citiacDi,  to  serve  in  the  regular  aimiea  and  in  the
fleet,  both  abroad  and  at  home,  for  the  defence  of
the  city.  (Xen.  d»  Ved^.  L  e. ;  Thucyd.  iL  1 3,  iv.
90;  Demosth.  e.  Pitfip.  i  p.  GO  ;  Thucyd.  I  143,
iiu  16.)  Reelecting  those  fifrouoi  who  had  ob-
tuned  thaI<r«T^(B,seeCiTiTAs(OR»i().  Tha
heirs  of  a  fi^ami  who  died  in  Attica,  wen  under
the  jurisdiction  of  the  jtolemanli.  (Demosth.  &
Si^kL  iL  p,  U3£.)

The  preceding  accoimt  of  tha  eondi^oo  of  the
alieui  at  Athens  applies  with  very  few  modifica-
tions to  most  other  parti  of  Orcece.  (Compare
Petitua,  l/gg.  AtL'^o-t,,  p  246,  &c  ;  F.  A.  Wolf,
Proleg.  ad  Lej^im,  p.  Ixn.  &C. ;  Heimann,  PoHL
.Latins.)  ■  [L.&)

HETOPA  or  METOPE  (^uriini),  the
name  applied  to  each  of  the  apacea  betwsen  the
triglyphi  in  the  frien;  of  the  Itoric  order,  and  by
metonymy  to  the  scniptured  oraameot  with  which
those  ipacea  were  filled  upL  In  the  original
ngnificuice  of  the  part*  the  triglyphs  repreaent
the  ends  of  the  cross-beams  or  joists  which  rested
on  the  architnve  ;  Hu  beds  of  theie  beams  were
called  iml,  and  hca>ce  the  ipacei  between  them
nrrirai. (Vitrur.  iv.  2.  fi  4.) Originaily  thtj


752


METRETES.


mrs  Uft  opai ;  next  thej  wen  SUti  op  with
plain  «Ubi,  u  in  lbs  pn^laea  at  Elcniii,  and
monj  other  bu3dingi,  and  lutlj,  but  Mill  at  u)
«rl;  poiod,  tbej  were  adoned  with  Mulptnrei
aitber  in  low  or  high  itlieL  Tbe  carlieat  eiiiting
(xunplet  of  Kiipttirad  metopea  ue  pmbabtj  thote
of  th«  mlddlo  templfl  on  tbe  B^npoliA  of  Sfllinu,
wbich  had  metopa  onl^  on  tti  eait  hmt,  and  in
which  the  itjls  of  the  icalpturei  ii  as  rode  aa  al-
Dioat  to  remind  one  of  Mine  Mexican  worka  of  att
Tha  data  it  probably  bclBeea  620  and  GGO  B.C.
Th«  Dtit  in  acUqaitf  ara  thote  from  the  middle
temple  on  the  eaatem  aide  of  the  lower  citj  of
Belinna,  in  which  there  it  a  marked  improrementf
bnt  which  ilill  belong  to  tbe  archaic  itjle.  Theic
data  ia  in  the  former  half  <tf  the  jth  eentm;  a  c
A  1^  forths  pngreiB  ma?  be  obaervad  in  the
metopei  of  tbe  aonthem  temple  on  the  eaalem
hUl,  which  1>elonga  to  the  lecond  half  of  the  lame
century.  In  theae  the  gromid  i>  tnb  and  the
figurea  marble  ;  tbe  othen  are  entirelj  of  tnfiL
{See  Rgant  of  the  Seliauntine  nHtopei  in  the
Allai  n  Kaffkr'lKiau^aMMe,  pi.il  pi.  6.  RgL  1
— t ;  cemp.  MlUler,  ArASol.  d.  KmL,  \  90,  n.  2).
"' ■' le  Selinuntoe  melopea,  with  the


of  the  epoch  of  perfoet  art,  namely  the  metopei  of
"' ■ ipleof  Theaeoaandof  thi " '
?B  of  iUaMiatii


the  temple  of  Theaeoi  and  of  the  Partheooo,
an  inCer«ting  Beriea  of  iUoitiationi  of  the  progreat
of  Omdan  icnlpture.  The  metopea  bom  the  Par-
thenon, now  in  the  Britiih  Hmeum,  are  too  well
known  to  need  deaniption :  but  it  it  important
to  Dotico  tha  marked  diSerenca  in  th«r  itjle ;
aoms  thow  evident  tract*  of  the  archaic  teheed,
while  otheci  are  worthj  of  the  hand  of  Pheidiaa
bimaelL  In  the  later  ordert  the  metopea  are  not
aeen,  the  whole  ftieie  being  bmught  to  one  aurfiue.
Thit  it  the  caie  even  in  aome  ancient  apecimRia
of  the  Doric  order.  (Comp.  Coi,DiiHjk,  and  the
plalei  of  the  ordei  in  Mauch,  AnMtitOK.  Ord-
■H^m.)  [P.  &]

METRETES  Owrmr^i),  or  AMPHORA
METRETES  (l^tfioptii  fMTpqr^f,  Ot  ^andatd
amfliora,),  waa  thJe  principal  Qreek  liquid  meamre.
It  contained  13  Aoa,  40  atontcu,  73  ralat  («-
turtO,  and  lU  tot^at.  It  wai  S>4tha  of  the  iw-
dinmia,  the  chief  dry  mntnie.  The  Attic  me-
trelea  wai  half  aa  large  again  aa  the  Roman  an-
fkora  ^aadnmtal,  and  contained  a  lillie  lee>  than
e  galloia.  (Sea  the  Tablaa.)  If  we  take,  ac
coining  to  Bdckh*!  viewa,  the  Onek  enbic  fi»t  at
equal  to  53^  Roman  asiAmt,  then,  aince  the  Attic
metntea  contused  72  tatarH,  we  hare  the  ratio
of  the  metntea  to  the  cubic  ti>ot  aa  72  ;  SH  or  aa
27  :20,  oraa  13JS;  loa,oraa  l'S5ta  1,  or  nearly
a*  4:  3.

Tha  Aeginetan  metretf*  waa  to  the  enbic  foot
(ttill  following  Bacl[h>>  calculationi)
of  S  :  4,  and  to  the  Attic  melretea  in
£  :  S,  to  that  the  A^netao  mcBanre  wai  3-6tha
greater  than  the  Attic  ;  and  tince  the  Atue  con-
tained 72  miuaii,  the  Aeginetan  contained  ISO,
which  it  precitelT  the  content  aaaigned  bj  Cleo.
patra,  Oajan,  and  Didymoi,  to  the  Babflmian,
Syrian,  or  Antioebean  metretea,  whieh  belonged
to  the  tame  ijitcan  aa  the  Eginetan. {MiNtou,

PoHUBta.!].

The  Macedonian  metretei  ia  inferred  to  have
been  mnch  imaller  than  the  Attic,  bam  the
camitance  mentioned  by  Ariitotle  {HM.  Jwwl.
TiiL  S)  of  an  elephanfa  drinking  U  of  them  at
awe  I  bat  thia  ia  donbtfiiL  [P.  8.]


HILUARE.

HETROVOHI  Ourpovjfiw)  were  oOeoa  at

Athena  belonging  to  that  daaa  which  we  miglil

polic»4fficen.  They  were,  like  all  efltcaa  of
tbii  kind,  B;^inted  by  lot  Their  nnmber  ia  alaled
diSerently :  Kane  my  that  there  were  Gfte«D  <tea
Ibr  the  PeiisBeu  and  fire  for  the  d^) ;  aooe  aay
'enty-fi>ar  (fifteen  for  the  Peimeena,  and  nine  fw
the  ci^)  i  and  othen  ttate  that  then  were  only  ten.
Era  tor  the  Peiraaeoa  and  Rto  for  tha  city.  <Har-
pocraL,  Snidat,  Phot  and  Lex.  Seg.  a  v.  Herpa.
v^wt-)  BSckh  iPiOLBcim.  L  !  9.  n.  193)  would
alter  all  theae  paaa^ea  of  the  gninnlariBna  ao  at  ta
make  them  a^j,  that  the  whde  nnmbec  of  metro-
nomi  waafifleak,and  that  ten  wen  for  the  d^  and
flie  for  the  Peiiasena,  becanae  tha  stophylacea  wera
diitrihuted  in  the  lama  manna.  Bat  there  doea
apfoz  mffident  gnond  ibc  tnch  a  bold  altoa-
1,  and  it  leema  at  any  mte  probable  that  tha
nnnber  of  theae  officot,  aa  the  grammariana  atate,
waa  neceuarily  greater  in  the  port-town  than  in
the  dty,  for  then  mut  bare  been  more  biininiaa
'  them  in  the  Peiiaeeoa  than  at  Athena,  whiiji
I  not  the  caae  with  the  lilophjlacea.  The  dotiea
of  the  metrcDomi  were  to  watdi  ^lat  the  woighta

icaanrct  iiwd  by  tradeamen  and  meceliantB

thould  hare  the  tiia and  weight  preatribod  by

law,  and  either  to  poniah  o%iden  or  to  raceitv

complainti  agakit  them,  far  the  real  natore  of  lb*

jnriidiction  of  the  metmnomi  ia  not  known.  (Meier

id  SchSmann,  Att.  Proc  p.  93,  &c) [L.  S.]

METR0T0LI8. [Colonia,  p.  313,  b,]

MILLIA'RE,  MILLIAOIIUM,  er  MILLS

PASSUUM  (jiifMr),  the  Roman  mite,  eenaiated

of  1000  pacea  (paiMui)  of  £  feet  taoh,  and  wm

tberefbre  =  5000  feet. Taking  the  Ronon  fiwt  at

'  1'64S6  Engliih  inchca,  the  Rnnan  mile  would

e  16IS  Englitfa  ynrda,  or  142  nrda  leat  than  tha

Inglith  ttalnte  mile. By  another  calcnlaliaa,  in

rhich  the  foot  ia  taken  at  11-62  incheo,  the  mila

would  be  a  little  mora  than  1014  yaidi. [Hn«-

\.) Tha  nnmber  of  Roman  mllee  in  a  di^ie*

lai^  circle  of  the  earth  ia  a  Tery  little  nxra

7&.  The  Roman  mile  contained  8  OitA
itadia. The  moat  oommDn  torn  for  the  n^e  ■•

paautm,  or  only  the  iniliali  M.  P.  j  Kme-

the  word  pa$tmBK  u  omitted. (Cie,  ad  All,

i  Salln«t,J>y.  ctU).

9  mile-itonei  along  the  Roman  radi  warn
called  mUtiaria.  They  were  alto  ealled  lapidai
thna  we  have  ad  (wtnm  laptdtm  (or  without  tha
word  bxfMnm)  (at  3  milei  from  Rome,  for  Roma
ia  to  be  nnderalood  at  the  ttarting-point  when  do
other  place  it  mentioned.  Sometimn  we  ban  ni
full  lA  Urit,  or  a  Jioma.  (Plio.  H.  JV.  iiiiiL  12.
t.  SB  i  Varro,  R.  Jt.  iiL  2.)  The  laying  down  of
tha  mile-atonei  along  the  Roman  rondi  iteoramonlj'
atcribed  to  C  OiacdiuB,  on  the  anlhori^  cf  a  paa-
•age  in  Plntarch  ( CroonL  fl,  7),  which  only  pntaa
that  Qracchna  erected  mile-atoneo  on  the  Nada
which  he  made  or  lenairad,  withonl  at  all  iBp1y~
ing  that  the  ayatem  bad  never  been  need  betim.
There  are  paiiagea  in  the  hiatotiana,  when  mile-
itonea  are  ipoken  of  aa  if  they  had  exitted  rnncb
earlier  ;  bnt  tnch  paaatgca  are  not  dedaiTe  ;  they

Flot.  ii.  6  ;  camp.  Jnatin.  xiii.  fl.  |  9.)  A  tneiw
important  teitimony  ia  that  of  Poljbina  (iii.  S9\
who  eiweaaly  ttatea  that,  in  hia  time,  that  part  tl
the  high  mad  from  Spun  to  Italy,  which  lay  m
Qui,  wai  prarided  with  mil»«li»et.
The  (JMOD  w«i  bragght  to  pofKlkn  by  Aa-


MIMU3.

gutu,  proDiliIy  in  eonneetion  witb  tint  nsanm-
ment  of  tk*  loids  of  Ihs  cmpini,  wliich  irai  ul
on  bat  by  Jalioi  Caeau',  imd  tiie  lenlu  nf  which
■re  ncN^ed  in  the  •o-olled  Jutonis  ^meraiy.
Aogmtni  let  up  B  gi\i  mari>1fl  pDlar  JA  the  Aintm
M  Kane,  to  mBii  the  cantral  poiat  Erom  which
tte  gremt  mdi  dimmed  lo  the  •CTerel  gitei  of
ltonw(DionCH.UT.  e  1  Flut.6aiA.24).  It  in*
called  the  MilSarnim  Aibvbii;  and  iti  p«il»D  b
dsGned  u  being  H  o^iK  Aoouni' Fan  (Pliu.  A  AT.
A.  I.  9),  nl  <»£«  »tf»«i  (Ttc  fffM.  L  S7).
SodK  naaiiia  at  it  itill  eiiit,  ckM  to  the  Aich  of
Septimioi  Screnu,  eomlMlni  of  ■  nnmd  bHC  and
a  piece  of  Ane  nBible  44  feet  m  diimMar,  the  whole
being  abont  10  leet  high.  (Pbtner  o.  Bnmoi,
Soab«>S.  d.  Sladt  Rem.  toL  iii.  pt.  i.  p.  7S,  pt.  2,
p.  loa  )  PUtner  a  Urlichi,  Saoilrnji.  Aoiiu,  p.  Sa)
It  iHint  thut  the  mublo  pillar  wu  coveted,  on
each  of  it!  itcet,  with  tablet!  of  gilt  bioiue  ;  but
whether  the  infimiBlioD  euiaTed  upon  than  con-
tbted  uiDplir  of  a  lilt  of  the  chief  placei  on  each
toad,  with  their  diitanoea,  or  whether  then  wat
■  eoR  of  map  of  each  let  of  nadi  with  iha  dii-
tancc*  maik^  npon  them,  !a  now  Dnkaown.  II  ii
■1b  atKtttain  whether  tho  nilei  began  to  be
raekoDed  bom  the  pillir  itMl^  or  from  the  atj
gatea.  (See  Dala  Kaoie,  in  theMfrn.  A  {"..load.
rfB  later.  Tot.  zxnii.  p.  S88,  &&  ;  Idelei,  in  the
AliamdL  d.  BerL  Atad.  1812,  pp.  184, 1S4.)

The  MiUovn*  Awrmm  at  Byzantinm,  erected
b;  Coutantiiig  in  imitalian  of  that  of  Anguatoi,
waa  a  large  building  in  the  forum  Angnttemn,
ntw  the  efaorch  of  S.  Sophia.  (See  Bncbholi,  in
the  ZtilKkr^  /ilr  Att^OmuaiueuA^  184fi,
No.  100,  ftc.)

Loodon  aliD  had  ita  MOliarvtK  Aartmni,  a  &ag-
mcnt  of  which  itill  remaina.  Darnel;,  the  cele-
brated Loxton  Stone,  which  nmj  be  aeen  affixed
Id  tha  wall  of  St.  Swithin^  Chnich  in  Cannon
Street.

Ftom  thia  example  it  ma;  be  inferred  that  the
chief  dt;  of  cBch  pinnnce  of  the  empire  had  iti
UaSarimm  Aaram.

The  ardmaiy  v^IUaria  slon^  the  nadf  wen
Uocki  or  pQlan  of  atone,  inKnbed  with  aome  or
all  of  the  fc^wing  point*  of  inionnation:  (1)
the  diatanee,  which  wai  eiprened  by  a  nnmber,
with  or  widkont  M.  P.  pi^ed :  (3)  the  placea
betwaoi  iriiieh  the  road  extended:  (3)the'nBme
of  the  ccoatmctor  of  the  mad,  end  of  ^e  emperor
to  wkae  hononr  the  wnic  waa  dedicated.  Several
of  Iheae  inacrip&iiu  remain,  and  are  collected  in
tha  CbOowing  worka ;  Onter,  C.  I.  pp.  ell  &&  ;
Mmati^  no.  ToL  i.  pp.  447,  tut. ;  Onlli,  Inicr.
Lat.SiL  Noa.  1067,  3330,  41177  ;  and  eapceiallj
Beigier,  HitL  det  gmadt  Cbflnnu  det  ifon.  toL  IL
pp.  7fi7,  ftc,  Bruielle^  1728,  4to.

Oa  aoue  of  dkeae  mil^atonea,  which  ban  been
timid  in  Qaot,  the  ■*'-■*--"  are  marked,  not  ooly
in  IfatBBn  milea,  but  alao  in  Oallio  Leagaa,


lablj  indebted.)

UIMUS  (>iv>ot) ia  the  name uj woico,  m

Greece  and  at  Rune,  a  apeciei  of  the  dnma  wM

hoogfa  the  koDan  mimna  difieled

im  w>  Greek  /u/iot.

The  Greek  minn*  aeona  to  bare  originated

I  (he  OreAa  of  Sidly  and  wallMn  Italy,


UIMUS.  763

id  to  hate  conoeted  originally  of  ertempory  ro-

•-■^-na  or  imitation*  of  ridieoloni  octuirenee*

life  at  certain  feilinia,  like  the  Spartan
At  a  kt<r  p«riod  tbeae  lude  rvpta-
acquired  a  more  artiatic  form,  which  waa
Droognt  to  a  high  degree  of  perlection  by  Sophron
of  Syncuae  (about  420  B.c).  He  wrote  hia  niecea
in  the  poonlar  dialect  of  the  Doriani  and  a  kmd  of
rythmical  pnae.  (QnmetiL  I  8.)  The  mimea  of
Sophnm  ate  doKnatad  aa  i^tei  inrsvtalH,  which
wan  probably  of  a  nun  amiosa  and  ethual  cha-
ncter,  and  ih/m  y^Xohh,  in  which  lidicnlooa  bof-
fbana7prqi0Ddented.  Snch  mimea  ronained  i^ier
the  tiaw  of  Sophnm  a  bnorita  anmaemtait  of  die
Onaka,  and  Philialioa  of  Hagneaia,  a  ooDtempoiary
of  AugnnDa,waaaeelebtBtedaelcr  m  than.  (See
MUUer.Cor.  i».7.  95.)

Among  the  Ronmna  the  word  miniua  wai  ap-
plied lo  a  ipeciea  of  dramatic  playi  aa  well  ai  to
the  penoni  who  acted  in  them.  II  ia  certain  that
the  Romana  did  not  derire  their  mimu  from  the
Greeka  in  •anthem  Italy,  Iml  that  it  waa  of  oatiTe
growth.  The  Greek  minua  were  written  in  fceae,
'  the  name  luimi  ma  never  ^iplied  to  an  aelor,
if  need  of  a  poion  it  aignified  one  who  made
gtimacea.  The  Eoion  mimaa  wete  it
finliah  and  moafly  indecent  and  obacene  i


aiatingman  of  gcatona  and  mimicry  than  of  anokeo
dialogiu,  which  waa  not  the  can  in  the  Ornek
~'  ;  The  diali^ae  waa,  indeed,  not  exdnded
bo  Beman  mime*,  bnt  waa  only  interaperaed
ion*  parti  of  the  repeaeotation,  while  the
acting  omitiniied  almg  with  it  and  uninter-
mptedly  bmn  the  b^inning  lo  the  end  of  a  piece.
At  Rome  Bofb  numea  aeem  originally  to  have  been
exhibited  at  fimeiala,  where  one  or  men  pemma
(■BMi)  nprcaentad  in  a  btirieaqoe  nuuma  the  life
of  the  deccaaed.  If  there  were  aevcnl  T^iJTni,  one
>f  them,  cr  their  leader,  waa  called  archinimub
Snet.  r«p<u.  IS  ;  Qiuter,  /luernK.  1089.  G.)
During  the  latter  psiod  of  Uio  republic  meh
&icoa  weie  aiao  renreaented  in  theatrea ;  bat  it
appear!  that  they  did  not  attain  any  high  degree
" ' "  "'  '  ■  bsfiwe  the  time  of  Caeinr,  for  it  ia  not
lal  writera  of  mime*  are  mentioned :
Cn.  Matiua,  Deciu*  I^iberina,  and  PDbL_  ~


L  Syma
:GelIiu,

r.  Sfi  ;  Soet.  Out.  39;  Cic  ad  Fam.  ziL  IB.)
Theae  coarae  and  indeoott  perfismancea,  of  which
Sulla  waa  very  fond,  had  greater  chacroa  for  tht
tana  than  the  ngnlar  dnma :  hence  they  were
only  peifbrmed  on  the  atagt^  but  even  at  re-
paita  in  the  hooaei  of  private  pcncau.  On  the
flags  they  wan  performed  aa  fiueea  aftm  tr^ediea,
and  during  the  empire  they  gntdnall;  lupplantod
ths  phue  of  the  Atellanaa  The  exact  tiine,  bow-
hen  the  Atellanae  yielded  to  the  mimea  it
It  waa  peculiar  to  the  actora  in  theae
her  to  wear  maaka,  nor  the  cothumna,
nia,  whence  they  an  aometimea  called
nlanipede*.  (Diomed.  iil  487;  Oelliua,  I  11  [
Maoab.  Sat.  ii  1.)  Aa  the  mimea  amtained
taken  from  nraunon  life,  loch  aa  exhibited
at  atrikiiw  featorea,  their  anthon  an  aoma-
ealled  bioTi^or  e^logi  (Cicyro  Adtr.  12,
dt  Oral.  ii.  £9),  and  the  work*  themaelve*  ware
diatinguifhed  tor  their  tiehncaa  in  mml  aentancea.
That  diatinguitbed  and  living  peraon*  wen  aoine-
timea  eipoaed  lo  ridicnlo  in  ihete  nujMi,  ia  deat


rsi  MISTHOU  DIRK.

&om  J.  Cnpitolinua  (Af.  Ant.  PhBoi.  c  29).  (Com-
pile Rcarali,  CaBedan.  Liltrar.  L  p.  SI,  &e.  ;
Ouin,  AmJacL  tnf.  i.  p.  67,  Ac  ;  Ziegler,  Di
Mimii  AiaiaiHnHn,  Oatdng.  HSS). [US.]
MINA. [T*HHTif¥.J

MINOR. [CdbATOH  J INPANS.]

MINU'TIO  CA'PITIS. [Caput.]
MIBHILLO'NES.  [CLADuronu,p.676,b.]
Ml'SSia [ExiKCiTDS,  p.499,  b.]
MI'SSIO. [Ot-AULiTOKU,  y.  G7G,  ■-]


MISTHO'PHOKI


ITOKIS,  p.  G


.). [Mu.


MISTHOSEOS  DIKE  (^uirAtviof  Swn),  alto
called  fuatArim  olnii  BCnt,  ii  tbs  utiaa  brgught
igiunit  ■  goudiui  for  silhet  tiariiig  ntgleeted  to
iwks  piolitable  me  of  the  pioperty  <Kf  hi*  inni,  oc
for  h&Ting  mide  do  uie  of  it  at  >I1.  Um  might  ba
made  of  nch  propern  either  hj  letting  it,  if  it
saiteltted  of  huidt  (S  bouo,  or  bj  poRiog  it  out
to  intereit,  if  it  amritad  of  ofitiL  Tha  tlmi
luatArims  moit  hsve  been  of  ■  twofold  ebaracts',
citber  public  or  priTale,  thai  ii,  it  night  ba  bmiflht
afgainit  the  Hoardian,  dnritig  the  minority  of  hii
ward,  by  any  perann  who  took  an  intereit  in  the
welbre  of  the  orphan,  or  it  ma  brought  by  the
orphan  hinuelf  after  hia  coming  of  ajia.  Comptunta
of  thit  kind  wen  broi^ht  before  the  fint  anhon.
In  ciuefl  whore  the  guardian  wonld  not  or  could
Dot  occupy  fainuelf  with  the  adminietntiou  of  tiie
pvperty  of  hii  ward,  he  might  requeR  the  atchon
to  let  die  whole  lubelaDce  of  hie  wnid'i  [ropcity
to  the  higbeit  bidder,  provided  the  teatator  had
Dnt  eipreuly  forbidden  thia  mode  of  acting  in  faia
will.  (Demoath.  c  ApkA.  p.  337  j  compare  853,
BS7  ;  Ljt.e.Dii^.-p.90e.)  The  letling  of  aueh
property  took  place  by  auction,  and  probably  in  the
prCKUce  of  a  court  of  juatice,  {or  we  read  that  the
eonn  decided  in  caaea  where  objectiona  were  made
■gaingt  the  terma  of  letting  the  pmper^.  (Iioeii^
ffa  PkiloeUm.  itrtd.  p.  HI,  &c)  Tha  penon  who
took  the  [Topeity  bad  to  pay  an  auuiial  per-
caitflge  tor  the  right  of  uaing  it,  and  thia  percent-
age fluently  amonntad  to  mora  than  IS  per  cent.

take  the  whole  property  on  anch  coiiditiatu,  it
might  be  divided  and  let  to  teieral  periona  lepo-
ralely.  (iBeni,  da  MaucL  iend.  p.  13.)  The
tenant  er  tenanli  of  the  property  of  an  orphan  bad
Id  gire  lecurity  (inTl;»|/ia)  for  it,  and  to  mort-
gage (ilnTifi^)  hie  own  eatate,  and  the  aichcn
■est  eipecial  poaoua,  ferirrifiirTal,  to  nine  hia  pro-

to  that  oftheorpiuui.  (  Suidaa,  i.  s. 'Awri^irnt'')
The  technical  term  for  letting  the  property  of  an
orphan,  whether  it  wn  done  by  the  gnardian  him-
•elf  or  by  the  nchon,  wi«  fU>4>M>,  and  thoaa  who
took  H  were  taid  /uiriimcfai  rhv  (^■wp  (abor  here
Hgnifiaa  the  vhole  anbatanca  of  the  pnpoty).  The
tenanta  of  the  eiDite  of  an  otphan  had  the  right
and  perh^B  the  obligation  to  protect  it  againat  any
other  perion.  (,ImeuM,  dd  Hoffm,  litrtd.  f.2BS.)  It
ia  not  dear  what  rctonrce  wai  open  to  an  orphan
agninil  a  tenant  who  did  not  fiillil  hia  obligationa,
bnt  it  ia  probable,  that  if  any  diqnitea  anae,  the
gnatdian  or  the  arohan  alone  were  anaweiable  and
bad  to  piocore  juatice  to  tbe  OTpban.

(Meier  and  Sehamann,^ff,/Vr>e.  pp.S9S.fiS2  ;
Biickh,  i^iU.  S(«>.  p.  SU,  Ac.  Sd  ed.) [L.S.]

MISTHOU  DIKE  (iu<r9ti  SSvn  or  ru«M»
thni)  ia  tbe  name  of  a  priTata  acthm  which  night
be  bnoghl  agaioat  penona  who  rcfiued  to  pay  for


MODULUS.
aeriioea  which  Iiad  been  pofonned  fa


i,fn-


bad  bem  agreed  that  Ibey  ahoold  be  paid
for  ;  and,  ■econdly.agunrt  penona  who  eitba  bad
not  or  had  impttfectly  peitbtmed  the  atnicea  (br
which  they  wen  pud.  It  made  no  diAmtea
whether  the  aerrice  waa  paformed  by  phyaical  or
intellectnal  powen,  aa  teachera,  aophiMi,  acton,
aathora,  and  aimilar  penona  were  paid  at  Athens
(BIka,  P-U.  Bam.  i.  |  SI),  and  it  ia  natuial  to


mentt,  either  w


»,like.


apecttng  the  i

caae  eiuier  party  thought  themtelTca  wronged  tbej

might  bring  the  (iiirtoG  B'  • ■ ■


thia  kind  ii


or  by  word  of  mouth,  te-
to  be  gifen  to  them.  In
:hemtelTca  wronged  tbej
Elm  againat  tha  otbec
a  wnnen  a  book  called  SIoi  iwifi
inatance  ii  recoided  of  an  action  of
rbich  be  demanded  paynuut  of  on%
. .  (Diog.  Laftt  it  8.  g  8.) It  ia  not

ioiprobaUe  that  hia  work  contaDied  an  accoont  of
thia  law-nit.  (Mei«  and  Schfimann,  AIL  Proa.
IiSU,  &c)  [US.]

MITRA  (rifrpa),  ugnified  in  genual  a  band  of
any  kind,  and  waa  naed  ipeciacally  to  indicue,
1.  A  belt  or  girdle  worn  by  waniora  round  iho
waiat.  [ZopiA.j  2.  A  broad  band  of  doth  worn
ninnd  the  head,  to  which  the  name  of  aaadana
vai  Bometimea  given.  [Coxa,  p.  329,  b.]  S.  In
later  timet,  a  band  worn  round  the  boaomby  wom^
wbjch  the  Qreeki  naually  called  iaiSrciiat,  and
the  Romani/bieiapaEtonilu  or  atnpiUiaiL  (Bccka,
C&mUa,  voL  ii.  p.  339.) [Fabcia;  STBOPBiuaL]

MIXTA  ACTIO. (Actio.]

MNA  (iin). [Talxstom.]-

MNE'MATA,  MNEMKIA  (Miaen,  fw*-
M*"). [FiTNoa,  p.  SSe,  a.]

MNOIA  (ftrok). (Coaui.]

MOCHLUS  (>«KJu)r). [jAsnA.]

HCDIOLUS,  the  diminntiye  of  MoDics,  i*
need  for  Tariona  kinda  of  anuiU  Teaacte  ;  among
Dthen,  fin  the  bucket*  on  the  edge  of  the  fjiia-
pBnnm,  by  which  wattr  waa  raiied  (Yitrav.  t,
IQ),  and  geueialty  for  any  kind  of  bncket  or
anull  ciitera  in  hydraulic  machineif  {Ih.  12,  IS);
for  the  well  of  an  oil  preaa  (Cat,  it  A.  20)  ;  far
the  boi  of  a  whed  (Flin.  H.N.a.i.t.1;  Vitrar.
I.  14)  ;  and  far  other  kinda  of  aocieta  (Vitror.  x.
18).  [P.  S.]

MO'DIUS,  the  principal  dry  meaanre  of  tbe
Romani,  waa  equal  to  one-thiid  of  the  ampboia
(Vohuiua  Maedanua,  Fotui,  Priadan,  op.  Wnnn,
§  67),  and  waa  therefore  equal  to  nearly  two  gal-
lona  Engliah. It  contained  1 6  »a  ■ '*  "-"


64  9>


t,12S


d  l9Sa


pared  with  the  Greek  dry  meaaure. «  wia  l-6th
of  the  Mkdimnus.  Ita  contcnta  weighed,  aecord-
ing  to  Pliny,  SO  pouuda  of  Qallic  wheat,  which
waa  the  lighteat  kiiown  at  Romf^  Farmen  made
uae  of  (eatela  hiding  3  and  ID  modii  (Colum.  lii,
IS.  %  S).  The  third  pait  of  the  jugenim  was
aomathnea  called  Msctna.  [P.  S.]

HO'DULUS  (JfiCdnii),  tha  alandard  mBann
naed  in  detsmining  the  futt  of  an  arehileetDnl
oidet.  It  waa  rau^natly  tha  lowtf  diameter  of
the  cohnnn ;  bnt  Vitruvina  take*,  in  the  Doris
erdcr,  the  lower  aemidiameter  far  the  modnle,  r^
taini^  the  whole  diametar  in  the  other  ordeia.
Modem  architecta  oaa  the  aemidianuNar  in  all  the
ofdeia.  The  ayalem  of  dividing  the  module  into
minute*  waa  not  naed  ^  tha  aaciant  architect*,
who  merely  oaed  anch  liaMlaial  part*  of  it  aa  wen
— ^j^  abMlnt*  lemth  of  tbe  iimM*


■  O"


MOLA.

dqModi,  of  camva,  on  lit  dimaulau  at  th«  sdi-

6a :  thn*  Vitnihu  dlncU  that,  in  s  Doric  teta-

(tjle  pottico,  I  -28th,  tnd  in  K  heiBrtyle  1-Mth  of

ths  wliola  width  ikrald  be  tiksn  u  the  nuxlule,

if  dkitjrle,  or  1-Q3rd  (od  l-3«th  lopsninlj,  if

mtyle. (VilniT.  I  2,  it.  3,  t.  9). [P.S.)

MOENIA. [MuBDB.]

UOICHEIAS  ORAPH£. [Addltbeiuk.]

MOLA  ^J•i)iat^),  ■  milL All  milli  wen  an-

osDtlj  made  of  itaiK,  tbe  kind  owd  being  ■  toI-

■aiiie  tncbfU  or  ponma  lava  (pj/riltt,  Pliu.  /f.  N.


oblaiiied  for  the  nms  puipua  *t  Majea  mi
Bther  parte  cf  the  Eifel  in  Rheoiih  Pnuua.  Thii
^ledei  of  itoDe  ii  sdminblf  adapted  for  the  p(U<-
peec,  beeuua  it  ii  both  hard  and  caTHnoni,  u
that,  aa  it  gTKdnallj  in«n  avmy,  it  atHi  paeaenU
an  infioitj  of  culdiig  nu&cea.

Ereij  mill  uuittcd  of  two  ft*"''*'  jutt,  the
dppo  mill-ftifie,  which  wai  mombU  (taiiOiu,
!*«,  Ti  hif^^,  Dat,  zxir.  6),  and  the  loveiv
which  wu  filed  and  bj  muh  the  huga  of  Ibe  two.

an  the  fitllowiog :  —

aha,  mi'OTii'K'i,  or  tntUHu.  (PUn.  H.  ff.  juzri.
39;  Oeaiii.3;  Cmto,  dt  Jit  SutL  10.)

The  iilandaia  t£  tba  Axchipalago  me  in  the  pro-
KOt  daj  a  miil,  nhkk  aauau  of  two  flat  nund
•toaea  abont  two  Jaat  m  diamatsr.  The  nppet
Mdoe  ii  tBiDed  bj  a  handle  (t^ni,  Schcd.  m
n4oeriL  IT.  68}  inaeilad  at  eoe  lida,  and  bat  a
hole  ni  the  nuldJe  into  which  the  com  ie  poured.
Bj  the  proceai  of  grinding  the  com  makea  ite  way
from  the  centre,  and  ii  pooled  out  m  the  atola  of
Bout  at  tha  rim,  (Tonoidbrt,  F(i)iiV>^  Xett  9.}  The
deaoipticBi  of  thia  "'^'•►'■r"  e^ctlj  agnwa  with
that  aitbt  Scottiih  quern,  fonnarly  an  indiipeuiable
jiait of  domeitie  fnmitnTe.  (Pennant,  IbarimSoot-
Ind,  1769,  PL  231 ;  and  1772,  <f.  S3B.)  There  csn
be  no  doubt  that  thia  ii  the  SanT-mill  in  ita  moat
eaoBit  form.  In  a  lery  ini[S0Ted  atate  it  liaa
beok  diacoTcred  at  Pompeii,  The  annexed  wood-
cot  ibowa  two  which  woe  finmd  Handing  in  the
inini  of  a  balcehoBae.  In  the  teii-hand  figoie  the
lower  millMooe  ool;  ii  ahown.  The  matt  euential
put  of  it  ia  the  cone,  which  ia  aumouDted  b;  a
Ho|ectioa  «■«**■  iiiing  originillj  a  atxong  iron  pivot
Tllc  upper  millatone,  leen  in  ita  place  on  the  right
hand  of  the  woodcnl,  apinacbei  the  form  of  an


MOLA.


766


^^3


bgn-^aH,  eoada^  of  two  hollow,  ccnaa,  jointed


togetliet  It  tlia  apex,  and  provided  at  thia  point
with  a  Hchet,  hy  which  the  npptf  atooe  waa  an^
peoded  apon  the  iron  pivot,  at  the  tame  time
tonchioR  on  all  lidei  the  lower  alon^  and  with
which  It  waa  intended  to  revolve.  The  vmet
■tone  waa  auiroimded  at  ja  narrdseat  part  with  a
■trong  band  of  iiVL ;  and  two  ban  of  wood  were
inietled  into  aqnare  holea,  one  of  wliich  appean  in
the  fignn,  and  were  uaed  to  turn  the  upper  atone.
The  nppomoat  of  the  two  hollow  oonea  arared  the
purpoee  of  a  hopper.  The  eotn  with  which  it  waa
filled,  gradually  fell  through  the  neck  of  the  vj^>er
atme  upon  the  mnunit  of  the  lower,  and,  ai  it  po-
ceeded  donn  the  cone,  waa  gtoond  into  floor  by
the  frie^on  of  the  two  rough  tuifacee,  and  fell  on
all  aides  of  the  baae  of  the  cone  into  a  channel
fonned  for  ita  receptiaii.  The  mill  here  repretenled
' five  oriii  feet  high.

The  hand-nilla  wen  worked  among  the  Greeka

id  Roman*  by  alavea. Their  piitcbinm  waa  con-

aequently  pcoTetbial  aa  a  pbue  of  pwnfol  and  d».

grsdiDe  hbatir ;  and  this  toil  waa  impoaed  prmd-

pally  on  woinen. (Horn.  M.  rii  104  ;  Biod.  li


.T.41.)

In  evoy  lat)ta  eataUi


at  the  hand-millt  w<


twelve,
by  a  aepaiata  ionale,  who  wia  oblued
to  grind  every  day  thefixedquandty  of  com  before
ahe  waa  permitted  to  ceaaa  mnn  her  labour.  ((}d*
a.  105—119;  cooniars  Gate,  lie  As  Aari:  £6.)

IL  The  cattle-mijl,  aula  otinHa  (Cato,  dt  Bt
EmL  10  ;  Matt  iriil  6}  in  which  human  iabooi
was  lupplied  by  tlie  uae  of  on  aaa  or  aonie  other
animal  (Orid,/^ut.ri.  318.)  The  animal  devoted
to  thia  labour  was  blind-folded.  (ApoL  Mit.  ix.)
The  mill  did  not  differ  in  ita  cooatmctian  from  tha
lajgfli  kinds  of  hand-mill.

IIL  The  water-mill  (aiola  ofaaru,  XpiAinis),
The  fint  water-mill,  of  which  any  record  ia  pie-
aerred,  wai  mnnecled  with  the  pahue  of  Milhri-
iniet  in  Pontna.  (Strabo,  liL  3.  g  30.)  That
watKr-miUa  were  used  at  Rome  ia  monifeat  fiom
the  deacription  of  them  by  Vibuviua  (x.  B.  ed»
Schneider).  A  cogged  wheel,  ettached  to  the  ozia
of  the  water-wheel,  tuned  another  which  was
attached  to  the  axis  of  the  nppei  null-stone :  the
am  to  be  groimd  Ml  between  the  stones  oat  of  a
hopper  liiffiadSmlMat),  which  waa  fixed  above
them.  (Seaalaa%unck,..<HLiLI19;  Pallad.cj*
Ra  HkmI.  L  42.)  Auaoniua,  ai  quoted  below,
mcntiiHia  their  ezislttice  on  the  Ruwernear  Trevea ;
and  Venantius  fonunatna,  deacribing  a  caatla
built  in  the  sixth  century  as  the  bonks  of  the  Ho-
salle,  makea  diitinct  mention  of  a  tail-race,  by
which  "  the  tortuDua  ilream  ia  ccmdocted  in  a
straight  clianneL" (Poem,  iii  1 0.)

IV.  The  floating-mill.  When  Borne  waa  be-
sieged by  the  Oothi,  A,  D.  536,  and  when  the  atop-
page  of  the  aqueducts  rendered  it  impossible  to  uae
the  public  corn-mills  (tt  rqs  rikHtt  iiJAmns)  in
the  Janicnlum,  so  that  the  dtiiens  were  in  danger
of  starvation,  Belisariua  aupplied  thai  place  by
erecting  floatmg-milli  upon  tae  Tiber.  Two  boota
being  moored  at  the  diilBnce  of  two  feet  from  each
other,  a  water-wheel,  suspended  on  its  axis  between
them,  waa  turned  by  the  fpcca  of  the  atrcam,  and
pat  in  moljoa  the  stones  for  grinding  the  com,  by  -
which  the  Uvea  of  the  boieged  were  preeared.
(Pncop.  dt  BMi  OoAico,  I  IS.)

T.  The  *aw-mill. Auaoniua  menliom niUa


76S  MONETA.

■itoated  on  101110  of  llie  Btnama  Eilliiiff  int
HoKlle,  and  tutd  (bi  cuttiiig  muble  mta  .
(jWohUo,  36%  363.)

VL  The  pqiper-milL A  mill  for  grinding  ,
p«T,  TOida  of  boivood,  ii  mentiooed  bj  Petraaiui
(iw^  tama  piper  trwO,  Sat.  74).  [J.  Y.I

MONA'BCHIA  (/uHpxl«).  >  gsnend  ume
fir  Bnj  form  of  goTenunent  in  vhich  tb«  ■nprama
tfonctioni  of  political  ulminiitrfttiiin  on  in  tll^
Imadi  of  a  unglc  parun.  Tha  tend  ftompx^  li
spiled  to  mch  ffOTenunonta,  whatbu  thvj  an  be-
ndituy  or  dcetiTO,  legal  or  uniped.  In  iti  cam-
moast  ApfJication,  it  ia  cqnivalont  (0  BtfAtla,
whether  abiolate  or  limited.  But  ths  rate  of  an
aetftauia  or  a  fjnn<  would  equally  be  called  a
Itorofxla.  (Arilt.  Pd.  iii.  9,  10,  it.  S  ;  Pllto,
Pom.  p.  S91,  e.  e.  p.  302,  d.  e.).  Henoi  Plntaich
Dtet  it  to  expreM  ua  I«tin  dtctatara.  It  ia  b;  a
iomawbat  rfaetonod  nae  of  tbs  word  tliat  ic  is  ap-
plied now  and  than  to  tbc  t^^t.  (Emip.  AfppL
S£2  ;  Aiiit.  FoL  IT.  4.)  Foe  a  mora  detailed  ei-
aminalion  of  the  nibject  the  reader  it  referred  lo
the  article  Ru,  Abchon,  Ttrahkus,  Phytanis,
AurHNiTis,  Tuus.  [C  P.  H.]

UONETA,  tbs  mint  or  the  plxe  when  manej
waa  (nined.  The  mint  of  Rome  wia  a  bnildinj;  on
tba  Capilolinc^  and  otlached  to  tbe  temple  of  Jano
Moneta,  u  the  snarinm  wai  to  the  temple  of
Batani.  (Lit.  tI  SO.)  Tbii  temple  wai  rowed  hj
Camillns,  and  dedicated  in  S44B.C  on  the  apol
vbere  the  home  of  M.  Manlina  CapiMtinni  had
once  been  Manding.  <Li(.  viL  23  ;  Ot.  Fail.  Ti.
1 83.)  Some  wiilsn  dncribe  tba  art  of  ooining  aa
having  been  known  lo  the  Itsliana  from  the  eariieat
timei,  and  a«gn  ita  ioTention  to  Janoa  (Hacrob.
Sal.  l  7;  AlLen.  it.  p.  69S)  ;  bnt  thia  and
limilar  aceounCi  are  noching  mora  than  &blei.
Tbe  etatemenl  of  Piiny  {If.  f/.  miiL  3),  who  aa-
■igni  tba  iniention  of  coining  to  Sarviui  Talliua,
hiia  umcwiial  more  of  an  hiitorica!  aapect ;  and  he
derires  tbe  name  pecnnia  Chim  tbe  drcnnutance  that
the  coim  were  otiKinallj'  marked  with  the  image
of  some  animal.  The  oirlieat  Roman  coina  were  of
aea  [Ais],  and  not  atmek,  bnt  cait  in  a  monld.
<See  the  repiaentation  of  ntch  a  monid  on  we
MS.)  The  monldi,  however,  were  Mmelimea  with-
out any  figure  and  merely  ihaped  the  metal,  and
in  thia  caae,  tbe  image  ai  well  ae  tbe  name  of  the
gena,  St,  were  rtrack  apon  it  by  meana  of  a  ham-
mer apon  an  anril  on  which  the  form  waa  fixed.
Aa  the  itrakei  of  the  hammer  were  not  alwaya
eqna],  one  coin  thoDgh  equal  in  Talne  with  another
might  differ  frnm  it  in  thickneea  and  ahape.
Ortater  equality  wai  prodnced  at  the  time  when
the  RoDuma  begsn  to  atrike  their  money  ;  bnt
when  thii  cnatom  became  general,  ia  not  known.
Reapecting  tbe  ehangea  which  were  introdnced  at
Rome  at  rariona  timea  in  the  coinage  aea  Ai8,  Aa,
AxoiHTUti,  Admcu,  and  Ndhuus.

In  tbe  eaiiy  time*  of  the  republic  we  do  not
nad  of  any  officen  who  were  chaiged  with  the
auperintendence  of  the  mint ;  and  rapecting  the
introdunion  of  anch  officen  we  have  but  a  very
iragiu)  ttalement  of  Pomponiua.  (Dig.  I>  tit  3.
I  SO.)  Their  name  waa  triDmriri  manetalea,  and
Niebiihr  (Htrt.  0/  Rtmi,  iiL  p.  646)  thinka  that
they  were  introduced  at  the  time  when  the  Ro-
Duuufint  began  to  coin  tilTer.i.a.  269  a  c  The
triumTiri  monetalea  had  the  whole  ai^Krintoid-
ence  of  the  mint,  and  of  tbe  money  that  waa  eained
in  it A  great  munbei  of  coiD%  both  of  gold  and


MONETA.
ailTBT,  ia  ngned  by  theaa  ttwniTin  to  the  fol-
bwing  manner:  — IIL  VIR.  AAAFP,  that  ia,
Irimimr  amro,  arpaijo,  aert  finmio  firimndo  (Cic
lb  Ltg,  iii.  3  ;  P.  MannL  ad  Cic.  ad  Pam.  TJi.
13)  or  III.  VIR.  A.P.F.  that  ia,  ad  ptemnoaa
/mtmdanu  Other  coins  on  the  other  hand  do  not
bear  the  lignatura  of  a  triuniTir  monetalis,  bnt  tbe
inacriptioa  CUR.  X.  FL.  8.  C.  i.  a.  crrator  data-
rionan  flaadonm  a*  ainfiiKomWto,  or  are  ugned
by  pnelon,  aedilea,  and  qnaotora.  Caeaar  not
otdy  inoeaaed  the  number  of  the  tiinmTiTi  nKio^
lalea  to  fbnr  ;  whence  some  coins  of  his  time  bettt
the  sigoaton  IIII.  VIR.  A.P.F.,  bat  entnated
certain  alsTes  of  his  own  with  the  anperintendenca
of  the  mint.  (Snet.  Can.  76  ;  cosniare  Cic.  Pi^p,
TiL  1 .)  The  whole  r^nlalion  and  maBBgement  of
the  Roman  mint  and  ila  officen  dnrii^  the  time  of
the  republic  ia  inTolTed  in  Teiy  great  ohacutity.

Tbe  coining  of  money  at  Rome  was  not  a  privi-
lege bdonging  eTclnsiTely  to  tbe  state,  bnt  fROft
the  CMns  atill  extant  we  moit  inii!T  that  ereiT
Roman  dtiten  had  the  right  to  have  hit  awn  gold
and  ailTer  coined  in  the  puUie  mint,  and  tmdn  tha
snperintendiftice  of  ita  officera.  The  indiridnal  or
gem  who  bad  their  meta]  coined,  atated  its  nam*
SB  well  as  the  value  at  the  cam.  Thia  waa  a  kind
of  guaiantee  to  the  public,  and  nearly  all  the  coina
oF  the  repablioan  period  coined  by  a  gena  or  an  in-
diridoal  hear  a  n^ik  stating  their  Talue.  Aa  iaog
aa  tbe  republic  henetf  uted  pure  nlver  and  gaiS,
bad  money  doea  not  aeem  to  have  been  eoiaed  by
any  one ;  bnt  when,  in  90  b.  c,  the  trilmne  Linua
Drnsus  anggeated  tha  expediency  of  mixing  tba
lilTBT  which  was  to  be  corned  with  one-eigbth  of
copper,  a  temptation  to  fbigery  was  given  to  tha
people,  and  it  appears  hotcefbrth  to  hare  occurrad
frequently.  As  early  ai  the  year  86  B.  a  forgerj
of  money  was  carried  to  such  an  extent,  that  no
one  waa  ann  whether  the  money  he  poweeaed  waa
genuine  or  hiae,  and  the  praetiv  M.  Morius  Qiali-
dianua  aaw  tbe  neceaaity  of  interfering,  (Cic  A
Q^  iiL  20.)  Ha  ia  said  to  have  diacorasd  a
m<»nB  of  testing  money  and  of  diatingniibing  tha
good  from  ^le  bad  denarii.  (Plin.  H.  N.  uxiiL
46.)  In  what  this  means  oHUBted  ia  not  clear ;  bmt
aome  method  of  examining  silver  coins  most  hav*
been  known  to  tha  Romans  long  beibre  thia  timo,
(Liv.  xxxii.  2.)  Snihi  inflicted  hoTy  jnuisb-
ment  npon  the  coiners  of  fitlae  money  ■  hia  law
icmained  in  fam  during  the  empire,  and  Dot
only  blse  coining,  but  any  crime  connected  with
the  deterioration  of  money,  was  gradually  made  to
nnder  it. In  the  latest  timea  of  the  empit*


All  Rnnan  mcaey  waa  gencnlly  coined  at  Rome,
hut  in  soma  particular  ouea  the  ninta  of  otW
Italian  towns,  u  in  the  previneea,  were  ated  ;  &■
we  must  remember,  that  during  the  time  of  tba
republic,  subject  countries  and  provinces  were  mt
deprived  of  the  right  of  coining  iheit  own  monn.
This  right  thn  even  ratained  tmdar  the  empin  fac
a  long  time,  Meugh  with  aoma  modilieatianB  ;  frw
while  some  placet  wen  allowed  to  coin  their
money  ai  befiwe,  otheri  wan  obliged  to  have  upon
their  coini  the  he^  of  the  empou,  ir  of  soma
member  of  his  family,  ^vet  and  gaU,  bowevar,
wen  cinned  only  in  place*  of  tba  fint  tank.  Wben
all  Italy  ncaived  ue  Raman  {tmchit^  all  tlw
Italiana  naed  the  Bcoan  monay,  and  in  riMiwi
qneiice  loat  the  right  to  coin  their  own.

It  hw  bcoi  AUd  aboT^  AM  fi^bMj  tnmrf


MONBTjL
Bomin  dtuen  Ud  tbs  rigbt  W  bne  hia  gold  mi
nlnr  OHiwd,  bnt  none  liad  ths  right  to  pot  hi)

own  isuge  upon  &  coin,  and  not  «tsi  9n]la
Tentund  to  ut  amiarj  to  thii  ctmom.  The
coini  ^ipusntlj  of  the  npahlican  perir>d  vith
the  partrait*  of  indicidniU,  were,  Kcording  to
Eckhel,  coined  M  a  later  time,  and  hj  the  de-
Kcndanti  of  thoM  pezwiu  whiaa  portiuti  are
gircn,  Cacaar  wu  too  fint  to  vhom  tliii  privi'
Irg«  ini  grantol,  and  hii  example  wai  foUewed
hj  maoj  othm,  aa  *e  lee  from  the  coin*  of  SeiL
Ponpeiaa.  The  empeRin  utmtud  the  lubt  to
put  either  their  own  imageeorthow  of  memben  of
ibeir  bmiliei  upon  their  coini.

From  the  lime  of  Angiutiu,  the  trioMTiri,  geoe-
nllj  ipaluiig^  no  iooga  put  their  namea  en  anj
coin.  Hid  it  bmame  the  eiduiiTe  prinlege  of  the
eoperu  to  coin  nlTar  and  gold.  The  loiBte  an-
tmtcd  with  the  admiuiitimtioD  of  the  eenrinm
ntainsd  onlj  the  right  of  couung  copper,  wbeooe
■Imoat  all  copper  oome  of  thii  pmod  are  mariced
with  S.  Cor  EX  S.C  Bui  tliia  laited  ont j  till
the  tiau  of  OalUcaiu,  whem  the  right  of  coining  all
BHHMj  becvna  the  eidnnTe  [ViTilege  of  the  em-
persra.  Ai,hawaT«r,lheTatt axlenlof theempire
tendered  mon  than  (me  nunt  Decenuj,  we  find
that  in  eerera]  [nriDcei,  each  ■•  Gaul  uid  SpWD,
Rmiian  monej  wu  corned  nndci  the  nperia-
tendence  of  quaeeton  or  prMmnli.  Boman  colo-
'  ■  and  i«o»unei  now  Biadnally  ■  -

In  de  . ■


their  own  laone;.


n  jarta  of  the


ccntiuj  of  OUT  BAa,  bnt
nunej  did  Dot  become  nniTeml  till  after  the  time
of  Galliemia.  Fiom  the  lime  of  the  emperor
Amelian  a  great  number  of  citici  of  the  empire
fnaeeaBed  minta  in  which  Roman  mone;  via  coined,
■od  during  the  latter  period  of  the  empire  the  iu-
perinteodenta  of  minta  are  called  procnntorei  or
nopoeiti  meaelee.

Tbe  pcnooi  wbo  were  emplc^ed  M  voriaHm  in
a  mint  wne  caUed  Bitmlani,  Their  number  at
Eoma  appeara  to  han  been  tot  great  during  the
latter  puiod  of  the  empire,  for  in  the  reign  of
Aqidian  thej  neail;  prodooed  a  meet  dangenm
tebdlioD.  (AoreL  Vict,  lit  Cat*.  35  ;  Vopiac.
AmnL  33.)  The;  teem  genenllj  to  liaTe  been
freedmec (MuiU.  Iiatripl.  968.  n.  6.)

In  Ortece  eytxj  free  and  iodepeadent  dlj  had
the  right  to  coin  it*  own  monej.  Sparta  and
Bjiaotinm  an  nid  to  bare  only  coined  iron  nHmty
(Pollux,  viL  lOS},  but  no  ancient  iron  coin  bu
OTcr  been  (bond.  Reapecling  the  time  when  money
waa  tint  coined  in  Oreece,  lee  Arointum  and
NuNmis.  The  Greek  tann  for  money  wa«i^»ii»-;ia,
bvm  vdfun,  becaojo  the  determination  of  iti  taloe
WM  Gied  by  law  or  ontract.  (Ariitot  EAie.  y.  6.)

Tbe  niot  M  Alhoii  wai  odled  dfTupononuv.
[Akovkocofuon.} We  do  not  hear  of  any

anpefinUDdcnce  of  the  Athenian  mini.  How  br
the  liehl  of  coining  mmey  wa*  a  priTil^a  of  the
ecobaJ  goreroment  of  Attica  ia  tmknown.  But
the  extant  coint  ihow  that  at  Icoit  lome  demei  of
Attica  had  the  right  of  coining,  and  it  ii  probable
that  the  goremmeut  of  Alheoi  only  watched  orer
the  wriiriit  and  the  purity  of  the  metal,  and  that
in  their  awembly  bad  the  right  of  r^ii-

a.  BIO,  ftc3 The  Attic  gdd  and
n  alwayi  of  Tery  pnfe  metal,  and


NONILE.  76r

w«  baT«  only  one  instance  in  which  tbe  itate  at  a
dme  of  great  diitreii  uaed  had  metaL  Tfaii  waa
in  the  anhonthip  of  Antigenei  and  Calliai,  B.  c.
407  ud  106.  (AriitopL  Asa.  673,  with  theSchoL,
and  G7S.)  IndiTiduali  who  coined  bad  money
were  puniibed  with  dealL  (Demoith.  c  Lapl,
p.  £08;  NoMiauAToB  Dufhoras  Doti.)  The
place  where  money  waa  coined  ii  slwaya  indicated
on  Greek  coini ;  either  the  name  of  the  place  ii
■tsled,  or  eome  tymboUcal  rspreientation  of  the
^■ce,  ai  the  owl  on  Athenian  and  a  peacock  on
Samian  coini.  Theae  lymbola  are  genenlly  of  a
religiont  natere,  or  omnected  with  Uc  wot^p  of
the  god*  or  haoea.

For  farther iufbimatiiBi on Ihii mlqect iee
£ckhel,AigfriiuA'w»niarej«nnN,i]idcepeciaIl7
iL  L  i  Dnresn  de  b


■Bf  PoUtiiiia  di

L'RII, {HOKI


MONETA'HII, tM

MUNI'LE(Ip;u>).BnecklBce.  Necklacow
worn  by  both  niei  amoiig  tbe  moit  poliihed  of
thoee  nationa  which  the  Oreeki  oiled  barbamoa,
eepedallv  the  Indiana,  the  Egyptionl,  and  the  Per-
■iani.  [Abhilli.]  Greek  mi  Roman  female!
adopted  them  more  particularly  ai  a  bridal  orna-
ment. (Lntan,  iL  SGI ;  Claud,  dt  tL  (ow.  Homor.
627.)

The  aimpUit  kind  of  necklace  waa  the  rnoaUa
hattalum,  or  bead  necklace  (Viig.  ^aa.  I  6fi7  }
Lamprid.  AL,  Sen.  41),  which  conauted  of  beniea,
imall  aphere*  of  glaia,  amethyit,  dec,  itmng  to-
gether. Thia  ii  very  commonly  abown  ia  ancient
paintinga.  (See  woodcut,  p.  136.)  The  head  i^
Hinerta  at  page  £66,  eibibita  a  frequent  modiB-
cation  of  the  bmd  seeklaee,  a  row  of  drop*  hanging
below  the  bcada.  Theae  dmpa,  when  won,  arranga
themaeliei  upoa  the  neck  like  laya  proceedii^
from  a  centre.  To  thia  claai  of  Decklania  belongi
one  in  tbe  Egyptian  collectioD  of  the  Britiah  Huaenm
(aee  the  annexed  woDdeul),  in  which  imall  golden
lincda  alternate  with  the  dropi. ThaGgmeinthe


768  MORA.

woodcat  immediately  iuiduii(«th  thia  eiltibiU  Itis
cmtnl  portion  of  a  very  andent  and  exqniaitelj
wrought  nedclace,  ithich  wu  icmnd  at  S.  Agatha,
iiearNBple*,iiitheKpukhnafaO»ekltulf.  It
hna  71  pendimts.  AfaoTelhem  ia  iliuid  comiating
of  aevenl  nwi  of  Iho  close  chain-work,  which  we
now  caU  Venetian.  [Citiha.]  We  bIb  giTe
here  the  central  portiont,  exhibiting  the  pattema  of
three  aplendid  gold  n«klacei,  norchaaed  from  the
Priace  of  Canino  for  the  Britiih  Muaeom.  Theie
were  fannd  in  Etraican  tomba.  The  omaDWBM
nmiiit  oT  ciidei,  loMngei,  ntettea,  irr-leam,  and
hippocanipL  A  heart  depanda  from  the  csntn  of
one  of  the  necUacea.

The  neditace  wsi  loiaMimca  mftde  to  icaemhla  a
lecpent  coiled  ahont  the  neck  of  the  wearer,  ai  waa
the  caaa  with  that  given  aa  a  naptiaJ  preaent  by
Venua  to  Hannonia,  which  wai  omamented  in  ao
eloZwrate  a  manner,  that  Notmiu  devotee  60  linot
of  hia  i>taitjraiaixi  (t.  I3fi,  &c)  to  jta  descrip-
tion. Thii  lame  necklace  afterwajda  appean  in
die  tnjlholoio'aa  the  bribe  by  which  Eriphyle  wii
tempted  Co  beMy  her  hiuband.  (Apallodor.  iiL  4.
§  a,  iil  6.  §§  2~~6  ;  Diod.  ir.  65,  t.  49  ;  Sen.  i»
Am.  vi.  44S.)

The  bekiily  and  iplendonr,  aa  well  aa  the  laloe
of  necklacei,  wets  enhanced  by  the  inaertion  of
pearl)  and  picciooa  atonea,  whkh  were  atnmg


B  greeniah  hue  (isaragdi),  were  often
employed  (viridti  gemma).  Jut.  y\.  363).  Amber
neckhieei  ate  mentioned  in  the  Odjiaey  (zr.  4S9,
iviiL  29£).  Some  account  of  the  Tarioni  kindi  of
linka  ia  given  in  the  article  Catinb.  The  hooka
or  claipa  for  laitaning  the  nedilace  behind  the  neck

geniooily  contrived.  Beaidea  a  hand  endnliog  the
neck,  there  wai  aDmetimea  a  aeeond  or  eren  a  third
row  of  otnamenia,  which  hmw  lower  dawn,  paaaing
oier  the  breoat  (Hem.  Hyma.  u.  in  Fn.  II  ;
bmga  BUmiiia,  Orid.  MA  i.  264  ;  BSttiger,  Sabma,
ToLii.p.l29.>

Very  valuable  necklaua  were  sometime*  placed,
ai  dedicated  offering!,  upon  the  atatues  of  Minerva,
Veniu,  and  other  goddeisea  (Soelon.  CoZi.  U),
and  thli  waa  in  accordance  with  the  deicriplion  ef
their  attire  given  by  the  poetL  (Horn.  HyoM.  L  la
Fen.  S8.)  Honea  and  other  bvourits  onimali
wen  al»  adorned  with  splendid  necklaces  ((uif«a,
ViiT.  Aen.  TiL  278  ;  gtmmala  momlia,  Ovid.  MA
■  X.  113;  ClandiaB,  £JpM.  zzxvi  9  ;  A-OelL  v.  5).
tTonquss.]  [J.  T.l

MONOPO'DIUM. [Mmra*.]
MONOPTEROS. [Timpluk.]
MONOXYLON. [NiviB.]
MONUMENTUM. [FuNus,  p.  fiSl,  a.]
MORA. The  bet  of  an  obl^tio  not  being
discharged  at  the  time  when  it  ia  due,  is  followed
by  important  consequences,  which  either  may  de-
pend on  the  nature  of  the  amtraet,  or  rosy  depend
on  rules  of  posidre  law. After  such  dehiy  the
creditor  is  empowered  to  nse  all  legal  m«ns  to
obl^  satisEsEtiDn  for  hia  demand ;  he  may  brii^
bla  action  agunst  hia  debtor  or  against  (hosa  who
have  became  secnrities  for  him,  and,  in  the  case  of


there  are  particulai  provisions:  fbi  mstBDce,  the
pnrchaiK  of  a  thing  after  reoeiving  it,  mnit  pay
interest  on  the  parcbase-money,  if  then  is  delay  in


MORTARIUM.

pairing  It  after  the  time  fixed  for  paynunL  (Dw.
19.  tit.  1.  a.  13.  g  30.)  The  rule  is  the  nme  as  to
debts  dne  to  the  Fiseus,  if  they  are  not  paid  whoi
they  ore  doe.  If  a  oolonus  was  behind  in  pajmait
of  his  rent  far  two  yearn,  the  owner  (loiator)  might
eject  him  (Dig.  19.  tit.  2.  i.64.  g  1) :  and  a  man
lost  the  right  to  bis  emphyteona,  if  he  delayed  tba
payment  of  what  was  doe  (canon)  for  thm  yeara.

Then  were  cases  of  delay  in  which  there  wM
simply  a  Dco^fnlfilment  of  the  oUigalio  at  the
proper  time  ;  and  the  term  Hoia  is  somelimei  ap-
plied to  inch  case*.  But  thai  which  is  propol^
MoK  is  whm  there  is  deUy  on  the  |Brt  of  hia
who  owes  a  duty,  and  culpa  can  be  imputed  to
htm.  Some  modan  writers  are  of  i^nion  that  all
delay  in  a  person  discharging  an  obligatio  is  Man,
except  there  be  some  impediment  which  ia  cnited
by  causes  beycnd  the  debtoi'i  controL  But  there
are  many  reasons  for  the  opinion  that  Hon  in  ita
prqier  sense  always  irapiied  some  culpa  im  the
part  of  the  debtor.  Tliia  is  {mved  by  the  general
rule  as  to  the  necessity  of  interpellado  or  demand,
of  the  creditor  (si  interpellatus  ojqxirtuna  loco  nan
Bolierit,  quod  apud  judicem  cxaminabitor)  ;  by
the  rale*  abotit  eicuaationes  a  mora,  which  only
have  a  OKaning  on  the  supposition  that  leal  mora
is  not  always  to  be  imputed  to  a  man,  thougli
there  may  be  delay  in  tiie  discharge  of  an  oiJi-
gatio.  That  this  is  the  true  mesning  of  Mora  b
alio  shown  by  the  tarns  used  with  refrrence  to  it
(per  enm  atetlt,per  earn  bctitni  eslqDOmuius,fte.).
This  view  is  conlmned  alto  by  the  rule  that  in
every  case  of  Mora  the  particular  circnmstancca
are  te  he  considered,  a  rule  which  |ijaia1y  implica
that  the  hare  bet  of  delay  is  not  neceissiy  to  con-
iticule  Mora.  In  a  {aasage  of  Papinian  (Dig.  12.
tiL  1.  a.  5)  the  doctrine  £at  bare  delay  doea  not
eonstitate  legal  Mora  ia  clearly  expressed.

When  Mora  could  be  legally  fanpuled  to  a  IaBl^
he  was  liable  to  loss  in  many  catet  when  he  other*
wise  would  not  be  liable  i  as  if  a  man  was  bound
to  give  a  thing  and  it  was  lost  or  destroyed,  ha
was  to  bear  the  Ioh,  if  the  bolt  was  his,  that  ia,
if  real  nilposo  mora  could  be  imputed  to  hiin,  (Dig.
IS.  tit  1.  s.  5.)  In  oies  when  a  msn  did  Dot
pay  money  when  he  ought,  he  was  liable  to  pay
interest  if  legal  Mora  could  be  imputed  to  him.
In  bonae  fidei  contructus  interest  (usntae)  waa
dne  if  there  waa  l^pil  moia.  ( Vangenw,  Aai-
<U«n,  lie.  iiL  p.  188  ;  Tbibaut,  ^tfot,  <te,  L
§96,  &c  ;  Dig.  22.  tit.  1.)  IB.L.]

MORA, [GxBBciTua,  p.  481]

MORTA'RIUM,  ab»  called  PILA  and  PI-
LUM  (Plin./f.Miviii3;  ixiiiL  36),  (lA^  :
l7»il,  SchoL  mHti.Op.t*  Diet,  431  ;  fytu,  ap-
{oiently  from  the  root  of  ioin,  to  strike),  a  mectar.

Before  the  invention  of  mills  [Mola]  earn  waa
pounded  and  rubbed  in  nortarB  (fiebim.),  and
hence  the  place  for  making  bread,  or  tbe  hake-
house,  waa  called  piethmam,  (Serv.  «  Fir^.  Ant.
i  179.)  Also  long  after  the  introductiosi  of  mills
this  was  an  indispensable  article  of  domestic  (iitni-
ture.  (Plane  A<d.  L  3.  17  ;  Cato,  da  Re  ZteK.  74
— 7B-,  Colum-^AsAut  iil££.)  Hesiod  (L  c).


,  directs  him  to  cut  a  mortal  three  leet,  aid
pestle  {tripor,  itoaifrar,  pielilbai)  three  enbita
ng.  Both  of  tiiaae  wen  evidBiIly  to  b«  made
liom  stiught  portioiia  of  tbe  tnmks  or  btancbei  of
trees,  and  the  thi^er  and  shoRar  of  them  was  to
be  hoUowwL They  might  tka  be  wad  in  tha


MUNYCHIA.

dating  on  tbe  tomb  of
et  Hoodcnt,  left-band
figure  taken  fram  WtlkinHin.  toI.  iL  p.  383)  ;  tor
then  ii  no  mwD  to  doubl  that  the  Egyptiona  end
the  Oneki  bialiioned  aind  iiud  their  morton  in  the
Mme  manner.  {3n  bIm  Wilkinion,  toI.  iii.  p.
1S1,  ibDving  three  itonB  mortan  irith  metal  p»-
Ileo.)  In  Une  poinlingi  we  ma;  obeerre  the
thickening  of  the  palle  M  both  endi,  and  thai  two
men  pound  in  one  mortar,  ninng  their  peitlei
ollemolely  u  It  (till  the  practice  in  EgTpt.  Plinj
{ff.ff.  xuvL  AS)  mention!  the  Tuioui  kind*  of
■toiie  iclected  for  making  moitoia,  occordii^  to  the
' '  ' '  B  intended  to  lerre.


Kg^ption  collectioD  of  the  Britith
cnctlf  Bntwer  to  thia  deacription,  being  mode  of
that  niBterial. They  do  not  eioeed  three  ' '
" '■  1  dotted  linei

B  voodcut  Bin  ahowi
peMte,  made  of  baked  white  cla;',  which
eorered,  ±.  D.  163i,  Bniong  DamODUi  apedmeiu  of
Roman  potteiT  in  msking  the  northen  q>pro«cfaea
te  IiondoQ-bndge  (AnAatiilogia,  toL  hit.  p.  199,

Betides  the

wilh  ftlae,  in  order  to  make  black  paint  (o/ror
tea,  Vitni*.  liL  1 Q.  ed.  Schneider)  ;  in  makmg
pbiter  for  tb«  walls  of  apBTtmenti  (Plin.  H.  ff.
xxiri.  M)  ;  in  mixing  apices  and  fragrant  herbs
and  flowm  br  the  me  of  the  kitchen  (Atfaen.  ii.
70;  BnuKk,.^iu/.iiL£l};  and  m  metBUnrgy,  as
io  trituratilw  cinnabar  to  obtain  merouy  horn  it
hj  sublinodon.  (Plin.  H.  JV.  nxiii.  tl.  luiT.
22.)  [J.  Y.]

MOS. piiB,p.657,  a.]

HCVTHACES,  MOTHOTIES  (fiMMH,fuW«-
Mi), [CiviTis,  p.  290,  b.]

MUCIA-NA  CAUTIO. [Ciuna]

MU'LLEUS. [PiTBiqn.]

MUL8UM. [VmoK.]

MULTA. [PoiNA.]

MUNERATOR. [Oi.*ni*TOltM,  p.i7*,B.]

1!U'NICEP3,MUNICITIUM.  [Coj.oi.Ui

FOSnULlTAB  CiTITATBa.]

MUKDS. IHoKaRis.]

HUNUa. [Oladutobh,  p.  S74.  ■.]

MUNY'CHIA  iiMrrixa),  a f<^nl «!•■

btBted  in  bmonr  of  Aitemii  Mtmrchia. Plntanh

(lit  Olor.  AA.  p.  349,  r.)  sa^  that  it  was  inali-

nucd  to  eatomfnMHUe  die  Tietoij  orer  the  Par-


MURUS.  769

ainni  at  Salamii,  and  that  it  wa(  held  cthj  year
on  the  aiitecnlh  of  Hunychion.  (Compare  Siiidaa
and  HoipooaL  f.  e.  Movrux^v-)  ^he  nmficea
which  were  oBeled  to  the  goddess  on  this  daf
coniiiled  of  cakes  called  ifi^i^mt,  either  be-
cause St  this  aeaton  the  full  moon  was  teen  in  the
west  at  the  moment  the  aun  rose  in  tbe  east,  or,
SI  it  more  probable,  and  alto  conGrmed  by  most
anthoritiei,  becauae  tfa^ae  cakea  were  adorned  all
round  with  bnmiiig  candles.  (Atben.  xit.  p.  645;
Suidaa,  t,  o.  'AMtorcn-oi :  Heaych,  end  EtymoL
Mag.  I.  E. 'A/i^i^r.)  Eustulfaioi  (mi /ZfoiJ.  iriii)
ears  (hat  these  cakes  were  mode  of  cheeie.  [L.S.]
'MURA'LIS  CORCNA. [Coboni.1

MUREX. ITbibulus,]

MU'RIES. LVxaTALZH.]

MU'RRHINA  VASA,  or  MU-BREA  VASA,
were  first  introduced  into  Rcona  by  Pompey,  who
dedicated  cups  of  thia  kind  to  Jupiter  Capiloliani.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xiirii,  7.)  Their  laloe  waa  very  -
greaL  (Sen.  cJ>  Bauf,  lii.  9,  BpiiL  11!l  ;  ISar-
tial,  UL82.25;  Dig.  33.  tit  10.  s.  3.  J  4.)  Pliny
({.  e.)  states  that  70  talenta  were  giren  for  one
holding  three  lexluii,  and  apeakt  A  a  muirhine
inlla,  which  coat  300  Calenta.  Nero  gare  ereii
SOO  tolenta  for  a  capia  or  drinking  cup.

Pliny  (xxxrii,  8)  nys  that  these  mnrrhine
•eiteli  came  from  the  East,  principally  from  placet
wilhiii  tbe  PanhJaa  empire,  and  chiefly  from  Can-
mania.  He  detaibea  them  at  made  of  a  subatonce
formed  by  a  moitture  thickened  in  tbe  earth  by
heat,  and  taya  that  they  were  chiefly  rained  on
B4x»tmt  of  their  Toriety  of  coloura.  Modem  writen
differ  mneh  respecting  the  material  ot  which  they
weie  compoeed.  Some  think  that  they  were  ra-
liegBted  glon,  and  olhen  thai  they  were  made  of
onyr,  tiuce  that  tlnne  preaenta  a  Toiiety  of  colours  ;
but  the  latter  conjecture  is  overthrown  by  a  pos-
tage of  Lampridins  (Hdiagab.  32),  who  apialu  of
onyx  and  mnrrhine  rases.  Most  ncent  writen,
hoverer,  are  inclined  to  think  that  they  wen  tma
Chinese  porcelain,  and  qnote  m  support  of  their
opinion  the  worda  of  Pmpertins  (ir.  5.  26)  :  —
"  Morreaque  in  Parthis  pocula  cocta  tocii,"
Thia  opinion  would  be  rendered  atill  mon  probable
if  we  could  place  dependence  on  the  atalement  of
Sir  W.  QeU  (PompeiaHa,  lol.  i.  pp.  98,  99),  "  that
the  porctlun  of  the  East  was  called  Mirrha  di
Smyrna  to  as  lale  m  date  aa  IfiSfi."  (Becker,
ea&iit,iaLip.U8.)

MURUS.  MOENIA  (r.rxoi),  the  wall  of  a
eity,  in  oontiadittinction  to  PaUIB  (toIxoi),  the
wall  of  a  house,  and  JVcteeru,  a  boundary  wall.
Both  the  Latin  and  Greek  words  appear  to  contain,
as  a  part  of  their  root  meanii^h  the  idea  of  ajim,
ilroi^  wall ;  and  they  are  nearly  always  used  fbr
walli  of  stone  or  tome  other  mastiTe  ceastruetion.
Afttrw  tad  TiT;i(at  ore  alto  Died  for  the  outer  wall


We  iind  citici  auirounded  by  maaaiTV  walla  at
the  earliest  periods  of  Greek  and  Roman  hiatcrry,
of  which  we  baTS  any  recordt.  Homer  speaks  of
the  chief  cities  of  the  Argive  kingdom  as  "  the
walled  Timja,"  and  "  Mycenae  the  well-built
ci^  "  {IL  ii.  &S9,  £69),  not  only  thus,  at  in  other
passage^  [OiiTiiig  the  common  use  of  such  atnie-
tum  in  the  Homeric  period,  but  alto  alteating  the
great  autiqmly  of  those  identinl  gigantic  walU
which  itill  stand  at  Tiiyns  and  Mycenoc,  and
Other  eitin  of  Greece  and  Ilalj. In  E^rot,  in


MDRUa
Etraria,  and  in  CcDtnl  Itt!;,  «tpeciallj'  in  tha


.hich


■like,;.


leiue  blocki  of  itoiwi  put  togetheT  williont
cemenl  of  oa;  kind,  bnt  which  differ  &om  one
imotltet  in  Uic  mode  at  tbcir  canitrticttDn. Three

r'  icipol  ipcciet  can  be  cleuly  diitinguiihed  :  —
Imt  in  which  ths  mauei  of  itonfl  nre  of  ir-
nguUr  ihipe  and  are  [wt  UgeLher  wiibaut  an;
attempt  to  fit  them  into  one  anotlier,  tba  intcr-
aticee  being  IookJj  filled  in  with  nnaller  itonu  \
ai  in  Ifag  wslli  of  the  citadel  of  Tiiyni,  a  panioQ
of  which  ii  ahown  in  the  foLIowiog  angxaving :  ■ —


Another  ipccbnen  of  the  bnildingi  at  Tiijni,  of
mnch  mom  regular  conitrnctun,  maj  ba  aeen  at
p.  125.

2.  In  other  caaea  we  find  the  blocki  Mill  of  ir-
regular polygonal  ahapei,  but  of  a  conitraction
which  ihovi  a  conaideiible  aditncc  upon  the
former.  The  ■lonea  aie  no  longer  unhewn  (ifyii
Ajtei),  but  their  aide*  are  lufficienlly  >inoolli<d  to
nutke  each  fit  occorately  inln  the  aoglna  between
the  othera,  and  their  bce>  are  cat  lo  a>  to  giro  the
whole  wall  a  toierably  amixith  aurfiue.  Eiamplea
nf  thii  aoit  of  work  are  leiy  commoD  k  Elmria.
The  engntiii^  ii  taken  bum  the  waUa  of  linriiin
InArgolia.


lone  of  the  horiaontal  joint!
aiB  Gonlinuoua),  ajid  with  terdcal  joinia  either
perpendicular  or  obliqae,  and  with  alt  the  joInla
mon  or  leai  acoustelj  Giled.  The  wdli  of  Mf-
cenae  preaant  one  of  the  nider  example*  of  thia
aort  of  itmcture ;  and  the  fallowing  engraving  d
the  "  Lion  Gate,"  of  that  foitreai  (to  oiled  bva
the  rudelf  aculptund  fignrei  of  liou)  abowi  alao
the  maimer  in  which  the  gaua  of  theae  three  ipe-
ciei  of  walli  wei*  built,  by  tupporting  an  '"■""—""
block  of  Hone,  for  the  lintel,  Dpou  two  othen,  for
jambi,  the  Utter  inclining  inwardi,  lo  aa  to  gire
more  ipacc  than  if  Ihe^  were  upright.  A  Teiy
large  number  of  inlenatug  eiMBpIca  of  tbeae  ooa-


■tructioni  will  be  fbond  engraTed  in  aome  of  the
worka  preiently  referred  to.  We  hare  only  apace
for  theae  three  characteriatic  ipecime
claai.  Neither  ta  it  here  poaaible,  or  a
to  diacuu  the  opinioni  of  ancient  writera,  moM  t^
whom  were  content  with  the  pOMilar  legend  wbkh
anigned  theae  woiki  to  the  Cydopea,  nor  the
theorin  of  modem  icholaii  and  antiquariaiu,  who
(with  aome  of  the  ancienta)  baTegenaally  refiand
them  to  the  Pelugiani.  The  jauujfal  eonduwiiBa
to  which  Mr.  Bunhnry  bal  come,  from  a  thonuBfa
examination  of  the  whole  mbjut,  in^  be  aafiehr
regarded  aa  canect:  namely,  that  wUle  io  aui^
worka  aa  the  walla  of  Tiryni  we  han  nndeiibt-
edly  the  earlieat  eumplea  of  mnta]  aichitectan^
it  ia  quite  a  fallacy  to  Uy  down  the  genenl  prin-
ciple, that  the  unhewn,  the  polygonal,  the  man
irreguUc  and  the  more  regnlai  netangular  eon.
atnictioni,  alwiya  indicate  asceeauTa  atepa  in  tlie
pn<[reaB  ci  the  art ;  and  (hat  it  ia  alao  erroaeaua  to
aaaign  theae  worka  to  any  one  pei^le  or  to  any  on*
period :  that,  while  aueh  naaaiTa  aauctorea  would
of  oouae  be  bailt  by  people  ceanpantireiy  JgDoraot
of  the  art  of  atane.aittit^  or  of  the  toola  nnper  for
it.  they  might  be  and  were  aim  erected  ia  lalot
timea  aimply  i»i  account  of  their  ad^icatioD  to  tb^
putpoae,  and  from  the  motive  of aaving  umMccaorj
labour  ;  and  (bat  the  diSerence  betwaeo  the  poly-
gonal and  rectangular  alracturei  ia  gaicnUy  to  bo
aacribed  not  to  a  diSermce  ia  the  ekiU  of  lb*
woitmen,  bat  to  the  difieieDt  phyaical  chonelcn
of  the  materiala  they  employed,  ^  the  one  aott  of
itructun  being  nauully  OC  a  apeaea  of  limiMaai^
which  eoiily  aplita  into  polygonal  hlockh  and  tba
other  a  aandatone,  the  natural  deamge  of  which
ia  horixeotaL  (Bimbury,  (y£qpaa>  RtmamM  in
CMroJ  Ao^,  in  tim  Oumcai  Malna^,  1  US,  vol.  ii.
pp.U7,&c  ;  iiWa,  AnAaoi,d.K*vl,i%t5. 166,
and  the  worlu  there  quoted  ;  Stir^ita,  JrMoL  d.
AHiwial,  ToL  L  pp.  96— 98  i  Hin,  0«al.<i.&i*-
haul,  ToL  i.  pp.  195,  Ac,  and  plate  viL  fron  which
the  foregoing  eula  are  taken;  Jliai  imKagltr't
Smi^iKUciU,  Pt  iL  PL  1  :  OSttling  m  tke
latin.  Mtu. I»3,  vaL  iv.  pp.  S21,  480,  and  in


Warn,


in  Orewc  alW  tha  ti
I  which  had  been  adooled  in  tb
oauch  eariiet In  Iba  Img  «


itusna

AlbaH,aiid  llw  inllaofPunMai,tblBMar<(ig(i
<rf  the  CydajfB  wodu  wu  nniled  with  perfect
i^ubritjrf  snoitrtctMD.  TbeitoDCC,  which  waw
w  laige  ihu  cMh  ma  *  twt-lo«d  (1M««m>  wan
■ccontdj  fitted  l»  «w  •umW<^  TOfig  JrriinB')*
and  bald  tantbe^  withosl  cancnt  bT  melal  cluDpt
Mtdued  with  Ifd  into  nckati  cut  mio  tlie  blockt
of  Ms^  (ThMC.  i.  9»).  Tba  Willi  of  the  Par.
thenoD,  and  the  other  gnat  adificai  of  the  period,
were  i^  limitar  cooMnictiaL  SonietinMi  waaden
plug!  w«i«  OMd  intteod  of  Beta)  clanpa.  It  ii
iiiminniij'  to  deecriba  here  the  deluli  of  the
modes  in  which  the  joint*  wMs  anaoged  in  ihii
ngvlai  and  maiiiTB  mdnriirr  So  parfsn  wai  the
woriuDauhip  at  ihii  pariod  of  the  art,  that  the
joinu  ofiao  apptarad  lika  a  thnad ;  and  Pliof
mcnlioQa  a  tonpla  at  Cjiieua,  in  the  inlerioi  wall
of  whkbafiaa  thnad  »f  gidd  waa aetnall;  inaerted
in  tha  joiirti  of  the  maHnrT.  (H.  N.  xzxri  IS.
i.3-2.)

The  aialiirieli  MifiloTed  M  thi*  period wen


e,and.i.


>  of  the  I


magnificent  templea,  marble.  Tha  piactica  of
pnllii^  a  luing  of  marble  orei  a  wall  of  a  com-
Booer  material  wai  intndaced  in  the  next  period
of  architectniml  hiilory.  The  tint  enrajJe  of  it,
accotdiog  to  Plinr  (Jf,  !</.  ixxrL  6.  ai  6),  wae  in
Ih*  palace  of  Mwuolui,  the  vail*  of  which  wen  of
briclii  bced  with  dabi  ientHat)  of  ProeonuFiiBn
maible  (about  B.C  360).  Vilnmii*  (iL  H)  alio
•iBlea  thu  hd,  and  add*  that  biick  walli,  when
perfectly  perpendicalBc,  are  quite  aa  duiable  ai
ihoae  nf  ilooa,  and,  in  ptoof  of  thia,  he  mendooi
aneial  eianplei  of  Ter;  ancient  i^ck  buihlingi,
buth  in  OiBeca  and  Italy.  (Camp.  Vicnir.  L  12  ;
Pani.  L  43,  iL  27,  t.  fi,  z.t,iB;  Later.)

Fat  baildiogi  of  a  common  eott,  the  matariali
caiploytd  woe  imallBT  etoau,  nmgh  or  aqDand,
cr  Sinta,  at  well  aa  bridu :  the  lulec,  howcTcr,
were  not  neallj  (o  mneh  aaed  by  the  Oreeki  ■•  b;


will  be  deacribed  jnatnllj.

The  waUi  of  aaMlkc  qnanied  atonea  a  lokki
win  boniid  togetha  with  wioni  kind*  of  mcrtac
at  eemant,  conpoaed  of  lime  mixed  with  diSenot
aindi  and  T<doanic  eartha.  The  meet  dnntble  of
ItteM  wai  the  ceDnot  f<med  by  mixing  two  paita
of  TVrTB  FtMvLaia (fa»rn/nan,  BTolcanic  pndnet,
which  ii  bund  in  vaiieaa  parti  of  Italy,  baiida
Pnleoli)  with  cue  part  of  mettar:  thii  cement  had
tha  propdW  of  hatdaning  lapidly  andec  watai :
it  waa  moch  naed  in  aqaMocti,  eiitoiu,  and  anch
warita.  (ForfunhudettilaoB  eemenli,iea  Vitm.
iL  ft,  6,  r.  13,  Tu.  3  ;  Plin.  tf.  M  xxiri  33.
I.  £3,  U  i  FllhuL  L  10,  11 1  Smb.  t.  p.  346  ;
Dioam.  t.  133).

Tha  hiitnrj  of  B<aMa  maaonij  ii  not  viry  dif-


1  of  Italy  haTe


bnat  from  that  of  tba  Oreak. f  ha  Cyclopean

B  beea  already  naticed. The
t  Roata^  neb  aa  the  Career

Walla,  ware  eanalineted  of  mamTe  quadrangular
bewn  iltaai,  pheed  taMlwr  withoit  eemcot
[ClOACl.]  IniisatofUanBaina,theftma*m
twice  11  hng  *a  they  an  high.  Canim  {Ard,
^aCif.)  diitiiigniilMa  fire  naciei  of  Roun  nuHDiiry ;
nUMly,  (1)  whea  tbe  blocki  of  iteu  an  laid  in
alienate  ogncaei,  kiigthwiM  in  ena  coqibb,  and

whoi  the  atoHi  in  each  contae  an  lud  altenale^
along  M»d  MCOM  [  ihiienMnutian  waaotwlrtm


MUR08.  771

tha  mlla  were  to  bo  Sued  with  lUb*  of  narble  i
(3)  when  they  are  hud  eitinily  langthwiie  ;  (4)
(otirdj  aoaawiia  ;  and  (£)  when  the  cooreM
are  alternately  h^her  and  lower  than  each  other,
M  in  the  lannd  temple  (of  Veeta,  to  called)  apon
theXibtw.  Thit  lerapk  aUo  afford«iiiBn  sxampio
of  what  ii  called  nuilii>tairk,  in  which  the  itonea

relied  Bt  their  join

geoenJIr  left  n

.ted,  in  lie  opinii
Bare  the  Iroable  of  imoothing  die  whole  bee  of
ue  •t«te* ;  bat  it  ia  more  probable  that  it  wai
adopted  in  cider  to  give  a  bolder  and  firmer  ap-
peaiancs  to  the  ■tructon.  Examplet  of  it  ara
found  in  the  icmuna  of  lereral  Roman  rortificatiDDa
in  Qeimany,  and  in  the  nibatnictione  of  the  tnidga
Dier  the  Mcaelle  at  Cobleni  (AbH.  Mat.  1836,
ToLir.p.SlO;  Witudi^  in  the  Rid.Sitcseiop.
i.dam.  AUtrtlh  art.  Jlfart).  Aa  by  the  QneU,
eo  by  the  Honuni,  walli  of  a  commoner  lort  wen
built  of  unollcr  ^lanicd  itonea  {eamaiita)  or  of
brieka.  Vilruriua  (ii,  8)  and  Pliny  (ff.  M  xxxvL
32:  a.  SI)  describe  the  Rjlloving  kinda  of  maaoniy,
Kcording  to  the  mode  in  which  the  amall  lUmea
((Bnasita)  were  pot  together.  (The  woodcat  ii
copied  from  the  Ablnidaiigm  w  tfiacUMim'a
Wtrii,  DwiaoaKhingen,  lU3fi,  fig.  10.)


Beaidta  the  large  HiBan  blocka  of  attne  (O),
they  Died  imallar  qaadnngnhr  sMMS  ananged  m
regular  conma  (rf  equal  and  of  nneqioJ  belKhta;
the  fenaer  wai  called  Uahtmm  <H),  the  letter
pmmdiiakmmmi'L);  in  mother  aort  of  work,  celled
unpUKim  (O).  the  outer  &cas  of  tha  walta  only
were  of  wioi^ht  itooe^  the  inlennediale  ]»rU
being  illed  up  with  nmgh  atoaei,  but  these,  in  the
Qnek  method  of  ecoaeuBtian,  wen  wdl  bedded
in  moRar,  and  anaond  with  orerlaKiing  jwnta,
and  the  wall  waa  bndad  together  with  atone*  laid
aoeaa  at  mterrala,  which  were  callsd  lulTam(F);
bat  the  workmen  of  the  time  of  Vitmvina  were  in
the  habit,  for  tha  lake  of  despatch,  of  running  up
the  outer  wall*  seurately,  and  then  filled  the
middla  wfaae  with  knst  tubbiih,  a  sort  ef  woik
which  Fliny  calb  diatiicbm.  The  eicellrace  of
tlie  cement  which  tba  Romani  Died  enaUed  tham
to  conMruet  walli  of  tctj  snail  reogh  atonea,  not
hiid  m  oDuraN,  but  heU  together  1^  the  Mcctari
thia  Blrnctnn  was  called  o^a*  imetrPam  (N).  An
im)«DTeniBnt  npcn  it  in  tfipeannoc,  bat  infariar  in
itahilitT,  waa  Uie  opM  ntiaUatam,  of  which  there
were  two  kinda,  tha  U*  <K)  and  the  aaZOe  (I).
This  lett  of  work  waacsoiposedofatcaa  orbridu,
inches  low,  and  ^Knt  thiee  iiichca
rhicb  bnned  the  fi


tqnara  at  tha  and,  wUi


>d9 ~


•  o'^


772  IIURUS.

irall,  the  intericc  beinjr  filled  in  vilb  morbir  and
■mail  iDDgh  (tiHie*.  VitnTina  Bunplain*  oF  thoa
valla  u  being  apt  to  ipUt,  on  Bccatmt  of  theic
baling  neilher  horiiuntal  ciHin«nor  corend  joints.
ADolfaer  itmctun  of  wbich  ths  Ronun*  made
gnal  UK,  and  wbich  wu  eoe  of  tho  niotl  dnrabla
of  all,  wu  that  oompoMd  of  coarse*  of  flat  ti1a(H).
Bach  coorses  vera  also  intndnced  in  the  olbar
kinds  ofttone  and  brick  valU,  in  wbicb  tbcj  both
■erred  as  bond-counai,  and,  in  Ibe  lover  part  of
tbe  wall,  kept  the  damp  from  riling  from  the
giDond.  Biick  mils  eoTered  with  Mnceo  vera
eiceedinglj  common  with  tbe  Roraana :  iTen
columns  wen  made  of  brick  eoTend  with  itocco  ;
VB  have  ta  example  in  the  colnmni  of  the  basilica
M  Pompeii,  tha  eonitroRian  of  which  i>  eipUinsd
in  Faaipai,  toL  L  p.  136.  In  hot  eauntnca,ai  in
AfWea  and  Spain,  nils  weie  built  of  eanli  rammed
in  between  two  taca  at  moulds  (teMoe,  /n-moe),
vhicb  wen  remorcd  wtien  it  hardened  ;  they
were  aUxi  pariita  Jarauitti ;  and  Pliny  mention
vatch-towen  of  this  conslnictioa,  built  by  Han-
nibal, OQ  tke  manntains  oF  Spain,  wbicb  still  stood
firm.  {a.N.  HIT.  14.  s.  46.)  Walls  of  toif
were  chiefly  used  in  tbe  lamperti  of  camps
(A uD ail, Vallum)  and  as  embankments  lor  riven.

With  respect  to  the  use  of  walli  at  foRifioitians,
we  haie  not  space  to  say  much.  Tbe  Cyclopean
walls  of  Tiryus,  &C.,  bad  no  towen  ;  but  Homer
refers  to  lowers  on  the  walls  of  Troy  ;  and  in  the
biitoricsl  period  we  Rnd  that  it  was  tbe  practice  to
fumtsli  walls  with  lowers  at  regular  interrals.
Some  writers  an  miUlaiy  affiun  recommend  them
to  be  placed  at  salient  angle*  of  the  walls,  in  order
to  command  tbe  intertealng  spsees,  vhilst  others
object  to  this  poiititm  on  account  of  the  increased
eipoMire  of  tbe  tower  itwlf  to  the  battering  nm.
Tbe  account  which  Thncydides  gi^es,  in  bii  se-
cond book,  of  the  siege  of  Plataeae,  is  an  inter-
J  exhibition  of  tbe  state  of  the  sciatica  of
id  attack  at  the  period  of  tbe  Pelo-
ponnesian  war.  Much  was  done  to  adrance  it  by
the  srebiteets  and  engine<n  of  tbe  time  of  Alex-
ander and  bis  sueceason.  Tha  mlei  which  baTe
been  established  by  tha  time  of  tha  Roman  era-
petnrs  may  be  seen  exhibited  in  detail  by  VitruTini
(I  b),  atid  tbe  writan  on  militBry  aSaua,  and  il-
InsCrated  by  the  remains  af  the  walls  of  Pompeii.
(Pompeii,  toL  L  pp.  66,  ftt)  The  system  may
be  described  in  a  fov  varit  as  a  bioad  tenaee  of
earth  (<ygtr)  enelcaed  betwe^  two  battlemnited
wnlli  and  furnished  with  towers,  two,  three,  or
mote  stories  bigfa,  communicating  by  arched  door-
vays  with  tbe  aggtr,  and  also  baring  a  sally-port
These  towers  vera  at  dittanoea,  on  the  arenge,
of  the  cast  of  a  javdin,  bat  Tirying  aecording  to
the  greuar  or  less  eiposnre  of  each  pan  of  the
vail Respecting  the  galea,  see  Porta. [P.  3.]

MU'SCULUS  was, according  to  the  description
of  Vegelins  (ds  A*  Milit.  It.  1G>,  one  of  the
■msllar  military  mncbioes,  by  wbich  aoldJNS  in
besieging  a  town  wera  protected  while  engaged  in
flIliiM[  up  the  ditcfaes  round  tha  besieged  place,  to
that  tlw  moieabia  towen  (tarrti  ambtinlohia)  at
tba  bearers  might  ba  able  to  appnaefa  tl
wilhoat  obstada.  A  tobnte  deacriptii
mnsodns  it  pisn  by
Ac).  Tha  one  which  ha  describia  waa  nine  fat
long,  and  was  constructed  in  the  foUowing  man-
ner 1  —  Two  beams  of  equal  length  were  placed
npon  the  ground  at  tha  diManaa  it  faer  Jihat  fmn


eating  e
fortificat


deacriptioo  o


HUSICJL

each  other,  and  npim  them  were  fixed  little  pillan
five  feet  high.  Their  top-endt  were  joined  bj
tnmtTose  beams,  which  (ciroed  a  gentle  slope  on
either  side  of  the  mof  of  vhicb  tbay  formed  tba
frame-work,  Tho  roof  was  than  entirety  cotered
with  pieces  of  wood,  tvn  feet  bnad,  which  Wet9
fiulened  with  metsl  plates  and  naiis.  Around  tlta
edge  of  this  roof  square  pieces  of  wood,  four  cubits
broad,  were  fixed  tor  the  poipoae  of  keeping  to-
gelhH'  the  bricks  and  mortar  with  whkb  tha
muscnins  was  then  corered.  But  that  thete  mat*-
lials,  which  were  intended  to  protect  the  nmscnloa
against  fire,  might  not  tnfler  fiwn  water,  the  bricka
and  motlBi  were  coTered  with  akina ;  and  thM
these  skint  again  might  sot  snSer  fnm  the  £r  or
stonea  which  tha  b«ieg«d  might  throw  npon  the
mntculaj,the  whole  was  cOTUeii  with  rags  of  elotfa.
The  whole  of  this  machine  was  constructed  under
tbe  eoTer  of  a  Tinea,  and  dote  by  the  Roman
rhen  the  besieged  w

' Tcnlni  was  a

The  men  engaged
I  imdermine  the  wall
I  it ;  and  while  thia
work  was  going  oil,  the  beaiegers  kept  >9  a  lirdjr
fight  with  the  betiaged  in  order  to  premt  them
liiim  directing  thair  attackt  aoaintt  tha  mnscnlos.
(Compare  Caat.  da  BM  On.  lii.  80,  d*  BA  Ala.
I.}  Tha  mntciilns  detoibad  by  Cwstar  was  eri-
dently  designed  for  difletant  pnipaast  than  the  eua
mentisaed  by  Vegetini,  awl  tbe  IbniKr  apptara  to
haTe  beta  only  a  naaller  but  a  aon  indaatruetiUa
hind  of  Tinea  than  that  enamonly  tisad.  (Lisaiaa,
Poliorc  i.  9 )  Oiuchaid,  JUimBim  Milil.  iL  p.  6&
tab.  2.)  [L.S.]

MUSEIA  (Maiireui),  a  fettiral  with  oOGtettt
celabiated  at  Tbetpiae  in  Boeotia  in  faononr  of  the
Musea.  CPan*-  i^  3>-  I  3-)  It  wai  held  eToy
fifUi  year  and  with  great  splendwr.  (Plat.  Amatar.
p.  748.  F.)  Fmm  Aeschines  (a  Tmank.)  it  ap-
pears that  there  was  also  a  testifal  called  Maseia,
which  was  celebrated  in  schools.  [L.  S.]

MUSE'UM  {ittuntor)  signified  m  ganml  a
place  dedicated  to  the  Mutea,  but  was  ipedally


founded  by  Ptolam;  Philadetphai,aboDt  B.C280,
for  the  promotica  of  leaming  and  the  aapport  of
learned  men.  (Athen.  T.  p.S)3.)  WalaanCnia
Soabo  (iriiL  p.  794)  that  tha  museum  finned
part  of  the  palaca,  and  that  it  contained  doBtai*
or  portioot  (nplTvrsi),  a  paUio  theatre  or  leetu*-
room  (^iSpa),  and  a  luge  hall  (oErst  ittyBt\
where  the  learned  men  dined  tcgethar.  Tba  mo-
tenm  vat  tuppoited  by  a  ccmmon  fond,  supplied
apparently  frooi the  public  t  ' '

whole  iastitotion  was  under  t
of  a  priest,  who  was  appointed  by  the  k
after  Egypt  became  a  prorinoa  of  the  Boman  am-
pire,  bj  tha  Caetar.  (Stnbo,  i.  a.)  Bolankal
and  aodogiial  gaidwit  appeaT  to  bare  been  at-
tached to  tha  mnsanm.  (Philortr.  ApaOMi.  li.  24  ;
Atben.  xiT.  p.  S64.)  Tbe  ampBcr  (^aodiaa  added
another  museum  to  thia  intdtnticsL  (SoeL  Cbtul.
43,  with  Casanbon^  note.)

MU'SICA  (4  fwrwtX  aigiiified  m  fen«l

any  art  oisr  which  the  Mutea  pmdded,  but  it  sook-

times  employed  to  ia^cnte  Miuit  in  the  modesn

iticm  of  the  term. 1.  Obbbe. Id  compOiDg

loving  article  little  more  has  bean  attempted

than  togiTeanontlinaof&ets  wbich  real  npon  pon-

_  __i ' ■■'io«B»tioiat«pnati«tlMm


nce^taticm
the  follovv


HUSTCA.
im  lacb  a  tana  ■■  b>  Kna  Tor  u  introductioD  to  tha
i«igin>l  KMinti.  Henca  it  aaeeunily  eoniuU  in
a  gmt  DHanra  of  t«hiucal  deUHa,  whidi,  how-
«nr,  au>  {ment  do  iUBpiitj  to  penon*  Bcqimiiilad
with  Ihfl  fint  doDEnti  of  the  modem  tbeoij  ;
■nd  Dothiog  hai  been  nid  in  the  way  of  deduction,
BMept  in  me  or  two  case*  when  the  iatareit  of
•abject  ud  tha  appuoit  pcobabili^  of  the


The  torn  'Ap/uruci  wai  naed  by  the  Oreck
writan  to  danota  what  a  dow  called  the  Science  of
Mmia ;  fovauc^  haTin^  ai  hai  bean  alnady  re-
mBiked,  a  much  wider  ligiiiltcaliDa.  'Ajvunidt
Amy  iwurrtiiiif  Sinpiirurij  nl  irpam-urfi  t^i  t»B
4p)>wy>ivMi  ^fw.  'Hpfufffi/mr  tf  trrir  rt  tu
^Myff  att)  timrrmiMmr,  Tmir  Ti{w  ixirrmii,
wftca^MVO*. (Enclid.  /at  Harm.  f.  1.)

The  tbUewing  MTHifDld  diTinon  of  the  lobjact,
which  it  adoptH  bj  tha  anthot  jut  qnotad,  ■*  wall
ai  br  otheta,  will  be  partly  adhered  to  in  the  pre-
MManicle:— I.OfSoaDda{>*p)^«4r)«'}.  11.
Of lDleTnI«(w<plC«WTiwi4T«r).  III.OfGanera
(wl  Y<^«r).  IV.  Of  SyMeraa  (w«pl  nwrtifuf.
Twr).  V.  Of  Hodn  (wyl  tJhp).-  VI.  Of
Tmiaitioa  (n^  firrafcAJH).  VIL  Of  Granpoai-
tim  {**ft  fuAaaWbr).

A  aonod  ii  nid  to  be  iwiW  when  it  hv  k  de-
UimiDale  pIKk  (liaa).  When  two  nondj  difier
in  pitch,  one  ia  >aid  to  be  non  aauiM  (ifit),  the
other  nun  ^poh  ( Oaf  it)  ;  or,  m  cammm  laugnage,
OM  >■  ailed  higher  and  the  other  lower.  The
t«in  i/ifuKiit  apfdied  to  a  tornid  either  lignifn
timplf,  that  it  i>  capable  of  being  need  m  a  nelod  j  ;
er  nialnily,  that  it  ia  capable  oS  being  nied  in  the
iBH  mtbxfy  vith  tome  other  lound  or  lyMem  of
mmdi ;  the  latter  ia  ita  moit  common  meaning.

An  Interral  ia  die  diSeienee  or  rather  dittacce
between  two  ioandi  of  different  pitch.  When  we
compare  the  inlerntli  between' two  pain  of  Mtindi,
we  judge  tbem  b  certain  oaea  to  be  nmilar,  or
aBBoI.  If  the  more  aente  eonnd  of  one  of  them  be
ttien  raited,  that  interral  ia  laid  to  beeimie  greater
than  the  other.  It  ia  thii  propcRj  of  inlerrali
(their  being  comparable  in  reapect  of  magnitode]
which  enablei  ni  to  claMify  them,  and  arametate
their  aereiBl  kinde.

Intaiala  are  aitbar  omKmiml  (iriiipmra)  or  if u-
mnait  (lui^nFaXaeewdingaathe  two  aonnda  may
or  mn  not  be  heard  at  tite  nma  time  without
eAodn^thefar.  (EDd.p.8.)  Strictly  ipenking
it  it  impaedble  to  define  the  limit  between  the  two
rltttna.  and  thit  teeina  to  be  acknowledged  by  the
later  writera,  who  diitii^niah  variout  desne*  of
cuttoiance  and  ditK>aanc«b  Originally,  Ue  only
e  the  Oetare  or


and  any  niteml  pndnced  by  adding  an  oetara  to
ooeoftbeae.  But  all  jnterrali  Icaa  than  tha  fonrth,
«  intamediala  between  an;  two  of  thoae  jut
'  1  {at  tb«  tilth,  tenth,  &&),  were  con-
■ •"  i  principal  inurralt,  lata


Mringi,  perftelly  aimilar  ezeept  in  length,
and  (tretchad  by  eqnal  t-""™*!  be  made  to  vi-
brate, the  number  of  Tibratioiu  ptribtmed  in  k
^Tan  tima  by  aadi  it  inTanely  ptoportional  to
itt  length  ;  and  the  UwW  between  the  tHndt
prodncad  la  found  to  d^wnd  only  on  the  ntfio  q^
U>  la^fd^  C  &  of  the  nomben  of  Tihratiou.  Thoa
if  the  ratio  be  ^  the  interral  ia


■  Tirtt  it  aaed  in  terenl  difioent  te


L  Pint


nalei  which  diSind  io  pitch :  and  then  it  it  i
sir  ntall  e^  JMtwa;  mence  ita  nuaning  a
name  of  an  interal,  1am,  beeaue  a  tone  it  tt
licTal  thnogh  which  tha  nice  ia  mott  nab
■uad  at  coe  eflgrt  (3wArii^p.28  ;  End.  19.)


musica;  77S

than  the  finrth,  employed  in  Greek  mnnc  were
the  doable  tone  {Shonr),  oeaily  equl  to  tha
modem  major  third  ;  the  tone  and  half  (rpatiuTi.
not),  nearly  the  tame  aa  the  minor  third ;  tha
tone  (r^m),  equal  to  the  modem  major  tone  ;  tba
half  tone  (fiiurinor)  and  tbe  quarter  tone  ( J/tcii),
(EucL  p.  8.)  Olhfr  wiiten  ipeak  of  Siiapmrla  or
uniion,  im^yui  or  the  cffiuwnance  of  the  octaTe,
and  aBiu^ila  or  the  aauanance  of  the  fourth  and
£fth.  aea  Ariat.  PnU.  xix.  39,  and  Gaudentiat,
p.  11.  The  latter  aathor  coniidan  rafa^nria  to'
mtennediato  between  c< — •■  ■•■'


nple  of  it.


a  ihaip  fourth  aa  an  ei


if


a  fifth.


if  n  4  n  B  major  tone.

The  diicDTery  of  theae  latiot  it  attributed,  pro-
bablv  with  truth,  to  Pytha^DiBi.  But  the  accounta
of  tile  eiperimeati  by  which  be  eatabliihed  Uiem
(tee  Ntcomachoi,  p.  10)  are  plainly  falte,  unce
they  ccoitisdiet  the  known  &ct  that  when  itmilai
and  equal  etringt  are  ttretthed  by  diftrmt  tenuoni,
the  number  of  Tibratioiu  tie  aa  tha  iTaan  nmb  of
the  teuioni.  (See  WheweU'a  Dynamia,  nrt  U.
p.331,ed.  1834.)

The  fint  or  tone  wa*  defined  to  be  the  dif-
fenmce  between  the  fourth  and  fifth  ;  to  that  the
inld  be  determined  ^ther  by


a.  tbe  t>


pounding  them  with  tha  oi


major  temitona  „  -j^
It  Kama  thfirefoze  eiDaoidinary,  that  analogy
ihould  not  have  led  at  once  to  the  diacorery  at
leut  of  the  nujor  and  minor  third,  u  aoon  at  the
connection  between  iatervatt  and  tatioa  had  been
ohaerred.  Howeier  no  tuch  diicoieiy  wu  then
made,  or  if  made  it  wai  neglected  ;  and  thii  aSbrdi
at  once  an  eiplanatian  of  tbe  Gict  that  inlerrala
]«■  than  the  fourth  were  reckoned  djuonant :  for


naot  except  luch  at  cotretpond  to  "TT*''™''*"
{hrtidpas)  h  mnltiple  (nAAowAAirW)  Eatiot ;
the  latter  being  nich  at  ^  ^  f,  &c On  thia


theory  the  uiaet  and  faoA  (|)  would  be  die-
tonant,  bat  the ociaee  and,  Sflk  It)  i
(See£iKL&>tO».p.34.)

>  n  3  t^


77*  MUSICA.

itiojIlMcMisaDaiweofthamtBrral.  In&ct,  wEtCD
a  k^ed  mdnuntnt  ii  tmwd  ueording  to  th«  equal
Umpenmant,  tbe  nujar  third*  ue  too  gnU  by  Ml
inten&l  little  man  thin  half  oF  thii  (^  nnrlj),
and  7*t  ore  mly  jut  lolcnblc.  Thii  rabjcct  ii
impottiiC,  beenuB  it  bean  unaMduttd^  i^on  tb*
qnNtun  whetlm  liuiwio;  m  lUed  in  th*  Onek

>  nrin  of  •oimd*  HpuBt«d  fton  ons  ■mther  b;
Inlerrak,  ooutitiited  a  ijileB.  SrHemi  wtn
iuiHdfrDm(h>in)iiherDfHiindjwhi<i  ttuycom-
pnhcodBd.  Thu  an  nttekord  wu  >  ijMcai  of
Mght  Mundi,  a  pentadund  of  file,  and  u  on :  and
lUDally,  thoiigh  not  uconuil?, tha  nnmbei  of


The  fimdanHnlal  ijitem  in  anrient  Bran«  ma
the  Mradnrd,  or  ijaUm  of  bur  uimda,  of  which
tbe  eitiemM  mra  at  an  inlsnal  of  a  fbartL  In
aodeln  nnuic  it  ii  die  oclacWd,  and  compcehenda
an  octBTe  between  tha  eimma.  Tbe  imponaat
•nd  pecaliai  property  of  the  Uttci  lyitem,  namely,
the  eompSMtiitm  of  ita  icale,  wai  My  uadentood,
aa  the  name  of  tha  mtetral  Sii  namr  lufficiently
iodioatei  (lee  alio  Ariitidea,  pp.  16, 17),  butitvai
not  taken  In  theoijllirthe  faondation  of  the  aala;
Dl  at  any  nta  wm  eeoiideted  al  made  up  of  two
tetrschiKdi.

Tbe  Oaau  of  a  lyiten  depended  upon  tbe  dia-
tribulion  of  the  tvo  intccmediate  aounda  of  the
tetncliord. The  Greek  mniieian*  naed  three  0»-


ra  beibie  hia

alncat  entiiel;  W  it,  la  tba  D^leot  af  tbe  tvo
eibea. (Arialox.  pp.2  ud  19.)

Tha  only  diSeroua  betmai  tbe  anoant
modem  Diabmie  ii,  that  in  the  fbnna  all  the  b
an  majo  tonei,  trhenaa  in  tha  latter,  acco^
Id  tbs  tAeaj  gwacally  adnitud,  majar  and  a


MUSICA.
oeenr  altmiately,  (Ben  Cntdi'g  Blimn^i
(/  Mmtiml  OnKpomtiim,  ehhp,  ix.)  The  interral
called  a  nmitane  'm  die  abora  deactiptioiu  ia
thereiim  itrktlj  neiAei  eqoal  to  tha  modem  majot
■emitone,  dot  to  half  a  nwjoc  tme,  but  tbe  ear
mold  hardly  q^reciala  tha  diSaence  m  imlady.
Beaidaa  tbaaa  foisa,  sartaia  Ooloart  (XP^)  "

(End.  >  10.)

Tha  Enhannoma  bad  ealj  one  XP^  "
the  geoDa  ilaelf  aa  deacribed  abon ;  it  ia  obi
called  abnplj  ifiuri^

TbeChMnatkhadthTe*:  lat.xp%^"


■afaatitated  for  tba  twn  K
3rd.  XpHiaa  ftaXiK^,  in  which  interrala  of  otia
thiid  of  a  tola  vera  almilarij  oaployed.

Tha  DiatODia  had  two  XP^:  lat  hdrww
irirTaier,  or  aimply  Mrtmr,  tba  vma  aa  tba
gentu  ;  Snd.  tidroHi'  ^loAan^,  in  which  an  in<
terral  of  thns-foonha  ef  a  tone  waa  anhtituted  far
tbe  aeoend  aemiloaa  (aeaending).

Tha  fbllDwing  taUa  wai  exhibit  at  one  Tiew
tba  intorrala  between  the  eoonda  of  the  teWaebued,
taken  in  tba  aacending  ocdd,  aaotsdiag  to  each  of
theaa  >yda(,  the  tana  beii^  npteaaaled  hj  wniVf,
and  two  tooea  and  a  half  benig  aappoaed  to  laak*
ap  a  fbuth,  a  aiqipautioD  whidi  ia  not  enctly
troa,  bat  ia  conmonly  adopted  by  tba  ancient
writera  aa  anfflcleotly  aceaiata  lor  tbaii  poipaae.
(See  EucL  aaiia  Commit  Tlmr.  xr.)

I.  Diatonio ...  I.  IuCtoriv  (airrnrtip)  \,  I,  1.

3.  tuh-svo*  iiaXaxir  .  {,  J,  }.

II.  CblomatiC  .  ,  1.  XP^f^  (Vnvialgt)  .  ^  h  J.

3.  xpApa  liiiUKiai • • »

III.  Enbannonte ■ afiia/ta  .
I  little

tba  TCf^  waia  praetioally  n
principal  onei,  iiirarar,  xfSfim,  inimlm.  Bat  it
woold  be  wrong  to  wmdodabaatily  that  tba  otben
woold  be  impooDble  in  iaaet>e%  or  neoeaaaiily  on-
^caaiao.  In  tha  aqd  Diatonic  ler  inataaoe,  tba
ulerTBl  wbidi  ia  loagUj  dcaoibad  aa  STclonrtba
of  a  tuw  would  be  gnaw-  than  >  au^ar  tone,  bnt
loaa  than  a  minor  tniid  j  now  tlma  an  two  in-
terralaot  thia  kiid  '— —y^"^  to  tba  inpHjai
liatlar  latioa  f  and  ),  which  oqght  tiMxJbte  by
■oalogy  to  be  oooaonuit,  01  at  anjnta  arable  ef
being  em^ared  H  well  aa  tba  tow  and  eenulaDe  t
and  althoogh  tbqt  an  sot  naed  in  laedeta  nnoi^
eratlaaat  not  adnittad  in  thevy*,  nolhii^  b«t
eiperinunt  can  detamine  how  fin  the  ear  raigbt
become  Boewtomed  to  tlum.  If  thia  liew  be  co(<>
net,  the  intcnala  of  the  tetnchetd  in  the  St^aiw
luXaiU*  wenU  nobaUy  comapond  to  tha  ntioa
«*  iJ-fc  "*  "■'''"  eonBdmtitaia  might  be  ap-
pbed  to  tbe  otba  xr^BL

Tha  Ibar  aooada  ef  tba  tatnchacd  wen  diitia.
guiahed  by  tbe  fi>llowiiig  namea  :  tcdrf  (at  X"fH)
waa  tha  IheM  ,■  >4tw  «  iwini  tba  higbeat ;  T^a.


J  •  i- 1.  i-
■ff  f-

-4.1.2.


*Sae8mith1firannKt,aeet<T.art.lO.  Thma
iatarrala  exiit  in  tbe  natnnl  aealea  of  tbe  hotn,
tnmpat,  dCe.,  and  an  ia  but  aaad,  inilead  of  tba
minor  thild  and  lone,  in  tha  hanaooy  of  tbe  domi-


MUSICA.

irJra  the  lomit  bnt  cnw.  And  TaparAnr  the  bigHect
bnt  (OK.  Ha^nHtrri  ni  alsii  {requcnllj  called
XiX<t^U  fffnbab^  becaaiB  ta  xmifl  ancient  instm-
mcnl  the  eonvipoaduig'  Aring  wba  ilnick  bj  the
fwefinnr  ;  md  wafirrAni  nu  aftswardi  called
T^Tii  in  cntiia  eaaei.  These  Dunei  were  lued  [d
ail  (he  BOKia ;  bat  Ihe  name  of  the  genu  vu
commoaT;  added  ta  hixo*^  (ihu  Aixa4i  Ii^erat,
Xfwfumitj)  rv  Ji-afifiJvifli),  jierhapa  becaiue  the
podtkn  of  thi>  Kniiid  with  nepect  to  trim  and
r^rq  ii  what  cbieflj  detenninct  the  damelir  of
the  genu.  When  the  two  laveat  iaterrali  of  the
tetnchoid  laken  together  were  leu  than  the  le-

JtaKd  iKUnal  {mnaiir).  Thng  the  interral  be-
tw«n  twini  and  kix""^'  ■•  wvirifi  in  the  En-
bunaoic  and  Chmmatk  gmeta.  The  three  lonndi
of  tha  n«rb>  wm  acniietiniea  tailed  fiapvrvKris,
fumwintrit  and  IfpnucrJi,  and  Kninda  which  did
not  bdoDg  to  ■  nmrir  mm  called  iiriiiiiigl.

It  ii  not  to  b«  nippDaed  that  the  tetnchord
eoold  long  continne  to  futniih  the  entin  Kale  Died
in  pfaetice,  thoogh  it  vsi  alwayi  coniidercd  ai  the
element  of  the  more  comprehemiTe  lyitemi  which
giadnallf  came  into  uae^  Tha  theoiy  of  the  genera,
>■  ha*  Inen  aean,  reqnired  onljr  the  tetnchord  ibr
ita  fbR  deYelopment,  though  it  certainly  coold  not
liaTo  been  iarented  till  after  tha  enlargenient  of
tha  Mala.

Terpander  ia  nid  to  harB  bvented  the  (eren-
■tringed  tyre  (Eocl  p.  19),  which  icenu  not  la
hare  been  obulete  in  Pindar^  time  (Pfth,  iL  70)  j
it!  Kale  contiited  of  an  octave  with  one  »u1id
omitte4.  (Arist  Pnt.  lii.  7,  25,  3Z)  Tha  ad-
ditiao  of  thi*  omitted  aoimd  (atttibnted  to  Lycaon


MUSICA.  775

or  PjthBgorai),  would  gire  an  odachordal  lyra
with  a  complete  octaie  ibr  ita  icale.  And  an  in-
itmmcst  c^led  magadii,  which  mut  have  had  A
rtill  greater  cwnpara,  waa  verj  eariy  known,  and
ii  >ud  to  have  had  twenty  Btringi  a*  need  by
Anaereon.  <See  BOckh,  d»  Atetr.  Pad.  lib.  iii.
cap.  7.  11.)

When  two  tetrachoid*  were  Joined  aa  that  tTis
highaiL  uund  of  ona  Krved  alao  for  tha  Uwot  of
the  other,  they  were  *tii  to  be  mmBid  avnin-
Ittra).  But  if  the  highait  Hnnd  of  ona  were  a
tone  lower  than  the  loweit  of  tha  other,  they  were
tailed  diiJwKi  (Bic^rvyfUra),  that


B  C  D  E  F  0  A conjunct
EFOABCDEdiaJimct.


•at. (End  p.  17.)

A  bendefBchonlal  lyitem,  contiiting  of  thieo
tetrachorda,  of  iriiich  the  middle  one  wa«  conjunct
with  tha  lower  but  diajonet  from  the  npper,  thna


BCD^FGificDE,


the  ^me  of

Periciei.  (Blickb.)  In  mch  a  lyitem  the  lowest
letiachcsd  waa  called  (rtr^xop'e')  >^aT«v,  the
middle  liicwr,  and  the  higbeit  iiiitvyiiimi'.
Afterwarda  a  lingle  lound  (called  ttpoirXii^Siwd-
liimi)  waa  added  at  an  inlemil  of  a  tone  below
the  loweat  of  trarfif,  and  a  conjunct  tetrschnrd
(called  linpeat^at)  wa>  added  above.  And  thut
aroae  a  ayitem  of  two  complete  octaves.


which  WW  oiled  the  ffnaler  ptrfitt  fj/ilem. An-  I  taorSf,  ninrf,  aoil  mrmi^wmr,  widi  wpoffAofb
other  syBtem,  called  t^  nuJ&rjia/MfiiyAM,  wna (or^wmi,  tkoa,
composed of Ihm conjonet tetrachorda,  otled  j


>'-jjJ^rrrrni


and  ihase  two  togethet  conititnted  the  imnibiUa
^Mem  (adirniiia  SfurdCoXor)  deacribed  by  all  the
writen  later  than  Ariitoienu^  and  probably  known
to  him.  (Eud.  p.  1 7.)

The  sonndi  in  tiiese  lyilenii  woe  named  in  the
way  before  deacribed,  the  names  of  the  tetnchord
only  being  added,  ai^  /tiini  and  rapanini  being
nbatitnteid  fbc  Hint  itivmr  and  bnrm  ji<fnry-
fi^Hv  mpcctively.  Thna,  taking  the  sonndi  in
tbe  aBBenduig  order,

A 9p(ie?iai>tar6iure7

B bwAni  AwoTtif

P AixaJ^f  AmT&r

F wapinr^n)  fiiffttr
Q Aixaril  liivttr


rrrfcfxoptiH'


So  far  the  sonndi  ara  eontmon
imatler  lyileni. Then  follow,

B vapivtAni

G TptTTt  Sif^ruyfifnn'

E rim  iH^firfiilnH'
F Tf  irii  bwip^Kaimr
Q rafiu^rni  {rtfftii\jiwr
A Hpni  binftaliaiar
The  inttnal  between  lUcii  and  wafefUni  a  a
tana. Bnt  m  the  amaller  lystem  /lirii  icrres  alao
ht  the  loweit  sound  of  the  tetiachonl  rvni^Awr,
whioh  tarmimtes  tha  scal^  Uiot
A ftAnj
iB rphii  avnvifi6w.
C Tafarirnf  ffi


776


MUSICS.


In  admpdDg  the  modem  notatiiHi  to  thcia  icalei,
we  liBTe  repmented  them  ia  the  Diatonic  genus ;
but  the  lome  ajTangement  of  the  tetnuhords  wu
adopted  in  the  alhen.  TboM  Hondi  of  the  im-
uulabla  tjgteoi  which  were  the  tame  in  all  the
fenera,  namet;,  rpoiTXa^fiaj^fif rav,  firdnj  &tafT&r^
vrdnf  fiiuvry  fiiaTtt  "^opOfAttni^  y^rq  avrnfAfiintv^
r4in)  tuCtirfiifuM',  and  i-^nj  IntpeaXaiixr,  wfre
called  fixed  (IotStii),  being  in  hiA,  eicest  Che
tint,  the  eitieme  niuidi  of  the  aeTenl  tetiacWda.
The  rest,  being  the  intennediate  lonndi,  on  the
poiition  of  which  the  genui  depended,  were  called
■UDvable  (Kiroifitrm).

VUrri  wai  certainly  coniidered  a  khI  of  ke j  note
to  the  wbole  ijilem  (tee  Arirt.  PtM.  liz.  20),
and  wpcwAi^viJfKi'Ba  wai  added  to  com^te  itte
octave  below  iiian.  (Ariitidei,  p.  10.)  Thii  ad-
dition ii  (nppoKd  lo  have  been  made  later  than
the  time  of  Plato,  but  Milier  than  Ariatozeinix
(BKckh.)

The  greater  of  the  two  iTilenu  thai  deicribed
appcsn  to  hare  Ripeneded  the  other  in  pnctice  j


MUSICA.
in  &ct  it  15  eTJdentlj  the  moat  natnnl  of  the  two.
But  it  mnit  not  he  luppoted  thalitwai  nfloenarilj-
nied  in  it*  complete  lami  ai  the  icale  of  an;  iu-
atmment ;  it  wai  nthei  a  tbeorotical  mnoo  by
which  the  Kalea  really  auplojed  were  conitnicted.
With  regard  to  iti  fitmea  for  use,  it  may  be  dT>-
■erred  tlut  in  the  Diatonic  gpniu  the  effect  of  lueh
a  (yttem  wonld  not  pBceptibly  difCr,  to  long  a*
mtlodg  only  waa  required,  from  that  at  the  ewTc-
■ponding  notei  (given  above)  ai  played  on  a  mo-
dem instrnment  with  or  without  lempeomietit.
The  Chromatic  lialo  ii  quits  unlike  *  anything
now  employed  ;  and  thongb  it  waa  net  coniidered
the  moit  difficult,  waa  certunl;  the  teait  natnnl
(TfxrwifTaTOff  S)  ri  x(™*«i  Ariitidea,  p.  19.)
But  it  ii  imppuible  to  fomi  a  decided  judgment  of
in  meiiu,  without  a  much  greater  knowledge  cj'
the  rulei  of  compoaition  than  uemi  now  attainable^
The  efiect  of  the  Enhamionic  muit  have  beea
nearly  the  umo  ai  that  of  the  Diatonic,  supjiiMmg
AiXOWi  to  be  left  out  in  each  tatiuhisd,  thni  i


Riatea,  on  the  authority  of  Arla-

tt  Olympui  waa  led  to  the  invention  ol

thit  genua  by  obacrving  that  a  peculiar  and  bcan-


tiful  cl


nelody  w


if  the  icHle,  and  porticalaily
leftouL  (SeoPlutarth'tDwiyiwoBJl/iine;  Jl/*m.
da  PAcad.  da  Intcriptiau,  vol.  x.  136.)  It  ia
therefore  mott  nrobshla  that  thii  wai  the  original
form  of  the  Enharmonic  Kale,  and  that  it  waa  man
ancient  than  the  highly  ortiliciBl  Chtomatic  In
Ihii  fonn  it  would  be  both  natuial  and  euy.  Bnt
alterwarda,  when  additional  aoundi  were  inter-
piMtftd  between  B  and  C,  E  and  F,  it  wonld  of
conne  become,  ai  it  ii  alwayi  detcribed,  the  moat
difficult  of  all  the  Oenen,  without  however  ceaaing
to  be  natural :  for  theae  additional  aonnda  could
certainly  be  neither  need  by  a  eompOMT  nor  exe-
cuted by  a  ainger  ai  nantial  to  the  melody,  but
muit  rather  have  been  introduced  oa  piaaing  or
ornamental  notes,  »  that  the  general  efiect  of  the
genua  would  remain  much  the  aamo  aa  before
The  aaaertion  of  Ariatoienua  (lee  pp.  28,  53)  that
no  voice  could  execute  more  than  two  quarter  Conea
in  aucceaaion,  eyidently  anpporta  thi»  view.*  Thua
the  Eoharmonie  would  derive  iti  distinctiTe  cha-
iBctcr  more  from  the  largeneai  of  the  higheat  in-
terval of  the  telnchord  than  ftom  the  amallneai  of
the  two  othera.  Ariatoienua  (p.  23)  eipreaaly
mentlona  the  important  in6uence  which  the  magni-
tude of  the  interta!  between  Xixm^i  and  r/rrii
had  upon  the  chamcter  of  the  genua,  and  blomea
the  muaiciani  of  hit  own  time  tot  their  propenaity
to  diminiah  ihia  ioterral  for  the  take  of  nodstwu
<To^ov  f  idruv  rh  eaiiMtrBai  yAukbIhiv  iti).
That  a  peculiar  chaiacter  really  ia  given  lo  a
melody  by  the  occumnee  of  a  lai^  interval  than
naual  between  certain  aonnda  of  the  Kale,  ia  a  well
known  fact,  eiauplified  in  many  national  ain,  and


eaaily  proved  by  the  popnhr  experiment  of  [Jajing
on  tbe  block  key*  only  of  a  pianoforte.-h

The  Genua  of  a  ayitem  was  determined,  ai  ha*
been  explained,  by  the  magnitude  of  certain  of  ita
interval!.  The  ipedet  (elSoi)  depended  upon  the
ord/T  of  their  nicceuion.  Hence,  auj^uaing  no
ayatem  to  be  uted  which  waa  not  aimilar  to  aome
pari  of  the  aifrjiim  ifitTdtoXnr,  every  syateni
wontd  bave  aa  many  apedea  oa  it  hod  interval^
and  no  more.  (Bncl.  p.  U.)

The  tetmchord,  for  example,  had  three  apede*
in  each  genua  thua  (Diatonic),

lat-J.,  1,1, 2nd. l,i,l. Srd.],  I,}.
(where  I  atanda  for  a  tone).

The  apeciei  of  a  ayatem  waa  often  dracritwd  by
indicstuig  two  tounda  of  the  aimtifiA  ititriStXar
between  which  a  limilor  one  might  he  found.  Of
tbe  aeven  apeciea  of  the  Octachord,  the  Erit  wu
exemplified  by  the  octave  comfmbended  between
4)fir?j  trrriir  and  mpofiAnj :  the  aecond  by  that
■"  '  apirrdTTi  bmrriy  and  rplnj  Sitftiry^-

ao  on.  The  order  of  the  intervala  in
theee  aeven  ipedei  wonld  be  oa  fbllowi  in  tbo
Diatonic  genua  (aacending)


i,  1,  1.  J,  1.  I,  1
I,  1,  1,  1,  1.  1,  1
1. *. I. 1. t, *. 1


The  modem  mind  aca]^  A,  B,  C,  D  K,  <  F,

S  O,  A,  can  hardly  be  conaidcred  an  eiceptioB  tn

a  aaaertion,  fur  ita  liaential  character,  aa  noar

■.i,  dcpenda  ao  little  upon  tbe  Chnmatic  interval

ween  F  and  S  G,  that  thia  peculiarity  ii  aamJly

got  rid  of  in  melody  by  laiiuig  the  F  or  lowerii>)[

the  SG,  according  to  circumstance*. Hence  the

popular  bnt mconect way  of representing the

ascending  and  descending minor acolei. (Sea

Dehn,  Thtoivfyck-jmitudu  HarmouuUm,  pp.  67,

6S.)

-f  See  Barney,  toL  L  p.  27,  on  the  Old  Eaiar


MUSrCA.
4tlL  i. 1, I, 1, 1. I, 1

fith.  1, I, 1,  i, 1, 1,  1
etb.  I, 1.  1, 1. 1,  i, 1

7iL  J,  J,  1,  1,  1^  I,  1
^n  dtemction  of  fpeda  u  importantf  becAme
it  6wmeionffiaaSfiba  chief  dificrEnes  between  Ihf
■Kxfs  (rd™)-  Unfiirtunalelj  there  an  no  raeaiu
of  determining  irfiM  wh  tba  real  diHerence  be-
twe«n  Kulaliti  written  in  tbnc  leieiBl  usle*  j  mi
tha  dtScnlty  of  fonaing  anj*  probable  hypotheaiB
on  thii  aabject  ii  inenosed  bj  what  if  uid  of  itini
in  the  paaage  qooted  aboie  from  tho  Arinotelic
Froblenut*. nirra  yip  t4  xpBiTi  /t<\iiiroAAi

■vo*  rpii  T^,  ^tnp.  lina-rSffi,  ctr  iw^A-
•mri,  TBX>  tuartpxci^ax,  ipbt  S)  &U.1]r  ofciw
•Mt/Jur.  For  liiiM  the  potiiioa  of  fiAm  wm  do-
leimined  (Euclid,  p.  18)  by  the  inlerr^i  sdjacenl
toil,  any  Kiia  ofwxmd*  beghmag  w  emUng  aiA
f^  would  giro  ■  lystem  nlwnyg  of  Che  nme
^ecieL  Pouibly  the  luilhor  of  the  ProUeniBta
doei  Dot  uM  the  tenn  ii4in\  in  tbe  mho  ki
Endid.

Hoveter  it  ig  certua  that  the  Hven  ipH

the  Octailiorf abote  dewribed  were  andealiy
(»ri  Tw  ipxolw.  Eniiid,  p.  Ifi)  denoltd  by  the
name* Hiiolydian, Lydtan, Phiygiiui, Dorian,
Hyinlj'dian,  Hypiqihrjgian,and  HypodoriBn  ;  and
U  Kau  liitely  tbal  they  alvayi  differed  in  pilch
a*  well  ai  ipeciet,  tbe  Miiolydiau  being  the  higheit,
and  tbe  Hypodoriin  tbe  loweat Hence  it  ii  a
Jectnred  that there were originallj  only thi
nodea,  comtpondinf;  Id  the  three  ipeciei  of  teti
ebort,  and  that  then  were  the  Dorian,  Phrjcian,
■od Ljdian ;  becaiue  the  Octachord  in  each  of
theae  time  mode*  ia  mads  ap  of  two  limilar  dii-
jmKt  tatnuhordi,  which  an  of  the  finl  speciea  in
the  Dorian,  the  aecoBd  in  the  Phrygian,  and  the
third  in  the  Lydian.

Ariitidea  dueribea  bIki  aii  eJarmaae  mode
of  Tery  ancient  origin  (nil  ol  irdni  ntjuharc
Wfiii  Til  if^rUa  Kixpttrrv,  p.  21)  eoututing  of
difleient  apedea  of  octachordi,  and  qnotci  the  wi "
known  pawsge  in  Plalo  {Rip.  iii.  c,  10)  a.  refe
nag  to  them.  The  older  of  the  interrata  ia  gin
ai  fcUowi  (iee  the  notea  of  Meiboming  upon  tl


MUSICA.
them,  and  conaider  the  qnarter  ta


Ljdian . .  X,

Phrygian


2. 1.


i. i. 2, 1, J,
ii 2. Ii,  J.

«^UVUWU . », i, 1, 1, fc i,

SiDtoiwlyduo  i, fc 2, Ifc  2.

It  win  be  obaerred  that  theae  Kalea  di

CM^mhend  eiacll;  ao  oMbto  ;  and  none  <„

eic^  lbs  Lydiau  ia  coincident  wlA  any  pert  of
(he  »*(mBia  ^foritoSov'  None  of  them  ii  de-
cidedly nnnatBial,  except  perhapa  the  Miiolydian.
Of  ODone  it  ia  jnrooaaiblo  to  recogniiB  their  chamc-
Ian  aa  deacribed  by  Plato,  in  the  abaence  of  exam-
plea  of  their  spptication  in  actual  melody.  Their
Evmcipal  intereat  therefore  ctoaiata  in  the  evidence
which  they  afford  of  the  antiquity  of  oianHopie
^itema,  i.  e.  of  ayalema  formed  by  omitting  certain


to  undcntand  how  they  could  be  nied  at  alL

Tho  diflereoce  of  ipeciea,  conaidered  aa  the
cbarocteriatii:  diitinction  of  mods,  ig  evidently
■poken  of  aa  a  thing  antiquated  and  obaolate,  not
only  by  Ariitidce  (who  wai  certainly  later  than
Cicero,  aee  p.  70),  hot  alio  by  Eudid.  Ae  to
AnatoieDUi,  the  fiagaienta  which  remain  of  hii
wntingi  contain  no  alluiion  to  (uch  a  diitinction
at  ali  In  iia  time  it  appeals  that  tho  number
of  modea  waa  thirteen  j  and  later  writera  reckon
fifteen.  (Eudid.  p.  19 ;  Arialid.  pp.  23, 2i.)  The
deacriptionaof  deae  fifteen  modem  modea  are  Trry
•canty,  but  they  indicate  pretty  plainly  that  they
were  nothing  mora  than  tiaiupiiiitiona  of  tha
jTMtor  H^Aef  Kfttan ;  their  namea  were  Hypo.
dorian,  Hypoiaatian,  Hypophrygian,  Hypoaeolian,
Hytolydian,  Dorian,  laitian,  Phrygian,  AaoUan,
I.ydiaii,MiioIydian,HyperiaitiaD,  Hyperphcrgian,
Hyperaeoliaa,  Hypwlydian.  The  Hypodorian  waa
the  loweat  in  pilch,  and  the  irpoiTJUviranlfUvoi  of
the  odiera  were  mcceMirely  higher  by  a  aemitone ;
and  only  that  part  of  each  acale  waa  uaed  which
waa  within  the  caiai«u  of  (he  Toiee.  It  aeema
likely  that  the  ancient  modea  mantisoed  by  Eudid,
and  deacribed  aboie,  coniiiting  of  oclachotda  taken,
aa  regard*  their  ipidtM,  from  different  parta  of  the
aimjiiia  iiirrdeoXor,  would,  aa  rmnU  pildL,  be
each  M  placed  aa  to  l!a  between  farin)  ,,J>».  and
"tini  liiituyiUrmw  of  the  modern  mode  of  the
lame  name.  For  they  certainly  did  alwaya  differ
m  pitch,  aa  the  name  tirat  ahowi ;  and  Uiero  ia  no
reaaon  to  belioTe  thai  their  relaliro  poailioo  waa
ever  changed ;  the  ayalem  of  notation,  mcmovor,
conGnna  thia  inppoaition.  fiot  ibr  detaila  on  ihia
fubject  WB  mnit  refer  to  tha  diiaemtion  of  BHckh
(UL  8),  whcra  it  ia  treated  at  length.  The  Mily
uuportant  reaulta,  howcTer,  are,  fin^  that  the
modea  did  anriently  differ  in  tptdf;  aacondly,
that  m  jHvceia  of  time  thia  differenc*  either  diaap.
pearcd  entirely,  or  ceaaed  to  be  their  diatii^uiihing
mad  ;  and,  thirdly,  that  their  geuenl  piek  waa
aJwuya  different  The  ide»  cmiTeyed  bj  theae
general  aatertioui  of  the  teal  charaelei  and  effect
of  tho  Greek  muiic  are  eiceiaiidy  vague  and  nn-
•atieiaeloiy  ;  but  an  examination  into  particniara
doei  not  tend  to  make  (hem  at  all  mora  definite

There  can  be  little  donbt  that  di^rent  rhylhma
and  degreea  of  alowneaa  of  qntckneaa,  aa  well  aa
■"■"ercnt  metrei  and  atylea  of  poetry,  would  looa
-  appropriated  to  the  modes,  ao  aa  to  aocoid  with
their  original  mutical  character ;  and  theie  dlf-
fereniea  would  in  time  naturally  auperacde  the  old
diatincticai  of  ipeciea,  and  come  to  be  looked  on  aa
their  characleriitie  marki ;  ta  that  at  length  all
the  apedea  might  aren  be  uied  in  each  mode,  for
the  aake  of  additional  Tariely.  With  regard  to
ih. ~^.— indeed,  it  ia  certain that  particular


modea  (Plat  Lig.  iL  p.  670),  ""a^u  „  ,«  ^.m
been  attempted  to  diride  Pbdar*!  Odea  into
Dorian,  Aeolian,  and  Lydian.  (BSckh,  iii.  16  )
The  rhythm  of  (he  muaic  muat  haxe  depended
chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  upon  that  of  the  woida,  or
el«e  ha™  been  of  a  rery  aimple  and  onifonn
:haracter,  aince  there  ia  uo  mention  of  a  notation
fm  it  aa  diitinet  from  the  metre  of  the  poetry.
Probably,  therefore,  nothing  like  the  modem
•yalera  of  anuMof  thylhm  eiialed  i  and  if  ii\  thia


778


MU9ICA.


mutt  luTe  (i>nDed  ons  of  tlis  tnoM  eMenlisI  (winta
of  diffbnnc«  between  the  ancient  and  modem
miuic.  Hair  the  rhytbm  of  mere  iwatrwufntal
mtuic  VBi  r^nlated,  or  vfaiit  Tarietj  it  admitted,
doa  not  appear.  There  is  no  Iroiaa,  faoircTer,  to
belie*e  that  mmic  witboal  vordi  wna  pnctiKd  to
any  extent,  thou|(h  it  tm  eertainlj'  linnwa  ;  for
Plato  Bpeaka  with  diaapprobation  of  thoM  vbo
nsed  ^«\0T  ffol  p^nhy  ifrv  ^ftArmy^  "^fA*}
KiBaplofi  T«  ml  o&McTfj  wpoffxp^/^tfoi  {Lfg,  iL
p.  669),  and  othen  mention  it (Btickh,  iii.  1 1.)

On  tile  tiro  but  oF  the  hrtit  enumerated  in
dividing  the  wfaole  Bobjecl,  i«rj  little  real  inform-
ation art  be  obtained.  In  fact  they  eonld  not  be
inlelli^Uy  dJKitued  vithont  sna^i^  a  metkod
of  illnitiatioa  which  nnfortunatfly  ii  nercT  em-
ployed by  the  ancient  writers.  HrrneDA^  nsi  the
tmnaition  fifom  one  genua  to  another,  from  one
^lem  to  another  (as  from  diijimct  to  conjunct  or
riee  vtni  \  ftnm  one  mode  to  another,  or  Emm  one
style  of  melody  to  another  (Euclid.  20),  and  the
changv  wai  made  in  the  same  way  a*  in  modem
nodtbstkm  {to  which  iirr^oKli  partly  conedpondi),
til.  by  pauing  throngh  on  iotcrmediats  itage,  or
luing  an  elemenl  common  to  the  two  eitranm  be-
tween which  the  tnnsition  was  to  take  dace.  (Se<
Euclid.  21.)

Mrtrnroita,  or  com;
or  nte  of  all  that  hu

ceding  headi.  Thi>  nibject,  which  ought
been  the  mart  inlcresting  of  all,  ii  treated  of  in
such  a  rery  nnvtiflftictoTy  way  that  one  i\  almost
forced  to  snipect  that  only  an  eroteric  doctrine  ia
contained  in  the  woiki  which  hare  come  down  to
ni.  On  compoaition  praptrlg  to  called,  there  it
nothing  bnt  an  enumeration  of  different  kind*  of
tequema  of  notes,  lii. :  —  1 .  ^vwr*),  in  which  the
aoundi  followed  on«  anothra  in  a  regolar  ascending
or  descending  order  ;  2.  wAwc^,  in  which  intemls
were  taken  altematdy  ascending  and  deaeending ;


oft!


■idenble  tii


>.  (End.  32.)  Besidn  thia  division,
(nere  are  levenl  dnsailicationi  of  melodies,  made  on
difTerent  pnncip)«.  Thnt  they  are  dirided  accord-
ing Vigemu,  into  Diatonic,  Ac. ;  according  to  sioifc,
into  Dorian,  Phrygian,  &e. ;  according  to  ^fitetn,
into  grare,  acute,  and  intermediate  (^irctrofj94'i
nrnxci^i,  nmamiS1)i).  This  but  diTiiion  leems
merely  to  refer  to  the  general  pitch  of  the  melody;
yet  each  ef  the  three  claaao  is  laid  to  hare  a  dis-
tinct tun  (Tprfroi),  the  gra™  being  IragU,  the
acute  KMTkO  (wfiurCr),  and  the  intermediate  di-
ihfrta^rie.  Agam  melody  it  dittingoisbed  by  its
tiutracter  (^iet),  of  which  three  principal  kinds  are
mentioned,  iamiikrmit,  ffiHTT«\TiKi»,  and  tiao-
X'UTiiciif'iBnd  these  termi  are  rapectirely  explained
to  mean  aptitude  (at  expressing  a  magnaminoui
and  heroic,  a  low  and  effeminate,  or  calm  and  re-
fined character  of  mind.  Other  snbatdinntc  classes
are  named,  as  the  erotic,  epithalamian,  comic,  and
encomiaaljc  (Eudid.21;  AritUd.  29.)  Noaccoont
is  given  of  ihe^/Wrnai  peeuliarities  of  the  melodies
diitinguished  by  these  diifervnt  chaiacters,  so  that
wlutt  it  taid  of  them  merely  excites  our  curiosity
withont  tending  in  the  leatt  to  ntisfy  it.

The  most  ancient  system  of  notation  appnn  to
hava  cODtiitcd  merely  in  the  appropriation  of  the
leCten  of  the  alphabet  to  denote  the  different
aoonda  of  tha  tcale ;  and  ths  onlf  alltMMii  inadn


MUSICA.

In  It  was  the  inttoduetion  of  new  signs  fanned  b)'
accenting  letters,  or  inverting,  distorting,  and  mo-
tilatbft  uicm  in  varioas  ways,  at  the  compaaa  of
the  scute  was  enlarged.  A  gnat,  and  seemingly
unnecHuarj,  oomplexity  was  caosed  b;  the  ate
of  two  di&rpnt  signs  for  oieh  sound  ;  one  Ibt  the
voice,  and  the  other  for  the  instrument.  Theas
two  lignt  tnm  written  one  above  ^le  other  inmw-
diatel;  over  the  tyllable  to  which  they  bdonged.
They  are  given  by  several  of  the  Greek  writen,
but  most  tijlly  by  Alypiut.  The  inttmmeBtal
tigns  appeal  to  baVe  beoi  choaai  arbitrarily ;  at
least  no  law  is  now  discovenhU  in  them;  hnl  the
VD(«1  (which  were  probably  more  ancienl)  foUov
an  evident  order.  The  sounds  of  the  middle  put
of  the  tcsde  are  denoted  by  the  lettan  ef  tke  lonim
alphabet  (attributed  to  Simonidea)  takoi  m  their
naOual  rider ;  and  it  is  raoarfcaUa  that  Ibeaa
signs  would  be  jnst  suffidoit  for  the  aonnda  oom-
priied  in  the  six  modes  supposed  to  be  the  nMnt
sncient,  if  the  compass  of  each  wen  an  octaTC  and
Ihey  were  pitched  at  intervals  of  a  lemitdna  abino
one  another.  Accented  or  otherwiis  altersd  letter*
are  liien  to  the  higher  and  Iowa  Bonikda.  To
the  ajstem  perfectly  mnsi  have  required
'*  labour,  though  its  difBculty  has  been
mncn  exaggerated  by  some  modem  writers,  (See
BBckh,  iiL  9.)  A  few  spsdmcai  of  Oteck  melody
expressed  in  the  ancient  notation  have  come  down
to  os^  An  accotoit  of  them  may  be  found  in  Bar-
ney (toL  L  p.  88),  whore  they  are  given  in  modem
notes  with  a  conjectaial  rhythm.  The  beat  i^
them  may  also  be  teen  in  Biickh  (lii.  13)  with  a
diflermt  rhythm.  It  it  compoied  to  the  wordt  a(
the  firat  Pythian,  and  it  inppoted  by  Biiclch  to  ba
certamly  genuine,  and  to  tvelonE  to  a  time  earlier
than  the  hfteen  modct.  Its  mentt  hare  been  verj
Toriauily  ettimated  i  probably  the  beat  that  can  bs


tained  of  its  real  effect  at  anci ,  ,

It  has  long  been  a  mattHT  of  dispute  whethrr
the  ancienli  prac^ted  kmumf,  or  mouc  in  paita.
We  believe  then  are  so  luflicieut  gtoundt  for  in^
posing  that  thay  did.  The  following  are  the  facta
uiually  appealed  to  on  each  side  of  the  qnettioo.
In  the  first  place,  the  writers  who  ptvfettedlw
treat  of  music  make  no  mentiDa  whatever  of  to^
a  practice ;  this  omiiiirai  oonttitutes  such  a  Terf
itiong  prim&  h:ie  evidence  againrt  it,  that  it  mnat
have  settled  the  qnestion  at  once  bnt  fer  cnppoaed
positive  evidence  from  other  sources  on  the  ot^ex
tide.  It  it  tme  that  ^Xn^ilo,  which  might  bavo
been  expected  to  hold  s  prominent  place  in  a  theo-
retical worii,  it  dismissed  very  summarily ;  bat
ttiU  when  the  mbjecls  which  m^  to  ba  explained
are  eniuneratcd,  /uAn-oita  is  mentioned  witli  as
much  letpccl  at  any  other,  whilst  harmoi^  it  ra-
linlj  omitted.  In  bet  there  teemt  to  be  BO  Oieek
word  to  express  it ;  for  ip/iorla  ti(?ufies  a  well
nrderednoHBoa  of  sounds  (tea  Biimey,ll31),and
•nl^lf^a'ia  only  unpliet  the  concord  between  a  tiiq|la
pair  of  toundt,  without  referenea  to  ncceiaioti.
That  the  Greek  musicians  wen  acqnainted  with
ffv/upmia  it  proved  by  many  puHiges,  ihongh  wa
are  not  awan  that  the/  ever  mentioo  the  conoid
of  nor*  than  two  toimat.  Bnt  the  subject  of  cod  -
cord,  BO  long  ss  succession  is  not  iatroduced,  be-
longs rather  to  aconstics  than  to  moDC  There  ia,
however,  a  ]ninge  (ArieL  PnU.  xii.  18),  wherB
succession  rf  concords  is  mentioned :  —  Ai4  ti  ^
hi  waaSr  mftfrla  <»*rai  ^ini  (  iMyttl(imtrt


unsicA.

7^  nirv,  bAqr  U  Mfiiiiar.  Itceyeititir
■ignified  (ba  liDgingor  pl&jins  in  two  put*  Bt  tn
inteml  of  ■»  ocBtb  g  and  ue  wtiid  it  darind
firai  firfTsIii,  tba  nuDO  of  ■  itiinited  mitniDinit
which  bid  HLfficieat  compaa  to  *Udw  k  gucoMura]
■  to  bo  ^T«i  on  it  (Tliii  pnctica  of
9  eodld  not  &U,  of  cduim,  to  miiw  u
■Doa  n  man  •od  vonun  attraBptcd  to  nng  tin
Mm*  mdod;  U  on.)  Ths  obiknu  mooaiiig  of
tha  pUMgs  thon  ia,  th&(  aisca  do  iutoml  eieept
tha  Mtara  could  be  magadjad  (tbe  efiocC  of  laj
otkar  u  <nU  known  Id  bo  intolanble),  Iktr^bn  ns
otbO'  inlanal  ma  a^loyad  M  *])  i  iniplj^.tliBt
■o  other  kind  of  ooontapnnt  than  mpidinng  ma
tboi^htot  But  tha  inrda  an  nrtunlj  capaUa
of  a  aomeirhat  mJIds'  mtcipntation.

In  tba  next  plu^  the  coiutitDtioii  of  the  aeda
wu,  at  baa  beat  Ken,  nrj  unfit  for  humcoj',  tha
bceutj  c^  which  dcpenda  ao  eaaantially  apon  tha
oaa  otlJardi.  Tha  true  loqar  third  wu  aitbac  not
diaooTcred  or  not  wlnitted  to  bo  oonaanant  till  ■
Torr  Ue  pviod,  Ptakmf  being  the  (ariieat  extant
aalhoc  who  apeaki  at  the  auwr  foM  (Bamej.nl.  L
|L  44S)  I  ii  &et  which  ii  ao  eitnonlinaij  and  ao
conlnvj'  to  all  that  could  have  bam  auiidpaMd,
■•  to  deatfoj  all  eonfidauca  m  anj  apriori  icaaon-
inga  oa  the  •nbjact,  and  to  aichiae  all  bat  aotaal
■Tideuoe  on  eilber  aide.  Tha  poaitira  oiidanoa  ta
jataHr  of  the  eiiilaica  of  eomMaqNint  omnila
ehiefljt  m  certain  indicationa  of  two  modea  hanng
beenaometiitioa  nasdit  Mce.  Thna  tha  aipreaaioo
m  HoiMe  (Bpad.  a.  B),

*  Somnte  miitom  tibili  cannen  tjrm
Hac  Dntium,  illii  baibamm,"
11  interpreted  to  mean  that  the  Ijra  waa  played  in
the  Dotian  mode,  and  tha  liliae  in  the  Lfdio^i ;
BO  that  if  the  oaotarf  Dorian  and Lydion  octitTe
emplcnred,  the  former  being  of  tha  fenith
S  whOe  the  latter  woa  of  tha  aecond,  and
a  higher^  the  leriea  of  interrali
iit  of  fanrthi  and  major  thlrdi,  or
lather  doable  tonea.
Again,  there  are  paangea  luch  ai  —
AiaKiht  Mom  Awpior  xiAnStr  ifuw
(qnotcd  fBm  Pindar  by  the  Scboliaat  on  Pyti.  il
127%  which  are  gnppoaed  to  indicaU  that  poetrj
writtoi  in  one  node  and  aiuig  accordingly,  waa  ac-
cmnanied  by  iuitmnienti  in  another. For  a  Tiew
of  the  moat  that  an  be  made  of  nich  argamenli,
lee  BOekh,  iiL  10. Our  knowledge  of  the  real
■aa  of  the  ntodea  ii  ao  Ttry  impufect,  (hat
■ncfa  reliance  can  be  placed  on  them  ;  and  at ,
rate  they  woold  odIt  {mre  the  eiialenco  of  b  kind
of  Bupadiinjr,  modiGed  by  taking  acatea  of  (
cut  (intcad  nf  the  ame)  apecEea  nt  tha  two  parti,
■o  aa  to  amid  the  iscoeaaiDii  of  iulemli  abeolntcly
the  aame.  Thii  would  certainly  bo  the  rery  lowMt
kind  of  eoimteniolnt ;  but  if  any  thing  mora  had
been  pnu:uwd,  it  wonM  bo  abaolnteiy  impoanfale
to  aecDont  tor  the  ntter  lilence  of  the  theoretiial
writen,  which  il  all  bat  htal  eren to  ai
limited  hypolheiii.  It  ia  only  neceiaaiy  to  add  that
the  iuftoence  of  auftnniniti  upon  the  derelopment
of  tho  art  oogfat  to  ba  k«>t  in  view  in  conaideri
thia  qaeatioa The  Oreai  had  only  two  kindi
inatrmnaital  mnoc,  atMimt  and  ■iMpie'it. The
ofAat  vH  alwayt  B  pipe  pierced  with  bolea,
ta  baTe  an  at^cial  acalb Tha  iimpla  tuba  or
trumpet  doea  not  appear  to  baie  been  died
■■idal  tiatWMHH,»»  HM  tim  fcale  otnatud


hammiea  waa  probably  onknown ;  and  thia  may
partly  accmni  for  the  major  third  eeeaping  obaerr-
lything  lie  tha  laoiera  ryalem  of


Tcntod  without  the  aniiiaoce  of  keyed  in  .  ._  .
than  the  EUniata  of  Eoalid  oonld  hare  been  a  .
in  tha  total  abaaooe  of  dtawinr  materiala.
fbUer  accoiiM  of  aaciMit  imuical  mMramenu
aaa  BBckh,  iii.  1 1.
Tbe  eUaf  anthoiito  on  the  anbject  of  thia
tide  Be  tha  "AntlqaBe  Unaicae  Anctorca
iptam,"  TIB. :  AriatozaDU,  Endid,  Nicomachna,
Aiypiui,  OaadanliiiB,  BacchJuy  Arlatidei,  Quinti-
lianni,and  HaniainiaCapdIa,  edited  by  Meibmnim,
in  oneTolDm*  (Amaterdam,  16S2),  to  the  pegea  of
which  )ba  pteoediDg  qootaliwn  refer;  the  Her-
moDic*  of  Ptgtaar  (with  ao  Appendix  by  Wollia,
(^  JVoOaaKK.  <nri.  iii)  ;  tha  I^lone  of  Plntarch ;
and  a  aection  of  the  ArittoMio  ProUemBta ;  Bnmev,
HiMory  if  Miait ; BHckh,  de  Mttrii  Pimiati  ;


beard  would  eo


ti,iAii/iiikaiatliberditMM*UiiUrOriaiiKi;Boae,
OtiL  dr  LfriiA.  Duithail  im  /TeUnaa;  Port-
t^e.  Cue  ManliaJiMita  %Ma  dtr  Ateitot,  Leiptig,
I«47.  [W.P.D.]

3.  Rohan.  It  nay  well  b*  baliored  that  in
oaic  «a  m  the  other  aria,  the  genisa  of  Greece
bad  left  little  bit  Ramaui  to  do,  but  admire  and
imitate.  Yat  we  mnat  not  fbrget  that  another
element  had  been  intKidDeed  into  tha  arta  of  Kame,
aa  wall  aa  into  her  hmgnaga  and  gorermnait ;  ana
which  WBi  derired  frnn  Itnria,  and  partook  ol
on  Oriental  chaiaeteT. Erery  ipedei  of  nmiical

: jjgnt  fiiand  on  Ofeek  woriu  of  art  ii  found

]0  Elmnii.  No  doobt  the  early  Roman
waa  tnda  and  iMTae,  atOl  from  tbe  moat
It  timfa  mentian  ia  made  cA  hynna  and  flutea
:ir  triumphal  proceaDoni :  to  Serrini  TuUiua
\  conitia  made  two  whole  oentnriea  of  cof^
■  and  ai6mn:  Bad  tbe  TwoIto  Tablea  al-
lowed at  fbneiala  ten  playen  on  the  flute,  and  en-
joined that  'die  piwe*  of  great  men  ibonld  bo
aong  in  monmfol  aooga  (aawia)  accompanied  by
the  fate."

The  yaor  B.  c  SfiJS  nuufca  an  en  in  Soman
muaic  by  ila  adaptation  to  theatrical  amnaemenla.


Itiai


efindmi


who,  without  reraea,  danced  in  domb  ihaw  to  tho
■cnnd  of  the  finta.  Some  tioM  later  Liry  (ii;  30)
menticoa  a  cnriana  tote  of  tho  deaertion  of  cert^
Roman  flute-playen,  who  were  only  bnnght  bade
by  an  amniing  ■tntogem.  We  leani  &om  Valerina
Mudmnt  (ii.  S)  that  the  Roman  flnte-playen  were
iacvepomted  intoa  cdlege,  and  Orid  (iW  n.  e97)i
ipeaking  of  their  ancient  importance,  aiyi  —

"  Temporibui  Telenun  tibicioii  nana  BTonun
Maonno,  at  in  maguo  icmpei  hcnore  fuit:
Cantabat  &nia,  caatabat  tibia  ludii,
Cantabat  moeatia  tibia  funcnbui."

Nero,  M  Snetoniua  {Kero,  S4)  tellg  ni,  played
on  tbe  Ante,  and  ome  in  a  aort  of  trimnplwl  pro-
caaaion  thnnigh  Italy,  bearing  the  apoili  he  had
won  in  1800  mniicaf  conteaU.  The  lama  writer
informa  ui  that  the  emperor,  to  preaerra  hia  Toice,
naed  to  lie  on  hia  beck  with  a  thia  plate  of  lead
on  hia  itonuch ;  that  ba  took  freqaent  emetia  and
cathortica,  and  at  laat  tnniaeted  all  bntineaa  In
writing.

Tfaoe  do««  mot  ifpear  tt  be  id;  0«e«  U  ■


reO  MUSTAX.

Romaa  mnucal  ajratem  sntinly  di)dnct  froni  Iht
Greek.  A  pauBgd  in  Cicero  mould  lead  u  to  aup-
pou  thai  tho  Ibwi  of  eoDtratt,  of  light  and  ihads,
of  loud  and  loft,  of  awening  imd  dimiiuAhiDg,  wen
undetitood  by  Ihs  Ronuni  (di  Orat.  iii.  44),  aud
another  panug?  from  Apultiui  decidedly  pnvet  that
the  RoDUUU  had  inatnuDealal  mmic  diilmct  fnini
theii  Tood  1  on  both  of  which  poinU  there  u  not
th«  Bme  clear  eTidence  to  decide  the  quettion
vith  reference  Id  the  Gneki.  Slitl  the  Boman
muiical  wriUre,  ai  St.  Augiutin,  Hacrobiai,  Mar-
tianui  C^wUa,  CaHiodonu,  and  Boethiui  (all  of
irhnm  flouriihed  between  the  fourth  and  liith
centuriea  of  the  Cbriitian  era),  did  Dothing  to  im-
prore  the  leience  of  muiic,  and  wees  little  mere
than  copylit*  o(  their  Greek  predecewon.  The
great  improreiaent  which  the  Roman*  introjccad
(rather  a  prutical  thui  a  theoretual  one)  waa  a
■implificatian  at  the  mniial  nomendatuie,  efiecled

Omka,  and  luhatiluting  for  thnn  the  lint  fifteen
Icttert  of  the  Roman  alphabet.  (Hawkini,  ToL  i
p.  279.)  Thii  aimpIificatiDn  the;  were  eoabled  to
make  by  a  reduction  of  the  modea:  indeed  it  leema
Tory  probable  that  thia  complicated  ajatem  had  in
practice  entirely  &ilen  into  diauae,  aa  we  know
that  the  diatonic  goat  bad  uaurped  the  place  of


Iheti


other.


n  aulhon  Boathiua  girea  the  aoat
profound  anount  of  the  aobjecL  Hia  work  ia  a
carrying  out  of  the  old  Pythagoreui  iyitem,  and  ia
a  mere  abitmct  speculatian  on  the  nature  of  mnaic,
which,  viewel  u  one  of  the  aaadrivimt  at  four


lat. "  „

2iid,  a  treatiae  on  aaTenl  kinda  of  proportion ;  3rd,

a  declaration  of  the  ofuniona  of  dir  ' ''^

leapect  to  the  diiiaioa  of  the  moi

general  Inwi  of  harmony.

Before  lhi>  lime  Sl  Ambrote  hi

[1  the  church  at

onlj  know  that  it  contkted  in  cvtain  progna-
aiona,  correaponding  with  difiereiit  apeciea  of  llw
diapaaoo.  It  ia  deacribed  aa  a  kind  of  lecitadm,
mote  like  reading  than  liiuing.

It  wBi  by  St  Gr^oiy  the  Great  that  tbeodare
waa  aubitituled  for  the  tettachord  aa  the  Funda-
mental diriaion  of  the  acale.  The  fint  ocUTe  he
denoted  by  capital  letlan  A,  B,  C,  &C.,  the  Mcood
by  amall  letteti  a,  b,  c,  dec,  and  when  it  became


■e  than  the  Oreeka,
■[no.  Where
.tal,  the  time


proof  that  the  Romana,  any  i

bad  any  notation  with  refere

Tocal  muiie  waa  united  with

waa  marked  by  the  metre  of  the  gong

of  a  notation  of  time  would  makeui  doubt  whether

any  but  a  lery  aimple  atyle  of  merely  inatnunenCol

muaic  prevailed  among  tbem. (Hawkina'a  Hiitory

i^MudCy  vol.  L :  Bnmey^  lliitory  of  Made,  tcL  L)

reader  ii  referred  to  the  preTioni  article, [tt  J.]
MUSfVUM  OPUS. [DoMtia,  p.  431 ;  Pic-

tuaa.  No.  XV.]

MUSTAX  (/i£<mit),mouatuhea.  The  difierent

pnrta  of  the  beard  [Barba]  had  di£erent  nnmei,

which  alao  varied  *'  '


HTSIA.
Iip,waacaDed^r^or(Tl^r|>ih^  (Diod.T.38;
Philoatr.  Sen.  Imag.  L  30,  iL  7,  9),  and  the  youth
joit  arriied  at  puberty,  who  waa  graced  with  it,
wa*  wp&nt  Imirlrnit.  <Ham.  IL  zxir.  34S,  Od,
I.  279;  SchoL  n  be..-  Bnmck,  A^d.  iii.  44  t
Aelian,  T.  if.  x.  ]  8.)  By  ita  growth  and  detelc^
ment  it  prodnced  the  moutachet,  which  the  Oreeka
generally  cheriahadaaamanlyaniamenL  (Theoerit.
lir.  4 ;  Andphanea^  op.  Atim,  ir.  SI  ;  Pollni:,
iL  80,  I.  ISO.)  To  thia  practice,  however,  there
•eema  to  have  been  one  eiception.  The  Spartan
Ephori,  when  dey  were  inducted,  made  a  pro-
clamation requiring  the  people  **  to  ahave  their
moaitachei  and  obey  the  hwa."  For  what  rcMcn
they  gave  the  farmer  command  doea  not  mpftax.
(Plut.  lii  Sera  JVm.  Viad.  p.  97S,  ed.  Steph. ;
Pinclua  »  Hu.  Op.  H  Dia,  72S ;  HUller,  Dor.
iiL  7.  g  7,  It.  2.  g  £;  Becker,  Otofitiaa,  Tol  iL
p.  891.)  [J,  Y.]

MU8TUM. tViMUK.]

MUTATIO-NES. [MiKBio.}

MUTUUM.  The  Mutui  datia  ia  mtotioned
by  Gaina  aa  an  inatance  of  an  obligatio  "  quae  >v
tcffitrahilur.*^  Tt  exiata  when  Ihii^  **  quae  poi^
dere,nmnero,meiiauraTeconalBst,"BaeaiaednHDry,
wine,  oil,  com,  aea,  lilver,  gold,  tie  given  1^
one  man  to  another  an  aa  to  beooma  hia,  but  ao
the  condltiDn  that  an  eqoal  qnanbty  of  tlie  aasw
kiTid  iball  be  relunied.  The  difference  in  tbe
thing  which  ia  lent  cenatitntt*  one  of  the  diScttncea
between  thia  contract  and  eommodatura.  In  tb«
mutui  datio,  inaamuch  a*  the  thing  became  IIm
property  of  the  receiver,  the  Roman  jnriata  were
led  to  the  abaurdity  of  aaying  thai  untfa—  waa
■0  calledfi>rtbiireBaan(;BadariHa(niiRj{t).  Thia
contract  gave  the  lender  (he  actint  called  condictio,
provided  he  waa  the  owner  of  the  thinn,  and  had
the  power  of  alienation :  otherwiae  hs  had  no
action  till  the  thinga  were  cffliaumed.  If  the
borrower  loit  the  thmga  by  any  accident  aa  fire,
■hipwreck,  &c,  be  waa  ttill  bound  :  the  mion  of
which  clearly  ina,  that  by  the  Mntui  datio  tho
thinga  became  hia  own.  It  WM  a  itricti  juria  actio,
and  the  leader  could  have  no  intereat  for  a  Icaa
of  money,  nnleaa  intereat  had  been  agreed  on.  Th«
borrowing  by  way  of  Mulnnm  and  at  inloect  an
oi^oaed  by  Plantui  ( Jn.  i.  3.  9fi).  The  Saiatna-
couniltum  Mncedonianmu  did  not  allow  a  right  of
action  to  a  lender  againat  a  filiua&miliaa  to  whom.
he  had  given  moDey  "  mutna,"  even  after  the
death  of  the  father.  [3aNATii8CONBUi:TUii  H*c»-
noHUNDU-J  (Qaiua,  iii.  90 ;  IntL  3.  tit  14  ;
Dig.  tS.  tit.  1.  Dt  IMau  Crtdaa;  Cod.  4.  tiL  1  ;
Vangerow,  Piadtklat,tLc  iii.  S  633.) [O.  U]

UY'RII  iiuifiei\  the  name  given  to  the  po-
pular aatembly  of  the  Arcadiant,  which  waa  eita-
blinhed  after  the  overthrow  of  tiie  Spartan  tu^re-
macy  by  the  battle  of  Leuctta,  and  which  naed  to
meet  at  Megalopolia  in  order  to  determine  npon
matten  affecting  the  whole  people.  (Xen.  HdU
vL5.  gfi.  Til  1.  §38,  T)i.4.  8  2;  Died.  it.  59  j
Df  m.  de  JFalt.  £^  p.  344 ;  Aeichin.  dt  PaU.  Lr^
p.257;PBua.Tiil3Z§li  Haipocral.  Suid.  Phot,
1.  V. ;  Schumann,  Aiiliq.  Jur.  PtiU.  Or.p.U  0.)

MT'SIA  (jtian),  a  hatival  celebrated  by  the
inhabitanta  of  Pellene  in  Achaia,  in  honour  of
Demetcr  Myna.  The  votahip  of  thia  godden
waa  introduced  at  Pdlene  hm  •  place  called
Myaia  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Aigoe.  fPaoa.  ii.
IS.  9  3.)  The  feadval  of  the  Myak  near  Pcllen*
laaled  tar  acren  dayi,  and  iho  idi  '


-  HYSTERIA.

toA  fkce  in  a  tempts  nminaded  1>j  ■  bcautifDl
gron.  Tha  fint  tm  daj-i  mm  uiil  women  took
put  in  tbe  eclcbration  Ii^vther ;  on  the  third  iij
the  men  left  the  mKHUTf,  aai  the  Tomen  Te-
niuninK  in  it  peiftniMd  daring  the  night  oertain
mjileriDng  ritH^  during  vbicb  not  eren  nude  dogi
wer?  aUowcd  ta  remEu  within  the  iBsed  precincts.
OtI  the  faiirth  day  the  men  returned  to  the  temple,
wid  men  maA  women  now  receiied  each  other  with
■honta  of  lanihter  and  ai wiled  each  other  with
TBiioui  railtenea.  (Paul.  *iL  37.  S  4  ;  Corontu,
de  NaL  Dm.  2B.)  Other  putieubn  am  not
known.  [L.  S.]

MYSTAE,  MYSTAOOT3U3  {/.*«■«,
IwffTSTwtJf). [El.aciiHU.]

MYSTE'RIA  OwTT^pm).  A«  e«!h  mytlery  or
niTilic  Jeitiral  ia  dcKribed  in  a  lepuate  article,  a
few  gen«B]  obeemtioni  onlj  will  be  requited  under
tlii*  head.  Tbe  namea  b;  which  the;  were  de-
■ignated  in  Qleeca,  an  fmar^pia,  rtArral,  and
frf  CO.  Tbe  name  Dn""  (from  lofr*)  originnlly
aignified  only  aamfitc*  accompanied  bj  certain
cerenumio,  bnt  it  wai  afterwardaippliedeipeciall;
ID  tbe  ecranoniea  Dbeerred  in  the  woiihip  of  Dio-
njmi,  and  at  a  aliil  later  period  to  m;iteri«  in
freoeiaL  (Lobeck,  Agbuphm.  L  p.  SOS.)  TiAtr^
ii)iniGes  in  general  a  leligjong  fMtiral  (Ariitot
JUrt.  ii.  34 ;  Find.  fftm.  x.  63),  hot  more  partica-
lari;  a  lualration  or  eerentony  perfbnned  in  ordei
to  arert  aoma  calamity  either  public  or  prirate.
(PlalD,ilaAi|7).ilp.264,x,)  Hmrr^pwr  lignifiea,
pit^riy  apffljdng,  the  aecret  part  of  the  wonhip,
bnt  it  waa  alaa  need  geneiallj-  in  the  lama  hub
H  nXrr^  and  for  myitic  wonhip.

Hyiteriee  in  geueial  may  be  defined  aa  aamfieei
■ad  ceremoaiea  which  look  place  at  night  ix'  in
■eeret  within  lome  lanctaarr,  which  the  nninitiated
were  not  allowed  to  enter.  What  waa  eiaential
to  them,  were  objecta  of  worahip,  aaered  uteniili,
and  tiaditionj  with  their  inle^irttstiona,  which
were  withheld  fit>ni  all  Mraooa  nol  initiattil.  We
mnil  howerer  diatlngniah  between  myatenes  pro-
periy  »o  called,  that  ia,  nch  in  which  no  raie  waa
allowed  to  partake  nnleaa  bo  had  nndergoDo  a
fbnnal  initiation,  and  the  myitic  ceremoniea  of
certain  IcatiTala,  the  ptffbrmancs  of  wEiich,  though
confined  to  partlcnlar  rla^fa  of  pereona,  or  to  a
panienlar  aai,  yet  did  not  reqnin  a  regolar  inida-
tim.  Our  attenUoa  In  thii  articla  will  be  confined
Id  the  Biyaleriea  pcopaly  lo  called.

It  mean  to  haie  bean  Ibe  deiira  of  all  Datiooa
of  aatiqnity  to  wiUiheld  cett»D  parti  of  thnr  re-
ligiooa  wcnhip  from  tha  eyea  of  tbe  mnltitnde  in
ordv  to  render  them  the  more  Teoeiable.  (SDaba,
p.  717.)  But  that  the  ancient  myateciea  were
nothing  hot  impoaitiont  of  ptieati,  wfao  played  upon
tbe  anperatidooa  and  ignorant,  ia  an  opinion,  wluch,
•Itbougb  entotained  by  Limbuig.Brauwer,  the
bUeat  writer  on  the  anbiect  (/futova  de  la  OtSua-
fini  MoraU  a  Rtlig.  da  Qrea,  vd.  iv.  p.  199),
certainly  onnot  latia^  ihoie  who  are  aeenitomed
to  aeek  a  more  aolid  and  vital  prind^Je  in  all  ra-
ligioai  Butitntiona  that  baTa  erer  bad  any  laating
infincDce  upon  mankmd.  The  pemni  muted
and  initiatM  lo  edehnta  tbe  uiyitaiiea  in  Greece
wen  ndther  aU  piieata,  nor  did  tbey  belmg  to  the
kwawit  and  npentitioaa  ctmaaa  of  lociety,  but
ibay  were  on  tbe  contiaiy  frequently  the  moat  di*.
tingiiiabed  eatecmen  and  philDoophere.  It  baa
ben  remarked  unds'  ELnutiNiA  (p.  454,b)  that
it  ia  bt  mn  ftobaUe  that  tbe  uyauciea  in  the


UTSTERIA.  781

rarioua  porta  of  Greece  wen  remuna  of  the  ancient
Pelaigian  religion.  The  aaaociationi  of  penons
for  the  patpoae  of  celebnting  them  moat  therefbn
bare  been  formed  at  Ibe  time  when  the  orer-
wbelming  inQuence  of  the  Hellenii:  religion  began
to  gain  tbe  upper  hand  m  Greece,  and  when  peranna
who  Blill  entertuned  a  nvermce  tor  the  woraliip
of  fismer  timet,  united  tof[etber  with  the  intention
of  preaerring  and  upholding  among  themoelTea,
at  much  aa  poaaible  of  the  reli^on  of  their  fbre-
fathera.  It  ia  natunl  enongh  that  tbey  formed
themaelTea  for  tbia  purpoae  into  •odeUea,  anakwoui
10  the  brotbcrbooda  in  Ibe  ebnrcb  of  Rome  (  Por-
phyr.d*  >4ia(ia.  ir.  5),  and  endeavoured  to  iveaerra
agaiaat  the  prefimabon  of  Ibe  mnllitade  that  which
wai  moat  dear  to  Ibera.  Hence  the  aecrecy  of  all
the  Greek  m^leriat,  and  heoce  the  (act  that  tbey
were  almoat  mToriably  connected  with  the  worahip
of  tha  ancient  Pelaagian  dinniliet.  The  lime
when  myateiiea  were  ealabliahed  aa  aucl,  moat
have  been  after  the  great  changea  and  diatuibonce*
pndaced  by  the  Doiian  migratioa,  although  tra-
dition referred  their  inttitation  lo  Oipheui,  tbe
Cnretei,  the  Idaeon  Doctylea,  Dionyint,  &C.,  who
belong  to  a  much  earlier  period.  These  iradi-
tiraia,  however,  may  in  »  £tr  be  regarded  aa  tne,
aa  the  myateiiea  -wtxt  ordy  a  continnaiion  and  pro-
pagation of  the  ancieiit  ruigion. But  it  mutt  bo

were  added  to  the  roytleriet,  which  were  origin-
ally foreign  to  them.  The  development  of  philo-
aophy,  and  more  eepecially  the  interconne  with
the  £aat  and  with  Egypt,  appear  to  have  eierciacd
a  conaiderable  inSnenca  upon  their  character.

Tbe  moat  celebrated  myatetiea  in  Greece  were
thoae  of  fiamothrace  and  Eleuaii.  [Cabshiia  ;
Eliubinu.]  Bnt  aeTeral  other  placet  and  divuii-
tiea  had  their  peculiar  myiterieo,  i.g.  the  ithuid  of
Crete  thoea  of  Zeui  <gtrabo,  p.  71S  ;  Athen.  ii.
la) :  Aigolia  thoae  of  Here  (Paua.  iL  3a  gS)  ;
Athena  thoae  of  Athena  and  Diooyiua  <PluI  AlciU
34  ;  DioNVSu)  ;  Arcadia  thoae  of  Artemia  (Paua.
viiL  S3.  §  3),  and  Aegma  thoae  of  Hecate.  (Paua.
iL30.  §2).  Bnt  not  only  the  worahip  of  the  great
goda,  but  alao  that  of  aome  ancient  bercea  waa
ccnnected  with  myiteriea.  (Paua.  iv.  34.  S  6.  ii- 1.
iL3D.  gS;  Herod,  v.  S3.)

The  henefita  which  the  initiated  hoped  to  obtun
were  aecurity  agunit  the  viciaiitDdei  of  tbrtune,
and  protection  from  dangen  both  in  thia  life  and
in  the  Ule  to  come.  Tha  principal  part  of  (he  ini-
tiation, and  that  which  waa  thoognt  to  be  moit
efficaeiona  in  producing  tha  dtaired  eSeett,  wem
— id  punficstiinia,  wiience  the  mya-


the  luatrationi


OSencea  agunat  and  vioiationa  of  tbe  myateiiea
were  at  Athna  under  tbe  iuriadiclion  of  the  aitbon
king,  and  tha  coon  in  audi  caaea  only  coouated  of
pereona  wbo  were  themaelvea  initiated  OH^unifU-
aw),  and  were  aaltded  &nm  the  heliaatae  for  the
puipoM^  (PoDnx,  Tiii.  141.)  Even  in  casea  which
were  brought  before  an  oriUnary  court,  the  jndgea
were  only  initiated  peraona,  if  the  caae  had  any
connection  with  the  myiteries,  (Andodd-da  JMjK.
p.  14.) That  no  one  but  the  inidated  might  hear

rounded  by  public  alafea  to  keep  all  pro&ne  per-
•oos  at  a  dJitanee. (Pollux,  viiL  133.)

The  Roman  religion  bad  no  auch  myateriei  ■<
that  of  tha  Gtecki,  but  ^Ij  rnjalk  lilaa  and  eei^


788  NAVARCHUS.

moiiiM  caontctBi  witli  the  celebntiai  oC  ccrtun
feniTolfl.  Tho  R*«*h*n»i»  were  t^  ibnign  origin,
■nd  of  iboit  dontiao. [DiowTai*.]

A  TMj  full  mtxaaat  of  tha  Greek  mjMerisi  ii
pien  bj  Limbarg-Brouwer,  tiid.  d»  ia  dtilmA
JWor.  H  RUig.  da  Gma,  vol  ii.  p.  leO—ilS,  and
ch^ter  UTi.  of  t)ie  wma  worii  nmlaiii*  a  urilil
(onn  of  the  Twiow  opmioui  vpon  tho  tuliiect
whicu  tiaTe  b«ai  eotaniliMd  t^  iDoden  idnlan
■ndpbilcwphen.  CI*  S.]

MYSTILE  OwtUii). [Com*,  p.  30S,  mj.

MYSTRUM  (1<4"(W),  ■  Greek  liquid  mm-
mit,  of  which  lian  wen  two  um,  oiled  the
luge  ud  null  mjttnun.  The  vnall,  which  *h
the  mare  conunan  of  tbe  Xva,  wea  ^  of  the  cotjla,
■odjof  Uiec7i<hai,aiid  tharefbncauuisedalMat
l-SOibofuEn^iilt  pint  (Oslm, /Vt^-  <^  I'-)
asleii  sdde  that  the  aiMUec  mjMcnm  noMiiwd  2*
dnchm^  that  the  laiger  wai  -^  ef  the  cotylk,  and
contained  3^  ■*■"*■"■■  j  but  that  the  moil  eiset
myitRun  {Titatmirafriiv  iibrrpar)  held  S  icrupln,
that  ia,  2}  diachma.  Accctding  tn  Ihia,  the  mall
mfitrum  woold  be  ^  of  the  laiger.  Bat  in  the
13th  chapter  ef  Uie  vme  Eragnwnt  he  makea  the
Urge  mfitiuin  '=  i  of  iti»  cot;la  and  the  unall
myatmm  ^  of  the  large.  In  e.  i  he  makei  tha
laigc  mjUnun  =^  3  uyUapho,  and  the  mall  =  l^.
Cle<qiatia  maket  Che  large  "  -^  af  tha  eatjhk,  the
«ii»U«  ^ (Wuim.ijf/'eini.p.lao.} [P.S.]


N.

NAE-NIA. [FirNU8,n.£i9.*.]
NAQ& [TsMPLnM.]
NATALITH  LUDL [LriDl  KATALim]
NATA'LIBUS  RESTITUTIO. IlNomtri]
NATATIO,  NATATO'RIUU. [Balhbas,
p.lS9,b.)

NATU-HA,  NATURA-LIS  RATIO.  [Jui.]

NAVA'LES  DUU'MViai. [Duunviiti.)

NAVA'LES  SO'CII.  [Ekercitiib,  p.  609,b.]

NAVA'LIA,  were  docki  at  Rome  where  ihipi

vera built, laid np, and  refitted. Thej  were

attached  to  tha  amporiBin outaida  of  the  Porta

Trigemioa,  and  waia  connedad  with  the  Tiber.

(Li>.  HIT.  10,  xL  ii,  xIt.  9.) The  emporinm

and  naTali*  wen  fint  iDclndnd  within  the  walla

ot  the  city  by  Aureiian. iVopac  Atinl.  2].)

Thedock)(>v£<isuioiarr>^ia)  in  tbe  Peinaeua
at  Atheni  coil  lODO  talent*,  aud  baTing  beeo  da-
•tcayed  la  the  anarchy  wen  again  rciMnd  and
£iuily  completed  by  Lyciugiu.  (Iiocr.  Areop(^f.
25;  B6ckh,  PmU.  Eeom.  p.  201,  Snd  ad.)  They
vere  Dnder  the  aaperintoidaKe  of  legnlar  oSeen
called  hiiuKirrti  tm'  nn^im,  [EuMMLKtAM,
No.  6.]
NAVAlilS  COTUyHA,  [Cokona,  p.  JG0.1
NAVARCHCJS  (mAoviX")  "  the  name  by
which  the  Greeka  daaunated  both  the  captain  of  a
aii^e  ihip,  and  the  adimnl  of  a  fleeL  The  office
ileelf  waa  eaUed  rauofxia.  The  admiral  ti  the
Athenian  fleet  wa*  alwaya  one  of  the  ten  geneiali
(oTpwHiToJ)  elected  CTeij  <reai;  and  ha  had  other
tha  whole  or  at  leaat  tha  pnodpal  aonunmd  ti  the
fleeL  <Plut.  Zlnaut.  18.)  Tha  ehief  officen  who
aarred  under  him  woe  the  truncckf  and  the  pen-
taeoalarchi,  each  oi  whom  eonunanded  one  veuel  ;
tbe  infatior  offlcen  in  the  TeaeeU  were  the  aittp-
vtrtai  or  hebnioien,  tbe  iMXrwrral  or  commanden


at  the  nwan,  and  tike  ay^aTai  who  n


NAUCRARIA.
been  emplajred  at  the  prow  of  the  vea
da  RtpmU.  AO. I,  2. t ^0  ; cb


e  ^BA-


\  fleet  and  u


Other  Greek  Matea  who  kept  a  nafy  had  IDce-
wiae  their  raTiidia  A  Spartan  namchiu  ia  meD-
tioned  by  Xenopfaon  {HtlUm.  iL  1.  S  7),  and
onder  hun  aerred  an  officer  called  tirirrA*i%.
{PcUni,  u  96  ;  Stnra,  Lm.  Zmcpk.  il  f.  321.)
The  nanidia  of  8|jai»  howerei  waaan  ionora-
if  later  tiaiea,  when  tha  Spartaai  had  acquired
'  — -*  Heaetuooa  in  foreign  cannttiea. Tbe

.  ._  diatind  from  that  at  the kingi,  and

Ariitollo  (PbIU.  ii.  6.  p.  69,  ed.  GBltling)  nlla  it
irxttlr  Mpa  ftufiJUIa.  (Soe  Weber,  D»  GfOuo
M  Laeedaemomonm  Rtb.  NavaHli.  p.  73,  &c.)

The  naTarchna  in  Riiodaa  aeema  to  haie  been
their  chief  military  officer.  We  End  him  antho-
rixed  to  coodode  tnMiaa  with  foreign  nationa
(Polyb.  ii-iL  1),  and  lent  on  cmbaniea  in  tha
name  of  the  republic  (Polyb.  ixx.  S  ;  LiT,  air.
25.)  IL.  S.}

NAUCRA'RJA  {rmunpafla)  1)  tha  name  of  ■
diTttiao  of  the  inhabilant*  of  Attica.  The  fmc
Allic  phylaa  wen  each  dirided  into  thna  phratiiea,
and  each  of  theae  twdie  phratriei  into  four  naa-
ctaiiea,  of  whkh  then  wen  thni  fbity-agbt.  Thia
diyiiion  ii  atcribed  to  Scloo  {PhotiDa,a.a.  Nov-
itfBfta),  but  Heiodoou  <t.  71)  in  lelating  the  'to-
of  Cylon  nMotioDa  magiitntet  at  Athena


nine  aichoni  iutead  of  the  piylanea  of  the  uau-

ciuiea. Wacfaanuth  (flU^  AlLreil  p.  36S,
Sd  ed.)  endearann  rery ingenieoily  la  neoncila


ptTtane*  of  tha  naucrariea  wan  the  nme  aa  th«
trittyanhi,  the  niiiawn  of  the  fint  archoo,  and
wen  Ibiu  identified  byThucydidei  with  the  arebona
ttaamaelTee.  What  the  Dauaaiiea  wen  preriona
to  the  legiilatiaD  of  Stdon  ia  not  ttated  anjwhero^
but  it  ia  not  iaprolBbie  that  they  wen  paUiiol


p<D]waa

of  regnlatmg  the  litoigiei,  taxea.  or  nnaaeial  ud
vililary  a&in  in  genenL  {BSeUi,  PabL  Eoxl  iL
3  21.)  Tittnvum  (Onci.  Siaigmi.  p.  369)  mcre-
OTer  mppoasi  with  aoiM  pnbability,  that  tltey
ware,  like  the  deraei  of  Attica,  local  dlTinoaa.
Henc*  the  granusanana  inlsTn  ui  that  niivafiei,
or  tha  chief  offioer  of  ctsj  nancrary,  «■§  the  nma
aa  the  demar^  At  any  taCe,  howeTar,  the  nan-
cnwiei  before  tha  time  of  Solon  can  hara  had  no
with  tha  naTy,  for  tha  Alhaniaoi  tbea


deriTed  Ennn  i«M,  a  ahip,  bnt  frian  rmim,  and
roliapapoi  ■•  only  another  form  ibr  rnitk^fH  in
Che  aenae  of  a  hooaehaldv,  aa  voii^aa  wai  oaed  fbs
Ifaeientofahoaaa.  (Pol)ni,x  20  ;  Waahamath,
£<&■.  Jtt.ToLL  p.S«7:  TbiAwiKHiit.^Or.
nd.  iL  p.  32.)

Solon  in  hii  Iqtila&n  tbaa  oiJj  retained  tli»

pnbahly  wai  tliat  ha  diargnd  ead  of  then  with

the  eqainuant  of  one  trireme  and  with  tbe  aovat-
(PoUux,  TiiL  lOa) AU


eipeocea,  ptolwbly  c«


clwnga  rf  th«  Solonian  comtitatioa  ntaiood  the


ii  ni  agunit  Aegiu  h
Lr  own,  ii  thai  wdect];  i
r  niDcniin  ol  Cleutfac


c«tabli*htd,  U


v  [he  aDmbei  of  thtir  >hip«  mu  in-
atated  Erom  fdrtj-eigtit  lo  idj,  and  thiu  of  hon«-
mcD  from  iuiKt7-ux  to  ooe  Imodnd  Tlit  jlBte-
it  of  HdTodotu  (tL  69)  th&t  tha  Atbaniuu  in
'ad  oal;  fift;  ihipi  of
_  in  (ccordum  with  ths
_..._  if  Cleutfaenci. The  fnncdani  of

ttw  fanner  MAi|>apgi,u  the  hndi  of  their  leipeetiTe
Mnasric,  woe  dot  tnntfemd  to  lb*  donuthi.
[DiXAiCBt.]  (HupocnL  1.  v.  A^fwpXvi.)  The
oblisalioa  of  Bch  naucnrr  to  aqnip  a  diipofnt-
for  Ue  MiTke  of  tlM  lepnbllc  IB>r  b«  regarded  ai
«f  tcienrchr.  (Laz.  Rhetor,  p.  283.)
■aj  became  developed  and
obligatioD  of  (he  namxaciei  ap-
pean  w  iuitb  snduallj  ooued  and  to  bare  Mien
ulo  dkue.  (Compan  TaJUtuusiA.)  {L.  S.]
NAUCRARUS.  [Ni.DCKAKU.}
NAVI3  (m£«).  The  bqinning  of  the  art  of
abip-boildins  and  of  naTigatioa  among  tbe  Oreelu
Dinit  be  rcfi^rred  to  a  time  Tnuch  anterior  to  the
agcf  of  which  wa  bare  an;  record.  Even  in  the
eimieet  mTtbical  atoriei  long  lojage*  are  men-
tioned, wbkh  an  certainly  not  alUtgether  poetical
bbrkatiooa,  and  ve  have  every  reawm  to  ruppoH
that  at  that  tarij-  age  ibipa  irere  Died  which  were
fu  ntHrior  to  a  eimpte  canoe^  and  of  a  mach  more
eomplKated  Knutnre.  The  time,  therefore,  when
boatt  eouiited  of  one  hollov  tree  (MoKiryla),  or
when  ihipa  were  merelj  raila  {Raiet^  D^tGicu)
tied  together  with  leathern  thongi,  ropei,  end
other  lubiBncei  (Plin.  ff,  N.  vii  fi7),  belong!  lo
a  period  of  which  not  the  alighteit  record  hai
rmched  ua,  although  inch  mde  and  limple  boata
•X  laft*  ffiDtinaed  occuionall;  to  be  med  down
to  tha  lateit  timet,  and  ^qiear  to  ha>e  been  varr
U  rftho  ■ ■


:h  theft


L  (CkjDi


compare  Qnintil.  i.  3  ;  Flr^.  iv.  2  ;  Feit
Sciedia:  LiT.  iiL  26.)  PaMing  over  tha  itor;  of
the  thip  ArgD  and  the  expedition  of  the  Argonaota,
we  ibaU  pCHeed  to  eoniidei  tha  ihipa  at  dcacribed
in  the  Homeric  poemi.

Tha  onmeroaa  fleet,  with  which  the  Oredu
are  laid  to  have  niled  to  the  coatt  of  Alia  Minor,
mmt  on  the  whale  be  r^arded  aa  nlScient  ei-i-
dence  of  the  extent  to  which  navigation  wai  car.

in  the  Homeric  deicriptiaa  may  have  nriten  froDi
the  poet^  own  bngination.  In  the  Homeric  cata-
loona  it  !•  Mated  that  each  of  the  fifty  Boeotian
•h^  anied  120  wamon  (fl  iL  510),  and  a  ihip
which  cairiod  n  manT  cannot  hare  been  of  very
■mall  dimenuoni.  What  Homer  italei  of  the
Boeotian  vcoeli  ippliei  mora  or  leu  to  the  ihipi
of  other  Grseki.  Theaa  boau  wm  provided  with
a  man  (Irrii)  which  wai  faitened  by  two  ropei
(wfirmm)  to  the  two  endi  of  the  ihip,  w  that
when  the  lopa  connecting  it  with  the  ptow  broke,
the  man  woold  &11  towardi  the  iteiti,  where  it
might  kni  the  hehuimatL  (Od.  liL  109,  &c)
Tin  mait  coold  be  erected  or  taken  down  ai  ne-
eeuity  reqoind.  They  alio  bad  nili  (Iffrls),
but  no  deck  ;  each  vcne!  however  appear*  to
bave  had  only  one  vil,  which  waa  tued  in  la-
Voutahle  wind ;  and  the  principal  meant  of  pro-


NAVia.  ?8»

«UiDg  tha  Tend  lay  in  the  rowan,  who  au  upon
lenche*  (icAiia«>.  The  oan  weiebiteued  to  tha
ida  of  the  ibip  with  leathern  ^oogt  (Tpvrol  tap-
^Tuw,  Od.  iv.  732),  in  which  thay  were  turned
aa  a  key  in  itt  hole.  The  ihipt  in  Homer  aro
moatly  odled  black  (^ixaivii),  probably  beoiiue
they  wen  punted  or  covered  with  a  black  «ub-
•ttsce,  inch  at  pitch,  to  protect  the  wood  ignioit
the  influence  of  tha  water  and  tha  air  g  aomelimea
other  cahmn,  inch  at  /ilAvoi,  wiai— a  (a  ted  co-
' ,  ware  uiad  to  adorn  the  tidal  of  the  ihipa
the  ptow,  whoDca  Homer  oceaaionally  lalla
thipi  ^Tonppoi,  i.c  red-cheeked  {IL  it.  S3T,
Od.  ii.  1 2£)  ;  they  were  alio  painted  occauonally
with  a  purple  cidour  (foirurovdnot,  Od.  xi  124)«
HenidotwBy*(iii.5S)  that  all  thipt  ware  punltj
with  iiIXtoi.  When  tha  Oieeki  had  landed  oa
tha  coatt  of  Ttvy,  tha  thipt  war*  dawn  on  land,
and  ^tened  at  tha  poop  to  large  ttonet  with  a
ropt  which  lenad  h  anchon  (A  L  436,  xir.  77,
Od.  ix.  137,  XT.  i9B  i  MoachopoL  ad  ILl  436).
Tha  Oreeki  then  inmimded  the  fleet  with  a  forti-
tha Bllscka  of  the


'J^l:^


Thi<  t


it  anintC  tha
[torn  of  drawing  i


ffiUDwed


from  the  accouata  in  CaetBT't  Commentariei.  There
it  a  celebrated  but  difficult  paiaaee  in  the  Odyiin
<v.  Hii,  &C.),  in  which  tha  buiTdiag  of  a  boat  u
deicribed,  although  not  with  the  minntenett  which
an  actual  ahip-builder  might  with  for.  Odyiaeat
fint  cull  doirn  with  hii  axe  twenty  treei,  and  pre-
pare! the  wood  lot  hit  purpoae  by  ratling  it  amooth
and  giving  it  the  proper  th^ie.  He  then  bore*
the  hola  Mr  nailt  and  boekt,  and  fiu  tha  planlta
together  and  faitent  them  with  nailt.  Ha  toundt
the  botMn  of  tbe  ihip  like  that  of  a  broad  tnnt-
port  veael,  and  laiia  tbe  bulwaA  (bp^t))  fittii^
it  upon  the  muDeroiit  ribt  of  the  ihijk  Ha  after-
mirdi  coven  the  whole  of  the  ouUide  with  plank^
which  are  laid  acroat  the  riba  from  tbe  keel  np-
varda  to  the  bulwaA  ;  next  the  matt  ii  made,
and  the  tail^yard  allached  lo  it,  and  laatly  tho
rudder.  liVhen  the  ihip  ia  thai  &r  completed,  ho
laiiei  the  biUwarit  atiU  higher  by  wickenradc
which  goei  all  around  the  vettel,  ai  a  pnitection
againat  thawavea.  Thii  luicd  bulwark  of  wicker-
work  and  the  like  wni  uaed  in  later  timea  alto.
(Eualath.  ad  Od.  v.  256.)  For  ballait  OdyiieDa
throna  into  tha  ihip  Eaii,  which  according  to  the
Schalioit  coDuated  of  wood,  Hoiiei,  and  land.
Calypao  then  bringi  him  mal^ali  to  make  a  tall
0^  and  he  raateni  Iho  Mpai  or  iop»  which  rnr
from  the  top  of  tha  man  to  the  two  endi  of  tha
yard,  and  alio  the  ndXti  with  which  tha  tail  it
drawn  np  or  let  down.  The  T6Sti  mentioned  in
this  peatage  were  undonbledly,  ai  in  the  hter
timea,  the  ropei  attached  to  ths  two  lower  comen
of  tha  iquara  nU.  (Comp.  Nitaicb.  AmmrL  «.
Od;^  vol  ii  p.  35,  &c  ;  Ukert,.  Saawr*.  iUor
fUm.  fStogr.  f.  20.)  Tha  ahip  of  which  the
building  it  thni  deacribed  wai  a  imall  bnt,  a
irx>SlB  at  Homer  ealli  it ;  bnt  it  had  like  al!  the
Homeric  ihipa  a  ronnd  or  flat  bottom.  Gieatn'
ahipa  muit  hare  been  of  a  more  complicated  nnw-
tnre,  ai  ihip-bnildan  ate  piaiied  ai  artiita,  (IL
v.  60,  &C.) Below,  under  CbracU,  a


78*  NAV13.

ItiiB

nilan  di

that  auch  wu  realty  dme  it  dear  from  tfae  (act,
that  Homei  nulcea  OdyiKoa  (s;  that  be  faad  list
tight  of  [and,  and  nv  nothing  but  the  iky  and
water  {Od.  lii.  «D3  ;  comp.  lir.  302  ;  Vicg.  Aen.
iii.  192,  &c\  Bllhongb  on  ths  vhole  it  may  b«
admitted,  that  ciBn  down  to  the  hinoiial  timst
ths  naiigation  of  the  andenti  woi  cnnfiiwd  to
coatting  along  (he  ihon. Homer  tiever  mentinu


whou  king  Hino*  i)  nid  to  have  pi
fleet,  and  olu  the  Phaeaciani. (
Horn.  Of.  TiiL  110,  Ac)
After  the  timn  of  the  Troi


and  with  it  the


I  of  the  Tnnan
t  of  ibip-huildu


e  the  Ciel


',  natsgitioo,


le  greatly  imprond,  on  accoimt  of  Ihe  etlabllih-
ment  of  the  immerDat  colooiet  on  foreign  coaMt,
and  the  increaied  commereial  inteiroaiM  vith
theoe  coloniet  and  olhtr  foreign  countriea.  The
practice  of  pincy,  which  woi  during  this  period
rairied  on  to  a  great  eitent  not  only  between
Oreeki  and  foreignen,  hut  alio  among  the  Greek*
themielTei,  muit  likewiie  hare  contrfbated  to  tbe
improTcment  of  ihipi  and  of  navigation,  although
1)0  porticDlan  ore  meutjoned.  In  Greece  inelf  Oa
Corinthioni  wen  the  £nt  who  brought  the  art  of
■hip-boildiiig  neorett  to  (he  point  at  which  we  find
it  in  the  time  of  Thucydidet,  and  they  were  the
firtt  who  intmduced  ahipt  with  three  ranki  of
rowen  (t^hV,  Tnnmei). About  the  year  700

Tention  it  otcribed,  made  the  Samiflut  acquainted
with  it  (Thucyd.  L  13  j  Plin.  H.  N.  vif.  57)  ;  but
it  mutt  have  been  preceded  by  that  of  thefiirenu,
that  it,  thipa  with  two  ronki  of  rowert,  which
Pliny  altribntea  to  the  Erylhroeuii,*  ThcH  in-
noTBtinu  however  do  not  lecm  to  hare  been  gene-
rally adopted  for  a  long  time  ;  for  we  read  (hat
aboDt  the  time  of  Cynu  the  Phocacani  introdncod
long  tharp-keeled  ihipt  called  ■*tmiKiirropo\.  (He-
rod. I  163.)  TheM  belonged  to  the  clou  of  long
war-lhipt  (k5m  /uucpal),  and  had  fifty  roweri,
twenty-five  on  etch  side  of  the  ihip,  who  Bt  in
one  raw.  It  it  further  itated  that  before  tbii
lime  Tetaelt  called  arprfyuKtu^  with  large  round
or  iBlher  flat  boltomi,  had  been  nied  eidautdy
by  all  the  Ionian!  in  Alia.  At  thii  period  most
Orceki  isem  U>  hare  adopted  the  long  ihipt  with
only  one  rack  of  roweit  on  each  tide  ;  then  name


NAVIS.
nried  accordingly  ai  they  had  fifty  (nmiicitrra-
(»i),  or  thirty  (TpuMdwopoi),  or  eren  a  nnaller
namber  of  rowen.  A  ihip  of  war  of  thii  cUh  U
re)aetented  in  the  prerioiu  woodcut,  which  it  taken
iram  Hont&Dcon,  FAiiiq.  E^jtiiq^  rol.  ir,  part  2.
pLU2.

The  following  woodcut  containt  a  beoulifnl  fmC"
mentofaBireiDewithaconiplete  deck.  (Windcd-
manit,  Momm.  Awtidu  nedit  pi.  207.)  Another
■peeiman  of  a  imall  Bireme  ■  giren  further  on.


The  lint  Greek  people  whom  we  know  to  hat*
acquired  a  navy  of  importance  were  the  Corinthiaiia,
Samiana,  and  Phocaeoni.  About  the  lime  of  Cyrni
and  Cambyeet  the  Corinthian  Triremes  were  gene,
lalty  adopted  by  tbe  Sicilian  tyionti  and  by  the
Corcyiaeani,  who  toon  acquired  the  moat  powerful
naciea  among  the  Oreeki.  In  other  psiti  of  Grtwe
and  eren  at  Athens  and  in  Aegiua  the  moat  comjibott
reaiels  about  this  time  were  Long  ships  with  only
one  rank  of  rowers  on  each  aide.  Athena,  althongh
the  foundation  of  ili  maritime  power  had  been  lud
by  Solon  [Naitcriria],  did  not  obtain  a  fleet  of
anj  importance  until  the  time  of  Themialodes,  who
pcnoaded  them  to  build  200  Triremes  for  the  pnt-
p»e  of  carrying  on  the  war  agoJntt  Aegtn^  But
even  then  thipa  were  not  provided  with  cumplele
dockt  (KarainpiiiuzTa)  covering  the  whole  of  tba


St


tmmL (Thucyd.  L  14;  Hend.  vii.  U4.)
with  only  a  partial  deck  or  wi '  ' *

were  called  HfipaieTiii  r^ts,  and  m  lAtin  ■ana
aperiae.  A  line  reprctentalion  of  socb  ■  one  ia
figured  above  &Dm  a  coin  of  Corcytn.  The  ihipi
described  in  Homer  had  no  decks,  and  were  all
S^ipaxTiM  (Thucyd.  L  10),  and  the  only  piotectiait
for  the  men  oontisted  of  the  tuprn  or  bolwork.
(Hom.  Od.  lit.  229.)  Even  at  the  time  of  tha
Pertion  war,  the  Athenian  shipa  wen  withoat  >
complete  deck.  (Thucyd.  L  14.)  Ship*  which  hod
a  complete  deck  were  called  Kvrd^paitrti^  and
the  dock  itself  nmdirrpmiia.  Thar  mienlion  ia
OKTibed  by  Piiny  to  the  Thoaiana.  At  tha  tune
when  Themittoclea  induced  theAtheoiaDi  la  bvild


NAVIS.

a  iaU  of  300  Mill,  lu  bIn  curied  a  decnie,  tlut
trajytrnt  tnutj  new  Tiiiemn  •hoald  be  built
fisu  l£«  produce  of  the  miiiet  of  Luuiam. (Pi
Inen.  i. SO  ; Plut TktPiiiL i  ;  cmaf.  Bitekh,
A^J:£eH.F.S49,  3d  edit.} After  tbo  tiine '
TbeniiitodM  u  nuuiy  u  twenty  Trireme*  mi
h«TO  been  biuit  ereiy  jmr  botb  in  timei  of  v
ud  of  peace,  u  the  BTenge  nuinbei  of  Trinmei
which  vu  ilwaji nadj  unomitcd  to  bei
thne  ud  four  buudnd. Such  an  rumual  tdiUtion
«si  tfa«  niDie  Doccmiy,  «  tbe  Teuali  were  o  ~
ligbl  Atmctnre  uid  did  not  ]ut  long. The  whole
mperintendenee  ef  the  building  of  now  Tnrei
wu  in  the  hudi  of  the  KUte  of  the  Fire  Hi
died  (Dcmuth.  e.  AmdnL  p.  39S),  but  tbe  utoal
bwiDeH  WM  eatnuted  to  a  eoauniRee  called  the
Tfflfpmiul,  one  af  whom  acted  ai  their  tree.
ud  had  in  hii  keeping  the  mone;  let  qHit  for  the
pnfwae. In  the  Dma  ot  Demotthenci  a  tm
of  ULt  Tpnipiiroui  nn  awa;  with  the  monej,  which
•nwimted  to  two  talenti  and  a  halfl During  the

period  after  Aleiandei  the  Onal  the  Attic

appeui  to  baTo  beainiB  contideiablj  dimiui
■a  in  307  a.  c.  Demetrini  Poliorcela  pmmiK
Atheniaiii  timber  for  100  new  Triiemei.  (Diod.
XX.  4«  ;  Pint  ZHnufr.  iO.)  After  thii  dma  the
Rbodiau  became  tbe  gieateit  maritime  power  in
Qreeca. The  navy  of  ^aita  wae  nerer  of  great


impananee,

NaTigsiion


tbe  ahipe  w


^laTigBiion  remained  for  the  moM  part  what  it
noa  been  before :  the  Oreeki  Beldom  Teiitnred  out
into  the  open  lo,  and  it  wai  generally  coneidered

neceaary  to  remain  in  tight  of  the  eoailDraf

iibmd,  which  alto  eerred  ai  gnidn  in  day tim
the  night  the  poeition,  rieing  and  aetting  c
diHerent  iMii  aniwered  the  lume  purpme.
winter  naiHgation  genenlly  ceaied  atti^ther
eaiee  where  it  would  hare  been  necenaiy  to

f  eitmt  of  conntry,  which  was
in  land  by  a  nurow  neck,
tre  KHnetJmri  drawn  aa«a  the  neck  of
le  aea  to  tbe  other,  by  machhiec  called
i^KoL  Thi>  vat  dope  mo*t  fnqnen^  actOH  the
iKhmiu  of  Corinth,  (Herod.  riL  2«  ;  Thncyd.  *iiL
I,  iiL  li,  with  the  SchiJ. ;  Stnb.  TiiL  p.  S80 ;
Polyb.iT.  19,  *.  101.)

Now  ai  legardi  the  Taricne  kindi  of  tbipa  need
by  tbe  Oreeka,  we  might  diride  them  with  Pliny
according  to  the  nomber  of  iinki  of  rowen  em-
ployed  in  them,  into  Monerei,  Biremei,  Triremei,
Qnadriremei,  Quinqusemee,  &c^  np  to  the  enor-
iBoaa  ihip  with  (atj  tank*  of  rowen,  built  by
Ptalenueu*  Philopator  (Plin.  L  c. ;  Alhen.  t.
p.  203,  &&)  Bui  all  thcMi  appear  to  hare  been
cnulrnded  on  the  nme  princijJe,  and  it  ia  more
eoOTBiient  to  diride  them  into  Mpt  o/ttar  and
dipii^biinie»  (popruti,  ^[inpvl,  jAxiUti,  rAoio,

of  tbe  tatter  kind  were  not  calculated  (or  quick
movement  or  r^id  lailing,  but  to  catrr  the  greaCeit
poirible  quantity  of  good*.  Hence  their  ttructtne
waa  bulky,  their  bottom  round,  and  although  they
were  not  without  mwera,  yet  the  thief  man*  by
which  they  were  propelled  were  their  nil*.

The  mo«t  common  ghipi  of  war  in  tbe  earlier
tiraei  were  tbe  pentecontori  (TtrrnKJrTOfwi),  but
afterwardi  Ihey  were  chicf1yTriieineB,and  tbe  latter
are  frequently  dnignated  onlr  by  the  name  r^i,
whUe  aU  tbe  other*  are  oiled  by  tbe  name  indi-
Btiif  their  peculiar  ehaiacter.  Triremei  howerer
*Ma  again  diiided  islo  ttro  claMca:  tlM  one  cod-


NAVIS.  7M

lilting  of  real  men-of-war,  which  were  qniek-iBil-
ing  Teueli  (raxeiai),  and  the  other  ot  traniponi
either  for  loldien  (oTpoTirfriJet  or  ^wXeraryiyoly
or  for  hor*ca  (twwiDvl,  Ima-jsiyeC).  Ship*  ot  ihi*
clou  were  more  heavy  and  awkwatd,  and  were
ihenfore  not  nied  in  hstlle  except  in  caie*  of  ne-
ceuity.  (Thucyd-i.  116.}  It  aeem*  to  bare  been
a  oomnxon  pactjce  to  u*e  a*  traniporta  tor  toldier*
and  boticB  nich  Triremea  a*  had  become  nieleia
a*  men-of-wui.  The  ordinary  aiia  of  a  war  galley
may  bo  inti^rred  from  tbe  &ct  that  the  aveisge
number  of  men  engaged  in  it,  including  the  crew
and  marioei,  wni  two  hundred,  to  whom  on  aome
eccaiiona  ai  much  ai  thirty  epibatae  wen  added.
(Herod.  Yiii.  17,  viL  184  ;  comp.  EpiaiTAa  and
Bockb,  Pi.it  BcoH.  p.  S78,  Ac)  The  rapidity
witb  which  thoH  war  gslleyi  niled  may  be
gathered  from  rarioui  itatementi  in  ancient  writeri,
and  appcari  to  hare  been  ao  great,  that  even  we
cannot  help  looking  upon  it  without  aatoniihment,
when  we  find  that  the  quichnet*  of  an  ancient
trireme  nearly  equalled  thai  of  a  modem  ateam-
bost.  Among  the  war-ahipt  of  tbe  Athenian*  their
iBcred  atate-icnel*  were  alwaja  included  (Pa-
aiLUB;  comp.  BOckh,  Urbadaa  liber  d.  Stm»m»
ia  AU.  SbuOt,  p.  76,  &c);  but  imatler  Tencli,
anch  a*  the  ifimiitirTcipai  or  TWacdrropai,  aia
nerer  included  when  tho  lom  of  men-o(-war  i*
mentioned,  and  iheii  uie  for  mililaiy  purpoaei  ap.
pean  gradually  to  have  ceaied.

Ve»eli  with  more  than  three  rank*  of  reweti  on
each  aide  were  not  conatmcted  in  Greece  till  about
the  year  400  B.C..  when  Dionyiiui  I,  tyrant  of
Syracuse,  who  beitowed  great  care  upon  bia  navy,
built  the  firat  Quadriremci  (Ttrp^po),  with  which
had  probably  become  acquainted  through  the


II  JikewiK  Bicribed  to  the  reign  of  Dionyaina.
i^iton  {op.  Plin.  Lc.)  atenbea  tbe  inrentian
jnqneremea  to  the  Sotaminiani,  and  if  tbia
lent  it  correct,  DioDTiiui  bad  bl*  Quinqoc-
probably  built  by  a  Salaminian  *bip-bnilder.
In  the  reign  of  Dionyaina  II.  Heiere*  (IfVeii)
re  alio  mentioned,  the  inrention  of  which  waa
Bribed  to  [he  Syracusani.  (Aelian,  F.H.  n.  12.
ith  tbenoteof  PeriioniniiPlin,  J.  c)  Afteriha
me  of  Alexander  the  Onat  the  me  of  Teoek
ith  four,  five,  and  more  lanka  of  rowen  became
Tery  general,  and  it  ii  well  known  fiom  Polybio*
(u  G9,  &c)  that  tbe  Gnt  Punic  war  wai  chiefly
carried  on  with  Qninqutttmet  Shi^  with  tweli^
thirty,  or  eron  forty  ranka  of  rowera  (Plin.  I.  e,  |
p.  204,  die.),  eiich  ai  they  were  built  bj
r  and  tbe  Plalenuea,  appear  to  haTe  been
mete  curioiitiea,  and  did  not  come  into  common
le.  The  Alheniani  at  fint  did  not  adopt  reeaela
Jger  than  Trremo*,probabtT  becau*e  they  thought
lat  with  rapidity  and  akilf  they  could  do  mora
lan  with  luge  and  unwieldy  ahipe.  In  the  year
c  SJG  they  continued  to  um  nothing  bat  Tri.
mea  ;  but  in  330  B.C  the  republic  had  already
number  of  Quadriremea,  which  wai  afterward*
creoaed.  Tbe  fint  Qoinqueremea  at  Athene  u»
entioned  in  a  document  (in  Btickb^  CriamJtm,
'.liv.litt.  K.)  belonging  to  tbe  year  KG.  3S&
HerDdotui  (tL  S7),  aoording  lo  the  eomnoa
reading,  alia  tbe  ^eotii,  which  m  01. 72  tiia
AeginetAM  took  from  lbs  Atheniana,  a  won^t  i

,...3a,  ^-.  - ,.^


TBB  NAVIS.

Imt  the  reading  in  this  passage  ij  conupt,  ftnd
witfTtTupis  ahould  Ik  written  initeiid  of  -rnrriip^j^
(BSckh,  Urkundm,  p.  76.)  After  lbs  year  330
Ibe  Athenians  appear  to  haia  gtaduallj  crsicd
building  Tritemci,  and  to  have  conatructed  Quad-
riiemn  initead.

Among  the  inialler  reueli  we  may  mention  the
inoTos  or  iutATiof,  which  icenu  to  have  been  lome-
timn  nud  B«  a  ahip  of  huiden.  (Herod,  lii.  1B6  ;
comp.  Pind.  FylA.  li.  62,  titm.  y.  5.)  The  acatiu
mmt  generally  haie  been  very  tmall,  snd  theuine
oi  a  icapia,  for  Suetonius  (Oku.  64)  in  doKribing
Coeser'B  eicape  from  Aleiandna,  nyi  that  he
jumped  into  a  acapha,  vhich  Plutarch,  in  nairaling
the  same  event,  alia  an  acalion.  From  Thucydide*
(iv.  67)  with  the  remark  of  the  Scholiait,  we  must
infer  that  it  wm  a  imall  boat  in  which  every  perion
•uling  in  it  managed  two  oan,Dne  with  each  hand.
The  name  Scnpha  (•rvdfx))  denote)  a  email  ikiff  or
life-boat,  whicb  wai  commonly  attached  to  mer-
chantmen for  the  piLTpots  of  saving  the  craw  in
danger.  {Act.  ApMt.


Libun


shCftfrema


ir  Z.i4.n.ioo,  in  Greek  \


1  apparently  lo  every  wa

lii  lines

P.  262,  e


(Lucia


^A«g.  17)1
time  of  Augustus,  libumae  even  with  six  lines  of
rowcn  were  considered  uiiall  and  m'yfi  in  com-
parison with  the  oDwieldy  ships  of  Antony  at
AcliuuL  {Herat  Epod.  i.  i.)  Pliny  (i.  32)  in-
forms us  that  thsy  were  conitmctcd  sharp  in  the
bows  to  offer  the  least  possible  rciislance  to  the
water.  Thi^y  were  usually  provided  with  a  beak,
whence  a  nant  r^nUa  is  generally  the  same  as  a
Libuma.  They  were  Grit  constructed  by  the
Libnrniana  (whence  they  deriTed  their  name),  and
first  used  by  the  Romans  tn  the  battle  of  Actium.
(Comp.  Gcll.  ivii.  3  1  Plin.  H.  N.  ii.  5,  ivii.  3  ;
Appian,  lb  B^L  lUgr.  3 ;  Juven.  iii.  240.)


It  Alhcni


a  name  given


it,  which  was  genemlly  of  the

_ „. , hcncB  Arisloptanes  (Sj.  1313)

calls  the  Triremes  nafSiimut,  and  one  lessel,  the
name  of  which  was  Nauphante,  he  calls  Ibe  daugh-
ter of  NauBo.  (BiSckh,  UrL  p.  81,  &c.  j  and  a  liit
of  names  in  p.  34,  &c.)  The  Romans  sometinie)
gave  to  their  ship*  masculine  names The  Greek

as  NnaticSB,  or  they  were  absttnct  words  such  as
T-inKoia,  dtpoTfio,  Tifiiaio,  Sdiiouaa,  'Kytiiiri),
&C.  In  many  esses  the  name  of  the  builder  also
was  added.

Wo  now  proceed  to  deicribo  the  principal  part*

1.  7'ile  proa  (rpipa  or  iifroiror,  prora)  was
generally  ornamented  on  both  siiici  with  figures,
whidi  were  either  pauited  upon  the  sides  or  laid

lent  an  eye  on  cnch  side  of  the  prow.  (BSckh,  LVL
p.  ID2  ;  Becker,  Chariilt$,  toL  ii.  p.  60.)  Upon
tha  prow  or  fore-deck  there  was  always  some  em-
blem ^rapiaTiiior,  tau^M,  fgura)  by  which  the
shin  was  distinguished  from  others.  At  the  head
■ ■ ■  ■■  ■• and  its  ei-

b  was  fre-


o  hare  been  sometimes  covered  w


brass  and  to  have  served  a*  an  embole  {i/iSoX-l))
St  the  enemy's  rcsiels. (Aesch jL /"ers.  4  U. )
' !t  designated  bj  the


against  the  enei
.Toe  ixpovriKu


goose  or  swan,  as  in  the  aoeompuying  woodcDt.
{Etj/m.  Moffn.  I.  r.)  The  eheniscus  wa*  often
gilt  and  made  of  brame.  (Loeiaii,  Ftr.  Hiit,  41,
Jap.  Trag.  1 4.)  A  cheniscni  of  bnnua  is  mo-
served  in  the  Royal  Libniy  at  Paris.  (Hilljn,
Diet,  da  beaaa  ArU.) [iNSram.] Jut  below


tha  prow  and  projecting  ■  little  above  the  keel  ma
the  Rottrum  (ttttoKot,  f^a^r)  or  beak,  whicli
consisted  of  a  beam,  to  which  wera  attached  sharp
and  painted  irons,  or  iha  head  of  a  ram  and  the
like.  This  ffiSoAot  wai  used  for  the  purpoH  of
attacking  another  vessel  and  of  betaking  it*  lidei.
It  is  said  to  have  been  invented  by  the  Tyrrheoion
Pisaeu).  (PUn.  L  e.)  These  beaks  were  at  fiftt
always  ilbave  the  water  and  visible  ;  afierwarda
they  wen  attached  lower,  so  that  they  were  in-
visible, and  thus  become  still  more  djuigeroui  to
o^er  sbipa.  (Diodor.  iL  27,  liv.  60, 7i ;  Poljb.  L
26,  ivi.  e,  viii.  6.)  The  annexed  woudculi,  taken
from  Uontfaocon  (L'Jatiq.  Etptiq.  iv.Z  tab.  1 33),
repreaeat  thrae  diSerent  beak*  of  ship*.


NAVI3.

CianMted  wilb  tbe  ffiSaXot  «u  tbe  wfiotfittMi,
which  according  to  Pollni  (i,  85)  miut  hive  been
■  wooden  pBrt  of  the  Tfuel  in  the  pnw  ibova  (lie
beek,  ud  wu  prolabl;  Iho  laiDa  u  ihe  'mrfStt,
■nd  mtndnl  to  ward  off  iha  attack  of  tbe  fySiAoi
eC  B  hottile  ihip.  The  eommmd  in  ihc  piDW  of  ■
Tcuel  WH  eieruiKd  hj  an  oflicu  called  rpopttii,
who  •ecmi  to  hiTc  bem  next  in  rank  to  the  ateen-
■un,  and  to  bare  had  the  cue  of  the  gear,  and
nmnnaud  over  the  rowen.  (Xeaopfi.  Oom,
14.)

3.  7i*  rtmt  (*^i*uTl,  puppu)  wu  genemlly
■boiB  the  other  pani  of  the  deck,  and  in  it  the
belmtman  had  faia  derated  KsL  It  it  Ken  in  the
Rpreaentaliooi  of  ancient  veueli  to  be  roundel
than  the  pnw,  though  iti  eitremitj'  ii  likewite
ahsip.  The  atctn  waa,  like  the  prow,  adorned  in
Tarisui  waji,  but  etpeciallT  with  (he  image  of  the
tuldar;  deily  of  the  reue!  (tuUla).  In  aome  re-
pnaeatationt  a  kind  of  nof  ii  formed  over  the
bead  of  the  iteeiiinan,  and  the  upper  part  of  (he
atem  frequentl;  haa  an  elegant  ornament  called
tjibuln,  and  in  Oreck  S^Xiurriir,  which  coiuti-
rated  the  higheit  part  of  ihe  poop.  It  farmed  a
etunsponding  omamenl  to  the  iitpo<rr6Xmv  at  the
prow.  At  uie  junction  of  the  aplnatre  with  tbe
itan  on  which  it  wu  bued,  we  commonly  obaerre
■a  amanient  membliog  a  circular  ihicld :  tht*
wu  called  iiniittar  or  i/rwiSinini.  It  ia  Men  on
tha  two  Bpluitria  hero  repretented. (Comp.  Apal-


NAYI3.


78T


kn.  Rbed.  I  1089,  iu  601  ;  Apollod.  19.  I  VI;
Hi>m./i.iT.716;  HenxLtL  114.)  The  apluitre
too  immediatelj  behind  the  gubemstor,  and  lerred
in  iema  degree  to  protect  hitn  from  wind  and  rain.
Sometimee  then  upean,  beode  the  apluilrr,  a
pole,  to  which  a  fillet  or  pennon  (i-oj»Ib)  wa«  at-
tached, which  aerred  both  to  diitingniih  and  adorn
the  Tcite!,  and  alio  to  ihow  the  dinction  of  the
wind.  In  the  column  of  Trajan,  a  lanlem  ii  iu>-
pended  from  the  aplmtn  to  at  to  bang  orer  the
ileck  before  the  helmtman.  The  apluatre  eom-
tiHBilj  conaitted  of  thin  planVi,  and  preiented  a
broad  nrftce  to  the  aky.  In  conaeqneDce  of  iU
and  beantifal  fonn,  the  apltit(n
n  of  nurilioie  afiaJrt :
it  wai  carried  off  in  triumph  by  the  lictor  in  a
■MTal  B^agement  (Juvcn.  i.  1 3SJ,  and  Neptone  ia


napieaoiu  place  a


Hmetimea  repmented  on  medali  holding  iha
apluitre  in  hii  right  hand,  a*  in  the  unneied  wood-
cat  ;  and  in  Ihe  ce1ebni(ed  Apotheoiii  of  Homer,
now  in  the  Britiih  Muieam,  the  female  personating
ihe  Qdjiiej  eihibita  the  aame  mnbUm  ID  refer-
ence to  the  Tojagca  of  Odjiaeua,


3.  The  Tfi^nii  ia  the  bulwark  of  the  Teucl,  m
lather  the  uppermoat  edge  of  it  (HHjch.<.e.)  Id
aniaU  boata  the  pega  (ouAfial,  uaimi)  betweeo
which  the  oara  mora,  and  to  which  they  are  ftat-
f  ned  by  a  thong  (Tfuwirr^p).  wen  upon  the  roitftiiJ,
(Btfckb,irrfaH{.  p.103.)  In  all  other  Teuela  the
oara  paued  thiDDgh  holee  in  the  aide  of  the  veeiel
(i^eoAfioi,  Tp^>iin-a,  or  Tpnrilfum),  (8cboL
Ariaopi.  Aiiarm.  97,  &c)

i.  The  middle  part  of  the  deck  in  moat  iliipi  of
war  appean  (o  bare  been  raiaed  above  the  bulwark
or  at  h»M  to  a  lerel  with  ita  upper  edge,  ntd  tJiDi
enabled  Ihe  •aldJera  to  occnpj  a  poaition  from
which  they  could  tee  bi  around  and  hurl  theic
daita  againat  the  enemy.  Such  an  etanted  deck
appear!  in  the  annexed  woodcat  reptaanting  k
Mtntrii,  In  ihia  inatance  the  flag  ia  ttandiDg
Dpon  the  hind-deck.  (Maioia,  PmBp.  Part  L  tak
iiii.  Gg.  Z)


5.  One  of  the  mott  mteretting,  aa  well  a*  im-
iTtaot  parte  in  the  anangementt  of  the  Birerae^
riremea,  Ac,  ii  the  poaition  of  the  rankt  rf
iwen,  from  which  the  thipt  thamtelTe*  derira
leir  namet.  Varioua  opinioni  hare  been  enter-
ined  by  thoaa  who  haie  wriltoi  upon  thii  lub-
ct,  aa  tne  information  which  ancient  writer*  giro
pan  it  it  extremely  icanty.  Thru  mach,  how^
rer,  ia  certain,  that  the  difiennt  lanka  of  rowerc,
ho  Bt  alcDg  the  tide*  of  ■  veatet,  wets  placed
one  abore  the  other.  Thia  Mtmi  it  Bm  lisht
3  ■  9  '^■'


nij  improbsblfh  M  the  common  aliipa  in  later
time)  mnit  hme  had  fivo  ordinca  of  rawen  on  each
■ido,  and  tince  tiea  the  lowest  of  them  mutt  have
been  aomewhut  raited  above  the  lurfue  o(  the
water,  the  highest  ordo  ratiit  have  been  at  a  con-
tiderable  height  above  it,  and  coiuc^uend^  required
very  long  oon ;  the  apparent  improbability  11  ttili
more  increaicd,  wben  we  hear  of  veuelt  with
thirty  or  forty  ordinet  of  rowert  above  one  another.
But  that  inch  mott  have  been  the  arrangement  it
proved  by  Che  following  facta ;  Fictt,  In  worka  of
art,  in  which  more  than  me  ordo  of  rovers  11  re-
pretentcd,  they  appear  above  one  nnoiber,  as  in
the  bircmea  given  on  pp.  784,  a,  791,  a,  and  in
•everal  othen  figured  by  Montlaueon.  Secondly,
The  Scholiaat  od  Ariitopbnnei  {Adam.  1106;
compare  Arittoph.  Han,  1 105}  ttstu  that  the  loweit
rank  of  roweis  having  the  ibarteat  oin  and  con-
pay,  while  the  highett  ordo  had  the  longest  oars,
and  coneeqnently  had  the  heaviest  tvorlt  and  re-
ceived the  higheil  pay.  Thirdly,  In  the  monttroui
vmrtLfKUcarrninit  of  Ptolemaeni  Philopator,  the
description  of  which  by  CaJliieaua  (ap.Atluii.  v.
p.  203,  Ac.)  it  at  authentic  at  it  well  can  be,  the
beight  of  the  thip  from  the  aurface  of  the  water  to
the  top  of  the  prow  {htpofrrS^ior)  wa»  48  cubits,
and  from  the  water  to  the  topoftheatem^d^Aoora)
A3  cubits.  This  height  afforded  sniGdent  room
fin-  forty  ninlu  of  rowers,  eapecialty  as  tbey  did  not
sit  perpendicularly  above  one  another,  but  one
rower,  as  may  be  aeen  in  the  above  representation
of  a  Bireme,  tat  behind  the  other,  only  lomewhat
elevated  above  him.  The  oars  of  the  uppermost
ario  of  Towen  in  this  huge  veaael  were  38  cubits
long.

In  otdinavy  leatols  from  the  Moncria  up  to  the
Quinqueremia  eaoh


nngod  by  m


brnchei  attached  to  the  ribt  of  tho  vessel,  and
called  ItiiAia,  and  in  lAlJn^n'  and  fnaalra.  The
^ '  "  s  Tv^  called  doAd^T ''


iXoftijai  or  dc
1106.)  ThBuj


ad  AriitoiA.  Adam.  1106.)  The  uppermott  ordo  of
lowers  was  called  ftpif  Tor,  and  the  rowcra  tbemaelvet
&pay7rai.  (Thueyd.  vi.  3i.)  Theraiddle  ordooror-
dinct  of  rowert  were  called  fioA  fi^ywi  or  ft-yiVoi.
(PolluK,  L  9.)  Each  of  this  Ian  diss  of  lowcn
had  likewiae  hia  own  teat,  and  did  not,  at  tome
have  auppoaed,  ait  upon  benchei  running  acroit
the  tesael. (Bifckli,  Urhmd.  p.  103,  tec.)

We  shall  pan  over  the  variont  things,  which
were  necettary  in  a  vessel  for  the  ute  and  main,
tenanee  of  the  crew  and  toldiers,  as  well  at  the
machines  of  war  which  were  conveyed  in  it,  and
confine  onrselTes  to  a  brief  detcripiion  of  things
beloT^Dg  to  a  ship  as  such.  All  >uch  utcniilt  are
diiided  into  uwiim  and  luagiiig  gear  (anOii
(iMra,»iiiain6iiKpiiiaFri,PolluT,i.  13;  At)ien.
i.  p.  27).  Xenophon  (Ofcm.  viiL  12)  addi  to
th^  the  ffwiij  ifAwri,  or  the  variout  kinds  of
wickerworic,  but  these  are  more  properiy  oompre-
hended  among  the  Kpt/iairnL

T.  ZxtAi)  ^i\iva.

1.  Oors  (ititmu,  nml).  The  coileetive  term  fiir
oort  it  TOfi^r,  which  propeily  signified  nothing  hut
the  blade  or  flat  part  of  the  oar  (Herod,  viii  1 2  i  Pol-
iuT,  L  90),  bat  vaa  afterwards  utcd  at  a  collective
aiprcttion  for  all  the  oan  with  the  eieep^on  of


NAvrs.

the  rndder.  (Enrip.  l/A.  Tom-.  1346,  Bd.  1SS4  •

Polyh.  ivi.  3.)  The  oan  varied  in  siie  accordingly
as  they  were  used  by  a  lower  or  higher  ordo  n
rowers,  and  from  the  name  of  the  ordo  by  vhieh
they  were  used,  they  also  received  their  special
names,  vii.  Kiixai,  iftahdfuiu,  Ci^uu,  and  ^parL
T<J(t.  fUkkh  {Ur±.  p.  1 19)  has  calenltted,  that
each  Trireme  on  an  average  had  170  rowers.  In
a  Quinquereme  during  the  first  Punic  war,  the
average  number  of  rowers  was  300  (Polyb.  L
26)  1  in  later  times  we  even  God  at  many  as  400.
(Plin.  ixzii.  I.)  The  great  restcl  of  Ptolenuuna
Philopator  had  4O0O  rowers  (Athen.  v.  p.  204),
and  the  handleof  each  oar  (iTx^P'"''")  wat  partly
made  of  lead,  that  the  shorter  part  in  the  veatcl
might  balance  in  weight  the  outer  urt,  and  thai
render  the  long  oaia  manageable.  The  lower  {art
of  the  holea  throngh  which  die  oais  passed,  appear
to  have  been  covered  with  leather  (S™>na),  which
alaoei:len4ed  a  litde  K'ay  outside  the  hole.  (Aria-
toph.  Acliara.  97,  with  the  gchol. ;  Seiol.  ad  Am.
367  ;  Suidas,  s.  v.  'Aaxiiuera  and  ti^ipa :  etm-
pareB(ickh,rrjtI06,&c)  The  to^i  also  con-
tained the  mplHif,  which  muat  conaequcntly  be  a
particnlar  kind  of  oart.  They  mutt  bavo  derived
their  name,  like  other  oan,  from  the  class  oF
rowers  by  whom  they  were  n»ed.  Biiekh  anp-
posei  that  they  were  oars  which  were  not  regn-
laHy  used,  but  only  in  ose  of  need,  and  then  by
the  Epibataev  Their  length  in  a  Triieme  is  ttaled
at  from  S  to  9^  eubttt,  bat  In  what  part  of  the
Teasel  they  were  uted  it  unknown.  Reipeedng
oars  in  general  tee  the  Appmdiz  in  AJnddH
TSugitToL  iL  p.  461,  it

2.  The  Tvdder  (m&Uuu',  ^H&vaimlmi).  Be-
fore the  invrnlioa  of  the  rndder,  which  Pliny
Cjy.  N.  vii.  i7)  BKTibea  to  Tiphya,  the  pilot  of
the  ship  Argo,  vessels  must  have  been  propelled
and  guided  by  the  oars  alone.  This  lircunutanoe
may  account  for  the  form  of  the  ancient  rudder,  at
well  at  for  the  mode  of  using  iC It  was  like  an

tremily. The  ai

of  itt  Bj^earance  as  it  is  frequently  exhibited  on
^emi,  coins,  and  other  works  of  art  The  figura
m  the  cent;^  is  from  one  of  Bartoli^  lamps  {/.ae.
Ant,  L  S),  andshowt  a  Tt^ton  blowing  the  baccina,
and  holding  a  rudder  over  hit  thoulder.  The  left-
hand  figure  in  the  mme  woodcut


a  rf  the  stem,  ui
voodent  prcaeni


Dg,l,r..cbyGOO'^Tc


NAVI3.

Uw  BUH  catleclioa,  Tcniu  Irani  vHh  ber  Ipfl
■np  upon  t,  mddcr  to  mdicata  her  origin  from  Ihi
as.  The  rudder  wu  idtinaged  by  the  gsber
DitoT  («u«»(>rfrriji),  who  ia  also  called  the  rtdoi
aow  u  dbtiDguuhcd  from  the  magitirr,  A  ihi[
had  Mmelinic*  one,  but  more  commiHilj  (wo  rnd
den  (Adiar,  V.  H.  ii.  40  ;  Heliod.  At&Utp.  r
p.  241,  ed.  Comnt.  j  ^diiirii.  <0),  and  the]
were  duCinniithed  u  I&e  right  and  left  ruddei
(Hjgin.  FA  14)  J  bnt  thej  were  mari^d  by  thi
tama  Bteetiman  to  prrrmt  confutiDn.  (Bartoli,
1,  e.  iii  31.)  ia  lar|Kr  ^ipe  the  two  niddcn  were
jaiaed  by  a  poU  wbich  wu*  niaccd  bj  the  gnber-
sator  and  kept  the  radden  parallal.  The  con-
triTanc«a  lor  attnching  the  two  mdders  to  one
Mother  and  to  the  •idea,  of  the  ihip,  are  tsUcd
CtvyKax  (Ebrip.  Hiltn.  1SS6)  or  ("""tifilai  {A/ii,
IiTiL  40).  The  bmooi  ilim  of  Plolemscni  Phi.
krpaliH-  had  lonr  mddcn,  each  30  cubiu  in  length.
(AthflL  T.  p.  201 ;  comp.  Tac  Jia.  iL  G.)

3.  Laddm  [kXi/iuISm,  tcajtut.  Each  Tiircmi
had  two  wooden  laddera,  and  the  Bame  iecmi  U
liaTebeenthe€a«lnTp<aiti>To^i.  (Bnckhv p.  12S.)

4.  Palct  or  pnnl  polei  ( Korrol,  ixnf  r).  Three  of
theK  bebnged  to  erery  Trireme,  which  were  of  dif-
ferent leng^i,  and  were  Kconiinitly  dlitinguiihfd
u  Ko^ij  f^yot,  Komht  lifpiii,  and  noi-rli  niirot,
TriBcontom  had  probably  alwiyi  four  punt  polei.
(CoKTca  ;  Bikkh,  p.  125,  &c.}

5.  TtafaardTai  or  BUpportt  fcr  the  maita.  Thoy
■eem  to  havo  been  a  kind  of  propa  placed  at  the
fixit  of  the  toaita.  (Iiidor.  Orig.  lii.  2.  11.)  The
mast  of  a  Trireme,  u  lung  ai  luch  propi  were
naed,  wa»  tnpported  by  two.  In  later  linioi  they
do  not  occur  any  longer  in  Trlremei,  and  nmit  haie
been  igppUnte^  byiometblng  ebe.  ThoTriaenn-
torea  on  Oie  other  hud  retained  (heir  waparri'Tai.
{BoAh,-p.l2S,iLc)

6.  The  laait  (Irvis,  noAu).  The  andentt  had
nsicia  with  one,  two  or  three  imuta.  Front
BOckb'i  Urhmdat  we  leant  that  two  muta  were
inned  at  Atheni  (rem  the  nipam  for  ereiy  tri-
reme. The  litRmait  waa  culled  indrtioi,  while
the  mainmaat  wu  called  Imit  liiyas.  A  tria-
eonter,  or  a  xeuel  with  30  rowen,  had  likowiM
two  maita,  and  the  imaller  mntt  here  as  well  aa
m  a  trireme  waa  near  the  prow.  In  three-tnaited
tetKla  the  laigeit  mail  wai  nearebl  the  item.
The  maala  ai  well  ai  the  yardi  were  luually  of
fir.  (Plin.  H.  «  xn.  76.)  The  invention  of
nMta  in  navigation  ja  attributed  to  Dnedaliu
(Plin.  H.  N.  Tii.  56.)  The  part  of  the  maat  imme-
dialdy  abore  the  yard  (attama),  fonned  a  rtnic-
tute  limilar  to  a  drinking  cup,  nnd  bore  the  nune
of  cimiaim  Imofx^iriot).  Into  it  the  ^maiincn
aacended  in  order  to  manage  the  loll,  to  obtain  n
diatant  view,  or  to  diaclaige  miuilci.  (Eurip.
flrfi.  1237,  with  the  Schol.  ;  Lccil.  Sat  3.)  The
cemchi  or  other  tackle  may  have  been  fastened  to
fta  lateral  prejectiana  which  corretponded  to  the
haadi  of  a  cup.  (Comp.  Pind.  A'em.  t.  91.)  The
eartheaia  of  Ihs  three-muted  ihip  built  for
Hiero  1 T.  by  Archimedea  were  of  bronce. Three


e  laigcil


n  tho  n


Bnaitworka  (fiapdma,)

wctd  filed  to  theie  itractarea,  to  aa  to  luppty  the
plaee  of  defeniire  artnoor ;  and  pnlleya  (Tpoxv-
Xi«,  IneUeai)  for  noiiting  up  atonea  and  weapona
fimn  below.  (Athen,T.  13.)  The  continuation  of
the  maal  abore  the  oirctieainm  wai  called  the
**£«■<"  (4ABiin|),  oofMaponding  to  out  top-


NAVIS.  789

maH  or  top-gallant  nuuL  (Apollon.  Rhod.  L  565  ;
Athen.  li.  49.)  The  carcheaium  wa>  ■omelimei
made  to  turn  upon  ila  aiM,  ao  thai  by  meant  of  ita
apparatui  of  pulleya,  it  lened  the  puipoae  of  a
otane.  (VilniT.  i.  2,  Jft,  with  Schneider'i  note.)
7.Theyarrft{«<piu,inpwa,aii(avta).  Themaio-
yaid  waa  fattened  lo  the  top  of  the  malt  by  mpet
termed  mncki,  at  aeon  in  the  asaexad  woodcut


Fortb


pmented  in  an  antique  bunp,  made  ia  the  form  of
a  thip.  (Bartoli,  J.  &  iii.  SI  ^  comp.  Iiid.  Orig.  u.
IS.)  In  the  two  eitremitiea  of  the  yard  (ooniBo,
ixponipiuiu),  ropei  (ceimehi,  mipoixiH)  were  at-
tached, which  patted  to  the  top  of  the  maat  i  and
by  meana  of  thaae  npei  and  the  pulleya  connected
with  them,  the  yard  and  tail,  gufded  by  tho  hoop,
were  hoiited  to  the  height  retjuired.  (Oust,  dt
B^.OalLi±  Hi  Lucaa,iilL  177  ;  Val.  FlaccL
46S.)  There  are  nnmeroni
cient  ihipi  in  which  the  ar

„  „  down  from  the  aL
lenna,  the  object  of  which  waa  lo  enable  the  uilori
to  turn  the  antenna  and  the  lail  according  to  tho


II.  SriOti  Hptiuarri,
1.  TiofBMaTa.  This  part  of  an  ancient  icMtl
wat  formerly  quite  mijundpratood,  a>  it  wat  be-
lieied  to  be  the  boardi  or  plankt  covering  the  out-
tide  of  a  thip  and  running  along  it  in  the  direciion
<nm  poop  to  prow.  But  Schneider  {ad  Vitni!.  z.
15.  6)  bat  proved  that  the  word  meana  cordage  or
tackling,  and  thit  opinion,  which  it  lupported  by
many  ancient  authora,  li  conRmied  br  the  docu-
menta  puhliibed  by  BSckh,  where  it  ti  reckoned
among  the  vKfiti  Kptumrrd,  The  iwaCiitara  wero
thick  and  broad  ropea  which  ran  in  a  horizontal
direction  around  the  ahip  from  the  atem  to  the
prow,  and  were  intended  to  keep  the  whole  fabric


790


NAVIS.
The;  ran  nmad  tbc  reawl  ii


circles,  and  at  certain  diitancei  bom
The  Uldn  nime  for  iin)fB>ta  U
Or^.  lii.  4.  4  ;  Plato,  de  St  PtM.  i,  p.  616.)
The  length  ol  tlioe  tarmeiita  Taricd  accordingly  M
the;  na  uouad  the  higher  or  Ismr  pan  of  the
ihip,  the  latter  beinv  lunimllr  ihorter  than  the
fiinner.  Theii  nnmber  Taried  aocwdii^  to  the
■iieoftheihip.  The  TcMaraeortorM  of  Ptolemasui
Philopstor  had  tvelva  inf^^Ta,  each  60D  cu-
bili  long.  (Athai.  t.  p.  204,}  Such  imti/iara
were  alwap  read;  in  the  Attic  inenali,  and  trere
only  put  on  a  leuel  when  it  wai  taken  into  nie,
Sometimefl  olio  the;  were  talcen  on  board  when  a
veufi  Bailed,  and  not  put  on  till  it  wai  thought
neceuar;.  (Ati,  ApoM.  TxvilU.)  The  act  of  put-
ting them  iHi  wu  called  6rir(iirr6r<u  or  Siafuvvfiyoi,
orfiirai.  (Polyb.  urii.  3  ;  AppiBri,B.  C.  T.  31  ;
Apnll.  Khod.  Argot.  L  368.)  A  Trireme  required
four  Arofd/iara,  and  KtmetimM  thli  number  waa
even  increaaed,  eipecially  when  the  Teuel  had  to
Mil  to  a  ilorm;  port  of  the  h>.  (Itiickh,  pp.  133 —
136.)

2.  'Irrrior  (ccfwa),  ajl.  Moat  ancient  ibipa
had  onlj  one  Bail,  which  wa>  attached  with  the
yard  to  the  great  maaL  In  a  Trireme  too  one  tail
might  be  lufficient,  but  the ' ' '  ' '


thele


Aiet


I  of  the  I


a  Trireme  bad  two  nil-yardi,
that  each  mait  might  have  two  aaili,  nne  of  which
wa<  placed  lower  than  the  other.  The  two  be-
longing ID  the  mam-malt  were  called  Ivrlu  layAxm,
and  tho«e  of  the  fore-mait  Irrla  icdreuL  (JCenoph.
Heat*,  vi.2.  127  I  Bekker,.J*mM.pp.19,  10.)


Thefii


the  latter  prohablj  only  in  caaei  when  it
necenary  la  sail  with  extrwH^nary  ap^ed.  The
Milt  of  the  Attic  wargalleyi,  and  of  meet  andont
■hipe  in  general,  were  of  a  iquare  form,  aa  ii  Ken
in  numemiu  repreaeatacieni  on  workiofart  Whe-
ther triangular  wilawere  erer  naed  hyth*  Oreeki,
■a  haa  been  fruquently  inppoeed,  ii  very  doubtful.
The  Hnmans,  howerer,  need  triangular  nit%  which
thej  called  ^pparo,  and  which  had  the  ah^w  of
an  inverted  Greek  A  <v),  the  upper  aide  of  which
va>  attached  Ui  tbe  yard. Such  a  aail  hod  of

(_SchiA.  ad  iMaa.  nun.  V.  42S  ;  laidor.  Or^.  xix.
3,  4  :  BiKkh,  pp.  138—143.)
3.  Tnn!^  cordage. Thta  word


I by t


r  ndAoi :  but  from  ^i
BOckh  it  U  dear  that  they  moat  hare  been  two
diatiiict  clastei  of  ropee,  aa  the  TOTtTa  are  alsaya
mentioned  after  the  aaila,  and  the  ffxiNWa  before
the  Bnchon.  The  oxevfa  (/kitet)  are  the  atrong
ropea  to  which  the  utchora  were  attached,  and  by
which  a  ahip  waa  fiulcaed  to  the  land  ;  while  the
Tortia  were  a  lighter  kind  of  ropea  and  made  with
greater  care,  which  were  attached  to  the  maata,
yorda,  and  auk.  Each  rope  of  thi>  kind  waa  rnade
tor  a  dialinct  purpoaa  and  place  (t^ot,  whence
the  name  rartut).  The  folkiwing  kiudi  ore  moel
VBTthyof  notice: — a.  iiaX^tia  or  (i^i.  What
they  were  ia  not  quite  clear,  ihcugh  Biickh  thinka  it
probable  that  they  belonged  to  the  atanding  tackle,
<■  «.  that  they  were  the  nqica  by  which  the  tnaat
waa  Eaiteoed  to  both  aidea  of  the  ihip,  ta  that
the  ifnirsrai  in  the  Homeric  ihipa  were  anly  an
eapedid  kind  of  ao^Vio,  ot  the  >n(^fl>ls  them-
aeliga differently  placed. In later  tioM  the


NAVIS.
■pfrarai  waa  the  rope  which  went  &wn  tiie  tap  at
the  DuinToaat  (icoiixwiov)  to  tbe  pi«w  of  the  diip,
and  thui  waa  what  ia  now  oUed  the  main-atay.
6.  IfiArm  and  «f  poDxe^  are  probably  namea  for  tha
aame  nipea  which  ran  from  tbe  two  enda  of  tha
aail-yard  to  the  top  of  the  moat.  In  more  ancient
veiaeli  the  l/iis  coDaialed  of  only  one  rope  ;  ia  lalcf
tjm»  it  coaaialed  of  twe^  and  lometimei  fair,
which  umting  at  tbe  top  of  the  maat,  and  then
pasting  through  a  ring,  deacended  on  tha  other
aide,  where  it  iormed  the  iwlrofoty  by  meana  ckf
which  the  aail  waa  drawn  up  or  let  down.  (Bikkb,
pp.  146 — 152.)  Compan  the  lower  voodciLt  at
p.  769,  which  ahowB  a  veaael  with  two  eemchi,  and
the  upper  woodcut  p.  769,  which  ahoira  one  witk
four  ceruehi.  ciyKoira,  Latin  mfiua  (laid.  Ong.
lix.  4.  7),  »u  tbe  rope  which  went  from  the  middla
of  a  yard  to  the  top  of  the  maat,  and  wai  intended
to  facilitata  the  drawing  up  and  letting  down  of  tba
aaiL  The  leyKoiya  SitAJ)  of  Quadrinmea  undnulit-
edly  conaiated  of  two  ropea.  Whether  Trirenea
alao  had  them  double,  ia  unoertaiiL  (Pollux,  /.  e./
Bikkh,  p.  163.)  d.  nitit  (paU,)  were  in  Ula
timea  aa  in  the  poema  of  Homer  the  lope*  attached
lo  the  two  lower  comen  of  a  aquare  nil.  Thaia
■w6ln  ran  from  the  enda  of  the  anil  to  the  aidea  of
the  Teaael  towarda  the  atem,  where  they  wvn
faaleoed  with  ringi  attached  to  the  mitar  aide  of  tba
bulwark.  (Herod.  iL  3S.)  Another  mpe  ii  called
Tpimiit,  propa  (laidor.  Vrig.  air.  4.  3),  which  waa
probably  nothing  elae  than  the  hiwer  aud  thiimer
end  of  the  robs,  which  waa  fiutened  to  the  rinf.
a.  Tr^pu  were  the  two  npea  attached  to  the  tw«
enda  of  the  aail-yard,  and  thence  came  down  to  «
port  of  the  ahip  nor  tha  atem.  Their  object  vat
to  moTo  tbe  jizi  aceordii^  to  the  wind.  In  I«tia
they  are  called  (fn/ini,  which  ia,  perhafa,  only  a
corToplioa  of  iypeni.  (Iiidor,  Ory.  in.  4.  S.)
Tbe  hut  among  the  Tenia  ia  the  X"'^"^',  "r
bridle,  the  nature  of  which  ia  quite  unknown.
(Biickh,p.  154,  &c)

4.  Ili^ii^/i^^iaTa.  The  aneieata  aa  early  aa  tlw
time  of  Homer  had  tariaaa  prepanCiaBa  taiaed.
abcTe  the  edge  of  a  veiael,  which  were  made  of  akina
and  wicker-work,  and  which  were  intended  aa  k
protection  ogainit  high  wbtco,  and  alao  Co  aerre  aa
a  kind  of  breaat-work  behind  which  the  men  mighL
batafesgsinalthedartioftheeneiny.  Theaeelera-
liona  of  the  bulwark  are  ailed  rajn^u^iara,  and
in  the  documenta  in  Btickh  they  an  eilhs  called
Tfilxuv,  made  of  hair,  or  Xiuid,  while.  They
were  probably  fixed  upon  the  edge  on  both  aid^
of  the  veaael,  and  were  taken  oS  when  not  wanted.
Each  galley  appeara  to  havo  had  ac?eral  Topc^^^uria,
two  made  of  hair  and  two  while  onci,  theae  fooi
bciog  regularly  meutioDed  aa  beltragiog  to  ooe  ibiik
(Xenoph.  HtUoL  L  6.  S  19  ;  BSd:li,  p.  IfiS,  &c)

5.  KoTiUAnrui  and  tritkriiia.  Tbe  fiitiner  of
theae  occun  in  Quadriremea  aa  veil  at  in  Triremea,
the  latter  only  in  Triremei.  Their  obicct  aad.
nature  are  Ten  ohieun,  bnt  they  appear  to  hais
beei  a  lighter  kind  of  rapi^^^^ta.  (Polyaeo.  SCrA
iv.  11,  13;  BSckh,p.l60,  Ac.)

6.  'Sx^yia  are  the  ativnger  ud  heanei  kmda  of
ropea  There  were  two  kinda  of  thea^  lii.  tlw
SX""^"  iiyiiuftia,  to  vhicbthc  anehcr  waaalBched,
and  irxoirla  iriyya  or  ^fyaia  intiaaaila},  1^
which  tbe  ahip  waa  &iteued  to  tbe  ehon  ec  dnwa
upon  the  ahore.  Foot  ropei  of  each  of  theae  twa
kinda  ia  the  bighcat  numbci
belonging  to  one  ahip, The  :^._^_.^__  ..^


NAV13.
of  MTunl  iLInncc  onn.  (Ariitopb.  Piw,  36 ;
Vun,  ((«  At  Awt  i  135;Beckh,pp.l61— 166.)
7.  Tbe  a-uiur  liyiipo,  »a>TO.}  We  h>v<  al-
radj  Kpwikod  IhM  in  llie  Homeric  ige,  uichan
wen  Dot  known,  and  krga  ttane*  ((b'd,  i/a>pcn)
nwd  in  Iheir  ikad.  (Horn,  U.  I  436,  liv.  77,  Od.
it  137,  IT.4S8.)  AccordinuloPlinyCtf.A'.  £7).


iicbor  *


afterwvdi  inipnrT«i  bj  AnBclianQi-  Afterwards,
wboi  aocbon  wen  dihI,  they  were  geDcrall  j  mad«
of  inu,  (ud  their  rum,  ai  ma;  be  laen  Ersm  the
uuMied  figure,  taken  from  a  coin,  resembled  that
of  a  modon  ancber. (Comp.  Virg.  Amt.  i.  169,


ri.  3.) Such  an

ax,  and  wat  then  called  iripii^iiuit.  Tbe  lech-
uioil  expnaioni  in  the  uso  of  tbe  anchor  are :
tmcomm  lolam,  iynipai'  X''^^  ^  '■X'*'  tlie
aocboc  i  ameoram  jaien,  tynipar  B"lAAn»  tr  ^Ijt-
Tiir,  to  CMt  anchor  ;  and  aaeoram  laBan,  iyicifia
igftv  or  irofptitOai.  In  weigh  anchor,  wbence
Of  a  br  iUelT  meant  "  to  aet  uil,"  irfifa
being  mdenlood.  The  following  fign^^  taken
from  a  marble  al  Rome,  ihowi  the  cable  (/uu),
laeitng  throogh  a  hole  in  the  prow  (aai£iu)» Each


before,  and  ibal  ihe  duumviri  navalea  had  been
pteTioulvappointedby tomeotherpowcr.  [DucH-
VIHL]  Bui  Niebuhr  (liiat.  f  Rone,  iiL  p,2e2)
thinka  that  the  eipreuion  of  Liv;  onl;  meana,
that  at  this  time  the  Romana  reiolvcd  to  build
■heir  fint  fleet  The  idea  of  founding  a  navy  wai
probably  connected  witb  the  eitabllihnieiiC  of  a
Dlonf  m  (he  Pontiaa  iihinda,  u  the  Romani  at
liii  time  muit  have  (elt  that  the;  ought  not  to  be
efenceleu  at  aea.  The  ihipe  which  the  Kamana
aw  built  were  nndoubtedlr  Triiwnei,  which  were
UB  lerr  common  among  the  Greeka  of  Ilalj,  and
loat  of  Uiem  were  perhaps  fumiihed  bv  tha  luliao
iwni  anbject  to  Rome.  Thii  fleet,  boweter  in-
aignificant  it  may  have  been,  continued  lo  be  kept


ahip  of  coons  liad  asveial  anchon  )  the  one  in
which  St.  Pad  sailed  had  four  {.led,  iiviL  S9),
and  oUho  bad  eight.  (Athen.  t.  43.)  T be  last  or
most  powerful  anehoE,  "the  last  hope,"  was  oiled
Ufi,  aoera,  and  penons  irring  their  last  hope  were
said  saarm  sobsn.  To  indicate  where  the  anchor
lav,  a  bmdle  of  cork  floated  over  it  on  the  snibce
of  the  wtteta.  (Paos.  riii.  13  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
zri.8.)

The  {cacsdiag  acconnt  i>f  the  difieient  pails  of
the  ship  will  be  Rudned  still  clearer  by  (he
dtawing  en  tha  following  page,  in  whicn  it  ''
IsuMd  to  give  a  lestcntioiigfaii  ancient  ih  ,

The  Bomaaa  in  the  eaHia  period  of  (heir  bis-
lor;  aent  ctncmTad  tha  >do  ef  incnaaing  theii
p»wtTth«ftwMtinnof»a««t TkelinawlKD


NAVia  781

tbey  Erst  appear  to have become  aware  of  the

iportonce of  a fleet, wu during the  second

imnite  war,  in  the  jear  B.  c  31 1, Livy  (ii.  30),

L___  L :...  .,.,.  .  duumriH


then  for  the  lint  ti


udae  rejviendatque
e  appointed  by  the  p


I  that


people.  This


lithe


power. This  wu  (he  time  of  the  £rat  Punic
war. That  their  dbtbI  power  until  then  was  of  no
imporlanoe,  ii  clear  from  Polybius  (I  20), who
speaks  as  if  the Roniant  had  been  totally  un-
acquainted witb  the  Ha  up  to  that  time. ]n  the
B.  c.  260,  when  the  Komani  saw  that  without
'•)  thej  could  sot  carry  on  the  war  against
Cartbage  with  any  advaotage,  the  inalc  oriUncd
that  a  ficet  iho«ld  be  bnilt. Triremes  would  now
e  been  of  no  avail  againit  Uie  high-bulwarked
leli  (Quinqttenmca)  al  the  Cartb^iani. But
the  Romani  would  bare  been  unablo  to  build  others
had  not  fbctunately  a  Carthaginian  Quinquereme
wrecked  on  the  cnil  r£  Bnttinm,  and  Ulen
their  hands. This  wreck  the  Romani  took  aa
niodel,and  after  it  built  120  (Polyb.  (.  t), or
according  to  others  (Ons.  iv.  7)  130  ships. Ao-
iing  to  Polybius one  hundred  of  them  were
-rAptii,  and  the  remaining  twenty  rptfifmi,  or,
Niebuhr  pmpDseg to read, TVi^pta. This
[e  fleet  wag  completed  within  sixty  days  after
trees  had  been  cut  down. (Plin.  //.  N.  itL
74.) The  ships,  built  of  ftreeo  timber  in  this  hur-
ried way,  were  very  clnniiiiy  made,  and  not  likely
to  hist  tor  any  lime  ;  and  the  Romans  ihersaeliei,
for  want  of  practice  in  naval  aflairs,  prored  very
(heir  first  macitime  imdenoking,
ihipt  were  taken  and  destroyed  by
the  Cartheginians  off  Ucssina. (Polyb.  i.  21  ;
Polyaen.  Ulrat.  Vl.  16  ; Oros.  iv,  7.) C.Duilius,
'.ed the  diaadvantoge  witb  which  his


niiilryn


nhndtc


it  sea,  devised  a  plan


change  a  sea  fight,  ai

Themacbine,  by  nbich
iflerwards  called  eorria,
and  i.  described  by  Polybius  (L  22  ;  comp.  Nie.
bohr,  ilL  p.  era,  &C.  1  Coavus).  From  this  time
forward  the  Romans  coalinacd  to  keep  up  a  power-
ful navy.  Towards  the  end  of  the  Republic  they
also  increased  (hesiie  of  their  ships,  and  built  war
vssseli  of  from  sii(o  ten  ordines  of  rovers.  (Fla-
tus, IT.  11  ;  Virg.  jIm.  viii.  69i.}  The  conitmc-
(ion  of  ibeir  ships,  however,  scarcely  differed  froin
that  of  Greek  vessels ;  the  only  ^cat  difference
wu  that  Ihe  Bomao  galleys  were  provided  with  a
greater  variety  of  destructive  enginea  of  war  (hon
(hose  of  tha  Greeks.  Tbey  even  arscled  tunes
and  Ubnlatm  i^oo  the  decks  of  their  grcU  nwn-ef-


A.  Pnra,  'p^px
R  (MhImi,  ttpOoMiit.

C.  Roitrm,  fytoXm.

D.  Ciaiiiaa,  XV'^""''-

E.  Pu/^iii,  Tpi/uni.

F.  Apliuin,  S^tjurroy,  with  the  pole  amtaiiiuig

G.  Tpi^.


E.  Matia,  larit.

M.  Ailana,  lapaia,  Wpoi.

N,  Cpruua,  htpoKipatai,

-  P.  Cardidum^  Kopx^l^ioi',

R  trfKjTPFDt,
S. Peda,tiin.


war  (noHi  birnbu),  uid  foiglit  npra  them  in  the
lamc  manner  u  if  tbej  wen  atandmg  npon  the
iralta  of  a  [ortRu.  Stntis  of  luch  lUTei  luitilae
occur  in  the  woodcoli  giTia  shoTe.  (Flor.  I.e. ;
PloL^dtoii.  33 1  DionCaM.xiiiLSSil'lin.ff.A'.
ztiiL  I  ;  comp.  Caei.  liit  Be/J.  OaU.  iiL  1«  ;  Dion
Cut.  uiii.  tS  ;  VegeL  dt  Ra  MUit.  t.  14,  Ac)

For  a  mors  detailed  account  ol  the  ihipi  uid
nBTigation  of  the  ancienti,  lee  Scheffer,  Dt  Militia
Navali,  Upai»,  1664  i  Bergham,  GadidUB  rfcr
SdofJaJtrlJauida  dtr  vanttimileii  ViUieT  da  Al-
tertinnu  ;  Benedict,  Oadi.  dar  Sdnffikft  laid  da
HiudrU  der  Allot ;  Hundl,  0«(*s  H^arira%i  o/
Ikt  AMittili ;  A.  JbI,  AreMolegie  A'amJe,  Patii,
1840  ;  and  far  the  Attic  n»y  etpeci^lj,  Bi>ckh-i
Urhmdai  (Iter  dot  .^wuoai  da  AtiicJiai  Slaala,
Beriin,  1640 )  K.  HBltnli*,  OaMcili  Rami  ua
ZtUaOer  dtr  i'anieln  Kriigii,  Leipiifl.  I84S,
F>607,*<:.)  [L.S.]


NAUMA'CIIIA,waithenuDe^Ta]lotbei*.
pieuntation  of  a  (ea-Bght  unoiig  the  Romani,  and
alio  to  the  pbu»  where  nich  engagementi  took
place.  Th«e  iighti  were  •omeimiei  eihibitrd  in
the  Circai  or  Amphitheatre,  sufficient  water  brinft
iotrodneed  to  float  ihipa,  but  ntora  gntent);  in
boilding*  Ftpecially  devoled  to  thii  pupoM.  Tha
fint  repreientatian  of  a  Ma-fight  on  an  eiteniivB
Hale  wai  exhibited  hy  Joltoi  Cuar,  trbo  earned
a  lake  to  be  dog  for  the  pnrpoM  in  a  part  of  tha
Campai  Martiot,  called  bj  Soetonini  tbe  "Leaarc
Codeta"  (Dion  Cau.  xliiL  23  ;  SucL  JmLOm.
39)  ;  thii  lake  wu  afterwardt  filled  np  in  the  time
of  Anguitni  on  account  of  the  malaria  ariiing  from
the  ilagnant  water  in  it.  (Dion  Caaa.  xl*.  17.)
Auguitui  al»  dug  a  Uie  (itayaiiai)  nan  the  Tiber
for  the  Mune  pnrpoM,  and  planted  areond  it  ■  grOTo
of  tree*  (oout).  (SoM.  A<g.  43 ;  Tacit.  Amm.  xii.
«e,  xi<r,l&) Thii  uMmacULim.tb^tetpWr


i^AUTODICAE.


had  bscn  made,  knd  w


to  be  Died  after  othen
HibMquently  railed  the
t.  Ta.7  i  Dion  Cbsi.
IitL  25  t  EniMti,  adSuA  Tii.  72.)  Claodiiu  «-
Jiibiled  a  migiuficsiit  ua-fight  on  the  lake  Fucumi.
(Tacit,  ^n.  liL  £6  ;  Snet  OamL  21  ;  Dioa  Cau.
ix.  33.)  Mere  appean  to  have  prefBrred  the  am-
phithaatre  be  tluta  exhibitian*.  (Dion  Can.  bd.
9,  InL  1  £.)  DomitiaD  made  a  new  nanmaebia,
■od  oecled  a  building  of  ■tone  arannd  it,  in  which
the  ipeotabm  migiit  lit  to  lee  the  engagement.
(Dkn  CiB.liTL8;3iut,i:toiib4,  G.)  RepmentB-


The  Gombattnu  in  theie  aea-fighta,  called  ^«-
maeUarii  (SoeL  Qaad.  21),  win  nraoll;  captim
(Diaa  Caa.  xliiii.  19)  or  crimiiiali  cooarnuied  to
death  (Dkm  Can.  Iz.  33),  who  fimglit  a*  in  gladia-
torial oombati,  util  ona  part;  waa  kilted,  nnleu
pieoeiTed  bj  tbe  demencj  of  the  empernr.  The
ihipi  oogigcd  in  the  lea-fight*  wen  dirided  into
two  paniea,  called  npectinly  by  the  namei  of
diSBBit  maritime  natiDU,  a*  Tyrtuii  and  Egyp-
tian (Saet.  yiii  31),  Rhodiani  and  SJeiliani  (Suet
Cliaid.il  ;  DionCau.li.S3),  FeruantandAtbe-
■iau  (Dion  Can.  lii.  9),  CoieynABni  and  Corin-
IhiHu,  Athaiiani  and  Syncusina,  &c.  (Id.]iTi.
26.)  ThcM  aa-Sghta  WHe  exhibited  with  the
Mme  manuGceoea  and  lariih  eipenditnre  of  human
life  aa  uancteriaed  the  gladiatorial  combBta  and
other  pablic  game*  of  the  Romaai.  In  Nero^
nanmachia  there  were  KB~mon>ten  iwimmiag
abont  in  tb*  artificial  lake  (Sust.  Nero,  12  ;  Dion
Caa.  Iii.  9\  and  Clandini  had  a  lilier  Triton
pbcad  in  tlie  middle  of  the  lako  Focinui,  who  wu
made  by  aaehineiy  to  giro  the  lignal  for  attack
wHh  a  Irampet  (Snet  Clamd.  21.)  Troopg  of
Nereida  were  alw  repreMntod  nrimming  abont
lMu^dt^iia.2S.)  Id  the  leo-flght  exhibited
by  Tinu  then  were  3000  men  engaged  (Dion  Caaa.
Ixri  2£),  and  in  that  exhiUled  by  Domitian  the
ihip*  were  almoat  equal  in  number  to  two  nol
Oeea  lpaaujialaidiutu,Satt.Dom.*).  In  the
huUe  on  the  bke  Fneinui  there  were  19,000  com-
batiuti  (Tacit  Aim.  xii.  56),  and  £fty  ihipa  on
each  aide.  (Dion  Caaa.  li.  33.)
NAUTA.  [EixBciToaiA  Actio.]
NAUTICON  (KBTiirfr).  i:F«NUB,p.B26,h.]
NAUTO'DICAE(™t««<u), are  called i*.x»'
or  magiatiatea  by  mott  of  the  aucieat  graminariuni
(Harpocnil.  Snidai,  Lex.  RheU  *  v.  NainaSLcm),
while  a  few  othen  <all  them  BiKtaraL  (Heiych.
1.  e.) The  ancomnt  authority  of  moat  of  tiiem.


IklB9;Bremi),

the  nautodine,  tenden  it  more  than  prsbable  thai
they  were  a  magiiliaiT.  Thii  can  be  the  leaa
donbtful  ai  the  wnda  Surdftir  and  lutaarfi  are
■ometimci  naed  ef  taagiitiatei  iu  their  capacity  of
•Inryvytu. (Meier,  Att.  Proe.  p.  28  ;  Ke  EiaA.

agree  that  the  nantodicae  had  the  jnriidiclioii  in
matttr*  belonging  to  navigation  and  commerce,  and
in  maiten  concerning  such  penont  aa  bad  entered
their  namei  as  memben  of  a  phratria  without  both
their  parmts  being  eitiuni  of  Athani,  c«  in  other
words,  in  the  Haw  4urJp»w  and  Sinai  (nrtai. The


menliooed,  bat  the  &et  that  they  bad  the  jurisdic


KEBRI8.  7S3

rights  of  a  phiator  without  his  &ther  and  mother
being  eilisens,  shows  that  their  institntiDn  must
belong  to  a  time  when  it  was  inSdent  for  a  man
to  be  a  citiiea  if  only  hit  bther  was  a  citizen,
whaterer  hia  mother  mUht  be,  that  is,  piETiooa  to
the  time  of  Perictei  (Pint  FaiiL  31  ;  compare
CiTiTAS,  p.  289},  and  perhaps  as  early  aa  the
time  of  Cleisthenet.  Tbs  naulodicae  were  ap-
pointed ereiy  year  by  lot  in  the  month  of  Qamelion,
and  prolnhly  attended  to  the  IIku  lii.ir6p»w  only
during  the  winter,  when  navigBtion  ceased,  wheicaa
the  JUu  tttlot  might  be  hiDugbt  befoie  them  all
the  year  round.

It  is  B  well  known  &ct  that  the  two  acUona
(tliaa  fftrifiir  and  tlnoi  ttylas)  which  we  haTS
here  assigned  to  the  nautodicar,  belonged,  at  leaat
at  oiH  time,  to  the  thetmothelae.  (Meier,  All.
Pnc  p,  64,  Ac]  Serenl  modem  writers,  such  as
Bockl^  Baumslark,  and  othera,  hare  theieroce
been  led  to  tuppoBe  that  all  the  grammBrians  who
call  the  naulodicae  ipX"^  ^e  mistaken,  and  that
the  nantodieae  were  Dot  itmrrtrr'i'  in  the  caws
Bbove  mentioned,  bnl  tuaurmd.  But  thii  mode  of
settling  the  question  does  not  appear  to  ni  to  be  aa
■atisfacUii;  aa  that  adopted  by  Meier  and  ScbO-
nunn.  (AU.  Pros.  p.  85,  &e.)  In  all  the  speeches
of  Demoathene*  no  trace  occnrs  of  the  naatodicae,
and  in  the  oration  against  Lacritns  (p.  940),  where
ali  the  enthorities  an  mentioned  before  whom  sncli
a  aae  a*  that  of  Lacritus  might  be  brought,  th»
orator  could  scarcely  bare  Euled  to  mention  the
oautodicae,  if  they  had  itill  exiited  at  the  time.
It  is  therefore  natural  to  toppose  that  the  tbccu
iinrifttr  at  the  time  of  Philip  of  Macedonia,  when
they  became  tlicw  fiiit^m  [Emmini  Diiti],
were  taken  from  the  naulodicae  and  tiuniferTed  to
the  theonothetae.  And  a*  the  republic  could  not
now  think  it  any  longer  necetiary  to  continue  the
office  of  naulodicae,  merely  on  aceoimt  of  the  ilictu
{•riot,  theae  latter  were  likewise  transferred  to  the
thennothetae,  and  the  office  of  the  nantodicae  waa
abolished.  The  whole  period  during  which  naulo-
dicae existed  at  Athens  would  thus  comprehend
the  time  irom  the  legiaUtion  of  Clcisthenes  or  soon
afler,  to  Philip  of  Macedonia.  One  difficulty  how-
erer  yet  remaini,  for  nautodicae  are  mentioned  by
Lueiou  (iL  p.  203,  ed.  Bip.)  in  a  dialogue  which
the  author  representa  as  haring  taken  place  after
the  death  of  Alexander.  Those  who  are  nnwilUng
to  betieva  that  Lncian  here,  as  in  other  places,  hat
been  guilty  of  an  anachronism,  must  suppose  that
the  nantodicae  were  after  their  abolition  restored
for  a  Imie,  of  which  however  there  is  no  other  ori-
dence.  (Compois  £ockh,iWJ.£:mi.  L  §S  {Bnum-
staik,  ii4  tiini!or&u  EmporU  et  NaiUodiciM  aptul
Alitniaaa,j>p.  65—78.)  [L.  S.]

NEBRIS,  a  fkwn's  skin  (from  yttpii,  a  fhwn  ;
see  Alois),  worn  originally  by  hunters  and  others
M  aa  ^ipiopriata  port  of  their  dress,  and  afier-
warda  attributed  to  Dionysus  (Euiip.  Bacei.  99,
125, 157,  790,  ed.  Matt  ;  ArisUph.  Aokh,  12D9t
Dionya.  Ftritg.  70S,  946  ;  Rufns  Festas  Avien.
1129),  and  consequently  assumed  by  his  Totariea
in  the  proceiaionB  and  eeremoniea  which  they  ob-
serred  in  honanr  of  him.  [Dionvua.]  The  an-
nexed woodcut,  taken  from  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton's
Vata  (L  37),  shows  a  priestess  of  Bacchus  is


!  offering  a  uebiis


Thi


irki  of  ancient  art  often
only  by  male  and  female  bac-
3  Paoi  and  EMjn, It  waa


TM  NEOOTIOHUM  QESTORUM  ACTIO.


commonlj  put  on  in  tha  nine  muum  u  th*  i^ii,
or  gcst-^n,  bj  tjing  the  two  Ibrs  Icgt  over  the
right  thoolder  M  ai  to  *Ilo«  the  bodv  of  (he  ikin
to  coTer  the  left  tide  of  llu  weam.  (Orid.  MH.  -n.
i93.)  [J.Y.]

NECRODEIPNON  (rtxfittiwrw).  [Funds,
p.5S7,l>.)

NECySI  A  (HKiaia). [Funot,  p.  SoB, ».]

NEFAST[  DlEa [Diis.]

NEOATl'VA.NEGATO'RIA  ACTIO.  [Cos-
riemBiA  Acno.]

NEGLIGE'NTIA. [Cvifj,.}

NEOOTIO'RUM  OESTORUM  A'CTIO.
Thii  wH  an  action  which  ■  man  might  hata
a^nit  anotbtr  who  had  managed  hii  a&in  for
him  in  hii  abtence,  witbont  being  commiiiioned  to
do  »  (nM  mimdalo).  The  action  wai  not  founded
either  on  conlimct  or  delict,  but  wai  allowed  for
conTfiiicDce  take  (ulUiiaiu  emua).  The  penon
whose  bnunen  waa  Inuitacted  bj  another,  and  the
pennn  who  tniuacted  the  buiineu,  m^ht  teverally
have  an  Ktion  againit  one  another  in  ratpect  of
that  which  "  ei  bona  llde  alterum  alteri  piantare
Dportec."  The  donuniu  negotii  had  a  aegotiomm
geHorum  actio  dtreeta.  The  action  of  the  lelf-
cnnatitDtsd  aftenl  (geitor)  wai  aome^met  called
Conttaria,  hj  analogy  to  limilar  actioru  in  other
coHL  He  wai  bound  to  make  good  any  loat  that
wai  incurred  dniing  hii  admioiitntlon  bv  dolui

been  incurred  by  caiui.  On  the  other  hand,  he
had  hb  action  foi  all  expenw)  properly  incnired,
and  in  lonie  caiea,  eren  if  the  reiult  waa  nnfortu-
nate  to  the  abieat  penon  ;  aa  if  he  paid  for  medi-
cal attendance  on  a  tick  ilaTe,  and  the  ilare  died
Dotwithilanding  all  hi*  ore;  bat  nrioui  difli-
cnltiei  miKht  eaaily  be  lo^eMed  aa  to  loch  eaaea
Bi  tfaeie  (Dig.  3.  liL  £.  L  1 D),  and  the  ruli^  moit
be  qnalilied  by  the  conditlaa  of  the  thing  under-
taken being  a  thing  aeccawry  (to  the  owner}  to
be  undertaken,  though  the  iciult  might  be  unpro-
fitabta.  It  wai  b1m>  neceuary  that  the  ntor
durald  hara  Dnderliken  th;  btuiaew  wl  wiUi  tba


NEHEA.

Tiew  of  doing  it  for  nothing,  bnt  with  the  inloitiea
of  eitabliihing  a  right  againit  the  negotii  domini:*,
though  ihM  might  not  be  the  imnudiale  moUTe  lo
undertaking  the  thing  (&BTigny,.^ila>,&c.  iii.  p.6,
note  9.)  There  wai,  howeiec,  no  negotionmi  gea.
toium  actio  contrari«,ifthegeitoc  had  dime  the  acta
that  he  did,  with  the  clear  mtanlion  of  doing  an  act
of  Libemlitaior  Pielat.  The  edict  allowed  a  man
be  had  been  pat  to

... t,  though  be  hiad  no

direct  suthoiily  for  looking  after  it  Tha  leaacti
of  the  nila  wai,  that  pcrwmi  might  not  be  pcaieuled
&xim  attaiding  to  lo  neceiiBTy  a  matter  u  the  in-
tennenl  of  a  corpie,  if  there  wai  no  peraon  preaAt
to  whom  tha  duty  belonged.  (Dig-  11.  tiL  7.
De  Relig.  et  Sumplibui  iimerum.)

It  wai  a  mnch  diiputed  queation  what  waa  tbft
effect  of  RatihabitJo  on  tha  negoIionuB  geatia,
whether  it  waa  thereby  tuned  into  a  Han&tum.
(See  Vangeniw,  Famdddni,  &c.,  iii.  p.  483.)  TIm
dominui  waa  not  bound  by  the  negoliisum  gt*tio,
except  when  tha  acta  done  were  loch  ai  were  d».

»jf.,--- - ■- '^'■"

(InM.  3.  tit.  27. 1.  3.  &c  ;  Dig.  ««.  tit  7.  a.  5  ;
Dig.  3.  tit.  b.  Dt  NegoHU  GttU;  Cod.  2.  til.  19  ;
Vangeniw,  PamlM-i,  &c.  iiL  p.  478.) [O.  U]

NEOOTIATO'RES,  lignified  iprdally  darii«
the  Ut«  limea  of  tha  npublic  Kunan  citiaena
lettled  in  the  proriacci,  who  lent  money  upon  in-
tereet  or  booght  i^  corn  on  ipeculation,  which
they  lent  to  Home  BI  weU  ai  to  other  plaeo.
Their  chief  buiineai  howcrer  waa  landing  dmapt
upon  interaet,  and  hence  we  find  the  wordi  m^nUa,
•HpBtiatio,  and  mgotiari  vacd  in  ttiii  hic  Tba
le  diitingnithed  &om  '>—  j— "vmii
L  L  fi,  **  maio  jaq;K4iatoiT^  BtiifacAn^
qiiam  puiiiermu;''  comp.  Cic.  Ferr.  ii.  3,  ;in>
flacc.  16,  pro  Lig.  MimiL  7),  and  fram  the  mer-
""■  prvPlami.  2S,-'m,^iiiia*)nin  comia,
jnitu)  ").  Thai  the  word  negotiatorM
wu,  during  the  later  dmea  of  the  republic,  alwaja
uaed  in  the  ligniEcation  abore  giren  it  am|dj
[voTed  by  Emeiti  in  the  tieatiH  qnoted  below,
alia  niffidently  ctmr  from  the  foUowii^
(Cic  pro  Ftaee.  39,  Ftrr.  iiL  60,  ad  Q.
pro  Ftaa.  36  ;  Hin.  B.  Afr.  36).  Heaea
the  MgMabirn  in  the  pnriiKei
tha  argatara  and  faaratarm  ai
lordingly  we  find  Cioero  giiing  tbe  name  of
.^Bcrsrforu  lo  certain  pemtu  at  Rame,  and  aflor-
wardi  culling  the  very  noie  pmooi  nagabaiam
'hen  they  are  in  the  proTiiieei  (Cicorf  AtL  t.  31,
L  1—3).  Coinpara  Eneati,  Dt  Ntgtli^oribmt  i>
hi*  Ofucmia  I'lulologica.

NEUEA  (Wfiio,  m^uTo  or  n/iua),  ma  of  tbe
u  great  nalicoal  feitirala  of  the  Greeka.  It  waa
id  at  Nemea,  a  place  near  Cleonae  in  Aigslia.
Tha  varioui  Icgendi  reapccting  iu  origin  are  re-
lated in  the  argumenta  of  the  Scholiaiu  to  tha
NeiDta  of  Piudar,  with  which  may  be  cenpared
PouNuviu  (ii.  15.  g  2,  &c),  and  ApoUodorua  (iii.
6.  I  4k  All  tbcas  legend*,  hawever,  agna  in
gtaling  that  the  Nemea  were  originally  ioHiluted
'ly  the  Seven  agninit  Thehea  in  oommeoMratioB
if  the  denthofUphelln,  afterward!  culled  Anh*-
ooruL  When  tha  Scten  airiTod  at  Nemea,  and
•era  rery  tkirity,  they  met  Uypaipile,  who  waa
DVijring  Ophelt«%  tba  child  U  the  print  of  Zeaa


NEHEA.
mi  of  EtuTdioe.  While  ■)»  ihowcd  to  tl
m  ilia  w&y  to  tin  hfbioI  well,  the  lufi  the  child
behind  Ifii^  in  »  nmdow,  which  during  hei  ah
■mee  wii  killed  bj  a  dngoo.  "When  the  Seven  oi
their  ratoin  ww  the  uxideal,  thef  ileir  the  diBgoi
■ad  inautaled  fbsenil  guan  (^7^  iwrriifiot}  u
be  held  eieiy  third  yur  {-rpiiTripiiiii),  Ottei
legBuU  utribalB  the  iiutitutiai  of  the  Kemai
nowe  lo  Henclei,  >Aci  be  had  ilain  the  Nemtui
£00  :  bnt  the  moie  gcDuiue  toadition  wu  thai  he
had  either  remind  the  ancient  game*,  or  at  leatt
intnidiued  liit  altnatlDn  by  which  Ihej  were  fmm
thu  liiDe  <^bimlsd  in  iautmi  oT  Zeu.  Thai  Zeiii
HTM  the  god  in  hoDmr  of  whom  the  games  were
■Acrnrij  celebrated  ii  ilaled  by  Ptndu  (Nan.
m.  114,&c.).  Tlw  game*  wereat  £nt  of  a  war-
like dunder,  and  only  varrion  and  their  aoiu
wen  allowed  lo  lake  part  in  thnn  i  aubaequenlly,
kowcTcr,  they  were  Ibiown  open  U  all  ihe  Oreelia
(Sv^TuAr  wXjfef  autilpaiu).  The  giinea  took
flaea  in  a  grove  between  Cleonae  and  Phliui.
(Stiaks  TiiL  PL  S77.>  The  laiioui  gamei,  ac-
cordii^  to  the  enumeratien  of  Apoiledonu  {L  0.),
woe  hene-iBcing,  nmning  in  armour  in  the  atadium
(Pane.  iL  1&  S  2),  wnirlliog,  chariot-nicing  and
dieena,  boxing,  thrawiag  the  ipesr  and  ihooting
with  tlw  bow,  to  which  wa  may  add  muncal  con-
teM&  (Paoa.  TiiL  £0.  gS;  FluU  PltHop.  U.)
The  Seboliaila  on  Pindar  deacribe  the  aooa  veiy
npcrieetly  aa  Inrtitit  and  yoimuiis.  The  priie
ciien  to  the  rieloi  wai  at  firat  a  cheplel  of  olire-
bmiehea,  bnt  afterwarda  a  ehjiplel  of  green
pHiley.  Whm  thia  altention  wa*  introdneed  ii
>st  oertaia,  thoagh  it  Bay  be  injened  from  an  ai-
pruBon  of  Pindar  (iVca.  n.  71),  who  callt  tke
panley  <r£UMr)  Ola  Bvrim  kiimi,  that  the
■ew  ptiae  waa  beliefed  to  bare  bees  introduced
ij  Heiaelea.  The  preudency  at  theee  ganiei  and
the  management  of  them  belonged  at  different
tnnea  lo  Cleonaa,  Corinth,  and  Aigoi,  and  from
the  fint  of  thcM  placet  the;  an  •omelimei  colled
iliv  KAa^Huai.  The  judm  who  awarded  the
blaek  robea,  and  an  in-
^hen  tha  Aigivei  presided,
u  (TiiL  10.  §  3).
m  of  the  year  at  which  tlia
celebiated,  the  Scbolioit  on
a  (JfipwiB.  ad  Nem.)  merely  ilatet  that  they
wen  held  on  the  12lh  of  the  month  of  Panemiu,
ihoosk  ki  another  pnwage  be  makee  a  ilMement
whiA  Bpiete thia  aiatton.  PaoaaniM  (il  15.(3)
ipeaka  of  winter  Nemea,  and  manifefllj  dinin-
gsiihe*  them  from  otben  which  were  held  in
mtnmer.  Il  Rem*  that  fee  i  lime  Iho  cel^^bntian
of  the  Nenwa  wu  neglected,  and  that  they  were
nrired  in  0I.S3.  2,  from  which  time  Euaebiua
dales  the  GnlNemead.  Haweforthit  licerlainthBt
ae  celebiated  regularly  twice


id  Olympic  year

mt  of  every  burth  Ohi
Thii  baa  been  thoitn
Bodch  in  an  MMy  ieier  dit  ZeUvaiaitiaie
Demattk.  IM»  gigm  Midiiu,  in  the  traoaut
■f  the  Beriin  Acad.  1816,  ISIS. HiHar.  PkM.
Klaut, p.  92,  Ac. ;  conipan  Ideler,  HmM.  Jt
Omot  ii  p.  eOG,  &c Aboat  tha  lime  of  tha
battle  of  M«.ftl>~ti  it  beooie  ciutomaiy  in  Argolii
to  ibAoo  aecordiagto  Nemeada.

In  268  B-c  Philip  of  Macedonia  wai  hniourad
by  Iba  Aigin*  with  the pcaudeacy  at  the  Nemean


NEXUM.  rofi

gmnei  (Liv.  nru.  30,  *c. ;  Polyb.  r.  26),  and
Quintiiu  Flaminiaoi  proclaimed  at  the  Nemea  the
treedom  of  the  Aigivei.  (Lir.  xxiir.  41  ;  Polyb.
X.  26.)  The  emperor  Hadrian  realored  the  hone-
racing  of  boyi  at  the  Nemea,  which  had  fallen  into
diiuM.  But  aStei  hti  time  they  do  not  teem  to
hare  been  much  longer  celebnted,  u  they  are  no
longer  mentioned  by  any  of  the  wiiten  of  the
lubaequent  period.  (See  Villoison,  Hiilairt  dt
I'Aead.  det  /nitript.  et  IML LdL loL  iutUL


1.29,  J


fte.§i.)  [L.3.]

NE-NIA. [FuNUB,p.W8,a.]

NEO'CORI  (WHKiffioi),  lignifled  cri^nally
lemple-iweepen  (Heaych.  and  Suid.  i.  v.),  but
wu  applied  even  in  eariy  time*  to  priestly  officen
of  high  rank,  who  had  the  luprome  ■nperiatend-
enca  of  templet  and  their  treoeurea.  (Plat,  ti  p,
75B;  Xen.^aai.  T.  3.  9  6.)  Under  the  Roman
emperon  the  word  wat  eipecially  applied  to  tboia
ciliea  in  Alia,  which  erected  temple)  to  the  Bemaa
empercta,  lince  the  whole  city  in  erery  locb  case
wai  regarded  ai  the  guardian  of  the  worahip  of  the
emperor.  Accordingly  we  frequently  find  on  the
coini  of  Ephenu,  Smyrna,  and  0^  dtie^  the
epithet  Niutifpat,  which  also  occnn  on  the  in-
aoiptioni  of  theie citiea.  Noneofthetecitie^how-
eier,  waa  allowed  to  auume  thi*  honnu  wilhool
obtaining  the  permiHion  of  the  Roman  tenate,  a*
we  learn  from  intcriptiooa.  (Comp.  bIm  Tae.  Jnm.
It.  SS,  £6.)  For  further  information  on  thi*  lub-
jaA,  He  KnuK,  NEQllOPOS,  Cmilaltt  Heocorat
tia  Atdiliat,  Uf*.  \aU. [AiniTULl

NEOSAMO'I>£IS(>»«<v>dS.»l.  [Huom,
p.  692.]

NEPTUNA'LIA,  a  fMtlnl  of  Neptnna,  cele-
bnted at  Rome,  of  which  vaiy  little  ia  known.
(Vatio,  da  i^.  Lot.  vi.  19.)  The  day  on  which
it  wai  held,  wae  probably  the  23d  of  July.  In
the  ancient  calendaria  thii  day  ii  marked  aa  Nept
ladi  el  Jtriat,  or  Xcpi,  bidi,  from  which  we  we
that  the  feitiTBl  waa  celebrated  with  gamea.  Re-
specting llie  ceremoniea  of  thit  feetival  nothing  i*
known,  except  thai  the  people  uted  to  build  hot*
of  brancheaand  foliage (unbnu,  Fett  i.v.  UnJirae),
in  which  they  isobably  feaited,  dnok,  sad  ainnied
themtelrea.  (Herat.  Oarni.  iiL  33. 1,  &c  ;  TertulL
Dt  Sp»cL  6.)  [U  8.]

NGRO'NIA. [QuiKQDSHiiuu.}

NEXI. [NuuM.]

NEXUMU  defined  by  Manilioa  tobe-omnB
quod  pet  lihram  et  aes  geritur,  in  qso  aini  Man-
eipia."  Uuciui  Scaeiola  ho*  a  different  definition :
'*  quae  pel  aes  et  libnm  Gantnt  oUigentu^pneter
quae  mancipio  dentur."  Vam  (dt  Liaa.  LaL  vii.
10S,ed.MUlIer)  who  hia  preserred  botb  these  de-
finitiona,  prefers  the  latter,  sa  being  consistent  with
the  etymology  of  the  word '.  "  quod  obligntor  per
lihram,  neque  suum  lit,  inde  Neium  dictum."  A*
an  illnstration  he  adds :  "  Liber  qui  snas  epetaa
rvitntem  pro  pecunia  qoadam  debebat,  dtim
aolTeret,  neius  Tocatur,  nt  ah  aen  obaentas."
The  difference  in  these  dafiniliona  araes  soldy
from  tha  diSerent  aspect  niider  which  the  Nemi

Tiewcd. Every  Neium  was  in  the  ibnn  of  t.

le,  md  consequently,  viewed  a*  to  its  formal
[art,Neinmcsmpce}tendedMandpianL  The  Tea-
tomenti  &ctia  was  also  included  under  Nemia.
Viewpd  as  to  its  object  and  legal  effect,  Naxuin
was  either  the  tinna&i  of  tfae  ownership  c^  a  thing,
or  the  tnufer  of  a  thipg  to  a  fnditn  u.  k  seen-


796  NEXUM.

rilj;  accordingly  in  one  »ni«e  Neinm  included
Mancipium,  u  erplained  in  MANCiPiuit ;  in  an-
other KBse,  Hancipium  and  Neinm  ue  oppoacd
in  the  nme  way  in  which  Sols  and  Hartgage  oc
Pledge  BIS  oppoKd.  The  formal  part  of  both
tranuetiinu  ctmiieted  in  a  tianirer  per  aea  et
libram.  Thu  eiplanatioo  ii  coniiatent  with  the
dcfinitioni  of  the  juriiti,  and  the  niea  of  iheie  two


The  penon  who  beearoe  Nem

by  the  effecl  of

Neimn  or  Nemi  (for  thia  form

of  the  word  aUo

uaed)  wai  >aid  Neiam  inire

(Li.,  vii.  19.)

iidBtio,N.

eipreii  the  ccnitacting  and  (he  releaie  &om  the
ohligUioiL

The  Roman  lav  >a  to  the  payment  of  bamwed
moDcy  (pecuHKi  osrVacmfifa;  aeeLeiGalL  Ciialp.
21,  22)  waa  nrf  itricb  A  curioui  puuge  of
Gdliiu  (n.  1 )  glTcl  lit  the  ancient  mode  of  \cmi
procedure  in  the  caae  of  debt,  ai  Sied  by  the
Twelie  Tablet.  If  the  debtor  admitted  the  debt,
or  had  been  condemned  in  the  amount  of  the  debt
by  a  judex,  he  had  thirlf  dayi  allowed  him  for
payment.  At  the  expiration  i>f  thia  time,  he  waa
liable  to  the  Hanoi  lojectio  [Manus  Injectio],
and  ultimately  to  be  aiaigned  over  to  the  creditor
(mUiefw)  by  the  aentenee  of  the  praetor.  The
creditor  waa  required  to  keep  him  for  aiily  dayi
in  chaina,  during  which  time  he  pabHcly  expoied
the  debtor  on  three  nundinae,  and  pnKlaimed  the
amount  of  hia  debt  If  no  penon  releiied  the
priaoner  by  paying  the  debt,  the  creditor  might
lell  him  Bi  a  aluTe  or  put  him  to  deatb.  If  there
were  leveral  cndilon,  the  letter  of  the  law  al-
lowed them  to  cat  the  debtor  in  piecei,  and  to  take
their  ahare  of  hii  body  in  proportion  to  their  debt.
Qellini  aaya  that  there  waa  no  inatance  of  a  credi-
tor ever  having  adopted  thia  extreme  mode  of  aatia-
fying  hia  debt.  But  the  creditor  might  treat  the
debtor,  who  waa  addictua,  aa  a  ala*e,  and  compel
him  to  work  out  hia  debt ;  and  the  treatment  waa

In  thii  paaiage  Qelliui  doM  not  ipeak  of  Neii,
but  only  of  Addicli ;  which  i>  aometimei  alleged
ai  evidence  of  the  identity  of  nexua  and  addietua,
but  it  provea  no  auch  identity.  IfaNoiut  la  what
he  ia  here  inppoaed  to  be,  the  Law  of  the  Twelra
Tabiei  could  not  apply  ;  for  when  a  man  bad  ooea
become  Nexua  with  respect  to  one  creditor,  he  could
e  NexQi  to  another  ^  and  if  he  became


Nox


leveralat


ebythi

cority.  ThiiLawoftheTwelTcTableaDnlyapplied
to  the  caae  of  a  debtor  being  auigned  orei  by  a
Jndicial  aentence  to  aeveral  debtora,and  it  provided
for  the  Httlement  of  their  conflicUng  claimt.  The
diatinction  between  a  neium  and  a  re*  judicata
ia obvioua enongb,  though some writers have

The  preciaa  condition  of  >  Nexiu  haa  boweTtr
been  a  anbject  of  much  diacoisioQ  among  achotara,
and  it  ia  not  eeay  to  Tcconcila  all  the  paiaogea  in
which  the  lens  occurs  ao  aa  to  deduce  ftom  thom
a  lonaiateat  view  of  theinatter.  Sometime*  indeed
Nexus  appears  to  be  uaed  in  the  same  sense  a*
Addietua,  which  cannot  canae  any  difficulty  if  we
eonaider  that  the  efieet  of  being  Neiaa  iiid  Ad-
dietua waa  the  •ame,  ai  will  presently  be  made
taobable.

At  a  Neinm  wa*  effected  per  aea  et  libnum,  it
vaain  the  form  of  ■  sale,  and  of  oouri*  there  woi


thin.


NEXUM.

ct  of  lale  ;  and  this  object  of  nle  might  be  a


ig  or  a  peiaon.


Wei


ib^am  ae  obligai^*^  and  for
himself  Nexus  are  the  same.  In  the  case  of  Neinm
ae),  it  ia  more  consiitent  to  consider  the  aea  aa  tin
object  of  the  obtigatio  per  aes  et  libram,  and  in  tha
caae  when  a  man  made  himself  Nexua  to  eonaider
the  man  aa  the  object.  It  doe*  not  fellow  them
that  an  obliga^  per  aea  et  libiam  aJwaya  made  a
man  Nexna  ;  but  there  ia  no  difficnilj  in  a*<
Burning  that  a  man  only  became  Nexua  with  refer-
ence to  an  obKgalio  ps  ae*  et  tibiam,  as  that  «
men  could  contract  an  obligatio  per  ae*  et  libram,
and  at  the  tame  time  could  raake  bimeelf  Nexua.  A.
free  man  could  not  propeily  be  the  object  of  a  sale,
but  it  require*  only  a  slight  acquainlanoe  with  Ro-
man law  to  perceive  that  this  difficulty  could  ba
^t  over  br  a  fiction.  Ai  in  the  ease  of  Mann-
miaiion  Per  Viodictam  then  was  a  fiction  that  tbs
alave  was  bte  ;  so  there  might  here  be  a  fiction
that  the  freeman  waa  a  slave.  And  if  thia  ia  not
admitted  as  a  probable  aolution,  it  cannot  be  denied
that  there  is  as  much  ditficnl^  in  nndcntanding
the  co-enitio  of  a  iemalc,  who  was  sui  juris,  which
as  a  legal  fact  it  quite  certain,  at  the  formal  sale  of
a  fireman  with  his  cooseat.  The  notion  of  a  fees-
man  giving  himself  into  the  pnwo  of  aaolber,  ao
far  from  being  foreign  to  the  notions  of  Roman
law,  as  tome  writen  have  aaaetted,  ia  perfectly
contiitmit  with  them,  a*  we  see  in  the  iuttaoce  oi
adrogation.  The  Neimn  thai  being  in  the  f«m
of  a  tale,  the  Nemt  wa*  in  a  terrile  condition
as  a  necessary  oontaqDaDce  of  the  Nemun,  and  tba
opinion  that  there  mtut  be  an  addietio  to  grn
e^Bct  to  the  Neium.  is  inconsistent  with  the  DO-
liaa  of  the  Neium.  According  to  this  view,  a
Nems,  a*  loon  a*  the  contract  of  Nexnra  waa
made,  waa  in  the  condition  of  an  Addictn*,  and
both were  treated  aa  alavea. But  it  haa been

' ereiy  inaolventt

n,l
creditor^  slave  (addictiu),  and  ho
stand  that  the  abolition  of  the  nexnm  was  ncn  an
advantage  gained  by  the  Plebeians  (Liv.  ym.  38\
if  the  addietio  still  remained,  which  might  be  ob-
tained when  there  wa*  no  nexnm  ;  and  it  cannot
be  denied  that  it  did  remain?"  The  advantaga
consists  preeiaely  ia  the  difFerence  between  a  coo-
tAct  which  cannot  be  enforoed  against  a  psaoti
without  the  forms  of  legal  |mceedii^,  and  a  con-
tract which  at  once  gives  a  man  a  powvr  trrtt
hia  debtor  without  any  applicatiec  to  a  court  of
justice.  The  effect  of  the  abcdition  of  the  Nexnm,
lu  thia  its  spedal  sense,  while  the  Addietio  atill
existed,  may  be  itluitiated  by  the  nipposod  «aae  at
a  landlord's  remedy  for  the  reeoveiy  ot  his  rent  \ij
distnas  being  abolished,  while  bis  otba  temediaa
under  the  contract  for  letting  and  biripg  nmuned.
It  is  remarked  by  Ooettling  (OHiUab*  dm-
Riim.  SlaaliBerfiuimig)  that  "  the  compniisaa  of
the  Adrogntio  and  the  Adnptio  gives  the  dearest
proof  of  the  comctncii  of  SaviEny'a  view,  who  ra-
jecli  the  nation  of  a  freeman  pledging  himsalC  la
the  aue  of  the  Adrogatio  of  a  Roman,  who  is  soi
joris,  there  was  no  mancipatio  wbicb  anch  pawon
could  efect  aa  to  hiraadf :  bat  in  tlie  caae  of  adop-
tion, a  mancipalio  ocean,  and  it  ia  eflected  bj  tlaa
living  bUier  and  the  son  together.  In  the  raise  of
coemtia  it  certainly  afqieara,  a*  if  tba  woman  of
henelf  effsotad  a  t"'f-"'""r^''""  |  AB,bo«eT«r,


eipalio i
•doptsd  ]


ii  not  licnelt  •ntetor,  bat  h«T  goardiui  ii  anctor."
Then  may  be  loaie  weight  in  thii  obMrvation,  the
point  of  which  appesn  to  be  thii :  there  wu  mon-
dpktio  ID  the  c*w  of  adoption,  where  liie  adopted
penon  wu  in  the  powei  of  snothei,  but  do  mui-
the  caH  of  AdrDgatjon,  when  the
mon  wBi  not  in  tha  power  of  another.
GODdiiiion  thun  Kctni  to  be,  that  if
w  there  wai  no  mandpalio  and  s-et  a
J  brought  into the power of  another

Kent,  there  could  be  no  mandpa-

Uo  nhen  a  perion  contented  to  put  himielf  into  a
■ert-ile  relation  to  another  ;  for  it  ia  here  auunied
that  a  neium  wua  rolunlai?.  But  thii  i>  not  a
legitiisats  conduiion.  It  ii  eai;  to  aee  that  man-
cipalio  in  the  caie  of  adoption,  where  the  hod  wb<
in  the  power  of  the  father,  wai  a  luScient  form,
cinuideiina  that  the  penon  adopted  wai  onij  a
filini  bBiQiai  1  and  that  Adrogation,  which  wu
of  a  penon  who  wai  lui  jorii,  wu  a  rei?  different
matler,  and  reqnirod  other  fermi  to  be  obterred,
b«<au*e  the  penon  adrogalcd  wu  not  a  liliiu-
bmilia*.  [Adoption.]  A  neium  effected  no
change  of  fimilia  like  an  adoption  or  adrogation,
and  while  iti  object  wu  different  finm  that  of  bath
of  theie  cerenianiea,  it  a  quite  coniiitent  for  iU
fbnn  lo  haie  been  the  tame  u  the  form  of  tie  one,
and  different  from  the  form  of  the  other.

The  mode  in  which  OoetUing  (p.  123)  eiplaini
tMi  mailer  of  the  neium  a  u  followi :  ■■  A  free
ciliien  can  come  into  a  mancipii  cauu  when  he
cannot  par  a  loui  (oil  can/atum)  out  of  hit  own
■neani.  What  in  guch  caic  he  hni  to  give  tccnritf
for,  that  to  uhich  he  hu  bound  himielf,  ii  called
nexum  (namelf  aci] ;  hence  the  phruci  neii  dalio,
ueii  liberatio.  The  penon  who  doei  aucb  an  act
ii  called  nHui  (&i>m  nenu  neiCli)  Jaim,  sutua
Jadmt,  but  after  he  hu  received  the  loon  in  the
above  lolemn  manner,  he  ii  nciu  obligntui,  neiu
lioetiu :  u  Kon  u  he  hu  ^Icd  to  fidiil  hii  obli-
gation, and  in  conieqnence  of  luch  failare  hu  been
addicted  (addielui),  and  given  in  mancipium  bj-
the  DiagialrBlf,  he  ia  called  neiui  (adjective),  qui  ee
neium  dcdit"  —  a  more  confuted  account  of  the
things  or  one  more  remote  from  1^1  ^reciiion,  can-
not be  imagined.  The  pauHge  af  Livy  (ii.  2?)  it
not  aij  ID  explain. (Compare  Liv,  ii.  S3.)

The  Lei  Poetolia  (b.  c  3-26)  allcvialed  the  con-
dilian  nt  die  neii.  So  far  u  wo  can  tmdenland
iu  pTDTiiioni,  it  let  all  the  aeii  free  or  made  them
Bolnti  (LiT.  Tiii.  38,  bub  Kt<di\  and  it  enacted  that
for  the  future  there  ihould  be  no  neium  (caudun^
n  jmlenm  me  wKttraibir),  and  that  no  debtor
ihould  for  the  future  be  pat  in  chaini.  Addictio
howeter  itJU  eontinucd  in  force  after  the  Lea
Poetolia,  it  we  tee  in  lereial  initaneet.  (Llr.
ziiiL  Ui  Sail.  OK.  33i  Cit.  pn,  Flacai,  SO.)
It  appeart  from  the  Lei  Oalliae  Clialpinae  (c  Si,
23),  that  in  the  caie  of  other  adioni  there  wat
oolf  a  PofKiHa  Bimorum,  but  in  the  caie  of  pe-


at of  the  Lei  Julia  which  introduced
the  BoDoruin  Cettio,  and  gradual  changei  in  lo-
ciMf,  mutt  have  diminiihed  the  beiiuency  of  the
Addictio.  [BoNORUM  Cusio.]  In  the  lyelem
ef  Juttinian,  Noium  did  not  eijat,  for  the  ui«  of
Ml  et  libra  in  ]egtl  trantactioni  had  ceaaed.

Neither  the  Addictut  nor  (he  Neiui  wu  a  ilaie,
•ad  hit  ingennitat  wu  only  in  luipeEtH.  Ai  to
the  NeiDin,  it  mutt  have  been  nccenary  that  the
•.leet  of  the  le^  act  by  which  the  ingenuat  wu


HEX  DM.  797

made  anexniihonldbe  done  away  with  b;  another
legal  act ;  and  thit  teemi  to  be  the  Neii  libera^o
which  wu  done  pet  net  et  libnni.  It  alto  ap-
peart bom  a  painge  in  Livy  (ii.  14),  that  a
certain  p«tan,  who  wu  judicatni  peeaniae,  and  ii
not  deicribed  m  naiua,  wu  releued  fnim  hit
obligation  per  aet  et  libram.  In  the  time  of  Oaiui
an  imaginary  form  of  pSTment  per  lea  et  libtam
wat  retained  in  catei  where  the  obligation  waa
contracted  either  per  aet  et  llbrom  or  wu  doe  ex
judicati  eauia.  (Quiua,  iii.  173—1(6.)  There
teemt  indeed  no  reaun  why  Ihii  ceremony  thould
have  been  naed  in  the  caie  of  an  addictu  who
tviihed  to  be  rettored  to  hit  foimer  itate,  for  the
Addictio  wat  by  implication  only  to  have  an  effect
till  the  debt  wu  paid.  It  might  be  contended  that
luch  wu  the  effect  of  the  Ncium  alto,  but  we
mutt  diilinguith  between  the  effect  of  a  lentence
of  the  Praetor  and  a  lolemn  act  like  that  of  the
Neium,  which  wu  in  form  a  traoifer  of  owner-
ihip.  The  addictu  wu  protected  agaiut  injuria
from  hit  muter  (OaiuLi.  Ml),  and  it  it  taid  that
he  retained  hitnameand  tribe  ;  but  it  li  tome  what
difficult  to  undentand  how  he  retained  hit  trib^
lince  he  had  tuttained  Infamia.  Upon  the  di^
charge  of  hit  obligaiioni  the  addiclui,  it  leenii,
returned  (o  hil  former  ilatui.

It  wu  Niebnhr^  opinion  that  the  Ncium,  when
It  became  a  form  of  giving  lecurily,  had  not  Id
complete  effect  un^  the  debtor  wu  unable  to  pay
and  wu  brought  into  the  condition  of  a  debtor-
tlave  by  the  addictio.  An  aniwer  to  thii  hu
been  alieady  given.  If  it  required  an  addictio  to
make  a  penon  neini,  what  wat  the  uie  of  a  Ncium
when  a  man  might  become  addictiia.  even  when
there  wu  no  Neium  ?  The  only  intelligible  M>-
lution  of  all  theie  difiicultiei  it  that  a  Nexum,  in
which  there  wu  a  manelpatio  pertonae,  had  im


It  teenti  to  be  a  1^;^  co


e  of  a  Nei


that  the  children,  if  they  n
the  power  of  the  parent,  muit  fallow  hit  con
u  in  the  case  of  ■drogation.

In the caie mentioned in Livy [viiL


SB),


hit  father'i  debt  (aim  w  mnn  dedittel),  it  may
be  that  the  bther  bound  hit  ion  only,  which  he
could  certainly  do  jut  in  the  nnie  way  u  he

tiither't  power,  he  could  ilill  bind  himielf  on  be-
half of  hit  father.  The  eipresiicn  in  Livy  doet
not  enable  ut  to  determina  which  of  the  two
potiiblo  caset  wu  the  real  caie,  but  it  tecmi  pro-
bable that  the  ion  wu  in  the  power  of  the  father.
Unterholmer  obtcrvct  {Lein  da  Roa.  RechU  ma
dn  Sdoildcerliallmim,  i.  p.  31.  noteg):  ~  The
legal  condition  of  the  neii  it  one  of  the  moat  ob-
icure  pointi  in  the  old  Roman  law.  It  it  here  ot-
tumed  thai  a  man  by  the  penonae  manelpatio  came
into  tbii  condition.  Per»>ni  who  were  in  the
Patiia  Poteetu  amid  tor  the  noiae  cauia,  which
wu  long  miintained  in  practice,  and  bIh  on  as-
count  of  the  debt*  of  him  who  had  the  Poteitai,
consequently  in  a  tenia  after  the  nature  of  a  pawn,
and  by  virtue  of  the  totalled  paternal  power  of
tale,  be  mancipated.  Further,  we  muit  atiume
that  pcreoni  who  were  auj  jurii  could  alio  manci-
pale  thcmtelvei  by  way  of  pawn,  though  no  evi-
dence of  that  hu  been  preierted.  Thii  ii  mads
the  leu  incredible,  lincc  we  cannot  doubt,  that
women  who  were  nii  jucii  could  make  a  cocmtio,


798


NEXUMl


andcoDwqatntlyconMtnBncipnle  thmaelTe*  citber
raBtrimomi  canga  or  fidnciae  cama,  whcrfbj  liow-
ev(T  they  did  not,  like  the  ncii,  come  into  a  con-
dition «mi!ai  to  that  of  alareji,  bnC  only  into  a
■tnts  of  dependencs eimilar to  thai  of  ■  child.


the  power  of  pnlting
togethpT  nboUahod."

The  meaning  of  the  praiUion
Tahlei,  cited  by  QeWmt,  u  to  ci


NOBILES.
NCHBILES,  NOBI'LITAS. In the «]^

period!  of  Iba  Roman  (tale  the  Patrieiaiu  wmi  tM
Nobiei  Bi  oppoied  to  the  Plebs.  The  P«trioi«ni
jwumed  the  chief  politicn]  power  and  the  diitme-
tion  which  power  giTM.  Liiioa,  who  wrote  in
Che  age  of  AnguitOB,  and  ii  not  Teiy  <arefiil  in  the
uie  a{  tenni,  often  deiignatei  the  Patrician
the  term  Noh)li»  (ti.  42)  ;  mi  yet  Nobilii,  i
' '  '  hu  a  different  meaiung.


Iq-


1  the  Two


being  eligible


glhedc
h  diBcuuion.

Taylor  in  his  euay  (Cimmrni.  ad  L.  Decninviralem
ds  laope  Debilort  in  porta  dinecando)  atlempti  to
pmie  thai  Gelliui  miaundfntood  the  oM  lav,  and
that  the  wotda  of  the  TwelFo  Table*  "  parti*
lecanto ;  ei  pins  minuare  sooierint  se  &aude  esto,"
mean  that  the  Berora]  credi
the  "partii,*'  thai  ia,  the  "opecae  "of  Iheaddiolua
divided  or  diitributcd  among  ihem  ;  and  be  j
to  explam  (he  test  of  the  law  in  theae
**  Onnmunii  *it  aervus  eomm,  qni  quide
fnerint ;  et  Bino  frande  eito,  b!  ceteri  totiet
tatt  auu  qnoqae  partiB  in  Dcbitore  Don  v
Terint."  Bui  the  ugumeuti  or  Taylor  an  ,
meana  tatiafactory.  The  conjecture  that  the
"portia"  ore  the  aharee  of  the  creditora  ariaiDg
from  the  tale  of  the  debtor,  i>  aim  iiniupported  by
any  prooC  Thii  monitrom  enactment,  if  we  take
It  literally,  Bhoclis  all  oni  notiona  of  humanity,  bu"
' "■ ■>  hynomean


,  the  plebeiasB  obbUDed  Che  nght  of
to  the  conmlahip,  and  finally  they
La to all the cunile mifff  '


Tbut  the  two  claaie*  were  put  on  the  Bme  footing
KB  to  political  capacity.  Thoae  plebeian*  who  bad
obtained  a  eurule  magiatracy  wen  ihna  delated
ahoTe  their  awn  body,  and  the  remna]  r^lioctioa
of  ■  fiither  VDoId  confer  diatincticai  on  hiadeiemd-
antB.  It  i*  in  Che  nature  of  ariatocratiml  in*tita>
tiona  to  periah  if  they  are  eiduiiic  ;  but  thej
perpetnate  tbemaeliei  by  ^ving  a  {JebeiaD  doaa
the  power  of  eaCering  within  their  nairow  limit*,
Thmo  who  are  received  within  the  body  of  noble*
are  pleaaed  at  being  aepomted  from  their  former
companion!,  and  an  at  least  a*  exclnaive  in  their
no^oni  ai  the  original  member*  of  the  elaa*  which
they  hsve  Joined.
'"  ' wu  the  hiatory  of  NobiliCaaatRnue.  The


:Cunl  divi


it  of  the  0


fiimishea  a  preaumpiion  agamat  me  eiiawnce
■neh  a  law.  The  Romans  had  no  pn'ioDi  f
dtbloiB.  The  creditor  v.-aa  the  debtor's  jailer,  ar
we  know  that  in  the  oldcat  time  he  wai  often
cmel  keeper.  When  there  were  »everal  creditora
who  clumcd  the  body  of  a  debtor,  he  might  be
kept  by  any  one  for  Che  benefit  of  himaclf  and  the
nt:  till  the  liity  days  were  over  ;  but  after  that
time,  if  the  creditor*  could  not  agree  among  them-
■elvcs,  there  waa  no  pOBaible  mode  of  settling  their
conflicting  claims  than  ChnI  which  the  hiw  of  the
Decemviri  gave  them,  and  which  Chey  might  adopC
If  they  chcee.  Such  a  law  could  never  be  carried
into  eSecC  in  any  country,  as  the  legialntorB  must
have  well  known,  and  ihui  while  in  torma  tiilly
■sttilied  the  ctsimt  of  the  crediton,  in  pracCice  it
may  hare  Cumed  out  really  favoorable  to  the  debtor,
(See  the  remarks  of  Oellins  on  this  part  of  the
law,  II.  1.)  BnC  th«  aolntion  of  the  dlffioulCy  ia
quite  A  different  matter  from  the  liict  of  ita  ei-
0  way  to  he  questioned  be-


Tba  vaHons  anthoricica  oi


ri  the  tubjccC  of  the
Nexnm  and  Addictio  arc  referred  to  by  Rein,  Dai
Rom.  PriKamht,  p.  313,  &C.  The  writer  of  this
article  has  not  had  Che  advantage  of  seeing  the
essay  of  Savigny,  U^ier  daa  alttomiada  SeAiUarteAty
Berlin,  1S34.  The  whole  subject  ia  etill  en-
cumbered with  difficulty,  a*  will  appear  from  a
reference  to  the  variona  wriCera  on  this  subject.
The  note  of  Walter  {OtKAickte  dti  Ram.  Rtchti,
p.  642.  n.  6)  appear*  to  contain  the  true  statement
IS  to  Che  dilference  between  Che  cflect  of  a  Ncium
and  ■  Res  Judicata  ;  but  he  rejects  Che  notion  of  a
man  selling  or  pledging  hiai>el£  [0.  U]


deicendanCs  of  plebeians  who  had  filled  eumle
magiatTBcies  fonned  a  class  called  Hobllca  or  men
"  known,"  who  were  so  called  by  way  of  dis^ction
from  **  Ignobiles  "  or  people  who  were  not  known.
The  Nobilea  had  no  1^1  privilega  as  such  ;  but
they  were  bound  together  by  a  common  diatinctioii
derived  from  a  legal  title  and  by  a  eommon  interest ;
and  Cheir  common  inCeresC  was  to  endeavour  to
mnfine  the  etecClon  to  all  the  high  magtscracie*  to
the  memben  of  their  body,  to  the  Nobililaa  Tbnt
the  descendants  of  those  Plebeians  who  had  won
their  way  Co  distinction  combined  to  exclude  other
Plebeians  from  the  distinction  which  theii  own
ancestor*  had  transmitted  to  them.

The  eilemal  distinction  of  the  Nobiles  wa*  ths
Ja*  Imaginnm,  a  right  or  privilege  which  was  ap-
parently established  on  usage  only,  and  not  on  an^
're  enactments  These  Tm*ginea  were  ^[nrra
painted  masks  ef  woi,  made  to  resembla
the  person  whom  they  represented  <Plin.  H.  If,
iixr.  S.  apran  ara  tnjrai) ;  and  they  wera
placed  in  the  .atrium  of  the  bone,  apparently  in
"  wooden  receptacles  or  cues  aonewhat  in  th«
of  temples  (£iXi«  mttn,  Polyh.  vL  43),
The  Imagines  were  accompanied  with  the  ticnll
or  names  of  distinction  which  the  deceased  had
acquired ;  and  the  titnli  were  connected  in  (ama
way  by  lines  or  branche*  le  as  to  eihlbil  tba
pedigree  (stemma)  of  the  iamilj.  (Comtare  the
passa^qnoled  inBecker,p.322,no(a53.)  TheM
IraagincB  were  generally  enclosed  in  their  tarn,
hnc  ihey  were  opened  on  feitiTal  days  and  other
great ceremonials,  and  crowned  with  bay  (lan-

iCae) ;  they  also  ibrmed  put  of  a  solemn  funeral
procession.  The  moat  complete  aocoont  of  thc*a
Imagines  is  in  the  passage  of  Polybio*,  which  haa
been  already  referred  to ;  but  there  is  traquent
mention  of  them  in  the  Roman  writers.

These  were  the  exteinal  marici  or  signs  vf  «
Nobilis  Familia  ;  ■  kind  of  heraldic  distiDction  in
substance.  The  origin  of  ibis  nse  of  Imaginea
from  which  (he  notion  of  a  Roman  Nobilitas  moat
I  separated, is  uncsrtaia  ThaternNobilila^
ai  already  obaemd,  is  applied  by  Livin*  to  •


N0B1LK8.
period  of  Rcnnn  hiitory  before  the  coninlifajp  wm
opened  to  tbe  Plebnani ;  ind  it  ii  pouible  that
tbe  Palriciana  11U17  hm  hid  the  lue  of  Imagin«,
whiefa  tbow  Plebeiuu  aftemrdi  adopted,  when
tbe  CTmle  magittnciei  wen  opened  to  ^cm.  Tho
Patridam  canied  bock  their  pedigree*  (item-
iDita)  to  the  remoteit  hiiCotical  period  uid  even
bejond  it.  (TiiciL  Ann.  ir.  9.)  It  Beemi  probable
that  the  Rjunm  Nnbilitai,  in  Xhe  icrict  >en»  of
that  term,  and  the  Jiu  Imi^nuin,  originated  with
the  adnUBlon  of  the  Plebeiani  to  the  coninlihip
B.  c  366.  Tho  pnctice  of  having  Imiginei,  ai
aLtad?  obMrred,  mny  hare  eiiited  and  probabtr
did  eiiit  before  the  notion  of  the  Jul  Inugioum
wa«  eitabliihed.  Indeed,  u  the  object  of  tho
Patriciani,  who  were  all  of  equal  nnlc  n  &T  as
respected  their  claii,  would  be  to  aUaeh  to  tbem-
■elTea  >ach  Plebeiani  aa  vera  elected  to  Cnnile
magiiliaciei,  it  leenu  confonDable  to  the  nature  of
the  thing  that  the  Gunily  of  lucb  plebeian!  ihonld
be  allowed  or  in<ited  to  adopt  »me  exiating  dii-
tinetion  which  ihould  leparatc  them  from  the  body
to  which  they  properly  belonged.  Uiage  woold
von  fpTo  to  mcb  a  practice  the  notion  of  IcmI!
■nd  thna  the  Jni  Imaginum  wonld  be  otabltit


"7"


onld  be  otabitihel.


tilityornpon  tome  pTEvailing  notion,
and  it  wonld  be  pcrpetnaled  by  cuatom.

A  idebeian  who  lint  attained  a  Cuntle  office
wai  the  founder  of  hit  family'*  NobiliCai  (princeu
nobilitatii ;  aiictoi  generia).  Such  a  peraon  could
haTB  no  imwinea  of  hia  anceaton  ;  and  he  could
ha^  none  of  hja  own,  for  auch  imagine*  of  a  man
were  not  mode  till  after  he  wa»  dtad.  (Pol^b.  tL
A3.)  Such  a  penon  then  wai  not  nolnlii  m  the
ftn  lente  of  the  term,  nor  yet  wai  he  ignobilk
He  WM  tailed  hy  the  Romam  a  "  noYu*  homo  "
or  a  new  man ;  and  hia  rtatui  or  condition  wai
called  Norilai.  (Sail.  Jmff.  85  ;  the  tpeecfa  which
ii  pnt  in  the  mouth  of  C,  Marina.)  The  term
ncTU  homo  wi*  never  applied  to  a  Patrician.
The  Em  norm  homo  of  Rome  vaa  tbe  firat
Plebeian  Cwirol,  U  Seitiui  j  and  the  two  moat
dttttngniahed  "novihominea  **  were  C.  Mariua  and
and  M.  TuUiu*  Cicero,  both  native*  of  an  Italian

The  Patriciani  would  of  eonne  be  jesUmi  of
tbe  new  nobilHy ;  bnt  Ihia  new  nobility  once
fanned  would  eaailj  unite  with  tha  old  srittoerscy
el  Roma  to  keep  the  political  power  in  their  honda,
asd  to  srerent  more  novi  homine*  ftca  pallating
thia  eidnaire  elaii.  (SaU.  Ji^.  63.)  Aa  early  aa
the  aeeond  Panic  war  thia  new  cloii,  composndod
of  Patriciina  or  originat  arietocrati,  and  Nobile*
or  newly-engraflcd  arittocralt,  wu  able  to  eidnde
DDvi  hominea  from  the  connilihip.  (Lir.  xiii.  34.)
They  maintained  thia  power  to  ^e  end  of  the
repabltcan  peiiod,  and  the  conaulahip  continued
almoM  in  the  exclnaive  poaaeaalcn  of  the  NobiHtai.
Tha  teatimony  of  Gicero,  hinuelf  a  novn*  homo,  on
thiiunnt  ia  fiill  and  diitinct.

The  mode  in  which  the  KobiKlai  contfained  la
keep  pooianoi  of  the  gnat  olBcei  jn  tha  Mate,  it
neillMr  difficult  to  cenjectnn,  nor  to  eataUiih  hy
rvidenee  ;  but  tbe  inquiry  doea  not  belong  to  thia

Aa  to  tbe  penotu  who  wonld  be  htelnded  in  the
ttemma  of  ■  noble  family,  it  appean  that  all  the
atcendanti  of  a  man  np  to  the  anceitor  who  tint
attained  a  ennile  office  would  be  comprehended,
tnd  of  founi  all  the  iotermediate  ancenon  who


had  attained  a  like  diitinction. The  kimfolkt  en


nolher-j


'"mid  c  ._  , —

Adoption  wonld  also  increaae  the  mrnibei  of  per-
toni  who  would  be  comprited  within  a  ttemma;'
and  if  Affinei  veie  occaaionally  included,  aa  the/
appear  to  have  been,  the  ttemma  would  become  an
enormou)  pedigree.

The  word  Optimatea,  at  explained  by  Cicem
(pro  Sal,  4S)  ia  oppoied  to  Popnlarei:  he  de-
•cribe*  the  Optimatea  to  be  all  thote  "  qui  ncqns
nocenlea  amit  nee  naluia  improbi  nee  fdhoii  nee
malia  domeilicit  impediti."  Tbii  ia  no  political
definition  -.  it  it  nothing  more  than  auch  a  name  aa
Contervatim  or  any  oUer  lifca  name,  The  nae  of
it  in  Litiui  (iii.  SS)  thovi  how  he  nndentood  it ;
bnt  Liviui  it  blameable  for  nting  the  term  with
reference  to  tboie  early  timet.  Velleint  (ii.  3)
describet  the  Optimatet,  at  the  Senatui,  the  better
and  larger  part  of  the  equettrit  ordo,  and  auch  part
of  the  Pieha  at  were  unaffected  by  pemidom  coun-
teli :  all  theu  joined  in  the  attadc  on  Gracchirt,
Thia  opena  our  eye*  lo  the  real  meaning  of  Optl-
nutei ;  they  were  the  Nobilitaa  and  the  chief  part
of  the  Equilet,  a  rich  middle  ciaia,  and  aJao  all
othen  whiMa  tiipport  the  Nobilitaa  and  Eqaitea
could  command,  in  fact  all  who  were  oppoaed  to
change  that  might  aflect  the  power  of  the  Nobilitaa
and  the  interest*  of  thoeo  whom  the  Nobilita*
allied  with  themielTca.  Optimatet  in  thia  lenaa
are  oppsaed  to  Plebe,  to  the  mate  of  the  people  ;
and  Optimatea  ia  a  wider  term  than  Nobilitaa,
inasnuch  at  it  would  comprehend  the  Nobilitaa
and  all  who  adhered  to  them.

The  term  Pspulare*  it  vagne.  It  could  be  uted
to  tignify  the  opponent*  of  Sie  Nobilitaa,  whe^r
the  motivet  of  thcte  opponent*  were  pure  and
honeil,  or  whether  the  motiiea  were  aeff-aggran-
dizement  through  popular  favour.  Of  Caeaar,  who
•ought  to  giun  tha  popular  favour,  it  wa*  truly
aaic^  that  it  wat  not  to  much  what  he  gave  to  tlw
people  which  made  him  formidable,  u  what  he
would  expect  to  get  from  them  in  return.  A
Fopnlarii  might  be  of  the  claia  of  the  NobiliM^
and  very  often  wa*.  He  might  even  bo  a  Patrician
like  Casear:  hi*  object  might  be  either  to  hnmbls
the  ooble*,  or  to  promote  ue  intereat  of  the  people,
or  to  promote  hia  ovm  ;  or  he  might  have  all  tho
objpctt,  at  Caenr  had.

The  NobHitat  it  ditcutKd  hy  Becker,  Haad-
(iiot  ibr  Aomuolai  ^totWoier,  ii.  late  Abtb. ;  and
there  it  probably  little  to  add  to  what  he  hat  taid,
and  little  to  correct  in  it.  There  are  alao  tome  re-
maiki  on  the  Roman  Nobile*  in  Zachariae,  Sulla
(i.  6).  Hoobaerveiof  SuUathatlhougbhitfimily
wat  Patrician,  he  coold  hardly  be  conaidercd  at
belonging  to  the  Nobilca  in  the  itrict  *en>e,  aa  tha
term  Nobilitat  implied  that  aome  one  of  a  man^
anoeatort  hod  filled  a  curule  magiittscy,  and  it
alio  implied  the  pDtieiaion  of  wealth.  But  thia
ia  a  confuted  view  of  tho  matter.  Sulla"t  an-
ceotorv  had  filled  cnmie  magiatraciea  ;  and  though
hia  Euuilj  wat  poor,  it  wat  alill  Nobilii.  A
Nobilii,  though  poor,  a*  Sulla  wai,  wa*  atill  No-
bilii. Wont  of  wealth  might  deprive  a  man  of
tnflnence,  but  not  of  the  Jut  Imaginum.  If  thero
wat  any  Patrician  whoee  anceatort  had  nerer  filled
a  cumie  magittrac;,  he  would  not  be  Nobilit  in
the  Itrict  tente.  But  when  the  Nobilitat  had  been
formed  into  a  powerful  body,  which  wa*  long  be-
,  fore  the  rsformi  of  the  Qtscehi,  the  d' '


Patrician  w.


NOMEN.

econdsTj  imporlance.  It  vould
nlikel;  that  there  wat  anjr  patiinan  geu
eiiating  in  iha  jtai  B.  c  1 33,  or,  indeed,  long
before  ihat  ^me,  the  lamilies  of  which  had  not
enjoj-ed  the  bighett  hanDun  of  the  itale  manf
timei. The  eiceptient,  if  anj,  wsnld  be  few.

In  reading  theOreek  wiiten  on  Roman  hiitorf,
it  la  OKful  to  attend  to  the  meaning  of  the  politji^l
termi  which  the;  uae.  The  tvi'iiToI  of  Pluureh
(Tib.Graai.  13,20),  and  the  wKaiauu,  an  the
NobililBi  and  their  partijaat ;  or  ai  Cicaro,  after


1  their  partijaat ;  or  ai  Cicaro,  after
e  consul,  would  tall  them  the  Opli-


matci. In  luch  pauago  at  Dion  Caauua  (i

3),  the  meaning  of  iwnrol  ma;  be  collecled  fiom

the  context.  [6.  L.]

NODUS,  in  a  ■pecial  ■enH^  wai  applied  la  the
following  parte  uf  drew  ;  —  I.  The  knot  lued  in
tying  on  the  eciBf  [CHLiuvs]  or  other  article  con-
■titnting  the  AuicTus.  Thii  wa>  often  cFTcctcd
by  the  aid  of  ■  brooch  [Fibula],  a  ring,  or  tonie
jewel  (Vii^.  Ja.  J.  3S0,  Tl.  301,  xj.  77G  i  Claud.
de  Rapl.  Pnt.  IL  40)  ;  but  frequently  in  the
method  ttiavn  in  the  woodcut  of  Diaiui  at  p.  27G.
I!.  The  knot  of  hair  (icifpir/iSiK,  KpuSuAgt),  either
at  the  top  or  at  the  bnck  of  the  head  adopted  by
both  leie*  in  liutening  their  long  bail,  which  wai
turned  upwarda  or  backwards  for  the  purpooe
icrine  ntrtus  adducio  reoocarv  nodOf  SenecA,  OedipM
iL  1  Viig.  Am.  i>.  138  ;  Hor.  Epod.  n.  28).  Ei-
amplei  may  be  teen  in  the  voodcnta  at  pp.  329,
597.  III.  The  knot  of  leather  worn  by  boja  of
the  poorer  daatei  at  Roma  inalead  of  the  golden
BniiA.  [J.  Y.]

NOMEN  (Srofia),  name.  1.  Obskk.  The
Oreek«,a«ii  well  known,  bore  only  one  name(Pniia.
-vii.  7.  S  4),  and  it  waa  one  of  the  especial  righta  of
A  fiither  Id  choue  the  namea  for  bia  children,  and
to  alter  (hem  if  he  pleaied.  (Demoitb.  c  Boeot.  i.
p.  1002,  1006,  c.  Maeari.  p.  1075,  &c)  It  vaa
customary  lo  give  to  the  eldest  nn  the  name  of
the  gnuidfatber  on  hii  fiilhcr'i  aide.  The  hiiloiy
of  Qreece  containa  many  inilancea  of  this  cualom,
and  Soiitheui  {ap.  DernaA.  a.  Macati.  Lc)  laji,
"  I  gare  to  my  eldest  aon,  ai  is  juit  (Sinrip  mil
BlxaUr  Atti),  the  name  of  my  father."  (Compare
EuitBlh.ndAT.  546.)  Whatcustom  was  generally
fallowed  in  reganl  to  the  other  children  may  'be
inferred  from  the  same  paaaage,  fci  Sogitheus  goei
on  to  aay,  that  he  (ailed  his  second  aon  after  the
name  of  hii  wife's  &ther,  the  third  after  a  relation
of  his  wife,  and  the  fourth  son  after  hia  own
grandfather  on  hia  mclher's  side.  Malhen  aeem
also  aomctimei  to  hare  assumed  the  right  of  giring
the  naniea  to  their  children  (Euiip.  Pioen.  5B],
and  it  may  be  that,  ai  in  the  case  described  by
Aristophanci  (A'xA.  60,  &c.).  iometimei  a  quarrel
arose  between  Ibc  parents,  if  they  could  not  agree
npon  the  name  to  he  giTcn  to  a  child.  A  boy  also
•ometimes  received  the  name  of  his  bther,  as  in
the  casei  of  Demcalhcnra  and  Demade«,  or  one
similar  to  that  of  his  lather,  Nauainicus  thua
called  his  son  Nausipbilus,  and  Cailieiatei  called
bis  son  CBllistralua.  (Bockh,  ad  Pad.  P^  It.
p.  365.)  A  similar  mclliod  was  seiaetimes  adopted
in  (he  names  of  several  broihen;  thus  two  brothen
in  the  speech  of  Lyslai  against  Diagiton  are  called
Diodotua  and  Diogiton.  In  some  msea  lastly,  the
name  of  a  son  was  a  patronymicon,  formed  from
the  name  of  the  father,  as  Phocion,  the  son  of
Phoco.,

The  day  on  which  children  received  their  namet


NOUEN.

waa  the  tenth  after  their  birth.  (Atiitoph.  At.
322,  &c) According  to  some  aceoonta  a  child  !•-

fifth  day  after  its  biith.  [AHFBinaoMU.]  Tha
tenth  day,  called  Atnlnj,  bowercr,  was  a  festiva
day,  and  fticads  and  rehoioDa  were  invited  to  take
pan  in  a  sacrifice  and  a  repast,  whence  the  ez-
preisians  Sfm^Tiir  Uta  and  Sucdmr  larifr.  If
m  a  court  of  justice  proob  could  be  adduced  that
a  father  ha^  held  the  SncifTq,  it  waa  suffident
evidence  that  he  had  recognised  the  child  as  hia
own.  (DemoatL  o.  Boaoi.  i.  p.  1001,  c.  Bo»aL  iL
p.  1017  \  IsBcui,  de  Pyrrk.  land.  p.  6a)

The  bet  that  every  Greek  had  only  one  name
rendered  it  necessary  to  have  an  innumerable
variety  of  names,  and  never  has  a  nation  shown
more  tatte,  ingenuity,  and  inventioc  in  devising
them  than  the  ancient  Greeks.  But  howerer  great
the  nnmbcr  of  names  might  be,  ambiguity  and  cxai-
' '  " - '  ided  J  and  in  reading  tba


of  the  Greeks  i


>t  always  ■


writers  belongs  to  one  or  to  seveiut  persona.  The
Oreeka  tbemseltes  were  aware  of  thu,  and  where
accuracy  waa  of  importance  they  used  variooa
means  to  prevent  misia^tes.  Sometime*  they  added
the  name  of  the  father  in  the  geoi^re  case,  aa
'AXKitMns  i  KAfiflou,  IUfurr«^6  nunrup:
sometimes  they  added  the  name  of  the  place  ar
country  in  which  a  person  waa  bom,  in  the  form  of
an  adjective,  as  OavKviitjis  i  *A6rtrai0t^  'HpAiortt
'AXijnipycvircfr,  Xap^itorTHjjs  Ilaurif^i,  Atnaia/^
Xot  i  Kfsaiiyuii,  Slc  ;  sometimes  they  added  an
epithet  to  the  name,  expressing  either  the  occupa-.
tion  or  profeiaion  which  a  perton  followed,  «  in-
dicating the  school  to  which  he  belonged.  Inatancea
are  of  snch  frequent  occumnce  that  it  is  superflnoua
to  quote  anv.  The  custom  of  adding  the  &ther^B
name  was  called  xavp^Sir  imJtinreai.  (Paua.  viL
7.  §  4  J  Xenoph.  Ommm.  7.  %  3.)

In  common  life  the  Greeks  had  yet  anothec
means  of  avoiding  ambiguity,  and  uis  waa  the
frequent  use  of  nicknames,  eipressive  of  mental  ex
bodily  peculiarities  and  defects.  Thus  Demoa-
thenea  was  from  his  childhood  called  B^ntXat.
(Aetchiac  TVmarciL  pp.  139,  142;  Demosth.  d*
n'^™!..™.  /  i- 1291,  &c.>


Athenaeus(vi'p.^42).

(Compare  Becker,  CtanJda,  vol  L  p.  33,  &c)

2.  Rohan. In  the  eerlieet  historf  of  Rhom

there  occur  penons  whi  are  designated  by  only

one  name,  such  as  Romulus,  Remui,  and  othen,

'' ''' are  many  also  who  beartwona~


Thel


of  a
10  the  legitimate  number  of  names  bona


a  (ap.


Vol.  Afoz.,  EpHime  da  i/ominam  Ratiom),  Ap-
pian  (Itea.  Hitt.  Pntf.  13),  and  others,  staled
that  Uie  earliest  Romana  used  only  to  hare  one
name,  their  opponents  adduced  a  great  many  in.-
atances  in  which  penons  had  two.  This  question
will  perhiqia  be  placed  in  a  more  proper  light,  and
become  more  satisfactorily  settled,  if  we  consider
separately  the  three  distinct  elemsita  of  whicti
the  Roman  nation  was  composed  in  its  otioin,  and
it  will  then  bo  bund  that  both  Vam  and  hia  op-
ponents are  right  or  wrong  accinding  as  their  a*-
■ertioos  eie  aj^ed  to  one  ct  to  all  of  tha  thiea
tribes.


NOMEN.

Tba  Salrins*,  from  the  Mrlicat  ttmea  down  to
(tis  end  of  theil  exjilence,  had  two  muna  (Val.
Hex.  iU  Nonumm  Ratiott),  one  indicaling  tfac
indiridiiml  u  iDch  (pnmonn),  (Ljf.  A  Ibm,  Vol«aue,
Pompu  (VbL  Mu.  I.<:.],TBltu(Fut.>.ii.),CBliii,
Titni,  Qomuu,  Appiu,  fte^  ud  tlia  wcoud  ths
goa  M  which  the  tudindnal  belonged,  vhich  Mr-
miDMed  liks  tha  Bomui  nnntnK  gentilku  in  >■>>  or
ma*,  «.  ^  Tathu,  PompUiiu,  CUndini,  &c  It  ii
nHmarer  a  ftaUra  peculiar  to  Ifas  Soibine)  that  a
poson  (Dmetimea,  inittad  of  ft  praouoineu  uid  a
Donien  gentilicium,  had  tvo  nomjna  gmtilido,  one
indicating  the  geni  of  hii  &thn  and  the  otbcc  that
of  hii  motbei.  The  latter  Mmetimtt  preceded  and
•ometbnei  followed  tli«  foncer.  Thii  caitom  ia
eltar  from  Lirj  (xnlx.  13,  17^  who  mentiona  ■
Canpuian  (Sabine)  woman,  Piualla  Uinia,  who
vat  manied  ts  a  man  wbo  bon  tha  nonw  li  Cer-
ijniui  fnan  hii  gaa,  and  ona  of  the  fona  of  then
wnita  was  called  Minim  Ceiriniiu.  Another
uutaDCe  ii  the  name  of  the  Sabine  angnr  Attiu
Nariiu,  where,  according  to  Dioaysni  (iiL  p.  70),
Atlitu  ii  the  ireiia  anyyartinir.  Dion^nni,
bowcer,  mult  be  mintaketi  in  making  Naiiiu  an
f  nfia  •wpanrfafHuhr,  H  he  meant  thu  b>  be  the
■ame  at  (he  Roman  praenomen,  which  the  name
Naiini  ncrcT  waa.  In  all  prebabilitf  thenfon
both  Attint  and  Nanut  are  nomina  gentiliciB.  A
tbiid  initanca  leenu  to  be  Hina^oi  Hagini  (Veil.
PaC  iL  16),  the  ion  of  Decioi  Mag^ni.  Thia  pnu-
lice  mutt  hare  been  t*it  common  among  the  Sa-
binet,  for  in  meat  caaei  in  which  the  two  naiaei  of
a  pcraon  have  come  down  to  ni,  both  bare  the  ter-
mnatiDn  nu,  at  Mariui  Egnatiiu,  Herini  Auniui
(Appiwi.  B.ai 40),  Statiui  GeUiiu  (Uv. ix.  44),
Ofiliu  Calanna.  A  mure  complete  lilt  of  inch
Sabine  name*  it  giren  hj  CiJittliug  (Oeick.  d.  Rom.
jVoaCfB,  p.  6.  note  3),  who  luppOMa  that  a  ton  bore
the  two  nomina  gentilicia  of  bit  htber  and  mother
onlj  Bi  long  aa  he  wat  nnmairied,  and  the


NOMEN.


801


■n  gentilii


hia  &ther,  and,  intcud  of  that  of  hit  matber,  took
that  of  hii  wife.  Of  thia,  howeTer,  there  it  not
anfficient  eridence.  Thuimoch  it  certain,  that  the
Sabmea  at  alt  timiM  had  two  names  one  a  teal
pCBCDomen,  ni  a  nomen  gentilidnm  lernng  ai  a
praeoomcn,  and  the  aecond  a  real  nomen  gentili-
cinm,  dniVed  frnm  the  gena  of  the  btber.  The
Sabine  women  bore,  aa  we  baTo  teen  in  ^e  csae  of
Paenlla  Hinia,  likewiae  two  name*,  i.  g.  Vntia
Oppia,  Faucnla  Clniia  (Lit.  nri.  33),  but  whether
in  cate  the;  both  terminate  in  ta  they  an  nomiita
goitilicU,  and  whelbsr  the  cue,  at  OSttlmg  thrnkt.


decided.  Many  Sabinea  alio  appou  to  have  had  a
cognomen,  bendei  their  praanomen  and  nomen
gendllriora  t  hot  whannr  thia  ocenn,  the  prae-
ncmen  ia  gmaralW  omitted,  e.  ff.  Herenoiag  Baatni
<LiT.  zinl  43),  CUaTint  Peiolla  (Lir.  uxiii.  S),


a  cognomen  nntt,  at  among  tha  Romani.


Tbe  IkliM  in  the  enrlieat  tiina  bad  generally
coly  one  name,  at  ia  teen  in  the  uutancet  adduced
br  Vans  (^  FaL  Mar.  L  e.),  Romnlut,  Remna,
futtulDi,  to  which  we  may  add  the  name*  of  tha
ktngt  of  the  Aboriginea  (Idluii),  Lattnna,  Afcanin,
C^eto^  CapTi,  PncM,  Nmuilor,  Amnlina,  and


others.  When,  thereibie,  Varro  and  Appian  laj
that  the  cultett  Romani  had  only  ona  name,  they
were  pnbabi?  thinking  of  the  Lalini.  There  oc-
cur, indeed,  aren  at  an  caiiy  period,  Latint  with
two  namea,  luch  ai  Oemiuut  Metiui,  Metina
Snfletiui,  VitmTiai  Vaceui,  Tumua  Herdoniua,
Ac  j  iint  theie  uamei  leem  to  ba  either  two
nomina  gcndljcia,  cr  one  a  nomen  gentijjcium  and
tbe  other  a  cognomen,  and  tha  lAtina  do  not  ap-
pear to  hare  bad  gennioe  praenomina  inch  aa
occur  aniong  tha  Sabinet  and  afierwardi  ammg
tha  Romani.

The  £tRiicaiii  in  the  Roman  hiitoriant  gencnllr
hear  only  one  name,  ai  Ponenna,  Spnrinna,  which
appanndy  conjirmt  the  opinion  of  Varro  ;  but  on
many  nrna  in  the  tombt  of  Eiruria  such  namea
leiminating  in  m  are  ireqaently  preceded  by  a
praenomen.  HUllei  (£friwt.  L  p.  413,  &c),  and
GOttling  (_L  c.  p.  31}^  who  fbllowi  him,  are  of
opinion  that  no  Etmican  ever  Inre  a  nomen  genti-
licium. and  that  the  namei  terminating  in  no  are
Niebuhr  (Hia.  if


11075,

billty,  that  tba  Etnacan  aa  corrcapondi  to  the
Sabma  and  Roman  im,  and  that  accordingly  nch
namea  ai  Portemia,  Spnrinna,  Caedna,  Paipema,
Vibenna,  Eigenna,  Matlama,  ftc  are  rral  nomiiK

From  thii  compaiiion  of  tha  diree  original  tribal^
it  ia  clear  that  when  the  Romani  beoimc  united
into  ima  nation,  they  chiefly  followed  [he  cnalom
of  the  Sabinee,  and  perhap*  that  of  tha  I^tint.
(Vaj.  Max. '.  0.)  Originally  eyen  Roman  eitiien
belraiged  to  a  gent,  and  derived  hii  name  {aomm
OF  Komm  geHtiiiaum)  from  hia  gem.  Thii  nomca
gentilicium  generally  terminated  in  hu,  or  with  a
pmeding  a,  in  eiw,  which  in  bier  timet  wai  often
changed  into  onu,  hi  Anniui,  Annciut,  and  An-
naeut  ^  Aj^nileiua  and  Appnlaeui.  Nomina  gcn-
tilicia  terminating  in  tlna  or  tliia,  lomelunea
change  their  terminatiDn  into  the  diminutire  illuf
and  dim,  at  Opillni,  Hoitillaa,  Quintillui,  and
Ofellua,  inilead  of  Opiliui,  Hoitiliui,  Qointiliaa,
and  Ofi^Hoi.  {Hort.t.Sat.  iL  2. 3,et  panim.)  Betidea
thii  nomen  gentilidBm  every  Roman  had  a  name,
called  praenomen,  wbich  pnceded  the  nomen  gen-
tilicium, and  which  wai  peculiar  to  him  ai  an  in-
diTidual,  >.  g.  Caju,  Lnciui,  Marctu,  Cneioa,  Sei-
tna,  &c  In  euly  timei  thii  name  wat  giien  to
boys  when  thay  attained  the  age  of  pnb^mt,  that
it,  at  the  age  of  fbtuteen,  or,  according  to  othen,
at  tha  age  of  lerenteen  (Oeilin^  i.  28),  when
they  recoiTed  the  toga  ririlii.  (Fat.  I.  V.  Puba ;
Scaerohi  i^.  Vid,  Mai.  Lc)  At  a  Uler  time  it
wBi  CDitranary  to  give  to  bi^  a  praenomen  on  the
ninth  day  after  their  birth,  and  to  girli  on  the
eighth  day.  Thii  Klenmity  vai  preceded  hj  a
tuttratta  of  tbe  child,  whence  the  day  wat  miled
duu  Imtriaa,  liiti  namnnnn,  or  mmtinaiia.  (Macrob,
SoAi.  16;  TectulL^/ita^o/.  6.)  The  pnenomm
giren  to  a  boy  wai  in  moit  taHi  that  of  the  &thec,
but  umetimca  that  of  the  grandbtber  or  great-
grandhtber.  Hence  we  freqnenlly  meet  with  in-
ittncei  ]Ike  U.  Tuilius  M.  P.,  that  ii,  Hbicub
Tullina,  Harci  filint,  or  C.  OetaTJui,  C  F.,  C.  N.,
C.  P.,  that  i%  Caioi  OetaTint,  Caii  Glint,  Caii  nepoa,
Caii  ponepot.  Sometimei,  bowerer,  the  pneuomes
waa  giren  without  any  reference  to  fiuhec  a  giand-
&ther,  Ac.  There  aiiited,  according  to  Vaito,
about  thirty  praenomina,  while  nomina  gentilkia


NOMEN.
9  Terj  nmnenmi. These  two  munec,  i
n  gcctilicium  or  BUnplj  i


a  Bdhuui,  uid  the;
>e  lulBcuiit  to  deiignMa  him  ;  beno:
tliB  amnenmi  initaocet  of  Ronuuu  being  deiisnated
ddlj  by  tfaae  two  nunui  eren  in  cfua  wMn  n
third  or  fouith  noma  wbi  pooKued  by  the  penon.
FlebetUH,  howerer,  in  nuuiy  cun  only  poueued
two  namn,  u  C.  Uariiu,  Q.  Sertcriiu,  CiL  Pom-
peiui,  &c.  The  pnenomen  chantctenKd  »  Rcniai)
citizen  ai  u  indiridiiBl,  and  gave  him,  ai  it  were,
hil  caput  [Caput]  at  the  time  when  he  receited
it  Ai  wmnen  had  not  the  irill  capnt  of  men,  they
only  bore  the  feminine  form  of  the  nomen  gentiJi-
cium,  oa  Comelut,  Sempronia,  Tullia,  Terentia,
Forda,  At.  In  later  tiioei,  boweTer,  we  find  that
women  alio  •omelimei  had  a  pcaenomen,  which
they  received  when  they  raairied,  and  which  wu
the  feminine  fonn  of  the  praenomen  of  th^  baa<
bandi ;  luch  ai  Ctin,  Luua,  Pnblia.  (Social.  <^.
FaL  Max.  Lc)  Caia  Caecilia,  the  wife  of  L.
Tarquiuiaa,  if  the  luma  b«  hiitorical,  ia  an  excep-
tion lo  tbb  rule.  (Vsl.  Max.  JL  o.  ;  lee  Cic  pro
Mum.  12.) When  Maoobiui  (!!.«.}  Katn  that

pnienomcn)  on  the  eighth  da;  after  their  bntb,  be
alludei,  aa  in  the  laas  of  boyi  receiving  tbeii*  on
the  ninth  day,  to  an  tanoTation  of  later  timet,  and
among  the  female  praenomma  given  at  luch  an
eariy  age  we  may  reckon  Prima,  Sectmda,  Tertia,
Quarto,  Poatnma,  Ac.  (Vam,  d*  Liag.  ■Lai.  iz.
60  1  Snet.  Oaf.  BO  ;  Capitol.  Mar.  «  Balb.  6.)
Veatal  Virgini,  at  the  appointment  10  theif  priest-
hood {a^itio),  when  tbey  left  the  patria  poteitai,
received,  like  married  women,  a  praenomen,  t,g.
Caia  Tanatia,  or  Caia  SnfCgtk. (Plin.  H.  N.

XXXiT.  11.)

Every  Roman  dtuen,  beiidea  belonging  to  a
gma,  waa  atao  a  member  of  a  familia,  contained  in
■  geni,  and,  aa  a  member  of  inch  a  bmilia,  he  had
or  might  have  a  third  name  or  cxtfuomea
cognomina  were  derived  by  the  Ramaaa
variety  of  mental  or  bodily  pecnliariciea,  ur  uvm
•ome  remarkable  event  in  the  life  of  the  peiaon
who  was  conudered  aa  the  founder  of  the  &milia.
Such  cognomina  are,  Aaper,  Imperioaua,  Mngnna,
Maiimoa,  Publicola,  Bnitua,  Capilo,  Cato,  Nau,
Labeo,  Cucua,  Cicen,  Sciplo,  Sulla,  Tocqnatua,
Ac  Theae  namei  were  in  meat  caiei  benditaiy,
and  deacended  to  the  lal«it  memben  of  a  bmilia ;
in  aome  caiei  they  crated  with  tbe  death  of  the
penon  to  whom  Uie;  were  given  lot  apecia!  r»-
tona.  Many  Homani  had  a  lecond  oognomen
^cogmMim  tecumdam  w  tKW3mn\  which  waa  given
to  them  aa  an  boootary  dittincUen,  and  in  commo-
moratiiHi  of  tome  memetable  deed  or  event  of  their
life,  t.g.  A&ioinut,  AaiaCicua,  Hiapallua,  Creteoiia,
MacedooicuB,  Nuniandanoa,  &c  Such  agnomina
were  tometimea  given  bj  one  general  to  another.


Such


ebief-gencra],  _  . .

penon  himtel^  at  in  tbe  cate  of  L.  Comeliua  Scipio
Aaiaticua.  Sanetime*  alao  a  perxni  adopted  a
tsEond  cononeu  which  was  derived  from  the  name
of  hit  moUiet,  aa  M.  Porciiu  Cato  Salonianiu  or
Saloninnt,  who  wat  tbe  ton  ef  M.  Catn  CenaoiiDa
and  of  Sakoi*.  {GtUiut,  liil  1 9  ;  ?]at.Oal.  Mq}.


NOMEN.


genlilicimn ;  3.  o^
tecnndum  or  agno
the  tribe  to  which


milia  (Cic.  d.  Terr.  L  B),  C.  Clandina  Palatina
(Cic.  e.  Verr.  iL  *3),  Ser.  Snlpioaa  Lemonia  (Cic
PAiUp.  ix.  7).  No  mw  waa  allowed  to  aaasme  a
Domen  B«n^idtmi  er  a  cngnnmen  which  did  not
belong  to  him,  and  he  who  did  ao  waa  guilty  of
blaom.  (D«.4a  tit.  11.  I.  13.)

It  muat  have  been  in  compMitJvely  few  caacs
that  penoni  had  a  fourth  name  or  agnomen,  bnt  tba
three  other*  were,  at  l«it  at  a  late  period,  when
the  plebeian  ariatoeraey  bad  become  eatabliahed,
thought  indiipeniabte  to  any  «»  who  claimed  to
belong  to  an  ancient  bmily,  (Jnvenal,  v.  137.)  In
the  inlercooiie  of  common  life,  however,  and  e^M-
cially  among  fiionda  and  relativea,  it  was  cna-
tomary  to  addrett  one  another  only  by  the  prae-
nomeo  or  ct^nomen,  at  ma;  be  aeeii  in  tbe  letters
of  Cicera,  It  waa  but  ver;  teldom  tbat  pctioaa
were  addreised  by  their  nonien  geatiliciuio.  Ths
moat  common  mode  of  itating  the  name  of  a  pel-
ton  in  caaea  where  legal  nccnmcy  wat  not  the  ol^
ject,  wai  that  cf  mentioning  the  piaenomen  and
cognomen,  with  tbe  omiaaim  of  the  nomen  gentili-
etunt,  which  waa  eaaily  undenlood.  Thna  Caiiia
Juliut  Caeear  would  during  the  better  aftea  of  the
repoblic  and  in  familiar  addma  be  called  Cains,
otherwise  Caiua  (^aeaar,  or  even  Cajut  Juliiit,  bat
Julius  Caesar,  which  was  only  done  during
the  latter  period  of  the  republic  and  under  the  eio-
pire,  at  in  Albiut  Tibollus,  CoRielint  Nepoa,  Me-
tut  Agrippa,  &C.  A  very  common  mode  of
ing  the  nsne  of  a  penon  during  thete  latter
M,  wat  that  of  merel;  mentioning  the  cogi>i>-
I,  {Huvided  the  penon  boring  it  wat  toScientljr
known  or  notorious,  as  we  apeak  of  Milton  and
ion,  witbout  adding  an;  other  diatinctioQ,
althongh  there  are  many  pertona  bearing  the  aame

e. The  most  common  of  theae  caaes  among

Bomana are  Vema, Catbo, Cato, Caepio,
Cicero,  Caeaar,  SuJla,  && In  the  time  of  Angna-
td  Tiberius  it  became  very  ocmmon  to  invert


<.g.  Druana  Claudiua,  or  Silvanoa  Planliaa,
d  of  Claudiua  Dnuui  and  Flantius  SilvanuL
(VeU.  Pat  a  97,  113.)

Roman  womeD  had  likewise  tometimea  a  eogoo-
men,  although  inatancea  of  it  are  very  ran-  It
unetimes,  like  that  of  men,  derivHi  from  p«-
peculiaritiea,  tnch  at  Rub  and  Pntilba
(Hoiat  5at.  iLS.216};  tometimea  torn  tbe  nomm
tilidnm  of  their  butbauda,  as  Junia  CHaadillB,
lia  Naavia  (Snet  Caiig.  12),  Livia  Ocilliaa
(Suet  Oalb.  3),  and  aometimei  fram  thecogDcmm
of  their  husbands,  as  Caedlia  Metella.

I>uriDa  the  latter  part  of  the  rqwblic,  and  tbe
eariy  period  of  the  empire,  when  the  Roman  fian-
WH  given  to  whole  coimttiea  and  pnvincea,
,>ertona.wba  thna  aoiuind  the  dvjiaa  Erc-
quently  adopted  the  {saenomen  and  nomen  of  tba
penon  thrmigh  whote  intereat  tht;  had  lAtaioad
tbe  dittinetion,  or  of  the  ampenr  himaelC  After
ibe  time  of  Cancalla  (a.  d.  313),  when  all  the  &m
inhabitantoiif  the  eoura  had  obtained  the  Bsman
itanchise,  and  i^Mn  th*  nnUlidan  idationa  which
had  alieiuiy  gradnally  tUlen  into  oblivion  wen
totally  fonotlen,  any  parson  migbt  adopt  what
name  he  lasted,  ejtliac  ancient  or  newiy  invented!,
and  trcD  change  hia  naau,  if  ha  did  not  Uka


NOMBN.
it  <Cod.  9.  th.  2&) ;  ud  heDafbrth  the  u


T.


penoa  by  *di>pt>on  pantd  from  aa  g


;  Thii*C.OctiTiu,afiaiba^>diipud
it-siicls  C.  Jnliiu  CtMtr,  ma  called  C
Jdini  Cueu  Octariaiiiii,  and  the  loii  ef  L.  ABmi-
liw  PuUiu,  wben  adapted  bj  P.  Conielnii  Scipio,
wai  (ailed  P.  Corac^iu  Seqiia  AeBulkoni.  [Aiigr-
no  (Roman}.]  Than  were,  hoireTer,  Im
gBitOt  Tu^  the  goH  AntoDUi  and  the  geat  Fla-
miiua,  which,  in  oub  of  uj  of  their  gontila  being
adopted  into  awthtt  gno,  toiA  the  tenmnatioD
ton  iaiuad  of  im^  ■■  Anloniniiiaiid  FlBminuiiu,
initcad  of  Antooiaiuu  and  Flamioiana*.  Some-
tiniei  alia  the  eocnomen  t(  the  (anBcr  fiunily  wai
retained  and  added  without  taj  altentirai  ta  the
name  at  the  adoptiTe  lather,  ai  in  the  oue  of  Q.
Senilini  Caepte  Bnitiu.  (Eckbel,  DoHr.  Num.
nL  T.  p.  59.)  Thii  wBi  dene  onlf  in  caia  the
CdgnnDeD  waa  of  gnat  eelelvity  ;  bnt  it  lome-
lime*  anderiKetit  a  change  in  the  tuminatjon.  Thus
Claadina  Manellng,  when  adapted  b;  C<Tmeliiu
Lentolui,  waa  called  Cameliui  Lentulua  Marcelli-
Bu  (Edihd,  Dedr.  A'an.  toL  t.  p.  59  and  p.  IS7.)
If  ene  man  adopted  two  brotlmn,  the  cdopdTe
btbei  might  chooee  any  pnenomiu  at  hi>  diacie-
tiea  in  order  to  diatinpiish  hie  edoptiTe  aoni  fnan
each  other.  ThoiwhniAiigiutaiadDpted  the  two
Booa  of  AgiipfB,  he  gaic  to  the  one  the  pnoMfDea
CUyi,  and  to  the  otha  the  piaeDoaiMi  Lntiiii.
<VeU.  Pat.  iL  96.) During  the  nriy  period  of  the

tOfin  ii  ippenii  to  bar ' '  ''""'

aipenon,  whenadopted

bii  own  Dooiea  gainlieii.._ ..  .,  _

to  that  of  hie  adopUTo  fiuhet,  aa  in  the  laeea  of  a
Pliniaa  Cateilina  Seenndni,  and  I.  Aeliai  Ann-
lioa  Caainodiia.  (Dim  C*M.SMarpt  lib.  IxiiL  t,
IS.) Beddea  Ihia,  manj  other  inegularitiei  oe-


t,  and  ainal];
beiine  thw  came  into
ailaie  waa  reetorad  to  medoca,  he


a  gentilieinin  of


neeiied  the  pasnoDMn  and

matt  which  be  had  had  ea

thna  in  eome  mcaeiin  the  gendlii  of  hie  ibnner

lidnm,  but  be  had  Dana  of  the  ether  clainii  which
a  bBcbom  goitilii  had. (Cic  Tbp,  6.) '"«*»"'•««
of  inch  freedom  are,  Tltaa  Aiaphia  *'
fnedman  of  T.  Ampna  Baflnu  (Ck.  <
70) ; L.  Comeliui  Chiyiwonni,  a  Ereedman  of
L.  ConelhB  Sulia  (Cic  pro  SotcAa.  2,  &c.),  H.,
Tnllini  Uaiea,  and  II.  Tulliui  Tiro,  freedmcE '
X.  Tullini  Ciooo. If  the etata  emasdpata
aerrie  pabliem,  and  ^tb  him  the  Eraixhiae  at
Miaa  timc^  any  paenoma  and  nomen  were  gi
to  hiia,  v  he  took  these  namea  fnm  the  magietrate
who  perforaied  theact  of  emaneipatioD  in  the  name
ef  the  atate,  and  thai  recajred  a  cognomen  dniTed
from  the  name  of  the  d^,  a>  Roi^na  or  Roma-
BCBM. (Vaira,  <ft  Uh.  Lai. tUl  8S  ;  Lir.  ir
BL)  [L.  S.]

NOUEN. [FxKDa,  p.  £37,  a ; Obluu-


NOMENCLATOR.  [AitBnu«,p.7;,a.l
NOMI8MAT0S  DIAPU0RA8  QRAPHB
(mfufffuTDi  tunfofit  Ypa^)  ia  the  name  o(  tin
pnbUc  action  iriuch  mi^^  at  Athena,  be  bronght
agunst  any  one  who  corned  money  dtbei  too  light
in  weight  or  not  contiatiug  of  the  pure  melal  pre-
ichbed  by  the  law.  The  lawful  poniehmeot  in-
flictod  npon  a  pereon  in  caae  he  wai  conTicted  wu
death.  (Demoath.  e.  L^  p.  508,  s.  TlmuraL
p.  7S5,  Ac)  What  action  might  be  1»oii^t
wainM  thoae  who  coined  moikey  without  the  nnc
tiou  ol  the  lepoblie,  and  how  inch  penoni  were
pimiahed,  ii  not  known.  (See  Petitu  Lm.  AU.
p.  BIO)  [L.8.]

NOHOPHyLACES  {ma^iKMa),  wen  ceh
lin  magiitatei  or  official  penona  of  high  antbMity,
'ho  eierdied  a  control  over  other  magiitratea,  and
indeed  trier  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  it  beinx
their  duty  to  lee  that  tlia  Uwi  were  duly  adnu-
metered  and  obeyed.  Hoition  ii  made  of  ineh
offioen  at  Sparta  and  dtewheie,  and  eome  of  the
n_-.L  ->-ii(Haphen  i^  wrote  on  Iqiilation  ap-
n  tnooght,  that  inch  a  body  of  men  waa
eiaen^Bl  to  the  well-being  of  a  iocial  cmnmnnity.
(Schiimami,  AaL  Jar.  Ptk.  Or.  p.  ISO  g  Pkt
Ltg.ii.y.'ib'i;  Xen.  Oeeoa.  ii.  U.)  No  iDch
body  eiifled  at  Adiena,  for  they  moat  haTo  had  a
too  great  for  the  eiiiteDca  of  a  democncr.
of  fiOO,  or  the  Aieopagitie  council,
I  Boma  meaanis  the  office  of  law*
gaaidiBDi  (Ariit.  PoL  vi.  JS,  nii  JEa. ;  Andoc.  D*
MytL  11) ;  tmt  the  only  penona  deeignated  by
thia  name  appear  to  haTa  been  infigiDr  fonciian-
ariea  (a  eort  of  police),  whoaa  baimeaa  it  waa  to
prerent  inegnlarilia  and  diiturbaneea  in  the
pnUic  Maembliea.  Eren  thur  exiatenee  haa  been
doubted  by  modon  writen ;  iome  think  they  haia
hccD  conBMmded  with  the  diortoMrai.  AJiotheT
hyiMtheeia  ia,  that  the  office  wae  nerer  introdoced
until  the  time  of  Demetriua  Phalerena,  who,  whm
be  wae  ineeated  with  die  anthori^  of  lawgina-  by
Ca>ander,  gave  to  the  Ekren  the  additional  duty
of  watching  the  coodnet  of  all  the  other  magia-
tntea,  with  a  new  to  inlroduee  a  more  aiiitb'
cntial  goremmoit.  In  &Tanr  of  tbii  opinion  it
haa  been  obaerred,  that  the  office  of  rt^a^'haat
ia  only  mcDtioDed  by  gnmmariaDi,  and  they  refer
to  Deinanhna,  who  waa  the  frioid  and  contempo-
nuy  of  Demetrina.  (Bee  Schneider^  note  to  Anat.
/W.  Ti.  5.  S  10  ;  Waeham.  toL  L  pt,i  p.  209  ;
Meier.  AO.  Pnc.  pp.  68—73.)  IC  R.  K.]

NOMOS  (r^fwu).  Thia  word  compnihsnda  tha
notion  not  only  of  eitabliihed  or  atatnte  law,  bnt
likewiie  of  all  cnilomi  and  opiniona  to  whkh  ling
peeoription  or  natnnl  feeling  girea  the  fbne  of
law ;  sa  Enripidea  (Baai.  893)  expeaaea  It,  -rh
ir  Tttini  iiaKf^  r^uiior  M  tfimi  rt  wt^miit.
lu  the  heroic  agea,  b^bre  the  period  of  autlMMie
hialoiy  begim,  we  find  in  the  Horaerio  and  othcj
poema  traceaofagensalbeliof  among  the  Greeki
that  gDTammmt  ought  to  be  coitRdlBd  by  law.
Aa  tfea  the  anpreme  God  waa  an]qxieod  to  be
labject  to  a  higher  power.  Fate  or  'Anerni,  lo  the
AioTpi^i  ^oriAfvi  waj  bound  to  goren  acood-
ing  to  the  ntlee  of  juatice.  Km),  ri/un,  (hwfifii,
(Horn.  OdL  iriL  iS7  ;  Pind.  J>U.  2.  167 ;  Hood.
iii.  38  ;  Hea.  Op.  ^  i>iei,  274.)  Ooremment,
thooflh  numaRhical  and  heredilarT,  waa  nereith^
leiB  Wlod,  ^1  hjTois  yifvn  (Thuc  L  18).  Tha
monaicha  wae  Vrk'ip't  4U  li&anti^  bound  to  ''
aniMlt  for  the  good  «F  th^  V^i^  omI  >■>  li*t>n
S  r  3 ^  O  ■  ~


804  N0M03.

to  th«  adTicB  of  their  coanuUan,  at  tile  chief  mm
of  the  Male  (yipiimt,  irvcrii,  &c),  uid  alu  to
sdimiuiter  juilio:,  limit,  d^fUtmu,  ibtuciai.  (II.
ii.  660,  iri  342,  Od.  xU.  3,  it.  669.)

ThcK  notiom  of  kv  ud  juitice  vera  necea-
«uily  vague.  The  regal  poirer,  thongh  limited  in
practice,  ^ipeui  to  ham  been  aheolats  in  theory,
mi,  Bi  luch,  wu  mil;  liable  to  be  sbOHd.  We
find  complunti  of  the  ab«ue  of  poiver  in  Hetiod
{Op.  ft  Dill,  39. 2S8)  ;  wd  Wachimuth  (HtIL  AH.
vol.  i.  pt.  L  c  IS)  nourlu  thu  the  Odjuey  contain!
indicatiDni  of  a  ttruggle  of  the  nobility  igainM
the  (oreieign.  That  nuoy  beneficial  conceuioni
wen  made  hy  the  king!  to  th<ii  people  befoce  the
age  of  authentic  faUlocy,  ia  not  improvable.  The
change!  introduced  by  Tbeaeui  may  be  conaidered
io  Ihii  light.  But  the  finl  great  itap  lawarda  the
eaubliihment  of  eomlitiilumai  bne  aKHan  to  hate
been  (alcen  hy  the  Athenian),  irhen  they  abridged
the  poTci  of  the  Hedonlidae,  and  reodend  gorem-
tneat  reipoanifa,  -riir  SaoiAffar  ^urfcrnimw  all
ifX>if  fcrtMuyar,  (Paaa.  it,  S.  §  10.)

The  traniitian  bom  euitomaiy  or  tiaditianaiy
law  to  fixed  civil  ordinancea  moat  have  taken  jdaca
gmdually.  When  people  came  to  unite  in  citiea
{BmnfKiQnTii),  and  form  compact  aocietiei,  they
began  lo  feel  the  neeeMity  of  having  permanent
lawa  to  define  and  aacnie  their  dvil  righta.  The
notion  loon  Bprang  up  that  aocie^  waa  formed  for
the  good  of  all  rlaiira  The  eijKnaian  ri  inui^i',
formerly  applied  ts  national  leaguea  and  confede-
laciei  (Hend.  t.  109),  came  to  denote  a  united
body  of  ciliieaa  ;  and  e([Dal  lawi  were  claimed  for
«11.  From  thit  body  indeed  were  eidnded  all
•uch  pcrsoni  at  came  under  the  definition  of  Ttpl-
omai,  provincial*  (Herod,  vi  £3,  ii.  11),  or  lerb,
like  the  HefoU  ;  and  all  alaves  of  every  kind.  It
wai  only  the  luwniman  (n\[-nti)  and  the  fire-
man who  could  enjoy  the  privilegea  of  a  citizen.
The  emigranl  (iT^ijTDt  fu^iaair^s)  though,  if  he
became  a  reaideni  ijiiramo!),  he  vaa  npon  certaiQ
conditioni  admitted  to  the  protection  of  the  law,
waa  never  placed  en  the  vune  footing  n  the

Before  any  writtgn  code*  iqipeeied,  law  waa  pro-
mulgated by  the  poetl  or  wiae  men,  who  aang  the
great  deedi  of  their  ancaaton,  and  delivend  their
moral  and  political  leuona  in  vene.  Such  waa  the
^fo.  (declared  law)  of  Sparta  and  Tanntum.
The  Ibki  of  Chirondai  were  rang  a  aicSXia  at
Athena.  (Aelian,  ii.  39  -,  Ariit  PnU.  liz.  3S  i
Athcnaena,  liv.  p.  619;  W acbmn. HtlL  AU.  yoli.
pLL  pp.  20 1,208.)  Theinanenceeierciaedbytheae
fliea  ainae  in  a  gnat  mraaore  from  the  belief  thai
they  wen  divinely  inapitcd  ;  a  power  which  waa
aacribed  to  moat  of  iheanrient  Uw-maken.  Thni,
the  lawi  of  Muio*  were  aiid  to  be  a  revelation  from
Jupiter  (Paman.  iiu  S.  g  4)  (  Lycurgna  wna  the
confidant  of  the  Delphic  god  ;  Zaiencua  of  Pallaa.
(Wacham-voLLpLi.  p.204.)  Some  have  tupposcd
that  the  naoof  r^t,m  the  aeuieofi>w,wu  dmied
&OID  the  drcumdaiice  of  lawa  having  firat  been
vene,  aa  the  Mme  i  '  '
But  thia  ia  not  aurpriaing,
prindplea  of  haimony  are
mnaic  and  pnetiy,  but  to
variooi  telatiHii  of  civil  a
inga  may  weU  he  derived  horn  v^uir  {dulrHmit

Aa  dvitiaation  advanced,  lawi  were  rednccd  to
wtiliii^  in  tte  ib*^  etther  of  ngnlur  codn  or  dia-


NOMOS.
tincl  ordinuicM,  and  allerwardi  pablicly  edibitrA,
engraved  on  tableta,  or  hewn  on  colunuu.  (Lye  e.
ieoo.  p.  1 65,  ed.  Sleph.  j  AriW.  Pol  v.  9.  g  2  i  Plato,
Leff.  V.  p.  73S.)  The  fint  written  lawa  we  hear  of
are  Iboca  of  Zaiencua.  (Wacham.vd.i.pLLp.208.)
The  fitat  at  Athena  wen  thoae  of  Diaco,  called
ftia>ul,  and  by  that  name  diatingniahed  fiom  tfaa
riituN  of  Solon.  (Andoc.d«My((.p.ll,ed.Steph.)
Fran  the  origin  of  tiiii  word  one  would  inppaae
that  it  lignified  ordained  or  abtute  law,  Ttdtlt
' ''  ia  fieqoentJy  uaed  like  3^>ut,  h


■rchoni  were  called  AwfuMnu,  bocaote  a  great
variety  of  cuuea  fell  under  their  cogniiance,  and,
in  the  ahaenoe  of  a  written  code,  thoae  who  declare
and  intapcet  the  lawa  may  be  properiy  Kd  to
make  them,  (Thirlwall,  Or.  Hid.  ToL  ii.  p.  17.)

The  lawa  of  Lycntgu  were  not  written.  Ha
eoJoiiMd  that  tbey  abonid  nerer  be  iofaibed  oa  an j
otnci  tablet  linn  the  beacti  of  hii  euiuiUymen.
(Thirlwall,  T<d.  L  p.  SM.)  Tho«!  of  SvIod  wera
inacribed  m  wooden  tableta,  arranged  in  pyramidal
blodca  turning:  on  au  axia,  (iJled  ({om  and  KJ^Ciifc
(Harpocration  and  Snidaa,  a  d.  ;  Pint.  Solom.  25.)
They  were  GrtI  himg  in  the  Acropolia,  but  after-
warda  bnagfat  down  to  the  Piytaaeum.  (Harpocr.
Ls. 'OaclTo«n<r4^i:  Panaan.  I  IS.  ga)  Ar-
chiraewere  eatahliahedfbrthecmtody  of  Athsiiaii
hiwa  in  the  temple  of  the  mother  of  the  goda  (ir
T^  flippy)  with  a  public  lerrast  {b^/iAruit)  to
take  care  of  them.  (Demoath.  A  JWl  L^  381,
0.  Ariitog,  799.)  Olhera  were  hung  up  in  (ariooa
public  piacei,  to  that  any  citinai  might  have  acorn
to  them,  to  read  «  lake  eniaeta.  For  imtuice,
lawa  which  conoenied  the  jnriadiction  ol  tk«  acekoB
were  hung  np  in  hii  office  ;  thoae  which  coocened
the  aenate  (0opA<vtuio1  p6f4jH)  in  tikeit  coondl*
room,  and  ao  on.  (Demoalh.  c  Arittoo.  S37,  643,
c.7Vnhk706;  WBchun.voLi.  pl.Lp.266i  Heier
and  Schflm.  AH.  Proc  pp.  170,  660.)  After  tLs
eTpuUion  of  the  thirty  tyianti,  in  ibe  arebonabip
of  Enctidei,  a  decree  waa  paued  by  the  awrmbly  la
reaton  the  mdent  Uwi,  and  appoint  a  c«ninittr«
to  nviie  them,  and  propoee  any  alleratioQi  or  ad-
ditiona  that  might  aeem  neceaaaiy.  The  new  and
old  lawa  were  all  to  be  written  out  in  the  entaiged
Ionian  alphabet,  which  had  not  come  into  uae  in
Solon*!  time ;  and  the  whole  code  thui  reviaed  waa
tnnacribod  on  the  walla  of  the  portico  (eir  ripr
irroiw  irtrfo^mi).  At  l}ie  eame  il  waa  enacted
that  no  magittnta  ihould  be  allowed  to  uae  an
unwritten  Uw  {hfi^  **  •*!»/  ^  *W[*'  1^
Xptivtcu  iLTiH  nfi  Ml,  Andoc  dt  JVjat.  11—13,
ed.  Steph.)

Aowding  to  theae  atatnlea  of  Solco,  and  thna
which  wete  lubaeqoently  enacted  al  vatMua  time*,
the  magiettatea  and  the  judge*  al  Athou  wen
bound  to  adminiits  Iha  taw,  execntive  n>d  jndi-
ciaL  The  Ueliaitic  body,  acting  in  tbedr  (a{iadty
of  judgea  ot  jurma  (aa  to  their  iMiaUtiTe  aee
NoMOTHKTBs]),  WCTC  awun  rtfl  i^r  tr  irtitot
liai,  Korlt  Tois  niiaii  ^fr^fititliu,  w^il  U  £*  |4
tCffl,  7>>^fi]i  v^  SutauT^r]).  (Meier  and  Scbtba.
AH.  Proc  p.  12&.)  In  all  canae^  whether  dnl  or
criminal,  the  partiea  pmcnred  ccfiiea  or  eitiacta  of
anch  lawa  aa  woe  material  to  the  qneationa  to  be
tried,  and  brotuht  them  befiin  the  ^ytitiir  juc— ■-
ntpfaii  at  the  bixfivit,  by  whom  they  not  cm-
ligned  to  the  ix^i,  and  ptaducid  al  the  trial,  to
be  nad  to  the  (wofral  by  the  7p^if4ar<l(i. If


NOMOTHKTES,
■ny  man  prndDosd  befbra  Um  Jndgei  •  fiditkKU
bv  (tin  Irra  fd/uir),  he  <na  piukuli*bl«  with
deUfa.  (I>eni«th.a.Jru£807.)

Ai  the  SucBOToI  (cboacD  w  ezpluocd
Dicastm)  pofeRDsd  thi  fonctiom  twth^  judgs
and  Jul;,  it  ii  erident  that  the  impcntut  qogation,
baw  the  kwi  of  Atheni  vn-kcd,  dqmidj  on  t!K
diMTetko  which  it  practiei  ihey  eiadHd  in  tbt
inlerpcctalioD  of  thi  written  law.  Thii  ii  anlj  tc
be  diNereied  bj  a  canfol  peioMl  of  the  Attic
natiaa,  and  i*  too  wide  a  qntdioa  to  b«  diictuied
heiv.  Hnch  light  ii  thrown  on  the  nbjoct  by
Ariilotle  (RJuL  i.  IS),  who,  in  treating  of  jadicial
mattcn,  alwkjrt  baa  in  riew  the  piaclica  of  the
Athanian  cooitL  He  leckonj  the  rrffw  among
the  h-txroi  wforaii,  and  adriMa  tha  orator,  when
tbe  Ut  of  the  cnnnliy  u  agaimt  him  (iir
Mrrut  i  t  yrfpciiiiina  t#  w^pan)  lo  appeal
to  the  DniTonl  law  of  jnitica  or  eqailT  (rf  ieou>^
vifuf  ml  Toil  Hauciaa,  lis  tuauailfott).  Foe
(_tt/j»  he)  if  the  written  law  i>  ontnij  to  jnitice,
it  i*  net  a  law,  vii  yif  mitt  fi  Ify^  foS  nJM»,
FiMD  ibii  it  ma;  be  Men,  that  ths  notioni  entep-
nuned  b;  the  Atheniani  of  the  ditcntion  to  be  ex-
CKiaed  b;  a  jodge  were  toniewhat  difFeroit  from
our  own.  Tbrav  edtfed  at  Atheni  no  elaai  of
penona  mireapoDding  to  oar  coiin>#l  or  attameyA,
wboae  bnaineei  or  profeaaion  it  waa  to  erponnd  the
laWL  The  office  of  the  iitrrr'«>  related  onl;  to
icligioiia  obaemncee.  [ExuiBTii.]  According
to  the  principle  of  the  coni^Iulion,  oier;  dtiim
waa  bound  to  watch  over  the  pRaerretion  of  the
lawi,  and  to  inforai  againtt  and  proaecute  an;  per-
poni  who  tnuugreued  theni.  The  people,  eithei
on  the  batch  or  in  the  a*Kmbl;,  were  the  nld-
nale  jndgei. (Lyciu^  cLtoe.  MS,  ed.  Steph.)

Aa  to  the  diSennce  between  rdfui  and  if/ii^riia,
and  ai  lo  the  maons'  in  whiidi  law*  were  enacted


Lb«  apidied  to  any  penon  who
enacted.  Thna,  Feridca  and
Tbemiftoelei  aca  oiled  HvuMrai,  raoiera  oc  pro-
powia  of  lawi.  (Lp.  a  Niom.  1S6,  ed.  StepL)
It  ia,  howerer,  num  conmunlj  giren  to  thoaa  eoil-
nent  msi  whoae  lawi  hare  been  celebrated  fbi
theii  intrinnc  merit,  or  for  the  important  infiuence
which  the;  ezerciied  over  the  dea&iei  of  their
eomitry-  Snch  were  Misoe  of  Crete,  Draco  at
Atheni,  Zalencu  at  Locri  and  Chaiondai,  vhoae
lawa  were  diatingniihcd  for  their  ixpittia,  and
were  receired  St  RhegiDni,Cataua,  and  other  Chal-
ddian  Blatc*.  (Ariitot.  PoLa.9.  18;  Hermann,
PuLAid.  %  88,  6S.)  Man;  other  men  hare  been
hcaonred  with  thia  title,  either  for  haring  im-
pnTed  the  htwi  of  theii  coontiymen,  or  si  having
h;  their  writing*,  their  counael,  and  good  example,
led  to  the  in^oduction  of  a  Hand  moral  diaeipline
among  them.  Theae  were  the  ngei  or  vIm  rnoi,
called  b;  Diogeaei  LaCrtioi  (L  40)  mrrrel  rmt
ul  MpoSrruul.  I^ttacni  of  Leiboi,  Phidon  of
Atgoe,  Tbalei  of  Miletua,  Biu  of  Prieue,  Chilon,
who  improred  the  Urn  of  L;ciirgii*,  and  Pj-tha-
gorai,  m^  be  reckoned  in  thia  clui.  ( Wachim.
TiJ.Lpt.ip.212.)  Bat  the  name  of  renoWri)!  ii
given  jnrr*  ^pj^f  to  Solon  and  Lycorgui  \  for  the;
■Bt  only  introduced  codea  of  laws,  hut  were  the
bmidBi  of  BHHtituf'an  (■aAirdiu),  which,  thcogh
fnm  time  to  time  modified  and  altered,  and
■onethnea  ertn  itupended,  remained  more  or  leu
a  iNca,  M  long  aa  Alboia  and  Sparta  eiiiled


NOHOTHBTGS.  809

aanpablka.  (Aii«ot.Pol  iL  9.  g  I.)  So  liigli
waa  the  eitaem  in  which  Solon  waa  held  b;  the
Alheniani,  aa  the  fbinder  of  their  eodal  polK;,
that  althongh  man;  important  rrformi  were  ef-
fected at  taiiou  periodi,  he  atill  continned  to  be
regarded  a>  Hit  laasiw  (d  ve/ioWnii),  and  the
whole  body  of  law*  paaied  under  hii  name.
Wachimutb  (vol.  L  pLl  [L 288)  rcooatki  that  on  thia
aecoont,  whenever  a  lav  of  Solon  ji  cited,  we  ma;
•napoct  that  it  conlaini  interpolation.  On  the
other  hand,  wo  »honld  bear  in  mind  that  in  all  the
changea  which  took  place  in  the  Athenian  tsniti-
tation,  the  reformen  aimed  at  preaorving  tha  main
prindpiei  of  Solon'i  polio;.  Cleiithenoi,  who  B««-
bli^ed  the  tw<os  remodelled  the  ^uAal,  and  nnda
other  change*,  i>  chaiacteriaed  by  AriUotle  (PaL
ii.6.  g  11)  a*  having  for  hii  olgect  oJ^MTi*
oq^MMpffrlv.

There  ii  thia  remaiiable  diSennce  between  tho
legidation  of  Salon  and  that  of  other  Greek  law-
given,  that  he  did  not  (u  they  did)  eudeaTour  lo
•ccure  hiity  and  finality  for  hii  inititnliona.  Za-
leucu*  and  Charondaa  are  said  to  have  made  it  a
capital  crime  to  ptopoae  new  law*.  Lyeurgni  for-
bade yonn^  men  to  cenrare  the  lawi  j  and  when  he
went  on  hit  htit  journey,  from  whidi  he  never  r«-
wmed  (the  atory  aa;.),  he  bonnd  hia  countrpnen
b;  an  oath  to  obearrB  all  bii  law*  till  hia  return.
Solon  exacted  a  umilar  oath  of  the  Atheniana  for
on!;  ten  jiiaii.  (Horod.  L  29 ;  Wacham.  toL  L
pL  i.  p.  31 1  ;  Thiriwall,  Gr.  HitL  vol.  L  p.  2SS.)
But  Solon  alio  deiiiod  regnhitiona  by  which  the
wi  might  undogo  periodical  roviainn,  and  be
tended  a*  oceadcn  required.  At  the  fir»t  Kvplo
UxKiftin  in  every  year,  an;  penon  waa  at  lib«ly
to  poml  out  deJecU  in  the  exieting  code  or
propose  altecationa.  If  hia  motion  waa  deemed
worth;  of  attention,  the  third  aiiembly  mijjht
refer  the  matter  to  a  lejpilalive  committee^  c^rA
rmueiriu.  Thia  committee  waa  lelected  by  lot
from  the  Hdiaitic  bod;  ;  it  being  the  intention
of  Solon  to  limit  the  power  of  the  popular  asumbl;
by  meaoi  of  a  mperior  beard  emanating  from  itaott
composed  of  citiiena  of  mature  age,  bound  b;  a
atncler  oath,  and  awoitomed  to  weigh  legal  prin-
ciples b;  the  eierdte  of  their  judicial  function*.
The  number  of  the  commiltse,  so  appointed,  varied
according  to  the  eiigenc;  of  tlie  Dctaaion.  Ths
people  mpointed  five  adcocates  (o^uem)  to  attend
before  (he  board  and  ■"■■■■^liiin  the  polio;  of  tha
■tiiating  institution.  If  the  proposed  rneaame  met
Jie  appwal  of  the  committee,  it  pasted  into  lav
orthwith.  Beaidea  thi*,  the  Theamothetaa  wera
ofliciall;  anlhoriaed  to  review  the  whole  code,  and
refer  all  atatntea  which  they  conaidered  unworthy
of  being  retained  to  the  tvnoSitiu.  (Hemiann,  Pol
A^a.  g  131  J  Waohsm.  vol  L  pL  i.  p.  260  ;  Thiri-
wall, voL  iL  p.  46  1  Demosth.  a  TVnoer.  706.)

Hence  appnm  the  diSerence  between  ^4^/ia
and  i^fior.  The  mere  rcaoloUon  of  tha  people  in
LMcmbly  was  a  iM^fffW,  and  onl;  remained  in
orce  a  jeu,  like  a  decree  of  the  aenale.  Nothing
na  a  ine  that  did  not  pass  the  ordeal  of  the
B/ioflirai.  The  democrac;  of  Solon  was  therefore
roe  of  that  kind,  in  which  (as  Ariiiotle  «a;s),
r^i  tr  i  ^iioi,  iw'  oir  t4  wAflSoi.  (Pof.  iv  4,
S3i  Hermann,  Pot  .iat  g  67.  n.  8  ;  Demosth-c
AruiBc  649,  661.)  PrivUigia  required  to  b«
poaaed  by  *ix  thousand  of  the  people  in  assembly,
giving  their  vote*  secretly.  The  natarnlisation  of
a  foreigner  is  «a  example  of  a  prmi^jium;  Ua

■  ft  r  a -  -  ■  ■  o "  ~


tens  NOTA.

wblch  tm  TOlei  oC  di^reat
temrj. (fimavM.  e.  Neaer.  137S.}

Prapadtioiu  to  be  nibniitCed  to  the  peopln  wen
Ant  apfC0T»d  hy  the  wnats  of  fiOC,  and  then
eiUed  rpo9ov\f^ugTt^  The  moTflt  of  &  Lav  was
Mid  dtTnu  or  fpA^iv  ^f"'^t  the  people  who  poMed
it  diaiai.  To  indict  a  mui  for  [rapotuig  illegal
meoiore*  «aa  called  7pd^4ir4af  Tim  vapeaf6fMtf.
Ju  to  the  proceedisga  in  foeh  *  cue,  we  Pira-
NOHOH  asArsB.  IC,  K.  K.]

NONAE. ICiLBNDiHtClI.]

NOKHA  (ft^tuay),  a  iqiian.  Died  by  caipen-

tela,  maaona,  aad  other  artifeen,  (o  make  Uieir
work  rectaogulai.  (Philo  d(  7  Ori.  J^wlL2  ;  Vi-
ItuT.  viL  3  i  PliiL  H.  N.  nzn.  22.  a.  61  j  Pni-
dent.PijcbMi.S2a)  Ilwaamade  bytakioglfane
flat  WDodsD  lulen  [R>oi7Li]  of  equal  thiekneM,
one  of  tbem  beiiv  two  feet  ten  inehei  long^  the
othen  (seh  two  feet  long,  and  joining  ''' —  '
nther  h;  their  eitremitjea  is  aa  to  ai
fonn  of  a  right-angled  triangle.  (laid.  Orig,  lii.
19.)  Tbii  method,  though  only  a  eloae  approif
mation,  muat  hsTe  heen  qoile  iDtBdenl  far  all  cotr
men  pnrpaN&  For  the  take  of  conTenienct,  ifa
IiH^Ht  tide,  1. 1.  the  hypalmnio  of  the  triangli
waa  diicarded,  and  (he  initnunent  then  aaiiune
the  (brm,  in  Kbich  it  !•  eihibited  among  othc
toola  in  trDodent  at  p.  283.  A  iquare  of  a,  itill
more  aimple  fiiahion,  made  by  merely  cutting  a
Ttetangular  piece  out  of  a  baud,  it  ihown  on  an-
other lepnli^ral  manament,  found  at  Rome  and
puhliihed  by  Omter  (J.  c;  p.  229),  and  o^ied  in
the  woodcut  which  it  here  intcodocad.  Tbetqoare
wai  uaed  in  making  the  lemiciRUlar  atriae  of  Ionic
eolnmnt  [Coluvna],  a  method  foonded  en  the
propoiitiaa  in  Euclid,  that  the  angla  eontaiiMd  in
a  temicirde  it  a  ri^t  angle  (VitiuT.  iii  5.  |  H).


IN5IRVMEN  .TABR  .TIGNAR.


Fnm  ^s  nte  of  thii  inatrument  a  right  angle
«u  alM  tailed  a  normal  angle.  (QninliL  li.  3.  p.
446,  ed.  Spilding.}  Any  thing  mii-thwen  «u
ttilti  abaormit. (Rar.  Sat.  H  2.  3.) [I.Y.]

NOTA,  which  ngnified  a  mark  or  aign  of  any
kind,  wBi  alto  euiployed  for  an  abbreviation.
Hence  aolat  Mgnilied  the  naAi  or  tigni  uaed  in
taking  down  the  worda  of  a  tpeokcr,  and  was

gr^by;  and  watarH  ligitified  ibort-hand  wiitera.
It  mutt  be  boma  in  tni^  howerer,  thai  note  aln


NOTA.
tigniGed  writing  in  dpher ;  and  many  p


a  ntei


id  by  Xenafiban  (Dn.  LaM.  iL  tS),
rt-biind  writera  were  cdled  raxniHf  "t


to  ahort-hand,  refer  in  reality  to  writing  in  ciplM&
Thoa  both  Juliua  Caeiar  and  Auguatoa  wrote  many
of  their  letten  in  ciphs  (fir  metal,  Smn.  JmL
Cam.  ee,  A^  S8  ;  eomp.  OdL  zrii.  9).  StiU
ahort-haad  wai  wall  known  and  azteodTdy  tm-

Cid. Among  the  Onaka  if  '" "''  " ■""
inranted  b-  " "^ "~  '"

and  their  thort-hi  -..,,,

^vypil^i  and  aiitmeypd^ot.  The  fint  introdito-
tion  of  the  art  among  the  Romana  ia  aicribcd  to
Cicero.  Plutarch,  in  apeaking  of  the  apeeeh  of
Cato  in  the  aenate  ca  the  puniabaMnt  of  the  CaliliBa-
rian  ooiupiralm,  relatea,  "  They  aay  that  thia  ia
tha  only  apeeeh  ol  Calo  which  it  proattrtd,  and
that  it  waa  owmg  to  Cieero  the  ctoual  wba  had
prerioualy  inatmcted  tfaoae  cloka,  who  ampaMod
the  >«t  in  quick  writing,  in  the  ue  of  e«tain
•igna  which  oomprehanded  in  their  mail  and  brief


For  Ibe

employ  nor  did  ll

writera  lin\)utirffipa4),  but  it  wat  ca  thit  ol_
tion,  at  they  By,  that  they  were  firat  eatablitbed
in  a  certain  form."  (fM  a».  c  3^  Lra^ *■  tnotL)
Cicero  hinuelf  tometimet  wrote  in  ahiat-haod  tr
the  aake  of  brerity  or  tecrecy  (tut  ntfufw  ler^
■mwi,Cie.ad^t(.iiii.  SJ).  Dim  Cawna  (It.  7)
alCrihntfa  the  intention  of  atougn^hy  to  Hae-
cenaa.  Enaebiat,  in  hit  Chrtmicon,  atcnbe*  it  to
Tiro,  the  fieedman  of  Cicero,  and  hnice  the  tyatna
of  abbrcTiatad  writing,  in  which  amne  manotcripti
ire  written,  baa  received  the  name  of  A^olaa  7Vn>-
aanai/  but  there  ii  so  evidence  to  tfaow  irtieihet
hit  apeciea  of  ahort-hand  wat  Rally  tha  iaTattioo
if  Tiro.  It  would  ^ipear,  moreovs-,  from  aeTaral
pattaitei  in  ancient  writen,  that  the  ayatem  of
thort-band  employed  in  tbe  time  of  the  Roman
'ra  mnit  have  been  of  a  much  aimplei  and
expeditioni  kind  than  the  tJatai  7bi  '
Thvt  Seneca  «>ye  (Bp.  90) :  "  Quid  vi
noui,  quibua  quamvit  citata  excipitor  oi
celeritatem  linguae  manna  aeqnitai."  1
apeaki  to  the  tame  eSect  (iv.  197} :  —


'Hie  el  I
Qnique


itvelc


And  likewiae  Martial  (xiv.  30S) :  —

"  Currant  verba  licet ;  manut  eat  velodor  Olil :
Nondmn  lingua  aumu,  dextra  pcregtt  opoa.^

Many  of  tbe  wnllhy  Ranaoa  kept  tlavsa,  wka
were  trained  in  the  Bit.  (Senee.  £>>.  ^  e.)  Thmtba
eider  Pliny,  wboi  travelling, uaed  to  any  a  nitni  iai
with  liim,  that  the  alave  mi^  be  rally  la  taka
down  any  thing  that  he  wiahed.  (Plin.  J^  iii.  S.)
The  art  wat  alu  Innit  even  by  tha  Ranm  nohlaa,
and  the  emperor  'ntm  wat  a  gmt  pcofidtot  ia  it.
(SueL  Ttt  3.)  At  a  latfT  time,  it  aetw  ta  kava
been  generally  Uught  in  the  achoola,  aad  heaea
Fnlgentiu)  {AfydtAff-  ii>-  10)  diridea  lb*  wtiting
laoght  in  lehoola  into  two  kinda,  tha  AlweJariiM
and  Notaria  ;  tha  former  being  the  ragular  lettoa
of  the  alphabet.  A,  B,  C,  D,  ftc,  and  tha  latter.
ttenogr^hy.  There  were,  moroorer,  abart-hmd
writen  (nottirii)  by  profcaticn,  who  win  dncfly
employed  in  taking  down  (wifen,  anwa)  tha
,.. —  !_  .y  eontttof  jwliBfc JU  a  ktrt


■.  19.  I  9). Thew  ihaVhud  n

•DD'i  wUI  (Dig.  SA  tiL  1. 1. 40).
Thii  k * '"  '  '■'

I,  who  liT«d

ceDtnry  of  the  Chriitiaa  en,  giret  &  ipore  detailed
acCDOtit  of  tha  hiitoy  of  Ihe  ut  <Orw.  i.  SI.
PL  836,  ed.  OodMAed).  He  aKribiB  the  lUTention
of  tlM  att  la  EuuM  (f),  iriko  be  my  iBTmted
IIM  taifki  (Mta*)  ;  but  tha  Ant  penoo  wbo
pfietiMd  H  at  Rona  ba  itatM  to  hara  bean  Tins
tha  fraadmaa  of  Cieen^  who,  bownar,  ■""■^■■y
la  liidoca^  aoeooD^  and  odl;  notaa  Sir  pa^on-
tioai.  Indore  then  gotn  on  to  By  that  additional
Dotae  wen  inTontod  bj  Tertiot  Penuiniiu.  Phi-
laiviiu,  Bid  Aqiiila,  ■  fnedmsi  of  Hasoiai,  till
■1  lenph  Seneca  reduoed  the  irhol*  to  a  regolai
■yitem,  and  incRaied  iba  nnmbar  of  nolaa  lo
1000.  What  tnith  then  Toay  be  in  thii  accmmt,
h  i>  impoMiblp  to  nr ;  but  the  Tiew  which  it
giree  of  the  gimduil  mtpraranent  of  the  ijvtain
i  penau  ie,  frnm  the  natore  of  tha
caaa,  moat  pnhable.

Tba  lyKem  of  ihoft  hand  ailed  Netat  Tin-
■toBH  it  exptained  in  a  work  printed  by  Oniter
in  hie  TlnoTW  ItucnfUimam,  Thia  work  ii
aaciibed  in  tlie  manmeripU  to  Tim  and  Seuea,
but  conlaini  many  wo^d^  which  wen  only  tued
at  a  much  later  age.  It  a[f>etn  bom  thia  worlt,
that  the  Notae  Tinniuuie  wen  TOiy  diSereat
tma  out  lyilem  of  itenoKTaphy,  and  wen  nmple
nbbnnatioiu  of  the  woida,  evch  a*  were  lued,
only  to  a  miBUeT  extant,  in  ordinaiy  writing.
We  likewtH  have  aome  roannacripla  wriltea  in
Notae  Tironioimtt,  of  which  bo  account  ii  giren  in
Ihn  work  of  Kopp  quDt«d  bdow  (Caipeotier,  M-
"■  ■  I,  Parii,  1747  ;  Kopp,  i^i-
lS17,T0Lli  Bedui,OaZlH,


&'


NOTA  CENSCRIA. [CM18M.J

NOTAItll,  abon-hmd  wrilan,  w«n  genoally
daiea  or  beediBcn,  and  are  qiakeo  of  undo'
NoTA.  Thay  wae  likawiae  called  ^cdnni.  Th«
wen  abo  aaplejed  by  the  empenn  (Ldmptid.
Aim.  &K  38,  JtnL  86  ;  TnbeiL  Oaad.  U),
and  in  eoane  of  time  the  title  of  Ntilani  wai
exclndTciy  apjdiad  to  the  prirala  lecntariei  of
the  empHon,  who,  of  coune,  were  no  longer
alBTcs,  bat  pcnoni  ol  high  rank.  The  ibat-hiuid
writo*  woe  now  oiled  tmnflarm,  ai  ii  remaiked
nndtr  Nor*.  On  the  reeiginiwlion  of  the  em-
pin  by  ConitBiitina,  the  NaarU  wen  coouitated
nto  a  kind  of  inHtnal  chaoceiy,  who,  in  addilioa
to  their  regidu  datiea,  wen  Enqnently  en)dayed
by  the  eiapmae*  fa^ertant  pnbht  laieiinna  The
fint  of  than  in  rank  waa  called  iMiwwniajyato-
n'BMi  and  the  aeccvd,  JTin:— JiwiiM  Natanonm.
Othaa  wen  called  Mml  It  m4ara,  and  another
it  malarii,  who  ^oUbly  acted  ipe-
raanrinteiMntaiMaoftbeempaon.  Otheia
1  wki  avred  nndar  tba  Piaefecti  Piaeti^i,
wen  (aUed  NttarU  Fniaoriaid  (Cod.  Theod.  6.
tit.  10 ;  Caniod.  Par.  n.  16  ;  Walter  tftteUaU*
im  SSmiichm  Haiti.  |  MS.  2d  ed.)

NOVA'LE. [AnaTHuM.]

NOVATia [OBLiainoNm.]

NOVELLAE  or  NOVKLLAE  CONSTITU-
TKyNEStenapitoftheCoqau  Jtiria.  Moat
ef  than  were  paUi^wd  in  Gred^  and  their  Oreek


NOXALIS  ACTIO.  807

'lovffTwiarav  Atr/wirrou
E«t.  Some  of  them  were  publiihed
ume  in  bMh  languagea.  The  fint  lA
a  of  Jnitinian  belong)  to  the  year
A.  s.  S3£  (Not.  I),  and  the  latett  to  the  ynr  A.D.
B6i  (Not.  187) ;  bnt  mart  of  them  were  publiihed
betweoi  the  yean  6S£  and  539.  Tbeee  C<Hutita<
tima  wen  publiahed  after  the  completion  of  the
•eeond  edition  of  the  Code,  fra-  the  puipoae  of  mp-
plying  what  wu  deficient  in  that  woii.  Indeed
It  Bppean  that  on  the  completion  of  hi*  aeoond
edition  of  the  Code  the  Empoor  deeigned  to  fbnn
any  now  conititiitioni,  which  he  might  pnbliih,
~*~  ~  body  by  thenuelTea  »  a*  to  render  a  third
1  of  the  Coda  unnaceiMiy,  and  that  he
contemplated  giiing  to  thii  body  of  law  the  name
of  Noiellae  ConaUCntionei.  (OuuL  Cordi.  t.  4.)
It  doe>  DDl  howoTer  a]^iear  that  any  official  com-
pilBtion  of  ttteie  new  conilitutioni  appeared  m  the
lifBtirae  of  Jiutinian.  The  Qreok  text  of  the
NorellBB,  aa  we  now  have  them,  conaeta  of  IGfi
NoTellae  at  the  lean,  or  168  ai  aome  make  it,  of
which  1£9  bekBg  to  Jnatinian,  and  the  reit  to
Jnitin  the  Second  and  to  Tibeiini :  they  an
geoenlly  dinded  into  chapten.

A  laige  part  of  tbeae  Noyellae  relate  to  the  ad-
miMnUini  of  the  itale  and  to  eccleeiaitical  afhin  i
It  a  eonaidenbla  nnmber  relate  to  Printum  Jui,
and  they  modified  or  allend  many  rolei  of  law.
Then  ii  a  Latin  Epitome  of  iheae  NoveUae  by
ilian,  a  teacher  of  law  at  ConitaniinDple,  which
containi  125  Norellae. The  Epitome  war  pro-
bably made  in  the time  of Joitinian,  and  the
anther  waa  probably  Anteceuor  at  CoDitantiocq>Io.
There  ia  alio  another  collection  of  134  Novel-
lae,  in  a  Laliii  Teraion  made  from  the  Greek  text.
Thia  collection  ia  genenlly  called  Aathenticum  or
ADlhenticonun  :  the  compiler  and  the  tinia
of  the  compilation  an  unknown. Thia  collection
baa  been  nwde  independently  of  the  Greek  com-
pilation. It  ia  diridrd  into  nine  CollationM,  and
the  CollatiiHie*  an  divided  into  titulL Thia  waa
the  oallectiiHi  which  the  Oloeaatorea  coiuideted  aa
having  the  authoh^  of  law.

Che  moat  oompleta  worii  on  the  hiiloiy  of  tha
Norellae  ia  by  Bienar,  OanluiUa  <&r  A'oHlfn.  See
alao  B^fri^  MIT  LUttrar-OetiAiiAit  da  Noid!em-
lnHi^  «■•  JWuB,  Von  Hanbold,  ZaUArifl,  itc.
'oLiT,  ThehiatoryafthecollectionaoftheNoTetha
■  Tory  confuaed,  and  it  ii  impouible  to  atate  it  cor-
nctiy  in  a  abort  ifa<«.  (Pochta,  /u(.  L  g  147.}
After  the  publication  of  bia  Codex,  Theodoaina
tde  variona  new  enactmenta  uidei  the  name  of
Novellas  CDOititutiona,  or  Novellae  L
which  aee  Conix  Thiodosunub.

NOVENDIA-LE  (at  ai»«)

given  to  two  diffioent  fistivala.  I.  Of  a  featital
bating  nine  daya,  which  waa  celebrated  aa  often
rained  from  heaven.  It  waa  originally
by  Tullna  Hoatiliua,  when  there  waa  a
ihower  cf  itoHi  npim  the  Mom  Albuuu,  and  waa
fieqnenlly  celebrated  in  later  timea.  (Liv.  I  31,
xxi.  63,  xiT.7,  xxvi  23,  iiviL  37,  nix.  34.)
3.  Of  the  N<ii£ea  perfonoed  nine  daya  after  a
fnnerBl  [FoNua,  p.fi63,a.]
NOVI  HOTdlNES.  [Nonitas.]
NOVI  OPERIB  NUNTIATIO. [OpwtM

NOVI Nll«TIiTIO.i

NOXA. [NoiiAl,u  Actio.]
NOXA'LIS  ACTIO. If  a  filiuajhmiliaa  or  a
ilave  coounitled  theft  or  injuria,  the  poson  injured


e  Legea,  aa  to
10.  L.]


Iwt


'  O"


808  N0XALI3  ACTIO.

had  a  Kondis  Actio,  oi  a  l^al  nmedy  far  tin  Noib
or  wrong  dona  Eo  him,  against  the  ikther  ( pater-
yiAtailiai)  or  the  owner  of  the  ilave,  ai  the  case
might  bfl  i  hnt  he  had  no  action  ogainit  the  hq  ot
the  il&ra. The  vnrd  Noia  (fiom  noceo)  pNpellj


injmjdi


t.  legal  K


hendod  ereij  delictum.  (Dig.  SO.  tiL  16.  ■.  338.)
The  lather  or  lh<  Diiatermighttithecpaj  dunagea
to  the  injured  penon,  or  nuretider  (he  oSendei  to
him.  The  muiender  of  the  offender  wai  eiprewed
hj  the  phivae  ^  noxae  dare  or  dedere  ;  **  and  tho
acceptance  of  the  offender  in  ■aliihction  of  tho  in-
jury waa  exprcflsed  hy  the  phraie  ^noiae  ao
cipeie ;  ^  in  theie  expreitioni  **  no ja  **  doea  Dot
moui  "  puniihiuent,"  tt  ii  Kimetintea  mppiiMd,
but  the  meaning  of  the  eipratioD  ii  that  the  per-
•on  VBi  lUireDdend  in  mpMt  o(  or  tu  a  compen-
ration  fiit  hi*  Noia.  In  the  Inititnteg  (4.  tit
S)  Noia  ii  defined  to  be  the  penon  that  doea
the  miKbie^  thM  ii,  the  ilave,  and  Noiia  tho
imacluefthat  ia  dona.

Noialea  Actionei  were  grren  both  by  Lege!  and
by  the  Edict ' '  -  " -

(fiien  by  the
Damni  Injuria  by  the  Lex  Aiiuilia.  In  the  cue
of  Injuriae  and  of  Vi  Bocoium  Raptonitn,  they
were  given  by  the  Edict  Thia  action  waa  n'-"
"caput  aequi,"  which  ji  thna  explained  by
atancei :  if  a  ton  or  alave  committed  Ndtb,  (he
action  wai  agnjiut  the  btbrr  or  own
the  offender  waa  in  bii  power  ;  if  thi
came  auijuHi,  the  injured  party  had  a  direcla  actio
againat  him  ;  and  if  he  came  into  the  power  of
anolhei  penon,  Ihnt  other  penon  waa  liable  te  the
action.  If  a  puterbmiliai  coiumlUed  a  Noxa,  and
waa  adopted  (adrogated),  the  actio  which  WSI
originally  againat  him  {dinda),  became  an  act!
againit  the  adopting  penon.  A  palerlamiltaa
matter  could  hare  no  nclion  a^inat  a  ion  or  abve
in  reipect  of  a  Nora  done  to  himaelf,  the  ground
of  which  waa  that  no  obligatjo  cnnld  be  contracted
between  euch  partiea  ;  and  aa  the  fonndatit
obligatio  waa  wanting  in  aucb  caae,  it  followed  that
there  oould  be  no  acdon  againat  auch  urn  or  alave,
if  he  became  Eui  jnria,  nor  againit  another  penon
into  whcae  power  he  might  come.  If  another  per-
aon'a  ikre  or  aon  committed  Noia,  and  then  came
into  the  power  of  the  injured  penon,  it  waa  a  quci-
tion  between  the  two  ichooli  whether  the  rigbt  of
action  waa  eitingniahed,  oi  only  tuapeadei'
to  reriie  in  case  the  offending  party  waa  i
fiora  the  power  of  the  injured  penon.
opinion  of  the  Procnliani,  which  waa  in  fkvour  of
the  fluapenaion  only,  appean  more  coniifltent  with
the  principle*  on  which  thia  right  of  action  wii
fonnded.

The  mode  of  the  "  noiae  dedltio  "  wai  by  man-
dpatio.  The  Proeuliani  contended  that  three  man-
rapationea  were  required  by  the  Law  of  the  Twelre
~  " '"  .Tio]  i  but  the  Sabiniani  om-


uDtaiy  mandpatiraa,  ai


If  the  fatha  ot  owner  made  no  defeoce  to  a
noialia  actio,  the  o&Dder  waa  giTen  np  by  a  d«-
cne  of  the  praetor  to  the  injnied  penon,  and  thai
became  hiapnelorian  pn«rty(iaDiiiui).  Ifiere-
nl  alBTca  committed  then,  Ue  Edict  requind  the

maater  to  pay  only  the  amount  of  i*~~ '''  '-

would  be  {layable.  In  am  ■  aingli
canidtlad  the  tkaft


NUMMUS.

JnMinian  aboliahed  the  noxae  daCa  in  the  caa*
of  children  ;  obaerring  that  it  appeared  liom  the
andent  juriita,  that  thoe  mi^t  be  an  action
againat  a  iihua&miliaa  in  reapect  of  hia  own  delicti

Aa  te  dain^e  done  by  an  *"■"*■'.  aec  Pavtb-

(Oaiua,  ir.  75-.79;  IiutU.  4,  tit  8 ;  Dig;  9.
tit  i.)  [a.  L.]

NUDIPEDAXIA. fC*Lc«c*,  p.  231,  a.]

NUDUS  (-mirii).  Thne  wo^  beaidei  de-
noting ahaolnte  nakedneaa,  which  waa  to  be  Afaft-
Wxom  Hal  ix'f"*  (compare  Moadmi,  i».  98),
were  applied  to  any  one  who,  being  without  am
Amictuo,  wore  only  hia  tonic  or  indntoa.  (Aria-
toph.  Scdtt.  409  ;  John  xd.  7.)  In  thii  atate  of
nudity,  the  ancienta  performed  the  opeiMioni  of
ploughing.  Bowing,  and  reaping.  (Hei.  Op.  d  Oiit,
"I  ;  Procln.  aJloc;  Virg.  0^10.5.  i.  299  ;  Senina

(«.,-Aelian,l'.ff.-ri.ll,iiii.27i  Matt  air.

.)  Thua  Cincinnatm  waa  found  naked  at  the
plough  when  he  wai  oiled  to  be dictator,  and

'  for  hia  toga,  that  he  might  qipear  before  tha
•enate.  (Plin.  H.  ff.  iiiiL  4  ;  Aur.  Vict  da  Vir.
/{faK.17;LiT.  iii.2G.)  The  accompuiynig  wood-
cut ii  taken  from  an  antique  gem  in  the  Florentiss
Collection,  and  ahowi  a  mi


only.  The  light  and  thin  clothii^  of  Hetaeiae,
waa  denoted  by  the  nta  of  the  aama  eutheta,
(Alhen.  liiL  24,  25.) [C0.1  Vuns,]

Thia  term  applied  to  the  wairioi  eipreaeed  tb*
abience  of  eome  part  of  hia  armour.  (Hom./iL  xxi,
50(  Ja>.Aa(./iiiJ.  Ti.2.  9  3;  OelLii.  IS;  Xen.
da  Hep.  Lae.  li.  9.)  Hence  the  light-anned  w<n
called  -fviavrwt.  [J.  Y.l

ND'HERUS,  the  name  of  ■  body  of  Una~  m
the  in "


NUM


A'RII  or  NUUULAIUI.  [Ukh-

NUMMU3  or  NUMUS,  coined  noney.—  I.
TieMifltrmiafdiHOftdtamI  Latai/ormmtf
are ipyipior,  xpAfwro,  riiuv/ia, on, peamia,

waa  called  itrytfiar  from  tpyvpat,  beouue  the
preTsiling  coinage*  in  Oneca  were  of  lilTer  [Ab-
aiNTUH],  (lo  at  a  laltf  period  we  hxn  -xfiaHr
and  ^'^■'o',  which,  howerer,  an  iddora  ued,
except  in  their  apeciSe  tenaea,)  and  osa,  bacaiue
that  of  Rome  and  Italy  waa  ot  copper  [An]  \
Xpilliica,  aimply  aa  the  rgreaentatiire  of  talue  |

which  either  meant  originally  ooWt,  and
thence,  in  an  eariy  age,  vobuUa  propa^r  ia  jeMn^
or,  perhapa,  viet  vena' ;  and  WfUir^  (ae.  ifyi-

*  There  ii  no  probability  whaterer  in  the  other
aara  giren  for  the  origin  of  the  wvd,  namely,
cauie  the  cariy  eouu  had  the  imig*  of  wtlls
Uanped  upon  them.  (See  Ata,)^


pmr),  trcm  pifiM,  bicaiiH  il  wu  ■  nedhmi  of  «■
chai^  (Mablkhed  by  eoMan  and  law,  amvii  (dm
(DoBiinh.  adt.  nmoer.  p.  80S ;  Ariitoph.  A'liA.
Ufi  ;  AiMtot.  SA.  T.  8). Thtte  hU  tarma,  ««-


hngmga  throogh^flGnekaof  SicQ^aadKnithani
Italy,  who  tmliiii  tbe  wixd  ti/ui  (ot,  u  it  ii
■bo  wriltBi,  mfifiM),  not  onlr  to  avmej  in  goKral,
bat  tpadEaUj  to  tha  chief  ailTd  coin  of  their
tfwtem  ;  and  tbiu,  in  ^f^",  the  word  ia  used  both
in  tha  ipeciGe  aenae,  u  eqninlait  to  imUiHn
[SwriKTim],  and  in  the  ganatic  mtaning  of  an?
•art  of  moDeT.  (Vano,  L.L.  y.  37.  g  173,  ed.
nailer ;  PolVnz,  ii.  79  ;  MUUer,  Minak  to),  i.
p.  SIS  :  Btlckh,  MeiTDL  UlenmiA.  p.  310  ;  Eckhel,
/W^DiL  GaMniL  c  I  ;  nod  tLe  Qmk  and  Latin
LencMM.)  Some  writen  gin  ths  ridicoloiu  deri-
imtwn  nl  wwaua  from  Nmna,  who,  they  ny,  fint
Boined  monej :  hen  the  proceM  hu  been,  fint,  to
bncj  tha  coDCMtion  of  (he  vocda,  md  then  to
iuTOit  the  fact  to  acanmt  f«  it.  (Snid.  a.  ti.  'Air-
rifM  ]  iHd.  Orig.  ztL  17.) Tha


le  of  Jonn,  in


-Aiiatotla  {PoUL
^_tutr  icol  ripas  t^i  oa-
Aoyift,  and  tiact*  iU  inTsntion  to  tha  eul;  ielt
neeeaaitr  of  a  oommon  medium  of  aiEhonge,  to
obviate  Ihs  iDconTenimiea  of  barter.  At  flnl,  he
1^  ua,  it  cmniatBd  of  mawM  of  matal  and  otbei
(cnTeniait  nibitance,  datannined  b;  aiie  and
weif[fat,  and,  laitlf,  with  ma^  atamped  upon
tbtm,  to  aare  the  tnwble  id  alwayi  WMshmg  tbem.
It  ii  uimeLtmiy  to  quote  odter  antliaitiaa  in  cm-
fiisMtion  of  tbia  Mstement,  (Eckhal,  iVoby.  c  2.)
The  thinga  which  an  eaaential  to  money  an  tbe
mabriid  and  the  itni^ — the  hnoa  giring  it  the
nali^  of  nlue,  tbe  Utter  ita  auniaDoe.  In  the
miT  itnte  of  conunarea,  deacribed  in  the  Ho-
meric poemi  and  other  andent  woika,  wlum  the
tnnaler  of  comraoditiea  vai  effected  b;  meani  of
qnnntitifa  of  nnatampcd  gold,  lilver,  or  eopper,
vbich  were  determined  b;  weight,  maug,  pro-
perly If— fci^i  did  not  exiiL  On  the  other  hand,
a  mse  atamp,  on  a  material  of  little  inlrinaic  valne,
don  not  make il  money,  bnt  a  moe  token  of

ntely  called  money.  Thii  aott  of  to-called  money
wal  amietimea,  thongfa  nraly,  employed  by  tJw
■ncienta,and  llM  eludy  t^  the  barbanui  natiena  ;
the  cinUaad  atataa  pcefcned  the  aobtsfuge  of  d«-
baaiiw  Ihair  coinua  la  any  attonpt  to  introdnca
the  eboMDt  of  cre£t  BTowedly  into  iheir  monetery
^atem.  Thn  bad  nothii^  like  our  paptt  mooay
ar  billa  of  exchange.

IlL  MattriaU  of  amomt  Jlfowy.  — Tbe  coic
ditiona  which  any  malerial  naed  fi^  money  moat
tf  nuawil/  anawer  are  abTionaly  the  following :
—  it  nmat  exiat  in  nfflcient  abimdance  ;  it  mmt
be  of  intriuic,  that  ia,  uuiferaally  acknowledged
Talm^  and,  oi  nearly  ■■  poaubla,  of  nniibrm  value  ;
it  mnit  be  capable  of  letiating  war  and  coimion  ;
it  m>ut  be  portable,  nailj  diiiaihle,  and  not  diffi-
cult to  wo^  into  thoae  nnc  and  to  mark  with
tkoae  itampa,  which  determine  and  certify  ita
entity  and  quality.  Theae  conditiona  are  beat
""  I by  the  mctali  gold,  iilrer,  and


quantity  i
ibiaUed l


which  therefore  have  formed,  either


■eparately  or
I  nuteriafa  of


nearly  eyery  iyatem  of  money  whie
iated.  The  biitory  of  Ifaeir  naa  by  the  Gieeka
and  Romani  will  be  Dotioed  preienlly  ;  bi^  it  ia
oeceaary  firat  to  ht  a  few  wordi  reipecting  aoma
other  mbataacea,  which  were  annently  enjoyed
tor  mmey.

/nw  waa  naed  by  the  Lacsdaononiana  and  By-
•antiaea,  probably  on  acconnt  of  tbe  abondanca  of
the  metu  in  Laeonia  and  on  tha  ahcraa  of  the
"  '  (Pollu  Til  106  ;  beudea  ni
■  ■ '  '  ■  itotle,  who  in  Ihi
iron  and  iIItk
f  money,  Ie11inae1ienhen(0«an.
iL  2)  tbM  the  people  of  Claiomenae  hajl  inn
money  ;  and  there  are  lome  obacnre  teatimoniea
reapecling  the  me  of  iron  money  in  the  eailittt
age  of  Rjnne  (Snid.  t. «.  'Aaaitia).  Not  a  ipeci-
men  of  iron  money  ti  now  extant,  a  &ot  eaiily  ac-
counted for  by  the  liability  of  the  metal  to  ntat.
{Eckhel,  rroAp.  6.)

71a  waa  coined  by  Dionynni  at  Syraenaa
(ArittoL  Otam.  iL  2  ;  Pollux,  ix.  79) ;  bnt  tbia
il  the  only  notice  of  lacb  money,  exe^  a  law  in
the  Digeat,  whieh  refiaa  merely  to  apmiotu  coina.
(iS.  tfL  10.)  No  apednena  an  extanL  (Sea
fbidwr,  Eckhel,  I  e.)

Ltadm  money  ia  not  nnfrequenlly  mentioned  by
the  poeta,  and  not  a  few  coina  or  medali  of  it  an
preeerred  ;  bnt  it  ia  doubtful  whether  they  wera
tme  mon^. (Eckhel,  La.)

Laalier,  taiod,  and  litlU  are  alao  nfened  to  aa
matariala  of  money  ;  bat  eoeh  moniea  could  only
bava  bean  tokena,  not  tme  coin.  Leather  money
ia  aaid  to  ha>e  been  naed  by  tha  (^anhaginianiy
Spartana, and  Romana.  (Eckbel, £e.)


the  pandnxical  aaMTtion  of  Sebulian  Eriiio,  that
all  toe  ancient  coina  which  bare  come  down  to  na
are  mere  madali,  and  wen  never  cnirent  money.
(SeeEdchel,fttiijj.c,5.)  But  the  quMlion  ia  very
important,  whether  any  among  them  were  mere
medala,  and  if  eo,  how  Uey  an  to  be  diilinguiihed
from  the  coina  whieh  wen  naed  at  money.  Tbia
queation  ii  fully  diacuaud  by  Eckhel  {L  c),  wha
laya  down  the  following  aa  tbe  chief  criteria  foi
dutinguitbing  between  them.

When  we  find  a  continnona  aeriaa  of  coina,
having  the  larae,  or  nearly  the  nme  weight,  atanif^
and  B^la  of  workmauahip  (allowing  for  tbe  declina
or  improvement  of  the  art)  ;  or  when  we  find  a  mul-
titude ofapecimenaoftheaafflaanna,>ndtbatU>>
in  difiiuBit  plaeea ;  wban  tha  alamp  upon  a  coin
expnaaea  ita  weight  or  ita  denominntion  ;  in  thcaa
caaea  then  mi  be  no  doubt  that  ilte  ecuna,
if  ganoine,  wan  nol  money.  Theae  icata  on
anawerad  by  tha  genanl  iniea  of  Roman  eamr,
ailvet,  and  gold  eoini ;  by  mori  of  thoaa  of  tha
Oreek  ilatea  ;  by  the  ^Id  and  lilver  coina  of
Philip,  Aleinnder,  and  hia  anoceaaon  ;  nod  In  tbe
cuisphori  of  fffoconaolar  Aaia,  On  the  otfaef  hand,
thoaa  appear  to  be  mcdaia,  and  not  coba,  whi^
very  much  exceed  in  sixe  the  oidinory  coina,  inch
aa  the  celebrated  and  beantifol  gsld  medali  of
LyiimacboA,  many  gold  medala  of  tlie  Roman
Empire,  and  aomo  lilver  medala  which  occur  only
onder  the  Ul«  emperora.  The  qnaation  of  tha
copper  or  bronse  medala  ii  more  d^edt  to  dadda
by  tbia  teat,  on  nccomit  of  die  iMif*  aiu  of  tha


HUHUUS.


p.  IT.) Anotlm  tr»t  I


... _  il  ii  hi  b«iii>  of

or  nn  gUbontt  dariea


■bip. RaiHcting  iIm  oceanmi  on  which  medali
appear  to  UTe  btan  itnick,  tee  EAhd,  Lcpf.

V.  TaU  t^  Aa  gmmimiua  rf  amamt  Onu.  —
Aj  thii  worit  u  intended  for  the  geturaJ  rlaMJrfil
■tndent,  ud  makei  m  pnteuiai  to  be  a  perfeetlr
adequte  gaids  ibr  the  niedil  etadjr  of  each  bnnu
of  antiqmtr,  aad  ai  thk  bntnch  of  nuoiisinatic
•cience,  aluottgh  of  iKimuj  importaiice  for  oae
who  wiihet  lo  entmina  the  maeot  aasM  them-
letrea,  i)  jret  one  of  die  moat  intrieate,  and  i>  com-
puKtiTFly  onimpiataut  for  the  men  explmitHni  of
the  Grnek  and  Roman  wiittti,  it  mnit  tnffisa  te
Tefer  to  tha  chief  writo^  quoted  at  tha  and  of  Ihii
article,  irith  only  the  oba«mti<n  that  the  abun-
dance of  andent  &ln  mone;  aad  modan  iapA
Mini  ii  one  chief  caaie  of  the  gratt  diScnltiea  of
the  iiibfect.

\1.  HUory  a/ emk  imd  Somcm  Oomt.~It
hai  alnadj  bMi  ohaemd  that  the  geneial  defini-
tion of  monejr  ia  a  certain  weight  of  metal  of  a
certain  tbIoo,  that  ia,  of  a  certain  fineioa ;  the
weight  and  the  finenen  being  atteeted  hj  ■  Mamp
upon  the  ccun.  The  latter  conditiDn  wai  not  in-
tndaced  nn^  the  fint  had  loi^  been  arted  apon  ;
and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  manir  ocouiont
on  which  the  atuop  upou  a  coin  ii  altogether  n^
leded,  and  it  paiaea  nunnt  merelj  aco«ding  to  ita
real  weight  and  fineneu  :  one  intenating  enrnple
of  thii  hae  been  noticed  under  Aa,  p.  UO.  The
primitiTe  itage  in  the  inrention  of  money  i>  i1liu-
Iralod  br  Tariosj  [■■iimn  in  the  hiatorieal  hooka
of  the  Old  TeMament,  and  in  Htmer.  Corned
mooej  i*  neTor  mica  menUoned  m  the  Homeric
poema ;  bnl  the  iuittument  of  all  the  traffic  re-
fcired  to  in  than  ia  either  iinipie  barter,  or  qoan-
titiea  of  gold,  ailrer,  end  (Tfiper.  Qold  alcme  ia
nteired  to  ai  ineaaured  b;  a  definite  weight,  the
riXarmr,  which  in  Homer  appean  to  be  qnile  a
difieiBit  quantitr  from  tha  common  laltiU  of  the
hiatorieal  period.  Thia  word  waa  wiginilly  a
generic  term  icH-  ittigii,  and  aignified  a  pair  of


The  ai


of  the


X  than  the

ia,  nndoiibtedlj,  of  Oriental  origin,  and  probably
meana  anything  divided,  aj^iirtiaaed,  or  deter-
mined, akm  to  the  Hebrew  ai«ii,  and  to  /wiiafuu,
■Kaure,  iwr<ri.  &c. Theae  worda  ceocnr  with  ail
the  other  mfbnnatian  we  hare  npoo
and  with  the  very  necearity  of  iho  i
that  nmjr  9^EM  ofmamji  iiJomJtd  t^xmaprt-
vtDW^  miilBig  tjUtm  of  uat^ It  it,  howe*  "
of  the  ntmoit  importance  lo  obeent,  that  a  wi
denoting  a  cerAin  weight  doea  not,  of  necaaai
when  aiifiied  lo  money,  inditate  a  quan^ty
metal  of  the  nme  weight. For,  fint,  the  word
loisit  or  paatd  may  b*  applied
mabt  of  gold,  lilver,  or  co{fMr,  although,  uwa^
ita  meanuig  murt  be  naliicted  to  one  o'  **■■—
metala :  aaeondly,  tbcM  m^  ha,  in  the  fe


ng  of  the  te


hara  beannbjeded,  deitroyi
terma  of  woght,  whieh  are
iptdied  to  tha  emni.  Examplea  of  the  fint
canaa  of  diaagraonent  occnr  of  mcMuty  in  eray
monetary  lyiteii  which  ecntaina  men  than  ona
metal ;  of  tha  Hoood,  an  intoeatJiig  illuatntioai
will  be  fbnnd  in  the  Attic  wnghta  and  mooc7 ;
and  of  tbe  thiid,  we  barn  a  atriking  inatance  in
the  pn^reanie  diminnticn  of  the  Roman  aa.  [Ah.]
Still,  howeter,  where  we  hare  no  hinoiical  r  '


weight  and  money,  and  to  expreaa  it  m  ti
our  own,  wonid  be  hopelaaa,  aa  there  woald  be  no
Imaia  wbatarer  lor  the  innaligaticei.  Unleaa  ihea
'  iw  anything  to  the  crntniy,  we  aaaurae  a
of  mooey  to  mean  a  tofanCi  toaipilf  of  tha
which  waa  chiefly  need  bs  mcKiey,  namely,
amoi^  the  Oieaka.  ailia  ;  and,  conTcnely,  that  tha
weight  of  the  ultet  coina,  which  make  iqi  the
Talne  of  a  talent,  girea  na  the  amoont  of  (olnic-

In  Oder  that  what  followa  may  be  better  OD-

itood,  we  give  bere  the  chief  dencrainalioDa  of

ighl  and  money  anoug  the  Oic^i  and  Komana.

Among  all  the  Orecki,  the  nitit  waa  the  iaJnat,

which  waa  thni  divided  (corap.  Pohduu  and  ths

tablea):-

"  Talent*  ctntaiDed SO  Mime.*
Hina  „  100  Dnchnae.

Drachma „  6  Oboli

of  the  deci^


Among  tha  Rumani,  tha  unit  of  wdght  and
money  waa  tbe  Aa  or  LlBRi,  which  waa  diiida^
on  tiM  dnodednnl  ayatam,  ita  twelfth  part  being
colled  waa,  and  the  intomediate  pvta  being
named  acooiding  to  the  nnmbv  of  leHiaa  they  coo-
tained,  \a  acoucding  to  the  fractional  part  (rf  tba
it  wUch  each  waa.  In  lome  paita  of  Italy,  bow
iTtr,  (namely.  Central  Italy,  north  of  the  Apen-
ninee,)  the  dedmal  diiiuao  of  Uta  ^i  wa  nied,
the  imaa  being  ita  tenth  part,  (Coop.  Aa,  Poir-
□■mi,  Uncu,  and  the  Tablea.)

i.HiMory<^  Omi  Mom^.  —  The  inTentin  of
coined  money  among  the  Greeki  ia  aaeribed  by
tradition  to  two  aonroea,  not  to  mention  the  meidj
mythicalatiricaafitaoriBin  (Pollai,!x.  83X  Ac-
cording to  one  aeonnl,  ue  Lydiana  wan  Ae  firat
of  mankind  who  coined  and  nied  gold  and  Bin*
moo<7  (Herod.  L  94  ;  Xeooph.  op.  PcO.  L  a).
The  other  and  preiailing  traditwa  ia,  Aat  Pbeidon,
king  of  Algoa,  firtt  corned  both  csi^e*  aad  nlm
money  at  A^ina,  and  fint  aitabliabed  K  ^ateaa  of
weighta  and  meaanrea.  (Herod.  tI  137 ;  Ei^.
i^.Slni.  Tiii  p.  376;  Ad.  F.B.  xU.  10 ;  PoU.
J.  0. 1  AtarnL  Par.  <S,  i6  ;  Orote,  fiuioiy  ^Otho^
ToL  iL  p.  434 :  the  date  of  Pheidoo,  according  tn
the  Parian  Marble,  ia  n.c.  SM  ;  bat  QjiM,  OiMiB,
Bdckb,  and  Hlilltt  all  acne  in  pkcing  h»  abntt
the  middle  of  the  a^th  ecotuy,  betwea  7U
01  770  and  744  ■>  730,  n.  c ;  aee  Onitp,  L  e.
p.  419.)  Tbtae  traditicoi  an  not  altwdW  in-
amnatoit ;  only  wa  nrart  ondentid  the  fstBier
aa  implying  nMbing  nun  than  that  a  i]T»Ma  ti
iLOOtj  eiinad  in  Asa  Minor  in  wy  caul  j  tiaaa  ;

*  Tbeaa  weia  ant  ooned,  bat  wm«  BMoiaa  «•


NUMMDS.
wliKb  wti  idqited  by  thi  Ionian  cnloniiti,  tnra
wbom  it  pUBCd  oTtr  into  tha  Imiio  StnM  of
Oneee  Proper,  aqietdally  AtfastM,  imder  the  mune
of  the  Enbaie  •T*t<iii  j  a  mme  which  it  pmbabljr
obtained  from  mi  eulj  coinue  in  the  iihnd  of
SaboeB,  wliich  mt  lich  in  ea^a  Mill  mlTct  otet.*
Tha  oth«  tndidon,  in  *U  pnlMtiili^,  ipiMaaa
a  hiMoriaal  bet,  eiiapi  m  to  the  riMmutuea
of  PhodoD'i  aiecMiiig  hit  oHiBgB  in  Aagimrt',
which  li  dnMrt  eatumj  mi  inraitiim  af  tha  hUr
mitei,  mad*  lot  tha  nnpon  of  axi^aiiifng  tho
name  Aegimiait,  applied  to  the  afftsm  whieh  m*
eatebliifaed  by  Pheidon  ud  adapted  hj  mott  of
tba  Darian  etatcL Tbii  ayMen,  •■  mil  aa  tha


tial  with  tba  Babj'loiiiaD  j  and,  UHnorei',  both
mtenu  eiiated  together  in  A^  Minor,  where
Ue  larger  (Babjlonim)  talent  wai  uaed  for
and  the  niallei  (Eubo'tc)  fcr  gcjd.  Thui  il  ap-
pear! that  theee  two  ijitona  of  weight  Mid  nKSej,
both  d«JT»d  niginail;  from  the  CuldBeana,  ma;
be  diMingniihed  ai  the  taryer  Batflomaii  or  Afffiu
or  (gently,  but  lea  preperl;}  JigimeLBi,  and
the  Mmallir  Batflimim  or  L^diat  nr  lomim  or  £■-
Urh  I*  bargir  AOie.  Tha  lait  term  ii  need  tc
diitingniah  the  old  Attic  icale,  which  wai  iden-
tical with  the  Enbolc,  &Hn  the  icalB  which  Solon
introduced,  and  which  wai  ccmudetably  leai  ;  the
latter  alone  wai  need  for  money,  altfaongh  the
former  ecotiniied  in  uie  u  a  ecale  of  *«ght  nnder
the  name  of  the  sonnxnial  tbmdiad.  The  lalenta
of  the  three  jytlenu  of  money,  whieh  hare  been
mentioned,  are  known  reapectirely  m  the .
the  BiAdia,  and  the  AUie  or  Stiaaam,  Their
uerical  latioe  to  one  another  wen  u  follawi


NUMMU3.  Bit

older  emnagea,  and  tha  tetndrachm  m  the  later.
Bidrachmi  are  the  pretailing  coin  among  the  oi-
tant  ipanmof  of  Aeginetan  money :  telndnchma
among  the  Attie.  The  didrachm,  frnm  iti  [Hera-
loice  in  the  ouly  coinage^  obtained  tha  nma  of
naut  <o-r«r*p,  i  a.  jfaadonO,  which  waa  atlet-
wwda  toad  apedficaUy  ai  the  name  of  tha  chief
g<rid  ttba,  bacanie  thay  wen  of  tha  Mme  weight
a*  tba  dfer  didmehm  [Statu]. Then  itm


(Reifiectin;  tha  detail*  of  thcaa  mattan  amp.
P0HDU14).


(l->/


thoagh,  according  to  the  trmditim,  Pheidon  coined
copper  aa  well  aa  nlrer,  and  altboogh  we  bare  in-
dicatjcni  of  a  capper  entien^  amoig  the  Otsek
atataa  of  SieOy  and  Uagna  Oraeeta,  which  fid-
lowed  the  Aeginetan  Mandard,  yet  in  Greece
Proper  copper  nunur  waa  altogether  eio^itioBaL
(CB4unr&)  Tba  ordinaiy  ennene;  in  all  the
■tate*  wa*  lilnr,  the  pdnciFal  coiia  being  the
rfniefcna,and  iti  donhle  <IlS^Xfai'),ai>d  quadnmla
{TrtfOficjiyat\  the  didnehm  praniliiig  in  Uie


*  Mr.  Oiote')  deiintion  of  the  namet  Entdie
and  AegtnAtHj  ^from  the  people  whoee  commercial
activity  tended  to  make  me  Jcale*  moet  geoeially
known  — in  the  one  caac,  the  Aeg'^'l^'x  '•  i"  the
other  laae,  the  inhabjtanta  of  Chaleia  and  Eretria  "
(toL  iL  p.  432}  ~  ia  at  leait  ai  prohabU  aa  that
•oggeeted  in  the  text.

f  The  italeraent  (£1^  Mag.  «.  v.  EMiAlr
r6tuaita)  that  Pheidon'i  coinan  vai  ttmck  in  a
flaet  ^ Argot  tailed  EiAota,  obTioui|y  anae  fton
a  cQOtuion,  in  the  head  of  the  oompuer,  between
■lie  Aeginetan  and  Enbo'le  iCandardi ;  and  then,
aAa-  the  frequent  faihion  of  the  grammariana,  at-
tempting to  tet  right  a  blnnder  by  a  wiUnl  mii-
MatancDt,  he  ionoled  tha  Aigolic  Uuboefc


temdiaehnu  of  nodoobted  genoinencM  1  many  of
tbe  higbert  antiqni^.  The  eeriieet  of  theH  coiu
are  nrj  thidc,  and  of  nida  woikmHuhip :  ther
are  Mamped  with  the  figure  of  a  turtle,  the  lenna
hating  no  deriee,  hot  only  an  indented  noA,  aa  if
the  coin,  at  tha  time  of  itrikino,  had  been  laid
apon  a  poncheoit,  the  impreea  ofwhkh  hai  hem
tranaferred  to  it  by  the  weight  of  tha  blow.  In
the  later  coina  of  Aegtna,  tba  turtle  ii  changed  into
a  tortoiee,  and  the  other  aide  bean  a  derioe.  (See
the  woodenl  on  p.  439.)

In  caknlating  the  weight  of  tbe  Aeginetan  etHna,
we  are  at  once  met  with  one  of  tbe  great  Hnrcea
of  miotrtainly  in  nnmiamatice,  namely,  the  doubt
whether  tha  oiiiting  coma  of  any  ayitem  an  of
full  weight,  which  doubt,  in  tha  mat  majority  of
caiet,  experience  conroita  into  the  certainty  that
they  are  not  The  chief  eiceptjon  to  the  general
debaaement  of  ancient  money  waa  the  nlyer  money
of  Athena,  which,  at  leatt  until  aome  time  alter
the  Feloponneiian  War,  wai  proTBrbial  for  it*  full
we^ht  and  pnrity.  One  method,  tberelbte,  n  to
take  the  beat  Attic  coina  aa  the  alandud  of  coia-
pulatian,  not  only  for  the  Attie  lyalem,  but  alio
for  any  other  lyitem  which  bore  a  known  deter-
mined ratio  to  tba  Attic  Now,  taking  Htuaey^
value  for  the  A«ic  drachma,  66  B  gmina  (which,
if  there  be  any  enot,  a  a  little  below  the  mark),
the  Aeginetan  drachma  ought  to  weigh  between
J 10  and  111  grains. J  I w  actual  average  weight,
however,  aa  obtained  by  Mr.  Huuey  from  the
coini  of  Aegina  and  Boeolia,  ia  only  96  giaina.
There  ia,  of  coune,  thaaltematiTeofiiaingthii  die-
crqiMicy  aa  an  aignmeatasainat  the  ratio  af  S  :  3  for
the  lyitonu  of  Awina  and  Athmi ;  and  thii  conna
Mr.  HoMCT  hai  adopted.  But  BSekh  haa  ahown
moat  ooDeliidTely  thU  thii  explanation  ia  totally
We  bare  not  apace  to  diacnia  the
length.  It  mnit  mffice  to  abaem
me  bcE  in  ancient  metrology  ia  to  ba
eatabliihed  by  teatimony,  it  ia  tha
Gut  of  thii  ratio  of  fi  ;  3  ;—  that  tha  &ct  of  die
prevmling  debaaement  of  ancient  coinagea,  by
which  the  diicrepancy  above  noticed  may  be  ex-
plained, ia  alao  one  of  the  moat  certain  £wta  in  the
whole  Bubject ;— that  coini  are  actu^y  fcund  of
the  Aeginetan  ayatent,  which  come  voy  nimrly  np
<»  the  full  theoretical  w^ht,  thnae,  namely,  of
lira  and  Bynntinni,  botii  Dorian  aattlementa,
and  thoae  of  iha  Macedonian  kii^  beftn  Alenn*
der  the  6rent-§  To  ^eae  poaiUve  aignmania  it
may  be  added,  that  Mr.  Huaey^  attempt  to  ex-
pl«n  away  tiie  alatement  of  PoUni,  that  the  Aegi-


}  BSdch,  film  a  latberhighemhiaofthe  Attie
-lachma,  givea  the  fbUowiog  theraetical  weighti
for  the  Aeginetan  coina :  the  didiacbm  224'fiS
graini,  the  drachm  112-295  gTaina,  the  olxrinf
18-716  grain*  (p.  77).

S  Theae  Hr.  Huaiey  ia  compelled  by  bii  theory


a  12  NUMMUS.

netan  talent  contunrd  10,000  Attic  dncbmse,  u
not  referring  to  the  genuine  ancient  money,  but  to
the  coina  which  paued  u  dnchnue  ncdei  the
RonHU  empire,  and  which  either  were,  or  wen
•qiud  to  densrii,  —  ii  not  onlj  muu[qiorted  bj
»ny  actual  BTidence,  bnt  ii  eaiily  prored  to  be
bUacioai.  Some  minor,  but  impMlaiit,  anrnnenli
an  mtiMbOotilf  diipoaed  of  by  Bockh.  {MrtraL
UnitnaA.  pp.  77,  folL ;  eomp.  Onrte'e  Review  in
XheOattaal  M<mim,  1844,  toL  L  pp.  10,  11  ;
Hnuer,  Awifit  Wt^Oi,  pp.31,  M.,  CI,  full)
Fir  tlia  actual  Talue  of  the  Aeginetan  lilTec
mipand  with  onn,  tee  Dbachha  and


(hT^'


ibloL
The  Aegiaetaa  lyitem  of  money  wu  adopted
tbroHghonl  the  Peloponneaui  (except  peihapt  in
Achua)  in  Boeotla,  and  Northem  Greece  geoenlly,
np  to  Theualj,  in  Macedonia,  in  Crete,  and  gene-
rally  in  the  I^irian  lettlementi  in  the  Aegean  and
on  the  Goait  of  Alia  MincH- ;  and  alio  in  the
Dorian  ■»!«  of  Italy  and  Sicily,  when,  however,
it  aiBumed  a  peculiar  form  thcngh  coming  into
connection  with  the  oatire  Italian  •jitero  (tee
below).  In  ^ypt  alto,  the  coini  of  thePtolemiei
appear  to  have  been  at  fint  confoimed  to  the
Aeginelan  eyttem  j  but  they  wen  loon  very  much
debaKd.  One  itate,  in  which  the  Aeginetau  eyitem
wa>  adopted,  demandi  epeciaJ  notice.  At  Corinth,
ai  being  a  Dorian  atau,  and  from  it)  proximity  to
Argoa,  tbere  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Aeginelan
■yatem  vai  adopted,  to  which  in  bet  lome  of  the
oldeat  eTtant  Corinthian  coina  approach  rery  near.
But  we  alao  find  a  amallet  Conuthlan  ttatcr  ot
didiacbm  of  10  Ai^elait  oboli,  wfaicb,  aeoording
to  the  Sied  ntio  of  the  Aeginetan  to  the  Eubolii:
t 13:  10)  would  be  IS  Knbo'Cc


Thit


uahnio


eqairalent  to  that  found  in  Sicily
tUrat  (3(iuUiT|W  or  SH<L\tTpoI  f^m^p).  Hence
il  would  aeem  that  the  Euboic  acole  wat  early  in-
troduced at  Corinth,  a  hct  which  might  eaiilv
have  been  anticipated  from  the  potition  and  com-
mercial aclirily  of  that  itate.  Thia  Corinthian
■taler  or  didiadun  aeemi  to  have  paaied  at  a  later
period,  at  a  depreuioo  of  1-lOth  of  ita  value,  that
u,  aa  9  A^netan  obola.  The  Attic  (Solonian)
■lale  leenu  alao  to  have  been  introduced  at  as
early  period  into  Corinth,  and  afterward*  to  have
been  uaed  then  in  prBfertDce  to  the  Aeginetan
and  Eubo'tc  Throtign  Corinth,  the  Attic  atandard
wai  introduced  into  Sicily  and  aeveial  itatea  of
Weateni  Greece,  auch  aa  Ambracia,  Anactoiium,
Leucaa,  Amphilochia,  Aetolia,  and  the  Looriana.

Rejecting  the  gold  money  of  A^ina  and  the
other  Greek  atalca,  He  Statik.

(2.)  Montg  of  ikt  EtAdio  Stimdard.~\n  A£a.
Minor,  midsr  the  Peniau  empire,  the  tribute  in

Eid  waa  paid  in  Euboic  talenti:  but  we  muat
re  underttand  weight  alone  to  be  referred  to :
for  the  weight  of  the  ciiidng  dario  ahowi  clearly
that  the  Penian  money  vaa  confanned  to  the
Babyhmian  itandard.  That  then  wen  in  aome
part!  of  Greece,  current  coina  of  the  Enbo'ic
■tuidard  of  weight,  ia  proved  by  the  very  term
EMiiIiiir  nifuir/u,  and  auch  csini  are  found  among
the  extant  money  of  the  Euboean  dtiei  and  their
colonies,  eapadally  thoaa  of  Chalda  Firet,  how.
aver,  iOt  itandatd.  may  be  obtained  theoretically
from  the  Attic  and  the  Aeginetan ;  and  in  thia
manner,  from  HoMcy'a  value  of  the  Atdc  drachma,
we  obtain  about  92  gnin  for  the  Eobolic  diachma.


HUMMUa
or,  from  Btklb*!  nlue,  rather  mora  than  S3\  (or
93-5792,  BOckh,  p.  109).  There  edit  aeveral
coma  of  Chakia  itad^  of  Rh^nm  in  Italy,  Nam
in  Sicily,  and  other  Chalcidian  citiea,  whii^  coma
quite  aa  near  to  thia  itandard  aa  could  be  expected.
(See  Bikkh,  JL  &  and  fblL)  Tho  Eubgic  gold
money  ii  lingulariy  Karca,  and  tha  few  piece*
that  exiit  miy  gire  rite  to  ~"  "'"  "'
(Bacldi,(.e:gS.)

(3.)  Mo-US  of  On.  Am  (Solamat)  Si  .  .  _.
Befon  the  time  of  Boton,  the  atandard  of  weight
uted  at  Athena  waa  tbe  Enbole ;  and  then  icOl
exiit  coina,  evidently  frcm  their  form  and  work*
manahip  among  the  moat  aneiait  we  poueu,  which
appear  to  be  didrachmi  of  the  Eubou:  acale.
Tfaeae  coini  are  itamped  with  the  fignn  of  an  ox,
which  we  know  fma  teveral  audent  wrilen  to
bare  been  the  r^ular  imprea  upon  the  oldest
Attic  coina.  iSdtoL  A.  B. L.  ad  Horn.  IL  •n.2i6  i
B^fn.  Mag.  a  v.  Imniiitri ;  PoUni,  ii.  fiO  ;  O'la-
genian.  iii.  18  ;  Hcaych.  a  m.  ftivl  M  ffMoay^
i»iieouu' )  Zenob.  li.  70  ;  Suid.  a.  e.  3oh  ^ri
■/\An-ni).  Thit  coin  waa  called  ^St,  and  ita
origin  wai  carried  back  mythically  to  the  time  of
Theteua,  who  wai  nid  to  have  6nX  coined  it,  and
to  have  itamped  it  with  the  figun  of  ao  ox,  in
alluiion  either  to  the  Majathonian  bull,  or  to  tba
Minotaur  j  reoaont  which  are  mere  goeaa-wci^'
(PlaL  IJiei.  S£.)  Thii  didischm  or  Pais  waa  Uw
chief  coin  of  the  old  Attic  inlem :  in  the  Solooiaii
■yatem  the  chief  coin  wai  the  tettadiachra  atamped
with  the  head  of  Athena  and  tbe  owl,  and  thia
alao  received  a  name  &cHn  ita  imprett,  and  mm
called  v^mif.  IPhUath.!^.  SduL  ad  Arutiijii,Av,
1106.)  The  latter  device  continued  to  be  iba
prevailing  one  throughout  tbe  whola  hiitwy  of  tba
Athenian  coinage.  (See  the  wood-cot  on  p.  438.)
Biickh  inppoiea  that  the  didiactmii  of  tlie  old
Attic  ayalem  paaaed  for  tetradrachmi  in  the  lattf
(or  Solonian)  currency.

The  politico-econiimical  hialory  of  Solon'a  alter-
ation of  the  Athenian  camney  doai  not  belong  to
the  pnient  anbject.  (SeeOrote^/fMfory^GrHas
vol  iiL  pp.  1 31,  foil.)  That  legialator  ia  known  ta
have  lowered  the  atandard  of  money  in  onl<7  to
relieTO  debton,  and  Plutarch  (Sofcn,  1£>  inftnms
ua,  on  the  tealimony  of  Andiotiaii,  that  "  Suloat
made  tbe  mina  of  100  drachmae,  which  had  fidv
meriy  contained  73."  It  ia  incndiUe  that  a  laqta
prime  number,  inch  at  73,  ihould  tare  been  niel
a>  a  multiplier  in  any  lyitem  of  weigbti ;  but  what
Plutarch  meant  to  ny  irBi,  that  Soloi  made  a  mioa
or  100  drachmae  oaf  ^  (it  Ktmi  ^aatti^  ^  tUver
which  waa  fiirmeriy  lued  for  73  diachmae.  The
value,  therefore,  of  the  Solonian  money  to  that  of
the  old  Itandard  wai  at  73  :  100.  Now  thia  waa
vaj  nearly  the  proportion  of  tbe  old  or  tammercial
weight  to  tbe  new  tilvei  we«bl,  namety,  1 00 :  1 38,
=  72U :  1 00,or,  more  eiactly.at  BOckb  hat  thown,
aa  100  :  USg^73  :  100-18  i  21.  [Ponhska.]
But  why  ahould  Sohm  have  adopted  ao  ■"■yi"  %
proportion  p  Bikjih  toggeited  m  hit  PMc  Eco-
nomy of  AOiiOU  that  it  wat  pnbablf  an  accident  [
that  Solm  intmded  to  i«duce  the  mma  one-£Hiith.
that  it,  to  make  100  drachmae  of  the  new  coinagv
equal  to  75  of  the  old,  bnt  that  by  tor '


*  Tba  ox  on  the  cmu  of  Enboea  ii  an|q»aed  tn
«  in  alluiion  to  tbe  name  of  the  ialand,  and  poa-
ibly  the  Attic  coini  may  hare  bixcowed  the  ^ypa
[OD  tiw  Goiu  of  Enboea.


of  munbctun  tin  new  oinni  mn  foniid  to  ba  ■
liule  too  light ;  inil  m  Solon'i  annias  fniniilud
IIh  MutdMil  fcr  aDwbieqnaitoiie^lbaBnQcinu

■mamit  cf  tin  ledoction,  S<Aon  WH  gnided  by  the
wiih  of  unmiUting  tha  Attic  tjilctn  to  tha  Eubolic,
wbich,  tctanllng  to  thii  naw,  would  bo  diflusnt
from  tha  ijd  AttK.  A  man  complHo  iiiTt«tig«tiaD
(tf  the  ntgect  hu,  howner,  coorinoed  that  dia-
tianulied  acholir  HuX  ha  m*  nuatafcan  in  lap-
poaiDg  the  Enbofe  itrndwd  to  ba  diitinct  btm  the
old  Attic,  and  that  lit  Inm  mUM  aflit  fmim
amonti^dibiuimmtaibiplttbg  Solum  wuimritr
to  brag  Ui  HOB  ^ItltM  into  a  timfk  dffinili  raHa,
BaM«/|>  3  ;  t  (a  d«  j4«M(ai^  wbidi  tbe  Phaidooian
inatitatigoi  had  eatablidied  tknogbont  tha  greater
part  of  Oimra.  (Fir  tha  Ibll  deiralopawDt  of  the
■i|iiiBaDt,  wo  BBcU,  JfiAvI^ruob  Vkkntttmfn,
c  II.,  and  fer  tba  dMnminationi  and  nhm  of  tbo
Attic  lilier  HKoej',  aee  Dbachiu).

It  nu  the  boaat  of  the  Athenimi  that  thor
coinage  ma  filter  than  all  other  mooej  in  OiMce,
and  Xsiophoii  ■y<  that  they  exehugod  it  with
pn£t  in  any  mu^t  (Arittoph.  Bam.  782  ;  Xen.
yieL  iiL  2)  :  then  ia,  howaTer,  a  diitiaction  ts  be
Bwde  in  thii  reqwct  between  the  Attic  coini  of
diierart  ago,  which  are  eaiily  diatinguithtd  by
tbeji  fonD  and  wotkmanthiB.  Tha  moat  andanl
BIO  TBy  thick  and  mtnnaly  rnda.  The  aeeoiid
kind,  which  appear  to  belong  to  tba  age  of  Fariclea
and  Xenopbon,  ire  ilao  of  a  thidt  form,  but  not  to
dmBfyinappcamice.  Tha  third,  whi^  behog  to
a  later  period,  an  bnad  and  thm.  Hoat  of  the
cilant  ipedniaii  an  of  Tciy  fine  ailrer.  gome
writen  bBTe  nippaaed  that  they  an  quite  Ctet
from  baier  metal ;  bnt  the  eiperinKnti  which  bare
been  made  ihow  that  the  fineit  poaKaa  a  uuall
quantity  of  alloy.  Mr.  Huaey  finmd  apon  trial
( Jinarf  Wt^  amd  Mokj,  p.  Ki),  that  the  moat
ancient  Athenian  coini  eoattuned  ^nnl  ^  of  the
weight  alloy,  the  Mcond  hind  abont  ^  and  the
more  modem  ■boBt'^;  the  lart  of  which  ii  Dearly
the  lame  alloy  aa  in  onr  own  lilTCr  coin.

Tbe  pori^  and  full  atandard  of  the  Attic  lilTor
money,  and  the  commeniil  chtncleT  of  the  people,
will  accoonl  eaaily  for  iti  wide  diSiiiian  thrnighont
the  Orecian  atatei.  It  wai  adopted  at  an  eariy
period  by  Corinth  and  her  colonie*  \  md  thai  wu
introduced  into  Kdly  and  Italy,  wboe  we  find  it,
not  aoly  in  the  coini  of  Rhegiam  and  Taiantm,  but
CTcn  in  thoae  of  Pfpuloiuai  but  in  moatrftheaa  caaea,
it  uiited  aide  by  nda  with  the  Ae^inetan  itaud-
nrd.  It  ii  alio  finod  in  the  lata  couu  rf  £nboea
■nd  of  Crete,  and  in  thoaa  of  Thaic*  and  Atan-
thai.  It  ii  probable  that  it  praniled  eiteniiTely
in  the  Ionian  iilandi  and  dtiei  of  tha  Aqan  Sea,
bot  then  are  grat  diScaltiM  connected  with  the
coin*  of  many  of  dieae  etato,  and  eome  of  them
(Chioa,  for  enmpU)  eeem  to  have  had  itindardi
altogelbet  diitinct  and  peculiar.  The  Attic  itandud
pKnikd  in  Wcatem  Orceca.  Tha  Theeailian
conlcdaacy  had,  at  a  late  period,  coini  on  Uw
Attic  Kale  ;  and  tba  money  of  Mnno  of  tbebarbi-
na  nUiaa  of  Eaatan  Europe  appeari  to  belong
te  (be  Nme  itaadatd.  It  alio  fbrned  the  haaii  of
the  later  Haeedooiaa  ooinBge,  hanng  been  adopted
by  Philip  f[>  gold  [Auboh,  9titui],  and  by
Alejonder  far  lilrar.  It  wai  followed  llkewiM
tqr  the  SelencidBe  in  Syria,  and  by  Philctaerui  in


f  other  point*  eoonacted  with


nm  ai


NUUMua.  SIS

Gred  money  in  genanl,  and  with  tha  lyitemi  of
particulBr  itatea,  which  annol  ba  compriied  within
the  limit*  of  thii  article,  bnt  which  are  fnlly  treated
itfin  the  worki  referred  to  at  tha  end  of  iL  The
delaili  of  the  minting  of  the  mooey  and  the  lawi
aflectiuf!  it  will  be  finod  nnder  Mokbta.

il /fiitofji  q^  Aoawa  mad /AiUm  MiaV^  —  Tha
earlieet  coinage  at  Roma  wi*  of  etnper,  Iti  hi*-
toiy  ha*  been  already  giren  mider  A*.

Silier  wu  not  c^ned  at  Rome  till  a.  c  3S9,  £*•
yiara  beli»e  the  flrat  Pimic  war  (Plio.  ff.  M  xziiii,
3.  i.  1 3}  ;  but  the  Roman  coinage  of  ailTer  lens
appcali  to  baia  beiD  *o  free  bom  baMr  metal  ai  tha
Mat  Atbanian  coin^*.  Unda  tha  Emperor  Oal-
liom^  the  eoJMge  wai  ta  inoch  debaied  that  it
omlained  t  lilTa  and  t  alloy.  In  the  time  of  tha
republic  tlu  impnaaiDn  on  iQTat  coini  wai  nnally,
on  the  obveiia,  the  head  of  Rome  with  a  hehnel,
tha  Dioacnri,  or  the  hnd  of  Jupiter  ;  and  oi
leyene,  carriage*  drawn  by  two  or  four  «"'
(%ae,  fBadrv"),  whence  they  were  called  nipee-
tiialy  iuirii  and  f«adr^;^  ».  tammi.  The  prin-
ipa]  ulTtr  cuna  among  tiie  T


,  , .  aa  not  of  great

Importance  fi>r  the  ordinary  daaical  itndent,  are
the  fiiller  diacuMon  of  the  eariy  lyMemi  of  the
other  Mate*  of  Italy  bendei  Roma,  and  the  deimp-
tion  of  the  coin*  tf  tha  lllw  empire.  On  the  lla-
ma nbieet,  the  reader  !*  refined  to  MBDcr^
BtnODt,  and  Abekeol  MlOiitaliem,  oo  tha  latter
loEckhd.

iii.  OngcAn  of  Ot  Omk  amd  RomaM  Sfitaat
a  iSioIy  amd  Lomr  Italj/.  —  For  the  naioni  jnit
awigned,  lome  reiy  bnaf  rsnaifci  muM  aoSca
for  thii  yui  of  the  nibject,  thoogh  it  i*  ooe  of
the  meat  intenatii^  in  tba  whole  mnge  of  nondi-
matica.  It  ii  olio,  howerer,  one  of  the  ntoit
difficult,  and  iti  fidi  diacnuion  would  nqutn  a
aefwate  woii  of  no  amall  dimeniioni.  We  find
in  Sicily  and  Lower  Italy  all  the  tbne  chief  ayi-
lem*  which  (retailed  m  Oteeee,  and  alio  the
Italian  lyitem,  not  kept  diitinct,  but  htooghl  into
connection  ;  betidea  a  lyitem  which  may  be  called
ipedfically  Sikelion,  ai  it  ii  not  bond  elae-
wbere,  and  betidea  alio  the  Carthaginian  lyitem.
Of  tha  three  lyatOBi*  imported  fiom'Qnecc,  the
AegineCan  woj  Mtomlly  brought  by  the  colo-
niiH  from  Corinth  and  Rhode*,  whio  wen  the
chief  Dorian  aettlen  in  Sicily ;  the  Eubo&  wa*
■imilarly  introduced  by  the  Chakidian  coboiati,
and  alio  iram  Corinth  ;  and  the  Attic  wai  im-
ported through  commerce,  both  directly  and  by
way  of  Connth.  The  Italian  ii  iuppmed  l^
B&kh  to  hate  bem  introduced  by  the  conunenial
ity  of  the  Etmican*  U  a  TCiy  eariy  period.


I  libra  and  m
mputant  to  obierra  that  we  have  here  B  mixture,
' only  of  diflennt  itandard*  of weight  and


Item  of  the  Greek*  commg  into  colliiion  with
tba  pnrdy  duodecimal  lyMem  of  the  Jtaliani.

In  adapting  theae  lyHemi  to  one  BDOther,  it
would  leem  that  the  pomd  of  tjie  Italian  ijileiii


8U  NUMMU3.

ilibra,  Mtjm)  Mi  idcDtiiied,  not,  u  toot  bsTC
mppoied,  with  lb«  una,  bat  with  the  ialfmma  at
tbs  Acfiiketaii  MBla  ;  utd,  oooieqneiitly,  th»t  ISO
jKimb  Tcnl  to  the  bJtml,  u  m  sre  upmal;  in-
ionoed  bj  tha  Tamanenian  iiiKriplion  ;  and  that
copper  monaf  mi  coined  io  confonnitj  with  thb
■tuidard.

PoUdi  (ii.  80—83)  n&n  to  Aiittadt^  iWi^
^  lie  /fuuroanu,  Au  Ml  Bceoimt  of  mraal  de-
nominationt  of  Siciliail  ooiu,  Mid  of  thew  ha  nwo-
tioDi  the  vifKla,  u  equl  in  nine  to  one  tialau;
the  SiE">  equal  to  two  tkald ;  the  t^oi  to  three ;
the  VlXirpsv  to  lU  ;  and  tie  fdrpn,  wUd,  u  «
oidfj-  Mt  SnixiTfiei',  he  addi,  itill  qaoting  Aiii-
totle,  if  uDrM  (n  o&rit,  tmditOit  CbmOtm  )bter.
Ub  then  proceedi  to  Mate  thai  then  wen  jduij
paingee  of  the  Attic,  at  well  u  the  Doriui,  cc-
mediui,  in  which  theie  coini  were  iltudHl  to,  and
he  qnotea  lioea  Skam  Diphiliu,  and  from  Epehar-
mm,  in  which  mantion  ii  made  of  the  Airpu,  the
illiiXtTper,  tha  IfdrrM*  (a  diminatko  of  ^is\
the  nn-^rau*,  and  the  SurfAnyo)  tririif,  at
■thw  eoiiu,  A  little  befen  thi^  he  qnotei  from
AiiMMle'iPalUjn^atAgngmtmmtiMUaUBuat,
that  (*e  Ur>  «i  tgmU  w  aUm  to  oa  A^»^»
Html.  (Compare,  to  the  Mme  aSed,  PolJu,  it.
174.  176.)

Fram  thcaa  itatenmti,  It  appeaii  that,  in  the
Siciliui  tilTer  money,  the  EufaDlic  and  Acginelaa
eialee  were  comeeted  juit  ai  we  bave  aem  that
thej  already  wei«  ia  <■»  of  tbe  intema,  from
which  the  ^cilian  money  wn  derired,  namely,  in
tbe  CDiintbiBn  didrachm  ec  alatci  of  ten  Aeginetaa


I4UHUVS.

obolt,  which  may  be  lenrded  a«  ftn^ng  dw
nar^,  or  chief  coin,  of  iLe  Sicilian  lyiteiB  aln  ;
that  then,  the  obol.  bung  identified  with  theAirfo,
wu  inbdiTidcd,  jut  like  the  Italian  poond  '


J  derired,  into  twelTe  niu  a.
{trftioi,  atr/i^M,  L  e.  i— »"«),  tack  M  whicb
olatet  (xa^JKovi ;  what  tbii  eibJait  Rally
'  r  endearoui  to  ■'
liate  parti  <f  U
.  bM  the  od'  ~
giTee  of  dfu  t»d  r^ifSt,  tb
tbon  to  be  named  from  the  muuba-  of  ouneee  tfaej
eontained,  aa  vai  deailj  tbe  eaea  with  tbe  nv-
T^7«ie*,  according  to  tha  analog;  of  which,  if  th«
idea  of  Pollux  b»d  been  right,  Ittai  and  Tpt(S>
would  have  been  ranieGtiTely  tiiymar  and  rptirf-
Kar  (like  fnaeau).  Bentley  hai  oonelnaiTel*
■hown  (onoted  by  BUckh,  p.  3S3)  that,  in  thN
the  Qieek  nammaiaDa  fi^  into  a  Tfiy
ermr,  tbnxua  net  andenrtandmg  a  lyMem
to  llat  of  tbnr  hnguga,  and  that,  in  Act,


5-12tiii  by  a  ah^le  weid),  b«t  fran  the  fiarliieil
part  of  Qtt  Um  vblch  each  of  them  wai  equal  loi,
jnit  ai  m  the  Latin  lyiMB.  Tbe  fidlowiiqi  tabl*
■howi  the  wMff  Kale,  with  the  eotn^goding
latin  namM,  and  with  the  nine*  of  tha  ooini  in
■Qrer  oboli  of  the  Afginetan  atondaid  and  in  tha


Tirr^p  ot  tt.

}-

lOXlrpn

-

IQch^

^. "*

=■

rtrpSi

=

z

1 "

-{


Jmt  aa  in  the  latin  lyitem,  n  in  the  Onoco-
Siulian,  there  leeni  to  bare  bom  ne  ooini  between
the  half  and  whole  Mrpa.  Thna,  in  the  Kcmid
pawge  quoted  by  PoU\u  from  Epichannui,  a
(am  of  mmey  ii  expreaaed  ai  emnitin;  of  Ktr/ta
ml  twdMrpsf  erciTiTp,  ildrriir  r*  jcol  nyriyiiim'.
Ercn  aa  deoominaiiona  of  weight  we  hare  <»  far
aa  we  know)  no  tenna  comapcoding  to  the  Latin
aaptewr,  het,  dodrami,  dttlaiu,  and  dtmmw.  BOdth
anppoiet  that  thii  ayitem  waa  introduced  in  Sicily
aboDt  OL  40  or  eo,  B.  c  620  cr  580.

The  worth  of  the  chief  coin  in  thii  lyitem,  the
nlesr  Bra,  or  jl^jncfoa  tilvar  obol,  mnat  eridently
be  ainimed  to  have  been,  like  the  Italian  Ura,
lit  mAm  of  a  pamd-aagU  ofcofper.

Tha  gold  money  of  thii  icala  baa  already  beoi
gffktB  of  mider  Dailuhtion.

For  fiirther  detaita  on  the  whole  ntbjed,  lee
BOckh,  Jtfefrej.  Unleriuk.  c  lii.

Beiidei  the  litm,  we  find  tha  word  imuwi
{rvSiifut)  itielf  in  Uia  Sicilian  ayatem  aa  the  name
'  .  The  Oieek  ong^  of  the
MnenI  of  the


3S.  I.  67,  ed.  MUlIer ;  Polki,  a.
.;  Sai±f.  u.riiLH.)  PollDi(J.e.)
two  paxagea  from  Spichinnni,  in  which
rd  it  lued  id  the  ipedfic  acnae,  fbr  a  parti-
entar  coin  ;  and  he  addi  the  itatonent,  from
Aiirtatla^  Foli^  of  ilia  Tbreafus,  that  nS/iiut  a
the  name  ^fdiad  by  them  to  a  ooiu,  on  whkk
Taiaa  wai  lepnaented  cairied  on  a  dalphin.  The
gnmmariini  gare  the  lahie  of  tbe  Sicilian  nan
MM  aa  I)  Attic  obola,  in  cannectiaD  with  a  amall
talent,  pecoliar  to  Sicily,  or  rathtr  two  inch  taleata,
the  older  contwniug  34  ■umu  and  the  lata  1 2.
From  a  caiefiil  ciitieiun  of  these  atatcmenti,  and

cornea  to  the  condnnon,  that  tha  — laiei  vii
nigiaally  tha  lama  aa  the  Utra,  but  that,  when
tha  Attic  atandard  came  into  ooonnca  »e,  thia
MifiH  or  Ikra  waa  diminiilwd  1^  I-lOth,  in
ordir  to  brinff  it  into  emiinnity  wiu  that  acale  ;
and  by  Ehii  diange  it  beame  -^  irf'  the  Aeginetaa
obol,  which  ia  equal  to  1^  Attic  obo]^  "  '^
fourth  part  of  an  Attic  diachma.  Thai  wa  gat
the  limple  law  bj  trbicb  tha  SioQian  Muaqr  "U


NDHUD8.
connected  vitli  the  Attic,  ntmdy,  t  nsMn'^
1  ^radim.  Hence,  elio,  ve  Me  hair  the  nws  of
tlie  Sicilimn  ijnem  came  to  be  idsntified  bjr  the
Onek  nrriten  with  the  ckaiaa,  in  iCi  ipcciGc
MOM.  The  AtticT  cialKM  wu  |  of  the  obol
{CaiLcoe]  I  benee  13  aloU  maid  make  np  H
Attie  aboil,  thu  ic  (netcniiig  the  1-1  Oth  of  depte-
cwtioti),  BO  Acginelan  ob^  or  &  fiiciliui  litre.
Tke  ■■■■■■•  of  the  Tinntinea,  nuntiaiied  in  tbe
^■OT*  pan^e  frcm  PoQuz,  nd  which  «>■  alio
and  >t  Hmtltia,  wu  ■  niuh  biser  oiiii,  end  ii
ptebablj  the  laiiie  u  the  foil-weighted  Aeginetao
diachma  (Bpsx^j)  nx*''*),  which  ame  near
•BOdgh  to  the  Attic  didrachm  to  be  identified
with  it  when  the  cnmndea  came  to  be  mired.  In
bet  the  word  ■aeiiiiai  wai  eridenlly  Bjtplied  (like
«Tar%i  in  Oieece)  to  the  chief  cnirenl  sain  in  en;
■jMcxD,  end  it  mej  tbeieibip  have  had  rerj  dif-
fcfCDt  nine*: Plwlua  aetnallj  niM  it  fi^  the

Foi  a  further  accennt  of  tbe  Sicnian  einHnu
and  oenff  talmt,  and  the  Attico-Sicilien  (fitem,
■ee  Btkkh,  oc  xxi.  nii.

JT.  On  Ht  Vaim  <f  Amdai  MoMf/  ia  fmu  of
vuraum. — When  we  endeanxit  leczpnatbeTalua
of  ancient  nnna  in  tcnm  of  our  <iwn,  we  meet  with
B  jtiULiiliijj  whid  leqmn  partienlar  con-
If  we  take  fiv  lomple,*  dncluna.


weighi  end  of  the  finBuaa  of  the  eilTcr  in  each,
we  at  once  obtain  a  deteimiuata  latio  for  the  nine
of  the  loie  to  the  other ;  and  it  might  appear
to  a  thonsbtlcM  perioa  that,  having  thn*  roond
what  fiactiona!  put  of  a  ihilling  a  djacbma  ii,  we
Might  uhelitnte  that  Tahie  for  the  dnchma,  iti
miuUple*  and  latla,  wheieiei  thn-  an  men^ned
bj  aaoent  anuioti ;  and  M  of  tbe  other  coioi ;
■nd  that  thni  we  nUKbt  eiprea  all  ancient  monej
in  tenoa  of  our  own.  Of  canne  we  v^it  da  *o  ;
but  it  doea  not  follow  that,  after  doing  io,  we
ahould  at  all  obtwn  what  we  are  aeeking,  a  (me
Uaa  of  lit  «JiH  of  c  '  '
which  an  throw  ligbt


or  nlrtav  iBd  aln  according  a»  we  eompaie  uiem
witb  tbe  true  Talue  of  the  metal  in  the  coin  and
the  lahw  at  which  the  coin  ia  cnmnt ;  onr  ihilling,
Im  enunple,  ii  ciunnt  at  rather  more  than  iti
nal  Taloa.  Another  lonice  of  diiagreement,  in
S  the  gold  and  the  ulver  coiui  with  oun,
^rent  ntioa  of  the  value  of  gold  tn  that
of  lilrer  in  ancioit  and  in  modem  tuna.  (See
AKoniTtfH,  AuBCM.)  The  only  ecnne  left  ia
to  eipreai  tbe  ralne  of  the  audent  coin*  in  tenni
of  the  fTTiMf  talmt  of  ooi  arini,  chooeiig  the
awmign  v  ihilling  u  tbe  itandard  jnat  ai  we
Bay  pre&c,  bnt  in  makiog  ue  of  the  rahiei  lo


■f  dc  do/h  ofmotji  at  eotpartd  \eilk  om-
iwfrtiTW  at  di&rent  penodl  of  ancient  hiitory.
Bach  ninati^tiimi  form  no  part  of  ool  looaent
nbjeet  The  nader  ia  lefeired  for  them  to
fiBekhl  PMieEoomaKt  ofAOait,  and  to  Jaeob'i
Hiitarr  of  m  Pneum  MMaU.  Tbe  TaUea  ^
pcaded  to  tbii  wi^  an  ocoMmcted  im  the  prin-
cqAe  ve  hare  deacribed.

'' '  ike  an  J  atkoipt  to  give  s


NUNDINAE.  815

complete  liM  eien  of  the  ilief  booka  on  Dnminna-
tica.  All  the  earlier  woiki  are  refund  to  in  eoe
or  other  of  the  few  booki  which  ire  now  proceed
to  mention  ai  tboie  which  are  moit  important  for
the  itodent  who  wiihn  to  pume  the  mbjeet  fbr-
ther:  — Eckfael,  Doctrimt  Nmtonm  felerMi,  8
vol*.  4to.,  Vmdobon.  1792—1839,  inne  of  the
vdnmea  being  Mcond  editioni ;  Raidu^  £«*iRHi
UmnTKu  Ha  Nranriat,  T  Tok  Svo.,  Lipi.  178£
— leofi  }  Worm,  dt  Foadtnm,  Nwmirm,  Mat-


Romaut  tt  Omaot.  Statg^  1831,  Svn. ;  Hunnt,
Btng  on  a»  AMiad  W^^  mi  Mom^,  OA,
1838,  Bto.  I  Btkkh,  MOndoginAt  IJittrndmiigm
iibtr  GauicUt,  JUtteQ'iiMe,  and  Mtum  dM  Atitr-
tiiau  m  Lima  ZuMaamaiiaMg),  Berlin,  1838,
8vo  >  Grated  Heview  of  BUckh^  worii,  in  the
Chaital  Mtanm,  TiJ.  L  [P.  S.]

NONCUPATIO.  [T«ST*M«i»TUK.J
NU'NDINAE  ii  innriabl;  and  joatlj  derived
by  nil  the  ancient  writan  fiom  nonai  and  dn,  N
that  it  lilsallj  aignifiei  the  ninth  day.  (Dionji.
AmL  Rum.  iL  28,  vii.  S8  t  Hacrdb.  SML  L  1 8 ;
FeMni,  i.e.ArvH(niii9i>OoiiHL)  In  ancient  Ca-
lendaria  all  tha  daji  itf  the  year,  bt^inning  with
the  fint  of  Jaonaiy,  an  divided  into  what  we  maj
0)11  weeki,  cMh  containing  coght  daja  which  an
marked  by  the  letters  A,  B,  C,  D^  E,  F,  O,  H.
Now  it  ia  admitted  n  all  bindi  that  thii  dirinoi
ii  made  to  mark  the  nandinae,  fee  every  eighth
day,  accordiiw  to  oor  roode  of  ipcaking,  wm  a
anndiiiae^  Then  wen  tbui  alwayi  Kven  ordi-
naiy  dayi  between  V


leven  ivdiniiry  dayi,  and
DCOMqoaitly  add  that  tha  mmdinae  reenmd  eva]r
ninth  day,  and  called  them  ewrfiaiiii,  aa  it  were
■vwndBHHL  A  limilBT  mode  of  itatiiig  the  unm-
ber  of  dayi  in  a  week  ii  itill  cuitomary  in  Oer-
many,  when,  in  oonunon  life,  the  eipmiion  tigkl
dofi  ii  Died  fi>r  &  week,  and  the  Fimch  and
Italian!  in  tbe  nme  manner  call  a  fortnight  }auus
,^oarv  and  qmdiatpono.

The  nomber  of  nandinae  in  the  andent  year  of
tea  monthi  wu  S3  [  and  can  wu  alwayi  taken
that  they  ihonld  net  fiJI  on  the  calcodi  ol  Jannair
not  apcn  the  nOM  of  any  month  (Hacrob.  Sat.  L
13  ;  Dion  Cau.  xL  17,  xlviii.  33),  and  in  order  to
efieet  thia,  the  SSfith  day  rf  the  lunar  year  (dia


idsnce  of  tbe  mmdinae  with  tbe
primae  talendae  «  the  noaec,  Maerobina  myi
that  it  wu  generally  believed  that  if  the  mmdinae
fell  upon  ue  gxiniaa  ealendae,  the  whole  year
would  be  ngnaliied  by  miifcrtiuiei ;  the  nonce
wen  nnded  became  the  birthday  of  king  Serviu
Tulliiu  wai  cdebiBled  on  tbe  nonea  of  every
mmth,  u  it  WW  known  that  he  wu  bom  on  the
nonu  of  loine  month,  though  the  month  itnlf
wu  not known. Now,  ai on  the nundincs.

It

Rome  on  the  nonei  might  _.

dan^  the  peace  of  the  lepablic.  Theae  reaaou
are  mdaed  very  imMtitfaftfrrr,  u  Oottling  {Oetek.
der  aSm.  StaaUv.  p.  IBS)  hu  ihowu,  and  it  ii
more  probaUe  that  the  calendi  of  January  were  Ul
iniled  to  be  nnndinae,  became  thii  day  wu  gaie-
rally  ipent  by  evny  father  in  the  boeom  u  hii
own  family,  and  that  the  nonea  were  avoided,  be-
came, u  Ovid  {FoAliSl  mjt,Nimanm  Mda


816  NUNDINAE.

dm  eariL  But  lE  the  time  when  tiic  Juliso  i
dac  wu  mtroduceil,  Iheie  KRiplei,  whsteTer
may  hATB  been,  wero  neglected,  and  in  h
ancient  alendaiia  the  nnadinae  fidi  on  the  Gnt  of
JuiuU7  u  well  u  on  the  nones,  (See  Onerini,
Tkiaair.  ToL  riii.  p.  7,  and  the  iirion*  uicient
Calecdaria.  Both  bcfoie  and  afttr  the  time  of
Caeei  it  vbm  •omelima  thought  OKoaaiy,  for  la-
ligioiu  leaaoni,  to  tnuuler  the  nundinae  from  Ifao
day  on  which  they  ihould  hare  iallen  to  another
one.  (Dion  Cau.  Ix.  24.)  The  uimdinae  them-
Mlrea  weie,  according  to  Plutarch  {Quaul.  Soul
p.  27S,  b),  BCred  to  Sstoin,  and,  according  to
Gianini  Licinianiu  (op.  Maeni.  Sal.  i.  IS)  the
Fliininiia  otlend  at  all  nundinae  a  lacrihoe  of  a
lam  to  Jupiter.

It  it  nneertain  to  frhem  the  uutjtntion  at  the
nnndinae  it  to  be  ucribed,  for  (ome  aay  that  it  vai
Romnlna  (DionjI.  IL  S8  ;  Tudilanni,  op.  Afaerab.
SiL  Le.y,  and  othen  that  it  wai  Serriui  Tolliui
(Canioi  Homioa,  ap.  Maarti.  L  e.),  who  initilnted
them,  while  the  nature  of  the  thingt  for  which
Ihey  were  arigioally  let  apart  Kemi  to  ahsw  that
their  initilution  wai  a*  old  *•  the  Haninlian  year
of  ten  monthi,  or  at  letut  that  they  were  inititutcd
at  the  tioio  when  the  RAman  popolation  extended
beyond  the  precincts  of  the  cin*  itiel£  For  the
nundinae  were  originally  matkEt-dayi  for  the
cauntry-frilk,  on  which  they  came  to  Kome  to  k11
the  produce  of  theii  laboor,  and  on  which  the  king
aeltled  the  legal  diipntee  amima  them.  When,
therefiire,  we  read  that  the  unniCinae  were  feiiae,
01  diea  nefuli,  and  that  no  comitia  weie  allowed
to  be  held,  we  bare  to  ondenland  thii  of  the  po-
puliu,  aod  not  of  the  plebi ;  and  while  far  tbe
populoi  the  nundinae  were  feriae,  Ihej  were  real
dayi  of  butincH  (tiiei  /aili  or  comiHaltt)  tiir  the
plebeian!,  who  on  theaa  occaiioDi  pleaded  their
cauiei  with  memberv  of  their  own  order,  and  held


public


1  (lhe<


plebeiaiu)  and  ..._
earned  their  own  order,  or  to  diactua  which  they
were  invited  by  the  leuate.  (Dionyi.  yii.  fiB  ;  Ma-
etob.ta;  Plin.  H. A^.  iviiL  B  i  Fettni,  to.  A-m-
dauu;  compare  Niebuhl,  ^Rit  o/Somt,  toI.  iL  p.
213.)  How  long  thi*  diitiuction  eiiited  Chat  the
nundinae  were  liefuti  for  tbe  patiiciani  and  &iti
for  the  plebeiana.  ia  not  quite  cfeai.  In  the  law  nf
the  TweWe  Table*  ther  appear  to  have  been  re-
(tarded  aa  bitj  ic»  both  oiden  (Oelliitt,  ix.  1.
S  49),  though,  according  to  Oraniut  Licinianua
op.  ^acRiii.  L  c),  thii  change  waa  imroduced  at  a
later  time  by  the  Lex  Kortenaia,  2S6  B.C.  Thia
innovatiou,  whenerer  it  waa  introduced,  facilitated
the  attendance  of  tbe  plebeiani  at  the  comitia  ceu-
tnriala.  In  the  anoienC  calendatia,  therefore,  the
Dondinae  and  diea  faati  coincide.  The  lubjecta
to  be  laid  before  Uie  comitia,  whether  they  were
propowla  foi  new  lawi  «i  the  appointment  of
officeia,  were  anaoBuced  to  the  people  three  nun-
dinae beforehand  (trnnmUui  dit  propaaera,  Ma-
cn>b.Le.;  Cic.  ad  Fam.  x-rl  12,  Flaiip.i.  l,pn
Domo,  16  ;  LiT.iii.  3G.)

The  nnndinae  being  tbui  at  all  timea  daya  of
btuiiieaa  for  Uie  pleheiauj  (at  firat  eicluii*ely  ioc
them,  and  afterwaida  for  tho  patriciana  aljo),  the


■honld  be
poaition  did  bot
waa  Isit,  and  if  i


1  one  day,  that  ia,  if  a  pro.
a  deciiion  in  one  day  it
1  be  biooghi  agaia  bobte


Inatead  of  —rfaw«  the  fonn
timea  tiled,  bnt  only  whoi  it  ia  preceded  by

aboie  refomd


la  which  elapiw  between


(See  the  paangea  a1

need  in  the exfow

midimm,  that  ia,  the  tL

two  nuncUnae. (Vam  i

iiL  14j.) The  word  nnndinae  ia  w

to  deaignate  a  maifcet-place  or  a  time  for  mariietii^

in  gowraL (Cic  dt  Lig.  Jar.  u.  33,  PkH^

T.  4.)  [L&]

NU-NDINUM. [NdkbinjU.]

NUNTIA1I0.  [OraRia  Non  Nomuno.]

NU'PTIAE. [UATUMaHroM.J


OBAE. [TnlBon.]

0BELISCU3  (Mehirni)  k  a  diammtin  of
OMhm  (ittX6i),  which  properly  aignifie*  a  ala>7i-
avd  lii'ig,  a  Jitaer  or  ^lit,  and  ii  the  dbok  given
lo  certain  wi>iii  of  Egyptian  Bit.»  A  delailail
detcripticm  of  inch  worki  would  be  ■— — -lii'
with  the  plan  of  thii  work,  but  iome  notice
them  i«  required  by  the  Sua  that  aoTeral  of  tl
were  tranaported  to  Rome  under  the  emperora.


I Han


WxT


.  4)  Btya  "  that  an


obelialc  ia  a  Tciy  rough  lUna  in  the  ahape  cf  a  kind
of  land-mark  or  bonnda^  atone,  rising  with  a  unalt
inclination  on  all  aidei  to  a  great  height ;  and  ia
order  that  it  may  imitate  a  aolar  ray  by  a  gradaal
diminution  d  iti  buQc.  it  teiminatt*  in  a  praloag»-
tion  of  four  focea  united  in  a  aharp  point  It  ia
Tery  canfully  amoothed.^^  Uoat  ancient  writen
consider  obeliiki  aa  emblematic  of  the  nn^  raja.
(Comp.  Plin.  H.  ff.  mvi  14.)

An  obeliik  i>  propeiiy  a  aiagle  block  of  atone,
cut  into  a  qnadtilatnal  form,  the  ndet  of  wbieh
diminiah  gradually,  but  ahnoM  imperceptibly  from
the  bate  to  the  top  of  the  (haft,  bnt  do  not  lemi~
nale  in  an  tfti  upon  the  top,  which  is  crawned
by  a  small  pyramid,  conustiog  of  four  aides  tenni-
nating  in  a  point.  The  Egjrptian  obeliak*  were
moatly  made  of  the  red  granite  of  Syena.  from
which  place  they  were  carried  to  the  different  parta
of  Egypt  Tb^  were  generally  placed  in  puia  at
the  entrants  to  a  temple,  and  occasionally  in  the
interior,  and  were  anally  corered  with  bierogty-
phiiai  inKzipUons.

Obeliska  were  firat  tianaparted  to  Home  trader
Auguitua,  who  canaed  one  to  be  tfected  in  tile
Cinma  and  another  in  tbe  Campna  Martial.  (Plin.
ihtL  U.)  The  former  waa  realored  in  158^
and  ii  called  at  preasit  the  Flaminian  obeliak.
lu  whole  height  u  about  116  feet,  and  wiihont
the  baie  about  76  leet.  The  obelisk  in  the  Campu
Uartioa  waa  set  up  bf  Aiwustniu  a  lun-diaL  It
atanda  at  ptsenl  on  the  Honte  Cittvio,  when  h
wu  placed  in  1792.  Its  whole  hugfat  ia  aboM
no  feet,  and  without  the  tan  aboat  71  feet.
Auolhei  obeliik  waibreughtto  Ifanie  by  Calinla,
and  placed  on  the  Vatican  in  the  fSniu  of  Cali-
gula. (Flin.iiETi.  IE,  xrt  76.  S3-)  Itataadn
at  inaeait  in  boat  of  SL  Pelet\  whoa  it  waa


M  itAii  in  the  at


ta


0BL10ATI0NB3
In  IEB6,  and  iti  wbda  hogbt  ii  about  l;


OBLlQATtONES.


817


u  lop  aboat  83  fwL  Bat  tba  Ivgiat  otwliik  at
Roma  ia  tbat  which  mi  aNuall;  ttaaptcted
&DII1  Hdiopolla  to  Alemidria  fy  CanatHitiiw,  aod
craTeyed  to  Rome  by  hit  aim  Conilanliiii.  who
pland  it  in  tba  Ciiena  Uaniniu.  (Amm.  Mare.
zTiL  4.)  Ilajaumut  poailion  ii  beCan  Iha  DOCth
nnties  of  the  Latenn  ebanh,  when  it  wai  ptaied
in  1S88.  Iti  whole  height  ia  about  U9  faet,  "  '
witbont  the  heaa  aboat  106  feet

Then  an  tight  otbei  obeliaki  at  Homa  bendea
dioae  nwfitioiied  above,  bat  jwne  of  them  are  of
hiatcrical  inpcctaoca. Than  an  alas  obtliiki  ~
nriooa  other  place*,  aa  at  ConatantiKi^,  Arii
Flsmtca,  Catana  in  Sioly,  &c^  aoma  of  which  >
worka  of  Egyptian  art,  and  otbcfa  only  imilatiim

Then  are  two  aaull  obeliiki  in  the  Britiih
Mnaemn.  which  were  brought  by  the  Fioich  fitmi
Cairo.  The  precediiqt  brief  account  it  chiefly  taken
(ram  Loog^  ^i^pfiaii  AnHjKiliet,  toL  i  cCi  14,
15.  LoBdaa,  13dm.  1832.

OBLIOATIO'NES.  OUigatio  i«  defined  (lint.
3.  lit.  13)  to  be  "abend  of  bw  t^  which  wean
nndrr  a  neoaaity  of  nleaaing  ((sheiKiiM)  aotoa-
thinff  aeeording  to  the  law>  of  our  atate."  Ac-
Mtding  to  Panlna  (Dig.  44.  tit.  7-  a.  S)  the  aub-
atance  of  an  obligatio  duet  not  omaitt  in  thia,  that
ita  object  ia  to  nuke  any  oiipanal  thing  (corpat)
er  lerTitna  aan,  bnt  that  it  ihall  bind  another  per-
Kn  to  giTB  ng  aomMhing,  or  la  do  aomething.  or
to  aicnn  or  make  good  aomething  {ad  Amdiim
aliquU,  «I  /barnilam,  «(  pnat/mdma).  Thia
**  binding  "  ia  ■  "  lq|al  binding,"  that  ia,  the  party
who  bib  to  pofbni  whtt  he  haa  engaged  la  do,
ia  liable  to  legal  compuuen  ;  in  other  worda,  the
dnty  which  he  owaa  may  be  enforced  bj  mit  or

baa  ft  pearokry  Taiae,  or  may  be  eatinaled  in
iiMiiey  (Dig.  44,  tiL  7.  a.  9.  §  3) :  if  the  da?  ia  not
capable  of  aoch  eatimatiiin,  it  ia  not  a  du?  which
can  be  enfimed  by  legal  pcoceaa.  An  agreement
which  (annot  be  enforced  be<snae  it  ia  not  mn.
fcimable  to  the  prindpica  of  Roman  Iaw,  ia  not
Cfly  an  ol>ligatia,  bat  (till  the  Romana  gate
the  name  of  Oblintio,  whmi  it
iraa  caniormaDie  to  the  prindplea  of  ths  Jni  Ooi-
Ihnn,  and  added  the  term  Natoialia,  by  which  il
ia  opimed  to  Cinlii  and  Pnetoria  or  Honanria.
Obligatione*  CJTilea  wtie  thoaa  which  pradaced  a
right  of  acUon  acecrding  to  ihe  Joa  Cinle  ;  Pnie-
f«  thoaa  which  owed  their
D  of  the  Pnetm'.  In  tlie
ea  Obtigatiooaa  comprehend  Hono-
aa  tbe  Edida  magiatntium  he-
toD>  U  Jaa  Cirile  in  ila  wider  aanae.  [Jua.]
Tbia  ia  At  aenae  of  Cinia  wben  oppoaed  to  Na-
tBska  Obligatione*:  Ciiilel  OUigationea  hare
the  narrower  •cue  when  (Srilca,  Honenriae,
Mod  Naturaba  are  onpaaed  anwn^  one  another.
TboM  oH^lionea,  whidi  wen  Ttewcd  aa  based
on  Iha  Natmalia  Ratio,  were  pacnliariy  nmai-
dered  aa  borne  fidel ;  and  anch  obligationea  were
the  fonndalion  of  bnwa  fidei  aclionea,  of  which
tha  Roman  Law  rccognited  a  limited  nnmber,  aa
emti  et  Tcnditi  aclione*  ;  local!  el  condncti  actio  ;
TntTwljH^  iH^otiannn  geatomm,  tntelae  actiont* ;
connnodBti  actio,  and  aame  other*.  The  term
«PM<aK  ^  (Cod.  6.  liL  13]  ia  oppcatd  to  bma
fidta  ;  and  atticti  juiia  aenonea  are  onnaed  to
k^  Ud  tfTt-trr Vlawed  irith  rafrate  to


prnpedj


the  &el«  «a  whiob  Iha  law  operated  to  gire  Ob-
ligationei  a  binding  fbrce,  Obligatione*  anae  from
ConKact  and  Qnui  Connact,  and  Delict  {gia£i|l-
(Aan,cUicMH),  and  Qnaai  delict  (Inat  3.  tit  13.)
Thi*  diriaion  of  OUigationea  with  reapect  to  their
origin  wa*  u ptiBilly  newed  as  eibanitiTe;  Uioiigh
it  ifl  donbtnil  wheuier  the  Roman  jnriats  naliy
Tiewed  BTery  obligatio  aa  included  with  coe  of
theaa  fear  tUtiiions.  For  instance,  it  ia  doubtful
whether  tba  actio  ad  eihibendmn  waaconsidoed
a*  an  ofaligalia  quui  ex  contnctn,  or  an  obligatio
qnaai  ex  dalicla.  Oaiui  diTidea  Obltgatianea  into
Acs* :  ex  contnctn  and  ex  delicto  ;  bat  be  mloida
lo  comprehend  tbe  obligatiDDC*  qnaai  ex  contncln
under  those  ex  conUacln,  and  obligatione*  quaai
ex  delicto  under  thoaa  ei  delicto.  In  his  Anna
(Dig.  44.  tit  7.  •.  1)  he  diitribotea  obligBtianea  aa
10  iheii  origin  into  obligatione*  ex  contiaetn,  ex
BgurU ;  and  the  ex
pKhqtd*  the  obliga-
qnaal  ex  delicto  ;  n-
.Te  enongh  to  compt*-
Ihey  m^'be.
a*  made  in  fbnr  w«yi —
Re,  Verbis,  Litteiia,  and  Conaenso.

Aa  an  example  of  en  obligatio  Re,  Oaius  mentions
Mutnnm  [HirrDDM].  Also,  if  a  man  receiTcd
what  was  not  dns  from  a  person  who  payed  by
mistake,  tbe  ntja  had  his  remedy  for  the  nairaj
(condtclio  indebili)  jnat  a*  if  it  wen  a  caae  of
Mnlnum.  But  "  Ihn  kind  of  obligation,"  obaerrea
Gaiiu  (ill  91),  "does  not  ^pcar  to  ariie  bom
contnet,  Iwanae  be  who  pre*  with  the  ialention
of  uyntent,  nther  inlands  to  disolTs  or  put  an
end  to  (du^nktri)  a  tnuuaction  (negoliim),  than
to  eomraencs  or  to  conatitute  (Dcainitne)  a  tians-

To  the  contracts  made  Re,  then  alia  belong
CouHODATUH,  DBroBiTCK,  and  Pianua.

Tha  Obligatio  Verbia  wai  contracted  by  oral
qneation  and  aniwer  between  the  pwtiea.  The
finmofwirdamightbe:  —  Dare  Spoodea?  Spondee
(Spooden'tniilud?  Spondn.  Plant  O^  it.  3.
117.)  Dabia?  Dabo ;  Pnmittii?  PnmitU ;
^depranittis  ?  Fidcpramitto  ;  Ftdejabe*  P  Fide-
jubeo;  FaciesP  Faciam.  Tbewoida  DareSpondeaf
Spondeo,  wen  ao  peculiarly  Roman  that  Ifaeii  legal
effect  could  not  be  pieaerred,  if  their  meaning  waa
tranafen^ed  into  another  langnage :  nor  could  a
nlid  obligatio  with  a  peregrinua  be  made  by  tbe
uaeof  the  mi  Spondeo.  (Gaiua,  iii  93,  179.)
The  eridmce  otauch  an  obligatio  moat  hare  be^
the  pieaeaoe  of  witneMca.  (Cw.  pn  Rami,  Q>at  G.)

It  is  to  this  fbim  of  contaict  by  question  uid
anawer  (ea  inUmgaiiam  a  rapauumt)  tlut  O*
teims  "atipalari"  and  "atipidatio'*  itla.  Ilia
word  "itipulari  "  properly  nfera  to  bim  who  asks
the  qneation  :  n  quit  ita  dari  atipaletar ;  Peat  mor-
lem  meam  dari  ipande*  }  tel  Ita,  Coin  morietia,
aponde*  p  The  peraon  who  aakcd  the  qo^ico  WM
Stipalalai ;  he  who  answered  the  queatloa  wm
Pnaiiaor,  and  he  was  Bid  Spondere.  (Oains,  iiL
lOO,  105  ;  Dig.  4£.  tit  1.  a.  113.  £•  Ferferm
tMt|;ii(NiB>(M.) Sonatimea  the  whole  f«m  of


•  the  queation  and  tl


Reii.  Onm.  6.y

A  stifolaliD  which  eonlained  an  impossible  cmt-
toisB  waa  intalid  (tortilii). AalheStipahtiowas


elS  OBLIQATIONES.

effected  by  woidi,  it  wiu  a  neefnexj  oni«ei|iie
that  the  partis  ahould  haie  power  to  ipenk  .
heoi,  and  oa  thii  gTaanil  na  founded  the  rnli
\av  that  a  mittiu  and  a  mrdiu  could  not  be  mr
to  a  Stipnlatio. Ai  to  llie  ability  of  Pu{ulli  i
Infantet  witb  recpect  to  Obligationo,  M«  iMrui
and  Inpanb. The  StipulBloc  might  haTt  another
partj  to  the  coalnul  oa  bi>  behalf  who  wai  tailed
Adalipalator. The  Adttipnlator  had the  nme
right  of  ttcliDn  aa  the  Stimtlator,  aod  Uietefon  a
payment  in  reipect  of  the  Stipulatio  could  be  made
to  him  ai  well  ai  to  the  Stipulator ;  and  the  Stipu-
Inlor  bad  an  actio  Mandali  againit  the  Aditipolaloi
for  the  rBoovorj  of  anything  that  he  had  received.
There  were  aome  peculiariliea  in  the  AdBtipolft-
^0. The  right  of  action  did  not  paw  to  the  fieret
of  the  Adtlipulatoi, and  (he adnipulatio of  a
■laTe  far  bit  maater  bad  no  effect,  Uiough  in  all
cawi  he  could  acquire  for  hia  matter  by  ttipnlatio.
The  aame  rule  of  law  appeared  to  apply  to  him  who
wHi  In  Hancipio,  for  he  wsi  lerri  loco. If  a  ion
who  WM  in  the  power  of  hit  lather,  became  hii
Aditipnlator,  be  did  not  acqaira  any  thing  for  hii
hther,  thoogh  he  acquired  for  him  by  ilipnlatio.
Still  hii  adatipuktiD  gave  tie  loti  a  right  of  action,
provided  he  ww  re1e««ed  from  the  iather'i  power
without  a  eapiti)  deminolio,  ai  for  iniCince  by  the
iathei^  death  or  by  being inaugurated  Flameo
Bialtt. The  ame  rule  of  Law  applied  to  a  filia-


The  Obli^tio  Litciia  ii  illuitraled  by  Oaiu
(ilL  ISB)  by  the  initance  of  Nomina  tmucriptiua,
ai  when  a  cndjlor  who  hat  a  debt  due  from  a
penon  in  reipect  of  a  nle,  or  a  letting,  or  a  part-
nenhip,  enteia  it  in  hli  boalc  (mrfuu,  or  ti^alaa
apenii  tl  acaijili)  u  a  iebl  (apeatam  Hli  firt  ;
comjsre  Cic  pro  Bote  Com.  4, 5  ;  mpemn  hdiae
■oa  didt,  cwn  tabalat  neat  ndtoO-  '^l''>  ^"^  isiiti
Nomeu  Iranioripticiuni  a  re  in  pereonanj.  It  waj
called  transcriptio  a  penona  in  penonam,  when,  for
initonee,  "  I  have  entered  ai  doe  from  yco  the  debt
which  Xitiui  owei  la  me,  that  ii,  if  Titiua  baa
traniferred  or  aiiiKDed  {diitgavU)  you  to  me."

Cicero  clearly  dlude*  to  thii  Lilerarum  Obliga-
tio  in  hii  Oraticmfrro  Aoaoo  Comotdo.  He  layi
(c.£),  ipealcing  of  the  pluntiff'i  demand:  "hia
claim  ii  for  a  certain  (um  of  money  (panMtaearfu),
aud  thia  mnit  be  either  *  data '  (a  caae  of  obUgatio
re),  or  '  expenia  lata '  (the  Liteiamm  Obligntio),
or  lUpulata  fan  obligatio  Verbia)."

Some  difficulty  uuea  about  the  mode  of  con-
verting  an  obligation  of  a  different  kind  into  an
Obligatio  Literia.  The  aubject  ii  diiouMd  by
Unterholmer  {UAtr  dit  Hade  df  Cum/iir  dm
SdmnpHltr  Q.  Rotaiu,  ZEitichrift,  vol.  L  p.  348)  in
an  ingenioua  evay,  which,  however,  waa  written
before  the  pubiica^on  of  (he  MS.of  Oaiui ;  and  it
baa  noes  been  diaauaed  by  bimielf  and  by  other
writeia.  UntahoUnei  conjectured  that  a  third
party,  with  the  conaoit  of  the  debloi:  and  creditor,
■mule  the  oitiy  in  hia  own  hooka  ;  but  then  ia  no
evidence  in  aopport  of  thiaaaiumption.  Theophilu
(Ai.  tit.  \.DiLU.Oiiig.)cemtaitt  the  Litenran,
Obligatio  aa  a  Novatio  or  a  change  of  ao  obligalioa
of  one  kind  into  an  obligation  of  another  kind,
and  thia  he  aayi  was  effected  both  by  wordi  aod
writins  (^fciwri  Kol  Tp^guun).  It  waa  effected,
Pfii.nl  lag  u)  him,  by  the  oeditot  writing  id  the


OBLIQATIONBR

debtor  (ypi^ui  pliiHrru  cpii  atrrif')  to


obligatio  contnoted  by  a  letter
of  the  a«di(or  to  ^  ^btoc  and  the  debtor^  nply.
In  piseipta  then  woold  be  no  otgecliiai  to  ia
being  eantneled  by  the  dgbtof  ^  cowat  anteaed
by  a  anbKriptioD  in  the  aedimr^  booka.  Tha
LileranunObligatioof  Thsophiloaihawevaviather
aeemi  to  osreipoDd  to  the  other  kindi  of  Litei>-
nun  Obligatio  rsfcrred  to  by  Oaiua  (iii.  IM),
where  he  nya  "  thia  obUgatioo  can  be  contracteil
by  chingiapha  and  lyngrapha,  that  ii,  if  a  mac
wrilea  tint  he  owe*  a  nun  of  money  or  will  pay  it;
provided,  however,  there  be  no  atipnlatio  on  the
aame  accoont"  It  ii  not  impoaaible  that  Ouu
meaua  that  the  oeditor  might  convert  an  oblige
lion  of  another  kind  into  that  of  pecnnia  ezpeoaa
by  the  bare  entry  of  it  in  hii  book  ;  for  it  ii  no
objection  to  thi^  aa  Unterboliner  hai  it,  "that  •
unilateral  writing  on  the  part  of  the  creditor  ihoajd
have  the  effect  of  putting  another  penon  under  aA
obligatio,"  for  an  obligatio  waa  already  contraetad,
which  the  creditor  would  have  to  prove,  bqt  if  ba
could  prove  it,  the  law  gave  him  aU  the  adnotaga
of  a  creditor  for  pecnnia  certa,  if  he  had  conipUed
with  certain  (oniu.  Oaiua  (liL  137)  oettaiiilj
may  be  nndentood  aa  aiierting  that  thii  oUigatM
WSI  contracted  aimply  "eipeninm  fbendo:"  but
it  aeema  to  be  the  general  c^union  tfaat  thia  Lite-
tarmn  Obligatio  required  the  content  of  the  debtee
either  orally  in  the  pretence  of  witneaaei  or  l^
letter  {Cic  pro  Rote  Com,  B ;  VaL  Max.  viiL  Z
S  S)  i  and  tbit  ii  not  inconaiatent  with  Oaini,  €<w
though  he  taya  that  the  debtor  ia  bound  by  tbs
"  eipenanm  f^do,"  that  doe*  not  eidude  bi*
conient,  bat  metely  ahowa  what  ia  neoeuat7  in
order  lo  make  the  cooient  an  obligatio  literia.

The  Obligationea  CoUKniu  were  Emtio  and
Vendilio,  Locatio  Conductio,  Sociela*,  Mandatmn.
All  Obiigationei  by  contract  of  couna  requirod
content  ^d  the  evidence  of  conaent ;  but  '  theaa
obligationet,"  layi  Oaiua  <iii.  i3£),  "  are  aaid  ta
be  contracted  omueani,  becauie  no  peculiar  fbnn  of
wordi  or  writing  wai  iBjoired,  but  the  canaent  of
the  partiei  to  the  tniniaction  waa  ■nfficiaiL''  Ac-
coidingly  auch  tnuuBCtient  could  take  plan  b*.
tween  penona  at  ■  dinancB  from  one  another,  but
a  Yerbmmi  obliga^  reqnirad  tha  pceunce  of  tbe
partiee. The  actioni  founded  on  the**  Obli^tionea

An  Obligatio  Civilii  implie*  a  right  of  actian
agniaat  the  penon  who  owca  the  duty  (fis  a6-
l^atur),  Thii  right  of  action  (acoafniiAi)  might
be  acquired  by  any  perton  who  waa  lui  juiia.  It
might  alio  be  acquired  for  him  by  thoee  who  w«*
in  nil  FoUataa,  Manui,  and  ManciiHum ;  and  iiy
free  men  and  ilave*  whcin  a  man  poHaaied  httm
fide,  with  certam  eiceptiona. Thia  right  of  action

ight  alao  be  acquired  by  a  man  thimi^  tha  atta

a  free  man  who  wai  hii  agent,  «o  br  that  b«

could  require  the  oatiion  of  tha  obligatiD  k  ae-

An  Obligatio  waa  tenninated  (leBjtv)  in  vati-

oua  way*.  The  moat  common  way  waa  l^  pay-
{talMa)  of  wbat  waa  due.  A  man  with  tlia
nt  of  the  creditor  miriit  pay  aaMbar^  debt,
he  two  tchooli  diffisied  aa  to  tba  legal  eonaB-
E*  of  andh  payment.  The  Precnliaoi  a*  nanai
ri]«  itiictly  lo  fiindamfBlal  pnnc^laa  nik-


OBLIOATIONES.
onned  tfaat  th«  dabtarmi  (till  undo  hu  obligalia,
but  if  the  nuuej-  vu  danwiided  ol  bim  bj  the
oedltot  he  had  ■  BDod  pIib  at  doln*  dhIu  (iinT)<iD

Ab  alJigBlio  mifcht  ba  tainiiiilad  by  Aceepti-
luia.  An  DtJjgUJD  BOntiaeted  par  us  el  libnm
might  b«  deterniiiied  in  the  nme  tnj,  and  aUo
oii«*ri|mg,''sz  judiciticvua."  [Nixuh.]  Ad
abliptio  might  *Im  be  detennined  by  NarUio,
which  k  th*  chcnge  of  on  txiatiiig  dntj  {dcbilam)
into  (DOlher  obti^IiMi,  end  the  detcnoinitian  of
th«  fbcBCT  obligUiail.  (Dig.  tB.  tit.  ZDi  Nona-
Homilm  «  Dtltfaliimiim.)  Thii  ii  eiplaiaed  b;
the  fiiDawii«  inMuBC  (Ouui,  iiL  176) :  —  If  I
Mjpokle  that  Titim  ihtU  i!iTe  m<  what  ii  due
fiom  jni,  k  new  oUi^tia  ariMi  b;  the  intenot-
tko  of  m  new  pcmn.  and  the  tanntt  obligstkin  it


bj  >  (aheeqncot  ilipnlBtio,  thsugh  the  rabeeqii
■tipoUtia  muj  he  inivlid. —  If  the  stipDlalioii  wu
bun  the  lune  penon,  it  nquiied  the  addition  D
0  effect  a  NoTslia,  ai  the  addition  of  i


adding  to  or  nbtiacting  (nm  the  tinieeoDlwiifd  in
the  tenna  of  the  coreiiant.  Ae  to  the  cue  of  a
BDiidilioa,  it  wai  the  law  in  the  time  of  Qaina  that
then  wu  no  Nonlio  nntil  the  omdition  wu  ful-
filled, and  till  that  lime  the  bimer  obligatio  con-
tinned.  The  iqnnion  of  the  gnat  juriit  Serrini
Sulpdoi  II  to  the  additioo  of  a  coiditian  imma-
diatel;  efiectii^  ■  Nontio,  waa  not  law  in  the
tine  of  Oaine  {aiiojim  aa'inir).

Ad  obligatiD  wu  iln  detennined  b;  the  Litii
eonteatatia,  if  the  praceedingi  had  taken  dace  in  a
Lcgitimom  jndicium.  It  ii  ilated  geneiulj  imdec
the  article*  Lilii  conUatatio  and  Legitimnm  judi-
einni,  what  ia  the  import  of  Ihete  lermi  mpee-
tireljr.  Th«gri)pDalobligatien(priKip(ibaU^ofo)
waa  detemined  b^  the  Latit  eonteatatia,  and  the

'  ~  '~~'  '  '  waa  then  boond  (teMto-)  by  the
If  ha  waa  coadenmed,  the  Lidi
d  to  hare  aaj  e&ct,  and  ha  wu
bound  bytlujadgment(iacaaaa^adiiirii>.  It  waa
a  ceaaaqMiiioa  of  theaa  dednnaa  that  after  a  Litia
wntt  alalia  in  a  Legitimmn  Jadieiam,  a  man  could
not  bring  bia  action  on  tba  original  Kstract,  for  if
bia  dedatatioB  <r  demand  waa  Dari  mihi  oporlen,
it  waa  bad  (mniiiu).  Cm  after  the  Litii  conlenatb
the  Dari  oportera  had  eeaied.  In  the  oae  of  s
Jndicium  quod  imperio  contiDetur,  the  obligatio
existed  and  the  action  could  be  bnaught,  but  the
demand  might  be  auwered  by  n  pica  (oHcptio)
of  a  Ka  jndKala  or  in  judicinm  dedncta.  In  the
jadicia  qna*  imperio^  &c^  the  eiceptio  rei  judi  -
calaa  Ba(Tia|icodi  to  the  cnulemnttio  in  the  Legi-
tina  jodicia,  and  the  Siceptio  rei  in  judicium
dedaelae  to  the  Litii  contestatio.  (Keller,  Uebir
UHm  CemUfatim,  p.  1 1,  &&  ;  0£n>,  iiL  160.)

Obligatioma  ariilng  from  ConlrBi:t  pawed  by
■mmaal  anoceaBton  to  the  heiea.  There  were  no
■aana  of  tmnsfaring  Obligaticoiet  from  the  credi-
tor to  another  pamo,  except  by  t.  Noralio,  which
waa  rifeeted  by  the  uugnee  atipulating  with  the
debitor  with  the  conient  of  the  ereditor,  the  ofiect
ti  which  wai  to  leliaae  the  debitor  ftaca  hia  fbrniei
Obligatio  and  to  bind  him  \ij  a  new  ok,  It  thii
BDiatia  waa  not  ejected,  tba  aaaionim  ranld  only
aua  aa  the  cogoitor  or  pfocaiator  of  tba  aHognor,
■od  not  in  bia  own  name. (Gaiaa,  iL  38,  Ac)


OBLIOATIOKBa  811

Oaina  (iiL  IBS)  paaaea  to  the  oai.
■■deration  of  Obligationea  "quae  ex  deliclo  ori-
nntur ;"  and  theaa  delicti  which  are  the  foimd-
Btion  of  thoH  obiigationea,  are  Furtum,  Doha
RarTA  1st  KiirlMa,  Dahnum  and  Injcru.  All
theaa  obligBtioiua  he  conaidera  to  be  compriaed  in
one  genoa,  whereaa  the  obligationea  ex  contiaeta
are  diatribated  into  four  geneta.

The  anai^mnent  by  the  Roooo  jnriata  <^  Obli-
gatioHa  ax  ddicto  witii  Obligatio»i  ai  contiBcln,
wu  founded  do  the  dnunutauce  that  both  chuaea
of  Obligationaa  were  the  Ibnndatian  of  rigbli  agaiuit
a  dataiminate  indindnal  or  delcnninate  indin-
dnala  ;  bnt  thoe  ia  an  important  difierence  in  IJm
origin  of  the  two  righti.  The  righta  ex  contnutn
are  righta  fbonded  on  lawfil  acta ;  and  lighti  e<
delicto  aro  righta  fbanded  on  infringementi  of  other

The  Oblijptionu  qnui  ex  ointractn  are  not
enomeiBtad  by  Qaina,  but  they  are  ditcnaaed  in
the  Inititutet  of  Juitinian  (B.  tit.  27).  Tbeae
Obligationea  do  not  properly  ariae  either  bnn  con-
tiaet  or  delict,  bnt  inaamuch  u  diey  are  founded
"  '  '  delicti,  they  were  coniidend

A  nther  than  to  delict In-
qnaai  contraela,  eniunentad  m  tba
■re  ~  abaantia  Dagoliuim  gcatio  "  [Na-
Oavromtm  Actio],  the  '^tntdae  jn-


behugingto  i
ncea  of  theaa


a  thing  hu  been  bequeathed  and  giren  to  aeveial
penoni ;  and  lome  other  initan^rt

TheH  qnui  cmtracti  are  arranged  in  the  Inati-
tutca  of  Juitinian  after  Obligationea  ei  eontraclu)
and  the  Ottligatience  quwi  ex  delicto  an  placed
immediateiy  after  the  Obligationea  ex  delicto.
InHancea  of  theae  ObUgationee  qnui  ex  delicto,
eniunentad  in  the  Inttitute*  (1.  lit.  £},  are,  ~u
judex  litem  anam  fKerit,"  and  the  caie  of  "  de-
jeclum  effununve,"  and  olhtn. [DxjiCTi,  &c.]

The  natnn  of  an  Obligatio  may  now  be  mora
clearly  nndentosd.  An  Obligatio  impliu  two
•ubjecti  or  penoni  at  leaat,  crtditor,  or  he  who
hu  the  light,  and  doMor,  or  he  who  owea  the
dn^ :  theaa  two  tenni,  which  itrictly  apply  to
creditor  and  debtor  in  the  commoo  aente,  on  alu
lued  to  expeai  goneially  the  rdatioo  of  the  partiei
to  an  Obligatio.  Obligatio  (liloally  a  binding)
primarily  denotei  the  fiwta  by  which  the  legal
nlation  between  the  partiei  ii  eitabliihed.  It
■Ib  denotei  the  daty  or  obligation  owing  by  one
of  the  partial  to  the  contract  (dttitor)  to  the  other
party  (nUor),  if  the  obligatio  it  nniklaiBl  i  and
the  duliea  mutually  owing  from  the  one  to  the
other,  if  the  ohliplio  ii  biUleraL  The  word,
which,  aa  oppoaed  to  obligatio  or  "  binding,"  ex-
pneMi  the  deteiminatioo  of  tueh  binding,  ia
**  tohitio  ;"  and  generally  loina  fonn  li  the  woid
"loho"  ii  the  apptiqifiata  term  to  ei^naa  the
legal  lamination  of  tlie  obligatio.  Bat  ■""""-*■
at  dutiea  owing  by  one  par^  to  the  contract,  or
dutira  mnlnally  owu«  by  the  partiei  to  the  con-
tract, imply  a  right  in  the  other  iiarQt  to  the  con-
tract, or  imply  mutual  righti  m  the  partiea  to  the
conttact,  the  word  obligatio  ii  often  oaed  to  expreu
alio  the  rightwhich  ii  eataUiihed  by  the  obligstio:
and  it  it  ^  uied  to  eipioa  the  whole  relatioo,
between  debit«  and  creditor.  Thni,  the  right  of
the  Creditor  ii  ipoken  of  u  hia  Obligatio,  and  the
duty  of  the  Debitor  u  hit  Obligatio. Thcco  ii  no


OBLIOATIONES.


It  ii  convcLlj  nmsked  (Autin,  A*  0¥&—  of
a  coma  of  Latum  on  Oeurnt  Jutl^mdema)

**  Ihil  in  the  nricingt  of  the  Roman  hwjm,  tba
term  obligatio  ii  nenr  affilied  to  k  dat;  which
siiBwen  to  a  rigbt  in  ran,"  that  ii,  a  nght  whkh
ii  good  (gtunit  all  tha  woild.  But  u  Che  duty
oniwenng  to  a  right  in  rm  ii  only  Ihe  dnty  of
fbrbeaiance,  thai  ii,  of  not  doing  anything  to  inter-
fere with  the  right,  there  i>  no  mconToiiena  in  the
want  of  a  name :  the  right  to  Ihe  eiduiTe  enjoj-
ment  of  anj  thing  (eorpm)  ii  ownenhip  ;  alloibec
people  an  net  awnen :  ai  mmd  ai  in  act  ia  dona
which  ii  an  infringement  of  an  owners  right,  tn  in
other  worda  a  delicCiua  <in  one  aoue  in  which  the
Ronuna  naa  thii  word)  an  oblieatian  ariiea  bj
force  of  mch  act  (obligatio  a  rMMi)  and  giTct
tho  injued  fmoa  a  right  of  action  agunit  the
wnng-doer.

A  eontnetaa  nquind  the  eoaaant  of  all  the
paniea  Eo  it. Thoae  ObligationM  which  were  iaid

lo  be  10  founded  only  betante  conaent  wai  aufS-
cient  (Oaiui,  iiL  136),  and  no  peculiar  form  of
wordi  01  eipreuion  waa  reqciied  ;  whereaa  a
Ohligalionei  contracted  "  re,"  "  Torbia,"
**literia,**  certain  nrta,  worda,  or  writing  wen
quiied.  In  those  amtiBcta  where  paiticnlar  i
were  not  required  in  order  to  umrart  them
Oblicattonea,  anir  worda  w  acta  wtn  antBcieat,
which  were  eTidence  of  eoniest.  Constraint  by
force  or  thieata  (vu,  metui),  and  band  (doZw),
and  in  many  caaeaenoi  (arror,  igmmalia),  either
render  an  ureement  abiolutely  nnll,  or  give  the
party  who  bat  been  eonitiained,  deceiTed,  or  in
error,  Tariona  modea  of  defence  againat  the  claima
of  Ihe  other  party.

An  Obligatio,  aa  alnadj  ohaened,  nq^MMM
peruna  at  leaat,  Bnt  there  nuy  be  more  than
two  partiea  to  an  Obligatio,  either  ai  creditnu  ot
debitom  or  both,  all  of  whom  ace  comprehanded
rmder  the  general  name  of  Rei.  (Cic  da  Or.  iL
4S.)  With  reference  to  a  penon  who  ii  under
the  ume  oUintio,  a  peraon  may  be  called  Cor-
ren^  Bnt  when  there  are  aeTcnl  partiea  to  an
obligatio,  then  are  pfnpniy  acTeral  Obligationei,
and  thii  ia  the  eaae  whether  the  ersditor  la  one
and  the  dehilorea  aie  aeTeial,  or  tba  creditoiei
are  leTOal  and  the  debitor  ia  one,  oi  both  tho
creditorea  and  debitcarea  are  aeTcraL  In  the  ob-
ligatio pro  rata,  the  claima  of  the  acTenl  credilorea,
ar  the  dutic*  of  the  BeTeral  debilona,  an  detei^
minute  parts  of  a  whole,  which  ia  made  up  by  the
parts  being  united  in  one  fcffmal  obligatio.  There
are  cnses  when  aereial  creditorea  may  claim  Uie
whole  (lolidMm,),  or  Beren!  debitorea  DIBJ  owe
the  whole  (tD^m)  ;  where  a  creditor  claUna  the
whole  Dgainit  aoTetal  debitorea,  there  are  in  bet
icTeral  oblivniiano  binding  on  the  serend  debi-
torea. But  if  one  creditor  haa  recovered  the  whale,
or  one  debtor  has  pud  the  whole,  the  entire  Ob-
ligatio is  at  an  end. (Init  3.  tit.  16  (17).)

If  an  obligatio  is  unilatenl,  it  onl^  gives  a  right
of  action  to  me  of  the  partiea  to  it,  aa  in  the  case
of  Hutumn,  Stipnlatio,  and  othen  g  if  it  ia  bik'
teral,  it  gives  a  right  to  each  larty  againat  tha
other,  aa  emtio  venditio,  and  locaitio  eooduetio.

The  moat  gBneral  name  fiir
object  of  wUtk  WW  to  eatat


between  tba  fnties,  is  CanraQtia,  Paclk^  RKtna

nilnuB  ^eoenle  Sit,  ad  omnia  pcMiaMa,  da

(Dig.  S.  tit.
woe  jorit  genliini,  and  aa  a
genua  were  dinsiUe  into  spcciss.  Tlkosa  Csnns-
tionea  which  were  redndUo  to  oecliin  [lass  is  WCM
called  Contmctna,  of  whkh  tbc  Jn*  Cirile  acksow
ledged  the  faa  kinds  alnadj  mentkawd,  B^
Verbis,  Literii  and  CooaenoL  Of  thoae  Oblin-
tiones  which  ware  eslabliahad  Ra,  tha  fen  wUcb
have  been  alreadj  mentioned,  had  qMuial  BantMi
MntODm,  Commodatimi,  DqMsitam  and  Pigma  [
and  accordingly  they  have  besn  called  by  nmdccB
writera  Cmtractus  Nominatl  Bnt  thoie  van
other  Obligatiooea  whi<^  were  eitahliihed  Re,
(or  which  the  Romana  had  no  particolar  name,
and  actcrdingly  they  Itare  been  called  by  nudeni
writers  Ccntntctna  InnominatL

These  ohli^tioQes  are  founded  npon  aooMhliw
that  has  been  giran  or  dmo  by  one  party,  whii£
girts  him  a  dum  against  the  other  for  nnatbing
to  be  given  or  done  in  return.  If  the  mattet  of
the  coDTtntio  was  a  dvile  negotima  or  had  a  eiviliB
caosa,  it  ibraied  an  obligatio,  and  was  a  fonnd-


Etctimi } "  or  as  it  ia  clouly  expressed  by  JsUbb
(Dig.  19.  tit.S^  Da  pratmr^itit  ovUa,  &e.},  this  ia
the  actio  *'  ad  qnam  necesse  eat  eoofegere,  quoCiaa
mntiactna  eiiatnnt,  quonm  uipeUatjiBiea  noUaa
jure  civili  proditae  sunt."  Au  tlw  eTenU  npos
which  these  actiaoa  could  ariM  ware  rcdoced  to
the  fbnr  following  heads :  "ant  do  tihi  ut  dea,  aol
do  Qt  bciaa,  aut  fade  nl  dea,  ant  fado  at  facaa,"
(Pa(i]n>,Dig.  19.  tit.  S.  s.fi.  gl— 1.)  Tha  hn«
agreement  (pactum)  both  in  nomiiiata  and  kmo-
minate  contracts  ii  not  snfficienE  to  *'*-""'•  an
obligatio ;  in  both  cases  some  act  mnst  be  dma  (o
make  the  agRomoit  beccane  a  ocaitlaEt,  aaid  it
establish  as  obligatio.  The  n
have  their  paiticnl  ""

tncM  take  the  a
semblance  to  Dominale  contncta ;  bat  as  ibej  a
not  referable  to  any  ma  of  such  cootntete,  tboj
an  fbrmed  mto  a  sepaiala  elau:  atill  nme  of  them
have  special  namea.  These  eantracts,  aa  it  will
appear  &om  the  deHxiption  just  gives  of  them,  hat*
their  fbundatian  is  an  act  (a  giving  or  doing)  hy
one  of  Ihe  parties,  and  ao  bir  neemUe  oootiaeta  R«.
The  tnnneticei  it  not  complatod  so  kog  a*  a  thing
nmaini  to  be  given  or  dtuw  by  Ihe  debitnc ;  and
the  creditor  mar  have  his  adien  (ooKlariBs)  far  tha
recovery  of  a  thing  which  he  has  givoi,  and  for
■ilicb  the  debtor  has  not  made  the  retain  (a  giving
or  aa  act)  agreed  npoa.  The  aeditoi  has  ^ae  Ua
aedon  genetallj  {/nuacriptii  cviia)  tar  the  fta~
fcnnance  of  the  contcaet,  if  bo  ptcfera  that,  oi  lor
■'  '.  of  the  injury


istic  of  which  ia  that  thej  wen  not  ca
ginally  the  foundatiaa  d  MtiDBa,  but  aoly  of  pleas

{eamBfalia,  padio)  could  not  ba  refand  to  eon*
clan  of  contracts,  it  did  not  give  a  tight  of  action
When  then  «ai  do  dvilis  cataa,  thtaa  waa  aa
eivilis  obligatio  creaUed  by  snch  eoDventio,  aod  it
is  added  (Dig,  2.  tit  14.  t.1.  |4h  "thosfaa*
ida  pactio  does  not  prndoco  an  obligatie  hM  ^
«eplio  ;i  whease  it  fcJbwB  thai  ■  aada  fMia


OBUOATIONES.
ti  m  paelia  nna  tamt.  SometiBMt  Nnda  coD'
Touio  ii  and  ta  •qajnlent  to  Nadk  pactio.  (Dig.
li.liLA.i.IG.)  It ii  >  ndiukc  10  B7 tlut  Pae<
tnn  bf  itMlf  nCBt  a  im»ud»d  contnet.  Pactum
b  ■  tain  u  gmanl  u  eonnDtio  (padum  a  pao-
Ham  —  ad  adam  fOdio  Awmm  fltriumvt  in  Htm

nut  of  all  BOtiact*  u  anTentio  U.  Thete  might
ba  a  Pictnm  or  ftictia  rdaling  to  mutiagc,  the
lalaUiiliiimil  of  ■  wrritiu  ia  prarindal  Imdj
(Giini,  ii.  tl),  and  otber  mattoi.  Bst  Pactum
a*  inelBded  in  the  Uw  of  ObligatioiMa,  abtuned  a

■gtseBMnti  not  indndod  uiHn^  the  Conlnctiu,  bat
■dll  bioding  agrHHumti  ai  bnng  fbunded  on  Kime
cauM.  Apactumtherdon  might  pniduceaiiatiiialii
sUigatio.  Book  of  thos  pacta  wen  in  coons  of
linw  iDBd*  tho  fbnndatioii  af  an  actio  dfilii,  and
ntna  vsn  ptotccled  hj  tb«  PraetoT :  ut  Piutor :
"  Pad*  noitaita  quae  oeque  dola  milo  neqoe
adtonu  lego  jJebifdla  Mnatiu-connilla  edicta
dscnta  piiodpani  Dcqns  qao  &aiu  cni  eoium  fiat
beta  aront  •errabo."  (Dig. 3.  tit  14.  a7.)  Tba
pactiai  to  a  Pactmn  were  Mid  "  ptdjcL"  Any-
thing might  be  the  uhject  of  a  "  pactnm  "  which
^  Dot  ioTOln  an  illagalit;. "—  '" — '  — ' —


matter  relauns  to  Pacta  ia  not  airanged  in  the
Digeat  mideiua  hod  of  ObligalioDta  et  Actionei
(I»g.  4i.  UtT),  bat  in  the  nina  book  with  the
titlaa  De  Jmiidiclioae,  Ac

Sangoy  ahowi  that  the  nation  of  Agreement,
(Mrtrojr),  ii  too  nuTOwlr  conceiTed  b;  juiitta  in
geneial.  Ha  define*  •gieement  to  be  tbe  **  union
of  aaretal  penooi  in  one  concoidant  declantion  of
will  wbcieb;  their  lenl  relotinu  an  determined."
(^onnqnenUr  the  notmi  of  ■greemant  miut  be  ei-
Icnded  (0  other  thing)  than  to  contraeti  which  pn-


aad  the  fiut  that  the  dedantiiai  of  their  will  by
the  paitiia  to  the  iraditio,  ia  innfflcienl  to  effect
Traditio  withoat  the  ezlunal  act  bj  which  poa-
~ ' '  in  the  leait  affect  the

rbe  imperfect  coocep-
n  from  not  leparating
It  &nm  th<


tim  of  an  agraemer

acta  Ibr  which  nch  obliniloij  uracmcat  ia  gena-
nll  J  a  prepnatian  and  of  which  it  ia  an  accaapani-
■BFDt.  Thii  become!  mon  a^fntal  if  we  conaider
the  am  of  a  gift,  which  ia  a  real  agreement  bnt
withoat  an  J-  obligatioD :  it  ia  m«el7  a  giring  and
reeeiniv  bj  malnal  eonfenl.  Thii  geneial  notion
•f  i^iMinaat  ia  eontained  in  the  w<^  of  Ulpiaa
^iHidf  quoted,  in  which  be  definea  Pactio  to  be
**  danni  [jnriumre,"  &c  It  dots  not  aaem  how-
erer  thai  tbe  Banana  ap|died  the  toma  Pactio,
Pactum,  and  CcoTentiD  ta  any  agreemenli  except
those  which  wen  the  booduion  of  ObligatioDat
et  tome  kind.  (Sangnj,  Si/dn  da  Hft.  Bam.
Rmtf,  iS.  I  UO,  &c)

Poliicilalio  ia  a  prc^  or  offer  on  the  part  of  a
pvaon  who  ia  wiUil^  to  agree  (pofliettario  ^fhnntu
mHuM  pmrnumm,  Dig.M).  tiLlS.  a  3>  A  pol-
licitatio  of  eoono  sealed  no  obligatio  until  the
jnta  or  oAer  wai  accepted.  Tits  word  ii  fre-
^■entljr  oaed  with  nferance  to  pniniaea  made  bj  ■
peraa  to  a  state,  city,  <■  other  bodj  politic,  iDch
as  the  poniM  to  sect  a  bnilding,  to  sxbitiit  pi^ic
ahow^  Ac Sadi  polUdltfiaiias  wen  binding,


OCHUXniATIA.  821

when  thcra  was  a  wua,  aa  a  promise  made  with
nfeRDce  to  a  dignity  (l">or)  conbiTed  or  to  ba
conferred.  A  poliicttatio  aine  caoaa  was  also
obligatorj,  if  the  person  began  to  do  what  he  had
promisBd,  as  if  belaid  the  bnndatiDn  of  a  builditig
or  cleared  ths  gimmd.  (See  Plin.  ^.  i.  IS.  Hue
limtn  *m  pritttonait  pollialatiomiia  auiUa  d*-
bmtir!  and  r.  13.)

A  person  who  Towed  anything,  was  also  bonnd
{voto  Migatm).

(Q^n^  iii.  88,  &&  )  Inal.  3.  tit.  13  (13),  4.  6 ,
Dig.  47.  tiL  7,  Cod.  4.  tit  10,  Dt  Ottigafy-J-t
-" '-•-■—■'-- Mllhlenbrqch,  Dadriaa  Pamlaa-


S  lib.  iiL  Oi


The  :


woA  CO  Roman  Obligstionea  ia  bj  Unli


da  mmitiAn  BeMt  vom  dea  Stinidti^iaamamii,
Leipdg,  1840,  2  vola.  Sro. ;  see  alio  Thitant,
Fami'lrtmrtiHj  Vuigerow,PlMiUttB,&c ;  Pncbia,
/aK.  roLiiL)  [O.  U)

O'BOLUS  (iteK6t),  the  amalleat  of  the  fan
principal  denominaUona  of  wei^t  and  money
among  the  Greeks,  was  l-flth  oif  the  drachma,
l-eOUtb  of  the  mina,  and  l-36,000th  of  die  talent
A)  a  coin,  tba  obalna  waa  of  silTsr ;  and  ean-
nected  with  it,  at  least  in  the  Attic  system,  were
silier  coins  weighing  nspectiveh  6,  4,  3,  2,  1^
obols,  and  1, 1,  and  i  of  an  obol ;  aU  which  are
found  in  Gollecliana  of  coins.  The  11  obol  piece
was  a  quarter  of  a  drachm.  The  Attic  obol  was
also  dirided  into  B  (or  according  to  olhers  10)
XiAiitS.  (See  PoHDiaA  ;  NranuSi  Dbacbna  t
Chalciii  ;  and  the  Tables.)  [P.  S.]

OBSIDIONA'LIS  COKONA. [Cdroh^I

OBSOTJIUM. [Op«oniiii».]

OCCUPA'TIO. The  word  ia  naad  t?  Cicoo

SQ^.  L  7)  to  eipnss  the  aeqnidtion  of  owner.
p  by  occupation  or  tbe  taking  poMesaiou  of  that
which  haa  no  owner,  and  wilb  the  intention  of
keeping  it  a*  one')  own.  Among  the  modaa  of
acquirii^  ownenhip  "  nsturali  latione,"  that  is,  by
anch  means  as  an  m  all  nations  acknowledged  to
be  lawfbl  means  of  acquiring  ownership,  Oains  (ii,
66,  Ac)  enomeiales  the  taking  poeMSsion  of  thoaa
thinp  quae  nullius  mnt,  as  animata  of  the  chace,
birds  and  fiahea,  and  such  things  are  nid  "oc-
cupantia  fieri."  The  same  applies  to  the  finding  of
things  which  hare  no  owner ;  but  then  were  par-
ticular rules  ss  to  theaaoTua,  treasure  fbond  in  the


round. (Inst2.  titl.aSS;  Dig.49.titl4.s.3.
I0;aiidOaius,ii.  7). The  latest  iMilatJon  about
Tbeaanna  is  in  Cod.  10.  tit  IS. Thing*  which


rere  lost  or  thrown  out  of  a  ship  in  <
cessity  were  not  subject  to  OecapaliD.  Things
taken  in  war  wen  subject  to  Occupatio.  (Inst2.
tit  1.  s.  17  ;  Dig.  41.  tit  I.  dt  atqartado  nrm»
dommia.)  {G.  L.]

OCHLOCRA'TIA  (JxXMpwrfa),  the  dominion
of  the  rabble,  a  name  ^  later  OTgin  than  the  time
of  Aristotle  and  applied  to  that  pervenian  of  a
demoaacj.  In  which,  thraigh  the  introdnctioD  of
dericea  tm  retDoring  or  ooonteracting  the  natnial
and  wholeaoma  inequalities  of  society  (nch  as
paying  citiaens  for  attendance  in  the  popolai  as-
sembly and  on  other  occasions  on  miich  their
civic  Ametiona  mi^bt  ba  eiercited,  increariog  the
number  snd  restricting  tba  duraticai  and  authority
oF  public  olBcea),  tbe  exercise  of  all  tba  higheat
fbnctiona  i^  gvieruDeDl  came  to  ba  piacticaljy  in
the  hands  of  a  men  hclion,  eouisting  of  tbe  low-
est and  poneat,  though  moat  noneKna,  dim  of


822  OCREA.

citiiena,  who  were  thai  lemptcd  ts  ndaptusne
of  their  ordiniuy  aTocaiioni,  thai  which  tbej  woald
athuwiie  Iibtb  lefi  in  more  mitabic  htmds.  (Po1;1).
Ti  4  ;  Plnl.  di  Maiarai.  JU.,  c  3  i  Thillwsll,
JTi^.  o/Omee,  c  i.  toI.  i.  p.  410.) [C  P.  M.]

O'CREA  {KtTiidt),  a  gimve,  a  leggin.  A  paJi
of  greSTea  (m^fuBft)  WM  one  of  tbe  ail  aRiciei  of
Hrmour  which  foratod  the  complete  equipment  of  a
OiHk  or  Etnucao  warrioi  [Abmi],  and  likewiae
of  B  Roman  aoldier  a«  fiied  hy  Servioi  Tallhu.
(Liv.  i.  43.)  Thej  were  made  of  bronie  (Alcacni,
Fnig.  [.  ed.  Matthiae),  of  biau  (Hca.  SaU.  122),
aftin(Hom.//.  xriii.  613,  nl  692),  oc  of  >ilter
and  gold  (Viig.


hurt  it,  wai  hj  the  intcrpotiti
mge  which  wai  aln  tiied  for  the  lining  of
luieti  [Oalia],  and  which  Ariitotle  deacrihea
heind  reniarkable  for  thinneu,  dentity,  and  firm-
u.  The  greaiea,  lined  with  these  material!,  ai
'ere  fitted  with  gifst  exaelneH  to  the  leg,
ihahty  required,  in  many  caaep,  no  other  fiiflten-
'leir  own  elaiticity.  01^  neicrlheleu,
farther  lecured  bj  two  atrapi,  aa  may
tbe  woodcut  at  p.  1 S5.  Their  fbrro  and
bMt  undentood  from  the  ac-

Cying  woodcoL The  upper  fisote  ia  that  of
waiiior  repr«enl«d  among  the  tculptiiTe),


they


ing


ig  the  tculpl
kt  Munich,  belonging  (o  the  temple  in  Ae„
In  conaequence  of  ^e  bending  of  the  kneea,  the
fireaTea  aie  aeen  to  project  a  little  aboTO  them.
Thia  ttatue  alao  ahowa  very  diatinctly  the  ankle-
ringfl  (iwitT^6pia),  which  were  uaed  to  faaten  the
greavea  immediately  aboi'e  the  feet.  The  lower
portion  of  tbe  tame  woodcut  representa  the  interior
TJewofabronEeBbieTd  andnpairof  broniegreaTea,
which  were  found  by  Signor  Campanaii  in  the


tomb  of  an  Etnucan  wairior,  snd  which  tn  now
preferred  in  the  Britiah  Mnaeain.  Theae  greaTt*
an  made  nght  and  left.

That  the  Oreelca  took  groat  delight  In  handaome
""' '"""  grtaTea  may  be  inferred  from  the


.ent  greaTea  may  be  inferred  fron
tiiiltti,  M  Died  b;  Unner,  and


ODEUM. ■

ii  mtnnteneM  in  dFacribing  aame  of  thorpaitt^


ikle-rinoa,  whiel


eapeciaily  the  anhle-ringa,  which  were  be
ofanrer.  (Hom.//.iiL  331,  iL18.>  The  moden
Oreeki  and  Albanians  wear  greareB,  in  form  le-
aembluig  thoae  of  their  anceatora,  but  made  of
■after  maleriala,  luch  ai  Telvel,  tnnamBiIed  with
gold,  and  &etencd  with  hooki  and  eyea.

Among  tbe  Romans,  gredtea  made  of  bfonat^
and  richly  embseaed,  were  worn  by  the  gladiaton.
Soma  inch  hare  been  fbnnd  at  Fan>peiL  [See
woodcut,  p.  576.]  It  appean  that  in  the  tinn  of
the  emperora,  greaTea  were  not  entirety  liud  ande
ai  part  of  the  aiinour  of  tbe  aoldicn.  (Lampijd.
AI.  Sever.  40.)  At  an  earlier  period,  the  besTy-
aimcd  wore  a  single  gnrare  on  the  right  leg.
(Vcget  de  Ra  Mil  i.  20.)  Leggini  of  oi-hide  or
Ilrong  leather,  probably  of  the  form  almdy  de-
acribed  and  deaignatcd  by  the  aame  namea  both  in
Greek  and  Latin,  were  worn  by  agricdtural  la-


Pidlad.  rf«  fl*  fiut  L  «)  ar


IT  agricdtun
'iin.tf.A'lii
by  hiuitimen.  (H<ff,
so:,  u.  it. -^34.)  [J.Y.]

OCTASTY'LOS. [TaHpioji.]

OCTA'VAE. [Vktioali*.]

OCTOBER  EIJUU3. fPiLiii*.]

OCTOTHORON. [Lmtka.]

ODE'UM  (^ai»>-),  a  apcciei  of  public  buHd-
ing,  which  wai  fint  erected  during  the  flonrishhijr
epoch  of  Greek  art  m  the  liRh  century  B.  c.,  lt>r
contest!  in  meal  and  initramenlal  muric  (ttaot
Ir  f  Bt  M^>9al  Kdl  ol  KiOipySol  tfym^iom.
Hetych.  a.  v.,  eomp.  Suid.  a.  v.).  In  ili  general
form  and  arrangenienta  it  naa  very  aimihir  to  the
theatre  ;  and  it  ia  aometimet  odled  S4aTpar.  *
(Pau!.  i.  8,  iL  3 ;  Philostr.  Fi(.  Sop*.  iL  1.  p.
S49.)  There  were,  howerer,  aome  charaeteriitie
ditferencea:  the  Odeum  waa  much  amaller  than
the  theatre  i  and  it  wna  roofed  over,  in  otder
to  retain  the  aouud.  (VilruT.  t.  S.)  The  <Ma-
paratiTcly  nuall  !ize  of  the  Odeum  ii  eaiily  ac-
counted for,  not  only  becauBe  tbe  apnce  required
in  the  thestn  for  the  eTolutioni  of  the  Chonu  wna
not  wanted  her«  ;  but  alao  becauie  it  appear!  ta
have  been  oiigtnally  deaigncd  chiefly  for  muaical
rehearsils,  in  aobordination  to  the  great  choral
performance!  in  the  theatre,  and  «m»equ™tly  b
much  imaller  apace  wh»  required  (or  the  audience.

Unfortunately  we  have  no  detailed  deacriptioii
of  Ihii  clasi  of  buildinga.  Vitruiiua  {L  c.l  makea
a  palling  mention  ot  3ie  Odeum  of  Peridel,  but
alatei  no  particukn  retpecting  it!  coTutmetioa,  ex-
cept that  it  waa  adorned  with  bIoqo  piilan,  and
roofed  over  with  the  masta  and  yaida  of  the  cap-
tured Perttsn  abips,  a  amtement  which  hai  led
aome  writer!  into  the  miatake  of  referring  lb«
building  to  the  time  of  ThemistocleB.  From  tbB
statement  of  PaunniaB  (L  SO.  S  4)  that,  when  the
Odeum  waa  rebuilt,  after  its  burning  in  the  cap-
ture of  Athens  by  Sulla,  it  was  made  of  a  fbnit
which  wai  nud  to  be  in  imitation  of  tbe  tent  of
^Cetrea,  it  may  perhaps  be  infcnvd  that  the  ori-
ginal bDildingwat  actually  cotetvd  with  that  tent.
At  ail  CTentn,  tliii  atatement  prores  that  the  nnf
moat  haTi  been  conical.  Accordingly  Plutarch,
who  Mates  that  tbe  original  building  t  waa  sd
imitation  of  tbe  king>  tent,  describes  its  reof  ai


*  See,  respecting  the  piaciae  mewiing  of  At
words,  the  note  on  p.  SS,  a.

f  Perhaja  he  confounded  it  with  the  a»  which
was  standing  in  bia  time.


ODEUM.
dapaig  aS  nmai,  and  iii^imit  fivtt  <mt  mtmil
(Peric  13).  He  kits  nyi  that,  in  iU  internal
■nan^fnnoit,  tha  bnildiag  b*d  many  k«U  and
many  irillan.  From  a  nv  other  unago,  and
boa  tke  wanty  leniain)  of  ncli  edincet,  m  maj
coiKlnde  fiirthFr  that  the  Odeum  had  an  orehntia
fir  the  flhociH  and  a  ilage  fbr  tSf  muieiBU  (of
leaa  depth  thaa  the  nage  at  the  ihiam),  behind
irkidi  wen  hmdh,  whuh  w«ie  probabl;  med  for
keeping  the  dreieei  and  tcmsIi,  and  amamenti
reqnind  tot  religioiu  prooeinoni.  Of  coone  the
OdnuD  reqaired  no  ihifting  leenet ;  but  tlie  irall
at  th*  bad:  of  the  itage  Menu  to  have  been  per-
Bianently  decorated  with  puntingi.  For  ei-
ample,  VitrtiTini  telU  u  (fiL  &  §  &),  that,  in  the
mail  thcacn  at  Tnllea  <«hich  waa  donbHeu  an
Odeum),  Apatnnoi  of  Alabanda  painted  the  jonu
with  a  oompontian  n  finUitir  that  he  ma  esm-


the  tnilli  of  natnial  ohjecta.  Among  (be  puntingt
in  tha  OdeiiD  al  Smjnu  wai  a  Onus,  aiccibcd
la  ApeUeh  (Pane.  ii.  35.  g  £)  The  OdM  of
lata  tbnei  were  lichly  deconled.  That  of  He-
lodea  Atctcm  bad  ju  roof  of  beami  of  cedar
adorned  with  carringa,  and  contained  nuioerona
worita  of  ait.  (Pbiloat.  iL  1.  p.  651.)

The  eailieal  building  of  thia  kind  waa  that  al-
t«ady  nwntimed  a*  erected  by  Periclea  al  Athena,
for  tha  pivpfiae,  according  to  Plalaich  (f.  c)  of
celalHaling  the  mnaicol  contetla  at  the  Panathe-
DaciL.  It  lay  DD  the  left  hand  to  pemKia  coming
oot  of  tlM  great  theatre,  and  therefore  at  tiie  fiwl
of  Ibe  aoath^aaUmjiaitof  the  AcTopolia.  (ViUoT.
T.  9.)  Ita  pcoiimin  to  tha  theatre  anggeatcd
Bome  of  the  naea  made  of  it,  namely,  aa  a  refuge
Sat  the  aidjenoe  when  diiien  out  of  the  theatre
by  rain,  and  ^ao  ai  a  place  in  which  the  cboma
could  be  prepared.  (VilnT.  L  c)  It  wu  burnt
when  Atbena  waa  taken  by  Snlla,  K.C.  B5,  and  waa
reatored  by  Aiiobananea  II.  king  of  Cappadocia ;
wbo  employed  C  and  H.  Stalliua  and  Menatip-
poa  aa  ua  architect)  of  the  work.  Aiiabamnea
raigMd  from  UC  63  to  about  B.C  fil.  (Vitmr.
L  c  i  Pana.  I  SO.  i*;  Af^iian.  B^  MiOr.  38  ;
Biickh,  Corp.  Incr.  toL  L  No.  3£7.}  The  btdld-
ing  ia  now  entiiel;  deatioyed.

Thia  waa  not  the  only  Odeiun  at  Athena  in  the
time  of  Hadrian  end  Uie  Anioninea.  Pbubiubi,
wbo  in  the  paaat^n  referred  to,  doea  not  apply  the
name  of  Odenm  to  the  boilding^  apeiika  of  sa
Odeam  at  Atiiena  in  two  other  paa^t*  (i  S.  S  6,
1 4.  i  \\  from  a  eloae  examinatioa  of  whicb  it  q»-
ptara  mom  thwi  doobtftd  whetlher  thi*  Odenm  ia
the  aamo  aa  the  foraer.  Slkglit*  (p.  S'JS,  foil.)
idtntiSea  it  with  the  Pnyx,  which  he  mppoaei  to
hare  b«n  fitted  ap  aa  an  Odeum,  while  that  of
Pcrielts  waa  in  rmaa.  It  ia  lemaikabla  that  Pan-  '
aaniaa  aowfacn  nxBtiona  tbe  Pnyx,  unleia  diia
Odema  bo  the  aauM  aa  it.

Authei  Odenm  waa  bnilt  at  Alhou  by  He-
tsdea  Altiena^  and  ww  the  meat  magnificent  edi-
fice of  tbe  nrt  in  tbe  whole  empire.  It  itood,  ai
ecanpared  with  the  Odemu  of  Peridee,  on  the
Dppaiu  aide  of  the  gieM  theatre,  under  the  aanth-
weatcm  part  of  the  Aeropolia  ;  where  latge  imna
of  it  an  (till  aeen.  The  Imgth  of  ita  largcat
dknts  waa  248  b^  and  it  ia  calculated  to  luve


OLKA.  82S

The  other  principal  Oda  were  that  of  Corinth,
al»  built  by  Herode*  (Paiit.  ii.  3.  %6;  PtiDoat.
that  of  Paliae,  which  waa  neit  in  mapiifi-
to  thatof  Hetodeiat  Athena,  and  ooDtained,
J  nther  worka  of  art,  a  celebrated  ataCne  Ot
Apollo  (Pana.  TJi.  20.  §  6)  i  thoae  of  Smyrna  and
Trallea  already  mentioned  ;  that  of  Meuene,  113
bet  long,  und  93  feet  in  ita  inner  diameter  ;  that
of  Nici^iB,  with  an  inner  dianieter  equal  to  the
laat,  but  widi  an  outer  diameter  of  193  feet:  then
lire  alto  luim  of  Odea  at  lAodicea,  Epheana,  Aoe-
lODiiDm,  and  other  placei  in  Aaia  Minn.  (See
Chandler,  Pooocka,  BtanCm^  OrraDuiiu,  Leake,


The  fint  Odenm,  properly  ao  called,  at  Rome,
u  biult  by  Domitian  (Saei.  Don.  6 ;  Entrop.
ii.  IS),  and  tbe  aecond  by  Trajan.  (Amm.
Marc  zri.  1 0.)  There  are  ruing  of  inch  buiMinga
in  the  riiU  of  Hadrian  at  TiToH,  al  Pompeii,  and

a  gennal  iiut,  tbe  Odea  were  leaa  atrictiy
leaerred  fbr  thnr  apecial  nw  than  the  thealrea.
Some  of  the  extra  naea,  to  which  the  Odenm  of
Periclea  waa  applied,  hate  been  already  men-
tioned. It  waa  alao  need  tometimea  aa  a  conrt  of
jiutice  (Ariatoph.  Piup.  1104,  s.  SdaH.,  comp.
PoUnx,  Till  6)  ;  and  pbileaophical  diapotationa
were  held  in  the  Odea.  (Pint  dt  EiaO.  p.  604.)
Further  detmla  will  be  found  in  the  fbllowtng
v«ka.  (Marthii,  Uther  dit  Odtm;  StiegHti,
Arti&iL  d.  Bautand,  loL  ii.  aecL  3  ;  Hirt.  leirt
d.Otiiiadt,ff.  111—113;  Rate,  iiber  dii  Odmrn
aa  Atiai,  Bom,  ■.  Karthago,  Soeat.  1631,  4to ;
MUller,  ArA  d.  KiaaL,  g  2B9  ;  Klanaeu.  in  Eiw^b
and  Oniber'a  EtiftlopiUlie ;  Banmalarii,  in  tha
Rnd  Etfdop.  d.  dan.  AUerOaat.) [P.  9.]

OECU& [Ddmus,  p.  428,  b.]

OENOMELUM. [Vindm.]

OENO'PHORUM  (oM^ptr),  a  baaket,  or
other  contrinnce  for  carryiig  bottlea  of  wine  ;  a
wine-baaket.  Thia  waa  aometimea  naed  by  thoae
who  took  their  own  wine  with  them  in  OaTellii^
in  order  to  avoid  the  neceaaity  of  porchaiing  it  «1
the  road.  (Hot.  Sol.  L  6.  109  ;  Jut.  Sol  tiL  1 1 ;
Pera.  Sat.  t.  140  ;  Mart.  vi.  88.)  A  ilaTe,  called
tbe  wine-bearer  (imophonu,  Plhi.  H.  N.  •""■  8.
a  19\  carried  it  probably  on  hia  back. [J.Y.]

OFFENDIX. [Arat]

OFFICIA'LEa [EMacima,  p.  60a,b.]

OFFI'CIUM  ADMISSIO-NUM, [Aniin-


bafon  be  wrote  his  aeteotb. (Pan


Oi'KlAS  DIKE  fotv'st  XKti),  an  action  to
reeoTcr  a  honae,  in  which  (aa  m  any  other  octJOD
where  property  waa  the  aubject  of  litigation)  the
dicaita  decided  (ItcSinocv)  to  which  of  tho  partjca
the  houH  belonged,  and  adjudged  it  to  him  (Art.
Sliccuro').  Nothing  fbrther  being  reqniaite,  tho
Buit  wBi  an  4ri^ijToi  4>i».  Certain  ipeechca  of
Lyaiaa,  laaena,  and  Hyperidei,  which  are  now  loat,
were  upon  thii  aubject  The  oIkCbi  Jfm?  waa  only
to  tecover  the  houie  itaelf  ;  the  by-gone  renla,  vg
mane  ptofita,  were  recOTeraUe  in  an  action  called
^utlov  tlitq.  [See  Enoiejou  Diex,]  (Meier,
AU.  Proe.  p.  492.)  (C  R.  K.]

OT.EA,  OLITA  (iXaia) ;  O'LEUM,  OLI'-
VUM  (IXoHw)  ;  OLETUM,  OLIVE'TUM
(4\al«>>).

The  importance  of  the  oliTe  wai  recogniaed  trtna
the  moat  remote  period  of  antiqui^,  in  nil  driliaed
conntriea  where  the  lempentun  admitted  of  ita
cnltiiation ; and  it  waa  widely  ado[4ed  a*  an


8e  4  -


•  o"


834  OLEA.

emblem  of  iadiutiy  and  pnce.  While  it  jiddi  *
targe  mpidy  of  pililabie  uid  highly  nntritiniu
food,  it  reqiiiRi  lui  outlay  and  leu  Uteation  thim
almoit  any  other  &uit  tree,  ii  mhject  U  few  caiu>
■l^H,  ud,  erea  if  Bllogelher  negleeUd,  doee  not
niifer  lerioiu  injury,  but  may  be  quickly  ruCoied
to  fertility  by  modenU  oat.  Heoca,  the  koDOVT
* tt  Alheni,  and  hoM*  the  ^tle  of  "  |  '


omninm  arbomm  "  beitowed  open  it  by  C
VABicrna. TheOtdifW^pwiiUitiiDly  im-
ie  utunl  bmily  of  (Vbohh^  which  jidda


tha  highly  ™lu(d  oUtb  oil,  but _,

nnduad  by  different  modes  of  culnin,aad  bypeen-
liaritiH  of  toil  and  elimate.  Columelj*  ennmentai
ten,  and  thii  number  may  be  coniidenbly  increaKd
fiDm  the  vorki  of  other  umient  wrilen.  The  fol-
lowing aaam  to  bars  been  the  moil  important :  —
1.  Pautia  i.  Pom  ;  2.  Sigia  ;  3.  Ortkit  i.  Or-
tUtit  a.  OrrMa  t-Ordat:  t.Badal;  B.Lidmia
t,  LtmuoKa  ;  6.  Stryia  l  Srrgi/aa^  Of  theiii  the
Pamtia,  according  lo  Columella,  irai  the  moit
pleaiant  in  flaniui  {jncmmdutimia),  although  upon
tbii  point  be  ii  apparently  cnntiadiclcd  by  Virgil
(aiHura  Pamiia  laeca) ;  the  R^/ia  wu  the  haod-
■omcat  in  i^ipearaoce  ;  while  both  of  theee  together
with  the  Or«rUi  and  the  Radiiii,mii  in  genenl,Bll
the  larger  -nrieCiea,  were  belter  miled  tor  eating
than  for  oiL  The  iKtatd,  on  the  other  hand,
yielded  the  fineat  oi\  the  Sfrgia,  the  gnatot  i^nan-
tity.  {Cat.fl.a7;  Van.ft.«.  7i  ColumeH...
»,di  Arbor.  17;  Plin.  ».  M  it.  6.)

Sou.  AND  Climati.  The  Mil  cimiidered  mott
congenial  wai  a  rich  tenadoui  ^y,  or  a  miimre
of  clay  and  nad,  a  gravelly  aubaoll  being  eaiential
in  either  caee  to  carry  off  the  water.  Deep  (at
mould  wai  foncd  to  be  not  uniuitable,  bat  any
hind  which  retained  moiiRiTe  waa  avnided,  and
alio  light,  itony  ground,  for,  although  the  treea  did
not  die  in  the  latter,  they  nerer  became  T^raoni,
Hen  again,  hovcTer,  Columella  and  ViigU  are  at
niiance,  for  while  the  fonua  obeervta  "  inimicni
cat  ager  Mbulo  macer  et  noda  glarca,"  the  poet

DISnIpi  prioinm  terrae  eolleiqne  maligni,
Tennii  ubi  orgilla  et  dumoii)  enlcului  arrii
Palladia  gaudent  lilya  nTaeii  olinw.

The  olirg  ii  Tery  impntioit  of  frnt,  and  acunty
any  of  the  Taiietiea  known  to  the  andeali  would
flouriih  in  Tcry  hot  ta  Tery  cold  aituationai  In  hot
locali^n,  it  wai  cniedient  to  form  the  plantations
on  the  aide  of  a  hill  facing  the  north,  in  cold
localltiet  npon  a  toulhem  ilope.  Neither  ■  Tery
lofty  JOT  a  Tery  low  poiiiion  wa*  aj^mpriate,  biU
gentle  rolling  emineneei  inch  aa  diancleriacd  tlie
country  of  the  Sabinea  in  Itdy,  and  the  diitrict  nf
Baetica  in  Spain.  Under  ordinary  ciienmataDcea,
a  western  eipoiare  lying  well  open  to  the  lun  via
preferred.  It  ie  aaierted  by  lernal  dataical  aatbora
that  the  oIits  will  not  live,  or,  ol  leait,  not  pcoTe
fhutfiil  at  B  diilanog  from  the  tea  coan  gnatar
than  from  thirty  to  fifty  mile*,  and  although  ei-
eeptisni  did  and  do  eiiit  to  thji  role  it  will  be
found  to  accord  with  general  ezperienee.  (Cat.
An.7;  VarT.L34:  Columella,  t.  S  i  PUa.ir.tf.
iriL  S  i  Palbd.  iii.  IS  ;  Theophr.  r.f,  a.  u.  S  ;
Oeopoo.  ii.  4.)

PBOMOATKIir tno Cl7LTDB(. PteTioiIl to

thefumationofanoliToyaid  (tUmm,  almlma)  it
wai  necBMar^  to  lay  oat  a  cnrHry  (ttmimiriiim)
fir  the  NofCton  of  the  ynung  plant*. A  piece  of


OLEA.
gtoimd  wu  aelecled  (or  thia  pmpow,  ficdy  ei-
poied  to  the  ana  and  air,  and  in  which  the  aou  na
a  rich  bla^  monld.  It  wu  the  pnctiee  to  ttmch
(paitiman)  Ihia  la  the  depth  of  three  feet,  and
thentoltsTsittocTunbledowiiinidcr  the  infl-ii™
of  the  annoapbere.

The  prapigaripn  of  the  oliTe  wia  efiected  in
nrianiwaya.

1.  Tha  method  graoalty  adopted  wai  to  fix

■ipon  the  moat  piodoel' " ' "'  ' ■ -  '

Iheae  It" '■

by  the  hand.  The  hiancbia  immedwtdy  after
being  detached  from  the  parent  item,  were  lawed
into  lengthe  of  a  foot  and  a  half  each,  great  car*
being  taken  not  to  injure  the  biifc  ;  Ibeae  leg-
menti,  which  were  nlledbibit  oi  tlaeolat  Btlnairi,
were  then  tapered  to  a  point  at  each  end  with
a  knife,  the  two  eitnmitiee  were  amaued  with
dnng  and  athca,  Ihey  wae  buried  upright  in  tha
ground,  »  that  the  top*  were  a  few  Siigen'  breadth
below  the  fnr&ce,  and  each  latia  wa*  traced  aa
□early  ai  pouible  in  the  lame  padEiDn,  both  Ter-
tically  and  laterally,  aa  the  branch  had  occtipied
upon  the  Oee,  During  the  lint  year,  the  gronnd
was  frequBitly  looaeaed  by  the  aaKuluni  ;  when
the  young  root!  (_radiadai  mn'aim)  had  taken  •
firm  hold,  hcBTy  hand-rakea  (roWm)  wtre  em-
ployed lor  the  nma  porpoM^  and  in  the  beat  ef
■nmmer  water  waa  regniariy  aupfdiad.  For  two
yovi  no  penning  waa  reaorted  to,  bnt  in  the  third
year  the  whole  of  the  ahooti  (nuufi),  with  tha
eroeptiwi  of  two,  wen  lofqied  off ;  in  the  fiairth
year,  the  weaker  of  the  remaining  two  wai  do.
tached,  and  in  the  fifth  year  the  young  treea
(ariaiadae]  were  fit  Ibc  being  tranaplanled  (ioMIn


were  conieyed  waa  dry,  bat  if  it  waa  n
rich,  in  apring,  a  ehort  time  before  the  bud*  wen
formed.  In  the  field  which  they  wen  to  occupy
_ ,  ,  ill  (icroiiH)  four  feet  erery  way
prepared,  if  practicable,  a  year  beforehand,
w  that  the  earth  might  be  thooughly  pulTeriaed ;
amall  itonei  and  gtSTcl  mixed  iritfa  mould  were
placed  at  the  bottom  to  the  depth  af  a  few  inche^
and  aome  graini  of  barley  wvs  acatleied  otk
aU.  The  yonng  tree  wai  lifted  with  ai  large
a  hall  of  earth  ai  poiuble  attached  to  the  nola,
placed  in  the  pit  nmnnded  with  a  little  maoDIe,
and  planted  »  aa  to  occupy  pneiidy  the  aama
puution,  in  nlalioQ  to  the  cardinal  poinla,  ai  in  the
nnnery.  In  rich  com  land,  the  tfmei  left  beteuui
each  row  wai  at  leaat  liity  feet,  and  between  each
tree  in  the  row  forty  feet,  in  order  that  the  l»arich<«
and  mtfl  might  buTe  full  ipace  to  i|Read,  but  ia
pofver  ao[]  twen^-fiTe  feet,  each  way,  wen  ooa-
■idered  lufficicnt. The  rawi  wen  airanaed  ■>  aa

*  \  iweep  fredy  i
Aftec  tha  trace  kad  beooa*  i
fiied,and  had  bean  pnmedupiDto  apn^er  ahap^
that  it,  into  a  tingla  Hem  kqit  Tritkiat  bmiehaa  te
the  height  of  the  telleit  oi,  the  labsar  attendii^
apon  an  olire  yard  wai  comparatiTdy  tii^ig.
Erery  year,  the  aoil  anand  the  noli  irai  InoemBd
with  hoei  (bidtat),  or  with  ibt  phnigfa,  the  nota
tbanaaliea  laid  bare  (atfaywn,  MmmaHo),  the
■neketi  cut  «wh,  aad  the  licaaM  KOf *


the  barii  J  BTery  third  year,  it


OLEA.

hen  indie

imbadied

in  a  proTSli  **  Vateria  pnTerbii  nmniniiBa  eoo-
TBDit,  euu  qui  mt  olif etnrn,  ngkn  fnictiiiii  i  qui
rtanont,  untm  ;  qui  cKdat,  tugm."  {Cdmnall.
r.  9. 1  IS.)  BcaidH  thk,  tbs  vbola  '
th«  gnmBd  «u  Mfikr^  ptoogbed  h
•euQiH^  and  cnpptd  in  nlhnUajMn,
qi^icd  fct  (haw  mm  boiu  allogatlui  inde-
pcBdaat  of  tktt  mpplwd  to  do  tnoi  ipecixllj.

JltnoTcT,  sinoa  tdirai  ban  ftnit,  in  ■^ — '

Itaal,  aelj  meo  in  two  yean,  nuttan .  _ ._
nu^ed  that  tlia  lud  iboiild  jiald  >  enp  in  thoaa
jwi  whan  tba  tnea  *«■  impTodiictiTi
d  nwtbod  of  pn^iagMtioa


i.  A  third  BiMhod  ii  lodicnted  bj  Virgil  in  Iha


Qtitn  ct  caadidbiu  tcctii,  mimbilo  dictn,
Tniditni  a  licco  ndii  oleagtna  ligno,

■od  ii  Hin  nmnied  in  mna  parti  of  Italj,  where,
u  wa  ara  told,  "  an  old  trae  u  bawn  down  and  ■<■-
■tack  cut  into  jitaa  of  mrij  the  iih  and  ih
of  a  mubnKnn,  and  which  frmn  that  drcnmala
an  ailed  Hoteli;  <an  at  the  tame  tInM  i*  taken
that  a  naU  portion  of  baric  aball  baloi«  to
Donfa.  Tbeaa,  afterhaTiag  been  dipped  fii  maDin,
BM  pal  Into  the  «nth,  mko  thraw  up  ilioota,  an
Muplanted  at  tin  and  of  om  jw,  and  in  tbrea
T«an  an  fit  to  f>m  an  aUrt  jaid."

Onfting  or  bndding  (bumwv,  iitilio,  enUei  it-
««H«)  wan  alto  reiwted  to  for  tha  porpooe  of  in-
trodncing  fine  varietie*  or  of  rendering  bamn  treei
IMtfoL  (Cat.  A  R.  40,  42, 43,  ii  ;  Vair.  A.  A.
L40|  CoInnwU.  T.  9,  De  Jrior.  17  |  flm.H.N.
zriiL  IS.  1.30;  Pallad.  iii.  8,  IB,  x.  1,  xi.8;
Ompoo.  ix.  S,  6,  Ac  ;  Blunts  I'aligf  of  Andad
JAmmti,  da,  H  Aa^,  II 31S.)

OtivB  aiTBnniit*)  (Otsiu^  OiMbu),  Tho
dliva  BfoalljamMa  to  mBtorin',  m  Italj,  ahoM  the
■iddla  «r  latter  end  of  Deeeniber,  bat,  according  to
tha  viaav  of  tke  pcoprietoi^  it  war  gathcrod  in
tarioaa  itagea  of  it!  pn^noa,  ritfaer  wfaila  jet  gnra
{alba),  or  when  changing  colmr  (mru),  or  when
bUj  ripe  (atirfv),  but  it  wai  conudend  highlj
dewnble  thai  il  •boold  oorer  ba  allowed  to  n-
main  b  long  u  to  hll  of  iU  own  aeoord.  Tbo
frait  wai  pi^od  ■>  far  aa  poaible  witb  tha  bare
hand,  Tmt  neh  ■«  conld  not  be  roacbed  from  the
pmmd  n  by  tbo  aid  of  laddon  wa*  bealoi  down
with  long  neda,  whicfa  were  prefamd  to  alicka  aa
l«*a  likMjr  lo  injnn  the  baA  if  tba  bnneba*  and
die  yaoDg  btanti,  a  want  of  atttotion  lo  Ihii  pro-
oanlioa  ta  the  part  of  Ibe  gatbemi  Qtgul*)  being
IB  tbo  opinion  of  VaiTo  tba  lanae  why  ollTa  tnea
a*  addw  yielded  a  Ml  crop  br  two  y<an  con-
aicalinlr.  <Vair.  A  A.  L  55 ;  Plin.  if.  M  n.  3.
B.«;  O(epon.ii.  17.)

DvrmaaMT  uans.  The.ilnit  (iaaa]  of  the  oliro
«ai  Ibr  tba  moH  part  employed  ba  too  of  two  por-


1.  Itwnaea
<r  laiMUied  in

2.  It  wa«  I


a  fhiit,  uther  &aah,  [ockled,


OLGA.  fi35

oil  wu  anployed  lot  a  Tariety  y  pdrpoaei,  bat

B.  Ai  an  article  of  food.


g  tho  body,  and  in  Ihii  d


1.  For  bwning  bi  lamp
PaxaaannD  OLirna.
ana  eom^iur*,  eofdiHa^


iCtmlf <


either  wbtn  aniipa  (a.

or  halfdpe  (earJa^,rt(Mw).

Qnan  oUTea,  tba  PmmA  beiw  need  principally

i»  tbia  poipoee,  wan  fxaerred  in  iliDag  brina

(■utfw),  ■cBording  to  the  modem  |ncticc,  or  Ibey

wen  beuen  together  into  a  man,  Maeped  in  water

which  waa  fiaqnenllj  chained,  thai  pnaaed  and

thrown  witb  aalt  into  a  jar  of  nnega^  to  which

nriooa  ipicea  or  flaTooriig  cndinienli  wen  added,

eapedally  Ibe  leeda  of  the  PiMacbia  Leoliacna,  or

Onm  Maiticb  tree,  andfouwL Sometiniea,  initead

of  vinegar,  Jn^JMitMl  mnat  (aopo,  dtfnanai),  or

ewoet  wine  (fUMaai)  or  honey  were  employed,  m

which  caae  the  oliToa  wen  pnaerred  aweet,  and

fometince  adt  pickle,  nnegar,  ninit  and  oil,  eeem

*-  ban  been  all  mixed  logMber.

Halh^  oliToa  (and  here  again  the  Poaais  wa*

a  &Toaiila)w«re  piefced  with  their  italk*  and

nred  orer  is  ajar  with  the  beat  oil In  ihi*

umar  thoy  retained  the  4annr  A  (ba  freeh  fhiit


with  aalt,  and  tett  aDlooched  for  five  dan,  iheaalt
waa  then  abakeu  o^  and  they  wa«  dried  in  tin
ann.  Or  they  wen  pnacTTed  iweet  m  de&ntota
witboat  aall.

Tba  peenliar  pRpotatian  called  i^p^iyrMi  waa
nade  \ij  taking  olirec  in  ai^  of  Iba  three  iMge^
iTtncting  the  itonea,  cbopfung  np  tbe  p^ilp  and
throwing  the  Aagmenta  into  a  jar  with  oil,  nuegai^
-— ^ — -■ '- — — '- —  ' - and  mint,  tha

.  .  m  with  choeaa.
(Cat.  A  A  117,  118,  119  ;  Van.  A  A  L  60  ;
Cohnnell.  ziL  49  t  OoopoD.  ii.  3,  32.)

On.  HAJUHO  (CUnh*  amfictn).  Tbe  fruit  of
tho  oUra  tree  connata  of  two  porta,  the  pdpy
o),  and  tbe  Mono  (hmIou).
or  pulp  Tieided  two  fliuda :  one  of
thtae  of  a  walaiy  ccauatBice,  daA  in  colonr,  bittn
to  the  taate.  Bowed  from  tha  dUto  upon  my  alight

'- — called  Mn^  by  Ibe  Oncka,

ini,  and  waa  extemiiely  oied  aa
\  great  nomb^  of  poipoeea  eoD-
neeted  with  domettlc  economy.  Tba  other  fiaid
which  Sowed  frooi  tbe  pulp,  when  (objected  to
mem  forcible  proMore^  waa  the  oil  (ni— i,  oJmm),
mingled  howoTer  to  •  oertain  extcst  with  ammea
and  other  imparitiea  (Jivan,  fifea),  and  thia  waa
of  diffoent  qoalilie^  aocMiUng  to  the  itato  (hT  tho
frait,  and  Ibe  amoont  of  preaamv.  Tha  fineat  oil
>  it  «a*  hlly  ripe,
fmn  ita  greeniah

- i*,  and by  tba

Oreeka  hit^tKOitr:  the  qnanti^giTenDat  waahow•
"  and  hmee  the  temaifc  of  0


S3S


OLEA.


(UJ  ebUuwd  fran  the  finit  when  grmi  (olnuB  OMr-
bm  I.  oaCinn),  when  half  ripe  {oUum  viride),
end  when  fully  ripe  (tiaan  matenn ),  and  while
be  coaiiden  Uie  muaEutiin)  of  the  £nt  u  inei-
fiedioit,  in  eoniaqueiMx  of  the  Kintf  prodnce,  he
'f  recommendi  the  proprieui'  '


»■,  the  ripe  fruit


when  githend

in  bukel*  to  the  &im  boiue,  when  i(  ws*  pucea
in  heapi  upon  dopii^  wooden  floon  (n  foAaia&i),
in  ordo'  thftt  ■  portion  of  the  iiiiiniiiii  might  Bow
out,  and  >  ilight  fermentetion  tahei  place  (nf  iU
Mtdioerittr  fraatad),  whkh  lendered  them  more
tender  and  more  prodnctiTei  and  exactly  the  nine
mtsn  ii  punned  for  the  inma  naaon  in  modon
tonei.  The  gathering!  of  eaoh  daj  (aeattura  naiiii-
mjiaqaa  dM)  wen  kqit  maiate,  and  great  care  wai
taken  to  Icsto  them  in  thii  Mala  for  ■  T«y  limited
period,  (or  if  the  mawei  heated,  the  oil  loon  be
came  nncid  (Olta  tettr  ii  •nmm  Jm/Min  aar-
OM,  raUon  fraeOBit,  tl  vkiBm  fb^Uam  fii).  It,
thenfbve,  eiccnmitaneca  did  not  iIIdw  of  the  oil


\o  check  anj  lendenejr
i*  the  nefjleet  of  Iheaa  ralgt  and  pcecantioni
renden  the  oil  now  Diade  in  Spain  lo  oSeuiTc,  ler
there  the  olitee  are  frequently  allowed  lo  remun
ill  Cflllan  for  moniha  before  they  are  naed.  Although
both  ancient  and  modem  erperience  are  tipop  the
whole  in  bronr  of  a  ilight  fennentation,  Cato,
whoee  gieat  practical  knowledge  entitlei  him  to
leipect,  ilnngly  recommend!  that  it  ihould  b«
altogether  diapenied  with,  and  affinna  that  the
(h1  would  be  both  more  abmidant  in  qoantily  and
aaperior  in  qualiqr : "  Qaam  dtiuime  confidea

The  olirea  when  ocnuidend  to  be  in  a  proper
■tats  were  placed  in  bag*  or  flexible  hwketi
(Jiieu),  and  were  then  tDbjeetsd  to  the  action  of  a
macbina  cofuUtiiig  partly  of  a  bniiaing  and  partly
of  a  tqnening  a^iaiatnt,  which  wai  conatmctcd  in
lariona  wayi,  and  deugnated  by  -varimu  namei :
TVoprtwa,  Mola  tttarla,  Caialit  at  ScJta,  Tonular,
Pr^iai,  TadiaJa.  The  oil  ai  it  iuned  forth  waa
received  in  a  leaden  pot  (ooftiaa  plaaiUa),  placed
in  the  ciilsm  (laau)  below  the  prae.  t>[»n  the
Cortina  it  waa  ladled  out  by  an  swMant  (tnpiiMir),


row  lor  tbii  porpofle.  It
to  rest  f«  a  while  in  lach,  and  Uia  operation  wat
Tepcsted  again  and  ag^  (oleum  fitjiUiilar  copiint)
nnlil  the  amnns  and  all  imporitia  had  been  oom-
plelely  tenoTed.  In  cold  weather  when  the  oil
remained  in  imion  with  the  annircanotwithitanding
thete  tnnifereneee,  Che  eapaiation  waa  effected  by
rnijing  a  little  parched  nit  with  the  combined
flnidi,  but  when  the  cold  waa  Tsy  intenae,  dry
rarbonate  of  (od*  («lnm)  wai  found  to  anaw«r
better.  The  oil  waa  Gnallj  pound  into  fan  (deBa
attana),  which  had  been  jBerionilj  thoroB^iIy
cleaned  and  tMioned,  and  ^aaed  with  wax  et  gvm
to  preroit  abioiption,  the  lidi  (igmtiM)  wen
arefnlly  woqred,  and  Ihqr  were  then  ddiTered  to
the  OTCTieet  (nutoi)  by  whom  they  were  itoted
Dp  in  the  vault  merred  for  their  reception  («ffa


OLIGARCHIA.
Afto'  a  mAdente  fbtcs  bad  been  applied  ia  tba
pren,  and  a  cratiderable  quantity  of  oil  had  flowed
forth,  the  bniaed  take  (lampta)  wai  takeo  ant  of
the  hogt,  miied  with  a  little  mlt,  nplaced  and
inlijecled  ta  the  action  of  the  pnea  a  amoid,  and
again  a  third  time.  The  oil  fint  obtained  (obna
primae  pmmrai)  wai  Ibe  Goeat,  and  in  pnpartkfi
aa  addiliotial  force  waa  mdied  by  the  pn«-mee
(Jadom,  Imalarii),  the  qaalii^  hacame  giadually

" mdiorit  taporitaaal  miium  ei  pnii

Hence,  the  pndnet  ef


am  prima  pnmra}.  The  knreat  qnijity  of  all
lottam  eAariam)  waa  Bkde  ftao  olma  which  had
been  partially  donogad  by  ittmio,  or  which  bad
fallen  from  tba  tieea  in  bad  weather  into  Uie  mud,
io  that  it  became  neceataiy  (o  waih  them  in  warn
water  before  they  could  be  naed.

The  qnantity  of  frnit  thrown  at  one  time  into  tlw
preai  Taried  from  130  to  160  modii,  aoccnding  tn
thecapacL^oftbeTeasela:  thii  qnanti^  wai  termed
Faeitu,  the  amonnt  of  oil  obtuned  &«n  one  bctna
waa  called  HoihH,  but  thoe  wordi  an  not  nnfra-
quently  cenfoanded.  (Cat.  R.  R.  7,  U,  S5,  Sfi  j
VaiT.  R.a.1  2i,  SB  ;  ColumelL  uL  £3  ;  Plin.
ff.M  IT,  a.  B,  7  i  Geopon.  a.  17.) tW.  R.]

OLIGA'RCHIA  {iMtapxi*),  li»  foocnnatf
qf  4  fito,  ii  a  term,  the  ^iplication  of  which  by
writen  on  political  leieDce  ii  leai  wide  than  it*
etymological  iignificatlon  might  baTB  wamotEil,
(See  Polyb.  n.  4  ;  Ariat.  PoL  ir.  3,  ban  when
we  leam  that  ionie  writen  need  Oligarctaia  aa  a
generic  name,  inelndii^  Ariitocratia  ai  one  of  ita
ipectea.)  It  ii  ihown  eliewhen  {Abibtocs^tu)
under  what  conditimi  the  linutalioa  of  poLtieal
power  to  a  portion  of  tbe  communis  wai  regarded
aa  a  proper  and  regular  conititution  (ipOii  aoAfril^
ArUt.  Piii.  iii.  4,  iv.  2.)  Tbe  term  OUgarMa  waa
applied  to  that  perrenion  (Ta^ta«u)  of  anilru-
loeratia  into  which  the  latter  paiaed,  when,  owing
to  the  riie  of  tiie  dtaua  [Deuocilitlij,  and  Ibe
nmiihing  of  thoee  lubitantial  groundi  of  pre-eau*
necce  which  rendered  an  AriMMratia  not  nnjuat,
tha  role  of  the  dominant  portioil  of  tiw  oonunnni^
ccaaed  to  be  the  exponoil  of  the  genva]  intenaca
of  the  itate,  and  became  tbe  aecsidann  of  a  tac-
tion, whole  effort*  wen  dineled  cfaiefly  toward*
their  own  a^randiiement  and  the  maintaiBZwe  of
their  own  power  and  privilegea  (Ariit.  La.  SH.
Nkom.  TiiL  12  [  Polyb.  tI  8.  |  4).  The  [«.
•erratlon  of  power  under  aoch  cireiunatBiice*  of
coune  depended  chiefly  upon  the  poneAioD  of
iuperior  wtalth  and  the  other  apptiancei  of  wealth
which  were  iti  eoneomitanti.  Thai  it  came  to  ba
K^arded  aa  eMeatiiU;  chancteriitic  of  an  oligar-
chy, that  the  main  diatinelioD  between  tbe  dcniinant
ta^on  and  the  asbjeet  portioB  rf  tha  eamarani^
wai  tba  poaMaaicn  of  greater  wealth  on  tbe  p»M  of
tba  forms'.  Hence  tbe  tana  Qiyaretia  wmld
not  ban  been  B)plied,  if  a  anall  aeclian  of  tba
cranaanity,  eanuitinf  of  poor  penona,  br  any
meanigot  theRimof  goionmentinlothor  naoda.
(Alfat  PaLiT.», >v>M lUr  forw Inw of  AeM*.
fK  iiifm  irir,  iXiymnef'  *1  Sra*  •!  vlioinm.
A  little  tbrtber  on  he  a^a ;  t)uymfxtai  SI  trt^
el  w\»im»i  ml  ityvitrr^fM,  toiiw  trm,  cf^iw
'Tqi  ifXVt  'e'v.  Comp.  ir.  6  ;  Plat,  dt  Aja.  litL
pp.  ££0,  e.  ££S,  a.)  The  Bie  of  the  wealthy  portion
being  alao  tba  man  somann  woold  b«  a  vny


OI.LA.

rare  nception.  Their  dominian,  of  cimne,  would
nut  be  ui  oliguchj  ;  bnt  Deitfarr  wanld  it  be  ■
dcmorncj  (Aiirt.  Pot.  it.  S).  Wben  an  ariMo-
crac;  paved  in  tha  nitnnl  dintopment  of  •ocjel;
into  u  aligwehj,  lbs  dI^bnIu  would,  of  count,
b«  high  honi  u  well  u  rich.  Bui  higb  btrtb  VM
not  u  fiKiitial  Eondidni.  It  tttj  fsaxjaorAj  hap-
pened that  the  oliguchi  w«n  thnuMltei  onlf  ■  kc-
lion  of  the  old  nobiiit^,  ha'riiig  excluded  the  poorer
meniben  of  their  nider  from  the  powMiion  of  pnwer.
Ariitotle  {PU.  It.  S)  diitingtuihei  Tsrioni  ipe-
riei  of  ol^inhj;  —  1.  Wbere  *  certain  large
amount  of  pnipat;  ii  tba  onl^  requiiite  for  being
a  mcsibcT  nf  the  ralhig  cliu :  1.  Where  the  pro-
pettj  qtudilication  ii  not  luge,  but  the  memben
of  the  goienmient  thcDuelTo  lupply  tui;  Tscancie*
that  nu;  occur  in  tbetr  nnki  bj  electing  olhen  to
All  them :  !L  Whuc  the  (on  incceed)  Co  the  powet
ef  hii  bther:  A.  Whert,  beiida  Ihii  being  the
mae,  the  mien  goiem  sMording  to  no  fiied  lawi,
but  arbitrarily.  (Comp.  PlaLPcrftf.  pp.  301,  S02.)
The  fint  kind,  especially  when  the  ^\|l,^||M  waa
not  ertratfigantly  high,  n  that  a  coniiderable
number  ihared  political  power,  though  only  a  few
of  them  might  be  eligible  to  the  bighevt  officei,
wa>  lametimei  called  n^wrpsrla  ( Arut.  E&.  Nie.
TiiL  12  ;  Xenophon,  Mem.  \t.  6.  g  12,  naea  Uie
term  ■wXoimtifariii ;  Plato,  dtSrp.  na.  p.  647,  d.,
niea  the  term  Titauparla  ID  a  diSiiiait  lenK).
It  appiorimBlei  cloiely  to  the  woKiriia,  and  hence
Ariilolle  {Pol.  iT.  11)  calli  it  i\iyapx''  nXiTuc^.
Elvwhere  (£U.  A'ic.  L  e.) he  identifiea  it  with

Theie  general  diiiiioni  of  courao  admitted  of
TarioDi  modiliailioDt ;  and  the  diatributinn  of  the
function!  of  goTemment  might  be  auch  aj  to  creal
an  aliiarcby  within  nn  oligarchy.  To  thii  ipecii
of  oligarchy,  the  name  Sanmla  waa  aomelimi
applied.  (AriiC  Pol.  t.  2.  6 ;  Thnc  m.  62,  I
78  i  Xen.  HeOoL  T.  i.  %  46.)

The  tarn  ArUecntia  u  not  nnireqnently  ap-
plied to  what  the  more  careful  diatinctiona  of  the
writen  on  political  acience  would  term  OtipanAia.
(Comp.  Thuc  iiL  92  i  Xen.  HiUm.  t.  2.  i  7
Ariitoph.  Av.  12S.)

Beiidca  the  aulhoritiea  quoted  abore,  the  reader
may  cuniult  Wacbonuth,  IKlaatcii  AlttrHamu-
kaadr,  SS  36,  44,  47,  SS,  64  ;  Hemann.  LAriaA
der  Grmk.  StaattaUeraSnuT,  §g  fiS— 61  ;  Thiil-
wall, ««.  </Grea«,  toL  i.  ch.  10.  [C.  P.  M.)

OLLA,  OMt.  AULA  (PlaiL  AtU.  pauia),
dim.  OLLULA  (X«j)ij  x^pot,  x<"f^  *■»!.
Xvr^t  \  a  Tcaael  of  any  material,  round  and  plain,
and  haring  a  vide  mouth  ;  a  pot ;  a  jar.

&'aidea  being  made  of  eartheuwaie  (Antiphanci
op.  Ati™.  X.  70  ;  iinfttxirri,  Ualaeea)  and  bronie
(xoJUtn,  aenea,  Aeaop.  Fab.  329  ;  Cato,  dt  Re  RuU.
81  ;  oontm,  O'id.  jifcf.  vii.  318—321  ;  Mtut
xi*Mi>t,  Herod,  i  48),  the  ancienti  alu  made
Iheae  icMeli  of  different  kinda  of  atone,  which
wen  timied  upon  the  lathe.  At  Plenn,  a  Tillage
near  ChiaTeaoa  to  the  north  of  the  Lake  ef  Como,
the  manubctuR  of  Teiaeli  from  tbe  potatone  found
in  B  neighbouring  moualali]  u  atill  carried  on,  and
baa  pnbably  eiiated  there  from  the  time  of  Pliny,
who  make*  eipceu  mealion  of  it  {If.  N.  ii
23.  a  44),  Some  of  iheae  reuela  are  nearly
feet  in  diameter,  and,  being  adapted  to  bear  the
fire,  Bie  nied  for  cooking.  (OcWtt  niternart  c^ant
ixjfu,  M  wfiirafiir,  Vairo,  ap.  Non.  Mara^.  p.  543.
•d.  Merccri  ;  FeatDf,  i.e..4>i/<u.)


The  j)rrceding  woodcut  I'l  taken  Cmro  a  Tase  in
the  Bntiih  Muaeum,  which  waa  found  at  Camno
in  Etroria.  Tho  painting  upon  it  Tepreaenti  the
iCory  of  Medea  boiling  an  old  ram  with  a  TJew  la
peranade  the  daoghtera  of  Pdiaa  to  pot  biro  to
dpBtt  (Qni,  Met  yil  318—331  ;  Itygin.  Fab.
34.)  The  pot  baa  a  lound  boitou),  and  ii  lupperted
by  a  tripod  under  which  ia  a  Imp  fire.  The  ram,
reatored  lo  youth,  ii  juat  in  the  act  of  leaping  out
of  the  pot  Initcad  of  being  aupporled  by  a  acpa-
rate  tripod,  the  Teasel  waa  aometimea  made  with
the  feet  all  in  one  piece,  and  it  waa  then  called  in
Greek  tfliunn  [Tnipos],  x"/"*""  (Hea  Op.  it
Dia,  748  ;  SchoL  »  Soplt.  Aj.  140j),  and  nplg.

TOTJJt,

Beaidea  being  placed  npon  the  Ere  in  order  lo


Italy,  and  Sicily.  (Xen.
HeBat.  it.  6.  g  4.)  They  alio  used  amall  pota  con-
taiablg  fire  and  pitch  to  annoy  the  enemyin  liegea
by  throwing  them  &nm  allngi  and  military  enginea.
Ollae  were  alao  uied  lo  hold  aolidi  and  keep
them  in  atere,  while  amphorae  rendered  the  lame
aenice  in  legud  lo  liquida.  [Ahfhoha.]  Thua
gispea  were  kept  in  jara  aa  at  preeenL  (ColumelL
A.)(.iii.43.)  Although  pota  were  commonly  made
•olely  with  a  liew  lo  nlilily,  and  were  iheiefora
dratitnte  of  omamenl  and  without  handlea,  yet
they  were  aometimea  mado  with  two  handlea
(ilirroi)  like  amphorae ;  and,  when  they  wen  well
turned  upon  the  wheel,  well  baked,  ameoth  and
neat,  and  ao  large  aa  to  hold  vx  congii  {^4^  gaJ-
lona  nearly),  they  were,  aa  we  learn  from  Plato
{Hipp.Maj.  pp.  153,154,  ed.  Heindorf),raiuiderad
Tery  beantifuL

Pota  were  nied,  ai  with  ua,  in  gardening,  (Cato,
ita  Rt  Rnt.  51.)  The  custom  of  placing  flower-
pota  in  windowB  ii  mentioned  by  Marti^  (li.  19.
1,  2).  A  Aowei-pot,  about  sii  inchea  high  and
I  suited  to  thii  application,  was  found  among  the
I  luina  of  Aldbotough,  the  ancient  lauiium,  and  ii


B2S  OLTMPIA.

{mfcmd  hj  A.  L&wion  Eaq^  dia  owiim  of  thil

Anotlin'  i«7  rsmarkmble  VM  of  tbeu  Tend*  of
carthenwan  uaaag  ths  Oreeki  mi  ts  pot  inhntt
into  them  to  be  oipond  (Ajnitoph.  AuL  1186  i
SdwL  ad  ItK. ;  Moeiii,  r  c.  'EYnrrpurfi^),  or  to
be  CMTied  Mijwbere.  (Ariitoph.  TlittiB.  612 —
616  j  SchaL  od  loe.)  Hence  the  eipomn  of  chit-
drm  ™.  allied  ^TX^pfft"  (Heijck  •.  d.),  aod
uenble  women  vho  pnetiied  it  iyyiyrpir-


OLTMPIA.


<SQi.


•■?■) .


numeatol  hucriptiani  tho  tenn  oSn  ii  fn-
qnenlhf  applied  to  the  pota  which  were  naad  to  n-
ceiTe  die  aahei  of  the  iavet  or  inferior  mamben  of
■  Auniljr,  and  which  were  either  eipoaad  to
in  the  niche*  of  tho  caliimbiiriuiD,  or  iramiiTed
in  iDch  *  mwmer  u  to  ihow  the  lid  only.  Some
good  apecimen*  of  cinerai;  ollae  are  preaerred  in
the  Britiih  Miueuzn  in  a  amall  sputment  ao  con-
■tructed  a*  to  eihibit  sccuratelj  the  man»T  of
ananging  them.  <See  above,  p.  661  ;  and  nniii»-
rooB  pUte*  in  Bartoli^  AnticM  5spobn.)

The lid  of  tiie oils  voi  called  i-rlBrifui  and


teiial  and  the  itfle  of  ornament  with  the  oUa  itael£
(Hend.  L  46  ;  Col.  i.o.)  [J.  Y.J

OLY'MPIA  {i\6^wia\  nmolly  tmHed  the
Olympio  gamea,  the  gieateat  of  the  national  fea-
tirali  of  the  Qroek*.  It  wu  celebrated  at  Oljm-
pia  in  Elii,  th*  name  giTen  to  a  imall  plun  to  the
weit  of  Piia,  which  wai  bounded  on  the  uoith  and
noith-eeit  by  the  moontuni  Cnnin*  and  Oljmput,
on  the  aoDlh  bj  the  river  Alpheoa,  and  on  the
weat  by  the  Cladeiu,  which  flow*  into  the  Alpheoa.
UlTmpia  don  not  appear  to  hare  been  a  town,  hot
nther  a  eoUectien  of  templea  and  pablic  bnildinn,
the  deicriptim  of  which  doea  not  come  within  die
plan  or  thia  work.

The  origin  of  the  Olympic  Game*  ii  buried  in
ohacuiily.  The  legendi  of  the  Elean  prieat*  attri-
buted the  institution  of  the  feetival  to  the  Idacin
Henclei,  and  referred  it  to  the  time  of  Cronoa.  Ao-
eording  to  theii  account,  Rhea  committed  her  new-
born Zeoi  to  the  Idaean  Dactyli,  aleo  tailed  Cnre-
tea,  of  whom  file  brothai,  Herulea,  Paeonaena,
Epimedea,  laiini,  and  Idai,  came  from  Ida  in
Crete,  to  Olympia,  wbere  a  temple  had  been  erected
to  Cnmoe  by  the  men  of  the  golden  age  ;  and
Heiaclei  the  eldeat  conqaered  hi*  bnthen  in  a
foot-iace,  and  wai  crowned  with  ^  wild  olive-
tree.  Heracle*  heteapon  eetabliihed  a  conteat,
which  wai  to  be  celebrated  oTery  five  year*,  be-
canae  he  and  lua  brotheia  were  fire  in  namber.
(PBua.T.7.  Si.)  Fifty  yean  after  Dencalion*B  flood
they  laid  that  Clymenni,  the  eon  of  Cardia,  a  de-
•cendant  at  the  Idaean  Heraclei,  came  from  Crett^
and  celebmted  the  featiml ;  bnt  that  Endymion,
the  Bon  of  Aethlioi,  depriTed  Clymenna  of  the
■OTeielgnty,  and  offioed  the  kingdom  a*  a  priie  to
hia  ion*  in  tbe  liMt-nee  i  that  a  generation  after
Endymion  the  featiral  waa  celehiated  by  Pelop  to
the  honaaT  of  the  Olympian  Zen*  ;  that  when  the
eon*  of  Pelepa  were  acatleced  through  Pebpon-
ne*ni,  Amythaop,  the  ion  of  Crethena  and  a  relo-
tio]  of  Endymion,  celebrated  it  j  that  to  him  ino-
ceeded  Pellai  and  Neleui  in  conjimctiDn,  then
Angeai,  and  at  laat  Heradn,  the  taa  of  AJnphi-
tiyon,  after  the  taking  of  Eli*.  Afterward*  Oiy~
tu  ii  raendoned  a*  preaidino  ovei  the  game*,  and
then  thn-  are  laid  to  hare  been  diacontinoed  till
Ihur  tvnial  by  Iphitoa.  (Pmu.  t.  6.  |  1, 2.)  Mou


■ndent  wiitcn,  bowerer,  attiibnta  the  inatitntia>
of  the  gamea  to  Heractea,  the  am  of  Amphitrvon
(Apollod.  iu  7.  g  2  ;  Diod.  ir.  U  ;  compan  Stimbo,
viii  p.  SG5),  while  others  lepreaeol  Almi  ai
fimnder.  (VeU.  Pat.  i.  "  "
28.  n.  10.)


hera  zepreaeot  A


the  retam  of  lim  Huaclidae  to  tbe  Pelqmnncana
by  the  Aetoliana,  who  nniled  tbemadrea  with  th«
Qeana.  It  i*  impoiaible  to  aaj  what  credit  ia  to  ba
giien  to  the  ancient  traditinna  reipecting  the  in-
■titution  of  the  featiral ;  but  they  aj^war  to  ahow
that  religion*  featiral*  had  been  oeleloated  at
Olympia  fiom  the  earlieit  timea,  and  it  i*  difficult
to  GODceire  that  the  Pelopanneaiaua  and  the  other
Oreeki  would  have  anached  auch  impartanea  la
thi*  ieitival,  nnleaa  Olympia  had  long  bean  re-
garded aa  a  hallowed  lite.  ThetiralbiaUncalfiKt
connected  with  the  Olympian  Qamea  ia  their  n-
tival  by  Tphitua,  king  of  Elia,  who  ii  laid  to  haw
accompliihed  it  with  the  ■■■^■**"'*  c^  Lycnigna*
the  Spartan  lawgiver,  and  Cleaathenea  of  Pin  ;  and
the  namea  of  Iphitoi  and  Lycurgni  were  inicrihed
onadiacineommamentionutheeventi  which  dim
Pauaaniaa  aaw  in  the  temde  of  Hen  at  Olympia.
(Paiu.T.4.g«,v.30.fliPhiL£yc.l.a3.)JtwDu]d
appear  from  thia  traditHO,  *a  Thirlwall  {HiM.  V"


eitabliihmmit  of  the  fenival,  and  mainly  eontri-
huted  to  procuie  the  eonaent  of  the  other  Pebpon-
neaiana.  The  celebration  of  tbe  feitinl  m^-  hava
been  diicoDtinned  in  cmacqneiKe  of  tho  trouble*
coniequent  upon  the  Dorian  invaaion,  and  we  ara
told  tbat  Iphitoa  waa  commanded  by  tbe  Delphie
Oracle  to  revive  it  aa  a  remedy  fiw  intestine  com-
motioni  and  for  peatilenca,  with  which  Greece  waa
then  afflicted.  Iphitu*  therenpon  induced  tbe
Eleani  to  Bcrifice  to  Hoadea,  whom  they  had
formedy  regarded  aa  an  enemy,  and  &om  thii  time
the  game*  were  regularly  oclebntad.  (Paua.  L  a)
Di3a«nt  datea  are  aaaigned  lo  Iphitoa  by  andent
writen,  aome  phidng  hu  revival  of  the  Olympiad
at  K  c  esi,  and  othera,  a*  Callimachaa,  at  B.  c
628.  <CliDton,J^liaLffa2i.p.409.t.)  Theinlerval
of  four  yean  between  each  celcbation  of  the
leitival  waa  called  an  Olympiad  ;  but  the  Olym-
piada  were  not  employed  a*  a  chronological  acn
till  the  victDiy  of  Coroebua  in  the  foot-race  b.  a
776.  [OLTMPua.]

The  meat  importanl  point  in  the  renewal  of  the
featival  by  Iptutua  waa  the  eatabllahmail  of  the
'  ;,  or  aacnd  armiitic^  the  formula  for  prt^
which  wBi  iOBCTibcd  ia  a  circle  on  the
it;oned  above.  The  ptoclamatian  waa
made  by  peace-herald*  (c^  *  - '  ^  -  .  .  -«.
*  '  laid*  iulba  oUiei
all  warbra  tar  tf

■re  celebrated,  and  whidi  waa  called
Tipoiaiiiia.  The  tenitoiT  of  EUa  itaelf  waa  oeo-
(idered  eapedolly  aacrad  during  il*  (onCiaDanee^
nd  no  armed  force  conld  enter  it  without  tncnr-^
ing  the  guilt  of  aaciilege.  When  the  Spaitam  m
oc  occaiion  tent  luce*  agunit  the  fnrtceaa  Phyt-
nm  and  Lepream  during  the  ejtialeDce  of  the
Olympic  truce  (ir  Toit  'OAiynruucaii  eweptail),
they  were  fined  by  the  Eleani,  according  to  tlis
Olympic  biw,  2000  minae,  being  two  fat  each
Hopllte.  (Tbucyd.  t.  49.)  The  ^ewia,  howerer,
pretended  not  only  that  thdr  lanita  vefe  inviolabl*


OLYMPIA.
during  the  liiteMa  of  tfaa  tnet,  bnt  tbat  bj  iba
oiipiMl  ignniwnt  with  tlia  otho  tMtt  of  Pelo-
pcoDou  thai  ludi  wan  mada  ncced  £>  ner,
■nd  Iran  DsrcTto  baUtided  bf  uiTboitila  lira
(Stnbcs  TfiL  PL  S&8)  ;  nid  tlwr  futber  itilcd  tl>l
the  fint  -riiil^iM  of  their  UniUOf  wm  mad*  by
PheidoB  of  Algol.  Bnt  tba  Elmia  tbemielTCi  did
not  abataiu  Sum  unu,  ud  h  ii  not  probable  llaX
mcb  ■  pritilege  wmld  ba>e  eiiited  witbont  im-
nmg  on  them  the  eaiRi|Kodiiig  duty  of  n&&in-
W  fram  attwking  the  temtorir  of  thor  neigbboiui.
The  latar  Greeki  do  not  >ppe«r  to  bare  admitted
thii  daim  of  the  Eleuu,  a*  m  find  muj  euea  in
which  thnr  ennitiT  mi  mado  tba  ksu  of  war.
(XcB./IUtiiL3.|2S,du^  TiL<ft^>

The  Olynwis  ftitinl  waa  pnhabljr  oontiwd  at
GiM  to  the  PdopamenaBa ;  but  ai  ita  ealshrity
eiteaded,  tba  o(hn  Onaka  toc^  net  in  it,  till  at
kngth  It  hnxBC  a  ttHiitl  br  tba  wbda  n  '
No  ona  w>*  allowed  t«  oontoid  in  the  gaiw
wlODi  tf  pdiB  HeUaaio  blood ;  barhaiiaoa  might
be  apectaton,  bat  ilaTaa  wan  aatiralf  eichidiid.
A)]  panooa  who  had  bani  biaudad  tn-  their  own
■talea  with  Alimia,  or  had  baan  guil^  of  any
•ffenca  igaiiiM  the  dinna  lawi  wera  not  pennitled
to  cmlend.  (Compara  Demotth.  e.  Aruloerat,  pBb
631,633.)  When  the  Hellenic  nca  had  been  ex-
tandod  by  Gojooiea  to  Aua,  A&ia,  and  other  porta
of  Bniope,  penom  contended  in  tba  game)  fnm
Tery  diatant  ptacea ;  and  in  later  timea  a  greater
nnmber  sf  eonqaeniri  oima  &om  the  coloniei  than
frnn  tba  molbar  coQiitry.  After  the  CDiiqaeat  of
Oieeoa  by  the  Romaaa,  the  Utter  were  allowed  to
take  part  in  tba  gwnea.  The  emperon  Tiberiiu
aod  Nero  were  both  conquenm,  and  Pauianiaa
(*.30.  |<)  qieakiaf  n  Rinian  teDator  who  gained
the  Tictory.  Daring  tbe  freedom  of  Gteece,  eren
Oreeki  woe  aomeiimea  exdodad,  whan  they  had
bean  gathy  of  a  ciiraa  which  aweuvd  to  the  ^leani
to  daaarre  thii  paniahmant  The  faoiaei  of  Hienin
of  Synenaa  wara  excluded  fran  the  chariot-race
Uuoo^  the  ioflaaDC*  of  Tbemiilnriea,  becanja  ha
had  not  taken  pait  with  the  other  Oraeki  a^uut
tbe  Peniioi.  (Pint.  TVm.  25  ;  Aalian,  V.H.  ix.
S.)  All  the  I^eadaononiao*  ware  excludod  in  the
SOth  Olympiad,  beama  they  had  not  paid  tba  fine
far  TkJaang  (he  Elcaa  tairiloryi  aa  mentioned  abore
(Thnc  T.  19,  50  ;  Pwu.  iu  8.  g  3)  ;  and  limilar


la  the  Alpbaoi  daring  the  cafabnuion  of  tha
gamea  under  penalty  of  being  hnrled  down  ftom
tbe  Typaean  rock.  Only  one  inelance  ia  recorded
of  a  woniui  hanng  vaptiued  to  be  [naent,  and  ibe,
•Ithongh  delected,  waa  pardoned  m  coneidentim
of  ber  bth^i  brotben,  and  eon  having  bema  Ticton
inthegmnea.  (Paua.T.  fi.  §6*  ;  AeL  F.  tf.x.  I.)
An  aieeptum  waa  made  to  thii  law  in  bfour  of
the  prieateM  of  Dameter  Chamyne,  who  nt  on  an
altar  of  iriiite  imrbEa  o^ioaita  to  the  HeUanoi^cae.
(P»na.  Ti  20.  g  e  i com[u>  Snet  A'v,  c  12.)


*  It  would  qipeat  (kom  aaotha  paange  of  Pan-
■aniaa  that  n'lpni  wera  allowed  to  be  praaeuL
though  marriid  women  wan  not  (japtirmit  Si
Bin ilfrfomn  btaaaaBiu,  n.  30.  3  6)  ; bat  thia


and  tha  mding  of  tbe  paMage  aeema  to  be  doobt-
foL (See  Valckenaer,  ad  Tiaocr.  Jdat.  pp.  1S6,


OLTMPIA.  839

Women  wera,  bowenr,  allowed  to  aand  chaiiota  in
the  ncea  ;  and  the  fint  woman,  wboae  honei  won
the  i»iie,  waa  Cyiuaia,  the  daoghlet  of  Arebida-
moi,  and  niter  of  Ageeilaua.  (Pan*.  iiL  8,  g  1.)
Tha  number  of  ipectalon  at  the  teitiial  waa  ray
great  i  and  these  wen  drawn  together  not  merely
by  the  duira  of  leein^  the  gamea,  but  partly
thno^  tbe  opportuai^  it  afioided  them  of  cany-
ing  on  commercial  tranaadiona  with  peramia  bom
dialant  ^acea  (VeU.  LSi  mtraOiu  (Xynfwuw,
Jnatiu,  sii.  fi),  aa  ii  the  caae  with  the  Uohamraedan
feMiT^  at  Uacs  and  Mediuk  Many  of  the  per-
aona  praaani  were  ^«a  depatiei  (StiifoC)  aoit  to
nfMMQt  tha  rarionaataleaofGreecai  and  we  find
tbt  theae  ambaaaiaa  Tied  with  ona  another  in  tha
number  of  their  oSeriugi,  and  tha  qJandour  of


•impart  tl
native  alia.  The  BMWt  OlDatrimia
cilueniDf  a  Mate  were  frequently  aaot  ai  i&mmoL
(ThucTL  18 ;  Andoc  c  J/o.  pp.  126, 127.  Raiika.)

The  OlyiuiHC  Scmlinl  waa  a  Penlaeteoi  (vtmu-
Ti)^i),  that  ii,  according  to  the  ancient  mode  of
leckimin^,  a  apace  of  four  yaan  eliqaed  between
each  festiTal,  in  the  nine  way  aa  then  waa  only  a
■pace  of  two  yean  between  a  rpimifit.  According
to  tba  Scholiaat  on  Pindar  (ad  OL  iiL  35,  BiickhX
the  Olympic  featiial  waa  c^ebnted  at  an  inleml

fiinaer  ate  in  the  moulh  of  ApoUaaini,  in  tba
latter  in  that  of  Parthaniua.  Tfaii  Matement  baa
giien  riie  to  moch  differeace  sf  opinion  from  tha
tnne  of  J.  Scaliger  ;  bat  the  exphnatitai  of  BSckh
in  hia  commentary  aa  Pindar  ia  tha  moat  Btiifiu-
thU  tha  featiral  wtt  ccMnatad  on  the  fint
noon  aftic  the  aummar  aolatio^  which  aimn-
fell  in  tha  month  of  Apoltonioi,  and  aome-
in  PartbanimL  both  of  which  he  eaiddan  to
be  the  namea  of  Qcan  or  OIym|^  montba :  om-
aeijnently  the  featinl  waa  oanally  celabnted  in  the
Attic  month  of  Hecatombaaon.  ll  laited,  after  all
the  ctHiteili  had  been  introduced,  five  daya,  tmm
the  11th  to  the  15th  dayi  of  the  month  incluaive.
[Scbol  ad  Find.  OLy.  6.)  The  fbnrth  day  of  (ha
natifal  waa  tha  Ilth  of  tha  month,  which  waa  Iba
day  of  tbe  full-mom  and  which  divided  the  month
into  two  equal  parti  (Six^ijni  fi^H,  Find,  Ot  B.
19  ;  SchoL  ad  lae.).
Tha  leatiTal  waa  under  tha  ■■""'-'"f  nperin-
ndence  of  tha  Olympian  Zeut,  whose  temple  at
Olynrpiaj  adonied  with  the  atatna  of  the  god  made
by  PhidMi^  wai  odc  of  the  moat  itJendid  worki  of
Grecian  art.  (Paut,  r.  10,  &c)  There  wen  aba
templei  and  allan  to  moat  of  the  other  goda.  The
featiTul  itaelf  may  be  divided  iclo  two  porta,  the
r  conteau  (M^  'OAufiwiocdi,  iM/^r
,  Kplais  iiSfjsr,  Tit/ilbt  Ue^Mr,  rmfw-  .
pfw),  and  the  feative  ritea  {ioprtf)  connected  with
the  iBcriEcaa,  with  tha  proeesaioui  and  with  the
public  banqueti  in  honour  of  tbe  conquenin.  Thoa
Pauaauiaa  diitingniibca  between  the  two  parti  of
the leatinl,  when ha  ipeaka  of rir  iyira  ir


Tha  conqnecoii  in  the  games,  and  private  indivi-
duali,  aa  well  aa  tbe  tbeori  or  depntiei  fiom  tha
italea,  oS^fd  aacrificca  to  tbe  di^rent
chief  sacrifioH  were  ofiered  by  the
lame  of  tbe  Elean  itate.  The  order
which  the  Elnni  offered  their  sacrifices  to  tbe
different  gods  is  given  in  a  passage  of  Pansaniaa
(t.  U.  %  5).  There  has  been  considerable  diipnta
among  modem  wiiten,  whether  tbe  saoihcci  wera


godi ;  ba


830  OLYMPIA.

oSercd  by  the  Elesiu  uid  the  Theori  M  (he  «


irlim


It  the  teimmatiDD  of  thf  i
Dt  allov


TOij,  hut it  ^>etin  matt  probebU  thiit  certain
sacrificM  mn  offered  by  the  Elotnt  u  introductory
to  the  gamea,  but  that  tho  mBJoritj  ■wen  not  ( ~
till  the  conchuioD,  when  the  fluh  of  the  *
mu  nqoired  fbc  the  public  btnqoet*  ginn

The  ooDteitg  eonniled  of  miooi  Iriali  oritnngtl

Hid  ikill,  irhicli  were  increued  in  numbei  from
time  to  time.  There  Ten  in  bU  tventy-fooi  con-
teiti,  eighteen  in  which  men  took  part,  and  *ii  in
which  hoyi  engved,  though  they  were  neTer  all
exhibited  at  one  feitlTsl,  linco  aome  were  aboligbed
almoat  immediately  after  theii  inititndon,  and
othen  after  they  had  been  in  OM  only  a  ihoit  time.
We  nibjoia  a  liit  of  Cheie  from  Piuuaniu  (t.  8.
§2,3,9.  §  1.2;  eornpaieP1nt.%>9i.  T.2),  with
the  dEite  of  the  jntrodaclion  of  each.


from  the  Oljnipiad  of  Coroebni : — 1.  The  fbotrwe
(Bpifaof"),  which  wu  the  only  ccmteet  during  the
Snt  13  Olympiad!.  2,  The  tfiivXoi,  or  fbot-mce,  in
which  the  atadium  wu  CmTened  twice,  lint  intro-
duced in  OL  U.  3.  The  SifXixoi,  a  itilllonget  foat-
luce  lluui  the  SdnAoi,  introduced  in  01.  IS.*  For
>  more  pBrticolu  account  of  the  tlauKas  and  SiXi-
XOi  (eeST^Diiiii.  4.  Wrestling  (ir^)|)  {Lucta],
and  S.  The  Pentathlum  (w^oSXav),  which  coDiiited
of  file  exerdHi  [Pintitbluk],  both  introduced
in  OL  1 S.  6.  Boiing  (■vr/i^),  introduced  in  01. 2.<i.
[FusiLiTua.]  7.  Thechanot-race,withfonrfiill-
grown  honee  [Irwmi  rtXiLtr  tpi/iai,  ipfia),  inCro-
auced  in  01.  36.  B.  The  Pancratium  {rrrKpiriar)
[PiNCBATiuMl,  and  9.  The  hor»e-mc«  (fmi
iti^fli),  both  IntRiduced  in  01.  33.  10  and  11.
The  foot-race  and  wrestling  for  boyi,  both  intro-
dncrf  in  OL  37.  12.  The  Pentnthlnm  for  boyi,
introduced  in  01.  38,  bnt  inunediately  alttrwuda
■bolLihed.  13.  Basing  for  hoyi,  intinduc^d  in  OL
41.  14.  The  Ibol-mce,  in  which  men  ran  with  the
Equipment!  of  heaTy-anncd  loldien  (tuv  hXi-rvr
tpi/wi),  introdnced  ui  OL  65,  on  account  of  iu
tmining  men  for  actual  terrice  in  war.  16.  The
chsriot-mce  with  main  (iir^i^),  introduced  in  01.
70  ;  and  IS.  The  horae-race  with  aaiti  (iiJAr>i\
deacribed  by  Pauianiai  (t.  9.  §  1,  2),  introduced
m  Oi.  71,  both  of  which  were  aboliahed  in  01,  84.

17.  Tho  chariot-race  with  two  fiill-grown  horaei
(Tn-Hf  TtAflw  irorupis),  inUodnced  in  01.  93.

18,  19.  The  eontejt  of  heraldi  (irtpittt)  and
tnunpeteti  (ira\irr]'icTal),  introduced  in  01.  9fi.
(African,  op.  Ettub.  j(por,  L  'E\K  iK  p.  41  ;
Pani.  1.  S3,  g  1  1  compan  Cie.  ad  Fam.  i.  12.)
20.  The  chariot-cBcc  with  four  fbali  {itiKat
Sf/iaeiyX  introduced  in  OL99.  21.  The  chariot-
race  with  two  fouli  (irJXuy  rurupl!),  introdnccd
in  01.  128.  22.  The  horae-race  with  fbalt  (t£Ao(
nixni),  iatmduced  in  OL  131. 23.  The  Pancra-

*  Some  worda  appear  to  have  dropped  out  of  the
psKBga  of  Pausaniai.  In  eiety  other  caae  he
meatisni  the  name  of  the  Gnt  conqueror  in  each
new  canteat,  hut  nercr  the  name  of  the  conqueror
in  the  aame  eonteit  in  the  following  Ot.  In  thia
pauage,  howoer,  iSiex  Diring  the  name  of  the  lirtt
coniineror  in  tho  Diauloa,  he  adda,  Tf  (t  *(5»
'Ajeu«ii,  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  thii  must
be  the  name  of  the  coniineror  in  the  Dolichoa ;
which  ii  alio  eipreaaly  alated  by  A&icanua  (apud
£ui.  xpw  I.  'EAX.  iK  f.  39).


OLYMPIA.

tinrafbrbOTa,  inttodneed  b  OL14£.  34.  Thn*
w»  b1k>  a  home-iaee  (Imt  itttiit)  in  which  bni
rode  (PanivL  3.  §  4,  13.  g  1,  13.  |  6),  hut  we
do  not  know  the  time  of  iu  intcodaction. Of  then

the  heroic  i^  bnt  the  tiiJlowing  wae  intredneed
lor  the  fint  tima  by  iha  Elcui:— ail  tbe  cnrteata
in  which  boyi  toiA  jait,  tbe  fbot-nce  cf  Hoplilc^
the  race*  in  which  ftale  wen  cnploytd,  tha  ekuiot-
i«ee  in  which  molai  were  oied,  and  the  hmafrnea
with  Buna  (xiKryi).  Tho  cnttwta  of  henldi  and
tminpeten  ware  alao  [folxbly  intrndnced  after  the
heroic  age.

Panaaniai  (r.  9.  §  3}  Byi  that  op  to  the  77(h
Olympiad,  all  tho  conleati  took  plan  !□  one  day  ;
bnt  aa  it  wat  found  impoiuble  in  that  Olympiad  to
Gniih  them  all  in  M  ahort  a  time,  a  new  arrangs.
ment  waaroade.  The  number  of  daya  in  the  wholo
feitiTal,  which  were  henceforth  dcToted  to  tba
game*,  and  the  order  in  which  they  wer*  cele-
brated, haa  been  a  (nbjed  of  much  diapute  uimt^
modem  writen,  and  in  many  particnlai*  am  bs
only  matter  of  conjecture.  Tho  following  arrange-
ment iapropoaed  hy  Kranae  (O^jFMpin,  p.  106):  —
On  the  lint  day,  the  initiatory  oerifioei  wa«
oSered,  and  all  the  (ompetilora  claued  and  amnged
by  tho  judgEi.  On  ^e  aame  day,  the  conleM
belweta  the  trumpeten  took  place ;  and  ts  tbia
■ucceeded  on  the  aame  day  and  tbe  next  tlM
conteati  of  the  boyi,  lomewhat  in  ibe  fallowing
order; — the  Foot-Race,  Wieatling,  Boxing,  tin
Pentathlnm,  the  Pancratium,  and  lanly,  the  Hone-
Raoe.  On  the  third  day,  which  appean  to  hare
been  the  principal  one,  the  conbsata  of  the  mm  toot
place,  aomewhat  in  the  following  order; — the(im[Ja
Fool-Race,  the  Diauloa,  the  Dolichw,  Wreatling,
Boring,  the  Pancratium,  and  tho  Race  of  Hnpliiea.
On  the  foorth  day  the  Pentathlum,  either  beftm  or
after  the  Chariot  and  Ilarw-Racea,  which  weiv
celebrated  on  thii  day.  On  the  aame  day  or  nn
the  fifth,  the  conleati  of  the  Herald)  may  bars
taken  place.  The  fifth  day  appoin  to  Ibt*  been
deroted  to  proceaiioni  and  gncrilicei,  and  to  the
banqueta  given  by  the  Eleana  to  the  conqneron  m
the  Qames.

The  judm  in  the  Olympic  Oamet,  called  Hel.

lanodicae  { EAAaivSInu),  were  ^pointed  by  the

Eleana,  who  had  the  regulation  of  the  whole  feaH-

It  appcara  to  have  been  originally  under  the

inlendcnce  at  Piia,  in  the  neighbourhood  of

I  Olympia  wai  iituated,  and  accordingly  we

legenda  the  namci  of  Oenomaua,


by  iheDo-

:dae,  the  Aelolinni,
!  tolheHefBclidK,


of  the  Herni

n  Elii,  and  from  thi

iblained  the  regulation  of  the  featival,  and
appointed  the  preaiding  officera.  {Stiabo,  vHi  im.
3.^7,  358.)  Piaa,  however,  did  not  quietly  r«-
linqniah  iti  claim  to  the  mperintnidenae  of  tlie
featival,  and  it  ia  not  improbable  that  at  fint  it  ImA
an  equal  ahan  with  the  Eleana  in  ita  adminiitr*-
tion.  The  Elcani  demaelvea  only  reckoned  lh«
feitivali  in  which  they  hid  not  had  the  pmidmcy,
namely,  the  8th,  in  which  Pheidoo  and  the  Piwana
obtained  it ;  the  94th,  which  wu  celebratrd  nnder
the  mperintendence  of  Pantaleon,  king  of  Piaa  -
and  the  101th,  celebrated  under  the  auperintend-
cnee  of  the  Piaeana  and  Arcadiana.  Thfl»B  Olym-
piadi  the  ElcuB  called  bv^i^Eahi,  «  eek-


OLYMPIA.
bnlad  cMktBit7  to  Iiv. (Fuit.  li  82.  S  %  ^■

6  2.)

Tho  HeUwjodKH  WKS  ehgcw  by  lot  ban  On
whale  bodj  of  Ilia  EImm.  PMMmM  (t.  9.  |  4, 5)
bu  giiBU  an  ■ccoaiit  of  their  namben  M  diflennt
uriodi  i  but  the  CMUDimcemMK  of  ths  pu*^s
II  anfoctiiiiatdf  oomqit.  At  fint,  he  aji,  then
were  onlr  two  jodgM  cboMn  frMi  rU  the  EUuu,
but  thM  in  the  anil  OL  (7£tb  OLP)  moe  Uel-
hnodicu  woe  tnniued,  thiee  i^  whom  had  the
■uparinteiidann  of  tb«  huii»-nMa,  Ihiee  of  the
PcDtatblim],  and  thne  of  the  other  caitat&  Two
Olympiad*  after,  ■  t«iith  judge  mi  edded.  In
the  lOSrd  OL  the  lumber  mi  incnaMd  to  IS,  a*
at  that  liiiM  then  ««a  13  Elno  Pbjlat,  and  a
jodga  wai  cltDaeu  &aia  eech  tribe  ;  bat  a*  the
£]euii  aftetnidi  lut  part  of  their  laoda  in  var
with  lbs  ARadiam,  the  number  of  Phjlae  wm  re-
dncad  to  eight  in  ^e  iUth  OL,  and  accwdinglj
there  ven  then  only  eight  Helloaodiaae.  Bat  in
the  lOSth  OL  the  DDmbei  of  Hellwadicaa  mi  in-
ixeaied  to  ID,  end  remained  the  Hme  to  the  time
ofPuuaniBb  (Paui.  I.e.)

The  Htlluuidicae  were  iDitract«d  for  ten  monchi
before  the  feMival  hy  certain  of  the  EUao  magi*-
tcalea,  calUd  NtfiapiXaiia,  in  a  boildma  d«Tot«d  ta
the  paipoaa  near  the  muket-pkce,  which  wai  oiled
'EMnmSiKoUlr.  (Pbiu.  tI.  ii.  §  3.)  Their  office
[nbably  ealj  laited  fin  one  feiliVBl.  The;  bad
to  ice  that  all  the  lawi  relating  to  the  gamea  were
obecrred  bj  the  ciHiipetiloii  and  olhtsa,  to  deter-
mine the  prizee,  and  to  giTe  them  to  the  con-
qneroji,  An  upeal  lay  from  their  deciiion  to  the
Elean  lenMa.  (Pau.  vi.  S.  g  3.)  Their  office  wa>
eoiuidered  nunt  hmoarable.  They  irore  a  purple
robe  (npf  upli),  and  had  in  the  Stadium  qieual
■eaU  apiCDpciated  to  them.  (Paas-vLSO.  j  £,  6,
7  1  BeVker,  Altai,  p.  249.  4.)  Under  the  dirte-
tion  of  the  Helluodicae  wu  a  certain  nuffib<T  of
dA^oi  with  an  dXvTilp;ici|T  at  their  head,  who
formed  e  kind  of  police,  and  carried  into  execnt
the  commanda  of  Uie  Hellanadicae.  (Locinn,  Hti
t.  to.  tdL  L  p.  73S,  Relli :  Etna.  Mag.  p.  73.
13.)  There  were  alio  variooi  ether  minor  officen
Dnder  the  control  of  the  Hellanodicoe.

All  free  Qreeki  were  allowed  to  contend  in  the
gamet,  who  hod  complied  with  the  rulei  preicribed
to  candidate!.  The  equeitrian  conteiti  were  necei-
aarily  confined  to  the  wealthy  ;  but  the  pooreet
atiirni  could  craitend  in  the  Bthletie  oonleMa,  of
which  Panaaniaa  (n.  10.  §  1)  mentiong  no  exam-
ple^ Thii,  howsTBT,  wu  &r  from  dt^nding  thf
giunea  in  public  opinimi ;  and  aome  of  the  noblcai.
u  well  aa  meaneat  citiieui  of  the  atats  took  part
in  iheae  coiteita.  The  ownen  of  the  charioti  and
hone*  were  not  obliged  to  contend  in  perxm  ;
the  wealthy  Tied  with  one  enother  in  ihe  Dumner
and  magntScence  of  the  charioti  and  horeee  which
they  leat  to  the  gamei.  A1cibiade»  aent  leTen
charioti  to  one  feniral,  a  greater  number  than  had
erei  been  entered  by  a  priiale  penon  (Thuc.  ri.
16),  and  the  Oreek  iLlngi  in  Slci^,  Maeedoo,  and
other  featt  of  the  Hellenic  world  contended  with
BOe  another  for  the  prize  in  the  eqnettrian  couttati.
All  penoni,  who  were  about  to  contend,  had  to
froTo  to  the  Hellanodicae  that  they  were  freemen,
of  pure  Helleoic  blood,  had  not  bean  biandedwith
Attmia,  nw  guilty  of  any  ucrilegiDui  ncL  They
farther  had  to  prore  that  they  had  undeigone  the
[cvpanlory  training  (wptyuiuriir/urra)  Cm  ten
BOBlhj  prcTioaaly,  and  the  truth  of  thii  thej  were


OLTMPIA.  S31

ibliged  to  iwear  to  in  the  BonXdint^uw  at
OlvmiUB  bebre  th*  itatn*  of  Zena  'Ofnun.  The
iaUHn,  brothen,  and  gynmaitio  tcacbea  of  the
n  mO  M  the  MBopetitan  tbeniielniB,
awwT  that  they  would  be  nitty  <i  no
i^pntu)  in  rdhtauce  to  tne  eooteeia.
(Paua.  T.  34. 1 3.)  All  com|HtiKn  ware  obliged,
thirty  iajt  naTioaa  to  the  featiml,  to  Dndeigf

the  foparinlaiideiKe  of  the  UaUanodkae.  (Pau.
tL  36.  §  1—3,  24.  g  1.)  The  diSerent  contota,
and  the  oidec  in  which  they  would  follow  one
another,  were  written  by  the  ilellanodicao  upon  a
tablet  (AaiiKigfia)  eipoaed  to  pnblio  liaw.  (Com-
pare Dion  CBM.lxxix.  10.)

The  compc^lon  took  their  placaa  by  lot,  and
were  of  oonraa  diSicnntly  arranged  acevding  to  the
difiereot  contetts  in  which  they  weie  to  h«  engaged.
The  hemld  then  pioclumed  the  name  and  coanlry
of  och  tompetitot.  (Cioqare  PhUoi  Leg.  nil  p.
833.) When  they  were  *U  laai^  to  b^  tba


Any  one  detaeted  m  btiluDg  a  conpetitw

iie  lictory  to  hii  ■ntageniat  wa*  heaTily
&ned  j  the  practica  ^ipeara  to  hava  been  not  nn-

mmm  from  the  many  inatincea  recorded  by  Pau-

niaa  (t.  31).

The  only  pri«  given  (o  the  a  .
garisnd  of  wild  Dlire  (k^wdi),  which  ac
Ihe  Elean  legmdi  wai  the  prim  originaUy  initi-
tulsd  by  the  Idacan  Hraadea.  (Paua.  t.  7.  S  4.)
But  according  to  Phlcgon^  account  (II(^  ra*
'OAu/ortvr,  p.  140),  the  olira  oami  wainotgiren
ai  a  priie  upon  the  terival  of  the  gamea  by  Ijfltui,
and  wai  £nt  beitowed  in  the  Mrenth  Olympiad
with  the  aj^iroba^ou  of  the  oracle  at  Delphi.  Thia
garland  wa*  cut  from  a  lacnd  oliie  tne,  called
]\afa  JcaUiirr/fuHH,  which  grew  in  the  lacred
grore  of  Altit  in  Olympia,  notr  the  alien  of  Aphro-
dite and  the  Iloun. '  (Paua  t.  15.  g  3.)  Henclei
ii  laid  to  have  brought  it  from  the  coDntry  of  the
Hyperborean*,  and  to  haie  jdaated  it  hmuelf  in
theAlli&  (Pind.CU.iiL  14;  UUUer,I>or.iL  13.
S3.)  A  boy,  both  of  wboae  parent*  were  atill
alive  (ifi^eoA^i  woit)  cut  it  with  a  golden  aickla
{xpwip  fytwirif).  The  victor  wa»  originally
'th  bronie
but  aftstwardi,  and  in  the
time  Dt  ranaania*,  npon  a  table  nude  of  iioty  and
gold.  (Paua.  v.  11  g  3,  30.  |  1,  2.)  Pahn
hranchea,  the  common  tc&ena  of  victory  on  othn
occaiiona,  were  placed  in  their  hand*.  The  name
of  the  victor,  and  that  of  hi*  bther  and  of  hi*
counlry,  were  then  prodaimed  by  a  hetald  befbra
the  repieuutative*  of  aiumbled  Oneca.  Tha
fealival  ended  with  proceinon*  and  aaoiSoea,  and
with  a  poUic  banqoet  ginm  by  the  Heana  to  tim
ouM|na«nin  the  PrytBDtnm.  (Itaav.  IS.  |  8.)
Th*  moit  powerfhl  MaU*  eonaidandan  Olynpia
of  tbeii  dtiacsa,  to  omdcr


M  and  priviltgea
id  uina  him  by  tho  gratitude  tit  ht*  feDow-
The  Elean*  allowed  hi*  Matne  to  he
■i.  in  the  Altii,  cr  aoad  grove  of  Zeo*,  which
adorned  with  nDnwron*  moh  alatiie*  erected
by  the  conqneron  n  their  fiunilja*,  or  at  the  ex-
pence  <f  the  atatea  of  which  they  were  dtiieni.
On  hi*  retnm  home,  the  victor  cotered  the  dty  ia
a  triumphal  proceaaioii,  in  which  hi)  piaiiea  were


irj. ((


t  nnUni  of


■  nUarj  mu  DbCunnl  widmnt  ■
amtci^  in  wldch  can  it  mu  nid  to  ba  iuortrl.
Thii  luqipand  ^ler  when  tbe  uiligDiii«t,  who
WM  uu^tcd,  D«gleetcd  to  coma  «  cune  loo  late,
or  when  ad  AtKleta  bid  obtniaed  nicb  csJebfit;
hj  formar  conqaeita  or  poaeoed  nch  nni^h  mid
■kill  that  DO  ona  dand  lo  i^poae  him.  (Pau.  yi
7.  i  2.)  When  ona  itata  coofemd  *  crown  upon
KiiDther  Mate,  >  proclamatiso  to  Ihit  eSect  wbi  fn-
qucDtlj  Dutdo  at  the  gntl  national  ftftinl*  of  the
Oieeki. (Demonh.  de  Cor.  p.  SSS.)

A>  penoBi  &oin  all  psTti  of  the  Hallanie  woiid
wara  a«iemb1«d  tagetfa«  al  the  Olympic  Oamei.  it
WM  the  batt  appDRonilj  which  the  irtiiC  and  tile
writa  poawaiad  of  nmhing  their  WMJci  known.  In
£Kt,  it  iDiwend  to  gome  eit«nt  the  nine  pnrpoaa
aa  the  pnn  doei  in  nadera  time*.  Before  Uia  in-
TentioD  of  prioliiif,  the  reading  of  an  antbor'a
woriu  to  oa  larga  an  aweinbly  aa  could  ba  oblsiDed,

ing  theni  |  and  thia  ma  a  ikroDrile  practice  of  the
Oreeka  and  Romana.  Accotdinglj,  we  find  man;
inilaneei  of  litanuy  workj  that  publiihed  at  the
01ym|ue  featiraL  Mendotu  ii  wid  to  haie  read
hia  hialoiy  at  tbii  featival ;  bat  though  thera  are
•ome  raaaoni  fat  doubting  the  correctneaa  of  tbii

tbui  pnbliihed  their  worki,  u  the  »phiit  Hipjiiaa,
Produnu  of  Ceoa,  Anaiimens,  the  oiator  Ljraiaa,
Dioa  Chmoitom,  &c  {CiBDpaic  Lacian,  HtnxL
e.  3,  4.  ToL  L  p.  834,  Reiti.)  It  mnit  be  bene  in
mind  that  thaaa  ndlatiODa  wen  net  eonttata,  and
that  tbej  fanned  pnpeil;  no  part  of  the  fatiraL
In  the  aaua  wsj  painlrn  and  otber  attiata  ex-
hibited their  worka  at  Olympia.  (LuHan,  {•«.)

The  (Hjnine  Oamea  ooatinned  to  be  celebnted
with  mock  queDdonr  under  the  Roman  «npenai,
b;  manj  of  whcan  giaat  pfinlegn  were  awarded
lo  the  cotiqueron.  [ATHLnUiip.  167-]  lathe
aiiteenth  jaarof  the  ngn  of  Thwdoiiua,  A.n.  394
(01-393),  the  Olynpte  featival  wai  for  ever  tlao-
liihed  ;  hut  WB  hare  no  aeoomit  of  the  namea  oF
the  ncton  finrn  OLS49.

Onr  Ibnita  do  not  allow  ui  to  enter  into  the
qneitioD  of  the  inflnence  of  the  Olympic  Qamea
npon  the  natiDnaJ  charactA  \  but  the  leader  will
find  Kime  oiefbl  nmaiki  od  tfaia  mbject  in  Thiri-
wali<iffu(,o^Oni(>K,  •oLLp.SSO,  ftc.

There  wen  laairf  andent  worki  on  the  anbject
of  the  Olrmpic  Oanm  and  the  conqunora  thereiD.
One  of  the  chief  aooicei  &am  which  the  writen
obtained  their  materiala,  mmt  bare  been  the  re-
giatna  of  Donqiiefan  in  the  gamea,  which  wen  dili-
gently prsMfTed  bv  the  EIcui.  ('HXciw  It  Tsfri
mufHTHFfni  Ypdr>«wra,PaDa,iiL2[.gl,  >.  21.
8  i,  Ti.  Z  g  1  ;  t4  'H\*w  ypifiiiare  ijix^  »■
4.g4.)  One  of  the  moot  aadcntwivka  on  thia  anb-
ject waa  by  the  Elton  Hippiaa,  a  eonlenipoiar;  of
Plato,  and  waa  mtitled  irrypa^  'Ohoiaruiriiimr.
(Plut.  JVima,  1.)  Aiiatolle  alao  qipeara  lo  hare
written  a  work  on  the  aime  antqect.  (Diog.  I^Hit.
T.  2B.)  Tbera  woa  a  work  by  Timaeni  of  Sicily,
entitled  'OAv/ivuwiJnu  4  j^Mnnt  i-paflSia,  and
another  by  Emtoathoiea  (ban  B.C  S7i)  ^tamlled
■OAJviwtarwi.  (Di<«.UAt.TiiL£l.)  The  Athe-
nian SteaidatdM  ia  mtntiaDad  aa  the  uithor  of  an
ibwxpa^  tA*  kfxlrtm*  vol  'OAlvnavutiir  (Diog|.
UH.  iL  B6\  and  Pliny  (tf.  N.  riiL  34)  qMk*
■f  Api^H  ta  ■  writ-'  -'  "'--^  -'--


OLYHPIA.

Thera  woe  alao  many  ancient  woriu  on  tt*
Qreek  feetivala  in  general,  in  which  the  Olympc
Oamei  were  of  oonne  tmted  of.  Thoa  the  woric
of  DiooicliDa  ntpi  'Arfintr  <Diog.  LsStt.  t.  47),
coatuned  a  diTiaion  entitled  i  'OXufA-xdi.  (Athen.
liv.  p.  620,  d.)

One  of  the  moat  important  woriti  on  the  Olym-
mc  Oamea  wat  by  Phlegtti  of  Tiallea,  who  lived
in  the  reign  of  Hadrian  ;  it  wa*  en^ed  n*pl  tw
'OAufiirlw  or  'OAifurtw  ml  Xporinr  lurrfwy^,
WB>  compriaed  in  16  booka,  and  eTtrnded  from  the
fint  Olympiad  to  OL  329.  We  atiU  paw  two
coniiderable  Ihgmenta  of  it.  The  impcstaot  work
of  Jolina  A&ianui,  'EAAVw  'OKafai^t  irt
rqr  iifinit,  hx.,  ia  pream«d  to  m  by  EnacUu  ;
itcomeidcwnloOl.349.  Dexippot  of  Atheu,  in
hia  xporuri)  forafila,  carried  down  the  01ym|Hc
oonqnoon  to  01. 26!!.

In  modem  worica  nmch  naabd  infetmatiai  en
the  Olympic  gimei  ii  fino  in  ConiDi'a  Dintrt.
Agamatm*,  and  in  BSckh^  and  Diaaen^  editieu
of  Pindar.  See  alao  Heiar^  artiele  oai  the  Olym-
pic Oamea,  and  Rathgeber^  arliclea  on  Olym|»,
OlymtNaiDD,  and  Oiympiachar  Jupilet  in  En^  and
Oruber^  EmcyimMit ;  DiMan.  ^(&r  ifi>  Amont-


P.IMi'  ...

grnaaw  Otf^titim ^^  Wien.  IS38.

In  eooraa  t£  time  feativali  wen  ectabliihed  in
aeTenl  Oreek  ataCe*  in  imitation  of  the  one  at
Olympia,  to  which  the  aune  name  waa  giren.
Scaae  of  theae  on  only  known  to  na  by  inamp-
tiont  and  coina  ;  bnt  otheim,  aa  the  Olympde  ieati-
tbI  at  Antiocb,  obtained  gnat  celebn^.  Afta
theia  Olnnpic  IbatiTalt  had  bean  eatabliahed  in
leTenl  piacea,  the  gnat  Olympie  fattiTal  ia  aone-
tiniea  deaignaled  in  inacriptuoa  by  the  addition  of
"in  Piao,"  ir  Utiirp.  (Compare  fi&lh.  liar.  n.
247.  pp.36],  362.  n.  1068.  p.  SS4.)  We  anl^oia
fiom  Krnnae  an  alphabetical  liat  of  tbeaa  ampler
Olympic  feaCivola. They  were  celebrated  ■! :  —

j4e;r«  in  Macedcoia.  Thii  featiTal  wat  in  eiitt-
ence  in  the  time  ef  Alexander  the  Oraat.  (Anian,
Au^i.  11.)

Abnadria.  (Gniter,  faacr.  p-cccnT.  n.  S40.)
In  later  timea,  tfie  number  of  Aleiandiian  eon-
qnenn  in  the  gnal  Olympic  Oamet  waa  grattf
than  from  any  other  alale,

Anatatiiu  in  Cilicia.  Thia  fottiTi]  waa  not  in-
troduced till  a  hUa  period.  (Ed:hel,Aic(r.  A^ma.
iiip.44.)

AnHaA  in  Syria. Thia  hrtini  waa  celetnted

Daphne,  a  amill  place,  40  aladia  brm  Aotioeh,
when  then  wai  a  large  lacred  gnre  walnvd  by

ifbuntunt.  The  featiTal  waa  originally  called
nen, and  waa  lacnd  to  ApoUo and  Artr-

(Stmbes  iri  p.  760;  Athen,  t.  p.  194),  but
called  Olympia,  after  the  inhabitant!  of  An-

h  hod  porchaaed  frrm  the  Bteant,  in  A.  D.  44,
tho  pritil^e  of  celebrating  Olympic  garnet.  It
wai  not,  howerer,  tt^liHy  cdetmted  ai  in  Olym-
pic fettiTal  till  the  time  of  the  ampMoi  Commodua.
It  eommeiraed  on  the  fliM  day  of  the  month  Hy-
perbeKtaent  (October),  with  which  the  year  trf'
Antioch  bc^an.  It  waa  under  the  prttideDcy  of
an  Alytarchea.  The  oelebiation  of  it  wat  abo-
liihed  by  Jnatin,  A.  n.  £21.  The  wiithiga  of  Ii-
baniui,  and  of  Chiytoalam,  the  Chrittian  Father,
who  lived  many  yean  at  Antioch,  gare  rarioM

...  ■ ^^  jjijj  1^^,,^

e  wan  t««  iwtiTib  «f  the  nam*


OLYMPIAa
ef  0! jiii[H>  cclebmtcd  it  Atheni,  one  ef  whicfa  vu
in  ciutenn  in  the  time  of  PiDdar  (Find.  Mem.
iL  23,  &C.  ;  SchoL  ad  he.),  who  celebrate*  the
uKcston  dF  the  AlhEniui  Timodemni  u  eooquenra
in  it,  and  perhapi  much  euliec  (SchoL  ad  Tlw.  I
12G).  It  wu  celebnted  to  the  honour  of  Zeut,  in
the  ipring  between  the  great  Dionfiii  and  the
Bendidis.  (B«ckh,  l-mr.  pp.  £3,  150—252.)
The  olhrr  01;nipio  reatinl  al  Alheni  wu  initi-
tBted  b;  Hadrian  A.  D.  131  ;  bam  which  time  a
iiewOI;mpicaaacanmeDced.  (Cunmi,  Fad.  AIL
■nl.il  pp.  lOS,  110,  Acj  Sptutian.  Hadr.  IS.)
IOlvmfiab.]

jiUaHa  in Paoipbjiia. Th'u  featiial  ii  onlj
known  to  na  b;r  («•■•.  (Rathgeber,  Lcf.  336.)
Cy!iau.  (BOckh,  Inter,  n.  2010.)
l^Tou.  (Bwkh,  EtpHcoL  Pimd.  p.  828.)
IJinm  in  Mufedonia. Thne  gaintg  wen  initi-
tnted  by  Arehelan*,  and  laited  nine  daji^  tojre-
iponding  Co  the  number  of  the  nine  Mniei. They
were  celebnted  with  gmt  ipiendour  by  Philip  II.
and  Alcumder  the  Onst. (Diodor.xriL  16  ;  bian
ChmocL ToL  L p. 73, KnJie; Suidai, «.  n.

Epi€Hi.  Tbii  (ettinx]  appean  by  Eucriptiani,
in  which  it  ii  tDmetime*  called  'Aipisyii  'OAii.ria
ir  "E^rtn  to  hare  beea  jnititaled  by  Hadrian.
(BBckh,/iuer.n.3810;  compare  n. 2987,  3000.)
£Wi.  Bejidei  the  great  Oiympie  Oimei,  there
mppeai  to  hare  been  nnaller  onei  celebrated  yeariy.
{Aaeaiat.  Or.  ed.  Siebenk.  p.  95.)

3f^w(u  In  Lydia.  (Rathgeber,  I.  e.  pp.  33E,
827.)

Ntapiiu.  {CiXBm,Dat.Agm.  it.  U.  p.  103.)
^uua in Dilhjnia.  (Eiuluh.adi>i»i)W.P(riB^.
pp.  173, 173,  in  Qeogr.Min.  ed.  Bemhardy.)

Nitopolii  in  Epeinu.  Angueliu,  after  the  con-
qneat  of  Antony,  off  Actiiun,  fmiuded  Nicopolia,
■ad  Eutitnted  gainei  to  be  celebrated  every  five
nan  (^7^  mrtmifiMii)  in  conunenoiation  of
hia  Ttclory.  Theie  game*  are  KHneiimea  called
Olympic,  but  mare  frequency  beer  the  name  of
Actia.  They  were  lacred  to  Apollo,  and  were
under  the  care  of  the  Lacedaemoniani.  (Smbo,
»iL  p.  525.) [Acn*.]

Olyaipa  in  Theualy,  on  the  monntain  of  that
name.  (Schot.  ad  ApaO.  Bkod.  Argimat.  L  S9».)

Ftryamot  in  Myiia.  (Bilckh,  I—cr.  Q.2310  ;
Hiannet,iL610.  n.626.)
Sida  in  PanphytiL  (Rathgeber,  p.  139.)
Smjnn.  Piiuaniai  (li.  U.  g  1)  mcntiang  fin
Agon  of  the  SmTniatani,  which  Conini  (pit,
Agom.  i.  12.  p.  3D)  iumiaeei  to  be  an  Olympic
fEttinl  The  Mannar  Oionienie  expreidy  men-
tiona  OlympBi  at  Smyrna,  and  they  alio  occur  in
inKriptioiu..  (Omter,  Iiuer.  p.  314.  1  )  Bfiekh,
/iuer.adn.1720.)

Tanui  in  Cilici*.  Thii  fMtiTB]  i*  only  known
tonabjcoina. (Kranw,  p.SS&)

Tegta  in  Ansdia.  (Backlt,  Intr.  n.  IfilS.  p.
700.)

TlomliMte  in  Macedonia. (Krinu,  p.  230.)
ngalim  in  Lydia. (Rathgeber,  p.  338.)
Tr^la  in  Lydia. (Kranw,  p.  233.)
Tfrmt  in  Phoenicia. (Rathgeber,  p.  323.)
OLYIriPIAS  ('OAlvtTiJt).  the  mon  oelebrated
chnmological  a«a  aniong  the Oreeka,  vai the
period  of  four  yean,  which  elapted  between  each
celebration  otihe  Olympic  Oamei. The  Olrmpiadi
began  to  ba  reckon^  from  the  (ictoiy  of  Coroeboi
in  tlw  bot^Me,  which  hanwMd  in  the  year  ■.  a


OLTMPIAS.  883

776. (Fani.  t.  3.  §  3,  riii.  26.  S  S  ;  Stiab.  riiu

p.  3S6.)  TiniaeiuotSii3ly,howaTer,  vhoSouriihed
-  -  ?64,  waa  the  fint  writer  who  regularly  ai.
_  d  event*  according  to  the  eonqueran  in  each
Olympiad,  witli  which  aera  he  compared  the  yean
of  the  Anic  Aichoni,  the  Spartan  Ephon,  and  that
oftheArgive^eeteMee.  (Po)jb.iiL  12.  g  1.)  Hii
jasctice  d'  mnrding  erenti  by  Olympiad*  wu  fol-
lowed by  Polybini,  Diodonu  Siculni,  Dionyiiu  of
Halicatnamu,  and  ■ometime*  by  Pantania*,  Aelian,
DiDgene*  LaErdna,  Arrian,  &G.  Itii  twice  adopted
bj  Thocydide*  (liL  8,  r.  *S)  and  Xenophon  (HtO.
i.  2.  S  1,  iL  3.  i  I ).  The  name*  oF  the  eonqueran
in  the  foot-race  were  only  uied  to  designate  the
Olympiad,  not  the  conquenn  in  ihe  other  cont^ata.
Thucydide*  (H  ee.),  hon-ever,  deaignate*  two
Olympiad)  by  the  name  of  the  conqaeron  in  ths
sthim  ;  bnt  thi)  ippeare  only  to  have  been
on  acconnl  of  the  celebrity  of  theia  riclon,
both  of  whom  conijnered  twice  in  the  Pancialium.
Other  writer*,  however,  adhere  *a  (triclly  to  tha
practice  of  dnignating  the  Olympiad  only  by  tha
conqncrar  in  the  fool-race,  that  even  when  tha
•anie  pei*on  had  obtained  the  priie  in  other  con-
teili  a*  well  ai  in  the  foot-race,  they  only  mention
tha  latter.  Thni  Diodonu  (xL  70)  and  Panwiiai
(iv.  24.  i  2)  only  record  the  eonqucit  of  Xenophon
of  Corinth  in  the  foot.race,  although  he  had  also
conquered  at  the  lame  feitival  in  tbe  PenUthlum.
Tha  writer*,  who  make  nie  of  the  aera*  of  tha
Olympiad*,  utoally  give  the  number  of  the  Olym-
piad (tha  firat  correiponding  to  b.  c.  776),  and  thai
the  name  of  tbe  conqueror  in  ths  foot-race.  SonM
writer*  alto  gpeak  of  event*  a*  happening  in  the
firat,  lecond,  third,  or  fourth  year,  a*  the  caie  may
be,  of  a  certain  Olympiad  ;  but  oChen  do  notgiva
tbe  aeparate  yean  of  each  Olympiad,  The  ml«a
for  converting  Olympiad*  into  the  year  B.  c.,  and
eia  eeraa,  are  given  nnder  Chronolooia,  [i  381 1
bnt  aa  Ihi*  i>  troobleiame,  we  tubjoin  for  the  ua
of  the  itndent  a  lilt  of  tbe  Olympiad*  with  the  yenra
of  the  Chrialian  aen  coireaponding  to  them  Irnm
Ihe  beginning  of  Ihe  Olympiad*  to  a.  D.  301.  Ta
aare  apnea  tha  aejsiBle  yean  of  each  Olympiad,
with  the  corrviaponding  yean  B.  c,  are  only  given
from  the  47th  to  the  126<h  Olympiad,  aa  thi*  u  tha
moat  important  period  of  Oncian  hiil«y  g  in  tha
other  Olympiad*  the  firit  year  only  ia  given.  In
corunlting  tbe  fallowing  table  it  moat  be  bonia  m
mind  that  the  Olympic  Oamea  were  celebrated
about  Midaummer  [OLTifru],  and  that  theAtlio
year  commenced  at  about  the  aome  time.  I^
therefore,  an  event  happened  in  the  aecrod  half  of
the  Attic  year,  the  yeara-cmuat  be  reduced  by  1.
Tha*  Soentea  waa  pot  to  death  in  the  lat  year  id
the  9JSth  Olympiad,  which  eoneipondi  in  tbe  fol-
lowing table  to  0.  □.  400  ;  bnt  a*  hi*  death  hap-
pened in  Thargelion,  the  Ilth  month  at  Ihe  AtUa
year,  the  year  B.C.  muat  be  reduced  l^  1,  which


OL

a! i!

i.  1.

S. 1.

7. i.

B. 1.
9. 1.
10. 1.

OL

736. 11. 1.
733. 12. 1.


700. 20. 1.


I  of  hi*  jeath.


OL

21.  1.

22.  1.

23.  1.
34.  1.
26.  1.
36.  1.


CUO. 4S. 1. 1


584. ta. 1.


392. 97. I.


B.C.

OL

B.C

OL

s-2a.

113.

1.

216.

141. I.

327.

a.

312.

142. .

336.

3.

308.

H3. .

3-JS.

304.

144. .

321.

lU.

1.

300.

146. 1.

32X

2.

196.

14& 1.

323.

3.

193.

147. 1.

321.

4.

188.

148. 1.

320.

116.

1.

184.

i4a 1.

319.

2,

laa

ISO. 1.

31S.

3.

176.

161. 1.

317.

172.

152. 1.

316.

116.

i.

lea

153. 1.

31S.

2.

164.

154. 1.

314.

3.

16a

155. I.

313.

A.

1.^6.

15a I.

313.

117.

1.

162.

157. 1.

311.

2.

148.

158. 1.

310.
309.

3.

144.

14a

159. 1.

16a I.

308.

118.

1.16.

161. i.

307.

2.

133.

162. 1.

306.

3.

128.

163. 1.

30S.

4.

124.

164. 1.

304.

119.

12a

165. 1.

303.

2.

116.

166. 1.

303.

a.

113.

1G7. 1.

301.

4.

108.

les. 1.

300.

12a

I.

101.

169. 1.

299.

2.

loo.

17a 1.

3S3.

3.

96.

17L 1.

297.

4.

9i

173. 1.

236.

121.

1.

88.

173. 1,

29S.

2.

84.

174. 1.

294.

3.

8a

175. 1.

293.

*.

76.

17a 1.

293.

132.

1.

72.

177. 1.

391.

2.

sa

178. 1.

390.

3.

64.

ua 1.

389.

4.

ea

laa 1.

3sa

133.

1.

5S.

181. 1.

287.

2.

62.

182. 1.

286.

3.

4a

183. 1.

38S.

44.

184. 1.

284.

134.

i.

4a

1B5. 1.

283.

2.

36.

18a 1.

282.

3.

32.

187. 1.

281.

4.

3a

188. 1.

28a

123.

1.

24.

189. 1.

279.

30.

19a 1.

278.

3.

16.

191. 1.

377.

4.

13.

193. I.

376.

126.

1.

&

193. I.

375.

2.

134. 1.

274.

3.

373.

OL

273.

127.

193. I.

268.

128.

6.

196. 1.

264.

129.

9.

197. I.

260.

130.

13,

198. 1.

2SG.

181.

17.

199; 1.

352.

132.

21.

30a 1.

248.

133.

3J.

201. I.

244.

1S4.

39.

S03. 1.

340.

l$5.

33.

203. I.

336,

136.

37.

204. 1.

233.

137.

41.

205. 1.

338.

13a

45.

206. 1.

324.

139.

43.

207. 1.

32a

14a

H.

SV8 1.

OPEBIS  NOVI  HONTIATIO.


.  241. 25S. 1.


lis. 32S. 1.
117. 23*.


1 65.  use.

IfiS,  217.

17S.  33a  1.

177.  -  -

181.  240.  1.

IM.  241.  1.

189.  242.  1.

IS3.  243.  1.

197.  244.  1.

201.  24J.


281. 266. 1.

28S. 266. 1.

, 28S. 267. 1.


121. 22i. 1. 20fi. 2*6.
]3«. 226. 1. 209. 247. 1.
129. 227. 1. 213. 248. 1.
133. 228. 1. 217. 249. 1.
1S7. 229. 1. 221. 250. 1.

Mm;  of  the  ineient  writvn  did  not  mniider
hiitoiy  to  brgin  till  tiic  Olympikd  of  Cnwbiu,  and
Mgardcd  u  hbnlDni  the  ennti  nid  to  haTC  «■
curred  in  pRceding  tinin.  (OolHrinni,  Dt  Da
NalaL  (.21  ;  Africul.  ^tHd  £us6.  Praep.  X.  10.
p.  487,  d  ;  Clinton,  FaM.  HtiL  ToL  ii.  Introd.  p.  ii.)

The  old  OljDipiad  aera  ^ipean  ouIt  to  haie
iKen  ued  by  wrilen,  ud  etp«ei*Uy  bj  hiiloriuu.
It  doM  not  MCin  to  havg  been  ever  adopted
by  my  itate  in  public  <lcininienti.  It  ii  ne^er
tKind  on  mny  coin*,  and  icarcely  tmt  an  in»crip-
tioD*.  Tlwn  an  only  tm  inicriptiDni  pDbliihcd
by  BSekh  in  wbich  il  appean  to  be  lued.  {Corp.
IiacT.  n.  2682,  2999.)  A  new  Olympiad  aera,
bove^r,  came  into  use  under  (he  Roman  emperon,
which  ia  found  in  inariplioiu  and  wu  OKd  in
poblie  docnmcnta.  Tbii  acta  brftim  in  01  227.  S.
{i.D.lSI),  in  which  year  Hadrian  dedioted  (he
01yni)Heion  U  Athent ;  and  accordingly  we  find
OI.227.  3.  ipaken  of  aa  (he  tint  Olympiad,  OL
238.  9.  (a.  D.  135)  na  the  wcond  Olyiapad,  &c
(Bcickb,  Carp.  /•uer.  n.  342,  446,  1345.)

(Krauee,O'yiiifH,p.60,&c.  ;  Wuim  cit  Powjl,
At,  i  94.  *t)

ONYX. [SCILFTDRI.]

OPA. [Mrropi.]

OPA'LIA,  a  RoDian  fcativa]  in  hononr  oT  Opit,
which  wu  celebrated  on  tite  Uth  day  before  the
Calenda  of  January  (Dec.  19th),  being  the  third
day  of  the  Saturnalia,  which  waa  alao  originally  ,
eeiebnted  on  the  nme  day,  when  only  one  day
waa  deToted  to  the  latter  feidTal.  1(  wae  believed
that  Opia  wu  the  wife  of  S^Ltnmaa,  and  for  thU
nuon  ibe  feMifali  were  celebnied  at  the  nme
time.  (Macnb.&f.  L  12  ;  Vnir.  di  lu^.LA^i.
22.ed.  MUUei;  Pc«Ru,>.t>.C^aUi.)  The  wor-
ihippen  of  Opii  paid  their  towi  litling^  and  Inoched
the  eaith  oo  pnrpooe,  of  which  ihe  vol  the  god-
leaa.  (Macnb.  L  c.)

O'PEUIS  NOVI  NONTIATIOwai  a  nm-
naiy  remedy  pierided  by  the  Edict  againK  a  per-
Bon  who  wai  making  ao  Opui  Nomm.  An  Opni
Nomm  conaiited  ia  either  adding  tomothing  in  the
my  of  bnilding  {attlifioando)  or  taking  away  lome-
thinf  10  a*  to  alter  the  appeaiaoce  of  H  thing
(/oaf  aptrit).  Tha  object  of  the  nantiatio  waa
ctlher  the  naintemma  of  a  right  (>•),  or  to  pre-
vent damage  {daaaum),  or  to  ptotecl  the  public
bletett  (pnUisHi  jiu). The  owDei  of  the  pra-


OP8ONI0M.  835

perty  which  wu  threatened  with  damage  by  the
Opui  Nonmi,or  he  who  had  nn  eewment  (wrnfM)
in  such  property,  had  the  Jni  nimtiandi  (Dig.  43.
tiL  25).  Nnniiatio  con&iiled  in  proteititig  ngainat
and  forbidding  the  progreia  of  (heOpua  No*ain,oa
the  ipol  where  the  woric  wu  proceeding  and  ia
the  pretence  of  the  owner  or  of  aorne  penon  who
wu  there  pceient  on  hia  acconnt. The  Nnntiatia


didn


y  ^iplica


the  part  of  the  Praetor.  It  waa  a  tuk  of  law
that  the  Nnntiatio  muU  lake  pbca  befbn  the
work  wu  oomfjeted :  after  it  wu  cranpleted,  tha
Operia  Nori  Nnntiatio  had  no  effecl,  and  redreu
eoDld  only  be  obtained  by  the  Interdict  Quod  ri

If  the  Opoi  Nonm  ooniiited  in  building  on  the
complamant'^  gtonnd,  or  inaertisf  tit  cauung  anr
thing  to  project  into  hia  premiaet,  it  wu  better  to
^>p1y  at  once  (o  the  praetor,  or  to  prerent  it  per
manom,  that  il,  u  it  ia  eipUined  "  jactn  ^dlli,"
which  waa  a  tymbol  of  die  «««  of  ibroa  for  mU^


The  Edict  dedaied  that  efts  a  Nnntiatio  na-

thing  ahould  be  dona,  until  the  NontiBtio  wu  de-
clared illegal  Imiatialio  miua  or  ruBaKi  JIat)  or  •
■acurity  (jntudatio  da  optn  nrtibKwfe)  wu  giveii.
If  the  perton  to  whom  the  no(ice  wu  giren  pei>
leTered,  eren  if  he  had  a  right  to  do  shal  he  wai
doing  ;  yet  ai  he  wu  acting  agunat  the  pnetor^
edict,  he  might  be  compelled  to  undo  what  be  had
done.  By  the  Nnntiatio,  the  pertlei  were  bionght
within  the  jnriadiction  of  the  piaotor.  In  cue*
where  there  »u  danger  from  the  intermption  of
the  WD^  or  the  penon  who  wu  nuking  the  Opni
NoTum  denitd  the  right  of  the  nnntiana,  he  wu
allowed  to  go  (HI  Dpon  giring  a  caatio  or  aeeuri^
for  demalilion  or  re<(orBtion,  in  caee  the  law  wu


It  him. When


la  giren


Kculing  the  work.

The  effecl  of  the  nnntiatio  eeaaed,  when  the
cantio  wu  given  ;  when  the  namiani  died  ;  when
ha  alienated  the  property  in  reaped  of  which  ha
clauned  the  Jni  nimtiandi ;  or  wh«i  the  praetor
permitted  the  work  to  go  on  (operri  nan  am/ts.
riown..  .  .  nm»iimrit,LtieGaU.Oii.i.  ;  Dig. 39.
tiL  1 .  a.  22,  tailt  namuaom  mntiatioiwm  ;  Dig.  39.
tiL  I  I  Hackeldey,  LiMmA,  Ac,  12th  ed.  §  237,

dct).  ra.  L.]

OPI'MA  SPO'LIA. [Spoli*.]

OPINATO'KES  were  olRcen  under  the  Bo-
nan  emperora,  who  were  lent  into  the  prmincea  te
iblain  ptciiaioni  for  the  army.  The  protitioni
lad  to  be  lupplicd  to  them  within  a  year.  The
etymology  of  the  noma  ia  tmeeruun.  (Cod.  12.  tiL
IB.  a.  11  ;  Cod.Theod.7.  tiL  4.  a  26;  11.  tiL  T.
1.16.)

OPlSTHODOMua [TauFLDM.]

OFISTOQRAPHl. [Libir.]

OPSO'NIUH,  or  OBSOQ4IUH  (Sfer,  rffm.
t^ifor ;  *W,«,  Pint  Sfmp>».  Pnb.  It.  1 ),  de.
noted  every  thing  which  wu  eaten  with  brnd.
Antong  tbe  aneienti  loarea,  at  leait  prepontioni
of  com  in  aome  form  or  other,  comtiluted  tha
principal  anbalsnce  of  every  meal.  Bot  together
with  thia,  which  waa  the  itafT  of  their  life,  they
partook  of  numerout  artictei  of  diet  called  optoniit
or  paimenlana  (Cot  dt  Re  Auf.  58  ;  II nr,  Sal.  iL
a.  20),  detigned  alio  to  give  nutriment,  but  atill
more  to  add  a  reliih  to  their  food. Borne  of  thett


S3B  OPSONIITM.

■rticln  ven  taken  from  the  Tegeubts  kingdon),


p.B5,
aifood
by  much  the  most  coumian  kind  wa*  fiih,  whenie
tlie  termi  under  explanation  were  in  the  courae  of
time  oied  La  i  confined  sad  fpeciBl  ienie  to  denote
fiib  only,  but  fi<b  Tuiomly  prepared,  and  mam
espccinlJy  Bait  fiah,  which  wu  most  titeniiisl;
employed  to  sive  >  nliih  to  the  legeuble  diet
eItheratb^^akBut(Meluulde^,p.  7<),tA.  Heineke),
or  St  the  principal  moL  (Plaut.  Aul*L  iL  B.  3.)
For  the  Bne  nnion  6it>iifd70f  moint  a  goonnand
or  epirnre,  and  i^^o^aryia  ginttony.  (Athen.  ix.
24—37.)  In  mari^me  dtiei  the  time  oF  opening
the  fiah-morket  was  lignified  by  ringing  a  bell,  »
that  oil  might  have  an  equal  opportunity  fbi  the
puichaia  of  delicacies  (Stiab.  ut.  1.  3  31  ;  Pint.
Sympoi.  Fret.  p. !  1 87,  ed.  St^L)

or  the  dlflcrenl  pacta  of  fiihei  the  na  wu  tha
moat  eitsemed  for  thit  pnrpow.  It  ia  >till  pn-
pared  from  Ihefiih  in  the  very  aamenten  adji '


r the  Kini


of  Pen


{Thut


to  Then


Com.  NepOL  TAnn.  i.S  ;  Diod.
ttat  foimd  at  Pompeii,  containing  carian  made  from
the  roe  of  (he  tunny.  <Oell,  PoBiptima,  1832,
tdL  L  p.  178.)

Soma  of  the  principal  Ta^i^fiai,  or  eatabliah-

of  Spain  (Strab.  iiL  4) :  but  the  Qreeki  obtained
their  chief  aupply  from  the  Helleipont  (Hennippui
ap.  AUiai.  L  49,  p.  27,  e)  ;  and  moni  e>pe«ally
Byzantium  lint  idm  into  importance  aftec  jta
eitabliihment  by  the  Mileiiana  in  canuqneDce  of
tbe  adire  proKciitiiin  of  this  branch  of  lodoatry.
Of  all  Moa  the  Euiine  wu  accounted  by  the  aa-
cienta  the  moat  abundant  in  fiih,  and  the  catching
of  them  waa  aided  by  their  migratory  habili,  aa  in
the  autumn  ther  paaacd  through  the  Boapoma
tonarda  the  Sonlh,  and  in  ipring  returned  to  (he
Euiine,  in  ocdci  to  depoeit  their  apawn  in  iti  tri-
butaiy  Tiien.  At  tbeie  tvo  aeaiona  they  were
caught  in  the  greateat  quantity,  and,  having  been
cured,  were  ahipped  in  Milaian  bottoma,  and  lent
to  all  part*  of  Greece  and  the  LeTsnt.  The  princi-
pal porta  on  the  Euiine  engaged  in  thii  traffic
were  Sinope  and  Panlicapaeum,  (Hegewiach,  Cb-
loniten  dor  Griedten^  p.  8D.)

Among  the  Gih  uaed  for  euting  were  diSenml
kindi  of  aturgeoa  (in-onoiot,  Heiod.  iv.  fiS  ;
Schneider,  Ed.  i|*j«-  i-  p.  64,  ii.  p.  48),  tunny
{»»r^(pli,  Hennippaa,  I  c  j  tmaher;  Ty)\a^ht,
a  name  itill  in  uie  with  aome  modilicatjon  among
the  dcscendanu  of  the  ancient  Phocoeani  at  Mar-
aeillei,  Paatov,  //oxi/iwrteriaai,  a  «.),  and  mullet
A  mlonle  diacnuion  of  their  ijaalitiea,  illuamled
by  quolBlioDa,  may  be  aeen  in  AthenaaoB,  (iii.  84
—93,)

Plata  nentiona  the  pnclioe  of  aaldng  eggi,
which  waa  no  doubt  intended  to  convert  them  into
a  kind  of  opaonium  {Sjimp.  p,  404,  ed.  Bekker}.
The  treatiie  of  Apieiu^  d*  Optaimi,  a  ilill  extant

The  Atheniimt  were  in  the  habit  of  going  to
markcta  (di  Tainf>or)  themaelvea  in  order  to  pur-
chaie  their  op»nia  (j^wtw,  Theophraat.  Char.
SR  ;  opionanj.  (Muilluh.]  But  the  opulent
Komana  had  a  alaie,  called  BpKmiiiar  (^ifnri),
whoaa  offics  it  waa  to  purchatc  for  hii  mjwtcr. It


ORACULUU.

ma  hii  duty,  by  learning  what  flavonn  were  mart
acceptable  to  him,  by  obaeiTing  what  moat  ddkghtcd
hii  eyei,  Btimulat«l  hia  appetite,  and  even  onr.
oinie  hia  niuiBea,  to  latiafy  aa  much  aa  ponible  all
the cravinga  of  a  luxurioui  palate.  {Sta.  E^iiiL  47 ;
compare  Hot.  Sal.  i.  2.  9,  ii  7.  106  ;  Plant.  Hfc
kkfA.  ii.  S.  1,  ^iV.  iiL  2.  73.)  We  may  alM  infer,
bom  an  epigram  of  Martial  (rir,  217),  that  thero
purveyora, who fnmiahed


id  other  i


head,  according  to  tbe  meana  and  wiahea  of  their
employera.  Spon  (Mite.  EtwL  AwL  p.  314)  baa
pnbliahed  two  inacriptiona  from  manamenta  laiaed
to  tha  memory  of  Ranuuia  who  held  the  office  of
puryeyon  to  the  Imperial  bmily.  At  Athena  botll
the  aale  and  Che  uie  of  all  kinda  of  opacmia  wov
auperintended  by  two  or  three  apecial  officeia,  a^
painted  by  the  leuate,  and  called  i^rA/uH.  (Athu.
vL12.>  [J.Y.]

O'PTIO. TEiKiictTtia,  p.  506,  a.]

OPTIMATKS. [NoBiLia.]

ORA'CULOM  (fiwTiwr,  xmirrip«a>)  wu
■ued  by  the  ancienta  to  deiignate  the  revelation*
mode  by  the  deity  to  man,  aa  well  aa  the  place  in

waa  in  none  of  theae  placea  believed  to  appsr  in

will  or  knowledge  of  the  future :  bnt  all  oracubr
revelationi  were  made  through  aome  kind  of  me-
dium, which,  aa  we  ahall  aee  hereafter,  waa  difle-
rent  in  the  different  placea  where  oradea  eiiated.
It  may,  on  lint  light,  leem  atrange  that  there
were,  comparatively  ipcoking,  k>  few  oracln  of
Zl'Ui,  the  lather  aud  ruler  of  godi  and  men.  But
although,  Bcconling  to  the  belief  of  the  ancienta,
Zrua  himielf  waa  the  Rrat  lonrce  of  all  oncular  re-
velationa,  yet  ha  waa  too  br  above  men  to  enter
with  them  into  any  doie  rolalion ;  other  goda
therefore,  eapccially  Apo1Io,and  even  heroei,  actvd
aimediaton  between  Zcua  and  men,  and  formed  a*
it  were  the  organa  through  which  be  communiaitel
hia  will.  (Soph.  0(d.  CU  629  ;  Aeach.  Emm.  19,
611,&c)  The  hct  that  tha  ancient*  connilted
the  will  of  the  goda  on  all  important  ocoaaioria  of
public  and  private  life,  aime  partly  fkom  tbe  uni-
venal  desire  of  men  to  know  the  iawie  of  what  tfaej
are  going  to  nnderlake,  and  partly  ham  the  great
reverence  lor  tha  godi,  ao  peculiar  to  the  aneiautai,
by  which  they  were  led  not  to  undertake  ai»-
thing  of  imputancs  without  their  atnctiau ;  for
it  ahauld  be  bonie  in  mind  that  an  oncle  waa  not
merely  a  revelation  to  aatiify  the  curioiity  of  man,
hut  at  the  nme  time  a  nnction  or  authoruatioD  by
the  deity  of  what  man  wai  inleDding  to  do  or  not
to  do.  We  tuhjoin  a  lilt  of  the  GrMk  at*d«,
claiied  according  to  the  deitiei  to  wham  they  bfc


I.  Okaclu  0


AroLta


1.  ntoraehi^Di^vtt  the  moat  celobnttd
of  all  the  oracle*  of  Apollo.  Ita  andenl  name  WM
Pytho,  which  ii  either  of  the  lanie  root  a*  nMo-.
ftu,  ta  conault,  or,  according  to  the  Homeric  hynrn
on  Apollo  (18£,  Ac)  derived  from  *it*rtai,  to
putrefy,  with  reC^mea  to  the  nature  of  the  loca-
lity. Reapecting  the  topi^rapby  of  tbe  temple  of
Apollo  aee  Fouaaniai  (x.  14.  S  7)  and  MUller  (m
Diaai't  FMar,  iL  p.  628).  In  tbe  inDarmM
aanctuaty  <the  m"X»»  MifTsi'  or  iitrofiar),  there
wiu  the  ttstDo  of  ApoUa,  which  waa,  at  leoat,  in
later  timea,  of  g^i  and  bebra  it  tbenbimtatnii


The  Pitbia  (the  irpo^ii)  wu  almi
of  DelDbi  (Enri^  /«,  9-2),  oiul  irhen  ab
entered  the  terTiee  oC  the  god  ihe  nerer


ORACULDM.
an  albn  aii  etemal  Itie,  which  vw  fed  only  vith
Sr-wood.  (At*ch.C*o^\D36;P]^t.  StTtap.
Dtlpi.)  TheiDDcrroof  of  the  temple  mu  covered
■11  o*er  with  laaiel  nriwidi  (AeKh.diin.  39),>nd
Dpm  Uis  altai  Uurel  wu  burnt  u  incnii&  In  the
centre  of  thk  temple  then  wu  m  mmll  opening
(pcdr/ia)  in  Ibe  groand  from  which,  from  time  lo
time,  u  intoiicBting  Bsoho  ime,  which  wu  be-
Uered  to  G«ne  from  Iho  woll  of  Ciuiotu,  which
Tuiihed  iuto  the  graimd  dose  bj  the  nnctuaij.
(PwB.  I.  24.  i  G.)  Ovu  thii  cbMin  then  itood  a
hitih  tripod,  on  which  the  Pjthi*,  led  iolo  tbe
temple  bj  the  pnphetet  (irpaipffrnis),  took  her  Kkt
whenever  the  tnacle  wu  to  be  ccnnilted.  The
■moke  rUing  from  nndei  the  tripod  affected  ber
bnun  in  •neb  a  muuier  that  iha  fell  into  «  itale  of
delirioiu  intoiicatioo,  and  Ihe  lonndi  which  the
Bltered  in  thii  itals  were  believed  to  contain  the
fcrelatiou  of  Apollo.  Theae  aoondi  wen  cbj«-
fiill J  written  down  h^  the  ptopbetca,  and  afterwardi
commimiialed  to  the  penoci  who  had  cmns  to  con-
rait  Ihe  orade.  <Diod.  irl  26 ;  Slrabo,  ii.  p.
419,  &c  ;  Phit.  th  Orae.  Dtf.)

'  '  u  alwsyi  m  nidn
m  abe  had  once
a  left  it,and
wa*  nerer  allowed  to  man;.  In  early  timei  the
wu  nlwaji  a  yovng  giil ;  but  after  one  hod  been
•ednced  by  Eehecratet  the  Thesuliin, Ihe  Del-

C'  iau  made  a  law  that  in  future  no  one  ihould
elected  u  propbcteu  who  had  not  attained  the
age  of  £fly  yean  ;  but  in  remembrance  of  fbraier
dayi  the  old  woman  wu  atwnyi  dreued  u  a
Btaiden.  (Diod.  L  e.)  The  Pythia  wu  generally
taken  from  Mine  family  of  poor  countiy-peaple.  At
fiiBt  then  vu  only  one  Pythiaal  a  time;  bnt  when
Gnece  «ai  in  it>  mott  flouriiliing  itate,  and  when
ihs  Uiunber  of  thou  who  cbdib  tocoDinlt  Iheofacle
WM  Ter7  great,  there  were  olwayi  two  Pylhiu
vho  took  their  Kat  on  the  tripod  alleniatcly,  and
a  third  wu  kept  in  readinest  in  ea*e  wme  accident
■honld  happen  to  either  of  the  two  otben.  (PloL
Qmaal.  Grmc  c  9.)  The  effect  of  the  nnoke  on
the  whole  mental  and  phyiical  constitalion  i*  aid
(0  hava  tometimei  been  to  great,  that  in  her  deli-
liam  iho  leaped  from  the  tripod,  wu  thrown  into
conniliioDS,  and  after  a  few  day!  died. (PhiL  di

At  fint  oradea  wet«  giien  only  enee  ereiy
year,  on  the  aerenth  of  the  month  of  fiyiiai  (pro-
bably the  lama  aa  nMui,  or  the  month  for  con-
lulting),  which  wu  beliered  to  be  tiie  birthday  of
Apollo  (Plat.  ^atML  Gr.  c.  9),  bnt  u  thia  one
day  in  (he  oodik  of  time  wsa  not  found  nifficicnt,
certun  daya  in  erery  month  were  iet  apart  for  the
potpoae. (Pint.  Ala.  U.) The  order,  in  which


wu  determined  by  lot  (AcMh.fua.  32  ;  Eurip.
/oa,422)  ;  bnl  Ihe  Delphsaa  magiatntei  had  tbe
power  of  granting  Ibe  right  of  npouavnla,  >.  a.  the
light  of  eanmlling  £nt.  Kid  wiihont  the  «der
baJiQ  detsmined  t^  IM,  lo  luch  indiTidaaii  or
Matea  u  bad  acquired  daime  «i  the  gratitude  of
the  Dalpbiani,at  whoaa  political  aacandancy  leaned
lo  ffira  tkem  higher  dana  than  olbeia.  Such  wu
the  case  with  Croenu  and  tbe  Lydiani  (Herod.
LM),  with  die  Lacedaemoniana  (Pint.  Ptr.  21),
nd  Philip  of  MMsedonk. (Denioith.cPift.iiL


ORACULUM.  837

intKtla  by  Ibe  Ddphiani.  The  Pytl^  alwnyi
apeni  three  daya,  before  ahe  aicendcd  the  tripod,
in  [flepaiing  beraelf  for  the  aolena  act,  and  during
Ihb  time  ihe  faaled,  and  bathed  in  the  Caitnlino
well,  and  dicsed  in  a  limple  manner ;  ahe  alio
burnt  in  the  temple  lanrd  leave*  and  floor  of  barley
upon  the  altar  of  the  god.  (SchoL  od  £Mp,  iMoe«.
230  ;  PlnL  it  Ptth.  Or.  c  G.)  Thoie  who  con-
aulted  Ihe  onele  had  to  ncri&ce  a  goat,  or  an  oi,
or  a  theep,  and  it  wu  neceaean  that  ihcae  victima
ahould  be  healthy  in  body  and  aonl,  and  to  aacer-
thii  thoy  had  to  undeigo  a  peculiar  acmtinv.
DI  receind  bariey,  and  a  iheep  chidt-peaa,  to
M«  whethsr  they  ale  them  with  appetite  ;  water
wu  ponied  orer  tbe  goati,  and  if  thia  put  Ihrm
into  a  thorough  tremble  the  Yictim  waa  gooiL
(Pint,  de  Or.  Df.  49.)  The  victim  which  wu
Ihna  found  eUgible  waa  called  Jo-inrq^.  (Pint.
Qitaal.  Or.  9.)  Wubimnlh  (Helltt.  AU.  ii.  p.
'iBII,2d  ed.)  atateitbnt  all  whocameto  cimaull  the
trade  ware  laurel-garlandaanrrounded  with  ribandi
of  wool ;  but  the  paaaagea  from  which  tblt  opinion
ia  derived,  only  apeak  of  nch  penona  u  came  to
tbe  temple  u  anppliwila.  (Herod.  viL  14  ;  Aeach.
OhxpL  103A.)

The  Uelpbiani,  or  more  poaeHy  apeaking  tha
noblo  iamiLiea  of  Ddphi,  had  the  ■nperintendEiice
of  tbe  oracle.  Among  the  Ddphiaa  ariatocrat^,
however,  there  were  five  bmiliea  which  traced
their  orioin  to  Dearslion,  and  fram  nch  of  theea
one  of  the  five  prieata,  called  iauii,  wu  taken.
(EHrip./oa,4ll  ;  PlntOHuM^O.  cS.)  Thiee
of  Ihe  namca  of  Iheae  familiea  only  are  known,  via,
the  Cleomantida,  Ihe  Thracida  (Died.  xvL  24  ;
Lycurg.  c  Zeocra^  p^  '^^)t  and  Ihe  Laphriada,
(He.ych...c.)

The  lo-ioi,  tagethei  with  the  high  prieat  or  pio-
pheMa,betd  their  effictafor  life,  aid  had  tha  con-
tnl  of  all  tbe  affiura  of  the  aonduary  and  of  the
ncrificee.  (Herod,  liii.  13(.>  That  tiieae  noble
luniliet  had  an  immenae  infuence  upon  the  orada
fa  manifeal  frnn  nnmenni  iaataneca,  and  it  ii  not
improbable  that  they  were  ila  very  aoul,  and  that
it  wu  they  who  dicUted  tbe  pretended  revelations
of  the  god.  (See  capecially,  Lycuig.  c.  Ltoerat.  pu
158  ;  Herod,  vii.  141,  vi.  66  ;  Pint.  FericL  31  ;
Bnrip.  /w,  1219,  1222,  1110.)

Moat  of  Ihe  oracular  anawera  which  are  ertant,
*rr  in  beiameten,  and  in  the  Ionic  dialect.  Some-
timea,  however,  Dorii  foimialao  were  Uled.  (Herod.
W.  IS7,  159.)  The  hexameter  waa,  according  to
Bome  acconnla,  inrented  by  Pbemonae,  the  firit
Pylbia.  Thia  metrical  form  wu  choaen,  partly
becauae  the  worda  of  the  god  were  thua  rendered
more  venerable,  and  partly  becauae  il  waa  eaaier  to
remember  verae  than  proae.  (PluLdei^.  Or.  19.)
Some  of  (ho  oracular  leraea  had  metrical  defecti,
which  tbe  bithful  anwng  the  Qreeka  acconnled  for
in  an  ingeoiou  manner.  (Pint.  I.  c  c.  £.)  In  the
limea  of  Tbeopompu,  however,  the  cuatORi  of
giving  the  ondea  in  vene  aeema  to  hare  gradually


'f«th  genenHy  in  prose,
and  in  Ihe  Doric  dialect  apoken  at  Delphi  Foe
•hen  the  Qreek  atatea  had  loat  their  pditical
liberty,  there  wu  little  or  no  occaaioni  to  coniult
the  oiada  on  mattera  of  a  national  or  palilical
ntm,  and  ths  affiun  of  ordinary  lii<v  neh  u  lb*
tale  of  alsTes,  the  cubivatiaa  of  a  Geld,  niatriagi^
Toyigea,  loam  <rf  money,  and  the  lik^  oa  wbidi
the  orade  waa  thea  nuatlj  connlled,  weit  Utd*
cdenhtad  ta  bt  ^dken  of  01  lof^  MrtW  aBaiiA.
8b  S  ^


ess  ORACULUM.

(PInL  d)  lyL  Or.  2B.)  When  the  tmcle  of
I>e1[^  loat  lU  impartanee  in  the  rjet  at  the  tui-
cienti,  the  numbtt  of  pemm  who  eoniulted  it
notunltv  dccnsaed,  and  in  die  day)  of  Plntureh
one  Pfliiia  mu,  u  of  old,  nifficieat  to  do  all  (he
work,  ud  oreclei  wete  cml;  given  m  one  day  in
ercrv  month.

The  diTine  agency  in  P;tbo  ii  laid  to  hare  Gnt
been  diacoTend  hr  ihuiherda  who  tended  thcii
flocki  in  the  neignbooiIiiKid  of  the  chaam,  and
whoao  iheep,  when  appvaching  the  place,  \rtn
•eiud  with  amvalaiona.  (Diiid.  ivL  26  ;  Plat,
c^  D^act  Or.  e.  42.)  Penma  who  came  nsar
the  placo  thawed  the  lanie  iTRiptama,  and  re-
ceived the  power  of  prophecy.  Thii  at  lait  in-
duced the  people  to  build  a  leinple  otct  Iho  aacred
rL  Anording  to  the  Hooierie  hymn  on  Apollo,
I  god  waa  himnlf  the  (bunder  of  the  Delphic
oiacle.  hut  the  local  legenda  of  Delphi  ilalcd  that
oiiginalW  it  waa  in  the  poueaaion  of  other  dciliea,
inch  aa  Gam.  Tl.emia,  Phoebe,  Poaeidon,  Night,
Cnmoa,  and  that  it  waa  given  to  Apollo  u  a  pre-
•ent.  (ActcbyL  Earn.  S,  &.c  ;  compare  Paul.  i.  5  ;
Ovid.  Aftfam.  L  Sll  ;  Atgum.  ad  Pi»d.  /yL;
TiEU.  ad  Lfeopir.  SCl'2.)  Other  tiadicioni  agntn,
aird  theae  perhapl  tllD  nuMt  ancient  and  genuine,
represented  Apollo  M  having  gained  poaaeiaion  of
the  omde  by  n  atcu^le,  which  ia  geoeiallj  de-
iciibcd  aa  a  /ight,  with  Python,  a  dngsn,  who
gunrded  tho  oraclo  of  Qaea  or  Themii.

"' ule  of  Delphi,  during  ill  beat  period,  was
-''■---  every


belies


d  adric


tion  in  all  antiquity  obu
llaencc,  not  only  in  Gitt
aroujid  the  Mediterraneai
portanee,  whether  relating


with  n  piTo  heart,  and  had

iitil  he  hndnioned  for  it  (Hend.  L
c  who  consulted  the  god  for  bad  pur-

lo  aecelomle  hii  own  ruin.  (Herod.

-u 18.  §2.) N,


wC"


lulled  01


la  the  oncle  of  Oelpbu


rinbly  of  a  hind  calculated
Dot  only  to  pnlecl  and  pitservc  riligioui  inaiiiu-
tiona,  but  to  (omouuid  new  onea  to  be  eitabliahcd
(Demoith.  a  Mid.  I  i  j  Herod,  t,  82,  i.  1 B5,  At),
■0  iitit  it  vraa  the  preierrer  and  promoter  of  reli-
gion thTxmghfnt  the  ancient  world. Colonies  were

the  advice  and  tho  directiona  of  the  Delphic  god.
<Cic,  dtZHe.l  I.)  Hence  the  oracle  wai  caiuulied
in  all  diajntei  between  a  colony  and  ita  metropolia,
as  welt  as  in  easea  when  seveml  statoa  claimed
to  be  the  metr^KiIi*  of  a  colony.  (Thaeyd.  L  SS,
28  i  Diod.  IT. IB.)

The  Delphic  oncle  had  at  all  times  a  leaning
in  faTDitr  of  the  Oreeki  of  the  Doic  race  i  but
the  time  when  it  began  to  Icae  its  influence  most
be  dated  frsB  the  period  when  Athena  and  Sparta
(olemd  SSHD  their  struggle  fat  the  a^iremacj  in
Greece  ;  for  at  this  time  tha  partialis  (br  Sparta
became  to  maniftat,  that  the  Athadua  and  their
party  begaa  to  laaa  all  rererenca  and  eitetm  j«r
II  (PlaL  DtmaM.  SO),  and  the  onela  beesiM  ■
men  inatnuBent  in  the  hindi  of  a  fn^Mal  laity.
In  tbt  timts  of  Cicero  and  Plntaivh  many  ho-
lieved  that  the  oncia  had  lot  the  powai  which  it
bad  ptsiiasid  hi  bnner  days ;  bat  it  itill  continntd
to  be  coiniltcd  down  to  the  timii  of  tha  empoor


ORACULUM.
Julian,  sntil  at  hM  it  waa  entirely  dons  awaj

with  1^  Theodosiu),

Notwilhatanding  the  geneml  obaenrily  and  am-
biguity of  moat  of  the  oracles  given  at  Delphi,
there  are  many  also  which  convey  so  clear  and
distinct  a  mesning,  that  they  eouid  not  possibly  ba
misnnderstaod,  so  that  a  wise  agency  at  the  bottom
of  tha  oracles  cannot  bo  den'  '  ""
which  t)


lied. The  i


I  agency  haa  been  eipUiined  at  diflermt
iea  greatly  according  to  the  apicit  of  tha
ing  the  best  period  of  their  hittorv  tho
.  ■  „.  ■  ■  idoohledly  a
oracle,  iti  coaniela  and  direc-
liont.  When  the  sphere  in  which  it  bad  most
benefitted  Onece  became  narrowed  and  conRned  to
matters  of  a  privnte  natnrc,  the  omcle  coold  no
longer  commaiid  the  Tenemtion  with  which  it  bad
been  looked  upon  before.  The  pious  and  belierii^
heatheni,  however,  thought  that  the  god  no  longer
bcatowcd  his  fonnel  are  upon  the  oracle,  and  that
he  waa  b^inning  to  withdraw  from  it ;  while  free-
ihinken  and  nnbetievera  looked  upon  the  oracle  as
a  skilful  contrivance  of  priestciaf^  which  had  then
outgrown  itaelf.  This  tatter  opinion  hai  alao  been
adopted  by  many  modem  wrilert.  The  early
Chntliant,  seeing  that  soma  aitraordioaiy  power
must  in  tevcral  ctiea  have  been  at  work,  Kpt»-
lented  it  at  an  inttitation  of  the  evil  tpiriL  la
__!._.-  ■ ins  are xety  much 6'  " '


Hullma


?,  has  endeavoured  t^


if  Delphi  was  entirely  managed  ar
conducted  by  the  analociatic  bmiliea  of  Delphi,
which  an  Ihoa  deacribed  aa  forming  a  aort  of  hier-
archical senate  for  all  Greece.  If  to,  the  Delphie
aennlo  tnrely  waa  the  wisest  of  all  in  the  hialory
of  the  ancient  world.  KUuten,  on  the  other  hand,
aeenu  to  be  inclined  to  allow  tome  duly  divine  in.
fluence,and  at  all  events  thinkt  that  eieo  in  toihr
as  it  was  merely  managed  by  men,  it  acted  hi  meal
catea  according  lo  lofty  and  pure  moral  principles.

Tho  modem  literature  on  the  Delphic  ontdc  ii
very  rich  ;  the  most  important  worka  are:— C.  F.
yf'i\Her,DeRdigitntitOrac<iliiApaUiituMplnci,
Hafniao,  11137  ;  H,  Piolrowski,  IM  GrwilaU  On-
mli  Udrkid,  Lipiiae,  1029  :  R  H.  Klauaen,  >■
Enii  mi  Gnber-i  EKgdopidir,  $.^Oraitl :  K.
D.  Hmimnnn,  Wirdintmg  da  IMpiir^tn  OnUt,
Bonn,  1837  :  W.  Oiitie.  Dot  DtlpUtdt  Oraktl,
in  ta'nen  jKHtartrm,  rdijtBiat  and  tUUiiAen  Eim-
Jiaa  au/die  <iHt  Witi,  Leipzig,  1839.

2.  (Micb  at  Attn  u  Piocii.  An  oiaele  was  be-
lieved to  ilBve  eiialed  there  from  very  early  liniM
( Paus.  i^  35.  g  2),  and  was  held  in  high  esteem  by  tha
Phoeiaiia.  (Soph.  Ood.  Ty.  899  ;  Herod,  viii.  33.)
Some  yean  before  the  Peniin  invasion,  tho  Pho-
ciana  gained  a  victory  over  the  TheBnliana,m  which
they  obtained,  among  other  spoils,  four  thosaand
shields,  half  of  which  they  dedicsled  in  ths  templa
of  Apollo  at  Abae,  and  half  in  that  of  DelpbL
(Hcnd.  viiL  27.)  The  ofacla  waa  like  many  other*
consulted  by  Cnesus  \  hot  hs  doca  not  aeam  to  hav«
found  it  agreeing  with  hit  wiahea.  <Hsod.  I  4(i.)
In  the  Petaiaa  inTuhn  of  Xenea,  the  temple  <Uf
Abaa  wit  bamt  down,  and,  like  all  other  templea
destroyed  in  this  inTasioD,  it  was  never  rebuilt.
The  ondo  itaeUI  however,  remained,  and  befora
tbe  bottle  ot  LcDCtn  it  pnmited  Tictnry  to  the
Thebani ;  but  in  the  Phocian  or  lacred  war,  when
BOma  Phocian  ftigitivea  had  taken  raliige  in  tba
mina,they  wen  entitalydeiIioyedbytbeThehan»
(Ant.  L  e.) Bat  oreti  afltt  Ihii  (alamity  tb*


OBACULUH.
ancle  •eemi  to  haTS  been  coniutted,  Tor  the  Ro-
muu,  hont  rcrerence  for  it,  allowed  the  iahabit  ■
BDU  of  AbutogOTem  themielvei.  Hadrian  built
m  null  tample  bj  the  lids  of  the  eld  one,  (one
w&lli  of  which  were  itill  atanding  u  mini  in  the
time  of  PuDuin  (i.  35.  9  2,  3).

3.  OracU  at  til  liiH  of  FtoBB,  ia  tie  tenitOT?  of
Thebo.  Tbe  oncle  ot*  here  giTtn  throngb  Che
medium  of  4  man  OkUed  rpJ^iamt,  and  the  fin!
pnimuitia  «ai  uid  to  h*Te  been  Tennn,  b  hh  of
ApoUoL  (Stnib.ii.  p.  413;  Paui.  ii.  33.  g  3.}
Tbe  OTKJe*  were  niuallf  giTm  in  tbe  Aeolian
dialect,  but  when  Mji,  ^e  Cacian,  coniulted  the
god,  tbe  antwer  wai  giTen  in  tbe  Canan  language
(Puia,  Lc),  B  thai  inlead  of  tho  three  Thebsui
who  gener^Ij  wrote  down  the  oracla,  the  Carian
waiobl^  to  do  it  bimttIL  (Herod,  ciil  135.)
Whea  Alexander  tbe  Gnat  deatrnyed  Thebea,
thii  oiade  alM  periahed.  (Paul.  ix.  33.  S  3.)  In
the  time  of  Plntacch  the  whole  dittrict  wai  com-
plete!; deaolate.  (ZJ«  One.  Dtf.  c.  S.)

4.  OraeZf  of  JpoUa  at  Jimaaim,  in  Boeotia,
fouth  of  Thelici.  Tbe  temple  <S  Apollo  iBneniot
waa  the  national  nnctuaiy  of  tbe  Tbeboni. Tbe

other  placea,  bat  fnnl  tbe  inapcction  of  the  victima.
(Herod.  Ttii.  134.)  On  one  occaaion  it  gaie  iti
piopbecf  fnun  a  hn;^  cobweb  in  the  temple  of
Denieter.  (Uiod,  zviL  10 ;  compare  Pani.  iz.  10.
I  2,  At)

5.  Oroeb  y  JpeOa  ai  Ilyiat,  on  the  fronlien
of  Attica.  Thii  place  contained  an  oiacle  of  Apollo
with  a  lacnd  well,  from  which  ihoie  diank  who
wiihed  tn  become  iupired.  In  the  time  of  PauM-
niu  the  oocle  bad  become  eiUnct  (Pwu.ix.3.Sl.}

6.  Orodt  of  Apollo  ai  Ttgynt,  wn  an  ancient
and  much  frequented  omcle  in  Bneotia,  which  wai


Apollo. In  the  time  of  Plntarch  the  wl

(rict  waa  a  wildemeM. (Plot,  dt  One  Drf.  c.  S,

r^ap.\6i  Steph.Byi.ati.T*)vpa.)

7.  OneU  of  Apo^  in  da  tiUi^  ofEvtraU,  in
the  neighbonrbood  of  Lenctm.  (Steph.  Bjz.  i.p.
El^pqaii  ;  Enttath.  ad  lUad.  ii.  SOS.)  This  olade
became  extinct  during  tbe  Macedonian  period.
(Pint,  dt  One.  Dtf.  c.  5.)

8.  Oracle  of  Avallo  at  Ontiat,  in  Eaboca.
Apollo  here  bore  the  aimama  of  the  Selinimtiaii.
(Stiab.  E.  p.  446.)

9.  Orneh  of  JpoHo  in  (ie  Zymm  of  ArpDt.
Tbe  oracle  waa  here  giren  bj  a  ptopbetew.  (FIdL
Psrri.  31.)

10.  OraeU  of  Applh  Drindala,  on  the  iciDpo-
lia  of  Argoe.  The  oracle  wae  given  hj  a  prv-
pheteai,  who  wu  obliged  to  abatain  trao  matri-
raonial  connectioni  once  in  ereiy  month-  She  waa
betieTed  to  become  inipind  by  taiting  of  the  blood
of  a  lamb  which  waa  iBmficed  during  the  ni^ht.
Thia  oracle  nmtinued  to  be  eonaulted  in  the  daji
of  Panianiai  (iL  24.  g  1 ).

]  1.  Oracle  of  Apollo  at  Didyma,  nnuill;  called
tbe  orada  of  the  Branchidae,  in  tbe  tenilorj  of
Miletua. Tbia  waa  the  omcU  meal  geneiall;  c
nlted  bf  the  loniani  and  Aeoliana. (Herod.
158  } The  temple,  however,  waa  aaid  to  hare  b<
fumded  prerionil;  to  the  arriial  of  the  loniana
the  conat  (J  Aaia  (Paaa.  vii.  3.  g  4 ),  and  the  altar
waa  aaid  to  haie  been  bnill  by  Heradea,  and  the
temple  bj  Branchui,  a  aon  of  Apollo,  who  bad
come  fion  De^  aa  a  [arising  prieat.  (Pani.  t.


ORACULUM.  SS9

13.  S  6  ;  StraKxiT.  p. 634.)  Hence  thia  oracle,
like  that  of  Delphi,  combined  purifying  or  atoning
rites  wiih  the  piaclice  of  prophesying.  (MUller,
Dot.  iL  2.  9  6.)  The  real  antiquity  of  tbe  oracle,
ler,  cannnt  be  traced  farther  back  than  tbe
half  of  tbe  7th  century  before  our  aeia.
(Siildan,p.£33,&c)  The  prieiti  called  Branchidae,
'  had  the  whole  adminiatration  of  the  oracle,
•aid  la  be  the  deecendanls  of  Branchna.
The  high  prieil  bore  tbe  name  Stephanephurai.
Among  them  was  one  family  whidi  possessed  the
^eredita^  sift  of  prophecy,  and  waa  called  the
■mily  of  the  Euangelidse.  (Conon,  44.)  Tha
iracie  waa  under  the  especial  management  of  a
irophet,  whose  office  did  not  last  far  lift.  Tha
iraclei  were  probably  inspired  in  a  manner  similar
o  that  at  Delphi.  (Pans.  v.  7.  %  3.)  Craesua  made
a  thii  onde  as  monilicent  presenla  as  to  that  of
Delphi.  (Hend.  i.  46,  &c)  The  pnndples  which
' .  followed  in  its  canniels  and  directions  were  also
be  some  as  those  followed  by  tbe  Delphians.  Tbe
'ersians  bumt  and  plundered  the  teniple  aa  had
been  predicted  by  tbe  Pythia  of  Delphi  (Ilerod.  vi.


19)  ;  bi


id  and  adorned  with  a


of  Apollo  (Paul
%  -2  ;  compare  MUller,  Aaci
laiu,  g  66),  which  Xenea  on  lua  retreat  car-
wiih  bim  to  Ecbatana. A  part  of  the  Bran-
ae  had  surrendered  to  Xerxes  the  treasures  of
temple,  and  were  at  their  own  request  trans-
planted to  Bsctriana  (SUabo,  L  c),  where  their
descendants  are  aaid  to  have  been  severely  ptuiithcd
by  Alexander  for  their  treaihety.  (Curt  lii.  5.)
Selencus  sent  Che  itatue  of  Apolki  back  to  Didytna,
because  the  oracle  had  sainted  him  as  king.  (Faus.
' 16.  S  3i  Diod.  it.  90.) Tha  orade  continued
be  cDniulled  after  the  feithleiinesa  of  its  minis-
rs. Some  mins  of  the  temple  at  Didyma  are
ill  extant.  (Compare  the  Commenlaton  on  Herod.
S3  ;  Said.  :  v.  Bf>r>x^>«  i  Droyicn,  Oeieh.  Alex.
det  Gponat^  p.  3D7  ;  and  an  excellent  essay  by
W.  a.  Soldnn, />«  Oniet  dtr  BnnAidea,  in
ZtTnuwnmxmi't  ^iaAriJl  fir  die  AUxrtAimtneittai-
Khafl,  1641. Ncee,  &c)

13.  Orade  of  Apolio  at  Clam,  in  the  tenitery
if  Colophon.  Ic  waa  said  to  ]ia>e  been  founded  by
Cretans  under  Rhaciut.  preTious  to  the  settlement
'■'  '  niaiii  in  Asia  Minor,  The  early  legends
oracle  in  connection  with  Delphi,  (rem
rianto,  the  daughter  of  Teiraiat,  came  to
Clares,  married  tthacius  and  gave  birth  to  Mopius,
from  whom  tbe  prophets  of  Clans  were  probably
bdieved  to  be  descended  (Pauavil  3.  gg  I,  3.)
Tbia  orade  was  of  gteat  celebrity,  and  continued
to  be  consulted  even  at  the  ^e  i^  the  Roman
emperon.  (Pans.  vii.  5.  g  I,  Ac;  Strab.  lii.
p.  643  ;  Tacit.  ArmaL  xii.  33.)  Tbe  oracles  were
given  throu|:[b  an  inspired  prophet,  who  was  taken
from  certain  Milesian  fsmitiea.  He  was  generally
a  man  without  any  reBned  edncation,  had  only  the
names  and  the  nnmber  of  the  persona  who  consulted
the  oracle  stated  to  him,  and  then  descended  into
a  cacem,  drank  of  the  water  bom  a  secret  well,
and  afterwards  proDounced  the  ecade  in  veise.
(Jiu:it.Aimai.ii  61.)

13.  Ondi  of  Apollo  at  Qryma,  in  the  terTttoi]r
of  die  Hyrinoeans.  (Hecab/Vi^m.  211.)

1 4.  Oracle  if  Apollo  Opanapaetit,  in  Lesbot.
(Schol.  Ari^igA.  NiA.  146.)

]£.  Oracle  r^  Apollo  at  Abdera, (Pindar,  n;.
Tietxtt,  Lycopir.  449.)

3a4^  O"


810  ORACULUU.

16.  Oracle  i/  Apollo  it  Drfoj,  wtich  *iii  only
coiuulud  in  aummer.  (Callim. //j«il  n  /M.  L  ;
S«v.  «f  Firs.  j™.  iy.  143.)

17.  OraeU  o/ Apollo  at  Patara,  in  Ljcia,  irat
only  coniulted  in  winter.  The  pnphcKu  ('p<(-
tiayrii)  ipent  a  ni^ht  in  the  temple  to  w&it  for  the

(Herod,  i.  182;  Ssrv.od  I'irg.  Ann.  ij.  143.)
\e.  OnuU  of  Apollo  ai  Tdnutna. The  priaU

the  interpretation  of  dnsini,  whcacs  Heii>datiu
(i.  rS  ;  compan  Clc.  dt  Dh.  L  41  ;  Anian,  ii.  3)
calls  them  J£ti7IJTb(. But  they  al»  inteqireled


irrellou,


e  of  A


Nea.


J,  where  Ihoi


vhe  OHVulted

■hoved  them  in  an  image  the  aniwer  to  their  qnea-

tiorn^  CPantyii.21.  §6.)

19.  Oracle  of  Apollo  ai  MaUot,  in  Cilici&.
(Slnib.  liv.  p.  67S,  Slc.  ;  Arrian,  iL  i.)

20.  Orada  of  tit  Sarptdoniaa  ApoUo,  in  CIliciL
(Diod-iErtitiiviiL  12.)

21.  Oraelti/ Apollo  oiHfUa,  in  Cuii^  (Alhen.
IX.  p.  67%)

22.  Oradt  of  ApoOo  at  lliera  Kome,  on  the
Musnder,  a  celehniMd  onde  which  ipiike  in  good
•sena. (LlT.izx.iiL  13  j  St*ph.  Bji.  m.)

II.  OucLiB  or  Zeus.
I.  Orade  rf  Zfuat  Oljrmpia.  In  thii  ai  in  the
other  ancle*  of  Zai*  the  god  did  not  rered  him-
Klt  by  inipiialion,  u  Apollo  did  in  aimoit  all  of
hii  onclei,  but  he  merely  )ent  ligni  which  men
had  to  inlerpnt.  TfauM  who  cnme  to  consult  the
oracle  of  Oljmpia  oEFercd  a  Tit:tim,  and  iho  pcifit
gave  hii  Bniwera  from  the  natare  of  the  KTeml
paiU  of  the  victim,  or  from  accidental  circumalancea
accompanying  the  ncrifice.  (Hated,  liii.  134)
atnb.  viiL  p.  3£3.)  The  pnipheti  or  interprelcn
here  belonfjcd  to  the  family  of  the  lamidi.  In
cnriy  time!  the  onele  wat  much  rewrled  to,  and
Sophoclct  iOtd.  Tjfr.  900}  mcnliona  it  along  with
the  matt  celebrated  oiacln  ;  but  in  later  timei  it
wiu  a1m«I  entirely  neglected,  probably  betsuae
oraclea  Irom  the  inipection  of  Tlctinu  might  be
obtained  anywhere.  The  apot,  where  the  oinclei
were  giicn  at  Olympia,  wu  before  the  allai  of
ZeuL  (Find.  Of.  tl  70.)  Il  wai  eaprcially  thoK
who  intended  to  take  part  in  the  Olympic  gnm«
"  Btconmlted  the  oracie  about  their  mtmu  (Find.


J.  -2),  h.


aubjeet


ought


iKiarf  i1

2.  Oradt  of  Zfm  at  Dodoma.  Here  the  oracle
WIU  given  from  aounda  produced  by  the  wind.
The  (Bnctiiary  wai  aitoated  on  an  eminence.
<A«chyL  Prom.  830.)  Although  in  a  barbarDiu
country,  the  oracle  wat  in  clnae  connection  with
Greece,  and  in  the  evUeet  timea  apparently  much
more  ao  than  afterwaria  (Ham.  II.  iri.  233.)
Zens  himaelf,  a*  well  aa  the  Dodonaeam,  were
reckoned  among  the  Felaigiani,  which  i>  a  pniof
of  the  ante-helicnic  eiiitence  of  the  wonhip  of
Zeui  in  thne  parti,  and  perhaps  of  the  oracle  aim.
(Heaiod.  and  E[ihor.  ap.  Strab.  Tii.  p.  327,  &e.)


The  oracle  ar


nfroc


lofty  «


trcd  with


foliage  (Hem.  Od.  iIt.  32B,  lii.  29/),  whence
Aeichy1uji(f  nnR.B32  jcompare  Soph.7VacA.117n)
mentiona  Ue  apcaking  oaks  of  Dodona  ai  grcnt
wondeii. Beech-Ueei,  boweier,  are  alio men-


.  OBACDLUM.
wblcli,  ai  Hetiod  (Froffm.  39  ;  Sopb.  TVoel.  169  ;
Herod,  ii,  55]  aaid.  dwell  in  the  atem  of  a  beech-
tiee.  Hence  we  may  infer  that  the  oracle  wai  not
thought  to  dwell  in  any  particulaj  or  single  tree,
but  in  a  grore  of  oaks  and  beechea.  The  will  of
the  god  woa  made  manifeat  by  the  mitling  of  the
wind  through  the  leaves  of  the  treei,  which  are
therefore  repreSEnled  aa  eloquent  tonguea.  In
order  Co  render  the  aounda  produced  by  the  wind*
more  distinct,  braaen  Tniels  were  au^ieuded  on
the  blanches  of  the  trees,  which  being  mored  by
the  wind  tame  in  contact  with  one  another,  and
thui  lounded  till  they  were  (topped.  (Suid.  i.  a.
AeS<iini  ;  Philoitiat.  Imaff.  iL)  Another  mode  of
producmg  the  sounda  wai  thia :  —  Then  were  taro
culumni  at  Dodona,  one  of  which  bore  a  metal
boain,  and  the  other  a  boy  with  a  aconrae  in  hi*
hand  ;  the  endi  of  the  acsurge  conaislcd  of  little
bones,  and  as  they  wen  moled  by  the  wind  they
knocked  agninit  the  metal  baain  on  the  othw
column.  (Steph.  Byi.  a.  v.  &iiAwti:  Suid.  i.  n.
AoSmuir  xoAjraiw  ;  Strabo,  Eiiarpi.  a  lit.  vii.
vol  ii.  p.  73,  ed.  Kramer.)  According  to  other
accounts  onclei  were  also  obtained  at  Dodona
through  pigeons,  which  sitting  upon  oak-tree*  pto-
nounced  the  willof  Zens.  (Dionys.HaLHS.)  The
aounda  were  in  early  timea  interpreted  by  men,
but  afterwards,  when  Lhc  wonhip  of  Dione  be<aiDO
connected  with  that  of  Zeus,  by  two  or  three  old
wometi  who  were  called  rt\ilaSii  or  rMoui,  be~
cause  pigeona  were  aaid  to  hare  hnught  the  con-
mand  to  found  the  oiacle.  (Soph.  Tradi.  1G9,
with  the  Schot. ;  Hood.  /.  c  ;  Paua.  x.  12.  S  5.)
In  the  time  of  Herodolui  (/.  c)  the  namea  of  tlte
three  piopheteues  were  Promeneia,  Timaretc  and
Nicandis.  Tlioy  were  taken  from  certain  Dodo-
naetui  families,  who  traced  their  pedigree  back  to
the  mythical  age*.  There  wera,  howeier,  at  all
timca  priesti  called  Tdfuwpoi  (Sirab.  (.  c.)  connected
with  the  ancle,  who  on  certain  ocoalona  inter-
preted the  aoiutds :  but  how  the  functions  wvra
divided  between  Ibcm  and  the  PeUeoe  ia  not  ciat.
In  the  hiatorical  time*  the  i^ade  of  Dodoaa  had
leu  inBoenca  than  it  appeal*  to  hare  had  at  an
earlier  period,  hul  it  waa  at  all  timea  inacceuibl*
to  bribea  and  refused  to  lend  iti  aaaiatance  to  iba
Doric  interest.  (Com.  Nep.  Z.;»i<f.  8.)  It  wai
hiefly  consulted  by  the  neighbouring  tribes,  the


n  Dodona  and  the  Bo(«.
tian  Iimenion.  (Strab.  ii:  p.  402 ;  eompan  MUller,
Orciom.  p.  378,  2d  edlL)

The  usual  form  in  which  the  oticlea  wsc  ginn
at  Dodona  waa  in  hexameten  ;  but  tome  of  th«
oracle*  yet  rcmaming  ore  in  pruae.  Tn  219  a.  c
the  temple  waa  destroyed  by  the  Aeloliana,  and
the  lacred  oaka  were  cut  down  (Polyb.  ii.  67),bat
the  oncle  continued  lo  eiiit  and  to  be  cmiiiilled,
and  does  not  aeem  to  hare  beeonw  totally  extinct
nndl  the  third  century  otoucaen.  In  the  time  of
Stiabo  the  Dodonaean  prophete**ei  are  eipresBlj
mentioned,  though  the  oracle  waa  already  deajiu^
like  all  the  others.  (Strab.  vii.  p.  329. )

Compare  Cordea,  Dt  OraaJo  Dodomato,  Om-
ningen,  182S  ;  J.  Ameth,  CiArr  Aia  TaabtmnM
am  Dodona,  Wien,  1640  j  L.  Ton  LasKuIi,  Zla*
PttamjiiOt  OraJbd  da  Zcat  at  Doiaia,  «■  Bmtr^
iw  HdigumifUlemipiM,  Wiinbaig,  1340.
, --- -  ^^--


ORACULUM.
S.  OraeU  afZmt  AmMon,  in  mn  obvi  in  LibyR,
ta  ihe  north- n-wt  of  Egjpt  According  to  the
tradilioni  cnirentat  Dodona  and  Thebei  in  Egypt,
it  mu  fiMinded  b;  the  l&tler  cit;  (Herod.  IL  42,
51,  &C.),  end  the  rorm  in  which  the  god  wu  rt-
pmenled  at  Thebei  and  m  the  Ammoniom  vu
the  nnie  \  ha  bad  in  both  ^ta*  tha  head  of  •
ram.  (Herod,  ir.  1S1.)  The  Oreeki  bemme  ae-
qBAiated  with  thii  onde  through  the  CTiciieani,
and  Sputa  waa  tha  fii¥t  ci^  of  Green  which
fiirnud  connectioiii  with  iL  (Paul.  iil.  18.  §  2.)
Ita  eaiDplc  wai  followed  b;-  the  Thebtuu,  QA^m-
piana,  Dodonaeani,  ElcMia,  and  othen,  and  tha
Atheniani  mit  fieqnent  theorret  U  the  Ammo-
niun  eiraii  before  OL  91  (Bdckb,  PM.  Bom.  p.
240, 2d  edit),  and  called  one  of  their  acred  Teiadi
Annmniis.  (Hc(jeh.  and  Suid.  j.  r.  "A^^wr ;
HarpoeiaL  i .  e.  'A/^wrli.)  Templea  of  Z«u  Am-
moD  woe  now  erefled  in  H*era]  parti  of  flreece.
Bit  oiacle  in  Libya  wB>  conducted  b;  men  who
■lao  gaie  the  aniwen.  (Diod.  zriL  fit.)  Their
imiber  appean  to  hare  been  len  great,  foe  on
■onM  occationi  when  they  carried  ua  atatoe  sbont
in  a  isoceanoD,  their  nnmber  i)  laid  to  hare  been
eighty.  (Diod.  iiL  JO.)  In  the  time  of  Stisbo
(iviL  p.  613)  the  oada  waa  rer;  much  neglected,
and  in  a  itale  of  decay.  The  Greek  vriten,  who
an  accDatomed  to  call  the  gnateat  god  of  a  bar-
banoi  nation  Zena,  mention  Hreral  oraclea  of  thii
diiinity  in  fcniga  countriei.  (Herod.  iL  29  ;
Diod.  iiL  e.)

IIL  Obaclm  or  oran  Oodb.


of  the  world  and  hnman  life  orer  which  they
pceiided.  Daiata  thui  gare  orsclea  at  Patiae  in
Acbaia,  but  only  concerning  lick  perxmt,  whether
ttcir  nSbiingt  wonid  and  in  death  or  recoTery.
Befcn  tha  aanctnary  of  the  geddeu  them  wai  a
■well  tamanded  by  o  walL


arope,io


■e  then  performed
and  incenae  offered,  whereupon  the  image  of  the
aick  pmon  waa  lein  in  the  mirror either  aa  a
eoipae  or  in  a  itate  of  reeorery. (Paiu.  viL  21.
J  5.) At  Phoraa  in  Acbaia,  there  wu  an  ciacle
vf  Henm. Hia  altar  itood  in  the  middle  of  the
marlcet-place. Incenae  waa  offered  there,  oil'Iampa
-were  lighted  before  it,  a  copper  coin  waa  placed
tipon  Ihe  altar,  and  after  thia  the  queation  wa*  put
to  the  god  by  a  whiaper  in  hia  ear. The  pei
who  coDBOlted  him  >hnt  hie  own  (sn,  and  nn:
dial'Iy  left  the  market-place. The  fint  nmaiiL
that  he  heard  made  b;  any  one  aflei  le«img  the
market  place  waa  belieied  to  i: ' '
Uemea. (Pana.  tiL  22.  S  2.)
There  waa  an  OmU  of  .
ChaiBi,  or  AchaiBca,  not  mr  from  Ny n,  in  Caria.
The  two  deiliaa  had  here  a  temple  and
and near  the Utta  there  waa  a  aabb
ca*e  of  a  niiiiacnloui  natnre,  (ailed  the  care  of
Charon  ; for  peraona  anffe ^
placing  confidence  in  the  power  of  tha  goda,  tra-
Telled  to  thii  place,  and  itayad  for  ioma  time  w'~'
Hpnieticed  }x\axt  who  liied  in  a  place  near
cBTe. Theie prieaU  then  alept  a  night  in
caTcm,  and  aAcrwaida  preieribed  to  their  patii
tbe  remediea  rerealed  to  them  in  their  drca
OfUo,  howerer,  they  took  thdir  pstienta  with  them
nto  the  an,  when  ttfj  had  to  Ma;  for  aaratid


ORAtniLVM.  841

qniet  and  wilhont  taking  an;  food,  and
._.i —  allowed  to  iail  into  the  prophetic
^ .  .  prepared  tbr  it,  and  receiied  the

adnca  of  the  prieata  ;  for  to  all  other  penona  Ihe
ad  htaL  There  wu  an
annnal  ptuiegyria  in  thia  place,  probably  of  aick
peraona  who  aonght  leliaf  linm  their  lufieringi.
On  Ihe  middle  of  tha  feativa  day  the  yonng  men
of  the  gymnaaiuni,  naked  and  anomted,  uaed  to
'e,  which,  u  Boon  ai  it  had
entered,  feU  down  dead.  (Strab.  xiT.  p.  649  |
mpare  lii.  p.  579.)

At  Epidaonu  Limeis  onclea  were  giren  at  the

featival  of  /w. [Inoa]. The  Mme  goddeaa  hod

an  oracle  at  Oetylco,  in  which  ihe  made  rerela-

dreama  to  penona  who  alept  a  night  in  her

•anctnary. (Paua.  iii.  26.  §  L) Htn  Acnta  had

iBcle  between  Lechaeoo  and  Pagaa.  (Stmb.

p.  380.)

IT.  OSacles  or  HsnoKB.
OraAi^Ampiiaram,heXwffn  Potniae  and
Thebei,  where  the  hero  waa  aaid  to  have  been
ffwallowed  np  by  Ihe  earth.  Hi«  lanetnarr  waa
lunounded  by  a  wall  and  adorned  with  columne,
upon  which  birdt  never  lettled,  and  birda  or  cattle
'ei  took  any  food  in  the  neighbourhood.  (Pana.
S.  §  2.)  The  oraclea  were  giTen  to  penona  in
ir  drcanu,  for  they  bad  to  sleep  in  the  temple
(Herod,  viii.  134)  after  they  had  prepared  them-
adrea  for  thia  vtcwbatio  by  bating  one  day,  and  by
abitaining  from  wine  for  three  daya.  (Philoatiat.
ViLAjK^.  iL  37.)  TheThebaniwerenatallowed
to  eoniult  thia  oracle,  hating  choaen  to  take  tha
hero  aa  their  ally  rather  than  aa  their  pnphet.
(Herod.  /.  e:)  Another  orade  of  Amphiaisua  waa
-\  OnmiB,  between  Boeotia  and  Attio,  which  was
loat  frequently  connilted  1^  tbe  aick  about  tha
leana  of  their  recoveiT.  Thoae  who  conanlled  it
ad  to  undergo  liutnCioni,  and  to  aaerifice  a  ram,
1  Ihe  akin  of  which  they  alept  a  night  in  the
miple,  where  in  their  dreama  they  expected  the
touta  of  theii  recoreiy  to  be  revealed  to  them.
(Paul.  L  34.  g  2,  &c)  If  they  ttcoTeied,  they
had  to  throw  tome  pieces  of  money  iuto  the  well
in  hia  aandnary.  The  oracle  waa
been  founded  by  the  Theban^  (Strab.


of  Amphiar


ia.p.399.)

•i.  OivtU  <f  AilpiOixAn.  He  waa  tbe  aon  of
Amphiarant,  and  bad  an  oracle  al  Malloa  in  Cilicia,
which  Fanaaniaa  calli  tbe  moat  tmitworthy  of  hia
time. (Pana.  i.  ii.%2:  Dion  Caat.  Iilii.  7.)

3.  Orvda  of  Tn-plvmita  at  Lebadeia  in  Boeotia.
(Pane.  ix.  37.  §  3.)  Thoae  who  wiahed  to  con-
avlt  thia  oracle  had  fint  to  puri^  tbemaelTea  by
■pending  aome  daya  in  the  lanctuBiy  of  the  good
apirit  and  good  luck  {irfoBoi  An/^m  ffol  k-ji^i
Tixtt'l,  to  li>e  aober  and  pun,  to  abalain  from
warm  hatha,  but  to  bathe  in  the  riier  Hercyna,  to
offer  iBcriGcea  to  IWhonini  and  bis  children,  to
Apollo,  Crone*,  king  Zcui,  Hers  Heniodia,  and  to
Demeter  Europe,  who  wu  laid  to  have  nnraed
Trophoniua  ;  and  during  theae  ascrificei  a  aooth-
a&yer  erplained  from  the  tnteftinea  of  the  Tictinu
whether  Trophoniua  would  be  pleaaed  to  admit  tha
conaullot.  In  the  m'ght  in  which  tbe  conmltor
wai  to  be  allowed  la  deacend  into  Ihe  care  of  Tn>-
phoniut,  he  had  to  aacrifice  a  lam  to  Agamedea,
and  onty  in  csae  the  aigni  of  the  ncrilice  were
bvourable,  the  hero  wu  thaughl  to  be  plrsied  to
admit  the  penon  into  hia  on. What  toi^  placa


842  ORACULUM.

■ficitliiiitMlufiJloin: — Two  boyi,  13  yean  old,
'  '  '  ■  ■  ' ■ r  Ilprcyiw,  and  balhed


drink  from  the  well  of


(A^)  that  he


waU  of  recollection  (Mi^^uwilnj)  that  he  might
nembei  the  vUinna  whirh  he  wu  going  tn  h&i
Thej  then  ihowed  him  a  mjglerioui  represenlBti
of  TiDphoBtiu,  made  him  wonhip  iL.  ind  led  hi
iaCo  the  sanctuuy,  dreued  in  linen  garmenu  wi

ellei  aroond  hii  hod;,  and  Hearing  a  pcculi
d  of  ihoei  (icfnttDx) '  '
Lahadeia. Within  the

ucminence,  thae  waa  a  cave,  into  vhich  the  per-
■OD  mi  nov  allowed  to  deteend  bf  meana  of  a
ladder.  Clote  to  the  bottom,  in  the  tide  of  the
care,  Ihi^e  wai  an  opening  into  which  he  pat  hii
feet,  whereupon  the  other  parti  of  the  body  were
likoviao  drawn  into  the  opening  hj  nme  inrliible
power.  What  the  penooi  here  Mw  wai  dillcrenl
■t  different  limeL  The;  retained  through  the
Ume  opening  bj  which  they  bad  entered,  and  the
pti«ti  DOW  placed  them  on  the  throoe  of  Mnenw-
(yoc,  aiked  them  what  Ihey  had  aeen,  and  led
them  back  to  the  nnctuary  of  the  good  ipirit  and
good  Inck.  Ai  mmd  aa  Ihey  had  recovered  from
their  !ai,  they  were  obliged  to  write  down  their


n  by  Paul


■  little  ti
temple.  Thia  ia  the
who  had  himielf  de
writea  Bi  an  eye-vitneaL  (Paul.  11.39.  3  3,&c;
compare  Pbiloelr.  Vil.  JpoU.  viiL  19.)  The  an-
■wera  were  probably  giran  by  the  prieita  according
to  the  report  of  what  penotii  bad  acen  in  the  cave.
This  oracle  wui  held  in  very  gnat  eMeem,  and
did  not  become  extuict  until  a,  very  late  period:
and  though  the  umy  of  Svlhi  had  plundered  the
temple,  the  oracle  waa  much  conaulled  by  the  Ro-
mani  (Orig.  cCtU.  vii.  p.  355),  and  in  the  time  of
Plutarch  it  wu  the  only  one  among  the  DUmcroui
Boeotian  oraelea,tliat  had  not  become  lUeiit.  (Plut.
da  Orac.  Dif.cS.)

i.  Orvela  of  CtJduu,  m  Dounia  in  tantbcm
Italy.  lien  aniwen  were  given  in  dreanu,  for
thoK  who  coniolled  the  oracle  had  to  tacriRce  a
black  mm,  and  elept  a  night  in  Che  temple,  lying
on  the  ekin  of  the  victim.  (Sirab  vi.  p.  384.)

5.  Orada  of  Atdtpiiu  (Aetculapiui).  The
oradea  of  A»clepiui  were  very  nomeroui.  But  the
moat  important  and  moat  celebrated  waa  that  of
Epidauma.  Hli  temple  there  waa  literally  covered
inth  votive  tablet!,  on  which  pcnon«  had  recorded
their  rKovery  by  apending  a  night  in  the  temple.
In  the  Icmplea  of  AcKulapiui  and  Serapia  at  Rome,
recovery  waa  likewiie  aoughl  by  iocubaiio  in  hia
temple.  {SueL  Cbwi.2S.)  F.  A.  Wolf  haa  writleo
an  esAay,  Btitrag  xur  Gack.  det  SOmnan^liaaiMi
an  dan  AltrriJuin  (  rermudila  Sdnfien,  p.  382,
&c.),  in  which  he  cndeavoura  to  ahow  that  what  ia
now  called  Meimeriam,  or  animal  magnetlam,  waa
known  to  the  prieati  of  ihoae  temple!  where  aick
periona  apeni  one  or  more  nighta  for  the  porpoae  of
recovering  their  health.  Other  oraclei  of  the  Mme
kind  are  mencioaed  in  thai  eaiay,  together  with
aome  of  the  votive  tablets  still  eitanL

6.  Oraiit  of  iltradtt  at  Bora  in  Achaia.  Thoae
who  consulted  it,  prayed  and  put  their  qoeationa  to
Iha  god,  and  then  caat  four  dice  painted  with
figures,  and  the  answer  waa  given  aecDrdiDg  to  the
^tion  of  Iheae  figures.  (Pau*.  vii.  2S.  g  6.)

7.  OraeU  ^/"(u^itac,  at  Tbalamiae  id  ljwini»,


ORACULUM.


8.  Oradt  of  Pbrim,  in Iberia  near Uoinit

Csnauus.  where  no  rama  were  allowed  to  be  laeH-

ficei (Htrab.  iL  p.  *98  j  Tacit  AmaL  vL  Si.)

V.  Orjclks  or  THs  Diad.


isutted  e


dead,  and  offered  u
world.  One  of  the  moat  ancient  and  most  c«l<v
hmted  places  of  this  kind  waa  in  the  country  of
the  Theeprotiani  near  lake  Aonma.  (Diod.  iv.
22  ;  Herod,  v.  93.  g  7  i  Pans.  ii.  30.  3  3.)  An-
other oiBcle  of  thia  kind  waa  at  Ueractea  on  the
Propontia. (PluL  dm.  G.)

Reapecting  (ho Orrrk ornclea in  general an
Wachsmuth, //eUm.  AllerA.-iLf.S6&.&.c.  ;  Klau-
aeu,  I'a  EnA  and  Gr»£«r-i  Enijdop.  s.  c.  OnluL
VL  Italian  Oracles.

Oracles,  id  which  a  god  revealed  hia  will  thraojtb
the  mouth  of  an  inspired  individual,  did  not  exist
'n  Italy.  The  oiaclei  of  Cnlchaa  and  Aesculapina
nentinned  above  were  of  Greek  arigm,  and  tb«
ormer  waa  in  a  Oreek  heroum  on  mount  Gar^aauc
The  Romans,  in  the  ordinary  courae  of  Ihinjn,  did
lot  feel  the  want  ttf  such  omelea  as  theaeorOrrec^

he  will  of  the  goAx,  such  as  the  Sibylline  booka,
lUgury,  haruspicea,  aigni  in  the  hravou,  and  the
ike,  which  are  partly  dcsotbed  in  scpanle  article*
Lnd partly  in  DiviNATio.  The  only  Ilaliaaarade*
known  to  ua  arc  the  fallowing! :  —

1.  Oroc/a  o/'Fuiuut. Ilia  oiadea  are  nid to
ve  been  given  in  the  Saturaian  vetic,  and  eoUec-

tioni  of  his  vaccinia  seem  to  have  existed  at  an
rly  period.  l,kare\.\'ict.O*  Orig. gai,  Rom.  t.*.y
le  places  where  hia  oracles  were  given  were  Vtm
gravea,  the  one  in  the  iieighhouThDod  of  Tihor,
romid  the  well  of  Atbunea,  and  the  othtf  on  th«
(Viig.^at  viL8l,tt;  Oyii,F<MsLn.
650,  &C.)  Thoie  who  nnaultcd  the  god  in  Iha
if  Alhunca,  which  is  said  to  have  been  rv-
lo  by  all  the  Italiana,  had  to  obarrve  Iha
ng  points:  —  The  priest  first  oSered  a  therp
and  other  sacrifices  to  the  god.  The  skin  at  the
'ictim  was  spread  on  llie  ground,  and  the  ewiiul.
or  wai  obliged  to  sleep  upon  it  during  the  night,
ifter  his  head  had  been  thrice  eprinkl^  with  puro
vnlei  from  the  well,  and  touched  with  the  branch
if  a  sacred  beach  tree.  He  waa,  moreever,  obliged
aeieial  days  befire  this  night  to  abstain  from  ani~
mal  food  nod  fimn  matrimonial  cotmecti<Hia,  to  b*
clothed  in  aimple  gnmenta,  andnot  to  wear  a  rii^
n  bia  fiogera. After  be  fell  aileep  on  the  ahcep

onderful  liiiona  and  in  ccaivene  with  Che  gad
imielE  (Virg.  L  c;  laidor,  viiL  II.  87.)  Ovid
(i.  0.)  transfen  aome  of  ths  pointa  to  be  obeoved
order  to  obtain  the  oracle  on  the  Albania,  la
I  oracle  on  the  Aventine.  Both  may  bate  had
much  in  common,  but  from  the  story  which  b«  re-
~  Numa  it  seenu  to  be  dear  that  on  Iba
s  certain diffiarsDl  OKsmoiuaa  alao  wen

2.  OneUt  ef  Fortmia  eiiiCed  ia  iOTeral  Italia
towni,  e^iecially  in  'j-'""",  a*  at  Aniiuni  and
PraeneflA In  the  fonnet  of  theaa  Wwni  t««


ORATION  E3.
giilm  Fartimu  won  tnuihippod,  and  their  itatuei
iiM'd  to  bend  IbrwBid  when  oracles  wire  giieiL
(Macnib.  Sat.i.-23;  annpare  llanL  Can*,  i.  SB.
1  i  SueL  Caiig.  S7  with  Emetti'i  note  ;  DomH.  15.)
At  Pmenate  tha  raada  wet«  deriTed  from  loU
(•orMi),  CDntiBtiDg  of  iticki  of  «Qc  witb  uncient
ch*nuun  grsTtn  upoa  thorn. Thou  kit>  were


to  bsTo  beta  fooi


Dobla


le  of  Numeriui  SufFudiu,
vhich  he  bad  def^  open  Bt  tbo  commuid  of  &  dream
by  which  ba  had  been  buuiled.  The  lota,  when
an  oracle  m<  to  be  giren,  were  ibaken  up  together
bj  a  boy,  after  vhich  one  «>■  dnwa  for  tha  pa-
ton  who  coniulled  the  goddeii.  (Cic  da  Dmit.  iL
41 .)  The  loll  of  Pnenerta  ven,  u  ieut  with  the
tuIbxt,  in  gRmt  eatoam  ai  Late  aa  the  time  of  Ctceio,
while  in  other  placet  of  Latium  tha;  wan  nioatly
neglected.  The  Etnucaa  Caen  in  carl}'  timca  had
lilwwiH  its  Bortei. (Lir.  xiL  62.)

3.  ^  ■  OracU  of  Man  wai  in  Teiy  aneieot  timet,
■oeordiiu  la  Dianyiiui  (L  15),  at  Tiara  Matiena,
not  br  man  Reata.  The  manner  in  which  oraclei
vera  hen  giTen  naembled  that  of  tha  pigeon.
erscia  at  Dodeaa,  for  a  woodpecker  (ptou),  a  biid
naed  to  Han,  waa  tent  by  the  god,  and  letlled
upon  a  wooden  column,  whence  he  pronooneed  the

On  Komao  oracle*  in  genenl  lee  Niebahr,  /fid
1^  Ramt,  tdL  i.  p.  50S,  Ac  ;  Hartong^  Die  Rilig.
tUr  Rimtr,  vol.  L  p.  96.  &c  [L.  S.!

ORA'RIUM  waiannall  handkerchief  UNd  for
wiping  the  face,  and  appean  to  have  boen  employed
for  much  the  aama  pnipoHi  ai  our  pocket-handker-
chiefi  It  WBB  made  of  lilk  or  linen.  Inthefifyn-
Mag-  (P-  60^  27,  ed.  Sylb.)  it  ia  eipUined  by
TfMiT^nii  iKiimyiiw.  Annlian  introduced  the
piactica  rf  ginng  Oraria  to  the  Koman  people  to
tue  ad  ^nmH,  which  apppan  to  mean  for  the
puipoae  of  waring  in  the  public  game)  in  token  of
appUuie,  ai  we  Die  our  bate  and  handlcenhiefi  for
(ha  nma  pnipoae.  (Vopiac  Aurtl.  13  ;  Caiaubon
bJ  he.  i  Aogoatin.  ija  Cit.  Da,  xiii.  S  ;  PindenL
Ot^  Sti^.  L  86  ;  Hieron.  ad  Ntjatiaa.  Ep.  2.)

ORATICNES  PRl'NCIPUM.  The  On-
tiooea  Principnn  an  freqnenlly  mentioned  by  tha
Konan  wiiten  under  tha  Empire  ;  but  thoaa  which
an  diiCTwacd  nnder  thit  head  hare  reference  to
legialation  only,  and  were  addreaied  to  tha  Senate.
Under  the  ChiifUin  Smpenm  niticajarly,  theK
OiBtionei  wen  only  a  mode  of  promolgating  I-aw
ai  coutituted  by  the  Emperor  ;  and  wo  haTe  an
iiulance  of  thii  ann  in  the  nign  of  Probui
0*  I^^ea,  qnai  Probui  oderet,  Scnatneconnltii  pro-
Briia  cniuactaimt,"  Prob.  Imp.  i^  Floe.  Fo^fic.
13.)  ;  and  in  a  uiaage  of  the  Inititntea  of  Jualiniaa
(2.  tiL  17.  a.  7),  iha  expnnian  "IHvi  Futinacii
oraUane  outum  eat."  Under  the  earlier  Emperora,
the  Orationca  wen  in  tha  fonn  of  propoiitiona
br  lawa  addrc«ed  to  the  Senate,  who  had  itill  in
sppeannce,  though  not  m  nsli^,  the  legialatin
power.  Tbia  leoond  kind  of  Oialionea  ii  often
cited  by  the  Cianiol  Juriita,  ai  in  the  foUoving
inilaiKC  tnim  Oaiu  (il  SG5)  —  "  «  ontkoe  Din
Nadiiaiii  SenBtaacminltDm  bctmn  eM." — "  Ora-
tioae  Dili  Hani  . .  quam  S.  C.  aecntnm  ett."
(Paolo*,  Dig.  23.  tit.  2  a.  16.)

Many  of  the  Ontionea  of  the  Roman  enpeion,
■Bch  ai  an  qaotad  by  the  Angnilae  Hiitoriae
SeTiptona,an  merely  eonmmucstioni  to  Ibe  Senate;
aach  fiic  inatance  at  the  anoouneement  of  a  Tictory.
(Hwin.  Doo^  v  •'•  C^ptbW.  13,  13.) Thaia


813

Epiltolae
ho  non-juristical  writers  ;  bnl  the  jnristical
rt  appear  to  have  generally  nruided  the  use  of
Epistola  in  this  sensr,  in  order  not  to  confonnd  the
Imperial  Oralionai  with  the  Retcripla  which  wen
often  called  Bpitlolae.  Il  appcan  that  the  Roman
juritlanted  tha  termi  Libelliu  and  Ocatio  Principii
Bi  equivalent,  for  the  jnuagei  which  haTe  been
inferred  to  in  anppoTt  of  the  opinion  that  theae  two
had  a  different  tenK  (Dig.  S.  tit.  S.  s.  20,
22),  show  that  Lihellna  and  Ontio  Principii  an
for  the  Oiatio  is  here  spoken  of  by  both


Theoi
nooDoed  by  tha  E
they  wen  cmnmo
menage,  which  ws


Epiit.


mpcror  himself,  hot  ^jparenlly
niy  in  the  fmm  of  a  written
I  read  by  the  Quaestors  (Dig.  1.
wage  last  referred  to,  these  Im-*
e  tailed  indifferently  Libri  and
IDS  (niuj,  6)  nyi,  that  Titus
.  blher'i  oiationei  in  the  lenate
We  freqnenllT  read  of  Lit-
teme  and  OiBtionea  being  tent  by  the  Emperor  to
the  Senate.  (TadL  ..<«.  iiL  52,  xri.  7.)  The
mode  of  proceeding  upon  the  receipt  of  one  of
theia  Ontionea  may  be  collected  from  the  pce-
ambia  of  tha  Senatnsconsnltnm  contained  in  the
Digt«(6.  tit.3).  ThesaOrationeawenthefomd-
ation  of  the  Senatutconsulta  which  wen  framed
■hen  the  Oiationei  were  drawn
up  with  much  regard  to  det^  they  contained  in
&ct  the  proTiiions  of  the  inbiRinent  Senatntcon-
lulCnm.  Thit  appears  from  the  £tct  that  thcOrstio
and  the  Senntutcontnltnm  an  often  cited  indif-
daaaioil  jnriitt,  aa  appean  from
.  „  *  (Dig.  2.  tit.  16.  a.  a  ;  5.  tit.  3.
B.20.23,40i  ll.tit.4.  t.8,&c>  Tha  OraUo  it
ited  aa  containing  the  reaaona  or  groundi  of  the
law,  and  tha  Senatniconnltam  for  the  particnlsr
— oTiiions  and  wordi  of  the  law.  To  the  time  of
^ptimina  Severut  and  hia  aon  Caracnlta,  nnmeniut
■nntoBeonsnlta,  founded  on  Orationea,  an  men-
tioned 1  and  nnmenns  Oiatioaea  of  these  two  Empe-
ited.  But  aflei  this  time  they  leem  to
m  into  disuse,  and  the  form  of  making
and  promulgating  Laws  by  Imperial  coni^tntionea
aa  the  ordinary  mode  of  legislation.
Then  has  b«n  mnch  discoision  on  the  amount
of  the  inilnence  eiercised  by  the  Oraliones  Princi-
in  on  the  legiilation  of  the  Senate.  But  il  leeini
be  tolerably  clear,  from  tha  eiidence  that  we
hare^  and  from  the  nstore  of  the  caw,  that  the
Ontio  might  either  recommend  generally  aonie
legishitiTa  meaiun,  and  leave  the  detaili  to  the
Senate  ;  or  it  might  contain  all  the  dcuuls  of  the
pnpoaed  measure,  and  to  be  in  aubetance,  though
not  in  form,  a  SenatuaconmltDin  ;  and  it  would
become  a  SenatUKODialtnio  on  btiDg  adopted  by
the  Senate,  which,  in  the  cue  tnppoied,  would  h«
tnenly  a  matter  of  form.  In  the  ate  of  an  Ontio^
eipieued  in  mora  general  tenns,  there  it  no  reason
to  tnppotethat  the  recommendation  of  the  Empeior
was  leas  of  a  command  ;  it  was  merely  a  command
in  mon  general  leima.

(Znnmem,  Gtiiielile  da  Ren.  PritatrTiAli,  I  p,
79  :  and  Diikten,  Uiier  du  Ridm  der  Rim.  Kaittr
Mad  dtrea  Einfita  aa/  dit  Gatbtg^mag,  in  Rkm,
Afw.  /Ur  Jwntpndma,  ml.  ii.)  [O.  L.]

ORATOR.  Cicero  nmarkt  (Or.  Pari,  e.28)
that  a  **  certain  kind  of  cantea  belong  to  Jut  Civile,
and  that  Jna  Civile  is  oonrenant  about  Lawa
(£o)  and  Ciulom  (oiof)  appcrtMning  to  tbiog*


ati  ORATOR,

public  tnd  {Hinte,  tbe  kaawieigt  ot  which,  though
Degicclcd  bj  most  oraton,  uwmi  to  mo  to  be  Decti-
taty  for  the  purpoia  of  oislotr."  In  hii  tiwtiw
on  tho  OiBtor,  ind  particduly  in  the  fint  book,
Cicuo  hai  f[irea  hi>  opinion  of  ths  dntia  of  an
orator  and  Ou  reqaiitte  quatificatiani,  in  ths  fonn
of  a  dialogna,  in  which  Lucia*  Liciniui  Cnuioi  and
M.  AntonluB  Ri«  the  chief  >peaken.  Cnuoi  mu
himielf  a  model  of  tho  hifthal  excellence  in  ont-
tnrr  ;  imd  the  Dpinioni  attributed  to  him  u  ta  the
qnaliGcstioni  of  an  oistoc  were  thow  of  Cicero  hlm-
■I'lr,  vho  in  the  iutrnductorjr  put  of  the  fint  book
(c6}  declare!  that  "in  bil  opinion  no  man  can
deKire  the  title  of  a  perfect  orator,  nnleu  be  hai
acquired  a  knowledge  of  all  important  thingi  and
of  all  aiti :  far  it  i«  out  of  knovledge  that  oretray
muBl  blouom  and  eipandf  and  if  it  it  not  founded
on  Dialter  irbicb  the  orator  hai  follj  maalcred  and
nndentood,  it  ia  idle  talk,  and  maj  almort  be
called  puerile."  Acoiiding  to  Crsuua  the  proTuice
of  the  Orator  cmbracea  everything :  hs  mnat  be
enabled  to  apeak  well  on  all  lubjecta.  Conie-
qoentl;  h«  moM  have  a  knowledge  of  the  Jni
Ciiile  (L  U,  Ac),  the  acceuitj  for  which  Crami
lUofltratea  W  inataDCta  i  and  be  ihould  not  only
know  llw  Jul  Cirik,  ai  being  neceuaiy  when  he
hai  to  apeak  in  c«dm«  relating  to  prirate  matten
and  to  pcirata  Judkia,  bat  he  ahonld  alio  haia  a
knowledge  of  the  Jul  Pubiicmn  which  ii  conTCt.
nnt  abont  a  State  at  inch,  and  he  ihould  be  hmi-
liar  with  the  erenU  of  hiiloiy  and  initancci  de-
iiTcd  from  the  experience  of  the  paat.  Antonini
(i.  49)  limit!  the  qualificBtioni  of  the  ontor  to  the
command  of  language  plcMant  to  the  ear  and  of
ai^gumenta  adapted  to  conTinco  in  tsuui  in  the
Ibnim  and  on  ordinary  occaiioni.  He  further  ce-
quiro  the  orator  to  have  competent  voice  and
action  and  !uflicient  graco  and  cue.  Antoniu*
(L  £11)  contend!  that  an  orator  doei  not  requin  a
knawledge  of  tho  Jul  Civile,  and  be  inalanc«  the
caH  of  hini!eli;  for  Cniani  allowed  that  Anioniui
could  latii&utoril;  conduct  a  came,  though  Anto-
niu!,  according  to  hii  own  adiniHion,  had  never
learned  the  Jul  Civile,  and  had  never  felt  the  want
oF  il  in  auch  cauaei  ai  he  had  defended  (imjany.

The  profeuion  then  of  the  orator,  who  with  re-
ference to  bil  undertaking  a  clicnt'i  caie  ii  alio
coIIhI  patronu!  {de  Or.  L  56,  Brat.  38)  wsi
quite  diilincl  from  that  of  the  Juriiconaullu!
[JtiRiscoKEULTi],  and  alw  from  that  of  the
Advocalui,  at  leaat  in  the  time  of  Cicero  (iL  74),
and  evm  later  {da  OraL  DiaL  34).  An  orator,
who  poueiicd  a  competent  knowledge  of  the  Jni
Civile,  would  however  have  an  advantage  in  it,  a»
Antoning  admiu  (,169) ;  but  ai  there  were  many
mentlsii  to  an  orator,  which  were  of  difficull  at-
tainment, he  sayi  that  it  would  be  unwise  to  dii-
tract  bim  with  other  thinRi.  Some  rrquiiitea  of
oratory,  inch  ai  voice  and  geiturc,  could  only  be
■equind  bydiicipline  ;  whereaa  a  competent  know-
kdge  of  the  law  of  a  caie  (,ftini  utiHtat)  conld  be
got  Bt  any  time  from  tho  juriacaniulli  (periti)  or
from  booki.  Antonini  tbinki  that  the  Reman
•raton  in  thii  mattir  acted  more  wiicly  than  the
Oreak  ofSbwa,  who  being  ignorant  of  law  had  tbe
aiiiitanee  of  low  fellowi,  who  worked  for  hire,  and
were  called  Piagniatici(L4£):  the  Roman  oraton
cntrailed  the  maintenance  d[  the  law  to  the  high
character  of  their  profeued  Jmiiti,

So  br  B>  the  profeuion  of  an  advocate  coiilisl*
in  tlu  (liilfiil  oooduct  of  a  cauia,  and  ia  the  ai^


ORATOR.

porting  of  hi

argument,  it  must  be  admitted  with  AntDiua<i
a  very  moderate  knowledge  of  law  i*  auScicnt ;  and
indeed  evenapuivly legal  argument  reqnirei  not  BO
much  the  accnninlatiDn  ofa  vaitilore  of  legal  know'
ledge  at  the  power  of  handling  the  matter  when  it
haa  been  collected.  The  method  in  which  thii  om-
lummate  maiterof  hii  art  managed  a  came  iiilated
by  hinuelf  (de  Or.  iL  72)  -,  and  Cicero  in  anotlier
poiaage  (Srvtei,  S7)  hai  reesided  bii  rnerita  aa  an
orator.  Bcrviui  Sulpiciua,  who  wai  the  grea.trat
lawyer  of  hii  age,  had  a  good  piactiial  knowledgs
of  the  law,  but  othera  had  thii  abo,  and  il  vraa
aomething  elie  which  diitingniihed  Snlpicini  fniiii
all  hii  contemporariei — "  Many  otb«a»  ai  well  oi
Sulpicioi  had  a  great  knowledge  of  the  law  i  hfi
alone  poHeued  it  ai  an  art  But  the  knowledgs
of  law  by  itself  would  never  have  helped  him  to
tbii  ivithont  the  poiieision  of  that  art  which
lesche*  ni  to  divide  the  whole  of  a  thing  into  ita
put*,  by  exact  definition  la  develope  what  ii  iiD-
perfectly  leen,  by  explanation  to  dear  ap  what  ia
obscure  ;  lint  of  all  to  •<«  ambigoitica,  then  to  dis-
entangle them,  lailly  to  have  a  mle  by  which
tnith  and  (aliehDod  ara  diitingniihed,  and  by  wfaidi
what  comeqnencei  follow  fi^m  prr-
0  not."  (finK.41.)  With  snch
combined  a  knowledge  of  letten
ana  a  pieasmg  style  of  speakii^.  As  a  fotmsic
ontor  tben  he  must  have  been  one  of  the  first  that
ever  lived ;  but  Mill  among  the  Romani  hii  nv

Cition  wai  that  of  a  juiist,  while  Antonini,  who
no  knowledge  of  the  law,  ii  put  on  a  lev^  as
in  orator  (pairamH)  with  L.Crassiii,  who  of  all  the
eloquent  men  of  Rome  had  the  bat  acquainlance
with  the  taw.


andSriiat  .


Oratory  wai  a  wriooi  itndy  among  the  Romani.
telli  ni  by  what  painnl  la'  >  -  -  •
illence. (Anrt.  sf,  &c)


by  what  painnl  laboor  he  attained


perfection  in  the  century  which  fc«-
ceded  the  Chriitian  sen.  Tti  decline  dales  froa
the  establishment  of  the  Impwial  power  nnder
Augustas  and  his  nuxeison  ;  for  though  lher«  wm
many  good  ipeaken,  and  more  Ailfal  rheloricisni
under  the  empire,  ths  otaloiy  U  the  npnblk  wna
rendered  by  circamMancei  mniitBUe  trr  tha  acnate,
for  the  popolar  aaaemblica,  or  for  catea  of  cnnci
and  high  misdenteonoiua.

In  the  Dialogue  De  Oraltdboi,  which  is  attri-
buted to  TacituB,  IdeiBklB,  one  of  the  spnken,
attempts  (c.  36,  Ac)  to  assign  the  nascns  for  ths
low  Itale  of  oratory  in  the  tic
the  Dialogue  waa  written,  compared  *
ditioi  in  the  age  of  Cicero  and  of  CJc
ccnora.  Ma  attribute!  iti  dedine  ta  the  neglect  of
the  (Uicipline  under  which  childrai  wen  formerly
brought  up,  and  to  the  practico  of  reaorting  to
rbetoriciani  (n&^ont)  who  profraaed  to  tea£b  tho

at  length  of  the  euly  discipline  of  (he  old  uuon
and  (^  Cicem'!  courie  of  stndy  as  dMcribcd  in  the
Brvte). The  old  oraton  (c  M)  leaned  their  art


diate  (Buses  of  the  decline  of  daqnaice  appear  to
be  indicated  by  Matenini,  aiMhtr  ^eaker  in  the
Diiloga^  who  attribatai  the  fonwc  flamiiluBf


and  to  ihe  port;  itngglei  and  aim  Ihe  vialenu
th>t  an  inridcnt  to  nicb  a  gtite  of  MKiety.  Thi
■liniioa  lo  tie  effnt  produced  b;  the  nUfaliih-
mait  of  the  Imperial  povar  i>  cleac  suaith  io  the
folloiring  wordi,  which  ipfer  both  to  the  Imperial
and  the  Rapohlican  period! :  "  cum  miitii  onudbni
«(  modenlon  imo  cannlibiu,  tantnm  qnitque  oratoi
wperet,  qnantum  emnti  populopemud«ri  potent"
The  ineiiioria]*  of  Rimian  oratory  are  th«  ora-
tiiHu  of  Cicero  ;  bnt  thej  are  only  a  imall  partion
of  the  great  nun  of  oiatarial  lileiatnre.  The  frag-
ment! of  the  Koman  onion  fnim  Appim  Coeciu
aad  U.  Partini  Cato  to  Q.  Aureliu  Symmachiii,
bare  been  collected  by  H.  Meyer,  ZUiicli,  1  toI.
Sto.  Sd  bA  1842.  [G.  L.]

OKBUS. [Luu  JuLUX,  p.  692,  b.]
OHCA. [SiTaLL*.]
ORCHE'SIS  (ipxiff't). [aiLTATio.]
ORCHSSTKA. [Xhiatruh.}
ORCINIIS  LIBERTUa. [Manomimid.]
0RCINU8  SSNATOR. [Smiths,]
0RDINA-R1U8  JUDEX. [Judbx  Pidj-

ORDINA'RIUS  SERVUS.  [Smbvub.]
ORIK)  ii  applied  to  u;  body  of  men,  who  finrn
*  diftinet  dOH  in  the  emnmmiity,  either  by  po«-
•eaing  diitinet  pri•iiege^  purfaiDg  certain  tnde*
or  pnHeanoni,  or  in  any  other  way.  Tbu  Cicero
(  yrrr.  u.  6)  ipcaki  of  the  "Ordo  aratonim,  aire
peeoariomm,  riie  mercatamm."  In  the  nine  way
tile  whole  body  of  ncerdotei  at  Rome  ii  ipoken  of
mi  an  ordo  (Fntni,  i.  b.  (Mo  Suwdnfim),  and
Befiarate  eccleiiaatica]  corporatianft  an  called  by  the
Mune  tilie.  (Onto  toUegii  noMtri,  Onlli,  I—er.  a.
2417  iOrdoStBiralium,  lA  n.  2'^9.)  The  liber .
tini  and  icrihae  also  formed  aejHrate  ordiuet.  (SneL
4*  GnuumaL  IB  ;  Cic  For.  i.  47,  iii.  79.)  The
Senate  and  the  Equitn  ate  alio  apokm  of  re-
■pectiTely  at  the  Ordo  Seostoriu  and  Ordo  EqaeS'

neTer  aj^ied  to  the  Plebea.  Accordingly,  ve  find
the  eipreaion  "  Utenjno  Ordo  "  nied  without  any
fiuther  eipUnation  to  deugnate  the  Senatorial
and  Eqneatann  oidmei.  (Suet  Aw/,  1  fi  ;  VelL  Pat.
ii.  100.}  The  Senatarial  Ordts  aa  the  highett,  ii
(ometime*  diatinguiihed  a>  "anipliHimu)  Ordo."
(FliD.  Ep.i.a;  SueC  Olia,  8,  Vap. S.)

Ordo  Deamonnm  (Dig.  £9.  tiL  2.  i.  3.  S  7  ;  Onlli,
/Mcr.n.  1167  ;  CoLQNL>,p.318,B),anda(Hnetimei
■imply  Oido  (Tacit  Hiit.  iu  £S  ;  Dig.  50.  tit.  3.
a.  2.  f  S  J  Oielli,  n.  3734),  Ordo  ampliitimni
(Cic  pni  £U.  2),  or  Ordo  mlendidiiiiBiiia  (Orelli,
■1.1180,1181).

■  The  term  Onto  ia  alio  applied  to  a  company
er  troop  of  aoldien,  and  ii  naed  ai  eqninlent
to  Centnria:  thiu  centnrioni  an  somo^e!  called
"qni  ndinn  daienmt"  (Cic  PkiL  i.  8  ;  Can.
BelL  Ca.  L  1 3),  and  the  Gut  eenluriei  in  a  legion
"{vimi  ordinaa''  (Caea.  B^  GalL  T.  S8,  44.)
BTcn  the  centiiriani  of  the  fint  umtnrie*  are  oe-
caHnoally  called  "Prinii  Ordinea."  (Caei.  BdL
GalL  T.  30,  Ti.  7  ;  Ut.  tit.  4  j  Ornwr.  ad  loe.)
[Comp.  EiiRciTii»,p.5ai,b.]

OR-OANON. [HvDBAUi.1 ;  Macbina

O'RGIA. [Mtbtbbu.I

OROYIA (ipyvii), a Greek meainr
length, derired  from  the  hmnaa  body,  waa  the
' '' M  extremity  of  the  oiit-


OSCHOPHORIA.  S4S

Itretched  anni,  whence  the  name,  ffom  iptyci,
(Xen.  Mem.  iL  3.  g  19  j  Pollni,  ii.  IBB.)  It  wai
eqnoJ  to  6  feet  or  to  4  cubite,  and  wai  1-IOOth  of
the  ■tadium.  (Herod,  ii.  149.)  It  may  be  «-
pmied  neuty  enough  in  Engliih  by  the  word
jftdon.  (Comp.  MasHURi  and  the  Tihle«.)[P.S-]
ORICHALCUH  (VixaAldt),  a  metallic  com-
pound, akin  to  copper  and  brenn,  which  nma
highly  priied  by  the  aneiente.  (See  the  psiaagea
in  Porcellini,  and  the  other  La^  Lciicona)  The
word  hai  giTen  ri»e  In  much  donht ;  but  the  truth
■eemi  lo  be  that  it  denote!  bran,  with  which  the
ancient!  became  acquainted  by  fusing  linc  on
{tndmnim,  calamine)  with  copper,  altbough  they
appear  to  have  had  acureely  any  knowledge  of
ime  ai  a  metal.  They  appear  to  have  regu^ed
oriehalcmn  a!  a  lort  of  bronze.  Haw  little  ac-
quainted tbry  wen  with  ili  true  formation  ia
■bown  by  Ihe  fact  that,  deceired  1^  iti  colour,
they  luppoied  gold  to  be  one  of  iu  conttitnenta,
and  then  perpetuated  their  error  by  a  &lae  ortho-.
graphy,  laarieAalcmm.  The  true  derivation  u  no
doubt  bum  tpgi  and  x'^'^'t  that  ia,  tnomCout-
irgue,  go  called  prahably  becauae  it  waa  obtained
by  fuiing  copper  with  an  ore  (metal  aa  fbnnd  in
the  mountain),  and  not  with  an  ainady  reduced
metal.  (See  eapecially  Strabo,  with  Oroikurd^
note,  and  Beckman,  aa  quoted  in  the  article  Ma-

TiLLDM.)  [P.S.]

ORIGINA'RII. tC<.LON«TiTg,p.Sll,b.l
ORNAME'NTA  TfllUMPHA-LlA. [Tltl-

ORNA'TRIX  [Coma,  p.  3S0,  bj.
ORTHODO'RON.  [Minsur*.]
OSCHOPHO'RIA  (iirxo^pw  or  wrxof^m),
an  Attic  fejtiyal,  which  according  to  acme  writera
waa  celebntted  in  hanoui  nf  Athena  and  DioDyiui
(PhcL  p.  322,  Bekk.),  and  according  to  otben  in
lur  of  Dionyina  and  Ariadne.  (Pint  Tiei.  23.)
time  of  ita  celi^bntion  ii  not  mentioned  by  any
ent  writer,  but  Canini  {Fait.  AU.  iL  p.  .TS4)
tuppoHi  with  gnat  probability  ^1  it  wai  held  at
tbe  commencement  of  the  Atlic  month  Pyanepiion.
It  li  said  to  ha>e  beeu  initiluted  by  Thueua.  Ill
name  i>  deriTcd  from  ifjuit,  ^^X^t  "  '^X^  a
bnnch  of  Tine*  with  grapet,  for  it  wai  a  -rintage
fea^Tal,  and  on  the  day  of  ita  eelebntion  two
youthi,  called  i^xoi^iipDi,  whoae  [orenta  wen  alive,
and  who  wen  elected  from  among  the  noblclt  and
wealdiieit  citiieni  (Schol.  ad  NicaiuL  Alaipi.
109),  carried,  in  the  diiguiie  of  women,  hrmchei
of  TJnea  with  freah  grapea  from  the  temple  of
Oionyaoa  in  Athena,  to  tbe  ancient  temple  of
Atheia  Scin*  in  Phalemi.  These  youthi  were
followed  by  a  pcoceaaion  of  peraona  who  Itkewiia
carried  vine-branchei,  and  a  cboma  aang  hymna
called  iHTXOlnpuiii  n4\ii,  which  were  accompanied
by  danco.  (Athan.  liv.  p.  631.)  In  the  aacrilica
which  wai  offered  on  thii  occaiion,  women  alio
took  part ;  they  were  called  iii-no^iifei,  for  they
repreieoted  the  mothers  of  the  youthi,  carried  the
proTiiiona  (t<|«  nol  o-irfa)  for  Ihem,  and  niated
itoriea  to  them.  During  the  lacrit^ce  the  itaff  of
the  henld  waa  adoned  with  gailanda,  and  whan
the  libation  wni  peHbrmed  the  apedatcn  cried
oat  i\t\it,  ioi,  Ui.  (Plat.  Tia.  2±)  Theephebi
taken  from  all  the  triba  had  on  tbii  day  a  conleat
in  racing  from  the  dty  to  the  temple  of  Athena
Scirai,  during  which  they  alio  earned  the  (Sffx^h
and  the  victor  received  a  cup  Eiled  with  five  dif-
ferent tliinga(nmfarAMi,w«tTawAd^  orTtmnrXq),


OVATIO.
ne,  haarr,  che«K,  flour,  and  i  little o


(Athpji.  xi.  p.  -)U.i.)  According  to  otliCT
the  riclor  only  drank  fioin  ibia  cnp.  The  >lory
whicb  will  )yii]ba1iullf  rcprewnted  in  the  rilei
and  ceieninnici  of  (hii  feMivnl,  and  which  wu  laid
to  have  given  ri»  to  ii,  ii  related  bj  Plutarch
(net.  33,  23)  and  by  Procliu  <p.  MB.  ed.  Gai«-
furd).  (Compare  Bckkcr'i  Aneodoi.  p-Slli  ;  £ly-
-  moL  Mbch.  and  Ilcsych.  j.c.^flo'X'' ;  Suidoi,  t-v.
'aaxo^ipm  Hnd  aaxo^pas.)  (L.  S.]

OSCILLUM,  a  diminutive  throngh  oki/wh
from  01,  meaning  "a  little  lace,"  wai  the  term
applied  to  facet  or  headi  o(  Bacchui,  which  were
>U!pendod  in  the  linejardi  to  lie  turned  ia  every
direclioD  by  (he  wind.  Whichioentr  way  they
looked,  they  were  »uppo«ed  lo  make  the  iLnei  in
that  quarter  truiiful.  (Viii.  Georg.  ii,  388—393.)
The  left-hand  figure  in  the annexed  woodcut  ia

Britiah  Muieum.  The  back  of  the  head  ii  want-
ing, and  il  ia  concave  within.  The  mouth  and
pupila  of  the  eyei  are  perforated.  It  repreientg
the  countenance  oT  Bacchus  with  a  beautiful,  mild,
and  propilioui  eipr«giau  (rnaUa,  AoHetfuM,  Virg.
I.  c).  A  £lle^  epitally  twiited  about  a  kind  of
wreath,  turroundi  the  head,  and  deicendi  by  the
cari  towarde  the  neck.  The  metallic  ring,  by
which  the  marble  waa  auapended,  atill  remaini.
The  other  figure  ia  from  an  ancient  Rcm  (Maffei,
Gtm.AiU,  iiL  Gi),  repteaealing  a  tree  with  lour


inl.  I  chariot  drawn  by  four  honea,  but  on  foot ;  he  w


1  in  the


oagold  ei


otcilla  hnrg  npon  ita  branciei.  A  Sy«ins  and  a
Panuuareplacsdat  the  root  of  the  tree.

From  Ihia  noun  came  the  verb  oKdto,  meaning
"  to  awing."  Swinging  (otailatio)  wa*  among  the
bodily  eiereiaa  pcaetiaed  by  the  Ronuni,  and  waa
one  of  the  amuaementa  at  the  Feriae  Ijitinaa.
(Feitui.  J.  B. :  Hygin,  foi.  130  j  Wunder,  Cfan-
mni.  ad  Cie.  pro  Plate,  p.  SS  j  Futiii,  p.
630,  a.1  [J.Y-]

O'PCINES. [AtiQUB,  p.  175,  h.]

OSTIA'RIUM  was  a  lai  upon  the  doora  of
houaea,  which  waa  probably  impoted  along  with
the  Oi^iiiiian'aii  by  the  {»  nnOuru  of  Juliua
Caonr.  Itwaa  levied  by  Melelloa  Scipio  inSyria,
together  with  the  Columnarium,  on  which  aee  Co-
LUMHtmuu  (Caea.  B.C.  iii.  33  ;  Cic.  ad  Fam.
iii.  B).

OSTIA'illUS. [DoMua,  p.427,b.]

OSTIUM. [J*Ni7i.l

OSTUACISMUS. [EiBiLiim,  p.  BU.J

O'STRACUN  CJffTpajHw). [FiOTnai.]

OVATIO,  a  IcMer  triumph. ;  the  lerma  em-
ptoyed  by  the  Greek  writera  on  Roman  hiatory  are
e*^  •iwrrlii,  *fO>t  dplaiigar. The  cireumitaneea

pc»ing  »len.nily  [TaitlKPllUb]  were  the  follow-
ing:—  The  general  did  not  enter  the  city  in  a


,  :  toga  praetexta  of  a  magiitntti
Ilia  browi  were  encircled  with  a  wnaih  not
laurel  but  of  myrtle ;  he  bore  no  accptre  in  t
hand  ;  the  prDctuion  wu  not  heralded  by  Imi
peu,  headed  by  the  aenate  and  thronged  with  vi
lorioua  troDpa,  but  wai  enlivened  by  a  eniwd
flute-playen,  attended  chiefly  by  knighta  and  pi
beiana,  frequently  withoot  aoldieia  j  the  ceremoni
were  concluded  by  the  aafnfiee  not  of  a  bull  b
" '  "■'  - jHorcetf.  c  22  ;  "


OelL  T


. 10,  ]


L  21.) The  ■


'Ij  to  be  derived  from  the  kind  of
victim  offered,  and  we  need  pay  little  tspect  to
the  opuiien  of  Featna  (s.  e.  Oiuataa),  who  aappoaea
it  (0  have  been  foimed  from  the  glad  ihoat  01  O!
frequE<ntly  reiterated,  nor  to  that  of  Dionyaiua,
whoae  ayilem  requiml  him  to  trace  every  eutum
to  a  Grecian  origin,  and  who  thenfbte  mamtaina
that  it  ia  eomipted  front  the  Bacchanalian  flw.
Dionytina  maket  another  mialake  in  aaaignii^  a
laurel  chaplet  to  the  conqueror  on  these  oaaiiona,
uDce  all  the  Roman  writera  agree  with  Plutarrh
in  representing  that  the  myrtle  crown,  hence  called
Or\alii  Omnia,  waa  a  ebaraeleriatic  of  the  oration.
(Featua,  i.e.  OtxdU  O>ro«o;  Plin.  //.A',  xv.  28  ;
Pkt  ;  Gell.U.  cr) Compare  CoaoH.!,  p.  sel.

In  later  timea,  the  victor  entered  upon  botae-
back  <Serv.  ia  Fir^.  Aa.  iv.  G43),  and  the  on-
ttona  celebrated  by  Octavianni,  Druaua,  Tiberiu,
&c,  an  anally  recorded  by  Dion  Caaaiua  by  a
reference  to  thia  circumalance.  (Dion  Caai.  ilviii.
31.  ilix.  15,  liv.8,  33,tv.  3.)

An  oration  wii  gtanted  when  the  advantage
gained,  although  coniideiabie,  waa  not  lufficient  ta
conititute  a  legitimate  claim  to  the  higher  diitinc^
tion  of  a  triumph,  or  when  the  victoiy  had  been
achieved  with  little  bloodahed,  aa  in  the  (sie  of
Poatumiu  Tubertol,  who  firatreceived  thia  hoooiv
(Plin.  H.tf.  IV.  29) ;  or  when  boitilitie*  had  sot
been  regularly  procUimed  (Featua,  OelL  IL  k)  ;
or  when  the  war  had  not  bean  completely  termi-
nated, which  waa  one  of  the  osteniible  reaaona  for
refuting  a  triumph  to  Marcellua  on  hit  letom  fawn
Sicily  (PluL  Lc;  Liv.  ixvL  SI)  ;  or  when  tbs
contett  had  been  carried  on  againat  bate  and  dd-
worthy  foea,  and  hence  when  the  aervile  banda  of
Athenion  and  Spartaeua  were  detlroyod  by  Per-
pema  and  Craatua.  thete  leadsi  celebrated  ova-
tiona  only  (Florui,  iiL  19  ;  Plin.  OelL  /.  c),  al-
though the  latter  by  a  apecial  reaolntion  of  the  a^
nate  watpetmilledtowearalaurdnvwa. [W.R.]

OVI'LE. (CoMtriA.  p  SSS,  b.]

OU'SIAS  DIKE. [ENOMlotr  Pikk.]

OXYBAPHUM. [AOTABtlLDH.]


P.

PA'CTIO,  PACTUM. (0»i.io*TH.K«a.]
PAEAN  (m4w,  iwdr,  rxuiw),  a  hymn  or

Apollo,  and  tecma  to  be  at  old  at  the  worahip  id
thii  di'ily.  The  etymolofy  of  the  word  ia  doubt-
ful. Some  tuppote  that  it  obtained  itt  name  frtml
Paeon,  the  god  of  healing  ;  but  in  the  Hompric
poemt  Paeon  ia  alwaya  tpoken  of  at  a  arparais
divinity,  dtttincl  from  Afwllo.  Other  writcrti
with  ttill  tew  probability,  soonact  it  with  ntm,  to


~  O"


PAEDAGOaUS.

Tlie  paam  nt  slvsji  of  a  jnyinu  natnn,  tod
iu  tons  and  loundl  eipreued  hope  imd  confidence.
Th«  Kund  of  H  sppoLn  to  hsTS  been  invtitHbly
connected  with  it  (Athen-ir.  pp.696,  e.£  701, b.c.)
It  WM  >nng  hj  urenl  penom,  one  of  vhom  pro-
bablf  led  the  atben,indtheimg«neitterinnrclied
ODWudg  or  Mt  lof[«tber  at  table.  Thai  Achillei
after  the  death  of  Hector  cbUi  upon  hii  companioni
to  retnn  to  the  ihipt,  nnging  a  psean  on  accoont
of  theR[orrthe]rhadgBiii«l(/ILiiiiL391]i  nnd
the  AchaMint,  after  reelocing  Chijieii  to  her
bihiT,  an  repmenled  ai  lingin);  a  puan  toApoilo
at  the  end  of  tfae  s.-ii:rificial  fiiut,  in  order  to  ip-
paw  hii  wnth.  (II.  L  473.)  Flora  thefs  pa«-
miiri  it  ii  dear  that  the  paean  vai  a  nng  of
thankigiTing,  when  danger  wai  pauad,  and  idjo  a
bymn  lo  pcofiidale  the  f^  It  mu  rang  at  the
aolemn  feidrab  of  Ap^o,  etpedallj  el  the  Hjo-
einthia  (*lt  ri  TuMui  M  rir  mora,  Xen.
JfilL  ir.  5.  g  II,  Affit.  iL  17),  and  WW  alto  tang
Sna  very  aarif  tinwa  in  the  templet  of  the  god.
(Hon.  Hfam.  ad  ApolL  614  ;  Eoiip.  /on,  126,
Ac)

The  pwu  wa*  alaa  (nog  a*  a  battle  song,  both
helbra  an  attack  on  the  enemy  and  after  the  battle
wai  Gniahed.  (Thucyd.  L  SO,  ir.  43,  iL  SI,  riL  44  ;
Xen.  J.o4.  i8.  g  17,4c.)  Tbii  pracliee  aeema
to  hBTe  ehiefljr  jxemiled  amoi^  the  Doriani,  but
g  the  ather  Greek  itBlei.


PAEDAG00U3.


B17.


id  lolaw
that  ApoUonng  it  aflei  hie  victory  at


(Pint


rthePjthiau


■171,  that  the  paean  which  wu  rang  'belme
the  battle  waa  atoed  to  Arel,  and  the  one  rang
after  to  ApoUo  ;  but  there  are  ilmng  resiraii  for
beliering  that  the  paean  bm  a  hatt]»4ong  wu  in
later  timet  not  particnlarif  conneclad  with  the
wvnhip  of  Apollo.  (Bode,  GacA,  dtr  IgritA.
J)KUiaiuiiltrHelbiitm,ttA.lyp.9,\0,&c)  II
it  certain  that  the  paean  wat  in  litter  timet  lung
to  the  hoDoor  of  oilier  godi  beiidet  Apollo.  Thai
Xenophm  relate*  that  the  Laeedaemoniani  m  one
occation  nng  a  paean  to  Poaeidon,  to  pro;Htiate
bin  after  on  earthquake  {HA  It.  7.  3  *).  and  bIu
that  the  Greek  amy  in  Atia  tang  a  paean  to
2ent. (.4»&.iilS.  SB.)

In  itill  later  timet,  paant  were  nmg  in  honour
nl  mortalt.  Thui  Aiatut  ttng  paeant  to  the
bonour  of  the  Macedonian  Antigonut  (Pint.  deon.
16)  ;  a  paean  computed  bj  Aleiinnt  wot  rang  at
IM|^i  in  hoDoor  (rf  the  Macedonian  Cratenu  ;  and
th«  Rhodiani  eriebrated  Plolemaeni  L,  king  of
EgTjt,  in  the  aann  numner.  (Athen.  it.  p.  C96,
e.  C)  Tba  ChaUidiani,  in  FInlarch't  time,  ttill
cantinnad  lo  eetehrale  in  a  paean  the  jhsIki  of
their  benefiMSor,  Tiwe  Flaminiut  (Pint /Ion.  16.)
The  pnctice  of  tinging  the  paean  at  banquelt,
■■  !  feat^  when  Uba-


aod  etpedallj  at  the  end  of  tl


inran  eantii


godi,  »a>  Tcry  an-
I  mentioned  by  Alcman,  who  lired  in
eentarrac.  (Smb.  x.  p.  482.)  The
.oed  to  be  nng  on  inch  occationt  till  i
iTLta.aymp-  iL  I  ;  Plul.5y»Fi.Tii.  a


(MBUer^  AM:  </  On^  LUtralan,  pp.  IS,  SO,
Dorwet,  ii.  6.  |  4  ;  Bode,GaoL  (far  lyriicL,  <te.
roLLpp.7~77.)
PAEDAOO'OIA. [PAiPieooo&]
FAEOAO(raUS(m)>y»7J>^atotor. The


iffice  of  tntor  in  a  Grecian  fiunily  of  nnk  and
ipuleiics  (Plato,  dt  Repai.  L  p.  87,  ed.  Bekker,  dv
Le^.  lii.  pp.  41,42)  waiattigned  lo  one  of  ihe  moat
tiuitwonhj  of  Ihe  tlsTca. The  torn  of  hit  matter
conunittad  (o  hit  care  on  attaining  their  liilli
leulh  year,  their  preTiooi  education  harin?
be«i  conducted  by  fenuaei. They  remiuned  with
the  tutor  (magiila-)  until  they  attained  the  age  of
puberty. (Ter.  A,ulr.  i.  1.  24.) Hit  duty  ws)
~  'Jier  to  giiard  them  from  eril,  both  phytiial  and
inl,  than  to  couuuDniaite  initruction,  to  eultiTSta
tir  mlndi,  or  to  impart  accamplitlunenti. Ha
mt  with  them  to  and  from  the  tchoot  or  the
Qthnauun  (Plato,  £jriu,  p.  118); he  accom-
panied Ihem  out  of  dotot  on  all  occationt ;  be  wni
retpontihle  for  their  penonal  tafety,  and  for  their
aroidance  of  had  company.  (Bato,(ifi..iflifli.  rii.  p,
379.) Thefhnnationof  their  moialt  by  direct  >u-
perintsndence  belonged  to  the  wailttiiai  at  publio
oScen,  and  their  initmction  in  the  lariou  biucbet
of  Ictmmg,  I.  e.  in  grammar,  muttc,  and  gymnaa-
tica,  to  the  ii&Lr«nA.oi  or  pmeenptorM,  whom  Plato
(II.  ea).  Xenophon  (da  Lae.  Rtp.  iL 1,  iiL  2),
Plutarch  (*r  L&.Ed.  7), and  Quintilian  (/«(.  Or.
B,  9)  oxpreitly  dittingnith  from  the  paedago^
la  latter  even  carried  Ihe  buokt  and  initru-
U  which  were  requitite  for  their  young  matten
udying  under  the  >aphi9li  and  profetiort.
hit  account  of  the  office  it  lulGcienI  lo  explain
why  the  laiSrriryis  to  oCten  appean on the
Greek  itage,  both  in  tragedy,  ai  m  the  Medea,
lUKu,  and  /on  of  Euripidea,  and  in  comedy,
a*  in  the  BaaJiuia  of  Plautut. The  condition  ol
tUyery acconnti  for the  circumatance,  that the
tutor  waa  often  a  Thncian  (Plato,  Ala/>.  I  p.  341,
ed.  Bekker),  an  Aiiatic,  ti  ia  indicated  by  nich
namei  u  Lydui  (Plant  IL  e,),  and  tomctunei  an
eunuch.  {Horod.  Tiii.  75  ;  Clom.  Nep.  TUmitU  ir.
3  !  Polyaen.  L  30.  g  2.) Hence  alio  we  tee  why
theie  pcnoni  ipoke  Orccic  with  a  foreign  accent
(frrofapS[ipI{amT,  Plato,  Zytit,  p.  I45,ed.  Bekker).
On  rare  Dccaaiont,  the  tutor  wae  admitted  to  the
pretence  of  the  donghlett,  at  when  the  thiie,  rat-
•-;-:.ig  thit  office  m  the  royal  i«lac«  at  Thebet,
ipaniei  Antigone  while  the  turreyt  the  be-
ig  army  from  the  tower. (Eurip.  Phom.  87 —
210.)

Among  the  Romani  the  attendance  of  the  tutor
I  girit  at  well  at  boyi  vat  much  more  frequent,
ai  they  were  not  confined  at  home  according  to
the  Grecian  cuilom.  (Vol  Max.  ii.  1.  g  3.)  Ai
luiuiy  advanced  under  the  cmpenrt,  it  irat  ttrik-
ingly  manifetted  in  the  dreu  and  truning  of  the
beau^ul  young  tlavet  who  were  dettined  to  be-
come jtaadoffoffi,  or,  at  they  were  alto  termed,
patdagoffia  and  puari  paedagogiaiu-  (Plin,  H.  A^.
xiiiiL  12.1.  Si;  Sen.  Epiit,  124,  Dl  VUu  btala,
17;  TertnlL  JpoL  13.)  Auguiiot  oiiigned  to
them  a  leparale  place,  near  hit  own,  at  the  public
apectaclea.  (Sneton.  Aug.  41.)  Nero  ^ve  oflenca
by  cButing  free  boyt  to  be  brought  up  in  the  deli-
cate hahita  of  paedagosL  (Snetou-iVer.  28.)  After
thil  period  nnmbrrt  of  them  were  attached  lo  the
imperial  family  for  the  take  of  itale  and  om^
meni,  and  not  only  it  the  modem  word  p*'ffB  a
carruption  of  the  ancient  appellation,  but  it  aptly
expteiKS  the  nature  of  the  terrice  which  the  pae-
dasogia  al  thit  later  era  afforded.

In  palacet  and  other  gmt  bouiei  the  paget  ilept
and  lived  in  a  teparate  apartment,  which  wot  alaa
called  j>«d>9i^'*Bi.  (Plin.  Bpitt.  vii.  27.).  [J.  YJ


818  PAENULA.

PAEDO'NOMUS  (■^lutori^f),  i™  a  mas!.-
ttate  at  Sparta,  who  liBd  the  geneisl  (uperintciid-
tna  of  the  education  of  tha  Iwya.  Ili>  oHice  waa
cantidered  tctj  honourable,  and  he  waa  alwsya
chDHiQ  from  Iho  noblest  dtiietu.  He  had  to  make
a  geneni]  inipection  of  the  boys,  and  to  puniih
aeiettlj  all  tho«  who  had  been  negligent  or  idle ;
for  which  purpoie  jtatTnyifpA^v  were  oui^fned  to
bun  bT  Lycurgni.  Thote  who  were  refractory  he
might 'bring  before  the  Ephon.  The  more  imme-
diate inipeclinn  of  the  gymmutii:  eiereisea  of  the
boyi  belonged  to  magiitietci  called  Silioioi.  [Bi-
Di*ET.]  (Xen.  Rep.  Lac.  ii.  2,  iiL  1 0,  iv.  6 ;  Plut
Lye  17  I  Heaychiua,  i.  v. ;  Krauie,  Gifmmutik  tmd
Affon.  tier  Heilaien,  pp.  251,  677.)

PAEDOTRl'BAE  (voiBm-pifaJ),  [Othhasi-

VM,  p.  sai.b.]

PAE'NULA  wu  a  thick  dixtk,  chieBy  tu«d  by
the  Romniu  in  travelling  iiuteail  of  the  ti^^a,  at  a
proteclion  againat  the  cold  and  rain.  (Cic.  pro  MH.
20 ;  Quinlil.  ri.  3.  §  66.)  Hence  we  find  the  ei-
pteuianol'KH^anpaani'aiii  (Cic  ad  Alt.  liii.  'i3)
nsed  ia  the  nnie  c^  greatly  preuing  a  (raTeller  to
(tay  at  one'i  hoaie.  Tbe  paenula  wBi  woiu  by
women  ai  well  ai  by  men  in  tnielling.  (Dig.  34.
tit  2.  a  23.)  It  appean  to  have  been  a  long  cloak
without  ileeves,  and  with  only  an  opening  for  the
head,  ai  is  ahown  in  the  folloning  ligure  taken
from  Barthollni.  If  thit  ji  a  real  example  of  a
paenula,  it  would  leem  that  the  dresa  waa  aewcd
in  front  about  half  way  down,  and  waa  ditided
into  two  porta,  which  might  be  thrown  back  by
the  wearer  »  ai  to  leave  the  aimi  compantirely
free:  it  mnat  have  been  put  na  oTrr  the  hnd.
Tbii  figure  eiplaini  the  eiptE»ion  of  Ciccio  (pro
MiL  I.  c),  "paenula  irretitui ;"  and  cf  the  author
of  the  Dialogua  de  Oialotibui  (c  39),  "paenulia
kdatricU  at  relut  induii."


Under  the  emperor*  the  paenula  waa  worn  in
the  city  ai  a  protection  againit  the  rain  and  cold
(Ju<.  V.  79),  hnt  women  were  forbidden  by  Alex-
ander Seterui  to  wear  it  in  the  city.  (I^uiprid.
Jkj!.  Setr.  27.)  At  one  time,  howeirr,  the  paenula
appean  to  hate  been  commonly  worn  in  the  city
ioitead  of  the  t<>ga,  aa  we  even  find  mention  of
eratora  wearing  it  when  pleading  rauaea  {DiaL  dt
Oral.  39),  but  thia  toibion  wai  probably  of  abort
Jaration,


PAL.\.

The  paenula  nai  usnally  made  of  wool  (Plin.
II.  N.  Tiii.JB.  a.  73),  and  particularly  of  that  kind
whiL:h  t.i»  culled  Gaiuapa  [Oaumpa]  (pMuito
gmaapiiui,  Man.  xiv.  145).  It  waa  alio  aome-
times  made  of  leather  (  paeaula  anortoi.  Marl  vr.
13U).  Seneca  (QxueX.  Nat.  ii.  6)  ipeaki  of
**  paenulae  aut  Bcorteae,"  but  he  appeui  only  to
use  thii  expreaaion  becaoH  paenulae  were  uiually
madeofwool.  (Banholini,(b  i^uouiAi;  Becker,
GaUiu,  Tol.  iL  p.  93.)

PAGANA'LIA. [PaoL]

PAOA'NI. [PaGi.l

PAOA'NJCA, [PiLA.]

PAO 1,  were  fortified  places,  to  which  the  conn-
iry-people  might  reCmt  in  aae  of  an  boatile  in-
road, and  are  laid  to  haTe  been  inatiiuted  by
Serviui  Tnlliua  (Dionyi.  It.  15)  ;  though  the  diri-
aion  of  the  conn  try-people  into  pagi  ii  aa  old  ■■
the  time  of  Numa  (Dionya.  JL  76.)  Each  of  the
country-tribn  wai  diiided  into  a  certain  number
of  pagi ;  which  name  wai  giien  to  tbe  coonlty  ad-
joiuiug  the  fortified  lillagE,  as  well  as  to  the  vilkce
itieltl  There  waa  a  magigtrate  at  the  bead  of  each
pagua,  who  kept  a  regiater  of  tbe  namea  and  of
the  property  of  all  pt'raoni  in  the  pigua.  niaed  tha
iBiea,  and  aummoned  the  people,  when  neceasaiy,
to  war.  Each  pagna  had  ill  own  lacred  ritea,  and
an  annual  feitiTal  called  FagataUa.  (Dionya  iw.
15  ;  Vamt,  de  Litg.  Lai.  vL  24,  26,  ed.  Miiller ;
Macrob.  Satan,  i.  16  ;  Ovid,  Fatt.  I  669.)  The
Paganif  or  isbabitanta  of  tho  pa^  had  tbeii  R-
gular  meetinga,  at  which  they  passed  reaolutioia,
many  of  which  hare  come  down  to  us.  (Oielli,
/ucr.  n.  SiSS,  4»y3,  lOS,  202,  2177.)  The  di-
riiion  of  the  country -people  into  pagi  continued  lo
the  latest  times  of  the  Koman  empire,  and  we  End
frequent  mention  of  the  magiatiatea  of  tha  pagi
under  tho  names  of  Magislri,  Praefeeli  or  Piao-
poaiCi pagomm.  (Orelli,/iuir.  n.121,  379J,  3796>
Cod.  Tlieod.  2.  tit.  34.  s.  1  ;  8.  lit.  15.  a.  1 ;  Wal-
ter, GaaiicUi  Has  Jiim.  ItedUi,  §3  26,  IGl,  217*
366,  2d  ed.)

The  term  Pagani  is  often  used  in  oppoaitioa  to
mililea,  and  is  allied  to  all  who  were  not  aoldien,
eien  though  the;  did  not  liie  in  the  country.
(iUifitef  el  pagani,  Plin.  A>i.  i.  1 8  ;  Jut.  iri.  32 ;
Suet.  Asg.  27,  Galb.  IS;  Dig.  11.  tit.  4.  s.  1;  43.
tit  19.  ■.14,&c).  Hence  we  find  Pigani  «  eili-
lena  applied  as  a  term  of  reproach  to  Kldien  who
did  not  perform  iheii  duty  (Tadt.  HiiL  iiL  34),
in  the  same  way  aa  Julius  Caewr  addressed  hit
rebellious  soldi^  on  one  occasian  at  Qniritea.
The  Christian  writers  gave  the  name  of  Pagaid
lo  those  )>ereana  who  adhered  to  tbe  old  RooiBa
religion,  because  the  latter  continued  to  be  gaie-
rally  beliered  by  the  conntry -people,  afbr  Cbria-
lianity  beame  tbe  prevailing  religion  of  the  in-
hahitanta  of  the  towna.  (laidonis,  Tiii.  10  ;  Cod.
Theod.  16.  tit  10;  Cod.  JuaL  1.  IiL  11.)

PAl,A{*Tiov,itxarirTi,  QKWfior,  /uw^AAa;,  a
Bpade.  (Cato  dt  Rt  Stat  1 0  ;  Plin.  //.  \.  zriL
17. 1.  27,  iviL  22.  s.  35.)  The  spade  was  bnt  litUa
used  in  ancient  hnibandry,  the  ground  having  bHn
broken  and  turned  over  by  the  plough,  and  also
by  the  nse  of  large  hoe*  and  rokeit  [.Lioo  ;  Ra».
rntju.l  But  in  some  cases  a  biead  cutting  edg
waa  neeetaary  for  this  purpose,  aa,  fiir  ecuiople
when  the  groond  was  full  of  the  roots  of  mshe^  cv
other  plants.  (Plin.  //.  ff.  ivilL  8.)  Also  in  gu.
dening  it  was  an  indispensable  instnunent,  and

it  WM  tlMi  Bwd*  Ml  tba  «*iM  inndple  at  tint


PALAESTRA.

nlonghHitanf  rix.  bj*  cving  its  eTtrcmitj  with
jrao.  (ColuiD.  X.  4S.>  Tb«uuieicdw«idcut,ts)ien
fnini  a  fanenl  monusient  at  Rome  (Fabretti,  In-
icrip.  Act.  p.  £74),  eihibils  a  donucd  coDnlrjmaa
with  fail  &Ii  and  bidciu,  and  bIm  with  a  pola,
modified  bj  the  addiiion  of  a  ttnng  cniu-bar,  b;
tbe  DM  of  which  be  wa*  enabled  to  dri>e  it  nearly
twice  ai  deep  bu  the  gnund  aa  ha  could  hare
dona  without  IL Id  thi*  ibmi  the  ioMiumeiit  wu


enlled  fi^poUnt,  being  enplojed  in  trenching  (pat-
Imaiio),  or,  when  the  gronnd  waa  fidl  of  nuu  to
a  CDuiderable  depth,  in  lootening  them,  taming
them  orer,  tatd  extirpating  them,  io  aa  to  prepare
the  »il  fw  planting  linea  and  other  trees.  By
ineans  of  thii  implement,  which  it  Kill  nied  in
Ilal]'  and  called  on^o,  the  gronnd  waa  dog  to  the
defith  of  two  ipade*  or  nearij  two  feet.  (Plin.
//.  fi.  xiiiL  2e.  ).  62  1  Cat.  <fa  A*  Awf.  6,  45,
Ifil  i  Varr.  da  Rt  Riul.  I  S7  ;  Col.  iJa  /ta  HmH.
T,  &  p.  314,  n.  3.  p.  410,  ed.  Bip>

Calo  (Ibid.  11)  mentiom  wooden  tpadei  (palat
I- 1  .1. jlemcnU  neceiiary  to  the

ncipal  application  of  them
be  winnowing-ahovel,  bIm
.  .,  -I  Btill  generallj  naed
jD  Ontice,  and  the  mode  of  employmg  it  is  ei-
bibited  b;  Stnail  in  bia  "  Antiqnillei  of  Alhnu."
The  com  which  hoa  been  tbnihed  liea  in  a  beap
npon  tbe  floor,  and  the  labourer  throwa  it  to  ft  dii-
tance  with  the  tbovel,  wbilit  the  wind,  blowing
iirongly  bctom  the  direction  in  which  it  ia  thrown,
driici  the  chaff  and  rdiiK  to  one  aide.  (TheocriL
•iilfi6;MalL  iji.  12;  Loke,  iii.  17.)  The  fruit  of
legaminniu  planta  wu  purified  and  adapted  to  be
na«i  foe  fbod  in  the  nme  manaer.  (Horn.  IL  r.
*a9—S02,  liii.  6B8— fiM.)

The  term  paia  wia  applied  aneientlj,  m  it  i(  in
raodon  ICalnji,  to  the  blade  or  broad  part  of  an
oar.  [RiHDi.]  In  a  ring  (he  broad  part,  which
held  the  gem,  waa  esUed  by  tbe  name  of  pala
[AHKCLDg.]  (J.Y.J

PALAE3TE.  [PiLMugj  MiNBD»A,p.791,b.]

PALAESTRA  (waKniarpd)  noperly  meana  a
phtca  for  wratJing  {nSaitir,  TiJAq),  and  app«n
CO  haTe  originally  formed  a  part  of  tbe  gymna-
■iom. The  word  wu,  however,  vied  in  ^ennt


PALILTA.  849

pcrioda,  and  ita  exact  meaning,
eapecially  in  relation  to  the  gymnuium,  hju  occa-
lioncd  much  contiOTeny  among  modem  writcn.
It  fir»t  owura  in  Herodotua  (xi.  126,  12S),  who
asy*  that  Cleiathenca  of  Sicyon  built  a  dromo*  and
a  palaeMiB,  both  of  which  be  calla  by  the  genent
name  of  pBlaealni.  At  Alheni,  bowerer,  there
wai  B  conaiderable  namber  of  patuelrae,  quite
diatinct  from  the  gymnuia,  which  were  called
by  the  namea  either  of  their  fbnnden,  or  c^  the
tCBchera  who  gm  inatmclion  there  ;  tliui,  for  ex-
ample, we  read  of  the  pahieatia  of  Tauretu.  (Phtt.
Oarmid.  init)  KrauH  {Oymnailii  mJ  Agwatiit
tier  HeUauH,  ^  117,  &c)  contend!  that  tbe  pa-
laeatne  at  Athena  wen  appropriated  to  the  gym-
naaCic  eierciiei  of  boya  and  jontbi  (tcuJk  and
fifipiUia),  and  the  gymnuia  Io  thoae  of  men  ;  bnt
Becker  (OiariUw,  vol.  L  pp.  311,  3S5,  &c.)  haa

though  it  appeara  that  certain  plactw  were,  for  obvioua
reaaona,  appropriated  to  tbe  excluiiTe  use  of  boya.
(Aeach.  e.  Timarck,  p.  3S,  Reiake.)  But  that  the
boya  eierciaed  in  the  gymnaaia  aa  well,  ia  plain
from  many  paiaagea  (Antiph.  de  Catd.  imoL  p.
661,  Reiake ;  roTt  t&fhubi  dn  Yv^ivafffou,  Aiiatoph.
Av.  138, 140) ;  while,  on  the  other  band,  we  r«d
of  men  viaiting  the  palaeatne.  (Ludan,  A'ae^.  4.
loLiil  p.S5l,Reita.)

It  ^ipora  moat  probable  that  tbe  Palaeetraa
were,  dnring  the  flouriahing  timei  of  the  Greek
rcpuhlira,  chiefly  apprc^iriated  to  the  exerciaea  of
wreatling  and  of  the  panoatinm,  and  were  prin-
cipally intended  for  the  Bthlelae,  who,  it  moat
be  recollected,  were  penona  that  contended  in  the
public 'gamea,  and  tberefore  needed  ipecial  train-
ing. Thia  ia  eipreiily  itated  by  Plutarch  (SimV-
ii.  4),  who  iBja,  "  that  the  place  in  wbich  all  tho
Bthletae  eierciae  ia  enlled  a  palantra ;"  and  we
olio  leun  bom  Panuniaa  (y.  15.  §  5,  vL  21.  §2),
that  then  were  at  Olympia  pateeatrae  especially


B  atbleli


1 Atben


I {.x.^


417,  £)  we  read  of  tbe  great  athletea  Damippns
coming  out  of  the  palaeatra  ;  and  Galen  ('tpl  rei
tti  fujtfWLS  tr^alpta  yvfijnaiav^  c.  fi)  places  the
athlelae  in  the  palaestra.  (Kianae,  Ibid,  p  115.)

Tbe  Romani  bad  originally  no  placea  comspond-
ing  to  tbe  Onek  gymnaaia  and  palaestrae ;  and
when  towarda  tbe  dose  of  the  republic,  w^thy
Romans,  in  imitation  of  the  Gneka,  began  (o  build
places  for  exercise  in  their  villas,  they  called  them
indifferentlygymnasiaandpaliestrae.  {CicadAK,
L  4,  8,  9,  10,  od  Qh.  /y.  iii.  1,  8  2,  Virr.  v.  72.)
The  words  wen  Ihua  used  by  tbe  Romana  as
aynanymona  j  and  accordingly  wo  find  that  Vitrn-
viua  (v.  11)  givea  a  dacription  of  a  Greek  gym-
naainm  ander  the  name  of  pchuatia.

PALATIIA. [PiLtig.]

PALATI'Nl  LUDI. [Lmii  Palatini.]

PALE  (iniATi), [LtrcTi.]

PALITilA.  a  festiTHi  celebrated  at  Rome  every
year  on  the  21st  of  April,  in  honanr  of  Pales,  tbe
tutelary  divinity  of  shepherds.  Some  of  the  ancient
writen  called  thia  featival  Pariiia,  deriving  the
name  from  pario,  because  aactificea  were  oflered
on  that  daypro./Jortii  pteorit,  (Feat  i.  o.  PaUii
(ompan  Popidaria  intra  i  Varro,  d»  limg.  Lot.
tL  15  ;  Dionya.  L  8S.)  The  21al  of  April  waa  tho
day  on  which,  according  to  the  early  traditiona  of
Rome,  Romulua  had  commenced  the  building  of
tbe  city,  ao  that  the  featival  waa  at  tbe  aame  time
Boleniniaed  aa  the  diea  natnlitiui  of  Rome<Fe*t.
31 ^  O"


BSD  FALILIA.

(.  e.  PorOibiu;  Cic  d«  Dnim.  u.  47  ;  Van,  da
Ht  RmL  iL  1 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  zriiL  '
of  th<  ritei  cutamary  in  laler  ^
)WT«  bean  fint  perfbnDed  bj  S
fixed  tha  pamoeriain.  (Dion}^  L  c.)  Oi\A  {FaiL
It.  731,  &c)  gWoi  a  dMcripuon  of  ihe  ritei  of  the
Polilia,  which  dcuiy  thawi  that  he  nguded  ita«
A  ihepherd-feiliTsJ,  inch  ai  it  muA  ari^nally  have
beeD  when  tLc  Romani  were  real  thepherdi  and
hiubandineQ,  and  OJ  it  must  have  continued  to  be
among  cooalrf'peo^e  in  hii  own  tima,  aa  ia  ox-
pieul;  Mated  by  DioariiDi ;  for  in  the  city  itaelf
It  muit  bare  loat  itt  origmal  ebaiacter,  and  hare
beea  legnrded  only  aa  the  dim  natalitini  of
Rome.  The  DonneetiDn,  bowerar,  between  tbeae
two  chaiacten  of  ihe  TatiTal  ii  manifeit,  ai  (be
foimdera  of  Che  city  were,  ai  it  were,  the  kingi  of
•hepherde,  and  the  foniiden  of  a  raligion  miled  to
•hepherda.

The  tint  part  of  the  aoleinnitiea,  ai  deaoibed
b;  0>id,  waa  a  public  purification  by  fin  and
amoke.  The  thingt  burnt  in  order  to  produce
thii  purifyiDR  imidie  were  the  blood  of  the  Oe-
Mnsiont,  the  aihet  of  the  calna  aacrificed  at
tho  ffitini  of  Cerea,  and  the  thella  of  beam.
The  people  were  alw  aprinkled  with  water  j  they
weihed  theii  banda  in  aprug-water,  and  drank
milk miifd  with  muK.  (Orid.  JS«(,  to,;  compare
Pntpert  ir,  1.  20.)  Aa  regard!  the  OcbibiriorK
(iguKM  Octobtr)  it  niiut  be  ob»nred  that  in  eaily
timei  no  bloody  Bcrifice  waa  allowed  to  be  cfiered
at  the  Palilia,  and  the  blood  of  the  October-
hone,  mentioned  aboTe,  waa  the  blood  which  bad
dropped  bom  the  tail  of  the  horaa  aaerificed  in
the  month  of  October  to  Man  in  the  Gampna
Martina.  Thii  Uood  waa  pmarred  by  the  Veatal
virgina  in  the  temple  of  Veata  for  the  purpote  of
being  and  at  the  Palilia.  (Solin.  p.  3,  d  i  FeM.
:v.  Odotw  tpm;  Plut.  RamiU.  13.)  When
towaida  the  eiening  the  ihepherdi  bad  fed  their
flocka,  hiurel-bnuiehes  were  oaed  ai  bnnmi  for
cleaning  the  itablea,  and  for  ipiinkling  water
throagh  them,  and  laitly  the  itablca  wen  adorned
with  lancel-bongha.  Hereupon  the  ihepherda  burnt
anlphur,  roaemory,  fir-wood,  and  incenaa,  and  made
the  amoke  paii  through  the  iloblet  to  purilr
them  ;  the  flocki  themielvei  were  likewiM  puri-
fied by  tbia  imoke.  The  ncrlGcea  which  were
offered  on  thii  day  oonaiitsd  of  cakea,  millet,  milk,
and  other  kindi  of  eatablei.  The  ihepherda  then
offered  a  pnyer  to  Palea.  After  theee  aalemn
ritea  were  erer,  the  cheerfiil  part  of  the  featiTal
began;  bonfixei  wer«  made  of  he^ia  of  hay  and
atiaw,  and  under  the  aounda  of  cymbali  and  fintea
the  iheep  were  again  purified  by  being  compelled
to  run  (hrcB  times  ihtvogh  tha  fire,  and  the  hep-
herda themaelrea  did  the  aaine.  Tha  featiral  waa
eondnded  by  a  feaat  in  ~
people  (at  or  lay  t
rimCifdly.  (Tibt
pert.  iT.  4.  7i.)

Id  the  city  of  Rome  the  EBatJTal  mnat,  at  Imt
in  later  timea,  baTs  been  celebrated  in  ■  different
manner  ;  ila  characts  of  a  ihepherd-featifal  waa
foigolten,  and  it  waa  merely  looked  upon  aa  the
da;  on  which  Rome  had  been  built,  and  waa  cele-
brated aa  inch  with  great  rejoicingi.  (Athen.  viiL
p.  B6Ii.)  In  the  nign  of  Caligula  it  waa  decreed
that  the  day,  on  which  thia  emperor  tiad  come  to
the  thnme,  ahould  be  celebrated  nnder  the  name
of  Palilia,  aa  if  the  empire  bad  beta  leiived  by


.  PALLIUM,
him,  and  had  eonunraoed  iti  u
(SneL  0%.  IG.)  Athnaeua  (i.  c)  Byi,  that
before  hie  thne  the  name  FalHia  had  been  changed
mio  Romama  ('Piffuwi).  Whether  thia  chwage
of  name  waa  occaaioned  by  the  decne  in  the
reign  of  Caligula  juit  mentioned,  ii  miknown.
(Comp.  Hartung,  Dia  Rilig.  dtr  Ammt,  toL  ii.
P.1S0,  *c.)  [L.S.J

PALIMP3E3TUS. [Lraia.]

PALL  A. [PALtlUK,]

PALLACE  (niAA«4). [Concubini.]
PALLJA'TA FA'BULA. [Cokoidi*,  p.
346.]

PA'LLIUM,  (tew.  PALLIOLUH,iXH<.  PAU
LA  (PlauL  Afm.  iL  3.  41—17  ;  Orid.  Auar.  iiL
1.  12,  iiL  2.  2S)  (l/iinar,  dim.  WrUwr ;  /so.
andoK^.  ^ofwi).  The  Ei^liih  s&xii,  though  cora-
monly  adopted  01  the  proper  tniDilalion  of  these
terma,  canveyB  no  aceumte  eonceptioa  of  ibt  fiirm,
maleiiBl,  or  use  of  that  which  they  denoted.  Tbe
article  deaignated  by  them  wa*  alwaya  a  rectan-
gular piece  of  doth,  exactly,  or  at  leaat  nearlj,
iquare  (irrfiymni  Ifiirui,  Poaidonina  op.  Adtem.
I.  p.  313  ;  THtfrw^sbi,  TectidL  di  Pallia,  1).
Hence  it  could  eaaily  be  diTided  without  loaa  <r
wBite  into  fooT  porta.  (John,  iti.  33.)  It  waa
indeed  uaed  in  the  very  form  in  which  it  wna
taken  from  the  ioom  [TxLi],  being  made  entirely
by  the  wearer  (t*  (^tiot  i^Foi,  Plat.  Okm.
pp.  S6,  9B.  ed.  Heindorf ;  Hipp.  Mia.  p.  210,  ed.
Bekker),  without  an;  aid  from  the  tailoc  eieept
to  repair  {Kovire,  inttaitiu)  the  injutiea  which  it

mtnted,  more  eapedallj  among  the  northern  na-
tiou  of  Europe,  irilh  a  fringe  rFiMUUB],  yet
thia  mi  commoiily  of  tbe  aame  piece  with  the
pallium  ilaeir.  Alao  whatever  additional  richneas
and  beauty  it  received  from  the  an  of  the  dyv,
wai  beatowed  upon  it  before  ita  matoiala  weae
woven  into  cloth  or  even  ipnn  into  thread.  Moat
conmonly  it  waa  nied  without  having  andeigena
any  proceei  of  tbii  kind.  The  nw  material,  nek
aa  wool,  flax,  or  coUoo,  waa  mannfactnnd  in  ita
natural  itate,  aad  hence  blanket!  and  ibeeta  were
commonly  white  (\niK^  i^iiria,  ArtemidoE.  iL  3),
although  from  the  aame  cauae  bnwu,  di^  and
grey  were  alio  prevailing  mlonn.  Tbe  man
aplendid  and  elegant  tinia  were  prDdaced  by  the
Bpplicatioii  of  tbe  mnrex  (mitnsaAi,  arndfliala,
jmrpana,  vtMiti  nof^vfovn,  lAoupyq  l/utrio,  Ue-
radidea  Pont  op.  Allnat.  xii.  p.  513),  the  ki


,  Hil»uvr),  I


■afiron  [erMew,  upBuirtir),  [CliiKOI't.]  P*l«
graen  wai  alio  worn  (l^ifiUuw,  Follnx,  OMia.
viL  £6).  BSack  and  grey  [allia  ware  dthv  made
Inm  the  wool  of  blai£  ane^  (Tfaeoarit.  v.  SS)  iw
were  the  reaull  of  the  art  of  the  dyer.  They  wera
wom  in  mourning  (jtikmiia  IfHiria,  Xsl  ffid.  Or,
L  7.  i  6  i  Artemidoj.  Lc;  ^wa*  ivtvra,  Imrip'
lien  n  Fellowa'i  Jemwal,  1838,  p.  31),  and  hj
■"  „.  Sal.  L  a.  is.) Thepallinnof


variegated  (utixlXar)  ;  and  of  thii  latter  daa  the
airapleat  kind!  wen  the  alripnl  (fiaMurir,  Xai.
CjiTop.  TiiL  B.  I  S),  in  which  tbe  effect  waa  pfo-
ducail  by  inaHting  alUmately  a  woof  of  diflintil
coloon,  and  the  check  or  plud  (loitialateia,  teai-
latum),  in  whidt  the  aame  coloura  were  maAa  ta
alternate  in  the  warp  alau,  Zeuii^  tbe  paintar,
exhibited  at  the  OlytDpic  gM>si  a  fhid  hnioK


PALUUM.
Ui  nMM  mma  in  the  K|iiani  (eenmu,  rXirflu)
in  gddm  letUn.  (Plin.  /T.  A^.  xxx*.  9.  >.  36.  S.)
An  endlta  imiigtr  vu  txodaced  bj  inUmsTuig
■pna  or  floren  in  lh«  woof  (Mtoi  riTUi
Wmt,  PUL  AqaEif.  Tiii.  p.  401,  ed.  Bskker).
the  nnw  jraan  orricd  to  a  higher  dcfiree  of
coBplazi^  ind  icfinnaeDE,  whols  figniea  and
cren  luMorical  ot  mythologial  nibJecU  vein  in-
tndnccd,  and  in  thU  itoU  of  adiucemenl  the
wcBTing  of  |iiilli&  VBM  thfl  eleguit  BDd  wortJij  em-
plojmept  of  inoBlfB  of  the  £nt  diitinctioo  (Hom.
IL  iii.  125— 12B,  niL  440,  441),  and  of  Alhesa,
tile  inientnu  of  lh«  ut,  hemlf;  (Apalion.  Rhod.
i.  721—768.)  The  gmteit  iplendoui  wM  im-
puted b;  the  me  of  gold  thnuL  (VJig.  jitn.  n.
262—264  :  Plln.  H.  ff.  niL  46,  xxxiiL  1 9  ;  Auoo.
Epig.  37  ;  ThemiiL  OraL  21  ;  Q.  CurL  iii  3.  17.)
Henxi  npmmU  Penelope  wtaiing  a  pniple
blanket  for  UljHei,  which  alio  diipla]^  a  beau-
tifnl  honting-pieta  wronght  in  gold.  (Od.  xix.
224— 3SS.)  The  epilhel  afrXaf,  which  ii  oom-
nunly  applied  b;  the  poett  to  thus  figured  [bIU,
•pruhably  denoted  that  they  were  made  on  the
principlfl  of  a  quilt  or  a  Scotch  carpet,  in  which
two  clotha  of  diJTerent  coloon  an  »  interlaced  ai


:,  the;  wen  tnb-
mitted  to  the  embroidrnr  {Pkrjgio;  sruiAT^i,
irA«vi^M(i :  Aeach.  e.  7VnarQi.p.l]8,ed.  Reiske  j
Schij.  ad  tot.) ;  and  atill  mora  caaunonlT  to  the
tidlai  IFuLLo],  who  leeeiTed  them  both  when
Ibej-  were  new  from  the  loom,  aod  when  thej
were  (ollied  through  nte.  Hence  it  waa  a  re-
commendation of  thii  article  of  attin  to  be  well-
trodden  (itoTiirrm,  Apollon.  Rhod.  ii.  30)  and
well  waahed  (^(hrAio^i,  Horn.  Od.  viii.  42S).  The
mea  who  perAvnted  the  operation  are  called  cl
wAnr^i^  i.  t.  the  waahen,  in  on  inicnptioD  foond
in  the  itadinm  at  Alheni.  Another  ippellalion
which  thej  bore,  Tii.  o(  <mC<it,  the  tieaden
<ScboL  n  AjkO.  lOod.  I.  c.\  ia  well  iUuitratea
bj  the  woodcut,  representing  them  at  their  work,
ID  p.  452.

Conaidering  fxtftwa  and  pal^  liidrior  and
frnfti,  aa  generic  tenni,  we  find  ipecific  terms
indaded  under  them,  and  denoting  diitinctioni
whicb  depended  cm  the  malpciali  of  whicb  the
doth  waa  made.  Among  the  Oceeki  and  Roman!
bv  &r  the  moat  common  material  wa>  wool.
<PladL  MS.  iiL  1.  93  ;  Xea.  Oacxn.  lil  36  ;
Theocrit.  L  c.)  The  garment  made  of  it  (fmieiin
jiallima,Cic  de  Nai.Dw.  iii  35)  >u  called  (from
the  root  of  lima,  wool),  in  Lutiu  Lain  j,  in  Greek
^Aalra :  and  at  the  garment  varied,  not  only  in
colour  and  anBcaent,  but  alia  in  fineneaa,  in  ctoge-
nen  of  texture  [liuerUir  ^.trrinrrat,  Aelian,  V.H,
i*.  S),  and  in  aiae,  Kone  of  theie  differencea  were
czpreaeed  by  the  diminntiTea  of  xAoiWn,  luch  aa
;cAatnw,  x'uvli  (Herod.  iiL  139;  Athen.  iii.  pp.
A4fi,a,  348,a,  SS3,B),  x^'O*^"''  (Herod,  i.  193,
compued  witb  Sbabo,  itl  1.  g  20  i  PluL  Sfmp.
PrM.  ti.  6  ;  Dionya.  AaL  Rom.  tiL  9),  x^u^-
uaw  (AiiatinlL  Ackan.  318  ;  AeacL  D.  Timartk.
p.  142  I  .^dpbnn,  i.  33),  and  x^""'*"""'-
(Aiiatoph.  Pom,  1002.)  Id  like  manner  we  lind
tb*  palUam  dm  mly  dengnated  bj  epitheta  added
to  tha  general  MiBi*  id  aiia  to  denote  that ''  —
naia  of  flax,  «■;.  ■fuh'in' An
fi^  (OiplMH,  d*  Ufid.


r,  yJjHtio  MtimXvi


PALLIUM.  851

(lud.  Hiip.  Ong.  lix.  25),  but  alio  diittngniihed
by  the  apecific  tanu  tMaam,  litittamtn;  mdon
(Uarl  Epy.  It.  IS)  ;  irivMi-  (Hend.  JL  86. ;
Marie,  xIt.  £1,  52)  ;  and  iti  diminutiTe  aatarlar,
(Fnlladii,  Ftfa  Sarvp.)  A  eoarae  linen  pallium  waa
alio  called  ^or  (Polloi,  tIL  t  16),  and  ■  £ne
one  Mn,,  din.  mtmr.  (Horn.  H  iii.  141,  xriiL
595  ;  Bmnck,  AmaL  iiL  31.}  Theae  ipecilic  termi
■re  no  donbt  of  £gyptian  origin,  haYing  beoi  in-
trodnnd  among  the  Hebnwa,  tha  Oreeki,  and
theRoniana,  together  with  the  aniclea  c^  mcivhaa-
diiB  to  which  they  were  ^plied.  On  tha  lame
principle  a  cotton  pallium  ia  oiled  paBm  cortaam
(FmdHit.  Pigdam.  186. 187),  and  a  ailk  abawl  ii
denominated  paUutm  Seriara  (Stat.  S^  iiL  4.
SaXand ieinByI^piK6i:  (AirJaB, Per. Afar. Eryli.
pp.  164, 17(1,  173,  177,  ed.  BlancardL)

The  foil  owing  initaueei  of  the  aj^iiation  of
pallia  to  the  pnrpoaet  of  common  life,  ahow  that  it
ia  an  emc  to  tianilate  tha  word  in  all  caiea  by
"cloak"  or  "^umeDt,"  and  although  in  aome  at
thaaacaaeatheapplication  may  have  been  aecideutal,
it  wrrei  notthe  Icaaou  that  aceoimt  to  demixiitrata
the  fenn  and  propeatiea  of  the  thing  gpoken  o^

whicb  it  wa*  caiied.

I.  They  were  naed  to  apread  ovtt  beda  and
oinchea,  and  to  cover  the  body  during  aleep  (ipd-
Tiw,  Aelian,  K.  H.  viii.  7,  xii.  I ;  Dial.  lUT.  13  ;
llutTKriiii,  Theophraik  Onr.  83 ;  ^dpai.  Soph.
TVmi.  916,  compan  537  ;  xAiu*",  Theocrit.  ivilL
19,  ixiy.  25  J  Horn.  Od.  in.  500—521,  xviL
86,  179,  II.  4,  95,  143  ;  /fjna.  i-  Vm.  159—
184  ;  x*"I»«'«',  Alciphron,  Lb.j  paiUum,  Jut.
tL  202  1  SpBttiau,  Hadr.  22).  In  many  of  theia
caiea  it  ia  to  be  obsored,  that  the  aame  paliiom
which  wai  worn  aa  a  garment  by  day  •erred  to
aleep  in  at  night,  in  emct  agreement  with  tha
practice  which  to  the  prcaeot  day  prevaila  amoDg
the  Bedouin  Araba,  who  conitantly  uaa  their  large
hykea  for  both  pnrpoaea.  [LiCTua  ;  LopiX  ;
TiPM,]

II.  Tbey  were  a^cad  on  the  groond  and  naed
I  catpela.  Clitna,the  friend  of  Alexander,  when
I  held  a  levee,  qipeand  walking  ^1  wap^ufmr

IfioTUtr.  (Alhen.  liL  p.  539,  c)  Thia  waa  an
aileetatioa  of  Eaitem  huur;.  When  the  people
at  Jenualem  apread  their  hykea  upm  (he  ground
(at  recorded  in  St.  Matt  zxL  8  ;  St.  Uik,  xL  8  ;
St  Lake,  xii.  36)  they  intended  thereby  tn  lecog-
ni»e  Jeani  aa  a  king. [TaPSB.]

III.  They  were  hung  ovu  doon  (Prudent,  ade.


(Athen.


L 726),  1


..518,  a.)

e  bath,  pemaa  wiped  and  rubbed
ihenuelTea  not  only  with  linen  ahceta  (loiMa),  but
with  very  adt  blanket)  (po^u  lUF  aioiUtiata  iota
/aelit,  Petnm.  SaL  33).  The  ooarw  linen  cloth
tiled  for  thia  pnrpoie  waa  called  mtamm  (odAwav).

V.  Agamemnon  (Hom.  IL  viii.  221)  hdd*  in
hii  haiul  "  a  great  purple  ^apot "  to  larre  oi  a
banner  floating  in  the  air.

VI.  Pallia,  eipecialiy  of  linen  and  cotton,  were
nied  for  «ili  {^wokhi,  Ljeophron,  •.  26  ;  Ami.
■poKDr  ^^i,  Eurip.iH'M.  1080  j  Horn.  Od.  v.  25S).

VII.  Whcoi  Antony'a  ibipa  were  on  fire,  hia
Boldieia,  having  hilid  to  extinguish  it  by  water,
which  the^  could  not  obtain  in  sufficient  quaoti^,
threw  npoa  it  their  thick  blanket!  (Ifidria  b6t£i
t1  woxfa,  Dion  Caaa.  1.  34).

VIII.  Thick  eoarae  blankets,  which  iad  Dot

8i2 ^  O"


S63  PALLinU.

betn  to  the  fnllfr  (liiiria  ierrirra,  Plut  Sfmp-
Pnil.  ii,  6),  were  wrapped  nnmd  ice  uid  *oow  td
kerp  thnn  fimn  meltinj;.

IX.  A  fine  white  blanket  wbi  •ometime*  nted
u  a  ihnud  (-pipei  Tartar,  Horn.  IL  XIJIL  3J3  ;
Od.  iL  94—100 :  l/ufruv,  Xeo.  CgTop.  Tli.  3.
813)-

X.  In  Alio,  lianea  and  other  iniinals  lued  to
ride  upon,  were  corered  with  beautiful  paUii,  eepe-
ciaJly  span  occaiioni  of  cennuinr  or  <^  rejsicing.
Cynu  had  200  hanei  corered  with  (triped  elolhi.
(Xen.  Cyrop.  Yiii.  3.  %  16.)  When  the  Penian
aoibauador,  a  few  yean  BffD,  went  to  tlie  leiee  in
London,  hi«  honei  were  in  lite  manner  covered
^SwTDtt  l/iorfiiii.  Compare  Sl  Matt.  xii.  7  ;
St.  Mark,  xl  7  i  St  Luke,  lii.  36. [T*r»g.]

XI.  The  nenl^-bora  inbnt  wu  wrapped  in  a
blanket  (iH^i,  Horn. /lyaut.  » ..^rK^- t^l}-  [I'

X  [  I.  Lattly,  the  pallium  wai  the  moat  eomni<
ankle  of  the  AmcTTun.  [CHLAvrs.]  Hence*
find  it  coatinuall;  iniQlioned  in  conjunctioa  with
the  TuNn:A,  which  conitituted  the  indntu.  Saeh
phraan  ai  "coat  and  waiitoMt,"  or  'i
atockingi,''  an  not  mora  common  with
•uch  u  thoH  which  follow, in  andent


.  (Cic i


; PIlT


Epid.  T.  a  61)  ;  liAiTior  Hal  x'tAi'  in  the  will  of
a  certain pbiloaopher (Diafi-. Labi.  t.  72)  ; '
lltirar  Kol  Tie  xtrmriaiair  ; fSpoi  W* X"
(Htm.  IL  xiiT.  5BB,  Od.  »iiL  425)  j x^^»
t'  an  x"*" (Horn. a. a.  262,  Od.  It.  I
r.  229,  TiiL  45S,  i.  36S, 461,  liy. 133, 11
320, 341, XT. 330, irii. 89); x>^" "^
XimwiVicat. (Antipbanei,  ap.  Ailm.  liL  p.  545,
B.) Tbe  MoiriDg  pauage*  al»  exempli^  the
pnctiee  of  naming  theie  two  artida  of  dre«  to-
gether: A.  OeU,  rL  10  ;  Phuit,  TriM.  t.  2.  30 ;
Alhen.  t.  p.  198,  c,  d,  f  r  Theophnut.  Oar.  21  ;
St.  Matt,  T.  40  1  St  John,  lii.  23—25.

But  althoogh  the  palliom  and  timica  wen  al-
WBji  regarded  aa  eMenliai  paiti  ofau  entire  drea*,
Jet  each  of  them  might  be  wom  without  the  other.
Caiea  in  which  the  tunic  waa  retained  and  the
blanket  laid  aiide,  an  eiptained  under  the  article
NuDUB.  It  ia  atao  eiident  that  tbe  pallium  would
not  be  the  moR  convenient  kind  of  dreia  when  the
wearer  of  it  hod  ocodoo  to  nui ;  and  we  find  that
in  luch  cinumitancei  he  nther  put  it  awaj  entinlj
(Horn.  IL  iL  1B3,  Od.  xiv.  500)  or  folded  it  up
a*  a  Scottith  Highlander  fblda  bia  plaid,  and  thnw
it  round  hia  nedt  or  over  bia  aboulder.  (PlauL
Capt.  \j.  I.  13,  iv.  2.  S  1  Cer.  Fkor.  1.  6.  4.)
On  the  other  band,  to  wear  the  pallium  withodl
the  under-clothing  indicated  povei^f  or  aeverity  of
manner^  ai  in  the  <saa  of  Sooatei  (Xen.  Afem.  i,
6.  i  2),  Ageailaui  (Aelian,  V.H.  viL  13),  and
Qclon,  king  of  Sjracnie.  (Diod.  Sic.  iL  26.)

The  pallinm  wai  no  doubt  often  folded  about
the  bodj  nmplj  with  a  riew  to  defend  it  ftmn
cold,  and  without  any  Rgard  to  giacefiilneea  of  op-
ppatance.  It  ii  thui  aeen  on  the  pencoa  of  Polj-
■  " ■  I  in  the  celebrated  intaglio,

1,  repreienting  fire  of  the
■  - ■  ' led  on

The

namet  of  the  ■everal  heroea  are  placed  bende  them
in  Etruaam  leltera.  Tbi»  predoua  relic  wai  found
at  Perugia.  (Winckchnaiui,  IHtmpl.  da  Piemi
gravUi  da  Stotck,  p.  314—347).  By  B  alight
adqilatioD,  the  mode  of  wearing  it  waa  teudi9«d


both  mora  grsceful  and  more  convenient.  It  waa
fint  paaaedorer  the  left  ahonlder,  then  drawn  be-
hind the  back  and  under  the  right  ann,  leaving  it
ban,  and  then  thrown  again  over  the  left  ahonlder.
Of  Ihii  we  aec  an  example  in  a  baa-retief  engnied
b;DodweIL  (row- Uro^  Cnuo,  roL  L  p.343.)
Another  very  common  method  waa  to  fiutcn  tho
pallium  with  a  brooch  JFibcl*]  over  the  right
ihoaldu  (^i^trtponiaAu,  Hom-/J^  i.  131^136  j
Stat.  TMi.  viL  6GB,  659 ;  Apnl.  Flor.  iL  1),  Inviofc
tbe  right  arm  at  liberty,  and  to  paai  ths  middle
of  it  either  under  the  lefi  arm  lo  ai  to  leKve  that
arm  at  liberty  alio,  or  over  the  left  ahonlder  ao  ai
to  cover  the  left  arm.  We  aee  Phocion  attirwl  in
the  lait'ineiilioiied  bahion  in  the  admind  alatue  of
him  preiened  in  the  Vatican  «t  Rome.  (Afiu.  Fio-
OcMmL  vol.  i.  tav.  43.)  (See  wmdcnL)  The
iltachment  of  the  pallinm  by  meani  of  the  brooch
caujed  it  to  depend  in  a  graceful  nuumer  {demon


__  _i»rH,  Virg.  Atn.  iv.  263),  aad  emtribattd
mainly  to  the  production  of  ihoae  dignified  aivd
sleganl  fiiimi  which  we  u  much  admire  in  ancient
■calptnrea.  When  a  penon  lat,  ha  often  allowed
hu  pallium  to  &][  from  hii  aboulda,  ao  aa  to  bi-
Telopa  the  lower  pan  of  hia  body  only.

The  ngnm  of  the  northern  naliaii  of  EnrofM
(■CO  woodcut,  p.  2lS)  wu  •  w<oal]«n  paUina^  fka>


PALLIUM,
toied,  like  (bat  oT  the  OntU,  b7  ineaiii  of  a
brooch,  or  with  a,  kiga  ihom  u  a  ■ubititute  for  a
bnoeh.  (Ticit.  Otnn.  17  ;  Stnbo,  It.  4.  3.)  The
Gaoli  von  b  nimmeT  ona  which  wm  atriped  and
cheqDond,  »  u  to  agreo  emcttj  with  the  plojd
which  fltilL  ditlinglUBhe*  their  Scottiili  deeceadanti ;
in  winter  it  VM  thick  ud  much  mora  limpla  in
ndonr  ud  pattern.  (Diod.  SicT.  30.)  The  Oneka
and  Romaiu  alao  wore  di9erenl  pallia  in  lummcr
and  in  winter.  The  thin  pallium  made  for  numaer
wear  wat  MeA  X^fcf,  din.  Xtitipiar  (Ariatopli.
Avu,  713— 717)  and  nt^niim.  mnipiar  (Horn.
Of.  ii.  1D2,  tL  179 ;  Xen.  OUt.  Gr.  ir.  6.  i  i)
is  coDtradiMiDction  from  the  warm  pnlliiun  with  a
loog  nap,  which  wu  worn  In  winter  (Imaa,  Mart.
xiv.  136  1  x^UuKi,  Moeru,  t.  v.;  Horn.  IL  xrl  234,
Od.  liv.  £29  ;  PluL  dt  AvL  p.  73,  ed.  Steph.  ;
kxXmaol,QaaiaLHgmm.i»I>iait.\\S).  Tbii  dli-
tiDction  in  dieu  wa*,  howeTer,  pnctued  only  by
those  who  could  a^rd  it.  Socntu  wore  the  mat
pallinm  both  in  lumnier  and  winter, (Xen.  Man.

Is.  ID

One  kind  of  blanket  woi  worn  bj  bop,  another
bf  mm  (Ti  nitwir,  ri  ittfM  ffidTiav,  Pint  di
AwLimt.).  Women  wore  thii  garment  aa  well  ai
men.  "  Phoeion-*  wife,"  myi  Aelian  {  V.  H.  fa.
9),**  wm  Phodon*!  pallium  :  "  but  Xanthippe,  ai
rtUled  bj-  the  lame  authir  (viL  10),  would  not
WHUlhat  of  herhiuband  SoeiatM.  (S«e  alao  Ham.
Od.  T.  239,  230,  x.  £42,  £43  ;  PUuC  Mat.  it.  2.
H  ;  Heiod.  T.  S7.)  When  the  meoni  wen  not
wanting^  womea  wore  palUa,  which  were  in  gene-
tal  anklet,  finer,  nnd  of  miH«  iplendid  and  beauli-
ttH  calain  (ban  tiiMe  of  men  (3oifiJria  irSftta,
AiulopL  Eteln.  26,  7fi,  333),  although  men  alio
•oniMdnea  diaplajred  their  fcndofw  for  drew  bj
■doptbu  in  tbeat  reapecti  the  female  c«tu7ne:
Thai  ^eibiadet  irai  diiUngniihed  by  fail  purple
pallium  which  trailed  upon  the  ground  (PluL  A}ab.
pp.  3£0,  S69,  ed.  Steph.)  ;  fee  a  train  wb«  one  of
the  omanients  of  Grecian  aa  well  ae  Oriental  di«i
(Ifiarlw  &i{<»,  Plato,  AliSk  i  p.  311,  ed.  Bekker  ;
Uvid.  Mrt.  xL  1G6;  QointiL  iL  3),  the  general
rale  being  that  the  upper  garment  ahould  reach  the
knee,  but  not  the  ground.  (Aelian,  F.  Al  zL  10;
TheophiaiL  Otor.  4.)

Philoiophen  wore  a  coarK  and  cheap  pallium,
which  tram  being  eipoeed  to  much  wear  wa<
(aHed  T^fwand  ipiSiruir.  (Arittopfa.  Pht.  897  ;
Athen.T.  p.  2ll,e;  Themut.  OroJ.  i.  p.155,  ed.
Dindotf  :  paltialtnaa,  ApuL  Fiorid.  L)  The  lame
wa*  worn  bIk>  bj  poor  penoni  (Iiacni,  d»  Die.
PL  94,  ed.  ReiAe  ;  Poljaen.  StroL  liL  3fi),  by  the
Spartani  (Athen.  riL  p.B35,e  ;  Aelian,  V.H.  TiL
13),  and  in  a  later  age  by  monki  and  bermita
(^of^  TptCcfriDF,  ^ynei.  EpixL  147  ;  tagvn  nati-
aim,  Hieron.  Vila  I/ilar.).  Theie  hlanketedn
(Tprfwro^poi,  Pa]ladii,/A>(.  Zuai.  ia  tnbiiSerap.)
often  wont  without  a  tunic,  and  they  lonietimei
■applied  it>  place  by  the  greater  >ixe  of  their  pal-
linra.  ItiaiKorded  of  the  philosopher  Antiitbenei,
ihat  "  he  fim  doubled  hie  pallium  *■  (Diog.  Lafrt
»L  6,  13),  in  which  contrifance  he  wai  followed
hj  hi*  brother  Cynic*  (Branck,  Jao/,  il  22  i  Hot.
BpiM.  I  7.  25),  and  eipecially  by  Diogenci,  who
alio  ilepi  and  died  in  it,  and  who  according  to
■one  waa  the  firit  inrentor  of  thii  feshion.  (Dioo.
Uax.  rl  22,  77.)  The  hinfe  pallium,  thai  uied,
wai  called  Si*Aiin  (dipioit,  Iiid.  Hi>p.  Orig.  lii.
24),  and  bIb  Exouia,  because,  being  worn  with-
out ths  fibnht,  it  left  the  right  ihoolder  bare,  ai


PALUDAMENTDM.


Wil.  ir.  4.  43  i  Aslian,  V.  H.  ii.  34)  ;
1  girdle  was  added  round  (he  waist,  it
■till  more  to  the  appearance  of  the
EiD^le-iloeted  tunic,  the  nse  of  which  it  lupeneded.

Under  the  Romsu  republic  and  the  early  Em-
perors, the  Tooa  was  worn  by  men  instead  of  thg
pallium.  They  were  piond  of  this  dittinction,  and
therefore  eonsideTed  that  to  be  jnZUnfiit  or  tagabu
initead  of  being  losubii  indicated  on  affectation  of
Grecian  or  even  barbarian  manners.  {Ontoo  paSki
amidiu,  Plin.  Ejiiil,  iv.  11  ;  ffrosn /xiUot^  Plaut
C*re.  ii.  3.  9  ;  Cic.  PkiL  T.  S,  air.  1  ;  Sueton.
JitL  4B  ;  VaL  Max.  iL  6.  9  10.)  Caecina,  oo  bit
return  from  the  north  of  Eniope,  offended  the
Romans  ( legaM)  by  addreetiog  ihao  in  a  plaid
(eertieeilort  lagalo)  and  trowaen.  [BhaOCaB.]
(Tacit.  Hit  iL  30.)  [J.  y.]

PA'LMIPES,  I  e.  pa  a  pofmaj,  a  Roman
measure  of  length,  equal  to  a  foot  and  a  palm  ;  or
a  foot  and  a  quarter,  or  15  inchea,  or  SO  digits.
(Plin.  «■.  M  iriL  20.  s.  32  ;  Vilmv.  v.6).  JP.S.]

PALMUS,  properly  the  width  of  the  open
hand,  or,  mere  exactly,  of  the  fonr  fingers,  was
used  by  the  Romaua  fn  two  different  measures  of
length,  namely,  as  the  Iranslatioa  of  the  Gnek
ToAcuoT^,  or  Upor  in  aid  Greek,  and  nriSi^i^
respectively.  In  the  former  sense  it  ia  equal  to
4  digits,  or  3  inches,  or  1-lth  of  a  foot,  or  l-6th
of  the  cubit.  {MiNSUiiA,  p.  761,  b.]  Jerome  (ia
Bt/tA.  40)  cxpreuly  stales  that  ^s  was  its  proper
meaning,  but  that  the  Greek  rwiSofiii  was  also
allied  by  some  pahmi ;  or,  for  the  sake  of  dis-
tinction, ja/ma ;  in  which  tensa  it  would  be  3-4tlia
of  a  foot.  Hoice  tome  writers  distinguiih,  in  the
old  Roman  metrical  system,  a  palava  major  of  9
inches,  and  a  fHdanu  miwr  of  3  inchea,  ^d  they
suppose  that  the  former  is  referred  to  by  Vam
(A.  Aiii.  7).  Ideler  hit,  howerer,  shown  that
this  supposition  ia  gioundlesa,  that  Vam  refen  to
the  common  pdm  of  4  digita  (3  inches),  and  the
torger  palm  only  occurs  in  later  Roman  writen.
(I/iier  die  l-anpea  md  FladiatBiaue  der  Altai,
p.  129).  Fnnn  thia  large  ^oZnsf  of  9  inches  the
modem  Roman  pidmo  is  derived.  [P.  S.]

PALUDAMENTUM,accordingtoVaiio(iJi
liL  37)  and  Featui  (i.e.),  originally  ligniGed
any  militajy  decoraticD  ;  but  the  word  is  always
used  to  denote  the  dcak  worn  by  a  Roman  gener.il
commanding  an  army,  hit  principal  oiGcen  and
personal  attendants,  in  contisdiitinction  to  the
ngura  [SaqumJ  of  the  common  soldien  and  the
toga  or  garb  of  peace.  Il  was  the  practice  for  a
Roman  magistrate  after  he  hod  received  the  impt-
run  from  the  Comitia  (Miriam  and  oifered  op  hb
vows  in  the  Capitol,  to  inarch  out  of  the  city  onayed
inthepaludamenIum(uTrsjnbidafw,Cic  adfhm.
viiL  10)  attended  by  his  lictioi  in  similar  attira
{palndatit  lidoribas,  Liv.  xlL  10,  tIt.  39),  nt«
could  he  ORain  enter  the  gatet  nntil  he  had  fennolly
divesled  huntelf  of  this  emblem  of  military  power,
a  ceremony  conaidered  to  solemn  and  so  rndupent-
ahle  that  even  the  emperors  observed  it.  (Tacit.
»^iif.ii.89;compBreSnetoD.P<taI/.c.ll.)  Henos
Cicero  declared  that  Verres  had  sinned  ^  contra

giones,*^  because,  aAer  Ifaving  (he  city  in  his  palu-
damentum  (cwB  paiadatmi  neiini),  he  itde  back  in
a  litter  to  visit  his  mistress,  ([a  Vtrr.  t.  13.)
The  poludsmenlnm  was  open  in  frrnit,  reached


8S4  PALODAMENTUM.

dosn  to  the  knee*  or  ■  little  lover,  uid  hung
IdokIv  orer  (he  ihoulden,  being  batened  acnni
the  chest  by  a  cbiAp.  A  foolish  controreny  hai
arisen  amtmg  intiquBiies  with  regard  to  the  poei-
tioQ  of  this  cliap,  MosoK  aaerting  ihat  it  mted  oa
the  right  ihoolder,  othen  on  the  left,  both  ^iet
appealing  lo  ancient  ttatuei  and  Kiilptiiiea  m  tup-
poit  of  their  aeTeial  apiniona.  It  ia  evideot  bom
the  nature  gf  the  garment,  ai  repmeated  in  the
imneied  illuitmlioni,  that  the  buckle  moat  hare
shifted  from  place  to  place  according  to  the  moTe-
menta  of  the  veaicr  ;  accordingly,  in  the  following
cut,  which  contains  two  GgnmBonTRuanlBiInmn,


PAMBOEOTIA.

and  arm  would  he  fiw  ar
in  the  preceding  cat,  copied  from  the  Raccolta
Mafi^i,  rcpreeenting  alia  a  Roman  empcrar,  wo
TO  that  the  dup  i*  on  the  left  ibonlder ;
in  the  cat  below,  the  Dobls  head  of  a  waiiior
from  the  gnat  Mosaic  of  Pompeii,  we  see  tha
peludamentum  laying  back  in  the  charge,  and  the
cIb«p  nearij  in  fnnt.  It  maj  bo  said  that  the  bat
ia  a  Grecian  figure  ;  but  this,  if  true,  is  of  no  im-
portance, since  the  chlamyi  and  the  paludamentnm
were  eSKntkll]-,  if  not  ahaolotdy,  the  ■me.  Nauns
Maieellus  considers  the  two  terms  sroanyinDas,
and  Tacitoi  (An.  zii.  £6)  tells  how  tbx  splendid
nannuchia  exhibited  by  Clandiui  was  viewed  by
Agrippina  dressed  eAiamyds  amratay  whiio  Pliny
{H.tf.  uiiii.  S)  and  Dion  Caaiins  (li-  S3)  m
Hating  the  nme  story  use  Rapecti*ely  the  ex-
wiona yafaJasssnto aMmltElilif  and x^'V^


one  repmcniing  an  officer,  the  other  the  emperoi
with  a  tunic  and  fringed  palndamentum,  we  ob-
serve the  daap  on  the  light  shoulder,  and  thii
voeld  manifestly  be  its  nmal  position  when  thf
cloak  was  not  used  fm  warmth,  for  thus  the  right


The  colour  of  the  poludamentniD  w
while  or  purple,  and  hence  it  ms  marked  and  le-
mcmbered  Uat  Cmsm  on  the  moming  of  the
&tal  battle  of  Canhaa  went  forth  in  a  datk-colcured
mantle.  (Val.  Mai.  i.  6.  §  U  ;  compaie  Plin.
a.  N.  xxiL  1  ;  Hirtius,  da  ielio  AJricami,  c
ir.)  [W.  R.]

PALUS,  a  pole  or  stake,  was  nsed  in  the  mili-
taiy  exercises  of  the  Komans.  It  was  stock  into
the  gnHmd,  and  the  tirones  had  to  attack  it  as  if  it
had  been  a  real  enemy  ;  henoe  this  kind  of  exsr-
ci»  is  nmetimes  mlled /'ofarw.  (V^et.  i.  II).
Jorenal  (ri.  347)  alludes  to  it  when  he  laya,
"  Quis  Don  Tidit  vulnua  pali  t "  and  Martial  (iriL
32.  6)  speaks  of  it  under  the  name  of  dguM,  "  Aut
nudi  itipilli  ictus  hebes."  ( Becker, Oo/bi,).  p.27&)

PAMBOECTIA  (n^ai^ui),  afeatiTi  pane-
gjris  of  all  the  Boeotians,  which  the  eianunw^ana
compare  with  the  Panathenaea  of  the  Atticana,
and  the  Panionia  of  the  lonims.  The  prinopal
object  of  the  Dieeting  was  the  commoo  wnship  of
Athena  Itonia,  who  had  a  tample  in  the  nei(h>
boorhood  of  Coronea,  near  which  the  p
was  held.  (Strabo,  ii.  p.  411  ;  Pani.  ii
From  Polybius  (ir.  3,  ix.  34)  it  appaan  mat  aormg
this  national  leftiTal  no  war  waa  allowed  ta  ha
carried  on,  and  that  in  caae  of  a  war  a  tnce  wms
always  concluded.  This  panegjrii  is  alao  men-
tioned br  PlolarcL  (AmaL  Narral.  p.  774,  £>
It  is  a  disputed  point  whether  the  Pambiieatia  hod
anything  to  do  with  the  political  conslitatiao  of
Boeotia,  or  with  the  relation  of  iti  seiEtal  tawna
to  Tbebea  ;  but  if  so,  it  can  hare  been  only  pie-
TJoui  to  the  time  when  Thebes  bad  lAtained  th*
nndiiputcd  suptemacy  in  Boeotia.  The  qoeation
ia  discussed  in  Sunte  Croix,  Da  Oummmimamti/i-
dint.  p.  211,  &c ;  Raoul-RodieNa,  Ar  la  fbrmt


:srT5


PANATHENAEA.
a  r^dnnufr.  d(  CEIat  fUira^  in  BiotiaH.  in
tbc  Mbm.  da  CAead.  da  I—crinL  lol.  Tiii.  (1S27)
IlS14,  &c;  W*chmith,/MJ.,iJf.TaLi.  Ikl76.
Sd  edit.  [L.  S.]

PANATHENAEA  (Oi««««>,  tie  gntMit
■Dd  miwt  aplaadid  of  tba  fettiTali  cilebnled  in
AuicB  in  koDour  of  Atbeiu,  in  the  choncter  aS
AtheBii  Poliu,  ot  thftiprotcctnH  of  tbe  cilj.  It
mi  Mid  to  haie  been  inadtuted  by  EiicfauioniDi
(HupocrU.  t.  >.  nii>a#4rwa ;  Mum.  Par.  Ep.  1  OX
and  it*  origiml  hmdc.  until  tbe  time  of  Thneui,
m*  beliered  to  h>Te  been  AthaDiea ;  but  when
Tbrenu  noited  oil  the  Atlkana  into  one  bod;,  thii
fntiTsl,  whicli  then  became  the  common  feetinl  of
■11  Atticwu,  wu  called  Panetbenaw.  (Pane.  riii.
2.  1 1  ;  Pint  Jim.  24  ;  ApoUod.  iil  H.  g  6  i
Hjgiu.  PctL  AHwuiuu.  13;  Suid.  i.  e.  nonASnu.)
Aeawding  lo  tb>i  aeoonnt  it  woold  cEam  ai  if  tbe
aaiDe  of  the  feetiTal  were  denied  from  that  of  the
eit; ;  bat  the  original  name  AthenaM  wai  on-
deubttdlf  dtnred  from  that  of  the  goddeea,  and
tbe  wbteqnent  appellation  Paaathenaea  menlf  iig-
nifiee  tbe  feetinl  of  Athena,  oommon  to  or  cate-
biated  bj  ell  tbe  Attic  (ribei  conjointlf.  Pana-
Ihtmara  an  indeed  mentioned  u  bning  been  eele-
iKBted  pretiooi  to  the  retgn  of  Theeeiu  (Apollod-
iii  IS.  S  7  ;  Died.  i*.  60),  bnt  tbeae  writen
dhrIj  tmuftt  a  name  eonunon  in  their  onm  davi
to  a  time  when  it  wm  not  jet  applicable.  The
Paaathenaea,  whi^  ae  fir  ae  the  character  implied
in  the  same  it  coDomud,  mnat  be  ngaided  aa  aa
intitnlioa  of  Tbeeeni.  vere  celebnted  once  in
(Tei7  jttr.  (HarpocnL  Stud.  t.  v.)  All  writen
who  bcTB  ocoiioo  to  ipenk  of  thii  ftetinl  igree
ID  diatingiii^king  two  kindi  of  Panatboiaea,  the
grater  and  the  leurr,  and  in  Kiting  that  the
former  wm  beld  emj  fbnith  year  {nrrarrqpli),
wbila  tbe  latter  wai  eelebiMrd  once  in  eTory
roar.  Libanini  (.<iyim».  ad  DmatA,  Mid.  p.  £10),
bj  mateke  olli  the  leiier  Panatbenaaaa  Tpi«n)p(i.

Tbe  time,  when  the  leewr  PanatbenaM  (which
are  moetlf  (died  PnaubeDaeajWitbontan^eiHthet,
while  the  greater  ate  guetallr  dkdngiuihed  bj
the  adJKtiTefMfdAa)  wne  celebiated,  ii  deecribed


br  PmcIb*  (ad  PU.  Tim.  p.  26,  &c)  in
ner  ai  following  the  cdebntien  of  the
;  ftnm  which  Meunna  inferi  tbat  the  Pans-


le  day  after  the  Bendideia,
that  ii,  on  the  SOth  of  Tbargelion.  Petitiii  (Leg.
AU.  p.  la),  on  the  olber  lund,  hai  ihown  from
Demnithenei  (a.  Timoirat.  p.  708),  that  the  Pauk'
thenaea  mut  hiTe  Ulen  in  the  month  of  Heia'
lonbaeoD.  and  Conrini  (FaiL  AU.  ii.  iSl,  Ac)
hai  finther  pmred  from  the  nine  paiNage  of  De-
moathenea,  that  the  feetiral  mutt  bave  oHnmenced
beftn  the  20th  of  thii  month,  and  we  may  add
that  it  waa  ptnhably  on  the  17th.  ClinliB  (Fad.
HdL  iL  p.  S32,  Ac.)  bai  reviTcd  the  opinion  of
Henruiu.  (Compare  H.  A.  Mttller,  i'BMt*— iim,
e.1)

Tbe  gnat  Panathmaea  won,  aecoidmg  to  the
■nanimoDi  aceonnta  of  the  andenti,  a  pentaelecit,
and  wtCB  bald  in  tbe  third  year  of  ereiy  Olympiad.
(Btkhh,  SlaatA.  IL  p.  16i,  Ae.)  Produ  (ad  Plat.
71bl  p.  9)  layi  that  the  great  Fenatbemca  wen
beld  on  the  28th  of  Hecalombaeon.  Thii  MKe-
meni,  bowerer,  mtiit  not  lead  o*  to  inppaie  Ihit
tbe  neat  Paoatbenaea  enlj  laited  for  one  day ;
bat  Prodw  in  mentienbig  thii  particular  day  waa
pnbably  thinUng  of  the  moat  eolemn  da;  of  the
fiatinl  en  whicb  the  great  pnceMW  todt  place


PAKATHEKAEA.  8dS

(Thneyd.  tI  £6),  and  which  wai  m  all  {Tobability
the  lait  day  of  the  featifal,  for  it  ii  expreiily  ataled
that  the  futiTal  lailed  fer  wreral  dayi,  (ScboL  ai
Emnp.  HaaA.  464 ;  Adetid.  PamaOi.  p.  147.)  Wa
have,  moreoTer,  eieiy  reuon  to  nqipae  with
BUckh,  that  the  gnat  Pinatbenaea  took  place  oa
the  Bune  deyi  of  the  month  ot  Uecatombaeon,  on
whicb  the  leiMi  Penathenan  wen  held,  and  that
the  latter  wen  not  celebrated  at  all  in  thoie  jean
in  which  tbe  former  felL  Now  i^  •■  we  ban
tapfoubi,  tbe  Inio  Panathenaea  commoued  ob
tbe  17th,  and  ^e  lart  day  ef  tbe  greater  leathal
fell  OD  the  28th  ef  He<ataoIbBe■n^  we  may  perhqa
be  joMified  ia  bdieiinf  that  tbe  leieer  ai  w^  aa
the  greater  Panathenaea  lailsd  for  twelve  daj^
that  ii,  frran  the  17th  tn  the  28tb  of  Hecaten-
baeon.  Thii  time  ii  not  too  long,  if  we  coniidei
that  tbe  indent*  themielrei  call  the  Panathenaea
the  loogeK  of  all  featiral*  (Schol.  ad  AriHofi.  ffwb.
386),  and  if  we  bear  in  mmd  the  gnat  lariety  of
gamee  and  cenmoniea  that  took  |&ce  during  the
ieaien.  When  the  diatinctiim  between  the  gnater
and  leeaer  Panathenaaa  waa  introdncad,  ii  not  cer-
tain, but  the  former  are  not  mentioned  before  OL

£6,  L  20  ;  Herod,  t.  fi6),  and

sd  that  they  were  in-
Toie  OL  66,  perhape  bj

were  made  in  the  celebnUion  of  the  Panathenaea,
11  ii  mentioned  below.  The  prineip^  difleraica
between  the  two  ftatinli  wai,  that  the  gnater
<Hie  WH  more  lolenm,  and  that  on  tbii  oceaiion
tbe  peplui  cf  Athena  wai  carried  to  her  taof^  in
a  meet  magnifieent  procewjon  which  wai  not  Jwld
at  the  leuer  Panatbeniua.

The  lolamnitiee,  gamei,  and  amtuement*  of  tba
Panathemea  wote:  rich  ncrificei  of  bull*,  foot,
hone,  and  ebariot  race*,  g;  "'


66.  S  (ThuCTd.  Ti.  £6,  L  20  ;
it  may  therefore  be  lappoied
itituted  a  abort  time  Mfore  '


I,  gynmaatic


cited  the  poemi  of  Homer  and  other  epic  poen,
pbiliiaephen  diipiiled;  eodc-figbli  wae  exhibited,
and  the  people  indulged  in  a  Tariety  of  other
amneementi  md  enlertainmenta.  It  ii,  howevei^
not  to  be  ini^oeed  that  all  iheie  idemnitiea
and  ganu*  look  phiee  at  the  Panathenaea  fraa
the  carlieit  Umea.  Oymnaitie  ccotetti,  horee  and
chariot  lacei  and  acrificei  are  mentieoed  in  the
legaidi  belonging  to  the  period  nteriw  lo  tba
nign  of  TbeHua.  (Apollod.  and  Died.  IL  ec  t
Plut  TUt.  24.)  The  piiae  in  theia  omteeM  wu
a  Tile  with  lome  oil  &am  the  incienl  and  nered
dUto  tree  of  Athma  on  the  Aoopolii.  (Pind.  Nimu
I.  SJ,  &c  ;  SchoL  ad  Sqpt  Oed.  Col.  G9S.)  A
great  many  of  iuch  nm,  called  Panathenaic  Tseei
( WiV<7i  norshiHuicei,  Athen.  T.  p.  199),  hare  in
yean  been  fonnd  in  Etniria,  loutheni  Italy,


gi*ea  m  priiei  to  the  ricten. The  cooteit*  them-


— S9),  and  the  prebable  order  m  whieh  they  took
pbue  bai  been  defined  by  MlUler  (1.  e:  p.  80,  &e.).
Tbe  poeaH  of  Homer  woe  read  b;  rii^ieodiA
only  at  the  gnat  Pinalhenaea  (Lycor^Oi  Lmral,
p.  161),  and  thii  coitom  comnuoad  in  tbe  time  of
Piiiitretm  or  of  bii  ion  Hi|raaichDi,  afia  theea
poemi  had  been  caileeted.  Anerwirdi  the  woAi
of  other  epic  poeli  aleo  wen  reciled  on  thii  oeea-
WM.  (Plat.  iHniarei.  ^  228,  b  ;  Aelian,  K  H,


8S6  PANATHENAEA.

viiL  2.)  SoDgt  in  piBiM  of  Uaimodiui  and  Arii-
togiton  appear  to  have  been  among  the  utimding
ciutonu  at  the  Puutfaenon.  Muaicsl  mnUHt  in
■inging  uid  m  plsfing  the  flute  and  the  dthan
were  not  intiDduGcd  until  the  time  of  Periclea  ;
they  were  held  in  the  Odeum.  {Pint  Perid.
13.)  The  fint  who  giined  the  Ticloiy  in  the»
contcti  wM  Pbrrois,  m  OL  81.  1.  (Schol.  ad
Arisloph.  NiA.  971  ;  Maim.  Par.  Ep.  61.)  The
priie  for  th^  victors  in  the  rauiicol  cont«tta  von,
tM  in  the  |{yiiiii;i>tic  eontoU,  B  vaae,  but  with
■n  addiciond  chaplet  of  dUts  branchn.  (Suid.
I.  B.  nan^rma.)  Cyclic  chonuet  and  other  kind)
of  dances  were  alio  perfbrmed  at  the  Panathenaea
(Lyi.  de  Mimtr.  aampl.  p.  161),  and  the  pjrrhic
dance  in  annnor  ii  aipreulr  mentioned,  (Arii-
topL  iVai.  988,  with  the  Schol.)  Of  the  dii-
ciutioni  of  philotophen  and  OTBlon  at  the  Pana-
thenaea  wb  aiill  poueH  two  ipcclmcni,  the  AiJroi
UaniBnnuK6s  of  Iiocnte^  and  that  of  Ariilidca.
Jlerodotui  ii  Hid  to  have  recited  hii  hiatnrji  to  the
Atheiiiani  at  the  Ponaihenaeo.  The  management
of  the  gamee  and  contala  waa  entruited  to  penoni
called  aPADDtrai,  whoae  number  wai  ten,  one  being
taken  Irom  every  tribe.  Their  office  laited  fmm
one  great  Panathenaic  featini  to  the  other.  <Pol-
Ini,  viii.  B.  6.)  It  wai  formerly  bclioTed,  on  the
itatrment  of  Diogene*  Laliniiu  (iii.  56  ;  compare
Snidai,  i,  d.  Trr^nADYfa),  that  dnmatic  reprcscnt-
atinni  alio  took  place  at  the  Fanathenaea,  but  tbi*
miitakehaibeendearlyiefutedby  Bdckh.  (Onte.
Trag.  Friaap.  p.  207.)

The  lampidephnria  or  tnreh-nce  of  the  Pana-
thenoea  hai  been  confounded  by  many  writen,  and
eren  by  Waeh.mutl  (HiiL  All.  ii.  2.  p.  246  j
il  p.  G73,  2d  ei.),  with  that  of  the  Bendidela.
On  what  day  it  waa  beld,  and  in  what  relation
U  itood  to  the  other  centeiti,  ii  nnknown,  thonRb
it  il  clear  that  it  mint  have  token  place  in  the
evening.  It  bai  been  luppoted  by  fame  writers
that  the  lampodephoria  took  place  only  at  the
gnat  Panathenaea,  but  thii  r«U  upon  the  freble
icatimony  of  Libaniui  {,^n;iiiii.  ad  Dmutitt.  Mid.
p.  £10),  while  all  other  writen  who  mention
this  lam^Adephoiia,  apeak  of  it  ai  a  part  of  the
Panathenaea  in  general,  without  tne  epithet
frri*xi,  which  ia  itKlf  a  nifficient  proof  tbM  it
wai  common  to  both  feiltvala.  The  same  is  implied
in  a  tlatcment  of  the  author  of  the  Etymologicum
Magsnm  (>.  v.  Kipofiswiii).  The  pH»  of  the
victoc  in  the  lampadephoria  wn>  probably  the
lampaa  itael^  which  he  dedicated  to  Hermea.
(BOckh,  Q>rp.  Iniaript.  i.  a.  243.  250.)

It  ii  impouible  to  determine  the  eiaet  order  in
which  tlie  lolemnitlea  took  place. We  may,  bow-


ancient  preceded  those  which  wen  of  later  i
duction.  Another  aaaijtance  in  this  respect  ai
trulpturei  of  the  Parthenon  {now  in  the  Bj
Mii«eom),in  whichaierics  erf  the  *  '


the  great  pr
it  all  the  s


It  repres


be  auppoaed  that  the  artiita  ihonld  have  laiTifieed
beauty  and  symmetry  merely  to  give  the  aolemniliei
in  preeisely  the  aame  onier  aa  they  lUGceeded  one
another  at  the  teilival.  In  fact  wa  seo  in  theiB
JcnlpCDKa  the  flnia  and  dtham  playar*  represented
ai  preceding  the  chariota  and  men  en  honeback,
though  tha  conloiU  in  chariot  and  hone  la^ng


PANATHENAEA,

proliaUy  ]»teedcd  the  mniical  eonteata. But  «a
may  infer  frarn  the  analogy  of  otlier  great  fcstivata


The  latrifice*  at


immenced  i
the  Panalbenaea  were  very  mnnj-
nccuL ;  lor  ncn  town  of  At^ca,  ai  well  aa  every
colony  of  Athena,  and,  during  the  tine  of  hetgnat-
neii,  every  onbject  town,  had  to  eontribnte  to  thi*
sacrifice  by  sending  one  bnll  each.  iStiol.  Arittppk.
A'nA.  385.)  The  meat  of  the  lictimi  appeut  to
have  been  distributed  among  the  people  ;  but
before  tbe  feasting  commenced,  the  pubJie  hersld
prayed  for  the  welfare  and  pfxpenlr  of  the  re-
public After  the  battle  of  Marathon  ttia  PlUaiwi
were  included  in  this  pi»yer.  (Herod,  vi,  11!.)

The  chief  solemnity  of  the  great  Panathenaea
wai  the  magnificent  procession  to  the  temple  of
Athena  Poliaa,  which,  ai  staled  above,  probably
took  place  on  the  last  day  of  the  festive  aauoo.
The  opinion  of  Crcnier  (^miW.  ii,  "'"'
also  took  place  a


nn  of  the  ScholiasU  on  Plato  (R^>*6L
n  ArialDphanei  (Bguil.  566),  and  thesa
iK  evidently  in  ntler  confiiiion  about


ii.p.aiO)
le  Wer  P


•cholinita  i
the  whole  I


Thei


loflhii


friexe  of  the  Parthenon,  th*
workof  Phidias  and  his  disciplei.  The  deacripboo
and  explanation  of  this  magnificent  voA  of  ait,
and  of  the  proceuion  it  reprearnts,  would  lead  na
too  &r.  (See  Sluart,  Aaiiq.  of  AAau,  vdL  iL  ;
Leake,  Topogr.  of  A&aa,  p.  315,  ftt  j  C  O.
Miiller,  Anaod  Art  and  if  Rim.  j  118  ;  H.  A.
MUller,  Panali.  p.  98,  Ac)  The  chief  object  0<
this  proceision  was  to  carry  the  peplui  of  the  god-
dess to  her  temple.  It  wat  a  erocoi-colonred
garment  for  the  goddess,  and  made  by  maideni,
colled  ipyariirai.  (HceycL  i;ii. ;  cttnpare  Aa-
KHiriioRiA.)  In  it  were  woven  Enoeladna  and  th«
giants,  a<  they  were  conquered  by  the  goddeia.
(Enrip.  Awa6.  46S  ;  SchoL  ad  Arilapi.  EgmO.
566  )  Snid.  J.  D.  n^XoI  ;  Vii;.  Or.  29,  &c  ;
compare  Plat  Eutifd.  p6.)  Pcoclns  (ad  PlaL
Tim.)  says  that  the  figures  on  the  peploi  repre-
sented the  Olympic  godi  conquering  the  gioats,
and  this  indeed  ii  the  subject  reprasentad  en  a
peplui  wont  by  an  Athena  preaerved  in  the  Mn-
Kum  of  Dresden. On  one  occuion  in  later  tinra.


Antigonui  with  their  fiatteriea,  they  also  decreed
that  their  imagn,  along  with  thoee  of  the  goda^
should  be  woven  into  tbe  peplus.  (PluL  Dauftr.
10.)  The  pepluiwas  not  carried  to  tbe  temple  by
men  but  wai  suspended  from  the  mast  of  a  ihip
(Schol.  Horn.  IL  V.  734  ;  Philoitr.  m  Sapi.  i.  6.
p.  550i  compare  BSekh,  C™c  T^ag.  Prime,  p.  1 93 1
Schol  ai  .^riifi^  Pax,  ilS)  ;  and  this  ship,
which  was  at  other  times  kept  Dear  the  Areiopi^a
(Pans.  i.  29.  g  1),  wai  moved  along  on  land,  it  ia
said,  by  nAerrooRiu  madiiiiet.  What  these  ii»>
chines  may  have  been  is  involved  in  utter  obeenrily,
Tbe  procesiion  procoeded  liom  tbe  CenmeictK,  nrac
a  monuDient  c^led  Leocorium  (Thneyd.  i  SO),  (o
the  temple  of  Uemeteral  Bleusia,and  thence  along
the  Pehisgic  wall  and  the  lan|Je  of  Apolh>  Pylhiua
the  Pnyi,  and  thence  to  the  Aoopolis,  whtra
!  itatoe  of  Uinava  Poliaa  waa  adoned  with  lb*

In  tfaia  proceasion  nearly  the  whole  popolation

Attica  oppean  to  have  taken  lait,  cither  en  foot,

on  honeback.  or  in  charioti,  ai  may  be  leen  in  tbe

biaia  of  tho  Parthenon. A^  men  cNtied  oliva


PANCRATIUM.

bODchei,  and  vera  called  AoAAo^fwi  (Gtym.  M.
and  Hcsych.  t.  v.) ;  yooog  men  Bttendedf  lit  leut
in  tmiWei  limei,  in  anDour  (Thnejd.  n.  16),  ud
maideDi  who  belonged  to  the  nobleM  &mmea  of
Aihent  canied  bukett,  cmtoming  oSeringa  da  tba
goddeat,  whence  thej  woe  called  Koni^^piH.  (Hbi^
V.  Korq^^i)  eompue  Tbncjd.  ^  ei>
^  the  part  which  ilieu  took  in  thia  pm-
ceauon,  and  the  dntie*  thej  hid  to  perform,  lea
Htduafhokia.

HcD  who  had  deaemd  wall  oFthe  lepnblicweie
nwuded  with  a  gold  erowa  at  the  great  Puui-
thanaM,aiMl  the  henJd  bad  to  announce  the  erent
during  tlM  gjnuiaatic  conteila.  (Demoath.  A  Cbmt,
f.  2tifi  -,  cnnpan  Maura.  Pamali.  p.  IS.)  Priiooera
alao  wire  allowed  to  enjoj  freedom  during  the
gnat  Panathenaea.  lU\pian,ad  DamoiA,  e.  Tirno-
eroL  p.  710  ;  compate  Demcath.  dt  Fait.  Lig.
P.SM.)

(Compaie  J.  Mnnii,  Ptmatinaea,  Hbtr  tnsnt-
ioit,  Liigd.  Bat  1619  ;  C,  Hoitiiiann,  PoHoOt-
maikot,  Cauel,  IBM,  8to.  ;  H.  A.  MUUer,  Pa-
aaOMaiea,  Bmn,  1S37,  an.  ;  C.  O.  MliUer^
Diiaertation,  Qko  am*  lempon  PamatiiaKua  fainont
ttUbra/a  nut,  which  ia  reprinted  io  the  Pbilalogital
Muaeam,  Tol.  JL  pp.  237—335.)  [L.  S.}

PANCRATIASTAE.  [Pakcbatidh.]
^PANCKA'TIUU  (irari^THv)  ii  compMed  at
irw  and  updrat,  and  accordin^j  lignifici  an
athletic  game,  in  wbicb  all  the  power*  of  the
fighter  were  called  inle  action.  The  pancratiom
*>a  one  of  the  gamaa  or  gjmnaatic  conteata  which
weie  exhibited  at  all  the  gnat  featiTBli  of  Greece;
it  eonained  of  boxing  and  wrealling  (*i>7ri)|  and
niAi)),ai]d  wu  reckoned  to  be  one  of  the  htttTy  or
hud  ezereiaei  (^irftalaiiaTa  $api<x  or  ffap^tpa),
on  acamnt  of  the  violeat  exertion!  it  required,  and
fiir  tbia  raaaon  it  wai  not  much  practiaed  in  the
gjmnaaia ;  and  where  it  waa  pnctiied,  it  wai  pro-
babU  not  witbonl  modificatjoaa  to  render  it  eoaier
fiir  the  boj^  According  to  the  ancient  phyaieiana
it  had  Tory  zazelj  a  beneficial  iofloena  i^xm  health,
(H.  MennuiaL  Dt  Art.  OfmrnuL  T.  7.)

At  Sparta  the  r^Ur  [«ncratiiua  waa  ^bidden,
but  the  name  vbj  there  applied  lo  a  fierce  and
irregniar  fight  not  eoatrotled  by  anj  rules,  in  which
eren  biting  and  acral^hing  were  net  nncommon,
and  in  which,  in  short,  cTary  thing  waa  allowed  by
which  one  of  the  pattiea  might  hope  to  oTeicome
the  other. In  Homer  we  neither  find  the  game


the  pancratiai
anced  at  the  (


y  degree  of  per-


game,  thcragh  it  may  have  exiati

flMtioD  until  a  short  time  before
acanely  poasibls  to  apeak  of  an  iuvmlor  of  the
panctaliiuB,  a*  it  mutt  have  gradually  arisen  out  of
a  rude  mode  of  fighting,  which  if  euslomory  among
all  oDCtTiliud  natiooa,  and  which  waa  kept  up  at
Sparta  in  its  origiDal  itale.  But  the  Oreeks  re-
garded ThcacDa  as  the  iuToilat  of  the  panoatiom,
who  for  want  of  a  aword  waa  aaid  to  haie  used
this  nude  of  fighting  againat  the  Minotannis.
(SchoL  ad  Pimd.  Ntm.  r.  89.)  Other  legends  re-
preaented  Heiaclea  a*  having  been  nctor  in  the
pauatinm  (Puis.  t.  8.  g  1  ;  H^in.  Fab.  273),
and  lats  writai  make  other  her«a  alao  fight  the
panentiimi  (Locao,  PkanaL  it.  613,  Ac)  ;  bat
tbext  are  mere  fictions.  After  the  panoatiom  waa
«aoe  intTDdnced  at  Oljmpia,  it  toou  found  its  way


PANCRATIUM.  8«7

alio  into  tba  other  great  gamei  of  Greece,  and  in
the  times  of  the  Roman  emperora  we  also  find  it
practised  in  Italy.  In  OL  US  the  pancratiam  for
boys  waa  introdnced  at  the  Olympic  gamea,  and
the  first  boy  who  gained  thenctory  waiPhaedimui,
a  natiie  of  a  town  in  Tiwa.  (Pans.  t.  t^  in  fin.)
Thia  innoration  had  been  adopted  before  in  otbera
of  the  national  games,  and  in  the  GlatPythiad  (OL
106),  we  find  a  Theban  boy  of  the  name  of  Olmdes
aa  Tictor  in  the  pancratimn  in  the  Pythian  gamt^
(Pans.  I.  7.  §  S.)  At  the  iMhmian  gamea  the
pancratiom  fbr  boya  is  not  mentioned  till  the  reign
of  Domilian  (Coiiini,  Diaart.  Agon.  p.  101)  ;  but
thia  may  be  merely  accidental,  and  the  game  may
have  been  practised  long  before  that  time.

Philoattatna  (iTsag.  iL  6)  laya  that  the  paneia.
tium  of  man  was  the  moat  beautiful  of  all  athletic
conteaU  ;  and  the  combatants  most  certainly  have
shown  to  the  ipectators  a  Tariety  of  beaatifu!  and
exciting  ipectadet,  as  all  the  arti  of  boxing  and
wrestling  appeared  here  united.  (Arialob  Aic(.  i.
£  ;  Plul.  Sympoi.  iL  p.  638,  a)  The  combatanta
in  the  panCTetimn  did  not  use  the  cestns,  or  if
they  did,  it  waa  the  TfiorriF  inKaKArtfoi  [CiE-
Tus],  so  that  the  bands  rc^aained  free,  and  wounds
were  not  easily  indicted.

The  tuune  of  tbete  combatants  waa  panctatiialaa
(Torpifaiiamd)  or  ^iiifusx't.  (Pollux  iiL  30.  G.)
Tliey  (ought  naked,  and  had  their  bodies  anointed
and  «OT«ed  with  sand,  by  which  they  were  en-
abled to  take  hold  of  one  another.  (Philottr.  I.  e.  ;
Aristopb.  Pax,  848.)  In  cases  where  the  contests
of  the  pancntiastae  were  not  regulated  by  strict
rules,  it  might,  as  at  Sparta,  aometimea  happen,
that  the  Egbton  made  use  of  tbeir  teeth  and  naila
(PhilosCr.  L  e.  :  Luclan,  Dwvmax,  c  49  ;  Plut.
Lac  ApopUi,  p.  234,  d.)  ;  but  such  iir^ularities
probably  did  not  occur  at  any  of  the  great  pnblic

When  two  poncraliastiu  began  their  contest,
the  first  object  which  each  of  tliera  endeafoured
to  aceompliah,  waa  to  gain  a  &Toarabla  poai.-
tion,  each  liying  to  make  the  other  stand  so  that
the  aun  might  ahine  in  hia  bee,  or  that  other
iUGUiienience*  might  prevoit  hia  fighting  with
succeas.  Thia  struggle  {ieyiir  rapl  ti)i  irrdstot,
Aeachin.  e.  Qaifk.  p.  S3,  ed.  Sleph.)  waa  only  the
introduction  to  die  »al  conteat,  though  in  certain
cases  this  prepaiatory  aOtiggle  might  t«ininata  the
whole  Rame,  as  tme  of  the  parties  might  wear  out
the  other  by  a  aeriei  of  ttratagems,  and  compel
bim  to  gire  up  further  resistance.  Sostratoa  of
Sicyon  bad  gamed  many  a  riclory  by  such  tricks.
(Paua.  Ti.  4.  g  1.)  When  the  real  conteat  began,
each  of  the  fighlen  might  commence  by  boihig  or
by  wrestling,  accordingly  as  he  thought  ha  abould  be
more  succetrful  in  the  one  than  in  the  other.  The
lictory  waa  not  decided  nnlll  one  of  the  parties
waa  killed,  or  lifted  up  a  finger,  thereby  declaniig
that  he  waa  unable  to  eoniinue  the  contest  either
from  pain  or  fatigue.  {Vtlba,  AgoaaL  i.  0.)  It
usually  happened  that  one  of  the  combatanta,  by
some  tiick  or  other,  made  his  antagonist  bll  to  th*
groond,  and  the  wrestling,  which  than  canmoiced,
was  called  inutAjmribn,  and  continned  nntil  one
a!  the  parties  declared  huutelf  cooquered  or  waa
stranglHl,  sa  was  the  case  at  Olympia  with  Arrhi-
chion  or  Amehion  of  Phigalia,  in  01.  54.  (Paul.
TiiL  40.  Sl,&i^i  Eujeb.  Cknm.  p.  IfiD,  Bcalig.)
A  liiely  deacription  of  a  itmggle  of  this  kind  is
giTCD  by  Pliilotliatni  (^  &). Sometimsi  me  of


SJS  PANDECTAR

the  fighlen  feU  down  on  hii  back  on  jnupoie  that
ba  might  that  word  a<F  the  allackt  of  bu  aotagD-
niat  mon  euilf ,  and  thia  u  perhap*  the  trick  called
iwTiaaidi.  The  nnial  modv  of  nuking  a  mkod
bM  in«  to  pnt  one  foot  behind  hii,  and  theo  to
pub  bim  backwani,  or  to  leiie  bim  round  lui
bodj  in  mch  a  manoei  that  the  upper  part  being
the  beaner  the  ptnan  loet  hii  balance  and  fell.
Hence  the  eipreaaloiu  fi^va*  \aiiSdii'ta;  fUcraAo-
tiir,  iiiaor  alptu',  t^  /iiini  fx'"!  ''^  MIC"
nrfu,  Ac.  (Sealig.  od  fueft.  Chnn.  ^  18.)  The
•muzed  woodent  repicMuti  two  jam  of  Pin-


entiaatae  j  the  one  on  the  right  buid  ii  an  ei-
anpU  of  the  irairAjivnl\i|,  and  that  on  tbe
leTt  of  tbe  /iwaAahw.  Thejr  an  taken  Irom
KranM't  Gymaattik  lotd  AgrmttUi  d.  Hdltn.  Taf,
iii  b.  Fig.  3E,  b.  31,  h.,  where  thaj  are  Mpied
reipectively  bom  Qriraud,  Aeo.  d.  Mtm.  AiU.
voL  L  pL  20, 21,  and  Kiauie,  %aanni  etL  iamti,
lab.  10.


Cau.  lii.  13.)  AfMT  ihu  time  it
become  eitreradr  popular,  aod  Jutinian  {ffovtU.
CT.  c;  I,  prorided  nyKOfiwor  be,  a«  aome  auppoee,
a  miatalu  for  wirfupituir)  made  it  one  of  tbe  leren
aolemnitiei  (vp^oSoi)  which  the  coniula  had  to
pnrids  br  the  amtuaiaent  of  the  people.

Serenl  of  the  Gnek  panantiaitae  have  been

I eptoiiaao odea  of Pindar,

■aof  Athena  (JVni.iL),Heli«ii
andSmpaiade*  of  Thebea  (IiO.  iiu  and  ti.),  Aiia-
todidee,  Cleaoder  and  Phylacidai  of  Aegina  (iVaia.
iii,  lA  iT.  T.  and  n.),  and  a  bej  PTthea*  of
Aagina.  (^om  *.)  Bnt  beeidei  theie  tbe  namei
of  a  gnat  many  othci'  ncton  in  tbe  pauo
known.  (Comjian  Fellowi,  ZMMsMna
P.S13,  Lond.  1S41.)

The  diet  and  tiwning  of  the  pukcratiaslu  wn*
the  fame  ai  that  of  othecAlhletM.  IAtulwixk.}

(Compare  HieroD.  Merenriatia,  ddArU  gjuueai-
tiai!  J.  U.  Knnae,  jDu  OfJii'iadik  nd  AgmiiMik
dtr  HJitnat,  ml  i,  [^  SU—66S.)  [L.  3.]

PANDECTAE  or  DI6ESTA.  In  tbe  laat
month  of  the  jcar  4.  n.  630,  Jnatinian  by  a  Con-
alitnticai  addnaaed  to  nibmian  em|)owaed  him
to  name  a  eanmiiaieo  for  the  pmpon  lA  fofining  a
Code  oat  of  the  writing*  of  tboaa  Jnriata  who  ud
mjoTod  the  Jna  Re^ondeadi,  or,  M  it  ia  ezpnand
by  the  EmpMvc,  "  aDtiqaonmi  prodMtian  qnibw


tetpn


The


prineipe*  pi

eompilatioo  howerer  compniei  eittacu  mm  aome

WTilen of tbe Repnbliaa  period (Cbiuf. Deo

Anccere)^  and  &om  AmdiDi  Cbaritiu*  and  Her-


PANDECTAE.
mogcBianoa.  Ten  jaaii  were  allowed  da  the  eom-
plation  of  the  w<n^  The  inatmctiaa*  of  the
Empam  were,  lo  aeleet  what  wu  mefuJ,  to  emit
what  wai  antiqoated  or  nipeifluau,  to  aroid  nn-
neceeaary  ivpelitiDnaT  to  get  rid  of  canuadictionip
and  to  make  mch  other  changa  aa  aboald  podu*
out  of  the  nam  of  anoiem  Jmiatical  wntingt  a
naefiil  ud  complete  body  of  law  (jt*  aatiqfimm').
Tbe  compilation  wna  to  Im  diatriboled  into  Fif^
Booki  and  the  Booka  were  to  be  mbdiTided  int*
Tillea  (71M>).  Tbe  work  waa  to  be  named
Digeala,  a  Latin  tenn  indicating  an  anangement
of  maleriala,  oi  Paodeetae,  a  Oreek  word  eiissaa-
ITB  of  the  compreheDai(Bi«a  of  tbe  wnrk.  The
same  Digeata  had  been  already  ued  by  Salriua
Julianua  nr  the  title  of  hia  chief  wotlc  The  tenn
Puideetae  had  alao  been  Rwlied  to  oomfnlatiena
which  contained  Tarieot  kinda  of  matter.  (A.GelL
Pratf.)  It  WB>  alio  decUnd  that  no  cammed-
tariea  ahould  be  written  on  thia  coDipilalioa,  bill


u>  parallel  paaiagea  with  a  abort  atalement  of  their
coQleau.  (roiui:  Deo  Anetore,  a.  12.)  It  wa*
aUo  declared  that  abbnTiatiaia  (a^irfa)  abonld  not
be  uaed  in  Cbnsing  the  text  of  the  Digeat  The
work  wu  completed  in  three  you*  (17  Cd  Jib.
533)  ai  tppean  by  a  Cooatinuioti  b^  in  Greek


and  L«nn  which  confimed  tbe  work  and  nn  to
it  legal  authority.  <Cbiu(.Tanta,&candAAwNV.)


tinned aa  hating  been  aapleyed


eapleyed  n  the  weak,
Profaaaan  Dvothena  and


Anat^iuB,  who  fee  that  pnrpoee  had  betD  inrited
bom  the  law-echool  of  Be^u^  and  Thx^hilH
and  Cnttiou*  who  retided  at  Conitantinople.  TIm
ampiler*  made  oae  of  about  two  thonaud  diSMeU
Ireatitei,  which  contained  abore 3,000,000  lioea

campilMion  <na  only  110,000  Itnea,  Tribmiaii
prarared  thia  large  o^leetton  of  treatiiaa,  many  of
which  had  aaidnlj  fallen  into  oblinon,  and  a  liat


uei  Jaaliniai


thew


ioatrictioDaef  Jaaliniaa.  (CWit.  Tanla,&c  a.  16.)
Such  ■  liat  ia  at  faeaeot  eiily  iband  ia  tbe  Fiona-
tine  HS.  of  the  Digeat,  hat  it  ia  fat  feaa  beiog
Mcnrate.  Still  it  ia  probably  the  Index  Bcntioiad
in  the  Comkilotioa,  Tenia,  &G.  (Pnchla,  BtwHr-
iavm  m/m-dmliuitm  fiarmlmat,  m  AMl  Mmi.
ToL  ilL  pp.  Mi— 370.)

The  work  ia  Ihna  diitribnted  inta  Fifty  Bo<ik%
wbich,  with  the  eiception  of  thne  booka.  are  cab-
dirided  into  Titlea,  <^  which  thoe  are  laid  to  b*
122.  Tbe  booka  30,  31,32,  are  uol  diiided  into
Tillea,  bat  bsTe  one  eommoD  Tills,  De  Legalia  ci
Fideicommiaua  ;  and  the  finrt  Title  of  tbe  iSth
bosk,  De  Vuborum  Obligatimibtu,  ii  really  dirided
into  three  parte,  though  they  bare  not  teearatc
Rubricae.  Under  each  Tide  are  placed  Ihe  ei-
tracta  from  the  aeretal  jnricta,  nnmbend  1,  3,  S.
and  to  on,  with  the  writer'*  name  and  the  naaa
and  diriaian  of  tbe  work  £nim  which  the  exnad  ia
made.  These  eitraEl*  an  Mid  to  aiaoimt  ID  9133^
No  name,  cotnipondinf  M  Liber  ta  Titalai^  ia
giien  to  Ibeae  aabdiTiaumt  of  Titoli  which  an
Immed  by  the  aitracia  fma  Ihe  eereral  writeit,
but  Juatinian  (Cbut  Tanta,  Ac  a.  7)  haa  ealltd
them  **  legea,"  and  thov^  net "  lawi "  in  the  alrict
aanie  <J  the  term,  they  wen  in  het  **  law ; "  and
in  the  aame  aenae  the  Empenx  calli  the  Jnrisu
"l^idalaica."  (Oim<.Ttata,Ac.ablfi.)  TlraFif^


PANDECTAE.
Booki  diScr  mataiillj  both  in  bulk,  mmiber  oT
titka,  and  number  of  extracM.  Tbe  Olauatona
tad  tbeir  hUovui,  io  RJbmDg  to  tbs  Digvt,  Mnw-
tnaoi  iudicata  the  work  bf  P>  p,  iv  n,  and  loniii-
»  b;  D  (C  ^  which  anordiiig  to  kim  wrilen


tCTm


iD,>i


i^iah  imzk  hi  whicfa  tia
Digaat  ii  dtod  ii  Braelon^  TVwlua  oa  tt*  Zov  of'
E^iamL,  mA  hi*  mod*  of  dtttioa  if  that  of  tU
Oln— IBW.  (TkB^HnanHbyO.  Lmg,  LoDdoD,
1847,  ^  107.)

Tlktie  wu  (In  m  dinioD  ef  tii«  wbole  Fi%
Booki  into  Sarai  brgn  nnuMn,  eallad  Pwtet,
wUeli  coRMinBdad  to  the  •aroi  main  diTiunu  of
ik  wwk*  «  the  Edict,  and  bad  alu  a  qiceial
nfcraoce  to  the  tOaoK  <A  imlnetion  thtn  alab-
liihod.  Tfaoa  tba  fii«  Pm  Mmpriwi  Fonr  Boaki,
tho  Mond  Pan  sompriMa  MT«n  Booki,  aad  to  on,
(Cbail  Tanta,  ft*,  i.  X  "  Igitn  prima  qiud*m
fan,"ftc)

TIm  nnmbtt  tt  wiitan  from  irboM  voiki  n-
Inet*  w«n  mada  ii  thirtj^iiiw,  cooiinhending
thoM  JuriMi  frma  whoa  axtncU  who  made  at
Mcond  hand,  at  Q.  Mochu  Bcaarda,  the  Pontifex,
frooi  irbm  fcor  fragmota,  and  Aalini  Oallo*
itDD  wboB  IBM  ftagniml  ii  takoi ;  bsl  omitting
Sstitia  Salpidu  Rofoi,  who  ia  wpmanted  bjr
AUana,  dialingniihiiig  Aelim  Oallu  from  Julio*
Aqnila,  Vnmliuiu  6i>bi  Claudiat  Satnniinni ;  ■•-
nrnfaig  that  tboo  ii onlf  om  Fompoiiui,  and


Tb*  bllowlng  ii  Iha  lilt  of  JuriM  frco  vhoi*
vntiagi  tha  Digeat  «ai  coanracted.  aa  it  >■  giran
in  the  Palingauaia  of  Hommelioi,  who  bai  a>
noffsd  the  mattar  taken  Enm  each  writer  imdet
hi*  DBin*.  and  plaood  tba  name*  in  alphabetieal
ote.  Tba  dalaa  *{  tba  Juiila  aie  chiaflj  fanodod
Ml  tba  anthotit^  of  Zignwni. The  Sgnn*  ii


to  tbo  IH«*t  br  Mwh  JariM,  etdmated  in  the
WW  «f  HmrmUu  :  (b)  diDoMa  that  tba  coolri.
bBtian  I*  andar  tae  saga  of  tba  Paliogtoema.
Thto  liM  indodca  Sabimu.  Tb*  aztnet*  from
wianj  iif  lliii  »illin  aia  fan  anil  iliiill  i  tbnao  fna
UlpiaD  an  mm  than  a  third  of  tha  wbot*  i  asd


■  Aftiaamu  .  Hadrian  and  the


JJAmh  Tama,  a  pupil  of
Serrini  Snlpi-
dnt  Rnfui  and

with  Cicara  S
JaMamu.  Unknown  ,  .  (a)
AfuHa  , .  pwhapa  abont  the

time of Sep.

Sereni  .  .  (u)
Jfvodiiu  Chariiiiu,  Coutan-

tinetheOiaat  ^
fliffiiJnitai  rirafallB  .  >  17^
CUhi*  .  .  .  Domiliaa and

Hadriao  .  33
Fbrmtimu  Alni.  demna  4
Gam*  .  .  .  Hadrian  and  tba

Antmini . 72


PANDECTAE.

C  Adia**

ofCic«ro . (

Clandiua

thg  Great .

Pritcn*

^onJflnH  .  yem and  Ha-

drian . . .  2

SaWoi

JiJiamu  .  .  a  pnpil  of  JaTO-

lonu* . . .9

M.Antirtini

LaUo  .  .  .  Angailni . ,  I

90


liliu  Mater .  .  .  Alex.  ScTcniB  . 1 0

iu  Voluma  Mateiaiutt Antoninni  Piiu B

Locini  Ulpiu Maralliu  .  The  Antonini  .  33}

Adiaa  Jlfaramw Caiacalla and

Alex-Sereni*  311


Jmiiai

JlfaarieHimii  Antoninw  Fini  11

Rutiliut

Matima  .  Unknown . .  (n)

Arrioi

JIfflUttto-.  Caiacalla . . S

HetenniiM

M«Uttiimi  a pupil of  D.

Ulrawnij .  lU

Qalntn.

Majlm«,con.

fnlB.c9J. 1

Priwra.

Ktralhu .  Traian  ...  10

Caiacalla 104

Jutnl

Pop'™. .  M.  Annliui . 21

JnliM

PaaluM .  .  Al«i.Seiera>  297

Pomponiiu Antoniana  Pin*  80

Lidniui?

Procmlul.  .  Othor  ... 6

I^iciniui

AalEaw  .  .  Caiacalla . . IJ
SMhu  .  .  Tiberini . . U

^laadin.

Sal>maau The  Antonini. i

Scaacla  .  .  The  Antonini .  7S(

Tarmdeiau Commodni
Tenmtiiu ,  Hadrian  and  tb*

Antonini , 3^
Q.  Sep.  Ploieni TVrteUunuu  S.  SeTerni and

Caiacalla . I)
Claudini  TiypHimbnu  S.  ScTenii  and

Caiacalla .  33

Salrio*  Abumiu  Valaa*  .  .  .  Hadrian  and  An-

toniuiuPio. 3

Vnaliitu  .  The  Antonini .  10

DomitiDi  Ulptamu  .  S. Serenu and

Alex,  SeTcnu  610


It  follow*  from  lbs  inatnctioni  of  the  Empenr
and  the  plan  of  tb*  wok  that  tho  eitiaeti  frna
the  Jaiiai*  an  lut  alwui  giTtn  in  their  exact
wocdj.  It  ii  pnibabia  that  maoj  ahoit  paiage*
were  inleipolaled,  or  altered,  ai  a,  matter  «t  neeaa-
■i^,  thciagli  tbera  aaaBU  to  be  no  naion  for  np-
poaing  tbM  thno  cbangea  ware  airied  bnhtr  than
the  natnre  of  the  caat  nqoired.  Still  there  it  no
doubt  that  the  change!  are  nicb  that  the  eitnetf
from  the  old  Jnriiti  cannot  be  nted  fa  maaj  pm.
poeei  witluat  tome  canttoo  and  jodgmanL

The  dixDibntion  of  the  mattCT  of  the  Digeat  into
Book*  and  Titlea  hai  eridoitlf  botn  made  accord-
ing to  a  plan,  u  will  he  obriow  on  intpecting  the
lilt  of  Titoli  prefixed  to  the  edttbui.  That  tba
38tb  book  traatt  of  teatamenta,  ti  the  inatitntioi
of  a  btret,  &&,  and  tba  39th  of  military  tcataiMntt,
and  rfcadiGill,&o.!in&etofmr"-- — '  '


Slit,  an


U  of  l^ann  and  Bdnciarj


*  He  mut  not  be  eonfoimded  with  C.  Aqiilini
Galliu,  one  of  the  maiten  of  SerriDi  Snlpioin^
fton  whom  tbiM  ia  no  eitnet  in  the  Digetb


fleo  PANDECTAE.

beqDHU.  Then  it  a  metbad  of  imngcment
therefore  to  for  m  geneialLy  to  hring  thiagB  of  the
HUDs  kind  together,  hat  the  compilatjoa  hu  no
clumi  to  being  comidtred  u  a  uieatilic  aim^s-
ment  of  tho  mBltei  of  law.  And  indeed  the  com-
ptien  trers  eiidentl?  faltered  in  thii  reapeet  by
the  tlmperoT'i  iiutractioni,  which  rrqnked  them  to
BiTBngo  (fl^trerc)  the  whole  body  of  the  law  com-
priied  in  the  Digett,  according  to  the  Code  and
the  Edictnm  Perpetnum.

It  hat  long  been  a  mattet  of  diipate  whether
the  compiler!  of  the  Digeit  were  smded  by  any,
and  if  an;',  by  what  principle  in  t^  anangeinent
of  the  KTeial  cilractt  under  the  ceapectiTe  Title*.
Thit  uibject  ii  axammed  in  a  very  leained  cuay
by  Blabme,  entitled  '  Die  Ordnnng  der  Fragmente
in  den  Pandeklentiteln."  (ZnUcirifl,  Tol.iy.)  The
iDTeitigatioD  it  of  coone  founded  on  the  titlei  of  the
lOTenl  worlct  of  the  Jnriiti,  which  u  already  ob-
•erred  ere  given  at  the  head  of  each  extract  i  tbui,
for  initance,  in  the  beginning  of  the  3d  book,  the
finl  Kian  eitiactt  are  heeded  at  fallowi :  "  Ul^-
aaui  Libra  lexagetinio  quarto  ad  Edictum;*'
"  Idem  Libre  primo  Fideicommiiaonun  ; "  "  Idem
Libro  quarto  ad  Sabinum  ; "  "  Idem  Libra  qointo
ad  Sabinum  ;"  "  Paului  Libra  primo  ad  Sabinum  ;"
"Julianut  Libra  trigeiimo  tertio  DigcMorum  ;  "
"  Paului  Libra  lecundo  ad  SabiuunL"  Theie  will
•erre  ai  lamplei  of  the  whole  and  will  eiptain
the  following  remark!  Ironi  Blnhme,  whole  con-
cliujoni  an  theie :  "The  compilere  leparated  all
the  wridngi  &om  which  eitiact*  wan  to  ba  made,
into  three  parti,  EUid  formed  themialTei  into  three
rommilteei.  Each  committee  read  thnogh  in  order
the  baokt  that  had  &llen  to  iti  lot,  yet  to  that
booki  which  were  clotely  related  ai  to  their  con-
lenti,  were  extneted  at  the  Hme  time.  Thebooki
wen  compared  with  the  Code  of  JoitiDian,  and
what  waj  selected  fcv  the  new  compilation,  wai
placed  under  a  Title  taken  either  from  the  Code,
the  Edict,  or  in  caia  of  necenity  from  the  vorit
itielf  which  waa  eitiaeted.  What  came  nndec  the
nme  title  imi  compared  ;  rn«titioni  wen  enued,
conlntdicliDUi  were  got  rid  o^  and  attentioni  wen
made,  when  the  content)  of  fhe  aztncti  teemed  te
require  it.  When  the  three  committed  had  finiihed
their  laboun,  the  pnneot  Digeit  waa  formed  out  of
the  three  collectioni  of  eitneta.  In  order  to  ao-
eompliih  thii,  they  made  that  collection  the  fdnnd»-
tioa  of  each  Title  which  tontainsd  the  moat
nnmeiwia  at  at  leaat  the  lonnet  eitracti.  With
thoB  they  compared  the  nnalleT  collectiona,  itrik-
ing  out,  a*  they  had  done  before,  tepetitioiu  and
controdictiont,  making  the  neceamiy  additiona,  and
giving  man  exact  dcGoitiont  and  general  prinei>
plei.  What  remained  over  of  the  imiitlec  collectioni
without  haling  had  an  appropriate  place  auigned
to  it,  wBi  ^aud  after  the  £nt  collectian,  and  iCi
fdace  in  the  leriei  after  the  first  collection  wu
generally  deUrmined  by  the  number  of  eitractt."

"The  Digett  doet  cot  teem  to  bare  bean  tub-
jocled  to  any  further  nTiiion."

Bluhme  remarki  that,  although  theConttitationi,
DtD  Aaetan,  Imperatoriam^  Tamta,  and  Oirtii,  con-
tain much  infttrmation  on  the  economy  of  the
Digeit  and  the  mode  of  proceeding  of  the  compilen,
only  the  two  fblhiwiag  Stat  are  dittinctly  itated ;
1,  That  the  extraoti  frem  the  writing!  of  the
Juritta  wen  onanged  aecording  to  the  title!  of  the
Code  and  the  Edfct  2.  Tltat  the  eitiaeU  were
eompued  nitli  tho  Code. Aecoidiagly  ef«rything


PANDECTAE.

eln  mntl  be  proved  from  an  examinition  of  tin
work  ittel^  and  thit  ia  the  object  of  Blohmeli
laboriou!  ewy.  He  obtema  that  if  ■  penonwill
ennine  the  eitiacti  in  the  title!  Do  V '


rill  find  a  r^nkar  ordar  obaatraUa  in  ^u  tillM
of  the  juriitie^  veriu  from  which  tlia  axtnKti  an
taken.  Ocoeially,  the  miei  of  the  hooka  gaoled
ehow!  that  the  wigiod  orda  of  the  voritt  ftna
which  the  extract!  wen  to  ba  snde,  hai  not  been
altered  ;  and  the  lereral  woHtt  gfsiiiaUy  follow  In
both  theae  titlea  in  the  aame  order.  A  aimitar  rs-
mai^  applin  to  the  title  Da  Verbonun  Oblig>-
tionibu!  (Dig.  46.  tiL  I),  though  there  ia  a  laria-
tion  in  all  the  three  titlea  aa  to  the  reladre  ordo
of  the  three  nuiaea,  which  are  {xBtencly  to  be
mentioned.  "  In  the  remaining  titlea  of  the  Di-
geit," addi  Blnhme,  "  at  fint  nght  it  apfieari  at
if  one  could  find  no  other  diitioctioD  in  the  tidea
of  the  Bitnuti  than  thit,  that  one  part  tf  them  hai
a  certain  kind  of  conneetian,  and  anothH*  part
merely  indicalei  a  motley  anemblage  of  booka  out
of  wlueh  the  extract!  have  been  inad&  Bat  en  •
clmer  compariiui  not  only  are  three  xiaiaei  dearly
diitinguithable,  but  thii  compatiion  lead)  to  tM
certain  coocluiion,  that  all  the  writing!  which  were
Died  in  the  compilation  of  the  Digeit,  may  be  re-
ferred to  three  claiteL  The  Common tariea  on  S&-
binua  (Ad  Sabinnm),  on  the  Edict  (Ad  Edictom),
and  Papinian*!  writing  are  at  the  bead  of  these
three  clatiea.  We  m»  accordingly  denote  Iheaa
three  maiaci  cetpecliTeJy  by  the  nanwa  Sahinian,
the  Edict,  and  Papinian.  In  each  of  thcM  iliiiia
the  leveral  worki  from  which  extract!  are  made,
folbw  ia  regular  order." Thia  eider  ia


ahy»


a  regular  u
le  which  Bl


hit  eaaay.

Thit  article,  if  read  in  nmneetion  with  the  aili-

general  notion  of  the  L^ilation  of  Jottinian,  the
object!  of  which  cannot  be  expraBed  better  than
in  the  following  word! '  - —

"  Juitinisn'a  plan  embiaced  two  pnncipal  wgrlu,
one  of  which  wai  to  be  a  leleetian  from  Uie  Joriata
and  the  other  ln>m  the  ConititutiDnei.  The  fint,
the  Pandect,  waa  rery  appn^mately  intended  to
ciBitain  the  fanndation  of  the  law :  it  wa«  the  fint
work  ainee  the  date  of  the  TwelnTabla,  which  in
itaelf  and  wiUiout  in{f)oung  the  eiiatence  of  anr
■'■  ■ ■  ■■  .....  |^,^_^

.  .  .  .aJledaCede.
and  the  tint  complete  Code  itnce  the  time  of  the
Twelve  Tablea,  though  a  laria  part  of  itt  contenli
ii  not  Law,  bnt  coniiiti  of  DogmaCie  and  the  in-
Teatigation  of  panicnlar  caiei.  Inalead  of  the  in-
lufficient  rnlea  of  Volentinian  III.,  the  excopla  in
the  Pandect  are  token  immediately  &om  the  writ-
ing! of  the  Juriit!  in  great  numbrai,  and  ananged
according  to  their  matter.  The  Code  alio  hu  a
comprefaaitite  plan  then  the  earlier  code^,
tince  it  oompriaei  both  Raicript!  and  Edict!.  Theae
two  work*,  the  Pandect  and  the  Code,  oaght  pci>-
perly  to  be  conaidered  ai  the  compleiiwi  of  Ja>-
q'i  deiign.  The  lottitnlioneecannotbeTieWBd
third  work,  independent  of  both;  it  eerree  ai
Ltroduetion  to  them  or  ai  a  nainnaL  Laally,  the
ellae  are  tingle  and  anbeeqiient  additiona  and
1  it  ia  merely  an  accidental  drcmit-
aunee  inai  a  third  edition  of  the  Coda  vai  not
made  at  the  end  of  Juatinian^  reign,  which  wnuld
huTecompriiedtheNoTallaewhichhadBpenaBiieia


. PANDIA.
•pptieation."  (Sarigny,  OonUab)  in  Sam.  Stdlt
»  MiMtbOT,  i.  p.  11.)

TiHm  uB  immeroiu  mumieripU  of  tho  DigeM,
both  in  Ubnuia  of  ths  CoDtinoit  and  of  Oieal
BrilauL  A  lul  of  tha  MS8.  of  the  Coipoa  Jurit
in  the  libnrka  of  thi«  caonliT,  vhich  an  princi-
mllj  in  the  College)  of  Oifc^  and  Cambridge,
M  giTBD  hj  Dr.  Hach  in  the  ZdUelirift  (tdL  t.>.
Bnt  the  MS3.  of  the  Digen  gesenlly  contain
(■■l;  parti  of  the  toiIc,  and  are  iwE  older  than  the
tmUih  ecnlDi;.  The  US.  called  the  Florentine
ii  coTDplete  and  pnbablj  ai  old  aa  the  lerenth
It  n  generally  Bid  that  it  liad been


PAKIONIA.


8«I


kept  a


It  of  mind,  and


td  the  Piaani  bj  Lothaiini  the  Second,  after  the
capnm  of  AmalG  m,  d.  1137,  ai  a  memorial  of  hit
■Tathude  to  them  for  thnr  aid  Bninit  Roger  the
Notnun.  The  Piiani  kept  it  till  their  cilj  wu
taken  hj  the  FliomtiDei  under  Oino  Caponi  A.  n.
1406,  who  acried  thii  pncioai  MS.  to  Florence
wban  it  it  (liU  pnaened.  Then  ii  hoveier
pcvtqr  gnod  evidence  that  the  MS.  wu  not  found
■I  Anufi.  Odofrsdn*  m;^  that  it  wu  tranamitted
to  Pin  bj  Jnitinian,  and  Bartolna  addi,  that  it
alwayt  bad  been,  and  then  vai  at  Piuu  At  an;
nU  it  ii  the  eldett  MS.  of  (he  Fandectae.  An
exact  copy  of  thie  MS.  wu  publiihed  at  Florence
in  lisi,  folio,  with  the  title  " Digetlurom  leu
Pandectarum  Libri  Qninquaginia  Ei  iriarentlnii
Pandectii  repneeentati ;  Florentiae  In  OfBcina
Lanrentii  Tarrentini  Dncali*  Typographi  MDLIU
Com  Sommi  PontiE  Car.  V.  Imp.  Heoriei  II  CW-
knuB  Regii,  Ednaidi  VI  Angliae  legifl,  Coami
Ifedicii  Ihicii  Flormt.  II  Ptivilegio."  The  bdi
(elating  to  the  hiitory  of  the  MS.  appear  &om  the
dedication  of  Fianciacu  Taorellini  to  Come  I.,
Dake  of  Florence.  Laelio  Tonlli  and  hii  eon
Fianciica  (nperiolecded  the  printing  of  the  editicm
of  thia  iplaodid  work,  irhich  ii  inraJnable  to  a
Kb^.  The  oithognphy  of  the  MS.  hu  been
aaapotnaily  otnerred,  Tboae  who  cannot  cooaaJt
tliiB  work  ma;  be  latiiSed  with  the  edition  of
tbe  Corpni  Julia  bj  Charondaa,  which  the  diitin-
gnidied  piiutar  of  ^t  edition,  Chriilophei  Planti-
naa,  affinna  to  be  u  exact  a  cop;  of  the  Florentine
•ditim  u  il  could  be  made.  (Antwerp,  lfi76).
Aa  to  the  other  editiopa  of  tha  Digaat,  mo  Coa-
rm  JuBiB.  [O.  L.]

PA'NDIA  (vitta),  on  Attic  feMiral,  the  real
ebaiacter  of  which  eeema  to  hare  been  a  labjeet
cf  diipau  among  the  andenta  themaelvet ;  for  ac-
cording to  the  EtTmologiciun  M.  <i.  e.  UirSia ;
comp.  Phot!  t.  v.),  lome  derired  it  from  Paadia,
who  il  BJd  ts  hBTe  been  a  goddeai  of  the  moon
(thia  ia  alao  Wachimnth^  opinion,  Ii.  p.  465)  ;
othen  boni  tbe  Attic  king  Pandion  ;  othen  again
from  the  Attic  tribe  Diaa,  ao  that  the  Pandia
wonld  haTe  bom  in  the  nme  relation  to  thii  tribe
u  tbe  Pn*thenaea  to  Atheni ;  and  othett  from
04^1,  and  call  it  a  featital  of  Zeoa.  Weleker
(Aadtfl,  TWit^.  p.  303)  coniiden  it  to  bave  been
orifpnallf  afeatii^  of  Zeni  calebiated  b;  all  the  At-
tic tribea,  anologDui  to  (ha  Panathenaea,  and  thinki
tbat  when  the  eonfederasy,  of  which  thii  featival
waa  aa  it  were  the  ecotial  point,  became  dluolred,
Ike  old  featifal  remained,  though  id  character  vai
cbannd.  It  wu  celebrated  at  Atheni  in  the  time
*  (fi.  Mid.  p.  617>. Tajlor  in  hi.

I  thia  paaaage  itiangely  coufoondi  it  with

tin  DiaHa,  doi^h  it  ii  well  known  that  thii  fee-
ItTBl  WM  held  on  tbe  IMh  of  Mnoychi^  while


(ha  Pandia  look  place  on  the  Uth  of  EUpheboIian,
(Campaie  Saidu  and  Hetj-ch.  j.  c.  Hdrtia  ;  BO^h,
AlAamiL  it  BtHin.  Ahadmit,  181B,  p.  G£,
ic)  lU  S.]

PANE'OYRIS  (irisArvfuf)  lignifiei  a  meeting
or  auembly  of  a  whole  people  for  the  purpose  ^
wonhipping  at  a  comnuin  nnctoaij.  But  the
woid  i>  nnd  in  three  waya :  —  1.  For  a  meeting  of
the  inhabitanli  of  one  particular  town  and  ita
Ticini^  [BrHKSii,]  j  3.  For  a  meeting  of  the  in-
h^itanti  of  a  whole  diitrict,  a  praiince,  or  of  the
whole  bod;  of  people  belonging-  to  a  paitlculat
tribe  [Dblu,  FAHSOwnu,  P^nioNiaJ  ;  and
3.  For  great  national  meeting!,  ai  at  the  Olympic,
Pythian,  IithnuBa,and  Nemeangamei.  Although
in  all  panegyreii  which  we  know,  the  reiigioui
ehoncter  foiioi  the  moat  prominent  featore,  other
ittbjecli,  political  <*i«i^Mi#rti»  and  reulationi,  u
well  ai  a  TirieCy  of  amuiemeati,  were  not  excluded,
though  thej  were  perhapa  matt  a  cannqiMDce  of
the  preaence  of  many  penoni  than  objecia  of  tha
meeting.  Ai  regaidi  tbeir  raligioos  ehaiaeler,  the
panagrreia  were  real  lutinli  in  which  prayera
were  perfonned,  nerilkei  offered,  proceniona  bald,
&C.  Tbe  amuiementi  oonprahended  the  whole
Tariety  of  games,  g^nuiaatic  and  mutical  conteit^
and  Brtertainmenti.  Every  panegyrii,  moreover,
wai  made  by  Irudeapeople  a  lource  of  gvn,  and  it
may  be  crenunod  that  luch  a  meeting  waa  nerel
held  without  a  &ir,  at  which  all  lorli  of  thingi
were  exhibited  for  aale.  (Paaa.  x.  33.  g  9 ;  Scrab.
X.  p.  4SS;  Dio  ChijKat.  OraL  xiviL  p.  £28.)  In
later  timea,  when  the  love  of  gain  had  become
itronger  than  leligioui  feeling,  Ue  fain  appear  to
have  become  a  mare  prominent  chaiacteriilic  of  a
paocgyrii  than  before ;  hence  the  Olympic  garaea
are  called  mercatia  Otfinjnaaa  or  bidi  at  mereaJuM
O^pionm.  (Justin,  xiii.  £;  Veil.  PaL  i.  8.)
Fettire  otattoni  irare  alao  fre^piantly  addiaaed  to
a  panwyrii,  whence  thaj  are  eallad  Aiyn  mnni-
TvpucoL  The  Pancsyiicua  of  laocialea,  though  il
wu  nevcc  delivere^ii  an  imagiraiy  diiooarM  of
thii  kind.  In  later  (imei  any  oraliim  in  piaiie  nf
a  penoD  wu  called  panegyricni,  ai  that  of  Plin;
on  the  eniperor  Tiajan.

Each  panegyrii  ii  tnated  of  in  a  lepaisle  article.
For  a  general  account  lea  Wachimuth,  AcAL  All.
i.  p.  H9,  At;  BOckh,  ad  PM.  Ot  vii  p.  176,
&C. !  Hennann,  Polil.  Ant.  1 10.  [L.  8.]

PANBLLE'NIA  (TaHU4i<M),  a  bntival.  or
perhqia  lather  a  panegyrii  of  all  the  Oreeka,  which
Kcmi  to  hare  been  inititnted  by  the  empetar
Hadrian,  with  tbe  weU-meant  bnt  impcacticahia
view  of  reviving  a  national  ipirit  among  the  Oreeka.
(Philoilr.  Ftf.5oii)A.  ii.1.  5;  Blickb,  Corp.  Intm^.
i.  p.  769,  ii.  p.  6B0.)  {L.  S.]

PANIO'NIA  iToriAtm),  tbe  great  oationnl
psnegyria  of  tbe  loniani  on  monnt  Mycale,  wb«B
their  national  god  Poaeidon  Heliconin*  had  hii
tanctnary,  csll«t  the  Panioninm.  (Herod.  L  148;
Stmh*  viU.  p.  88*1  Pane.  viL  34.  |  4.>  One  of
the  principal  object!  ef  thii  national  meeting  waa
the  common  wonbip  of  Poseidon,  to  whom  iplendid
lacriUcea  were  offered  on  the  occasion.  (Diodor.
IT.  (9.)  Aa  chief-prieit  fv  the  conduct  of  the
iBcriGcei,  they  always  appointed  a  young  man  of
Priene,  with  the  title  of  king,  and  it  ia  mentioned
as  one  of  the  peculiar  superstitions  of  the  loniaoa
on  this  ocaiioii,  that  they  thought  the  bull  which
they  sacrificed  to  be  pleating  to  flie  god  it  it  nared
at  tbe  moment  it  waa  killed.^  (Staab.  La) Bat


8GS  PANTOMIMUS.

nligiuu  wonliip  tnu  not  die  talj  object  !m  vhicli
they  aaembled  at  the  Pouioniiuii ;  on  eerMin  emcF-
nnciM,  ttpedailj  id  Oue  of  1117  danger  thnaten-
mg  their  coimtrj,  the  loniuu  ducuued  at  theee
meeliDga  poUtiesl  qostioni,  uid  passed  resolations
wliichwen1>mdhigDpaailL  (Uerod.i.  141, 170.)
But  tfae  political  union  amoDg  the  lonians  appean
ncTertheieH  to  hare  boea  Tery  Iook,  and  their
Gontedemy  to  bam  been  vithoot  anj  ngolnr  in-
ternal oiganiiBti>ni,  lor  the  Lfdiani  conqaored  one
Ionian  town  after  another,  wilhont  then  spearing
anything  like  tbe  spirit  of  a  politial  conMeracy ;
and  we  alio  lind  that  lingle  ciliea  concluded  sepa-
isls  treaties  for  themielTai,  and  abandoned  tbeii
oonfedeiates  to  their  (ate. (Herod.  L  169.)

Diodonis  (xT.  <9)  saji  that  in  later  times  the
Ionian!  nied  ta  hold  their  mBedng  in  the  n«tb-
boarbood  of  Epheani  instead  of  at  MtcsJc.  Sirabo,
on  the  other  hand,  vlio  speaks  of  the  Panionic
pon^yriB  as  still  held  in  nis  ''"' ''"  ~''

only  not  mention  any  sncb  ch
imply  that  the  pancgyrii  wu
the  same  ipot,  lia.  on  monnt  Mycale.  Diodorus
thereroro  teems  to  consideT  the  Ephetian  panegyris
[ErBaslA]  as  hating  been  inititnted  instead  of
the  Panionia.  Bnt  both  panegyreii  eiiBted  limnl-
taneoiisly,  and  were  connected  with  thewonhip  of
two  distinct  diiinitiei,  sa  is  dear  btna  a  com-
FArison  of  two  ;passages  of  Stiabo,  Tiii.  p.  381,  in.
p.  839,

(Con,

fto.  :  1

F.  Hennami,  Ltiri.  dir  Ootlud.  AlttrA.
3.  3.)  [L.  a]

PANOTLIA. tAnvA.]

PANT0MI'MU3  is  the  name  of  a  kind  of
aelon  pecoliar  to  the  Roniini,  who  very  neariy  re-
sembled in  their  mode  of  acting  the  modem  dancen
in  the  ballet  They  did  not  speak  on  the  stage,
but  mraely  acted  by  gestuiea,  movements,  and  atli-
tndet.  All  moTcmenti,  howeier,  were  rhythmical
like  those  in  the  batleC  whence  tbe  general  term
' ' is  taUaiio,  rdtan;  the  whole  art  was


A'uin  and  inZfafw  Ledam.

Mimic  dancers  of  this  kind  are  common  to  all
nations,  and  hence  we  lind  them  in  Oreece  and
Ilaly  ;  in  the  former  country  they  acquired  a  degree
of  peifeclionof  which  we  can  scarcely  form  an  idea.
But  pantomime*  in  a  narrower  sense  were  peculiar
to  the  Romans,  to  whom  we  shall  therefore  confine
ouraelvBi.  During  the  time  of  (he  republic  the
niune  pantomimui  do«  not  occur,  though  the  art
itself  was  known  to  the  Romans  at  an  early  period  1
for  the  ftnt  hiitriones  said  to  hare  been  introdnced
from  Etruria  were  in  fact  nothing  bnt  pantomimic
dancers  (Hismio.  p.  612],  whence  we  find  that
under  the  cmpiis  tbe  aamea  hislrio  and  panlomimus
wore  used  aa  spionynMOt.  The  pantomimic  art,
howcrer,  was  not  cairied  to  any  degree  of  perfec-
tion nnti!  the  time  of  Angustui ;  whence  some
nritcn  ascribe  its  JnTcntion  to  AngnMus  himself;
or  to  tb(  great  artists  who  Sourithnl  in  bis  rrign.
(,M.i»i,t.v.'Opxvri.i'warTintiu>t.)  The  grealotl
pantomimes  of  this  time  wero  Balhyllua,  a  fwedman
and  faionrilfl  of  Maecenas,  and  Pylades  and  Hylas.
(Jot.  Ti.  63 ;  Snet.  Aug.  45  ;  Macrob.  Sakn.1 ;
Athem.  L  p.  70.)  The  great  popularity  which
the  pantomimes  acquired  nt  Rome  in  the  time  of
thnmgh  these  distingnished  actors,  was


PANTOMIMTJS.


the  cansD  of  their  sinading  not  only  in  Itdy  but
also  in  the  proiincet,  and  Tiberius  found  it  necta-
sary  to  pnl  a  check  npon  the  great  mniality  lor
them;  he  forbade  all  senaCon  to  teqncnt  tlia
houses  of  inch  pantomimea,  and  the  eqnile*  wen
not  allowed  to  be  seen  walkii^  with  then  ia  tbe


any  odier  nlaee  ihau  the  pnUie  theatie^  tm  wealthy
Romans  freqnenllj  eng^ed  male  and  fismale  pan-
tomimsi  b>  amuse  tbair  gnesta  at  their  tepasts.
(Tacit  jlimaJ.  L  77.) Bnt  Caligula  was  so  fiHid  of

pantomimesthat  omof  them,  M.  Lepidns  Hneatsr,
became  his  &Tanrita  ;  and  throngli  his  inflnence
the  wbole  ckis  of  pantomimia  again  recorend
their  aacendancy.  (Snet  Qt%.  S6,  63,  87  ;  Tadt
AtnaL  lir.  21.)  Nero  Dot  miy  patnnised  them,
but  acted  himself  as  panlomime  (Snet  Ntn,  16,
36),  and  bvnt  this  thne  they  tet^ned  the  highest
itftee  of  popularity  at  Kome  down  to  the  lattat
pmod  of  tha  empira.

As  regards  their  mode  of  acting,  we  must  fint
stale  that  all  pantomimes  won  maak^  so  that  the
features  of  the  conntenanos  wen  loH  in  thnr  act-
ing. All  the  other  parts  of  their  body,  howers',
were  called  into  action,  and  e^iecially  the  aims
and  hands,  whence  tha  eifessions  atoiw  kquaeir
tina*,  diffiti  dimoii,  x<<P*>  mii^im.  Ax. Not-


ings,  pBisioni,  ftc,  mora  beantifiilly,  curectlj,
and  intelligibly  than  it  would  be  passible  ta  do
by  speaking  or  writing.  They  were,  howero;  *•-
sifted  in  their  acting  by  tbe  cinnnutaDce  that  they
only  represented  mytbologiml  ebaracter*,  which
were  known  la  SToy  spectator.  (Jnr.  ti.  63,  t.
131;  Herat  EpiiL  iL  S.  I26i  Sneton.  JV«po,54;
Veil.  Pat  ii.  83.)  There  were,  moroover,  cettain
conventional  gestures  and  moremoita  which  ererr
body  nnderstoDd.  Their  costume  appear*  to  hsTc
been  like  that  of  the  dancers  in  a  ballet,  to  as  to
show  ^e  beauty  of  the  human  form  to  tbe  greatest
adrantage;  though  the  coatnme  of  coane  varied
according  to  tbe  various  chancten  which  were  re-
presented. Sn  the  manner  in  which  Plancua  ia
described  by  Velleius  (iL  83)  to  ham  danced  the
character  of  Qlaucus. In  tlic  time  1


on  the  stage,  and  he  represented  all  ttie  characlcra
of  tha  story,  both  male  and  female,  in  sneeessioii-
(Lucian,  da  Sallal.  c  67;  Jacobs,  ad  AmOol.  ii  I,
p.  30S,)  Tbii  remabed  the  euiKnn  till  towarda
the  end  of  the  second  century  of  our  aeia,  when
the  tcTcral  parts  of  a  slaty  began  to  be  acted  by
ssveml  pantomimes  dancing  tt^lher.  Women,
during  thr  eariier  period  of  the  empire,  neier  ap-
peared ai  pantomimes  on  the  stage,  though  they
did  not  scruple  to  act  aa  such  at  the  priiate  panie*
of  the  great  Dnring  tbe  hittet  time  of  the  empira
women  acted  as  pantomimns  in  public,  and  in  scoie
cases  thej  threw  aside  ad  regard  to  decency,  and
appeared  naked  belbn  the  public  The  Chi^iaa
writers  thenfore  represent  the  pantomimic  eihibi-
liona  u  the  school  of  erery  rice  and  licantkoaMaa.
(TertulLct«$)rKi.p.269.  ed.  Paris )  see  also  Senec-
QhooI.  NoL  riL  33  i  Plin.  SpiM.  v.  34;  Ammiaii.
Marc  xiT.  6  ;  Pmcop.  Atedot  9.)

Mythological  Iotc  stories  woe  from  tha  Int  dw
fiiTOiirile  subjects  of  the  panlomime*  (Orid.  JttateAi
An.  733),  and  Ac  eril  effccis  oTaOch  wntmJt  Tt-
presentations  upon  women  an  deaeiibed  in  stenrc
ndonrt  by  Junmal  (n,  G3,  tK^' .  KvKj.tgffuKm^


PARAC&TABOLE.
■ticn  wa  bM«d  upon  t,  ttat  written  fat  the  pm-
fve.  Thu  trit  wu  called  tfaa  Oaatum  (Haciab.
*»t  ii.  7i  Plin.  .^i*  TiL  2*),  and  wu  mortly
wriUoi  in  the  Oiwk  luigiugB.  Sonw  of  them
nwj  bavfi  jBpwmtBd  teens  from,  or  tlui  vhoke
nhjeetf  of  Omt  dmnw  t  but  when  Amahiiu


of  tb*  paiiHiiuBW  (CI
•ttDdina  m  th*  bachf^nnd  of

li  md  ftelingi  eipreMed  by  thu  chomi
«d  by  th«


.  , ,  :c  daoee*  wet«  called

fiaXXiaiul,  whance  pcriiapa  the  nodeni  wnrde  ball
■nd  bailaL  (Compare  LtHJng,  Ahkimdiii^  torn  d4n
" ■  m  d*T  AUm; Grywr,  ia  Eneh  and

!atyebp.  $.  n,  Panlonumueia  Kiatit  det
!  Welcker,  Diigriteki**m  Tngodiai,
ptk  1317.  U08,  )«3,U77.)  IL-S.]'

PAPY'BUS. [LiBBa.]

FAB  IMPAR  LUDERE  (ifTia^iiii,  ipruU
(tir,  fyru  4  npirri  volfiv),  the  game  at  odd
and  eren,  wat  ■  bTooiite  game  amimg  the  Oreeki
•Dd  Romuu.  A  pnnon  hdd  in  hii  baud  a  cettain
nambet  of  aatiagali  or  other  thingi,  and  hii  op-
ponoit  had  to  guSH  wbether  the  number  «a>  odd
orersii.  (PDllai,ii.  IDl  i  PlBta,£fa.p.  207;  Hor.
&•/.  iL  3.  34a  ;  Soet.  Av  71  ;  ^H  £^  IS  ;
Decker,  OoBai,  toL  ii.  p.  23a.)

PARA'BASIS. [CoMaaou.]

PARA'BOLON  (ir«pd*aAor  or  nfotiMci'),
m  Buall  Jee  paid  by  the  uipellant  party,  on  an  ap-
peal (l^tffii)  &om  aa  inbiiac  lo  a  luparior  tribu-
nal i  ai  ibc  inMance,  from  an  arbitialor  or  a
na^atnta,  oi  Inm  die  court  of  the  ht/i^roi,  or
&om  tbe  Sottte  of  File  Hnndnd,  to  the  jniy  or
Heliaalis  ooort.  Ai  to  the  nun  to  be  paid,  and
otb«r  partieulan,  we  an  munfanned.  (PdIIoi,  Tiii.
62,63;MmM,^«,i'roij,  n),767,772.)  [C,R.K.j

PABACATA'BOLE  (>cip«aTaCe\lS),aRunof
rooaey  roqnired  of  b  pdainliff  oi  pMitioiier  in  certain
(■•ea,  M  I  Mcurity  that  bii  complaint  a  demand
wee  not  &7to1ddi,  or  made  on  lught  and  inmffi-
cient  groimdA.  Such  waa  the  depoiit  made  in
certain  inberilaiice  came*,  Tii.  a  tenth  part  of  the
islne  of  the  propen;  •ought  to  be  reoareRd.
[Hinu.J  So  aJ*o  in  the  pniceedlng  termed
irtriffinfftftA,  which  was  a  init  iuslituted  against
the  public  tieaauiy  by  a  creditor  to  obtain  payment
ant  of  hii  debtoi'i  onliHated  goodi,  a  tifui  purt  oi
the  lalue  waa  depoaited.  It  wui  relunied  n  '
petitiimer,  if  (acceHful ;  otherwiie  it  went  I
•talfr  (Snidai,  a  v,  't>nrlirici|/i/uL)  The  mmey
VM  depoailed  either  at  the  iaiixpuru,  at  on  the
(VBimeneenunt  of  the  (sue.  The  word  lopo-
■aroCiAit  ugniBei  both  the  payii^  of  the  depont,
and  the  moner  depouted ;  and,  being  a  wicd  of
nun  gtnanU  import,  we  find  il  med  lo  denote
Dlbar  kinili  of  deposita,  aa  the  ■piironia  and
cu^n-ovu.  (Pollux,  TiiL  32  ;  Meter,  AtLPrte,
rp.  604,616—621.)  [CaK.]


FARADISDS.  863

PARACATATH£'CE  {nfajacrMiicr,).  ge-
nerally lignifiei  a  depoait  of  •ometliing  valoi^e
'ith  a  friend  or  other  perMD,  Ibc  the  benefit  of  tbe
vner.  Tbnt,  if  I  delJTeT  my  goodi  to  a  friend,
I  be  taken  oale  of  for  me  ;  or  if  I  depoait  monej'
ith  a  banker  ;  luch  deliray  or  baSmait,  cr  tha
goodi  bailed  or  deliveied,  or  the  money  depoiited,
may  be  called  rnpajun-aA^  (Herod.  Ti.  86 ;
I>^MtlLprai>ionn.9t6)i  and  tha  word  ii  often
^iplicd  metaphorically  to  any  important  truft  com-
mitted by  one  penon  to  another:  (Demoath.
-  A^«A.  G40  1  Aeeeh.  &  TimarA.  26,  ed.  Ste[^
Fidt.  Lig.  47.)  Aa  every  bailee  ii  bonnd  to
reatore  to  tbe  bailor  tha  thing  depoaited  ;  either  on
demand  {in  caao  of  a  limine  bailniBnt),  or  on  pcr-
fonnaoce  of  tha  nmditiona  on  which  it  waa  le-
ceiTcd  i  the  Atheoiou  gave  a  nofiutaTaBiiinii  Slicq
It  a  bailee  who  unjnitly  withheld  hii  pRtpertj
the  owner,  ^xtmifiiat  tV  safXuuiTa^Jinp'.
(Pollux,  TI.  Ifii.)  An  example  of  nich  an  action
bankez  ii  the  Tpawt^iTutiti  ^^yoi  of
A  pledge  given  to  •  credited  eodld  not
be  reeorered,  except  on  payment  of  the  money
owed  to  him  ;  bu^  after  e^ling  tbe  article,  and
■atii^ruV  ^'*  ^'^*  ""*  °f  *^'  pnioeedi,  he  would
of  conree  be  bound  to  tenote  the  niTpIui  (if  any)
)dedgor.  It  tollowi  from  the  nature  of  tbe
iini  that  it  wu  drl/itrrat,  bnt  it  ii  not  im-
probable that  the  sdditioiial  penally  of  ^i/ila
light  be  inflicted  on  a  detcndant  who  frinduleolly
enied  that  he  bad  erer  receiTod  tha  depouL
The ■■-•■'  - . .


pin,  and  othen.  (Meier,  jitf.>n».p'p.fil2— SIS.)
'I  may  be  obaerved  that  TiSia^  xapaxaTa-
[0ti74(u,  m  tJu  middU  voice,  aie  alwayt  need  of  a
>iion  making  a  depoait  fir  hit  oun  bexefij^  with
le  intention  of  tCkklag  il  up  e^iain.  Hence  the
cpreiiion  Siir6(u  X'V"''  to  confer  an  obligatioo,
bich  girei  the  right  (a*  it  were)  of  drawing  upon
the  obliged  party  for  a  return  of  the  fanwi  at
lome  fiiMra  time.  Kifif^ivfliu  ii  to  reeoTer  your
propern  oi  right,  (leocrat.  c  Eutifit.  4Q0,  ed.
Stepb.)  [C  R.  K.]

FARADI'SUS  {wnpiStuni),  wat  the  name
giren  by  the  Qceeka  to  tbe  porki  or  plearare-
groundi,  which  ■omninded  the  country  reaidotce*
of  the  Pemian  kingi  and  latiapi.  They  wen
generally  itocked  wjth  animale  lor  the  chace,  we
lull  of  all  kindi  of  treea,  walend  by  onmeroiu
itreami,  and  endoeed  with  walk.  (XeiL  Jnoi.  i,
4.  g  10,  Cyr.  i.  3.  8  14,  4,  g  fi,  Hatt  ir.  1.  g  33,
OeciT.  13;  Diod.  SicSTi.41 ;  Cort.nlLl  g  U.
1 2  ;  OelL  iL  20.)  Theie  paradiiei  were  freqoently
of  great  extent ;  thu  Cyrtti  on  one  occaiion  re-
viewed the  Greek  army  in  hU  paradiae  at  Celaenao
(Xen.  Am^  L  3.  g  9),  and  at  another  occaaton
the  Oreeki  were  alannad  by  a  report  that  them
waa  a  great  army  in  a  neighbonring  paiadiM.  {Id.
ii.4.S160

PoUdx  (iz.  13}  nyi  that  npiSiiaot  waa  ■
Penian  woid,  and  tlure  can  be  do  doubt  that  the
Oreekt  obtained  it  from  tbe  Pertiani.  Tbe  wordi
howorer,  aeema  to  hare  been  uted  bV  other  Eaateru
nation*,  and  not  to  hsTo  been  peculiar  to  tbe  Per-
■iani.  Oeeeniut  (£enaoa  J/Araiaiat,  p.  838,
Lipi.  1S33)  and  other  wriien  suppoie  it  to  be  the
ame  ai  tha  Sanikrit  junufcB,  but  thia  word  dot*


864  PARAQRAPHE.

Dot  mean  b  land  deuaied  aad  aiiiivaicd^  u  Qe-
•CIiliuaiidothenitBle,buImenlfmytir»^  comOy,
whence  u  denied  pandmii,  a  fortigiitr.  Tbe
word  oeenci  in  Hebrew  (DTlf,  partdU)  fu  <at!y
■■  tbe  time  of  Solomen  {Eada.  ii.  fi  ;  Onit.  it.
J3),  and  il  al(a  found  in  Anbic  {firkata),  and
Arinniiaii  (ponJei, Schneder, DumH,  Ztoow.

FARAOAUDA  (ir<v>a7±»iii).  t>>e  border  of  a
tunic  [Lihbub],  enriched  with  gold  thread,  mrn
b;  ladiei,  but  not  allowed  to  men  except  ai  one  of
the  iniigni&  of  offlee.  Theie  borden  were  among
the  rich  present*  giren  b;  Furiui  Plaeidui  i.d.
SiS,  when  he  wu  made  coninl  (fitae  paragimdat,
VopiK.  Aur^  \i).  Under  the  later  empcron
the  mannfactDTB  of  them  wai  foibidden  except  ii
their  own  gjnsecea.  (Cod,  11,  tit  8.  *.  1,  2.)  Thi
term  pon^jatfa,  which  ii  prabablj  of  Oriental
origin,  leemi  al«o  to  ham  been  conrerted  it
■djectiie,  and  thui  to  have  become  the  dena
tion  of  tbe  tunic,  which  wa>  decorated  with  nieh
borderi.  (LydniibAr.V.i.i;,  ii.4.13.) [J.  Y.]

PARAQRAPHE  (nfoypa^).  Tbii  word
doei  not  exactly  corretpond  with  any  term  in  our
lanpage,  bat  majr  without  mnch  impropriet?  b«
called  a  fUa.  It  I*  nn  objection  railed  bj  the  de-
fendant to  tbe  admiuibQitj  of  the  plainliff'i  nc
tion :  **  eiceptio  rei  ulTeiiiui  aetotem,  actionemit
qnerentia  ant  de  foro  hand  conipelente,  aut  d
tempai!,  modore  procedendi  illegitimo."  (Reiikr
Inda  Or.  n  Oral.)  Sir  William  Jonci,  in  the  pre
&ce  V}  hii  tianilalion  of  Itaent,  eoRipuet  it  with  i
dtmmrrer.  But  tbii  ii  not  to  correct ;  becaue  i
demnrrtr  ii  in  objection  Bri«ing  out  of  the  adier
aaiy't  own  itatenent  of  hii  caie ;  whereaa  thi
WBpoypaf^  wu  an  objection  depending  on  feet,
itated  by  the  defendant  faimeeli^  and  therefore
lather  reserablei  a  pica,  or  (mom  itrictlj)  a  ipecin!
plea.  Tbii  appears  from  the  vapoTpa^al  \iyci
of  DemD>Ibenc«,  in  which  we  find  the  defendant
intiDdncing  new  allegations  into  the  oiuic,  and
■upporting  them  hy  proof.  Thni,  in  the  ipeech
agamit  Naniimachn)  and  Xenopilhei,  the  gnmnd
of  objection  ia,  that  the  &lher  of  the  defendant!
haTtng  obtained  a  reteaae  from  the  plaintiBi,  it
no  longer  open  V>  the  pjaintib  to  faring  an  ac-


PARAQRAPHt


tion  for  the  i
thii  release  is  made  by  the  defendants  in  their
plea.  In  the  speech  against  Zenothemis  the  de-
fendant objects,  that  the  inrofucii  Sfinl  does  not
lie,  becante  there  was  no  written  contract  between
him  and  the  plaintiff  on  a  Tojage  to  or  from  Athens  ;
and  this  (»aji  he)  appoors  from  the  declaration
itself  (ir  T#  iyit\^imTi).  As  parties  conld  not
1»  defeated  M  Athens  by  a  lechnicsl  objection  to
the  pleadings,  the  defendant  in  the  sbore  case,
notwithstanding  the  dcrective  statement  of  the
jdaintiff  in  the  declaration,  was  compelled  to  bring
forward  hi*  abjection  by  plea,  and  to  support  il
before  the  jury.  In  the  speech  against  Phannio,
the  plaintiff  lays  that  as  the  defendant  only  denies
that  he  has  committed  a  breach  of  the  contract,
there  wu  no  occaaim  for  a  roforfpa^ :  the  qnes-
tjon  merely  wu,  whether  the  plaintiff  charge  wu
true  It  seems  that  a  npirypa^  might  bo  put  in,
not  only  when  the  defendant  conld  show  that  the
cause  of  actiim  was  dischaijed,  or  that  it  wu  not
— : — ■__.! -.^  point  of  law  j  but  alio  when  the


forr


ng  tim


plea  to  tiujuraditliim.  (.DgmoRh.  a.  PtrntanL  9JS  ■
ijaidas,  s.  e.  IlapaTpa^  and  eMuiuEls,)  '

The  w^Krypo^  like  every  other  answer  (irn.
ypa^)  made  by  the  defendant  lo  the  plaintiif^
charge,  wu  gJTen  in  writing ;  u  the  wotd  itself
implies,  (Demoith.  c.  Pkarm.  912.)  If  the  dc
fendant  moriy  denied  the  plaintiffs  oiluations,  or
(uwem%ht.ay>pf— ■  -■-  ■■ ■

said  (Wi/iiCw  or  ■•  .
AOTiiirthu  H|»  tbhAMiar  tlffiAi
court  was  at  once  held  for  tlw  trial  of  tka  tatae.
If,  howeter,  he  put  in  a  tupiejifa^  he  mainlaiDed
that  the  oausa  wu  not  •Itrriy.iuu  {npr^ftitan
liil  tWir/A-niiai  sLnu  tV  Jlnir),  ud  in  Aat  eaie
a  cmrl  was  lo  be  held  to  try  the  ptdinuMiT
question,  whether  the  cause  could  be  brooght  into
Upeo  thi*  preTioni  trial  tlw  defod.


Demosthenes  (c  FlionK.  908)  nnryiipsw  *»
Sk^ohtoi,  He  began,  and  had  to  '■""lam  the
gronnd  of  objection  which  he  relied  upon.  (Demorth.
c.  SUpi.  1  lOS.)  If  he  sncceaded,  the  whole  aiae
wBiataocnd;  nnleatthaobjeetioawu  only  toihe
form  of  action,  or  some  other  snch  tedmiaili^,  m
which  case  it  mi^t  ba  rscemmencod  m  the  pnfier
manner.  1^  howBro  the  plaintiff  Mccceded,  the
jury  merely  decided  tinyiytiat  tint  tV  <iiv,
and  then  the  original  action,  which  in  the  mean-
time had  been  nupended,  wu  proceeded  with.
(Demotth.o.2««>d,888i  IjJ^-d*  PviLPt-lO.
ed.  StepL)  Rolb  partita  ra  tbe  tral  of  the
"VnTpo^  were  liable  to  the  ^nrfsAJo,  eo  biliu*
to  obtain  a  fifth  part  of  the  Totc^

The  course  of  proceeding  on  a  irapwypa^l|  was
obviotuly  calcoiated  to  d^r  the  pn^ress  of  tb«
lanse,  and  wu  thenfore  not  looked  on  with  brour

by the dicASlL TlooOiatit. LwMIUtlwiai. ■■mim^.


otjadioiu, ate  dassad  together  by  tbe  on
'^"—  -'-) muuBuTTes of  deHmdaiit* U

Hence  we  find  '


being the

justice. E

■•1  A.6yei,  that  Che  defendant,  ii
-'--— ^judiceofthediisstsaganaR  hinual^  net  mly
U  tbe  ground  of  the  nfurypii^,  bot  dia-
the  general  menu  of  the  canie,  and  co-
in to  ahow  that  there  is  no  fooi^tirai  tar
the  plaintiff's  complaint  And  lhet«  is  no  doabt
that  the  dicuci  were  materially  infioeneed  by  soch
ditcnsuon,  however  in  stHctncM  itttleTant  (De-
motth.  c  Mid.  641,  o.  iatr.  934,  cSC^  1117,
pro  Plum.  944,  Aryiim.  Or.  e.  Zmalk.) The

obserration  applies  to  the  liaiaapnpia. [See

u.] (Isaeus,  de  PUioet.  ier.  SO,  d*  Jpe/L

itr.  63.  ed.  Steph.  (  Demosth.  e.Lioek.  1097.)

There  wu  no  nch  thing  u  this  proceeding  by

Vay/M^  until  after  the  eipoliion  of  the  thirty

tyrantii,  when  a  law  was  paased  on  the  pr^rasal  «F

•-"■inns,  tr  ta  8unlfi»Taj  irspi  reii  tfinn,  if-

»  «oi Toirn.  ■pvTBi'  slirdYeir,  A^ynr  U

ipor  Tir  Mop^Bic^ifunT,  iwirtfet  V  kr
*TTiie^,  Ti,f  irultKiar  ifieU.w.  The  object  of
this  law  »ppear»  to  hare  been,  to  enable  any  pawm
against  whom  an  infiirmation  or  pmeentjon  might
be  bnught,  or  action  cmimeaceil,  for  any  matter
arising  ont  of  the  late  political  ttoubW,  u.  obtain
the  benefit  of  tbe  general  amnesty,  by  sneeiaUy
1b  bringing  hi*  debiwa  in

pririlegc  was  afterwards  eilefldad  IooUmt  grotndi


Tii.116;


PARANOIAS  ORAPRE.


le  adTCTdiy'i  eoiicio  of  pu-
c««diiig  teen  to  hiTe  been  called  imyfa^id,  mi
MOictime*  ifyrttotriaty  b«aius  on  oeth  wv  token
bj  the  fitj  who  undend  them.  (Ljiiai,  a.
PomL  lee,  ed.  Steph. ;  AtutopL  Ecdn.  I02e  ;
ScboL  ai  loe.  ;  Suidu,  t.  r.  'Efofiorla  ;  Meier,
AU.  Pna.  pp.  64i— 6ia.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PA'KALUS  (nipaAdt),  ud  SALAMi'NIA
{•gnkaiurUj.  The  Atheuiaai  from  ytxj  rtilj
timet  kept  (or  public  puipoKi  two  ucred  at  Mata
Tweb,  the  one  of  which  vu  csUed  /'nroJiu  end
tka  e«hcr  jb/amwia ;  the  crew  of  the  one  bore  the
name  of  irofoJ^ai  or  v^paAai,  sod  that  of  the
othei  BoAn/ilruH.  (PhoL  «.  r.  nifoivot  ind
wJpAd^et)  In  the  fanner  of  theee  two  aiticlea
PbotiH  enoDBDiulf  tegardi  the  two  noniai  tt  be-
longiiis  to  ooe  and  iha  laine  ihip.  (PoUi
Ue^^  1.  B.  Hapa^Tiit.)  The  iiali
alao  called  J^qXia  ot  Btmfit,  beotiua  it  wu  uaed  to
emiej  the  dtmpiA  to  Deloi,  on  which  occaiion  the
•hip  wai  adonied  with  gailandi  by  the  piitit  of
ApoUo.  (PliL  Fkatd.  p.  £8,  c.)  Both  theee  vet-
teli  wen  quick-iailmg  trireme*,  and  wece  uied  ibc
a  lariet;  of  Hats  purpoaea:  iheyconrefed  Cheariei,
deapalchca,  ftc  fnmi  Atheni,  carried  tmiuiei
from  aabjtet  eouutriei  la  Athrni,  fetched  itate  cri-
ninali  from  fOTcign  parti  to  Atheoi,  md  Che  like.
<Thiicjd.  tL  S3,  61.)  la  hatclei  the;  wen  fre-
qDently  tued  ai  the  ghip>  in  which  the  edmirali
aailed.  Theee  Tcaeela  and  theii  crew  wen  alwayi
kept  in  rcadineK  to  act,  in  caie  of  any  necotaitj
Brieing  ;  and  the  crew,  otthoogh  they  could  Dot  for
the  greater  port  of  the  year  be  in  actoal  eerricD,
received  their  regalar  pay  of  four  oboli  per  day  ail
the  year  roond.  Thie  ia  expnuly  itated  ouy  of
the  Paislu  (HotpscnL  and  PhoL  >.  c.  Uifoliot),
but  may  be  ufaly  leid  of  the  Salaminia  alu.  The
itatemenl  of  the  tcholiait  DQ  Anetophanei  {Av.
1 47  -,  comp.  Stiidai,  •.  v.  XaABfuria  raui\  that  the
Salarainia  wu  only  uied  to  conrey  chmlnale  to
Athena,  and  ths  Paralna  for  tbeoriea,  it  lincoirect,
M  Inut  if  applied  la  the  eailier  time*.  When
Athena  bad  beeome  a  great  mnri^me  power,
and  when  other  (hip«  were  employed  for  pnipoiei
for  which  bcfbn  either  the  Salaininia  at  the  Paialni
had  been  oied,  it  ii  natural  to  nppoae  that  tbeae
two  Tcaieli  wen  chiefly  employed  in  matteri  con-
Deeted  with  nligion,  ai  theorica,  and  in  emaordi-
nary  caaee,  luch  aa  when  a  ttats  criminal  like
Alcibiadei  waa  to  be  lalemnly  conreyed  to  Atheni.
The  nanxa  of  the  two  ihipi  leem  to  pomt  to  a
very  early  period  of  the  hiatory  of  Attica,  when
there  wai  no  narigation  ezcept  between  Attica
and  Salamia,  for  which  the  Salaminia  waa  lued,
and  around  the  coaat  of  Attica,  for  which  pnrpOH
the  Paialni  waa  dcitincd.  In  Inter  timea  the
namea  wens  retained,  although  the  dolioation  of
the  thipt  waa  pimcipally  to  lerre  the  purpoaca  of
religioii,  whence  they  an  frequently  <alled  the
MCied  •hiu.  (Bitckb,  P<iU.  Ecob.  of  Alhma,  p.
2(0,  2d  ed. ;  Ooller,  ad  Thicyd.  iii,  33  ;  8chi>-
nann,  ad  Itaaam,  p.  ES6.)  [L.  S.J

PARANOIAS  GRAPHE  (ito(««/«  7(«^)-
TUi  proceeding  may  be  compared  to  oar  commia-
aioa  of  lunacy,  or  writ  de  Ittvitieo  iw/virevlo.  It
WH  a  init  at  Athena  that  might  be  jntlttuted  by  a
aon  or  other  nlalion  againit  one  who,  by  reaun  of
madoeta  or  mental  imbecility,  hud  become  inca-
pabla  ^  managing  hia  own  a^iii. If  ths  ctim-


PARANOHON  ORAPHE.  865

plain!  wai  w^  gronnded,  the  conrt  deened  that
the  next  heir  ibonld  tskeponetaionof  the  Innatie'a
!,  and  piobably  alio  made  lome  prenaion  fin'
ig  put  in  con&iement,  or  under  proper  can '
and  gnardiaiuliip.  (Suida*,  i.  n.  tlaparola:  Xen.
Mm.  12.  H9  ;  Ariiloph.  Nub.  84-i  ;  Aeach.  e.
Cum,  89,  e<L  Steph.)  It  ii  nUted  of  Sophoclc^
that  haling  oontinned  to  write  tragediet  to  an  ad-
vanced age,  and  by  rcaton  thei«f  neglected  hia
family  a&in,  he  wai  brought  before  the  nnirt  by
' ^hethennma


if  lunaer ;
ipni  Colone


juit  composed,  and  uiked  them  if  a  man
mind  could  writs  lach  a  poem  a*  that ;  wbereupon
they  acquitted  him.  (Cic.  dt  S^kL  7.)  The  alory
it  told  diEFenntly  by  the  anonymoni  anthor  of  the
life  of  Sophoelca  ;  who  apeaki  of  the  init  ai  taking
place  between  Ic^on  and  hia  biher,  and  leemi  to
intimate  that  it  wu  pnfeit«d  I»f«e  the  ffderim.
In  thii  lait  point  he  a  nipported  by  the  Scholiaat

Ariitophuiei,  bat  it  can  hardly  be  consct ;  a*

we  hare  no  other  authority  (or  nippcaing  that  the

Topit  had  inch  a  juriadiction,  and  Polloi  (riii

,  ezpniily  layi  that  the  wo^nrofar  ypa^  came
btUae  the  anhon  ;  to  whom  indeed  it  pecnliariy .
belonged,  ai  bemg  a  matter  eonnected  with  ftmily
right)  1  and,  if  lo,  we  an  to  nnderiland  that  it
came  before  the  anhon  in  the  ngular  way,  ■■
vytfii' tutaimiplea.  (Meier,^U.7VD0.  pp.29fr—
398.)  It  ii  highly  probable  that  then  wu  unn
foundation  for  Ihii  anecdote  of  Sophodei.  Ha
might  perhapi  hare  ^iren  oSence  to  hii  wxii  by
that  penurionineii  which  ii  laid  to  ha<a  cnpt  npon
tun  in  hii  old  age  ;  and  lopbon  being  a  poet,  and
lying  under  the  nupicion  of  beuig  ouiited  by  hia
lather,  might  ponibiy  b«  induced  by  a  mean  jw-
louiy  to  bring  thii  charge  againit  him.  (See  Aria-
-iph.Km.78,/^,S97.)  ThepIa^ofOeACoLai^
pean  to  eihibit  the  wounded  feehngi  of  the  writer.
(Seemon  emciuUy  337, 141.)  [C.  R.  K.]

PARANOMOM  ORAPHE  (iraiiiir6fuiv  yya-
pil). An  mdiclmeat  for  propounding  an  illegal,  or


.  [N(


y  Athen


a  tho  popular


paniiu  of  the  law. If  he  wi
did  the  law  become  void.


wai  at  liberty  to  i

aiiembly,  to  pan  a  new  law,  or  amend  an  oia  one,

order  lo  check  raih  and  hai^  If^iilation,  the

>nt  of  any  law  or  decree,  though  he  inccwded

atming  it  to  be  paued,  waa  itill  amenable  to

diminal  juitice,  if  hii  enactment  wai  (bimd  to  be

inconiiitent  with  other  lawt  that  remained  in  force,

or  with  ths  public  intenat. (Denunth.  c.  TVwe.

710,711.) Any  pction  might inititute  againit

f..  .1..... _.../.... -.1- ^  y^^  Sram  the

iTicted,  not  only
[d,  but  any  pimiihment
might  be  inflicted  on  him,  at  ths  diicntion  of  ths
ju^^  hthn  whom  he  wai  tried ;  for  it  waa  a
TilOfrii  ty^f.  A  peraon  thrice  w  convicted  loit
the  right  of  propoiing  lawi  in  future.  The  eogoi-
lance  of  the  (auie  belonged  to  the  TheoDotbetae.
(Schiimann,  AsLJiir.  Pub.  Gr.  p.  244.)  Tbe  pro-
■eculor  wai  compelled  to  tako  an  oa^  called  by
the  lame  name  ai  that  taken  to  obtain  delay  in
courti  of  juitica  (iwniiaaia),  becauas  it  had  the
effect  ot  delaying  the  opention  of  the  piapaaed
mearore,  which  otherwiie  might  have  eome  into
foreo  immediately,  (Schnmann,  Id.  p.  294.)  Ei-
amplei  of  luch  proaecutioni  are  the  ipeeeh  of  De-
mmlhenei  againit  Timocratei,  and  that  of  Aefr-
cbinet  Bgunil  Cteuphon. Thajbothco


Sk


■  O"


8C6  PARAPRESBEIA.

ths  impertanca  of  the  pnwcution,  u  tending  to
prueivB  tha  exigting  Uwa,  and  maintain  conatitu-
lioDal  Vibertf.  (Dvnoach.  c  Tim.  748, 74S  ;  AeKh.
e,  Ctei.  hi,  S2,  ed.  Stepfa.)  NotwilhilBudiiig  thia
cj}eck,  the  mania  fbr  legiala^oa  appMn  to  baxe  in<
creaaed  ao  greatly  at  Athena  in  later  limes,  that
Demoathenea  (a.  L^tia.  48G)  dccUna  that  i|n)^i
pi-rar  ouS'  iraivr  Sivpifmivtr  ol  riiuu.  Tiii
aroae  from  the  relaxation  of  thai  piMaulioDarf  lai
of  Solon,  vhich  required  ii«iy  meaauie  to  b«  sp-

Ced  bjr  the  tviu^ai,  befbn  it  could  pau  into
(NouoTRBTXS,  and  ScbOmaan,  Id.  p.  239.)
It  it  obriDUi  that,  while  the  people  in  aaaembl;
had  the  power  of  making  decreca  which  could  it-
nmin  in  force  fbr  a  yaai,  if  they  wiihcd  to  evade
the  law  of  Solon,  all  they  had  to  do  wu  to  renew
their  dccna  from  year  to  year,  and  thua  in  practice
the  i^^Tfa  becaioe  riiua.

If  the  year  had  elipaed,  the  pnpoonder  of  the
law  eould  not  he  puniahed,  though  the  law  itacll
might  be  repealed  in  the  ordinary  way  by  the  ia-
Rlitution  of  procecdinga  before  the  roiioSirai,  before
whom  it  waa  defeuded  by  the  live  aimlmai.
apcech  againat  LeptinH  waa  made  in  a  proceeding
againal  Vat  law  itaelf^  and  not  agaioat  ths  mover.
Aa  the  author  of  the  aecond  argument  uy>,  wopaX-
M*Toi  -rei  ■xp6rm,  ir  f  Uiitumt  fi/  npi/rti  nal
TifnapLf  ypi^Hi'  Ttt  yifiar,  i^altna  Anrrlnit
Anlrivfos.  SBrr  wfibt  afrrAf,  ^\*  ob  mr*  ^/rov
6\iyai.(UwTiiiaiD,Pi>l.Aia.%lS2.) [C.ILK.]

PARANYHPHUS  (wafinfl^t). [Ml
MomvM,  p.  737,  ft.]

PARAPETASMA. [VuuM.}

PARAPHBRNA. [Dos.]

PARAPR£SBBIA  {raparpmetia),  ligi
any  compt  conduct,  miifeaaanec,  or  neglect  of
doty  on  the  part  of  an  smbaaiador  ;  for  which  he
waa  liable  to  be  called  to  account  and  proaecuted
on  bia  telum  home.  (Denwath.  e.  Mid.  £15,  de
FaU.  Liig.  H2.)  Anibouadonwtreuaiiiillyelected
by  the  people  in  aiaembly  ;  they  either  had  in-
f  auctimtB  given  to  (hem,  or  not ;  in  tho  latter  cue
they  were  called  awoiC(Hro(ni,  envoja  with  full
powera,  or  plenipotentiaiy.  (Thueyd.  v.  45  ;  Aesch.
e.Cttt.  62,  ed,  Steph.)  To  act  conlraiy  to  their
iaatrocticua  (wttpi  rh  ^ifipifffttt  rptff€tutii')  waa  a
high  miademeaiuur.  (Demoiili.  da  Fall.  Leg.  Si6.)
On  their  return  home  they  were  required  inme-
diately  to  moke  a  report  of  their  proceedingi
(iinrryi>tA.wir  Ti)f  rprtStlar)  fintto  the  Senate  of
File  Hondnd,  and  afterwaldt  to  the  people  in
aaaembly.  (Aeach.  de  Fail.  Ly.  30,  od.  Steph. ;
Aciitoph,  A<i.  61  ;  SchSnuuui,  AiU.  jar.  pub.  Or.
p.2S4.)  Thia  done,  they  wen /(■(«' i^Ecui,-  but
itill,  like  all  other  peraona  who  hod  held  an  office
of  tniit,  they  ,were  liabla  to  render  nn  Recount
(cMAroi)  of  the  manner  in  which  they  hod  di>-
chnrged  their  duty.  (Demoath.  dt  Fall.  Leg.  367,
406.)  The  paraona  to  whom  aoch  account  waa  to
be  rendered  were  ^e  Xayurra^  and  the  offlcen
naaocinted  with  them,  called  »tf0ivtL  A  peaaiary
nocnunt  waa  only  i«nder«i  in  caaea  wherQ  raoney
had  paaacd  through  the  hand*  of  the  parly ;  m
other  laaea,  after  alaling  that  he  had  neither  tpent
nor  receiiod  our  of  the  public  niouef ,  the  aceonnting
pany  waa  diacharged,  mileu  there  waa  reaaon  tor
thinking  ^t  he  deaecicd  to  be  proceeded  ag
for  miaconduet.  The  Xpyiarai  themaclrea
power  to  tummoD  the  (arty  al  once  to  opoeor
criminal,  and  undergo  the  iuntupim  in  their
<Ao¥(iT4pw),  open  which  they  would  dtrc«t  ^e


PABASANGA.
avrfritpei  to  praeente  g  and  thia  probably  waa  tbo
ordinary  coune  in  caae  of  any  pecuniary  malver-
■atioD.  Acenntioni,  howavtr,  of  a  mora  gaienl
nature  wen  commonly  prefetied  by  indindiml*,
giving  iufbrmation  to  the  Aoyurrai,  who,  for  tbe
purpoae  of  giving  any  dtiaan  an  opputmii^  tt  m

doing,  caoaed  their  ichpu^  to  r"""" ' "

public  aaaembly,  that  luch  a
render  hit  account,  and  to  atl

would  be  rednced  to  the  hjtnn  of  a
the  proaecution  would  be  conducted  id  tbe  nnal
way,  the  AsyiiTsi  being  the  (nperintcnding  Bafia-
tratea.  (Pollux,  viiL  40,  4£  ;  SehHrnami,  Id.  p.
■J-10  ;  Meier,^0.  /'ret  pp.  214—324.)  HagiaUmto,
who  were  annoally  elecud,  rendered  their  at
at  the  end  of  the  official  year  ;  '  '
who  were  exlmordunry  fimctionariea,  had  no  tin
limited  for  thia  purpoae.  Aeachinel  delayed  givia
an  account  of  bit  emboaiy  to  Philip  for  thrra  year
(Ucmoalh.  de  Fab.  Leg.  374  ;  Thiriwall,  Or.  Hi,
vol.vi.  p.  26.)  We  can  hardly  aappoae,  howevi
(at  Thirlwall  atalea),  that  the  dme  i  '
the  account  waa  optional  with  the  a  '
aelf;  tioce,  not  to  mention  thepewetof  tbe  Avfiff-
Tof,  it  waa  open  to  any  man  to  more  fbr  a  apeciBl
decree  of  the  people,  that  the  parly  tbovld  be  called
to  account  immediatelT.  TheTiMipllixviarperttfat
wat  a  ■ntajTlt  irri'  (Meier,  ^0.  Proe.  p.  193) ;  wd
at  it  might  compriae  cbaigea  of  the  moat  aeritna
kind,  inch  aa  tnachory  and  tteatou  ^ainat  the
atale,  the  defendant  might  have  to  ^prehend  tbe
heaviett  puniahment  Aeichinaa  (da  Fidt.  Leg.  38,
£3)  remindt  the  diaatt  of  th*  great  peril  to  which
ha  it  expoted,  and  makei  a  merit  of  anbmittii^  to
hif  trial  without  fetr.  Beiidea  tiie  ypa^ii,  an
tlaa.'^f*\la,  might  be  brought  Dgainat  an  aiob*aaader;
upon  which  the  accuaed  would  be  committed  to
pT^en,  or  compelled  to  give  bail  fbr  hit  a|ip(«ranee.
Thit  coune  waa  taken  by  Hyperidea  againat  Phi1o<
cratoi,  who  avoided  hit  trial  by  viduntary  exile.
(Aeechin.  c:  Cta.  «&,  «L  Steph.) [C.  R.  K.]

PARASANOA  («  wa^urirffnt),  a  Peniaa
meaanre  of  length,  ftiquently  mentioned  by  the
Ureek  writera.  It  la  atiU  uaad  by  the  Pertioni,
who  call  it  fcneiig,  which  hai  been  changed  in
Aivbie  inte/moU.

According  to  Herodotna  (iL  G,  T.  Si,  -n.  43)  the
paraaang  waa  the  half  of  the  Egrptian  achaenBt,
and  waa  equal  to  SO  Oreek  atadia.  Soidaa
(IB.)  and  Heaychina  (t  e.)  aaaign  it  the  aam.
length  ;  and  Xenophim  mail  alao  have  calculnti^
it  at  the  Kuo,  aa  he  aiya  {Anab.  ii.  3.  g  6)  that
16,050  atadia  BR  eqna)  to  £35  panmiiga  (16,050
■i-b^=iO.)  AgBthtaa  (ii.  SI),  however,  who
quotct  the  teatimony  of  Herodstua  and  Xenophon
to  the  paraaang  being  30  atadia,  »ji  that  in  hi*
time  tbe  Ibcti  and  Pertiananwde  it  only  31  atadia.
Strabo  (xi.  p.  518)  alao  atatea,  thai  aome  writm
reckoned  it  Dt  60,  othcn  nt  40,  and  othen  at  30
atadia  ;  and  Pliny  (H.  N.  ri.  26.  a.  30)  infbrma
ua,  that  the  Pertiant  thomtelvea  aaaigned  dilTrrent
lengtha  to  it  Modem  Engliah  tnve  Iten  eatimsle
it  varioualy  at  from  3^  to  4  Kngliah  milea,  which
nearly  agreet  with  tha  ctleulatioa  of  HendotBa.
Thcte  variattona  may  probably  be  accounted  fbr
by  the  fiict,  to  which  attention  haa  been  called
under  Mshsura,  that  itinerary  dittancei  were
originally  indefinite,  and  theretbre  that  the  \alues
of  the  ponaang,  at  leait  thoae  given  by  the  Mrlier
Oreek  wrilen,  were  <mly  amptiid  adam. Thi*


PARASITI.
Tie*  i>  eonfinaed  by  the  opinion  of  llw  beat
OritnUl  Kholiin  R4>eeting  the  ctymologj  of  the
woni.  (Comp.  Ukert,  Gfogr.  d.  Orieck.  u.  Ran.
ToL  i.  pt.  2,  p.  77,  and  Bin-  di)  AH  d.  Gr.  b.  ».
die  Entftnmgai  =*  btitiBmm.)  lU  tins  cljma-
logj  B  doabtfilL  Rtidigs  (n  Ertch  mf  Oruitr'l
BKydopSdit,  (.  v.  Fmia.)  lapposci  the  latter  part
of  the  word  to  be  theiame  u  Ihs  Penan  tetg,"^
■l(HK,~  Hid  the  farmer  part  to  be  connected  arilh  Che
Siwikrit  pint,  "end,"  and  thinkt  that  it  may  have
deriied  ite  nuno  from  ihe  nonet  placed  at  the  end
of  eertain  dntanca  on  the  public  roada  of  Henia.
PARASE'MON  Cirapilinifuw).  [IHiWwE.]
PARASITI  {inpianBi)  properly  denote,  per-
•on)  who  dine  with  othen.  la  the  early  hialoiy
of  Orecoe  ths  word  had  a  Tery  difierent  maoninB
&oni  [hat  in  which  it  wat  naed  in  later  time*.  Ti
U  TDV  ropwr^ou  bv/ia  w6^^i  f/Av  9ir  fftfwhr  ml
Itpir,  Bja  Alhenaena  (vi.  p.  334),  and  he  prore)
&imi  Taiiom  deetwa  (it-^ofuwn)  and  other  autho-


0  diitingiii^d  peraona,  •


i  appointed  oi

gialnitc*.  Ab  rrgardithepiicillyandciTil  fanaiti^
iheacoDunU  of  their  office  BIB  >o  obacnn  that  we  are
•areeW  able  to  form  any  definite  notion  of  it.  An
andent  law  (Athen.  L  e.)  ordnined  that  each  of  the
pcieatly  paniitea  ahonld  lelect  from  the  $iHiKa\ia
the  liith  port  of  a  medimnua  of  barley,  and  lupply
with  it  the  Athaniaiii  who  were  pretent  in  the
(emple,  according  to  the  cuatom  of  their  lathcn  ;
•nd  thia  aiith  of  a  medimnua  woa  to  be  given  br
the  panaitei  of  Achamoe.  The  menniii);  of  thia
Teryobacurelawiidiacnaiedhy  Prelior.  (I'niaaonii
Frapm.  |l  115,  &c)  Thna  much,  however,  ia
clear,  thai  Ihe  paniitet  were  elected  in  the  drmes
of  Atti^  from  among  the  moit  diatingniahed  and
moat  ancient  fomilici.  We  find  their  number  to
haM  been  twelve,  lo  that  it  did  not  coincide  »ilh
that  of  the  demci.  Thia  may  be  occoonted  for  by
■oppoaing  that  in  one  demoa  Iwo  or  more  goda  were
wonhijiped,  whose  lerricereijairedajieraaiti ;  while
ia  aootbcr  there  waa  no  aneh  diiinily.  The  godi
ia  whole  aenice  paraaitea  are  mentioned,  are  He-
ncl«,  Apollo,  the  Anncca,  and  Athena  of  Pollene.
Their  aerricet  appear  to  hare  been  reworded  with
A  third  of  the  viciima  aacrificed  to  their  respectiTe
goda.  Snch  officen  exialod  down  to  a  late  period
of  Omk  hiatory,  for  CleaRhoi,  a  diaciiJe  of  Ari-
itolle,  »id  that  piuMit™  in  hia  own  daji  con-
tinned  to  be  appointed  in  mogt  Onciim  atatei  to
the  nwit  diitingiiihcd  maglBlmtci.  (Athen.  iL  p.
835.)  Theae,  howerer,  muit  hare  been  diferent
from  the  prieally  paraailci.  Solon  in  liii  legialatioi
called  the  act  of  giving  public  meola  to  certaii
magiatintea  and  foreign  anibaatadon  in  the  pry-
twKum,  npaffrrfTr  (Ptut  Sal.  24),  and  it  may  b<
thai  the  puitaitea  were  connected  with  thia  inali
tniinn.  (Compare  PdUui,  vi.  c,  7.)

The  daia  of  penont  whom  we  call  paraaitea  wni
Tery  nomeniu*  in  ancient  Greece,  and  appear*  Ii
hBTe  Cliated  from  early  timea,  though  they  wen
■at  deaignated  by  thia  name.  The  comediea  o
Ariili^huMa  Miniain  rorions  allnaiona  to  them,  oni
Philippaa,  who  ia  introduced  in  the  Sympoainm  o
Xenofhnn,  n  well  oa  a  pcraon  deacribed  in  tcniK
iiiaii  of  Epichaimna  preaerred  in  Athenocua,  are
perfect  apeciraena  of  patnailei.  But  the  firil '
who  deaignoled  thcae  penoni  by  the  nai
wapdirtTiH  wai  Alexia  in  one  of  hii  coniediei.
(AtheiL  n.  p.  S35.} In  th«  lo  called  middle  and


PABEDIM.  867

Attic  mmedy,  and  in  their  Roman  imitatioiu,
paraaitea  ore  ttanding  characteti,  and  althongh
I  ore  deacribed  m  Tery  atrong  coloura  in  the**
edici,  yet  the  description  doea  not  teem  to  be
h  exaggerated,  if  we  may  jndgo  bom  other  ae-
ita  of  real  paratilei. We  abalJ  not  Ihereforo
be  much  miataken  in  borrowing  our  deeeriptioa  of
xaaitea  chiefly  from  theae  comediea.
The  ehoiacteriatic  feature*  common  to  all  para-
**  are  importunity,  lore  of  aenaoal  pleeauree,  and
OTB  all  the  dcaire  of  getting  a  good  dinner  with-
oat  payinD  ibr  it. According  to  the  TOriooa  msma
the^  employed  to  obtain  thia  oblect,  they  may  be
dirided into  three claaaea. Ths fint ore the
7«Xa>TitiniioI  or  jeiteta  ;  who,  in  otdei  to  get  aomo
Itatioii,  not  only  tried  to  amnia  peiiona  with
ir  jokee,  bnt  e*en  expoaed  their  awn  peniHi  to
ridicule,  and  would  bear  all  liindi  of  ia*ult  and
aboae  if  they  could  mly  hope  to  gain  the  deiited
object. Among  ihete  we  may  elau  Philippui  in
theSympoaiumof  Xenophon,  Ergaatilni  in  IheCap-
tiTi,andOelaaimui  intheStichnt  of  PlaulntL The
•econd  cloaa  an  the  xitiami  or  flalterert  (aaaaada-
fsnEi),  who,  by  plaiting  and  admiring  Tain  peraona,
endeafDUied  to  obtain  an  iuTitation  to  their  bonte.
Onatho  in  the  Eunachna  of  Terence,  and  the  Arto.
tiogUB  in  the  Hiie*  Olorisaua  of  Plautna,  ore  ad-
mirable delineation*  of  auch  chaiacten. The  third
ilaai  are  the  StpatnitiKoi  orlheofilcioua,  whobya
'nriety  of  Berricea  eren  of  (he  loweaC  and  moat  de-
grading dCBcription  endeaToured  to  aa[uire  claim*
to  inTitatiouB.  {P\at.  dt  Adyl.  23,  dt  EdncaL  \7.)
Character*  of  thia  cloaa  ore  the  paraiito  in  tha
Aainaria  and Mcnaechmi  of  Plautua,  and  man
etpecially  the  Cnrculio  and  Satnria  in  the  Periae  of
Plautua,  and  the  Phormio  of  Terence. Fnm  the
vnriaui  Matementi  in  comediea  and  the  tinliae  of
Plolarch,  D*  Adalaiorit  tt  Amid  Dimrnmint,  we
>ee  that  paruitce  Blwiyi  tried  to  diacarer  irheie  a
good  dinner  wni  to  be  had,  and  for  thia  purpoae
they  lounged  about  in  the  roarkot,  the  pnloeitrae,
the  hatha,  and  other  public  placet  af  reaoit After
Ihey  had  fixed  upon  a  peraon,  who  woa  in  moat
catM  probably  an  inexperienced  young  man,  they

them  ftom  pnraning  thnr  plana.  Some  exnmplca
of  the  moat  diagnating  humiliation*  which  paniaile*
endured,  and  ercn  rejoiced  in,  am  mentioned  by
Athenocua  (ri.  p.  2i3)  and  Plutarch.  {De  OmuU.
rm,  1,  ^rn^m.  TiL  6;  compare  Diog.  Lolfit.  ii.
67.)  During  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperart  a
panuite  aerm*  to  haTO  been  a  conttant  gneet  at  the
mblra  of  the  wealthy,  (Lueian,  dt  Faratit.  iB.)

((^umpore  Becker,  Ctariklet,  toL  i.  p.  490;  Le
Beau,  in  the  Ilitloin  ds  CAead.  da  Ijaerijt.  lol.
xxxi.  p.  G1,  Ac  1  M.  H.  E.  Meyer,  in  EthA  md
Orvber''  Etteyriopadit,  «.  ».  Paratita.) [L.  S-J

PARASTADES. [ANTia.]

PARA-STASIS  («pirroff<j),  a  fee  of  one
dnichm  pud  to  aa  arbitrator  by  the  pluntifF,  en
bringing  hia  cauie  before  him  \  and  by  the  de-
fendant, on  patting  in  hi*  anawer.  The  lama
name  wai  giien  to  the  lee  (pnhap*  a  drachm)
paid  by  the  proaecntK  in  moat  public  eauae*.
(Harpocr.  (.  t>.  napdirrao-jr  ■  Ideier,  Alt  Froa.
pp.  614,  61j.)  [Compare  Duitit^ie,  p.
397,  b.]  [C.II.K.J

PARASTATAG. [Hindica.]

PARAZO'NIUM. [ZoN*-]

PAREDRI (irifOfoi). Each  of  Uie  thiM


PARIES.


[or  nrchcHU  va*  at  ItbvTtj
[wdpthpai)  cboicii  by  himscii,  to  luub  jiim
Irico  Bitd  otbenviiie  in  tbc  peiformance  of  hii
u  dulin.  Tho  asKuor,  like  the  msfriitnte
ilf,  had  to  undervo  a  SoKiiuurla  in  tbe  Sinale
TO  Hundred  ana  before  a  judicial  tribunal,
be  could  be  pennicied


I.  Hfl'


nt(.M«ni)


end  of  the  ;ear. Tha  office  u  called  an
ip^J! hy  Demuthenn (n.  JVncr.  1369). The
duliei  of  ibe  arcbon,  mngiilerial  and  judicial,  were
)  of  the  principal  objecU  of


hnv


nablc


lo  net  through  iheii  buiini
ptipo7  aMiating  tbe  archon  at  the  A^{ir  ilmft
(Demotlh.  e.  ntoa  13.13.)  Ho  had  aulhoritf  lo
IccFp  ardor  at  public  fntiTali  and  lbealr?i,  and  to
impDfo  a  fine  on  the  diurderly.  (Demogth.  e,  Mid,
S7-2.)  At  the  archoni  were  choacn  by  lot  (NAq-
pfrol),  and  might  be  peranna  of  inrerior  capacity,
and  not  very  well  litted  for  their  atation,  it  might
often  bo  nieful,  or  even  noceaniy  for  them,  lo  pro-
cure the  auistanee  of  clever  men  of  bniintna.
(Dcmoath.  e.  fftatr.  1372.)  And  pcrhapa  it  wai
iiiteuded  that  the  irdpatpoi  iboold  not  only  a>-
aitt,  but  in  tome  meaanre  check  and  control  the
power  of  their  principola  They  are  apolien  of
at  being  ^si)0al,  iri/iiiiv^ai  Kid  ^uAaxii.  Demo-
athcnei  accuaea  Stephanui  of  buying  bil  place  of
tlie  'Apx""  fiaaiXtit  (a.  Kfotr.  13fi9).  It  woa
luual  to  chooM  rclationa  and  Ericnda  to  be  auet-
aon  ;  but  they  might  at  any  time  be  diamiued,  at
leait  for  good  cauae.  (Demoith.  c  A'ecui-.  1373.)
The  Tbeimotheloe,  tbongh  they  had  uo  rcguhu-
■wiptSpoi,  uied  to  hnre  ooanieUan  (ti/fitauKQi),
who  aniwcred  the  aame  purpote.  (Demoath.c.  Hoc
1 330 ;  Schiimann,  A  at.  Jut.  Pali.  Gr.  p.  245 ;  Meier,
AtL  Pne.ff.hl—S9.)  The  office  of  irdotSjwi  waa
called  irapilpJa.  and  to  exerciie  it  TOftiptiuy.

From  the  xJ^ifai  of  the  archona,  we  muat  dia-
tinguiah  thou  who  utiited  the  tS9vyoi  in  unmin-
ing and  auditing  magUtratea' accounts.  Tbett^foroi
wore  a  board  of  ten,  and  each  of  them  cboie  two
aauaaon.  (Schiimann,  ^a^.^ur. /-Hi.  Gr.  p.  340  ;
Meier,>((./*>TO.p.l03.)[EurHTN£.] [C.R.K.]

PAREISQRAPHE  {irip«i(r«H^).  aignifict  a
fiauduIeDt  enrolment  in  the  rcgiater  of  citizena.
For  thia  an  indictment  Uy  at  Athcoi  called  {(rks
YpB^  :  and,  beiido,  tho  t^iiMat  might  b;  their
IiiD^^irit  eject  any  penon  who  waa  illegally  en-
rolled omoiiz  them.  From  their  deci*ian  there
;ouit  of  dicaaCi  ;  of  which
henca  againat  Eubalide*
If  the  dicaiti  coafinncd
the  dcciaion  of  the  iruiirak,  the  appellant  parly
woi  aold  (or  a  alaic.  Spuiioui  citiicDi  are  tome-
timea  called  aap/TfyjunrTDi,  TOfiiyyty/iaiLiiini,
(Aeach.dafufi.^.38,Sl,ed.Sleph.)  The  ei-
preaaion  wapiurffioifiit  fpaiph  ia  not  Aliic  (SchH-
iaajia,AnLJiir.FiA.Gr.p.i06i  ticict, Alt. Proc
pp.  317— 349.)  [C.R.K.]

PARENTA'LIA. [Funus,  p.  502^^.]

PA'RrES(ToIxoi).thB  wall  of  a  hou«,  in  ton-
tradULinction  to  MuKUS  (T'^xot),  the  wall  of  a
eiiy,  and  DuorHi  (rtlxmr),  a  amall  encloaure,  auch
aa  a  court-yard  ;  aomcitnira  Tif^iov  it  uted  for  the
wall  °fa  haute.  (St'e  LiddcUand  Scolt.)  Among
tbe  numemii  methodt  employed  by  the  oncienta  in
eowtructing  walla  we  God  menlioa  of  the  follow-

riu  erat&iu,  i.c.  Hu  wattled  or  the


PARIES.-

latb-and-platUr  wall,  made  of  canea  or  hardlea
[Chitx8]i  eoicred  with  clay.  (Plin.  H.  ^V.  lur.
U.  a  ta  ;  Featui,  t.v.  Soha.)  Theae  were  lued
in  the  Driginnl  ciiy  of  Rome  to  form  entire  bouaea
(0»id./'iHtiiLI83,vL26l  ;  Vitni*.  ii  Diafter-
warda  they  wen  coated  with  mortar  iutead  of  day,
and  introduced  like  our  lath-and-plaater  walla  in

II.  VitnzTiuB  (L  a)  mentiona  aa  the  nect  alepi,

and  continued  (o  our  om  in  Dertmabire,  of  drying
aquare  lump*  of  clay  and  building  them  into  mill,
which  were  ttrengthened  by  meant  of  boriiooiDl
bond-limben  (jii^aniflifu)  laid  at  intemli,  and
which  were  then  catered  with  thatch.

I I I.  Tho  paria  Jormaoau,  i.  a.  the  fiat  wall,
mode  of  rammed  smb.  [Fonira.]

IV.  Indtitriclinbanndingwithwood,  log-boaae*
were  commun,  eouitniclel,  Tike  theae  of  the  Sibe-
rians and  of  the  modem  Amcricani  in  tbe  back
leltlemcnU,  of  the  tmnka  of  treet,  which,  harii^
been  mora  or  leu  tqnared,  were  then  laid  upon
sue  another  in  an  horiioalal  poaitioa,  and  liad  theii
iiiletiticea  filled  with  chip*  itdadiii),  mo**,  and
clay.  Af^  thia  manner  the  Colchiani  erected
houtri  aeTeral  itorie*  high.  (VilntT.  t  a  am-
pare  Herod,  it.  lOS  ;  Vitrur.  iL  9.)

V.  The  paria  lattritiat,  i.  a.  the  hrick  wall
[I.ATaa.]  Among  IbeRomantthe  ordinaij  thick-
neu  of  an  onttide  wall  waa  lU  inchei  ((njiiipa),
being  the  length  of  the  oommon  or  Indian  brick  ;
but,  if  the  building  wat  more  than  one  abxj  high,
the  walla  at  the  bottom  wera  either  two  or  ihm>
brickt  thick  (dipliiiOni  oaf  trifUt^ax^  ■ceuding  to
circomatancea  The  EgyptiantumetJme*  eihitnted
a  chequered  pattern,  end  perhapi  other  derJcn,
upon  tbe  walu  of  their  hootea  by  th*  altematian
of  while  and  btock  brickt.  (Atb.  t.  p.3l)8,  e.)
The  Romana,  probably  in  imitation  of  the  Etio-
rinni,  often  coaed  the  higheat  pact  of  a  brick  wall
niih  a  range  of  lerra  cotla*  (ifriicfara  and  briea
tataaa.  VitruT,  il  6  ;  Palhul.  da  A>  RmL  l  U),
eighteen  incbei  high,  with  projecting  cornice*,  and
apouta  lor  di&charging  the  water  from tho  reoC


might  be  an  appeal
the  tpeech  of  Dc
funiiihfi  I


VI.  The  Tttialata  trudara  (Plin.  H.  N.  ani.
S3,  t.  £1),  1.  «.  the  relioilaled,  or  rewmbling  net-
work. Thia  atnictura  contittt  iapladna  tonan  or
loaenge-ahaped aC<Hie*  aide by  ti


the  material


mgi  —
I.  Tben


mrimalaiaacalcmHama).  In
I  mortal  hat  pnved  more  duiabia
eapecially  where  vulcanic  tufa  ii
iployed,  at  at  Baiae  in  the  Bay  of
Naplea,  and  in  the  Tilla  of  Hadrian  near  TitolL
Thii  kind  of  bnjlding  it  vf  -nmm«i  {»  a^  •«_
eient  ediiicea  of  Italy.  Viu
it  wat  univertally  adiqited
that  congtrucled  were  email
the  eye,  but  leti  aecnre  tha
iloQea  lay  upon  their  flat  a
the  wall  vat  the  only  part  i
wat  reguUr,  or  the  alDnet  cui  inw  ■  ce
the  inlerior  being  Tubble-wock  cs  cm
jam),  io.  fragmenti  and  chippinga  of
mada,  xiUtf)  imbedded  in  mortar.  Only  part  of
the  wall  waa  reticulated:  to  gira  it  GrsuKal  and
durability  the  aidea  and  baae  wen  built  of  brick  or
of  tquared  ttonra,  and  horiaontnl  count*  tt  brid*
were  laid  at  iutervali,  ealending  through  tho
length  and  thicknci*  of  tho  wall The**  ciRam>


iTiui»yi(i).  8i.that
in  hii  time.  Walla
ered  mora  pleaiing  to
I  thoae  in  which  tbe
i&cct.  The  ihial  o(
1  which  the  tiniclura


rcll  ciemplifitd  in  the  umeiFd  wood
.  copird  from  llie  drawing  of  m  wait  i
'culed  OD  tlie  ipol  by  Mi,  MocatU,


VII.  The  itmctam  atUiqua  or  ineerla,  Li
•wmU  of  imgular  nuuonry,  built  of  itonet,  i
verc  not  Mjuared  ot  cut  into  nny  tiact  form.
neccuarj'  coiu«<]nencc  nf  thig  method  of  con
tioD  wu,  that  *  gnat  part  of  (he  wall  coaiuted  of
mortar  ud  mbble-woili.  (Vitnii.  L  c)

VIII.  The  emplMon,  i.  c  the  complicated  wall,
eoniiiting  in  iact  of  tlinc  wallt  joined  together.
Each  aide  isewnted  r^cular  nuiMnij  or  brickwork  ;
bul  the  interior  wu  tilled  with  nibble  {Jarhim.).
To  bind  together  the  two  ouUidc  inilli,  and  thut
rvoider  the  whole  lirm  Bjid  durable,  lai^«  itoocs  or
coonei  of  brickwork  {caagmaOa)  wen  phtced  at
iDterrmli,  extending  through  the  whale  thickueu
of  the  wall,  u  wu  done  alio  in  the  Stmclura  Re-
tiodata.  Walli  of  Ibii  deicriplion  are  not  uncom-
mon, cipeciallj  in  buUdiriga  of  couaiderable  jiie.

IX.  The  porier  0 'a/m^ fBoifrafo,  I.  e.  the  aehlar
wall,  coniiiting  entirely  of  bIorh  cut  and  aquared
by  the  chiael.  [Dolibha.J  Thia  -ma  the  moft
perfect  kind  of  wall,  eipecially  whea  built  of  mar-
ble. The  coD»trnction  of  tuch  wnlli  wai  earned  to
the  highefl  perfection  by  the  architecta  of  Greece  \
the  temple*  of  Athena,  Corinth,  and  many  ciliei  of
Alia  Uioor  atill  attealing  in  their  mint  the  ei-
trnne  akill  bcatowed  npon  the  erection  of  walli.
Conaderabte  excellence  in  thia  art  muat  bate  been
attained  bv  (he  Qretka  eren  ai  early  at  the  age  of
Horoer,  who  dirira  one  of  kii  limiln  from  the
"  nicely  fitted  itonca  "  of  ibe  wall  of  a  hooie.  {It.
■vi.  213:)  But  probably  in  thia  the  Greeki  only
copied  the  Aaialici ;  for  Xenophon  came  to  a  de-
•crled city  in  Ueaopotsmia, the brick  wolla  of


which  w


I0f"p(]li>h


laheU


onfcn


adTBnIage,  to  which SL  Paul  alludea,  when  he
coDtiaali  the  aloDn,  valaable  both  for  material  and


PAItlES.  scg

.  (AlSoui  Tr/Joui),  and  the  gold
and  ailver,  which  were  exhibited  in  the  walli  of
ancfa  a  temple  aa  (hat  juat  mcnlioned,  with  the
\offi  of  wood,  Iho  thatch,  the  straw  and  cane,  era-
ployed  in  building  walla  of  the  four  lint  kind*.
(1  Cor.  iii,  10—15.)  Vitiuviua  alao  strongly  ob-
jecta  to  the  paria  cmHIiai  on  accuant  of  iti  great
cotnbnatibilily  (li.  8.  o<Z;fii.).  Reipecling  walla  of
ihia  kind  aee  further  under  Murus.

Cicero,  in  a  ainple  pasaaRe  of  hi)  Topica  {§  4>,
uaea  four  epithet*  which  were  applied  to  wtJla.  Ho
the  parift  toiidia  to  the  fonicatta,  und
'.o  the  dirvdnf.  The  paasage  at  the
HI  that  the  Romani  iniened  archea
0  their  "common"  or  party  walla,
woodcut,  lepreten^g  a  pc^on  of


oppoeea  tl


inppoied  Thermae  at  Trivea  (Wyttenbach-a
Guide,  p.GQ)i  exemplifiea  the  frequent  occutreocfl
of  arciica  in  all  Roman  buildings,  not  only  when
inlfndcd  for  windowa  or  doorwaya,  but


engthen


»nIL


I  thia  ^'poriea  fotr:


;ach  arch  i>  a  camblnalioii
:ric  sichei,  all  built  of  brick.  Thia  epecinien  alio
ihowa  the  alteniation  of  connw  of  brick  and  atone,
which  ia  a  common  chomcleriatic  of  Roman  ma-
lonTy.  The  **panea  toiidut^  i,  e.  (he  wall  without
ipcningi  for  windowa  or  doorwava,  mu  alao  called
•a  blind  wall  "  (Virg.  Aa.  v.  689) ;  and  tho
parita  a/mmtmit  (Ovid.  Met.  iv.  66  \  Kowhs  roix",
'"hucyd.  iL  3),  which  waa  the  boundary  between
wo  tenemenls  and  common  [o  them  both,  waa
illed  inlerntrima,  ol.  iatrrgeriau  (Kealui,  i.  n.,-
Plin.  W.A'.  XXI*.  14.  a.  43),  and  in  Greek  #<«*-
r{Athen.  vii.  p.281,d),or»MO(J™xe*.  {Efi.
)  The  n'alla,  built  at  right  angle)  to  the
forty-wall  for  (he  conrenierce  of  the  respecliio
fiuniliea,  were  the  parieta  diredi,

Walla  were  adorned,  eapecially  in  the  interior  of
buildings,  in  a  great  variety  of  wayi.  Their  plane
■urtace  wai  broken  by  panels, [Abacus.] llow-

rery  unevcnneat  waa  remored  by  a  coating,  (wo
■  three  inchei  thick,  of  mortar  or  of  plaster  with
ingh-CBit,  conaiiting  gf  tand  together  with  alone,
rick,  and  marLle,  broken  and  ground  to  varioni

) Gj-paum  bIk, in the  alate  which  we  call

.alter  of  Poiia, una  miwh  uacd  in  (he  mors

3k  3


870


PABMA.


■plerilid  edISces,  uid  vni  decomtcd  with  nn  md-
IcM  variety  of  tMteful  dericoi  in  hss-rflicf.  Of
theie  ornament*,  wrought  in  stucco  (opuj  aftarinm),
epecimeiiB  remain  in  the  "Bathn  ofTitui'^al  Romo«
When  the  ploalfici  {Uttor,  icoriirTii)  hod  dnishcd
hii  vmik  (IralU—atm,  i.  t.  trou'clling ;  opia  Irdo
rinm),  in  all  of  nhicfa  he  nai  dir«ted  by  the  uh
of  the  ■qiiare[NoHUA],tbe  rule,  and  the  line  and
plummet  [PiHrBNDictiLUH],  and  iu  which  be
aimed  at  producing  a  tur&ee  not  only  imoiplh  and
ihining,  but  aa  little  u  pouible  liable  to  crack  or
decay  (Vitrav,  vii,  3),  ha  wa>  often  ■nceecded  by
the  painter  in  treico  (tuio  Iteiorio^  Vitmv.Lc)^  In
many  caiea  the  plajler  or  itucco  wu  left  without
nn;  additionnl  onuunent ;  and  its  nhlunes)  and
frethneu  were  oceaaionally  reilored  by  washing  it
with  certain  fine  cBlcsreooa  or  nluminoua  cnrthi
diuolTed  in  milk  {par-ibmiam,  Plin.  fl.  N.  hit.
6.  ■.  IS  ;  terra  Sdmulla,  IE.  a.  .^6).  A  painted
commonly divided by  the nrtiil  mto


i,fi.)


endleu  VBiictj
Idinga,  gaidena,  animaJa, &.c


nelhod  of  decorating  walli  was  by  en-
cmtting  them  with  alahi  of  marble  {snulat).  The
blocks,  deaigucd  for  thii  puqioac,  wcro  cut  into
thinalaUbylhGBidofiaw-milli.  [Mola.]  Vnri-
oui  kindt  of  land  wcro  uied  in  the  operation,  ac-
cording to  the  hardneaa  of  the  atone  ;  emery  (mma,
Plin.  //.  ff.  iiivi.  5.  a.  9)  being  uaed  for  (he
hnrdcBt.  Thia  art  waa  of  high  antiqnity,  and  pni-
baljly  Oriental  in  ita  origin.  The  brick  wall<  of
the  Mmiaoleum  at  Ilalicaraaaans,  built  oi  early  as
3j5  b.  c,  were  coTered  with  ilaba  of  Procnnneaian
marble  (Plin.  //.  N.  iiivi.  B)  ; and  lhi«  ia  the

of  PUny  llf.N.  mt".  1)  aUb.of  annifonncolonr
were  aomctimea  inlaid  with  rarionaly  coloured  ma-
terial! in  auch  a  way  aa  to  represent  animali  and
other  olijccli.  In  abort  the  beautiful  invention
now  called  Florentine  Manic  waa  then  in  uie  for
the  decomtion  of  the  walla  of  apartmenla.  [Eh-
ULEHA.]  The  common  kind  nf  Mosaic  waa  alio
•amelimo  uaed  in  walla  aa  well  a>  in  Itoora  and
ceilings.  The  grealcst  refinement  waa  the  attempt
to  produce  the  elTect  of  mirron,  which  was  done
bv  inaerting  into  the  wall  piecea  of  black  glau
m'anufactuced  in  imitation  of  obiidian.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xirvi.  26.  a  67.)  [Doiius  p.  431 ;  Picturj,
g  XV.]  [J.Y.]

PAKILIXIA. [Pai.ilta.1

PARMA,  din.  PARMULA  (Ilor,  Cam.  iL
7.  10),  a  round  ahleld,  three  fool  m  dlADicier,
cnrried  bytho  c^Ha  in  the  Roman  army.  Though
amall,  compared  with  the  Clipkus,  it  waa  ao
atrongly  made  ni  to  be  a  very  elfectual  proleclion.
(Polyh.  »L  20.)  Thia  wna  probably  owing  to  the
uae  of  iron  in  ili  (lame-waik.  In  the  Pyrrhic
dance  it  raa  raised  abovs  the  head  and  atruck

(Cland.  A  vt  Cbna. /foaor.  62li.)  Thepamiawas
also  worn  by  the  Ettums  (Salloit, /Vt^. /fut
IV.)  ;  and  for  the  soke  of  state  and  hahton  it  waa
aomelims  adorned  with  predooa  atonea.  (Ptopert.
ir.  3.  21 .)

Wa  find  the  term  parma  often  applied  to  the
target  [C*Ta>],  which  waa  alio  a  amall  round
ahield,  and  therefore  Tery  similar  to  the  parma.
(Propert.  ir.  2.  40  ;  Meb^  i.  fi.  §  1  ;  Vu^.  Am.
X.  817.) Virgil,  in  like  manner,  applies  the  tenn


to  the  clipenjef  the  Pnltadium,hacaiiac,  the  statue
being  small,  the ahield  waa  amall  in  proportion.
{Aa,.il  175.)
The  annexed  woodcut  ropreaentt  a  voliie  parma.


iboBied  (ffln^^arw)  [ttitttna]  and  gilt,  re-

Tsenting  on  ita  border,  aa  ia  inppoacd,  the  taking
of  Rome  bv  the  Oaula  under  Brennua  and  ita  re-
covery by  Camillua.  It  helonged  formerly  to  the
W'oodwardian  Mnaeum,  and  ia  anppoaed  by  anti-
[innrirg  to  have  been  made  in  the  time  of  Clandiu
or  Nero.  The  boss  (umbo)  is  a  grotesque  bee,
aumnndcd  with  rnm^  homa,  foliage,  and  a  twisted
beard.  (Dodwcll,  dt  Farma  Wooduxmiiami,  Oim.
1713.)  Compare  Bernd,  Dai  WapptmBtu^  itr
Gnecif  lad  RSnmr,  Bonn,  IS-Jl.  (J.  Y.}

PA-ROCHI,  were  certain  people  who  vera
piid  by  the  atate  to  aapply  the  Roman  maaistraua,
ambassadon,  and  other  official  perwrns,  when  ihej
were  traTclling,  with  thoae  ncceaaariee  which  thej
could  not  conveniently  oirry  with  Chetn.  Th^
exialed  en  all  the  principal  aCationson  the  Roman
roada  in  Italy  and  the  provinces,  wh«e  penona
were  accnstomed  to  pase  the  night  Bnt  aa  many
magistmtea  frequently  made  extortionate  demands
from  the  parocbi,  the  lei  Jnlia  di  Repelundia  of
Julius  Caesar,  B.  c  £9,  defined  the  thin^  which
the  parochi  were  bound  lo  supply,  of  which  hay,
fire-wood,  salt,  and  a  certain  number  of  beds  ap-
pear to  have  been  the  moat  important  (Hor.  Sat,  L
5.  46  I  Cic.  o^  JfL  T.  le,  ziii.  2  ;  Heindoif;  ad
rior.  t.c)

PAROPSIS  (.'ttp-rHs).  Two  difereot  meui-
inga  are  given  to  this  word  by  the  Ortak  giwnma-
rians  ;  some  interpret  it  as  meaning  any  food  eaten
with  the  Cfw  [Ofboniuu},  aa  t&e  r^a,  a  kind
of  fnimcnty  or  soft  iske,  broth,  or  any  kind  of  em -
diment  or  aaoce  (Pollui,  >i.  6S,  i.  S7  ;  HensCerh.
ad  Inc.)  ;  and  othen  a  sancer,  plate,  or  amall  di^.
(Heaych.  and  Snidaa,  i.  v.)  It  ia  plun,  h
from  the  numerous  paasaget  collected  by  At
(ix.  pp.  367, 368),  that  die  wan
aignificationi,  and  was  the  name  <if  the  diah  or
plate  aa  well  aa  of  ita  contents.  (Compare  Xcn.  <y-
I.  3.  S  4  ;  PluL  it  Ad*L  H  Amuc  9  ;  St.  Halth.
xiiiu  36.)  The  Roman  wriiera  sc«m  always  to
uae  it  in  the  aenae  of  a  dUh  or  plate  (Jav.  iiL  142  ;
Mart  xi.  27.  S)  ;  and  according  to  Chariaioa  it  was
ae  called,  "quia  in  eo  reponontar  obeonia,et  ex  es
in  menia  comedantnr."  The  word  ia  alao  written
Paiapsis.  (Hesych.  a-o.  ;  Snrt  fl^.  12  j  Petno.
34j  Dig.34,  tit2.s.l9.  i9.>-  ^^v-


k!  by  Adienaans


PASTOPHOBUS.
PABRICniA, PABHICI'DIUM.


PATERA.


en


-ve«"i"),


ling  of  th


irord,
chadren  bom  by  niini«iri«d  women  {wofHru,  Horn.
Jl.  xti.  ISO).  Some  writen  ml»  daignaled  b;
thta  luuie  these  legiltmale  childien  ml  SpeiM  who
were  born  before  the  mother  tu  inttodaced  into
tbe  boue  irf  her  hnibiuid.  (Heijcli.  i.  v.;  MUllei,
Av.  IT.  4.  i  2.)  The  parthenae,  bowerer,  M  a
diitioct  dnu  of  citiieni,  nppar  at  Sputa  after  the
fint  UeMenian  var  and  m  connection  with  the
loundUioDofTartntnni ;  but  the  legenda  s>to  who
they  vera  iiSei  bom  one  another.  Haychiui
■aj*  that  they  were  the  children  of  Spartan  cili-
lena  and  female  ilaTca  ;  AnCiocbm  (17.  Strab.  ri.
p.  376,  At)' itate*,  that  they  were  the  uns  of  thoK
Sfartani  who  took  do  pan  is  the  war  ^in>(  the
UnKUtwu.  Theae  Sportsni  were  mude  Ueloti,
and  their  children  were  called  putheniae,  and  de-
clared triitoi.  When  they  grew  up,  and  were
unable  to  bear  their  degrading  poiition  at  honir,
they  emtgnted,  and  became  the  fbondcn  of  Taren-
tnm.  Ephorui  ((ql  Sirab,  tL  p.  279)  again  related
the  atory  in  adiSereot  manner.  When  the  Meue-
nian  war  had  laited  for  a  eoniidenble  nnmber  of
yean,  the  Spartan  women  lent  an  embouy  to  the
camp  of  their  hoibandi,  complained  of  their  long
•haaxz,  and  itatid.  that  the  rei«blic  would  lafier
fat  want  of  an  inereue  in  the  nmnber  of  eitizeni
if  tho  war  tboutd  cantinne  mnch  longer.  Their
faiuliiuidi,  who  were  bonnd  by  an  oath  not  to  leave
the  field  until  the  MeMenioni  were  conquered,  aent
heme  ill  the  young  men  in  the  camp,  who  were
sot  bound  by  that  oath,  and  requoted  ihero  to
cohabit  with  the  maideni  at  Sparta.  The  children
thus  produced  were  called  parthcnlae.  On  the
letnni  of  the  Spartani  from  Mcwenia,  tbeie  par-
ibeniae  were  not  treated  ai  citiieni,  and  accord-
ingly united  with  the  Helott  to  wage  war  aaaintt
the  SpartaDL  Bot  when  thli  plan  waa  found  Im-
pmcticable,  they  emigrated  and  tonnded  ^e  colony
of  Taraitam.  (Compare  Theopomp.  op.  Atien.  ti.
p.  371  ;  EnuHACTXi.)  Thew  itoriei  Kern  to  be
nothing  but  diatmtiona  of  aome  hiatorical  lacL
Tho  SpaRana  at  a  time  of  great  diitresi  had  per-
hapi  allowed  mairiagea  between  Spartani  and
alara  or  Laconioni,  or  had  admitted  a  nooiber  of
penooi  to  the  iiancbiu,  bat  afterward)  endearoured
to  cortail  the  privUegeaofthcaenewcitiEeni,  which
led  to  iniarreclion  and  emigration.  (See  Thirlwall,
IliH.  o/Otko,  toL  L  p.  352,  &C.)  [L.  S.J

PASCUA  PU'BLICA.  [ScwNOHA.]
PASSUS  (ti™  prmdo),  a  meaaure  of  length,
which  coniiited  of  fire  Roman  feet.  (Colum.  t.  1  1
Vitru..i.U.)  [MuNBURA.]  Thepomiwaanot
the  aii^e  atep  (gnuiia),  but  the  doable  Mep  ;  or,
more  exactly,  it  waa  not  the  Glance  from  heel  to
heel,  whoi  the  feet  were  at  tlieir  ntmoat  ordinary
cxtenaion,  bat  the  diitance  from  the  point  which
the  heel  leBTea  to  that  in  which  it  ii  let  down.
The  aiiQa  ;xiann,  ot  tbonaand  paceo,  waa  the
comnoo  name  of  the  Roman  milo.  {Milliari.]
In  coanectiag  the  Oreek  and  Roman  mtaiureo,  the
word  |)Limi  waa  aometimea  applied  to  the  txUniiim
of  til  ana,  that  ii,  the  Greek  ifiyvii,  which,
howeter,  differed  from  the  true  paitUM  hj  balfo-
Ibol  ;  and,  conrenely,  the  ffradm  waa  ^led  by
Graek  wiiteia  ^fia,  or  ri  ^q^  ri  ixXour,  and
(he  paami  ih  3^pi  t^  IiiXaDc.  [PS.]

PASTO'PUOROS  (watrfftfoi). Tho  ihawl.


richly  inleiwoven  with  gold  (xf<r6wairTin),  and
displaying  Torioui  ajmbslicil  or  mythological
ligurei,  waa  much  uted  in  religioui  ceremoniei  to
conduce  to  their  aplendonr,  to  explain  their  ligniS-
cDtion,  and  alio  to  Teit  their  lolemnity.  The
maidoii,  who  oiried  the  figured  peplua  in  the
Panathenaea  at  Athena,  wera  called  ifi^<^p<H.
^  %ypti  the  priesti  of  Iiii  and  (Jtiiia,  who  pro-
bably fiilklled  a  limiiar  office,  were  denominated
airre^fBi,  and  were  incorpoiated.  (Diod.  L  29  ;
'orphvr.  de  ^Wut  it.  6  ;  Apul.  Afet  xL  [^
34,  12B,  ed.  AldL)  They  appear  to  hare  ei-
!ndcd  tbemielTai  together  with  the  eiteniion  of
le  Egyptian  worahlp  over  psili  of  Oieeoe  and
taly,  io  that  "the  Collrge  of  the  Paitophori  of
ndnitria,"  a  city  of  Liguria,  ii  mentioned  in  an
iHTipllon  Ibund  nearTnrin.  (MaBti,Afw.  Venm.
p.SSD.)  Tho  Egyptian  college  woi  divided  into
minor  companiea,  each  containing  ten  paatophori,
and  each  having  at  its  head  a  leader  who  wna
called  decurio  quinqtiamaiit,  bccnuie  he  wui  ajv
polnted  for  Eve  yeara.  (ApaL  Mel.  li.  nd  lin.)
Beiidee  carrying  the  waaris,  or  ncred  orDamenul
ihawl,  they  performed  other  dutlo  in  cotmection
with  the  worehip  of  the  temple.  It  wai  the  office
of  thi)  chut  of  prieits  to  raise  the  ihawl  with  the
performance  of  an  appropriate  chaanl,  bo  aa  to  dii-
corer  tde  god  seated  or  standing  in  the  adytum
{Qem,  Alei.  Paedag.  iii.  2),  and  generally  to  ehow
the  temple  with  its  sacred  utensils,  of  which,  like
modem  sacristans,  they  had  the  custody.  (Hom-
pollo,  Ilier.  i.  41,)  In  consequence  of  the  sup-
posed influenco  of  Isis  and  her  priesthood  in
healing  diseases,  the  pastophori  obtained  a  high
rank  ai  pbysleiana.  (Clem.  Alei.  Strom,  vi.  4.
p,  758,  ed.  Potter.)

It  most  be  obienrcd,  that  accmdiog  to  another
interpretation  of  tamii,  the  pastophori  were  so
denominated  from  carrying,  not  a  shnwl,  but  a
shrine  or  small  chnpel,  containing  the  image  of  iha
god. Supposing  this  etymology  to  be  correct,  it  ii


10  less  true  that  the  pastophon
ous  offices  which  have  here  been  assigned
It  was  indispensably  requisite,  that  so  n
and  important  a  body  of  men  should  hai
dence  appropriated  to  them  in  the  tempio  \
they  belonged. This  residence


(he  VI


The  c.


I  d  the  1


by  the  Greeks  la  Egyptian  temples,  led  to
plication  to  the  corrcipoadlng  part  of  the  ten
'  rusal™  by  Josephns  (Dgll.  Jad.  *  '  —
s  anthon  of  the  Akiandrine  Tei
istamenL  (1  Chrwi.  iz.  26,  33,
:xr.i  :  IJtfooc.  iv.  38,  £7.)
PATER  FAMI'LIAE. [Fai

^NIIIH  ; PaTRIA  POTkETAt.]

PATER  PATRATUS. [Fs
PATERA,  if™.  PATELLA  (fniXij),


if  the  Uld
,  28  ;  Jer.
tJ.Y.]


diih;


Macrol


.s  {io(.


■  21),


■rence  betwt

the  Carcubkiuh,  says  that  the  former  received  its
name  6tnn  its  flat  expanded  form  (  ptattam  ae  pa-
togs).  The  patelae  of  the  most  common  kind  on
thus  described  by  Feslui  (>.  n.  Faleiiiu),  "  Vasa
pcota  parra,  lacriticlis  IbciendiE  apto."  (A'^ni
patrila.  Mart.  v.  120  1  RnUnada  tssto,  liv.  114.)
They  were  small  plates  of  the  eoounon  red  enrthen-
wnre,  on  which  an  ornamental  pattern  waa  drawn
in  the  manner  described  under  the  article  of  Fic-
TILI,  nnd  which  were  aometimei  entirely  block.
Numerous  specimena  of  them  may  Ira  iteu  in  th*


872  PATERA.

Biitlih  HuiemD,  md  ia  other  callectioiu  of  uicient
fictile  TUM.  The  more  reluable  palens  vere
meuUic,  being  chiefl;  of  broDie :  but  ereiy  bmilj,
railed  iibo»e  poierty,  poaieued  one  of  lilier
(ipyopSi),  together  with  a  ailier  ull-celUr.  [Sali-
NuiL]  (Plin.//.Ar.iiiiii.  12.  •.SI.)  Inopnlenl
house)  there  iru  a  plate  of  i^ld  ixpufi',  Athen.
xi.  pp.19r.S02;  Find,  0(.  vii.  1  — 3  i  Virg.  Gw^.
iL  192).  Thete  metallic  pUlea  were  ofUDBdomed
with  figuret,  engraved  or  embosied  upon  them.
(Cic.  Knr.  If.  2!  ;  Xen,  And,.  1..  7.  §  27,  vii.  3.
9  27.)  A  beaulirul  ipecimea  il  presented  in  the
voodcut  to  the  article  Libha  ;  and  the  aaompanj-
ing  woodcut  eihibiti  a  highly  ornamented  diah,
alio  of  bronxe,  deiigned  to  be  u»ed  in  the  worship
of  Mara,  and  found  al  Pompeii  (Donaldaon*!
Pomp.  voL  ii.  pL  78.)  The  view  of  the  upper  tur-
fhce  ia  accompanied  hy  a  lide-view,  ihowing  the


"^ssiyifiiP


form  and  dejrth  of  the  veiseL  The  omamental
palerae  »melim«  repreienled  leavel  of  Tern,  which
probably  diverged  from  the  centre  (fiJicatat,  Cic
Farad,  i.  g  2).  Oema  were  aet  in  othen.  (Cic
Vtrr.  iv.  2)  i  Virg.  An.  i.  7-2B,  739.)  We  read
also  of  an  amber  dith  {dedriaam),  having  in  the
centre  the  conntenance  of  Alexander  the  Great,
and  hii  history  represented  on  the  border.  (Treb.
Poll.  THfi.  TJw.  13.)  The  amieied  woodcut  con-
tains a  riew  and  lection  ofaptsto  of  white  marble


PATINA.
in  the  British  Museum,  which  was  found  in  tha
ruins  of  Hadrian's  Villa,  and  purchased  by  Mr.
Towuley.  It  ia  14  inches  in  diameter,  and  1}
high.  It  il  cut  with  skill  and  delicacy,  the  loarble
not  being  mnch  more  than  a  qnarter  oF  an  inch
thick.  In  the  centre  ia  sculplnred  a  female  bac-
chante in  a  long  tunic  and  with  ascarf  [Chlauvs]
floa^g  over  her  head.  This  centre-pieca  is  en-
circled by  a  wreath  of  ivy.  The  decomiiona  indi-
cate the  apprupnatioa  of  the  plate  to  the  worship
of  BHcchua.

Plate)  were  samelimcs  made  so  as  to  be  used
with  either  side  downward,  and  were  then  distin-
guished by  the  epithet  d^ifhieeTOf.  (Hom.71.  xiiii.
270,  616.)  In  these  the  under  surliux  was  orna-
mented M  well  as  the  upper.  The  Hassilians  knd
other  Ionic  Greeks  commonly  placed  the  undef
iutface  uppennosL  Plates  were  further  distin-
guished from  one  another  by  being  either  with  at
without  a  base  (nf^^r),  a  boas  in  the  middia
(D^i4>a\(rH,  fUDiififHiAot,  fSoTt),  feet  (Ai^anrrit),
andhandlea  (Athen.  d.  pp.  SDI,  G02.)  In  tha
pmxiding  woodeuti  the  brome  paleta  has  one
handle  :  both  the  faleiae  are  mode  to  aland  npoii

Small  plates  vere  sometimes  used  in  cookiu
(Plin.  A-.Miai.  8.  s. 21), on  operation  moia com-
monly performed  in  pots  [Olla]  and  basins  or
bowls.  [Patina.]  They  were  used  at  meaU  to
eat  upon  as  we  use  them  (Varro,£a]«a,  op.  Aos.
Marc.  IT.  6  ;  Hot.  Kpitt.  1.  5.  2),  althongh  it  ap-
pears that  very  religioua  peisoiu  abstained  &om
this  practice  on  account  of  the  customary  om^oj-
mcnt  of  them  in  sacrificing  to  the  gods.  (Cbc.  A
Pia.  iL  7.)  A  krger  plate,  in  (act,  a  round  dish,
was  oied  to  briiiK  to  Ubie  such  an  article  of  food
as  n  Hut  fiab.  (Mart  liiL  81.)  Mustard  (Plin.
If.y.  lii.  a.  s.  £4)  and  omtmenta  (Xenophaoo,
p.  68,  ed.  Karaten)  were  brought  in  saucers^  Tba
Greeks  also  drunk  wine  oat  of  plates  or  saareta
(Xen.  Cam.  ii.  23),  si  we  see  in  the  woodcut
ider  SvMpaBit/u,  which  represent)  a  symposium,
d  in  which  the  second  and  third  £gnn«  ftna

-right  ht--'  '- ■-  - -


The  I


:  of  pateiue  at  meal)  no  doubt  gave  origin
them  in  ancrificea.  On
.  ild  either  solid  food  (jiiKfiir
Kpias,  Varro,  Afaii.  ap.  Non.  Marc  L  e. ;  tiiot,
Ovid,  Fait.  \i  310),  or  any  liquid  intended  to  be
poured  out  ss  a  libtUion.  (Vitj.  Aew.  iii.  67,  ir.
60,  V.  9B,  vi.  219,  TiL  133,  xiL  174;  Orid.
Ma.  ix.  160,  Fan.  iL  B34,  iv.  934  :  VaL  Fliec
V.  132;  Ju..  iiL26i  Heliodor..l(«Ucp.ii.  p.g8;
Athen.  iL  p.  482.)  We  find  them  continually
repreientcd  in  conjunction  with  the  other  instm-
ments  of  sacriAce  upon  coins,  gems,  attars,  ba»-
relieb,  and  the  frieses  of  temples.  In  the  ancient
Doric  temple  at  Rome,  now  dedicated  to  St.
Adrian,  the  tasteful  paten  and  the  croniom  of  tha
bull  are  alCemalely  sculptured  on  the  metop<^
(Ubacco,  AiU.  di  Rama,  IS,  17.)

Plates  of  the  moat  precious  materials  and  of  tha
fineit  workmauabip  were  sometime)  given  as  priwa
at  the  public  garnet.  (Hom.  JL  xiiiL  270  ;
Pind.  /•(*.  L  20  i  SchoL  «  P»d:  Ntn.  ix.  121,
123.)  [J.  y.]

PATI'BOLUM, IFuncA.]

PATINA  (Asnlr^  dim.  A.*itJnor  aL  Xitip^,
A«aor(Tioi,  Alhen.  yi.  p.  268,  Aeiwrfj,  meeml  <Mii.
IIiov,  Drkker,  Anac.  794),  a  basin  or  bowl  of
earthenware,  rarely  of  broue  (Pallad.  dt  St  JimtL
■ ,  --■ -  ^^--


PATRIA  P0TE3TAS.
L  40  1  Plin.  H.ff.  xxxir. 11.  a.  SS)  or  ailier.
(Treb.  Poll  aaad.  p.  208,  c)

A  patina,  caToed  with  m  lid  (pperadam)^  m>
tofuUDu*  Hied  (0  keep  gnpe«  iiutiad  of  a  jar
(CoL  ie  R»  R¥tL  xii.  43),  a  pnof  th>t  thii  tcsscI
wu  M  a  fpnn  intenpediaie  hatveea  ths  Patika
ud  tht  OlLa,  not  n  flat  01  ths  fiinnet,  nor  to
deep  ai  the  latter.  Hencs  it  ii  compand  to  the
enter.  {Schol.  at  AriHtfk.  Adam.  1109.)
[CsiTiB.]  Thiiaccoont  of  ill  thaps  accord)  with
a  Firietf  <^  nm  to  which  it  wai  applied,  Ti^  Co
hold  mler  and  a  ipoiigB  for  waihmg  (Aiuti^h.
Ff^.  i99),  and  clay  for  making  l^du  [Abim,
1 1ll,  1146),  in  tcoiiling  OVxA.  901),  and  in  ■melt'
li«  the  m  of  quickiilrer.  (Plin.  H.  ff.  niiiL  8.
1. 41.)  But  it!  mMt  frequent  me  wu  in  eodiat;
andphinnae;.  (Plin.  A.  JV.  uiii  2.  i.  83.)  Al-
though the  (atcn  and  the  oUa  we«  alio  mad,  the
arti^a  of  dint  wen  commcmlf  prB]Ared,  tome-
time*  over  a  fin  (PUuLPndlm.  2.  £1  ;  PUn.
H.  ff.  iriiL  1 1.  1. 26,  ziiL  25.  a.  80),  and  wme-
tinm  withoat  Era,  in  a  patina,  and  more  speciall;
when  they  wan  aasmpaiiied  with  laiux  or  fluid.
(Hcir.&<.  L  3.  SO.)  Hence  the  word  occun  in
ilmgal  ereiy  pa{[e  of  Apiciu*  De  C^mni  [Opbo-
MWH]  I  and  taoice  cams  iti  ijnonym,  i^etiiai.
(Photiu,  Imc.  (.a.)  In  the  nma  bowl  the  food
WBi  comnKail/  ImHight  to  tablo  (XeiL  Cgrvp,
§4;  Athen.iT.  p.  149,  t;  PlauL  jVif.  iil  1. 164  j
Tet.  Emt.it.  7.  46  ;  Hor.5at  iL  8,  43),  an  eif— '-
of  which  ia  >Mti»u>*  rSr  Xrfftir  Kpfir,  i,
batiii  of  atswed  hare."  (Aristoph.  Adiani.  DOB.)
But  it  ii  to  be  DUerred,  that  dlihei  [Lanx,  "
t»a]  wen  uaed  to  bring  to  table  thoie  articli
Inid,  the  foim  and  aolidit]-  of  which  were  adag

The  liirer  bowl  wu  umetimea  omamaitid
with  iTj-WTCi  (Wtrabi,  Treb.  Poll.  La),  oi  ,
the  iuertioii  of  miiron  (Mpidllata,  Fl.  Vopiic  Prxt-
Iw,  p.  2S4,  ed.  Salmaui).  Theaa  bowU  weighed
frsm  10  to  SO  Iha.  each.  Vitdlius,  wiahing  to  ob-
tam  an  earthenwan  bowl  of  imjnente  liu,  bad  ■
fiunaEe  eonftnicted  on  pnipoie  to  bake  it.  (Plin.
a.N.axi.  12.  1.46  ;  Jav.ir.  130—134.)

A  method  of  dirinatiisi  b;  the  um  of  a  baiin
(AtmMfwrr'lii)  i*  mentioned  bj  Tietaei  on  Ljco-
pfcron,  T.  813.  (J.  Y.J

PATRES. rPAr«lCII  i SlKiTUB.]

PATRIA  POTESTAS.  PoleilM  tiani£ei  ^
■anil;  a  power  or  faeult;  of  any  kind  by  which
we  da  any  thingi  "  Poteitaa,"  tayi  Panlna  (Dig.
£0.  tit  16.  1.  2I£),  "  hai  Mrera]  lignifica^ona :
when  applied  to  Magiitistm,  it  ii  Imperimn  ;  in
the  caae  of  Children,  it  ii  the  Patria  Poteilai ;  in
the  mie  of  Slavet,  it  ia  Dominium. "  According
to  Paoliii  then,  Poteetst,  aa  iqiplied  to  Muii-
tntoi,  ia  eqniT^ent  to  Impoium.  Thiu  we  find
Potaitaa  aiHicicled  with  the  adjective!  Fnetoria,
Coamlaiii.  But  Poteetai  ii  ^iplied  to  Magia-
tntoi  who  had  cot  the  Imperium,  aa  for  iiutance
to  Quaeiton  and  Triboni  Flebii  (Cic  ;in>  ClneM.
c  27)  ;  and  Poteitu  and  Imperiara  ace  often  op-
poaed  in  Cicero.  Both  the  eipreuioni  Triboni-
ciiun  Ju  and  Tribunicta  Peleatai  an  oied  (Tacit.
Ami.  L  2,  3).  That  it  aeenu  that  thii  word
Potntaa,  like  many  other  Romao  tetmi,  had  both
•  wider  lignification  and  a  nanowei  one.  la  iti
wider  tig^eatiiHi  it  might  mean  all  the  power
that  wat  delegated  to  any  perion  by  the  State,
whaterer  might  be  the  extent  of  that  power. In


PATRIA  POTESTAS.


87S


hand  eqnivalent  to  Imperium  ;  and  aa  the  other,
it  eipreued  the  power  of  thoae  fdnclionariei  who
hod  not  the  Imperium.  Sometimea  it  wat  nied
to  eiprew  a  Magiitiatna,  oa  a  peraon  (Soeton.
Cbad.  13  ;  Jut.  SoL  i.  lOU)  ;  and  hence  in  the
Italian  knguage  the  word  Podciti  ligniflea  a
Magittrale.

Patettsa  it  olio  one  of  the  wotdi  by  which  ia
eipreiaed  the  power  that  one  prirate  penoo  baa
over  another,  the  other  two  being  Monua  and
Maneipium.  The  Poteatoa  it  either  Dominies,
that  ii,  ownenhip  a>  exhibited  in  the  relation  of
Maater  and  Slaie  [SaKVi'x] ;  or  Patria  aa  ex-
hibited in  the  relation  of  Father  and  Child.  The
Maneipium  waa  framed  after  the  analogr  of  the
Poteilaa  DDminica. [Mancipiuk.]

Patria  Poteato  then  ligniflei  the  power  which
a  Roman  father  hod  over  tbepenaatafbuchildnn,
grandchildren,  and  other  deeceodaoli  (jUii/aaaliat,
fiiiaefiimiliai),  and  generally  all  the  right*  which
he  had  by  lirtne  of  hii  paternity.  The  fonnd-
ation  of  the  Patria  Poteauu  waa  a  Roman  mar-
riage, and  (he  birth  of  a  child  gars  it  foil  efiitct.
[MiramoKtui.,]

It  doei  not  leem  that  the  Patria  Potellal  wu
ever  viewed  among  the  Romnna  aa  abaolulcly
oquiTolent  to  the  Dominica  Poteataa,  or  at  inioh-
ing  ownenhip  of  the  child  ;  and  yet  the  original
noticai  of  the  Patria  came  rery  near  to  that  of  the
Dominica  Poteacai.  Uriginally  the  father  had  the
power  of  life  and  death  over  hia  aan  an  a  member
of  hia  bmilia:  he  could  aell  him  and  ao  bring  him
into  the  moncipii  coma ;  and  he  had  the  ins  noiiu
dandi  ai  a  neceauuy  conaequence  of  hia  being
liable  (at  the  delicta  of  hia  child.  Ha  could  olio
give  hii  child  in  adoption,  and  eoianeipate  a  child
at  hii  pleaaura

The  bther  could  eiheredate  hia  ion,  he  could
aubttitnte  another  peraon  aa  heir  to  him  [HkhuJ,
and  he  could  by  hu  will  appoint  him  a  tutor.

The  general  righta  and  diiabilitlea  of  a  filiui-
fiimiliaa  may  be  thnt  btiofiy  cxprened—-'*  The
child  ia  incapable,  in  hia  priints  righta,  of  any
ppwer  or  dominion  ;  in  eTery  ether  reapect  he  ii
capable  of  legal  righta."  (SaTigny,  Sfttea,  dtc.
iL  £2.)  The  inoqiacity  of  the  child  it  not  really
an  incapacity  of  acquiring  legal  lighta,  for  tbo
child  could  acquin  by  contract,  for  inttance  ;  bnl
ereiy  thing  thM  ha  aaiuiied,  wu  acquired  for  hia
fiuher.

Aa  to  mitten  that  belonged  to  the  Joa  Publi-
cum, the  ion  Isboored  tinder  no  iitcapacitiet :  ha
could  TOte  at  the  C«mtia  Tribula,  he  could  fill  a
magiilratui ;  and  he  could  be  a  tntor ;  for  the
Tulela  wu  conaiderad  a  port  of  Ju  Pubiienm.
(Dig.  1,  tit  6.  1.  9  I  Lit.  hit.  44  ;  Gell.  ii.  2.)

The  child  had  (^onnubium  and  Commardum,
lilcB  any  Roman  citizen  who  wu  nu  juria,  but
theie  I^^  oipacitiea  brought  to  him  no  praaent
power  or  ownenhip.  HiimaRiage  with  hiihthcr'a
conient  wat  legal  Ijiuhm),  but  if  it  wat  accom-
panied with  the  In  Monum  conTentio,  bii  wife
came  into  the  power  of  hia  bther,  and  not  into  the
power  of  the  aon.  The  lon't  children  wen  in  all
cBiei  in  the  power  of  their  gnndfalher,  when  the
•on  wu.  The  aon  could  alao  dirmee  hia  wife  with
hii  &ther'i  conianL

Inatmuch  u  ha  hod  Commerdum,  he  eaoU  be
a  witneai  to  Uancipationea  and  Teitamsnta  i  but
he  could  not  have  property  nor  lerritntea.  He
had  the  teatameali  bctio,  aa  alreadf  Malad,  (o  &r


874


PATRIA  P0TESTA3.


vfd,  aeqnii


poM  ai ;  Mid  he  could

He  tould,  aa  Blready  obai
ibr  his  fiiCheT  bj  contnrC,  faut  none  for  hitnidf,
except  in  the  oufl  of  lui  AditipnlAlio,  an  initonce
vfaich  ahoin  the  difTeicncs  Iwtween  s  Mn  and  a
alSTe.  [Obligationeb.]  But  a  filiui  pnbet  conid
incur  obligalionn  Bad  could  be  iued,  like  n  patei-
Amiliai.  {Dig.  iS.  tit.  1.  >.  Ui.  §  2  i  44.  tit  7.
i.  39.)  The  fornidalion  of  tbeia  rnlei  oT  law  wni
the  nuuini  that  the  condition  of  s  maatei  amid  be
improTcd  by  the  ocM  of  hi<  iLitw,  but  not  made
•wtne  1  and  Ihii  nuiiim  applied  equally  to  a  lon
and  a  alare.  Between  the  ftlher  and  (he  aon  ne
dTila  abligatioDei  conld  eiiit ;  neilber  nf  them
conaeqnentlj  could  bate  a  right  oF  actioa  agaiDst
the  other.  Bat  naturalea  obligationei  might  be
talaUilhed  belireen  them,  tjonie  writera  have
•uppued  that  then  woi  a  difTerence  between  the
(•pacitiea  and  incapacJtie*  of  a  filiuitamiliu  and  a


filiaf


bligation


alleged  b;  Sarignyteei

tbere  ma  no  difference  ai  im. \^ytam^  etc  u.

Beylage,T.>

In  the  can  of  delict  bj  a  filinalaniiliaa  noialei
■ctjones  were  allowed  agpinat  the  hther.  (Oaiii«,
ir.  75.)  But  Juttinian  aboliabed  the  noxae  deditio
in  the  caie  of  a  liliaa  or  filiaianiiliai,  "  cum  apud
TderN  legum  cammentatorct  inTenimna  taepiua
dictum,  ipaoa  iitiaafainiliiu  pro  anii  dclii


(In


a  7  i  Dig.  43.  lit
a  Actio  ;  Filius-


39.  «.  1.  ^  I  4.) (No
F1HILU8.]

The  incapacity  of  the  child  to  acquire  for  him

■elf  and  hia  capacity  to  acquire  foe  hia  lather,  Bi

" ' '  '  incapaeily  of  Bcqairiug  righli


■dby«


modem  writen  at  a  conaeqoence  cf  a  legal  ui
of  penon,  while  olhera  affirm  that  there  iinotrnce
of  euch  a  fiction  in  the  Roman  law,  and  that  the
anumption  i<  by  no  meani  neceuary  to  explain
the  rule  of  law.  (Bdcking,  Intl.  i.  228,  n.  20.)
Indeed  the  fiction  of  auch  a  unity  ia  quite  rninecea-
nry,  fc>r  the  fundumenlal  maxim,  aircndy  referred
to,  that  a  man  may  be  made  richer  but  not  poorer
by  bii  alavea  and  children  it  a  aimple  po<itiTe
rule.  ThouHh  the  child  could  not  acquire  for  bitn-
aelf^  jet  all  that  he  did  acquire  hi  hia  father,
might  become  hia  own  in  the  event  of  hia  father^
death,  a  oircumatance  which  materially  diitin-
goiahed  the  aoquiaiCioni  of  a  eon  from  those  of  a
alare  i  and  accoidingly  the  son  ia  nmetimea,  though
not  with  itrict  propriety,  conaidered  aa  a  kind  of
joint  owner  with  hii  fottiei.

The  rule  ai  to  the  incapacity  of  a  filluifamillai
for  acquiring  property  wu  tirit  varied  alMut  the
time  of  Auguitua,  when  the  ton  vaa  empowered
to  acquire  Cor  himaelf  and  to  treat  ai  hia  own
whatever  he  got  in  military  aerrict  Thia  wa*  tbe
Caatrenie  Pecnlium,  with  reipcct  to  whieh  the  ion
wat  nmiidend  ai  a  penon  >ui  jurja.  (Jut.  SoL
ui.  ai  ;  Oaiui,  iL  106.)  But  if  the  tiliuatiuniliaa
died  without  having  made  any  diapoaition  of  thia
peculium,  it  came  to  the  fiither,  and  thia  continued
to  be  the  law  till  Jna^ian  altered  it ;  but  in  thia
caae  the  property  came  aa  Peculium,  not  aa  Here-
ditua.  The  priviii^^  of  a  filiuafamiliaa  aa  to  the
acquintion  of  property  wen  extended  under  Con-
atantine  to  hii  ocquiailiona  mode  during  the  dio-
dHUSa  of  eiiil  afficet,  and  aa  thia  tww  priTiUgt


PATRIA  POTESTAS.

waa  fintmed  after  the  analogy  of  the  Caitrenae  Pe-
culium, it  waa  deiignated  by  the  name  Quoai  Coo-
treuae  Peculium.  Farther  priiil^ea  of  the  aamc
kind  were  alao  gireu  by  Conauuitioe  and  extsidcd
under  aubioquent  empeiun  (io»  gaaii  patri  wtm

orffM'nBjlir).

Tbe  Patiia  Poteslai  began  with  tie  birth  of  ■
child  in  a  Roman  marriage.  If  a  Roman  had  by
miatake  married  a  woman  with  whom  he  had  no
connubinm,  thinking  that  connubium  exiated,  he


a  Senatna-conaultun  (Gaina,  L  67),  which,  aa  it
Bppcari  frcm  (he  context,  and  a  compariion  with
Ulpian^  Fragment!  (vii.  4),  mil  an  amendmmt
of  the  Lex  Aella  Sentia.  Other  inUonce*  of  tbe
caiuae  pnibaiio  ore  mentioned  by  Oaiui.

It  waa  a  condition  of  the  Patria  Poteitii  that
the  child  abould  be  begotten  in  matrimeoinm  Ic-
(tiiimum.  (Gaiua,i.  6S— 107  ;  InaL  1,  tit  9— II.)
By  tbe  old  law,  the  nbiequent  marriage  of  the
parent!  did  not  legitimate  a  child  born  before  lb*
marriage.  But  it  (cema  to  have  early  betome  the
JBshion  for  the  Emperor,  ai  an  act  of  gnee,  to
place  auch  child  en  the  nune  footing  as  Intimate
children.  The  legitimation  per  aubioqaena  matri-
monium  only  became  an  eitabliabed  rule  of  lav
under  Conatantine,  and  waa  introduced  Ibr  tbe  ad-
vantage of  children  who  were  bom  in  concubinave.
[CoNCDBiNA.]  In  the  time  of  Tbeodoiiua  11^
the  rule  wai  calabliibcd  by  which  a  child  voa
legitimated  per  oblationem  curiae.  To  time  two
mode*  of  legilimation,  Jualinian  added  (hat  per
reecriptom  principis.  Tho  child  chua  It^titaatcd
came  into  the  bmilia  and  the  potealaa  of  hia  fathir,
aa  if  be  had  been  botn  in  lawftil  marriage.

The  Patria  PoteMu  could  alao  be  acquired  by
either  of  the  modes  of  Adaptjou.  [Aaorrio,
p.lfi,b.)

The  Patria  Potcatoa  waa  dinotved  ia  variona
woya.  It  waa  diaaoivMi  by  the  death  of  tho  btha,
upon  which  event,  Che  giundcbildren,  if  Ha^et  were
any,  who  had  hitherto  been  in  tbe  power  of  their
grandfethcr,  came  into  (he  power  of  tbdr  bthet
who  waa  now  loi  joria.  It  coutd  alio  be  diuolved
in  variona  wsya  during  tbe  lifetime  of  tbe  bthcr.
A  maiima  or  media  capitia  diminntia  either  of
the  parent  or  child  diasolvcd  tbe  Patria  PoMatoa  ;
though  in  tbe  coie  of  either  party  auMainirn  a
capitia  diminudo  by  falling  into  tJie  hands  of  an  '
enemy,  the  relation  might  be  rerived  by  Poat-
liminium.  A  father  who  was  admgated,  and  conse-
quently sualained  a  minima  capitia  dimiimcia,  cnme
together  with  bis  children,  who  had  bitheno  been
in  hit  power,  into  tbe  power  of  hia  adoptive  Ikthpr.
The  emancipation  of  the  child  by  tbe  biber  was  ■
common  mode  of  dieaoUHng  tbe  Patria  PoteUaa,
and  waa  accompanied  by  the  Minima  Capitia  diui-
nutJo.  If  a  son  wna  elected  Flomen  Ustlia  or  a
daughter  iras  chos^'u  a  Vestal,  the  Patria  Potenas
ceased  ;  and  in  tbe  later  period,  it  waa  alao  dia-
■olved  by  the  aon^  attaining  certain  rivil  or  eccle-
uaatical  hononn.  Tbe  Poleatai  of  tbe  bxber
might  cease  without  the  son  becoming  aui  joria,  a
in  tbe  case  of  tho  aon  hw^  given  in  sdoptioa.

The  term  Patria  Paieatas  strictly  expressee  tbe
power  of  the  lather,  aa  auch,  which  ariaei  frnm  ihe
paternal  actation ;  but  the  tos  alio  impocti  the


PATRICIL
lifchli  of  ibe  child  u  *  lilintbniiliu  or  filti&miliiu.
Of  Ibeso  rigbu,  ihe  iDoaC  iraponsnt  waa  the  ra-
pacity af  beinK  tba  ma*  herea  of  tha  father.  Oene-
nlly,  tha  [«rent  could  fmuicipata  hii  child  at  bia
plcunn,  wid  thn*  depriTu  him  of  the  righti  of
Mgnation  ;  but  the  law  in  thii  mpect  waa  altered
br  Jntiniu  (.Not.  69.  e.  11),  who  madi  the  cod-
■nl  of  tha  child  neoeaaarf.  (Saiigny.  Sfiitm,  it,
ii.  49,  iK. ;  Puehta,  IiuL  m.  142  ;  Btickin^,  IiaL
i224.)  CaL.)

PATRI'CII.  Thi*  word  ii  a  deriTMive  fnnn
paltr,  which  in  tbo  eulj  tiin««  inrariably  denoted
a  palriciiii,  aod  in  the  later  limei  of  the  republic
fteqUBntly  oGCun  in  tha  Roman  writen  a>  eqaiva-
lent  to  •enalor.  Patricii  thererore  (igmfie*  thoae
who  bclonfted  to  the  patna  ■'  rex  patiee  eoa  (amo-
tont)  TDlnit  nomlnioi,  polricioaqae  «>nim  liberu."
(Cicda  R»  PfiL  il  13  ;  Ut.  L  S  i  Dionja.  il  8.)
It  ii  a  miatake  in  thaae  writera  to  inppoae  that
the  patrieii  wen  oolj  the  albpring  of  the  patns
in  tlw  aanae  of  aenaton,  and  neccMacily  conoectad
■rith  them  by  blood.  Pacrce  and  pelricii  wen
originaUy  coiTcnible  tennt.  ( Pint  RonuL  1 3  i
Ljdui,  d*  Mau.  i.W,dt  Mag.  I  IG  )  Niebuhr,
Hut.  if  Rama,  i  p.  338.)  Tha  worda  foita  and
yairieu  bare  imdically  and  eaaaitiaUj  the  aame
vieaning;  and  aome  of  the  aaaonla  beiieTed  that
the  nana  pBlna  waa  gtf«n  to  that  particolar  claaa
ef  tha  Roman  population  from  the  bet  that  they
wen  fathen  of  bmiliet  (PhiL  Dvj^p.  L  e.)  ;
otheca,  that  they  wne  called  w  fram  their  age
(SallMt,  Cats.  6)  ;  or  becanaa  Ihfiy  dittiibnted
land  amoog  the  poorer  citiienB,  a*  ikthera  did
among  their  childreii,  (Feat  a.  v.  Pairm  Seaatona;
Lyd.  da  Mao.  iv.  SO.)  Bat  raoat  writen  joatly
r^fer  tbe  nane  to  the  patrociniiun  which  the  t»-

•U  ilaiiia  of  penona  of  whom  it  waa  compoeed,
(Pint  and  Sallnat,  I.  a. ;  ZcBamt,  lii.  8  ;  Suidaa,
a.  V.  OaxflKmL)

In  ecaaideriog  who  the  patriciani  were,  we  ban
to  diMingoiah  thne  pcrioda  in  the  hiatory  of  Rome.
Th*  &IM  extenda  frim  the  iwuidatian  of  the  dty
down  to  the  ctCaUiahmeDt  of  the  plebeiBoi  «  a
HCODd  order ;  the  aecond,  from  thia  erent  down  to
tbfl  tivie  of  rimatantinr,  during  which  time  the
I-ttr"T~-T  wen  a  real  ariatocracy  of  birth,  and  u
an^  brmed  a  dialiDCt  claM  of  Komaa  eitiieua  op-
poaed  to  tha  pleMana,  and  afterararde  to  the  now
r*-*— ■"  aiiMoaa<7  of  the  nobilea :  tba  third  period
•JileBd*  fieoi  Cenalantgie  down  to  the  middle  tget,
darinf  which  the  ptftidan*  were  no  longer  an
arktocncy  ef  biitb,  bat  wen  penona  who  merely
enjoyed  B  title,  Slat  granlsd  1^  the  emperon  and
■fterwarda  by  the  popla  alao.

Fir*  Pthad:  from  HufixBtiatitm  o/aadl<f,lo
ttt  titMJAmtat  {/  tia  pMeiioi  order.  Niehuhr'a
reaanrcbeo  into  the  early  hiatory  of  Rome  hare
eaUUiahed  it  aa  a  bet  beyond  all  doubt,  that  dur-
ing thb  period  the  patriciana  compriaed  Ibe  whole
body  nf  Rotnana  who  enjoyed  the  full  franchiie,
that  they  wan  tba  pofmlat  Romami,  and  that
ihctw  wen  no  other  itsl  cititena  beiidea  them.
( Niebuhr,  AM.  o/AMm,  il  pp.  22i,  2-25.  note  ^07;
Cie.  pro  Caadn.  ii.)  The  patriciana  muit  be  re-
■atded  ai  ccaiqnenm  who  reduced  tba  earlier  in-
hatntanta  of  the  jiacr*  they  occupied  to  a  itale  of
aertitode,  which  m  our  autboiitieB  ii  deiienated  by
the  lerau  cUam  tii<ipUb$.  The  olhs  parla  of  the
Kootaa  populBtion,  namely  clienta  and  alarea,  did
not  bdoog  la  Uie  popnlne  Ronunua,  or  MTenign


founded  aetUementa  u[


PATRICIL  875

people,  and  wen  not  burghcn  or  pitiiciina.  Tha
aemtnri  »en  a  lelecl  body  of  the  populdi  or  pa-
triciana, which  acted  ai  their  rppiFientatiTr.  Tha
burghen  or  patrician*  conaiited  oiiginalty  of  tbrea
diatind trib«t,  which gradually  became united

-_._ .L. '^ popului. Thcio tribe* bad

maeveral  of  the  hilla  which

anbaequently  included  within  the  precinct*  of

ily  of  Rune.  Their  same*  wen  Ramnea,
Titiea,  and  Lucerca,  ra*  Hamnense*,  Titicnaei,  and
Luceniuea.  Each  of  theae  tribee  conaiated  of  tea
curiae,  and  each  curia  of  ten  decurio,  which
wen  eatabliahed  for  repreeentatiTe  and  military
purpoee*.  [Sinatus.]  The  lint  tribe,  or  the
Ramnea,  wen  a  Latin  colony  on  the  Palatine
hill,  nid  to  hare  been  fomided  by  Romului.  Aa
long  a*  it  itood  alone,  it  eonlained  mly  one  huit-
dred  gentea,  and  had  a  lenate  of  one  hundred
membera.  When  the  Titie*,  or  Sabine  letllen
on  the  Quirinal  and  Vimbal  bille,  under  king
Tatiui,  beome  nnited  with  the  Hamnea,  the  num-
ber of  genie*  a*  well  a>  that  of  (cnetin  wna
increeicd  to  200.  Theia  two  tribe*  afta  (heir
UDion  continued  pnbably  for  a  conaideinbia  time
to  be  the  patriciana  of  Rome,  un^  the  third
tribe,  the  Idicere*,  which  chiefly  conaiited  of
EtruBcwu,  who  had  settled  on  tha  Caelian  Hill,
alao  became  united  with  tha  other  two  aa  a
third  tnba,  When  thia  aetlleraent  wa*  made  1*
not  cerum  :  aome  aaj  that  it  wh*  in  the  time  of
Ramnin*  (FoL  a.  d.  Caaliat  Mau  and  LMcant;
Vano,  da  Ling.  Lot.  T.  55)  ;  olhen  thai  it  took
pUee  at  a  later  time.  (Tacit.  Amai.  It.  65 ;  FeaC
I,  D.  TWcKB  noun.)  But  the  Etruican  leltlemeat
wa*  in  oil  probability  older  than  that  of  the  EabhicB
(•0*  OUttling,  OatcL  der  Kim.  StaaltBerf.  p.  64,
&c),  though  it  aeema  occaaionallyto  hare  receiied

band*  of  Etruacan  tetllen  eren  a*  lata  a*  the

of  the  lepublic

Iba  amalgomatim  of  theae  three  tribe*  did  not
take  place  at  once :  the  union  between  L^Iina  and
Sabine*  it  aacribed  to  thani|tu  of  Romulua,  though
have  been  quite  perfect,  (ince
the  Latin*  on  Mune  occaaion*  claimed  a  inperiority
(Dionye.  ii.  62,)  Tho  Lucerea
axtgted  for  a  long  time  a*  a  •epaiate  tribe  with-
out enjoying  tho  aame  right*  oa  the  two  othen
until  Tai^niniua  Priicna,  himaelf  on  Elnucan,
cBuaed  them  to  be  placed  on  a  footing  of  equality
with  tha  ether*.  For  thi*  rea*on  he  i*  (aid  to
hare  iDcreaaed  Ihe  number  of  tenaton  to  300
(Diony*.  iil  67  j  Liv.  i.  8S  r  Cit  lia  fie  PvU.
ii.  20 ;  compare  Sknatub),  and  to  hare  add»i  two
Ve«lBl  virgin*  to  the  eriiting  nnmber  of  four,
(IHouy*.  L  a. ;  Feat.  *.  o.  iSkz  Vtilat  mcenUtai  ;
Niabubr,  HiiL  ofjioau,  !.  p.  302,  &c)  The  Lu-
cerea, howerer,  are,  notwillutonding  this  cqnaiia^
tion,  aomclimca  diatingniahed  from  tho  other  tribe*
hj  the  name  patra  niiunm  gtmtiwn;  though
thia  name  i*  nlw  applied  to  other  member*  of  tha
patriciani,  a,  g.  to  thoae  plebeian  &milte<  who
wenadniitled  byTarquinin*l'ri*cua  into  the  thioo
tribe*,  and  in  eorapariaon  with  theae,  the  Lucerea
are  again  called  pairea  rn^ontm  gentimm..  (Compon
Niebuhr,  i.  p.  304,  and  Oiitlling,  p.  226,  dtc.)
That  thia  diitinnion  between  patiea  majontm  and
minoium  gentium  waa  kept  up  in  private  life,  at  a
time  when  it  had  no  value  whatever  in  a  political
point  of  view,  ii  clear  from  Cicera  (ad  Fam.  ix,
21). Tnllua Hoitlliu*  admitted  aeveral  of  the

mble  genie*  of  AUm  amoDf  the  patcickn*  (w

. ,. .  ... ^.^.^


87G


PATRICII.


jalra  lagii,  Ut.  L  30),  vit,  the  Tullii  (Jnlii  t),
Serrilii,  Quinctii,  Oej^iuiii,  CaiUtii,  and  Cloelii,  to
vhich  Dinnjriiu  (iiL  29)  odds  the  gem  Metilin.
Ancui  Mnniui  admitted  tfae  Twquinii  (Dionya.
iij.  4li),  Tarqniniiu  Priicui  the  Tullii  {Diony«.
iv.  3),  Serriiu  Tuliiu  the  Octaxii  <Suelon.  Aug.
1,  &t),  ud  even  Tuiiiiiiniiu  Superbni  i«ms  to
Uve  had  ■imilu  intention!.  (Dionya  i*.  fi7  ;
ijueton.  Vit^.  1 .)  M'o  do  not  h.aa  thai  (he  nam-
her  of  gentea  vm  incremed  by  theu)  admiDions,
and  mint  therefore  mppoH  that  Bome  of  them  bad
already  become  extinct,  and  that  the  vacauciet
which  thai  nroie  were  filled  up  with  these  new
hurnhen.  (OOtlling,  p.  222.)  During  tbe  line  of
the  republic,  diitiiiguiihed  itran^re  and  wealthy
pUbeiani  were  occaiionally  made  lioDun  patricuuia,
e.  g.  Appiiu  ChiDdiDt  and  hit  gem  (Lit.  x.  B  ;
compan  iL  16  ;  Dion]:!,  v.  40  ;  Sueton.  Tib.  1),
and  Domiliui  Alienobartma.  (SueL  A'ero,  1.)  Ai
legarda  the  kingly  period  the  Roman  hiitnriana
■peak  aa  if  the  kingi  had  had  the  powei  of  railing

bul  it  ii  evident  Ihat  the  king  coidd  not  do  Ihia
withonf  the  conaent  of  the  patna  in  their  curiet ;
and  hence  Lity  (It,  4)  makei  Canuleini  aay,  "per
coopBtionem  in  palrea,  aul  ab  regibna  lecti,"  which
lectio,  of  couiK,  requiitd  the  tanelion  of  the  body
la  the  lime  of  the  republic  anch  an
e  rank  of  patrician  could  only  be


Aon.  AUthL  \\.  1.  p.  26.  &c.)

Since  there  were  no  other  Kuouui  ciuzeni
the  patriciana  during  thit  period,  we  cannot  a;
of  any  riahta  or  priTilegei  belonging  to  Ihcm  ei
aively  ;  they  are  all  eomprehended  imder  Civi
(Rom4n)  and  Cans.  Reapecting  their  relalioc
the  kinga  tee  Couiru  Cubiata  and Stv


T'uring  tbU  CBiiy  period  we  can  scarcely  ipeak  of
the  patriciana  oe  an  ariitocmcy,  nnleu  we  regard
their  reUlion  to  the  clienu  in  lhi>  light.  [Cliin«.]
Sieimd  Period  :  from  tkt  atailidnrnt  of  Iht
jitheiim  ordtr  to  Oa  time  of  Conthattiae.  When
the  plebuana  beoune  a  dietinct  elau  of  citiiena,
who  ahared  certain  righti  with  the  patriciani,  the
latter  loat  in  ao  fu  ai  theie  righta  no  longer
belonged  to  theoi  eiclniivelr.  But  by  &r  (he
fjreater  niunbei  of  rigbta,  and  thoae  the  nioat  im-
portant onea,  atill  remnined  in  the  eicluaive  poa-
aetaion  of  the  patriciana,  who  alone  were  aoa
op^aa  j^in,  and  were  the  patrei  of  the  tiation  in
the  tame  aenie  aa  before.  All  civil  and  religious
oflicei  were  in  their  poiaeHJon,  and  they  continued
as  before  to  be  (he  populni,  ihe  natioa  now  con-
liiting  of  the  populni  and  the  plebei.  Thia  dia-
tinction,  which  Livy  fbnnd  in  aociont  documents
(iiT.  13),  leema  however  in  the  courae  of  time  to
have  fallen  into  obliiion,  so  that  the  historian
aeemi  to  be  scarcely  aware  of  it,  and  uaea  populua
for  the  whole  b™ly  of  citiieni  including  the  plo-
beiani.  Under  the  Antonines  tin  term  populua
signified  all  the  citiieni,  with  the  exception  of  the
patricil  (Gaiua,  i.  3.)  In  their  relation  to  the
^ebelant  or  the  commonalty,  the  patriciana  now
were  a  real  aiiitocmey  of  hinlu  A  peraon  bom  of
a  palhcian  family  waa  and  remained  a  patrician,
whether  he  waa  rich  or  poor,  whether  ha  waa  a
member  of  the  senate,  or  an  equea,  or  held  any  of
the  great  ofticei  of  Ihe  slate,  or  not :  there  waa  no
powra  that  conld  mike  a  patrician  a  plebeian,  ex-
cept his  own  Ilea  irill,  for  entry  patrician  might


by  ndopticai  into  a  plebeian  family,  or  by  a  aoleeni
traniition  Jrom  bia  own  order  to  the  plebi,  became
a  plebeian,  leanng  bit  gen*  and  curia  and  re-
nouncinK  the  aaoa.  Aa  legarda  the  ccnsoa,  ha
a  the  weolEfay  ilniaia.


family  of  the  Sullai  prvvioai  to  the  time  of  Iha
dic(B(or  of  that  name.  (SueL  Aug.  2  ;  Liv.
iv.  16  :  Plin.  H.  H.  xviiL  i  ;  Znnar.  riL  li  ;
Ascon.  Fed.  n  &iaw.  p.  26,  ed.  OrdlL)  A  plebeka,
on  the  other  band,  or  even  a  stranger,  mjg^t,  as  v«
■tated  shore,  be  made  a  patiiciaa  by  a  lex  cutiata.
But  this  appraii  to  have  been  done  very  sddvn  ;
and  the  conseqnence  wii,  that  in  the  coune  of  a
few  centoHes  the  nnmber  of  patiidaa  fiunilies  be-
came so  rapidly  diminished,  Ihat  lowaida  ike  cioaa
of  Che  republic  there  were  not  more  than  fifty  such
Eunilies.  (Dionya.  L  BS.)  Jnliu*  Caenr  ij  tb*
lex  Caiiia  raised  aerara]  plebeian  bmilie*  to  th*
rank  of  patriciana,  in  order  thai  they  might  be  aide
to  continue  to  bold  Ihe  ancioit  priestly  ulEcta
which  ilill  belonged  ts  their  order.  (SueL  Oaa.
41  ;  TaciL  Aiaid.  li.  25  ;  Dion  Cbil  iliiL  47,
iIt.  2.)  AugnitDB  soon  after  finiud  it  aecCMary
to  do  Ihe  same  by  a  lex  Saeaia.  (Tadt.j.c;  Dion
Caas.  xlix.  4S,  IiL  42.)  Other  emperor*  followed
theae  exampiei :  Claudius  raised  a  number  of  seoa-
lors  and  such  person*  aa  were  bom  of  iliiutiiani
parenta  to  the  rank  of  patriciana  (Tacit.  Le,  ;  Suet.
Oli,  1)  ;  Veapaaian,  Titui,  and  other  empaan  did
the  same.  (Tacit.  Agrie.  9  ;  (^pitoL  M.  AtimiM.
i  ;  I^mprid.  Conaiod.  S.)  The  expreanim  for  thia
act  of  niaing  persona  to  the  rank  of  patriciana  wa*
in  patrioiot  or  inJaMtiiain  patriaaxt  ad/igert.

Although  the  patriciana  throughout  this  whole
period  had  the  character  of  an  ariatocracy  of  Irirth^
ye(  their  political  rigbta  were  not  the  mtaa  at  all
time*.  The  firal  centuries  of  thia  period  arc  an
almost  uninterrupted  atcu^le  between  p"^-**-?
and  plebeiana,  in  which  the  farmer  eierlied  tntn
meeni  to  retain  their  eiduiive  rights,  bntvluu
ended  in  the  establishment  of  the  politiad  equalin
of  the  two  Olden.  [Plebb.]  Only  a  few  iaufu*
ficant  priestly  offices,  and  the  perfi:OTruuicaofoe>tain
ancient  rBligious  rita*  and  ceremonies,  remained
the  exclusive  ^vilcge  of  the  paCridaDs  ;  of  wbidi
they  were  the  prouder,  as  in  fimner  dayi  their  ro-
ligioua  power  and  aignificance  w«e  the  boska  of
their  political  superiority.  (See  Amlooach,  .SfariHi*
HKJ  AndaifiBigim,  J.t.  p.  £B,  &c)  At  the  liiDe
when  the  struggle  between  patricians  and  plebeiana
ceased,  a  new  kind  of  arislocracy  b^ao  to  aiisa
at  Home,  which  was  partly  bated  upcm  wealth  and
partly  npon  the  gr«tt  ofiicis  of  the  republic,  and
the  term  Nobiles  waa  giien  to  all  persran  wboaa
ancestors  hod  held  any  of  the  cuiule  offieea.  (Cam-
pare  NobilsS.)  This  aristocracy  of  nobilei  threw
the  old  patricians  as  a  body  suli  more  into  ib«
shade,  though  both  claian  of  ariilocnts  united  aa
&r  aa  waa  poiaible  to  monopolise  ail  the  gn«t
olUce*  of  the  etate  (Liv.  xiil  34,  xixii.  41} ;
but  although  the  old  patricians  were  obl^ed  in
many  cases  to  make  common  cause  with  the  nobilea,
yet  they  could  never  tapprc**  the  feeing  of  Ibrir
own  superiority  ;  and  the  veawntion  which  histari~
cal  antiquity  alone  can  bestow,  always  diitinguiahed
'^em  aa  individuals  from  the  nobilea.  How  mneh
realth  gndnally  gained  tho  upper  band,  is  snn
' ' ' Ibe  tine  of  tb*


PATRICir.  ■
fint  Punic  wsr,  by  which  the  eipenM*  fee  tha
poblic  ganwa  wen  no  langtr  $[ireii  from  ihc  aan-
rium,  bnl  wrre  defrayed  by  the  udilo  ;  and  u
their  office  ww  the  fint  itep  to  the  iinst  oflim  of
tlie  republic,  that  meomre  vu  >  tacit  eidiuiou  o(
the  poorer  eitiieiii  frain  thoae  dllceL  Under  the
empeiwi  the  poeition  of  the  palrieiiini  u  ■  body
wu  not  impniTed  ;  the  filling  up  of  Iha  racanciee
in  their  niler  by  the  emperon  began  more  and
le  iha  character  of  an  especial  honour,


.1  faic


merely  aa

tion  from  thii  period  to  the  third  had  been  grm-

dnally  preparing.

ReipectiDg  the  great  politicnl  and  religiom  priri-
Vfin  which  the  pntricianft  at  fint  poaieued  alone,
but  tf\erwardi  were  compelled  to  ihan  with  the
plcbeiana,  are  Flibs  and  the  articlea  treating  of
the  MTeiBl  Kotnan  mafiiitracio  and  ptieally  affjeea.
Compare  alK  Gins  ;  Citria  ;  SaHiTtrs.

In  their  dreai  and  appearance  the  patrician*
wrre  acartely  diitinguiihed  fmin  the  reit  of  (he
citiiein,  nnlees  they  were  aciuitora,  cnmle  magit-
tralH,  or  eqnitea,  in  which  cue  they  wore  like
other*  the  eniigni  peculiar  to  theic  difjnitiee.  The
ealj  thing  by  which  they  appear  to  haTo  been  dla-
tingniihed  in  tfapir  appearance  from  other  citiienB,
wai  a  peculiar  kind  of  ihoca,  which  corcrcd  the
whde  foot  and  part  of  the  leg,  though  they  were
DM  ai  high  ai  the  ihon  of  wnalon  and  cnrule
maeiiiratei.  Thrte  ihoei  were  fiulened  with  fiinr
Rrinm  (corr^iar  or  lora  palHcin)  and  adorned  with
a  Innnla  on  the  top.  (Senec  De  TnoKpiH.  Anim,
1 1  ;  Plat  Q^ittl.  Ram.  75  ;  Stnt  SUr.  v.  2.  37  i
Martial,  i.  iO,  it,  29.)  Fetlui  <t  -..  MiUleot)
itatei  that  mulleni  vu  the  name  of  the  ahoe*
worn  by  the  pntrician*  ;  but  the  pa««age  of  Vano
which  he  nddncn  only  ihowi  that  the  mnllei  (ehoes
ofa  purple  colour)  were  worn  bv  the  cnrule  magia-
trale*.  (Compare  Dion  Caaa.  iliiL  *3.)

Tti'rd  ferial :  /mm  lii  hat  of  Omton/nH  ta
lia  middle  ago.  From  the  time  of  Conitantine  the
dignity  of  patriciui  wai  a  penonal  title,  which
eonfcmd  on  the  penon,  to  wbiiin  St  waa  granted,  a
Ten  high  nuik  and  certain  privileges.  Hitherto
patricinni  had  been  only  genuine  Homan  citiiena,
and  the  dignity  had  detcendnl  Ironi  the  bther  to
hii  children  ;  bnt  the  new  dignity  waa  ereated  at
Connantinople,  and  wai  not  bellowed  on  idd  Ro-
man &iniliea  ;  it  wot  gi*en,  without  any  regard
to  penona,  to  inch  men  aa  had  for  a  long  time  dia-
tinguiihcd  themielTei  by  good  and  faithful  acrricea
to  the  cmpin  or  the  empeior.  Thia  new  dignity
waa  not  heteditair,  but  became  extinct  with  the
death  aS  the  peraon  on  whom  it  vaa  oonfemd ;
and  when  during  thii  period  we  read  of  patrician
brniliea,  tbemeaninn  it  only  that  the  head  of  tuch
abmily  waaapairiciua  (Zoaim,  11.40  ;  Cafiiodor.
ronnr.  tL  2.)  The  name  patricina  during  thia
period  aaamned  the  conTcntiona!  meaning  of  father
of  the  empemr  (Ammian.  Maicellin.  xiii.  2  ;  Cod.
I3.tiL  3.  gS),  and  those  who  wcrethiudiatinguiahed
occupied  ths  higheit  rank  among  the  iUoitrea  ;  the
conauli  alone  ranked  higher  than  a  patriciui.
<l(idor.  ix.4.  1.3;  Cod.  3.  tit.  24.  a.  3  i  IS.tiL
3.  a  3.)  The  titles  by  which  a  patriciui  wat  di*-
tmguished  wero  mAgnificentia,  celaitndo^emioentia,
and  nuu^itado.  They  were  either  engaged  in
actual  serrice  (for  they  gcncially  held  the  bigheal
dB«  in  the  itate,  at  the  conrt  and  in  the  pro-
naoM),  and  mra  than  called  pairidi  jmutmtalu,


PATRONOML

or  they  had  only  the  title  and  were  called  j>
eodidUara  or  hmorarii,  (Caiiiod.  Tiii.  9  :  Sa
ad  Sidtn.  ApolL  i.  3.)  t
diatinguithed  in  their  a
ordinary  penoni,and  leidom  appeared  beibrv  tl
pttblic  otherwiae  than  in  a  carriage.  The  empema
were  gcnenllT  tcit  cantiona  in  beatowing  this  great
diitinction,  though  some  of  the  moat  arbitiaiy
deipota  confemd  the  honour  upon  young  men  and
even  en  etuncha  Zeno  decreed  that  no  one  ihonld
be  made  patridut  who  had  not  been  conin],  praa-
feet,  or  magiiter  militnm.  (Cod.  3.  •a\.  S4.  a.  3.)
Juatmian,  boweier,  did  away  with  aome  of  these
restrictioni.  The  elevation  to  the  ranit  of  patriciui
was  testified  to  the  penon  by  a  writ  called  diploma.
(Sidan.Apotlin.T.16  ;  Suidai,  i.  ri.  rpo/ifisriDiov ;
coinHre  Caaiiodor.  ti.  2,  liii.  51,  &e.)

Tbii  new  digm^  was  not  confined  to  Romana
or  mbjects  of  the  empire,  hut  wai  lometiinea  grant
ed  to  foreign  princes,  mcfa  ai  Odoacer,  the  chief  of
the  Hanili,  and  othen.  When  the  popes  of  Roma
had  eitabliihed  their  authority,  they  aia  aiiumed
the  right  of  hettowing  the  title  of  patricina  m
eminent  penona  and  prince*,  and  many  of  the
Gcnnan  emperon  were  thui  diitinguiihed  by  Iha
popn.  In  sevenl  of  the  Germanic  kingdoms  the
soYcreigns  imitated  the  Roman  emperon  and  pope*
by  giving  to  their  most  diitinguiihed  suhjecia  the
title  of  palriciu*,  but  these  patricii  wen  at  ail
time*  much  lowor  in  rank  than  the  Roman  patricii,
a  liUe  oF  which  kinga  and  emperon  themiclTes

(Rein,  u  EnA  u^  GnAer'i  Biuydapailit,
a  r.  FalrtcUr,  and  for  the  early  period  of  Roman
History,  GiHtling^  Genk.  dar  Rom.  StaiUtttr/.
p.  fil,  ftc,  Becker's  HaiidbiuA.  I.  p.,  and  p.  133,
&c.)  (L.  S.]

PATRIMI  ET  MATRIMI,  al»  called  Pa-
trima  tt  Atnirimit,  wen  thow  children  whoae
parenti  were  both  bIItb  (Feitoa,  i.  v.  FlamtKia  ;
Matrima  ;  called  hy  Dionyaios,  iL  22,  ^.BoXiii) ;
in  the  Bme  way  as  pater  jtoiriiaHt  aignilies  a
fiitheT,  whoie  own  father  ia  Hill  alire.  (Feitns,  k  v.
PnttrPatr.)  Sertiu*  (od  Virg.  Otorg.  31),  how.
ever,  confine*  the  term  jatrimi  H  mairiaii  to  chil-
dren bom  of  porenta  who  had  been  married  by
the  religion*  ceremony  called  confaireatio ;  it  ap-
pean  probable  that  thia  i*  the  correct  uie  of  the
term,  and  that  it  was  onlyapfJitd  to  auch  children
so  long  as  their  parent*  were  aliie.  We  know
that  the  flamines  majorea  were  obliged  to  haTs
been  bom  of  parent*  who  had  been  mamed  by  eon-
faneatio  (Tae.  .4  m.  iv.  1 6  ;  Qaini,  i,  1 1 2)  ;  and
aatheehildien  <alled  paMmi  st  matrimi  are  olmotc
always  mentioned  in  connection  with  religioui
rite*  and  teremoniei  (Cic.  dt  Har.  rap.  1 !  ;  LIt.
uxril  3;Oell.L12;Tacit.^^.iv,S3;  Macnb.
Saltnt.  6  1  VopiK.  Aurd.  19  ;  Orelli,  Itacr.  n.
2270),  the  ilalemeal  of  Sertiui  ia  rendered  more
probable,  lines  the  same  reaion,  which  confined
the  office  of  the  flamine*  majore*  to  tho*e  bom  of
porenta  who  had  been  married  hy  confarreatio,
would  alio  apply  to  the  children  of  auch  mairiagea,
who  woold  probably  be  thought  more  auilahle  for
the  wrrice  of  the  goda  than  the  ofTipring  of  other
marriagea.  (Rein,  Dot  Sin.  PnvatncM.  p.  177  ;
OHttling,  Gaeh.  d.  Horn.  Slaaltv.  p.  90.)

PATRO'NOHl  (irxTpot^fioi),  were  magiatrate*
at  Sparta,  who  eierclied,  aa  it  were,  a  paternal
power  oret  the  whole  Hate.  Pauaaniaa  (ii.  9.  S  I )
u;*,  that  they  wei«  iutitnted  by  Cleomana*  III,


878


PATBONUS.


(b.  c  S36 — S21),  who  deiuojtd  the  pavtr  of  tha
■ytpomrln  by  eitabluliing  paUonoDii  in  tbeir  place.
The  yipovtia,  however,  wa»  not  aboUihed  by  Cleo-
mene«,ft»  ilia  iguinpokenof  by  PauBiniu  "■
I  3),  and  nlio  iu  inacriplioM.  Tha  patroni
menuaned  by  PhilaatrutDa  (  ViL  Apolloa.
among  the  priDcipnJ  magiitmtfii  along  with  tbe
gyninasiarchi  and  ephori  ;  and  their  office  ia  llao
apoken  of  by  Plutarch,  (An  «n  ml  mp.  go-.
C.21.)  Theii  number  ii  tuieertaJD  g  but  Uiwkh
{Corp.  liuarif.  T<^  L  p.  COS)  boa  abown  that
they  luceeeded  to  the  power*  whiih  the  ephori
formerly  potaeaied,  aod  that  the  fint  pilronainui
wai  the  twiroint  of  the  ilate,  that  ii,  gare  hii
nnme  to  the  yc&i  aa  the  £iit  epbor  had  formerly
done. (CompBia  Mliller,  Dor.  iii.  7.  §  SO

PATKO'NUS.  The  act  of  mannmiiaion  cnatei
a  new  relatioa  between  the  maDumiuot  and  thi
ilare,  which  wai  analogoua  to  that  between  father
and  aoo.  The  manumiMor  leeame  with  re«pect
to  the  manumitlMi  penon  hia  Patianu^  and  the
manumitted  penon  bccama  tha  Lihertua  of  the
manumiHDC.  The  word  PatreDua  (frnm  Pater}
inilicatcilheDalursofthfl  relation,  If  the  manu-
iniiaor  wu  a  woniaa,  ihe  became  Patrona ;  and
the  uie  of  thii  word  inalead  of  Matrona  appeara
to  be  eiplalned  by  the  nature  of  the  patronal
righta.  Viewed  with  reference  to  the  early  agea
of  Rome,  thit  patronal  relation  muat  bo  conaidered
8  psrt  of  the  ancient  Clientela  ;  but  from  the  tine
of  the  TweWe  Tahlea  at  leaat,  which  contained
legislative  proviaions  generally  on  the  aubject  of
patronal  righla,  we  may  coniider  the  relation  of
i'nUonui  and  Libertui  aa  the
cue  of  Patrician  and  Plebeian

The  Libertui  adopted  the  gentle  iudm  of  tha
Manumiiuor.  Cicero*!  frecdmun  Tiro  waa  called
M.  TuUiua  Tin.

The  Libertua  owed  leapect  and  gtatituda  to  hia
pntron,  and  in  sndent  tim«  the  pstrou  raiKht
pnniah  him  in  a  aunininry  way  for  iieglecurg
th«a  dutiea.  Thia  oUigxtion  eilendcd  to  the
children  of  tha  Libertui,  and  the  duty  waa  due  to
the  children  of  the  palron.  In  later  timet,  the
patron  bad  the  power  of  idegaling  an  angraleful
freedman  to  a  certain  dialance  from  Rome,  undei
a  hiw  pnbably  paased  in  the  time  of  Auguitne.
(Tacit.  Am.  liiL  26  ;  Dion  Gen.  It,  13.)  In  the
time  of  Nero  it  wai  propoaed  te  paaa  a  Senatoa-
coniullum  which  ahoald  give  a  patron  the  power
of  reducing  hia  freedman  to  alaiery,  if  he  niiacon-
ducted  hinitelf  towarda  hia  patron.  The  meaaure
Wfia  not  enacted,  but  tliia  power  waa  gi<ea  to  the
palnn  onder  the  later  empetoti.  The  Lex  Aelia
Senlia  gare  the  pntron  a  right  of  pnnecatiag  hia
freedman  for  iiigcatituda  {vt  iggratim  aaaaart).
(Dig.  40.  tit  9.  a.  30.)  An  ingtstua  wsa  alia
allied  Libertui  Impiua,  aa  being  deficient  in  Pietoa.
If  the  Libertui  brought  on  action  againat  the
Patrenua  {injia  vocaai)^  ha  ^raa  himaelf  liable  to
a  ipMdnl  action  on  the  caae  (Ooina,  ir.  4G)  ;  and
ho  could  not,  aa  a  general  rule,  inatitute  a  capital
charge  ngainat  hia  paUon.  The  Libertua  waa
bound  to  BUppnrt  the  patron  and  hia  children  in
cnae  of  ni;ce>aity,  and  to  imdeMake  the  nmnage-
■ncnt  of  hli  property  and  the  tutcla  of  hia  childreu :
if  be  refuaedi,  he  waa  ingratna.  (Dig.  37.  tiL  14.
a.  19.)

If  a  alavB  were  the  property  of  lereml  raaaten
and  were  inanumitled  by  all  ti  them,  and  bccama
a  Roman  dtiien,  alt  of  them  wen  hia  Pattonl.


PATRON  Ua

.  leenre  to  hinielf  farther
righta  over  bit  libotut  by  a  atipuUtio  v  by  taking
an  oath  from  bim.  The  inbjecta  of  auch  agrea-
mcnta  were  gifta  fnm  the  libertua  to  the  patrooua
{dam  tt  aiwHra)  and  aerrica  (igierat).  The  oatb
waa  not  valid,  tmleia  Ihe  petaiai  waa  a  libotoa
when  ho  look  it.  If  then  he  took  the  oath  aa  a
tlave,  he  had  to  repeat  it  u  a  freeman,  which  acema
to  be  themeoningof  the  panageof  Cicero  m  which
he  ipeoki  of  hia  freedman  Chryaogonui.  (,Ai  AU.
vii.  3  ;  compare  Dig.  38.  tit  1.  a.  7.)  Theae  Opeiae
were  of  two  kinda,  Officialea  which  eonaiatad  in
napect  and  affection  ;  and  Fabrilea  which  are  ex-
plained by  the  term  ilielf.  The  officialea  deter-
mined by  the  death  of  the  Patioaua,  unleaa  there
waa  an  agreement  to  the  contrary  ;  bnl  the  bbrilea
being  of  the  nature  of  money  or  mooey^  worth
paiaed  to  Ihe  brredea  of  the  Pacronui,  like  any
other  property.  The  Patroouj,  when  he  eonunauded
the  cperae  of  hia  libertua,  waa  laid  ^ei  operaa  in-
dicere  or  iraponere."  (Qaina,  It.  163  j  Dig.  38.
tjt.2.  B.2S.)

The  Patron  could  not  command  any  aenieea
which  were  diigraceful  {lurjia)  oc  daagsma  to
life,  tuch  aa  praatitnlioa  or  Sghting  in  tha  amphi-
thealia  ;  but  if  the  libertui  eierciaed  any  ait  or
calling  (aitifidam\  eien  if  ha  learned  it  after  bia
manumiiaion,  tha  operae  in  lespect  of  it  wen  dne

The  Lei  Julia  et  P^ia  Poppas  releaaed  freed-
men  (except  thoie  wbo  fiJlowed  the  aia  Indicia  v
hired  themielvca  to  fight  wilh  beaita)  from  all  ob-
ligation  aa  to  gifti  or  operac,  who  had  begotten  two
children  and  had  them  tu  their  power,  or  one  child
'-  yconold.  (Dig.  S8.  lit  1.  Di  OptriM  LOir-
tonuB,  i.  37.)
If  liberty  wai  gii-en  diiecdy  by  a  teatament,  the
itator  wai  the  manuniiaaor,  and  hia  patnaal
lighta  would  conaequently  belong  to  hia  ehildmi :
' '  it  waa  given  indirectly,  that  ia,  per  fii'
im,  the  penon  who  perfirmed  the  act  of  m
iaaiou  wn*  the  pationua.  In  tboie  caata  whi
ITS  obtained  bii  freedom  onde
itum  Silanionum,  tho  Piaetor  could  aaaign  him
Pateinua  ^  and  if  thia  waa  not  done,  that  pcraoa
u  the  Patron  of  whom  the  liberUu  had  laal  been
Ihe  aluTe.  (Dig.  38.  tit  IG.  >.  3.)

The  patronal  righla  were  aemewfaat  reatiietcd,
lieu  the  set  of  manuniauon  wai  not  aliogethrr
the  free  act  of  the  manumiaur.  for  inatance,  the
per  SdeicommiBaum  had  all  the  pauo-
nal  righli,  except  the  power  to  praaeeute  for  uigtK-
tilude,  the  right  to  be  tvpported  by  tha  libertui,
and  to  atipnlMe  hr  munera  and  operaa :  hia  righta
■'  pmperty  of  the  libertua  wen  howcTer
Ufaeaeofanyothcinuinnmiaani.  (FW.
Vat  §  225  i  Dig.  3a  tit  2.  1.  29.)  If  a  alaio
had  given  money  to  analher  petaan  in  order  tliat
thia  other  peraon  might  purcbaae  and  manamit
had  no  patronal  righta,  and
no  of  patron,  if  he  nfoied  u>
perlbnn  tho  act  for  which  he  bad  reccind  tks
money  and  allowed  the  alaie  to  eompel  him  to  per-
form hia  agreement,  which  the  alaTc  could  do  by  a
cenatitntion  of  M.  Aoreliui  and  L.  Venu,  (Dig.  4Q.
.  1.  L  1,  5.)  It  a  maaler  maniunitted  hia  iUt*
conaiderotioD  of  a  aum  of  mone^,  he  retained  all
palroual  righta,  but  he  could  not  itipulalc  for  optrac
A  penon  who  pnrchaaed  a  alaTC,  and  on  the  sea-
tion  of  Ihe  purehaae  agreed  to  manunit  htm,  bad
lUI  patronal  righta,  except  tha  right  U  gntoaUiag


PATRONUS.

for  ingTBtitodc,  in  ^le  tha  ilave  compelled  blm  to
manuniil  puraDonl  to  tbe  CDiutitution  of  M.  Anm-
liiu  and  L.  Vena.  (Dig.  40.  tiL  9.  i.  30.)

Il  wu  tho  dutj  of  [hi  pslnm  to  mpport  fail
freedmBa  in  out  of  Deccuily,  Mid  if  he  did  not,  hs
lest  bb  yaumtd  righU  ;  the  contequence  vu  the
nine  if  he  bnught  ■  apiud  chuffe  agunit  him.
The  Lei  Aclia  Seatii,  uooDg  iti  vBiiouj  froyi-
tioDM,  coDtaioed  ■eTeral  that  related  to  the  righta
Aod  datiei  of  ihe  patrnu

A  cmpitii  dinunutlD,  either  of  the  Patraa  or  the
Libcrtui,  diuolred  the  lehuion  between  them.
(dee  Tuit.  fliit.  ti.  92,  vheie  "  juni  libertonini  "

The  relition  wai  diMolvcd  wh^n  the  Libertm
abuuned  Ii^esuitH  by  (be  Nalolium  Reititutio,
but  Dot  when  he  merely  obtaioed  the  jut  aureomm


PATRONUS.


679


nnulon


n.  [IN(


.fl!«.]


It  impeitant  of  the  FBlronal  righti  re-
lated to  the  prapertT  of  Libecti  who  died  intestate
or  hflviog  made  i  tciuincut.

The  •ubject,  k  far  a*  caneemi  the  Ante-Jiuti-
DiBii  period,  maj  be  dittribnted  under  the  tiro  fol-
lowing htadt ;  —  1.  the  ordiniuy  mlee  of  lav,  and
H,  the  utrHordinorj  :  the  former  eamprehcad  the
Tulei  of  the  old  civil  lav,  and  tha  Edict  on  the
Bonomm  PoucHio  t  and  the  latter,  the  Banonun
PoaMMio  eontn  tabula*  liberti  and  contra  laoi
non  nanmlei,  the  BonDrum  Poueuio  contra  tabo-
Lw  Hbertae,  and  the  riKht  to  a  cirili>  pan  wbieh
mu  gi'en  by  the  Lex  Fapia  Pappaea.

By  the  law  of  the  Twelie  Tablo,  if  a  freedman
died  inleitale,  without  aui  heredea,  the  patronni
wna  bii  heir.  Thii  right  waa  viewed  aa  a  right  of
Agnatiai.  The  Legiuma  patninoruin  tutcla  wna
not  eiprtuly  mcntionnl  in  the  Twelve  Tablea,
but  it  was  a  legal  cooiequence  of  the  rula  aa  to
inberifauice.  {i:]p.  Frag.  li.  S.)  lathecaaeofan
incnUM  libcita.  who  could  not  have  a  euui  herei,
the  patron  wai  hoea.  The  Senatiuconiultum  Urfi-
tinnum,  wbich  waa  paiaed  after  Gaiua  wrote  (iii.
£1),  and  in  the  hut  year  hot  one  of  the  reign  of
it.  Aursliua,  made  an  alteration  in  thii  reipecL
The  paaMge  of  Ulpian  {fYag.  uii.  2),  which  waa
written  when  thii  SenntiiKenaultuni  uai  in  force,
aaya,  that  if  a  libcrla  died  inlcttaCe,  the  patron  auc^
cecded  to  her  property,  became  a  mother  could  not
haTB  mi  heredei ;  yet  Ulpian  hinuelf  (lib.  12,  ad
Sulniim;  Dig.  38.  tit.  17.  a.  1 )  uyi,  that  whether
the  molbei  waa  Ingenuu  or  Libertioa,  the  children
cDuld  aticceed  to  her  inheritance  by  tbe  Senalui-
eoniiJtimi  Oifitianuni.  Thli  apparent  eonUsdic-
tion  ii  ronoTed  by  the  •uppoaitiun  that  the  Sena-
tuaaminltnna  gave  the  children  m  luch  catet  an
equal  tight  with  tbe  patron.

Tbeae  patronal  righta  belonged  both  to  a  Patro-
BDi  and  a  Patrona,  and  to  the  libcri  of  a  Patronui.
(Ulp.  Frag,  xivii.)  The  male  chiidron  of  the  pa-
troBnihad  the  aantcrighlsaathepatronoi  himielf ;
but  the  fcmalet  bad  only  the  righu  which  the
Twelve  Tablet  gave  to  the  malca,  and  they  had  not
the  Bonorum  Poaseaaio  contra  tabulai  teitamenti
liberti  ant  ab  inteilnto  contra  auoi  heredea  non
iritmatea,  until  tbeia  righti  were  given  them  by
the  Lei  Papia  Pappaea.  (Ulp.fro^.  iiii.  i,  6.)
A  diffical^  whief  ■ ■ ■  ■  ' '


teeoM  that  tbe  children  of  a  Patrana  bad  not  by
tba  TweWe  Tablea  the  ume  righta  aa  the  cbildran
atiPtttaama,hat  the  Lex  Papia  Peppota  probably


made  tome  change  in  thia  reapeet (ZtHadajft,  *.
p.  43,  &c)

In  order  that  theaa  patnnaJ  right*  ahould  exiiC,
il  wa*  neceoBiy  that  tbe  libertu*  muit  haie  been
made  hwe  by  a  Roman  citiien,  and  have  become  i


alarant
bthave


Roman  citiien  by  tbe  :
Gordingly,  if  a  penon  obtained  lti>
waa  Deeeuary  ibat  he  ihould  hare
of  the  jui  patrenatna,  in  order  that  he  might  hi
patronal  right*  againat  bia  then  fceedmen,  who
muat  nloo  at  the  aame  ^me  become  Roman  citiaona.
(Plin.  Ep.  x  6.)  A  c^itia  diminutio*  aa  already
obierved,  either  of  tha  patran  or  tbe  libertu,  de-
aCrojed  the  patronal  nshta  to  the  inheritance.
(aaiiia,iii.  £1.)

If  there  were  teTersl  patroni  or  pationae,  they
divided  the  inheritance  eqnally,  though  their  abarei
in  the  libertua  when  a  ilave  might  have  been  un-
equaL  Theae  pitronal  ruhta  leaembled  a  joint-
tenancy  in  English  Law,  for  the  lurriTor  or  lurri-
Tor*  <^  the  patroni  had  all  the  patnwal  righta
to  the  excluaion  of  any  childroi  of  a  deceiiied
patcoDua.  A  son  of  a  patron  alao  claimed  the  in-
LcritBDce  Co  the  eicluaion  of  the  grandaon  of  a
patron.  If  the  patroni  were  all  dead,  leaving  aoteral
children,  the  heredita*  waa  divided  among  all  the
children  equally  {in  oi^ila\  pursuant  to  the  law  of
auccesaion  in  the  case  of  Agnation.  ^Qaiua,  iii.
IB,  S9,&c)

A  SenatuaconaulCum,  which  waa  passed  in  tho
time  of  Clnudini,  allowed  a  patron  to  aaiign  hia
patronal  rights  to  the  inheritance  of  a  libertua,  to
any  of  his  children  whom  he  had  in  hia  power,  to
the  eiclution  of  the  rcat.  (Dig.  3S.  tit.  4.)

The  Edict  extended  the  Bonorum  Foaaeaiio  to
Patroni.  The  Patronui  right*  of  the  Civil  Law
were  founded  on  an  aaiumed  Agnatio ;  thote  of  tho
Edict  were  roiuided  on  an  aBaiimcdCcignatla.  The
Edict  called  to  the  Bonoium  Posaeuio  of  Libeiti,
1.  their  children  j  2.  their  heredea  legltimi ;  3.  their
cognati,  who  mustof  course  be  deecendants  ;  4.  tho
Emilia  of  the  Patmnus  ;  £.  the  patronus  and  fu-
trona,  and  their  children  and  perenta,  by  which


trona  had  sustained  a
could  not  be  called  in
husband  or  wife  of  the


e  fourth  order  j 6.  tho
eedwomau  or  freedman  )


Originally,  if  the  freedman  made  a  will,  he  could
pass  over  {pttulerire)  the  patron.  But  by  the
Edict,  unless  ho  left  him  a*  mucb  a*  one  half  of
hi*  property,  tbe  patron  or  hia  male  children  could
obtain  the  Bonorum  poeaeaaio  contra  tabula*  of
one  half  of  the  pioperty.  If  the  libertua  died
intestate,  leaving  no  auua  herea,  except  an  adopted
child,  or  a  wile  in  manu,  or  a  uurua  in  tha
manua  of  hi*  aon,  the  patron  hod  a  bonorum
poaiestia  of  one  half  against  theae  aui  heredea.
But  if  the  libertu*  had  children  of  hi*  own  blood
(naittFoiia)  either  in  hi*  power  at  the  time  of  hia
death  or  emancipated  or  given  in  adoption,  and  if
these  children  were  made  beredes  by  lu*  testament
or  being  praeteriti  claimed  the  Bonorum  possasaio
contra  tabulae,  the  patron  had  no  claim  on  the
fftedman'a  property.  The  patron  waa  not  excluded,
if  the  childron  of  the  freedman  were  eiheredated,
(Gain*,  iiL  40 ;  Dion  Caaa.  li.  15,  and  the  noto
of  Rrimsrus.)

By  the  Lei  Papia  Poppaea,  if  a  freedman  had  a
property  amounting  lo  a  hundred  ihouaand  aeatertji
and  fewar  than  thne  ehildien,  tbe  petronoa  had  an


ia  freed  a  libcrta


880  PATRONUS

equil  liidre  (mriUi pari)  with  the  children,  whpthfc
the  fteedmait  died  teitate  ot  inteitate ;  mid  a
patTDna  uigenuii,  who  hud  thrpe  children,  enjoyed
tlie  wunR  priviteoe.  Before  the  Lei  Papia,  Patroine
had  anU  the  ri^hU  which  the  TwgIts  Tsblei  gaie
Aetn  !  but  this  Lei  put  Ingonuao  palronw  who
bad  two  children,  and  Libertimtc  palrauie  who
bad  three  children,  on  the  >ame  footing  with  re-
■pect  to  the  Bononun  poweuio  cantni  tnbulai  and
with  respect  to  nn  adopted  wn,  a  wife  in  manu,  or
a  niinu  in  manu  filii,  ai  the  Edict  had  placed  Pa-
tmiii.  The  Lex  did  the  vime  for  dauf^hten  of  the
Patnnu)  who  had  three  children.  The  Lei  alio
gace  to  a  Patrona  ingenua,  but  Dot  to  a  Libertlns,
who  had  three  children,  the  >ame  righti  that  it
gnre  to  a  Patronui,

AccordinR  lo  the  old  law,  ai  the  liberta  wu
in  the  li^iima  liitela  of  her  patron,  ahe  could  make
no  diipmilion  of  hei  property  without  hii  conaenC
(pofTiMO  OBrtont),  The  Lei  !
tram  tbi>  tiuela,  if  ihe  had  So\
could  contequentty  then  make  a  will  without  the
tonicnt  of  her  palnnus,  but  (he  lav  piorided  that
the  patrenui  ihoidd  hare  an  equal  thare  with  her
inrTivint;  children.

In  the  caw  of  a  liberta  dyinj;  intatate,  the
Lei  Papia  ga*e  no  further  right*  to  a  Patrona,
whi>  bad  children  {liherit  honorata*)  than  the  had
bclbre  ;  and  therefore  if  there  had  been  no  capitl*
diminutio  of  the  Pntronn  or  the  Liberia,  Ihe  Pa-
trona inherited  the  property,  eren  if  the  had  no
childreo.  En  the  eicliision  of  the  children  oT  the
liberta.  If  the  liberta  made  a  will,  the  Lei  Papia
gaie  lo  the  Pationn,  who  had  t)ic  number  of  chil-
dren required  by  that  law,  the  lame  righti  which
the  Edict  gave  to  the  PaOonui  can'js  ubulai  li-
bertL  The  nme  Lei  gave  to  the  daughter  of  a
patrona,  who  bad  a  aingle  child,  the  tiune  righli
that  the  patrcnna  had  contis.  tabulni  iibertL  (Oaiui,
iii.  53  i  a  pajuge  which  Untcrholioer  propoiea  to
correct,  but  on  xeiy  inanfEciont  grounda,  ZnlnArifi,
y.f.^6.^

The  rulei  of  law  ai  ta  the  nicceuioa  of  the
Patronui  to  Ihe  property  of  Latin!  Liberli  differed
in  varioui  reapecti  frnrn  Ihoic  that  have  been  si-
plained.  Being  liewcd  a>  a  pcculium,  it  had  Ihe
incident!  of  luch  propi'rty.  It  came  to  the  eitianci
hercdn  of  the  maiiuniiMDr,  but  not  to  hii  eihere-
dated  childrrn,  in  both  which  reipecti  it  differed
from  the  property  of  a  Libcrtuj  who  wa»  a  CiTJi
Romaiiiu.  If  there  were  Hcvem]  patrons,  it  cnme
Xb  them  in  proportion ia  their  intereati in Ihe

trine  that  the  iharo  of  a  deceaied  patronui  ihould
go  to  hia  herea.  The  SenaluaconiuJIam  Largianum,
which  vaa  posied  m  the  time  of  Clnudina,  enacted
that  the  property  of  Latini  ihould  go  first  to  Ihoie
who  bad  maaumiiled  them,  th^u  to  theii  liberi
predated,  according  lo
Lj!  to  the  old  law,  to
thf  heredea  ot  the  mnnumisaor.  The  only  effect
of  thii  Senatuiconiultum  wni  to  prefer  liberi,  who
were  not  eiprcs9lyelheredaled,tocxtniaeiheredei.
J^ccordingly,  an  emancipated  ion  of  the  patronui,
who  wai  pnietfritai,  and  who  could  not  claim  the
Bonnrum  poneiiio  of  hti  father'a  property  contra
tabulni  tcatanenti,  had  a  claim  to  the  property  of
a  Latinui  prior  to  the  eitntnel  heredei.

Ai  to  the  Dpditicji  under  the  Lei  Aelia  Sentia,
there  were  two  nilca.  The  properly  of  thoie  wlio
on  their  minnmiiiiaD  woald  haio  becone  Kmium


PECHUS.
eitiiena,  but  foe  the  impedimenti  tbcreta,  cams
to  Ibeirpstioiu  aa  if  they  had  been  Raman  dtinns :
they  had  not  however  the  lestamenti  bctio.  The
property  of  thoae,  who  on  their  manumiaaun  would
have  become  Latini,  hut  for  the  impedimenta  then?ta^
came  to  their  patroni  aa  if  they  had  bcm  Idtini :
on  thii  Qaiui  remarki  that  in  thii  matter  tbe
legiilalor  had  not  very  cloiriy  eipcened  hii  in-
teniioni.  He  had  alr^y  made  a  aimilar  lemaik
aj  lo  a  proviiion  of  the  I<i  Papia  (iiL  47).

Ai  to  the  other  meaninga  of  the  wud  Patnooi,
leeCLiiNSand  ORiTon.

The  luhject  of  the  Patronatui  ii  one  of  rmi-
lidemble  importance  towardi  a  right  undentandii^
of  many  patli  of  the  Roman  polity.  Thii  imperfect
outline  may  be  tilled  up  by  referring  to  the  tidlow-
ing  anthoriliea.  (Oaini,  iii.  39 — 76  ;  Ulpiaii,/Va9:
tit.  xxviL  xiix. ;  Dig.  37.  tiL  It,  15  ;  38.  tit.  1,  3,
3,  jic ;  the  Indei  to  Pattlni,  Sent  RecrpL  ;  and  fbr
Juitlnian'a  legtalalion,  Inat.  3.  (it.  8,  &c^  ;  Unlet-
holiner,  Uiier  dta  patraafyAt  BiindU,  ZrH-
lArift,  T^  and  the  article  QiNS,  with  the  rtfereDOR*
in  Rein,  Dai  Ram.  Pmalndd,  p.  26i,  and  in
Waller,  Qadiiditt  da  Rom,  Recitt,  pp.  £07^5)6,
and  661— 689.)  [O.L.]

PAVIHENTUM.  [DauuR,  p.  431,a;  Vuk.]

PAVONACEUM. [Tkoiila.]

PAUPE'RIE.  ACTIO  DE. (Pii-mms.]

PAUPE'RIES  waa  the  legal  term  for  mischji-f
done  by  an  animal  (qaadrupa)  etatrary  to  iha
natnis  of  the  animal,  aa  if  a  man^  oi  gored  an-
other man.  In  tuch  casei,  Ihe  law  of  the  TwcIto
Tablei  gave  tho  injured  person  an  aetioo  ^aiiut
the  owner  of  the  animal  fbr  the  amount  of  tb«
damage  niilained.  The  ownct  waa  bound  eitbir
to  pay  the  full  amonnt  of  damage*  or  to  gire  up
(he  animal  to  the  injured  penon  (ihuih  dart).
Pauperiei  eidnded  the  notion  of  Injuria  ;  it  ia  de-
itncd  lo  be  ^  damnum  line  injuria  fccientii  &ctam,*
for  an  animal  conld  not  be  laid  to  hare  dene  a
thing  "injuria,  quod  lenni  caret."  The  actio  d*
pouperie  belonged  to  the  clan  of  Noxalca  Actionea.
According  to  the  old  law,  if  a  bear  got  away  from
hii  maiter,  ho  wai  not  liable  \  hecHua  when  the
animal  got  away,  it  ceased  to  be  the  mailer^  pi^-
perty.  But  the  Aedile'a  edict  declared  that  it
was  not  lawful  to  keep  a  dog,  boai,  wild  boar,
bmr,  or  lion,  in  any  place  wluch  wsi  ■  place  of
public  teaort.  If  Ihii  rule  H-at  tiolaled,  and  any
damage  waa  done  by  one  of  theee  beaati  lo  a  fire-
man,  tho  judci  might  condemn  the  owner  in  nirh
mm  ai  he  ihonld  think  lo  be  "  bonom  el  aeqoimn-"
If  damage  wai  done  to  any  thing  elae,  the  jndcl
might  condemn  the  owner  in  double  Ihe  amoont  of
the  damage.  There  might  also  ba  an  actio  da
panperie  in  addition  lo  the  BedililiaeaetianeL  (Dig.
9.  liLl  i IniL4.  tit.9.)  [O.L.]

PAUSA'RII,  wai  the  name  given  to  the  jtfieata
of  Iiii  at  Rome,  brcauie  they  were  accuatomrd  in
the  proccaiioni  in  honour  of  Iiii  lo  make  pam
{pamne)  at  certam  chapela  or  placee,  called  ■»■-
noiwi,  bT  the  ro«d"a  aide,  to  ling  hymni  and  per-
form other  lacrcd  rito.  (Olelli,  InKr.  n.  1885  ;
Spartian.  Ptmn.  Nig.  6,  CaraeM.  9 ;  Sahn.  ai
loc)

The  portucubu,  at  commander  of  tba  rovtn  in
a  Teiiel,  was  mmetima  called  pamtariia  (Sen.  .£^
66\  because  the  rowcn  began  and  ceaaed  (lanuii)
theiritrokeiaccordingto  hiacommudi.  [PoKTU-

CtllDS.]

PECHUS  (wvx«>)> [CraiTtrij  Ma.'etDVA.I


PECULATUS.

PECTEN  (irrtli),  ft  comb.  The  Ondu  mi
Itatiuuu  DNd  combt  muld  of  boi-«i»d  (Bnindc,
A^d.  I  221;  Ond.  Fait.-n,  2i;  Mart.  xiv.  2S),
irhich  Ibef  obtainFd,  u  we  do,  tmia  the  thorea  a{
the  Eaime  ke.  The  moimtuii  ridg«  of  Cjtonu
in  {hlBtDi  wu  puticnlul;  celebnued  trx  Ihi)  pro-
docL  (Orid.  3fe(.  IT.  311.)  The  EgTptiBiiihad
imrf  caiDtM  (ApuL  3M.  xL  p.  121,  ed.  Aldi),
vhich  alio  came  into  UM  by  degree*  among  the
Roman*.  (Claudxao,  rfo  A'l^K. //owr.  102.)  The
golden  CDDib,  ueribed  to  the  goddeuei,  ii  of  coune
imaginaiy.  {Callim.M  jCav.i'aa.  31.)  ThevoodeD
comba,  foond  in  Egjptiai]  tomha,  an  toothed  on
one  tide  only ;  but  the  Gieeki  uied  then  vith
teeth  on  both  tide^  aa  aprh?an  from  the  rernaiiu  of
comba  found  at  Pompeii  (DonaldioD^  Powqmiy
yoL  Li.  pL  7Q),  and  from  the  repreieiitatiaa  of  then
combi,  exactly  like  oui  imall-tooth  combt,  an  the
Amjclaean  marblei.  (Memoin  Tooting  to  T*rhg,
cdilol  by  Walpole,  p.  iS2.)

The  principal  nia  of  the  comb  waa  tat  dreaiing
the  bail  (OTid.  Amor.  i.  14.  15,  Met.  lii.  409),
in  doing  vhicb  the  Oreeki  af  batb  aeiea  were  re-
mariubl;  taiefdl  and  dUigtnt.  (Heiod.  vii.  208.)
To  go  with  UDcombed  hue  wu  a  aign  of  afflicticm.
(Soph.  Otd.  CoL  1M7,>

A  comb  with  iron  teeth  waa  nied  in  com-fielda
to  aepaiate  tha  grain  from  the  Btinw,  whilit  it
waa  yet  itanding.  (Col  ib  Re  Rml.  u.  21 .)  Tfaia
method  of  reaping  waa  failed  pectinart  tegden,
A  painting  in  tlie  aepolcbraJ  grotto  of  EL  Kab  in
Egypt  re;naenta  B  man  combing  flal  for  the  pur-
poae  of  aepajating  the  linaeed  frnm  the  Btem.  The
nke  need  in  making  hay  ia  called  rvnu  fwctn
(Orid.  Rtm.  Amor.  192),  becanae  iU  teeth  are  (ai
apart ;  but  tliia  may  be  only  a  poeUeal  nae  of  the

Two  partiona  of  the  Oraek  lyre  were  called  the
comba  (Eialoath.  Cdlatltr.  24)  i  they  may  bare
be«n  two  rowa  of  peg*,  to  which  the  atringa  were
tied.  The  uae  of  the  comb  in  weaiing,  and  the
tranaferflKo  of  ita  name  to  the  [Jectmm,  an  ex-
plained under  Tai,A.  [J.  Y.]

PECUA'RII,  the  name  ginn  to  penoai  who
paatored  their  cattle  on  the  public  landa  (piucaa),
far  which  they  were  bound  to  pay  s  tax  to  the
Btate,  called  Scriptuiu.  But  in  the  earlier  timea
of  the  lepablie  many  pcnona  aupporled  tbeir  cattle
im  the  public  poaturei  vithnnl  paying  thia  tax  at
all,  or  paying  leaa  than  wu  legally  due ;  and  hence
the  word  peeuarii  waa  frequently  employed  to
■igniiy  thoae  periona  who  thni  illegally  made  uk
of  the  public  paatuiea.  They  cere  often  proae-
cnted  by  the  aedilea  and  fined  (0(.  FaiL  1.  2S3—
294;  Lit.  1.23,47,  xixiii.  42,  xxir,  IDj  Fea-
toa,  p.  238,  ed.  Hiiller.)

PECULA'TUSiapraperiylhemii^prDiKiBtii
BT tbeft  of public property (pcconia  publica
whether  it  waa  done  by  ■  functionaiy  or  by
priTate  peraoa Labeo  defioet  it  thu,  "pecnniaa
poblioe  ant  ascrte  fortnm,  non  ab  eo  Gutonr
cnjaa  paricnlo eat." The  penon  guilty  of  thi
oOeDce  waa  Pecnlator. Cicero  {da  Of.  Va. 18
cnmnfTalea  PecnUtnrca  with  ucatii,  renefici,  teata
mentaiii  and  fnrea. The  coigin  of  the  woid  ap-
pcara  to  be  Pema,  a  term  which  originally  denoted
that  kind  of  morable  properly  which  waa  the  chief
aign  of  wealth. Original  ly  tnala  ia  Pnulatna  were
More  the  Popnlui,  or  b^re  the  Senate. (Ijr.  •
S3,  xxxrii. £7,  xxxtiii.  SI.) In  the  time
Cioero  raalten  of  peculataa  nere  one  of  the  Qoa


PEDUM.  881

tionea  perpetoae,  which  imply  aome  Lex  de  Pecn-
lata,  and  auch  a  Lex  ia  by  lome  writen  enumerfttrd
BUHHig  the  Legea  Sullaaae,  but  without  alating  the
authot^ty  for  thia  aaaerlion.  Two  Legea  relating
to  PeciQatoa  artf  cited  in  the  Digeat,  Lex  Julia
Pecutatna  and  Lex  Julia  de  Keiidui*  (Dia.  48.
tit.  IS)  ;  bat  theaa  may  be  tho  aame  Lex,  though
quoted  aa  two  Lego,  juat  aa  Che  Lex  Julia  da
Adulteriii  compriied  a  proriaion  De  Fundo  Dotali,
which  chapter  ii  often  quoted  aa  if  it  were  a  aepa-
rate  Lex.  Matters  relating  to  aacrilege  were  alao
comprised  in  the  Lex  Jului  Peculatua  (w  flu  a
peama  wcra,  r^iffioia  pnUiam  aufiral,  &C.)  ;
matter*  relating  to  the  debasement  of  the  coinage  ;
the  eraaing  oi  cancelling  of  labolae  puhlimc,  Ac
The  Lex  de  Reaiduia  applied  to  thoae  who  had  re-
'ed  public  money  for  public  purpoaea  and  bad
retained  it  {ajmd  gtim  ptttpoa  ptdiUai  nmdU).
The  penalty  under  thii  Lex,  on  conviction,  waa  A
third  part  of  the  nun  retained.  The  pnniahment
which  waa  originally  aquae  et  ignia  intj^ictio,  waa
changed  into  Deportalio  under  lbs  Empire :  the
iflcnder  l«t  all  hit  rights,  and  hii  property  wa*
fbrfeiled.  (In»t4.  tit.  IB.  g  9.)  Under  the  Em-
pire tacril^  waa  puniahed  with  death.  A  "  Sa-
--'-  u*"  ii  one  who  plunder*  public  aaired
I.  (Rein,  Dai  CWDunafrnU  der  Romtr,
p.  672.)  {G.  L.1

PECU'LIO,  ACTIO  DE. [Sirvus.]

PECU'LIUM. [Skrvu*.!

PECU'LIUM  CASTRENSB. [Pathia  Po.

PECU-NIA. rNUKMUa.]
PECU'NIA. {Hxaaa,  p.69e,a.]
PECU'NIACERTA.  [OBLlOATioNia,p.8la]

PECU'NIAE REPETUNDAE. [Rbpr.

TUNDAB.]

PBDA'NEUSJUDEX,  [Jvnai  Pidanids.]

PEDA'Rll. [SlNATUK.]

PEDI-SEQUI,  a  daat  of  ilarea,  who«!  duty
waa  to  follow  their  matter  when  he  went  out  of
hia  bonte.  Thia  name  doea  not  appear  to  have
been  given  to  any  bUtc,  who  accompanied  hta
maater ;  but  the  pediaeqni  aenn  to  have  tonned  a
■pecial  chut,  which  waa  n1m«l  tbe  lotteat  of  all.
(Nep.  Attie.  IS  j  Plant.  MO.  Olor.  iv,  2.  18.)
There  waa  a  aimilai  data  of  female  atavea,  called
ptdiixgniUL.  (Phiul.  AoK.  i.  3,  31.)  Compare
Becker.  GaSai,  vol.  i.  p.  101.

PEDUM  (xopinj,  Adywed^OT,  Theocrit.  viL  43,
128),  a  crook.  The  Hccampanyu)|:  woodcut  ii
taken  from  a  painting  found  at  Civita  Vtcchia.
{AaL  d'Enolaiui,  ToL  ill  tav.  63L) It  ahowa  the


D.g,l,...cb,.GOOglC


GG2


FELLIS.


crook  in  tlie  }iuid  of  a  ihepIieHfii,  utia  ilU  apon
■  rocic,  tendiDg  iheep  BDd  other  catCla*  {See  ftlao
woodcul  to  OSCILLUU.)

On  occounl  of  iu  ranncctioa  with  pulonl  Ufa
the  crook  ia  caBtinus%  Men  in  wocki  of  lucieal
art  in  the  huidi  of  Pan  (SiL  Ital.  Au.  liiL  S34),
and  of  Mtyn,  bum,  and  ahcpbeida.  It  waa  alu
the  viiuil  attribute  of  Thalus  aa  (he  Unas  of
PaatoraJ  poetiy.  (Combe,  Amc  Mori'
JtfBKKsi,  Part  ill  pL  5.)

PEOMA  (*vrt»>'),  ■  PV"^  ■■  «■  on  cdifin  of
wood,  conaittiD^  of  two  or  man  atagea  (labalala),
which  were  raised .  or  depreued  at  pleaiuni  hy
meana  of  balnncc-weigbtA  {pomdcrtimt  ndMctitf
ClaDdian,  de  Mallii  lieod.  Cbiu.  323—328 ;  Sen.
Epist.  89).  Theas  great  machinal  wen  oied  in
the  Roman  amphitheatre*  (Jut.  ir.  121;  Man.  L  2.
2;  Sueton.  Oowf.  3J1,  the  gladiatan  who  fought
upon  them  being  called  ptgmam.  (Calig.  26.)
The;  were  lupported  upon  wheela  K>  aa  to  be
drawn  into  the  ciicns,  glittering  with  lilver  and  a
profuiliin  of  wealth.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiiL  3. 1. 16.)
At  other  timeg  ihejr  exhibited  a  msgniiicent  though
dangenui  (VapiK.  Carm.  15)  diaplay  of  fire-
worka.  (Cluidian,/.  e.)  Accidenta  Mmetimei  hap-
pened to  ibe  muucioni  and  other  perfbrmen  who
were  carried  upon  them, (Phaedr.  t.  7.  7.)

The  pegnuta  mentioned  by  Citeio  (fld  Ati.  ir,  8)
may  have  been  movshle  book-caiea. [J.  Y.]

PEQMARES. [PiBHA.]

PELATAE  (irtXil™).  are  defined  byPoUnz
(iit.  82)  and  other  aatboritiea  to  be  &ee  ^boorera
working  for  hire,  like  the  Svrti,  in  cantrBdiitioe-  .
lion  to  the  Heloti  and  Peneitae,  who  was  bond«-
men  or  aerfa,  baring  loat  their  fnedom  by  conqneat
or  othetwija.  Ari*tot3e  (op.  Piot.  a.  r.  HtXAriu)
tbui  connecta  their  name  with  ri\at ;  IltAdTiu,  he
isyi,  fnnn  ii4Xai,  ator  Fy^um  liA  ^triat  -wpmr-
dvTrt :  i.  a.  penona  who  are  obliged  by  poverty
to  attach  thenueliei  to  othen.  Timaeui  (Cu
PlaL  f.  D.)  giiea  the  lame  eiplanation.  IltAjInit,
i  Aj-tI  TpQ^r  trwTjprrai/  jcoi  irpaoTitXi^vr.  In
the  later  Greek  writen,  loeh  aa  Dionyaiiia  of
Hallcamaaaui,  and  Plutarch,  the  word  it  nied  for
the  Latin  client,  though  the  ralaCioni  eipreaied
by  the  (wo  tenna  are  by  no  meana  timilar.  Fiu-
torch  {Agn.  a.  S)  alto  uae«  the  word  rather  looecly
for  Helott,  and  wa  are  told  of  a  nation  of  lUyriaiu
(the  Ardiaei)  who  poHeaaad  300,000  ProapeUtaa,
compared  by  Thei^iompuB  (ifi.  Alk.  m.  p.  37 1 ,
d.  B.}  with  the  Heloti  of  Laconia.  (MUUei,  Dor.
ivL  4.  §  7  ;  Wachtmulh,  Udiai.  AUtrAamtk.  toI  I
pp.  361,  Bll,  2ded, ;  Hermann,  GriedL  StmOtal-
iBtk.  gl01,n.S.)  [It.  W.}

PELLEX. [CoNCtTBIKA.]

PELLIS  (>^  Sapd),  the  hide  or  akin  of  a

quadruped.  Befbre  weaijng  waa  introduced  into
Europe  there  ia  reaton  to  believe  that  ita  inhabit-
ant! were  uniTcnally  clothed  in  tkint.  The  prac-
tice conUnned  among  the  leti  oiriliied  nationi
(Viig.  Omrj.  iii.  383;  Tacit  <7>nii.  17,  46;  Orid,
TWtf.  iii.  10.  19),  and  ii  often  ascribed  by  the
poeti  to  heroes  and  imaginary  beinga  [Comp.
AioiS;  NiBSil.]  The  term  niriifa  ex  aaripm,
denoted  an  article  of  domeatic  furniture,  which  wai
made  by  aewins  together  leTeisi  goal-ikina  with
the  hair  on.  (ScW  «  Aritlopli.  Avn,  122.)  The
theep.*kin  {ita,  nUoi,  Si^'fu)  waa  worn  not
ooly  by  Ibe  Lacedaemonian  helota,  bnt  frequently
by  the  laborioua  poor,  aa  ia  itill  the  tate  in  many
jutt  of  Europe. The  lamb-^iD  waa  called  l^


PENESTAE.
nuclt,  and  a  dreaa,  aoppoaed  to  ban  bad  a  abeep-
■kin  lewed  to  it  below,  ncTWBtfinj,

FELTA  {liKtii),  a  imall  ahield,  IpbicraKa,
obierving  that  the  ancient  Clifkejs  waa  combrom
and  moiaTenient,  intnidoced  among  (he  Oreeka
a  much  aaaller  and  lighter  shield,  from  which
tboae  who  ben  il  look  the  name  of  jidtaAaa.
[E^iiRciTUR,  p.  487,  b.]  It  eonaiited  priucipelly
of  a  frame  of  wood  or  wickerwork  (Xm.  Amab.
ii.  1.  g  6 ),  covered  with  akin  or  leather,  witbout
the  metallic  rim.  [Antvi.]  (Timaeut,  Lt*.
Flat.  ).  e.)  Light  uid  aniaU  ahielda  of  a  great
•arie^  of  abiqwi  were  uied  by  numenui  nf.tiana
befbre  (ha  adoption  of  them  by  the  Qreeka.  Tba
round  target  oi  o^ra  wa*  a  ipeciea  of  (be  Pella,
and  waa  oied  e^iedally  by  the  people  of  Spaun
and  Mauritania. [CaTKA.] The  Pelta  it  alas

" '  luadrangulal. (SchoL  n  TliniiJ.

■hield^iimilai


ii,  29.) A  light  i

un  (^  the  national  amoDr  of  Thrace  (Thucyd.
li.  29  ;  Eurip.  ilea.  SIS,  iUri.  40ri  Max.  Tyr.
Dia.  Tii.)  and  oF  laHeni  parti  of  Aeia,  and  wai  ao
thli  account  attributed  (o  the  Amaxoni,  in  wboae
handt  it  appeara  on  the  worlu  of  ancisut  art  acnte-
timei  elliptu^  ai  in  the  hronict  of  Siiia  (woodcnt,
p,  712),  and  at  other  timet  Tarioutly  ainuated  on
the  margin,  bnt  matt  cannunly  with  a  temicii^
colar  indentation  on  one  tide  (kautu  ^leUi,  Virg.
Aea.  i.  490,  li.  G6S).  An  elegant  fbnc  of  the
pellB  ia  exhibited  in  the  annei^  woodcot,  (akea
from  a  af^nlcbral  nrii  in  the  Capitoline  Muitnm  at
Roma,  and  renreaentbw  Pentbeaiioia,  Queoi  of  tba
Amaaoni,  in  the  act  of  oflering  aid  to  Priam.


PELTA3TAK.  [Exucttdb,  p.  487,  It  t
Put*.]

PENATEa  ^tit  Diet.  1^  Or.  ami  Horn.  Biegr.
aadMj&.

PENESTAE  (nW<rr«),  pnb^ly  boo  >^«w-
hu,  npiran.  (I^Dim,  iL  9.)  Th*  Peneata*  aC
Tbeaaa^  are  geneoU^  concaind  to  haie  itaod  ■■
nearly  tile  lame  reialun  to  (bar  Thrall  it  ii  kiida
at  the  Helota  of  '-y— ~  did  U  (he  DoiiaM  %ar>
tan^  ahhoufa  dtcir  eoadition  t»imt  (a  h>ira  be<n
on  the  wfaOa  Mpetiat:  (PlaL  I^^f.  77C)
They  wer*  the  datwadaati  of  the  oU  P^tgie  at

._(=__ ,_..., ,-..__, ^ ^ y^


PEKTATBLON.


qocnd  bj  tba  Thcnaliu*  (e
■omndned  tlMiiiwlTCi  to  lb«  ncton  aa  amdicion
that  tbej  ihontd  not  be  curied  oat  of  tha  coinitiy
(wbenoe,  he  >dik,  ttaaf  mm  fonnarly  eallsd
HcrJuTw,  bnt  aAoinrdi  II**4nw),  nor  b*  pot  to
daub,  bst  (hoold  cultinlB  the  tind  ha  the  new


ehusd  ikTai^  being  rednced  to  aerTitDde  by  con-
qam,  ind  nHmblilig,  in  their  fimd  pajneDti,
ths  'Irrviipi-  of  Attio*.  HDnnrer,  tb^  iren
not  mbjeet  to  the  whole  commniiity,  but  belonied
to  partJcnhv  hooiH,  whence  alu  Ihej  wen  cafied
9fmXj>attTai.  The;  wen  veiy  nnmsrau,  fat
inetBDca,  in  the  bmuiea  of  the  Ateittdae  and
Beo^adae.  (Theotr.  xtL  U  ;  Mtlller,  Dor.  IH.  i.
f  6.)  We  any  add  that  amonnt  tin  TheMslian
PuMMae  ThcapHDiHU  indndei  the  dcMendanti  of
the  eaaquend  MafBedani  and  Prarhwbiiua
(Atko.  tL  p.  365),  a  Matemant  which  eu  only
applj  to  a  part  of  tlK«a  nationi,  M,  though  reduced
to  dMModtDco,  tbn  wan  not  made  entirely  nb-
jact (Hmd.TiU.lS3i  Hall.l.<i;)

FnaapaMage  in  "  '
1)  it  afneat*  that  tiv
■airiad  Ihetr  maiten  la  battle,  and  fooght  on  hone-
bach,  M  their  knighli  or  niiali :  a  cinamitance
which  need  not  eicite  *iir|ffiia,  ai  Tbenaly  waa
■0  &IIWIU  for  canlrj.  The  PeoeMaa  of  Thenaly
abo  naembled  the  lAconiao  Hdot)  in  anotfaei  re-
ipect ;  for  they  often  nae  iqi  in  atnu  againft  tlieir
Ivda.  (Ariet  PoL  ii.  6,)  Than  wen  Penaatae
amBagit  the  HacedoDiao*  alio.  (Htillar,  t.  e. ;
Wacbnoth,  AUerHmmili.  AaffaiL  foL  i.  pp.  177,
462,  403,  B42,  Sd  ed. ;  Thirlwall,  HitL  </  GrsMc,
-roL  L  p.  437;  Clinton,  AiW.  HtO.  Appendix,  c.
S2.)  [R  W.]

PENICILLDS. [PicTtrmi,  No.  VI.]
PSNTACOSIOMEDIHNI. [CBNing^ p.


KB,


PKNTAl


(TADORON. [LiTWL]

PENTABTE'RIS  (nrrurnfd).  [OLrnFu,
p.829,b.]

PENTALITHUB  (wo-nUite).  IGthma-
nvM,  p.  raS,  a ;  Taldi.]

PENTA3PA3T0N. [MiCHUt*.]

PENTATHLON  {»*to*Ao»,  ymnq^fUKu)
mM  next  to  the  pmcntinni  the  moat  btautifiil  of
an  athletic  pofbiiiiaDcta.  (Hend.  ii.  33  ;  Pans,
nl  II.  I  6.)  It  doea  not  apHar  to  have  been
known  In  the  heroic  agea  of  Qiwce,  allhongh
ApoUodimi  (iL  4.  g  4),  according  to  the  nnial
practice  of  laUT  tnnea,  deacribea  Penem  u  killing
AoiDDfl  in  the  poitatblon,  and  although  ita  inren-
tion  vaa  attribnled  to  Pelena.  (SchoL  ad  Pad.
MaLTiLlI.) Thaae  eccoimti  an  Eafanlont  i  the


the  grnt  nMunnl  gamea  of  Greece  bepn  to  SoDiiih,
The  penona  engaged  in  it  wen  cwed  pcnlalhli
(«frra»i«,  Heml  Ix  76  i  Pam  i.  S9.  |  4).  Tfae
■--■-' '^"doffin  diaUnrtKndeofgamea,


te^niw  <XV>)i  tlM  loot-iBco  (Ip^/us),  thi
Omwiaa  M  the  diKU  (Mmoi),  tha  thio  wing  of  tht
■pear  (^jrwn*  or  iitAiruv),  and  wTCftling  (nhig)
(ed>oL  Af  PlK.  jImA  p.  lU '■■■


PENTATHLON.  BSS

JaliUL  Pdca.  ToL  iL  p.  eSS,  ed.  Jacoba),  which
were  all  performed  in  one  day  and  in  B  certun
order,  one  after  the  other,  by  the  Bine  athletaOi.
(SehoLaiJ»^£[.e91  :PBiu.iii.tl.§e.>  Tha
penUlhlon  wai  ihtrodaced  in  the  Olympic  games
m  OL  1 B,  and  we  may  preenma  that  aoon  after  thii
it  «u  alao  introdnoed  at  the  other  national  game*,
ai  well  a>  at  aome  of  the  leaa  important  f^tinla,
inch  aa  the  Erotidia  in  Thopiae.  (BSi^ti,  Corp.
Iiui!rtpi.a.\B90.)

The  order  in  which  the  diSennt  ganei  of  the
poitatUon  fbllowed  one  another  haa  been  the  fob-
jecl  of  much  diieniaioB  hi  modem  timea.  Themort
pmbabte  ojnnion,  howeTer,  ii  BHdch^  (CbsHHal;
orf /iBid.  A'aai.  TU.  7 1,  Ae.),  which  haa  been  adapted
by  Diaaen,  Kraoaa,  and  otben,  although  O.  Her-
mann haa  combated  it  in  a  little  mA  tailed  Dt
SogmiiAigmaat  titloria  admerU  Lipaiae  1 828,
The  order  adopted  by  BUckh  ia  aa  ioUowa:  —
1.  The  lA^M.  Thii  waa  the  meat  pnmiDoit  part
of  the  pentathlon,  and  waa  aometimca  nied  to  dc-
aignale  the  whale  game.  It  waa  accompanied  by
flutfr-rnnaic.  (Pane.  t.  7.  S  *,  '■  17. 1  *■)  Other
writera,  aa  Paaaaniaa  hinuelf  (rL  14.  S  ()  and
Plulareh  (Dt  Mm.  c  26)  apeak  aa  if  the  whole
penlBlhloD  hod  been  accompanied  by  the  flute,  bnt
m  theee  pauagei  the  whole  game  aeemi  to  be  men-
timed  inatead  of  that  [articular  one  which  formed
the  chief  part  of  it.  2.  The  fbat-rac&  S.  Tha
diacua.  4.  The  thnwing  of  the  apeer.  S.  Wreal-
ling.  In  later  timea,  probably  after  01.  77,  tha
foot-rac*  may  han  been  the  fbnrth  game  iaatcad  of
the  aeeond.  ao  that  the  three  gamea  which  gare  to
the  pentathlon  ita  peculiar  chancter,  lii.  leqdng,
diacua,  and  the  aptar,  preceded  the  foot-race  and
wraalling,  and  thua  formed  the  ao-called  rputy/iii.
The  foot-race  of  the  pentathlon  waa  probably  the
aimple  itadion  or  the  dtanloa,  and  not  a  nee  in
armour  aa  baa  been  auppoaed  by  aome  ;  for  Ibe
itatuaa  of  the  TictoR  in  the  pentathlon  an  nexer
aeen  with  a  ahield  but  only  with  the  hallena,  be-
aide*  which  itihould  be  rnmembend  that  the  race
b  armour  waa  not  introduced  at  Olympia  until
OL  6£  (Peua.  t.  8.  S  3),  while  the  pentathlon  had
been  performed  long  bejbre  that  time.  It  ia  mor»-
arer  highly  imjmbable  that  eren  aftn  OL  6fi  the
race  in  armour  ahonld  bare  formed  a  port  of  the
pentathlon.  In  01. 38  the  pentathlon  for  boya  wa*
ntttoduoed  at  Olympia,  but  it  waa  only  eihibitad
thia  one  time  and  afterwaida  aboliahed.  (Pant.
..  S.  §  1.)

In  leaping,  racing,  and  in  thnwing  the  diacua
or  apear,  it  waa  eaaj  enongh  to  dedde  who  won
the  Tictor;,  even  if  aereral  athletae  took  pert  in  it
and  contended  for  tha  priu  uuniltaneoiwy.  In
wreatling,  howerer,  no  more  than  two  persona
could  be  ennged  together  at  a  time,  and  it  ia  not
dear  how  Uio  victory  waa  decided,  if  there  were
aeferal  pun  of  wreWlen.  The  anangement  pro-
bably waa,  that  if  a  man  had  conquered  hii  an-
tagoniat,  he  might  begin  a  &e>h  conteit  with  a
aeeond,  third,  &c,  and  he  who  thua  conquered  the
createet  nmnber  of  advenariea  waa  the  victor.  It
la  difficult  to  conceiTO  in  what  manner  the  priia
waa  awarded  to  the  vietor  in  the  whole  pentathlon ;
for  an  athlete  might  be  conqnered  in  one  at  two
gamea  and  be  Tictorioui  in  the  ethen,  irtiereaa  it
can  haie  occurred  but  aeldom  that  one  and  the
•ame  man  gaiiied  the  TJctory  in  all  the  Eti.  Who
of  the  pentathli  then  wat  the  *ietor  P  Modem
wriien  UTS  nid  that  the  priia  traa  either  awarded

sl  a


88*  PENTECOSTE.

tohini  who  hRdbeeaiictonciUB  inall  thefivegUDCi,
or  to  the  penon  who  bad  cimqiiered  big  onlagoniil
ui  at  leait  three  of  the  ganiai ;  but  nothing  can  be
dctermiaeil  on  Ihia  point  Kith  onj  cettaintf.  That
ths  deciiion  as  to  who  wu  to  be  rewarded  waa
coniidered  difRcullb;  the  Oreeki  tbein>elT«,>e«ni
to  be  implied  bf  the  &ct  that  at  Oljmpia  then
veiB  three  helkaadjcu  for  the  pentathloa  alone.
(P«u».  T.  9.  §  5.)

Aa  regard!  the  TpitrfiUi  mentioaed  abore,  ureral
■tatementi  of  andent  vriten  inggeat,  that  the
whole  of  the  pentathloD  vai  not  alwaja  pertonned
rcgnlori;  and  from  b^inning  to  end  i  and  the
vordi  b;  which  tbey  deiiguUe  the  abridged  game,
Tpiiefiiit,  iroTpiiiiir,  and  -rpivl  -iirpifirai,  lad  ui
to  nippOM  that  the  alnndged  conlat  onlj  coniiited
of  thrae  gamet.  and  moit  piolmblj  of  lh«e  three
whkfa  gave  to  the  pentalhion  itt  peculiar  chancier.
Til.  leaping  and  throwing  the  discu)  and  theipear.
(Dion  Chijaon.  AiTf.  L  p.  279,  ed.  Reitke ;  SchoL
ad  Ariitid.  op.  PhoL  Cod.  p,  409,  Bekker  ;  MUUec,
Andimt  AHmdiU  Rtn.  %  123.  S.)  The  muoa
for  abridging  the  pentathlon  in  thii  mannei  maj
bate  been  the  wiih  to  mve  lime,  oc  the  ciraim-
atance  that  atblet^a  who  tad  been  conqoered  ia
the  first  three  gamea  were  frequently  dLKouniged,
and  declined  centinoing  the  eanlcoL  When  the
triogmoi  waa  inliodoced  at  Olympia  ia  not  men-
tioned any  when,  but  Kraaae  infen  with  gittl
probabilily  from  Pauania*  {y.  9.  §  3)  thai  il  woi
b  01. 77.

The  pentathlon  leqnired  and  deTeloped  Ten-
great  elaaticity  of  all  parte  of  the  bod;,  whence  it
wai  principally  perfonned  by  yonng  men  {SchoL
ad  Plat.  Amat.  p.  13S,  d,  &c)  ;  and  il  ia  probably
owing  to  the  &ct,  that  thia  game  gave  to  all  parti
of  the  body  their  hormonioua  development,  that
Arlitotle  (/Uef.  L  6)  calls  the  penuthll  the  most
handsome  of  all  othletae.  The  pentathlon  was  for
the  same  iMion  also  regarded  a<  very  benelicisl  ia
a  medical  point  of  view,  and  the  Elean  Hyinion,
who  had  from  hia  childhood  lufiered  from  rheuma-
tism, was  cured  by  practising  the  pentathlon,  and
became  ODe  of  the  most  diatinguished  athletae,
(Paus.  tL  3.  g  4.)  (Compare  G.  Fr.  Philipp,  Dt
FmlaMo  im  Qwnjiiartia  CbmnBtlatio,  Berlin,
1337;  Erause,  Oymiaitik  nd  Agcm^  itr  Htt-
faBB,  pp.  *76— 497.)  [L.  S.]

PENTECO'NTERUS  (-mTjicJwepu,).  [N*-
Tis,  p.  784,  a.]

PENTECOSTE  {nmjKoar*),  a  duly  of  two


Alhcn, '■■


941)  ;  and  alto  oa  woollen  cloth,  and  other  mann-
facluied  goodi.  (Demoath.  a,  Mid.  S£8.}  On  ini'
porta  the  duty  was  piyable  on  the  unloading
{Demoath.  e.  Zocr.  932)  j  ou  eipocta,  probably,
when  thej  wen  put  on  board.  The  money  was
collected  by  persona  called  rtrTtiKoarilKiyiit,  who
kept  a  book  in  which  they  entered  all  cualonu  re-
ceiicd.  Demoithenea  refeii  to  their  entry  (iio-
TpoL^),  to  proye  that  a  ahip  waa  not  laden  with
more  than  a  certain  quantity  of  gooda.  (o.  Piorm.
909.)  The  merchant  who  paid  the  duty  waa
aaid  trti-TiiiirM^diiffSiu.  All  the  cusloma  appear
to  have  been  let  to  fenn,  and  probably  from  year
to  year.  They  were  let  to  the  higheat  bidden  by
the  Mo  nuKitral,  acting  DUdei  the  anthoritj  of  the


PEPLOM.
senate.  The  brmen  wen  called  T«\finu,  and  wera

said  BHLThu  tV  w«m|icoaT4>'.  They  might  ntker
collecl  the  duty  themMtreB,  or  employ  othen  for
that  purpose.  SeveiBl  pecMma  oAol  joined  togclhra
in  the  apeculadon,  in  whieh  caae  the  princi^d,  in
whose  name  the  bidding  took  pUo,  (md  who  waa
Rsponsible  to  the  state,  was  called  ifx^"!'  or
Tthe*v^X^%.  Sui«tiea  wen  usually  required.
(I>emHth.a.7Vmocr.713  ;  Andoc  (2>  Vji^  17,  «L
Steph.)  Whether  the  customs  on  different  articlea
of  merchandise  were  flumed  altogether,  or  sepai-
rately,  does  nA  appear.  The  com-du^  at  least
was  kepi  d!atiiKt(I)emoalfa.e.JV*Kr.  1353):  and
this  was  the  caae  with  another  toi.  (Aesch.  c.
rinarel.  1 6.)  With  nvpect  lo  the  amoont  of  the
nTenue  dcrired  from  thla  source,  the  reader  mmy
considt  Bdckh  {PM.  Bam.  ofA&mi,  p.31Ss  hxL^
Sd  ed.).  The  TtrngicotfT^  has  been  Ihongbt  by
tame  to  be  the  same  with  the  ItAi/ihtar,  men-
tioned by  Pollux  (TiiL  1 32,  iz.  30},  but  ths  waa
more  probably  a  duty  paid  for  the  oie  of  the  bar-
hour,  whether  good*  were  onladen  ai  not ;  and  was
perhaps  the  same  as  the  JKirrsaT^,  mentioned  b^
Xenophon  {de  Rtp.  AA.  I  17)  a*  being  fii  by
foreign  ship*  entering  the  Peiraaeus,  and  alluded  to
by  AriBlopbases.  (Fsip.  eSB.)  BSckh's  Donjeo-
tiire,  that,  besidea  a  penonal  hsibaur  due,  a  duty
waa  levied  of  one  per  cent,  on  all  the  good*  oB
board,  appears  lees  probable ;  lor  it  would  bo  ait-
reaaonable  to  eiaet  a  euslomi  duty  on  goods  not
landed  ;  and,  if  they  were  to  be  landed,  why
should  the  wsmiiuwni  bo  required  in  addilisa  to
the  iKonXTrti.  [C.  H.  K.]

PENTECOSTYS  ('RrvKoirrit), [Exua-
Tus,  p.  403,  a.]

PEPLUM  (w^Xoi),  a  shawl,  differing  fina
the  Cblamvb  in  being  much  huger,  and  bam  tho
Pallium  in  being  liner  and  thinner  and  also  cao-
aiderably  la^er.  It  iraa  sometimes  used  aa  a
c^Ter  to  protect  valuable  articles  of  fumitun  (Hcfn.
IL  T.  194)  or  to  adorn  a  throne  ((M.  vil  S6),  but
most  commonly  as  a  part  of  the  dress  of  femalea
(Horn.  /i.  T.  316,  734,  735,  riii.  384,  Oi  xt,  133
— 12B,  iwfis,  II.  liT.  176  1  Eurip.  Ute.  1013,
Mod.  791  ;  TheocriL  L  33)  ;  although  instance*
occur,  even  among  the  Oreeka,  in  which  it  ia  wont
by  the  other  aei,  unlea  we  inppoie  ^e  term  to  ba
in  theae  inatoncei  improperly  put  fiirfapsi.  (Eurip.
/ol^l033)  TheocriU  viLU.)  In  Penia  and
other  Esslcm  countriei  the  shawl  was  no  doobt
anciently,  as  it  ia  at  the  present  day,  by
leics.  (AeschyL  Pen.  201, 474, 1030, 10«1.>
in  Baixhaiialiiui  processions  it  was  worn  by
mi'n  both  in  allniian  to  Oricnlal  habits,  and  beeanaa
then  avowedly  assumed  the  dress  of  femalea.
ip.  Baai.  783—791.)  W^men  of  highnnk
theirshawlssolougos  to  trail  upcn  the  ground,
(TpiKl>aiJMnviw^\in>i,Honi.71LTL443;  'Exb^
msirrrirAM,  Od.it.  305.)  Like  all  othtf  pietea
of  cloth  used  [or  the  Amictub,  it  was  tittn
fastened  by  means  of  a  brooch  [Fibdl*]  (Sopb.
Tra-JL  920  ;  Callim.  Lm.  PatL  70  ,  ApoUon.
Rhod,  iiu  S33),  and  waa  thus  dbpUyed  npon  tbe
statuea  of  female  diTinitiea,  such  as  Diana  (Brandy
Amid.  iii.  206)  and  the  goddess  Rome.  (Sidon,
Apollia  Cam.  Y.  IB.)  tt  waa,  however,  fre-
quently worn  without  a  brooch  in  the  maiiDCT
represenled  in  the  aimend  woodcut,  wbidi  ia
spied  from  one  of  Sir  Wm.  Hamiltoo^  japta
(ol.  iii,  pL  £8).  Each  of  the  femslea  in  tiua  gma^
earn  a  ahifl  Uliof  down  to  hir  fMt  (Tnxtca],


■ml  orer  il  an  ample  ihkwl,  which  the  puia  en-
tirely mind  her  bod.T  and  than  thrawi  ihs  Iodh
exUmiit;  of  il  dtcf  h«  left  ihoulder  and  behind
her  badi,  m  ii  dinincti^  aeen  in  ihe  littiDg  Ggnre.
The  ihawl  va*  bIh  often  worn  » u  to  cover  the
head  while  it  enveloped  the  bodj-,  aad  more  e*pe-
ciallf  on  oeniioa  of  ft  funenl  (lee  woadcnta,  p.
fii7),  or  of  a  marriage,  when  a  yeiy  iplendid  ahawl
( wmarii,  1  lUamai.  L  '27)  wai  worn  b;  the  htide.
The  fallowing  woodcut  (from  Baitoli,  Admir.  Sum.
A*t.  pL  67)  nuj  be  luppoeed  to  repreKnt  the  mo-
ment when  the  bride,  lo  veiled,  ii  delivered  to  her
hiubuid  at  the  door  of  the  nuptial  chamber.  He
wean  the  Palliitu  only  ;  ihe  bu  a  longfhift  be-
neath her  ibawl,  and  ii  lupportod  by  the  promiba.


Thn  ™Ied  the  poeti  repreeented  Anrors  and
Night,  but  with  thia  diHerence,  that  the  one  ama
erpanding  a  ahawl  djed  with  ufiron  {KpoKSvtTKot
•Hmt,  Horn.  IL  nil  I,  iiiii.  227),  whema  ■  bUck
one  enieloped  the  other  {iit\iiitrwKos  Nuf,  Eurip.
lorn,  1150).

Uf  all  the  prodnctioni  of  the  iDom  ibawli  were
thoae  on  which  the  gmteat  ikill  and  labanr  were
beitowcd.  So  lariona  and  1aM>'ful  were  the  anb-
jecta  which  they  rcpretented,  that  poeta  delighted
to  deacribe  them. The  art  of  wearing  them  waa


PER  PIONORIS  CAPIONEM. 885

enlirelj  Oriental  (Baptipur  ft^Arfiara,  Enrip.  Ion,
1169) ;  thoie  of  the  moat  iplendid  dyn  and  cariou
workmanihip  weie  imported  from  Tyre  and  Sidoa
(Horn.  IL  yi.  28S— 29*  ) :  a  whole  book  wat  written
by  PoUmo  "Cbwerni^  (Aa  Sfuanlt  at  CarViagt.''
<Athen.  lii.  pL  641.)  Hence  "  Shswla  "  (whAoi,
Clem.  Alei.  Strom.  tL  I.  p.  73G,  ed.  Potter)  wai
~~~  of  the  titlei  of  imAt  of  an  imiginatire  or
riptiTe  cbaiaoter,  and  wai  adopted  to  intimate
variety  of  their  aubjecta  and  the  beanlifbl  mode
of  diiplaying  them.  A  book,  intended  to  depict
aome  of  the  cfaancter*  ia  the  Iliad,  and  denomi-
nated "The  Shawl,"  waa  ascribed  to  Ariitolle.
(Euitalh.  wrt.  iLi57.)  Varro  alao  wrote  a  P^o-
yropij  (wmXoTjM^B,  Cic  ad  Att  iri.  11.)  A>
a  apecimen  of  the  iDbjecti  delineated  a  ahawl  may
be  mentioned,  which  eihibiled  the  frame  of  (be
world.  (Mart.  Capella,  L.  tI.  in  Mattaire^  Cor-
jiH/'oefanin,TDl.ii.  p.  1446.)  Euripides dewribea
oat  which  repreiented  the  aun,  moon,  and  atora,
and  which,  with  Tariona  othen  containini  hnntinir-
piecea  and  a  mat  varipty  of  lubjec
the  temple  rf  Apollo  at  Delphi,  ai
form  B  magnificent  tent  far  the  pnipose  ot  an  enter-
tainment (/on,  1141^1162)  i  tor  il  u  to  be  ob-
lerred,  that  itorca  of  ahawla  were  not  only  kept  by
wealthy  indiridaili  (Ham.  Od.  it.  104— lOB),
but  often  conatitnted  a  very  important  pen  of  the
trcaavrea  of  a  temple  (Eurip.  /on,  329, 330),  baring
been  preaented  to  the  divinity  on  numerous  occa-
aions  by  snpplianta  and  devoleea.  (Hom.  II.  Yi.371
—304  [  Virg.  .^en.  L  480,  0>.  21—35.)  [Com-
pare DONARIA  ; PlNATHaMAIa  ; pASTOFHO-

aca.]  [J.  Y.J

PER  CONDICTIO'NEM.  This  Legis  Actio,
■Byi  GaiuB,  waa  ao  called  because  the  plaintiff  gave
notice  lo  the  defendant  to  be  present  on  the
thirtieth  day  after  the  notice  in  order  that  a  judeK
might  be  appointed.  (Comp.  OcU.  i.  34.)  It  waa
an  actio  in  persnnam  and  applicable  lo  those  cases
in  which  the  phiintifT  required  the  defendant  lo
give  something  {qua  itUtndit  dari  oporiere).  This
Legia  Actio  was  introduced  by  a  tei  Silia  in  the
case  of  a  fixed  aum  of  money  (oeria  peaoua\  aad
by  a  hex  Cnlpumia  in  the  case  of  any  definite
thing.  QaiuB  observes  that  it  does  not  appear  why
thia  form  of  action  was  needed,  for  in  a  cose  of
"  dari  oportere  "  there  waa  the  Sacramentum,  and
the  Per  Judicia  poatulationem.  The  name  Con-
dictio  waa  applied  to  actionea  in  peisouam,  after
the  legis  actionea  fell  into  diinae,  though  impro-
periy,  for  the  notice  (datmifiaUo)  whence  the  legis


L  (Oaiui


18,  &C.)  [O.L.J

PER  JUDICIS  POSTULATIO'NEM  was
one  of  the  Legii  Actionea. The  passage  in  Gaiui

There  are  aome  remarks  on  this  Actio  by  Puchta,
/»rf.  ii.  §  154,163.  [G.U]

PER  MANUS  INJECTIO'NEM. [Manhb

PER  PrONORIS  CAPICNEM  or  CAP-
TIO'NEM.  Thia  was  one  of  the  Legia  Actiones
or  old  Forms  of  procedure,  which  in  aome  cases
was  fcunded  on  custom  (moi),  in  oihera  on  enart-
menta  {lea}.  It  was  founded  on  military  usage  in
the  following  cases.  A  soldier  might  seiie  aa  a
pledge  (piffiimt  twpen)  anything  belonging  to  tliQ
penon  who  had  to  fbmiih  the  aes  militare,  in  caao
he  did  not  Duike  the  proper  payments  ;  be  might
also  make  a  seizure  in  respect  of  the  money  due


3  t  J  -


•  o"


BBS  PERA.

to  him  <br  tba  punhax  of  »  honn  (ati  tqimOn),
uid  alio  in  ntpKt  at  lie  allowum  fbi  ike  food  of
hid  hone  (of  Aor^^AfnuiJi),  DpoD  what  belonged  to
tba  penon  whow  dutj  it  wu  to  make  the  pBj-
menc  OriginaUj,  nick  pajmenti  ware  &xei  upon
particulAT  penoni,  mnd  not  made  out  of  the  Aeim-
rlnm  (Liv.  1 13  ;  Oaiui,  ir.  27).  The  U«  of  the
TwelTs  Table!  allowed  apignorii  eapio  in  reapect
of  pt;  doe  for  the  hiia  of  a  beatt,  when  tbe  hire
monej  wai  intended  (or  a  aurifice.  Bj  ■  ipecial
Uw  (the  name  ia  not  l^hle  in  the  MS.  of  Oaiiu)
'  e  publicaai  had  the  right  p^i


re  due  W  any
lex. The  tliing  wu  aeiied  (r>w»i  opuJoteO


vtigalia  publics


with  certun  formal  worda,  and
wu  bj  aome  mniidend  to  be  a  le^  actia  Othen
did  not  allow  it  to  be  a  legit  actio,  becauie  the
proceeding  wu  extra  jut,  that  ia,  not  before  the
Praetor,  and  geneiallj  alto  in  the  abeence  of  the
peiwm  whote  property  waa  (eiicd.  The  pignua
could  alae  be  teiied  on  a  diet  ne&atua,  or  one  on
which  a  legia  actio  wu  not  permitted.

It  app«art  Erom  a  poaaage  of  Qaiua,  in  which  be
apeaka  of  the  legal  fiction  that  wu  ofterwarda  in-
tmdnced  into  the  Formula  bj  which  the  pobllcaui
rtcovered  the  Tectigalia,  that  the  thing  aeiied  wu
onlj  taken  u  a  aecurity  and  wu  tedeemed  bj
payment  of  the  tun  of  money  in  reapect  of  which
It  wat  aeiied.  In  oae  of  noo-paymaot,  there  mutt
however  haie  been  a  power  of  aale,  and  accordingly
thii  pignoria  capio  reaembled  in  all  mpecta  a
pignut  prnier.  except  at  to  the  want  of  conaent  on
the  part  of  the  penon  whoee  piDperty  wot  aeiied.
Itdoean.
origin  of

veloped  ;  bnt  it  aeem*  not  improbable.  (Gaiua,  it.
26,  &C. )  Cic  Virr.  iiL  11  ;  Figmorii  eapio,  OelL
>ii.  10.)  [G.L.]

PERA,  dim.  PEOIULA  (irtipa),  a  wallet,  mode
of  leather,  worn  auipended  at  the  aide  by  ruatica
and  by  tiarelleri  to  carry  th«r  proviaiona  (Hut.
xir.ai)  and  adopted  in  imitation  of  them  by  the
Cynic  philotophera.  (.Diog.  Laert-Ti.  13  ;  Brunck,
J«*/il J 0'"Jfl {: OO OQ  . !..»,. r ' "*  * ""


^naL  I.  22S,  ix


IB  ;  Anaon.  Epig.  £3.) The


PEBOULA.
precedini  woadoit  ta  the  repreteatation  of  a  geM-
nerd  with  hit  ttaff  and  wallet  from  the  eolnmn  of
Theodotiui,  formerly  at  Conatantinople.  (Henes-
trier,  Dt*er^*iom  dt  la  CoL  Hit.  Far.  1702.  nt.
16.)  [J.  Y.]

PEBDUE'LLIO. [Minm'.ia,  p.;2£.]
PERDUELLIO-NIS  DUUTiIYlBI  were  two
offlcera  or  judget  i^'pointed  for  the  poifwee  of  try-
ing peiama who were  accuied of  the  crime of


det  Rom.  RioUt,  p.  24.  nc
though  in  a  later  port  of  hia  work  (p.  855.  oole
20)  he  admiti  that  tbej  were  diatinet.  It  >p-
pean  from  a  conpaiiaon  of  the  fbllowius  panaaet,
—  LiT.i.26;  Dig.l  tit.  2.  fc2.  §23;  Fe«.tT.
Parid  and  ^ronniB, —  either  that  aome  of  tha
ancient  writera  confound  the  duumriri  perduri-
lionit  and  the  qnaeitoniB  pairiddii,  or  that,  at
leut  during  the  kingly  period,  they  were  the
tame  penoni ;  for  in  giting  an  account  of  tho
tame  occmrence,  aome  wiitm  call  the  judges
quaeatorea  poiripdii,  while  othen  (alt  them  duum-
riri peiduellionii.  After  the  enabliibmenl  of  tha
republic,  howeTei,  there  can  be  no  donbt  that
they  were  two  diatinet  officea,  for  the  quaeetotva
were  appointed  regulaHy  erery  year,  whereat  tba
duiundri  were  appointed  veiy  rarely  and  oolj
in  cate*  of  emergency,  u  had  been  the  oaa  dnring
the  kin^y  period.  (Lit.  iL  ^^,  ti.  20  ;  Dion  Caaa.
inni.  27.)  Livy  (L  20)  reproenta  the  durnnnrj
perdoellionia  u  being  appointed  by  the  kingt,  but
from  Joniua  Oraccbanna  (Dig.  I.  tit  13.  l.  1  ;  coD-
pars  TaciL  AmaL  n.  22}  it  ^ipean  that  tbejr
were  propoaed  by  the  king  and  appointed  by  tlie
populut  {nget  P<^P^  aiffrigio  craoAaat).  Durinff
the  early  part  of  the  republic  they  woe  qipoinleS
bj  the  comitia  curiata,  and  aiterwanU  by  tha
comttia  centuriata,  on  the  propotal  of  the  cootulL
(Dig.],  tit.  2.  a.  2.  S23j  Cic.  pro  Babir.  <,  ftc.)
In  the  oue  of  Rabiriua  (a.  c.63),  howero-,  thia
cuatom  wat  Tiolaled,  u  tbe  duumnri  were  ap-
pointed by  the  praetor  initnd  of  by  the  eonitK
centuriata.  (Dion  Cait.  (.&  ;  CicJLe.;  $aat,Cte(.
12.)  In  the  time  of  the  empenn  no  dnumTiii
perduellionii  were  erer  appcunted.

Tbe  puniihment  tor  thoae  who  wen  loimd  guilty
of  peiduellio  wu  death  ;  they  wen  either  hanged
on  tha  ariar  ayUii  or  thrown  from  tba  Taipsaa
rock.  Bnt  itben  the  dniuDTiri  fbond  a  penm
guilty,  he  might  ai^cal  to  the  people  (in  caHy  tiaea
the  populna,  afterwaida  tbe  comitia  sentnriala),  aa
wu  done  in  tbe  ftiat  cate  which  ia  on  record  ( Li*.
L  26),  and  in  the  but,  which  it  that  of  lUbiriat,
whom  Cicero  defended  before  tbe  people  ia  an
niation  atill  extant.  Marcnt  Horaliui  who  had
tlain  hia  tiater,  wu  acquitted,  bnt  wat  neretthe-
leaa  obliged  to  undergo  aome  aymbolical  pouiak-
ment,  u  ha  bad  to  paaa  under  a  yoke  witb  big
bead  covered.  Tbe  houae  of  tboie  who  were  exe-
cuted for  pardnellio,  wu  ruxed  to  the  ground,  and
their  iclatirea  were  not  allowed  to  mooni  far  them.
(Dig.  3.  tiL  2.  a.  11.  g  S  ;  comp.  Becker,  HimJbmA
da-  Aon.  AlUrii.  iL  2.  p.  329,  &c)  [L.  S.]

PEREGRI'NUS.  [Civiria  (Roh^h.)]
PE'ROULA,  appnn  to  haie  been  a  kind  td
booth  01  muill  honte,  which  afiotdad  acamly  amy
protection  except  by  itt  lool^  an  that  tboaa  wl«
patted  by  could  eatily  look  into  it.  It  tarred
both  «  a  woriuhop  (Dig.  5.  tit.  1.  a.  19)  ud  a
ilall  wbera  tbingi  wen  jwlij^iijii  for  n^ Wa


PBSIOECL

find,  fat  loiluic*,  Aa  pKinter*  aliilnUd  their
wnAt  in  K  p«g<Ua  IhU  the;  migfat  bs  Hen  b;
tboM  vbo  psHcd  hj  { LuciL  (^  LactamL  i.  32),
ud  Apella  ii  aid  U  hsTe  amsealsd  hiniMlf  in
hia  pe^nls  bebind  hu  nctnm  dtM  he  migbt  ovcr-
btar  tha  temuki  of  uoM  who  hxiksd  U  thsm.
(Plin.  H.  N.  xoLt.  at.  I  IS.)  floeh  plwai  Ten
ocaDided  bj  jMnoDi,  wbo,  ulbar  b?  worting  or
titii^  in  Om,  wiakad  to  ittnci  the  MtmtiMi  of
thop^Uk.  (adnaiiadd^rqitAul^itr.pp.4i8,
459.)  Heooi  we  find  tkem  inhaUtMi  I7  foot
pUlooopbai  (nd  gnmnunuu  vbo  gftTO  dutmelion


■•  to  the  n>]  mMning  of  pergnU :  SoJiger  {ad
PImL  PukL  i  2.  79)  deodibu  it  h  ■  part  of  >
bone  bailt  out  into  tb*  itrMt,  u  in  nsne  old
bmi*eo  of  modeni  tima  ;  Gravti  (ad  Suit.  Aug,
94)  thmk*  thK  ■  pergola  ■•  B  litUe  nioni  in  the
Bpper  fiBzt  of  K  bou«e  which  v>fl  oaanoiuLUj  DKd
hj  poo-  philaeoplien  u  m  obienalory.  But  neither
of  thcM  t«D  definitiuii  ii  lO  oj^lieable  to  ■]!  the
[■■in  in  which  the  witd  oceun  u  thnt  which
VB  tera  pnuMed.  [L- S.)

PERIACTOS  (-nftarmf,  ■  thedticd  inKhine,
iMiiiiliin  II  f  thno  iconei,  pUctd  in  the  fenn  of  ■
lhan|^  (or  mtber,  triui^nlu'  prism)  on  *  revolring
phtfin^  10  that,  by  tiniplf  tnming  the  machine,
the  eccDe  could  in  changed.  It  wu  cbieAj
wliBi  a  god  ma  u  be  introdnced  wilh  the  ae
paniment  of  Ibmidef.  The  name  wai  al»  applied
lo  the  ipaca  which  wai  ]»atided  for  tho  machine
in  the  erection  of  the  theatre.  {Vitmr.  *.  T ;
PiJliiz,iT.  126.)  (P.S.]

PERIDBIPNON  (rtpttawnr).  [FuHtiH,
t.  567,  b.]

PBHmilOUIDSS. [XTiTtia.]

PEftlOECI  (nfbmtj. Thk  T
denotaa  the  inh^tanti  of  a  diitriet  Ijing  around
■ooM  paitiolir  tootUtf,  hut  b  gmenlly  aaed  *~
daaetilia  a  depeDdntt  popnlation, liTing  witho
tbe  waUa  or  in  the  eonnay  prorincea  of  a  dorai
•Hi  ^tjf  and  althoqgb  peEwmally  free,  de[nTed  of
the  O^^T"'"''  "f  citiienghip, ud the  political
riahia  oanfcaied  bj  iL The  wotd*  vimuiot
flinati  bate  an  snalogaoi  meaning.

A  politkail  cotiditian  neh  u  that  of  the  Perioeei
of  Greece,  and  lilie  die  Tuaalige  oF  the  Oermanic
nalifa,  could  hardly  bare  arcuated  in  anything
clae  than  foreini  euiqueit,  and  the  Perieed  of
LAconia fbmiah a


tr  origin  di


niah  a  atiiking  illiutratiaD  of  tbii.
data  from  the  Dorian  conqaeit  of  the
I,  when  the  old  inhabitant!  of  the
oeontiy,  the  Achaiani,  tabmitted  to  their  om-
qoenn  on  certain  cooditionB,  liy  which,  according
Id  EpbonM  (Stiab.  riiL  p.  861),  they  were  left
in  pMHaaioo  of  tbeir  prirate  righti  of  eitticDihip
<IawTMifa),  web  aitha  right  of  hitennarriago  with
the  Doriaoi,  and  ahoof  their  political  fnuichiae.
Tbw  nrfbtad  indeed  a  partial  deprivation  of  their
land^  and  were  obliged  to  aubmit  to  a  king  of
fiiniign  race,  bnt  atiil  they  mnained  equu  in
law  to  their  conqneron,  and  wen  eligible  to
mil  efieea  of  aula  eieepl  the  aoTOviffnitv.  'lni-
raiim  /ttrtxtrrti  ml  *9KirtUa  aol  ifxtita:
(Arnold.  71^^  tdI.  i.  p.  G41.)  Bnt  thia  Mate
«f  thing!  did  not  laat  long ;  in  the  next  nmeralion
after  tha  conqneat,  eithet  from  the  lul  a  incnaaed


PERioECt.  ear

imaueeeaifiil  attempt  by  the  Achaiani  to  regain
their  independence,  the  relatim  between  the  two
partiea  waa  changed.  The  Achaiana  were  reduced
'  nn  citiiena  to  iiuaala  j  they  were  made  tributary
Sparta  (crum^ti),  and  their  landa  Wen  anb-
,  :l«d  to  a  tax,  perhapa  not  an  mnch  for  the  aabs
of  rorenne  aa  in  token  of  tiieir  dependence  (Ephiv.
L  «.) ;  tbej  loot  th«r  r^ta  of  cidimahip  (Iro-
riiiim),  lodi  aa  tbat  of  intermaniage  witb  Hw  Dd-
rianl,  the  ririit  of  Toting  in  the  gtmral  aaaemblTi
and  theit  eligiblUV  to  important  ifficea  in  the
BtBta,  Bocb  aa  that  of  a  aenalor,  &c  It  doea  not,
howerer,  appear  that  the  Peiioed  (eapecially  in  the
Hiatliric  timea)  wb«  generally  an  oppreaaed  pei>-
pl^  thoogh  kept  in  a  itate  of  political  inferiori^
10  theit  conqnenm.  On  the  conliary,  the  moat
diatii^uiihed  amoont  them  were  admitted  to  office*
of  tmat  (Thncyd.  nil  61),  and  aometimea  inTeated
with  uaral  command  (liLiiiL  32),  bat  ptvbably


good  aaikrabip.  Horeorer,  the  Perioeei  ac
aerred  aa  bcsTT-annad  loldion  ortroopa  of  the  lino ;
at  the  battle  of  Phtiene,  for  inalance,  tbey  aupplied
10,000  mm,  5000  hoplitea  and  5000  light-armed
(Hcnd.  ii.  61),  a  eircumttance  which  aeema  to
imply  a  diflinoce  of  nuik  connected  with  a  dif-
ference of  ocmpAtion  amongst  the  Perioeei  tfaem-
■elTea.  Again,  at  Sphacteria  292  priaonen  werv
taken,  of  whom  130  were  SparBni  and  the  reat
npUxiu.  (Milller.  iii.  3.  §3.)  We  aho  read  of
neAoI  i&yatol,  "  or  accompliihed  and  well-born  "
gentlemen,  amonsat  the  Perioeei  aerving  aa
Tolnnuen  in  the  Smrttn  aerriee.  (Xen.  llelL  t.
3.  t  9.)  Bnt  atill  It  ia  not  to  be  expected,  it  ia
not  mtural,  that  men  competent  to  the  diccbaree
of  high  ^cttona  in  a  ilate,  and  bceiing  ita
bardeu,  ihonld  patiently  anbmit  to  an  excluaion
from  all  political  righta.  Accordingly  wo  End,  tbat
on  the  riaing  of  the  Helota  in  n-c  161,  aome  of
the  Perioeei  joined  them.  (Thncyd.i  101.)  When
the  Thebana  invaded  Laconia  (B,  c.  SG9X  the
Perioeei  wen  ready  to  help  them.  (Xen.  fldl.  ii.
5.  §  25.)  In  connection  with  the  innmection  of
Cinadoa  we  are  told  that  the  Perioeei  were  moat
bitter  againat  the  roiing  Spartona.  (Id.  iii  S.  |6.)
From  tbtae  and  other  beta  (Clin.  F.  H.  Append,
ixii.)  it  appean  that  the  Pmoeci  of  Ijiooiua,  if
not  an  opjseaaed,  wbe  aometimea  a  diaaifected  tfld
diacentented  claaa  \  though  in  oaea  of  itrong  ei-
ciUment,  or  of  gawral  danger  to  the  whde  of
Greece,  tbey  idcn^ed  tbemaelrea  with  their  con-
ignerora.  The  xery  relation  indeed  which  intitiated'
between  them  waa  sofficient  to  produce  m  Sparta  a
jealousy  of  hersBbjectajwithcorreipoDdingfoeiinga
on  their  pan.  Nor  can  we  anppooe  that  the  Doriana
wonld  willingly  permit  the  Perioeei  to  acqniro
strength  and  opulence,  iv  eren  to  aettle  in  large
town*  (Thhlmll./'u'.^fAwiie.TaLl  p.S07.)  In
bet  it  ia  atated  by  laocralea  {PtaaA.  p.  907),  that
llie  Doriana  intentionally  weikened  me  Achaiana
byditperungthemorera  great  number  of  bamleta,
which  they  called  niXta,  though  they  were  lesa
powerful  than  the  country  {«!(£(*  of  Attica,  and
were  ailnaled  in  the  moat  unprodnctiTe  parta  of
Laconia,  the  beat  land  of  which  waa  reaorred  for  the
Spartana.  It  ia  not,  liowerer,  neceaaaiy  to  nnder-
■land  the  orator  aa  speaking  of  a  unifi>rm  piactice  |
and  anotha- of  hia  statements,  to  the  efiect  that  the
Ephori  i»uld  pat  any  of  the  Perioeei  to  death
(p.  271}  without  trial,  ia  either  a  penecaioa  of  th<


888  PEMOECL

tnith,  01  WDU  &Dm  hii  confixuidiDg  tlM  Perioaei
with  the  HelotL

Still  the  giienocea  of  the  Periood  mn  tut
after  alt  intolsnble,  nor  do  the;  wem  to  hiTe  bem
Imled  wilh  maliumeu  or  imolencs.  The  dirtonee
U  vhich  loMDj  of  them  lived  frnn  Spaxta,  tout  L&vs
nndctod  it  uopouible  for  them  io  ihin  in  the  ad-
miniilnlion  of  the  itaC^  or  to  Btlend  the  public
ouemblie* ;  a  drcumitaaea  which  mint  in  eome
'c  blunted  their  hdm  of  their  political


inferiority. Nor  w


9  they  mb^eeted  b


n  duciplioe  which  the
of  maintain mg  their  political  lapreoiBcj  ildpaaed
upon  iho  Spatlani,  making  them  moia  liko  an
**  uin  J  of  occupation  in  a  couquend  eoiintiy,"  or  a
"  beU'egored  gamnn,"  than  a  eocielj  of  men
onited  tor  ciTU  goTcnmieat  and  mutual  adnntage.
By  way  of  compeiuation,  too,  the  Periaed  enjoyed


lege.)  V


Thamdeand

their  hands,  and  caniod  on  by  thcDi  with  the  more
&cUity  and  profit  ai  they  occapied  maiitime  towna.
Ths  eulliration  of  the  art*  alto,  ai  well  in  the
higher  a*  io  the  lower  departmenta,  waa  conSned
to  the  Perioeci,  the  Spartan*  eonaidering  it  beneath
theouelvea  ;  and  many  dietinguiibed  artiiti,  ench
la  emboaaen  and  bnat-fbnnden,  wen  fbiind  in  the
Laconian  achoola,  all  of  whom  wen  probably
PeriotcL  (HQlIer,  Z)ar.  iii.  S.  S3.)  Nor  i>  there
waaUog  other  eiidenco,  though  not  altogether  bte
from  doubti,  to  ihow  that  the  Spartan  proTincialt
were  not  in  the  leait  ebeclied  or  ihacUed  in  the
deTelojanent  of  their  intellectoal  powers  (Thirl-
wallandMUller.f/.dt)  Moreover,  it  leemi  naliual
to  auppoae  that  they  enjoyed  ciTil  righti  in  the  com-
mnniliei  to  which  they  belonged,  and  which  other-
wiae  would  Ksrcely  hare  b««i  called  riXiis  ;  bat
whether  or  no  theee  citlei  had  the  power  of  elect-
ing their  own  chief  magiicrale  ii  a  matter  of  cotijec-
tore.  Ephorni,  indeed  (^c.J.infomu  ui  that  on  the
eonqueet  of  the  Peloponneaiu  by  the  Dorian*,  they
divided  the  country  of  Idconia  iaW  lix  dialricta,
fbor  of  which  were  left  in  the  poiKuion  of  the
Achaiana,  and  governed  by  magulratet  lent  &am
Sparta  ;  but  we  do  not  know  how  long  thia  prac-
tice buted,  nor  can  we  diaw  any  concliuian)  wilh
reipect  to  the  gDvemment  of  Uiconia  in  general
fa>m  the  eiampla  of  Cythera,  to  which  a  Spartan
officer  wai  aimuaily  tent  under  the  pecidiar  title
of  Kv^npuJlitiii,  or  the  "  Juitice  of  Cythera."

The  number  of  Xdconian  (ai  they  are  called)
or  eubject  ciuei,  ii  luid  to  have  formerly  amounted
to  100.  (Strab.  viii.  p.  362.)  Scleral  of  them  lay
on  the  coait,  ai  Oythium,  the  port  of  Sputa  ;
whence  the  whole  coatt  of  L.acania  ii  called  jj
ripioitii.  (Thocji  iii.  IB.)  Many,  however,  Uy
more  inland,  ai  Thuria  (Thncyd.  L  101)  and
Cardamyle,  which  aeemi  to  have  belonged  to  the
old  Mcaunia.  The  inhabitanbi  of  the  diilnct  of
Sciroi  (i^  Iki^it),  on  the  confinet  of  Arcadia,  aecm
to  have  be«i  distinct  from  the  other  Pcriacd
(Xen.  HelL  V.  2.  %  34),  and  in  battlewem  poated  by
thenuelva  on  the  left  wing.  (Thucyd.  v.  67.)  An
annmeratioa  of  the  principal  cJ  theee  eitiei  ii  given
inOinton.  (FaM.  ITilL  Af^  ilHZ)  The  Perioeci
alio  occupied  the  iiland  of  Cythcra,  at  the  port  of
which  the  lAcedasmonian  merchant!  uiually  put
in,  on  their  voyagei  home  from  Egypt  and  Libye.
(Thocyd.  iv.  63,  viL  57.)  We  have  mid  that
Uia  Pcriacd  liiing  in  thne  towni  were  Iho  de-


PERIOECT.

■cendanti  of  the  old  inhabibuita  d  the  amntry,  hot
we  miut  Dot  mppcae  they  were  ezcluiiiely  aa.
Some  of  them  on  tho  contrary  were  liac^iwra,
who  had  either  aeoompanied  the  Doiiana  on  thaii
invasion  of  iTonin.  or  been  aftowanla  invited  by
tham  to  lUE^y  the  place  of  the  diipoaeeued
Achaiana.  One  of  theie  dliea.  Bain,  ia  even  nid
to  havabem  founded  bja  Hcneleid  chief  (StMlk.
p.  S64)  ;  and  ai '


1  bya  Hcndeid  chief  fStiU


bytheoldinbabilaoti.  <Paiii.iiL  23. 15.)

Tho  number  of  Perioeci  in  the  Ptaau  wax
ii  tbu  determined  by  Clinton  (JL  u.)  :  —  "  At  the
battle  of  PlatacH  in  B.  a  479,  the  Perioed  mp^died


Ifw


the  Bme  aa  that  which  the  Spartan  foice  bore  to
the  whole  number  on  the  nme  oeaaian,  or  Sve-
eightha  of  the  whole  number  of  dtiaena,  thia
would  give  16,000  for  the  malei  of  fiill  ^t^
and  the  total  population  of  thii  diaa  of  liie
inhabitant*  of  I^conia  would  asunnt  to  aboot
66,000  peruKU."

In  the  later  timu  of  Spartan  hiatory,  th*
Ferioecian  towna  of  the  coaat  (I^cmiate  arae  caa-
lella  et  vid)  were  detached  from  Sparta  by  T.
Quinllui  Flaminmua,  and  placed  uader  lbs  proteo-
liou  of  the  Achaian  leagm  (MOUer,  iii.  3.  1 1  ;
LIv.  luiv.  26,  30,  zizvitL  Bl.)  SabaeqHPtlr
to  thi*  the  emperor  AnguMai  idaaaed  34  towna
from  their  nbjaetioo  ta  Spaita,  and  tMBed  thi  in
into  eeparate  communitiea,  nnda'  lawi  of  their  own.
They  were  conaequently  called  Eleulhera-lAceneib
(PauLiiL31.  g6.)  ButeveninthetimeotPaaM-
niaa  lome  of  the  Laconian  towna  wero  uotaAw-
ri/uii,  but  depmdent  upon  Sparta  (ovmAwnu  it

A  dau  of  Perioeci,  sad  alio  of  Helot*,  ha*  been
said  by  MiUler  to  be  the  basii  of  the  Doiiaa  fbtm  of
government :  wa  may  tharafbra  expect  to  find  Pari-
oed  amongst  other  Dorian  commnmtica,a*  wall  aa  at
Sparta,  at,  for  instance,  £lii  and  Atgoa,  and  the
Boeotian  Thebes :  tha  dependoti  towns  of  which
states  formed  aeparale  cammuDitiea,  a*  Thupbii
onder  Thcbea,  the  Tryphyliaa  dtiea  is  Elis,  and
Omeae  under  Argoa,  though  they  coold  not  be  called
alrTor6iuii.  (WachtmotluL  l.p.161.)  From  tha
1a»  mentioned  town,  which  iraa  loog  independeat,
but  reduced  about  n.  c  £60,  all  the  Argive  P«iaeci
derived  their  name  of  Oroeatae.  About  the  tioM
of  tha  Penian  war,  however,  the  inhabitants  of  th*
town*  sumundiog  Argea  were  received  inta  tlM
dty  ai  fflroimi,  and  admitted  to  tha  rigfala  of
citiienihip  ;  a  change  which  was  attended  wilh  a
revolulion  in  the  constitmiDn  of  Aigoa,  and  gave
additional  Airta  to  it*  democracy.  (MQUer,  iiL  4.
§  2.)  The  Dorian  dlie*  of  Oeta  also  had  their
Perioeci  (Arin.  FU.  ii.  7X  as  well  at  the  eolouea
of  Cyrene  and  Theia. (Herod,  it.  161.)

The  Perioed  of  antiquity  have  beta  ampaird
to  other  bodiea,  iuch  as  the  pleb*  of  Rooi^  and  I^
communities  of  the  Athenian  dsiu  o
But  the  only  reaembiance  they  biwa  ti

wa*  in  the  dmiltr- '

the  chief  dty  of  tli
body  stand  in  the
at  the  Laconian  pravincialt  did  to  tha  Spartaa
citiiena.  Modem  history  fumishe*  fitttf  obiecsa
of  mmparisoa  in  the  Norman  eonqiuat  of  Eapaad
and  the  city  of  Annburg.  (Arnold,  Tlmfd.  voL  i.
App.  1  and  2.)  The  burghers  or  free  cOiieM  of
Augsburg  lived  in  tho  city,  while  ihm  pew  Op


■bmit  tbem  >  digtincl  and  Urge  nminiiinit^  tinng
vithoat  tbt  city,  chieil;  fbrmed  of  the  tmEo-
cipaled  tmmU  of  tlit  daminuit  dan,  and  ailed
"  PfchlbUrger,"  or  dtiieni  of  the  "pda."  iho
•ubulM  in  which  thej  liisd  bcdng  nuTCUDded  bj
pnliiada.  Thi  NnrmsD  tmqnat  of  Eogtud  pre-
•cnD  1  nrikiiu  pualld  to  ihs  Dorian  eonqoMt  of
l^cxnia,  both  m  ita  achicTnnuit  and  eoucqaaiCM.
The  Saioiu,  like  the  old  Aduuaiu,  mn  dsprind
of  their  laodi,  excluded  from  all  offlcea  of  (nut  and
dignity,  and  rednced,  though  THnonalJj  free,  to  a
Mate  of  political  ilaro;.  The  Noimani  on  the
contniy,  of  whatcTer  rank  in  their  own  eannliy,
wen  all  nobla  and  wairion,  caDi[and  with  the
eonqnend  Saioni,  and  for  a  lon^  time  enjo7ed  ei-
dnurelf  the  eiril  and  eodedutxal  adniniitration
of  the  land.

fur  ftanher  detoili  aee  Amid,  Itn^.  lib.  I  c
101,  and  Appendii  il ;  Tbieiij,  HiiUtin  d»  la
Qm^uStB  dt  rAngleterre  par  la  NormamtUj  Lirrea

iT.-Tii.  [R.W.]

PERI'POLI  (nplnXn). [EphIbuk]

PERI'PTEROS. [TBurfcun.]

PERI'SCBLIS  (TtpunnA/i,  Limg.  PaM.  I  3  ;
Uouuider,  ap.  Foilme.  il  191,  t.  100,  Hor.  Bp.  I
17.  A0  :  PetroD.  67).  Uueh  eontrorenj  hai  ariHH
with  r^ard  to the  tjne  meaning  of  thii  word.

Ihb^  wDcn  nnnd  the  teg  {rtpi  aiiKa)),  bat  from
the  conleit  of  the  pBMage  in  Horace  when  it  ii
fnind  we  muil  at  once  infer  that  it  wa>  a  trinket.
The  Sdioliait  eiphuui  it  u  "  omamenttun  pedii
nreom  cnua,"  and  hence  we  an  tcvcelj  doubt
that  it  denote*  an  anklet  or  bangle,  eapeciill}'  lince
we  know  that  theae  were  commonly  worn  not  only
by  the  OrimUdi,  lie  f^yptiani,  and  the  Qneki,
bnl  by  the  Reman  tadieaalKi.  (Plin.  if.  A^.  iniiL
3.  a.  13  ;  oompaie  WilkiuKn*!  Andimt  E^yptiam,
ToL  iii.  p.  374.)  Thii  eitdaoalion  parfecllj  *e-
cordi  with  the  eipreiaioiia  of  TertoUBUi  (cfa  CWta
Fimlnanim,  ii-  nb  Gn.),  where  the  jwruntian  ii
ipaketi  of  M  deoDoUng  the  leg  in  the  nme  manner
ai  the  bracelet  adonia  the  wriit  and  the  necklace
the  threat.  The  anklet  ia  beqoenlly  npreiented
in  the  ntiiiliiiDi  of  Oreek  fignni  on  the  walli  of
I'mnpeii,  aa  In  the  fbUowiug  repreacntalion  of  s
Nereid. (,MatH>  " '  -' '  '" '


It  molt  be  obeerred,  howerer,  that  the  Oreek
leiicogiaphcn  Hoychioi,  PhotiDa,and  Snidaa,  iu-
ter|«et  wftattkii  and  ttfurniXai  by  fffoiaiia,
ftiuriXia,  and  St.  Jerome  (_EpiML  ad  Fabal.)  ei-
pnady  (tatea  that  the  Oreek  wtpiviitk^  were  the
laiiM  with  the  Latin  fimiaalia,  that  i>,  diawen
nathing  from  the  na<e1  lo  the  knee*.  In  the
> find  wfpwHAli (m;  Mfiu') in


PERSONA.  S89

Eiod.  xzriil  49,  xuiz.  23,  Lerit.  H  10,  and

wipiai^Auw  in  Leiit.  iiL  4,  which  onr  tranilalon
mtiformly  render,  and  apparently  with  accuncy.
Hub,  bnaeiei.  [W.  R.]

PERISTIARCHUS  (ir.fiurrlapx").  [EocLl-
lu,  p.  441,  b.]

PSRISTRO'HA. [Tafm  ;  VuttM.]

PERISTY'LIUM  (ntwriMor),  aa  iw  nante
impliea,  wu  a  continued  row  or  leriea  of  n>wi  of
cslsnmi  all  nnnd  a  eonrt  or  building,  in  contra-
diatmctioD  to  PosncuB  (.•rr6a\  in  whuh  the  piUara
did  not  nuniand  a  ipace,  bnt  were  (unmged  in
one  or  mora  parallel  line*.  The  eacloeed  court
wai  aJu  called  ptrialjiaim.  The  diief  ipedfic  UM
of  Ibe  woid  i>  in  relation  to  the  ancient  dweUing-
bouin. [Do>l^^p.428,a.]  [P.S.)

PERJU'RIUM. [Juaji/BANnuM.]

PERIZCMA  (Jipii^^). [SUBLIOACULUU.]

PERO  {iptix-n,  dim.  iftuMt ;  wftarlrt),  Xen.
Anab.  It.  G.  g  14),  a  low  boot  of  milanned  hide
(cfvdai,  Virg.  Jin  riL  6S0  ;  Bnmck,  AnaL  i.
330),  wHn  by  plooghmea  (pennaltu  ambir.  Pen.
T.  1 02)  and  ihepherdi,  at  exempliEed  in  the  wood-
ent,  at  p.  808,  and  by  olben  employed  in  rural  occu-
pationa.  (Juv.  lii.  IBG.)  It  had  a  etreng  eola
(TheocriL  riL  26),  and  waa  adapted  to  the  foot
with  great  exactnetL  (Oalen.  in  Hgipoc  Lib.  ir.)
It  waa  alio  tailed  -njAiiTdTK  on  accoont  of  ita
adaptation  for  walking  through  clay  and  mire.
In  tiie  Oreek  mythology  Perteui  WM  reprtaenlsd
wearing  booEa  of  Ihia  deeoiption  with  wingg  at-
tached to  them.  (LycopbTon,  639.)  Diana  wore
them,  when  accoutred  for  the  chaca.  (BiiiDck,jiiid^

iiL206.) [COTHUBNUB.]

The  term  iftiKti  il  apiJied  to  an  ^ipendage  to
the  Greek  chariot.  (Eunp.  Hippol,  1179,  Htre,
At.  127S.)  It  teenu  to  We  been  a  ihoe  fan-
rned  to  the  bottom  of  the  chariot,  into  which  the
drircT  interted  bit  foot  to  uiiit  him  in  drinng  and
to  preTent  him  from  being  thrown  out. [J.  Y.J

PERPETUA  ACTIO. [Actio.]
—  ■ - 8TATUAE  PERSICAE were


the  Caiyatidei,  Atlanlea,  and  Telaanonea.  Tha
tradition  mpecting  their  invention  ii  thai  they
wen  fint  tucd  in  Uie  Portiaa  Penioa  which  WM
buill  Bl  SpartB  out  of  the  ipoili  of  tha  battle  o£
Plalaeae  (Vitmr.  I  1.  3  6).  Paunniat,  bowoTer,
(iii.  2)  deacribei  the  atatoe)  of  the  conquend  Per-
aiani,  ai  being  M  -rut  xiimr.  [P.S.]

PERSECUTOTilA  ACTIO.  [Actio.]
PERSO'NA  (farm,  Tp6<rtnror  or  irp«r«t£)v),
a  maak.  Haiki  wen  worn  by  Greek  and  Roman
acton  in  nearly  all  dramatic  repnaentatiout.  Thi*
enatom  anoe  undoubtedly  from  the  practice  of
amtaring  the  bee  with  certain  joicea  and  eolonn,
and  of  appearing  in  diigniie,  at  the  feitlvala  of
Dionyau*.  [Dioirraii.]  NowuthsOnekdnmn
aroao  out  al  thete  feetiTsli,  it  ii  highly  probable
that  (ome  mode  of  diagniaing  the  fhce  waa  aaold  ai
the  drama  itaelt  Choerilu*  of  Saowa,  howerv,  ia
■aid  to  ha^e  been  the  fint  who  introdnced  regular
maika  (Suid.  t.  v.  XoipIXAu.)  Other  writen
attribute  the  inientiim  of  maaka  to  Theipii  or
Aeichylua  (Herat,  ad  Pit.  27B),  though  the  latter
had  probably  only  the  merit  of  perfecting  and  coui-
pteting  the  whole  theatrical  appaiatna  and  coatume.
Phrynichua  it  aaid  to  have  fint  introdnced  fenuile
maika.  (Said.  >;  e.  *p^>:or.)  AriMotle  (i^ief.  iL
22)  waa  unable  to  diacoTer  who  had  GiM  intra-


tm  PERSONA.

eoTcnd,  lib  tlia  maiki  of  modem  time*,  ool;  the
&ce,  but  tiiev  appear  moia  generaUj  to  hsre  eorered
the  wfaola  head  down  w  Che  alioalden,  tor  n
find  alwayg  the  hair  belonging  U  s  maik  deecribod
u  beiog  ■  part  of  it ;  and  thia  miitt  have  beoi  ths
cBie  in  tinged^  mo»  eBpeciall^,  aa  it  waa  oeceanrf
to  make  th>  h«d  correapond  la  the  nature  of  an
actor  irhich  waa  heightened  b;  the  cothurntu.

I.  Tkioic  Uabkb.  It  ma;  at  fint  Mem  iCraiige
to  OS,  that  the  aacienta,  with  their  TeGned  tute  in
the  peneptioa  of  the  beantifal  in  Jenn  uid  eipret-
lion,  iboaM  br  the  nae  of  idmIu  hare  depriTed
the  qieelataii  m  their  tbealra  of  Uie  poaaihiiitj  of
obaendng  the  *uioni  eqKcniiina,  i^  vhieh  the
hinm  nee  ii  oqaUe,  aod  vhidt  with  aa  contri-
bnte  10  roach  to  theatrio*!  illnaion.  But  it  mnat  be
ramemberad,  thn  in  the  iaige  thntrea  of  Uia  an-
cient* it  woold  haie  been  impoaaihle  for  the  gnater
part  of  the  aadienca  to  diatingniah  the  Datmal
ieaturei  of  an  actor.  The  featiii«  of  tlie  muka
were  for  thia  aame  leaaon  laj  nnag  and  maikad.
Again,  the  diaaiitia  penonae  of  moat  of  the  aneient
tta^iea  wne  heroea  or  gDdi,and  their  cbanictsia
were  >o  welt  known  to  the  ipectaton,  IhMX  they
were  perteetl;  typiotL  Everj  one  thoefora  knew
immediately  on  the  ■ppevsnce  of  nich  a  chuacter
on  the  Mage,  who  it  wb«,  and  it  would  haie  tieen
difficult  for  a  Greek  andience  to  imagine  that  ■
god  or  hcati  ihould  have  had  a  bco  like  that  of
an  odinaiy  actor.  The  naa  of  the  cothninn
alas  nndend  a  pmportionate  enlargement  of  the
eonntenatwe  abBolutely  necmaiv.  or  sba  the  Gmra


portionata.  Liatly,  the  lolsmn  chaiaeur  of  ancient
tragedy  did  not  admit  of  inch  a  nris^  of  exprea-
•ioni  Id  the  conotanaDoe  a*  modem  tngedw*  ;  the
object  of  which  leenu  to  be  to  ^libit  the  whole
laoge  of  hnman  puaioDi  in  all  their  wild  and  lelf.
deromlng  play.  Ho*  widely  diff««rt  are  the
cfaaisttera  of  ancient  li^edy  1  It  ii,  as  MUller
{ffiiL  o/Ae  1M.<^  Ate.  OreiKi,  L  p.  298)  juMly
remarka,  perfectly  pdiaibie  to  imagine,  for  cTample,
the  Onatea  of  Aeachylna,  the  Ajai  of  Sophoclea,
or  the  Medea  of  Eonpide*,  thnughoot  the  whole
tragedy  with  the  Mne  ooant«iunce,thoagh  it  would
be  difGcnlt  to  aiaait  the  nine  of  a  eharaetai  in  any
nodem  drama.  Bnt  there  ii  no  leeeiilty  for  np-
poung  that  the  actori  qipearad  thnrariiont  a  whole
[Hece  with  die  nme  enmtsnance,  Rr  if  drcnro-
itance*  required  it,  tbey  a^^IIt  Barely  change  maak*
duriog  the  tnterrab  between  the  acta  of  a  piece.
Whether  the  open  er  balf^pan  moath  of  a  Inglc
maak  alao  CDSIribiited  toiaias  theTOJceoftheactiH',
aa  Oellin*  (r.  7)  Uiinka,  cannot  be  decided  hen,
IhoDgh  we  know  that  all  ekcamilantM  nniled  to
compsla  trapeactorlo  acqnira  a  )o<id  and  nDcconi

The  maiki  nied  in  ancient  tngediea  were  thna,
for  the  moat  part,  typical  of  certain  chaiacten,  and
ooneeqoently  diffeied  according  to  the  age,  eei.
Tank,  and  other  pccnliatitiea  of  the  being*  who
were  repreaantad,  PoUnx,  from  whom  we  dmTe
moat  of  our  informatJon  eo  thii  nibjact,  enDnwnta*
(It.  Its,  &C,)  35  epical  or  Manding  maidu  of
mgady,  aix  fbr  old  men,  iCTtn  kr  jaang  men,
nine  tit  fonalei,  and  thna  far  lUfe*.  The  num-
ber of  maikawhidi  were  net  ty|deaI,bntrapTcaented
certain  individnal*  with  their  peraonal  peciUiaritiea,
anch  a*  the  blind  Thamyria,  the  hnndred-eyed
Argn*,  &c.,  moat  hate  beoi  much  more  mtmerooa,
ftr  Pollnz  by  w^  of  eaao^  mtaitioni  thir^  of


mA  peenliar  raaakt. The  atanding  nadu  of  tn-
gidy  an  diiided  t^  PoUax  into  fi<re  rlawce.

I.  n^ienadtfiroldauK.  The  naafc  fcr  Iha
olden  man  en  the  ataga  wa*  called  iafUi  ir^p,
from  the  ciremnflaDoe  H  tba  beanl  being  aDioathly
■haTed.  The  haii,  which  wae  in  " ' - ....


maak*,  waa  white,  and  hunc  down  with  the
pan  abore  (be  for^ead,  which  roae
;le,  or  m  a  lound  ahape,  and  left  the


exception  of


u  called  tr»i. The  cheeki  of  thii  ■


old  men,  ailed  Aewbida-ip,  had  gley  bag,  leating
annnd  the  head  in  lock*,  afoU  beard  andafcami-
aent  forehead,  ahoTo  wbtdl  the  hair  fociaed  a
amallfTMi.  The  oouUtaiaiwa  waa  pnbahlr  nale,
aa  the  ad}actiTeAn«^ieemi  to  indicate.  A  third
maak,  i^led  vwoprwr^AHH,  bad  black  hur  iatei^
qierged  with  gny,  and  waa  aomewbat  pale,  It
froliably  npnaented  a  hero  (^  &am  40  to  50  yean
of  age,  and  in  a  nififlring  condiljon.  The  fanrtli
niaek,  iii^ai  ^*^  repteaenlad  a  hero  in  bia  foil
rigour,  with  bladt  and  cariy  hair  and  beard,  atnaig
featnrea  and  a  high  tymt.  Thi*  wae  probably  the
maak  for  moot  in  tba  tragk  heroe*  who  wen  not


with  flcatiog  lo
good  cdonr  in hii count

%  TVoffie  aa^  fir  ttm^  mm.  AwBg  thaaa
■re  ntentioaed,  1.  The  narlnmt  tt^jy^arw,  a
maak  intended  ts  rapreaent  a  mas  wbo  bad  jaat
entered  the  ^  of  manhood,  and  waa  yet  anhearded,
bnt  of  a  hloomii^  and  brawniah  complexion,  and
with  a  rich  bead  i/  hair.  Tba  name  wdyj^^rri
probatily  indicatea  that  the  maak  might  be  aaed


impudent  chiractei ;  hia  hair  waa  caiiy  mad
fbnned  a  high  Htui  ;  hia  charaetsi  wa*  {ndicated
by  hi*  Tai*ed  eyo-browa. IL  Hmrlamt  wd^oaAai,


yonng
cample


I,  of  yaUoir
r  hair  ;  the  one,  howarw,  waa
d  yoongcr,  and  hii  hair  waa  man  enriy


a  need  (o  repreeent  aide  or  woonded  pi
J.  The  ripmxpbi  might  be  n*ed  fbr  the  w^yxfC^v
if  thia  chancter  waa  to  be  repnaenled  in  a  aaSw>
;  01  meluicholy  utnation.

3.  TVi^  noiib  fir  mall  ilava. Pollai  men.

ma  Ihne,  nz.  the  SifViplai,  which  had  no  l^ui

d  won  a  hand  nmnd  the  imooth  whilB  hair.

ie coontenance  waa  pole,  the  beard  gray,  tlie

*e  ihuis  and  the  expnaaian  i^  the  »na  nd>i>.

chely. The  vftimw*ytir,  or  tbepimHed  be»d,  le-

pteaeated  a  nan  in  hi*  bort  y«an.  wiib  a  high  aged

bnad  bnhead,  a  hbh  l)«i»,  hardaoed  fcatem,

andaredbco. The  Mn*Hi,or  the  p«.Don,  wm

an  impodent  faee  with  fiiir  linng  ludr,  el  t  tai

ealom  and  without  beard.

7higiemiuttfirfim^iU»m. Oftheaafi**
ipacUMH  an  DKDliowd,  Tt*.  tba  aokii  Mcnia^a^


aid  wmnui  vith  iaag  vbiM  hair,  witA  noblt  bnt
s  leatona,  to  iodtote  ■  pcnon  vho  h*d


»,  repTCMntw
r,  witA  BobU


d  tailed  «a^xi>*V<">  repreientod  m

«1.  ft""  '

bMlar  dayi ;  the  ypdOuir  ikiUtper,  an  old  freed-
woman  ;  the  ypdttuK  tSictrucir,  the  old  dooieatic
ikTa  ;  the  ditrudr  fiKr^mvpiir.  ■  dcBneetic  ilare
of  middls  ■!•  ;  mi  lutl;  tb*  Si^<fi(ru,  ■  joong
faasle  ihTik

S.n<ifiewmihfirfitiwimtii.  Thefintofthaaa,
tailed  KBTdnfiaj^  nnmHnted  ■  pile  ImAj,  witt  long
block  bur  uid  a  wd  axproMum  in  her  ootutAianoe.
She  gensmllj  ihand  the  nifieriDgi  of  the  principal
ben  ia  a  pLj.  The  leamd,  called  /untnupgt
iXf^  neembled  the  fbrmer,  vHh  the  excqitioa
that  ho  hair  wa*  half  ahem.  She  wu  a  mnnan
rf  middle  ive,  aod  vai  pcobabi  j  intended  to  tepn-
aeot  the  wife  of  the  chief  hero,  if  he  wa*  not  too
adTaiK«d  in  age.  The  third  ii  the  fih^hh^i
wpiafajtt,  npnauitii^  a  newly  mairied  woman
in  fnll  bloom  with  long  and  floating  hair.  The
fomtb  il  theae^pi^i  rc^i#^nH,aniaidenafmatare
■ge,  with  ibart  hair  dirided  on  the  middle  of  the
forehead,  and  lying  muotUj
Tbe  eoloiir  of  her  aonnlenaiiu
Tben  urn  another  maik  of  the  lama  name,  bat  it
diSered  &am  tha  foim«  bj  the  fbUowing  oiemn-
■tncea; — the  hair  waa  not  diridad  en  tbe  forehead
•r  railed,  but  wildly  Boating,  to  indicala  that  ihe
bad  bad  moeh  n^ii^  to  go  tbrongh.  The  bat
ia  the  Kif^  or  young  girl.  Thi>  mw  teimaentad
the  bantiea  of  a  muden*!  face  in  tbeii  fnll  blooin,
lach  ai  Iha  &ee  of  DanaC,  or  an;  other  great
bvn^  wai  coneeired  tn  bare  been.

*"  ~ which  PoUui  giTea  of  the  tragic


in  with  the  great  nriety  of  maak*  which
the  Oteeki  auiat  hare  naed  in  their  raiioai  tiage-
diea,  tai  tmj  hero  and  erof  god  who  iraa  known


PERSONA.  891

TioaajifdtSaLaL  ^7,Aitaii.2i,  Ntgrii.lltSlma'


parently  cranio  and  the  other
tragic,  which  are  placed  at  tbe
feet  of  the  chongni  in  tho
celebnted  mouic  fouod  at
PompeiL  (Afawo  Boricn.  nd.
iL  tab.  SB ;  Oell,  Pontp.  toL  i.
pL46.)

II.CoHicMASEa.— In  the  old  At&  eonwdy,
in  which  living  and  dittingniihed  panrau  were  lo
often  hTonght  upon  tbe  itage,  it  wuneceamry  that
the  matki,  tbongh  lo  aonM  extent  they  may  hats
been  (aricaloR*,  ibonld  in  the  main  pointi  be
bithfni  portrait)  irf  tho  indiTidnali  whom  Ihey
were  intsnded  to  repreaent,  ai  otbsrwiae  tbe  object
of  the  comic  poeta  could  not  hate  been  attained.
The  ehotnj  on  the  other  liand,  aa  well  ai  certain


by  a  paiticolar  a
enaUsd  to  reco)


•■>  that  lb*  ipeetalDn  were  enaUsd  to  recsgniae
bba  inupadiatejy  on  hii  appeaianc*.  for  thii
itmaneea  of  the  gnda,  hcroei,
in  punt  of  baaaty,  hare  beoi


ir  repreaantal
icb  the  ayai


„  .  0  which  the  ayee  of  the
Oraeka  wna  aocoMomedi  and  tho  diitorted  maiki
with  widely  open  noatlu,  wbicb  are  aeen  in  great

Pompeii  (mc  tbe  annexed  woodcnt  from  AfaMo
■.  ToL  i.  teU  20)  would  gire  bnl  a  Tory  in-


e  particnlaijy  in
that  thej  in  mne  degree  were
than  nprtaenlatiani  of  ideal  or  real  eennteuaneea.
(Apiika.  ViL  AfaUm.  -r.  9,  p.  IM,  ed.  Olaarj


complolem ,  _  ,

when  tba  chorentae  ^ipeared  with  the  heada  of
birdi  or  of  &o«.  At  We  may  remaii  here,  ly
tb*  wvt  that  Ue  chona  of  li^edy  appeared  gene-
inlljr  inthont  maikij  the  EnmenidM  of  Aeachyln*
being  probably  eoly  an  axecptioo  to  the  oenaal
mle.  Themaduaftheobaiacletain  theold  Attis
comedy  were  therofints  on  tbe  wbde,  &ith(bt  Id
life,  and  free  &om  the  bmleaqna  eiaggentioni  which
we  aee  in  the  naaki  of  lat«  time*.  A  change  wa*
made  in  the  comic  maeki,  when  it  waa  fbcbidden  to
repreaent  m  comedy  the  archon  by  imitating  hi*
penon  npon  the  itage  (SchoL  ai  ArittejA.  Nti6.
il),  and  itill  more,  ehmtly  after,  by  the  eilenaion
of  Ihii  law  to  all  Athenian  dtiieai.  (Scbol.  mi
AriMtopk.  AA,  1U9,  Av.  1297 ;  Said.  i.e.  'Arrt-
IWXH.)  The  coueqaeDce  of  inch  lawi  wai,  that
the  maika  hsneefbrth,  inilead  of  iudindiiali,  repre-
aenled  rlantw  of  men,  i.  a.  they  were  maaki  typical
of  men  of  certun  profeanoni  or  tndta,  of  a  partico-
kr  age  or  itatian  in  life,  and  ume  were  groteiiiDa


niaek*  waa  thn*  introduced i

giTH  a  ti<l  of  anch itandinfl maiki,  which  are

divided,  like  tboae  of  tragedy,  into  five  claiae*.

1 .  Comia  nuuka  for  aid  fNAc Nine  maaki of
■'■ '  itioned. Tha  niB«k  renreeenting


the  oldeat  m


la  called  >


: hia


piannce,  aad  and  pale  ;  be  had  hair  on  bii  biad
and  a  beard,  bat  tbe  hair  waa  red  and  bii  earf
broken.  3.  The  ^tfiAr,  Ukawiio  an  old  man,
with  a  tbin  cmwn  of  hair  round  hi*  head,  an  aqni-
lioa  noae,  and  a  flat  conMenance.  Hi*  right  eje-
bmw  wai  higher  than  tha  left.  i.  Tbe  irpeirdiri)*
bad  a  long  and  floating  beaid,  and  likewiae  a  crown


Tbe  npw«oir«ii  retembled  the  a
AunD^^ior,  bnt  hi*  lipe  were  contorted,  tha  eye-
brow* contracted,  and  the  bead  withont  any  hair.
1.  The  ipiiAniot  ttirtpts  had  a  pointed  beard,
"-- B.TherfntM-


893  PERSONA.

itiItm',  or  ptrinted  bearf,  wa«  likewiie  bnld-liMdea,
bad  attended  eje-hn>w«,  and  wm  looking  ill-lem-
pered.  9.  Tfae  Xuitiifi^tKii  had  a  thick  beard,
wai  eonipienoui  on  aeconnt  of  hig  long  chin,  and
Iba  form  of  liii  ejebRiin  eiprMied  gnM  curiouty.

The  anneied  cninw
maik,  rqinnendng  as  old
man,  ii  taken  {nm  the
JUMBO BorioH, ToL  i.


kind.  l.Tha^iyxpW<

formed  the

the  old  to  the  fonng

he  had  bat  fev  viinklei  an  til  forehead,  ahowed

a  muKular  conititntiaQ  (yviiraaruci!),  wat  rather

Ted  in  the  face,  the  nppei  port  of  hii  bewl  wa>


batd,  1


3.  The  Marlmwi  iidKia  wai  jonnget  than  the  pre-
ceding one,  and  with  low  eyebrinn.  He  npre-
lented  a  joong  man  of  good  edocaliaii  and  food  of

rnailic  eiennaea.  6.  The  novdricu  siAnt,  or
thick-haired  young  man,  wot  yoiuig  and  hand-
*ome,aiid  of  a  bloomli^  conntouinca,  biiefehmva
were  extended,  and  ^ere  waa  only  one  vrinkle
upon  hi)  forebiad.  4.  The  ftariffKos  inUl,  hia
W  wBi  like  that  of  the  -wiyxpnimt,  but  be  wai
the  youogEit  of  all,  and  lepreaentod  a  tendor  youth
brought  up  is  lediuion  from  the  world. 6.  The

or  the  formidabie  aoldier,  with  black  hair  banging
eier  hia  forehead.  7.  The  ^rifffiimir  Stln-fpoi
wu  the  aame  aa  tbe  preceding,  only  younger  and
of  a  bic  compleiion.  S.  The  irlEAaf  or  the  flatterer,
and  9.  The  rafdarrvi  or  parante  were  dark  (com-
niie  Atben.  li.  p.  237),  and  had  aquiline  noiei.
Both  were  aiiparently  i^  a  ijmpathiiing  nature  ;
the  paruile,  howeTer,  had  broken  eara,  wai  m^rj-
looking,  and  had  a  wicked  axprcujon  about  hia
eyebrows.  10.  The  tlmnii^i  iqireaented  s  itranger
in  iplendid  attire,  hia  beard  waa  abaved  and  his
chedii  pierced  thioDgh.  The  (rurtAiadi  waa  another

3.  Comia  motit  Jvr  nab  alnea.  Of  tbii  cIsm
leTcn  nuaka  are  mentioned.  1.  The  maak  repre-
aeuEing  ave^old  man  was  called  tcItoj,  and  had
giey  hair  to  indicate  that  he  had  obtained  his
lib^. 3.  The  Iryf^r  Atpdxt«r  had  hii  red  hail

Stted,  railed  eyebrows,  and  a  contracted  forehead,
was  anwng  slaies  the  aame  character  aa  the
/ptaSirtii  among  freemen.  3.  The  icing  rpixfai,
or  xdT.  trrpixmiiiroi,  wu  half  bald-heeded,  bad
red  bail  and  niiaed  eyebrawi.  i.  The  dIXoi
bfpirat/,  or  the  thick-baii«d  itaTe,  had  red  hair
and  a  red  coontenance  ;  be  was  without  eyebtowa,
and  had  a  distorted  countenance.  6.  The  dtfiria'
lihei  was  bald-beaded  and  bad  red  hair.  6.  The
StpdiRw  Tfrri{  waa  bald-headed  and  dark,  bat
had  two  or  thtee  alipa  of  hair  on  hii  bead  and  on
hii  chin,  and  hia  conalananca  waa  dulorted.  7>
The  ^ImuTTot  irciiAr,  or  the  GercO'loohing  alave,
TNembled  (he  irfl'^  btpiirar  with  the  eictptioo

4.  Comie  maJa  for  aid  mmm.  Pellni  mni-
tioni  three,  lia.  the  tptitivr  lrrx>^  or  Kimai-
nov,  a  tall  woman  with  many  but  imall  wrinklen,
and  pale  but  with  animated  eyes ;  tlie  waxtia


PERSONA.
ypmt,  or  the  £a  old  woman  with  large  wrinkles,
and  a  band  round  her  bead  keeping  the  bair  ti>-
getber ;  and  tin  TpoAwr  eimvp^r,  or  riw  domesiii;
"  Oman.  Her  cheeks  ware  hollow,  and  ahe  had
only  two  teeth  on  each  ^de  of  her  moolh.
b.  Come  tiuula  fiir  fruBtg  mma. PoUnx  m


'-rz'


lire  woman  j  ber  hair  waa  smoothly  ccmbed
down,  die  eyebrowg  rather  raiaed,  and  tbe  cotti-
pleiioQ  white.  2.  The  -/m^t  oEhq  wai  oaly  dia-
ttoniished  for  her  line  head  of  hair.  3.  The  iti^ti
had  ha  hair  combed  smoothly,  bad  high  and  blade
eyebrows,  and  a  white  complssion.  t.The  ^ii3»-
iciffni  had  a  whiter  campleiion  than  the  lormer,  hM-
baor  wu  bound  np  above  the  fbrehavl,  and  ahe  waa
intended  to  represent  a  young  woman  who  had  not
been  married  more  than  once.  h.  Another  maek  of
the  same  name  wat  only  diatingnished  from  tha
former  by  the  irr^ular  manit^  in  which  the  hair
wu  repmnited.  6.  The  naprtnwiyuit  AerrucA,
an  eldslj  womao  who  bad  oooe  been  a  pcristitutp,
and  whoae  hair  wu  partly  grey.  7.  The  nAAmi^
reiembled  the  Ibrmer,  but  had  a  better  bead  of
hur.  8.  The  rVAtu*  inupuiir  wu  more  led  in
the  face  than  the  ^/ttXemifii,  and  bad  locks  ■bout
her  ean.  9.  Tba  Iraipijiarwu  of  a  less  good  ap-
pearance, and  wore  a  band  rwmd  the  head.  1 0.
The  Bccfxpiw  'rcdpa  derired  the  name  bwm  the
gold  with  which  her  hair  was  adorned.  11.  The
Jid/uTpoi  JToIpa,  (rom  the  nriegated  band  wound
around  her  head.  12.  TheA^i>vdScar,frora  tbeiai^
cnuutance  of  her  hair  being  dreaaed  in  socb  aman-
ner  that  it  atood  upright  npon  the  head  in  the  (una
of  A  lampDs.  13.  The  oSpa  vtfimvpoi  re|gesqitcd
B  female  iiare  newly  hongbt  and  wraring  ooJt  a
white  chiton.  14.  The  nfo^nipMTit  wu  a  ^to
distinguished  by  a  pog-noie  and  bar  hair ;
attended  upon  helaemc,  and  w '—


Numerous  aa  these  masks  are,  the  list  caunol  by
any  means  be  considered  u  cotuplete,  for  we  know
that  there  were  other  Btanding  muks  tat  persona
following  particuUr  l±ida  of  trade,  which  are  oM
mentioned  in  Pidlui.  Maeaon  of  Megara,  for  ex-
ample, is  aud  to  bare  niTcnted  a  peenlkr  mail
called  at^  hia  own  name  fislaur,  another  for  a
■lave,  and  a  third  to  represent  a  csok.  {Atboi-iiv.
p.  659.)  Prom  this  pasaan  of  Athenaeus  wv  ate*
team  that  Stephanui  of  Byiantiani  wnte  a  wvk

IIL  MASsa  uaiii  ih  tbs  Sattuc  DaAita.

The  masks  Died  in  thia  species  of  the  OteA  dlaaw
wen  intended  to  tepmaent  Sarrn,  Sileaoa,  and
simUsr  comjMHiioni  of  Dionyaui,  wheoca  (he  ei-
preaiana  of  the  countenanoi  and  the  (rem  of  tbeit
acadi  may  euily  be  imagined.  Pcdlnx  only  iitcn-
lioni  the  grey-headed  Satyr,  the  unbearded  Satyr,
Silenui,  and  the  %imt,  and  adda  that  Uw  cbarac-
ten  of  all  the  other  Satyric  maslca  ehbcr  rcaonbled
these,  or  w««  aufllciendy  eipreaaad  intbeifBaaca,
e.  g.  the  Pappoailenna  ww  an  old  man  with  a  tmf
predominant  animd  character.  (Corapaia  Ei^sttdt,
cie  Dnanaf  OomitaSatjriea,  p.  S 1.)  A  grote*
mask  of  a  Satyr,  together  with  one  of  the  fii
specimens  of  a  Ingic  mask,  is  c '


, .  following  page.

Ai  ragardi  the  eaiiieat  mpreaenl
gnlar  drama  among  the  Romana,  it  ii  ezpnaly
stated  by  Diomedei  (iii.  p.  486,  ed.  Piitacfa.X  that
maski  woe  not  uied,  bet  nwdy  tbe  gaknta  m


wig.  and  that  Itotciui  GaIIiu,  bImuI  Ihs  year  100
B.  c^  nt  the  fint  who  iDDnduced  Ihe  lue  of  maika.
It  ihotiid,  fa(ivn«,  be  remcinbend  tlul  mulubad
been  nted  long  befbre  Ihat  time  in  the  AlellBnu
( Fat  1.  e.  Ptrtomda),  u  that  the  innoTatioii  of
RoKini  nut  bare  been  confined  to  the  regoUr
dnmB,  that  im,  Io  Iragcd?  and  comedj.  Ai  for  the
Ibrmi  of  Roaum  indjika,  it  may  he  pranuned  that,
being  intTDduced  6um  Greece  at  lo  late  a  period,
tbcy  had  the  aune  defecti  ai  ihoH  nied  in  Greece
at  the  time  when  the  arti  wen  in  their  decline,
■od  thii  mppoiition  ii  con&mied  by  alt  worlii  of
vt,aiid  Ihepuntingi  of  Herculanemn  and  Pompeii,
in  which  maik*  an  lepttaented ;  for  the  muki
■jipMi  Dnnaturally  diilorted  and  the  month  alwayi
widB  open.  The  eipmaioni  of  Roman  wrilen
•In  lupport  thia  mppotitian.  (Gellina,  T.  7  j  Jar.
iii.  175.)  We  ma?  mentioii  hen  that  Mtme  of  the
oldetl  MSS.  of  Terence  contain  rei^eientaliona  of
Roman  pukt,  vaA  from  theie  MSS.  ihcy  bare
been  enpied  in  aeveiml  modern  editioiu  of  that  poet,
■a  in  the  edition  pobliihed  at  Uibino  in  1726,  foL,
KDd  in  Ihat  of  Daciei.  The  cut  annexed  contain!
repnaentatiooi  of  foui  of  theae  maika  prefiied  to
the  Andri^


When
■ndwm


ome  digplcaaed  their  andience
'  wen  obliged  to  lake  off  their
IO  acted  in  the  Alellnnae  wen
not  obliged  to  do  ao.  (FtU.  i.v.PtrKmala/abmh.-
llmaob.  Sat.  iL  7.)  The  Roman  mimea  never  wore
maaki.  [Hmua.]  (Compan  Fr.  Do  Ficonni,
DiMwrrftio  tU  Larvit  teenicit  ei  Figmru  amudt  ohL
A«b,Ra»Bl73eandl750,4lo;Pr.StieTe,ZKH>i'-
latioiiirtiteBHeaeaimdRomimatOriffiiie.)  [L.S.]
PE'RTICA,  the  pole,  nwd  by  the  Aobihin-
■OBu,  wa)  aln  called  DiciwranA  becauM  it  WH
ten  feet  long.  Ou  accoiml  of  ita  uae  in  aaiigning
bndi  to  ^e  memben  of  a  colony,  it  ii  lometimei
reiHoenled  on  medab  by  the  aide  of  the  augorial
eloDgh.  (Pmpert.  W.  I.  30.)  [J.  Y.]

PES  (nil},  a  foot,  the  tlandard  meamire  of
length  among  the  Oreeki  and  Homana,  a*  wdl  at
amoif  uarij  all  othM  nUiom,  bolh  ancient  and


OUT  nctei ;  and  many  of  the  woidi  lued  to  eipreaa
certain  numbtn  of  undae  an  qiplied  to  the  paita
of  the  foot.  (V(«ct  •<■  A«  AfiKf.  L  G;  Plin.  A.jV.
iniL  S.  i.  II,  liiu  IS.)  It  wai  al»  divided  into
16  difiti  (finger-hmdthi)  ;  thia  mode  of  diviiion
wa>  need  eipecially  by  archilecta  and  land-inr-
veyon,  and  it  foond  on  all  the  footmounna  that
hne  cone  down  to  ni.  Pofba  (the  thumb),  which
ii  naed  in  modem  Latb  for  oa  not,  ii  not  found
in  the  ancient  wrilert,  but  Pliny  {H.N.  nviL  9,
IT.  24,  liii.  33)  UH  the  adjectiTa  paliitant  (of  a
lhnmb<i  breadth  nr  thickneM).

From  the  analogy  of  the  aa,  we  bave  alio  rfipaii-
dimn  for  2  feet  (Colom.  iiL  I£,  tcXinipiialer-
tiH  for  21  feet.  (Leg.  XII.  Tab.,  Tai.  viii.)  The
chief  HiboiTiiiDni  and  mulliplea  of  the  foot  will  be
found  mentioned  ander  MiNSua^  and  more  fully
deicribed  in  their  proper  place*.  (See  alio  the
Tablet.)  One  itinerary  meaanie,  which  haa  been
omitted  in  iti  proper  place,  ia  the  Ltuga,  or  Zoko,
which  wai  a  OaUic  meuon  —  1500  paaina  or  1^
mile.  (Anunian.  Maic  irL  12;  Ata.  Antomm.)
Slonea  an  itill  found  on  the  nadt  in  France  with
diitancei  marked  on  Ihem  in  £«iijM<;  [HlLLUHK.]

The  aquare  foot  (pa  fu^roAu)  ii  called  by
Froalinui  coiutnUai^  and  by  Bolfthina  ecmlractaM,
FrontiaDi  qipliea  the  term  ^aadratiH  to  the  nibio
foot,  and  the  nue,  ai  a  meaaon  of  capadcy,  waa


Certain  peculiar  foot-meamea,  diflering  from  the
ordinary  onet,  are  mentioned  by  ancient  writeta.
The  Swnian,  which  waa  the  tame  aa  the  Egyptian
fool,  ii  known  from  the  length  of  the  Egyptian
eabil  aa  derived  from  the  Nilomeler  (namely,
17'74278576inchea>  to  have  contained  11-82862384
Incbea,  or  mon  than  1  ] }  inchea.  A  larger  foot
than  the  common  atandard  leema  to  have  been
OMd  in  Alia  Min«.  Heron  (dt  Mau.  p.  S6S}
namei  the  Royal  or  Phiiaeterian  foot  ai  being  16
finger-bnadthi,  and  the  Italian  aa  13^,  and  he  alto
mention!  a  mile  (fiiAM*)  of  5400  Italian  or  4£00
royal  feeL  Idelcr  luppoaet  that  the  Italian  6»t
mean*  the  eommon  Rraian,  and  the  royal  a  Greek
foot  larger  than  the  common  atandard,  correapond-
ing  to  the  ttadium  of  7  to  Ihe  mile,  which  had
been  inlrodnc«d  befbre  Heron'i  time,  lumely,
the  tenth  century.  The  Pa  Dnutmu  or  foot  of
Drunii,  contained  13^  Roman  incbea  »  1310511
Engliih  inchei.  It  wat  nied  beycmd  the  bound-
ariei  of  Italy  for  meaniring  land,  and  wat  lbs
atandard  among  the  Tungii  in  Lower  Germany.

(Hn«y,  oa  AmiiaU  Wt^kU,  &c.  App^diz  ;
Worm,  dt  Pond,  chapi.  6  and  7  ;  fiockh'i  MUnlaff.
Unltnadt.  pp.  196,  &c  ;  Ideler,  Langm  ynd  Fid-
otavwui* ,'  Frftet,  Obwarvatioiu  nr  U  Rapport  da
Mimtt  Otnpiei  M  da  MiturtM  Somaimt,  MAn.
del'A(ad.d'Intcrip.Liiiv.  pp.  SSI,  Ac [F.a.]
FES8I  i^Ktrot). [LaTHiiNCULL]
PE-SSULUS. [jANUA,p.626,b.]
PETALISMUS (wrraMaiiit). [EzsiLiUH,
p.615,a.l

PB'TASUS. [PiLIUi.]
PETAURISTAE. [farauaDH.}
FETAURUH  (r^aifxiv,  w^ttFpor)  ii  laid  by
the  Greek  grammarian*  lo  have  been  a  pole  or  board,
on  which  fowit  rooated.  (UeiyclL  t.K;  Pidlui,!.


891  PHALERA.

1£6.}  Ws  alio  find  tlu  name  of
RoDUUi  ganiBi,  mi  eooiidtrMe  doubt  hu  iruen
rMpecting  ili  meaning.  It  aeems,  howBrer,  In
have  hem  a  board  monng  np  and  down,  wilh  a
pcTSOQ  at  vcb  end,  and  supported  in  the  middle,
■oiDflthing  like  onr  eee^Aw  ;  onlj  it  sppeon  to
hare  be«D  much  longer,  and  conaegmntlj  w«at  to
a  gnaler  liei^ht  tban  ii  common  ammgal  lu.
Some  wiilera  deicribe  it  u  a  muhioe,  from  which
thoee  who  uhibiled  wen  raiaed  fa>  a  great  beight
and  then  leaned  to  flj  to  the  gnnnd  ;  bnt  tkii  in-
teipretation  doca  not  agree  k  well  with  the  pae-
nge>  of  the  ancient  ai^on  a>  the  one  prerioiuljr
mentioned.  (LnciL  op,  Fal.  i. «.  PNowuf. ;  Jnr.
ziT.  26S  ;  Hart.  iL  21.  3  ;  ManiL  T.  43S.)  The
penoia,  who  took  part  in  thii  gaoie,  wen  ailed
Piiaiinilai  or  Patauriilarii  ;  bnt  thii  name  aecmi
to  haTfl  been  alio  applied  in  lathor  a  wider  dgnifi-
cation.  (Compare  Petron.G3,)

PBTI'TOB. [AcTot]

PETO'RRITUH.  a  fbofwheeled  catriaae,
which,  like  the  EaaiDDH,  vtt  adopted  bj-  the
Romozu  in  imitalian  of  the  OauU.  (Hor.  5al.  i.  6.
104.)  It  diHend  from  the  Hakhamaxa  in  being;
nncoiend.  lU  name  ii  obrionily  compounded  of
ftor,  Eonr,  and  rit,  ■  wheel  Featol  (i.e.)  in  az-
plwning  thia  e^mologj  obaerrca  that  jxtor  meant
foor  in  Oaon  and  in  Aeolic  Qnek.  Then  ij  no
Teaion  to  queatian  the  truth  o[  thii  remark  ;  hat,
■ince  Petoi  meant  four  in  DUU17  other  Europsui
langtiaM,  it  ii  more  probable  that  the  Romani
denied  the  name,  tosether  with  the  ftihion  <rf  Chit
Tehicle,  irnn  the  Qanlfc  Qellina  (zr.  30)  eipreailf
aayi  that  it  i>  a  OaUic  word.  [J.  T.J

PEZETAERI  (nf^rwpw),  [Eibecitds,  p.
488,  b.]

PHALANGAE  «t  PALANOAE  (f£ur>7et),
an;  long  ej-UndiJcal  piceei  of  wood,  foeh  m  trimki
or  brandiea  of  t»et  (Herod,  iii.  97  ;  Plin.  H.N.
zii.  4.  a.  H),  tnmcheoni  (Plin.  H.  N.  TU.  £6.
a.  £7),  and  polea  nHd  to  cairj  burthens.  The
carrien  who  uaed  thcee  polei  wen  oiled  fhaian-
garii  [Gioat-AnL  t.v.),  and  tleo  hexapkory  tttra-
pbrt,  Ac,  according  a*  they  walked  in  partiei  of
■iz,  fboc,  or  two  pereoDi.

The  word  wat  aapeeially  lued  to  nani^  rollen

M  to  draw  Ihnn  upon  ahon  or  into  the  water
((D>)MT4giavAlr!fio<,Bnnck,.^Hi^iii.a9;  ApolL
Rbod.  I  375 — SS9).  Thii  waa  effected  either  by
making  uie  of  the  can  aa  lever^  and  at  the  Bme
time  fulening  to  the  Item  itf  the  ihip  cahlei  with
a  noDio  (fiqplrftit),  againit  which  the  aailon
pieaeed  with  theit  bieaila,  at  we  tee  in  out  canal
naTigatton  (0:ph.  Argo*.  239— S49,  270— S73),
or  by  the  0*0  <^  machioea.  (Hot.  CanK.  L  4.  2.)
Rollen  wen  employed  in  the  aamo  nuuinet  lo
men  militaiy  engmea  (C^oaai,  OJL  Ch.  ii.  10).

PHALANX  (9<iAii7t}.  [Ei»crruB,pp.48S,b,
488.]

PHALATIICA.  [Hisr*,p.fi8S,a.]
PHA'LERA  (^dAopor),  abas%  disc,  or  orennt
of  metal,  in  many  caaea  ol  gold  (Hered.  i.  2IS  ;
Athen.  liL  p.  6fiO  ;  Clandian,  £pv-  ^)  ■"^  ^^t'
lifoUy  wnoght  lo  ai  to  be  highly  ptiied.  (Cic
Virr.  if.  12.)  Onuunenla  of  thii  deamptioi,
being  uaed  in  poire,  are  Kwcely  erer  mentimed
except  in  the  plmal  nnmber.  The  namw  for  them
an  eridently  tomed  from  tha  ton  ^dXoi,  which
ii  explained  under  OjiLia.  (Coupan  Horn.  IL
XTi.  106.) Baddea  the  nwtaUtQ  oanmenta  of  tha


PHARBTRA.

h^et  limilai  deccnatiani  were  lometimea,  thongfa
Teiy  rarely,  worn  by  warriore  on  other  p«rta  of
their  dreii  or  annoor,  prebably  upon  the  breaat.
(Vug.  Am.  ii.  359. 158.)  The  negro  ilavra  who
wen  kept  by  opulent  Romani  wore  them  sus-
pended round  theii  necki.  (Sueton.  A'em,  SO.)
Alio  the  tiara  of  the  king  of  Penia  waa  thua
adorned.  (AeichyL  Pen.  668.)  Bat  we  moM
commcmly  read  of  phalsrae  ai  oniamenu  attached
to  the  hamen  of  hom  (Xen.  HiOai.  it.  1.  S  39  ;
Vag.Am.T.A\<i■,OeU.T.^■,  Claiidian,£^.  3G),
etpetdally  about  tha  head  (dfiwin-^pw  ^MUapa,
Si^h.  (M.  CW.  lOeS  ;  Eurip.  Suppi-  ^^  ;  Cir^.
Cor.  4»  Dialtd.  p.  SQA,  ad.  ScUfu),  and  often  worn
ai  pendanta  (pmiQia,  Plin.  A'.  JV'.  xxirii  12^  a.
74),  ao  ai  to  produce  a  torific  e&d  when  ihaken
by  the  lajud  moticni  of  the  hone  (terioater  pAa-
Irnu,  Clandian,  >■  It.  Cbm.  Homir.  £48).  Theae
oniamenta  wen  often  beetowed  upon  honemen  by
the  RoniBD  gmenia  in  the  lame  manner  as  the
AnxtLLA,  the  Toitqtias,  the  haita  pun  [HastaJ,
and  the  crown  of  gold  [Coh-ocaa],  in  order  to  ma^e
a  public  and  permanent  acknowledgment  of  bujgrr
and  merit  (Jut.  iri.  80  1  Gell.  iL  U.) [J.Y.]

PHALLUS. [DioNTBii,  p.  411,a.]

PHALOS  (<t>itJ>i). [Qalia.]

PH  ARETRA  (f<V^|><(,  ap.  Hand.  ^oftrptAr),
a  qoirer.  Aquifer,  fbO  of  airawatWaitheusaBlMc-
eompaniment  of  the  bow.  [Arcds.]  Itwaacona^
quently  part  of  the  attire  of  OTery  nation  addicted
to  archery.  Viigil  appliea  to  it  the  ei»theta  Oom,
ijna,  TMbn  (f^org.  iii.  S4£,  Am.  to.  SIfi,
o.  ess)  ;  Orid  menlioni  the  piantntn  Oeta  {Da
Pimlii,  i.  8.  6)  ;  Herodotu  rrpmenti  it  aa  put
of  the  ordinary  arraoar  of  the  Peniana  (rii.  Rl).
The  quiver,  like  the  bow-can  (earyba),  waa  prin-
cl pally  made  of  hide  or  leather  (Herod.  iL  14l>,
and  was  adorned  with  gold  (Anaa.  xit.  6  ;  cainita,
Virg.  Am.  iT.  1S8,  xL  858),  painting  (Ond,
Bpiii.Her.  iiL  173),  and  bmidrnj  (waxi^^ainw,
TheKiit  xrr.  265).  It  had  a  lid  (wiip^  Hem.
H  ir.  ]  t«,  Od.  ii.  314),  and  was  an^i^ded
from  the  right  ihoalder  by  a  bell  [Baltbd*],
paiiingorer  the  breaitand behind  the  bad.  (He^
(-  e.) Ita  moM  oommon  poutioo  w«i  on  (ha  left


D.g,l,.™byGOOglC


elbow-  (Ota  150.  iBl)  0
(inKinar,  TheocriL  nii.  30)
by  the  Scjthuuu  (SchoL  in  Fiad.  La.)  mi  hj  the
^TptiwM  (WilkiaKn,  Mob.  owf  CuM.  f oL  L  pp.
31 1,  391),  and  it  m  lefnteaxti  in  th*  ptBcedii
figan  of  tin  Amuon  Uinomache,  copied  (ran
tiiHknw.  (Hopo.OMtanee/'tif^MMi.LSl)
Ths  left-huid  figura  in  th*  uuna  woodoil  !■  Inaii
MM  oi'  liM  Acgini  iDuble*.  It  it  tht  itMu*  of  ui
Aiiilic  uibar,  irliiiw  qiuT«i  (fnctund
arigintl)  ii  iDipiiDdcd  equBUy  lav,  bat  vith  the
opemi^  tomrdi  hii  tight  clbov,  n  th»t  il  would
ha  ne««nn  lor  him  in  tiking  the  urowt  to  pan
hi*  bud  bahiud  hii  bod;  iualead  of  b«fors  iU  To
(hi*  faibiai  wh  o^nied  tha  CraOo  mMhod  of
mryiBg  tht  qnior,  which  ii  smiipliSed  ia  tl
woo^l,  p.  S76,  ud  il  nuiibim];  tata  in  tl
■DcicDt  itstoea  of  Diuia.  [J.  Y.]

PUARHACON  GHAPHE  (_fftJmmrorl>9.
funuiaa  tf^),  m  indietaiMDt  iguiiM  ooa  who
cmaMd  tha  imiit  rf  aiMitba  b;  pwMD,  whatha
giTOD  «ilk  inliDl  to  kill  or  to  abtun  nnduo  Ma-
cau, (Pollai,TiiL10,  il7;  Hemailh. e.  AriHecr.
637  ;  Argam.  ■•  Or.  Ani^  Kunry.  ^api^)  It
vH  tried  bj  t^  conn  of  Aieiopagu. Thai  the

aiatt,  DBT  ba  guhovd  from  tha  onmaiiatu  <■
wpww'ni,  it  tritavk^i  ml  TfttavKiis,  m  Autiphoo
(Lc  iii.  112,  cd.  Stcph.)<  Tho  ponithnwnt  wu
deMh,  bat  might  (no  doobt)  ba  mitigMed  by  the
oonrt  imder  palliulDg  drcoiuluae*,  We  hate
•wnplM  of  nch  Tipo^  in  the  apach  of  Antiphoii
■liCBej  cilod,  aod  that  entitled  Tifil  rsv  XV""™-
{Mtiia,  AU.  Pnn  f.  311.)  AiiKBig  the  Oreeki,
vonan  appear  ta  baie  beoi  matt  addiolod  to  thif


fmpiiKittrTfiai.  Poiioaotu  drag*  were  Inqoentlj
adiainiitirwd  ai  Ion  potioD>,i>r  £>  Mb<r  (larpiwu
of  ■  Binilai  natoTt.  Men  whtM  mindi  were  at
fccted  bj  tboa  wen  nid  f^viacfr.  Willi  made
bja  man  under  the  inAnoica  of  drag!  {bwh^apt^A-
tmr)  mt  raid  at  AlbaiL  (DemoML  e.  Sl^
1133.)  [aiLK.]

PHAROS  or  PHABU3  (M"')>*  light-hmue.
The  mat  o^brtted  light-honn  of  inliqait;  wu
that  utaatad  at  the  enDaace  to  the  port  of  Alei-
■Bdria.  It  wa*  built  b;  Soetntna  of  Coidoa  on  an
ialand,  which  b«e  the  bdw  noma,  by  oHnniaiid  of
one  irf  tha  Ptojemiea,  and  at  an  eipenia  of  300
lalKta.  (PliB.tf.A^.xzxTi.  12;  Staph.  B;a.i.«.
**frt ;  AebiO.  I^  T.  6.)  It  WM  aquart^  eon-
■kocted  of  white  Mane,  and  with  admLiaUa  art ;
ezeeediaglj  luAf,  and  in  ill  teuccti  of  great
dimBiiiona.  (Caeur,  OCCSr  liL  112.)  1(  con-
taioed  man;  alariei  (M^Unf^ai^iw,  Birabo,  xtil.  1.
i  6),  which  dininiabcd  in  width  bum  below  ap-
warda.  (Hendian,  it.  8.)  The  qipar  •teriea  had
wiadowa  looking  loiwBida,  and  tndHa  or  firea
wen  kept  hiiiiibg  in  than  by  night  in  ordar  Xa
gaida  Teaatb  iato  the  harbcmr,  (Vti,  Flacc  Tii.
34  ;  aee  Bartoli,  Zw.  Jat  iii.  12.)

Plinj  (JLa)  meatiooi  the  ligbt-hooiea  of  Oitia
■■d  RaTanna,  and  laji  that  theta  wire  aimilar
towen  at  maaj  othar  (lUeca.  Thar  are  lepre-
Kalad  oti  tka  madala  of  Apamca  and  other  mari-
tine  eiliea.  Tha  name  of  Pharoa  w«  giTen  to
tboa  m  alhiMon  to  that  at  Alaiandiia,  which  wai
tfaetaodalftclbmr


PHASia  G9S

Saelon.  Ointil.  20  ;  Bmnck,  AkJ.  il,  186.)  Tha
Phana  of  Bnmdiuium,  for  example,  wai,  lie  that
of  Alexandria,  an  iileiid  with  a  light-hoaie  npon
it  (Mela,  ii.  7.  I  13  j  Sleph.  B;i.  L  c)  Suctoniiii
(TVier.  74)  meatioDi  another  phoroi  at  Capnat.

The  innexed  woodcut  showi  two  pbari  remain-
ing in  Britain.  The  Gret  li  within  the  precincia
of  Dam  Caitle.  It  it  about  4(1  feel  high,  octago-
nal extefnallj,  t^wring  from  below  apwarda,aiid
built  with  nariow  aninea  of  brick  and  much  wider
conrKi  of  atone  in  alternate  ponioni.  The  apace
within  the  tower  la  aqaoie,  the  lidet  of  the  octagon
without  and  of  the  ajuare  wllhln  being  equal,  viiq
each  15  Ruman  fe«L  The  door  !i  leen  at  the
bottom.  (Stukelj,  /(ia.  CaHot.  a.  129.)  A  umilar
pharoa  formerlj  exiaied  at  BoinognB,  and  it  inp-
poaed  to  have  been  bnill  by  Caligula.  (Sueton.  CUw.
46;  Montbacoa,5'^9ibit.TaI.iir.L.TL3,4.)  The
rsnnd  tower  hen  inlndnccd  ia  on  the  lummit  of  a
hill  on  the  ceait  of  Fiintihire.  (Pennant,  /'or.  q/
rrU<^«I  aarf  HaifuM,  p.  113.)  [J.  T.]


lelua  or  kidi


PHAROS  (fa^oO- [PAiutriL]
PHASE'LUS  (fdniAoi),  vaa  a  leaiel  nther
long  and  narrow,  uparently  ic

•emblana  to  the  twp<  of  a  ]
bean. It  waa  chiefly uied  _  _ .

and  waa  of  Tiiiau  tiiaa,  from  a  mere  boat  to  a
veiael  adapted  for  long  rayaget.  (Virg.  Gtotg.  It.
239  1  Caloll.  4  ;  Martial,  x.  3a  13  ;  Cic  nj  Att.
L  13.)  Octavia  tent  ten  triremea  of  Ihii  kind,
which  the  bad  ebtained  from  Antony,  to  luiat  her
brother  Octaiianua  ;  and  Appiaa  (fis/i.  Civ.  t.  95)
deacribca  tham  oa  a  kind  of  medimn  between  the
afaipa  of  war  and  tha  conmun  ttauiput  or  merchant
'cuela.  The  phiaalui  wM  built  fiff  qieed  (Catull.
, c.pioKbuilit — itainBii oriarrnuu),  to  which  mora
ittention  aeema  to  hare  been  paid  than  to  ila
ttrength  ;  whence  the  epithet  fivgila  ii  g^ven  to
it  by  Honua.  {Oarm.  iu.  2.  27,  23.)  Theaa  rea-
'  aamatimea  made  of  clay  (Jietiii&iuiiiatila,
127),  ta  which  (ha  epithet  of  Horace  ma;
perhipt  alao  refer.

PUASIS  (^u),  waa  one  of  the  Tarioni  me-
thoda  by  which  public  oKnden  at  Athena  might
be  piueecnted  i  bat  the  word  ia  oftan  uaed  to  de-
note any  kind  of  infimnation  ;  aa  PoUni  (viiL  47)
■lyi,  aottwt  ^dtrtit  iiuAoSirra  nmi  nl  /atriatii
Ta*  kareBrirrm  itunuiinif.  (See  Aiiatoph.  Eg.
300,  and  Aciam.  823,  826,  whue  the  word  #ar.
riC"  ia  uted  in  the  nme  lenae  m  ^oImi.)  The
word  nia^Amtt  it  derived  from  the  practice  of
laying  infermatioD  againit  thoie  who  exported  figi.

(SyGOPHANTU.J

Though  it  il  certain  that  tha  ^^il


S9S  PHASTS.

BttpL),  we  are  nol  informed  in  wh»t  iuijeculiwi-
tiei  coiuUled.  According  to  Polloi  (L  c),  it
migbt  be  branghl  Bgoinit  thoH  who  comraiUed
ofieDcei  agninal  the  mine  Um,  or  the  cnitomi,  or
any  olhei  put  of  tbe  revenue  ;  i^auut  inj  penoiu
wbo  broDght  blie  tecuntkins  agumt  othen  for
lucb  offencea  ;  and  egaioil  gnoidiuu  who  injoied
tbeir  wsrdi.  The  charge,  u  in  (he  7P^>  wai
made  in  writing  (ir  ■ypafitAiniiif),  with  the  name
of  the  proKcuIor,Bndthepnpoted  penaln  (rliaiiia)
affixed,  and  aim  the  name*  of  the  iKtrniiiti.  The
Mme  Buthor  stji,  tpaliiorTa  H  wpit  rir  IfX"^"-
Hera  we  ititiit  either  nndentand  the  word  (tpxoKni
to  be  need  in  ■  more  genenl  Knie,  ai  denoting
anj  magiitnte  to  whom  a  jnriidictioa  belonged,  or
read  with  Schthnann  (^  Cbnif.  178)  Tab  SpX**^"-
For  it  ii  dear  that  the  accbon  vai  not  the  onl;
pcnon  before  whom  a  piait  might  be  prefened.
In  catei  when  com  had  been  carried  to  a  foreign
port,  or  money  lent  on  a  ehip  which  did  not  bring
a  relum  cargo  to  Athena,  and  probably  in  all  caiea
of  ofience  againit  the  export  and  impect  lawa,  the
infonnation  waa  Laid  before  the  iTi)ii\rtTid  rai
iianpUn.  (Demoith.  a.  Tlitoer.  1323.)  Where
pablie  money  had  been  embenled,  or  illegally  ap-
propriated, for  which  a  ^tdrti  wai  mainainatale,
the  iriyitMot  were  the  preeiding  magiitntea,  (laocr.
0.  Callim.  S73  i  Lyi.  da  PM.  Pmum.  149,  de
Jridoplt.  boL  lfi4,  ed.  Steph.)  Offcncs  relating
to  the  minei  lame  befne  the  tbumothetae.  {Heiei,
Aa.Proc.p.6i.)  InjDiiee  done  by  guardiani  totheit
wardi  or  wardi'  eitate,  whether  a  public  pnoecu-
tion  or  a  eiril  action  wai  rewnted  to,  belonged  to
the  joHidictiaa  of  the  anhoit,  whose  dn^  it  wat  to
protect  orphona.  (Suidaa.  a.  v.  ^dffit ;  Demoath.  c.
0<Ht. 865,  e.  Laer.  940,  c  ymuim.  991.) All


^1^,


o  PoUni


id  he  layl  ri  Tiini9ir  iylyrrra  rSy
iaiKovitiymr,  tt  nol  lAAoi  hrtp  abrir  ^rt»v.
By  thii  we  are  to  tindentand  that  the  Tlfiijfw  went
to  the  state,  if  lbs  proeecntion  waa  one  of  a  punly
public  nature,  that  it,  when  the  offence  imme-
diately aiiiscted  the  atate  ;  but  where  it  i
mixed  nature,  at  where  a  private  penon  wu  in-
jured, and  the  ilale  only  indirectly,  in  luch  case
compenntion  waa  awarded  to  the  pinte  peraon.
Thia  waa  the  case  in  praaocntiona  ^;ainat  franduient
gnardiani.  On  the  aame  ground  whereTer  the
pnuGcutor  had  an  interett  in  the  caoae,  beyond
that  which  he  might  feel  »  the  Tindicator  of  public
juilics ;  aa  where  he,  or  aome  third  peraon  on
wheae  behalf  be  interpoted,  waa  tbe  party  directly
injured,  and  might  reap  advantage  from  the  mutt  ;
he  waa  liable  to  the  tirtttt>da,tad  alio  to  the  pay-
ment of  the  wpvtartfa^  jmt  aa  he  would  be  in  a
private  action.  Probably  thia  liability  attached
upon  infonnaliona  for  carrying  com  to  a  foreign
port,  aa  the  informer  there  got  half  the  penalty  if
(uccnafuL  (DemMth.  c.  ?>«»■.  1S35.)  Where
the  9^11  waa  of  a  porely  public  nature,  the  pre-
aecutor  would  be  aubject  only  to  tbe  jayment  of
tbe  v^idirraaii,  and  to  the  thouaand  drachma,  if
he  &3ed  to  obtain  ■  fifth  part  of  the  voloi,  accord-
ing to  the  common  [owtice  in  criminal  caoaea.
(Demortb.  c  TVscr.  1323.)  Whether  in  thoae  of
a  mixed  naton  ha  waa  liable  to  these  psymenta,
'aa  well  aa  to  the  rpranCa  and  tnltjila,  ia  a
queition  which  baa  been  much  diacDaeed,  1}ut  con-
not  be  lettled.  We  have  no  ipecch  left  ni  by  the
otatora  on  the  lubject  of  a  ^u,  but  miy  mention
'of  a  loal  qneefa  of  Ljaiai  rpiii  t^  ^dn»  nS


PH0N09L
ilKparimi  obrov. (See  BSekh,  PaU.  Beau rf
AHura, p.  g68, Ac.  2d  ed. ;  Meier, AU.  Proc
pp.247— 252,  7Sa  i  Plainer,  Proe.-imd  KU  toL
iLpp.9— 17.)  [C.R.K.]

PHEIDITIA  (^iIlTia). [Svanru-I

PHENACE(^«tt.,). [Coiia,p.3W,a.]

PHERN£  «M^). [Doa.]

PMIALA. [Panu.]

PHONOS  (f<l»t),  Homiiidt,  waa  dther  bai-
(Tioi  or  ibnis'uH,  a  diatiDetian  which  comspiBida  in
wmifl  raeaiure,  bnt  nol  exactly,  with  nor  mwrdar
and  maruiamgktBr ;  fat  the  ^mr  JaaJinaT  m^lkt
fall  within  the  deicription  of  juatifiaMe  horaicide,
while  ^rtmt  iniiietiis  might  be  eicniBUe  homicide.
According  to  the  diBennt  ""•"■"T  under
which  the  homicide  waa  cimunitted,  the  tribonal
to  which  the  ok  waa  nfomd,  and  the  nwdea  of
proceeding  at  Athenij  Taried.  All  taasa  of  rnnrdcr
(with  one  exception,  to  be  hereafltr  noticed)  were
tried  by  the  conrt  of  Areiopagua  ;  other  taaea  of
homicide  wen  (by  the  itatutea  of  Draco)  to  be
tried  by  the  ^^bj.  All  ^vtaal  Kim  belox^ed
to  the  JBriadictioa  of  tbe  ifX"*  AunXivr  aa  4t*~
liiir  Jinairrqpfaii.  He  wai  anciently  the  wAe  judge
in  caaea  of  nnintcntionat  homicide ;  for  mch  an  act
waa  conaidered  in  a  religiuna  point  of  view,  u
being  a  pollntion  of  the  city  ;  and  it  became  faia
du^,  aa  guardian  of  religion,  to  take  care  tlMt  the
polfation  (firfoi)  waa  duly  expiated.  Diaco,  bow-
ever,  eatabliahed  the  ti*Tv,  Gnt  aa  a  eoort  of
aMi^  from  tbe  ipX"'  AviA*^  ;  and  loan  after
they  began  to  perform  the  .office  of  Suoaval,  be
being  the  preaidmg  magiatrate.  (Suidaa,  a  e.  'H-j*.
laria  SucafrnHilw ;  PoUnx,  viiL  90,  1S&)  la
dljcuaaing  thia  anl^ect  we  have  to  ecnaider  tbe
varioua  courta  eetaWihed  at  Athena  for  the  ttml  ol
homicide,  the  different  ipeeiei  of  crime  tberiHii  re-
ipeetirely  pmaecnted,  the  manner  of  proceedii^
-  -' '  id  the  nBtnreDfthepanMb-

a  liabhL All  tl
1  by  Matthiae  b  hi*  ti
n Ue AfuD

thii  article.

Sirion,  who  aeenu  te  have  mudeUed  tb*  eoort
of  Areiopagna,  enacted  that  thia  court  dunld  ti^
caaea  of  murder  and  maliciaui  woimding,  beaida
■raon  and  poiaoiiing.  (Donoath.  e,  jlruancr.  SS7.)
One  would  be  deemed  a  moidenr,  wba  inati||aUiil
another  to  eoDunit  the  deed,  providad  tb*  pBrtuaa
wereBcc^pliihed.(DeBMMth.aCbM>a.lS(H,12G5;
MattLp^US.)  DeaideB  thacoort  of  Areioaanai,
there  were  four  other  cmlta,  of  trfueb  the  jfih-w
werejodgei;  ri  M  naAAnilf ,  rb  M  &«Af(v<T^  Tt
M  lifHToitlf^  and  tI  it  Jyaarral  (Harpox.  at
Said.  f.  r.  "E^Mu.) To  the  court  M  UaUUBly

*  mroler(B«A(i«u).  Sacb


ilaughter.  It  aema  alao  that  thia
court  had  a  eoncntimt  jnriadietioD  with  the  Aivio-
pngui  in  charge!  of  mnrdemiu  coBBfUiaey,  whieb
wai  carried  into  effect  The  law  penapa  allowed
the  proaeeutor  to  waive  the  haaner  charge,  anil
proceed  againat  the  tSoAa  iat  the  cwpiia^
only.  (H*ipocr.(.v.  BoDhiirfm;  Antipb.  myaiC
126,  ed.  SU^h.  i  Hatlh.  p.  ISO.)  Aa  to  tbt  fop-
poaed  origin  of  thii  court,  aee  HarpoQt  a^w,  *Bai
naAAaNy  ;  PoUnz,  aiii.  lia  To  tbe  eoart  M
A(kfin|i  wctc  nteed  «MM  «rh«  tha  fac^  Gia-


PHONOS,
fftj  tlw  dwd,  but  JDitified  it ;  If  tii  ttuKayf
liir  KTiirai,  irrifiut  ti  ^  tttpaxhiai.  Demo-
MlMn«t  calU  it  ^^tAnra*  nal  ^puuMenta*  (c
Arutoer.  %*i  ;  HupMT.  $.  V.  'Eitl  AiX^ivly  ;  Pol-
lux, TiiL  119).  A>  to  iha  origin  of  thii  court  lee
Matth.p.162.  InlfaeriM  npvriwtlythaDbjecCi
of  proHcutioD  mce  imniimto  things,  tu  mod,
■Mo*,  or  iron,  wfaich  bad  canted  the  death  of  a
nwa  by  ItUling  on  him.  (Hirpocr.  t.  o.  'Cirl  Ilfvra-
nlv;PoUiu,TiiLl-20  il>cino>lh.o.  JriKocr.  64S.)
J>nco  emded  that  the  ouue  of  death  ^oold  be  eait
Dot  of  iho  boaadariea  of  the  land  (ihrfpopiffffOfu),
in  vhich  ceraniooj  the  &px*^  ^offcAtPi  wi4  »-
mttA  bj  the  ^vt^atAtU.  (Heier,  Atl.  Pne.  p,
117iSuida*,>.v.Nui»;  AeKh.  c.  CIw/A.  KB,  ed.
Supb.)  Thu  wai  a  relic  of  Toy  nide  timet,  and
majr  b«  not  inaptl;  compared  with  our  ciulom  of
giTiDg  deodandi.  Madbioe  (p.  ISl)  thinki  there
vaaan  idterioc  object  in  the  inceatigalion,  via.,  that
bj  the  production  of  the  inttniment  by  xvhjch
death  waa  inflicted,  a  cine  might  be  fbnnd  lo  the
diaeoTCTj  of  the  real  muidavr,  if  any.  The  court
frffieaTTsTiraanaerTed  (orapecaliaicaae;  where
■  man,  after  gwng  into  exile  for  an  tminlentional
bomicide,  and  before  he  had  ^ipeaied  (be  relalioai
of  the  deceated,  waa  charged  with  bating  com-
nitled  mnrder.  He  waa  brought  in  a  ihip  In  a
^ace  m  the  harboor  called  ir  ^ptanai,  and  there
pleaded  hii  cauae  on  hoard  ihip,  while  the  jndgei
renaiaed  on  land.  If  he  wai  conricled,  ha  laf-
lend  the  paniihmoit  of  mtirder  ;  if  acquitted,  he
anSend  tae  remainder  af  bit  foimer  pnniihmcnt.
Tbg  object  of  ihii  contriiance  waa  to  BToid  poUu-
tioo  (for  the  crime  of  the  tint  act  had  not  yet  been
•ipiated),  and  at  the  lama  lime  to  bring  the  lecond
«Ance  to  trial.  (Demoath.  c  AriitBcr.  646  ;  Har-
pocr.*.*. 'Er#t(trrai';  Pollux,  viii,  130  ;  Matth.
p.  155.)

To  ooa  or  other  of  theie  courti  all  ^ruwl  tUai
wan  Hat  for  trial ;  and  it  wai  the  buioeii  of  the
IpX**  3a>r'A<l'>  to  decide  which.  Tho  taak  of  pn>-
■ecndiai  devolved  npon  the  neareit  lelatlTei  of  the
decMBcd  J  and  in  cmc  of  a  lUit,  npon  the  matter.


relation  not  fnrther  moored  than  a  fiiat
MD  (dnfwSoiii).  Within  that  desree  the  Uw  en-
joined the  relatioot  to  piwecute,  nnder  peniliy  of  tn
irtCiEu  tft^  if  they  biled  to  do  n.  (Demoath.
e.  Andnt.  693,  e.  Mamrt  1069,  e.  Euerp.  H
MwL  1160,  1161  ;  An%h.  <£a/fer.  coed.  135,  ed.
Sleph.)  They  might,  howcTer  (without  iocuning
nif  etnnire),<brlHr  la  protecute,  where  the  mur-
dered man  had  foijpien  the  murderer  before  he
died  (Demoath.  o.  FamtaiM.  963)  ;  or,  in  catet  of
iDTolnotary  homicide,  where  the  offender  gare  the
don  which  the  Uw  required  ;  unleai  the  de-
bad  giTca  a  gpeeial  injunction  to  arenge
(Lriiu,  c  Agar.  1S3,  1S3,  ed.  Steph. ;
.  p.  170.)
Tbe  Grtt  ttep  taken  by  the  ptiMecutai  waa,  to


PHONOS.  897

mi,  to  prefer  the  charge  before  the  king-arcbon.
t'o  toch  charge  the  temi  iwiVKitrrttr^iu  or  ^Ttf-
erw  wai  pnuliarlj  aj^ied.  (pDilllx,Tiii.  33,118)
Flarpocr.  r  v.  'Evt^vfyttro  ^  AntipL  jrcmj7.  ^^tK
111,  ed.  Steph.)  The  charge  waa  deliTcred  in
writing  ;  the  proeeciitor  wai  lud  lnnyfiturSai
Sbniii  ipimv,  (Antiph.  di  Chor.  145,  ed.  Steph.)
'le  king-arcbon  harini  received  it,  afta  fint
iming  ^e  defendant  air^to0aj  rbv  tivwytf^tar
J  TW  SMli»  rofjfiar  (Pollux,  Tui.  16,  90),  pro-
seeded  in  due  liirm  to  the  iriicpau.  The  nuun
tbiog  to  be  inquired  into  waa  the  nature  of  the

pertatucd.  The  eTidence  and  other  nuuten  were
prefBred  in  the  uiual  way.  Three  montht
allowed for thii  preliminaiy  inquiry,  nnd


cording  to  Bekker*(


ontb.  called  tiotuiavlai,  or


|h.


. Thitw


1-p^-


Jnfiru,  and  waa  given  at  the  funeral  of  the  de-
ctated.  (Antiph.ift/Ar.oKcf.  130,  139,  ie  Ckor.
141,ed.Slepb.i  Demoath.  e.£e;ifm.  £05,  a  Jruforr.
632,  c  EMerg.  1160.)  After  thii,  he  gave  a  pub-
lic notice  in  the  marltct-plsce,  warning  the  acciucd
to  appear  and  miiwer  to  the  charge :  here  he  nai
Mid  ffttrrm  or  TfoayoiMitir  <pinn.  (Demoitb.  e.
Mmnt.  lOeS,  «.  Ntatr.  lUZ.) Tbe  next  thing


tfoflTeHji'Slion'.  (Matth.  p.l60.)Th«
It  allowed  to  put  in  a  nftrYpa^,  if
I  that  the  charge  ought  to  be  triid  in
one  of  the  minor  courti.  (Pollux,  viii.  S7.)

All  the  ifanici  SmairHipia  wer«  hdd  in  tbe  open
air,  in  order  that  tbe  jnd^  might  not  be  under
the  lanie  roof  with  one  iuipecied  ef  impurity  ;  nor
the  proeecntorwithhit  adrertary.  (Antiph.ttoffn-.
coed.  130,  ed.  Steph.)  The  king-orehon  preatded,
with  hii  crown  taken  off.  (Pollux,  viii.  90.)  The
partici  were  bound  b;  tbe  mut  ial<  mn  oathi ;  the
one  (wearing  that  tbe  charge  wai  true,  that  ha
bore  inch  a  relationihip  to  the  deceaacd,  and  that
he  would  in  conducting  hit  rate  confine  hinitolf  to
the  qneition  at  iitue  ;  the  other  declaring  tbe
charge  to  be  falte.  (Antiph.  d*  Htr.  aud.  ISO,
l40,dWCior.l43,  ed.  Steph.  i  Demoath.  t.Eaerg.
116!  ;  Matih.  p.  163.)  The  iritnciKi  on  both
tidtt  were  iwom  in  like  manner  (Anlipb.  dt  Her.
mid.  130,  131,  ed.  Steph.;  Meier,  AH.  Proe.
p.  675)  ;  and  tlaret  were  dJIowed  to  appear  at
witnrtteo.  (Meier,  AIL  Pne.  p.  667.)  Either
party  wai  at  liberty  to  make  two  ipeecbeB,  tbe
protecutor  beginning,  ai  may  he  leen  from  the
Tn-poAoyla  of  Anti^on  ;  hut  both  were  obliged  to
confine  ibemtelvea  to  tbe  point  at  iiane.  (Lyi.o.
Simm.  100  ;  Antiph.  dt  Oar.  143,  ed.  Steph.)
Adiocatet  {•rvrfrfofoi)  were  not  admitted  to  Ipeok
fiir  the  partiet  anciently,  but  in  later  timee  tbey
were.  (Hatth.  p.  164.)  Two  dayi  were  oecnpied  in
tbe  trial.  After  tbe  firu  day  tbe  defendant,  if
fearful  of  tbe  retult,  wai  at  liberty  to  fly  the  coun-
try, except  in  the  caie  of  parricide.  Such  flight
could  not  be  prevented  by  the  adienary,  bat  the
property  of  the  exile  wai  coniiiciited.  ( Pollux,  viiL
117;  Demoath. c. .4 r^rtDcr.634,643;  Matth. p.167.)
On  the  third  day  the  judgei  proceeded  to  give  their
TOlet ;  for  wbiob  two  boiei  or  umt  were  provided
(L^pfaj  or  JL^i^opfTr),  one  of  brait,  the  other  of
wood  ;  the  fonner  for  the  condemning  balloti,  the
latter  for  thoie  of  acqnitlaL  An  eqiial  number  of
Yotea  wni  an  acquittal ;  a  point  lint  etiabliihed
(according  to  the  old  tradition)  upon  the  trial  of
Oieitet.  (AeK^hyl.  fiimai.  753  i  Matth.  p.  165.)
At  tbe  defence  might  contitl  either  in  a  ilmple
denial  of  the  killing,  or  of  tbe  intention  to  kill,  or
in  a  jnttificotion  of  the  act,  it  i>  neceaiary  lo  in-
lonted  lot  legal  ji


Wi


learn  from  Demoithi'nea
wai  eiciuable  lo  iiiU  an-
a  gymnutic  wmbat,  or


SBS  PHONOS.

to  kill  ft  friend  in  1»tde  or  unbnnde,  miiUlung  I
him  fiiT  an  eoflmj  ;  that  it  wu  jiu^fiable  '  '"~
wi  aitnltercr  if  aught  u  tpio  dttido,  or  >  panunotu
ought  in  the  umc  way  with  B  titter  or  daugh-
ter, 01  ercD  vitfa  a  coDcubint,  if  her  ciiildren  vould
be  free.  (Ai  to  an  adaltatec,  we  Lyi,  dt  ErataHi.
catd.  SI,  ad.  SlepL)  It  wh  lawfiil  to  kiU  a  rob-
ber at  tiie  tine  when  he  made  hii  attack  (tiMi
VvJfiw)  but  not  after.  (DemoatL  i
629.)  By  aipeeiiil  decree  of  the  people,  made  after
the  expukioQ  of  the  thirty  ^rnnti,  it  wu  lawful '


PHTHOHA  TON  ELKUTHERON.
Ilm,  Tiii.  SO  i  UBTpocr.  and  SnidM,  i-  v.'Aidb*-

ThoH vbo  wera  cftSTicted of  Bnintaitiaaal
homicidei,  not  perfectly  eieaiable,  wen
(0  le«Te  the  eounoy  foe  a  year.  They  i
to  go  oat  mtpxiotiB)  by  a  eertaia  1
a  certain route  (ra


kiUai

or  pot  down  the  democnuy,  or  conunitted  treaaon
■gainat  the  itate.  (Lycnrg.  &  Leoer,  ]  65  }  Andoc.
dt  MftL  13,  ed.  Stepfa.)  A  phyiidao  waa  ei-
enied  who  eamad  the  <lrath  of  a  patient  by  mi*.
lake  or  profeuiasal  ignorance.  (Antipb.  rirpiiA.
127,  ed.  Steph.)  Thii  diilinction,  howeter,  muat
be  oberared.  Juitifiable  bDcaicida  left  the  perpe-
tutor  entirely  free  from  pollution  (xafcip.li').  That
which,  thongh  mdntentional,  wa>  not  perfectly
free  tnim  blame,  required  to  be  eipiateii.  See
the  lemarka  of  Antipbon  in  the  TFrpo^ryla,  a.


123.
Itn

The  a


HI  to  ipeak  of  the  pnnLihmenL


tionary  power  in  awarding  pimlihmeat ;  the  law
determined  thii  according  to  (he  nature  of  the
crime.  (Demoeth.s.  A'kw.  1372.)  Wilful  murder
wai  puniihed  with  death.  (Antiph.  de  Htr.  toed.
ISO,  ed.  Steph.  i  Demoath.  c  Mid.  &2S.)  It  wa*
the  duty  of  the  TheimathetH  to  lee  that  the  im-
tence  waa  eiecnted,  and  of  the  Eleien  to  execute
it.  (Demoith.  a.  AriiUxr.  630 ;  Meier,  AIL  Proa
p.  74  ;  SchBmann,  Aat.  Jar.  FkU.  Qt.  p.  246.)  We
hate  aeeu  that  the  criminal  might  avoid  it  by  fly-
ing before  the  lentenco  waa  paued.  Malicioui
wounding  wai  paniihad  with  banithment  and  cen-
liiatioa  of  goodt.  (Lyi.  c  SinuM.  IDO  ;  Matth.
iL  1J6.)  So  wen  attempta  (a  mnrder  {Bt'Miaia).
But  wh«a  the  dnign  wai  fallowed  by  the  death
of  him  whoaa  li'e  wat  plotted  agunit,  and  the
erime  wai  tnated  aia  ninrder,  it  mishl  be  puniihed
with  death,  at  leatt  if  it  wai  tried  in  the  Anio-
paffoi ;  for  it  ii  doubtfal  whether  the  minor  couiti
(except  that 'p  f peoTTA)  had  the  power  of  inflicting
capital  punithment  (Matth.  p.  150  ;  ScfaiimanQ,
Anl.Jvr.PiibL&r.f.29i  ;  MeieT,>n.  Proa.  p.  SI  3.)
If  the  crimioal  who  waa  baniihed,  or  who  aroided
fail  lentence  by  Toliuitary  exile,  returned  to  the
country,  an  fvJiifii  might  forthwith  be  laid  agaiut
him,  or  he  might  be  antated  and  liken  before  the
Thounotbetae,  «-  eieu  ihiin  on  the  ipot.  (Suidai,
a  V.  'tyitiiu ;  Maitb.  p.  1 68.)  The  piweeding  by
i-TBr/tr^  (amtt)  might  perfaqw  be  taken  agaiail
a  matderer  iu  the  lint  inatanco,  if  the  murder  wai
attended  with  robbery,  in  which  caw  the  praaccu-
tOT  wat  liable  to  the  penalty  of  a  theunHid  dncfamt
if  lie  Med  to  get  a  fifth  of  the  vetea.  (Den  oath,  c,
Arittoer.StT  i  Meier.^tt.  fVse.  p.  231.)  But  no
murderer,  eien  after  coniietion,  cenld  lawfully  b«
killed,  or  eien  aneated,  in  a  foreign  connEry.
(Demoath.  c.  Ariitoa:  631,  632,)  The  humanity
of  the  Greeki  fort>ade  inch  n  practice.  It  wai  a
principle  of  intanationsl  law,  that  th<'  eiila  had  a
vife  aiyluai  in  a  foreign  land.  If  an  Athenian  wai
killed  by  a  foreigner  abroad,  the  only  method  by
which  hit  reUtioni  could  obtain  redri-ii,  waa  lo
•cite  nntiTei  of  the  murderer'!  country  (not  more
than  thm),and  keep  them  until  the  murderer  wsi
givea  1^  tot  jadgmeut  (Demoath.  e.  AriMoer.  647 ;


rite*.  Theirtecm  sfabaence
waa  ailed  ^trHwriirfi^i.  It  wa*  their  duty  alao
to  appeaae  (aUfwhi)  the  nlationa  of  the  deuurd,
or  if  he  iMd  none  within  a  certain  dtgree,  Ibe
membert  of  hi*  dan,  either  by  preatnia  or  by
hnmble  entreaty  and  nibmiuiiiD.  If  the  conTJct
could  pieiail  on  them,  he  might  even  tnnin  bcibre
the  year  had  expired.  The  word  B^SeiJe^ai  ia  uaed
not  only  of  the  criminal  humbling  himielf  to  the
lehitioni,  but  alao  of  their  fngiiinghim.  (Ilacpocr.
>.  e.  Yire^ia ;  Demoith.  o.  jpontaea.  S83,  e.  Ma-
airt.I069,c..drutacr.643;  HaUh.p.lTO.)  The
property  of  nch  a  criminal  wai  not  forfBited,  and
it  waa  unlavfal  In  do  any  injory  to  him  either  oa
hii  learing  the  country  or  during  hii  ahaiiai
(DenuMth.  a  Jrutwr.  631.)

Snch  wBi  the  conititution  of  tb«  court*,  and  the
ilate  of  the  law,  ai  catabliihed  by  Soion,  and
moitly  indeed  by  Dtaca  ;  for  Solon  retained  moat
of  Draco'i  ^nxol  nifiai.  (Demoath.  cCucrir.  1161.
c^Jrutocr.  6S6.)  But  it  appean  tlMl  (b«  Jniiadic-
tton  of  the  J^u  in  later  timet,  if  sol  laoa  after
the  legiilation  of  Solon,  wai  greatly  abridged  ;
And  that  raoet  of  the  fNvml  tinai  were  tried  by  a
common  juiy.  It  ii  probable  that  the  people  par-
ferred  the  ordinary  method  of  trial,  ts  whicb  tliey
were  accuilomed  in  oth^  cauiea,  siminil  ai  wrU
Bi  ciril,  to  the  more  ariatecraliad  caulitolioi  of  tite
court  of  ^m.  Their  jnriidictian  in  the  covrta
ir  fptaml  and  tui  IlfHiTimiqt,  waa,  no  doubt,
■till  retained  ;  and  there  leem  to  hare  bwn  other

Eullar  catea  reterred  for  tbeir  cosniiaoce.  (Pol-
,  Tiii.  126  i  Matth.  p.  15B  ;  Schtiaann,  jfnt
Jar.  I'Ht.  p.  206.)  Wbetber  the  powtn  oftba
Areiopagu*,  at  a  enantaj  touri,  were  curtailed  by
the  pronedinga  of  Peridn  and  Bphialte%  er  only
their  adminiatiatiTe  and  cenaorial  aathantj  aa  a
ivmieit^  ii  a  qucetion  which  ha*  been  much  dia-
cutnd.  The  itnrag  bi^nage  of  DenmatkeaeB
(c  Ariilaa:  641)  in^ei  one  to  the  latter  cfiniea.
See  also  Dinarehni  (&  ^riiiD^  iniL),  fhiD  which
it  appean  there  waa  no  appal  from  the  decinon
of  that  oonn.  (Matth.  166  ;  PlaHier.  Pm.  amd
f%.vol.Lp.27i  ScbOmaiin,^8f.,/iir.P^.p.301;
Thiriwali,  Or.  HitL  toI.  iii.  1 17.  p.  24.)

No  eitnordinary  pnniahiBCiit  wa*  impeatj  1^
the  Athenian  legialalor  on  ponieide.  Sucide  waa
not  conudeted  a  dime  in  paint  ef  hw,  tltoagk  it
aaamt  to  have  been  deemed  an  oBenet  t^tainat  n-

y 'on  )  fix  by  the  enatom  of  the  caont^  lb*  hai>d
the  tuicide  wai  buried  apart  bm  ha  body.

(Aeach.  c  Cta.  SB,  ed.  Staph.)  [C  R.  K.j

PHORBEIA  (i»of)<<I>). [Capiitiiiim.]
PHOaHINX  (fNifvuTt). [Ltka.]
PHOROS  ipipoi),  literally  Oat  wkuk  ittnm^

H,  waa  ipeciaUy  Died  tougnify  tbetribata  paidbj

the  Attic  itatta  to  Atheua,  which  i*  qiokcn  itmaia

TiLoa.
PHRATRJA.  [CiviTAa,pp.283,S90i  Tun*


(0..


<).]


be  erimuiallr  pratMotcd  at^  AAi^^ Tha  ward


PHYWBASILKIS.
^ttfi  BUj  ngni^  ui j  aort  of  comption,  bodilT  m

if  it  ii  not  limilol  to,  ■  crimi  bw  common  (anDng
tha  Qneki,  >•  ippcan  bvm  ■  Uir  cited  bj  Am-
cbiiM  (c.  nwirol.  2,  td.  Sicph.).  On  thia  nbJKt
■M  PaOiiiKMiiui  OKAfBM,  ud  ScfalimuD,  Atl.
Jmr.  PiA.  Or.  pp.  33S,  838.  [C.  R.  K.)

PHYGE(*B7*). [EisiLiciL]

PHYLARCHl  (^Aapx").  eo«»l'j 'lie  t«-
fccB  of  tile  tribe*  in  ■nj'  atale,  H  at  Epidunniu,
wImt*  the  gOTenuuait  mu  {ertatsAj  reiled  in  the
^<AVX^  But  afterwardi  in  ■  lenmu.  (AriiL  Poftt.
T.  L)  At  Atkeu  the  MBccn  B  called  wen  (after
the  age  of  CleiitlKDa)  ten  inmnnber,  Dnefoccach
of  the  Iribei,  and  wfie  ipeciallj  chuged  witfa  the
ommind  and  Baperintendcnce  of  the  cavalry.
(Harpocr.  j.B.;Poliai,Tiii.94.)  There  can  be  but
litlJe  donbt,  thai  each  of  the  Phjlareiu  commanded
the  taralrj  of  hi«  own  tribe,  and  they  were  them-
idTc*  collec^Tclj  and  indiriduall;  ondcr  the  coa-
tnl  of  the  tvo  Hi^ianiia,  juit  ii  the  Taiianhi
wm  inbject  to  the  two  Strotegi.  According  to
Pollai  (liii.  94 ),  they  were  elected  one  ftaia  each
tribe  by  the  Aichoni  coUectiTel; ;  bnt  bii  anthorily
can  hanily  be  coaiidend  u  conelniiTe  on  thii  point.
HeiodDtoi  (•.  1 9)  infomu  ni  that  when  Cliiithoiei
inenaeed  thenaiabei  of  the  tribei  fromfDOT  to  ten,
bealeomade  ten  Phylarchi initead  of  fbar.  It  hai
been  thooght,  however  (Tilmann,  Sftwfap.  pp.  27  <,
975),  lliat  the  hiitodaii  ihould  have  laid  ten
Phylaich*  in  the  pbce  of  the  old  fBXaCa<riAi?t,
who  were  {bur  in  nomber,  one  for  each  of  the  old
tribea.  (See  Wactumnth,  Htlin.  AlfrtiaMik.
¥0L  Lpp.  426,643, Tol.il  p.  S36,2ded,>  [R.W.]

phVlobasileis (♦.x^wA.rv). The

eram  and  dutiei  of  the  Athenian  magiatmtea,  eo
called,  are  involved  in  much  obacnrity,  and  fbe
little  knovledge  we  poeieu  on  the  nhject  i*  de-
TiTed  almoet  entiielj  &nm  the  grammariana.  In
the  eariieat  timei  they  were  four  in  niunber,  le^
jmaenting  each  me  of  the  four  tribei,  and  pnbably
elected  (but  not  Ibr  life)  from  and  ^  them.
(Heaych.  a  e.)  They  were  nominated  'bam  the
Enpalridae,  and  during  the  continuance  of  royalty
M  Athene,  theae  **  king!  of  tbe  tribea  "  were  the
eonatant  aiaenon  of  the  aoTereign,  and  rather  aa
kia  eoUeagnei  than  connKlliicB.  (Thiriwall,  HM.
t^  Grteot,  Tol  iL  p.  11.)  From  an  eipnNion  is
one  of  tha  lawa  of  Solon  (Pint.  «■A)•^  19),  h  ap-
pcan  that  befrae  hia  time  the  kingi  of  the  tribea
axereiied  a  criminal  jnriadiction  in  caaea  of  murder
or  high  tnaaon ;  in  which  rtapcct,  and  aa  con-
Dected  with  the  four  tribet  of  the  city,  they  may
be  compared  with  the  "  duomriri  perduellionii "  at
Rome,  who  appeared  to  have  npmented  the  two
ancient  iribci  of  the  Raninea  and  Tilie*.  (Nie-
buhr,  HiA.  ^  flome,  tdI.  t  p.  304.)  They  were
alao  inlnuted  (bnt  perhspa  m  later  timea)  with
the  perfbnnance  af  certain  relTgiou*  ritea,  and  aa
they  lat  in  the  flafflMu.*  (Poll  riil  111),  they
prehably  acted  aa  aaaeaton  of  the  Spx"*  BvT'^'ii,
or  "  Rer  aacrificolua,^  u  they  had  fbmi«'1y  done
of  tha  king.  Though  they  were  oriiinaily  con-
nected with  the  four  ancient  tribei,  im  Ihey  were
not  aboliahed  by  Cleiathenea  when  he  increaaed
the  number  of  tribea  and  otherwiae  altered  the
conatiution  of  Athena ;  probably  became  their
dutiea  were  mainly  of  a  religiona  character.
(Waclumnth,  HiUm.  AUerOmik  ToL  iL  p.  426,


PICrURA.  8M

'  tant  a  mo^  formal  matten.  Thay  [miided,
we  a«  told  (Poll.  liiL  120),  ovar  tbe  oonrt  of  the
Ephetae,  held  at  the  Prytaneiont,  in  tha  mock
tnala  over  inttnunenla  of  homicide  (d  rur  i^ix-r
Slaw),  and  it  waa  part  of  their  dn^  to  mnoTs
theae  initmmenti  boyood  tha  linuli  of  their
ooimby  (t6  ^^trwvh^  Hmxor  6irapiipf(rai).  Wa
may  reaioiiably  conclude  that  thia  jnriadiction  waa
a  relic  of  more  important  functiona,  auch  aa  thoaa
deacribed  by  Plutanh  (Sobm,  19),  from  which,
and  their  dHineclion  with  the  Prytaiieimn,  it  baa
been  omjecCured  that  they  were  identical  with  tha
old  Prytanea.  (HIiUer,  Enata.  3  67.)  Phitafch
(I.  I.)  apeaki  of  them  both  aa  fiairikiTi  and  ayw-
TaHTt.  In  a  i(4f  "fia,  qaoted  by  Andocidaa  (da
MSoL  p.  11),  thatilleof^wnXtiitoemitobaw-
jiied  to  them.  [R.  W.]

PHYLON  (1>SXmr}. [Tbibdb.]

PICTU'RA(7pa**,7(«*«*.f-7P«*H  Fat-
ing. I.  The  art  of  imitating  Uie  appeaiasce*  of
bodiet  upon  an  eren  anrhee,  by  meana  of  light
and  ahade  ot  colour,  waa  an  art  moat  extenuTely
cuttJTated  by  the  ancienta,  bnt  eapecially  by  th*
Qreeki,  amongit  whom  it  wai  oertninty  carried  l«
tha  highetl  degree  of  technical  development

II.  AaliorHia,  The  principal  original  aouRaa
of  informatian  npon  the  hiitory  of  ancient  art,  are
Pausiniaa,  the  elder  Pliny,  and  Qnintilian  ;  tha
writingi  alao  of  Cicero,  Lnrian,  Aelian,  Ariitotla,
Alhenaeoi,  Plutarch,  tht  elder  and  yomigec  Phi-
loatntus,  contain  many  hinti  and  maiirai  inva-
lusbla  to  the  hiacotian  of  ait.  The  heat  modem
worka  on  tha  nibject  are;  Janiua,  Z>a  Pietura
Fttenm  and  CaHdegi  ATtifiiam,  Boter.  1694,
folio,  which  contain  almoit  all  Uie  pauage*  in
ancient  anthon  relating  to  the  arte  ;  but  the  Cala-
li^e  ii  tha  more  raluable  portion  of  the  work  t
"■"■ " " Dreaden  1B27,  Bto,


liUig,  CbtalogM  AtHfiam,  I
an  indiap "


Engliih


holar  and  tbe  artin,  haa  been  ti


of  a*


iitt  o/  Anliqmtf,  1837*;  a  fbnher  aupple-
it  to  Eiliig,  (d  gceat  importance,  ia  the  vmk  of
M.  Raoul-Hwhette,  LeOrt  i  M.  Sdion,  AppU-
naii  au  Caltdagm  dtt  Artaba  da  fAotiqiBti
Gne^at  a  Robuohi,  Paria  1846  }  Hllller,  Uamd-
bMiAderArcUiotogUdtrKyiul,Bra\ia  1848, 8nh,
3rd  od.  by  Welcker,  a  moat  nieful  work,  but
written  more  for  the  antiquary  than  the  artiit  |
the  2nd  edition  hu  recently  been  tranalated  by
Mr.  I^tch  1  Batliger,  Idttn  no-  ArAaobiffu  dir
Malerei,  Drnden  1811,  Svo.,  Gnt  part,  tnm  tha

poiariea,  incluatve  ;  Duiand,  HiMoin  de  la  PR'a-
tan  .lacunae,  London  1725,  folio,  a  tianalation  of
book  TxiT.  <k  Pliny,  with  copioua  notea  (  Carlo
Dati,  Fill  dei  Pitlori  Attidii,  Florence  1667(
4to.,  the  livei  of  Zeoiia,  Parrbatiua,  Apellet,  and
Pntogenea  ;  Thiersch,  Utttr  da  Bpeidm  dtr  Ui-
derdat  Knot  m>itr  da,  Gritdm,  MUnchen  1829,
Sto.,  2nd  ed. ;  Baoul-Roehette.  Redurdia  tar
CEnifM  d«  la  Peintyn,  Ac,  Paria  1836,  4U>.  |
John,  Malmi  dar  AUm,  Berlin  1636,  Sto.  i  La-
tnnne,  LeUra  d'an  AmUqtutiri  A  ■«  ArliMe,
Pariilfl40,8vo.;  Nagler.JVmani'


tenn  eaomai  ia  throughout  eiroDeonaly  luad  in  tiM
place  of  naeoarite.  •

8  m  a  ^ o"


PICTORi.

«,  MUnchen,  17  toU.  Bto,  not  yet  com-
plet«l ;  and  the  lemma  of  FuhII  upon  uicieot
pointins,  and  of  FUimBTi  upon  uulpiun.  Othei
voilu  han  hesa  writlen  upon  genenl  and  pai-
ticulu  lubjecli  bearing  more  or  lf*>  upon  paintiag,
mih  u  tfaoaa  of  Hcyne,  Meyer,  Hirt,  Heimuin,
Kogler,  Valkel,  Jwoh*,  Creiaer,  Gnind,  Oijliil,
LsveiquF,  MilJin,  D'HaiHsirillc,  QuBlmaere  de
Quincy,  Ingfainmi,  Vuconti,  MilUnaen,  and  othcn,
too  noDieisui  to  mention  here.  Of  the  celabml«d
*oTi  of  Wmckelnuuui,  CmdUqIK  der  Xuu(  da
AlliTtlHiiat,  only  ■  very  iniaU  portion  ia  deToted

HI.  FaMiiig  w  Ui  earlieil  dttle.  The  legendi
relating  to  the  origin  of  painting  in  Greece,
tboDgh  the;  may  hare  no  nsl  blitorical  tbIiw,  are
at  leait  intereiting  to  the  loTen  of  art.  0ns
l^end,  which  it  recorded  by  Pliny  {ft.  N.  xiu.
12.  t.  4S)  and  ii  adrerled  to  by  Atbenagomi
{Ltgai.  pro  Chriit.  14.  p.  59,  ed.  Dechair),  reiata
the  origin  of  the  delineation  of  a  ihadsw  (skIo,
oKia-ypa^,  Pollux,  viL  128),  which  ia  the  esm-
lial  principle  of  detign,  the  haaia  of  the  imitatiTe
and  plaatic  ana.  The  legend  mna  ai  folUwi :  —
The  danghtei  of  a  certain  Dibotadei,  >  potUr  of
Sicyon,  at  Corinth,  atnuk  with  the  ihkdiiw  of  her
loTei  who  waa  about  to  leave  her,  caat  by  her
lamp  upon  the  mil,  drew  ita  oulliiie  {vnthram  tx
Jbeia  Uneii  dmmueriptU)  with  auch  force  and
fidelity,  that  her  bther  cut  away  the  plailer
within  the  outline,  and  took  an  imprvaaion  from
the  wall  in  clay,  which  he  baked  with  the  reat  of
Ilia  poltaiy.  (Hia.  i^Bias.  i.  v.)  There  iceia  to
bc^  howeier,  othor  claimantt  to  the  honour  of
having  invented  akiigniphy  (irtiarffapia).  Atbe-
nagonu  {L  e.)  mention*  Sanriai  of  Samoa,  who
tniced  bit  horae'i  ahadow  in  the  aun  «i^  the
point  of  hie  apear,  and  Ciato  of  Sicjon,  whom  he
atjlea  the  inventor  of  drawing  or  outline  ('ypo^iid)),
for  he  vaa  the  £rat  to  practiae  tbo  art  upon  tableu
with  prepared  groiuida  {if  winuii  XikiuxuiUnf).
Pliny  ill.N.  rii.  57)  meutione  span  the  teatimooy
of  ArlitDtle,  that  Eucheir  (£(!>:«f>)<  ■  relation  of
Daedalua,  invented  painting  in  Oreece.  (Diet  of
Buy.LV.)  A!lhoiigbPliny<aBccount(/r.Ar.xiiv.
5)  of  the  origin  and  progreaa  of  painting  in  Greece
ii  aomewhat  cimumalantial,  hii  infonnatioa  can  itill
Dot  be  coDtidered  ae  authentic  matter  of  hitlory  ;
and  the  eiittence  of  eeveral  of  the  moot  ancient
artiita,  mentioned  by  Pliny  and  many  Greek  wri-
ten,  ia  very  queationahle.  Beaidea  those  alnady
■poken  of,  we  find  mention  made  of  Fhiloclet  of
Kgypt ;  Cleanthea,  Aidicea,  and  Cleopliantua,  of
Corinth  ;  Telepbttaea  of  Sicym,  Engrammut,  and
other*.  (Upon  the  mouunga'  of  aome  of  theae
luunet  aee  BUttiger,  Idtai  mr  AnUioiegie,  p.  133,
and  Thieiach,  Xpock.  it,  note  22,  and  Did.  of
Biag.  art.  ClMriioplmi.)

Sadpturt  ia  gsnetaUy  tappoaed  to  be  a  more
ancient  art  than  paimHag :  but  thia  ariaei  from  an
imperfect  compnhemion  of  the  nature  of  the  two
aiti,  which  are  Ofu  in  origin,  end,  and  principle,
and  differ  osly  in  their  dev^pmenL  Deaiga  ia
th<  budt  of  both,  colom  ia  eaaenlial  to  neither,  nor
.can  U  bo  aaid  lo  belong  more  particularly  to  the
latter  {ffa^ucti)  than  to  the  fanner  (TAoariir^)-
Cokiured  worka  in  plaatic,  in  imitation  of  nature,
■were  in  ancient  timet  at  common,  and  probably
mora  to,  Ihancolooced  deugnt:  the  majority  of  the
iltuttretiont  npon  the  vaaea  are  colourleaa.  The
Uainmj  of  the  hnmu  body,  or  th«  coloujiiig  of


PICTORA.
imagea,  \i  the  temmoa  noticai  of  the  ecipo  of  painb
ing  \  but  (inipte  eaJanrnj^  and  poiwiimg,  ttrietly
apeaking,  ai«  quite  dittinct  j  the  diatioeuoii  be-
twesi  "  to  coLur,"  xpiC"'\  alo'tiK  iititian,  and
"to  paint,"  ftr);^ii^ir,jiti^gfere,daUwc>R.  (Pollux,
vii.  126')  The  colouring  of  the  tarly  wooden
imagea,  the  ancient  {ifoKi,  or  the  Jffu^  the  woA-
AdSia,  and  the  toJiiiAB,  matt  certainly  have  pre-
ceded any  important  eeaayt  in  [aioting,  or  lb*
repieaenlBlian  of  forma  upon  an  even  no&ce  by
meant  of  colour  and  light  and  ibade  combined.
But  thia  ii  no  toga  in  the  art  of  painting,  and
theae  figurea  were  moat  probably  coloured  by  iha
artitli  who  made  them,  by  the  old  vAdwu  or
tpiuiyKi^Qt,  tbenuelvea  i  the  exitteoce,  howon^
of  the  an  of  dea^  iaeanblithed  by  the  eiiitenc*
of  the  plaatic  art.

We  wiU  now  aa  briefly  aa  ponible  cooMder  ths
gradual  developmenl  of  painting,  and  the  infoma*
tion  relating  to  itt  pmgreaaive  ttepa,  peaerred  in
ancient  writenu  The  limpleit  form  of  deeigu  or
drawing  (yfu^iK^)  ii  the  outline  of  a  ihadow,  with-
out any  intermediate  markingi,  or  the  ehape  of  a
thadow  ilielf  (s  lUhoatOt),  in  black,  white,  or  in
colour  {vnibm  homimis  lutaa  dnuntdueta)  \  thia
kind  of  drawing  wot  termed  O'auri'piifla.  Bat  tbia
timple  figure  or  thade,  o-aln  (o-Kui^pi^ia),  when
in  colour  waa  atao  eaaentially  a  monochnim  (furo.
Xpiiunor).  The  ueit  ttep  wot  the  outline,  tk*
"  pictura  lincoria,"  the  monogram  (fiavirffainuai) ;
thia  ia  aaid  to  have  been  invented  by  Philoclea  of
Egypt  or  Cleonlhea  of  Corinth,  but  fint  developed
in  practice  by  Ardicci  of  Corinih  and  Telephawi
of  Sicyon :  it  wat  the  complete  outluu  with  the
inner  markinga,  atill  withont  cfllonr  \  toch  aa  wa
find  upon  the  ancient  vaaee,  or  auch  aa  the  cele-
brated deiigna  of  Fiaiman,  which  ate  pcrfMl
monogramt.  Thuac  ontlinci  were  moat  probably
origiiwUy  piactitcd  npMia  while  ground  ((rwlran
kthivxaiaKf),  for  Pliny  rcmarki  that  ikej  wen
fint  coloured  by  Clfopbantut  of  Corinth,  wbonted
**  lata  trita,**  by  which  we  ahonld  perh«|ia  noder-
atand  that  be  waa  the  Srat  to  draw  them  upco  ■
colnured  or  red  gnnmd,  auch  aa  that  itf  the  naei.
(Pliu,  H.  N.  ii».  a.)
~"  itep  it  the  more  perfect  hnn  of  Ilia
illudcd  tn  above  ;  in  thia,  light  aad
re  introduced,  and  in  ita  mott  perhet  ttate
I  eveiything  that  ia  etaential,  a  peifecl
I  Theae  "monochromala"  were  prietiaed
tn  all  ^ea,  and  bj  the  grealeet  maateri.  Plinj,
ipeaking  of  Zeuiia  (,H.  N.  ixiv.  36).  aayi,  "  [uniit
■t  monochromata  ei  albo  j "  u  oUo,  tbM  ia,  in
gisy  and  gray,  timilar  to  the  aiMritawi  of  the
'laliant.  They  are  detcribed  by  Quintilian  (<L  3.
46),  "  qui  aingulit  piuxcrunt  coloribu^  ofia  Atauia
aiaeiiAbra,  aiia  rtdvijiora  feccranL'*  They  wero
painted  alao  red  in  red.  Pliny  {H.  tf.  xziiiL  39)
lelli  ni  that  the  old  maiten  painted  them  in  vn-
"' ibari  vetcret,  qua*  tti


locin:


pingebaa^"


n  red  k


that  aflcrnarda  the  rubrica  oi
labitituted  for  theae  eoleura,  being  of  a  moic  de-
licate and  more  agreeable  tint.

Hygiemon,  Diniat,  and  Charmadaa,  are  ukeu-
lioned  by  Pliny  (/f.  tf.  iiiv.  34)  at  havir«  beoi
fiunoua  ancient  nionochromiitt ;  theii  age  it  ml
known,  but  they  moat  probably  pncUacd  tka
lunpler  Asia,  auch  aawe  find  npon  the  moat  oneient
vaaea.  Four  monochnima  in  the  latta  ttyle,  nd
in  ltd,  wera  ditcovered  in  HereulaDcnM. (2«


PICTUBA.
JaMOi  fEnolimB,  ml.  i.  plitci  I,  2,  3,
Tbej  no  [■intingi  rf  i '  ' '


(idcnhle  mfrit  m  enrj  reniect,  but  tha  csloun
ban  been  narij  dntrofrd  bj  the  brat,  and  lbs
pirturee  ue  in  loma  pUcea  debced ;  tbej  ore
JiuDted  upon  muble.  Tbe;  vers  piobablj  all
•««nt«d  by  the  mne  artiit,  Alexander  of  Athena
AAESAN&POa  ASHNAIOl  ErPAtEN,  u  an  in-
■eri;«ion  npm  rmt  of  them  (pi.  I),  whichrepreient*
fire  fonalei,  vitb  their  namei  Mtaehed,  two  of
vrboD  an  {dajing  at  the  ancient  game  of  the  tali
iirrprra^c^s).  Thete  tableU  are  in  tha  col-
lection of  atKiatt  puntingt  ef  the  Moieo-Borbonico
at  Naplei,  No*.  403,  409,  410,  411.

Tbe  mit  md  lut  eueatial  ttcp  tovardi  the
Itan  deTelopment  or  cMabliibment  of  the  an  of
pajpthig  {iftypafla,)  <n>  the  proper  applintion  of
lool  auonn  m  aeeoidasee  vith  DitnTe.  Thii  ia,
faaweier,  quite  a  diatinct  pcoceaa  from  the  timple
uplieatiDn  of  a  rariety  of  cfJonn  before  light  and
aoade  went  ptnerly  midertiaod,  allhan^h  each  ob-

emaf  hare  had  iti  own  abaohile  colour. The
c^oor  of  an  object  ii  tbe  coloot  or  appearance


■odenrtoad  nnU  a  nrj  late  period,  but  there
1m  oc^aaiiin  to  apeak  of  Ihii  hereafter.  Probabl;
Bttmaiiu  of  Atbena,  and  certainlj-  Cimon  *  ef
Cleome,  beh»iged  to  the  claaa  of  ancient  telra-
cbramiala  or  pdychnmiat^  for  painting  in  a  lariety
ef  (olonra,  witbont  a  due  or  at  leaat  a  partial  ob-
Mrrasca  rf  &»  Uwi  rf  light  and  (bade,  ti  limplj
pfdyehroiij  ;  and  a  pictnro  of  Ihii  latter  deacrip-
tion  ia  a  much  mom  aimple  eSbrt  than  the  rndcat
fBCma  rf  tbe  nranochnm  in  cluaioiCDiD.  There  an
a  finr  example*  of  thii  kind  of  poljcbront  npon  the
moat  ancient  Taie*.  In  the  vorka  of  Eumama  of
Atfaena,  hoveier,  there  mtat  have  been  aome  at-
tentjon  to  light  and  thade,  and  in  thoM  rf  CimiHi
of  CleoDae  lUU  more.

IV.  PttnUiaff  in  Atia  Minor  md  n  Magna
Orania,  It  ia  aingolar  that  tbe  peema  rf  Homer
io  not  contain  an;  mention tl  painting  aa  an


re  preceded


*  Theaa  two  ramea  are  generally
with  each  ether,  but  Eamaine  moat  ha
Cinoii  aoiDS  time.  He  waa  the  irtt,
Pliny  {H.  N.  xttr.  84),  who  diatinguiahed  tbe
male  from  the  female  in  painting ;  ^  qui  primui  in
pictnra  marem  feminamque  diacnTOri^ . . .  fignma
(Kmea  imitari  auaum."  Tbe  moat  gbtiona  dia-
tinctirai  which  here  an^ata  itaeU  oui  aearcety  bo
alinded  to  by  Pliny,  or  Eomarua  mnat  behing  to  a
*cfy  euly  period,  for  we  find  that  diaiinclion  Tcry
decidedly  giTco  on  eren  ^le  meet  ancient  Tuaea,
wbcnera  the  figon  ia  mked.  That  Emnama
dared  oc  rentaied  to  imitate  all  figurea,  may  imply
tliat  be  made  erery  diatmction  between  the  male
and  tbe  (ouJe,  giTing  alao  to  each  aex  a  character-
iitic  iTrle  rf  deaign,  and  eren  in  tbe  compcaitiaoi,
drapoiea,  attitudea,  and  onnplexiona  of  hia  figurea,
deuiy  iHnitialing  the  diipoailioni  and  attribatea
rf  each,  exhibiting  a  nbiut  and  Yigoroua  form  in
tlu  male*,  and  niaking  the  (einalt*  alighter  and
mora  delicate.  Theae  qoalitiea  are  all  perfectly
eerapatible  with  the  imperfect  alate  of  tbe  art  of
erea  lo  eariy  a  period,  and  they  may  alao  be  xeiy
erident,  Betwithttanding  ill-arnnged  conpoiitian,
Mbctin  deaign,  oode  caloor,  lad  a  bud  and


PICTURA.  901

huitatiita  art,  nor  ia  then  mention  of  any  artiat,
ahnilar  to  Ilephaeitua,  who  might  reptearal  the
claaa  of  peinlera.  Thia  i*  the  mora  remarkably
aince  Homer  apeaka  rf  rich  and  elaborate  em-
broidery ai  a  thing  not  uncomnuHi ;  it  ia  anffieicait
ition  the  qilendid  Diplai  of  Helen  (A  iii
, .  in  which  wen  worked  many  battlea  of  the
Orceka  and  Trojana  fought  on  bei  account.  Thia
— ibroidery  ia  actual  painting  in  principle,  and  ia
ipeeiea  of  pamting  in  practice,  and  it  vaa  conai-
red  ancb  by  the  Roman*,  who  termed  it  "  pictnia
[tilii"  (Go.  yerr.  ii  4.  1),  "teitili  atragiOo,
ignilieia  operiboa  picio"  (Id.  T—c  t.  21);  that
ia,  painted  with  the  needle,  embnidered,  aaipietiK
(Ovid.  Mrt.  vi.  23  :  Vh^.  Aa.  ii.  £63.)  Tha
Tarioui  alliuiana  alie  to  other  atta,  nimilar  in
natnre  to  painluig,  an  mfficient  to  proTC  that  paint-
'  ig  mutt  hare  exiated  bi  tome  d^me  in  Homer'i
ime,  although  the  only  kind  rf  painting  be  notice*
I  the  **  nd-cheeked  *^  and  "purple.cheekedahip*^
(v^if  fu^Towippa,  IL  iL  637  )  riai  ^mramaff-
nrt,  Od.  li.  123),  and  an  irory  ornament  for  the
foce*  of  hofaea.  which  a  Maeonian  or  Carian  wo-
iiin  colour*  with  purple.  {IL  it.  141.)  The  de-
^riptiou  rf  the  thield  rf  Achillea,  worked  by
Hephaeitcit  in  Tariout-colound  meiala,  Btia&»-
torily  eatablithei  the  &ct  that  tha  plaatic  art  mnat
Lttained  a  conaiderable  degree  rf  deTciopment
time  of  Homer,  and  therebre  determines  alio
lialcnce  rf  tbe  ut  of  deaign.  {Andrinattitiii
Tpo^ut*.)

Painting  acema  to  hate  made  conaidnable  pro-
eu  in  Alia  Minor,  while  it  waa  aiil]  in  ita  inmncy
in  Greece,  for  Candaulei, king  DtLydia(H.c  716),
'  I  auid  to  hare  purchaaed  at  a  high  price  a  paint-
ig  of  Bularchna,  which  repreaented  a  battie  rf
le  HagncleL  (  Plin.  H.  JV.  xm.  34.)  It  would
nipear  from  the  expreiaion  rf  Pliny  (//.  A*.  lii.  39}
that  Candaulei  paid  the  painter  aa  much  gold  corn
ould  cover  the  plclnre.  It  nnat  be  confrued
tbe  tradition  la  very  doubtful  (*ee  Diet,  ef
Bicg.Eit-BviarAiit)  ;  but  thia  painting  of  Dulurchu*
:  an  iiolated  fact  in  eridenee  rf  the  early
ition  rf  painting  in  Aaia ;  there  a  a  remark-
able pataage  in  Eickiel,  who  propheaied  about
GOO  ■.  a,  relating  to  pictttrea  of  the  Aaayriana
(xiiii.  14,15);  " Men  poortrayed  npon  the  wall,
tha  imagea  of  tbe  Cbaldeiiia  pourirayed  aiik  iwr-
lottCwa,  girded  with  giidleo  upon  their  loina,  ex*
eeeding  in  dyed  aiHr*  upon  then  heada,  all  of  them
princea  to  look  to,  after  the  manner  of  the  BabylO'
-'ma  rfChaldao,  the  land  of  their  aatirity."

Tbe  old  Ionic  or  Aiiatie  pKnling,  the  "  genua
picturne  Aiialicum,"  aa  Pliny  (H.  M  xxxv,  10*
a.  36)  term*  it,  moat  pmbahly  ieiuiibed  at  the


tinned  at  an  indepeiiden


Bchool  notil  the  aiith


the  luniao*  kat  their  liberty,
and  with  their  liberty  their  art. Ilerodotua  (i.
mentiooa  that  when  HaraagDa  boieged  the
rf  Phocaea  (B.C  514],  the  inhabitant*  col-
lected all  their  valuabln,  their  atatuei  and  Totiie
ingt  from the  temjdet,  leaving only theit
paintitigi,  and  tach  wori^i  in  metal  oi  rf  alone  aa
conld  not  esaily  be  nmored,  and  ikd  with  them
to  tbe  ialand  of  Chloa  ;  &om  which  we  may  con-
clude that  painting*  wen  not  only  valaed by  tbe
Phocaeana,  but  alao  conmou  among  them. Ho-
rodoto*  (iv.88)  alao  infoimi  na  that  Mnvdndea  rf
Samoa,  who  conatnicted  lor  Dardna  Hyataapi*  the
teidge  ti  baalt  mm*  lb*  B«qr<>n*.jXe-  M8},


fl03  PICTDRA.

bad  a  pichin  punted,  rfprefmting  the  puugfl  of
Dareini'i  ami;,  and  the  king  Hated  on  a  tbrona
TBtiewing  tbe  trtwpa  u  thej  pnued,  which  Iib  da-
dialed  in  the  tampla  of  Hera  at  Samoi.

After  the  conqueit  of  looia,  Samoi  beama  the
■eat  of  the  art).  (Hend.  JiL  60.)  The  Heraeom
kt  Samoa,  in  which  the  |Hetiu«  of  Mandniclei  wai
placed,  wai  ■  genRal  depoeitorj  for  worlci  of  art,
and  in  the  ^me  of  Strabo  appean  to  hare  been
particularly  rich  in  (laintingi,  lor  he  larini  it  a
*•  picture-gal lei7 "  (*i™«S(iiii|,  iIt.  p.  637).
C(!n>ecn.ted  or  lolive  picture!  on  paneli  or  tableu
(rfrutt  itiKiiiiii'u,  oi  Tpn^ial  ivwHifiAu)  eon-
■tituted  a  eoniidcnble  portioa  of  the  int^iara
or  lotiie  offetingt  in  the  lemplei  of  Oreete,  matt
of  which  in  a  later  period  had  a  diitinct  building
or  galleiy  (otrtina)  attached  to  them  diipoied  for
the  reception  of  pictum  and  woTki  of  thi)  cbua.
(Pain.  i.  22.  S  4. 1.  35.  §  1,  2  J  Ath.  liiL  p.  606,  b-j
Stnb.  ii:  a.  S96.)

After  the  declioe  of  the  Ionian  art,  painting
flonrithed  amonft*t  the  Onekt  in  Italy  and  Sicily,
and  upecially  in  Crotona,  Sy)i«ri(,  and  TarantiUD.
Anitotle  (dt  Mini.  AoKult  c  99)  tpeaki  of  a
magnificent  cloth  or  pallium  (l/tiriiir)  of  Alcii-
thenn  of  Sybarii,  which  meaaured  15  cnbita,  wai
of  the  richeit  purple,  and  in  it  were  worked  tha
reprraeniationi  of  cities,  of  godi,  and  of  men.  It
came  atterwarda  into  the  pouetaioa  of  the  lynmt
Dionyiiua  the  elder,  who  lold  it  to  the  Carthagi-
nian! for  120  utenta.  Thii  ii  niflicient  cidence
of  the  eiiilcnee  of  ]sinting  among  the  ICalioi*,
and  cren  of  painting  of  a  high  degree.

Pliny  would  induce  us  to  believe  that  punting
wa*  eitabliihed  throu^out  Italy  u  early  Bi  the
time  of  Tarqniniui  Priacui  (H.  ff.  iitt.  6). He

and  •  naked  group  of  Helen  and  Atalanta,  of
beautiful  fonu,  painted  upon  the  wall  of  a  temple
at  LanuTium,  and  tome  paintinn  by  the  amc
iirtiii  in  the'tem;rie  of  Juno  at  Aidea,  accompanied
with  an  injcription  in  ancient  Latin  ehaincten,
recording  the  name  of  the  arliat  and  the  gratitude
ofArdeo. (»'.  A^.  iiit.  6,  37.)

V.  Paimliiig  n  Gma.  Cimon  of  Oeonae  ii
the  firtt  important  penonage  we  meet  with  in  the
history  of  painting  in  Greece.  Hia  exact  period
ia  rery  nncenain,  but  he  wM  probably  a  contem
poiary  of  Solon,  and  lired  at  leaat  a  century  before
Polygnoioa.  It  ia  not  at  all  necenary. »  Pliny
iuppoKB,  that  he  muit  hare  preceded  Bnlaithua,
which  would  place  him  Tery  mticb  cariier  ;  u  he
may  eaiily  hnTo  acquiitd  the  art  in  one  of  the
Ionian  cities,  Ibr  in  the  lime  of  Solon  there  w»  a
Tciy  eitensid  intercoone  between  Qi


coirm


The a


which  Pliny  and  Aelian  bear
mmcieni  lenimany,  ia  a  ainng  naaon  for  auigning
him  a  later  date  ;  but  hia  haning  been  conton.
porary  with  Dionyaina  of  Colophon,  who  imitated
the  worka  of  Polygnotua,  ia  quite  ont  of  the  quea-
tioa.  Thia  baa  been  inferred  from  the  occurrence
of  the  name  Cimon  in  connection  with  that  of
DtonyuDi  in  Sitnonidei  (Amiiol.  PaL  ii.  75B,  and
in  .^nwid.  iL  p.  eiS)  1  bat  at  HlUler  (JrciaaJi^
J  99,  1)  hai  obaentd,  Mliiiii>  ooght  to  be  thoe
moat  prohaUy  aabathuled  Ibr  Kf/ugr.

Cintsn  improved  upon  Che  inientioni  of  Eamant ;
ke  waa  the  Gnt  who  made  foreiborteninga  (eota-
frofJia),  and  draw  the  figure  in  a  Tariety  of  attl-
tndea  ;  be  finl  made  mmcBhi  artkabitiaDt,  Inli-


PICTOBA.

caled  tbe  Tsini,  and  gave  nstnnl  fblda  to  irtpitj,
IPWo.  H.  N.  IXXT.  U.)  The  terra  "  cmtapapha,"
which  Pliny  naea,  evidently  ugnifiea  any  obliqn*
view  of  the  figure  or  countenance  whatever,  whetbtf
in  profile  or  oChenriae  ;  in  teebuical  laa((iug>,/iin-

We  learn  from  Aelian  (  V.  H.  viiL  S)  tbat  Clarai
vai  much  better  paid  for  hia  vocka  than  any  of  hii
predcceuora.  Thia  alone  impliea  a  great  npentcity
in  hii  worki.  He  appeara  to  have  emandpaled
painting  from  lt>  orciuuc  rigidity ;  and  hia  nakt
probably  occupied  a  middle  place  between  tha
pniductiona  of  tbe  earlier  achool  and  thoae  of  Pol^
gnoloa  of  Thaaoa,

At  the  time  of  Polygnotua  (b,c^  460),  partlyoi
account  of  the  changea  which  took  place  in  Ike
Oieek  character  aubaequent  to  the  Peniaa  iniaaico,
and  partly  in  coneeqnence  of  hia  own  great  wuka
in  Athena  and  at  Delphi,  painting  attncted  tb*
attention  of  ill  Qreece  ;  but  pnvioua  to  thii  tinM)
the  only  dtiea  that  had  paid  any  eonaidsable  at^
tention  to  it,  were  Aegina,  Sic^m,  Coriothf  and
Athatu.  Sicyon  and  Corinth  had  Img  beat  bmoM
for  their  painlingi  upon  vaaca  and  npon  aniclea  of
furniture  ;  the  achool  of  Athena  wat  of  mneb  later
dale  than  tbs  othen,  and  had  attained  no  eiJebri^
whatever,  tutil  tha  arrival  of  Polygnetua  frta
Thaaoa  raiaed  it  to  that  pre-emineoca  wbicb,
through  variona  drcumatancea,  it  ccntiniied  to
mamtain  tor  mme  than  two  centuriea,  althoogb
very  lew  of  the  great  painteia  of  Oreece  were  na-
il hai  been  attempted  hitherto,  aa  fiir  a>  an
apace  would  admit  nI,  (o  trace  the  jm^miive  atep*
of  Grecian  painting  from  its  in&oey,  until  il  at-
tained that  degree  of  development  Rquiaite  to  en-
title it  to  the  name  of  an  independent  an ;  bat
before  entering  upon  tbe  couidention  of  the  paiai-
iog  of  the  Oreeka  in  ita  complete  derdapmnit,  it
will  be  welt  to  examine  both  their  tedmie  HitaiH*
and  their  mechanical  meana,

VI.  Ttdbiie.—  VMtia,  MaUnali,  it*,  (f^
luaa,  BAoi,  &t,  PoUai,  viL  128),  The  Oredta
painted  with  wu,  mini,  and  in  water  colanra,  M
which  they  gave  a  ptopcr  eonaiat^icy,  according  to
the  msteri^  npon  which  they  painled,  with  gum
(guami),  glue  (gliUmmm),  and  th*  while  of  tfg
(on'  oJtiuiea)  ;  gum  and  giue  were  tbe  moat  Mo-
mon. Il  doei  not  appear  that  Ibey  ever  painted

□nnrc^on  with  painting,  ia  the  amaS  qoaBlity

ch  entered  into  the  compoaition  of  emnatic  var-

,  to  temper  it. (Vitrutiua,  viL  9;  Pliu.  H.lf.

iii.  40.)  Theypaintcd upon  wood,  day,  plaater,

e,  parchment,  and  anvat  ( the  hut  waa,  accord-

. .  to  one  aoDunt  (Plio.  H.  N.  xxxt.  33),  Dal  wed

till  the  time  of  Nero  ;  and  tboi^  thia  MalcBent

ippean to be  doablfnl (**  depictam in tabah

«;xiriaeH  imaginem  nn,"  ((jaint  /mH.  Op.  ri.  1.  |

12  ;  lee  tlaoul-Roehetta,  p.  331).  tbe  aae  •(  ma-

rai  muil  have  been  of  tele  introduction,  at  then

a  no  mention  of  it  hi

Greek  painien  of  tbe  I

leinled  npon  panela  or  tablela  (ciiutt^

'  itae,  toMlat),  and  very  iwely  apto wmila ;

1  an  aael  aimHar  to  vbat  ii  now  tMsd,  waa

unon  among  the  aacienta,  wba  called  it  impitml

nXMot. (PoUu,  Tii. 139.) Eiwi  in  tb*

e  of  Pliny,  wb  - ■ ■

KMdmMe*^.  „ . .


PICTURA.
niK  «anm  qm  Ubnlu  pinien  "  (H.  N.  txn.  37) ;
tlikt  it,  that*  wbo  pBiDtsd  hiitorr  or  !Me  upon
puicU,  in  what  it  tanned  the  tiiitiffic  or  grnt
•Ijle,  the  mi!falagn^ilaa  of  VitruTiiu  (tiL  *,5\
and  [li*  xfvrrrffo^  eC  Plntuch.  (ArtU.  13.)
ThsK  pnncli,  wbin  finiibvd,  were  liied  into  frsinci
of  YBrioiu  doCTiptiaiia  uid  nvteriaU  (Plin. /f.  A^.
XXII.  U),  ind  mcmied  in  wbUi.  (Plin.  H.ff.
ixxt.  10;  Cic  n  VfTT.iT.  SS;  Dig  19.  tiL  1. 1.
17.  g  3  1  HUllsr,  Ani.  f  319.  S  ;  ■»  Raonl-Ro-
dulta,  Sur  rEvxp/oi  d*  la  Pantart,  Ae^  ud  L»-
troDiie,  Liltta  iitm  An^ipain,  ic.,  worki  devoted
to  tha  diieuMwn  af  lUi  lobject.)  The  onumental
pBnel-painting  in tlie  honiei  of  Pompeii  ii  evi-

D  of  decofating  wbUl The  mud


PICTUEA.


»03


whic>


179).


wilh  eluilk  oc
wa«  tenned  KtimmiLa,  which  term  wu  applinl  4]k
to  th«  MMet  it«e]f  when  thnt  prepand.  (Snidai,
d  v. ;  it  irlfui  XtXiMWfiAv,  Athtnag.  I.  <.)

The  (Ijle  or  ceeCnun  med  in  dnwing,  uid  fei
AjtfEsding  the  vmr  cotoan,  pointed  at  ene  end  and
bnad  uid  flat  at  the  other,  wai  termed  Tpn^Ii  bj
tha  Oncki  and  ceatnun  l^  the  Romani ;  it  wai
gmcnll;  made  of  mataL Then  u


the  paintiua  of  HcrealaDC&m.  [AtMMta  d'Bm-
hmo,  Td.  iiL  pL  4£.}  Tbe  but  pcDcil  {ptncUlia,
fmieittmm)  wai  tenntd  irtryfaitit,  and  apparently
tiaa  ^aOler  (xfiCtir  Sii  t»  ^oOisB,  Timatiu,
Zm.  Plat,  t.  v.  XpaJrw:  lee  Letronne,  fwoaifu,
Jeurm.  dn  Sav.  Sept.  ISSf,  on  ths  meaning  of

Tba  aneienti  ued  aln  a  palette  ttrj  aimilar  to
that  uaad  hj  the  modema,  allhongh  it  appcan  that
there  it  no  abaolale  mention  of  the  palette  in  any
neitnt  author.  The  bet,  hawcTer,  ii  infllrientl;
attealed  by  the  figure  af  Painting  diacaTared  in  tha
ao^alled  Pantheon  at  Pompeii,  which  holdi  the
paletta  and  bnahei  in  her  leiFt  band. (Zabn,  Dit

■"■ ■  ■  ganiiUt

■■  — ia,)


paintb^  ii  repreMuted  holdint;
left  hand  whkb  appcen  to  be  a  palstte.  but  it
Doi^tll  deGoid  erea  in  the  otiginal.  (MDKum  of
Naplea,  No.  SB3.  "  U  femme  Peintre,"  Pomp^.
In  the  AmlitkUi  d^EreolamOt  it  ia  given  aa  a  female
eepjing-a  Hattnea,  to).  TiL  pL  1.)  In  the  groleaqne
dnwing  of  a  portnit-painter  at  work,  copied  by
Maaoie  (Im  Rumat  Je  Ponpii,  part  iL  p.  68}  fiom
■  pictnre  in  tba  Ctm  Canlina  at  Pompeii,  a  tmali
table  icrna  ai  >  palette  and  Mandi  cloaa  to  fail
right  hand  }  it  appear)  la  have  MTsnleen  diflerent
tintiaponiL  It  it  mott  probable  that  the  "  tabella  "
of  Pliny  and  the  vivdicur  of  Pollni  (or  enn  the
wirffar,  X.  £9) i^fied aba  |^etta  aa  wall  aa


The  andot  anlhoi*  baTe  left  aalan  mfomation

OMMening  tbe  media  ot  tebicle*  i*ifpAiiu)  oMd

by  the  painteii  ef  antiquity  than  on  any  other

natter  omnected  with  andMit  painting. Gmnnnd

wereeridenllyincainmaaaM. {PYm.  H./f.xtir.

2i  J  VitniT.  Til  10.)  Pliny  (ff.  N.  .iiL  20)  apeak*

pB  Doal  nadiil  lo  ptunten. The  Oracka  tacciTcd


it  fow  Perna.  (Dioac.  iii.  99.)  Ill  nbitanea  haa
been  analyied  by  M.  Pelletiei^  (tiee  Meiat,  Ditl.
Mcd.SoBi.)

Maatich,  a  reiin  of  the  Pidacia  Lenliacoi,  now
much  Hied  by  painteca,  ii  aUomentianed  by  Oiedt
and  Homan  wnlen  (Plin.  H.  ff.  lii.  86,  xxW.  28  |
Dioac.  i.S6  i  Thewhr.ff.il  n.  4)  )  the  beat  waa
praduced  in  the  Uland  of  Chioa.  It  waa  termed
piflnr  <rxvl>^  and  paarlxv,  alio  iKartaii  liar.
tIx?!,  Ttma  brntinama,  mOMtirit.  There  were  la-
rioni  kiodi  j  Pliny  mention*  a  kind  bom  Pontna
which  reiembled  bitumen.  Thii  nain  wai  not
improbably  mixed  with  the  Panie  wnx  ptepued
fw  painting  in  encaoatic,  for  the  Aisle  Raqneno,
_.!..  _..j.  ijj^y  eiparimenti  in  encatutie  (Saggi
lado  d^aa&a  arte  dti  Grtit  Ro-
Panna  1787),  aMCtta  that  it  amalga-
'ith  wax  {  tbe  nme '


e  paiDl


alio  amber  (oieaiHiai}  and  fhuikmcaueoT.olibanum
(n<H  moHmiam)  in  die  preparation  of  their  eolouti.
Pliny  (H.  N.  iiiir.  26),  ipaking  of  Terdigrii,
rema^a  that  it  wai  lometimea  mixed  with  fruk-
incenK!.  He  nln  mentioni  (liT.  35)  other  mini
and  lubatanee*  which  are  niefnl  to  painlera,  and
(xiiv.  22)  partinilai^y  turpentine  (T'mgtwtUn),
of  which,  aa  now,  there  were  fininetiy  Tariona
kindi.  (See  OeolTroy,  Maitr.  Mtd.  \  and  Etcnn.
Ti.  ad  Plin.  H.  N.  uiT.  22,  ed.  Lemalre.)

The  method  of  pnparinfi  wax,  iff  Punic  wax  (em
/'unm),  ai  it  waa  lenittd,  ii  preaarred  in  Plioj
(//.AT.  iii.  49)and  Dioaeoridei(iL105).  It  wa*
the  ordinary  yellow  wax,  poriBed  and  bleached,  by
being  boiled  three  diattnct  time*  in  aea-water,  wiu
a  mtiall  quantity  of  nitre,  applying  beih  watar  each
time.  When  taken  eat  of  the  water  the  third
time,  it  wa*  eorered  with  a  thin  cloth  and  phuad
in  the  tun  lo  dry.  Wax  thn*  purified  wai  mixed
with  all  ipeciH  of  coionn  and  prepared  fiw  paint-
ing ;  but  It  waa  applied  alio  to  many  other  uaai,  aa
polithbg  (Utnei,  nlli,  Ac.

Pliny  ipeaki  of  two  kindt  tS  bitumen  or
aiphaltom  (iir^aA.TDt),  the  ordinary,  and  a  whita
BabjlOTian bitumen  (H.A'.iiiT.Sl).  IlwBin»d
aa  a  lamith  for  bronae  italuea.  For  an  account  of
the  cotouri  u*cd  by  the  ancioit  painteia,  lee  tha
article  CoLonia,  and  John,  JUo/efw  dir  Allta,  &e.

Vn.  MtUadi  of  Paaiti*g.  Then  were  two
diitinct  rlnwn  of  punting  practiied  by  tbe  an-
dent!  ;  in  water  eoloun,  and  in  wax  ;  boih  of
which  wen  practiied  in  TarioQ*  way*.  Of  tha
former  the  prindpol  wen  freaco,  al  freico  ;  and  the
variou  kindi  of  diitemper  (a  ismpeia),  with  ({lue,
with  the  white  of  egg,  or  with  gumi  (a  guaaio)  ;
and  with  wax  or  reaini  when  theae  were  rendered
by  any  mean*  lehidei  that  could  be  worked  with
watar*  Of  the  latter  the  principal  wa*  through
Are  (IA  >ii|iir)  termed  encaoatic  (f/imtfTwii,
oHEDutHa). The  paintmg  in  wax,  ntpOTpuffa,  or

waa  diitioet  ftom  eiusnatic. Compua  Athenaeui,


•  Wax  b


ti'mm,  when


boiled  with  lareociilla  or  maitich,  according  to
Abate  Reqneno,  who  mixed  fire  onncei  of  maiiicE
with  two  of  wax,  which  when  boiled  he  cooled  in
a  baiin  of  cold  water  ;  turpentine  becomea  audi
whan  well  mixed  with  the  white  of  e^  and  water
The  yolk  of  egg,  wben  mixed  with  Tinegar,  ali(
fuakea  ■  good  woricing  rehicla  for  ihii  apeciai  ol
paintingi  but  it  dnaBotrequIn  water.

3«)^ - ,_,.-


AM  PICTURA.

».  p.  20*,  b.  ;  aipoyp«^  naTrrorofiATo,  whicti
u  disCiiict  from  Atont . .  ^ ,  ir  ^xti&fuvi  ypa^A-
luvm  tii  rvpiis.  Pint  Mor.  Attalor.  16.)

Freaco  ni  pnbably  lilile  emplojcd  b;  ihe
tscienU  for  woika  of  imiUitiTe  an,  bul  il  Rppsm
tg  bare  been  the  oidinary  method  of  timpty  colnur-
ing  walli,  eapecinil;  anmnitit  the  Romtini.  The
wollii  wen  diiided  into  compartmenU  or  poneli,
which  were  termed  abaci,  iSanit ;  the  compMition
of  the  itucca  ud  themcthod  oF  preparing  the  wnlls
for  pointing  ii  deecribed  bj  Vitxuriui  (rii^  3).
The;  tint  cohered  the  wall  with  a  layer  of  ordi-
nary piadir,  DTcr  which,  when  dry,  were  auccu-
•irely  added  three  other  layen  of  a  liner  quality,
mixed  with  aand ;  aboTo  Iheao  were  placed  aiili
three  Uyera  of  a  coiripoeitlon  of  chalk  and  marble
dutt,  the  upper  one  being  laid  on  beforo  the  under
one  waa  qnlte  dry,  and  lach  anccecdinji  coat  beina

that  the  whoto  maaa  formed  one  aolid  and  beautiful
alnb,  reaembling  marble,  and  wai  copahlB  of  being
detached  Irani  the  wallandlranaportedina  wooden
ftnmetoanydiauince.  (Vltrnv.  li.S  i  Plin.  ff.  N;
IIIT.4S.)  Vllruviuireraailia  (hnt  lhe«>mpoaition
of  the  ancient  Greek  walla  wai  »  excellent,  that
peraona  were  in  the  habit  of  cuttinff  away  alaba  Erom
tnem  and  conrertlng  them  into  lablei,  which  had
a  Tery  brnutirul  appeamnce.  Thii  scouring  al
freaco,  in  which  the  ailmira  wen  milted  >im)dy  in
water,  aa  the  term  impliea,  wai  applied  when  the
compoaition  wai  aiill  wet  (ado  ltdr>rio),aBi  on  that
account waa limited to  certain colouri, for  no

thai  have  not  alirxdyalind  the  te>'t  of  fire.  Pliny
{II.  N.  XXXV.  31)  mention!  thou:  coloun  which  could
notbe  in  employed:  Purpariaaum,  Indicum, Coem-
leutn,  Melinum,  Auripigmentum,  Appianum,  and
Ceruua ;  inalead  of  Melinum  they  uaed  Paiae-
tonium,a  white  fmm  Egypt,  which  wai  by  the  Ro-
mana  coniidered  the  beat  of  whiiea. [Coldrkb.]

freaco,  and  the  tedioui  and  expeniive  proceaa  of
preparing  the  valla,  mnal  have  effectually  excluded
»  from  ordinary  placei.  The  majority  of  the  walla
in  Pompeii  are  in  common  diatemper  ;  bat  ihoK  of
the  better  houiei,  not  only  in  Pompeii  fant  in  Roma
and  elaewhere,  eapccially  Ihow  which  eonititute
the  gnnuida  of  fnet^re^  are  in  freaco.  All  the
picturei,  howcTer,  ore  apparently  in  diatemper  of  a
■upcrior  kind,  or  a  gunixo,  but  ibe  impaalo  ii  of  <a-
rioui  qnaJitiea  ;  in  inme  it  appcara  to  liaTe  the  con-
lialency  of  oil  painting  without  ita  defocta,  in  othen

Ordinary  diatemper,  that  ia,  with  ghie  or  aiae,  la
probably  tht  moat  ancient  apreiea  of  pointing  7
man*  of  the  ancient  ornamental  frieiciand  painted
baui-rclievi  m  the  templea  and  mini  io  E;iypl,  and
■lao  many  of  the  moat  ancicDt  rcmauu  in  I  loly ,  are
punted  ia  thii  rnanoei.

The  freaco  walli,  when  painted,  were  eoietcd
with  an  «icau8tic  Taniah.  both  to  heighten  the
coloura  and  to  preaerro  them  from  the  injorioua
effect!  of  the  ami  or  tha  weather.  VilniKini  (iii.9)
deaoibei  the  pncaa  aa  a  Greek  practice,  which
(hey  lersied  natio'ij.  When  the  wall  wat  coloured
and  dry,  Punic  wax,  melted  and  tempered  with  a
liule  oil,  waa  rubbed  orer  it  with  a  bvd  bnub
(wto) ;  thia  waa  made  imaoch  and  cTen  by  apply.
in^  a  anUiriim  (imiiT^ar),  or  an  iron  pan ,  filled
Mth  lin  coala,  or«r  ttw  nilKe,  u  sou  la  it »


PICTURA.

waa  jut  Mctaarj  to  melt  the  wax :  It  wtt  itcn
mbbed  with  a  candle  (wax  P)  and  a  clean  linen
cloth,  m  the  way  that  naked  marble  atatnea  wm
done.  (Compare  Plin.  H.  N.  iiiiiL  40.)  Ilie
Abate  Requeiio  luppoaealliallhecaiidlea  wse  oaed.
aa  a  apeciea  of  delicate  cauteriom,  aimply  (0  ke«p
the  wax  aoft,  that  il  might  receive  a  pobah  from  tha
fticlion  of  the  linen  ;  but  it  ii  a  aabject  that  ftt-
•enti  conaidersble  difficulty.

Thii  kind  of  Tomiih  waa  applied  apparently  to
plain  walla  only,  for  Sir  Humphry  Dan  diacorovd
no  remaiiu  wlateTcr  in  the  Bathi  of  Tito*,  ot
an  encnuatic  vamiah  apon  paintmga,  althoagll  the
plain  walla  had  generally  tracea  of  a  red  lamitk
of  thia  deacriplion.  Neither  Plmy  not  Vilnnoa
mention  anything  about  colour,  but  thia  ia  endeUly
a  moat  limple  addilioo,  and  doe*  not  interfete  at
ait  either  with  the  )fflociple  or  the  application  o(
the  vamiah.  Paintingi  may  have  poaaibly  been
executed  upon  the  walla  after  they  wen  thna
tamiabed.

A  method  apparently  Tery  genenUj  pcaetiaed
by  the  Roman  and  later  Qreek  painlen  wat  Ka-
cnuatie,  which,  according  to  Plutareh  {L  c),  ma
the  moat  durable  of  all  melhoda  ;  it  waa  in  raj
little  uae  by  the  earlier  paintera,  and  waa  not
generally  adapted  until  after  the  tbne  of  Alexander.
Pliny  (//.  N.  ixiv.  39)  define*  the  tcm  thua:
"  ceria  pingere  ac  picturam  inorere,"  to  paint  witll
wax  or  wax  coloun,  and  to  bunim  the  picture  after-
wardi  with  the  caiiterium  ;  il  appean  (berdbc*  M
have  been  the  aunple  addition  of  the  procc**  of  Wa-
ing  in  la  the  ordinary  method  of  pointm^  willi  wmx
coloura.'  Ceraa  (waxei)  waa  the  ordinvy  tern
for  paintera' coloura  amangii  the  Rontana,  bat  raon
eapccially  encouatii;  coloun  and  they  kept  them
in  pnrtitianed  boxci,  a*  pBinteri  do  at  ttamL
("  Pictorei  loenlatu  magnaa  babent  arcuiaa,  nbi
™e,"  Varro,  da  fle  Am*,  iil  " "


when  colour  waa  required,  or  they  w
by  the  artiat  prcrioua  to  commencing  work,  yrora
the  term  cerae,  it  would  appear  that  wax  coniti-
tuted  the  principal  ingredient  of  ibe  cdourioj;
Tchiele  uaed,  but  thia  daea  not  neceaaarily  fallow,
and  it  ia  very  improbable  that  it  did  ;  thrre  mnat
have  been  a  great  portion  of  gum  or  irain  in  the
coloura,  or  they  could  not  hue  hardened.  Wax
waa  ntidcubtedly  a  moat  eaaeiitial  ingredient,  uicn
it  apparently  preventa  the  coloura  £mm  cracking  :
cerae  therefore  might  origuiilly  »ira|Jy  mean  coloor*
which  contained  wax,  in  conliadiatinction  to  Ihoao
which  did  not,  but  waa  afterwarda  aj^ied  gene-
rally by  the  Romona  to  the  ccdoun  of  paintera,  a*


*  There  were  variona  kind*  of  encanitie,  wiib
the  pencil  and  with  the  trttmrn  ;  but  the  difference
between  them  and  the  conunan  pnce**  in  which
the  cauteriura  or  heater  waa  aot  applied  cannot
hare  been  very  great,  for  Pauaiai,  wboae  atylg  wat
in  encauitic  with  the  ccatnun,  neTertheleca  m-
dertook  to  rcpaii  the  paintingi  of  Polygnotot  at
Theapioe,  which  were  painted  in  the  ordinary
manner  jn  water  coloura  with  tlie  pendL  Pliny
(H.  N.  TixT.)  in  enumcTB^g  the  moat  celebrated
painten  of  antiquity  apeaka  lepanlely  of  thoao  who
excelled  in  either  claai ;  ebap.  36  i>  dented  to
thoao  who  painted  in  lb*  ordinary  method  with


*ICTURA.

xbjSlathu(^.Ll.  lOOVApellcne
a  icribere  cerae."  Theiponge  (nrrri-jJa,
^Magia),  ipokra  of  by  Ftin;  tnd  other  writen  in
cMinHtioD  with  pajnling,  aSardi  mat  proof  that
pualing  in  mltr  eolourt  wbj  the  method  gHietallj
{ffactiied  hj  the  uxcLeut  paiDt^ra  ;  which  is  mlso
cambonted  hj  the  null  t«kI  pliiced  iIoh  to  the
palelte  ot  Ubls  of  the  portnil-paiDtiT  of  the  Cub
Cuolina  of  Pompeii,  eTideotl;  for  the  pntpoie  of
VMhing  hit  lingle  brush  in.  Senna  (Ep.  131.  6)
twtina  the  hcilitf  uid  rapidity  with  wliich  i,
painter  taliei  and  laji  on  hia  colnnn.  Tlut  wax
or  nain  ma;  be  naed  aa  Tebiclea  in  water-  colonra
hat  been  alieul  j  mentioned.

The  origin  of  enaxutic  painting  ia  unknown. It
wu  pnctiaed in two  irafa vitb the  ceitrum,

ner  vnh  the  pencil.  The  lait  method,  according
to  Plinj,  wu  applied  chiefly  to  ibip-painling  ;  the
coloon  wen  laid  on  hoL  Hit  woida  are, — "  En-
eaaalo  pingendi  doo  foiue  antiqaitiu  acnen  con-
MM,  cen,  et  in  ebon,  ceitro  id  eit  vinculo,  doiec
elaaata  jHngi  coeptrc.  Hoc  teitinni  loeeuit,  reio-
htia  igni  ceria  penkiUo  utendi,  quae  pictnra  in
naTihoa  nee  aole  nee  »ale  Tentiaqne  eormmpitnt,"
iH.ft,  utt.  41.)  Thii  paiuge,  from  ila  conciu-
nen,  pmenti  man  J  difficoltiea  "  Cera,  ceitro,"  that
ia.  in  wai  with  the  ceitnnn  ;  thil  <nu  the  method
«f  Paniiai ;  **  in  ebore,  cealro ; "  thii  mnit  hale
htta  ■  apedei  of  drawing  with  a  hot  point,  upon
iTocj,  fill  it  wu,  la  ii  diitiaetly  aaid,  withont  wax,
•■  oeia,  t<  in  ehore."  The  third  method,  "  reaolutij
igni  oeiis  pesicillo  ntendi,"  though  fint  employed
on  ihipt,  wu  not  neceaearilj  confined  to  >hip-
painting  ;  and  if  the  aaiertion  of  Pliny  ia  eormt.
It  rniut  lave  been  ■  Tefy  different  >tr'°  of  punting
from  die  abip-eolonring  of  Homer,  noce  he  layB  it
wai  of  a  iMer  date  ^an  the  prnxding  mcthodi.
The  "  inceramenia  naiimn  "  of  hlrj,  and  the  tvpo-
Tfrnfia  of  Athenaena,  nienlinned  above,  may  have
been  executed  in  thii  third  method  of  Pliny  ;  the
me  of  the  anteiium,  or  pioceaa  of  burning  in,  >i
hot  not  alluded  to,  bat  «uioe  lie  defined  encaoitic  to
be  **  cerii  pingere  ac  pictnram  inurent"  (ff,  N.  im
119),  ila  employment  may  be  nndentood  in  thii  cai
alio.  It  ia  difficult,  however,  to  undetiland  whi
effect  the  action  of  the  caalerium  could  have  in  tb
Mcond  method  (Hiiors,cn(ro),  which  woa  wjthont
«ax.  It  would  appear,  therefore,  that  the  deflnition
alluded  to  ii  the  explanation  of  thefirat  mentioned
melbod  only  ;  and  it  ia  probable  that  the  ancient
uelliods  of  painting  in  enonitic  were  not  only
tlttee,  but  aeverai ;  the  *<ata  of  Vilravini,  men-
tioned tiao  by  bimielA  ia  a  fourth,  and  the  varioui
mode*  of  ahip  painting  add  othen  to  the  nnmber.
Pliny  (H.  N.  ivL  23)  himiclf  ipeaka  of  "  «npi»»«,"
a  eompoution  of  wax  and  pilch,  which  waa  icraped
trata  ahipa  ;  and  it  ii  difficult  to  tiippoae  that  the
higher  elaai  of  encnuilic  ttai  practiied  with  the
OEitnnn  only,  lince  the  pencil  ia  auch  an  infinitely
more  eflicient  rnitrmnent  tor  the  proper  mixing  and
tmilieatiDn  of  colonn.  (K.ipiiiaatai  ri  ^(pAiiara,
MM  tttcaifO¥  riHfiaSiu  ritr  iriSoKtiv  a^HV,  Locian,
/h^.  7.  ToL  ii  p.  teS,  n.)  The  wax  painting
an  the  fictile  vaMi,  mentioned  by  Atheaaem  (v.
p.  200.  6),  can  have  been  icarcrly  executed  with
the  ceatnim  ;  and  it  ii  alio  nnlikely  that  it  waa
done  with  hot  colouri,  u  the  painting  otthe  "  fig-
linim  opna"  mentioned  hj  Pliny  (//.  jV.  invi.
4<)  may  have  been.  Bnt  aa  there  were  varioui
- ..:-!- =1,  it  follow*  that


friCTURA.  gos

the  eoloun  deiigned  for  thia  ipeciet  of  psintjng
wore  also  veriouily  prepared,  and  thoie  which
were  tnited  for  one  style  may  have  been  quite  un-
fit for  another.  All  thCK  ilylci,  however,  are
comparatively  aimplo,  comfared  with  that  of  Pao-
■iaa,  in  wax  with  the  ccilrum, "  cera,  ceatiu  ; "  and
it  ii  difficult  fi>r  a  modem  pmctitioner  to  under-
stand how  a  laige  and  valuable  picture  could  be
produced  by  inch  a  method  ,-  unlen  these  eolouia
or  cerae,  which  pajnten  of  thii  clau,  according  to
Varro  (Z.  c),  kept  in  partitioned  boiei,  were  a

rie*  of  wax  ciayoni,  which  were  worked  upon
panel  with  the  broad  end  of  the  ceslrum
(which  may  have  had  a  rough  edge)  within  an  out-
line or  monogram,  previooily  dmwn  or  cut  in,  with
the  pointed  end,  and  were  af^rwards  fixed,  and
toned  01  blended  by  the  action  of  the  cauterium.
Painten  were  in  the  habit  of  inxribing  the  word
Irimucir,  "  homt  it  in,"  upon  picturei  executed
in  encaoitie,  u  NikIiu  iriKouaii;  Avvlmt  int.
(Plm.  H.ff.  iiXT.  10,39.)


dentally  noticed.  The  cuilom  waa  very  genera]  j
ancient  statues  were  also  often  painted,  and  what
is  now  termed  polychrome  sculpture  was  very  cotn-
mon  in  Greece,  for  the  acrolilhic  and  the  chrys-
elephantine itataea  wen  both  of  this  deicriptiaii.
Many  worki  of  the  latter  clasa,  which  were  of  ex-
traordinary magnificenee  and  coallinns,  are  de.
■cribed  by  Pautaniai.  The  term  pclychromy,  thui
applied,  wu  ^>parenCly  imknown  to  the  ancienti  ^
thil  ipeciea  of  painting  ii  called  by  Plutarch
{Da  aloT.  Aikai.  6)  iyaSiiArmi  f/icaus'ii.Bnd  sp-
peara  to  have  been  executed  by  a  diitinct  class  of
artists  (iyaX/uiTHV  tyiiaarrJi),  They  are  men-
tioned bIh  by  Plato  {De  Krjmil.  iv.  i20.  c),  ol
irifiiirria  tpi^vrtit:  and  if  it  is  certain  that


»ji,  ■


marici,  that  it  ia  natbynpplyiugarich  or  beautiful
colom  to  any  fartienlar  part,  but  by  giving  ils
local  colour  to  each  part,  that  the  whole  is  made
beautiful  (i\A'  tiSf*i  t\  ri.  ifmrfiKorra  iiciimut
iwaOirrn,  -ri  iKw  JcoAkr  woioffu r).  That  thil
was,  however,  not  a  general  practice,  ii  evident
from  the  dialogue  between  Lyciuus  and  Poty.
stratus,  in  Lucion  (Imag,  &~-9),  where  it  ii  clearly,
though  indirectly,  itated,  that  the  Venui  of  Cni-
dua  by  Praiitelei,  and  other  celebrated  llatuei,
were  not  coloured,  although  they  may  have  been
omamenled  in  parts  nod  coTend  with  an  enauatio


they  were  perhaps  originally  coloared  more  from  a
love  of  colour  than  frmn  any  design  of  improving
thereiemhlonceof thereprcientation.  TheJnpiler
of  the  Capitol,  placed  bv  Tai^uiniui  Priicna,  waa
coloured  with  minium.  (Flln. //.»'.  xixv.  4£.)  In
later  timea  the  custom  aeemi  to  have  been  reduced
to  ■  system,  and  was  practised  witb  more  reserve.
Considerable  attention  atao  seems  to  have  been
paid  to  the  effiect  of  the  object  as  a  worit  of  art.
Praxiteles  being  uked  which  of  his  marble  works
he  moitadmind,  answered,  those  which  Niciaihad
had  a  band  in,  **  quibus  Niciai  mnnum  admo-
viiiet,"  u  much,  nys  Pliny  (ff.  JV.  xixv.  40),  did
he  attribute  to  his  circumlitia.  Nicios,  there-
fore,  who  painted  in  encaustic,  leemi  w  hit  youA


being  Bjraliot


sot  PICTURA.

to  luiTa  b««B  as  ir/^ii4na'  iyiuaiaTtt,  <u  painter
(^■tatiua,  md  from  the  approrBl  of  Pmilalu,
ucelled  ipputull;  in  thii  ducriplion  a[  fMndng
of  colouring.

Thii  Tie*  differ)  reiy  iiuit«riall;  from  thaw
which  hsTe  heen  hithirta  adiaactd  upon  thia  tub-
jeet,  but  it  haa  Dot  been  adopted  wiiluut  DuUuie
coniidemtion.

In  ths  "  circatnlitio'"  at  Niciaa,  the  naked  form
irni  moat  probabi;  merely  vamiibed,  the  colomiog
pplied  ool;  to  the  eyea,  ejehiowa,  lipi,  and
the  draperi»,  and  the  tbtidu  omameDta  of
dreat ;  and  there  can  be  litda  doabt  that  fine
alatuea,  eapecially  of  femalea,  when  carefully  and
taaiefull J  colouied  in  thii  say,  muit  hare  been  ei-
tiemaly  bsaatiful ;  the  encauilic  Tanitb  upon  the
white  marble  miiit  hare  had  lery  much  the  (Sect
of  a  pale  Iianaparent  Seih.  Oold  waa  ilao  abun-
dantly employed  upon  Bacient  atatnea  ;  the  hair  of
the  Venui  deMediciawaa  gilded,  and  iDiome,gtaaa
sycBaiideyeIuhe«ofcajqierwerainKrted,examplea
af  which  are  itill  (itant.

The  practice  alao  of  adooring  architecture  aeemi
to  haTe  been  uiiTenal  amongst  the  Greeka,  and
Tory  general  amoonl  the  Komaaa.  It  ii  difficult
to  define  siactly  what  the  ayitem  waa,  for  there  ia
tcareely  any  notice  of  it  in  ancient  writen  )  a  few
caaual  remarki  in  VitruTiua  and  Pauaaniaa  are  oil
we  poiaea*  of  any  value.  Out  informatioa  ii  drawn
chiefly  fi-om  the  obaerratiaai  of  modem  tiSTeUeca  ;
for  tracea  of  colour  have  been  found  npon  rnoat  of
the  arehitectural  mini  of  Greece,  and  upon  the
■oclent  Dionuncnla  of  Italy  and  Sicily  ;  but  with
tite  eiception  of  the  Doric  ruina  at  Corinth  and  the
temple  of  Aegina,  which  are  not  of  marble,  the
colouring  waa  confined  to  the  moulding  and  other
omamentB,  the  frieiei,  the  metopea,  arid  the  tym-
pana of  the  pedimenta.  The  eiterior  of  the  wall
of  the  cella  of  the  Aeg^  temple,  and  the  eolumna
of  the  Corinthian  mioa,  were  cohered  with  itucm
and  GolouTBd  red.  It  doea  not  appear  that  the  di-
terior  wulla  when  ot  marble  were  ever  coloured,
jbr  no  tracet  of  colour  have  been  found  upon  them.
At  an  early  agi^  before  the  uae  of  marble,  when
the  temple*  and  poblic  edificea  were  conitructed
moitly  of  wood,  the  uaa  of  colour  mnit  haie  been
much  more  coniideiUihle  and  leu  tyitematic  ;  but
during  the  moat  refined  ages,  the  culooring,  other-
wiie  quite  arbitrary,  appcan  to  have  been  ttrictly
confined  to  the  rxnamHital  parti.  From  the  tiscea
found  upon  ancient  monumenta  we  are  enabled  to
form  a  rery  Udeiable  idea  of  the  ancient  ayitem  of
deconting  mouldinga.  They  were  painted  in  va.
rioui  wayi  and  in  a  grcftt  Taricty  of  colour),  and  a
taateflil  combioatioD  of  colour)  mnit  have  added
greatly  to  the  effect  of  eren  the  richut  mouldingi.
The  ordinary  decoratlene  wtre  foliage,  ova,  and
bead) ;  but  upon  (be  larger  mouldlngi  on  which
lolime  wai  [ainted,  the  ouilinei  of  the  leaica  were
firat  CDgnTcd  in  the  itone.  Gilding  and  metal
work  wore  alio  ialroduced,  particularly  in  the
Doric  order  ;  the  archiuare  of  the  Farthenon  at
Athena  wai  decorated  with  glided  ihblda.  Frlezei
that  were  adorned  with  aculpuire  appear  to  hate
been  iniariably  eolaured,  ai  alw  the  tympana  of
the  pedimenta  ;  in  the  Parthenon  theu  parti  were
of  a  pale  blue,  in  aome  of  ths  Sicilian  monumcuta
red  haa  been  fbnnd.  Some  interior  polychronw
cornicoa  of  Pompeii  are  giieu  in  the  work  of  Zahn
(i)HiaiDiu(«0nUBUiaU,^c;,pl91).

Id  later  timea,  amoDgat  the  Koman^  the  jnctiea


PICTUHA.

of  eohnring  bnildinga  aeeina  to  b

into  a  mere  taita  for  gaudy  coloun. Pliny  and

VitniTiu)  both  repealedly  deplore  the  eraiupt  taate

of  their  own  timea. Vitruvina  (lii.  5)  obaerrea

that  the  decorationt  of  the  ancicnta  were laita-

teatly  laid  aalde,  and  that  atrong  and  nndy  colour-

ing  and  prodigal  eipeow  were  aubatituted  for  ibe

beautifiil  effectj  produced  by  the  ikilt  of  the  incient

artiat^ Pompeii,  with  much  that  ii  chaitc  and

beautiful,  haa  many  trace*  alao  of  what  Vitnttisi

and  Pliny  complain  oC Plate  99  of  Zahn  affixda  a

lutiful  ipecimen  of  the  ancient  wall-painting  of

mpeii,  in  conrta  and  interior!. For  a  tkirSwr

»unt  of  thi)  an^ect,  aee  Kugler,  "Ueber  die

Jchnunie  der  Gciechlachen  Anihitectur  oiid
ptur  und  ihre  Orenaen,"  Beriin,  1635.

IX..  VoM  Paijtting.  The  fictile-iaae  painting
of  the  Greeks  wu  an  art  of  itael^  and  waa  piac*
tiaed  by  a  diatlnct  clan  of  artiita  (Aiiatoph.  EaL
SSS,  936,  Bakker),  who  mou  bare  required  a
peculiar  initnunion,  and  probably  exerciaed  their
art  according  to  a  {racriW  ayitem.  It  ia,  bow-
ever,  impoaaible  to  lay  anything  poaitiTO  r^ardio^
the  hiatory  of  thii  bivi^  of  ancioit  paintings  aa
icarcely  aoythbg  ia  known.  The  deaigna  npon
■^  I  Taaea  (which  the  Gneki  tamed  Xfucvin)
been  Tarioutl  j  interpreted,  but  they  h«Te  been
generally  coniidered  to  be  in  aome  way  caonected
~'ith  the  initiation  into  the  Eleuainian  and  oUter
lyiteriea.  (Lanzi,  £U'  Vati  Amtidii  dipmdi
Chrittie,  Diapdaticmi  if»*  lit  pamM  Grmk
Vata  !  Battiger,  Idtn,  die.)  They  wen*  gina  aa
prize)  to  the  victora  at  the  PanatheaacA  and  otber
gamei,  and  aeem  to  have  been  always  buijed  wiib
their  owner)  at  tbeir  death,  fi>r  tbey  have  b«B
discoveted  only  in  tomba.

Vaa)  painting  lanugt  be  adduced  to  detanniiM
the  goieral  natnra  or  cbaractei  of  ancient  p°'"t'ig
live  art ;  though  the  nida  de-
algni  upon  tho  me)  throw  couuderablo  light  npon
the  progieasiTa  development  of  the  art,  a)  rdaiea
to  ttjie  of  deiign,  and  in  aom*  device  upon  tlie
principle*  of  Grecian  composition  oftha  early  timea;
but  their  chief  interest  and  value  conalat  in  the
faithful  pictute*  they  afford  of  the  traditiooa,  □

Thee
to  the  potteries,  or
the  TSiea  were  made  ;  or  themaelvea  coaatftuted
distinct  bodies,  which  from  the  geMcal  aiauiaritj
of  ttyle  and  execution  of  the  design)  npoo  tlia
vaiei,  is  not  improbable.  They  do  not  accm  ts
have  been  held  in  any  eiteem,  for  their naaie*  hsT*
not  been  preserved  by  any  ancient  writer  ;  aod  it*
only  know  the  nameaof  ven  few,  &am  their  btdng
inscribed  upim  the  vuea  themselvta,  aa  Talaidea,
Aasteai,  Laiimoa,  Cailiphon,  and  a  few  olheta.
(MUlin,  Pantara  dt  Vata  AttHjaf,  voLl  pL&
pi.  14.  to),  ii.  pL  37.  pL  fil :  UilUiutti,.daB.  Vmad.
ilf«.pL27.}

The  WOTdi  KaKit  and  aXfi,  fboad  fi«qnait]j
upon  the  ancient  tasea,  are  eipbined  to  be  aaaapl*
acckmntions  of  praise  or  approval,  aappcaed  to  be
addreaied  to  the  person  to  whom  the  vaae  wa*  pre-
sented ;  tho  words  are  fmjuenlly  pceoeded  or  bil-
lowed by  a  Dame,  evidently  that  of  the  psaoD  tor
whom  the  vaae  was  designed.  The
also  4  ■<>'>  kbaIt  has  been  found  on  i
which  have  [oabably  been  deaigned  aa


CDiiDth,  and  thM  tho  ut  of  muiuiacluriDg  lua
bcgu  to  dediua  lomrdi  ihe  rei^  of  Trajan,  and
uTiTBd  ■(  iu  hat  period  aboat  tfaa  time  of  the  Anlo-
uina  and  Septimiiu  Sarnm-  Vue  painting  hid
•TidroUf  ciaioi  long  befoie  tba  timi  of  Piin;,  for
in  ia*  tinos  the  paint«d  Tam  wen  of  munenae
-ndne  and  wars  much  aought  liW  ;  hnl  the  monii'
bctan  of  ihe  laaea  thuuKlvai  spptsn  to  hate  bean
(till  citeDaire,  Sat  he  hinuell  mentiona  tirteen
«lBbn(cd  poluriei  of  hit  owd  tima,  eight  in  Jtalj
and  iix  elaewhere.  The  laaea,  however,  appesr  to
kaTc  been  mcnlj  ramarkabla  for  the  fineneaa  or
diuabili^  of  the  claj  and  the  elegance  of  their
ibapca.  (n.iV.iiiT.  16.)  For  tile  compoaition  of
tba  claj.  with  which  theae  fictilia  wen  made,

Etn  in  (be  linis  of  the  empire  sainted  yaiea
was  tanned  **^wria  antiqni,"  and  wera  then
aought  for  in  tba  andanl  tnmba  of  Campania  and
otka  put*  of  Ha«na  Oraecia.  Soeloniua  (JuL
Ova  61)  Bwntinna  the  diacorerj  of  aome  raae*  of

1  the  time  of  Jnliua  Caour,  id

la  to;  ancient  tflmbi  M  Capia.
It  il  alao  nmariuMe  that  not  a  lingle  painted
Taa«  baa  beeD  yet  dtiooTered  in  either  Pompeii,
Hdcolanenm,  oi  Stabiae,  which  ia  of  itielf  almoit
•nffident  to  pnre  that  T»e  painting  waa  not
piactiaed,  and  alao  that  painted  vaaei  wen  ei-
tremcl;  acarce,  Wa  ma;  form  aame  id(«  of  their
immenae  laloa  from  the  alatemcnt  of  Plin;  (II.N.
xxiT.  <fi),  that  they  were  more  Taluahie  than  the
Uutrb'uie  naca.  [MtiimaiN*  Vasa.]  The  paint-
ingi  oa  tba  vaiei,  considered  oa  work)  of  art,  vary
cxoeediogly  in  the  detail  of  the  execution,  allhough
in  Mjle  of  deiigD  thej  maj  bo  airaoged  in  two
prindpal  claaaea,  the  black  and  the  yellow ;  ibr
tboio  which  do  not  come  alrictly  under  either  of
tbew  bcadii  are  either  too  few  or  lary  too  ilightly
to  rm^Dire  a  diaUnct  claaaificatLon.  The  majority
of  the  Taaea  that  haia  been  aa  yet  diacoTcnd  bare
been  toondi,  in  aadant  tombi,  about  Capua  and
Noh.

The  black  laaei,  or  thoie  with  the  black  figorea
npco  the  itatned  nddiab-jellaw  Uina  cotts,  the
beat  of  which  wen  linuid  at  Nola,  are  the  mott
apcieati  and  their  illiiitnlioni  contiat  princi[aliy  I
of  icpretBitationa  from  the  early  mytholc^^ol  tn-
ditiona  ;  bnt  the  atyle  of  theeo  Taaea  waa  aome-
limaa  imiUled  by  inter  artiala.  (Plate  SE,  vol.  It.
of  D'Haucarrille  ia  an  example.)  The  inferior  ai-
aa^ilea  of  thia  claai  baie  tome  of  them  tiaceaofthe
Biafhia  er  ceatium  upon  them,  which  appaar  to
Mie  bean  made  when  the  day  w>*  itill  aoft  j  Mme
alao  bate  line*  or  •cntcbea  apon  the  Sgurea,  which
hava  bMn  added  when  the  painting  wu  completed.
The  atyle  of  the  deaign  of  tbeae  black  figurea,


PICTURA.  907

laFt:  TON  ABENEOH  AAAON  EHl,  T&f  'Atif

riuy  iBKtr  fifil,  "  I  am  (he  piiie  dt  the  Athe-
naea"  (Panathenaea).  It  ii  luppoaed  to  be  of
the  time  of  Solon.  (Millingen,  Ame.  Vfd.  Mom.
pLl.) .

The  latet  with  (he  yellaw  monograma,  or  nther
the  bUck  DtODOgramt  npon  the  yellaw  grounda,
conttitate  the  mau  of  ancient  vaiea.  Their  illua-
tiBtiona  are  executed  with  Tarioua  decree!  of  merit :
thoae  of  inferior  execution,  alao  of  this  class,  ha?e
traced  of  the  giaphifl  upon  them,  which  appear  to
bare  been  drawn  upon  the  soft  clay  ;  the  only
coloiti  upon  theae,  independent  of  that  of  (be  day,
ia  the  dark  back-gronnd,  generally  black,  which
randera  the  figurei  very  prominent.  Tiie  dcaigna
upon  the  better  Taaea  are  alao  merely  monagramt,
with  the  naual  dark  back-gronnda,  but  there  is  a
•ery  great  difference  between  the  execution  of
theae  and  that  of  thoae  juat  alluded  to  ;  then


.  .ijii

auy  a  porpla  tint  instead  of  ttie  black  ^
tion  of  a  red  aaah,  or  white  Teit,  azid
aometime*  ■  white  face  and  white  handa  and
feeL  A  canons  and  intcreating  example  of  this
kind  of  polfchiDm,  in  black,  red,  and  white,  waa
diaDOiend  near  Atheni  in  1813,  representing  on
one  aide  a  Minerra  with  a  ipeac  and  ahield,  in  the
Daadalian  i^le  ;  and  on  tba  reverse,  in  a  aomc-
vbat  better  style,  a  yoosg  man  driiing  a  biga
of  nasi  ancient  cmstruction ;  it  ia  suniosed  '
rcpieaeat  Erichtboniua.  Near  the  Mlnerta
tba  faUowiDg  imcnptton,  wiitleo  from  right


Cjet?)  (-...,

ia  indelible  when  used  on  this  kind  of  eanheuwara.

<H.  JV.  xxiTL  34.)

Tba  best  of  these  Tasea,  which  probably  belong
to  about  the  time  of  Alexander,  are  conspicoaua
for  a  Teiy  correct  style  of  deeign,  although  they
are  inTariably  caceleaaly  execute^  eapecially  in  the
extremitiea,  but  exhibit  at  the  same  time  a  auiprit-
ing  bcility  of  hand.  Tlie  celebrated  yaae  of  Sic
W.  Hamilton's  coUeetioD,  now  in  the  Bdtiib  Mu-
Benm,  the  paiotrnga  of  which  represent  Ilerculea
and  hia  comfoniaiu  in  the  gardens  of  the  Hope-
rides,  and  the  nee  of  Ataluita  and  Hippontenet,
eihibila,  for  design,  compoiitioit,  and  executiou,
perhaps  the  Gneit  apedmen  of  ancient  lase  paint-
ing that  haa  been  yet  discoTered :  the  stylo  of  de-
sign is  perfect,  bnt  the  execution,  though  on  the
whole  laborious,  ia  in  many  purta  lery  careleaa.
(D'HancarTille,  platea  127,  128,  139,  130.}

There  ^peara  to  be  no  example  of  the  mon
perfect  monochnm  (see  No.  III.)  upon  ancient
vaaea.  and  exnmplei  of  the  polychrom  are  Tery
Sir  W.  Hamilton'*  collection  there  are  a
iplei  in  which  Tarioua  colours  have  been
added  after  the  radinary  monogram  has  been  com-
pletvd,  for  they  are  not  mcorporated  with  the  vaae,
~i  the  tjack  and  ground  tints  are,  but  are  aubject
1  scale  and  are  eaaily  nibbed  off.  They  consist  of
rhite,  red,  yellow,  and  blue  coloon.  Theae  Tssea
re  apparently  of  a  later  date  than  the  aboTe  ;  (or
the  style  of  design  is  reiy  inferior.

The  Muaeutiia  of  Naples,  Parii,  Loudon,  and
her  cities  a&rd  abundant  examples  of  theae  ao-
ent  lasea  ;  the  Museo  Borboaico  at  Naples
>ntains  ^one  npwirda  of  2500  apecimcni.  The
ibjecta  of  the  iUuatraliona  are  ahnost  always  con-
nected with  ancient  mythology,  and  the  execution
is  generally  inferior  to  the  composiiiDn.

No  opinion  of  the  style  of  the  designs  upon
ancient  Taaea  can  be  formed  from  the  generality  of
the  great  works  purporting  to  illustrate  them,  which
haTe  been  published  of  late  years.  Very  few  are
at  all  accurate  in  the  lines  and  proportions,  etpo-
cially  of  the  extremities  ;  and  in  some,  even  tbe
oompoution  it  not  faithfully  imitated,  Thii  i*
particulacly  the  case  irith  the  splendid  works  pub-
lished b^  Dnboia-HaisioaDeaTe^  Uiorde^  and  SMoa


908  PICTURA.

othen,  tn  which  Ihe  illiutnitiDni  (tro  Sravn  witli  ■
ore,  prednan,  tai  uuifoimitY  of  chArocter  quite
fonign  te  the  pkintinga  on  the  Tawa.  The;  ail
appear  to  be  drawn  rather  according  lo  tominiiD
and  perfect  itandsrdi  of  the  diSerent  itjlei,  Ihui
to  be  the  ^thftil  iinJCadens  of  diitinct  original
dnigni,  Flst«i  3J  and  2E  of  the  Gnt  Tolnme  of
MaisionncuTe^  purporting  to  be  &]thful  imitationB
of  the  deiign  upon  tha  celebnled  Nola  Tuc,
<in  the  MuHum  at  Naptei,  No.  1B16,)  repre-
■enting  a  Kene  &om  the  dnlniction  of  Tro;,  bear
but  lillle  niemblance  to  the  original  Thji  remari:
li  npplicabU  al(0  to  the  vak  of  D'llancarrille  and
other  earlier  prodnctiona,  bnt  in  a  lew  dwree.
Perhapt  the  work  which  iliiutrate*  moil  faithAdl;
the  ttyle  of  the  deti^  apoo  ancient  -met,  aa  &r
u  it  goea,  ia  that  ui  conno  of  pahlication  hj
Oerhnid  (Amerlaau  GriuMKAt  VturiAiMer,  Ber-
lin 1S39).  The  apccimeni  alio  of  ancient  paintingi,
publiahed  h;  Haoul-Rochetto  {Pmnliim  Aidiiitei),
have  e*eT7  appearance  of  being  &ithfiil  imitaUcni
of  the  otiginala.

X.  Rtmaim  q^  Asatid  Falniing.  There  ii  a
general  prejudice  agUnil  the  opinion  (lut  tlie
painting  of  the  Grecka  efjuallcd  their  aculptnn  ;
and  the  earlier  diacOTeriea  of  the  remaina  of  ancient
paintinga  at Pompeii and Hercnlanenm  t«nded

The  itflcof  Ibe  pointing!  ditcovcrcd  in  theaeciliea
WHi  condemned  both  b;  Pliti;  and  Vitrtiiitii,  and
Tet  almoat  ever;  ipeciei  of  merit  may  be  diacorered
in  them.  What  therefore  nnit  bare  been  the  pro-
ducliana  which  the  andanta  tbenuelvea  eateemed
their  immortAl  worka,  and  which  aingly  were  eati-
mated  equal  to  the  wealth  of  citiea?  (?^  fT.N.
i«v.  32.)

Theae  remain!  of  Pompeii  and  Herculanenni  in-
dnced  Sir  Joehua  Hcpialda  to  form  a  decided
opinion  upon  ancient  psunting.  He  remariia  {NoUt
ta  Fnm,  37),  "  From  the  lariona  ancient  paint-
inga which  hare  come  down  to  na  we  ma;  form  a
judgment  with  tolerable  accuracy  of  the  eicellenciea
and  the  defecta  of  the  arti  aniangat  the  aocienti.
There  can  be  no  doubt  hot  that  the  suns  correct-
neai  of  deaign  waa  required  from  the  painter  aa
and  if  what  baa  happened  in


thecaa

gard I


;alptare,  ha
ir  pointi


.  tikew
and we


1 the  good


s  what  the  ancienta  their
:mcd  their  maatcrpiecei,  I  bare  no  doubt  bnt
we  ahould  find  their  fignrea  aa  correctlf  drawn  aa
the  Laocoon,  and  probably  coloured  like  Titian."
Thia  opinion  haa  been  further  confirmed  hj  later
diacoToriea  at  Pompeii }  eapeciall;  b;  the  great
monic  of  the  Caaa  del  Fauno  diacovered  in  1831,
■uppoaed  to  teprcaent  the  battle  of  liana.  (_MoMae,
No.  XV.)  Bui  the  beaut;  of  ancient  aeulpture
alone  ia  iucif  a  pofferM  advocate  in  faTour  of  thia
Dpiaion  ;  for  when  art  hai  once  attained  inch  a
dearec  nf  excellence  aa  the  Orc-ek  acnlptnre  cTincea,
It  ia  evident  that  nothing  mediocre  or  even  inferior
could  be  tolerated.  The  principlca,  which  guide
the  practice  of  both  arte,  are  in  deaign  and  proper,
lion  the  lame  ;  and  the  >t;te  of  deaign  in  painting
cannot  have  been  inferior  to  that  of  acnlpturs.
Several  of  the  moat  celebrated  ancient  artitta  were
both  Bcnlptoia  and  pvntera ;  Pheidiaa  and  En.
pbianor  were  both  ;  Zeniii  and  Protogenea  were
Iwth  modeilen  ;  Po1;gnotua  devoted  aome  atten-
tion to  itatoar;  ;  and  Ljiippni  conanlted  Eupom-
puiiifona^leinicnlptnr^  The  deaign  «f  Plteidiu


PICTURA,

I  painting  cannot  ban  been  iif
lyie  CO  that  oF  their  aeulptun  ;  oar  aa
jiave  been  an  inferior  critic  in  hia  own
that  of  L;aippna.  We  hare  beaidea  ib«
leeiimiHi;  of  neori;  all  tho  Qreek  and  Ronoatt
writenof  er^  period,  who  in  goiimd  ipeak  men
freqnenti;  and  in  huher  term  of  paintiag  than  at
acnlptoR.  **  Si  qtud  geDOta  iatin*  modi  na  de-
lectac,  pictntB  delectat,"  anri  Cicem  (ad  Fam.  tu.
23).

The  occaiional  enon  in  penpeetiire,  detected  ik
aome  of  the  archilectmal  deeonliom  in  Pompeii,
have  bean  iMmned  aa  evidence  that  &e  Onek
painten  geneiall;  were  deiidtst  in  pecipeetiTe.
Thia  condnnon  b;  do  meona  follow*,  and  ia  entirely
confuted  b;  the  moawc  of  the  battle  of  Imu,  in
which  tha  perapective  ia  admiraUe  ;  in  many  oths
vorka  alao  of  minor  importance  the  per^tective  htt
been  carefall;  attended  to.  We  know,  moceover,
that  the  Greeka  irere  acquainted  with  penpectivB
at  a  very  eari;  period  ;  fiir  Vitnivina  (viL  pnef.)
aaya,  that  when  Aeachylui  waa  exhibiting  trage-
dies at  Athena,  Agatharchni  made  a  scene,  and  left
a  treatise  npon  it.  By  tbe  assiataiKe  of  thia,  De-
mocritna  and  Anaiagoraa  wrote  npon  the  aama
subject  (See  Diet,  of  Biog.  arL  AgaOankmi.'i
Thia  claaa  of  painting waa  ter


acenogiaph  (rniivypd^t).  (Dicg.  iL  12£.)  Se-
rapiun,  Endorua,  and  others,  were  celebrated  aa
acene-puntets.  <Ftin.  ff.MTXTv.  37.  40.)  Scom-
painting  waa  not  perhapa  generally  praetued  ontil
after  the  time  of  Aeschylna,  for  Ariatolle  {PoiL  4)
attributee  its  introdnction  to  Sophoclea.

The  most  i-oluable  and  the  moat  conaidoaUe  of
the  ancient  pajn^ga,  that  have  been  ;et  diaoovered,
are; — The  so-called  Aldobrundini  Mairiose,  Hoxie
Aldobiondine,  originail;  the  property  of  uie  Aldo-
brandini  family,  which  was  foiind  on  the  EaqniliBe
Mount  during  the  pontificate  of  Clement  VIII.,
Ippolilo  Aldobrandini,  and  waa  plaoed  by  Pins
Vll.  in  the  Vatican  ;  thia  pointing,  which  ia  <n
atnceo  and  contains  ten  rather  amaU  figorea  in  th»e
groopa,  ia  a  work  of  conaideiable  merit  in  ceanpoa-
tion,  drawing,  and  colour,  and  ia  execnted  with
great  freedom  <B(lttiger  and  Meyer,  Dit  Abb-
bramdvaMcit  Hcdxeii,  Dresden  MO)  -,  and  the
following  pointingi  of  tbe  Muaeo  Borbanico  M
Naples,  which  are  eonapienona  fiw  frndom  of  eie-
cution  and  genera!  technical  excellakce :  the  tvft
Nereida  found  ia  Stabioe,  Noa.  £61  and  S6S,  Cot. ;
Telepho*  nouriahed  b;  the  roe,  ftc,  Inini  Rem-
laneom.  No,  495  ;  Chiton  and  Achillea,  also  beta
Herculaneiini,  No.  730  ;  Briaeis  delivered  to  tbe
hciolda  of  Agamemnon,  from  Pompeii  (Sir  W.
OeU,  PontpewM,  pi.  39  and  40),  No.  684 ;  and
the  nine  Fonambuti  or  Rope-daiicen,  which  are
executed  with  remarkable  tkUl  and  (aciiit;.  (Una.
ilorb..  Ant  d'Ercol.,  and  Zahn  contain  engmiugi
from  these  works  ;  tor  fiicaimiks  of  aikcient  paini-
inga,  aee  "  Recueil  de  Peiatnret  antiqaea,  imittfea
fidetement  pour  lea  eenleun  et  iioar  le  ttait,
d'apris  Ics  desseins  colons  foita  par  P.  9.  Baiteli,"
ftc.  Paris  1 757,  folio.)

XI.  Pttiod  if  Deeebtpmmt.  —  EaaHiml  a^U.
With  Poiygnolua  of  Thaaos  (b.  c.  463)  pauntutg
was  fillip  developed  in  all  tbe  essential  prioeiplea
of  imilatHin,  and  was  established  at  an  intepaxlent
art  in  pnctka, The  wnka  <£  Pal;i&ota*  wan


for  enmwon,  cTuzActtf^  mnd  dwign  ;
the  iDon  minute  diicriniiiiatioiu  of  Une  mi  lool
colour,  united  with  dmulic  aHnptuitioD  and  eSeet,
wen  not  Kcotnpliihgd  aatil  &  later  period.  The
limited  ipue  of  thi*  (rtids  ntcniM-ily  ftnliidea
aojlhiDg  liho  >  gencntl  notic*  of  tU  the  nriooj
prodnctioni  of  Oreek  paintcn  incidentall}'  men-
lioned  in  lacieal  write™.  With  the  eioeption,
therefiTT,  of  ocdiiODBllj  raentianing  work*  of  ei-
tnwrdinuy  celehril;,  Uie  notices  of  the  vBrioui
Omk  jjointen  of  whom  tre  hare  an;  latialiKloij
koowledg*  will  be  reitncted  to  thoM  who,  b;  tha
qualtlf  or  peculiai  chanctw  at  Ibeii  work),  have
costribnted  towArdi  the  eitabllthinent  of  ooj  of
tha  TarioDi  itylet  af  pamting  pnctiied  hj  the  u-
cicDth  A  lUler  account  of  each  aitirtwiU  be  foond
nadei  the  Rtpetliie  oama  in  the  DiMomary  of
Crmi  amJ  Remum  Bugrapif.

Polygnotu*  i«  fivqueoily  meationcd  by  andeat
miten,  but  Iho  ^taga  of  moM  importanca  re-
lating  to  hi>  Wjle  aie  in  the  PoMka  of  Ariitotle  (c
Z  and  G)  and  the  lamguti  of  Lucian  (c  7).  The
notice  m  Pliny  <H1  A",  im.  35)  ii  veiy  cuiaory  ;
be  mentiDiti  him  amongit  the  man;  before  Olymp.
90,  tna  which  time  be  data  the  commencement  of
hit  hittiwy,  and  limply  gutea  that  he  added  mach
ta  the  Bit  of  painting,  inch  u  opening  the  moutb,
ihowing  the  teelh,  improiing  tlie  foldi  of  disperien,
painting  tranipareDt  veati  for  women,  or  giving
tfaem  Tmrioui  coJoured  bcad-dieatea,  Anitotle
apeaki  of  the  gmeiel  characttu  of  the  deiign  and
Ei|iR*uon  of  PolyRnottu,  Lucian  of  the  caloni ;  in
«hkb  mpectt  bom  wrjtenawaid  him  the  higbut
prwML  Ariitotle  (c  2),  ipeaking  of  imitation,
remarka  that  it  miut  be  either  luperior,  ioferior,  or
equal  to  id  model,  which  b«  illiutratei  by  the  caiea
of  three  painten :  "  FalyguoKu,"  ho  layi, "  painli
nni  beUec  than  they  are,  Pauaon  wane,  and
Dionjaiiu  u  they  are."  Thii  paange  allndet  eri-
deully  to  the  geneial  quality  of  the  deugn  of
Polygnolaa,  which  appean  to  haro  been  of  an  ex-
alted and  ideal  chaiacts.  In  aoother  paiiage  (c
6)  be  iHaki  of  him  as  an  iyaMt  Ifioypi^t,  or
>D  eieeltent  dalincalDT  of  moral  character  and  ei-
prenion,  and  aailgai  him  in  thii  leapect  a  com-
pieta  inperiorily  oiet  Zeuxia.  From  tbe  nwage
in  Laeian,  wa  nmy  infer  that  Polygnotni,  Euphn-
Dor,  Apaliei,  and  Action,  were  the  beat  colouiuta
among  the  andenti  according  to  tbe  general  opinion
(JipioTw  Pfirirrt  •tpinai'icu  ri  xp^l"""^  "'i  *"-
Kwifar  roifurftu  H)v  MSdAV  alrrm').  He  noticei
also  in  the  aame  paiiage  the  truth,  the  elegance,  and


n  chapter), (i,
25—31,  DiaL  i^Biag.  j.  e.)

Tha  r*'"'i"g  of  the  destruction  of  Troy  (and  Iha
other  wai  •imilarinttyle)  leemi  tofaaie  aonlained
three  rowi  of  fignna,  with  the  namei  of  each  written
near  them,  in  dialinct  groDpa,  coiering  the  whole
wall,  each  telling  it)  own  itory.bnt  all  contributing
to  rekto  the  tale  of  the  deatruetion  of  Troy.  It  ii
erid^n  fnan  this  description  that  we  cantkot  decide
upon  cither  the  merit*  or  the  demerita  of  the  eom-
positioii,  from  the  principle  of  art  which  guide  the
lulei  of  eompDsituin  of  modeni  timea.  Neither
pcfqieetin  aci  eompoailioii,  aa  a  whole^  ace  to  be
eipactod  is  tacb  waAi  at  thaat^  fw  tfaay  did  not


PICTURA.  S09

eonilitnta  nngle  eompoaitioni,  nor  wai  any  imily

of  time  or  action  aimed  at ;  they  were  painted
biatoriei,  and  each  group  wai  no  further  connected
with  it)  contignoua  group),  than  that  they  all
tended  to  illuitmta  diflerentiactaafthe  tameiloiy,

Polygnotua  hai  been  termed  the  Michel  Angela
of  antiquity.  Hit  etjle  wai  itrictly  etbic,  for  his
whole  art  aeenu  to  have  been  employed  in  illnt-
traling  tha  human  chanctei ;  and  that  he  did
it  well,  the  aumame  of  Eihognph  C^Seypii^t)
given  to  him  by  Ariitotle  and  othen  lufficiently
testifies.  Hii  principles  of  imitation  may  be  de-
fined to  be  tlioae  of  individual  repreaentation  inde-
pendently af  any  accidental  combination  of  nccei-
soriea  ;  neither  the  pktnretque,  not  a  general  and
indiscriminate  picture  of  nature,  formed  any  part
oftheartofPolygnotuioroflheperiod.  Whatever,
tbereibre,  was  not  absolutely  neceaeary  to  illuttr^te
the  principal  object,  was  indiisted  merely  by  lym-
bol :  two  or  th»e  waniori  represented  an  army  ;
a  single  hut,  an  encampment ;  a  ship,  a  floel ;  and
a  aingle  house,  a  city :  and,  generally,  the  law*  of
bajso-rilieTD  appear  to  have  been  the  law]  of
painting,  and  both  wen  )till  to  a  great  extent  aub-
lerrient  to  architeclura.

Xhe  princip&l  coutemporariei  of  Polygnotss  were
DionytiujorCDlaphoii,Piei(taenetu*andPBnaenui,
of  Atheni,  brcihen  (or  the  latter,  perhaps,  a  ne-
phew) of  Pheidiai,  and  Uicon,  also  of  Athena.

Dlonyaius  waa  apparentlj^  an  eicellent  poctiait-
palnler,  the  Holbein  of  antiquity  ;  for  beiidet  the
testimony  of  Aristotle,  quoted  abore,  Plutarch
(TTiMil.  S6)  remariu  that  the  woriis  of  Dionysius
wantad  neither  force  not  apirit,  bat  that  they  had
the  appcBisnce  of  being  loo  much  laboured.  Po-
lygnotua alio  painted  portiaita. (Pint,  dinofl,  4.)

Panaenua  iMialed  Pheidiaa  in  decorating  the
itatue  and  throne  of  th^  Olym^wn  Jupiter.  Micon
was  particularly  dittingniahed  for  the  ikill  with
which  he  painted  hones. {Did.  o/Biog.  t.  a>.)

Prize  contests  also  were  already  established,  in
this  early  period,  at  Corinth  and  al  Delphi  Pliny
(fl.  iV.  xixT.  35}  mention)  that  Pannenui  waa
defeated  in  one  of  Ihoe  at  the  Pythian  games,  by
Timsgonta  of  Clhalcis,  who  himself  celebrated  bit
own  victory  in  vene.

The  remarks  of  Quintilian  (Tnl.  Orator.  lii.  10)
respecting  the  itylo  of  this  period  are  leiy  curious
and  iotereating,  althougb  they  do  not  accord  en-
tirely with  die  testimiHiic)  from  Oieek  vriten
quoted  above.  He  lays,  that  notwithstanding  the
simple  colouring  of  Polygnotua,  which  wat  Utile
more  than  a  rudo  fbuadation  of  what  wa*  after-
wards accomplished,  then  were  those  who  even
preferred  his  atyle  to  the  stylet  of  the  grMIcit
painten  who  lucceeded  him ;  not,  aa  Qnuitiliaa
thinks,  withont  a  certain  degree  of  aflectation.

Xn.  EilaUiAintiiiofPaitiiitg.—Dnmatictt^
In  the  succeeding  generaiion,  about  420  B.  c,
through  the  efforts  of  Apollodorui  of  Athens  and
Zeuiii  of  Heraclea,  dramatic  effect  vnis  added  to
the  eiieatial  ityle  of  Polygnotui,  cauiini  an  epoch
in  the  art  of  painting,  which  henceforth  conipre-
hended  a  unity  of  sentiment  and  action,  and  the
Imitation  of  the  local  and  accidental  appeanncei  of
objects,  combined  with  the  hiatoric  and  generic  re-
fresenlation  of  Polj^otus.  The  contemporariea
of  Apollodonii  and  ^aiit,  and  those  who  carried
oat  udr  princtple*,  were,  Parrhatiut  of  Ephetui,
Enpompus  of  ^cyon,  and  Timanthet  of  (Tythnui,
all  ftiatan  of  iha  grtalMt  i*n». Athens  and


■  O"


910  PICTURA.

Seyon  vert  the  prinnpal  usta  of  iho  ut  at  Ihia

Apnllndonti,  nyi  PlDtarch,  inTcnted  Aim  (f  topib>
■b1  iwixp<*<'ir  mSi),  which  ii  well  defined  bj
Fiueli  (Ceo.  1)  u  "the  element  of  the  ant'  '
'ApfuyA,  that  imperceptible  Imnsiliaa,  which,  n
out  opacity,  confiuion,  or  hudnen,  snitrd  looil
colour,  demitint,  ihade,  and  rcfleies."  Thi>  tnuat,
however,  not  be  oltwelher  denied  to  the  cbfIi
ninun  ;  for  Plutarch  himielf  (Timnl  36)  atc
iMiiei  the  lame  property  to  the  worki  of  Dionyiin*
(tffX^  IxovTn  ffol  TJtvf),  thongh  in  a  leva  degree
The  diitinction  ii,  that  what  in  the  worki  of  Dio
nyiiiu  was  really  merely  a  gradation  of  light  am
(joda,  or  gndiiol  diminution  of  li),*hl,  wai  in  thoi
efApollodoru  >  grodatioa  alta  o/ liati,  (tit  tin
gradually  cbanp'ng  according  to  the  dpgrH  of  light.
The  fbnner  wm  tcirned  rifvat,  the  Ult«r  ip^uy^
hut  the  EngUih  terra  totu,  when  applied  to  a  Co
lotmd  pioture,  comprehendi  both  ;  it  is  equivateni
tothe"e^endor"otPliny.  {ff.  M  Hxv.  II.)

Apollodnrui  fint  painted  raen  and  thlngt  aa  the]
really  appeared  ;  thii  ii  what  Pliny  {H.  N.  hit
36)  m«na  by  "  Hie  primnj  ipeciei  eiprimere  inili-
toit."  The  rich  eflcct  of  the  combination  of  light
and  ihade  with  colour  Ii  alio  clearly  eipreued-in
the  wordt  which  follow;  "primnique  gloriam
jKniciUo  jara  contulit  t "  alio,  "neque  ante  eu
tabula  ulliui  ogtcnditur,  quae  lencnt  ocoloi."  W
may  almoat  imagine  the  Horlta  of  a  Kemtimndt
be  ipoken  of ;  hii  piclnrei  rivellcd  the  ey
Through  thii  ilrihing  quality  of  hii  worlta,  he  was
aumamed  the  tAadotEtr,  ffKiaypdjpoT.  (Hesychius,
I.e.  Comp.  fDTthec  Did,  o/Biag,i.v.)

Zcuiii  ann1)ined  a  certain  degree  of  ideal  fbnn
with  the  rich  effect  of  Apalladarui.  Quintilian
lie.)  layi  that  he  followed  Homer,  and  wai
pealed  with  poweifi^  formi  even  in  Komcn.
Cicero  {Bnil.  18)  alio  praisei  hii  deilgn.  Zeuiii
painted  duuit  celebrated  works,  but  the  Helen  of
Croton,  which  wai  painted  from  five  of  the  moat
beautifiil  Tirgini  in  the  city,  wa»  the  mott  re-
nowned, and  nnder  which  he  inscribed  three  tctipi
(Ii6~l58)  in  thethitd  book  of  the  Hiad.  (Valer.
Mai.  iiL  7.  S  3 ;  Cie.  d«  IrnKnt.  ii.  1  ;  Aelian,
V.  H.  ir.  12,  tc)  Stobaeni  (Arm.  61)  idatei
an  anecdote  of  the  painter  Nicomachua  and  thii
HehMi,  when  the  painter  ii  reported  to  hare  oh-
ierred  to  one  who  did  not  understand  why  the
picture  waa  ao  much  admired,  "Talte  my  eyei
and  you  will  aeo  a  goddeai."  We  leam  from
another  anecdote,  recorded  by  Plutarch  {Perid.  13),
that  Zruiit  {ninled  very  alowly.

Pairbaaiui  ii  ipoken  of  by  ancient  writeri  in
termi  of  the  very  higbcit  praise.  He  appoan  to
have  combined  the  magic  tone  of  Apnltodonts,  and
tho  eiquiiite  design  of  Zeuiis,  with  the  clasaic  in-
Tention  and  eipression  of  FotygnolDS  ;  and  he  so
defined  all  the  powers  snd  ends  of  art,  says  Quin-
tilian (t  e.),  that  he  waa  called  the  "  Legislator."
He  was  himself  not  leas  aware  of  hia  ability,  for
he  termed  himself  the  prince  of  painters.  ('EAA4-
twr  Tpara  ^IpovTa  t<x>^'i  Allien.  lii.  p,  G43,  c)
He  waa,  says  Pliny  {H.N.  inv.  36),  the  niMI
insolent  and  most  arrogant  of  artiata.  (Compare
Alhcn.  IT.  p.  6a7,  b. ;  and  Aelion,  V.  H.  ii.  1 1.)
Timanlhes  of  Ctthnui  or  Sicyon,  was  diitin-
Ifuiahed  fijr  invention  and  expression  ;  the  par-
ticular chann  of  his  invention  wu^  that  he  left :
to  be  supplied  by  the  spectator^  own  fiuicy ;
»  a]«ay*«diur>  |


much  to  be  supplied  by  tb
and  although  lua  prndaeli


PICTUBA.

ahls  mrki  of  art,  i^  the  execution  waa  surpassrd
by  the  inrentinn.  A*  an  instance  of  the  ingenuity
of  hii  iuTention,  Pliny  (ff.  N.  art.  36.  S  6)  men-
lioni  a  sleeping  Cyctnps  that  he  punted  upon  a
small  panel,  yet  conveyed  an  idea  of  faia  gigantic
form  by  means  of  some  small  satyrs  who  irerfl
painted  measuring  his  thumb  with  a  thyrana.  He
was  celebrated  also  for  a  picture  of  the  sacrifice  of
Iphigenia.  (See  the  adminble  temarki  of  Fu»li
upon  this  picture,  Ltctiav  L)  Timanthe*  de(eale>d
Parrhaiina  in  a  profiiuional  competilim,  in  which
the  inhjecl  was  the  contest  of  Ulynea  and  Ajar
for  the  arms  of  Achillea.  (Aelian,  I.  c  ;  Plin.  L  p.)
Eopompui  of  Stcyon  was  the  fonnder  of  tha
ceiebialed  Sicyonian  school  of  fainting  wUdi  «ai
afterwards  established  by  Pamphilns.  Sach  was
the  influence  of  Eupompus's  style,  that  he  added  a
third,  the  Sicyonic,  to  the  only  two  distinct  style!
of  painting  then  recoguiied,  the  Hdladic  or  Qreciu
and  the  Asia^  but  subsequently  to  Eupompoi  dii-
tinguiihed  as  the  Atticand  the  ionic  ;  which  with
■stftuted
a  paint-
ing. (Plin.  H.  y.  inv.  SB.  s.  7.)  We  may  jodge,
from  the  advice  which  Gnpompiis  gave  Lysippna^
that  the  pcedominant  cbaiacteriatie  of  this  style  ma
individuality  ;  for  upon  being  consulted  by  Lyaip-
pui  whom  of  his  predeceisors  he  ihoutd  imitate,  ba
a  reported  to  hare  anid,  pointing  to  the  eotroDnding
crowd,  "  Let  nature  be  your  model,  not  ao  ailiit."
(Plin.  H.f/.insT.  19.  a  6.)  ThU  cdebrated
maiim,  which  eTentually  had  ao  ranch  inflanKa
upon  the  arts  of  Greece,  was  the  first  profeaisJ
deviation  from  the  principlei  of  tho  generic  styieof
Polygnotns  and  Pheidiaa.

XIIL  Ptnoi  of  nrfiiunail. The art  of  tbu
period,  which  has  been  termed  the  Alenndriaik,
bocnuse  the  moat  celebtHled  artists  of  this  period
liied  about  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Onat,  was
the  last  of  progreaaion  or  acquiaitiun  ;  bnl  it  only
added  variety  of  effect  to  the  tonea  it  eould  not  im-
e,  and  waa principally  characterised  by  the
Tiity  of  the  styles  of  ao  many  conlemponiy
[ta. The decadence  of  the  art  inmediately
eeded ;  the  ncceamy  conseqoenee,  i^en,  in-
stead of  eicellence,  variety  and  oriiinality  became
the  end  of  the  artist. "  Floruit  ems  Fhilrppam,
et  usque  ad  snccessorea  Alexandri,"  aayi  Qniiiti-
lian  {I.e.),  "pictura  praedpue,  sed  divents  virtoti-
bua  ; "  and  he  then  ennmeratea  same  of  the  priacj-
pal  painters  of  this  time,  with  the  excelleieiea  fer
which  each  waa  diatdnguished. Prologeaea  waa
iguiihed  for  high  finish  ;  Parapbilua  and  He-
lanthius  fcr  compimtion ;  Antiphihia  fcr  fiwHity  j
Theon  of  Samoa  for  his  prolific  faxj ;  and  lot
ce  Apelles  waa  nnriTBlied ;  Euphranor  waa  in
things  cTcellenl ;  Pnusiai  and  Nicias  were  re-
markable fiv  chiaroscuro  of  variom  kinds  ;  Nic«-
bui  was  celebrated  lor  a  bold  and  rapid  pencil;
his  brother  Ariateide*  sorpaued  all  in  the  depth
iipreiaion. There  were  also  other  psdnteim  of
it  celebrity  during  this  period :  Philoxeniu  id
tria, Asclepiodoms of  Athena, Athenion  of
Haronea,  Eehion,  Cjdiai,  Philocharea,  Theomne*.
lus,  Pyieicua,  &c.

This  genera!  reTolntioa  ia  die  theories  and  prac-
tice of  painting  appears  to  have  been  gitatty  owii^
the  principles  tauj[ht  by  Enpooipoe  at  Sc^ob
Pamphilua  of  Amphipolb  succeeded  Enpoiapns  in
the  school  of  Sicyon,  which  ftma  that  thne  becnma


PICTURA.

])UIm  Ud  ttie  iqntatian  of  bnsg  tin  ntMt  utnilific
■rtilt  of  hii  timt  ;  and  uch  wu  hii  Bnlhorit;,
majtPtiaj  {H. X.  HIT.  ae),  that chiefl j  throDgh
Ilu  inflOEDec,  fint  in  Sicjim,  then  thronghoat  1^1
Onto,  noble  ymtlu  mn  Iwiglit  tbe  art  of  dnw-
JDf  bdbce  ill  otfatn:  tbe  fint  ucrciM  wu  pii>-
hMj  M  dimw  k  «Bpla  lise.  (rf^^iJlv  JAxtooi,
Ponu,  Til.  128  ;  we  ftntlwt,  mpe^ing  ths  Kbool
of  Pan^hilni,  Did.  i^Biag.  t.  v.)

Nioonucbni  of  Thebes  ml,  sfcovding  to  Plinj
(JL  e,\  tba  molt  npid  psinta  of  hi)  time  ;  bnt
lia  Via  la  CDupictiou  far  the  fiun  and  power
of  bii  paneil  u  fis  id  npidilj  ;  Platanh  {Timd.
SS)  ampan*  bii  paintingi  with  the  Tenet  of
Ilmier.  Niomiehiit  had  nmnf  tcholm,  of  whom
Pbilaicniu  of  Errtria  wu  celebnttd  u  a  painter
of  battle*  ;  ■  battle  of  Alciuider  and  Dtmiui  bj
hmiimentiaiKdbj  Plmy  i^H.N.xxrr.  36) M  one
of  the  mad  eelebiated  paintingi  orontiqnitj  ;  bat
tfaej  wen  oil  nrpaHed  l^  hii  own  bnlher  Ari*-
tcid(%wh*^ipcanlo  hare  been  the  greatett  maiter
of  cipRMiiB  amoiig  the  Oraekt.  We  miuC,  how-
erer,  apply  taut  modiBcatioa  to  the  eipie«ion
of  Plioy  ((,  &),  that  Aiuteidei  fint  painted  the
Bund  nd  «qx««*d  the  fe^infit  and  puiiom  of
Man,  uaoe  4A|,  bi  it  ii  explained  b?  Pliny  in  thli
pBiaga,  anmt  be  denied  to  Poljgnotna,  ApoUii-
iam,  PaRhuina,  Tiniantfaea,  and  many  oihen.
(See  Initber  DicL  ofBiog.  an.  AraMda.)

Paoaiu  of  Sicyon  painted  in  encanilic,  vith  the
eailiam,  and  teemi  to  have  inrpaMed  all  olhen  in
thii  method  af  painting  ;  he  wu  tlie  pupil  of  Pam-
l^ilBi,  and  the  contonponry  of  Apellat.  Paaiiu
-waa  coupicBCKU  toi  a  bold  and  powerfit!  elfeet  of
light  and  ihad^  which  he  enhanced  by  contiuti
«ad  Mnog  fiMahtrteninga, (Dili.  ofBiog. •.  v.)

Apellee  waa  a  natiTB  of  Epheiii*  or  of  Colo-
phon (Snitei,  I.  ■.),  according  to  the  genera]
totinMny  uf  Greek  writen,  altbongh  Pliny  (^.c)
t«nu  hjm  of  Cot.  Pliny  aaeerta  that  ha  lor-
paiaad  all  who  eilber  preceded  or  nicceeded  him  ;
the  qmlhy,  hewever,  in  which  he  nrpaiaed  all
other  paiDlen  will  icafcely  bear  a  definition  ;  it
baa  baen  termed  gtaoe,  slefpuioe,  beaoty,  X^'i
taaaiftii.  Faacli  {Leo.  1}  definea  the  t^te  of  it.
Apellea  thoi :  —  "  Hit  great  preregatiie  eoDiitted
Buce  in  tbe  miitim  than  the  extent  gf  hit  powen  ;
bo  knew  better  what  he  eonld  do,  what  ooght  to
bo  done,  at  what  point  be  could  airire,  and  what
laj  beyond  hit  nacb,  than  any  other  aitiiL  Oiace
af  emnptioa  and  refinement  of  taate  were  hit  ele-
aatinti.  ud  went  hand  in  hand  with  grace  of  azsi
eatioa  and  taate  in  finbh  ;  powerfiil  and  teldom,
poiieitei  abgly,  iireaittible  when  united."

The  nan  nIebnUed  work  of  Apellea  wai  per-
bapi  bi*  V(Mn  AnadyanMM^  Venni  ricing  ont  of
tbo  wirteti, {Diet.  i^Bio/i.  art  Apilla.)

Ho  aiealled  in  portnit,  and  indeed  aD  hit
««rita  aHxar  to  hare  been  pcnraitt  in  an  ei-
taidad  tante  [  ftr  bit  pictnrai,  both  biatorka)  ud
aUegiaital,  conaaled  neariy  all  of  tingle  fignree.
He  enjoyed  tbe  aielorive  pririlega  of  painting  the
paitnite  crfAIcnader.  (Hor.  Ep.  ii.  1.  339.)  One
of  tlwae,  which  npreaenled  Aleianda  wielding
the  thoBdeifaolti  of  Japiler,  temtd  the  Alexander
Itfmmfifn  Hpean  to  We  been  a  niaaleipieoe
ef  efllMt;  fl**  bond  and  li^hCning,  uyi  Pliny,
mta»i  to  Mart  from  the  picture,  and  Plutarch
{Aha.  i)  iofeima  ni  that  the  complexion  wu
ttowner  tbaa  AlexanderX  thoi  making  a  finer

MoaM  wilk  AoGi*  i«  biahntd,  which  ^pwently


PICTURJL  811

eon>t)tated  tlie  light  of  the  pictnre.  Pliny  (I.  e.)
telle  n*  that  A  peliei  glased  bitpicturet  in  a  manna
peculiar  to  hinuelf,  and  in  which  no  one  could
imitate  him.  When  hii  woAi  wen  finiihed  b«
corered  them  with  a  dark  tranipateiit  nmiih
(matt  probably  eenlaining  aipbaltnn),  which  had
a  remanobk  effect  in  humoniaing  and  tonins  the


tcombUiie,  lo^  u  wii  pnetiied  by  Tilii

B  real  of  tha  Venetian  paiatera."  (Mitea  (e
Fnin.  37.)  Then  is  a  lalnable  tbongh  rnddenlal
remark  in  Ciceni  (ds  Nat.  Dtot.  L  37),  niaring  to
tbe  colouring  of  Apello,  where  be  nja,  that  liia
tinta  of  the  Veniu  Anadyomene  were  not  blood,
bat  a  leaembtanee  of  bloocL  Tbe  femalea,  and  tbe
pictaret  generally,  of  Apellei,  wen  moat  probably
"~  '  and  nnadorned  ;  their  abiolute  tnerili,  and
sir  egini,  conitituting  Iheit  chief  altnctien.
See  fnrther  DicL  o/Oiog.  to.

Protogenea  of  Caunni,  a  contempelaty  of  Apel-
lea, wu  both  itnlusry  and  painter  g  he  wu  rs-
morkable  for  the  blah  finith  of  bia  woika,  for  a
detailed  account  of  wbieb,  u  well  a*  af  h»  life  and
hia  relationi  aHth  Apdiea,  tea  Diet  itf  Bieg.  art
Pnliigatn.

Enphianor,  tbe  iHlnnian,  wu  eelebinted  equally

pamter  end  itatnary ;  he  woi,  aaya  Pliny  [H.  N.
at.  40},  in  all  thii^  eicellent,  and  at  all  timet
equal  to  hinudf.  He  wu  dittingnithed  foi  a  pecu-
liarity ti  ttyle  of  design  ;  be  wu  fond  of  a  mmmlar
limb,  and  adopted  a  inon  decided  anatomical  dia-
play  generally,  but  he  kept  the  body  light,  in  pro-
portion to  the  bead  and  iimb^  Pliny  layi  that
Gnphnnor  firrt  repreaented  heroet  with  dignity.
Pnrrbaaiua  waa  vid  to  have  eBtabliibed  the  canon
of  art  for  heroea  ;  but  the  heroet  of  Pinhuiot
wen  appanntly  mon  dinne,  thoie  of  Enphianor
mon  human.  We  have  exantplei  of  both  thete
itylea,  in  the  kindred  art  of  tcnlptun,  in  the  Apollo
and  tbe  Laecofin,  and  in  the  Heleager  and  Iho
Gladiator,  or  tbe  Antinou  and  the  Diwobolut.
It  wu  to  thii  dittinnion  of  ityle  which  Enphranor
Of^ianntly  alluded,  when  be  aaid  that  the  Theaena
of  ParrbanBD  hod  been  fed  npon  roaea,bnt  bi*  own
upon  beef.  (Plut.  d»  Otor.  AAat.  2  ;  Plin.  L  e.)
Eupbranor  painted  In  encauitic,  and  executed  many
famoua  work)  ;  the  principal  wen  a  battle  of  Hon-
lineia,  and  a  piclun  of  the  twelTe  godi.  (Plin. /.  o. ;
Plut.  He.  ;  Pauo.  i  3  ;  Lncian,  Imag.  7  ;  Valer.
Max.  TiiL  11.  S  £  ;  Eutath.  ad  R.  \.  529,  &e.)

Kiciaa  of  Albeni  wu  eelebmled  for  tbe  delicacy
with  which  be  paintrd  femateo,  and  for  the  ricD
tone  of  chiaroacuTO  which  diitinguiahed  hi*  paint-
inn.  Hs  al*o  painted  in  encauitic  Hi*  moat
cdehisted  work  wa*  the  mvlo,  or  the  region  of
the  ihadei,  of  Homer  (nrnmunK^  Homtri),  which
he  declined  to  lell  to  Ptolemy  I.  of  Egypt,  who
bad  oSend  60  la]«ili  for  it,  and  prefemd  pte-
■enting  to  hit  native  city,  Athena,  at  he  waa  uen
ndSclently  wealthy.  Niciat  al)o  pabted  aome  of
tha  marble  *taWe*  of  Praxiteles.  (Plin.  H.  A".
ixxT.  40 ;  Pint,  jifar.  £^»n-.  ]]  ;  tee  No. VIII.)

Athenian  of  Maronea,  who  painted  alio  in  en-
cauttie,  waa,  according  to  Pliny  (I.  a),  compared
with,  and  even  preferred  by  lome  to  Nieiu ;  ha
wM  more  anttere  in  colouring,  bat  in  bit  autt^ty
mon  pleating,  and  if  he  bad  not  died  young,  aaya
Pliny,  he  would  hare  earpaaacd  all  men  in  paint-


ing. He  >{


■  O"


letaiaing  iadiTidnBlil]'  ■:
of  ddign  dF  hii


PICTURA.

mere  mean*,  to  Ii>Te  neglKted  pictorial  cffrct,  and,
'itj  and  much  of  the  retinement
nnpotarin,  to  hkie  endearotired
. .  rita  the  graieric  itjl*  of  Palj-

^notui  and  Pheidiu  (■<  u>  ipB  piebtra  »nidilu>
ibictat).  Hit  picture  of  a  gnxim  with  a  hona  ii
msntioned  by  Plinj  aa  a  remarkable  paintini,

PhiJocharei,  tbe  brother  of  the  orator  AeKhinu,
va*  atw)  a  paJDier  of  the  greatait  merit,  according
to  Pliny  (tf.  JV.  iin.  10),  althouith  he  iteoRlemp-
tuoiulf  tenoed  by  Demotthenei  {Fait.  Ligat.  p.  4  ]  £,
Reibke)  "  a  painter  of  perfuni«-poU  and  tamboara"
(iX.aeainpiM*as  icol  Ti/irara).

Eehion  atto,  of  uncertain  coontry,  ii  mentioned
by  Cicero  (first  IB)  and  Pliny  (_H.  N.  xnv.  36)
u  a  famou  painter,  Pliny  epeaki  of  a  picture  of  a
bride  by  him  ai  a  noble  painting,  diitlnguiihed  for
iU  eipreHion  of  modeity.  A  great  compliment  ii
nlu  incidentally  paid  to  the  wcikt  of  Echion  by
Ciceio  (Parad.  t.  S),  vhere  he  ii  apjareutly
ranked  with  Folyclelui.

Theon  of  Bamoa  wa«  dittingniihed  for  what  the
Oreeki  termed  ^orriurliu,  according  to  Qun^lian
(I.e.),  who  alio  lanki  him  with  the  painten  of  the
bigheit  cktu.  Flinj  {H.  ff.  xxxr.  40),  howsTer,
elauM  him  with  thoM  of  tha  Mcond  dqree.  Aelian
give*  a  ipirited  detcription  of  a  young  warrior
pabied  by  Theon.  (  V.  II.  il  44.)

XIV.  DetOaa.  The  caniei  of  the  decline  of
painting  in  Oreoce  are  rery  eridenL  The  political
levolntiona  with  which  it  wu  eonTuiied,  and  the
Tarioni  dynaitic  chattel  which  took  place  after  the
death  of  Alexander,  were  perhapa  the  principal
obataelca  to  any  important  eflbrta  of  art ;  the  m-
telligent  and  higher  clauea  of  the  popnlatiolt,  upon
whom  paiDleii  chieSy  depend,  being  to  a  great  ex-
tent engroBied  by  politics  or  engaged  in  war.
Another  influential  cauM  waa,  that  the  public
Imildinga  were  already  rich  in  work)  of  art,  elmoat
•Ten  to  the  eihaajtion  of  the  national  mytfaolosy
and  tiiatory  ;  and  the  new  mien  found  the  traniier
of  worki  alxeedy  renowned  a  more  lure  and  a  more
eipeditiou)  method  of  adorning  their  public  holla
and  palacea.  than  the  mors  tardy  and  haiardoua
altematiTo  of  requiring  original  productiona  from


.  (he  ortiita  of  Ihoie
timca  were  under  the  neceaiily  of  trying  other
fialdi  of  art  j  of  attracting  attention  by  novelty  and
Tarlely  :  thua  rhyparogisphy  (^urapoypa^a),  por-
nography, anii  all  the  lower  claises  of  art,  atlained
the  aiccndancy  andhecamothe  characteriitic  itylei
of  the  period.  Yet  during  the  early  part  of  tbii
piaiod  of  decline,  from  about  B.C.  ilOO,  imtil  tha
d«ttuctlan  of  Corinth  by  Mummiui.  B.C.  146,
then  were  alill  aaTeial  namei  which  upheld
the  ancient  glory  of  Orecian  painting,  but  lubic-
quent  to  the  conqueol  of  Greece  by  the  ltoala^^
-wfasl  ¥raa  previoiuly  but  a  gradual  and  aorcely
aenaibla  decline,  then  became  *  npid  and  n  total

In  the  lower  deicriptioni  of  painting  which  pre-
Tsiled  in  thia  period,  Pyrcicua  waa  pre-eminent ;
ha  waa  termed  Rhyparogtaphoa  ((kwrnfwyiii^i),
on  account  of  tbe  mean  quality  of  tiji  aubjecU.  He
bdonged  to  the  clou  of  genre-painters,  or  "peintrea
e  boa,"  ai  the  Ft"'-  '  —  ''-—  ""■-
■' ■ iforeiiBPi  . .

I  atyle. (See


PICTURA.

timaoftheBomaiu,  waa  prndiaed  vith  thagmMnt
licence  (Propart.  it  6  |  Bueton,  Jll.  43  j  and  Ki*.
Hor.X  preiailed  eapecially  at  no  partioiiar  period
in  Qreece,  but  wat  apparently  lolemted  ta  a  con-
■idenbleextenletalltiinea.  PairhBiiui,Ariiteidra,
Pauianiu,  Nicophanea,  Chaerephanea,  Arelliua,
and  a  few  other  rapFOTpdfoi  are  mentioned  aa
having  made  tbemielrea  notoHona  Sar  thia  apeaes
of  licence.  (Alhen.  liiL  p.  £67,  b  ;  PloL  d*  aati.
riH.  3  j  Plm,  H.  N.  ra».  37.)

Of  the  few  peinten  who  alill  maintained  the
dignity  of  the  dying  art,  the  following  may  be  men-
tioned ;  Hydoo  of  Soli  )  Neatcei,  Leontianu,  and
Timanthea,  of  Sieyon  ;  Areeailana,  Erigonua,  and
Poiiaa,  of  uncertain  country  ;  and  Metrodoma  of
Athena,  equally  eminent  aa  a  punter  and  aa  a
philosopher.  Tbe  achooi  of  Sicjon,  to  which  tha
majority  of  the  diatinguiahed  pwnten  of  thia  period
belonged,  ia  eipreaaly  mentioned  by  Plutarch
(ArtU.  12)  aa  the  only  one  which  atill  retained  any
ttacoa  of  the  purity  and  the  greameaa  of  atyle  d(
(he  nrt  of  the  renowned  agea.  It  appeaca  to  hare
been  atill  actjte  in  the  time  of  AcaCoa,  about  SAO
B.  c,  who  aeenu  to  hoTa  ioatilled  Hnne  of  hia  own
enterpriaing  apirit  into  tha  artiala  of  hia  time.
Aiatua  waa  a  great  lover  of  the  aiti,  but  thia  did
not  biuder  him  from  deatroying  the  portimita  of  the
Tyraata  of  Sicyon  ;  one  only,  anl  that  hot  par-
tially, waa  aared.  (Pint.  AroL  II)

It  waa  already  the  Ihahion  in  thia  age  tn  \iSk  vC
the  inimitable  woriu  of  the  great  naatera  (  and  tha
artiati  gcnenlly,  initead  of  exerting  thunaelTea  to


All  worita  bearing
greet  name*  were  of  the  very  higheat  Tolne,  and
were  aold  at  enormoui  pricei.  pTuIarch  naitioa
that  Aratua  bonght  up  tome  old  pictorca,  but  par-
ticnlarly  thou  of  Udanthua  and  Pamphilua.  and
lent  them  aa  [mienti  to  Ptolemy  III.  of  E^typt,
to  conciliate  hia  &TonT,  and  to  induce  him  to  join
the  Achaean  league.  Piolemy,  wiio  waa  a  great
admirer  of  the  arte,  waa  gratilied  with  these  [ve-
■enU.  and  preaenled  Aratua  wilh  150  talenti  in  em-
aideration of  them.  (Plut.^ni<.  12.)  The«!*reiT,
howeier,  by  no  meana  the  £nt  woriii  of  the  great
painteri  of  Oreece,  which  had  found  their  way  into
Kgypt  Ptolemy  Soter  hod  employed  agent*  in
Oreece  to  purchaio  the  worka  of  aJebrated  naatera.
(Plut.  Mor.  Epiar.  e.  II.)  Atheoaew  alia  {».
p.  196,  e.)  eipreatly  mentioni  the  |HcttiKa  of  Si-
cyonian  maaten  which  contribnied  to  add  to  tha
pomp  and  display  of  the  celebrated  ftatinl  oi
Ptolemy  Philadelphnaat  Alerandtia.

From  the  lime  of  Alexander  tha  uiiit  of  tha
Qreeki  animated  Egyptian  artiata,  who  adopted
the  alondard  of  Grecian  beanty  in  pcepocticni  and
character. Antiphilui,  one  of  tha  moat  o^ihtaled

Gintera  of  ootiquily,  was  a  natice  of  Egypt,  per-
pa  of  Nancratia.  {Did.  if  Biag.  l  r.T  Many
other  Greek  paiotera  olio  wen  eatabliihed  in  Egypt,
and  both  the  population  and  ana  oF  Alexandria
wen  more  Or«k  than  Egyptian.  (Quint.  xiL  lO  [
Plin.  H.  ^'.  XIXT.  S7  anriO  ;  Athen.  r.  p.  I9&}
Among*!  the  moit  mnarkabhi  prDduetiotia  ox
thi*  period  were,  the  celebrated  ahip  of  Hitn  II.
of  Syraeate,  which  had  Mosaic  flosia,  in  which
the  whole  history  of  the  &11  of  Truy  waa  waited
with  admirable  skill  (Alhen.  t.  p.  207,  c),  and  tb«
immense  ship  of  Ptolemy  Philopator,  on  the  prow
and  stem  of  which  were  otrred  rWoawl  figwv*)
eighteen  l«et  in  height ;  and  the  wkoJo  Ttaaii^


PICTQRA.
botbiDlwiw  and  exterior,  mudaoraatedwitb  pttint-
iog  of  nrinu  demipdcioa. (Athcn.  v.  p.  3IM,  i.)


nwotko  at  two  pKDMn  a
■Kdina^  diitincUBi,  Hm
■ad  IfMndgna  Mi  Athi


aemd  ui  Plinyi  but  bo  ootioa  tbon  onl;  in  >
cmoT  DMiBcr.  Wlun  AonQiai  Paalni  had  con-
quoM  riinriiM, ■.  c.  168,  ho  eanrnBuidud  tha

paintcc  tai  pnpetnatB  hi*  triumpb,  and  thair  mint
^nnmd  phikac^ber  to  eduatB  hii  na.  Th«
AUMDiaa*  Mlacted  Metndonu  the  pointer,  pio-
ttimoM  HM  ha  -wat  pR-eminoit  in  both  ratpsets.
Htnoudei  mu  a  Macedonian,  and  originally  a
•liip-paiBlcr ;  be  repaired  to  Atheni  after  the  de-
feuofpemu. (Plin.  A^.  AT.  urr.  40.) Plutarch

ill  liii  iliwiijili f  Mm  iiiiiiinih  nf  (Imiiiliiii  Pnliu

(■«  yu.  33)  HTi,  that  tha  puulinga  and  •tatoea
bnnght  by  him  from  Oreaoe  varo  w  nnmeroui
thai  thej-  nqnirod  2fi0  waggooi  to  any  them  in
inc^nod,  and  that  tb«  ^eetada  laalad  the  endte
day.  AmuUm  ^nean  at  all  tioMt  to  hare  beeo
m  gnM  adMiiw  it  the  aMi,  for  Platareh  (AtmiL
i>Ml  C)  nambna  that  aftar  bil  fint  coualahip
ba  laofc  cnedal  ooe  to  bare  hia  iOD*  adacatad  in
the  art*  of  Oneee,  and  amongat  ethcn  in  p ■"'■"g
and  acnlptiae  ;  and  that  he  aecoidiii^T  aotartaJned
■aalai.  of  ihoae  art*  (vAiLrrai  k^  irnii^)  in
hia  bmily.  From  which  it  i*  ondeat  that  the
of  Ortek  artin*  to  Roma  had  abeady
id  before  the  genenl  xpoliation*  of  Qreeca.
dLiTy{iixii,  23)^01  '  -  - -•  -


mGieece  la  R


oaanon  af  tha  tan  diyl  ^mea  ai^oinled  by  Fnt-
Tiaa  Nobilior,  B.C.  18S.  Rat  Borne  moat  haie
bad  it*  Greek  painteri  eren  before  thi*  time  ;  for
tba  pictora  of  llw  fca*t  of  Oiaeebni'i  uddien  after
tha  battlt  of  Renereutum,  cnueoated  by  him  in
tba  temple  of  LilartT  on  the  Ai  _  -  ix-


t  m  all  (Cobabilitf  the  weik  of


(Lit.  niT.  16),  i
kOreekartiiL

Tin  tf  itant  adoptad  by  tha  Roman*  of  plander-
ing  Graeaa  of  it*  wgriu  of  art,  reprobated  by
Polybia  (li.  S),  wai  not  withoal  a  precedent.
Tbe  CarthaginiBD*  before  them  had  plnndaed  all
Iba  aoBCt  town  of  Sicily  ;  and  tba  Penian*,  and
aien  tha  Macedoniam,  caiiied  off  all  wotki  of  ait
aa  the  lawful  pciie  of  emqaeit.  (Diedcr.  liiL  90  ;
Polyb.  iE.  S.  1 1 ;  Lit .  luL  26 ;  Plin.  H.  ff.  aodr.
IB.  ixiT.  A6.)  The  Roman  cmquerora,  howster,
plimdnad  with  a  certain  dHree  '
I*  MaradTiiia


at  fintplim


•■'):•


u  at  S jneua.


away  DO  mon  worki  of  ait  than  weie  nacaaaary  to
adiitn  tbair  triomph*,  or  decorata  wnna  of  tha
pnblie  boildingi.  (Ci&  im  Vvr.  j.  62,  ttc;  Pint
iWu  Mw.  3-2,  ATonC  SO.)  Tha  work*  of  Greek'
art  brnoght  haa  Sicily  by  Mareellaa,  were  the
fiiat  n>  in^Hre  the  Rmnani  with  the  deaire  of
ademing  tb«r  public  edifice!  with  ttatiiea  and
paintingi ;  which  mte  waa  conntted  into  a  paa-
men  wheo  tbsy  became  acquainted  with  the  great
liiaiiiin  and  almoet  ineihautible  reaonrcca  of
Onaca  ;  and  their  lapaci^  knew  no  ImandK
Rntueh  i^i  that  Maieatln*  (■« Fit.  21)


tbnagh the


inboductioa  of  woA*  of  art  i
period  the  people  wu'
li^oting  abaiit  aita  ■


PICTURA.  giS

gloried  in  the  fiict,  and
boBiled  (Ten  before  Greek*,  that  ba  waa  the  lint
to  teoch  the  Romana  to  eateem  and  to  admire  tiM
uquiaite  production!  of  Greek  arti  Wo  learn
from  Livy  (ziri.  31}  that  one  of  the  vnamenta  of
tba  tiinn^^  Marcallo*,  311  B.C.,  wa*B  pictora
of  tha  oqitara  of  Sjiaenaa.

Thaa*  quliation*  of  Qraaoa,  of  the  Grecian  king-
dom* of  Aaia,  and  of  Kcily,  continued  uninterrupt-
edly liir  about  two  oantuiie*  ;  ytit,  according  to
Mndann*,  laya  Plioy  (ff.  ff.  luir.  U),  mcfa
waa  the  inconeaiTahle  wealth  of  Greeea  in  woriu
of  art,  that  Rtiodea  alraie  itill  coDlainod  upward*
of  3000  itatuea,  and  thai  there  could  not  bafa
been  let!  at  Athena,  at  Olympia,  or  at  DelphL
Tha  man  who  contribated  principally  to  fill  tba
pablio  edificca  and  temple*  of  Rome  with  tba
work*  of  Grecian  art,  were  Co.  Hauliua,  Fulno*
Nol>ilior,  who  plundered  the  lemplea  of  Ambncia
(Lit.  mriii.  44),  Mummint,  Sulla,  Lucollua,
SoBuma,  and  Vernn.  (Lir.  uiir.  G,  6,  7  1  Plin.
H.  K.  uxiiL  43,  imr.  17,  Mirii.  6.)

Mummini,  after  the  deetruBtios  of  Corinlb,  B.  c,
US,  carried  off  or  deatroyed  more  wnk*  of  art
than  all  bia  fnitetman  put  t^eths.  Some  of  hi*
•oUioa  wan  ibimd  by  Polybnit  playing  at  dica
npiHi  tha  odabiBtad  pictora  tl  Dionynia  by  Ari*-
taida*.  (,3ti«b.TiiLp.861.)  Many  nlnable  wirita
alao  warn  porchaaid  upon  tlu*  occaaian  liy  Attalu*
III.,  and  aent  to  Pernmu  ;  hot  they  all  found
Iheii  way  to  Rome  aa  nil  death,  B.  c  133,  a*  be
bequeathed  all  hi*  proper^  to  the  Roman  people,
(Plin.  H.  If.  iniii.  £3.)  Scaunu,  in  hi*  ae£le-
ihip,  B.  c  £8,  bad  all  the  public  picture*  itill  re-
maming  in  Si^on  tnnaported  to  Rmne  on  account
of  tbe  debt*  of  tha  fanner  city,  and  he  adorned  the
great  lomponiy  theatre  which  he  erected  upon  that
Dconoo  with  3000  bronia  atatnei.  (Plin.  H.  If.
HIT.  40,  ihtL  34.)  Verrea  laiuackcd  Atiauid
Achaia,  and  plundered  almoit  oTery  temple  end
public  edifice  in  Sicily  of  whatcTer  wai  ralnabla
m  LL  Amoi^Bt  the  numenm*  robberiei  of  Verre*,
Cicero  (n  Verr.  iT.  £5)  mention!  paiticuiarly
twenty-eeien  beantifhl  pictnrea  taken  from  the
tem^e  of  Uinerra  at  Syracnae,  cmaiidng  of  par-
tnit*  of  tha  king*  and  tyrant*  of  Sicily.

From  the  deatnictiao  of  Corinth  by  Mmnmiua,
and  the  ipolialiim  of  Atheni  by  SnUa,  tbe  higher
bianehea  of  art,  eipecially  in  paintinTi  experienced
!o  !eniible  a  deny  in  Greece,  that  only  two
painteta  are  mentioned  who  can  be  claised  with
the  gnat  maalen  of  former  limei :  Timomachu*  of
Byiantinm,  contampaniy  with  Caemr  (Plin.  ff.iV'.
nzT.  40^  Aa.),  and  AKoon,  mentioned  by  Lncian
{Imoff.  7 1  Haiod.  5),  who  lired  apnuentl*  about
the  tiBM  of  Hadrian.  (HOllar,  .rfniUat:  g  211. 1.)
Yet  Roma  waa,  abaut  the  end  of  tha  republic,  fiiU
of  painter*,  who  appear,  howcTer,  to  haTc  been
chiefly  occupied  in  portiwt,  or  decomtiTe  and  ara-
beaqoo  pointing:  painten  mu*t  al*o  hare  bean
Tery  nomerou*  in  Kgypt  and  in  Ana,  Painting*
of  Tarion*  deacriptiona  !till  condnned  to  perform  a
conipicnou!  part  in  the  triomph!  of  the  Roman
conqneron.  In  the  triumpb  of  Ftmp^  orer  Mithri-
date*  the  portrait*  of  the  children  and  bmilj  of
that  monarch  were  carried  in  the  prouaiion  (Ap-
piao,  lit  BdL  Mitkrid. )  1 7) ;  and  in  one  of  CaeMrl*
triomph*  tha  portniiu  of  hi*  principal  enemie*  in
the  ciTil  war  were  displayed,  with  the  exception  of
that  of  Pompey.  (Id.  d>  BM.  GmL  ii.  101.)

Tha  aehool  of  art  at  Rhode*  appear*  la  bac*  been


S14


PICTURA.


the  only  doe  that  hud  eipBrieacediiognatcbaii|{e;
for  worki  of  the  hiv heU  diss  in  irnlyum  were  Mill
pioduced  there.  The  cotine  of  painting  Kemi  to
liBva  been  much  mora  capriciooi  than  that  of  Knlp-
Mn ;  in  which  niuteipitcei,  eihibiting  Tirimu
bwntiea,  appear  la  ha«  been  produced  in  nearly
ereryage.&Dm  that  of  Pheidiota  Ihatof  Hudruii.
A  decided  decay  in  painting,  on  the  other  baud,  ii
repeatedly  acknowledged  in  the  later  Greek  sod
m  tbe  b«t  Roman  wiitert.  One  of  the
of  thii  decay  may  be,  that  the  hi^ett  exceltence
in  paintinff  requirw  the  combinUion  of  a  mnch
greater  yanety  of  qiialitiet ;  whereai  inrention  and
deeign,  identical  in  both  arts,  are  the  tide  elemanta
of  Kulptnre.  Painlen  alio  an  addicted  to  the
pemicioDi,  though  Incrativ^  tsutice  of  daahing  off
or  deanitchmg  their  worke,  mm  which  icalptore,
friim  the  Teiy  natuie  of  their  materiali,  aie  ex-
empt: to  paint  quickly  wa«  all  that  wai  required
from  Ktme  of  the  Roman  {unter*.  {Jdt.  ix.  146.)
Worifi  in  eculptore  alio,  through  the  durability  of
their  material,  are  mote  eaiily  preserved  than
pabituiga,  and  they  Hrre  tiierBfore  ai  modeti  and
mcenliTei  to  the  artiiti  of  after  agea.  Artiite,
therefore,  who  may  hare  had  ability  to  excel  in
•culplafe,  xroold  natiually  efaooae  that  art  in  pre-
ftawice  to  painting.  It  la  only  tfaiu  that  we  can
account  fbi  the  production  of  mch  V(iri:i  ai  the
Antinoua,  the  Laocoon,  the  Torao  of  Apollaiiiii,
and  many  olhen  of  torpauing  Hcellence,  at  a
period  when  the  art  of  painting  waa  eomparadrely
extinct,  m  at  lout  principally  pradiaed  ai  mere
deeoratiTe  colouring,  anch  ni  the  majority  of  the
paintings  of  Home,  Herculaneum,  and  Ptnnpeii,
now  extant ;  though  it  mnil  be  remembered  thai
these  were  the  inferior  worki  of  an  inferior  ige.

XV.  AoDua  PamlBig,  The  eariy  painting  of
Italy  sod  Magna  Oraeeia  haa  been  aliesdy  noticed,
and  we  know  nothmg  of  a  Roman  painting  indo'
pendent  of  that  of  Oreeee,  though  Pliny  (AI  /f.
xxiT,  7)  telli  ui  that  it  was  cnitinled  at  an  early
period  by  the  Raonna.  The  head  of  the  noble
home  of  the  Pabii  receired  the  lumame  of  Pictor,
which  remained  in  hi>  &niity,  through  some  paint-
ing* which  he  executed  in  the  temple  of  Solus  at
Rome,  B.  E.  301,  which  laited  till  the  time  of  the
emperor  Claadiua,  when  they  were  destooyed  by
the  Sre  thnt  consumed  tliat  temple.  Pacuviniolso
the  tragic  poet,  and  nephew  of  Enniiu,  diitin-
onisbed  himself  by  lome  j»jntkigs  in  the  temple  of
Hercules  in  the  Fomm  Boarium,  abosC  180  B.  c
Aflerwardi,  nyi  Pliny  (i.  e.),  painting  vai  not
practiied  by  poiHt  kaiuli  (i/malu  mamim)  amongst
the  Romani,  except  perhaps  in  the  case  of  Tnrpi-
liut,  a  RamaD  knight  of  his  own  times,  who  exe-
cuted some  beautinil  work*  with  his  left  band  at
Verona,  Yet  Q.  Pedius,  nephew  of  Q.  Pcdioi,
ooheir  of  Caesar  with  Anguitos,  was  instructed  in
painting,  snd  became  a  great  proficient  in  the  art,
though  he  died  when  yonng.  Antjatiui  Labeo  also
Binusad  himself  oilh  painting  imali  pictures.

Juliui  Oacaar,  Agiippa,  and  Avjpittui  were
among  the  coiliat  great  patrons  of  artitt*.  Bus-
tonius  (Jui.  Oaa.  47)  in^ums  m  that  Caeaai  ex-
pended great  anina  in  the  purchsM  of  pietijres  by
the  old  maateis ;  and  Pliny  (ff.  M  xixt.  40)
mentions  that  he  gaTe  as  much  a>  BO  talenU  br  two
ptctnres  by  his  contempoiaiy  Timomachus  of  By-
nntiim,  one  an  Ajai,  and  the  other  a  Media  nu-
ditatingthenwrdetof  heichildnii.  Theae  picture*,


There  are  two  circomataDces  eonneeted  with  the
earlier  history  of  painting  in  Rome  which  deaars
mention.  One  is  recorded  by  Liry  (xll  28X  wbo
informs  oi  tlial  the  Conuil  Tib.  Semfnoint  Grac-
chus, dedicated  in  the  temfde  of  Ifata  MatMa,
upon  his  return  from  Sardmia,  B.  c  174,  a  pieMn
of  nppareutlr  a  lingular  description  g  it  conaiiltd
of  a  plan  of  the  isuind  of  Sardinia,  with  npn-
senlarioni  of  TOrioos  battica  he  had  fought  tlisv^
pnintad  upon  it  Tha  other  is  meBttaoed  by  Plinv
(//.  JV.  XIXT.  7),  who  layi  that  L.  Hoatilias  Mali-
cious, B.C.  147,  exposed  to  Tiaw  in  tha  bnm  a
picture  of  the  takiiq  ofCarthages  io  vtiich  he  had


I  part,  a


Tarions  inddsots  to  the  people. Whether  tfaeae

pictme*  were  the  prodoaions  of  Qieek  or  of  Roaari

dsli  ii  doubtful ;  nor  have  we  any  gnide  aa  to

eir  rank  aa  win4u  of  art

The  Romans  generally  haTe  not  the  alightot

daiffli  to  the  merit  of  haTing  promoted  tha  fine

We  hare  seen  that  before  the  xpolialiDas  of

Omce  and  Sicily,  the  arts  were  held  in  no  eosw-

deration  in  Rome ;  and  evao  nfterwardi,  antil  tba

ime  of  the  emperors,  painting  and  scalptare  secdn

a  haie  heen  praclisnl  Trry  racdy  by  RanaDS  t

and  the  works  which  were  then  prodoccd  were

:hiefly  ehaiictenaed  by  their  bad  taste,  being  nss

nilitory  reovds  and  gaudy  disfJays  of  oolonr,  ai-

Lhongh  the  eicy  was  crowded  wilk  tbe  finest  pts-

ductions  of  ancisskt  Qreeca.

Then  an  tiiree  distinct  periods  obasnaUe  in
the  history  of  punting  in  Rome.  The  Got,  or  gnat
period  of  Oraeco-Riraian  aM,  may  be  daiud  &0B
the  conquest  of  Onecc  until  the  time  «f  A^BStas,
when  the  artists  wen  chieflyOteeks.  Theseood,
Jie  time  of  Angostu*  to  the  io-<alIed  Thirty
Tyrants  and  Kodelan,  or  from  ikt  h^inning  ^
the  Christian  era  until  about  the  latUr  tad  tC  tke
third  cenCniy  )  during  which  tima  the  gnat  ma-
'oritT  of  Roman  works  of  art  were  prodnced.  Tha
;hird  comprehoids  the  state  of  the  arts  daring  tlM
tiarehata  J when  Rodh "~ ' ' """"


iTolred,  sufienid  similar  spolia^oni  to  those  whidi
had  pnTiously  inflicted  apon  Qteeee.  This  waa
le  period  of  the  total  decay  of  the  imilali**  acta
nongst  the  andenti.

The  establishment  nf  Christtanity,  the  dinainn
of  the  empire,  and  the  ineursiou  of  !»>**"«  "«i
re  tbe  first  great  cansca  of  the  inpvtant  revo-
sn  experienced  by  the  imitatJTe  arte,  and  tlw
ions  cheek  they  nceixed  ;  bnl  it  was  naerred
the  lanatie  fnry  i^  the  ioonodssla  aSKtoally  la
destroy  all  tmcea  of  their  fivmer  afJepdonr.

Of  the  first  of  these  three  periods  suffldcnt  baa
been  alrwdy  said  ;  of  the  iecand  tlM*  iBnaia  alUl
a  few  obserni^ons  to  be  made.  About  tbe  be-
ginning of  the  aecond  period  is  tha  eariieit  age  ia
which  we  hare  any  notice  at  poHiait  pautaa
(imagvuBH  pieliav),  as  a  distinct  ehusL  Pliny
menticvs  partienlariy  Dionysins  and  Siipalis,as  the
most  celebrated  at  abont  th*  time  of  Aagaataa,
or  pcrb^js  earlier,  who  filled  piclnn  pJleriea  with
their  works.  Aboat  the  aona  age  also  Lak  eC
Cyiicus  was  very  celebrated ;  she  tainted,  bawarcr.
■lieflyfe '


PICTURA.
■moDgit  Um  Ronmu  ;  Vuiu  made  a  atOeetioD  of
Dm  portniU  of  7M  nninait  ma.  (Plm.  H.  N.
IIXT.  2.)  The  poraaili  ot  itatnes  of  mmi  who
Iwd  peHbnsed  mn^  public  MiTTka  were  traced  in
Um  tein|da  and  othsc  public  pltoei ;  and  MTeial
edict!  wan  paiwi  by  the  enperon  of  Rome  re-
Wftaiaa  tba  phdng  of  than.  (SuetoD.  Tihar.  36,
Orf^  U.)  Tha  portniU  of  uthon  alio  wen
plated  in  tba  pablio  libnrica ;  thej  were  appa-
rantl;  find  abOT*  the  OMs  wbich  conUiiwd  theii
wrilingl,  below  wbich  chain  wara  placed  iat  Iba
oaoToiience  of  nsden.  (Cic  ad  AUie.  if.  10 ;
Ssetoo.  libr.  70,  (Mm.  34.)  They  wen  ^Ced
alaa  at  tba  baginning  of  manucripti.  (Martui,  xiT.
166.)  RaqMcting  the  imagioea  or  wax  portiaiM,
wkich  ware  pieaarrad  in  "armaria  "  in  tbe  atria
of  friTata  houMa  (Plin./T.JV.  xut.  S  ;  Senec  dg
B«K^.  iiL  28),  then  ia  an  intenitiiig  aeeonnt  in
Polybina  (n.  £3).  Witli  tho  eiceptiDn  of  Aition,
a*  atroid]'  roentioDad,  not  a  nngie  painter  of  lliii
period  mas  to  eminence:  altiungb  aoma  were  irf

]ai>fligBle  Arelliui  }  Fabolliu,  who  puntad  Noo'i
ipildai  bonaa ;  Duntbeoi,  who  eoped  ia  Nen  the
Voiaa  Aaadiromaia  of  ApeUaa  g  Cocnelmi  Pinaa,
Aedm  Priicui,  Uarcm  Lndina,  Malliiiitand  otbera.
<nii./r.JV.  xxiT.  87,  ftc) Faltrait,  deeontire,


hu  dmoted  an  entin  charter  (vii.  5)  to  a  lament-
Bticn  orer  ila  bllen  itala  ;  and  Pliny  q)eaka  of  it
M  a  dying  art.  (H.  N.  xxiT.  11.)  The  latter
wtitcr  tnatancea  iJI.N.  xxxt.  B3)  ■•  a  (igo  ctf  tba
■»— ■<'>T«  of  bii  ^0  (aoMnM  Mbifu  MmnlsM),  tba
coloiaa]  portrait  of  Nero,  ISO  feel  high,  which  wat
paintad  npon  canna,  a  thing  nnknown  till  that


Mama  Lndini,  in  the  „  .
my  oelebnued  for  hia  landecape  decantiona,  which
wm  Ulnatnted  with  Ggniea  actiTdy  employed  in
Mtvpstioni  inited  to  tbe  Ks»a ;  tba  artiifa  nime,
Imwcts;  ii  doubtfdL  (S«  DiaL  vf  Biog.  j.  v.)
Thi*  kind  of  painting  became  nniienal  afiai  bii
time,  and  appannlly  with  araiy  qiaciaa  of  licence.
Vitrufiaa  contraili  the  ilate  of  dacoratjie  painting
in  bia  own  aoa  vilh  what  it  waa  fbnneriy,  and  he
Btumeratea  tbe  Taiiona  kind)  of  wall  painting  in
DBB  anxaigtt  the  aneitnt*.  Tbey  fint  imitated  tbe
aiTangeaient  and  Tarieliea  of  ilab*  of  marble,  then
Ibe  nuiegated  fnunea  and  comicee  of  pandi,  to
which  were  iAerwerdi  added —'■'■--■ — '  '


tknia  ;  end  finally  in  the  eiedne  wen  painted
tragic,  comic,  or  Blyric  icene^  and  in  the  long
gaUtriei  and  corridon,  Torioiu  kind*  of  liuidicapee,
or  even  enbjecta  from  the  poete  and  the  higher
walk*  of  hiatjvy.  Bnt  th«e  thinga  were  in  the
time  of  VitroTina  taateleaaly  laid  aude,  and  had
giT«]  place  to  mere  gaudy  diaplay,  or  the  moat
phannatic  and  wild  conceptiona,  anch  aa  many  of
the paintiuga which bare been diacoreitd in

Paintmg  now  eanM  to  be  [ractiied  by  alavea,
■nd  painteti  aa  a  body  ware  held  in  little  or
LatetBL  Hcapecting  tba  deprared  ^iptiiBtiaa  of
Oe  arta  at  thia  penod  aaa  Plin.  H.  N.  iikt.  SS
Patcoo.  SaL  BB ;  Prapeit  iL  6 ;  Soetmi.  Tib.  43
' Lii.  lW,iii2a


PIONHS.  918

1  waa  alao  common  in  Qieaoa  and  Alia
an  earlier  perind,  but  at  the  time  of
we  are  now  treating  it  began  to  a  great
eTsn  to  npciaede  painting.  It  waa  need
chiefly  for  Boora,  Init  wslli  and  alao  ceilinp  «-eia
eometimea  omamoilad  in  the  aune  vay.  (Plin.
H.  If.  iixri.  60,  64  ;  Athan.  xii.  n.  612,  d.  (
Senec  Bp.  B6 ;  Lucan,  x.  116.)  There  wen
•ariona  kindi  of  nuaic  ;  tbe  lilkodnia  wen  die-
tinct  fnun  the  puteroa  da  aiHaD.  Then  wen
aetetal  kinda  of  tba  fennet,  aa  the  kcHU,  the  tet-


Mmor  a


paindng,  aa  tbey  were  worked  in  rcgnjai  figarai.
\i  a  genenl  diatinction  between  mnunmi  and
ithaalrotam,  it  may  be  obaened  that  the  picture
laelf  waa  d»  auMiao  or  opat  mutumm,  and  it*
wne,  which  waa  oftoi  vary  large  and  beaotifiil,  Wat
JiUaAoAm.  The  former  waa  made  of  Tartooa
«d  amall  cobea  (taaawna  or  teaaaUw),  of  dif-
fment  mateiiala,  and  the  latter  of  imaU  thin  alaba,
la,  of  nriooa  marble*,  ftc  ;  the  aitiata  wen


apactirely.  Pliny  (H.  N.  zxrn.  6Q)  attribntn  the
~~'ginofmoaaic  panmaDla  totbe  Oieeka.  Hemen-
n*tba''BiaigtB*oeeu*''atPfl[gannm,  l^Seeu,
I  moat  odebntad  of  the  Oraak  mnainrii,  the
paTcmoit  of  which  mRtented  tbe  nomanta  of  a
anf^iar.  Ha  mentlDn*  alaa  at  Perganram  tba  iaaiont
Canthama  with  tba  dorea,  of  wluch  the  *  Doiea  of
the  Capitoi'  ia  anppoaad  to  be  a  copy.  (ifai.  Oi^
' -■).) Another =--"- -'  — i-i-


of  Pompeii.  (Mut.  Sort.  iv.  34.)  FiTa
oinm  anmenliDnad  by  MUUer.  (^reUiiiJ.  1 322.
4.)  Than  an  ftiU  manr  great  moiaic*  of  tba
ancient*  eitant  (Sea  the  work*  of  Ciam|uni,
Furietti,  and  Laborde.) Tbe  moat  interning  and


peii,  whidi  i*  nppiaed  ts  npteaent  tba  battle  of

I**iia. Thi*  moaaK  i*  orrtunly  otie  of  the  moat

'  lable  nlita  of  aneieot  art,  ud  the  denn  and

ipoaitiai  <rf  tbe  wodt  ate  ao  mpetior  to  it*  eie-

cntion,  that  the  original  baa  eiidently  been  tbe
production  ot  an  aga  long  anterior  to  the  degenenle
period  of  the  moaaic  itaelE  The  compoaitim  la
aimple,  fcnable,  and  beautiful,  and  tbe  deaigii  ai-
bibila  in  many  reipeet*  merit*  of  tba  highaal  order.
(See  Nicoliui,  Qfiadro  >a  atMOiCD  aioparA)  ia  Pom-
paij  Idaioi*,  PompH,  ir.  4S  and  49  j  and  MUller,
Daiaaifr  dtr  aUn  Swui,  i  85.)  [R.N.W.]

PIGNORATI'CIA  ACTIO. [Piobub.]
PI'ONORIS  CA'PIO. [Pan  Pionobib  Ca.-

PIGNU8,apledgeor


[J9,  a  pledge  or  aecori^  for  a  (
derired,  aaya  Qaina  (Dig.  £0.


for  a  debt  or  do-


L  16.  a.


238),  fr , „  . , ,„.  .  _

mann  tradnntur."  Thia  ia  one  of  aoTcral  inatancea
of  the  fiiilnra  of  the  Koman  Juiiita  when  they  at-
tempted etymological  explanation  of  word*.  [Mn-
Tuuv.]  Tha  element  of  pignui  (pig)  ia  conti^ned
in  the  word  pa{ii)g-^  and  it*  cognate  fbrnuL

A  thing  ia  aaid  to  be  pledged  to  a  man  when  it
ia  made  a  aecurity  to  him  for  *ame  debt  or  demand.
It  ia  called,  mya  Ulpian,  Pigana  when  tba  peaaaa
aien  of  the  thing  ia  giren  to  him  to  whom  it  ia
made  a  •ecnrity,  and  Hypothecs,  when  it  i*  made
a  aeenrity  without  being  pnt  in  hi*  poan
(Dig.  13.  tit.  7.  a.  ».  9  2;  laido.  Or^.  i
•ee  abo  Cic.  (BJ  Fom.  ziii.  £6.)  Tbe  tpn
ihr  pledge  which  waa  made  withontiieliTeijrof  tha


918  PIONUa.

tUng  by  bare  igTeanient  (nudk  convmtlo)  it  pra-

ej  Hjpotheca.  (Init  *.  tit  6.  %  7.)  The
relOiting  to  Pigniu  uid  Hjpolheca  wM  in  ill
QuentiaU  tfas  UDie.  The  abj«t  cf  the  pledging  ii
that  tha  plsdgee  ihall  in  cue  of  DewHity  hII  tbe
pledge  and  ps;  humelf  his  dcDund  out  i^  the  pio-
ceedjL  The  oiiginil  natun  of  pleiigs  perbapi  wu
■implj  the  power  of  holding  s  debloc'i  property  ai
&  moini  of  compelling  hitn  to  pay  ;  and  a  fowa  of
•ale  would  b«  a  matter  of  agreement
later  Roman  juritUvieved  a  poirer  of
part  of  tbe  cmtnct  of  pledge.

A  pledge  mar  be  giren  ffi
potai)  for  anj  obligation,  whethi
{miUaa  peatma\  dot,  in  a  caie  of  bnjing  and  Bell-


the  obtigatio  i*  conditional  or  uneooditimiB] ;  for
part  of  a  inra  of  mooey,  u  well  ai  for  the  whole.
(Dig,  20.  liL  I.  !.£.)  An;  thing  could  be  die  ob-
ject of  pledge  which  coulil  be  an  object  of  lale
(Dig.  SO.  tiL  1.  a  9  :  Dig.  20.  tit.  S.  Quae  ret
pignorivel  hypothecaa  datae  obligaii  dod  pounnl),
and  it  might  be  ■  thing  eorpweal  or  incorporeal  ;
m  lingle  thing  or  a  imiveraity  of  thingg.  If  a
single  thing  woa  pledged,  the  thing  with  all  iU  in-

of  land  which  woi  incrcBocd  by  allnvio.  If  a  shop
(pt/iema)  waa  pledged,  all  the  goode  in  it  were

Cledged,  and  if  lamx  of  ihem  were  lold  and  olheti
rongbt  in,  and  the  pledger  died,  the  pledgee'*
•ecnrily  waa  the  ihop  and  ail  that  it  contained  at
the  time  of  the  pledger'i  death.  (Dig.  ^0.  tit.  1.
1.  34.)  If  all  a  man't  prtmerty  waa  pledged,  the
pledge  eamprehended  alu  hia  future  property,  tm-
leu  Aiich  property  waa  clearly  CTcepled.  A  man
might  bIm  pledge  any  claim  or  demand  that  he
had  aninit  another,  whether  it  wai  a  debt  (nomen)
or  a  thing  {corpui). (Dig.  13.  tit  7.  i.  IB.)

The  act  of  pledging  required  no  particular  form,
in  which  nepect  it  renmbled  contmcta  made  by
conaenaiu.  Nothingmore  waireqaigiletoeniibliib
the  validity  of  a  ple^fe  thui  proof  of  the  ogtee-
ment  of  the  partiea  to  it  It  waa  called  Contnctus
pignerati^uj,  when  it  waa  a  caae  of  Pignua  ;  and
Pactum  hjpothecae,  when  it  waa  a  caae  of  Ilypo-
thecB ;  in  the  former  caae,  tradition  waa  oeceoaary.
A  man  might  alio  by  hia  teatomant  make  a  Pigno*
(Dig.  13.  tit  7.  i.  26) ;  Cor  tbe  RomaiM  applied
the  notion  of  pigmii  to  an  annual  payment  left  by
way  of  legacy,  and  charged  or  iccured  on  land.
(Dig.  S4.  tit  I.  a.  12.)  The  intention  of  a  man  to
pledge  eonld  in  any  caae  be  deduced  either  from
hia  worda  or  from  any  ocU  which  admitted  of  no
other  interpretation  than  on  inlenlion  to  pledge.
A  man  coidd  only  pledge  a  thing  when  he  wai


in  could  pledge  another  mon'a  properly,  if  th(
oioer  conaented  to  tbe  pledge  at  the  time  or  after-
wardi ;  but  in  either  cue  thia  moat  ptoperly  be
conaidered  tbe  pledge  of  the  owner  for  the  debt  of
another.  If  a  man  pledged  a  thing,  which  waa  not
hia,  and  ofterwarda  became  the  owner  of  it,  the
pledge  WH  nlid,  (Dig.  13.  tit  7.  i.  20;  Sa  tit
2.I.S.)

The  amount  tai  which  a  pledge  wn  aecnrtty  de-
pended on  the  agreement :  itmight  beforprindpal
and  iuleiHt,  or  for  either  ;  or  it  might  comprehend
principal  and  intenat,  and  all  c«t*  and  eipenaea
which  the  pledgee  might  bepnt  totnaramnt  of  the
thingpledged. (Di{p.  13.  W.  17.  i.  %  3S.) For


PIGKD8.
inatanee  ■  aeiibx  would  be  oilitled  to  hia  necR*-
aaij  eipenoa*  concenung  a  ilaTe  or  an  eatate  which
had  been  pigneiated.

Pignua  might  be  created  by  a  judicial  imtence,
aa  for  inatanee  by  the  decna  of  the  praetor  giring  to
a  creditor  power  to  lake  poaanaaJMi  of  hia  debtor^
property  (iHimio  endUorit  ta  faaa  dttHtrit),  aOux
a  aiiigle  thing,  or  all  hia  propacqr,  aa  the  caae  migfat
be.  But  the  peimiauon  or  eomniand  of  the  nogia-
traCut  did  not  afieet  a  pledge,  onlcn  tbe  pnnn
actoally  took  poaKatioD  of  the  thing.  Tbe  follow-
ing are  initance*  ;  —  the  immitaio  damoi  iniiKti
cooat  [DiKHuK  iNrocTDH]:  legatonim  aemn-
doinm  cauB,  which  had  lot  its  otgect  the  •eenring
of  a  legacy  which  bad  been  lefi  eub  condiiioae  or
die  (Dig.  36.  tit  4):  miaBo  Tcntda  in  poooes-
lionem,  when  the  pr^;ikant  widow  waa  allowed  to


causa.  The  right  which  a  pcnon  oblaiixid  by
aach  Immisaio  wsi  odled  Pignos  Praeturium.  It
waa  ailed  Pignoria  capio,  when  the  Praetor  al-
lowed the  goods  of  a  peraon  to  be  taken  who  was
in  contempt  of  the  court,  or  allowed  hia  peraon  to
be  seiied  after  a  judgment  giren  against  him  (air
ooBsajfufisafi).

Then  was  also  among  the  Romsna  a  tadta
hypothecs,  which  existed  not  by  omacnt  of  tlie
partiea,  but  by  rale  of  law  (^w  jvre),  a*  a  conae-
quence  of  certain  acta  or  agreements,  which  wa«
not  acts  or  agreemenla  pertaining  to  pledging.
(Dig.  20.  tit  3.  /•  guibia  eamiu  p9-w  «( typs-
U«B  Uuait  euUnUlKr.)  These  Hypothecaa  were
general  or  special.  The  lollowing  are  inataneea  of
what  were  Oeneral  Hypothecae.  The  Fiseos  had  a
general  hypotheca  in  respect  of  its  dainu  on  the
property  of  the  labject,  and  on  the  property  of  in
agents  or  officers :  the  husband,  on  the  property
of  him  who  promised  a  Dos ;  and  legaieea  and
fideicommissaiii  in  respect  of  their  te^uiea  or  6dei-
commissa,  on  that  portion  of  the  berodilas  of  him
who  hod  to  pay  the  legacies  or  fideicnnmiaaL
Then  were  other  coaea  of  general  hypotbeeae.

The  following  are  inilancea  of  Special  hypo-
thecae :  —  The  leaior  of  a  Praedinm  arbaaatn  had


lessee  {aqmlitiu)  brought  upon  the  premisca  fur
constant  oh  (imvtda  H  iUala.).  The  leaaor  of  a
Piaedinm  mtticiim  had  an  hypotheca  on  the  fhiiis
of  the  brm  as  soon  as  they  were  cotlected  by  the  lea-
see(<»<auu>.  (Dig, 20.  tit  3. s. 7 ;  19.  tit  2.a  24.)
A  peiKn  who  lent  money  to  repair  a  nuDoas
honse,  bad  an  hypotheca  on  the  house  azid  (be
ground  on  which  it  stood,  prorided  the  nnney
were  laid  oat  on  it ;  but  there  waa  no  faypothe*^
if  the  money  waa  lent  to  build  a  bottse  witb  or  to

bad  on  hypotheca  on  thinga  which  were  bought  with
their  money.

The  poraon  who  had  giTen  a  pledge,  waa  atOI
the  owner  of  the  thing  that  waa  pledged.  Heomld
therefore  tue  the  thing,  and  enjoy  its  &uits,  if  ha
hod  not  giTen  up  the  pcsaesdcii.  But  the  ^tre-
ment  might  be  thai  the  credttor  should  ban  tbe
nee  or  profit  of  the  thing  instead  of  inltfat,  which
kind  of  contract  was  ouied  Antichresis  or  motoai
use :  and  if  there  was  no  agreemait  as  to  nso,  tba
creditor  could  pot  use  tbe  thing,  eT«i  if  it  waa  in
his  pcssesnon.  Tbo  pledge  could  also  aeQ  the
thing  pladged,  nnleal  then  wm  aoaae  I


pioNoa

to  tba  Motnuy,  but  inch  nie  did  not  eSCexl  the
riflht  of  the  p1ed|;e&  (Dig.  13.  tit.  7.  1. 18.  g.2.}
If  the  idedger  (old  ■  morable  thing  th>t  vu  pig-
nented,  or  tluU  vu  tpecially  hjpathHatcd,  wiih-
oat  ths  knovlfldge  uid  nmunt  of  tbs  cndilor,  he
na  guiltj  of  fuitnni.  (Dig.  17.  tit.  2.  1. 19.  §  6,
■nd  1.  68.  pr.)  If  the  pledger  M  the  time  of  >
pignoi  being  (['Ten  mi  not  the  owriet  of  the  thing,
hot  had  the  jneoion  of  it,  he  could  ttitl  Mqoile
the  pnpeitf  of  the  thing  bj  niaca;uii>i,  for  the
~ '  '  ' —  -  - '  -m  intem^tioa  of  the  uxxapio.


[POMl


0-]


a  of  >  pigDCT-


Tbe  ovdilcv  RnM  keep  pi
■ted  thing  till  hi>  demand  w
fafl  ciPitd  maintun  hi<  right  lo

tfcing.
pledged

pledge.  (Dig.  30.  tiLl.L  13.  IS.)  He  hftd  nlK
the  right,  in  sue  hit  demand  mu  not  nllified  M
the  time  agreed  on,  to  (ell  the  thing  and  ntiifjr  hii
deraandt  out  of  the  pcoceedi  (jiu  JiMraiendi  $hi
voKitmli  pigmv).  (Cod.  B.  tit  27  (28).}  Thia
power  of  mJo  might  be  qnalilied  by  the  term*  of
Ute  agreement ;  but  a  oeditor  conld  not  be  ds-
prired  of  all  power  of  lale  ;  nor  could  he  be  com-
pelled to  eiereiH  hit  powerirf' lale.  aaiDi(iLet)
UlnMnte*  the  maxim  that  he  who  *ai  not  Ibe
Dwnn'  of  a  thing,  conld  in  aoine  ouei  tell  it,  br
tlie  example  of  Ibe  pledgee  lelling  a  thing  pledj^;
bnt  ha  ptoperif  refen  the  act  of  vie  to  the  wilt
of  the  debtor,  u  eipreued  in  the  agreemeni  of
pledging  ;  and  thm  in  l^sl  eSect,  it  ii  the  debtor
who  Hlla  by  mcani  of  bii  agent,  the  creditor.  An
■gieement  that  a  pledge  Bboold  be  fiirfeited  m  caae
the  demand  wai  not  pttid  at  the  time  agreed  on;
wna  originallj  rerj  common  ;  bnt  it  wai  declared
by  Contaotine,  A.  n.  S2e,  to  be  iU«aL  [Couxia-
•OKU  Lix.]  In  cue  of  a  aale  the  creditor,  ac-
cording to  the  latR  law,  mnat  giro  the  debtor
mtice  of  hii  intention  to  lell,  and  after  nch  notice
be  mnit  wait  two  jean  before  he  could  legall;
•nalie  ft  Mtle.  If  an;  thing  remained  orcr  after
mtiMfimg  tbs  creditor,  it  waa  hii  doty  to  giro  it  to
the  debtor  ;  and  if  the  price  waa  inaulT
>ati>r7  the  cieditar'i  demand,  hi>  debtor
bit  debtor  br  the  remainder.  If  no  pnn
a  reawmable  price  could  he  tonnd,  the  creditor
mWht  become  the  pttrcbaaer,  bnt  atill  the  debtor
bad  a  right  to  ledtem  the  thing  within  two  yean
on  condition  of  fhllj  latlffjing  thecreditor.  (Cod.
8.  tit.  34.  1.  9,)

If  there  were  •ereca]  crediton  to  whnn  a  thmg
wai  pledged  which  wai  iniufficient  to  tUvtj  them
■11,  he  whoH  pledge  wai  prior  in  time  had  a  pra-
fenneeoreT  thereat  (;w(»reM  In plgnongmiprim
emiidil  fxamiam  tl  aecepit  kffiMecam,  Dig.  SO.
tiL  4.  i^  1 1).  There  were  tame  eicepticai  to  ihii
rale  i  for  inatance,  when  ■  nhfeqneat  pledgee  had
lent  hii  sxmn  to  we  the  |dedged  thing  irom  de-
Mnietion,  he  bad  a  preference  orer  a  prior  pledgee,
<I%  SO.  tit.  4.  I.  f,  6.)  Thii  mle  hai  been
adopted  in  the  Engliih  law  ai  to  monej  lent  on
•bipi  and  lecared  by  bottomiy  bonda

Certain  hypotherne,  both  tncilae  and  fennded  on
contiact,  had  ■  inference  or  priority  (privH^m)
orer  all  other  elainu.  The  Piactu  had  a  preference
in  Ripect  of  ill  daimi ;  the  wife  in  ropect  of
her  doi  ;  the  lender  of  money  for  the  re[BiT  or
rBMoration  of  a  bnilding  ;  &  pupilliu  with  whoee
tnoarj  ■  thing  had  been  banght. Of  thote  hypo-


PI0NU8.  917

Ihecae  which  were  foonded  on  eontiact,  the  ibl<
lowing  wen  pririkged :  the  hypothecae  of  thoea
who  had  lent  money  tor  ths  purehaie  of  an  im-
movable thing,  or  of  a  ibop,  iv  for  the  building,
maintaining,  or  imprDTing  01  •  hooie,  dtc,  and  had
eontiBCted  he  an  hypolheca  on  the  thing  ;  there
waa  also  the  hypotheca  which  the  •eller  of  an
immoTable  thing  reeerred  bycraitiact  nntil  he  waa
paid  the  pon:haae-DiDnsy.  Of  theae  dmmanti,  the
Fiicni  came  ficit ;  then  the  wifig  in  reipect  of  hei
doi ;  and  then  the  other  priril^ed  iredjlaci,  ao-
canliog  to  their  priority  in  pmnt  of  time.

In  the  caie  of  unprivileged  crediton,  ths  go-
naalmleaiiJready  obeerred  waa,  that  priority  in
time  gara  priority  of  right  Bot  an  hypotbea
which  conld  he  prored  by  ■  writing  exeented  in  b
certain  public  fbim  (iiMir—Mftm  puilia  am-
fietim),  or  which  wai  potad  by  t(


of  tluee  repnlable  pereoni  (nrfmiHiitKn  fwui
pmiHa  ea^aohai),  had  a  priority  orer  ill  thoia
which  conld  not  be  10  prored.  if  leTeral  hypo-
thecae of  the  lame  kind  were  of  the  ums  date,  be
who  wai  in  poiieiiion  of  the  thing  hud  a  priority.

The  creditor  who  had  for  any  rouon  the  jsini^
orer  the  reit,  wu  inlitlad  to  bs  ntitbed  to  the
tuli  amoont  of  hii  chum  out  of  the  pnceedi  of  Aa
thing  pledged.  A  auhaeqnent  creditar  could  ob-
tain the  rights  of  a  priiv  creditor  in  leTeral  ways.
If  he  fumuhed  the  debtor  with  money  to  pay  off
the  debt,  on  the  condition  of  etan^ng  in  hia  fwice,
and  the  mraiey  waa  actuUy  paid  to  the  price
creditor,  the  lubuquent  owdilor  Mopped  into  the
phue  of  the  prior  creditor,  (Dig.  20.  lit  3.  a.  3.)
Alio,  if  he  purchaied  the  tiling  qn  the  conditim
that  the  purchue-tnoney  ihonld  go  to  Mjify  a
prior  creditor,  he  thereby  alepped  inio  hii  place.
A  lubeequeot  creditor  conld  aln,  without  the  nm-
•ent  either  of  m  prior  crediliH'  «'  of  the  debtor,  pay
off  a  prin  ercdilor,  and  aland  in  hia  pUce  to  thia
amount  of  the  mm  ao  paid.  Thia  amngemenl,
hawsTsr,  did  not  afleet  the  righta  of  an  inter-
mediate pledge*. (Dig.  SO.  tit4. 1.16.)

The  oeditor  had  an  actio  hypothecaria  or  pig^
noiaticia  in  respect  of  the  pledge  againit  erery
penon  who  wai  in  poaaesaioa  of  it  and  had  not  a
lietter  right  than  himirif.  Tliii  right  of  action
eiiited  uidiSerenlly  in  the  caie  of  Pignni  and
Hypothsca.  The  hypotheiaria  actio  wu  designed
to  giTs  offset  to  ths  right  of  the  pledger,  and  con-
ieqiKnlly  for  the  delirsry  of  the  hypothecated
thing  or  the  payment  of  the  debt.  A  creditor  who
had  a  Pignui,  had  al»  a  right  to  ths  Interdictum
retinendae  et  iKuperandas  pcwciiionii,  if  he  wai
diitorbed  in  hii  poneHion.

The  pledgee  wei  bound  to  naliHs  a  ptgnu  on
payment  of  the  debt  tor  which  it  hod  been  giren  ;
and  np  to  that  time  he  «ai  bound  to  take  proper
care  of  tt  On  payment  of  the  debt,  he  might  he
'  " "~  piguonticia  by  the  pledger,  f  "


tingniihed  if  the  thing  wu  changed  so  aa  no
mger  to  be  the  ume,  aa  if  a  man  ihoald  h>Te  all
ie  limber  in  a  merchanfi  yard  u  a  aeeurity,  and


918  PILA,

the  timbw  iIiodIiI  be  ued  in  bdlding  n  iliip  (Dig.
13.  tit.  7.  1.18.  I  3)  J  if  tbetB  wu  confmia,  u
-when  the  pledgee  became  the  otdbt  of  the  thing
that  mt  pledged.  It  vu  tin)  extinguiihed  by
the  pojmrat  of  the  deht ;  and  in  Kme  ether  wajt.

The  kv  of  pledge  U  Rome  wu  [^iacdpallj
founded  on  the  EdicL  OrigiiiBll;  the  onl;  mude
of  giving  Hcoritf  wsi  by  s  tnuufer  of  the  Quiri-
tinan  omieiihip  of  the  thing  bf
jnie  ceieia,  if  il  wu  K  Reg  MuKipi,
tion  id  it!  being  le-eoaveyed,  when  the  debt  wu
ima(_niligtT*maneipaihiaiQfiAfidaeia).  [Fi-
DDCIA.]  Afterwuda  n  thing  wu  giren  to  the
creditor  irith  the  coodition  that  he  mif^ht  *eU  it  in
cue  hii  demand  ww  net  nliiRed :  ^eie  wu  no
traiufer  of  tin  owncnbip.  But  ■•  low  u  the
creditoc  could  not  protect  hii  poMeHion  b;  legal
meiuu,  thii  wu  >  *ety  innfficient  Mcuri^.  Ulci-
mately  the  Pmeter  gave  a  cndit«  a  right  of  nction
(adio  H  mn)  under  the  name  Serriann  actio  for
the  reeoretj  of  the  property  of  a  eolonni  which
wu  hig  wcuritjfar  hiorent  {prQiiuraditma^mdi)i
and  thig  right  of  ac^on  wno  extended  Imder  the
name  of  qoui  SerTiaoa  or  hypothecanB  geoeniltj-
ta  oediton  who  had  things  pigneiated  or  hypothe-
cated to  them.  (Inat.  i.  tiL  6.  •.  7.)  As  to  the
Inteidictun  Salnannm,  lee  InTuiDicTDif.

The  pKwrcM  of  pledge  in  the  Roman  irttem
waa  from  the  clomty  contrivance  of  a  cooTeyance
and  reconTejance  of  the  omunhip,  to  the  deliraiy
ftraditio)  of  a  thing  without  a  coaTcyanea  and
npon  ta  agreement  that  it  ihould  be  a  lecarity
(pignno),  and  finally  to  the  limple  Pactmn  hy-
polWae,  in  wlych  ate  there  wu  no  delireiy,  and
all  thai  the  creditoc  got,  vu  a  right  to  hare  xune
porticolar  thing  of  the  dehtAr  oubject  to  be  lold  to
pay  bio  debt  The  hypotheca  wu  the  last  itnge
in  the  dcTelopment  of  the  Roman  law  of  Pledge.
It  gsie  facilitiei  ibr  [hedging  beyond  what  exiiled
when  the  Pigmu  wu  only  in  oh,  becsuw  thing*
eonid  be  hypothecated  vithout  a  tranifer  of  owner-
ahip  or  a  giving  of  poaHuion,  aocb  u  men  righta
of  action,  debti,  and  the  like.  In  hct,  Pawn  or
Pledge  under  the  fbnn  of  Hypotheca  wu  perfected
by  the  Romani,  and  there  ii  nothing  b>  add  to  iL

The  Roman  Iaw  of  Pledge  hu  many  pointi  of
leeemblance  to  the  Engliih  Law,  bat  mon  ia  ccm-
prehended  imdtf  the  Roman  Law  of  Pledge  than
the  En^ieh  Law  of  Pledge^  inelndinf  in  tut  term
Mortgaf[&  Many  of  the  thiwt  comprehended  in
the  Roman  Iaw  of  Pkdn  fading  to  the  Engliih
Law  of  Lien  and  to  oUur  divisiona  of  Engliih
l«w  which  are  not  included  nndv  Pledge  or
Mortgage.

(Dig.  20.  tit.  1,  2,  S,  &a. ;  Cod.  8.  tit  14—55;
Oaini,  iL  G9— 61 ;  Dig.  IS.  tit,  7,  and  Cod.  4.
tit.S4.  DePignotaticiaAetione*elconlrai  Puchia,
lit.  i.  g24G,  &c  ;  there  i*  an  Engliih  treatise
intitled  •*  The  Law  of  Pledges  or  Pawni  as  it  wu
in  me  among  the  Romani,  ftc,  by  John  Ayliflc^
London,  1732,"  which  appfan  to  cmtain  all  that
can  be  uid,  but  the  antiior^  method  of  treating
the  mbjeet  il  not  penpknooi.)  [I-L.]

PILA  (tr^cupa),  a  bolL  The  game  at  ball
(a^aipiOTuri)  wu  me  of  the  most  faronrite
gynuiutie  eierelses  of  the  Oneks  and  Romans
from  the  tailieat  times  to  the  Ml  of  the  Roman
omfure.  As  the  ancieati  were  food  of  attributing
the  inTcntim  of  ill  gsntei  to  particular  penoni  or
occaskoi,  WB  find  Che  same  to  be  the  case  with  r»-
ipect  to  dw  origin  of  thii  game  (Herod.  I  $t ;


PILA.

Atheo.  L  p.  14,  d.  e. ;  Plin.  nl.  £6),  hnt  swh
■tatemenli  do  not  deserre  attention.  What  is
more  to  the  psrpoee  m  rdeience  to  its  antiquity  i*,
that  we  find  it  mmtioned  in  the  Odysiee  (tL  lOOy
'*'  870,  &c),  whne  it  is  ^yed  by  the
1  damsda  to  the  KiQnd  of  mnaie,  and  also
by  two  eelebnUed  perfbrmen  at  the  comt  of  Aid-
nous  in  a  moat  artutie  aannsl  Moompanied  inth

The  Tuiiona  morsmoiti  of  Ae  body  required  ia
the  game  of  ball  gave  dastioiEj  and  graca  to  the
figure  ;  whence  it  wu  highly  esteemed  by  the
Greeks.  The  Aiheniani  set  so  high  a  Talne  on  it,
that  they  oaafened  upon  Ariatonieu  of  Caiystas
the  right  of  cilkenih^  and  erected  a  stataa  ts
his  hooour,  «<■  aceount  of  his  skill  in  this  gioK.
(Athen.!.  p.  I9,b.  ;  eonpate  Sntdas,  t.  v.'Onn'-)
it  wu  equally  esteemed  by  the  other  state*  ol
Qretce ;  the  young  Spartana,  when  they  wen
leBTine;  the  conditiaD  of  epbebi,  were  called  vfo-
ptit  (Paua.  iiL  14.  S  6  ;  B&kh,  Orp.  /aacr.  n.
1 336, 1 432),  probably  hecanae  their  diier  emiie
wu  the  game  at  ball.  Erery  eotoplete  QynmBihim
had  a  room  (inpaitHVTlipiBr,  a^^fiirrpa)  derated  to


I [G«


'x].


teacher  (rpaifiarait)  gare  hutmction  in  the  ait;
for  it  required  no  small  ikill  and  [ractiM  to  play
it  veil  and  gracefully.

The  game  at  ball  wu  u  great  a  &Toante  with
the  Romans  u  the  Oreeki,  and  wu  I^ycd  at
Rome  by  persons  of  all  ages.  Augustus  Died  to
pby  at  ball  (Suet.  Ayff.  S3.)  PUny  (^  iiL  1)
nialei  how  ranch  hi*  aged  frimd  Spniinna  fun-
cised  himself  ia  this  game  for  the  purpose  of  ward.
ing  off  old  age  ;  and  under  the  empiia  it  wai
generally  played  before  taking  the  bath,  in  a  room
{ipJiaerulgrium)  attached  to  the  baths  lor  the  pur-
pose ;  in  which  we  read  of  the  piii/T^mt  or  player
at  tennis. (Sen.  Bp.  67  ;  Onlli,  Immr.  a.  2S91.)

The  game  at  ball  wH|Jayedat  in  nrioos  waya :
the  later  Greek  writeti  mention  five  imtnnl
modes,  aipcurlOy  Matcvpot,  ^ajWrfn,  kfmffrir,
irii^/iatii,  and  there  were  probably  many  other
vaiietieiL  1.  Oiipana  was  a  game,  in  which  the
ball  wu  thrown  up  into  the  air,  and  each  of  the
persons  who  played  itroTe  to  atch  it,  befiire  it  Irll
to  the  gnond.  (Pollux,  ii.  1D6 ;  Hesyeh.  and
Phot.  I.  v.;  Eustatii.  ai/  CU.  liiL  372.  a,lGnl.)
2.  "EwIffitupaT,  also  called  ^fi)Cur4  and  twitatm,
wu  the  game  at  foot-bsl!,  played  in  much  the
■ame  way  u  with  ui,  by  a  gnat  nunalwr  at  fa-
loni  divided  into  two  parties  opposed  to  one  an-
other. (Pollux,  iz.  104.)  Thii  wu  a  faroorite
game  at  Sperta,  when  it  wu  I^yed  with  gnat
emulatian.  (Siebelis,  ad  Paai.  iii.  14.  j  S.)  S.
twWvfo,  called  i^trMta  bj  Haychiu  (t  c),  wu
played  by  a  number  of  persons,  who  thnw  the
b^  from  one  to  asothtr,  but  its  peeoliaiity  cm-
sisled  in  the  person  who  bad  the  ball  ptcunding
' ' ''  to  a  certain  individnal.  and  while  the


lid  an  giteo  by  the  gianunaiiana.  (  Pollu,
ix,  lOS  ;  Etym.  Mag.  s.  n.  *rnii ;  Athm.  i.  {w
15,  a.)  4.  'AfrcarrA',  which  wu  slso  played  at
by  the  Romans,  is  apoken  of  under  Hahtastvii.
5.  'Awiffafii,  wu  a  game  in  which  the  i^yct
threw  the  Ml  to  the  ground  with  such  finn  as  to
came  it  to  rebound,  when  he  itrack  il  down  agaiu
with  the  palm  of  his  hand  and  so  went  on  dung
many  times:  the  number  M'.Ume*  utt  tnnate^


PILENTUM.
(FdliD,  it.  lOS.)  We  lown  bim  Plain  (ITuael.
p.  UG)  thsL  in  OLt  game  of  ball,  pJujed  U  by
boji,  t]iinig:h  wa  do  not  know  what  kind  it  wu,
the  boT  who  vu  conquered  wsi  oiled  Mi  (but)  ;
ud  uie  one who  eooqaeted  m*  named  king


X \Kilw


i>lw>


plajrcdMinrarioDiwajL  Pik
tal  HUM  fbr  any  kind  of  bdl :  but  the  balli  among
the  Reuam  ■eem  to  ban  beau  of  three  kindi ;
the  pHa  in  iu  namwar  loue,  a  naall  ball ;  the
tbaU,  a  gmt  ball  filled  witlf  air  [Follis]  i  and
the  pagaaiea,  of  which  we  know  acaieelj  anTlhinfc,
M  it  ii  only  nwnUoned  in  two  pauagea  by  Manial
(Til  S2.  7.  liT.  43).  but  from  the  laCta  of  which
we  may  eooclade  that  it  tnu  imaller  than  the
fbllii  and  larger  than  the  pils.  Moat  et  the  game*
at  ball  among  the  Roniana  lesn  to  bare  been
played  at  with  tbe  pila  or  imall  haJL  One  of  the
aimpleit  mode*  of  playii^  the  ball,  where  two  per-
Boni  itaadhig  oppoaile  to  one  another  threw  the
ball  ftom  one  to  the  other,  wai  called  datattm
ImUn.  (Plaot.  Om.  ii.  3.  17.)  But  the  mnM
fiioante  game  at  ball  tsenu  to  haie  bean  the
trigou  at  pila  trigomUu,  which  wat  played  at  by
tluve  pereona,  who  Rood  in  the  form  of  a  triangle,
Jr  tfefiiKf.  We  haie  no  particnlan  mpecting
it,  hot  in  are  told  that  akilfol  playen  prided
tluniielTH  npon  catching  and  throwing  the  ball
with  their  left  hand. (Mart  liv.  46,  vii.  72.  9).

The  ancient  phyiiciana  preicribed  (he  game  at
ball,  ■•  well  a*  other  hinds  of  eierciic,  Ui  their
patienlB ;  Aotylliu  (op.  On&of.  Ti.  32)  giret  tome
latemting  mformatian  on  thii  nihjeeL

The  perwjoi  phying  with  ihepila  orimal!  ball
in  the  annexed  woodcut  an  taken  from  a  pointing
in  the  bathe  of  Titua  {Doer,  da  Baiiu  de  Tihu,

EL  17) ;  but  it  ii  difficult  to  say  what  {articulnr
ind  cf  game  they  are  playing  aL  Three  of  the
playen  hare  two  balls  each.


(BQrette.  De  la  ^irUruftjwi,  p.  214,  Ac,
JUim.  lit  FAcnd.  dai  Jnirr.  vol.  i.  ;  Kisuse.  (ijpa-
mattii  a.  Jyom. d.  HtU. p.  2S9,  &c  ,  Becki
OaUuM,  YoL  L  p.  268,  &c)

PILA. [MoaTAKIUH.]

PILA'NI. [EMKCiTua,  p.  SOI.b.]
PILENTUM,  a  iplendid  four- wheeled  taniage,
foniLsbad  with  soft  cushions,  which  conveyed  tbe
Roman  matrons  in  saoed  processions,  and  in  going

666  ;  Hor.  EpitL  iL  1. 192  ;  Claodian,  De  Ni-pL
JIoMir.  2\ii  ;  lui.  Orig.  iz.  12.) This  disli: "
was  granted  to  them  by  the  Senate  en  acco
tbdr  geaensity  in  gixing  their  gold  and  jew
•  paitkolar  occaaion  lor  the  •entice  of  the


».  25.) The  Valal  Tiigina  were  conTcycd
■tune  manner. (Prndeutiua  eoalra  Sym.  iL
ni>i.) The  pilentum  was  probably  Tery  like


e  aides,  so  that  those  who  nl  in  it  might  both

s  mid  be  seen.  [J.  Y.]

Pl'LEUS  or  PIl-EUM  (Non.  Marc  iiL  ,piUa

ramm  nml,  StTV.  w  Viry.  Atf.  il.  616).  dim.

PILE'OI.US  or  PILE-OLUM  (Colum.  <U  AHar.

25)  ;  (vl\ar,  dim.  riXuir,  second  dim.  viXUtier ;

slAqfia,  nAuT^r),  any  piece  of  feit ;  more  eape-

ikull-cap  of  felt,  a  hat

I  teema  no  reaian  to  doubt  that  felting  (^

*ATrrurii,  put  PoiO.  ii.  2.  p.  296,  ed.  Bekker)  is

a  more  ancient  inTontion  than  weaTing  [Tkla  ],  nor

that  both  of  these  arts  (ama  mto  Europe  from  Asia.

From  the  Greeks,  who  vera  acqoajnted with

is  article  as  nriy  as  the  age  of  Homer  (//.  x.

265)  and  Hesiod  (Op.  et  Diei,  542,  546),  tbe  use

of  felt  pasted  together  with  its  name  to  the  Ro-

Among  them  the  employment  of  it  waa

alwaja  far  less  extended  than  among  the  Oreelu.

Nerertbelets Pliny  in  eoa  sentence,  "  lanao  et

per  se  coactae  vestfm  ftciunt,**  gi^et  a  very  exact

account  of  tbe  process  of  felting. (//.  iV.  viiL  43.

a  73.) A  Latm  sepulchral  inscription (Gruter,

p.  648.  IL  4)  mentions  "  a  manobcturer  of  woollen

felt "  (Imuxriat  coadilariui),  at  the  same  time  in-

diouing  that  be  wat  not  a  native  of  Italy  {Larv-

The  principal  use  of  fett  among  the  Greeks  and
Bomans  was  to  make  co?erings  of  the  bead  for  the
mala  sex^  and  the  moat  common  kind  was  a  simple
skull  cap.  It  was  often  more  elevated,  though  st"
round  at  the  top.  In  this  shape  it  a
coins,  especially  on  those  of  Sparta,  or  au
hibit  the  tymbolt  of  the  Dioscuri ;  and  ii  »  inus
represented,  with  that  addition  on  its  summit,
which  dittingniihed  the  Roman  flsmiaea  and  tolii,
in  three  £gURt  et  the  vioodcut  to  the  article  Afex.
But  the  ^lex,  according  to  Dionysiu*  of  Halicar-
nasan%  was  sometimes  conical ;  and  conical  or
painted  caps  were  certainly  very  common.

In  the  Greek  and  Roman  mythology  different
kinds  of  caps  were  lymbatiislly  aitigned  to  indi-
cate the  occupationi  of  the  weareri.  The  painter
Nicomacbut  first  tepretentod  Ulysses  in  a  cap,  no
doubt  to  indicate  his  sea-iaring  life.  (,P[iB.H.N.
ixiri.  g  22.)  The  woodcut  on  the  following  page
shows  turn  clothed  in  the  EzoHis,  and  in  the  act  of
offering  vine  to  the  (^clopa.  (Winekehnanii,Maa.
/■oi.ii.l64!Homer,Od.ii,346— 347.)  Hebere
wears  the  roond  cap  ;  but  more  commonly  both  he
and  the  boatman  Charon  (see  woodcut,  p.  512)
'  Lied. Vulcan  (see  woodcut,  p.  726)


and  Daedalus  wear  the  caps  of  common  artificeri

of  ancient  art  is  that  now  generally  known  by  the
name  oF  "  the  Phrygian  bonnet."  Tbe  Mysion
pileus,  mentioned  by  Aristophanc*  (Atiarn.  429),
must  have  been  one  of  this  kind.  For  we  find  it
continually  introduced  at  the  charaderiatic  •ymbol
uf  Asiatic  life  in  paintings  and  sculptures  of  Priam
(see  woodcut,  p.  S82)  and  Uilhtas  (woodcut  on
tide-page),  and  in  short  in  all  the  representatinns,
not  only  of  Trojans  and  Phrygians,  but  of  Amuons
(woodcut,  p.  894),  and  of  all  the  inhabilanta  of
Asia  Mmor,  and  even  of  nations  dwelling  still
further  east  The  reprcKSitatiDntof  this  Phrygian,
or  Mjtian,  cap  in  sculptured  marble  show  that  it
vBi  made  of  a  strong  and  stiff  noaterial  and  of  a
■ ■■■ in* •  o"


end,  u b;  the  Saoie.  wboia  niff  pnked  c^
H«Ridi>tiu  deKribc*  under  the  nams  of  nvpSairli
The  fbnn  of  thoM  wcrn  by  the  Annesiani  (riA
^poi  'AffUwiai,  BnuKk,  AiaL  ii.  146)  ii  ahoi
on  vuHonj  coim,  which  -wen  itraclc  in  the  reign
of  Venu  on  ocouion  of  the  ncccwM  of  the  Ronun
nrmj  in  Annenis,  a.  n.  161. It  ii  lame
c^rect,  1>ut  lometiina  bent  downwurdg  or  Cnint
The  truncated  conical  hat  ii  moil  diitinctly
on  two  of  the  SwmBliaai  in  the  group  it  page
Among  the  Roniaiu  the  cap  of  felt  whi
emblem  of  liberty. When  a  alave  obtained  hia
freedom  he  had  lua  haul  ahaTed,  and  wore  iaitead
of  hii  hair  an  nndjed  pilena  (utoMii  \tuKir,  Diod.
Sic  file.  Ug. 22. p.  633, ed. Wu*. ; PlauL
AnpMI.  L  1.  906  J Peraiua,  t.  82). Hence  the

librnj,  by  which  ilaTci  were  fiwjnently  called
upon  to  uJie  op  anni  with  a  priHniu  of  librrtj.
(LiT.  ixiT.  32.)  The  figure  of  Liber^  on  lome
of  the  coin*  of  Antonbu  Piua,  itrock  A.  D.  14£,
holdi  thU  cap  in  the  right  band.

to  the  Tarioiu  fbnna  of  the
we  bare  Bo  coiuider  otbere


hu  cap  in  tl
ontradiBtiDe


a  expand,"  and  adopted  b


■rrifftou,  detJTod  from

d  by  the  Latini  m  the
lonn  paatHt,  ana.  ptaaimemliu,  well  eipreued  the
dutinctiTe  ihua  of  thete  hat*.  What  vni  taken
from  their  height  waiadded  to  thur  width.  Thoae
already  deacnbed  had  no  brim :  the  petant  of
eTery  Tariety  had  a  brim,  which  wa«  either  exactly
or  needy  drcnlai,  and  which  Taried  gmtly  in  iti
width.  Id  aome  cam  it  ii  a  circolar  diik  withmt
any  sown  at  all,  and  often  then  ii  onW  a  deprtt-
Eion  or  alight  coniSTit;  in  tbia  ditk  fitted  to  the
top  of  the  head.  Of  thia  a  beaatifiil  example  ia
ptvtenled  in  a  refnmbent  aCotne  of  Endymior,
habited  aa  a  hunter,  and  ileeping  on  hij  acnif^
tfaii  itaCne  belonp  to  iIm  Towidey  CoUkUob  in


PILEna
the  BiiAb  Hnasniii,  and  ahowa  tli:  mode  of  wear-
ing the  petaaua  tied  mider  the  chin.  In  other  ia-
■tanoa,  it  ia  tied  behind  the  neck  inatead  of  beiiur
tied  before  iL  (See  the  next  woodcat.)  Very
fiflqnently  we  obeerre  a  boai  on  the  top  of  the  pe-
taaua, in  the  litnation  in  which  it  ^poin  in  bba
woodeala,  p^aa  359,  879.  In  tbeie  wnodoits
and  in  tlut  hoe  intntducad  the  tfim  of  the  pwaatu
ii  nnnoonted  by  a  cnwn.  F^iientl}r  the  oown
is  in  the  fiam  of  a  aknll.*^  ;  we  also  find  it  ani^
Monded  with  a  tccj  nainiw  brim.  The  Greek
petiaua  in  ila  moat  tamnun  lem  i^ned  irith  tba
eheopeat  hata  of  nndyad  fdt,  now  made  in  Eiw-
land.  On  the  haadi  of  niftic*  and  utifioera  Ira
OUT  atreeli  and  lanea  we  often  mm  fbrma  the  eoact
counterpart  of  thoaa  wiiich  we  most  admire  in  tha
works  of  ancient  art.  The  petaaua  ia  alu  atfll
commonly  worn  by  agricultural  labo<ii«n  in  Orvocv
and  Ana  Minor.  In  ancient  times  it  was  pn-
feired  to  the  skull-oqi  as  a  [aolectioii  from  the  am)
(Sueton.  Atig.  S3),  and  on  this  account  ^ignk
pennitted  tha  Roman  senators  to  wear  it  at  the
theatn*.  (Dion  Cass.  Itx.  7.)  It  was  nsed  br
thepberda  (Callim.  ftty.  ISA),  huilen,  and  t»-
Tellera.  (Plant.  AiqiUlr.  ProL  143,  L  1.  287.
Ptfd.  iL  4.  4G,  n.  7.  SO  ;  Brrmek,  AmU.
The  annexed  woodcnl  ia  from  a  fielile  tbic
>ng  to  Mr.  Hope  (OutniK,  i.  71),
senis  a  Greek  soldier  in  his  bat  and


belopg-


irdinaiy  dress  of  the  Athenian  epheln,  well  eihi-
lited  in  the  Panatheaaic  Frieze  of  the  Partheonn,
now  preserred  in  the  British  Museum,  was  the  bat
and  taif.  [CBLtutt.]  (Dninck.  AwaL  I  5,
"  41  ;  Philemon,  p.  367,  ed.  Meineke  g  PoUnx,
maginaiy
was  oomroDnly  attributed  Ic
adii.Gml.yi.;  Hartianus  Cimella,  iL  176'i~Bphip-
pns  <^,  Atiait,  xil  p.  fi37.  f),  and  aometimca  to
the  Dioscori.

Andent  andiora  mention  three  nrietiea  of  tha
petaaua,  the  ThesaaJain  (Dion  Cast.  Le.;  Callim.
Fra0.  1S4  j  Schol.  lia  Sopk.  Otd.  CoL  316),  the
Arcadian  (Bnuick,  AimL  ii.  384  ;  Diog.  La61.  tL
102),  and  the  I^eonian  (Arrian.  Tm*.  p.  12,  rd.
Uhincardi)  ;  bat  they  do  not  ai^  la  what  tba  dif-


PISTOR.
femn  coiniWd.  In  like  n
mean  dear  in  wbit  ruptcM  tbc  Cadsu  difTsrcd
{ran  ths  paUou,  although  tlunr  m  diitinctly  op-
piaed  to  ODS  (Dolhec  by  a  writer  in  Atheiu
<iiL  p.  SS7,  e).  McveoTer  in  the  lalsr  Oreek  .
tlun  m  find  viXsi  ued  to  dowta  >  hat  of  othar
iiialmal*  bends  fiilt (Athen.  *L  p.  374.)

On  tba  nn  of  felt  in  coinng  lh«  fsM  mb  Udo.

Felt  mu  likewiu  nud  tot  ue  Itninf;  of  bdmeta.
[Oai-u.] ForfutbarilliiMiatioiucf  thiirabjee^

dim  B.  '  [J.  y.]

PIU'CBEPUS. [PiL*.]

PILUH. [Hiarj,]

PINACOTHE'CA  (*(»{,  ft^ni),  a  pictoi
nllenr.  HaraUui,  after  the  laptore  of  Syricnie,
fint  diiplajed  the  woiki  of  Oreek  painlen  and
•colpton  (o  hii  coDotijman,  whoa  lasts  for  the  Bne

Seipio,

a  pamn  aikcrtba  ipeiU  of  Aehaia  had  been  tnni-
piwtid  by  Monmiini  to  Roma.  Objeeta  of  thii
dcKt^itian  wne  at  AiH  emplqjred  excliuiTelf  for
the  decontion  of  toaplta  and  {dacea  of  public  reaort,
bat  prirate  cdlactiona  wan  aoon  fanned, ;  and  to-
wmrda  the  doie  of  the  republic  we  find  "Uiat  in  the
hoMM  of  the  more  opulent  B  room  wai  dcTOted  to
the  reception  of  psintingi  and  (tKtoea.  (Vam^
A  ft.  i.  3.  63  ;  Cit  «  Vtrr.  L  31.)  In  the
time  of  Angnitm,  VitroTini  indudea  tho  pinsco-
theca  unong  the  ordinary  apartmenli  of  a  complete
manmon,  and  nTca  directioni  that  it  ahould  be  of
ample  aiie  and  being  the  north,  in  order  that  the
Ijgbt  might  be  eqnable  and  not  too  atrong.  (VitniT,
i.  2,  tL  5.  7  ;  compare  Plin.  H.  N.  xxt.i.  2.  7.
1 1  ;  Haioia,  L>  Patait  d»  SaMnu,  cap.  ii. ;
Becker,  OoUaj,  toL  i  p.  93.)  [W,  K]

PISCATO'RII  LUDI.  [Loni  Phic*to«il]
PISCI-NA,  properly  a  fiih-pond,  either  of  taJt-
nler  or  of  fiiah  (aee  the  panegea  in  Forcellini


the  batlu.  (AauAiDDcruiip.  114,  a  j  Balniii,
pp.  IBS.  b,  19.  a.)  [P.  8.]

PISTILLUM. [MoaTJBiDK.]

PISTOR  (V™"i*i).  »  baker,  fimn  fomr*  to
poDnd,  aince  com  vu  pounded  in  mortan  be-
ixe  the  ioiealian  of  milla.  [Hola.]  At  Rome
■bread  vai  otiginallj  made  at  boms  by  the  women
of  the  hmue  i  and  then  mre  do  peraoni  at  Rome
wbo  mads  taking  a  trade,  or  any  ilaTca  tpecially
kept  iat  thU  purpoae  in  prirate  honiea,  Ull  b.  c.
I7S.  (Plin.H'.Ar.XTiilll.  1.2B.)  InVarro'.
time,  however,  good  boken  were  bighly  prixed,
and  great  anma  were  paid  for  ilaTea  who  excelled
in  this  art.  (QeU.  xt.  19.)  The  name  wat  not
confined  to  those  who  made  bread  only,  hnt  wu
•lao  given  to  paatry.co(^  and  ccnfeclimen,  in
whi^  case  however  they  wna  UMally  c^led
fiiUira  MeiarU  or  ooiadirfarij.  (Mart.  ST.  333  ;
UTeUi,/«itr.iL4363.)  The  baken  at  Homelike
moat  other  tradeepeopic,  farmed  a  coll^nm.  (Dig.
3.  tit.  4.1.1  ;  37.  tit  1.1.46.)

Bread  waa  often  baked  in  monldl  oiled  artaptat,
and  the  loavea  thna  baked  were  termed  arioptiaL
(Pirn.  H.  N.  u^i.  11.  ■.37,28;  PlaaL^aMliL
9.  4.)  In  one  of  the  bakehotiMa  diKovered  al
Pmspeii,  aereral  loaTo  have  been  fonnd  apparently
bakeil  in  monldi,  which  may  therefore  hs  rtgorded
aa  artoptiai  i  they  are  repreaented  below.  They
are  Bat  and  about  eight  iochea  in  diameter.


t  genendiy  made  at I


Bread waa i _

Atbeoi,  bat  wai  aold  in  the  market-piece  chiefly
by  women,  called  ifirmrdAiltt.  (Compare  AriBtnph.
Yof.  1389,  &c)  ThoHi  women  leem  to  have
been  what  the  fiih-womcD  of  Iiondon  are  at  pre-
lent  i  they  eicelled  in  abuie,  whence  Ariitaphnne*
(Aaa.  8£6)  nyt,  AaiSapirrrAu  Aowifi  dpTDnMiSai.
(Becker,  OkB-iUtt,  vol.  i.  p.  384.)

PISTRfNUM. [Moij ;  MoBTiRiuM.]

PLAGA. [RrrB.]

PLAGIA'RIUS. [Pt*oiDii.]

PLA'OIUM.  Thia  offence  wai  the  anbject  of
a  Fabia  Lex,  which  ia  mentioned  by  Cicero  (Fro
Habirio,  c.  3),  and  ii  aaiigned  to  the  conanltliip  of
Qnintoi  Fabina  and  M.  Clandioi  Marcellni,  b.  c,
183;  bnt  without  infficient  reaion.  The  chief
proviaiaiia  of  the  Lex  are  collected  from  the  Digeat
(48.  tiL  If.  a.  6):  '*if  a  freeman  concealed,  kept
confined,  or  knowingly  with  dalui  nuJiu  puichaied
jennua  or  libertinna  a^init  hi*  wilt,  or  par.

,  Ud  in  an;  luch  acta  ;  or  if  hs  persuaded
another  pcraon'i  male  or  female  ilave  to  mn  away
&om  a  maater  or  mlitraa,  oi  without  the  oonaent
or  knowledge  of  ths  maater  or  miitresi  concealed,
kept  confin^l,  (a  purchased  knowingly  with  dolus
miUui  and]  male  or  female  ihtTC,  or  panicipated  iu

,  nch  acta,  he  wai  liable  to  the  penalliea  of  tbe
Lu  Fahio."  The  penalty  of  the  Lex  wai  pecu-
niary, and  the  conieqnence  waa  Infiunia  ;  but  thia
(ell  uito  diauae,  and  panona  who  oSended  sgainit
the  lex  were  puniihsd,  either  by  being  aent  to
in  the  minei  or  by  emcifiiian,  if  they  were
iorea,  or  with  confiKation  of  half  i^  their
poperty  or  papettal  rdf^tion,  if  they  wen
honestiorea.  The  aime  of  kidnapping  men  beoune
unon  practice  and  requiied  vigiiant  pursuit
onina,  Odaeiam.  c  33).  A  Senatoicaniulram
ad  Legem  Fabiam  did  not  allow  a  master  to  give
or  adl  a  runaway  alaTe,  which  waa  techniolly
called  ^  fogam  vendeie ;  **  but  ths  provision  did

t  apply  to  a  slave  vrho  was  merely  absent,  nor

the  case  of  a  runaway  iIsTe  whm  the  master

d  conuuiasioned  any  one  to  go  after  him  and

1  him :  it  wes  ths  otject  of  the  proviaion  to  en-
eoorage  the  recovery  of  runaway  ilaves.  The  name
-  ?  the  Senatusoansnltani,  by  which  the  Lex  Fabia
aa  amended,  does  not  appear. The  word  Plagium

■aid  to  come  from  the  Greek  nXAyiat,  oblique,
idirect,  doloaua.  But  thia  is  donbtfij.  Sehrader
(Inst  4.  tit.  18.  g  10)  thinks  that  the  derivation
from  plaga  (a  net)  ia  more  probable.  He  who
committM  plagium  was  plagiarina,  a  word  which
Martial  (J^  i.  £3)  applies  to  a  petson  who  bliely
^ve  hinueif  out  as  the  author  ol  a  book  ;  and  in

mr  language.  (Dig.  48.  tit.  IS  ;  Cod.  9.  tiL  30  ;
Paulut,  S.R.  L  tit.  6  A.  I  Rein,  Dot  OHmmalmU
■ -^iii««r,p,386.)  CO.L.]


PLANETAE.


932

PLANETAE,  >.  Stell4«  brrantM  (i\a»^-
roj  1.  lAuv^imi  icrifft  u  oppoud  to  rt  iarkar^
•raw  itrr^v).  The  popnlar  utronomy  ot  theenrlj
Qieek*  waa  chieSy  conEned,  u  u  pointod  dul  elie-
vhen  [AsthohoHia],  to  s  knowledgn  of  the
maming  wid  evening  rinngi  and  Kttingi  of  the
brightat  itan  and  m«l  renurkabla  amilsllations,
Binco  upon  tfap!ia  obaerrationi  the  formation  and
n^ulation  of  the  piizniLive  kalendan  ia  a  great
ineBiure  depended.  No  lingle  ilar  was  mon  likcl  j
to  attnct  attenlion  under  lucfa  ciirunntance*  than
the  planet  Venui,  and  accordinglf  Tie  Mimmg
SUir  {'Eita^iipoi)  ii  placed  first  among  the  itelLu
progen;  of  Erigsneia  in  the  2i«9nt)r  (381)  —
Toit  W  nh'  (m  iri/Mwt)  ioripa  tIktic  '&»ff-
iarpa  ti  Kaiurrriam  ri  i"  oGparbf  loTt^A-

whilfllKith  the  MomMj  Star  C'<fri^.*p«i),  and  the
Enaiinff  Star  (*E<r»pai),  an  tuuned  in  the  Ho-
incric  poanu  (72.  nil  317,  xiiii.  326,  comn.  Od.
liil  93),  where  they  are  endecUj  rrganted  u
diitinct  from  one  another.  Areorditig  to  ApoUo-
donu,  in  the  teeond  bonk  of  hii  vorii  IIip)  htmv,
Pnhagonu  wai  the  flnt  who  innniKd  that  tma-
^opos  and'EoTfpoi  w^n  one  and  the  same,  bot  by
Phavorinna  the  hooonr  of  thii  ditcoTaiy  ii  aaeribed
to  Pwmenidea.  The  latter  certainly  looked  upon
thiibody,  which  he  called  both 'Knot  and 'Etmpot,
H  altogether  di9«Hit  in  iti  naton  frran  th^fiied
atan,  for  ha  placed  it  in  hiihigheat  region  or  aether;
below  it,  but  alio  in  the  aether,  wu  the  nm,  and
below  the  tan,  in  the  fiery  region  ('vrf  irvp^ti),
which  be  oilli  aipiaii,  were  the  iiied  •tan.  The
term  wXoi^tbj  aeema,  if  w«  can  tmit  Plntarch  and
Slobaeoi,  to  haie  been  reoogntaed  ■«  early  m  the


at4wd  highest  in  the  oniTene,  next  Mow  waa  the
moon,  and  thai  the  fixed  ilan  andtheplanoti  (inri
U  bIto^i  ri  irXot^  rUr  larpw  vol  roil  *\iu^
raf).  Empedaclei  anpuaed  the  fixed  itan  to  be
imbedded  bi  the  cryataJliDa  ifdiua,  whbh,  accord-
ing to  hii  lyitem,  enreloped  all  thinj^i,  bat  the
planet!  to  be  detached  from  it,  thai  implying  the
necemity  felt  for  aome  theory,  which  ahould  acconnt
fbr  their  erratic  coone.  Democrito)  wnte  n  trea-
tiae  nipi  t&h  ir\antTuVy  among  which  he  reckoned
tho  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  tua^im,  but,  u  yet,
their  ntimber  bad  not  been  determined.  Tbia  ia
expreuly  affirmed  by  Seneca  (QmiaL  ffaL  Tii.
3),  "  Democritoe  anbtiliiaimiB  antiqaoram  omnimn
(Dspkari  ait  aa  plurei  itellai  asaa  qoaa  eorrant ;
ted  nee  nimienun  illnium  poaoit,  Dec  nomina,  non-
dam  compreheniii  quinque  aiderum  cunibui.  Eo-
doiua  ah  £gypto  beg  motm  in  Oraedam  tianatu-
Lt"  Bnt  dthoagh  Kudoini  may  haie  been  the
firat  to  communicato  acientific  detail*  with  reapect
to  the  otbita  and  nunemeoti  of  the  plaoeta,  Pbilo-
laaa,  ■  Pythagoiaui,  who  fionriahed  niate  than  s
eentaiy  euiter,  wm  (crtwnly  acqaainted  with  the
i^e  five,  fiir  he  aiaintabud  that  there  wai  a
central  fire  anund  which  the  lea  heavenly  bodice
{tita  iri/iara  diJa)  revolved.  Of  theae,  the  moat
remoto  Ainn  the  centre  waa  aiporii,  that  ia,  the
aphere  containing  the  fixed  i«u«,  next  in  order
wen  the  planete,  then  the  lun,  then  the  moon,  then
tiie  eartii,  and,  below  the  earth,  the  Anticthon
(irrlxBrnr,  tee  Ariat.  dt  Codo,  ii.  13),  thna  com-
pleting the  DDinber  ten  if  we  reckon  Uia  planeti  a>
five, in  the  Tinueut  of  Plato,  tlie  plan«ta  an


PLANETAE.
mentioned  ipaeiEeally  ta  five  in  nnmbet  (tXux  nl
irtXVv  "^  *trrt  SAAa  ierfa  Mxkt^  tx—^n
■Xar^Tiu),  aitd  in  the  maa  paange,  we  iat  the
firat  time  meet  with  the  name  Htrmam  eonnectnl
with  one  of  these  (kwfrf^ar  B)  nl  vi*  laptr  'E^
Itai  Krfiiitrw).  it  ia  not,  however,  muil  wecaan*
down  to  the  Etuoomia,  the  wok  of  tome  diteiple
of  Pbto,  that  the  whole  five  an  eDomenlsd,  nch
with  a  diatingniahing  appeUatkm  derived  finaa  a
god:  ■riirniKfitiii,rbifnu&At,tiirTai'itf»t,
fMr  rit  'A^ptth^t,  rlai  roi  'Eji^.  Ii  the  tract,
nepi  H^/uv,  fbond  among  the  writingt  of  Arialotle,
althoDgb  probabl;  not  &om  hit  pen,  we  He  fur-
niahed  with  a  aecond  aet  of  namea  —  *alpi>r  farihe
■tar  of  Kroniia;*QM>r,forthBt  ofZena  ;  IlDpiicir,
fur  that  of  Ana  t  *Krf^,  forthat  of  Aphrodite;
SvUfoi',  for  that  of  Hermea  ;  and  tliete  teem  to
have  been  the  ordinaiy  deaignationa  employed  bj
men  of  iciance.  It  ia  hen  iBted  alao,  that  Hapfcu
waa  by  aome  termed  the  alar  of  Hmklet,  and
thatlTlACMT  vai  b^aome  termed  the  alar  cf  Apollft
Pliny  givet  addiuonal  variatioDi,  for  in  hia  liaC
they  an  oitalogued  aa  Sidub  Satdbhi,  Jovia,
MABTia  a.  HsBCDLls,  VsHrau  a.  Jdnonis  a.
laiDi*  a.  MiTHia  Ocdm  (.Lmciftr,  Vetper),  H>K-
cuRi  a.  Apollinib  ;  and  theae  may  be  lUI!  fartha-

and  the  lexicografthera.

The  Earth  being  Banerally  r^aided  aa  the  ototn
of  the  Univena,  die  Moon  waa  believed  ta  ba
nnreat  (o  it,  then  the  San,  Venoa,  and  Meren;  ;
beyond  theae  waa  Man,  beyond  Mara  waa  JapiHr,
b^'ond  Jupiter  «at  Satimina,  the  fixed  ran  being
the  moat  remote  of  alL  Bat  while  aatnmonB*
fer  the  moat  {nrt  agreed  in  placing  the  Sm,  Venua,
and  Mercury  between  the  Moon  and  Miua,  the
greitett  divenity  of  apinion  obtained  with  reganl
to  their  nUtive  poaition.  Atcordinf;  to  aone,  the
Snn  waa  the  nnnat  of  the  three  to  the  Earth,  ac-
cording to  ollien  the  moat  diitant,  vhiJe  a  third
aet  of  philoaophoa  aaaigned  to  it  the  middle  plan
between  Venua  and  Mercury.  In  liks  maanei^
Bonie  nii^oBed  that  Mercury  waa  neanr  to  the
Earth  than  Venua,  othai  the  leveraa,  and  every
ibie  cmnbinatica  of  the  three  bodia*  waa  ci-


pouible  CO

Satnmna  WM  belitved  to  petfbnn  ■  complete
revolution  in  liartj  aolar  ycoo,  Jnailer  in  twelve,
calculations  approaching  very  neaiij  to  tha  truth.
The  period  of  Mara  waa  GiEd  at  two  ynn,  a  de-
tenumation  leia  acituals  than  the  two  fiuma;
but  not  very  wide  of  the  truth.  Aa  to  Vont  and
Mercury,  noteven  an  apptoximatioa  waa  made,  for
they  were  both  belieied  to  ptrixm  their  nvolntioa
in  exactly,  or  vcaj  nouly  the  aame  tima  aa  the  San  :
Pliny,  -who  aSecti  great  pnciaion  in  thia  natter,
flxs  318  dayific  Veona,  and  3S9  dayi  far  MenncT.

Sotuinni  being  that  reoioved  to  a  gnat  dialaDrc
from  the  aonrce  of  heat  waa  natgnlly  vieand  aa
poaaeaaing  a  cold  and  i^  character  {grUdm^  ao
ripalii  waturat  —fi^Ua  ataffii  Salmrm),  Mara,  on
the  other  hntd,  aa  of  a  hot  and  Strj  natote,
while  Jupjtei  which  lay  betwecai  then  eqit^td  a
tempeiatnre  made  Dp  by  (ha  coaibinatiaB  of  the
extreme!.  The  aitnlwtn  eanght  up  theae  aotiMM,
and  uniting  than  with  the  lagendt  of  mythdun,
adapted  them  to  tiieir  own  porpete,  anitwii^y
repreaenting  the  inflteoet  of  SaOiaat  at  malign,
and  that  of  Jnpiter  at  pnpitJevt.

Haec  tamen  ignotW,  quid  tidut  liale  minetar

Satunu.  Jxn.  *i  tea.


PLAUSTRUM.
Sthunnnqiw  gnTon  jmmcn  Jon  fiangimiu  una.
Pan.  T.  411.
T«  Jorii  im^
TMela  Satumo  ishilgenj

Hot.  Qtrm.  iL  IS.  7S.

It  tniut  b«  mdmbKid  that  in  the  abdva  ramuki,
m  haie  coDfioed  oundiei  entinly  la  ths  popalu
nolioai  wtueh  pnniled  unong  th*  mcieati  with-
out M(«inpliiig  to  trace  the  pneRw  of  KiealiSc
obMrvalioD,  a  lahject  which  bdonn  to  a  rormal
biiMr;  of  aatrmomy,  bat  doea  not  bll  within  our
limit!.  (PliiL  dt  Placitit  PMa.  u.  It,  IS,  i6  i
SUA.  Ed.  Pl^!.!.  23.  i  I,  35.  ii;  Diogta  Labi.
viiL  14,  ix  as ;  Aiat,  Pkatu.  464  ;  Gemini  Ett-
■aota  Ji*n.  c  I  i  AcUlL  Tat.  Iiag.  ad  AnL
J'luam.  xiii. ;  Ljdna,  D»  Mtn.  T.  Ai:. ;  Cic.  it
A'aLOwr.  iL20;  Plin.  jf.  M  ii.  S.  8;  Tac /fut
T.  4  1  Maciob.  ScmM.S>if.  4.)  [W.  H.]

PLA'STICA.  [&rATU*«ti.]
■  PLAUSTRUM  «Pl.OSTBUM.rfiatPL0S-
TELLUM  (liofo,  ifua.l^4a{ii),  a  cattDi  waggon.
Tbti  Tchiele  had  commoDlj  two  whaelj,  but  KHni-
timca  four,  and  it  wu  then  called  thi  pjuiutnim
wu^n.  The  inTinlion  of  fbui^wheeled  wig;iani  ii
ucribalcd  to  the  Phijgiaoa. (Plio.  H.  ft.  tiL  £6.)

Be«idM  the  wherli  and  aile  the  plauiirum  con-
aialcd  of  a  ilnog  pole  <Mwi),  lo  the  hinder  pan  of
which  wu  bfiensd  a  table  of  wooden  planka.
The  blocki  of  atone,  or  other  thinp  to  be  carried,
were  either  laid  upon  thii  table  without  an;  other
■uppoit,  or  an  additional  aecurity  wai  obtained
bjtfaeaae  either  of  boudi  at  the  lidei  (Anpreplu,
Uom.<U.Ti.70;PUlo,n«ef.p.467,  HaindorC)
or  of  a  large  wicker  baiket  tied  upon  the  cart
(nlpifl,  Horn.  IL  iiir.  267,  Of.  ly.  131).  The
■mieied  woodcut,  taken  bom  a  baa-relief  at  Home,
exbibiti  a  cart,  ttie  bod;  of  which  ia  nipplied  by  a
baaket  Shnilai  Tehicle*  are  (till  uaed  in  man;
puta  of  Europe,  being  employed  man  eapedall;
to  out;  chanoeL


lo  man;  caaea,  thoogh  doI  nniTetBll;,
whaela  woe  &(tened  to  ^e  axle,  which  noTsd,  u
in  ont  children*!  carta,  within  wooden  miai  adapt-
ed for  it!  neeptiou  and  Eutened  to  the  body.
Theae  rii^  wm  called  in  Oreek  itiaiintti,  in
Idtin  ariaicahn.  The  parti  of  the  aiii,  whicb  re-
volved within  than,  were  umetiniei  aaed  with
inn.  <VitnT.  x.  20.  g  14.)  The  commonett  kind
of  cart-wheel  wa!  that  oiled  ^nipaiHia,  "  the
dtom,"  <R|n  it!  naemblance  to  the  mnucal  inilru-
nwnt  «f  the  Hne  name.  (Vami,  di  Rt  SmL  iiL  S  ;
ViiE.  Otorf.  iL  444.)  It  wai  nearly  a  foot  in
thiekncaa.  and  wai  made  either  by  lawiag  the
tfwik  of  a  tree  aerou  in  aa  horiionlal  direction,  or
by  nailing  tcgether  b«rdi  of  the  reqairite  ahape
■ad  tiaa. 1( ia  eionpUGed  in  lbs  pMedmg


933

woodcut,  and  b  the  uulptnrea  on  the  arch  of
Septiniui  Severn!  at  Rome.  Although  theae
wheela  were  excellent  for  keepiiw  the  road*  hi
repair  and  did  not  cut  up  the  fieldi,  yet  thej
rendered  it  neseaaaiy  to  take  a  long  circuit  in
tuning.  They  adnnod  ilowly.  (Vin.  Gtorg,  L
1311.)  Thqr  alas  made  a  lend  crealung,  which
waa  heard  lo  a  great  diitaooe  (ilridmiia  flmatra,
Viig.  Gterg.  m.  £38  ;  gtmaMa,  Aem.  li  138).
"" ' '  nuuie  them  liable  to  be

orertumed  with  their  load  of  itone,  timber,  manure,
or  ikini  of  wine  (Jut.  iii.  241—243),  whence  the
Emperor  Hadrian  prohibited  hesTily  loaded  wag-
goni  from  entering  the  city  of  Home.  (Spartian.
Hadr.  22.)  The  waggcmer  wai  lometimea  required
to  aid  the  team  with  hii  ihoulder.  Accident!  of
thit  kind  gave  origin  to  the  proverb  "  Plaiutmm
perculi,"  meaning  "  I  have  had  a  miafbrtoDe^"
(Plant.  £^  iv.  2.  72.)  Carti  of  thii  deacription,
having  eolid  wheel!  without  ipoke^  are  itill  tued
■  Oreeco  (DodweU-i  Taio;  voL  ii.  pp.  102,  103)
d  in  tome  paiti  of  Aua.  (Sir  R.  K.  Portri\i
Ihiolt,  vol  iL  p.  B33.)  [J,  Y.J

PLERE'Il  LUDI. [LuDi  Plbbeu.]
PLEBES  or  PLEBS. PLEBEII. Thia  word

jid  ii  thereibre  etymalogicaliy  oonnected  with
r\^^>,  a  tenn  which  wu  applied  to  the  plebeian*
ly  the  more  coirect  Oreek  writer!  on  Rinnan  bie-
tory,  while  othen  wrongly  called  them  Svi"!  or  el
Siuioruial.

The  plebeian!  ware  the  body  of  cinnmon!  or  the
commonalty  of  Rome,  and  thui  couitituted  one  of
the  two  great  elemenu  of  which  the  Roman  nation
conaiated,  and  which  hai  given  to  the  earlier  period*
of  Roman  hiilonr  it!  peculiar  character  and  in-
terett.  Before  the  time  of  Nicbuhr  the  moat  io-
(cniiitant  notion!  were  entertained  by  icholan  with
regard  lo  the  plebeiani  and  their  relation!  to  the
patriciaui ;  and  it  ia  one  of  hie  peculiar  merit!  to
have  pointed  out  the  real  poaition  which  they  oo*
cupied  in  the  hiiloly  of  Rome.

The  ancient!  themaelve*  do  not  agree  napectiDg
the  time  when  the  plebeian!  began  to  foim  a  part
of  the  Roman  pmulatioiu  Dunyiiui  and  Livy
repreaent  them  aa  having  formed  a  part  of  the  Ro-
man! >a  early  aa  the  time  of  Romolua,  and  !ecm
to  coniider  them  aa  the  client!  of  the  patrician!,  or
aa  the  low  multitude  of  oulcaata  who  flockad  to
Home  at  the  time  whan  Rcmutui  opened  the  aiy-
lum.  (Dionja.  L  3  ;  Llr.  L  8.)  If  there  ia  any
truth  at  alt  in  theie  acmnint!  of  the  early  eii!lenee
of  the  plebeian!,  we  can  only  conoeive  them  to
have  been  the  original  inhalwlanl*  of  the  diitricta
occupied  by  the  new  leltlen  (Ramnea  or  Romana),
who,  after  tlieir  teiritory  wi!  conquered,  were  kept
in  that  itate  of  nibmiieion  in  which  conqueied  ika-
lion!  were  to  Avqucutiy  held  in  early  timea.
There  are  alio  lonie  other  ■tatemenli  re&rring  to
inch  an  eariy  exiitence  of  the  plebeiana ;  for  the
client!,  m  the  time  of  Romnlu!,  are  laid  to  bare
been  formed  out  of  the  plebeian!.  (Dionji.  ii.  9  t
Plot  HomuL  13  i  Cic  dt  lU  PWd.  iL  9  ;  Fat.
t.  V.  Patnmia.)  In  the  early  time*  a(  Rome  the
poeitlon  of  a  client  wa*  in  many  reapect*  nndoubt-
edly  i*i  more  bvootable  than  that  of  a  plebeian,
and  it  ii  not  improbable  that  mna  of  the  piebeiani
may  for  thii  itaion  have  entered  into  the  relation
of  dientela  to  Kimo  patrician!,  and  have  given  up
the  right*  which  they  had  aa  free  plebeian*  ;  and
of  thii  kind  may  have  given  riic  to  ttia


OtbiiUxler  Rim.  rerfiutaiigtpi>KiiiMe,FiaiikLl  84  7)
hu  anderbLken  vith  Tcry  pluuibla  argnUMJiU  to
proTe  that  originiUj  plcbeiuu  BDd  client!  wen  the
ums  n«[JB,  and  thit  arigin^j  all  the  p1«bciiuii
w«n  clienti  ol  the  {Btriouu,  iriim  whicfa  dependent
lelatieo  they  gndoallj  emukcipated  tbcnuelTu.

Wbatcm  maj  ba  thought  of  the  eiiitnics  of
plabeiani  at  Rams  in  Ibe  (wliMt  timea,  their  amn-
b«r  at  all  OTent*  eannot  Iistb  been  rery  great.  The
time  when  they  firat  i^tpear  u  ■  diitmct  dau  of
Roraiin  citiieni  in  contiBdiatinctioii  to  the  patri-
ciuu,  ii  in  the  nifcn  of  Tullni  Hm^iiu.  Alba,
the  head  of  the  Latin  confedeiacy,  mu  in  hii  niga
taken  b;  the  Roman!  and  laied  to  the  ground.
The  moit  distingniehed  of  it!  inhabitant!  were
tianipionted  to  Rome  and  meiTed  unang  the  paCri-
eian!  (  but  the  gnat  bulk  of  Alban  citiiena,  lome
of  whom  were  likewiae  tramferred  to  Rome,  and
TBceived  •etllemenl*  on  the  CaeliBa  hill,  were  kept
in  ■  itate  of  (ubminion  to  the  populu  Roniaiiiu  or
the  paCHciiini.  Tbii  new  population  in  and  aboal
Rome,coinbined,perhap>,  with  the  nibdued  original
inhabilanu  of  the  place,  which  in  number  ii  laid  to
haie  been  equal  to  the  old  inhabitanti  of  the  city
or  the  patriciani,  were  the  plebeiant.  They  were
Latin!,  and  con«eqnBnt!y  of  the  uine  blood  u  the
Hamnei,  the  nohlett  of  the  three  patriciim  tribes.
(Lir.  i.  SO  1  Dionyi.  ilL  39,  31  ;  Val.  Mai.  iii  1.
g  1.)  After  the  conqueat  of  Alha,  Rome,  in  the
reign  of  Ancni  Harciui,  acqiuied  poneuion  of  a
coniiderable  extant  of  country  containing  a  number
of  dependent  Lslin  towni,  ai  Medullia,  Fidenae,
Polilorium,  Telleoae,  and  Ficana.  Number)  of
the  inhabitanti  of  theie  towni  were  again  tiani-
planted  to  Rome,  and  iuearpomted  with  the  ple-
beian! already  Killed  there,  and  the  Aventine  wai
aaatgned  to  them  aa  their  habitation.  (LIt.  L  S3  ;
Dionyi.  iii.  31,  37.)  Many,  however,  remained  in
their  original  homei,  and  their  landi  were  given
bach  to  them  by  the  Romane,  !0  that  they  re-
mained free  tind-ownen  a!  much  aa  the  conqneron
themielvei,  and  thai  were  distinct  from  the  client!.

The  order  of  plebeian!  or  the  commonalty,  which
had  thus  gradnally  been  formed  by  the  side  of  the
pntriciani,  and  which  far  eiceeded  the  populu  in
number,  liyed  partly  in  Borne  iuelf  in  the  diilricli
abore  mentioned,  and  partly  on  their  farmer  eatatei
in  the  conntry  lubject  to  Rome,  in  lowm,  «il!iy[ei,
or  Hsttered  bnra.  The  plebeian!  were  eitiieni,
hot  not  Optimo  jure  ;  they  were  perleclly  diilinct
fimn  the  palrieiini.  Hid  were  neither  contained  in
the  three  tribei,  nor  in  the  curiae  nor  in  the  patri-
dan  gente*.  They  were  comequently  excluded
from  the  comitia,  the  aenale,  and  all  civil  and
prieatly  ofFicei  of  the  itate.  Dionyeini  !■  greatly
miitaken  in  elating  that  all  the  new  citiiena  were
dialribuled  among  the  patrician  curi™,  and  nnder
thi)  errsr  ho  laboun  Ihroughont  hit  hiolory,  for  he
eenceivee  the  patriciana  and  plebeiana  ai  having
been  united  In  the  comitia  ouriala  (ir.  12,  ii.  41  J.
That  the  plebeiani  were  not  contained  in  the  cnriei,
t!  evident  from  die  following  bet! :  —  Dianynui
himself  (iv.  7S,  78)  call!  the  cnriei  a  patrician  aa-
■embly  ;  Livy  (v.  46)  apeak*  of  a  lei  curiala,  which
wai  made  without  any  cooperation  on  the  part  of
the  plebeiani ;  and  Ihoae,  who  confirm  the  election
ofkmga  or  magiatraCea  and  confer  the  impcrium.


e  (Uionya.  ii.


4  1  Liv.  vi  42  J


id  not  belong  t(  .  „  ,

exprady  italed  by  Liiy  (i.  8).  The  only  pmnt
of  contact  between  the  two  ealatea  waa  the  amy,
for  after  the  conqueat  of  Alba,  Tnllo!  Hsaliliui
doubled  the  number  of  l^ioD!  of  the  RiMBan  amy.
(Lit.  i  30.)  LivyalaoitateatfaatTnlhuHoatiliBa
formed  ten  new  lurmaa  of  egoitea,  bat  wbctber
theaa  new  tmmaa  omnitad  of  Albaaa,  aa  Livy
aaya,  or  whether  they  vara  takaa  from  the  three
old  tribe*,  aa  OItllii|g  (OtaeL  d.  JtSm.  Slaalfr.
p.  325)  thinki,  ii  only  matter  of  ipecuhtion.  Tba
plebeian*  were  tfana  obliged  to  fight  and  ahed  their
blood  in  the  defence  and  aupport  of  their  no  fel-
iow-dtiaeni  without  being  allowed  to  ihare  any  of
their  righta  or  privilegea,  and  without  even  the
rifi^t  of  intermairiagie  (eojnnifiiKn),  In  all  judi-
cial matteta  they  woe  entiiely  at  tht  neiey  U  the
patridana,  and  had  no  right  of  appeal  agajnat  any
unjnat  aentence,  though  they  wen  not,  like  the
clients,  bound  to  have  a  pationn*.  They  coDtinued
lo  lave  their  own  ncTi  which  they  had  had  before
the  conquest,  but  they  were  regulated  by  the  pa-
trician pontifla.  (Feat  i.  n.  Mmcipalia  vcm.}
Lastly,  they  were  free  land-ownen,  and  had  thrir
own  eente*.  That  a  plebeian,  when  married  to  s
plebeian  woman,  had  the  patria  poleatns  over  his
children,  and  tt^  if  he  belonged  to  a  plebeian
gena,  he  abaced  in  the  jura  and  aatia  gmtilidB  of
that  gena,  are  pinnti  which  ag^ear  lo  ba  aelF-eri-

The  popuktion  of  the  Ronian  itate  thai  cco-
*iitcd  of  two  oppoaite  eJementa  ;  a  nilinff  elasi  or
an  ariatocracy,  and  the  cammnialty.  which,  tho(t||h
of  the  same  slock  aa  the  nobleat  among  the  mien,
and  eiceedmg  them  in  numben,  yet  enjoyed  ntaie
of  the  rif[hts  which  might  enaUe  thent  lo  take  a
pan  in  tho  management  of  public  affiurt,  rdigioss
or  riviL  Their  atinrnihip  rcaembled  the  relation
of  alien!  to  a  state,  in  which  they  are  merely  toie-
lated  on  ccaidltion  of  perfiirming  certain  aervics,
and  they  an,  in  fact,  KHnetimei  called  pernrial
While  the  order  of  the  patridaii!  waa  perfectly
organiied  by  ita  division  into  curiae,  docariae,
and  gmtea,  the  commonil^  had  no  luch  organiaa-
tian,  except  iti  diviaion  into  ^las  ;  its  relalieiii
to  the  pntiiciana  alao  were  m  no  way  defined,
and  it  coiiaequently  had  no  meana  of  protecting
itaelf  against  any  arbitiaiT  procecdinga  of  the
rulera.  That  luch  a  itate  of  thinoi  could  not  kit,
ii  a  truth  which  moil  have  been  hit  by  evety  one
who  wai  not  blinded  by  his  own  Milfiihta!  and
lo(e  of  dominion.  Tarquiniu!  Primu  wai  the  finl
who  conceived  the  idea  of  pi


nncelved  the  idea  of  placing  tlie  plebeiaBa  on
ting  of  eqnality  with  the  old  bu^hera,  Irf  di-
Tiding  them  into  three  tribct,  which  he  intrnded
to  call  afiec  his  own  name  and  thoae  of  hia  fHendi.
(Verrius  Flaoraa,  op.  FinL  t.  v.  A-ne**  ,■  Liv.  i  3S,
Ac;  DionyLiil,71;  Cic  d»  Rt  PoU.  il  70.)  Bat
thia  noble  plan  was  frustialed  by  the  oppoaitini  o(
the  augur  Attaa  Navina,  who  jrohably  acted  iha
part  of  a  repieeenlatira  of  the  patridana.  All  that
Tarqninina  could  do  waa  lo  efieet  the  »*"■-«""  of
the  nohleet  plebeian  finniliea  into  the  three  M
tribea,  who,  howern,  were  diatmgnished  frcan  the
old  patrician  famsliet  by  the  nanM!  of  Ramata,
Titles,  and  I^ceres  seenndi,  and  their  g«tea  an
aometimea  diatinguished  by  the  epithet  minia)^
aa  they  entered  into  the  mate  relatios  in  which  tht


IiDCtm  hti  bean  to  the  fint  two  tribs,  befon  tbo
tioK  of  TuqaiDiu.  (FnL  t-v.Sia  Vitat  Saetr-
deta;  Cie.  d*  R<  i-aU.  iL  2fl ,  Lit.  L  35,  47.)
Thii  nuuure,  klthoogb  mn  sdnutage  to  th«  matt
diMiiigiuihed  plabciaa  &iiuli(^  did  not  booefil  tha
pkbnlnl  M  an  orde^  tea  ths  mv  patriciu)
BHt  Iww  beeana  aliaaitad  from  tba  ctaUNnal^,
vhiU  tba  p*-!"!™  u  B  b«d7  van  ommditaU;
MrangtboMd  bj  tba  atciwiin  of  tba  Daw  familita.
It  mi  Kaatrad  ta  U*  wteeaier.Samai  Tullini,
to  gira  to  tha  caniDaiiBlqr  a  Rfalar  intamai  «gaa>-

bidm.  The  iBtaotion  of  thia  k^  wia  not  to
npaat  tha  aid  aautitation,  but  tnlf  to  anbtfge  it  to
M  to  Rikd«r  it  capiMe  af  iMdnng  wilbia  itaalf
the  new  elamaDta  of  tha  «■!&  He  fint  dinded
the  dl;  into  bur,  ftnd  then  Ifaa  aabisct  aDnntij
uaaod,  which  wai  inhabited  bj  plebeiani,  into
tvantr-aiz  TCgioiu  or  IocbI  tribe*  [Lir.  L  tS  i
Dtooji.  IT.  U,  Ac),  «Dd  in  tbeae  r^^ou  ha


PLEBES.  93ft

TUHUiC  oF  their  proper^. Taxation  and  tha
T  dutiei  were  arranged  luanrding  to  theie
I  in  lacli  &  nacaei,  ^st  tha  hHrier  buidena
fell  upon  ths  wcDlthier  cluaea. The  whole  bodir
of  dtiieni  chna  diTided  vai  formed  into  a  great


jugen  rrh,  aa  opinion  which  .
ad«tli»(p.339,  Ac).  Aa  r^nla  the  fanr  dtjr-
uibea,  It  abould  be  obaeiTed  that  the  * — •^
and  tha  Cb|nIo1  wen  Dot  eoDtained  m  t
fomar  fanning  a  part  of  tbe  coonlcr  Iribea,  and
the  latter  being,  M  it  were,  the  oit?  of  the  god).
<Vana,  lU  Ua^.  Lot  r.  £6,  ed.  MUUer.)  Tha
twentr-aii  oxintij tribei  a  .-  - • •

LiTf  in  hii  BcCDoDI  of  tha  Se
wboehafintapealuoftbe  whole  number  of  ttibea
(iL  31 ;  caupara  Dionj).  tIl  61),  ha  only  man-
tiona  twto^-oaa  intlead  of  thii^.  Niabobr  (L
p.  418)  ii  nndoabtadlf  right  in  leconcilina  tlui
unnbu  with  the  thirty  tribea  of  Soviua  by  tho
aoppaailioo,  that  in  the  war  with  FoiMooa  Homa
loat  ooa  third  of  bar  torilory,  k  a.  ten  tnbei,  ao
tbal  there  wcie  only  twenty  lefL  Ai,  tliere-
fcra,  after  the  inunigialkia  of  tba  CUudii
client!,  a  new  thbe  waa  fiume d  (LIt
larj  ia  right  in  manliaiing  only  twenty-«iia  tiibo.
Tboa  lb£^  Snrian  tribea  did  not,  at  leatt  origi-
nally, tnntain  any  petriciani,  and  aran  after  &t
Clau^  bad  ccme  to  Rome,  it  it  not  neeaaviy  it
aappoBB  that  the  bou  Claudia,  which  wna  niaed  to
tbe  lank  of  patndan,  WM  coalained  in  the  new
tribe,  bat  the  new  tribe  {«obablj  confined  of  then
elienta  to  whom  buida  wen  aiaigned  beyond  th<
Anio.  {LiT.  ILo.,' cranpan  TniBus.)  Soauofthe
clienlt  of  the  petriauia,  hawaTar,  were  fHnbably
eanlained  m  the  Senian  tribea.  (Diooyi.  It.  22,
&C.)  Each  tribe  iiad  ita  preafect  oUed  tribnmii.
(Diouji.  ii.  14  ;  Appian,  B.  C.  iiL  23 1  Thibuhii«.)
The  tribea  hod  al»  their  own  aacn,  featinli,  and
nwetinEi  (oonifia  trilmla\  which  wen  conioked
by  tbett  tribonci.

Thia  diTicion  into  triba  with  tribimei  at  their


of  the  plebeiana,  analogooa  to  the  divition  of  the
[•Irieiiiu  into  thirty  coriae,  without  canfeiring
npon  them  the  right  to  mlerien  ia  any  way  in  tba
managemait  of  public  afiaiit,  or  in  tha  electii
which  wen  left  entirely  to  tha  aenate  and
curiae.  Theae  rigbta,  however,  they  obtained  by
another  ragoUtioa  of  Serriua  TuUiiu,  which  wn
made  wholly  indf  pendant  of  tho  thirty  tribci.  Fq
thia  purpoao  bo  inaiituted  a  cenna,  and  dirided
the  whole  body  of  Roman  ritiiena,  plebeiaua  ai
wdl  aa  r**^-i— ■,  into  Gto  claiaea,  acoNding  t«


[CoMin*,  p.  S33,  &c] In
ibly  tbe  plabaiana  now  met  the  patridaoa

footing  of  eqwlity,  but  the  votea

.  .  .1  in  nicb  a  way  that  it  wia  alwan
in  tbe  power  of  tha  wadtbieat  rlimi  i,  to  which  tba
[Btriciana  utually  beloi^ied,  to  deiide  a  qnaatioQ
i_i —  ;.  —  pot  to  the  Tote  of  the  poorer  daiaea.


of  equitea,  with  tw^TO  ioSmgia  in  the  comitia
eanturieliL  [EatrrrM,  p.  471.]  I*«ly,  Serriai
ToUiu  ia  aaid  to  bare  i^pdaled  the  eomma-
inm  between  the  two  ordcn  by  about  fifty  lawi,
(Dionya.  ii.  13 ;  Niijuwi  rota  tiir  ownAAwTi-
■csif  nil  TD^i  »|>l  Tier  Uun))utr»  ;  sompara  T.  2,
23)  Oiitt]iD^,p.34a>  B«ck(r,l.ap.]£6.)
In  tbii  oautitatioQ  die  plebeiani,  aa  ancb,  did
not  obtain  admiMion  la  the  aviale,  DOT  to  tba  bi^ait

'-tn^,  mw  to  anj  tf  the  prieftlT  ofEcaa. To

NO  office*  tha  pabiciana  alone  Ihougbt  them-
aelraa  entitled  by  divina  righL  Tbe  plebeiana
alio  oontinoed  to  be  excluded  from  oeeupyii^  any
pOTtioo  of  tho  public  land,  which  aa  yet  waa  only
Bieaaed  by  the  patridau,  and  were  only  allowed
keep  their  cattle  upon  tha  common  paatore.  Car
which  they  had  to  pay  to  tha  itate  ■  certain  iDm.
It  la  tiue  that  by  the  acquiiilion  of  wealth  ple-
beiant  might  beocma  memtien  of  the  fint  property
claiB,  and  that  thus  Ibeii  Totea  in  tha  comitn
might  become  of  the  nmo  weight  ai  thoae  of  tha
wealthy  patridana,  bat  tba  poaaibility  of  acquiring
iueh  wealth  waa  diminiihed  by  Ibair  being  ex-
cluded fnm  tbe  ueof  tha  agnpablicui.  Niabnhi
(L  p,  430,  ftc)  infin  fraa  tba  natora  of  tbe  Ser-
Tiao  craatitntion  that  it  muat  bare  gianied  to  the
plebeian*  fimta  adTanlagea  than  those  mmtiaiied
by  our  faiitoriana :  be  couceina  that  it  gaTe  to
them  the  right  of  appeal  to  their  own  aaaembly,  and
to  pan  seuteuce  npon  nch  a*  gioaily  infringed  their
iibeniea,  in  thon  that  the  Serrian  conatitutioa
placed  them  m  the  lame  footing  in  legard  to  tbe
patrician),  aa  waa  afterwaid*  permanently  effected
by  the  hiwi  of  C.  Liciniui  and  L.  Seitiua.  There
ii  no  doubt  that  inch  might  and  abould  haTe  been
the  cue,  but  tbe  ar^nmeota  which  be  bringa  fio-
waid  in  lupport  of  hi*  bypotbcai*  do  not  anMar  to
be  coaTincing,  aa  ha*  been  poinlad  oat  by  Otfttling
<i).265,  Ac).  All  that  wa  know  fbr  astab  ii,
that  Serrioa  gave  to  the  body  of  tba  plebnani  an
inteiiial  oiganintion  by  tha  eatabliabmenl  of  tha
thirty  ^dabeian  tribea,  uid  that  bi  the  comitia  cod-
tnriata  ha  placed  tbam,  at  Icoat  appaicDtly,  on  a
tooting  of  aqoality  with  tha  populai.  Wbelbet  be
intended  to  dn  mete,  or  wofJd  haTs  done  mcae  If
it  bad  been  in  hi*  powa,  ia  a  diffiaent  questimL
But  &et*,  like  thoae  ataled  abore,  wen  aufficient
M  a  later  period,  when  the  benefit*  actnally  cna-
ferred  upon  tbe  plebeiani  wen  taken  away  from
them,  to  make  the  giatdul  cammoiialty  look  upon
that  king  a*  it*  great  patron,  and  CTsn  icfjard  him
a*  baring  gnnted  all  thoM  righta  which  aubse-
qUHitly  ibej  acquired  after  many  yean  of  baid
■iraggk. Tbni  what  ha  actually  had  dme,  wa*


936

Bisffgeisted  to  irhit  he  poHibTjr  might  hare  dons,
al  vould  buie  wiihed  U  do.  In  thii  light  we
have  to  r^ard  the  itoiy  that  he  intended  to  laj
doirn  his  royal  dignity  and  to  eatabliih  the  gorern-
ment  of  two  comoU,  one  of  vhom  ma  to  have
bseo  a  plebeian.

Dnring  the  reign  of  the  tut  Iciog  tba  plebeianl
not  onlf  l«t  all  t&ejr  had  gained  by  the  legiilation
of  hii  predecoMt  (DionjTL  JT.  43,  Ai) ;  bat  the
tynnt  aim  compelled  tbem  to  work  like  ilaTea  in
tail  gnat  uctiitectunl  worki,  audi  u  the  doaos
and  the  cdcau.

On  the  eataUiahment  of  iba  rapnblie,  the  coniCia
eantariala,  and  pahapa  the  whole  oonitJCution,
inch  ai  it  had  been  bdon  the  reigD  of  the  lut  Tar'
qniniui,  wen  lettoied,  M  that  the  patrieiana  a]one
conlinoed  lo  be  eligible  to  all  the  public  offices.
(Lit.  iT.  6,  iL  iO,  Ac,  z.  B.)  That  the  comitia
eentnriata  wen  reatored  iointadiatety  aftet  the
baitiihment  of  the  Taiqaini,  may  be  iiiferred  &em
the  vordi  of  Li<y  <i.  60),  who  laya,  that  tlie  fitit
coniuli  vera  elected  e>  imunaihirni  Servii  TUHi,
for  Ihcae  vordt  probably  refer  to  the  eomitia
centoriata,  in  which,  according  to  the  regnlations
of  king  Serrioi,  the  eiectinnt  wen  to  be  hrid.
There  waa  atill  no  connabinm  between  the  two
ordera,  and  the  popolaa  waa  itill  in  every  n^wct
diatinet  from  the  pleba.  Coniidering  the  hct  that
the  patriciana  reaerred  fin  thenueliei  all  the
powen  which  hdd  fomierly  been  coneealrated  in
the  king,  and  that  theee jHWen  were  now  given  lo
a  nomber  of  patrician  omcen,  we  muM  admit  that
the  plebeiana  at  the  commencement  of  the  republic
were  woree  off  than  if  the  kin^y  role  had  con-
tinned  nnder  the  initiEotioaa  introduced  by  Ser-
vinj.  They,  however,  soon  gained  tome  advantage!.
The  vacancica  which  had  occurred  in  the  Moate
during  the  reign  of  the  laat  king  ware  filled  up
with  the  meat  diatinguiihed  among  the  plebeian
equite*  (patrfBmter^Lit.Vi.  I  ;  Dionyi.T.  13^
FeM.s.s.QH'rxKnt,-FtuC.iVifiB.Il  ;  Sinatur),
audValerina  PnbliooU  carried  a  number  of  Jouu  by
which  the  relatiou  between  patriciana  and  ple-
beiana  vare  more  accuiately  defined  than  they  had
hitherto  been,  and  which  alao  afforded  aome  pro-
tection  to  the  plebeiana.  [Laaaa  Valuuk.]  Botii

,  in  which,  however,  the  patri-
in£oence  through
(US  nomoer  of  their  dicnti  w£o  voted  in  them  ;
and  in  addition  to  Ibii  all  dacnei  of  the  oenturiea
atill  required  the  lanclioa  of  the  corise.  Notwith-
atandiog  theae  diaadvantagea,  the  plobeiana  ocim-
pied  A  poiitiiHi  which might  aoon  have  enabled

dani,  had  not  a  great  calamity  i
and  put  an  end  to  their  political  progreaa.  Thia
wat  the  uniortunate  war  with  Ponenna,  in  which
a  great  number  (a  third)  of  the  plobeiant  loat  their
eatAtca,  became  impovenabed,  and  perhapi  fi>r  n
time  aubject  to  the  Btiuacnna.

'' '  nnvhile,  the  patriciana,  not  latiaSed

!ciae  of  all  the  authority  in  the  atate.


comjtia  centunala,  n
ciana  eieiciaad  an  a<


appear  ni

rights  gnuiled  to  the  plebaiani  by  the  Valerian
lawa.  (Liv.  iL  27.)  Such  proceedh^  and  the
mcrcileaa  harahncM  and  o^ireauan  on  the  part  of
the  ralaa,  could  not  &i)  to  roDie  the  indignatioi
and  nil  tanb  the  luulance  of  the  plebeinna,  who
gmdoally  baoune  convinced  that  it  waa  impos-
■ibls  to  retain  what  they  paa«eM»d  arithout  acqoir-


PLBBBS.
ire.  The  acniggle  which  Ihnt  originated  be-
tbe  two  parties,  ii,  u  &r  aa  the  eammaiialtj'
Hned,  one  of  the  noblest  that  baa  ever  been
eatried  on  between  oppnason  and  oppriaaid.  On
the  one  band  we  sea  a  haughty  and  fiuthleia  oli-
garchy awlyinf  aU  mema  liut  tbe  love  of  dankuoD
and  ieluanen  can  deviae  ;  tat  the  other  hand,  k
eoomonalty  Gxbeaiing  to  tbe  last  m  iia  oppodtion
and  nsilMuct^  erer  fccf^ing  witluB  the  bon^s  of
the  eziatiDg  laws,  and  atiinng  after  power,  not  tar
the  UMte  gratiflcation  of  ambitioo,  bnt  in  order  to
obtain  the  means  of  Bntrcling  itself  against  baad
and  lyranDy.  The  details  of  this  iti^^E  belong
to  a  history  of  Rome  and  cannot  be  given  here  ;  we
can  only  point  ont  in  what  manner  the  plebeian*
gradually  gained  access  to  all  the  civil  and  nligt-
ous  offlcEa,  until  at  last  the  two  hostile  rieiuBUta
became  united  into  one  great  body  of  HemaD  dt)-
lons  with  equal  righta,  and  a  atate  of  thinga  anae
totally  different  bom  what  had  existed  beCne.

After  the  first  aeeeaaion,  in  n.  c.  494,  the  ple-
beisni  gunsd  aeTenl  great  advantage*.  First,  n
law  was  passed  to  prevent  the  ptrieiiBa  fion
taking  uancious  interest  of  monqr  wbich  they  fre-
quently lent  to  impovaiihed  plebcianB  (Dieaya.
•L  83)  ;  aemndly,  tribonu  were  anmnled  lir  tba
protection  of  the  plebeiana  [Thibchi]  ;  and  laatly,
plebeian  acdUes  were  appoinied.  iABDtl.BB.)
Shortly  after,  they  gained  the  right  to  BBnuDea
before  their  own  comitia  tribnta  any  one  wba  had
violated  the  rights  c^  their  order  (Feat.  av.  Saor
HUBS  ;  OUttiing,  p.  SDQ,  Ac),  and  lo  make  deem*
(pIMtaia),  which,  however,  did  ncA  becaw
binding  upon  the  whole  natirai  until  tbe  year  ^.e,
4i9.  [PtiBiBCiTiJii.]  A  few  years  after  this
{US,  B.  c),  &»  tribune  Csnuleiu  established,  by
his  rogation^  the  counDbinm  between  pnriciana
and  plebeian*.  (Liv.  ir.  44,  v.  II,  13  ;  Dionya.  x.
60,  xl  28 ;  Cic  dt  JU  PidL  iL  ST.)  He  abo
attempted  to  divide  the  consulship  between  tbe
two  mders,  bnt  the  i*lricians  flrastiated  the  realiia-
tion  of  thia  pbn  by  the  appointment  of  six  mili-
tary tribunea,  who  wen  to  be  elocted  frtsa  both
orders.  [Tkibdni.]  Bnt  that  the  plebnans
might  have  no  share  m  tbe  ctoaorial  power,
with  which  the  consuls  had  been  iovested,  the
military  tribnnca  did  not  obtain  that  power,  and

blished,  with  which  patriciana  alone  wen  to  be  in-
veated.  [CbksoK.]  Shortly  after  the  takii^  of
Rome  by  the  (Janla,  we  find  the  plebeians  again  in
a  atate  little  better  than  thM  in  which  they  bad
been  before  their  firtt  seoeeairai  to  the  nuna  mtxr.
In  B.C  421,  however,  they  were  admitted  to  tbe
qnoeatorahip,  which  opened  to  them  the  way  into
the  senate,  whete  henceforth  their  number  em-
tinned  to  intnaie.  [QtiiisraR  ;  SHNjima.]  In
B.  c  367,  tho  tribunes  L.  Liciniua  Stolo  and  L.
Seztiua  ptaeed  themaelTei  at  the  hiad  of  the  oom-
loaity,  and  returned  ttw  conteel  against  tin
tricians.  Alter  a  fierce  stniggle,  which  lasted
for  sevenl  yean,  they  al  length  carried  a  regatioo,
according  to  which  decemvirs  were  to  be  sfipoinled
fiir  kecpmg  the  SibyUine  books  inatcad  of  dmns-
virs,  of  whom  half  were  to  be  plebeiaos.  (Liv.  ri.
37,42.)  The  next  gnat  step  wa '  - - -


dwap  be  a  plebeian.  A  ihird  ngatia
I  only  intended  to  aAud  n
poor  plrbeiaoa,  regulated  the  nie  M'  in-
Flim  Ihii  time  ftnrnrd  the  pldmana  ■!••


which  wa


PLEBBS.

appttf  in  the  pQWenion  of  the  rigkl  to  axnpy  put
of  dM  iger  publiciii.  (Livj,  vii.  IS;  Kiebuhr,ui
p.  1,  &c)  In  B.  c  366,  L.  Sexliui  L&lenoiu  wu
the  fint  plebeiui  eauoL  Ths  patririuu,  hawsTer,
who  dwaji  eoDtrircd  to  field  no  nam  thu  vbM
it  wai  alwidutelr  impoMibla  Cor  dum  to  retain,
■tripped  iIm  eooMUhip  of  a  omaidtnUe  pait  of  itt
power  aad  twuCniM  it  to  two  new  cnrula  officM,
TiKitbatofprMtoraDdofaitaleaadili.  [AaniLaa
PftABToa,}  Bat  afin  meh  gnat  adTaot^fee  had
been  DDce  gained  bj  tfaa  plcbeiant,  it  wai  impot-
aiUe  to  itop  them  in  ttKit  pm^teM  tawud*  ■  perfect
eqnalitj  of  polidal  rif^htfl  with  ths  pHtriciana,  In
B.  c  356  C.  Maiciui  HuUliu  wai  the  Gnt  pitbeian
dietaMc  ;  in  b.  o.  3il,  the  oenaotihip  wai  thrown
(nai  to  the  plebeiau,  and  in  a.  c  S&6  the  prBeta>
aoip.  The  Ogfnhiiaa  law,  in  b.  c  SOO,  alio  opened
to  them  the  offlcee  of  ponlifex  and  aofpir.  Theie
adTaotagta  were,  w  might  be  lappoeed,  not  gwned
withoQt  the  fierceit  oppotition  of  the  patridaoa
and  era)  aflar  the;  wue  nined  and  aanctioned  bf
law,  the  patiieiuu  exerted  tYVrj  meeju  to  obttnct
tin  i^KnUkm  i^  the  law.  Such  bandulBnl  atlaiipti
led,  in  ■.&  386,  to  the  lut  Mceeiion  of  the  pls-
beiuM,  after  which,  howarer,  the  dictator  Q.  Hot
le&ua*  laeenrfiiUy  and  panBaDSDtljr  laconciled  th
two  ecdeia,  aecsrad  lo  th*  plebeiaiia  all  the  liahl
th^  had  acquired  until  then,  and  pncored  for  tbei
plebivita  the  fnU  powar  at  legea  binding  upon  the

In  a  pcditial  pouit  of  new  the  diitincti
tween  pBlrieiani  and  plebeian!  now  ocued,  and
Jtota^  ntonallj  itrengthened  and  nnited,  enteted
Bpoo  the  happieit  penod  af  bar  hiatoi?. How


nla  wen  tnqnentlf  plebeian!.  The  gOTemment
of  Roiae  had  tho*  gradually  changed  from  an  np-
fiiMJTB  oligaichf  into  a  inodeiale  democian,  m
which  each  party  had  iti  propw  mfiuose  and  the
power  of  cheching  tba  other,  if  it  ehould  TCnlnre  la
■HDOte  more  than  it  could  legaH;  claim.  It  vai
thi*  cenatitntion,  the  woA  of  muy  gowatit


H  excited  the  admiiatioa  of  the  great  itetewian
Foljtniu.

We  atated  n1»>e  that  the  plebaiini  daring  their
itniggle  with  the  patridau  ^d  ixit  leek  power  for
the  men  giatificatiiHi  ti  their  ambition,  bnt  aa  a
nffMTj  meoni  to  |avtect  themie]*ca  fntm  op-
ptBiBan.  The  aboae  which  they,  or  lather  their
trihnnea,  made  of  their  power,  bdongi  to  a  much
later  time,  and  no  tracci  tf  it  ajqwar  until  mora
than  half  a  centarj  after  the  Uorteuian  law  ;  and
enm  then,  thi*  power  waa  coly  abnaed  by  indi*i-
dnala,  aod  not  on  behalf  of  the  real  plebeiaiu,  bat
of  a  degeneiBling  dwnecratiml  party,  which  ii  un-
fbrtunatelf  deajgaatad  Inr  latai  wiiten  bj  the  name
of  plebefanu,  au  thu  hai  become  identified  with
thim.  Tboae  who  know  the  inunente  influence
which  religian  and  ita  public  miniitert  had  upon
the  whole  managerocDt  of  the  itate,  will  not
wcoder  that  the  plebeiana  in  their  conlett  with
the  arietociacj  exerted  tbeuuelTci  ae  much  to  gain
aeccaa  to  the  pricatlj  offices  u  to  those  of  a  purely
politiea]  chancier ;  ai  the  Utter  in  reality  would
taBTe  been  of  little  anil  withoat  the  fbimer.  The
ofioe  of  cnria  maihnui,  whidi  the  plebeian!  (ought
and  obtained  neaiiy  ■  centnr;  after  the  Ognlnian
law  (LiT.  iniL  6,  6),  leenu  indeed  to  afii^
gnnnd  for  mpponng  lint  in  thia  hutance  the  ple-
beiana •ought  a  dminction  tucdj  Ibc  the  pni-


PLBBISCITUM.  S3J

poae  of  extending  their  pinlegei ;  bnt  Ambroich
ISmdim  m.  Amlaitioigen,  p.  96}  hai  rendered  it
niare  than  probable  that  the  office  of  cuiio  maxi-
mu*  w>!  at  that  lime  of  gnatcr  political  import-
ance than  ia  genemlly  believed.  II  i*  alao  well
hnown  that  aooh  prieatly  offloe*  aa  had  little  or  m
coaneetiBn  with  the  manBgeUNat  of  poUic  a^un,
nch  ■!  that  of  the  rex  Mcnnun,  the  flaminei,
•aUi,  and  othoi,  were  aever  cmeted  by  the  pie-
bei!aa,  and  cimlinaad  to  be  held  hj  the  paBi^n
down  to  the  taleit  timea  (Diooyt.  t.  1 1  Cic  no
Dom.  U  i  Feat  •.  e.  Migor.Jlam,)

After  the  pauing  sf  the  Uortenaian  hiw,  the
political  diafinctioD  between  patriciaiia  and  ple-
beiana ceaaed,  and  with  a  few  imimpaitant  ex-
ceptiona,  both  otden  were  phuxd  on  a  footii^  of
p«fect  equalily.  Hancefortb  the  name  pspnlD*  ia
aometimee  applied  to  tho  plebeian*  alone,  and
lometinwa  to  the  whole  body  oi  Roman  ddKoa,
a*  anembled  in  the  eomilia  centnriala  or  trihuta.
(Lit.  xxtIL  &;  Ck.  od  AU.  a.  2  ;  QelL  x.  20.)
The  lemi  pleU  or  plebecnla,  on  the  other  hand,
wu  ap{died  in  a  loooe  manner  of  (peaking  to  the
maltituiie  or  popolacs  in  oppoaition  to  the  nobiica
01  the  aanalorial  party.  (SoUutt,  Jty.  63 ;  Cie.
ad  AILLl6i  Ilor.  ^uf.  U.  1.  IfiS  ;  Hirt.  Btli.
AI-.  6,  &c)

A  penon  who  waa  bora  a  plabetm,  conld  only
b«  laited  lo  the  nnk  of  B  patrician  by  a  lex  mrvta,
Bi  wu  somctims  done  during  tho  kingly  period,
andin  the  early  timet  of  the  republic  Caesar  wu
Ibe  fint  who  Tcntorcd  in  hi!  own  name  to  niae
plebeian!  to  the  rank  of  patricians,  and  hii  example
wai  followed  by  the  emperen.  {PATnicu-J

It  frequently  occurs  iu  the  hi!l«y  of  Rome  that
me  and  Uie  same  gen*  contain  plebeian  a*  wall
aa  petririen  fJunilica.  In  the  gens  Cornelia,  fee
ioatauice,  we  find  the  plebeian  bmiliee  of  the  Delhi,
Uannnalae,  Memlae,  &e^  along  with  the  patrician
Sdpiimaa,  Sollae,  LanluU,  &c.  The  occuirence  of
this  pbeoomenon  may  be  accounted  for  in  diffennt
ways.  It  may  hare  been,  that  one  branch  gf  a
pleboao  fiunily  wu  made  patrician,  while  the
others  remained  plebeians.  (Cic  Bnt,  16,  d»  Lig.
il  3  ;  SnetoD,  Ntr.  1.)  It  may  olao  have  hafi-
pened  that  two  liunDica  had  the  same  nomeo  gen-
tilicium  without  being  actual  members  of  the  same
%eom.  (Cic.SnK.letTacit.^iHaJ:iiL4S.)  A^sin,
a  patrician  family  might  go  oier  lo  the  plebeians,
and  a*  snch  a  family  coutinncd  to  bear  the  name
of  ita  patrician  nn!,  tbi!  gena  appuenlly  coalained
a  plebeian  familj.  (Liv.  i*.  16  ;  plio.  H.  N.  xyiiL
4.)  At  the  time  when  no  cennubiuni  exiated  be-
tween the  two  orders,  a  marriage  between  a  patri-
cian and  a  plebuan  had  the  camequence,  that  the
same  nomen  gcntiliciDm  belonged  to  persona  of  the
two  order*.  (Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  337,  n.  7AE  ;  SueL
Aug.  1.)  When  a  per^inoa  obloiaed  the  civitas
through  the  inflncDce  dT  a  patrician,  or  when  a
slaie  wu  emancipated  by  his  patrician  muter,
they  generally  adopted  the  nomen  gentilieium  of
their  benefactor  (Cic  ad  Fok.  xm.  &,  3S,  A  Vtrr.
It.  17  i  Appian,  OhiL  lOO),  and  thu  appear  to
beh>ng  to  the  nme  gena  with  him.  (Camp.  Becker,
£  c  p.  133,  &C. ;  Ihne,  Le.)  [L.  g.]

FLEBISCI'TUM.  a  name  properiy  andied  to
a  law  paaaed  at  the  Comitia  Tiibuta  on  the  nsa-
tion  of  a  Tribone.  According  to  Laeliu  F^z
(Gelling  IT.  27,  and  the  note  in  tbe  edition  of
Grononua),  he  who  had  authority  to  conrene  not
umreiHS  populua,  bat  only  a  part,  could  hold


928  PLUMAHIt.
■  CondliDm,  bat  Dot  Comitid  ;  md  U  the  Tribnns
Dould  uDl  lummgii  ibe  Patricu  nor  itCer  any
to  them,  wh&t  wai  Totod  upon  ths  propouJ
ttiboneB  wu  sot  1  Lex,  bnt  ■  Sdtum. ]
eonna af  time  Plebiadtn oblained tha  Sara  of
L^et,  properij  m  tailed,  lod  iccoidiiigly  the;  K
=-»  included  in  the  tmn  Legci. [Lbx.]


9  foUovine  pamgea.
l-_«u  .u  the  Cotnitia  Cantumla  B.  c  4i3  (Lit.
lii,  55,  67}  enacted  that  the  Popnlna  ■honld  be
boand  ({nendtr}  b;  that  which  the  Pieba  loted
tributim ;  and  the  aame  thing  it  eipreaaed  in  othei
worda  thua:  "  Scita  plebie  injancta  pBtribn*.''
A  Lex  PaWilia,  339  B.  c.  (Lii.  filL  12),  wai
puaed  to  the  effect  that  Plebiacila  ahould  bind  all
the  Qtiiiitea  ;  and  a  Lu  Uoiiemia  a.  c  288,  to
the  e%ct  that  Plebiacita  tlianid  bind  all  the
popnliu  (■■iBwiai  popmln)  M  Qaina  (i.  3)
preaae*  it ;  or,  "  at  eo  jure,  qnod  plabea  itatniiiet,
omnea  Qiuntfa  tenereDtur,*'  acasdinr  to  Laeliui
Felix,  ai  quoted  by  Oelliiu  ;  and  thii  latter  ia  bIk
the  eipreuion  of  Plin^  llfiii.  Nat  x<.  10).  Th(
Lei  HoRentia  ia  refeired  to  ai  the  Lei  which
put  Plebiacita  ai  to  their  binding  fwce  eiactlj
the  laine  Awting  aa  Legea.  The  efiect  of  these
Leges  ii  diacuaied  in  Lil  nndei  theaeTenl  heada

Vf  VaLBRUa,  PUBLILUE,  HORTINBIA.

The  principal  PlabiidCa  an  mentioned  nndn
Lu.  [O.  L.]

PLECTRUM. {hf%A.l
PLEHO'CHOAE (irX«uxAu.) [El«u-

•INIA,  p.  iSt,  K.]

PLETHRON  (it\i9pBi)  waa  originally
aure  of  aurface,  which  iithe  only  aenaa'ot  the  word
■MtV  in  Homer.  (11.  xxi.  i07,  Od.  li  £77.)
It  Kema  to  haTe  been  the  AindamenCal  land  m«-
BUre  in  the  Greek  lyatem,  being  the  square  of  100
feet,  that  ia,  10,000  aqiare  feeL  The  later  Oraek
writera  nae  it  aa  the  tnutBlation  of  the  VUsnaDJiigi-
niM,  probably  becanae  Uie  latter  waa  tha  atandard
land  meaaoro  in  the  Remain  ayitem  ;  but,  in  Mie,
the  jUtAnm  anawered  more  nearly  to  the  Ronum
acba,  or  haJf-jugerum,  which  waa  ^e  (Jder  anil
of  land  meaauiea.  The  jilttknm  wonld  anawei  ex-
actly to  the  aetia,  but  for  the  diSenncs  cauaed  by
the  former  being  decimal  (IOOkIOO),  and  the
otherpartlydnodecimal  (120x130).  ThepUtnn
contained  4  armrat  of  3500  aqnare  feet  eacL

S.  Aa  frequently  h^paned  with  the  ancient
land  mnanica,  the  aide  of  the  pUOarm  waa  taken

pUtiroa  waa  equaf  to  100  feet  (or  abonl  101
Eng!i^lMt)~66||ir^>ii='  10  Ivoirai  acmbii-
lun,  IE  waa  alaa  introdoced  into  the  ifitem  of
itinerary  meaanrea,  being  l-6tfa  of  the  rfarfiaia.
(Heiod.ii.  121 ;  comp.  Minbura,  p.  7SS,  b.,  and
the  Table*).  [P.tj.j

PLINTHUS  (vAlpfct),  an;  reetuigolar  paral-
lelepiped. 1.  A  britl  or  tOe.  [Latbr].  2.  The
n'rangnlar  piece  of  itooe  which  ahonld  properly
the  loweat  member  of  the  baee  of  a  colnnui,
and  which  mat  be  luppoaed  to  ban  originated  in
the  nae  of  a  tile  or  a  fiat  piece  of  wood  to  pterent
tha  (haft  from  ainkina  into  the  ground  ;  althoogh
very  frequently  Che  plinth  ia  wanting,  the  highest
step  or  other  basement  forming  a  aortofeontinaotia
plinth  or  podim. [Sfiba].  [P.  Sl]

PLUHAHir,  B  chus  of  perwns,  menticmed  bt
Vilruviiu  (Ti  7,  p.  177,  ed.  Bip,),  Vano  (^
«b™»,iL  p.  716), -■  ^ ■ ■  ■■


POCULUM.

not  be  decided  with  eertaintj  what  their  exact  oc-
cupation was:  their  name  would  load  na  taaof^Kiee
that  it  had  something  to  do  with  f«theri(r/BniaiM).
Sslmasius  (ad  Fapitc  Carim.  c  20)  suppoaea  that
they  were  p«iont  who  wore  in  gaimenta  goldea  or
poiple  flsniea  made  like  faatbeia.  The  word,  how-
eto,  pTMiabt;  aigniiifB  all  thoae  who  work  in  Itm-
thera,  ai  faiarii  thoae  who  work  in  wool,  and
atgnitarii  those  who  work  in  ailter.  SeDeca  <.£^
SO)  speaka  of  dresaea  made  of  the  feathets  of  binlK
(Becker,  OoOm,  toI.  L  pp.  44—18.)

PLU'TEUS,apiWBn  tohate  ugnified  in  genanl
any  kind  of  pratection  or  shetter,  and  waa  heaKe
need  in  the  fallowing  ^lecial  vgnificatioaa :  —  ).
A  kind  of  shed  made  of  hnrdies  and  lotend  irilb
raw  hidea,  which  eonld  be  moTed  liirwaid  by  a

wheela  attached  to  it,  and  nndet  which  the  besi^

o(  a  Iowa  made  tbi^  appraaehea.  (Peatoa^  a.  e.  ;
Veget  iv.  IS  ;  Lit.xxxir.  17.)  S.  A  praoM  tr
breastwortc  made  of  boarda  and  aimilai  ni
placed  on  the  nllnm  of  a  (amp,  on  i
towHB  or  other  military  enginea,  on  nfta,  tke  dedj
of  ships,  duL  (Peatm,  a  e,  ;  Caea.  AA  OaB.  viL
•2B,  41,  7a;  fiaO.  Oe.  L  25.)  3.  The  board  at
the  Bide  of  a  bed.  The  side  at  which  a  pawn
entered  the  bed  waa  Cfieu  and  called  ^mada ;  the
other  side,  which  waa  protected  bj  a  board,  waa
called  pluteua.  (Suet.  OU.  26  ;  llattiaL  iii.  91.)
[LacTtra,  p.  674,  bb]  4.  Casea  of  SMne  kind  nim
the  walla  of  booaas  on  which  small  atataes  and
bosta  were  placed. (Dig.  39.  tit.  1.  a.  17  | Jnt.

PLTNTK'IIIA  fw^arrVuX  bum  wAdvw.  to
waah,  waa  a  featlTal  celebrated  at  Athena  etoj
year,  on  the  22nd  of  Thaij^im,  in  hoooar  at
Athena,  anniamed  Aglanma  (Phot.  Lim.  a.  «b ;  Plot.
AUb.  S4  ;  Harpocntt.  Said,  l  b.),  whoae  tampla
atood  on  the  Acropolis.  (Herad.  tiii.  53  ;  UtaTch.
I.  V.  minrrifui.)  Plutarch  atetea  tW  the  IcMital
took  placa  on  the  25tt,  batprohablToalyheaaaa
it  bated  6r  aeteral  daya.  (DodweH,  de  CMb,  f.
849  ;  eamp.  PiOoL  Mum.  ii.  ^  334.)  The  dat  oT
thia  fBatitat  waa  at  Athena  aniai^  the  kwafftaa
or  dw*  me/iuli;  Sat  the  taoqila  of  tha  goddeat  waa
Boironnded  by  a  rope  to  jxeclode  aU  occnnmni-
cationwithit  (Pollu,  tiiL  141);  ha  atatna  waa
stripped  of  ita  gannent*  and  oniamenta  fiir  tke  pa>>
poae  of  cleaning  them,  and  was  in  the  nwanwhila
corered  oter  Co  conceal  it  finm  the  airiit  of  man.
(Platf.c,Xen./faifai.l4,.  |  12.)  TbapaniD*
who  perlonned  this  aertica  ware  (died  wpati^
jitv.  (Plat.  L  0. ;  Ha^ch.  t.  at)  The  city  WM
Uierefbre,  ao  to  apeak,  on  this  day  withatit  it*
pnjleeting  ditinity, and  any  aixlRtakinc  cob-

id  on  it  waa  belieted  to  be  BecaManly  na-

lahl.  A  pnceMon  was  aba  held  aa  the  day
af  the  Plynteria,  in  which  a  qoautily  of  dried  ^a,
called  irfVpU,  waa  ntriad  ahoot,  (BItboL
Magn. ;  Heaych.  t.  e.  'Hfirrapfa;  PhoL  L^.
».•.)  [L.a.]

PNYX.  [SccLisu,  p.  440,  a.]
PO'CULUM  was  anjkind  of  drinkbg-cap.  It
luat  be  diatingniahed  fivm  the  OntT  or  reead  ia
'hich  the  wine  wai  mixed  [Cxivait],  and  *»^
the  CgaOau,  a  kind  ef  ladle  or  aman  eop^  wfcieh
waa  used  to  oontey  the  wine  frnn  the  Cntcr  la
tha  Pocutum  or  drit^iDg-aip.  rCTATiiiia.1  Tbaa
Huace  (Oint.  iiL  19.11)  —


POLEMARCHUS.

PODIUM,  in  iRhitectun,  it  a  continaed  p«-

d<aul,  foe  Bipporting  ■  row  of  colonuu,  or  iming

for  a  pumpel,  ot  fonaing  a  (art  of  tcOTace,  u  the

jorfi—  in  the  (hestn  and  amphitheatre.  (VitniT,

in.  3,  T.  7,  ™.  <  ; AlIFBlTH«*TIlllll.)  [P.  S.]

POENA  (Qnek,  mi4).  The  Bomui  uiue  of
Ihii  wori  u  Bipkioed  br  Ulpau  (Dig.  fiO.  tit  16.
■.  1 3)  at  the  Bune  time  that  he  ajn>laiiu  Fraiu
and  Mulla.  Fiwu  ii  ganecBltj  an  offence,  Noia  ;
and  Poena  it  thi  pniuthiiMDt  of  an  oSonce,  Noue
Tiadicta.  Poena  u  a  general  aame  fiir  any  poniih-
menC  of  KOj  offence :  Multa  ia  the  penoltj  of  a
pwtinilai  afienca,  which  ii  now  (in  Ulpian*!  time)
peauiiar;.  Ulpiflo  b;i  in  hii  lime  beeann  by
tlie  Iaw  of  the  Twslie  Table*,  die  HolU  tru
peciuii*  or  a  certain  nnmliei  of  oxen  and  ibeep.
(Plin.  iriiL  3 ;  Fertoi,  i.  m.  Midtim,  Ftadaint.)
[Liz  ATIBJ4U  TARriiA.J  Ulpian  ^nceedi  to
aaf  that  Poena  may  affect  ■  person'!  caput  and
cjriitiniatio^  that  it,  Poena  may  be  lou  of  ciliien-
■iiip  and  Iniainia.  A  Hulla  wai  impoted  acond-
ing  to  dnonitlancia,  and  itt  amiKUit  wot  detei-
nuned  by  the  pleBinie  of  Mm  who  uspoted  it.  A
Poena  wet  only  iziSJcted  when  it  voi  impoeed  by
BOBie  lu  «  eome  other  legal  authority  {jiu  alio
Jm),  When  no  poena  wm  imposed,  then  a  multa
oc  penalty  might  be  inflicled.  Eieiy  person  who
bad  juritdictio  (thit  leema  to  be  the  right  reading
inilead  of  judiiatia)  conld  impoH  a  multa ;  and


•e  mogiitratna  and  piaeiidei  proi
A  Poena  might  be  inflicted  b;  any  one
intnuted  with  the  judicial  proiecntion  of  the  offence
to  wUch  it  wai  alGicd.  The  legal  dininc^n  be-
twe«i  Poena  and  Multa  ii  not  alwaji  obierved  by
the  Ronun  writer).  [O.  L.]

POLEMARCHL'S  (woAinopxoi).  Anaaimnt
of  the  fimctioni  of  the  Athenian  magiitnte  of  thia
name  it  giien  nnder  AncUoN.  Athena,  bower
wu  not  the  only  ttate  of  Greece  which  bad  offici
BO  called. We  nad  of  them  at  Sparta,  and
larioui  citiei  of  Boeotia. Ai  their  name  denotei,
ther  were  originally  end  properly  connected
niliOiy  aSiira,  being  entrailed  either  with the
command  of  ormiee  abroad,  or  the  lupcrinlendence
at  the  war  department  at  home :  tbrnetimea  with
both. The  polemorchi  of  Sparta  ^pear  to  Itave
naked  oeit  to  the  king,  when  on  nctuil  Mrrice
abroad,  and  were  generally  of  the  royal  kindred  or
boute  (7^™). (Herod.  Tii. 173.) They  com-
naiided  aingle  m(«aa  (Xen.  Sep.  Lac  xL  1),  lo
that  they  would  ^ipeor  to  hare  been  lix  in  number
(MUller,  Dor.  iiL  12.  g  i),  and  ■ometunes  whole
anniea. (Herod.  L  c.) They  alio  lormed  part  of
the  king*!  council  in  war,  and  of  the  myaf  eicort
tailed  tafMiia  (Xen.  HeU.  ii  4.  |  H),  aod  were
(appoiled ot lepreiented by  the  olficen called
v«fupopt2t.  (MUller,  liL  12.  §  5.)  The  polemarrbi
of  Sparta  had  alio  theinperinlendeDceofthe  publi
tablet;  a  drcumttance  vbicb  odmitt  of  explano^
tioii  from  the  fact  that  Lycurgui  ii  laid  to  ha
inititated  the  lyuitia  for  the  purpoiea  of  war,  a
theretbre  at  military  dirltlona  ^  to  that  the  Idi
daemoniani  would  eat  and  fight  in  the  lame  co
^ny.  (MUller,  iiL  12.  g4.} But  in  addition
their  military  functioni,  and  the  dutlet  connected
therewilb,  the  polemarcha  of  Sparta  had  a  civil  i
well  ai  a  certain  elleni  of  judicial  power  (Id.  iii.
g  S),  in  which  icepecl  thej  reiembled  the  ipx*
taKiiiofXBi  at Atheni. In Boeotia  alto there
were  magiilrate*  of  tbii  name. Al  Thebei,  for
"Ttnnrr,  tbera  appenn  (o  hart  been  two,  perbajH


POLU&  »29

fleeted  annually,  and  from  what  bappowd  when
Choebidai,  the  Lacedaemonian  commander,  teiied
Jie  Cadmeia  or  citadel  of  Thebet  (b.  c  362),  we
nay  infer  that  in  timet  of  peace  they  were  in-
reeted  with  the  chief  executiie  power  cd  the  Mate,
and  the  cmnmand  of  the  dty,  haiing  its  military
ordera  (Xen.  Aetf.  v.  2.  g  30.)
They  are  not,  howeier,  to  be  confounded  with  the
Boeotorcba  At  Thetpiae  al»  (PluL  DtmHr.  c  39)
there  were  offlcert  M  thii  name,  end  likewite  in
Aetolia  (Polyb.  it.  79)and  Arcadia.  At  Cynaetha
—  the  loiter  country  the  gatei  of  the  city  were
itnuted  to  the  apocial  care  of  the  Polemarcha :
they  had  to  keep  guard  by  them  in  the  day-time,
and  to  close  them  at  night,  and  the  keyi  were  al-
wayi  kepi  in  their  cuttody.  (Id.  ii.  IS.)  [R.  W.]
POLETA£  (voKvTw),  a  boBid  of  ten  ofiicen,
or  magittralet  (for  they  bib  called  ifixA  by  Har-
pocration),  whoae  duty  it  wat  to  grant  Icatei  ot  the
public  land)  and  mine),  and  alta  to  let  the  reiennea
ariaiug  fnm  the  cuaComa,  taiet,  conliaatient,  and
forfcitum.  Of  auch  letting  the  word  n\tir  (not
fiurSaui')  was  generally  used,  and  olao  the  correU'
tire  vorda  mntaeax  and  ipliu^tu.  Their  official
place  of  biuinost  wai  called  waiAirr^pior.  One  waa
chosen  from  each  tribe,  A  chairman  presided  at
their  meetings  (irfiniutvt).  In  the  letting  of  tho
revenue  they  were  aoaiated  by  the  managen  of  the
theoric  fund  (tJ  ifvpui6r),  and  they  acted  nnder
the  authority  of  the  Senate  of  Fire  Hundred,  who
eierei)ed  a  general  control  over  the  financial  de-
partment of  the  adminiitnlion.  ReaidenE  aliens
who  did  not  pay  (heir  residence-toi  (firrolmov),

committed  default,  were  wld  in  a  room  called
wtAjfriliior  tov  >»tsui1du.  (Demoath.  e.  Ariilog.
787.)  Other  peraona  who  had  forfeited  Ibeir  free-
dom to  the  alate  were  aUo  told  by  tlie  ■sA.^ai,
at  foreigner!  who  had  been  convicted  of 'uaurping
the  right)  of  citizcnabip.  (Harpoc  and  Smi.  t.  ee,
HiiAirrol  and  itfraiKmv  ;  PdIIui,  rilL  S9  ;  BSckh,
PM.  Earn.  ofAtliau,  p.  15G,  2d  ed.;  Meier,  dt
ban.  damn.  p.  11.)  [C.  R  K.]

POLtTEIA,  POLI'TES  (woAn-tla,  woAtruj),


rCiv:


,8  (On.aa).]


POLITO  PHY 'LACES <«ai™^&u««)-

[TiQtlS.]

POLLICA'RIS.  [Pm.]
POLLICITATIO.  [OBLiBiTiowas,  p.  821.]
POLLINCTO'RES.  [Funifs,  p.  558,  a.]
POLUS  (ii6\ot\  in  attronomy,  i)  a  very  diffi-
cult word  to  eipbun  in  a  perfectly  tali^acloiT
manner,  on  account  of  the  Tariooa  H'nact  in  which
it  it  nted.  In  auch  a  csae,  the  only  lafe  guide  to
the  original  meaning  of  a  word  i)  to  determine,  if
po)aible,  ila  lenaa  in  the  earlicat  paasage  in  which
it  occur),  uid  to  compare  that  aense  with  what  it
known  of  the  etymology  of  the  word.  Now  it  it
evident  that  a^Xoi  contain)  the  root  HEA,  which
we  find  in  tr^Ao^i  and  other  word),  and  the
fundamental  idea  attached  \a  which  appeara  to  be
that  of  Biotioii.  Then,  luming  to  the  Greek  au-
thor!, we  find  the  word  flnl  eccnrring  in  the  well-
known  puaage  in  which  Aeechylua  [PrvM.  427)
apeak)  of  Atloa  ai  tupporting  on  hia  ahonldCra  the
poi)  of  kemem,  that  ii,  the  mtiU  of  tkt  liy,  which
wa)  called  ri\ai  in  accordance  with  tbe  notion,
I  whicb  prevailed  from  the  time  of  Thalea,  that  the
aky  waa  a  hollow  tpbere,  which  moved  continuall;
round  the  earth,  carrying  the  heavenly  bodiet  wiUi
it  (Camp.  Eurip.  Or.  1 685  ;  Pteodo-Pht.  AmaiL
So -  O"


930  POMOERIUM.

p.  371,  1i ;  Ariatoph.  Av.  179  ;  Alex.  ap.  A&.
p.  60,  s  ;  Ukcrt,  GfW7.  d.  GrieA  u.  Rm.  rol.  L
pi.  ii.  p.  116;  Grote,  Hilary  of  Ortece,  ToL  il
pp.  15+,  lis.)  The  neit  piu«ge,  in  order  of
time,  il  Ihal  in  which  Hcrodolui  (ii.  103)  nji
that  thn  Greek)  lainit  from  the  Babjloniani  ^\ar
ical  yriiiora  ifal  tI  tmiKaiSlKa  liipta  t^t  V'CI^
whne  the  later  canunenliitan  and  leiicographen
for  the  miMt  pert  piplain  the  vocd  u  mcanini  im
aslronomical  iQitrnmeDt,  different  fram  the  yviiatr
or  nu  diuL  Mr,  Orate  (I.  n,)  interpret*  the  ptu-
Mgo  as  ligntiying  that  the  Oreet«  "  acqnir.-d  from
the  BabjToniam  the  conception  of  the  polt,  or  of
the  heavens  «  a  romplela  hollow  ipherc,  roroliing
round  and  encloiing  the  eu-lL"  But  Herodoliu
certainly  teemi  to  he  ipOikinj  of  lomelhing  more
definite  and  tpeciBc  than  &  mere  conception  reipccl-
ing  the  ikf  ;  and,  an  the  vhole,the  msat  prebable
explanation  il  that  of  Scaliger  and  Salmatiui,  ai
modified  bj  recent  aatronomera  and  icholan  (lee
Bsillj,  Delarnbre,  Letronne,  and  Creuzer,  ai  quoted
by  Ruhr,  ad  toe.),  namely,  that  the  word  Biipiifiei
tke  coneapeAfmujAeriaairHn-diai^JtiStAt  in  Itnilation
of  the  heaTenly  ipbsrc,  and  hence  called  by  the
■nme  name,  iri\ot,  which  wai  the  earliest  fann  of
the  lun-dial,  inaimuch  aa  it  required  leea  ikiti  than
the  dcltnealion  of  a  lun-dial  on  a  plane  furface.
The  ff^ttwf  wai  not  another  ditTerent  lort  of  iim^
dial,  bul  the  aiUx,  or,  ai  we  ■till  say,  ipiomoB  of
the  dial  it^lt;  the  ihadow  of  which,  falling  upon
the  meridian  linei  of  the  enn-dial,  indicated  the
houTi  of  the  day  ai  marked  by  the  motion  of  the
Bun  in  the  true  heavenly  iti$Adi  ;  go  that,  in  bet,
the  wordi  TiJXei'  sal  yvinBm  ioge&er  deecribe  the
initnimenL  Pollux  (ix.  46)  eiplaini  *6Kii!  at
meaning  liftiXiyiai',  in  a  passage  which  he  qnotea
ftom  the  Oaytida  of  Ariitophanei  ;  and  Lucian
(iei^.  J)  upcftkl  of  the  -/r&iun*  mrrihadoamg
the  Toiddle  of  the  i'6\oi,  —  a  Hriking  eonfirmalion
of  iho  eiplanatton  we  have  Riven.  The  yiiiimr
alone  was,  in  fact,  not  originjly  a  lun-dial,  but  a
mere  upright  itile,  the  length  of  the  ahadow  of
which  wa«  meaiured,  to  oblain  a  rough  notion  of
the  nltitade  of  the  tun  and  thence  of  the  time  of
the  day  ;  afterwarda,  a  dial  waa  added  with  linea
marked  upon  it,  naato  forma  Inie  nm-dial,  which
waa  ilill  cliled  yiiiutv.  The  limple  gmamoit  wai
used  by  tbe  Greek  geogmphcn  to  determine  the
latitude  of  plncei. (Comp.  Hoholooiuh.*)

For  the  other  meanings  of  ■wikn,  iec  the  Greek
Lexieona.  [P.  S.J

POLY'MITA. [Tbla.]

POMOE'RIUM.  This  word  is  compounded  of
pat  and  mosrnin  {-rnvToi),  in  the  aame  manner
aa  prntriiysin  of  jwrf  and  ntriditni,  and  thna  aig-
nifiea  a  line  running  by  the  nalli  of  a  town  (jiOM
or  pofj  nvroj).  The  pomoerinm,  bowerPT,  did  not
tcniiit  of  the  actnni  walla  ot  fortilicBtiona  of  a  placa,
bnt  waa  a  ifmbolical  wall,  and  the  conrae  of  the
pomaerinm  iCaelf  waa  marked  br  itane  pillars  (n^ipi
ftmaerii,  Vbtto,  it  Ling.  Im't.  143,  ed.  MUner),
erected  at  certnin  interrali.  Thecnatom  of  making
a  pomoerinm  wai  common  to  the  Ladna  and  Etrai-

*  In  the  article  HonoLoainM  will  be  foimd
atatementa  differing  in  aomc  minor  points  &i3m
thoie  in  thii  article :  nicfa  differences  are  nnsioid-
■ble  when  a  diiGctilt  subject  is  discussed  by  difier-
ont  wrileri  j  and  they  may  oren  be  naofiil  to  the
reader  who  wiahea  to  exuaiM  tho  qncMion  tho-
ronghly. [Ed.]


POMOERIUM.
cans,  end  the  manner  in  which  it  wu  done  in  the
earliest  timei,  when  a  town  waa  (o  be  fbnnded,
wBi  aa  fbUowa :  —  A  bullock  and  >  heifer  were
yoked  to  a  l^ongh,  and  a  furrow  wai  drawn  anoDd
the  place  which  wai  to  be  occupied  by  the  new
town,  in  lach  a  manner  that  all  the  dodi  fell  in-
ward. The  little  mound  thna  fcnned  wu  the
symbolical  wall,  and  along  it  ran  the  pomaerium,
within  the  eompeii  of  which  alone  the  dCr-anapicra
{aaspida  ariaaa)  could  be  taken.  (Varxo,  de  £jiag.
tat.  L  t.)  That  the  actoal  walls  or  fbrtifie&tiani
of  a  town  nui  near  it,  may  naturally  be  suppoaed,
though  the  pomoerinm  might  either  be  within  or
without  them.  Thij  cDitnm  wai  alio  followed  in
the  building  of  Rome,  and  the  Romans  afterranla
obserred  it  in  the  eitahliahment  of  their  colmiea.
The  lacred  line  of  the  Roman  pomoerinm  did  not
prevent  tho  inhsbitania  frnm  building  cpoo  <b-
taking  into  use  any  place  beyond  it,  bat  il  wa*
necessary  to  leave  a  certain  space  on  each  side  of
it  unoccupied  so  as  not  to  nnhollow  it  by  prafiiae
use.  <Lir.  i,  44.)  Thus  we  find  that  the  Arm-
tine,  although  inhabited  from  early  timei,  waa  for
many  eenlarica  not  included  within  tbe  pomoe-
num.  (GeU.  lilL  14.)  The  whole  space  indndod
in  it  was  enlled  njn-  Q^btw  or  /bki  l^btL  Tbe
pomoerium  of  Rome  was  not  ihe  aanM  at  all  time*  ;
ai  the  city  increased  the  pomoerium  also  waa  ex-
tended, hut  this  extension  could,  acctrdiiiK  to  an-
cient niage,  ho  made  only  by  such  men  as  bad  by


di.23>.


boundarici  of  the  empire  (TaciL  AnmtU,  xi

and neither  could a  pomoerinm  be  fan  ._

altered  without  the  augun  previoutly  conin1tiiif[
the  will  of  the  gsdi  by  augury,  whence  thejiu
punoerii  of  ihe  anguii.  (Dionyi.  iv.  13  ;  Ck.  da
Did.  iL  35.)  The  formula  of  the  prayer  which  tile
angun  perfermed  on  such  occaiions,  and  which  wu
repeated  afrerihem  by  the  people  who  attended,  is
preaerved  in  Feetna  (i.  e.  ProtinHirimm).

The  oriiinal  pomoeiium  of  Romulns  lao,  accord-
ing to  Oeliiua  (L  c),  around  the  loot  of  ihe  P»l^
tine,  but  the  one  which  Taeitni  (^wxij.  ail  24)
detertbei  as  the  pomoerinm  of  Romnlni  eompriied
a  much  wider  space,  and  was,  aa  Niebnhr  Uiinka
{HiiL  of  Rom.  i.  p.  288  ;  compare  Bunien,  Be^
obnA.  d.  Sladl  Ram,  i.  p.  13B  ;  Sachie,  BacAna.
ma  Rom.  i.  p.  GO),  an  enlargemeut  of  the  ongiaal
eompaii,  taking  in  a  suburb  or  bomogh.  Niebuhr
alio  believca  that  pomoerium  properly  dennlea  m,
luburb  taken  into  the  city.  The  Romnlian  pomoe-
rinm, according  to  Tacitni,  ran  from  tbe  Poram
Boarinm  (the  aich  of  Seplimiua  ScTcraa)  throujfh
the  valley  of  the  Circua  so  as  to  include  the  an
maxima  Hercuiia  ;  then  along  the  foot  of  the  Pala-
tine lo  the  lus  ConsI,  and  thence  from  the  Septi-
lonium  to  the  curiae  veleres  (a  little  bflow  tbe
baths  of  Trajan),  along  the  top  of  the  Vrtia  la  Ifae
Sacellnm  Larium,  and  lastly  by  the  Tia  sacra  U
the  Ferum.  From  the  eaiteni  ude  of  the  Fonin
to  the  Velabram  there  was  a  iwaoip,  »  that
Tacitus  doei  not  mention  the  line  of  the  pofsoc-
rium  here.  Sertiss  Tullins  again  extended  ths
pomoerium  (Lit.  i.  U  ;  Dionys.  i>.  13),  bat  tha
AvcnCine  waa  not  iDcluded,  either  bri«ue  tbs
auipieea  here  taken  by  Remua  had  been  unb^xmr-
able,  or,  whidi  ia  more  probable,  became  there
stood  on  this  hill  the  temple  of  Diuia,  the  aanoB
sanctuary  of  Ihe  Latiai  and  Romana.  (Oeti  /,  c  ;
Varro,  di  Lag.  LaL  t,  48.)  Tbe  Aveotme  did  not
beconw  mctnded  within  tbe  p '  '" '


■  O"


timaaftlw^DpiniCluidiiH.  (OcU.  t  a. ;  TKit.
^■mLzu.33.)  Di(i07iiiu({.s.)Matei  that  dawn
M  hi*  dnM  ■^><>dT  had  extended  the  pcnoeriiun
UDca  tbe  tfam  of  King  Seniiw,  alUioiigh  we  know


■It  AuoDitiu  ei
to.  p.  139),  an


5.  p.  139),  and
UW  aau  u  Mia  at  SdIIb  and  J.  CiwHr.  (Tuit.
Jmial.  Lb.;  GaU.  Lc;  FaL  t.v.  PrtuimKHiim;
Cw.aifjdAiiu.aai  DioiiCau.iliii.GO,iliT.49.)
The  bat  who  extended  tba  pomDerium  dC  Rome
wat  the  Emperor  Anceliaii,  tSta  he  had  enkiged
tha  wallt  of  the  citf.  {FlVopMC  Oiv.AiirtL2l  ;
amp.  Becker,  Himdbiiek  dtr  Riia.  AUahk.  I  p.
93,  Ae.)  [L.S.)

POMHA  (TofiT^),  a  tolenm  praceanixi,  aa  on
iha  occaaioD  al  a  fimeral,  triumph,  ftc.  (Cic.  pro
AliL  13 ,  Suat.  JaJl  Gm.  37,  &c)  It  ii,  how-
BTer,  Doce  paiticularl;  i^lied  la  the  fiaod  pco-
aewiwi  with  which  the  game*  of  the  Circni  com-
meneed  IPompa  CiTtmiu). [ClKCUa.]

PONDERA  (oToa^}.  Tha  conaideiationi.
vhieh  lie  at  tha  baiii  of  the  whole  nihject  of
waighti  and  meanutt,  both  generallj,  and  with
^ledal  referenco  to  the  ancient  Oreek  and  Roman
■jitemi,  bare  alnady  been  mentioned  in  the  b-
tnidoctoi7  part  of  the  article  Mknsuki.  In  the
prpirnt  article  it  if  pcopo«ed  to  gire  a  brief  general
AGconnt  of  the  Gr^ck  and  Roman  ntitnt  t^veighit.

I.  Ewig  Gnek  WtigUt.  —  It  ku  been  already
atated,  in  Uia  anicla  Mineuri,  tbat  all  the  know-
ledge we  hare  upon  the  tubjectgoei  to  prore  that,
in  the  Greek  and  Rnman  metrical  ■yitcmt,  toeurUi
preceded  aunnmi  /  that  the  Uttei  were  dcnred
finn  the  fanner;  and  hoth  &om  a  lyitem  which
had  |»VTai1ed,  from  a  period  of  unknown  antiquity,
Binoi^  the  Cbaldaeona  at  Babylan.  Tbii  lyttem
iraa  introduced  into  Greece,  after  the  epoch  of  the
Hanenc  poemi ;  for,  of  the  two  chief  denomina-
tiona  used  in  tha  Oreek  iyit«m,  namely,  TfiXarror
(faUmtim)  and  laa  (ni'aa),  Homei  uiu  only  the
bnnar,  which  ii  a  gennine  Oreek  word,  meaning
letigU,  the  other  being  an  Oriental  word  of  ibe
■ame  meaning.  (See  Nuimiis,  p.  810;  whfre
■oma  thingi,  which  n
article  hare  been
uaea  Ti/mrrar,  like  t^trfurj  in  a  ipecific  lenie  {IL
,T""  260—270}  ;  and  Indeed  in  all  languagci  the
earliest  wordi  lued  for  weight  an  merely  gfnric
tthia  ipanfieaUg  aj^ilitd;  aucb  are  rdAaimu',
wumek  (jfn),  ii&ra,  and  our  own  poand,  from
jNWiiw.  Hence  the  introduction  of  the  foreign
word  aKnel  (»»«)  by  Iha  aide  of  the  natiTe  word
Ti^arror  indicate)  the  introduction  af  a  new
atandard  of  weight  -,  which  new  itnndord  loon
anpeneded  tha  old  ;  and  then  tha  old  word  TiiAw-
lor  wai  lued  aa  a  denorainatioQ  of  weif{ht  in  the
new  lyalem,  quite  different  from  the  weight  which
it  aigni&ed  before.  Tfaia  hut  point  ii  manifeat
frran  iha  paasagca  in  IlDmsr,  in  which  the  word  ia
wed  in  a  ipeciGc  aenje,  eipecinlly  in  the  deecription
of  the  funeral  gamei  (L  c. ),  where  tha  order  of  the
frixa  prorei  that  tha  talrai  mnat  bare  been  a  Tery
Dnch  amallcr  weight  tlian  tha  later  talent  of  fiO
ininae,  a-  about  82  ponnda  atoirdupoli ;  and  traoei
of  thia  ancient  amall  talent  ara  itill  found  at  a  vary
much  later  period.  Thai  we  airiie  at  the  flnt
poaitkn  in  the  rabjed,  that  ii*  Oriti  lytfm  ^
mu^  moMixal'lImunc.

2.  Tfa  Omk  Sfitaa  to  tie  Hiitoriad  Pavtd.
—  Of  conne,  by  the  Greek  aratem  here  ia  meant

lb*  qutea  which  pMiailod  ttmughout  Oneca  in


PONDERA.  SSI

tha  tiitlaciad  time*,  and  wUch  contained  fonr
priocipa]  denominaliona,  whieb,  though  diSerent  at
difl^ant  timea  and  plaeea,  aitd  even  at  tha  mine
I^aee  for  different  mbatancea,  alwaya  bon  the
•ame  lelation  la  eooi  oMer.  Theaa  were  the  Talml
(TiUanoc),  which  wai  the  laroeat,  then  the  AfiH
(^uv),  the  Draduna  iipaxji!^),  and  tha  Obol
(MoAiii).  The  two  latter  termi  are,  in  all  pm-
babilily,  gaiuine  Greek  word*,  introduced  for  the
poipoae  of  making  conrenient  aubdivisiDOA  of  tba
atandani,  ipaxj*'^  aigni^ing  a  hiadfid^  and  h€oXit
being  perhapa  the  aame  aa  AttAii,  and  aignlfylng
a  anull  wadge  of  lilver;  ao  that  theaa  worda  ngain
&11  onderthe  deaoijitian  of  fenarig  bnaj  ^leciiiai^


Theae  weigbti  wen  related  to  aa
toUawai-

1  TiJad  conlaiDed - - 6
1  MiiM „ - -  101
IDnOma „ ■ -
Their  relative  valnaa  are  eihibitec
in  the  foUowLng  table:-
Obol

G

Dnehma

600

It* Uina

36,000 I 6000 I


60 Talent.

Sj/ttm  from  Bat^Iat.^
Now,  in  tbii  ayatem,  tho  unbellenic  word  /in
iodicatee,  aa  already  cbMrrad,  (Aa  aoarca  firitm
akiri  lie  itiaiard  vtat  derived.  Thia  word  ia
imdonbtedly  of  Semitic  origin  ;  and  it  aecma  to
belong  more  etpecially  to  the  Chaldee  dialect,  in
which  it  aignitie*  niimjier  or  nuafara  in  ill  wideat
aenie,  the  proper  wonl  for  tutisil  being  tdid  ar
lititL*  (Sea  San.  t.  25,  26.  where  both  worda
occur).  In  Hebrew  it  ianied  aa  a  ipecific  weight,
e<iu«lloSOore0.hekeli+  (1  King.,  x.  17  ;  Km,
ii.  69  1  Nehem.  rii.  71,  72  ;  Eiek.  iIt.  12).  The
word  wa>  alio  need  in  Egypt,  in  the  aenao  of  a
/laid  uKofurt  and  al>o  of  a  toa^  ^  miter.  (See
Bbckh,  MOtvL  UtOernui.  c.  ii.)  From  an  ex-
amination of  leTeral  paaaagea  of  the  Oreek  wriln^
by  the  light  of  the  etymological  ugnification  of  tha
word  /tfo,  Bikkh  arrivea  at  the  following  condii-*
■iona,  which,  if  not  atrictly  demonitrated,  ara
eatabliahed  on  aa  atrong  gronnda  aa  wa  can  pnv
bably  erar  hops  to  obtain  in  ao  difEcnlt  a  atibject ;

(1)  that  in  the  aatronomical  obaerTaliona  of  the
Chaldeet  and  Egyptian!,  time  waa  menaund  by  the
running  out  of  the  water  thrangh  an  orifice ;  —

(2)  that  the  quantity  of  tho  water  which  ao  res
out  waa  eaiimated  both  bymeaaure  and  by  weight:
' — (4)  that  thia  made  of  meaiuring  time  led  na>
tnrally  to  ihe  dtitmimaiai  of  a  caatOed  ^Icn
boCk  ofitagbUami  moMrta.  the  nnit  of  which  wu
the  BuinaA  (jutb),  which  originally  signified  a  tiffi-


paaaed  from  Aaayiia

*  The  (  and  st  are  merely  diatert  Tariationi.

t  Which  ii  tha  tine  value  ii  doubtful.  Ptrb^
the  two  Taluea  were  need  at  different  placaa,  ao-
cording  u  the  duodecimal  or  dednial  ayatam  |m-
niled.

tot  O"


933


PONDERA.


the  Oreeki,  who  are  eipreuly  itated  to  hsTe  de-
rircd  Irom  Babylon  their  meUiDd  of  dividing  the
dfif  and  meaanring  time,  and  other  important
uBgea,  and  whose  moit  ancient  talent  (the  Atgi-
netan)  wm  (til),  in  the  hiilorical  times,  idaitiol
with  the  Babjlonian.

4.  Til  Saiylimim  Taleit.—Tht  Bahrlanian
talent  itieir  wai  cncnnt  in  tha  Pernan  Empire
a*  the  itandaid  weight  for  niver.  Under  Daieiui
the  KID  of  Hjitaapes,  the  ailvpi  tribnU  of  the
prorinees  w«  estimated  hj  the  Babylonian  talent,
theti  gold  tribnte  by  the  Euboic ;  and  coined
■ilvFr  was  al»  pud  fnnn  the  njal  treasury  ac-
coiding  to  tha  Babylonian  talent  (Herod,  iii.  B9,
foil.  {  Aelian.  V.  U.  L  22.)  Now  the  two  stand-
ard! hen  moitioned  are  ecauKded  by  Heradotna
by  the  statement  that  the  fojyiiniin  ialait  a
equal  la  70  Eaia'ie  miKte,  which,  arncs  ererj  ta-
lent contained  60  minae,  girei  TO  :  60  Ibc  the  ratio
of  the  Babylonian  (alenc  la  the  EuboYc.  Tbeie
are,  however,  very  snfficicnt  reaaoni  fttr  con-
clading  that  TO  is  here  a  ronnd  number,  not  an
exact  one.  [See  Bdckh,  e.  t.)  Potlui  give*  the
aameiatio  (70:  60)  for  (hat  of  the  Babylonian  to  the
.^Uio  talent ;  ibi  he  saya  (hat  the  Babylonian  taleot
contained  70  Attic  minao  andTOOO  Attic  drachmae
<iz.  86) :  and  it  is  ^bable  that  this  slaleinenE  is
founded  on  the  tettunony  of  Herodotus,  but  that
PoUiu  subitilaled  the  lamiliu  Atlic  standard  for
the  less  known  Euba'ic,  which  two  itondards  he
knew  to  have  some  dose  connection  with  each
other,  and  lo  he  fell  into  the  error  of  making  them
precisely  equal.  The  same  conection  mtut  be  ap-
plied to  the  testimony  of  Aelian  ('.  e.),  who  makei
tke  Babyhinian  talent  equal  to  73  Attic  minoe  ;  and
in  this  itatemenL,  so  corrected,  we  have  prahshl  j  the
tiuB  latio  of  the  Babylonian  talent  lo  the  Eubo^
namely  72 :  00  oi  6 :  S.  In  inch  argumentt  aa
these,  it  is  eitrBmelf  important  to  remember  thnt
the  eridence  ii  not  that  oTPollui  and  Aelian,  who
could  not  pOBiibly  give  any  independent  testimony
on  each  a  sobject,  bnt  that  of  the  ancient  an-
thoritieB  whom  they  followed,  and  by  whom  the
tenn  Attic  may  have  been  nied  indy  as  eqnivdent
to  EiAiie;  for  the  Attic  standard  before  tho  legii-
lation  of  Solon  was  the  same  ai  the  EuboXc,  and
this  itandaid  was  still  retained  in  commerce  after
Solon's  alterations.*  In  this  sense  there  can  be
little  doubt  that,  in  the  statement  of  Aelian,  we
have  (he  testimony  of  lome  ancient  writer,  who
gave  a  more  exact  tbIub  than  the  round  number
which  Herodotu  deemed  sufficient  for  his  purpose
as  an  historian  ;  and  the  truth  of  his  testimony  is
confirmed,  not  only  by  the  greater  exactness  of
the  number,  but  by  ill  Toy  nature  ;  for,  not  on1r
do  we  find  in  70  (=7  *  10)  a  priine  bctot  whii^
is  most  unlikely  to  hare  entered  into  a  lyttem  of


*  It  is  neeesaaiy  here  to  caution  the  student
against  an  emr,  which  he  might  mistake  for  an
ingeniona  discovery ;  into  which  BUckh  himself
fell  in  his /■■ifia  £cDRoniya/.JtWi,- and  which
Mr.  Hussey  has  adopted  ;  and  to  which  therdijre
the  English  itodoct  it  mnch  exposed.  This  error
coniisti  in  assuming  that  both  Herodotus  and  Aelian
may  be  right ;  and  thus  that  the  Babylonian  talent
was  equal  to  70  Euiole  or  72  Attio  minae  ;  and
therefore  that  the  tatio  of  the  EnboTe  talent  to  the
Attic  wu  72 :7a  It  will  presently  be  shown  that
this  ratio  wot  ik4  72:  70,  bnt  100 ;  73,  L  t.
72:SI'81.


PONDERA.
weights,  namely  7,  but  in  72  (siSs  12)  as  wdl

as  in  60  (5  K  12)  we  have  the  duodecimal  eompota-
tion  which  we  know  to  have  prevailed  most  eztot-
sively  in  the  eaiiy  metriol  systems.  The  diTiaioo
of  the  day  into  12  honrs,  whieh  Hemdotua  ex-
pressly oscribea  to  the  Babylonians,  is  not  only  a
striking  exarapta  of  this,  bnt  a  &et  pecnliarijr  iui'
portant  in  connection  with  the  idea  that  the  jatm-
turement  of  time  by  water  led  to  the  inTcntkai
of  the  Babylonian  lyitem  of  weights.  It  is  Klaa
important  to  observe  that  theae  two  ancient  ay*-
lemi,  the  Babylonian  and  the  Euboic,  difo  fnian
one  another  m  a  proportion  whieh  is  eipresacd  bj
multiplying  12  by  the  numbers  which  fiem  thu
bases  of  the  decimal  and  dnodeclmal  lystema re-

thia  bet,  it  is  intereating  to  Dbserve  that  tka
Hebrew  talent,  which  was  no  donbt  essendally  Um
same  aa  the  Babylonian,  is  made,  by  difiasit  eoot-
pulations,  lo  consist  of  60  or  50  masat.

Indeed,  the  whole  of  the  Hebrew  system  thiowa


100


£0


neh


3000  I  60  I  Kikkar
where  the  principal  unit  is  the  £lisM,  which  can
be  identilied  with  the  principtl  unit  of  the  old
Greek  system  (in  its  chief  application  to  ouned
money),  namely,  the  rfirfmalsi  or  o]dslB(cr. Henea


fiUnr  equivalent  t
SMxl


r  (c,vi.//»


ml  SfritditM  GtaitU  Md  Odd).

S.  Til  AtgimtaK  TUoif.  ~~  Betuning  to  tha
connection  between  the  Babylonian  and  Grt«k
tolen^  we  have  aeen  that  the  Babylonian  talent
contained  72  Eiibo'ic  minae.  It  will  ptrsentty
appear  that  the  Eubolic  talent  and  mina  wav  l)u
same  as  the  great  Attic  talent  and  mtna.  whieh
wera  in  use  before  the  reduction  effected  in
them  by  Solon ;  and  fntthcr  that  the  nature  af
thai  reductim  was  such  that  the  Old  Attic
(Euba'ic)  talent  was  equivalent  to  833Sf  New
Attic  (Solonian)  drachmae,  end  tit  Eabom  mima
to  ISSf  Sijamam  ditaimae.  Now  the  Baby-
lonian talent  contained  79  GuboTc  minae,  that  ia
(13Bf  X  73—)  10,000  Solonian  drachnste.  Bat
10,000  Solonian  drachmae  were  equivalent  to  ao
Aegineton  talent.  (PdIJui,  ii.  76,  86  ;  coup.
NtiiiHiii,  p.  mo,  a.)  Therefore,  U*  Aiymitait
T<^iml  am  apatalaa  to  tit  AiiyJoinn.  What  ia
meant  precisely  by  the  Atgitlaii  talott,  and  bow
(his  (alent  was  established  m  Greece  by  tha  Ifgta-
lotion  of  Pheidon,  baa  already  been  explained
under  NuMMtnL  The  only  step  ronaining  ts
compteta  the  oxpoaJtioo  of  lk«  tolliM  sf  the  Mi^


PONDERA.
JM(  ii  Ihc  obrimi  remBrk  thu  Phcidon  mint  lun
amuigtd  hii  ilandud  ot  mighti  bj  that  which
had  alreadj  been  introdae«d  talo  Oteece  by  tlie
X  ot  ihe  Phoeniciuu,  nunil;,  tlia  Bab;-


6.  TV  Eabaio  Tttlmi,  —  Td  ths  fongMBg  n-
nufci,  OU  Ei^u  foJort  bu  bsen  coDlinDBlljr
itfttni  to  a>  *  itandKil  with  which  to  compan
the  Babyloniu.  We  h&TC  Dow  U  inTMtigMe
indqicndciitlj  it«  origin  and  nlae.  Tha  nuna
Enttae,  like  the  noma  AegiietaH,  it  oJcnkted  to
mtilnd,  u  we  Ma  m  tha  ftbtocd  eipUnBtioiu
by  which  aoma  of  the  gnininiriuu  attempt  to  ac-
mmit  for  ita  ocigin.  (See  Nkhhui,  p.  SIO.)
That  tha  niUDe  com«  from  the  iilond  of  Eubo«,
and  that  iha  Enbc'ic  nandBrd  wu  not  only  nied
there,  but  wu  widely  diffiued  thence  by  the  Ch^-
eidic  coloniei,  admiu  of  no  resKnable  doubt ;  bnt
it  i*  not  Teiy  probable  that  the  lUindard  originated
there.  The  moat  important  teatimony  reipccting
it  ii  tha  ttatement  ahrtady  quoted,  that  DBreiui
reckoned  the  gold  tribnta  of  bit  nlnjiiet  in  Eobaic
taleiAi.  (Herod,  m.  89,  95.)  BUdch  (c.  riii.)
thinka  it  incredible  that  the  Penian  king  ibonld
hara  made  thii  nae  of  a  Qreak  itandaid ;  and,
before  him,  tbe  beat  of  all  the  wiiten  on  metro-
l<^y,  Raper,  bad  acknowledged  the  Oriental  origin
oftbe  itan^bid.  (Piiiot.  Traia.  toLIiL  p.48S.)
Thia  TJew  deriTei  alu  Kinie  lupport  from  the
CQiiona  nvnoricaJ  relation  alnady  noticed  between
tbe  Babylonian  and  Eubo'Cc  lealei ;  wbtch  uiggeiti
tba  idea  that  the  minoa  of  tha  two  acslea  may
bate  been  derived  from  tha  tubdiviaion  of  tbe
■ami  primary  nnit,  in  the  one,  into  parta  both
decimal  and  dnDdeeimol,  that  ia,  aeiageumal  (60),
Id  the  other,  into  parta  purely  doodecimal  (7S)  ;
■nd  then,  far  tha  sake  of  nnifbimity,  a  talent  of
ibe  btter  icale  wu  introdnced,  containing,  like
tbe  other,  GO  minae.  Be  thia  u  it  may,  it  tan
be  affirmed  with  tolerabla  aafely  that  the  Euba'ie
talent  ia  derired  from  a  itandaid  of  weight  naed
for  gold,  whicb  eiitUd  ia  the  Eail,  in  the  earlieit
hiitoncal  period,  by  the  tide  of  the  Bdbylonian
■tandard,  which  wai  nied  chiefly  for  lilver:  that,
at  an  eariy  period,  it  wai  introduced  by  commeree
into  Euboea,  from  which  iihmd  it  aerived  tha
nanw  by  which  it  wai  known  to  the  Oreeki,  on
anonnt  of  iti  diSbiion  by  the  commercial  acviity
of  tbe  Enboeani,  jntt  ai  the  Babylonian  ttandaid
obtained  iti  Greek  name  from  the  commercial  ae-
liTitT  of  tha  At^inetana. (Comp.  Uvumvi,  L  a)

The  examination  of  the  totnnoniei  ntpecting
the  Talne  of  this  atandard  involrea  a  diacuuion  too
intricate  to  be  altered  npoD  here,  altfaongh  it  ia
one  of  tbe  mnat  inteteating  points  of  tbe  whole  aub*
jeet. Wa  mnat  be  content  to  refer  the  reader  to

to  tbe  ioDawing  cODclationi:  — that  the  Eoboic
atandatd  wai  not,  as  tome  hare  thongbt,  the  lame
as  tha  Aegtnetan ;  nor  the  tame,  or  Uit  slightly
difleiml  fivm,  the  Solonian  Attic  ;  but  the  lame
as  the  old  (ante-aolauan)  Atfic:— that  itt  tme
ratio  ta  tha  Babjbmiaii,  or  Ae^atan,  was  that
giren  ia  ntmd  mnaben  by  HerodotDa,  aa  GO  i  70,
and  in  aiaet  immbeii  bj  Aelian  (who  by  Atlit
mxn<ildAttic)mil}:  7!!,  that  ia,  S ;  S  ;  and  that
Hi  ratio  to  Hit  Solonian  wm,  u  wilt  preaently  be
ahown,  Sfi  ;  IB.  These  riawa  are  confirmed,  not
Doty  by  tbe  eonaiatency  of  tha  retulta  to  which  they
lead,  bot  by  tbe  dcdsiTe  eridcnce  of  tbe  existing
coins  of  the  Eoboic  ttandard.  [NuMMva.]


PONDERA.  633

Thaaa  two  slandaida  form  tbe  fonndation  of  the
wbole  tyslem  of  Greek  wcigbta.  But  tbe  tecond
reeeiTod  an  important  modification  by  tbe  legis-
latirai  of  Solon  ;  and  this  modification  became,
under  the  name  of  tkt  AUio  iScer  talent,  the  chief
standard  of  weight  tbrauhont  the  East  of  Europe^
and  the  Weat  of  Alia.  Wapnoaed  to  notice  both
of  tha  Attic  itsndarda.

7.  Til  OidAtHc  Talaid,  ami  Oa  Sclomia»  Ti^
2mL  —  Wa  hsTe  already  noticed,  under  Nuvuva
(p.  912,  b.),  Plutareb't  aecoant  of  tho  reduction
efected  by  Solon  in  tha  Attic  syitem  of  weights
and  money,  according  to  which  the  old  weighta
were  to  the  new  in  the  proportion  of  100  :  73.
An  important  additional  light  is  thrown  on  Uiia
matter  by  an  extant  Athenian  insmption,  ftom
which  we  obtain  a  more  exact  statement  of  tha
ratio  than  in  Plutarch'i  aeoount,  and  from  which
we  alto  learn  that  the  old  tystiia  continued  in  ute,
long  after  the  Solonian  reduction,  for  all  commoditiei,
except  luch  as  were  required  by  law  to  ba  weighed
according  to  the  other  standard,  which  wu  alto  the
one  olwayi  used  Ibr  mmey,  and  is  thereJm  called
the  silTec  ttandaid,  the  old  system  being  oiled


(4  fin  i  iiimpitti).  Tha  inacriplion,
■lucu  n  a  decree  of  Dncertam  date  {about  OL  iSS,
B.cl60,accardiDg  to  BSckh,  C./.  No.  123,  g  4,
ToL  i.  f.  164),  mentioni  lit  eomwurdat  nua  u
weighing  "  13S  drachmae  ZT(^ai-i(faf»u,  accord-
ing to  the  standard  weights  in  tha  mint  "  [AaoT.
bocofiion],  that  is,  oi  courae,  iSS  diadunae  of
tbe  ailrer,  or  Solonian,  ttandard.  Thia  wouid  giro
the  ratio  of  the  old  to  the  new  Attic  weighta  aa
138  :  100,  or  100  :  72j3i  certainty  a  Teiy  curiona
proportion.  It  appear^  however,  on  dotn  re-
leareh,  tiiat  this  atio  ia  atill  not  quite  exact  It
often  happens  that,  in  some  obteun  patssge  of  a
grammarian,  wo  find  a  ttatement  inTolving  minata
details,  to  curious  and  so  inexplicable,  till  the  cine
is  blind,  that  tha  lew  scholars  who  notice  tha
pasBge  reject  it  aa  unintelligible,  without  ceo-
tidering  that  tbcaa  atrange  minutiae  are  the  best
etidenca  that  the  statement  is  no  inrention  ;  and
that  the  giammaiian,  who  eiqiied  the  statement.


haie  lost  or


or  perrerted.  Such  pastages  are  grsina
Di  pure  gold  amidtt  the  mud  which  forms  the  hulk
of  the  depoiit  biought  down  to  ut  by  those  writers.
A  striking  initancB  is  now  before  n>,  in  a  petioge
oC  Priscian  (,d»  Si  A'anm.)  in  which,  following  a
certain  Dardanus,  be  tays :  "  Talentnm  AthenieUM
^niHB  minaeteiaginta.iiiasnnm  minae  octingenla
ties  e(  nnciae  qnaitaoi."  Taking  the  ]ut  words
to  be  the  Roman  mode  of  eipreasing  83),  and  aa-
snming,  what  is  obikint,  that  the  «tiuw  meant  in
tba  two  cUnsea  an  of  the  same  standard,  namely,
the  common  Attic  01  Solonian  (for,  ai  a  general
rule,  this  standsd  ia  to  be  undentood,  where  no
other  it  specified),  and  understanding  by  tbe  ffrmt
Atlie  AiM  that  of  the  tonmardid  ttandard,  and
by  Ibe  lataS,  the  nicer,  at  Sviomax,  we  obtain  Ihii
Itmlt,~liM  tie  ratio  ^lit  old  Attic  or  ammtrcial
laled  to  Mi  ano  Attie  or  Solomon,  wu  as  BU ;  60,
orulSSf  :  I00.ornsl00:72.  For  the  masterly
argument  by  which  B6ckh  sustains  the  truth  of
this  statement,  we  must  reler  to  hit  own  woA
(c.  Tiiu).  It  it  easy  to  understand  how,  inproceas
of  time,  the  Eraction  tame  to  be  neglected,  to  that,
in  the  deme  quoted,  the  commercial  mina  of  100
So  3


934  PONDERA.

cammenusl  dmchnise  wu  ipolcen  of  aj  contaiamg
13S  ailver  drachmu  itutead  of  138^,  and  how,
foither,  when  Plntaich  came  to  calculate  how  many
dmchmae  of  the  old  icala  vere  contained  in  the
Solonian  mina,  ha  gave  an  inlegiml  nninber  73,
insKad  of  72JJ,  and  thna,  bj  Iheaa  two  rejectiona
orfFBctiofii,  the  true  tatiaof  lOa  :  72  wu  alteced
to  100  :  73.*

R.  Hatioi  of  til  iJhta  Onei  Syifmu  to  laAiOka:
— Thi  inpoitance  of  thia  calculslion  it  made  loiuii-
feat,  and  ita  truth  IB  confimied,  by  comparing  the
reiult  willi  the  itatementa  irbich  we  bine  of  the
latiD  of  the  Aeginelan  etandard  to  the  Solonian.
That  ratio  wai  fi  :  3,  according  to  the  i
ment  of  Polliuc,  that  the  Aeginelan  talent
lained  10,000  Attic  drachmae,  and  the  dra
10  Attic  obola.  (Poll  ii.  76,  8G.)  Mr.  Hi
(who  wa*  the  fine,  and,  an«r  the  replf  of  BlSckh,
ought  to  be  the  lait,  to  call  tbii  italement  m  quea-
tian)  obaenei  that  tbii  value  would  give  an  Aegi-
iKtan  diachma  of  110  (praitu,  wherea*  the  eiittuig
ooini  give  an  arcraRc  of  onlj  06  ;  and  he  eiplaiai
the  itatement  of  Pollux  u  referring  not  to  the
Attic  tilfer  drachma*  of  tha  full  weight,  but  to  the
lighter  drachma  which  waa  current  in  and  after
the  reign  of  Augustus,  and  which  was  about  equal
to  the  Bomin  ^naiiug. [DttACUHA.]

On  the  othor  hand,  Bikkh  adherei  to  the  pto-
portion  of  5 1  3,  aa  given  by  Pollux,  who  could  not
(he  contuida)  have  meant  h;  dnchmae  thoie  equal
to  the  denaiii,  bccauK  he  ii  not  making  a  calcnla-
tion  of  hia  own,  luited  to  the  value  of  the  dnehtna
in  hia  time,  but  repeating  the  atatement  of  eome
ancient  writer  who  livod  when  the  Attic  and
Acginclnu  camncJM  vere  in  their  heat  condilioD.
Mr.  Huiae;  himaelf  aUtci  (p.  34),  and  for  a  ■>-
milar  reaion  to  that  uijed  by  ItiJckb,  that  when
Pollux  ipeaki  of  the  value  of  the  Babjlcniaa
talent  In  relation  to  the  Attic,  he  it  to  he  under-
itood  aa  referring  to  Attic  money  of  the  ttiU
weight:  and  DSckh  odda  the  important  remark,
that  where  Pollux  nKkoni  by  the  lighter  dmchmae,
a»  in  the  caae  of  the  Syrian  and  amall  Egyptian
talenbs  tbii  only  prove*  that  tha>e  talcnta  had  but
recently  come  into  circulation.  Biickh  thinki  it
very  probable  that  PoUni  fallowed  the  anthoritji
of  Ariitoile,  whom  he  used  mnch,  (d  which  ha
makei  frequent  references  in  hia  itntementg  re-
■pecCing  mfBinrea  and  mone}-,  and  *ha  bod  fre-
quent occaaions  for  ipeaking  of  the  valuei  of  money
in  hia  political  wotka.

Again,  ai  the  Aegizietnn  Btandard  wu  that
which  prevailed  oier  the  greater  part  of  Greece  in
eariy  timca,  we  ihoold  eipeet  to  Snil  lonie  deEnita
nroDortion  between  it  and  the  old  Attic  befbre
and,  if  we  tske  the  itatement  of  Pollux,


iich  a  proportion,  namely,  that  of  G  r
bich  baa  been  obtsioed  tram  the  fore-


IMckli  aupportt  hia  view  by  the  «videnca  of  ai-

*  The  oHnnKtcial  weight*  underwent  a  chaoKO
by  the  decree  mentioned  abore,  which  order)  \baX
12  dmchmae  of  the  lilver  gtandard  ahall  be  added  to
tho  mina  of  1S8  dmchmae  ;  that  to  every  five  com-
tnertial  minae  one  commercia]  minaBhall  be  added  ;
and  to  every  commeraal  talent  five  comaeroiat
minis. Tbua  wa  aholl  have —

the  mina  »  I  SO  dnchmae  (ailver),
5  minoe = 6  miaae  (commercial),
(ba  (altnt  »• 6i  miaaa  (eommeraal).


PONDERA,
iiliig  eoini,  enscially  the  old  Macedmiui.  before
the  adoptioD  of  the  Attic  itandaid  by  Philip  and
Alexander,  which  site  a  drachma  of  about  110
giaina,  which  ii  to  the  Attic  aa  £  ;  S.  The  ido-
lity  of  the  old  Macedonian  ■londard  with  tha
Aeginetau  ia  proved  by  BiSckb  {Mtlnl  p.S9  ;
compare  MUUer.  Dvr.  iiu  10.  S  13.  and  AtgmU.
pp.  64 — 58).  Then  are  aleo  other  Terr  ancioit
Greek  eoini  of  thia  atandard,  which  bod  thdt
origin,  m  all  probability,  in  the  Aeginelan  ijaKDi.
[Ntimii;!,  p.  812,0.]

The  lightcsM  of  the  eiiitji^  coin*  refemd  ta
by  KuiKy  ii  explained  by  Biicith  tram  the  wdl-
known  tendency  of  the  ancient  minia  to  depart
from  the  full  atandard.

Mr.  Huaaey  quotea  a  pootage  when  Hemdotua
(iii.  131)  alatei  that  Democedea,  a  phyrieiao,  alW
receiving  a  talent  in  one  year  at  Aegina,  obtained
at  Athena  the  next  yoir  a  vlary  of  100  jniaae^
which  Herodotua  clearly  measB  woa  more  tlwi
what  he  hod  bejhie.  But,  according  to  PoUni'i
Itatement,  aaya  Mr.  Huaey,  the  two  inma  wen
exactly  equal,  and  therefore  Iheis  wax  no  gain.
But  Herodotua  taya  nothing  of  difletent  atandardi ;
•urely  then  he  meant  the  ume  atandard  to  be  ap-
plied in  both  csaea.

Fnmi  comparing  itatementt  made  reapecting  tba
pay  of  Kildicra,  Huiaey  (p.  6!)  obtaini  4  :  3  aa
about  the  ratio  of  the  Aeginetao  to  the  Attic
standard.  Biickh  accounta  for  thii  by  enppoaii^
the  pay  of  uldiaca  varied,  and  by  the  Eact  that
the  Aeginetui  money  woa  ocloally  lighter  than  tha
proper  etandard,  while  the  Attic  at  the  aama  peiiad

u  very  little  below  the  full  wdgbt.

There  are  other  argumeati  on  both  ijdea,  bnt
what  hoe  been  add  will  give  a  anfficieiitly  conplela
~'ew  of  the  qneition.

Ai  the  nanlt  of  the  whole  tnveatigatiiBV  we  get
tha  following  defioite latloa  betweon  tho  tbna
'  ayitemt  tS  Greek  weight!  :
Aeginelan  :  Eabolc :  :  6  :  5
Afginetan  :  Solonian  :  :  £  :  3
EuWic :  Stdonian  : ;  13Bf  ;  100


:  100


The  reaion  of  the  ittongc  ntio  between  tha

Solonian  and  old  Attie  (Euba'ic)  lyilem  aeema  ta

e  been  the  deaire  of  the  legiihuar  to  '-■-'■I'lh

im^e  ratio  between  hii  new  ayitam  and  Ih*

Aeginetan. Reipecting  the  diBuiion  of  tha  ihiB*

lyilcmi  throughout  Qnece,  lee  NDimtra.

9.  OUnn-  GrtdtBi  Sgiletii. — Our  mfbraiaiion  iw-

ipectiiig  the  other  itandardi  need  in  (ireece  and  tha

lelghboiring  countriei  i>  very  aianty  and  confiusd.

Ka^tcting  tht  Egjipttam,  A  UjaKdrian^  or  Ptoi^aaia

Taiml,  the  rt&der  i*  refeired  to  Biickh,  c.  i. Th*

TjtrioH  Ta/att  Mfpeun  to  have  been  exactly  eqnml

to  the  Attic. A  iUodioa  Taleil  ii  menliaaed  by

Feitai  in  a  panage  wbich  ti  moniftitly  CMTopt  (a.  n,

TaleTiiim), The  moat  probable  emendalicci  of  tha

pauage  gi<ei4000  dslophori  or  7500  denahioi  tha

lue  of  thia  talent A  SyiaM  7U«t  ia  mentiaDnl,

e  value  of  which  ia  very  nneertain. Tbo*  wera

'o  aiiea  of  it. The  larger,  which  waa  aix  tinea

at  nied  for  money,  waa  uaed  at  Antioch  for  ireif  li-

rwood. A  CIt'uH  TbZsit  of  3000  drachmae,  ec

Jf  the  Attic,  ia  mentioned  by  Poilui  (Lx.  6).

A  mveh  amallei  talent  wai  in  me  fir  gold. It

woi  equal  to  6  Attic  drachmae,  or  about  |  so. It


PONDERA.

WW  callad  tlia  gold  talmi,  or  ibe  Smliun  talent
froni  iu  bemg  much  uHd  bj  the  Oreeka  of  Italy
■sd  Sicilr.  Tltii  Ultni  ii  perbapt  connected  with
ihs  nnall  ulnit  wbicb  ■•  tht  only  one  that  kxdii
in  UDmcr.  The  Italian  Omlia  divided  il  into
m  oguu,  and  afierwwdi  into  12  (Polluz,  U.  6  ;
Featut,  I.  V.  TiiMw}.  [Compaie  Numhus,  p.
81*.]


gnal  talnl  (maanum  laltntuin),  which

^ ■■ '  Ti,iwth« "

D  villi  111

a'Roiuuu  u  altogiihet  tsit

caaea,  wban  the}-  rollow  old  Greek  wrilen.


Latin  aathaii,  lor  tlx  ulTar  Allie  talent  wa<  gn
in  compariaoD  villi  Ihii.  But  the  uaa  sf  the  tat
b;  Iha  EUauuu  u  altogether  lerr  ineinct ;  and


thej  nae  it to  aignifj  the  old  Attic  or  Eub
Talent.

There  an  other  talent!  baRl<r  mentioned  by  ta-

100  pound!  (Xlrpw),  Vilniiiiu  (i.  -21)  otu  of
120  I  Sitidaa  (>.  n),  lleeychiui,  and  Epipbaniua
(tU  Mtmt.  a  PomL)  at  1-25  ;  Dionytiiu  of  Halieai-
nawu  (ix.  27}  one  of  125  auo,  and  Ueiychiue
three  of  16S,  400,  and  1 125  poondl  leipcctiTel]'.

When  talent!  an  mentioned  in  the  claiaical
wiilen  without  any  ipocification  of  the  itandaid,
we  muit  genenlly  Dndenland


IT  ow^  the  only  lafe  eourae  ii  to  folloi
tbeexittingcoinai  and  among  theie  (for  the  reaioni
ataled  tmder  Numiua,  p.811,  b.),  il  ii  only  the
belt  Attic  coini  that  can  be  relied  on  with  any  cri^
tainty,  altboiwh  there  are  many  other  coina  which
■flbrd  TalDahle  conlirmatary  cTideaci,  after  the
■landardi  to  which  they  belong  haie  been  fired.

hli.  Huiaey'B  compulation  of  the  Attic  drachma,
from  the  coina,  !■  perhapt  a  litUe  loo  low,  bnl  it  i>
to  jtij  near  the  truth  that  wb  may  aStly  follov
it,  tar  the  nke  of  the  adTiutage  of  naing  hi)
Dmnban  wilbmt  alteiatian.  Ha  inakta  the
draekma  GG'S  gnuDa.  [DaacHua.:  comp^  NtiH-
Hca,  p.8U,  b.;  fiir  the  other  veighta  Ke  the
Tablet.]

II.  AonunKU^Ui.— The  aniline  of  the  Roman
and  Italian  lyitem  of  weighla,  which  wai  the  >ame
■■  the  Bucient  ijitem  of  copper  mone^,  hai  been
already  giien  under  Ai.  The  lyitem  u  extremely
aimple,  but  it*  conTenion  into  our  own  itanilBid
it  a  qnotion  of  recy  coniiderable  difficulty.  The
fbUoving  are  the  diSerent  mathodi  of  compnting

(1)  Tie  RonKM  CDtat  fnmith  >  mods  of  calcu-
lating the  weight  of  the  ifbni,  which  faai  bCTti  more
relied  on  than  any  other  by  moit  modem  writfrt.
The  At  will  tcarcety  help  oi  iu  thli  calculation,
becauH  ill  weight,  though  originally  a  pound,  wai
TMj  early  diminished,  md  the  eiiiling  tpecimena
differ  from  each  other  very  giettly  [As],  but  ipcci-
meni,  which  we  may  anppoH  to  be  auei  liirala,
may  of  conrae  be  naed  ti  confirmatory  oTidence.
We  mutt  thenfon  boll  chiefly  to  the  lilrer  and
gold  coint.  Nov  the  arersp  weight  of  the  extant
qieciniciu  of  the  denariui  it  about  GO  graint,  and
in  the  early  sgei  of  the  coinage  Bl  denarii  wtnt  to
the  pound.  [DiNAniL-a.]  The  pound  then,  by
thit  calmlatiui,  would  contain  £040  giaiu.  Again,
tike  oant  of  the  early  gold  coinage  were  equal  in
veighttoaiov^w'aaand  ita  multiplei.  [AirHUU.]
Now  the  ■empulum  wii  the  238th  part  of  (he
pound  [Unci*],  and  the  arertge  of  the  tcnipulnr
•orei  baa  boen  Ebond  by  Letromw  to  be  about  1 7^


PONDERA.
graint. Hence  the  pound  nill  be


2B8jtI7i=


5040  graint,  at  before.  The  n
were,  according  to  Pliny,  40  to  the  pound,  and
therefore,  if  tho  aboTe  caJculo^on  be  right,  =  12fi
gniini  ;  nnd  we  do  find  many  of  thii  weight.  But,
well  Bi  thete  leiulia  hang  ti^ctber,  then  it  great
doubt  of  their  truth.  For,  beaidei  the  uncertainly
which  alwaya  alleudi  tho  proceu  of  calculating  a
larger  quantity  from  a  amaller  on  actouul  of  the
mulliplication  of  a  tmail  error,  we  bare  ereiy
reaaon  lo  beliere  that  the  eiiating  coini  do  not
cozue  np  to  their  aominal  weight,  for  there  vat  an
early  tendency  in  the  Roman  mint  lo  make  money
below  weight  (Flln.ff.;^.iiiiiL  13.1.46  ;  compare
Aa,  AiTRuiu,  DiNaniLiB),  and  we  have  no  proof
that  any  extant  coint  belonged  to  the  K131  carlkU
coinage,  and  therefore  no  tecurltj  that  they  may
depreciated.  In  fact,  there  oi


fore  probable  that  the  1  „
tained  from  thii  tource,  ii  too  little  Hence,
Wurm  and  BUclib,  who  olio  follow  the  coint,  give
itaiomewhat  higher  value,  the  former  making  it
5053-635  gruini,  and  the  latter  5053-38.  (Huwey,
C.9;  Wunn,c.2;  Bockh,  dl).

(2)  Another  mode  of  determining  the  pound  it
from  lie  relatiim  Mmn  tie  Hamui  leeigkli  and
Buaamt.  The  chief  meoiurea  which  aid  nt  in
thia  inquiiy  an  the  amphora  or  quadnntal,  and
the  congiua.  The  aolid  content  of  (he  amphora
wBi  equal  to  that  of  a  cube,  of  which  the  aide  waa
one  Roman  foot,  and  the  weight  of  water  il  con-
tamed  waa  SO  pounda  [Qitadkantal.]  Hence,
if  we  tan  atcertaiu  the  length  of  the  Roman  foot
independently,  it  will  give  ui  the  tolid  content  of
the  amphora,  from  which  we  can  deduce  the  weight
of  the  Roman  pound.  Taking  the  Roman  foot  at
U'eS  inchet,  ita  cube  it  15H1-I67  cubic  inches  ^
57025  imperial  gollout  =  17025  pounda  avoirdn-
poii,  the  BOth  part  of  which  it  '7128  of  a  pound,
or  4989  grsina.  But  there  are  many  ditturbing
elementa  in  thia  culcuUtion,  of  which  the  chief  ia
our  ignorance  of  the  preciae  deniity  of  the  fluid,
80  pounda  of  which  Gllcd  the  ornphon.

It  might,  at  fitit  thought,  appear  that  the  reiult
might  bo  obtained  at  once  ^ni  the  congiui  of
Vetpetian,  which  prefeatet  to  hold  10  Roman
pounda  [Conqiub],  and  the  content  of  which  hat
been  twice  examined.  In  1630,  Auzout  found  it
to  contain  51 163'3  giaint  of  dittilled  water,  which
would  give  6146-32  graint  for  the  Roman  pound.
In  1721,  Dr.  Hate  found  it  to  contain  52037'G9
graint,  giving  G203'77graintfDrlhe  Roman  pound.
Both  uete  reiultt  an  probably  too  high,  on  ac-
count of  the  eulaigement  which  the  vetaci  hoa
undergone  by  the  corroaion  of  itt  inner  lurfnco  ;
and  Ihia  view  ia  confirmed  by  the  tect,  that  tho
earlier  of  the  two  experiments  gave  it  the  tmaller
content.  (Sea  Wuim,  p.  78;  Biickh,  pp.  166,
167.)  Agam,  the  nature  of  the  fluid  employed  in
the  eiperunent,  itt  temperature,  and  the  height  of
the  barometer,  would  all  inSuence  the  reaoll,  and
the  error  from  these  tonrces  moat  occur  Iwicr,
namely,  al  the  original  making  of  the  congiua  and
at  the  recent  weighing  of  itt  conlents.  We  an,
therefore,  by  no  mesna  agrae  with  Mr.  Huttry  in
taking  the  weight  of  5204  giaint,  at  obtained  from
Ihli  experiment,  to  be  the  nearett  i4)prDiimation
to  the  weight  of  the  Roman  pound.  On  the  con-
trary, if  this  method were  foUowod  at  all,  we


D38  PONDERA.

■hoold  1>«  compelled  to  pretrr  tie  tfaeoretioi]  cnl-
culation  from  the  jaadrnxlal  slrendy  giKii,  and  lo
nj  tbkt  the  Talae  of  S053'2e  (or  £053'635)
gTWTu,  ohtained  from  the  coiiu  ii  too  liigh,  rather

(3)  Another  method  it  from  arufn^  Roman
miglUi,  of  which  we  poueu  mRny.  but  diSering
■0  greatly  among  tbemseliea,  that  thej  can  gii
no  cafe  independeot  remit,  and  (heir  eiaminatio
ia  little  more  than  a  matter  of  cnrioeity.  A  foil
Bccount  of  them  will  be  fbnnd  in  Btickh,  pp.  168—

ise.

(4)  The
from  it!  rati
(see  Diickh,  c  9)  ii  not  to  be  mnch  relied
since  we  do  not  know  whether  that  mtia  vai  exact,
or  onl;  approiimate.

On  the  whole,  the  retult  obtained  from  the  coioi
ia  probablf  neareat  b>  the  truth.

12.  CamKiiom  belmini  Wiyill  and  Meaant.
• — TTpoiL  the  intere&ting,  Ijnt  very  difficult,  ad bj«t«
•■■ " ■ ■"  reighU


1  of  the  Or
with  one  another,  and  of  both
meiuurei,  mir  apace  docfl  not  permit


ith  the  Oreeli
lo  add  naj-


i.  Aaaeat  A  yUar^'u.— In  addition  la  the  clauic
wrilfra  in  general,  especially  Che  historiani  and
geographera,  (IJ  the  Anaent  GramtivirianM  and
lexicngraphen  contain  many  scattered  notices,
aonie  of  which  are  preier?ed  from  the  laat  raetro-
logical  treatise*  of  Danlaniu,  Dindomi,  Potemar-
ehua,  and  others.  (!)  We  poaseis  a  number  of
taiaU  mctroUigical  Irratua,  which  are  printed  in
the  finh  volume  of  Stephenni'a  TKenunu  Lagnai
Gratcat.  and  with  the  worka  of  Galcn,  vol.  lii.
ed.  Klihn.  The  nioit  important  of  them  are,  that
ascribed  to  Dioacoridca,  the  piece  entitled  wepl
fiirpttv  Oypuw,  and  the  extract  from  the  KoirnTyrutA
of  Cleopalm.  Beaides  these,  wa  haie  a  good
treatise  on  the  aubject,  printed  in  the  Benedictine
AiKdidaCrofca,  pp.3S3>foll.,and  in Monl&ucon'a
Paleogntphie  Grtcqagf  pp.  369,  foil. : — two  works,
of  but  litde  value,  ascribed  to  Epiphaniui,  entitled
wtiA  lihpuy  lal  uTaBnov  and  rtpl  injA.itdniToi
liirpar,  printed  in  the  Varia  Saera  of  Steph.  Le
Mojno,  vol  L  pp.  470,  foil:  —  varionj  wrilinga  of
Heron  (see  Dwi.  of  Binff.  ». «.)  ;  —  and  a  trealise
by  Didj-mua  ot  Alexandria,  h»'t(»  luip/ulfor  Kol
rarrottiv  i&Aay,  published  bj  Angelo  Mai  from  a
MS.  in  the  Ambmaian  Library  at  Milau,  1817,
8vo,  Certain  difflenltiea  respecting  the  authomhip
of  some  of  these  works  are  discussed  by  Bikkh,
c.  2.  In  Latin,  we  baie  two  works  by  Priscian  ;
the  one  in  prose,  entitled,  De  F^urii  et  NoaiimlmM
NuTaeroriBa  tt  de  Numinit  ae  Poaderi/HU  ad
Syouaacham  Liher ;  the  other  is  the  poem  Dt
PandtrAm  tt  Mnnrit,  in  208  beiamel*r  veracs,
which  is  commonly  aicribed  to  Rbcmniui  Fannius,
and  which  is  printed  in  Wemsdorf 's /"rxtos  Ziaftni
jtf.«™,  nl  T.  pt.  1.  pp.  212,  rolL,and  in  Weber^
Carpia  Poetanm  Latinonim,  pp.  1369,  1370.
The  slalemenla  of  all  these  metrological  writers
must  be  used  with  great  caution  on  account  of  their
late  age. (3)  The  chief  Ezit&^  Mnrmtaeati  auch


PONS.

and Nt7Mii[J8. Further  information  n^ectinf
them  will  be  found  in  B6chh.

iL  Modern  Woria :  see  the  list  given  at  the  end
of  the  article  Nuhmubi.  Tba  ptsent  posidiHi  of
our  knowledge  ia  matked  by  the  work  of  Bitckh,
so  often  referred  ta,  with  Mr.  Orole^  review  of  il.
Theiv  is  no  Btiifactory  Englisb  work  in  the  aab-
jecL  The  best,  so  br  ai  it  goea,  ia  the  ttcatiH  fif
Raper,  in  the  Phibuopkieal  TVauoctfoiu,  voL  lii.
Mr.  Hussey^  work  ia  very  naeful,  but  its  wJue
is  mucb  impaired  by  the  want  of  moiv  of  that
criticism,  at  once  ingenious  and  sound,  which  haa
giiided  Bitckh  to  ao  many  new  and  Grm  msilta
amidtl  Inliicadea  which  were  belbn  deemed  bop».

For  a  general  view  of  the  lalne  of  the  MvetBl
weights,  meaearei,  and  money  m  terms  of  our  own,
■ee  the  Tablet  at  the  end  of  this  work. [P.  S.l

PONDO. [LiBBi.]

PONS  (T/fvpa),  a  bridge.  The  mod  ancient
bridge  upon  re«ird,  of  which  the  conitructied  luu
been  deicribed,  is  the  one  erected  by  Nitocria  ower
the  Euphrates  at  Babylon. (Herod.  L  1S6.) It

aisted  merely  of  stone  pien  without  anhea,  bnt
connected  with  one  anotha-  by  a  framewnrfc  of
planking,  which  was  removed  at  night  lo  prermt
the  inhabitant!  from  pasting  over  fron  the  difliemit
sidea  of  the  river  to  oommit  mutual  depiedaliDiia.
«  &stened  together  by  iron  ctiunpa
■ai  i  and  the  piers  were  buHt  whibt


a  large  lake,  which  wai


soldered  vrith  li:

the  bed  of  the  river  wai

having  been  diverted  ii

again  restored  to  the  na  .

had  been  completed.  (Herod.  L  e.)  Cmnparv  tba
detcription  civen  by  Diodonu  Sicnlnt  (ii.  8,  vol.  i,
p.  121,  ed.  Wetteling),  who  ascribes  the  waik  lo
Semiramit.


Aesch.  Pen.  G9,  ed.  BlomC,  et  Oloss.),  i
of  very  early  invention.  Darehit  is  men
having  thrown  a  bridge  of  this  kind  over  ui«
Thracian  Boaporua  (Herod,  iv,  83,  85)  ;  but  we
have  no  detula  respecting  it,  beyond  tho  name  of
its  architect,  Mandnides  of  Samoa.  (Herod,  i v.  87,
88.)  The  one  constructed  by  order  oF  Xonc*
across  the  Hellespont  is  more  celebrated,  and  luu
been  minutely  described  by  Herodotut  (riL  3fi>.
It  WHS  built  at  tho  place  where  the  ChcnMHwe
forma  almost  a  right  angle,  between  the  towns  of
Scstfla  and  Madytiu  on  the  one  side,  and  Abydm
in  the  other.  The  first  bridge,  which  was  con-
itmcled  at  this  spot,  wat  washed  away  by  a  atorm
ilm«t  immediately  after  it  wat  completed  (Herod,
iii.  34),  and  of  thia  no  details  an  given.  Ths
lubtequmt  one  wot  executed  under  the  direetioaa
if  a  diSbrent  set  of  architeda.  (M  36.)  Doth  ef
them  appear  to  have  partaken  of  the  nature  of
napeaiion  bridges,  the  platform  «hich  fbtmed  the
pasuge-way  being  secnred  npon  ennrmoos  nblea
frirmed  by  rope*  of  Aoi  (AnwoXtnH')  and  pipyTBa
(Buttdnsr)  twitted  together,  and  then  tttetehed
tight  by  mana  of  windlasses  (Er«)  on  each  aide.
""he  bridges  hitherto  mentioiied  ^jmot  ha
:tiy  denominated  Greek,  althoDgh the


a  of  the  Onck  islands.  But  the  freqaeat
on  of  the  word  in  Homer  pn>ret  (hat  bridgn
not  oneommoD  in  the  Gnek  states,  or  at  Mot
:  weatem  part  of  Alia  Minor,  during  hit  tinifc


PONS.

The  Qnck  term  for  ■  pmnnncat  L^dgc  ii  y/i^pa,
whicb  th*  UKtmt  etjmologuiti  ooiuie^cd  whh  the
Ocphrnei  (ri^upauai),  a  people  whom  HerodDtua
(t.  S7)  italc*  to  bkvc  been  Phoeniciui).  though
they  pretended  ta  haTe  come  from  Eretria ;  and
the  elymologuta  (ccordingl;  tell  ui  that  the  fint
liridin  in  Gieeee  ni  built  by  tbii  people  utdh
the  CefduKiu  g  but  tuch  ta  eipUnuion  u  oppmed
la  nund  «tfii»logf  wd  eommon  •ents.  A>  tfaa
riTen  of  Greece  were  aniBlI,  tud  the  me  of  the  arch
koown  to  them  onlj  to  a  limited  eiteat  [Arcuh],
It  ii  prabable  thai  their  bridgea  wen  built  entini;
of  wmid,  or,  at  beat,  were  nothing  more  than  a
wooden  platform  acppartod  upon  atone  pien  at
each  eitremitr,  like  that  of  Nitocrit  deKTibed
■hore.  Pliny  (H,  K.  it.  ])  mentiona  a  bridge
orer  the  Acheron  1000  feet  in  length  ;  and  alto
amjt  <iT.  31)  that  the  ialand  EnboM  waa  joined
to  Boeotia  t^  a  bridge;  but  it  ia  probable  that
both  thtee  wortu  were  executed  after  the  Roman
conqneft

Id  Qreec*  alio,  ai  well  ai  in  Italy,  the  term
iniigi  wa*  nMd  to  aigniiy  8  roadmy  raiaed  upoo
pien  or  arehea  to  connect  the  mpoaiie  aidea  of  a
iBTJDev  onn  when  no  water  flowed  through  it
(tV  T^fypor,  1)  M  t^  rini  ft,  Xeo.  Anat.
tL  «.  8  22).

The  RomBM  vera  undoubledlj  the  fint  pea(Je
vlto  antied  the  arch  to  (he  canttructioD  of  bridge*,
by  which  they  were  enabled  to  erect  almclorea
of  fftai  beanty  and  lolidiiy,  ai  well  aa  utility ;
Ibr  by  thii  neana  the  openingi  between  the  pien
for  tiw  conTenience  of  naiigation,  which  in  the
btidgti  of  Babylon  and  Qreecemuil  hare  been  Tcry
naiTDv,  could  be  extended  to  any  itece»iuy  tpan.

The  width  of  the  pausge-way  in  a  Raman
bridge  waa  eomtBonly  narrow,  aa  compared  with
modera  atraclurea  of  the  sune  kind,  and  corre-
q»nded  with  the  road  {eia)  leading  to  and  from
iL  It  waa  divided  into  three  parti.  The  centre
one,  fbr  honea  and  (arriagea,  waa  denominated
^^o-  or  ibr,-  and  the  laued  footpatha  on  each


in  the  batiliea.  [BAULicii,'  p.  199,  b.]
Ei^t  bridge*  acnaa  the  Tiber  are  a
by  P.  Victor  at  belonging  to  the  city  of  Rome.
L  Of  tfaeae  the  moat  celebrated,  aa  well  oa  the
moat  ancient,  wa*  the  Pdnb  SuBLiciua,  ao  called
beooae  it  waa  built  of  wood  ;  atfAihsa,  in  the  lan-
guage oF  the  Formlani,  meaning  wooden  beama.
(Feitea,  i.  ■.  S^iUdmiH.)  It  waa  built  by  Ancua
MartiUB,  when  he  united  the  Janiculnm  to  the  city
<LiT.  i.  33;  Dionya.  iiL  p.  IBS),  and  became  re-
nowned frtini  the  well-known  feat  of  Hoiatiu*
Cocle*  in  the  war  with  Poraenna.  (Liv.  ii.
10 ;  VaL  Mai.  iiL  2.  g  1 1  DionyL  t.  pp.  2as,
S9S.)  In  conaequence  of  the  delay  and  difficulty
' '  'n  brmking  it  down,  it  waa  re-


each  beam  could  be  removed  and  replaced  at  ple^
•ure.  (Plin.  H.  N.  luii.  23.)  It  wai  lo  rebuilt
by  the  ponlificea  (Dionya.  iii.  p.  183),  from  which
CkI,  accordmg  to  VaiTO  (IM  Lmg.  Lot.  t.  83),
they  derived  their  name ;  and  it  »u  afterwaida
conaidered  ao  aacred,  that  no  repun  could  be  made
in  it  without  previoua  laciifice  conducted  by  the
pootifei  in  penon.  (Dionya.  ii.  L  c.)  In  the
age  of  Auguitua  it  waa  ttil)  a  wooden  bridge,  at
ii  manifeat  from  the  epithet  roboreo,  uaed  by  Ovid
(f\ut  V.  621)  i  m  which  atate  it  ^ipean  to  have


PONS.  ,  937

remained  at  the  time  of  Otho,  when  it  waa  earned
away  by  an  ioondatiDn  of  the  Tiber.  (TadL  HiA
L  8G,  who  calla  it  peia  taiiidat.)  In  later  agea  it
wBt  alao  called  pau  AanUiia,  probably  from  the
name  of  the  peraon  by  whom  it  wat  rebuilt ;  hut
who  thia  Aemiliua  waa  ia  uncertain.  It  may  bare
been  Aemiliua  Lepidua  the  triumvir,  or  probably
the  Aemiliua  L^idua  who  waa  cenior  with  Muna-
tina  Plancui,  under  Angnttni,  ten  year*  after  tba
pant  mUkibi  letl  down,  at  related  by  Dion  Casiiui
{p.  423,  c.)  We  leam  from  P.  Victor,  in  hia  de-
Bcription  of  the  Regio  xi.,  that  tbeae  two  bridge*

lichu."  It  ii  called  Aemilian  by  Juvenal  (Sal.
vL  82)  and  Lompridiua  (Hiliog.  c  17),  but  it  ia
mentiiHied  by  Capitelinne  {Antam  Piia,  c.  8}  aa
the  pom  SMiciia ;  which  pawage  it  alone  auRl-
cient  to  refute  the  aaaertion  of  aome  wrilera  that  it
vraa  built  of  alone  at  the  period  when  the  name  of
Aemiliua  wai  given  to  it.'  (Nardini,  Jiom.  Aid.
Yiii.  3.)

Thit  bridge  waa  a  favonrite  retort  lor  bejqmra,
who  uaed  to  ait  upon  it  and  demand  aim*.  (Senec
D»  FK.  Btal.  2A.)  Hence  the  expreaaion  of  Ju-
vennl  (xiv.  1 M),  aiiqau  dt  ponlt,  fbr  a  b^;gar.
(Compare  alao  Jov.  iv.  1 16.)

It  waa  Hluated  at  the  (bat  of  the  Aventine,  and
wai  the  bridge  over  which  C.  Oracchua  directal
hia  flight  when  he  waa  overtaken  by  hit  opponenla,
(Pint.  OrtuA  p.  842,  c. ;  compufl  VaL  Max.  iv.  7.
8  2;  Ovid. /ii«(.  vL  477.)

II.  Pons  Palatiniis  fbimed  the  communica-
tion between  the  Palntuie  and  ita  vicinities  and
the  JanicolDm,  and  ataod  at  the  >pol  now  occupied
by  the  "  ponte  Rollo."  It  1*  thought  that  the
worda  of  Livy  (iL  SI)  have  reference  lo  thii  bridge.
It  waa  repaired  by  Augtutui.  (/aacrip.  op.  Qnit.
p.  160.  n.l.)

III.  IV.  FoNt  PABaiciv*  and  Pons  Cxstiub
were  the  two  which  connected  the  Inaula  Tiberina
with  the  oppcaite  aidea  of  the  river ;  the  ftit  with
the  city,  and  the  latter  with  the  Janiculnm.  Both
are  ttil!  remaining.  The  poni  Fabriciaa  waa  ori-
ginally of  wood,  but  waa  rebuilt  by  L.  Fabriciua,
the  amtor  vianat,  aa  the  inieription  teitifiea,  a
abort  time  previona  to  the  conapiruy  of  Catiline
(Dion  Cat*.  xriviL  p.  50) ;  which  luaage  of  Dion
Caauut,  aa  well  aa  tbe  worda  of  the  Scholiatl  on
Hoiace  (Sat.  iL  3.  36),  wamut  the  aitumption  that
it  wai  then  Snt  built  of  itone.  It  ia  now  called
"  Ponte  qnattro  capL"  The  pom  Ceatiua  it,  by
■ome  authort,  tnppieed  to  have  been  built  during
the  reign  of  TilK^riui  by  Ceitiut  Gallua,  the  per-
•on  mentioned  by  Pliny  (x.  60  ;  Tacit  Aan.  vi
91X  thongfa  it  ia  more  reaaonable  to  conclude
that  it  WBt  conatracted  before  the  termination  ot
the  republic,  aa  no  private  individual  would  hare
been  permilled  to  give  hia  own  name  to  a  public
work  under  the  empire.  (Nardini,  I.  e.)  The  in-
•criptiona  now  remaining  are  ia  commemwation  of
Valentiniannt,  Valent,  and  Oratiannt,  the  emperon
by  whom  it  waa  rettored.  Both  theee  bridge*  are
repreaented  in  the  fbltowing  woodcut  ^  that  on  the
right  hand  ia  the  pona  Fabriciui,  and  ia  cnrioua  at
being  one  of  the  very  few  remaining  worka  which
bear  a  date  during  the  republic  ;  the  pont  Ceitiui
on  the  left  repretenta  the  eCfortt  of  a  much  later
age  I  and,  initead  of  the  building  turn  Been
upon  the  ialand,  the  tempi  ea  wh;ch  originally
■tood  there,  aa  weU  at  the  itland  ittelf^  have  been


V.  PoNsJiNlouLBNaw,  which  led  direct  to  the
Juiiculum.  The  name  of  ill  founder  sod  the
period  <^  ita  cooitniciioD  an  imknaini ;  bat  it
OKOpied  the  liW  of  tha  preient  "ponte  Siito,"
which  wu  built  bjr  Siiliu  IV.  upon  the  mini  of
th<  old  briflge.

VI.  Poms  VATicjtNUB,ia  called  becsuieil  formed
the  eonunimicalian  between  (he  Campua  Martius
and  Cunpui  Vuicuiua.  When  the  waten  of  the
Tiber  are  Terjr  low,  veitigea  of  the  pieri  are  ttill
diaamible  at  the  hack  of  the  Hospilal  of  San
Spirito.  Bj  modem  topographlita  thii  bridge  if
often  called  "  Fona  Tiinmphalia,"  but  without  uij


dawal  authotil;  ;  the  iiifemic«,  howCTa;  ia  not
improbable,  becanae  it  led  directly  fnim  the  Cam-
piia  to  the  CliTua  Cinnac  (now  Monle  Mario),  fiom
which  the  triumphal  proceuiinu  descended.

VII.  Pons  AiLiua,  built  bj-  Hadrian,  vUch
led  Ironi  the  dtj  to  the  M.-iuaoleum  [MADSOLBtiH]
of  tbat  emperor,  now  the  bridge  and  caitle  of  Sl
Angelo.  (Spart,  //orfr.  clS;  Dim  Caaa.  Isii.
p.  797,  ■-)  Areprcacatalion  of  ihia  bridge  iigiTcn
in  the  following  woodcut,  token  from  a  laecial  atill
cxtnnL  Itaffin^iaapccimenof  the  ityte  employed
at  the  period  when  the  fine  arta  are  coniidend  to
have  been  at  theii  greateit  perieclion  at  Rome.


VIII.  P0K8  MiLVius,  on  the  Via  Fkaiinia.  now
ponla  llolle,  was  built  by  Aemiliua  Scaunu  the
oenaOT  (Aur,  Vict.  Zfc  Fi™  Illmtr.  c.  27.  %  B),
and  ia  mentioned  by  Cicero  abcput  fortj-fiTs  yean
afler  ilaformation.  Upon  thii  bridge  thearobasaa-
don  of  the  Allobrogea  were  arreated  by  Cicero"!
retamera  during  the  eontpiracy  of  CatiliDe.  (Cit
61  Oat.  iii.  2.)  Catulua  and  Pompey  encamped
here  against  Lcpidua  when  he  attempted  to  annul
the  acta  of  Sulla.  (Flonia,  iiL  23.)  Ita  viciuilj
waa  a  favourite  place  of  reiort  for  pleniuie  and  de-
bauchery in  the  licentious  reign  of  Nero.  (Tacit
.i^wLiiii.  t7.)  And  finally,  it  was  at  thia  apot  that
the  battle  between  Maieulina  and  Constantme,
which  decided  the  fate  of  the  Raman  empire,  took
places (A.D.3i2.)


The  Romas  bridgea  without  the  city  wen  £ir
too  many  to  be  enumerated  here.  They  formed
one  of  the  chief  embelliibmenta  in  all  the  public
roads  ;  and  their  numerous  and  stapendou  rc-
muns,  ttill  eiisting  m  Italy,  Portugal,  and  Spain,
8tte9t,CTen  to  the  present  day,  the  scale  of  pandenr
with  which  their  woAi  of  national  uliU^  *er«
alwaya  earned  on.  Subjoined  is  a  representation
of  the  l»idge  at  ArimiuDm  (liimim),  which  mnaiu
entire:  it  waa  commenced  by  Angualns  Bad  tcr«
minated  by  Tibcjiua,  as  we  icam  from  the  i&acrip-
tion,  whidi  ia  still  extant.  It  is  intiodatrd  in
order  to  give  (ha  reader  an  idee  of  the  style  of  ait
during  the  age  of  Vitmciui,  thai  pecallar  prnod  of
transition  between  the  austere  simplicity  of  Iho  re-
public and  the  profuaa  magnihceDce  of  the  empire.


PONS
whieb  Tnjan  boilt  lerou  the  Damibe,  which  ii
one  of  the  gnaUM  eSbrti  of  human  ingBoaity,
mut  not  ptH  umnentiaied.  A  fbll  account  of
it*  cmMnictuia  it  giren  bj  Dion  Cauiiu  (liiiii.
|l776,  0.);  uid  it  u  ilu  mentioDed  b^  the  joungei
Flioj  (£^.  TiiL  1 1  compen  PnicopiDi,  Da  Aiii-
teiit).  The  Ibcm  af  it  ii  ^vsn  in  the  umexed
-woodcut,  trata  ft  lepitMntttMn  of  it  tn  the  coloma


PONS.  939

of  Tnjan  at  Borne  ;  which  'ba»  pTm  riae  to
ranch  controven^t  as  it  doei  not  agree  in  many
reipectt  with  the  deecri{ition  of  Dion  Cauiia.  The
inicriptiDn,  •Dppoaed  to  have  belonged  to  thii
bridge,  i(  quoted  b;  LennclaT.  p.  1011.  G,  and  bj
Qntter,  446.  3.


SUBJI


H  KCBB.


IT  Danovid*


It  wiU  be  obiemd  that  the  piui  only  an  of
■toBo,  and  the  tnpaatinetuw  of  vood.

The  Cents  MacngH,  in  a  letter  to  Mont&ncon
(pionuiltdt'  LMtnH  (T  Aoiia,  toL  nil  p.  116),

CI  the  pobable  meuarementi  of  Ihi)  icnictiirt,
obKiiationi  made  npon  the  ipot,  which  will
eerra  ■•  a  Uthtul  d^nmentaij  npon  the  text  of
IHoD.  He  coniidai  that  the  whole  line  coneitted
of  3S  pien  and  33  archee  (making  the  whole  kidge
■Ixnt  3010  feet  lang,and4S  in  heichl),  which  an
BiDch  nam  than  the  number  diiplayed  npon  the
eolnmn.  But  thti  i*  eaiily  aeoounled  for  withoat
impairing  the  anthority  of  the  artiil^  wotk.  A
lew  «nh»  were  nScient  to  abow  the  genenl
featniea  of  the  bridge,  witbont  coptinniDg  the  mano-
toDoni  nnifomii^  of  the  whale  line,  which  would
hmre  produced  an  efect  ill  adiqiled  to  the  pnrpOMi
of  acnlptuie.  It  wai  deatn>yed  by  Hadrun  (Dion
C*a.£.a.),  under  the  pretence  that  it  would  bcili-
Imte  the  iDcnniona  of  the  barbBnani  into  the  Roman
terfitffiieo,  but  m  mbty,  it  ii  anid,  from  JMloutj
and  deepair  of  being  able  hinuelf  to  accomplish
any  eqnally  great  undertakuig  |  which  ii  guppoaed
to  be  confirmed  by  the  £utt£at  he  afterwanli  put
ta  death  the  architeel,  Artemidonii,  trnder  whoH
directicai  it  wu  conatneted.

The  Romani  alao  denominated  by  the  name  of
yoHto  the  laneewBji  which  in  modern  langsagB
■IB  tensed  "Tiadncla."  Of  theee  the  Pom  ad
Nrmam,  now  called  ponte  Nono,  near  the  ninth
Bule  bom  Roma  on  the  Via  ffuiMtiita  ia  a  fine


longat  the  bridgea  of  teniporai7  nae,  which
were  made  ibr  tbe  immediate  prnpoaea  of  a  eam-

paign,  the  moat  celebrated  ia  that  conalmcted  by
Jnliu  Cbbbi  orer  the  Rhine  within  the  abort
period  of  toi  daya.  It  waa  built  entirely  of  wood,
and  tb*  whole  pmcsa  of  iti  conitmction  ii  mi-
ntaly  detailed  by  ita  author  (SafisU-Oo/J.  iv.  17).
An  eletatiiKi  of  it  ia  given  by  Palladia,  conitructed
in  eontbnnilf  with  the  aceount  of  Caeaar,  which
hai  been  copied  in  tbe  edition  of  Oudeudorp  and
in  the  Delphin  edition.

Vigetiua  (iiL  7),  Herodian  (viiL  1,  8),  and
Lwan  (it.  490)  mention  the  nae  of  coska  [dolia,
€t^pa4)  by  the  Homana  to  nnpport  raita  for  the  poa^


■age  of  an  army  ;  and  V^elius  (Ic)  nya  that  it
waa  cnalomaiy  for  the  Roman  army  to  carry  with
them  amall  boala  (moitenii)  hollowed  out  firom  the
tnmk  of  a  tree,  together  with  planka  and  nmli,  ao
that  a  bridge  coidd  be  conatiTieted  and  bound  to-
gether with  ropea  npon  any  enieritency  without
toea  of  time.  Pompey  paaaed  the  Euphratea  by  a
aimilar  device  duriDR  the  MilhiidBtic  war.  (Flotua,
iii.  fi.)  The  pneediDg  woodcut,  taken  fnm  a  bn>-
lelief  on  the  column  of  Trajan,  will  afford  an  idea
of  the  general  method  of  coniiruction  and  form  of
theae  bridgea,  of  which  there  an  hfcibI  deaigna
upon  the  anme  monument,  all  of  which  greatly  re-
aemble  each  other.

When  the  Comitia  were  held,  the  voteia,  in  order
to  rnch  the  encloaun  called  aptuia  and  oci/e,
peaaed  over  a  wooden  plalJbnn,  eterated  aiwve  the
gnmnd,  which  WB)  called  poaa  taffragiiirmm,  in
order  that  they  might  be  able  to  give  their  votea
without  confuaion  or  colluaion.

Pona  ia  aito  uied  to  aignify  the  platform  (^i-
€dBpay  inrotiSpa)  naed  lor  embarkuig  in  or  dia-
embaiking  from,  a  ahip.

"  Interea  Aeacai  locioe  de  puppibua  allia
Ponlibua  eiponit." Virg.  Aea.  i.  368.

The  method  of  oiing  theae  pcnUa  i>  npreeented
in  the  anneied  woodcut,  taken  from  a  lery  cnrioua
intaglio  repreunting  the  hiitnry  of  tbe  Tnjan  war,
diacovered  at  BoviUao  tovrarda  the  latter  end  of  tbe
irth  century ;  which  ia  given  by  Fabretti,  i^m/qjnia
da  Colanm.  Trtfjani,  p.  315.  (See  further,  Hirt,
Lain  der  Gatdadi,  §  x.)  [A  R.]


PO'NTIPEX  ((.poA&faicaAoi,  UpovS^i,  l,po.
ipiXal,  l(pofki«7ji).  The  origin  of  thia  word  ia
explained  in  vnrioua  ways.  Q.  Scaovoln,  who  waa
■  inuelf  pontifei  muiimuB,  derived  it  from  ;ious
.JiA/aeen,  and  Vano  from  pom,  bccanao  the  pon-
tiifa,  he  aaya,  had  built  the  prna  aubliciua,  and
afterwarda  frequently. reitored  it,  thai  iti^tbo


940  PONTIFEX.

pouibic  to  peribrm  nnilicft  on  each  >ide  of  the
Tiber.  {Vam,  <^  £11^.  Lai.  t.  83,  ei.  MUller ;
Diixifi.  iL  73.)  Tfai>  ilatemenl  ii,  however,  cnn-
tndicted  b;  Ihe  trndilion  which  Bucribci  the  build-
ing of  the  pom  nibliciiu  10  Ancai  MnrtiUB  (Lir.  i.
33),  at  a  time  whea  ihe  ponlifli  bad  long  ciiBted
and  boniB  thi>  muae.  Qdttling  (GeiA.  d.  RSn.
Staaln.  p.  173)  think)  that  ponlyferiloQly  another
form  for  pompifyj:,  which  wonld  chDnoteriae  the
pontifTi  only  u  the  managers  and  eondocten  of
public  procenioiu  and  Klemnilin.  But  it  aeeini
far  more  pnibablo  that  the  word  ia  formed  ftnm
pow  and  fieeTv  (in  the  lignificalion  of  the  Greek
^^(tir,  to  perform  b  ucrifice),  and  that  conseqnentl;
it  aidniliBa  Lhe  prieata  who  offered  aacrificee  upon
the  bridge.  The  ancient  laciifica  to  which  the
name  tbui  alladei,  ii  that  of  tbe  Aigeans  on  the
•ncnd  or  lublician  bridge,  which  ii  deuribed  by
Di«i;aiai(L38;ei>nipBraAnOBi).  Greek  writera,
' la  tmulate  the  void  pontifi  b;


The  Roman  pon^%  fanned  the  meat  tHuHriaiu
■roeng  Ihe  great  collegea  of  prieata.  Their  iuati-
tution,  like  that  of  alt  important  nutteia  of  leli-
gion,  wai  aacribcd  to  Numa.  (Li>.  L  20  ;  Dionja.
iL  73.}  The  nombec  of  pontifit  appointed  by  thii
king  wai  fonr  (Lir.  x.  6),  and  at  their  head  wsa
Ihe  pontilex  Diaximni,  whaii  generally  not  included
when  tbe  number  of  poDlifla  ii  mentionsd,  Cicero
(it  JFU  Publ.  iL  1 4),  Sowe'cr,  includea  the  ponlifei
maiimna  when  he  layi  that  Nunut  appointed  G>e
pontic  Niebahi  (Hiil.  0/ Romt,  L  p.  303,  &c  ;
compare  iii.  p.410  ;  Liv.  i.  6  ;  C\t.  di  Rt  PM.
ii.  9)  luppoeea  with  great  probability,  that  the  ori-
ginal number  of  fbtir  pontiffs  (not  including  the
pontifei  maiimtu)  iiad  reference  to  the  two  eorliat
tribea  of  the  Honiana,  tbo  Hamnea  and  Titiea,  ao
that  each  tribe  waa  represented  by  two  pontifli.
In  the  year  B.  c  300,  tbe  Ogulnian  law  raiaed  the
number  of  pontifli  to  eight,  or,  including  the  pon-
tiiez  muiniiii,  to  nine,  and  four  of  them  were  to
be  plebeiana.  (l.ir,  x.  B.)  The  pontifei  maiiraua,
howeTer,  contmued  to  be  a  patrician  down  to  Ihe
year  b.  c  2fi4,  when  Tib.  Corancaniua  waa  the  fint

E}^.  ]8.}  Thia  number  of  pontiff  remained  for
a  long  time  unaheied,  until  in  81  B.  c  the  dictator
Sulla  increaaed  it  to  fineen  (Ut.  EjnL  89),  and
J.CBuar  (o  liiteen.  (Dion  Out.  iliL  Gl.)  Jn
both  theae  changea  the  ponCifex  maiimua  ia  in.
eluded  in  the  number.  During  tho  empire  the
number  varied,  though  on  the  whole  fifteen  ap-
pear) to  have  been  the  regular  number.

The  mode  of  appointing  the  pontiffi  waa  alto
different  at  different  timet.  ]t  appear*  that  aftet
their  inatitution  by  Numa,  the  college  had  the
right  of  co-Dptatian,  that  ta,  if  a  member  of  the  cot-
1^  died  (for  all  the  poolifb  held  their  office  for
life),  the  membori  met  and  elected  a  lucceaaor,
who  after  hia  alec^on  waa  inaugurated  by  the
augur*.  (Dionys.  iL  22,  73.)  Thii  clpclion  wai
Bometimea  called  oc^ifia.  (Gclliui,  I  12.)  lathe
year  212  B.C.  Livy  {uv.  5)  ipeake  of  the  election
of  a  pontifei  maxlmiu  in  Ihe  comitia  (piDbably
tbe  comitin  tribnta)  ai  the  ordinary  mode  of  ap-
pointing thia  higb-prieiL.  But  in  relating  the
CTODta  of  the  year  181  B.C.  he  agun  elates  that
the  appointment  of  the  chief  pontiff  took  place  by
lb*  eOH^tfttion  of  the  college.  (Liv.  1!.  42,)  How
theae  anomaliea  atoaa  (unleaa  LirJ  eipreatca  him-
ialf  eanleialf )  ia  uDcettun  <uc  OlUUiiig,  £  e.  p.


37S)  i  fot.


PONTIFEX.

ai  fti  aa  we  know,  the  fint  aUMUpt  ta


illego  of  iti  ri^t  of  00  optation,  artd
to  cranBter  tue  power  of  election  to  ^b  people,  waa
not  made  unlit  the  year  B.  c  H£,  by  the  tribana
C.  LicmiuB  Crauoi  j  but  it  waa  initialed  by  the
praetor  C.  Laeliu).  (Cic  da  A».  25,  BnL  21,  da  ■
Nal.Dtar.  iiL  Z)  In  104  B.a  the  atlnopt  -waa
Blicceaafully  npeated  by  the  tribune  Co.  Dtanitiiu
Aheoobnrbui :  and  a  law  (Lex  Domitia)  waa  tbca
paaaed,  which  tianaferred  the  right  of  dectmg  the
memberg  of  tbe  great  college*  of  ptitat*  to  th«
people  (probably  in  the  comiiia  tribala)  ;  that  is,
the  people  electod  a  candidate,  who  was  then  nmda
a  member  of  the  college  by  the  co-optatio  trf*  the
prieata  themielTei,  ao  that  Uie  coHiptatiD,  allbooKh
■till  nete*>ary,  bccameamerenutteroffiiiu.  (Ctc
di  Lrg.  Agr.  iL  7,  Epiit.  ad  BrmL  L  5  j  VelL
PbL  iL  12  ;  Suelon.  Ntn,  2.)  Tbe  lei  Damitia
was  repealed  by  Sntla  in  a  lex  Carudia  de  Saecr-
dotiiafai  B.C),  which  reaWrad  to  the  gnat  prieatlj
collcftci  (heir  full  right  of  00-optatio.  (Ut.  Epa.
89  ;  Pieudo-Aacon.  ia  Dmam.  p^  102,  td.  Otelli ;
Dion  CaH.  iiiriL  37.)  In  ths  year  63  B.  c  t^
law  of  Sulla  wai  aboliihed,  and  ^e  Damitian  lav
waa  leatcred,  but  not  in  ita  full  extent  j  for  it  waa
now  determined,  that  in  caae  of  a  laaincy  tbe
college  itaelf  ihonld  nixniiwle  two  candidaiea,  and
the  people  elect  one  of  them.  Thia  mode  oi  ytn^
ceeding  ia  eipreaaly  mentioned  in  regard  to  tbe
appointment  of  augnra,  and  waa,  no  donbt,  tbe
•aoie  in  that  of  tho  pontic  (Cic  PhSip.  ii.  3.)
Juliui  Csmr  did  not  alter  Ihii  modified  bii  IkHni-
tia,  but  M.  Antoniui  again  Rslsred  tbe  right  of
co-optatio  to  the  college  .  (Dim  Can.  xlir.  53->

Tbe  college  of  pontlBa  had  the  nipreme  auperiii-
tendence  of  al!  matten  of  religion,  and  of  things
and  peraoni  connected  with  public  aa  well  a*  pn-
Tate  wonhip,  A  general  outline  of  their  rigfata
and  fnnctioni  i>  giren  by  Liry  (L  20)  and  Diony.
•  iui  (ii.  73).  Thia  power  ia  vid  to  have  bf«a
given  to  them  by  Numa  ;  and  ha  alao  entmatad  to
their  keeping  the  hooka  containing  tbe  ritoal  €ir-
dinancea,  together  with  (he  obligation  to  gira  ia.
formation  lo  any  one  who  might  comolt  them  oat
mattera  of  leligioa.  They  bad  to  guard  agaiaat
any  iiregularily  in  Ihe  obaervanee  of  tdigiooa  ritca


manner  what  aigna  eithei
phenomena  were  to  be  receired  a
They  had  the  judicial  deciaion  in  a
ligion,  whether fsivute petiotu, t ,.  ....

prieata  were  eoDcerued,  and  ui  caaea  when  tbe  ex-
iitmg  lawa  or  euatonu  were  found  defectiiia  at  ia-
anffident,  they  made  new  lawa  and  rffuhliiiM
(dtcrHa  pimtifiaat)  in  which  Iheyalwaya  felbnred

with  the  exiating  ctiatont  and  tiaata.  (OeU.  iL
38,  X.  IS.)  Thi7  watched  oiet  Ihe  taidnct  of
all  peraooi  who  had  anythiug  to  do  with  tbe
nerilicet  or  the  wonhip  of  tbe  goda,  that  ia,  Direr
all  the  prinU  and  their  aervanta.  The  fiirma  of
worahip  and  of  mcrificing  were  determined  by  tbe
pontift,  and  whoeiei  nAiaed  to  obey  their  injaoc-
tiona  waa  puniihed  by  them,  fir  they  were  **  mvai
quae  ad  aacra  et  rehgionei  pertinent,  jadinra  rl
Tiadiost,"  (Fcab(.n  JftnaHHjwMl^/ csBifan


PONTIFES,
Cie.  (fa  £«^  ii.  8,  13.)  The  i»nd&
wen  not  tubJMt  to  mj  coort  of  law  or  piin»li-
mcDl,  4ad  nn  ndl  rapouible  either  to  the  leiMe
or  to  lh(  pMple.  Tha  dataili  of  tbex  dutjea  and
fniKtiDiu  wen  cantaiaed  in  booki  called  libri
pootifieii  or  pontifiolet,  conuncntuii  Burorum  is
maamat  ponlificaliua  (FeA  i.  r.  AiiMla  and
Oauui),  vhieh  ihef  mie  «id  lo  Iibts  nceiied
film  Nulla,  and  which  were  wietioned  bf  Aneui
Mattiui.  Thi*  king  ii  Mid  to  have  made  public
that  f«rt  of  thcM  regntatioiu  which  had  rcfemtce
IS  tha  <Bcn  pabliea  (  Lit.  i.  33}  ;  and  when  at  the
commencemait  of  the  republic  the  wooden  tabki
oa  which  Iheae  publiahed  regulatiou  were  written
had  Ulea  into  decay,  (he;  were  mlorcd  by  the
pootilu  maiiMDi  C.  Pupiriui.  (DionjL  iii.  36.}
Om  {jait  of  theaa  lihri  ponliEcalei  wai  called  Indi-
gilaiuanla,  aod  contained  the  name*  of  the  gedi  u
w^  ai  the  manner  in  which  theH  uamei  were  to
be  naed  in  public  wonhip.  (Sen.  ad  Virg.  Gears.
i.  31.}  A  ncond  part  mutt  have  contained  the
tanaoUa  oT  the  jua  pontificium.  (Cic  d»  Rt  PnU.
iL  31.)  The  ariginal  lawa  and  regulationa  con-
tained in  theae  booki  vat  in  the  eourte  of  time
inenaied  end  mon  aecnratel;  defined  by  the  de-
OMa  of  the  pontiff*,  whence  perhapa  their  name

Cic  Brml.  14.) Another tiadition concecning  th«e
boi^  atatad  that  Noma  ccmmonicatcd  to the


Donlh,  and  that  he  had  boiied  the  bfiolc*  in  a
BKna  cheat  on  the  Janicntum.  (PluL  Nui*.  22 ;
Plia.  //.  M  liiL  27  ;  VaL  Max.  L  1. 13  ;  AuguiU
d*  Ciml.  Dai,  Til  U.)  Theie  hooka  were  found
in  181  B.  c,  and  one  half  of  them  contained  rilnal
Rgotatiotit  and  the  jiu  pontificium,  and  tlie  other
balf  philosophical  inquiriei  on  the  aame  lubjecto,
and  iraR  written  in  t1)e  Qnek  huignB|{e.  The
booki  were  broo^t  to  the  piaetot  Drbanaa  Q.
Patiliua,  and  the  asnata  odered  the  latter  half  to
be  burnt,  while  the  fbimer  wat  carefully  preacTTed.
Reapeeting  the  nature  and  aothentidty  of  ihit
■toi7,  lea  Hartung,  Dit  Rdig.  d.  Rara.  i.  p.  214.
The  annalea  maiimi  wen  reconU  of  the  CTenta  of
each  jear  kept  bj  the  ponlifei  nuiimoi,  from  the
cotmiKaceinent  of  the  atate  to  the  time  of  the
poDtifaz  mazimui,  P,  Mnclu  Seaerola,  b.  c
133.

Aa  lo  the  rigbta  and  duliea  of  the  pontiff,  it  muat
Jiat  of  all  be  heme  in  mind  that  the  pontilft  were
not  prieata  of  any  particukr  diriuity ,  but  a  college
which  atood  abo'e  all  other  piieita,  and  snpecin-
tendcd  the  whole  external  wonhip  of  the  godi.
—  la  Leg.  iL  8.)  One  of  their  principal  dnliea
— ilattou  of  the  aaoa  both  publica  and
10  watch  that  they  were  obicrred  at
XMt  (for  which  pnrpoae  the  pontic
or%iii*lir  had  the  whole  regulation  of  tha  calendar,
•ae  Calkhdabidk,  p.  330,  &c),  and  in  their  proper
" '  n  publica


vJDallr  hac


In  t


n  later  time*  astiitcd  in  o

and  had  in  their  keeping  die  funda  from  which
aa  of  Uie  noa  publics  wen  deEiayed.


[Sac


'■I


The  pODtiSa  ccoiToked  the  ataembly  of  the  cnriet
(eamilia  calata  or  curiata)  in  caiei  when  prieiu
were  to  be  appointed,  and  Baminea  or  a  rex  aacro-
nm  were  to  M  inaugurated  ;  alio  when  villa  were
to  be  leedTod,  and  when  a  deteitatio  lacrorum  and
adoplun  by  adrcgalia  took  phieei (UolL  t.  19,


PONTIFEX.  941

xt.27i  Adoptio,)  Whether  thepreeeneeoftho
pontifia  together  wiUi  that  of  the  augura  and  two
fiamioci  waa  neceaaory  in  the  comitla  curiata  alao
in  caiea  when  other  matten  were  trHuocled,  aa
Niebuhr  think*  ([.  p.  342,  IL  p.  333),  doea  not
appear  to  be  quite  certain. Tha  cuHhu  circnm-

wsa  conimanded  by  the  aenata  lo  )ffeaide  at  the
election  of  tribunea  of  the  people,  Ii  explained  by
Niebuhr  (iL  p.3i9,&c.).

At  r^rda  tha  jurisdiction  of  the  pontiHa^
magiatratci  and  prieatt  at  well  aa  priTate  indiri-
daalt  were  bound  lo  aubmit  to  their  tonCence,  pro-
Tided  it  had  the  aanction  of  three  memben  of  the
college.  (Cic  ib  Hanap.  Rap.  6.)  In  moat  caica
the  aenteace  of  the  pontilft  only  inElcted  a  6na
apon  the  oSenden  (Cic  Pkilip.  xL  8  j  Lit.  iiiTii.
£1,  iL42},  but  the  pemn  fined  had  a  right  to

ral  to  the  people,  who  might  relate  hun  from
hue.  In  r^atd  lo  the  Veitol  Tirgint  and  tha
peraona  who  committed  inceil  with  them,  the
pontiffa  hud  criminal  juriidictiDn  and  might  pro-
''  of  death. (Diony*.  ii,  40  ;


LL  61  ;  Feat


nwho


had  Tiolated  a  Veilnl  Tirgin  wo*  according  to  on
ancient  law  tcooiged  to  death  by  the  pontifex
maiimua  in  the  comitinin,  and  it  i^ipean  that
originally  neither  the  Vnlol  virgin*  nor  the  nude
offender!  in  auch  a  cate  had  any  nfht  of  appcaL
OSttlina  (p.  185)  coniidcn  that  they  had  the
right  of  appeal,  but  the  [utage  of  Cicero  (i/g  Ba
/■ait  iu  31)  to  which  he  refera,  doet  not  aupport
hia  Dpinion.  Incut  in  general  belontfod  la  the
jiuiidiction  of  the  pontiSi,  and  might  be  ponished
with  death.  (Cic.  dtLrg.  ii.  19.}  In  Inter  time*
we  find  that  eren  in  the  ease  of  the  pontifft  having
paiicd  lentence  upon  Vettol  rirgint,  n  tribune  in-
terfered and  induced  the  people  to  appoint  a
qnoealor  for  the  purpsee  of  making  a  freih  inquiry
into  the  caie  ;  and  it  aametimcs  happened  that
after  thia  new  trial  the  lentenca  of  the  pontifFi
wat  modified  or  annulled.  (Atcon,  ad  Miioit,  p.
46,  ed.  OrellL)  Such  caiei,  hovcTer,  aeem  to  hate
been  mere  tiregularitiei  founded  upon  an  aboM
of  the  tribunitian  power.  In  the  early  timet  tha
ponliffa  were  in  the  eicloaive  poancuion  of  the
civil  u  well  oa  religion*  law,  until  the  former  vai
made  public  by  C.  Flariui.  [Actio.]  The  i^u-
latioot  which  teived  aa  a  guido  to  the  ponliA  in
their  Judicial  proceedingi,  brmed  n  large  collcctiim
of  law*,  which  wot  called  the  jus  pontificium,  and
formed  part  of  the  lihri  ponlificiL  (Cic.  de  Oral.  L
43,  iiL  33,  pv  Zlomo,  13  ;  compare  Jua,  pp.  6j6,
6o7.)  The  new  decree*  which  the  pontiff*  made
either  on  the  preposal  of  the  tenate,  or  in  catei
belonging  to  the  sacra  privala,  or  that  of  priiata
individuola,  were,  at  Liiy  (ixxiz.  16)  aays,  in-
Dumecabla.  (Compare  Cic  da  Leg.  ii.  23  ;  Ma-
crab,  jilt.  iiL  3  1  Diony*.  iL  73.)

The  meetlngi  of  the  collej;*  of  pontiBe,  to  which
in  (ome  in*tancea  the  flamine*  and  the  rei  la-
crorum  wore  summoned  (Cic.  da  Hanap.  Rerp.  6),
were  held  in  the  curia  regia  on  the  Via  Sacra,  la
which  waa  atlacbed  the  residence  of  the  pontifei
maiimus  and  of  the  rex  tacnirum.  (Suet.  Cust.  46  [
Scrr.  ad  Aait.  riii.  363  j  Plin.  EpiiL  It.  II.)  Aa
the  chief  pontiff  wa*  obliged  to  live  in  a  domoa
publico,  Augustus,  when  hs  atinmed  thit  dignity,
changed  port  of  his  own  honte  into  a  domui  pub'
lico.  (Diun  Can.  liv.  27.)  All  the  pontiff*  were
in  Iheir  ^^learauce  diatingoithed  by  the  conic  up


9«  PONTIFEX.

called  tatulDa  or  gHlenu,  w!lh  sn  ^ci  npan  it,  and
the  togft  pnetfxta.

The  pontiiei  muimiii  wu  the  [feudent  af  ttie
cnlltge  uid  Hclad  in  ita  lunu,  whence  he  alone  u
freqamtly  mcntiimed  in  caiee  in  nhieh  he  muH  b«
eoniidertd  only  u  the  organ  of  the  college.  He
wiu  generally  tho«en  from  lunong  Ihe  mott  dj»-
tingnuhed  perBons,  and  luch  u  bad  held  a  curulc
mogiatiwy,  or  were  Blnady  ntflmlien  of  the  col-
lege. (Lit.  hit,  G,  iL  12.)  Two  of  bii  eipecial
dnties  wen  to  appoint  (mpen}  the  Veata!  Tuyine
wid  tho  iainjnu  [Vibtalis  ;  FlaninJ,  and  te
hf  present  at  eterr  mamage  by  conbrreatio.
When  feitiTe  gamet  were  vowed  or  a  dedicaliaa
made,  the  ohief  pontiff  had  to  repeat  over  berore
the  penoni  who  made  tho  tow  or  the  dedication,
the  focmula  with  which  it  wu  to  he  peilamied
{promt  rtrba,  LIt.  t.  40,  it  46,  St.  27).  During
the  period  of  the  republic,  when  the  people  exer-
eked  lOTereign  paw«r  in  eiecy  reapect,  wi  "  '
that  if  the  pontiff  on  conatitational  or  nl
BTOUnda  refuied  lo  petTonn  tbia  aolenmit;,
M  compelled  bj  the  prnple.

A  penCifex  might,  like  all  the  memben  of  the
great  prieatly  collcgee,  hold  any  olbei  military,
doil  or  pcieatly  oflico,  prorided  the  different  officeg
Hi  not  interfere  with  one  another.  Thui  we  find
ene  and  the  aame  penon  being  pontiff,  ingor,  and
deceioTir  ucrorvm  (Lit.  x\.  42)  ;  iniiaaaa  of  a
pontirei  maiiniui  being  at  the  lame  time  conaol,
are  veiy  numeroua,  (Lir.  lirriiL  38  i  Cie.  rfe
Hariap.  Reip.  6  ;  corapsre  Ambnuch,  Sbidieii  imd
Atuit^tvigeii,  p.  229,  note  105.)  But  whatercr
might  be  the  civil  or  military  office  which  a  ponti-
fei  mBTimua  held  beaide  hit  pontificate,  he  wai
Dot  aUowed  to  leais  Italy.  The  <irat  who  Tiolated
thii  law  wat  P.  Liciniua  Cnuni,  in  B.  c  131
<Liv.  E)rit.  B9  ;  Val.  Max.  riii.  7.  6  j  Oroi.  r.
10)  ;  bnt  af^  thil  precedeDt,  pontiffi  ipem  to
hare  fteqaeiitly  tranagretaed  the  law,  and  Catmi,
though  pontifei:  moximiu,  went  to  hit  nrevincv  of
Oaal.

The  cillege  of  pontifTa  continned  lo  exiat  nntil
the  OTcrthrow  of  p^anism  (Amob.  it,  34  ;  SjTO-
mach.  Epit.  ii.  128,  129)  ;  but  iU  power  and  in-
fluence were  conaiderably  weakened  aa  the  em-
peron,  according  to  the  example  of  Cneiar,  had
the  riRhl  lo  ^pouil  aa  many  memben  of  the  (treat
collei^i  of  nneita  09  they  pleated-  (Dion  Ciisa.
zlii.  «1,  xliiL  51,  Ii.  SO,  liij.  17  ;  Soet.  Oaa.  31.)
In  addition  to  thta,  the  emperora  themaoUea  were
■Iwiyi  chief  ponti^  and  at  anch  the  pregidenta  of
the  colli^  I  hence  the  title  of  pontifei  maiimna
(P.  M.  «  PON-  M.)  appeart  on  ac>.-eral  coina  of
the  emperoia.  If  there  were  aereral  emperora  at
a  time,  only  one  bore  the  title  of  ponlifei  maii-
mua ;  but  in  the  year  a.  o,  23B,  wo  find  that
each  of  the  two  emperora  Maximal  and  Balbimu
ataumed  thit  dignity.  (Capitol.  Maiim.  et  Bali,
8.)  The  laat  tlacca  of  emperora  being  at  the
iome  time  chief  pontiffa  are  found  in  inacriptiont
of  Valentiniu),  Valena,  and  Oiattonna.  (Orelli,
Iiter^  n.  1117,  1118.)  From  the  time  of
Thcodoaioi  the  emperora  na  longer  app?ar  in  the
dignity  of  pontiff;  bat  at  lait  the  title  wat  at-
lomed  by  the  Chrittian  biahop  of  Rome.

There  were  other  pontifli  at  Rome  who  were
diitingniahed  by  the  epldict  mbraei.  Varioiu
opiniona  haTs  been  entertained  a<  to  what  thete
pontificea  minoret  were.  Niehahr  (i.  p.  302.  n.
775)  thinki  thu  they  w«n  or^cin^y  iba  pontifi


PORISTAB.
of  the  Lai:erea  ;  that  th^  ttood  in  the  nma  te-
lation  to  the  other  pontifb  a*  the  patcea  mimnnn
gentium  to  the  patna  majonm  geotinm  ;  and  that
aubaeqiiflntiy,  when  the  meaning  of  the  naioe  na
forgotten,  it  wai  apgdied  to  the  aeovtaiiet  of  tha
great  college  of  poatib.  In  another  pajaa^  (iii
p.  411)  Niebnhr  himtelf  d


pontifii,  and  lii

by  all  tha  atali

tion  the  pootiEoea  ninoret,  Lirj  (nii.  67 ;
compare  JuL  CapitoL  Optf-  Afoern.  7),  in  B|iittk-
ing  of  the  aecretariaa  of  the  college  of  pmtiSa,
adda,  "  qnoa  nunc  minocea  pcntificea  i^pellant ;  "
from  which  it  ia  eiident  that  the  name  pontifioea
minorea  wat  of  later  intntdactaon,  and  that  jt  waia
given  to  persona  who  origioally  had  na  clainLa  to  it,
that  ii,  to  the  eecretariea  of  the  pcotifi.  The
only  natBial  aolution  of  the  qaeition  aeemt  to  be
hit.  At  the  time  when  tha  real  ponti&  be^Ba  ts
leglect  their  dntiea,  and  to  leave  the  priacipal
luaineu  to  be  d«ie  by  their  aecrelariet,  ii  bccaine
cuatomary  to  designate  these  acdbca  by  the  Dune
of  pontificei  miama.  Macmbint  {SaL  L  15),  in
speaking  of  minor  pontifli  proTiont  lo  the  time  of
Cn.  Flarini,  makes  an  Buachronitni,  as  he  tnina(«a
cuttomary  in  hit  own  dart  lo  a  tima
coidd  not  pooibty  exitt  The  nnnbvr  of
cretariet  ia  nnoertain  ;  Cicero  (da  Jfan^
Aetp.  6)  mention!  the  name  of  three  minnr  poatifia.
The  name  cannot  baTs  bem  lued  long  b^ote  th*
end  of  the  republic,  when  even  chief  pontift  bcfxa
*~  -ihow  a  dian^ard  for  their  laered  datiea,  aa  in
case  of  P.  Liciniua  Craaiut  and  Jnliea  Cacaar.
itbcf  pnnf  of  their  falling  off  m  eompaiBsa
with  fbnner  day*,  is  that  aboDt  tha  mne  time  tba
good  and  lumriont  living  of  the  pontiA  betaaaa
proverbial  at  Rome.  (Hont.  Om.  iL  11.26,ftc.  t
Mart  xii-  48-  12  ;  Macrob.  SaL  n.  B.)  [U&]
PONTIFICA'LES  LUDL [Ludi  Fonrtri.

PONTIFI'CIUM  JOS. [Jua,  pp.  6iS,  teT.]

POP  A- [CaCTONA  i SACUnCIDM.]

POPPNA. [CAuroN*.J
POPULA'RKS. [NoBiLia,  p.  799,  kj


day  of  the  people's  flight,  wai  celebrated  on  the
None*  of  July,  acconthig  to  an  anciait  tiaditioD
preserved  by  Vano  (0«  Lap.  Lot  vi-  18,  rd.
MUllcr],  in  commemoration  of  tha  fiigfat  of  tba
peo[Je,  when  the  iohabitanta  of  Ficnlea,  Fidenae,
ad  other  places  round  abont,  aKwucd  in  anna
^tnst  Rome  thonly  after  the  dcfartnie  et  iIm
Oauls,  and  prodnced  toeh  a  panic  that  lilt  RonoBi
suddenly  fled  before  them.  HacTobioa  (gaftirw.
iii.  2),  honrever,  laTi  that  the  Pojralihgn  m>  ccia-
hrated  in  commemotation  of  the  flight  of  th*  peopla
before  the  Tnsoini,  while  Dionyaiaa  (iL  76)  nka
origin  to  the  flight  of  tha  petite  on  the  death  of
RonmW  Niebuhr  (Hiil.  a^  Ram,  nd.  ii  p.
£7S)  aeema  difpoaed  to  aee^  the  tnditioo  arr~
served  by  Vam  j  bat  the  dinerent  ■eeoanta  of  ila
igin  given  by  Macrolnai  and  DSoajtioi  reaideT


PO'POLUS, [Patkimi.]

PORISTAE  (wpiiTToI),  WW
Athens,  who  probably  levied  the  eztnwcdinHj
supplies.  (Jlaparai  ilrir  tpx^  ^''  'A#it*yw,
^a  itifBut  /ftrsi,  Bekker,  AiKc  f.  394. 19.)

AbHi^imi  (A  Cbr.  p.  791,  Bciak*)  Ommt  tkia


PORTA,
wilb  tht  Pdetee  and  PibcIomi  ;  tz\3  Dtmoitbi
ifUlip.  i.  p.  *9.  IS)  join"  "»  XPiMt-'  to,
ml  npMTof,  from  vhich  it  nimld  apptar  thai
tlwj  mn  public  officer*  in  hit  tinie,  allhoujih  ihe
vorda do  mt DCCeHarilj  provg  Ihia. (Biickh,
rM.  Earn.  ofAikaa.  p.  166,  Qd  cd.)
PORNAK  {wifrat). [HaT*M*«.]

PORPE (»ifW>t). [FlBUtA.]

PORTA  (ir**t|,  rfn*  mAd),  the  gate  oT  a  citj,
ciladfl.  or  other  open  ipace  ineloied  by  a  wall,  in
(onlradiMiDCtioa  to  JaHui^  which  iraa  tha  door  at
B  IwoK  or  anj  eorered  edifice.  The  lermi ,
■nd  'Mil  an  often  found  in  Ihe  pluisl,  oTen
applied  to  a  lingle  gate,  becaiue  it  conaiAled  of
two  leaTCi. (Thacrd.  ii.  *  ;  Virg.  An.  iL  330.)

The  gale*  of  a  citT  were  of  ccium  Tarioiu  in
their  nnmber  and  poiilion.  The  ancient  walli  of
Pantnai,  Sepiannm,  and  Aoita,  Uill  remain  and
iDc1o«e  a  •qoare ;  in  the  centre  of  each  of  the  foor
mil)  wai  a  gale.  It,  inalead  of  being  litnated  on
a  plain,  a  cilj  wai  boilt  on  the  raniniil  of  a  pre-
cipitnu  hill,  there  a'ai  a  gate  on  Ihe  ilopinf^  do-
cliTitr  which  afTorded  the  eaaiul  accCH.  If,  in
CDiueilDencs  of  the  unevenneaa  of  the  ground,  Ihe
form  of  the  waili  wai  irregular,  tlie  number  and
•ituuion  of  the  galea  laried  according  to  the  cir-
CQimtancet.  Thai  Megan  bad  G  gates  (Rein-
gaoBm,  Afe^aru,  pp.125, 136)  ;  Thebet,  in  Boeo-
tift,  bwl  7  ;  Athetia  had  8  (Erach  u.  Ombf^r,  Enqf'-
(.e.Atfiai,  pp.240,  Sll)  1  and  Rome  20,  or  per-

The  jambt  of  the  jjate  were  aunnounted,  1.  by  a
lintel,  which  vu  hu^  and  itnng  in  proportion  to
ibe  width  of  Iho  gate;  eiamplea  of  eilremely
DiuiiTe  Jamba  and  lintela  are  pitaenled  by  Ihe
galea  in  the  ao-called  CjelopeBn  Walla  ;  aee,  for
inatance,  the  cngracini;  of  the  ceUbiBted  Lion-
Onte  at  Mycenae,  under  Mnitus,  p.  770,  b.  The
lintel  of  the  centre  gate  leading  into  the  Atbcntsn
Aempolti,  i*  17  feet  long.  3.  by  an  arch,  na  we
•«  exemplified  at  Pompeii,  Paealnm,  Sepiannm,
Vollen,  tJan,  Antitn,  DeIanl;or^  and  Trevea.  3,
At  Arpinom,  raw  of  Ibe  galea  now  remaining  ii
arched,  whilal  another  ia  eonilracted  wilh  the
alonea  {nojecling  one  beyond  another,  aflcr  the
mannn  repreaented  in  ihe  wood.mt,  at  p.  125.
(Keppri  Graven,  Eiairnait  n  tkt  Abrwcd,  voL  J.
p.  108.)

At  Conto,  Tcrotu,  and  other  ancient  citiea  of
Lomhardy,  the  gate  Cfaitsini  two  pawogea  dote
togetfaer,  the  one  detigned  for  sirriagea  entering,
and  the  other  for  carriagea  leaying  the  eity.  The
■une  proriiion  ia  obaerred  in  Ihe  magnificent  min
of  a  gate  at  Trew*.  (See  the  following  wooden!,
■howing  a  Tiew  of  il,  together  wilh  ita  plan.)  In
ollwt  inatance*  wb  find  raily  one  gale  for  carriagea,
but  a  amaller  one  on  each  aide  of  il  (»a(wTiAfi,
Hcliodor.  TiiL  p.  394)  for  foot-fMiengen.  (See
the  plan  of  Ihe  gate  of  Pompeii,  p.  266.)  Each  of
the  fine  galea  which  remain  at  Antan  hu  not
only  two  orriage-waya,  but  exterior  to  them  two
aidewBy*  tot  pedettiiani.  (Mililn,  Yoj/age  rfaM
In  Dfporlemau,  &c  tdI.  L  ch.  22.  Atlu,  PI,  16.
Figa.  3,  4.)  When  there  were  no  aidewayt,  one
of  the  Talna  of  the  large  gate  i«metimea  contuned
a  wicket  {  pariula,  rvkit  ■  ^innrO\Ji\  large  enough
to  admit  a  lingle  perton.  The  porter  opened  it
when  anjr  odo  wiihed  to  go  in  or  ont  by  night.
(P*b.YiiL  20,  24  1  LiT.  iir.  9.)

The  coDtriTancea  for  &atening  galea  were  in
fenenl  the  Mnie  h  tluMe  nied  for  doon  [Janpa],


PORTA.


948


but  larger  in  proportion.  The  wooden  bar  placed
Bcmat  them  in  the  iniide  Ou>xUi)  wa«  kept  in
ita  poaiiion  by  the  following  mediod.  A  hole,
paaaing  through  it  perpendicularly  (jBoXorotdn)^
Aen-Tad.  IS),  admitted  a  cylindrical  piece  of  iron,
called  M^Jlros,  which  aleo  entered  a  hole  in  the
gate,  ao  that,  onti]  it  waa  taken  out,  ibe  bar  could
not  be  ranoTed  either  to  Ihe  one  aide  a  the  other.
(Thuejd.  ii.  4  i  Arialoph.  Faap,  200  ;  fliSnArlwmii,
Jvn,  1 159.)  Another  pi«c  of  iron,  fitted  to  the
3dAiuvi  and  called  AiAantTpa,  wai  lued  to  ei-
tract  it.  (Afn,  Tact  /.  e.)  When  the  beuegera,  for
want  of  ihii  key,  the  PaKiirdypa,  were  unable  to
remoTO  the  bar,  they  cut  it  through  with  a  hatchet
(Thucyd.  IT.  Ill  ;  Polyb-Tiii.  23,  24),  or  tet  it
on  fire. (Aen-Tact  19.)

The  galewBy  had  commonly  ■  chamber,  either
on  one  tide  or  on  both,  which  aerred  aa  the  reai-
denee  of  the  porter  or  guard.  Il  wu  called  avAiir
(Polyb.  TiiL  W,  23,  2*).  Ill  aitnition  i*  ahown
in  the  folloiring  plan.  (See  wood-cut.)  But  tha
gate-way  waa  alao,  in  many  csaea,  nirmounttd  bj
er,  adnpled  either  for  defence  (jKaHi  tumt

.  «it,  Caet  B.  G.  TiiL  9;  Virg.  Aea.  tL  fii2—
5£4)  or  for  conducting  the  gecenl  baiineaa  of  go-
Tcmment.  In  the  galea  of  Couio  and  Verona  lhi«
edifice  ia  3  ilnrie*  high.  At  Tterca  il  waa  4
itones  high  in  Ihe  fianki,  although  the  4  atoriea
eraain  atanding  in  one  of  them  only,  aa  may  be
ibaerred  in  tha  anneied  wood-cnt. The  length


of  thli  building  ia  IIS  feet ;  in  depth  47  in  the
middle,  67  in  Ihe  Sankij  iU  grtaleat  height,  92.
'"  the  4  atoriea  are  ornamented  in  erety  direc-
with  rowi  of  Tuacan  colnmna.  The  galeirayi
are  each  14  feet  iride.  The  entrance  of  each  ap-
pear* Id  haia  been  guarded,  aa  at  Pompeii  (tee
p.  2£6),  firat  by  a  portcullia,  and  then  by  galea  at
wood  and  iron.  The  barbican,  between  the  donble
porlcullia  and  the  pair  of  galea,  na  no  douht
open  to  Ihe  aky,  as  in  the  galea  of  Pompeii.
Thii  edi£ee  waa  ^bebly  erected  by  ConiluiuM


p,  9-S9.>


inb^aded


1  the  Old  Tut


Rnd  wielded


SH  PORTICUS.

lWjttmhaehtItimmJaLofnmf,w.i—
Iti  roin  of  oniamental  windowB  and  ite  gei
ityle  of  iu  arebiUi^Curo,  sjlbrd  eulEci
tioni,  that  olthaugfa  lei;  itcgng,  it  wai  c
•olely,  nor  prineipally,  for  the  purpoiei  ui  ukici.™,
but  to  be  sppUcd  in  time  of  puce  to  the  rariaiu
abjecU  of  ciril  ga-ranaxat.  To  theie  latter  par-
poees  the  nte  bouH  (iruA^r)  whb  cDRnaDulj  de-
Totod,  morBeip«iaIljiiiE«leniniiijilrie».  HeaiM
Polybiiu  (iv.  2S)  calli  a  buildiog  at  Alexaodria
Ti»  xF'UiarioTuAr  ni\Ara  rmr  BaaAilur,  L  «.

"  the  g»t6-boiue  of  the  p»l»ce,  OMtd  for  the  '

action  of  public  buiJUMi.'' ' '' ""

ment  the  wfenncei  to  thi«  cuiunn

quent. By  melonjiny  "  tha  gat«i

who  adminiitered  jutlJce  at  ^  gUi

the  powert  oE  goTemmcot. (Horn.  IL  ii.  313  ;

MatL  irL  18.}

StatUM  of  tbe  lodt  vcie  often  placed  neai  tha
sate,  or  eren  withiD  it  in  the  barbican,  u  ai  to
be  mutr  to  recelr*  tbe  adoration  of  tlioae  who
entered  tbe  cily.  (P""-  ",  SS.  I  ij  Lacret  L
314;  jli<i,ziT.13.)  The  probable  pHition  of  the
■tatue  TBI  the  point  S  in  the  aboie  plan.  The
Hate  wBi  aometimes  mneh  omajnenteiL  Sculp-
tured clephaaH,  liir  eiani[J«,  were  placed  upon
the  Porta  Aiirea  at  ConitaoUnfiplB.  [J.  Y.j

PORTENTUM. fPaoDiQiun.]

PO'KTICUS  (<rT*J),  a  walk  corered  with  a
roof,  which  »  mpported  by  colunuu,  at  leaat  on
one  tide.  A  porticua  wai  either  attached  to
templea  and  other  public  buildingi,  or  it  wai  built
independent  of  aay  other  ediJic&  Such  ihaded
walki  and  place*  of  ruort  are  almut  indiipeiuable
in  the  Hulhem  ceucuiei  of  Europe,  where  people
lire  much  in  the  open  air,  aa  a  protection  from  tbe
beat  of  the  inn  and  from  lain.  Tbii  wai  the  case
in  anciml  time*  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  at
preunt.  The  porticoei  allached  to  the  temple*
were  either  conitnicled  only  in  front  of  them,  «
went  round  the  whole  balldmg,and  templet  leeeiied
different  name*  according  to  taewdilTerentporticoea,
and  according  to  the  arrangement  of  the  column*
of  the  porticoea.  [Timpldh.]  They  were  ori^-
all  J  intended  aa  placa  for  thoie  peiioui  to  naiembla
and  confene  in  who  yiiittd  the  temple  for  raiioua
.inch  tem^e-porticoe*,boweTer,  were
lU  or  not  iuited  for  the  nrioiu  j
ji  and  public  life,  nio*t  of  the  Gi
town*  bad  independent  porticoei,  lome  of  w]
were  Tery  eiteniive,  eipceially  in  their  place*  of
public  aaiemhly  [Aooha]  ;  and  a*  the  Greek*,


^rpo»


Uof  m


ir  public


utility,  t


*oA.,«


t  bejon


public  walk*  >


adorned  with  picture*  and  atatuei  by  the  beat
nuuten.  Of  thit  kind  were  the  Foecile  (aroi
voiirUn)  and  oToik  ftifflAtui  at  Alheni  (Athen.
liii.  p.  Sr:  J  Paua.  i.  3.  §  I,  *c.),  and  the  .rToi
■n,p<,urii  at  Spaita  (Paua.  iiL  II.  9  3.)  The
SlHi  at  Spaita,  where  the  popular  aiw^bliet
were  held,  aeenu  to  bare  been  a  building  of  the
aamekind.  (Paua.  iiL  iS.  §  S.)  In  meet  of  thewi
■tcae,  leat*  [Exidrai]  were  placed,  that  tbote
who  were  tirad  might  lit  down.  They  were  tie-
quented  not  only  by  idle  lounger*,  but  alio  by
pbiloaopben,  rhetonciana,  and  other  pertm*  food
of  intellectual  eonTenaiim.  The  Stoic  ichool  of
phlloaophy  derired  iti  name  from  the  circumatance,
that  the  founder  of  it  lued  to  conTeno  with  bit
diiciploi  in  a  itoa. Tha  Roinaa*  ddired  their


PORTORIUU.

gtest  fondnen  for  inch  cOTered  walk!  &ddi  tlia
Qreek*  ;  and  a*  Iniiuiea  among  them  were  csiried
in  ererylbing  to  a  greater  extent  than  in  Qroace,
wealthy  Roman*  had  their  priTate  poiticoea.  taatt
time*  in  the  city  itielf^  and  aometime*  in  their
coantiy-ienl*.  In  the  pnblic  pnticoea  of  Rome,
which  were  exceedingly  mmierou*  and  Ttry  cx-
teniive  (ai  that  around  tha  Fonun  and  the  Cuipoa
Martin*),  a  lariety  of  buiineet  wa*  onuioiudly
tnnvtcted :  we  find  that  law-tuiU  win  coadiwted
here,  meeting*  of  the  aenate  held,  good*  exhibited
for  nle,  &c.  (See  Piutcnt,  Lttkim,  t.  el  PerCiewi,
who  ha*  girai  a  complete  lilt  of  all  the  portieocB
ofRome.)  [US.5

PORTI-SCULUS  («\e«rr^.),  an  officer  in  a
ahip,  who  gave  the  aignal  to  tbe  rawer^  that  tliey
might  keep  lime  in  rowing- The  mrae  nave  *wa
al*o  giren  to  the  pole  or  hammer,  by  the  atrikiiig
of  which  he  regulated  the  motion  of  Ilw owm.
<Fe*lni,  a  v.) The  dutie*  of  thii  ofScer  are  ttuw
deteribedby  Silin*Italicu*(Ti.3liO,&c);  —
**  Mediae  (tat  mirgine  pnp]na,
Qui  toee  altemoa  nautamm  temprret  tctna,
Et  mni*  dictet  Aonitam,  paiiterque  relali*
Ad  aonitiun  plaudat  remantia  aetnla  teoaia.*

Thii  officer  i*  (ometime*  called  Horlator  (Otid,
Mu.  iii.  61U;  Plaut  Mm.  n.  3.  5 ;  Vir|^  Atm.
iiL  128)  or  PAuaaaiDa.  (Compan  Blomfirld,  od
AuA.  Fen.  403.)

PORTITO'RES.  [PoanjiUDii ;  Pi71ii.k:xki.]
PORTO'RIUM  wai  one  bnnch  of  the  n^lai
rcTcnae*  of  the  Roman  itate,  coiudating  of  tha
dutiei  paid  on  imported  and  exported  noda:
•ometime*,  howOTer,  the  name  pottoriom  la  mlao
applied  to  the  dutie*  raiiod  upon  good*  (br  being
csriied  through  a  country  or  oier  bridge*.  (Plio.
H.N.  lii.  3t  ;  Suelon.  FiUlL  14.)  A  poatoinni.
or  duty  upon  imported  gosdi,  appear*  to  hacs
been  paid  at  a  rery  earty  period,  for  it  ia  *kid  that
Valenu*  Pubticola  exempted  the  plebe*  ban  th*
portocia  at  the  time  when  the  republic  >a*  tlinM-
ened  with  an  inraaion  by  Ponenoa.  (Ut.  ii  9  ;
compare  Dionyi.  t.  32.)  The  time  of  it*  iutiv-
duction  i*  nncartain ;  bnt  the  abolition  oT  it  as.
cribed  to  Publicola  can  only  bare  been  a  lempoiaiy
meoKire  \  uul  aa  the  expenditnre  of  the  repubUe
increaied,  new  portoria  mnit  hare  beoi  intro-
duced. Thus  the  conion  «.  Acmilin*  Lepidn*
and  M.  Fuliiu*  Nobilior  inititutedporisna  <<■•«-
iigalitt  midia  (Lir.  xL  51),  and  C  Oracchu  agua
increaaed  the  number  of  article*  which  had  to  paj
portoria.  (VelL  Pat,  a.  S.)  In  conqoaccd  pWin»
and  in  tbe  pioTinee*  the  import  and  export  dntiea,
which  had  been  paid  there  belore.  were  gcDOBll  j
not  only  retained,  but  incraaed,  and  apprapiiated
to  tha  aerarium.  Thai  we  rotd  of  portoria  being
paid  at  Capua  and  Putcoli  on  good*  which  vera
imported  by  merchant*.  (Lit.  xaxiL  7.)  Sicily,
and  abore  all,  Aua  tiinuahed  to  tha  Hacaao  tna-


(Cie.


I which  were  raiiad  aa  p


caae*,  howerer,  the  Roman*  allowed  a  anliject
nation,  u  a  particolai  favour,  to  laiie  ibr  thna-
lelre*  whatever  portoria  they  pleaied  in  their
porta,  and  only  atipuiated  that  Roman  fitfin*
and  aocii  Latini  should  be  exempted  froai  ibera.
(Lii.  xxiviii.  44  ;  Oiuta,  ItuerijiL  p.  500-)  In
the  year  60  i.  c  all  tha  portoria  id  the  ncto  of
''  '  — I  dona  away  with,  bj  a  lex  Cat  cilia
the  pnatar  Q.  HetdJia  Htpm. (INob


Ilalf  n


of  ths  poftilDrei,  i.  <
and  who  grfttj  *i
luGw  coDdoct  and


PORTORIUM.

SI -.dead AtL ii.  16.) It appon,

that  the  aoBa  of  tbii  ■bolition  vu  not

lunt  br  tbo  people  of  the  tax  itielt^  but

the  penona  who  collected  it,

lyed  the  mercbanti  by  thnr


»  odIj  leii


....  .] That  tko  rnabiM  »r

import  and  n^oct  dntiei  m  the  pioTiiun,  until

Jaliwr


imported  Eram  liavigii  CDnntria.  (Suet.  Caa.  iS.)
Doting  tbe  trJomTirala  new  portoria  were  intro-
dncsd  {Dion  Caee.  ilTiii.  34),  and  Aagnitoa  partlj
inccnnd  the  M  nnnt  dotica  and  partly  nuli-
luted  new  aam.  The  nibeeqasit  emperon  in-
I  laaiiiil  or  diminiihed  this  branch  of  the  raiemie
a*  neceoi^  riiqnmd,  or  aa  their  own  diieretiDn
dictated.

Ai  regard*  the  artielei  lobjeet  to  an  import
dmy,  it  aiay  be  Mated  in  general  lemu,  that  all
aoDiiDoditiea,  indndbg  ilaiH,  which  were  im-
pottad  by  nuidiant*  for  tbe  puipoee  of  ■clling
then  again,  were  nibjaot  to  the  portoriom ;
vbereai  thingi  which  a  penon  broaghl  with  him
lbs  hi*  own  nae,  wen  exempted  froDi  iL  A  long
li*t  of  mdi  tanUe  article*  i*  giten  in  the  Diseil
(39.  tit.  1.  a.  16  ;  cranpara  Cic  o.  Kerr.  ii.  72,  74).
Many  tbn«*.  howerer,  which  belowed  more  to
the  lanrie*  than  to  the  nccewarie*  oflifiE,  aneh  a*
eunochi  and  handmna  youth*,  had  to  pay  an
impotl  dMy,  even  though  they  ware  imported  by

run*  br  their  own  n*<.  (Soet.  Aa  cfar.  Hhi,
.  Cod.  4.  tJL  42.  *.  a.)  Thing*  which  were  im-
ported for  the  oaa  of  the  Mate  were  alas  exempt
from  the  pottorinra.  Bat  the  gorenior*  of  pro-
Tinee*  (proendN),  when  they  aenC  per*on*  to  pnr-
chaae  thingi  fOT  the  me  of  the  public,  had  to  write
a  li*t  of  (och  thingi  for  the  pnblicani  (jnrtUora)
to  enable  the  latter  to  tee  whether  nkocs  thingi
were  imported  than  what  were  oidered  (Dig.  39.
fit.  4-  *.  4)  ;  for  die  pcaetiM  of  aannling  apptan
to  hare  beat  a*  mmmoo  anMng  tho  Ronwiu  a*  in
nnden  tiaica.  Renecting  the  ri^t  of  the  pccti-
tore*  to  atarch  trateflera  and  meichaDti,  (ee  Pub-
LEAin.  Such  goodi  a*  were  duly  italed  to  tbo
'itonn  wen  called  tenpta,  and  thoie  which
B  not,  ia»arT>^.  If  good*  aabjeet  to  a  duly
re  Bmeealed,  they  were,  on  their  diKoiay,  csn-
- • (Dig.  59.  tit.  4.*.  16.)

!ting  tbo  ainoant  of  the  import  or  export
B  Imto  bnt  Tery  few  atatementi  in  the
nitcn.  In  the  time  oF  Cicen  tha  tnr<
rat  in  the  port*  of  Sicily  wa*  one-tmntieth
..  .an'aui)  of  the  tuIud  of  taxable  article*  (Cic
e.  Verr,  iL  7A)  ;  and  ai  thii  wu  the  ciutDmary
nla  in  Greece  (Bbckh,  PM.  Earn.  p.  326,  2d
edit.),  it  i*  probable  that  thii  va*  the  a'oagB
HUB  niied  in  all  the  other  ]foTinct*.  Id  the
tiow*  of  the  empeiwi  the  ordinary  ral«  of  die  por-
torinra  i{ip«ui  to  hare  been  the  fortieth  part
(jfiadrageiima)  of  the  Talue  of  imported  good*.
(Suet.  Vt^at.  I  ;  Quintil.  Dedam.  3S9  ;  Symmacb.
^liM.  T.  62,  66.)  At  a  Idle  period  the  exorbitant
tata  of  ODO-eightb  (attava.  Cod.  4.  liL  61.  *.  7)  ii
mentioiMd  a*  tbe  odinary  import  duty  ;  bnt  it  i*
nMertain  whethCT  thi*  ii  the  dnty  far  all  articUi
at  enaBKTce,  or  merely  for  certain  thingi.

The  portorinin  wai,  like  all  other  Tectigalia,
Anted  oat  by  the  ccniMi  to  the  pablicani,  who
etJleetMl  it  throogh  the  poitilore*.  (V%moi.LiA  ;
PmUK^Hi.}  (Bunnano,  Dt  VmSgaSbat  Populi
Atai.  FP.60— 77 ;  R.  Bcuf,  CnmMf*  in/lHW


(OMCM  in  Rant.  Stoat,  Brannichweig  1003,  3
ToU.  ;  Hegtwisch,  rnraxA  iUer  dit  him.  PiRim-
»«,  Altona,  1804.)  [L.S.]

PORTUMNA'LIA,  or  PORTUNA'LIA,  a
fntiral  celebrated  in  honour  of  Portumnui,  or
Portanni,  the  god  of  harbouia.  (Vairo,  £i<  Liag.
Lai.  TiL  19,  ed.  Mllller.)  It  wa*  ceUbnted  on
the  17th  day  beftm  the  Kalendi  of  September.
(CWanfarwB  jVq^}

POSCA,  Tinegar  mixed  with  watv,  wa*  ths
common  drink  of  the  lower  order*  among  the
Itonnn*,  a*  of  Mildien  when  on  •erviee  (Spart.
Hadr.  ID),  ilare*  (PlauL  Mil.  iiL  S.  23),  &c

POSEIDOTIIA  (nniMrw),  a  Awtiial  held
erery  year  in  Aeghu  in  honour  of  Poeeidon.
(Atheu.  xiii.  p.  68S  ;  Pint.  Qh»i(.  Or.  44.)  It
aecm*  to  Iuto  been  celebrated  by  all  the  inhabit-
ant* of  the  iiland,  a*  Athenaeui  (xiii.  fi.  £90)
call*  it  a  piaegyri*,  and  mention*  that  dnnng  ona
celebration  Phiyne,  the  celebrated  hetaera,  walked
naked  into  the  sea  in  the  preBenee  of  the  auem.
bled  Greek*.  The  festival  1*  alto  mentioned  by
TheodoceCu*  (Titn^,  7),  but  no  parUculaia  an
recorded  reepeeting  the  way  in  whidi  it  wu  cele-
brated. (Comp,  HUUer,  Aepmel.  p.  148.) [L.  S.]

POSSE'SSIO.  Panlu*  (Dig.  41.  tit.  2.  ■.  1)
obierm,  "  Poneiaio  appellata  eat,  ut  et  Dibeo
ait,  a  pedibu*  *.  qnaii  poNtio :  qnia  imtomlitcr
taaebir  ab  to  qui  indatiL"  The  abeurditj  of  Iho
etymology  and  of  the  mion  an  equal  The  de-
ment* of  Poandete  are  either  put  (pot-i*X  and
udere ;  or  the  fint  port  of  the  word  ii  related  to
spu^  and  the  cognate  Greek  fom  of  totI  (wfit).

Pmeiiio,  in  it*  priroary  ien*e,  ii  the  power  by
rinuB  of  which  ■  man  ha*  *neh  a  maalery  over  a
corporeal  thing  a*  to  deal  with  it  at  hi*  pleamro
and  to  exclude  other  pcnon*  from  meddling  with
it.  Thi*  condition  or  power  ii  called  Detention,
and  it  lie*  at  the  bottom  of  all  legal  lenie*  of  the
word  Poucuion.  Thi*  Poaieuion  i*  no  legal  itata
or  condition,  but  it  may  be  the  (ource  of  right*,
and  it  then  becomn  PDHeuio  in  a  juriaticaJ  or
legal  leiue.  Still  eien  in  thii  lenie,  it  i*  not  in
any  way  to  be  conlbonded  with  Property  (pn-
pritlai),  A  man  may  haTO  the  jnriitica]  pouea-
lion  of  a  thmg  without  being  the  ptoptietor  ;  and  n
man  may  be  the  {Hiiprietor  Of  a  thmg  without  hav-
ing the  Detention  of  it,  or  even  the  juriitical  po*.
Kiuon.  (Dig.  41.  tit.  2.  *.  12.)  Ownenhip  ii  the
legal  apacily  to  operate  on  a  thing  according  to  •
man'i  (Jeaiuie  and  to  exclude  everybody  eUe  from
doing  Ml  Poateaaion,  in  the  lenee  of  Detention,
ii  the  aetnal  eiereiee  of  each  a  power  aa  the  owna
right  to  exeroiaa.


I*  the  intentim  {amimai}  to  deal  with  the  thing
_  hi*  own.  If  ha  deal  with  it  a*  the  proper^  S
another,  a*  excrciung  orer  it  the  right*  of  anoUier,
he  i*  mt  oud  "  powdera  "  in  a  jnriMiial  lenie  t
but  be  i*  (aid  "  abcno  nonine  poatidete."  Thia
i*  tbe  OMe  with  the  Commodatann*  and  with  him
who  holdi  a  depoait. (Dig.  41.  tit.  Z  *.  18,  30.)

When  the  Delentiim  i*  mads  a  jmialical  Poa-
■eaiio  by  virtne  of  the  anbuni,  it  layi  the  fmmd-
ation  of  a  right  to  the  Interdicta,  and  by  virtue  of
Umc^iioD  It  may  beeoma  ownenhip. The  rubt


"SadibM.-— Bd.Fl«.-


except  tliBt  it  muat  not  ban  DriginiOed  illegsllj
wilh  respect  to  the  peniHi  Bgniiuit  whom  the  Inter-
dict ii  clsimed.  [I  ntih  dictum.]  Simply  b;
Tirtoe  of  being  paaieinr,  ^e  poMestor  hs*  ■  better
right  than  an;  penoa  who  ii  not  foueaai,  (Dig-
is.  tit.  17.  1. 1,  S.)  Unu^jton  reqnim  mt  only
a  jiuinicsl  pouenia,  but  in  iu  di^  it  mint  h&ie
been  bana  fide  and  fonnded  on  a  juata  miua,  that
i>,  on  wme  legal  tiaDiacti<Hi.  He  who  bufa  a
thing  from  a  man  vho  a  out  tho  owner,  but  whom
lis  belieTH  to  be  the  owner,  and  oblaini  potaeaiion
of  thn  thing,  ii  a  bona  Ede  poaMior  with  a  juata

The  tight  which  ii  Gmnded  on  a  Jnriitica]  poa-
■nab  ii  a  Jiu  poHenioaii,  or  right  of  poMesiDa,
that  ii,  a  right  ariiing  from  a  jnriitini  pouea-
UDD.  The  eiprcuion  Jul  pooeaicHui  it  nisd  by
the  Roman  Juriita.  The  ngbt  to  pmeo,  called
I^  modem  Juriata,  Jiu  poiudendi,  beloiigi  ta  the
Ihoorr  of  Ownenhip.

All  Jnriitical  PoHeaiio  then,  that  ia,  Poaaeiiia
in  the  Roman  Law,  ai  a  totiRa  of  righti,  haa
lefereDca  onlj  to  UiucaiHoD  and  loterdjcta ;  and
alt  the  rolei  of  law  which  treat  PoMeition  u  a
thing  of  a  ioriitical  nature  hare  no  other  object
than  to  detnmiiie  the  poMibilitj  of  UmcajUoa  and
efthelntecdiela.  (Simgaj,  Dom  RtcM  da  Btalxa,
p.  24,  Ac)

In  aniwer  to  the  qaeatum  to  which  clan  of
RighU  PoueHton  belor^  fiatign;  Dbaerrea  (%  6),
—  So  fat  u  concern!  UiocapiDii,  one  cannot  mp-
poMi  the  thing  to  be  the  iab;e«t  of  a  qneation.  No
one  thinki  of  aiklng,  to  what  cian  of  righta  a
jnita  laun  beloaga,  without  which  tradition  can-
not gire  ownenhip.  It  ia  no  right,  but  it  ii  a
patt  of  the  whole  tiannctioD  bj  which  ownenhip
la  acquired. So  it  it  with  Poiieuioa  in  retpect  to


to  poucntaial  Inleidkti  thto  bekoga  to  the  Lai
of  OhligaliiHiaa,  aod  thetein  poaHanon  ia  only  •
hi  eoDiideied,  aa  eeotBuung  the  oonditioa  without
whkh  the  Intodicta  cannot  be  luppoeed  poauble.
The  Ju  Poneiiionii  oonaequentlj,  that  ii  the
right,  which  mere  poweation  giiei,  conuitt  aimply
in  the  claim  which  the  Poaieawr  hu  to  the  Inter-
dicta,  aa  aoon  aa  hij  pooeaiion  ia  diatorbed  in  a
definite  form.  Independent  of  thii  diitoibanca,
ben  poeeenion  pta  no  righta,  neither  a  Jni  Obli-
gationia,  ai  ia  aelf-eridcnt.  Dor  yet  a  right  to  the
thing,  ^r  no  dealing  with  ■  thing  ia  to  be  conai-
dered  aa  a  legal  act  aimply  baauie  the  peraon  ao
dealing  haa  the  poaaewion  of  the  thing."  (SaTignj,

The  teim  PoMeaaio  ocean  in  ue  Roman  jnriala
in  Tsriom  aenaea.  There  ia  Poateaaio  generally,
and  Poaieiain  CmlU,  and  Poiaewio  Nntunlia.

Poaaeana  denoted  originally  bare  Detention.
Bnt  thia  Detention  nnder  certain  conditiona  ba-

Jiiicapion. Aco^ingly  the  word


a  Poaanaiio,
ea  anch  qualification  when  Detention  beoomca
k  legal  atate.  This  Detentim  then,  when  it  haa
the  conditiona  neceaaary  to  Uiucapioi,  ii  called
FoaMiaio  Ciiiiia ;  and  all  other  PoaMvio  aa  op-
poaed  to  Cirilia  ia  Natanlia.  But  Detention  maj
■lu  be  the  fonndalion  of  Inteidicta,  which  notion
a  alwayi  nqceaaed  bj  PoweMie


timply ;  and  this  ia  the  meaning  of  PoanaBO,  vrheo'
it  ia  uaed  alone,  and  yet  in  a  technical  imtt.  Am
oppoaed  to  thia  aenae  of  Poaeaaio  all  other  kinds
of  Detention  an  alae  loIled  Natmlia  Peaatano,
the  oppoaition  between  the  NatnnI  Bod  the  Jtiria-
tical  Pnaieaaion  (pot—me)  bco^  beta  uiuntJ

in  the  <»■  of  the  Cirilii  PoaaMirnen  ■  tben-
Con  a  twofold  Jnriatical  PoaaaHie:  Potmamo
Oivilu  01  Paaaeaaian  fat  the  pgipoae  of  Uno^iMi  ;
and  Pomeaio  or  PuaaeHci]  lor  the  |aii|Bii  ot  the
Interdieta.  It  Mows  that  PoueNio  is  indiided
in  Poaaesaio  Cirilie,  which  cnly  requina  more  can-
dhiona  than  Poaaesaio.  If  then  a  nnn  hu  Pi»-
seiilo  Ciiilia,  he  haa  also  Poaacaiio,  that  ia  the
right  to  the  Interdicts  ;  bat  the  conTcna  ia  dk
true.  Foaaeaaio  Natoialia,  aa  aboTS  obaermd,  baa
two  aignificaliona,  bat  they  are  both  ugatiTe,  and
merely  expraii  in  each  caae  a  logical  "w-—iriwn.
that  is,  they  are  reipeetinly  not  FianMiii  Civilia,
or  Peaseasio  (ad  luletdicts).  The  Tarioaa  expca-
aiona  uaed  to  denote  bare  Delentkai  an  "  Itaii  ni,~

(Sangny,  p.  109,)

In  the  case  of  a  thing  being  pigneiated,  the  per-
aon who  [dedgei  it  haa  still  the  posssasia  ad  naa-
capionem,  but  the  pledgee  alone  bas  the  paaneaaia
ad  interdieta.  It  ii  not  a  Posseasio  Ciriba  wliidi
9  fonndatian  of  the  pledga'a  title  bf  >iaa-
CKfvaa  ;  but  by  a  apedal  fiction  he  ta  ccnaideivd  to
haTe  Boeh  Poueition,  and  ao  the  aae  ia  a  apcciil
eioeptim  to  the  general  rule,  "  aina  poaeaaiooo
uaucnpio  oontingere  non  potesL"

Poaaesaio  Juata  ia  erery  Paasesrin  that  is  not
illegal  in  its  origin,  whether  aach  Poaacaia  be
mere  Datentton  or  Juristical  PoaseswL  Tin  wmd
Juata  ia  hate  used,  not  in  that  acceptatioB  in
which  it  haa  refaiencB  to  Jna  Cirile  and  ia  equiva-
lent to  Ciiilis  or  Lefrilima ;  hot  in  another  aeene,
which  ii  more  ind^ite  and  moan  ''rigbtfal'*
generally,  that  ia,  not  wmngful.  Tha  oeditsr  wha
IS  in  posaaaiioa  of  a  pledge,  haa  a  Jnata  PoaaBno,
but  not  a  Civilia  Puaaessio:  he  haa,  howertr,  a
Juiiatical  Poaaeasio,  that  is,  foaataub,  and  coai-
aequently  a  right  to  the  Inlerdicla.  The  UiaBia
in  Poaseaaionem  is  the  fbundatiao  of  a  Jnata  Poa-
aeaaio,  bat,  aa  a  general  rttle,  not  of  a  Juristical
PoBaesaio.  Poaaesaio  Injusta  ii  the  logical  o|fie«iia
of  Juata,  and  in  the  caae  of  Foaaeaaio  Injuau  thai
are  three  apecial  Vitia  poaaeeaioiis,  that  ia  wWm
the  Posaeaaion  haa  originated  Vi,  Qam,  er  Pncariei
(Tcrentina,  Bomui.  ii.  S.  HamB  (a  aiiU  m(  a^
t!<iebm,vtl  pnearii  Jaoir^at:  Dig.  49,  tiL  17.
a.  1.3.)

With  respect  to  the  a
was  a  legal  maxim :  NenKi  utu  ipse  4
aeauonts  mutare  potest,  which  appliea  batb'  to
CiTilia  and  Natnrdis  Pommmo.  This  nim  a  ax-
plained  by  Sarigny  by  nuao*  rf  Qaiaa  (iL52,ftc.)
OS  haring  referoica  to  the  old  nsacapio  pro  iKiade,
and  the  meaning  of  it  was  that  if  a  penoai  had  esce
began  to  poaaeaa  with  any  paitlcubr  eanaa,  he  eavld
not  at  his  pleaaDie  diuga  snch  Poaataaia  into  a
Posseaaio  pro  hereda. ( Saiigny,  p.  M.)

A  Poaaaaaor  booae  fidei  ia  lu  who  belierca  that
no  person  hat  a  better  right  to  pcaacaa  than  hiu-
aelL  A  Foasiascg  malae  fidei  ia  ho  who  knawa
that  be  baa  no  right  to  poaaeaa  tha  things  (8aiiig»',
p.  84.)

Beddca  theae  Tlrioia  mouinga  of  Paaaaaajo,  Psa-
asMoi,  Pcaaidai^  at  the  bittoB  cf  aU  wUeb  hm


Hm  natioti  rf  PflMMDon  io  the  innte  of  DctSDtlnn,
tbera  us  nme  ctlwt  mwiningi.  **  To  h>n  ownar-
■hip"  ii  tnoetiniM  axpnaed  by  Pooidan,  the
thing,  whkh  ii  th*  oljact  <£  owtunhip,  ii  •coW'
timM  PoMsms  and  the  owner  i«  FooMMiK  Thii
me  of  tie  wnd  ocean  beqand;  in  the  Cado  mi
Pandect,  and  aleo  in  (Stan,  QdMiliwi,  Hinaoe,
ud  other  wrilML Bat  It  ii  lasuked  by  8mif|sf


nlilioa  to  tlie  jiu  in  re,  Ihftt  )acper  jnTwTnii  luu

lanhip. (Serignj,  p.  166.)

arder  lo  the  ecqniutian  of  juriitical  Poeieuia
■ppnheniian  end  Bnimni  en  necanan'.  The  ap
prehenuoQ  of  ■  coipaial  thing  it  •Dch  a  dealinf
whli  it  ai  anpowm  the  penon  who  intanda  ti


alinja  rate  lo  bod  at  th^  object.  The  phreae
*■  pMUMJo  pmU  Ronani,"  ie  applied  bj  Gcoo
to  paUia  tad,  and  it  it  tranikted  hj  Flnlanh
<PMv^  t9>,  «T%MTof  l4MM>'P<4ia£«'.

PoHHM*  aba  dcDotaa  the  rdadoa  (f  a  de&od-


•  but  thii  does  not
that  •Bch  penon  nmit  hsToa  juiMicalpoaMuioD.
In  •  VindKatio  aecoriinglf  tbe  [Jaintiff  ia  called
Petitv,  and  the  pendant  >•  named  Poaaanor.  be-
caise  in  &et  he  haa  the  paaaaaaioo  of  that  which

the  plaintiff  daiBa. *"'" * —  ■.--!--  ■»-_j?

^uio  waa  alaoadaplei
■ad  bare  alao  the  ti


nail;  aach,  and  ana  object  of  _

titia  wea  to  reoaver  aii^e  thiiiga  which  thi
fepdent  po^oieed  pn  hezede ev  pn
But  the  term  iiiieireiw  wei  not  Imtit
caeae,  ia  the  dc&atdant  ia  caUed  pnaaaaair  what
the  petitia  ii  not  aboot  a  maltm  of  poaaaaaion
ia  lUed  Jniia  poaaaaaor,  baeaaaa  Im  rafaaaa
Boawlhing  which  the  hecea  duma  of  him  to  do,
or  becanaa  ha  BMSrta  hia  lighl  to  a  portion  of  the
boreditaa. (Sangnri  P-^^-)

The  jnriatieal  nation  af  Poaaaauon
thing  whiiA  can  be  the  object  af  ownarahip:  it
alao  impliaa  that  the  Poaacaaor  can  be  no  oth
than  a  pewm  wha  haa  ■  capacity  for  ownerahipL

The  notio '


iaa<). When  eemal  paraona  poaaaaa  a  thing

»nm«»i«i^«»  ^lnnh»ip  J  ■ inn  u  nmtnallj  limited,

each  in  bet  poaaaaaaa  aoly  a  ftaotioaal  part  af  the
thing,  but  doaa  net  peaaaaa  the  other  parte,
theogh  the  difinon  uto  pane  it  only  ideal,
doca  IMt  afiect  the  legal  imiaideiaticii  rf  the  mw
Peracna  tu^  alao  pocKia  the  Mme  thing  in
icnnt  imira.  ai  in  the  caie  of  the  debtor  and  hii
cndiliK  iriio  haa  teceired  fiom  him  a  pignna.

Though  thinga  incoipoical  are  not  alrietl;  ob'
jecia  nf  [inaanatiiin.  vet  there  ia  a  Jnria  quaai  poa-
aeaaaa  of  tiiam,  aa  uir  "»"™-  in  thacaae  of  a*
nuitaa. The  axerciaa  ef  a  right  pf  thia  kind
aualogooa  to  the  poaaaaaaa  of  a  corponal  thing:


thing  {caijmi}  which  ie  pceacaaed,  and  n
jimpettj  :  by  aualogj  then  we  ahoald  not  aa

ttie  aarritna  or  the  jna  in  re  ia '

in  the  caaa  of  a  jna  m  re  tlien  :


the  erchuicw  af  all  other  ptcaona, Actual  o


■I  ocntact  with  the  thing  ia
BhenaiM :  it  ia  enongh  if  thi


,  B«e  him  the  phyaical  cfad^  to

opaiale  on  the  thing  at  Ue  fuimm. Thn*  in  tho

caae  of  a  piece  of  gnmnd,  be  ^a  entan  npon  pert

"uideied  to  hate  cotered  npon  the  whole. A

may  acqniie  pceeaaiiDn  of  what  ia  cealained
in  a  thing  by  delirery  of  the  key  which  giree  him
acoaaa  to  the  contenti,  in  the  preeence  oF  (opwO
the  thing.  The  caae  mentioned  in  the  Digcit
(Dig.  18.  tit  1.  t.  74)  ia  that  of  the  key  of  a
gnnaiy  being  deliTered  in  ught  o(  the  gianaij
iapmi  jionw).  The  dalirery  of  the  key  n  not  a
■ymboliol  delircry,  aa  aome  haTe  luppoeed,  but
'a  delivery  ik  the  meant  of  getting  at  die
(Compaie  Lord  Hardwicke'i  reaiuk*  an
Her,  Ward  i.  Tnroer,  2  Vei.)
■ninnu  conniti  in  the  will  ta  treat  aa  one'i
own  the  thing  that  ie  the  object  of  our  a|>pteben-
uon.  All  peiaane  thetefoce  who  an  legally  in-
'  to  will,  an  inccoipetent  to  acqaira  a
In&nM*  and  fnricai  are


tlH  owe  of  ownenhip  there  ia  the  thing  to  which

pellad  to  raaort  to  the  eipraanon  Jniie  Quau  Foe-
■mifl.  by  which  netluDg  n«e  ia  meant  than  the
•Mfdfa  «(  a  jot  in  ta,  which  toetdaa  baa  the  Mune


the  other  condition  baa
been  already  complied  witlt.

[o  order  that  jnriatieal  poaaeadon  may  be  ae-
quired,  there  nmitalwaya  be  the  animnt  on  tliepart
of  him  who  intenda  to  aoqnire  the  poaaeauon  ;  bat
the  act  of  ^iprehenuan  (.earpiu)  may  be  o^cted
In  another  aa  hia  n^naentatiTe,  if  that  other  doca
the  neceaary  acta,  and  with  the  inlentian  of  ac-
quiring the  patailon  for  the  other,  end  not  for
himael£  (Panhia,  &  A.  t.  tit.  2.  a,  1.)  There
mnat  be  a  certain  relation  between  the  peraon  fiir
whom  poaaraaion  ia  ttnia  acqoind  and  the  penon
who  acqoim  It  for  Urn,  uther  of  legal  power  (po-
l«itai>,or  of  agen^:  thefbrmer  ia  the  caae  of  a
ala*e  or  Alina  bmiliaa  who  obeya  a  command,  end
the  latter  ia  the  cau  of  an  agent  who  foUowa  in-
atmctiana  (iMaarfadni).  A  pciaoo,  who  ia  already
the  repieaentatiTe  of  another,  and  haa  the  Pouewio
of  a  thing,  may  by  the  aninma  almm  ceaee  to  haTc
the  Pceeemio  for  himadf  and  haTe  it  for  that  oiha,
retaiaii^  only  tiie  here  detenlicoi.

Foaaeieio,  that  ia  the  Right  of  Poaacaaifo,  can
be  tnnafetted,  withoat  the  tnnater  of  ownenhip.
In  thia  caae  of  detiialiTe  Foeueaia  the  apprehen-
■ioo  ie  the  aeme  aa  in  the  caae  of  acquiring  a
jnriatieal  ineeeaaio ;  bat  the  animua  with  wbicli
the  thing  u  apprehended,  cannot  be  the  "  animne
domini,"  bat  mcTriy  the  "animna  pcaaidendi,"
that  ia,  the  will  to  acqnire  the  Job  Foaaeuonla,
which  the  PceieuoT  trasafen,  and  nothing  mora.
The  Detention  of  a  thing  may  be  taanafeired  with-
oat the  ownenhip,  but  the  tmufo'  of  the  deten-
tion ia  not  alvBja  accompanied  ^  a  tnmafer  at  tho
Jni  FoaaeeaioniB.  There  an  Uieo  ilaiwa  into
which  all  acta  may  be  diatriboted  which  are  ac-
companied with  a  lanafat  of  Detention :  1,  tboae
which  are  never  tha  finmdation  af  a  detiratiTe
Fcaaeaaio,  3,  thoaa  wUeh  alwaya  are,  and  B,  tluM


918


hendt  inch  a


Ths  Fint  chn  coBipr«-
iH  whea  the  dcIentioD  of  K
ui  a^ent  ( ^irocHrafor),  and
the  ouo  of  ■  Cammodatam.  [Com  hod  atom.]
The  Second  clau  comprehendi  th«  oue  of  the
SlnphjleuU,  which  it  n  pMMida,  but  only
ritatiro  ane,u  th«  Empb jleuta  hu  not  theai
domiai ;  it  tdxi  comprehende  the  cbh  of  thi
ditor  who  receive*  the  detendon  of  ■  [dgnoi
coctractui  pignori*,  and  with  the  detention,  the  JoA
Poueuionii ;  but  it  doei  not  comptehmd  the  oue
€if  ■  Pigniu  pisetoriiun,  Pionut  in  cum  judicati
captiun,  Tior  K  Pactum  hj^Mlhectte.  In  the  oue  nf
a  contnudu  Pignorit,  when  the  thmg  wu  deli-
Teted  to  the  creditor,  be  had  Fo—aiio,  that  i>,  a
light  to  the  Interdict!,  but  not  Foaaao  dvOit,
that  ii,  the  Right  of  Uaucapion.  The  debtor  hod
so  Potaono  at  all,  but  b  j  virtue  of  an  exception  to
a  genera]  ruje,  the  uauaipion  that  hod  been  com-
Denced,  itill  continued.  The  Third  cloB  compiv
hendi  Depi]-ilii<n  and  PrecBrium.

The  Right  of  PosKWDn  coniitti  in  tbe  right  Is
the  protsetion  of  the  Interdict  [Intibdictui  ''
and  thii  Hotection  ii  alio  extended  to  Jura  in
The  nlabon  of  the  Juri)  quati  poaHoio  to  P
■eMio  bai  been  already  explained.  The  objecta  of
thii  Jarii  quaii  poMtuio  ore  Penonal  (erritute*,
lUal  lerTitDtes,  and  Jum  m  re  which  do  not
belong  to  Uie  clou  of  Serritntei,  of  which  Supers
fidea  IB  the  oni  J  proper  inilance.  (SBvigHT,  p- 52A,)
In  all  the  atn  M  Jurii  quaii  pomeMlo,  the  oc-
qoiiition  and  (he  continuance  of  the  right  of  pco-
•euion  depend  iHi  the  corpui  and  aniornt ;  and  the
animiu  i>  to  be  riewed  exactly  in  the  mme  way
B<  ia  the  caae  of  poneuioa  of  a  corporeal  thing.
The  eierciu  of  Pertonal  territutee  (particularly
niQi  and  aius&Qctua)  ia  inieparable  from  the
natural  pOMeauon  of  the  thing ;  and  the  poaaet-
oion  of  them  ia  ccmequently  acquired  in  the  Kune
way  aa  thn  poaacaiian  of  a  corpraral  things  Aa  Co
the  Jnria  quail  poiKHio  of  Real  Setvitutei,  there
are  two  <aiea :  either  he  who  hai  a  right  to  the
Senitui,  muat  do  aome  Oct,  which  if  he  had  not
the  right,  he  might  be  forbidden  to  do  {itrcttia
QMoe  in  patiatdo  coruuU);  or  the  owner  of  property
hai  no  right  to  do  Hme  partictdar  thing,  which,  if
the  right  did  not  eiiit,  ha  might  da  ((erTifM  woe
in  mm  fadaido  coniMt).  At  to  the  Snt  cjota,
which  may  he  coUed  PoailiTa  SerriCnteo,  the
Bcquiaitioo of  the  Juri*  quaai pooeaaio  conaiata

the  right,  and  the  doing  of  thii  act  mnat  be  for  the
porpoie  of  exerciaing  the  right.  (I^'  8-  tit.  6.
l25.)  Thii  rule  appliea  to  the  Jui  Itineri*,
AcluB,  Viae,  and  othett,  which  an  independent  of
the  poaKiiiaa  of  any  other  property  by  the  penon
who  claima  the  Jut.  Such  an  act  ai  the  Jua  tigni
itnmittendi,  or  the  drivine  a  beam  into  the  wall  of
one*!  nelghbour'i  house,  ii  a  right  connected  with
the  poeaeaaion  of  another  piece  of  properly,  and  the
poaaeuion  of  thia  right  conaiali  in  the  eierciae  of
it.  Aa  to  the  aecond  claia  which  maybe  called
NcgutiTe  Servitnleo,  the  Jurii  qoaoi  poaaeaaio  ia
acquired  in  conaequence  of  the  peivon  whoie  right
ii  thereby  limited,  attempting  la  do  Borne  act  con-
trary to  the  right  of  the  penon  who  elainu  the
aerritna,  and  meeting  with  o^potiUaa  to  tnch  act
and  acquieieing  in  the  oppoution.  (Dig.  8.  tiL  JS.
a  B.)  Thia  Juri*  quaai  poawaaio  may  alao  be
founded  on  a  legal  title,  thiit  ia,  on  any  juriitical
tmntactioQ  which  can  give  •ndi  tigjtL


Every  potaeaaion  contiuuea  ao  long  aa  the  eapna
aod  the  animua  contlnne.  (Savigny,  p.  339.)  If
both  ceaie  or  either  of  them  couea,  the  pi— eidon
ia  gone.  (Dig.  41.  tit.  9.  a.  3.  46.)  Aa  to  the
corpna,  the  potaeMJon  ia  bat,  when  in  oooasqiKOea
of  any  event  the  po— aainr  aniNt  openUa  oai  the
thing  at  bii  plwiure,  aa  bdbre.  In  the  caae  of
moveable  tbingo,  the  pooiOMiBi  ia  kit,  when  ■■>-
other  peraon  haa  gtit  hold  of  tbem,  other  by  bna
or  aecretly  :  In  the  caae  of  immonaUe  thiini,  it  ia
l«t  when  a  man  haa  turned  another  ont  of  the  poa-
aeiaion  ;  but  if  in  the  abaence  of  the  pi— pair,  an-
other occnpiet  hi*  land  without  Itii  kjnaledge,  hs
do«  not  loae  the  poMcaaion  till  be  atMmpta  to  ei-
endie  owaenhip  over  the  land  and  la  preniitad  by
the  penon  then  in  poaaeauon  of  it,  or  thnngfa  fbar
doea  not  attempt  to  recover  hia  poaaeavoo.  Tba
poaaeaaion  thua  acquired  by  the  new  poaaeaaor  ia  a
violenta  poneoaio.  If  the  farmer  poiae— r  lutova
the  &ct  and  acqnieacea  by  doing  nothing,  he  loa^
the  poatetuim  by  the  animna  alone.  In  the  caae
of  poaeeiaicm  being  loot  by  animua  alone,  it  iBBy
ha  sfiiictad  eider  expreaily  or  tacitly ;  the  ooly
thing  neciaaaiy  i*  that  there  imut  be  on  btentjim
to  give  up  the  poaaeuion.  The  poMctaito  ia  kwt
cotpore  et  anima,  whoi  It*  poaaaaaar  girea  op  a
thing  to  another  to  poaaaaa  aa  hia  own.  Id  the
caae  of  a  Jnria  qoaai  paaaeaaiay  aa  wcU  aa  id  thu

•'" --  rr'irr.lhn  r-ntiminnrr  -flh-  paiiaiiii

dependj  on  the  corpna  and  animna  together.
There  can  be  no  Juria  quaai  poaeeaBo  witbcait  the
animua  poaaldendi ;  and  if  that  be  meidy  the
ammna  poaaldendi,  the  Jnria  quaai  poaaeraii  anat

Fooaeuio  can  be  loot  by  miana  of  a  poaon  wbo
repnaenta  the  Potaeaior.  Such  penm  niay  him-
ielf  acquire  the  poaaeaaion  by  exerciiiiw  th


pciiidendi,  when  it  ia  accompanied  wi£  i
colporeal  act:  in  the  caae  of  moveable  I
ia  furtom  i  in  the  caae  of  tmmoveable  thingi,  it  u
diapoaaeation. The  pone— ion  can  be  Iom


In  many  of  the
Uw,  th ■
dnetory


7  of  Ownenhip  (.


the  Uieory  of  0

which  baa  been  h ^

not  nnivenally  aeqnieaced  in,  bnt  it  ia  the  correct
view.  For  ioitance,  Oani  m  hia  chapter  on  Pse-
■eaion  (^Mem  da  Ram.  CVnlmUt  w  Orm/ruK,
^)  begina  with  the  two  following  lectloni :  —

$  103.  Dantelinng  der  venchiedisett  heiKk
enden  Meinungen  Qber  den  Beaita.  —  Der  Beaiia
itC  k«n  btoaaea  FMnm,  mid  enitrht  oiefat  ah
Recht,  dnrch  Aea  nmweg  dea  Unnehta.

g  104.  D«  Beaita  Ji  dat  Eigenthtm  nach  der
Seite  det  bloia  beaondanm  wiUcDo. — AnSmgatdcK
prSaumtlTCi  Eigenlbno.

Savigny't  view  oo  the  contiaiy  ia  briefly  thia:
"  Poiaesuon  ii  a  Fact  (Paitmt),  ao  far  aa  a  ■!(*•
betiah  (wvuriWaDdf)  relation  (rftfwfi—)  ia  the
fonndatioQ  of  iL  fint  Pnaaaaaion  ia  alto  a  Riglttt
to  far  at  rightt  are  ecnneOHi  with  the  bare  eiiit.
Bice  of  the  relatioa  of  Fact.  Conaeqiiaitly  ri— i  a
lion  ii  both  Fact  and  Risht"

Atao — "The  only  Right  arieina  from  bars  Poa-
teaion  ii  a  Right  to  the  Interdtcu"— and  **  the
Right  to  the  Interdieta  la  fbonded  on  the  fact  of


P08SES8IO.
On  wbit  gMand  !i  tun  Pouenion  to  be  m^n-

twned,  if  it  ii  not  ft  Rwlit  ?  Th«  anioer  i>,  ibal
Pnmwion  caonot  b«  diitoibcd  eic«pt  by  force,
~ dI  tUlaire^ The  fDnduoenUl  notion


hm  B  lliii  ;


ildift


Hvncaof  Pouefsion  i


tlie  oriffin  of  tha  Rnnan  doetrii
nobaUf  ba  tncad  to  the  PoMauio  of  the  Ager
Fablkni.  PpHHMis  Powtlior.  wd  Posiiden  in
the  pnipB-  tcchsiotl  tamt  mod  bj  the  RomBo
wrilcn  la  ezprea  the  ponauon  uid  tbo  enjoy-
nent  of  the  Public  I^mU.  Thew  termi  did  not
cipnM  ovnenhip  (em  jmt  Qiwifnni) :  they  had
in  fiKt  no  nam  nlilion  to  Dwnenhip  than  the
Pmarmm  of  which  thii  article  tieati.  Still  the
notion  of  Ibii kind  of  ate  and enjojnieiit  WM


e  amy.


?"'y«


I  ^iplicable  to  nrion)  awi  in
which  there  waa  no  Qairilamn  ovnetihiii,  but
■omethiu  that  bad  w  analoK;  to  iL  Thni  in  the
«ue  of  Daoniun  infactnm,  Mth  refarence  to  the
■eeond  anaaio  in  poueMMiem  («c  lamdo  dtcrtlo),
the  Pnelv  atji  "  poeiidtre  jnbebo,"  which  ii
vqninlent  to  giiiag  cmiitariaii  ownciabip  with  the
power  of  luocajiion. A  unufrnstna  which  coold


Braafrnctnt.  Tba  expnaiioni  Hcieditatii  or  bo-
Donun  poiwio  do  not  me>s  the  octnJ  poaaenton
of  the  Ihingi,  bnt  tho  peculiar  chancter  of  the
Piaaloria  beieditai :  Cbi  thia  Booonun  poueiaio
hu  the  lanH  rdatioQ  to  the  Hereditoi  that  Boni-
tarian  haa  to  Qiurilarian  ownenhip.  [DauiNiuu  ;
Hnm.]  Now  diers  ia  a  clear  analos;  in  all
Iheae  inilucM  to  the  Poauaiio  of  the  Ager
Pnbiicua,  which  eeoiirta  in  thii,  thai  in  both  caaca
an  actml  eiclunra  enjoyinent  of  a  ]nrticuhtf  fo-
aoo  10  a  particular  thing  i>  recogniied.  Thia  will
alia  explain  how  pToportj  in  proiinciat  ground
laine  to  bo  called  Poiaaiio :  mch  proponj  waa
Dot  Quiritarian  ownenhip,  bat  it  waa  a  right  to
the  eiclnaive  enjtTioent  of  the  land,  a  right  which
the  word  PoneuiD  •ufficlenllj  eiprened.  Thua
the  name  PoaneHio  wai  tianafenBl  from  the  Right
to  ita  Object  i  and  Aga  and  PoaaCHio  wen  una
oppoaed :  Ager  vai  a  fieca  of  laad  which  waa
the  object  of  Quiritarian  ownenhip,  and  Paaaeauo
a  piece  of  land  which  waa  either  accidenlBll;  ao
abject  ml*  of  Sanitarian  ownenhip,  aa  a  fundoa
Italicii*  01  which  there  had  been  merely  tradition  ;
or  it  waa  land  that  could  nM  be  the  object  of  Qniri-
tarian  ownenhip,  nich  aa  Pronncial  land  (Jbto-
Isma,  Dig.  50.  tit.  16.  a.  116),  and  the  old  Agar
Pablicna.

Other  matlera  lelatiog  to  Pawtiaio  appear  to  he
pipUined  by  thia  new  of  ita  hiatorical  ongin.  The
Interdictmn  iMopanndae  pneet^lonia  relatea  onlr
(0  land,  a  eirenmalance  whidi  ia  oonaiateot  with
the  hypothida  of  ihe  origin  of  Poaaeaaio,  The
mtore  of  the  Pieearinn  slao  ia  aiplainCd,  when
we  know  that  it  eiprened  OTuinaUy  tho  rebitioo
between  the  Patronua  and  the  Clieni  who  occupied
the  PiMeaaio  d  the  Patronua  aa  a  tenant  at  will
and  onld  be  qected  by  tbe  Intecdictnm  de  pre-
caria,  if  be  did  not  qoit  on  notice.  Further,  we
roay  thna  explain  the  anrent  incontiatency  in  Ibe
caae  of  a  leeaee  of  Ager  Vectigalia,  who  though  he

had  only  a  jna  in  re,  had  yet  juriatical  " "  ■

Ihe  Aga  Vectigalia  waa  in  iact  £  "
ii^  la  tbo  •nology  of  tbe  old  Ager


:t  fiwhioaed  accord-


POSTLIMINIUM.  94B

wi)  a  liinple  proceea  to  tramfer  it  to  that  iMtion  of
Poeaeaiia  which  had  eiiBtod  in  the  caae  of  the  Ager


the  Ager  Publicui  and  Privatoa.

The  preceding  liew  of  poaieeaion  ii  from
Savigny,  Dai  BkH  da  BaUia,  fifth  ed.  1B27.
There  ii  an  aoalyiia  of  thia  eicellsit  work  hy
WamLSn^t,  "  Analjaa  do  tiait^  de  la  poaaeuien
par  M.  de  Savigny,  Li^  1824  ;"  and  a  Runnuinr
riew  of  SaTigny"!  Theoir  ii  gi»en  by  MaekeUey,
Ltkrimi,  dce.±  f.1.  See  alao  Puehta,  Int.  iL
g  224  J  Gaina,  ir.  138—170  i  laat.  4.  lit.  15  j
Dig.  41.  tit  2,  3  ;  43.  tit.  16—23,  28,  31  ;  Cod.
7.  liL  32  ;  3.  tit.  4,  6,  6,  9  ;  Cod.  Theod.  4.  db
22,  23.  to.  L,]

POSSE'SSIO  BONORUM.  IBonobitji  Fob-

POaSE-SSIO CLANDESTl'NA. [Ini«ii-

POSTl'CUM. [JiNUA.]

POSTLIMINIUM,  JUS  POSTLlMlTiJII.
"There  are,"  nyi  Pomponiui  (Dig.  49.  til.  \&.
a.  14),  "IwD  kinda  of  Paatliminium,  for  a  man
nuy  either  Tetnm  bimaelf  or  recorer  eomethLng.**
PaitliniiniDm  ii  fblthel  defined  by  Paulna  (Dig.
49.  tiu  13.  a.  19)  to  be  the  "right  of  recovaiog  a
hxt  thuig  from  an  extranena  and  of  ill  being  re-
•tored  to  ita  former  atatu^  which  right  hai  been
eatahliihed  between  ua  (the  Romani)  and  feet  peo-
ple and  kingi  by  naage  and lawa (fliori6w  aa

of  war,  if  we  recover  it,  we  are  aaid  to  recover
pcatliminio ;  aad  thia  naage  hai  been  introduced
by  natural  equity,  in  order  that  be  who  waa
wrongfully  detained  by  Rtrangera,  iheuld  leeover


Again  Paulu.  laj^  "a
mod  FHllirainio,  when  be


haa  enteied  onr  territorr  (>"
writ)  ;  at  a  foundation  ia  laid
(nnfi  odmiMter*}  (?)  when  he
territoriea  (ubijinn  m

ahip  with  Rome,  at  hai  come  to  a  King  in  alliance
or  friendihip  with  Rome,  he  appean  to  have  forth,
with  retOTDod  by  PoatUminium,  becauae  he  then
fint  begina  to  ba  lafe  under  tbe  name  of  the  Roman
itate."  Theae  eitiacti  an  made  for  the  porpoeo
of  clearing  up  Ihe  Etymology  of  thia  word,  aa  to
which  thoe  waa  a  dilfersncs  of  opinion.  (Cic
Top.  a.)  The  explanation  of  Scaevola,  aa  given
by  CiceiD,  haa  reference  to  the  elymolopy  of  the
void,  put  and  ii'mca  .-  "  what  haa  been  loit  by  ua
and  haa  come  to  an  enemy  and  aa  it  were  haa  gone
from  it!  own  limen,Bnd  then  haa  afterwarda  (pml)
retomed  to  the  nine  limen,  leeni)  to  have  returned
by  Poatliminium.'*  According  to  thia  explanation,
the  limen  waa  the  boundary  or  limit  within  which
the  thing  waa  under  the  autbi^ty  of  Rome  and
on  object  of  Roman  law.  A  recent  writer  (Ooel-
iling,  GttcUciieiier  Ram.  Slaaltairfiu$<mg,  p.  I  \7)
aiiggeata  that  Poatlimtniom  moat  be  viewed  in  a
■ " -■  There  ia  a  fancifiil


iir,"  Fhir,a«b<,«t  Spang.


9U  P08TLIH1N1XTU.

thow  vlia  IiBTS  been  Uielj  reported  to  iatt
in  B  fbreiga  liad,  not  received  into  tbe  houie
through  the  dooi,  ia  caie  of  their  retaiD,  but  let
* n  through  na  opening  in  the  roof  ?


If  a


enemy,  he  iu»tiuned  ■  dhninn
oqiitii  maiima,  end  all  tii  civil  righti  wen
■Mjuice.  Being  caplnred  hj  the  enemj-,  he  1
OUne  a  ilaTe  ;  but  hii  righli  o<rer  hii  cluldren,
he  had  tuy,  were  not  deatmired,  but  were  nid  to
ba  in  kbejince  (p<id«ni)  bj  virtue  of  tlie  Jiu
Poitliminii :  when  he  returned,  hij  children  were
Bfiain  in  hie  power;  and  if  he  died  in  captivity,
tGey  became  mi  jnrii.  Whellier  their  condition
M  toi  joiii  dated  from  die  time  of  the  captivity  or
oflhBd«th,wuadi>pntedmatter  (0>iiii,L  129)  ;
but  Ulpian,  who  wrote  after  Oaini,  declares  that
in  loeh  caae  he  mutt  b»  contidered  to  have  died,
when  he  wai  aaAt  active  ;  and  thia  it  certainly
the  true  dednctSon  from  the  premilei.  In  the  caw
of  ■  fiHua  or  nepof  being  made  a  i^tive,  the  pa-
nntal  power  wai  nupended  (in  nu^wwi).  If  the
■on  ntnmed,  he  obtained  bii  civic  righti  and  the
bther  reouned  bit  parmtal  power ;  which  'a  the
COM  mentioned  in  tbe  Digeit  (49.  tik  15.  •.  U).
A>  to  a  wife,  the  nutter  wa«  diSereot :  the  hui-
band  did  not  recover  hie  wife  jnre  pottliminii,  but
the  marriage  waa  renewed  by  conaent.  Thii  rale
of  law  involvH  the  doctrine,  that  if  a  hniband  wai
captured  by  the  enemy,  hia  mamage,  if  any  then
eiiited,  wai  diuolved.  If  a  Roman  waa  ramomed
by  another  pemn,  ha  became  free,  bnt  he  wai  in
the  nature  of  a  pledge  to  the  raniomer,  and  the
Jni  Poitliminii  iiad  no  effect  till  he  bad  paid  the

Sometimei  by  an  act  of  the  itate  A  inaa  wai
given  np  bound  to  in  enemy  i  and  if  the  enemy
would  not  receive  him,  it  wu  n  qneation  whether
he  had  the  Jni  Poitliminii  Thii  wai  the  caK
with  Sp.  Poetiunioi  who  wai  given  up  to  the
Samnitei,  and  with  C.  Hoitiliui  Mandnoi  arho
wu  given  ap  to  the  Nnmantinn  ;  hot  the  better
opinion  wai  that  thry  had  no  Jul  pMtliminii  (Cic
Da  Or.  i.  tO,  Da  Of,  ill  SO,  Top.  3,  Pn>  Cat-
am,  c  34  ;  Dig.  49.  lit  1.1.  i.  4  i  £0.  tit.  7.  %.  17)  ;
and  Mancinni  mu  reatored  to  hii  civic  righli  by  a
Lex. (DifrJO.  tit.7. 1.17.)

Cieero  (/Vo  ita&i,  c  12)  uiea  the  word  Poitli-
nininm  in  a  different  lenie  ;  tor  ho  appliei  it  to
the  caio  oF  a  man  who  had,  by  hii  own  Tolantary
act,  ceaied  to  be  a  citizen  of  a  itate,  and  lubae-
qoenlly  ranmed  fail  original  civio  rigbta  by  Peetli-

It  appean  that  the  Jnt  Pottliminii  wai  foonded
on  the  fiction  of  the  captive  baving  never  been
abieot  from  hunt ;  a  GcUoo  which  wu  of  eaiy  aji-
idiottion,  for  ai  tbe  captive  during  bb  abtence
could  not  do  any  legal  act,  die  interval  of  captivity
wli  ■  period  of  legal  non^edvity,  whicb  wu  tcs-
nlnat^  by  hii  ahowtog  himielf  again.

The  Romani  acknowledged  oqilnre  in  war  a>
Ae  HHiRe  of  ownenhip  in  other  natioai,  ai  they
claimed  it  in  their  own  c**e.  Accordingly  thingi
taken  bf  the  enemy  loit  then'  Risnan  ownen  ;  bat
when  they  ware  recovered,  thoy  reverted  to  their
original  ownen.  Thii  irai  the  eaie  with  land  that
bad  been  ocen|Had  by  the  enemy,  and  with  the  fol-
lowing moveablei,  which  are  enimieiated  by  Cicero
■•  Bei  Portliminii  (Tap.  a), "  homo  (that  ii  ilavei),
navii,  mnlni  elitelbriua,  «|nni,  equa  qnae  fraena
ndpafa  ■obL"  (Coi^an  FmIh^  ta.  fmtf—Wwii)


POSTLIMINIUM.
Arma  were  not  Ret  Pottliminii,  for  it  wat  a  nutim
that  they  conld  not  be  hnnDuribly  loaL

The  recovery  above  referred  to  leema  to  mno  tba
recovery  by  the  Roman  itale  or  by  the  raiginal
owner.  If  an  individual  recaptured  from  an  sieny
what  had  belonged  to  a  Roman  citken,  it  wenld  b*
coniiitcnt  that  wb  ihoold  nqqioae  that  tbe  thing
reo^tnred  inti  mads  hit  am  by  tbe  «et  of  eqi-
taio  I  bnt  if  it  waa  a  rei  poalliminii,  thii  might
not  be  the  <-  - "  - -*^ '


81  poitliminii,
k  tiling,  as  a


It  the


ler,  tba  e


till  he  had  paid  the  la
oea  not  appear  to  be  itated  h
•ettled,  if  a  Rom
(of  the  clau  rei  poi  ,  j,__

to  another  Roman  dtixen.  Thii  appanot  diiS-
cnlty  may  perhapi  be  icilved  thui :  in  time  of  war
Roman  dtlien  could  individoally  be  omidercd
acting  on  bis  own  behalf  under  any  drmm-
•tancea,  and  therefora  whatever  be  did  waa  the  act
of  the  Slate.  It  i>  a  remaifc  of  I^beo  (Dig.  43,
tit  IG.  1.  28),  "Si  ^oid  bsllo  aptmn  est,  m
pneda  eit,  non  poatUminio  redit ; "  and  Pmpoaiu
(Dig.  49.  lit.  If.  1.  20)  italei,  that  if  the  mta-t
iipelled  from  Roman  landa,  the  lands  ntsn  to
ir  former  owners,  being  iwitber  coondend  pab-
land  nor  pmeda  ;  in  making  which  lamaik  be
evidently  ammei  the  jenraf  doctrine  b^  dawn  ky
Labeo.  Paoloi  alio,  in  hii  remark  on  I^bee^  rale
of  law,  merely  mentioni  an  exception  to  tbe  nilc,
whichia  of  a  peculiar  kind.  If  tben  anything  taka
in  war  waa  boo^  (^imnfo),  to  what  did  Uie  Jns
Poalliminii  apply  ?  It  applied  at  leant  to  all  that
wai  restored  by  treaty  or  waa  included  in  the  tsaa
of  luirenda ,  and  alavea  no  doubt  vrere  a  very  ka-
pwtantpartofaUnch  thinnas  wen  eaptsred  m
loit  in  lims  of  war  ;  and  they  wore  tbugi  that
cunld  be  easily  identified,  and  natored  to  tbair
ownen.  It  alio  apjdied  to  a  ikve  who  escaped
from  the  enemy  and  returned  to  hia  master.  The
maxim  "quae  res  hoitiki  apnd  Doa  nrnt,  ocea-
pantium  fiont"  (Dig.  40.  tiu  I.  i.  Gl)  haa  do
iferenee  to  capturo  from  the  eoemy,  aa  it  imiF.
mes  leems  to  be  supposed.  (HOhluibnKh,  OoA.
Paml.  p.2t'i.)

It  may  be  objected  that  tbe  si^aimtioa  of  (bs
difflcully,  that  has  been  already  timmUA,  iwaes
anothCT.  Accordii^  to  thia  eiplanatum,  if  a  ma
in  time  of  war  rocaptured  hia  own  ilava,  it  would
be  praeda,  and  he  would  not  at  one*  leoorer  tbs
lersbip,  aa  above  su^^iosed.  The  auawir  ia,
:  it  may  be  so,  and  that  this  matter  of  Poatli-
ium,  paiticuUrly  ai  regaids  things,  waits  br  a
corefol  bveitigatiin.  Aa  a  gsnenl  nUs  aU  SMve-
ibles  belongii^  to  an  enemy,  which  wan  eMtaiwl
>y  a  Roman  army,  wen  Piaeda,  a]]pn«ndj  sot
the  prsperty  of  the  indlvidial  siddwr  win  hap~
pened  to  lay  hia  hands  on  then,  but  the  inpetty
of  tbe  state  or  at  least  at  the  anuT.  Nsw  the
diiBcol^  it  to  ascertain  whetbar  all  imMlilea  so
taken  wm  Pneda,  sn^  Rea  PosdiaiBii ;  or
whether  all  thinn  n  takm  wen  Piasda,  Res
induded.  In  the  fbnns  owe,  tha
Res  Postlfaninii  would  be  tba  laiyeilj  ef  ibe
ownv  when  he  amid  prevs  them  to  bar*  been
hia,  ai  in  the  case  nuntioned  by  Ijty  (v.  16)  ;  in
the  latter,  when  a  I^ing  bad  beeoma  PoMidi,  it
had  lost  its  lajiaci^  (if  we  may  so  mak)  of  being
imuiii.  The  diitinetieB  facia  made  ia  •
bindamental  ona  The  difficulty  partly  HMca
siftettian  of  Labeo  ahns  vwled.  Si


PRAKCINCTIO
qnM  ftc^  when  the  Flucntiue  naduig  hai  baen
iiillow«d.  Bat  Bri>^a*>u>ck  {Op.  On.  L  p.  76)
■ixndi  llu  nadJDS  into  ffi  qnod,  &C.,  die  pro  '
of  whiA  Da;  b«  doubled. [Pbaioa.]

If  •  mm  inada  •  wiH  befrao  be  wu  taktu  cap-
tin,  ind  aftvwacdi  ntnined,  the  will  wu  good
jnn  pgrtlimioii.  If  he  died  in  c^itiTitf,  thi  -will
wu  pood  b;  tha  Lex  COTDelia.  The  bw  of
Poitlimiiiiiua  applied  to  time  of  peace  a>  weU  a*
-war,  wbm  the  dreimntancea  were  neb  tliat  the
peTMO  er  the  ibiiw  onld  becmm  the  jsopetty  of
BDOther  uMiaa  (1%  49,  tit.  15.  ■.  fi),  > '


might  ha  the  TeUtion  of  a  Batiou  to  Unite,  aod  jot
h  might  aot  be  Uoctii.  A  natkai  wai  not  HmiIi,
in  the  kta  aonptadon  of  that  torn,  till  the  So-
man! bad  dedared  war  agaiuit  it,  or  the  nation
had  dedand  war  agnnat  Romei,  Robben  and
PiimtM  were  not  hoctea,  and  a  penon  wha  wae
captond  bj  them  did  not  beome  a  tlaTc,  and
Ibenfiwa  had  no  need  of  the  Jni  Poetliminii
Then  an  luBe  moatki  no  PotlliminiDm  in  Walla-,
GmdUcUi  dm  RaL  Aeabi,  p.  £0,  and  the  nota,
IM  ed.  [O.  L.]

POSTSIONA'NI. [Ezncrrui,  p.  502,  b.]
PO'STUHUS. [Huia,  p.  601,  a.]
P0TESTA3. [Patbia  PorisTAa.]
PRA'CTORES  {iipiimftt),  nbordinate  offi-
on  (bifu  AiniptirCai,  taya  Pollux,  liij.  114)  who
coUacled  the  Gnea  and  penaltioi  (faitoAit  and
Tiy^fiirra)  impoaed  faf  magiitntea  and  coorta  of
jiulica,  and  nnbie  to  the  Mate. The  magiitiale
who  impoeod  the  fiu^  or  the  i/y^itifif  Autumjplov^

STO  Dotics  theiBof  in  writing  to  the  npirrtpts.
)  WM  then  laid  ivrffi^ai  ri  rl^ipn  ibis
Mfimiiair,  ud  the  debtor^  name  wapaMtpm
T«  wpdcnprv.  If  ihe  fine,  or  any  part  thereof
wna  to  go  to  a  temple,  the  like  notice  vat  aenl  to
the  Tojilai  of  the  god  or  goddem  m  whom  the
t«B^  bdoDged.  <AcidL  e.  Ttmani,  6  ;  Andoc.
^  MjA  1 1,  ed.  Steph.  i  DemoMh.  c  IlkDsr.  1 32a)
The  naoB  of  the  debtor,  with  the  uaa  which  he
•w—  amdemmd  to  pty,  waa  entend  b;  the  *pJiK-
Tofi  in  a  tablet  in  the  Acnpolia.  Hence  the
deiilai  wai  aid  to  be  iyywypaitfiirB%  ry  SiHiMiif,
ttirif  iMpvriXii.  It  WBi  the  bntiniaa  of  the
rpirrtptt  to  demand  ^yment  of  thii  inm.  and,  if
thn  ncUTod  it,  to  paj  it  orer  to  the  ItroNKrai,
and  alaa  to  ecaae  the  name  of  (he  debtor  in  the  re-
giatar  {/(pHttfir  a  dni\((f<w).  Soch  emnn
nanall;  took  place  in  the  preeence  of  aome  memben
of  the  aenate.  An  Iricifii  lay  uainat  anj  man
vho  made  V  oaied  to  be  made  a  bandulent  enttj
ar  enema  of  a  debt.  {Harpoo.  and  Snidaa,  t.  v.
'ATpafler,  kwMmi,  if>n«rnpa^:  Andoc.  de
Myd.  1 1,  cd.  Staph. ;  Donoetfa.  e.  Arvtag.  778,
s.  Tktae.  1338.)  The  collectora  took  no  atepi  to
enlora  pajrmail ;  bat  after  the  eipintion  of  the
ninth  vpnonia  from  the  legiataring  of  the  debt,
(or  in  caie  of  a  penalty  impoted  on  a  Ypii^
s,  after  the  eipintam  of  elercn  daja),  if  it
I*  doobled,  and  an  mtiy
mdingfj.  (Acach.  a.  TViumi.  3,  ed.
' e.  Paat  973,  a.  Tiater.  1323,


PRAEDA.  9jl

PHAECO'NES,  niera,  woo  emploftJ  for  t*.
-ooa  jnrpoM  :  J.  In  ulei  by  anctioa,  they  fn-
qnentiy  advertiied  the  time,  place,  and  conditiona
otiale:  Uiey  leem  ah«  to  haie  acted  iho  part  of
-he  modem  auctioneer,  to  &r  ai  caUing  out  the
idduga  and  amoiing  the  company,  thongh  the
property  waa  knocked  down  by  the  nugiaCer  aue-
tionia.  (Hor,.dni>orft419i  Cic.oi(daxlL40.
A  Q?:  iL  23.)  [Adcito.]  2.  1b  all  poblic  a<
aembliea  they  raderad  (iloDCe.  (Lit.  iii  4?  ;  Plant.
Pool.  prol.  11.)  B.  In  the  comitia  tiiey  called
iCarua  one  W  bh  to  give  their  Totea,  pro-
id  the  lote  of  c«h  century,  and  lalled  out

Lmei  of  thote  who  wen  riecled. (Cic.  «■

Vtn.  *.  li,  pro  MO,  36.)  Th^  alao  recited  the
lawa  that  wen  to  be  paued.  4.  In  trii^a,  they
■Dinmoned  liw  aocnier  and  the  aonued,  tbe  plainttlT
and  defandoat.  (Soet  Tih.  II.)  3.  In  the  public
gamea,  they  invited  the  people  to  attend,  and  pin-
-'"''"*'  ''■■'  'iotota.  {Cic.  ad  Pbm.  T.  13.)  6.  In
elab  thoy  alao  innled  people  to  attend

-J iftni  I  htaicetheeefnnaBlewera  called

Fnneni  Indlctin.  (Fcotna,  t.  e.  QidrHen  Snet.
At  84.)  7.  Whm  thingi  wen  kat,  they  cried
then  and  atardked  fer  them.  (Plant.  JIferc  iiL  4.
7B ;  PetrotL  £7.)  &  In  Ihe  infiiction  of  apital
poBiihment,  they  acmetimea  conniyed  the  com-
manda  of  tin  magiatnUea  to  tbe  lictora.  (Lir.xiri.

Their  office,  called  pratamiim,  appean  to  hnn
Iwen  regarded  aa  nthel  diarqmtable  :  in  the  time
if  Cicem  a  law  na  paaaed  prarenting  all  pmona
who  hod  bean  laeccaiea  bam  becoming  decnrionea
in  the  munici[ria.  (Cit  mf  /ba.  ti.  18.)  Under
the  eariy  empemn,  bowertr,  it  became  Tory  pro-
fitable (Jht.  iiL  li7,  TiL  6  !  Martial,  »,  M.  II,
8.  5), which  waa  no  doubt  paMlv  owing tn


r.  1347.) Thenupoo


of  the


farther  dnty  to  pofmn,  except  peifa^ii

btmatian  of  tin  default  to  the  aenatA [tTlLE.]

PRAKCI'NCTIO.  [AjiraiTHUT>irM,p,87.]


....w-  .-...^..  ^,f  nn.ciT.Ti  jiwm  the  auitorv,  &c.
PRAECCNIUM.  tpBiiBcos»s.]
PRAEDA  ligaiSea  moTeable  thinga  taken  by
—I  enemy  in  war.  Such  tbii^  wen  either  dii-
trihnted  by  the  Imperalor  among  the  aoldiNi  (Lit.
iL  42,  *L  13  ;  Sail.  Jvg.  SB),  or  aold  by  the
quaealon,  and  the  prodnn  waa  brought  into  the

"iatoa  captiroadnoa,
de  paeda  de  (Jnaeatoriboa."
(Plant.  Cbpt  L  2.  1.)
The  diffennoe  between  Praeda  and  Manubia*

ii  exphuned  by  Qelliui  (xiiL  24)  b>  be  Uiia :

Pneda  i«  the  thinga  themielTea  that  are  takm  in
war,  and  Manubiae  ia  *^  pecania  per  quaeatoreDt
populi  Bomani  ex  pcneda  veadita  cmtiacM:  "  noi
ny  otvectiaa  to  thia  explanation  be  derired
the  wordi  rf  Cicero  (is  L^.  Agr.  ii.  22).
When  priusen  woe  uld,  they  wen  mid  to  be
"'■'  "anb  corona,"  the  true  explanation  of  which
aion  ia  pnbably  that  given  W  OelliDa  («(
i^ia,Aa.  ni  4).  The  mode  of  aale  of  other
thinga  than  itaTca  waa  at  fint  probably  in  detail,
but  afterward!  in  the  lump,  that  ia,  (he  whole
ptaeda  might  be  aold  to  the  highut  bidder,  or  it
'be  aold  in  large  mainna  which  o  '
lomber  of  aepante  thii^  ti

the  whole  or  the  niau  wonld  pau  to ^

at  a  UBivetiilai,  and  he  might  retail  it  if  he  chock
Thii  mode  of  mle  in  the  lump  wu  called  "aectionam
___= ..I  ..  J  j^^^_ ^^


&52


PRAEFECTU8  ANNONAE


propprt  J  '


■wu  tfae  practico  to  Kt  up  a  ipear  at  null  lalej,
which  w«  aAcrwuda  naed  at  all  nle«  of  thitigi
bj B  magutiBLui Id  the name  of  lbs  people.

[SBCTia]

CoReapoDding  to  the  acqututton  of  moTcable
diingi  in  wu&re,  and  their  Imng  msde  pnTate  pro-
perty, ii  the  trander  o!  Ager  poblicm,  which  wu
■cquired  in  war,  to  individuoli  bj  a  Lei  Agiaria
a  de  eoloniii  deducendii  or  by  a  hIc  by  the  qimei-
lon  (SRW  quftMtoriiu),  [Portli minium,]  [G.L.]
PRAKDIATOR. [PR*«a.]
PHAEDIATtyRIUM  JUS. [Prau'
FRAE'DIUM. Thii  word  oiigiiwlly  tit
iKcrading  to  Vairo  {£.  L.  t.  40,  ed.  MUller}  any
ipprty  which  vai  made  a  •eeurity  lo  the  State
" n  :  "  Ptaedia  dicta,

Mgnori  da .
Subiequently  tht
limited  to  lignily  land  geaenllj. Ii
Piudia  wen  dirided  into  Ruatica  and  Urhana,
uF  which  the  fallowing  definition  hai  been  gii
Roilica  an  thoie  on  which  there  ire  no ud
which  are  in  the  country  (n  agro)  ;  and  Url
are  thote  which  are  in  the  city  and  compnie  hi
ingi. Thote  iDcoipomal thingi  which  conii
not  in  the  ownetibip  of  Pta^ia,  but  in  ca
right!  with  rnpect  to  them,  weie  called  Jon
Pnedionuu. Ai  to  a  difieienoa  in  the  mode  of
tranifening  tuck  Jura  in  the  oue  of  Praedia  Rni-
tica  and  Urbatia  iee  Oaiui  (iL  29). A  Praedium
which  wat  liable  to  a  tenitnt  wat  nid  ''  •errire,''
and  wai  "  a  pnedlum  Krviena."

Provincialla  Praedia  were  either  Btipendiana  01
tribntaria :  the  former  were  in  thote  provincee
which  were  coniidered  to  belong  to  the  Populni
Bomanue  ;  and  the  latter  in  thote  pravincei  which
were  contidered  to  belong  to  the  Caeiar.  (Oaioj,
ii.21.)  [G.L.]

PRAEFECTU'RA.  [Colonia,  pp.  SIB,  b,
319.  a.]
PRAEFECTUS  AERA'RTT,  (Ara.
PRAEFECTUS  ANNO'NAE,the  (aoefeet  of
the  proiiiiont,  etpeeiallj'  cF  the  com-marhet,  waa
net  a  regolar  mngittntc  under  the  republic,  bnt
wat  only  appointed  in  casea  of  extiBordinary
Bcarcity,  when  he  hnd  the  entire  charge  of  iUpply-
ing  the  capital  with  provitiona,  eapedally  with
com,  and  Ried  the  price  at  which  the  latter  wit
to  be  told.  Thia  maftittrate  waa  appointed  for  the
fint  time  in  kc  439.  (Ur.  ir.  IS  1  Nicbuhr,
KH.  tf  Somt,  u.  p.  418.)  The  aoperinUKidcnce
bf  the  oom-markeE  throughout  the  whole  republic
waa  ai  a  later  period  enlruated  to  Pompey  for  a
period  offiTeyeara  (Dion  Caia.  liiix.9;  Cic  oif
Uu.  ir.  1  ;  Liv.  Epil.  104}  ;  and  in  accordance
with  thia  example  Auguatot  took  the  tame  tuper-
hitcndence  upon  himaelt,  and  oinimanded  that  two
penoni,  who  had  been  praeton  live  yeort  before,
should  be  appointed  eTeiy  year  fiir  the  diairibution
of  the  com.  {jyim  Caaa.  Ht.  1  ;  euron  /ramatti
poputo  /thidrntdi,  3ueL  Auff.  37.)  Bcbiequently
Angnitut  aaaigned  thia  duty  to  two  peratma  of
contnlar  lank  (Di«i  Caat.  It.  36,  31);  but  he
alao  created  an  efflccr  imder  the  title  of  Pra^atm
AKKnia^  who  mutt  be  dittingnithed  from  the
above-mentioned  officera.  Thii  offiea  waa  a  per-
manent one,  and  appewi  to  have  been  only  held
by  one  person  at  a  time :  he  had  jurisdiction  over
alt  mattera  appertaining'  to  the  enm.market,  and,
like  the  Pttis^^h  Vigilnm,  mit  chosen  lion  the
Eqniles,  and  wBi  not  t«dccti«d  among  tbe  onUnH;


PRAEFECTUS  PRAETORIO.
msgistntet.  (Dion  Cast.  lii.  3-1 ;  Dig.  1.  til  S.
s.  S.  §  33  ;  14.  tit.  1.  s.  1.  g  la  tit.  5.  a.  8 ;  4&
tit.  2.  s.  13.)  The  Praefectos  Annouae  eontiDned
to  eiiat  till  the  latest  times  of  the  empire  ;  respect-
uig  hia  dutiea  in  later  times  see  Waller,  GeidL
da  Rom.  Haiti,  §  360,  2d  ed.  Cna^  FaDMBH-

PRAEFECTUS AQUA'RDM. [AaD*»

Ductus,  p.  llj,  b.]

PRAEFECTUS  CASTRCRUH,  •^tekdi  of
the  camp,  is  first  mentimed  in  the  rcigo  of
Auguatua.  Then  wat  one  to  each  legiso.  ( VelL
Pat.  iL  1 19  ;  Tac  Am*.  L  20,  lii.  37.)  We  laun
frnm  Vegetius  (11  10)  that  it  was  hit  duty  to  at-
tend la  all  matters  connected  with  the  mdcing  c^
a  ounp,  such  as  the  Tsllum,  Itoss,  Ac,  and  also  to
the  internal  econaroy  of  iL

PRAEFECTUS  CLA8SI3,  the  comuandei  of
a  fleet.  This  title  was  frequently  giren  in  the
limes  of  the  republic  to  the  caDuoander  of  a  fleet
[Liv.  ixii.  48,  niri  42) ;  but  Angnstoa  ap-
p<Hnted  two  pennanent  offieera  with  this  title,  «ie
of  whom  waa  atationed  at  Rarenna  on  the  Ha-
driatic  and  the  other  at  Uiaenum  on  the  Toacaa
tea,  each  haiing  the  command  of  a  fleet.  (SoeL
.^■^49;  Vegctir.33;  Tac/fi^iiL  IZ)

PRAEFECTUS  FABRUM. [Pabrl]

PRAEFECTUS  JURl DICUNDO. [Co-

LONlA,p.SlB,b.l

PRAEFECTUS  PRAETO'RIO.wa.  the  com-
mander of  the  tnwpa  who  guarded  the  eaipfVDT^
person.  [Pbaktoriani.]  This  office  was  ioUi-
tuted  by  Aognatus,  and  was  at  first  only  znititBrr,
and  had  comparatiTsly  amall  power  attached  (a  it
(Dion  Cats.  IIL  34,  It.  10  ;  Suet.  Aug.  49)  ;  bnt
under  Tiberiu,  who  msde  Sojanns  comiDaadeT  of
the  priKtarian  tnwpa,  it  benme  of  much  gtealer
importooee,  till  at  length  the  poser  of  these  paae-
fecta  became  second  only  to  that  of  the  enpenta.
.  2  ;  AureL  Vict,  dt  Can.  9.)  The
nlatioo  of  the  prsefeetut  pisetaio  to  the  emprm
ipared  to  that  of  the  nugiater  equitnm  to  the
dictatorundertherepuhlic  (U^.l.  titll.)  Froin
the  reign  of  Serema  ta  that  of  Diodct^  the
ptaefccts,  like  the  viiin  of  the  East,  had  the  super-
intendence of  all  departments  of  the  stats,  the
pdace,  the  army,  the  linancea,  and  the  law  :  they
alto  had  a  court  in  which  they  decided  cases.  (Dift.
1.  s.  40.)  The  office  of  pnefect  of  Hk
pnelorium  wu  not  conEoed  to  militaij  idicen  ;  it
filled  by  Ukiioa  and  Popinian,  and  other  dia-

■  ■  J  j.„-


Originally  th
of  Commodoa  s>


>en  two  praefectt ;  aAetwanlt
lometimes  two  ;  from  the  time
mes  three  (LAmpiiiL  Oimatoii,
They  were  as  a  reRnlar  rule
chosen  only  from  the  equitea  (Dion  Cnss.  lii  34  i
Suet.  7U.  6  i  Lomprid.  Oommod.  4)  ;  but  frvn  tbc
'  ne  of  Alexander  Serenis  the  dignity  of  aiiialis
u  alwaya  joined  with  their  idee.  (I^iapiid.
!«.  Sen.  31.)

Under  Conalanline  the  pnefacti  wen  dqirivpd
of  all  military  connaml.  and  chiaged  into  go-
of proviucea.  He  ai^nntad  Imt  nrii
pnefecls :  the  on,  who  eonmiiily  atteaded  on  tba
'-nperiat  court,  bad  the  1  iinaaii  1I  of  Tlmce.  the
rhole  of  the  East,  and  Emt ;  the  sacend  had  iIm
immsnd  of  lllyricnm,  Macedonia,  and  Onece,
and  usually  resided  fint  at  Sinninm,  aftentanla  at
Thcsnlonica  ;  the  third  of  Inly  ai^  Africa  1  the
fbonh,  wtM  rwdad  at  Ttirea,  of  Gaal,  ^sIb.  ud


PRABFECTDS  URBl,
BriMin. (ZMimiu,  ii.  33.) Thoe  pneTecti
the  proper repmenUtiiei of  the emperor,  and
tbNT  power  extended  orec  oil  ■" ' ■-  -'-'--


■ubjed
(Wdter,  CoeL  da  Rom. RtdiH,
S9  2S9,  3*1  ;  Gibbon,  Dtdimm  and  Fdi,  e.  17.)

PRAEFECTUS SOCIfyRUM. [Exuu:i-
Tin,  p.  497,  b.]
PRAEFECTUS  VI'OILUM. fEiwuarcs,

pLilO,*.]

PRAEFECTUS  UKBI,  i«efecl  or  mrden  of
the  cHjr,  KM  wiginaDj  cmUsd  CiuftK  Ufiit,  <Lj-
dni,  Dt  lUagiMtr.  i.  34,  SB.)  The  uuna  Pmfictut
UM  dan  not  wem  to  han  been  lued  till  after
the  thne  of  tba  Decemfin.  Tbe  dignity  of  Coi-
liB  Uibio,  bung  eomfained  with  that  of  Princepa
Sentni,  wai  conlened  by  the  king,  u  be  lud  to
fpaat  one  of  the  decent  primi  ai  princept  aena-
tiii.  (Lir,  L  *9,  80  ;  Dionyi.  ii.  12.)  The  fune-
tiont  of  the  cnitoi  urbii,  howBTer,  were  not  ei-
ereiaed  except  in  tbe  abience  of  the  king  from
Rome  ;  and  thm  he  acted  oi  the  reprewntative  of
the  king ;  bat  whether  he  alio  bad  tbe  right  to
couToke  the  aaiembt;  of  the  populos,  ii  doubtful,
but  on  any  emergeacy  ha  might  take  inch  mea-
anni  ai  he  thonght  proper  ;  kt  he  bad  the  im-
perium  in  the  city.  (Tacit  Aim^  Ti.  11.  j  Lir.
I.  59,  iiL  24.)  Romulni  ii  laid  to  hare  con-
ferred thia  dignity  upm  Denter  Homaliu,  Tnllni
Haatiliu  upon  Noma  Uaitiui,  and  Tanjninitit
Sopetbut  apoa  Sp.  Lucntint.  During  the  kingly
peridd  the  office  of  warden  of  the  city  na  pro-
bably for  life.  Under  the  republic  the  i^ce  and  tta
vame  of  costn  nrbia  remamed  unalteted  ;  but  in
487  B.  c.  it  WM  el.
beMow

Thoet -.  .  ,.

the  curiae,  inatnd  of  wbom  Dionjuiu  (viii.  64)
mentiou)  tbe  lenale.  Penou  of  contnlar  rank
vcte  aione  eligible  ;  and  down  to  the  ioBv  of  the
DeceniTiiBte  ereiy  praefbet  that  i>  mentioned  ocean
neriouity  as  coniuL  The  only  exception  ii  P.
Lunlioa  in  Li<y  (iii.  24),  whoae  name,  however,
ia  pcobaUy  wrong.  (Niebuhr,  it.  f,  120,  note
2Ei.)  In  the  eaily  period  of  tbe  republic  the
warden  exerciied  witbiu  the  city  all  the  powen  of
the  eoniuli,  if  tbey  were  abeent :  ha  conToked  the
■eiate  (Lir.  iiL  9  ;  OelL  liv.  7.  g  4),  held  the
camitia  <LiT.  iii.  24),  and,  in  timea  of  war,  eren
leTied  diic  Icfiona,  which  were  ctraonanded  by  him.

When  the  office  of  praetor  Drbonni  waa  initi-
tQted,  the  wardenthip  of  the  city  waa  iwallowed
Dp  in  it  (I'ydni,  Da  JWou.  19,  Dt  Magatr.  iL  6) ;
but  at  tbe  Rornani  were  at  all  tium  avene  to
dropping  altogetber  any  of  their  old  inilitutioui,  a
pneuctna  nrbi,  though  a  mere  thadow  of  the  former
■See,  waa  haicebt^  appointed  erery  year,  only
for  tbe  time  that  the  COTiiuli  were  absent  from
Home  for  the  pmrpcae  of  celebrating  tbe  Ft
Idtioae.  Thii  pnulectui  bad  neither  the  pi
■f  convoking  the  aenate  nor  the  right  of  apoking
in  it ;  aa  in  moal  caaea  he  waa  a  pcnon  bdow  the
Mnatoriil  age,  and  waa  not  appointed  by  Ihr
uwple,  bnl  by  tbe  conanla.  (OelL  xiv.  8.)  Whei
Vairo,  in  the  paaaage  of  Oelliua  here  referred  to,
daima  fir  the  praelectQi  nrbi  tbe  right  of  con-
Toking  the  aeoate,  ha  ia  probably  apeidcing  of  the


power  of  the  praefect  an


of  tt


ofp;


PHAEFKCTU3  URBI.  653

Cnm  the  facta,  that  it  waa  alwaya  pita  to  young
men  of  illualrioni  bmilie*  (TadL  Atm-O.  ii.  36),
and  that  Jnlioa  Caeaar  e*en  qipointed  to  it  aereral
youtht  of  eqoeatriau  rank  under  age.  (Dion  Caaa.
ilix.  42,  xliiL  29,  48.)  Dnrii^  the  empire  auch
pnefecta  of  the  city  ccotinned  to  be  appointed  as
long  aa  the  Ferine  Latinaa  were  (elebrated,  and
were  even  invealed  with  aome  kind  of  juriadiclian.
(Tacit.  AtuvO.  vl  1 1  ;  Suet.  Nm,  7,  Cbrd.  4  t
Dion  Caaa.  liv.  17  ;  J.  C^toL  jfatoaui.  PiU.  4.)
On  aome  occationa,  however,  no  praefectna  nrin
waa  appointed  at  all ;  and  then  lua  dutiea  were
pofbnned  by  the  ;Hietor,  nrtauini.  (Dion  (^oaa.
xIL  14,  ilix.  le  ;  comp.  Becker,  Hamii.  cfar  Rom.
AUvii.  Td.  ii.  pt.  ii.  p- 146.)

An  office  very  di&rent  innn  thia,  tbongh  bear-
ing the  <ame  name,  waa  inatitnted  by  Anguniu  on
the  tuggoition  of  Maeeenat.  (Dion  Caaa.  IiL  21  |
Tacit.  Lcj  Suet  Aig.  37.)  Thia  new  rnefectui
nrbi  waa  a  legnlac  and  permanent  ma^atiate,
whom  Auguatna  innated  with  all  the  powcn
miiiaanij  to  TnamtBin  peace  and  order  in  tha  city.
He  had  tbe  superintendence  of  butchen,  banker*,
gnardiant,  thcetrea,  &&  ;  and  to  enable  him  to
eiereiaa  hia  power,  he  haJi  diitribaled  thronghout
the  city  a  number  of  militet  ataUonarii,  wbom  we
may  compare  to  a  modem  police.  He  alao  bad
juriadiction  in  caaea  between  alavea  and  thdr
maateri,  between  paltona  and  [heir  freed  men,  and
over  aooa  who  had  violated  the  pietaa  towards
their  parenta.  (Dig.  1.  tit  13.  a.  1.  g  5^14  ;
37.  tit  \S.  a.  1.  82.)  Hit  juriidiction,  however,
became  gtadnally  extended  ;  and  at  the  powen  of
tbe  ancient  republican  pnefectoa  nrbi  bad  been
awallowed  upby  theofficeofthe  jnnetorurbaniia,80
BOW  the  power  of  the  praetor  nrbaniu  waa  grads'
ally  abaorbed  by  that  of  the  praefectna  nrbi ;  and
at  lait  there  waa  no  appeal  trara  hia  aentence,  eX'
cept  to  tbe  penon  of  the  prmcepa  hinuel^  while
anybody  migbt  appeal  litim  a  aentence  of  any
other  city  nugiatrals,  and,  at  a  hitei  period,  even
from  that  of  a  governor  •>(  a  province,  to  tbe  tri-
bunal of  the  praefectna  lubL  (Vopitc  Flariaii,  6,
6;  Snet  .^luj.  33  !  Dion  Caaa.  Iii.  SI.  33  )  Dig.
4.  tit  4,  a.  38.)  Hia  juriadiction  in  aiminal  mat-
tela  waa  at  ficat  connected  with  the  qoaeatiouea
(Tacit  .4ii»^  di.  41,  with  the  note  of  Lipaiua)  ;
hut  &nm  the  third  cenlnry  he  eieteiKd  it  alone,
and  not  only  in  tha  city  of  Rome,  but  at  a  dialante
of  one  bnndred  mile*  from  it,  and  he  might  aen-


,  and  undrr  good  empeion,  tbe  office
waa  generally  held  for  a  number  of  yean,  and  in
many  caeet  ibr  life  (Dion  Cati.  IiL  21,  24,
Izxnii.  14  ;  J.  Cqiitol.  AMtomn.  Pint,  8  ;  Lam-
prid.  Omaiod.  14  ;  Vo[Hac.  Cam.  16)  ;  hot  from
the  time  of  Valerian  a  new  praefect  of  the  dty  oc-
cuii  abnoat  every  year.

At  the  time  when  Gonttantinople  waa  made  the
KGond  capital  of  the  empire,  thia  city  alao  received
ita  praefectna  urbL  Tbe  maefecta  at  thii  time
were  the  direct  repreaentatifta  of  tba  emperora,
and  all  the  other  cheers  of  tbe  adminiatmtion  of
the  dty,  all  corpomtiona,  and  all  public  inalitn-
tiona,  were  under  their  control  {Cai,  1.  tit  2il,
L  4  ;  Symmach.  EpitL  i.  37,  43  ;  Caulod.  Va-
riar.  vL  4.)  They  alao  exerciaed  a  anperinlen-
dena  over  the  impottation  and  the  pricea  of  pro-
viiioDt,  though  theaa  inbjecta  were  under  the  more
imnwdiata  r^olation  of  othsc  officen. (Cod.  U


SS4  PRAEJtTDICIUM.

tit.  2S.  >.  1  ;  Orelli,  /ncnpC.  s.  31 IG.)  Ths  pne-
feeli  of  the  cit;  had  etetj-  raontli  to  n»lu  >  report
to  ike  empenr  of  the  tniuacticaii  of  ibe  kdUd
(SjnuiuctL  ^litL  X.  H),  when  they  giTs  their
Tote  befin«  tbe  ouuuUrei.  They  were  the  medium
throogli  which  the  emperon  FScetTed  tbe  petitiona
nnd  present!  ftom  their  capitoL  (SymmBch.  Ejntt.
T.  20,  29,  35  ;  Cod.  12.  tit.  49.)  At  tbe  election
of  n  pope  the  pneiect  of  Rome  bad  tbe  care  of  all
the  eitemal  i^aktioa.  (Symmacfa.  EpuL  x.
71—83.)  [L.  8.]

PRAE'FICAE. [Fmtos,  p.  G5B,  b.j
FRAEFU'RNIUM. [Buhxa*,  p.  192,  b  )

FOKNAX.}

PRAEJUDI'CIUM.  Thii  word,  ai  appeui
from  it*  etymology,  bat  a  oerUin  rriation  to  Judi-
cium, ta  which  it  it  oppoaed  by  Cicero  (DioioaL  4)  :
"  de  quo  Qon  pnejujicium,  led  plane  jam  judicium
isctum."  The  commentativ,  who  goei  mider  the
name  of  Aiconiua,  obaerna  on  tbki  panage,  thai  a

C judicium  ii  umething,  which  whsD  ettabliihed
imea  an  aatrnplum  for  the  judjcea  (jurftratari]
to  follow  ;  but  tbii  leave*  ni  in  doubt  whether
he  meajii  lomeChing  eatablithed  in  the  nme  ouue,
by  way  of  preliminary  inquiry,  or  eomelhing  ettab-
liihed in  Bdifferent,  buta  like  (wtee,  which  would
be  what  wo  call  a  precedent  Quintilian  (/■»*.
Oral.  T.  I.  S)  itBtea  thBtitiinKdbotbintheKnw
of  B  precedent,  in  which  caae  it  il  rather  taaipbtm
than  pnwfudiaium  {ret  cm  parSmtoiBmtJwdiealai)  i
and  alio  In  (he  aenie  of  a  preliminaiy  inquiry  and
determination  about  lomethiDg  which  bdongi  to
the  matter  in  diipute  {jadicia  ad  ipiant  aamara
perloHntaia),  from  whence  alto  comet  the  name
Praejudjeimo.  Thit  latter  aenie  it  in  confonnity
with  the  meaning  at  Praejudiciales  Actionei  or
Pracjudieia  in  which  there  it  an  Intentio  onl;  and
nothing  elaa.  (Oaini,  ii.  ii.)  Thete  accordingly
were  called  PraejndiciBlet  Actionet  whkh  had  for
Ifaeir  object  the  determination  of  aoma  matter,
which  wnt  not  aecompaaied  by  a  condemnatio.
**A  praejudieium  it  an  actio,  which  htti  not  any
condemnatio  at  a  coneeqnence,  bnt  imly  a  judicial
decliustion  at  to  the  eiittence  of  a  legal  relation.
The  name  of  thit  kind  of  actiont  comet  from  the
circumttance  that  they  lerre  ai  pr^minary  to
other  and  future  actiont.  All  th»e  Actionei  are
n  rent,  that  ii,  they  avail  not  eicloiively  agunat  a
delerminBte  penon  who  owes  a  duty,  like  actioni
which  an  founded  on  Obligationea."  (Sangay,
SiaUm,  &c  TOl.  i.  p.3£6.)  For  inttance,  the  gnea-
tion  might  be,  Whether  a  man  it  a  father  or  not,  or
Whether  he  bat  a  Potatat  over  hit  child :  th<ae
were  the  nihject  of  Praejudicialea  Actionea.  If  a
bther  denied  that  the  child  who  wu  bom  of  hit
wife,  or  with  which  the  wst  then  pregnant,  wai
hit  child,  ihit  wsa  the  tnbject  of  a  "  Pnojodicinm
cum  pAtn  de  porta  agnoecendo."  If  a  Judex
thonld  hare  declared  that  the  child  muat  be  main-
tained by  the  reputed  father,  there  nmst  itill  be
the  Praejndicium  Eo  aicertain  whether  tbe  repnlcd
bther  it  the  true  father.  If  il  wai  donblfiil
whether  the  mother  waa  bit  wiie,  there  mutt  be
a  praejudicinm  on  thii  matter  before  the  praejn-
dicium  de  partn  ag;n«cendo.  Thete  praejudical
action)  then,  were,  ai  it  appear),  action)  respecting
Statui ;  and  they  were  either  Civilet  or  Piaetoriae.
It  WBi  a  CiTilii  Actio  when  the  qneilion  wai  aa
to  libertai ;  the  mt  teem  to  hare  been  Piaetotiae
Actionet.  Quintilian  makei  a  third  clau  of  Pmejn-


Sometlniea  Praejudidum  menu  incoiTaiKnee,
damage,  injury,  which  taoaa  apnean  to  aiiae  from
the  notioD  of  a  thins  ben^  prnodged,  or  decided
witboat  being  Urly  heard  ;  and  Iba  Hoae  of  the
word  Ksmt  to  be  rerj  nearly  the  nme  in  whidi
it  occnii  in  our  law  in  the  pbiwe  "  witbtnt  pte-
jadice  to  ether  matteri  in  the  canw."

(0«Bt,iiLI33,  iT.44;  Dig.2«.  dl.3i  Dig.  22.
tiLS.  a.8;  Dig.  43.  tit.  30.  De  liberit  eihibendi) ;
IniL  4.  tit.  e.  t.  13  ;  Kod  Tbeophilu^  Poniplr.sd
IniL4.tit«.  a.13.)  [O-LJ

PRAELU'Sia [aLiDUT(wn,bfi7G,a.]

PRAENOVEN. [NoMBM.]

PRAEPETES. [AuauB,  p.  I7fi,  b.]

PRAEPO'SITUS,  which  mewu  a  pna
placed  orer,  wat  gi'en  aa  a  title  in  tbe  lata  time*
of  the  RiHUan  empife  to  maoy  officm;  of  thete
the  moat  inipattant  wai  tbe  /VayoiifM  Sacri  Ot-
iiaiti,  or  chief  chamberiain  in  the  empemr^  palace
(Cod.  IS.  tit.  6  I  Cod.  Theod.  6.  tiL  8.)  Under
him  waa  the  Primicerina,  tagetber  with  the  CbIh-
cukrii  and  the  ccupi  of  Silantiarii,  connnanded  by
three  decnrionea,  who  preaerred  aileoca  in  tb«  in-
tenor  of  the  palace.  (Cod.  13.  tiL  16  ;  Walter,
Oask.  d«  Rii«.  HtditM,  %  3iO.  2d  ed.)

PRAEROGATITA.  [Connu,  pp.  338,  b,
33B,  b.J

PRAEa  If  we  might  tnat  a  definitico  by
Atuoniui  (.Id^L  liL  9),  he  waa  ailed  Vaa  who

aecurity  for  another  in  ■CaniaCapitBlia  ;  and

ho  gave  tecnrity  for  anothet  in  a  dTil  actiaa
waa  Prsei.  But  thia  anthority  cannat  be  mated,
and  the  otage  of  the  wotda  Vaa  and  Praa  waa
certainly  not  alwaya  cosfoimable  to  thia  defiiutioa.
According  to  Varro  (Ling.  lot.  n.  74,  ed.  HOUer),
any  penon  wai  Vat,  who  promttFd  VadinMnima  fbr
another,  that  it,  gave  tccui^  fbr  anMher  w  any
iagal  proceeding.  Fsttua  (•;  ■.  Fadtm)  t^a  Ibal
"^'- il  a  Sponsor  in  a  ret  tajiilalii.  If  VaaiagHUU,
'hick  Vai  in  ita  ipecwl  uaaa,  and  Pnea  are
ipeciot;  theee  definition*  wiU  be  eoniittent.  (Ccwk
SallaiL  Jyg.  3S,  61  ;  Roimt.  &1:  i.  1.  11,  ud
Heiadorfi  note.)  Under  Mamo^  Fartai  la-
mirki,  that  Mancept  aignifiei  him  wbo  b«yi  or
hires  any  pnblic  ptvperty  (fat  a  pepula  tmH  eoi»-
daeiin),  and  that  he  it  also  called  Piaai  bocaiUB

he  ii  bound  to  make  good  hit  ootiact  (j ^aia

fsoi  pnmuiOi  at  well  aa  he  who  it  lua  Pnea.
(See  alio  VaiTo,  t  B.)  Acnsding  to  thia,  Ptaa  ia
aiiiety  for  onewhoboytofthe  Mala,  and  to  called
became  of  his  liability  [praalani.  Bat  tbe
etymology  at  leait  ii  doubtfol,  and  we  are  inclined
to  think,  &be.  The  paiage  of  Featn*  eiplaina  a
pattage  in  the  Life  of  Attieua  (a  Nt/t.  6),  in  whitk
it  it  taid  that  he  never  bought  anything  *t  pablic
auction  (fld  Acufon  piiUiaiii^  and  never  waa  utba
Mancept  or  Fraes.  A  cata  it  mantiouad  hj  Gd-
lius  (nl  19)  in  which  a  ^enaa  «■■  eeaamiued  to
prison  who  could  not  obtain  Prtadea.  n*  gaodi
'  Praea  were  called  Praadia  (PacDdo-AiEeA.  ia
■.  iLI.£4),aDdiBCi<em(j:e.>andIiiT<ixiL
60)  "  pnedibm  et  praediit "  cddm  tesetbar.  Tbe
phiaie  **  piaedibui  caveie,"  to  give  aecnrity,  •eem
'-  the  Digest  <1 0.  tit.  3.  >.  6),  when  anna  editieat

Te^proaedibmcarere."  (SeetbevariovKat-
ingi  ed.  Oebaner  and  ^langenheig.)  Tbe  phraaa
"  praedei  vendere  "  meant  u  sdl,  not  tbe  pncdea

iperly  to  called,  but  tbe  thing)  wfaiefa  an  gtw

Praediatorea  are  wppnaed  by  Britaootna  ube  tba
ne  at  Piaadea  (Cic  }m.StA  «.  30^  Mt  .^O.  ziL


PRAESCEIPTIOt
U,  17  i  Sottm.  Cbmd.  e.  9  i  V«L  Jin.  Ti[l  12),
■t  Icut  10  bi  u  Lhej  wa«  ■metica  to  the  State.
Bat  pnediator  ii  dcGntd  I17  Ouoi  (ii,  61)  to  be
cue  **  nba  bap  fRiia  the  people,"  aod  fata  tbe
contezt  it  !i  dear  tliat  it  !■  rme  wko  bnji  a  Ptu-
diiim,wbichi>ftinher  defined  to  be  a  thing  pledged
to  the  poputni  "  lei  obligata  popnlo."  Tna  Pra»-
dUloT  then  ii  he  who  bufi  a  Pntediiuii,  that  ii,  a
thing  gircn  to  the  po^ni  M  a  Kcnritj  b;  a
Plan  ;  and  the  whole  law  relating  to  nich  niatten
mi  called  Ju)  Praedlatoriiun.  [Q.  L.]

PRAESCRI'PTIO,  or  mther  TEMP0KI8
PRAESCRIPTIO,  »ignifie«  the  Eioeplio  or  an-
■ver  which  a  defendant  hu  to  the  demand  of  a
plaintiff  fbonded  on  the  ciicomituKe  of  the  lapie
of  lime.  The  word  hai  pmperi;  Do  reference  to
the  plaintiff'!  lou  of  iigh%  but  to  the  defendant's
acqaiution  of  a  right  bj  which  he  exclodo  the
pLuntiff  from  praeciiting  bit  luit.  Tbit  right  of
a  defeadani  did  not  eiiit  in  the  old  Boman  law.
When  the  Praeton  gaTS  new  actioni  b;  their
Edict,  thef  attached  to  them  the  condition  that
tbcae  irtioni  nut  be  bnoght  within  a  jear  (atra
a  f  mm  judiduM  daio),  that  iaa  yeaifrnm  the  time
when  the  right  of  action  iccni^.  Theie  actioni
then  wen  eicqiliani  from  the  old  mle,  that  all


eatahtithed  that  in  setioni  about
joiB  in  re,  ten,  or  in  tame  aue>  twentj  jean,
vould  give  a  praetCTiptio,  when  the  Pouenor
could  ihow  that  he  had  complied  with  the  main
eonditioni  of  Unicapion,  without  having  acquired
Dwnenhip  by  Uaocapion,  for  if  be  bad,  be  had
tu  need  of  any  Eiceptio.  Thia  rule  waa  faither
extended  t^  Coiulantuie,  and  a  period  of  30  w
40  jean,  jor  it  aeenu  that  the  time  wai  not
quite  settled,  vaa  to  be  coiuidend  ai  infficient
itt  a  piacecriptio,  though  the  defendant  had  not
eomplied  with  the  omditiona  of  UtncafHou.  A
geoeial  conititulion  wsa  nude  bj  Theodotina,
A.  a.i24,  which  with  lome  lariationi  appesn  in
both  the  Codei  (Cod.  Theod.  1.  tit.  W  ;  Cod.  7.
tit.  39.  L  3)  ;  and  it  enacted  that,  ai  in  the  caae
(^  the  actionea  already  mendoiMd,  there  ^laald  be
DO  hertditatii  petitio  aflet  30  yean,  aod  that  after
the  nme  time  do  peraonal  aetioa  alumld  be  brought.
The  actio  fininm  regnndomm  vai  excepted,  and
alio  tbe  aetioa  of  a  creditor  for  hie  jngnui  v  hjpo-
tbeca  agunit  the  debtor,  but  not  againit  otherv.
Piaejudieialefl  actiouei  aa  to  Statua  are  not  enmno-
r«ted  among  thoie  agahiit  which  there  waa  a
Praeaeriptio,  hut  they  leem  to  be  included  in  the
geseral  wivda  of  the  law.  Jutinian,  bj  a  con-
■titntion  of  the  jaz  £30  (Cod.  J.  tit.  40.  1. 1),
eatabliihed  the  general  rule  of  30  Teara  for  iH
sctiooi,  with  Iheeiception  of  tbe  actio  hypotbecaria,
for  which  he  required  40  jean.  Hia  conititulion
enumeimtei  the  fallowing  actiona  to  which  tbe
HaHcriptio  of  30  jeara  woiUd  apptr:  Fsmiliac
herciacundae,  Commun]diTidanda,Fmiumregnndo-
nim,_  Pro  Socio,  Fnrti  et  Vi  Bonorum  Raplomm  ;


nloni


impetlt,  B


[0  liiginta  annia,  Ac,


Del  ni
ri" It  Ibiu  B]


11  acliona  were  originallj  perpetnae,
«bt  of  action  continued  without  anj
Iram  the  lapie  of  time  ;  then  aome
ityeet  to  Praeaeriptio,  and  £natlj  all

' of  tbit  ehaiig«  tha


the  right  ofactJon.  3.  There
m  nedaet  on  the  part  of  the
ingUe  BMkti,in  eider  thai


PBAfflCMPTla  SU

term  Perpetuae,  originallj  ^iplied  to  aedimi  that
were  not  nhject  to  pneacriptio,  waa  naed  to  iigiiify
an  actio  in  which  30  jean  were  ueceiHuj  to  gire
a  Piaeacriplio,  ai  oppiaed  to  actime*  in  which  the
right  to  a  Praeacnfrtio  accrued  in  a  ahirter  time.
(IniL  4.  tit  12.)

The  oonditkina  ncwaaary  to  ettabliih  a  Prae-
aeriptio were,  1.  Actio  Nala,  for  there  mnat  bo  a
right  of  action  in  order  that  a  pnwicriptio  maj
hare  an  origin,  and  tbe  date  td  it~  — '~~  ~'  '  '  '
ftied  by  the  data  of  the  rt  '  '
mnat  M  a  coatiinMiia  net
peraco  mtilled  to  bring  Ue  aetkai,  in  older  that
the  time  of  tha  Pneacriptb  ma;  be  i«ck«ied
anintennpledlf. -  ~  ■

ly  ingredient  in

waa  the  ne^oet  of  tl ,  .

foundation  of  the  PiMacri^n.  Battba  loa^teoi*
pcsia  praeaeriptio  waa  nada  like  to  UaDca|rion  m
to  itt  conditiona,  of  which  tnna  Edei  waa  one,
Joitinian  (Cod.  7.  tit.  39.  a.  8)  rvqaired  a  bona
Gdea  in  tbe  caae  <rf  a  thulj  jear  Praeaeriptio,  but
thia  waa  no  new  mle  «ie«it  to  br  aa  the  Pea-
aeaaor  claimed  the  benefit  of^Utneapio  ;  and  aa  tha
longj  temporia  pnaamptio,  aa  an  indepandmt  rale
of[Bw,diaBppeiiredbnntlie)egialatianof  JnatiDHUi,
tbe  bona  Sdea  a*  »  eMdilioa  of  nneacriptio  went
with  it.  4.  Tbe  lapte  of  timc^  which  waa  SO  yean ;
bat  to  thi*  then  were  many  ^DcntiaiK

The  tonrcet  on  the  nbfeet  ni  Pntfnriptin  am
referred  to  In  Brinkmann'l  ratfihatfuaii  Jarit
XtmaiB,  and  HnhlanbtiMb'i  DoeMm  Pamthela-
nm,  g  261,  and  g  481,  on  the  ditlinetica  b^
ultiniatelj  nboliahed  between  Pmaatriptio  rad
Uiucapia ;  Saibnj,  £Mm  tin  ImOifm  SSm.
RkUi,  *oL  t.,  from  wnooi  thia  ontline  ii  takm.
Bee  alto  UiCCAPIO.

Pnmcriptio  had  a  apecial  aenae  in  Roman  plead-


le  (ir.


aetore,  and  not  [so  reo  ;  and  an  ei
plain  the  torn.  It  often  baepena  tl
ii  aueh  that  a  man  ia  boond  to  ano


iple  win  ei-

nce,  yearly,

half  yeariy,  or  monthly.  Tha  payment  of  intaeat
on  mmeT  wonld  be  an  example.  At  tha  eloae  o(
any  of  tbeae  eenain  perioda,  (he  par^  to  wban
the  obligatio  waa  doe,  m^t  aoa  tar  what  wat
dnt^  bot  not  for  what  wai  not  due,  though  an  ob-
,;_.; . — ^1  —  ..  i^ .1 — What


ibligatio,  ihete  waa  aaid  to  be  a  Fraatatio,  or  it
*aa  aaid,  "  aliqnid  jam  praattari  oportet :  "  when
he  obligatio  existed,  bnt  the  Praeitatio  waa  not
Iaa,  it  waa  "fntura  pneatatiD,"  or  it  waa  tatd,
**  praeatatio  adhoe  nnlh  eat"  If  then  the  pjaintiff
'  '  id  to  limit  hie  dentsnd  to  what  waa  due,  it
lecenuy  to  uae  the  following  PTa«criptio;
rea  agatur  cujui  rei  din  fuit."  (Compaiv  CiiL
■£<  Or.  L  37.)  Tha  name  of  Pnw*oription«,  ob-
lerrca  Qaiui,  ia  manifestly  derirod  from  the  eir^
ctmittance  of  their  being  prefixed  (fffneacribuntar)
to  the  fonnulae,  that  ii,  they  tame  befero  the  In>
tentio.  In  the  time  of  Gaiua  tbe  Pneacriptiwiea
were  only  naed  by  the  acter  )  hut  tbnnerly  they
were  na»d  alao  in  bfonr  of  a  defendant  (reiu),
aa  in  the  following  inilnnoe  -.  "  Ea  rea  agatnr  qnod
jmejaiidam  hereditoti  nan  fiat,"  which  in  tba
time  oS  QtinM  waa  tamed  into  a  kind  of  exceptio
or  aniwer,  when  the  petitor  heredtlatli^  by  uaing
a  different  kmd  of  actii^  wn*  pajodging  the  que*-


968  PRAETOR,

tion  of  tbe  hereditu  (nun  petSor,  Ae. . . .  prtuju-
cfiewi  tarirfilaCi  Jiuiat): Compare  Ouui Dig.
in.  tit  2.  a.  1  ;  md  lee  FBAaiUDiciuti).
Savign;  ibovi  ttut  in  the  legitUtion  of  Jui-


ui,Pni


micBl  uid


1  be  oied  indiSerentl;.
obwrrei  that  the  Piamxiptione*  wbich  in  the  old
form  of  procedure  were  introduced  into  the  fbrnnl
for  the  benefit  of  the  defendmt,  were  properly  Ei
cepticniei,  and  it  wms  merely  tm  ucident  that  ca
tun  Eicoptiima  nfB  placed  befbra  the  iutenti
initcad  of  being  placad  U  ibe  and  of  tbe  foimala,
M  wai  the  mul  pnetiee.  Subtequntly,
port  from  Osini,  ooljr  ths  PiuiciiptioT
Bctore  vere  prefixed  to  the  (ennnb ;  and  Ifaiiae
pro  ICO  were  placed  M  (he  end,  and  they  retained,
thougb  improperly,  the  lome  of  PneaciipdoEieL
Thni  Eiceptio  ud  PraHcriptio  ana  to  be  iijed  a*
equinleni  lemu,acinaimitance  to  which  tbe  dliuu
of  the  Oido  jiididomin  eontnbuted.  Yet  in  thi
ctue  o(  particular  eiceplionei,  one  or  other  of  tb<
namei  vai  moat  in  uee,  and  the  indiacriminati
emplojmenE  of  them  vaa  an  exception  to  th(
general  mie.  The  prendeDca  of  odb  or  the  other
name  in  partientat  caaei  ia  caaily  explained  :  thoa,
the  Doli  and  Rei  Judicataa  Exeaptuoiei  were  al-
wajn  at  the  end  of  the  Fonnola,  and  the  Temporie
•nd  Fori  Pnuacriptiooei  in  earlier  dmei  were
placed  at  the  begmnin^.  SaTigny  addi  tl  '
modem  timea  Praeacriptm  baa  acquired  tbe


of  Uiu


of  tht


word  Praacriptio  in  tbe  Roman  law.  Though
Exccptio  and  Pmacr^Iio  camo  to  be  uaed  u
eqniialent,  yet  neither  Eiceptio  noi  Praeicriptio
ia  nted  in  the  teuM  of  Temporia  praeecriptio  with-
out the  addition  of  the  wordiTemporia,Tenipiaalia,
triginta  annonun,  &c.  (Sayigny,  ^/ittm,  ix.  It.
309,  T.  163.)  [G.L.]

PRAESES. rpRO  VINCI*.]

PRAESUL. [Salii.]

PHAETE'HITI  SENATOTIES.  [Sbnatds.]

PRAETEXTA. (Toui.]

PRAETOR.  AccordiiigtoCicen(da£«.iiL3)
Praetor  wai  a  title  which  deilgnated  the  coniult
at  tbe  leodeia  of  the  armiei  of  the  atale  ;  and  he
coniiden  the  word  to  contain  the  vme  elemental
parta  ai  the  verb  pniairfl.  The  period  and  office  of
the  (ommand  of  the  ccnaala  might  apprc^iiiately  be
called  Praetorium,  (LIt.  viiL  II.)  Praetor  wna
alao  a  title  of  office  among  the  Lalitu  i  and  it  ia
tbe  name  which  Livy  gire*  to  tbe  itrategni  cf  the
Acbaeana.

The  firal  praetor  (pcciolly  to  oiled  wai  ap-
pointed in  the  year  B.  c.  366,  and  he  wax  cbnien
only  ftom  the  Fstriciana,  who  had  thii  new  office
eriated  ai  a  kind  of  indemnification  to  tbemaelTet
for  being  compelled  to  ihare  the  ominlihip  with
the  Plcbeiana.  (Lii.  ri.  42,  rii,  I.)  No  Plebeian
pmetoi  waa  appointed  till  tbe  yMTB-c  337.  The
Praetor  wai  called  collc}^  connlibna,  and  wat
elected  with  the  tame  auapicei  at  tiie  Comitia
Cenluriata.  The  eontult  were  elected  firat,  and
then  the  praeton.  (Lir.  xlr.  44.)

The  Praetorehip  waa  originally  a  kind  of  third
eoninlahip,  and  the  chief  functioni  of  Uie  praetor
(jw  a  vie  daen,  Lir.  ri.  42  ;  .^ini  nddere,  Lir.
-vii.  1)  were  a  portion  of  the  rnncliona  of  the  con-
■ula,  who  according  to  the  paaaoge  of  Cicero  aboire
referred  to,  were  olio  called  jiulice*  a  judicando.
The  praetor  aometimei  commanded  tbe  aimiea  of
ibaMaie;  and  while  the  caoaiili  wen  abaent  with


PRAETOR.

the  armiea,  ha  exerciaed  their  faictioni  within  tb*
city.  He  waa  a  Magiitiatna  Cnnilia  and  he  bad
the  Imperinm,  and  cnnaeqnentlj  waa  one  of  tha
Hagiatratoa  Majorca;  but  he  owed  rauet  and
obedimce  to  the  ciHiauk.  (Polyb.  niilL  1.)  Hia
iniignia  of  office  were  lii  lictora,  whence  be  ii
called  by  Polybiua  fry*"*'  or  trrptcnnit  l(awi^x-
Kvi,  and  acroetimta  aimply  ^ari/Mnit.  Plnlareh
(Stilla,  G)  naea  the  expreaiion  arpanrrfa  toXnuHt,
At  a  later  period  the  Pmetor  had  only  two  IJctMB
* Rome. (CeiuoriQui,  c  24.) Tbe  -

* SilT'  ' '

after  being  eonaoL  (LiT. .  ,

In  the  y«r  B.C. 346  another  Pnetor  wai  ap-
pointed, vhoae  buaineia  wu  to  adminiiter  jnatiee
m  matters  in  diapnte  between  peregxini,  or  pc»-
grini  and  Roman  dtiaena  ;  anJ^ccJvdingty  he  waa


Praetor  Urbuua  and  Praetor  Urbia.  The  two
Praetwa  determined  by  lot  which  fimctiona  they
ihould  reapectiiely  eiertite.  Jf  either  of  th^
waa  at  the  head  of  the  army,  the  other  petfonned
alt  tha  dutiet  of  botb  within  the  dty.  Sonw-
timea  the  military  imperium  of  a  Pnetor  wat  pn-
longed  for  a  tecond  year.  When  the  tarilnrie*  of
the  Blale  were  extended  beyood  the  limiti  of
Italy,  new  praeton  *rere  made.  Thoa  two  pne.
-on  were  cteated  b.  c  227,  for  the  ■uln.mi.t,..;-,
if  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  and  two  more  were  added
vhen  the  two  Spanijb  provincee  were  fbrmed  a.  c
197.  When  there  wen  lii  pmeton,  two  atayed
n  the  city,  and  the  other  four  wont  alMoad.
;LiT.  zIt.  44).  Tha  Senate  detennined  their
jronincea,  whkh  were  dittribaled  amang  than  br
Dt.  (Ut.  xnii.  27,  28.)  After  the  diachatge  tt
lii  judicial  funcUoni  in  the  city,  a  Praetor  oAeo
had  the  adminiatiation  of  a  pmrince  with  the  title
of  Propraetor,  and  aometimei  with  tbe  title  of  Pn»-
coniaL Sidia  incroued  the  numbs'  of  Praeton

to  eight,  which  Jullua  Caeior  taiaed aaiiilj  Ib

ten,  (welre,  fourteen,  and  tLiteen.  (Dion  Caenoa,
ilil  £1,  xlIiL  SI,  and  the  nolea  of  Reimaraa.)
Auguatua  after  aeTeral  changet  fixed  the  nnmbcr
at  twelre.  Under  Tiberiut  there  were  uilecit.
Two  iKselisa  were  appointed  by  Clandiot  for  mat-
~  a  relating  to  Fideiannmiewi,  when  the  bniineae
thia  dc|iartment  of  the  law  had  become  ooo-
aiderable,  but  Titua  reduced  tha  number  to  one ;
and  Nerva  added  a  Praetor  fat  the  dedtum  ef
between  the  Fitcui  and  individual*.
"Thna,"  layi  Pompontut,  tpeakiug  of  hia  own
time,  "eighteen  praeiort  admiaiater  joatke  (jn
<f^c»f]  in  the  Stata'  (Dig.  I.  tit.  3.  t.  34.)  M.
cording  to  Capitolinnt  <Af..di>l.  e.  10).
Piaelor  for  maUera  relating  to  tnlilB,
which  mutt  haie  taken  plan  af^  Pomponin*
[Pandbct*b.j  The  main  dutiea  of  tha
Praetora  were  judicial,  and  it  appean  that  it  waa
found  neceuary  irom  time  to  time  to  increaac  their
lumber,  and  to  aatign  to  them  qiecial  departtnenta
if  the  adminittration  of  juatio^

Sometimet,  extiaotdinaiy  dniiea  were  impoacd
~  Ihaa,  aa  in  tbe  caae  of  the  Praetor  Pei^TiDo*


(h,c^  144)  who  w
conaultimi


i  by  a


™^)™


PBAETORIANI.
Pnetor,  and  ha  wuthe  Gnt  in  nnk.  Hii  duUci
ccofiiHd  hiia  lo  Rome,  u  ii  implied  bj  the  name,
■od  he  Eoiild  ont;  leave  the  d^  for  [en  dsys  at  a
tiat.  It  wa*  pan  <^  hit  dutr  (o  lupenntand  the
Ludi  Apollinarei.  He  wu  iIb  ihe  chieT  migi*-
mte  for  the  adminiitntiim  of  JMtice,  and  to  the
Edicla  of  the  iiiniwiin  paetan  tba  Romaii  Law
avH  in  a  gnat  denee  itj  derale^anMnit  and  im-
pniTemenL  fiolli  the  Pneto  UrtMiiDt  and  the
Pnetor  Ptncriirai  had  the  Ju  Edioccdi  (Oaini,
L  2),  and  their  liuKtieiii  in  thia  rapect  do  not  ap-
pnc  to  have  been  limited  on  the  eaafaliahment  at
the  imperial  pomr,  ihont^  it  mtut  hire  been
UnuliiaUj  reetticted  a<  the  pcaelin  of  Imperial
" ' ■  "" '  "  '  mmca.  (Eeto-


ndReeerinttbeg
imiu  oF  theae  ti


The  chief  jadicwl  fbnetioiu  of  the  Pnetor  ia


^  [Jci


)  CB»  of  lalerdict^  that  he  de-
cided in  a  Bmmiiij  waj.  {Ihtib DICTUM.]  Pro-
ceeding) befim  the  paetoi  wen  techoically  nid

The  Piaaton  alio  pceiided  at  triali  of  criminal
matten.  Thtae  wen  the  Quaeationea  popetiue
(Cic.  Brml.  &  37),  or  the trial*  for  RepetiindBe,

AnUtoe,  Majeitu,  and  Peeulatui,  which,  when


Panicidia,  and  lor  thb  poipoia  ha  added  two  er
according  to  *ome  aooniili  lear  jmeton,  for  the
atcoimtt  of  Pomponiiu  and  of  other  writen  do  not
agree  on  ihii  point.  (Sneton.  QMamr,  41  ;  Dion
CaM.  iliL  51.)  On  thete  occMiou  the  Praetor
preaided,  but  a  body  of  jndice*  detannined  by  a
najoritf  of  Tste*  the  condemnatioD  ot  acqaitlal  of


■K.1


[JCD

The  Pnietot  whi

on  a  (dla  Cinilii  in  a  Trihnnat,  which  wai  that
part  of  the  Court  which  wai  appnpriatad  to  the
Fnelor  and  hii  aaaeaion  and  fneiide,  and  ii  op-
poaed  to  the  Sabaellia,  oe  part  occupied  by  the
Judice*,  and  otben  who  wen  inaent.  (Cic.  Brut.
Bi.)  But  the  Pnetor  could  do  mai^  toiniiterial
act*  onl  of  eonit,  or  11  it  HB«  ex[nued  e  iifiHO,  or
e>  aigmo  lav,  which  teimim  oppoied  to*  triiaiiali
or  SI  Hywioii  loco  :  for  mttanee,  he  could  in  cer-
tain cuea  gire  nJidity  la  the
when  he  wu  out  of  door*,  oa  on  hii  mad
UUi  or  to  the  theatre.  (Qaiiu,  L  30.)

A  penon  wbo  had  been  ejected  bam  the
eoold  recorei  bii  rank  b;  bemg  made  Pmetor
(Dion  Ca«*ini,  inril  30  ;  Plutanh,  Cietro,  17).
Sallnitin*  WH  made  piaetor  M  t^  t^v  fiaa>^r
irmXaitir.  (Dion  Cawlu,  iliL  5%)

The  Piulon  eiiilad  with  nuying  ni
a  late  period  in  the  Empire,  and  they  had  itill
jnriidictia.  (Cod.  7.  tit.  eZ  1.  17iG.  tiL71.  1.18.)

The  fonctian*  of  the  Pneton,  ai  aboie  ob-
aerred,  were  chiefly  judidal,  and  thii  article  ihonld
be  completed  by  a  rafeience  to  £dictuii,  IkpI'
aiDH,  Junai,J[iaiB[)icTio,  HlalBTKA'rlIa,Pttl>-
vlNl;u.  To  the  aulhoriiiei  referred  to  under
Edietam  may  be  added,  "  Die  PriUoiiBhen  Edicte
de(  Rtm^,  Ac,  tod  D.  Eduuil  Schndcr,  Weimi
1815."  [O.L.]

PRAETOTtIA  A'CTJO. [Actio.]

PRAETO'RIA  COHORS. [Pbaitoi
, PflAETORlA'NI,  K. ■  ■


PRAETORIANL  957

Caiorta,  a  lodj  of  tnopi  iiutitated  by  ADguMm
to  protect  hii  penon  and  hja  power,  and  called
by  that  name  m  imitation  of  the  Pratlana  Ot-
ion,  at  idect  tioop,  which  attended  the  peiaon  of
the  praetw  or  irenenl  of  the  Roman  army.  (Sal-
laH,  Oa.  60 ;  Ob.  an.  iu  11 ;  Caei.  BiO.  GaO.
'  iO.)  Thii  cohort  ii  Bid  to  hare  been  flrit
nned  by  Sdpio  Africanui  out  of  the  bravat
whom  be  exempted  from  all  other  datiea
„  •  penoD,  and  to  whom  he  gave
liifbld  pay  (Fealm,  i.  d.)  ;  bnt  eren  in  the  Mriy
time)  of  the  republic  the  Roman  genenl  loenii  to
have  been  attended  h;  a  lelect  tmop.  (LIt.  iL  3(1.)
In  the  time  of  the  civil  wan  the  number  of  the
praetorian  cohorti  wu  greatly  incrcaied  (Appiin,
"  "  Gv.  iii.  67,  t.  B)  ;  but  the  etlabliahmeut  of
at  a  Kiaiate  fone  wa*  owmg  to  the  policy
of  Aognito*.  They  originally  eomiited  of  nino
""--  An.  i«.  &;  Saet.  Ai^.  49)  or  tan  oohorU
Cau.  Iv.  24),  each  conetiting  ti  a  thousand
mm,  hone  and  foot  They  were  choaen  only
from  Italy,  chiefly  from  Etraria  and  Umbria,  or
ancient  ijatium,  and  the  old  coloain  (Tac  J.  o.
Hitt.  i,  S4),  but  afterward)  from  Macednua,
NoricBm,  and  Spain  alto.  (Dion  Caes.  lixiv.  3.)
itoi,  in  accardance  with  hi*  geneial  policy
lidi^  the  appearance  of  deepotiim,  nation^
only  three  of  the*e  cohort*  in  the  capital,  ind  di>-
pomd  the  remainder  in  the  adjacent  lowni  of
Italy.  (3Det..^M.  49.)  Tibuiui,  howcTer,  under
pretence  of  introdnmng  a  itrieler  diieipline  among
them,  aaaembled  them  ail  at  Rome  in  a  pennanent
amp,  which  wai  atroagly  fortified.  (Tac  Amt.
i..  2;8oet.7V4s-.37!  DionC™.lTiL19.)  Their
number  wa*  iiicnia*ed  by  Vitallini  to  liiteen  co>
herti,  or  16,000  men. (Tac  Hid.  il  93.)

The  Praetaiani  were  diitinguiabed  by  double
pay  and  eapecial  privil^ei.  Their  term  of  serriea
WU)  oruinally  fixed  by  Auguitui  at  twelre  yean
(Dion  Cut.  liT.  25),  but  wai  aft«wBrd*  iocKaHid
to  )ixteen  year)  ;  and  when  they  had  lerred  their
time,  each  Kildisr  receired  20,000  aeMerce*.  (Id.
It.  23 ;  Tac;  Am.  I  17.)  All  the  Praetariam
■eem  to  hare  hod  the  lame  nnk  a)  Uie  eentnrionl
in  the  iHolar  legioni,  linee  we  an  told  by  Dion
(It.  24)  Utat  they  had  the  priiilMe  of  carrying  ft
Titii  (^Sof  >  like  the  eentmioni.  The  Praetorian),
however,  loon  became  the  moat  powerbil  body  in
the  iCale,  and  like  the  janiuoriea  at  CooKantiiiople,
frequently  depoeed  and  elerated  emperon  accord-
ing to  thur  pleamre.  Eisn  the  moet  powerfnl
of  the  emperon  were  obliged  to  coort  thrir  laTonr ;
and  they  alwaye  obtained  a  liberal  danatioo  upon
the  acoMaion  of  each  emperor.  After  the  death
of  Perlinax  (4.  o.  193)  they  even  oSeted  the  em-
pin  for  lale,  which  wa)  nmhaiad  by  Didint

2,  Herodian.  ii.  7)  ;  but  i^jon  the  accewon  of
SeTcnu  in  the  aome  year  they  were  diibanded,  oa
account  of  the  part  they  had  taken  in  the  death  of
Peitinai,  and  bani*hed  from  the  ci^.  (Dion  Caaa.
Ixxif.  1.)  The  emperm,  howeret,  could  nut  dit-
penae  with  guard*,  and  accordindy  the  Plaeloriaiit
wen  reatored  on  a  new  modd  by  Seran^  and
iacnaacd  to  four  timea  their  ancient  somber.  In-
itead  otb«iig  leried  in  IioIt,  Hacedcaiia,  Nan-
com,  01  Spun,  ai  formeriy,  tbe  beat  aoldien  wen


w  draughted
that  the  [


[uaetodui  cobwta  now  formed
bnieat  tioop*  of  the  empin.  (Dion  Con.  liiir.
HerodiBtt,  ill,  13.) DiDclttiw  lednced  their  n


PRIinCEBIUS.


ben  and  aboluh«d  (heir  piTil^ei  (AunL  Viet,
(fa  Cbu.  39}  ;  thcj  were  itiU  Blloved  ta  nmain  at
Roma,  but  bad  dd  langsl  tba  maid  of  the  «nt-
nror'i  pcmn,  at  tw  iwnr  niided  in  thg  c^iitaL

Thair


it  by


A.l>.812,tl


e  eudialy  npinMud  bj  the  latter,  thur  ba-
ti£ed  camp  dnOvyed,  and  than  who  had  not
periihed  ia  the  badtle  botwen  ContamiDe  aad
Huenliaa  wen  diipanad  amng  the  legimu.
(Zoumu,  iu  17;  AonL  Vict,  da  Cam.  40.)  The
new  fbnu  of  Enrnnniait  enabliihed  bj  CamtwiHne
did  not  icqnira  nich  a  bod;  of  tnoiai  and  amBd-
ingly  they  veie  iWTet  nrjniL  ^e  mnfenr'g  body
giiarda  now  only  ouiited  of  the  Domeatici,  boiM
and  foot  under  two  couitn,  and  of  the  Pntactom.
(Cod.  la  tit.  17(  Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  21.}

The  cainmden  of  the  Piaetoriani  Twa  called
pBAiracTi  Pbixtouo,  >heaa  dn^  jowtrt,
icji.  ara  mcntianad  in  a  aapanta  artide.

PRA£TO'HIUM  vat  the  name  of  the  genaial^
teat  in  the  camp,  and  wu  ao  called  baeania  the
name  of  the  chin  lUmaa  magivtiala  vai  originall  j
piaetor,  and  not  conml.  [CiaTKA,  n.3t9.]  The
officen  irho  attended  on  the  Mnenl  in  the  Pra»-
briam,  and  ibrmed  hii  cnuKilof  war,  ircn  called
b;  the  Mme  nana.  (Ut.  izz.  S.}  Ilie  irord  wai
alee  uaed  in  iereial  oilier  tiKiiificatiooi,  vbieh
wen  deiiTed  from  the  ori|pDal  one.  Thoa  the
reeidana  of  a  gorenur  of  a  pcoTince  wai  oiled
the  PntftvwHt  (Cio.  a  Vwt.  it.  36,  *.  iB ;
8l  John,  zriil  39,  S3)  i  and  the  lame  name  waa
alio  giTon  to  any  la^  homo  or  palace.  (Snet
A^.  72,  QU.  37  t  Jot.  L  75  i  pnubria  eobpAA'
tamlam  dneniailia.  Dig.  £0.  tiL  16.  i.  1S&)  The
camp  of  the  Ptaatorian  troept  at  Bom^  aiid  &•■
quentlj  the  PiMtorian  Iroopa  ihenualn^  ware
called  I7  thia  name. [PixBraUAKL]

PAAEVABICATOB.  [Sbh

TU«PILI1NU«.]

PRA'NDIUM. tCosHA,  p.

PRBCA'RIUH. [Ihtikdic

PRELUM,  or  PRAELUM,  )•  a  part  of  a
pieaa  nied  bj  the  andann  in  making  wine,  <^re-
oil,  and  paper.  The  prata  itaelf  waa  qUled  tar-
eniar  1  and  the  pnlum  wai  that  part  wliicli  wai
«ther  acnwed  or  knocked  down  upon  tlie  Ihingi
to  be  yrcaied,  in  order  to  aqneos  out  the  liat
jnicaa.  (Serr.  ad  Virg.  Owrg.  ii.  343;  Yilmr.Ti.  9.)
Sometinwe,  however,  [nUun  and  tofcnlar  an  Died
ai  eonTBTtible  tdma,  a  pan  bong  named  inauad
of  the  whole.  Ai  te^ida  tho  preaama;  of  the
giapee,  it  ehonld  be  lemembeied  that  the;  were
fiat  ttoddoi  with  the  feet  1  Int  aa  thii  proeew  did
not  preu  out  all  the  joice  of  the  gnpea,  they  were
nfterwardi,  with  th«r  alalka  and  peeli  (wopi  4
/bUiaUi),  pu  under  the  prahmi.  (Vairo,  ^  Ri
Smd.  L  S4  ;  comp.  Colmn.  m.  88.}  Cato  (da  Rt
Rtat.  31)  adTiied  hii  conntrynwi  alwnji  to  make
the  jactum  of  the  wood  of  black  m^e  (fiarpaaa
aira).  After  all  the  ioics  waa  feieed  out  of  the
grapea,  the;  wen  soUected  in  cailu,  wal<r  waa
poDied  open  them,  and  after  ataoding  a  nigbl  the;
woe  pTMed  agva  The  liquor  thoa  obtained
wai  called  kn ;  it  wai  pnaored  in  cadca,  ~'
wai  uiad  aa  a  drink  Cv  workmen  daring
winter. (Vaim,  L  a.) Ra^eetii^  the  nae  of  the

Hdam  in  making  oliTe-eil,  and  in  !"■ — »—■ —

-' r,  aae  Plin.  H,  JV,  it.  1,  i:


dLAO.
PRUUCE'BIUa,  a  n


PBOBOLE.
I  and  dignilariei  under  tbe  latar  Ronaai
e,  i*  expbimed  b;  Soidaa  (1;  n)  to  be  tba  po^
in  hdda  tba  fint  mk  in  an;  thing. Tha

etjmolog;  of  the  word  !■  dmblfbl :  '■

llttt  a  penen  waa  «Uad  Pr{ '
name  itood  Grrt  in  the  wax
tablet  made  of  wa^  wbidi  01
aoDtof  an;  rank.

The  word  Piimieerioa  doea  not  ai
been  alwa;i  qqilied  to  tbe  panoB  who  WM  at  tfc*
bead  of  an;  dupai  Iweut  id  tba  itata  or  any,  htt
" ""  '  '  ■ ■Dthoril;  j


(Cod.  13.  tit  17.  a.  3},  AMoa.  (Cod.

11.  tiL9.a.3XJiraM)rM((Cod.l3.  tiL  38.  1.1)^

tMfianm  (Cod.  13.  tit.  7%  Ac
PRIUIPILA  RES. [BiaKCim,  p.  60S,  h.]
PRIHIPI'LUS. [EiDioiTiit,  p.  MS.J
PRINCEPSJUVENTU'TIS. [Efloiraa.]
PRINCEP3  BENATUa [SwATm.]
PRINCIPA'LIS  PORTA.  [Cabtka,  p.349.]
PRI'NCIPES. [EznciTDa,  i^  495 — 197.]
PRINCI'PIA. LExnclrna,  p.  SOS,  k]
PRIVILE'OIUM. [Lix,  p  —  •  -
PROAOOOE1A3 ORAPHl


ypu^),  a  pnaeentioa  aguut  tbooa  Hntaa  wka
perfoniad  tbe  dmading  oAcs  of  pmpa  or  pre-
coreia  {wfotrtmyt).  By  the  kw  of  SokD  the
I. — !...  — 7  i_ _.  j^  jrfyuTo  jsnffua)  waa


rfwuka  mptaywyiivf,  Amib.  «.  Tfmanit.  3&
ed.  St^). AoMwdiw  to  Plmanh  (SoL  23).  ■

>._  .•  ^ — ^  dmduni  war  impMed  for  iIm

To  reecocile  ibi*  alatemeirt  wiA

that  of  Atachinea,  wa  may  anniaa  witk  Plataa
(Pna,  md  Slag.  vol.  iL  p.  31S}  that  the  law
' '  - "'  '^  1  only  to  pftadtatea.

deatli  lor  taking  an


Plutarch  apjdW  only  to  pi
f  B;niBn  pot  to  death  lor  1
Olpithian  girl  to  >  brothel  (n^m  *^  tU^imni^


unpl.<rf.:


in  Dinirohna  (&  DmoA  OS,  ed.  St^j.
A  jHuaujilion  of  a  man  b;  Hncridaa  M  wpea-
■pr/if  ii  nientiaiied  by  Pi^ni  (iiL  37).  A  ebm
(preb^y  Uie)  wa*  btongfat  againit  Aapana  far
getting  freebom  women  into  her  home  fv  tbe  oaa
of  Peridee.  (PInL  PwiaL  33 1  Aiiitapb.  Adiarm.
S37.)  In  crauMOlion  with  thii  nbjeet  en  (be
HcTitmnnoi  Oalrll  and  pHTHOiua  ton
EliDraiBoN  OurnB.  (Meier,  AO.  Fnc  p,
332,)  [C.  R.  K.]

PRO'BOLE  (Tpe<e\1t),  an  accaatkn  of  a  eri-
mtnal  natnr^  pnrfored  befoee  the  people  cf  Athena
in  aieembly,  with  a  view  to  obtain  their  naetitn
far  bringing  the  charge  btkrt  a  jndidal  trOiimal.
It  ma;  be  command  a  thia  eoe  reaped  (na^  that
it  wai  a  prdiminaiy  alep  to  a  mare  (brmal  tM)
wiUi  oar  applicatio  '"  "  ~'  '"'  '  '
ihongh  in  regard  li
ceeding  iben  ii 1

wpa^B^ii  waa  naerred  ftr  thoae  caeca  n
pablie  had  mtifaiad  en  injury,  or  idwn^  (hai  tha
ftatioa,  powar,  or  (nflaewe  of  tbe  deUnqncat,  the

die  ordinary  way  withoal  befaig  aathotiMd  1^  a
rata  of  the  Miertngn  aaambly.  la  (Ua  famt  it
diffoed  from  the  ilaarfflJa,  that  in  the  faottr
the  people  w«e  eallad  npon  either  to  [joiiauw
Bnal  judgment  or  to  direct  eeme  peculiar  metllad
,of  tridf  whorwin  tha  *fe«aAi|,  aftnthajwdf.


e  object  and  mode  of  n-
mneh  reacmUaaea, IIm


PROBOLB.
■aot  tt  At  tmnitij,  tbe  putlet  pncwded  b>
W*l  fn  tb*  wad  mMHWt. Tb«  court  Mace  wbon


mj  ififttnt,  hnranr  inflDtDCM  tbey  nught  m
kj  tha  fiiidmlltiMm  of  tba  pawl*,  wcnoMirDa
I^ll  ooapalnoB  to  aUd*  bf  thnr  dednoa ;  and
n  Dm  otber  band  it  k  nat  intprotnUe  lUt  if  tba
paopla  nftusd  to  gin  jndgiiiBiit  in  faTow  of  tlis
CMnpkiiiul,  li«  mubt  ttill  umuiod  uaiut  hii  ad-
ytamij  bj  •  Ypa^  oi  ■  pmau  actioo,  aeeotding
to  tlw  Baton  «f  the  (MO.  lF]Mb»r,  Ptob,  mni  KL
Td.  i.  p.  183.)

Tba  <aoea  to  wUcIi  tlia  vpoCgA^  wu  aDpUcd
inn  oMoplunta  againtf  DMgiitnitn  Sw  official  nii-
eonduet  or  OfDnarim;  againat  tboaa  nbl"
bmo*  and  ■UeUetmaken  win  wna  ailed
^livTW  ;  aaaiiut  iIhbo  who
•t  tbo  idigjoni  fstifala  |

Incvil'^n^icn  eiliibhod  _ ...

(rlaipoc.  and  Soidai,  a.  ■.  K«r«x«p*m'ia  g  PoUm,
liii  46  [  Anek.  A  AIl  Zoo.  47  i  laoo'.  npi
bnl:  S44,  ad.  aiaidi.)

WitiiwBaettaB^tatiBta^  Bclillmaim  (ibO»Ml.
e.  3S1)  tkmka  tbat  tin  apofiAal  could  only  ba
Mno^t  affunat  tkoa  at  tlioH  twixipfrltu  wiieh
watBbddattlMfintnvJaAuXiKlain  enryPrj-
tanoa,  urbva  tlw  people  iaqoind  into  th«  cuidnct  of
■BagktiMaa,  with  a  view  to  continna  tbem  in  office

- ' -* " ■ - An


aann)  coold  aot  procaad  ta  the  iwixiip"—^  ex-
eept  m  the  enplant  <iipaC»x4)  of  tone  bdindoal;
tbe  danld  n^iMMe  ma  afiafwaria  hmgbt  to
trial,  if  tba  *«c««ar  tbaa^  pn^Mi  to  pnaocnle  the
mattat  fartkw.  Thate  xppma,  bowvrar,  to  ba  no
■nthori^  fot  iliniliBg  the  v^oW  ag^ut  magi-
■mta  to  tbeae  particalar  occxiana ;  and  other
wtiten  have  sot  ^reed  vitb  ScbUniiiin  on  ihii
uint.  (PlaBaz,  Pna.  imd  SI.  -rol.  I  p.  3»6  i
Maicr.^a,  JVDa.p.S71.>

Ab  »— t**  of  a  wfttaKi  a^ioM  Sjcophanla  la
tbat  whidi  tbe  peopla,  dituwemg  too  taU  their
cirar  in  potting  to  daUh  tba  fCDuali  who  ^uned
the  battle  of  Aipnowt^  dinetad  to  be  bnoght
Bgaimt  tlieir  acenaan.  (Xm.  HtlL  L  7.  |  39.)
Anotfaar  team  in  Lyriai  (e.  Aaorat.  15S,  ed.
Steph.),  when  the  word*  rvJUU^Chiv  ftrvrn  nl
if  T^  t<W  aol  ''  TJ  iuEBimipIv  nwo^orrfai
KKriynrit,  deeorilw  tha  coorae  of  {mceeding
in  thii  netbad  of  froaacntion.  (SchUnuuiii,  (^
Oil  p.  334.)

Tboie  who  wnked  tlia  public  minea  daudea-
tiDely,  and  thoaa  who  wen  guilty  of  paenladon  or
embeaaleaent  ot  the  pablie  DHOey,  wen  liable  lo
a  wpa<*\4.  A  taoe  oiF  anbeialeiBcat  ii  refened  to
by  DeaHMhoiu  e.  MU.  584.  (BdUimann,  L  e.  j
Plaua.  Pm.  ihIJI.  toL  L  p.  SSI.)

Bm  the  wpflafti  which  baa  bec^  moat  cele-
brated, owing  to  the  ipeeeh  of  Donoathenei  againt
Haidiaa,  >a  that  which  vai  broogbt  for  miibeba-
noor  at  paUk  featifalL  We  learn  bum  the  lavi
dtM  in  that  ipeei^  (SI7,  518,571)  that  irpe<»Aj)J
w«n  aqoined  agaiaat  ainr  petaona  who,  at  the
Dimjaian,  Thaigalian,  oi  EleanuiaB  fettinl  (and
tbe  nma  eBactment  waa  jnobaUy  eilaaded  to
Dtlivfeativtla),bBdheengiiil^of  nch  an  ofhoce
aa  would  GUI  within  tbe  deaoiption  of  bMiu
wfk  Itftir,  A  riat  or  diatnrbanca  during  tba
emmmt,  an  aMaelt,  or  othei  i^tom  iniult  or  ont-
1  npoD  any  of  tba  perfonnrn  or


by  legal  pi

upon  the  ipi

of  the  feiti  _,

be  a  pniiuiation  of  ila  udity,  and  to  aobfect  Iba
oAnder  to  tha  penaltiei  of  theae  iMotca. Fcr


wai  to  be  nude  b  ....
Piylanea  (i  «.  the  Pnedri),  wbo  were  to  bring  tot-
ward  tha  charge  at  an  BMambly  to  be  brid  laoQ
after  the  ftatinl  in  the  tbeoln  at  Dimynii.  Tbe
dcfeodant  waa  to  bo  ptoduoad  beSm  tbe  aaaembly.
Both  partlea  were  beard,  and  then  tha  peiqile  pn-
seeded  to  Tota  by  aluw  of  baud*.  Thue  wbo
nted  in  &T0ur  of  tbe  pmaecntion  ware  Mid  (cara-
XatpoToniv,  Iboae  who  wen  agiinat  it  iraxtifa-
nmv.  The  eompUinant  wu  Mid  wpatiXXtatm
rir  itutavrra,  and  tha  people^  if  Huj  omdaDnad
him,  rpnUTOTMiinu.  (Demoatlua  Jfid.fi7B,i8&
58e.)

SoBM  diflenlty  baa  aiiiMi  In  enJalnmg  the  Ibk
lowing  wnda  in  lb*  law  abaTo  nfettad  t«;  —  ria
wpawUt  vapotiWrMnv  tnu  ftv  /di  hmriapiwm
Anr.  Plalsar  (AoaMrf<lnd.L  B.S84)  and
'■  "  thatbytbaaa


(i<t  Ctaw  p.  3S8)  aipHiaa  thai  ,  __
wccda  the  Prytnaa  an  ctoaanded  (a  bring  befim
tba  people  tbMo  aownlaiiita,  for  wbidi  NtubetiMi
baa  not  baiai  Made  b;  tha  afftedw  (a  tba  praea
enliB ;  toA,  lo  duv  that  a  eomjaMaiaa  woDld  ba


legil,  natMr  ra&n  to  DcmoatkaMa,  e.  Mid.  861,
COS ;  to  which  we  mar  add  Iba  dreamMance  that
DeBoathawa  la  Mid  to  una  canpnoioed  hiaehaq^
VtautMvdliateaMtaiaf  mgoey.  Haier  (j<aL
ftsA  p.  ST£)  enlaiaa  itthnt:  that  the  Piytanea
(or  ratha  Praedil)  wan  to  being  bafbn  the  peocla
all  tbe  wfittK^  anapl  thoaa  cf  a  trUbg  cba*
ncler,  fis  whicb  thaj  wve  Aanuahn*  anipowend
to  impoM  a  Ana.  (Aa  to  Iba  power  of  fining  aea
.^(t.  Pra&p.  M.)  If  we  BDppaae  tbe  complaint  to
take  tha  name  of  wpofoXA  npco  ila  being  piaaautud
to  the  Proadii,  tbe  expraarisn  imwriaiurii  wpattKi
will  caoae no difficalty  I  ibraillaqv  rlmraigniflea
>paytl ■  -  ...  -


i*i€Mir,  any  more  than  if  .
other  nae.  Perhapa  then  it  mon  fores  in  another
objeetiaD  n^ed  by  Plainer,  to^  that  (accndiiis  M
thia  inlBpcelatioD)  tba  not  bringing  tbe  eaae  bdna
the  aaaembly  ii  made  to  depaad  on  tbe  Hcm-p^
mat,  and  not  (u  nigbt  ban  been  eipaeted)  on
the  tJg^oMlAM  of  tbe  too.

The  people  .bating  given  thor  acalaice  lor  the
f  uaaention,  the  caae  w«t  to  ba  bnogfat  into  tha
coDR  of  Heliaca.  In  certain  eaaea  of  a  aofiooa
naton  the  dafgndant  might  be  reqnired  to  giTe
bafl  for  bii  appeamnce,  or  (in  de&nlt  thereof}  go
to|>iiDn.  (Meier,  .^B.  Ave.  p.  376.)  Tba  penona
on  wbcn  derolTcd  tiie  irfltorla  iunuTwfw  were,
aceoiding  to  Pollux  (yiii.  87),  the  Theamothetaa.
Meier  (T  c)  tbinka  thia  wmld  depend  on  the
natoro  of  the  canai^  and  that  opon  a  charge  tta  the
pn&nalion  of  ft  featiTal,  tba  co^ninnee  nroold  b».
long  toioebof  tbe  three  anpanor  aicbooi  Mbad
tba  inpainteDdeMa  thereat  Thir  would  (on
doibt)  fbUow  from  tht  ordinary  principlea  of  Atb»-


860  phobouli.

D[>uncB  thoii  Tudkt  on  the  guilt  of  tbe  partf ,  tnd
to  HKn  the  pmJ^,  vhich  might  be  death,
onJj  ■  pecaniu;  fine,  aonsdrng  to  their  dticnt
Tbe  trial  (it  uemi)  wu  itlei^ed  vhh  no  riik  to
the  ptDiecutot,whonicoiMideredb>  proceed  tmd
the  lathoritf  of  the  popiilar  decree.  (Meier,  <<
Pne.  p.  277.)  [C  H.  K.]

PROBOULEUHA  (*fw<>£\nvia}. [BoULB,
p.  210,  b.J

PROBOULI  (wpigmMi),
to  Euij  petiotii  who  are  appainted  to  coninll  at  take
meuurea  for  the  benefit  of  the  people.  The*,  the
delefntee  who  were  lent  by  the  tirelTe  Ionian
citiee  to  attend  the  Panionian  council,  and  deliberate
On  the  afiain  of  tbe  confsdna^,  were  called  *p^
tnuKn.  (Hand.  tL  7.)  So  wen  the  deputie*  irait
by  tbe  Hieiai  Qreek  itatei  to  atteud  the  congrcB
at  the  Inhmni,  on  the  occaaioD  of  the  Moend  Fer-
■ias  iniBiiou(HBrDd.')iL  172);  and  al»  the  eu-
voyi  whom  the  Gneki  agreed  to  tend  annually  to
PUtaoL  (Plutarch,  Jriii.  21.)  The  word  i«  al»o
nied  lilce  niia^iXami,  to  denote  an  oligaichiod
body,  in  whom  the  govemment  of  a  italB  waa
Teited,oc  who  at  leeateierciaedacontndling  power
a>er  the  lenate  and  impDlai  auemblioi.  Such  were
the  >ixty  lenatan  of  Cnidui ;  and  a  •imilar  body
•ppeara  to  have  eiiiled  at  Hegus,  where,  althougli
democracy  joeTaJled  at  an  eaiiiec  period,  the  go-


of the  I


I  oliguchical  before  the


lcnLTDl.i.pt2.p.91  ;3ch(fa>iaiin,ila^.jir,fwU,
p.  eZ.)  A  body  of  men  called  wpJCaHAai  wtie  ap-
pointed at  Athma,  after  the  end  of  the  Sicilian  war,
to  act  aa  a  committee  of  public  nfe^.  Thueydidei
(TiiL  l)cslli  them  hfxh*  rawrptiriirriftir  ij-ip&r,
oTru^i  wtfj  tA*  wapirrmr  bi  or  nupii  $  rpttou.


of  any  concerted  plan  for  OTertuning  the  conititu-
tion,  ii  doubtfuL  The  oUeniible  object  at  Isut  wu
different ;  and  the  msiuret  which  they  took  for
deteuding  their  eonntry,  and  proaecnting  the  war,
appear  to  hare  been  pmdent  and  Tigorooa.  Theif
authority  did  not  lait  much  longer  than  a  year  ;
for  a  ysBi  and  a  half  afterwarda  Pitauder  and  hia
Btlleaguea  eitabliihed  the  council  of  Poor  Unndied,
by  wtuch  the  democracy  wu  arerthrawn.  (Thocyd.
(iiL  67  :  Wachiinath,TaLLpt.Zp.  197.)  The
firit  itep  which  had  been  talieii  by  Kiander  and
hie  pony,  imt  to  pwiure  the  election  of  a  body  of
men,  called  (irrwio^Ii  «tToit(>dT0p»t,  who  were
to  draw  np  a  plan,  to  be  lubmitted  to  the  people,
for  remodelling  the  conitituliDn.  Thncydidei  nyi
they  were  ten  in  number.  HarpocralioD  (t.  e.
SuTTfnf  III)  citei  Aodrolion  and  Philochorai  ai
hanng  (tated  that  thirty  wcro  choien,  and  adda,
'O  St  9avKvil^t  tAv  tima  iinntiiirtvo*  ninv  rmr
Vfttaikm.  Tbii  and  the  language  of  Snidai  (f.ti.
npilm\oi)  hare  led  SchOnvum  to  conjectnre  that  the
tpMaaXM  were  elected  sa  cir/ypei^is,  and  twenty
more  peraoni  aeaodaled  with  them,  making  in  all
tbe  thirty  mentioned  by  AndnMJon  and  Philochonu.
(Jat  jar.  pM.  ISI.)  Otheta  have  thought  that
the  rvyypo^ir  of  Thucydidea  hare  been  ccn-
faunded  by  giamniBriana  with  the  thirty  tyranti,
who  were  fint  eboaen  ol  Tail  TOTpisiii  rifiaut
jvyip^wm  lot  >t>  fakenigimn.  (Xen,  HilL
il  S.  g  2  t  Ooeller,  ad  nme.  riv.  67.)  Theae
AthetUan  >pjCBt■^M  areallnded  to  by  Ariitophanea
in  die  l^tittrala  (167).  which  woi  acted  the  jev


PBOCONSUL.

after  the  Sicilian  defeat,  and  by  Ljnu,  e:  EmloA.
126,  ed.  Sleph.  [C.  R.  K-l

PROCHEIROTO'NIA  (irpoxiifOfwa).

[Boui.«,p.211,a.]

PROCLE'SIS  {rptAveu).  IDllwiktam,
p.  398,  b.]

PROCONSUL  it  an  officer  who  acta  in  tke
place  of  a  couul  without  holding  the  id


adviMble  lo  pmlong  tte  impedim  (im
ri9ari))ofQ.Pablilin>Phila,wbo«etetaiii  Diuma
would  have  bean  folbwed  by  the  leai  of  mt  of
the  adTantagea  that  bad  been  gained  in  hia  am-
paign.  (Ut.  viiL  33,  26.) The  power  of  pcooanaal


in  the  comitia  fbr  election
mil.  28,  nir.  13.)  Hence  whenenir  a  pneon-
inl  led  hia  army  back  to  Rome  for  the  porpoae  of
holding  a  triumpfa,  the  imperium  (m  wti)  waa
eepedally  granted  to  htm  by  the  people,  trhid
waa,  of  eoutae.  Dot  neccaeary  when  a  coiuni  tri-
umphed during  the  year  of  hia  offiock  Liry  (iii,
1),  it  ia  true,  mentiaBa  men  appointed  with  pn-
ctmaubu  power  at  a  much  earlier  period  than  t^
lime  of  Puhlitina  Philo  j  bnt  there  >•  tUa  differeacc,
that  in  thia  eariier  inatance  the  pnconinlar  pawar
ia  not  an  imptriiim  frvrtgattm,  but  a  freah  ap-
pointment aa  Dommander  of  the  reaore,  mni
Niebuhr  {Hiit.  ofBoau,  iL  p.  123)  jnatly  miBrka
that  Liiy  here  probably  appliea  the  phiaae^ofcy  of
a  much  Inter  time  to  the  oommander  of  the  reaerve  ;
and  thi*  ii  the  more  probable  aa  Dionyiini  (ii.  12}
apeaka  of  thia  imirrpanr/ii  at  haxing  been  ap-
pointed by  the  conanla.  N  ineloen  yian  after  the
pneODsulabip  of  Pnblilina  Philo,  SOS  ■.  c^  Utt
(ii.  42)  relatee  that  the  aenale  alooe,  and  without
a  plebiKitum,  prolonged  the  imperium  of  the  conau]
Q.  Fabiui  Maiimua  Ruilianui ;  but  it  i«  annifeat
tbat  hoe  again  Liry  tiaiufen  a  later  inatilntion  Is
B  time  when  it  did  not  yet  eiitl ;  for  il  waa  ailj
by  the  lei  Maenia  (236  B.  c.)  that  the  iiaiBta  ol^
tained  the  right  to  prolong  the  impetiom.

When  the  number  of  Roman  ptonncea  bad  ba-
come  great,  it  waa  cnitamaiy  br  the  conaola,  who
during  the  latter  period  of  the  repoblie  tptat  tb«
year  of  their  coniulahip  at  Rome,  lo  undertake  at
ita  cloae  the  conduct  of  a  war  in  a  pnTioce,  or  ila
peaceful  adminiitiatiofi.  (Cie.  de  Mrf.  Hear.  iL  3  ;
LiT.  iiiiiL  2£  i  Cic  orf /biB.  TJii.  5.  13.)  Then
am  Hme  eitnordinwy  taaca  on  tecoid  in  which  a
man  obtained  a  praiiDce  with  the  tille  of  pnconanl
without  haling  held  the  conaniibtp  before.  The
£nt  caie  of  thii  kind  occocnd  inB.r.211,  wbca
Toung  P.  Oinieliui  Sdpio  waa  cnoled  procaaiKil  of


iU;..


. 18.)


PSODiaiUH.
Cic  it  Lig.  i.  20.)  lUtpeding  the  pawm  and
jurudicdoD  of  tha  procoiiauli  ia  the  prorincet,  Ke
Pbovihcu.

After  Ihs  idminittnlion  of  the  empi
newlj  ngulated  bj  Coiutantine,  parU  of  certain
4io«ia  w««  unda  the  adminutzatian  of  pro-
Bonull. Tfaui  ■  put  of  the  dio««  of  Alia,  callei'

of  Maoedouia,  and  the  comulnr  pn>TiDca  in  th
diMCM  of  Africa,  wen  ftorerned  bj  prooBiHili
(WaUer,  OmoUdUi  dtt  Kimttdiim  RediU,  %  366,
2d  edit.)  [L.  S.J

PROCUBITO'RES.  {EzRBcrrUB,p.G03,a.]
PKOCURA'TOR  ii  the  penon  vho  Ins  the
management  utanj  biuinew  oommitted  to  him  b;
another.  Thui  it  ii  applied  to  a  person  who  muD-
taini  or  defendi  an  action  on  behalf  of  another,  or,
aa  we  ihonid  my,  an  attorney  [Actio]:  to  n
iteicatd  in  a  hmily  [Calculatob]  :  to  an  officer
in  the  pntvioca  belonging  to  the  Caeiar,  who  at-
tended to  (he  dntin  diKharged  by  the  quacator  in
the  other  proiinca  [Provihcu]:  to  an  officer
engaged  in  the  adniniitratian  of  the  Fiicni  [F»-
cna] : and  to  luioui  other  olGcsi  iindei

PRODI'OIUM  in  ita  wideit  acceptatioi
DMei  any  lign  by  which  the  god)  indicated  ti
a  fbtnre  erent,  whe^er  good  or  evil,  and  tht
dtidea  omeni  and  auguriet  of  every  description.
(Virg.  .iiM.  T.  BB8;  Smiu*,  arf iie. ,■  PUn.  H.N.
xi.  37  ;  Cit  h  Vtrr.  W.  *8.>  It  ia,  howerer,
Dennally  employed  in  a  more  reatrieted  aenae  to
dgntf^  M>me  itnuige  incident  or  wonderjiil  appear-
J  Bitppoaed  to  herald  the  approach
and  happened  imder  aoch
■mncca  aa  u  MiiMNUiea  that  the  caLunity
poiding  via  a  whole  eommiuiity  or  natic
than  priTite  indiTidiiali.  The  word  may
aidoed  aynony]
(Mteim  "Qui
trant,  pnadieu


i'  miiibmiDe,  n


la  anim  oateodunt,  portendunt,  i
' )  oatento,  porlenta,  monnra. ,
<Cic.  lU  Dn.  i  42.)  It  ihould
be  obaerred,  howerer,  that  pndigiim  moat  be  de-
rived from  ago,  and  not  from  diai,  ai  Cicero  would

Since  prodigiei  were  viewed  aa  direct  inanifeata-
tiont  of  the  wrath  of  heaven,  and  vaminga  of
earning  Tcngeance,  it  wa>  believed  that  thia  i
might  be  apptued,  ud  coiiie<;uently  Ibia  v
ance  averted,  by  prnyen  and  sutificei  duly  offered
10  the  oflended  potvera.  Thia  being  a  matter  which
deeply  conceined  the  public  welrare,  the  neceiaBiy
ritei  were  in  ancient  times  regularlj  perfbrmed,
Older  the  direction  of  the  pontiticee,l^the  connda
before  they  left  the  city,  tha  aolemnitiea  being
called  procKnitio  prodigiontn.  Althoogb  from  the
very  naturo  of  the  oanirrenoea  it  wai  imponible  to
mlidpate  and  provide  for  eveiy  conting«icy,  we
have  reaaen  to  know  that  rule!  for  expiation,  np-
fdiisble  to  a  great  variety  of  caaea,  were  laid  down
in  the  OtttM/ana,  HieLUri  Riluala,  and  other  aocred
booka  of  the  Etmrianf  (Cic  d»  Div.  i.  33  ;  Mliller,
Brndur,  TiA.i.ff.3S,  36,  343,  ToL  ii.  pp.  30,  SB,
123,  ),tl,  Jt6, 337),  with  the  cootenU  of  which  the
Roman  pfieati  were  wrll  acquainted  ;  and  when  the
pndigy  waa  of  a  very  terrible  or  unprecedented
nature  it  wai  Dinal  to  aeek  connsel  from  aome  re-
nowned Tuican  leer,  from  the  Sibylline  hooka,  or
even  bom  the  Delphic  oracle.  Prodigiet  were  fi«-
■juently  ntfhred  to  paaa  nnheeded  when  they  were
' >  have  no. direct  referanee-to  pnblie


961

iSura,  u,  for  example,  when  the  nmrrel  nported
had  been  obtrrved  in  a  private  maanon  or  in  aome
toHTi  not  eloecly  connected  with  Rome,  and  in  thia
caae  it  waa  nid  am  ttueipi,  hot  a  ngulu  record  of
the  more  important  waa  carefully  pfeMTved  in  the
AnnaU,  aa  may  be  aeen  from  the  numeroua  detail*
dllpened  thrnighout  the  extant  booka  of  Livy,
(See  Liv.  iL  42,  liL  10,  iiiv.  44,  xxxrii.  .'l,  xliiL
13  i  MUller,<fu£%rHter,voLii.  p.19]  ;  Hartang,
dia  RtUgiim  dar  Aoner,  vol.  L  p.  96  ;  and  for  an
intereatuig  eiMy  on  the  ilbatrntionB  of  Nntural
Hiitory  to  be  derived  Iroci  tha  recorda  of  ancient
piodigiea,  Heyne,  QpaM  Aead.  loLiiL  pp.  I9B,
26S.)  [W.R.]

PHO'DOMUS. [Donus,  p.  42.S  b  j Te»i-

Pr'oDO'SIA'  (TpsSoirln).  Under  thia  term
vma  included  not  only  every  apeciea  of  treaAon,
bnt  alao  avDiT  auch  crime  aa  (in  the  opinion  of  tha
Oreeka)  would  amount  to  a  betraying  or  deaenioa
'  1  man'a  roontry. The  higheat

..  .- - _  the  attempt  to  eatablbh  a  do-

potiam  (tu|Xi»'ii),  er  to  uibtert  the  conatitutioa
ir  T^r  vDAiTiioi'),  and  in  demooacie*
'  Tir  l^/Aiiir  or  ri  vAqOai. Other  kinda


nportant  tmit,
a  desertion  of
ly  other  act  of


a  betraying  of  u
army,  or  wrtreaj


fleet,  army,  or

lobediencfl  of  ordf

^,  31  breach  of  dulj  ^  _._

(Demoith.  pro  Cor.  243,  c  Zapf.  4B1,  e.  Timae.
743,  e.  Tmoli.  1204,  pro  Cor.  JUtrarcA.  IS30  ;
Lye.  c.  Agar.  130,  131,  ed,  Steph. ;  Ljcurg.  a.
Ltoer.  155,  ed.  Steph.)  It  would  be  n  betiayal  of
delude  the  people  by  ftilw  intelli-
uiiea  ;  or  to  diHbey  any  ipecial  de-
that  (for  inatance)  which  prohibited
the  eiportation  of  ansa  or  niTal  atom  to  Philip,
and  that  which  (after  Philip  bad  taken  pcsieuion
if  Phocia)  forbade  Athenian  citiiena  to  pasa  tha
light  out  of  the  c-:ty.  (Domoatb.  c.  Zapt.ie?,  498,
pro  Cor.  S3S,  dt  Fait.  Ltg.  433.)  But  not  only
' '  '  icfff  of  disobedience  or  treachery  amount
of  ■^eBofffn,  but  also  the  neglect  !»
e  active  duties  which  the  Gneks  in
geoeral  expected  of  every  good  citi>«D.  (^wnrdiOi
in  battle  (ttiAla)  would  be  an  instance  of  thia
kind  i  ao  would  any  breach  of  the  oath  taken  by
the  i^jfiot  at  Atheni  j  or  any  line  of  conduct  for
which  a  charge  of  disaSection  to  the  people  (/oira-
3T};ua)  might  be  succeaafully  maintained.  (Xen.
QfTo/L  Yi.  4.  S  14,  vL  S.  g  27  ;  Eurip.  Ploaia.
1003;  Andocc^fcA.  3U,  ed.  Steph.;  Lycurg.  a.
/.«oc.  157,  ed.  Steph. ;  Demoath.  pro  Cor.  212.)
Thwi,  we  iind  persona,  whose  ofience  vaa  the  pro-
pouuding  muoDStitutioniU  lawa,  or  odviaing  bad
neasuiea,  or  the  like,  charged  by  their  political
ipponenta  with  an  attempt  to  overthrow  tbe  con-
ilitaiion.  (Demoath.  wf,il  ounoj.  170;  AeK:h.
:.  TimarA.  I,  0.  Ott.  82,  ed,  Steph.  ;  Lya  ^n>
PoV.  ISfli  ed-  Steph.)  Of  the  facility  with  which
'  '  ges  might  be  made  at  Athens,  oapecially
of  political  excitement,  when  the  moat
cillaens  were  liable  to  be  suspected  of
plots  against  tue  state,  fiistory  aflbrda  abundant
proof ,'  and  Qreek  history,  no  leaa  than  modeni,
'lowa  the  danger  of  leaving  the  crime  of  treason
ndefined  by  the  taw,  and  to  be  interpreted  bj
idgea.  (Ariatoph.£^.236,  475,  862,  Vttp.t&\
953;  Wacbamuth, /faO.  .iit.  ToL  i.  pL  iL  p.  154.
roL  ii,  pt.  L  p.  179.) One  of  the  moat  remarkabl*


963  PR0DO3IA.

triali  foi  eonttnictiTs  tnuiin  >1  Athena  wai  tin
of  Leocntei,  vbo  left  lEie  cil;  kfler  the  defeat  ■
Cbmenmeta,  and  mi  pr««uted  fa;  Lycurgu*  f'
dcnertiim  of  hii  omuli;. The  ipeeth  of  Lfcnrgu
ii  pmerrcd  to  tu,  and  ii  a  gwKl  tpeennen  o'  '-'-
eloqumce. The  &cti  of  the  ate  ire  aUted
leo,  ed-Stepb. The  Datun  of  the  charge  mi
Men  fnm  nrkni  expreoiDna  of  the  omtai,  lu
irpeSd/s  Tobt  rnbi  iral  rii Rif ul  ria  4r
rituHf  ftvirfu  (U7},  /i4  3«l«4<ru  tbii  Tirrpleit
hpiHi,  ^TnraAiinbr  rllr  ir^ir  (US),  sC  ffv>i<t-
•AiifiJni sUtv  fli rilr  Tni c^AtiaT iwr^plar
(IS3),  ^^jur  riv h-lp  rqi  nrpiSiii  sCrSiiFor
(154),  and  the  like. The  deTence  of  the  accmed
waa,  that  he  did  not  leaTe  Athena  with  a  tiaitor-
oDi  mtention  (_M  ffioSva'ff ),  hut  for  the  purpoui
•t  tisde  (M  Jftropif). (See  Aignmen^  and  p.
IBS.)

The  ordinuy  method  of  proceeding  agiJnat  thoae
who  ware  accused  of  Iieaion  or  tieaaanable  pnt-
Haa  wai  hy  itrtyytJa,  aa  in  the  cate  of  Lee-
cnilea.  ( Pollux,  liiL  £S.)  Id  aoms  tatea  a  yfo^
might  ha  laid  before  the  Thennolhetae.  (DemMh.
aSlepillV-)  Ws  read  of  an  old  iaw,  by  which
the  jnriadictjon  in  triali  for  high  traaon  waa  giTcn
to  the  archon  3air'A><i.  (.lStKT,Atl.Fn)e.ji.sa.)
But  it  could  hardlj  be  enected  that  in  a  Greek
dlj  Btate  offence!  would  alwaja  he  praaeculed  b£-
cording  to  the  forma  of  law  ^  and  we  find  TBjimu
imtancu  in  which  inagiitialea,  gmwrali,  and
othera,  took  a  lummaij  method  ibr  bringing
traiton  and  conipinlon  to  joitiee.  Thai  a  certain
penon,  named  Antiphon,  who  had  promiaed  Philip
to  bum  the  Athenian  araenal,  waa  aeited  b;  the
eonncil  of  Areiopagna,  and  aftsrwarda  pnt  to  the
tnrture,  and  condemned  to  doUh  by  the  peo^e.
(Deniorth.  pro  Car.  271  ;  Aeach.  e.  Ola.  8S,  ed.
StepL)  Ai  to  the  power  of  the  Areiopagna,  aee
fortner  Lyenrg.  o.  Leae.  1 M.  The  people  in  ai-
aembly  might  of  eonrae  direct  any  eiCraordinary
sieaanrea  to  be  taken  againal  anapected  penona,  aa
they  did  in  the  aSkir  of  the  Hennc*  huiU  (Thocyd.
Ti.  60, 61),  and  by  their  i^iftriia  might  inpenede
aren  the  fwm  of  a  trial.  So  tealful  were  the
Alheniani  of  any  attem|)t  to  eatabliih  a  tyranny
or  an  oligarchy,  that  any  penon  who  eeoMfini  fot
Buch  pBrp«e,  or  any  penon  who  held  an  office
nnder  a  goTetnment  which  bad  OTerthTown  the
conititution,  mif;hl  be  ihun  with  imsnnity.  Eveiy
eitiien  indeed  waa  under  an  obligation  to  kill  aach
a  penon,  and  for  ao  doing  wai  entitled  by  law  to
hononn  and  nwsrda.  {Andoc.  >£■  3fjnf.  12,  1 3,
ed.  Steph. ;  Lya.  ajyi.  iraToX.  iveX.  172,  ed.
Steph.)

The  nwular  puniahment  appointed  by  the  law
for  meet  kindi  of  treaaon  appeari  to  haTe  been
death  (Xen.  iYeUta.  i.  7.  |  32  ;  DeDmith.  pn
Cor.  S3a  ;  Lycuig.  e,  /joe.  US,  152,  ed.  StepL),
which,  DO  doubt,  might  be  mitigated  by  deOH  of
the  people,  aa  in  the  one  of  Miltiadei  (Hsod.  vi.
ISfi)  and  many  atheiB.  The  leia  heinoui  kindiof
WfoivfU  were  probably  pnniihed  at  the  diacrelion
of  the  canit  which  tried  them.  (Demoath.  g.  Tinaoc.
740.  a  Tboer.  1344.)  The  guoda  of  traitora,  who
■uffiH^  d<alh,  were  confiKSted,  and  their  boaaea
laied  to  the  groond  ;  Dot  were  they  permitted  to
be  buried  in  the  comitry,  but  had  thair  bodiea  oat
oat  in  iome  {ilacs  on  the  conltnea  of  Attica  and
Megan.  Thenfbn  it  waa  that  the  booei  of  The-
had  bean  eoodemned  for  trMioi,
om  and  bohed  aecntly  by  in


FROHETHEIA.

P>

liable  to  ihare  the  fate  of  their  anceator.  (Heoraia^
7%eH..Ja.  ii.2,lG;  PlUaa,  Pnx.  and  Kl^.  vA
ii.  p.32i  Meier,.i«.  J'rvcp.S41,iti  bim.Jamm.
pp.  11—13,  136.)  Traiton  might  be  p
againiE  even  after  their  death,  ai  we  have  a>
dona  in  modem  timea.  Thai,  tb*  AthsBiiiu  n>
aolred  to  pnaecute  Fhrynichna,  who  had  been  mat
active  in  letting  up  the  oligarchy  of  the  Foa
Hundred  (rhr  raiphw  nfirtir  wjwiegfni),  and
alio  to  mbject  hia  defeaden  to  the  ptmiihiiiait  of
traitora,  in  caae  of  a  GoDTietion.  Thla  waa  daw.
Jndgment  of  treaaou  wai  paaaed  ^auiat  Phiyni-
chua.  Hii  bonei  wns  dug  up,  and  ant  oat  of
Atlio  j  hia  defender!  pot  to  deiuh  ;  and  hia  mar-
derera  honoured  with  the  Gnedom  of  the  dty.
(Thuc.  Tiii.  S2  ;  Lyiiai,  c  Agar.  136  ;  Lyemg.  b,
i^mr.  164,ed.  Steph.)  [C,  R.  K.]

PROEDHI  (v^tpoi).  [BoDLi,  pp.310, 2U]

PROEI-SPHOHA lEiWHOBi.]

PROEISPHORAS  DIKE  (apotur^e^SlE,).
an  action  hronght  by  a  member  of  a  Synmioiia,  ta
RcoTer  a  tale  paid  on  accDunl  of  another.  Tbe
Symmoriae  being  lo  airanged,  that  tl
of  the  ticheit  men  wen  aalected  to  fwm
board,  mpoiaible  to  the  Mate  in  the  fii
for  the  collectioo  of  a  fropeny  tax  i
paaaed  a  decree,  in  caie  of  need,  cenusBi
to  pay  the  wh(da  tax  in  adfanoa.  Tbeae  thea
were  entitled  lo  be  reimburaed  bj  tbe  icnainiaj
nine  hundred  of  the  Symmoria^  and  eaeb  of  Ika
probably  had  a  certain  nomber  aM^oad  to  him  by
"■■-  Stnt^  for  that  potpoM  j  — ~""  "  ' "


e.  Piomiff.  1046,  t.
Polfd.  130(j.)  Thii  ciui^  like  othera  rdali^  M
the  pvperty  lax  and  the  trivarchy,  behaiged  to
the  juriidiclion  of  the  StralKi,  (Blickli,  /^U.
Earn.  o/Alieu,  pp.  450,  £36,  SSS,  3d  ed. ;  Heacr.
.da. /^w.  pp.  107,  MO.)  rCR-K.) ■

PROELIA'LES  DIES. [Dm.]

PRUBRO'SIA  or  FRUERO'SIAE  (>po<tpJr«
n'  a-funipairfai)  were  lacTificei  tor,  aoniding  ta
ether  writen,  a  fatiral)  ofTered  to  Demeter  at  tba
time  when  the  eeedi  wete  eown,  for  the  puipoae  of
obtaining  a  pleudful  harreit.  (Soidaa,  Hcayek,
E^moL  Hag.  aa.;  Airian  h  SficUt.  m.  21.)
ABOding  to  Snidaa  the  Atbeoiana  perioraed  tbia
iacri£ce  in  Ot.fi.  Ml  behalf  of  all  the  Qncki;  bnt
fram  all  the  other  aceoimta  it  woold  appear  ikst
the  Atheniani  did  ao  at  all  timea,  and  that  the  ja-
itanca  menliaiied  by  Suidaa  ia  oily  the  firit  dm*
that  inerDiia  were  ofiared  by  tbe  Albsuani  for
all  the  Qneka.  Ihxj  are  iwd  to  haye  been  iiMi>
tuled  by  the  command  of  aoma  emcla  at  a  tinai
when  alt  the  world  waa  aofiring  fom  acan.itj  v
from  a  plague.  (Said,  a  •.  Elpae'i^r^  ;  tUBpaia
Lycom.  Frxigm.  a.  MmmnxiL)  Il^S.]

PROFESTI  DIBS. [Dtu.]

PR0aAMEIA(a^<rT4>«<i)-  [HAnuMonDH,
P.7S7,  a.]

PROIX  (vrotE). [Dos.  p.  416-]

PROLKTA-RIL [Cimr.]

PROHETHEIA  (wp,,di»*f.\  a  tatiral  eela-
bnted  at  Athou  in  henmr  of  PriinMlliaiii  (X*-
uoph.  di  Aa  Pail.  ^HL  3.  |  4  ;  HarpoaML  a.  ■.

Aaiirit.) The  time  at  vhidi  it  vaa  id weil  ia

not  koowDt  bat  it  wan  «M  «(  llw  fit*  Attia  iMi


ntOFTLAEA.

nit,  vilid  wm  hsld  with  a  tanh-mee  In  tlie
Ccnmiciu  (Hupocrat.  Le.;  Schol.  ad  Ariilopk.
Adl  131  i  camp.  LtHrADiPHOBiA),  far  which
th>  gjimnnircht  had  to  mpplj  ths  youthi  fram
tba  gjnmuiL  Pnimelheiu  hinuclf  wai  belieTed
to  Ibtb  inititated  this  torch-race,  wheoce  he  wu
called  the  tORh-beaRr.  (Hjgtn.  Patt.  Aitr.  iL  Ifi  ;
Esrip.  PluKiim.  11S9  t  PU&ttnt.  FU.  Sopliiil.  ii.
30.)  Tha  lonh-nee  of  the  pTomelhaia  commenced
M  tin  MMsiled  altar  of  Pmoethtni  in  the  ac»-
demia  (fan*.  L  SO.  g  3  i  SchoL  nd  Sig*.  CW.  CaL
53),  or  in  tha  Carunkn*,  and  thence  tfap  Tontha
whh  their  tsrchM  need  lo  the  eitj.  (Welcker,
i>*>  Aadifl.  Tribg.  p.  ISO,  Ac)  [L.  S.]

PKOMIgSOR. [OBLiaATioHEfi,  p.  B17,  b.]

PROHNE'STRIAE  (vpufuVpui).  [Ma-
Taiiioinuii,ii.736,b.l

FROMULSIS. [CoiNi,  p.  307,  a.]

PROHUS. ICblx*  ;  Saavui.]

PRONA'Oa [Tbhplum.]

PRCNtlBAE,  PRO'NUBI.  [MATamo-
wirif,pp.74S,b,7«.a.]

PBOPHKTES,  PROPHETI&  [OniODi-UM,
p.  837,  a.]

PROPNIGE'UM. [BilKBi«.p.l92,h.]

PBOPRAETOR. [Paovmcii,]

PROPRI'ETAS. [DoBiltroM.]

PROPYLAEA  (irpwrf^iua),  the  entrance  to
•  temple,  or  lacred  encloure,  eonaitled  of  a  gate-
waj-  duiked  bf  boildingi,  whence  the  plninl  fonn
af  the  word.  The  Egypdan  temp1«  genonlly  had
uugnificent  ptopj/iaaa,  anuuting  of  a  pair  of  oblong
truncated  pfranidi  of  »lid  muoniy,  the  bcea  of
which  wsic  unlptDnd  with  hiengljpbici.  (See
Hood,  ii  e\  101,  121,  nud  other  putagei  ;  the
modem  worki  aa  Egyptian  antiqaltiet ;  the  Allot
to  Kuftler'i  EtmttgacUiditi,  lect.  1 .  p!.  fi.  Eg.  1 .)

In  Onek,  except  when  the  Egyptian  temple*
■re  Bpoken  of,  the  word  ii  f^enlly  uied  to
■vnily  the  entrance  to  the  Acrapolii  of  Alheni,
which  wai  the  lut  complsted  of  the  great  wgrki
of  archileetnrB  eiecnted


PROSCHIPTIO.


961


:r  the  adminiitralion


ildmg  01
,  437—


-132,  and  coM  SOIS
taleott.  The  name  of  the  architect  wm  Mneiktn.
(Pint.  Ft.  1 3  ;  ^nc  IL  1 3,  with  Pt^po'i  Notea  ;
Aiutoph.  KqtdL  1336  ;  Demoath.  iLi  Hep.  Ord.  28.
p.  174.  23,  ed.  Bekker;  llarpocrat.  Mii.  i.e.;
CK-dtOf-  it  17.)  The  edifice  waa  of  ths  Doric
Older,  and  preMoted  in  front  the  appeannce  of  a
heiattyla  portico  of  white  mBcblc,  with  the  central
mlereotnBuiiatica  wider  than  the  ml,  and  with
two  adranced  wingi,  containing  eharab«»,  the
Dcathem  ant  of  which  (thai  on  the  left  hand)  wu
adorned  with  pictorei,  which  are  fidly  deicribed
by  Panaaniaa  (i.  22.  M  *— 7),  and  among  which
were  worica  by  Poljgnotna,  and,  jBobably,  by
Prolonnei.  (See  Dia.  of  IKog.  t.vti.)  On  the
right  hand,  and  in  front  of  the  Fropylaca,  (tood
the  temple  of  Niie  Apttna,  and  clow  to  the  en-
trance the  rtatue  of  Henna  Frnpflatai;  and  the
Pnpglaea  themielTes  were  adorned  with  numeroua
itatnea.  (Pant.  £.  e.)  A  brood  road  led  atraight
fram  the  Agora  to  the  Propybua,  which  fbmied
the  ooly  enOBDce  to  the  Acropolii,  and  the  imme-
diate approach  to  which  wai  by  a  flight  of  itepa,
in  the  middle  of  which  there  «u  lefl
plane,  pBTed  with  Pentelic  marble,  aa
way  for  the  jsoeeuion*.  Both  ancient  i
wnten  hare  agreed  in  conaidering  the  Propylaca
m  fl^  «f  tlM  meet  pofect  worka  of  Grecian  an.


(For  fnller  deaeriptjoni  and  reitared  Tiewi,  lea
Stuart,  ii.  6 ;  Leake,  Topog.  e.  8  ;  Milller,  Ar-
aioof.  d.  Emit,  %  lOS.  n.  1,  3  i  and  a  bcantifal
eloTation  and  plan  in  the  .^  lira  to  Engler'a  Kwut-
fftiMMe,  KCt.^.  pLS.  GnlS,  13.}

The  great  temple  at  Eleuiia  had  two  acta  of
mailer  Guming  the  entrance  of  the
{Tipigo\iK),  and  the  greater,  of
urn  aaua.  i  ue  latter  were  an  exact  copy  of  th«
Athenian  prtgij/laea.  (MUller,  Lc  n. £.)  There
wero  alio  prrniylaaa  at  Corinth,  anrmonnled  by
two  chariot!  M  silt  branie,  the  one  carrying  Phaf-
thon,  and  tin  other  the  Snn  himaelf.  (Paua.  ii.  3,
9  2.)  [P.  S.]

PBORA. [Navih,  p.  78B,  a.]
PUOSCE'NIUM. [Thiath™.]
PROSCLE'Sia  (wpArifMinf). [DniJ
PROSCRIPTIO. The  *erb  pronriban  pro-
periy  lignifiei  to  exhibit  a  thing  for  aale  by  meana

I  gnat  many  pamgea.  Bnt  in  tlve  time  of
Sulla  it  aMumed  a  rety  difleiwit  meaning,  for  he
applied  it  to  a  mnmro  of  hi*  own  ioTenUon  (VelL
Pat.  iL  2B),  namely,  U  the  nle  of  the  property  of
thoae  who  were  pnt  to  death  at  hii  command,  and
who  were  themseliet  called  pmcr^'.  Tovaida
the  end  of  the  year  82  K  c  Sulla,  »Ctar  hia  retnm
from  Prseneite,  declared  before  the  amembly  of
the  people  that  he  would  improve  their  condition,
and  puniih  KTOely  all  thoae  who  had  (upported
ths  party  of  Marina.  (Appian.  B.Ci.  95.)  The
people  appear  tacitly  to  haTe  conceded  to  him  all
pover  which  he  wanted  for  the  eiecntion  of
leiign,  for  the  lex  Cornelia  de  proecriptiane  et
pioecriptii  waa  lanetioned  afterwarda  when  be  woi
made  dictator.  (Cic.  d*  Leg.  i.  1 5,  da  Leg,  Agr.
1  2,  &c  ;  Awian.  B.  C.  L  98.)  Thii  law,  which
laa  propoaed  by  the  interrex  L.  Valeriui  Flaccua
at  the  command  of  Sulla,  ii  umetimeg  called  lex
Cornelia  (Cie.  c.  Verr.  I  47),  and  lometimea  lex
"  leria.  Cicero  (jm  Bote.  Am.  43)  pretenda  not
know  whether  he  ahonld  call  it  a  lex  Cornelia
Valeria.  (Comp.  Schol.  Gronor.  p.  43fi,  ed.
OrellL)

Snlla  drew  np  a  liit  of  the  penoiu  whom  he
wished  to  he  killed  ;  and  thii  liit  woa  exhibited
m  the  forum  to  pnblic  inipection.  Erery  penoo
contained  in  it  wu  an  untlaw,  who  might  bo
killed  by  any  one  who  met  him  with  impanity,
eren  by  hii  alaiea  and  hii  neareil  relativM.  ^
hi*  proper^  waa  taken  and  pnblicly  lold.  It  may
nalurolly  be  luppoaed  that  inch  property  wai  told
Bt  a  very  low  price,  and  wu  ia  moat  caaet  pur-
chaied  by  the  ftienda  and  favooritei  of  Solla ;  in
lome  inatancea  only  a  jart  of  the  price  wna  paid
at  which  it  had  been  parehaaed.  (Salliut,  Fragn.
p.  238,  ed.  GerhKh.)  The  property  rf  thoea  who
hod  fallen  in  the  rnnki  of  hia  enemiea  waa  aold  in
the  aame  manner.  (Cic  pn  Hoae.  Ant.  43.)  Thoae
who  killed  a  proacribed  pennn,  or  gaTC  noUce  irf
hia  place  of  ccmcealment,  receired  two  talBita  u  a
reward  ;  and  whoerec  concealed  or  gate  ihelter  lo
a  proacribed,  wu  puniihed  with  death.  (Cic  o.
Verr.  I  17,  Plat.  SkO.  31 ;  SueL  Oiei.  II.)  Bnl
thia  wu  not  all ;  the  praacription  was  regarded  aa
a  corruption  of  blood,  and  coniequently  the  aona
end  grandHna  af  proacribed  peraraia  were  for  eiet
excluded  Iraai  all  public  officn,  (Pint  J.  c;  Veli.
Pat.  ii."28;  Quinctil.  xi.  1.  85.)

After  thia  example  of  a  proaoiption  had  one*
beoi  *et,  it  wm  readily  adopted  by  thoie  in  power
3«  2 ^  O'^


»fl4  PROTHESMIA.

during  the  ciiil  cranmotiom  of  tubcequt
Thu  wu  (he  caie  duriog  the  tiiumTirale  of
AotoDioi,  Caeiar,  aod  Lcpidiu.  (43  b.  c)  Theii
firoscriptioo  wu  eTen  Cat  more  formidebla  than
thiit  of  Salla.  roi  3000  oquitei  and  300  tenaton
are  wd  to  have  been  mordered,  and  the  motive  of
the  CriumTin  waa  nothing  but  n  eold-bloodfd
Ibint  for  Tengeance.  FoitDnalely  do  more  than
tbcH  two  QIKa  of  proKription  occnr  in  the  hiitorj
of  Rome.  (Appian.  B.  C.  n.  5  ;  Veil  Pat.  iL  66  ;
Suol.^i(j.  27i  Llv.  Epit.  lib.  120.) [L.  S.J

PBOSTAS. [DoMua,  p.  42i,  b.]

PRO'STATES  (rpihrrd-r^s).  [LiBiHruB,  p.
705,  a ;  Mitokcl]

PRO'STATKS  TOU  DEMOU  {rpoorttnii  toC
Hl/iav),  a  loader  of  the  people,  dcDOted  at  Atheru
and  in  otliet  democialical  itatea,  a  prnon  who  by
hia  chaiBcter  and  elsqueDCe  placed  bimwif  at  tbe
head  of  the  people,  and  whoae  npiniun  had  the
gRBtcat  iwBj-  amongat  tbem  (Plato,  Hep.  viii.
p.  6S&.  c)  :  nich  WM  Peridej,  It  appean,  ■■  —
eier,  that  rfptrrir "  " — ■"-

a  pablie  officer


rO  Sijtiov  w


the  s


Thui


L  9.  SI


lu  tfipjp/  al  Core
at  Sjracuie  (Thoc  tI  35),  at
iii.  2.  S  27),  at  Manlinpia  (Xel
and  St  other  placei.  (MUIler,
WachimDth,  HilL  AUertiumMk.
ed. ;  Arnold,  ad  Thac  n.  36 ;  G.  C.  MUlIer,  d,
Corcj/r.  Rep,  p.  19 1  £.  F.  Hermann,  LtkrbiuA,  jtc
9  69.  n.  3,  4.5

PROSTIME'MA  (wporriiimia). [Timsm*.]

PROSTOON. [Domrs,  p.  426,  a.]

PROSTY'LOS. [TauFtiiii.]

PROTELEIA  OAMON  {TporiXtM  yiiMf).


[Mai


?■  W, ».]


PROTHESIS  (irpiawii).  [FuNUB,p.565,a.]
PROTHE'SMIA  (ijxrfWfJo),  the  lena  limited
for  bripging  acliona  and  proiecutions  at  Athena.
Tn  all  ayfltenii  of  juriipnidence  sorne  limitatioa  of
^il  iort  hai  been  pmcribed,  for  ^e  (ahe  of  quiet-
ing poaaeuion,  and  alTbrding  aecurity  agiunat
veialiouB  litifralion.  The  A  then  Ian  eipmiLan
XfniBtriiUu  rSfWi  coneepondi  to  our  fMuCi  of
Umilalimu.  The  time  far  commencing  action*  to
recoier  debta,  or  compenmtion  for  injuriei,  sf-
pean  to  have  been  limited  to  6ve  year*  at  Athena.
Tou  iSmsufi/wii  i  Ii\mr  ri  irirri  (ri)  luerir
iyfliroT'  litai  tfiTirpiEfaiTftu.  (DemoilL  pro
Plam.  952,  c.  A'awim.  98S;  Harpoc  «.  r.  Jlpit-
^iTfiiaa  r6fior.)  Inheritance  cauiea  itood  on  a
peculiar  footing.  When  an  eatate  had  been  ad-
judged to  a  party,  he  vtu  Btill  liable  to  an  action
at  the  (git  of  a  nev  clahnant  for  the  whole  period
of  hii  life  i  and  hia  heir  for  fi/e  ycaia  afler-
ward).  Thii  aroH  from  the  anxiety  of  the  Athe-
nians to  tiHuiuil  inheritance  m  the  n^tu  line
ofincceuion.  [IIcRis  (Orxik).]  The  liability
of  bail  continued  only  for  a  year  {iyyiai  Iwiriiai
iaar),  and  of  cmine  no  proceeding  could  be  talcen
atiainit  (hem  at^r  the  eipiratioo  of  tbe  year.
(Demotth.  c.  Apaiv.  901.)  It  i>  donbtiitl  whether
any  period  wu  pmcribed  Gir  bringing  criminal  pn>-
Kcutkmi,  at  leut  for  oSencet  of  the  more  aerioni
kind,  though  of  courao  thera  would  be  an  india-
potitton  in  tbe  jury  to  convict,  if  a  long  time  had
elapaed  rince  the  offence  woi  committed.  (Lya.  c
Siaom.  98,  wtfi  tw  «^ico£,  109,  e.  Agar.  137,
ed.  Steph.)  Cenain  caaea,  however,  muit  be  ex-
cepted. Tbe  fpa^  waftfiiuir  could anl;  ba


PHOVINCIA.

brought  within  ■  year  after  th.  ,_., „

law.  (napanj^r  ypa/^  and  SchSm.  da  Ganil.
tL  273.)  And  the  titirv  againn  niagi>tral«  wse
limited  to  a  cerlam  period,  according  to  Follni
(viii.  46).  Anineitici  or  jardona,  granted  by
■pecial  decree!  of  the  people,  icaccely  belong  to
this  subject  (See  Aeich.  c  Timardt,  6,  ed.  Steph.)
The  term  upaStaida  is  applied  also  to  the  ^me
which  wu  allowed  to  a  defendant  for  paying  da-
Eiagn,  after  tbe  expiration  of  which,  if  he  had  not
(*ud  them,  he  was  called  {vtp^fACpoi,  uryirpJJtcr-
iu>i,  or  inpi9taiuis,  (Meier,  AH.  Prne.  pp.  636,
746.)  [a  K.  K.]

PRO'THYRON.  (AiTHOuaA  j  Dauvt,  p.
424,  h!  Jasua,  p.  627.  a.]

PROTRYCA£A  (uporfiyaia),  a  featird  cele-
hmted  in  honour  of  Dionysua,  lumamcd  Protrvg^s,
and  of  Poeeidon.  (Heijch.  •.  v.;  Aelian.  K  //.
iii.  41.)  The  origin  and  mode  of  celebration  of
this  fettivnl  at  Tyre  are  described  by  Achilla
Tatiui  (ii.  init),  [L.S.]

PROVI'NCIA.  The  originni  meuing  of  this
word  seems  to  be  "  a  duty  "  or  "  matter  eatmstcd
to  a  person,"  u  we  see  in  varioos  passage*.  The
word  i>  an  abbreviated  form  of  Pinvidentia,  *s
Hngo  has  luggealed.  All  other  proposed  derint-
I  ought  to  be  rejected. In  the  Hedieean  MS.


That  tbe  word  originally  bad  not  the  signiScai
of  a  toritcry  merely  appears  fian  such  eipreaaiens
as  Urhana  Provincia  (I.iv.  ixri.  6) ;  and  tie  ei-
presaion  Urbana  Pntviocia  wu  still  used,  after
the  term  Provincia  was  used  to  eipreaa  a  ter-
ritory beyond  Italy  which  had  a  regular  ot^ia-
nidtion  and  was  under  Roman  adiuuuitratkm.
This  ia  the  ordinary  aenae  of  the  word,  that  of  a
foreign  teirilorf  in  a  certain  relation  of  aabordiiia-
tioQ  to  Rome.  But  the  word  waa  alao  used,  berac
the  ettabliahment  of  an?  proTincial  govemmHits,
to  denote  a  district  or  enemy'i  country  which  wu
assigned  to  a  general  at  tbe  field  of  hit  i^Hiiion*.

The  Roman  State  in  its  complete  development
consiated  of  two  parts  with  a  distinct  arganisaUDn,
Italia  and  tbe  Provinciae.  Thera  were  no  Pro-
vineiae  in  this  aense  of  the  word  till  the  Roouma
had  extended  their  conquests  beyond  Italy  ;  and
Sidlj  (Cic.  Farr.  iL  2)  was  the  first  coontry  thai
was  made  a  Roman  Province,  B.  c  241  ;  Ssildinia
wu  made  a  Province  a  c.  236.  The  Roman  pR>-
vineo  of  Oallia  Ulterior  in  the  time  of  Caeaar  wai
sometimes  designated  simply  by  the  tetm  PraviDcia
(Caeur,  BtlL  GalL  L  I,  7,  &c)

A  conquered  country  received ita pnvincial

Xoiution  either  bom  tbe  Roman  comiiiaader,
M  act!  required  tbe  qiproval  of  the  Senaie ;
or  the  government  wu  organised  b;  the  com-
mander and  a  body  of  cranmiuiHiers  aj^jnted  by
the  Senate  out  of  theu'  own  number.  (Ploiireb,
LuaJl  ii,Z6.)  Tbe  mode  of  dealing  with  a  con-
quered country  wu  not  uniform.  When  cooitiiuied
a  Provincia,  it  did  not  become  to  all  pnrpoac*  an
integral  part  of  the  Roman  State  \  it  retained  its
national  existence,  though  it  lost  its  aovereigntv.
The  otganiiatian  of  Sicily  waa  completed  bj  P.
Rnpiliua  with  the  aid  of  ten  legate*,  and  his  ean-
■litutioD  i>  sODietimei  idicrTed  to  under  the  name
of  Legea  Rupiliaa.  The  island  wu  fcnued  into
two  districts,  with  Syiacusae  for  the  chief  town  of
the  cutem  and  Liiybaenm  of  the  western  diatrict :
the  wbole  iiliind  waa  adminiWeted  by  a  gsTtmac


PEOVINCIA.
ansnaltj'  tent  fnm  Rome. He  mi  uiiated  bj

two  (juwiton  uid  WM  aeconipuiiiid  bj  a  train  of
pnuooiua,  icribat,  buiupim,  uid  olber  penoiu,
wba  fonned  tai>  Cohon.  Ths  Quanlon  RcdTrd
from  the  Roman  umrimn  tbe  necesMr;  Hunt  for
the  Bdniiiiiitnition  of  Iha  ulasd,  and  the;  aim  ecd-
lected  the  taiM,  eicept  tkoM  which  were  let  by
the  CeDfon  tt  Rome.  One  quaeiLor  reiided  al
Lilftaeum,  and  Ihs  other  with  the  goTemor  or
PnetoT  at  SjracaMa.  The  goTenior  coold  diimin
the  qnaeiton  from  the  province,  if  the;  did  not
amfono  to  hii  order*,  and  coiild  appoint  Legati  to
do  their  dutiea.  The  whols  iilaod  waa  not  tteated
Biailly  in  the  mne  way.  Seventeen  conquered
(owna  Ibrfeiled  their  land,  which  waa  reatored
on  (Miditlon  of  the  payment  of  Ihe  decimoe  and


nndentood  ai  meaning  that  the  ownenhip  of  the
hod  WBi  realored,  fat  the  Roman  Stale  became  the
owner  oF  the  land,  and  the  occapien  had  at  moat
a  Poaweiio.  Theae  tara  or  dnei  wen  let  to  fann
liy  the  ceniota  at  Rome.  Thm  ciliea,  Meuana,
TaunmeniuM,  and  Netnm,  wen  made  Poedentas
Ciritalca  and  retained  their  laud.  [PoiD«a*TA«
CmrATis.]  Five  other  dliei,  among  which  were
Panormui  and  Segeala,  wen  Liberae  el  Immnnei,
that  it,  they  paid  no  dccimae ;  bnt  it  doea  not  ap-
pear whelher  they  were  free  from  the  bocdeni  to
which  the  Foederalae  Ciritatea  aa  loch  were  lub-
Jeet  by  virtue  of  their  Poedua  with  Rome.  Before
the  Roman  cooqueat  of  Sicily,  the  itland  had  been
■object  to  a  payment  of  the  (enth  of  wine,  oil,  and
cither  produeta,  the  collecting  of  which  had  been
determined  with  great  preciaion  by  a  law  or  re-
gulation of  King  Hiara  (£u  Himmka).  The
regulaliona  of  Kiero  wets  preaerred  and  theae
tenthi  were  let  to  lann  by  the  Quaeitor)  in  Sicily
ta  Sidliant  and  Romana  lettled  in  Sicily:  the
tentha  of  the  fint-menlioned  towna  were  let  to
fann  to  Romana  in  Rome.  The  towna  which  paid
the  lentba  were  called  by  the  geoeml  name  of
Stipcndinriae.

For  the  adminiitration  of  jnetice  the  ialand  waa
dinded  into  Foia  or  Conventna,  which  were  terri-
teiial  diviiioni.  Siciliana  who  belonged  to  the
aame  town  had  th«i  ditpntea  teltlcd  accoiding  to
ila  lawt :  ciliiena  of  di^rent  towni  bad  their  dli-
potei  decided  by  judicea  appointed  by  the  go-
Tenior  ;  iu  caae  of  ditputei  between  an  individual
and  a  community,  the  Senate  of  any  Sicilian  town
might  act  aa  judicea,  if  the  parties  did  not  chooae
to  have  aa  judica  the  Senate  of  their  own  town! ;
if  a  Roman  citiien  ined  a  Sicilian,  a  Sicilian  waa
jndei ;  if  a  Sicilian  lued  a  Roman  citiien,  a  Ro-
man waa  JDdei ;  bat  no  perwn  belonging  to  the
Cohora  of  a  Praetor  conld  be  jndei.  Thete  were
the  proviiioni  of  the  Rapiliae  Lrgea.  Diipntea
between  the  leiaeea  of  the  lendi*  and  the  Aratoret
were  decided  according  to  the  rulea  of  llieroL
l-nr.  iL  13.)  The  acttlemenl  of  Ihe  Mim
coaatltution  of  the  tovna  waa  generally  left  1

C.  Clandini  Marcellua  and  ths  town  of  AleM,  a
e  Roman  al  the


rt,  aa  it  amican,  of  th(
People  itill  continued


TheS<


',0;


of  Ihe  old  Gi

ef  130  men  called  eeni

take  the  eennu  of  Sicily  every  five  yean,  after

the  fashion  of  the  Raman  ccntna  (i* "

65,  &&) The  ialaad  waa  alaa  boimi


PROVINCIA.

and  mmntun  nldien  and  lailon  for  t}ie  ae
Rome,  and  lo  pay  tributom  for  the  cairyinj
wars.  The  govemor  could  laka  ptuvisiona
n«e  of  buiuelf  and  hii  cohon  on  condition  of  pay-
ing for  them.  The  Roman  State  had  also  the
Portoria  which  were  let  to  fiirm  to  Romoni  at
Rome.

The  governor  bad  co
island  with  the  Inipeiiui
delegate  theas  powen  b
was  alwaji  an  ^peal  1


Tying  on  I
iona  lor  tb


iplete  Jurisdictio  in  tb*
■  "  - - . Uec "


lis  quaeatoia,  bat  them

him,  and  for  this  and

otner  purpoaes  ne  made  cinniti  through  the  dif-

Such  was  the  orj^imtion  of  Sieilia  a*  a  jm-
vince,  which  may  bo  taken  as  a  sample  of  tha
general  character  of  Roman  provincial  gnvemment.
Sicily  obtuncd  the  Latinitas  from  C.  Jnliui  Caesar,
and  the  Civitai  waa  given  after  his  death  (Cie.  ad
AU.  liT.  13]  ;  but  notwithstanding  this  there  re-
mained lome  important  diitinctians  between  Scily
and  Italy.  The  chief  authority  for  this  aecoontu
the  Provincial  organiaation  of  Sicily  ii  the  Venine
orationi  of  Cicero.

Hispaniawas  formed  into  two  Pravincei,CileTior
or  Tamconensii  between  the  Iberus  and  tha
Pyreneea,  and  Ulterior  or  Baelica  south  of  the
Ibems.  Hispania  Citerior  was  divided  into  seven
ConTCnlns, — Carthagiaiensis,  Tarraconeniii,  Cae-
■nraugnslanita,  Clnnieniis,  Astttnun,  Locensii,  and
Braotrum.  The  diversity  of  ths  condition  of  tha
several  parU  of  the  Province  appears  &na  tha


a  of  Cole


le,  Oppida  Civiui
Foederati,  Oppt


Oppda  glipen-


diaiia.  HisfBnia
Jnridici  conventua,  —  Gaditonna,  Cordubensia,
AstigitonUB,  Hisfalrnais.  The  oppida  crauisted  of
Coloniae,  Municipia,  LatSoBntiqaitnidonala,  which
appear  to  be  equivalent  to  Latini  veterea,  Libera^
FoedeiMa, Stipend iaria.  (Pliii.H.iV.iii.  1,3.)  Tha
Provincia  of  Lusitania  was  divided  into  three  Con-
ventua,  —  Emeriteuiii,  PacenBi>,aiid  Sotlobitanns.
The  rlHsses  of  Oppida  enuoiersled  are  Colontae,
MunicipiaCiviiuoRflmanorum.OppidaLAtiiantiqui
or  leterii, Stipendiarin.  (Plin.MA'.iv.  2i)  This
example  will  (rive  some  idea  of  the  Roman  mode
of  administering  a  province  for  judicial  purposes.
All  Hispania  receiTedthe  Latinitas  from  Vespasian,
( Plin.  H.  N.  iL  3.)  The  province  pud  a  Sied  vecti-
gal  or  [and-tai  in  addition  to  the  tributum  wbidi
waa  collected  by  Praefecti,  and  in  addition  to  being
required  lo  deliver  a  certain  quantiljof  com.  And
Ihe  Praetor  had  originally  the  right  lo  porchase  a
twentieth  part  at  what  price  he  pleased.  (Ijv.ilUL
2  ;  comfore  Tacit.  A^rie.  19  ;  and  Cic;  w  Virr.
iii.  81,  de  atitimalll  frmmtnte.)

This  organiiation  was  not  confined  lo  Ihe  Western
Provincei.  In  Asia,  for  instancy  there  waa  a
Smjmarut  Conventus  which  waa  frequented  by
a  preat  pari  of  Aeolia ;  Ihe  term  conventna  waa

Ihe  territorial  division  made  for

m  of  justice  and  also  to  the  chief
in  quem  conveniebant.''  Uphetua
gave  name  to  another  Conventns.  Ai  the  Cim-
ventns  were  mainly  formed  for  jndidal  poipoaes,
the  term  Jurisdictio  is  aametjmas  naed  ai  an  eqni-
ralent.  Thus  Pliny  (H.IV.  t,  29)  speaks  of  the
Sardiana  Jurisdictio,  which  is  the  same  a*  Sar-
diannt  coaventni.  The  object  of  this  division  ii
further  shown  by  inch  phrases  aa  "eodem  discep-
tant  fbro,"  "  Tarracone  disceptant  popoli  iliii."
SUabs  nmaika  (liii  II  eas)  that  tka  boutdwie*


allied  bi


S4  S


■  O"


966  PROVINCIA.

<rf  Pbryjia,  Lydia,  Caria,  and  Mjiia  wwb  con-
fiucd,  and  that  tbe  Romaiu  had  added  to  tht
confuiion,  by  not  attending  to  the  labiuting  na-
tional diTuitins,  hat  making  the  adminiatrativc
diTisioni  different  (r^  Ewuc^imt),  in  which  an
the  Foia  {i,Tiifai  MS.)  and  the  adminiitratian


The  C

onTennii,

1  appan.

were  •ome

mei  htld

(MmwxAu  wA')

n  IheTin

er  (Cawar,

BdLOaU.

LHvi.41)l  batinCaeuT

•tcaiethu

night  be  a

matter

of  conwn

*nce. Cio

ere  ppopoied

to  do  the

7in«  <*i

41L  T.  U).

The  «..

pKuioi

»  -forcm

agere" i

agere."

(PneUr  Romano*  conn

mtxagm

138.)

The  Conventni  won  attended  bj  tha  Somaoi
who  were  resident  in  the  piDTince,  among  whom
went  the  poblicaoi,  and  gtneiBl1]r  by  all  penDO*
who  had  any  boaiticiata  leCile  there.  The  jndicei
for  the  deciiioD  af  miu  were  choaen  from  the  per-
■oiu  who  attended  tlie  conventiu.  OI^l'^  acta
were  alta  done  there,  which  were  not  limLLm  of
litigBtion  but  which  required  certain  fomu  in  order
to  bo  legal  In  the  caae  of  mannmiuion  by  per-
MBi  under  thirty  yean  of  age  cettabi  fonna  wen
lequtred  by  the  Lei  Aelia  Sentia,  and  in  the  pre-
TJiuei  it  waa  eflnled  on  the  lait  day  of  the  Coa-
Tentni  (Qaiu,  L  20)  ;  from  which  it  appean  that
Convenltu  nuau  alio  the  time  dnring  which  bnai-
nen  wa*  tianaacled  at  the  place  "  in  qneni  couTe-
niebant"

The  goTnnor  upon  entering  m  hii  dutiei  poT>-
liefaed  an  edict)  which  waa  oFten  framed  upon  tho
Edictum  Urbannm.  Clam  when  Proconinl  nf
Cilicia  lay*  that  aa  to  ume  malten  he  framed  an
edict  of  hia  own,  and  aa  to  otben  he  referred  to
the  Edicta  Urbana.  (Ad  AIL  Ti.  1.)  Though
the  Romani  did  not  fomallj  introduce  their  hiw
into  tht  prorincea,  and  ao  much  of  it  ai  applied
to  land  and  the  iliLtui  of  penoni  wni  inapplicable
to  ProTincial  land  and  Provinci^  penoni,  great
change!  were  gradually  introduced  by  the  ediclat
power  both  ai  to  the  forma  of  pnxednre  and  all
other  mstten  to  which  the  Roman  Law  waa  ap-
pltcnblo  ;  and  olio  by  ipecial  enaetinenti.  (Uaiun,
ilflS,  1B5,  iii.  122.)

There  wni  one  great  diitinction  between  ludy
and  the  Prorincei  a>  to  the  natnre  and  property  in
land.  Provincial  land  could  not  bo  an  object  of
Quiritarian  ownenhip^  and  it  wna  accordingly  ap-
propriately called  Foiaeuio.  Tha  owumhip  of
ProTindal  land  waa  either  in  the  Popului  or  the
Caetar :  at  Itaat  thii  wni  the  dncbine  in  the  timo
of  Oaiua  (iL  7).  Provincial  huid  could  be  tiani-
feireJ  without  the  forma  required  in  thfl  taae  of
Italian  land,  but  it  waa  auhject  to  the  payment  of
a  laod-Iax  (ractigal).  Sometimn  the  Jna  Itdicmn
waa  given  to  certain  provinciiU  towns,  by  which
their  lands  were  asiimilnled  to  Itnlian  land,  for  all
legal  purpoKs.  With  the  Jos  llalicum  such  towns
receired  a  free  conititution  [ike  that  of  the  tnwns
of  Italy,  with  magiitnlea,  as  decemviri,  quin-
quecnalea  (ceniMcs)  and  aedilet ;  and  also  a  juris-
dictio.  It  was  a  ground  of  cODijJaint  againit  Piao
that  he  exercised  jnriidietio  in  a  Libera  Ctnta).
(Cie.  ie  Prm.  Cau.  3.)  Towns  pouewing  the
Jus  iMIicam  in  Hispania,  Gallia  and  other  coun-
tries are  onnmerated.  The  l«tiniuu  or  Jni  I-atii
also,  which  wai  conferred  on  many  prorincial
towns,  t^Mii  to  have  ouiiad  with  it  a  oactain


PROVINCIA.

jiirisdjctio ;  and  those  who  filled  CCTtain  '►'■g!*-
trntus  in  these  towns  thereby  obtained  the  Roman
CiTitai.  {Strubo,  p.  136,  Cataub.)  It  is  not
eaay  to  state  what  was  the  precise  condition  of  the
Coloniae  Romonae  and  Latinae  which  van  esta-
blished in  the  PlDvioces  :  if  the  name  ia  a  certain
indioitioii  of  their  political  condition,  tliat  ia  pretty
well  aacertained.

It  has  been  atated  that  tha  terma  Italia  and
Piorincioe  are  oppoaed  to  one  another  as  the  com-
ponent parts  of  the  Romsm  State,  after  it  had  rw-
ceired  its  complete  deTelopemenl.  Under  the  Em-
peron  we  find  Gallia  Cisalpina  or  Citcsioc  on  irv-
tegral  part  of  Italy  and  without  a  gonnor,  tbe
ProTincial  otvani^tion  having  entirely  dinpfxued
there.  In  tic  year  &  c  49  when  Caeaar  enaaed
the  Rubicon  on  his  march  towards  Rome,  it  was  a
Province  of  which  ha  was  Proconsnl,  a  ciicnioMaaee
which  give*  a  distinct  meaning  to  this  evem.
Cictfo  still  call*  it  PiOYincia  Oollia  at  the  epoeli
of  the  battle  of  Mutina.  In  the  antmnn  of  B.  c
43  D.  Brutus  the  Proconml  of  the  Previnda
Oallia  wns  murdered,  and  from  that  time  we  bear
of  no  more  Proconsnls  of  this  Province,  and  it  is  a
reaaonable  conjecture  that  those  who  thai  had  all
(be  politicnl  poiver  were  unwilling  to  allow  any
person  to  bare  the  command  of  an  army  in  a  dia-
-  '  t  so  near  to  Rome.  The  name  Italia  was  how-
r  ap^died  to  this  part  of  Italia  before  it  becasM
inlegml  portian  of  the  Peninsnla  by  ceasing  to
n  Provincia.  (Caeiai,  Btll.  QaO.  L  £4,  v.  1,  n.
&c ;  Cic  PUi.  V.  12.)  On  the  determinaiioo
ial  form  i^  ggvemmeDt  in  Gallia
IS  necessary  to  give  to  this  part  of
i  new  organiution  suited  to  the  chaniEe  of
itancea,  particalarly  as  regarded  the  adminia-
of  justice,  which  was  effected  by  the  Lei
Rubria  de  Oallia  Cisalpina.  The  Proconsul  of
Oallia  Ciaalpina  had  the  Imperinm,  hnt  on  hi*
functimi)  ceaiing,  the  Juriidinio  waa  placed  m  tha
hands  of  local  magiitrUes  who  hod  not  tbe  Inpe-
rium.  These  magiitiatua  could  give  a  jsdei ;  in
■ome  case*  their  jurisdiction  was  nnlimited  ;  ia
olhen  it  did  not  extend  to  cases  oboie  a  oettaln
EUnoont  of  money  ;  they  could  remit  a  Boii  operi*
nimtiatio,  require  a  Caudo  in  caae  of  Damnam  In-
fectum,  uid  if  it  waa  not  given,  they  could  grant
VI  action  for  damages.

The  Reman  provinces  np  to  the  battle  of  Actium
u  enumerated  by  Sigonius  an:  SieQia  \  Sardinia
et  Conicn  ;  Hisnania  Citerior  et  Ulterior ;  Oal-
lia Citerior  ;  Oaliin  Norbonnisis  et  Comata  ;  It-
lyricum  ;  Macedonia ;  Achaia  ;  Asia  ;  Cilina  ;
Syria  ;  Dithynia  et  Pontus  \  Cypnis  ;  Afria  ;  Cj-
.  CreCH  ;  Nomidia  ;  Mauritania.  Tboa*
equent  date  which  were  «ther  ztew,  or
]  diviuoD  are  aceording  to  Sipauna:
Rhaetia  ;  Koricnm  ;  Pannonia  ;  Uoeaia  ;  Dnaa  ;
Britannia  ;  Mauritania  Caesariensis  and  Tingi.
i  Aegyptos  ;  Cappadoda  ;  Oalatia  ;  Rbodna  i
Lycia ;  Commagene  ;  Judaea  ;  Arabia  ;  Meaimn-
'  imia  ;  Annenia  \  Asiyria.  The  sccuracy  of  thia
numeration  is  nM  warranted.  It  will  appear  that
doe*  not  contain  Lnsitania,  which  ia  one  of  tlu
ro  dirition*  of  Ilispania  Ulterior,  the  other  beii^
lietica ;  Lusitania  may  however  not  have  hsd  a
■pamte  governor. Originally  the  whole  of  Spain,


IS  divided  in


>lhel<


provinces  Citerior  and  Dllerior  .

Ulterior  into  Baetiea  and  Lnsitania  btlu^ed  t"  a

Uterfcried. UndetAlgMtei.QoUiawM  dinJaJ


PROVINCIA.

pRtineei :  Nutnneiuii,  C«1tica  or  Lue-
,  Belgia,  >nd  Aquitaiiia.  The  Prarincis
of  Coeiar^  ComidRiUria,  Ctooi  vhicti  term  the
Bodem  niinie  PnTtnce  it  derived,  appoui  lo  hnie
CBfmpiindcd  to  the  mtxequent  provinea  Nubo-
neniii.  He  hod  alto  the  Piavince  of  QtH'tim  Cii-
alpiiia,  or  CiltrioT  (Ciieear,  BtU.  Gall,  i  54)  which,
ai  alreadj  expluned,  vu  ■utneqnentlj  incorpo-
nted  with  ItiliB  u  an  integiBl  rail  of  it.  Cuxra
•peiki  of  tbe  two  GilliAe,  u  thm  nailed  in  one
Imperinni  onder  C^  Jolioi  Caenr,  and  he  farther
diningntiha  them  bj  the  Daines  of  Citerior  and
Ulterior.  (£ie  Prw.  Qmi.  iL  16,  16.)  The  nuve
expnuioDi  an  uied  by  Caeiar  in  hii  Conunen-
tarie*.  iBtlL  OaU.  i  7,  f.  1,  2.)

Stiabo  (nil  n.  S40,  Cawab.)  ^vei  the  divivon
liilo  PiDtineei  (m^ x"")  ■■  conititnted  by  Aii|;iu-
toa.  Theptovinceief thePopuliu(l(3M<u)wereliro
eooralar  pcoiincea  (vtbtuibI),  and  ten  piwtoriui
proriiitet  {arpanrrlai).  Thereat  of  the  aparehiei,
be  aayi,  belong  to  the  Caeaai.  Loiitonia  ii  oot
CDOinerated  among  the  eparchiel  of  the  Populu,
nd  if  it  wu  a  diilinct  eparchy,  it  muM  have  be-
leoged  to  the  Caeur  acmrding  to  the  principle  of
(be  diriciaii  of  the  proTincea,  aa  itated  by  Strabo.
The  lilt  of  prerincei  in  the  "  Demonitrstio  Pro-
Tincbtnun"  {MyOiog.  Fat  Bode)  menliont  the
Prorioca  of  Aituria  et  OaUoet*  Lnutania.  Dion
Cmubi  (liiL  12)  itatei  the  dietribmion  of  the
PTorineea  by  Aoguetiu  aa  toUowi ;  the  PrOTincee
of  Afrin,  Nomidia,  Aiia,  Hellai  (Achaea)  with
Epinia,  Dalmatia,  Muccdonia,  Sicilia,  Creta  with
the  Cyrenaioi,  Bithynia  with  the  adjacent  PoDtue,
Sardinia,  and  Boetica  belonged  to  the  Senate  and
the  people  (I^hoe  and  ytpavala.),  Taimcooemia,
Luitania,  all  Oallta,  Cocle  Syria,  Phoenice,  Cilicia,
CjjroM,  and  AegypCiu,  belonged  lo  Aagniliu.  lie
■nerwBidi  took  Dalmatia  (ma  the  Senate,  and
gare  ts  them  Cypnu  and  Gallia  Narbooeniia,  and
other  change*  ware  made  aubaeqnenlly.

At  fint  Praetor*  were  amoinlsd  aa  governor*  of
firoriiwa,  but  afterward*  they  woe  appointed  to
the  nreminait  of  pmineei,  npon  the  eipinlion
U  their  you  of  office  at  Rome,  and  with  the  title
of  Propnetore*.  In  the  later  time*  of  the  re-
pnhlic,  the  conent*  alio,  after  the  expimtion  of  their
year  of  office,  receired  the  goremment  of  a  pro*ince
with  the  title  of  FRKonmlei :  loch  proTincea  were
called  Cmantare*.  Cicero  wai  Proouuul  of  Cilicia
B.  c  65,  and  hii  colleagae  in  the  conanlthip,  C.
Antonlni,  obtained  the  piocananlihip  of  Macedonia
immediately  <»  the  eipiiatJan  of  hii  conmlai  office.
The  pcoviDcei  van  genetaUj  diatribnted  by  lot,
bnt  toe  diitribation  wu  aometintee  arranged  by
■graiment  among  tlie  penom  entitled  to  them.
By  a  Sampicaia  Lex  the  pncDDfnlai  province*
war*  amnmllj  datennlned  before  the  elKlion  of
the  canenl*,  the  object  of  which  wai  to  pceTent  all
^qnlci.  A  Scnatnaconnttnm  of  the  year  55
B.  c,  provided  that  no  ooniul  or  pnetot  shonld
haTa  a  pnirinca  till  after  the  expiration  of  fiie
jeara  from  the  time  of  hii  eonnilihip  or  praeta^
■hip.  A  proTince  wai  generally  held  for  a  yrai,
bat  the  time  wai  oltea  prolonged.  When  a  new
goTsnor  ariiTed  in  hii  prorinee,  hii  predeceMor
wBi  leijDind  to  leave  it  within  thirty  day*.  A
If  I  Jnlia  paiaed  in  the  time  of  C.  Jnliiu  Caesar
limited  the  holding  of  a  Pntetoria  Prarineia  to  Dn<
year,  and  a  Connilarii  Provinda  to  two  yenn
(Dion  CaHhu,  xliiL  2G  ;  Cic  PUL  L  8,  t.  3.)  Th<
(otemmef  f(OT)DC>*  I>d  no  ftjiaMBich,  butcer


PHOVINCIA.  fi67

I'ln  ezpenie*  were  provided  for  out  of  the  Atniinm.
Augtiitoi  fint  attached  pay  to  the  office  of  pro*
vincial  governor.  (Dion  Cairini,  liiL  15  i  Soeton.
Aagvl.  36.)

The  goTemor  of  a  province  had  originally  to  ae-
unt  at  Rome  (mt  nrbem)  for  hii  adminiitration
mi  hii  own  bootu  and  thoeo  of  hii  Quaeilon ;
but  after  the  puling  of  a  Lex  Julia  B.  c  61,  ha
bound  to  depoait  two  copie*  of  hi*  aceounta
(ruftlomi)  in  the  Iwn  chief  citie*  of  hii  province
and  to  forward  one  {latidtm  osriu)  to  the  AeiariunL
(Cic  ad  Fm.  ii.  17,  v.  20,  ad  AtHe.  vi.  7.)  If
the  gaveniar  miieonductad  hiniielf  in  the  admtnii'
tration  of  the  province,  the  jxovinciali  applied  to
the  Ronua  Senate,  and  to  the  powerful  Roman*
who  were  their  I^tronL  The  ofiencei  of  Hepe.
tondae  and  Peculatui  were  the  ntual  gronndi  of
complaint  by  the  provinnali  i  and  if  a  goremor
had  betrayed  the  intereita  of  the  State,  he  wa«
alio  liable  to  the  penalties  attached  to  Majeitai.
Quaeitiiinei  were  eitahliibed  for  inquiriea  into
theie  oKocei ;  yet  it  wu  not  alwayi  an  eaiy
matter  to  bring  a  guilty  govenur  to  the  poniitt*
meat  that  he  deserved.

With  the  eitabUahment  of  the  Imperial  power
under  Anguitui,  a  coniiderable  change  wu  mnda
in  the  adminiitruion  of  the  pnrrince*.  Augustoi
took  the  charge  of  the  prariDcea  whoe  a  large
military  force  wa*  rcqnired  ;  the  leet  were  left  to
the  care  of  the  Senate  and  the  Roman  people.
(Stnbo,  iviL  p.  B40.)  Accordingly  we  find  in
the  older  jnriiti  (Oaiui,  iL  21)  the  diviiton  of
provinciae  into  thoie  which  were  ^  propriao  Populi
Rotnani,^  and  Ihoae  which  wera  *^  propriao  Caa-
Mtrit,"  and  thii  diviiion  with  lome  mrdlGcalion*
continued  to  the  third  century.  The  Senatorian
|Kovincei  were  diilributed  aminig  contiilaret  and
tfaoie  who  had  filled  the  office  of  Pmelor,  two  pro-
vinces being  given  to  the  coasulaiei  and  the  rest  la
the  Piaetorii :  these  governors  were  called  Pro-
coniulei,  or  Fraetidei,  which  Utter  ii  the  niuat
term  employed  by  the  old  jitriit*  for  a  provincial
governor.  The  Praciidei  had  the  juriVdiclio  of
the  Praetor  Urbanni  and  the  Praetor  Peregrinu*  |
and  their  Quaeiton  bad  the  lame  jnriidictioa  that
Che  Curule  Aediles  had  at  Rome.  (Oaiu*,  i.  6.)
The  Imperial  puvincca  were  governed  by  Legati
Caesaiii  with  Praetorian  power,  the  PrDconsular
power  being  in  the  Caesar  himself,  and  the  Legatl
being  hisdeputiea  and  representatives.  The  Legati
were  (elected  from  those  who  had  been  conauli  or
praetors,  or  from  the  Senators.  They  held  their
office  and  Uieir  power  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Em>
pecor  I  and  he  deiegaled  to  them  both  military
command  and  juritdiciio,  joit  ai  a  Proeannil  in
the  Repablicon  period  delegated  these  powers  to
his  Legsti. These  Legnti  nod  also  Legati  under

the  Caesar,  and  fix-  this  reason  observe*  Gains,  (Us
edict  (jtat  idktan)  is  not  pabliihed  in  those  pro-
vineo,  by  which  he  appears,  from  the  context,  ta
mean  the  edict  of  the  Comle  Aedileit  In  plae*
of  the  quaestors,  there  were  PrDcumtores  Caenris,
who  were  either  Bqnitesor  freedmen  of  ifae&eBor.
Egypt  waa  governed  by  an  Eqnes  with  the  title  of
I^cfectos.  The  Proenralores  looked  after  the
taxes,  paid  the  troaps,  and  gEDenOly  were  intrusted
with  the  interests  of  the  Piieus.  Judaea,  which
was  a  part  of  the  province  of  Syria,  was  governed
by  a  Procurator  who  bad  the  povrers  of  a  Legaai*.
It  mnar*  that  then  wen  also  ProcoiBtons  Cae>-
3«4  ^  O"


i-eie  the  poU-
I  founded  on


968 •  PROVINCIA.

■iriB  in  the  Senatorian  provincH,  ffho  collected
ccrt&in  dun  of  the  FIbcua,  whic^h  wero  indepenirnt
«f  what  WBi  doe  to  Ihe  Acnuiuin.  The  renular
taxes,  aa  in  the  Kepnblican  period,  we

a  ceniiii  of  penoni  &nd  property,  which  «u  ota-
bliihed  b;  Au;;l>Iiu.  The  Portoris  and  other  duet
were  bmed  hjr  the  Puhlicaai,  a>  in  the  Repub-
lican period.

The  gDVemon  of  the  Senatorial  proTincei  and
the  1ei;ati  of  the  Caesar  received  their  ioiUnctian)
Irom  him,  and  in  all  ouei  not  thui  prvTided  fur
they  had  to  apply  to  the  Caesai  for  tpecial  direc-
tion*. The  Retcripla  of  the  Emperon  to  (ha  pro-

miniitepcd  in  the  prorincM  acconiin)[  to  the  lawi
of  th '  ProTincei,  and  auch  Roman  laws  as  wen
■peeially  enacted  for  Ebnn,  and  according  to  Im-
perial Coutitutionei, SenatiuoHuutla and the

praviiioni  of  Romaa  lawa  wen;  extended  to  the
pnivincei.  (Oeiui,  L  47  :  UIp.  Frag.  li.  SO.)

The  orxanliatian  of  the  Italian  towna  under  the
Empire  hui  been  already  explained  in  the  article
CoLONiA :  and  the  ume  DbKrvationa  apply  in
general  to  the  Senalea  of  Pravincial  towni  which
nave  been  made  with  reipect  to  the  function!  of
the  Senate!  of  Italian  towni.  Even  in  the  pro-
Tinea  the  namei  Seuate  and  Senator  wxur  in  the
■enie  reapectively  of  Curia  and  Decurionea.  But
there  wai  a  great  diatinclion  between  the  Mngu-
tratui  of  Provincial  and  thoit  of  Italian  towita.
The  liinction!  of  theie  penonagei  in  the  Provincial
town!  were  Kenernlly  Munera  (Imnlev)  and  not
Honorei.  [Honoris.}  Such  Honora  oi  have
reference  to  telif[ioui  function!  thry  certainly  had,
and  probably  otlien  also ;  but  they  had  nothing
correaponding  to  the  Duaroriri  Jnri  dieundo  of  ihe
Italian  towns  that  LI,  no  functionary  "qui  jiu
dieebnl."  The  only  exception  were  luch  towna
a>  had  received  the  Jul  Italicum,  the  effect  of
which,  HI  elsewhere  ciplaincd,  appears  to  have
been,  in  brief,  to  give  to  a  certain  city  and  district
the  same  chvacter  that  it  would  have  had,  if
it  had  been  a  part  of  the  Italic  loil ;  but  only  so
Sw  aa  affccied  the  whole  district ;  it  did  not  affect
the  itatnaof  individnala.  Freedom  from  the  Und-
tai,  and  a  free  conatitutioB  in  Italian  form,  with
Duumviri  J.  D.,  Quinquennalei,  Aedile*,  and  Jurii-
diclio  were  essentin)  inf^rcdientaof  thia  Jm  ItalicuiD.
Sicily  received  the  Civiia!  after  the  death  of  C.
Juliui  Caesar,  and  from  the  occuirence  of  the  men-
tion of  Duumviri  in  the  tntcriptiona  of  a  Sicilian
town,  Savigny  drawa  the  probnbte  inference  that
the  Sicilian  town*  received  the  Jus  Italicuin  also ;
at  least  if  in  any  oue,  we  can  ahow  that  any  pro-
vinciai  city  had  Duumviri,  we  may  conclude  that
auch  city  had  the  Jus  Ilalicnm  and  conacquenlly
MaAistratus  with  Jurisdictio.  The  regular  Juna-
dictio  in  all  the  provinces  was  vested  iuthcgovemori
who  exercised  it  personally  and  by  his  icgati :
with  reference  to  his  circuits  in  the  proYJncia  the
governor  in  the  later  ages  of  the  Empire  was  called
Judex  Ordinarius  and  snraetimeg  timply  Judex.
The  town!  which  had  the  Jus  Italicum  were,  a!
already  observed,  not  under  his  immediate  JurU-
dictio,  though  a  right  of  appeal  to  the  governor
from  the  judgment  of  the  Duumviri  must  be  con-
sidered a*  always  existing.  The  provincial  towns
had  the  nuuiagemsit  of  their  own  revenue  ;  and
foma  of  the  principal  town*  could  coin  moQ^. It


PROVINCIA;

does  not  appear  that  the  religion  of  dia  prorindaln
was  ever  interfered  with,  nor  had  it  been  pnt  nnda
any  resDaint  in  the  Uepublican  period.

The  conalitullon  of  Caiacalla,  which  ga»  Ibe
Civilas  to  all  the  piovineet  and  towns  nf  the  Empire,
merely  affected  the  personal  statu*  of  tbe  peuple-
The  land  remained  Provincial  land,  when  the  Jn*
Itnlicum  had  not  been  conununicnted  to  iLniid  tbe
cities  which  had  not  received  tbe  Jus  Italicnni.
were  immediately  under  the  Juiisdictio  of  ilw
govemora.  Thii  constitution  however  mutt  hava
made  considerable  changes  in  the  condition  of  the
provincials,  for  when  they  all  became  Roman  dti-
leu!,  tbe  Roman  incident*  of  marriage,  mch  a*  tba
Patria  Potestas,  and  the  Roman  Law  of  sncceanoa
in  case  of  inteatacj  would  leem  to  be  inseparable
consequents  of  this  change,  at  least  to  (ar  as  tlia
want  of  the  Jus  Italicum  did  not  render  it  in-
applicable.

The  constitution  of  the  provincial  toviu  wu
materially  affected  by  the  estnhliihmcnt  of  De-
fentorct,  whose  complete  title  ii  "  Deiensons  Ciri-
latis  Plebii  LocL"  Un^l  about  the  time  of  Oxi-'
!(antine,  *a  Gir  as  tbe  Pandect  shows.  Defensor
was  the  title  of  persona  who  were  merely  em-
ployed in  certain  municipal  matten  of  a  temporary
kind.  In  the  year  a.  d.  365,  the  Defetuon-i  w-
pear  ai  regularly  established  functjonarie*.  (Cod.
1.  tit.  5S.  Di  DtfauoHbu.)  They  were  elected
by  the  Decuriones  nnd  all  tbe  city  ;  but,  untilia
the  magittratus,  they  could  not  be  elected  out  of
the  body  of  Deairiones.  Tbe  office  was  origiaaUy
for  five  yeari,  but  after  the  time  of  JnsIiniaD  anly
fbr  two  years.  The  principal  buiineta  of  Ihe  De-
fensor was  to  protect  hit  town  ogainit  the  op-
preasion  of  the  Oovemor.  (Cod.  1.  tiL  S5.  a.  4.)
He  had  a  limited  Jurisdictio  in  dril  matla^
which  Justinian  extended  from  matters  to  the
amount  of  60  solidi  to  matters  to  the  Amount  of
300  solidi.  Then  was  an  appeal  frtmi  hin  to  the
Gowmor.  (Nov.  15.  t  S.)  He  couM  not  impose
a  Mnlta  ;  but  be  could  appoint  a  Tutor.  In  cri-
minal matters,  he  had  only  Jurisdictio  ill  some  ol
the  less  important  caica.

The  number  of  Senators  both  in  the  Italic  and

trovincial  towns  teems  to  have  been  generally  one
unditd  ;  and  this  was  the  number  in  Capua-  (Cie.
»  R-JL  ii.  35.)  But  the  number  was  not  in  all  (Jaea
the  same.  Besides  the  actual  member*,  tbe  Albom
Decurionum  comprised  others  who  were  merely
honorary  members.  The  Album  of  the  town  it
Canusiuni,  of  the  year  a.  d.  S23,  which  has  beea
preserved,  conUBla  of  146  members,  of  whom  30
were  Pationi,  Roman  Senators,  and  2  were  Palnmi,
Roman  Equites  ;  the  remainder  were  7  quiuquen-
nalieii,  a  term  which  is  eaiily  explain^]  by  re-
ferring to  tlie  meaning  of  the  temi  QuipqnrniialM
[CoLONU],  4  allecti  inter  qninqnennalet,  3-J  duum-
vicalicii,  ISaodilieii,  21  pedani,  31  pneteitati.
The  distinction  between  Pedani  and  Pneteitati
Sarigny  profestei  himself  n:uible  to  explain.  Id
many  towns  the  first  penons  in  tbe  list  of  actual
aenatora  were  diiiinguishni  from  the  rest,  and
generally  the  firtt  Ten,  at  Decemprimi  ;  of  whick
there  ia  an  example  in  LIvy  (ixix.  IS.  mugistrania
denotque  principei)  ;  and  in  Ihe  cate  of  Ancria,
and  of  Centuripae  in  Sicily  (Cic  pnt.  An.  Amer.
c.  fl,  /■  rcTrtia,  iL  67).

It  has  been  previously  shown  that  at  the  tinle
when  tho  Roman  Rospuhiica  had  attained  ita  eota-
^ste  developenent,  Italia  and  the  Pninodme  wa«


.PROTINClJt

th*  tv<i  gnat  campoDenl  poiti  of  tha  Empire ;  isd
■ae  gnftt  ditimctkra  bfitrem  them  wu  thu,  that
in  Italic  ihs  toimi  had  moKiBtntug  witb  Joru-
dictio ;  in  the  pniTiiicei,  except  in  pltuei  which
had  reeeiied  the  Jiu  Italinun,  the  goTemar  tlaat
had  Juriidictio.  Bal  with  the  growth  ind  deTelope-
ueitt  of  the  Imperia!  power,  a  giealer  nniformitj
mu  intndueed  into  the  idmiaiitntion  of  all  parti
ot  the  Empire  ;  and  ullimatel;  Italf  itMlf  wai
under  a  ProTincial  form  of  goremineiit.  [CoLO-
KIA.]  Ai  abore  ihDmi,  the  nlation  of  the  Oorernor
to  (be  proTince  wa*  not  the  nme,  wben  k  cdlj  had
magiilranu,  and  when  it  had  not ;  and  caowqneDtl;
il  wai  in  thia  ceipect  not  the  lame  in  Ital;  a*  in  tlie
Protiniet.

The  connilotion  of  Conitantine  mi  baaed  on  a
compete  KparUion  of  the  Ciiil  and  Militarj
power,  which  wens  eiKntiallr  united  in  the  old
ayilem  of  proTincial  goreniment:  Juidnian  how-
erer  oltimalelf  re-united  the  civil  aod  militai;
power  in  the  luae  penoo.  Tha  gaienior  who  had
CiTil  power  waa  oiled  Rector,  Jodez,  Jadei  Ordi-
nnrina ;  and  of  thew  goieniora  then  vm  three
clMBca,  Conaulacet,  Correetore),  Praeaidei,  among
whom  the  only  dittincEion  waa  m  the  extent  and
rank  of  their  goTemment.  In  the  writingi  of  the
older  juritta,  which  are  eiceipted  in  the  Pandect,
the  Pneiei  ii  a  gaietal  name  for  a  Provinciai
govemK.  (Dig.  8.  tiL  18.)  The  military  power
waa  ginm  to  Ducea  who  weie  under  the  gcnentl
•uperintendence  of  the  Magialri  Militum.  Some
of  these  Ducet  were  (&Ued  Comitea,  which  waa
ortgtuall;  a  title  of  rank  given  to  varioui  function-
■riea  and  among  them  to  the  Ducei ;  and  when
the  title  of  Cornea  wai  Rgnkrif  given  to  certun
Dneea,  who  hod  impntant  commandi,  iha  name
Dax  waa  dropped,  and  Comea  became  a  title.  Thia
waa  mare  puticulail;  the  caae  with  important
commandi  on  the  frontier.  (Cod.  Tbeod.  7.  bt.  1.
a.  9.)  The  Comea  i>  mentioned  in  Imperial  Con-
atilutiana  before  the  Dui,  whence  we  infer  hia
higher  rank.  (C°d.  Thcod.  B.  tit.  7.  a.  11.  Jd
tuagiMm  Jtiliiim,  it  comilet,  tt  dual  omma.)

of  the  Juriadiclio,  k  far  ai  the;  have  not  been
anticipated  in  epcaking  of  the  functLonariea  them-
aelvea.  In  Italy,  and  in  the  towiu  which  had  the
pnvilegeaof  Italian  towna,  all  mattera  aa  a  general
rule  came  before  the  magiatmtua  in  the  fint  in-
atanee ;  bnl  in  certain  excepted  mitten,  and  in
(■aea  where  the  amount  in  quottion  wai  above  a
certain  aum  (the  prcciie  amount  of  which  ia  not
known),  the  matter  oime  before  the  governor  of  the

EHti^e  in  the  £rat  inatance,  or  in  Itolj  before  the
oian  Praetor.  Until  the  middle  of  the  fourth
c^ntuTT  A-  D-  all  matlera  in  the  Provincial  towna,
which  had  not  magiatratna,  came  befiue  the  governor
in  the  Gnt  inalaoce  ;  bat  about  thia  time  the  Dc.
fenioc  acquired  a  power,  like  that  of  the  magii-
tiatui  of  the  privileged  towna,  though  more  limited.
The  old  fbnn  of  proceeding  in  civil  matten  haa
been  explained  elaewhere  {Jui>nx]  l  the  mngia-
tntDB  empowered  the  Judex  to  make  a  condem-
natio ;  and  thia  inatitution  waa  the  Ordo  Judi-
donim  Privaionun.  That  which  the  magiattatua
did  without  tha  aid  of  a  Judex  wat  Gitn  Ordi-
nera.  [iKraHWcruu.]  The  aame  institution  pre-
vaiW  in  tboae  towna  which  had  a  mogiatratua,  for
it  waa  of  the  esH^nce  of  a  Mngittmlua  or  of  Juria-
ikln  b>  name  a  Judeix.  (La  Gait.  Oiialp.  c  30.)
Under  tha  empchn,  it  gtaduolly  ifecame  camnum


■PBOVINCTA.  «e»

for  the  mi^iatratua  to  decide  variooa  caie*  widiout
the  aid  of  a  Judex,  and  tbeie  are  the  Eitraordi-
naiiae  Cognitionea  apoken  of  In  the  Digeal  {iO.
tiL  !.<)).  In  the  reign  of  Diocletian  the  Ordo  Judi-
ciorunt,  aa  a  geneial  rule,  wai  aboliihed  in  the  pn>-
vincee  and  the  pedanei  judicea  (hoc  eat  qui  negotia
humiliora  diac^tent)  were  only  appointed  by  the
piaeaea  whan  he  waa  very  much  occupied  with
buaincaa,  or  Ibc  aome  trifling  malten  [JtTnfeK
PiDANaus]  ;  (Cod.  3.  tit.  S.  a.  3)  ;  aod  in  tha
time  of  Juitinian  the  inititntion  had  entirel;  dia-
appeand  (Inat.  4.  tit  IB.  t.  S),  and,  aa  it  ia  con-
jectured, both  in  Rome  and  the  Munieipia.

Bj  the  ud  of  tha  Judicea,  two  Pneton  wen
able  to  conduct  the  whole  judicial  buiineia  between
citiieni  and  Peregrini  at  Rome ;  and  b;  the  aid
of  the  nrae  initituticm,  the  judicial  bnaineaa  waa
conducted  in  the  Jnriadictionea  out  of  Rome.  In
no  other  way  ia  it  conceivable  how  tha  work  coold
have  been  got  thtongh.  But  when  the  Ordo
Jndieionun  waa  aboliahed,  the  difficultif  of  tram-
acting  the  hiiainaaa  moH  have  been  qipannt.  How
tiiia  waa  managed,  ia  explained  by  Etevin^,  by  re-
feiring  Id  the  growtb  of  another  inatitntnm.  Even
in  the  time  of  the  Republic,  the  Piaetora  had  their
legal  adviiera,  eapeeially  if  they  were  not  juriitt


laelvei


when  all  the  i


cenlialed  in  the  Caeaati,  they  were  loon  obliged
form  a  kind  of  college,  for  the  diipatch  of  buii-
la  of  varioui  kind*  and  particularly  judicial
mattera  which  wan  referred  to  the  Caeaar.  Thia
college  waa  the  Caetar'i  Conaittorium  or  Andito-
rinm.  The  Provincial  govemon  had  their  body  of
Baieaaon,  which  were  like  the  Caeaar'a  Audito-
rium (Dig.  1.  tit,  22)  I  and  it  ia  a  conjecture  nf
Savigny,  which  haa  the  higheat  probability  in  ita

the  municipal  towna  and  in  the  provincial  towna,
10  that  here  alao  the  magiitratna  and  the  Defeuioi

Beaidei  the  Juriidictio,  which  had  reference  to
Litigation,  the  ao-called  Contentioia  Juriadictio,
there  wai  the  Voluntoria.  Mattan  belonging  to
tbii  Juriidictio,  aa  ManomiBian,  Adoption,  Eman-
cipation, could  onlybetianiBcted  before  theMagii-
ttatni  Populi  Ronuuii,  and,  unleaa  these  powen
were  apeeially  given  to  them,  the  Municipal  Magi^
tratei  hod  no  authority  to  give  the  legal  sanction
to  aucfa  piTKeedingi ;  tbougb  in  the  old  Municipia
it  il  probable  that  the  power  of  the  mngiattatoi
waa  aa  little  limited  in  the  Voluntaria  ai  in  the
Contentioea  Jurisdictio.  In  the  Imperial  period  it
ma  usual  to  perform  many  acta  before  the  public
inthoritiea,  and  in  the  three  caiea  of  large  Oifta,
he  making  of  a  Will,  and  the  Opening  of  a  WiU,
t  waa  neceaaaiy  for  theae  acta  to  be  done  before
1  public  authority.  Such  acta  could  be  done  before
I  previncial  governor  ;  and  alao  before  the  Curia
if  a  city  in  the  presence  of  a  Magialratua  and
olherperaona  (Comparo  theConititutionof  Hotio.
riui,Cod.Theod.la.  til.  1.  a.  151,  and  a  Novel  of
■'alentinian,  Nov.  Theod.  til.  23,  with  Savigny^
maika  on  them.)

Though  the  general  adminiittation  of  the  Roman
ovincea  la  adequately  nndenlood,  there  are  dif-
ference! of  opinion  aa  to  aome  mattera  of  detail ;
le  cauae  of  which  liea  in  the  dilTerences  which
^tunlly  eiisted  in  the  Ddministration  of  the  pro-
incea  and  which  had  their  origin  in  the  difTerent
rcumaloucei  of  their  conqueit  and  acquisition,
and  in  the  diveraity  of  the  native  cutfmnuy  law  la


670  PRTTANEION.

the  diifgrmt  pmrinco,  with  >  latft  pait  of  which
the  Romuu  originillj  did  not  iateifen.  A  genent
rinr  of  th>  PtQiincet  thoold  therafon  be  completed
ud  eomned  by  a  new  of  the  Hveral  proTinco.

The  satbariliet  for  thii  tibw  ti  the  Pntriiicial
BOTeminenC  tare  been  nnersll;  nfnmd  to.  The;
■re,  more  perticnlarly,  SigoolULt  D*  Amii^io  Jan
Provaidamm,  Lib.  L — ill  ;  Ooeltling,  OMdtirAf
dtr  R'imaekat  Sbntntrfima^  i  Wdler,  OuoliaUg
ia  AonuciM  AaaUi,  where  lie  luithniltea  ere
Tei7  cOQTenientlj'  coUeeted  and  tinnged,  and
chap.  zxiL  Notei  76,  79.  wbeiein  ha  di%n  frnrn
Savigny  u  lo  the  Ju  ItaUenm  ;  in  chapter  ZKirii
Waller  \ax  detcribed  the  prarineial  dhinoiu  of
the  Empire,  which  eiiited  atxmt  llie  middle  af  the
iifth  centurj-  A.  D. ;  SaTignf,  OanUoUa  ia  fSm.
R.  >«  MiUdatia;  Tol.  L  ;  PuchM,  UAtrdtM  Iniait
der  La  Rabria,  ZelUchrift,  Ac,  toI.  x.  [O.  L.]
PROVOCATIO.  [ApMLiiTio,  p.  107,  a.J
PROVOCATO'RES. [GLiDUToaM,  p.  675,


(wpot«4.,


b.]

PROXK'NTA, PRO'XENUS
fpii.r«). rHoaFrntrit]

PRUDENTES.  [JuRUcoNiPLTi.]
PRYTANElUM<T?in-iiHS)y).  The  irpir
ef  the  ancient  Greek  itale*  and  citiea  wen
commuuitiu  liTing  aiuond  then,  the  co
hauKi  or  which  they  in  loine  nunmre  reE
what  priiite  hoiuei  were  to  the  bmiiiee  which
occupied  them.  Jut  aa  the  home  of  each  family
wai  iU  home,  ao  wu  the  tpvniitttr  of  erery  )tal«
or  dtr  tlie  common  home  of  ita  memben  or  inba-
bitanU,  and  wai  ciKiieqnentlj-  ailed  the  iarta
viKun,  the  "Ibciu"  or  "penetnle  uibii.''  (Cic
(fa  Lig.  iu  12  ;  Liv.  ill  30  ;  Dionyt.  ii.  23,  85.)
Thii  coitHpondenca  betwecD  the  wpirrartiw,  or
home  of  the  dtj,  and  the  priiata  home  of  a  man^
family,  wBi  at  Alhnu  ytrj  nmarkable. A  per-

Cilual  fire  or  -rSf  SBttimv  wai  kept  continually
utning  on  the  public  altai  of  the  city  in  the  Pcy-
taneium,  juit  ai  in  miTate  honwe  a  Are  waa  kept
up  on  the  domcattc  allar  b  the  inner  court  of  the
houK.  (Pollux,  i.  7  i  Arnold,  ad  Thmyd.  [I  I  j.)

The  aame  nutom  wai  obaerred  at  the  Piy-
taneium  of  the  Elcama,  where  a  fii«  waa  knii  bnni-
%  night  and  day.  (Phib.  r.  16.  g6.)  Moreorei
the  city  of  Athena  eieKiied  in  ita  Ptylaneium  the
dntiea  of  hoapitalitj,  both  to  jta  own  dtiiena  and
■tiansen.  Thai  fomgn  ambaaaadon  were  enter-
tained here,  as  well  aa  Athenian  enToya  on  their
letum  home  from  a  lucceiafiit  dt  well  conducted
million.  (Anitaph.^c*anL  126  ;  PoUni,  ix.  40.)
Here,  too,  wen  entertained  from  day  to  day  the
(ueceiaife  Prytanea  or  PreudHita  of  the  Senate,
together  with  theee  dtiiBu  who,  whether  from  per-
•imal  <a  aneeitnl  lerrleei  to  the  (tatea,  were
hononnd  with  what  wai  called  the  rtriait  iw
flfwrajieltf,  the  "  Tietni  qnotidiiniu  in  Ptytaneo  **
(Cic  d*  Orat,  L  £4),  ot  the  pririlege  of  taking
their  meola  there  at  the  public  eoat.  Thia  wu
granted  aometime*  Ibr  a  timilad  period,  Hirae-
tiniei  for  life,  in  which  latter  isae  the  pattice
enjoying  it  were  called  iflmToi.  The  cuttom
ef  confeTiing  thii  hononr  on  thoae  who  had  been
of  [ignal  letvice  to  the  itite  and  their  dcicend-
■nli,  wai  of  ao  great  antiqnity  that  one  initance
of  it  wat  referred  to  the  timet  of  Codnii ;  and
in  the  caae  to  which  we  allnde  tiie  isdividDal
tiioa  hcaouied  wai  a  fbrmgner,  a  natiie  of  DelphL
{\.jaag,  e.  Later.  pL  168.)  Another  illiutration  of
the  naca  to  whkh  the  PrytanciDin  via  dedicUed,


FSEPEI8HA.
li  fennd  in  the  caae  of  the  danghtoi  of  AiiitBde^

who  on  the  death  of  their  father  were  oonoiderad
ai  the  adopted  children  of  the  itate,  and  niaiiieJ
from  (faMnim)  that  camDon  home  of  ths  a^,
jnat  ai  they  woidd  ban  been  from  thor  Eatbo-^


they  wonld  haTe  I
■d he  been  alire.


<PlliL


t.27.)


the  Hcred  file  vfaicli  waa  to  be  kept  buning-  m
the  prylanna  of  hw  colctuea  )  and  if  it  happsttd
that  thii  wBi  erer  eitiiyiiahed,  th*  Same  vaa
rekindled  from  the  {wytaneinm  of  the  sunt  dtr.
(Daker,  at  Tlatfi.  i.  34.)  lutly,  a  Prytaneinln
waa  alao  a  diatinguiahinf  mad  of  an  in^paident
■late,  and  ia  mentioned  ai  auch  by  Thu^didee  (ii.
IS),  who  infbima  u  that  be&te  the  time  of
TheaeuB,  OTeiy  city  OE  atate  (vJAii)  of  Attica  pas-
■eeaed  a  pntaneiom.  The  h  rharnm.  we  arc  told
(Herod.  Tiu  197),  called  their  uytandimi  AfEnw
(from  \tit,  popaloa],  or  the  ^  ta«D-hall,"  and
exdoiion  from  it  icema  to  haTa  been  a  aorl  of  civfl

The  PiyunafauB  of  Athena  lay  under  tka
Aoopolia  on  ila  northern  lide  (near  the  rtj^iil),
and  waa,  at  ill  name  denotei,  originally  the  {dace
of  auembly  of  the  n^vTOfau ;  in  the  eariicni  riiaia
it  probably  atood  on  the  Acfqxdia  OOeen  tailed
HfHrronu  woe  entnuted  with  the  diief  magi-
tra^  in  acreral  itatea  of  Oieeee,  at  Csr^ra,
Connlh,  Miletnt,  and  the  title  it  annetimci  ty-
nonymodi  with  ^oiriXtTi,  or  princci,  hanng  una.
renUy  the  lame  root  at  Tfwrii  ot  -rpJToTei.  At
Athou  they  were  in  eariy  timea  piobaUy  a  ma-
gittiacy  of  the  lecaid  tank  in  the  alala  (next  ta
the  Arehon),  acting  ai  jadgea  in  wioaa  i  aaia
(perhqia  in  conjimctioii  with  him),  aid  litli^  in
the  Piylauehnn.  That  thii  waa  the  caae  ia  i«i-
dered  probable  by  the  &ct,  that  em  in  altertiaMa
the  feea  paid  into  court  by  plaintiff  and  ddodaat,
before  they  could  pniceed  to  trial,  and  icceiTed  bj
the  dicatU,  were  called  rfWrunia.  (Pollax,  Tiii.
38.)  Thia  coort  oftbe  PrytaneiDm.  <r  ^  rt  M
IVirranlti,  It  taid  (Pollux,  (iii.  120)  to  hnye  beM
preiided  oiec  by  the  fiAaCMi;^^,  who  pertMfa
wen  the  lama  at  the  wptfraMu.

In  later  agea,  howerer,  and  after  the  eatabliah-
ment  of  the  courti  of  the  Hdiaea,  the  eoail  of  the
Prytaneium  had  loat  what  ia  tnppoaed  ta  hare  beea
ill  original  impMtance,  and  wai  made  ooe  of  tke
coorti  of  the  EpheMe,  who  beld  there  a  apedea  tt
.!._...._. .  I . which  any  indi-


lidiial  had  lott  hia  life,  aa  wall  ai


The  Ubleti

which  Solim't  Uwa  win  wriltm  (PtnL&t  95},
were  alio  depodted  in  the  Piytaueiom  (Pkna.!.
IS.  g  8);  they  were  at  Gnat  kept  oatboAcropolii,
[robably  in  the  dd  Plytaneiam,  bat  aftRinnU
removed  to  the  Piytueiam  in  tba  *y*f<,  that
they  might  be  i^md  ta  pnUio  ini|)ectiaiL  (Pellox,
Tiiil28.)  EphiaheaiiHidtohaTebarB^ullMc
of  thii  maaiue  (Harpoerat.  i.  ■.  "O  wtttttn  wifMi\
but  their  remonl  may  haTe  been  merdy  the  ceit-
•eqnence  of  the  erection  ot  a  new  Prytanaam  oa
the  lower  tite  in  the  time  of  PeikW  (Thiriwall,
UitL  i/^Ontet,  viJ.  ii  p.  64.)  [B.  W.J

PRYTANE3  (wpvrwnu). [Boi;Li,n>-  31(L
312  ;  PatTAKSIUH.]

P8EPHISMA  (ti^/M). [BoOLtKL  510.

311  I  NMUtMITM]


PSEPHUS.
PSEPHUS  <tq^i)- Tlia  AdwDim  HoMit,

in  ptittg  thiir  nrdkl,  rated  by  bdtot.  For  thu
pDipDH  the;  DHd  alher  HO-ahtUi,  x'f^*"  (Aru-
topL  Ft^.  333,  349,  £9. 1392),  or  Iwau  (hcnM
the  ftvut  is  oiled  matiarpH  bv  AriitophanM,
£^.41),  or  b*Ilt  of  met^  (nrJrSvXsr)  or  itoae
<4^i}.  ThetelutwenthsnwUcannnin:  bence
i^>i|f(firiu.  Hid  it!  TuioDi  derintirn,  on  oied  *a
often  to  iignify  v'*^  dtUrmmmg^  Stt,  The  IbIIj
were  eitl«r  pierced  (rerpimifi™)  and  whole
(rkiifta),  the  i«iiiv  fa  eondemiBtiini,  Che  latter
for  eeqnitlal  (AbkL  cu  TKoorei.  11,  ed  Steph. ;
Hupoc  I.  D.  TfTpim)>L^)  ;  or  they  vere  bladi
and  white,  Ibr  tbe  Mine  pnrpoeei,  reipectivet;,  u
the  follomiig  Ihiea  *haw  (Ond.  Mit  it.  41)  :  —
"  Moe  eiat  antiqam  niveii  anieque  lepilHi,
Hi*  danmare  reee,  Qlu  abxilTere  culpa."
There  might  be  three  nietbodi  of  voting.  Pint,
the  Hcret  method,  called  upMSiir  f^ftriku,
vben  each  dieatt  had  two  balli  giien  him  (n;  Bi
Uadc  and  m.  white)  t  twa  Imee  (iJIm.  cotCnM,
or  ifi^optii)  were  prepared,  one  of  bnu,  called


]at  the  heli  bj  wUch  he  gwe  hie  rate,  and  the
other  of  wood,  called  Curypot,  into  which  he  put
the  other  boll,  and  the  onl/  object  oF  which  wai
to  enable  him  to  conceal  hii  TDt&  Each  box  had  a
Beck  or  funnel  {ttiiiii,  i.  a.  iwlBtiiia  luSt  iiit^ar
%Afr  fiior),  into  which  a  man  coild  pnt  bi*  band.
bnt  only  isie  ball  eonld  paii  throogh  the  lower  put
into  the  box.  (Ariatoph.  Top.  99,  751.)  Secondlj,
there  might  be  only  one  boT,  in  which  the  dicaat
pDt  which  of  the  two  buili  he  plesHd,  and  retnm-
ed  theothec  to  the  office!  of  the  court  Thirdly,
there  might  be  two  boicA,  one  for  condemnation,
the  other  Ibr  acquittal,  ood  onlj  one  bslL  (Harpoc.
3.  X.  KsSlimti.)  The  Gnt  method  wea  mon  eom-
monlj  pnctieed  at  Alhona.  Where,  hoverer,
there  wen  Kreral  partiea  before  the  court,  u  in
inherinuKe  caiuet,  to  one  of  whran  an  eitate  or
other  thing  wm  to  be  adjudged,  it  wni  coMoniirj
to  have  aa  man;  ballot-boiei  aa  then  were  paitiei,
or  at  leait  partiee  in  dictinct  intereiti  ;  and  the
dicut  pot  the  white  or  whole  ball  into  the  box  of
that  penoD  in  wboie  faionr  he  decided.  [Hubs
<Or>bk).]  Tbe  nme  tjitem  of  balloting
employed  when  the  diouli  rated  on  the  qnei
of  danugea.  Hence  the  rerdict  on  the  qua
g^tj  at  mtd  gmltf,  at  far  &a  plmn^ar  dt/mdaiH
(to  dietingoiflh  it  from  the  other),  i<  called  vpt^ni
fitpn.  i/iach.  c  Oa.  S2,  ed.  Steph. ;  DemortL
JeFaU.Leg.4H,(i.Ariitoa:6'IS,e.An^  79fi,
0.  A'svr.  1347.)  A  curiooi  cnMom  waa  in  ngne
in  the  time  of  AriMnphaiiei.  Each  dicaat  had  a
vuten  tablet,  on  which,  if  the  bearier  penal^  ma
awardcid,  he  drew  a  long  line  (lengtbway  on  tha
tablet)  ;  if  the  lighter  penalty,  he  drew  ■  ihcn
line  (breadihway  on  the  lahtet).  We  mnfl
poae,  not  that  the  Tomig  took  plnce  in  thie
hot  that,  on  the  (otee  baio|it  coonted,  the  jnron
ImdE  a  note  of  the  niult  for  their  own  ntliafactiDn  ;
imleai  we  retort  to  thii  hfpothtaii,  rii.  that  the
drawing  linci  on  the  tableti  waa  an  act  preliminary
to  the  ditiaira,  whereby  the  jury  intimated  to  the
jairtiea  bow  the  matter  waa  likely  to  go.  unle»
thev  came  to  a  compromiie.  Such  intimation
night  be  neceasry  in  thoee  caeei,  whele,  the  eati-
male*  of  the  pnrtin  being  widely  different,  the
one  propsnng  too  high  a  penalty,  the  other  loo  low
■  «ae,  the  jury  wiuied  to  inftom  tbe  mon  iin-


PSSUDKNORAPHES  ORAPHE. 971

reMonable  parW,  that,  nnteei  he  ofTeied  tbein  eome
better  altemaure,  they  ahonld  adopt  the  eitimats
of  hiaadiemiy.  (Ai  to  Chia  point,  loe  Meier,
^tt  Pne.  p.  181.)  The  tablet  is  called  by  Ariito-
phanea  irirdiiitt  ritntTui6y,  la  the  eipreuion
Ti/ifr  tV  iMKpir,  wa  undentand  -ipaii)i:l\f  or
Tlia^ir  <  F<7.  106,  167,  650).  See  Pollux,  riiL
16,  17.  123;  Meier,  AU.  Prae.  pp.72D,  726;
Platner,  Pne.  mi  Klag-  ^1-  i-  p.  1  BO  ;  Wach»-
mnth,  Tot.  iL  pt  L  p.  344.

In  the  popular  aaeembliea  the  common  method
of  TOtingwna  byihow  of  handa.  [Cheirotonii.]
There  were  aome  oceaairaii,  howerer,  when  the
ballot  waa  employed  ;  ai  where  itwat  deemed  im-
portant that  the  Totinf  thoold  ba  aecnt,  or  that
the  mnnhoi  ihodld  be  acomtaly  eonnted.  Thua,
to  pal*  a  law  for  the  natnraliia^an  of  a  fore^ner,
or  for  the  releaia  of  a  itaU  debtor,  or  for  the  reito-
ration  of  a  diiftanchieed  dticen,  and  indeed  in
erery  cue  of  a  priuila/Him,  it  waa  neceuary  that
(ii  ihonsand  peraona  ahould  rote  in  the  majority,
and  in  lecmt.  (Andoc.  dt  Myl.  12,  ed.  Steph. ;
Demotth.  «.  Tiaoa.  715,  719,  c.  Ntatr.  1374.)
On  the  condcmnaticm  of  the  ten  general*  who
gained  the  battle  of  Aiginuiae,  the  people  voted
by  ballot,  but  openly,  according  to  the  aecopd  of
the  plana  abore  mentioned.  The  roting  waa  then
by  tribei,  nri  ^xds.  (Xen.  HOL  i.  7.  §  9.)
Secret  vg^g  by  the  Senate  of  Fiia  Hundred  i*
mentioned  in  Aeachinea  (a.  UmaroL  S,  ed.  Steph.) ;
and  in  oeCnciam  the  Totii^  wa*  condncted  in  tecret.
(BebOmann,  Dt  Comit.  ^i- 121—198,  245.)

The  pec^le  or  jury  were  nid  ■^it^itatai,  i^^ov
piftai  or  iivBv,  (0  vale,  or  git»  limr  volt  or
jadgmtnL  T^^r  tiBiiUi,  to  eotf  aetfMttt,  ia  Died
with  a  diffaeut  alluaion.  {Demotth.  fro  Cor.  904.)
Tlie  ^eaiding  magiatnte  or  officer,  who  called  on
the  people  to  giie  their  Totei,  wu  said  ^iifi)f  Iff ir,
i^^fnM  iwiritai  or  lit6m,  though  the  but  eiprei-
tion  ii  alto  uaed  in  the  lenae  of  votag  ia/aimir  0/
a  perfoK.  Vii^fi'^o',  (0  <v(^  i"  raoloi,  Ats.
•Ini^CtirSai,  la  aeqiat,  and  other  derivation*  from
•fr^ipot,  are  often  uied  metaphorically,  where  the
method  of  Toting  waa  x"poTorta,  and  COTTtnely.
XtiptTtwrir,  howerer,  ia  not  uied,  like  ■H^C'irfa',
with  the  occaiBlite  of  the  thing  Toted.  Aa  to
thia  tee  SchSmann,o[<anmtiu,p.  123.  [C.  B.  K.]

PSKUDENORAPHES  ORAPHE  (iftv-
StTTpB^t  Tpa^).  It  ia  ihown  nnder  Pkao
TOnas  that  the  name  of  erery  ilate  debtor  at
Athena  waa  entered  in  a  regi*ter  iby  the  pntdorea,
whote  duty  it  waa  to  collect  the  debta.  and  einie
tbe  name  of  the  mztj  when  he  bad  paid  it.  The
entry  wai  nraally  made  upon  a  return  by  *ome
magiibBta,  to  whom  the  inaming  of  the  debt  be-
ame  effidally  known  t  la.  Sot  inatonce,  on  a  re-
liin  t^  the  ntXvToi,  that  mch  a  penon  had
becctae  a  leaiee  of  pnblie  landi,  or  farmer  of
talet,  at  aucb  a  rmt  or  on  mch  Cenu*.  In  case,
howcTer,  the  antboriliea  n^leeted  to  make  the
[Boper  letom,  any  indiTidnal  might,  oa  hii  own
reipouiibility,  giie  information  to  the  registering
officer!  of  the  eiiatence  of  the  debt ;  and  thereupon
the  ofilcen,  if  they  thought  proper,  might  luake  an
entry  accordingly,  thmgh  it  would  probably  be
their  duty  to  make  tome  inquiry  berore  ao  doing.
If  they  made  a  falae  entry,  either  wilfully,  or  upon
the  lug^tiou  of  anotho'  perton,  the  aggrieved
party  might  inatitnte  a  pnwecntion  againat  them,
or  againat  the  penon  Dpon  wboee  anggea^on  it  wna
,  madtw Such  pwaecntwn  waa  called  ipn^  ifw-


972  PSEUDOCLBTEIAS  GRAPHE.
Sryypa^f,  It  would  lie  alio,  where  k  mm  mt
regutered  u  debtor  for  more  Ihan  wu  remllj  due
&om  him.  And  IhensdermuiluadenUndlhelike
nmedy  to  be  apenlo  one,  who  wtia  faJtel;  neoided
as  a  debtor  bj  the  Tofilm  riy  biSai.  Whetber
ihii  fbtm  n(  proceeding  could  be  adopted  ngiinit
magittiatea  ht  making;  a  iatae  rctnni,  or  wbether
tbfl  remedy  againit  Chem  could  only  be  at  tbe
irixtVOTorlai  or  tlMnu,  we  ounnt  ay.  The
7pa^  ^vSf77pi^nir  win  bnmgbt  before  the
Thennothetae.  If  the  defendant  wu  conrieted,
lbs  name  of  the  complauiaat  mil  Btmck  out  of  the
rpgi>t«r,  and  that  of  the  defendaiit  iraa  entered  in
bii  Btead,  M  debtor  for  the  nma  amoanl.  Tbe
7pa^  ^vAi^fbf  waa  aimilar  to  tbia  ^  only  it  lay
in  thoto  caaeg  where  a  man,  wbo  had  been  a  itate
debtor,  had  paid  alt  that  wai  due,  but  hii  name
wa>  not  enued,  or  haring  been  enied,  wai  re-
entered. We  may  preiuine,  that  ftaudolent  or
malicioTU  motirea  were  neceosniy  to  be  proTcd  on
auch  a  cbarge  ;  but  it  ii  rauonable  also  to  nippuM
that  in  any  cue  of  groH  negligence,  fraud  or
molicE  might  (u  matter  of  coune}  be  Drtnimed  by
the  dicKila.  (Pollm,TiiL  40,  43  i  Ilarpoe.  uid
Suid*  t.  VD,  BovAji^wi,  'iftvtryyjKt^,  ^ttitiy-
Ypofai  tin) ;  BSckh,  PmU.  Beom.  ijf  AUmn,  pp.
349,  390,  2d  ed. ;  Meier,  AH.  Proa.  p.  337  ;
Platnei.PnK.iBuff^.iDLii.  p.]17.)  [C.R.K.]
PSEUDOCLETEIAS  GRAPHE  (i^<i*>.
■AtlTiIat  ypa^),  a  pmaecutioa  againit  one,  wbo
had  appeared  ai  a  witneia  {"^ir^lii  or  i(A4ti>|>)  to
prove  that  a  defendant  had  been  duly  >ommonBd,
and  therehy  enabled  the  plainlitT  to  gut  ajudgmeat
by  default.  To  prevent  fraud,  the  Athenian  law
directed  that  the  namei  of  tbe  witneHci  who  at-
trnded  tbe  nuomont  ihonld  he  tubicribed  to  the
bill  of  plaint  or  indictment  (,PyK\j)/ui),  u  that  the
defendant,  if  be  nerer  had  been  mmmooed,  and
judgment  had  ueTertheleaa  been  given  againat  him
by  deEault,  might  know  agiunat  whom  to  proceed.
The  hita  witneu  (lAirr^p)  wai  liable  to  be  crimi.
■tally  pmaecuted,  and  puniihed  at  the  diacretion
of  the  court.  Even  drath  might  be  inflicted  in  a
caie  of  grou  conapiracy.  (Demoath.  s.  NianL
1252.)  A  person  thrice  connkted  of  Ihii  oflence
waa,  ai  in  the  oua  of  other  blie  teitimony,  ipao
jan  dia&nnchiKd  ;  and  eren  tor  the  £nt  offence  tbe
Jury  might,  if  they  pleased,  by  a  vpoirrffiTiiiii  inflict
tlie  pmidly  of  diafnuichiiement  upcoi  him.  (Andoc
da  Mgti.  10.  ed.  Steph.  i  Meier,  di  Boa.  Damn.
p.  125.)  Here  wc  mar  obaerfe  thii  diitinction,
that  tbe  proceeding  againat  the  lalse  witneaa  to  a

le  (/iipriip)  waa  liabli


. The  I


le  that  tbe  fon
Tbe  I


magiilrate,

before  whom  the  defendant  neglected  to  appear,
when  by  the  evidence  of  the  witneu  it  wai  ihowD
that  he  had  been  duly  lummoned,  had  no  diiers-
tion  but  to  pronounce  judgment  againit  him  ;
whareai  the  dicaiti,  to  whom  the  witneaa  gave
blH  evidence  at  the  triaL  might  diibeliere  him
and  find  their  verdict  according  to  tbe  truth.  If
the  fraud  wiu  owing  to  a  conipimcy  between  ths
plaintilf  and  the  witneu,  it  ii  probable  that  an
action  at  the  auit  of  the  defendant  would  lie  againit
the  fonner,  to  recover  compenaation  ;  for,  though
the  conviction  of  the  witneai  would  tod  to  a  re-
veraal  of  the  judgment,  alill  he  (the  defendant)
might  have  niifered  damage  in  the  meantime,
which  the  wttiiv  aaida  of  the  judgnent  would  not


PUBLICANI.

repair.  Such  actioti  (it  hat  ber
might  be  a  Bin)  <rwio^iamlas,  or  perhapi  »
nuv.  If  the  name  of  tbe  witneit  bad  been  naiuiD-
lently  uied  by  the  plaioti)!^  and  the  witneai  had
thereby  been  brought  into  trouble,  we  may  con-
clnde,  fay  analog  to  the  cau  of  other  witneaaea,
that  he  had  a  SCci)  P>Miii  againat  the  piaintiC
(Demoilh.  c  Aplioi.  849.)  The  Tpo^  4>Ri«a-
K^TfTilat  came  bt&m  the  Theamolhetae,  aiid  tba
queiboo  at  the  trial  limply  wai,  whether  the  de-
fendant In  tbs  former  cstue  had  been  innunoatd  ot
not.  (Plainer,  Pnc  tmd  Klag.  vol  i.  p.  417  ;
Meier,  AU.  Proa.  pp.  33B,  S??,  768.)  [C.  R  CJ

PSEUUODI'PTEROS. [Tbupluk.]

PSEUDOMARTYRION  GRAPHE  <4wS».
liapTvpmr  Tpn^). [MuTrsu,  p.  731,  h.]

PSILI  (+<>ji). [ARiia.]

PSYCTER  (ifwTitp,  di-a.  ^Mcn)pittar\  a  wine<
cooler.  (Plat  Comm.  p.  333,  d  i  Tim.  Lt».  Plat,
i.v.  ;  Menander,  p.  177,  ed.  Meineke  ;  Aihen.ii.
pp.  469,  S02,  503.)  The  leaul  iptcially  adaptrd
for  ihii  opeiHtian,  waa  loraetiraei  made  of  bnnie
(Athen.iT.)).142]  or  *Uver(v.p.  199).  Ono  of
earthenware  ii  preaerved  in  the  Muienra  of  Anti-
qnitiet  at  Copeiihagai.  It  coniiita  of  one  deep
veaael  for  holding  ice,  which  is  lired  within  anotlier
for  holding  wine.  Tbe  wine  wai  poured  m  at  lb*
to[k  It  thua  iumnnded  tbe  veiiel  of  ice  vtd  waa
cooled  by  the  contact.  It  wai  drawn  off  n  u  M
£11  the  drinking-^npa  by  meant  of  a  coi^  al  tha
bottom.  That  the  ^tuntp  waa  a  kind  ofCaATBK  ;
and  accordingly,  wher*  Phylarchut  (ap.  AAat.  iv.
p.  143)  in  dctcribing  the  mode  of  life  of  CleofocDea.
King  of  Sparta,  ute*  the  fumer  term,  Plntani
((?«Ha.  p.  14B6,  ed.  Steph.)  adopts  the  bUter.

The  tiie  of  the  ifvitrV  waa  very  varioai.  It
oontained  from  3  qnarta  (Piat.  ^  o.)  to  a  gnat
number  of  gallons.  (Aiben.T.  p.  199,  d.  t)  It  waa


;  Im


'«.]


[C.JI.


[J.  Y.)
ITOa; iM.


PUBLICA'NI,  etrmera  of  the  public  rcvennca
of  the  Roman  atate  {vtcHgaJia).  Their  name  ii
formed  from  putficiM,  which  tigniSea  all  that  be-
longi  to  the  atate,  and  ii  anmetimei  nard  ai  ly-
nonymout  with  vectigaL  (Dig.  39.  tit.  4.  a.  1.
g  1  :  50.  tiL  16.  a  16  ;  SueL  A'eru,  1 ;  Cic  fm
Habir.  Pod.  2  ;  VaL  Hai.  vi.  9.  g  7.)  Th«  re-
lennet  which  Rome  derived  from  cODqtiered  ennn-
triea,  contiiling  chiefly  of  tnllt,  tiihet,  harboor
dntica,  the  acriptura  or  the  tax  which  waa  paid
for  the  nse  of  the  public  paiture  landt,  and  th*
duties  paid  for  the  uha  of  minn  and  lalt-wtu^
(ifl^i'aae),  were  let  out,  or,  ai  tbe  Romaoi  ex-
pressed it,  were  lold  by  the  cenion  in  Roiae  ttaelf
to  the  higheit  bidder.  (Cic  dt  Ltg.  Agr.  iL  31,
c.  Var.  iii.  7.)  This  ade  generally  took  pUce  in
the  month  of  Quinctilia  and  wia  made  for  a  lot-
tram.  (MaerobL  Sat.  L  12.)  Tbe  tannt  on  which
the  revenuea  were  let,  were  fixed  by  the  cenaora
in  the  Bo-eslled  bja  asuoriK  (Cic  od  Qamt.  »Ht
L  1  ;  Varro,  dt  Hi  /tut.  ii.  1  ;  Feat,  a  k  Pn-
dail.)  The  people  n  the  tenaM  however  frmrtinira
modiJBed  the  terms  fixed  by  the  eenten  in  order  is
raiie  the  credit  of  the  pubticaoi  (Plut.  FJamiM.  19;
Polyb.  vi.  1 7  1  Liv.  xixix.  44),  and  in  aome  caan
even  the  tribonei  of  the  people  intHleicd  in  thii
bnuich  oftheadminiatmtioD.  (Liv.iliiL  16.)  Tbn
tithet  raised  in  the  proviuca  of  Sicily  atone,  with
tha  aioeptjon  of  tboM  of  win^  oil,  lad  padco


PUBUCANI.
pndnce,  were  not  Mid  at  Btnne,  but  id  th«  di>-
triMi  of  Sidly  iMl^  aecardiii^t  to  a  pcsctice  c«tab-
liihfd  by  Hiero.  (Cit  o.  Var.  iL  3,  fi*,  &t)  The
pcnoTu  who  DDdertook  the  bnnmg  of  ths  public
nnnue  of  anine  belnamd  to  the  wealtbien  Ro-
nuiu.  Their  wealth  Bud  coiueqneDt  influeoce  ma;
be  tcai  from  lite  bet,  that  ai  evly  at  tbe  Kcond
Pmir  ni,  after  tht  battle  of  Cannae,  when  tbe
■enriuin  woi  entirely  eibaoited,  tbe  publicaoi  ad-
TBitced  laige  uimi  of  mimej  to  the  itate,  on  amdi-
tion  of  ivpaymtat  after  the  end  of  tbe  war.  (  VaL
Mbx.t.  6.  I  8  i  Lit.  zut.  18  ;  compan  niii.
48,  Ac) But  what  cUa  of  Ramani  the  poblicani

cenlnry  later  boveTcr  m  find  that  they  were
principally  men  of  Ibe  equcatrian  order  (Liv.  xliiL
16)  ;  and  down  to  tbe  end  of  tbs  republic,  aa  well
■■  during  the  early  part  of  the  empire,  the  Eaiming
of  the  public  rarenuaa  wai  tlniMt  eicluaively  in
tbe  haiid»  of  the  equitei ;  whence  the  word  equitea
and  publicanl  aie  Mmetiinea  ued  at  lynonyniooi.
(Cic.  e.  Vtrr.  i.  SI,  ii.  71,  ad  AU-'ii.  1  ;  SueL
Aag.  21 ,  Tadt^nui.  it.  6.)

The  publicani  had  to  gire  aecurily  to  the  ttate
for  the  mm  at  which  Uey  bought  one  or  mote
bnncbea  of  the  MTenue  in  a  proTince  i  but  u  for
Ihii  rUHHi  the  pnpoty  ot  efen  the  wealthiest  in-
diiidnal  miut  have  been  inadequate,  a  nnmber  of
equitea  geoerally  united  ti^ether  and  formed
company  (eocit,  tocieCat  or  corpua),  which  waa  r
eogniaed  by  the  itate  (Dig.  3.  tit.  4.  a  1),  and  by
which  they  were  enabled  to  Carry  on  their  under
takinga  upon  a  large  icale.  Such  ooinpaiuei  np-
pcar  ai  early  aa  the  Kcond  Punic  war.  (Lit.
xiiii.  48,  49.)  Tbe  iham  which  each  partner  of
nteh  a  company  took  in  the  buiiiisi,  were  called
partea,  aud  if  they  w«e  hubII,  psrliculae.  (Cic.
jm  Rabir.  PoO.  2  ;  Val.  Maji.  vi.  9.  S  7.)  The
mpcuMible  petHn  in  each  compuy,  and  tbe  one
who  eonlracted  with  the  itate,  waa  called  muncepa
^Fmt- 1,  o.  MuKoepB  ;  Peeudo-Aicon.  u  i>R»aJ.  p.
113,  ed.  Orelli.)  (Mi  - • ■


PUBLICANL  973

becDmeaneiDberofacompany  of  publican! ;  froed-

men  and  iliiTea  were  excluded.  (Pieudo-Atcon.  u

JMoMol. p. 113; Cic. e. Vtrr. iii. 39.) No

Roman  magiatrmta  bowerer,  or  goremor  of  a  pn>-

Tince,  waa  allowed  to  lake  nuj  ahare  whatever  ia

acnmpaxy  ofpublicani  (Cic,  c  Cctt.  iii.  67),act!gU'

lation  WMch  waa  chiefly  iatended  si  a  protection

agwiut  tbe  oppreaiion  of  tbe  iJivvinciali. During

later period  of  tbe  empire Tarioua  changei

i  introduced  in  the  tiirming  of  Ibe  public  reve-

I. Although  it  waa,  on  tbe  whole,  a  rule  that

lonon  ifaomd  be  cmapelled  to  take  any  ahare

«  ocfoned.  (Burmann,  Victij/,  Pop.  Rota.
p.  138,  &c)  Fmni  tbe  time  of  Conitantine  the
of  the  publieani  were  generally  not  longer
fat  three  yon.  (Cod.  4.  tit.  61.  a.  4.)
SeTeral  parte  of  the  reTeime  which  had  befers  beeti
'-"  ~i  publieani,  were  now  nuaed  by  eipecial  offi-
ippointed  by  the  smperen.  ( BBrmaon,  i.  e.
p.l41,&c)

All  ths  perwni  hitherto  roenticaied  aa  memben
of  these  companiei,  whether  they  held  any  office
in  inch  a  company  or  not,  and  merely  contributed
their  ibana  and  receired  their  portiona  of  the
protit  (Cic  ad  AIL  i.  19  ;  Nepoa,  Aa.  6),  did  not
tbemaelTca  take  any  part  in  the  actual  leyying  ot
coUectii^  of  the  taiee  in  the  proiincea.  Thia  part
of  the  buaineaa  wua  perfinmed  by  an  inferior  claaa
of  men,  who  were  aiud  tptrat  putijcat


of  a


I.  (Cir


ad  AIL  T.  IS,  e.  Vtrr.
held  bia  office  only  for  ime  year  .
tiTs  in  the  prDrincca  waa  called  aub  magiatro,
had  to  tnTcl  about  and  superintend  tbe  actual
boaiDeas  of  collecting  the  reTenues.  Ths  ifx"'-
Jk^rm  in  St.  Luks  (lix.  2)  waa  probably  tuch  a
aab  magiilro.  The  magtilei  at  Rome  had  also  tc
keep  the  aecotrnta  which  were  sent  in  to  him  {Udm-
laattee^4i  tt  »fpani).  The  credit  of  these  com-
paniea  of  publieani  and  the  flonrishiiDg  stale  of
their  finances  were  of  tbe  utmost  importance  to
the  stale,  and  ia  hct  ita  very  foundation :  i£
this  ths  Romana  were  well  aware  (Cic. ^iro  Leg.
MamU.  6\ and  Cicero  therefore  calls  Ihem  (he


aa  a  kind  of  public  hank  and  adranced  mms  of
mmey  to  the  atate  (compare  Cic  ad  Font,  t  '
which  theie&re  thought  them  worthy  oS  i
pecial  ptotaction.  But  they  abnaed  their  power
at  an  urly  period,  in  the  prorinces  as  well  as  a1
RoBW  itself ;  and  Livy  (iIt.  IS)  says,"  ubi  pub-

(aaiaeiis  nulla." (Compare  Li>.  xit.  3,  4.)
Nobody  but  a  B«inui  dtiiHi  wu  allowad  tc


(Val.  J


).  S  8t


Cic  e.  FSTT.  iii.  41,  ed  Faa.  liiL  9  ;  compare
e.  Vtrr.  ii.  70,  prv  Plana.  19.)  They  were  eiv-
gaged  by  the  publieani,  and  consisted  of  freemen
aa  well  aa  slaTea,  Romana  aa  well  as  proTincials.
(Cic  &  Vtir.  ii.  77,  d»  Pne.  Con.  5.)  This
body  of  men  ii  called  Janilia  jnMioamamm,  and
comprehended,  according  to  the  praetor's  edict
(Dig.  39.  tit,  4.  a  1),  all  persons  who  assisted  (ha
publieani  in  collecting  the  Tectigal.  Venous  laws
wore  enacted  in  the  course  of  time,  whjeh  wera
partly  intended  to  support  the  lerranta  of  tbe
publieani  in  the  performance  of  their  duty,  and
tartly  to  pnTeat  (hem  from  acts  of  oppcnsion.
(See  Digest.  39.  tit.  4 :  De  PvblicaaU  a  vteH-
galiS.  tt  cmuusm;  Qaiua,  it.  20.)

The  separsts  bnnches  of  the  public  revenue  in
(he  piuvinca  (deauaaa,  porlaria,  icriptimi,  and
ths  revenues  from  the  minea  and  nltworks)  were
mostly  leased  to  separate  omipaniea  of  publieani ;
whence  they  were-  distinguished  by  names  de-
rived from  iktt  particular  branch  which  tbey  had
taken  in  &rm  ^  a  jr.  decumani,  pecoarji  or  serifs
(urarii,saIinariiorniaiKipes  salhurum,  tec  (Paeudo-
Aacon.  L  e.;  compare  Dicdhae,  PDRnmiirX,
Salikac,  ScHimiBA.)  On  some  ocoaiona,  how-
ever, one  company  of  publieani  farmed  two  or
more  branches  at  once  ;  thus  WB  have  on  inatsnco
ietas  farming  the  portorinm  and  the  scrip-

-■- -'—- (Cic  0. P«JT.  iL  70.)

goes  by  tbe  name  of
Asconins,  asserts  that  ths  portitorea  were  publi-
eani who  {uBied  the  poitorimn  ;  bnt  from  all  -
the  pasaesea  where  they  are  mEntioned  in  ancient
writeca,  it  ia  beyond  all  doubt  that  (he  portitorea
were  not  publieani  properiy  ao  called,  but  only
their  servants  engaged  in  examining  (he  gooda
imported  or  eiportad,  and  levyhlg  the  cuatoni-
dniies  upon  them.  They  belonged  to  the  lanM
clnta  as  the  publicans  of  the  Now  Testament.
(St.  Loltc,  T.  27t  29.) Betpeetuig  tfae  i»p<ident


a  at the a


m  PUBLICIAKA  IN  REM  ACTIO.
■wvf  in  which  tbe»  inferior  offion  ■ometiniei  be-
liaved  tomidi  InTelJcn  uid  mercliuitc,  les  Plant
Mmatck.  i.  2.  5,  &c.  ;  Cic  od  Qiml.  Fr.  L  \  ;
Pint  <l»  CariomL  p.518,e.  (Compara  Btimiaiiii,
A  VKHg.  c.  9.)  [L  3.)

PUBLICUTJATN  REM  ACTIO.  wMgi™
to  him  who  had  obtaiDrd  powaaiion  of  a  thing  ex

C>  (siua,  and  bad  loat  the  Fnanaiion  beibn  hs
acquired  the  ownenklp  bj  Um^iioiL  Thii
inu  a  Fnsloriiii  aeticm,  n  ailed  bom  a  Pnator
Pobliciiu  (  and  tbs  Action  hj  which  iha  Pdueanr
ma  enaUed  to  aae,  na  tW  ha  iai  obtuaad  tbs
owiMt^ip  Inr  Unc^ioii.  (Oaina,  it.  36,  wbne
the  intaitis  la  gixiL)  Thia  actio  wM  an  incidant
to  ncc;  kind  of  poMcaaio  which  waa  vacaptibla
of  Uiocspion  (ths  thirty  yean*  ciocpted).  In
the  old  Roman  Lav,  thia  Actio  maembled  thr
Vindicatio,  and  in  the  nawer  Raman  Lav  it  waa
atiU  DHW  dotelj  aaiimilated  to  it,  and  conaaqimntly
in  tbti  actio,  mere  PoaiBnion  ww  not  the  only
thing  omiidcied,  hut  the  matter  wai  likened  to
the  OH  where  ownoihip  and  Foitnuon  wen  ac-
qnind  at  the  aoma  lima  by  Occupatio  or  TiaditiOi
Aocoidingly  Pciimio  for  the  porpoae*  of  Ucnca-
pioD  laay  be  liewad  Ib  two  wayi ;  liewed  with
laapaet  to  the  ownenhip  of  which  it  it  the  fbonda-
tioD,  it  ii  as  oUeot  of  jmifindence  aa  bare  Poa-
awaian  ;  tiawed  with  rafarenea  to  the  Publieiana
Actio,  irtiich  ia  ioddoit  to  it,  it  ii  viewed  aa
ewnanhi|k  The  ownr  of  a  thing  inight  anil
himaelf  of  thii  action,  if  ha  had  any  difficalty  in
pnring  his  owBenhip.

Thia  action  wai  iDlrodnced  for  the  pntectioD  of
thoia  who  had  a  eivilii  poueatio,  bat  that  only,
and  conieqaently  oiald  not  lecorir  a  thing  by  the
R«  nndicatio,  an  action  which  a  man  could  only
haie,  when  he  hod  the  Qnirilacian  owsenhip  of  a
thing.  According  (o  tba  defioitios  a  man  could
hate  thia  actio  both  for  a  thing  which  he  bad
in  bonii  and  fiic  a  thmg  of  which  be  bad  a  cinlii
BMamiie,  withoal  haTins  it  in  bonia.  When  he
bad  the  Ihing  in  booi*  hu  action  waa  goad  againit
the  Qniriterian  owner,  tia  if  anch  owner  pleaded
hia  ownenhip,  the  i^aintiff  night  nply  that  the


phiintiff  who  had  a


d  deliTt

The  Pnbliciaii


0,  without  haling
' -  -  t  the


while  the  pujntis  had  it  only  m  Ecluo  ;  nor  waa
it  Tolid  againat  onather  who  had  a  CiTilia  poaienio
ai  good  aa  hia  own.  Hie  action  waa  good  againtl  a
PnaeoBor  who  had  not  a  cJTilii  poaaeaaio.  In  diia
action  the  piuntiff  had  to  pcore  that  he  poaaeaaed
QTihler,  belbra  the  time  when  ha  loat  the  poo-


[Poa


"■]


7  of  the


The  abject  of  the  action  waa  the  :
thfaw  and  all  thai  belonged  to  it  (on
In  da  la^alation  of  Jutiniaii,  th*
twaoi  Rea  Uaneiid  and  NeeHan^ldi
and  owneiahq)  oould  ia  all  a
traditiaD.  The  PuUieiBDa  actio  tbaieibce  becama
uaeleaa  f«  any  olhet  purpaaa  tlun  a  caae  of  bonae
fidei  poaaeaiia,  and  thi*  aeema  to  explain  why  the
worda  "  non  a  domino  "  apptai  in  Iho  Edict  M
cited  in  the  Dkat  (6.  tit.  2.  a.  1),  while  they  do
not  appeal  in  (hunt  (It.  tS).

The  PnUioana  actio  qipliad  alao
the  tight  to  which  had  not  baea  tranrfanad  by
tlaneipatja  k  In  jnra  — ' ....  — i^.i  t-.  »-._
ezyorai  with  tha  —


PUaiLATUa
land. Al  tba  legialatioD  of  Jnatlniam  radanj


(Dig.  6.  tit  2  ;  IniL  t.  tiL  6  ;  Sarigny,  fin
ReaU  da  BttUmn,  p.  13,  £th  ed. ;  Pnchto,  laat,
ii.  i  233  ;  Mackeldey,  ZaMaol,  I3lh  ed.  S  270,
and  the  notea).  [O.  U-j

PU'BLICCU. [Aalukiiiti,  p.  aS,b.]

PUBLICUhl,  PRIVATUM  JUS.  [Jua,  p.
6sr,  b,]

PU'BLICUS  AQEB. rAou-1

PUER. [SinvuB.]

PU01LATU3  {w*(,«7^*,«7fi.x'a,™w*
tini\  boxing.  The  firt  (fi^Mii,  Tii)  being  tba
■imfJcil  and  moat  natural  weapon,  it  Hmy  ba
taken  fur  granted  that  boxing  WM  one  of  the
eatlieat  athletic  gamaa  amooit  the  Oiedco.  Heoca
and  aararal  of  the  tariieit  henea  are
either  aa  ncton  in  the  inrfiiit,  at  aa  dia-
tingniahed  boien,  iuch  aa  Apolln,  Hencleo,  Ty-
deui,  Polydeneaa,  &c  (Pans.  t.  7.  M  ;  Tbeocnt.
xn>.  113  j  Apollod.  iii.  S.  1 1 :  Pana.  t.  8.  f  -J.)
Tha  Scholiait  on  Pindar  {Nat.  r.  89)  laya  diat
Theaeui  waa  heliered  to  ha?«  infected  the  ait  of
hoiin){.  The  Homeric  bcnca  on  well  ac^paintcd
with  iL  (Horn.  IL  xxJiL  «81,  Ac. ;  coapan  Od.
Tiii.  103,  Ac)  The  oontaat  in  brai^  waa  one  of
the  hardeat  and  meat  danggenoa,  wbeoce  Honer
giTca  it  the  attribute  Aa.i7«v4.  (A  xiiiL  G53.)
Boxing  far  nien  waa  intndnead  at  the  0\jwjie
gamai  in01.a3,and  for  boyi  inOL37.  (Paoa.
T.  S.  g  3.)  Conteeti  in  boxing  for  boyi  an  abs
mentioned  in  the  Nemea  and  Iithmio. (Pbib.  iri.

In  the  eoriiMt  timea  boitn  (pdgiln,  vAmu)
feugbt  naked,  with  the  eiceptign  of  a  (lifw  loand
their  loina  (Horn.  IL  xiiiL  GB3 ;  Vitg;  Am.  t.
481 )  I  bat  thia  waa  not  naed  when  boxing  waa  in-
tnxbcvd  at  Olymiua,  aa  tba  eanteata  ia  wnnling
and  lacing  bad  been  eairied  on  ben  by  porania
aniiidy  naked  enr  ainea  OL  15.  Reapntng  the
leatbani  tbonp  with  which  pugiliatt  aumamded
Ibur  fiala,  aee  CuTva,  when  ita  Taiiooa  ten*  an
illnatntad  by  weod.tQt«.

The  boxing  of  the  aiwicnta  a^qicBn  to  bare  ik-
aerablad  the  pnctice  of  modan  unca.  Sone  par.
ticnlan,  howeter,  doaerre  to  be  mentioBed.  A
peenliar  method,  which  roquired  gnat  ikill,  waa
not  to  attack  the  antagonin,  but  to  mnain  «a  the
defennTc,  and  thna  to  wear  oat  t)M  oppoamt,
until  he  wu  obli)(ed  to  acknowledge  himaelf  ts  be
conqnend.  (Dio  Chryaoat.  Miimo.  ii  omt  39 ;
Enotath.  ad  II.  f.  132-2.  29.)  It  waa  annitni
a  aign  of  the  grealeat  ikill  in  a  boxer  to  conqncc
withoDl  raceinii^  any  waunda,  oo  that  the  twa
great  pirints  hi  tbii  game  were  to  inflict  Uawa,
and  at  the  ame  time  not  to  ennae  ooealf  ta
any  danger  {iAwyJ(  koI  foWf,  J.  ChryaoC
Strm.  Tii  I  g  PlaL  AnafW.  iL  S  ;  compai*  Paaa,
TL  12.  t  S).  A  pdgilBt  uaed  hti  right  am  diiefly
fiir  igbting,  and  the  Itft  u  a  prstectiMi  far  hia
head,  for  all  rtgnlar  blowa  wan  dirtcied  a^inat
the  upper  porta  of  the  body,  and  the  wouada  in-
flictadnpoo  (ba  h '

their  n

their  teeth  wen  fivqucntly  knMked  oat.  (Apol,
'  Hhod.  ii  7Sfit  TheoeriE.  it.  13S  t  Viig.
409;  Acliao.  r.lf.  i.  19.) The  can


«tdl  wgabx  pngflirti  th<T  woe  gmcnUy  miu^
antOBled  and  broken.  (Plat.  Oorg.  p.  £16;
i>niAW.  p.  S43  I  Mutial,  tii.  S2.  G.)  Henca  in
werti  of  ut  tba  wa  i^  tka  puKcUiiM*  alwaya
■(pear  b«a<Q  flat,  and  ahbough  iwollen  in  nma
pwu,  an  j«t  niallcr  than  sail  unallr  arb  In
otdet  to  protect  Ilia  can  from  Hme  blowi,  little
coren,  called  i^i^arrltai,  were  iaTBDtsd.  {Pollni,
a  S3  I  EljB»l.  Mag.  >.c)  Bill  thew  eat-coien
which,  acoitdiDg  to  the  Etjmologist,  wen  toada
of  btaia,  WGI*  undgnbledl;  uerei  uicd  in  the
great  public  gamee,  but  anij  in  the  gjmnMia  and
Dalautiae,  oi  at  nwat  in  the  public  conteaU  of
bonng  for  ban ;  the;  an  neTci  eecn  in  any
•ndcDt  worii  of  (It

The  gane  of  boung,  like  all  the  other  gjmau-
tic  and  athletic  gwnee,  wu  ngnlated  b;  certain
rnlea.  Urn*  pniliMa  wen  not  allaved  to  take
hold  of  OHO  aoodier,  oi  to  ma  their  feet  lor  the
purpeae  of  naking  one  amtbet  fall,  u  wu  the

ciam^HoLS.)  CaMa  of  death  either  doriog  the
fight  itKlf  St  iOMi  after,  appeal  to  bane  occurred
tather  frequantlf  (SchoL  ad  Pimd.  Oi.  T.  31),  bat
if  a  fighter  wilfutlj  killed  hit  antagonin,  he  wai
•BvetElj  puniehed.  (Puis.  tuL  40.  S  S.  *i.  9.
S3.)  If  both  the  combatanla  wen  tind  withoat
wiihing  to  giTe  up  the  fight,  thef  migbt  pauie
K  while  to  recoTct  their  itmi^th  ;  and  in  eome
caaea  they  tfe  deacribed  **  reetuig  en  th«r  kneei.
(ApoUiB.  Rhod.  iL  86  ;  Stat  Titb.  -n.  796.)  If
tba  fight  lailed  too  lon^


witbont  neiog  anr  maina  of  defence,  except  a  cet^
tain  poaition  of  the  hand*.  (Bnrtath.  oif /I.  xiiii.
p.  1334  ;  Paaa.  Tiii.  40.  %  S.)  The  codleit  did
not  end  Dotil  toe  of  the  eonbatanla  wae  ccmpalled
Ik;  btigne,  wonndi  or  deepair,  to  daelan  hini-
■elf  cUKpiared  (ArvinfMitiv,  Paiu.  ri.  10.  g  1),
which  wai  gsDoall;  done  h;  lifting  up  ena  hand.
(PleL£y(>iq«.lS.)

The  loDiaiu,  eipeciall;  thoee  of  Siunoa,  woe  at
all  timea  more  dutingtdahed  pu^iliita  than  the
Dttiaix,  and  at  Sparta  boxing  u  aid  to  haTe
been  ftcbiddeD  hj  the  lawi  of  Ljenisui.  (Fnu.
vi.  3.  e  <  ;  Plat-  ifm-  19-) But  the  ancienU

riallr  cmiidered  boxing  a*  a  oaefbl  tnining
Biilitai;  poipou^  and  a  part  of  education  no
anC  than  an;  other  g^mnailie  eierdie.
loaA.  3  ;  Flut  CU,  M<ig.  30.)  Sren  is
I  point  of  Tie*,  boxii^  *u  recom-
■  a  remed;  againit  giddineea  and  chronic
.  (Aretaeue,  De  Wor*.  rfhrt.  «r.  L  3.)
Id  Italy  boxing  qipean  likeviie  to  have  been
pnctiaed  from  eulr  timea,  capeciall;  among  the
StiwaiM.  (Lit.  i  35 ;  Dionn.  liL  73 )  It
cantinntd  H  a  popular  game  during  the  whole
period  of  the  republic  ai  well  ai  of  Iha  empire.
(Suet  Ai^  4£  ;  Cic  0>  £9.  iL  15,  10 ;  Tacit.
Awmd.  iri.  31  ;  Suet  Calig.  \Z.)  See  Kianw,
Di»  Gtmmodik  and  Agon.  d.  HtStait,  pp.  497—
fiS*.  [L.S.1

PUGILLAItES.  [TaBDt.ix.]
PU'OIO  0>dx"V<K  ■''■»■  tutxiir*"'  hX'fi-
tar),  a  dagger  ;  a  tiro-edged  knife,  commonl;  of
hcnta^  witD  the  handle  in  man;  caiea  TBiiouil;
onianMitad  or  enriched,  aametimee  made  of  the
hud  black  woodof  the  SyriuiteRbinth.  (Theophr.
tf.  /'.  T.  3. 1  3.)  The  accaii:^aB;ing  woodcut  ihova
thiea  aaciMt  daggen. The  two  nppet  iigarei  an


k*i  imporianC  tl


PULVINAR.
coined  liom  Beger  (7I«>..finaKf.  ToL


ns


419):  the  third  repreuoti  a  dagger  about  a  foot
long,  wbicb  wai  found  in  an  Egyptian  tomb,  and
is  preeerred  in  the  Muiemn  M  Leyden.  The
middle  figure  ii  entirely  of  metal.  The  bandlei
of  the  two  othn*  were  fitted  to  receire  a  plats  of
wood  on  each  aide.  The  lowermort  hai  elao  two
boMee  of  iior;  or  bom,  and  ihowi  the  remaioi  of
a  thin  plate  of  gilt  metal,  with  which  the  wood


(o>=3


In  the  bonie  age*  the  Oreeki  ic

a  dagger  Bupendcd  by  the  iword  OL

of  the  bod;  [Oladiub],  and  need  it  on  all  oc-
cauona  inetead  of  a  knife.  (Horn.  [L  iiL  271  j
Athau.TLp.332,c.}  The  cuatom  it  coalinuad  t«
the  pieeent  da;  amopg  the  Amanti,  who  an  de-
tcended  bom  the  ancicait  Oreaka.  (Dodwell,
7\mT,  ToL  L  p.  133.)  The  Bomana  (aee  wood-
culi,  m.  2,  6i4),  wen  the  dagger  ai  the  Peniana
did  [AdHuu]  ou  the  right  tide,  and  ceue-
qnentl;  dnw  it  with  the  thumb  nt  the  upper  part
of  the  hni,  the  poution  meat  eSbctiTc  for  itabb^.
Tba  tone  pfio  and  iyx"P^">*  denote  both  ita
■mallneu  and  the  umnner  of  grasping  it  in  the
hand  (ir^  maw).  In  the  aame  wa;  we  muat
Iindei^aDd*'lhe  two  iwords  "  (rfaot  ^fbdns,  QeU.
ii.  IS)  worn  by  Iha  Gallic  chieftain,  il^  b;
Manliui  Tctqnatm  )  and  the  monumenti  of  the
middle  (gei  prore  tliM  the  cnilimi  long  continued
in  our  own  and  in  adjoining  conntriee.  (See  Slo-
&Mii,Mim.:^figiaa/GLBTitam.)  Anung  eome
of  the  northeni  nationi  of  Europe,  a  dirk  waa  con-
itanlly  vam  on  the  ude,  and  wa*  in  readinew  to
be  drawn  on  eiery  oeiaaioD.  (Ovid.  TriA  T.  8.
19,30.)  The  Cbalybes  employed  the  tame  wnpon,
atabbing  their  enemiea  in  the  neck.  (Xen.  AmA,
It.  7.  f  16.)  For  th*  Greek  hoieenwn  the  dagger
waa  c<miid««d  preferable  to  the  long  (word  »■  a
venpim of  oSaoce^ (Xeu.  dt  Si  EaioL  xii.

11)  iTy.]

PULLA'RIUS.  [AiroDa,p.l7e,a.l
PU-LPITUM  (THiiTRui..]
PULVI'NAR.  A  repreientatioD  of  the  node
of  uaing  cnihicu  or  pillowi  (^vw),  to  ncline
upon  at  entartainmenu,  ia  given  in  the  wood-cut
under  SvMroBIVic.  The  moat  Ininriaoi  of  luch
cuihiona  were  ituffed  with  ■wan'i-down.  (Mart
xiT.  161.)  An  ancient  Egyptian  cuahion  ia  pie-
aerred  in  the  Britiih  Museum.  In  reference  to
tbii  practice,  the  Bnmana  wen  in  the  habit  of

Claciug  tbe  ilalnei  of  the  gods  npon  piltowa  at  the
xliilemia.  [Epulonu  ;  LicnsmNtuH.]  The
couches  pnTided  for  this  purpcae  in  tbe  templee
wen  called  aMnaria.  (Hor.  (hrm.  i.  37.  3  t
Ond.  itfet.  ST.  837  ;  Cic  ia  GnL  ilL  10,  ^orwo.

fi,OoK  S3,7kK.  if.  3;  VaLUai.  iiL  7.  |  I'l


876  PTANEPSIA.

Serrina,  in  Viiy.  Oeorg.  iii.  533.)  There  wu  alto
B  pDlrinBi,  on  which  the  imagsii  of  the  gods  were
laid,  in  the  Circiu.  (Saebm.  AagiHt.  43.  Claad.
t.)  [J.Y.)

PULVl'NDS. [PULVINAR.]

PUPILLA, PUPILLUS. [IwuBBSilN-

FANS  ;  TUTKJ.A.]

PrPILLA'RlS  SUBSTJTUTIO. [Hbrm,
p.  599.]

PUHPIS. rNAVia,p.787,«.]

PUTEAL,  [onperl;  meBni  the  endonre  nir-
muidini;  the  apening  of  ■  well,  to  protect  p«r>on>
frinn  hlling  into  iL  II  WM  eilher  round  or  iquue,
and  Menu  uiuall;  to  have  been  of  the  height
of  three  or  ibuT  feet  from  the  gmind.  Then  ii  ■
round  one  in  the  Briliih  Miiuum,  made  of  maible,
which  WM  fouad  among  the  mini  of  one  of
Tiberiui's  I'illaj  in  Capreie  ;  it  eihibitafive  gnmpi
of  fauRi  and  baechaniilim  nympbi ;  and  anond
the  edg«  ai  the  top  may  be  eeen  the  marki  of  (he
ropea  naod  in  drawing  Dp  water  from  the  well
Snch  puteolia  aacni  to  hare  been  common  in  the
Roman  villas :  the  jmlmlia  lignala,  which  Cicen
(ad  Alt.  i.  10)  wanted  for  hii  TnKuIan  villa,  mn>'
hare  been  of  the  tame  kind  u  tlie  one  in  thi
Biitiah  MuKDin  ;  the  ligaala  lefen  to  iti  heiiif
adorned  with  figurti.  Ji  waa  the  practice  in  lomi
catea  (o  imround  a  jaered  place  with  an  encloiun
open  at  the  top,  and  auch  eneloenrea  from  thf
grtit  limilaritj  thej  bore  to  PvteaUa  were  called
hf  thii  name.  There  wai  a  Fxttal  of  thil  kind
at  Rome,  called  I'aUai  Scr&imiamm  or  fyteai
I-Smtii,  which  ii  often  exhibited  on  coina  of  the
Scribcnia  gene,  and  of  which  a  apecimen  ii  j
below.  The  pnteal  ii  on  the  Teierte  of  the
adorned  witb  garlandi  and  two  Ijna.  It  i>  gene-
rally ttaled  llmt  there  were  two  puteatia  in  t''  ~
Roman  foran  ;  bnt  C.  F.  Hermann,  who  hu  en
folly  examined  all  Che  paisagei  in  the  ancit
writeii  relating  to  thit  matter  {lad.  LnL  Mi
burs.  1840),  comei  to  the  eoncluuon  that  th.
wai  only  one  each  pnteal  at  Rome. It  wai  in  I

cated  in  very  ancient  timei  either  on  account
thewhelltone  of  the  Augur  Nariui  (comp.  Li».
36),  or  beauie  the  ipot  had  been  atnick  by  light'
ning. It  wa«  lubiequenlly  repaired  and  re-dedi-
cated by  Scriboniui  Libo,  who  had  been com-
manded to  examine  the  itata  of  the  aacred  plaeea
(Feaini,  i.  v.  ScrSmvamxa). Libo  erected  ii '
neighbonrhood  a  tribunal  for  the  praetor,  in
eequence  of  which  the  place  waa,  of  eoorac,  fre-
quented by  penona  who  had  law-iuita, auch
money-lender)  and  the  like. (Camp.  Hor.  Sat.
6.  35,  EpM.  \.  19.  B  :  Ot.  Renud.  Amor.  fi6
Cic  pro  .Su.  3  ;  a  F.  Hernumn,  L  e.)


PUTl'CULAE,  PUTI'CULI.  IFonus,  p.
£60,  b.]

PYANE'PSIA  (nari'^m),  a  featiral  ce!a-
brataa  at  Athena  erery  year  on  the  leTenth  of  Py-
anepoon,  in  honour  of  Apollo.  (Harpooat.  Hoych.
Huidti.a.«.  llvarAfM.) It  waawidlo  hsTe  bean


pythia;

initituted  by  Theiona  after  bia  return  linm  Crete. '
(Plut.  Tha.  22.)  Tbe  feativa]  aa  well  aa  Die
month  in  which  it  took  place,  are  lud  to  hare  de-
rived their  name*  from  v^t^ioT,  another  f«m  far
Kiofui!,  i,  e.  pulse  or  beazii,  which  were  cooked  at
tbia  leanon  and  carried  about.  (Harp,  and  Suid.  L  c ;
Athen.  ii.  p,  4D3.)  A  proceition  q>p«n  to  ban
taken  place  at  tbe  Pyane^ia,  in  which  the  tlptst^n)
WBi  carried  aboot.  Thi*  (ifxa-idv^  wai  an  olive-
branch  aurrounded  with  wool  and  laden  with  the
ftuiti  of  the  year  ;  for  the  featival  wai  in  reality  a
harveat  feaat,  Itwaicanied  byaboywhoaeparenti
were  >till  living,  and  thoae  who  followed  him  asng
certain  veraea,  which  are  preserved  in  Plutarch.
iL  e.  ;  compare  Clem.  Atei.  Strom,  iv,  p.  474  ;
Eiutath.  ad  tl.  iiii.  ;  Snid.  1. 1>.  tiftttiim, ;  ud
Etymol.  Mag.  where  a  dilTereot  acconnt  ii  given.)
The  proceuion  went  to  a  temple  of  Apollo,  and
the  oUve-branch  was  planted  at  ita  cutiance.  Ae-
eording  to  others,  every  Athenian  planled,  on  the
day  of  the  Pyanepsia,  such  on  olive  branch  before
hie  own  house,  where  it  was  left  standing  tilt  ibe
next  celebtntiou  of  the  feitirgi,  when  it  was  ex-
changed for  a  fresh  one.  (Schot.  ad  AriMapk.
FM.  lOSO.)  [L.S.]

PYCNOSTY'LOS. [TjdPlnM.]

PYELUS  C»*»Am). [Funus,  p.S55,Ii.1

PYOME. [MENauRA,  p.  752,b.]

PYOON. [MassuRi,  p.  7i2,a.]

PYLA'GOKAE  (rMorlp*).  lAjiPaiCTVO-
N«s,p.80,b.]

PYRA. [FuNUB,p.559,h.]

PYBGUS  (ripyo,),  a  tower.  1.  The  towtn
used  in  fonilication  and  in  war  are  apnken  of  under
TuHRis.  2.  An  army  drawn  up  in  a  deep  oblong
column.  [TuRRiS,  No.  VI.]  3.  A  dice-box,  ■>
called  from  its  reumblance  to  a  towa  [Fbi-
TiLLUB.].  4.  The  territory  of  tbe  loWD  of  Tee*
wu  diitiibuteJ  among  a  certain  nnmber  at  towen
(ripyoi),  to  each  of  which  coiresponded  ■  lyrn-
mory  or  section  of  the  citiieni  (Biickb,  Oifp.  later.
No.  3D64  I  and  the  elucidations  of  Gtole,  HiiL  ^
Onm,  vol  iii.  pp.  247,  248).

PY'RRHICA. [SitTano.]

PYTUIA  (*Mia),  one  of  the  four  gnat  na-
tional festivals  of  the  Greeks.  It  was  cclebiattd
I  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Delphi,  anciently  called
Pytbo,  in  honour  of  Apollo.  Anemia,  and  Lets.
The  place  of  this  tolemnity  was  the  Criiami
plain,  which  for  this  purpose  contained  a  hippo-
drnmui  or  race-course  (  Pau^  x.  37-  S  4 ),  a  itadinu
of  1000  feet  in  length  (Ceniorin.  da  lite  SaL  13),
and  a  theatre,  in  which  the  musical  eoDtcsts  took
place.  (Lucian,  adv.  imdott.  9.)  A  gynuHainm.
prytaneium,  and  other  building)  of  this  kind,  pn-
bably  existed  bete,  as  at  Olj'mpia,  althoDgh  Uiey
are  not  mentioned.  Once  the  Pythian  games  wen
held  at  Athens,  on  the  advice  of  Demetrius  Pol^oi^
cetes  (OL  122.  3  ;  ace  PluL  Daielr.  tO  ;  Conini,
Fail.  All.  it.  p.  77),  because  the  Aetolians  were  in
possession  of  the  piiisos  around  Delphi.

The  Pythian  games  wen,  according  to  nwM
l^endi,  instituted  by  Apollo  hinurlf  (Atfa.n.  iv.
p.  rol  i  SchoL  Amm.  ad  Piad.  PgO.}:  aihti
traditions  referred  Uiem  to  ancient  heroes,  sucb  aa
Amphictyon,  Adrastui,  Diomedcs,  and  oUten.
They  were  originally  perhaps  nsthing  more  tkau
a  religious  ponegyn),  ocfasioned  by  the  aiads  of
Delphi,  and  the  sacred  games  are  nd  to  hav*
been  at  first  only  a  musical  contest,  which  eott-
HMed  in  singing  ■  liyinii  to  tbe  lunwar  «f  iho


PYTHIA.
PjUuiii  goi  with  Htv  KaompuunMit  at  tbe  d-
tbua.  (pBtu.  X.  7.  i  2  i  Stnh.  ii.  p.  421.)  Soma
of  Ibe  poata,  howercr,  and  mjtliographitn  npre-
MDt  even  the  god*  u>d  the  cul;  beioea  u  bd-
g>ged  ID  grmnutic  and  MOMtnui  conleau  >(  the
Pjtfaiao  puoei. Bot  mat


•  wrilwi  mn  food  of  in-

dnlging.  Tha  d«*criptim  of  ilia  Prihian  gunei
in  which  Sophodca,  in  tha  Elaotn,  makai  Omtc*
take  part,  bch>agi  Id  thia  cIam.  Tha  Fjtbiaii
■Binaa  matt,  on  accooat  of  tha  calebiitf  dF  the
Delphk  onuile,  haro  bacome  a  DUicmBl  fealiTal  fgr
all  the  Oieoki  M  a  mj  early  period  ;  and  when
Sdou  fixed  paeoniMy  lewaidi  for  Ihoee  Atheoiaiu
who  wen  Tietoti  m  tha  gnat  nationBl  feativali,
Ihe  Pylhiati  agon  waa  nndonbledlf  indoded  in
the  nnmbar,  thannh  it  ia  not  aipnoly  mentioned.
(I>i«t.  I-iat.  i,  M.)

Wbethet  gynuiHUo  <(«itat*  had  been  performed
at  tba  Pylhiau  gaiaei  pnriova  to  OL  47,  ii  na-
ceitain.  BSekh  nppoaea  tint  theH  two  kiudi
nf  gamei  had  been  c«ineeUd  at  the  Pjthia  bnm
aailj  timea,  bnl  that  aAarwarda  tha  gymoutic
gamea  were  ne^eetad :  but  howern  (hit  may  be,
it  ia  csnun  that  about  OL47  they  did  not  exitt
at  DelphL  Down  to  OL48  the  Delphiana  them-
aelrei  hod  been  the  agonothetae  at  the  Pythian
gamaa,  bat  in  the  third  year  of  thii  Olympiad,
when  after  the  Criaaaeui  war  the  Abphictjoni
took  tha  mauaMmenl  nnder  their  care,  they  nala-
lally  became  the  agDnalhetae.  (Strab.  ii.  p.  421  j
Pant.  X.  7.  I  3.)  Some  of  tha  andanti  data  the
inatitation  of  the  Pythian  gamea  fron  thia  tinu
(PhoL  Cod.  p.  6SS,  ad.  Bekker),  and  othen  ny
that  hencefrath  thay  waca  called  PflUam  gaaut.
Owing  to  their  bainf  nnda  tho  nanagenwnt  of
the  Amphietjont  they  are  aometinKa  oiled  'A/i-
♦umwMKldton.  (Heliod-^ettiT.  1.)  Fiom  OL
48.  3,  the  Pythiida  wen  ocxaiionally  oiad  ai  an
Beta,  and  the  fini  celebration  onder  the  Amphjo
tyvoa  wu  the  fint  Pythiad.  Faoaaniaa  (J.  a.)
eipnaatj  ilalea  thai  in  ihia  y<ar  tho  (oiginal
mnaioU  esntatt  in  KitapifSUt  waa  extended  by  the
additicn  of  aixiftiit,  i.  t.  tinging  with  the  ae-
coapaiument  of  the  duta,  and  by  that  of  Ante-
pbying  alonb  Stiabo  (JL  a }  in  apeaking  of  theae
uinondoot  don  not  mention  tin  aiiXifiia,  bn(
atatea  that  the  conteat  of  cithaia.plByem  (mfcipiff.
nl)  WH  added,  while  Pauaniaa  aiugni  the  in-
tnduction  of  (hit  conteal  to  the  eighth  Pjlhiad.
One  of  the  muical  coDIetti  at  tha  Pylhian  gamea
in  which  only  fiata  and  cithara-playert  took  part,
waa  the  KKalled  vdfuu  HMuui,  which,  tt  teaat
in  anbaaqoent  timet,  eoniieted  <^  Eva  parti,  lii.
iriMp(itaf,iii.-wupci,  uaaiit\.aMrii£i,  fo>iS«  ical
SdtfTvAoi,  and  ff^prfyn.  The  whole  of  thia  vA/ui
waa  a  mntical  deacriplion  of  the  fight  of  Apollo
with  the  dragon  and  of  hia  rictory  oTer  the
montter.  (Stnbo,l.a}  A  umewhst  different  ac-
count of  Iha  parte  of  thia  ri/Mt  ia  given  by  the
Echoliiut  IB  Pindar  (Jryiin.  ai  Pflk.)  and  by
PoUu  (IT.  79,  SI,  84}.

Beaidea  theae  innoTBtiona  in  Ibo  mntical  con-
teita  which  were  made  in  the  firtt  Pylhiod,  mch
gymnat^  and  aqneitrian  gunea  ai  were  then
caitamary  at  Olympia,  were  either  reiived  at
Delphi  or  introduced  bi  tbe  fitit  time.  Tha
chanoE.4«c«  with  four  h«iei  wat  not  intcoduoed
till  the  Kcond  Pythiad.  (Paot.  x.  7.  J  3.)  Somo
ganra  m  the  otliei  kind  were  adopted,  which  had


PYTHIA.  m

Dot  yet  bean  jaaetiied  at  Olympia,  rib  tha
ioKiX^i  and  the  tiauKoi  for  boya.  In  the  fott
Pjlhiod  tbe  Ticlon  receiTed  MJ^^iara  aa  their
priie,  but  in  the  lecand  a  chaplet  wu  aalabliihed
at  the  reward  lor  tha  victon.  (E'aua.  and  SchoL
ad  Piad.  Lc)  The  Scboliaili  on  Pindar  reckon
Ihe  firit  Pythiad  tiom  tbit  iatrodnction  of  the
chqilot,  and  [heir  lyitem  hat  been  followed  hj
moit  modem  chrondogera,  though  Pauianiai  ex-
preuly  ajiigni  thia  inatilution  to  the  lecond
Pythiad.  (See  ClintDO,  F.  II.  p.  19G  ;  Knuac,
Dit  PgOi.  Ntm^  Ac  p.21,  &c.)  The  a4Ji»^la,
which  waa  introduced  in  the  fint  Pythiad,  waa
omitted  at  the  tecond  and  OTer  after,  a*  only
el(^i€a  and  Api^mi  had  been  lung  to  the  flute,
which  were  thought  loo  melancholy  for  thit  lo-
lemnily.  The  Tt^imu  or  ehariol-mce  with  four
honei  howeiec  wat  added  in  the  nine  Pythiad.
In  the  eighth  Pythiad  (01.  55.  3}  the  conteit  in
pkying  tha  cithora  without  tinging  wat  Lntroduced  ;
in  Pj-lhiad  23  the  foat-race  in  anna  wat  added :
in  Pythiad  46  the  chaiiol.race  with  two  full-
grown  hiHwa  (aimupiio)  ipAimi)  waa  performed  for
the  firtt  time  ;  in  Pythiad  53  the  choriol-nce  wiUi
four  fcwli  wat  intraduced.  In  Pythiad  61  the
pancratium  for  boyi,  in  Pythiad  fi3  the  hone-raoe
with  foali,  and  in  Pythiad  69  the  chariot-race
with  two  foali  wera  introducad.  (Pain,  t  e.)
Varioni  muiical  conteili  were  alio  added  in  the
CDune  of  time,  and  conteati  in  tragedy  aa  well  at
in  other  kindi  of  poetiy  and  in  recitation!  of  hia-
torical  coDipatitiona  are  expiBaly  mentioned.
(PhUoatr.  Va.  &^  ii.  27.  2  ;  PluL  Sfmpiit.  ii.
4.)  Worki  of  art,  at  painlingi  and  iculpturea,
were  exhibited  to  the  ataeinbled  Oreekt,  and
ptiiet  were  awarded  to  theae  who  had  produced
the  fineK  worfca  (Plin.  ixxf.  3S.)  The  mntical
and  artiatic  contettt  were  at  all  timet  the  moat
pnminenl  feature  of  the  Pythian  gamet,  and  in
thii  napect  they  even  excelled  the  Olympic
gameL


at  the  end  of  CTcry  eighth  year  ;  but  in  OL  48.  3,
they  became  like  the  Olympia  a  Tmrarr^pli,  ■'.  t,
they  were  held  at  the  end  of  ereiy  fourth  year,  and
a  IVthiad  thenfine  erer  lince  the  lime  that  it  wat
utedaa  an  aera^  comprehended  a  apace  of  four  year%
commenciog  with  the  third  year  of  ereiy  Olympiad.
(Patu.  Jlc;  Diod.XT.  60  j  compare  Clinton, /'. //.
p.  195.)  Othen  have,  in  ot^xaition  to  direct
ilatementt,  inferred  &am  Tbueydidei  (iv.  117,
T.  1)  that  the  Pythian  gamet  wera  held  towardt
the  end  of  the  aecoad  year  of  every  Olympiad.
Rejecting  thii  tontiDfeny,  lee  Krauie,  I.e.  p. 29,
&c  At  for  the  leaioa  of  the  Pythian  gamea,  they
wen  in  all  probability  held  in  the  iping,  and
moat  writan  beliare  that  it  wai  in  the  month  of
Byiioi,  which  it  nppoaed  In  be  the  lame  aa  the
Alllo  Munychion.  Biickh  (ad  Corp.  latcrifL
n.  168S}  howcTer  haa  ahown  that  the  gamea  took
place  in  Ihe  month  of  Bucatiut,  which  followed
after  the  month  of  Byiiui,  and  that  thia  month
mnil  be  coniidered  at  the  tame  at  the  Attic  Hu-
nychion,  The  gamet  lailed  for  teveral  dayi,  aa  ia
eipnaaiy  mentimed  by  Sophodea  (£M.  690,  &c),
but  we  do  not  know  haw  many.  When  ancient
WTJtan  apeak  of  cAa  day  of  the  Pythian  agon,  they
ore  probably  thinking  of  tha  mntical  agon  alont^
which  waa  the  mott  important  part  of  the  gamet,
and  pmbably  took  place  on  the  7tli  of  fiocalina.


87B  PYTHIA.

It  ii  qlilta  inpiMtible  U  eonceiTs  tliat  ftll  tht  nu-
meroui  gunea  iboold  hare  Uken  place  on  ona  dny.

The  ctmnuna  of  ■Unngen  si  Uie  lenMOa  of  thli
MnegjrU,  mmt  haii  been  Terr  gnat,  a*  un-
doabtodt;  all  tbe  Oieelit  were  tJlawed  to  attend.
Tbe  itatn  beloniim  to  the  amphictjonf  of  Delphi
hod  to  Knd  then  theaii  in  the  raonth  of  Bygini,
■ome  time  before  tlie  eonimencement  oT  the  TeitiTal
iUetC  {B>iekh,ayrp.Itacr.l.c.)  All  theori  lait
bf  the  Greeki  la  Delphi  on  thii  occuton,  wen
called  IIuAiIrrTiJ  (Stnb.  ii.  p.  404),  and  the  theo-
ries tent  b;  the  Atheninni  were  klvayi  particu-
larly  brilliant  ISchol.  ai  Arvtepi.  Av.  IS«S.)  A<
tegsrdi  MKriHcM,  pneeiuoiis,  and  other  tolemni-
tiei,  it  may  be  prceamed  thil  thej  neembled  in  a
gnat  ToeoHue  tboH  of  Olympia,  A  ^lendid,
though  probablj  ta  Mne  degree  fiditioue,  deaerip-
tion  of  a  tbeoria  of  TbeBBliani  may  be  read  in
Heliodonu  (AM.  il  34).

Ai  to  the  order  in  wbich  tbe  Tirioiu  gamei
vere  perlbnned,  ecanely  aoytblng  ii  known,  will
the  oxeeplion  of  ■ome  allntioni  in  Pindar  and  a
few  lanarki  of  Plutarch.  The  latter  (Synp.  ii.  4  ;
'hiloetr.  ApolL  7>ai>.  tL  ID)  layi  that  the


I  preceded  the  horw  and  chariot  race*.
Every  game,  moreorer,  wbich  wae  periomied  bj
men  and  bj  boys,  waa  alwayi  firvt  petfonned  by
the  latter.  (Plst-Spn;!.  ii.  fi.)

We  hare  Mated  abore  that,  down  to  01. 48,  tbe
Delphiani  had  the  managemeiil  of  the  Pythian
gamei  ;  but  of  tbe  manner  in  which  they  were
conducted  ^nnoui  to  that  time  nathina  !•  known.
When  they  came  under  the  care  of  the  Amphie-
^on*,  eipecial  potoni  were  appointed  for  tbe  pur-

CB  of  conducting  the  wnet  and  of  acting  ai
pn.  They  were  called  'ETt/ttkrtni  (Pint
Svmp.  ii.  4,  Tii.  6)  and  «n«wered  to  the  Olym-
pian Hellanodicae.  Their  number  a  snknown.
(Rrauie,  2.  c.  p.  44.)  In  later  times  it  vat  decreed
by  tbe  Ampbietysna  that  king  Philip  with  the
Themliani  and  Boeoliani  ihould  undertake  tiie
Duuiagement  of  ibe  gamei  (Died,  iri.  60),  but
•flenrardi  and  eten  under  the  Roman  emperon
the  Amphictyoni  again  ^ipear  in  tbe  poiaenion  of
thit  pririlege.  (Pfailoitr.  Fa.  Sopi.  ii.  27.)  The
tti/ukriTai  had  to  maintain  peace  and  tH^tr,  and
irere  auitted  by  iiaariyofiiiBi,  who  eieented  any
puniihment  at  their  ounnumd,  and  thai  anawered
to  the  Olympian  iXtrei,  (Luc  ode.  iadocL  9,  &e.)
The  priie  giren  to  the  licton  in  the  Pythian

Cei  waa  from  the  time  of  ^e  lecond  Pylhiad  a
il  chapiet ;  an  that  they  then  became  an  iytir
rra^avfrqi,  while  befoR  they  had  been  an  irfiw
Xp)Jt«iTiri|t.  (PanL  r.  7.  9  3  f  SchoL  in  Argttm.
oi  Pind.  PfOu)  In  addilioD  to  Ibii  chapiet,  the
victor  beie,  ai  at  Olympia,  received  the  aynibolic
patm-teancb,  and  waa  allowed  to  have  hia  own
statue  ended  in  the  Crinaean  plain.  (Pint  ^oii;i.
viii.  4  t  Pana.  n.  15.  S  3,  IT.  |  I ;  Justin.  iiiT.
7,  10.)

The  time  when  the  Pythian  games  ceased  to  be
nlemnised  is  not  certtun,  bat  they  probably  lasted
as  Img  as  the  OIyni[ric  games,  i. «.  down  to  the
Tear  a.  d.  39*.  In  a.  n.  191  a  celebration  of  the
Pytbia  ii  meotioaed  by  Phllostmlns  (  FA  &ipl
ii  37),  and  in  the  dmeotthe  emperor  Jnliau  they
■till  Gonlinned  to  be  held,  aa  la  manifest  fnm  his
own  word*.  (Jul  S^.  pro  Argh.  p.  3S,  a.)

PytUmgainM  of  lesl  imponanca  were  oe)ebiM*d


QUADRAQESIMA.

in  a  gmt  many  other  places  where  the  mnnTiip
of  Apollo  was  iatioduced  g  and  tbe  game*  of  Del-
phi an  aDmctimes  dialiDguished  from  these  Ivan
Pythia  by  the  addilicMi  of  the  worda  h  ^tfuftit.
But  as  by  btr  the  gnalsr  number  of  Ibe  leasO'
Pytbia  are  not  menbooed  in  the  extant  inetait
writen,  and  are  only  known  from  estas  or  inamp-
tiona,  we  ahall  only  give  a  list  of  the  plaos  when
the?  were  held  ; — Ancyn  in  Qakthi,  AphrodiaiBS
in  Caria,  Antiochia,  Cartbaea  iu  tbe  idand  cf  Cees
(Athen.  X.  p.  4£6, 167),  Canhage  (Tattall.  Smrp.
G),  Cibyia  in  Fhrygn,  Delos  (Dionys.  Pan^
537),  Emiaa  in  Syria,  Hien^xjis  m  Phiygia,
Magneaia,  Hegaia  (SchoL  ad  Pimi.  fttm.  r.  84,
d.  liiL  1A5  ;  Philoeti'.  Pit.  Soplt.  I  3),  Hiknis,
Neapolia  in  Italy,  Nicvia  in  Bitbynia,  Nkoniedia,
Pei^amns  in  Myaia,  Pe)ge  in  PamphylB,  Peiia-
tbna  on  the  Prepontia,  Philippopolis  in  llirace,
Side  in  Pamphylia,  Sicyon  (Pind.  OL  aiii.  I6G,
with  the  Schol.  ;  Ntm.  a.  Al),  IU«  in  oiria,
Thcssaloniee  in  Macedonia,  in  Thraca,  Tbyalin,
and  IWlea  in  Lydia,  Tripolis  ea  tbe  Mai  ■ml  1 1
in  Caiia.  (Eranse, /Nt  iyUa,  JVMMaauirf /sA-
«i«,  pp.  1— ]08.)  [1.S.J

PY'THTA.  [On*CDHiii,p.aS7,a.J
PYTHII  (■ri»,o,\  called  ttoISm  in  the  I«ce-
daemonian  dialect  (Photina,  t,*.),  vov  tma  per-
sona a[^inted  by  Ibe  Spartan  kingi,  two  by  each,
as  measengers  to  tbe  temple  of  Delphi  (Oaaayf.
troi  it  AiX^dt).  Their  office  was  higUj  boaoBP.
able  and  important :  they  were  almya  the  mraa
mates  of  the  Spartan  kings.  (Hetod.  (i.  S7  ;  Xek
Bep.  £ae.  IT.  S  1  MliUer,  Dor.  IlL  I.  S  S.)

PYXIS,  Jim.  PYXIDULA  (>4it,rf^  nfl-
>wr),  a  caaket ;  a  jewel-box.  (Mar«  ix.  U:)
Qnintilinn  (Tiii.  S.  f  3S)  produces  this  tvn  aa  M
example  oC  calachresia,  becaoaa  it  prqwriy  doMcJ
that  which  was  made  of  box  (v^oi),  bat  wa  ap-
plied to  things  of  similar  (gnu  a>d  Use  Bade  of
any  other  material.  In  fact,  the  caskets  (ti  which
the  ladiei  of  aneient  lime*  kenc  tbeir  jewA  and
otbci  ornaments,  wen  made  af  gold,  aimr,  inry,
mothei^of-p«rl,  tortoiae-abell,  die  Tbey  «aR  also
much  enriched  with  scnlpturh  A  ailvfr  ootf^
3  feet  long;  1^  wide,  and  1  deep,  meat  dabantdy
adorned  with  figuiea  in  baa-idief,  ia  iltirila.il  t^
Bfittigcr.  (SoUk,  nJ.  i.  {^  64 — BO.  pbta  iii.)
The  annexed  woodcut  (frail  Ami.  J'Srnlmtn,  ToL
ii.  tab.  7)  represents  a  Teiy  plain  jewel- best,  aot  ef
which  a  dora  is  extiaeling  a  riband  n  iUsl. Nao


deported  hia  beard  m  a  nlnahle  pyxis,  wbca  be
■haTcd  for  the  fiiM  tine. [Bakba.]

The  same  term  is  applied  to  boxes  Bae4  ta  at-
tain drags  or  poison  (Cib  pn  CoeBa,  35^~39  -.
QuintiL  tL  3.  g  3£)  ;  and  to  metallic  rin|ta  tia-
^oyed  In  maehinenr.  (Hin.  H.fr,  zriii.  11.  *.
29.)  Ii.T.l


QnADBANTAL.

L  <Si»t  FcqnL  1. ;  QnintiL  Dadam.  3S9  ;


Ncni  mi  had  d


1  bj'Sm


1»bia  tUt  tid>  Qudngcidi
wMi  not  tka  Pottnion,  b«  the  tu  impoMd  bj
Califf^  (Suet,  Cbl.  40)  of  the  (brtictli  put  of  the
Tkloe  of  ill  prnoi^,  mpcellng  vbich  titers  waa
m^kw-nit.  That  UBbttci*  the  liH(ei»obabIe
omnkm  ^ipmi  fhim  ibt  &ct,  that  ve  htct  md
of  thii  tax  npoi  law-niit*  ifter  (hs  timr  of  Nen,
while  the  fanner  me  u  mentioned  to  the  Umt
timei  oftlie  empire.  Coniidereblo  difflnil^,  how-
arcr,  bu  iriiHi  in  ewneqnence  of  Mmo  of  the
oobaM  of  Oalba  haTing  Qitadruffaima  Remima  upon
I  hi  III,  which  ii  mppwd  bj  uaie  vrit^zi  tu  con-
tradict ihepuaags  ofTacitiu,  and  bj  othen  to
{■or*  that  Oalba  lioliAtd  tfao  QuadiBgeeiaia  of
the  pctaioiit.  The  woida,  faowerer,  do  not  neces-
Hrilj  implj  tbii  i  h  wai  common  in  MMoni  of
■wcitj  and  mot,  or  *>  an  act  of  ipecial  fimmr,  (or
the  cmperon  to  nmii  certain  taxee  for  a  certoui
period,  and  it  ii  probabts  that  tbe  coini  of  Oalba
ven  Mmd  in  cammemaiation  of  luch  a  reminion,
wd  not  ot  ui  abolition  of  the  lax.  (See  Bni-
Mann,  it  Vatigei.  ^  61,  ke-,  who  conOofertt  tbe
ii|niiicDa  of  Spanheua,  it  Pratd.  M  Un  Nutmm.
ToL  ii.  p.  M9.)

QUADRANS. CA^  n.  liO,  b,  Ul,  >.]
QUADRANTAL,  or  AMPHORA  QUAD-
BANTAL,  or  AMPHORA  only,  wm  the  prinei-
pal  Riman  meawn  of  capecity  foe  finiik. All  tbe

weight,  and  thm  the  amfAora  waa  oiiginall;  the
qiBoe  oeenpied  by  eighty  pound*  of  wine.  (Fe*tn«,

There  i>  alio  pnacrred  to  sa  1^  Feetni  (i.  n.
PMiea  Pom/era,  p.  34S.  HOIler),  a  plcbiacitmi
(tbaSilUan)ofnnknowndat<,iegulatingtbeTeighti
''le  lollowing  efieet-. — E»  pm-


atogmla  pouda  litt :  amgnu  nut  deem  p.  (i.  e.
powfe)  «t0f  :  «f  mitafi  ratgita  tiet  mm  ;  duodt-
gmiimtffgimta  tfxtari  qmadr^alai  net  Mt:  —  that
la,  that  the  ipiadnalid  ihsuld  c<Hitain  80  poundi
of  wine*,  and  tbe  amgi—  10  ;  and  that  the  laxta-
rioi  abonld  be  l-6(h  of  the  cmgim,  and  l-48th  of
The  qoadTanud  waa  mbdinded


QirAI>IUNTAL.  S7»

(Cato,  R.R.6T  ;  OelL  L  30  ;  PiiwaUL  Otnt.  dt
Men*,  tt  Pond.  tt.  59—88 :  —
"  Pee  longo  in  ipatia  latoqne  altoque  notetnr :
AnpilDt  Dt  par  lic,  qnem  clondit  tinea  triplex,
Qnattjor  et  njedium  qoadiii  cingator  inane :
Amphora  fit  cubui,  quam  no  riolare  Hcoret,
9aciHTere  Jori  Tarpeio  in  monte  Qniritei^*'
A  itandard  model  of  the  Ampiora  waa  kept
ritb  great  rare  in  the  temple  of  Jn|Htet  in  the
Capitol,  and  wai  called  ampiam  O^^dUh  (Piia-
-■-- ' Capildin. jtfiuMuii.  4), There  itiU
gim  which  lanfeBH  to  ban  becD  made
0  thii  Itandard. [Consiub.] For  a
full  aconint  of  thii  eongiiu,  lee  H,  Haie,  AiiaadI,
d.  Beri.  Atad.  18-24.

Theie  are  two  qneatioM  of  Terj'  gnat  Intereat
imected  with  the  Roman  gHadnrntai,-  namely,
(1),  whether  the  equality  to  tbe  cubic  Cxil  waa
originally  exact,  or  only  apfHoxinuIe,  and  (2),
whether  there  waa  any  exact  ratio  between  the
Roman  and  the  Orecian  mtaiona.  The  fiill  dit-
■e  qnettioni  would  be  Inconaiitent
both  ¥ntb  tbe  limit)  and  with  tbe  chief  object  of
thii  wort  A  geneni  ttatemenl  of  the  mattoi  in
diipaie  will  be  found  under  HBNavna,  p.  764.
It  ma;  here  be  added  that,  whether  there  waa  or
waa  not  on^witfy  any  predie  latio  between  the
Greek  and  Roman  maaaoraa  of  capaci^,  they  were
at  leail  n  neariy  related  to  one  aiiotha,  that,  when
the  two  ijitemi  came  to  eiiit  aide  bj  aide,  it  waa
found  eaEj  to  eitabliih  the  fbllowing  definite  ratiot.
Of  the  liquid  mcaiuiea ;  tbe  Roman  aaplom,  or
gaadnuUal,  waa  3-5th>  of  the  Aeginetan,  and
3-3rda  of  the  Attic  aapiorv  or  mttnltt;  and  the
loiigmt  of  the  Roman  ayitem  waa  equal  to  the


l-Srd  of  tbe  Aeginetan,  and  one  half  of  the
Atti^  narfiimi.  Conaeqnently,  oflhedtymeaanns,
modiui  (which  waa  l-8rd  of  the  guadrauiUU)
l-9thof  theA^iuetan,aDd  l-6thaf  the  Attic,
connecting  nibordinate  unit  in  all
Ibete  aeta  of  meaturea  ia  ua  Roman  mkmimi,  or
Bath  part  i/lh»  eaHgin*,  which  waa  introduced  into
the  Greek  lyatem  under  the  name  of  iiirr^t,  and

tioned  in  the  following  Eelationi :  —


; 96  jk


only  taeanre  larger  than  tbe  quadraMlat  waa  the
imltmi  of  aOampbnse,  which  wai  tued,  aa  well  i
the  ampfaua  ilielE,  in  ealimnting  the  produce  of


aures  of  length,  by  the  law,  that  it  waa  the  cube
of  the  loot,  whence  ita  name  quadratilal,  or,  aa
other  writen  gire  it  (uaing  the  Greek  aMot  in-
•tead  >f  tbe Latin  qnadramkd) ampiora eubrnt.

*  Tbe  Romani  were  aware  that  there  ia  a  dtfleF-
eaee  in  the  apecific  granty  of  wme  and  of  watv,
and  in  the  different  aorta  (if  »ch,  but,  ibr  tbe  lake
of  limplieily,  they  regarded  them  a>  of  tbe  aame
apecific  grarity:  when,  however,  they  wiafaed  a
Tei7  exact  determination,  they  naad  Tain  water.
(BlkUi.cS.)


H A^netan „  >^  144 »

The  t^onii,  or  Rmnaa  ittariia,  ia  nut  to  be  eon-
founded  with  the  genaine  Attic  Iimiu  or  tittk
of  ^  eae^'BHMf,  which  was  equal  to  tbe  Roman
modiua  (On  the  whole  of  thia  part  of  the  lub-
ject,  aee  Badih,  cc  iiu  xL  it.— siii.)

From  the  gxeceding  remarfca  it  wiU  be  aeen
that  tbe  only  lafc  mode  of  cmoputing  the  omtent

capacity  ia  by  deducing  it  from  the  tahie  already
auigued  to  the  Ronun  ponnd,  cat  the  antborily
chiefly  of  the  coiua.  That  Talua  may  be  taken,  in
round  nomben,  at  £050  graina.  Now  the  im-
perial gallon  contuni  70,000  %' " '


Sk  3


•  o"


9BB  -QUAKSTOR.

the  Ronuin  amphom  =  ^_^^JLp=-J  5-71  im-
perial galloiu,  or  >  littla  more  than  5J  gsllmu,  oi
Ihaa  G  galloiu  and  6  piDla.  U  we  were  to  make
tht  eompntalion  direcllj  &om  the  longiut  of  Ve»-
puian,  ws  abould  bate  a  »mewbat  higher  falue  ;
which,  ai  hu  already  been  ahown  mider  Pondiiu,
ariiei  probably  from  ■  aooits  of  eiTor.  Oa  ths
other  hand,  the  cinnpntalisn  &om  ths  Roman  cnhie
but  giva  ■  lomswhat  lower  Taiue  [Pondeki]  ;
but,  aa  already  intimated,  it  ii  leiy  danbtful
wbether  Iha  true  conlent  of  the  amphom  wa»  ei-
Hctly  n  cubic  foot,  and  in  bet,  if  Bflckh  be  right,
It  WM  a  little  more.  At  all  eienta,  the  Talue  of  6
•^nu  e  pnia  ii  qnite  near  enough  to  the  tmlh
for  all  the  porpout  of  the  cUnical  student.  (See
tke  Table*.)  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  were  to
ndcon  the  fwnfrmla^  at  exactly  S  galloni,  and
coDieqnently  the  «ft«orii»,  which  ii  the  unall  unit
of  the  lyetem,  at  exactly  1  pint  (initead  of  -96}
we  abonld  obtain  a  lyitem  ao  extremely  tbnple,
■nd  with  io  email  •  limit  <rf  eirer  (namely  leaa
than  -rib  i"  '  P>"4>  *^*  ''  '"^^  probably  be
allowable  to  adopt  jt  in  the  ordinary  reading  <^  the
daaiic  BDthora ;  indicting,  however,  the  email
etror,  by  preliung  in  each  ca»e  the  wordj  a  HKtn /«f
Aim;  and  coireeting  it,  when  the  numbera  are  laiRe,
bj  taking  fmm  the  naultl-asih  of  ilarif.  fP.S.]
QUADRTOAE.  [Curbtis.  p.  379.]
QUAnHlQATUS.  [DaNARiirs.]
QUADRIHE'MES,  [Navis,  p.  786,  h.]
QUA'DRUPEIS.  [P*up»RiBS.]
QUADRUPLATOR'ES,  poblic  infiamora  oi
accuieri,  were  K  called,  cither  beeauae  they  re-
ceived a  fonrth  mrt  of  ia  crimmal'a  properly,  or
becaoae  ihoae  who  were  convicted  were  condemned
to  pay  fimrfbld  {gaadntpU  danuiari),  a»  in  caaea  of
licJation  of  the  lawi  napecting  gambling,  uniiy,
Ac  (Paendo-Aacon,  n  Cic  Dmn.  p.  110,  w  Verr.
a  p.  208,  ed.  Orelli ;  Foatai,  ».  •■> We  know


QUAESTOR.

fimctiona  of  botli  daaaei  of  officcn :  '
a  qnnerendo,  qni  conquirerent  publicai  peeviiiaa  et
DialeficiB."  The  eoo  dan  theieloie  had  to  do
with  the  collectmg  and  keeping  of  the  public  rt-
and  the  othen  wa«  a  kind  of  poblic  ac~
The  fonnec  bore  the  name  of  }wwtoRt
eiania,  the  latter  of  faoaitorwpanviitt  (Dig.!
■,3.  a.  2.  §22,33.)

The  gtaeiiont  parriadii  were,  M  we  have  aaid,
public  aceiiaera,  two  in  numlier,  who  condDCted  tbe
!aiation  of  peramu  guilty  of  murder  a  any  fxhrr
litol  oflenoe,  and  tarried  the  icntCTBo  into  rxr-
tioa.  (Featui,  Kc, /'urici  and  QBoedorw;  Ut.
41 1  Dionyt  TiiL  770  There  are  many  pointa
which  might  make  oi  inclined  to  belieie  that  the
quaeatorea  panicidii  and  the  duinovtn  perditel-
tionii  were  the  aame  officen  ;  bat  a  doaa  exsmi-
tbat  the  fdnner  wen  a  permaomt
lile  the  latter  were  appointed  inly
__  ipecial  emergencies  [  See  PianuiLLUiKa
DutiMViaLj  All  teetimoniee  agree  that  theae  pob-
lic Bcciuoe  eiiited  at  Rrane  during  the  period  of
the  king*,  though  it  ia  impowihle  to  aKKtaiit  by
'hich  king  they  wen  ini^toted  (Feat.  !!&;  Tacit.
[maaL  jd  22;  Dig.  1.  tiL  IS),  ai  Kinie  mention
lem  in  the  reign  of  Romului  and  othtfi  in  tkat
of  Numa.  When  Ulpian  lakta  it  fcr  certaia  that
they  occnired  in  the  lime  of  Tullna  Koatiliaa,  be
i^ipean  to  confound  them,  like  other  inilen,  with
the  duumviri  perdueUionii,  who  in  Ihn  tngn  acted
aa  judgea  in  the  caae  of  Hocatiua,  who  l»d  alain
' '  ■  r.  During  the  kingly  penod  theie  oeam
„„  _._jice  in  which  it  couW  be  n>d  with  any
certmaty,  that  the  quaealorea  pairicidii  to^a  pan.
Aa  thoi  everything  ia  to  nncertain,  aad  aa  hte
trtiten  are  luiltT  rf  tuch  manifeat  coofoaiona,  wa


Kived


fbnrth  jart  of  the  property  of  the  acnued  (Tae.
jM.iv.  ai);bnt  the  other  explanation  of  the  word
may  alio  be  correct,  becaoae  uaurera,  who  violated
the  law,  were  aobjected  to  a  panaJty  of  fbnr  time*
the  amount  of  the  loan.  (Cato,  <i<  Ae  Riat.  init)
When  ths  general  right  of  accneatioo  wai  given,
the  nhuie  of  which  led  to  the  mringing  up  of  the
QuadmpUtorea,  i*  uncertain  ;  but  originally  aU
fines  went  into  the  common  treaniry,  and  while
that  waa  the  caao  the  accuBtioni  no  doubt  wen
brought  on  behalf  of  the  etata.  (Niebuhr,  HiH.
t/Ronu,  vol  iiL  p.  37.)  Even  under  the  republic
an  Bcenitttioa  of  a  public  officer,  who  had  merited
it  by  hi*  crimea,  wa»  coneidered  a  aerrico  ren-
dered to  the  itate  ;  the  came  of  Qnadruplalorc*
aeemi  to  have  been  given  by  way  of  contempt  to
mercenary  or  £i1ie  accuaeri.  (Cic  Da,  iL  7,  c.  Verr.
iL  7|  Piaift.  Ptr^  i  a.  10  I  Liv.  iiL  73.)  Sencta
\dt  Bentf.  TiL  aS)_(»U*  thc«  who  ^^  ^^
nianu  {at  amall  '  "-i •-


QUADBUPLICA'TIO. [Actio.]
QUADBUaSIS. [As.]
QUAE8TIONE8, QUAEBT10NE3 PBR-
PETUAE. [JuDix, p.  MB,  b  ; Pniiioll,

QUAESTOR  ii  a  name  whiA  waa  gften  to
two  diitinct  cIbmc*  of  Roman  offieeia.  It  la  de-
rived fimn  tttatro,  and  Vairo  (De  Im?.  Lot.  •-
81  gi«i»4>ftnUionwhi<4eiDbracoilb*priiidj«l


n  an  guilty  of  tuch  manifeat  coofoaiona,  w

jay  no  more  than  that  lueb  pablie  aecoaaa

eiuted,  end  infer  irom  the  analogy  of  later  tiiaes
that  they  were  appointed  by  tie  popuhii  M>  tbe
pceeentalion  ol  the  king.  In  the  early  period  of
the  republic  thequaatorea  pairicidii  appcsu  to  hat«
becnne  a  atanding  office^  which,  like  othen,  waa
hdd  only  for  one  year.  (Liv.  iiL  2i,  25.)  Thej
wen  appointed  by  the  popolui  or  the  curta  oa
the  preeentation  of  the  conauk  (Dig,  1.  tit,  2.
a.  Z  8  23 1  Tacit,  t  e.)  W  ben  theae  quaeatami  dia-
coveied  that  a  capital  ofEcnce  had  been  commiitpd,
they  had  to  bring  the  charge  before  the  conitia
for  trial.  (Liv.  iiL  2*;  Dionye.  ri)L  75.)  They  coo-
vdced  the  comitia  through  the  penoo  of  a  Inn-
peter,  who  proclabned  the  day  of  mcelii^  {raai  Ott
capitol,  at  the  gatca  of  the  city,  and  at  the  bouae  of
the  accuaed.  (Vaire,ia  Luig.  i/it  vL  90,  ed.  Miil-
ler.)  When  the  aenlenc*  bad  been  prcaeanced  by
the  people,  the  quaeatorea  parricidii  eiecaled  ii ;
thuiliiey  threw  Spuriua  Oaiiut  from  the  Tarpnaa
rock.  (Dionyt.  viiL  77  i  Liv.  iL  *1  s  Cic.  Je  «•
PM.  iL  35.)  They  were  mentioned  in  tba  lawa
oE  the  Twelve  Tablea,  and  after  the  time  of  the
deeemvirate  they  atill  canliDiied  to  be  appobiMd,
though  pnhably  no  longer  by  the  enriea,  bat  eiihw
in  the  comitia  centuriata  or  tribnta,  which  thpy
therefon  mnet  alto  hare  bad  the  right  to  aiarmhb
in  caaea  of  emergency.  (Varro,*!  £iH9,i«tTi9.>
Thii  appean  to  be  implied  in  the  atalMDOit  of
Tacitua,  that  in  the  year  447  «.  o.  ikey  wn*
created  by  ths  people  without  any  pnaeatatiia  oT
coniuli.  From  the  year  SG6  a.  c  the;  an  no
1  in  Roman  hiatory,  at  thaii  fane-
rradaBlly  tr*naf«red  to  the  tfiamnfi
'aL  J&i.  T.  4.  j  7,  viii  *,  S  3  i  S«lh«,


QUABSTOB.
Oat.  SS  ;  Tainxviiii  Cxrmi.ta\  and  putl;
tli«  Hdil»  and  tribunal.  (Asdilis,  Tribuni  ;
Niebnlir,  HiM.  ofRiaiitf  toL  liL  p.  11  ;  Zacbuiae,
6W2(i,  alt  OrdwT,  &c  tdL  il.  p.  117,  &c)  Ths
qiuetuiiei  puiicidii  hara  not  oiu;  be«n  confounded
vith  the  duiunfiri  perdncllionJi,  bat  >1»  »t(b  the
qnacttore*  cUaici  ( TsciL  L  a. ;  Zunar.  lii  1 3,  &cX
wid  tfaii  probiblj  owing  lo  ths  &ct,  that  thejr
Dated  to  bfl  appointed  at  inch  an  early  period,  and
that  tha  two  kindi  of  quaeaton  ara  Kldom  dU-
tinguiihed  ia  uicient  writingi  b;  their  chancter-
inic  epithett.  <B«ker,  Hamdb.  der  Aon.  Alltrtk.
ToL  u.  pt  ii.  p^  228,  &&)

Th«  jaaaim*  etanki  were  offl<!era  enlnuted
with  llw  care  of  the  public  montjr.  It  ii  eitabUafaed
bj  the  dearat  pouible  eridence,  that  dnrinff  the
kingiy  period  thu  magiitrtuj  did  nateiiat(Liv.  !•.
4  :  F]ol.FopL  12),  aadit  woaldwem  tbatacai-
aideiaUe  time  riapied  after  the  expaUion  of  the
kinga,  before  thia  magLBtracj  waa  ine^Ented.  Their
diatingftiihing  epithet  clauici  ia  not  mentioned  by
■a;  ancient  writer,  except  Lydua  (De  Mag.  i.  27),
who  boveTer  gWa  an  abiiud  intctpretalion  of  it
Niebnhi  (voLii.  p.  ISO)  relen  it  to  their  haiing  been
elected  bf  the  centnriei  ever  lince  the  time  of  Va-
leriot  Publicola,  who  it  nid  In  have  firit  initilnted
the  office.  (PluL  foU.  13.)  They  wen  at  finl
only  two  in  number,  and  of  couraa  taken  only  from
the  palriciana.  Aa  the  lenate  had  the  aupreme
AdmkoiatTBlion  of  the  linancea,  the  qoaeatoci  were
in  aome  meaaore  only  ita  agenta  or  paymaiteia,  for
they  GDold  not  diipoae  of  any  part  of  the  public
money  withoat  being  directed  by  the  aeuate.  Their
dotiee  eonteqatatly  coniiated  in  making  the  nec«-
mij  parmenta  fnnn  the  oerarium,  and  receiTing
the  pubiie  nveunee.  Of  both  they  had  to  keep
auTon  accounti  m  their  tidi^as  puUicat.  (Polyk
tL  13.)  Demaada  which  any  oua  might  haie  on
tlie  ■erorium,  and  oatatanding  debta  were  likewiae
regiitered  by  them.  (Pteudo-AicoD.  ■■  Vtrrm.  p.
158,  Orelli  i  Pint.  Cat.  Ma.  27.)  Finei  to  be
paid  to  the  poblio  treaiuij  were  regiatered  and  ei-
aeled  by  them.  (Ut.  mriii.  60  ;  Tacit  AutiaL
xiii  28.)  Another  branch  of  their  dutica,  which
howeTO'  waa  likeviae  connected  with  the  treafiiiry.


n  and  laefa  penoni  a*  were  con-
nected with  the  republic  by  tiet  of  public  hoa-
pitalitj.  Lsitly  they  were  charged  with  the  care
of  the  boiiali  and  monument*  of  diitinguiahed
lacB,  the  expeoaei  for  which  had  been  decreed  by
tbe  aenate  to  be  defaayed  by  the  tmaorj.  In  the
Katarinm,  and  cooaeqaently  under  the  luperintend-
Btca  of  the  qoaeatoca,  were  kept  the  books  in  which
tha  aenatoMnunlta  veie  regitlered  (Joieph.  Jaf.
Jad.  zi(.  10. 10  ;  Plot  CaL  Mm.  17),  whUa  the
■aigiiwl  dKumenti  were  in  the  keeping  of  tha
■edSee,  imtil  AngitMui  trBniferred  tha  care  of  them
alM  to  the  qoaeMon. (Dion  Casa.  liv.  36.)

In  tha  year  a  C  421  the  number  of  quaetton
waa  doahled,  and  the  tribunal  tried  to  eSect  by  an
,.~^^m»ni  of  ills  law  that  a  part  (probnbt;  two}
of  the  qnaeMona  •hnuld  be  plebeiani.  (Ui-It.  IS  j
Niebdhr,  TDLiLp.130,  &c}  Thit  attempt  wai  in-
deed Jhutntad,  bat  the  intemi  L.  Papiriui  effected
ft  COBpromiie,  that  the  election  ihould  not  be  re-
■tiiel^  to  either  rader.  After  thii  law  woa  cnr-
ried,  eleren  yean  poaied  without  any  plebeian
Imng  elected  to  the  ofQce  of  qnaottor,  until  in  b.  c.
109,  three  of  the  four  qnaeiton  were  plcbeiane.
(Lir.  if.  51.) A  pentn  who  hid  held  the  office


QUAESTOR.  TlBl

of  qnoeitoi  bad  undoablsdly,  ai  in  later  ^mei,  tha
right  to  take  hii  leat  in  the  eenote,  unleaa  he  waa
eiclnded  aa  onworthy  by  the  next  cenaon.  And
thii  wai  prohahlj  the  reuoa  why  the  pntiiciani  ao
determinalely  oppcaed  the  odmiaaion  of  plebctant
to  Ihit  office.  [SaKiTti&J  Henceforth  the  con-
auli,  whenerra  they  took  the  field  aj
were  accompanied  by  oi
Inc  bod  only  to  euperinl
the  produce  of  which  «
the  legion,  or  wa*  tiai
(LiT.  IT.  bi.)  Subaeqnently  hoveier  we  find
that  tbeee  qoaeatore  alio  kept  the  fundi  of  the
otmy,  which  they  had  receiTed  from  the  treaanrj
at  Rome,  and  gaye  the  widiera  their  pay  ;  ther
were  in  lact  the  pay-martere  in  the  army.  (Polyt
■n.  S9.)  The  two  other  quaeaton,  who  remained
at  Rome,  continued  to  diicharge  the  lame  duliea
aa  before,  and  were  dulioguiilwd  from  thoM  wha
accompanied  the  conaula  by  tha  epithet  srt^.  In
the  year  &  c  265,  aTter  tha  Rumani  had  made
thenuelrea  maaters  of  Italy,  and  when,  in  oonae-
quence,  the  adrainiatmtion  of  the  treaiory  and  the
raiaing  of  the  rerenoca  became  mora  lobiuioua  and
important,  the  number  of  quaeaton  waa  agaia
doubled  to  eight  (Lyd.  dt  Mag.  i.  37  ;  Lir.  ^At.
lib,  [B  ;  Niebuhr,  Tol.  iiL  p.  645)  ;  and  it  ia  prtK
hable  that  henceforth  their  number  coa^ned  to  ba
increaaed  in  proportian  a*  the  empire  became  ex-
tended. One  of  the  eight  quoeiton  waa  appointed
by  lot  to  the  gnaatitra  oitiauu,  a  moat  lahorioua
and  important  poit,  aa  ha  hod  to  jooTide  Rome
with  com.  (Cic  pro  Mam.  8,  pre  Snct  17.)
Beaidea  tha  qnaeitor  eatietuii,  wboretided  at  Oitia,
three  other  quaeatoi*  wen  diatrihuted  in  Italy  to
nuae  tluwa  porta  of  the  reTenue  which  were  not
Aumed  by  the  publicuni,  and  to  controL  the  latter.
One  of  them  reaided  at  Calei,  and  die  two  othet*
pnbably  in  lowni  im  the  Upper  Sea.  (Cic.  u>  VoL
£-)  The  two  remaining  quaeatcrv  who  who  aent
to  Sicily,  are  epoken  of  below.

Sulla  in  hit  dictalonhip  raieed  the  nmnber  of
quaeitcn  to  twenty,  that  he  might  hsTe  a  largo
number  of  candidate*  for  tha  aenate  (»nlu  ex-
plmdo.  Tacit  Amiai.  iL  22),  and  Juliua  Caeur  even
to  forty.  (Dion  Can.  iliil  17,51.)  In  the  year
B.C.  19  no  quaeetora  were  elected,  and  Caeaar
tianafeiTed  the  keeping  of  the  ocntrium  to  tha
aedilea.  From  thia  time  (srwaid  the  treaamy  waa
Bocuetiniei  entruited  to  the  praelui,  aDmetimes  to
the  praetorii,  and  lometimea  again  to  quaeatoiiL
[AiRAKiuH.]  Quaeaton  bovaier,  both  in  the
city  and  in  the  provincea,  occur  down  to  the  lataat
period  of  the  empire.  Soma  of  them  bon  the  title
of  aatdidati  priac^tit,  and  thair  only  duty  was
to  lead  in  the  aenate  the  commusicBtioDa  which
the  [Kincqia  had  to  make  to  thii  aaiembly  (,liM
pritidpaUi,  epuiolaa  priadpU,  Dig.  1.  tit  13.  |  S
and  1  i  Lyd.  de  Mag.  I  28  ;  Uunpnd.  Ala.  Snr.
13  i  Plin.  EpUL  Yii.  16).  From  the  time  of  the
emperor  Claudiug  all  qooeiton,  on  entering  their
otHcc,  were  obliged  to  ^re  gladiatorjal  gsmea  to
the  people,  at  their  own  eipenie,  whereby  the
office  became  inacceaiible  to  any  one  except  the
wealthieat  individoala.  (SneL  Oauit.  21 1  Tacit.
AntuiL  L  e.  xiii.  5  ;  Suet  Danil.  1 ;  Lamprid,
Alet.  Set.  13.)  When  ConalBntine[de  had  be-
come the  tecond  capital  of  the  empire,  it  reccired
like  Rcme  ita  quaeitoi^  who  had  to  give  gamea  to
the  people  on  entering  upon  their  office  ;  hut
they  were  pnbably,  like  the  praeton,  elected  hj


S83  QUANTI  HIKORIS.
tba  Ha>ts  and  onlj  ■nnoimad  to  tlis  empaar,
(Becker,  AmS.  i*r  Rom.  AUtrA.  ml  iL  pt.  tL  p.
SS2,  &c  ;  Wilter,  OtKlk.  da  Rim.  Atnid,  p.  371.)
The  pcacmiHil  or  [ncbir,  *ho  had  iha  aidmmu-
(ntton  of  *  proTincc,  mi  kUcodsd  bj  a  qoaeator.
Thii  qaaaur  had  nndoubledl;  to  pd&mi  ihe  sune
AuictJDiu  ai  IhoH  wtiD  accomiiaaied  the  armici  into
the  field  i  the;  were  in  bet  the  Hune  oScert,  vith
the  exception  that  the  fanner  vera  dationarj  in
their  pravince  during  the  tirait  of  their  office,  and
liad  couequentlj  rigbta  and  dutiei  which  ihoH
who  Bocornpanied  tba  armiea  could  not  have.  In
gidlj,  the  «rii«t  Roman  ptofince,  there  wen
two  qnaeston  anairering  to  the  tvo  fOTQcr  divi-
■ioai  of  the  iiland  into  the  Carthaginian  and
Greek  terriuny.  The  one  reiided  at  Lilyhaeun,
the  other  at  Synenw.  Betidea  the  dntiea  which
■■ ■  I  of  the


■  niKd,  Ugether  with  Ihe  account!
of  (hem,  to  the  aenrium.  (Pteudo-AMan.  «
Vtrrm.  p.  Iti7i  OrallL)  Id  the  prorince*  the
qaaeatim  had  the  Mine  jnriidietion  at  the  cnrvle
ladjlea  at  Rome.  (Oaina,  i  6.)  The  reUlion  ei-
iatioff  beEweeti  a  praetor  or  proconnl  of  a  proTinec
and  oil  qnastor  waa  according  to  ancient  ciutom
ngaided  ai  tnambling  (hat  faetween  a  (ather  and
hit  ion.  (Cic  Ditim.  19,  e.  Verr.  iL  1.  iB,pro
Pbmn.  U,adf^M.  iii.  10.)  When  a  quanlor
died  in  hi*  praiince,  the  praeUn  had  the  right  to
qtpaitit a pnquaeitor in hii etead {Cic c  Verr.Lc),
and  when  the  praetor  wu  abaent,  the  quantor
aupplied  hii  pla«e,  and  wa«  then  attended  by  lie-
ton.  (Cic  ai  Fm.  ii.  15,  pro  Plane  41.)  In
what  manner  the  proTincea  were  aaaigned  to  the
qoaeaton  after  their  dectJoD  at  Rome,  ia  not  men-
tioaed,  though  it  wai  probably  hy  lot,  a>  in  the  caae
of  the  <]«aeitor  oatieniii.  Bnt  in  Ihe  couinlihip  of
Decinuu  Diuitu  and  Porcina  it  wai  detrecd  that
the  pcorincea  ihoold  be  diitributed  among  the
qoaeaton  by  lot  aaMKUunwatto.  (Dig.  1.  (it.  13.
§  2l  Cic  0.  Vtrr.  iL  I.  IS.)  During  the  time  of
tha  *iii|Nre  thia  practice  eoDtiiraed,  and  if  tht
DDmber  of  qoaeaton  elected  waa  not  iDScient  for
the  number  of  ivoTincea,  thoae  qnaeilon  of  the
preceding  year,  who  had  had  no  pnrinee,  might  be
■ent  onL  Thia  waa,  howerer,  the  aie  only  in  the
proiinca  of  tha  Roman  people,  for  in  thoie  of  the
emperon  there  were  do  qnaealon  at  all.  In  the
time  of  Coiutantine  Uie  title  o!  ipiaeibr  miTi  pakiiii
waa  given  to  a  miniiler  of  neat  importaztce,  whoae
offiea  pnbablf  originated  in  that  of  the  candidati

CdpSa,  Rcapeeting  bia  paver  and  influence  lee
Iter.GawL  d.  Aim.  R.  p.  3G5.  [Ii.S.1

QUAESTO'RIILUDl.  [Ludi  Quamtoril]

QUAKSTO'RIUH.  [Caittra,  pp.  249,  a,
26S,b.]

QUALSS-QUALE3. [8««VD».]

QUALUS. [CiltTHua.]

QUANTI  HINO'RIS  ii  an  actio  which  a
bnjer  had  ag^nit  tha  Kller  of  a  thing,  in  reapect
of  aoj  non-apparent  &niti  i«  impeifeetiona,  at  the
time  of  the  lala,  eren  if  the  aeller  wai  not  aware
of  them,  or  lor  anr  defect!  in  the  qoalitiei  of  the
thing  which  the  idler  had  wimnled;  the  object
of  tha  actio  wai  to  obtain  an  abatement  in  the
pureliaie-monej.  Thia  action  vai  to  be  bronght
within  a  jar  or  within  hi  moDthi,  aeccrdiog  sa
thai*  wwaCaaliaernot.  Tba  actio  qouti  aiinri*


QUItfQUATRUS.
might  be  brought  ai  often  ai  a  new  defect  tna  di>-
eorered  ;  bnt  the  porchaaer  coold  not  recoTW  tha
value  of  the  lama  thing  twice.  [Emtio  kt
VaNDiTio.]  (Dig.  21.  5l  1  i  41.  tit  2.  a.  Si
S  1.)  [O-  L-l

QUARTA'RIUS,a  Roman  mnunre  of  capacity,
one  foanh  of  the  mtlarnH,  and  coDKqneailj  a
little  [eaa  than  a  quarler  of  a  pint  imperial.  It  ia
alto  lijiuid  in  the  Greek  ijilem  of  ilqnid  nuoanrts
under  the  name  of  T^T-ajn-oi',  [P.  S,J

QUASILLA'RIAK. [C*L*T«ca.]

QUASILLUM. [CitiTBus.]

QUATUORVIRI  JURI  DICUNDtt  [Co-
LOJiii,  p.3ia,h.]

QUATUORVIRI  VIARUM  CURANDA-
HUM. [ViiiJ

QUERE'LA  INOFFICIO^I  TESTAMEN-

TI. [TiaTAKBNTITU.}

QUINA'RIUS. [DiNinius.]

QUINCUNX. [As,  p.  140, b.]

QUINDECIMVIRI.  [DiciMTiai,  p.3S7,a.]

QUINQUAOE'SIMA,  the  fiftieth  or  «  laj  of
two  per  cent,  npon  Ihe  nine  of  all  ^rea  that
were  lold,  waa  intCitnted  by  AiiftBalna  ascordin^
to Dion Casaiu (It.  31). Tadtna (ziil 31\

(bur  per  cent  upon  the  lala  of  ilavea  in  the  time  of
NcK :  if  both  paiiagei  an  comet,  thia  tax  mnat
hare  been  incteued  alter  the  time  of  Aagaalm,
probabtj  by  Caligula,  who,  we  are  tidl  bj  SBeloniiB
(at  viia,  c  40),  intiadnced  many  new  taxea.
(Bnnnann,  d6  Tt^  p.69,  &c)

WeBrea1iotoldbyTacilui(jH.ziiL  SI}thM
Nero  abolished  the  Quinquaffeaima ;  thia  natt
have  been  a  different  tax  from  t£e  aboro-menlieord
one,  and  may  have  been  liinilar  Id  the  Quinqaa-
geaima  mentioned  by  Cicero  <e.  Varr.  iiL  -19)  in
connection  with  the  Aratorei  of  Sicaly.

A  duty  of  two  per  cent  waa  bvwd  at  Alb^
upon  exporti  and  impcrta. [PxtmcosTft-J

QU1NQUATRU3  or  QUINQUATRIA,  ■
featival  lacred  to  Minerva,  which  waa  calebrated
on  the  19th  of  Maich  (o-d.  iiv.  Kal.  Apr.},  and
waa  M  called  according  to  Vam  (A  Lmg.  LaL  ii.
14,  ed.  MUUei),  beeaows  it  waa  the  fifth  day  afW
the  Ides,  in  the  nme  wmy  aa  the  Toicalaia  oiled
a  featival  on  the  iiilh  day  after  the  Idea  Anrtru,
and  one  on  the  seventh  Sijitimalrmt.  Odlias  (iu
21)  and  FeatuB  (a.  e.)  also  give  the  aRine  ctymotogy,
and  the  latter  stales  that  the  Faliaeana  tootaUed  ■
festival  on  the  lenth  day  after  the  Idea  JHaawff  as.
CCoinp.MQll«-,E(nH*Br,voLiLp.49.)  BothVaira
and  Fettus  stale  that  Ibe  Qninqnatm  waa  crle-
biated  for  only  one  day,  bat  Ovid  {FoM.  iiL  treS,
k.e.)  lays  that  it  was  celebrated  fir  five  daya,  snd
wsi  for  this  reaKn  called  by  this  name:  that  ea
Ihe  first  day  no  blood  was  ihed,  bnt  that  on  the
last  fonr  there  were  tnnteata  of  gladiatota.  It
would  appear  however  fram  tha  abovc-BentieaKd
authorities  that  the  first  day  was  cnly  tin  featival
pnpecly  ao  called,  and  that  the  liat  Ibar  wets
merely  an  addition  made  peiliapa  in  tbe  time  vl
Caeiar  to  gratify  tha  people,  who  hiiamn  ao  pu-
sionaicty  nad  ofgladialoria]  comhatL  ThcanoeM
Calendars  too  aaaign  only  one  da^  to  tin  lolivo].

Ovid  (J:  c)  tays  that  thia  feitini  wva  eeiebaated
in  commemoiation  of  Ihe  birth-day  of  Minsva ;
bnt  Bcccrding  to  Featoi  it  wai  aacred  lo  Mmera
becauae  her  temple  on  tbe Aventina  wna  caoae-


QUIBINALLL

med  in  ncnd  rild  mn  jmrificd  ;  but  ihu  Menu
to  haie  bemorigiDaUyftKpBniH  fratinl  cmlled  7W
MutriM)  <P(Mn,L«..-  Vun,i.c),  which  m*
odabnttd  ■•  m  knmr  ban  tha  udat  CklaidBn
OD  tU  S3d  cf  Hvch  (<•.  <1.  i.  CU.  ^i>r.).  umI
mraM  of  none,  when  tba  (^liDqmmu  wn  «i-
tanded  to  Gtc  daji,  M  en  Uis  lut  d>j  of  that
(MtinL

Aa  Ihii  feMinl  w»  Hwivd  ta  Mintm,  it  ieau
tbit  women  wh«  KCiubiined  to  cODMit  loitDQe-
tdlmud  diiincn  apon  thii  iaj.  (Pkut  MiL
iiL.l.  98.)  Domitiui  tatued  it  W  be  celebrated
ei«n  JMT  in  hi>  Albui  VilU,  utmted  at  the  fmt
of  tSa  hiUi  of  Alba,  and  iniutnted  a  collegium  to
■upecintend  tha  celebnlioD,  which  coniiiled  of
(be  banting  of  wild  beaala,  of  tha  eihibilion  of
phf  •,  and  of  eonteili  of  oMon  and  pooti. (9uet,


■  alio  anDthai  hatiral  of  ttiii  ni


*■)

There  n

oJW  - .

■ora,  eelebfatad  oo  the  Idea  of  June,
th*  tibidnea  went  thton^  the  cit;  in  praceiaion
to  ihs  temple  of  Hinam.  (Vim,  d»  Limg.  Lai.
*i.  IT;  Orid.  Fiatii.  6£],An.;  FeMai,  p.  US,
cd.Hilller.}

QUINQUENNA'LIA,  wan  gtaat  iutitnted
by  Nero  a.  d.  60,  in  imitatioD  of  the  Oreek  feati-
nla,  and  ealebaled  like  the  Qnik.  wtrramipUti
■t  tba  end  af  mij  taia  jean :  tbi^  nnuiated  ot
mnaical,  nmnaatic,  nd  equeatrian  omteata,  and
wen  calU  ATaKiiB.  (SneL  iVcr.  IS;  Tat  ^m,
xJT.  20;  Dim  Cku.  IiL  21.)  Sneloniiu  and
TaBtoB  (0.  a)  nj  that  lOch  ^mea  Here  fitit  in-
tfodooed  at  Rune  b;  Nero.  The  Qar»j—atia,
which  had  pmioualf  been  inititaled  both  in
boBou  of  Jofitu  Cuaar  (Dioo  Cua.  ilir,  6)  and
af  Angnatoa  (Id.  li.  19  ;  Sset  Atu.  69,  98),  wen
eonfiaed  to  the  towna  of  lulf  and  the  pnriiKH.
The  Qsioqaenualii  of  Nero  appear  not  to  hare
been  cetabnled  after  hii  time^  till  th^  mn  R-
lired  loua  b;  Domitian  in  hoooir  of  the  Capi-
toline  Winter.  (Suet.  i>iMa.  4.)
QUINQUENKA'LIS.  [CoLamA,p.31S,b,]
QUINQUGRE'MIS.  [Navii,  p.  785,  b.]
QUINQUFBTIUM.  [PwfTATSLOn.]
QUINQUEVIRI,  or  6n  oiininii^oaen,  we»
frequentJj  appnnted  under  Ute  repnbllc  aa  eit»-
ordinaij  magiatntea  to  cartj  anj  miaann  into
efiect.  Thna  Qainoamri  MmtmH,  ot  public
banker^  wen  oecaiienallj  ippoinled  in  timet  of
gteat  diitrcM  [HinbahuJ  ;  tlw  ume  niunbei  of

intend  tba  lonDBlimi  of  a  odooj,  ibongh  three  (M-

p.315,b.]  We  find  too  that  Quinqaeriri  were
cnated  to  aaperintand  tha  tepain  of  the  walla  and
of  the  towen  of  the  ei^  (Lir.  iit.  1\  aa  wall  aa
ler  Tarioni  other  purpoaai.

Bcaidea  the  aitnMdinaiy  comniiMionB*  of  thia
name,  there  were  alto  permanent  officeia,  called
Qunqoeriri,  who  wtn  napooaible  lor  the  lafetj
•f  the  eilj  after  atuaet,  aa  it  wai  ineonTenient  fin
tba  tegular  nugiatiBta  to  attend  to  ihii  dotf  at
that  time:  the*  wae  Bnt appointed  aoon  after  '
«v  with  Prnliia. (Dig.  i.  tjt.a.  ■.2.  fSI.)

QUINTA'NA. [CAsraA.]

QUnUNA'LIA,  a  iMtiral  Mcrad  to  Qnirinui,
whwb  waa  cdebmed  an  the  17th  of  Febniar?
(a.  d.  xiu  OmL  Mori,),  <Hi  which  day  Romnlni
(Quirinna)  waa  nid  to  have  been  carried  np  to
h«Tcu.(Orid.AAiL475iFMRH,i;K/  Vamv


QUORUM  BONORUIL  eu

dtUia.  Lot.  Ti.  13,  ed.  MUller.) Thia  fealiral
waa  i^  called  StnJiorum  J^riae,  mpec^ng  tha
meaning  of  which  aee  Fornacalia.
QUIRINA'LIS  FLAMEN. [FLAKaN.]
QUIHI'TES, yUlRITIUM  JUS. [Jui,
p.  658,  a.]
QUOD  JUSSU,  ACTia [Jorau,  Quon,

QUORUM  DONORUM,  INTKRDICTUM.
The  objeet  of  thu  interdict  ia  to  gi'e  to  the  Pne-
lorian  heiea  the  poaoeiaion  of  anything  belonging
to  the  hereditaa  which  BDOther  poaaeaKa  pro  he-
reda  or  pro  poaaeaaon.  The  name  of  thia  laleidicl
ia  deiiied  from  tho  introdiKtory  wordi,  and  it  nuti
aa  foliowa ;  "  Ait  Praetor ;  Quonun  bonomm  ei
ei^lo  mw  illi  poiaeaaio  data  cat;  quod  de  hia
boaia  pro  henda  aat  pro  poaaetaore  pcaaidea,  poa-
aldercare  d  nihil  nancaptiun  eaaet  \  qnod  quidem
dolo  malo  fnia^  uti  deiinena  poaaidere :  id  illi
reatituai."  The  plaintiff  ii  entitled  to  thia  Inter-
dict wiwn  ha  haa  ghtsined  the  Bonomm  Poaacaaio^
and  when  any  one  of  tha  fhor  fiillowuig  cmditiou
ol;  to  the  defendant.

1.  Quod  de  hia  bonii  |(i>  hrrede,

S.  Aut  T/ro  poaaeiaore  pOMidea,


4.  Quod  quidem  dolo  malo  feciati,  uti  deainerea

The  two  fint  cam
and  applf  alao  to  the  i

The  fourth  tondition  a»o  appjiei  to  tne  caaa  ot  tbe
heredilatia  pelitio  and  the  rei  rindicstio  ;  bat  in-
ataad  of  "  qood  quidem  "  tbe  reading  "  quodqne  "
haa  been  pmpoacd,  which  aeenu  to  be  reqoired,
for  No.  4  haa  DO  reference  to  No.  3,  hot  ia  itaelf  a
Dcw  condition.  Tbe  worda  of  No.  3  bare  cauaed
aome  difficulty,  which  ma;  be  explained  aa  fol-

In  eatahliibing  die  Booonn  Poaeeauo,  tba
PiactoT  mtended  to  give  to  man;  peraooa,  luch  aa
emancipated  children  and  Cognati,  the  aame  right*
that  the  herea  had  ;  and  hia  object  wia  to  accom-
pliah  thia  effectnally.  Tha  Roman  herea  waa  the
repreaenlativa  of  the  penon  who  had  died  and  left
an  hereditaa,  and  b;  rinae  of  thia  npreaentatiia
or  juriatical  Gclion  of  the  penon  of  the  dead  baling
a  continued  ciitieDce  in  the  penmi  of  the  hem,
the  herea  auccceded  to  hit  [foperl;  and  to  all  hia
righia  and  ohiigationa.  In  tha  matter  of  righta
and  obl^Btiooa  the  Practt*  pot  tha  bonomm  poa*
■eaaor  in  the  aame  titoatton  aa  tha  hem  bv  allow*
ing  him  to  lua  in  mpect  of  tha  daima  that  the
deceaaed  had,  and  allowing  anj  peraon  to  lue  him
in  reipect  of  claimi  agaioat  the  decesaad,  in  an
actio  utilia  or  ficlitia.  (U^  Frag.  tit.  S8.  a.  13  |
Gaioa,]*.  34.)  In  retpect  to  the  property,  accord-
ing to  the  old  law  an^  penwn  might  take  pniaea-
aion  of  a  thbg  belonging  to  the  hereditaa,  and  ac-
quire the  ownenhip  of  it  in  a  certain  lime  by  ttanca-
jHCOi.  {Oaina,ii.  53— £8.)  Tbe  petaoni  in  whoaa
bTOur  the  Praetor'a  edict  waa  naiie  could  do  thia
aa  well  ai  any  other  pcraon ;  bat  if  they  foond  any
other  penoo  in  pewaaaion  of  anything  bdooging
to  tba  hereditaa,  they  coold  neither  daim  it  by  tbe
Tindicatio,  Ua  they  ware  not  owiMn,  mr  by  tbe
bendiutia  pelitio,  for  tbey  were  not  bnedei.  To
meet  thia  diSenlty  the  Intardietsm  Qooinm  Bono-
mm waa  introduced,  the  object  of  which  waa  to
ud  tha  BanMnm  Pooaoaor  in  getting  the  poaaiiiion
(wbcDoe  the  title  of  the  Intvdictum  adipiacendae
poaaenioqia)  and  to  commencing  the  Biiic^iie&


sei  QUORUM  BONORUIC

If  be  liMt  the  poNeoiiui  heton  tlie  nntiapSon  in

PoiKuoriil  lulirdicU,  [Knperly  »  ailed,  or  b
olhei  legal  mtaiu.  Thij,  accordiiig  lo  SarigD;, .
ths  origin  of  ths  Bonanun  Pottetaa.

In  eoaite  of  time  when  Boniurian  ownenhin
(in  bonis)  ira<  fully  efitablilbed  and  co-exiited  witn
Quintnrian  owncnhip,  tbii  new  kind  of  ownenhip

bid  uqoired  tbe  Bonotmn  Poae»io,  and  thni  >li
that  belonged  to  the  deteued  eijunQumtinm  be-
came hi*  in  bonia  ukI  finally  bj  Uneuion,  ei  jure
Quiritiuni ;  thoo^  in  tbe  mean  time  he  had  nuiet
oFthepmcticil  idnoUgei  of  Qoiritarian  ownenhip.
Ullimatelj  the  Boaormn  PosHigiD  came  to  be  ran-
fidcred  ai  a  ipecin  of  hcredita*,  ud  the  like  fonni
ofprocedanlo  ihoHin  the  com  of  the  reel  hetediUu
were  applied  to  the  oue  of  the  Bonorum  Cowenia ;
thut  ante  the  poMeswiria  heredilatii  petitia,  which
■•  menlipned  b;  Oaiua,  and  cannot  theiefbn  be  of
later  origin  Ihu  the  time  of  Malm  Aoielius.
Thui  the  new  form  of  procedore,  which  would
bnce  rmdend  the  Interdict  Quorum  Bonorum  on-
neceHarj,  if  it  had  been  introduced  Moner,  co-
eiigted  with  the  Interdict,  and  a  per»n  might
avail  bimielf  of  either  mode  of  proceeding,  u  he
fcnnd  belt.  <Gsiui,  iii.  31.)  In  the  legiilation
of  Jiulinian,  we  find  both  formi  of  procedure  men-
timed,  tbough  that  of  the  Interdict  bad  altogether
bllen  into  dinue. (IniL  4.tit.  15.)

Aecordinft  to  the  old  law,  an;  poeaeMor,  wilbont
mpect  to  faia  title,  conld  b;  naucapion  pro  herede
obtain  the  ownenhip  of  a  thing  belmging  to  the
bereditu  ;  and  of  canr>e  the  Bonorum  PoHenor
waa  eipoaed  to  this  danger  aj  much  aa  the  UereL
If  the  time  of  Unicapion  of  the  poueaaor  wai  not
intempted  by  the  ^nt  claim,  the  berea  had  no
title  In  the  Interdict,  aa  appeara  &om  ita  terma,  for
— 1. --Joded  in  No.  1  or  2.


Hadrian  (Oaiua,  ii.  S7)  b;
changed  tbe  law  lo  br  aa  lo  protect  the  hetci
againit  the  complcio  uiDcapion  of  an  Improbui  Pot-
■eaaor,  and  to  mton  the  thing  to  him.  Though
the  wordt  of  Oaiua  are  general,  there  can  be  no
donbt  that  the  Senatuacontultum  of  Hadrian  did
not  apply  to  the  Uancapion  of  the  Bonomm  Poa-
aeaur  nor  to  that  of  the  Bonae  fidei  poaaeaaor.
Nov  if  we  aaanme  that  the  Senatuaconiultimi  of
Hadrian  applied  to  the  Bonorum  Poaaeaior  alio,
ita  proTiaiona  mnat  Eiare  been  introduced  into  the
fbnnula  of  the  Inlrrdict,  and  thua  tbe  obacnn  paa-
nge  No.  3  neeivei  a  dear  meaning,  which  i>  thii ;
Yoxi  thai!  reatoce  that  alu  which  you  no  longer
poueta  pro  poueuorc,  but  once  id  poaaeiaed,  and
the  poueuion  of  which  ha>  only  lott  that  quality
in  conaeqnence  of  a  lucrativa  nancapio.  According
to  thia  eiplanaiion  the  pauage  No.  3  appliea  only
to  the  new  rule  of  law  eatabiiibed  by  the  Senatoa-
conanltum  of  Hadrian,  which  allowed  tbe  old  OAU-
capinn  of  tbe  improbna  poaaeaaor  to  hare  ita  legal
effect,  but  rendered  it  oaeleai  to  him  by  canpelling
natitatioa.  In  tbe  legialalion  of  Juttinian  coue-
qnently  theae  worda  have  no  meaning,  lince  that
old  uauiapion  Amu  no  part  of  it ;  yet  the  worda
have  been  retained  in  the  campilatim  of  Juitiaian,
like  many  othen  belonging  to  an  earlier  age,
thougk  in  their  Dew  place  they  are  entirely  devoid


(Savigny,  Ciitr  Jai  TnUrdiel  ^
^aimirifl,  Ac.  T<ri.  T. :  Dig.  4S.  tit.  2  ;  Oaina,  i


RAMNES,  RAMNEN3ES. [Pitdtcii.]

RAPfNA. rBoHARtPT*; FCBTCK.]

RASTER  or  RASTRUM,rfi»..RASTBLLDS,
RALLUS,  RALLUH  ({ixn-Ap),  a  ipud  (irA.
Tpirtii)-  a  lake,  a  hoe.  Agneably  to  ita  dni-
Tation  &nm  rods,  to  Krt^w,  "  Raatet "  denotnl  a
hoe  which  in  its  operation  and  in  ita  lirapleit  fbmi
resembled  tbe  aerapen  used  by  our  acarengcn  in
dewiauig  tbe  itreeta. By  the  dinuvi  of  itt  blade

of  aDrguden-iakea,anditwaadiatinguiahrd  br  iba
epithets  Udemt  and  jaadrUaH  (Calo  Je  Rt  RmaL.
10)  aeei^diDg  to  the  number  of  the  diTisiona.

The  ratUr  tidau  vaa  by  br  the  moat  oomman
apectei,  and  hence  we  frequently  find  it  menlianeiil
under  the  aimple  name  Mw.  (Jut.  iiL  2S8.)
Thia  term  oxnaponds  to  the  Oreek  JinAAa,  br
which  eiuriti  waa  anbatituted  in  the  Attic  dialect.
{Xw.  Cymp.  Ti.  3.  g  34,  36  ;  Arialoph.  A'a«L
1488,  1502,  ..1110,601;  Phtyn.  fUo;.  p.  302,  c^
Lobeck  ;  Plato,  R^mb.  p.  426,  f ;  Tim.  Lea.  Flat,
t.  e.)  Tbe  bidani  waa  used  to  tarn  np  the  aoil,
and  thua  to  perform  on  a  anall  leale  the  part  of  a
plough.  (Pirn.  U.  N.  xriL  9.  a.  G.)  But  it  wm
much  mora  cammimly  uaed  in  the  work  callrd
oceohs,  ■'.  a.  the  bieaking  down  of  the  eloda  after
ploogbing.  (Vitg.  Otorg.  i.  94,  155.)  [ADa.ii;irL..
T<7Bi,p.S2,  a.]  Hence  it  waa  hearr.  (Orid.  .HeC
li.  101.)  The  prongt  of  the  bideni  held  by  tba
matic  in  the  woodcnt  at  p.  849  are  cuned,  vfaick
agree*  with  the  deacriplian  of  tbe  nme  irngjement
in  CatuUua  (I>L  39).  VinB-dreasen  oootiaDalljr
used  the  bidena  in  hackii^  and  bnakinf  tlie
lompa  of  earth,  stirring  it,  and  collecting  it  aboU
the  roota  ef  tbe  Tines.  (Virg.  Gnrg.  ii.  355,  VM  ;
Col.<f>ffi  Au<.iillS,iT.I4,Gtopo<s.T.25.)  In
stony  land  it  was  adapted  for  d^ging  trendw^
whilst  the  ipade  was  better  suited  to  the  pmpeaa
when  the  soil  was  full  of  the  root*  of  mahea  oad
other  phmta.  <P1ia  H.  N.  xviiL  6.  i.  8  ;  Saet.
Nm,  19.)  [PxLA.]  Wooden  nkea  wen  aooia-
timea  nwd.  (Col.  <U  R,  Hut.  il  I S.) [J.  T.]

RATES. [N*Ti8,[i7BS,a.)

RATIO'NIBUS  DISTRAHENDIS  ACTia

[TUT«LA.l

RECEPTA ;  DR  RECKPTO,  ACTia  Tka
Praetor  declared  that  he  woald  allow  an  aetmi
agxinst  Nautaa,  Canponea,  and  StabuUrii,  in  »-
lect  of  any  property  for  the  aeenrily  of  whid
ley  bad  undertaken  (ne^Knnf,  whence  the  nwm
of  the  action)  if  they  did  not  leahn  it.  Tbe
meaning  of  the  term  Nanla  baa  been  explained
[ExKRCiTOHiA  Actio]  :  the  nuaniii;  of  Canps
foUowB  &wn  the  descripticm  of  the  boaineaa  of  a
Caupo.  (Dig.  4.  ^L  9.  s.  5.)  ■*  A  NauM,  Canpi^
and  Stabalanui  are  paid  not  for  tba  care  wkich
they  lake  of  a  thing  ;  bnt  tbe  Nauta  ia  paid  for
carrying  poaaengeta ;  the  (^upo  fa-  pemittiag
tnvellers  to  stay  in  his  (^pona ;  tbe  Stabolaiiaa
for  allowing  beasts  of  burden  U  stay  in  hia  atahk».
and  yet  ^ey  are  bound  for  the  aecuity  of  Urn
thing  also  {aHlodiae  mimmt  Imnatmr).'  Tba  tw*
latter  actions  are  aimitar  to  ancb  actiona  a*  arias
among  us  agvnit  innkeepen,  and  lirery  itabla
keopera,  on  whoae  premisBs  loaa  or  injury  haa  be^
■ustoined  with  leapect  to  the  pnpafty  of  peiscaia
which  they  have  by  legal  implication  nndettakva
tha  caca.ot At  first  eight  than  lacBS  no  raaaai


HEDnrBlTOIUA  ACTIO.

tot  Aim  Pngtoriu  anunm,  as  ths  p«i«(Hi  who
had  •lutBined  Iom  mnld  either  have  u  actio
locad  aad  cmdacti,  in  cue*  when  pajmert  bad
been  igraed  m,  or  an  actiD  depoaiti,  where  an  pa;-
ment  ud  bxa  agreed  on ;  bat  PDnipanim  anggnti
thai  the  nnea  vat  thii :  in  a  matter  of  Lontum
>Dd  CaDdnetnm,  ths  reeeiTcr  wbi  CFnly  aniiretable
ta  Ion  in  can  ba  na  paltj  of  Culpa  ;  and  In  ■
matter  of  Bcpoaitom,  only  in  caae  he  waa  gniItT  of
DoXoM  Maliu  ;  but  the  re«iier  waa  liable  to  tfaoe
Pnutiinaii  aclioDo,  if  the  thinjt  waa  loat  or  injnrad
eTCD  wilhoDt  an;  Culj*  on  hit  part,  and  be  waa
only  eicaaed  in  caae  of  Dtunnoia  fiUale,  anch  aa
•bipwreck,  piracy,  and  an  forth.

Theae  pnetorian  actiona  in  betam  wen  either
*^  rei  penocntnriaa  *^  ^  the  recovety  of  the  thing,
or  **  poenalee  "  for  damages.  The  fonner  action
night  be  maintained  againil  the  here*  of  the
Nauta,  Csupo,  or  Slabuluiua.  The  Eineilor  of  a
■faip  waa  anawoable  fat  any  Icaa  ix  damage  canted
■a  praperw,  which  ha  had  nceirad  in  the  l^al
erne  ofuia  term,  hr  uf  peraon  in  hie  employ-
aetia  againat  him  waa  in  dnplum.  The
liability  on  the  part  of  Canpaiie*  and  3labularii


^  t«  the  gooda  of  any  tiaTelli
'bo  weM  dwelling  or  employed
in  the  anpona,  bnt  not  if  caued  by  a  mere  tro-
Tcden  The  actio  for  damaget  could  net  be  main-
tained ^aiaat  the  hen*.  (Dig.  i.  tit.  S  ;  Peckii
In  TitL  Dig.  et  Cod.  Ad  rem  nantlcam  peiti-
■entea  Ceomuntarii,  &e.  AmateL  1668.)

Aa  to  tbe  pwMgea  in  (he  Digeit  (4.  tit.  9.  a.  1.
|1,  ind*?.  til.5.f  G)  tee  Vangerow,  i^iwfeiteit,
Ac  iii.  p.  4  J6.

Tbcn  ii  a  title  m  the  Digest  (L  tit.  8),  De  Ra-
teptia,  qui  arbitiini recepenmt nt  aententiam
dicant. Wbm  partiaa  who  had  a  matter  V
gale,  had  agreed  to  refer  it  to  an  arbitator,  i


had  aoe^ted  tba  efflca  of  aibitiator  (arMriaai
ctpeni),  the  jneter  wonld  compel  him  to  p
iuanceaaeot(Dc«,nnleaibabadaome  l^ein
Tbe  Piaetoc  couid  conpel  a  peiaon  of  mj  rank,  aa
■  Coninlarit  for  inatance,  to  pronounce  a  aentenea
after  taking  npon  him  the  office  of  arbitrator  ;  bnt
be  could  Dot  compel  a  penon  who  held  a  Hagia-
tntni  or  Poteataa,  at  a  CoDanl  or  Praetor,  for  he
bad  no  Impoinm  orer  them. Tlia  partin
bound  to  aabmit  to  the  award  of  the  arhitialor ;
and if  either  perty  refuted  to  abide  by  it,  tbi
etber  had  agaiut  bim  a  poenaa  petitio,  if  a  poem
waa  agreed  on  in  the  oam|ff<miiaanm ;  and  if  then
waa  no  poena  in  the  compromiaaum,  he  bad  ai
Incerti  actio. (Dig.  i.  tit  8.)  [O.  L.]

RECI'NIUH. [RiciNtUN.]
RECISSO'RIA  ACTIO. [I;
EECUPEBATCRES. [Jon
BEDEHPTOH,  tbe  genenl  i
tiactar,  who  nndertook  the  building  and  tqiaking
e£  public  woi^  private  houiea,  Alc,  and  in  &ct  of
any  kind  of  work. (Feilai,  i.  d.  ;  Hor.  Cant,  iii
I.  3S,  Ep.  iL  2  72  ;  Cic  ila  Dh.  ii.  21.) Tbe
Kumera  of  tbe  public  taiet  were  alto  called  Jtt-
itmjion*. (Dig.  19.  tit.  3.  a.  60.  |  8.)

REDHIBITO'RIA  ACTIO  waa  an  acti
which  a  bayra  hod  againit  a  teller  for  mcindin
the  bargain  of  tale  on  account  of  any  non-apparet
detxt  at  tbe  time  of  the  purcbate  in  (lie  thing  puc-
ehaaed,  which  the  buyer  wni  not  acquainted  with,
■u4  which  aeonding  to  tbe  Edict  of  the  Cantla


RBOULA.

Aedilea,  he  mght  to  bavr


985


Jntedwith;
for  any  defect  in  the  qualitiei  of  the  thing  which
B  aellcr  bad  warranted.  The  aellor  waa  antwer-
la  cTon  if  he  was  not  aware  of  the  drfecta.
"  Rcdhibeie,"  layi  Ulpian,  "  ia  to  to  uct  that  tha
teller  shall  hare  back  what  be  had,  and  becauaa
this  ia  done  by  restotation,  for  that  rauou  it  it
called  '  Re<Jhibitia,'  which  ia  as  much  aa  to  tar
■  Redditio.' "

The  efiect  of  the  redbibitio  was  to  reacind  the

bai^n  and  to  put  both  partiea  in  the  lams  con-

diliou,  aa  if  the  sale  had  nerer  taken  place. The

allowed  for  proaeculing  the  actio  redhibitona

'  »er  menace  nlilet,"  whon  a  caulio  had  been

giTim,  which  wen  ncksned  tram  the  day  of  skle

from  tho  time  when  any  atalement  or  promiio

1 been  made  relating  tn  the  mutter (dictum

iiiBBsaims,  tha  worda  of  the  Edict). If  then

a  no  cautio,  the  time  allowed  was  two  months.

(Dig.  21.  tit  1.)  [0.  L.]

REDIMI'CULUM  (naBrr^f),  a  fiUet  attached

the  Olantica,  Diadettia,  Miln,  or  other  head-

dreat  at  the  ocdfait,  and  pataed  over  the  sbanldera,

lo  bang  on  each  aide  oyer  the  breast. C^irg>

I.  61S;  Orid.  MK.  i.  26.^)  Redimicub
properly  female  omamenta  (Featui,  s.  r.  ,"
Orid,  JSput  It  71 ;  Jut.  iL  rO ;  Prudent  PtycAom.
«48) :  and  in  the  ttatuea  of  Venus  tiiey  vera  imi-
tated in  gold,  (Orid.  Z"!!*.!!.  136— 137.)  [J.Y,]
REOIA  LEX.  [LiK  Raou.]
REOIFU'OIUM  or  FUOA'LIA,  tbe  Ung-a
flight,  a  featiTal  which  waa  celebrated  by  the  Romana
grery  year  on  tbe  31th  of  February,  and  according
to  Verriua  (ap.  Feat  i.  e.  B^/iigitat)  and  Orid
(Fat.  iL  6S5,  &c)  in  commemomtion  of  the  flight
of  king  Tai^ninhu  Supeibui  fitim  Rani&  The
day  ia  marked  in  the  Paiti  aa  nefaatna.  In  aome
ancient  caleudaiia  the  24Ih  of  Mny  ia  liltewita
called  Regifu^um,  and  in  olhen  it  it  described  sa
Q.  Rex.  d  F.,  that  is,  "  Quando  Rex  cooiiliaTil,
fas,"  or  "Quando  Rei  comitio  fugit"  Scieial
ancient  aa  weli  at  modem  writen  hare  denied  that
either  of  theaa  dayt  had  anything  to  do  with  the
flight  of  king  Tarqniniua  (Cincius,  op.  Fat.  L  i.\
and  are  of  opinion  that  these  two  daya  derired
their  name  from  the  symbolical  flight  of  the  Kex
Sacrorum  from  the  comitium  ;  for  this  king-priest
waa  generally  not  allowed  lo  appear  in  the  comi-
tium,  which  was  destined  for  the  tianiaction  of
politiml  matters  in  which  he  contd  not  take  part
But  on  certain  daya  in  the  ytar,  and  certainly  on
the  two  daya  mentioned  abore,  he  had  to  go  to  tha
comilium  for  the  purpose  of  oflering  certain  auri-
ficaa,  and  immediately  after  he  had  performed  hit
fimctlant  there,  he  twatily  fled  from  it ;  and  tbia
aymbolical  flight  it  aaid  to  hare  been  called  Regi'
fngium.  (FeatJLo.;  Plut  eiuietl.  Amu.  68  i  Ovid.

i^.  r.  737.)  [uaj

REOULA  (■arfo'),  the  ruler  nied  by  scribea
for  drawing  right  line*  with  pen  and  ink  (Bnmck,
Anal.  m.&,  87);  also  the  nileoted  bycarpenlert,
maaoni,  and  other  antficera,  either  for  drawing
itraight  linet  or  making  plane  aurfiuea.  (Ariatoph.
Ran.  796  ;  Vitray.  nL  3.  §  5.)  That  it  waa
Dialed  with  equal  diriaiont,  like  our  carpenter'a
rules,  it  manifett  from  the  lepreHntationi  of  it
among  the  "  Initrumenta  bbrocum  tignariantm,"
m  tha  woodcut*  at  pp.  287,  80(i,  The  substance,
with  which  the  Imes  wen  made,  waa  raddle  or
!  red  ochn  (.idKnt,  Brunck,  AmO.  i.  221  ;  ^vwi
i  aarJn,  Eurip.  Htm.  Ftar.  926.) [Itltru.] Tha


fir^r [J.


REPBTUNDAE.

I  lometuiiM  called  nu^v  initoid  oC
».]„ . JJ-XJ


BEI  UXO'RIAE  or  DOTIS  ACTIO,  [Dot]
RBLA'TIO. ISsNATUH.]
RBLEOATIO. [Eisilioh.  p.  SU,  b.]
REMANCIPATIO. [EiriNcipjTia]
REMULCUM  (pviuiuXKfir  Til  rail),  n.  reps
Jot  towing  ■  ihip.  Kid  likewiie  &  tow-bar(p  ("  Ri  ■
flucZtwit,  fbnii,  quo  deligaU  u&rig  magaa  tnhitoi
Tim  remi,"  Iiid.  Orig.  lii.  4.  §  a ;  Rnu^co  ett,
quum  Ksphu  nmis  navii  magna  tn^tnr,"  Futoi,
«.  s. ;  eomp.  Cans.  £.  (7.  iL  23,  ill  40  ;  Hiru  B.
Alta.  11  ;  Lir.  IIT.  30,  xcxii,  16  ;  Poljb.  i.  27,
"" -i-iS).


REPETUNDAE,
TUNDAE.  Bcpetmidaa  Peniniaa  in  iu  widsM
■eoM  VH  ths  lenn  uied  to  deiignate  inch  mnu  of
money  m  the  Sodi  of  the  Roinui  S(Ua  oi  indifi-
duali  clumed  ID  recoer  from  Magiitnlni,  Judice*,
or  Pablici  Curotorei,  which  thay  hid  impropecly
token  or  noelfod  in  the  ProTinciM,  or  in  tha  Urb*
Bonia,  either  tn  the  diKhu^  di  their  Juriadictio,
or  in  their  owity  at  Judicea,  or  in  mpect  of  an;
other  public  ftnction.  Sometimm  the  word  Repe-
tondaa  wu  owd  to  eipccu  tfaa  illegal  act  fat  which
compenvition  wai  Bought,  u  in  the  phraie  "  Hope-
tundamm  iniimolari,  danuutri  ;"  and  Feeunmo
meant  not  only  money,  but  anything  that  had
THlae.  The  eipieiiion  which  the  Oiink  writen
■ometjmca  ma  for  Repetondoe  ii  Hunt  MpMr.  (Plut
Sulla.  &.)

ll  ii  ■latedbyLiT7(x1iLl}  that  hefbre  the  year
H.  c  1 73,  no  eompIaiuU  were  niads  by  the  Socii  of
being  put  to  any  coit  ot  charge  b  j  the  Roman  magii-
tiatui.  When  complaint!  of  exacliooi  were  made,
an  inquiry  iirai  iaitinted  into  thli  offence  eiln  or-
dinem  ex  SeaalaMoiuullo  u  ai^iean  from  the  caae
of  P.  Fnrini  Pbilns  and  M.  MMienot,  who  were
acenied  of  thii  oSenoe  by  tba  Htapani.  (LIt.  iliii
2.)  The  fint  Lei  on  the  lubject  wai  the  Calpor-
nia,  which  wa«  propoied  and  tarried  by  the  Tri-
bonut  Plebi^  L.  Calpamiiu  Piio  {b.  c.  US),  who
alas  diningoithed  himielf  aa  an  hiatorical  writer.
By  thit  liei  a  Piaetor  wai  appotnled  for  trying
penona  charged  with  thia  crime.  (Cie.  dtCif.a.
SI,Sral.27.) Thia Lex only  anilied


io  eit™  ordinenu
tiea  of  the  Lei  Calpurnia  were  merely  pecuniary,
and  at  leaat  did  not  comprise  exailium,  for  L.  Civ-
ncliua  Lenlnloa  who  waa  Cenaor  B.  c,  U7,  had
been  conricled  on  a  charge  of  Repetimdae  in  the
previoua  year.  The  pecuniBry  penalty  waa  aic«-
tained  by  the  litia  aeatimalio,  or  taking  an  acvomit
of  all  the  nnu  of  money  which  the  crairkted  party
bad  illegally  reed  Ted.

Varioua  leget  do  repetundii  were  [auBed  tha
the  Lex  Calpunil*,  and  the  penal^ea  were  con-
tmually  made  hokvio'.  The  Lei  Jonia  waa  paaaed
probably  about  >.  c  126  on  the  propoial  of  M.  Ja-
oini  Pennua,  Tiibunna  Plebia.  ll  11  probable  that
thia  wai  the  Lai  under  which  C.  Cato,  Procoutul
of  Macedonia,  wai  living  in  eiile  at  Tamco  (Cic
rn>  B-Mo,  11  ;  VelL  Fat.  ii.  6)  ;  forat  leait  eni-
liom  waa  not  a  penalty  unpoied  by  the  Calpurnia
Lex,  but  wu  added  by  aoma  hU«l  Lei. Thia


REPETUNDAE.
Lex  Jnni*  and  the  Lax  Calpurnia  an  meuticQcd
io  the  Lei  Serrilia.

The  Lei  Senrjlia  Olanda  waa  prapoaed  and  or-
ried  by  C.  Serriliui  Olnuia  Praetor  a.  c  IIML
Thia  Lex  applied  to  any  niagiatiatui  who  had  im-
properly taken  or  recetred  money  from  any  priTaie
pcnon }  bat  a  muiatiatu*  could  not  be  accnaed
during  the  term  of  oSoa.  The  Lei  enacted  that
the  PrseCor  Psicgrinni  ihoold  annually  sjifniat
4£0  judicea  for  thalrialof  tbiaoSence  :  thrjudicea
were  not  to  be  aenaton.  The  peoaltiea  of  the  Lex
were  pecuniary  and  eiailiim] ;  the  law  allowEd  a
comperendinatio.  (Cic  m  Verr.  L  S.)  Before  ths
Lei  Serrilia,  tha  pecuniary  penalty  ma  mnple
raititution  of  what  had  bran  wrongfuity  takm ;
thia  Lei  acona  to  bsTo  raiacd  the  peoalty  to  doohle
the  amount  of  what  had  beoi  wrongfiilly  taken  |
and  aubaequently  it  wua  made  qnadrupleh  Eni-
lium  wa>  <udy  the  pnniibmenl  in  caae  a  man  did
not  abide  hia  trial,  but  withdnw  fron  RoK^
(Sarigny,  VvnUmSclailtderMiiid.,ZatKiirift,t.)
Under  thii  Lax  wen  tried  M'  AquiUini,  P.  Rati-
liua,  M.  Scaunu,  and  Q.  Metelliu  Xumidicna.  The
Lei  gare  the  Cifilaa  to  any  penoa  on  wboaa  eeaa.
plaint  a  pertOD  waa  ccovicled  of  Repetundaa.  (Ci&
pro  Boao,  23,  24. )

The  Lei  Acilia,  wbieh  aeema  to  be  of  mKotaiB
date  (probably  B.C.  101),  wupropeaedand  airied
by  M'  Acilioi  Gbibrio,  a  Tribunui  Plobia,  whiiA
enacted  that  there  ihontd  be  neither  f—pliatiir  ner
comperendinatio.  It  ii  conjectured  that  tUa  ia  tka
Lei  Caedlia  mentioned  by  Valeriua  HaiiiBna  (ii.
9,  10),  in  whichpaaiage  if  the  conjectutei*  coned,
we  ahould  read  Acilia  for  Caccilia.  ((&  at  Vnr.
Act.  L  17,  £■  Fur.  L  9.)  ll  haa  aamatiinea  been
doubted  whether  the  Acilia  or  Sarilia  waa  Brrt
enacted,  bat  it  mwart  that  the  Acilia  took  away
the  cempcrandiDatio  which  the  Strrilia  allowed.

The  Lex  Cornelia  wai  paiKd  in  tlu  dictatntikip
of  Sulla  B.C.  81,  and  eonlinsed  in  force  to  tka  tima
of  CJoUuaCaeiar.  It  exiaded  the  pecmlttv  tf
Repelondae  to  other  illegal  acta  committed  ia  ^m
prorincet,  and  to  jadicea  who  IccMTed  bfibea,  to
ihoae  to  whoae  haitda  the  anoey  ome,  and  to  thoaa
who  did  not  giTo  into  the  Aerarinm  their  ProcoD-
ndar account! (pnxnnmlaRerntiiinea}.  ThaPraetoc
who  prcaided  OTerlhia  qoaeatio  choao  the  jnd^ee  by
lot  from  the  Senator!,  whence  it  fipmn  that  tlie
Sernlia  Lex  waa  repealed  by  thia  Lex,  al  iBit  ia
for  a!  related  to  tha  cnutitution  of  the  eamt,
Thia  Lei  alio  allowed  amptiatio  and  eiautiaeudi.
nado.  The  penalto  wera  peeuniaiy  (iila  acati-
matio)  and  the  aquae  et  ignie  isienUetio.  Uods
thi!  Lex  were  tried  L.  Dolabella,  C>.  Piao,  C.
Vtnea,  C.  Micer,  M.  Footeioa,  and  L.  FUoai%
the  two  kit  of  whom  were  defended  by  Cicenx  In
the  Vcrrins  Oratioii!  Cioero  com^aim  of  (be  eoa-
perendinatio  tx  double  hearing  of  tike  owe,  wiiitb
'  [X  Comalia  allowed,  and  ref
the  Lex  Acilia,  acoorcUng  to
for  the  DRMaculJon,  the  defonea,  and  tlia  eridoica
wera  imly  beard  mee,  and  ao  the  matlM  waa  de-
cided, r/a  Vtrr.  L  ».)

The  tan  Lei  da  Bepetundia  wh  the  Lex  Julia
paucd  in  the  fint  conialibip  of  C  Julia  riiaai
B.cfi9.  (Cicn  ra(.  13.)  Tkk  Iu  combtrd
of  nnmeroai  heada  (caoila)  which  han  Ihcb  eel-
lecled  by  Sigimiii.  (Cic.  ai  Fnm.  niL  8.)  Thia
Lex  repealed  the  penalqr  of  anilhun,  but  in  ad-
dltioi  to  the  liti*  aetttmalia,  it  ancted  that  pa~
•ma  ooDTictad  under  thia  Lti  (laMid  loae  theii


RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEQRUU.


n  by  the  Juriiti,  wbon  cipiMitloiii
ManKMrrcd  in  tba  D«Mt  (ia.  tit  ll)t  uiil  in  the
Coda  (S.  til.  27).  Thii  l«i  adopted  Bme  pn-
TJeku  that  oktad  in  tnviMU  Leg**,  u  for  in-
Muwe  that  bj  which  the  muiej  that  had  been  im-
pnperiy  ntuiicd  amid  be  Teoorend  frao  thoee
mte  wboae  kanda  it  canld  be  Ineed.  (Cib  firs  C.
Oabir.  Pad.  *.)  The  Lex  had  bees  poiwd  when
Cieera  made  hu  oniioa  igainit  Piio,  >.  c  G6.  (/■
PU.il.)  A-Oabiuini  wu  conTieud  under  thii
Lex.  Many  of  ila  pntiaiona  a»j  be  collected
from  the  natioa  et  Cicero  agaiiut  Pin. Cicero


lowed  hkn.  (,AJ.

Under  the  EmfHin  the  i^EgDca  waa  poniihable
with  exDa.  (TadL  AimaL  liT.  38,  and  the  note  of
LiiMfna.)

In  Clinton'!  Fatti  HiBtmti,  the  Lex  Calpnnua
i*  ineocTectlj  ataled  to  be  the  fint  law  at  Rome
^unatBribayatElectiena Briberyii AMBiroa.

(Sifooiu  i*  JmUeiiM,  iL  e.  37  i  Rein,  Ztat  Cn-
■B»iIr*abArAMfr,p.G04,fte.t  Rudori^  [Wer
A  OUavtuBBAe  Arw;  OiitAnfl/Tir  OneUM.
AnlftB.  Ac  xii.  p.  1  Se.}  [G-  I^J

REPLICATIO. [Aotio,  p.  ID.]

RBPOSITCKRIA. [Coika,  p.  S07,  b.]

REPO^IA. [MATaiMOHiuM,  p.  744,  i.]

REPU'DIUU. [DiTOBTiuu.]

RES. [Dominium.]

RES  JUDICATA. [JuDiUTa  A<rria.]

RES  HAHCIPI. [DoMiHiuM.1

RESCRIPTUU. [Coi

RESPONSA. (Juauo

RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEGRUM,  in  the
"  ^h  the  teim  will  bera  be  need,  ugnifiea


ma...


reuecl  to  one  mottier  whkb  they  occnpied
)  the  contntct  waa  laade  or  the  tiaiiBctioii


took  place.  Tbe  Reatitatio  hen  q»k<
boBded  aa  ti»  Edict.  If  tbe  eontiaet  or  liani-
neum  ii  ench  ai  not  to  be  Talid  according  to  tbe
Jaa  CiTile,  ihie  Reatiuitio  ia  sot  needed  ;  and  it
eoly  apidiea  te  taaea  of  contnut*  and  Inneactica,
which  are  not  in  theii  nature  ir  fbnn  innlid.  In
erder  to  catitle  a  penon  to  the  Rcelinitia,  he  niut
bare  mtained  iCDie  injniy  capable  of  hiring
BMcd,ineoB«eqnaiaafthacoatrBi:t<irtr
It  ihnm^  anj  fcnlt  at  bit  own  ;


tbea


ftoteeled  by  the  Reatitolia  againat  tbe  eoni
td  hit  own  tanleaaweB.  The  injoiy  alao
eoe  for  which  the  isjucd  perean  baa  no  other

Tbe  Rcetitntia  nay  either  be  effected
CDBplaiiit  of  the  injnred  party,  which  would  gene-
lally  be  made  after  (he  completiMi  of  the  traua
action,  or  when  he  ii  toed  by  the  other  par^  in  re-

rof  the  Innnctian  and  defendi  himeelf  by  ar
ptio.  The  craDplaint  aa  a  geneial  nile  mna'
be  made  within  four  yf»n  ottiie  time  of  the  injur)
being  dtaotrraied,  and  of  the  party  being  capabli
ti  bringing  hii  aediai ;  in  the  <Me  ti  Minotea  thi
taa  yma  wen  Teckaned  tttm  the  time  of  their
attaining  tlxHT  majerttj.  In  the  eaae  of  en  Eicep-
tia  tkmwainoUmilMionof  tiin*L  (Cod.  3.  tit,G3.


RESTITUTIO  IN  INTEGRUM, 987

a.  7.)  According  to  tbe  old  law  the  oomplaint  mail
'  I  made  witliin  one  year.

The  ^iplicution  (or  a  Rntitntia  coold  only  be
tde  to  one  who  had  Juiiidictio)  either  original
or  delegated,  which  flowed  boia  the  poaacaion  of
tbe  Imperium  ;  and  it  might,  according  to  the  cif
conutancea,  be  decreed  by  tbe  Magiitiatui  extim
onlinem,  «  the  niattci  might  be  referred  to  a
Jodez.  When  a  Beelitnlio  wai  decreed,  ocK
party  mtored  to  the  otfaei  wbat  be  had  leceiiad
&om  him  with  all  ita  ■iniiiim  and  fcnite,  except
»  fiv  aa  the  fhiita  on  one  aide  might  be  eet  off
agaiiut  the  inlereat  of  money  to  be  returned  on
the  other  aide.  All  propra  ooata  and  ezpenae*  in-
cnired  in  raaped  of  toe  thing  to  be  laatond  wtte
allowed.  If  tbe  object  of  the  Reatitatio  waa  a
right,  the  injnred  party  waa  rettored  to  hii  right ;
10'  if  he  had  incuntd  a  duty,  he  waa  raleaied  bma
the  duty.

The  action  Gir  Reatitatio  might  be  maintuned
by  the  peraon  iujored,  by  hia  beredo,  cewionarii,
and  inietica  i  bat  aa  a  general  rule  it  could  only
be  maintained  againat  ue  peraon  with  whim  the
contract  bad  been  made,  and  not  ^wnal  a  third
peraon  who  waa  in  poeieiaion  of  the  thing  which
~'~  loagbt  to  be  recoTDed,  except  when  tia  ac^


for  re


a,  or  when  tbe  right


tidebitor  in  inlegnim  reatitnam,  quod  mna  per
La^  Plebiadta,  Seoatnaconaiilla,  Edicts,  Decreta
Pnncipiun  licebik"  (Dig.  4.  tit.  6,  a.  1.)

The  fallowing  are  the  chief  oaae*  in  whbh  a
Reatitutio  night  be  decreed.

The  ca*e  o!  Via  at  Metua.  If  a  man  did  an  act
that  wai  injuiioua  to  himaelf,  thnwgh  Tie  or  mctoa,
theactwaiDotfor  tbM  reeaoa  invalir^  nor  waa  it  cen.
aidered  that  hii  aaaent  waa  wanting  (Dig.  i.  til.  2.
aSl.SG);  but  itwueonlrBbanoemoreatoallow
each  an  act  to  hare  iegal  effect  When  aman  had
acted  under  the  influence  of  force,  or  leaaonabl*
(ear  cauaed  by  the  acta  of  another  otny,  be  had
an  actio  quod  melna  caum  for  reatilntioii  againat
the  party  who  wai  the  WTongdoei,  and  alao  againat
an  innocent  peraon  who  waa  in  poaaenioo  of  any
thing  which  had  thoa  been  got  Ima  him,  and  alao
■gunat  the  heredea  of  (be  wimgdoer  if  they  were
enriched  by  being  hia  haredc*  (faaaAnw  ad  to*
ptrymil).  If  he  waa  lued  in  teapect  of  the  trana-
action,  he  could  defend  himaalf  by  an  eioeptio
quod  melna  cnnta.  The  actio  Quod  Mctoi  waa
giTen  by  the  Piaetor  L.  Octariua,  a  eontamporaiy
of  Ciceni.  (Compare  C)c  «  Vtrr.  iiL  6£,  and  Dig.
4.  tit  3.  a.  1.)

The  eaae  of  Doloa.  Wheal  a  nun  waa  &widn-
lently  mduced  to  becone  a  party  to  a  tianaaetion,
which  wu  legal  in  alt  reapecta,  laring  the  band,
he  had  hia  actio  de  dole  malo  againat  the  guilty
1  I.,  ijjfjjj^  eo  iar  aa  they  w


richer

net  poaiible,  for  c


compenaation.  AgaJnit  a
wTLj  wuu  WHS  la  bona  iide  poueuion  of  the  uung,
ho  had  no  action.  If  he  waa  iued  in  reapecl  of  the
tmnuclion,  he  could  defend  himaelf  by  the  eieep-
tio  doli  nuli.  (Compare  Dig.  4.  tit  3.)

The  eaae  of  Minorca  xxv.  annorum. A  MinM
could  by  himaelf  do  no  legal  act  for  vbich  tbe


988 REsnTurro  in  integrum.

auent  of  &  Tatar  or  Conlor  wu  icqaired,  and
theiefore  if  he  Hi  luch  act  t»  hiniKir,  do  R«iti~
tuijo  wai  D«»i>i7.  If  tha  TatOT  had  given  hit
Ani:toritBi,  at  the  Cantor  bin  utenl,  the  tmn*-
ftclion  wu  legally  binding,  but  jet  the  Minor
«uld  clum  Reatitutio  if  he  h&d  luitaincd  injury
b;  the  tnuiKKtion.  Gum  (It.  67}  gira  an  u-
BDiple,  when  he  uyi  that  if  too  large  an  amoiuit
vu  inurted  in  ths  Condemnalio  of  the  Foimali,
the  matter  ii  ael  right  hj  the  Praetor,  or  ill  other

linls  mu  inieited  in  the  foraaula,  the  Praetor  would
not  make  aaj  alteration  i  "  for,"  be  adda,  "  the
Prailor  man  readily  relieTea  a  defendant  than  a
plaintiff;  hot  we  except  the  caie  of  Minoce*  xiv
annonun,  for  tbe  Praetor  relicTe*  penooi  of  Ihii
claat  in  all  catet  wherein  thej  haTs  committed
eiTM  (in  omnibu*  rebus  lapaiO."

There wern  however  taiei  in  wbich  Minomeould
obtain  no  Reitilatio  ;  for  iniUnce,  when  a  Minor
with  ftmdalect  deiign  gate  himtelf  out  to  be
Major ;  when  he  eoiilirmed  the  tiannetion  after
coming  of  age  ;  and  in  other  cue*.  The  bensGt  of
thii  Reatitutio  belonged  to  tbe  berede*  of  the  Mi-
nor, and  gencrallj  atw  to  lureliei.  The  demand
could  only  be  made,  n  a  ^enJ  nle,  agaioit  the
penon  with  whom  the  Mmor  had  the  traniaction
and  hit  heredec  Tbe  Minor  had  four  jean  after
attaining  hii  majority,  in  which  he  coald  ane.  The
older  law  allowed  oaly  one  ^eac.  If  the  time  bad
not  elapied  when  he  died,  hii  hem  bad  the  benefit
of  the  remaining  time,  which  waa  reckoned  from
the  lime  adeundi  heredilaleni ;  and  if  the  bena
vai  a  Minnr,  from  the  time  <^  hii  attaining  hia
majority.  [Cubatoh.]

The  caae  of  AbienCia :  which  eomprelunda  not
merely  abieuce  in  the  ordinary  ienae  of  At  word,
bat  abaence  owing  to  madnesi  or  imprieonnient,
and  the  like  caoKi.  (Dig.  4.  tit.  G.  1.28.)  If  a
man  bad  outained  injory  hy  hia  own  abientia,  he
wai  generally  iatitled  to  reilitnlio,  if  the  abaentiB
wu  muToidable :  if  it  wu  not  unayoidable,  he
wu  intitled  to  Reflitatio,  either  if  he  coold  have
no  redreai  fiom  hia  Procuiator,  or  wu  not  blamahle
for  oot  having  appointed  an&  If  a  man  foand
that  he  might  auitain  damage  on  account  of  the
abienee  of  hia  adveraaiy,  he  might  avoid  that  by
entering  a  ptoleetation  in  dne  form.

The  caae  of  Error,  Miatake,  comfSehoida  inch
error  at  cannot  be  imputed  as  blame  ;  and  in  nieh
caae,  a  man  could  alwaya  hsTa  teatitatio  when
another  wu  enriched  by  hia  loaa.  The  erroria
cauiae  probotio  uraewhat  rtaemblei  thii  caae.
(Oaiua,  I  67—75.)

The  cue  of  C^tia  diminatio  through  adngatio
or  in  manum  conventio,  which  wai  legally  followed
by  the  extinction  of  all  the  obligationea  of  tbe  per-
aon  adiogated  oi  in  manu.  The  Praetor  realored
to  ths  cnditon  of  mch  peitona  their  fbrmei  righta.
(Oaiua,  iii.  S3,  iv.  33.)

The  laae  of  alienatio  judicii  rnntsodi  mua  beta
ii  hardly  a  caie  of  reatitntio,  though  aometimea
conaidered  laeh.  It  occura  when  a  man  alienalea
a  thing  for  Che  purpose  of  injuring  a  claimant  by
anbatiluting  for  hinuelf  anothei  againat  whom  the
claimant  cannot  |a  euil;  proaecate  bii  right.  In
the  caae  of  a  thing  which  the  Poaaeaior  had  thua
alienated,  the  Praetor  gave  an  actio  in  faetaro
againit  the  alienor  to  the  fall  value  of  tho  thing.
if  a  man  oaiigned  a  claim  or  right  with  the  view
gf  injuing  hi*  advomiy  hy  giving  him  a  harder


RH'IS.
elumant  to  deal  with,  ths  advemry  oonld  meet  the
aaaignee,  when  he  ined,  with  an  eiceptio  judicii
mntandi  cauia.

The  ceae  of  alienatio  in  firaodem  crediloniBi
beta.  (Dig.43.tita)  When  a  man  wu  insd-
vent  (non  aolvoido),  and  alienated  hia  property  fir
tbe  puipoaa  of  injuring  hia  cndittn,  the  Piaetrc^
Edict  gave  the  oeditoca  a  remedy.  If  fir  !■■■»■  nnf
a  debt  wai  paid  poat  bona  pcaieau,  it  waa  abao-
lutely  void,  for  the  eSect  of  the  Bonrarun  Poaaeaaia
in  the  caae  of  inaolveney  waa  to  pat  all  the  mdi-
tora  on  the  lame  footing.  If  any  alienatiaa  waa
made  before  the  Boncnun  Poaacaaio,  it  wu  valid
in  aome  cues.  A  debtor  might  reject  any  thing
which  wu  for  hia  advantage,  for  the  Praetor^
edict  related  only  to  the  diminution  of  hia  property,
and  not  to  ita  increaae.  If  the  act  vat  aach  u  to
diminish  hii  pnper^  (baudationis  eanaa)  the  cn-
ditotl,  u  a  gennal  rule,  were  intitled  to  have  the
act  undone.  A  creditor  who  exacted  hia  joat  debt,
waa  intitled  to  retain  it.  The  actio  by  which  tha
creditora  deatroysd  lbs  effect  of  an  iUegal  aliens-
tim  wai  called  Panliana,  which  waa  brought  by
the  Curator  bonorum  in  the  name  of  the  creditor^
for  the  restoration  of  the  thing  which  had  bc«i  im-
propeily  aliened,  and  all  its  frnitL  Tbe  creditora
were  also  Entitled  to  an  Interdictnnr  fraadatanani
in  order  to  get  poaaeaiion  of  the  thii^  that  had
been  improperly  aliened.  (Dig.  36.  tit.  1.  a.  67.)

In  the  Imperial  times,  Reatilatio  was  also  ap-
plied to  the  remission  of  a  pnnithment  (Tac  Jan,
riv.lS;  PUn.Qi.x.e4,6£iDig,4atit,19.a37>
which  could  only  be  done  by  the  Imperial  grace.

(Dig.  4.  til.  1—7  i  44.  tit,  1  j  Paulna,  S.  K.  i.
tit  7—9  i  Cod.  2.  tit  20— 6S  j  Cod.  Theod.  3.
lit.  1£,  16  ;  Mtlblenbrucb,  Dert.  P-adtri.  ;  Mac-
keldey,  ZeMul,  &c  1 2th  ed. ;  Rein,  Ob  fl^nM*
Frimtniit  ;  Rndor^  Zabdaifi  /iir  GaaUoU.
ifaeUfB.  lii.  1 31 ,  ITokr  i/ie  Oc^snonucis  Farad  ;
Fuchta,  liut.  ii.  §  209.)  [O.  U]

RESTITUTO'RIA  ACTIO [iMTincBanx]

RETIA'RII. [OuDiATOKSa,  p.  £76,  b.]

RETl'CULUM,  a  head-diw.  [Coka,  p;
3S9,a.)

RETIS  and  RETE  ; dim. RBTI'CDLUSf


(81«T,


Netsw


from  Egypt,  Cojchia,  the  vicinity  of  tin
Cinyps  in  North  Africa,  and  aome  other  placva.
Ociaiionally  Ibay  were  of  hemp.  0'*>^  ^  A»
SaM.  iiL  5.)  They  are  aometimea  called  Jaa*
(Aim)  on  aceonnt  of  the  mateial  of  wbiefa  ^hef
conuated.  (Hom.  H  v.  4B7  ;  Bmnd,  AmiL  u.
494,  495.)  The  meshes  (lucaiae,  Ovid.  £^i^  t,
19;  Varro,iIa  AeAuf-iiL  11  ;  Nemeaiaiii,  (>.^.
302  ;  epix".  <*"».  Bpaxl^i,  Heliodor.  vL  p.  231,
ed.  Commelin.)  were  gnat  or  atnall  anatding  to
tbe  purpoaea  intended  ;  and  these  pvpoaea  wen
very  vaiiona.  But  by  far  the  mow  impottant  mp~
plication  of  net-woi^  wu  te  the  three  kindred  aita
of  fowling,  hunting,  and  Ashing  ;  and  besidea  the
gcneisl  lerma  oaed  alike  in  reierence  to  all  tbeaa
nploymenta,  there  are  apedal  tenns  la  be  explained


;n5er.


:bofthe«


limited  (Ariatoph.  .lis.  SSS)  ;  nevertbeleas  tk
were  caught  in  them  (Hor.  Epad.  a.  33,  34)  ;  ai4
dorea  or  pigconi  irith  tbeir  timbs  tied  np  tr
fastened  to  the  ground,  or  with  their  eyea  covered
or  put  out,  were  coMined  in  a  net,  in  order  that
their  cries  might  allure  othss  inti  the  snore-
(Ariatopb.  .ie.  [083.) The  wcieat  Ei;n«iaQ*,aa


BKTIS.

w«  kun  Iram  tbe  paintinKt  in  thair  tamls,  ouight
biidi  bckp-neU.  (WtlkiiuoD,  jifav.aarf  Ditf.  toL

iii.  PP.3J— 3^4£.)

11.  la  huallngit  vu  ntoal  to  exlefld  neta  Id  a
enrred  Ibc  of  coniidombls  lenrth,  k  u  in  put  W
KUTOund  A  ipue  into  vhich  Ina  bcoiU  of  cbaee,
■uch  u  tbe  iiMn,  the  bav,  th«  dwr,  the  Hon,  and
the  bear,  were  driTon  throagh  the  opening  left  on
one  lide.  (Aeliw,  //.  A.  xiL  46  ;  Tibulhu,  iT.  3.
l-i;  Plin.  M.A'.  xii.  2.12.)  Thia  nnge  of  Beta
wai  flunked  by  card*,  to  which  fcaihen  d;ed
Bcoilet  and  of  other  bright  coloun  vera  lied,  to  aa
to  dare  ud  flutter  in  the  wind.  The  hanlen  then
nllied  <bnh  with  their  dngi, diilDdged  iheuinuli
from  their  eoTerIa,  and  hj  ahouu  tuid  barking
drove  them  fint  wilbin  ihe/bnado,  aa  the  appa-
ratua  of  atring  and  fealhen  wai  called,  and  then,
a*  they  were  acared  with  thia  Rppeaiance,  within
the  circuit  of  the  Deu.  Splendid  deacriptioni  of
thia  acene  are  giien  in  Knne  of  the  fcdiowing  paa-
■igea,  all  of  which  allude  to  the  apacioua  encloauiB
of  network.  (Viig.  twrj.  iii.  411— 413,  .,•
1-2],  lol— 159,1.707— jli  J  0'id.Epiit.
42,T.19,2D;  Uppian,  C>il  It.  120 — 1'.;3  ;  Eurip.
Aioeliw,  tt21 — BSi.)  ThenawmpiinjiiiK  wo
an  taken  from  two  baa-rrlieft  in  the  colled
ancient  marblea  at  Ince-Blundell  in  Loncaahire.
Id  the  upHnnoat  liguiB  three  aervanti  with  atavei
u  their  ahoulden  a  luge  net,  which  ii  in-


tmdrd  tobeietopualrivdjdeacrihtd.  Cnhallua,
i.  4.  49,  60  i  Sen./iippoL  L  1.  44  ;  Propert.  iY.2.
32.) The  roremoit  lerrant  hsida  by  a  leaah  a  doj;,


124.)  Deing  intended  to  take  iuch  luge  qnadra-
peda  M  boar*  and  deer  (which  an  aeen  within  it),
the  meabe*  are  »ery  wide  (ntia  rara,  Virg.  Aem,
IT.  131  I  Hor.  /^lod.  iL  aS).  Thenet  la  anpported
by  three  alakea  (o^cUucti,  Oppian,  t>u^.  ir.  67
Ac. ;  Pollux,  T.  31  ;  rsKOHH,  Oratiua,  Cy»y.  87
ton',  Luon,  It.  4S9).  To  diapoae  the  ncU  in  thi
manner  waa  called  rttia  ponr*  (Virg.  Csor^.  i
S07),  or  rttia  temdtn  (Orid.  Art.  AnuH.  L  45)
dnnpiuing  it  with  the  lUiture  of  the  attendant*,
we  perreiie  the  net  to  be  between  fire  and  iL
high.  The  njqier  border  of  the  net  coniiita
atzwg  rope,  which  waa  called  trqp&Ar.  (Xen.  d*
Ftaat.  Ti  9.)  The  figuree  in  the  following  wc  '
repraaent  two  men  carrying  the  net  home
the  ehace  ;  the  atakea  for  nipporting  il,  t-
which  they  hold  in  theii  huidi,  are  forked  at  Iho
top,  M  ia  eipieaaed  by  the  tarn*  for  them  already

fieaidei  the  net*  uaed  to  incloae  woodi  ta
YCfta  or  other  large  tiaela  of  country  two  additional
kind*  ar*  mentioned  by  tboM  Mith«n  who  treat  co.


i

hunting.  All  the  three  are  mentioned  together  bj
XenophDn  (tlcruo,  MSia,  Sfuuii,  u.  4}  and  bj

M .ianni  {C^iup.  299,  300).

i  two  additional  kindi  were  placed  at  inter-
nla  in  the  nine  circuit  with  the  htrge  honting-net
haye.  The  rood-net  ( plapa,  /*Mid»)  wob  much
leaa  than  the  cthera,  and  w*a  placed  tcroaa  roadi
arrow  openinga  between  bnahe*.  The  pnn».
mel-nel  (ouiu,  ipmit)  waa  nude  with  a  bog
{n*fipa\e,,  Xen.  de  VnaL  ji.  7),  intended  to
ceive  the  aninial  when  ebaaed  toward*  the  ertre-
ity  of  the  inclotnre.  Within  thia  bag,  if  we  mar
«11  it,  were  placed  brancha  of  Uee*,  to  keep  it
^jmnded  ozid  to  decoy  the  aniitiali  by  makina  it
inviaible.  The  word*  l^»i  or  «im  ue  naed  me-
taphoriaUy  to  denote  loine  certain  method  of  do-
ion,  and  aro  more  particularly  applinl,  a*
u  i/ufpHMiBTpor,  which  will  be  ei^ined
immediately,  to  the  large  thawl  in  which  Clylem-
-Htia  enveloped  her  huibond  in  order  to  murder
im.  (Aeachyl.  JsoiB,  10B5,  1346,1353,  CVmL
BS,  Emmet.  112.)
111.  Fi»hing-net«  (iMnwiai  tlirrva,  Diod.  Sic
•iL  43,  p.  193,  Wen.)  w«n  of  *ii  diffi^mt  kinda,
which  are  enrunemted  tiy  0[ipma  (HaL  iii  BD— 82)

Tiytaiia  t',  f,V  fiiroxal  ntpniyitt,  ifii  mrpiyia,
'AAAa  St  KMkiiaiiauat  uaAip/iara.

Of  theae  by  br  the  moat  tomniaa  wen  tba
^ICAqrTpDr,  or  caatini-net  (Jymh,  jacabm,
niitacahm)  and  the  irwrtni,  i".  e.  the  drag-net,  or
aian  {tragnm,  laid.  Hiap.  Orig.  xii,  4  ;  (n^jfWo,
eemciJiiia).  Cooaequenlly  theae  two  are  the  only
kind*  mentioned  by  Vii^l  in  Gtorg.  L  141,  142.
and  by  OtH  in  Ar.  AmaL  L  763,  764.  Of  the
KoMiww  we  find  nowhere  any  fivtber  mention.
We  are  alao  ignorant  of  the  eiacl  form  and  nae  of
the  Ypi'^t,  although  it*  compoiatire  utility  may
be  in^rred  from  the  mention  of  it  in  eonjunctioii
with  the  •can  and  caating-net  b;  Arlemidania  (IL
14)  and  Plotanh  {n^  .Mufi.  toL  t.  p.  838,  ed.
Slcph.).  We  know  no  more  of  the  yiyyaiiar.
(Hetych.t.c;  Aeachyl.  AgaM.Wi.)  The  irox^
wo*  a  Unding-net,  niads  with  a  hoop  (nCicADt)
lattencd  to  a  pole,  and  perhapa  provided  alio  with
tbe  meana  of  elating  the  cireular  aperture  at  the
top.  (Oppion,  UaL  n.  251.)  The  metaphorical
nia  of  the  term  llfi^<Ai)ffTp»  haa  been  already
mentioned.  That  it  denoted  a  ca*ting-net  may  be
concluded  both  from  ita  ttpaiAogs  and  from  the

aothoro.  (Hniod,  Seal.  Htre.  213—216  ;  llend.
i.  141  ;  Pa.  cili,  10  ;  la.  lii.  6  ;  Hab.  L  16—17
(LXX.  and  Vulgate  •oniona);  St  MatL  It.  18i
St.  Mark,  L  16.)  More  capeclally  the  cailing-net,
being  alwajt  pcu-abaped  or  conical,  waa  auited  to
the  .tuc  mentwoed  anda  the  aititig  Conopiqh,


femd  to,  in  Pkutiu,

U  i  ud  in  laid.  HiipL  Orig.  lii.  G.

Tba  Engliih  tenn  mm  (which  ia  alio  in  the
WiUi  of  En^and  pronounced  uid  ipelt  laae,  >■  in
Pnnch),  hsi  be«a  brooght  into  our  luifpuge  br  ■
oomptiDn  of  the  Greek  irai^ni  through  the  Vul-
|>ta  Bible  {lagaa)  imd  the  Aii)[1o-Saioii.  (Eiek.
iiTLS,U,iilvii.m!StMBn.iiiL47,48;Sl.John
XD.  6—1 1.)  Thii  net,  which,  u  Dov  tued  both
by  the  Anbiana  and  by  our  own  fiibermen  in
doRinll,  ia  KnietinMi  half  ■  mils  long,  waa  pn>-
baUf  of  equal  dimenaioni  tnioiig  the  andent^  for
the;  apeak  of  it  aa  nearlj  talking  in  the  compau
ofa  whole  b»T.  (Horn.  OJ.aii.  SB*— 887  i  A!ci-
phron,].  17,'18.>  Thia  cimunMance  well  illu»-
Uataa  the  apj^ication  of  the  tenn  to  deicnbe  the
beiieging  of  a  dtj-:  to  eocirele  a  dly  by  an  unin-
tefinpted  line  of  aoldiera  waa  called  aar/ii*titir,
(Hentd.  iiL  I4G,  fi.  SI  ;  Plato,  it  Ln.  vL  tiA
fia. ;  Heliodonu,  tIL  p.  304,  ed.  Commelini.}  The
lue  of  oorka  (^XXat,  corHeii  uienai,  Sidon.
Apollin.  EpiM.  a  2  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xvl  B.  t.  IS)
to  tapport  (he  top,  and  of  leadi  (/laXiStlttt)  to
heep  down  the  hottoBi,i>  Erequentlj  mentioned  hj-
■ncieatirriten(0nd.7>nt.  lii.  1.11,  13  ;  Acllsn,
tf.^.  iii.4S;  PaiiaBi.TiiL12.|l),  udiieleariy
eihibitad  in  aome  of  the  paiatingt  in  Kgyptian
tomb*.  Loadi,  and^ecei  of  wood  aerriog  aa  fioata
inalead  of  coika,  itill  nmiiii  on  a  Mao  which  ia
pmeiTed  in  the  fin*  colleetioi  of  Egyptian  aoti-
quilin  at  Berlin.  (3m  Yatei,  Tuthaum  AnU-
9«fii.  Appendii  C)  [J.  Y.)

REUS. [AcTon  ;  Obltoitiones,  p.  £58.]

REX(e<><rrA>^,<ni{),king.  1.  OniiK.  Inlhe
ewlieat  agu  of  Greece,  of  which  we  haye  any  Bu>
thentic  recorda,  we  find  the  kingly  form  of  goTerD-
ment  OTeiywbere  prevalent  On  thiA  point  we  may
aafely  liuit  the  piclurea  of  lociclj  found  in  the
Homeric  poemi ;  Sot  whatever  amount  of  hiitorical
truth  there  may  be  in  the  legcndi  which  form  their
■ubjeot,  thnc  cannot  be  the  aimllcit  qutation  diat
the  poetni  pretcnt  a  huthftJ  rcflectieo  of  the  fecl-
ingi,  condition  and  mannera  of  the  McieCy  in  the
■ge  sf  which  theywerc  compoeed.

Whether  in  early  timet  oianAite  mcmarchiea  ei-
lAtod  in  Greeee,  we  hare  no  hiatorical  data  fcv
det»mining.  The  £nt  of  which  we  can  tiaco  the
featurea  are  htreditarj  moman^ut  wiik  limited
/wHtUmt  {rpirtpor  U  ivay  M  ^ait  yipaat
trarpinal  fiaaOMU,  Thnc.  i.  IS  ;  4  *<pl  Toh
ilfJsKalit  xpitaia  IPaaiXtla]  ir  jidn-w  fiir  iwl
run  r  ipariiimi,  Ariit.  Pvl.  iiL  10,  ed.  OOttL
U,  ed.  Bekkct  i  oonp.  DknyL  Halie.  t.  74).
By  (hia  we  are  to  undentand,  not  only  that  the
kinga  wen  tfaenuelTea  under  the  control  of  law  or
CDitooi,  but  that  only  a  portion  a(  the  functiona  of
poliucal  aorereignty  were  in  tiieir  banda.  Thia  ia
the  fourth  apeciea  of  Boinkfla  which  Aiiatotle  re-
cogniae*  ;  the  othera  being,  a.  the  royalty  of  the
Spartan  hingi ;  b.  the  nyall;  of  barbarian  kingi
(an  henditaiy  deapotiam  adminiatered  aceoiding  to
law)  ;  B.  the  goremmait  of  an  aeiymneCe*  (AritL
PaL  iii.  9  or  14).  It  ia  not  to  be  tappoaed,  how-
ler, that  the  Grecian  kicga  of  the  heroic  i^  were


inbjecti  in  any  lecogniied  aenaa.  Their  authority
wu  founded  purely  on  the  penDnal  feeling  and
1  for  them  by  their  lubjecti,


whow  power  «H  bit  liula  iDfenortoOnt  if  A«
kinga  thsmielTea.  Eno  tb«  title  0artXq«i  ia  as-
plied  to  then,  ai  well  u  to  the  khig  (Horn.  IL  li.
H6,  Od.  i.  S94,  Tii.  iS,  viiL  S91).  Tb*  mun-
tenanco  of  regal  authority  doabtlaa  depended
greatly  on  the  poaaeaaion  t^  psional  aiqinority  iv
bravery,  nilitary  proweaa,  wiadem  in  emndil  and
eloquence  in  debate.  When  old  age  had  blmted
hia  powpn  and  activity,  a  king  ran  a  gnat  chaocT
of  loaii^  hii  inflaeiic&  (CW.  li.  496  [  eomp.  71.
liL  310,  fte.)  There  wai,  however,  an  undrfined
notion  of  a  lori  of  divine  right  amnected  with  iIm
kingly  office  (in  N  Aili  jIviMn,  Hanod.  TSe^
Se ;  eomp.  Hon.  Odl  zL  365.  Heoc*  the  epithet
liovfH^i,  fo  conuacDly  applied  tokingi  in  Hoaer).
Thia,  in  meat  caaea.  waa  probahly  aUaulbuied  t^
a  belief  in  the  divine  deacnit  of  kingly  hiniliM.

Beflidea  the  more  ordinary  kingly  aoconpttili.-
menla,  there  were  variooa  othen,  pn)6ciawy  in
which  gave  incnaied  dignity  and  oonaideiatiaB
even  to  a  king.  To  be  a  akiljiil  carpenter  or
I^Dnghmaa  waa  eooiidered  not  unworthy  of  heaig
nudo  a  matter  of  boaat  (Horn.  Od.  r.  346,  iviii.
165,  ixiii.  !88).  Plowea  in  boxing  and  other
itkletic  exerciiea  waa  mare  ckaely  oniucted  with
inperiorlty  in  the  nio  of  anna.  (Od.  viiL  180,  Ac
'L  iiiil  267,  &C.)

Ariatotle  (L  e.)  nentiani,  aa  the  functiooi  af  the
kinga  in  the  heroic  age,  the  Icodenhip  ia  wit,  lbs
"  '  ig  of  anch  aaoificea  aa  were  noE  appro|inated
^  iTtLcular  priefttfl,  and  the  dn^  of  decidnig
judicial  caniea.  Bot  both  in  the  field  and  in  the
ngorathekingalvayaappcaii  in  connection  with  tba
ItauKi.  or  councU  of  chieft  and  pldeia,  of  which  be
acta  aa  preiidcot.  Even  before  Tmy  Agamemnoa
anbmita  hia  plana  to  ^e  aaaemblcd  cbieftaina  and
uldien  (IL  iL  £S,  &c  z.  195,  &c>.  The  natrictiie
inHuenco  of  thcuaiacmbliea  waa,  howevei^  imtber
indirect  than  oatenaible.  The  ehienainaor  princra
merely  oScr  their  advice  (IL  ii.  95,  die.},  rad  tbo
multitude  aaacmbled  .outdde  the  ciicla  in  whicb
they  ait  tako  no  part  in  the  delibaraticaii.  They
only  liatoD,  and  aonietinM*  upland  (A  iL  100  ;
Ariitot.  op.  StiUj.  ad  ILiT.  17).  StiU  laaa  U
the  matter  in  hand  put  in  any  fcamal  way  to  the
vote  of  either  the  Bavki,  v  ^  Hooably  of  fimHik
The  auembliea  deacribiediu  theaacood  boak  of  tike
Iliad  and  the  aecoad  book  of  tbe  Odwr  will
givo  a  Rood  idM  of  their  nalon.  In  judiiaiil  trialt
th*  eouncil  of  eldera  aeema  aiwaji  to  have  bdd  a
prominent  place.  (IL  xriiL  604  ;  Hwiad.  7te^.
65,  Op.  U  D.  ii.)  ThcoretkaUy  the  goien-
ment  of  the  heroic  ags  waa  in  the  Hricteat  aeaaa
moniuchieal  (ace  eipecially  the  remarkable  ;■>
aago  IL  iL  204).  Hei«  and  there  the  »l  lapie.
aenta  kinga  aa  uaing  language  vrhick  woud  ii^J  a
power  on  the  part  of  the  kmg  to  deal  with  hia  do-
mitiioni  and  lubjecta  in  a  very  anmmary  laaaiii  i
(aee  the  ofiet  of  Agamemnoi  la  make  avtc  an
Achillea  levan  dliea,  IL  iz.  163  ;  and  of  Ua^aaa,
to  depopulate  me  of  hb  towna  to  nako  raaia  lii*
Ulyaaea,  Od.  iv.  176).  No  donht  the  power  ■(
diS^nntkion  varied,  and  in  tbaahacacei^defintlB
conadtutional  reiiricliona the  actual  anoBM of

nwet  in  the  handi  of  each  dapmded  mainly  oa
I  individu^ qoalifieatiau and addiiM Tbe

caiea,  howavar,  mot  have  b«M)  attaaalj  taca  ik


REX.

to  kbialate  power  (rc»lari-
tiMia).  Bi«i  the  Tuice  o(  tha  commonalty  carried
a  notal  migbl  with  it  that  ennmd  «ni«  degcM  of
napfct  far  it  Oc«^*'4  SV*  *VI"i,  Od.  IIT.  239,
Yt  27S).

BciidM  nch  prirata  propeTtj  u  ths  king  miglil
poam^  1h  had  tha  u«  of  a  dmnaiii  allacfacd  f>
tba  n^  offlcc  (Oi  il  ISS.)  Ths  ri/Airn  ban
•pakan  of  are  diffenni  fram  the  n-f^ura,  or  pri-
Tat*  propot;  of  the  bmilj,  which  Tclemuhoi
VDold  retain,  enn  it  eiciaded  Cram  the  throne,
■ltd  n  drprind  of  the  tua  of  the  royal  domain.
(M.  L  403.}  There  were  obo  itatad  Jim  (3^
fU«Ttf),  which  formed  an  important  item  ia  Ibe
king'a  emalumetiCi  (hence  tcmed  Xinpal,  II,  is.
156, 2M}.  But  beiidci  theie  a  lai^  |«il  of  hi*
iFTemiei  wai  dctifcd  ftora  jrrttiUi  {Imrirai  or
tif),  which  appear  to  (ibto  been  giFen  on  noit
oecauMU  en  which  hit  aid  or  protection  mi  in-
nkcd(/JL  ix.  I5£,  xni.  32d}.  The  chuacleriitjc
emblem  of  the  kingly  offia  wai  tha  OK^par  {IL
n-lOl,  2M). [ScKPnujK.]

It  WH  doabllcB  Kldom  that  the  rule  of  here-
ditary iDcceHion  wai  infringed  opon,  thongh  the
owe  of  Telemubtu  (Od.  i.  386,  jic)  indiotci  that
Bnder  peculiar  ritcnmitance)  the  idea  of  departing
tram  it  might  be  entertamed.  But  tren  here  the
pnatmpliTe  right  af  Telcraacboi  ii  admitted.  Such
a  di-panani  from  the  ordinaiy  rule,  howBTCr,
marki  a  eociidcralte  decline  in  (he  hingly  power,
and  adcance  on  the  part  of  the  noblei,  Al  a  laler
period  we  find  hinge  dcprired  of  their  throne  br
niaoondiut,  ae  in  the  rue  of  Thymoelce  in  Attica.
At  a  laler  period  than  Iha  Homeric  age  the  &ct  of
KCpoiuibility  waa  regarded  ai  conitituting  the  dif-
feniMebetveenakingandBtfiant  (AriitPo^ii'.
fl).  Hence  at  Argt»  Pheidon  ii  called  a  tt/raiH,
thongh  ha  vai  a  lefititoata  mcccuor  to  the  throne,
beCBOM  he  (cqoind  for  hinuelf  deapotic  authority.

Our  infiirmalion  refpecting  the  Orerian  kingi  in
tbe  mora  hiitorical  age  is  not  ample  or  minute
enongb  to  enable  ui  to  draw  out  a  detailed  Kheme
of  their  function!.  The  ri*ing  influence  of  the
Bohlea  gfidoally  reduced  the«  to  nanower  and
nanower  limiti  till  at  Un  the  enabliBbment  of
^arehical  goienmenti  beoune
it  nniTeml.  Rapecting  the  kinga  of  Sfaita
iIm  reader  it  referred  to  the  article  EfbOHI.
an  illiuuatiaa  of  the  gmdu^  limitation  of  tha
MgatiTe*  of  tha  king  or  chief  msgiitmte,  tha  reader
Bay  coomlt  the  artkle  AacHOH.  The  title  Bo-
lUia  waa  nmettmei  applied  to  an  officer  who  db-
daiged  the  prieitly  hnctioni  of  tha  more  ancient
kion,  aa  in  Atheni  [Ahcuoh],  Delphi  (Pint
i^aOL  Or.  7.  p.  177),  Siphnoa  (laoer.  ad  OJUm.
p.  ess),  HeiaiB  (Chandler,  Marm.  OBm.  2,  B2),
Chaleedon  (Caylna,  Htcatil,  &c  ii.  55),  Cyiicui
<M.  ii.  71,  72),  and  Sunolhrua  (Lir.  iIt.  5).
<K.  F.  Hemunn,  LiAHiiich  der  pnt>A.  SlaaltaHtP-
aVmtr,  It  S3— eS  ;  Wachnuulh,  Hdlmidt  Al-
ttrtkmJtuMde,  S§  38,  iS  ;  Thirtwall,  IliA
Orttet,  DC.  tL  X. ;  Onte,  HitL  <^  grww,  e.  i
Td.  iL  p.  79,  Sic.)  [C.  P.  M.]

2.  RoHAK.  Rome  waa  originully  governed  by
kinga.  All  the  ancient  writers  agree  in  repre-
•aniiig  ths  king  ai  elected  by  the  people  for  life,
•od  ai  Tolontarily  entniated  by  them  with  tht
■dpceme  power  in  the  atate.  No  reference  ia  made
to  the  beredioiT  principle  in  the  election  of  the
firat  bar  biw  l  and  it  ia  not  until  the  hfth  king
lina  Vttem  obtained  the  aoTsreigntj,  that


REX.  SSI

„  ia  n^d  abont  the  chQdm  of  the  deeaaaed
king.  Conaeqoently  tbe  andent  writera  itata  that
'^e  king  waa  chosen  on  acenuit  of  hia  Tirtoea  and
It  hii  deacant  (Cic  dt  Rep.  ii  13 ;  Appian,  B.  C
99).  It  ii  tma  that  in  the  case  of  Romolua  tb«
gemiine  l^end  make*  no  mention  of  his  election  to
Bw  royalty;  and  cme  of  the  acutest  modem  writen
ths  hisMy  of  the  Roman conatitation  baa


people,  but  derired  his  power  in _,

the  goda,  and  that  this  power  derolied  upon  tha

1  at  hia  death,  and  was  Innamitted  in  all  it*

„  ity  to  the  neit  king  by  mwu  of  the  into-

regc«  (Rubino,  fTnterwciiinjni  liitr  SSmteii  Vtr-

fiatiag,  p.  107,  Ac). Onr  limits  will  not  permit

' enter  into  an  examination  of  thia  theory. It

M  a  great  extent  upon  Iha  ammption  that

the  Pstres  in  the  early  Roman  conatitation  were

nats  ;  and  it  laOs  if  it  can  be  prored  that  tho

Patrea  in  ths  eariiest  time*  wen  tbe  lameaa  tha

whole  body  of  tbe  patridau.  We  think  that  W.  A,

Becker  {HmibaA  dtr  RimitAem  .dtterMBaM-)  ha*

establiibed  beyond  all  doubt  thM  the  ktter  i*  tha

'■ne  meaning  of  the  Patie*,  and  that  the  common

iew  ia  correct,  whieb  rapraienta  the  king  aa  Tolon*

tarily  entniated  by  the  people  with  the  nipreme


modem  aUles  it  ia  held  that  the  king  nerei
in  like  manmr  in  Rome  the  Taont  place  was
instantly  filled  np.  But  aa  a  new  king  conM
not  be  inmicdiatciy  iqipointed,  an  InleRei  lorth-
wilh  stepped  into  hia  place.  The  neceiai^  tor  an
immediate  mccetsor  to  tba  king  atose  from  the
ciicumatanee  that  he  atone  had  had  the  power  of
taking  ths  auapicia  oa  behalf  of  the  itate  ;  and  aa
the  auapicia  deioked  opon  the  people  at  hia  death,
it  waa  impentiie  upon  them  to  create  a  magiatnlp,
to  whom  they  could  delegate  the  antpicia  and
who  would  Ibu*  pneseas  the  power  of  medisling
between  the  goda  and  the  state.  Originally  the
people  conaiitad  only  of  the  paire*  or  patricii  J
and  accordingly,  on  the  death  of  the  king,  wO
read  ra  ad  patrm  ndit  (LIt.  l  S2),  or,  what  is


{pfodebai)  his  an
flnt  interrei  eonld  not  hold  the  comitia  for  tba
election ;  but  it  frequently  bappoMd  that  tbe
da  third,  tbe  third  a
fooith,  and  so  on,  till  tha  eleetiDn  took  place.  Thia
was  the  custom  nnda  tha  republic ;  and  there
wmld  haie  been  no  reaaon  to  (n|ip]*e  that  tbe
pnctica  waa  different  during  tha  kingly  period,  it
It  had  not  been  for  the  account  of  the  appoint-
ment of  mtefregee  after  tbe  dialh  of  Romulus,  ao-
cording  to  whi^  tbe  senate  was  divided  into  d»-
cnrie*  for  tbe  pmnae  of  sharing  the  intan^num
between  tbem. [IirrniBax.]

The  Intarrei  presided  otct  the  comitia  euriata,
which  waa  oaiemhled  for  the  election  of  the  king.
He  had  pRTionsly  agreed  with  the  aenata  upon
tha  pereon  who  wai  to  be  proposed  to  tha  comitiB
aa  king ;  for  it  ia  inconceiTible  that  he  had  tho
Bbsolute  power  of  iclecling  whalerer  panon  ha
chose,  aa  Dionraiui  itate*  m  some  pasaages.  The
had  fdected  was  pn^noed


^tiem


•  o"


99!  REX.

vliich  the  peap1«  canld  oiily  aeoept  or  reject,  far
the;  had  not  Ue  iuitimtiTe  uid  could  not  tbem-
■elra  )ffopOie  any  name.  If  tha  people  Toled  ia
fiiToui  of  the  rogation,  they  wen  nid  iram  ngem,
and  their  acceptance  of  him  waa  called  jamu
fopvU.  (Dionyi.  [t.  40,  80  i  Lit.  L  22,  82  i  Cit
deRtp.-^  17,  31.)  But  the  king  did  not  imme-
diatelj  enter  npon  hii  office.  Two  other  acti  bad
itill  to  take  place  belbre  he  waa  inTeited  with  the
full  regal  authoritj-  and  power.  Pint,  hii  wtw^rB-
ralio  bad  to  be  performed,  ai  it  wat  neceuary  to
obtain  the  diTine  will  reipecting  hit  appemtraent
bj  mean)  of  the  anipicea,  sLnce  be  wae  the  high
prieit  of  the  people.  This  cerenion  j  was  perfumed
by  aa  aognr,  who  conducted  the  newly-eiecled
Tkxag  to  the  ara,  or  citadel,  and  there  pbiced  him  on
a  alone  leat  with  hii  hce  tomed  to  the  looth,
while  the  people  waited  below  in  aniioui  nupcnK
nntil  the  auj(ur  announced  that  the  god*  had  tent
the  favourable  tokeni  ccnRnniiig  the  king  in  hie
prieitly  chfliseler. (Liir.  i.  18;  Pint.  Num. 7,)


RES.

I  pMTad,  by  the  maiteriy  inTeatigatiiaia  of  RnUiMk
" 'haleier  eiception  may  be  taken  '


Thei


1  obtained  by  hia  election  to  the
royalty,  ai  the  comitia  were  held  am^iieato.  It
limply  bad  reference  to  hii  prienl;  character,  ai  al-
ready remarked,  and  ooitiequently  did  not  take
place  in  the  caee  of  the  republican  magiitrale*,
thoogh  Che  nxtaeroniM  and  other prieeti  were  in-
augniated.  The  paangeof  Dionyiitu(iu  6),  which
it  qaoted  in  the  article  iNAtiouBATia  to  proTe  that
the  republican  magiitntea  were  inanffurated,  refen
only  CO  their  taking  the  anipicee  on  Uie  morning  of
the  day  on  which  cbey  entered  upon  their  office.
(Comp.  Becker,  tbid.  Ted.  iL  pt  L  p.  314.)  The
aecond  act  which  had  to  be  perfarmed  wai  the
conferring  of  the  imperiiun  upon  Iba  king.  The
Goriae  had  only  determined  by  their  preiiona  TOte
who  waa  to  be  king,  and  hod  Dot  by  that  act  be-
itowed  the  neceuuy  power  upon  bun  ;  they  had.


the  curiae  a  ioi  , .

by  voting  in  hvour  of  it  gave  him  the  imperiusL
(Cicdaiiq).  iL  13,  17.18,30,21.)  The  reawm
of  thii  donbla  vole  of  the  curiae  ii  clear  enough.
The  inperium  could  only  be  conferred  npon  a
determuiale  pcrton.  It  was  necesury,  therefnre,
fine  to  determine  who  wa*  to  be  the  penon  who
wai  capable  of  receiving  Che  impeiium  ;  and
when  tbii  wie  determined,  the  imperium  wai
granted  to  bun  by  a  ipecial  vote.  Livy  in  hii
Bnt  hook  makei  no  mention  of  the  la  ariala  da
imptrio,  but  be  niei  the  eipreuiona  palrtt  aaetortt
fimxt,  patrai  amdortt  /ac  '
That  [he«e  eiprcuiona,  hr
the  /sc  curiaia  d»  impirio
■hown  by  Becker,  an  abal


117,22,  32.)
a  the  kingly  period  ii


II  ve^  d


Gcnll  to  deU


luigned  to  the
omiua'of  the  curiae,  the
ctioni  which  wore  only
reference  to  the  coniuli,  the  tenate,  and  the
comi^  oF  their  own  time.  Moat  modern  writen
hare  represented  the  inpreme  power  aa  reaidbigin
tha  people,  and  have  ri^arded  the  king,  to  a  great
extent,  aa  the  eiecntive  of  the  lenalc  and  the  cunae;
but  thii  view  of  the  limited  nature  of  the  kins')
paven  ii  itrai^y  attacked,  and  wa  may  aay  dia-


>ehia


without  feeling  convinced  that  the  kmg  p
the  lupreme  power  in  the  eariieit  timta,  and  tint
the  aenale  and  the  comitia  of  the  curias  wen  very
■light  checka  upon  ita  eierciaa.  In  tbe  fine  place,
the  king  alone  paaaeaiad  the  right  of  taking  iha
noapicei  on  behalf  of  the  alate  ;  and  aa  no  pablic
butineaa  of  any  kind  could  be  peilonned  witboal
the  approbation  of  Ihe  gods  eipreaaed  by  the
auapices.  the  king  stood  as  mediator  betwHn  the
gods  and  the  people,  and  in  an  emrly  stage  of  ao-
ciety  mnaC  nrmarily  have  been  legatded  with
religioua  awe.  [Auaua.J  He  was  thus  at  tbe
head  of  tbe  national  rsligion  ;  and  the  prieata,  who
are  in  all  naliona  most  jealooa  of  their  exdiinta
rigbta  and  priiile^^iea,  acknowledgsd  that  tbey  wen
originally  instituted  by  the  king^  and  leant  Iraa
him  their  religiooa  ritea.  Thns  Romuliu  ia  nsi
only  aaid  to  have  eatabliahed  tbe  auguis,  bat  Co
have  been  himself  the  beat  of  all  angnia  (Cic  dt
Jin.  L  3) ;  and  the  inatitutioD  of  the  poutiSa  in
like  manner  was  not  only  attributed  to  Nona
Pompiliut,  but  they  are  said  to  have  been  taught
by  this  king  the  whole  doctrine  of  tbe  public  and
private  lacra,  the  arrangemenC  of  the  alendAT,  the
division  of  daya  inCo^^uti  and  mefiati^  in  ooa  vord
thtjui  pimti^aim.  (Liv.  L  1 9,  20  ;  Cic.  i^  Ab.
u.  H  ;  Dionya.  iL  72  ;  PlntJVan.  12.)

Secondly,  the  people  aurrendered  ca  Uic  king  tlw
supreme  military  and  jodicial  authority  by  ego-
fening  the  iniperiiai  upon  him.  Il  ia  true  tbat
tbe  imperium  waa  granted  to  tbe  conaoll  in  liko

nally,  was  in  reali^  limited  in  its  eieiciac,  at
the  consuls  at  the  end  of  their  year  cS  officv  !»■
come  private  penona  again,  and  might  be  brought
to  trial  for  acts  which  ihey  had  p^oimed  during
their  coniulship.  In  addition  to  which  varioaa
lawa  were  passed  for  the  piatection  of  the  dtiiena
' arbitnuy  use  of  their  power,  doem  of


ity  (tn^wnaH,  lim  no  ra  walitari*  ad-
an,  towri  exeraiiu,  iiUmiKgiri  noapirfEM^
Pha.  v.  1 6  1  comp.  Liv.  v.  52  ;  Gc  de  Ltf.
.  iL  12)  ;  but  this  definition  aimplj  aiiaes  &tim
£ict  that  tho  wrilera  are  thmking  of  the  lu-
im  of  the  consult,  who  were  d^nived  of  ja-
dicial  power  in  the  city  of  Rome,  and  within  tha
first  mileatone  from  it,  from  the  time  of  the  instk-
tulioo  of  the  pnetonbip.  (Liv.  iv.  42  ;  Oaiiu,  iv.
101.)  But  the  praeton  alio  had  tha  imp^ua
conferred  upon  Ibem  by  a  lex  cariaCa,  and  It  waa
by  poaaeaaion  of  the  imperium  that  they  nn
alone  qualified  to  pronounce  a  jmdieium  tt^itimwm,
at  all  events  in  criminal  mee.  Il  must,  there.
fore,  be  recollected,  that  the  king  waa  not  only  tha
comnumder  in  war,  but  tbe  sii[aeme  jndgs  in  peace
Seated  on  bis  throne  in  the  DQEoitium,  tie  admi^
istered  jnstica  to  oil  comeis,  and  decided  in  oil
lasea  which  were  bnmghl  be&re  hint,  dvil  aa  will
aa  criminal  Tha  oeiniDn  of  Paehta  (Atftt,  nd.  i,
p.  1 40,  &c),  that  pnnte  niU  ven  not  decided  if
tbe  king,  but  come  nnder  tbe  jntiadicliea  «f  lb
pontifii,  rests  on  no  nlficieiit  wtlhorin',  and  ia  n-
fuled  by  the  tale  of  the  pretended  dilute  whid
H-aa  bronght  before  ~  -  —  -  ■  •
deren  of  that  kini


bronght  before  Tanjuinina
Ii  of  that  king. (Liv.  i , . .
place  leliauce  upon  Livj,  the  king  did  not


40.) If  we  we  la


,  bat  mu  fettered  by  a  etmtilmm,
it  ii  bnugbt  fotvsrd  u  a  reproach  agiintt
TVrqiiinitu  Superbui,  aq^ifiosu  e^laiiiai  rtrtm
lim  maUiU  ptr  m  kIui  txtnebal  (Liv,  L  47)  ;
bnt  it  i*  not  euy  to  believe  in  the  eiiitmca  o(
nich  m  coniiliuiQ  in  the  time!  of  tbe  earl;  kinn,  or
if  it  did  Mist,  it  miut  havo  been  a  bod;  limpl;  to
adTJH  Ibe  king,  and  could  not  bare  had  the  power
of  omtrolliag  him,  u  he  adminiitered  juiticg  in
(irtu*  of  hii  paueding  the  imperiimi.  There  u
nioreovei  no  cue  receded  m  which  the  coniiiinm
had  any  ibare  in  the  admiautrfttion  of  jtutice.
Pmm  Ibe  dtciiien  of  the  king  there  Nemi  to
hare  been  do  appeal  (preceeofui).  Thia  ii  in-
deed denied  bj  Ni*buhr,  vho  maintaini  that  in
all  CMC*  afFecting  the  caput  of  a  Roman  ciliien,
an  appeal  lay  Fran  the  king  to  the  people  in
the  comitia  of  the  curiae,  and  vho  further  ai^ei
that  thia  wai  an  ancient  right  of  the  patticinns,
and  waa  extended  to  the  pleba  b;  the  Lbz  Va-
leria, enacted  at  the  eatabliihment  of  the  re-
poblic  II  ii  true  that  the  ancient  writen  refer
the  iiutitotion  of  tbe  protaeatio  to  the  kinfily
peiiod  (Li..  L  26,  riiL  33  j  Cic.  pnMU.  8  ;  VaL
Max.  yL  3.  S  6.  'riil.  ).  §  1  i  Featui,  i.  e.  lonrvim
tigilbm  ;  Cic  d«  lUp.  iL  31),  but  it  b;  no  meani
foUom  that  the  prprocatio  of  that  early  time  waa
the  «une  aa  the  nght  aecured  by  the  Lei  Valeria,
irhich  irai  r^arded  aa  the  great  bulwark  of  the
liberty  of  a  Uoman  citiieu.  We  haTB  indeed  the
rpH^  of  only  one  caie  of  piOTOcatio  under  the
kinga.  namely,  when  the  lurriving  Hoiatiu,  who
nunjeied  hia  liiter,  appealed  from  the  dunmriri  to
the  people  -.  and  in  thi*  eaae  it  muat  be  borne  in
mind  that  the  appeal  waa  not  from  tbe  oenteoce  of
the  king,  but  from  the  tentcnee  of  the  dnumTiri.
It  appean,  even  front  the  narratiTe  of  Liry,  that

the  king  Tolunlarilj' aurrendered ''

the  criminal  and  pooling  lenience  i
onler  to  OToid  tbe  odium  of  putting
hem  who  hod  rendered  mch  aignal  KTticea  to  the
Btate,  and  that  he  appointed  duiUDTiri,  &um  whose
deeiuon  an  appeal  lay  to  the  people,  in  order  that
the  people  might  have  tbe  reaponaibUity  of  pro-
nouncing hia  acquittal  or  eondcmnatian.  (Ljv.  L
S6 :  comp.  Dionya  iii.  12.)  In  addition  to  which
expreuly  otated  that  the  dictalonhip  wai  a
atiOQ  of  the  kingly  power  (Zonar.  tIL  13  ;
comp.  Cic  dt  Rtp.  ii.  32)  ;  and  it  ia  certain  that
the  great  diitinetion  between  the  power  of  the
dictator  and  that  of  the  connli  coniialad  in  there
being  no  ivonicatio  from  the  deciaioni  of  the  fbrmer,
aa  there  waa  from  the  deciaion*  of  tbe  latter.  Our
limita  do  not  allow  oa  Co  enler  forther  into  an
cnuninalion  of  thia  queation  ;  but  tbe  reader  will
Gad  tbe  argnmenta  ogainil  Nicbnbr'a  Tiewi  atated
at  great  length  in  Rabino. {Ibid,  p.  430,  &c)

Again,  all  the  magiitratea  in  tbe  kingly  praiod
appear  to  haTe  been  appointed  by  the  king  and
not  elected  by  the  curioe.  Thia  ia  cipreaily  elnled
of  the  two  mul  important,  the  TViSkru  CeUnim,
who  occupied  the  lecond  pisca  in  the  atale,  and
who  Hood  in  the  nme  relation  to  tbe  king  ai  the
mogialer  eqnitum  did  in  later  timei  to  the  dic-
tator <Lydua,  d»  Mag,  L  14),  and  ibe  Gufoi  or
i'rxt/fictia  arii,  who  waa  nominated  by  the  king
lo  aupply  hit  place  when  he  waa  abaent  fnan  the
eity(Tat.^iBi.  vLll).  We  may  contequmtly  infer

by  the  king,  although  tbe  ancient  aathoritiei  dlSer
on  tlw  point,  Tacilna  aactibtng  th«r  mp/intatai


1  right  of  trying
lo  deoUl  (he


■e  appom


1  byti


i.  22)  and  Jnnitu  Oiac*

lie  1.  tit.  13.) Livyei-
e  Ihnanari  Perdittl-


aathe
kingly  period,  at  many  writi
doubt  that  tbe  latte


1  if  Iheai


■  by
the  king.

Further,  the  king  wat  not  dependent  upon  tbe
people  lor  hit  tupport ;  bnt  a  luge  portion  of  tho
ager  pnblicui  buonged  to  him,  which  wat  culti-
Tated  at  tbe  eipenie  of  the  ttate  on  hia  behall
(Cic  da  Rep.  t.  3.)  He  had  alto  the  abtoluu
diipooal  of  the  booty  taken  in  war  and  of  the  con-
queiod  landa.  (Dionyt.  ii.  23,  63  ;  Gc.  de  Hip.  u,
9,  14,  IB.)  '

It  must  not,  however,  be  auppoaed  thai  the  an-
ihoHly  of  the  kiag  waa  abiolute.  Tbe  tenate  and
the  aotembly  of  the  people  mutt  have  fonned  tome
check  upon  hia  power  ;  thoogh,  if  the  viewt  we
have  been  tUting  are  correct,  they  were  far  from
poaaeaaiog  Iho  exteiiiiTe  privilegei  which  Dionyaiua
(iL  14)  atiigna  to  them.  The  tenate  and  tha
comitia  of  the  curiae  were  not  independent  bodiet
poeieiaing  tbe  right  of  meeting  at  certain  thnca  and
ditcutiing  queationa  of  atate.  They  could  only  be
called  together  when  the  king  chote,  and  further
could  only  determine  up<Hi  mattera  which  the  king
•ubmiltsd  to  them.  The  tenate  waa  aimply  the
contilium  of  the  king,  the  memben  of  which  were
all  appointed  by  him  (Liv.  i.  8;  Dionyi.  il  12  ;
Fealna,  p.  346,  ed.  Mliller;  Cic.  de  Rep.  ii.  B\
and  which  only  oSered  their  advice  to  him,  whieli
he  could  follow  or  reject  according  to  hit  plcoture.
The  comitia  of  the  curiae  aeem  to  have  been
rarely  oaaembled,  and  then  probably  more  to  hear
the  decitiont  of  (he  king  than  to  ratify  hit  actt ;
and  it  it  eertain  that  they  bad  no  power  of  dia.
cutting  any  matter  that  waa  brought  before  them.
The  only  public  matter  in  which  the  king  couid
nut  diapente  with  the  co-operation  of  the  aenate
and  Ute  curiae  wea  in  declaiationa  of  wnr  ogolntt
foreign  nationt,  at  appean  clearly  fnm  the  dedo-
_..._ .r  againil  the  Latiot  i ''

>,  aa  related  by  Liv
ancient  fbnnula.  T
tf  the  people  having  had  anything  (o  do  with  the
conduaion  of  tnatiea  of  peace ;  and  Dionyaiua  in
thia  caaa  at  in  many  othen  hot  evidently  Irana-
fened  a  later  cat[om  to  the  earlier  times.  The
relaUon  in  which  the  tenate  and  the  curioe  ibwd
to  tha  kmgi  it  apoken  of  more  at  length  under
Comitia,  p.  331,  and  SiNiTi7a.

The  iniignia  of  tha  king  were  the  feacet  witH
tbe  aiei  (aacKtet),  which  twelve  licton  orried
before  him  a>  oftni  aa  be  appeared  in  public,  tha
traliea,  the  idla  t3iiWui,and  ihe  logapntlexla  and
pitta.  The  Iraiea  appean  to  have  been  (be  moat
ancient  official  dreaa,  and  ia  otaigned  eapecially  t4
Romuloa !  it  woo  of  Latin  origin,  and  ia  therefore
fepnaented  by  the  antiquarian  Virgil  oa  worn
by  tha  Latin  kingi.  (PliiL  ff,  N.  viii.  4<i,  ii.
39  1  Ov.  FaO.  iL  601  ;  Virg.  Ati.  riL  187,  li.
334.)  The  laga  praotxla  and  pida  were  bor-
rowed, together  with  tbe  aeUa  cnndta,  from  the
Etruacana,  and 'their  introdnction  ia  variously
aacribed  Co  Tidloa  Hootiliua  or  Tarquinina  Pritcua.
(CicilB.Rr^.  iLl7;  Macrob. Snf . i,  6)  ?lin.tf.lV.
ii.  39 ;  Dionyt.  iii.  6%)  Dionyiiua  (J.  c)  oLu
meuliona  a  diadem  and  a  aceptre  oa  iniigiiia  of  the


S!W  HEX  SACRIFICULUS.

For  funller  inrsimation  Ripectlng  [he  Roimul
kingi,  tee  Nieljulir,  Niit.  of  Home,  vol.i.  p.  aaS,
At;  Walter,  Gaciidle  da  Semiictiai  Haitt,
gl7,  2d  ed. ;  End  eap«d&11j  Rubino,  U^Uemei-
■■y™  iiltr  i/Dmiacie  Vrrfaaiag,  pflMiro  [  snd
Becker,  Handbadt  dtr  RmaitcUH  Atitrtiiimer,  Tol.
iLpLL|).291,  &c

REX  SACRIPI'CULUS,  REX  SACRITl-
CPS,  nREX  SACRO'RUM,  WheE  tho  riyil
and  mililai7  pawen  of  ths  king  ven  inuiBfemd


oftbei


mblia


it  Rome,  tbcK  m


high  prieat  of  hii  oalkoLiuid  hsd  eonducted  seie
at  the  ncia  publioi,  Init  lliu  pricadj  part  of  hit
office  wu  tnuiifeiTed  to  *  print  calied  Rei  SacH-
ficulnior  Rei  S»crnrani.  (Liv.  iL  2  ;  Dionjt  it.
74,  T.  I.)  ThefirrtreiBcrorum  WM  designated,
U  ihs  command  of  the  cooiuli,  bj  the  allege  of
pontiUi,  and  inuiguiatad  bj  the  augurs  He  was
almjrt  elected  uid  inaugutaled  in  the  canitia  a-
lata  under  the  pretjdenc;  of  the  ponlifli  (OelL  it.
87),  and  u  long  m  »  nx  naiflcului  vai  ap-

n'  ited  at  Rome,  he  waaaliniyt  a  patrician,  for  u  fie
no  iaSoencc  upon  the  maugeineDt  of  political
ajlain,  the  plebeiana  never  coveted  thit  dignity.
(Lir.  vi.  41  I  Cic  pn  Dom.  14.t  But  for  the
aame  icoion  the  pal
have  attributed litt


when


I the affira


tat  two  lucceuive  jam  no  rex  acrDiuni  «ai  ap-
pointed, and  during  the  civil  wan  in  the  lut  pe-
riod of  tho  rqiublic,  the  office  appeare  to  have
UleD  altogether  into  dianie.  Auguatui  however
teems  to  bave  revived  it,  for  we  find  frequoit
mentioa  of  it  during  tho  empire,  until  it  wai  pro-
babl;  nboliibed  in  the  time  of  Thaodoiiui.  (Orelli,
luKT.  n.  2280,  2382,  2283.)

Contideiing  that  tliii  prieat  wu  the  teligiooi
repreientative  of  the  klnge,  he  mnked  indeed
higher  than  all  other  prieita,  and  even  higher  than
the  pontifei  maiimu  (Feitna.  >.b.  Orda  KKtrdo-
Ahr),  but  inpowerandinflnence  hewubiinferior
to  him.  (Id  HKtrdntium  ponlifia  ndgtcere,  Liv.  iL
2.)  Dt  held  hii  office  for  lifb  (Dionjo.  i>.  74),
waa  not  aiiowed  to  hold  anrcivil  or  military  dig-
nity, and  woi  at  the  ume  time  exempted  from  all
military  and  civil  dulie*.  (Dionyi.  L  e. ;  Plut.
Qiaeit.Roia.60;  Lir.  x1.  42.)  Hie  prindpalfuQc-
tioiu  weie:  1.  To  perform  thove  eacia  publica
which  had  beforo  been  performed  by  tho  kingi:
and  hii  wife,  who  bore  the  title  of  rn/ijia  jocrDnrm,
liad  like  the  queeni  of  liinaer  dayi  al»  to  perfonu
certain  prinlly  func^one.  Theu  lacra  publiea  he
or  hit  wlfn  had  to  perform  on  all  the  Calendi,  Idea,
and  the  Nundioei  I  he  toJnpiter,  ondiheto  Jono,
in  the  regie.  (Vorro,  di  Lmg.  Lot.  tL  12,  13  |
Macmh.  SaL  i  15.)  2,  On  the  day*  called  legi-
fl^^um  he  had  to  offer  a  locrifica  in  the  comitiom.
[RsoiPUOIUlf.]  3-  Whenextraordinaiy  portenla
aeemed  to  announce  iome  gecicn]  calamity,  it  wai
bii  duty  to  try  to  propitiate  the  anger  of  tiie  godi.
{Feet.  :  d.  Rtgiat  firiat.)  4.  On  the  nundinet
when  the  people  awemhled  in  the  dty,  the  rei  «a-
eiorum  aimaanced  {tdiabai)  to  thtm  the  niccanoQ
of  tho  feitivali  for  the  month.  Thil  [arl  of  hii
fbictioni  hoivoTei  muil  have  ceaaed  after  the  time
ofCn.  Flavint  (Varro,  de  lAag.  iot  vi.  13;
Serv.  ud  Arn.  viiu  6H.)  He  lived  in  a  domoi
publica  on  the  via  Ben,  near  the  regia  and  the


RHETRAE.

homo  of  the  Voelal  nraine. .

Amdntungcm,^/f.  tl—iS.)  [L.  S.]

HHEDA  or  KEDA  wm  a  travelling  eairiagc
with  four  wheeli.  Like  the  CoriNua  and  the
EtuoDUH  it  wai  of  Gallic  origin  (Qumtil.  /«£
(hot.  L  5.  §  68 ;  Caet.  B>il.  OaU.  i.  fil),  vid
may  perhapi  contain  the  Hune  root  ai  the  Oeiman
notdi  and  our  rvU.  It  wu  the  common  ^image
uied  by  the  Romani  for  tiavelling,  and  wai  fre<
queutly  made  laigo  enoogb  not  only  to  contain
many  penoni,  butalio  baggageand  utenaila  of  n-
riouikindi.  {da-proMiL  10,20  ;  Jnven.  ill  10  ;
UarL  ill  47.)  The  word  Epititdiwn,  which  wai
fbnned  by  the  Romani  from  the  Greek  prqnaitioa
^1  and  th»  Gallic  nMu  (Quint.  Z.  c),  iaeiplained
by  the  Scholiast  on  Juvenal  (viiL  GS)  ai :  ^  Ona-

RHETOR  [RunoRicE  Grafbb.]
RHETO'RICE  GRAPHE  (^ofuti,  yfafi\
The  beat  interpretalioa  of  thit  expreauon  it  ptr-
hqii  that  given  by  Haipoaalion  and  Snidta,  t.  n.
J  sari  pipopta  -fmiUrt),  TpAJarrii  ti  4  ttaiWoi
1i  vpctforToi  mfimnur.  There  wai  not  any  par-
ticular clan  of  penoni  called  j^^rt^j,  inveiced
with  a  legal  character,  or  intruiled  with  political
dutiei,  at  Atheoa.  For  every  dtioen,  who  did  not
labour  under  lome  tpecial  dinbility,  waa  oiiitled
to  oddrcti  the  people  in  auembly,  mako  motkm,
propote  lawt,  &c  The  nann  of  ^apn,  bowevtr,
wai  given  in  common  parlance  to  theoe  otalcn  tad
itatetmen,  who  mon  especially  devoted  tbemidvei
to  the  businesi  of  public  apeaking  ;  while  tbooe  ria
kept  aloof  from,  or  took  no  part  in,  the  biuilKM  of

S polar  aiaembliea,  were  called  Harrmi.  Hence
Tap  ii  explained  by  Suidaa,  lb.  'O  Uiiiif  4nf
eouAiiiiu  xtd  S  tr  Ww  iTOfwi"'.  The  ^rvaptit
ypa^il  might  be  either  the  nme  ai  the  rmfar^ar
Tfxi^,  or  a  more  special  protecation,  altaiiled  with
heavier  penaltiea,  against  practised  demagsgaea,
who  exerted  their  talenia  and  inflnOKe  to  deceive
the  people  and  recommend  bod  metiauna.  Othm
have  conjectured  this  to  be  a  pneeeding  linilar  to
the  inirrjtktti  ioKttiotrita,  directed  a^aintt  thote

Knons  who  ventured  to  apeak  in  public  after
Tu^g  boon  guilty  of  aome  misdemeanour  which
would  render  them  liable  to  irifiia.  OrthiaiiBtare
wai  the  charge  brought  tgainit  Timaichai  by  Aei-
chinet,  whose  object  wu  lu  prevent  tba  litter  from
appearing  as  proseiiatw  against  him  m  the  rabject
of  the  embassy  to  Philip.  (SchikoaoD.  d*  C6miL
P.10B;  Meier,  .4(1. /■«]«.  p.  209.) [CR.K.)

RUETRAE  (^fxu),  apedally  the  nama  of  the
ordinajices  of  Lycoigu.  (PluL  Li/e.  S,  1 S. )  Th*
word  it  defined  by  the  grammariana  to  tigni^  •
compact  or  treaty  <^^pi|,  ^  ^irl  ^eliTiffi  rurtin,
AprJloD.  La.  Hon.  p.  133.  30,  ed.  Bckker  ;
^qrpai,  nirfqiui  Sii  X&fta,  Heaych.)  ;  and  most
modem  writers  adopt  thit  inurfcetaticn,  nF^unng
the  word  to  lignify  originally  words  (rk  ^vrir),  w
a  dedajation,  which  bound  ]flrtiei.  Tt  ia  true
that  the  etymology  points  simply  to  that  which  it
ipoken  or  declared  ;  bot  Piutaich  give*  auitba
meaning  to  the  woid  in  rciation  to  the  lawi  tt
Lycurgns,  and  tayi  that  they  ware  dtviiw  ordi-
nances {fi^pas  itriftaerw^  ill  wapi  to*  di«C  S4^-
fiffi»«i  leal  jirvrimit  Srra,  PlnL  tjo.  13).  Th*
opinion  of  Ur.  Grate,  which  reconcile*  thns  tiro
accounta,  team  the  motl  pnhable.  **  The  word
hii&a  meani  a  lolcnin  compact,  cdther  triginBllT
emanating  from,  or  aubaeqnentlf  nnctimcd  1^  tba
godi,  who  arealwaja  piitiM.to  loeb  B( ~


R1C1NIUU.
*M  t!i«  old  treat;  betveen  the  Elniuu  Mid  He-
Twtia — 'A  Tpirpa,  between  the  tiro,eoinmcmoroled
io  the  Taliuble  iiiKription  itiU  preuired,  —  u  ar-
dent, Bonrding  to  BUckb.u  OlTin.  iOSO  (Blkkb,
Corj).  Itaer^.  No.  iL  p.  26,  put  L).  The  voidi
of  Tyreuui  impl;  auch  ■  contnct  between  the
coDtnutiDg  patliei :  fint  the  kingi,  thea  the  bus-
tii*,l>ut1y  the  people, —  tbttla  f^paa  in-mr^ii-
tofi^Hvi, — when  the  participle  luloccnmngappl  iea
not  to  ths  pec^le  aloiM,  but  to  all  ths  three.  The
Hhctn  of  LycnrgD)  emoiuted  from  the  Delphian
Ifod  \  but  the  Icin^  Acnaton,  and  people  all  bound
thosKlTei,  both  to  each  other  and  to  the  godi  to
obey  it."  (Qrole,  HiH.  of  Onto,  vol  ii.  p.  463  ;
for  a  diBcncl  eipUnation  of  the  word,  He  Thirl-
wall,  Hilt.  o/Onea,  vol.  i.  p.  335,  2d  ed.)

RHYTON  (^dr),adriukmg-hDnl(>i'pai),b7
which  DameltwaaoiiginalljcBll^ii  laidby  Athe-
iiaeui(d.  p.i9r,h)  to  hare  been  Gm  mademider
Plolemj  Pbiladelphiia ;  but  it  !■  eien  mentioned
in  DemMtbeDa  (e.  ^"i-P-  ^^-  29),  u  Athenaeun
himadF  alto  reuurki.  Ths  oldett  and  original
fbnn  of  tbia  drinliiog-hom  wm  probably  the  hom
of  the  o^  bat  one  end  of  it  wat  aftcrwarda  oina-
raent«d  with  the  headi  of  Tariona  animala  and
bird*.  We  freqaently  find  lepnaentBtioni  of  the
^ir  im  andent  vaiei  depicting  lyinpsiia.  Sevenl
apecimnu  of  theae  drinking-bonu  have  alio  been
diacannd  at  Pompeii  (Mutto  Sorioma/,  vol.  viii.
II,  V.  20} ;  repretenUtioni  of  two  of  thoM  are
given  in  the  annexed  cat*


The  pvrAr  bad  a  amall  opening  at  the  bottom,
irlkich  tba  person  who  drank  pnt  into  hia  month,
and  allowed  the  wine  to  ran  in  :  hence  it  derired
ill  name  (An^uffftii  T(  br^  r^t  ^i<rti*t,  Alhen.
li.  p.  497,  e).  We  hm  pemia  nting  the  fiurir  in
thia  way  in  aneicnt  painlinga.  <Piti.  d'ErcoL  v.  t
46  ;  Zahn,  Onam.  amd  W<mJga».  t.  90.)  Martial
<a  36)  apeaki  of  it  under  the  name  of  Alj<ian.
(Becker,  a,ariU>a,  vol  I  p.  SOB.)

RICA. [Fl-AMBN.]

RlCI'NIUM,RECl'NIUMorREClNUS,an
article  rfdceai.  The  name  waaacfordingto  Feitm
(a.  «.)  Dplicd  to  an;  dren  ci  '  '
pieca  of  eloth.  It  occuta  i
TwelTe  Tablei  (Gc.  <U  L^.
eient  comnientBtoia  according  to  Feitui  expUined
the  word  then  ai  a  toga  for  women  (if  the  reading
Ver.  logai»  be  light  instead  of  viritem  logam'i,  with
a  purple  itripe  ui  front.  That  it  wai  an  article  of
fesialE  dreo,  and  more  eapeciall;  a  aroall  and  abort
kind  of  pallium,  i<  Hated  b;  Noniu*  (lir.  33)  on
the  anthorit;  of  Vairo.  It  waa  worn  in  grief  and
DwaniDg,  and  in  inch  a  manner  that  one  half  of  it
wu  thmwn  bach  (Vairo,  dt  Utig.  Lai.  v.  132  ;
Serr.  ad  Am.  L  2B6  ;  ludor.  Orig.  xil.  35),
vhoKa  the  ancient  giammanant  derive  the  word
fron  rnieen,  although  it  ia  maniieitl;  a  deriratire
fran  mu,  which  wm  a  carering  of  the  head  nacd


fiflU

b;  femalea.  (Vairo,  I.  a.  ;  Felt.  (.  V.  Aiao.)  Thu
grammoiiana  nppear  themaelTea  to  bare  had  no
clear  idea  of  the  ricininm  ;  butafter  careful  exami-
nation of  the  pataaj^  above  referred  to,  it  appear*
to  hare  been  a  kind  of  mantle,  with  a  sort  of  cowl
attached  to  it,  in  order  to  cover  the  head.  It  waa
al«o  worn  b;  mimci  upon  the  atage  (Feat.  I.  c  and
1.  V.  Oeiatfni),  and  the  mavortiuin,  mavorte,  or
mavon  of  later  timea  woa  Ihouffht  to  be  only  an-
other name  ior  what  had  fbrmerl;  been  called  rici-
ninm. [L.  S.]

ROBIQA'LIA,  a  public  featival  in  honoar  of
the  god  Robigua  to  preaene  the  £elda  from  mil-
dew, ii  laid  to  have  been  inatituted  by  Nnma,  and
waa  celebiated  a.d.  viL  £dL  Jtfot.  (April  2fitb).
(Plin.  H.  M  zviiL  29.  a.  69  ;  Varro,  Rt  BuH.  i.
1.  p.  90,  ed.  Bip.,  Lmg.  Zot  vi.  16,  ed.  MulL  ;
Foatni,  t.  V.) The  aacrificea  offered  on  thia  occa-
aion  conaitted  of  the  entraila  of  a  dog  and  a  aheej^
accompanied  with  frankincenfle  and  wine :  a  Hayer
vraa  preaented  b;  a  flamen  in  (he  grove  of  the  an-
cient duty,  whom  Grid and  Coiumella  make  a
goddeaa. (Ovid.  l^ut.  ir.  907—942  ;  Colum.  x,
343.) A  god  Robigua  or  a  goddeaa  Boh^  ia  a
mere  invenlioa  from  ths  name  of  thii  featival,  for
the  Roman!  paid  no  divine  hoaonra  to  eril  deitiea.
(Harlung,  Die  Bdigiaadtr  Ronur,  vol  JL  p.  148.)
ROBUR. [Ciacia,  p.  241,  a.]
ROGATIO. [Lix,  p.  682.]
ROQATO'REa [DiRiBrronxH.]
ROGUS. [FuNUB,  p.669,b.]
ROMPHEA. [Hast.1,  p.  589,  a.]
RORA'RII. [ExiBciTUa,  i^.  495,  £03,  b.]
ROSTRA,  oc  The  Bralu,  waa  the  name  applied
to  the  atage  (itiggatitt)  in  the  Fonun,  from  which
ths  oiaton  addioacd  ths  people. Thia  atage  was
originally  called  ttntpbim  (Liv.  ii.  SS),  because  it
waa  couaeciated  by  the  angura,  but  it  obtained  its
name  of  Rottra  at  the  conclnson  of  the  great  Lntin
war,  when  it  was  adrancd  with  the  beaka  (nufn)
of  the  abips  of  the  Antialea. (Lir.  TiiL  14  ;  Flor,
L  II ;  Plin.  H.  N.  uiiT.  6.  a.  11.) The  Oreeka
also  mutilate  - - - -*


of  te>phif
[A,


]

The  Roatra  lay  between  the  Comitimn  or  fdaca
of  meeting  for  the  curies,  and  the  Forum  or  place
of  meeting  lor  the  tribest  ao  that  the  speaker  might
turn  cither  to  the  one  or  ths  other  ;  bat  down  to
the  lime  of  C.  Giacchut,  even  the  tiibanea  in
apeakiog  used  to  front  the  Comi^am ;  he  first
turned  his  back  to  it  and  spc^e  with  hii  bcs  to-
wards the  foraro.  (Niebuhr,  Hut  <fitomt,  vol.  i,
p.  426,  note  990.)  The  form  of  the  Rostra  haa
been  well  described  by  Niebuhr  (vol.  iiL  p.  144,
note  268)  and  Bunien  (quoted  by  Arnold,  Hiii.  ttf
Rami,  vol.  iL  p.  1 64) :  the  latter  lupposes  "  that
it  was  a  circular  bnilding,  raised  on  arches,  with
a  stand  cs  platform  on  the  top  bordered  by  a  puia-
pet ;  the  access  to  it  being  bjr  two  flights  of  steps,
one  en  each  side.  It  fronted  towards  the  comilinm,
and  the  roitrs  were  aJhxed  to  the  front  of  it,  just
under  the  arches.  Iti  form  haa  been  in  all  ths
main  points  prcaened  in  the  ambonea,  or  circular
polpita,  cf  the  moat  ancient  churches,  which  also
had  two  flights  <^  steps  leading  up  lo  them,  one  on
the  salt  side,  b;  which  the  preacher  ascended,
and  another  do  the  west  side,  for  his  descent.
Specimens  of  thoe  old  churches  are  still  to  be
seen  at  Rome  in  the  churches  of  St  Clement  and
S.  li<v«Qxo  fuui  le  moit."  The  speaker  was  thus
33  2


996  RUTRUM.

ennhled  to  walk  la  and  fro,  irfaile  addreaiiig  hia

The  luggeiCm  or  Roalni  wu  tnnifemd  by
Jnliui  Caeiar  to  B  comer  of  Ihe  Fanun,  bat  the
ipot,  wh?r«  the  ancient  Roitra  had  itood,  atill  eon-
tinued  to  he  called  Rottra  rettn,  while  the  other
ynt  tailed  Aiutni  Nova  or  Roilra  Julia.  (Aion.
in  Oic.  MiL  i  12.  p.  43,  «L  Orelli ;  Dion  Cau.
xliii.  49,  liL  34;  Buel.  Aug. 100.) "  "^ '


of  illiul


o(Cic


Philip.  iL  61)  ;  the  now  Roitm  conloined  equ«-
trian  ■lalDa  of  Sulla,  PompOT,  Juliiu  Caaar,  and
Augiuliu.  <Vell.Pat.iL  61.)'  Niebuh[(/.t)  dii-
covcred  the  new  Roitra  in  the  long  wall,  that  rum
in  aji  ajigle  towards  the  tliree  columnj,  which  have
for  n  Tery  long  timp  bonio  the  name  of  Japil*r
Stntor,  but  which  belong  to  the  Curia  Julia.  The
■ubgtance  of  the  new  Rann  coniiiti  of  bricki  and
catting- work,  hul  it  waa  of  coune  caaed  with
marble:  the  old  Roitrn  Niebuhi  tuppotei  were
conatnicled  entirely  of  peperino.

The  following  coin  of  M.  Lolliui  Paliourai  con-
tuDi  ■  npnacDlatkin  of  tha  Roatn.


ROSTRATA COLUMNA. [CoLDMNi,  p.
337,  b.]
ROSTRATA  CORO'NA.  [Corona,  ».  860.1
ROSTRUM. [Nina,  p.  788,b.l
ROTA. [CDaRirs,  p.  378.]
RUDENS  (irdAsf),  any  rope  uaed  to  more  or
Jix  the  maat  oiKulofa  vcatcl  (Jii*.n.l02;  Grid.
AM.  iiL  616;  Achillea  Tatiua,  iL  32.) The  dif-
ferent ropei  of  an  ancient  ahip  an  ipoken  of  ondcr
Nivis,p.790.

RUDERA'TIO. [Domus,  p.  431,  a.]
BUDIATIII. {Gi.inUT0R«»,p.i7B,a.]
RUDIS. [OLADiATOiiu,p.a;j,a.]
RU'FULI.  the  nune  of  the  trihunu  of  tbo
inldien chOBen by  the  coninl  or  other  general.
(Lit.  Tii.  &  ;  Featiu,  i.  n.) For  further  inform-
ation aee  E^naciruB,  pp.  £03,  a.  504,  b.

RUNCI'NA  (piiaiyr,),  a  plana  (Tertull.  Apol.
12;  Bmnclc,  Altai.  L  227),  u  delineated  among
jolner't  toola  (trulnmem.  Fabr,  Tignar.)  in  the
woodcnlaCp.  906.  The  aquare  hale  in  the  right  ude
of  the  Btock  ieemi  intended  for  the  poAaage  of  the
ahavinga  (mnuata).  The  Uitin  and  Oreek  namei
for  thia  inatnunent  gaTB  origin  to  Che  (orretpondiug
tmnaitive  rerbi  ruifliw  and  fivKoritt,  rapenlng  to
plant.  (Min.  Felii,  23.)  They  uem  Co  be  allied
etymoloffically  with  ^J^yxor,  referring  to  the  opera-
tion of  thoK  beau*  and  birdi  which  uas  their  anout
or  beak  to  plough  up  the  ground.  [J.  Y.]

RUTILIA'NA  ACTIO  waa  a  Praetorian  actio
introduced  hy  the  Praetor  Pnbliua  Ruliliiia,  by
Tirtue  of  which  tha  honorgra  emptor  could  me  in
the  name  of  the  peiaon  whoae  good*  he  had  bonght
and  claim  the  condemnntio  to  be  made  in  hii  own
faTonr  and  in  hi>  own  name.  (Oaiua,  iiu  SO,  61,
i».  35.)  [O.  L.]

nUTRUH,  <f>H.  RUTELLUM,  a  kind  of  hoe,
which  had  tha  handle  filed  peniandicularlj  into
the  middle  of  the  blade,  thci  difieiing  from  the


SACERDOS.
RasTKR.  It  waa  naed  befoie  uwii^  to  leral  tin
ground,  hy  breaking  down  any  dodi  wliicb  adb«rd
loo  lon^  toKctber.  (Non.  MaicpL  1B,ed.Merc<fi.)
Thia  operation  it  deicribed  by  Virgil  in  the  fbllow-
ing  termi,  which  alao  aaiign  the  deriTation  of  the

IGeory.  i.  105.)  See  Featua,  a  d.  ;  Vam,  d*  £.
Lai.  T.  p.  137,  ed.  Spengri.  The  nuie  implement
wai  uied  in  mixing  lime  or  clay  with  water  and
■traw  lo  mako  plaater  for  walla  (Clto,  dt  R4  Rait.
10,  128  ;  Pallad.  a!a  St  Awl  L  15  ;  PUn.  H.  .V.

The  word  mlijiiJiim  ought  (0  be  conaidefed  ai
another  form  of  ndriua.  It  denoted  a  fao«  or  take
of  the  lame  conatmciion,  which  wai  naed  by-  the
baker  in  alirring  tbe  hotaibesof  hia  oren.  (Featiu,
«.  T.)  A  wooden  rutabnlum  waa  employed  to  mil
the  contenta  of  the  Tata  in  which  wine  waa  mkde^
(Colnm.  do  tU  Ruit.  lii.  20.)  [J.  Y.]


SACCUS  (ainKot),  aignilied  in  general  any
kind  of  nek  or  bag,  made  of  hair,  cloth,  at  ather
materiala.  We  have  only  to  notice  here  its  megu-
ingai  — 1.  AhcBd-dren.  [CoiiJ,p.  339.]  2.  A
aiere  for  aUaining  wine  [Vinum].  3.  A  piir>e
for  holding  money.  Hence  the  phnte  in  Flutoa
in  ad  tocoHi,  "  to  ge  a  begging."  (Plant.  CUpL  L
1.  22.)

SACELLUM  ii  a  diminutire  of  aacer,  and  aig-


an  altar,  and  aometunc*  alio  a  atatae  of  the  foi  to
whomil  waa  dedioitcd.  (Odliua,  vL  12.)  Falna
(t.  D.)  completet  tbc  dcEniuon  by  atating  that  a
aacellum  never  had  a  rooC  It  wat  thereWe  a,
sacred  encloaure  amrounded  by  a  fence  or  wall  In
BCpamte  it  from  tbe  probne  ground  aronnd  it,  and
anawcn  to  the  Greek  ntpitoKot.  The  form  of  a
aacellum  waa  aomctimea  square  and  sometLiaei
round.  The  ancient  sacellani  of  Janoi  which  Kai
said  to  have  been  built  by  Romulua,  was  of  a
square  form,  contained  a  italne  of  the  god,  and  had
two  galea,  (did.  FaM.  1.  375  ;  Terent.  Maur.  ia
Wemadorf'ti'oef.Afia.ii.p.  279.)  Many  Rstaane
had  prirale  sacella  on  theii  own  aatate*  ;  bat  the
city  of  Rome  contained  a  gnM  number  of  pnblic
ncella  such  aa  that  of  Caca  (Serr.  ad  Atm.  riii.
19a),of  Hercules  in  the  Forum  Bouinm  (S«lin.L;
PItn.  H.  N.  I.  29),  of  the  I^na  (Solin.  3),  of
Naenia  (Feel,  i,  e.  A'aouis  dtaa),  of  Pudidtia
(Li>.  I.  33),  and  olhen.  [L.  S.]

SACERDOS,  SACERDO'TIUU.  Cicoo  (da
Lig.  ii.  3)  diitinguiihea  two  kinds  of  ■cerdoM* ;
Chose  who  had  the  superinlendence  of  Ike  fbcma  at
worship  (ourrnoniae)  and  of  the  saoa,  and  thoaa
who  interpreted  signs  and  what  was  uttered  by
seers  and  propheU.  Another  dlTiuon  ia  that  into
prieals  who  vm  not  devoled  to  the  ra^ce  of  any
particulai  deity,  anch  ai  the  pontic  angura,
feliales,  and  those  who  were  connected  with  tbe
worship  of  particular  diTinitJei,  auch  as  Ihe  fia-
minei.  The  priests  of  Ihe  ancient  world  did  not
contiat  of  men  alone,  for  in  Oreece  aa  well  aa  sa
Rome  certain  deities  wen  aOended  cnlj  by  pritat
esaea.  At  Rome  the  wives  of  paiticulac  prna
were  regarded  as  prieeleasea,  and  had  to  periini
certain  sacred  fimctiona,  aa  tbe  tegina  sacnmn
and  tha  flaminica.  [FtaiiKN;  Rax  Sacbobum.]
Ia  other  caiM  maidoii  were  a{f>oinwd  |aiittwai  1,


SACERDOS.
M  the  TM(ilnigiiii,riibo7t,  with  regard  to  whom
It  «u  aJwkyi  requiaiU  Itial  tfaeii  blben  and
moihen  ahDuld  be  bIIts  (patriini  d  mofnnu').
Ai  «11  the  different  kindi  of  priats  ars  treated  of
■ennUelf  in  thii  work,  it  ii  only  neceuaiy  here
to  DUtke  (oma  geneml  remiilu.

tn  eoDpaiiion  with  the  cItU  magiatntel  all
erieiU  at  Rome  vera  regarded  ai  hoininei  priiati
(Cic  0.  CWA  LI,  da  q^.  I  22,  ad  Aa.  ir.  2,
PhSip.  T.  17),  thaogh  all  of  them  ai  priuli  were
ncerdotc*  publLci,  in  aa  fiir  u  their  ofHeo  {nardo-
(»■)  WH  connected  with  anj  wonhip  recognited
by  the  alUe.  The  appellation  of  nocriJat  /nibliaa
wu  hovew  giren  pcincipallj  to  the  chtef-ponliff
aod  the  Somen  di^it  (Cic  dr  Leg.  iu  9  ;  Serr.
ad  An.  xiL  G31),  who  were  at  tha  lanw  time  tha
only  prieiti  who  were  membcra  of  the  aenate  hy
Tirtuo  of  their  office. All  prieetly  offica  or  ucei-


e  held  fi


life  V
•Dj  civil  magiitiBta.  A  priat  wai  generally  al-
lowed to  hold  any  other  civil  or  military  office  be-
■idcahii  pii«tly  dignity  (Liv.  xiitiii.  47,  xiiiT.
49  ;  BpiL  19,  iL  4G,  E^.  £9,  tut.)  ;  aome  prieita
howorer  formed  an  eiception,  for  the  dnumviri,  the
rex  lacrmiia  and  die  flamen  diilia  weie  not  allowed
to  hold  any  atnte  office,  and  wen  alao  eiempt
from  lervice  in  the  anniea.  (DionyL  i<r.  G.)  Their
priatly  chaiacter  wai,  generally  apeaking,  iniepa-
rablebom  their  penon,  ai  long  ai  they  lived  (Plin.
Hpi^  ir.  B) ;  hence  the  augun  and  fratrei  arrolca
retained  theii  character  eren  when  lent  into  exile,
or  when  they  were  talcen  pri«iner>.  (Plin.  H.  N.
iriii.  2  ;  Pint.  <^uat.  Sam.  99.)  It  alio  occuii
that  one  and  the  lame  pcnon  held  two  or  three
priestly  officei  at  a  time.  Thni  we  find  the  three
digltJtie*  of  puntifei  maIiDlIl^  augur,  and  decemvir
aaoDnun  muted  in  one  indjiidn^  (Lit.  xL  42.)
Bat  two  penont  belonging  to  the  aame  gens  were
not  allowed  to  be  membera  of  the  aame  college  of
prieata.  Thia  regulation  however  wai  in  later
timea  often  violated  or  evaded  by  adoptions  (Serr.
ai  An.  viL  303;  Dion  Caia.  luii.  17.)  Bodily
defect!  rendered,  at  Rome  a>  among  ^I  ancient
nationi,  ■  pcnon  tmlit  for  holding  any  prieatly
office.  (Dionyi.  il  31 ;  Senet  Coairov.  iv.  2 ;  Plat,
Qwwrf.  Rom.  73  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  2fl.)

All  pneata  wen  originally  patriciani,  bat  from
the  yev  8.  c  3e7  the  plebeians  also  began  to  take
part  in  the  lacerdoli^CPLiBia,  p.  927],  and  those
prieatly  offices  which  down  to  the  latest  times  n-
nuuned  in  the  hands  of  tha  patTiciana  alone,  anch
aa  that  of  the  rei  sacronun,  the  diamines,  aalii  and
othen,  had  ao  influence  upOD  the  aSsirs  of  the

Aa  regards  tha  ^ipointment  of  priests,  the  an-
cienta  mianimoasly  state  that  at  fint  they  were
•ppoinled  by  the  king!  (Dionyi.  iL  21,  &c.  73  ;
Lit.  i.  20),  bat  after  the  aacerdotia  wen  once  in-
Blilnted,  each  college  of  prirata  —  for  nearly  all
pneata  oonsututed  cert&in  corporatioiia  called  col-
l^ia  —  had  the  right  at  filling  op  the  occurring  va-
canciea  by  cooptatio.  [PoNTiFix.p.  940.]  Other
prieata.  on  the  eontmy,  auch  oa  the  Vcslal  virgina
and  the  flaminea,  wen  ^pointed  (capi^oJitar)  by
the  pontifi!!  maiimua,  a  rule  whirji  appears  to
hava  been  observed  dawn  to  the  lateit  times  (
olliers  igaio,  such  as  the  duumviri  sacronun,  were
elaeled  by  the  people  (Diooya.  i«.  62),  oi  by  thi
curiae,  aa  the  enrioitea.  Bat  in  whatever  monnei
tbej  wen  appointed,  all  priests  after  their  appoint
mont  nqniiM  to  be  inaogurated  by  the  pontiSa


SACERDOS.  997

and  the  augurs,  or  by  the  latter  alone, (DionyB.ii.


deprived  of  this  right,  or  at  least  the  cooptatio  waa
reduced  to  a  mere  form,  by  several  leges,  called
leges  de  socerdotiii,  such  aa  the  lex  Domitia,  Cor^  -
nelia,  and  Julia  ;  their  naton  ia  described  in  the
article  Pontifix,  p.  910,  ftc.  and  what  is  there
taid  in  regard  to  the  appointment  of  pontifTi  ap-
pliea  eqaally  to  all  the  other  calli^ea.  The  Icgea
annales,  which  fixed  the  age  at  which  penoni  bc'
came  eligible  to  the  different  magiitmcica,  had  no
refennce  to  priestly  officea  ;  and  on  the  whale  it
seems  that  the  pubertas  was  regarded  as  the  time
after  which  a  pcraen  might  be  appointed  to  a  aa-
eerdotium,  (Liv.  iliL  38  j  Pint.  TO.  Graed.  i.)

All  priests  had  aome  extemoJ  distinction,  aa  tha
apex,  tutulnt,  or  galenii,  the  toga  praetcila,  aa
well  aa  hooomiy  seats  in  the  theairee,  eimisci  and
amphitheatres.  Thej  appear  however  to  hava
been  obliged  to  pny  taxes  like  all  other  citiiena,
bat  iccm  occasiannfjy  to  have  tried  to  obtain  ei-
emption. See  the  case  related  inLivy,  xxxiii.  42.

Two  interesting  queaiions  yet  remain  to  be  an-
swered: £»t  whether  the  prieits  at  Rome  wen
paid  for  their  services,  and  secondly  whether  they
mttmcted  the  joung,  or  the  people  in  general,  in
the  principlea  of  their  religion.  As  regardi  tho
fint  question,  we  read  that  in  the  time  of  Romulus
lands  were  assigned  to  each  temple  and  college  of
priests  (Dionys.  iL  7),  and  when  Fcstus  (».  v.
OMiwt.)  Stales  that  the  Roman  augurs  had  the
enjoyment  (/rai  (oIcAasO  of  ■  district  in  the  terri'
toiy  of  Veil,  we  may  infer  that  all  priegta  had  the
nans  of  the  lacied  landa  belonging  to  their  respec-
tive collegea  or  diiinitiet.  This  anppogition  ia
■trenglhened  by  the  fact  that  auch  waa  actually
the  case  in  the  Roman  colonies,  where,  beaidei  the
lota  assigned  to  the  coloni,  pieces  of  land  an  men-
tioned which  belonged  to  the  colleges  of  priests,
who  made  use  of  them  by  letting  them  out  tobnn.
(Siculua  Flaccus,  de  amdit.  agror.  p.  S3,  ed.  Goes. ;
Hyginna,  de  Limit.  Comtit.  p.  31)5,  ed.  Goes.)  It
appears  however  that  we  must  distinguish  between
■uch  lands  aa  wen  sacred  to  the  gods  themaekea
and  could  not  bo  taken  from  them  except  by  cxaa-
guralio,  and  such  aa  vrere  merely  given  to  the
priests  aa  poeeessio  and  formed  part  of  the  agei
publicns.  or  the  latter  the  aUte  remained  the
owner,  and  might  take  them  from  thcprieita  in  any
caseofneccuity.  (l)ionCaai.xliii.47  ;  Oros.  v.  IS;
Apnian,  de  Dell.  Mithr.  22.)  Besides  the  use  of
■uch  SBcnd  or  public  lands  some  priesta  also  had  a
regular  annaal  salary  (ff^fKnfiani),  which  was  paid
to  them  from  the  public  tresaury.  Thii  is  ex-
pressly staled  in  regard  to  the  Vestal  virgina  (Liv.  L
20),  the-  ougun  (Dionys.  iL  G),  and  the  curionc*
(Fest.  s.c.  CSinbm'im),  and  may  therefore  be  sup-
posed to  hava  been  the  cose  with  other  priesta  also.
The  pontifex  maximui.  the  rex  sncronira,  and  tha
Vestal  virgina  hnd  moreover  a  domua  puhlica  aa
their  place  of  reaidence.  In  the  time  of  the  empe-
rors the  income  of  the  prieets,  eapecially  of  the
Veatnl  virgini,  woa  increased.  (SueL  Avg.  31  ;
TaciL  Awto/.  iv.  16.)

Aa  regards  tho  accond  question,  we  do  not  hear
either  in  Orecca  or  at  Rome  of  any  clau  of  prieata
on  whom  it  waa  incumbent  to  inatrnct  the  people
respecting  the  nature  and  principles  of  religion.
Ofpnaciui^ there ianotthealighteattiaee. Beli-


993  SACRA.

gum  witd  tliD  iDumti  WB>  a  thing  wUch  mu
EiLnded  down  bj  Omdition  from  father  to  ion,  nnd
coniUtfid  in  the  proper  perfonnance  of  certain  riles
and  ceremoniei.  It  waa  respecting  thrsc  external
fonDi  of  worship  aione  that  the  pontilTs  wen  ob-

Uera. [PONTIFKX.]  [L.&1

SACRA. This  word  in  its  wide.1  unia ei-

tiniM  the  stats  u  well  m  all  ill  subdiiisioni  had
their  own  pecaliai  forma  or  wonhip,  whence  at
Rome  we  find  sacra  of  the  whole  RoDum  people,  of
tho  Furiea,  gcntes,  &niiliei,  and  even  of  private  in-
dividualt  Ail  theae  (acre,  howerer,  were  divided
into  1*0  great  clauei,  tho  public  and  piivaUi  sacra
(mera  puUica  el  privata),  that  is,  they  we™  per-
Ibrmed  cither  on  behalf  of  the  whole  nation  and  al
the  eipenie  of  the  state,  or  on  behalf  of  indi-
Tiduali,  families,  or  genles,  which  had  also  to  defray
their  eipenaea.  (FesL  i.  c.  PMta  lomi ;  Lir.  i.
20,  T.  7  ;  Plot.  mm.  9  :  Cic.  de  Hnnup.  Aup.
7.)  Thii  diviiion  is  ascribed  CO  Niuno.  AUiacia,
publica  11  well  at  privata,  were  superintended  and
rr^Uled  b;  the  ponlifft.  We  shall  £nt  speak  of
the  eacra  publica.

Sacra  PaUioa.  Among  the  lacra  publica  (be
Romnne  reckoned  not  only  those  which  were  per-
formed on  behalf  of  the  whole  Roman  people,  but
also  those  performed  on  behalf  of  the  great  aubdiri-
sions  of  the  people,  Tiz.  the  tribes  and  the  curiae,
which  Feilus  {Lc.)  expresses:  pro  nuniAiiRi, /kmh,
nriu,  nartllii.  (Sec  Dionya.  iL  21,  23;  Appian,
/lilt.  flom.  TiiL  138,rf<  Belt  Cie.  il  106;  PluL
QuuA  Horn.  B9.)  The  sacra  pro  monlibui  ct
jiagis  are  undoubtedly  the  sacra  montanalia  and
pagimalia,  which  although  not  sacra  of  the  whole
Roman  people,  were  yet  publico  (VaiTo,  dc  Ling.
Jjal.  vi.  24,  4c.  i  wrap.  Fesl.  s.  o.  ^ytimtmeam.')
The  sBcella  in  the  eiprcsslon  of  Festiis,  (arm  pro
maillU,  appear  only  to  indicate  the  places  where
'  '■  1  were  performed. (QBltlijig,


6.)  WhB
n  pabtico,  is  that  they  were  per-
cipense  of  ccrtun  public  fundi,
jvide  111


which  had  to  provide  the  money  for  ilcluna
lions,  incense,  and  for  the  building  and  m


(Feat


;  Dion


.^ ^  .ontiffs,  and

formed  a  part  of  them.  They  were  kept  hi  the
domui  publica  of  the  poulifei  maiimus,  and  wexe
called  scrarium  pontiBcum.  (Varro,  de  Ling.  Lai.
T.  180  ;  Oruter,  Inteript.  413.  B,  496.  6,  452.  6.)
Wlcn  these  funds  did  not  auBicc,  the  state  tiea-
lury  supplied  the  deficiency.  (Fest.  a.  p.  iJimi-
maitum.)  In  the  lolemniiitioD  of  the  sacrn  pub-
lica the  senate  and  the  whole  people  took  port.
(Plut.  ffmn.  2.)  This  circumatanc*  bawevcr  ia
not  what  constitutes  (heir  cbaiacter  as  sacra  pub-
lica, for  the  sacra  pepularia  (Fest  a.  v.  Poptd.
nor.)  in  which  the  whale  people  took  part,  might
nerertheless  be  lacia  pritata,  if  the  eTpenies  were
not  dc&syed  out  of  the  public  funds,  but  by  one
or  mise  iiidividuali,  or  by  magistiatei.  The  pon-
ti&  b  conducting  the  ncra  publica  were  aaiisted
by  the  epulonei. [Epulonbs.]

^ocro  prieala embraced,  as  we  have  stated,
thou  which  were  performed  on  behalf  of  a  gena,  a


SACRIFICIUH.
publics,  !•  that  they  were  made  at  the  exftam  of

those  petmna  or  person  on  whose  behalf  they  wet?
performed.  Respecting  the  sacra  of  a  geru^  called
•ocra  gentilicia,  see  Gins,  p.  £G8,t).  The  sacn
connected  with  certain  fanuliei  were,  like  those  of
a  gens,  performed  regularly  at  Eied  times,  and  de-
scended as  an  inheritance  lixra  father  to  son.  Ai
they  were  always  connected  with  eipcniei,  and
were  alio  troublesome  in  other  respects,  inch  an
inheritance  was  regarded  as  a  burden  rathfr  than
anything  else.  (Hacrob.  Sal,  L  16.)  They  may
generally  haie  consiited  in  sacrificei  to  the  Pe-
nates, but  also  to  other  dirinitics.  They  had
usually  been  vowed  by  some  member  of  a  family
on  some  particular  occasion,  and  then  cootinned
for  ever  in  that  family,  tho  wel&re  of  which  wai
thought  to  depend  upon  their  regular  and  ivoper
performance.  Besides  these  periodical  sacra  of  k
ftmily  Ihera  wer«  others,  the  performance  of  whiA
must  have  depended  upon  the  discrMion  of  the
heads  of  families,  such  as  those  on  the  birthday,  or
on  the  death  of  a  membar  of  a  bmily.  Saiignj
(^Rbejri/I,  vol.  ii.  p.  3)  denies  the  eliilaica  id

An  individual  might  perform  sacra  at  «Dj  time,
and  whenever  he  thonghl  it  necrastry  ;  bat  if  lia
vowed  such  sacia  before  the  pontifli  and  wished
that  they  should  be  continsed  after  bis  death,  bil
heirs  inherited  with  his  property  the  obligation  to
perform  them,  and  the  pontiffs  bad  to  waleb  that
they  were  performed  duly  and  at  their  pnipa'  time.
(Fest.  a.  e.  Saeer  mont ;  C'\z.pro  Z>om,  fil ;  cosnp,
ad  Alt  lii.  19,  &C.)  Such  an  obligation  was  ist
Inter  titnea  evaded  in  various  ways.

Among  the  sacra  privata  wBre  reckoned  also  tlw
sacra  mimicipalia,  that  is,  such  sacra  as  a  comms-
nity  or  town  had  hern  accustomed  to  perlbnn  be-
fore it  h.id  received  the  Roman  franchise.  Aha
this  event,  the  Roman  ponliffa  tjok  care  that  they
were  continued  in  the  same  manner  as  hrton.
( Fest  I.  tF.  Mmic^Kilia  tacra ;  comp.  Ambiwch,
Slad.  a.  JndnU.  P.21S.)

<Sce  Ootding,  p.  176,  &c  ;  Waller.  Gari-iL

'in.  RirAti,  p.]7<i  ;  Itartung,  Dit  Rel^d.  /lSm~

TuLl  p.  326,  &c.  i  camp.  SACitiFiomii.) [L  S.1

SACRAMENTUM. [Ju»UH.aMiuii ;  Vin-

SACRATIIUM  was,  according  to  the  definilim
if  Ulpian  (Diff.  I.  lit.  8.  s.S.  5  2),  any  place  ia
vhich  sacred  things  were  depuaited  and  kept,  whe-
ther this  place  was  a  part  of  a  temple  or  of  a  pri-
■  ^ouse.  (Comp.  Cic  c.  Terr.  iv.  2,  pm  Masfc
.  luet.  TH.  51.)  A  sacrarinm  therrfore  vaa
that  part  of  every  house  in  which  the  images  of  tha
penates  were  kept.  Respectiu)!  the  sacrariiim  of
the  lares  see  T..arjbivh.  Public  sacrariaat  Romv
one  attached  to  the  temple  of  the  Capitolinc
Jupiter,  in  which  the  tensaa  oc  chariots  for  publio
processions  were  kept  (Suet,  Keip,  5  ;  Orat.  Falisc.
£34]  J  the  place  of  the  Salil  in  which  the  ancili*
-  *  -be  lituna  of  Romulus  were  kept  (VaL  Mat
1 ;  Serr.  ad  AtiL  vii  603),  and  others.  Ia
me  of  the  emperors,  the  name  sacrarinm  waa
imes  (qiplied  to  a  placo  in  which  a  tiatue  of
an  emperor  was  erected.  (Tacit.  AmaL  iL  41  ;
Slat.  SUb.  t.  I.  240.)  Lity  <L  21)  uses  it  as  a
name  for  a  sacred  retired  place  in  general.  [L.  S.]
SACRIFI'CIUM  (lipi^ar).  Sacrifices  or  oftr-
ingi  fonncd  the  chief  part  of  the  worship  of  tha
ancients.  They  were  I»rtty  signs  of  gratilade,
partly  a  means  vf  propitiating  Ijie  goit,  and  putlj


8ACR1FIC1UM.
■lao  intended  to  indnce  the  deit;  to  bcitoir  unia
fctoui  upon  Ihe  mcrificer,  or  upon  thoie  on  whoie
behRif  toe  locrifice  vu  o^ied.  Saoifice*  ia  a
irid«  wnia  vonld  ilao  embmce  the  Domria  ;  in
M  nuTower  xmie  ncrificia  wen  things  ofietcd  to
the  godi,  which  BHielj  aSbrded  momentar}'  gro-
tificalioo,  which  wen  bunt  npon  their  ainn,  or
wtn  hetiani  to  b<  BEonmed  hj  tba  goda.  We
(hall  difida  ill  wcrificea  into  two  great  diiiiiont,
bloodj  ncrificet  mi  raibloody  ucrificei,  and,
when  it  k  netwwy,  eooiider  Greek  and  Roman
MOiiicei  •epualelr.

Btoabi  ntrifiea.  Aa  ngarda  •amfleei  in  the
tariieat  timea,  the  ancLenU  themaeiiu  Mmetimei
imagined  that  unblood;  laerifieei,  chicBj  aScrion
of  frnit,  had  bwn  cnitomaiy  loiw  bclore  bloodj
ncrifcea  wen  iotndaced  omonft  uem.  (PlaL  dt
L»g.  tL  p.  7S2 ;  Paiu.  viii.  2.  g  1,  i.  26.  g  6  ;
Sla(iobL5IX.i.  ID,  Ac)  It  caonol  indeed  be  de-
nied, that  nerifion  of  fmit,  csk»,  libaliona,  and
the  like  uiMed  in  tci;  ibH;  timH  ;  bat  blood;
Mcrifiee*,  and  in«e  than  tliii,  hnman  ncrifico,  are
ytij  freqaentlj  mentioned  in  earlj  itoij  ;  in  fiict
Ihc  dijtliolog7  of  Greece  ia  full  ofinatancn  of  hu-
man aaciifica  being  offeird  and  of  their  iJcaaing
thegoda.  Wachnaoth  (H^  JU.  iL  p.  £49,  Su.
3d  edit)  hat  given  a  liat  of  the  mott  celebrated
iiutaDCca.  It  ma;  be  uid  that  none  of  them  haa
CODW  down  to  ui  with  an;  d^ne  of  bittoricsl  en-
denoe  ;  but  inrely  the  ipkit  which  gave  origin  to
tbow  tegsndi  ia  lufiluent  toprore  that  human  lacri-
ficei  had  nothing  repuleire  to  the  ancienta,  and
Uniat  hare  eiiited  to  same  ertent.  In  Ifae  hiatorical
timei  of  Greece  we  find  Tarioui  cuitoDU  in  the  trat-
•hip  of  UTeza]  goda,  and  in  leTaal  paila  of  Greece,
which  cao  ool;  be  acconnled  for  b;  aappooing  that
tiitj  wen  intioduced  aa  nbititutei  for  hnman  lacri-
ficeb  In  other  caaei  where  civiliiation  had  ihown
leaa  of  ita  aoftening  influcncea,  human  aadijicei  n-
mained  automary  Ibmnghout  the  hiitorical  periods
of  Greece,  and  down  to  tbe  time  of  the  emperaia.
Thut  in  the  wgnhip  c^  Zeni  Lycaeiu  in  Arcadia,
where  hnman  lacrifice*  were  nid  to  have  been  in-
troduced bj  Lycum  (Pana.  xliL  S.  §  1),  the;  ap-
pear to  hare  continued  till  the  time  of  tbe  Koman
cmparon.  (Tfaei^hraat.  ap^  Porphgr.deAbttio.ii.
27;  I'lat.  Quoeal:  Gr.  SS.)  In  Lencaa  a  peiaon
waa  ever;  tear  at  the  feiliTal  of  Apolb  thrown
frem  a  rock  into  the  wa  (Strab.  x.  p.  iSl);  and
ThemiMocle*  before  tbe  battle  of  Silaniia  it  uid  to
hare  sacrificed  three  Pereiana  to  Diunjjiiva.  (Flut.
TlUm.  13,  AruL  11,  FdBp.31.)  Beapeeting  an
■npnal  sacrifice  of  human  beings  at  Athena,  see
Thahoclia. With  these  few  exceptions  bowarer

ss  of  ciTJlisaljoQ,
itutvd  fnr  hnman
bsnga,  in  othen  a  few  drops  of  human  blood  were
thought  sufficient  to  .pinpitiale  the  godi.  (Paul.
Tiii.  33.  S  1,  ii.  S.  §  1.)  The  custom  of  saciiBciiig
human  life  to  the  gods  nroae  nndoiibtedl;  fniin  the
belief,  which  under  diffoent  fonna  has  tnamfeatad
itself  at  all  times  and  in  all  natioDs,  that  the  noblei
Ibe  sacrifice  and  the  dearer  to  ita  posseesor,  the
mon  i^eaaing  it  would  be  to  tiio  gods.  Hence  the
baqumt  inHtancas  ia  Grecian  >ti^  of  persona  ea-
crificiilfC  their  own  children,  or  of  persons  devoting
themaelvea  to  the  goda  of  tlis  loner  world.  In
lator  tbnes,  however,  persons  sacrificed  to  the  gods
mtn  geiwrall;  criminals  who  had  been  condemned
todeatb,or  siich  as  had  been  taken  priaoours  in  war.


of  Giee


Owing  to  the  inSnel


SACBIFICIUM.  Mi)

That  the  Romans  also  believed  human  aacri-
ficei  to  be  pleasing  to  the  gods,  might  be  inferred
from  the  itor;  of  Curtius  and  fiom  the  seir-sacrilicB
of  the  Decii.  The  spnbglic  sacrifice  of  hnman
ligurea  made  of  rushes  at  the  Lemuralia  [LiMir-
halia]  also  abowt  that  in  the  eari;  histoi;  of
Itai;  human  samfices  wen  not  unconunon.  Fcr
anetbei  ptoof  oflhia  practice,  see  the  article  Vn
Sacrum.  One  awM  inalance  also  is  known,  which
belongs  to  the  latest  period  of  the  Bomau  republic
When  the  soldiers  of  Julius  Caesar  attempted  an
insumctjcm  at  Rome,  two  ot  them  vrere  sacrificed
to  Mars  in  the  Campos  Uartins  b;  the  ponlilices
and  the  flaraoi  Usrtialis,  and  their  heads  were
stTtek  up  at  the  regia.  (Dion  Cass.  ilii.  24.)
A  second  kind  of  bloedy  sacrifices  were  these  of
imals  of  various  kinds,  according  to  the  nainn
and  eharaeler  of  the  divlnit;.  The  sacriiicea  of
the  Greeks


The-


In  ti


amaw  the  Greeks
cnilcd  Ifpsloi',  and


«!;  ti


appean  to  have  been  tbe  general  ci
the  whole  victim  (4Ad«cwt**)  upon  the  altars  ot
the  goda,  and  the  eaioe  waa  in  some  caaes  also  ob-
serred  in  later  times  (Xenopb.  Amb.  vii.  0.  %  S),
and  more  especially  ia  siurifices  to  the  gods  o(  the
lower  world,  and  such  aa  were  offered  to  atone  for
some  crime  that  had  been  committed,  (jtpallon.
Rhod.  ill  1030, 1209^)  But  as  carl;  as  the  time
ofHomer  it  was  the  almost  general  pnclice  to
bum  only  (hs  legs  (fiiipoi,  /iiipia,  /t^pa)  encbaed  in
fet,  and  certain  parts  of  the  intcslinea,  while  the
remaining  parts  of  the  rictim  were  consumed  bj
men  at  a  f«tire  meaL  The  gods  delighted  chiefly
in  the  smoke  arising  from  the  burning  victims,  and
thegreater  the  number  of  victims,  the  mora  pleaa-
ing  was  the  sacrifice.  Hence  it  was  not  nneommon
to  offer  a  aacriliee  of  one  hundred  bulls  (JkotiI^d)
at  once,  though  it  must  not  be  supposed  dial  a
hecatomb  always  signifies  a  socrifico  of  a  hundred
bulls,  for  the  name  was  used  in  a  genetal  way  to
designate  an;  great  sacrifice.  Such  great  locrificea
tre  not  less  pleasing  to  men  than  to  the  gods,  for
regard  to  the  former  they  won  in  reality  a  do-
tion  ot  meat  HeDre  at  Athens  the  partiality
'  iuch  ncrificta  rose  to  the  highest  degree^
(Athen.  i.  p.  3  i  eomp.  BBckh, /VA  ficoa.  p.  211,
&c.)  Sparta,  on  the  other  hand,  was  !«s  eiliava-
yintm  sacrificea,  and  while  in  other  Greek  ilHlea
It  was  Decesaary  that  a  victim  ahould  be  hedllhy,
beautiful,  and  uninjund,  the  Spartans  wen  not
very  scrupulous  in  this  respect.  (Plat,  Aidi.  il
p.  149.)  The  animals  which  wen  sacrificed  wen
mostly  of  the  domestic  kind,  as  bulls,  cows,  sheep,
rams,  lambs,  goeit,  pigs  dogs,  and  horses  ;  but
fiihei  are'  alsu  mentioned  as  pleasing  to  certain
gods.  (Athen.  vii.  p.  M?.)  Kach  god  had  his
favourite  animals  which  he  liked  beat  aa  sacrifices;
but  it  may  be  considered  aa  a  general  rule,  that
those  animals  which  wen  sacred  to  a  ged  wen
not  sacrificed  to  him,  though  bones  wen  sacrificed
to  Poseidon  notwithstanding  this  usage.  (Paus.
TiiL  7.  g  2.)  The  hewl  of  the  victim  before  it
was  killed  was  in  moat  caaea  strewed  with  nnsted
barley  meal  (o^X'iTa  or  ovXaxOrai)  mixed  with
salt  (ouJa  sofsa).  Tho  Athenians  used  for  this
pnrposa  only  barley  grown  in  the  Rharian  plain.
(Pans.  L  SB.  g  6.)  The  per»Mu  who  offered  tho
■aerifies  won  genenlly  glands  reond  their  hnda
and  aometimes  also  earned  them  in  their  humb^
and  before  they  touched  anything  belonging  to  the


1000  SACRIFICIUH.

nuriiice  (biT  «uh«t  tbeir  hniidi
victim  iUelf  wa»  likewiw  iidomed  with  gulands,
and  its  Loiu  ven  •omflimci  ^ilt.  Betan  iht
animnl  wai  killed,  a  bunch  of  bair  wsi  cut  frarn  ite
forcbfttd,  uid  thrown  into  the  fire  u  primitiBs :
tbil  prepoiBlory  rite  WM  railed  KorifX"^"-
(Horn.  JL  lit  251,  Orf.  bt.  422  j  Herod,  ii.  45,
\r.  60  [  Enrip.  IplUg.  Taar.  40.)  In  the  heroic
Bfcei  the  princes,  u  the  higli  prieits  of  theirpeople,
killed  the  Tictim  ;  in  later  ^mei  thii  was  done  bj
the  prieitl  thannelwe.  When  the  Hcrifice  wu  to
be  offered  to  the  Oiympic  godi,  the  head  of  the
animal  «sa  drawn  hesTemnrd  («»  the  woodcut
on  the  tide  page  of  tbii  work  :  camp.  Euttath.  ad
Iliad,  i.  4G9  )  ;  wbon  to  the  gad>  of  the  lover
mrld,  to  henKs,  or  to  the  dud,  it  wai  drawn
downwardi. WhUo  the  fleeh  wa4  buming  apoc

{Iliad,  L  264,  iL  774,  Ilc),  and  prayen  and  muiic
accompanied  the  >oleninilT.

The  mott  coniman  intinxl  ncriGcca  at  Rome
were  the  luoTelaurilia,  or  lolituiriliB,  conaiiting  of
a  pig,  a  iheep,  and  im  or.  "Tbfy  were  performed
in  all  csHi  of  a  luittation,  and  the  Tictimi  were
carried  around  the  thing  to  be  Inttnteil,  whether
it  wai  a  city,  a  people,  or  a  piece  of  land.  [Lub-
TRiTial  The  Greek  tpittJo.  which  iikewiw
eoniined  of  an  oi,  a  ihtep  and  a  pig,  wu  the
•ame  ncriiioe  as  the  Roman  sunieCaariiio.  (Calli-
mach.  op. /'in(.J.ti.Tp.TTio»;Ariilopli. /•(•(.  820.)
The  enstoms  obiened  before  and  during  the  lacri-
Gce  of  an  animal  were  on  the  whole  the  lame  at
those  obierred  in  Greece.  (Virg.  Jea.  tl  24a  ;
ScTT.  ad  Am.  i>.  67  ;  Fat.  i.  «.  Imauiati ;  Cato,
dt  Re  Aorf.  134.  132.)  But  the  Tietim  wai  in
moit  casn  not  killed  bj-  the  priesti  who  conducted
the  sacrifice,  but  hj  a  person  called  popo,  who
struck  the  animal  with  a  hammer  befon;  the  knife
was  used  (Seir.  ad  Am.  lii.  120  ;  Suet.  Oi/ig.
32.)  The  better  ports  of  tho  intcatinei  (srta)
were  gtrewed  with  hurley  meal,  winr,  and  ineense,
and  were  burnt  npon  the  ollai.  Those  parts  of
the  animal  which  were  burnt  were  called  pmieia,
ftroficvu,  or  idjitgmima.  When  a  sacrifice  was
oflcred  to  goda  of  riiera  or  the  sea,  these  parts
were  not  burnt,  but  thrown  into  the  water.  (Cato,
da  Ra  RmiL  134  ;  Macrob.  JU.  iL  2  ;  Lir.  iiii.
27  ;  Virg.  .i4<R.  V.  774,)  Reipectingthe  uie  which
tho  ancients  made  of  sscrificei  to  team  the  will  of
the  goas,  see  HAB'japRX  and  Dives jiTio.

UxHoodt/  merifiDM.  Among  these  wc  may  finl
mention  thelibalions  {liiatioius,  Aaiflul  or  (norSai).
We  hare  seen  above  that  bloody  sacrifices  were
uiuaily  accompanied  by  libatiims,  as  wine  was
poured  apon  them.  Libationa  al  wavi  accompanied
a  sacrifice  which  was  offered  in  concluding  a  treaty
with  a  foreign  nation,  ond  that  here  they  formed  a
prominent  put  of  the  solr  ""~  "  -'---'  -■--
fact  that  the  treaty  itself

libations  were  also  made  inacpenaenc  oi  any  otner
ncrifice,  ai  in  solemn  pisyen  {Iliad,  itL  233),
and  on  many  other  occasions  of  public  and  prirate
life,  as  before  driDking  at  mrals,  and  the  like.
Libations niuallj consisted of nnmiied wine

honey,  and  other  flnids,  either  pare  or  dilated  with
water.  (Soph.  Oad.  CoL  159,431  ;  Plin.A.JV.
xiT.  19  ,  AcKihyU  Bum.  W.)  latent  was  tike-
wiio  an  oBteing  which  usually  aomipaiiied  Uoody
siscrHiees,  but  it  was  also  burned  as  an  ofoing  by
HsdE Real  iaoenM  upean  to  bore  been  nwd


SAECULUM-
only  in  later  times  (I'lin.  /f.  M  liiL  1 ),  bat  in  tbe

early  times,  and  afterwards  also,  rarions  kinds  of
fiagnat  wood,  such  as  cedar,  fig.  Tine,  and  myrtle-
wood,  were  burnt  upon  the  altars  of  the  gods.
(Sutd.  I.  V.  N-f^n  iika.)

A  third  clan  of  nnbtondy  acrifices  consisted  of
&nit  and  cakes.  The  forms'  went  mostly  oftred
to  the  gods  as  primitiae  or  tithes  erf'  the  haireat,
and  as  a  sign  of  gntitade.  They  wae  snaetimes
offered  in  their  natiial  atate,  sometime*  also
adorned  or  prepared  in  Tsrious  vara.  Ofthiakiad
were  the  slpiffiitn],  an  olive  branch  wmnd  smond
with  vool  and  hung  with  varions  kinds  of  fniiti ;
the  x^pi"  or  pots  filled  with  cooked  beiuu  [Pva-
M»i"8iij  ;  the  tifnar  or  Kfpra,  or  dishes  with
frait ;  the  iirx<t  or  OrX'  [ObchophokuJ.  Otbo'
instances  may  be  found  in  the  accounts  of  the
varions  festivals.  Cake*  (WAsrw,  wiiifiara,  wi-
ruoi,  lituKt)  were  pecniiar  (o  the  worship  of  ta-
lain  deities,  as  to  that  of  Apollo.  They  wen
either  simple  cokes  of  flour,  soraeomes  also  of  wai,
or  they  were  mode  in  the  shape  of  sme  animal,
and  were  then  offered  as  symbolical  lamficri  in
the  place  of  real  aninials,  either  becaase  tbey  csnld
not  easily  be  procured  or  w<a«  too  eipensJTc  for
the  saoificer.  (Said.  s.  v.  Eaut  ffBo^r  ;  Strr.  ad
Am.  iL  1  IS.)  This  appearance  instead  of  ivaJity
in  sacrifices  was  also  manifeat  on  other  eoaainii.
for  we  find  that  sheep  were  sacrificed  instewl  of
stags,  and  were  Chen  called  stags ;  and  in  the
temple  of  Isis  at  Rame  the  priests  used  water  of
the  river  Tiber  instead  of  Nile  water,  and  osDed
the  fiirmer  water  of  the  Niie.  (FeM.  ■.  o.  Or-
variaori,;  Scrr.ta)

See  Wacbsmiith,  HilUm.  ^Itardnut  toL  iL
pp.  648— £59,  2d  ed. ;  Hartang,  Dit  Hitigitm  dtt


vol.  i


0,  &e.


[Lai


as  called  TwortoL Bnt


SACKlLE'OIUMis  the  crime  of  staling  thii^
consecrated  la  the  gods,  or  thmgi  depositrd  in  a
consecrated  place.  (QuinctiL  vii.  3.  5  31, 4c. ;  Cie.
deZe^.  ii.  IG  J  Li>.  iliL  3.)  A  lex  Jnlia  rcfemd
to  in  the  Digest  (48.  (it.  13.  s.  4)  appfAta  to  have
placed  the  crime  of  sacrileginm  on  an  equality  with
pecolatns.  [PacULiica.]  Several  of  the  in^riai
conatitations  made  death  the  poniihmeut  for  a
sacnlegus,  which  consisted  acoiTding  to  cimim-
stances  either  in  being  given  np  to  wUd  beasia,  in
being  burned  alive,  or  hanged.  (Dig.  48.  tit  IS.  a.
6.)  Paulus  says  in  gencnl  that  a  sacrilcgns  was
punished  with  death,  but  he  diitingcisbci  bi-tveen
snch  persons  who  robbed  the  Bcrs  publics,  and
such  as  robbed  the  sacra  privata,  and  he  b  of
opiniun  that  the  latter,  thongh  mon-  than  a  cDSnaian
thief,  yet  desorrei  leu  punishment  thin  the  finser.
In  a  wider  sense,  sacrilegium  was  used  by  the  R^
mans  to  designate  any  violation  of  religion  (Co™.
Nep.  AlcA.  6),  or  of  anything  which  shooJd  be
treated  with  religious  reverence.  (Ovid.  Mtt  xii
639,  Item.  Am.  367,  FatL  iiL  700.)  HeiKe  ■
Uw  in  the  Codei  (9.  tit.  29.  a  1)  stales  that  any
person  is  guilty  of  mcril«i>un  who  Deflects  tx
violalM  the  sanctity  of  the  divine  la*.  An-
other law  [Cod.  9.  tiL  29.  s.  2}  deemed  that  erra
a  doubt  ai  to  whether  a  persoa  appoinled  by
an  emperor  lo  some  office  was  wonhy  of  this
office,  was  to  be  r^arded  as  a  crime  «qul  to
saerileginm.  tI^S.1

SACftO'RUM  DKTESTA'TIO.  [Oe.*.  p.
668,  b.]

SAECULA'RESLUDI.  [LodiSabcouuk.]
was  of  •  twofcJA


SAE'CULUU. A  ■


8AGITTA.
otitn,  that  ii,  eitbst  diil  or  aitunl.  Tfae  cUtl
nccuIdiUi  acGordui^  to  the  aJcaUtion  of  the  Etnii-
cau,  which  mi  Bdoptad  by  the  Romuii,  wu  ■
■paca  of  time  coBtaiiung  110  limu  jean.  Thg
OBtonl  ■jralgm,  upon  tha  calculation  of  which
the  fanner  vat  fmaided,  expmud  the  longut
tann  of  ^■Ti^^n  life,  and  iti  dontton  or  length  wBi
'dmg  to  the  rilDBl  boi^  of  the
foUowing  aaioHs:  the  lila  o(  a
penoa,  which  laited  the  loDgeal  of  all  thoae  who
wen  bm  ai  the  day  of  the  foiuidation  of  a  town,
BHUtilalad  tin  fint  aHnlmn  of  that  town ;  and
tha  loBMt  linr  of  all  who  ware  bora  M  the  time
when  the  Mctnd  ■"•"I""'  began,  agun  detanumd
the  itBiatian  of  ths  nemd  •aacnluiu,  and  m  on.
(Canaoriii.  A  Dit  Nat.  17.)  In  the  auna  manner
that  tha  Etnuoui*  thna  called  the  longeet  life  of  ■
man  a  wtciiltini,  an  (hey  called  the  longeM  axiit-
aam  <d  a  atate,  or  the  apace  of  1100  yean,  a  «ae-
ealai  day ;  the  kngert  eiiMeiice  of  one  human
race,  oi  the  apace  of  6B00  jean,  a  Hecnlai  week,
Ac  (PlnL  ^lla,  1 ;  Niehohi,  Hiit.  o^  Ruiu,  i.
p.  137.)  It  wu  b«lieT*d  that  the  retorn  of  a  new
aasculnn  waa  Duubd  hj  tuuku  wonden  and
a^na,  which  wen  ncoided  ia  tha  hiitoiy  of  the
Stnuiau. Thentomof  each  " -'


UMmeedlnthe  pontiA,  w
7  inteMJaliona  in  moh  i


u  which


a  new  weralam  the  begio-
ning  of  the  tan  mimtlu'  yeai,  of  the  twelve  montht'
yiar,  and  of  the  tolar  yoi  coincided.  But  in
tbeae  azrangenienti  Che  greateit  arbiUarinev  and
imgnlaritj  ajniean  to  hare  pnvuled  at  Rome,
may  be  hbi  bmn  the  uneqiial  ioteirali
Ibe  Indi  Meealun  wen  udebratad.  [Ld
CULAHO.}  Thii  alas  acaumti  for  the  vansni
w^i  in  which  a  neenlum  vu  defined  hy  the  an-
denli :  maa  beliored  that  it  cmCained  thir^
(Cenaohn.  L  a),  and  other*  that  it  contained  a
himdnd  yean  (Vairo,  dt  Lag.  ZoL  Ti.  11 ;  Feat.
t.  B.  Saacalartt  ladi)  )  the  latter  opinion  nppean


that  a


eatoiy. (See


r,  HM.  ofOomt,  L  p.  S76,  &c)  [U  &]
SAOA'Bll,  the  aellen  oi  maken  of  the  a^a
01  aoldien'  cloaki.  \%i.aoiL\  Ther  farmed  a  col-
Ugimn  at  R^M,and,  like  many  of  the  other  (rade-
caqMnlioni,  wonhippad  the  imperial  bmily,  ai
we  ne  from  inicripUens.  (Dig.  14.  tit.  i.  a.  fi.  g  15  j
J  7.  til.  2.  a.  £2.  S  4  i  and  tbe  inscription  in  A.  W.
Zmnpt,  D*  Aigtmaiilmt,  Bend.  1846,  p.  17.)

SAOITTA  (itorij,  U.  J  HemL  T««v(ca),  an
amw.  The  account  of  the  arrawa  of  Hercolee
(Heaiod,  SeA  ISO—ISS),  enmnemUa  and  de-
Bcribea  three  parta,  ria.  the  head  or  point,  the
abaft,  and  the  fsther.

L  The  head  wu  denominated  iflis  (Herod.  L
215,  IT.  81),  whaice  the  initnunent,  nied  to  ex.
tract  amw-beada  from  tbe  bodiei  of  the  woonded,
WBi  e^Ied  tfiiotifa.  [FoBCiPS.]  Qnat  quan-
tiliea  of  flint  anaw  head*  are  foo^  in  Celtic  bar-
lowa  thnwghaut  the  north  of  Europe,  in  form  ei-
aellr  reaembling  thoie  which  are  itill  oied  by  the
Indlau  of  Nonh  America.  (Hoan'i  Jnf.  Wiil-
iUrt,Soaa,f.l83.)  Neyerthdew,  the  Scythian*
and  Minigetae  had  them  of  bronie.  (Herod.  U.  ee.)
Jli.  Dodwell  Ibnnd  flint  amw-heads  on  the  plain
of  Maiathon,  and  conclude*  that  they  had  be.
longed  to  the  Patian  army.  (Thar  linxgi  Cnac*,
nL  iL  p.  1£9.)  Those  nied  by  the  Oieeki  were
wiwiwiV  tonxe^  ai  ii  tipteiMd  by  the  epithet


SAOITTA.  1001

XaAif^p^i,  "fitted  with  bronje,"  which  Homer
appUe.  to  an  anow,  (TliiiL  6S0,  662.)  Another
Uomeric  epithet,  via. "  three-tongued  "  (rpiyXix",
IL  V.  393),  ia  illnitiated  by  the  brma  of  the  atiow-


•>l  which


tha  abaft,  bis  from  the  pUin  of  Marathon.  (Skellon,
lUiuL  of  Armoar  at  (hodrich  Qmrt,  i.  pi.  44.)
The  fourth  specunen  woi  alaa  found  in  Attica.
(Dodwell,  L  c)  Soma  of  the  northern  nationi,
who  could  not  obtain  iron,  barbed  their  anott-
head*  with  bone. (TaciL  Osm,  46.)

Tbe  a*e  of  barbed  {adiacat,  ioinoiae),  and  pai-
Koed  anew*  (mmkoJim  togiOae)  a  elway*  repre-
sented by  tbe  Greek  and  Roman  authoii  as  the
chaiacteristic  of  barbareus  natioa*.  It  is  nttri-
bnted  to  the  Sauromatae  and  Qetae  (Oiid.  TViM.
iii.  10.  £3,  64,  dt  Ponlo,  ir.  7.  11,  12)  ;  to  the
Serrii  (Amoldi,  Omm.  Slat.  (.  g  8)  and  Snthiana
(Plin.  H.  AT.  I.  53.  s.  ItS),  and  to  the  Araba
(Pollux,  L  10)  and  Moon.  (Uor.OinR.  L  22.  S.)
When  Uljise*  wishes  to  hare  recouiae  to  this  in.
■idioo*  practice,  he  is  obliged  to  tiaiel  north  of  the
conntry  of  the  Thesjaotians  (Hom.  Od.  i.  261—
2G3)  i  and  the  clmiml  aathon  who  mmtion  it
do  so  in  terms  of  condenuiatioo.  (Hom.  Plin.
U-eai  Aehaa,  H.  A.  t.  16.)  The  poiion  applied
to  the  tips  of  arrows  having  been  called  Imncimi
(.fH->"\  W"  account  of  its  connectioD  with  the
nsaDfthebow(Pliii.tf.MiTi.  10. 1.20;  Festns,
I.V.;  Dioacor.  Ti.20),lhe  significatianof  this  term
waa  afterwaida  eitoided  to  poisons  in  geneinL
(Plant  Mtte.  ii  4.  4  ;  Hor.  ^lorf.  rrii.  61  ;
Proper!  i.  5.  6.)

II.  The  excellenca  of  the  ihaA  coniisted  in
bemg  long  and  at  the  lame  time  ittsisht,  and,  if
it  WBI  of  light  wood,  in  being  well  polidied.  (Hea.
Seat.  133.)  But  it  often  conaisted  of  a  uoooth
cane  or  reed  (^Ar^mdo  dova  or  p&rtj^ait^i^  Linn.),
and  on  this  account  the  vhale  arrow  wa*  called
either  animU  in  the  one  CMe  (Virg.  Aea.  i>.  69—
73,  T.  52S  1  Grid.  Met.  L  471,  -riii.  382),  or
enZomu  in  the  other.  (Viig.  fine  iii.  12, 13 ;  Orid.
Mel.  TiL  778  ;  Hor.  Oarm.  i.  15,  17  ;  Jnv.  liii
80.)  In  the  Egyptian  tomb*  reed-afrowi  hare  bean
found,  varying  from  34  to  22  inches  in  length.
They  shoir  the  tlit  (7Ai>f ft,  Horn.  It.  iv.  122,
O/LxiL  419)  cat  in  ^e  reedfiir  fixing  it  npon
the  string.  (Wilkinson,  Afas.  amd  Ciat.  ito.  ti^  i.
pSO«.)


1002  sAauM.

III.  The  feathen  are  thoirn
roenta  of  ill  kindt,  uid  are  indicated  b;  the  tenni

oittH  (Piudentini,  Hamart.  49S),  ind  rrtpJtmT
ild-raf.  (Horn.  n.T.  171.)  The  urowi  of  Henjn-
lu  UB  (Bid  to  tare  beeu  feathend  from  the  wings
ofa  black  eagle. (Hei.2.c.)

Beiidet  tbs  use  of  amwi  in  the  ordinaij  vay,
the;  were  tometiiiKB  emplajed  to  earn  £re.  Jnliui
Caeaar  attempted  to  Mt  Ajitony'i  ihijii  on  Gee  h;
■endinft  ^<Ai)  rvp^pa  trom  tbe  bowa  of  hit  irchert.
(Dion  Com.  1.  34.)  A  hiad-dreu  of  unnll  airowi  ii
•aid  to  have  been  worn  bj  the  Indian!  (Prudential,
I  c),  the  Nnbiani  and  Egyptian!,  and  other  Oriea-
tal  nationi.  (Claudian,  'de  Nuj*.  Honor.  22-2,  da
3  OflH.  Homor.  21,  d»  Load.  Slil.  i.  251.)

la  the  Greek  and  Ronuui  aimiei  the  i^illarii,
raore  ancienlljr  called  ar^aiia,  i.  ».  archen,  or
bowmen  (PcMui,  i.  c),  formed  an  important  part
of  the  light-armed  infiuiCrj.  (Caesir,  BeH,  On.  i.
81,  ill  44  ;  Cicadl^im.ij.i.)  Thej  belong
for  the  moit  part,  to  the  atliea,  and  were  prmci-
pall;  Cretana.  [Arcub  ;  CoBVTUa  ;  FUAHtriu  ;
%^,.,^Tv«.-\  [J.Y.]

SA'GMINA  were  the  aame  aa  the  Tarf™,
namely,  hcrba  torn  ap  by  their  roota  from  within
the  indoaure  of  the  Capitol,  which  were  alwaya
earned  b;  the  Fetialea  or  Brabaaaadan,  when  Ihej'
went  to  a  foreign  people  t4  demand  reatiCutioa  for
vronga  committed  againat  the  Romana,  or  to  make
a  treaty.  [FaTiALBa,]  Tbey  aerred  to  marii  the
aacred  character  of  the  ambaaaadon,  and  aniwered
the  aame  purpote  ai  the  Qreek  xiipiKtia.  (Plin.
H.N.  xdi.  2.  t.  3  ;  LiT.  i.  U,  xxl.  43  ;  Dig.  1.
tit.  S.  a.  S.)  Pliny  (J.  c.)  alio  aaya  that  tagmima
were  lued  in  reaiediit  pWttiat,  by  which  we  moat
nnderttand  erpiationi  and  Inatrationa.  The  word
Verbfna  aeema  to  hare  been  applied  to  any  kind  of
herb,  or  to  the  bimgha  and  learea  of  any  kind  of
tree,  gathered  from  a  pore  or  tacred  place.  (SoTT.
ad  Viri;.  Aa.  iM.  120.)

According  to  Feataa  (a.v.),  the  verAejtoa  were
called  mgmaia,  that  ii,  pure  heriM,  became  they
were  taitea  by  the  cooaul  or  the  pcaetor  bam  a
aacrcd  {aoncto)  place,  to  giTe  to  legali  when  aetting
out  to  make  a  treaty  or  declare  war.  He  connecta
it  with  the  wordi  tancliu  and  wnnra,  and  it  it  not
at  all  impouible  that  it  naycontain  the  nmeroot,
which  appeara  in  a  aim^er  form  in  Kie.iir  (tag-mat,
n(?i}c-(M):  MarciaD  (Dijt.  J. c)  howeTar  make!  a
ridiculoiu  mistake,  whan  he  detiTea  lanctua  tcaai
eagmina.

MUllpr  {ad  Ftthm,  p.  330)  thinka,  that  tamat-
boH  ia  the  aame  word  bb  aETjrmei,  atthoogh  aied  re-
apocting  another  thing  by  the  Anagnienaea.  (M.
Aarelins,  ui  Ejail.  ad  ProKloB.  it.  4.)

SAO  UM  was  the  cloak  wom  by  the  Roman  lol-
dien  and  inferior  ofiicen,  in  coatradislinclion  la  the
PaJudamentum  of  the  ;renera1  and


[Pii


,]  iti«


to  (he


toga  or  garb  of  peace,  and  we  accordingly  End  that
when  there  waa  a  nor  in  Italy,  all  citiieni  pat  on
the  iagum  Bven  in  the  city,  with  the  eiceptjon  of
thnae  of  conmlar  rank  (jnga  Rmera,  ad  lya  in,
in  tagit  «Ma,  Cic.  PkiL  Ttii.  11,  t.  12,  xW.  I)  :
hence  in  the  Social  or  Manic  war  the  ngum  was
worn  for  two  yeari  (Lii.  EpiL  72,  73  :  VelL
Pat.  iL  IB.)

The  aagsm  waa  open  in  tbe  &ont,  and  nnudly
fastened  acraaa  the  ahonldera  by  a  ctaap,  thougli
not  alwaya  (Trebell.  Poll.  TV*?,  TJmw*  10>:  it


resembled  ii

cnta,  p.  B34),  as  we  aae  from  the  ^wcimena  of  xx
on  the  oolumn  of  Trajan  and  othH*  andent  moDD-
meata. It  wia  thick  and  made  of  wool  (Mart.

the' wool 'ilselt  (Vairo,  £.  L.  t.  1 67,  ad.  MtUier.)
The  clnk  worn  by  the  general  and  anpcrier  efficei*
la  lometimet  called  sagum  {Ptiacmm  tagmm,  HiK.
Ep.  ix.  28),  but  the  diminutive  Sagmbm  ii  nan
commonly  cied  in  aucb  ouea. (Compare  SiL  llaL


,  SI 9, J


18  ;  LiT.


The  ckak  worn  by  the  northeni  natieaa  of
Enrope  ia  alao  called  tagum ;  see  woodent,  p.  213,
where  three  Sarmatiana  are  repreacnted  w4th  aa^a,
and  compan  Palliuu.  p.  853.  The  GennaB
lagina  ia  mentioned  by  Tacitna  (Germ  17):  thai
worn  by  the  Oanls  aeemi  to  ban  baoi  a  a^ieeiea  of
plaid  {vmiooior  lagulmn,  Tac  Hid.  iL  30).

The  outer  garment  won  by  alares  and  poor
persons  is  alao  aometimea  called  aagnm.  (ColmBcU.
1,  S  ;  compare  Dig.  34.  tiL  3.  s.  23.  g  2.)

SALAMI'NIA. {PuALU«.]

SALA'KIUM,  a  salary.  The  udcntB  dcriiv
the  word  from  aof,  i.  a.  salt  (Plin.  /f.  N.  ixii.  41);
the  moat  necessary  thing  to  sapport  homan  lib
bemg  thua  mentioned  aa  a  TejreaeDtatiTe  tcr  all
othaa.  Salarium  therefore  compriaed  all  the  |«o-
Yisiona  with  which  the  RooBn  offiooi  wse  aa^
plied,  aa  well  aa  tbeii  pay  in  money.  In  tlie  tina
of  the  tvpablic  the  name  aahrinm  does  not  apptai
to  have  been  oaed  ;  it  was  Anguitai  who  in  onlat
to  pkce  the  goTemois  of  prorinna  and  otba  siili-
lary  officen  in  a  grtaur  state  of  depeodeiwe,  nn
aalariea  to  tbem  or  eertmn  iBms  t£  nuBey,  to  which
afterwards  ranous  luppliea  in  kind  wca«  sdde>d.
(Suet.  A<y.  36  1  Tacit  Agrie.  43 ;  Ticb.  PolL
OoBd.  UandlSr  FlaT.Vo!»acf^iii.4.>  Be&a*
if  Angnatu!,  the  pronncial  mafiaoate*
had  been  provided  in  their  proTinoaa  with  evvty-
thing  they  wanted,  throogh  the  medinm  of  Kdeabp-
torea  (rctpoxoi),  who  undertook,  lor  a  certain  sua
paid  by  the  atate,  to  pniTide  the  goienioi*  witb  all
that  was  niceiaaiy  to  them.  During  the  empire
we  find  inatancea  of  the  sakrinm  bring  paid  to  a
peraon  who  had  obtained  a  pforince,  bitt  araa  nt.
Tertheleas  not  allowed  to  govern  it.  In  this  (kbc
the  niaritim  waa  a  eompansalion  liir  tba  benoair
and  advanta^  which  he  migbt  ban  darirad  hm
tbe  actual  goTenunent  of  a  pronDce,  wbeooe  we
scaredy  iiiFet  that  the  soin  of  10,000  seattma,
cfa  was  offered  on  such  an  occasiea  (Dion  Caaa.
IxxriiL  22),  was  the  regain  salarinni  Icr  a  pro-


T.  6  J  Jut.


132),t


[Aw


Ntro,  lOX  to  the  eomitea  of  tliB
piinceps  on  hie  expeditions  (SueL  IK.  46),  and
othen.  AntcminuB  Pins  find  tbe  aalariM  gf  all
the  rhetoricians  and  pbiloaophen  thniqtbam  IIm
ernpire  (Capitol,  .4 n^  Piat,  II),  and  wbenp«Ki(iB
did  not  ^llil  their  duties,  b*  panisbed  tbea  b;
dedaeting  fiom  thor  aalahea.  (C^iit^  4i^  7.)
Aleiander  Sararaa  institntad  fixed  — ""j-r  far
rhetoiiciana,  grammaiiana,  pbjiieiaBa,  hBiiiMJiai.
matbematieians,  mnehaniciana  and  aiduucta  (Lhb-
prid.  Aim.  Sn.  44)  t  bnt  to  bow  rnndi  tbaa  aaU-
riea  amounted  we  are  not  mfonBed.  Resfiectisf
tbe  pay  which  certain  classei  of  prirata  neeind,
aee  SAcnnoc  [L.  &]

SALieriTJiS. [F<»n,p.544,b.]


SALII.

SA'LII  mn  pdast*  of  Man  Oradivni,  uid  an
■dd  to  have  been  ioHilaMd  by  Kama.  Thpy
wen  twelTC  in  ntUDber,  ehoMn  fhun  the  pstiiciuu
mn  in  the  lalat  time*,  and  fbnncd  so  ceclaiai-
ticm]  corpontioii.  (Liv.i.  2D;  Dimiji.  ii.70j  Cic
Ji^.  iL  14  ;  bda  jaomlMM  patrida.  Loan,  ir.
17&)  They  had  thit  on  of  Iba  tvelve  Ancilia,
which  w«re  kept  in  the  templa  of  Han  an  the
Palatine  hill,  whence  thoaa  priMta  wen  •omeliinei
called  Salii  Palatini  to  diatingniih  them  ftam  the
other  Satii  mntkned  balow.  The  dbciuguahing
dmi  of  the  Salii  wai  an  embraidend  tunic  bwuid
with  a  biaien  belt,  the  trabea,  and  the  Apei,  alio
woni  bj  the  lamina.  [Afii.)  Eacli  bad  a
Bword  bj  hi*  rids,  and  in  hii  right  hind  a  tpear
or  itaiE (Dinji.  L  «.)

The  featiTal  of  Man  wM  eelefaialed  hj  the
Salii  on  Ihelitof  Hanh  and  ibr  wrenl  cucceiiiTe
daji ;  on  which  Mcatioa  the;  was  accoitomed  la
go  thnoffh  the  city  in  their  official  dna  carrying
the  aneilia  In  their  left  bandi  or  nupended  finm
thrtr  •honldov,  and  at  the  nme  time  lingjng  and
daiKing.  In  the  danee  they  itnick  the  imelda
with  Todi  M  ai  to  keep  tbns  with  thejr  foicei  and
with  the  moTeraenti  of  the  dance.  (Lii.  I.e.;
Dionyi.  L  e. ;  Hor.  Carm.  L  36.  1,  it.  I.  28).
Freoi  their  dandng  Orid,  apparently  with  cor-
rectneaa,  dcriTn  their  nuie  (FoiL  iiL  387).  The
aonfn  or  hymna,  which  they  aaog  on  tbie  occauon
(Saliaria  soniuiu,  Hor.  Ep.  ii.  I.  SG  ;  Tae.  ^la.
ii  S3},  were  called  Atanumta,  Aaamtala,  at
Amimala,  of  which  the  etyroolDgy  ii  nncertain.
GOttling  {GtKk.  der  Rom.  Slaatn.  p.  192}  thinki
they  were  »  called  ' ■■■ '■'■


SALINAK


1003


It  any  ni


ii  etymcJogy  ii  oppoaed  to  the  eipreai  itntoment
of  Dionyaiua  (iiL  33).  Some  idts  of  the  itibjeet
dT  theae  BCigi  may  be  obUined  from  n  paavge  in
Viigtl  {Am.  viit.  286),  and  a  imall  tnigmeni  of
them  ii  preaerred  by  Varro  <_L.  L.  rii.  26,  rd.
HlUler).  In  later  timea  they  were  acarccly  im-
dcntood  eren  by  the  prieali  themielvea.  (Varro,
£.  £.  tU.  2  i  Hiv.  j^  ii.  1.  86 ;  QaintiL  I  6.
p,  54,  Biponl.)  The  ptaiiet  of  Hamnriua  VeCnriai
feiraed  the  priDcipal  aabieet  ef  theae  •ongi.  though
who  Mamurina  Vetoriiu  waa.  the  ancMOtt  them-
telTea  were  not  Bgteed  spOD.  (VaiTD,  £.  L.  n.  43.)
He  ii  genenlly  Bid  to  be  dn  armoareT,  who  made
denn  ancilia  like  the  one  that  wai  lent  from
beaTen  in  the  reign  of  Nima.  (Fettiu,f.  e.  Mani.
Vh.:  Dionyi.  ii.  71  ;  Grid,  Fiat,  iii  384),  hot
■oma  modem  wriCen  aappoae  it  to  be  merely
another  name  of  Mara,  Beaidei,  boweTcr,  the
praiaea  of  Mamnriui,  the  Tsnea,  which  the  Salii
aang.  appear  to  hare  contained  a  kind  of  theogony,
in  whKb  the  imiiei  of  all  the  celestial  deitie*
wen  celebiated,  with  the  exception  of  Veniu.
(Hicnb.  Sol  L  13.)  The  TerK>  in  honoor  of
each  god  were  called  by  (he  reepectire  name*  of
each,  al  Janoli,  Jononii,  HinerriL  (Fatni,  i.  e.
^auwiafti.) Dirine  bononr  wai  paid  to  >ome  of


of  the' Silii.  Thii  honoor  wai  Unt  beitowed
u  (Monnm.  Ancyr.),  and  afterword!
licm  (Tac.  Am.  iL  S3)  ;  and  when
la  died,  hii  name  waa  inierted  in  the  lon^  of
the  Satii  by  eomiaaad  of  M.  AntHunui.  (Capitol.
M.  Ant  PUl.  21.)

At  the  concluion  of  the  fealiTal  the  Salii  were
accaatnned  to  partake  of  a  iplendid  entertainment
is  the  Maple  of  Man,  which  «■•  proTerhia]  bit


iti  excellence.  (Snet  Ctaad.  33  ;  Cic  a<I  AO.  r.
9  ;  Hor.  Carm.  i.  37.)  The  memben  of  the  tul-
l^fimn  were  elected  by  eo-optatioa.  We  read  of
the  dignitiei  of  praeial,  Tiitei,  and  magiitcr  in  the
colUginm. (CnpitoL  Ibid.  4.)

The  ihape  of  Iha  aneils  ii  exhibited  in  the  an-
nexed cat,  taken  from  anaDcionlgeminthaFloten-
tiae  cabmet,  which  illiutratei  the  accounta  of  the
ancient  writen  that  iti  (brm  wai  onl,  but  with
the  two  iidei  receding  inwardi  with  an  eren  euir-
atnie,  and  ao  ai  to  make  it  broader  al  the  ends
than  in  the  middle.  The  penocu  engaged  in  ai-
lying  these  ancilia  on  their  ihouldcn,  supended
from  a  pole,  are  probably  leiTaiiti  of  the  Salii  ;
and  the  tepreaenlatian  agree)  exactly  with  tho
statement  of  Dionysini  (ii.  70)  w4XTat  iwnpiriu
ilirrvfiiina  lari  *ar6riir  ira/Jfoiwi.  At  the  lop  of
the  cnt  is  represented  one  of  the  rod*  with  which
the  Salii  were  annatonied  to  beat  the  shield  in
their  danca,  as  almdy  described.  (Qniter,  Iiucr.
p.  occclxir.  Dole  3.)


TuIIdi  HosUlini  established  another  rollegioni
of  Salii  in  fnllilnient  of  a  tow  which  he  nade  in  a
war  with  the  Salnnei.  These  Salii  were  also
twelve  in  nmnber,  chosen  from  the  patricians,  and
appeared  to  hare  been  dedicated  to  the  lerrice  of
(juirinu.  They  were  called  the  Salii  Collinl,
Agonalei  or  Agoneniea.  (Liir.  i.  27  ;  Dionyi.  ii.
70,  iiL  83  ;  Vano,  L.L,  tL  14.)  Niebnhr  (Hitt.
o^Rome,  toI.  iii.  p.  351)  lUppoKi,  that  the  oldest
and  most  illnttriout  college,  the  Palatine  Salii,
were  chosen  originally  from  the  oldest  tribe,  Iha
Ilamnea,  and  the  ime  iaititaled  by  Tulloi  Hoitiliui
or  the  Quirinalian  from  the  Tiliea  alone:  a  third
college  for  the  Laccrea  was  neier  established.
(Compaie  Hartong^  Dia  Rdigitinltr  Rama;T6L  iL
p.  IBS.}

SALI'NAE  (4a*1,  Ixei+yio.).  a  nil-work.
(Vano,  rfa  £.  Kol.  TiiL  25,  ed.  SpengeL)  Al-
thongh  the  ancicola  were  well  acquainted  with
mck-sall  (Herod,  ir.  181— 186  i  bir  JpincraC,
i.  e.  "  foiiil  salt,"  Arrian,  iSnped.  AU^.  iiL  4,  pp.


30)  and  from  aatoial  ipringi  («  brins-piti  (Cic
Nat.  Dm.  iL  £3 ;  Plin.  H.  N.  ixii.  7.  i.  39—
43),  and  foimd  no  small  quantity  on  certain  ihorei
where  it  was  congealed  by  the  heat  of  the  son
without  human  labour  (AXei  airriiurroi,  Herod.  It.
53  ;  Plin.  I  c),  jet  they  obtained  by  bi  the
greatesl  qnanlily  by  the  management  of  wtski
cnnatnicted  on  the  sea.shore,  where  it  was  natu-
rally adapted  ht  the  pnrpsae  by  being  le  law  tiA


'  O"


B  itningly  impTBgnated


1004  SALINUM.

flat  M  to  be  eaailj  overflowed  by  the  lea  (mon-
timae  areae  miitianim.  Col.  de  Re  Rial.  ii.  2),  or
even  to  be  ■  biackiih  manh  (oXuiilt)  or  s  marine
poo]  (AiMnB^vTTii,  Strabo,  it.  1.3  6,  Tii.  4.  g  7;
Cbobt,  Se2f.  CiV.  iL  S7).  In  order  to  ud  the
nHtoral  ev^istion,  ihallow  TcctangnlAr  pondi
(miUifidi  laau}  vere  dog,  divided  froin  me  ui-
olher  by  esithen  walU.  Thu  leE-watft  irai  »d-
mitted  uuongh  ouwlf,  which  were  oHiicd  br  tbe
puipue,  and  cloied  again  by  ili
The  wtler  wa«  nioreand
with  tait  u  it  flowed
(Rulilii,

brine  (noodo  imnoni),  it  wbi  called  by  the  Oreeki
b/(%  by  the  Latini  tdiugo  or  xd^ago,  and  by
the  Spaniardt  wnn'o.  (Plia.  J.  n.)  In  this  Mate  it
wai  Died  by  the  Egyptian)  to  pickle  fiih  (Herod,
ii.  77),  and  by  the  Romani  to  prenrre  oliTea,
che«M,  and  fleah  likewiH.  (Calo,  da  Re  Eatt.
7,  88,  105  i  Hw.  Sai.  iL  8,  68.)  From  niuria,
which  aecnu  to  be  a  corruption  of  iVi/jilj,
^  briny.^'  the  yictnali  cured  in  it  were  called  ao^
Bmrialua.  (Piaut  Foem.  L  2.  82,  39.)  Aj  the
bzine  which  vaa  lef\  in  the  ponda  cryatallized,  a
man  entnuted  with  the  care  of  them,  and  there-
fore called  foUnfor  (iAinnryki),  lakcd  oat  the  ntll
■o  that  it  lay  in  beapa  (tmnii/t)  upon  the  ground  to
drain.  (Muiiliiu,  V.  props  jii.;  NUxaixr,  AUx.
S]8,  £19.)  In  Attics  (Steph.  Byi.),  in  Britain
fPto].},  and  eliewhrre,  seveml  placet,  in  conie-
quence  of  l)ie  v^rkt  eatahliahed  in  them,  obtained


nlt-work)  an  nid  to  haTS  been  eitabliahed  by
Ancui  Mareiiu  at  Onia.  (Lit.  t  33  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
xni.  41.)  The  publicani  who  fanned  thcM  woiki
appear  to  hate  lold  the  lolt,  one  of  the  moit  ncees-
■aiy  of  all  commodi^eo,  at  a  verr  high  price,
whence  (he  cenion  M.  Liriiu  and  C.  Claodina
(b.  c.  204)  filed  the  price  at  which  Ihcw  who  took
the  leaie  of  them  were  obligsd  to  aell  the  hIi  to
the  pei^le.  At  Rome  the  niodiui  waa  according  lo
thia  iT^lation  kM  for  a  leitani,  wbQa  in  othor
parti  of  Italy  the  price  wai  higher  uid  nuied.
(Lit.  uii.  37.) The  lalt-worki  in  Italy  and  in

couDbriei  however  they  watv  Mmetimet  left  in  the

who  bad  to  pay  to  Rome  only  a  £ied  rent,  bat
moiC  of  them  wen  brmed  by  the  publicanL  (Buc-
iminu,  VeOigaL  Pop.  Ron.  p.  90.  &c)  [J.  Y.]
SALi'NUM,  dim.  SALILLUH,  a  slUxllai.
Among  tlie  poor  a  ihell  lerved  fiic  a  1811-4x1181
(Ilor.  %(.  I  S.  14;  Schol.  odbc):  but  all  who  were
raited  above  poverty  had  one  of  ailvar,  which  de-
■cended  from  bther  (o  ion  (Hor.  CoriR-iL  16.  13,
1 4),  and  wat  accompanied  by  a  tilver  plate,  which
wai  Died  together  with  tbe  lalt-celUr  in  the  do-
neitic  iBcriScei.  (Pen.  iiL  24,  25.)  [PiTlai.]
Theie  two  article*  of  titrer  were  alone  compatible
with  tbe  limplicily  of  fioman  manneri  in  the  earij
timet  of  the  lepuUtc  (Plin.  A^^  A',  xzriii  12.  (
Bi  1  VbL  Hai.  i<.  4.  g  3  1  Calull.  xuiL  19.)  Thi
talt-eellar  wai  no  doubt  placed  in  the  middle  of  tbe
table,  to  which  it  communicated  a  lacred  character,
the  meal  partaking  of  the  nature  of  a  ocrif
[FoatiB ;  MiNIA.]  ThCH  ciRnmitanoa,
gather  with  the  nligiooi  revenmce  paid  lo  .
and  Iha  halutiial  compariaou  of  U  to  wit  and


SALTATia
vaoity,  explain  Ibe  metaphor  by  which  Iha  ml  of
a  man  ii  called  hii  taiiUum, (Piaat.  TVn.  ii.  4.
90,  91.)  [J.  T.]

SALTA'TIO  iifxva,  ipxvrrbs),  ducng
The  dancing  of  the  l^«eki  ai  well  aa  of  tlie  Bo-
mani  bad  very  little  in  common  witli  tbe  exercua
which  gofli  by  that  name  in  modem  timea.  Ttmay
bo  divided  into  two  kinda,  j^mniitiG  and  mimetic  ;
that  ii,  it  waa  intended  eillier  to  iqiraent  bodiJ*
activity,  or  to  eiprea  by  geatum,  moremeoli  and
attitndei  CBtain  idnu  or  feelingi,  and  aba  aingU

All  thew  m

by  mnaic  i  hut  tl

were  tued  in  lo  much  wider  a

word  dancing,  that  they  were  applied  ti

gcaturei,  even  when  the  body  dA  not  move  lA  alL

(Ovid.  ^rt.  .dot.  1595,  iLSOS;  nttan taluae^it,

ApuL  Afet.  X.  p.  2S1, ed. Bip. ; camp.  Onitc,

Hill.  o/Grtea,  vol.  iv.  p.  114.)

We  £ud  dancing  previJent  ammg  the  Gtceki
from  the  earlieit  times.  It  ia  Ireqaen&y  mntiooed
in  the  Homeric  poami:  tfa«  witoti  of  Pcnelapa  de-
light Ihenuelvei  with  rnmic  and  dandng  (CU.  L
152,421,  iviiL304)i  and  XIlyHea  ii  enterUsed
at  the  court  ofAlcinoui  with  tbeezhibiticHuafviiy
ikilful  dancon,  the  rapid  movemenli  of  wheoe  feet
eicite  hii  admintion.  (M.  viiL  265.)  Skilful
dancen  were  at  all  times  highly  praad  by  the
Oicelu :  we  read  of  wnne  who  were  \nm  iilnl  with
Kolden  crowni,  and  bad  itatuei  ersctad  to  iheii
honour,  and  their  memory  celehiated  I^  inicrip-
tioui.  (Ptut.  de  PfA.  Oraa  S  ;  Aathd.  Flu.  iv.
n.  283,  &c}

The  lively  imaginitioa  and  mimetic  powtti  of
the  Oreeki  found  abundant  lubjecti  fu  laiioiB
kindi  of  dances,  and  accordingly  the  ikiDKS  of  do
leu  than  200  diScrent  dnnm  have  come  doVB  Is
ni.  (MeuniuiiOrciatr.j  Athen.  lir.  pp.  627 — 630;
PoUiuciv.  95—lU  :  Liban.«>tp  tw  ipx.)  It
would  be  inconiiitent  with  the  nature  of  this  wak
to  give  a  deacriplioo  af  all  that  an  knowa :  only
the  matt  imp«ianC  can  he  mectiooed,  and  nch  at
will  give  flome  idea  of  the  danring  of  tha  anoen^

Dimcing  wai  originally  doielj  eoimecteJ  with
religion:  Plato  (irfp.  vii  pf.  J98,  799)  thought
that  all  dancing  ihould  ba  band  on  nU^on,  aa  it
wai,  he  nyi,  among  the  Egypthuu.  The  ducaa  of
the  Chorui  at  Sparta  and  in  other  Dccic  ualoa
vera  intimately  connected  with  the  wunhip  of
Apollo,  a>  hoi  been  ihown  at  length  elmdMn
IChobub  i  HvK»CHaHa]  ;  and  in  all  the  puUic
leativali,  whicb  were  is  nnmenmi  anmii  tha
Qreeki,  dancing  fonnad  a  very  pnaainnit  om.
All  the  religioui  daneei,  with  the  eiceptioD  of  the
Bacchic  and  the  GoryboDtisn,  were  very  limple,
and  coniisted  of  emtle  nvvemcnti  of  the  bodv
with  varioni  tumuigi  and  windingi  amutd  tha
altar :  such  a  dance  wai  tbe  yipam,  which  Tb*-
leiu  ii  laid  to  have  performed  at  Drhn  on  hii
retum  bom  Crete.  (Plut.  Tka.  21.)  Tbe  Diony-
■iac  or  Bacchic  and  the  CoiybantiaB  were  of  a
very  different  nalim.  In  the  former  the  life  and
adventam  of  the  god -were  npRooited  by  mimane
dancing  [Uiohvhia]:  the  diDca  oUad  Baaxuci
by  Lucian  (da  Salt.  79),  waa  a  Satyiic  doac*  and
chiefly  prevailed  in  Ionia  and  Pootai ;  tha  moat
iUuil  ■  ■ ■  ....


inting  Tilaai,CDryhai


'  evarytfaing


3ALTATI0.
I  daj  to  witnen  it,  fngetful

The  CoirbKniiao  wm  of  a  Tcry  >
:;  it  ni  cIiieBy  duKcd  in  Pbiygia  uid  ii:
I  ;  tbc  duuen  were  umed,  itnick  tJieil
cldi,  uid  diip^yed  thf
'XlnT^KDi  iury  ;  il  wbb  Bcnnipamed  chieflj
•  Sute. (Luciu,  Ji.  8  {  Stnb.  z.  p.  i73


■vordi  ■ffaint  their


put  Cnt  p.  54.)  The  preceding  woodcut  from
tb*  HuK«  Pio  Clemenlino  (vol.  iv.  pL  2}  ia  np-
poMd  to  repreienl  a  Corybuitiin  diDce.  Kaapecl-
mg  ttas  dmncH  in  the  theatre,  tee  Cbokub.

Dancing  wia  applied  to  ([yDinaitic  purpout  and
to  training  for  war,  eipeciallir  in  the  Duk  alalei,
and  waa  belieied  to  hare  conlribnted  rerj  much
Id  the  •iKccaa  oF  the  Dorian*  in  war,  at  it  tnabled
them  to  perfbrm  their  eTolatiena  ■imullancouilj
and  in  order.  Hence  the  poet  Socratei  (Alhen.
sir.  p.  fi3S.  I)  myt.


:k<U^X><


m  Sf o&t  Tifiiair,  ifirm


I  Tarioiu  dancei  in  earlj  tint*,  which
pre]snilion  for  war :  hence  Homer
(/(.  xL  49,  lil  77)  lalli  the  HoplilM  ipuAJ.i,  a
war-dance  having  been  called  -irpiiMt  by  the  Cre-
tans (Mailer,  Dor.  iii.  12.  i  10.)  Of  tuch  daneei
the  mo«t  celebrated  wai  the  P]-rrhic  (4  nuffiixt).
of  which  the  ip6\it  wju  probably  only  another
name:  thia  Piato  (Ze^.  lii.  p.  81&)  take*  ni  the
tvprnentaliTe  of  all  war  dancei.  The  inTenlion  of
thia  dance  ia  placed  in  the  mythical  age.  and  ia
naually  aiaigned  to  one  Pyrrhicoi,  bat  moit  of  the
accounta  agree  in  aiaigning  it  a  Cretan  or  Spnrlan
origin  ;  ihauth  athen  refrr  it  to  Pyrrhui  or  Nco-
ptolemiia,  the  aon  of  Achillea,  apparently  milled  by
the  name,  for  it  wna  undonbtedly  of  Doric  origin.
(Athen.  xn.  p.  630,  e  ;  Slrab.  i.  p.  *66  ;  Plat.
Ltp.  p.  796 ;  Lncian,  lb,  9.)  It  waa  danced  to
the  Boond  of  the  flole,  and  it*  time  wsa  very  quich
and  light,  aa  ia  ihown  by  the  name  of  the  Pyrrhic
loot  ("v^^  which  nuit  be  connected  with  thia
dance:  and  from  the  tome  tonrce  csmc  alto  the
Proccleotmatic  (—- ')  or  challenging  foot  (MUI-
ler,  HH*.o/(*ati«7ti(.D/CreBM,p.  161.)  The
Pyrrbie  dance  waa  performed  in  dillrRnt  wayi  at

by  iw  mrana  confined  to  the  Doric  italea. Plato
(Ziy.  vii.  p.  815)  deacribea  it  at  repretenting  by


and alio the  mode


1 the e


raided.


attacked. In  the  non-Doric
bably  not  pmcliaed ai a  inuning  for  war,  1
aniy  aa  a  mimetic  dance :  ibut  we  read  of  ita  bei
danced  by  women  to  entertain  a  company. (Xi
Jaai.  Ti  I.  S  '2.) It  waa  alto  perfonned
Athen*  at  the  greater  and  leaaer  Panathcnaca  b;
Ephebi,  who  were  tailed  Pynhichiala  (ni^^ix'orol)
and  were  mined  at  the  eipente  of  the  Choragui.
(ScboL  ad  AritlcjA.  ^«6.  SBB ;  Lyiiaa,  finA.


8ALTATI0.  1005

■•fiotar.  p.  ege,  Reitke.)  In  the  moimlainooi
parte  of  Tbetaaly  and  Macedon  dance*  are  per.
fonaed  at  the  pretent  day  by  men  armed  with
mutketa  and  (ward*.  (Dodwell,  T'oiir  Unwjii
Omxie,  Tol  iL  pp,  21,  22.)

The  following  woodcut,  taken  ftom  Sir  W.
Hamitton'a  raiea  (ed.  Tiachbein,  <oL  L  pi.  60),
repreaenli  three  Pyirhidata,  ti— '  — '


i*  a  female  balancing  herielf  on  the  head  of  one,
and  apparently  in  the  act  of  perfbnning  a  tomeraet ;
ihe  no  doubt  i>  taking  pan  in  the  dance,  and  per-
forming a  Tciy  artiitic  kind  of  nailirr/irit  or
tnmbltng,  lor  the  Greek  perlcinnancei  of  thia  kind
tnrpaia  any  thing  we  can  imagine  in  modem  timea.
Her  datigs-  ia  increaaed  by  the  penon  below,  who
holdaatwoid  pointing  towaidj  her.  A  female  tpec-
tator  titting  looka  on  attonithed  at  the  axbibitun.


The  Pyrrhic  dance  wa*  introduced  in  the  puHio
gamea  at  Rome  by  Juliua  Caeaar,  when  it  waa
danced  by  the  children  of  the  leading  men  in  Asia
and  Bithynia.  (Suet.  JiiL  Caa.  39.)  It  aeemi
to  have  been  much  Uked  by  the  Romana  ;  it  wua
exhibited  both  by  Caligula  and  Nero  (Dion  Caia.
li.  7  1  SueL  Ww.  I'J),  and  alio  frequetiUy  by
Hadrian.  (Spartian.  f/adr.  19,)  Athenaeua  (lir.
p.  631,  a)  aara  that  the  Pyirhic  dance  wa*  ttill
practiaed  in  bia  time  (the  third  ccntoiy  A.  D.)  at
Sparta,  where  it  wai  danced  by  boyi  from  the  ago


Dionyaua  waa  repretented,  and  where  the  dano
inatead  of  arma  carried  the  ihyraui  and  birchea.

Another  important  gymoaalic  dance  wni  prr-
formed  at  the  feativHl  of  Tv^uforoiSfa  at  Sparta  in
commemoration  of  the  battle  at  Thyrea,  wUrre  the
chief  object  according  to  MUIler  (Z>Dr.  ir.  6.  g  B)
waa  to  repreaeut  gymnaitic  cTerciae*  and  dancing
in  intimate  union :  retpecting  the  dance  at  thia
fettival,  tee  Qimnopardia.

There  were  other  dancei,  betidea  the  Pyrrhic,  in
which  the  performera  had  arma,  but  theie  teciD  to
hare  been  entirely  mimetic,  and  not  ptsctiied  with
any  view  to  training  for  war.  Such  waa  the
Kaprala  peculiar  to  the  Aenianiant  and  Magnctei,

following  manner ;  one  lay*  down  hi*  arma,  lowa
the  ground,  and  plongha  with  a  ynke  oF  cicn,  fre-
qucQily  looking  around  ni  if  afraid  ;  then  coniei  a
robber,  whom  a*  toon  aa  Ihe  other  leei,  he  anatchea
np  hi)  arm*  and  fight*  with  hjm  fol  the  oxen. All


lOM  SALTATIO.

th«e  nuiTcnunli  are  rfaythmical.

the  Hate. At  lul  the  robber  bind)  tli


«  by  p

Xeaophon  on  tbe  nine  ociAiioa.  Theae  dancea
were  frequeullj  peifonDed  at  bsnqueti  for  the  en-
tenuanent  af  the  guetti  (Atben.  ir^  p.  1 55,  b.)-
At  bauqneti  likeviM  tLe  nutiimiT^pti  or  tiim-
Mera  were  frequently  introducKJ. Thae  tiunbkn.


TtfuptpiiHVH  Kudrtiai  xiiiXif,  Pkto,  Symp.  c.
16,  p.  190),  We  n«d  of  mittimrt^fts  u  tailj
MthelimaofHoDwr.  {11.  jrriii  605,  Od.it.  IS.)
They  were  aim  accnitDmed  to  moke  tlieit  tnineniet
over  kiuvet  or  iwoiiU,  vhicb  wai  called  JcufiitrTur
ill  iiaxa^.  (Plato,  Eutifd.  c  £5.  p.  2S4  |  Xen.
Mem.  IS.  g9,  ^i^iLU;  Atheu.  iv.  p.  l-29,d  ;
Pollux,  iii.lSl.)  Tha  way  in  which  thii  feat  wai
perfbimed  ii  deicribed  by  Xenophon,  who  layi
{Si/Hip,  iL  11)  that  a  circle  wat  tude  quite  full  of
npright  twordt,  and  that  the  dancer  •ii  roSra
iKiitiirra  t(  koI  iiiKuiinTa  iwip  atirmi ;  and  it  ia
well  illuttrated  by  the  fDllawii]g  cut  taken  fnni
the  Mtaao  Borioaifo,  toI.  fiL  Uy.  58.  (Becker,
CSoHi/M,  vol.  i.  p.  499,  vol.  ii.  p.  387.)  We  learn
from  TadtDi  {Gem.  24]  that  the  Oemian  yoathi
alu  lucd  to  dance  among  tvordt  and  ipean  pointed


Other  kiodi  of  dancMwere  freqnently  performed
at  entertainmenli,  iji  Rome  aa  well  ai  in  Greece,
by  CDUrtruuu,  many  of  which  werecf  a  very  inde-
cent and  lauivioiu  nature.  (Macrah.  Sal.  iL  10  :
Plaut.  Stid.  V.  2.  11.)  The  doncerg  teem  to  have
frequently  repreieated  Bacchaoali :  many  luch
doncen  occur  in  (he  punUnn  fonnd  at  Hercula-
neum  and  Pompeii  in  a  ranety  of  graceful  atti-
ttidea.  (See  A/hko  Botioaieo,  yA.  lu.  Ut,  34 —
40,  Tol.  ii.  lay.  1 7,  Tol.  i.  lay.  6,  C,  54.)

Among  the  dancei  performed  without  anni  orie
of  the  moat  important  wsi  the  IpfUi,  which  wai
danced  at  Sparta  by  joutha  and  maideiu  together ;
the  youth  danced  fint  wme  moementt  lulled  to
hie  age,  and  of  a  military  nature  i  the  maiden  fol-
lowed in  meatured  tteps  and  vnth  feniinina  gc»-
torei.  Lucian  {di  SaU.  12)  nyi  that  it  waa
aimilar  to  the  dance  performed  nt  the  Oymnopaedln.
(Compere  HQIler,  Dor.  i>.  6.  g  .'■.)  Another  com-
mon dance  at  Sparta  waa  the  Bibaat  (pita-tis),
which  waa  much  piactiaed  both  bj  men  and  women.
The  datiR  conuited  in  apringing  npidly  IroiD  the


SALUTATORES.
ground,  and  atriking  the  fed  behind  ;  a  feat  of
which  a  Sjnrtan  woman  in  Ariatophanea  (Z^sufr.
2B)  pridea  heraelf  (TV^vatSofwi  ya  col  nrrl  mryir
SUujfUU).  The  number  of  snecaarul  atmks  waa
counted,  and  the  moit  akilful  recrayed  prim.  We
are  told  by  a  verae  which  baa  been  uiunnd  by
Pollux  (iy.  102),  that  a  Laconian  girl  had  danced
the  bibaaia  a  Ihouaand  timeai  which  wa*  mare  thaa
had  eyer  beeu  dona  befbia,  (HUUeE,  Doham,  vt.
6.  SB.)

In  many  of  the  Oreak  ttatea  the  art  of  ■'■ir""i;
waa  carried  to  great  perfection  by  fenaiea,  wba
were  frequently  engaged  to  add  to  the  pleamrH
and  enjoyment  of  men  at  their  aympcaia.  Tbne
dancen  alwaya  belonged  to  the  heEaoae.  Xeno-
phon  (.^p.'ix.  2 — 7)  dc«ribea  a  mimetic  dance
which  waa  repreienled  at  a  ajmpouum,  whero
Socratei  waa  preieat. It  waa  pcrlonDed by  a


who  ia  culled  t1 , .. .

■enled  the  bye*  of  Dionyaoi  and  AriaW.

Reapectiug  the  daucera  gn  the  ti^ht-rope  tee

Dancing  waa  common  among  the  Ronan*  in  aa-
cient  time*  in  connection  with  religiona  featinb
and  ritea,  and  waa  practiaed  acconling  to  Serriaa
(ad  Virg.  Eel.  v.  73),  becauae  the  andeota  tkn^ht
that  DO  part  of  the  body  ahonld  be  free  fnu  the
influence  of  religion.  The  dance*  of  the  Salii,
which  were  performed  by  men  of  patrician  &milies,
are  apoken  of  elaewberc  [Saj.ii.]  Dioaiisu*
(viL  72)  mentioni  a  dance  with  anna  at  the  Ladi
Magai,  which,  according  to  hia  niual  plan  of  re-
femng  alt  old  Roman  ua^ta  to  a  Giedc  cdgio,  he
call)  the  Fyirhlc  There  waa  another  old  Komaa
dance  of  a  militvy  nature,  called  BiUiatpit  Salti-
tio,  which  ia  said  to  hare  been  inatitoted  by  Ro-
mului,  after  he  had  carried  off  the  Sabine  yintioa,
in  order  that  a  like  miifortune  might  not  beUI  hia
atata.  (Featua,  t.  e.)  Dancing,  howeyei^  waa  oat
perlormod  by  any  Ronian  dliieu  except  in  enn-
nection  with  religion  ;  and  it  ia  coly  in  refaenra
to  inch  dancmg  that  we  are  to  undentaud  the
atatementa,  that  the  ancient  Komana  did  not  coc-
aider  dancing  diagraceful,  and  that  not  only  froe^
men,  but  the  aona  of  acualon  and  noble  maDnni
practiaed  iL  (Quiutil  ImL  OraL  i.  11.  |  18  ;
Macrob.  SaL  ii.  10.)  In  the  later  timea  of  tlie
republic  we  know  that  it  waa  oonaiderrd  highly
diagmceful  for  a  freeman  to  dance :  Ctccn  re-
pnachea  Cats  fur  calling  Muiena  a  dancer  (mxElU-
tor),  and  adda  "  nemo  fere  aaltat  aobriua,  oiu  fbile
inaaniL- (/VoAfariBi.  6;  compare  tW«K»,  10.)

The  mimetic  danc^  of  the  llomani,  which  vttv
carried  to  auch  perfection  under  the  empire,  are
dcacribed  under  Pantouhhis.  (Meunma,  Or-
chatra;  'OfiiWit,iU  la  Doom  dti  Aaaaa :  Kianae,
Gfmaatlii  imd  Agon.  d.  lltIL  p.  B07,  &c)

SALVIA'NUM  INTEttDICTUSt (lKTU<

SALUTATO'RES,  the  name  giyen  in  llie  later
timea  of  the  republic  and  under  the  empira  to  a
clau  of  men  who  ubtiuned  their  Hying  by  riaiiing
the  houaea  of  the  wealthy  early  in  the  morning  to
pay  their  reipecta  to  them  {talMtarr),  and  to  aocian-
pany  them  when  they  went  ahmad. Tbia  anae

to  pay  to  their  patrona,  and  degenerated  in  bter
limca  into  the  aboTe-menlJcoed  practice.  Snob
pcnoDi  teem  to  haye  obtained  a  good  lirinf  annng
the  great  nomber  of  wealtbf  and  tain  gawaim  M


SAMBUCA.
Rome,  wlio  wrrc  gntified  b;  thia  sttmtion.  {Mrr-
amariui  Salmlator,  Colum.  Prat/,  i.  ;  Martial,  i.
7* ;  Bnker,  OaBm,  vol.  L  p.  116.)  [Spobtula.]
SAMBUCA  (n^Swni,  or  rntrnir,  Arcadioi  ie
A<f*i.  p.  107),  ■  hup.  The  pnceding  Latin  and
Gneh  noma  m  wiin  good  n«ioo  npmcnled  by
Bochail,  Voaiiu,  and  nther  critici,  (o  be  Iht  uaa
with  the  Hebrew  Mp^Q  (labeca),  which  ocean  in
Daniel  (ill  5,  7,  10).  The  perfomiancei  of  lon-
Imcittnae  {aatitiHdnTpWLi)  wm  only  known  to  the
earlj  HonUna  u  Imurici  brought  oter  from  AiL^
<Flaut.SliQi.ii.  3. 57;  Lii.  ixiii.  6.)  The  Athe-
niuia  anutdend  ihem  at  an  eiotic  nfinement
(PhilentDn,p.  370,  ed.  Meini^ke) ;  and  the  Rhodian
vomen  who  played  on  the  harp  at  tha  marriage-
Cewt  of  Caianiu  in  Macrdonia,  clothed  in  very  thin


(.  (Alhon.iv.ji.l7S,d.)  Th<
who  aacribed  it  to  the  Lyric  poel,  Ibycui,  can  only
■utliariia  Ihe  eoncluian,  that  he  had  the  merit  o<
iannling  ainne  modifiistion  of  it,  the  inilrameni
aaimpnred  by  him  being  called 'Kimni'.  (Athcn,
Lc;  SDidaa,ace.'I(£>iir>»-:  'ICiwiii:  la^iKiu.)
Smbo,  moreoTer,  repreaenli  aatiSin)  aa  ■  **  bar-
b«roia-n™.i(i.S.gl7).

The  Hunboca  ii  aererol  timet  mentioned  in  con-
jnnctioc  with  the  iniall  triangulai  haip  (rpi-funr),
which  it  rcaembled  in  the  princijJea  of  ila  con-
Btmction,  though  it  waa  much  larger  and  more
complicUed.  The  r  '
which  from  the  Hi
annexed  woodcut,  waa  held  like  the  lyre  in  the
luDdi  of  the  peHbrmcr  (Spon,  Mix.  Brtd.  Jut.
p.  21},  whercai  the  harp  wai  umelim«  conaider-
ahly  higher  than  the  ilatUR  of  the  performer,  and
wai  placed  upon  the  gisund.  The  haip  of  the
Pmhiao*  and  Tnglodytae  had  only  foni  atiinga
(Athen.iir.p.  633,£)  Thoae  which  arepainledon
the  walla  of  Egyptian  tomba  (lee  Deaoti,  Wilkin-
•on,  &C.)  have  from  4  to  36.  One  of  them,  taken
from  Broce'i  tnvela,  ii  here  iatroduced.  From
the  aUuaioni  to  thia  intlniment  in  Viuuviua  (tJ.
I )  we  find  that  the  longeat  atrjig  woi  called  the
"  proalmnbanomeniKi,"  the  neit  "  hypate,"  the
ihorteat  hot  one  "  paranele,"  and  the  ahorteat,
which  had  oonaequently  the  higheit  tone,  waa
called  "nete."  [Hee  Muaici,  p.  775.]  Under
tbe  Roman  Kmperon  the  haip  appear*  to  bare


SARCOPHAGUS.


1007


e  (r^nmiffl,  a  repretentation  of


into  more  general  oae  (Pera.  t.  95  ;  Spartiaii.
Hadr.  36 ),  and  waa  played  by  men  <<riiu<iiii«n'al)
11  ai  women. (Alhen.  iv.  p.  182,  b.)
Uinta  waa  alio  the  same  of  a  military  engine,
lued  to  acale  the  nalli  and  towera  of  beiieged
ea. It  waa  tailed  by  thia  name  on  account  of
general  leaemhlance  to  the  lem  of  the  harp.
Bordingly,  we  may  conceive  an  idea  of  iti  eon-
atructioo  by  taming  lo  (he  woodcul  and  auppoaing
a  mait  or  upright  pole  to  be  elevated  in  the  place
of  the  longen  itringi,  and  to  have  at  ita  aummit  an
[■isina  of  puUeya,  from  which  ropea  proceed  in
e  direction  of  toe  top  of  the  harp. We  mu»t
ppoae  a  itiong  ladder,  4  feet  wide,  and  guarded
the  lidei  with  paliiadea,  to  occupy  tha  place  of
a  aounding-board,  and  to  he  capable  of  being
lowered  or  raiaed  at  pleaiun  by  meani  of  the  mpei
pulleyi. At  the  liege  of  Sytacnae  Harcellna
bad  engine!  of  thia  dcacription  fixed  upon  veaaeli,
' 'i  the  rowera  moved  up  to  the  walli  lO  that
ildiera  might  enter  the  city  by  aacending  tbe
ra. (Holyb.  Till  S  ;  Flut.  Mare.f.5SB,  ed.
Sleph.  1  Athen.  liv.  p.  634,  b;  Onoiandr.itral.  42 ;
ViiniT.x.  16.g9;  Fiina3,i.v,Sambiuaj  Athen.
(Jd  MaA  <9i.  Math.  Vet.  p.  7.) When  an  inland
city  waa  beleaguered,  the  Sambnca  waa  mounted
upon  wheela. (Bito,  op.  jtfoU.  ytLpa.110,  111  :
V«et.i.,2I.)  [J.y.]

SAMNI'TES.  [QLAUUTOaaa,  p.  576,  a.]
SANDA'LIUM  {trarSiXuy  or  irir9aXor\  a
kind  of  ahoe  worn  only  by  women.  In  the  Homerie
age  however  it  wai  not  confined  to  either  aei,  and
coniiated  of  a  wooden  lole  &tteaed  to  the  foot
with  Ibonga.  (Uonu^yin.  ■■  Mtm.  79,  83,  I3S.)
In  later  tunei  the  aandnlinm  muat  be  diatlnguiahed
from  the  OwAiiffut,  which  waa  a  airaple  aole  bound
nnder  the  foot  (FoUui,  viii.  H4,  with  Kilhu'i
emendation),  whereaa  the  aandalinm,  alao  called
B^irin  or  P^^ri),  waa  a  aole  with  a  piece  of
leather  covering  the  toea,  to  that  it  formed  the
tianaition  from  the  irSSiiiia  to  real  ahoet.  The
piece  of  leather  nnder  the  toea  waa  called  (vyis  or
ivyir.  (Ariatoph.  Lytiitr.  390,  with  the  Schol.  ;
Uetych.  t.  V.  Zuyis;  Pollux,  viL  31  ;  Phot.  La.
p.  54,  ed.  Dobr.)  The  ffoxMAia  iCyya  in  Stiabo
(vi.  p.  2JS)  are  however  not  aandalia  without  the
(■TrJr,  bnt,  aa  Becker  {Oaniia,  ii.  p.  367,  &c)
juttly  temaika,  aandalia  which  did  not  belong  to
one  anotber,  or  did  not  form  a  pair,  and  one  of
which  waa  larger  or  higher  than  the  other.  The
iir/ir  waa  frequently  adorned  with  coatly  em-
broidery and  gold  (Cephiaodor.  o^  PaU.  ill  S7  ;
Clem.  Alei.  Patdag.  iL  1 1 ),  and  appeora  to  have
been  one  of  the  moat  luxurioni  atticlei  of  female
dieia.  (Aelian,  r. /;.  i.  IB.)  The  amall  cover  of
the  toea  however  waa  not  auffideol  to  Suten  the
aandalium  to  the  fi»t,  whcrefne  thonga  likewiae
beautifully  adorned  were  attached  to  it  (Pollux,
viL  92.)  Althongh  ■■""tiil;*,  aa  we  have  atated,
were  in  Greece  and  iDbaequsitly  at  Rome  alio
worn  by  women  only,  yet  there  are  tracea  that  at
leaat  in  the  Eait  they  were  atao  worn  by  men.
(Hetnd.  iLfllj  SuMark,  vi.  9.)

The  Roman  ladiaa,  to  whom  thia  ornament  of
the  foot  Bai  introduced  from  Greece,  wore  aandalia
which  appear  to  have  been  no  leia  beautiful  and
coatly  than  thoae  worn  by  the  Oreeka  and  the
Oriental  naliona.  (Taipilina,  (^.A^on.  v.  24  ;  TerenI,
EumMcA.  y.  7.  i.)  [L.S.]

SANDAFILA. [Funus.  p.6S9,a.]
bAKCO'PHAOUS, [Fiihi;b,  p.  559,b.]


eedingp


neynrdfc {Ho


>rjd.  Met.  xi.  38,  Fa^

IT.  930  ;  PUut!  Zyuir.  ii.  Z  2 1 ;  Csto,  ija  A«  AW
10  ;  ColamellK,  i.  21  ;  Psllad.  i.  43.)  It
■Dmeliniea  uied  to  coth  ths  ued  when  i
Inmella,  ii.  11),  ud  in  mountaiaooi  cs
Mired  iiutcad  of  A  plDiit;h.  (Plin.  /f.  N.
a.  49.)  Directiani  lor  luinj;  it  to  dear  tbe  niriue
of  the  ground  (ffKiiAAtii',  Herod.
BclwL  u  TVocrif.  i.  14)  m  givou  bj  Palladiu
(A>  fl«  flw*.  ii.  8).  [J.  Y.]

SARISSA.  [EiBRCiTU«,p.4S8,K.]
SARRA'CUM,  a  kind  of  mmman  cui  or  wb
fton,  which  wu  used  by  the  couDby-pcople
Inl;  for  coaTejing  the  produce  of  th«r  fieldi,
tie«>,  (ud  the  like  from  one  plus  to  (mother.  (Vi-
tnir.  X.  1 ;  Juv.  iiL  354.)  lu  name  tu  well  u
the  fact  tliaC  it  vu  iu«d  by  Mveml  barbutnu  na-
tioii*,  ihoTi  that  it  wu  introduced  Iram  them  into
Italj.  (Sidoo.  Epiit.  jv.  18  j  Amm.  Man.  ixtL
8.)  That  penona  alia  lometimea  rode  in  a  ht-
nnnn,  i>  clear  from  a  pnuage  of  Cicero  qnoted  b;
Quinctilijin  (viii.  3.  %  21),  who  even  regardj  the

{Anton.  Pkiiot.  1 3)  ilalei,  that  during  a  plagiie  thr
monaliC;  at  Rome  wai  to  gnat.  lLiI  it  wai  found
neceMuy  to  can;  the  dead  bodiei  out  of  the  city
upon  the  eooimon  mrsca.  Several  of  the  bar-
baroua  na^ona  with  which  the  Romana  came  ii
cODlact  nnd  theae  waggou  alio  in  war,  and  placed
them  aiound  their  campa  aa  a  fbrtificaCiou  (Siaenna,
op.  Nam.  iii.  3S),  and  the  Scythiani  UKd  them  in
their  wandering!,  and  apent  almoat  their  whole
livea  upon  them  irilh  their  wirea  and  children,
whence  Ammianui  comparai  >ucb  a  caraian  of
nrraca  with  alt  that  wai  eonvejed  upon  them  to  a
wandering  citr.  The  Romani  appear  to  hare  used
the  word  aaimciim  a>  ayaonymoua  with  plaualrum,
and  JuTenal  (v.  22)  goei  even  bo  fiir  aa  to  apply

mlly  called  plauitmm.  (Scheffer,  da  Ra  VUdcaL
iL  31.)  [L.S.]

SARTA'OO  [rkytanr),  wai  a  urt  of  pan  whicb
wai  uted  in  the  Roman  kilehena  for  a  variety  of
purpoua,  luch  aa  roaiting,  melting  bt  or  butter,
cooking,  &C.  (Plin.  H.  iV.  iri.  32  i  Jot.  i.  63.)
Frequently  alio  diahei  coniiidng  of  a  Tariety  of
ingredienti  aeem  to  have  been  prepared  in  nch  a
urtago.  aa  Peniua  (L  79)  ipeaki  of  a  tarlago
bxpmli,  that  ia,  of  a  mixture  of  proper  and  im-
proper expreaaioni.  Some  commenlaUin  on  thii
paaaa^  and  perhu)i  with  more  jtuticc,  underatand
the  aarlago  loquendi  at  a  mode  of  apesking  in  which
biifling  Bcunda  ore  employed,  aimilar  to  the  noiae
produced  when  meat  ia  fried  in  u  pan. [L.  5.]

SATISDATIO. [AcTTio.]

SA'TURA,  or  in  the  aoftened  form  SATIRA,
ia  the  Dame  of  a  ipecics  of  poetry,  which  we  call
ntire.  In  the  hiatory  of  Roman  literature  we
have  to  diatingDiib  two  different  kinda  of  aatirca,
vii.  the  early  Mtnra,  and  the  later  aatira  which
Tocaived  ill  paafact  deTelopment  from  the  poet  C.
Ludlina(U8— 103B.C.).  Both  ipociea  of  poetry,
however,  an  altogether  peculiar  to  the  Romani.
The  literal  memiing  of  laliirB,  the  root  of  which  ia
tat,  eaant  neamt  to  wbat  the  French  call  pat-
paarri,  or  lo  the  Latin  /armgo,  a  mixture  of  all
aorta  oiF  thingi.  The  name  waa  accordingly  applied
by  the  KtoBu  in  many  wayi,  bnt  al**^  to


SATURA.

thingi  conititing  of  larioni  paita  or  mgredicnta,

iruita,  aueh  aa  were  afierod  al  harreit  featival*  and
to  Cerea  (Acron,  ad  HanU.  Sat.\.\;  Diomed.  iiL
p.  483,  ed.  PutKb.);  la  per  latvam  lata,  a  Uw
which  contained  aeTeml  diatinet  regulationa  *t
once.  (Foil  i.  e.  SatunL.)  U  wonld  appesTftioiii
the  etymology  of  the  wonl,  tliat  the  eariien  Ro-
man lacun,  c^  which  we  otherwiae  KUt^y  know
anything,  muit  have  treated  in  one  woik  on  a
variety  of  lubjecta  juit  ai  they  occurred  to  the
writer,  and  perbapi,  aa  wai  the  raae  with  the
■atirei  of  Vairo,  half  in  pniaa  and  half  in  renc,  or
in  verwa  of  different  metre.  Another  feature?  of
the  earlieit  bIuib,  aa  ws  learn  &om  the  celebrated
paaugB  in  Livy  (viL  2.),  ia  that  it  wai  Kcnie,  that
ij,  an  improriaatoxy  and  iirtgular  kind  i^  diainatic
patformaoce,  of  the  aame  claai  ai  the  veraua  Fea.
cmninL  [Fiscinnih*.]  When  Lirim  Andri^
nicni  introduced  the  rrgular  dnma  at  Roid^  the
peoplt^  on  account  of  their  fonduoia  for  ludi  ex-
tempore jokei  and  isillerica,  atill  continued  to  keep
up  their  former  Bmuaeiueiiti,  and  it  ii  not  impro-
bable that  the  exodia  of  later  tiroea  wen  die  old
ntuiae  merely  under  another  name. [EiODia-)

Bnniui  and  Pacuviui  are  mentioned  at  the  fiiat
writer!  of  latirn,  but  we  are  entirely  unable  to
judge  whether  theii  worlia  were  dramatic  like  the
utun  of  old,  or  whether  they  rsiembled  the
latirea  of  Luciliua  and  Horace.  At  any  rate,  how-
BTer,  neither  Ennioa  nor  Pacuvini  cam  have  aade
any  great  improvement  in  thia  apedea  of  poeliy,
ai  Quinctilian  (i.  1.  g  93)  doea  not  meatioQ  eiihs-
of  them,  and  dcwxibei  C.  Luciliua  aa  the  Gnt  gtcM
writer  of  ntitei.  It  la  Luciliua  who  ia  nnivenally
regarded  by  the  ancient!  aa  the  inTcstiir  of  the
new  kind  of  aatira,  which  reaembled  on  the  whole
that  ipeciea  of  poetry  which  i>  in  modan  tine*
detignated  by  the  tame  name,  and  which  waa  no
longer  acenic  or  dramatic.  The  character  of  thia
new  latiru  waa  aftcrwardi  emphaticadly  Ailed
c&uucMr  Ladlimuu,  (Valro,  lie  Aa  AiuL  lu.  2.)
Theae  new  latirca  were  written  in  beiametefa,
which  metre  waa  ubiciiucntly  adopted  by  all  the
other  laliriita,  aa  Horace,  Peniui,  and  Jnvcnal.
who  (btlowcd  the  path  opened  hy  Lnciliaa.  Their
character  waa  eaientially  ethical  or  practial,  and
aa  the  ilage  at  Rome  wai  not  ao  free.ai  at  Athena,
the  aatirea  of  the  former  had  a  aimilar  object  to
that  of  the  ancient  comedy  at  the  latter  pUtc  Tb*
poeta  in  their  latirei  attacked  i»t  only  the  folliea
and  vice!  of  mankind  in  general,  but  alio  of  aorh
liring  and  dittingniihed  individuali  aa  had  any
influence  upon  their  coatempontiei.  Such  a  qiecie!
of  poetry  muit  neceaaarily  bo  »ubj«t  to  great
modifitationa,  ariiing  partly  from  the  cbaract«r  of
lime  in  which  the  poet  lirea,  and  partly  fiwiB
peraonal  chatactet  and  tempemmeiit  of  the
poet  binuelf,  and  it  ia  (Wm  tbeie  circiuutoacca
''  '  hare  to  explain  the  diflerenca  between
rea  of  Luoliua,  Hraace,  Peniua,  and
JuTenaL

After  Luciliua  had  already  by  hi»  own  example
eitabliihed  the  artiitic  principlea  of  aatira,  Tetc»-
Vatro  in  hii  youth  wiute  a  kind  of  ntira^
which  were  neith^  like  the  old  latuia  nor  lika
the  Ktiia  of  Luciliua.  They  coniiited  of  a  miitoia
and  pnae,  and  of  venc*  of  diSoait
metrea,  but  were  not  leenic  like  the  old  Htme.
They  were  altogether  of  a  peculiar  character,  and
<v  H^


SATURNALIA,
uippiwi  or  CfnScae,  tbe  Utter  betanH  he  w»  nid

to  h&n  imltMed  tbe  mtkt  gf  thB  Cjuic  pbilowi-
pbcr  Hsnippoa. (Oellioi,  ji.  18.)

(See  Cannbaa,  4t  Sa^riea  Oraeeormm  Poai  tl
Romamnm  Sa^ra,  libri  ii.  Halae  1774,  iritfa
Bate*  bj  RunbKfa.)  [L.  &]

SATURNA'LIA,  tbe  ftatind  st  Satanin*,  to
wbom  the  inhabilMilt  of  L«tinni  BttTibated  tbe  in-
trodnetioii  of  ^ricnltan  mnd  the  tiu  of  driliiFil
life.  Falltng  towwdi  the  md  of  Drcember,  at  tbe
teama  when  Uw  if^inileDnl  Uboon  ef  the  ;rear
■mm  foUf  cmpletBd,  It  «ae  eekbnted  m  ncient
time*  1^  tha  nutii:  pepnlMioa  ai  «  nrt  of  jojou
huveM-honi^  and  in  eTo;  age  mi  TJawtd  b;  all
ebuH  or  tbe  oammasi^  a«  ■  penod  of  ■hwJnte
nlA^ition  aud  unrettiwoed  merrinieiit.  Daring
it*  Doattmyuioii  no  pnblic  bsnnoM  conld  be  tmu-
acted,  the  law  coorti  were  doled,  the  Khoirii  kept
holiday,  to  commpDce  ■  mr  wat  hnpioni,  to  pnniih
a  male&ctDr  intotied  pollntiDD.  (Maoob.  Sat.  i
10.  16)  Martial,  L  S6;  Savt  Amg.  32;  Flin.  .^.
TiiL  7.)  ^led^  indnigencea  were  granted  to  the
ilate*  of  e^  domntie  eMabliihmeDt ;  they  were
nlieied  trma  all  Drdinarr  toi1>,  were  pemitled  to
wear  the  pUma  the  badge  of  tnedoni,  were  granted
fall  freedom  of  ipeech,  pulook  of  a  banqoet  at^ied
is  tbe  clothe*  of  their  muter^  end  were  wailed
mioD  bj  them  at  table.  (Mwmb.  SaL  i.  7 ;  Dion
Ch*.  Ix.  19;  Hot.  JU.  iL  7.  G;  Haittal,  xi.  6,


thronged  the  itreeta,  ihouting  lo
wai  termed  daman  Satmdia),  while  nerihcei
were  oSend  with  uncoTered  head,  from  a  coniic-
tion  that  no  ill-wnened  light  weald  intempt  the
rile*  of  inch  a  happy  dav.  (CatuU.  11 ;  Senee.
fp.  18;  Snet  Aug.  IB;  Martial,  t.  IB,  19,  to.
63,  UT.  1 ;  PliD.  Ep.  it.  9 ;  Maerob.  Sal.  i.  8, 10 )
Srrr.  ad  Virg.  Am.  tii.  407.)

Many  of  the  pecnliar  eiutomi  exhibited  a  re-
raarfcaUe  reaemblanee  to  the  ipom  of  our  own
Chriatniai  aod  of  the  Italian  CarDiial.  Tbni  aa
the  Satnmilia  public  gambling  waa  allowed  by  the
acaiica  (Martial, ».  8i,  iot.  I,  iL  fi),  jnrt  ai  in
the  dayi  of  our  anoetton  the  moat  rigid  wore  wont
to  oHuiteaance  card-plBying  on  Chrtitmai-eie  ;
the  whole  population  threw  off  the  toga,  wore  a
hioH  gciwn,  called  ^/lOliaa,  and  walked  abont  with
' r  head*  (Martial,  iit.  141,  n.


and  HemiTei,  co  hi*  return  from  Spain,  wai  laid
to  have  reformed  the  wonhip,  and  aboliahed  tbe

third  traditiDn  repreienled  certain  (ollowen  of  the
lait  named  here,  wbom  he  bad  left  behind  on  hii
retam  to  Greece,  ai  the  authon  of  the  Sntntnalia.
(Uacrob.  Sat.  L  7-)  Record*  apfftaching  nwre
oeady  to  hiatory  referred  ^e  erection  of  temple*
and  altan,  and  the  fint  cdebration  of  the  fiatiral,
to  ejmehi  comparati»ely  recent,  to  the  reign  of
Tattm  (DiDnyL  IL  £0),  of  Tulloi  Hoailiu  (Dio-
nya.  iil  33 ;  Maerob.  SaL  \.  8),  of  Tarquiniua
Snperbui  (Diony*.  vL  I  ;  Maerob.  I.  a),  to  tho
conauUhip  of  A.  Semprmiui  aod  M.  Minuciua,
'  B7.  or  to  that  of  T.  Laniua  in  the  preceding
(Dionya.  vLl;  Lit.  ii.31.)  Theae  eonflisU
itetnenti  may  be  eaiily  lewmeiled,  by  mp-
poeing  that  the  appointed  ceremonies  were  in  theas
nde  agea  neg;lectod  from  time  to  time,  or  cormpled,
ind  again  at  diflerent  periodi  reriTed,  punGed,
tneoded,  and  perfbnned  with  ba'k  iplendour  and
jreater  regnlanlj.  (Compaie  Lii.  xiiiL  1.  nfr
Jm.)

During  the  republic,  althongh  the  whole  mimth
of  December  wa*  coniidered  a>  dedicated  to  Sa-
uim  (HuTob.  i.  7),  only  one  day,  the  Jiv.  Xal.
Jan.  waa  let  apart  fbr  the  laered  rite*  of  the  diri.
nity ;  when  the  month  waa  lengthened  by  the  ad.
dition  of  two  dayi  upon  the  adoption  of  the  Julian
Calendar,  the  SatnniBlia  iell  on  the  xvi.  Kal  Jan.,
which  ga*e  riie  to  confiuion  and  mistake*  nmong
the  more  ianoraot  portion  of  the  people.  To  ob-
Tiate  thii  utconiemence,  and  alia;  alt  religimi
•cmptn,  Anguatna  enacted  that  three  whole  days,
the  17th,  18th,  and  19th  of  Deeemb«r,  ibauld  in
all  time  coming  be  hallowed,  thna  embracing  both
the  old  and  new  ityle.  (Macrah,  I  10.)  A  fourth
day  wai  added,  we  know  not  when  or  by  whom,
and  a  lilUt,  with  the  title  Jmmala,  by  Caligula
(Dion  Caia.  lii.  6 ;  Soeton.  Col.  17),  an  anange-
ment  which,  after  it  had  fallen  m(o  dime  fir  lone
yean,  wai  reatwed  and  oonfinned  by  daodjoa.
•"■ Can.  li.  2.)

although,  itrictly  ipeaking,  one  day  only,
during  the  rapnbiie,  waa  eoMacrated  to  religioni
ibiectaDcei,  die  ftatiTil'--  '


34,  1


r.  I,  iL  6  ;  S


1.  18),  I


lich  n


oa  of  the  dotninoea,  the  peaked  c^is,  and  other
diigaiie*  worn  by  maiqnei  and  mummen ',  the
erra  were  probably  employed  ai  the  moeoM  now
an  on  the  laat  night  of  the  Camiral  j  and  laitly,

electinn  of  a  mock  kii«  (TadL  Ann.  xiiL  IS ;
Arrian,  Ditt.  BpieltL  i  3fi  ;  Lucian.  Satm.  4),
which  at  ODce  calli  to  recollecticai  the  chaiacteriicic
ccremcny  of  Twelfth-nighL

Satumoa  being  an  ancient  naticaal  god  of  Ia-
tiiun,  the  imtitntioa  of  the  Satnmatia  ia  lort  in  the
neat  lamota  antiqni^.  In  one  legend  it  waa  aa-
oibed  to  Janoa,  who,  after  the  mdden  dii^jMai-
anee  of  hii  giwat  and  beneEador  from  the  abode*
of  aen,  reand  au  altar  to  hhn,  ai  a  deity,  in  the
forum,  and  ordained  arninal  ncrifiee*  ;  in  another,
aa  rrialed  by  Vami,  it  waa  attributed  to  the  wan.
daring  Pthugi,  i^vu  ttieir  firit  aattlamrat  >o  Itidy,


;d(-e


mSiw.


20) :  and  it  would  aeem
that  the  merry-making  laated  during  leren  days,
fu'  NoTini,  the  writer  of  AtaUanae,  employed  the
eiptenioD  mpltm  Salimaiia,  a  phnie  copied  in
later  time*  by  Memmiiu  (Macreb.  i.  10),  and
even  Martial  tpeaki  of  Satenit  •aptan  rfta  (xiv.
73),  although  in  many  other  panagei  he  allude*
to  the  fire  dayi  obaerced  in  aeecTdance  with  the
edicti  of  Caligula  and  daudiu  (ii.  B9,  xiv.  79,
141).  In  reality,  under  the  empire,  three  different
feitiTali  were  celebrated  daring  the  period  of  aaren
dayi.  Firat  came  the  SbtenHJu  pnmer,  com-
mcneing  on  xvi.  KaL  Dee^  foliowed  by  the  OpaUa,
anciently  coincident  with  the  Saturnalia  (Maerob.
L  10),  on  XIV.  KaL  Jul  ;  theae  two  together
huted  for  live  dayi,  and  dw  uith  and  aeroith
were  occupied  with  the  SigiUaria,  »  called  from
little  earthenware  ligme*  {tigillit,  onUa)  expoaed
for  nle  at  thia  seaaon,  and  giten  aa  toya  to  cbil<
dren.  [W.  R.)

SCALAS(iiAM>>*>>ddar. TbegenalcoD.


3  c


■  O"


]0]0  SCALPTUHA.

nmctioo  and  oM  of  ladden  wbi  tb«  wma  uung
the  oitcwDti  u  in  modeni  timea,  and  thBrafore  re-
quires no  expluution,  with  the  eiceptJoQ  of  thoee
tued  in  beiieging  K  lortified  place  and  in  tatkmg
an  Mwnlt  upon  it.  The  laildcii  were  erected
agsintt  ths  walli  (adaumn,  /mun,  apponttt,  or
trigm  leaiat),  and  the  beaiegen  aacoided  thun
under  ihoven  of  dartt  and  itanei  tbnwn  upon
them  by  the  beii^t^  (Sallnrt.  Jtg.  6,  64  ;  Caea.
dt  BtIL  do.  \.  26,  63 1  Tacit.  Hid.  ir.  39,  Ac  ;
Veget.Jaii>Mi£f.  i<.21:Polrb.iz.  IB.)  Some
of  theH  ladden  were  fomied  like  our  commoa
onea  ;  othen  cantitCed  of  levenl  porta  (icXffuvcii
nj/rrixl  or  SiaAvrol)  which  might  be  put  together
>o  aa  to  form  oiLe  lafge  ladder,  and  wen  taken  to
piecea  when  they  were  net  oied.  SemetimH  alio
they  were  mads  of  tope*  or  leather  with  large  iron
hooka  at  the  top,  by  which  they  were  lattSMd  to
the  walla  to  bo  aacended.  The  Udd^n  made
vholly  of  leather  coiuiated  of  tubea  aowed  up  air-
tight, and  when  they  wen  wanted,  theia  tubes
were  filled  with  air. (Uenm,  c  "i.) Heron  alao


manner,  that  it  might  be  oncbed  with  a  man
Btanding  on  the  top,  whoae  object  waa  to  obmrre
what  wai  going  on  m  the  beiieged  town.  (Heron,
c  IZ)  Othen  again  were  porided  at  the  top
with  a  amatl  bridKc,  which  might  be  let  down
upon  the  walL  (Herwt,  19.)  In  (hip*  email  lad-
den or  itepa  weto  likewiie  ued  for  the  purpote  of
aKsoding  into  or  deecending  (nm  them.  (Viig.
AcH-x.  6£4;  Heron,  e.  II.)

In  the  hoiuea  of  the  Roman*  the  name  Scalaa
wot  applied  to  the  *tun  oi  alaircaae,  leading  fhim
the  lowar  to  the  nppei  jazU  of  a  hoiue.  The
■tep*  were  either  of  wood  or  atonr,  and,  at  in  mo-
dem times,  fixed  on  oofi  ude  ID  the  wall.  (Vitmr.
ii.  I.  g  7,  &c)  It  appean  that  the  itaircaaea  m
Roman  hoDiea  were  aa  dark  ai  thoae  of  old  houwi
in  modem  timea,  fijc  it  i>  Tery  often  mentioned,
that  a  panoD  concealed  himaelf  h  aeiiulu  or  ia  eta-
form  tatibru  <Cie.  pro  MiL  15,  Piilip.  iL  9  ;
Herat.  Epiat.  iL  2.  Ifi),  and  poaaagea  like  theae

hare  dme,  by  the  auppoaitim  that  »  aoofu  ia  the
■ame  aa  wi  teaiii.  The  Roman  houM*  had  two
kind*  of  atainsia* :  the  one  won  the  cotnmea
Bcalae,  which  wen  apisi  on  one  side ;  the  othen
wen  called  acalae  Qraecae  or  (^i/uwd,  which  were
doted  on  both  udea.  Maatntiiu  Sabinu*  (if).  GM.
X.  15.  g  39)  atatea,  that  the  Flaminica  wai  not  al-
lowed to  aacimd  higher  than  three  atep*  on  a  com-
mon scala,  bat  that  aha  might  make  nae  of  a  climax
like  eiecy  other  penon,  ai  hen  aha  waa  oHicealed
when  going  np.  (Serr.  ad  Atn.  v.  664.)  [L.  S.]
SCALPTO'HA  or  SCULPTU'RA.  Then  are
two  dilTeient  form*  of  thia  word  both  in  Greek
and  Latin,  Tia.  aoabiD,  icalfitara,  and  iciJpo,  lealf^
tura  (in  Oreek  ^\At*l  and  yKi^},  and  there  is
much  doubt  reapecting  their  preciae  mexcing.  The
original  meaning,  eoomion  to  them,  i>  nndoobtedly
the  cuttiu  Ggarea  out  of  a  tolid  materiaj.  The
genenl  opinion  it,  that  both  aoo^  and  wa/po,  with
tbeit  deTiTativea,  aigni^  (he  mne  thing,  only  dif-
fotnt  in  degree  of  peitcctioD,  (o  that  acofateni
wonid  ugnify  a  esane  or  rude,  aoa^Amtn  elabo-
laM  and  pedaot  engiMing;  lliii  opinMa  k  ehiedir
based  upon  the  fellowii^  pasaage*  t  UonL  SaL  ii,
3.  33  ;  Ovid,  MtL  X.  31B  ;  Vitmr.  ii.  6.  (Com-
pare  the  commentator*  on  SnetCa/i.lO,>  Other*
■gain  baltsire  that  *n^  (rA^fai)  agnifiea  to  cut


SCALPTURA.
figunt  bto  the  material  (inta^^),  and  icmlpo
(yKi^)  to  produce  miied  Eguna,  a*  in  auntot.
But  it  ii  Tery  donblfal  whether  the  ancieiita  thaa-
telTea  made  or  obaatred  each  a  diatinction.  Fimn
the  patsagea  in  which  the  woida  occar,  both  in
Greek  and  Latin  writer*,  it  *eeB**  that,  in  their
widest  senie,  they  wen  wed,  almost  indifficnotly.


natciial*,  mofe  pv-


■0  caU  « ,
wood,  marble,  iTocy,  or  oth
ticulaily  for  leHeb,  for  ea
nitioQ  of  nuall  wo^  by  co
prteiom  damti  bat,  of  theae  aenaea,  ttie  1
the  most  specific  and  naoal  i  the  first,  ii
modem  writen  n*e  the  word  tmlftun,  waa  Um
moat  unuauaL [5t.*Tui«U.] (Sea  tin  Orack


a  iriiich


It  may  be  expedient,  boweraCi  in  aecacdnwe
with  the  atwie  distinction  to  diride  the  art  aata  twa
departmsntt :  1.  the  ait  of  cutllDg  figmea  into  tbe
material  (intaglios),  which  was  dii^y  ^iplicd  to
producing  aeeii  and  matrices  for  the  mint*  ;  and  S:
the  art  of  producing  raised  figuna  (cameoa),  which
serred  for  the  moat  part  aa  onuunenla.

The  former  of  theae  two  braDChev  wai  much
more  eitsnsirdj  piactiaed  among  the  aoeiaits
-I— _.>_....  1  ■ -1.  chiefly  frosa


tbe  general  coatom  of  every  tree  d
aeal-ring.  [AxNulDB-J  The  first  a  _
metal  or  atone,  which  serred  as  teal*,  wei
and  rude  ligns  wilhont  any  meaning,  ai
mareljeonsiitingofBToondcsaqiBialula.  (Hejcr,
KmUj/nMcAli,  l  10.)  In  the  second  (tags  of  tha
an,  certain  symbolical  or  conTenttonal  fonna,  as  id
the  worship  of  the  gods,  mn  tntndDcad,  until  at
last,  abontthe  ago  ofPheidias  and  Praiiielca,  itua,
like  the  other  branches  of  the  fine  aria,  had  com-
pleted its  free  and  onretlramed  csireer  i^  dcTslape-
ment,  and  was  ouried  to  such  a  degree  of  patec-
tion  that,  in  the  beauty  ofdesiga  as  well  as  of  exe-
cntian,  the  works  of  the  ancient*  remain  Dnriiafied
down  to  Che  preamt  day.  But  few  of  tbe  names
of  the  artists,  who  exoalled  in  tlu*  art,  havw
come  down  to  na.  Some  intagiica,  aa  well  as
cameoB,  hare  a  naaw  engiared  i^gn  the*),  bit  it
is  in  many  cases  mote  pnhKble  that  sack  an  tlw
nameaof  Ihaewnersthanof  theartiBla.  ne  fint
artist  who  is  mentioned  at  an  engraver  of  tianea  ia
Theodoras,  the  ton  of  TebcUt,  the  Smiu,  who
engnvad  the  stone  in  the  ring  of  FolyoMia.
(Herod,  iii.  41.)  The  moat  oelabfated  numg
them  waa  Pyrgocelst,  who  engiand  the  aesJ-riaga
for  Alexander  the  Qnat.  (Wiockelmana,  n.  jk
107,  &C.  ;  see  the  arliclea  in  the  DieL  ^  Biaa.)
The  art  conlinned  ibr  a  long  time  afW  Pyipwica
in  a  very  high  atata  of  perfecticn,  and  it  af^oan
to  hale  been  applied  about  this  poiod  to  oana.
mental  works.  For  ssieTal  of  the  inniwiias  of
Alexander  and  othtr  wealthy  peraons  adopted  the
eiittom,  which  was  and  is  still  very  prarileot  in
tbe  £ast,  of  adorning  their  gold  and  ulnr  iiaaila.
crateis,  caodelahms,  and  the  like,  with  pncioas
BUmcs  on  which  raised  figuiea  (orneoa)  vera
worksd.  (Ath.  li.  p.  781  i  Cic  a  Terr.  B.  4.  37.
±c}  Among  the  aanie  clan  of  cfnamaktal  woAs
WB  may  leikoii  such  Tsaaels  and  txerae  a*  g«b-
aiatad  af  cos  alone,  upon  which  then  waa  in  aaay
(Baea  a  whole  teriaa  of  raited  figaits  of  the  moat
eiquiaita  woikmanahqi.  (Appiao.  AfiUnd.  US;
Cicilii.;  Plin.ALA'.xxxTilB.)  Theartwaaia
at  Rome  nndec  A>-


1  paniealaiJT  fl


SCEPTEUM.
tide*  and  other  utiiu,  man;  af  wban  mrk*  *»
■lill  jntemH. R(ap«ctiiig  the  Tariou*  imcioiu
and  other  iloatt  whkh  the  widcnt  Bitiiti  ued  in
thne  VDtlu,  *n  MOller,  ^rsUM  |  313.

At  regardi  the  techntoU  pan  oT  the  ait  of  imrk-
ing  in  predot*  itonta,  we  onlj  tnow  the  following
panicuUn.  The  itone  ma  finC  poliihed  by  the
potilor,  and  Rceired  either  a  plane  or  cmiveT  iqt-
bce  ;  the  htler  vai  eapetially  pRferred,  when  the
itouwaimtaulait  taKTTeaaaKaL  Tile  Kolplor
himaeir  naed  iion  or  itee!  inMnuiWDt*  moiMened
with  oil,  aad  lomethnea  alio  a  diatnond  framed  in
iron.  Theee  laet^  iiutninienta  vera  dther  ihaip
and  pointed,  or  mmd.  The  aocienti  nndenlood
the  nie  of  diamond  duM  in  thii  work.  (Plia.  H.  N.
iiiriL  76  ;  HUUer,  Arri.  §  314.  S.)  The  itooei
which  wera  deetined  to  be  framed  in  ringi,  am
well  a*  thoee  which  were  to  be  inlaid  in  gold  oc
lilTer  Toaeli,  then  paiasd  boio  the  haudi  ot  the
tcalplor  into  thwa  of  the  goldamith  {amuilarim,
amtpotUor)^

Nnmennu  ipeeimena  of  intag^ioi  and  (aaeoi
an  itill  praened  in  the  fariooi  mLMimi  of  Eo-
rope,  and  are  deacribad  in  umnenKii  vorka.  For
the  litcramn  of  the  nibjeet,  and  an  account  of  then
gema  and  theii  aDgraTen,  aee  Winkelnuum,
Gnek.  4.  Kwmt,  and  othei  woifci ;  MUIla,  Ar-
ckOoL  S  Slj,  &e.  i  and  Raod-Roeliette,  L-tlrt  i
JW,  Souwn,  2d  ed.  [I-S.]

SCALPTURATUM. [Domub,  p.  431,  jl]

SCAUNUH,d«.9CABELLUH,ail«pvhi<:h
wai  placed  bc'nn  the  hedi  of  the  ancieau  m  order
to  awit  peiwfli  in  getting  into  them,  at  aomo
wne  yerf  high :  othen  which  wen  Iow*r  nqnired
alaoloweratepa,  which  were  calledMaMfa.  (Vairo,
da  iMg.  Let.  i.  168;  Iridor.  xx.  11 ;  Grid,  An

Hied  n  a  fiml-atooL  (Orid,  Ar.  .^iii.  l  1 G2.)  A
Kamnnm  extended  in  length  bacomea  a  bench,
and  in  thia  aenac  the  woni  ia  freqnenllj  naed.
The  earir  Romana,  befote  conchet  were  introdaeed
among  them,  tiaed  to  ait  upon  hent^aa  (aCMMMi)
before  the  hearth  when  tbey  took  their  me^.
(Orid.  FiiiL  vi.  30d.>  The  bcDchei  in  ahipa  wen
netimea  called  Mamna.  la  the  technical
B  of  the  ^[TinMnaona  a  acamnnm  wai  a
rhich  araa  bnadar  than  it  waa  long,  and  one
that  WM  longer  than  bnad  waa  called  itriga.
< Vnii  AnctoT.  Rei  Agr.  [m.  4 6, 1 2fi,  1 88,  ed.  Ooea.)
In  the  language  of  the  Roman  peaaantt;  a  Beam-
DDDi  waa  a  Large  clod  of  earth  which  bad  not  been
broken  by  the  plough. (Colum.  iL  2.) [L.  a.]

SCAPHA. [Navis,  p.  786,  a.]

SCAPHEPHO'RIA. [HvoaurHoitiA.]

SCENA. IThiatbuii.]

SCEPTRUM  ia  a  latiniaed  form  of  the  Onek
■rc^a^poi',  which  originally  denoted  a  limpla  itaff
or  walking-Mick.  (Hom.  IL  inii.  416  ;  AeH:h;l.
Apam,  74  ;  Herod,  i  I9S.)  Tba  comaponding
Latin  tenn  La  ae^no,  apiinging  liom  the  aame  root
and  baring  the  Hme  aignifiation,  bnt  of  leat  Ire-

Aa  the  alaff  wa*  naed  not  maiAj  to  aopport  the
Btqia  of  the  aged  and  infirm,  but  ai  a  wea|Kin  of
defence  and  aaaaalt,  the  privilege  of  habitnally  cai-
ryiDg  It  became  emblematic  of  atation  and  sntbo-
nt;.  The  atraight  ataiea  which  are  held  by  two
of  the  frar  aitting  Ggnrea  in  the  woodcut  at  p  Sti,
while  a  third  holda  the  emved  itaS^  or  LiTUOS,  in-
<ILaite  DO  \tm  than  their  attitude  and  poaition,  that


tanmaae  o
field  which


schola.  ion

utthon  the  acepUe  ia  reprcaenled  ai  belonging
mora  eipecially  to  kinga,  princsa,  and  leaden  of
tribei  (HunuAii.  186, 199, 26£,  268,279,  iriLL
557,  Od.  ii.  37,  80,  ill  412}  -.  but  it  La  alao  home
by  jodgea  (Hom,  Od.  iL  S68),  by  hraddi  (/t  iiL
218,  »ii.  277,  iriiL  405),  and  by  prietU  and
•eera.  (Horn.  /J.  L  IS,  Od.  ai.  91  i  Aeacbyl,  Agmiu
1236.)  It  waa  mi»a  eepecially  ctHiaeteriftlc  of
Aaialic  mannera,  ao  that  amoia  the  Peniana  whole
claiaea  of  thoaa  who  held  high  nnk  and  were  in-
neled  with  authority,  including  eonucha,  wen
diatinguiahed  aa  the  accplfe-beaiing  daaaea  (ol
irinrwToiix'".  Xen.  Cgr.  til.  8.  «  17.  Tiii.  1.  %  38,
3.  9  15).  The  acaptra  dcaeended  from  &ther  to
eon  (Hom.  Jl  ii.  4S,  100—109),  and  might  be
committed  to  any  ona  in  order  to  cipreaa  the
tiaaafer  of  authority.  (Hand.  rii.  62.)  Thote
n  the  acepin  awon  by  it  (Hera.  IL  i.  234
,  aol^nnly  Inking  it  in  the  right  hand  and
„  It  toward*  heSTon.  (Horn. /i.  ril  413,  t
S2I,  328.)
The  original  voodoi  ata^  in  conaequaica  of  it*
the  naea  now  deacribed,  receiTed  B


Tsriety  of  omamenti  oremUema.  It  early  became
a  'bnnchaon,  pLeiced  with  golden  or  aLlrer  atuda.
{IL  L  246,  iL  46.)  It  wa*  enriched  with  gema
(Otid.  MH.  iii.  364),  and  made  of  preciou*  metala
or  of  ivory  (i.  176,  Fatt.  ri.  38.)  The  aoncied
woodent,  taken  fnin  one  of  Sir  Wm.  Hamilton*a
fictile  laaca,  and  npnaenting  Aencea  followed  by
Aacanin*  and  lanying  off  hL*  btber  Anchiaea,  who
hold*  the  aceptn  in  hu  right  band,  di  owe  ita  I«m  aa
wom  by  kinga.  The  iyoiy  aceptn  (aiariMM  aa^pto,
Val.  Mai.  It.  4.  {  fi)  of  the  kmga  of  Rome,  which
deacended  to  the  conanla,  waa  aurmoonted  by  an
eagle.  (Virg.  Aen.  xi.  238 ;  Serr.  ad  laa-i  Jut.  x.
43 ;  Iiid.  Orig.  xriiL  2.)  flNBiBHi.]  Jupiter
and  Jnno,  a*  aovenigna  of  the  godt,  were  repn-
aenled  with  a  Ksptn. (Orid,  U.  te.) [J.  Y.]

8CH0ENUS  («,^0xolnii),  Ulerally,  II  rope
0/  rulai,  an  Egyptian  and  Fenian  itincnuy  and
Land  raeaaun  (Uend.  L  66).  Ita  length  ia  atated
by  Herodotua  (iL  6,  9)  at  60  Bladia,  of  2  para-
*aogi  J  i>y  Eratoatbenaa  at  40  atadia,  and  by  othen
■tS2oi30.  (Plin.ff.M*.9.  a.lO,riL  14.  a.  SO.)
Stnbo  and  Pliny  both  atate  that  the  acboanna
nried  in  ditferait  parta  of  Egypt  and  Peiaia.
(Stiabo,  p.  803  ;  Flin.  H.  N.  n.  26.  a.  80  ;  ounp
Athen.iiLp.l22.a.)  [PS.]

BCHOLA [BaLNuK,  p.  189,  b.J

$t2 - •  ^s  —


1013  SCRIPTURA.

SCIADEPHO'BIA. [H

SCIOTHE'RICUM.  [Hi
SCI'PIO.  [ScmiTBUM.]
SCIRl'TAE. [ExiRciTU^  p.  485,  b,]

SCO'RPIO. [TOIIIISNTUII.]

SCRIBAE.  ThB  SeriWat  Homewe»  pobli
noUiiea  or  clerki,  in  ths  pa;  of  the  itale.  Ths;
were  chieflj  fncplo^ed  in  nuking  up  tha  pablic
■cccHtntA*  copjiog  DQt  lAwif  and  lacxirduig  Xh«  pro-
eaediofii  of  the  diffomt  fonctToniiriH  of  tha  iteta.
Tbo  pbnia  wBr^jtmfiiam  <LiT.  ii.  46  ;  Gellioi,
■wi.  S)  WBI  oied  to  dMMta  tlieir  Dampatioo.  Being
my  nnnwioiu,  tbay  were  divided  intn  companiet
or  rininnt  (dKirriiu),  u>d  were  anigned  bj  '  '  '
different  magiMntee,  whence  Ibey  weia
Qiuuitnu,  Aedilicii,  n  Praalorii,  from  tba  i^oan
of  >ate  to  whom  they  wen  anclied.  (Cie.  Vtrr.
ii\.19,e.Cat.  iy.  7,  jm  C&Mtt  *5  ;  Plin. ff. M
iivi.l.i.3.)  Wa  alio  read  of  a  NsTali*  Scrib^
wboH  occapation  waa  cf  a  nry  inleriDr  order.
(Feitiu,  1.  ■■  JVoDoIu;}  The  upoinCniaDt  to  the
■Sea  of  a  uriba  •eemi  to  hare  Men  either  made
on  the  DomiuB^o  of  the  nugiilrata,  or  purehued.
Thai  Lit;  (iI.  39)  telli  lu  that  a  •erihii  wai  ap-
pointed b;  a  qoaettor:  and  we  meet  with  tne
phmie  iamriaa  nwcr*  to  "  purchate  a  compan;,*'
I. «.  to  ba;  a  elerk*!  pbee.  Horace,  for  inilanco,
bought  fbf  hinuelf  a  **  patent  pkice  u  clerk  in  the
treuur;**  [tcr^tlim  qitaailiyriim  eampamnt,  Tate'g
ifonKt,  ed.  L  p.  58).  In  Cicero-*  time,  indeed,  it
■eemi  that  an;  one  might  becoma  a  scriba  or
public  clerk,  b;  purebaie  (Cic  Verr,  ilL  79),  and
cutiK^uentlj,  ai  freedmen  and  their  loni  were  eli-
gible, and  cDoititDled  agreat  portion  of  the  public
cleika  at  Rome  (Tacit  Jim.  liii.  37),  the  offloe
waa  not  highly  eiteemed.  Chough  {requenll;  held
b;  inganoi  or  Graebom  dtizeua,  Cicero  (JL  e.)
however  infonni  HI  that  ^e  Scribaa  fbnned  a  re-
■pectable  daai  of  men,  bnt  ha  thinkj  it  neoanry
to  aaign  a  naeon  for  calling  them  mch,  ai  if  he
were  contciaui  that  ha  wai  combaling  a  popoloi
prejudice.  Very  few  intlancat  an  racordad  of  the
Scribaa  being  nu*ad  to  the  higher  digniliei  of  the
ilnte  :  Cn.  Flarioi,  the  acribe  of  Ap.  Ciaodiiu,  vai
raiMd  10  the  otSce  of  curule  aedile  in  gratitade
for  hi>  tiuking  public  the  TU-inui  formi  of  actioni,
which  had  ptevionily  been  tha  eidotiTe  property
of  the  (Atriciaai  [Actio],  bat  the  returning  oT-
ficer  nfiued  to  acquieate  in  hii  election  till  he  had
gireii  np  hii  booki  (trUniia  pamU)  and  left  hit
proleuian.  (Oelliua,  ^o.)  The  piiTala  *eet«t»-
riea  of  indiTiduili  were  oiled  LiBKABii,  and  Kime-
timea  Scribaa  ab  epittolia.  In  aodent  time*,  a*
FaitDi  (i.  e.)  informa  ui,  tcriba  waa  uaed  for  a  poet.
(  Emeati,  OmU  Oiofrat.  a  o. ;  OGttling,  Oaet.  dcr
Kom.  Slaatnaf.  p.  »7*.)  [R.W.]

SCRI'NIUM. [CAPBi.]

SCRIPLUM. [S0RiiPtii.f«.]

SCRIPTA  DUO'DECIM. [LxTanirenLr]

SCRIPTU'HA  waa  that  part  of  the  revenue  of
the  Konuin  republic  which  »a>  derived  from  letting
out  thoee  poRioni  of  the  «gtf  publicoa  which  were  ,
not  or  eoidd  not  ba  taken  into  ctdtiratioa  at  pa«-
ture  Und.  (Feat  (.  v.  Sattm.)  The  uuue  for
each  puta  of  the  ager  pnbliena  waa :  juanu  pub-
Hea,  aoAaa,  or  lilBae.  They  were  laC  by  the  oen .
aon  to  the  pabljcaoi,  like  aU  other  Taetigaiia ;  and
the  peraDDi  who  tent  their  tattle  to  giaia  on  auct
public  pMturea  had  to  pay  a  certain  tax  or  dnty  to
the  publican!,  which  of  courae  Taried  according  to
iIm  nuabet  ud  quality  of  tlu  i»llle  which  U^y


SCUTUM.


the  rBTenne  which  the  atats
derived  from  it  appear*  to  hare  been  very  con-
aiderable.  The  publkani  bad  to  keep  the  liat*  of
the  peraona  who  aent  their  <sttle  upon  the  public
ibel  and  qsaiitT  of
„  ring  (ainbn>'ibe
duQr  imlf  waa  called  acr^jAira,  the  ptibltc  faatme


paalDiBB,  higediai  w
tba  cattle. Fnm

danr  ilaelf  waa  called  aeryftira,  th
knd  ^n  Mir>{MBrariu  (Feat,  i^
imr),  and  the  pidillcani  or  thnr  aganii  wno  laiaea
the  tax,  an^gfanini.  Cattle,  not  legiaured  by  the
publicaoi,  wef«  called  iiamim  imer^ptat,  and  thoee
who  aent  nch  cattle  upon  tba  pabUo  patare  were
pnniahed  aceording  to  the  lei  ccDaona  {Vane^  da
Re  Jbat.  iL  1),  and  the  cattle  waa  taken  by  tba
publicani  and  forfeited.  (PlauL  Trwai.  L  2. 43,
&&)  ThDlelTh<Hia(Appian,<la  Ac^JLOre.  l27;
Cic  Brut.  36)  did  away  with  the  icriptan  in
Italy,  where  the  public  paauina  were  Ten  nnmer-
oua  uid  aitenaiTc,  ea[>eci«lly  in  Apulia  (Vam,  da
St  Rut  Le.:  Ut.  xiux.  29),  and  the  laoda
themaelTe*  were  now  aidd  or  diaCribnted.  In  the
proTinoei,  where  the  pablic  paatnre*  were  alao  let
out  in  ths  aame  mannv  (Cic.  e.  Vetr.  u.  3, 1,  jwo
Ltg.  Mat.  6,  ad  Faat.  nil  6fi  ;  PUn.  H.  ff.  xiz.
1£>,  the  praclico  continued  until  tlM  time  of  the
empire  ;  bat  afterwarda  tho  acriptuim  ia  no  langrr
mentioned.  {Compare  Niebuhr,  Hitt  af  Rtmt,
ToL  iii.  p.  1 5,  &£. ;  Burmaou,  Fectig.  P^  Som.
tt)  lUS.]

SGRUTULUBI,  or  mote  pnoeriy  Scnipnt-trH
or  ScniPLUM  (yed/tiu,),  the  imaUaat  denownatia
of  weight  among  the  Romana.  It  waa  the  24ik
part  of  the  Uhcia,  car  the  S8Sth  of  the  LimtA,
and  therefiire  about  IB  graina  Eo^h,  wbick  ■
about  tbe  aTcrage  weight  of  the  aoupular  aura

Aa  a  aquare  meaanie,  it  waa  the  malltat  dinva
of  the  JngeTum,  which  coaCaincd  2Bfi  atfapala.
[JuannuH.]  Pliny  (It.  ff.  ii.  7)  uaea  the  word
to  denote  amall  diTiaJHu  of  a  degrees  It  waa  in
&ct  to  ba  appliahle,  according  to  the  oa*  of  tlH
As  and  itaparta,  to  the  2IJSth  part  itf  any  snit.

Though  Oit  ampahua  waa  tba  aoaOnt  ve^
in  common  nae,  we  find  dinaioiv  o<  it  ■■!  ijima
mentioned,  aa  the  oMaa  k  1  of  a  acrsplo,  tha  aaaat.
Aobu  =  -^  of  an  obolna,  and  the  aifafna  ••  }  of  u
ibcilu,  •«  i  of  a  Bcnple,  which  i*  thiB  than  to
haTo  been  originally  the  weight  ef  a  cotain  nun-
bra  of  aeedi.  (PtiKUD.  A/^mLt.  8— 13:  —
"  Semioboli  dnplnm  eat  oboloa,  qnem  poodrre

Oiamma  vacant,  acriplum  noetri  dixere  fnores.

Semica  aei  alii  ailiqnia  latitaniia  cvnia

Attribnont  tcripln,  lentiava  giaoa  bit  oeta,

Aut  lalidem  apeltaa  nomenot,  trialeave  launa

Bia  dno.-)

SCULPTUHA. [SuLrTDU.]

SCU'TICA. [Fuoudk.]

SCUTUM  (Aiftit),  the  Bonao  ahieU.  mm
by  the  heaTy-armed  infantry,  i""**^^  of  beibfc
round  like  the  OiMkCuMiua,  waa  adapted  to  the
form  of  the  human  body,  by  bong  B^a  eitikcr
oval  or  of  the  ahape  of  a  door  (Mya)  which  it  alio
reaembled  in  being  made  of  wnod  or  wickcr-woal:,
and  Irnn  which  cmaequently  ita  Gnek  aaBie  waa
deriTed.  Two  of  ila  fernu  are  ahown  in  tbe  wood-
cut at  p.  711. TW  which  ia  beic  exhibited  u


Mve  launoa


Hnwwlhmilir:  in  Uiii  OMth


SCYTALE.

•■>  •■  hi  jitrt  to  encircle  the  body.  Ths  terma
elipm  uid  Bufni  ui  eftcn  conTounded  ;  bal  that
thej  picpcrlj  dacDted  diff««nt  kindi  of  (bieldj  ii
iiumift«t  frara  Che  pusgn  of  (CTHml  incient  vrjten.
(LiT.Tiii.8;Plut.ADB.'JI  ;  Diodl  Ecleg.  iiilt.  3.)
In  like  muuisi  Plularcll  dutuigniibH  the  Roman
dvprit  ftDm  the  Greek  irwlt  in  hii  life  of  T.  Fla-


minnn  ({1.688, eiSleph.)  Td.^i*.tL  16  Si.  Puil
uws  the  tarn  AvptJi  nlher  ihin  i<r*[t  or  (TokJi,
becmue  ha  it  deecHbing  the  eqaipmeat  of  a  Roman
ulditi.  Theae  Roman  ihielde  «re  called  mta
hmga,  <Viig.  Aol  liii.  662  ;  Grid.  jbK.  n.  393  i
.^(Moti  hifi^Kiit,  Joieph.  ^Kf.  yn^.  Tiii.  7.  g  2.)
Pcajhiu  (»L  2 1 )  wyi  iheir  dimenuoni  were  *  feet
by  3^.  The  ihield  waa  held  on  (he  left  aim  bj
maiii  of  a  handle,  and  coTeied  the  left  ihouldcr.
f  Comp.  EiiBCiTua,  p.  496,  b.]  [J.  Y.]

SCY'RIA  DIKK  {rnvfia  UmtJ  ii  thni  ei-
plained  by  PdUoi  :  iiaipiat  iSicnr  Jro/ulfoiwii'  ol
avfiftotiUtfiiaAai  H|r  rpaxtiar-  tl  yif  firfoti-
Kavrrii  ioK^rrorro  all  ixipoii  fl  *Ji  Afjiirtr  iaru-
ttifiia.  By  tfaxiM  Slmt  it  meant  one  baiel  with
diffieol^ea,  in  which  the  plaintif  had  to  enamnto'
cTeiy  iolt  of  trickery  and  evaaion  on  the  part  of
lbs  deftikdant.  On  the  appointed  day  of  triid  both
portiea  ware  required  to  be  pretent  in  coon,  and  if
either  of  them  did  not  appear,  jndgmeat  na  pto-
DotUKcd  againat  him,  onteu  be  bad  aome  good
eieoae  la  ofiei,  loch  as  illneaa  or  inevitable  abaence
abrsad.  Caiue  waa  thown  by  •ome  friend  on  hii
bcbali^  mjqiorted  by  an  aJBdaTit  oiled  iwmiuffla,
in  anawer  to  which  the  opponent  waa  allowed  to
pat  in  a  coimler  affidavit  {arOvrttfioata},  and  the
court  decided  whether  the  eicoie  waa  valid.  It
aeeiDa  to  have  become  a  practice  with  peraoas  who
wtahed  to  pat  off  or  ihirk  a  trial,  to  pretend  that
they  had  gone  to  aome  iaisnd  in  (he  Aegom  aea,
either  on  bnuikeaa  or  on  the  public  aerTice  i  and
the  ialei  of  Scynu  (one  of  the  Cychdea),  Lemno^
vtd  Imbrui  arere  particularly  lelected  for  that
porpoa*.  Shammen  of  thia  kind  were  therrfore
nicknned  Icmniana  and  Imbriana.  (Pnllat,  viii.
60,81;  K.Olm,adloe.,-  Snidaa.ae.Smpiiu'Jljini*:
HHijcb,i,«."I*rff«oi;  StepL7»eacoB-.B4fi4.e.t.ti.
jMiipoi :  DemoaIh.c  O^mpiod.  1174  i  Meier,  Att.
JhTK.f.696.)  [C.R.K.]

SCYTALE  {mtiraXti)  ii  the  name  applied  to
■  aecret  mode  of  writioK  by  which  the  Spartan
«pbota  eommnnicaled  with  their  kingiond  goicreU
when  abroad.  (PlaLZ.yaa«f.  19;  Seiml  ad  TiiKjid.
L  131  i  Suidaa,  t.  v.) When  «  king  or  geaaial


SGCTIO.  1013

left  Sp«ta,  the  ephon  gare  to  him  a  atafTof  a  deE-
nil«  length  and  thickneu,  and  retained  for  Ihem-
Bclvea  another  of  precijely  the  aame  eiie.  When
they  had  any  communicaton  to  make  to  him,  they
cnt  the  material  open  which  they  intended  to
write  into  the  shape  of  a  narrow  riband,  wound  it
ronnd  their  italF,  and  then  wrote  upon  it  the  mea-
•age  which  they  had  to  Bend  to  him.  When  the
■trip  of  writing  material  waa  taken  fmia  the  itafT,
nothing  but  liogle  or  broken  letlen  appeared,  nod
in  thia  ilate  the  alrip  waa  aeot  to  thegeneral,  who
after  having  wound  it  around  hla  atafEj  waa  able  to
read  the  commanication.  Thii  rude  and  imperfect
mode  of  sending  a  aecret  meaaam  muat  have  come
down  from  cnrly  timea,  although  no  inalance  of  it
ia  reconied  prerioui  to  the  time  of  Pauaaniaa.
(Com.  Nep. /^nit.  3.)  In  later  tunet,  the  Spartani
used  the  acytale  aomettmet  alao  ai  a  medium  thnwgh
which  they  lent  their  nnnmandg  to  (ubjeet  and  al-
lied towns.  (XenopL  ffia.  v.  2.  g  37.)  [L.  S.l
8CYTHAE  (a«M»).  [DiMosu,]
SECE'SPITA.  an  inatniment  uaed  by  the  Ro-
man prieata  in  killing  the  victima  at  aacrificea.
(Suet.  Tib.  is.)  Acc^ing  to  the  definition  of
Antiatiua  I^beo,  pw^crved  by  Fettus  (p.  348,  ed.
MUtkr)  and  Serviua  (ad  Virg.  Aa.  \v.  262),  it
waa  a  long  iron  knife  (a^itr)  with  an  irery  handle,
uaed  by  Uie  Flamuica,  Flaminicae  Viiginei,  and
Pontificea.  Paulai,  however,  in  hia  epitome  of
FcatuB  (p,  336)  aayi  that  aome  think  it  lo  be  an
axe  (aKKTu),  othen  a  dalabra,  and  others  again  a
knife  (aiUir).  On  Roman  coina  representing  sacri-
ficial emblems  we  see  an  aie,  which  modem  writcis
call  a  aecespiis,  though  we  do  not  know  en  what
aalhority,  eioept  the  doubtful  statement  of  Paulua.
See  the  annexed  coin  of  the  Sulpicia  Oeni,  tbe
obverse  of  which  ii  supposed  to  represent  a  culter.


SECRETA-RIUM. fAui

SE'CTIO.  "ThoMi  are  called  Sectoies  who  bny
property  phUmb."  (Osius,  iv.  146;  Fettus,  s.d,
SKtonss.)  Property  waa  aaid  to  bo  aold  puUke
(mire  fwUtn),  when  a  man's  pmperty  was  sold

for  the  purpose  of  repayment  to  the  State  of  such
sums  of  money  as  the  condemned  penon  had  im-
properiy  appropriated  ;  or  in  consequence  of  a  pro-
seriptiQ.  (Lit.  inriiL  60  j  Cic.  in  Vrrr.  i.  20.)
Such  a  lale  of  all  a  man's  property  was  a  Sectio
(Cic  pro  Soldo  Avar.  36,  43,  Ac.)  ;  and  some-
timea  the  things  sold  were  called  Sectio.  (Tacit.
HiiL  i.  90.)  The  sale  waa  effected  by  the  Praetor
giving  to  the  Quaeatora  the  Danomm  Possesuo,  in
reference  to  which  tbe  phrase  "  bona  publico  poa-
■ideri "  is  used.  The  property  iras  sold  snb  hasta
and  the  sale  tranaferred  Quiritarian  ownership,  to
which  Oaina  probably  alludea  in  a  mutilated  pna-
aage  (ilL  80  ;  comp^  Vairo,  de  Rt  RutL  ii.  10.
a.  4  :  TaciL/futL  20).  The  Sector  waa  intitled
to  the  Interdictnm  Seeloriom  for  the  porpoae  of
obtaining;  poaaesaioo  of  the  proper^  (Oaioa,  iv.
146)  ;  but  be  took  the  property  with  all  its  liabi-
lities. An  henditas  that  bad  Adlao  lo  the  Vagat


Uti


•  o"


101*  SE13ACHTHEIA.

wu  nAi  in  thii  waj,  and  the  Sector  scqnircd  tlie
tureditBlii  psiitio. [Pkaida.]  [O.  L.]

SECTOR. [Sbctio.]

SECTO'RtOM  INTERDICTUM. [IiiTni.

SECU'RIS,  dim.  SECURICULA  (iPnj,  «-
l^itiri),  tn  ufl  or  hUchsL  The  US  wsi  nthn
made  with  a  liogle  sdge,  or  tii^  ■  blids  or  head
DO  each  lids  of  the  haft,  the  tatter  kind  being  de-
nominiiEed  b^ieamt  (ntximi  Siord^i,  or  i^i^urrd-
fui,  Agathiaa,  ftiiL  EL  5.  pp.  73,  74). Aa  the  an

huidi  of  ^e  carpester  and  the  haibaadman,  bat
wiu  moreoier  one  of  the  carlieM  veapooi  of  attack
(Horn. /L  TV.  711 1  9DeLI?iiJta,ie),  aconititneDt
poRion  of  t!i«  Romiui  tatttt,  and  a  part  of  the  ap-
paiBtni  when  ■^iwft*!*  were  slaia  in  lacrifica,  we
find  it  omtiniuill;  recDRing  nnder  a  great  Tarietf
of  fonai  upon  ceina,  genu,  aad  ha«-relieb.  In  the
woodeut  to  the  article  Sciptrum,  the  ronng  Aa-
tuiiiU  batdi  a  baltle^ie  in  hii  hand.  A!h>  real
axe-headi,  both  of  Rona  and  metal,  are  to  be  leen
in  many  culleetionB  of  anliquitiei.  Betidei  beinf
made  of  bronie  and  iron,  and  man  ntTEty  of  ail'er
(Virg.  ^M.  T.  307;  Willtinwii,  Mam.  amd  CW.  of
JBgml-  ToL  i.  p.  321),  aie-heada  haTa  (mm  the
eiulieat  limf*  and  amcng  all  nationi  been  made  of
Btone.  They  are  often  Aland  in  lepnlchnl  tnmnli,
and  are  urajiged  in  oar  miueDDU  together  with
ehJKU,  bothaf  ilane  and  ofbroDK,  ondertheiiame

The  pniaJenl  aie  of  the  axe  on  the  field  of
battle  W1U  gvnendly  chatacteriilic  of  the  Aiialic
natidiu  (Curt,  iiu  i),  whoee  troopi  are  therefore
colled  KCHrigeraa  catervaa.  (VaL  Flacc.  Ar^im.  t.
138.)  At  uiasl,  wo  find  the  Asiatic  costoni  pro-
pafiatiog  ilaelf  oTcr  the  north  of  Eotope.  The  bi-
pennia  and  the  ipear  were  the  chief  iieMpODt  of  the
Fianki. (Agnthiai,  L  c}  [J.  Y.]

SECUTO'RES.  [OLADiiToaas,  p.  fi76,  a.]
SEISACHTIIEIA  (niidx'""),  a  diibnrden-
ing  ordinance,  wu  the  firtt  and  preliminary  itep  in
the  legiilation  of  Solm.  (Plat.  SoL  IS  ;  Diog.
lAStt.  L  *S.)  The  real  nature  of  ihii  meaiora
wu  a  auhject  of  doubt  eien  among  the  aneienti
thenuelfei,  for  while  Bomc  itate  that  Salon  thereby
cancelled  all  debta,  othen  deecribe  it  ai  a  mere  re-
duction of  the  rata  of  intereat.  But  from  the
Tarioui  accounti  in  Plntaich  and  the  gttunmatinn*
it  Kcnu  to  be  clear  that  the  mirdxitia  cenaiited
of  fbmr  dininct  meamrea.  The  fint  of  thew)  waa
the  reduction  of  the  nie  of  intemt,  and  if  thia
waa,  aa  it  appean,  reUmpectire,  it  would  natandly
in  many  caiea  wipe  off  a  conaidemble  part  of  the
debt.  The  Kcond  part  of  tbe  mouiire  coniialcd
in  lowering  tbe  ttandard  of  the  aiWer  coinage,  thai
ii,  Solon  made  73  old  dnchmaa  to  be  worth  100
new  onei ;  ao  that  the  debtor,  in  paying  off  hia
debt,  gained  nther  more  than  one  fbuith.  BHchh
(PM.  Earn.  p.  16)  luppoaei  that  it  wu  So1on-a
intention  to  lower  the  ilandard  of  the  coinage  only
by  one  fourth,  that  i>,  to  make  75  old  drachma*
eqnal  to  100  new  one^  bnt  that  the  new  com
ptored  to  be  lighter  than  he  had  expected.  The
third  part  oontiated  in  the  releaae  of  mortgaged
lands  from  their  incombrancefl  and  the  reatoratioa
of  them  to  their  owner*  aa  fait  property.  How
thia  wai  efliEcted  is  not  clear.  Laitly,  Solon
aboliilied  the  lav  which  gnra  to  the  creditor  a
right  to  the  peraon  of  hia  inatrfrent  debtor,  and  he
TeMored  to  ih^  fall  Uiwrtr  thoM  who  had  be«D


SELLA.

enalaTod  hr  debt. For  fucther  infbrmatica  to  thit
meaiure,  >ea  Diet  o/Biaffr,  art.  Soim.

Thii  great  meoiure,  when  cairicd  into  (fleet,
gave  general  ladifactian,  be  it  confared  the  grvat-
eat  benefits  upon  the  poor,  witboat  defnvij^  tbe
rich  of  too  mach,  and  the  Atheniaiu  eipneed  tbeir
Ihankfulnug  by  a  pablk  sacrifice,  which  they  oJIed
BiirixSiia,  and  by  appointing  Solon  to  legislate
for  them  with  milimiled  power.  (Plot.  So^  16  ;
compare  Suidaa,  Heaych.  Etym.  Mac.  i.  n.  ;  Cic
dt  Sa  PaiL  ii.  34  ;  Wachamath,  HOai.  All.  toL
L  p.  472.)  [L.  S.]

SELIQUASTHUM. [Satt*,  No.  IV.]
SELLA. The  general  term  for  a  ital  or  diair
of  any  deicription. The  Tatietiea


I.  SiLLA  CuHfiis,  Iba  chur  of  slate. OnI£i

OelL  iiL  18(  Feinu,  i.  ti.  Otrtia;  Sbyiu,  ai
Firff.  .J«.  li.  334i  Isidor.  ii.  11.  §  11)  ;  bu  it
ii  more  probably  connected  with  e-mmt.  The  rita
curalit  ia  laid  to  havo  been  need  at  Rrane  frcan  b
very  remote  period  as  an  emblem  of  kin|{ly  pnwn-
{henceainilirei/iaKlIaadoniimt,LiT.L^\bmy!nf[
been  imported,  along  with  vnrious  other  insignia  of
royal^,  fram  Etnirla  (Liv.  L  B),  amiding  to  tew
account  by  Tullua  Hostilius  (Macreb.  &K.  I  6)  ;  ac-
cording to  another  by  tbe  cider  TaE^ainiaa  (Fkr.
i.  S)  ;  whQe  Silins  names  Vetolonii  m  iSa  ehy
from  which  it  was  immediately  derired  (niL  487).
Under  the  republic  the  right  of  ntting  apes  thii
chair  belonged  to  the  eimauli,  pneton,  ennle
Bedilea,aud  ccnaora  (Lit.  ii.  64,  *ii.  1,  ii.  46,  x.  7,
zL  46  i  AuL  OelL  n.  9,  &c)  ;  to  the  Fhno
Dialia  (Li7.  i.  2D,  iiriL  8)  [Fi,akin]  ;  ta  tlte
dictator,  and  to  those  whom  ba  deputed  to  act
under  himself,  a*  the  magi^tr  ^uitmm.  Hnce  he
might  be  said  to  comprehoid  all  t
within  himteIC  (DiuiCaa.  i!iiL48  )  Ln.ii
Festus,  I,  e.  Sdht  amlii).  After  the  dovaU  ef
the  conititution  it  wai  assigned  to  the  eapenna
also,  or  to  their  atatnei  in  their  absence  (IWdt.
Ann.  IT.  29,  Hilt.  iL  £9  ;  Serrins,  i.cL}:  ta  the
Augustalea  (Tacit,  ^n.  iL  83),  and,  pefh^ia.  to
the  pnefectiu  nrbL  (Spanheim,  Jt  Prai^  K  CTm
JViuMUM.  z.  3.  I  I.)  It  was  displayed  i^Mn  nil
great  public  occanens,  eipecially  in  the  cncns  and
theatiB  (LiT.  ii.  31 ;  Suet.  Odim.  43  ;  Dioi  Cam.
Iriii.  4),  sometimea,  eren  after  tha  death  of  the
pervm  to  whom  it  bdoaged.  a  maA  of  fecial
nononr,  bestowed  on  Mai^ellus,  Oemanicui,  and
Pcrtinai  (Dion  Cass.  liiL  30,  Iiiit.  4  :  Tacit.  Aim.
ii.  B3,  and  Comm.  of  Lips.  ;  Spanhejm,  z.  2.  |  I ) ;
and  it  was  the  seat  of  the  praetor  wha  be  ad-
ministered  justice.  (Cit  Firr.  ii  38;  VaL  Max.  iiL
5.  g  1  ;  Tadt.  Jim.  175  ;  Martial,  xL  S8.  1&)
In  the  proTincca  it  was  asaamed  by  inffcior  magis.
Iratea,  when  they  exercised  pmconsnlar  or  pro-
praetorian  audiority,  as  we  infei  from  ila  a|^
pearing  along  with  bacet  on  a  com  of  tbe  Oens
Papla,  struck  at  Nieaes  in  Bithynia,  and  bewiiw
the  name  AVAOC  novmoc  TAHIAC.  We  find
it  otcaaionally  exhibited  oa  the  medals  of  fecrign
monarchi  likewise,  on  thoae  of  Ariohamnea  II.  of
Cappadoda,  for  it  waa  the  [cadiea  of  the  Romana
to  present  a  cotule  chair,  an  iTccy  sceptre,  ■  ingt
pneteita,  and  such  like  oroSDent^  *■  tokew  of
respect  and  confidence  to  thoae  rnlo*  whose  friud-
ship  they  desired  to  cnltifale,  (LIt.  xxt  1 1,  xBL
'  ■ "  ilyb.  Em.  lug.  cxiL  ;  Cit  ad  Pwm,  «t,  2  ;


,«.*.)


•  o"


BELLA.

Tbe  lena  cumlb  vpoei*  fitm  the  finl  ta  liave
been  «iianMnted  vith  iTcttj,  lad  thLi  ii  ajmmonly
indicated  bj  luch  eipmtioiu  M  oiirM^g  lAur  ;  A'n-
wdat  ten^tile  dtulu  afrnt:  Uld  tKu^airtint  SI-
fpat  (Hot.  Bp.  L  6.  £3  i  Ovid. «  Pott.  It.  9.  27);
at  >  later  peiitid  it  wu  oTcrlaid  with  gold,  and
CDoaequenllf  we  find  BIfipavT  itt-xpitan,  Spiroui

■rayiphtinn,  rir  Slfpoi


In  ih^B  il  long  nmained  eitmnclj  plain,  cloielir
KKmUing  a  oomniaD  folding  {jikatUti)  camp  (tool
with  oookcd  legL  Then  lut  gare  rlH  to  the
nanv  iynAJnM  Siftm,  found  in  Plutarch  (Afo-
rntt,  i);  the;  111111^17  lonind  ui  of  cirphanta'
tMth,  vhich  they  may  hare  been  intended  t<i  imi-
tate, and  the  eMporoT  Anrelian  propoted  to  con-
■tnicl  one  in  whieb  each  foot  wu  In  coniiit  of  an
enormoitt  tnik  entiie. (Vopiiciii,  Fim.  8.)

The  fonn  d(  tbe  Hlla  cnrnlii,  ai  it  ii  conunmlf
lepceMDled  apoa  the  deoBiii  of  tbe  Roman  ia-
mOiea,  ia  gina  in  p.  G20.  In  ^e  tbllowing  ml  ue
repTCMUted  two  pair  ef  broma  leg>,  belonging  to
■ellae  cnralca,  pmierved  in  the  mueiun  at  Naplea
(Muaa  Bortomiea,  m\.  tL  tar.  SB)  )  and  a  lella
•,  eepied  from  (he  Vatican  collection.


11.  BiSBLLiUM.  Tbe  word  ii  found  in  no  clo*-
■ical  aotboreicept  Varro  (/-.  L.  t.  ISB.ed.  MUller),
aceording  to  whom  it  meani  a  MUt  Urge  cnongb  to
cnnlatn  twa  penoni.  Wo  ieani  fnnn  tarioua  in-
•criptioM  that  tbe  ri^t  of  ntuig  a  Kat  of  this
kind,  npon  poblic  oeouioni,  wa»  gianlod  ai  a  maik


SELLA.  lOlS

numt  to  diftinguiihed  penooi  by  the  nu^*.

■  and  people  in  proviaciBl  towni. There  an

iplei  of  thu  in  an  inieriptjon  found  at  Pin,

which called forth  the long,  teamed, rambling

diMortalioD  oF  Chimenlelli  (Qrur.  Titt.  Antiq.

Rom.  ToL  *iL  p.  2030),  and  in  two  other*  found

at  PompriL (OreU.  /■»-.  B.  4(MS,  4044.) In

another  ioKriptioD  we  have  Bibbllutdr  Hohok

OitJL  4IM3)  i  in  another <OreU.  4055),  can-

aining  the  roll  of  an  ineaip«ation  of  carpenteri,

me  of  tbe  office-bearen  ij  ityled  COLLEQI  BI-

SELLEARIUS. (Compare  OrelL4046,  4047.)

Two  bronie  bitellia  were  diKoiered  at  Pompeii,

id  tbna  all  nncertunty  with  r^*"!  to  tbe  form  of

le  leal  hoa  been  lemoTed. One  of  theie  ig  en-

gnTed  aboTB, (Mat.  Boiiom.  Tol,  iL  tar.  31.)

UI.  SiLLi  OiSTAToau  (Suet.A^er.26,  VUilL

;  J  Junta.  Hon.  uiz.  2)  or  Firtohia  (Cae-

u  Anrelian.  L  5,  iL  1),  a  Hdan  used  both  in

wn  and  conntnr  (TaciL^M.  iit.  4  1  Snet.  Oaad.

29),  by  men  (Tadt.  HitL  L  35,  iiL  8£  ;  Javen.

Tii.  Ul  ;  MortiaL  ix.  23),  ■*  well  ai  by  women.

(TaciL.^iM.  liT.  4  ;  Juv.  L  124,  tL  532  ;  bencs

matabru  tlia,  Soet  Otio,  6.) It  ia  eipreuly  di>-

tingniahed  boni  the  Lsctica  (Snet.  Clmid.  26 ;

Martial,  i. ID,  li.  SB;  Senec  bra.  nit  12),  a

portable  bed  or  lofai,  in  which  the  penon  catded

lay  in  a  lecnmbsnt  poaitioa,  while  the  tiUa  wu  a

Cible  chair  in  which  the  occupant  aat  nprlghl,
they  ore  nmetimee  oonlbiinded,  u  by  Haitial
(it.  61).  It  diffeiedfrom  the  aolWni  atao,  but  in
what  the  differaice  conaiated  it  ia  not  eaiy  to  de-
teimina.  [CATatDRA.]  Tbe  hUb  wai  «Hnetim(a
entirely  ^en,  a*  wg  infer  bum  the  account  given
by  Tadma  of  the  death  of  Qalba  (HiiL  L  35,  &c),
but  more  frequently  ahat  in.  (Juven.  L  126  ;  SuaL
Ntr.  26,  rUtU.  le,  otio,  6.)  Dion  Cauiua  (li.
2)  pretenda  that  Clandiui  Eral  employed  the
corned  aella,  but  in  thii  ha  U  eontndicted  by
Snotonioa  (Oelav.Si),  and  by  himaelf  (iliriL  23,
In.  4S).  It  appean,  hawever,  not  to  hare  been
introduced  until  Ions  after  the  lectica  wai  comnuin,
ainca  we  icarcely,  if  ever,  find  any  allnaion  to  it
until  tbe  period  of  tbe  empire.  The  iclioe  vera
mode  aometimea  of  plain  leather,  and  aometimei
oroomanted  with  bone,  ivory,  iQver  (Laniprid.
Elagab.  4),  or  gold  {Claud.  Himor.  Cant.  iv.  £S3),
accrading  to  the  rank  or  fortune  of  the  proprietor.
They  wen  funiiihed  with  a  pillow  to  ■opport  tbe
head  and  neck  (cervical  Jav.  vi.  fi32,  and  Schol.),
when  made  nomy  the  epithet  tana  wai  applied
{Senec.  di  Ornl.  14),  when  amallei  than  uiual
Ihey  were  termpd  idbJae  (Tacit  HiiL  iiL  S6)  ;
tha  motion  wai  »  eoiy  that  one  might  itndy  with-
out inconvenience  (Plin.  Bp.  m.  5),  while  at  the
uune  time  it  ailbcded  healthful  eicrcite.  (Senec.
Bm.  eii.  12  ;  O^eo.  de  TKud.  Val.tH  ;  Caelina
Anrelian.  L  c.)

IV.  Skllab  of  different  kind*  are  mentioned
inridButally  in  andcnt  writen,  accompanied  by
epithets  which  aerre  to  point  out  generally  the
purposes  for  which  they  were  intended.  Thus  we
read  of  kHm  iahtfarBt^  telltu  tauoriae,  teilae  d&-
ttetriaat,  ullai  fiamiUariait  y.  perhuae,  and  many
otben.  Both  Vbito  (L.  L.  t.  12S)  and  Pestu*
(i.  V.)  have  preserved  the  word  ttliqiKittnm.  Tha
former  cluies  it  along  with  tedet,  udiit,  toiium,
tliai,  the  latter  colls  them  "aw^itin  <m(i}M  jwao-
rit,"  and  Amobiua  include*  them  among  common
aniclea  of  fnraitute.  No  hint,  bowarer,  ia  given
by  any  of  these  authnitiei  which  could  lead  u*  10


1016  SENATUS.

conjecture  the  ihipe,  nor  ii  any  oddilioiul  light
thnnn  upon  the  queBtion  b;  Hfginiu,  wba  telli
01,  wben  detcribing  the  CDnatellBliaaa,  that  Couio-
ftiA  i>  tested  "  in  itiigaoMlro."

or  cluin  in  ordinaij  me  for  denieitic  pnrpotn,
a  gremi  nriety,  many  diiplaying  gre&t  tule,  haie
been  diicovered  in  eieavBlioni  or  aie  ie«n  rcpre-
•enled  in  ancient  freKoe*.  The  fint  est  annexed
t  bronia one  bom the Mnjenin at


Naplei  (Afw.0ari.Tol.Ti  taT.SB);  the  lecond,
two  chain,  of  which  Ibe  one  on  the  riftht  hand  ii
in  the  Vatican  and  tbe  other  ii  taken  ftom  1  point-
ing at  Pompeii.  (Mw.  Airi.  Tol.xii.  tlT.  3.)  A
cluir  of  a  very  btaiitiful  fbna  it  giten  in  the  Mm,
Bni.  vi>LTiiLtaT.2l>.


V.  SiLua  EauMTaia.  [Rphiffiuh.]  [W.B.)

SE'MATA  (rtuiara). [FuNua,  p.  S56,  a,]

SEUDELLA. [Dinariub.]

SEMGNTIVAE  FERIAE.  [PiRU,p.£30,a.]

SEMIS,  SEMISSIS. (As,p.UO,b.]

SEMU'NCIA. [Uncia.]

SEMUNCIA'RIUM  FUNUS.  [Finus,  p.
627,  b.]

SENATUS.  Ta  all  the  i^uhlici  nf  antiqnit;
the  gorernment  wa«  dividrd  betVMn  a  eenate  and
a  popular  auemUy  ;  and  in  CMea  irherc  a  king
Mood  at  tbe  head  of  affiiin,  ai  at  SparU,  the
king  had  litOe  more  than  the  eiecotivt  A  »-
Data  in  the  eactj  timei  wai  olwaji  regarded  ai
an  Bwemhly  of  elden,  whicb  ii  in  hcl  the  meaning
of  the  Roman  Kiiatui  a*  of  the  Spanan  yipoueia,
and  it!  memben  wen  elected  Roni  among  the
noblea  of  the  nation.  Tha  number  of  lenaton
in  tbe  ancient  lepuhlici  alwaya  bore  a  diatinct  re-
lation to  tbe  number  of  tribei  of  wbich  the  nation
wai  compoeed.  [BouLi,  OiauUJ.]  Hence  in
the  eaHieet  timee,  when  Rome  conaijted  of  onlj
one  tribe,  it4  eenate  conaietcd  of  one  hundred  mem-
ber* (Kaoloni  or  patnt ;  compan  Patbu:ii),  and
when  the  Sabine  tribe  or  the  Tiliet  became  united
with  the  Latin  tribe  or  the  Ramnea,  the  number
of  aenaton  mi  incresied  to  two  hundred.  (Dionji.
ii.  47  i  Pint,  floia.  20.)  Thii  number  wai  again
augmantad  bj  ooe  buodrad,  when  tbe  lliird  tribe


or  the Lnceret became incorponted witb the

Reman  tute.  Dionj-tiui  (iii.  G7)  and  LJTir  <L
35)  place  thia  lait  eienl  in  the  reign  of  Tar-
■ "  ■  -xnide  Ri  PpU.  iL  20),  who


MToeiw


liui  doubled  the  nomber  of  •enaioia,
according  to  which  we  ought  to  luppoae  that  be-
fore Tan^uiniua  the  lenate  conuated  onlj  of  150
membera.  Thia  difierence  howeTcr  may  be  ac-
counted for  b;  the  luppontion,  that  at  the  time  at

tad  became  Tacant,  which  he  filled  up  at  the
iame  time  that  he  added  100  Luoere*  to  the  Hoale,
or  elae  that  Cicero  rqt*"^^  f'^"  I>»cerci,  in  oppo-
aition  to  the  (no  other  tribei,  aa  a  aecoud  or  a  nrir
half  of  the  nation,  and  thua  incomctlj  cnuidoed
their  lenatora  likewiaa  aa  the  aecond  or  new  half
of  that  body.  The  new  aeuaton  added  by  Tar-
qulniui  PHicaa  wcro  diatunKoiihed  &Dm  thoae  be-
longing to  the  two  older  tribei  by  tha  appellatioa
pairet  MJnonns  pmd'aM,  aa  preriouily  thoae  who
'^'  'ea  had  been  diatingniahed,  by
the  tame  name,  from  Ihoae  who  repnaeitled  th«
Ramnei.  (Dionyi.  iL  67.)  Serriua  TDlliu*  did
not  make  any  change  in  the  compoajtioo  of  the
lenale ;  but  under  Tarquinioa  Snperboa  their
number  ia  aaid  to  bare  become  Tery  much  di-
minitbed,  aa  thii  tyrant  put  many  to  death  and
tent  other*  into  exiles  Tbit  accoont  hoverac  ap-
pear* to  be  greatly  exaggerated,  and  it  ii  a  pco-
'  ible  auppoiition  of  Niebuhr  (Hiit.  of  Awe,  L

S2S),  that  aeveml  Tacanciet  in  the  aenate  anM
from  many  of  the  aenaton  accompanying  the  tyrant
--'-  Ml exile. The  lacanciei which had  thua

. . .  were  filled  up  immediately  aAcr  the  catab-
liahmcnt  of  the  republic,  h^ U  Junioi  Brataa,


e  (Li-.


1),  c


Dionyaiut  (t.  13),  by  Bratui  and  Valeriuj  Pobli-

cola,  and  according  to  Plutarch  {PmU.  II)  and

" 1  (i.  D.  Qui  piUra) by  Valerioa PnUicoIa

All  howercT  agr«e  that  the  pertma  who

on  thia  occoiion  made  tenatoia  were  ttoblo

plebeiani  of  equcittian  rank. Dionyaiaa atatra,

(hat  the  noblcit  of  the  plebeiana  were  fint  rajaed

to  the  rank  of  patrlciana,  and  that  then  the  aew

tenaton  were  taken  from  amoua  them. Bat  thia

appesrt to be incompatible  with the name by

which they  were deiignated. Had  they been

made  palriciana,  they  would  hiTe  been  [Btn*  lika

:  other*,  whereoa  now  the  new  lenaton  are  tail]

hare  been  di*tinguithed  from  the  idd  onea  by

'.  name  of  CMUcriptL  (Lir.  iL  1  ;  Feat,  i;  v.  Om-

ipti  and  aditetL) Hence  the  cnttonuiiy  mode  oT

addreiaing the whole  aenate heneefiuth alnya

paint  coHichpti,  that  ia,  patra  it  eamtcnpti,

an  wai  164  (PluL  PiJJ.  II ,  Feat.  t.v.  Qm
patra)  ;  but  thit,M  Niebuhr haa  juMly  renuufctd,
ia  a  bbrication,  perhaja  of  Valerina  of  AntiaiD,
which  ia  contradicted  by  all  aufaoeqnent  hitLvy.

Henceforth  the  number  nf  300  lenaton  a|ipMn
to  have  remained  unaltered  for  tevcral  cauuneiL
<Li<.  EpU.  60.)  C.  Semproniui  Oracchna  wu
the  firit  who  attempted  to  make  a  change,  but  in
what  thia  eoniiited  ia  not  certain.  In  the  epitoma
of  LiTy  it  ia  expretaly  itated,  that  be  inleoded  ta
add  600  oguitea  to  the  number  of  300  tenatm,
which  would  have  made  a  tenate  of  900  iDcrabsa,
and  would  hare  given  a  great  prepondentnee  to  tba
equitei.  Thiaappeanto  bcanabturdi^.  (OettlJK
GfA.  d.  Km.  Slaatn.  p  437.) Plolmh  (C


8EKATUS.
Oncdk.  S,  Ac.)  •tatd,  that  OTwxhni  added  to  tlie
■eoale  SOO  equiu*.  whom  hs  wu  alloved  to  leUet
from  the  wb(d«  bodj  of  sqoilei,  and  Ihit  be  Innt-
fored  tiia  jndida  la  th»  nsw  Moata  i^  600.  TbU
account  ■wnu  to  be  famideil  Dpon  a  coafiuioD  of
the  Ih  hdEdaiia  of  C  Oncchu  with  the  1at«
BM  of  LJriw  Dram  (Walter,  Gaek.  d.  iOm.
AMibii,^344),  and  aU  tba  other  wrileia  vhd  men-
tisa  Um  lax  jodidaria  of  C.  Oiacchoi  do  not  allude
to  anj  chiB^  or  incnaaa  in  the  anmber  of  wna-
ton,  bal  111^7  MUa  that  he  tranifamd  the  jodt-
cia  froo  th«  aenate  to  the  eqnitaa,  wbo  nmaioed  in
their  poaMMim  till  the  tribanealiip  of  Lrdna  Dro-
Mi.  The  Utat  prapoaed,  that  a*  the  aenate  con-
■iated  of  SOO,  an  equal  munber  of  eqnitea  ahould
be  elected  (ipiffrirSiir)  into  the  amale,  and  that  in
faMn  the  jadicea  ihoold  be  taken  from  thii  lenate
oT  600.  (Appian.  S.  C  i  SS  ;  Amel.  Vict,  dt  Vir.
lOailT.  66  ;  Ut.  BpU.  71.)  After  the  death  of
Linna  Drama,  hoverer,  thii  lav  wsi  abeliabed  b;
the  MDMle  ilael^  M  whoie  behalf  it  bad  bean  pn-
poaad,  and  the  aenata  nev  again  eonairtad  of  SOO
■wmben.  Daring  the  dnl  war  batvaen  Maiina
and  Snila  maoT  lacanciea  mint  baTo  oecmred  in
tba  Hnata.  Siula  in  bit  dictatonhip  not  only  filled
up  tbeae  TKaDciea,  but  incnated  the  nnmbec  of


aiabed  eqnitea  to  ha  elected  into  the  lenate
B.  A  CM  100),  bat  tba  nl  iocnaae  whKh
be  made  to  the  numbei  of  lenaton  ii  not  mentioiied
anjwbate.  It  appeal^  ba<ra*ar,  benceTorth  to
ba*e  eoDaiited  of  batweea  fire  and  lii  bandied.
{Citi.adAa.LH.)  Jnliu  Caenr  aoKnwnled  the
noDber  to  900,  and  niud  to  thii  digni^  even
eanntoa  toldiai,  ftecdmen,  and  penflriaL  (Dion
Can.  zliiL  47  ;  Boat.  Ctt.  80.)  Thii  aihitoari-
■  in  electing  nmmtbj  pecwm  into  the  acoUe,


Ai^.  U.)  AognatH  ^aied  the
wottbif  nMmbBi,  who  "  ~
b*  tba  po^  Onmi  k
to  600  (Dion  Can.  liv.  14),  and
of  the  amaton  ibould  alwaja  be  exhibited  to  pablic
inapKtien.  (Dtcn  Can.  It,  3.)  Daring  the  fint
eentariea  of  <itt  empin,  thii  nnmbei  appeact,  en  the
wfaole,  to  hare  inmaiDed  the  nme  ;  bat  aa  every-
thing depended  npon  the  will  of  the  empeior,  we
can  Bcanxl;  expect  to  fiad  a  resnlai  and  Gied
nomber  of  tbetn.  (Dion  Can.  liii.  17.)  Donng  the
latter  period  of  the  erapiie  their  nnmbct  wai  again


ni  Kuatant,  reduced  it*  nnnber


With  icipect  to  the  eligilnllty  of  penona  ka
ibe  Msate,  ai  wall  ai  to  the  manner  in  whieb  they
B  elected,  we  mnat  diatingniib  betweaa the
—  It  waa  fbcmerly

LiTT  (i.  H)  and

Bodem  tban  foond  new  auppoitati  in  Hiuchke
and  Rnbinis  that  fai  the  cariy  poiod  of  Roman
biMoiy  the  kinga  appointed  the  membtri  of  the
lenate  at  their  ova  diacietien.  Niehnhr  and
Dtban  after  bim  ban  attempted  Id  ihov  that  the
popahu  of  Rome  «m  the  real  mereign,  that  all
the  powen  which  tbe  kioga  pannied  were  dele-


nnblT  i


Kiple  of  ra-
Ibe  popnloa,
ra  afectad  hr  tka  popaloi.


8ENATUS.  1017

Dicnijitui  fli.  14)  alio  itatei  that  tlia  unatora
were  elected  by  the  popnlua,  but  tbe  manner  in
which  be  deeciibet  the  election  it  erroneoui,  for
be  belierei  that  tbe  three  tribei  were  alreadjr
imiled  when  the  eenate  omiitted  of  only  me
bundled  memboa,  and  that  the  Knalon  were
elected  by  the  eoriea.  Niebabj  (i.  p.  336)
ibinki,  that  each  gena  lent  ita  deeorio,  wbo  waa
it!  aldccman,  to  nprearat  it  in  the  aenate  ;  Odt-
Ilii^  (p.  \6l,  eomp.  u  62)  on  the  otfaei  hand
belierei,  with  Kmiewhat  more  probabilitj,  that
each  deciBT  (the  tnia  af  Dionyiini),  wbicb  con-
tamed  eitber  a  part  of  one  or  paiti  of  aeveral
amaUer  gcolea,  had  to  af^xdnt  one  old  man  by
whom  it  waa  npnaented  in  tbe  aenate,  and  ■
coeaa  eqnca.  Thia  aappetitien  rsBoTea
3i]ty  reapKting  the  deeario,  which  ha*
been  poiotad  out  by  Waller  (OskL  d.  Htm.  StalUi,
p.  23.  IL  IS)  ;  tor  the  dacurio  wai  the  commander
of  a  ditiaioD  of  the  army,  aiid  ai  aueb  coold  not
well  bare  been  of  tbe  age  of  a  aeoator.  Aa,  to-
aording  to  thia  tbeoy,  each  deciuy  or  gena  ^i-
pmntad  one  aaiat«,  each  cuiy  wa*  i^snented  by
ten,  CBcb  tribe  b;  one  hundred,  and  the  whole
poimlu*  by  three  hnndred  aenMiin,  all  of  whom
held  their  dignity  for  life.  But  thia  tbeor;  cannot
be  accepted,  for  we  matt  either  let  nearly  all
iha  ancient  aathoritiea  at  defiance,  or  wa  moat
acquieace  in  the  old  opiniou  that  tbe  king  ap-
pahited  tbe  lenalm.  Tbe  pleheiana  a*  tnch
were  not  rniteaentad  in  the  anatc,  for  the  in-
(tancea  in  which  plebeian*  are  mentioned  aa  being
made  nniton,  aa  in  tba  nign  of  Tanpiiniaa  Pria-
cu*  and  after  tbe  abolition  of  tile  kingly  power,
cannot  be  Rgarded  in  any  atber  light  than  mere
■Bcmentvy  meamti^  which  the  goTarament  waa
obiigad  to  ad<^  fn'  leteial  teaaani,  and  without
any  inlentioa  Is  appoint  lepreaatatiTn  of  tbe
plebea,  (Niehohr,  i.  p.  Sa6,  At.)  Tbe  nnmben  of
■neh  pdebnan  lenabHt  al  any  rate  muat  baTe  baoi
much  mailer  than  they  are  ataled  by  our  anlbori-
tiai,  far  there  ia  no  initance  of  any  plel)eian  aena-
toroi  Teeoid  until  tbe  year  439b.Ci  whenSpnrini
Maelina  ia  mentioned  aa  tcBStor.  The  aenate  it-
Bclf  appeara  to  bare  had  lame  influence  npon  the
election  of  new  memberi,  inacmuch  u  it  might  miaa
objectiona  againit a  pewB  elected.  (Dionya.  liL  35.)
Tbe  whole  amate  waa  dirided  into  decuriea,  <ach
of  which  corrcapmided  to  a  caria.  When  tha
lenata  comiited  of  only  one  hundred  OKmbeia,
then  were  accordin^y  only  ten  deeoriea  of  iena>
toil  I  and  tea  lenaton,  one  being  taken  from  eaeh
decniy,  fanned  the  dteeu  primi  wbo  repccaeotel
tbe  tan  coriea.  When  wbeeqaently  the  npKaent-
■triea  of  tha  two  other  tribe*  were  admitted  bta
tbe  aenate,  the  Ramnet  with  their  decent  ^mi  re-
tained foe  a  time  their  mperiority  orer  tha  two
Dths  tribe*  (DionyL  ii.  56,  iiL  1  ;  Plat.  Ktam.  3\
and  gare  their  rotea  fint.  (Dlonya.  ii.  B4.)  Tba
fiimt  among  tbe  deccm  primi  waa  the  prvuepa
imabu,  who  waa  appointed  by  the  king  (DJonya.
iL  12  ;  Lyd.  d»  Mau.  i.  19),  and  waa  at  the  aame


u  [Pi


ing  the  age  at  wbicb  a  peraon  might  b  . _

into  the  lenate  during  the  kin)riy  period,  we  know
no  man  than  what  ia  indicated  by  tbe  name  aena-
tor  iltiit,  that  ia,  that  Ihey  were  peracoa  of  ad-
nnaed  age,  (Comp.  Becker,  Aon.  Altaik.  y6L  ii.
pLii.  P.38G,  du.)

On  the  eatabliahment  of  tba  republic  the  dee>
tioo  of  wnaMn  ;ai*ed  btm,  Ih*  handi  of  tha


lOIS  SEHATUS.

kingf  into  tboM  of  the  ma^tiatei,  the  connli,  con-
mlar  tribnnei,  and  nibfeqaentlj  tha  couon,  {Lir.
m  iF—L M.v.PnuUritiiaiatont.)  Butthepower

of  aleeting  matxan  poMiMed  b;  the  republican
mtgiitntei  wu  by  do  mnaiu  to  orbitnry  power,
for  tha  unaton  vne  iSvt.ji  taken  from  unoni;
tbMs  who  toe  cqniln,  oc  whom  the  people  bad
pnviDBilf  iaieatcd  with  a  magiitncy,  u  that  in
reaUtf  the  peaple  tbemselTc*  nlmji  aominatid
tbe candidate*  for  the  aenats. Fitnn tbe jeai

appointed  for  lifo,  bat  became  a  magiKiats  ap-
pointed bf  the  cttriea,  and  the  patrei  miaonim
gentium  were  likewiie  eligible  to  tbi*  dignilj.
(Niebuhr,  ii.  p.  119.)  It  mneorer  q)pean,  that
all  the  ctinde  magiatratca  turn  tbe  qnaeiton  up-
wardi  had  by  Tirtne  of  their  office  a  leit  ia  the
lenate,  which  thej  retained  after  the  j>±r  of  their
office  waa  oTer,  and  it  wai  Enmi  thcH  ei-maf^a-
Inta*  that  the  taonciet  occurring  in  the  lenalo
wse  gentfallf  filled  up.

After  the  inibtntion  of  the  cenionhip,  the  {en-
eon  alone  had  tha  right  to  elect  new  memben  inta
tbe  Knats  bom  among  the  ei-magittiBtrJ,  and  la
excladc  laeh  aa  they  deemed  nnwarthy.  (Zonar.
Tii.  19;  eompan  Cic  dt  Lig,  iii.  12.)  [Ckn-
BOB.]  The  eiclnaion  waa  aBeeted  by  limply
paaaing  orer  the  namea  and  not  altering  them
into  the  llati  of  aenaton,  whence  luch  men  wet*
□died  pratlenti  Kvibtra.  (Feet.  t.  n)  On  one
eitiaordinary  ociaiiou  the  etdett  amoDg  the  ex-
eennn  was  inTeiled  with  dictatcdal  powa  to
elect  new  members  into  tha  aenata.  (LIt.  niii.
32.)  The  cenaon  were  thai,  on  the  one  hand,
confined  in  their  electiona  to  inch  peraona  ea  had
already  raedied  the  confidence  of  tbe  pei^te,  and
on  the  odier,  they  were  eiprenly  directed  by  the
lei  Ovinia  tribonicia  to  elect  >*  ex  Omni  otdine  op-
timnm  qnemqne  curiatim."  (Fest.j.s.)  Thll  ob-
icure  )er  Oiinia  ia  referred  by  Niebuhr  <L  p.  hll)
tn  the  time  anterior  to  the  aduunioD  of  icat  cud-
■cripli  into  (he  senate,  bat  it  evidently  belong!  to
a  much  hiter  period,  and  wat  meant  to  be  a  gaid-
ancB  to  the  censora,  aa  he  himielt  afterward*  ac-
knowledged (iL  p.40B,  D.  S55  ;  oomiian  Walter,
p.  IDO,  n.  6S).  The  onjo  mentioned  in  thi*  lex  ii
the  ordo  aenatoiiua,  i.  e.  men  who  were  eligible  for
tbe  lenate  fmm  Che  office  ^ley  had  held.  (Liv.
iiiL  49.)  The  expreuion  wnlafHB  ii  Toy  difficult
tn  eiplam  ;  »me  beliere  that  it  refera  to  the  bet
that  the  aew  aenaton  were  only  ^ipointed  with  tha

PUiiji.  T.  17),  and  in  tiia  preaenee  of  the  lictor^
who  repreeented  the  curiea.

From  the  time  that  the  cumle  magiftntei  had
the  rigbt  to  take  their  leati  in  the  aenate,  we  mult
diatinguiih  between  two  claaae*  of  lenaton,  tii,
real  lenaton,  or  inch  ai  had  been  reguiariy  raiKd
to  their  dignity  by  tha  magutntea  or  the  caniara,
and  anch  a*  had,  by  Tirtne  of  tbe  office  which  they
held  or  had  held,  a  right  to  Bke  dieir  aeata  in  the
aenate  and  to  ipcsk  <  taOaitiam  if KBraJwaMtaHtiae),
but  not  tOTote.  {Gellini,  iiL  18  ;  Feat ».  ■.  SbhHoiw.)
To  thia  ordo  aenatoriua  alio  belonged  tbe  pimti-
fex  maximal  and  the  flamoi  dialii.  The  whole
of  theH  aenaton  bad,  ai  we  have  atated,  no  tight
to  vote,  but  when  the  othen  had  voted,  they  might
itep  over  or  join  the  trae  or  <he  other  party,  whence
ther  were  called  unuOota  ptdvii,  an  appelhUion
which  had  la  fbtmer  time*  beai  applied  Co  tboie
JBniorei  who  were  not  conanlar^  (QelL  I.  e. ;  com-


8KNATU8.
pen  Niebuhr,  iL  p.  lU  ;  Waller,  p.  144,  sod
more  eipecially  Beder,  Lcf.  431,  &c. ;  F.  Uof-
maaa.  Der  Rom  Semat,  p.  IS,  &c)  A  aingalv
itrcgularily  in  electing  memben  of  the  aovte  **■
committed  by  Appiui  Claudini  Caecua,  wka  electird
into  the  aenate  aon*  of  beedmen  (lir.  ix.  39,  46  ;
Aur.  Viet.  <b  rir.  Hbutr.  M)  ;  hot  thia  caadnct
wu  dedand  illegal,  and  bad  no  fiirtlia  iiaiii
qnencea.

When  at  bmgtb  all  the  itate  office*  had  be«»
e<;ually  aiceinhla  to  the  plebeiani  and  tbe  {stri-
ciana,  and  when  tbe  majority  of  office*  wan  keld
by  the  fijnuer,  that  number  intheisialeDitDrall*
increaaed  in  {coportioo. The  miala  bad
become an  aawmbiy  repreaenting  the  ;
formerly  it  hid  repreaenMd  the  popohii,
to  tbe  lut  century  of  the  TepQMK  tbe
dignity  WBi  only  regarded  a«  one  coBfam
people. (Cic  pre  StxL  E£,  it  Leg-  iiL  13,  (^  Pa
!. M — f, — . tg) But  B-'-="~^-»=


BiLU.)  The  oflita  o  .  .
had  become  independent  iS  that  of  pnetor  Bttmna,
wai  DOW  given  by  the  cenaon,  and  at  fint  alwaja
to  the  eldcat  among  the  ei-ceneon  (Idv.  xxrii.  II),
but  aflerwardi  to  any  other  Benator  whom  they
thonght  moit  wortby,  and  nnleaa  then  waa  any
charge  to  be  made  againat  Mm,  he  waa  iii  iljiinl
at  tbe  next  tnttnmL  Thit  diitinctioii,  howcm;
great  ai  it  waa,  afiiirded  neither  power  tur  adv^
ta^  (Zonar.  vii.  IS),  and  did  not  evea  coob  tke
privilege  of  pivtiding  at  tbemBitiiigicf  thoaOBto,
which  only  belonged  to  thoie  aagiMnUKa  wbo  had
the  right  to  conv^e  the  acoalB.  (BelLnv.  7;  Oc
*  Lw.  iiL  4.)

It  baa  be<ii  nppoaed  by  NJehnbr  (iii.  p.  406),
that  a  aenatocial  oenani  eiifted  at  Rima  at  Um
commencement  of  the  aeooad  Pome  war,  but  tbe
word*  of  Liry  (xxiv.  1 1)  od  which  Ihia  anniinilim
ia  founded  aeem  to  be  too  tagne  to  admit  itf  aoeb  aa
inference.  GtUUing  (p.S^fiJinfen  froa  Ciocn  {at
Faa.  liil  5),  that  Caeaar  wa>  the  fint  who  initi-
tuted  a  aenatorial  oraaaa,  bat  tbe  paiiMfli  af  Cicero
it  itill  more  inconcluaive  than  that  of  Livy.  and
we  may  aafely  take  it  tor  gianted  that  liwMg  tbe
whide  of  the  repnblicaii  period  no  aotl  oaiana
exiited  (Pibi.  H.  ff.  xiv.  I),  although  aenUn
naturally  alwayi  beioi^ed  to  tbe  wcalthiaMdaMH.
The  inathution  of  a  cennu  for  koUoc  '  '
altogetlier  to  tha  time  of  the  empire.
Gnt  fixed  it  at  400,1)00  aeaMcceB,  aflen
enaud  it  to  donUa  tUa  nun,  and  at  IM  enai  to
1,300,000  aettotoa.  Thoaa  aenaton  wboa  pta-
perty  did  not  amoont  to  thia  mm,  reonved  gia&ta
from  the  emperor  to  make  it  up.  (Ssct.  Amg,  41  ;
Dim  Cbu,  Ut.  it,  36,  30,  Iv.  13.) SulHqaMitly


the  eenite  thoae  who  had  leat  their  (aopK^
through  their  own  |mdigBlity  and  vica^  if  llvy
did  not  quit  it  of  their  own  anxwd-  fTrrit  tmmil
y.  48,  ziL  S3  ;  Soet  TO.  47.)  A^aMM  aba,
after  having  cleared  the  acaale  of  imvoitkj  mob-
ben,  intrndnced  a  new  and  nanimaliag  alcBBt
into  it  by  adaiitting  men  from  tbe  ■mi-t^jj-  t^
coloniei,  and  eTen  from  tbe  provincea. (Tad


SENATUS.
mmA>l  PivriMikli  wha  wen  made  (enaton  of
amnt  wnt  to  node  *t  Bon^  ud  with  the  ei-
ceptuD  of  nch  u  bdosgsd  ta  Stcilj  or  to  ObIIu
NubgoeMiij  ibejr  wen  not  allowed  to  tiiit  their
natita  coontrie*  mtbont  ■  ipeekl  pecnuMion  of
thaemperor.  (TmII.  AimaL  lii.  2S  ;  Dim  Cut.
ML  4e,  Ix.  as.)  Id  ordar  to  indn  Roma  or  Italif
tiuii  Dew  home,  tka  proTind*!  cuididnto  (or  the
Knata  waia  labieqiiantlj  alwayi  aipected  to  u-
qaire  luded  pnavt^  in  Itidf.  (Plin.  EpM.  n.
19.)  On  tfaa  whale,  hovarer,  the  aqiiUa  mnuiuid
dniing  the  fint  eeatDrin  of  the  enpin  the  eeaii-
mrinm  Moatui,  which  the;  had  alao  beau  in  the
latMr  period  of  the  repiblic

Ai  reg&rdf  the  *ge  at  which  a  pei*oD  might  be-
eDme  a  fenatar,  we  hare  na  axprpia  <tatement  far
the  tima  of  the  rapoblic,  altboagh  it  appaan  to
have  been  find  bj  loine  eoitom  or  lav,  ai  the
■elaa  ■atiatoria  ii  ft^nently  meatianed,  eipeciallf
ddrii^  the  Utter  period  of  the  republic.  Bat  we
Bay  bj  indoftion  dlMom  the  pnbaUe  ag&  We
know  unt  aBcndfa^  to  Iba  kz  annalii  of  tlw  tribsne
ViUn^  the  an  fixed  tor  the  qiaeetonhip  wai  31.
<OnUi,OMai.mj:Tol.  iu.p.l9S.>  Now  u  it
aught  baqipai  that  a  qnatatw  waa  Dude  a  Knatar
imoediatdy  after  ^a  erpirBtion  of  hie  r^ce,  we
maj  pRnme  that  the  aarlint  age  at  which  a  man
emdd  become  a  laiator  wu  32.  Aaiiutiu  at  hut
iiied  the  Hnatorlal  age  at  3S  (Dion  Can.  lii.  30),
wbidi  appean  to  hate  Rmained  unaltered  thrmgh-
ODt  the  time  of  the  empire.


No  a


«  alio*


■■utile  boiznaai, Abmt  the


a  have


violated  thia  law  or  cnitoai,  and
Teat  ite  neunatat  a  law  waa  paiaed  with  the  Te-
hement  ORnaitioo  of  the  lenate,  that  none  of  ite
memben  BBonld  be  pemitted  to  pouta  a  ihip  of
men  than  SOO  amphona  in  tomage,  aa  thi*  wu
thovght  RdGcientlj  large  t«  cooTay  to  Rame  tha
HOdooo of tbrnrMtatea abroad.  (LiT.nlSS.)  It
la  dear  howerer  fiwa  Ckato  (e.  Virr.  r.  18),
that  thii  law  wu  ficqaenlly  nolatad.

R^dIh  meetingi  of  the  itDite  (lenofai  ItgOi-
ani)  took  place  during  the  republic,  and  probsbl  j
dnrms  the  kiagljrpariodaUo,  on  tha  oJcnda,  nones,
and  idea  of  eiery  moDtb  (Cic  ad  Q.  Fral.  \l  13)  ;
eitiauTdniaijtnwetTiigi  (anutet  miUedu)  might  ba
coDToked  on  any  odier  da;,  with  the  eiceptioo  of
iboac  which  wpre  otri,  and  thoaa  an  which  cemitia
were  held.  (Ctc  ad  Q.  FTat.  a.  2.)  The  right  of
BCDToking  the  lanate  dniing  tba  kingly  period  be-
loBgBd  to  the  king,  or  to  hie  TieegercDC,  the  outoe
orbia.  (Dionya.  ii.  8  t  PiuSraiTrtiB  Urbl)  Thii
right  wia  daring  the  repoblie  tniufamd  to  the
cnnla  magiMntei,  and  at  lut  to  the  tribunal  alio.
Under  (be  empire  the  eonaoli,  jraeton,  and  tri-
faunea  continued  to  enjoy  tbe  ume  jxirilege  (Dion
Ca«,  ItL  47,  lii.  2«  ;  Tacit.  Hitt.  iv.  39),  al-
though  the  enperon  alio  had  it  (Dion  Cau.  liii.
1,  It*.  3.)  If  a  waator  did  nol  appear  on  a  day  of
aaeting,  he  wa*  liable  to  a  fine  for  which  a  pledge
«■■  It^ca  (jigtorit  eapHa)  until  it  wai  paid.
(OeUiu,  ziT.  7  ;  Lir.  iii.  38  I  Cic  dtLtg.uH,
FUI^.  i.  S  ;  PloL  Cie.  43.)  Under  the  empire
the  penalty  far  not  appearing  without  luSeient
KMCO  WM  increMed.  (Dim  Cati.  liT.  IS,  It.  S,
Ii.  1 1.)  Toward!  the  end  of  the  republic  it  waa
deiraed,  that  dnrhw  the  whole  ncmth  of  February
tbe  Moate  ibsold  gira  andioMO  to  loi^n  imbai-
Ndon  ODaU  daja  od  iriiidilhe*enateca«ld  laW'


BENATUB.  1019

fulty  meet,  and  that  no  other  matten  ihoutd  b«
dimuied  until  theaa  aSain  were  nttled.  (Cic  ad
itFnt.\\.\i,adFita.i.i.)

The  pUeei  when  the  meatingi  of  the  icnale
wen  held  (ear^oe,  anaa^d)  wen  ulwayi  inaugu-
rated by  the  angnrt.  [Timfluh.]  The  moat  an-
cient phce  waa  (he  Curia  Hoetilia,  in  which  alone
originally  a  aanatuacontnltum  conld  be  made.  Jtt-
terwardi  howsTer  nTcml  tample*  wen  uied  Ug
thii  purpoie,  inch  a«  the  temple  of  Concordia,  a
place  neat  Iha  temple  of  Bellon  [LiOATua],  and
one  near  the  porta  Capena.  (Feat  i.  e.  Sam»la  ;
Varro,  d*  Lkg.  Lot.  r.  IBB,  iB6.)  [Jnder  tha  em*
peron  the  eeuate  alto  met  in  other  piacei :  under
"  '  Julia,  a  buitdbg  of  a


When  in  the  eariieat  time*  the  khq;  or  the  ni-
toa  urbia,  after  eonanllJDg  tha  pleanra  of  the  god*
by  aoapieea,  had  cannced  no  aenale  (eaaahiw
edteaw,  coinioiv*),  ba  mnad  the  HaaioD  with  tka
■ "Qoodbt


called  Dpon  the
memoen  to  aiicnia  ina  matter,  end  when  the  die-
cuaaion  was  orer,  ereiy  member  gaTe  hia  lote.
Tbe  majority  of  Totei  alvayi  decided  a  qncation.
The  majority  wsa  aaoertainod  either  by  ■nnemAki
or  by  tjueeaw,  that  ia,  the  preaident  aither  counted
the  Tote*  (Fen.  a  e.  JVafura),  or  tha  memben
who  TOted  on  the  lame  aide  joined  ti^thar,  and
thai  aepanted  from  thoie  who  Toted  otharwiie.
Thia  latter  method  of  rating  n^qxan  in  later  timei
to  haTe  been  tha  luual  one,  and,  aceording  to
Capito  (cgi.  OiB.  xIt,  7),  the  only  legitimate  method.
■-,]


longed  to  the  internal  affiura  of  Iha  atate,  partly
to  legialation,  and  partly  to  finance  ;  and  no  me*.
ann  could  be  broiight  betbn  tha  popnloa  without
haTing  preTioaaly  been  djicuaaed  and  pnpared  by
the  lenato.  Tbe  aotata  waa  thna  the  medinm
thnngh  which  all  aflkin  of  the  whole  goTnnment
had  to  poaa ;  it  oHuidered  and  diacnlaed  wbateTer
meaiurea  the  king  thought  proper  to  introduce,
and  had,  on  the  other  hand,  a  pnleet  cmlrol  dtct
tha  aaMoibly  of  the  popnloa,  which  could  only  ao.
cept  or  TC)eet  what  Ue  aenate  brought  befim  it.
Wheo  a  king  died,  ^e  royal  dignitr,  until  a  aue-


primi  (Lit.  L  17),  each  of  whom  in  rotation  held
tfaii  dignity  for  Eve  daya  The  candidate  for  the
nyal  power  waa  firat  decided  upon  by  the  inler-
regea,  who  then  propoaad  him  to  the  whoia  aenate,
and  if  the  eenate  agned  with  the  election,  the
intamz  of  the  day,  at  the  oommand  of  the  aenat^
{mpoaad  the  tandidata  to  the  conitia  and  took
their  Totea  nqiectiiw  him.  (Dionya.  iL  38,  iii  36,
iT.  40,  80  ;  comp.  Walter,  p.  25,  n.  38.)  The  wilt
of  the  goda  waa  then  conadted  by  the  aagma,  and
whoi  the  goda  tiM  noetioned  the  electiou  (Ut.  i.
IS),  a  accood  meeting  of  the  pepuln*  waa  held,  in
which  the  aognn  aonoonced  the  aonction  of  the
goda.  Henupmi  the  king  wai  inTeiled  with  the
powen  belonging  to  his  office

Under  the  repablic  the  right  of  muToking  die
HBiate  waa  at  fint  only  poeHiaad  by  tha  dictator^
praeton  or  oouanla,  inteiregea,  and  tha  piaefectaa
latbi,  wboal>^  like  thakingiofi«CBKrdB(a,bud


1020  9ENATUS.

hthn  the  taiMe  tha  lubjecti  fnr  delibentlDn.
The  power  of  ihe  lenite  wai  &t  lirat  tfae  nupe  ai
undfr  the  kings,  iF  iiol  grtatei :  it  bad  the  general
can  of  thg  public  welmre,  the  (aperinUndence  af
■11  matten  of  religiou,  tha  minagcment  of  all  pf-
&in  with  foreign  nAtion*  ;  it  commBuded  tha  leriei
of  tiDop«,  ragulatad  the  tmei  and  duties,  and  hud
■ ■ ■  onlTQl  of ■■ ■


Tha  order


which  the  ■


and  Toled  wsi  determiiied  b;  ibeii  rank  u
iMlanguig  to  the  nutjoro  or  tninora.  (Cic.  dt  Rt
PybL  U.  20  1  DinnjrL  iL  69,  Tii.  47.)  TUi  dis-
tinction of  rank  howcTer  appean  to  have  ceawd
after  tfae  deoemviiate,  and  even  under  the  decem-

without  any  ngular  «det.  (Dionjs.  vi.  4,  10,  19,
21;  Lir.  iii.  39,  41.)  It  is  also  probable  that  aAei
the  decemTiiate  vacancies  in  tbe  senate  ware  gene-
tall;  filled  with  ex-magistratcs,  which  had  now
beraiiDe  more  practicable  as  the  nmnber  of  nagis-
mtes  kad  been  incRaied.  Tha  tribunes  of  the
people  likewise  obtained  acc«as  to  tha  deliberations
of  thesiinate(Liv.iiLe9.Ti.  1);  but  thej  had  no
leata  in  it  yet,  but  lat  before  the  opened  doors  of
the  enria.  (Val.  Mai.  iL  2.  S  7.)  The  souUe  had
at  first  had  the  right  to  propote  to  the  comilia  the
andidates  for  magialraciei,  but  this  right  vat  now
bst :  tha  comitia  cenluriata  had  become  qnite  free
in  regatd  to  electioruand  were  no  longer  dependent
upon  the  proponl  of  the  aenate.  The  cunei  only
atill  pottBNed  the  right  to  Bnctiiin  the  election ;
but  in  the  jmi  a.  c.  299  they  were  compelled  to
nnctian  any  election  of  magiitntea  which  ^e  co-
mitia might  make,  before  it  took  place  (Cic  flmJ.
14  ;  AunL  VicL  de  Vh.  Illutlr.  33),  and  tbii
soon  after  baiaine  law  by  the  lei  Maenia.  (Orelli,
Omtta.  TulL  toL  iu.  p.  215.)  When  at  latt  the
curies  no  longer  aaiembUd  fsr  thii  empty  ahow  of
power,  the  senate  slept  into  their  place,  and  hnice-
fbnh  in  electioni,  and  eoon  after  siso  in  nutten  of
Ir^slalion  the  lenate  had  previously  to  sanction
whatever  the  comitia  might  decide.  (Liv.  i.  17.)
Afttr  the  lei  Horteniia  a  decree  of  the  comitia
tributa  beouie  Uw  even  without  the  sanction  of
the  semte.  The  original  stats  of  things  had  thai
gradually  become  reversed,  and  the  senate  hod  lost
very  important  branchn  irf'  its  power,  which  had
all  been  gained  by  tha  comitia  tribala.  [TsiBUNua
Plbbib.']  In  its  idation  to  the  comitia  eenln-
riala,  however,  the  ancient  rule*  were  itill  in  force,
as  laws,  declaniticiu  of  war,  eondusions  of  peace,
treaties,  &c  wete  brought  before  them  and  decided
by  them  on  the  propoaal  of  the  lenate.  (Waller,
p.  132.)

The  powera  of  tha  Koala  after  both  orden  were
placed  upon  a  perfect  equality  may  be  thus  briefly
summed  up.  The  leuate  continued  to  have  the
iupreme  superintendence  in  all  matters  of  religion
(Qellius,  liv.  7)  ;  it  determined  upon  the  manner
in  which  a  war  was  to  be  eandncled,  what  leginns
were  to  be  placed  at  the  dispoeal  of  a  commander,
and  whether  new  uies  were  to  be  levied  ;  it  decreed
into  what  provinna  the  coniuli  and  praetors  were
to  be  sent  [ProVincu],  and  whoae  imperinm  was
to  be  prolonged.  The  commisuonen  who  ware
generally  sent  out  to  settle  tha  odministrBlion  of  a
newly  conquered  oountry,  were  alwayi  appointed
bytheienate.  (Liv.  il<.17  i  Appian.<i(  Ae&ffup.
99,da  Btb.  Pm.  I3£;  Salluat.  J<ig.  IS.)  All
embaaiei  ia  tha  conclusion  of  pease  or  treaties
tritb  loraigD  stalea  were  *bM  sot  b;  the  aoMa,


e  aoHfltf  tha


SENATUSl

■ere  gCMtaUy  aeoUm
themtel'es  and  ten  in  number.  (Polyb.  vL  13;
Liv.  ptuBin.)  The  senate  alone  carried  on  the  ne-
gotialioDi  with  foretgn  ambaoadon  (Polyb.  L  c  ;
Cic  e.  VatHt.  IS),  snd  received  the  complainta  of
subject  or  allied  nationa,  who  alwayt  regarded  the
senate  as  their  common  protectw.  (Lir.  xxix.  IS,
uiii.  3,  iliL  14,  iliii.  2  ;  Polyb.  L  c)  By
virtue  of  this  office  of  prolectoi  it  also  satlled  aU
dispute*  which  midht  ariu  am
and  ccloniea  of  Italy  (Diooys.  i
Varro,  <U  Be  0x1.1112;  Cic  ad  AU.  ir.  li,da
Of.  i.  ID),  and  pnniahed  all  bovy  crimes  com-
mitted in  Italy,  which  might  endanger  the  paUie
peace  and  security.  (Polyb.  i.e.)  Even  in  Rooa
itself  the  jndices  to  whom  the  praetor  referred  io».
portant  casea,  both  public  and  fcrrata,  were  taken
&am  among  the  aenatiKi  (P^yb.TL  IT),  and  in
eitiaordinary  cases  the  aenate  appointed  eapecial
comnuHioni  to  investigate  them  (Liv.  nxviii.  51,
■nix:  14,  iL  37,44,  Ac),  but  such  a  camoiH-
siim,  if  the  case  in  questjon  wa*  a  i^tal  oBaia
committed  by  a  citjaoi,  required  the  ^jictMa  ef
the  people.  (Polyb.  vi.  16  g  Lir.  nvl  33,  Sue.)
When  the  republic  was  in  danger  the  senate  mjgbl
confer  untimiled  power  upon  the  magisliales  by
the  formula,  "  videaot  conmlea,  ua  quid  nKBl>.
lica  detrimenii  capiat"  (Salliut.  On.  29  ;  Caa.
B.C.  I  5.  7),  which  was  equivalent  to  a  da-
daration  of  martial  law  within  Ike  city.  Tbia
general  care  fbr  tha  intonal  and  external  irelian
of  the  repnblic  included,  as  befbn,  the  right  to  <ti^
poae  over  the  finances  tsqaiute  for  these  purposes.
Hence  all  the  revenue  and  eipenditun  of  the  re-
public were  under  the  direct  administntion  of  tlw


its  miniMera  or  igents.  [Cinsob  ;  Qn.iUTiMu)
All  the  e^qienaea  necessary  fbr  the  maintenane*  of
the  armies  nqnired  the  taoctiaa  of  the  aenale,  be-


fijfling  to  assign  the  monf
(LIS.)  There  are,how
triumphing  without  the  c


rr  fcr  ft.  (PgJyh.
msumeaaof  agenenl
at  of  tha  aenstc  (lit.


How  many  members  were  required  to  be  presort
n  order  to  constitute  a  li^  meeting  ia  Boerctaiiia
'  [  appears  that  there  siisted^caBe  irgala-


(Lir.  xuix.  18.)  The  |
opened  the  buuneu,  and  ai  tha  ae
foQowing  order, — prine^  semtna.  conauiaRa,  coi-
urii,  pruetorii,  aedilicii,  trihunicii,  qoMatarii, — «it
is  natiual  to  suppose,  that  they  wnre  aaked  lltrir
opinion  and  voted  in  the  same  order.  {Sme  Jon
itmimtiam  dintn,  Cic  PUiip.  v.  17,  xiiL  IS,  ftc,
wl^a.uL3l.)  Towards  the  end  of  the  republis
the  order  in  whidi  the  qoestioo  was  put  to  lb*


7 ),  who  called  upon  each  n
hii  name  (»iitu>a<)si,  Cic  e.
usually  began  with  the  prirtc^ia  v


.B.) The  coiuul  generally  ol
rannd  the  same  order  in  which  he  had  a
OB  the  fint  of  Jaimarf. (Saat.  Cam.  SI,) A


SENATUS.
■enBtar  when  oiled  upon  to  tpak  migbt  do  lo  i
foil  length,  &iid  (Tea  bititidnce  aubjwta  not  directi;
eoiiDectid  with  the  point  nt  iuue-  (Cic  dt  lag.
jii.  IS  ;  QAXwL,  ir.  10  ;  TuiL  Ataal.  iL  S8,  xiil
39 1  eompui  Cic  FitUip.  tii.)  It  depeoded
npon  tbs  pnaidml  which  of  tha  opinion!  cipnued
be  VDuld  pat  tn  the  vote,  end  which  he  would
pMt  orer.  (Poljb.  ixiiiL  1  ;  (Me.  ai
z.  12 ;  Caet.  B.  C.  L  2.)  Theee  mm  who  were
Bat  7*1  ml  eeoaton,  but  bad  odI;  ■  leat  in  the
•eoale  on  ■ccouot  ef  the  c^ce  the7  brld,  or  had
beld.  had  w  light  to  Tote  (Oelliiu,  liii.  8.)  When
k  SantuKamltuni  wu  pwaed,  Ihs  kkuqIi  ordered
it  to  be  written  down  by  a  cleric  in  the  pretence  of
aona  tenaton,  eipeclallj  of  thoie  who  had  beoi
moat  tDlenaled  in  it  or  moat  actira  in  bringing  it
about  (Poljb.  tL  12;  Cie.  de  Orai.  HI  2,  ad
Fam.  TiiL  S.)  [SiNiTDaconauLTDK.]  A  meet-
ing of  tha  aenate  wai  not  otlowed  to  be  held  be-
fore annriae  or  to  be  prolonged  ailcr  Bunaet  (Vaim,
t^.  GeiL  ^  tx)  :  on  eElnnrdinary  wnei^enciea,  how-
BTer,  thia  regulation  waa  let  aaide,  <DiODJl.  iiL
]7:  Macrob.  SO.  i.  4.)

Dnring  the  laCter  put  of  the  republic  the  lenate
waa  degraded  in  varionB  wayi  by  Sulla^  Coeenr,
and  othefa,  and  on  nianj  occanatu  it  wai  only  an
iaatnimeni  in  the  bandi  of  the  men  in  power.  In
thia  *a;  it  became  prepared  lor  the  (Cnpotie  go-

tha  treaUue  and  obedient  inimiment  of  the  prin-
ocpa.  The  emperor  hinuelf  waa  generally  alio
priDceuaenaMa  (Dion  Ctua.  liii.  1,  hii.  8,  Iniii.
S),  SDO  bad  the  power  of  conToking  both  ordinaiy
and  eitTBordinarjr  meetinga  (Dion  Caaa.  lir.  3 ;
Lei  de  ■

praetora,  and  tribunea,  continued
right.  (Tarit  Hitt.  iv.  53 1  Dion  CaaL  Iri.  *7,  lit
34,  li.  16,  &e.)  The  ordiaaty  meetiuji*  according
(a  B  regulation  of  AaguitDa  were  held  twice  in
neiy  month.  (Suet.  Aag.  35 ;  Dion  Can  W.  3.)
A  fi^l  aaaembl;  required  the  preaenca  of  at  laut
400  membera,  but  AiU[iunu  hiroaelf  afterwarda
modified  thii  rule  acoording  to  the  difieimce  and
imporMocc  of  the  lubjecta  which  might  ba  brought
under  ditcoxion.  (Dion  CoaL  iir.  Sfi,  W.  3.)  At
a  Uler  period  we  find  that  leventy  or  eren  fewer
leoatixi  conilitDtcd  an  aaaembly.  (Lamprid.  AL
SeBer.  I S.)  The  regular  prcttdeut  in  tha  uaembly
wu  a  Gonaul,  or  the  emperDi  himaelA  if  he  waa
iDTcated  witb  the  cotuDlabip.  (Plia.  Epitt.  ii.  11,
Fauigfr.ie.)  Alaittaardinarymeeunga,thepenon

who  conroked  the "

lireaident.  Thaem|
not  pieiide,  had  by  virtne  of  hia  offii
Ibe  right  to  introduce  any  lubject  for  diieuauoo,
and  to  make  the  aenate  decide  npon  it.  (DioaCaia.
liiL  32;  tex  de  imperio  Veapai.)  At  a  bUef
period  thij  right  waa  expieaily  and  in  proper  fbmi
coafencd  npon  the  emperor  under  the  nnma  of  jus
ftjofvcni,  and  accordingly  aa  he  obtained  Cha  right
ta  iDtrodnce  three  or  more  nibjeeta,  the  jui  waa
oUed  JH  taiku,  ^martae,  jaiaini,  ic  rtlatiowii.
(Vofiiac  Pnb.  12  ;  J.  CapitoL  Pertin.  S,  M.  An-
ion*. 6 :  lamprid.  AL  See,  I.)  The  empemr  in-
ttodKcd  hii  pnpoaaU  to  the  acnate  in  writing
(oratiD,  Sbt&u,  tpitlobi  ptintipa),  which  wat  read
k  the  BCData  by  one  of  hii  quaeatora.  (Dion  Caaa.
li*.  26,  Iz.  2  i  SueL  Aug.  65,  TU.  6;  Tacit  AtauiL
xti.27t  Dig.  l.tit.13.  a.l.gS3and4.)  [Ora-
TiOHES  PalNCiFtiH.]  The  piuton,  that  they
Bught  Dot  ba  inloiat  Id  tha  trihinea,  likawiae


SEXATUa  1021

received  the  joarelatianit.  (Dion  Can.  Ir.  S.)  The
mode  of  conducting  the  buaineu,  and  the  order  in
which  the  aenatoia  were  called  open  to  tote,  re-
mained on  the  whole  the  ama  aa  under  Ibe  re-
pnblie  (Plin.  £>»K.  rtiL  14,  it  13)j  bnt  when
magiatratea  were  to  be  dectad,  the  aenate,  aa  in
former  timea  the  comitia,  gave  their  Totei  in  aeciet
wi^  little  tableta,  (Plin.  BpiM.  iiL  SO,  li  5.)
The  trannuliima  of  the  aenate  were  from  the  time
or  Caesar  reginered  by  derica  i^pointed  tor  ^
purpoae,  under  the  lupetintendowe  of  a  aenalor.
(Suet.  Dm  20,  .^^.  36  ;  Tacit,  .dasol.  t.  4,  &c ;
SparL  HadrioH,  3  ;  Dion  Caaa.  lixiiiL  32.)  in
caera  which  required  aecreey  (•MoAusDaaaftitai
taeittm\  the  aenatara  thenuelvei  officiated  aa
clerkL  (CapitoL  Onrd.  SO.)

Ai  the  Roman  onpanr  cmceDtialed  in  bii  own
person  all  tha  pownt  which  had  formerly  been
pasacaasd  by  the  sareral  magiatntea,  and  w'*
limitation  i  .»...-....


odminiatrBtiTe  powers,  waa  dependent
npon  the  emperor,  who  might  anil  faunself  of  its
Eonnsela  or  not,  jnat  ai  he  pleased.  In  the  reign
of  Tibetiua  the  election  of  magiatratea  wai  tiaiia-
jarred  &am  the  people  to  the  senate  (Veil.  Pot.  ii
124  ;  Tacit  Ammd.  L  15  ;  Plin.  EpitL  iiL  SO,  tL
19),  which,  howerer,  waa  enjoined  to  take  especial
notice  of  those  candidates  who  were  recommended
to  it  by  the  emperor.  This  regulation  remained,
with  a  abort  interruption  in  the  reign  of  Caligula,
down  lo  the  third  ceDtnry,  when  we  find  that  the
priocqia  alone  eierciied  the  right  of  appointing
ougiitratea.  (Dig.  43.  tit  14.  s.  1.)  At  tha  de-
BOKi  of  an  emperor  the  aenate  had  the  right  to

nominated  by  the  emperot  himaelf ;  bnt  the  sennas
had  in  >cry  rare  caaea  an  opportunity  to  eierdse
this  right,  as  it  was  uiniped  l^  the  uldiers.  The
aeinriani  at  first  still  continued  nDminally  lo  be
under  the  contml  of  the  senate  (Dion  Caaa.  liiL  16,
22),  but  the  emperora  gradually  took  it  under  their
own  eicluaiTa  management  (Dion  Casi.  lixL  33)
VoTilac  AuTtL  9,  12,  20),  and  the  aenale  retained
nothing  but  the  adminiitntiixi  of  the  fonda  of  the
city  (an»  puMwa),  which  were  diitinet  both  from
the  aenrium  and  from  the  fitcut  (Vopiac  AmrtL
20,  45),  and  the  right  of  gi'ing  its  opinion  upon
caiea  connected  with  the  fiscal  taw.  (Dig.  49.  tit
14.  a  15  and  42.)  Its  right  of  coioiD^  money
was  limited  by  Auguatna  to  copper  coiot,  and
ceased  altogether  in  the  reign  of  Oulienus.  (Eck-
\a!\,D.N.PTvltg.  e.13.)  Augnstutordaioed  that
no  accuiationa  should  any  longer  be  brought  before
the  eomitia  (Dion  Caaa.  Ivi.  40),  and  instead  <^
them  he  raised  the  senate  to  a  high  court  of  juitic^
upon  which  he  ctinleiTed  the  right  of  taking  cog-
niaance  rf  capital  offences  committed  by  lenators
(Dion  Caaa.  LL  31,  &c  ;  Snet  Cai^.  8  ;  Tacit
Aiaui.  liiL  44  ;  Capitol.  M.  Aabmm.  10),  of
dimea  aguiiit  the  state  and  the  peraon  of  the  on-
peiors  (Dion  Cass.  IiL  15,  IT,  ^  It  16,  Inti
S;  SaeL.1iv.  66;  TaciL  .inol  iiL  49,  &c.),  and
of  crimes  committed  b;  the  prerineial  magiatratea
in  the  administration  of  their  proimces.  The
senate  might  alao  re<«iTe  ^ipeals  from  other  conrta
(Suet  Nm,  17 !  Tacit  .iMwt  xiv.  28  ;  CapitoL
M.  Ataua.  10  j  VopiKi  Prd.  13),  whmas,  U
least  from  the  time  c^  Hadrian,  there  waa  no  ap.
penl  &om  a  sentoica  of  the  aenate.  (Dion  Can.
lit  1 8  ;  Dig^  49.  tit  2.  s.  1 .  §  2.)  The  princep*
a  wtucb  were  not  tontaiae4


1032


8EKATUS.


in  tha  abors  taUgoriei,  or  vhich  he  might  have
decided  faimidt  to  the  •anBte,  or  requected  ill  co-
opentiDD.  (Suet  OaaiL  It,  lB,Nero,  16,  Domil.
8,  &C.)  Reageetiaa  the  laoriDcei  of  the
pKovma*.

When  CorvtsstiDciple  wu  trade  the  teomd
capital  of  the  empire,  Cenatsnliiie  inetitnted  liia  a
HKond  aenste  in  4hi>  cit;-  (Sazomen,  ii.  2  ;  Etotrj*-
lU  gal.  Qm^  30),  upon  which  Julian  caahzmi "
the  priTiEegea  ef  the  aouite  of  Roma (Zoaim,
11  ;  Liban. OraL ad  Jleodot. iL p.  3B3, i
JdotelL) Both  tbeie  Knalei  were  atill  umedn
conaulled  b;  the  Gmperon  in  an  ontia  upon  m.
ten  of  legi^tion  (Cod.  Tbeod.  6.  lit.  2.  a.  11  ;
gymimch.  EpiiL  x.  2.  2B  ;  Cod.  1.  tit  14.  i.  S) :
the  lenate  of  Conitantinc^le  retained  ita  ihaie  in
legiilaliDn  down  to  the  ninth  oentniy.  (Not.  Leon,
78.) Each  aenate  alao  cmtinned  to  be  a  high
oonrt  of  juatice  to  which  the  emperor  nfcned  im-
portant crimina]  caaea. (Amm.  Mart  zxriiL  1.


no  longei  lame  imdff  their  joriadiction,  but  eithn:
under  that  of  the  goTernora  of  proriDcea,  or  of
the  ^feetl  of  the  two  dtiet.  {Walter,  p.  S67,
Aic)  CinI  euea  of  tenaton  likewiaa  beloaged  to
tha  fbmiD  of  the  pnefeetni  nibi.  (Cod.  3.  tit.  21.
a.  S  i  SymmadL  MpitL  i.  68.)  The  leuBtorial
dignity  via  now  obuined  by  deaeant  (Cod.  Theod.
6.  tic  2.  a.  2;  IS:  tit.  1.  a.  SB;  Caaaiodv.  Fariar.
iii.  6),  and  by  haTing  held  ceitain  offlcea  at  the
court,  or  it  waa  gnmted  ai  an  eapedal  brcar  by
the  emperor  on  the  propoaal  of  the  aenate.  (God,
Theod.  Lc;  Symmach.  BpU.  i.  25.113.)  To
be  made  a  amalor  wat  iadeed  one  of  tha  greateat
hooouii  that  could  be  coufemd,  and  wai  aum
Talood  than  hi  the  timea  of  the  repnblic  ;  hut  ita
burdcni  were  TeTf  heavy,  for  not  oulr  had  the  teua-
ton  to  give  public  gunet  (Syiumaeo.  EpiiL  x.  26.
28),  to  malta  magnifioent  pmenCa  to  the  einpenm
(Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit.  3.  a.  6),  and  in  thnea  of  need
eitraordinaiy  doiuUiona  to  the  people  (Zoaim.  t.
41  ;  Symmach.  Ep.  ti.  14, 26,  rik  68),  but  in  ad-
dition they  had  to  jsy  a  peculiar  tax  upon  their
landed  proper^,  which  waa  called  filUt  or  glfta,.
(Zo(im.ii.  32;  Cod.  Theod.  6.  tit  2 ;  aymnach.^
Epiil.  IT.  61.)  A  aenatoc  wbii  had  no  landed  pro-
perty waa  laied  at  two  follea.  (Cod.  Theod.  6.
tit  2.  a.  2,  8.  tiL  4.  a.  21.)  It  waa  therefore  only
the  w«althieat  penona  of  the  empire,  no  matter  to
what  part  of  it  they  belonged,  that  could  aipire
to  the  dignity  of  Knaloi.  A  lilt  of  them,  together
with  im  account  of  their  [oopeTty,  wu  laid  before
the  enjperor  erery  three  montha  by  the  prefect  of
the  city.  (Symmach.  x.  66,  &e.)  Down  to  the
time  of  Jiutiniaa  the  conanla  w««  tha  preaidoiti
of  the  Bcnate,  but  Iidqi  thia  time  the  ptaefectoa
■rbi  alwara  preaided.  (Cod.  TheDd.G.  bt.  6.  a  1;
Nov.  iDitit  63.)

It  now  reraafaia  to  maidoit  aome  of  the  diidnc-
tiou  and  priTileni  enjoyed  by  Roman  lenatm  i
1.  The  tunica  with  a  luoad  purple  stripe  (Jotet
datru)  in  front,  which  waa  woren  in  it,  and  not  n
ia  commonly  believed  Bewed  upon  it.  (Aooa  od
//onO.  Sat.l  6.iSi  compare  L  6.  28  i  (Juinctil.
li.  3.)  2.  A  kind  of  abort  boot  with  the  letter  C
on  the  frent  of  the  foot  (Jut.  to-  1 92  ;  Cic.  PkiL
xiii.  13.)  Thia  C  ia  generally  lUppoaed  to  mean
MaMn,  and  to  lefte  to  the  original  number  of  100
<«■■(■«)  tenatoia.  3.  Tha  r^ht  of  aitting  in  the
aRheiM  in  th*  thntna  and  ic^theabvi. Thia


SENATU9C0NSULTUM.
diitiodian  waa  fint  procured  for  the  amaton  1^
Scipio  Afrionua  Hajiff,  1S4  B.C.  (Lit.  zkut.  H  ;
Cic  pnClaaH?.)  The  aame  hoonir  wai  gianted
to  the  aenaton  in  the  laga  of  Qaudioa  at  the  Kamea
in  the  circua.  (Suet  Oamd.  21  ;  Dion  CMa.  ^T?.)
4.  On  a  MCtnin  day  in  the  jair  a  aaoiSce  waa  at-
fered  to  Jupiter  in  the  o^itot,  and  on  thia  occaboa
the  aenaton  alone  had  a  faat  in  the  csfnul  ;  tbe
i^bt  waa  called  thejau  ptiAiiat  epuiasuiL  (Gc^oa,
xiL  8  ;  Soet  Aug.  35.)  t,.  The  jW  U«.  Uga-
UatiU. [Lsa«Tira,  f86.AiaH.)  [I^S-J

SSNATUSCONSULTUH.  I>  ha  entDBen-
tion  tt  the  fenoal  parte  of  the  Ju  CSiil^  Ciocn  in-
dndaa  Senatnacmtnlta.  (  Tap.  6.)  Nmnemu  Ltgii
ptoperiy  ta  called  were  enacted  in  the  icign  of
Auguataia,  and  Legea,  preperiy  ao  odled,  -mat
made  even  after  hia  bme.  [Lsx.]  It  waa
nnder  Augnatua  boweier  that  the  Senatuacon-
aulta  bwaa  to  take  the  place  of  Legea  iu«paly
ao  callec^  a  change  which  ia  aiao  indialed  by  tha
fiict  that  undl  hia  time  the  Senatuicanaolta  vbs
not  daaigDated  either  by  tho  namea  of  the  Cod-
lula  ot  by  any  other  penonal  name,  ao  br  aa  w«
have  CTidence.  But  firoa  that  time  we  find  the
Senatoaconanlts  derigniled  eilbet  by  the  a


UMriani,"  &c^  <r  **  ad  ccb-

Hadriani,"  &c  Tb«  name  of  the  Seaatoa-
OQOaultum  Macedonianuin  ia  an  eaoqitioD,  aa  will
afterwatdi  appear.

Many SeaaluicaivDlta wen  eikacted in tha

Republican  period,  and  acme  of  them  were  lawi  in

the  proper  aenaa  of  the  term,  though  bodw  modeia

'  a  bare  denied  ^ia  poaitioo. But  the  opi-

of  thoae  who  deny  the  Icfiila^Te  power  of

the  Senate  during  the  Republican  period  ia  Of-

poaed  by  &eta. An  attempt  haa  aometimea  been

made  to  anpport  it  by  a  paiwtge  of  Tadtaa  ("  tan

priimun  e  campo  Comitia  ad  patira  tmialala  •nat,"

Ana.  L  15),  a  paaiage  which  only  nfoi  (o  the

electiena. It  ia  dilfienlt  bowoTer  to  dettsiniae  bow

hi  the  le^latire  power  of  tba  Senate  eKtewled.

A  recent writer  (Walter,  OtanUalto  ia l^m.

HtclOt.  4Sr,  lat  ed.)  obaOTea  "  llat  tba  Snmtaa-

ilta  were  an  important  soorse  ol  law  ftt  laat-

which concemed  adminiatialiaa,  the  "■"-

tee  of  Religion,  the  auapenaion  or  repeal  4^

in  the  caae  of  mgeot  public  neceaaily,  tba

right*  of  tha  Aetarium  and the Pnbliiaai,  ibc

treatment of  tha Ilaliaoa  and  the  PniiBciala."

34,  uxli.8,  ilL  9.) The  fUiowing

are  iuataueci  of  Senatuanaaulta  under  the  Re-

SenatDaoonanltum  "  na  quia  in  urba

aepelintnr  ; "  tha  Senatuaowadlam  de  Baechaiia.

libUB hinaftec  more  fautieulai4y nentioDed ; a

Senatnacomultnm  de  Libvtinonun  tribu  (Lir. *

16)  ;  a  Senatnaomaul

IS);  a  SenatnaconanJt
lenie*  Indi  (GelL  ii
"  na  homo  immolaretnr -  (Plin.  B.  N.xa


Ssnatnaconaultnm de prerincib  (. , _

" -  '■  m  made  M.  Tallio  Cicerone  »-

(fact,  *■  nt  I^ationum  liUnium
eaaet ; "  Tadooa  SenataaoanMlta  da
eoUegiii  diaaolvendia  ;  an  old  S—ustnarnnan  Itiim.
acontuitum  retna  ne  lieerat  AKiBnaa  (it*.
'taliam  adTehere,"  which  waa  ao  &r  re-
r  a  Plebiacitum  propoaed  by  Ca.  Anfidio,
I  Plebia,  that  tha  imporlatigo  far  tba  par-


SBNATU3C0NSULTUM.
pon  at  Ihe  Curcmx*  «m  nude  Icg^  (Plio.  H.  N.
viiL  17))  on  old  SeuBtuconiuhum  by  which
**  qoaatio  (mi  uui  ■■)  in  c^at  domiiu  pnhibcla-
tar"  (Tut.  Aiut.  \L  30),  a  rale  of  Uw  which
Cicero  (pro  ATtJoL  2S}  nten
foondBtun.  Fnxn  Ibetc  uutanai
•ulta  nwdg  in  th«  Republican  period  ws  m>;  eal-
1h«  in  a  gsonal  w«j  the  kind  of  matten  to  which
.  (hi*  fiirm  of  l^iiUtioD  applied.  The  conititutioo
of  tha  Senata  waa  loch  at  to  gradoallf  bring
within  the  iphere  of  ila  Icgialatioa  all  nwltflia  that
peRaioed  le  nligiou,  police,  admiiualntioa,  pro-
vincial matleza,  and  all  foreign  rela^iu,  And  it
•ecDu  that  the  power  of  die  Senate  had  lO  fat  in-
cnued  at  the  time  of  the  accaaatou  of  Auguitui
that  it  waa  no  gnst  change  to  make  it  the  onlj
legiikdng  body.  PompoDiiu  (Dig.  1.  tit  S.  >.  3),
though  tut  hittnical  ^rideDoe  mmt  be  reeeiied
with  caution,  Uatea  the  matter  in  a  way  which
ii  geneiaUv  omaitteat  with  what  we  otherwiie
know  of  the  pcognai  of  Senatorial  legiala^on:
"  Aa  the  pleU  found  it  difbcult  to  aiaembla,  '
it  waa  a  matter  of  nsceaait;  that  the  adminii
tioo  of  the  State  came  to  the  Senate:  thua  tba
Semte  b«nn  to  act,  and  wbatSTer  the  Senala  had
detennined  (amititaimt)  wat  olMerred  (oiwno-
Aoter),  and  a  law  la  made  it  called  Senataacon-
■tdtum."

A  Senatoicinuiiltam  wui  to  named  becanaa  the
Caniul  {}■>  radiU)  waa  aaid  **  Senalom  cODnloe ; "
■*  Haniii  L.  F.  S.  PoatTmin  L.  F.  Cot  ScDatrm
CouaolTemL"  (ScnatoacontuUiun  de  Bacchsna-
liboa.)  Id  the  Senatnaconmltain  De  Pbiloaophit  et
1)b  Rhet«ibiu  (OelL  kt.  11),  the  Piaelor  "  cob
•uluiL"  la  the  enacting  part  of  a  Lex  the  Pi^na
wat  «Bid*'jubeie,"andina  Plebiacitom  "acne:"
in  a  Senatutcontuitum  Iha  Senate  waa  Bid  "  ceo-
acre  : "  "  De  Bocehanalibia,  Ac,  ita  udeiceudnu
ccnavere."  (S.  C.  de  Bacch.)  In  the  Seoaluacoa-
'  '  '  le  of  Angunu  cited  by  Frontinui
It  Amain,  ii,),  the  phrate  which
loUoWB  "  ceotneie  "  it  Kunetiinei  "  placers  hnic
ordinL"  In  TadCut  the  lerb  "  canaen"  ia  alao
applied  to  the  peraou  who  made  the  motion  for  a


>  the  Seoatut  the  tennt  which  ariginallj
denoted  the  Itgiiiatiie  power  of  the  Popnlut:
**  Senalut  jubet  atque  comtitoit ;  id^e  l^i  yicem
optinet,  quaniTit  fuit  qoaetitam."  "  Halwre  lena-
tum  "  it  to  hold  a  meeting  of  the  aenate.  Whan
Co.  Punpeiua  wat  elected  coniul  tat  the  Gnti
hit  [lieDd  H.  Vam  wiota  Ibr  hit  me  a  tn
**de  Seoatn  habendo  eontulendoque."  ASeniitui-
contoltum  made  bafbn  the  riting  or  after  the  nl-
tiu  of  the  ton  wat  not  Talid. (Gelliua,  lir.  7.)

The  mode  in  which  the  l^i^Uon  of  the  Senate
waa  conducted  in  the  Imperial  period  it  eKplained
in  the  article  OHATiaHaa  Princifuu.

Certain  fonni  were  obaerred  in  drawing
SeDBtnaconaaltimi,  of  which  then  it  an  example  in
CiccfD  {ad  FaaL.  liiL  8):  "S.  C.  Aocloritntea
(for  thia  ia  the  right  raadiiu:)  Pridie.  £al.  Octnb.
in  Aede  Apollinii,  acribeodo  adfuenmt  !•.  I
tint  Co.  Filial  Aheuobarbiu,  Ac  Quod  M.  Hi
lot  Conaol  V.  F.  (nria  feat)  de  i«ot.  Codi.  D.  E.
B.  L  C  {<^  aa  r*  ita  Muaenal  f  ti,  At.) . "  Th
amble  of  the  Senatuacontultum  de  Baccbanalkbiu
la  liauhv,  but  the  oomea  of  the  conaola  come  at  the
J  and  the  word  ia  "  cotiaolTermt :


SENATUSCONSULTUH. 1028

date  and  place  ara  alao  giTOi ;  and  the  uamea  of
thoae  qai  icribendo  adfuenmt  (SC.  ARF.  in  the
InacriptioQ).  The  namet  of  the  peiaooi  who  were
witneaiet  to  the  drawing  up  of  the  Senatntcon-
tnltum  were  called  the  ''anctoritatee,"  and  thcaa
auetoritatei  were  cited  at  eiidmca  of  the  fiurt  of
the  peraoni  named  in  them  baring  been  preient  at
the  drawing  up  of  the  S.  C  ("  id  quod  in  ancto-
ritatibut  praeicrip^  eitat,"  Cic  de  Or.  iiL  2) ;
&om  which  paaaage,  and  &om  another  (Cifr  od
flm.  T.  3  ;  "  illnd  S.  C.  ea  praeaoiptione  eat ")
hich  Cicaro  lafera  to  hit  name  being  fonnd
\a  the  ouctoritatet  of  a  S.  C  aa  a  prouf  of
hit  faendahtp  to  the  peraon  wham  the  S.  C.  con-
it  certain  that  **  pracKribo "  in  ita
at  it  the  pnqier  reading  ia  theaa  Senoi-
(Compare  the  timilai  nee  of  Piae-
Bomon  Pleadingi  [PB«aL«CBirTIoJ.)
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  certain  pertonj  wcra
required  to  be  prttrnt  "  tcribendo,"  hot  otheca
mightatiitt  if  the;  ehoa^  and  a  peraou  in  thia  way
might  leaci^  hia  regard  fis  another  on  behalf  of
whom  or  with  ivfetenoe'to  whom  the  S.  C.  wat
made.  ("  Cato  aatem  at  teribendo  adfhit,"  Ac
Cm.  oiAU.  Til  1.)  Beddet  Ihe  phtaae  ■*  ach-
bendo  adeae,"  there  are  "  ette  ad  acribaidam  "
(Cic  ai  Att,  i.  19),  and  **  poni  ad  icrlbeiidnm  "
(at  to  which  *ae  the  cnriona  paaaage  in  Cicero,  ad
Fam.  ia.  Ifi).  When  a  S.C.  waa  made  on  the
motiDD  of  a  perton,  it  waa  taid  to  be  mad*  "  in
tentsiliua  ejiu."  If  the  3.  C  wat  carried,  it  waa
written  on  tableti  and  placed  in  the  AetariDm :  the
S.  C  da  BBCchanaliboa  proTidet  that  it  ahall  be
a  bnnia  tablet,  but  thia  waa  for  the  pnr-
iti  being  pot  op  in  a  public  place  when  il
could  be  read  (uiai/Halteiuid  jfKucur  pntM).
The  Senaluaconiulta  were  oiiginaltr  inlnitted
the  care  of  the  ttibuuee  and  the  oe^ei,  bnt  in
e  time  of  Angualni  the  quaeatora  had  the  tare  of
em.  (Dion  Caat.  It.  36,  and  the  note  of  Re>-
arai.)  Under  the  Uter  emperon  the  Senatua-
contulta  "  quae  ad  principet  pertinebant,"  were
preaerved  in  "  libn  clephantioi."  (Vopiacu^
Tbolw^cB.)

A  meoiure  which  wat  propoaed  at  a  Scnatntcco-
Bullum  might  bo  ttopped  b;  the  Inlerceaab  of  the
Tribunet,  and  prDvition  wat  tomelimea  made  for
further  proceeding  in


itntconaulto  i


.i  placer,  auclo.


peracribi  (praetcribi)  et  de  ea  re
torn  popolumqac  refenL"  (Cic.  a<f  Fam
Thii  eiplaini  one  meaning  of  Senatut  a
which  la  a  Senatutconaultum  which  hat  been  pro^
poaed  and  not  carried,  and  of  which  a  record  waa
kept  with  the  "  auetoritatei  eoruni  qni  tcribeodo
adfuenmc."  In  one  patiage  Cicero  calla  a  S.  C
which  had  feiled  owing  to  an  Interceado,  an  Ads'
loiitai  (oil  Fam.  L  7).  One  meaning  of  Auctoritat
in  Isct  it  a  S.C.  raopoaed,  bat  not  yet  carried  i
and  thii  agmt  with  Liyy  (It.  fi?)  :  "  Si  qait  ii-
temdot  Slo,  auctoritate  te  f««  cantentum."  If
Senatna  auctoritat  octaiiotaill;  appean  to  be  wed
at  equivalent  to  Senatutconaultum,  it  it  an  im-
proper uae  of  the  word,  but  cue  which  preienta  no
difficulty  if  we  conaider  that  the  nanua  which  dfr-
note  a  thmg  in  ita  two  ataget  are  apt  to  bt  eco-
foonded  ia  popular  language,  aa  with  ua  the  worda
Bill  and  Act.  In  itt  graieia]  and  origintl  ttma
Senalui  Auctoritat  it  any  meoture  to  which  ■
mqority  of  the  Senate  hat  ataenled.  (See  the
"■  "  Cic  ad  Fam.  t.  3.)


1034 SENATUSCONSULtUM.

Tfae  proper  inae^ng  irord  in  the  SenotOMmualta
ia  "  ceiueo,"  hot  ths  word  "  detemo  "  i" "  " '  "
used  in  ordin^y  IsTiguagB  U>  exprest  (he
of  a  SmatDaconiullDm.  (Clc  ad  Fam.  viii.  S  ;  Staa-
ftu  decrsBil  kI  Jx.  ad  AU.  i.  19.)  But  a  Smatiu-
caaaollum,  whicb  vai  ■  l*v  in  the  proper  icnie  d<
tbe  term,  ii  not  called  m  Decretum,  which  vu  a
nda  made  bj  tbe  Senate  ai  to  lome  matter  irbich
wu  ilrictif  within  iti  Rnnnetence.  The  wordt
Decretom  and  Senanuconinltuin  an  often  Hied
indiscriminatelj  and  with  Little  precision.  (Ge!L  li.
31.)  i&ee  AdiiaOii]iit,apad  FatKm,$.v.Smahu
Daerttum,  and  DacRrruu.)

The  fbnst  of  tbs  Sentitiuconnilta  are  the  beat
•*idenoe  of  ibeir  chnrarter.  The  following  are
lonie  of  the  prmcipal  S^nalnaconiulla  which  are
preaerred :  the  SeDBtuKomultum  de  Tibortibni,
printed  bj  Qruter  and  othen,  which  il  "  rni-
donbtedly  the  oldest  of  all  Roman  document*  "
(Niebnhr,  Aon.  Hial.  toL  ill.  p.  264,  note  66) ;
the  SenatUMonmltum  de  Bacchanalibni ;  the
Senatntoonniltnm  in  tbe  Letter  of  Cicao  alnndj
referred  to  ;  Cic  FUiipp.  t.  1 3  i  Odliua,  xr,  11  j
the  til  Senatniconiulta  abont  tbe  Roman  Aqne-
duett  in  the  teeond  book  of  Frontinui  de  Aquae-
ductibot ;  tbe  Senatujcomultrim  nboat  the  Aphro-
diiienwi  (Tadt.  Am.  iiL  62  ;  Tacit.  Obeilin.  il
635)1  the  oration  of  Claodiui (Tacit.  ^SLli. 24;
Tacit.  Oberlin.  ii.  806)  ;  tbe  larioui  SeaatuaoNi-
■ulla  preserved  in  thcDigeit,  which  are  mentioned
in  a  lubiequent  part  of  thii  article.  See  aleo  the
SenntUKongultum  printed  jn  Sigoniiu, "  De  Antiquo
Jure  Prorincianim,"  i.  2BB  ;  and  the  Sctum  by
which  the  name  Anguetni  wu  giren  to  the  month
Sextilii.  (Macrob.  SatanaL  i.  12.)

The  following  lilt  of  Senltiueon
perhapg  all  of  them  which  are  diitinguiihed  bf
the  name  of  a  conin!  or  Dther  diilincliTe  name.
Numeroni  Senatniconiulta  under  tbe  Empire  are
referred  to  in  the  I^tin  wrilert,  lor  which  ve  find
no  dialinctin  name,  thoDgh  it  ia  probable  that  all
of  them  had  a  title  like  the  Legea,  bat  man;  of
them  being  of  little  importance  were  not  much  re-
ferred to  or  cited,  and  thai  their  namei  were  for-
gotten. Tacinu,  for  initanoe,  often  apealu  of  5.  C.

are  able  tc  afiii  tlie  titlei  flam  other  authoriliei.


SENATUSCONSULT  vm.


Hofthe<


ord.


n  Uwi  in  tbe


Some  of  the  Sanatuaconaulta  of  the  Republican
period  were  lawt,  ai  alreadj  obaHred,  bnt  othera
were  only  detcrminatioDa  of  tbe  Senate,  which
hefnme  Legei.by  being  carried  in  the  eomitia.
Snch  S.  C.  were  mil;  only  uictorilatea.  One
iniCance  of  thii  kind  occnncd  on  the  occuioa  of
the  trial  of  Clodiua  lot  liobting  the  mjateriei  of
the  Bona  Dea.  A  rogatio  on  the  anbject  of  the
trial  w»  pnpoaed  to  the  Comitia  ex  Senatuscon-
ulla  (Clc.  ad  AU.  i.  U)  ;  which  ii  alio  apoken  of
■I  the  Aneloritaa  of  the  Senate,  and  aa  "  quod  ab
Saiato  Conititutmn  "  (the  wordi  of  Oalaa,  i  4).

i.piioNiANiJu,  protnbty  enacted  in  the  time  of
Hainan,  empowered  all  Ciritstn  which  were
witHn  the  Roman  Imperium  to  take  a  Gdekom-
miiaa  hereditai.  Thia  Senalutconiultiun  ia  cited
by  Ulpinn  {Frag,  tit  22)  withont  the  name,  but
il  appear!  from  coaigaring  Ulpian  with  the  Digect
(36-  lit.  I.  a.  26)  to  be  ^  Senatiiiainndtmn
Apnmianam.  A  Senatuiconanltam  alio  aUowed
CiTitalei  01  Munkipia,  which  were  itgtl]y  eon-


u  Uni'


by  their  liberti  or  liberOe-  Ulpiaii  ^Kski  sf  thii
Senatuiconialtum  in  tbe  paaaage  nfarvd  to,  im-
mediately befoie  he  apeaki  of  that  Stuatiuoai-
mlcum  which  we  know  to  be  the  Aprmiainuii,
and  it  appean  probable  that  the  twu  Senatoa-
conanlta  were  the  aame,  for  their  objeeti  woe
aimHar  and  the;  are  mentioned  tcgelfaci  wiibnt
any  indication  of  their  being  diffsuit.  Thii  laat
mentioned  proTiaioo  ia  alio  mentioDed  in  the
Di^teil  (38.  tit  3}  ai  being  containeil  in  a  Son-
totcoainltiun  which  waa  poilajot  ts  the  IMmUi-
annm,  but  tho  name  ia  not  giteo  in  the  Kgeat.
Under  tbit  pronuon  a  Umiidpiiim  coold  otaiio
tbe  Booomm  PoBMuio.  Bachioi  [Hubria  Jurit-
pradailiae  Bonaaae)  amigna  this  ScnabueotMilliiia
to  the  tRgn  of  Trajan.  Bot  it  appean  to  beloair
to  tfae  time  of  Hadrian,  and  to  be  the  aone  S.  C.
which  allowed  Cintatei  to  take  a  lega<7'.  (Ulo.
Pny.  tit.  24.)

AnTicnLxiAHDH  gBTOthe  Piaeau  of  a  Prorince
jnriidietion  id  Che  case  of  fidelcommiiaa  libataa,
eren  when  the  hem  did  not  belai^  to  the  Pra-
Tinc&  The  herea  could  be  cmnpetled  to  pi*  the
libertaa  which  wai  the  anbject  of  the  SdeicooUBia-
inm.  (M^iHuNiMio  ;  Dig.  40.  tit- A.  1.44.51.)
Tbii  Senatuieonaultum  waa  enacted  i-U- 101,  in
hich  year  Sex.  Articuleini  Paetua  wai  coataoL

Di  BucHAHiLiBDB.  Th[i  SenatoaRnailtam.
which  i*  gometimea  called  HatciaiinBi,  waa  |ii  il
in  tbe  year  B.  c  186.  The  tcnu  of  it  an  (tBted
genenllj  by  Livy  (xxxii.  18),  and  maf  be  coa-
pared  with  the  original  SenatnaonaidtBm  whU  ia
pnntsd  inlheediticnDf  Idryb;Dl  ■  ■  ■
■-  that  by  J.  Oeric ■ "  "  "

Bynkenhoek  (CU  CWlii  A^^uni  f
Fittra  RamoHoi,  C^.  L412),  who  haa'pnTiudtbe
SenatuconmltDm  and  commsntcd  upm  it  U  asms
length.  The  proviiiDni  of  thii  Senanacoisiihaia
are  itated  generally  under  Diontiu,  p.  414,  h.
There  ia  no  ancient  authority,  aa  it  a^qieaii,  for  the
name  Marcianom,  which  has  beeti  jn^en  to  it  fivaa
,he  name  of  one  of  the  Coniula  who  propoaed  it.
Hid  in  accordance  with  the  naual  title*  of  S.  G  in
Jio  Imperial  period.  Thia  Sctnm  waa  fwoid  ia
I.  n.  1640,  in  a  Tillage  in  Calabria,  and  i>  >a>d  to
X  now  at  Vienna.  (SeaatUHnnnlti  De  Bao-
ihanalibua,  ftc  Biplicatio,  aucton  Hatthaeo  Ae-
gyptio,  Ne«poL  1739.)

"AhvmxtioH.  (,V\faai,Fng.^t.xTi.  i  JuuA

PiPU  PoFPABA  Lax,  p.  692,  b.)

yLAUDiAMuu  paaaed  in  the  time  of  the  Empera

Claudidi,  reduced  a  &«  woman  to  tbe  cmditioii  of

■lave  (andSa)  if  ihe  cohabited  with  the  ilaTs  li

iDtber  penOD,  after  the  maUcr  had  giTen  hci  no-

»  that  he  woald  not  pcnuit  it. Bat  if  «  wmnan,

ho  wBi  a  Roman  citiaeii,  cohabited  with  a  aUn

ith  the  cmaent  of  the  dare'i  maatcr,  iba  night

r  agreement  with  the  maater  tennin  fin  and  yet

any  cbild  bom  fnm  thia  cohabitation  wmld  he  m

ilare  ;  lai  the  Senatoacananltnn  oaule  lalid  anj

agreemoit  between  the  free  wmmo  ud  ihealan^

maiter,  and  br  such  unentent  Ae  ■  iiiaaii  waa  •»■

liered  from  Hm  penafiy  of  the  niimlainaiHilliilii

Bnt  Hadrian,  bunf  noved  tbento  bj  a  cooudciB-

ion  of  the  bardahip  of  tbe  taie  and  Iba  iBeangniity

if  thia  rule  of  law  (iarfpnTiajgO),  mlDfed  the

old  rule  of  the  Jn  (hnliom,  accotding  to  whidt

-* mun  coDtinuing  Am  waa  the  wntlMi  of  a

liild.

'  ~'' '  O"


8BNATU8C0NSULTUM.
A  diiBcnln'
acataitt-.
pmriilrd. If  ■  woman,  who  wu  a  Roman


I,  WM  with  chJd,  and  becar
paninnl  to  the  SenaniKDninltiun  in  conwqneim
of  HiliBbiliBf!  with  a  tlave  conDniy  to  Ihe  mailer'i
viih,  the  naiditiDn  of  the  child  wu  a  diiputed
natter :  Kinie  contcDded  that  if  the  woman  bad
become  pnsniint  in  a  l^al  nmriagF,  the  child  wh
a  Roman  citiien,  hut  if  ihe  had  become  pr^nant
hj  illicit  cohahitation,  (he  child  wa*  the  properl;
fif  the  pemin  who  had  become  the  maitec  of  the
mother. (Siavus  (Rohan).]

Then  it  ao  apparent  ambigiiitj  In  a  pauafre  of
Oaina  (L  88)  in  which  he  uji,  "bat  that  rule
of  the  lanw  Lei  ii  itill  in  fone,  by  which  the  inne
of  a  free  woman  and  another  man*!  ihiTe  ii  a  elaie,
if  the  mother  knew  that  the  man  with  whnn  ihe
cohabited,  wai  a  lUm"  The  Lu  of  which  he
^loikj,  i*  the  L«i  Aelia  Sentii.  The  eiceptioa
in  the  SoiatiiKoiwitltiiin  of  Claodiiu  applied  to  the
ewe  of  a  compact  between  a  free  woman  and  the
maater  of  the  daTe,  which  comfoct  impUea  that
tbe  woman  mnit  know  the  condition  of  Ihe  ilaTc,
■od  Ihsafon  occoidiiig  to  tbe  termi  of  the  Lex
tbe  ianiB  would  be  ilaTea.  Bnl  Qaiui  aa;!  (L  84)
thai  umUt  thb  SenBliueoanllam  the  woman  might
Vf  agreement  conliDBe  free  and  jet  give  birth  to  a
aiaTe  ;  for  the  Senataucooniitum  gave  validitj  to
the  eonpact  between  the  woman  and  the  miiiei  of
tha  liare.  At  Snt  light  it  appean  ai  if  the
SenatnaeaanillDm  produced  enctlj  the  lame  eflect
■•  the  Lex  with  reepeet  to  the  conditioa  of  the
child.  But  thie  i*  eiplained  by  referring  to  the
chief  prorieian  of  the  SenataJconaultmn,  which
VH  that  eohahita^on  with  a  ilave  "  inTito  et  de-
nnntiante  domino"  reduced  the  woman  to  a  lerf  lie
conditioD,  and  it  wa*  a  legal  conKqnence  of  thii
cfaai^  of  Gondilioa  that  the  inne  of  her  cohabita-
tian  null  be  a  alare.  The  Lei  Aelia  Senlia  had
ftlrrsdy  deelaced  the  condition  of  children  bom  of
the  nnion  of  a  free  woman  and  a  alaTe  to  be  eer-
Tile.  The  SenntuKonanllnm  added  to  the  penally
of  the  Lei  b;  making  the  mother  a  alare  alio,  nn-
Icat  ihe  cohabited  with  the  onuent  of  the  mailer,
and  thai  icpilted  thai  "  ineleganlia  jnrii "  bj
!r  could  ncape  tha  penalty  of
m  b;  her  agreement  and  jet
ber  child  mut  be  a  ilare  pnnuant  to  the  Lei.
Hadrian  lemoied  thii  inelegantia  by  declaring  that
if  the  mother  netwithitanding  the  cohabitation  es-
caped from  tbe  penaltiea  of  the  Senalaiconiultam
b;  TirtDO  of  her  compact,  the  child  alio  ibonld
baie  the  benefit  of  the  agreement.  The  Senatui-
comnltom  railj  ledoccd  the  cohabiting  woman  to
aaenile  itale  when  (he  cohabited  with  a  man'a
ilare  **  inTito  et  denaDliante  domino : "  if  ihe  co-
habited with  him,  knowing  him  to  be  a  ila'e,
without  the  knowledge  of  the  roattcr,  Ihers  could
be  IB  denunliatio,  and  thli  cue,  it  appean,  wu
not  afiecled  by  the  Senatniconiultum,  for  Giiiu
obeene*,  ai  abore  ital«d  (i.  86),  thai  Uie  Lei  had
Blill  effect  and  tha  o&pring  i^  each  cohabitation
wu  a  ilare.  The  foct  of  thii  dulse  of  the  Lex
lemaioiiu  in  force  after  the  enacting  of  the  Sena.
tmcmniUinn,  ^ipean  to  be  an  initance  of  Che
Itriet  ioter^taCion  which  the  Roman  Juiiiti  ap-
plied to  poaitire  enadmenla  ;  for  the  Senatuscon-
•ollam  of  Hadrian  ai  ilaled  by  Oaini  only  applied
to  the  laae  of  a  coatiact  between Ihe  ntaater'i


SENATUSC0N3ULTUM.  1026
not  comprehend  a  case  of  eohabitatlcm  when  ihete
wu  no  compact  Brides  thii  if  a  free  woman
cohabited  with  a  man*!  ilire  either  without  the
knowledge  of  the  mailer  or  with  hii  knowledge,
but  wilhoot  the  "  denunliatio,"  it  leemi  that  thii
wu  coniidered  u  if  the  woman  limply  indulged  in
pnimiicuou  intercourse  (vaigo  oaicrpil).  Bud  Ihe
mother  being  free,  the  child  alio  wai  ftee  by  the
Jua  Oentiom  till  the  Lei  attempted  to  reitrain
inch  intercoune  by  working  on  the  parfntal  aOec-
tioni  of  the  mother,  and  the  Senatuiconniltnm  by
a  direct  penal^  nn  henelE  There  wu  a  "jurii
inelegantia "  in  a  free  woman  gifing  birth  to  a
ilave,  but  thii  wu  not  r^arded  by  Hadrian,  who
wai  struck  by  the  inelegantia  of  a  woman  by  com-
pact bdi^  able  to  CTade  the  penally  of  the  Sena-
tuicanniltum  while  her  child  wu  itill  inhject  to
the  penalty  of  the  Lex.

Thii  SoiBtuicoDiulCum  wai  paned  a.  d.  62,  and
ii  mentioned  by  Taciini,  but  tha  terms  in  which


dominui,  pro  lihertit  haberentor,"
they  difier  materially  fnna  the  text  of  Oaina,  imleM
the  reading  "llbertu"  ibonld  be  "  liberia"  (See
lhenotaionTacit(u,.^m;xiLG3,ed.Oberim.)Itap-
[lean  bowerer  Asm  a  jnmgt  in  Paulni  <&  R.  it,
tit  10),  that  a  woman,  in  KHBeiBiea  which  are  not
mentioned  by  him,  wai  ndnccd  to  Iha  condition  of
a  liberta  by  the  Senatuiconiultnm  ;  a  circumitanoe
which  Goniimu  the  accoracy  of  the  text  of  Tacitus,
but  alio  ihowi  how  Tsry  imperfectly  he  hu  itated
ihe  SeiiatuKonnllDm.  Suetoniui  (Teip.  11)  at-
tribntei  the  Senalmcounltum  to  the  reign  of  Ves-
paiian,  and  expicsies  ils  effect  in  terms  itill  mora
general  and  uicorrect  than  those  of  Taciloi.  Such
inilancet  tbow  how  little  we  can  lely  on  the
Koman hiUoriaas  for exact mformition ai  to

1 1  appean  from  Paului  that  tha  |»»iiiana  of
thii  SenatuBoniuItom  are  stated  Tery  imperfectly
oral  by  Oaius,  and  that  they  applied  to  a  gnat
number  of  oties  of  cohabitation  between  free  wo-
men, whether  Ingenuae  or  Libettinae,  and  ilavea.

This  Senatusconsultom  was  entirely  repealed  by
a  CoastituUon  of  Justinian.  Some  wrilen  ref^
the  words  "ea  lege"  (Oniui,  i.  6fi)tothe  Senatna-
coniultum  Claudiauum,  and  diey  must  consequently
refer  the  words  "  ejusdem  legis"  (Oaiui,  1 86)  alio
to  this  SenatUKoniuImm  ;  but  tha  word  **  lex  "  in


e  appean  to  refer  to  tbe

)  the  Lex  Aelia  Sentia.

.84,86,91,  160;  Ulp,


Cod.  7-  til.  21 ;  Faulua,  S,  R.'d

There  were  lereral  othw  Senalusconsalta  Clau-
diana,  of  which  there  it  a  abort  notice  in  Jo.  An-
guiti  Bachii  Hiitoria  Juritpmdentiao  Romanae.

DaBUHUNUH,  jamei  in  tbe  reign  ofTtajsn,
related  to  Fideicommisaa  libertaj.  (Dig.  40.  tit  &.
t.&l.)  SeeRudoiff,  2«CK>ln>!,&cToLxiLp.lW7,
Dot  Tcttanifli/  da  Danmin.

Hadkiani  Ssnatusconsulta.  Numerous  te-
natuscraunlta  were  patted  in  tbe  reign  of  Hadrian,
but  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  which  is  oiled
Hadriinum.  Many  SenatnsconiiJta  of  this  reign
are  referred  to  by  Oaini  as  "  Senatusconialta  auc-
ton  Hadriano  beta,"  i.  47,  &C.,  of  which  there  >i
a  lilt  in  the  Indei  to  Oaiui.  The  SenatasconaulM
made  in  th?  reign  of  Hadrian  are  enumerated  by
Bachiui,  and  some  of  them  are  noticed  here  nndi^


•  O"


1028 SENATUSC0N8ULTUM.

JdMCIawum,  fiutei  in  the  reign  of
lelaledtoFideLmmmiMiLibeilni. (Dig.40.  iiu
*.  2H,  SI.) Thii  genalDicnnnJtuiD  ii  pnwrred
eiw  of  the  paiHgu  of  the  Digest  referred  to,

JuNUNUic,  puKd  in  the  time  af  Damician,
the  tenth  cooiultliip  of  Domitian,  and  in  the  «>
■ulthlp  of  Ap-  Juniua  Sabintu,  a-  d.  84,  had  for  it4
dbJHl  to  prerenE  coliiuicoi  betwe«n  A  moitel  Uld
hit  (Ibtb,  bj  which  the  i]ii\e  ihauld  be  trade  to
qipear  to  be  u  ■  free  miin.  The  pcnon  who  dii-
oOTered  the  calluiioQ  oblaiaed  the  ilaTe  u  hi>  pni-
pertf. (Dig.40.  tit.16.)

JvrminiAnvu  it  the  name  given  bj
jnriitt  to  the  Senattuconeultum,  which  ii  piwerted
in  the  Digcat  (G.  tit  3.  •.  20.  §  6).  The  Senattu-
oanultum  ia  [Jaeed  under  the  title  "  De  Heieditatii
PetJtitBis."

Lahouhdu,  pBMcd  m  the  fint  yeu  of  the  Em-
gt  Claudini,  A.  D.  i2,  gate  to  Ue  children  of  a
nnmLMar,  if  they  were  not  eiheredated  h;  name,
a  ri^t  to  the  bona  of  IaIuu  in  pnrcreiKO  to  Ex-
tnmei  heredei.  (PimowiM  ;  Gain*,  Hi  63—71  ;
Inat.  3.  titl.w*;  Cod.  7.  tit  E.)

LiBoNunuu,  paned  in  Ihc  reign  of  Tiberiai,  ia
the  coniulihip  of  T,  Statiiiui  Taunu  and  L.  SerilMt-
nina  Libo,  a.  d.  16,  contained  Tiiioui  prorigioni,
ene  of  wfaicb  waa  to  the  effect  that  if  a  man  wrote
a  will  for  anotlier,  eiery  thing  which  he  wrote  in
bit  own  faroar  waa  Toid  ;  accordingly  he  coold  not
make  himaelf  a  tutor  (Dig.  26.  tit  2.  t.29},  nor
ban  or  legataiiai  (Dig.  U.  tit  8).  Tbii  SenaRu-
cmuoltum  contained  other  pioTiaiana,  and  it  ap-
Hsrt  to  have  been  an  extention  of  the  Lex  Cornelia
da  Faliii.  [FAi.a[;ii.}  See  al»  CbJ/.  Z^.  M.  &
S.  Tiii.  7.

MAODaNUNDW,  enacted  a.  d.  46,  prorided
that  any  loan  of  money  to  a  filiui&uniliai  cevJd  not
be  rccoTered  eren  after  the  death  of  the  &theT.
The  Senataieooiultmn  took  ita  name  from  Macedo,
a  notorioDi  muter,  aa  eppeara  from  the  lecmi  cf
tbe  Senatizicontulmn  which  ia  prcKcved  (Dig.
U.  tit  6).  Theophilua  (J-aropSr.  /««.)  atalea  in-
correctly  that  the  Senatuconiullani  took  ill  aaste
from  a  filiua&miliai.  Theproviaionofthe  Senattia-
ecmaoltiun  ia  cited  by  Tadtua  (Au.  xl  13),  bnt
in  auch  tenna  aa  might  lead  to  ambiguity  in  the
JnleitMation  of  the  law.  Snetoniui  (Ve^.  II)
attribntea  thu  SenatDaeonanltam  to  tiie  time  <^
Veapetian  ;  bnt  he  itatai  iti  prariiiona  in  leaa
ambiguona  terma  than  Taeitaa.

MiMHiAHUH.  Thiananx  iaaometimei  nienlo
the  Senatniconaultnm,  paned  in  the  time  of  Nero,
the  termi  of  which  ate  preierTed  hj  Tacitna  (Am.
XT.  19) :  "  ne  limalata  adoptio  in  ulla  parte  nnne-
ria  pobliei  jaraict,  ac  ne  niurpandia  qsidem  here-
dilalibna  ptodeaaet"  The  object  of  thii  Senalni-
oonaiiltunx  waa  to  prevent  the  eraaion  of  tbe  Lex
jDlia  et  Pa^  Poppaeo.  It  ia  lometiDiei  leftned
to  the  conmlahip  of  C.  Memnuna  Regulu  aod  Vir-
jrinini  Rufai  A.  D.  63,  but  it  af^Kora  to  ititag  to
Uu  preceding  year.  See  Dig.  SI.  a.  61,  and  S3,
tit  1.  >.  76.

NiRONuncii  de  Legada,  the  ptnTJaiona  of
which  ate  alated  in  the  article  Lbhatdh.  (Oaioa,
ii  1*7,198,312,218,2201  Ulp  fti^.  xxiy.)

NiaoNiAKDV,  alao  called  Pisohiandii,  &om
being  enacted  in  the  conaolahip  of  Nero  and  L.
Calpuiniiia  Piao,  x.  d.  fi7.  It  cdntuned  faiiotu
proTiaiona :  "  Ut  ai  quia  a  aaia  aerria  intetfeclu*
■Met,  ii  qnoqae,  qui  teatamento  nummnini  aub
eodem  tecio  wanaiueiit,  inter  •ermi  aupplieia  pen-


BENATUSCONSULTUU:

derent-  (Tacit  .Jin.iui.  S3):  "UCeceiMidcni
etiam  de  familia  liri  qoaeitio  habeatnt ,  idnnque  at
juxta  nxoria  Suniliam  obterretur,  li  yir  dKatnt
ocraana  "  (Panlua,  S.  H.  iii.  tit  J,  wbo  |[iTfa  ia
inbitBiice  alio  the  pnniaiai  mentioned  by  Taotna,
but  adda :  ^  Sed  et  iii  tcrquentut,  qui  com  octiaa
in  itinen  fbemnt ") :  "  Ut.  u  poenae  ohnoiiDi
■ervtu  Teoiaaet,  qnandixiae  in  enm  animadTrmia
eaaeC,TCnditor  pnttunpiaealaiet.*'  (Diig.29.  titS.
M.e.)

OitPSiTiANtiH  tnacted  m  the  time  of  IS.  Aore-
lini  (Capitol  in  vila,  11)  that  the  legilimB  heredita*


c  baa  n


the  exdnaion  of  the  miaaii-
guinei  and  other  agnatL  The  name  Orphitiwiain
ia  nipplied  by  PaoW  (S.  R.  ir.  tit  ID),  and  tbe
Digeat  (38.  tit  17)  ;  the  enactnwnt  waa  nwle  in
the  conmlahip  of  V.Ru&iand  COiphilBB.  (Inat
3.  tit  4.)
Panlna  (It.

Orphitianum. [Hiau.] Thia  _.

vaa  made  in  the  joint  icign  of  U.  Anrdin  and
Commodua.  (Impp.  Anton,  et  ComiDodi  iniimir
in  aenatn  rocilata.  Dip.  Fng.  tit  xxri.)  Se«  0«A-
TioNM  PaiNcwim.

PxOASiAHUH  waatoactad  iatheRignofYeqa-
aian.  Pegaana  and  Pniio  being  Cooanlet  ( Snffeed  ?)
in  the  year  of  the  enactment  (Inat  ii  tit  S3  ;
Oaini,  ii.  2£4,  &c  )  The  jKHTiiiona  of  tliii  Srat-
tuaconaultiun  are  itated  under  PiDaicomtiiVA
andLioATUH.  Thii  SeDatOKODaollum,  or  another
of  the  lame  name,  mo^fied  a  pfuiiaion  of  the  Lex
Aelia  Sentia  aa  to  a  I^tinua  becemins  a  Rananoi.
(Osiua,  i.  31.)

PlKgiciAM7K,  which  may  ha  the  ooarect  fbtia
inatead  of  Pemicianam,  waa  enacted  id  the  liaie  of
Tiberiui  A.  D.  84,  and  wai  an  amendment  of  the
Lex  Jniia  et  P^ia  Poppaeo.  (Ompare  Lki
JuiiA  n  Pap.  Pop.  i  UIp.  Prof,  tit  iii.;
Sueton,  Ctaaii.  23.)

PlSONIANUM. [NaaoHUNDM.]

wtiteti  aangued  to  the  time  of  Veapaaias.  Tbs
Lex  Jolia  Pspia  et  Poppaea  appansitly  eestuDed
aproTiaion  by  which  afidneammiaama  waa  hifrited
to  the  Fiacna,  if  a  hetea  or  legatacioa  aigag«d
himaelf  by  a  written  inatnunent  or  any  alba  lecret
mode  to  piy  or  give  the  Gdekoianuiaam  to  a  poaca
who  waa  li^aliy  incapable  of  taking  it  (Dig.  30l
a.  103  ;  34.  tit  9.  •.  10,  18  i  49.  tit  14.  i.  3.)
Such  a  Fideicommiwmi  wai  callol  Taatam,  and
when  made  iu  tbe  way  deacribed  waa  aaid  to  be
"  in  &andem  legit,''  deugned  to  evade  the  la*.  If
it  wai  made  openly  (paiam.},  thii  waa  no  frau,
and  thongh  the  Edeieommiaauni  might  be  inialid
on  aoconnl  of  the  ino^iBeity  of  the  fidacoanaia.
aarioa  to  take,  the  penalty  of  the  tei  did  not  ap(4y.
It  doea  not  appear  certain  whether  Uii*  pnTaion
aa  to  tbe  eonmialMD  ma  contained  in  the  orifinal
Lex  or  added  by  aome  anbaeqnent  Setataacanaat-
tun.  However  thia  may  be,  the  fidueiaiiBa  atin
retabed  hii  Qnarta.  But  a  SenattBCOoaultoBmeit-
tioned  by  Ulpian  (^Vqg,  titxrv.  a.17)  enacted  that
if  a  man  undertook  to  psfbim  a  tadtnn  lidi  ii  laii
muaum,  he  loit  tbe  (Joadrani  n  Quaita  [PiD»-
coHHiBsiiu],  not  could  be  cIbLb  what  waa
Cadncom  under  the  Teetamenta,  which  a*  a  |{enefal
rule  he  eottid  chum  if  he  had  childreD.  [LaeATtm  t
Bona  Caddca.]  Thia  Seoataacoualhun,  it  ap-
pean  bum  an  axBaet  ia  tba  Digaat  <U.  tit  %


BENATDSCONSULTUH.
■.  68)i  WM  the  PUndaiinni,  sr  PUotiannm,  lor
tin  IWdiim  u  dmiblisl ;  and  in  thii  puuge  il  ii
■Mted  tbil  tlie  Fonith,  which  ths  Fiduduioi  «u
not  >IUiw«d  to  nuin,  «••  clum«d  for  ths  Fimu
bj  K  Hocnpt  of  AnloniDiu  Piuj.  Ths  penalty  for
t£«  band  0IU7  apfilud  to  that  pact  of  tlw  prapeitj
to  which  the  bnA  (ateodtd,  *ad  if  tba  bent  wu
Itant  'm  a  larasr  ibace  of  t^  benditM  than  the
ihan  to  vbich  th«  finun  cxtatdol,  ha  had  the
borafit  of  the  Falddia  for  that  put  to  which  tha
which  i«  thai  exwcaied  hj
-  ill),  "kJu  major

u  baadii  fimil  quod ad


Pa^nian  (Dig.  Si.  1


,  le  inpeiBao  qnarti  cctinsbi
The  hiilorr  of  Iqiiiktion  oa  the  nibject  of  Tacita
"  '  *■  not  altogetlwc  &ce  bom  lome


the  emuulihip  of  Ratdu  Galliu  and  Q.  Coeli
HioM  (pnbahlrtfbn«ile*nOicti)^D.  101, related
to  Gdaicrai


the  Digeat  (40.  tit  S,  i.  26)  :  "  Si  hi  a  quibiu  li-
bertateiD  pnealari  oportel  eroaUi  b  Piaetore  adeaie
DoluiaMnl,  K  casaa  cognila  Fntetor  pnnimtianal
libaitatem  hi*  deberi,  eodem  jan  ■tatnio  •ervari
ac  ai  dincto  mazminiaai  ewent.^^  (Jranpars  Plin.
^  ii.  S,  ad  Uanm  with  the  ?■»%■  ">  '^
Dintt.

QASiHlANUH,  of  uncoftaia  date,  but  apparentl;r
after  ths  tinu  a{  Antonmiw  Piua.  It  idMed  to
the  light!  of  mo  of  three  brothen  who  had  been
adopted,  to  a  portioD  of  the  bereditai  contis  labolai
teatamentL  (Cod.8.  tit.4e.  ■.  10  ;  loitS-tiLl.)

SiLiHUNUH,  probablT  paaied  in  the  time  of
Angnitiii  in  the  connilihip  of  P.  Comelioi  Dola'
belU  and  C.  Janiiu  Silamu  a.  i>.  10,  coDluoed
Tariooa  enaclDKiitt.  It  Raie  freedom  lo  a  ilare
vho  diicoT«Ttd  the  murderer  of  hii  nutter.  If
a  maiter  wai  mnrdered,  all  Iha  aUrea  who  were
nndo'  the  roof  at  the  time,  if  the  murder  waa  corn-
■Bitted  noder  a  roo^  or  who  were  with  him  in  anj
place  at  the  time  el  the  muiler,  were  put  to  the
torture,  aod,  if  the;  had  not  done  their  beat  lo
defend  him,  were  pat  la  death.  Tacitoa  (^m.
xiT.  43)  reCot  to  thi*  proTialon  of  the  Senatnicea-
(oltnm,  and  he  oiei  the  phraae  "Tetera  ex  ntor&"
LipBoa  (note  on  thii  {aaaa^)  referi  to  Cicero
(ai  Pdm.  IT,  12),  Serri  Impuberea  were  ei-
cepted  frooi  thia  proTiaioa  of  the  Senataiconaultiim.
(Di^.  29.  tit.  S.  a.  U.)  The  herea  who  touk  poa-
aeeaHD  of  the  hereditaa  of  a  mnnletvd  penon  be-
fine  tike  proper  ijiqniij  waa  made,  fbifeited  the
beteditaa,  which  fell  lo  the  Fiacoa :  the  rule  waa
the  •ame  whether  being  here*  ei  leatamento  be
opened  the  will  (lalmim  tofonmb'}  before  the  in-
quiry waa  made,  or  whether  being  herei  ab  inlea-
tato,  he  took  poaaeaaion  of  the  hereditaa  {adat  Aa-
rariiMan)  or  obtained  the  Bonorom  Pcucaiio  ;  he
waa  alto  aabjecled  lo  a  hearj  pecuniary  penally.
A  Senatntceaauttam  pitted  in  the  coittutihip  of
Taoret  and  J,cpidna  a.  n.  1 1,  enacted  that  the
poial^  for  opening  the  will  of  a  mnritered  penen
conld  net  be  indicted  tftei  fire  yari,  except  it  wat
•  oate  of  parricide  to  which  thia  tempoiit  praeacrip-
tio  did  not  opplj.  (Paalut,  JL  A  iii.  tit.  5  ;  Dig.
SB.  tit,  i  ;  Cod.  6.  tit.  36.)

Tbkthlliaiiom  it  atated  in  the  Inalitatea  of
JaMiaian  (3.  lit.  3)  to  hsTe  been  enacted  in  the
tiae  of  Hadrian,  in  the  conaalahip  of  Terlnlliu  and


BENATU3C0NSOLTUM. 1027

iar  il  to  the  time  of  Antoninst  Pint.
Thit  SenaEutcantnltma  empowered  a  moths;  whe-
ther Ingenna  or  Libntina,  Co  take  the  Legitima
heredilai  of  an  inleatate  ton  ;  the  Ingenua,  if  ihe
waa  or  had  been  the  mother  of  three  i^dtni ;  the
Libertina,  if  the  waa  or  bad  been  the  mollier  of
tbnr  children.  They  conld  alio  lake,  though  they
neither  were  nor  had  been  mothen,  if  they  had
obtuned  the  Jua  Liberonmi  by  Imperial  larour.
SeTsal  penooi  howerer  took  pceeedoKa  of  tba
mother  ;  the  tui  heredea  of  the  ton,  Iboae  who
were  ailed  lo  the  Bonorum  Potteado  oa  mi
heredce,  the  father,  and  the  frai^r  contanguiiieDa.
If  there  waa  a  aoror  conaanguinta,  iha  ihind  with
her  mother.  The  Senataicanaaham  Oiphitiannm
gare  the  children  a  claim  lo  the  huedilat  of  tbe

(UIp.  FVag.  tit,  nri. ;  Pulnt,  S.IL  rr.  tit.  9  :
DiK38.  liLl7.)

Tbublluni/ic,  enacted  in  the  time  of  Nere
in  the  contuiihip  of  L.  Annaeua  Seneca  and  Tm-
bellitu  Maximna  A.  &  63,  reklad  to  Fidaicommia-
tae  heredilatet.

(FiniKnimissuii ;  Gaitu,  tL  2S1,  25B  ;  Dig.
36.  tit  1  !  Pauln^  S.  it  i*,  tit  2.)

TuRPtLiiMitii,  enacted  in  the  tone  of  Nen  in
the  conaalahip  of  Ciewnina  Paetu  and  Petnmina
TurjHlloa  a.  d.  G1,  wu  againat  praeraricatifl  or  tha
colluaive  dcaiating  from  prooecnting  a
charge.  The  Dcaaion  of  thia  Senatnt
and  the  temu  of  it  are  italed  by  Tacitoa  (Awt.
iiT.  14) ;  "  qui  talem  opoam  emplitoiaet,  Tcndi-
diiaetTe,  perinde  poena  terurelur  ac  publico  judicio

The  definition  of  a


tha  eonauUhip  of  Marcai  Silannt  and  \
Tutor,  aa  appeart  from  tbe  preamble  of  the  Sena-
luaconiultum  (Dig.  16.  tit  I),  and  it  appeart  mod
probably  to  have  been  paaaed  in  the  reign  of  Claudiua
from  the  worda  of  Ulpian  in  hia  comment  upon
it  The  name  of  Vetleiu  Tator  doet  not  occur  in
tba  Fatti  Contidarea,  and  he  may  be  a  coniul  luf-
fectua.  The  name  of  M.  Silanoa  occnrt  at  eonni
in  tbe  leign  of  Claadiua,  and  the  colieagne  of
Valeriua  Aiiaticua,  A.  n.  46.  (Dion  Cata.  Ix,  27.)
[iNTiRCiaiiio.]  In  the  year  iLD.  19,  according
to  the  Faali  a  M.  Silaniu  waa  olio  conanl ;  hia
calleagne  aceotding  to  tbe  Fatti  wia  L.  Norbonna
Balbut,  and  thia  agnet  with  Tacitut  {Amm.  iu  £9).

ViTKiaiANtiM  ia  aaaigned  lo  the  reign  of  Vea-
paaian,  hat  tbe  time  ia  Tary  imcertain.  Il  re-
lated to  Fideiconnsiaw  Uberlaa.  (Dig.  40.  tit  5.
a.  30.)

VoLDnANUM,  enacted  in  the  reign  of  Mete  in
tbe  conmlthip  oiF  Q.  Volaiina  Satnmiiiet  and  P.
Caneliiu  Sopite  A.D.  fi6.  It  cootained  a  provi-
tioD  againat  polling  down  a  domoi  or  nil*  Sx  the
Bake  of  profit ;  but  the  object  of  thia  law  aeema
lather  obacnra :  it  ia  nfetted  to,  without  the  name
being  giTan,  in  the  Digeat  (1 B.  tit  1.  a.  £3.  Snufw
caimil,  Ac.}.  Tadlnt  {Am.  liii.  23)  menlioni  a
Senamteantnltum  in  thia  eoDJoltbip  which  limited
the  power  of  the  Aedilct :  **  qutntnm  cnrulei,
qoanlnm  plebeii  pignorii  oapertol,  re)  poenae  im-
garent"  A  Senatasconiultnm  Volutianoni  (if  tbe
name  ia  ri^t]  enacted  that  pemnt  thonld  be  liable
to  tha  praialtiti  of  the  Lax  Jalia  de  li  printa,.


3d  2


•  o"


lOSB  SERICUH.

who  jidned  tn  the  ndl  oT  wioltiflr  penon  «i(h  the
baigwii tl«t  iho;  thoald  ihin  whklcTer  w
Mqnired  br  the  condanuutio. (Dig'  48.  lit
>.  6.)  [O.  L.]

SENIO'RES. [CoMiTiA,  p,  833.]
»SPTA. [CouiTU,  p.  336,  b,]
SEPTEMVIRI  EPULO'NES,  [Efclonm*.]
SEPTIMATRUS. [QuiHOiJirBUB.]
SEPTIMO'NTIUM,  *  Roman  fcidyml  w
wu  held  in  the  month  of  December. It  li
onlj  for  one  day  (dia  Septinumiiiim,  dies  SejMi
Halu)' According  to  Feitiii  (j.  r.  Septinontii
the  fettJTid  wu  the  nine  (u  the  Agonalia  ;  but
Scaligec  in  hi>  note  on  thii punge  hii  thnmi
from  VuTo  idt  Lnig.  Lai.  iL  SI)  uid  from  T<
tnllian (da  IdaU. 10),  that  the S^ptimon^u
mnit  ha«e  beoi  held  on  one  of  the  lut  dnyi
December,  wherou  the  Agoa&iia  took  place  on  Itie
tenth  of  thi« month. Theday  of  thoSentimm''-
WM  s  diei  feriihu  fix  the  montani,  or  the  in)
aatt  of  the  eeren  andeitt  hiU>  or  nthsr  dittriete  of
Roma,  who  a3ered  on  thii  daj  Mcrifiepi  to  the
godi  in theii  reipectiTe  diitncta. Theia  vom
(Hero  pro  MOoJiiu,  Feit.  s.  e.  FuUiea  laera)  were,
like  the  p«|ipn«lia,  not  lana  publics,  but  printa.
(Vairo,  1.11.;  compare  SACBi.)  Thej  were  believed

clonre  of  the  aeTcn  hilli  of  Rome  within  the  wal!i
of  the  city,  but  mnit  certaiu);  be  referred  lo  ■
tine  whoi  the  Capitoline,  Quirinal,  and  Vininal
wot  not  jet  iiMOiporat«d  with  Rome.  (Compare
Colnmelk,  iL  10;  Sneb  Domk.  4  ;  Plul.  Qmiat.
Rom.  68  ;  Niebuhr,  HiA  o/Jtami,  toI.  i.  p.  389,
4t)  [L.S.]

SEPTUNX. [As,  p.  140,  b,]

8EPULCRUM. [FuNifB,  p,  o60,h.]

SEQUESTRES. [Ahhiti'*.]

SERA. [Janda,  p.  626,  b.J

SE'RICUH  (inipuidr),  .i)k,  iIm  called  iam-
jyn'wm.  The  firM  ancient  author  who  aSordi
any  evidence  napeeting  the  nia  of  ailk,  is  Ariitotle
(//.  A.  T.  19).  Alter  a  deuription,  pettiall;  cor-
rect, of  the  metamocphoaei  of  the  •ilkwonn  (6omts(i,
Martial,  riii.  38),  he  intimate*  that  the  produce  of
the  cocooni  wa>  wound  upon  bohbina  by  women
for  (he  purpoic  of  being  woTen,  and  that  Pamphile,
daiightet  of  P)ate«,  wai  eaid  to  hare  fini  woren
■ilk  in  Cat.  Thii  itatement  aulhoiiiaa  the  concln-
lion,  that  lav  nlk  wu  bronght  from  the  interior
of  Aaia  and  manu&etured  in  Coi  Be  early  ai  the
fourth  century  n.c  From  this  island  it  appean  that
the  Roman  ladica  oblsined  their  moat  splendid
garments  [CoA  Vibtib},  to  that  the  later  poeli
of  the  Aagustan  sge,  Tibnllnt  (ii.  1),  Prapeniua
(L  2,  iL  1,  W.  2,  iT.  S),  Horace  {Cant.  ir.  13.  IS,
SaLlS.  IDl),  and  Ovid  (Art.  Amat.  ii.  S»8),
adorn  their  renes  with  altnaions  to  these  elegant
textures,  which  were  remsrlcably  thin,  sometimes
of  a  fine  pniple  dye  (Her.  U.  ce.\  and  'mriegated
with  truirrans  ttripei  of  gold.  (Tiboll.  u.  6.)
About  thit  time  the  Puthiao  conqnesti  ojmed  a
way  for  the  transport  into  Italy  of  all  the  mott
Taliuihla  prodnetioni  of  cential  Alia,  which  wae
the  suppoied  territory  of  the  9crea.  The  appear-
nnce  of  the  silken  flags  attached  to  (he  gilt  stand-
ards of  the  Parthiani  m  the  battle  fought  in  54
B.  c  (Flom^  iiL  1 1 },  must  have  been  a  very  iliik-
ing  light  £»  the  army  of  Ctamu.

The  inquiiiet  of  the  Ramani  leapceting  the
Dalure  of  Ud*  beautifiil  mannAuture  led  (a  a  Tery
goMnl  o^nioa  that  «li  in  its  natotal  slate  wm  a


BERTCUlf.
thin  fleece  ionnd  on  treo. (Viig.  Otarg.  iL  131  ;

Petron.  1 1 9 ;  Seneca, //>>fioI.  3B6;  Festoi  AtH^-
nni,  935 ;  &S.  ItoL  Fvl.  tL  4,  xir.  664,  xriL
596.)  An  author,  nearly  coutemponry  with
those  of  the  Auguilan  age  ali^y  quoted  (Diet.
nyiius  Periegetei,  75S),  eelebtalea  not  only  tlw
extreme  fiueueas  and  the  high  ralue^  hot  also  the
flowered  texture  of  these  pndnctiang.  The  cir-
cnnutancea  now  ilated  sufficiently  aceoimt  fbr  ibs
huX,  that  after  the  Augnstan  age  we  find  no
fbrthcf  mention  of  Coan,  but  only  of  Sate  web*.
The  rage  for  the  latter  ineteaaed  mesa  and  mat.
Even  men  atpired  to  be  adorned  with  ulfc.  and
hence  the  senate  eaily  in  the  leign  of  Tiberna
enacted  "  Ne  Testis  Serica  moi  foedoret.''  (IW.
Ami.  iL  33 ;  Dion  Cass.  IriL  li  ;  Soida^  t.  t.
•MJpiet.)

In  tlie  iDcceeding  trigna,  we  find  the  moat
Tigoraii  meaanraa  adopted  by  thcae  enpom
who  were  charaeteriied  by  eereiity  of  nanasi,
to  restrict  the  use  of  ulk,  whilst  Calignla  md
otheia,  notorioui  lor  luxury  and  excess,  not  only
encouiaged  it  in  the  female  eei,  bul  ddighted  to
display  it  in  public  on  their  own  penona.  (Soet.
«%.  5Si  Dim  Case.  lii.  IS;  lee  also  J<m|^
B.  J.  Tii.  S.  §  4.)  Shawli  and  larttt,  iaterwuiea
with  goU  and  brought  from  the  reraotaat  bat,
were  accumulated  in  Uie  winlnba  of  the  Emfweas
during  auceeitiia  reigni  (Hattial,  xL  9),  now  in
ynr  176  Antoninoi,  the  phDeaepher,  in  e«Bae-
nce  of  the  eihauated  stale  of  hit  tttuoir,  aald
m  by  public  auclisn  in  the  FontB  of  Tti^
with  the  teat  of  the  impnial  omaneata.  (CB|d(nL
n  Vila,  17.)  At  this  period  we  find  that  tha
aQkoi  texture,  beiidee  twing  mixed  with  gold
(xpvirdnurrot,  xp^'^P'lt),  was  adorned  with  em-
broidery, thii  part  of  the  work  being  eiteculed
eiiber  in  Egypt  or  Alia  Uinor.  (A'iMu,  Maav^
cia>a,Lucan,i.UI  lSenea^H<n^CW.6G4.)  The
Christian  an  then  from  Clemeoa  Alexandrnoa
[Paadag.  iu  ID)  and  Tertullian  <d*  PaBia,  4)
downwards  diicoufage  oe  eoodemn  the  use  of  nlk.
Plulanh  alio  diaaoades  the  TJnuooi  and  pndent
wife  (rom  wearhig  it  (dm}'.  Prate,  p.  fi£0,  tdL  ii.
cd.  Rcitke),  although  It  ii  probable  that  ritand*
' ■  the  hair  (Mart'al,  xii.  34)  wen  dm

ince  theee  gooda  (Striea)  were  f«b
lie  Yicna  Toacn*  at  Borne  (il  27).
Silk  thread  waa  alio  imjxirted  and  uaed  for  roriooa
paipaees.  (Oalen,  Ilepl  &iiyr.  toL  tL  p.  £33,  ed.
Cbaitier.}

Although  Ccanmodni  in  anne  degiea  replenished
the  palace  with  nduable  and  euriona  efinta,  in-
doding  thoee  of  lilk  (Ca^td.  Ptriim.  8),  this  arti.
■in  aoon  afterward*  again  became  Ten  lore,  ao  that
iew  wrileiB  of  the  third  century  moke  meotioD  nf
t.  When  finely  manu&etured,  it  sold  for  it*
night  in  gold,  on  which  account  Aanlian  would
lut  allow  hia  empreat  to  have  eren  a  tingle  shawl
jf  pnrde  rilk  (pallio  hbHtn  itrm,  Vopiac.  .^anf.
*&\  The  n*e  of  ailk  with  a  warp  of  linen  cr  wool,
called  fraauMrwo  and  nian-in,  a*  dialingniahrd
lioni  jio/bsarioi,  waa  permitted  under  nanv  teatric-
joni.  About  the  end,  howerer,  of  the  third  cen-
ury,  ailk,  especially  when  woven  with  a  irafp  of
nferior  nlue,  b^iao  to  be  much  mere  gcnetoUy
wora  both  by  men  and  women ;  and  the  fw
juence  waa  that,  in  order  to  confine  the  ajornenl
if  this  luxury  more  entirely  to  the  imperial  taaSj
~  '  court,  prirate  ptnoot  wen  fccfaidden  ta  an-
i_  .1 1 J —  _j  j^  ^^  aiikeai  h^


SERRA.
den  [paragaadae)  win  iltawed  (a  be  made  mlj
in  tha  impaiil  g7ii*««a. [PiBiOiUDi.]

Tha  podactiaa  ot  n«  (ilk  (jihatfl)  in  Enn^
vu  lint  attcinpWd  nndci  Jiulioiui,  A.  □.  S30.
Tb«  egg*  ot  tie  lilkwonn  were  cornered  to  Byuii-
tinin  in  the  liollow  item  of  tt  pUot  from  "  Seiinda,"
which  WH  prebabtv  Khotan  in  Little  Bochuu,  b;
«Mna  niMikl,  who  had  leunt  the  method  of  tilUch-
iug  and  retnng  them.  The  womu  were  fed  wilh
the  leaf  Df  the  Black  or  Common  Mutberrj'  (ranl-
luut.  Pntof.  B.  Got*.  IT.  17  ;  Oljou,  Am.  it.  p.
209  i  Zonar.  Jn.  liT.  p.  69,  ed.  l>u  Conge  ;  Phot.
BiU.  p.  SO,  ed.  Rolb.).  Tb*  culliTatian  both  of
thiiip«ieaBBda[thaWbiteMalbeii7,the  bleeding
of  ■ilx.wonua,  and  the  nianu&ctnre  of  their  pro-
duce, haTing  been  long  confined  to  Greece,  were  at
lenrth  in  the  twelfth  centmy  tnnaported  into
Sicily,  and  thence  extended  otci  the  »uth  of  Eu-
rope. (Otto  Fritingen,  Miit-Imp,  Frtdtr,  i.  33;
Ifan.  Comncnut,  ii.  B.)  The  prwreu  of  thii  im-
poctaoi  branch  of  induiltj  wai  however  greatly
impeded  eren  in  Greece  both  by  mmptuary  lawi
retlrictiDg  the  ue  of  lilk  except  in  the  church  ler-
Tke  or  in  the  dren  and  omamcnli  of  the  conit,
and  aka  by  finea  and  prohihitiani  againit  piiTate
ailkmilli,  and  by  other  altempti  to  cegalstr  the
price  both  of  the  nw  and  mannbcturtd  artidr.
It  wat  at  one  time  delennined  that  the  buiineu
■bould  be  caiiied  on  lotely  by  the  imperial  trea-
aurer.  Peter  Banamca,  pralwbly  a  Phoenician,
bcid  ibe  office,  and  cnndocted  himielf  in  the  moit
opprenive  manner,  10  thntthe  lilk  tiade  wai  mined
both  in  Bjiantiiun  and  at  Tyre  and  Berytm,  whilat
Joitinian,  the  empreu  Theodora,  and  their  tre«-
anrer  amniard  great  wealth  hy  the  monapoly.
(Procop.  HiM.  Atobi.  26.)  The  lilki  woTea  in
Eunpe  preTionilT  to  the  thirteenth  century  were
in  genetal  plain  ui  their  pattern.  Many  of  thoae
produced  by  the  indiutry  and  taile  of  the  Serei,
■-  e.  the  lilk  mannhcturera  of  the  interior  of  Aiia,
were  highly  elaborate,  and  appear  to  haie  been
Toy  limilar  in  tbeir  pBltemi  and  ityle  of  ornament
to  the  Fenian  ibawli  of  medem  time*. [J.  Y.]

SKRRA,J.-w.SERBULA{wpW),aiaw.  It
wai  made  of  iron  i/fma,  Non.  Marc  p.  223,
ed.  HereeH ;  dt  fim  Imma,  Iiid.  Orig.  iix.  19 ;

S.  Caory.  L  143).  The  fomi  of  the  larger  >aw
for  cutting  timber  ia  leen  in  the  annexed
woodcut,  which  ti  taken  from  a  miniature  in  the
oelebiated  DiMcoridei  written  at  the  beginning  of
the  axth  centnry.  (Idont&ncon,  Paf.  (Troec.  p.
203.)  It  LI  of  the  kind  which  we  call  the  frame-
Mw,  became  it  ii  fixed  in  a  rrctangnlor  &anv.  It
*aa  heid  by  a  woritman  (Mrrnrnu,  Sen.  Epiii.
57)  at  euh  end.  The  line  wai  naed  to  mark  the
timber  in  order  to  guide  the  nw  (Sen.  EpitL
99)  ;  and  iti  morement  wai  bcilitated  by  driiing
wedgei  with  a  hammer  between  the  pteaka  [laiitB
tatmtae)  or  raften  (fraiei).  (Corippui,  dt  Load.
JtA  iT.  ii—iS.)  AiimilarrepreMntationofthe
nae  of  the  6ame-iaw  ia  gTTcn  in  a  punting  foond
St  Rennlaneum,  the  opeiaton  being  winged  genii,
M  in  thii  woodcit  {Anl.  d'EraoL  i.  ta*.  Si)  ;  but
in  a  baa-relief  pabliihed  by  Micati  (_IlaI.  av.  it
Dom.  dti  Rim.  tai.  49)  the  two  lawyert  w<«r  tunica
girt  round  the  waiit  like  that  of  the  >hip-builder  in
tbe  woodcut  at  p.  141.  Tha  woodcut  here  intro-
duced al»  ihowi  the  blade  of  the  nw  detached
1Mb  iti  Enme,  with  a  ring  at  each  end  for  fixing
i(  in  the  frame,  and  exhibited  on  a  fimertaJ  monu-
natt  poblitbed  by  Oruter. On  each  lida  of  the


iJ


lait-raentianed  figure  ia  rqneaented  a  band-aaw
adapted  to  be  naed  by  a  ungle  penon.  That  on
the  left  ii  from  the  nme  fun^eal  manmnent  at  the
blade  ot  the  frame-iaw:  that  on  the  right  ia  the
fignre  of  an  ancient  h^p^tian  >aw  preieiTed  in  tha
Bridih  MnKum.  Thrae  nwa  (lemilaa  tjun-
briatat)  were  uaed  to  diride  the  imallei  objecta.
Some  of  them,  called  liipi,  had  a  partictdar  ihape,
by  which  they  were  adapted  for  amputatil^  the
hnnche*  of  tree*. (Pallad.  <fe  Ri  Rat.  i.  43.)

St.  Jerome  (»  It.  xxnii.  27)  acemi  clearly  to
allude  to  the  circular  aaw,  which  wat  probabij  iiaed,

Plin.  H.  A'.  iTi.  43.  a.  G4).  We  have  al»  inti-
mationa  of  tha  nae  of  the  centie-bit,  and  we  find
that  eren  in  tha  time  of  Cieere  (  pm  Oiiart.  64)  it
wai  employed  by  thieTci.

Pliny  («■.  y.  ixxii.  22.  «.  44)  mention*  the  uaa
of  the  aaw  in  the  ancient  Belgnim  for  cntling
white  building-atone :  aonie  of  the  oolitic  and  ere-
ticeoni  rochi  an  itill  treated  in  the  aame  manner
both  in  that  part  of  the  continent  and  in  the  uulh
of  England.  Inthiacaae  Pliny  niuat  be  andentood
to  ipuk  of  a  proper  or  toothed  taw.  The  >aw
without  teeth  wai  then  uted,  juit  ai  it  ii  now,  by
the  workeri  in  laarble,  and  the  place  of  teeth  wna
■upplied,  according  to  the  hardneu  of  the  none,
eiUier  by  smery  or  by  larioaa  kindi  ot  nnd  of  in-
feriiff  hardneu.  (Plin.  t/.  !V.  xxiri.  6.  a-  9.)  In
thii  manner  the  ancient  anificen  were  able  to  cnt
ilaba  of  the  hardeit  rocka,  which  eonaeqaentlj
were  adapted  to  receiTe  the  higheat  polith,  inch
aa  granite,  poipbyiy,  lapia-laiuli,  and  amethyiL
"tloLA ;  Paitiia.1
The  taw  ia  an  inatrument  of  high  antiquity,  iti
•enlion  being  attributed  either  to  Daedalu*
(Plin.  H.  N.  Til.  is  J  Sen,  Epit.  90),  or  to  hi*
nephew  Perdix  (Hygiu.  Fab.  274  ;  Ovid.  Mtl.  viii.
246)  [CntciNua],  alK  called  Tal«,  who,  hanDK
ioond  the  jav  of  a  aerpest  and  divided  a  piece  of
HOod  with  it,  wai  led  to  imitate  the  teeth  in  inin.
(Diod.  Sic  iT.  76  -,  Apollodor.  iii.  IS.)  In  a  baa-
relief  pobliihed  hy  Winckelmann  (Afon.  Imrd.  ii.
fig.  91),  Daedalui  ii  repmenled  holding  a  law
^pruaching  very  cleaely  in  form  to  the  Eg^'ptian
w  above  delineated.  ■  [J.  Y.]

SERRA'TI  NUMMI.  [Diii.iitiiT8,p.  394,b.]
SERTA, naed only  in the  plural (irr^fvu,
-f^fbv^),  a featoon  or  prland. The  art  ot
eaving  wnaUii [ConoNA],  garlandi,  and  fe».
tooni,  emplayed  a  diitinct  claaa  of  penoni  (soro-
■wn  and  DonMOrtM  /  irrt^ayrfwxiiiot,  Theophrait.
H.  P.  -n.  B.  i  \  ;  Plin.  H.  M  ui.  2.  >.  3.  or
■t^aimchiKBi),  who  endeuTonred  to  combine  all
the  nxNt  beautiful  Tsrietica  ot  tMrea,  of  flowen.


1030  SERTA.

uid  of  fraiti,  <o  u  to  blend  iheir  fonni,  CDlonre, '
andacoiti  (VirK-Cbpo,  14,  35}  in  ihe  matt  agree-
>b1e  auuincr.  The  uumed  wosdcnt  taken  bom  s
•aiTDphngiu  a.t  Rome  (Millin,  Gal.MgA.  iL  100),
tbowi  a  fHtoon  adapted  to  bfl  impended  by  meani
of  the  filleli  at  both  endi.  Iti  eilremUlei  are
■killuIlT  encaied  in  acanlhai-lfsTei:  iubodycon-
■iata  apparently  of  laurel  or  bay,  together  wiih  a
pnifiuiDn  of  rmlM,  aucli  lu  appli'i,  pean,  pome-
EranolM,  bimcbei  of  titape*i  ""'^  tir-conei.  At
Athena  thne  wu  ■  nuukel,  called  irr*fwiowKiKior


forlkB  maiiubctme  and  Ble  oF  thii  ctan  of  pn-
ductioni,  the  work  being  principally  ptrfonned  by
women  and  girli. {Aiiiloph.  TI^db  45j.)

When  a  prieit  wai  preparing  ■  ucrilice,  he  often
appeand  with  a  friloon  intended  to  be  placed  on
In*  door  oFthe  t«op1e  {feitafrtmdt,  Vir^.  ^ea.  ii.
349  i  wmii  kHU,  it.  203  ;  Jui.  liL.  84  ;  Luan,  iL
354),  on  the  iTDlit  of  the  altar  (Virg.  Xn.  i.  417)
or  npon  the  had  of  the  victim.  Thin  in  the  Jliad
(i.  14,28),  Chrjaei beiidei  the gilded aceptre

garland  in  honoui  of  Apollo,  vhich  vai  probably
wonnd  about  the  aceptn.  (See  alio  Ariitoph.  An.
894,  Pat,  948  ;  Callim.  Hyim.  in  Cer.  46.)  The
act  here  described  ii  aeen  in  ihe  anneied  woodcat,
which  ii  taken  from  a  baa-relief  in  the  collection


of E


I Incc-


nndelU  a


»  carrying  in  her  two  handi  a  (eatoon  t
lUBpend  apon  the  circnlar  temple  which  ia  aeen  i
the  diitaiics. At  the  featoont  remained  on  th


templea  long  after  their  freahnMi  had  departed,
Ihey  beoHne  very  conibiutible.  The  lemple  of
Jiuio  Bt  Argoi  wai  dcalroyed  in  couiequence  of


SERVIT0TES.

their  brfng  let  rai  fire.  (Thut  ir.  I  S3-  82j
Paul.  ii.  17.  §7.)  The  gatlanda  on  funereal  mami-
menta  hung  there  for  a  year,  and  were  then  re-
newed. (Tibull.ii.4.  48.7.  32;  ProperLiiL  le-
as.) The  fiinetal  pile  wai  r1»  denrated  in  a
limihu  manner,  but  with  an  appropriate  choice  of
planu  and  flower*. (Virf.  Arm.  iv-  506.)

Feetoonj  were  placed  upon  the  door-poata  of
private  hooaea  in  token  of  joy  and  aSiKtion  (  TibolL
]-  2.  U)  more  eipecially  on  occaiian  of  a  weddiiu;.
(Locan,  ii-  354.)  The?  were  hang  about  a  palace
in  compliment  to  the  wealthy  poiWMiir  (imsirlaio
eoronit  atria.  Prudent,  u  Sjmm.  iL  736) :  and  an
occaiiona  of  genenl  rejoicing  the  atreeta  of  a  cily
were  Kmelimet  enlivened  with  theae  aplendii^  asd
toateful  deeontioDi. (Martial,  vL  79.  S.)

The  anuller  garlanda  or  crowni,  which  wen
worn  by  penoni  on  the  head  or  nnind  the  neck,
are  lomelimoa  called  lerfa.  (TibnU.  L  7.  53.)  Tlie
^bion  of  wearing  anch  garlanda  ao^iendn!  fnm
the  neck,  wni  adapted  by  the  fuly  Chriitiaii&
<Min.  Felii,  38.)  [J.  Y.J

SKRVIA'NA  ACTIO. [Pignus.]

SE'RVITUa, [SjKVns.]

SERVITUTE3.  The  owner  ot  a  thing  cmn
oie  it  in  all  wayi  coniiatent  with  hi)  DWnnhip,
and  he  can  prevent  othen  from  uaing  it  in  any  way
that  il  inconiiatenl  with  hit  full  enjoyment  of  it  aa


0  the  condition
I  order  that  tome  other  peram  tony  hare  the
enelit  of  auch  forbearance,  or  to  the  coaditka  of
llowing  othen  to  do  ccrt^n  acta,  which  limit  hia

snjoyment  of  a  thing,  the  thing  1


lo  be  auhjeci


Ho


nuiiska,''  thia
waa  legally  tmderatood  to  mfan  that  il  waa  war-
ranted free  from  Servituto.  (Dig.  50.  tiL  IGL
a.  90.  169  J  compare  Cic.deZ^.il^.  iiL  2.)  The
eTiatence  of  a  Servitua  muat  be  pnved ;  the  pre-
aumpiion  i>  that  the  ground  ia  free  (libs-)  till  it
it  ahown  to  be  aerrient.  Serrttutea  are  alio  in-
cluded in  the  terma  **  Jura,**  and  "  Jtua  in  Re,"
and  thcH  terma  are  oppoaed  to  Domiaium  or  eom-
plcte  owneiahip.  He  who  oiaciiea  a  Servitua
Ihi^refore  has  not  the  animua  domini,  not  even  in
the  cue  of  niDafructui,  for  the  Uaoi&uctnariai  ia
never  mogniied  ai  owner  in  the  Roman  Idw.  The
technical  word  for  ownenhip,  when  the  uauafhtctua
i)  deducted  frcra  it.  It  Proprietaa.

right  to  a  lervitni  in


□other  peraon^a  property ;  and
c  in  a  corporea]  thing- Vie


.  .-eapect  to
lEie  uwiici  of  the  thina.  a  Senilui  either  aniiita
in  hia  being  reatrained  from  doing  certain  acta  to
bii  properly,  which  otherwise  he  might  do  (»-.
TLhu  quiu  tH  WW  faaenda  conJvtU  ;  SetvtimM  utyit'
(im)  ;  or  it  conaiata  in  hia  beiiig  bound  to  allow
aome  other  petion  to  do  aomething  to  the  properly,
which  auch  person  might  olherwiie  be  prevenled
from  doing  {weruUiu  ^ime  im  patiauL)  nf^rittil ;
SfreitMt  qffvrmaeha).  A  Servitiu  never  conaiata  ia
the  owner  of  the  aerrient  property  being  obliged  to
do  anv  act  to  hia  property,  though  he  may  be  under
an  obligatio  to  do  acta  which  are  neceaaaiy  tovarda
the  enjoyment  of  the  Servitua-  <Dig.  S.  tit.  I.  a.
15  1  Puchia,  fntLli  352,  note  e.)

Then  were  two  claaiei  of  Serritotea. Either
tbey  bad  for  their  auhject  a  deGaile
could  e,


d  eierclK  the  right,  in  which  a


■  O"


SERVrrUTES.
«Ilfd  Penonkl,  Ptnonaniiii ;  nid  thaj  nawd
witli  the  d«a(h  of  tha  penon :  the  eipiHnon
"  pencaulii  Krrjtiu  "  wh  nied.  (Dig.  54.  lit.  3.
•.  B,  g  a.)  Or  they  h»d  for  their  Mbject  uiolher
piece  of  propertj,  u  i  hnue  or  Uud,  and  the  per-
HD  who  eierciwd  the  Semttu  OTeroKd  it  in  n-
■pcet  of  hit  right  to  the  baoM  or  Undi,  which  wu
ita  nibject.  SiirTilatM  of  the  k&ttec  kind  wen
called  Pnedial,  Serritutai  Pnedionim  or  Beium,
or  Jura  Pnediomn  (Quu,  iL  17.  29 ;  Dig.  8.  tit
I.  ■.  1)  ;  wtd  with  refersQce  to  their  ipecial  kuida,
Jura  aqDuinn,  Ac (Cit.  pro  OatdM,  QB.)

The  eiereiie  of  Peremal  Soritntn,  of  which
Unu  and  Uni£ruetDi  were  the  [niicipBl,  wai  al-
wayi  connected  with  the  nataiBl  poueuion  of  tha
thing  i  and  oanenjuentlj  the  Qiaii  PoawMio  at
•och  Serritutea  had  a  cloM  laMtublaoce  to  Pnuea-
no.  [Poseuaio.]  Ssrritnteiof  thieclanecnainad
■otely  ^  in  patieado."

Piaedial  ■enitatea  CDnuitsd  both  "  in  palimdo,"
and  **  id  non  fteiendo,"  Thoae  which  cootiated
■*  in  patiendo  **  eompriaed  either  Kieh  acta  aa  a  per-
Bon  might  do,  b;  Tinne  of  the  Berritm,  which  acM
bad  onV  mediately  B  rafeieiice  to  aiioth«  pieoa  of
laiid,aa  in  the  csae  ofa  Jna  Itioeria  g  ortuch  acta
aa  a  man  might  do,  with  immediate  raEerance  to
auolher  piece  of  land,  aa  Jua  tigni  immitleodi,
and  the  like.  Thoae  which  conaiitad  ~  in  non
faciendo"  on  the  part  of  the  owner  wen  acta
which  another  paiaeiiiir  oF  a  pieae  of  bnd  coald
nqaiiB  the  cwner  oF  tha  lemBnt  properly  not  to
do,  hut  which  except  for  the  aemlua,  the  owner

PenoDal  aerritntea  were  UavR,  VauarnucrcB,
Habilatia,  and  Operae  aarromm  et  Animalinm.

Uabitatio  or  Ibe  right  of  liYing  in  another  per-
Bon'i  home  leiembled  the  aandnictaa  or  nana
aediiun.  But  it  waa  not  loat  aa  nauafruetDa  and
nana  were,  bj  capitia  diminutio  et  neglect  to  ext^
ciae  the  right  Alao,  it  conriated  in  the  right  to
inhabit  aome  definite  part  of  a  home  only,  and  not
the  wbide  ;  the  habitatio  could  be  aold  or  let  If
it  waa  a  donatio  inter  Tivoa,  it  could  be  act  aaide
by  the  heiedu  of  the  pjtr.  (Ug,  1.  tit  B.  Dt
Un  a  HMkitiama:  Dig.  39.  tit  6.  a.  27,  82;
Inat.  2.  tit  G.)

Operae  aeiTonmi  et  ammalimn  cunaiated  in  a
nun  IttTing  a  right  to  the  nae  and  atrricaa  of
another  peraon^ilaTe  or  beBat,ao  long  a*  tha  ^TB
or  beaat  lired.  The  aerritsa  eontiniied  after  the
death  of  the  peraon  entitled  to  it,  and  waa  not  loat
by  a  a4iitia  diminalio  nor  by  neglect  to  cieniH  it.
Tbii  it  called  by  Oaiu  (iL  32)  »  the  Unufrnctoi
bominum  et  cetemnun  animal  inm."

Piaedial  SerritDtee  imply  the  eiiatence  of  two
' looa  piecea  of  land  {praidia\
a  aerritna  to the  other  (i

Ma)  J  and  the  lerrilaa  ia
10  be  doe  ((Mm)  from  the  one  to  the  other.
The  mma  of  praedinm  daninana  which  ia  now
often  uied  to  deaignate  the  praedinm  to  which  the
aerritna  ia  due,  ia  a  modern  intention.  It  ia  of
'a  Serritni  to  be  an  advantage


»of  whii


land  t.


which  il


nCntt*  praediortun  pecpetnai  canaa  habere  del
(Panlv,  Dig.  8.  tit  3.  *.  8),  which  meaaa  th<
a  cOBtinnona  ad^ptaliim  of  the  aerricBt  to  th
tt  the  dominant  tenemerrt Tlie  SerriUa  ia


SERVITUTES.  lOSI

aideced  a*  belmging  to  the  dominant  pnedinm  in
■ach  a  aente  tlwt  it  cwuiol  be  alienated  witlwal
the  praedinm  nor  pledged  nor  let

Piaedial  Serritutea  were  either  Piaedionun  llr-
Isaomm  or  Rniticonun.  But  the  word  Serritni
dovble  meaning,  aoevding  ai  we  liew  il  aa  ■
right  or  a  duty.  The  Seiriioa  of  a  Praedinm  Rua-
'ciun  or  Urboniim  ia,  in  the  former  aenae,  the
sryitua  which  helonga  to  a  iHrticular  Praedium,  as
right:  in  the  latter  aeoae  it  ia  the  territua  which
>me  particular  Praedinm  owia,  at  a  duty.  When
la  two  Praedta  are  etotempUted  together  in  their
mntoal  relationi  of  right  and  dnty,  the  word  Ser-
"■ —  eipietiea  the  whole  relation.  Sertitnles  Ut-
I  are  thoae  which  are  lor  the  advantage  of  an
edifice  aa  anch,  whether  the  adTantase  ia  drrired
from  another  baiiding  or  limply  a  piece  of  land  ;
Rutticae  are  thoae  which  are  for  the  advantage  of
a  piece  of  ground,  aa  anch,  and  mainly  for  the
benefit  of  agricnlture.  "  Urbaonm  praedium  non
locna  &cit,  ted  materia." (Ulp.  Dig.  60.  tlL  16,

The  lollawing  are  the  principal  Serritulet  Ur-
hanae:— 1.  Oneria  ferendi,  or  the  right  which  a
man  haa  to  ute  the  edifice  or  wall  of  hit  neighbour
to  nipport  hii  own  edifice.  The  owner  of  the
eerrient  property  waa  conaeqaentij  hound  to  keep
it  in  repair  to  that  it  ahoold  be  adequate  to  die-
char^  ila  duty.  (Dig.  8.  tit  £.  a.  6.)  2.  Tignl
imnuttendi,  or  the  right  of  planting  a  beam  in  or
upon  a  nelghboai^  wall.  3.  Pnjiciendi,  or  the
right  oF  adding  tomclhiag  to  a  man't  edifice,  though
it  thall  project  into  the  open  tpace  which  ia  above
hie  neighbour't  gmoada. 4.  Blillicidii,  or  iluiainia

a  right  which  a  man  had  fi>r  the  rain  water  (o  ran
from  hia  honae  npon  and  ihnugh  hit  neighbour't
piemitct,  or  a  right  to  draw  luch  water  from  hia
neigfabmir^  premiaea  to  hia  own.  The  technical
meaning  of  StlUicidinm  ia  lain  in  dropa  ;  when
collected  in  a  flowing  body  it  it  FIumeiL  (Varro,
d»  Lag.  Lai.  t.  27,  ed.  Mllller;  Cic.  da  Or.  I
38.)  5.  Altina  non  toUeiidi,  or  the  duty  which  a
man  owed  not  to  build  hia  bonta  higher  than  ita
preaent  eleratiMi,  at  the  duty  of  the  owner  of  a
piece  of  land  not  to  raiae  hia  edifice  ^ve  a  cai>
tain  height,  in  order  that  tke  owner  of  aome
other  houae  might  hare  the  advantage  of  anch
forbeuaoce.  If  a  man  waa  releated  hno  Ihta
duly  by  iiii  neighboor,  he  obtained  ■  new  right,
which  wat  the  Jut  altina  tclleadi.  In  like  man-
ner,  a  man  whota  ground  wat  leleaaad  from  Uio
Servitua  Stillicidii,  waa  taid  to  have  the  territut
itilliddii  nou  tecipieadL  Thti  waa  Del  itrictly
aGCiiiatalangttage,fi«if  a  tervilnt  it  defined  to  be
■ODM  linitalran  of  tha  nana!  rightt  of  ownenhip,  a
leeonoT of  ibcte righta  era  nlcaae  from  the  diitiea
which  la  implied  by  the  poaaeation  of  theae  rigbta
by  another,  noely  givea  the  complete  eieicite  of
ownenhip  and  to  dettroya  alt  notion  of  a  Servitna.
Still  auch  waa  the  laugiinge  of  the  Roman  Jurial^
and  accordingly  we  find  enumerated  among  the
Urbanae  aervituta  (Dig.  8.  tit  2.  a.  2),  "  SliDi-
cidium  aiertendl  in  tectum  vel  anam  licini  ant
Don  aiertendL"  6.  Sertllua  no  Luminibm,  and  no
Protpectni  officiatur,  or  the  duty  which  a  man  owea
to  hit  neighbonr^  land  not  to  obatruct  hit  light  or
hit  pnapect  (ami  Oaiua,  ii.  31 ;  Cie.  da  Or.  I  39)  ;
and  Servitut  Luminnm  «-  Proapectua,  or  the  duty
of  a  man  to  allow  hit  neighbour  to  make  opoiinga
into  hia  premiaea,  aa  in  a  common  wall  tut  ianaM^


1033  BEBVITUTES:

to  gtl  light  01  B  proipect.  It  wu  a  Serriti
object  of  which  wu  to  piocnro  light,  whera
no  officiatur  wu  lo  prermt  thi  deitrojing  of  light.
(Dig.  8.  tit.  3.  •.  i.  40.)  But  there  an  dif!rrenl
opinion!  u  (o  the  meaning  oF  Serrilua  Laminam.
7.  Servinu  Slercolinii,  or  ^e  right  of  placing  diuig
agsLut  a  neighboui'a  wall,  Ae.  B.  SeivjRu  limii
immittendi,  or  the  right  of  winding  aae*)  imakg
through  &  neighbour'!  chimney.  9,  Serritiu  eloacae,
oi  the  right  to  %  diain  or  •ever  from  ■  man  "a  Und
or  hooie  throngh  a  neighbour'!  luut  or  houie.

The  following  are  tho  principal  Serritutes  Ru»-
ticae  :~^1.  Serritui  Itinena,  or  the  right  to  a  foot-
path through  another  man'!  ground  or  to  ride
through  on  honebuk  oi  in  a  Klla  or  lectio,  for  a

Viewed  with  nferencs  to  the  penon  vho  ai enited
the  right,  thii  Servitui  wu  properly  ailed  Jua
enndL  (Gaiui.  ii.  S.)  2.  Aclua  or  Agendi,  or  the
right  of  driviug  a  beaat  or  carriage  through  another
man'a  bnd.  3,  Viae  or  the  right  eandi  el  agendi
el  ambulandi.  Via  of  coune  included  the  other
two  Servitutea ;  and  it  wai  diitlnguiahed  from  them
by  itt  width,  which  waa  defined  by  the  TweUe
Tablet.  (Dig.  a.  tic,  3.  i.  8.)  The  width  of  an
Itet  «-  Aclui  might  be  a  matter  of  eiidence,  and
i[  il  wu  not  detfrmined.  it  waa  nttled  by  an
arbiter,  [f  the  width  of  a  Via  wainot  determined,
iu  width  wu  taken  to  be  the  legal  width  {laOtwlo
ligUinia).  In  the  work  De  Coloniia,  attributed  lo
Frontinua,  the  phnue  "  iter  pnpolo  dcbetur  or  non
dehetur"  frequently  occur!.  When  "  iter  debelui "
Dccun,  the  width  of  the  iter  ii  given  ui  feet.  It
eeem!  that  in  the  aiaignmenl  of  the  laidi  in  theie
in!lance>,  the  landi  were  made  "  aervire  popuin,"
for  Ihe  purpoiee  of  n  road.  i.  Servitua  pe«endi
or  the  right  of  a  man  in  reapect  of  the  gnuind  to
which  hi!  cattle  are  attached,  to  paature  Ihem
va  anolher*!  groand.  6.  Serritu!  aquaeductu!  or
ducendi  aquam  per  fundum  alienam.  There  were
alio  other  Servitutea  aa  Aquae  hanatu.  Pecan!
ad  aquain  appulaua,  Calcia  coqueudae,  and  Arenae
tbdiendae.  If  a  Puhlicua  locui  or  a  Via  publio
interiened,  no  aerrilua  aquaeductna  coald  be  im-
poaed,  but  it  waa  neceiaary  to  apply  lo  the  Prin.
cepa  hi  permiinon  to  form  an  aquaeductua  acroaa
a  public  road.  The  intenention  of  a  Sacer  el
rrligionu  loeui  wai  aD  obatade  to  impoeing  an

any  penon  on  ground  which  waa  laeer  or  leli-

A  Serritua  Negaiiva  could  he  acquired  by  mere

Senitua  Alfirmaliia  could  be  ao  acquired,  and  that
quaii  pouenis,  at  leait  in  the  Uter  pcrioda,  waa
not  uceeHary  in  order  to  ntabliah  the  Jui  Servi-
tutia,  hat  only  to  give  a  right  to  the  Publiciana  ui
rem  actio.  (Gunt,  iL  30,  31 1  Savigny,  Dot  Redl
da  BmUxa.}  The  phiBica  "  aquae  jua  congti-
tuere,"  **  aervitntem  nuido  impoucn^^  occar  (Cic
ad  Quml.  iii.  1.  e.  S).  According  to  Oaiui,  Servi-
tute*  Urbanae  could  enly  be  tmuferrcd  by  Ihe
In  jure  ceuio :  Senitutei  Ruiticse  could  be  trani-
feirod  by  Mandpatio  alto. (Oaina,  ii.  29.)

A  Serritua  might  be  eatabliahed  by  Teatament
(Strvil—  la^oJa,  Dig.  33,  tiL  3),  asd  the  eight  to
it  wai  acquired  when  the  "  diet  legal!  eeuit"
fLiaATUu];  hut  IraditiDa  nj  nec«uaty  in  order
to  give  a  right  to  the  Pnblicisaa  in  rem  aeUa.  A
Seiritm  could  be  eatabliahed  by  the  dednon  if  ■
iudei  in  the  Jndidum  Familiae  erdicnadw^  Coo-


SERVrrUTES:

muni  diiidnndo,  and  is  a  caie  wboe  the  Judex
adjudicated  the  Pmprietaa  to  one  and  the  13m-
fructai  to  another  (Dig.  7.  ^t  1.  i.  6).  Senitata
could  ain  be  acquired  by  the  Pnusoiptio  loi^
lemporiL  (Cod.  7.  lit.  33.  a.  13.)  An  obacur«  and
cormpt  pauwe  of  Cicero  (ad  JU.  n.  26)  Keou
to  aJludc  to  the  ponibility  of  aequiring  a  right  to  a
Servitua  by  use ;  a>  to  which  a  Lei  Scribooia  made
achange.  [Lix ScniBONiji.]  Quaii lerTilDdei  vera
BiHnetimet  atmpty  founded  on  poiitiTE  enactnunta,
which  limited  the  owner  of  a  proper^  m  itt  fsjn--
ment  (Nor.  22.  e.  46.  a.  2) ;  and  olhen  were  coo-
lidcred  aa  "velut  jure  impoaitae"  (Dig.  S9.  t"  "
t.  1.  ;  23 ;  and  Dig.  43.  tit.  27,  il>  y  '
CatdoHlu.)

A  Serritai  might  be  releaied  (riKitIi)  ta  tba
owner  of  the  Fundu  aeriieni  (Dig.  S.  tit.  1.  a.  U) -
or  il  might  be  inrrcndered  by  allowing  the  owTm-
of  the  Fundni  Servient  lo  do  certain  acta  upen  it,
which  were  inconaiatent  with  the  eontinnauee  of
Che  Serrinu.  (Dig.  8.  tit  6.  a.  8.)  If  both  iha
dommant  and  the  aerrient  land  came  to  behng  ta
one  owner,  Ihe  Servitutea  were  eitinguiBbed  ;
tbere  waa  a  Confnaio.  (Dig.  8.  tit.  6.  a.  l.)  If  the
teparate  ownen  of  two  Hparale  ertalea,  witillj
acquired  an  ealale  which  wai  lervient  to  the  two
separate  ettato,  tba  Serritnta  wen  not  eirtin-
guiahed  ;  but  they  wen  exliuguiihed  if  the  jrant
Dwnera  of  a  dominant  eetate,  jointly  acquired  dw
aerrient  eatate.  (Dig.  S.  tit.  3.  a  37.)  A  oa-
fructn*  waa  eitinguiibed  when  the  Uaufrnetaa-
riui  acquired  the  Proprieta*  of  the  thing.  A.
Servitui  wai  eilinguiihed  by  the  eitinelioT)  of  tba
ibJFct,  bat  if  the  lervicnt  object  wai  reitoced.  tlia
«rvittii  waa  alio  rntond.  (Dig.  B.  tit  2.  a.  30  ;
it  E.  1. 14.)  A  lervitu!  wai  eilinguiihed  by  tin
iitinction  of  the  enhject,  aa  in  the  cxie  of  a  Pn-
aonal  Servitude  with  the  death  of  the  penoa  wbo
—  intitled  toil ;  and  in  the caae of  Pracdial  Ser-
tea  with  the  deatructlon  of  the  dominant  aab-
ject,  but  they  were  revived  with  iti  revival ;  lor
inatance,  if  a  building  to  which  a  lervitiide  be-
longed,  waa  pulled  down  ui  order  to  be  nebiult,
and  if  it  waa  rebuilt  in  the  nme  form,  the  arrri-
tudc  revived  (Paulni,  Dig.  8.  tit  2.  i.  JO.  f  2 ;
MooreV  Rawmn.  3  a  &  Cr.  333).  A  Serritaa
tgbt  be  eitinguiibed  by  not  uaing  it  Tbse  ia
cnae  in  tba  Digeat  (3.  tit  3.  a.  Si)  of  the  Krritna
a  ipricg,  the  oie  of  which  had  been  intsnttrted
J  the  tempotary  bilurc  of  tbe  ^^ing,  and  a  rc-
icnpt  of  Aoguitua  ou  the  matter.  According  ta
the  old  law,  Uamfractui  and  Uaui  were  loat,
through  not  eiereiimg  the  right,  in  two  yean  ia
H  of  thing*  immoveable,  and  in  one  year  in
lac  of  thingi  moreible.  In  Jottinian'i  legia-
Uauifructui  and  Uni  were  only  loat  by  not
exerciiing  the  right,  when  there  had  beoi  a  Un-
pio  libenalia  on  the  part  of  Iha  owner  of  tht
ing  or  the  ownenbip  had  been  aniuired  by  Uki-
pion.  (Cod.  3.  tit  33.  a  16.  j  1,  and  lit.  34.
13.)

Semlutei  might  be  the  aubjeeta  of  Actioies  io
m.  (Dig.  7.  tit  6  ;  &  tit  S.)  An  Actio  Cm-
fettoria  or  Vindtcalio  Servitulia  bad  Kir  ita  object
the  tatablithlng  the  right  to  a  Servitoa,  and  it
oould  only  be  brought  by  the  owner  of  the  docai-

'and,  when  it  wai  due  to  land. Tba  object

adicn  waa  the  eatabliahnmt  of  the  rigl)^
damagei,  and  aecBrity  againW  fatora  diMaibnca
in  the  eiereiae  of  the  right ;  and  tbo  aecioD  mifiht
be  not  ody  tguatt  the  oiiDef  of  (be  tcrnat


SERVITUTEa.
iDUt  (ny  penon  whc
it  [igbL  The  plustiff
to  {SDTB  bu  litle  to  tbe  Serriliu.  Tha  Actio  Ha-
gttariM  «  Viodio^D  liboiUtii,  might  be  biingbt
bj  the  owner  of  ihs  pnpeity  ^uut  taj  penon
irbo  dtinied  a  Senritui  in  it  The  object  wu  to
eitabllih  the  freedom  of  tlie  pmpert7  bom  lh«
■enitn*,  Ibr  dumgt*,  and  ior  ucuiitjr  to  tbe  ovner
^■ioM  fiitare  ditCurlwnce  in  the  eienije  of  hia
ownenhip.  The  plaintiff  had  at  coune  to  proTe
bit  ownenhip  md  tbe  defendant  to  proTe  hia  title
to  tbe  Sarritiii. (Gain*,  tr.  3  ;  Dig.  3.  tit.  £.)

In  the  OMB  of  PeiWDal  Socritudu,  the  Inter-
dict! wn«  jut  tbe  nine  ai  in  the  cue  of  pioper
Powtniim  ;  the  Interdict  which  vm  applied  in
the  ewe  of  proper  PoMeMion,  wu  here  applied  aa
a  Utile  Interdietnm.  (Frag.  Vat  90,  n  emended
by  S«TJgny.)

In  the  can  of  Piaedial  Senitndea,  we  mnit
Gnt  camider  the  PnitiTe.  In  the  fint  dan,  tbe
aequiritioD  of  tl»  Juiii  Qoaii  Pouoiia  ii  effected
b;  an  act  which  it  done  aimply  u  an  eieRiie  of
the  Right,  independent  of  my  other  righL  Tha
inierieieocs  with  the  eiensiae  of  the  right  waa  pro-
Tented  bj  Interdict!  ippliotble  to  the  KTeral  caiei.
A  penon  who  waa  duturbed  in  exerciiina  a  Jna
Itineria,  Aclua,  Viae  by  any  penon  whaterer,


object  of  tbii  Inteidict  wai  prutec^on  ^unat  the
disturbance,  and  compenjotioa  :  iti  effect  wai  ex-
actly like  chat  of  the  Interdict  Uti  poaaidetii.
Another  Interdict  applied  to  the  Bune  objeeta  u
tha  pt«cedtng  Interdict,  bnt  iti  obieet  waa  to
prDtect  the  penon  intilied  to  the  (erritnda  Irom
being  diatnibed  by  Uie  owner  while  he  waa  putting
the  wmy  or  read  in  a  cfuidilion  fit  fiti  nie.

There  were  Tarioua  other  Intctdicta  aa  in  the
caae  of  the  Jna  aquae  qDotidianae  Tel  aeotivae
dncoidae  (Dig.  43.  tit.  20}  ;  in  the  cnae  of  the  re-
pair of  water  paiaagea  (4S.  tit.  21,  d»  mni) ;  in
the  caie  of  the  Jtu  aqnae  hanriendu  (43.  lit  S3).

The  iecond  claa  of  PositiTe  SerTitndea  ccnaiati
in  the  exereiae  of  the  acrritude  in  connection  willi
the  pooeiaion  of  another  piece  of  jmiperty.  Tbi
Inlcrdicta  applicable  to  ihii  case  are  explained
under  the  third  claia,  that  of  Ne^tiie  Secritadei.

In  the  caaeof  Negative  Serritudea  there  are  only
two  mode*  in  which  the  Juria  quau  Poaaeaaio  can
be  aeqoiied:  1,  when  the  owner  of  the  aerrient
proparty  attempu  to  do  aome  act,  which  tbe  i
of  the  dominant  property  conndeti  ineonuaCent
with  hi*  Serritni,  and  ia  prereated ;  2,  by  any
legal  act  which  is  capable  of  tzanaferrinff  the  JoJ
Senitncit.  The  poaieaion  ia  loat  when  the  owner
of  tbe  eerfient  proper^  doea  an  act  which  ia  con-
traiy  to  the  Right.  The  Poeaeaiion  of  the  Servi-
tode*  of  tha  second  and  third  claaa  wu  protected
by  the  Interdict  Uti  poaaideti*.  There  wu  a
special  interdict  aboit  Mwen  (Aa  CSeatit,  Dig.


lof  th


properly  to  called,  for  they
lO  exercise  of  ownenhip  made
le  public  benefit  The  only  cases  of  the  linij-
n  of  the  exercise  of  ownership  by  poeitiTe
'icb  are  mentioned  in  the  I^deet
a  three  prinelpd  claases.  The  £nt
dasB  comprehends  the  limitation  of  ownenhip  on
nligiaut  gToimda. To  thia  dast  belooga  Fioi^  or


SERV1TUTE3.  1035

, e  of  fire  feet  in  width  between  adjoining  ea-
tatea,  which  it  wu not  permitted to  cultiTala.
Thia  intermediate  apace  wu  sacred  and  it  wu
'  by  the  ownen  of  the  adjoining  lands  for  sa-
I. To  this  class  also  belonga  (he  rule,  that  if
J  bad  boried  a  dead  body  cm  the  land  of  an-
other without  bis  consent,  he  could  not  as  a  general
rale  be  compelled  to  remote  the  body,  but  he  wn*
bcund  to  make  reoompeoce. (Dig.  11.  tit  7.  a.  2.
7,  6.) The  second  dass  comprehends  rules  relat-
'  ig  to  police. Ansrding  to  the  Twelre  Tables
rery  owner  of  land  in  the  city  was  required  to
are  a  apace  of  two  feet  and  a  halF  mant  all
lond  any  edifice  that  he  erected:  this  waa  called
'gitimum apatium, legitimos modus. Conse-
quently between  two  adjoinii^  houses  there  must
be  a  ncant  space  of  fire  feet This  law  was  no
doubt  often  neglected,  for  aHa  the  fin  in  Nero'i
reign  (Tacit  Anm.  n.  43),  it  wu  forbidden  to
build  houaea  with  a  common  wall  (aHamuno  parit-
tam) ;  and  tha  old  legitimnm  tpetium  was  sgaia
required  to  be  obeerved  i  and  it  is  referred  to  in  a
rescript  of  Antoninu  and  Verua. (Dig.  S.  tit  3.
14.) Thia  class  also  comprehends  rulesaa  to  tbe
light  and  form  of  buildings. Augustas  (Sueton.
ibn.  89)  fixed  the  height  at  leTcnty  feet ;  Nero
10  after  the  gnat  firo  made  some regulations
ith  the  tiew  of  limiting  the  height  of  bonsea.
Trajan  £xed  the  greatest height at  sixty feet
These  regulutiona  were  general,  and  had  no  refer-
to  the  conrenience  of  persons  who  possessed
ling  bouses ;  they  bad  therefore  no  relation  at
tbe  Serrilutes  altius  tollendi  and  nan  tollendi

jie  writers  su!ipa*& The  rale  of  the  Twdie

Tablet  which  forbade  the  remoTmg  a  "  twnnm
funiTum  udihni  Tel  Tineit  Jimctnm,"  had  for  its
object  the  prerenting  of  accidents.  (Dig.  47.  tit  3.)
Another  rule  declared  that  the  ownen  of  landi
which  were  adjoining  to  public  aquaeducts  should
permit  materials  to  be  takoi  from  their  lands  for
these  public  purposes,  but  should  teceiTe  a  proper
compensation.  The  Twelre  Tables  forhade  the
bunuDff  or  interring  of  a  dead  body  in  the  city  ;
and  ihia  rule  wm  enforced  by  a  Lex  Duilia.  Id
the  time  of  Antoninus  Pins  this  rule  prerailed
both  in  Rome  and  other  citiea

Tbe  third  dass  of  limiutions  had  for  its  abject
Che  promotion  of  Agricnitiire.  It  comptued  the
rules  relating  to  Aqua  PLUvu,snd  totheTignam
Junctnm  iu  the  ease  of  a  Tineyard  ;  and  it  gate  a
man  permission  to  go  on  hia  neighbonr'i  premiMi
to  gather  tbe  fruits  which  bad  fiillen  thereon  from
hit  tree*  ;  with  thia  limitation  that  he  coutd  only
go  every  third  day.  (Dig.  43.  tit  26,  £«  Glamla
bStada.)  The  TwoIto  Tables  enacted  that  if  a
nejghbcRir^  tire  hung  over  into  another  peison^s
land,  that  penon  might  trim  it  to  the  height  of
fifteen  feet  from  the  ground  {gmdidai  ptdet  altiat
Run  mUMOfor).  Th«  rule  wu  a  limitation  of
ownenhip,  but  not  a  limitation  of  the  ownenhip
of  the  tree-owner :  it  wu  a  limitatioH  of  tbe  owner-


With  these  eiceptioni,  seme  of  which  were  of
great  antiquity,  ownenhip  in  Roman  Lawmnit  be
cDEiidered  u  onlimiCed.  These  limitadons  alto
bad  no  reference  to  the  conrenienca  of  indiTidtiaU
who  had  adjoining  honsee  or  lands.  With  respect
to  neighboiui  the  mw  allowed  them  to  iqulala  thai


103*  SERVU3.

mutul  inteieiti  u  ther  plcucd,  and  aceardin^j
man  eotild  agree  M  allow  a  neighbour  to  deriTa
■  ceRain  benefit  fnaa  fail  land  vhich  their  proii
oit^  rendered  deairable  t'S  him,  or  he  could  Bgnt
to  abstain  from  certain  acta  on  bit  land  fbl  thi
benefit  of  hii  neighboni'a  land.  The  law  gaT<
force  to  thcM  Rgteementi  ondei  tbe  name  of  Scrvi-
tutei,  and  auimilated  the  benefiti  of  them  t
right  of  ownenhip  by  attaching  to  them  a  right  of
oclim  like  that  which  an  owner  enjoied.

TLia  view  of  the  limitation  of  owneiahip
among  the  Romani  hj  poaitiTe  enactment  ii  from
a  valuafale  eeiaj-  by  IKriiien,  [I'tber  dit  gaetxlkiat

(Oaiiii,  iL  28—33  ;  In«.  2.  tlL  3— S  ;  Dig.  7
and  e  :  Cod.  3.  tit.  33,  34.)

Tbit  tketch  ma;  be  cumpleted  fa;  referenea  to
tie  following  woiki  and  the  lathoi^lica  quoted  in
them  :  Machelde)-,  Lehriari.  ,(^e.  12th  ed. :  MUh-
lenbnicb,  Doetrina  Paitdeaarxm,  p.  S6S,  ftc.  j
fiarigny ,  Dai  Rtdd  da  Bailxet,  Jarii  Quaa  Poi-
(HBD,  p.  £25,  5tb  ed.  ;  Vom  dar  Batelliaig  der
StrviMtm  dardi  timpU  Vertng  unf  Stipidataai,
Ton  Haue,  Rhein.  Mui.  fUi  Juiiapmdenz,  Er^er
Jalirgaitg ;  Von  dem  Va-ASitna  da  EigBUiunu
ts  (l«  Senalaltii,  tod  Pnchta,  RMn.  JViu.  Eni,
Jairg.  g  Scbentl,  Btaurhimgen  zttr  Mn  voa  dn
Sen^tOia,  Za^Ar^  iso^  liL  p.  237  )  Puchia,
/wtiL  8252.  [O.L.]

SERVUS  (Qriue).  Tbe  Oi«ek  SoSXai.  like
the  Latin  tenna,  correepondi  to  the  uiuttl  meaning
of  onr  word  tlave.  Slaierf  eiitted  almoet  tbrough-
ODlthe  wholeof  Greece  j  andArietotle  (/■aW.LS)
■ajd  that  a  complete  houicbold  i<  tijat  which  con.
lilU  of  ilBTee  and  freemen  <gi>fB  S)  r^twi  ix
itih^t  Kil  i\t<AifW\  and  be  define*  a  ilare  to
be  a  living  working-tool  and  poaaeuion.  ('O  SoiiAoj
ffu|iuxav  t^mrar,  BtUe.  Niaim.  -no.  13  ;  4  SoiiAiu
KTTi^  Ti  fiii^nxoffPolU.  L  \.)  None  of  tbeOreek
philotapben  ever  teem  to  have  objected  to  ilaveiy
a*  a  thing  moally  wrong  ;  Plato  in  hii  perfect
atste  only  deiirea  that  no  Qreelu  ehonld  be  made
alarea  by  Oreeki  (da  A91.  t.  p.4G9),  andAiiitotle
defend)  the  juttce  of  the  iutiUition  on  the  gmnnd
of  a  diTonitj  of  race,  and  divides  mankind  Into
the  free  {iM&Qfpoi)  and  thoie  who  are  elavei  bj
nature  (al  fiari  SouAn) :  under  the  latter  de-
scription he  appcan  to  have  regarded  all  borba-
riani  in  the  Oreek  lente  of  die  word,  and  ;here-
fore  coaaiden  their  ilaTery  juitifiable.

In  the  moat  ancient  timee  there  ant  nid  to  have
been  no  alavei  in  Greece  (Herod,  vi.  1 37  ;  Pherc-
crat.  op.  Atiem.  vi.  p.  263,  b),  but  we  find  ihem  In
the  Homeric  poema,  though  by  no  meaoi  ao  gene-
rally aa  in  later  iimn.  They  are  uiually  priaonert
taken  in  war  (tofiiiUorriii),  "ho  (erve  their  con-
^uenn :  but  we  b1»  read  ai  wall  of  the  purcfaaae
•adaaleDCilBTa(aJ.i*.4a3).  Ther  wen  how-
ever at  that  tine  moitly  confined  to  the  houica  of
the  wealthy.

There  wan  two  kindi  at  ilavery  among  the
Oracka.  One  ipcciea  areae  when  the  inhabitonta
of  a  country  were  subdued  by  an  invading  tribe  and
reduced  to  the  condition  of  ler^  or  bondimen :  they
lived  upon  and  cultivated  the  land  which  their
maiteti  had  ^pnprlated  to  thcmaelvea,  and  paid
them  a  certain  rent.  They  also  attended  lacir
mailen  in  war.  They  could  not  be  lold  out  of  the
country  or  leponted  from  their  familiea,  and  could
Bcquire  property.  Such  w«e  the  Helota  of  ^larta
[HaLotu],  tba  Peoeatae  of  Theanl;  [Pbhib-


SERVUS.
tab],  (La  Bithyniani  at  Bynntinm,  the  CUIkyrn
at  Syracnae,  tbe  M^riandyni  at  Heradea  in  Poo-
tuB,  the  Apbamiotae  in  Crete.  [Coul]  The
other  apeciea  of  alavery  cannit«d  of  domaalie  ilaTea
acquired  by  purch»ae  {4pT*P^"r'oi  or  xf^^Po^i
■ee  lucr.  Platae.  p.  300,  ed.  Sleph.),  who  wn*
entirely  tbe  property  of  their  mutera,  and  eootd
be  diipoaed  of  like  any  other  gooda  and  chattdi:
theae  were  tbe  lotlAdi  properly  ao  tailed,  and  wer«
the  kind  of  ilavea  that  eiiited  at  Athena  and
dainth.  In  commercial  ciliea  jlavea  were  very
numerouai  aa  they  performed  the  work  of  tbe  arli-
■anl  and  mannfactnren  of  modem  towna.  In
poorer  tepublica,  which  bad  little  or  no  cqalal,  and
which  anbeiiled  wholly  by  agricvltuir,  they  would
be  few  :  thua  in  Phocia  and  Locria  thers  an  aaid
to  bare  beoi  originally  no  domeatic  alavea.  (AtbeiL
Ti.  p.264,c;  Clinton,  i^. ff.  voL  ii.  pp.411,  412.)
The  majarity  of  ■laves  waa  aorchaaed ;  lew  eom-
paratiTcly  were  bom  in  the  famil;  of  the  maata-,
partly  becBUie  the  number  of  fanale  alaiea  vaa
very  Email  in  compajiaon  with  the  male,  and  partly
bet^uae  the  cohabitation  of  ilave*  waa  diaomraged,
aa  it  waa  coniidered  cheapo  to  purchaae  tbaa  to
rearalava.  Ailave  bora  in  the  bouae  ofa  maeur
wu  called  olirirpi^,  in  contnidiMinctioii  to  ooe
purduied,  who  wai  called  oinrnii.  (Ammaa.  and
Suid.  (.«.)  If  both  the  fiilher  and  mother  were
ilavea,  the  oftpring  waa  called  ijA^ZmAes  (Ella-
tatb.  ol  M.  ii.  290) :  if  the  [srenU  were  ol-
■c^jHtft,  tbe  offapriag  waa  mlled  ofnrrafSuaj.
(Pollux,  iii.  76.)

It  waa  a  tteognlied  rale  of  Greek  "»■!-"■'  law
that  the  peruna  of  those  who  were  taken  priaeiins
in  war  became  the  property  of  tbe  eonquHoc  (Sen.
Cgr.  vii.  5.  g  73),  but  it  wai  the  practice  for
Greeks  to  give  liberty  to  these  of  their  own  raiisa
on  payment  of  a  ranaom.  Ckmaequenlly  almoal  aQ
alavet  in  Greece,  with  the  exception  of  the  anb
aboTsmentioned,  were  borbariana.  It  appean  to
follow  fnaa  a  pauage  in  Timaeoa  (i^  Azicm.  vi.
p.  265,  b)  that  the  Chiana  were  tbe  first  who  car^
riedonthealarg  Rode,  where  the  iIbts  were  DMra
nnmerons  than  in  any  other  pdace,  eic^  Sparta,
that  is  in  comparismi  with  the  free  rnhabiaotsL
(Thoc  viiL  40.)  In  the  early  ages  ef  Greece,  a
gnat  number  of  ilavea  waa  obluied  by  piiatei,
who  kidnapped  penoni  on  tbe  ooaita,  bat  the  tbirr
aupply  Boema  to  bare  ecme  frran  the  Greek  coknie*
in  Aaia  Minor,  who  had  abundant  i^portnnitiea  of
obtaining  them  firom  their  own  netghbourbood  and
the  interior  of  Alia.  A  conuderable  number  ot
■laves  also  came  from  Thrac^  where  the  pantile
frequBntly  sold  their  children. (Hoed.  v.  S.)

At  Athens,  aa  well  ai  in  other  ttatea,  tbere  waa
a  regular  slave  market,  called  the  ichiAoi  (llatpo-
crau  a  e.),  becanae  the  slaves  abwd  round  in  a
circle.  They  were  alto  aometimn  aold  by  aitctiBi,
and  appear  then  to  have  bo«]  plaoed  on  a  atoan
called  the  e-fxHlfi  Affci  (Pollux,  iiL  7B),  u  is  alao
done  when  ilaves  are  sold  in  the  United  Statn  of
North  America :  tbe  aame  was  alae  tbe  pncfia  in
Rome,  wheocs  the  phraae  ii/mo  d4  lapid*  tmtmt.
[AucTio.]  The  tlave  market  at  Athena  aeeoia  t>
have  been  held  on  certain  fiied  days,  naually  tha
laaC  day  of  the  month  (the  tr^  ml  '^  ot  nutria,
AriMoph.  Bi/ibL  43,  with  Sthol).  The  {vicfl  of
alavca  naturally  difiered  according  to  their  age,
stKngth,  and  aequiremeola.  "  Soma  alana,"  laya
Xenophon  (.V«bl  ia.  B.  |  2}  *>  an  well  wactb  twa
minaa,  olhen  hardly  half  a  mio* ;  aoaie  aeD  im


SKRVU8.
Urg  minu  lod  otlicn  ct«n  for  ten  ;  and  Nic'uu  (kt
•Dn  of  NicaiCui  ii  nid  to  fane  giTm  no  Icm  than
a,  Ulcnt  for  an  OTcneer  in  Ifae  mines."  BOckb
(PaiL  Sew.  ^  Aliau,  p.  G7,  Ac,  Sd  ed.)  hu
oolleded  manj  paiticDlns  mpecdng  the  price  of
■laree  ;  healcaUteitlHiialiieof  a  connnoiiinmiiig
ii*Te  at  finm  135  to  1£0  dnchnuu. The  know-


the  low««tD)ore  than  three  minai ;  and  hii  twenty
cooeh-makin  together  were  worth  <0  minai  (in
Aphot.  i  p.  816).  Omiiderable  iuma  wen  paid
fat  comtBana  and  female  plajen  on  the  cithun  ;
twtaty  and  thiitj  minae  went  common  priest  for
iDch  <TeT.  A<i4>^  iiL  1.  37,  iil  2.  Ifi,  it.  7.  21 ;
PtoTM.  iii.  S.  24) ;  Neuia  wu  lold  for  thirty
minaa (DemoMb.  e.  Ntaer.  p.  1354. 16.)

Tbe  number  of  ilarei  wu  verr  great  in  Athmi.
Aeeoiding  to  the  centoi  made  when  Demetrius
Fhalfreiu  wai  archon  <b.c  309),  there  ue  nid
to  ban  been  21,000  &ee  citiieni,  10,000  Meti<»,
and  400,000  alava  in  Attica  (Cteddee,  op.  Alim.
TL  p.  272,  o) :  according  to  which  the  ilsve  popn-
lation  ■•  fO  immenaely  taige  in  propoilion  to  tbe
free,  tfaat  Krae  wrilen  hare  rejected  the  Kcoiint
■Itogttber  (Niebohr,  Bill,  of  Rami,  toL  ii.  note
143),  and  otben  hafenippOMd  a  comption  in  the
Dumben  and  tfaat  for  400,000  we  ongfal  to  rod
40,000.  (Ilmn^  £)«}*,  ToLi.  p.  443.)  BOckfa
and  Clinton  {F.H.  iL  ^391),  taowerer,  remaric
wilb  tome  jaitiee,  that  in  conpaling  the  citiieni
and  nietic*  the  object  vai  to  aicertain  their  po-
litical and  militaiy  itren^b,  and  hence  the  ceniui
bI  only  mats  of  full  age  wai  talicn  ;  while  in
enmnerating  ilarea,  whicb  were  properly,  it  would
be  neeeanry  to  compute  all  the  individuili  who
compofed  that  propmy.  BSckh  lakes  the  pro-
portion of  free  inhabitants  to  alaies  as  nearly  one
to  Ibar  in  Attica,  Clintim  as  ntber  more  than
three  to  one ;  bnt  whaleTer  may  be  tfaongfat  of
these  caknlations,  tbe  main  fact,  that  the  slare
popalation  in  Attica  was  much  larger  than  the
me,  is  incooEiDTertible :  dnring  the  occnpation  of
Deotea  by  Uie  Lacedaemonians,  more  than  20,000
Athenian  ^les  escaped  to  this  place.  (Thoc  vii.
27.)  In  Corinth  and  Aegina  their  nnmber  was
eqiuUy  h^:  aecwding  to  Timaeui,  Corinth
had  460,000,  and  aceoiding  to  Aristotle  Aegina
470,000  slaTc*  (Athen.  Lc),  bat  tbtse  laige  num-
bcn,  emecially  in  relalios  to  Aegina,  must  be  im-
dersfawd  only  of  the  early  times,  before  Athens
bad  obtained  pcaieation  of  the  commerce  of  Greece.

At  Athens  even  the  poorest  dtiien  had  a  slate
flic  the  care  of  his  hoosehold  (Aristopb.  Pint,  init.),
and  in  erery  moderate  eslabliilimcnt  many  were
employed  for  all  possible  occupaliDng,  as  baken,
coou,  tailon,  tc  The  nnmbn  possessed  by  one
penou  was  oerer  so  great  a*  at  Bome  during
tbe  later  times  of  the  republic  and  under  the  em-
pire, bat  it  was  still  niy  coniidenble.  Plato  (de
/?q».  ix.  f.  S7S)  ecpreiaiy  nunariiB,  that  some  per-
sons bad  fifty  alarea  and  even  moic.  This  was
abont  the  nombet  which  the  fkCtitt  of  Demosthenes
possesKd  (n  Apioi.  I  p.  823)  ;  Lysiai  and  Pole-
manhu*  had  120  (Lya  M  EratcaA.  p.  395),
Philemooidca  had  300,  Hipponicus  600,  and  Niciaa
1000  slares  in  the  mines  alone.  (Xen.  de  FtcL  h.
14,  lA.)  It  must  be  botne  in  mind,  when  we  read
af  tot  penoa  pcawssiiy  so  large  •  number  of


SERVU8.

e  Anployed  in  ti


1035


slaTcs,  tliat  they  w

shops,  mines,  or  nuinu&ctoriei :  the  niunber  which
a  penon  kept  to  attend  to  his  own  prirale  wants  or
those  of  his  hoosehold,  was  probably  nerer  my
Isige.  And  this  conitintes  one  gral  distinction
between  Onek  and  Roman  slaves,  that  the  labour
of  the  former  was  retarded  as  the  means  by  which
an  owner  might  obtain  profit  for  the  outlay  of  his
capital  in  the  pnrchase  of  the  slares,  while  the
latter  were  ebii^y  employed  in  ministering  to  the
wants  of  their  maalei  and  hii  fiunily,  and  in  giati-
Ij^ng  hit  luxury  and  lanity.  Thns  Athenoeus
(tI.  p.  272,  e)  remarks,  that  many  of  the  Romans
posseti  10,000  or  20,000  slares  and  even  more,
but  not,  he  adds,  for  die  take  of  bringing  in  a
rCTenue,  as  the  wealthy  Niciaa

Slaies  either  worked  on  tiieir  matters'  account
(in  the  latter  case  they  paid  their


adaj);


«  let


out  by  their  master  on  hire  either  fiir  the  i _

any  other  kind  of  labonr,  or  as  hired  semnta  for
wages  (laro^pi).  The  rowers  on  beard  the  ships
were  usually  ikiTea  (Isocrat  dt  Poet,  p.  169,  ed.
Stepb.)  ;  it  is  remarked  at  an  annsual  circumitonce,
that  the  seamen  of  the  Paralos  were  freemen.
(Thoc  Tiii.  73.)  These  ilares  either  belonged
to  the  tiate  or  topnTBte  penons,  who  let  them  oat
to  the  state  on  payment  of  a  certain  sum.  It  ap-
peals that  a  considerafale  nnmber  of  peraons  kept
large  gangs  of  slaTct  merely  for  the  purpose  of
letting  out,  and  found  this  a  prolttable  node  of  in-
resting  their  capital. Great  numbert  were  required

would  be  obliged  lo  hire  some,  as  they  wonld  not
have  aulficient  capital  to  purchase  at  many  as  they
wanted.  We  leant  firom  a  bagment  of  Hrperides
preaerred  by  Suidaa  ((.D.'ATtif>qf  (aare),  that  there
were  at  one  time  as  many  ai  150,000  ilaTei,  who
worked  in  the  mines  and  were  eniployed  m  country
labonr.  Generally  none  but  inferior  slarei  were
confined  in  these  mines :  they  worked  in  efaains,
and  numbers  died  from  the  elects  of  the  unwhole-
some Btmo^here.  (BOckb,  (M  Oa  Silmr  Mina  if
ZaartM.)  We  cannot  oilcnlate  with  accnney
what  was  the  osnal  rate  of  profit  wfaicfa  a  stave'
^prietor  obtuned.  The  thirty-two  or  thirty-
three  iword-cutlert  belonging  to  tbe  btbcr  of  De-
mosthenes produced  annually  a  net  profit  of  30
minat,  their  purchaie  nlue  being  190  mtnas,  and
the  twenty  couch-makers  a  profit  of  12  minot,
their  purchase  value  being  40  minaa  (Demosth.  ta
Aphd.  i.  p.  Ble.)  The  leather-woiken  of  Tunar-
chus  produced  to  their  masters  two,  the  oreneeia
three,  oboli  a  day  (Aeschin.  n  Tim.  n,  118);
Nieias  paid  an  obolnt  a  day  for  each  minmg  thiie
whicb  he  hired.  (Xen.  Vat.  It.  14.)  The  rate
of  janfit  upon  the  purchate-money  of  the  slave*
was  naturally  high,  at  their  value  was  dettmyed
by  age,  and  tfaose  who  died  had  to  he  replaced  by
fresh  pnrcbasc*.  The  proprietor  wa*  also  exposed
to  the  great  danger  of  their  running  away,  when  it
became  necesiaiy  to  ponue  them  and  offer  rewarda
for  their  recapture  (iriwrrpa,  Xen.  Mem.  ii.  10.
g  1,  2  ;  Plat.  Protag.  p.  310).  Antigenea  of
Rhodes  was  the  first  that  ettabliibed  an  inimancs
of  slaves.  For  a  yearly  contribution  of  eight
diachmas  for  (sch  slave  that  was  in  the  army,  he
nndeitook  to  make  good  the  valne  of  the  ilave  at
the  time  of  hii  ._....

OsEDii.  c  3fi.) :


1036  SERVUS.

wbolfl  iQinAgflniBnt  of  the  at&t«  wai  frfqoBiGj
cnCm^ted,  whlLa  tha  meiter  tgbuIcmI  m  the
the  hoiijehold  ilnTei  veie  under  ■  itewud  {roi
ibie  female litia under  n  itewaideu  (n
(Xell.Oaan.iu.  S,  ii.  11.)

The  Athenian  iUtm  did  not,  like  lie  Heloti  of
8p»na  «nd  tha  pBne«lM  of  TheMalj,  itrve  in  the
•nnie* ;  the  battlei  of  Marathon  uid  Arf[iniuBe,
when  the  Atheniuu  aimed  Iheir  elayu  (Puis
L 33. i  3  ;  SchoL  ad  AriiU^.  Sam.  33),  wi
cxceptionH  to  the  genera]  rule.

The  right!  of  pouauion  with  Rsard  to  ilftTCt
dilTeiBd  in  no  iHpecl  from  anj  Dtaec  properl;  ;
they  could  he  pten  or  taken  u  pledget.  (Dcm.  u
/'cnftMKt.  p.9e7,  M  Aplbib.  p.  S31,  ts  Ondor.  i.
p.  871.)  The  condition,  hsveTei,  of  Qreek  ilavei
WD  upon  Che  whole  better  than  that  of  Romnn
onea,  with  the  exception  pechapi  of  Sputa,  where,
according  to  Plutarch  (Zjv.  28),  it  waa  the  belt
place  in  the  woild  to  be  a  freeman,  and  the  wont
to  be  a  ilare  (4r  AoKtEal^ri  koI  rU  iXiittpiir
fidAtffra  i\t66iptaf  tJmiy  jcbI  rip  ZovKor  ftdktara
SwAar).  Al  Atlieoi  apedallf  the  ilaie)  >e#m  to
luiTB  been  allowed  a  di^ree  of  liberty  and  initul-
grace,  which  wai  nerei  granted  to  tbem  at  Home.
(Compare  PluL  da  Garni.  18  ;  Xenoph.  dc  Rtp.
Alh.  I  13.)  On  the  reception  of  anewilaTB  into
a  houia  at  Ath^u,  it  wai  the  ciutom  to  icatter
iweetmeats  (iiaTa;t^fTa),  ai  wat  done  in  the
CMC  of  a  newlj  mairied  pair.  (Arittoph.  PUU.  768,
with  SchoL;  Dtmoith.  in  ^i^.  p.  1123.  29;
PcJlux,  iiL  77  i  Hesych.  and  Suidai,  i.e.  E^to-
Xfe/mra.)

The  life  and  person  of  a  ilave  were  al»  pro-
tected bj  Ihs  law  :  a  panon  who  alruck  or  mal-
tnated  a  ilaTe  wai  liable  to  an  action  (Sepcoi
yfv^fi,  Dem.  I'a  Mid.  p.  529  ;  AcKhin.  »  Tim.  p.
41  ;  Xen.  dt  Rqt.  Alk.  \.  \l\  ;  Athen.  n.  p.  257,
f ;  Meier,  AU.  Proa.  ^  322,  &c)  i  a  tiave  too  could
not  be  pnl  to  ieath  without  legal  lenience.  (Eurip.
HeaJi.2B7,  263  ;  Antiph.  di  catd.  Htrod.  p.  72S.)
He  could  even  take  eheller  from  the  cmeltj  of
iu  maatei  in  tha  temple  of  Thaeui,  and  there
claim  the  privilege  of  being  lold  by  him  (vpaaui
aJnltrStu,  Pint.  7!tn.  S6  ;  Pollux,  liL  13  ;  Meier,
AU.  Proa,  p.  403,  &c).  The  penon  of  a  ilave,
however,  wat  not  eontidered  to  tacred  at  that  of  a
freeman  :  hit  offencet  were  punithed  with  corporal
chaatitement,  which  wat  the  laat  mode  of  puniih-
ment  inflicted  on  a  freeman  (Dem.  i'a  Tiauyr.  p.
7£2)  i  he  waa  not  beliered  upon  hit  oath,  and  hit
evidence  in  court*  of  juitice  wat  alwaji  taken  with

Notwilhilanding  the  generally  mOd  tic&taient
of  ilaiet  in  Qreeee,  their  iniunectioD  wat  not  un-
fnquent  (Plat.  Lig.  n.  p.  777) :  but  thete  inaur-
lectioni  in  Attica  were  utually  confined  to  the
mming  ilaTes,  who  wen  treated  with  mon  teverity
than  Uie  othvi.  On  one  occation  they  murdered
their  guarda,  took  pottettion  of  the  fortific&ticnt  of
SnniiUD,  and  from  thii  point  iSTaged  the  cooLtry
Gv  a  ccnaideiahle  dme. (Athen.  vi.  p.  272,  £)

though  not  to  fRqnantly  aa  at  Rome  ;  hut  it  teenu
datibtfnl  whether  a  naater  waa  ever  obliged  to
liberate  ■  ilaraagauut  hit  will  for  a  ccftaintumof
money,  aa  aome  writen  have  concluded  &om  a  pu-
aage  of  PlaatU.  (,Catim.  ii.  S.  7.)  Tho«:  who  were
nuDonutted  ^i■Tt\^ie^pet}  did  not  become  citiceot,
■a  they  did  at  Rome,  but  ptated  into  the  condi-
IMD  of  Metio. They  were  obliged  to  honour  tbeii


SERVUS.
foimer  tnaaler  «a  their  patnm  (vpoorcmii),  and  to
ful£l  certain  dntiei  towarda  him,  the  nealect  of
which  rendered  (hem  liable  to  the  Urq  <hrwra.
irfou,  bjr  which  they  might  again  be  told  into
ataveiy. [LiBiBTtia, p.  70S,  a  ; Apobtakiou

DlKt]

Reapecting  the  public  alam  at  Athene  aee
Dkhdeii.

It  Bppean  that  there  wat  a  tax  Dpgn  abvtt  at
Athena  (Xen.  Al  Tert.  iv.  25 ),  which  Bockh  (/>rft
Eton,  pp.331,  332,  2d  ed.)  rappoaea  waa  thne
oboli  a  year  for  each  tlare.

Beaidei  the  authoritiei  quoted  in  ths  coane  tt
tbit  article,  the  reader  may  refer  to  Petitaa,  £e^.
Aa.  iL  6.  p.  254,  &c  ;  Reileimeiei,  Gaol,  dtr
SdoBsra  in  GriteieHloMA,  Berl.  ]  789  ;  Limbutj;-
Bconwer,  Hittaindt  la  CiriliiaiUM  da  Gna,  toI.
iii.  p.  267,  &c.  ;  Oettling,  dt  NotUme  SatHmUt
ajmd  ATuMilem,  Jen.  1S21 ;  Hermann.  LiAriti*
da-ffriech.Staairtli.%  114  ;  and  eqiecially  Beckn,
amriiia,  toL  ii.  p.  20,  &c.

SERVUS  (RoMiN).  SE'RVITUS.  "SwiCna
eit  conititutio  jniit  gtntiuia  qua  quia  dominio
alieno  contra  natoram  mbjicitor."  (Plorent.  Dig.
1.  tit,  £.  t.  4.)  OaiuB  alto  contidcn  the  potest**  of
a  matter  oiei  a  thiYe  at  "jnria  gentiom  ~  (L  S3),
The  Romant  viewed  Liberty  aa  a  Natural  States
and  SlaveiT  at  a  condition  which  wat  contrary  to
the  Natural  State.  The  mutual  nlaiioo  of  Slave
and  Matter  among  tha  Romant  wat  eipreaeed  by
the  termt  Servua  and  DomiaDB  ;  and  the  pown
and  intereit  which  the  dominui  bad  over  and  in
the  tlare  waa  eiprcMed  by  Oominiam.  The  tern
Dominium  or  ownerahip,  with  referertce  to  a  tlave,
pointed  to  the  alave  merely  at  a  thing  cr  object  of
ownenhip,  and  a  tlave  u  one  of  the  Rea  Mandpi
waa  clataed  with  other  object!  of  ownerahip.  The
word  Poteitei  wai  alio  applied  to  the  maacer'a
power  over  hij  alsvc,  and  the  lame  word  waa  aaed
to  eipreo  the  &lher'a  power  over  hit  children,
Tha  boundariei  between  the  Patiia  and  Dooinica
Polcttai  were  originally  very  narrow,  bat  the  rhild
had  certain  legal  cajxuitica  which  were  altogether
'  t  to  the  condition  of  the  ^ve.  Them
Foteitst  over  the  alave,  if  be  bad  m

my  that  the  tlave  ibonld  be  hi
(Gaiut.  L  64.)

Aceotding  to  the  alrict  pcmciplei  of  the  B
iw,  it  wat  acontequenceortherelatioocJMaata
and  Slave  that  the  Matter  could  tmt  the  Slave  ai
he  pleated :  he  could  aell  him,  punith  him,  and
put  him  to  death.  Poiitive  monlitj'  hovevnr  and
that  moat  alway*  mlxitt  be-
and  the  tlave*,  who  are  immedi-
ately about  him,  ameliorated  the  conditioit  of
ilavery.  Still  we  read  of  acta  of  gmt  ciurity
commilled  by  maitcn  in  the  later  R^tJion  and
earlier  Imperial  periodt,  and  the  Lex  Petrenia
waa  enacted  in  (nrder  to  protect  the  ahre.  The
original  power  of  life  and  death  over  a  tlave,
which  Qniut  conaiden  to  be  a  part  of  the  Joi
Oentium,  wu  Ilmiied  by  a  conttilnliaii  of  Anto-
ninui,  which  enacted  that  if  a  man  pot  hia  alare
to  death  without  aufficient  reaaon  (trw  cons),  he
wat  liable  lo  the  tame  penalty  ai  if  he  had  killed
another  man'i  tlave  The  Conatitutim  i^jlied  id
Roman  dliieoi  and  to  all  who  were  under  tba
ImpeHum  Ronianum.  (Oaiui,  i.  52,  &c>  The
tame  Conatitulion  alto  prohibited  the  cmel  tmt-
menl  of  ahiTei  by  th«ii  mailer^  by  enacting  tkat


siHvua.

If  the  cniell;  of  the  muter  ma  IntoTualilr,  he
mighl  be  compelled  to  k]1  the  date  ;  *nd  the
tUve  wM  enpoirtred  to  make  hie  compUint  to
tha  pnper  satbarilj.  (Senec  dt  Sna/l  iiL  23.)
A  &i[UtituCiDn  of  CUudiui  enuled  that  if  >  mui
eipoted  bii  ibvei,  who  were  infinn,  thej  ebould
bccntie  free ;  imd  the  Coiutitution  alto  declared
that  if  the^  wen  pot  ID  dMth,  the  act  ihotdd  be
mnrder.  (Suetoo.  Oamd.  2£.)  It  wu  alio  emcted
(Cod.  3.  tiL  38.  L  11)  that  in  salea  or  diTuion
of  pnperty,  iliTee,  nch  u  Inuband  ud  wife,
(•renu  and  children,  bntlien  and  liMen,  ahoold
act  be  eepaiMed.

A  ilaTC  (mid  n«t  cmtnet  a  mamags.  Hii
cohabitBtiia  with  a  woman  wai  Contnbentnm  ;
and  no  legal  irlalion  between  him  and  bit  ebildren
WHi  mngniiMl.  Still  ntameu  of  blood  wu  con-
lidered  an  impediinent  to  marriage  after  mannmit-
liDn  :  tbu  a  manumitted  iIbtb  could  not  mairr  hli
manomitted  liiUr. (Dig.  23.  tlL  2.  a  U.)

A  ilaTe  conld  have  no  propeitj.  He  wai  not
iiH^iBble  of  acquiring  ^pefty,  hot  hi>  aeqniii.
tioni  belonged  to  hia  matter  ;  which  Oaiut  conai-
den  to  be  a  ni!a  of  the  Jut  Oentinm  (L  £2).  A
■laie  could  acfjnire  for  hit  matter  b;  Hancipslio,
Tradilio,8tipu!atio,  or  in  any  other  way.  In  thii
capacity  of  the  alare  to  take,  though  he  could  not
keep,  bit  condition  wu  Buimilated  to  that  ef  a
GliuiiamiliBt,  and  be  wii  regarded  at  a  perton.  If
one  perton  had  a  Nudnci  Jot  Quiritium  in  a  ilaTc,
■nd  he  wa*  anolher'i  In  bonii,  bii  acquiiitioni  be-
longed to  the  person  wboae  be  wai  In  bonit.  If  a
man  bona  fide  potieaaed  another  man^  tlave  or  a
free  penon,  he  only  acquired  through  the  liaTe  in
two  catoi:  he  wu  entitled  to  all  that  the  ilare
acquired  out  of  or  by  meant  of  the  property  of  tha
poticitor  (&r  n  ^jat)  ;  and  be  wat  entitled  to  all
that  the  ilavc  acquired  by  hit  own  labour  («
aperu  nil)  ;  the  law  wu  tha  Mine  with  reipecl
tnaalaTe  of  whom  a  man  had  the  Uiuifhictiu
only.  All  other  ocqnintiont  1^ inch  ilaretor  free
penont  belonged  to  their  owner  or  to  themaelTei,
according  at  they  were  tlavei  or  irea  men.  (Ulp.
Pny.  tit.  19.)  If  a  ilare  wu  qipointed  herei,
ha  conld  only  accept  the  hereditu  with  the  content
of  hit  muter,  and  be  acquiied  the  hereditaa  for
kit  matter :  in  tha  aama  way,  the  tlavc  acquind  a
Iqacy  for  hit  muter. (Gains,  ii.  87,  &c.)

A  matter  could  alto  acquire  Poueuio  through
bis  d>Te,  and  thru  have  a  conuneneemant  of  Uaa-
capion  (Ouni,  iL  39)  ;  but  the  owner  mutt  hai


ofthaiUTe


n  throngb  him,  nnd  contequently
a  man  could  not  acqniia  poatettion  by  meant  of  a
pignonted  alan.  [Pionua.]  A  bonae  Edei  poa.
■eaaoT,  that  it,  one  who  beliered  the  alaTo  to  be
n,  conld  acquire  poweiaion  through  bim
■uld  acqi  ~


t  he  could  acquii


impeny  ;


n  bona  tide,  for  (bit  bona
wat  not  that  which  u  meant  in  the  phnae  bonae
Gdei  poaaetw>r.  The  UtnFntctnariui  acquired  pot-
■eation  through  the  ilaTc  in  the  atma  caira  in
which  the  bonae  fidei  poaaeaaor  acquind  it.  (Sa-
vigny,  Dai  Redt  da  Bailta,  p.  314,  ed.  5.)

ShTca  wen  not  only  employed  in  the  ntnal  do-
maatiB  offleet  and  in  tha  labourt  of  the  field,  but
■I«D  u  bcton  or  agoitt  for  their  maatert  in  the
mtjuganant  of  bunneti  [iNiTtTORiA  Actio,
Ac],  and  ai  mechanic^  altitant,  and  in  OTuy


BERVUS.  1037

bnoch  of  induttry.  It  may  eaaily  be  conc«iTad
that  imdar  theta  circiunttancea,  eapecially  aa  they
ware  often  introtted  with  property  to  a  large
amount,  there  miut  have  aritm  a  pmctice  of  al-
lowing tha  alave  to  conaidcr  put  of  hia  gaina  «
(a  hia  Peculium,  a  term  alao  ap-


II  of  a  filiui&miliaa  u


ptieabie  to

hit  father  allowed  him  ti  .. . ._

[PaTHu  Poranraa.]  According  to  itrict  law,
tfaa  Peculium  wat  the  property  of  tha  maner,  but
according  to  naue  it  irat  oontideied  to  be  the
property  of  the  alaTe.  Sometimea  it  wat  wteed
between  matter  and  alave,  that  the  tlave  tbould
pnrchste  hit  freedom  with  bit  Peculium  when  it
amounted  to  a  certain  aum.  (Tacit.  Am,  liv.  43,
and  the  note  of  Lipaiut.)  If  a  ilava  wat  mami-
milted  by  tha  owner  in  hit  lifetime,  the  Peculium
wu  coniideredto  be  given  together  with  Libertai,
rmleB  it  wat  ezpraialy  retained.  (Dig.  lfi.tit.1.
t.  53,  cfp  P«k/».)  Tnntactiona  of  borrowing  and
lending  could  take  place  between  tha  matter  and
tlave  with  retpeet  to  the  Peculium,  thoiu^  no
right  of  action  aroae  on  either  aide  onlof  tuch
dealing!,  cmformably  la  a  general  prinoiptB  of
RomanLaw.  (Oaiu,  iv.  73.)  If  after  the  ilavet
mnnumiition,  the  matter  paid  him  a  debt  which

could  not  mover  it  (Dig.  12.  tit  6.  a  «4.)  In
caae  of  the  daim  of  creditonon  the  atave'a  Pecu-
lium, the  debt  of  the  alave  to  the  muter  wu  fint
taken  into  the  aecoont,  and  deducted  from  the  Pe-
culium. Bo  &r  waa  the  law  modified^  that  in  the
COH  of  nnturalea  obligutionea,  u  the  Romant
called  them,  between  maaler  and  alava,  a  fideiuaaor
could  be  bound  for  a  tlave  ;  and  ha  could  alao  be
bound,  if  the  creditor  waa  an  extraneui.

A  nattualit  obligatio  might  tetult  from  tha  dcal-
ingt  of  a  alave  with  other  pertont  than  hit  maa-
ter  ;  but  the  muter  wu  not  at  all  aFfected  by
tnch  dcalinga  The  matter  wu  only  bound  by  the
actt  and  dnlingi  of  the  alave,  when  the  ilava  wu
employed  u  hit  agent  or  inttnunent,  in  which
cate  the  maaler  might  be  liable  to  an  Actio  KxiB-
ciroKii  or  iNBTiTOni*. (Oaiua,  iv.  71.) There

tlave  acted  by  hia  orden.  [Juaett,  Quon,  &c,}
If  a  tlave  or  filiuifamiliu  traded  with  fail  peculium
with  the  knowledge  of  the  dominnt  or  father,  iIm
peculium  and  all  that  wu  produced  by  It  were  di-
vitible  among  the  creditor!  and  maater  or  father  in
due  proportiona  (pro  rata  partioat),  and  if  any  of
the  creditora  complained  of  getting  1e«  than  liit
thare,  he  bad  a  tribntoria  actio  againat  the  matter
or  father,  to  vbom  the  Liw  gava  tiia  power  of  dii-
tribntion  among  the  creditora.  (Oaiua,  iv.  72,  lit.)
Tha  muter  waa  not  liable  for  anything  beyond
tha  amount  of  the  peculium,  and  bit  own  demand
wu  payable  firat.  (Dig.  14.  tit.  4.  da  JVitnloria
Actkne.)  Sometimea  a  tlave  would  have  another
tlave  nnder  him,  who  had  a  pecnlium  with  reaped
to  the  firti  ilave,  jutt  at  tha  fiitt  tlave  had  a  pecu-
lium with  reipect  to  hit  matter.  On  thii  practice
wu  founded  the  diitinction  between  Servi  Ordi-
narii  and  VIcariL  (Dig.  IS.  tit.  1.  a  17.)  Then
tubordinate  peculia  ware  however  legally  ontidered


of  a  tbve  dying,  being  told  or  manumitted,  the
Edict  required  that  any  action  in  retpeet  of  tha
Peculium  muttbe  bnnghlwithina  year.  (Dig.lfi.
tit.  2. 1. 1 ,  which  conlaini  the  wordt  of  the  Edict)
If  a  tlave  or  filimftmiliaa  had  ouiied  on  dcaliaga


1938  SEBVDS.

wilhoDt  tfa«  knowledge  sod  eorumt  of  liu  muter
ot  father,  there  might  be  m)  action  agumt  the
muter  or  bther  in  respect  of  mdi  dealing  »  &i
Ai  it  could  be  prored  that  he  had  derived  adiBii-
twe  frora  them.  Thii  vu  called  the  Actio  de  in
TCDi  Veno  (Dig.  15.  tiL  3),  uid  it  wu  in  fact  the
nma  utio  u  that  De  Peculio.  That  »u  uid
"in  rem  pUrii  di>miai(e  Teraiun,"  nhich  turned
mt  for  hia  sdruitJtge.  For  initanes  if  t  ilsie  bor-
rowed ten  leiteitia  uid  paid  them  to  ths  mailer'i
oediton,  the  matter  nu  bound  to  pa;  the  loan,
and  the  leader  had  an  actio  againat  him  De  in  rem
Teiio.  If  the  tlsve  paid  any  nn  of  (he  bonoved
iheq  to  hit  maeler'a  ereditora,  the  matter  wae  Liable
to  the  tender  for  the  amaimt  lo  applied,  and  if  the
■laTB  had  mited  the  oth«  put,  the  maiter  wai
'bound  to  make  that  good  to  the  amount  of  the
•lare'a  pecDliom  ;  but  (till  with  thii  proviiioo,
that  the  anunint  of  the  ■lare'e  peculiiun  could  onlj
be  atcertained  by  £nt  deducting  from  it  what  he
owed  to  the  maitei.  The  cue  waa  the  tame  with
the  pecoliam  of  a  ton  and  a  ilave.  Tbua,  at
Oaiot  obierve*  (ii.  73),  the  Actio  De  peculio  and


Deir


w  wBi  one  actio,  but  oo


condemnatii

It  ia  a  conieqaence  of  the  relation  of  Slave  and
llaiter,  that  the  Matter  acquired  no  rigbta  agninat
the  ^aTB  in  conaequence  of  hia  Delicta.  Other
penoot  might  obtain  rights  againat  a  tlave  in  cod-
aequence  of  hit  delicto,  but  their  light  cooLd  not  be
proaecuted  b;  action  until  the  ^va  vat  manu-
mitted. (Ouua,  It.  77.}  Tbejr  had  howeia  a
right  of  action  aguuit  the  tlsTe'a  nuuter  for
damagee,  and  if  the  matter  would  not  pay  ths
damaget,  he  mutt  give  up  the  ilave.  [Nox^]
The  tlava  waa  protected  againit  injur;  from  other
persont.  If  the  alave  waa  killed,  the  matter  might
either  piDKcuta  the  killer  for  a  capital  ofience,  or
*qe  for  damage!  under  the  Lei  A^uiUla.  (Qaiua,
tiL  213.)  [AquiLi.u  Lan;  Injuki^]  The
maiter  hiad  ^to  a  prsetoria  actio  in  duplum  agaiiut
thoie  who  corrupted  hit  ilave  (in-m,  lena)  and
ImI  him  into  bad  pnclicee  (Dig.  U.  ^L  3.  a  1.
where  the  worda  of  the  Edict  are  given) ;  Uie  in
dnplum  wai  to  twice  the  amount  u  the  eMimated
dainage.  He  hod  alto  an  action  againat  a  peiKin
who  committed  ■tupmm  with  hii  female  alave.
(Dig.  47.  UtlO.  ».2S.)

A  nmawa;  ihive  (fiigitiviii)  could  not  lawfull;
be  leceiiad  oi  harboured  i  to  conceal  him  waa
Furtnm.  The  matter  wea  entitled  to  punne  him
Vrherever  he  pleated  ;  and  it  wot  the  doty  of  all
anthoriciet  to  give  him  aid  in  recovering  the  tlave.
It  wot  the  object  of  variout  Uwi  to  check  the
nmning  away  of  tlaret  in  ever;  way,  and  ac-
oordingl;  a  runawa;  tlave  could  not  legally  be  an
object  of  tale.  A  clait  of  pertont  called  Fogitirarii
node  it  their  botineu  to  recover  runaway  tlavea.
The  rightt  of  the  nuuter  over  the  tlave  were  in
no  way  affected  by  hit  lunning  awa;.  (Dig.  11.
lit.  i.  Dt  fUgitivii:  there  wat  a  Lex  Fabia  on
thii  lubjecC,  and  appareutl;  two  SenatUMoniulta
atleatl;  tee  olio  Vano,  lia  Aa  Aut.  iiL  U  ;  Floiut,
iil.  19,  and  the  note  in  Duker'a  edition.)

A  peraoa  wai  a  alave  either  Jure  Oentiom  at
Jure  CivilL  A  penon  waa  bom  a  alave  Jure  Qeo'
tium  whoia  mother  waa  a  tlave  when  the  gave
bim  birth  <Qaioi,  L  82)  ;  for  it  waa  a  legal  prin-
ciple that  the  condition  of  thou  who  were  not  be-
gotten in  Juatae  Nuptiae  wai  to  be  reckoned  from
the  Donant  «f  the  birth. A  alavs  bom  in  lbs ,


BEavn&

matter's  home  was  Vema. But  it  w*i  alaa  a

principle  of  Roman  Law  that  the  ttatna  of  a  penoo
who  waa  begotten  in  Jutt»e  Nnptioe  wat  mkosed
from  the  time  of  conception.  At  a  later  period  the
rule  of  law  wat  eatablithed,  that  though  a  wanan
at  the  time  of  the  birth  might  be  a  alave,  atill  hec
child  waa  free,  if  the  mother  had  been  6«e  at  an;
time  reckoning  backward!  iram  the  time  of  the
birth  to  the  timeoftheccooeption.  (Panlua,&A:
ii  tit.  24  i  Dig.  1.  tit.  5.  a  5.)  There  were  nnoa
caaei  of  diildren  the  oSipring  of  a  free  parent  and
a  tlave  aa  to  which  poticive  law  provided  whethcc
the  children  should  be  free  or  tlavea. (Gaint,  i.

BS,"&C.) [SaNiTDfiOONHULTtm  CLii;DlA.N01I.]

A  penon  became  a  alave  by  capture  in  wax;  alaa
Jure  Qentiuni.  [PaAKnA.]  C^ptivea  in  war  wero
told  oa  belonging  to  the  Aerariam  or  diiuibated
among  the  Kildien  b;  loL  (Walter,  GevUoitt
&.C  p.  SO.  note  iS,  Ut  ed.)  In  reierenca  to  the
practice  of  telling  pritonera  with  a  mwn  on  their
beada,  we  find  the  eiprettion  **  tub  conma  venire,
vendere.-  (GelL  vii.  4  ;  Liv.  v.  22 ;  Caetv,
fl.O.  iii.  16.)

A  free  peraon  might  become  a  alave  in  Tarioni
waya  in  consequence  of  poiitJTB  law,  Jnie  Ciiili.
Thit  was  the  caie  with  Incenii  [Caput],  tnd
those  who  evaded  military  service.  (Cic  pra
aaama,  34.)  In  certain  caiet,  a  roaii  became  a
alive,  if  he  allowed  himself  to  be  told  as  a  alave  in
order  to  defraud  the  pnrchaier  ;  and  a  free  wonau
cohabited  with  a  tlave  might  be  ledoced  to
ime  condition.  [SaNATUBco^isULTDN  Ci.*u-
ETlf.]  Under  the  em[ure  the  rnle  waa  et-
tabliihed  that  pemna  condemned  to  death,  to  the
minea,  and  to  fight  with  wild  beasti,  lost  thrir
treedom,  and  their  property  wii  omfiscaled,  whoic^
concludes  Guns,  it  Bj^ieara  tbat  tbey  lose  the
Tcalamentiraetio.  (Dig.  28.  tik  1.  a.a)  Bat  this
wat  not  the  cadier  law.  A  person  i
though  he  lost  his  freedom,  had  m
eooioqaentiy  the  hereditstca  and  legacies  which
at  left  to  him,  were  timpl;  void  ;  for  such  a
naa  was  **  poenae  lervui,  octi  CaesariL'  (Dig.
..  tiL  8.  a.  3.)  A  mao  never  lost  his  frrBdon
by  usucapion.  (Oaint,  ii.  4S.)  Accordiog  io  tbe
old  law  a  manifcatnt  fur  waa  liable  to  a  ^pitalii
poena  and  wot  addicted  (addiaebatur)  to  the  pexaca
hote  property  ho  had  alolen  ;  but  it  wat  doabud
belbctihe  efiecl  of  the  addicllo  was  to  make  him
servus  cr  to  put  him  in  the  coadltiDD  of  an  adja-
dicilus. (Oaiui,  iii.  189.)

By  a  Conititutio  or  S^tuaconsnltnm  of  Claa-
us  (Suelon.  Oaad.  lb)  a  frwdman  who  mticen-
Lcted  himtdf  towardt  hit  patron,  wat  reduced  U
fait  former  stste  of  tlavei;.  But  this  was  not  the
role  of  law  in  the  lime  of  Nero.  (Tadt  j4>a.  liii.
27  ;  see  the  note*  of  Eroesti  and  Lipaini  oo  thi*
pottage :  and  Pjthonus,  LisiRTita.)

The  State  of  Slavery  wat  terminated  by  Makb-
uisaio.  It  waa  olio  terminated  by  varioiit  poaitive
enactmenla,  either  b;  way  of  leward  to  the  tUv*
or  punishment  to  the  matter.  The  Sihatukon-
suLTUH  SiLANiANDM  It  an  eiam]Je  ef  the  CKmo- ;
and  various  subteqnenl  C^onititutions  gave  Ercedea
to  sieves  who  discovered  the  pcrpetiaton  of  certain
crimen  (Cod.  Theod.  tit.  21.  a  2.)  Libert;  ni^
alto  be  acquired  by  the  Pnuaoiptio  Tca^nnt.
After  the  tstabliihinent  of  Chriitianity,  it  migbt
be  acquired  subject  to  certain  llmitaticsia  by  be-
coming a  monk  or  a  spiritual  person  (Nov.  5.  <^  3.
and  133.  c^  17.  U)  j  U>t  if  the  paoM  kft  im


8ERVU8.
rtmuilaj  for  ■  unilar  life,  or  nmbtcd  about  in
the  iDwii*  or  tbe  axattzj,  h«  mi^t  be  redacad  to
hii  fbnDer  ■errile  coudhiotL

Then  wen  ilare*  that  beloDgtd  to  tha  itala  and
were  nlled  Sorri  PubUci  (Plaut.  O^  ii.  2.  86)  :
Ifaey  bid  the  tdtameDti  hctia  ta  the  amount  of  oa«
hdf  of  their  pcopertj  (Ulp,  Fn^.  tit.  20),  ttnta
wbich  drctmutAnce  it  Af^}ean  that  thej  were
viewed  in  ■  light  loinewlut  diSerent  from  the
■lATei  of  priTatfl  penonL

In  tims  of  nroliition  nndei  the  Republic,  it
was  Dot  Djnuail  to  proclum  the  Hber^  of  ftliTei
to  btdoa  tham  to  join  in  revolt  (PluL  Mar.  e.  41,
42>  1  but  tbtM  were  iiregulat  ptoceediiigi,  uti
neitlier  jmtiiiable  nor  exunplea  for  imitatian.  Lord
Damnore,  th«  U»t  Briti»h  Goreraor  of  Virginia,
■t  tbe  comnitiweinent  of  th«  Ameiican  llcTolution,
bllowed  thii  bad  ennple.  (G.  L.]

The  preceding  accoant  tnata  of  the  legal  oon-
ditioi  of  ilBTei  in  lelation  to  their  inanen.  It
muuiu  to  giie  an  account  of  the  biiloty  of
■UTrT7  among  the  Eomani,  of  the  aals  and  ralne
of  ala'O,  of  tha  different  claisei  into  which  thaj
mre  diTided,  and  of  their  general  treatment

Slare*  axiated  at  Rome  in  the  eatliett  timei  of
which  we  haTo  any  record  ;  bnl  they  do  not  ap-
pear to  baTo  been  numeroug  under  the  ^ingi  and
in  tbe  earlieit  agei  of  the  repablic  Tbe  diflbrent
tndea  and  the  mechanical  arta  were  chiefly  carried
on  by  the  clientei  of  the  jHtriciani,  and  tbe  im^l
fiumi  in  the  country  wen  cultivated  fin  the  moat
part  by  the  laboun  of  the  praprietor  and  of  hi>
own  fiunily.  But  aa  tha  temtoriet  of  the  Rranan
viate  were  extended,  Iho  patiiciana  obtained  poa-
aeiaion  of  large  eatatee  out  of  the  agar  pnbliciia,
■ince  it  WH  the  {KBctiee  of  the  Roman*  to  deprire
ft  conquered  people  of  wt  of  their  land.  Tfaeae
eatatfa  probably  required  a  largei  number  of  bandi
for  their  culliTation  than  could  readily  beobtBined
among  the  free  populatim,  and  sinoe  the  freemen
wen  eoDttaiiily  liable  to  be  allod  away  from  theb
work  to  ler^e  in  the  aimie*,  the  lands  hegan  to  be
cnltiiated  almoat  entirely  by  alave  labour.  (Com-
lAiT  LJT.  n.  la.)  Tbningb  war  and  commerce
■laret  could  eaiily  be  obtained,  and  at  a  cheap
rata,  and  their  niunbei  loDn  beeuna  >o  great,  that
the  poorer  claia  of  freemen  waa  thrown  almost
entirely  ont  of  employment.  Tbia  state  of  things
«ma  <HK  of  the  chief  arguments  used  by  Licinius
and  the  Oracehi  for  limiting  the  qiuntity  of  pnblie
land  which  a  person  might  poueu  (Appian,  B.  C.
L  T,  9, 10)  !  and  we  know  that  there  was  a  pro-
Tisien  in  the  Licinian  Rogations  that  a  certain
number  of  freemen  should  be  employed  on  aveiy
ealmte.  (Appian,  B.  C.  L  S.)  This  regulation,
bnwerar,  was  probably  of  little  arail :  the  land*
■til]  omtinnod  to  be  almost  entirely  cnltivated  by
■lans,  although  in  tbe  laleit  times  of  the  re-
pnblic  we  find  that  Julius  Caesar  attempted  to
remedy  this  stato  of  things  to  some  extent  by
enacting,  that  of  Chose  persons  who  attended  to
otlls  a  third  ihonid  always  be  freemen.  (Suet
Jid.  42.)  In  Sicily,  which  supplied  Rome  with
■D  jnat  a  qnanlitf  of  com,  the  number  of  sgii-
coltnnl  alarci  was  immense ;  the  oppressions  to
whieb  th(7  wen  exposed  drore  them  twice  to
open  rebellion,  and  their  numben  enabled  them
to  defy  for  a  time  tbe  Raman  power.  Tha  first  of
till  SI  I  Senila  wars  began  in  B.C.  134  and  ended  in
B,  c  1 82,  and  the  second  nmmenc«d  in  b.  c  1 02
and  lM««d  almost  GHir  jtara.


SERVUS.  loss

I  Long  hoTCTer  after  it  bad  become  the  enatom  to
employ  Urge  ganga  of  slaras  in  the  coltiTation  of
the  land,  the  number  of  those  who  served  aa  per-
sonal attendants  itill  condnued  to  be  small.  Per-
sona in  good  ciicumatanoes  teem  amnlly  to  have
bad  only  one  to  wait  upon  them  (Plin.  H.N.
iiiiii.  I.  a  6),  who  was  Keneralty  called  by  tb*
name  of  his  master  with  tha  word  par  (that  is^
paw)  affixed  to  it,  as  CbqMr,  Lwiipor,  Mardpor,
Puilipor,  (jumtipor,  &c. ;  and  hence  (juinlilian
(i.  4.  g  26)  says,  long  before  whose  time  luxury
had  augmented  the  number  of  personal  attendants,
that  such  names  no  longer  existed.  Cato,  when  he
went  to  Spain  as  consul,  took  only  three  slarett
with  him.  (ApuL  Apol.  p.  430,  ed.  Onden.)  Bnt
diuing  the  latter  times  of  tile  republic  and  under
the  empire  the  number  of  domestic  slaves  greatly
increased,  and  in  every  family  of  importance  then
won  sejarate  slaves  to  attend  to  all  the  necessitJM
of  domestic  life.  It  was  considered  a  npnacb  to
a  man  not  to  keep  a  considerable  number  of  skvea.
Thus  CicHo,  in  describing  iho  meanness  of  Piao^
housekeeping,  says  "  Idem  coquns,  idem  atnensis :
pistor  domi  nullus  "  (u  Fii.  27).  The  first  ques-
tion asked  respecting  a  person's  fortune  was  "  Qoot
pascitianoai'-  (Juv,  iii.141).  Horace  (5W.  L  3.
13)  seems  to  apeak  of  ten  slaves  as  the  hiweet
number  which  a  penon  in  tolerable  citcnmslancei
ought  to  keep,  and  he  ridicules  the  praetor  Tullius
for  being  attended  by  no  more  than  five  slaves  in
going  from  bis  Tiburtine  villa  to  Rome.  (Sat.  I  6.
i07.)  The  immense  numbrr  of  ptisonen  token  in
the  constant  wan  of  the  repoblic,  and  the  increase
of  wealth  and  luxury  augmented  the  number  of
slaves  to  a  prodigious  extent,  Tho  itateoient  irf'
Athenaeiu  (vL  p.  272,  e),  that  veiy  many  Remans
possessed  10,000  and  20,000  slaves  and  even
more,  is  prebably  an  exaggeration,  but  a  fr«edinan
under  Augustus,  who  had  lost  much  property  in.
the  civil  wan,  left  at  bis  death  at  many  as  4,1  IG.
(Plin./f.Ar.xxxiii.lO.  S.47.)  Two  hundred  wai
no  uncommon  number  for  one  person  to  keep  (Hor.
Sal.i  3.  11),  and  Augustus  permitted  even  a
person  that  was  exiled  to  take  twenty  shivcs  or
freedmen  with  him.  (Dion  Coaa.  Ivi.  27.)  The
mechanical  arts,  which  were  formerly  in  tha  bands
of  the  Cllentes,  were  now  entirely  exercised  by
slaves  (Cic  ifs  Q^  L  42) :  a  natural  growth  of
things,  fur  where  alavcs  perform  certain  duties  ot
practise  eerlun  arts,  such  duties  or  arts  will  be
thought  degrading  to  a  freedman.  It  must  not  be
fbi^tten  that  tbe  games  of  the  amphitheatre  re-
quired an  immense  number  of  slaves  trained  for
tha  purpose.  [OLADUToaaa.]  Like  the  slaves
in  Sicily,  the  gladialores  in  Italy  rose  in  B.  c  78
against  their  oppresson,  and  under  the  able  gene-
ralship of  Spartacns,  defeated  a  Boman  consnlar
army,  and  were  not  subdued  till  B.  c.  71,  when
G0,000  of  them  ore  said  to  have  bllen  in  battle.
{Liv..^*.  97.)

UndiH  the  empin  varioua  enactment!,  mentioned
above  (p.  I  OSS,  a),  were  made  to  restrain  the  cruelty
of  matters  towards  their  slaves  ;  bnt  the  spread  of
Christianity  tended  most  to  ameliorate  their  con-
dition, though  tha  possession  of  them  waa  fiir  a
long  time  by  no  mfans  condemned  as  contrary  to
Chiistian  justice.  The  Christian  wrilen,  however,
inculcate  tha  duty  of  acting  tovatdi  them  as  we
would  be  acted  by  (Clem,  A\ei.  Paedagcg.  iii.  12),
bnt  down  to  the  age  of  Theodoains  wealthy  pcr-
•ons  still  coDtmned  to  keep  as  many  as  two  or


SERVUS.

<C1ii7iait  tdI.  viL p. 633.)


1040

tbree

tiDcIiDD  of  lUvery  ;  bat  (he  number  of  tliiTei  ma
again  incrcated  by  tbe  invuion  of  tha  bubsria
firiwii  ihe  north,  wbo  not  only  brought  iriih  Ibi
tbeii  own  tiant  who  ware  cbially  Sclari  or  Sdii
niint  (whence  onr  word  Siane),  bat  alio  reduc
many  of  Iha  inliabilmDti  of  the  conqnered  provini
to  the  condilioa  of  (Urea.  But  all  (be  Torio
cluiei  of  alivet  became  merged  in  coutm  of  tii
inlo  tba  Adicripti  Glebae  m  lerfi  of  the  midc
■gea

The  ehirf  nuna  from  wkich  the  Romuu  a
tained  ibrea  hare  basn  pointed  oat  abow.  Und
tba  tepublio  one  of  the  diief  lapplie*  vai  priMnen
taken  in  war,  who  were  eold  by  the  qiue«tore«
(Plant.  O^  ProL  S4.aiidi.3.  1,  2)  witfaanown
on  their  beadi  (tee  above,  p.  1 03S,  b\  and  umally
OD  the  ipot  where  (hey  were  taken,  at  (he  care  af  a
large  number  of  captivei  wai  ineosreaient.  Con-
aequently  ilare-deaten  generally  accompanied  ao
army,  and  frequently  after  a  great  battle  had  been
gained  many  thouiandl  were  aold  at  once,  when  Ihe
llaTe-deolen  obtained  them  fra  a  mere  nothing.  In
the  camp  of  Lumllui  on  one  occaiion  ilaTei  we™
anld  for  four  drachmae  each.  The  ihive  trade  wna
aleo  earned  on  to  a  great  piteat,  and  after  the  fall
of  Corinth  and  Carthage  Delu  vat  the  chief  mart
for  thii  Irafiic.  When  the  Cilician  pintei  had
poHsHion  of  the  MedileiTaaean  ai  many  at  10,000
ilavBs  ue  said  to  bare  been  imported  and  told
there  in  one  day.  (Strab.  tit.  p.  668.)  A  U»e
nnmber  came  from  Thrace  and  the  eoootriea  in  the
north  of  Europe,  but  the  chief  mpply  wai  from
Africa,  and  more  etpMiatly  Aua,  whence  we  fre-
quently read  of  Phiygiani,  Lyciani,  Cappadodana,

The  (rode  of  alandnlera  (utangomtt)  wai  con-
aidered  diareputable,  and  expreaely  diilmguiihed
from  that  of  merchant!  (mangtma  son  mercainnM
«d  temdiaariiapptaaiilm-.D'iif.  60.  tit.]6.  a. 207;
PlanL  I>u.  ii.  'i.  £1)  j  but  it  wai  very  Incrative,
and  great  fortune!  were  frequently  realiied  from  it.
The  ilavtdealer  Thoraniui,  wbo  lived  in  the  time
of  Auguilut.  woa  a  well-known  character.  (Suet.
^W7.  69;  Macrob.  &K.  ii.  4;  Plin. //.  JV.  viL  12.
i.  10.)  Martial  (viiL  13)  mentiona  another  cele-
bralid  aUve-dealrT  in  hit  tune  of  the  name  of  Oar-
giliaoui.

Slaiea  were  unially  aold  by  auction  at  Rome.
They  were  placed  either  on  a  raiaed  alone  {hence
da  lapda  nOat,  Cic  «  Pit.  15  ;  PlauL  BacA.  ii.
7.  1 7),  or  a  raited  pUtform  (cotaifa,  Tiboll.  iL  3.
60;  Peium,  tL  77,  Caaabon,  od  loc\  ao  that
every  one  might  aee  and  handle  them,  even  if  they
did  notwiah  lo  poichate  them.  Purcbaiera  nau-
ally  took  aa*  to  have  them  itript  naked  (Senec
Ep.  HO  ;  Suet  Aug.  69),  for  ilav^calera  had  »-
eonne  to  ai  many  lack*  to  canceal  peiaonal  detedt
aa  (he  hone-jocheya  of  modem  time! ;  lomelimea
purchaaera  called  in  the  advice  of  medical  men.
(Clandian,  n  EtUrop.  L  35, 36.)  Slavea  of  great
beauty  and  tirity  wei*  not  exhibited  to  public
gaie  in  the  common  tUve-tnaritet,  but  were  ahown
to  purehaaen  in  privBta  (annua  labalata  oaiatlia,
Man.  ii.  CO).  Newly  imparted  alavea  had  their
feel  whitened  with  chalk  (Plin.  H.N.  mv.  17.
a.  fie  ;  Ovid.  Am.  L  6.  64),  and  thoie  that  came
from  the  Eaat  had  their  tan  bored  (Jut.  L  104),
which  we  know  waa  a  aign  of  tlavery  amcng  many
Eaitem  natimu. The  alav^markel,  like  all  othei


maAeta,  waa  nnder  the  joriadiction  cf  tie  aedilei,
who  rnade  many  regulation!  by  edictt  t>!^wcting  the
■ale  of  alavea.  The  character  of  the  alave  waa  art
forth  in  a  acioll  {titutma)  hanging  round  hia  neck,
which  waa  a  wammty  to  the  pnrchatei  (OcIL  i*.
2  )  Fnfieri  iv.  fi.  61) :  the  vendor  wa*  bound  to
announce  fairly  all  hit  defecU  (Dig.  31.  tit.  1.  a.  I ;
Hw.  SaL  ii.  3.  284),  and  if  he  ^>a  •  Uae  accomK
had  to  take  him  back  within  an  monthi  frcoi  tlw
time  of  fail  nle  (Dig.3!.  tiL  1.  ..  19.g  6),  or  make
up  to  the  purchojer  what  the  latter  had  Icat  throi^h
obtaining  an  inferior  kind  of  alave  to  what  had
been  wamnted.  (Dig.  19.  tiL  I.  a  13.  §  4;  Cic
lUqf.m.  16,  17,  23.)  The  vendor  might  bow-
ever  nte  gmeial  terma  of  comtnendatioD  withoot
being  bound  la  make  them  joed.  (Dig.  IB.  tit.  I.
a.  43  ;  21.  tit.  1.  a.  19.)  The  chief  poinla  which
the  vendot  had  to  warrant,  waa  the  health  of  the
alave,  e^>Bcially  freedom  from  epilepqr,  lad  that
he  had  not  a  tendency  to  thievery,  mnniog  awar,
or  committinciuieide.  (CicrfaQ^.  iiL  17.)  The
nation  of  a  dave  wat  oentidered  important,  and
hadtobeaetforthbythevendiK.  (Dig.  21.  tiL  1.
a  31.  g21.)  Slavei  told  withrat  any  wanaon-
wore  at  Ihe  time  of  tale  a  as  (p^law)  npoa  tbcB-
head. (GelLvLi.4.) Slavaqr-'-^ ■

Esueiallj  preferred  for  common
■d  served  long  were  conaiderad  artfol  (nl
Ter.  /feirt  V.  I.  16) ;  and  the  ]
pudeuce  of  theae  bom  in  iheii
<iwnnH,Beeabove,p.  1039]  were  prDTcibiaL(rin
procwu,  Hdi.  SaL\i.6.66;  Mart  L  42,  x.  3.)

The  value  of  tlavet  dep«ided  d  coone  npm
their  qualificatlona  ;  but  under  the  empire  the  in-
creue  of  luxury  and  the  camiptton  of  morala  led
punhaaen  to  pay  immente  nimi  few  bfuUhl
ahivca,  or  inch  ai  miniitered  to  the  caprice  or  whia
of  the  purchaaar.  Eunucha  alwart  fetched  a  nrr
highpncc{Plin.».  JV.vilSS.  a.  40],  and  Martial
(iii.  62,  xL  70)  apeaka  of  beautiful  boya  who  aii.
for  at  much  at  100,000  or  200,000  aeatetDea  each
ifi6iL  8>.  id.  and  1770J:  16f.  Ocf.).  A  mona  or
fool  aometimea  lold  for  20,000  aettema.  (Mart.
TiiL  13.)  SUi-a  who  pooeaied  a  kDowledljrt  of
any  art  which  might  bring  in  profit  to  their  owvar^
alio  told  for  a  la^  lum.  Tbna  litcnuy  bi^  and
doctora  frequently  fetched  a  high  price  (SoM.  di
la.  Oram. ;  Flia  H.  N.  viL  39.  a  40),  and  alao
^Bve!  fitted  for  the  itage,  aa  we  tee  troa  Ciccn**
apeech  on  behalf  of  Q.  Rctdua.  Female  elavca
who  might  bring  in  gain  to  their  maitera  by  pna-
titution  wete  alio  dear :  tometiDiet  GO  minae  wtm
|»id  for  a  girl  of  thia  kind.  (Plant.  Pen.  ir.  4.
'  13.)  Five  hundred  drachmae  (pcrit^  at  that
ime  about  ISL)  aeen  to  have  been  a  hk  fna  br
,  good  ordinary  alave  in  (he  time  of  Ilofacab  (Sal.
i.  7. 43.)  In  the  fourth  centary  a  alan  rafiaWn
of  bearing  armi  waa  valaed  at  2S  aolidi  or  ancei,
lAuauM,  p.  la2,a.]  (Cod.  Theod.  7.  tit  H  a.
13.]  In  the  lime  of  Juttinian  the  legal  ilnatii»
-'  -'-ivet  waa  aa  foUowa ;  commoi  davtt,  botk
and  female,  wtrt  valned  at  20  aoUdl  •
piece,  and  under  ten  yotra  ef  age  it  half  that
turn  ;  if  they  were  arUficeii,  they  wifa  wnctb  30
tolidi,  if  natarii  60,  if  medical  men  or  midwm*
60  ;  eunncht  under  ten  yean  of  age  ven  vattk
30  lolidi,  above  that  age  £0,  and  if  they  wna
artificcra  alao,  o  much  at  70.  (Cod.  6.  tit  H,
I.  3.)  Female  tlavea,  unleti  pmaajed  of  peneoa]
attiactiona,  wen  geiierallj  cheaper  than  naW
'  indied  iait«tc«*  (absot  iL)  wen  ihoqgfct  toa


BVRYVS.

end  for  *  alBre  giri  of  indjfiiniit  cbanclci  in  tbe
time  of  MkRial  (vi,  66)  ;  and  two  auni  or  lolidi
wen  not  ctnuidend  »  Idv  ■  price  for  a  iUtb  gitt
(imBUla)  in  the  tim«  of  HadriBn  u  to  occuion
doubt  of  her  baring  cona  hoaa^j  into  the  iianda
orthe  Tcndor.  (Diy.  *7.  tiL2.  «.  76.)  We  haT*
teea  tliat  in  th«  time  of  Juitinian  tlie  lesal  lalue
of  female  ikm  vraM  equal  to  (hat  of  malei ;  thii
may  pnbablj  luTa  truen  from  ths  ciicumitanca
thai  the  nip|il;  of  lUre*  «u  not  K>  abundant  then
ai  Bl  earlier  lunn,  and  that  therefore  reeouiu  wai
bad  to  propagation  for  koepins  np  tha  nnmber  of
ilavn.  But  under  the  rcpublie  and  in  the  esrlj
timet  of  the  empire  Ihia  <ivu  done  to  a  Terj  limited
eitent,  M  it  was  tbond  cheapn  to  purcuaa  than
to  breed  llaTea,

SlaTH  wen  divided  into  man7  Tarioni  diiice :
the  iinl  diiiiion  wu  into  public  or  prirata.  Tb*
fanner  belonged  to  Ihe  itate  and  public  bodies,
and  their  condition  wai  preferable  to  that  of  the
anmnoo  ihiTa.  Tbej  were  leu  liable  to  be  toid,
and  ondtr  lea  control  than  ordinal;  ilarei :  thtj
otao  powraied  the  pririlege  of  the  teilameQli  Actio
to  the  amount  of  one  half  of  tbeir  property  (lee
■bare,  p.  1039,  a),  which  ihowi  that  iho;  were  re-
garded in  a  different  light  fnnn  other  ilaTe*.  Sci-
pio,  therefore,  on  the  taking  of  Non  Carthago,
pnnniied  2000  aitixani,  who  had  been  taken  pri-
aonen  and  wm  coaieqnently  liable  to  ha  uld  ai
cmnmon  ilaiei,  that  ther  •bould  become  public
■biT«  of  the  Roman  people,  with  a  hope  of  ipeedy

iirn.  47.)  Public  ilaTei  wen  employed  to  take
cam  of  the  public  bnildiDgi  (compara  Tacit.  Hat.
i.  43),  and  to  attend  upon  magiitiate*  and  prieeU.
Thna  the  Aedilei  and  Quositon  had  great  nnmbera
of  public  (lares  at  iheir  command  (Qe!L  liii.  13),
aa  had  alio  the  TriumTiii  Noetumi,  who  employed
them  to  eituigoiih  fiiei  by  night  (IKg.  !■  tiL  IS,
a.  I.)  They  were  alto  employed  ai  licton,  jailora,
eiecationen,  mtfnnen,  &c  (Camp.  Ocaioer,  Dt
Swrit  Bomimanai  publicii,  Berlin,  1U4.)

A  body  of  alBTei  belonging  to  one  penon  vu
called  /inaitia,  but  two  weni  not  eoniidered  infli-
cient  to  conatinite  %  JmOut.  (Dig.  50.  tit  IB.
t,  40.)  Private  ilaio  were  divided  into  urban
<  j^ni/u  viaa')  and  rutic  (.jimiilia  nutist)  )  but
tha  name  of  urtian  wat  given  to  thoas  ilarea  who
•erved  in  die  villa  or  country  midence  aa  well  aa
in  tha  town  hojue ;  to  that  the  wordi  uiton  and
raatio  rather  ehancteriied  the  nature  of  their  oc-
cupadone  than  tha  place  where  they  lervod.  (  Z7r-
Aofld  ftvtdiia  et  natiea  non  /oco,  md  ffenfrv  ditiui-
guitar.  Dig.  fiO,  tit  16.  L  166.)  The  familia
nrtana  coiQd  therefbn  accompany  their  maater  to
hit  villa  without  being  called  ruitica  on  account  of
their  remaining  in  the  country.  When  there  warn
a  large  number  of  ilaTet  in  one  houae,  they  were
frequently  divided  into  decuriaa  (Petron.  47) ;  but
indepradent  of  thi)  diviiion  they  wets  arranged  in
certain  daatei,  which  held  a  higher  or  a  lower  nmk
according  to  the  nature  of  their  occupalion.  Theie
daaiet  are  r  Onfiaam,  Fu^rtt,  sitdimliiii,  and
QmOH-Qtaia  (Dig.  47.  til.  10.  i.  15),  but  it  ii
dunblful  whethei  Ihe  LiUrati  or  literaty  sla'ca
were  included  in  any  of  theia  claaiei.  ThoK
called  Vicarii  are  ipoken  of  above  (p.  1037,  b).

Ordhara  acem  to  have  been  thoae  davet  who
had  the  lUperintendence  of  certain  porti  of  the
houukeepiug.  They  were  alwnyt  chosen  from
thwr  wbo  had  tha  coDfidence  rf  their  maiter,  and


8ERTUS.  IWl

they  generally  had  certain  slaves  under  them. To


1  the  former  aie  almost

They  wen  stewaidi  or

baili&. (Colum.  t  7,  8 ;  Plin.  Ep.  m.  19  ;  Cic.  ad

■  ■  li.  1 ;  Suet  Ca/i.  12,  Fmi.  22.) Tothesame

I  also  belong  the  slaves  who  had  the  charge  of

the  different  stores,  and  who  correspond  to  our

booiekeepen  and  fauden ;  they  are  called  eal'iiru,

vmiy  condiy  prvamiom  pm,  Ac [Cxll^.J

Fa^nrat  included  the  great  body  of  daves  in  a

nie  who  had  to  attend  to  soy  particutor  duty  in

the  house,  and  to  minister  to  the  domestie  wants

As  thoa  were  distinct  slaves  or

For  almost  every  department  of

household  economy,  as  bakers  (futam),  cooks

{eogui),  confectionets  {daidaTii),  ficUat  (lohuii-

tarii),  &c  it  is  nnnecestary  to  meDtion  these  TDore

particularty. This  claH  also  Included  the  porter*

(Oritoni),  the  bed-chamber  slava  [CuBICCLiRrl],

the  litter- bearera  (Italiatrn)  [LiCTVU],  and  all

personal  attendants  of  any  kind.

Mediattmi. [HlDIASTlNI.]

Quaia-Qiialet  are  only  mentioned  in  the  Digest

(L  c),  and  appear  to  have  been  the  lowest  dais  of

■laves,  but  in  what  respects  they  diffisred  from  the

" '■ tini  is  doubtfhl :  Becker  (Coflw,  vol  i.  p.

lagines  they  may  have  been  a  kmd  of  ilsvee,

quaUqMoii  eonditione  vivada,  which  however  doe*

■"it  give  us  any  idea  of  their  duties  or  oCcnpstioni.

Littrati,  literary  slaves,  were  nied  for  voiioui

irpoies  \>j  their  nuuten,  either  as  readers  [An«-

MANuiNBis],  Ae^  Com^ela  Utta  of  all  ^e
duties  performed  by  slaves  ate  given  in  the  worki
"  "'" ~  ~ Popma,  and  Blair,  referred  to  at  the

slaves  of  conree  varied  greatly
according  to  the  diipoattioo  of  their  nuuten,  but
they  appear  upon  die  whole  to  have  been  treated
irith  greater  severity  and  cruelty  than  among  the
Atheniana  Originally  the  maater  could  use  dis
bUvo  as  he  pleased:  nnder  the  republic  the  law
does  not  seem  to  have  protected  the  person  or  life
of  the  slave  at  all,  but  the  cruelty  of  nuiten  waa
to  some  extent  restrained  under  the  eminre,  si  haa
been  slated  above  (p.  103G,b).  The  generid  treat-
ment of  slavey  however,  was  pnbably  little  a^ctcd
by  legislative  enactments.  In  early  timci,  when
tha  number  of  slaves  was  small,  they  were  treated
with  more  indulgence,  and  more  like  members  of
the  fiunily:  they  joined  tbeir  maslen  in  offering
up  prayers  and  thank^vings  to  the  gods  (Hor.  g^.
ii.  1.  142),  and  partook  of  their  meals  in  common
with  dieir  masters  (Plut  CWiof.  S4),  though  not
at  the  same  table  with  them,  but  upon  benches
(uiadlia)  placed  at  the  foot  of  the  iectua.  But
with  the  increase  of  numbers  and  of  loinry  ainimg
masleia,  the  ancient  simplicity  of  mannen  irai
changed :  a  certain  4jiiantity  of  food  was  allowed
them  ((finiauaia.in'  daiKiumn),  which  was  granted
to  them  either  monthly  (nwutnam,  Phrat  SUA.
i.  2.  3),  or  daily  (dianum,  Hor.  Ep.  i.  14.  41  ;
Mart.  iL  lOU).  Their  chief  food  was  the  com,
called  fiir,  of  which  either  four  or  Eve  modii  wera
granted  them  a  month  (Donat  n  TVr.  Pibm.  I  I.
9;  lien.  Ep.W),  or  one  Roman  pound  (fibn)  a  day.
(Hor.5at.i.6.69.)  Tbi^y  also  obtained  an  allowance
of  salt  and  oil :  Cato  (A.  R.  bK)  allowed  his  sUvoa
a  tcxtarini  of  oil  a  month  and  ■  BwdiM  of  salt  a


dose  of  thia  ai


ltM2  SSRVUS.

jttt.  The?  tin  got  ■  uibII  qsantitj'  of  irina  yiiih
an  additionBl  allowsiics  on  iha  SBtamalis  and
ConipitiLlia  <CbUi,  R.  R.  £7),  and  lometime*  fruit,
but  Kldom  vggetablet  Butchei'i  meat  ieein>  to
have  beta  budly  ever  given  them.

Under  the  republic  thef  ireie  not  allowed  to
serve  in  the  aimj,  though  aftei  the  botlJe  of  Can-

eOOO  >lava  were  purchued  by  the  itate  for  the
annj,  and  nil>Mi)neiitlj  munmiCted  on  aeooont  of
their  bravery. (Lit.  iiiL  5?,  oiv.  14—16.)

The  offence!  of  ilavee  vere  pimiahed  with
teverily  and  ^cqaently  tlw  utmoit  borbefilj.  Ono
of  the  mildeet  puniibmeuu  wai  the  removal  ftom
the  bniilia  uibwia  to  ths  nutica,  where  ihej  were
obliged  lo  work  in  chaini  or  fettsTL  ( PknC.  Mad.
i.  1.  Ifl ;  Ter.  Ftam.  iL  1.  20.)  They  were  fto-
queasy  beAten  with  itiEke  or  uourgod  with  the
whip  (of  which  an  uxount  ia  given  under  FiA-
oHuu),  bullhaie  wore  inch  every -day  puniahmeata,
that  many  slave)  eeaaed  almnat  W  care  for  them  :
Ihuf  Chryulut  nya  (PlauL  Baeddd.  iL  S.  131),
"Si  ill!  aunt  viigae niti,  almiht  tet^[iiai  aM  domi."

Rnnaway  ilavee  (.fl^iiiw)  and  liieve.  (JtiTa)
were  branded  on  the  fbiehesd  with  a  murk  (^t^Tiu),
whence  they  an  laid  to  be  naiaH  or  mjcripA'.
(Mart.  riii.  7S.  9.)  Slai«  were  alio  puuiahed  by
being  hung  up  by  their  hands  with  weighta  eni-

rded  lo  their  feet  (PlaaL  Aiim.  ii.  2.  37,  36),  or
being  WDt  to  work  in  the  Ergaittdnm  or  Piatri-
num,  [EnOASTULuM  ;  Mola].  The  carrying  of
the  furca  wai  a  very  common  mode  of  pimiehment
[FURCA.]  The  toilet  of  the  Roman  Udia  was  a
dji!iidful  oideoJ  to  the  female  alavea,  who  were  often
barborouily  punuhed  by  their  mislreuei  for  the
■lighteit  miitaka  in  the  arrangement  of  the  hair  or
apartof  thedrcH.  (Ovid.  .dm.  i.  14. 15,  .dr.  ^hl
ill.  235;  MarL  il.  66;  Jar.  vi.  49S,  &c.)

Maetera  might  work  their  ilavei  a*  many  houra
in  the  dayai  they  pleased,butihty  usually  allowed
them  halidiya  on  the  public  featiiaU.  At  the  fca-
tival  of  Sntumus  in  porbcnUr,  aptcial  indulgences
were  granted  to  all  alavea,  of  which  an  account  is
given  under  Saturnalia.

There  was  no  diatinctive  dreu  for  ilavei.  It
wu  imco  proposed  in  the  senate  to  give  slaves  a
distinctive  {ostuma,  but  it  was  rejected  aince  it
was  conaidered  dangerous  to  ahow  them  their
nomber.  (Sen.  ils  CVsn.  u  24.)  Male  slaves  were
not  allowed  to  wear  the  toga  er  bulla,  nor  females
the  alola,  but  otherwise  they  were  dressed  nearly
in  the  lame  way  as  poor  people,  in  clothes  of  a  dark
colaur  {piiUali)  and  slippen  {cr^idat).  (_Vtilii
urviliM,  Cic  w  Pit.  311.)

The  rights  of  burial,  however,  were  not  denied
to  slaves,  for  as  the  Romans  regarded  slavery  as  an
institution  of  society,  death  was  coHsideied  to  put
an  end  to  tho  distinclioH  between  aiaves  and  free-
men. Slaves  were  aDmetiroes  even  buried  with
their  mailers,  and  we  £nd  bnenl  inscriptioni  ad-
dresaed  to  the  Dii  Manes  of  ilavei  (Dii  MtmHnu).
llsecma  lo  have  been  considered  a  duty  foramasler
to  bury  hia  alave,  aince  we  find  that  a  person,  who
buried  the  skre  of  another,  had  a  rigiil  of  action
agninat  the  master  for  the  eijKOta  of  the  fiineraL
(Dig.  11.  tt  7.  s.  31.)  In  1726  the  burial  vaults
of  ue  slaves  belonging  to  Augustua  snd  Livia  were
discovered  nest  ^e  Via  Appia,  where  num


been  also  diseonnd  in  th«

neighbourhood  of  Ram&

(Pignorius,  da  Stnit  tt  asms  tpad  Fttuwt
Mauteriu  ;  Vvfitti^  dt  Operit  Su  uui  ass  /  Blair,
AnEnpiirji  iUo  &t  Statt  qf  Shwrji  amcmg^  lit
Romoni,  Edinbiugh,  1633;  B«ker,  (Miat,  nd.  L
p.  109.  ftc)

SESCUNX. [Aa,  p.  140,  h.1

SESQUIPLA'RES  and  SESQUIPLATllL
[Ex<RC.rDa,p.S09,a.]

SESTE'BTIUM,  a  place  outside  Rome,  Ht-
tant  two  Roman  milea  aiid  a  half  (wbeoca  tba
name)  &am  the  Esquilina  gate,  wImr  alavea  ad
malcfitctora  of  the  loweat  claaa  were  pat  to  dratli
(ScboL  ad  Hot.  Epod.  B  ;  PluL  Ga0.  2B ;  a  iocn
(ks.  Sat4rtiiia.)  sernUu  piieii  mp  an'lm.  Tub.
Ann.  IV.  60).

SESTE'RTIUS,  a  Boffitti  coin,  which  (nperiy
belonged  to  the  silver  coinage,  in  which  it  was  aie-
founh  of  the  denannt,  and  ihen&te  equal  to  SJ
asses.  Hence  the  nanu,  whkh  ia  an  abbtevBtiisi
of  ssniw  fsAiti  (sc  luniiiM),  the  Rocnan  msde  of
eipressing  2^.  (Vaira,  .t.  i^  v.  1 73,  ed.  MGUer ;
Feshj.,  ».e.;  Plin.AT.A'.  miii  3.1.13.)  The
word  JViunmiu  is  often  erpressed  with  seifcrtas,
and  oftfo  it  stands  alone,  meaning  se^erlat.

Hence  the  symbol  H  S  or  I  I  S,  which  is  >«d
to  deaignate  (he  sestertius.  It  itanda  either  te
L  L  S  (Libra  Libra  H  Soku),  or  fbt  II  S,  the  Iwo
I^  merely  forming  the  nnnteial  two  (sc^  osiai  <c
Wrra»),  and  the  whole  beiog  in  either  eaae  equi-
valent to  rfi^nxJiM  A  ssaui.  (Priadan,^  i>oarf(r.
p.  1347  ;  FeaWs,  p.  347,  Miiller.)

When  the  as  was  redjiced  to  half  an  onDce,  and
the  number  of  aoea  in  the  denariB*  wna  aaade
liiteen  instead  of  ten  [As,  Dihauub],  the  lo-
tertiua  was  still  ^  of  the  denarius,  and  theveCiTe
contained  ns longer  2|,  but  4  asses.  Tbeoldrerk-
oning  of  1 0  asses  to  the  deuangs  was  kept,  how-
ever, in  paying  the  troops.  (Plin.  nxiiL  3.  s.  H)
After  this  change  the  eeslertins  was  aiaed  in  braaa
as  well  as  in  silver  ;  the  melal  used  fw  it  was  that
called  ORicHALCuif,  which  «aa  much  finer  than
the  common  Ais,  of  which  the  iMea  woe  laadc.
(Plin.ff.Ar.iiiiT.  2.)

The  sum  of  1000  tatarlii  was  called  intirtitm.
This  was  also  denoted  by  the  aymbol  H  S,  lb*
obvious  explanation  of  which  is  - 1 1  S  (2^)  mil-
lia  ; "  bnt  Ornnovius  nndentonds  it  a*  2^  povnda
of  silver  {aataiivK  pomdiu  ar^ati),  which  be  cosh
aiders  lo  have  been  worth  originally  1 000  seatenii,
and  therefore  to  have  represented  this  valoe  eve*
after,  (i'ee.  Fet.  I  4,  U.)  The  mitrtimm  nt  al-
ways a  sum  of  money,  never  a  osei  ,■  the  <■»  nied

According  to  the  value  we  hare  assigned  to  the
DsNASifa,  np  to  ths  time  of  Angnslos,  we  have
£  t. d.frj*k.
s  -0 0 3 -4
m-B  17 I
after  the  reign  of  Angustns

0 0 1  3'5
7  16 B

Taking  the  earlier  value  at  (ha  sssfcrlsM,  and
!glecting  the  half  brthino,  we  have  1  sutartun
■  two-pence,  6  HSterlii  ••  I  ahiltmg,  and  1 20  ta-
rtii  ™  \l.  storiing. Hence  we  get  the  fblCewing


SESTERTIUS.
fomdt  HbO^  daida  ly  1^0  )  owf  aimatf  Oe  r
milt  if  addiaff  to  it  On  tmtitmt  aitaimd  if  dhidii
tk  Df^uol  «*{«•  ly  1 930  :  fa -S  of  a  feithiag

Tha  MMcflrai  wM  tha  daioanDUion  of  bmm.
•buist  >Im;i ued  in  Teekoning eonudontbU


Snmi  bf  low  1  two  le^Brtti  wers  ezpreiMd  h y  the

Dumml  ftdjeGtiva  joined  with  either  of  then  fomu.

The  lum  of  1000  Kilenii  =  mSb  tatertii  =

H  mttertimm  (la  talirtionim)  =  M  nnni'  =  M

M  ntetiini  iwaimiin  =  mialimm.  Thete  fonni
are  uied  with  the  numerml  adjectivet  below  1000,
far  nmu  between  1000  and  l.OOO.OOO  Hriertii:
•ometimea  nuVfia  ii  need  iiutead  o(  mittrlia  :  lome-
tlmei  both  wordi  ore  omitted  :  nmetimei  aiinRiin
or  (utertiut  it  added.  Fi7  eiBUipIe,  600,000
antenii  ^  toemla  leMtiia  ss  mmbkCk  mSlia  ^
tneaita  ^  jenea^  aatertia  ■wwnim.

For  mmi  of  1  thouuid  Kiitrtia  (u  i.  a  million
■mfti  lii)  and  apwardi,  the  Dmneral  adTerba  in  >u
(dtdtM,  mmbdet,  eicuu,  <te.)  an  uxd,  wilh  wbjch
the  vordi  cnMiu  tuiUia  (a  hundred  thoitnnd)
mut  be  nndentood  With  ibeM  adTerbi  the
nenier  lingnlar  KikrAwa  ii  joined  in  the  ca*e  re-
quired by  the  conrtiuction.  (Nepoa,  All.  liv.  2,
giTe*  antertui  atia  and  aoiiTltD  eoiftei.) Thua,


f«  b'«  a  lamdred  Hiommd  tatenii  =  1,000,000
acMtnii  =  1 000  wXfflia .- luOu)  U  B  =  ntUim  «■-
loM  MiiliKi  auttrfiaM  =  a  Ihouaand  tiuica  one  hun-
died  thotund  uMotii  =  100,000,000  latertii  =
100,000  Matntia.  When  an  amount  ia  deuribed
bj  more  than  one  of  tfaeae  adrerba  in  ix,  they  miut
" ''.e  larger  numeral  atandj  firat,
u  Dndler  ia  Srat ;  caie  how-
il  to  reckon  the  oattaa  miUia
I  undcrttood,  more  than  once  in  tha  whole
Thua,  Sueloniu(£M(n>.lDl)liiuni^Kj
a  for  150,000  lotertia,  iL  e.  1 00,000,000


be  added  toother  if  the  larger  m
but  nin1ti[]hed  when  the  Dnaller


+  S0,0(


=  liO,(10'


diataly  after  quattnietia  miUiat  for  1,400,000  lea-
tertia, !'.<.  14  X  1000 -t-100,000(=l, 400,000,000)
•niertiL  A  rariety  wia  allowed  in  iheaa  formi :
thua  Cicero  luea  d/^a  d  otIiHi/tiita  miliia  for  ISOO
amettia,  ■.«.  1,000,000  4-800,000  leilartii,  and
^milerdeda  fur  1400  Kitertio,  I.  a. U  x  100,000

When  the  nnmbera  are  written  in  cypher,  it  ia
often  difficult  to  know  whether  aatertii  or  tatertia
■ra  meant.  A  dii^nction  ia  aometimei  made  by  a
line  placed  ovar  the  numeral  when  watgrtia  are  in-
toidcd,  or  in  other  words,  when  the  numaial  ia  an
■dierbioMi. Thai:  —

H&  H.C=  1100  aeatertii,  bat

IIS.  M.C  =  HS  miltJea  centiea

=  110,000  aealenia  =  110,000,000
■eatertii.

Wuna  (p.  34)  girea  the  following  mle :  When
the  nnmbeta  an  divided  into  three  daaaea  by
poiata,  the  ^igh^hand  dinaion  indicatai  unita,  the
aeoind  thoumnda,  ihs  third  hnndnda  of  thouiazida.
Tbua, III. Xn.DCss 300,000  4-  12,000  4-  600  =
312,600  latertii.  But  Ibeae  diitincdona  an  by
\  itricljv  abaerred  in  the  manuKrinla.

a,  tha


SIBYLLTNI  LIBRI  104t

acateithia  la  qi)ilied  to  othac  kinda  of  madsituda,
a.E.iM>>sto«Hliir2tfaet.


genaine,  a  &ct  which  n^  admit  of  doubt

&>(ma  ia  aometinita  naed  ai  an  Engliah  word.

If  u,  it  DDght  to  ba  naed  only  ai  the  tnnalation  of

leiterftBi,  never  of  anMrb'iPM.  [P.  S.]

SEVIR. [EoDiTia,  p.  47S,  a ;  AuounALI^

p.  180,  b.1

SEX  SUFFRA'GIA. [Equii™.]

SEXATRUS. [QnnfQDATBDB.]

8EXTANS. [As,  p.  140,  b.]

SEXTAOilUS,  a  Uoman  Arj  and  liquid  meft-
anre,  which  may  be  coniidBwi  one  of  the  principal
meaaarea  in  the  Roman  ayitem,  and  tha  erauMC^f
point  between  it  and  that  of  the  Oreaha,  Icr  it  wu
squal  to  tha  {^o~n|i  of  the  latter  j  and  there  <an
be  little  doubt  that  the  iimp  waa  oat  on  viginal
Greek  meninre,  but  that  ths  ward  waa  intioducod


into  tha  Omk  iritam

pprpote  of  ea  tablial


lyitam  from  th
iahingaunitofaj


itnt  [Qdid-

tha  Greek  ayitem  it  was  ooe-

:tb  of  tha  daat. It  wai  dirided,  in  the  miat

uuier  aa  the  Aa,  into  paita  named  aaAri,  tom-

bau,  gHadnmt,  Irimt,  fSHcnz,  •nuw,  dx. The

nncia,  or  twelfth  port  of  the  seitariui,  was  tha

fmdriMa  threa,  ita  tram  haz,  ila  jiuaafwr
fife,  &c  (Wnrra,  dt  Poad.  &e,  p.  1 18,  comp.  tha
Table*.)  [P.S.J

SKOCTULA,  the  aiith  part  of  the  awiii,  «M
e  amaUtit  denomination  of  money  in  oae  among
e  Romana.  (Vairo,  L.£.  t.  171,  ed.  MUller])
waa  alio  applied,  like  tha  nnda,  to  other  kinda
mapiiwde. [  0  NCi  A.]  (P.  S.J

SIBYLLI'NI  LIBRI.  Theae  booki  aie  >ud
have  been  obtained  in  the  reign  of  Tarquinina
riacoa,  or  according  to  other  accoonia  in  that  of
Tarquiniui  Superbna,  when  a  Sibyl  (2J<ijUa),  w
'  ~iphetic  woman,  preaented  hcraalf  before  the  king,
1  offered  nine  booka  for  aale.  Upon  the  king
tiaing  to  punhaie  them  ihe  want  and  burnt
three,  azid  then  returned  and  demanded  the  mnw
~>r  the  remaining  lix  aa  ahe  bad  done  for  tha
The  king  again  refnaed  to  purchaaa  them,
wbercapon  ihe  burnt  three  more  and  demanded  the
aame  lam  for  the  remaining  three,  aa  ahe  had  done  al
firat  for  the  tiioa :  tha  king*i  cnriotitj  now  became
excited,  ao  that  he  pnrchaaed  the  hooka,  and  then
the  Sibyl  vaniihed.  {Dionyi.  i».  82  j  Vairo,  m.
Lxbad.  I  6  j  OdI.  L  19  ;  Plin.  H.N.  ini.  37 i
reapecting  the  ditlereot  Sibyls  mentioned  by  an-
cient writeraBeeDiviNATio,p.4l6,b.)  These  bookl
wen  probably  written  in  Greek,  aa  the  later  one*
undoubtedly  were,  and  if  ao  cootequenlly  cama
from  a  Greek  source,  though  it  it  donbtftil  from
what  quarter :  Niebuhr  {fiat,  cf  Unit,  tdL  i.  p.
A06)  lapposes  them  to  hare  come  from  Ionia,  but
they  were  more  probably  denied  (iom  Cnmaa  in
Campania.  (Gtittling,  OtkA.  dtr  Hint.  jKoutn.  p.
SIS.)  They  were  kept  in  a  atone  chest  nnd^
gnond  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  CB|HtolinDa,  undw
the  custody  of  cerEain  offlcera,  at  urtt  only  two  in
number,  but  oAerwarda  incresaed  tncceasiTely  to
ten  and  fifteen,  of  whom  an  account  ta  givea  onder
"  I,  p.  307,  a. Tha  public  were  not  ai-


104*  SIBYLLINI  LIBRT.

Gc  di  Din.  !.  iS  ;  L.W.  nil  £7).  Tbcf  wen
contnlted  in  tbf  oat  of  gnndigiis  and  calamitU'i.
but  itudlfficDll  touceitemwhethei  the;  contained
predictioni,  or  merely  dirertioiu  u  to  wh»t  WM  to
be  done  for  coDcilintin^  or  appeving  the  godi,  in
coiuequenca  of  the  mjilery  wiiich  enveloped  them
Jiom  the  time  thai  one  of  their  keepen  wni  pat  to
death  for  diTidciiiA  their  Kcreta.  (Dionji.  Lb.;
Valer.  Max.  i.  1.  I  IS.)  Niebukr  remarki  (mm
the  initancei  in  Lirf,  that  the  original  hooka  were
not  connilted,  u  the  Greek  oiacTei  vere,  for  the
pnrpaM  of  gettbg  light  concerning;  fiitura  event)  ;
bnt  to  laam  what  ironhip  wu  required  by  the
god>,  when  Ihey  bad  manifcited  their  wrath  by
national  cklanitiet  or  prodigiei.  Accordingly  we
find  that  the  inttniction  they  give  ii  in  the  aune

Suit ;  pmcrihing  what  hcDOiir  vu  to  be  paid  to
e  deitiei  already  recognized,  or  wlial  nev  ouct
wer«  to  be  imported  irom  abroad^  They  were  pro-
bably written  on  palm-leavei  (Serv.  ad  Fin;.  Am.


I  7*).  a


ilikely  th


:  the


leavet  of  the  Cumaean  Sihjl  deacribed  by  Virgil
trera  deugned  ai  an  alluiion  to  the  form  of  the
Sibylline  hooka.  Their  natuie  being  nch,  Niebohr
tuppOH)  that  they  ncn  referred  to  in  the  same
way  ai  EuCern  natiotu  refer  to  the  Koran  and  to
Hafia :  they  did  not  louch  for  a  paua^  and  apply
it,  but  probably  only  ihaScd  the  pabu  leavca  and
then  drew  one.

When  (he  temple  of  Jupiter  Capilolinna  wai
bnml  in  B.  c  82,  the  Sibylline  book*  pcriihed  in
the  fire  ;  and  in  order  to  reitore  them,  anbaaeadors
were  lenl  to  vaiioui  towna  in  Italy,  Qiectf,  and
Aaia  Minor,  to  make  hah  collection!,  wbich  on
the  rebnilding  of  the  temple  were  dcpoeited  in  the
fame  place  that  the  former  had  occupied.  (Dionya
I,  c.)  Bnt  Bi  a  great  many  prophetic  hooka,  many
of  them  pretending  to  be  Sibylline  oraclca,  had  got
into  general  circulation  at  Rome,  AuguMua  com-
manded that  all  auch  books  should  be  delivsed  np
to  the  praetor  urbanns  by  a  certain  day  and  bnmt,
and  that  in  future  none  shonid  be  kept  by  any
private  person.  More  than  2IKI0  prophetic  books
were  thm  delivered  np  and  burnt,  and  tboae  which
were  considered  genuine  and  were  in  the  custody
ef  the  state  were  deposited  in  two  gilt  caae<  at
the  base  of  the  (Istue  of  Apollo,  in  the  temple  of
that  god  on  the  Palatine,  and  were  enCniated  aa
before  to  the  QuindecemrL  (Suet  .Jvf.  31  j  Tacit.
Ann,  vi.  12.)  The  writing  of  those  belonging  to
the  ttatc  bad  laded  by  time,  and  Augusliu  com-
manded the  priests  to  write  them  over  again.
(Dion  Om  liv.  1 7.)  A  fr«h  eiaraination  of  the
Sibylline  books  was  again  made  by  Tiberius,  and
many  rejected,  which  were  coosidered  spurioni.
(DioR  Casa  Mi.  18.)  A  lew  yean  aftem-ards,
also  in  the  reign  of  Tibrriua,  it  was  proposed  to
add  a  new  volume  of  SibylliDe  oracle*  to  the  re-
ceived collection. (Tacit ;,«.)

The  Chriitian  wrilen  freqnently  appeal  to  the
Sibylline  verse»  as  containing  prophecies  of  the
Meuiah ;  but  these  in  moat  caaes  are  clearly
forgerioa.  A  complete  collection  of  Sibylline  ora-
cles was  published  by  Oa1beaa,AnuL  lfiS9:  fng-
mrnta  ofthem  have  also  been  published  by  Mai,
MilBnlB17,andStmTe,  Regiomont  1818.  (Corn-
Fare Heidbreede, da SiMlii Dutrtat,  BecoL

ia3£.)

The  Sibylline  booki  were  also  called  Fiita  Sfiyf.
ant  (CIc  Cal  iii.  4),  aod  Litri  Fataki.  (Liv.  v.
.IG,  xiiL  67.) Tbow  that  mm  collacted  after


SIONA  HILITARIA.
the  burning  of  the  temple  on  the  C^lol,  -wnn

undoubtedly  irritten  m  Greek  versea,  and  were
acrostic*  iiutpo^nx'^t  ^ic  d*  On.  ii.  51 ;  Dionya,
L  0.).  Along  with  the  Sibylline  books  wen  pre-
KTved  under  the  guard  of  the  same  officer*  tbe
booka  of  the  two  prophetic  brothoa,  the  Maitii
(Serv.  ad  Firg.  Ata.  vi.  72 ;  Cic  de  Die.  i.  *Q,
ii.  £5),  the  Etniacan  propheciea  of  the  njmph
Bygoe,  and  those  of  Albmia  or  Albuiua  of  Tibor.
(Lnctant  L  6.)  Those  of  the  Mardi,  lahich  had
not  been  placed  there  at  the  time  of  the  battle  of

them  have  come  down  to  HI  in  Livy  (iit.12)  and
Macrobius  {Sal.  L  17).  See  Nlebuhr,  vdL  i.  p.
G07  ;  Gdllling,  Gad.  d.  RSnt.  SlaaiiB.  p.  213  t
Hartmig,  Die  Rtl^ion  d.  Rimer,  voL  L  p.  1 23,  tu.

SlCA,d>«.  StCILA,  whence  the  English  adit,
and  SICILICULA  (Plaut.  WaJ.  iv.  4.  125),  a
curved  dagger,  adapted  by  its  fbrm  to  be  concealed
unds  the  dothcs,  and  thercfote  carried  by  nbbm
and  murderers  [AciNaciB.]  (Cic  CU.  iiL  3.}
Sica  may  be  translated  a  taaatar  to  diatingnisli
it  from  PuGio,  which  denoted  a  da^er  (^  tbe
common  kind.  Siea-rin,  though  pcop^y  meaning
one  wbs  murdered  with  the  aica,  was  applied  v>
mnrdcrert  in  generaL  (Quintil.  i.  i.  §  12.)  llenca
the  forma  de  licariit  and  inter  nmrus  were  naed  in
the  criminal  courts  in  reference  to  murder,  Tbof
judicium  inUf  ftoanoi,  "a  trial  for  murder"  (Cic
pro  RoK.5)  \  dtfsnd^n  inttr  licortoa,  "to  defend
agmnsl  a.  charge  of  murder  "  {PiiL  ii.  4 ). [J.  T.]

SICA'RIUS.  [Sica;LbxCoknki.ia,pl687.]

SICILICUS, [ScauFULtiM  j  n«cu,]

SIGILLA-RIA. [SiruaNiLix]

SIGMA. [MaNSi.]

SIONA  MIUTA'RIA  (•nuiCa,  nataiat),
mQitory  ensigns  or  standards.  The  most  andcDt
standard  employed  by  the  Ramans  is  said  to  hava
been  a  handiul  of  straw  fixed  to  the  top  itf  a  qiear
or  pole.  Henco  the  company  of  mldiera,  belonging
to  it,  was  called  il/iwi)iiifu.  [Exancm's,  p.
£00,  b.]  The  bundle  of  hay  or  fem  was  lona  suc-
ceeded by  the  figures  of  animals,  of  which  Flinj
(H.N.x.  i.  t.  G)  enumerates  five,  via.  the  eagle,
the  wolf,  the  minotanr  (Feslus,  i,  b.  Mimtiimr.%
the  horse,  and  the  boar.  In  the  second  consulship
of  Harius,  B.  c  104,  the  four  quadrupeds  were  no-
tircly  laid  aside  as  standards,  the  eagle  being  alono
retained.  It  was  made  of  silver,  or  bronac,  arid
wiili  expanded  wings,  but  was  probably  of  a  small
size,  unce  a  standard-bearer  [siffni/fr)  unds*  Julioa
Cocsar  is  said  in  cirxrumstancea  of  danger  to  have
wrenched  the  eagle  from  its  itaff  and  concealed  it
in  the  folds  of  his  girdle. (Flor.  iv.  VL)

Under  the  Utei  emperors  the  eagle  was  carried
as  it  had  been  for  many  centuries,  with  the  tr^noo,
a  legion  bemg  on  that  acconnt  somelimea  called
aqiula  {"Bin.  BdLHi>p.iS),  audit  the  same  Uidb
each  cohort  had  for  its  own  eiuign  the  aerpent  or
dragon  (draco,  tpixmi),  which  was  WDveo  on  a
square  piece  of  cloth  {UrtUit  angmt,  Sidno.  ApidL
Cbrm.  T.  409),  elevated  on  ■  gill  itaf^  to  which  a
crost-bar  was  adapted  for  the  purpote  (Tbomist.
Oral.  L  p.  1,  iviii.  p.  267,  ed.  Dindorf  j  Claa-
dian,  iv.  Omi.  Hater.  54G  ;  vl  Ows.  //iHor.  S6S),
aod  orriad  by  tbe  dnunmariiu.  (Veget.  dt  Kt
Mil  ii.  13  )  compare  Tac  Ami.  I  IS.)

Another  figure  used  in  the  slandaidi  was  a  ball
(  pila\  auppoaed  to  hare  beoi  emblonatie  of  ih«
dominion  of  Rome  over  the  world  (laid.  Orif,
tviil.  3)  ;  and  for  tbe  Mme  naioa  a  bnaae  figioa


SIGMA  MILITAKIA.
of  Tktor7  wu  tanctiniM  liied.  at  (he  tcp  af  tfaa
■taff,  ai  wa  tee  it  Knlptund,  tdgtther  nilb  until
■Otoe*  of  Man,  m  the  Column  of  Tnjui  and  the
Arch  of  CaiiMuitine.  (See  the  next  woodiiiit,anil
CuiKiu  Jt  Sig,  w  Groini  Tiei.  vol.  x.  p.  2539.)
Under  the  oigle  or  other  emblem  wu  oflea  placed
4  head  of  the  reigning  emperor,  vhich  was  to  the
Brmj  the  object  of  idolatmui  adoration,  (Joeepbu,
B.J.  il  9.  |3;  Saeunttr.  48,0%.  14;  Toe
Ami.  i.  39,  41,  IT.  63.)  The  nunc  oF  tfae  em-
peror, or  of  him  who  wu  acknowledged  ai  emperor,
wai  lometimea  inacribed  in  the  some  aituation,
(Sueton.  Feiptu.  6.)  The  pole,  nied  to  rarry  the
eagle,  had  at  itl  lower  eitremil;  an  imn  point
tcw7«)  to  fii  it  in  the  gnuDd,  and  to  rnable  the
m/niii/rr  in  cBH  of  need  to  repel  an  attack.  (Su«t.
J*L  62.)

The  nuoor  diriaioni  ofa  tohort,  called  trntaria,
had  alio  (Bch  an  eniign,  inicribed  with  the  num-
ber both  of  the  cohort  and  of  the  ccnttuy.  By
thii  proviiion,  together  with  the  diTeniliei  of  the
cmla  worn  bj  the  centarioni  (Oalka],  erery
•oldier  wai  enabled  with  the  gnateat  eaia  to  take
hii  place.  (Veget.  Lc)

In  tfae  Arch  of  Conitantine  at  Rome  tfaere  are
foDT  Bulpturad  paneli  near  the  top,  which  eihibil
a  grtat  number  of  itandardi,  and  illiutrate  aome  of
(he  fbnni  here  deimbed. The  aimeied  woodml


SIONA  MILITAHIA.


i*  copied  from  two  ont  of  the  four.  The  linl  panel
Rpreeenti  Trajan  ginng  b  king  to  the  Pailhiana :
aeran  itandard*  ore  held  by  the  Mddien.  The
■econd,  containing  fice  atandardi,  reprcwnti  the
performance  of  the  locrifice  cnllcd  (iKmfaan'/ta.
(Bartoli,.rfie.7V.'smpt.)

When  ComtanliDe  bod  embmced  CbriitUnity,
a  Ggnre  or  emblem  of  Cliriat,  woren  in  gold  upon
puple  doth,  waa  lubatitultd  for  the  bead  of  the
emperor.  Tbia  richly  ornamented  atandard  waa
called  Morm.  (Piudentiua  eait.  Symin.  I  466,
4SS  ;  Niceph.».£:TiL37.)

Since  the  moremeDU  of  a  body  of  tioopa  and  of
erery  portion  of  it  were  regulated  by  the  atandorda,
all  the  CTDlutiaai,  acta,  nnd  incidenla  of  the  Ro-
man array  were  eipreurd  by  phiaaes  derived
bma  tbia  drcumitance. Thua  ligta  infirrt  meant


to  adi-ance  (Caecu',  B.  O.  I  3G,  ii.  35),  rtjim  to
retreat,  and  tamertere  to  lace  about  j  tfim,  or
antrit  orffcw,  to  march  ont  of  the  camp  (Virg.
GenTff.  i.  108)  J  ad  liffHa  ooitoBinVe,  to  re-aaaemble.
(Caeaar,  B.  O.  tL  I.  37.)  Notwilbatanding  loma
obtcurity  in  the  nie  of  teraia,  it  appon  that,
whilat  the  atandard  of  ^e  legion  whi  properly
called  af)uEa,lhoie  of  the  cohorla  were  in  a  apecial
aenae  of  the  term  called  ligna,  their  beoren  being
ligiii/tri,  and  that  thoie  of  the  manipnll  or  amallw
diiiiioni  of  de  cohort  were  denomiDated  txxilla,
their  bearera  being  jKrillarii.  Alao  (hoae  who
(ought  in  tbe  lirtt  ranka  of  the  legion  before  the
aiandorda  of  the  legion  and  cohorti  were  called
anicnanrai.  (Caeiar.f.C.L  43,  44,56.)  ApecQ-
liar  application  of  the  term  vejillani  ia  explained
on  p.  507,  b.

In  military  atratagema  it  waa  aometimea  necea-
aary  to  connal  tbe  alandarda.  (Caeaar,  B.  G.  viL
45.)  Although  the  Romana  commonly  conaidered
it  a  point  of  honour  to  preierve  their  atandorda,  yet
in  gome  coiea  of  extreme  danger  the  leader  himielf
threw  them  among  the  ranka  of  tbe  enemy  in
order  to  divert  their  attention  or  to  animate  hia
own  aoldien.  (Floma,  i.  11.)  A  wounded  or  dying
alondard-bearei  delivered  it,  if  poaiible,  into  Iha
handi  of  hia  general  (Flonii,  jt.  4),  from  whom  he
had  received  ii  {lignit  acaptii.  Tat  Ann.  u  42).
In  time  of  peace  the  alandarda  were  kept  in  tho
AaRAHlUH  under  the  care  of  the  Quaibtoh.

We  have  Utile  information  reapecling  the  atand-
orda  of  any  other  nalioa  bcaidea  the  Romant.
The  banneri  of  the  Parlhioni  appear  to  have  bad  a
aimihir  form  to  that  of  the  Romana,  but  were  more


Cyrop.  viL  1.  %  4,  ^ftofC
i. 10.912.)  The  military  eniigna  of  the  EgypliBDi
were  very  varioui.  Their  tacred  oniraala  were  rc-
preacnled  in  them  (Diod.  i.  86),  and  in  the  peint-
ingi  at  Thebe*  we  oburre  tuch  objecla  aa  a  king'i
name,  a  aacrrd  boat,  or  tome  other  emblem,  t^
plied  to  the  aame  purpoae.  (Wilkinion,  Mom.  aid
Cud.  vol.  L  p.  294.)  The  Jewish  army  wn»  probably
jporaholled  by  the  aid  of  banncn  (Ft.  ix.  3  ;


lots  SISTRUM.

CW.  vl  4  ;  tt.  ziiL  2)  ;  but  nal  10  ths  Greek,

kllhough  the  Utter  liad  a  atBndord,  the  elevatian
of  which  urred  u  >  >ign>l  for  joining  biltle,
either  by  Und  (Poljaen,  iii.  9.  §  27  ;  Com.  Nepo*,
iL  2.  S  2)  or  bj  ««.  {Thucji  L  49.)  A  xailet
flag  {^irtnU)  wu  fom^timet  used  for  thii  pur-
po«.  (PolyMii.  i.  48.  i  2.)  [J.  Y.]

SIGNINUM  OPUS. [Doiiira,p.431,».]
BIONUM,  ■ di*»ioD  of  ihe  Romaa  legion.


[Es.


ru8,p.;


l.a.]


SILENTIA'RII. [P«iiPOBiru»,I

SILICE-RNIUM. [FuNUB,  p.  662, ».]

SILIQUA. [Uwa*.]

SI'MPULUM  or  SIMPU'VIUM,  wm  tbe
nnme  of  ft  imoll  cap  used  id  lacrificeft,  by  which
libetioni  of  wine  were  offi'red  to  the  godi.  Feiliu
uyi  that  il  wu  not  nnlike  tbe  cyslhai.  {Futoi,
<.  V.  ;  Van.  L.  L.  i.  1 24,  ed.  Milller  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
HIT.  12.  >.  46  1  Jav.  .L  343  ;  Cic.  dtRrp.  tL  2.)
It  often  Bppean  on  Roman  coini,  ai  on  the  an-
neied  coin  of  the  Solis  gen«,  which  reprcMnli  on
the  obvene  a  tiipod  with  a  teccipita  on  *


There  wai  a  proToibial  eipreuion  txalare  fiaeba
ia  timpulo,  "  to  make  much  ado  about  nothing  "
(Cic.  <ta  £^.  iiu  Ifi).
SINDON.  [Pallium,  p.  BSl.b.J
SINGULA 'RES.  [ExiRciTtja,  p.  508,  b.]
SIPA'RIUM,  a  piece  of  iBpitrj-  itrelched  on  a
frame,  which  loio  before  the  ilage  of  the  theatre
(Fettui,  I.V.;  Cic. Prm.Ccmt.  6  ;  Juf.Tiii,  1B6),
and  conieqiiently  aniwered  the  purpoie  of  the
drop-ecene  with  tu,  although,  contrary  to  our  prac-
tice, it  wai  depKwed  when  the  play  began,  »  ■>
to  go  below  the  lercl  of  the  itngc  {aalaea  prtmim-
lar,  Hor.  Epiti.  ii.  1.  189),  and  wai  railed  again
when  the  performance  waa  concluded  (M/iu/iir,
Grid,  Met.  m.  111—114).  From  the  laei.cited
poiiage  we  learn  that  human  figures  were  repre-
■enled  upon  it,  who»e  feet  appeared  to  rest  upon
the  alage  when  thia  icreen  wae  drawn  up.  From
a  paaiBge  of  Virgil  [Gtorff.  iii.  25)  we  further
learn,  that  the  fi^om  were  •omclinies  ihoie  of
Britoni  woren  in  the  eauiau  and  railing  their
anna  in  tbe  altitude  of  lifting  up  a  purple  curtain,
10  ai  to  be intn>duced  in  the  nme  manner  ai

tipariitm  denoted  any


dolh  01


- .  [J-Y.]

SISTRUM  (aumfof),  a  myitical  iiutniment
of  muiic,  used  by  tbe  ancient  Egypliani  in  dieir
ceremoniea,  and  etpecialtj  In  the  n'orahip  of  laie.
(Ovid.  Mm.  it  784,  Am«:  )i.  13.  11,  ill.  9.  34,
cfo  Paito,  i.  1,  38.)  It  wa)  held  in  the  right  hand
(■ee  woodcut),  and  ihaken,  from  which  cirtum-
atance  it  derived  iti  name  {aera  repuiaa  majiu,
Tibuaia24).  It!  moil  common  fbrm  i>  leen  in
tbo  Hgbt-hand  figure  of  the  annexed  woodcut,
which  repreienti  an  aodent  •ittium  fbnneriy  be-
loog^g  to  the  libniy  of  St  Genoveh  at  Pari*.


SITOPHTLACES.

Plntuch  (<l*  2t.  el  Onr.  po.  670,  671,  ed.  Steph.)
•aya,  that  the  shaking  of  the  four  ban  within  tba
circular  ^ii  repreaentod  the  agitation  of  the  four
elonenla  within  the  compoH  of  the  worid,  by  whKfa
all  thingi  are  contuuioUy  deitroyed  and  repro-
duced, and  that  the  cat  icnlptnred  upon  the  apoia
wai  an  emblem  of  the  moon. Apuloua  (.Wat.  zi.


Chrutian  k


1 19,  121,  ed.  Aldj)  deicribet  tlte  *L

TOW  plate  curred  like  a  iwoid-bell (tuJteu),

loud  Aril]

were  aometimea  made  of  silver  or  emi  of  gold.
He  alto  seems  to  intimate,  that  the  ahakca  were
three together (terjieniwu  >t4w), whicb vonld

ihip  of  Ilia  iota
encement  of  tbe
made  the  Romana  ^miliar  with  tbis
initrument  The  "  linigeri  olii,  liitntoque  tnrba  "
(Mart.  liL  29)  are  moit  eiactly  depicted  in  two
pointiugi  found  at  Portiei  (AmL  d'Ertoiamo,  toI-  ii.
pp.  309— 320),  and  containing  the  two  Egumof  ■
prjeat  of  Itii  and  a  woman  kneeling  at  her  oitar,
which  are  introduced  into  the  preceding  utoodcut.
The  use  of  the  tiRrum  in  Egypt  aa  a  militarr  in-
A^iunent  to  collect  the  troopa  is  jffobablj  A  fictian.
(Virg.  Am.  niii.  696  ;  Prt^rt  iii-  1 1.  43.)  Tim
aiatrum  ii  uaed  in  Nubia  and  Abyaiinia  to  th«  pr^
«mtd.y.

SittnoH,  which  is  in  lact,  like  Sckptrum,  a
Greek  word  with  a  l^ljn  lerminatioo,  the  propn
Lalm  term  liir  it  being  enrpUaatlia^  ii  tometiniea
used  for  a  child's  rattle.  (Martial,  xiT.  54  ;  PdUbz.
ii.  127.)  [J-Y.]

SITELLA. [SiTUL*.]

SITO'NAE  (o-.Ti™). [SiToil

SITOPHY'LACES  (xn-iifiMAni),  a  bcatd  of
ollicera,  choKU  by  lot,  at  Athena.  They  wen  at
^t  three,  afterwards  incTEsapd  to  fifteen,  of  wbosn
ten  were  for  the  city,  five  for  the  Peineeua.  Their
buiineM  was  partly  to  watch  the  arrinl  of  the
corn  ihipa,  take  anoont  of  the  quantity  impoclrd,
and  see  tbat  the  impart  lawi  were  duly  obotrnJ  ;
partly  to  watch  the  nlei  of  com  in  the  market,
and  take  core  that  the  pricea  were  fair  and  reaaot-

uied  by  the  bctcn  ;  in  which  reipeet  their  duiia
were  moch  tbe  same  as  thoae  of  the  AgtnuKOU
and  Melroaami  with  regard  to  other  aaleaUearttcleo.
(Sin>B.J DemottheDes  nfsn  to  the  entry  io  the


srros.

'Dooki  of  the  ^topbjka*  (tV  'V^  toii  tiTtpi-
Aa{w  iTtypa^r}  lo  pnn  tbc  quantity  of  com
imported  from  Fontna,  which  (he  njri)  wu  equal
ts  »U  that  came  frun  alaewbcre,  During  to  the
libenlitj  of  Lenoon,  king  of  the  Boapanit,  vho
■Ilowed  am  to  be  (iported  from  Tbetidoeia  to
Athm  fiw  of  iatj.  (Donanh.  e.  Ltpdi.  iSG,
467.)  Thoae  booki  wen  pcohablf  kept  by  the
five  who  acted  tar  the  Peineflii%  wbeae  eepecial
buiuwn  it  woald  be  to  inipect  the  car^oee  that
wenunladen.  (Haipocr.  i.e.  ZiTo^Moicti:  Bdckh,
I'M  Earn.  ^AlitnM,  p.  83,  Sd  ed.)  [C.  R.  K.]
8IT0S(ffrrst),canL  Theaoit  of  AtIica,thoiigh
fitTDonble  to  the  prodnction  of  iigt,  eliita,  and
grapea,  waa  not  as  braniablB  for  com  -,  and  the
popoktion  betnjt  very  coandentble  in  the  flonriahing
prriod  of  the  Athenian  repnbUe,  it  «■■  neeeaaaiy
ta  import  earn  for  their  >ubiittence.  According  to
the  calcnlatioD  of  Biickb,  which  docs  not  mate-
rially  differ  from  that  of  othnr  writsn,  there  wen
IS&JXIO  lieenieii  and  065,000  tlaTcg  raiding  in
Attica.  The  anntiy,  which  contained  an  area  of
64,0O0Madia,pnidacedBnniialt7  about  two  niltioni
of  medimpi  of  com,  chiefl j  harlej.  The  medimnui
was  aboDt  1  buihel,  5  gallona,  and  fi'75  pinto,  or
48  Attic  xolrui't-  A  x't^i  waa  conwdered  a  fiiir
dailj  allowance  of  neol  (iitH/niirla  rpapii)  foe  a
abiTe.  The  eonnmption  of  the  whole  population
waa  three  million  medimni,  and  one-third  theiefbre
wtta  impacted.  It  came  fTom  the  countriei  border-
ing on  the  Etixine  S««  (PoDtm,  ai  it  wu  called  bj
tba  Oreehg),  and  more  atpedally  ftom  the  Cbame.
riiB  Boqionn  and  the  Thcaciao  Chertoncaa  ;  aim
fion  Syria,  Egypt,  Libya,  Cypnu,  Rhodea,  Sicilj,
aad  Eoboca.  The  necaaiitiea  of  the  Atheaiam
Dade  them  aieeedingij  aniioiis  to  hcdto  a  plenti-
fbl  lun^y,  and  entyfteeanlion  waa  token  for  that
pnipooe  by  the  goreniment  aa  well  aa  by  the  l^ia-
lator-  Sunhua  waa  fortified,  in  ordor  that  the  com
veNeli  (aeraryttyal  ifjMtt)  might  come  lafely
fmmd  the  promontory.  Shipa  of  war  were  often
employed  to  eooToy  the  caigo  (irapoiJfi¥ii»  ihr
firer)  berond  the  reach  of  an  enemy.  ( Dem.  dt
Cbnm.  2G0,  251,  e.  Pofycf.  1211.)  When  Pollia,
the  Lacedaemonian  admiral,  wu  atatianed  with
hia  fleet  off  Aegina,  the  Athenian!  embarked  in
haate,  under  At  command  of  Cbabriaa,  and  offered
him  battle,  (n  order  that  the  com-ihipi,  which  had
miTed  aa  lar  aa  Gcntestni  ia  Suboea,  might  iftt
mtD  the  Peimeeni.  <Xencfh. /fai!ni.  t.  4.  |  61.)
One  of  the  i^ncipal  objecu  of  Philip  in  hii  attack
<n  Byiantium  wa*  that,  by  taking  that  city  he
taighE  cmnmand  the  entrance  to  the  Endne,  and
•oliaTe  it  in  hii  power  to  diatren  the  Atheniani
in  the  com  trade.  Hence  the  gnat  eienioni  made
by  Demoithenci  to  relieve  the  Bymntinei,  of  the
neceaa  of  which  he  iuilly  booata  (_dt  CoroK,  254,
807,326).

The  nuuorea  taken  by  the  IcgiiUtore  to  obtain
mppliei  of  com  may  appear  haraii,  and  their  policy
ia  at  leait  doubtful,  but  they  strongly  erince  the
anxiety  of  the  people  on  the  lubject  Exportation
wu  entirclr  prebibited,  imr  waa  any  Athenian  or
itaident  alien  allowed  to  cany  com  to  any  other
place  than  Alheni  (trmrYtu'  AAAi^e  f)  'A^Mtfi).
Wboerer  did  to,  WBi  pmiuhahle  with  death.  (Dem.
aPketiLSlB  ;  Lycu^.  cLtoer.  161,  ed.  St«ph.)
Of  the  com  broi^t  mto  the  Athenian  port  Iwo-
ihirdi  waa  to  be  brought  into  the  dty  and  >old
tbeie.  (Haipocr.  >.  n.  'EnfiiAiHiT  />nr^ou.)  No
one  might  lend  monaj  OD  a  ihip  that  did  not  lail


SITOS.  1W7

with  an  erpnH  cocdiiian  to  bring  ■  ntatm  eugo,
part  of  it  com,  to  Athena.  If  any  merchant,  capi-
taliit,  or  othti  person  advaneed  money  or  entered
into  any  agreement  in  cmtraFention  of  lh«e  lawi,
not  only  waa  he  liable  to  the  penalty,  but  the  agree-
ment itaelf  waa  null  and  void,  nor  conM  he  recoTer
any  lom  of  money,  or  bring  any  action  in  respect
thenoE  (Dem.  cZognt.  Ml.)  Infisraatioa  agunat
the  o^nders  waa  to  be  tud  bslbre  the  Jn/iiXitral
ToB  Jfcnpiav.  (Meier,  Alt.  Pnc  p,  87.)  Strict
mgoIatiouB  wen  made  with  respect  to  the  nie  of
com  in  the  moiket Conspira


were  ptmiahed  with  death. They  wi
to  make  a  prolit  of  more  than  one  o


Dt  allowed


unlawful  to  buy  mon  thafi
fifty  ^tpiuA  at  a  tiai&  It  ii  not  certain  wlvt  the
■iu  of  a  fo^i  waa ;  Bijckk  sappoasi  it  to  be
abont  aa  much  aa  a  medimnua.  These  laws  remind
US  of  oar  own  statutea  ^ainat  engrosting  and  re-
grating  ;  but  they  tqipcar  lo  have  been  easily  evaded
by  the  com-dealers.  (See  the  speech  of  Lyaiaa
MTik  T«»  giTowuMr:  Dem.  e.  Dia^nxL  1285.)
The  aale  of  com  was  plaeed  niuler  the  inpervisim
of  a  special  board  of  otBcen  called  Silapi^acn
(oTTof  Mutt),  while  that  of  all  other  markelabb
commoditif*  waa  siperinlended  by  the  agnreuomi.
(Lya.  ii  165,  ed.  Steph,)  It  was  their  buslnw
to  see  that  meal  and  bread  were  of  the  proper
quality,  and  sold  at  the  legal  weight  and  price.
They  wen  bound  to  detect  the  frauds  of  the  bctor
and  the  baker,  and  (if  we  may  believe  Lyiiaa)
they  sometimes  auSered  death  for  their  wont  i^
vigilance.  The  mode  of  proceeding  agabial  them
waa  by  iSanyytkia  before  the  senate.  (I'lalnei,
Pm.  mf  Kh^.  toL  ii.  p.  149.)

Notwithatanding  these  carehil  proviiions,  acnrci-

• (iTtToS<rai) frequently  occurred  at  Athena,

Lher  from  bad  haneats,  the  miafdrtuncs  of  war,

other  accidental  causes The  atate  then  made

grmt  efforts  to  supply  the  wants  of  the  people  br

importing  large  quantities  of  com,  and  sejling  it  at

a  low  price. Pablie  granaries  wen  kept  in  the

Odeom,  Pompeum,  Long  Porch,  and  naval  itne-

bonte near  the  eea. (Pollux,  ii.  4S ;  Dem.  e.

FioniL  91S.) Silaiae  (aiTinu)  were  appointed

to  get  in  the  supply  and  manage  the  sale* Do.

motlhencs  waa  appointed  on  one  occaaion  to  that

office  (da  Cortai.  310.) Persona  called  apodeeUa

(AntS^ttraiJ received  the  com, measured  it  out,

and  distributed  it  in  certain  quanlities.  (Pollux,

114.) Public-apirited  individuals  would  some-

■  import  grain  st  their  own  ei]Kn>e,  and  sell

a  moderate  price,  or  diatiibuta  it  gnituitously.

(Dem.aPto™.  918.) We  read  of  the  Athenian

itate  receiving  presents  of  com  from  kings  and

princes. Thua  Leuoon,  king  of  the  Bosporus  cent

a  large  present,  for  which  he  had  the  hcooai  of

i,Tiktui  (exemption  froni  customs-duties)  CMifetred

bim  by  a  decree  of  the  people.  (Dem.  o.  Ltptim.

4G7  ;  see  Isocr.  Tpa,Tt(rr.  3rO,ed.  Steph.)  Psam-

metichus,  an EgypUan  prince,  sent  a  present  in

Olymp.  83.  4,  Demetrius  in  Olymp.  1 1 B.  2,  Spar-

tacus,  king  of  the  Bospoma,  a  few  years  after. In

later  times,  that  mode  by  the  Roman  Atticos  i*

well  knowiL On  the  whole  of  this  lubject  the

rcMler  ia  referred  to  Biiekh  (PsK  £lsB.D/^bks>^

p.  77,  &&.  2nd.  ed.),  where  also  he  will  find  the

vorioua  pcieea  of  meal  and  bread  at  Athtaia,  and

other  dctuU,  copiously  expl^ned. A*  to  the  iMj

3x4


1018  SITOU  DIKE.

paTSblc  on  the  iiopoRstioa  of  com,  tM  Finti-


Sitor  ii  ilridly  vAial-Jloiir,  llX^iTa  barleg^ur,
npci  tttkait,  Kpi9ai  barley,  ipros  wAaai  bread,  f^i^
barley-hrvad,  2?ti?i,  howcTer,  ia  often  applied  to
oil  kiDdi  of  com,  and  even  in  a  larger  Hcnae  to  pro-
Tiiiaiu  in  genenl.  [C.  R  K.]

SITOU  DIKE  (trfTw  Blicn).  The  marriage
portian  (rpoif)  being  intended  SI  *  proiiiion  fur
the  vtfe,  altbsngli  it  mi  paid  to  ibe  haiband  bv
iiertather,  brother,  or  other  nittUTaJ  guardian  {kL
ptat),  if  anything  happened  to  mtct  tbe  maniage
contract,  the  haibaad  or  hit  representative  tnu
bound  to  repa;  it ;.  or,  if  he  &iied  to  do  )o,  he  wag
liable  to  pay  iaterett  apon  it  at  the  rate  of  eighteen
per  cent,  per  tminm  (*r'  irr4a  Uehea  rciait>opi7r).
Thi)  ma  the  lav  in  ooe  of  a  divorce  (Demoatb.  e.
Neaer.  1369)  ;  and  alio  when,  afler  ■  contract  of
marriage,  and  af^r  payment  of  the  morria^  por-
tion, the  intended  husband  refused  to  perform  bii
engigenient.  <DemHlh.  c.  >pM.  818.)  Upon  the
death  of  the  hoibaad  without  children,  the  wife
end  her  money  vent  back  to  the  natural  guardian
(lueUB,  de  Pyrr.  W.  41,  ed.  Steph.)  ;  bat  if  be
died  learing  children,  the  had  the  option  of  atajing
with  them  or  gning  back  (o  her  icbpiat.  If  ihe  did
the  latter,  the  children  (or  iheii  guardian,  if  they
were  under  age)  were  bound  to  pay  hocli  the  p(w-
tion  to  the  ttvpioi,  or  eighteen  percent  intereat  in
tha  meantime.  (lueui,  di  />t.  ker.  38.  46,  ed.
St*ph.)  And  if  >ha  married  again,  her  *iip'Bj  wu
bonnd  in  honour  to  give  the  lame  aam  to  her  now
butband.  (Demoath.c.  Sa»f.<f(iia«i,  1010.)  Upon
the  tmnaferof  a  woman  from  one  ha>l»nd  to  another,
which  wa>  not  ancommon,  the  ir|)oif  wai  tiaoo-
ferred  with  her.  (Demoitli.  c  Oitet.  666.}  A  wo.
man'd  fortune  vaa  oiually  aecnred  by  a  mortgage
of  the  huiband't  property ;  but  whether  thia  wai
•0  or  not,  her  guardian,  in  any  of  the  caies  above
mentioned,  might  bring  an  action  againil  the  party
who  unjuitly  withheld  it ;  Il«q  vpomii,  to  recover
the  principid,  Jiuij  (tItou,  for  the  intereat. The

had  to  be  maintained,  oi  ^tit^fitrtu  Tpa^ol,  it
ttSoiUrti  itpJimioi  ill  t/w^c  tbTi  yiwuif  (».  (Har-
pocr.  «  V.  XErst :  Polloi,  viii.  33 ;  Demoatb.  <^
Aphni.  839,  8S4.)  The  word  <r?rot  ia  often  uted
BTnemliy  for  proviiiona,  juit  ■■  we  use  the  word
bnad.  So  in  the  law,  which  reqaired  the  aon  of
on  /t(it\i)|iot  to  maintain  hil  mother  when  he
came  of  age  and  took  poaieuion  of  her  inheritance,
the  eipreiiion  la  rhr  trirar  /irtfitTii  ifi  larrpi,
(Demoith.  cStrpi.  1135.)  The  allowance  for
ntiona  given  to  aaldien  waa  called  sirtipiiruir,
<B<(ckh,  Fabt.  Earn,  of  AOaa,  p.  372,  2d  ed.)
The  Hkij  trtrov  waa  tried  before  the  archon  in
the  Odeom,  the  nme  bnilding  in  which  the  mm
gmnariea  were  kept,  which  makea  it  not  imprabable
that  in  earlier  timet  the  defendant  was  called  upon
to  pay  the  damagei  in  iand,  that  is,  in  com  or  tome
othrT  aort  of  provialona  ;  though  it  wat  Boon  fonnd
to  lie  more  eonrenient  to  commute  thit  for  a  money
payment  Thia  cause,  like  the  tlm)  rpainit,  leemi
to  have  belonged  to  the  littairot  Blxai,  at  it  wu  pre-
aomed  that  the  woman  eould  not  wait  long  for  tha
meant  of  ber  daily  anbaijtence.  It  waa  iTf/xTfTot,
for  the  daniagn  were  clearly  liquidated,  b«ing  a
mere  matter  of  oilculation,  when  the  payment  of
the  marriage  portion  waa  proved.  (Suidai,  «.  ».
'tMJewi  PoUux,  iii.47,  vL  153.  viiL  SI,  33;


SOCCUS.
Meier,  JU. Proe. pp.  43,  423— <37  ; PUtner,
Proa,  tnd  KIoq.  vol.  it  p.  266.)  [G  R.  K.1

SITTYBAE. [LiBin.]

SI'TULA,  dim.  SITELLA  ii6pU\  waa  pro-
bably a  bucket  or  pail  for  drawing  and  csrrviag
water  (Plant.  Ampk.  ii.  2.  30),  but  waa  more  iiaii-
ally  applied  to  the  veiael  fiiim which  lota  wen

ID  thia  tignification.  (Plant.  Ou.  ii.£.  34,  43,  iL  6.
7,  ll.Liv.  XIV.  3,ilL  18.)  It  oppean  that  tha
vcaael  was  filled  with  water  (aa  among  the  Oreeka,
whence  the  word  Mpla),  and  that  the  Iota  («rta)
were  made  of  wood  ;  and  at,  though  iacmiing  in
liie  below,  it  had  a  narrow  neck,  only  one  1st
could  come  to  the  top  of  the  water  at  the  taow
time,  when  it  waa  ahoken.  ^SHialam  hm  tKm^
ajKrtenmaoaacf  aiir(u,PlanLCu.iL4.  17  ;  Ck.
in  Verr.  it  5 1  ;  Vopiac  PnA.  8.)  The  vewl  iwd
for  drawing  lota  wat  alsn  called  ursa  or  una  ai
wS\  la  Siiila  ta  SitiUa.  (Cic  n  Fatim.  14  ;  V>L
Mai.  vi.  3.  §4)  Virg.  ^m.  ii.  431,&c  ;  Ludal^
v,394,  with  SchoL  ;  compare  Pera.  ii  48.)

It  ia  important  to  nndentand  the  Irae  mtwiing
of  Silella,  aincc  olmoat  all  modeni  wrilera  ba<e
luppooed  that  the  name  of  Sitella  or  Ciata  waa
given  indifferently  to  the  ballot-boi,  into  which
Ihoae  who  voted  in  the  comitia  and  conrta  of
juttice  cait  their  (abellae:  but  Wonder  (CodrJ
Erftdaiit.  p.  dviii.  &c)  baa  proved,  that  the
opinion  of  Manutiua  (il>  Cbnitiu  Romamit,  e.  1 3.
p.  £37,  ed.  QracT.)  it  correct,  who  mainlainrd  that
the  Sitella  waa  the  um,  from  which  the  naina  of
the  tribea  or  centnriea  were  drawn  oot  by  lot,  u
ight  have  ita  proper  place  in  voting,
m tbt b- -"— -


and  that  the  Ciat
which  the  I


. [Cld


repre-


SOCCUS,  dim.  SO'CCULUS,  waa  neariy  if  not
allogeder  equivalent  in  meaning  la  CitapiDa,  and
denoted  a  alipper  or  low  thoe,  which  did  not  fit
clotelr,  and  waa  not  &atened  by  any  tie.  (laid.
Orig.'xii.  33.)  Shuea  of  thia  deacripiiaD  woo
worn,  mora  eapecially  among  the  Qieeka  logetber
with  the  PlLLIITH,  both  by  men  aod  by  wonm.
But  Ihoae  appropriated  to  tha  female  au  wpre
linerandmDn>amamented(Pliu.//.iV.ii.35.t.56;
Socct  sw&e&ru.  Suet  Oaiig.  £'2,  rOnlL  2),  altlm^h
thoae  worn  by  men  were  likewite  in  aome  inatancH
richly  adoined  according  to  the  taate  and  nmna  of
the  weuw. (Plant.  BaaA.  ii.  9.  98.)


byGooglc


80CIETA8.

For  tbe  KHont  mentioiud  nudsr  Uib  utidn
BiSA  mnd  Critida  the  Soccna  ni  vom  bj
comic  uldts  (Hot.  .In  PolU.  SO,  aO),  and  m  in
tbii  mpcct  oppaed  to  ths  Cothuknus.  (Hart.
viu.3.13;PtuL.Qiu(.u.  7.)  Th< precediii; wmd-
cmt  ii  taken  Irani  an  ancient  punting  of  a  boffaon
[Hmim],  wlw  b  dancing  in  boH  jellov  ilifqifn
<Mmm  taeam,  CaSdl.  f^U.  yat  10).  Thii
wuoneofthaicnnatCManuHieidonn.  (De  L'Aal-
uja,  SaO.  Tliat.  pLW.)  [SoLU.] [J.  Y.]

SOCl'ETAS.  SodelaaiiclBMed  byOaiui  (iiL
]  U>  and  in  t' ■  ■  ' '  '

thiwi  oUigatiaDea  whict
acveial  penoni  unite  ibr
ia  legal,  and  eonttibnla  1
>miani*Soeietai,uidtlieiiciMUtnSocii.  (Dig-.
17.  tiL  2.  •.  £7.)  Ths  nmtmct  of  Societu  might
either  be  made  in  mnda  or  bj  ths  acti  of  the  par-
tie*,  or  bj  the  cauent  of  th*  partiei  ugnified
tbnragh  thiid  pcnoiu :  it  reqnind  no  paitimlir
ibrra  of  BgRemmt.  A  Sodeui  might  be  fonned
either  Ibr  the  Mke  of  gain  to  ariu  frrai  the  dnlingi
■ad  labonroftbeSooi  <fMMAM),«iioL  Sodetaa
for  ibeparpoMof  quuatDaeom^ondito  theEng-
liah  Partoenbip.  A  SocielM  night  be  fonned
which  ihould  eompriie  all  the  prDpert;  of  the  Socii

m*  the  Sodetu  mt  formed,  all  the  property  of  all
Uw  Soeii  immedtMely  b«anie  coDunon  (ret  guaa

Societal  might  be  limited  to  a  put  of  the  profetty
of  the  Sadi  or  to  a  aingle  thing,  ai  the  buying  and
aolUng  of  iUtoo,  or  to  eanyii^  on  trade  in  a  pa-
tieuiu  thing  in  a  paiticuUr  place.  (Cic  pm  P,
Qmintio,  c  3.)  The  commiiuinn  of  pnpertj  in  a
Societal  might  aUo  he  limited  to  the  uia  of  the
thii^  A  Soeietu  might  be  fonned  either  ta
fajittiiiim,  that  it,  to  long  a>  the  partiei  liied,  or
sftnpwot  BibfliponiimieDKi^lum  (Dig.  17.
tJt.2.a.l.}

Each  Socini  wai  boond  to  contribute  tovardi
Ibe  objecti  of  the  Societal  according  to  the  tenni
of  the  eontiacL  Bnl  it  wai  not  ncctiMTy  that  all
tbo  Socii  ■booldconCribulemiKieT:  oncmight  mp.
ply  money  and  another  might  lupply  labour  (opera),
and  ^e  profit  might  be  diviiible  between  them,
lor  the  Labour  of  one  might  be  ai  Taluable  M  the
moBef  of  the  other.  In  the  taie  of  Roaciui  the
•ctor,  Fannini  had  a  iIiTe  Pannrgot,  who  by
■■icement  between  Roieini  and  Fanniiu  wai  made
Oeir  joint  propertT  (Dotannu).  Boacini  paid
DothiDg  ibr  hii  one  Eulf  of  the  man,  but  he  under-
took to  inilmct  bim  in  hie  art  Apparently  they
became  partaen  in  the  man  in  equal  ihaiei,  fiir
Cicero  complaini  of  the  termi  of  the  iiocient  on
the  part  of^Kmciui  whoie  initruction  oai  worth
much  more  than  the  pdce  of  the  aiiFe  before  he  wai
taught  hi* aiL  (Clc  liro  Q.  Aoxw  Cbm- 1 0.)  The
agreement  between  ihe  Socii  might  also  be,  that
oDe  Sociui  ihoold  luitoin  no  leu  and  ahonid  hav(
a  ihare  of  the  gain,  piuTided  hii  labour  vaj  K
valuable  ai  to  render  it  equitable  for  him  to  becomt
a  paitno'  en  incb  leimj.  If  the  >hare«  of  the  Socii
wen  not  fixed  by  agreen
to  be  equal.  (Dig- 1 7.  tit.  2.  a.  29.)  One  partner
night  tiBirg  two  or  mora  ibBie*,  and  anotht
have  only  one,  if  their  contiibntioni  to  the  Societal
in  money  or  in  labour  were  in  then  proportion!.
If  the  agreement  wai  merely  ai  to  [be  diiition  of

Cfit,  it  fallowed  that  the  Socii  moit  bear  thi
lei  in  the  Mme  proportion. Each  Sodui  wai


SOCIETAS.  104ft

Bimrembla  to  the  othva  for  hia  eondoct  in  the
management  of  the  boBniM  :  he  was  bonnd  to  uM
Diligentia  and  wai  aniweiable  for  any  toM  tbroDgh
Culpa.  The  action  which  om  Kdui  had  igaintt
another  in  nupect  of  the  eontrael  of  parlnenhip,
wai  an  actio  duecla  and  called  Fro  Socio  (cv  bm
orhUrtnjmiicuadisHritQii.  Rttawm,  Sit. ;  Cie.
jm  q.  RoKM  Chm.9).  The  action  miriit  ba
Inonght  Gv  any  breach  of  the  igreement  n  [wt-
nenbip,  ti»  an  account  and  for  a  diuolation.  A
partner  might  tzaniler  hii  intcmt  to  another  per-
•on,  hat  thii  tFanifer  did  not  make  that  other  pe^
1  partner,  for  conient  of  all  partis  wat  enoitial
Societal ;  in  bet  inch  a  tianifei  wai  a  diaw
nof  the  partnenbip,  and  the  penu  to  whooi
the  tnnifer  woi  made  might  baTo  bii  actim  Ds
Commnni  dindundo.  But  there  might  be  the  pro
■Dcio  actio  againtt  the  belt*  of  a  KiciD^  for  thoii^
the  hers  ii  not  a  lodui,  yet  he  •occcedi  lo  the  in-
ar  or  inleitate  in  the  partnenhip
■Bor  (If;  Dig.  17.  lit.  2.  a.  63.
§8).

Each  ncini  had  a  right  of  action  in  proportion

I  hii  interett  againit  any  penon  with  whom  any

F  the  ncii  had  contracted,  if  the  iodi  had  com-

duioned  him  to  mike the  contract  or  had  ap-

prored  of  the  costtact ;  or  if  it  wai  an  utiaii

ariaing  from  a  delict. Thni  in  the  caie  of  Readui

id  Fanoiui^  ttey  bad  WTerally  nied  a  third  penun

reipecl  of  their  ineiB]  dauna  ae  partnere,  and

aFanniui  itill  claimed  the  half  of  what  Kotciui
recotered  in  rspect  of  hii  ibare  in  the  part-
"  ip. {Pn  ft  Rate.  Cbm.  11,  17,  18.) ' ■"


ither
alone  ine. All  the  »


le  theco


could  be  lued  if  they  bad
Ml  joiuEu  ui  uiu  cuuuact  with  a  third  penon,  and.
each  in  proportion  to  hia  ahanL  Jf  one  lodm  con-
tracted on  behalf  of  all,  being  commiaioned  to  da
•0,  all  were  liable  to  the  fbll  amount  (u  toiidum).
If  a  nxivA  borrowed  money,  the  other  lodi  wen
in  no  caae  bound  by  hia  contnct,  tmles  the  money
bad  been  brooght  into  the  common  itock.  In  fiut
^le  dcalingi  of  one  partner  did  not  bind  the  other

Cen,  except  in  nich  caas  u  they  would  b«
1  indnicndent  of  the  eiiiteuce  of  the  Sodelai.
Condemnalio  in  an  Actio  Pro  Socio  wai  MHnetintet
attended  with  Infahia.

A  Sociataa,  unleai  it  waa  for  a  limited  period,
could  be  ended  at  the  pleaaure  of  any  one  of  tba
iDcii :  any  member  of  the  body  could  give  notica
of  diuolution  when  he  pleated  {mrnniim*  tocielaii),
and  therefore  tho  Societal  wai  diaiolTed  (wJeifur).
But  in  the  cue  of  a  ■seietai  omnium  bonorum,  if
one  lociui  had  been  appointed  heiei,  he  could  not
by  giving  notice  of  diuolation  defnnd  hii  co-
pannen  of  their  (bare  of  ibe  bereditai.  The  death
of  a  partner  diuolred  the  Sodetai ;  and  a  Capita
diminuliowai  laidto  hare  the  aamoeflect.  If  the
property  of  any  one  of  the  locii  wai  aold  either
pub]  ice  (Aonorwnpvifutdui)  or  privatim,  the  Societal
waa  diuolved.  It  wai  alio  diiaslTcd  wben  tho
pnrpoae  for  which  it  wai  fonned  wai  occompliihed  ;
or  iJie  thing!  in  which  there  waa  a  Societat,  had
ceowd  to  eiiit  j  or  by  the  UfU  of  the  time  for
which  it  wai  formed-

If  on  the  dinoIutiDn  of  a  partnenbip  there  was
no  pmlit,  but  a  las  to  auimin,  the  Imi  wni  bame,
aa  already  ttated,  by  the  loeii  in  proportion  to  their
ahars.  If  one  man  contributed  money  and  another
labour,  and  there  waa  a  lou,  how  itaa  the  lea
borne  ? If  the  money  and  the  labour  were  cod-


1050  SOCII.

udered  eqninloit,  it  mmld  Kem  la  Iblloii
until  the  portoenhip  propotj  ven  eihEub
thu  jnyment  of  the  deti^  there  ibould  be  i
coniaiy  contribu^OD  by  the  penoD  vho  lU;
tliB  labour.  Thii  priiiet;de  is  a  coaeequet
what  Gaim  •tatea  thit  the  ai{utal  of  one  and  tb«
labour  of  another  might  be  coundeied  eqoal,  and
the  gain  might  be  divided,  and  if  there  waa  a  ton
the  lou  mnit  be  divided  in  the  tuns  proportion.

Societatei  were  formed  for  the  pnipotet  of  fum-
in;  the  pnblic  reiennn. [Publiunl]

(Oaiiio,  iii,  148—16*  ;  Di(t.  17.  tit.  2  ;  Init  3.
tiL  26  ;  Cod.  4.  tiU  S7  ■  MUhlenbrucb,  Domrimi
PamltelanBii ;  Mackelde;,  £«tr{wi,rfw.;  Houe,
£m  Ca^  da  Rim.  RaAU.  >.  46,  49.) f  0.  L.]

SO'CII  (<rl/ifwx«).  In  the  cari;  tinle^  whei
Rome  formed  aqual  allioncea  witli  any  of  tbe  mr
nranding  nationi,  theic  nationi  wen  called  Soai
(Lit.  iL  63.)  Atla  the  dinolntion  of  the  Latin
Ingue,  when  the  name  Laimi,  or  A'anen  Laliimm,
waa  artifioiall;  applied  lo  a  great  number  of  Ita-
lian!, few  old;  of  whom  were  r«d  inbabitanu  of
the  old  I^tln  towni,  and  the  majority  of  whom
hod  been  made  Latini  by  the  will  end  the  law  of
Rome,  there  necetaaril;  aroie  a  diiference  between
theis  Latina  and  the  Sodi,  and  the  eipieMioa
Sodi  Nimat  Leijiam  i>  one  of  the  old  asyndela,
inilead  of  Soai  «t  ffomm  Lathmm.  The  Italian
allio  again  muat  be  digtinjpiiahed  from  foreign  si-
lies.  Of  the  latter  we  ahsll  eixak  hereafter.  The
Italian  alliei  ccmaiited,  for  the  nioat  put,  of  each
nationi  u  had  eiiher  been  eonqnerrd  by  the  Ro-
mani,  or  had  eome  nnder  their  dominion  by  other
clnmmataiices.  When  each  nations  farmed  an
alliance  with  Home,  tfaey  generally  retained  their
own  laws  ;  or  if  at  fint  they  were  not  allowed  this
wivilege,  they  afterwards  received  them  back  again.
The  condition  of  the  Italian  alliei  varied,  and
mainly  depended  apon  the  manner  in  which  they
had  come  onder  the  Roman  dominion  (Liv.  Tiii.  2S,
ii.  SO)  :  bat  in  reality  they  were  alwayi  depend-
ent npon  Rome.  Niebuht  (ffat  of  Rome,  ToL  iii.
p.  616)  conaiden  that  there  were  two  main  con-
ditioni  of  the  Sodt,  analogoui  or  equal  to  thoie  of
the  provinciali,  that  ii,  that  they  were  either
fatdtraS  or  /itm  (immmtt,  Cit  t  Vtrr.  iii.  6).
The  former  were  auch  at  had  formed  an  alliance
with  Home,  which  was  awom  to  by  both  parties  ;
the  latter  were  those  people  to  whom  the  aenate
hod  reetored  their  autonomy  after  they  were  eon-
qnered,  auch  a«  the  Hemican  towni.  (Liv.  ix.  ii.)
Bat  the  condition  of  each  of  theae  cla«aea  must
Bgnin  hare  been  modified  according  to  circum-
tloncei.  The  cases  in  which  Rome  had  on  eqnnl
alliance  with  nations  or  towns  of  Italy  became
gtadoally  fewer  in  nnmber ;  alliances  of  this  kind
cjclited  indeed  for  a  long  time  with  Tibor,  Prae-
neite,  Naplea,  and  otheis  (Polyb.  n.  14  ;  Liv.
iliii.  3  ;  Cie.  pro  BaH,  8);  but  these  placea  ivete,
neverthcleaa,  in  reality  aa  dependent  hi  the  olhec
Soeii.  It  was  only  a  tew  people,  luch  aa  the
Camertei  and  Heracleona,  that  maiclauied  the
righti  of  their  equal  allianca  with  Rome  down  to
B  very  late  time.  (Liv.  xiviii.  45  ;  Plot.  Mar.
2B  J  Cic.  pro  Balb.  20,  pro  ^  roi.  4.)  With  these
few  eiceptiona,  moat  of  the  It^iani  were  eiiher
Soeii  (in  the  later  Bcnie)  or  lAtmi  During  the
latter  period  of  the  republic  they  had  ibe  coonn-
binm  with  Rome  (Diodor.  RtMrpt.  Mai,  mvii.  6),
but  net  the  aufftnge  of  the  I-atini.  It  ■omctimcs
Ti^pened,aain  t^cueoftiiB  Abuedoniaii  Oneai-


SOCII.
moi,  that  a  fixogn  isdividud  wu  bonoiuvd  by  the
tenate  by  being  n^Aied  among  the  Italian  So«

the  aenate  provided  him  with  a  bonae  and  lands  n
srane  port  of  Italy. (Liv.  iliv.  IE.)

Although  the  allies  bad  their  own  laws,  tbe
senate,  in  ratrti  where  it  ^ipeared  conducive  to  the
general  wel&re,  might  comnuuid  them  to  aubnit  to
any  mdinance  it  might  iine,  aa  in  the  com  of  the
Scnatusconsultnm  de  Bacchanolihus;  (Ijv.  nxi^
1 4.)  Many  regnbitiana  oiu,  which  were  pert  sf
the  Roman  law,  especially  inch  as  related  to  umrr,
aureliei,  wills,  and  innameiable  other  thing*  (Liv.
ntXT.  7  ;  Gains,  iii,  121,  &c. ;  Cit  jm.  ita».  8>,
were  intiodnced  aoHmg  the  Socii,  and  nonunally
received  by  them  volnnlariiy.  (Cic  Lc;  GelL  xn.
13,  lax.  8.)  The  Romans  thus  giadnally  anitpd
the  Italiasa  with  thenuelvea,  by  introdsdng  thrir
own  Uw*  amcog  them  ;  hat  ai  they  did  not  grant
to  them  the  tame  diie  right*  the  Socii  oltiiutvlT
demanded  than  arms  in  their  hands.

.Among  the  dntiet  which  the  Italian  Sodi  hadM
perform  towards  Roma  the  following  an  the  prio-
cipal  onea :  iher  had  lo  send  nbiidies  in  cnupa,
money,  eorri,  (hipg,  and  olha-  things,  whenenr
Rome  demanded  them.  (Liv.  xiri.  39,  xiriiL  46i,
rxTv.  16,  Ac)  The  number  of  tncfa  nqnkiM
for  completing  at  hicreaaing  the  Roman  anniea  waa
decreed  every  year  bj  the  MDate  (LIt.  pmna),
ud  tiui  coniula  filed  the  ■maimt  which  c«h  alliol
nation  had  to  send,  in  jauportian  to  its  populoiica
capable  of  bearing  amu,  of  which  each  nation  wsi
obliged  to  draw  up  accurate  liita,  called  fimmalar.
(Lir.  wiir.  56  ;  Polyb.  ii.  23,  ftc;  Li».  nil  57.
iirii.  10.)  The  cansnl  alio  appoiotrd  the  plaea
and  time  at  which  the  tniopa  nf  tha  Socii,  each  pan
nnder  iii  own  Inder,  had  to  meet  bin  and  fail
If^iona.  (Poiyb.  ti.  21.  28  j  Lir.  miv.  66,
imL  3,  iii.  5.)  Tha  in&ntrj  of  tha  allie*  in  a
conanlar  army  was  usually  mon  nDmerooa  thaa
that  of  tha  Romana ;  the  eaTolrj  wu  gownlly
three  ttmea  the  number  of  the  Rmnana  (Polyk  HL
"■"  ■  26,  30)  :  but  thaw  immerical  pnpntioM
iBlwayaobierred.  {Pdyb.  iL  24,  iii  72.)
luls  appointed  twelra  pnefecta  aa  ecat-
miuiden  of  the  Socii,  and  thnr  pown  aniwetHi  la
that  of  the  twelve  military  tribunn  in  the  cmunW
l^oUL  (Polyb.  Tt  26,  37.)  These  ptaeferts,  who
re  pminbly  tskmfn>mtheal1iesthrmsrlrFs,and
finm  the  Romans,  lelecled  a  third  of  the  rxrajij,
1  a  fifth  of  the  inhntiy  of  the  Soeii,  who  fonned
' ~  delachment  for  eitranrdiDary  cases,  and


The I


ling  body  of  the  Socii  waa  then  divided  inls
porta,  called  the  right  and  tbe  left  wi».
(Polyb.  t  c  .-  Lir.  ml  21,  tot.  5.)  Tbe  in-
^t^  of  the  wings  was,  as  nsoal,  di'ided  into
ohorta,  and  tha  cavalry  into  turmae.  In  sona
aica  alan  legioni  were  formed  of  the  SndL  (  Lit.
:iivii.  39.)  Pay  and  clothing  wrn  given  lo  lbs
.Uied  troopa  by  the  itates  or  towns  to  which  they
belonged,  and  which  aj^uited  qnanlors  or  fny-
masterBfarthiBpnrpo3e(PoIyb.Ti.21 ;  Cica.  I'trr.
.  24)  i  but  Rome  furnished  them  with  pfoTisii—
1  the  expense  of  the  lepnblic :  the  iotoitiy  re-
vived the  same  bm  tbe  Roman  infantrr,  bot  tbe
ivalry  only  received  two-lhirda  of  what  waa  girm
)  the  Roman  cavalry.  (Polyb.  vi.  89  i  CJc,  pm
tali,  30.)  In  the  diitribation  of  tha  spoil  and  ^
>nqaered  lands  they  Ercqncntlj  received  the  taaa
ahan  aa  the  Romani. (Lir.  xl  43,  xIL  7,  IS,


SOCII.
slT.  iS,  ilii.  i.)  The  9ocii  iran  i]m
■nt  mt  u  eolonitti  with  the  Remain.  (AppUu,
da  BelL  Civ.  L  24.)  Thef  wne  never  alloired  lo
take  ap  anoM  of  (heir  own  sccoid.  Mid  diiputea
■mmiK  them  wen  Mttltd  bjr  the  Kiial&  Notirilh-
■tundiiig  kU  thii,  the  toeii  fell  graduoll;  noder  the
■rbitnr;  nle  of  the  icDate  ud  tha  nufUtratv  of
Kome;  and  after  the  yew  B.C.  173,  it  ena  be-
cune  caaUaovj  for  magiitratee,  when  thef  tATelled
thnD^  Italy,  to  raquiie  tha  authoiiliea  of  allied
tDwni  ta  pay  homage  to  them,  to  provide  them
with  a  naidaue,  aud  ta  funi^  them  with  beut*
of  balden  when  they  ctditinaed  their  jonnief.
(Ur.  xliL  1.)  Oetline  (x.  S)  mentioiu  a  Domber
of  otbtr  vanUioo*,  which  th*  Roman  nia^Cnta
inflicted  npon  tha  Soeii,  who  coold  not  venture  to
aeflk  any  mdrcai  againat  thanu Tha  only  way


kind  of
clientek  with  ■oma  influential  and  powerflil  Ro-
man, ai  the  SamnilM  wan  in  tha  dientela  of
Patnichu  Lukuhm  (Val.  Mu.  iv.  S.  §  6),  and
tha  aanata,  wbieh  wai  at  all  timet  rwaidsd  at  the
chief  prataetoT  of  tha  Socii,  not  only  recogniaed
fqeh  a  relatiaD  of  cUsDleia  between  Socii  and  a
Ranui  litiien,  hot  eren  referred  to  euch  jntnni


which  other


decided  itKl£ (Dionyi.

pv  AW.  21.)  Socii  who  revolted  Bgainit  Rome  wen
brqnenlly  puniihed  with  the  loai  of  their  freedom,
or  of  the  bsnMii  i^  acrring  in  the  Roman  aimiei.
(OellLe.:  Appian,i(cifiaa:  AiBn^61lStrab.T.
p.  3«fi,  vL  p.  S89 ;  Fett  *.  v.  BrvtiaiL)  Such
pnnithmenti  howerer  varied  accaiding  Co  eiicam-
itaneu  After  repealed  and  fraitlea*  attfinpli  to
obtain  the  fall  Roman  ftanchiao  by  legal  meana,
the  Italian  alliea  broke  oat  in  open  war  agUDtt
Rome,  the  Rinlt  of  which  waa  that  ihe  wu  com-
pelled to  giant  what  aha  had  before  obatinBtely  re-
fiiard.

After  the  dvitat  had  been  obtuned  by  all  the
Italiau  by  the  Lei  Jnlia  da  Ctvitate,  the  relatioo
sf  the  Italian  Sodi  to  Roma  ceaaed.  Bat  Rome
rent  apiiied  tha  name  Sodi
0  which  were  allied  vilh
taning  of  the  word  in  thij
caae  diSered  from  that  ct  the  Socii  Italia.  Livy
(xixiT.  £7  I  ccmip.  lETT.  46)  diitlngoiihea  two
paincipal  kinda  of  elliancea  with  foreign  nationi:
1.  fiadai  aijaaat,  inch  aa  might  be  conclnded
either  after  a  war  in  which  neither  party  had
Tirtary,  or  with  a  nation  with
-  lat  war;  S.a/Hf»
tioD  coinnefed  by  tha
I  obliged  u  enter  the  aSiance  on  any
icrma  pnqioaed  ij  the  eonqneron.  In  the  latter
caae  thfl  foreign  nation  vaa  nibieet  to  Rome,  and
obliged  to  comply  with  anything  that  Rome  might
deiMod.  But  all  foreign  Socii,  whether  they
had  ao  equal  cs  nneqnal  alliance,  were  obliged
to  aend  lubcidie*  in  troopa  when  Rome  demanded
them  I  these  troopa,  howevei,  did  not,  like  thaw
of  the  Italian  Socii,  ta^e  in  the  line,  but  were
em^oyed  a*  lightwmed  uldlere,  and  were  csited


(WRKa  artariH.  (Polyb.  iL  S3  ;  Liv,  Txi.  46,  Ilc,
utii.  22,  xirii.  S7,  inr.  1 1,  ilii.  2»,  35.)  To-
wahli  the  end  of  the  lepahlic  all  the  Reman  alliel,
whether  they  were  nalioni  or  kingi,  lank  down  to
the  eoDditum  of  mem  nhjecta  or  vaiaali  of  Rome,
wboM  freadon  and independence oonnited in


10S1

nothing  hut  a  name. (Walter,  GacL  d.  Aon.
JtedU,  p.  1SI2,  &e. ;  compare  FoBniEATAi  Cm-

T*T<«.)  IL  S.]

SO'CIO,  PRO,  ACTIO. [SocuTis.]

SO'CIUS. [SociiTAa.]

S0DA'LE8. [CoLLioivu.]

SODA'LES  AUGUSTA 'LES-CAuGUBTAiM.]

SODA'LES  TITII. [Titu.]

SODALI'TIUM. [A«BiT(TB.]

SOLA'RIUH.  tHoBOLOGiuH,  p.  616,  b  i
DoHi;8,p.429,b.]

SO'LEA  wai  the  aimpleaC  kind  of  sandal  [Sak-
DAtiuvJ,  coniiating  of  a  iole  with  little  more  to
laaten  it  to  the  fi»t  than  a  lUsp  acnw  the  initep.
iQelliu,  iii.  U,  liii.  31.)  It  wai  umetime*
made  of  wood  ( Iiid.  Or^.  xix.  3S),  and  worn  by
ruitia  (_Kat~awiSiKa,  Thcocrit.  xxt.  102, 103),  ts-
tembliog  probably  the  wooden  nndala  which  naar
fonn  part  of  the  dreaa  of  the  Capucbina.  The
■olea,  a<  worn  by  the  upper  dauca,  waa  adapted
chiefly  tor  wearing  in  the  hoiiae,  lo  that  when  a
man  went  out  to  dinner,  he  walked  in  ihoea
[Calcius],  takii^  with  him  ilippen  [Socci-'b]  or
■oleae,  which  he  put  on  when  he  entered  the
houH.  Before  lediuingal  table,  theie  were  laken
away  by  a  eervani  {>es  woodcut,  p.  SOS  ;  Plaut.
7'nic;;i4.  IG;  Ovid..dr..l>it.  iL2l2  ;  Mut  viii-
59.  14)  ;  conaeqaently  when  dionei  waa  over  it  ,
wa«  oDcenaiy  lo  call  for  ihem.  (Plant.  Trre.  n.
4.  12,  Afort.  ii.  1.  37  J  Hor.  Sat.  ^  B.  77.)  But,
accoi^iag  to  the  atale  of  Ibe  roadg  or  of  the  wea-
ther, tha  ahoet  or  booti  were  agua  put  ou  in  order
to  return  home,  tiie  loleae  being  carried,  oi  befoie,
under  the  aim.  (Hor.  Epiii.  L  13.  Ifi.)  When
circumataneeawere  tavonrable,  Chia  change  or  tbo
ahoci  ioi  ilippera  or  aoleaa  waa  not  conaidered
neceiaary,  the  latter  being  woni  in  the  atreeta.
(Mart  lii.  aa.)

Soieaa  Uffneae,  aolea  oi  ahoea  of  prood,  wen  put
on,  under  the  authority  of  the  Roman  Inn,  either
for  the  purpoae  of  torture,  or  perhapa  merely  to  ID-


. (Cic/an


utHtn ■ "


i.  13.)


In  domeitie  life  the  nndol  commonly  won

femalea  waa  oftm  otcd  to  chaatias  a  huiband  and

to  bring  him  into  eiibjection. (Meuandei.  p.  6H-

IS6,  od-Meineke:  isba o^raR^aliirg mira, Pen.  V-

169;  un^ia,Ter.  £anae<i.  v.e.  4;  Juv.vLSle.)

Iron  ahoea  (loiaaefirreae)  were  put  on  the  feet  of

mnlei  (CatolL  xvii-  26) ;  but  uuUod  of  ihia,  Nero

hadhiamoleaihod  with  liliei  (Stieton.  JVero,  30),

and  hit  empteta  Poopoea  her'i  with  gold. (Plin.

//■.Af.  xxniLll.a.49.)  [J.  Y.]

SO'LIDUS. [AuauK,  p.  182,b.]

SOLITAURI'LIA.  [8AcaiF>oii:-M,p.  lOOO.a ;

Lubthitio,  p.  719,  bj  and  woodcut  on  p.  ia4G.]

SO'LIUM. [EitNlAK,  p.  191  ; THBONVa.]

S0PHR0NI3TAE.  [GviCN*aiuii,  p.SUl.b-]
S0KTE3,  lota.  It  wai  a  frequent  practice
among  the  Italian  natiom  to  eudekioui  to  aicertoin
a  knowledge  of  futuie  erenti  by  dnwiiig  lota
(lorta) :  in  many  of  the  andent  Italian  lemplea
the  will  of  the  goda  waa  coDiulted  in  ihia  way,  aa
at  Piaeneite,  Caere,  &c  [Obaculuh,  p.  343,  a.]
Reapeeting  the  meaning  of  Sora  lee  Cic  de  Dh.
iL41.

Theae  aorteaor  lota  wervumally  little  ta^'ela  or
cotmten,  made  of  wood  or  other  material*,  and
were  commonly  thrown  into  a  utella  or  am,  filled
with  water,  aa  ii  eiplaioed  under  SiitJi-A.  The
ihlDWD  like  dice.  (Suet.  Tib.
. --- -  ^^--


10G2  SPECULUM.

U.)  Ths  name  of  Sorteg  ma  bi  &ct  giien  (o  rniy-
thing  nifd  to  delerminB  chances  (cflinpan  Cic  tU
lAv.  i.  34),  and  wai  a]»  applied  to  anj  Teibal  »
■ponH  of  an  oracle.  (Cic  !&£>».  iL  66;  Virg.  Am.
JT.  316,  377.)  Variaui  thingi  nre  written  upoc
the  loll  accotdiDg  to  dramitlance*,  u  Sit  initance
tbo  namei  of  (be  penoni  uiing  ihem,  &c :  it  teemi
to  ban  b«en  a  JaTourite  practice  in  later  tiniea  to
write  ths  tciki  of  illoitriDiu  poeta  npon  little  tab.
let*,  and  to  dnw  themoat  of  the  urn  like  other  loti,
the  Tenet  which  a  penon  thne  obtained  heing  tnp-
poied  to  he  applicable  to  him  :  hence  we  re*'  '
Soriea  Vtr^HanoA,  &c-  (I^nprid,  jiZu.  Seetr,
Spanian.  Hadr.  %)  It  wai  alao  the  practin
cooault  the  pacta  in  the  same  way  ai  the  Moh
medani  do  ths  Konin  and  Hafia,  and  many  Cii
tiaiu  the  Bible,  naoielr,  b;  opening  the  book  at
landom  and  ^plying  the  Rrat  panage  that  atniek
the  eye  to  a  pcraon*aawn  immediate  ctieniaataRces.
(AngiiH.  On/n.  >'.  3.)  Thia  practice  wai  Tery
common  among  the  early  Chriadana,  who  aub.ti-
tnted  the  Bible  and  the  Pialter  for  Homer  and
Virgil;  manycouncilarepeateiljcnndemned  theae
Sena  Siacbmm,  ai  they  were  called.  (Gibbon,
£KA'w>wfi%ii;cxi]rviiL  nole  AI.)  TheSitayUine
booka  wer«  uobably  alao  conaulled  in  thia  way.
[SiBVLUNI  LlBKI.]  ThMe  who  foretold  fnture
eventa  by  lota  were  c^led  Sortilegi. (Lncan,  ii.

«ei.)

The  SorUt  Catnimilet  were  tableta  tealed  up,
which  were  aald  at  entertainmenta,  and  upon  bring
opened  or  nnaealed  entitled  the  purchaaer  to  thingt
of  Teiy  nnequal  valne  ;  they  were  therefore  a  kind
of  lotteiy. (Suet.  Oelae.  75  ;  Idmprid.  H^imA,
22.)
SPADfTOES. (:iiiPiiBi«,p.6ai,b.]
SPARUS. [HASTi,  p.  SHB,  b.]
SPE'CIES  NOVA. [CoNrusio.]
SPECTIO. [AuoiH.  pp.  177,b,  I78,a.]
SPECULA'RIA. [DoMDMfc  ^a,  b.]
SPECIILA'RIS  LAPIS.  (D<»<u^  p.432,a.]
SPECULATO'RKS. [EK«tcrruB,p.  £08,  b;
eomp.  HsHBHODitoiii.]

SPE'CULUM(  mlTowrpoi',  taarrfor,  Irarrpar),
a  mirror,  a  lookin^-glaaa.  The  naeof  mirron  ia  of
very  high  an^quity  (Job,  xxiiiL  18  ;  Erodu^
zixviiL  8),  bat  they  are  not  mentioned  1^  Homer,
even  when  be  deacribea  in  ao  ciicumatantial  a
manner  the  toilet  of  Hera.  In  (he  hiaCoiical  timet
of  Oteeee  they  are  liequently  spoken  of  (Xen.  Qir.
viLl.ga  i  Euiip.  JIfwfaa,  1161,  »«(<.  1112,  jux),
and  they  were  probably  known  in  Greece  long  be-
fore, ainee  every  lubitance  capable  of  receiving  a
fine  poliah  would  nnawer  the  purpoie  of  a  mirror.
Thni  haaina  were  employed  inslesd  of  miiTon
(Ancmiod.  Onor.  iii.  SO.  p.  279,  ed.  Reiff),  and
alio  cnpa,  the  inaide  of  which  wat  aometunea  ao
diapOBPd,  that  the  image  of  the  penon  who  drank
from  them  waa  aeen  mnltiplied,  (y\ii\.H.N.iixm.
9.».iS;  compare  Vopiac  Fnb.  t.)

The  looking-glaaaea  of  the  ancienli  were  nanally
made  of  metal,  at  fint  of  a  compotttion  of  tin  and
cwpper,  bnt  afterwarda  more  frequently  of  ailrer.
(Plin.  I.a.)  Pliny  layi  that  ailver  roimra  were
fint  made  by  Praxitslea  in  the  time  of  Pompey
the  Qrut,  hut  they  an  mentioned  aa  early  a*  that
ot  PUntui.  (AfoM.  i.  3.  111.)  Under  the  empire
the  naa  of  silver  minors  waa  so  common,  that  they
began  to  be  naed  erea  by  maid  lervanta  (Piin.
.^.JV.iiiiT.  17.1.43):  they  ore  conatautly  men-
tioiled  in  the  Digeat,  whan  silvw  plata  ia  qskoa  et


SPECULUM.
(33.  lit.  6.  a  3  ;  34.  tit.  3.  a;  19.  S  8). At  Gut

Oie^  were  made  of  the  purest  ailvw,  but  neOl  of
an  inferior  quality  was  afterwards  emfjoyed.  (Plio.
H.  N.  iniiL  9.  %  4S.)  Freqaently  too  tfaa
poliahed  ailver  plate  was  do  donbt  very  alight.  bM
the  excellence  of  the  miinir  va-y  much  depended
on  the  thickneaa  of  the  plata,  amce  the  reflecln
was  atronger  in  proportion  aa  the  plate  was  thicka.
(Vitmv.  Tii.  3.  p.  204,  ed.  Bip.)  We  find  pAi
mirron  mcntionM  once  or  twice  by  attdent  writm
(Eurip.  HiaA.  S2fi  ;  Senec  qoaoL  NaL  L  17  ;
Aelian,  V.  H.  xiL  S3)  ;  but  it  ii  not  jmpaidMB.
ai  Beckmann  haa  remarked,  that  the  term  goldan
rather  reien  to  the  fiame  or  cnnamenta  than  tn  the
minor  itielf^  aa  we  apeak  oF  a  gold  watch,  tkanfh
the  raiea  only  may  be  of  that  metaL

Besidea  metala,  the  ancimla  alao  fonDed  iIcd«
into  miiTon,  but  these  an  mentwned  ao  addoai
that  we  may  conclude  they  wen  iatended  for  onia.
ment  rather  than  for  nse.  Pliny  (ff.  A',  rari.  36.
a.  67)  mentiona  Cha  obaidian  atone,  or.  aa  it  ia  new
called,  the  Icelandic  agate,  aa  portjcalarly  anitaUe
for  thia  purpoaa.  Domiuon  ia  said  to  have  had  a
gallery  lined  with  jiAa^ita,  which  by  ita  nfiectifla
ahowed  erery  thing  that  waa  done  behind  kia  ba^
(Suet  Ooaa.  14),  by  which  Beckmaim  undeiBtaiida
a  calcanoQ*  or  gypoeoos  a^,  or  leloiite,  which  ii
indeed  capable  of  reflecting  an  image ;  bat  we  oat-
not  therefore  concludo  that  the  ascjenu  Ibnaed
minori  of  it.  Minnra  wen  also  made  oF  mlMca
according  to  Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxrii.  7-  i.  25),  who
rcfen  to  Theopbraatna  for  bia  anthority,  Imt  ha
Boema  to  have  miiundentood  the  panage  ot  Tbeo.
phraatua  (i^  Lopid,  61),  and  thia  atone  ia  nevfr
found  now  aufficiently  large  to  enable  it  to  be  made
into  a  mirror.  The  emerald,  it  a[^iaan,  alaa  aBTCd
Nero  for  a  mirnH-.  (Plin.  ff.M  xxirii  &  a.  16;
Isidor.  XTi.  7.)

The  ancienli  mm  to  lian  bad  f^im  mimTB
alao  tike  onn,whidcoiiaiatofa  gtiM  plalc  enntcA
at  the  back  wilb  a  thin  leaf  of  nulil.  They  nn
manubctared  ai  eaily  ai  the  time  of  HiBT  at  tbt
celebrated  ^an-bouBe*  of  Sidoa  (Plis.  It.X.  xxxvi.
26.  a  66),  bnt  they  mnat  have  beoi  infenr  la
' e  of  metal,  aince  they  Di

and  an  never  meutioaed  by  ai
amoi^  coitly  piscei  of  fumititn,  when
ran freqnentlj ate.  Piinyieematoalladete
another  panage  {H.  N.  xniti.  9.  a.  iS]
'  t  ot  gold  being  applied  bahJDd  a  n:
in  undentand,  if  wa  adnit  that  Plioy  vaa
inted  with  glaaa  minon.

_  miiTon  made  of  a  mixtnre  of  copper  and  tin,
the  beat  were  monu&ctnred  at  Brandiainm.  (  Pliu,
A.JV.iiiiii.9.a4£,xiiiT.17.a.4S.>  Tkiemii-
tan  pnducea  a  white  melal,  which,  nnleaa  pip-
aerved  with  grott  tare,  iooa  becomea  as  dim  that
it  cannot  be  need  nntil  it  haa  been  pnTioaaly
cleaned  and  poliahed.  Fcr  tbia  naano  a  apcaige
with  pounded  piuniceHrtone  waa  gex»eia]lT  fiufo^d
to  the  ancient  mimn.  (Plat.  Timatiu,'f.  72,  c  ;
VoasiuB,  ad  CaialL  p.  97.)

liiiiHiijI  [[liiaaia  were  generilly  wiall  and  aueb
ai  could  be  mniDd  in  the  hand.  Host  of  Iheae
which  an  i^eaerved  in  out  Moaouma  aiw  of  thia
kind  ;  they  oanally  hare  a  baodle,  aad  ate  of  a
round  or  oval  shape.  Their  ooiaal  font  a  tbewa
in  tha  woodcnt  annexed.  (Caylna,  Rtcmmt  J-Aa-
tiquilU,  vol.  V.  pL  62.)

Inalead  of  their  being  fixed  ao  aa  to  be  bvpg  a^anst
the  wall  or  to  ataiid  i^Ml  tk*  table  s  Boor,  Ihi^


'Wpn  gnmBll;  held  br  fenia]«  i1st«  tnTore  tLeif
tniitreMf*  wbn  dresuDg  (Propert  iv.  7.  75,  76),
which  affics  *rai  alw  peifonDed  loinRimci  by  the
loier,  when  admitted  to  tile  Uilel  of  hii  mutnw.
(Grid.  At.  Am.  ii.  216.)  On  UKinit  tu«  ttt
ttaaetima  find  fcm&le  lUTct  npreMsted  boldhig
Dp  iniiTini  to  their  miitram.  (Tiichbaiii,  Eaffrav.
Jiom  ommbK  Vata,  TcJ.  L  pL  10.)


Looking-gluMi,  hawercr,  wen  also  made  of  the
length  of  a  penon^i  hodj  (tptatla  totiipaTta  cor-
j»i4h,  SeiiM.  Qmu/.  A'of ,  L  17)  :  of  which  hind
the  niiTor  of  Demnthena  nmit  haTs  heen.
(Qniotil.  Imit.  Or.  zL  S.  S  68.)  Thi?  were
&(laied  to  the  wsUi  Mdnetimet  (tpttnliait  paridi
l^firmi,  D!)t.  34.  tit.  2.  1.  19.  I  8  ;  VitruT.  ix.
6.  (9.)  p.  280.  Bip.),  thoQgh  not  genCTaUy.  Soe-
toniiu  in  hi)  lib  of  Honce  iptaka  of  on  aputmait
belonging  to  th»t  poet,  which  wm  lined  with
mimn  {tpea^atm*  aAiatbtm^^  which  eiprenim,
howerer,  Lfuing  coniiden  u  cmitrBiy  to  the  Latin
jdiom,  uid  Iherefcn  regaidi  the  whole  pungo  H
a  foT^eiy.  That  then  were,  however,  cnonia  oma-
msiled  in  thii  way.  ii  probahle  from  Claudian^i
deacriptioD  of  the  chamber  of  Venoi,  which  waa
coreced  orer  with  minoit,  to  tliat  whicherer  way
Iier  eyea  tamed  ihe  could  aee  her  own  image.
(H>M-.  M  NiqA.  Honor,  tt  Mar.  IDS,  &c)  We
freqaently  find  the  mirror  mentioned  in  conmctian
with  Venni  (Athen.  it.  p.  687,  c),  bnt  Miner™
mi  RippoMd  to  make  do  lue  of  iL  (Callim.  Hymn,
a  Lataer.  PaOad.  17.)

(Spanheim,  Otters,  m  CWmadd  Hfruum  n
lm>acnimPalladu,f.Si7,Uitai.lG97;  Menard,
Aeeiensia  lar  la  Mirmn  df  Amau  in  PHitoiTt
de  PAeadlmie  du  Inter,  vol  xriii.  p.  1 40 ;  Cajlni,
KoMta  d-Aiitiqnill*,  HI  p.  331,  t.  p.  173  ;  Beck-
mann,  Hiilory of  ltaetitiiau,to\.  iiL  p.  164,  traniL  ;
Batticer,  Sahita,  toL  L  pp.  133,  1S2,  toL  ii.  pp.
'\*&,\69,arifddKiai  VateagmaUdai,  tqL  iii.  p.
46;  Becker,  <;a/^H,T0Li  p.97,  vol.  ii.  p.111.)

SPECUH. [Aiju*«DUCTus,p.ll3.]

SPHAERISTETIIUM. '


afl2.»


*.]


SPI'CULUM. [HAaT*,p.S89.a.]
SPINTKR  at  SPINTHER. [Abvilla.]
SPIRA  (iTTfifKi),  dim.  SPIRULA  (Serriu  in
Virg.  An.  iL  217),  the  hBK  of  a  column.

Thii  membei  did  not  eiiit  in  the  Doric  order  of
Omk  architecture  [Columns],  hut  wai  alwayi
pceteot  in  the  Ionic  and  Corinthian,  and,  besidei
the  hM*«  prnperly  belonguig  to  thaw  Mden,  tliel«


SPOLIA.  loss

waa  one  tailed  the  Allic,  which  may  bo  regarded
BB  a  variety  of  the  Ionic  [ATTicuaou].  The
term  occur)  frequently  in  V  itruiin*  (iii.  3.  S  3 ;
4.  S 1,  a  1  S.  S  1—4.  ■'.  1.  §  7,  T.  9.  S  4,  ed.
ScliDeider)  and  in  Pliny  (H.N.  imL  Ji.  i.  4  ;
23,  ».  66).  _  They  adopted  it  from  the  writingi  of
Gieek  arehJtectR,  whoae  worki  fasYe  perished.  It
ii  in  bet  the  Greek  term  ntipa,  which  wai  ap-
plied totliia  member  of  a  coloma  (PDllai,Tii.  121)
pmhably  OD  account  of  iti  reaemblance  to  a  ccdl  c^
rope.  In  ancient  Onek  inieriptioui  aw<^  de-
Dolei  the  bate  of  Ionic  and  CoriiithiBu  pillan,
being  applied  to  thoee  of  Ihe  temple*  of  Minena
Poliai  at  Athena  (C.  0.  MUlIrr,  Mm.  PaL  Saera,
pp.  35,  50  ;  Bdckh,  Corp.  Inter.  Or.  i,  pp.  261 —
286X  and  of  Jupiter  at  Labianda.  (C.  Fellowi,
En.  la  Alia  Minor,  pp.  262,  331.)

In  the  Tnican  and  the  Roman  Doric  the  baaa
enuiited  of  a  tinglo  tocu  (Festm,  i.  e.  Spira),
•ometimee  anrmonntsd  by  an  aatngal.  In  the
lenie  and  Attic  it  commonly  coniitled  of  two  tori
(tonu  taperior  and  fonu  afirior)  diiided  by  a
mUa  (Tpixi*^'),  and  in  the  Corinthian  of  two
tori  ditided  by  two  Kutiae.  The  upper  tonu  wai
often  fluted (pvffkrris),  and  lurmoonted  by  a


>l[Ai


a  the  left-hand  fignrv


of  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  il
the  baie  in  the  Ionic  tample  of  Panope  id  the
Iliuua.  The  right-band  Rgiue  in  the  ume  wood-
cot  ihawi  the  cocreaponding  port  in  the  tem[Je  of
MineTTB  Pollu  at  Alheni.  In  thia  the  upper
tonu  il  WTonght  with  a  plaited  ornament,  pertu^
designed  to  repreieiit  an  " ' '


(fUmOmt,  itAWoj),  but  on  a  podimn.  In  Ionic
building!  of  a  later  date  it  leeli  on  a  iquaie  plinth
comapondiog  in  ita  dimauiioni  with  the  Abaodb.
For  other  example*,  lee  Mauch,  .Jrabtnboitual*
Onfamjoi.  [J.Y.]

SFITHAME  (owi8(vi^),oqi>w,aGteekmea.
mre  eqoal  to  3-4thi  of  the  foot.  There  wa*  no
proper  Roman  meainre  corre*ponding  to  it,  hut
the  later  writen  nied  jwiima  in  thii  lenae  ;  the
early  writen  expren  the  Greek  apaa  properly  by

dod™-».  [M«NB[JB4,p.7Bl,bjP*LMU8.] [P.S,]

SPtyLIA.  Four  word*  are  commMily  employed
to  denote  booty  taken  in  war,  Pratda,  MataUae,
BxiiBiai,Spolia,  Of  tbeie,  proeiii  bean  the  moat
comprehenaire  meaning,  being  naed  for  plunder  of
erery  de*cription,  [Pkabd*,]  A/amii™  wai  the
money  which  the  quaeilor  realiied  from  the  lale  of
thoee  object*  which  congtituted  piaeda  (OelL  xiiL
24;  Cic.rf«iv..iiPr.  iL2a.)  The  term  £nma«
indicate*  any  thing  ttnpped  from  the  peraon  of  a
foe,  while  ^xilia,  properiy  ipeeking,  ought  to  be
confined  to  armour  and  weapon*,  although  both
vordi  ace  >nli*di  looael;  to  in^hie*  mch  a*  cha-


1051


SPOLIA.


tioU,  Mondardi,  b«Bk>of  abipi  uid  the  like,  vhicli
might  be  preserred  and  diiplaj-ed.  (See  Doedor-
lein,  Lai'  fiyn.  toL  it.  p.  3.^7 »  Ranuhom,  LaL  Sym.
p.  669  ;  Xlabicht,  Spi.  MatahimterbuA,  n.  758.)

In  the  heroic  agei  no  victoi?  «u  coniidfred
cnmpleM  unleu  ths  couqaerDn  could  tneceed  in
■Irippii^  ihe  bodiei  of  the  lUun,  the  ipolls  tiiiu
oblnmed  being  yieiird  (like  scalps  amang  tha
North  Aineri(sn  Indians)  as  the  only  unquestion-
iibls  evidence  of  •uecewTuI  Tslonr  \  and  we  find  is
Homer  that  when  two  champjoni  c»me  forward  to
contend  in  lingle  combat,  tha  manner  in  which  the
body  and  arms  of  tha  Tnnqnished  were  to  be  di>-

Kpd  of  fonned  tha  subject  of  a  regoiiir  compact
ween  the  parties.  (Horn.  IL  fii.  7fi,  At,  uiL
254,  &c)  Among  tha  Ronnni,  ^il>  taken  in
bstilc  wen  coniidercd  the  moM  honounUt  of  all
disttnctiDna  ;  to  have  twice  itrif^d  an  enany,  in
ancient  limei,  entitled  the  aoldiiei  to  promotion
(VoL  Max.  iL  7.  S  U),  and  during  the  second
Punic  war,  Fabius  when  filling  np  tha  nnmerous
vacancin  in  the  senate  ramed  by  the  slaughti?r  at
Cannae  and  b;  other  dinutrons  defeats,  aAer  hav-
mg  selected  ancti  as  had  borne  some  of  the  great
offices  of  state,  named  those  next  "  qni  apolia  ex

accepinenL"  (LiT.niii.  23.)  Spoils  collected  on
the  battle  field  after  au  engagement,  or  foand  in  a
captured  tovn  were  employed  to  decrante  the  tem-
ples of  the  gods,  triumphal  archea,  porticoes,  and

hour  of  extreme  need  served  to  one  the  people
(Liv.iiiLi:,  ixiT,  21,  x.  47  ;  VnL  Max.  Tiii.
6.  §  1  !  IjiL  Ilal.  X.  S99),  but  ihosi  which  vera
))ained  by  individual  prowess  were  considered  the
undoubted  property  of  the  successful  combatant,
and  were  exhibited  in  the  rawt  conspicuous  part
of  his  dwelling  (Polyb.  ti.  39),  being  bung  up  in
the  atrium,  suspended  from  tha  door-posts,  or  ai-
mnged  in  the  reilibulutn,  with  appropriate  inscnp-
tions.  (Liy.x.7,  MXviiL43j  Cin.  PUHpp.n.'ia  ;
SiioL  Nm,  38  ;  Virg.  Am.  ii.  504,  iii.  286,
TibulLi.l.i4  ;  Propert.  iii.  9.  20  j  Ovid. -Ir.-im.
ii.  743;  Sil,  Ilal.  vi  446.)  They  were  regarded  as
peculiarly  sacred,  so  that  erai  if  tlie  house  was
soid  the  new  posiessor  wns  not  permitted  to  re-
move them.  (Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  2.)  A  remnrkabla
instance  of  this  occurred  in  the  "  rostrala  domus"
of  Pamper,  which  wai  decorated  with  the  beaks
of  ships  captured  in  his  war  against  the  pirates  ;
this  house  passed  into  the  hands  of  Antonius  the
triumvir  (Cic.  I'iHipp.  I.  c),  and  was  eventually
inberiled  by  the  emperor  Goidian,  in  whose  tune
it  appeuB  In  have  still  retained  its  ancient  oma-
mcnls.  (Capitalln.  GBrdias.S.)  But  while  on  the
one  band  it  was  nnlawfiil  to  remove  spoils,  so  it
was  forbidden  to  rtpiaee  or  rgMir  thcni  when  they
had  (alien  down  or  become  decayed  through  age
{Plutarch,  QwmK.  Bom.  37),  tha  object  of  this
regulation  being  doubtlea  to  gtard  againft  the
bauds  of  &lse  pretenders.

Of  all  spoils  the  most  important  were  the  Spntia
C^ma,  a  term  applied  to  those  only  which  ibe
commander-in-chief  of  a  Roman  army  Mnpped  In  a
field  of  battle  fioin  the  lender  of  the  foe.  (Liv.  W.
SO.)  Feslus  (s.  t>.  Opiina)  gives  the  Bme  defini-
tion as  Livy,  but  ndds  "  M.  Vam  ail  o|rima  spolia
esse  {etiam]  si  manipolaris  miles  dettax«il  dum-
modo  dud  haslinm,"  a  statement,  if  corwetly
quoted,  directly  at  variance  witli  the  opinion
generally  Teceived  and  acted  upon. Tlnu  irbui


SPORTULA.
M.  Crassns,  in  the  fifth  consulship  of  Octananns
(b.  c  2S),  slew  Deldo,  king  of  the  Bualuiue,  ba
was  not  conaidered  to  have  guned  spolia  c^ima
bccatue  acting  imder  the  auspices  of  another  (Uioa
Cass.  Ii.  24  ;  compaie  VaL  Mai.  iii.  2.  |  G),  and
Plutarch  (A/onWL  S)  eipresilf  asKrt*  that  Hmdoii
history  up  to  his  own  time  affivded  but  Ihire  ex-
amples. The  first  were  said  to  have  been  woa  by
Romulus  fnnn  Acto,  king  of  the  Caeninenses.  the
second  by  Anios  Cornelius  Cossus  from  Lar  Tnlom-
ninsking  of  the  Veientes,  the  third  by  H.Clandlni
Malcellus  from  Viridamsnis  (or  BftrSiafret  as  be
is  oiled  by  Plutiich),  king  of  the  Gaesatae.  In
all  these  msea,  In  accordance  with  the  ordinal
instituiioti,  the  spoils  were  dedimted  to  Jupm
Peretrios.  The  hoooun  of  spolia  opima  wen  roled
to  Julius  Caesar  during  his  fifth  consulskip  (b.  c
44,  the  yor  of  his  lualh),  but  it  was  not  even
pretended  that  he  had  any  legitimate  claim  to  this
distinction.  (Dion  Cass.  iliv.  4.)  (The  qaesiioa
with  regard  to  the  true  definition  of  apolis  opima
is  discussed  with  gnnt  leaning  by  Periuniai,
Amna^.  Hit.  c.  7.)  fW.  R-]

SPONDA,  [Lktos,  p.  674,  b.]
SPO'NDEO.  [Obliqationsb,  p.  817,  h.]
SPO'NGIA.  [PicTUB*,  p.  905,  a.]
SPONSA,  SPONSUa  [MiTaiMOKiCTM.
p.  741,  b.]
SPONSA-LIA.  [MtTKlHOMUM,  p.  741,  b.]
SPONSOR.  [iNTXttcxBSio,  p.  640,  h.]
SPO'RTULA.  In  the  days  of  Roman  freedon
clients  wen  in  the  habit  oflfsUfj-ing  tafectia!
their  paiton  by  tbnn^g  his  atrium  at  an  earlT
hour,  and  escorting  him  to  places  of  pablk  naort
when  he  went  abtwd.  As  an  acknowledgmejit  of
tliese  courtesies  some  of  the  number  wen  usually
invited  to  paitaka  of  the  evening  nwal.  Aftu  tha
oxtinctian  of  liberty  the  presence  of  nch  guests,
who  bad  now  lost  all  political  importance,  vas
soon  regarded  as  an  irksome  restraint,  while  at  the
same  lime  man;  of  tha  nobis  and  wealthy  wen
unwilling  to  tacrjiice  the  pompous  display  i^a  nu-
meions  body  of  retainers.  Hence  the  practice  waa
intioducrd  under  the  empire  of  bestowing  on  each
client,  when  he  presented  himself  loi  his  nicniiw
visit,  a  certain  portion  of  food  as  a  nibstiialE  and
compensation  lor  the  occasional  iuTitatioD  to  •
regt^  supper  {eoe»a  nota),  and  this  dole,  being
carried  off  in  a  little  basket  provided  for  tbe  par-
pose,  received  the  name  of  ^orbtJo.  Hence  also  it
is  termed  by  Greek  writen  tsa  Kobaa  afbiis
i«iiKU>  irwb  g-irvpllof,  which  howerec  most  mt  ba
confomjded  with  the  Ztirvo¥  &rb  onplftev  of
earlier  authors, which  wasasort  of  pe-nic  [Coaxi,
p.  304,  b.] For  tho  sake  of  convenieocB  it  soon


Martial  indeed  often  speaks  of  this  oa  ■  slwbbf
pittance  ieentam  mitoUi  nadramia^  iiL  7,  cooipara
I  GO,  iiL  14,  I.  74),  which,  howerer,  he  did  net
scorn  himself  to  accept  (i.  75),  but  at  the  lama
'""  '-■'••■  -  -  -  -  -  Qpalart  who  ea-
by  a  bi^pB*  to  a
birthday  (x.  38).  Tbe  di>-
nation  in  money,  however,  did  not  enlinly  anpcr-
sedo  the  aportula  given  in  kind,  for  wc  find  in
Juvenal  a  lively  description  of  a  great  man^  Tcstj-
bnle  crowded  with  dependents,  each  attOMlcd  by  a
slave  bearing  a  portablo  kitchen  to  mceive  the
nands  and  keep  tham  hot  while  Ibe;  woe  cu>m4


STADIUM.
.  S49). ir  the  iketcbn  of  the  ntinit
o  highly  coloBird,


It  amdadfl  th»
in  h»  lime  in*at  nuiobcn  of  the  lower  order*  de-
lirtd  their  whola  iiulenuice  oad  the  fund*  for  oi^
dinvj  eipenditure  eicloiivelj  from  this  •ource,
wbila  eT«i  the  highboni  did  Dot  acmpleta  incieue
their  incomei  by  taking  Kdvuitags  of  Che  oitenlB-
ti«u  pnfuion  of  the  rich  nd  vitin.  (Jot.  L  95.)
A  regnlir  roll  wu  kept  *t  each  maiuiaD  of  the
penoiu,  male  and  female,  entitled  to  neeJTe
the  uUoinuic*  ;  the  name*  vera  called  orer  in
order,  the  indiTiduals  were  required  to  ippear  in
penou,  and  the  almoner  tu  erer  on  hii  goard  u
uucrale  the  ngucrj  of  falie  pretendei*  (Jqt.  L  a.),
vhtnee  the  proverb  quoted  by  Tenullian  (e.  Afar-


i-  16),


™(Jn.,


Tho


.  128),  7


tJO.)


Nero,  imitating  the  cnatom  of  priTata  penoni,
oduntd  that  a  iportnla  ihould  be  nibititnled  for
the  pablic  banquet*  {jmUica*  omwu)  giien  to  the
pei^e  oa  certain  high  loleninitiea  ;  but  diii  unpo-
pnlar  regulitioa  wu  repealed  b;  Domitian.  (Suet
Aer.  16,  On*.  7;  Maruai,  Tiii,60.)

When  the  Emperor  cWdiui  on  one  occBiion
rnolTed  nnerpectedlj  to  entertun  tiM  popolace
vith  iome  game*  which  wen  to  lost  for  a  ihort
time  only,  he  Btyled  the  aihibidon  a  ^wrhite,  and
ia  lh«  age  of  the  yomig»  Ptiny  the  wind  was
coEnnosly  emnlDyed  to  i^i^  a  ^toity ,  gift,  or
(■Mdimient  of  an*  de«riptioiL  (Plin.  Ep.  iL  H,
X.  lis.)

(Cotnpais  a  ditaertaCiDD  on  the  SportnU  by
Buttmann  tntheJTntintoSiEAotMfbr  1821;  lee
also  Becker,  Gallju,  voL  L  p.  1 47.) [  W.  R.]

STADULA'RIUS. [RreaPTi  Actio.]

STA'DlUMtioTdiioiandTiima™')  I. The
foot-race  eoarw  at  Olympia  and  the  other  placea  in
Orceee  where  game*  were  celebrated.  It  wae
orifiiiially  intended  for  the  foat-iace,  bat  the  other
oonteets  which  were  added  to  the  gajnei  fntm  time
to  tine  [Oltvfii]  were  al«>  eihibihsd  in  the  Stn-
dioBi,  eieept  the  hone-nce*,  for  which  a  place
was  set  oiurt,  of  a  rimikr  fbrm  with  the  stadium,
but  larger:  this  was  called  the  Hiffodbouus
(fn^^Mfwi).

The  stadiom  wa*  an  oblong  area  teiminated  at
one  end  by  a  straight  line,  at  the  other  by  a  semi-
circle  tuning  the  breadth  of  the  stadinm  for  its
hate.  Round  this  area  were  ranges  of  seata  nsing
aboTe  one  another  in  stepL

It  was  eoutracted  in  three  different  way*,  ac-
cording to  the  nature  of  the  grouDd.  The  simplest
form  was  that  in  which  a  place  conld  be  found
which  had  by  natnre  the  required  shape,  as  at
Laodicea.  Most  commonly,  howeier,  a  position
was  chowin  on  the  side  of  a  hill,  and  the  stadium
was  fotmed  on  one  side  by  the  natural  slope,  on
the  other  by  a  mound  oF  earth  (-yqi  x^fxa),  at  at
Olympia,  Thebes,  and  Epidoums.  (Pauvni.  ii.  27.
I  6,  Ti.  30.  £  5, 6,  ix.  23.  9  1.)  Someames,  hov-
■ver,  the  ttadium  waa  on  lerel  gioimd,  and  moonda
of  earth  were  cast  np  round  it  to  form  seats,  and
Cdrered  with  stone  ot  marble.  We  haie  two  cele-
brated e  jompiei  of  this  constiuction  in  the  Pythian
Stwlitim  at  Delphi  and  tbfl  Panalhenaie  at  Athens.
The  former  was  originally  constructed  of  Pamos-
tian  stone,  and  afterwards  corered  with  Penlelic
BNsble  bj  Herodet  Attieni  (Ptua.  X.  33.  §  1),  wb*


STADIUM.  lOU

adorned  in  the  same  manner  the  stadium  at  Athens,
which  had  been  originally  eonalructed  on  the  baiikt
of  the  Ilistos  by  the  oialor  Lyeurgos.  The  mar-
ble covering,  which  look  four  yean  to  cmnplele,
bss  now  diuppeand,  bat  the  ana  is  still  left,  with
some  ruins  of  the  matODiy.  (Paa^  i  19.  S  7  i
Leake's  Tc^K^n^  o/jSUima.)

The  stadium  aometime*  fbiined  a  part  of  the
buildings  of  the  gymnaainm  [OthkiSiuh],  at
other  time*  it  was  plieed  in  it*  neighbourhood,  and
often,  Bs  at  Athens,  stood  entirely  by  itself.  That
at  Ulympia  was  in  the  sacred  groTs  called  Altja.

The  sin  of  the  Oreoan  stadia  varied  both  to
length  and  breadth  ;  hut  this  vaiiety  ia  in  all  pro-
bability to  be  understood  of  the  siae  of  the  wimlo
endotore,  not  of  the  length  of  tbe  part  marked  out
for  the  race  ;  the  latter  appears  to  have  been
filed,  while  the  fbnner  was  natnially  different,
acceidiDg  to  the  accommcdatian  to  be  jKorided  for
qieetBtora,  or  the  me^i£cence  whicb  the  builder
might  with  to  confer  upon  the  structure.  The
fixed  length  of  the  course,  between  the  pillaia
which  marited  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the
race,  wu  600  Greek  feet.  There  was  a  tiadi-
tion  that  Hetcnles  mcuuted  it  out  originally  by
hia  own  fooL  It  i>  not  iBipnbable  that  Pheidan,
vho  claimed  to  be  a  dcKeDdant  of  Hercules,  and
who  presided  si  agonothele  ut  the  Olympic  gooiu,
may  hare  filed  the  length  of  the  stadium  accord-
ing to  the  alondard  of  meuure  which  he  esta-
blished.

The  accounts  left  by  ancient  writers  of  the  ar-
rangement of  the  parts  of  the  stadium  an  scanty,
but  from  a  compBiisoa  of  them  with  eiisting  re-
maini  of  ttadia  we  may  collect  the  following  par-

At  one  end  a  tdaight  wall  shut  in  tbe  area,  and
here  were  the  entrances,  the  starting-place  for  the
runners,  and  (at  Olympia)  an  allot  of  Endyminn.
At  the  other  end,  at  or  near  the  centre  of  tho
aeuiicircle,  and  at  the  fixed  distance  From  tho
atarting- place,  was  the  goal,  which  was  the  termi-
nation of  tho  simple  fool-race,  tbe  runncia  m  which
were  called  maSiitpiiwi:  the  race  itself  is  called
OTiUiiw  and  Bpi/iat:  in  the  tlouAei  tpi/at  the
racers  turned  round  this  and  came  beck  to  the
starting-place.  The  starting-place  and  goal  had
TOrion*  name* :  the  Fiirmer  was  called  I^mt,
ypBitui,  IirwAiif,  and  0a*.tis:  the  latter  rif/ia,
Parlip,  Ti\at,  ir^urT^p  and  fiaaa.  Tbe  term
ypiitili.1l  i*  eipl^ned  u  the  Use  along  which  the
racer*  were  placed  hefore  starting  ;  3nAi){,  which
meani  iAe  liuA  q/^a  vHp,  is  anppoied  lo  hate  been
a  cord  whicb  wna  atretehed  in  Front  of  the  racer*
to  restrain  their  impatience,  and  which  wu  let  fatl
when  the  ugnal  was  given  Co  (tart ;  the  name
Ma^rrffp  was  applied  to  the  goal  because  the  nin-
nen  in  the  ilavf^j  and  Eii\ixei  tumid  round  it  to

plied  indiEercntly  lo  tbe  slor^g-place  and  the
goal ;  probably  because  the  slarting-ploce  was  also
the  end  oF  all  races,  except  the  simple  ordtiDi'.
The  atarting-placs  and  goal  were  each  marked  by
a  aqnaie  pJlar  (or^Mi,  kFovk  mfotiStii),  and
half  way  between  Iheee  wa*  a  third.  On  the  first
was  inscribed  the  word  iploTtm,  on  the  second
crr<lfSc,  on  the  third  Kd^i^oF.  The  SoXixe^p^M^i
turned  round  both  the  extreme  pillar*  till  they  had
completed  the  nnmber  of  atodia  of  which  their
course  consisted,  which  oppeara  to  hava  been  dif-
,  feieal  on  diSennt  occasion*,  ht  the  length  of  the


t056


STADIUM.


tiXiXM  ipi/^f  il  •arioiiily  ilalfd  al  S.  T,  B,  IS,
20,  md  2i  itadiH.  (Schol.  ad  Soph.  BUctr.  691.)
The  icmicircuUr  end  of  the  itrea,  which  waa
called  a^ftoirii,  uid  vu  not  xucd  in  ihe  iscct,
■WM  probobly  desoWd  to  the  other  Blhleiic  ipurt*.
Thii  a^tntorli  is  itill  clearly  wen  in  the  EpheiiBn


a  Ihe  I


The  I


Lofthr


uided  by  16  «
■tadimn  wu  nuTDunded  by  the  »
■which  were  •eporUed  froni  it  by  A  low  wall  or  po-
diuDi.

Oppaili  la  Ihe  goal,  on  ana  >ide  of  the  itiidiinii,
wort  the  KSti  of  the  Heltaiiadicae,  for  whom  there
•mt  \  ucret  cntnnce  into  tho  alBdium  (icpvrd)
firsjoi),  and  on  the  other  lidc  wai  on  Bllai  of
-white  marble,  OD  which  the  priuleiHi  of  Demeter
Chmnyne  Bt  to  riew  the  fma.  The  km  wu
genemlly  adorned  with  altan  and  atalaec

Such  wu  the  geuenl  form  and  arrangement  of
the  Greek  itodiuDL  AfUr  the  Homan  cooquHt  of
Greece  the  form  of  the  itadium  wu  often  modified
H  u  to  retemblo  the  amphitheatre  by  making  both
iu  «nda  leoiiciteukr,  and  by  lurrDunding  il  with
MStl  lupported  by  nulled  maaonry,  u  in  the
Roman  amphitheatre.  The  Epheiian  iladinm  itill
hu  inch  KiU  ronnd  a  poilioa  of  it.  A  reiloislioa
of  thia  Madium  ia  giren  iu  the  fallowing  woodcnt,
copied  from  Kibum.


le  of  the  euth^  aorfKe.


A  i>  the  bonndiry  wall  at  the  Apheak.  77  tett
Acef,  B  C  the  aidea,  and  D  the  aemicircolar  end,
of  the  aome  depth  ■•  A  ;  P  F  the  area,  inctuding
.ihe  a^riorfi  ;  b  h  {neat  of  maaonry  jailing  cut

the  length  of  an  Olympic  atodiura  ;  frcm  7  to  i  ihs
range  of  amphilheatrical  aeota  mentioned  iboTci

{Krante,  Die  Gymmiutik  wtd  Agmoitii  do-  Hd-
laien,  p.  131,  g  It  ;  MUller,  ArdiaiJ.  dtr  KmmtL,
3  290  i  Olvmfu.)

2.  The  word  alia  signifiea  tbe  chirf  (9reck  dm*.
aore  for  itinerary  diatancea.  which  au  adopted  \ij
tbe  Roniana  *Ik,  chiefly  for  nautical  and  aatn>-
liomicol  meaaurementt.  It  wu  equal  to  600  Greek
or  625  Roman  feet,  or  to  125  Roman  pace*  ;  aad
the  Roman  mile  contained  B  Madia.  (Hetnl.  ii.
149;  PluL^.JV.ii.  33.1.21  ;  ColomeU.  A.  A.  r.
1  ;  Strabo,  liL  p.  497.)  Hence  the  ladinin  om-
lained  606  feet  9  inchea  Engliah.  (See  the  Table*.)
Thia  Blandard  preiaUed  ihraoghoot  Otecre,  nnder
the  name  of  Ihe  Olympic  itadium,  ao  tailed  becanae,
ai  abone  itated,  it  vu  the  eioict  length  of  the
■tadimn  or  foot-race  eourae  at  Olympia,  miaiured
between  the  pillara  at  the  two  extremitiei  of  tke
iDUne.  There  were  multiplea  of  the  mraaure,
correipgndtng  to  Ihe  longer  racei  ;  thai  the  UamKn
wu  2  priUia,  and  the  i6\ix<"  ^  or  more.  (See
aboTB.) The  irruiir  of  i  aladia  we  may  {vemiM

the  chariot  race,  which  woold  give  2  aladia  fiir  the
dialanca  between  the  pillan  in  the  hippodtiam
[HiproDao»ius,p.611,a].  In  1  '
gmphy,  the  ordinary  tompuial"
to  a  degree  of  a  great  circle  of
The  important  qneition,  whether  the  iladium  wai
a  uniform  meuure  tbi^ghout  Greece,  ia  foUr  dia-
cuaied  under  Mknsura,  p.  7S5.  [P-'&]

STALA'OMIA. [iNitaiB.]

STATER  ((TToTip},  which  mans  limply  a
tfaadunJ  (in  Uiii  caie  both  of  weight  and  roore
particularly  of  money),  waa  at  first  Ihe  name  of  the
chief  coin  in  the  early  Greek  lyitcma,  namciv,  ihe
•JUmoim.  [N[JHHU8,pp.eil,b,S12,a.)  AVfaen
gold  began  to  be  coined,  the  name  wai  qiplied  la
tho  principal  gold  coin  of  Greece,  which  wu  alio
called  Chryaui  (xpMTovt),  and  which  in  the  ma-
jority of  cam  wu  conlbnued  to  tbe  Attic  aland-
ard,  and  therefore  a  MtaUr  commonly  aigni6ca  a
gold  RHK  npinl  u  veighl  to  tteo  AUie  drrtckmat  amrt
»  vibie  la  laalf!  hot  there  are  alio  atalen  of  Ihe
KuboVc  acale.  The  general  tubjiTt  of  Greek  eold
money  baa  been  diimiaed  mider  AuiLU,  when
it  it  Ilatcd  thill  ihe  Greeka  obtained  iheir  pcisci)*!
supply  of  gold  from  Aaia.  To  the  aane  quutiT
we  mual  look  fur  the  origin  of  ibrir  gold  manry.
The  Daricui,  which  came  in  them  from  Persia,  haa
bri-n  alrndy  treated  i>£  [D^Kicus.]  The  atalei
is  aaid  to  hare  been  first  cnined  in  Lydia  by
Croenia.  To  ihia  connlry,  indeed,  one  tradilioo
aacribei  Ihe  origin  both  of  gold  and  ailrer  tnooeT
{Herod.  i.»4)  ;  but  be  thia  u  il  may,  the  staut  of
Croeiut  wu  the  first  gold  coinage  with  which  til*
Greeks  were  aoqnainted.  (flerod.  i.  84  ;  Pdlox,
iii.  67,  ii.  84.)  Biickh  (.Mttnlog.  V^tnmA.  n.
1*29)  aweru  ibat  these  alaicis  were  undoubii>d^
formed  of  the  pole  gold  nr  electnun  which  waa
washed  down  foim  Tmolos  by  the  Pactolui,  and
which  Sophocles  speaks  of  as  Satdian  elretrum.
(Ja(«.  1037.)  [Ei.HTnrii.1  There  is,  in  th«
Huntcrian  eoltectton  (Plate  66.  fig.  1),  a  Trry  an-
cient cnn  of  this  pale  gold,  eC  ao  oiai  txiil-like


STATER.

1  villi  tlic  figura  ef  a  man  IchmI-
ing,  holduig  ■  Sih  in  bii  left  hand,  and  in  hit
right  ■  knife  hanging  down,  which  Pinkerton
tokei  Sot  a  coin  of  Cneiua,  but  ntpecting  vbicb
nothing  mora  can  be  nid  with  tafcty  tlum  that
it  ii  a  my  anci«nt  tpecimm  of  Aiiatic  monef.
Ita  weight  is  24S1  EngUth  gnini,  or  allawing
for  the  loM  of  weight  by  wear,  about  that  at  the
Atlie  leOadraehm,  which  wu  twice  th*  weight  of
the  •tater.  Thia,  IhenTon!  would  be  a  double
atater. (B«ckh,  La.) At  all  exent^  in  the  ab-

■nppoae  bom  the  tbij  lilence  of  the  Greek  wn-
ten,  that  it  did  not  differ  materinll;  from  the
alatai  which  wai  afterward*  current  in  Oieece  ;
and  which  wat  equal  <■  uk^jtU  *•>  tmi  drachmae,
and  M  valm  U  Iwtnlf.  {Hetfch.  i.  e.  Xpmroii :
Pollux,  IT.  173  ;  Haipocotion,  '


STATER.  10A7

girei  leTeial  of  theie,  the  laigttt  of  which,  ataiiRied
withB«,weiBhi2JS'43En^i«hgraina  Thiiua
doable  itater,  giring  a  liagle  one  of  l'J7'71  gtaini,
[Tsiiu  lew  than  the  Attic,  and  it  hcidi  to
the  itsndard  of  the  darieui.  Matt  of  the
othera  ara  third)  of  the  itater,  and  of  a  lighter
comparativa  weight  Then  wat  alao  al  Atheni  a
Pbocaean  coin  called  limj,  and  it*  half  fmltrror,
and  Heiycbini  (l  v.  Im;)  moitiona  the  cvTtf,
rpinj,  and  Terdpni,  aa  coini  of  gold  or  lilver  or
copper. Reapecling  tfaeea  coina,  lea  Hicn.

fi.  The  atater  of  Macedonia  waa  coined  by
Philip  11.  and  Alexander  tk«  Great  after  the
itandard  of  the  Attic  didiachm,  and  of  vciy  fine
gold.  Under  thoae  princei  it  came  into  genenl
circulation  in  Greece  and  throughout  the  Macedo-
nian empire.  The  extant  ipecimena  of  thii  coinage
Ferjnun:


IS „


HACiDONiaH  Stitu.  BarrtAH  Mt^siuu.
The  following  were  the  principal  Qreek  atatera :
1.  The  Attic  lUtei,  which  ha*  been  apoken  of  un-
der AuauM.  The  weight*  of  the  coin*  there  mtoi-
tioned  are  132-3, 132-7, 132'6,  and  13S-7A  giaina,
the  arerage  of  which  i>  132-^873  grain*,  wbich
only  bdii  ihort  of  the  weight  of  the  Attic  didnchm
b;  a  little  more  than  half  a  grain.  [Drachul]
The  gold  of  the  Attic  coina  ii  lemai^bly  pure.

2.  The  alater  of  Cyiicu*  waa  common  in  Gieece,
capecially  at  Athena.  We  leam  from  Demoitbenea
(■'■  riottn.  p.a^4)  that  at  a  particular  period  (a
little  after  B.  c  333)  Ihi*  atater  paiaed  on  )he  Boa-
poiua  for  23  Attic  drachmae,  which,  by  a  compari-
aon  with  the  then  Talneof  the  daricn*  [Daricus],
would  give  for  it*  wnght  about  160  graina,  Se-
Tcial  Cjiicene  ataten  eiial,  but  none  of  them
come  up  to  thia  weight.  Hence  we  may  conclude
that  the  price  of  gold  on  the  Boiponu  wa*  at  that
time  nnnanally  high.  Some  of  the  eiiating  coin*
give  IGD  giaina,  and  othera  not  more  than  120,  for
the  weight  of  the  Cyaiceue  itater  ;  but,  allowing
for  dchoaement  in  the  minting,  and  for  lubw-
quent  wear,  we  may  pcrhapa  take  ISO  grain*  for
about  it*  true  i-alue,  and  if  ao,  it  beloogi  to  the
Eubo'ic  atandard.  It*  value,  olcuiated  iiom  the
number  of  drachmae  it  pe**ed  for,  wodd  be  If.

3.  The  Stntn  of  Lampeacua  ia  asitioned  in  an
Attic  inacription  of  B.C.  434.  Several  gold  coin*
of  Lampeacua  are  extant ;  they  may  be  known  by
the  impieaiion  of  a  aea-hone  upon  them.  There
are  two  in  the  Biitiah  Muteum  of  the  weight  of
about  129  giaina,  which  i*  jnit  that  of  the  daricn*.
The  weighta  of  the  Ijunpeacene  ataten  an  very
unequal ;  and  both  laropiacna 'and  Cyiicn*  appear
to  hare  had  gold  coin*  which  were  multipla  of
diflerent  itandard*.  It  i*  not  improbable,  that
the  Eabeic  and  Attie  atandarda  eiiated  together

4.  The  auter  of  Plkocaea  ii  mentioned  by  Thn-
cydidea  (i*.  33)  and  Demnthenea  (ia  AmoL  p^
1019)  ■■  in  drenlation  ia  theii  Unea. Scatini


The  ailver  i*  an  accidental  admixture,  or,  if  known
<  be  preient,  wa*  not  allowed  for,  as  that  thia
Jn  may  be  reckoned  at  1 33  graina  of  fine  gold,
ur  urcreign,  after  deducting  the  alloy,  contain*
13-12  grain*  of  fine  gold. Therefore  the  Maeedo-


n  Itater  o.


133


if  the  Engliih  i


11313  "

R3).6(f.  0'672  &rtbing.  Tbe  aTerageia  however
a  little  below  tbia  atater,  but  not  more  ao  than  ia
due  to  wear.  The  itater  of  Philip  wai  very  re-
cently cnmnt  in  Greece  at  the  nine  of  about  33
ahillings.  Thia  atandard  wa*  preaerred,  or  very
nearly  u,  under  tbe  later  Macedonian  kingi,  and
1*  adopted  by  other  atatea,  a*  Epirui,  Aetolia,
amania,  and  Syiacuae.

Beaide*  the  *tatera  noticed  abore,  moat  of  the
iea  of  Ionia  had  gold  coina,  but  Cheit  value  ia
17  doubtful.  There  are  apecimena  in  eiiitence
from  Chioa,  Teoi,  Colophon,  Smyrna,  Epheaui,  and
■any  other  placea  Samoa,  Siphnu*,  Thaaoa,  tha
Greek  dtiea  of  Sioly,  and  Cyrene  had  gold  money
an  eaiiy  period.

Pollux  mentiona  a  Corinthian  itater  aa  nied  in
cily  which  he  call*  IhirdAiTpiif  a-rnT^fi,  and  makea
equal  to  la  Aeginetan  ohol*.  {Pollux,  i*.  174,  ii.
80.)  The  exiJnnation  of  thia  atalement  ia  very
difficult,  and  depoida  in  a  great  meaiure  on  the
diiputed  queition  whether  the  Corinthian  money
followed  the  Attic  or  the  Atginetan  atandard.
[SeeNuHiiu8,p.H12,a.]

In  calculating  the  value  of  the  atater  in  oar

looked.  Thu*  the  itater  of  Alexander,  which  we
have  valued,  according  to  the  preient  worth  of
gold,  at  Ii.  3f.  M.,  poued  Ibr  twenty  drachmae,
which,  according  to  the  preaeiit  value  of  lilver,  were
vroith  only  ISi.  Sd,  But  the  former  givui  tbe
better  idea  of  the  worth  of  the  atater,  the  differ-
ence ariiing  from  the  greater  v^ua  of  ailver  in  an-
cient time*  than  now. [ARaaNTUH.]

'ti ,

rk*,  doublo  ataten,  a
halvea  (^fx^vcofli,  AfuffroTqpii),  quarten,  third*,
•iith*,  and  twelfth!  of  the  itater. The  coina  oC  .
the  laat  four  denimiination*  an,  however,  much  lea*
common  tban  the  tingle,  double,  and  half  itaten,
The  term  vrariip,  in  huer  timea,  wai  a^ed  to


105S  STATUARIA  ARa

ths  ailTci  Ictradnrbm,  but  wfattber  it  wu  »  vtei
in  the  6<iunihing  timt*  of  Athena  ii  doubifaL

It  vu  also  DBed  id  T^ereiw  to  ireight,  appo-
rentl;like  the  HebnwuieU  and  (he  Latin  poitdo,
in  >  genemi  lenM.  Tbr  Mina  (Pollai.ii.6)  and
the  Sicilisn  LiTBA  (Polliu,iY.24>,ueboth  odled
■tattr.

(Scttini,  dtgliSUttriAiaidd;  Huney ;  Wann  ;
B&kh.)  [P.S,]

STATERA, ■  iteel-Tud. [Libka  ; Trv-

STATI  DIES.  [DiiB,  p.  109,  b.]
STATIO'NES.  [CiSTBi,  p,  SBO,  b.]
8TATI0'NBS  FISCI.  The  Fircub  wa.  di-
lided  into  Tariong  defaitmenli,  called  St^ieMi,
aecordin^  to  tbo  difisrnt  iwfavan  belan^Dg  to  it
(Cod.  4.  tiL  31.  ■.  1 ;  10.  tit.  £.  1. 1.)  Thiu  vs
T«d  of  a  Stt^  XX.  ienditatiam  (Onlli,  Inter.
n.  3333],  >  SMIia  HtrtditaHim  (Orellj,  n.  S2{I7  ;
Oruler,  p.  451,  n.  3) ;  a  Statii,  Anmmat.  (Orelli,
n.  4107,  44S0.)  S«e  Walter,  OttA.  da  RmL
Rcrhli,  %i\*.  Sded.

STATIO'NES  MUNICIPIO-RUM.  [G«a«.
COST*  ail.]

STATOR,  a  pablic  trrjm\,  who  attended  on
the  RoDMii  niagiitrate*  in  ths  proTincei.  The
Statam  leem  lo  hare  dsrired  their  naine  from
■landtng  bj  th<  tide  of  the  magittrats,  and  tbni
being  at  btuid  to  execute  all  hit  catoniandi ;  the;
appnr  to  have  been  cbiefij  employed  in  caiTTing
letten  and  meaaagcL  (Cie.  ad  Fa-*,  il  17,  19,
I.  21  ;  Dig.  1,  tit.  6.  a.  10.)  Alexander  Serenu
forbade  tbe  nia  of  alatom  in  the  pmyinccB,  and
cummanded  that  their  dniiet  ihoold  be  diacbaiged
by  Hldiela.  (Dig.  t.  tit.  6.  1.  10  ;  I^mprid.  Aim.
See.  62.)

STATU  LIBER. [Minuhusio.]
STATUA'RIA  ARS  ii  in  iu  proper  eenee  the
ait  of  making  ttatuei  or  biuta,  whethec  thej  con-

inelodn  the  art  of  making  tbe  Tirioui  kmdi  of
relief!  {alto,  bano,  and  meuo  reliero).  The  an-
cienli,  accaitomed  to  triea  all  tbeir  art!  and
Kieocet  to  a  tingle  pertoti,  who  wai  genecallj'  be-
lieved to  bate  been  led  to  bit  diMOTerjr  by  gome
accidental  circnnutanca,  relate  *enrat  itociee  to
arcoont  for  the  origin  and  diaeoTery  of  the  arte  of
painting  and  ititnir;.  {Plio.  H.N.  xixt.  6  and
43  ;  compare  Quintit.  x.  2.  3  7.)  But  arU  ncti  at
tbeae  cannot,  like  thoia  which  are  tbe  Deeeaauy
remit  of  particular  local  CLrciuDilancea,  or  are  in
their  origin  of  ■  compliated  nalutv,  be  aingned  to
anj  particular  oslion  ot  to  anjr  partienlar  indi-
lidual ;  they  >pnng  up  naturally  in  all  conntriei,
and  lake  ^eir  origin  alike  everywhere  in  the
imitatiTe  bcult;  of  man. It  ii,  therefore,  idle  taik

abont  tbe  invention  of  aculptare  or  painting,  or
Biiign  the  inTenlion  of  eilber  of  them  to  the
Egypliani  or  any  other  nation.  Then  arta  in  their
infant  lUte  exiited  among  the  Qreeki  frnin  time
immemorial,  and  if  there  an  any  teiemblancee
between  the  earliaat  vorki  of  Grecian  art  and  thoae
of  Egypt,  we  bare  tlill  no  ijgbt  to  infer  that  the
Greek!  learnt  tfaem  &am  the  "P^pitnt,  and  we
might  aa  well  aoert  that  tbe  Oreeka  leamt  theirartt


B,  for  tbe  <


of  tboie  ngtioni  too  natmble  thoae  of  early  Greece
An  art  In  iti  primitiTe  alate  manitaeti  itaelf  nearh
in  (he  Bane  DumetiB  all  parti  cf  the  WDrid. Bii


STATUARIA  ARS.
what  i>  of  rad  intereit  it  to  know  the  canafa
through  which  !latuaTy,  or,  to  nee  a  more  CDaunm
but  leaa  appropriate  term,  aculpwre.  became  w
pre-eminently  dU  art  of  tbe  Ornka,  that  down  to
thit  day  no  other  nation  hat  pntdaced  artiala  ibat
can  compete  with  them,  aztd  that  all  look  npa  the
Grrekt  a>  tbe  great  muten  and  modda  1«  all
ni>e>.  Winckelmann  hai  pointed  onl  tfam  gnat
CRUMB,  ill.  their  innate  genini.  thrir  religion,  and
tbeir  Booal  and  political  inatitutionB ;  and  ittaa
pointB,  if  accurately  examined,  will  certainly
*  ignlarly  o


be  found  to
the  Greek  ai


L Thenia


lecled  with  (he  origin  of  Oi
which  appear!  to  hate  led  tome  modtnt  wtiten  to
form  erroneoui  opiniont.  The  peculiar  farm  of  tba
Hennae  [HaRuia]  hai  given  riao  to  the  betief
that  in  the  earlint  Btatnci  the  brad  only  (but)
waa  represented,  and  that  the  remaining  part  ef
the  body  waa  eipreaoed  by  a  timple  plUar  or  blo^
ThiB  view  ii  contrary  to  nature  at  well  aa  to  hit-
lory,  for  neither  a  nation  nor  a  child  (irhicb  in  thia
cane  ma;  be  fairly  taken  aaa  t^jreaentatin  of  a
nation  in  its  infancy),  when  they  begin  to  exadee
their  itnilative  fiually,  wil^  itat  aatiiSed  with
forming  the  mere  head  of  a  hnman  being,  bat  ta-
deavour  to  produce  tiio  whole  at  well  aa  tbey  can.
We  may  add,  that  no  other  nation  preaoita  eadi
a  phenomenon  in  tbe  earlieat  bittory  of  ita  ana.
The  Hermae,  therelbre,  aUDot  have  ariaen  Enim  an
incapabilitrof  fonningawhalebiimaii  fignre.  Tbey
appear  rather  to  point  to  the  time  when  ifae  OreekB
btgait  to  repreeent  their  gode  in  a  bnmao  forai.  To
give  to  a  god  the  entire  form  of  a  man  weald  ban


and  at  tbe  aamr
aa  a  diatinct  individual  iwing  and  endowed  with
ipiritual  and  thinking  poweia.  Tlia  pnccM  of
homanixing  the  godi  mtwt  have  been  preceded
by  the  cnilom  of  repreaenting  them  in  vnnaunl
forro!,  or  inch  aa  were  partly  hnraan  and  partly
animal.  Tbe  (arliett  inugea  of  tbe  goda  were  pwra
imagea  (not  the  godi  themaelveaX  and  inteaded  te
eipreia  Bune  thought  or  idea :  now  aa  tba  aataral
figure  of  man  ii  only  cxpreiaiTa  of  itielt|  tbe
aignificant  parti  of  two  or  mora  bongi  wen  pat
tc^lber  to  (xpreii  the  idea  which  men  had  Imaed
of  their  godi.  Such  manitraai  figuret  wen  re-
tained ai  reprewnlationi  of  aome  godi  down  to  tbe
lateat  timei.  Ai  initineei  of  tbii  we  may  nm-
tion  Glancsi  with  the  tail  of  a  fiib  (Pbiloatr.  lam.
iu  Ifi),  the  Arcadian  Pan  with  goal-a  toM  (Hial.
Mg&i^  Bilderi.  ii.  p.  161,  kc\  and  tbe  Uenelcr
of  Phigaleia  witb  the  bead  and  mane  of  a  bone.
(PauL  viiL  4-2.  S  S.)  Uomer'a  aileoce  on  aaefa
compound  repreMntatiani  of  the  goda  ii  do  pmaf
that  they  did  not  exiit  in  aariy  timca.

Before proceeding  to  connder  itatsair  ia iti
MTeial  itagei  of  '-  ' '* ■


applicable  lo  atalmty  which  wai  not  naed  by
the  Qreeka  Ai  (^  rfoy  ii  tapabla  rf  baiag
•haped  without  difficulty  into  any  fcna,  aasd  ia
eaiily  dried  either  by  being  eipoaed  to  tbe  aaa  at
by  being  hiked,  we  nay  coDBJder  thii  inliliiin  t>
have  been  the  earlieat  material  of  wUA  iBtna
were  made.  We  have  a  tiaea  <rf  (hii  in  tba  alary.
that  Zeui,inbitangeralPiometbeiii  barinf  atalen
(he  fire,  ordered  Hephaealni  to  fam  hndaa  tt


8TATDARIA  ARS.


uan.  (Hni«d.  lHaoffim.
£71. &C.:  Stob.&nB.  I.)  The  nune  pUnic  art
(4  wKafTUr^),  by  wtaicta  ths  oacienu  (Ametimn
dnigiiBU  the  art  of  (UIUU7,  propetly  tignifitt  to
foim  at  ibape  ■  thing  of  day.  But  natwithitaod-
inf  tho  gnat  ttdlity  of  miking  fignm  of  clny,
they  tn  not  often  meniioaed  in  the  euiy  iget  of
Qnrtm,  while  in  llaij  the  Dn  fitUa  (i^roi
fteof)  wen  Tery  common  fnHU  the  eailieit  tinm.
CUy  figoIH.  hovenr,  neni  fell  into  diniie  en-
tiiely,  uid  in  bin  lintM  we  find  not  only  Blatuee
of  day,  hnt  the  padimeata  in  tmall  or  nml  templet
Ireqnially  eonuined  the  moM  beaotirul  Rliefi  in
cUj,  which  wen  eopiet  of  the  marble  rtliofa  of
la^  templM.  When  Pliny  {H.  N.  iiit.  43)
■poki  of  Rhoccua  and  Tbeedana  of  Suioa  aa  the
inTenlon  of  the  pfaifMat  he  aeemt  to  labour  ander


called  ^aKiee.  Sen*  aodcnt  Ggoce*  of  clay  ara
■till  pnMTTod.

lit  aecond  maleiiil  waa  leoed,  and  fignrea  made
sf  wood  wore  allod  C^ovn,  fnmi  {^  **  poliah  "  or
**  carTe.**  Variona  kindi  of  wood  were  oaed  in
■tatnary  ;  we  find  mention  of  oak,  cedar,  cypreaa,
ayomDEVi  pine,  fig,  box,  and  ebony.  It  wai  chiefly
tiaal  fiir  Diking  itnagea  of  llie  goda,  and  pnbably
more  on  account  of  the  fodlity  of  working  in  it,
than  lot  any  other  reaaon.  It  ihould,  howerer,  b«
reourked,  that  panienlar  kinda  of  wood  were  nxd
to  make  the  imagea  of  particnlar  deitiea:  tfaua  the
■tAtnea  of  Dionytua,  the  god  of  figi,  wen  made  of
fig-wood.  The  oae  of  wood  fol  Matoet  of  the
godi  continued  to  the  lateal  timet ;  but  ilatDei  of
tDen,  oa,  lor  example,  aome  of  the  victora  in  the
public  gamea,  were  likewiaa  mode  of  wood  at  a
time  when  the  Oieeki  were  gufficieiilly  acqaainted
with  the  an  of  working  in  atone  and  metoL

jtiaw  waa  little  uted  in  ilatuaiy  during  the
early  agea  of  Oreeco,  though  it  waa  not  altogether
nnkjiown,  aa  we  may  infer  from  the  relief  on  the
LioD-gale  of  Mycenae.  In  Italy,  where  the  aoft
pepeiino  afforded  an  eaay  material  £>r  wuking,
atone  appear!  to  have  been  uocd  at  an  earlier
prtiod  and  o»Te  comraonly  than  in  Onwco.  But  in
the  hiatorical  timet  the  Oitelti  uied  all  the  principal
Tarietiea  of  maiUe  for  their  llaluei ;  the  moil  ce-
kbrated  kindl  of  which  wen  the  marblea  of  Pai»
and  of  Mount  Pvntclicua,  both  of  which  were  of  a
~  ~ It  kindl  of  marble  and  of


the  a


coloa


:  the  work  it  ca


Polylithic  ttatiiory.

Mnmst  (x^Ajrof,  a««),  t^vtr^  and  goid  wen  uied

{rofuarlj  in  the  atate  of  asdetj  deicribed  in  tbe

worka  of  an  in  theae  mcteli  were  not  altogether

and  long  after,  the  worka  eiwuted  in  metal  were
made  by  meant  of  the  hammer,  and  the  different
piecrt  wen  joined  together  by  pint,  rireli,  cnmpa,
or  other  mechanical  &ateninga,  and,  aa  the  art
adnwoed,  by  a  kind  of  glue,  cement,  or  toldcr.
Iron  came  into  oie  muh  later,  and  the  art  of
coaling  both  bronie  and  iron  iiaacribed  to  Hhoecua
a  Theodonu  of  Suuoa. (Paua.  x.  3S.  §  3.)


[Au


«■]


Ivory  come  into  n^  at  a  later  period  than  any
of  tbe  before- mentioned  materiali,  and  then  waa
UgUy  ulned  both  (or  iti  beantjr  and  laiily. In


STATnARIA  ARS.  105!

it*  application  to  itatnory,  itory  waa  generally
combined  with  gold,  and  woi  lued  for  the  porta  re-
prrienling  the  Heth.  Winckelmann  baa  calcniatcd
ibal  abml  one  hundnd  atatne*  of  Ihii  kind  are
mentioned  by  the  oncienta.

The  bialMy  of  ancient  art,  and  of  ttotuary  in
potticnlar,  may  be  diiided  into  Gtb  periodi.


.  Fini  Period,  from  Ot  tariitd  ti
OLiO,orSBaB.c


Tha  Ttsl  hittory  of  the  arti  I^  pnceded  by  a
period  of  a  pnrel;  mythical  character,  which  tra-
dition hai  peopled  with  dirine  aniita  and  moat
eitiaordinaiy  pnidnctiona.  Three  kind*  of  oniiti,
howerer,  may  be  diatingnitbed  jn  thia  mythical
period :  the  Snt  conaiiti  of  goda  and  daemona,  tnch
aa  Athena,  Hephaettua,  the  Phrygian  crDardanisn
Dactfli,  and  the  Cabin.  The  aecond  conlnina
whole  tribea  of  men  dittingniabed  fnm  othen  by
the  mjiteriom  poueation  of  luperior  (kill  in  the
practice  of  the  arta,  luch  at  the  Telchinei  and  the
Ljcian  Cydopei.  The  third  contiita  ot  individualj
who  on  indeed  deicribed  at  huoian  beingi,  but  yet
ore  nothing  more  than  penonificaliont  of  particular
branchei  rf  art,  01  the  npreienlstirei  of  fnmiliei
of  ortiiu.  or  the  latter  the  moit  celebrated  ja
Dtudahu,  wboie


the  mythical  anceator  of  a  nomeroui  family  of
artiala  (DatdiUidi),  which  can  bo  traced  from  the
time  of  Homer  to  that  of  Plato,  for  cren  Sociatet
ia  Hid  to  hare  been  a  deiondant  of  thia  family.
It  ia,  howcTer,  lery  probable  that,  in  Homer,
Zteado/u  ia  metely  an  ejHlhet  of  the  god  Hephaca-
tu.  (See  acU  f  Biog.  a  v.)  He  waa  beliered
to  be  in  Athenian,  but  Crete  alu  claimed  the
hononr  of  being  hit  natiie  conctiy.  The  tloriet
retpecting  him  are  more  like  allegorical  accounlt  of
tha  pn^reia  of  the  am  than  anything  elK.  He
waa  principally  nnowned  in  antiquity  for  hia  ('■>«,
and  aoTeial  porta  of  Greece,  aa  Boeotio,  Attira,
Crete,  and  eien  Libya  in  later  limea,  were  belieTcd
to  poueu  ipcciment  of  hit  warkmanihip.  (Paua.
vii.  e,  ix.«0.  g2,  L  IS.  §5;  Sctlax,  p..«3,ed.
Hudi.}  Numetout  inrentiona  alto,  eapcciall;  of
initnunenti  uied  in  carving  wood,  an  aacribed  to  r
him.  He  ii  laid  to  have  mode  hia  ilatitea  walking,
which  appear*  to  mean  that  bcfbn  hia  time  human
AgaRt  were  repreaented  wiih  their  iegi  clnae  to-
gether, and  that  in  hit  atalnei  the  legi  were  aepa-
rated,  which  waa  at  once  a  gr«t  ttep  forward,  a*
it  imported  greater  life  and  activity  U  ■  fignra.
SmiiU  (fnm  ffi^^  a  carving-knife)  exerciied  hit
art  in  Somot,  Aegino,  and  other  placet,  and  lome
remarkablBworkiwenallributadtohim.  (Mlitler,
Arginet.  p.  97.)  Endoeia  of  Atheni  ia  called  n
diaciple  of  Dsedalua. Variout  worka  were  attri-

wot  a  coleual  iSetot  of  Athena  Poliai  in  a  temple
at  Erythiae  in  Ionia.  She  wu  repreiented  litting
upon  a  Sfins,  holding  a  apindle  in  bet  band,  end
with  awAol  en  her  head.  Paiiaaniaa  (Tii.«.  g  4)
inw  thii  {WW  himieIC  (Sea  Did.  of  Biag.  t.  m.
DaedaiiOf  Endoettt^  Smiiu.)

According  to  the  popular  trnditioni  of  Greece,
there  was  no  period  in  which  the  godi  wen  not
repreaented  in  aome  form  or  other,  and  then  it  no
doubt  that  for  a  long  time  there  eiiated  no  other
atatuei  in  Ottece,  than  thoM  ot  the  goda  ;  a  itatue
of  a  man  appeait  for  a  long  time  to  have  been  a
thing  unheard  of  in  Greece.  The  ta^ett  tepre-
8,4 -  O-


TOSO  GrrATUARIA  'ARS.

•cntatiinii  atlhe  godt,  howerer,  wen  b^no  i
icgnnled  u  the  goda  tbcEnMlret  oi  ercn  u  ii  ^
of  them,  bat  an\j  u  aymbol)  of  their  prcKoea ;
and  H  the  imaginaUon  of  n  pion*  primitive  Kge
iati  not  require  much  lo  be  remioded  of  the  pre-
•ence  of  the  deity,  the  rimpleil  ijmboli  wfre
•ometime*  luiiicient  te  prodnee  thii  etlict. Hence

wu  indicated  bf  the  niopleil  and  molt  ihlpe-
IcH  ■)-inl>oI>,  luch  01  unhewn  Uocki  of  itoue  (Al-
toi  ift't,  Pauk  ii.  27.  g  1,  35.  g  I,  vii.  22.
g  3)i  and  by  na^  pSan  or  piece*  of  wood.
(Paiu.  vii.  22.  gS.;  Ciem.  Alex,  jtron.  i.  ().<ie,
and  p.  .'S48,  ed.Sjrlbarg;  I>acANA  and  Daidila.)
Manj  luch  lymbDlie  rBpreuatatloni  of  godt  were
held  in  the  greatnt  Mleem,  even  in  the  biitoricul
ngn,  at  taered  inheriUuicm  of  former  limeii  and
remained  the  conTeDtional  repieaenlaCioni  of  the
godi  notvithiUmding  the  progreu  which  the  arta
hnd  nude.  The  genenl  name  for  a  tepreientatian
of  a  god  QoE  conaiidng  ef  lucfa  a  mde  ajmbol  wae
i-ya^tm. (Iluhnken,  ad  Tim.  p.  2.)

In  the  Homeric  pserai,  idthough  the  ibield  of
AfhilEea,  the  gold and lilver  dogi  which  kept
' gt  the  pidace  of  Alciuona,  and  other  limilar


tataet  of  the  godi  j  bat
ideal  of  the  godt  wen

i,  the  repreaenlatii


thi


.of  tl


yet  gigantic  and
•eieraJ  inperhumi
inipira  awe  than  to  diiplay  any  artiitic  beanCy.
(//.  li.  36,  dtc;  Uenod,  Smit.  Hen.  U4,  1G6,
248,  &e.)  Thi*  wo*  howcTer  not  alwayt  the  caie.
Temple*  are  mentioned  in  *e'eral  placea  (IL  i.  39,
vii.  RS,  la.),  and  templet  preiuppote  de  eiiitence
of  repreeentationa  of  the  god*.  A  atatue  of  Athena
it  mentioned  at  Ilion,  upon  whote  knee*  the  queen
place*  a  magnificent  peplm.  (//.  Ti  92  ',  comp.
273.)  The  iCatne  Ihui  appean  to  have  been  in  a
lilting  poulion  like  the  itatuea  of  Athena  among
the  loniani  in  geueraL  (Sirab.  liii.  p.  601.)  The
existence  of  a  atalue  of  Apollo  muit  be  inferred
from  Iliad  L  29,  for  the  vt4iuia  Atalt  can  only
m«an  the  wreath  oc  diadem  with  which  bia  ttatne
itself  Died  to  be  adoined.  Thia  itatue  muat  more-
O'cr  have  been  repretented  earrying  a  bow,  for  at-
tribulea  like  d^rrupirofoi  could  have  no  meaning
nnleta  they  referred  to  aomstbing  eiiiting  and
well-known.  Other  prooti  of  repreien  tali  out  of
the  godi  in  human  fonn  nuj  be  found  in  Iliad  ii.
473,  Ac  iiL  S96,  &c  Theee  ataluee  were  un-
doubtedly all  I6nm,  and,  ai  we  muit  infer  <iom  the
s  far  more  perfect  than


re  Hid  to


ebeenp


or  Daedaiut.  A  work  atill
tninly  as  old  ai  (he  time  of  Homer,  if  not  much
older,  it  the  relief  nbore  the  andent  gate  of  Myce-
nae, repretenting  two  lion*  *landing  on  their  hind
le^e,  with  a  tort  of  pillar  between  them.  (Paul.  iL
IR.  g  4;  SirW.  Cell,  >ir^  pi.  Q— 10;  Oottling
in  the  IlhtimcL  Mut.  1341.  part  2:  wood-cut
luider  Muaus.)  Thete  &eta  jutlify  n*  in  inp-
poaing  that,  at  the  time  of  Homer,  the  Oreeki,  but
more  eipecially  the  louiani  of  Alia  Minor,  had
mnde  gnat  progren  in  tmlplure.  The  loninnt
appear  to  have  been  lai  in  advance  of  the  Oneki
of  the  mothe^connt^y■  The  eanie  of  thia  mnat
probably  he  lotight  in  the  influence  which  aome  of
the  nntiona  of  weatem  Aala,  inch  ai  the  Lydiani.
Lycinna,  and  Phoenician*,  had  upon  the  Ionian
culonitts,  for  that  theie  nation*  eieelltd  the  Oreeki


FTATDARIA  ABS.
in  varioiu  biaodie*  of  the  acta  ia  abnDlanlly  al-
le*ted  by  numeroui  putage*  in  the  Homeiie
poem*.  We  moit  not  hoveTei  attribute  too  mndi
to  thi*  fonign  influence,  for  there  were  maaj  other
caniea  at  work  beaidei,  by  which  the  Greek  coio-
niea,  not  only  of  Aaia,  but  of  Sicily  and  Italy  aiis,
were  carried  forward  in  advance  of  the  motber.
country.  The  ancient  coiue  of  the  Italian  tincki
too  an  much  mora  beautiful  and  ahow  more  indi-
•iduality  than  Ihota  of  Greece  proper;  w*  aiait
itnd  that  Leaiebut  cf  Rhcgium  came  to  ^tarta  at
a  Tery  eariy  period,  and  formed  then  the  <ar-
Itait  brooie  itatoe  of  Zeoa,  which  canabted  tt
leveral  piece!  nailed  together.  (Pana-iib  17.  S  6-)
About  the  aame  time,  aa  tome  think,  Qitiadaa  ^
Sparta  made  a  bronae  atatoe  of  Albena.  (Paa*k
iii.  J7. 1  13.) There  ia,  however,  very  gieat  aa-


(See  Did.  of  Btog.  a.  es.  Giiiadat,  i
Another  great  work  in  bronia  belongiiw  to  thia
period  ia  the  coloisal  atalue  of  Zeni  iriticfa  was
dedicated  at  Olympia  by  Cypaelui  or  Periwdef  ef
Corinth,  and  for  which  the  wealth;  CotinthBiH
wen  obliged  to  aacri^ce  a  conaiderahle  put  of  tbeir
property.  (Sttab.viii.  pp.  353,  S7S;  Phot,  ajid  Said.
a  e.  KwfifXiUv.)  About  650  B.  c  Hyrao  of  Scyss
dedicated  two  diAafiai  of  broaH  at  Ulymjua,  wbjch
wen  itill  (hero  in  tbe  day*  of  Pananiaa  (*i.  19.
S2).

The  tnn*  which  el^aed  between  the  compontioa
of  the  Hmnecie  poem  and  the  i-ginning  of  the
fifth  century  before  ooi  aem  may  be  termed  tb*
age  of  diicoveiy ;  for  neariy  all  the  invealion,
upon  the  application  of  which  the  deTeiopniaDl  tl
the  arti  ii  dependent,  are  aaiigned  to  ihii  periad,
which  may  at  the  aame  time  be  regarded  at  the  Gnt
hiatorical  period  in  the  hiatory  of  tat.  Okaueat  of
Chioa  or  Samoa  ia  laid  to  have  invenUd  Ike  art  of
aoldering  metal  [eMfvu  sJAAilira,  HeiwL  L  SS).
The  two  Bttiita  mon  celebrated  (ot  their  diaesioiei
wan  the  two  bmthen  Telecle*  and  Tkeodoiaa  el
Samoa,  about  the  dme  of  Poljcratee.  The  Boat
important  of  their  inisntioiia  wai  the  art  gf  caatiif
figure*  of  metal  It  ia  a  ungular  cuennuance,
that  the  very  two  artittt  to  whom  thia  inmtiDa
it  ucribed,  are  nid  to  have  made  their  itudiei  hi
Egypt ;  and  the  curieua  Uory  of  the  two  hniken
executing  a  {Jsnr  of  the  Pythian  ApoUo  in  wA
manner,  that  while  Telecle*  mad*  the  mm  IkIT  oT
the  atatue  at  Deloa,  the  other  half  waa  maia  by
Theodoina  at  Ephema,  and  that  when  the  two
halve*  wen  put  together,  they  tallied  aa  ecomwelT
ai  if  the  whole  had  bean  the  work  of  ooe  uiiii
(Uiodor.  L  98),  hai  been  thought  to  nppcn  ilw
Egyptian  tradition  that  these  artitli  were  greaily
auieted  in  (he  eiercite  of  (heir  art  by  what  tbrj
had  learnt  in  Egypt.  But,  in  the  Gr*t  phn,  the
whole  liny  ha*  a  very  fabuloaa  ippMnacc,  and
even  admitting  (hat  the  artiila,  at  the  Egrpiiaiii
aiaeited,  had  actually  been  in  their  eeuntrr,  sa-
bodywillon  thia  ground  maintain  (bat  they  Wnt
(heir  an  there:  (he  ntmoat  they  t»nld  have  lc«rat
might  have  been  aome  maehanical  piwcaae* :  the
art  itielf  mnit  be  vindiated  tta  the  Oneka.  I  a
the  tKond  place,  Tetecle^nd  Theedom  ai*  calWd
by  Diodeiui  km  of  Rhoecni,  and  Pauania*  hiit-


Theodorui,  law  at  Epheao)  a  btmis  m
waa  the  work  of  Rhoecn*  (i.  38.  g  3.)
have  reason  to  auppoae  that  Teiecle*  and
learnt  at  any  rate  the  ait  of  caatina  i


STATUARIA  ARS.
A«{r  bther,  and  not  in  *  fbraign  caanby.  Re-
Ipccting  the  nrioai  ■ceonnU  at  thew  two  utUu
and  the  lime  it  whicli  they  lived,  aee  the  DiA  of
Bug.  I.  n.  Plin;  (ff.  ff.  hit.  SB)  BJi,  that
Paiiteln  called  the  art  of  medelling  elaj  the  molhei
st  the  alt  of  catting  Ggures  in  metal  (jfalinnia),
■nd  Ihii  {MMBge  bu  been  expUiiKd  tt  if  Puitelca
meant  to  lay  that  in  Samot  the  farmer  of  thne
ant  had  giien  liv  to  the  latter.  But  this  ii  ma-
nifcadf  TTop^,  fer  &ora  the  wordi  which  follow
in  the  text  ef  Plinj  it  ii  clear  that  the  meaning
ia,  that  he  nerer  executed  any  work  in  metal,
maiUe,  &e.  wilhoal  preTionilj  taking  a  model

Siatnei  af  god>  in  baked  tiaj,  Ibongh  in  general
mere  naed  lor  domeitic  and  private  than  for  public
werthip,  eonlinued  to  be  nnde  ai  berora.  Many
■pecinieni  of  unall  dimeniioni  and  of  reiy  lude
wotknunthip  hare  been  diieoTered  in  Attic  giaTea.
lSteScbtlailArUlBfA.Av.tX.)  Otnamenu  and
relieb  on  lionaea,  porticoea,  and  Itmplei  wen  Uke-
wiM  Tei7  commonly  made  of  daj,  tapeciallj  at
Corinth  and  in  the  Cerameiena.  (PasL  i.  2.  g  1,
i-  »■  I  1-)

RepmentatioDt  of  the  god)  in  marble  are  net
■nentioaed  in  Homer,  although  they  may  have  ti'
iatcd  in  hi*  time,  M  well  a*  atatnet  ot  wood,  which
an  likewiaa  not  expreuly  mentioned.  Marble  ii
firand  in  the  ancient  TheMunu  of  Oichomenoa.
Pliny  {H.  N.  uiri.  4.  a  3)  cdcnlatea  that  woika
in  marble  were  executed  by  Malai  in  Chioa  at  the
beginning  of  the  Olympiad! ;  and  aboat  01.  £0
(280  a.  c).  Dipoenoi  and  S^llia  were  renowned
lor  Uieir  voiki  in  marble.  The  moat  ancient  •»-
eimen  of  a  marble  ttatue  waa  leen  by  Pauuiuaa
(I  43.  g  7)  in  the  market-place  af  Megara.  The
work  eoniiited  of  tvo  figaret,  Coroebiu  kDIing
Poene.  There  are  MiU  exUnt  Koe  worki  in  mar-
ble which  may  with  certainty  be  aacribed  to  the
period  preriont  to  01  50.

BeGva  we  eondade  onr  aeconnt  of  the  worki
produced  dnring  thia  period,  we  bare  to  mention
the  cricbcated  cheat  of  CypMlni  at  Oljmpia,  which
PanaaniaaaawanddeacribedCir.  17.S%&c.).  It
belonged  perhapa  to  the  year  733  B.  c  The  cheat
wai  made  of  eedai^wood,  which  traa  thought  mi
durable.  It  wu  adorned  on  it>  fonr  dilet  and
the  cover  with  figurea,  partly  in  ivory,  partlr
in  gold,  and  partly  m  the  cedar-wood  itaalf,  which
repreaented  virioua  icenei  taken  from  the  atoiiei
of  the  henic  agn.  Panaaniag  doea  not  expreai  bit
opinion  ai  to  their  artritic  merits,  but  the  mi
neaa  with  which  he  deteribei  them  it  a  and


nnpted  (in  hia  JupUer  Olgnpten)  M


thia  chat

and  it.  or;

amenU  tn

m  the

docription

oTPaoBU

a>i  hutth

oil  to

egtegiontly

bad,  that

meyeaccnj

lomed  to

lb*  n

rfsenuin.

worka  of

irt  ahrinki  from  il  with  dii-

goal.

During  th«  whole  of  thia  period  we  acarcely
bew  of  any  atataei  except  dtOM  of  the  godt,  and
although  marble  and  bronie  began  to  be  eiten-
Dvely  ^iptied,  yet  wood  wat  much  mom  generally
uaed  fot  repmenlationi  of  the  goda^  Theae  itatuea
weRpoinled  [Pit:TEnA,p.90i],and  in  moat  caies
dreoaed  in  the  moat  gorgeoua  attire.  The  general
character  of  the  atatuea  produced  in  the  earlier
thnei  of  thit  period  ia  on  the  whole  the  lame  at
-miiig  other  n^oiia  at  «nch  an  early  period. The


STATUARIA  ARS.

e  in  wbkh  they  are  executed  u


loei


ailed  tlie
ordaic  or  the  iittulic  atyle. The  figurea  are  atiff

Lty,  the  eyea  long  and  amall,  and  the  outer

angleo  turned  a  little  upwardt,  the  mouth,  which  ii

likeiviH  dtsirn  upwarda  at  the  two  comeri.  haa  a

uniling  appcaraoce. The  hair  ii  carefully  worked,

■""'  """  " "'iff  wiry  ^peanuice,  and  hangi  gene-

I  atnughl  Hnei  which  are  curled  at  th«

endi. The  arma  hnng  dawn  the  (idea  of  the  body,

leas  the  figure  enniea  aomething  in  ili  haniU.

le  drapery  it  likewite  atiff,  and  the  foida  are  very

mraeCrical  and  worked  with  little  regard  to  na-

re. At  the  arti  during  thia  period  wen  chiefly

emplnyed  in  the  terrice  of  religion,  they  could,

ithttanding  the  many  mechanical  ditcoveriet

t  time,  make  but  tlow  progreu  towardt  the

prodnetion  of  aria  of  lablimity  or  beauty,  for  in

the  repreientaiion  of  the  goda  for  publie  worship

ancient  fonui  hallowed  by  time  and  cuatom  were

~  iued  and  repeated  vithont  the  artitt  being  al-

!d,  even  if  he  wai  able  to  do  it,  to  depart  from

thete  fonnt  or  to  introduce  any  material  change.

rt  tberefon  codd  not  make  any  great  progreti,

ilil  it  waa  applied  to  purpotei  in  which  the  ar-

it'a  genhitwBanol  reatraiaed  by  religioua  cnatom,

id  not  bonnd  to  eonventional  forma. Religion,

although  the  foitecing  mother  of  the  arta  in  their

inhncy,  became a tedioua mtraint  when Ihey

grew  op  to  mai^ood. But  aa  aoon  aa  other  apherea

of  action  were  opened,  religion,  in  her  turn,  coold

of  the  artt,  and  the  old  conventional  fonni  in  many
placet  gave  way  to  workt  oF  real  merit  and  geniut.
Thii  great  and  important  change  look  place  about
and  Jter  01.  GO.

II.  Steaid  Ptrioi,firm  OL  BO  to  0175.
(£80— *80  B.c)
Thii  period,  although  compriaing  no  rnore  than
me  century,  developed  all  the  elementi  which  com-
bined to  m^e  Grecian  art  what  it  became  during
the  third  and  mott  Aourithing  period  of  ila  hiatory,
Omce  now  came  into  clou  contact  with  the  na-
tion* of  the  Eaat  and  with  Egypt ;  eammene  flon-
riahed  at  Corinth,  Aegina,  Samoa,  Mi]elua,Phocaea,
and  other  piacea  ;  gold  became  mare  abundant  in
Greece  than  it  had  been  before,  and  the  lynuita,
who  aptangnpinaereral  parta  of  Greece,  lurraund-
ed  Ihemaelvei  with  aplendour  and  msgnilicence,
and  acted  ai  thepatroni  of  art  to  palliate  their  Dwa

fluencea,  and  could  not  have  produced  a  nation  of
artitti  like  the  Omki.  Epic  poetry  had  gradually
created  in  the  minda  of  the  people  more  defined
ideal  of  their  godt  and  herou,  while  philoiophy
began  to  make  men  look  beyond  what  waa  conren.
tionsl  and  traditianatT.  The  athletic  and  orchetlio
arta  attained  about  OL  £0  a  high  degree  of  perfec-
tion, and  the  drcmnatance  that  about  the  Dime
time  the  gymnattic  and  athletic  conteatt  at  the  great
public  feativala  began  to  be  perfiirmed  naked,  di-
rected the  attention  of  the  artiata  at  well  aa  of  the
public  to  nature,  and  rendered  them  familiar  with
the  beautiful  formioriha  human body. But  the

teien  ehatacter,  and  the  inBuence  of  conventional
forma  atill  acted  in  many  caart  aa  an  obitacle.

The nnmber  of  artiita  who  flontiihcd during
thit  period  ia  truly  attonithing. It  hat  been  aaid
that  the  clotc  councciion  of  b4t^  and  Ku  amoni
3  Y  S  ^  O


1062  BTATUABIA  ARS.

the  uliiU  ccMid  ■!  Ihii  dme,  mi  that  indhidual
UiiitB  worked  &n  Bnd  occoidiog  to  the  dictatei  of
their  own  gmiui.  Est  thi)  ii  going  too  fat,  foe  it
■lill  conllnaed  to  ba  Qia  coDunon  practice  for  n  un
to  be  inatnicled  by  hii  fiiher,  and  although  ihii
relalion  i)  luuallj  eiprsMed  by  tha  term  ji»i|i7((,
yet  OQ  ttalua  w«  odI;  meat  with  tha  term  uJn't.
But,  along  with  theae  lamiliei  of  artitti,  Khonl*  now
beoune  mora  gananil,  ia  which  tbearta  wan  t&ujiht
and  culttntad  according  to  certain  prbdplt*  which
wera  or  became  tnditionary  in  each  school ;  the
•chocta  that  acquired  KiiuetbiDg  of  ths  ipirit  of,
cait«>  or  cnrpamliDni.

The  loniani  of  Aiia  Minor  and  the  iilandan  or
tha  Aegean,  who  had  praTiouil;  been  in  ad(
of  tha  other  Graeka  in  the  eierci«  of  the  line
had  their  laat  fiouriahing  period  from  01  Sj  t(
G3  (56(1—538  B.c).  But  this  abort  period  i
have  been  one  of  the  greateit  ai  well  ai  one  ol
moat  activo  and producliva <rf  nomcrout  coady

Delphi,  and  aome  of  which  wara  aaid  to  bars  been
made  by  Iha  Samian  Theodonia,  most  haie  berl
ejiacuted  at  the  beginning  of  theao  forty  yean.
Oar  want  of  information  raipeciing  tha  lonlani
muat  be  ucribed  to  tlia  elrcumatance  tbat  we  haic
no  Pauaaniu  to  take  ni  through  their  citiei,  and
to  daicribe  and  eiplaiD  the  worka  of  an  with  which
they  wara  adomad-  It  ia  owing  to  tha  aarna  dr-
cumitanca  that  we  know  ao  little  of  Rbodei,  Lam-
DD>,  Nuol,  and  Cyprua,  although  ve  may  take  foe
gmoted  that  theia  flouriihiDg  iaiandt  did  not  by
any  meani  neglect  tha  arti.  Iteipecting  Chioiand
Bainoa  wa  poateai  mora  infoncatioD.  Worka  it
metd  wara  produced  ia  high  perfection  in  the  lat
ter  iaiand,  in  Aegin^  and  Argot,  while  Chioa  gain-
ed the  greatest  reputation  from  ita  poiaeuing  ihr

which  Bupalua  and  Anthermua  ware  the  moat  dii-
tingniihed  about  01.  GO.  Their  worka  were  acat-
tered  orer  lariout  paru  of  Oreecr,  and  their  ralae
may  be  inferred  froDi  the  fact  that  Anguiiut  adom-
ad with  them  the  pediment  oF  the  temple  of  Apellc
on  the  Palatine.  ( Plau  H.  !f.  iizyH.)  Theae
works  muat  be  lappoaed  originally  to  hare  belonged
to  a  Qreek  temple  of  the  aame  god,  and  muit
tainly  hare  beau  of  auperior  beauty  to  tha  wi
diicovered  in  the  iaiand  of  Acgina,  otherwiie
guatut  would  not  have  chosen  them  ai  ortiam
hr  the  Pabitine  temple.  Sicyon  alto  poueiaed  a
celebrated  achool  of  aculpien  iti  marble,  and  about
01.  50  Dipoenua  and  Scylha,  who  had  come  trotn
Crete,  wara  at  tha  head  of  it,  and  executed  KTeral
marble  atatuaa  of  godi.  (PUn.  L  e.)  In  Aetolia,
whither  they  withdrew  for  a  lime,  and  at  Argot,
there  likewite  eiialed  worki  in  msrble  by  theae
artiita.  Diiciple*  of  them,  luch  at  Darycleidoa,
Medon,  and  Theoclei,  were  engaged  at  Sparta  and
in  other  pUcea.  (Paul,  t,  17,  5  1,  'i.  19-)  Rc-
apacting  Magna  Oraeda  and  Sicily  we  know  few
porticulara,  though  it  appeara  that  the  arta  here
went  on  improving  and  coniinned  to  be  in  advance
of  tha  tnothei^country.  Tha  moat  calehralad  artiata
in  MUtbam  Italy  were  Duneaa  of  Croton  and
Pytb^oia*  of  Rhpgium.  (See  the  liiai  of  tfaaaa
aniita  in  the  DiclumaTg  qf  Biagrapiji.)

In  Qmn  itaelf  Sicyon  continuM  ftom  early
time*  to  be  the  aeai  of  a  diitjnguiahed  achool  of  ar-
tiata. Here  Canachua  and  Ariatoclei  floariahed
about  01,  70  aa  alaluaiiea  in  mat^  though  the
fonpar  wai  alao  celebrated  in  the  ait  ofiarviug  in


STATDABIA  ARS.

WDod  and  in  lonntic. Ptiny  (B.  ff.  (mi.  4)

calll  Sicyon  :  dot  t/fidmanim  omnium  aielallonam
pairia,  Canachiu,  whoae  worki  Cicen  (BruL  IS)
calll  more  rigid  and  hard  than  wu  conaiaienl  with
tha  tmth  of  nature,  wai  tha  moat  diatinguiabcd
among  tha  Sicyonian  artiata.  and  fail  akill  fiwnd
employment  in  other  parte  of  Greece  aim.  Ilia
meat  ctlebiated  w<Hk  waa  a  eoloaaal  bninxr  itatnc
of  Apollo  Phileaiu)  in  the  Didymaeon.  the  daaciip-
tion  of  which  may  give  nt  an  idea  of  the  chaneur
of  temple-autuei  at  thia  period.  The  whole  £gon
wu  atiS^  very  muicular,  and  without  anf  elegaacc.
In  hii  right  hand,  which  wu  atretcbed.  out,  Iba
god  held  a  bwn,  and  in  the  left,  which  wai  lome-
what  lower,  a  botr.  Tha  fatorei  of  the  counte-
nance were  hard  and  worked  in  the  old  hieratit
atjle;  the  hair  waa  divided  and  hung  down  tike  win
with  little  cuds  at  the  end-  (Uu\]ti,Jreiai>L  p.  &i.)
In  Aegina  tha  arti  appear  likewise  u  have  can-
tinued  to  flourish  as  before,  and  tha  moat  cdabiated
among  il*  artiau  waa  Gallon,  about  OL  E&  {Fm.
iii,  1H.  f  5,  ii.  U,  |-2.)  Atbeni,  whiiA  at  thJt
time  riralled  Aegitia  in  tha  £ae  arts,  appesn  in  a
short  ip&ce  to  hare  mado  great  progrecs,  br  giant
arliats  as  well  as  gmt  works  bepn  now  to  Mf-
pear  in  the  pages  of  Athenian  history. Thia


After  tha  death  of  Peiiiatratu*  himiel^  the  firH
quadriga  of  bronia  waa  erected  in  fcont  of  the  Ksi-
ple  of  Pallas.  The  most  eelebtated  aBOng  ibt
Athenian  aculptor*  were  Critias  and  H^iai  at
Hegeuas,  both  dialinguiibed  for  ihur  weiks  in
bronie.  The  former  of  them  made  in  OL  75  tha
•tatuea  of  Harmodius  and  Ariitt^um.  (See  tha
arUcles  in  the  DicL  afBiog.)

Argoa  alao  diatinguiahad  itiel^  and  it  ia  a  cniiona
circnmatance,  that  tha  greatest  Attic  anim  arilh
whom  the  third  period  opana,  and  who  brought  the
Attic  art  to  its  culmioaling  point,  arc  disciples  ef
the  Araive  Ageladai  (about  Ol-  G6),wbich  at  once
taiaea  this  city  and  her  other  artiata,  such  as  Ahs-
tomcdon,  Giaucui,  Dionysina,  and  otbers  to  a
greater  importance  than  we  might  otherwiie  be  itr
dined  to  attiilnile  to  them.

Among  the  nnmeroos  woiks  pndsced  daring

thia  peiiod  we  shall  first  mention  the  rrpmcota-

tions  of  the  goda  (dTdA/ura}. In  all  the  aBia**

which  were  made  for  templea  as  objecca  of  wonhip,

Jie  hieratic  style  waa  more  or  leaa  eanadentioualj

retained,  and  il  is  theretbro  not  in  theae  siatoen

,hBt  we  have  to  seek  for  pnofs  of  the  prorma  el

ut. They  were  for  the  moat  part,  as  of  aJd«  madn

if  wood,  and  when  an  old  atalna  was  to  be  lepbced

ij  a  new  one,  the  latter  was  generally  a  foiihlial

iopy  of  the  former. Thui  the  wooden  stalae  vf

Uemeter  at  Phigaleia with  a  horx's  head,  froaa

vhidi  dragons  and  other  monsiera  apiang  forth,

and  wliich  bore  a  dolphin  and  a  dore  in  its  handa^

1  imitated  by  Onatas  in  bnniie  after  tha  wooden

ire  had  been  humL (Paua.  viiL  43.) Tha

la  adherence  to  ancient  fonns  of  the  gods  wu

1  viaibla  in  other  laiaa  ;  for  when  cahuiea  wen

t  out  the  images  of  the  goda  of  the  moiher-dty

ware  for  the  most  part  bithfully  copied  for  the  c*-

' — and aueh  eopiea were calLsd ilT»lfidyvn.

lys^Hal,  ii.  22,  liii.  56  ;  Strab.  iv.  p.  179.)

of  tha  Apollo  Phileiiua  and  sf  t)>a


Deme


■ofOna


wood  began  to  give  way  to  other  and  better
matetialt.  Besides  himnie,  marUe  alan,  and  inrj
and  gold  were  now  applied  to  ttalitei  ef  tha  fod^


STATUARIA  ARS.
and  It  im  sot  Terj'  ancommoD  to  ferm  the  bodj  of
k  lUtut  of  wood,  uid  to  mika  iu  hold,  unih  uid
feat  of  >los«  {lUfiXitin),  at  to  cover  tha  whole  of
inch  k  woodon  figun  villi  ivor;  mi  gold.  (Puu.
iL  4.  3  1.  Ti.  25.  S  4.  A<%  ii.  22.  g  6  ;  Eurip.
Tinad.  1061.)  Tha  latter  matliod,  vbich  aboat
thi*  lime  bacuna  n  distinct  sod  much  Bdmind
btBMh  of  italDuj,  wBi  pnctiied  b;  Dorjclaidu,
Tbmeln,  Msdui,  CuMcfaui,  Meniwchmiu,  Bod
othciv  ud  appcan  to  haia  been  ialcodocad  bj
INpoeniu  ud  ticjilii.  Qtialnmere  de  <Jutii<j  con-
■idend  dii  kind  of  Malptara,  which  the  modenu
call  chr; HlephiaCme  icidptua,  u  &  pvt  of  the  art
which  the  aocieDti  called  toranlic  (nfHirrunl).
There  an  few  emn  more  urpiiiing  than  Ibii,  ud
jcl  tha  opinion  of  tha  French  critic  hu  been  re-
pealed aa  if  then cenld  be  lu  doabt  about  iL

[ELBrBAS.]

From  the  ilatoe*  o(  the  godi  erected  for  wonhip


diodcd  ID  lenpie*  m  dra^ibisra,  and  which  now
beouw  fa»ta—ry  inatead  of  cnlen,  tripode,  &c.
But  ban  too  th*  abanga  wai  not  ludden,  tor  the
•tKtoe*  at  finl  were  frequantlj  connaatad  with  tri-
podi  and  liaiiJar  enunwnta.  At  Amjclae  than
wan  tiipodi  made  by  Gallon  and  Qitiadaa  mrith
■mall  (taloee  of  goddeiaei  imdei  them.  (Paul.  ilL
18.)  In  the  execution  of  (tatnei  to  be  dadicaladai
dro^^uara,  aien  thauj^  the;  van  repneentalioni
ti  godi,  tbe  artUta  wen  not  onl;  not  bound  to  an;
tndilional  or  conTentional  forma,  but  wen,  like
the  poati,  allowed  to  malie  free  oae  of  IB jthak^cal
aabjeela,  to  add.  and  to  oniit,  or  to  inodifr  tha
[«  adapted  for  their


■tjle  waa  Tinblo,  or  thaj  wtn  eian  made  in  that
•tjle,  a*  the  alatua  of  Mjrlon  bj  Dameai.  (Phi-
iDilr.  Apali.  rjm  if.  2S  ;  aomp.  Paua.  ii.  23,
Ti.  14.  i  2.)  Alihmgh  thaae  atatuea  were  gana-
tall;  notpannila,ta[P)in;{/f..V.  ixiir.  S)  itatei
(hat  onl;  thou  wbo  had  gained  the  Tietocy  thrica
were  allowed  to  hare  an  iconic  ttatna  arocted,  yel
thej  wen  deitioed  to  preHure  tbe  mamojy  of  the
partieitlar  phyiical  powen  and  tha  bodilj  derelope-
ment  of  the  athletea,  at  even  to  thaw  the  peculiar
ekiU  or  tfaepacnUar  Btrat^enu  b;  whicb  en  athlete
bad  eiedlad  and  oreteome  hi*  adrenaij,  and  thua
■aiirded  (0  the  artiM  numenui  opponuotliei  of
lapmmilii^  Sftttt  in  a  Tarietj  of  attitude*  and
aetiona.  (Pan.  n.  ID.  g  1,  TiiL  4D  ;  SchoL  ad
Piad.  OL  Tii.  ifliL  ;  Xenoph.  Mem.  iu.  16.  j  6.)
Statnei  oeeted  in  public  or  dediotad  in  tamplei  in
hoiKiar  of  other  diitigniibed  penone  are  mentioned
TOT  nfclj  during  thia  priud,  but  thej  appear
geiMiall;  to  haie  been  portrait*  {ihtim,  Moteu
ioomm).  The  eailietl  italtM  of  thii  kind  we
know  of  are  thoao  of  Cleobia  and  Bltm)  of  Argot,
which  wen  dedicated  inthatem^a  of  Delphiaboui
OL60,  (Hecod.i.31.)  The  fint  iconic  lUtue*  of
Narmoditu  and  Ariitogition  were  made  by  Antenor
in  509  B.  c,  and  in  477  b.  c  new  ilalue*  of  the
laiae  peraoo*  wen  made  bj  Ciitiu. It  ii  allowed


STATUAIUA  ABa  106S

on  ill  hauda  that  nothing  contributed  mon  to  tha
adiancamenl  of  itatuar;  than  the  conteata  at  the
public  gamei,  a*  thej  not  only  rendered  tbe  artitta
bmiliar  with  the  grealett  tarielj  of  attitude*,  and
with  the  most  beiutifidly  developed  form*  of  tha
hodiei  of  the  athlete*,  but  alio  afibrded  to  them
nnmaiaoi  opportunitie*  to  lepreient  in  their  work*
Ihoee  aame  penoui  end  attitude*  which  they  had
lean  and  admired.  The  wideet  field  for  itudy  and
aierdia  waa  thui  opened  to  the  artiiti.

We  have  aeen  that  at  a  tery  earlj  period  of
Qrecian  art  attempti  wen  made  to  adorn  the  out-
■Ide  of  temple*  and  other  publia  building*,  but  it
wai  not  till  the  period  we  an  now  dticribing  that
it  became  cuttomoij  to  adorn  ihe  pedip)aDt*,frieia*,
and  other  part*  of  temple*  with  relief*  or  group*  of
(tatnei  of  marble.  We  tltll  poaaea*  two  gnat
work*  of  thi*  kind  which  are  lufficient  to  ahow
general  charaeter  during  thi*  penod. 1.  Tha


ASarUu,  or  the  metope*  of  two  Irmplaa
on  Iha  aeiopali)  of  9elinii*,  in  Sicily,  which  war*
diHioTered  in  I  B'23  by  W.  Harria  and  Sam.  Angell,
and  are  at  preient  hi  the  Muaeum  of  Paleimo,
Tha*o  belonging  to  the  wetlem  lemgda  appear  la
hBTB  bean  mode  at  the  beginnuig  of  tbi>  period,  a*
they  thow  a  Tery  greet  roambUioce  to  the  work*
in  (he  hiaiatie  ilyle.  Tha  figure*  of  the  other  or
middle  tampJa  ihow  indeed  a  conuderabla  advance-
ment of  the  art,  but  the  eieculion  i*  itill  hard  and
■tiff )  they  mar  hoie  poiubly  been  eiecalad  ■  ahort
limebafonOWG.  (See  &Angell  and  Th.  Enna,
Seulptand  Mehfii  ditmand  aamig  (ie  rami  o/*
JUnou,  Lond.  1S2G  ;  compL  MrrorA.)  2.  Tia
Aegin^  Matila  wan  diaeoTered  in  1HI2  in  tha
ialaud  of  Aegina,  and  are  new  at  Munich  in  the
collectkm  of  ihekingof  BaTsria.  They  eoniiil  of
eleven  atatuei,  which  adorned  tno  pediment*  of  B
temple  of  Athena,  and  rej^eient  tha  goddeu  lead-
ing the  Aeacidi  againat  Troy,  and  contain  manifeat


of I


larblen


il  probable  that  originally  (eveial  pan*  o
itatuei,  perhap*  the  anuoui,  wen  of  bronae,  and
filed  to  theta  with  nail*.  The  general  character
of  theie  Aeginatan  atatuea  i*  a  miitnn  of  tbe
archaic  atyle  and  an  aniiona  imitation  of  nature.
The  hair  ii  wirj-,  and  trace*  of  paint  an  vitibla  on
all  part*  of  the  atalue*,  with  ^e  exception  of  thoae
repTCHmling  the  Se*h.  (See  Edw.  Lyon,  OtUmm
ofUie  Egiaa  JUarila,  1829.)

Beeidc*  thcK  a  gieat  Dumber  of  work*  in  brtmse
and  marble  of  (hit  ^od  an  *till  eilant ;  they  an
partly  round  tigure*  or  atatuea  and  partly  telief*.
(MiJiler,  ^mk^o^  p.  73,  Sc.)  Some  of  the  beat
■pecimena  in  marble  relief,  which  >eem  to  form  the
tranaition  from  thi*  to  tbe  third  period,  are  pre-
•ervad  m  the  Briiiih  Muiemu.  (See  Combe,  JUar-
Ua  t^&e  BrU.  Mn.  ii.  pi.  6  and  7  ;  Speamau  of
Awe.  Scmlplart,  pi.  II.)  It  J*  not  alwaya  eaty  to
■y  whether  a  work  made  in  the  archaie  aiyle  is
really  aa  old  oi  tha  ityle  indicate*,  aa  thi*  ttyte
waa  never  entinly  abandoned,  and  waa  retained
in  templa-ataluea  eran  under  tbe  Ramon  amperon.
llLnird  FertBd/hm  Oi.  7S  to  OL  111.
{4B0— 336  fl,c.)

During  thia  period  Athena  waa  the  centn  of  tha
fine  ana  in  (Ireece.  The  Peraion  wan  awakened
in  the  hearta  of  tha  people  tha  feeling  and  the  con-
viction of  their  own  power,  and  tbe  Qreeka,  who
had  at  Srat  only  warded  off  tha  attack*  of  the  but-


8Td


•  o"


1064  BTATUARIA  ARS.

barUna,  nair  !e!i  ttrong  enough  to  act  on  tlie  oiTen-
■ire.  The  fsil  of  the  Spamn  Pauuoiu  niud
Alheci  in  472  b.  c.  to  tho  aupremu;  in  the  wan
p^inat  Penia.  Atliena  hod  naw  acqirirvd  n  pow-
erful nBvr,  and  the  tribntci  of  the  lUliea,  wliich
Bitioiiiitid  Bt  diflerent  timca  tram  460  to  1200
tidenU,  and  which  from  4ES  a,  c  were  depoaited
in  the  ireunry  at  Athena,  niaed  the  city  t«  a
bcight  of  power  aueh  aa  few  citiea  hare  ever  poa-
•eawd.  Only  a  imall  portion  of  theae  treaaurea
waa  apent  upon  war  ;  the  reit  waa  applied  at  lint
to  the  fortification  of  the  cit]-,  and  aftenrarda  to
the  building  of  templei,  porticon,  theatna,  g^'m-
nails,  &c  Among  them  we  need  only  nienlion
the  Theaeum,  the  Pnrthenon,  ths  Pnipylaca,  the
■lone  theatre,  the  Poecile,  and  the  Odeum.  After
th«  wan  with  Penla  Athena  appenra  bf  no  mtajia
exhauited  or  broken  down,  but  rerreahed  and
atrengthoned  like  nature  after  a  heayy  atorm.

Statuary  during  (hia  period  went  hand  in  hand
with  the  other  nrta  and  with  literature :  it  became
emancipated  from  ita  ancient  feltera.  fiorn  tba  iliff-
neaa  and  conrentional  forma  of  fotmer  timet.  The
free  and  noble  apirit  iif  the  Athenian  demociacy
ahnwed  ita  inauence  ia  all  departmenta  of  litera-
ture and  art.  and  amonglhe latter atalunryratched
iti  culcninating  point  in  the  aubllme  and  mighty
Kortta  of  Pheidia*.  (See  Did.  ofBiog.  t.  b.  Pbd-
diat.)  The  demoeratical  apirit  did  not  howcTer
lead  to  any  kind  of  eitrayngance  in  the  arta ;  no
vehement  paaaiona  or  actiona  were  repiraented,  and
although  the  chancier  of  Ihoie  warka  which  belong
to  the  hittei  half  of  Hat  period  diflen  rery  much
from  thoae  of  the  fbraier  half,  yet  on  the  whole
all  ahaw  a  calm  dignity  and  an  almoat  pataionleae
tranquillity  of  mind,  a  featurs  »  peculiar  to  all
the  great  matlerpiccet  of  Grecian  ait.  The  Pelo-
ponneaian  war  and  the  calamltiea  which  accom-
panied it  produced  a  change  in  the  atata  of  thiiigi ;
a  new  genentian  now  aiepped  into  the  place  of
the  heroic  race  which  bad  partaken  in  or  wiineued
the  memorable  erenti  of  the  Peraian  war.  Scr-
auality  and  an  indulgence  of  the  paaaiona  became
the  prominent  featnrea  in  the  character  of  the
Athenian  p«ap1e  ;  nnd  the  pTerailing  deaire  after

Erodnca  an  injurioua  inRuenca  upon  the  arte  alao.
n  the  work!  of  art  which  were  produced  after  the
year  380  B.  c.  there  wai  no  longer  that  calm  and
lublime  majeaty  which  charac(eii>ed  the  woriia  of
Pfaeidiai  and  hii  more  immediate  followera,  but  the
figurea  were  more  pathetic,  and  cslcolated  to  liave
a  gienter  effect  upon  the  lenaea  of  the  beholdera.
The  difterent  etagea  of  the  ana  during  thia  period
bear  tbo  moat  atriking  analogy  with  the  three
phaiea  of  tragedy  ai  they  lie  before  ua  in  the  woriia
of  ihe  three  great  dramatim,  Aeachylui,  Sophodaa,
and  Euripidea.

Atgoa  waa,  next  to  Athena,  the  moat  diitin-
guithed  aeal  of  tbo  arte  during  thia  period,  and  the
woriia  of  Ihe  Athenian  and  Aigive  artiali  apread
orerall  Qreect^  and  became  the  modela  foe  other
Greek  artiata.

The  deTelopemenl  of  atatuary  at  Athena  and
ArgiM  had  been  prepared  by  Calamii  of  Athena
and  Pythagoraa  of  Rhegiom,  the  fomec  of  whom,
although  not  quite  free  from  the  baidneaa  of  the
el  produced  a  great  Tariety  of  worka.


ong  whit


lionedre


STATUARIA  AB&

ff.AT.  niiT.  19.  Sll;Qninctn.iii.]0,  STsCSe.

Brut.  18  ;  Lucian,  Inag.  6.)  Pythagona  waa  ^■
linguilhed  Ibr  the  perfectioD  with  which  he  ei-
preaied  the  nmaclea.  >dna,  and  hair  in  hia  athlcik
alatnee,  for  the  beautiful  propoitioni  and  the  power-
ful eipreaiion  of  ihe»  aiatttea  which.  a>  Pliny  mjt,
made  the  bebalden  feel  the  paina  which  the  indi-
Tiduala  repreaented  were  auBering.  (Plin.  H.  N.
a«iT.  19.g4(PBua.Ti.  6.  Sl;l3-§«0  SevmJ
of  hia  worka  are  apeeified  br  Panaaniaa  and  niDT,
1  See  DicL  of  Bing.  a.  e.)  Thi  career  of  Pbeidiu  the
Athenian  begint  about  01.  83.  The  geniui  of  thia
ariiat  waa  eo  gnat  and  ao  generally  recogniaed,  that
all  the  great  wotki  which  were  eiecnted  in  the  a^
of  Periclea  were  plac«d  nndrr  hi*  diisction,  and
thua  the  whole  boat  of  artiatt  who  were  at  that  time
aaaembied  at  Athena  were  engaged  in  workins  odI
bii  deugna  and  ideaa.  (Plut  J>eri^  12.)  HsIiiB-
•elf  waa  chiefly  engaged  in  eieenting  the  colanal
work*  in  iTory  and  gold,  tiie  eipenaea  of  which
were  anpplied  by  the  Qteek  atate*  with  the  gmieit
liberality,  and  other  wodia  ia  bnmie  and  marble.
(For  an  account  of  the  (dityaelephantiiie  atattes  of
Athena  at  Athena,  and  of  Zena  at  Olym^  aod
ths  other  woriu  of  Pbeidiai,  aee  the  Did.  af  ^eg.
a,  v.)  Pheidiaa  waa  greateat  in  the  ii  [iiiainialiini
of  the  goda,  and  eapedally  in  portraying  tfae  da-
racier  of  Athena,  which  ha  repreaenitd  arith  nriaoa
modiScalioni,  aometime*  aa  a  wariike  fRiddea,  and
id  graceful  protectreaa  of


arta. (Plin. //.  W,  uiiv,  8.  a  1 9.  f  I  ;  P
§  1 ;  Lucian,  Ivag.  6.)

■'  ■■ '  ' of  Pheidiaa,


We


H  many  d'
liahed I


Agoracritoa  of  Samoa  uid  Alcamenea  of  Athena,
Doth,  though  the  UtKi  wiih  gtnter  independeaec,
applied  their  akill  like  their  maater  ts  uatnei  ef
the  goda ;  both  were  capedally  renowned  (or  Ike
great  beoaty.  aoftoeei,  and  calm  majeatj  with
which  they  repreaented  goddeeeet,  in  the  maupaai
tion  of  which  they  riralled  each  othn.  Setae  of
the  alatuea  of  Alcamenea  were  very  highly  nlwd
in  antiquity,  especially  hia  Hecate,  Athena,  A^i«>
dils  in  the  gardena,  Hephaeatna,  and  abe  ths
groupa  in  the  pediment  of  the  tem^de  at  OlyaipiB.
The  moat  celebrated  atatne  of  AgDiacriM*  iraa  the
Nemeeia  of  Rhaimiua,  which  had  ariginally  been
intended  a*  an  Aphrodite  to  compete  with  that  of
Alcamenea,  bat  waa  afterwarda  1^  tba  addition  of


Tiee  oC  •colptimd  wnrica  ta
la  by  the  achool  of  Pheidiaa,


marble  which  wero  m

and  lome  of  them  nndenbledlj  by  the  gt

himaelC These  woiki  are:

1.  Some  part*  of  the  eighteen  Kolptnred  laetopsa,
together  with  the  &ie»  of  Ihe  email  udei  of  lln
cellaofthe  templeof  Theaeua.  Ten  of  the  uetopea
repreaent  the  exploit*  of  Harwlea,  and  the  eigkl
othen  thoae  of  Theaeui.  The  figure*  in  tha  inem
are  manifeatly  goda,  but  their  meaDiiqiaiiiicntaiB.
All  the  figures  are  fijU  of  life  and  actiiity,  nd
worked  in  ths  sahlime  atyle  of  the  ichoel  cf  Phei-
diaa. Some  aniiquariana  lalne  than  erm  higher
than  the  aeulpture*  of  the  Parthenon.  Caai*  oT
Iheae  figure*  are  in  the  Briciah  Hoaann.  (Cempai*
Stuart.  ^U-iiLehap.  I.)

2.  A  conaidenbla  number  of  the  mglopea  of  tbt
Parthenon,  which  are  all  adorned  wi^  relielh  ia
marble,  a  great  part  of  the  frieie  of  the  cetla,  aioa
coloiaal  figure^  aadaannberaf  feagataia •[  tha


STATUARIA  ABS.
Im  padmMnti  of  (hit  tmnpt&  Ths  gi
thcM  WD[i)  ii  now  in  the  Britiih  Hu
tlitjr  an  collected  under  the  lume  of  the  Elgin
MuWei.  Thar  IwTa  been  de«ibed  ud  com-
nwnted  opou  u  often*  that  Ibej  nquin  no  farth^
meation  hen. (_Sa  DicL  if  Biag.  m.  tk  Pieidiu.)

8.  The  tnaiUe  nliab  of  tha  tam^a  of  Nike
Apletea  bdoog  indeed  to  ■  tutu  iga  than  that  of
PmdiM,  but  thaj  an  taanifattlj  wus  in  ihe  ipirit
oThiaachooL  Tm;  npceamt  with  great  lirelineu
and  encrgj  eonteila  of  Greaki  with  Poniani,  and
ot  Oreahi  among;  thenuelTM.  Theaa  alio  ua  in
the  Bridih  Mutcnm.

All  tbeaa  aoilptiue*  bnatha  «  tha  whole  the
■tme  lablima  ipirit,  ihongh  it  would  aeem  that
•Doe,  eapeciallj  aame  figuna  of  ibe  metopei  of  Iba
Paithenon,  were  eiecutdl  b;  artiati  who  bad  not
Mnanctpatcd  IhanuelTea  antinlf  Itma  ths  ioHucDM
of  an  earlier  age.  Witfa  Ibi*  aiceplion  and  aorae
other  Ji^t  defecta,  which  an  pcobablj  the  conaa-
qnaMsa  of  tha  plnca  which  the  acnlptiuea  occopied
fai  tba  lewplet  Uugrkdomed,  va  find  erairwhera  a
tenth  in  the  imitatioD  of  natnra,  which,  wilhonl
g  or  omittiiia  iBything  that  ia  eaaential.
It  an  J  fbnad  attanpt  to  go  bejond  na-
tora,  pnUDcea  tha  pnceat  and  ublimnt  beaatf :
tbeae  workl  (how  lireljr  moTemeala  combined  Hlth
cvlmneaa  and  eaM,  A  nataml  dignity  and  graco
nniled  with  aaae«ted  limplidl;  ;  no  itrif  jng  after
eflacl,  or  axcitepwnt  oF  the  paaaiona.  Thtae  aculp-
toiet  alDoe  afford  na  anijda  mean*  to  joiCiff  die
ancient  critica,  who  atata  that  the  lArya^mr  and
r^/air,  or  tha  gnnd  and  niblinie.  wen  the  chaiac-
terntic  f^tum  ofPheidiM  and  hii  ichool.  (De-
Bieti.  dt  EbxaL  It  ;  Dionjra.  Hal.  di  IkxtoL  p.
fi42.)  Pbddiaa  waa  the  AeKhjlua  of  itatuary,
and  il  inaj  be  lafel;  auerted  thai,  although  Ihe  art
nbscqnentl  J  made  crrtoin  pngreat  in  the  eiecntion
of  detaiU,  jet  Pbeidia*  and  hii  achool  were  norer
excelled  hf  anbaeqneDt  generaliona.

Beaidea  the  aeniptiuea  of  tha  three  templet  men-
tieoed  abon,  then  an  alao  aimilar  omaroenti  of
other  temple*  extant,  which  ihow  tba  influence
which  the  aebaol  of  Phddaj  moat  bare  eienaaed
ia  Tariani  porta  of  Qneee,  though  they  wen  aie-
raled  in  a  diArent  alyle. Of  tbeae  we  need  only


i.  Tha  Phigaleian  narblea,
the  temple  of  ApoUo  EpicniiuK  bnilt  abont  01.  BE
by  IcliuDB.  They  were  diacofered  in  1812,  and
eoDHat  of  iwenty-tbreo  plalea  of  marble  belonging
to  ikie  inner  friae  of  tha  cella.  They  an  now  in
the  Btiliih  Moteam.  The  lobjecta  repnaented  in
them  ore  figbia  with  centaun  and  amaaona,  and
one  plate  ibowi  Apollo  and  Anemia  dnwn  in  a
chariot  by  ataga.  Many  of  the  attilodea  of  Ibe
iignrea  appear  la  be  npe^tioni  of  tboee  aeen  on
t£e  Attic  tampica,  bat  there  an  at  the  uma  time
gnu  different*,  for  the  Phigaleian  marblet  aoma-
limea  ahow  a  boldneaa  of  deaign  which  abnoat  har-
den on  eTtraraganee,  while  aome  figurea  are  Incop-
tectly  drawn  and  in  fbrred  attitudes  The  beat
deacriptioni  of  Ibem  an  tboae  in  Bam  nUtvi  lUlia
Oneia^ditigm.  da  O.  U.  Wagner  (IBU),  and  in
Slackelberg'i  Jpollaltmpii  at  Bamit  «  Arcadiai
K.  ifia  doKliit  am/egrab.  tiildverlm,  1838.

3.  Marbtea  of  the  temple  of  the  Olympian  Zena,
whidi  wen  mada  by  Paconiu)  of  Mande  and  Alca-
nenn  of  Alliena.  (Pnna.  t.  16.)  Sereral  ftag-
'tDaota  of  these  acntptnna  wen  diacoTeredlD  1B29, .
and  an  now  at  Pari*  (ExpfdO.  Sa—Sf-  i*  la  \


8TATUARIA  Ana.  lOfiS

Afor&,pL  74—78.)  The  fignma  of  these  marblel
are  indeed  free  from  the  fetten  of  ths  andent  tlyle,
and  show  a  tros  imitation  of  natnn.  but  do  not
neariy  come  op  to  the  ideal  timplicitT  of  the  worfci
of  PbeidiaL

AbODt  the  BOW  time  that  tha  Allic  lehool  ross
to  ill  higheat  perfection  under  Pheidiaa,  tha  icbocd
of  Argot  waa  likewiae  tailed  to  iti  nimaiit  by
PolycleLtnt,  who  waa  inferior  to  the  formei  in  his
ilaloei  of  godi  (QuiodiL  lil  10.  §  T,&c  ;  Cie.
Bntl.  le),  ihoogb  he  adTanced  the  torenik  art  in
hiactJoaial  statue  of  Hera  at  Aigoa  further  than
Pheidiaa.  (Plin. //.JV.  iiii*.8.L  19.g  2.)  But
the  art  of  making  bnnie.  itatoet  of  athletes  waa
carried  by  him  to  the  grealeat  perfection :  idtvl
youthful  and  manly  beoaty  wastbeiphrn  in  which
be  excelled.  Among  his  statnea  of  gods  we  only
know  two,  that  of  Hen  and  another  of  Harmea.
Pliny  menlioui  aevend  of  hta  repreaentationa  of
human  beings,  in  which  wilhsnt  neglecting  to  giio
tbem  indiridoalily,  ha  mads  youthfiil  %urEt  in
their  purest  beanty,  and  with  the  most  aecnnta
pivporlioui  of  the  aeierttl  parts  of  the  human  body.
(Plin.£.  0.;  camp.  Strab.  viiL  p,  Hi.)  One  of
these  itatuea,  a  youthful  Dorjphorua,  was  made
with  inch  aceniale  obseiralian  of  the  proportions
of  the  paiu  of  the  body,  that  it  waa  looked  npon
by  tba  andent  artiita  aa  a  canon  of  rulea  on  thia
point.  {Ck.  Bt%L  as,  OnK.  2;  QuinliL  t.  12,
i  21  ;  Lneian,  dt  SaltaL  75.)  Polyelaitni  ia  aaid
to  haTo  written  a  work  on  the  aame  snbjnt,  and  it
may  be  that  his  Doryphorus  waa  intendMi  to  giie  a
practical  apednen  of  the  rulea  he  had  laid  down
in  hia  tnUiae. He  gaine


ithe  I


conseqoenlly  hare  been  a  figon  ii


{HUler,  Jretool.  |  121.)


Polyclei.

which  that  of  Artemoii  Pen^ontas,  a  mechann
cian  of  the  time  of  Periclea,  it  menlioDed  with  ea-
pedal  pnise. (Comp.  Diet,  of  Biag.  i.  v.)

Uyron  of  Eleulhatae,  about  OL  87,  waa,  like
Polycleitua,  a  disciple  of  Ageladaa,  bntadhered  to  a
eloaer  imitation  of  natun  than  Polycleitua,
fiiiaa  the  impreasion  i^Hm  the  scDSei
his  works  wen  most  pleating,  but  onau  souas
■KM  nrpraiii,  tayi  Pliuy  (#.  K.  ixxiv.  8.  i.  19.  |
3).  The  cow  of  Mynn  in  hronsa  wit  celebrated
in  all  antiquity.  tTielaea.  CU^  viiL  1 94,  Ac  ;  Pro>
pert.il  81.7-}  Pliny  mentions  a  conddenble
number  of  bis  works,  among  which  a  dog,  a  disco*
bolua,  pentathli  and  pancntiasta  wen  most  cele-
bnted  ; Ihe  last  of them wen especially  dis-


ita,  as  weU  aa  for  Ihe
moil  beautiful  athletic  attitudes.  Among  hit  tto-
tnes  of  godi  we  find  only  mention  of  a  coloiial
gronp  npresenting  Heracles,  Zeus,  and  AlheiM,
which  he  made  for  tha  Ssmiana.  (PUn.^c;Ci&
0.  Verr.  it.  3  ;  Strab.  lif.  p.  637.)  In  his  execu-
tion of  the  hair  he  adhertd,  according  to  Pliny,  to
the  ancient  tlyle. (See  DicL  <f  Bug.  m.  a.)

The  deviation  from  the  tnbiime  idi^ily  of  the
Attic  achool  of  Pheidiaa  was  still  more  manifett  in
the  workt  of  Cnllinucbui  and  Demetriua.  Ths
formec  executed  hit  ttatuet  with  the  nlmottpoaai-
Ue  accuracy  and  attention  to  the  minniett  detaila,
tweUasinihe


loss


STATUARIA  ABS.


nicknuna  of  csraniffTtxm.  Qnioctiliin  (li
g»)i«y«othini  (mBiuiuiowitoto.  (Comp.LoiH.ii,
Pkilept.  la  ;  PVm.  ^liM.  nl  e.)  On  the  whole  ' '
■honld  be  obKTTsd,  thit  new  the  end  of  the  Peli
ponneaiui  wu  luid  Hflecwuda  (be  ereator  part  af
the  vtiiU  continued  ID  work  in  the  apirit  and
■t;te  of  PDljclaitua,  and  that  th«  principal  produc-
tion! in  Ptlapocnciu*  were  bronie  itatuci  of  ath-
let«>  and  itatuei  erected  in  bonoar  of  other  diitin-
iniiihed  penont.  (Paiu.  i.  9.  g  4,  ri.  S.  i  4  ;
Pint.  ijMtJ.  1,  la,  de  Orac.  PJAi.  2.)

Tba  change  which  took  place  afterthe  Pelopon-
neaian  war  in  the  pnhlic  mind  at  Athena  could  nat

the  achool  of  atatuatj,  which  had  Kladuall;  become
developed,  waa  ai  different  from  that  of  Pheldiaaaa
the  then  eiiitidg  (tale  of  feeding  at  AlhtDt  wufhim
thai  which  had  grown  cnt  of  the  wan  with  Peraja.
It  waa  Mpedallr  Scopaa  of  Paroa  and  Pruitelea
of  Alhen*,  about  one  generation  after  Mjnn  and
Polycleitua,  who  gare  the  reflex  of  their  time  in
their  productiona.  Their  worka  aijKeaaed  the
iofter  feelinga  and  an  eidted  itale  of  mind,  inch
aa  would  make  a  alrong  imprraaion  upon  and  eap-
tirata  the  aenaea  of  the  beholden.  Bnt  the  chief
maatera  of  ihia  new  achool  atill  bad  the  wiadom  to
combine  theae  Ihini^  which  wen  comnuinded  bj
the  tpiiit  of  the  age,  with  a  noble  and  aublime  con-
ception of  the  ideal  which  the;  embodied  in  their
worka.  Scopaa  and  Praiitelei  wen  both  diitin-
gnithed  aa  aculpton  in  marble,  and  both  worked  in
the  ume  itjrle  ;  the  legendary  circle!  to  which  moat
of  their  ideal  prodoction*  belong  are  thoae  of  Dio-
nyana  and  Aphrodite,  a  fiict  which  alao  ahowt  the
characMr  of  the  ag^  There  wai  a  time  when  thia
'Khool  of  atatoarf  waa  ccaiiidend  anperior  tna  to
that  of  Pheidiaa,  and  it  iaindewltmethat  ili  pn>-
dnctiona  aie  diatingniihed  bj  exquiaite  beaqty  and
giaeefnlneaa,  whence  their  female  atatuea  in  parti-
cular are,  in  ana  aenae,  onriialled  ;  but  the  e^t
thej  pndneed  npon  the  minda  of  the  beholden
waa  by  no  meana  of  the  tame  pun  and  elcTating
natun  aa  that  of  the  worka  of  their  predecaiaora.
(For  anaccoontof  their  worka, leetheatticlea/'nu-
ilila  and  Soopat  in  the  Dictitaarsi  af  Btograph/.)

CephiiaodDnia  and  Tinurchn*  were  loni  of
Praiilele*.  There  wen  eeieral  woriie  of  the  for-
mer at  Roma  in  the  time  of  Plinj;  be  made  hii
art  labaerrient  to  paaaioni  and  aenaoal  dnirea.
Pliny  {H.  N.  iiiri.  5.  a.  4.  §  S)  mention*  among
hia  work!  a  celebrated  Symplegma  at  Pergamoi,
which  ia  the  fint  inatance  of  thia  kind  that  we  hear
of  in  Grecian  art  A  aimilar  apirit  pervaded  the
worka  of  Leocharea  (u  hia  Oanjmedea  carried  by
en  eagle  np  to  Zona  J,  of  Polyclea,  who  waa  the  firat
that  made  the  TolupEBoo*  alaluea  of  Hermaphro-
dites,  and  of  Silanion,  who  made  a  dying  Jocaate.
(Plin.  H.  N.  iiiiT.  8.  a.  19:  S  17  and  SO  ;  Plat,
ri*  Aad.  Foet.  3,  S^pal.  <r.  1  ;  tee  Did.  of  Bicg.
t.  oe.)  Leocharea  alio  made  a  number  of  portiail-
ttatuea  in  ivory  and  gold  of  memb«n  of  the  royal
family  of  Macedonia,  and  of  other  penona.  (Paua.
T.  20.)  Such  portnit-tlatuea  ahotit  thia  tinia  began
to  gire  much  oecupatjon  to  the  artitti.  Abonl  the
year  3£0  B.  c  iereral  of  the  greateit  artiati  of  iha
age,  mch  at  Scopat,  Leocharea,  Timothena,  and
Bryant,  wen  engaged  in  Caria  in  making  the
magnifieent  maoaoleum  af  Manaolui,  a  genenl
deacription  cf  which  ia  given  under  Hauioliuk.

Hoat  of  the  above-mentioned  artitt*,  hoiTeiBr
widely  ttwii  woika  difierad  from  IhoM  of  the  uhool


STATDAHIA  ABS.
of  Phridiu,  may  yet  be  resided  aa  haviiig  only
continued  ajid  developed  ita  prindplea  of  art  in  a
certain  direction  ;  but  towarda  the  end  of  thia  pe-
riod Eaphianor  and  Lyaippuaof  Sicyoo  carried  out
the  principlea  of  the  Aigive  achool  of  Polyclalsa.
(Cic  BnL  86.)  Their  principal  object  waa  la  n-
pieeeut  the  highest  potaible  degree  of  phvaiisl
beauly  and  of  athletic  and  heroic  power.  (See
tbeirliTtain  tiM  Ditt.^  Biog).  The  chief  chanc
terittic  of  Lytip|>na,  and  hia  nbool  ia  a  clcae
imitation  of  DMore,  which  even  cantiired  to
repreaent  bodily  defecta  in  aome  intoeating  maa-
ner,  aa  in  hia  portiaita  of  Ale^yider  ;  ila  tendency
ia  entirely  reatiitic  The  ideal  atalaea  of  fomer
tunea  diaappeac  mon  and  more,  and  make  ny
for  mere  portraita.  Lyaippnt,  it  ia  true,  made  ata-
tnet  of  goda  ;  bnt  they  did  not  properly  belcag  la
hia  tphere  i  hs  merely  execated  them  became  he
had  received  orden  which  he  coald  not  wdl  nrfnae.
Hia  greateatore  wot  bettowed  upon  the  eiecntioo
of  the  details  (argMiiat  t^pfmai),  upon  the  conect
proportiona  of  the  parla  of  the  human  body,  and
npon  making  hi*  atatuet  (tender  and  Ull  above  the
common  tUmdard.  In  thorl,  all  the  fbatarea  which
characterite  the  next  period  appear  in  the  acboo)  of
Lyaippna.

IV.  FosriJt  Period,  ;>oib  OL  111  Io  (K,  lit

(336—146  B.C.)
Within  a  few  generstiont  Oreciaa  art  had  paaaed
through  the  variDua  atagea  of  developement,  and
each  of  them  had  piwiiiced  inch  an  abanlaDce  of
Tpiecea  that  it  waa  difficult  for  a  nev  geoera-
if  artiili  to  produce  new  and  original  wofki.
g  the  aniala  of  the  perioda  which  fallowed
could  not  do  much  more  than  imitate,  and  their
prodoctioaa  are  better  or  wane  in  praportiOD  ai
they  ware  founded  upon  the  itudy  of  earlier  wniia
or  not.  But  even  thia  period  a[  edecticiuii  hu
levertheleai  produced  itatnet  and  gronpa  siuihy
if  the  higheit  admiralion,  aud  which  can  ba  phiced
by  the  aide  of  the  beat  worka  of  antiquity.  Tha
very  alow  decay  of  the  art*,  in  cacnpariaon  with  tha
rapid  decline  of  literature,  it  indeed  a  attaoge  plte~

iring  the  first  fifty  yeara  of  tin*  period  tha

il*  of  Praxiiele*  and  Lyaippoa  continoed  to

flouriah,  eapedally  in  worka  of  bnmic  ;  b<Bt  after

''''i  time  bronie  atatuea  wen  teldom  inade,  lutil

art  waa  carried  on  with  new  vigour  at  Athena

ut  the  end  of  the  period. The  achoU  of  Ly-

.  u>  gave  riw  to  that  of  Rhode*,  where  Id*  dii-

cipie  Chant  formed  the  mo*l  celebialed  among  tha

hundred  odowtl  atatuea  of  the  ton. It  waa  acveniy

I  high  and  partly  of  meuL It  alood  near  the

ur,  and  was  thrown  down  by  an  eanbqaak*

225  B.e. <Plin.//.iV.xiiiT.l8;MeQi»iua,

u,  i.  IG  ;  Diet  of  Biop.  a.  s.) AmiqKtuuii

aaaign  to  thia  part  of  the  fourth  period  aevrtid  vrrv


itiful  V


the  ntagairiceiit


gioDp  of  IjiocDon  a

!d  in  1506  near  the  bath*  of  Titua,  aad  b  it
It  at  Rome.  Thit  is,  next  to  the  Niobe.  the
beautiful  group  among  the  extant  worka  of
It  art ;  it  waa  aocoiding  to  Pliny  the  work  of
three  Rhodian  artlala :  Agesander,  Polydoma,  and
Athenodorut.  (Plin.  il.N.  xxxti.  3^  a.  4.  fi  II  ;
Leaaing'a  Laociiim.)  The  celebrated  FameaiaibiU
it  likewise  the  work  of  two  RhodiaO  ariius  Apat
loniui  artd  Tauiitcua.  (PUo.  H.  X.  xxxti.  5.  a.  4.
910.)


£TATUAR1A  AR3.
In  Ilia  nrisut  kingdomi  which  uoa  ant  of  tha
ocwMinMU  of  AUiander  tha  irU  wen  man  o
cnlliTU«J|  uid  not  odI;  vers  ihs  gtcal  m
wvAi  of  former  timet  copied  to  adorn  (he  at
pitali,  but  new  Kbooli  ofiulUu  tpnmg  op  in  »
of  them. Aleiindru,  Pocgunai,  ind  Seloucna
riialled  each  other  in  ut  do  leu  (his  in  liter  '
Al  Fergimiu  tha  alebnled  groape  were  com
which  nprauDled ^e  nctoriei  of  Atl^ui
Eomenea  orer  tha  Ouili. (Plio.  tf.W.  ui
«.  19.  g  21 1  Phi.  L  2&.  |  S  i  PluL  Anton.
Jtubeliei'adl>r  MmefMUUer.^rnLI  IBS)  that
Ita  u-calied  dfing  gladiklor  at  Roma  ii  ■  ita
•  Gaol,  which  aiiginall]'  belonged  to  one  of
gtmpa. Ephenii  alu  hid  a  flourithuig  Kbaol  of
art,  whkh  appan  to  hars  followed  in  the  main
tba  Mjle  of  Lyiippu,  and  aicellad,  like  that  of
PergiiBDii  in  the  repmenlation  of  battle  iceni
Tha  BoighuaL  fighter  in  the  Louire  i>  auppoied
ba  the  work  of  an  Epheuan  Agaiisi,  and  to  ha
Miginall]'  fimned  a  part  of  inch  a  baltle-icene. '.
Syria  too,  itt  flanrufaed  al  Antioch  until  the  lii
of  Antiochni  IV.,  bcfiue  whoH  riiga  a  nnmbei  of
Btatuei  had  alnadj  been  carried  awi;  bj-  Sciplc

In  thete  new  manarchiei  ttatnei  of  tbe  godi
vera  aeldom  made,  and  wbon  ibej  were  executed
thoj  wen  hi  mon  caau  copici  from  sailier  wotki,
ma  tbe  character  in  which  the  godi  vera  ajm-
lentcd  hid  grado^Ijr  bacDme  fixed,  and  few  artiiti
Tentured  to  altar  the  farwt,  which  had  become
tjpic^  Portnil'MBtnei  of  kingi  iDdcoiad,  on
tbfl  other  band,  ta  a  great  extenL  The  ranitj  of
the  kiop  and  the  flalt«7  of  the  aitiili  created  a
IHV  kind  of  atataea:  the  priocea  were  frequentJj
identiSad  with  ceitaia  deitiei,  and  were  conae-
quantl3r  n|aiiaimted  ai  rnch  with  all  the  requiaile
altribnlea.  In  man;  miea  the  mere  bolt  of  a  king
vaa  pal  apoa  the  bodj  of  a  itatoe  of  i  god.  Tbi*
waa  a  ant  daageniu  lock  for  artJMi  i  for  the
ample  rapitaantatian  of  ■  king  in  the  ihape  of  a
god,  which  cotamenead  ■•  early  ai  the  time  of
"  — '--  —  won  thought  an  iniufficieni  mark


FtaUarf  toward*  tha  gnat  wal  al»  ifaawn  in  tha

one  and  the  lama  indiiidniL  Demettioi  Phalereni
had  360,  or  aceording  to  other*  liOO  tlalnai  erected
to  him.  (Atben.  lii.  p.  G37  I  Pant.  r.  24.  g  3 ;
CienLAlax.  PtnlnpL  ir.  p.  16.  ed.  Sjlb.i  Dion
Chrjioeu  OtoL  37.  p.  133:)  When  the  honoor  of
■  (tatna  coued  to  bo  conddered  at  ■  high  diitino-
tion,  and  when  it  became  necuiai;  to  prodnca
BDcb  nomben  of  itatnei,  the  workmanihip  na-
tuAJIy  became  woree  in  proportion  aa  the  honoor
^uk  in  public  eatimation.  During  thit  time  it
became  cuitomar;  to  combina  with  tbe  alatuee  of
kiligl  and  geneiala  ajmbolical  repteaenlationl  of
lovna,  vhich  aia  called  tiixiu  ircEAiwr.  In  Magna
Oi>ecia  ait  gtaduallj  fell  into  decay  after  tbe  wan
vilh  tha  Roman*  ;  and  tha  eiw)i[ile  of  Capua,
finnn  which  all  tha  etatne*  were  carried  to  Rome,
■ffbcda  D)  an  initana  of  the  robberie*  and  plunder
vbieh  were  cammilled  by  the  Romana  in  other
town  of  Italy.  But  eren  after  the  Roman  con-
qneiti  the  caltiration  of  the  plutic  art*  cannot  haie
eaaaed  alci^ther,  a*  ve  mutt  infer  Irom  the  nn-
iD«Dni  woika  found  at  Pompeii,  loma  of  which
liaher  dcgna  of  peifocUou  and  baaoty
ra  bevl  expected  in  wodu  of  to  lata


(iBa*»n  a  higher


STATUARIA  ABS.


ana  witn  wnicn  we  are  made  acqiuinled  by  Cicero
(c  Vtrr,  IT.),  nuatly  belong  to  an  eaiiier  period.

Shortly  before  the  taking  of  Corinth  by  Mnm-
miut,  icatuei  in  bronia  and  marble  wen  reTiied
at  Athen*  ;  and  although  the  artiita  were  Cu  in-
ferior to  tho*e  ofToraiet  ttmoK  yet  tbey  itill  pro-
duced work*  of  great  excellence,  ai  they  ahowod
their  good  wnie  and  CuU  by  making  the  muter-
worki  of  their  predeceuon  the  lubjecti  of  (tudy
and  imiUEiDn.  (Plin.//.  A'.xixif.S.a  19.)  Among
thoae  who  contributed  moil  to  tbi)  revival  of  in*
tuary  were  Cleomenei  (who  made  the  Medicean
Venui,  an  imitation  of  thai  of  Cnidiu,  but  inferior
in  point  of  laata  and  deliocy),  hii  ton  Cleomane*
(by  whom  Aem  la  a  ilatoe  in  the  Louvn,  which
•hoTi  aiquiuia  workmanihip  but  little  life),  Gly-
con,  Apolloniui,  and  otheri.  (Sea  theii  liiei  in
lhe£>u<.o/Su^.)

About  the  cloie  of  thii  period,  and  for  mon  than
a  century  a^rwanlt,  the  Romnni,  in  the  conqueit
of  tbe  countriei  where  tbe  an*  hid  flouiiihrd,
nude  it  a  regular  pnctics  to  cany  away  the  wnrk*
of  art  i  and,  ai  thay  were  unable  to  appteom  theil
value  and  merit,  ihey  acted  in  many  caae*  no
better  than  rude  baiboriani,  regarding  the  moat
preciou  relin  of  art  in  no  other  light  than  thai  of
chain  and  lablea.  which  might  bo  made  again  at
pleniure  and  al  any  time. At  Gnt  these  robberiei

Tareoluoi,  and  only  with  a  liew  to  adorn  ibeir
triiuupht  and  the  public  boildinga  of  Rome.  Tho
triumphi  over  Phiiip,  Anliochua,  the  Aelolian*,
tba  Gault  in  Aaia,  Peneui,  Paaudo- Philip,  and
ibora  all  the  taking  of  Corinth,  and  aubaequentiy
tha  viclorita  over  Milhridale*  and  Cleopatia,  filled
tbe  Roman  templea  and  poilicoei  vilh  the  greateat
variety  of  worka  of  art.  After  tbe  taking  of  Co-
tinlh,  the  Roman  general*  and  goremoi*  of  pro-
fincai  began  to  ahow  a  kind  of  amaleunhip  in
worka  of  Bit,  vhich  waa  probably  more  owing  to
the  faihion  prarailing  among  the  Roman  grandeea
han  to  any  real  title  Cf  Ion  for  the  fine  arta:
hey  now  carried  olf  whatever  they  could,  to  adorn
hair  DWD  leaidencei. Someiimea  either  their  ava-

loit  pretion*  worka  without  any  regard  to  artiitic
lortb.  The  aacrilegiou*  plunder  of  templea  and
lie  carrying  away  of  the  eacred  etaluet  from  tbe
public  aaaetuariea,  which  bad  at  firat  bean  pr^
Tented  to  aome  extant  by  tha  poutiA,  became
aflerwaida  a  common  piaclice.  Tbe  manner  in
which  Verm  acted  in  Sicily  it  but  one  of  many
initancei  of  the  extent  to  which  theee  mbbeiie*
wen  carried  on.  The  emperert,  eapecially  Au-
gtutut,  Caligula,  and  Nero,  fbUowed  theae  exam-
ple*, and  the  immenie  ntunbor  of  itatun  which
no  twitb  standing  all  thi*  remained  at  Rhodei,  Del-
phi, Atheni,  and  Olympia,  ia  truly  aitoniehing.
(See  Viilkal,  Utbtr  dit  W^iiinoig  dtr  aHt»
Kunttwtrke  out  dtn  Broimtem  Ltindtm  tmdt  Homg
r,Aniiui.  %  164,  die)


Befon


lOeS  STATUARIA.  ARS.

Tha  Etrunuu  wen  on  the  whole  an  indiutrisiiu
Uld  enterpriiing  people.  Different  hypothem  bare
been  propoKd  to  BcsoDDt  lor  the  coltiTBltoa  of  the
UU,  in  which  th'u  HBlioa  oicellni  all  olben  in
centnl  uid  northern  Italy,  lu  well  u  (or  the  peculiai
■tf  le  of  loms  of  their  productioni.  Sonut  writen
think  (hat  it  wa*  owing  to  colonio  from  Ljdia,
which  were  eitsbliihed  at  Cum  and  Taiquinii,
Dthera  IhM  the  EtniKani  themlelyn  weie  a  Pe-
lugiRIl  tribe.  With  the  worki  of  Grecian  ut  the;
mnit  have  become  acquainted  at  an  eulj  time
through  their  inlercoune  with  the  Oreeki  of
•outheni  Ilalj,  whoie  influeDce  qjkid  tha  art  of  the
Etnucani  ia  erident  in  numeroua  caaea.  The  Eatt
alio  appean  to  haTO  eierciid  aorae  ioflnenoe  npon
the  ElmKana,  aa  many  voriu  of  art  Tonnd  in
Etnria  nHitaJn  predMl?  tha  lame  repreientationa
la  thou  which  we  lind  in  Aiia,  eipecially  among
the  Babylonian).  Howerei  thii  may  have  been
efiected,  we  know  fni  cerlain  that  the  whole  range
o£  the  fine  aita  waa  culliiated  by  the  EtniKani  at
an  early  period.  Statuary  in  clay  (which  hen
•applied  the  plan  of  wood,  iioKt,  uied  in  Oreece)
and  in  bronie  appear*  to  hate  acquind  a  high
degree  of  perfection.  In  267  B.C  no  lew  than
SQOO  hronu  itaCnei  an  laid  to  have  axiated  al
Volnnii  (Plin.  H.  N.  iiiir.  16.  18;  compare
VitmT.  iit.  3),  and  nnratrDOa  work*  of  Elnucan
art  are  Itill  extant,  which  ahow  great  rigonr  and
life,  IhoQgh  they  do  not  poaaeaa  a  Tery  high  degree
of  beauty.  Among  them  we  may  mention  the
Chmueia  of  Amcium  (al  Florence) ;  the  Capiloline
She-wotf  (Dtonya.  i.  79  ;  Lit.  i.  23),  which  waa
dedicated  in  B.C.  296  ;  the  Hineiva  of  Arena
(now  at  Flonnce] ;  and  olhen.  Some  of  their
■tatuoi  an  worked  in  a  Greek  atyle  {  othera  are  of
a  character  peculiar  to  themMlrea,  and  entirely
diflerent  from  work!  of  Oreeian  art,  being  adlTand
ngty ;  oChen  ag^  are  eiajgcerated  and  torcod  in
their  moremente  and  attitudea,  and  roHmble  the
figure!  which  we  meet  with  in  the  repieaentationi
of  Aiiatic  nationa.  Etmican  nteniili  of  bronie,
aach  ai  candelabra,  paterae,  cupa,  thionei,  &c.,
erabelliihed  with  Tarioni  omainenU  and  fignni,
were  fcry  highly  Talued  in  antiquity,  and  even  al
Athena  al  a  time  when  the  art*  were  alill  flonrith-
ing  there.  (Ath.  i.  p.  28,  xr.  p.  700.)  Their
worki  in  atone,  eipecinlly  tha  alto  and  baiao-
nliem,  which  are  found  in  contidenble  nnmbera
on  cheata  containing  the  aahea  of  the  dead,  are
with  few  eiceptiana,  of  Tery  inferior  merit

The  Homani  pnTioutly  to  the  time  of  the  fini
Tarquin  are  aaid  to  bare  ^nd  no  imagea  of  the
godi  1  and  for  a  long  time  afterwardi  their  itaCnea
of  goda  in  clay  or  wood  wen  made  by  Etmican
artisu.  (PUn.  //.  ff.  hit.  4S,  iiiiT.  16.)  Durmg
the  early  part  of  the  republic  tha  woikt  executed
at  Rome  were  altogether  of  a  oaefol  and  practical
and  not  of  an  omamenlal  character ;  and  atalnary
wai  in  conieqnenee  little  mllirated.  But  in  the
conne  ef  lime  the  Knate  and  the  people,  aa  well  aa
foreign  itatea  which  deiired  to  thow  their  gratitude
to  Bome  Roman,  began  to  erect  brenie  atatnea  to
diatingniihed  peraon*  in  the  Forum  and  other
place*.  (Plin.  H.ff.  hut.  U.)  The  earliest
work*  of  thil  kind,  which  we  can  coniider  aa  really
hittorieal,  an  the  itatne*  of  Attui  NaTiui  (Plin.
M  AT.  xixiT.  11  i  Cic  da  iMoei.  i.  1 1 ),  of  Hinuciui
onUide  the  Porta  Trigemina,  and  of  Pythagona
and  Akabiadei,  whioh  atood  in  the  corner!  of  the
comitium  Itoia  the  year  &c.  314  down  to  the  dio-


STATUABtA  AB£
tatonhipof  SiUla.  (Plin.H'.^.mir.  19.) The
laat  two  atBtnea  wen  undoubtedly  of  Greek  wntic-

manihip.  The  earlieit  melal  itatoe  of  a  deity
wai,  according  to  FItny,  a  Crie*  wfakh  waa  made
of  the  conliacatad  pmperty  of  Spurina  Canu,  abont
4S£B.c(Piin.//.A'.i»ir.  9.)  Two othet  metal
Itatoe*  of  god*  wen  the  Capitoline  Hercule*,  306
B,  c  (Lit.  ix.  U),  and  the  coloan]  itatoa  of  iha
Capitoline  Jnpiter,  which,  accoidiog  to  LiTy,  waa
made  about  490  B.  c.  {LiT.  ix  40,  z.  38  ;  Pfin.
H.f/.atir.lS.)  The  number  of  lUtne*  of  men
in  the  Forum  appear*  aoon  to  hare  become  Tery
great,  and  many  peraon*  leera  to  have  had  tbem
creeled  then  without  any  right:  hence  in  IGI
B.  c.  the  cenion  P.  Coineliua  Sdpio  and  M .  Po-
piliu!  nmoTcd  (nm  tha  Fanm  all  the  atatoea  of
magiatralea  which  had  not  been  erected  with  the
>r  the  aenals  ra- tha  people. (Plin.J/.A'


r.  14.) A  )1


mlH  m


the  Oracchi,  itood  in  tha  porticu!  of  Metribn.
The  Biti!t!  by  whom  theae  and  other  atatwa  war*
executed  were  ondoubledly  Graeka  and  EDBBm.
V.  Fl/a  FtHod,  from  OL  Ue  {B.C  146)  talk
f6UifOit  Weittni  Bmpln.
Ehiring  thii  period  Rome  waa  the  capital  of
nearly  tha  whole  of  the  ancient  world,  not  throagh
it*  inielleclual  auperiority,  but  by  it*  military  and
political  power.  But  it  neferthdei*  baoma  At
centre  of  art  and  literature,  aa  the  aitiata  reaaited
thither  from  alt  pacta  of  the  empin  for  the  parpaae
of  aeeking  employment  in  llie  honeel  of  the  grst.
The  ma*!  of  the  people,  howcTer.  had  aa  little  taoe
fbr  and  wen  aa  little  concerned  about  ibe  art!  a*
cTer.  (Herat.  Art  PoiL  323;  Petim.  8B.)  Ia
addition  to  thia  then  waa  atill  a  atrong  party  <t
the  RomaiB,  who,  either  fnm  an  aflectad  or  as
honeat  contempt  for  the  Oneka,  entstained  tJia
Tain  hope  of  beiof  able  to  redan  the  oldei  tiiana

like  Cicero  Ihou^t  it  naceaaary  to  eonaai  and  di»-
gui*e  hit  loTC  and  knowledge  of  the  fiDe  aita.  It
waa,  therefore,  only  the  moat  diatjngniahed  and  ii>>
lellectual  Roman*  that  really  loTed  and  cbeciahed
the  arta.  Thia  waa  both  a  fortunate  aikd  aa  uaior-
tnnate  circnmitance :  had  it  not  been  as,  an  would
hare  pcriabed  at  once  ;  now  it  continaBd  in  aoBa
degree  lobe  cultivated, but  it  eipeiieDcad  the  bbb
fate  which  it  haa  met  with  al  all  tiiw*,  wben  it
hu  conlinoed  it*  exiilence  without  the  lyBfUbiea
of  the  people,  and  merely  under  the  panimgc  of
the  great.  Noiwilhatanding  theie  nn&TVanUa
circumaiancea,  there  were  a  namber  of  diitinguiatied
artiata  at  Home  dniing  the  latter  period  of  the  tw-
public,wba  bad  really  imbibed  the  ipirit  •(  the  an-
cient Greek*  and  who  produced  worka  of  great  bevaty

a>  Paiitelei  of  aoixlheni  Italy,  who  waa  a  Robbb

ciliien,  and  who  made  an  icory  italoe  of  Jitter  fur
the  lemple  of  Metellui  (Plin.  H.  N.  iiiri.  5.  a.  4.
;i2);  Arce>ilBua.orffhom  Pliny  menciona  aeiefal
highiT  valued  worka,  and  whoae  modola  wen  priacd
more  than  tbo  amtuea  of  other*  ;  Dccioa.  *ba  ens
ventured  to  liial  Charea  in  the  art  ef  fbujadim
metal  itataea  ;  Uiogene*,  and  other*.  Doriiv  Ibit
empire  the  art*  declined,  and,  with  w^m  noble  ex-
ception*, merely  adminiatend  to  the  Tani^,  lara-
riea,  and  capricn  of  the  enipenia.  (Sencc  F^"^
8S,)  TheinertneBBofthetimM.My*Pliiiy(/f..V.)
CUT.  3),  hM  deatnyed  the  a


•  o"


STATUARIA  AR3.

wntationi  rf  the  bodiH  vers  likewin  ii«gt«ctel
Orcaiionftltj,  howeTer,  txcxilmt  uid  gifted  icii1[k
ton  itiU  iKHe,  ud  adomed  tbs  pnlacci  of  the  oo-
peicn  wilh  baulifn]  groiipa.  Plin;  (ff.  JV.  luvi.
4.  i  1 1 )  mentioDi  «*  invh  Cntenu,  PjthDdorat,
PulidRlei,  Hsnnolaui,  «  *r««nd  Pjtbodomi,  Ai-
tarioD,  and  Apbndittg*  af  TnUlu.  (Sw  the  uti-
c1«  in  the  Diet,  o/Biog.)  In  the  time  of  Nero,
who  did  moeh  for  the  titt,  we  meet  with  Zeno-
donia,  ■  founder  of  metal  atatnei,  who  wu  com-

atatna  of  1 10  leet  high,  reprcKnting  Nen>  u  ^
Soil  The  innk  me  out  compleleij'  siecated,  u
the  ut  of  Diing  the  metnl  bad  (alien  inu  oblifion.
In  A.  D.  75  the  ttatue  vu  conHcnCed  ai  a  Sot,
*nd  wae  afterwerdi  changed  into  a  itaEne  of  Com-
Bodtu  b;  altering  the  head.  (Plin.  Jf.N.  iixir.
]Bi  Uerodian,  i.  15.)  The  principal  Knlplimd
vorki  that  were  produced  during  the  enpin,  wen,
1.  Relicft  on  public  raoanmenti,  luch  ai  thoM
adorning  the  trianiphal  anh  of  Titu*,  which  repra-
Knied  Ibe  apotheoni  of  the  emperor,  and  hia  tri-
nnpta  orer  Judaea.  The  inrtntion  and  gronping
of  Ibe  figurei  are  good  and  taiteful,  but  the  eie-
cation  ii  carelEBi.  The  lanie  ma;  be  laid  of  the
reliefi  at  the  (enpla  of  Minerra  in  the  Fomm  of
Domitton,  in  which  the  drapeiy  in  particular  ii
fri7  bad.  2.  Statuei  and  buiti  of  the  emperoca.
Tbeae  ma]'  again  be  dinded  into  claim,  and  are
cuieet  di)tingni(hed  bj  ibe  eeatumei  in  which  the;
mre  repreeoiled.  Thej  are  (a)  fulhfnl  portnit*  in
the  coatnnw  of  ordinary  life  {toga),  or  iti  the  attire
of  wanion  (iCafiiru  tioraeaiiu)  gaoenll]'  in  an  at-
titade  aa  if  thej  wen  addreung  a  bod  j  of  men,  ai,
t-g.  ibe  coloaeal  ilatue  of  Augui'


and  the  ii


slong


mphalca


depbanta,  which  wen  freqnenllj  made  for  empeniti
■Mit  of  mere  vaniljr,  and  without  there  baTing  been
■oj  real  tiiamph  to  ooouion  inch  a  wori^  (pion
Cu*.  liil  S3 ;  Stat.  5^11. 1 1 ;  Mart.  ix.  £9 ;  Tacit.
>f«  OnL  a.  [  1 ;  Jut.  tiL  1 9G  }  Plin.  Jf.  N.  iiiiT.
la)  b.  Such  itatuea  ai  were  intended  to  ihow
the  indifidnal  in  an  exalted,  heroic  or  deified
diaraclcr.  Among  lh«e  were  reclioned  the  •■>■
called  Achillean  •talnei,  which  were  firtt  made  in
the  lime  of  Anguttui ;  they  vera  naked,  and  bore
ahwiainonehAod(Plin.//.  JV.iiii'.lDj:  and
aecondly,  ftatnei  in  a  liliiug  poeition,  with  the
Bpper  part  of  the  body  naked,  and  a  pallinni  co-
nnng  the  loini. Thew  itatuea  were  intended  to

also  aa  an  Apollo.  (Hiiller,  Artk.  g  199.)  Thii
method  of  nptventing  an  emperor  aa  a  god  wai
at  Gr*t  practiaed  with  much  good  taale.  The
UoUei  of  the  ladle*  of  tha  imperial  funiUei  are
Kkewiie  either  itmple  and  blthful  portniti,  or  they
are  ideallaed  ai  goddeuei:  ipecimeni  of  each  kind
are  (till  eilaoL  The  cuilom  adopted  in  the  Hace-
donian  time,  of  combining  allwrical  reprtaanla-
tinu  of  town*  and  proTlncei  vitb  the  monmnente
ancted  in  hanonr  of  the  aeveieigni,  wai  wmetimet
followed  by  (he  Roman*  al«,  and  ume  of  them
wan  made  by  Tery  ditiingutthed  artiili.  (Stmb.
IT.  p.  193;  Hiiller,  Le.)  In  the  nign  of  Trajan
wen  eiecnted  the  column  of  Tnjin,  with  Bulp-


and  other


Wr


la  Vatican,  and  ia  the  Iioavia  than  it  a  beau-


STATUARIA  ARS.  IDS9

tifid  itataa  thoncata  of  Tnjan,  add  teteni  fina

Down  to  the  nign  of  Hadrian  italnaty  hid  be-
come mon  and  man  confined  to  the  repmentatiim
of  mbjecu  of  a  common  nature,  »  that  at  length
we  Karcety  find  anything  elie  but  the  reeorda  at
Tictoriea  in  the  reljer*  on  the  public  oonnmenla,
and  the  Tarioni  kind*  of  itatuea  of  the  enpann
and  the  memban  at  their  bmiiie*.  But  in  tho
nign  af  Hadrian  the  aili  leeDied  to  begin  *  new
aen.  He  bimielf  wai  undoubtedly  a  real  lovcC
and  connoiiKUr  of  art,  and  he  encooraged  it  not
only  at  Rome,  bat  tu  Greece  and  Aua  Minor.
The  great  Villa  of  Hadrian  below  Tiroli,  the  rain*
of  whi^  coTer  an  extent  of  ten  Roman  milea  in
circumferena,  wu  richer  in  worki  of  ut  than  atiy
other  place  in  Italy.  Hen  mon  work*  of  art  baTa
been  dug  out  of  the  ground  than  anjwhon  alia
witbiu  the  lanie  compaJL  ,  Hadrian  wai  fond  of
the  ancient  formi  in  art  m  well  ai  in  language,  and
muiy  woriis  in  the  archuo  ityle  itlU  extant  may
baTo  been  executed  al  thii  time.  Soma  itatuea
mode  at  thia  time  combine  Egyptian  ttiffneai  with
Grecian  elegance ;  and,  eapecially,  the  npreianta-
lion*  of  Egyptian  deitiei,  •ueh  ai  that  of  Iiia,  an
half  Qieek  and  half  Egyptian.  But,  by  the  aide  of
Ihii  itnnge  achool,  then  eiiited  another,  in  which
the  pun  Onek  ilyle  wai  cuIdTBted,  and  which  hn
produced  worii*  worthy  of  the  higheit  admiratioa.
Foremott  among  iheae  itand  the  ■talnei  and  buit*
of  Antinoo*,  for  whom  tlie  emperor  entertained  •
'  mate  partiality,  and  who  wat  repnienled  in
lenble  worki  of  art  The  ealotial  butt  of
Kmi  in  the  Lonrn  ii  reckoned  ona  of  tba
work*  of  ancient  art,  and  ia  placed  by  aom*
I  on  an  equality  with  the  bail  woriu  that
8  hai  pnduced.  The  two  caitanra  of  black
marble  on  the  C^tol  pnbably  belong  to  tba  nign
of  Hadrian:  one  of  them  ii


:  ityle,  ai


executed  in  an  old
J  managed  by  a  Ultle  Ens


riding  on  hii  back ;  the  other  boka  i
inloxicalad  Satyr.  Then  are  aJao  aome  recj
good  work*  in  red  mvbla  which  an  itftned  to
tfaii  period,  ■*  that  material  ii  not  known  to  have
been  uied  befon  the  age  of  Hadrian.

A*  the  am  had  ncelved  luch  enoouiagement
and  brought  forth  aocb  fruiti  in  the  nign  of  Ha-
drian, the  eBecia  remwned  Tiiible  for  lomo  time
during  the  reigna  of  the  Antoninei.  Antonlnoi
Piua  built  the  great  tilla  at  Lanavium,  of  which
mina  are  itill  extant,  and  when  many  excellent
work*  of  art  have  been  diacoiered.  But  Kphiilry
and  pedantic  learning  now  began  to  regard  the  an*
with  the  nme  contempt  at  the  ignoronoe  of  tha
Romana  had  foimeily  done.  Tho  frieze  of  a  tem-
ple, which  tha  lenata  cauied  to  be  erected  to
Antoninni  Pin*  and  Faoitina.  ii  adorned  with
griffin*  and  veMeli  of  recy  exquiille  woi^manahip ;
bnt  the  but*  ind  Uatuei  of  the  emparon  ihow  in
many  part*  an  afiected  elegance,  while  the  featurel
oF  the  GOnntenance  an  taileleia  and  tririal  copiei

thii  time  are  tha  equeitrian  ilatue  of  M.  Aurcliu*
of  gilt  iHTinie,  which  itandi  on  the  C^icol,  and
the  column  of  H.  Annliui  with  nliefi  reprswnt-
ing  icenei  of  hie  war  agsintt  tha  MarcomanuL
The  buiU  which  we  poHM  of  M.  AnreliUK  Fan*-
tina,  and  Lncini  Vera*,  on  executed  with  vary
great  care.  Mpecially  ai  regardi  the  hair.  Tha
number  of  extant  buiti  of  the  Antoninea  anunnt*
taaboTc  ona  hundred  i  and  the  imtaal  which  boata


STATUARIA  AR8.


ft

tmpcron

*«■  HRie

iniH  multiplied  may

in

erred  from  th«  fact,  t

IBt  the  Huiale  tometim

drI

ainedtbii

t  the  bn.t  D

in  empeior  thould  be

th

hoDHO

eray  citli«i

Afwi  Ihe

time  of  the  Antoninti  the  .rropt™

ef

decline  in

the  BTti  be«aine  mow  und  mop.  riubl

The  ir


iForki  eantinaed  u


ebett  »


tiiem  in  not  free  from  iifFef  latisn
The  hair,  etpecinll;  in  the  rcpreientatiana  of  female
fignrei,  brcomei  gradnally  utterly  toiteleu,  and
intlend  of  (he  niluml  hair  the  artiitl  made  it  a
point  to  ihow  that  il  wal  a  large  peniqne,  which
in  nine  caipt  mifilit  be  put  on  arid  taken  alF  at
pleuure.  [Qalikcs.]  In  the  time  of  Cnracalla
DUtny  atntuea  were  made,  Mprdallf  of  Aleunder
the  Gnat.  Alexandn'  SoTenia  wu  ■  great  nd-
mirer  of  itatne*,  not  from  a  genuine  lore  of  art,
bnt  beeaoie  he  delighted  in  the  lepretentaiioni  of
great  and  good  men.  (Lamprid.  Al.  See.  3S.)  The
reliefi  on  the  triuTDphnl  arch  of  Senlimiua  3en-
rui,  repreienting  hii  lictoriei  onr  the  Parthiani,
Artiba,  and  Adiaheniini,  hare  acaKel;  any  arliitic
merit!.  During  Chii  time  of  deaj  the  cnilom
arw  of  adaming  larcophagi  with  figum  in  high
nlief.  repreienting  Kcnei  fnim  the  legend*  of  De-
meUr  and  Dionyius,  and  from  the  heroic  agei  of
Greece,  umcCiTaet  alio  the  fable  of  Eroi  and
Pifche:  all  theie  contained  allniront  to  the  im-
mortalit;  of  the  tool.  Art,  bowereT,  now  declined
v)th  great  mpidtty:  huiu  and  ttatoet  vera  mate
■eldom  made  than  before,  and  ue  awkvard  and
poor;  the  Uir  ii  fequenay  indicate]  by  nothing
elte  hut  holeg  bored  in  the  atone;  The  relief*  on
the  larcophigi  gndnally  befoma  monotonoui,  life-
leu,  and  evidently  executed  without  epirit.  The
relieb  on  the  ■tch  of  Conitontine,  which  are  not
taken  from  that  of  Tnjnn,  aro  perfectly  nide  and
worthleu,  and  tfaoae  on  ibe  column  of  Theodonua
it  better.  Art  in  the  proper  lenu  of  the
aied  to  eiirt;  tiatuet  of  Ticton  in  the
Braft  coalinued  to  be  erected  down  ta  the
.  ind  atatun  of  the  eaipcren  (at  Conetnni!-
nople)  down  to  the  eighth  century  ;  but  M  Rome,
h%  at  CDnataniinople,  ihoae  who  were  hononied  in
thia  way  were  taan  concerned  about  their  rank
and  dreu  being  properly  repreecnted  in  their  ita-

Statuary  become  mere  manrul  labour,  and  required
nothing  hut  meehanieat  akill.  At  Conatantinople,
however,  where  atatnea  had  been  collected  from
Rome,  Greece,  and  Alia  Minor,  the  eveata  of
hialory  allowed  the  plaatic  arta  (A  die  away  more
gmdunlty  than  in  Italy.

Before  conctnding,  it  temaina  to  tay  a  few  word*
on  the  dntruction  ai  ancient  worha  M  art  Daring
the  btter  part  of  Ihe  reign  of  Conitantine  many
ataluei  of  the  goda  were  deatroyed  and  melted
down,  and  not  long  after  hit  time  a  lyatemntic  de-
atruction  began,  which  under  Theodonua  ipread
to  all  pMta  ef  the  empire.  The  ipirit  of  deitme-
tion,  however,  WM  not  directed  againat  worka  of


public  j


only  ai


pagan  idoli.  The  opinion,  thenfo
tertained  by  aome,  that  the  loaaea  we  naTe  anaoin-
ed  in  worka  of  ancient  art,  are  mainly  attrifautafale
to  the  iutisdnclion  of  Chriatianity,  it  too  aweeping
and  general.  Of  the  lame  character  i>  another
opinion,  according  to  which  the  final  decay  of  an-
cient art  wai  a  eonieqnence  of  the  apirilmU  nature
of  tiKlMwnligitB.  TliBCM>ddeiK«of  Ihegenenl


STATUARIA  ARS.
introdnctioa  of  Chriatianity  with  the  deoiy  of  d
aruiimetely  accidental.  That  the  early  Chnitiai
did  net  detpin  Ibe  ail*  «a  each,  ra  dar  Iimb  ai
Teral  fiicti. We  know  that
their  martyn,  of  which  wa  I
of  St  Hippolitna  in  the  Vati
eipreaaly  atstad  dal  Chriatiana  d
to  the  eiereiie  of  the  arta.  ( Barn
SOS.) The  Dumeraaa  woika,  lully,  which  ban
been  found  in  the  Chiiati
night  alone  b
Chrittiaua  wen

The  hoetilitr,  auch  aa

Talian  and  Angualine.

general;  and,  in  fiict,  Chiitlianiiy  during  thai

die  age*  became  aa  much  the  motJier  of '

modem  limM,  aa  the  religion  of  Grea

mother  of  ancient  arl Another  very  geDeial  and


any  ef  Ihe  cc

probahle.  The  harbaruna  were  onjy  annont  w
cany  with  them  the  moat  precioaa  tnaaniea  m
order  to  enrich  themaelTet;  a  itatBe  muat  ha*B
been  an  object  of  indiff^rrnce  to  them.  WUt
periahed,  periabed  natumlly  by  the  circnmituon
and  ealamitici  of  the  timea:  in  tine)  of  need
bronze  ataluea  were  melted  dawn  and  the  material
uaed  for  other  purpaaea ;  marble  atatne*  were  fie-
tjnently  bn^en  to  piecet  and  nied  for  bvildiDt
maleriali.  If  w*  conaider  the  hiuoiy  of  Rone
during  the  (iral  anturit*  afler  the  conqueat  of  Ilalf
by  the  German*,  we  have  every  naaon  to  wondtr
that  10  many  apecimena  of  ancient  art  have  tene

The  gmteat  deatruclion,  at  one  tine,  ef  ancient
work*  of  art  ii  Buppoaed  to  have  occnrtrd  at  ^
taking  of  Conatantinople,  in  Ihe  beginning  of  tiM
thirteenth  century.  The  collection  of  staDiea  had
been  made  with  great  care,  and  iheir  niambet  laid
accumulated  to  an  amount  which  aeemi  quite  m-
priiing  when  it  ti  coniiderrd  how  lo  - ' ■


'  of  turning  the  material  into  aonry,
or  for  aala  to  the  metal  fonnden  for  Ihe  mlae
of  the  bronie.  Among  the  few  woikt  Hved  freca
Ihii  devaataiion  aia  the  oelebrated  bmm  hum  a
which  now  decorate  the  eiteriac  of  St.  Halt's
church  at  Venics.  They  have  been  aKriboi,  \M
without  lufficient  iDlhority,  lo  Lyaippna.

The  fineat  eollection  of  ancient  bnmae*  i*  in  tbe

Mnaeo Borbonica at  Naple*. They hava  bnn

foand  chiefly  in  the  rnini  of  DercolanewB  and

Pompeii,  and  among  Ibem  an  looe  eiiBplea  af

great  akill  and  beauty. A  Irw  af  th*  bead*  oA*

nliaritie*  in  the  treatment  of  the  hair,  the  mal]

kacrew  cai4a,  and  the  tmda  of  the  bearda  bdfi|

ned  of  aepamt*  piece*  of  metat  batened  as.

reral  of  the  atatnee  have  the  eye*  of  paite,  and

■  tone*,  or  (ometimea  of  a  diSermt  mMal  b««

Ihe  material  of  the  reit  of  the  work. Silver  WM

oFlen  united  with  brutii& Ciceiv  (Terr.  iv.  43)

atatue  of  Apallo  aaitio,  ntjaw  ■  /naar*

mutit  argaim  mamew  Styremk  trot  it-

In  a  bronta  atatue,  of  a  youlh,  is  the

eoUeclioa  at  Porii,  an  the  leiMiu  af  a  Onife


STILUS.
JTUoiptioa  {n  lilTfr  iMUrt.  Thej  ue  iBMrttd
into  tha  left  fbot.  The  Mum  Borbonico  poiKUCi
■oms  BiamplH  of  inlaid  tilrer  work.  Tli«n  tn
alto  initucei  of  it  in  (he  eolketion  of  broDiet  in
tha  Britiiti  MuMura.  Mauj  of  tha  cumplo  of
bronia  iroik*  thu  biTO  mchtd  ni  eihibil  ligni
of  h«iing  baen  gilt,  uid  iho  writeti  of  antiquity
ratn  sccaiionallj  to  tha  preclica.  It  doa*  not
aaem  to  hava  baan  amplojed  till  taita  hod  much
datarioratad  ;  prohnblj  when  the  Talua  and  rieh-
'  '' natarial  waia  more  highlj  ~ '


than


icallen.


of  tha


Nai


r,  tha  work  of
L<riippi»,  ta  be  gilt ;  but  Plinii  { H.  N.  xixir.  19.
§  6)  telli  Di  it  wa*  found  to  injure  the  beantj
and  affart  of  liie  work,  «nd  the  gold  wa»  removed.
( Wiiiekalnunn.  Gath.drr  Knnrif  MaTar,  Cadi,
dir  bddnd-nt  ATtiiute  An  den  Grireieii ;  F.  Thiench,
l/fiir  dii  Epoelm  dtt  Uldtnden  Smut  mltr  den
OiieduHi  K.  0.  Milllar,  tiandlmcli  der  Arctuo-
Ugk  der  KmiL,  2nd  ed.  18SG,  3d  ed.  with  noln
by  Wrkker,  1848.)  [LS.]

STELAE  (irrflXiu).  [Fundb,  p.556,b.]
STELLATU'RAE.  [Ehibcitus,  p.o05,«.]
STHE'NIA(o4Jna),  a  fbtiial  with  conteaU
celabiatad  by  (he  Argivei  in  honoor  of  Zeut  aar-
namad  Stheniui,  who  bad  an  altar  conaitting  of  >
large  rock  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Hcnnione.
(Hcijch.  >.  e.  Z«(na:  eompara  Paua,  iL  3-2.  |  7,
3*.  is.)  Plulareb  (rf«  Mm.  p.  lUO.e.)  atatei
that  tha  *lUi|aTwr«tling,  vhich  fbrmad  a  part  of
the  eoDtnta  at  tbia  feitiTol,  waa  accompanied  by

ording  to  irhich  tha  faitival  had  originally  bean
held  in  honout  of  Uanaut,  and  that  it  wu  aflei-
wardi  cooiecnted  to  Zeni  Stheniui. [L.  S.]

STIBATJIDM. LMisB*.]

STILUCl'DIUM.  [SiBTrrOTM,p,1031,b.l

STILUS  or  STyLUS  il  in  all  pnbabili^  tba
nuM  word  with  the  Oreak  irriXoi,  and  convayi
tbe  general  idea  of  an  object  tapmng  like  ta
anhiteduial  colonm. It  littnifiea,

1.  An  iron  initrnment  (Oiid.  Mtt.  \x.  621  i
Martial,  iIt.  21),  rcsemblug  a  pencil  in  liie  and
■bape,UKd  for  writing  upon  waxed  lableti.  (Plaol.
Daask.  if.  i.6S;VVia.  H.N.  nai.  U.)  At  one
end  it  wai  ibarpened  Co  a  point  for  aerntcbijig  tha
ehaneUn  Dpon  the  wu  (Quintil.  i.  1.  g  S7),  while
the  Dthar  end  being  flat  and  circular  lerrad  to
rander  tbe  loriaca  of  the  lahleta  niii>oth  again,  and
io  to  obliterate  what  bad  been  written.  Thui,
vrttn  ttiiuM  maana  (o  erote,  and  henee  to  eomd,
u  in  tba  well-known  precept  ■wpo  aUum  vtriai.
(Hot.  A*  i.  10.  72;  Cic,  Vtrr.  ii.  41.)  The
i^lni  waa  alio  termed  grt^iun  (Orid.  Amor,  i
1 1.  23  ;  Suet.  J»l.  8-2),  and  die  cue  in  which  it
«aa  kept  yn^iUarHwi  (Uartinl.  xii.  21)or.on7i^
■ru  data.  (Soet.  OoiKf.  35.) The  anneiadcut  ■•


STIPENDIUM.

I  Hercnlaneum.


1071


Borbon.  vol  tL  lay.  35.)

2.  A  aharp  atake  oi  ipike  placed  in  pitfalta  bo-
fbre  an  entrenchment  to  embanaaa  the  profreu  of
an  ittadting  enemy.  {BdL  A/riaa.  31 ;  Sil.  InL
I.  415.)  It  wu  intended  to  aniwar  tha  aame
purpoie  ai  the  conlriTancaa  called  cippi,  iilia,  and
Mona/i  I^  Coeiar  (B.  O.  Tii.  73).

3.  A  bmnza  needle  or  itid  for  picking  wtdina  off
fruil-treea  {Pallad.  ir.  10.  g  SO),  alao  a  woodan
probe  employed  in  gardening  Dperationi.  (Colu-
melL  li.  3.  §  S3.)

It  bean  alio  the  meaning  of  the  ilein  of  a  tree
or  regetable  (ColnmelL  T.  10.  §  21,  il  3.  S4fi),
which  ia  perhspa  the  primary  aignification  of
•rriK,,.  ..  [W.R.]

STIPEND lA'RII.  The Stipendiariae urbei  of
the  Roman  proTinca*  were  aa  denominaled,  aa  being
inbject  to  the  pnymanl  of  a  fixed  money  tribale,
"  atipendium,"  in  con  trad  iatinction  to  the  vecti-
gale*,  who  paid  a  certain  portion,  u  a  tenth  oi
twentieth  of  the  produce  of  their  landa,  their
caltte,  or  euBtomi.  The  word  "  atipendium  "  <•■■
uted  to  signify  the  tribute  paid,  aa  it  wu  origiit.
ally  impnied  for  and  aHerwarda  apprnprialed  to  the
pnrpOK  of  furniihing  the  Roman  aoldieii  with  piy
(iHpa^iim,  U'.  il.  60;  Tadt.  ifiNLiF.  74).  The
condition  of  the  urbca  atipendiaiiae  ia  generally
thought  to  bare  been  more  honourable  thui  thftt  <^
tha  vectigalea,  bot  the  diitinction  between  the  two
termi  wu  not  alwaya  obaervcd.  {LIt.  mill  36.)
Tha  word  itipendiariua  ia  alao  applied  to  a  peraon
who  recaivei  a  fixed  aalary  or  pay,  aa  a  "  atipen-
diBrinimilei''(IIirtins,(fadeIL^/ic43),a  '
which  ia  «o~  ■' '  ■ "  -  ■ -  -  ■


campaign

MSS.  hsTo  atipendioana  in  tha  pauoge  laat  quoted,
which  ia  parhapa  a  belter  reading.  (GBltling,  Gfaji.
der  Him.  Slaat>t:af.f.  410.)  [R.  W.]

5TIPE'NDI{;M,a  penaion  or  pay,  from  jf^xn
and  pendo,  becauta  before  ailier  waa  coined  at
Roma  the  copper  money  in  uae  waa  paid  by  weight
and  not  bT  tale.  (Varro, /^  £.  y.  182,  ed.  Mliller;
Plin.  H.  N.  XX*.  3.)  Accoiriing  to  Livj-  the  prac-
tice of  giving  pay  to  tba  Romaa  aoldien  (iff  Mtipett^
dium  milet  de  pvUico  accipwrt}  waa  not  introduced
till  B.  c  405,  on  the  occaiion  of  the  taking  of
Tnmcina  or  Anxur.  He  repreaenU  the  change  a*
the  apontaneoua  and  unaolicited  act  of  the  aennte,
but  from  another  pausge  (it.  36)  we  learn  that  in
the  year  421  b.c.  the  tribune*  bad  propoeed  that
the  occnpien  of  the  public  land  ahonld  pay  their
wctigai  regularly,  and  that  it  ahould  be  devotad  to
the  pnjmant  of  tha  troopB.  Tha  conceuion  waa
probably  acre!aratad  by  tha  proipcct  of  tha  loat
war  vilh  Veil,  and  made  niiha  view  of  conciliating
the  plebt,  who  without  enna  luch  faiour  would  in
their  then  humour  have  rafnaed  to  vote  for  ihe  war,
Livy  alao  rapicaenta  the  fund*  for  tha  payment  to
have  been  railed  by  a  tributam  or  general  tax,  but
aa  Arnold  obHtrvaa  (HiA  of  Rom,  loL  i.  p.  369  t
compare  Niebuhr,  lol.  ii.  p.  440),  "The  vectigal,  or
tithe,  doe  fram  the  occnpien  of  the  public  land,
wai  to  provide  pay  for  the  aoldien ;  and  if  thi*
were  not  auliirienC,  it  waa  to  bo  made  good  by  ■
MI  or  tribute  laiied  upon  the  whole  people:.  Thi*
tithe,  howerar,  wa*  probably  paid  rary  irregularly,
and  hence  the  pay  of  tha  aoldien  would  in  point
of  fitct  be  provided  chiefly  out  of  the  tribotum.^
A  bw  yean  after  tbi*  conceiuon  (&C.  403),  and


1072


STIPENDIUM.


during  the  hoitiHtiei  igiuiutVeii,  aeertnmainonnt
of  pay  vat  auigned  [certitt  nunbrnu  turis  est  tu-
ugmUat,  Ut.t.  7)  to  the  knight  bIu.  [EauiTsa,
p.  472,1.]  Li<7,  bdweTer.ieeTiutobebeieaiiekk-
ing  of  the  citiidu  who  guaeued  an  cquesDun  for-
tnne,  but  had  no  hone  (nfwajnUiina)  mugati  to
them  by  the  tCate.  For  it  had  alwaja  been  cu»-
Xamaij  for  the  knighti  of  ihs  18  centuriet  la  re-
ceive pa;  out  of  the  cnnimon  tnaioi?,  in  Ihe  ihape
of  on  allowuice  for  the  parchue  of  a  hone,  and  t,
TearlT  peniion  of  2000  anea  foe  iU  keep.  [Ais
Eovirtrb;  AISHORUIARIUM.]  HenceNiebahr
(.ol.i  p.  47*,  and  roI.iLp.441)doublilheaKO-
racj  of  the  «count  which  ii  given  bj  Livy  (iv.
59),  and  otwerree  that  "  Ihe  Veientine  wai  rannot
have  been  Ihe  occaiion  on  which  the  piactice  of
giTing  pay  to  the  treopi  wu  fint  eiUbliahed  :  Ihe
oenrii  muiI  andaoblcdly  have  alwayi  continued
to  pay  peniioai  (m^itea)  tn  the  inlsalrf,  in  ihe
earns  way  ■•  tingle  women  and  lainon  did  to  the
knighu:  and  the  change  couuiied  ui  thli,  that
eveiy  legionaiy  now  became  entitled  to  pay,
whrrem  the  nnmber  of  peniionen  had  preTinulj
been  limited  by  that  of  ihe  penane  liable  to  be
charged  wilh  them  ;  and  hence  the  deficiency  wu
aupplied  out  of  the  aetarimn,  from  Ihe  pieduce  of
the  veetigsl,  and  when  thi)  failed,  by  ■  tribule
levied  even  from  thoee  pleheiani  who  were  ihem-
mIth  bound  to  tene."  Conieijnently  the  ttibnueg
nuinnured  that  the  trihnle  wai  only  impOMd  fot
the  nke  of  ruining  the  plebe.  (I.ir.  iv.  60.)
In  mppert  of  hit  opinion  Niebuhr  {U  e.)  advance!
argumcnti  which  at  lean  make  it  very  probable
that  the  "paternal  legialalion  "  of  Serriiu  Tullioa
piavided  for  the  pay  of  the  inlantry  in  the  manner
mentioned]  but  even  admitting  thii,  Ihe  practice
might  hare  been  ditcnntinned  to  a>  to  juitify  tbe
ilatemtnt  made  on  thii  lubject  by  Liry.  We
have  not  apws  to  repeat  or  diicuii  Ihoie  argu-
ment) here,  and  therefore  limply  refer  to  vol.  L
p.  374,  and  vol.  iL  p.  441,  of  hli  Hiitory.  Accord-
ing to  Polybiu  (vL  37)  Ihe  daily  pay  of  a  legionary
amomited,  in  hii  time,  to  two  oboli,  which,  u  he
makci  a  drachma  equiialent  to  a  denariu,  and  a
denariut  in  paying  ihe  toldicrt  wu  then  eilimated

oiual  in  other  money  tmniaclioni,  givci  S^  aaMt  a
day,  or  100  a  month.  Now  ihe  yearly  pension  of
the  kniKbU  (1000  aoea),  observe!  Niebuhr,  girei,
if  we  lake  the  old  year  of  10  monthi,  300  auea  a
moDlh ;  jn>t  doable  (he  pay  of  the  fool  uldiert.
In  later  timei  ibe  knigbti  received  triple  pay  (Jri-
pUsc  itipesdiiiia  merriaitt).  Thi*  allowance  wu
firgt  ctlabliihed  by  the  military  tribune  Cn.  Come-
liua  Cauui  (400  B.  c),  and  accoiding  to  Niebuhr
wu Ihen deaigned  u  a  compenuiion  to  thoie

become  the  general  ciulom  lill  KOie  time  after-
ward!. Polybiu  (tl  37)  thui  apcakt  of  the  iti-
pendium  of  hii  day,  which  he  callt  Uririar,  u
Sl  Lake  <iiL  14}  alM  doea.  "The  foot  aoldier
rei^civu  aa  pay  two  oboli  a  day :  the  centurion
twice  at  much :  the  horaeman  a  drachma  or  dena-
riu. The  foot  eoldiert  alto  reeaivc  in  com  every
month  an  allowance  (dtaaniaa)  of  }  of  an  Attic
medimnu  orabout  2  huheli  otwheat:  ihe  hone-
men  7  medimni  of  baitey  and  S  of  whcaL  The
infantry  of  the  aliiet  receive  the  lama  allowanca
(s-iTOfitT^in-cu)  aa  the  Ronun :  the  horaemea  H
medimni  of  whfnl  and  6  of  bariey.  But  there  it
thit  diftmuw,  that  tbe  alliml  fonal  reeeire  theii


STIPKNDIOJit
a  gntoity ;  the  Roman  aoldict^  IB
the  contnry,  have  deducted  from  their  pky  the
money  value  of  whatever  they  receive,  in  oxa,
armODTorclothei."  There  wu  indeed  a  law  panrrf
by  C.  Oiaccbui  (PluL  C.  Graak.  5)  which  provided
that  bethiea  their  pay  the  toldien  thoold  receive
fro.m  the  trcainry  aa  allowance  lor  dotlies;  but


from  T«:iti


{An.


.  mth


Uwac


have  bee

repeded  or  to

have  fiJlen

inUdiauae

The  two

holi  ot  Polybiu*.  which  we

inakeequl

to  Si-aaw.,  are  reckoned

hyPlautuin

ronndania-

xnatS

ame*. Thu  h

e.^.  («o-.ii.l-10).

blat."  Thij  amamc  wu  doubled  fur  the  If^ioo-
ariea  by  Jaliua  Caear  (Snclon.  J<d.  CaeM.  26)  be-
fore tbe  civil  war.  He  alio  gave  them  nun  whs)-
ever  he  had  the  tnouit,  without  any  TOtriciiDna
(sue  Boifa  numntragiuy.  Under  Angvtnu  (Suet.
Aiig.  4S ;  Tacit.  I  e.)  it  appean  to  have  bcoi
raiaed  to  10  aiara  a  day  (three  tiznei  the  uigiaal
anm),  or  3U0  a  month,  or  1200  in  four  montht.
Now  at  the  original  amounl  of  their  pay  had  been
tripled,  the  Boldien  could  not  complain  if  the  de-
nariut  were  reckoned  al  1€  ataet  in  p^ymestt
made  to  Ihemtelvei,  at  well  oi  otha  poaooa  i  and
taking  thi*  value,  the  1300  utee  amotml  to  ex-
actly S  anrei,  or  3  ■  400  aaica.  Thji  torn  tbeo
wu  eontidettd  at  an  unit,  and  called  ttyiaarfiai,
being  paid  three  timet  a  year-  Hence  ^netsoiat
atyi  of  Domiiian  {Dom.  7):  "Addiditetqaartam
atipendium,  temot  oureot :"  a  Gut  which  Zonuaa
(j4ai.  iL  p.  litlj)  otherwite  enreaaea  by  ataling,
that  iuitead  of  75  drachmae  (i.  &  dentrii)  Uumi-
tian  gave  the  aotdien  100,  i.  bl  be  made  aa  addi-
tion of  25  denarii  or  1  aoreu  to  their  pay.  The
eiprtaaion  of  Sueloniui  luppoia  that  3  amei  were
paid  every  quarter  inatead  of  every  fbor  moDtka,
afttr  the  addition  made  by  Qtnnititii ;  that  i£
Zonaraa  implies,  that  4  ourei  inilead  of  3  were
paid,  u  before,  every  thteie  month*,  the  anaad
amount  being  the  tame  either  way,  and  the  qnr-
terly  or  four  monthi'  initalment  of  3  or  4  airei
being  called  a  ttipendinm.  NiebnhrV  (vuL  ii.  p.
443)  itaument  on  thia  aubject  ia  only  partially
correct  or  elte  obacnre :  at  any  rate,  if  the  aoldisi
received  10  utea  a  day  they  mint  have  nerived
more  than  I200aycai.

The  Praetorian  cohHtt  received  twka  at  nodi
ai  the  legioiumc*.  (TadL  L  c)  The  pay  <rf  the
tribunea  ia  not  known ;  but  it  wai  conndmd  niy
great  (Jnven.  iii.  132),  and  probably  vat  not  le«
than  *B  aurei  per  annum,  after  the  time  of  I>aBU-

pay  were  withheld  the  Roman  loldier  waa  allowed
by  an  old  unwritten  milom  to  diiUain  ibe  goodi
(pariMsmoru  eapiomBu)  of  the  officer  whoae  dniy
it  wu  to  supply  it.  The  equat  wu  allowed  the
tame  priviie^  agsintt  Ihe  peetou  who  were  bomd
to  futuiih  him  with  the  aea  equeilre,  for  (be  par-
chaae  of  hia  hone,  and  the  ae*  hordeanun  Ibr  ha
keep, (aaiu^  lib.  iv.  g  26— 2B.)

From  an  expression  which  Livy  (v.  4)  fat)
into  the  mouth  of  a  patrician  onlor,  it  might  be
auppotad  that  the  loldien  alwayt  received  a  fall
year*!  pay,  independent  of  tbe  length  of  iheir  lef  •
vice.  Thia,  however,  aeema  to  uartatnoabi^  that
we  cannot  but  agree  with  Niebnhr  in  topfniiiw
thai  the  hittorian  wu  misled  by  the  dtttosa  of  hia
own  time,  when  a  fidt  year  had  loiq  been  tbe  ati-
putoled  term  of  •  aoldier'k  pay  aa  wall  u  <^  U*
•ervioo.  JR.  WJ


STSATEOUS.

BTIPDLATIO,  STIPULA'TOB.  [Obiioi-
noNBi,pp.g17,b,aiS,L]

8TIVA. [Abatbuh.]

STOA. [Posticus.]

STOICHEION. [HoaoLooiDM.]

STOLA,  m  >  ronils  dnu  worn  otu  the
loDM ;  il  came  u  la*  u  ths  ankle*  oi  feet  (aJ  (ojot
itoia  iJ«uB,  Hot.  jU.  l  2.  99),  tod  wu  &it«ied
roond  tin  bodf  In  ■  girdle,  leavmg  kboie  the
biCMI  brad  foldt  (n^noonn  i<iito/»iil«>,  Mart.
UL  93.  i).  The  tunic  did  not  noch  mocb  below
tha  knee,  bat  the  ewential  dininetion  between  tbe
tank  and  atoU  aeemi  to  hare  been,  that  tbe  Utlei
alwaji  bad  an  iHSTiia  or  fioonce  lewed  to  the
botloni  and  reaching  la  the  imtep,  (Hoi.  Sal.  ').  1.
29 ;  Olid.  Ar.  AmU.  I  33.)  Otci  tbe  Stola  (be
Palh  or  Pailiom  waa  worn  [Pxlliuh],  u  we  kc
in  tha  ent  annexed. (Afw.  Sortoii,  iil  tsT.  S7.)


The  itola  Menu  to  hate  been  oinaltj  fiutened
OTa  the  ihonldcc  by  a  Fibula  vt  ctup,  and  gene-
tallj  bad  (leerea,  but  not  alwif •.

The  Stola  wai  the  cbaiaclenitic  dna  of  the
Reman  natreni  ai  the  toga  wai  of  the  Koman
tnea.  (Cic  PUL  il  IS.)  Henoe  tha  mentricei
were  not  allowed  to  wear  it,  bat  only  a  dark-


ihe  aanu  ttaaon  women,  who  had  been  diioRxd
from  theii  hnihandi  on  account  of  adullerr,  wen
not  allowed  to  wcai  the  Stnla,  but  wil;  the  toga
(Schiri.  ad  Hot.  1.  c)  :  to  which  Martial  aUudei
(iL  39,  Ti  64.  4).  See  Becker,  Gallm;  to!.  L  p.
J21,  fte.

STRA'OULUM. [Tapm.]

STRATE-OUa  (crrpmrrifi).  The  office  and
title  ef  Stiategni,  oi  Oaneral,  leeni  to  baie  been
more  eipecially  peculiar  to  tha  demociatic  itatei  of
ancient  Greece :  we  itad  of  them,  for  inatance,  at
Athena,  Taientom,  Sjiacnte,  Argoe,  and  Thurii ;
and  whan  the  tjnnte  of  the  Ionian  eitiee  in  Aaia
Minor  wen  depoaed  by  Ariitagom,  he  ealabliihed
Strategi  in  their  room,  to  act  aa  chief  magialiatei.
<Hen>d.  T.  38.)

Tbe  StiBlegi  at  Athena  were  inatitated  after  tbe
nmodelling  of  the  csnatitnlion  by  Cleialhene*,  to
dixbai^  the  datiei  which  had  in  former  timet
been  peifinined  either  b;  the  king  ot  tbe  Aicbon
Poleinarcliiii.  They  were  ten  in  niunbec,  one  for
eack  of  the  ten  tribe^  and  choeen  by  the  lufbigea
(Xtfrmia)  of  the  people.  (Polloi,  TiiL  87.)
Babnantaingcn  thuidntieaithey  weienqnind


stuatequs.  1075

o  aubniit  to  a  ioKt/mvlOf  or  examinaticm  of  their

ihataclei  (Lyiiai,  c  Alab.  144);  and  no  one  waa
eligible  t>  the  office  unleu  he  bad  legitimate  chil-
dren, and  wat  poueaied  of  landed  pnpeity  in  At-
-"-  (Dinarcb.  &  i>mia(Iil.  99.)  They  were,  aa
name  denetea,  entniited  with  tbe  command
ililaiy  eipeditiono,  with  the  nparintendence
warlike  prepaiationi,  and  with  the  rqnlation
of  all  matlen  in  any  way  connected  with  the  w
department  of  the  ilale.  They  lefiedand  eoliited
the  Kldien  (kbt JXifor),  either  penonally  or  with
the  auiitance  of  the  Taiiaichi.  (Lyiiai,  e,  Abab.
140,  prv  Milii.  114.)  They  wen  entnuled  with
the  collection  and  management  of  the  ilfi^opai,  or
property  tniea  railed  Ebr  tbe  purpeeet  of  »ar  ;  and
alio  preaided  over,  or  officiated  aa  Elroy^^ytts  in
ihe  coorti  of  jnitice  in  which  any  diiputei  con-
rected  with  thia  anbject  or  the  tiiemrehy  were  do-
tided. (Wolf;adZ<p<.pL94)  Dem.o.£>«r.  940.

1 6.)  They  alio  nominated  liinn  year  to  year  per-
■oni  to  aenro  at  trierarchi  (Dem.  c  BotoL  I  997;
Xenoph.  dt  Hep.  Alitrn.  3),  and  took  cognizance
of  the  caaea  of  AxTiDOSia  ariaing  out  of  the  trle-
nrchy  and  pmpetty  taxea  {Iwtlevr  jis  irriSiatu,
cPkatnip.  1040.)  The^  also  preiided  at  courti-
nianial  and  at  tbe  triala  in  caaea  of  acniialion  lur
non-pertbmunca of military  and naial dutiea.

[AaTRATiuB  and  ANAttlLicaiou  Giiafha>.1
They  likewiie  had  the  power  of  conreniiig  ei
■■■ lofthep ■ ■


crdinary  aaembliea


le  people  i


inatance  of  Peride  _ _ .

in  critical  timet  they  had  the  power  of  pnTenting
an  auembly  being  balden.  CThacjd.  ii.  22.)  But
their  moat  important  truit  waa  the  command  in
war,  and  it  depended  upon  circumitancea  to  how
many  of  the  number  it  waa  girrn.  At  Marathon
all  the  ten  were  preaent,  and  the  chief  command
came  to  each  of  them  in  turn.  The  Archou  Pole-
marchui  alio  wat  then  aiaoeialed  with  them,  and
according  to  the  ancient  cnatom,  hit  Tote  in  a
council  of  war  waa  equal  to  that  of  any  of  the
genenli.  {Heiod.  tL  109.)  In  the  expedition
ngalnil  Samoa,  alio,  all  the  ten  geneiali  were  en-
gaged (Thucyd.  L  116),  tbe  poet  Sophodea  being
one  of  tha  numbei  (MUllei,  Lileratitrt  a/Andail
Gnea,  p.  333)  ;  but  It  wat  obviona  that  in  moat
caiei  it  would  he  neither  convenient  nor  uieful  to
lend  out  tbe  whole  number  en  the  same  under-
taking, and  during  tbe  courae  of  a  pnttactf  d  war
it  would  be  neceataiy  for  come  of  them  to  be  left
at  home,  in  charge  of  the  war  departmeat  there.
Accoidingly,  in  the  beat  timet  of  Atbeni,  three
only  were  for  the  moil  put  lent  ont )  one  <^  thete
(Tfilror  aiiTit)  waa  considered  as  the  commander-
ia-chie£|  but  his  colleagues  had  an  equal  roiee  in
a  council  of  war.  Somatimei  a  strategni,  ai
Pericles,  waa  ruled  with  ailraordinaiy  powera
(Tbneyd.  iL  65) ;  in  Uke  manner,  the  three  ge-
naals  engaged  in  the  Sicilian  eipedition,  Nicias,
Alcibiadei,  and  Lamarcbut,  wen  made  alnoHp^
roptt,  or  supreme  and  independent  in  all  matters
connected  with  it.  (Thucyd.  n.  B,  26.)  So  also
was  Ariatidcs  in  his  command  at  Plataeae.  But
eren  in  ordinary  eam  the  Athenian  generals  were
not  fettered  in  the  conduct  of  a  campaign  by  any
council  of  war,  or  other  contnJIing  authority,  a*
the  Spartan  kingi  lometimet  were ;  still  they  were
responsible  fiir  il,  and  in  tha  time  of  Demosthenee
{PkUip.  i.  53)  eiposed  on  the  termination  of  their
command  to  capital  indictment  at. die  nwice  of


lOri  StRATEOUS.

the  people,  or  frnm  tla  malerolence  of  penona
enmity,  (e.  Mid.  ASA,  c.  AriHoer.  67S.)  Ever
Pericln  luHuelf  (Thucfd.  ii.  66)  vu  fined  by  Ihi
people  for  imputed  miusuiBgemeiil,  but  really  be-
came the  Atfaeniuu  were  diuppointed  in  tlii'


ezwctat

In  the  timee  of  ChabriM  and  Phocion,  bowcTcr,
the  grenter  put  of  tbe  geneiwli  regulail;
M  Iiame  to  coadact  Ue  pncenions,  i
dtiieni  did  to  enjoy  them,  loiTing  thi
bo  coodncted  by  mSYrentriee  And  tbeir  leaders,
(Demoeth.  FlaL  i.  47.  13.)  Some  of  them  too  wm
not  cociimuideii  of  all  tbe  dmpt,  bnl  only  ef  (hi
Iione  and  loot  of  lepante  armiei  [rrrfunr)>it  A  M
Tvr  ir\iH  or  ArAirkr,  and  i  M  rin  iwitai)  ;
and  one  of  them,  tba  general  of  Ibe  adminiitntion
^iM  T^i  flioiirqfffifi),  performed  part  of  the  judi
ctal  labourg  of  the  Atiategi,  nnd  other  ciril  lerTieet ,
foch  aa  that  of  giving  out  the  pay  of  the  tnxnH,
(BUdEh,  PvU.  Earn,  o/  Aliau,  p.  IB),  Sd  ed. ;
Dem.pn  Coron.  266.  11.)  We  mnit  Bin  le
member  that  the  Athenian  navy  ai  wfU  at  tht
army  mu  commanded  by  the  Stiategi,  vhcnce  the
**  praetona  naiii  ~  or  flag-tbip  u  called  rrpaTtrr^i
iBV!.  (Hermann,  ZMrftwt  dar  onecA.  SUmlnU.
%  162.)

' The  gtntegi  at  Athena  were  perhapa  the

imporant  oflicere  of  the  TepuliUc,  eapecially  during
war ;  and  amongat  them  are  numbered  loine  of  her
mogtdiitinniiahed  dtiitna,  Milliadea,  Thcmiitodea,
Pcriclel,  Phodon,  Ac  Bat  tbe  genendi  of  the
early  tintei  differed  in  many  regpeeCa  fnnn  the  con-
lemponrite  of  DemDithenn.  FDrmerly  the  geneial
and  the  itateaman  were  united  in  one  penou  ;  the
leader  hi  the  field  tb«  the  leader  in  the  aaeembly,


.d  thii4  at
with  a  dau


nired  a  dooble  in


n  later  timee,
and  the  profeeaed  orator  or  ttateanmn
were  generally  perfectly  diatinet  (Ihht.  d*  Pact.^
m\  andlhelaller,  BiDUght  alwayaUbethe
in  free  ilatei,  had  by  Su  the  gnater  tafloi
The  lait  of  the  Athenian  mnerali  who  waa
■idered  to  miile  the  two  charaetera,  wai  Phocion,
who  wai  general  no  leta  than  fcity-liTD  timea.
(Plot.  Phoc.  5.)  Aecoidingly  the  Tarions  nartiea
into  wbkh  the  atata  wai  then  diiided  hod  each
their  ontOT  and  general,  the  iarmer  acting  aa  a
recogniied  leader  (Demoitb.  OlgK.  iL  2S)  ;  and  a
wnnal,  when  abaent  on  foreign  expeditiona,  waa
liable  to  be  maligned  or  miar^nsentcd  to  the
people  by  an  un&iendly  and  inflnenUal  dem^o^u^
(Demoith.  ie  Oitnan.  97.  13.)  Hencewe  cannot
wonder  that  the  g^erala  of  the  age  of  Denwrthenea
Were  neidier  ao  patriotii:  nor  ao  diatinguiihed  ai
thota  of  ibtmer  timea,  more  eapocially  when  wa
call  to  mind,  that  they  were  often  the  commandert
of  Biepcenary  troopa,  and  not  of  citiicna.  whoae
presence  might  have  checked  or  imimated  them.
HonoTer,  they  aufiered  in  mora)  chatactet  by  the
contamination  of  tho  mercenary  teadera  vith  whom
they  were  aaiociated.  The  neecuity  they  were
nnder  of  ptoTiding  tbeir  hired  aoldien  with  pay,
babitualcd  them  to  the  practice  of  leiying  exac-
tion! from  the  alliea;  the  iiuna  thua  levied  ware
not  ttrictly  accounCed  for,  and  what  afaouM  hare
been  af^ed  to  the  service  of  the  itato  waa  f»-
qntntly  ipent  by  men  like  Chare*  upon  their  awn
plcaamea,  or  in  the  puRhaae  of  a  powerful  orator.
<ThiriwalI,  0M.  0/ l^rMos,  ToL  v.  p.  2M.)  An-
other aAct  of  the  lepamtion  of  the  two  chuactors,
WM  that  tba  naponaibili^  of  t^  general  and  of


8THAT0HKS.

the  orator  or  niniits  waa  leaaened,  and  it  w


:ndy  di


id  advocacy  of  hie  Gondnet.  Ti


waa  thia  further  abuie  conneoled  whh  the  ^toi,
that  according  to  laociMet  {dtPaee,  lC8),iinIi1ary
command  waa  lo  mncfa  coveted,  that  the  electka
of  generala  wa*  often  determined  1^  tbe  moat  po-
fiigato  bribery.

The  ouiat  «ninait  genoala  of  tbe  time  oT  De-
moitbsHa  were  T^raotheui,  Chabriaa,  Iphiaatc^
and  DiofHthea ;  Charea  and  Lvaicdfe  wera  infericr
to  them  both  m  loyalty  and  ihill,  but  the  fenna
and  the  mercenary  CharidcniDi  wtre  fiwpiealy
emplc^ed.  Towaida  the  decline  of  the  RoDon
empire  the  chief  magutrato  at  Alhau  waa  called
^ftmrfit,  or  the  Duke:  Conitantiae  beatowed
on  him  the  title  of  Njysi  9rBnr)4i  or  the  fimit
DiUie.  (Jidian.  Orat.  I)  The  nilHaiy  eUeb  o(
the  Aetolian  and  Achaean  leagoea  were  abo  called
StratcgL  The  Achacm  Stialegi  had  the  power
of  canvening  a  general  aaaembly  of  the  league  on
extraordinary  occaaiooa.  [Achaicdm  Foanr^
P- *,!>.]  [R,W.]

STRATO'RES.  I.  Imperial  Eqneme*  anhject
to  the  Tribmiua  StabnlL  Their  [nper  doty,  ii
the  name  importi,  waa  to  saddle  the  heme* ;  thri-
alu  led  them  from  the  tlabie  and  aaadaled  the
emperor  to  mount  Hence  thej  wen  tamed  in
Greek  inXoKtit.  From  the  addition  of  mOn  to
theli  title  il  ^peara  that  they  wen  conaiderpd  u
port  of the  military establiihmf

CaraeaH. 7;  Amm.  Mare.  m.  S .  .  . ,  ,

Lv.)  Coniult  and  ptaetora  bad  their  (tiaum
ai  we  learn  from  iiucnpttona  (OrelL  /iucr.  n.  79ft,
"'^50,  3S23),  and  perhna  aedila  alao. (Ord^

1£S4.)

2.  OlGccia  aent  into  the  pravinca  tf  lelect
honea  lor  the  atod  of  the  pntnx  or  for  the  gmrral
aervice  of  the  ataU.  (Amm.  Mare.  ixii.  3  ;  Cod.
Theod.  S.  tit.  &  >.  4  ;  Cod.  13.  til.  25  ;  Salaias.
ad  Capltolm.  M.  AaUmm.  8,  ad  TnM.  PtiL  IV
leritm.  3.)  These  in  all  pnb^ihty  bejuq^  Is
tbe  aame  body  with  th»*  mefrtioied  abuve  ;  (ha
title  gralom  a  pmbikia  nrtuMiiw,  by  which  tbpjr
—  niually  diabngaithed  in  wotki  npoa  RavMO

iquitieo,  reata  open  no  anlbority  except  the
letlen  STR.  A.P.R.  in  an  inscripticiQ  (Omter,  fh
nLiix.  n.  B),  Iha  interpretation  of  which  ia  ven
doubtfhL

3.  Jailon  nnder  the  orden  of  ibe  fbaaaaaarta-
KW  orChieflnipectorofPriaona.  (Cod.  Tbeod.

tit.  3.  a  I.) To  these  Ulpian  reAn  (Kg.  I.

habere  potM,  aed  vice  (snua  mililea  Dunittnia
in  prnvinciia  fungnntBr,"  ahhoagh  d«  passage  ta
quoted  hi  moat  dicticDarit*  at  Maring  apsti  the
ttiMorss  of  the  stoble.  (Conftn  tbe  MMia  /%•
"  m  Impnii  Orimta,  e.  IS  and  c  101  iaGfme-
«.  Aoii..^atia.  voLvii.  p.  137G  andp,  1«0&)
In  the  law  I^ttn  writon  and  espeijlty  in
onkish  historians  of  the  iniilillii  agia.  ^iti  i ..
danote  a  chosen  body  of  aoldioi  sent  in  ail  him  a  of


neeeisaiy  foi  the  aafct^  and  CDndgct  of  tha  ti
when  they  haltsd,  their  datiia  being  ai  aaai»  rr~
ipecta  analogont  to  those  sf  tha  dasaieal  liaieiui.


80BLIOACULtTM.
''  ll"17e  find  in  an  hucdptiiHi  Uw  wordi  Dib-
MKPiB  Ap.  Strator,  which  it  oenenil;  nndcr-
to  tba  Ikbonn  otMins  indiTidiuil


if  deicriptioa  in  uollicr  iuoip-
lin  Ibimd  U  HayaDce.  (Ontl  n.  1450  ;  eamjiaie
Fvcbt.  GfMMt  ew  Mmx.)  [W.  R.]

STRBNA,  >  pMHDt  giTRi  on  a  ftrtire  daj  ud
fir  tfaa  ^a  of  nod  onm  (Fotu,  «■  e.)>  whetita  •
good  OBIS  iaoOlad  by  PbutvbMXrMK.  {SUA.
V.  2.  34.)  It  waaboinvaohigflirap^icdlaaEwi*
ytu't  g^  to  a  pnitnt  mada  on  tn*  Calsnds  of
Jamurr.  Is  aiiiailMin  with  a SanatuKenniltuDi
Daw  jrar*!  gUli  had  to  be  pnMinUd  to  Augnitu
in  tlw  CajHtol.  «n>i  wh«n  he  wu  kUoit.  (  Suet.
■A<ig.  bi  ;  nop.  Dion  Can.  liT.  3S.)  Ths  penon
who  nnhcd  nicb  prcMoU  mi  acnutooied  to

bat  Tilwriua,  who  did  not  like  ths  eonam  on  ac-
count of  the  Inabla  it  gat«  bim  and  BJM  of  the  ei-
penie  is  mailing  pnaenur  in  ratnm,  fRqnentlj  l«fl
Rome  at  (be  b^uming  of  Janosr;,  tbU  h<  might
bs  oal  of  the  wn;  (Dion  Can.  liii.  S),  and  alM
at/icll;  lorbade  anf  mcb  pwnt*  to  be  offered
him  ^er  tlie  Rnt  of  Januarf,  a>  be  ued  to  be
■nnoyed  by  thoDi  during  the  vhol*  of  the  month.
(Suet.  7U.  M  ;  Dion  CaM.  Mi.  17.)  ThecuKom,
aa  &r  an  the  enpera  wu  eanceriKd,  tlnu  leemi  to
haTe  fallen  obnoat  entirely  into  diiiue  daring  the
reign  ofTiberioL  It  wai  reiiTed  ignin  b;  Caligula
(Soel.  Col.  43  ;  Dion  Cou.  lii.  21),  but  abolished
by  Claudiiu  (Dion  Can.  li.  6) ;  it  mait,  hoverer,
hare  been  reatored  aftenrardi,  ai  we  find  it  men-
tioBod  ai  late  aa  ibe  reign*  of  TheodotiDi  and
Arodina.  (Anaoo.  Ep.  zviii.  4  ;  SymiDMb.  ^,
Z.38.)

STRIAE. [CoLuHHi.}

STRIOA. (C*ffntj,p.364.]

STRIOIL. (BiM.«l,pp.lB5,^19^,a.]

STRO'PHIUM  (Turlo,  TotfUHH',  iatiwfidi)

hnait  and  orer  tbe  inner  tunc  or  ehemiae.  (Non.
sir.  S ;  ttnti  ttropUo  imtbinla  •bbJo  papiila*,
Calnll.  IziT.  65.)  II  appcan  from  an  epignni  of
Hanial  (xiv.  66)  to  bars  been  neoally  made  of
kMber. (Becker,  GaUm,  t^  i.  p.  321.)

STRUCTOB, [CoKM*.  p,S07,M

STULTOBUM  FE'RIAE. [Fork

8TUPRUM.  [ADULnnniM ;  Conoubinaj
Inckstuh.]

STYLUS. [SnioB.}

SUBCENTU'RIO. [Exancirns,  p,S(IS,a]

SUBITATIII. [TuMULTUs.1

SUBLIGA'CULUM  orSUCCINCTO'BIUM
(SiiC'l^  "fii*!"!),  diawen.  (Joaeph.  Anl.  iii  7.
S  1.)  Tbia  DTticle  of  dnei,  or  a  bandage  wotmd
abont  the  loin*  m  aa  to  anawer  the  mme  pntpose,
Wat  vnn  bj  atfaletea  at  the  public  games  of  Greece
in  the  sHieat  agea  [ATnLBTii] :  but  the  nie  of
ii  wai  Booa  diacontinned,  and  tlwj  went  entirely
naked.  (SehoL  «•  Him.  IL  niii.  683  ;  laid.  Orig.
zvin.  17.)  The  Ronuuie,  on  the  eonliaiy,  and  dl
Mber  aatiooi  eioept  ths  flreeka,  alwayi  adbeted
Is  tbe  nae  of  it  in  their  gymnaatie  exercUet.
(Tbucyd.  L  «  ;  ScboL  mtoe.,-  Clem.  Alex. Patdag.
iiL  9  i  Ind.  Orij.  lii.  33.)  It  waa  alto  worn  by
•ctart  <n  the  stags  (Cic  •UQf.i.  36),  I7  tboie
who  were  eD[dayed  in  treading  grapei  [Toacit-
La>]  (GsopaL  -n.  1 1),  and  by  the  Renin  pen
mt  tbe  a•eri6ce<^  and  it  then  recciTed  tba  ds-
MniMMiaattMH  (Vbs--^*^  >>i-  'iMi^fin,


SUCCESSIO.
I  loe.\  which  name  via  alas  a;


by  Roman  tij


L  (OelL  li


3.)  Tba  circumitanes


'Bring  (Stiabo,  iv.  1.  g  73.  p.  15G,  ed.  Bleb.)
igreeBble  to  the  practics  of  modern  alarery  in  the
West  Indies  and  other  tropical  cotmlriea. [J.  Y.\

SUBSCRI'PTIO CENSO'RIA. [CiNson,
p.3<l8,b.]

SUBRECl'VA. [AeniituaLMiB,pL42,a.1

8CBSELLIUM. (Tukonuii.]

SUBSIONA'NI. [ExaRcrroB,  p.  j(J3,  a.]

SUBSTITU'TIO. [II■RI^p.B9B,a.i

aUBTETdSN. [Trla.]

SUBU'CULA,  [Tunic*.]
_  SUCCE'SSIO.  Thit  word  i*  ued  to  denote  r
ight  which  remaina  nnchangsd  oe  inch,  but  ia
hanged  with  reference  to  its  auhject.  The  change
I  of  anch  a  natnre  (hat  ths  right  when  riewed  ai
attached  to  a  new  person  is  lounded  on  a  preceding
right,  is  derlTsd  from  it  and  dspenda  upon  iL  The
right  moat  accordingly  begin  to  be  attached  to  ths
new  person  at  the  moment  when  it  ocaaea  to  be  at-
tached to  the  peiaon  who  |H«TioDdy  had  it ;  and
it  cannot  ba  a  better  right  than  it  waa  to  the  per-
•on  Aom  whom  it  waa  derived  (Dig.  60.


i.176.  ID. Thna


when  the  old


of  t^e  transfer  of

ownerthip  begin*

lenhtp  ceases,  and  It


iwnenhip  by  tiaditioD,  the

Id  ownenhtp  ceases,  and  It  oniy  ar
former  poawisDr  a(  the  thing  bad


Dwnerahip,  that  i^  prior  ownership  is  a  ncccaaary
condition  of  anbsecjuent  ownership.  This  kind  rf
change  in  ownership  is  called  Succeaaio.  It  fol-
lows from  the  definition  of  it  that  Uanoipon  is
not  included  in  it ;  for  Uoacapion  ia  an  original
Btqniution.  The  tuceeiaia  of  a  berea  ia  included,
fct  though  there  might  be  a  conaiderable  inleml
betweoi  the  death  and  ths  aditlo  heieditatis,
yet  when  the  hereditaa  waa  ones  taken  poaaea.
aion  of,  the  act  nf  aditio  had  by  a  l^at  fiction  re-
lation to  the  time  of  ike  death.  Thus  whereas  we
genemlly  view  persona  wbs  poiaesa  righta  aa  tite
permanent  anbaUnce  and  the  rights  as  accidentia
in  the  case  of  Succession  ths  right  is  the  permanent
mbatance,  which  pertiit*  in  a  aenet  of  persona.

The  notion  of  snecestion  appliea  mainly  thongk
not  eidutirely  to  property.  With  respect  to  the
law  that  relates  to  Familia,  it  applies  so  br  u  the
parts  of  tbe  Familia  partake  of  the  nature  of  pro-
perty, anch  as  the  power  of  a  master  over  his  slave,

Thog  the  patria  poteetaa  and  the  condition  of  a
wife  in  mann  may  ho  objede  of  sv
applies  also  to  the  rase  of  adoptioi.
" '-- -"-  "^'  ' '—-> Singn'


These  terms  conTenl-


(Dig.  21.  tit.  3.  s,  S)  ;  per  Dniveraitatem,  in  re
snccedere  (Gains,  iL  97  1  Dig.  43.  tit.  S.  s.  1)  |


.34.)


•-  (Dig-S


It  ia  Singnlar  ioccenion  when  a  ihiglc  thing  as
an  object  «  ownerahip  is  tranileiTed.  or  seiend
tbinga  together,  when  they  are  transferred  oa  m-
diyidual  thinga,  and  not  as  having  any  relatloD  t«
ons  another  in  conseqocnes  of  this  occidE^ntal  com-
mon mods  of  tiansfer.  Tha  penon  into  whose
]^*o*  attothaf  comet  by  StognlM
3i  3


1076  SUCCESSIO.

(aI1«!  Anetor  with  mpect  to  hia  tnccenor
order  to  be  Singular  incceuion,  the  whale  ri)
the  aactai  muit  be  Innifeired.  He  to  wht
eilBte  ta  fee  eimple  ia  tnuulerred,  takn  bf  Singular
■Dcceuion  :  be  to  wbom  a  life  eatate  ia  gnntid  out
of  ao  Eitote  ia  tee  aimple,  doea  not  take  by  Singn-


alon  applin


to  a  fraction  of  thia  ideal  whole
'it  thii  ideal  whole  ia  oonceiTed
to  b«  1  fin  the  whole  property  bein^  Tiswed  aa  a
unit,  ic  may  be  eonc«r«d  ta  be  dinded  into  &ao-
tioEul  porta  without  may  reference  to  the  KTeml
thing!  which  are  included  in  the  ideal  whole.  It
waa  Blao  amiiitrnl  with  thii  apeciel  of  ■uneuioQ
that  muiy  purtlculu  thinga  ahould  be  inopable  of
being  tnuiafened:  ttiua  in  ibe  caae  of  an  heredilaa
the  uiuafnictua  of  the  deceaaed  did  not  piua  to  the
here*,  and  in  the  due  of  adrogation  neither  the
naua^ctoi  nf?  the  debta  of  the  odrogaled  peraon,
according  to  Che  i.ld  law.

In  the  caae  of  Obligationei  there  ia  no  Singular
aucceaaion  :  there  ia  either  the  change  of  the  Obli-
gDtio  into  another  by  Noratio,  or  the  niing  for  the
debt  by  another  (ceiaia  actionii).

The  object  of  Uoiieraal  aucceaiion  it  a  Uairer.
ailaa  aa  anch,  and  il  ii  by  mtana  of  the  wonli
UniverailBi  and  UniireraiiDi,  that  the  Romana  de-
note thia  kind  of  aneceaaion  ;  hut  it  would  be  er-
nmeow  to  iuFei  6oni  thia  uie  of  the  term  that
aneceaaion  appliea  to  all  Univeniutea.  lu  proper
application  it  lo  property^  and  the  true  character  of
Unirenol  Huxeuion  ia  the  immedtote  puaing  over
from  one  peraon  to  another  of  oil  the  credita  and
debt!  that  belong  or  ore  alOched  to  the  propertr.
'  Thia  happena  in  the  caae  of  an  herediCai :  heiee  m
omne  jue  niortui,  non  tantum  aingularum  renini
dominium  auccedit,  qnnm  el  ea  quae  in  nominibni
nnt  ad  heredem  tmnaeant  (Dig.  29.  tit.  2.  a.  37)  ;
and  in  the  caae  of  admgation  aa  to  man  mlttera.
Tba  debta  would  be  tnnafemd  by  adn^tiou  if
thia  ven  uol  acccaB[anied  with  a  copitia  deminatio.
Credit*  and  debt*  could  not  be  (mnaierred  by
Singular aDccraairai.  Thecaaeiof  Unirenal  auccea-
lioD  were  limited  and  the  notion  could  not  be  ap-
plied and  made  effsctaal  at  the  pleaanre  of  indiri-
duala.  The  moat  importanl  caaea  of  Univenol
re  the  property  of


S  lideic


i  othen  of' the  like  kind.  The  pto-
perty  of  a  living  penon  might  be  Cranafetred  in
thia  way,  in  the  caae  of  adrogatio,  conventio  in
mannm,  and  the  bonorum  emtio.  (Gain*,  iL  9G.)
In  many  other  caaea  though  the  object  ia  to  tront-
fer  a  whole  property,  it  ia  in  feet  effected  by  the
tranafer  of  the  Kvetol  thinga :  the  following  are
Initancea  of  thia  kind  of  trODafer,  the  gift  of  a
whale  property,  or  ita  being  modi:  B  Doa,  orbeiog
hronght  into  a  Socielaa,  or  t)ie  aole  of  an  benditaa

.  The  natiiin  of  a  Unirtnal  anci;eiaion  among  the
Romana  appeara  to  have  been  derixed  from  the
notion  of  the  hereditaa,  to  which  it  woa  neceaiBiy
to  attach  the  credita  and  debt*  of  the  deceaied  and
the  1000.  Other  inilancc*  of  Univenal  ancMauion
ouch  OB  the  Bonorum  Poaaeiaio  grew  out  of  the
notion  of  the  hereditaa ;  and  il  waa  found  con-
venient to  extend  it  to  othtf  caaea,  anch  aa  Adro-
guian. Bnt,  aa  already  obaened,  the  eitmiiao


StIFFBAOIUK.
oT  the'notloB  waa  not  left  to  the  pleanm  of  iody-
vidnola,  and  accordinglT  thia  doetrina  waa.  Id  mm
a  Rdruo  phnae,  Jnria  PablieL

The  worda  Snecaade^  Sorceaaor,  Soecedm  by
■benaelTca  hare  a  gennal  meaning  and  cooipnaa
both  kinda  of  Soccaaion.  Sometimea  tfaeae  worda
by  ihemaetrea  aigni^  uniTenal  aneoaaian,  aa  i^
pear*  from  the  context  (Oaiiia,  iii.  83),  and  by
auch  expreauon*  a*  herede*  ceterique  m
In  other  eaaea  the  kind  of  m  -  -  '
appropriate  worda  aa  per  nn
acquirers,  tTHDaire,  in  vnivtr
in  the  caie  of  Unireiaal  Snceeadon  ;  and  ia  nn,

nictedere,  Ac  ia  the  caae  of  SingnUr  Soce^oioiL
In  the  phrase  "par  Bi '

preaaed  ;  £»  the  pluaae  haa  in

the  aeqaititwa  of  a  dngla  thing,  and  it  ia  only  by

meana  of  the  word  UniTaraitaa  that  a


(Savjgny,  Sflmt,  <to.  iiL  Pl  8 ;  Oaioa,  iL  97.

&c  ;  Pnchta,  /«<.  ii.  §  19a)  [O.M

SUCCESSOR. [St!oca»*ia]

SUCCINCTO'RIUM. [SuauaicDLDai.]

SUDATIO,  SUDATCyRIUM. [Bujaui,

p.  190,  b.]

SUFFI'BULUM. [VaffritM.)

SUFFRA'QIA  SEX. [E<»rrr«,  p.  472,  b.]

SUFFRA'aiUH,aTota.  AtAthenalheTMa«

in  the  popular  aaaembliea  and  the  eoorta  of  jqatica

wai  either  by  ihow  of  haoda  or  by  ballot,  aa  ia

explained  under  Cbbirotonia  and  PaarHD^ It

ia  commonly  lapiMted  that  at  Rcme  the  pnple

wen  alwaya  polled in the  comitia  by  wvd  of

mouth,  till  the  [uung  of  the  Lege*  TabellariM

about  the middle  of  the  aecond eentarf  beHm

Chriit  [TiBULAKUX  Laoas],  when  the  balkt

by  meana  of  tabellae  woi  intmlnced.  [Tabu-l^}

Wnndei  (fibdti  Erfidimu,  p.  dxiiL  Ac)  bowcnr

haa  ahown,  that  the  popular  aaaembliea  Toted  by

'-"~>t,  a)  well  01  by  word  of  month,  long  belwa


t  the  I


a  be  oaed  in  the  jqipnoaliad


black,  the  fi

the  latter  in

Toling  hr  word  of  mostfa  inema  Is  hare  beta
adopted  m  electiooa  and  tmla,  and  the  aa  af
pebblea  to  have  been  confined  to  the  laaiiiaiiil
and  repeal  of  lawa.  That  the  laUet  mode  if  n
waa  adopted  in  early  timee  ii  p
paaaageaofDio "  "^


r  timee  ii  pnnd  by  maay
and  ei^eaallT  by  x.  4 1 :  in
4fmi,  el  Fnincrai  iw  wm-


nr^V4fwi,


i^aaum  i  and  by  iL  52 :  ixiknnai  aajl— e*
■tHini  Mp  riff  w^wt  "PiirialM,  anT  Uirr^
^aV,  <Ii  tr  inxMrnrriu  T&t  f^^fwn.  Il  ■  aka
cooGnned  by  the  common  axpctaiooa  oaed  witk

. _ „fiy,gi,^  firrt,  mittm  aa

_ . .  te  ttfiagia,  wbuch  lead  «b

(0  rajHWaa  that  the  euffiagiom  prohafair  aigaified
Kmelhiug  nUh  waa  pot  ^  the  ba»i  frnn  oat
place  into  anetho;  For  if  tke  Rooane  had  btm
the  Grat  been  polled  only  'bj  wotd  of  otaath,  it  ii
acendy  poeaible  that  tnu  an  eapwum  aa  la^Va
gimm  fim  wodd  hara  baea  naed,  whea  titej  bad
nothuif  to  eony/  bat  en  tha  eMAwy.  mbb  aBih


SUUTUASIAE  LEQES.
■mti  u  Jkcn  would  hiie  been  emplojad,  man
eapeeiiillj  u  it  ii  ccrtaia  ibat  in  the  emit  uicieat
timea  tboie  wbo  voted  bf  mitd  of  moalb  did  not
go  up  one  bj  one  (0  the  officer  who  noeired  tbe
VDtei,  bat  mnaioed  in  their  placo,  and  were  uked
for  their  TOte*  b^  the  Sogalpra,  who  thence  de-
rived their  BMOt.  Bctidei  which  tbe  wont  ng^ht-
ffiam  can  Kuee^  ogQi^  the  unie  u  imtaitia  or
ou.  The  ntjaiiogj  ii  niwataiiL  bt  the  c^niooi
of  tium  who  connect  it  with  fipdfnrfci  or  fngar
do  Ddt  deeem  sotiob  Wonder  tfainki  thmi  it
mj  poaiibly  be  mllied  wilh  B^m^  uid  liEniGed
originallj  ui  uiklB-beHie  at  kniickle-lwuB.  On  the
{Suing  of  tbe  Lege*  Tebelkriae  tbe  voting  with
Mooe*  or  pebble*  went  oat  ef  uh.  For  further
puticulan  with  mpect  la  the  voting  in  tbe  comilia,
•ee  CoMiTU,  p.  336  ;  DiRiairoKis  \  SituLa  ;
Tasilli  j  Tabkllakiak  Lwixb.

Tboee  who  bid  the  J<a  Si^'ra^  or  tbe  ij^ht  of
Totiog  in  the  camiti*,  ■*  wdl  u  the  capaeit;  of
enjofing  nagietnciee,  were  dtiEsu  offyut  jmrt.
{CiviTAl,p.291,b.]

SU00E3TUS  mean*  in  genenl  any  denied
phce  mads  of  material*  Leaped  np  (ni  and  gero),
and  i*  ipecially  ^iplied:  1 .  To  the  itoge  or  pulpit
final  which  the  antan  addreued  Ae  peopJe  m  the
cmnitia.  [Rostra.]  2.  To  the  elevstian  fiou
which  a  general  addrceeed  the  teldien.  (Tacit
JJiiL  L  Sfi.) 8.  Td  the  olevaled  Mai  fram  which

e  enpenr  beheld  tbe  public  game*  (Snet  JmL


76;  P]m.i^

■0


p.fil>.>l


SUOGRUNDATIIUM.  [Funui,  p.  fiS9,  b.]
SUI  HERE'DES.  [HiRU,  p.598,b.]
SUMTUA'RIAE  LEGES,  tbe  name  of  varioui
law*  paiinit  la  prevent  inordioite  expenie  (wMtef )
in  buqneU,  dtesi,  &c  (OoUiut,  iL  34,  zx.  1.)
In  the  uatet  of  antiquity  it  wm  cnuidered  the
dDQr  of  gnreniment  to  put  a  check  upon  eitia-
vagucg  in  the  private  eipenee*  of  penrau,  and
aanong  tbe  Roman*  in  particalar  we  find  trace*
«f  tbi*  in  the  Uwi  attnbuled  to  the  king*  and
in  the  Twelve  Tablet.  The  cena>T^  to  whom  wai
entnuted  the  ditdpliiia  ttt  cara  moniiii,  puniahed
bj  the  aoCii  cnuaria  all  penoni  guilty  of  what  wm
then  i^arded  a*  a  huurioiu  mode  a(  living :  a
great  maoj  iiittance*  of  thi*  kind  an  ncorded.
[CsNaoa,  p.  264, 1.]  But  a*  the  lave  af  luini;
greatlj  inenued  wilh  the  foreign  cDnqunl*  of  the
tepablic  and  the  growing  wealth  of  the  nationi,
variou*  Lege*  Sumtnariae  wen  pmied  at  diflennt
time*  with  the  abject  of  natraioing  it.  Theae
bowerer,  aa  may  be  mppoaed,  lanlj  accomplithed
tbeir  object,  and  in  the  lattet  time*  of  the  republic
tkar  wen  vlrtaallj  repealed.  Tbe  following  i*  a
Ii*(  of  tbe  mo*t  important  id  them  amnged  in
cbroDological  order.

OFrtA,  propoeed  by  the  tribune  C,  Oppiuainthe
eonaolahip  of  Q.  Fabiu*  and  Ti.  Sempnmiiu  in  the
middle  of  the  lecond  Funic  war  B.  a  213,  enacted
that  DO  woman  ahould  have  above  half  tm  ounce  of
gnld,  nor  weai  a  dma  of  diSment  colour*,  nor  ride
in  a  ctiriage  in  the  city  or  in  any  town,  or  widiin
a  mile  of  it,  Dnleea  on  aceonut  of  public  aacrificet.
Tbia  law  wai  repealed  twenty  yean  afterwaida
(Liv.  iiiiv.  1,  B;  VaL  Max.  ix.  1.  §3),  whence
we  frequently  find  tbe  Lei  Orehia  mentioned  at
the  Gnt  Lex  Somtiiaria.  Tadtu*  (^aa.  iiL  S3, 34 )


^eaka  of  Oppiae  L«m.

Obchia,  propoeed  by

Aalhird  year  ifleT  tbe  ea


SUMTUARIAE  LBGES. 1077

limited  the  EDmber  of  gueatt  la  be  pnaent  at  cn-
leitainmenta.  When  atlempla  ven  afterward*
made  to  npeal  thi*  law,  Calo  oSend  the  itmngett
o^ntitiou,  and  delivered  a  apeecb  in  defence  of  the
l*w,  which  ia  refemd  to  by  the  granuoarian^
(Macnb.  SaLil  13  g  Featu*,  k  m.  Ob-natmen,
Ptnmelatmm;  SchoL  Bob.  ia  Cie.  pro  SaL
ILSlD,ed.OrelIii  Meyer,  Orat.  Ooimm.  Frvgn.
p.»l,&e,2ded.).

Pahmia,  pn^Mod  fay  tbe  conaul  C.  Fanniui  b.  c
161,  limited  the  lum*  which  wen  to  be  ipent  on
enlerlainmenla,  and  enacted  that  not  more  Ihtn
100  utea  ahould  be  ipent  on  certain  fotival*
named  in  tbe  lex,  whence  it  ii  colled  Ctatiaiu  by
Luciliut,  that  on  ten  other  day*  in  ewh  monlb  not
more  than  30  aiaei,  and  Ibal  on  all  other  day*  not
mon  than  10  oaaea  ahould  be  expended  ;  alto  tbat
no  other  fowl  but  one  hen  abould  be  terved  up,  and
that  not  ianened  for  the  pnrpote.  (Qell.  ii.  34  ;
Macnb.  Jltf.  ii.  13)  Plin. /f.  JV.  x,  60.  1.71.)

DiDiA,  patted  a.c.  143,  extended  the  Lex  Fan-
nia  to  tbe  whole  of  Italy,  and  enacted  tbat  not  only
tbo*e  who  gave  entertainmentt  which  exceeded  in
expen*e  what  the  law  bad  pceaciibed,  but  tloo  all
who  wen  pnaent  at  tnch  entertainment*,  ihould
be  liable  to  the  penalUet  of  the  law.  We  are  not
however  told  in  what  thete  csntiated.  (Macrob.
5at.ii.lS.)

LiciNiA  agreed  in  it*  chief  provitiona  with  &a
Lex  Fannia,and  wa>  bnnght  (orvard,  we  an  told,
that  then  might  be  the  aulhority  of  a  new  law
upon  tbe  tubject,  inatmucb  aa  the  Lex  Fannia  waa
beginning  to  be  neglected.  It  allowed  EOO  aiaei
to  be  qcnt  on  entettainmenlt  upon  marrla^  day*
and  on  olber  daya  tbe  aame  aa  tbe  I>ei  Faonia :
alto,  that  on  aiSinarr  dart  then  iboald  not  be
a^ed  up  Tarjto  than  three  pounda  of  freth  and  one
pound  of  tail  nieat.  (OelL  Macnb.  U.  «.)  Oelliu*
{I.  e.)  Btate*,  that  tbii  Ian  waa  brought  forward  by
P.  Liciniui  Crutut,  but  we  do  not  know  nt  what
time,  probably  however  in  hi*  {ffaetonhip  B.C.  103.
OcUiut  ntnlca  eliewben (iv. B)  thai  a Latin

itor  of  the  name  of  Favarinut  apake  in  uipport
oflhiaUw. {Sot  Diet  of  Bkff.  an.  ^mraiat.)

CoaKXi.iA,  B  law  of  the  dictator  SuUa  n.  c  81 ,
waa  enacted  «i  account  of  the  neglect  of  the  Fan-
nian  and  Licinian  Jaw*.  Like  Uie*e  it  regulated
the  eipealee  of  entertainment*.  (OeU.  ll  24  ;
Macnb,  L  c)  Extravagance  in  funerals,  which
bad  been  forbidden  even  in  the  Twelve  Table*
(CicifaZw.  iLSS— 25),  irat  aleoreitninedbya
'  Bulk.  (Plut.  SmU.  35.)  It  waapnbaUy
e  lav  which  determined  bow  much  might  ba
apent  npan  monument*. (Cic  ad  AH,  xii.  35,  36.)

AsuiLiA,  propcaed  by  the  conaul  Aemiliu*  Le-
pidua  B.  c  78,  did  not  limit  the  eipeutet  of  enter-
tainmenla,  but  the  kind  and  quantity  af  food  that
wu  to  be  oted.  (OelL  Macrob.  II.  on.)  Plmy  (H.
N.  viiL  bl.  a.  62}  and  Aunliui  Victor  (r£e  Kir.  10.
72)  Mcribe  tbia  Uw  to  the  conaalahip  of  M.  Aemi-
liu* ScaoruB  B.  c  1 16.  It  i*  not  impoaaible  that
there  may  have  been  two  Aemilian  Legei  on  the

Ahtia,  of  uncertain  date,  prepfted  by  Antiu*
Realjo,  betide*  limiting  the  expenie*  of  enlertain-
menli,  enacted  that  no  actual  magiatrat^  or  magi*-
tiate  elect,  ahould  dine  abroad  any  when  except  nt
the  houie*  of  certain  persona.  Thi*  law  however
wu  little  obterved  ;  and  we  are  told  that  Autiui
never  dined  out  afterward*,  that  he  might  not  aeo
V! , !.,_..^ (OeU.  Mamb,  A  «.>


3l  B


■  O"


SUPERFICIES.


»,  which  h»d  &Jlen
Cll».  xliii.  25.)  Jnliiu  Caami  iidopled  «tnm^
mtrt  to  acTj  this  Imw  inlo  cieculion,  but  il
violated  when  he  wiu  ftbaeat  from  Rone.  (Cic  ad
All.  liiL  7.) He  Btslinned  offictn  in  the  jnTiaioii
market  to  leiie  upon  iCI  «(ilsblei  forbidden  hf  the

quet«  to  lake  kvrj  every  thing  which  wai  ml
nilowedbythelBw.  (Snel.  Jul.  *3.)  Cicen  MaDU
tn  refer  to  tliit  biw  in  two  of  hii  epiitlM  («<  Pom.
Tii.  2G,  ii.  li).

Jt7Lii,  a  lei  of  Aagugtui,  allowed  200
to  be  expended  upon  fettivali  on  die*  [mrfeiti,
SOO  upon  thoM  on  the  CnJendi,  Idea,  Non«,  Hnd
tamt  other  feitive  dayi,  and  lODO  upon  marriage
feaata.  There  waa  al»  an  edict  of  Angnitoi  or
Tibariua  hj  which  aa  much  u  from  30fl  to  2000
eeilercei  were  allowed  to  be  expended  upon  enter-
tainiaenta,  the  inerfue  haing  made  with  tba  hope
of  Aecuring  thereby  the  obaemnce  of  the  law,
(Qetl  i  «.  ;  Sueton.  Ottm.  U.)

Trberin  attempted  ta  check  extixTBganca  in
banqueta  (Suet.  Tli.  34 )  ;  and  a  lenatDacanniltDm
waa  paaied  in  hii  rejgn  for  the  po^Mae  of  reatrain-
in);  1UIUI7,  which  forbade  gold  Taaes  to  b«  em-
ptoved,  except  for  ncred  porpOMa,  and  which  alto
prohlbiteil  the  nee  of  lilk  garmenta  to  men.  (Tacit.
AiBi.  il  33 ;  Dion  Cam.  Irii.  Ifi.)  Thii  anmptiiarr
law,  baweTci,  wai  hut  Utile  obienod.  (Tadt  Amu.
iJL  53,  £3.)  Somengalatinnionthenihjectwtfe
bIm  made  by  Neni  (Suet  ffer.  16),  and  by  idc-
cecdin;;  empenn,  bat  they  appcu  to  boTa  betti  of
little  or  no  avail  in  cheeking  tne  indeating  love  of
luxury  in  drrai  and  Ibod.  (PlaCnec,  E^trciL  II.
dt  Ij^filmi  Stmbtariit  Rom.  Lipa.  1752  ;  Boi-
mann,  Diatert.  atitiquario^itridica  de  Lag,  Jiom,
Suntaariii,  Lngd.  BalBT.  1)116.1

Sumptuary  lawi  were  not  peculiar  to  antiquity.
"  Our  own  legislation,  which  in  ita  abaurd  ti  well
aa  iu  beet  parti  ba>  generally  loina  parallel  in  that
of  tiie  Romatu,  contain!  many  inttancea  of  Sump-
tuary Lawa,  which  preacribod  what  kind  of  dieaa,
and  of  what  quality,  ahould  be  worn  by  particular
claiaei,  and  ao  (onh.  The  Ei^liih  SumpMary  &M-
tulei  relating  to  apparel  commenced  with  the  S7lli
of  Edward  III.  Thia  italute,  after  declaring  that
the  ontraaeouB  and  exeeMiTe  apparel  of  divan  peoide
againat  their  eatata  and  degree  ia  the  deatruction
and  impoTariahmeot  of  the  land,  preacrihea  the  ap-
parol  of  the  varicua  clouea  into  which  il  diitributea
the-people  ;  hnt  it  goea  no  higher  than  knighta.
The  clothing  of  the  women  and  children  ia  alto  le-
gnhtted.  The  next  itntutc,  3rd  of  Edward  IV.,  ia
Tcly  minute.  Thia  kindof  Itatnts-making  went  on
at  intervali  to  the  lat  of  Philip  and  Hary,  when
an  act  waa  jsHedfor  the  RaloniiBtiaQ  of  Eiceaiivs
AppareL  Theae  Apparel  alatiilea  were  i^jealed  by
the  l»l  of  Jamea  1."  (Long-i  "  '  ■
Plutnrrh'a  Lih  of  Sutia,  e.  2.)

SUOVETAURI'LIA- [Si

SDPEHFI'CIES,  SUPEBFICIA'RIUa.  —
SuperfideB  ii  any^iing  which  ia  pbced  upm  the
ground,  to  aa  to  became  attached  to  it.  The  moat
common  caae  of  aaparfidea  ia  that  of  buildii^
erected  on  another  man'a  land.  "  Thoae  an
aedea  anperficiariaa  which  are  built  ca  hired
ground,  tni  the  prt^rty  of  which  both  by  the
Jna  Cirih  and  NalnnJe  belanga  lo  him  to  whan


.  SDPE&FICIES.
the  gtaund  (aobia)  alao  bel<Bigi.''  (Oaina,  Dlg^'
4S.  tit.  IB.  a2.>  Cice™  (ad  JO.  W.  3)  nea  tbe
expreaaion  **  mpe^det  narfrwai."  Every  boildio^
then  wag  couidered  a  patt  of  the  gntuid  on  wliicb
it  ateod  ;  and  the  ownenfaip  and  poaaajon  of  tbe
bnilding  were  intepnabla  firan  the  oviwnliip  and
paaanaion  of  tbe  gnnind.  The  Suptrfiae*  rtaeoi-
Uea  a  SarritB*  and  ia  claaaed  among  tbe  Jon  ia
le^  Aeeordinf  to  the  definiticn,tbe  Sapeificiariat
had  not  the  tbn^  even  In  boiia;  ■ndutbeaniBBa
DoBUni  conid  not  exiat  in  the  caae  ef  Snpcrficia,
be  ooojeqHntly  could  not  be  Poaaeaaor.  He  bad
however  a  Jnria  Qnaii  PoneaiiD.  Tbe  SnperSckrioa
had  the  right  to  tba  enjoynent  (d  ths  Buperfiiici :
he  conld  alionale  the  Superfidea  and  pledge  it  for
tbe  term  of  hia  enjoyment  ^  be  conld  diapeae  of  tt
by  Icalament ;  and  it  conld  be  tlie  object  of  auc-
ceatioD  ah  intealato  -,  he  conld  alao  make  it  aul^ert
to  n  Servibia  ;  and  ha  could  pnaeCDle  bia  right  by
a  atilit  in  ion  actio.  Aa  ha  had  a  Jina  Qaaa
Poaaeaaio,  be  waa  jaoteded  a^ainit  tbrcMcDed  die-
turbance  by  a  apecial  InterdKt,  whicb  ia  gireo  in
the  Digeal  (43.  tit  18X  and  in  ita  eflect  iMcaUea
the  InCardictom  Uti  poandetia.  Tba  cxpluatiaa
of  the  paaage  relating  to  thia  Interdict  (Dig.  43.
tiL  IB.  a.  3)  ia  given  by  Sav%ny  (Dot  Rtdd  ^
BttUaa,  p.  289,  Sth  ed.).  If  he  wu  ejoclcd,  be
""'  have  tlie  Interdictum  de  vi,  aa  in  the  oaa
ipo'  PoseaiioD  ;  and  if  he  had  gianlcd  Iba
:  the  SnperGdea  to  another  Prvotrio,  who  re-
fuied  to  rctluc  il,  bs  bad  the  Iptenlietam  dc  \tt-

man  could  obtain  the  oae  -  ,  -  -

agreement  with  the  owner  of  the  land  for  ,
aion  to  erect  a  building  qd  it :  be  thai  obtained  a
Jua  Supertidaiiom  ;  and  he  might  alio  by  agm-
ment  have  the  uio  of  an  eiiitiag  Super&iea.  Ha
bound to  diicbei^  all  the  dntiea  which  b*


the  |ffoper  pajmeni
any  payment  had  been  agreed  on.  Tbe  aobnaB
wu  a  grouud-tenL  (Dig.  IS.  tit.  8.  a.  2.  g  17.)
The  rok  of  law  that  the  Supeificiea  bdtaiiRd  ta
(he  owner  of  the  (oil  waa  expieaiei  thni :  SiipaF>
ficiea  aolo  cedit.  (Oaina,  iL  73.)  If  thai  a  man
hailt  OB  another  raan'i  land,  ^a  bsoaa  beasH  Iha
pn^KTty  of  the  owner  of  the  bnd.  But  if  tbe
owner  of  the  land  claimed  the  beoae.  and  wsaU
not  pay  the  eipenae  incuned  by  bahding  it,  tha
builder  of  the  houae  could  mset  tba  claisaul  viik
a  plea  of  dolna  malua  {tmptia  dcU  maW),  that  ia
to  ny,  if  he  waa  a  B<nae  £d<i  poaaeaaor.  Ia  a^
other  aae,  he  had  cf  oama*  no  anawcr  ts  tla

Acc«idingtaC!(ilce(Cb.£*ll.4B,b)k"amaaaM
have  an  inheritance  in  an  upper  chuabar,  tbea^
the  lower  bnildingi  and  the  loil  be  in  aaa^ta,imi,
aeeing  it  ia  an  inheiitaDca  cwporeal,  it  a^  |Ma
by  livery."  Bnt  thia  doctrine  il  open  to  aaioaa
ihjectioni,  and  contadieto  a  fJindanitiatal  nKiB)*
flaw.  ^

At  Rone  if  a  man  noeived  peiviaaiaB  In  boiU
a  a  leeua  {mblicua,  ha  thenby  obtai&ed  a  Jna
Supeirfieiarium.  Tba  Lex  Irilia  de  Anatiao,  »  e.
4G6,  probably  gave  tbe  groand  inownenh^to  the
Pleba,  Dionyaua,  tAo  apckka  ptrticolMiy  of  ihia
lex,  aayi  that  aenial  p^noa  nailed  la  bnild  a
houae  on  the  anma  phH  of  mud,  and  diatarihatel
the  aloriei  among  them  ;  thia,  howevar,  wwdd  M*.


SUSPKNSUBA.
for  the  gmmd  on  which  Iimdoa  wen  Lullt  to


ji  the  property  of  tht  di


of  the  Kil,  »b^l<


t  Mohei,  in  leipect  of  whicb
btrium)  WM  payable  to  the  dominui  of  the  loiL
Radoiff  {BeOr^  nr  GtiiidiU  der  Saperfidet,
ZaUdur^/iir  OuaitoK.  BaiUtD.  &(l,  No.iL)  uyi
that  thcK  tenni  were  ai  conunon  in  Rome  "  u
thej  DOW  an  ia  LoadoD  where  great  landholder!,
in  cuuideratian  of  a  rent  lor  ciae  tuA  nine^  yean,
and  the  ntenattOD  of  the  omenhip  of  the  toil,
nllow  othen  to  occupy  building  groni^  and  alightly
built  homo."  He  who  buildi  oa  another'!  land
00  a  building  IcaM  hat  a  Jui  Snpeificiarumi  and
nothiDfl  more.

(O  Ju,  il  73—75  ;  Dig.  iS.  tit  1 8  i  Lex  Icilia,
Dionyi.  Jutiq.  Rom.  i.  32  ;  Pucbtn,  Jatl.  ii.
j  344  ;  Ziittdirift.  Ac  iL  SIS  ;  Stair,  /uttta/u,
book  il  tiL  7  i  M-Dovell,  fad.  1.  67S  ;  Codt
CSrO.  art  664.)  [G.  L.]

SUPERNUMERA-HII. [Accisbl]

SD'PPARUM. (Nivia,  p,790,«;  Tdnica.]

SUPPLICATIO  wai  a  lalemn  thankagiring  or
jappliration  to  the  god!  decreed  by  the  teaiate,
when  all  the  templea  weie  opened,  and  the  italuea
of  the  godi  frequently  placed  in  public  upon
conchei  (puMsana),  to  which  the  people  offered
up  their  thank^ringi  and  piayen  {ad  omnia  pui-
n'HFunfT'JMsfiactenfticil.Cic.iaaiti^iiL  10).
[LccTisTKHNiitii.]  A  SupplicaiiB  wni  decreed
Ait  two  diSerent  reaaooL

[.  Ai  a  ihuilugning,  when  a  great  Tictory  had
been  gained :  it  mu  (unally  decreed  at  Boon  ai
ofiiclat  intelligence  of  the  victory  had  been  le-
cciwd  by  a  Tetter  ftom  the  genml  in  conunand.
The  number  of  dayi  during  which  it  wu  to  lui
wat  proportioned  to  the  importance  of  the  rictory.
Sometime!  it  wai  decreed  Sol  only  Due  day  (Lii.
iii.  63),  bnt  more  commonly  for  ihree  or  fire  daja.
A  Hipplication  of  ten  day!  wa>  £raC  decreed  in
boDHir  of  Pompey  at  the  conclu!ion  of  the  war
with  Mithridatci  (CIc  dt  I'roe.  Cotu.  11),  and
one  of  fifteen  dajtailer  the  victory  over  ibeBclgae
by  Caeiar,  an  honour  whicb  Cacur  hinuelf  layi
{B.O.  iL  35)  had  never  been  granted  to  any  one
before.  (Compare  Cic.  Lc.)  Sublrquently  ainp-
plicatio  nf  twenty  dayi  waa  decreed  after  hiicon-
queat  of  Vcrdnsetorii.  (Caei.  B.  O.  >iL  30.)
From  thii  time  the  lenaleteema  to  have  frequently
increaaed  the  niimbec  of  dayi  ont  of  mere  compli-
ment to  the  general  We  thua  find  men^on  of
thankagiTUig)  far  forty  day>  (DionCaaa.  ililL  14),
fifty  daya  {Id.  jdiii.  42,  and  Cic.  PiU.  xi>.  14),  and
even  liity.  <DioD  CaaaxL  50.)  A  auppHcstiu  waa
umatly  n-gaided  ai  a  prelude  to  a  triumph,  but  it
waa  not  alwayi  followed  by  one,  aa  Cato  leminda
Cicero,  la  whoie  honour  a  luppluatio  had  been
decreed.  (Cic  ad  Fan.  ay.  S.)  Thii  honour  waa
conferred  upon  Cicero  on  accnoDl  of  hii  luppreuion
of  the  lonipitacy  of  Catiline,  which  had  neiei  been
decreed  to  any  one  Man  in  a  civil  capacity  (to-
patiu),  ai  he  frequently  takea  occauon  to  mention.
(/»  CtrtiLiii.  6,  ]0,  in  Fit.  3,  PkiL  il  6.)

II.  A  Supplieatia,  a  ulemn  m^ication  and
humiliation,  waa  alao  decreed  in  timea  of  public
danger  and  diatnaa,  and  on  account  of  piodigiea  to
ave^  the  anger  of  the  god*.  (LiT.  iiL  7,  x.  23,
mi.  S,  uiviL  3.)

SURDUS. [Ou.ioAiioM&,p.Sie,a;  Tu-

SUSPENSU-RA. [BAi.NBx«,p.l91,b.]


SYCOPHANTES.  1079

SYC0PHANTE3  (ounofJm,!).  Atan«rly
period  in  Attic  history  a  law  waa  made  probibiting
the  exportation  of  figa.  Whether  it  waa  made  in
a  time  of  dearth,  or  through  the  fboliih  policy  of
prcteriing  to  the  natiiea  the  moit  valuable  of
their  productioni,  we  cannot  aay.  It  apprara,
howerer,  that  the  law  continued  in  force  long
after  the  csuie  of  ita  enactment,  or  the  geneinl
belief  of  ilt  utility,  had  craMd  to  exitt ;  and
Atlie  iig-gnjwen  exported  their  fruit  in  apita  of
prohiblliona  and  peualtiea.  To  inform  againit  a
I  doing  wai  couaidered  hanh  and  VEia-
ill  people  are  apt  to  think  that  obaolcte
Ly  be  infringed  with  impunity.  Hence
which  originally  aignified


»/».


«•/»,


be  applied  to  all  ill-natured,  maliuoiu,
groundlesi,  and  vexatloua  accuaationa. It  ia  de-
'" :d  by  Suidaa,  i^«^»!  tiwi  (ta-nryDptlr. (Ste-
in. T^ietaw.  BIIj3,b.)

^copianla  in  the  time  of  ATi>tm)hanea  and
Demotthenea  deaignated  a  peraon  of  a  peculiar
-'---  --^  capable  of  being  deacril>ed  by  any  aingle
lur  language,  but  well  underttood  and  ap-
preciated by  an  Athenian.  Ha  had  not  much  in
Hnmon  with  our  ^fcojAaiitj  but  waa  a  happy  com-
nmd  of  the  comrnan  UtrTdor^  v^omer,  petiijbggfr^
ajfiodg,  ngvt,  liar^  and  Jimdervr.  The  Athenian
lW  peimilted  any  citizen  (rbr  0m\6fitrar)  to  give
ifurmation  againil  pnblic  offender*,  and  proKcute
lem  in  courta  of  joitice.  It  waa  the  policy  of  tbs
^giilator  to  encourage  the  detection  of  crime,  and
reward  (auch  na  hiDf  the  penalty)  waa  frequently
iven  to  the  lucceuful  accuaor.  Such  a  power,
ith  lucb  a  Icmptatian,  wai  likely  to  be  abuied,
unleifl  chi'cked  by  the  force  of  public  t^inion,  or
the  vigilance  of  the  judicial  tribuuala  Unfortu-
nately, the  character  ot  the  Athenian  democracy
'  the  tcniper  of  the  judgea  fnmiihed  addltionid

on,  geiicrali,  magiatratei,  and  all  penona  of
]ih  and  influence  were  regarded  with  jealouiy
by  the  people.  The  more  rsuaes  came  into  court,
the  more  feea  accrued  to  the  judgea,  and  £nea  and
confiicationi  enriched  the  public  treoaury.  The
proKcalor  therefore  in  public  causei,  ai  well  aa  the
plaintiS'  in  civil,  wai  looked  on  with  a  more  &vour-
ahle  eye  than  the  defendant,  and  the  chancei  of
aucceu  made  the  employment  a  lucrative  one.  It
waj  not  alvayi  neceisaty  to  go  to  trial  or  eten  to
commence  lepJ  proeecdingt  The  timid  defendant
wai  glad  to  compromiie  the  cauae,  and  the  con-
Kioua  delinquent  to  avert  the  threat  of  a  prosecu-
tion by  paying  a  *um  of  money  to  hia  opponent
Thriving  informen  iwmd  it  not  vety  difficult  to
procure  wltneaaea,  and  the  pn>6ta  were  divided  be-
tween them.  According  to  Theophraalna  {aj/.AIieii.
vL  254,  b),  Atbeni  waa  full  of  Aion-iroiroAiUur
ical  Ajeroivriir  aa]  i^tuSufi^^ipttr  aol  ovKO'payTur
jial  •fin^Kkifiiipat,  The  character  of  the  o-iwa-
^dn-ai  wilt  be  beat  uodenlood  by  the  eiamplee
and  deicriptiona  found  in  the  Attic  writen.  Aiia-
lophanei  direct!  the  heeneat  edge  of  hii  aatire
against  them.  (See  particutarlj  Ackarn.  8111,
Aea,  1410,  Plat.  350.)  Demoatheuei  uya:
noini^r  6  mrafxlmil  ical  fidnKoror  no]  f  lAufruii'
(di  Coram.  307  ;  compare  c  EidmL  1309).  Xixo-
ipama-  Tpiiiatrra  imi  m  Lyaiaa  {cEnasd.  177,
ed.  Steph.)  aignilie*  "to  extort  thirty  minaa  bj
Syatpkaid-t^  practicea.''  (See  further  Lys.  Aq>t.
KotbX.  AnX.  171  ;  Aeach.  dt  Fait.  Lrg.  S6,  ed.
•St  4


lOBO  STLAG.

Sleph.  1  D™.  d»  Cor.  291  ;  XcEOph.  Mtm.  ii.  9,
li.de  Rtp.  AIA.  i.  4.)  Thai  Iht  increaw  of  li"'
giition  and  peijnry  wai  in  wma  mea»urc  owiny
the  eiQbliihmenC  of  clubt  and  political  auociatio
■nd  th«  liolencB  of  putj  Bpirit,  maj  he  gather
from  vRriom  puiagei  of  the  Attic  wiilen.  (Tb
cvd.  vlij.  5i  ;  Demonh,  c  Botot.  dtdote,  1010,
Pmtam.  S78,  c.  Zmolh.  085.)

Thp  Athenian  la*  did  indeed  ffforide  >  remedy
Bgainat  thi>  miuhieroat  clut  of  men.  There  wtu
a  ffKup^  avKo^anlas  tried  before  the  Themnothe-
toe.  Any  periori  who  brtniffht  a  false  chargE
against  another,  or  extorted  money  by  threat  oj
legal  procMdings,  or  niboined  falie  wilnmea,  di
engaged  in  a  conipitacy  to  niia  the  chancier  of  an
innocent  man,  wai  liable  to  ihia  7pa^.  He  niight
alio  be  proceeded  againit  by  ^Kio-ii,  ttti^tt
ttroTVT^,  irpofoh^  at  tlaarfyt\lai.  (See  article
Phasis,  Ac.  i  Aeaob.  de  Fait.  Lrg.  47,  ed.  Steph.
Dem.  c  neoer.  1325.)  The  [rial  wai  an  iyiir
Tttat^6t.  The  hearieil  ptmiibment  might  be  id-
llicted,  together  with  inida  and  confiicadon  of
property.  Beiidet  thii,  if  any  man  brought  a  cri-
mtnal  chargv  againit  anolher,  and  neglected  lo
proircale  it  {hti^tXtttr)^  he  waa  liable  to  a  pe-
nalty of  1000  dracfaoiai,  and  loit  the  priyilege  of
instituting  a  similar  proceeding  in  future,  which
was  considered  to  be  a  speciet  of  iri/ua.  (Deni.
c.  Mid.  648,  0.  n«ocr.  1323.)  The  >ame  conse-
qnence  followed,  if  he  failed  to  obtain  a  fifth  pari
of  the  votes  at  the  trial.  The  i-wwii\ia  in  civil
a  penalty  of  the  same  kind  and  hai


objcci


0 prevci


abuse


legal  proeesB,  and  check  fri'ok
tioni.  Such  were  the  rrmedlei  provided  by  law,
but  they  were  f^und  ineHicaclons  in  practice  ;  and
the  word!  of  Ariitophanc.  {PliUvt,  885)  were  not

the  bile  of  a  Sycoph^tea.-  (See  Plainer,  Proe.
md  King.  vol.  ii.  p.  1 64  ;  Meier,  ^».  Pnc.  p:  33£  ;
Schihuann,  Ant.  Jnr.  ptb.  Or.  pp.  101, 18G  ;  Pol-
lui,  viii.  31,  46,  47,  88.)  [C.R.K.]

SYLAE  (iriAoi). When  a  Greek  italc,  or
any  of  ita  members,  had  received  an  injury  or

condition,  to  declare  open  war,  it  was  not  unusual
to  give  a  commission,  or  grant  public  authority  to
individuals  lo  make  reprisals.  This  was  called
ei^as,  or  ffuAn,  titirm.  (Demoslh.  c.  Larrit.  931  ;
Lvsias,  c  A'iom..  185,  ed.  Sleph.)  Poijbins  (iv.
26,  36,  63)  calli  it  Xd-pvfxir  or  ^iffin  kbtbtt^A-


Adf.  Thus,  when  the  l-acedaemonians  thought
the  Athenians  had  bicken  the  treaty  with  them
by  making  incunions  from  Pylus,  they  issued  a
proclamation  that  any  of  their  subjects  miiht
commit  depredations  on  Iho  Athenians  (XtflCtaiai
Toil  ■Aft)™'"!",  Thucyd.  ■.  H5).  Demosthenes
(rfs  Ctmm.  Trvranh.  1232)  declnres  that  the
deputy  cBptaini  of  triremes  so  misbehated  them-
selvei  in  foreign  ceuntriea,  plundering  everybody
they  came  neat,  that  no  Athenian  could  travel  safely
tiA  Til  Ml  nbruti  ilvtpoXTr^lat  ml  aiKas  kstm-
HttmeiLiwai^  where  irZ^Xij^iat  refers  to  the  arrest
of  the  penon,  ai\»t  to  the  seiiure  of  goods.
Siiidai  eiplaini  ffvXoi  by  the  synonym  mAMt^it,
Atta  &rJ|»Ai;if(ai  for  another  Dutpoae,  see  PHoNoa.
In  the  ratPTiii))  avyyfa^ii  in  tne  speech  of  Demoa-
thenea  (o.  Lner.  927),  one  of  the  conditions  is  that
goods  may  be  landed  only  Srov  &r  n^  ei\iu  itrm
'AtifHlaii,  "  where  no  hoitilitiei  an  uerciaed


SYMBOLAKON.
against  Athenians **  The  people  of  Atbaii  pa
a  specie  deoee  to  authoriae  pnTateerii^  ;
when  any  booty  was  taken  by  Athanian  nbr
Ihey  rvsHved  lo  themselves  the  rigfat  of  d<
ing  whether  it  was  lawfoily  taken,  vhetber  H
oDghl  to  be  kept  or  restored,  and  what  shDnld  Ik
done  with  it  (Demoath.  c  Tvmoa.  703  ;  Aigam.
694,  69G.}  The  ancient  pisctice  may  be  canpand
with  the  raodnro  one  of  granting  letters  of  marqUB
and  reprisal,  (Harpoa.  s.  o.  1v\ai  -,  SchtJmanik,  dt
Comit.^2M,Aiit.Jia^.Pab.GT.^Sei.)  (CRK.]
SYLLOGEIS  (mUiDTfrOiUmally  called  2>A-
\aYt?>  tdC  t^fisu,  or  the  Collectors  of  the  People,
were  special  commiiiionen  alAtbena,  who  made  out
n  list  of  the  property  of  the  oligarchs  prerioiulT  to
iUconiiscation.  (£«rffM.p.304,Bekker.)  They
formed  an  ifx4i  (Harpoer.  i.  n.  SoUAyit),  and
seem  to  have  been  introduced  after  the  dominion  of
the  Thirty  Tyranta.  It  appears  tjxtm  an  iuaip-
tion  that  the  Syllogeis  bad  to  altend  to  the  >«»d
riles  connected  with  the  worship  of  Athena  and  the
Olympian  Zeua,  whence  BOckh  conjecture*  tbal
they  collected  or  tummoned  the  citizens  to  certain
•acred  rites,  in  which  the  people  were  feasted,  and
thai  ftbm  this  circumstance  they  drrived  their
name ;  the  property  of  the  oligarchs,  of  which  Ihey
are  said  to  have  made  out  a  list  for  the  porpoae  af
confisoLtiaD,  may  have  been  applied  to  these  paUie
banquets,  since  confiscated  property  was  not  unfiv-
queutly  divided  among  the  citizeua.  (CWpar/ajcr.
Gra«.  Nd.99.  pp.  137,  138,  No.  157.  p.  350.)
SY'MBOLA.  [CozNA,  p.  304,b  ;  Dicaktk]
SYMBOLAEON,  SYNALLAGMA,  SYN-
THE'CE  (nif(«(iAaia>-,iiimt>AB7^ffw»4ci|),aK
'1  words  used  to  signify  a  conlracl,  but  are  dii>
nguishable  from  one  another,  Zu/iffjAwor  it
led  of  contracts  and  bargaini  beln-^cn  jsiwa
rnons,  and  peculiarly  of  loans  of  mooey.  Tha^
jligdKflr  til  Mp^nn&w  ii,  lo  lend  npoD  the
security  of  a  slave.  (Demoslb.  e.  Apiob.  833,  e.
Zfmth.  884,  c.  PhoTiK.  907,  c  Tiaatk.  1 1S5,  c.
Diiaigi.  1284.)  SucdXAay^u  signifies  aoj  mana
legotiated  or  trancacted  between  two  or  mon  per-
ons,  whether  a  contract  or  anything  else.  (Dt-
nosth.  c.  Oitt.  867,  863,  c  Timorr.  760.)  3w-
"ftitij  is  used  of  more  solemn  and  important  eon-
mcls,  not  only  of  those  made  between  priimte
ndiriduala,  bul  alto  of  Umties  and  ronvenlioiia
letvcen  king*  and  statrt.  (Thucyd.  I  40,  t.  IB,
iil.  87  ;  Xcnoph.  HilL  viL  1.  §  2  j  Demosth.  i*
Rhod.  199,  de  Conxt.  SSI,  e;  Aratag.  774  ;  Di-
nnrch.  e.  DmnHi.  101,  ed.  Sleph.)

'  -  to  the  necessity  or  advantage  af  faavini
n  agreements  betwoeo  individuals,  see  Sv>-
H  X.  National  compa^  m  accoont  of  tbeit
importance,  and  the  impoHibilily  of  other-
preserving  evidence  of  them,  wnv  almul
always  committed  to  writing,  and  camsiaiJy  in-
"  d  on  pilLars  or  lablela  of  some  durable  mate-
(Thncyd,  v.  23,  47  ;  see  Aristoph.  Adnra.
727.)  Upon  a  breach,  or  oo  the  expiraiion,  of
the  cmty,  the  pllan  were  taken  down.  (Deausth.
TO  M^alopcL  309.)

For  breaches  of  contract  actions  wne  nmintais-
ble  at  Athens,  called  nyiCsAafor  (or  cvrtm^)
■apatimut  aUv.  (Pollui,  tL  liS,  viii.  31.)
Inch  actions,  it  it  appnhended,  applied  only  ta  ei-
prest  contracli,  not  lo  obligaliona  u  Mida,  or  tl>«
dicovffia  avnAXirriutra  of  Aristotle.  (fUis.  A'uiaL
4.)  Thua,  if  I  had  ptomised  to  pay  a  snm  of
me;  by  a  certaiD  day,  and  Mled  ta  pctfam  that


8THB0LON.
promue,  an  action  fbr  brauh  of  ccntract  would
hiiie  luD  al  Albnu. But  if  ay  cav  had  broken
mj  neighbour')  fence,  mj  obligstion  to  lepair  tht


brcBch  of


brcBch  of  cootnict,  bat  to  ■  ilicii  3aiU)|i.  (Meior,
AtL  Proe.  pp.  i76.  477.)  On  tha  other  hand,  ■
tiint  0AJi€jjt  would  lie  AgvQit  i  peiwm  who  had
committed  a  breach  of  contract  i  for  ho  waa  te-
gsrded  aa  a  wrongdoer,  and  liable  to  pay  compnt-
Btion  to  the  paitj  injnnd.  Therefore  Dionyio-
doma,  who  had  failed  to  perfiAm  tho  conditicHii  of
A  rmnmii  avyypa^,  had  &  Ii'in)  ^^<i(nI  brought
agninit  him  by  iha  penotii  wbo  lent  him  money
on  hii  (hip.  (DemoitD.  1 SS2  ;  Me  alto  pro  Piomi.
950.  c  O-Bipp.  1240.)  The  Athenian  Uw  fie-
qoentljr  gSTo  an  option  between  vtiriona  Ibmu  of
action.  It  il  not,  howerer,  improbable  liat  the
Ktcij  oird^juHv  rapatdjrtor  waa  only  one  apeciefl
of  the  Hint  fiJ^JMiji,  and  the  name  one  of  a  leu
tcchnioiJ  kind.  Whenrer  ■  debt  had  become
due  to  a  man  by  maon  of  lotne  preiioai  contnct,
*a  nay  auppoH  that  he  hod  the  option  between
Ml  action  of  debt  (Xf^')  ■"^  Mie  for  breach  of
conmct.  The  Hune  obccrtation  will  apply  to  the
tUai  npaiiizTa^inis,  V)^^",  and  othen  of  a
(imihr  kind.  The  main  point  of  difference  might
be  tbi) :  that  in  a  general  action  for  breach  of  con-
tract, the  pluntiff  went  for  nnliquidatcd  damagei,
which  tha  court  had  to  nueu  ^  whereai,  upon  a
claim  to  recover  a  debt  or  nun  certain,  or  a  ipecilic
chattel,  the  court  had  nothing  more  to  do  than  to
determine  whether  the  phuntiS'  waa  entitled  lo  it
or  not ;  the  i^r  wu  ififLirrei,  All  nioh  actiont
were  tried  before  the  BibiuMtoi.  (Meier,  AM.
I'roe.  pp.  87, 184,  4S3— *B7,  610.)

'Oiioktryia  appears  to  be  a  word  of  leaa  technical
imtnre  than  mrSiiini,  though  (a<  we  might  expect
in  wordt  of  thi«  tart)  tbey  are  often  lued  indiffer-
ently. Qrammariana  moke  Ehem  lynonymoUB.
(HorpoGT.  t.  V.  'Affvr^rT^aror :  Suidaa,  j.  v.  Xbv-
Wfl-)  3BP#^«ai  irci(!o*«  or  rittaSiu  /urii  riroi
il,  lo  moke  an  agreement  with  any  one  ;  ififiiriif
raXs  ffvtr9iimit^  to  abide  by  it ;  brtptairtiy  or
wap<iSalv(ii>,  to  brrak  or  tnuugreM.  Ilete  we  may
obscrre,  that  mre^tai  ii  constantly  uud  in  the
l^ural,  imtCBd  of  tavHim},  the  only  difference
being,  that  strictly  the  former  signifie*  the  terms
or  articlea  of  agreement,  in  the  same  manner  ai
Sio^jcoJ,  the  ietU%tn£Klaiy  di^totilioni^  la  put  for
SiiMiiai,  lis  teili. ii/iSa^jiv  also  lignifiea  n  com-

Ct  or  agreement,  but  had  become  (in  Attic  par-
ce)  ohulete  in  this  sense,  except  in  the  expres-
•ion  ilcoi  ill  ininei\uy.  (See  below.)  [C.RK.]
SYMBOLON,  UIKAE  APO  (.H-au  i'i  m,*.-
eiXvr).  The  ancient  Greek  slates  hod  nc  well
deflaed  internalional  law  for  (he  protection  of  their
rnpective  members.  In  the  earlier  times  troops
of  robben  nsed  to  rmm  sbont  from  one  cr^nntry  to
nnnther,  and  commit  aggreiiioni  upon  indiiiduals,
who  in  their  turn  mode  reprisals,  nnd  took  the  law
into  their  own  hands.  Even  when  the  slate  took
upon  itself  to  resent  the  injury  doiu  to  its  mdabers,
a  violent  remedy  vm  resorted  to,  such  aa  the
gixing  anthority  to  take  lTv^a,  or  piaia,  a  sort  of
nntionnl  dlMiesa.  As  the  Greeks  advanced
eiviliiaiion,  and  a  closer  intercourse  sprang
among  them,  diiputea  between  the  nalirea  of

poaaiblt)  by  fnendlr  negotiation. It  loon  began


SYMBOLON.  1081

Dch  disputes  could  be  decided  by  legal  proceas,
ither  in  the  one  countay  or  the  other.  Among
iveij  people,  however,  the  lawi  ware  so  framed,
J  to  reader  the  administrBtim  of  justice  mora
ftivcnrable  to  a  dtiien  than  to  a  fitreigner ;  and
therefore  it  vonld  be  disadnntageoai,  and  itften
dangeroni,  to  sue  a  man,  or  he  sued  by  him,  in  his
Dwn  eotmtry.  The  most  friendly  lelatiaa  might
iuhaiil  between  two  ilalei,  inch  a*  mi/i/iaxia  or
Iwrynfiia,  and  yet  tha  nativei  of  each  be  exposed
to  this  disadvantage  in  their  mutual  intercDUiM.
Fo  obviate  inch  an  evil,  it  was  necessary  to  havs  a
Ipecial  agreement,  declaring  the  conditions  upoti
which  justice  was  to  be  reciprocally  administered-
Intemational  contracti  of  this  kind  were  colled
■diitoXa,  defined  by  Suidaa  thus,  aimOB"'  At  Ir
dXXi^Xaif  of  TiiAsif  bifiMvai  -rimaoi  rots  ro^lrur,
tMria  nol  KafiMiinui  -rit  tlicaui :  and  the
cause*  Cried  in  pursuance  Of  such  contracts  were
called  Suiai  iri  oviiXiKmr.  The  more  constant
nore  important  the  intercourse  between  any

to  establish  a  good  system  of  international

jurisprudence. Commercial  peo[Je  would  stand  in

need  of  it  the  mocL Aristotle  mentions  the  Tus-

ns  and  Carthaginians  as  having  o^fiCoAa  aspl

li;  pi)  ituLftr. {Polit.  jii.  1,  3,  and  S,  10.) No

mch  agreement  has  been  preserved  to  ui,  and  we

but  little  about  the  teimi  that  were  nauolly

-ibed. The  basis  of  them  seems  to  have  been

ihia,  aa  well  la  other  cmditioDs,  must  have  varied
oconding  to  circumstances.  Liberty  of  person,  and
protection  of  property,  wotdd,  no  doubt,  be  secured
to  the  foreigner,  as  br  as  pouible  ;  and  it  would
be  the  dntj  of  the  wpiifcroi  to  see  that  thete  righli
were  respected.  A  common  provision  was,  that
the  party  who  lost  his  cause  might  appeal  to  the
tribunal  of  the  other  conntry,  or  to  that  of  soma
third  state  mutuaUy  agreed  upon.  (Etym.  Magm
I.  e.  'ERicATrral  r6\it.)  This  was  perhaps  suR-
gested  by  the  practice  which  hod  grown  up,  of  re-
ferring national  quonels  to  the  arbitration  of  soma
individual  or  third  state.  (Thucyd-  i.  34,  78,  140,
V.  41,  viL  18  i  Schtmann,  A«l.  Jar.  pub.  Gr.  p.  ■


When the  Atheni


jniT  of  th
the  TLeimoibelaa.  Hence  Pollux  (viii.  B8)  ssya
of  thoae  ma^tratei,  rit  triiitaKi  ri  ipbt  rit
■^\(ii  lufoSair.  The  other  conUucling  slate  waa
thcrefbra  compelled  to  send  an  envoy  to  Athens,
with  power  to  conclude  the  trea^  (if  he  thought
fit)  OS  it  was  drawn  up  and  settled  by  the  Theimo-
thetne  and  jumrs.  Most  of  the  people  with  whom
the  Athenians  had  to  deal,  were  either  subject  or

the  above  r^uiation.  Philip,  however,  would  not
■ubmlt  to  it.  and  demanded  that  ths  term*  should
receive  final  ratification  b  Macedonia.  This  de-
mand is  made  the  subject  of  complaint  by  Demoo-
thenes  (dt  HaliKt.  78).

The  name  of  iucai  iwSi  mifiSiXmv  waa  given  also
to  the  aatrs  which  the  allies  of  the  Athenians
sent  to  be  tried  at  Athena.  (PoUni,  viii,  6S.)  This
fact  haa  been  called  in  question  by  BSckh,  but
there  is  not  much  reason  for  doubting  it  It  ia
true  that  the  expression  is  nol  strictly  Bpplicahl*
to  canaea,  not  between  an  Athenian  and  a  foreigner.
bat  betweVD  two  foreigners ;  and  it  may .  be  allowed


loeS  SYMPOSIUM,

thai  the  object  of  the  Atheniani  in  bringiae  n
csUKM to Atbcns wbi, not  (o  give  itie  fdllei
better  or  speedier  maaa  of  oblaiaing  justice,  but
to  Koin  certain  adiantagca  to  the  imperial
(XeuopL  dt  SfiuhL  Ali.  \  16.) It  i>,  haw
not  impmbable  that  the  Bmngement  wu  csUed
aifitoin,  for  the  lery  purpoee  of  loftening  tbt
hanhneu  at  the  menaore,  bf  giving  an  honouiBblt
name  to  thnt  which  in  rralily  wu  a  inait  of  nervi
tnde. For  the  nine  reason  the  confedeiale  atatei
were  called  fffi^^x*"*  *^S*^  while  in  point  of  fact
they  were  rather  SilSjtiwi  or  ivijaii.

Thete  cauKt  weie  tried  ia  the  summer  monthi,
when  the  Tojsge  to  Alhoni  ws«  more  conrenienl,
■nd  (Hkn  all  other  Ji'iai  iv&  <niiiS6}Mr)  belonged
to  the  jiuiadiction  of  the  Thetmothctae.  We  have
but  one  eiample  of  lUch  a  came  preierved  to  -at,
viz.  the  ipeecL  of  Antiphon  on  the  death  of
Herodea,  where  both  the  proiecntor  and  the  de-
fendant are  nativet  of  MylUene.  (Haipoc.  i.  v.
li^ii\a :  Thucyd.  i.  77.  c  not.  Ooelkr  ;  Plainer,
Fnc.  vml  Klag.  Yoli.  ^^lOS— 114  ;  iXiln,  AU.
Proe.  pp.  67,  77S  ;  Schomann,  Ait.  Jar.  putt
Or.p.876.)  [C.R.K.]

SYMBU'LI  (ai^ooXai). [Pabbdbi.]
SYHUO'BIA (nfi^ofiia). [ElgPHoHi ;

TbIERjIRCBIA.]

SY'MPHOREIS  (<n,,i^t'it). [Exbucitus,

p.4B5,h.]

SYMPO'SIUM  (miiiwiiriBr,  comi-atio,  amn-
ciuin),  a  diinking-paitj.  The  auiar6aua',  or  the
Trirar,  muil  be  diitinguiahed  from  the  liTirruv,  Sor
though  drinking  atmoal  alwajB  follawed  a  dinner-
party, jet  the  former  vaa  regarded  a4  entirely  dis-
tinct from  the  latter,  wm  regulated  by  different
ciutom*,  and  frequently  received  the  addition  of
many  guestt,  who  were  not  preient  at  the  dinner.
For  the  Oreelu  did  not  uiually  drink  at  their
dinner,  and  it  wai  not  till  the  conclusion  of  the
meal,  that  wins  waa  introduced,  at  ii  explained
nnder  Coina  [p.S06,a].  Thut  we  read  in  the
S^posium  of  Plato  (p.  176,  a-)  that  a^er  the
dmaar  had  been  finished,  the  libations  made,  and
the  paean  lung,  they  turned  to drinking (rpi-

Symposia  teem  to  have  been  very  frequent  at
Athens.  Their  enjoyment  was  heightened  by
ngreeable  conrenation,  by  the  introduction  of  Oiusic
and  dancing,  and  by  garnet  and  amusements  of
vurioiis  kinds  :  sometimes,  loo,  philoaophical  lub-
jccU  were  discUEsed  at  them.  The  Symposia
of  Plato  and  Xenophon  give  us  a  lively  idea  of
such  cnterlaiamenta  at  Athi.'ns.  The  nanie  itself
shows,  that  the  enjoyment  of  drinking  was  the
main  object  of  the  Symposia :  wine  from  the  juice
of  the  grape  (olyos  ^rtXitot)  irai  the  ooly  drink
partaken  of  by  the  Orecks,  with  the  exception  of
water.  For  palm-wine  and  beer  [Cersvisia],
though  known  to  many  of  the  Greeks  from  inter-
courso  with  foreign  nations,  were  never  introduced
among  them  ;  and  the  eitiaordinaiy  chenpness  of

moderate  drcimiBtanees  to  give  driiiking-panies  to
their  friends.  Even  in  the  most  ancient  times
the  enjoyment  of  wine  was  considand  one  of  the
greatest  source*  of  pleasure,  and  henca  Mnsaeus
and  hii  SOD  gupposed  thnt  the  just  paased  their
time  In  Hades  m  a  slate  of  perpetual  iatoxicatjon,
ai  B  raward  of  their  virtue  {iytiaiiuni  ■iAAjorov
iprrqs  ;u<rShf  lifen'  aUvuv,  Plat.  £«.  ii.  f.  363,
c  d.). It  maid  i^ipcar  tnnn  the  Sjmpotuun  of


r,  i^jior  taXBufittf^


SYUPOSIUH.
Plata,  that  even  the  Alhemana  lieqnnitly  con-
cluded their  drinking-paities  in  rather  a  riutous
manner,  and  it  was  to  guard  against  this  that  loch
ponies  were  forbidden  at  Sparta  and  in  Crelr.
(Plat.  ^Vn.  p.  320,0.)

The  wine  mu  almort  bvaiiablv  miTed  witli
water,  and  to  drink  It  unmixed  (jUparBv)  was  oo-
sider^  a  characteristic  of  barhariani.  (Plat.  Ltg.
1.  p.  637,  e.)  Zaleucus  ia  said  to  ham  enacted  a
law  among  the  Locrinns,  by  which  any  me  wbo
waa  ill  and  drank  of  unmixed  wine  withoirt  the
command  of  his  physician,  was  to  be  put  to  dealh
(Aelian,  V.  U.  iL  37);  and  the  Greeks  in  govral
congtdared  uumixad  wine  aa  eicaedingly  jOEJadicial
to  phyticnl  and  mental  health.  (Atben.  iu  p.  36,
b.)  The  Spartans  attributed  the  ins.-uiity  li  Cles-
menea  to  his  indulging  in  thia  practicr,  irbicfa  be
lenint  from  the  S^thians.  (Jlerod.  vi.  B4.)  Sa
universal  was  it  not  Co  drink  wine  unleas  mixed
with  water,  that  the  word  orrei  is  nlwaya  applied

of  in  connection  with  drinking,  we  arc  always  to
undentond  wine  nuicd  with  water,  nnless  the
word  ixparat  is  expressly  added  (rh
Koirat  Koret  fitrixor  TXfZoror,
PluL  Cofji^.  Prate.  21  _

The  proportion,  in  which  the  wine  and  water
were  mixed,  nat^ually  dilTered  oa  diSerent  octa-
sions.  To  make  a  mixture  of  even  half  wine  and
half  water  (laoy  X<jf)  was  considered  it^uriiSB
(Athcn.  I.  c),  and  generally  there  waa  a  much
gicatcT  quantity  of  water  than  of  wine.  Iiaj^Kors
from  Plutarch  (jymp,  ili.  9),  Athcnacua  (i.p.4261,
and  Enstnthiu*  (<kJ  Od.  Ix.  '209.  p.  1 624),  that  the

3  :  2.  Heaiod  (,0p.  fiflfi)  recomm^ds  tbe^fint  of
these.

The  wine  was  mixed  either  with  wain  or  cold
water:  the  former, which  correspondad  latheDittte
or  Caila  of  the  Romans  [Calida],  waa  by  br  the
less  common.  On  the  contrary,  it  waa  endeavoured
to  obtain  the  water  aa  cool  ua  pouible,aad  for  thia
purpoae  both  anew  and  ice  were  frequcQUt  era-
ployed.  [PsvcTER.]  Honey  was  «metim;*  put
m  the  wine  (Athen.  i.  p.  32,  a.),  and  also  spice*
(Id.  p.  31,  e.)  :  in  the  latter  case  it  naiTcd  the
name  of  vpl/i/ui,  and  is  frequently  mentioned  by
the  writers  of  the  New  Comedy.  (Pollux,  vi.  IB.)
Other  ingredients  were  also  ocouionally  added.

The  mixture  waa  made  in  a  Imgt  vcuel  oiled
the  KpaHip  [Cbaixb],  from  which  it  was  coo-
veyed  into  the  drinking-cupa  by  meona  of  ewsxiai
or  iciaSoi.  [Cvatucs.]  The  cup*  oanally  coh
ployed  were  the  itiAif,  ^iiiifl,  napx^tior.  and
xdifBapoSf  of  which  an  account  is  given  in  separate
nrticlea.  The  fiuriff  or  drinking-horn,  was  also
very  commonly  used.  We  find  several  rtaun  on
vasea  representing  drinking  scenes.  (Sec  fur  cx-
smple  Mm.  Botio*.  vol.  v.  i.  .^1.)

The  guest*  at  a  Symposium  reclined  on  eoneb**
and  were  crowned  with  garlands  of  fiowns,  aa  is
expkuned  under  Cokna.  A  master  of  the  rvvela
{SfX"*  ^V!  'inat,  oviaoalofXiiotBiuiAiai)  waa
usually  chosen  to  conduct  the  Sympoaium  (wajJa^w
ytxr  VBiaivier,  Plat.  Leg.  i,  p.  641,  a.  bl),  whw
command*  the  whole  company  bad  to  obey,  and
who  regulated  the  whole  order  of  the  HiienaiB-
ment,  |)ropo*ed  the  amiuementa,  &c.  The  aanw
practice  prevailed  among  Ibe  Itomaas,  and  thril
Sympoaiarcb  was  called  the  Ataguter  or  HOr  Cto-
ckw,  (k  the  Arliiler  Bibenili. The  choiot  waa


STMPOSIUIC
gcDMBlf J  detamiiMd  b^  tfae  thraving  til  AitrqaL
or  Tali ;  but  vb  Gad  in  Plate  {Syap.  p.  213,  e.)
Aleibiadn  mutltntiug  hiniutf  SjmpMiarcL  Tbe
|ropi>rtion  in  which  the  vina  and  wM«r  mn
niied  waa  fli«d  by  him,  and  olao  hov  mncti  eocb
of  the  contpuiT  vai  tn  drink.  Tha  lerranti
{alrtj(ioi  and  Mvijpol  ft«p(Eavrr*l),  onifllly  joiuig
■laTcfl,  who  hod  to  mix  tha  wins  and  pmoil  it  ta
tha  company,  wan  alas  aoder  hii  ordsn  ;  but  if
then  n*  no  Sympotiareh,  the  oompanjr  called  fbr
the  wine  jut  aa  the;  pleaied.  (Xen.  ^mp.  iL  S7.1

Beron  Ha  diinkii^  sammenecd,  it  wai  agmd
npou  in  what  wa;  they  ahould  drink  (PlaL  Sfip.
p.  176,4.  b.},  lar  it  vu  not  Ufualljr  left  to  the
optiea  of  each  of  the  compan  j  to  drink  a*  mncb  or
Ba  little  aa  be  pleaaed,  hnt  ha  vaa  compellad  to
take  whaterer  the  Sjmpeaiarch  might  order.  At
Atheni  they  uauall;  begaa  drinkin;;  aal  of  amali
eupa  (ji^pia  xvr^pia,  Athan.  i.  p.  431,  &),  bat  oi
the  entertainment  want  an,  luger  oaet  wets  intnt-
dnccd.  (Diog.  Lafrt.  i  104.)  In  the  Sympoaitm
of  Plato  (pp.  213,  214)  Alcibiadea  and  Socratta
each  emplT  an  immenM  dtp,  emtainini  eight  at-
tjUe,  nr  nrarl;  fbor  Engiiih  [«iit(  i  and  fraqoently
aoch  tap*  were  emptied  at  ana  dianght  {hrmml
ar  i^unrrt  ir(«ir,  ifuwrlffw,  Athai.  i,  p.431,  b.t
Laeian,  Lecripk.  3 ;  Snidoi,  «.  v.  'A^uvti),

Tbe  eupa  were  alwaya  earned  raand  from  right
lo  leit  (M  ii{uf),  and  the  laiBe  order  wu  ob-
•erted  in  the  conienatiou  and  In  ererTthing  that
took  place  in  the  entertainment  (M  3«{ia  SiavlMiv,
Phi.  Rep.  IT.  p.  420,  ft,  M  Sefii  \iyot  tlntr,
if)ni;).p.214,b;  Athen.ii.p.463,e.>.  The  com-
pan;  frequently  drank  to  tha  heaJth  oiF  one  annlber
\mfawfwtir  ^iAn-if(ri«,  Lncian,  G<JL  13 ;  Athen.
xi.  p.  49S,  i.\  and  each  did  it  eapecially  to  the  ona
lo  whom  he  handed  the  lame  cap.  Tbia  aeemi  to
kaTs  been  tbe  cailom,  which  Ciceia  allndea  to,
when  he  apMtki  of  "drinkuig  after  the  Qreek
bahion."  (pTatco  more  f>a)en,  Var.  i,  26  ;  com-
pare Toe.  i.  40,  Onaei  in  ammiii  nJatl  aow-
nora,  cat  poeulmin  tradituri  taut)

Unite  and  dancing  were  nioally  introdueed,  ai
already  Btated,  at  Sympoaia.  and  we  find  few  r^
pdeaenlationi  of  men  acenea  in  ancient  ruaa  wilh-
mt  the  [seaenM  of  [emalo  player*  oa  the  flute  and
tba  rithiua.  Phito,  inde^  decidedly  objeeti  to
their  preaence,  and  maintain!  that  it  ii  only  men
incapable  of  amuaing  themaelTe*  by  lational  con-
vermtioD,  that  hare  recoune  lo  ituch  meana  of  en-
JBjmeot  (Fnlag.  p.  3^7,  c  d.,  Symp.  p.  176,  e.)  ;


SYMPOSIUM.


Sympoaia  of  yonng  man  for  another  porpoie,  and
vera  cAentimea  actually  ^alpoi  [Uitairai],
aa  we  Bee  dcoriy  repreaented  cm  many  ancient  vaaeL
(See  for  example  Jtraj.farIiaa.TaLT.  LSI.)  Re-
apecting  tha  diSaent  kinda  of  dancea  perfonned  at
Sympcaia^  aee  Saltatio.

Reiavaentaliona  of  Sympoaia  are  Tery  common
on  ancient  Taaa*.  Two  goeita  ninally  reclined  on-
each  amch  (jiAlni),  aa  it  eiphuned  on  p.  305,  and
illiutnUed  hy  the  following  cnt  from  ong  of  Sir  W.
Hamilton'!  Taaea,  where  the  ccnch  on  the  right
Iwo  penona,  and  that  en  tha  left  ii


bare  been  tha  nanil  practice.  The  gnett!  wear
garianda  of  flowara,  and  the  two  who  are  reclining
on  the  nme  coach  hold  a  fmbt)  each  in  die  right


Sometimaa  then  were  fonr  or  fire  penona  on
<me  ooncb,  a!  in  die  following  woodcut,  taken
from  HiUin  (PtuitHrt,  de  Vata  Aatiqait,  tdI.  \w
pi.  53).  Three  yonng  and  two  older  men  are  n-
clinmg  on  a  couch  {nMni),  with  their  left  anna
reeling  on  atriped  pillowi  {wpdna^dftOiu  or  bwry-
Kidnn).  BefoR  the  conch  are-  two  table*.  Threa
i^  the  men  are  holding  a  coUm  or  KJAif  taapended
by  one  of  the  handle*  to  the  fbre-finger,  (he  fourth
bolda  a  «uUi),  and  the  flfth  a  ^ii\^  in  one  hand
and  a  fvrir  in  the  other.  [Calix  i  Phula|
Rhtton.]  In  the  middle  Cmitet  ia  beaUiig  lb*
tympanum.


Dig,l,7.cby'GOOglC


10B4  STNDICDS.

.  lUipeetiiig  the  gvnea  and  unimimanta  Ii j  which
tlu  SjnptniA  wars  eoliienid.  it  ii  uiiaHnHn  to
nj  much  hen,  u  moil  of  ttiem  ats  detctibed  in
Kumte  articla  in  (hii  work.  Euigtui  i>r  liddla
(carl7fun'a  or  •nxpf)  •rera  wnm^  the  nuMt  unul
and  &Taiitita  mode*  of  diieninn.  [Ainioka.]
The  Cottabo)  wu  (Uo  inothu-  bTnnrita  gmm«  M
SyrapMw,  ud  wu  played  it  in  niioui  mn.
[CffiTXBoa]  The  olheiiomci  at  Syinpouk,  which
Rquira  meotiaii,  ere,  the  iirrfvytAiafiis  and  nfefn,
eiplained  under  TiLZuid  TisaiBia,  theiwrrtlo,
■paken  of  nndec  Latrunciili,  uid  the  x*^*")'^'-
The  latter  coniiited  in  tuminj;  nnnd  a  picc«  of
monej  pUead  npright  m  iU  edge*,  and  ouuing
it  Buddenly  to  itop  while  monng  hj  placing  a
finger  on  iu  lop.  (PoUur,  ii.  118  ;  EiiaUth.  ad
ILxir.29i,f.a86.)

A  dnnking'par^  among  the  Romaai  wat  aoTDe-
time*  called  OxnniM,  bat  the  wold  Camiaatio
more  neailj  conapondi  to  the  Greek  niiwivior.
[CoMiBBiTin.]  The  RDnwiu,  howertr,  nniallj
drank  daring  their  dinner  (daeaa),  which  they  be-
quenlljr  {folonged  during  many  houia  in  theJater
timea  of  th>  republic  and  imdnthe  empire.  Their
cutlonu  connecled  with  drinking  differed  little
from  thoee  of.  the  Oieeki,  and  hare  been  incident'
ally  noticed  aboTe,

The  prrcediag  accotmt  hai  been  mainly  com-
poeed  from  Becker*!  ClumUa  (toI.  i.  p.  4£l,  Ac)
and  Gi^Mi  (toL  IL  p.2SJS,  Ac),  whoe  the  mh-
ject  ti  treated  at  length.

SYNALLAOMA (iniKtUurrfu). [SiKBO-

SY'NDICUS  (<nMiui).  «  <>•ftm<>t^  i*  &e-
^uently  uted  as  »ynooymoui  with  the  woid  avrlt-
yvpot,  to  denote  any  one  who  pleadi  the  cauie  at
anoth{!r,  whether  in  a  court  of  juBtice  or  eliswhen.
2irriucfv  al»  ii  uied  indifferently  with  awipVfMtr
or  cvnrywICt'ftu-  (Andoc  ifa  M/d.  19,  ed.
gleph. ;  Demutb.  B.  Aritloer.  6S9,  e.  Znolk.  BSJ,
e.  &qA  1 127.)  Ttiui,  the  ttt  public  advocala,
who  wen  appointed  to  defend  the  ancient  lawi
before  the  Court  of  Heliaata,  when  an  emendmeni
or  a  new  Uw  in  abn^licn  thereof  wai  propnud,
an  called  both  aivSinoi  and  nrr^iipot.  A*  to
them,  no  NoWOTBBTxa  and  ales  Schjjnmnn,  dt
Oanil.  p.  2£5,  Aat.  Jur.  FM.  Gr.  p.  326.  The
name  of  eirSiiai  nemj  to  haie  been  peculiarly
applied  to  thoie  nrUon  who  wen  lent  by  the  ilate
to  plead  the  cwiae  of  their  counlrynien  befcm  a
foreign  tKbuniL  Aeichinca,  for  example,  wai  ap-
pointed to  plead  before  the  Amphictyonic  CDunnl
on  the  lubject  of  the  Delian  temple  ;  bat  a  certain
dlKoTSiy  baling  been  made  not  very  credilable  to
hit  patnolinn,  the  eonrt  of  Aniopg^  took  upon
thenKelre)  to  remove  him,  and  appomt  Hypende*
in  hit  (tead.  (Demotth.  dt  Coron.  371,  272.)
Then  eitiaardinaiy  adTocatei  are  not  to  be  eon-
fonnded  with  the  Pylagoiae,  or  ordinary  Am*
phictyonie  deputiei.  (Schiimaon,  da  Qnnlt.  p.  331,
Jul.  Jar.  PmU.  Or.  p.  357.)  There  were  other
cMiKot,  who  acted  rather  at  raagiitnlei  «  judgei
than  ai  advocatci,  though  they  probably  deriicd
their  name  &nm  the  ciRumatance  of  their  b«ng
appointed  to  protccl  the  intereeti  of  the  itate.
Theie  were  eitraordinary  fuDctionariea,  created
from  time  tc  time,  to  eTcrciie  a  juriadietion  in  di^

Stea  concerning  confitcated  property  j  aa  when,
'  initance,  ao  infonnation  waa  laid  againit  a  man
for  haling  in  hii  potaeaaion  the  goodi  of  a  con-
denmed  criminal,  or  which  ware  liuile  to  be  leiied


STNEOOBUS.

CD  behalf  of  the  itale  ;  tr  whw  iIh
gooda  of  a  contict  haring  been  eonfiacated,  a  chin
wu  made  by  a  mortgagee,  or  other  crediloc  having
a  lien  thercapun,  to  hare  bit  debt  lalia&ed  oat  ef
the  proceed*.  Such  a  claim  wst  ailed  ^mlo-aiyifia,
and  to  proaecnte  it  lrtl^alHr^laat%u.  (Harpoc  and
Snidaa,  :  e.)  On  thii  aaltject  the  nader  it  refinHl
to  the  nechea  of  Lyna*  dM  I1M.  Pecam^  dtKie.
Fralr.  Ptam^  da  JrUtpIL  i'laoH',  and  mot*  eape-
ciaUypp.  U9, 151,  IS^  ed.  Steph.  The  EiU  ap-
pointment of  theae  judicial  tfili'tiiiM  look  pl>Be  ofta
the  expolaign  of  (he  ihir^  trianla ;  a>d  eaM  of  their
dutiet  appma  to  hare  bean  to  lecuTa  inlanBatkia
from  the  ffoapx"  agabiM  thota  poMaa  wba  had
aerrad  in  the  canlr;  during  the  intaregDmn,  aod
who  by  a  ipecial  deoree  of  ue  people  wera  ordovd
to  reatcre  ta  the  treamy  all  the  pay  which  they
had  receiTed  (at  that  aerrice.  (Lyaiaa,  ym  .Uuia-
tilk.  146,  ed.  8teph.)  See  SvHiooBUi :  Uarpac
(.  e.  3MwM :  Meier,  AU.  Pne.  pL  110  ;  ScU-
mann,d*Cbin(.p.316.  [C.  B.  K.]

SYNEDRI  ((rJntpMX  a  lame  gina  to  the
memben  of  any  eoondl,  ot  an;  body  <t  mea  vbo
■U  together  to  eoDinll  or  delibefaU.  Tha  coBgna
of  Oweka  at  Sahmaia  called  giwJViar.  (BonL
TiiL  TS,  79.)  FreqiMDt  rtfartDcs  ia  nad*  to  the
geoeial  aaembly  of  tha  Oreehi,  rt  mai^  n»
^AAliMw  nrOffr,  at  Corinth,  TbcntemW,  or
eliewbere.  (Atach.  o.  Oa^  62,  ed.  Suph.;
Deniotth.n*plnir>pb>AA4»t^,315.)  Wboi
the  new  alliance  of  the  Atheniaiu  waa  famed  after
a.  c  S77,  npon  biier  and  nxtfe  eqoitablo  prindplei
than  the  fonwr,  the  aereial  alalea  who  wen  in-
cluded therein  wen  eiprcttly  declared  to  be  inde-
pendent, and  a  eoogreta  wat  held  at  Athene  to
which  each  of  the  allied  R


The  congrett  wai  ailed  ovrHpior,  and  the  doa-
tiet  einSfei,  and  the  aunu  fnmiihed  by  tBe  altte*
ovrriiftii,  in  order  to  BToid  the  old  and  balaAil
nameDf«ilpoiartribata,(Haipocnt.i.D.;  PloLJliL
1 5.)  hbny  ollnuona  to  thii  itew  league  ate  nade
by  the  UBton,  eapedally  lioetatea,  who  ctn^ily
urgea  hia  coonlrymen  to  adhere  ta  llw  priociple  on
which  the  league  wat  (emed,  and  TOMonca  all
attempt  (o  re-eaiablith  their  old  aapnaacy.  (£■>
Fof.  165.  ed.  Steph.)  Perhapa  tha  wirOfn  mta-
tioned  in  the  oath  <^  the  AunvTol  am  the  \  ibi  iijaii
memben  of  Ihii  coi^na.  (Scblimann,  AM.  Pm.
130.)  For  further  information  en  the  tabjeet  of
thia  confederacy,  aee  Schtiniaiin,jlBf.>^Br.i>iiU.  Gr.
p.  434  ;  -Biii^\  P*U.  Earn.  <f  Admi,  p.418.2d
ed. ;  Tbirlwall,  HiM.  ifGnm,  toL  t.  pp.  42, 203:

The  naDM  idrvrtSptat  waa  giTta  at  Athena  to
any  magitterial  or  official  body,  ai  to  the  eoort  of
Aretopagua  (Aeach.  e.  Ttmartk.  IS  ;  Dinarth.  e.
Damulk.  91,  ed.  Staph.)  j  w  to  the  place  when
they  tianaacted  buiineea,  their  board  or  oHtbcit-
rsom.  (Iaocrat.n^'An<UrMH,31S,ed.Sti>h.i
Demoath.  c  Tfcoer.  1334.)  [C  I^  K.]

SYNEOCRICON '  '  ' "

ja.]


eompnhenaiie meaning than  the Greek word
ttrietty  heart.

According  to  tht  andcnt  practice  of  the  Athan
law,  [ortiea  tear -  -'--  »'■ ■ -  ' -


OppOD


^loainpeta
To  anuDJt  ■


S;


frwod  befbn  briDging  M  aEtioa,  u  tbout  th<
Dwam  at  pniiuuig  a  ddcme,  «nn  sbriHU  eip*-
dirati.  It  wu  but  aiutlMr  alep  to  LtTe  &  ipaBeh
preinnd  bj  nch  friead  ont  of  cmiit,  to  ba  dalircnd
bf  the  pac^  Unudf  when  tha  caoM  wii  bnnght
to  DiaL  A  daM  of  pcnani  (Im  iptaag  op,  mDe-
whu  in  tho  ntara  of  ctuunbn  comiael,  wbo  te-
ceiTed  moDC^  for  writbg  fpeadm  and  giiing  tagal
■d-rioi  to  thow  who  caiaaltad  tiwm.  Of  Ibia  chn
AntipbcB  na  tho  firat  wbo  acqiiind
Ljiiai,  IiKiu,  and  Iwoatn  obtaiiwc
incomea  bj  ■pecch-writing.  DcmonheiiM  foUowea
tbs  lamg  pnifHiion  ior  womt  tima,niitilliiiengaae-
mcDti  in  public  buuncs  foncd  him  to  nlinqauh
it.  (Dcm.  e.  ZtrnA.  BSD.)  Tbeae  penoDi  wcra
called  not  rvf^TvpM,  but  tJtyrffi^i,  a  naina  ap-
plied to  DemonkeoM  i«|aoachfitU]'  bj  hii  riial,
who  accnaea  him  alao  of  betraying  hii  dimti  by
abowing  the  •pc«hei  which  he  bad  written  to  the
ndTenaiT.  (Acaeh.  B.  Ompk.  78,  e.  Tanarck.  IS,
ed.  SUph.)  [LooooB^iruL)  SlDl,  wbaleTer  aa-
aiataoce  the  party  might  hare  receiTed  out  of
court,  the  law  *hkh  eompclled  him  to  wiear  in
peraon  at  the  trial,  remained  in  force  ;  uthoogh
the  prohibitien  to  tpeak  by  couniel  waa  lo  Iki  n-
Uied,  thu  if  Che  party  waa  labonring  nnda  ilfawM,
or  tbimgh  any  pbyaiad  or  mental  debility  iraa  tm-
■ble  to  eondoot  bia  own  canao  vitlumt  mauifaM
di^ulTBntagB,  be  might  (by  peimiuion  of  the  court)
pnciue  a  tetitign  ot  tnoid  la  ap«ak  for  him.
Tbua,  when  Hiliiadei  waa  impeached  foe  trauon,
and  by  na»n  of  a  gangtena  b  hie  hip  waa  umbte
to  ploid  hit  own  taoae,  he  waa  brooght  on  a  litter
into  eoort,  and  bia  bradMr  Tiaagoiaa  addnaed  the
people  on  hia  behalf  So,  whan  laocnlaa  waa  ill,
hii  ■«  Apbantna  ipoke  for  him  m  the  canae  abcot
the  irrllaaii.  And  in  the  apeecb  of  Demoitfaenea
againat  LMicbaiea  va  aee  (p.  1081)  that  tho  urn
condacta  bn  father^  canae^  Aa  a  gsieial  mle,  the
party  waa  expected  to  addreaa  the  court  hiniaalf ;
for  tbe  jndgea  liked  to  form  an  opinion  of  him
fnan  hia  Toice,  look,  and  demtaooar  i  and  therabre
if  a  man  dtttniated  hia  own  ability,  he  would  open
the  caae  himaelf  by  a  abort  ipeeih,  and  then  aik
penniauon  for  hia  friend  to  come  forward.  (De-
moath.  e.  PAorn.  932.  a.  Near.  IS49.)  Thia  waa
■iddom  lefiued  ;  and  in  the  time  of  the  oratora  tbe
IHBctice  waa  ao  well  eetabliabed,  that  the  principal
■peechea  in  the  caaaa  wen  not  mitreqnently  made
1^  the  advocate.  The  deiencea  by  DemoatheiMa
of  Ctfaiphco  againat  Aeichinea,  utd  of  Phanna
■gaioat  Aphobna,  may  be  cited  aa  eiamplea.  In
both  of  llieae  it  will  be  Been  that  Demoatfaenea
waa  ■■  mneh  interaated  aa  the  defendanta  tfaem-
aelrea  ;  and  it  ia  ftirther  to  be  obaerred,  that  the
adTooto  wBi  looked  npon  with  more  fBTHU  on  thia
0  f^  wen  atloffed


a  waa  i^atded  with  n


e  iiar  ondartaking
of  another  peraon.  Henoe  we  £nd  in  mi
ssniyapical  A^Toi,  that  the  ipeiker  arowa  what
hia  motiiea  are ;  aa  fte  inatance,  that  be  ia  con-
nected by  blood  or  ftiendahip  with  tbe  one  (ai^,
or  at  ennuty  with  the  other,  or  that  ha  haa  a  (take
in  the  matter  at  iaane  between  them.  (See  the
opening  of  the  apeecbea  of  laaeua,  dt  Niecd.  ier.
and  (fa  Fkilael.  ier.  ;  booatea  e.  fWtya.  and  De-
BHWlh<a(a  e.  AndnL)  In  the  canaa  againit  Lco-
K^ita  aboTc  cited  it  i*  aridsit  tint  the  wn  lad


8TNSOOBU9L  1085

[  an  eqnal  btateat  with  hia  &ther  in  puianiug  ths
inheritance,  and  therefore  he  woold  be  conaidared
in  the  light  ot  a  party.  The  law  wbich  pn><
hibited  the  adTD^Oe  &can  taking  feea,  under  peril
of  a  71M>^  before  the  Theamotbetae  (Demoalb.
.*,Stfi.  llS7>,madenopreTiaiai(aDdpeiliapait
waa  impoaaihia  to  make  an  effectire  pminon)
Mainat  an  infltuBca  ef  a  more  pemicioaa  kind,  rib
Ikat  of  political  aiaociatian,  whidi  induced  men  to
nppcrt  tbe  mambera  of  their  dab  or  par^  without
the  leaat  regard  for  the  right  Of  joatioe  of  the  caae.
Hence  the  freqnent  aUnaHU  bj  the  oiatoia  to  tba
^TOorApta  imn^aiTar,  /laxiiiAr  ittf^nmr  imr-
amyajrifr,  rapatfinwU  X^yaw,  liofripm'f  mru-
lurrSm,  all  which  eipreaaiona  bave  releience  to  that
ayatem  of  confedentioo  at  Athena,  by  which  indi-
TiduaU  endntTDORd  to  inflnence  and  control  the
conrta  ot  jnalice.  (See  £rini  t  SvcorSjtNTxa  ;
Reiake,  ladn  e>  Orat.  Alt.  a.  v.  '^Ton-jpur  and
-npamttir^.)  That  frienda  wete  often  reqneated  to
plead,  not  on  account  of  any  intapad^  id  the
parW,  but  in  order  that  by  thrir  {seaence  they
might  exert  an  inftoence  on  the  bench,  ia  evident
irma  an  attontiTe  pernaal  of  tbe  oratora.  In  lome
caaea  thii  might  be  a  perfecllj  legitimaU  eonne,  aa
where  a  deAmdaat  charged  with  iome  aetiona  (rime
called  a  man  of  high  lepatation  to  apeak  in  bia  be-
half and  pledge  hnuelt  tbent^  that  he  beliend
tbe  charge  waa  gronndlMa.  With  auch  view  A«a-
chinea,  on  hi)  mal  for  miacoudncl  in  tbe  embaaay,
fnayed  the  aid  of  Eubulna  and  Phocion,  the  latter
of  whom  be  bad  proTiooaly  called  aa  a  witncaa.
(Aeach.  <£(  J^iZa.  L^.  SI,  62,  ed.  St^h.)

On  criminal  triala  tbe  practice  with  reapect  to
adTHBtea  waa  nmch  the  aame  aa  in  drii  ac^ooa ;
only  that  it  aeeroa  to  have  been  more  conunon  to
have  aereral  apeakera  on  the  part  ot  the  pnwecn-
tion  ;  and  in  cauaea  of  importance,  wherein  the
itato  waa  materially  intareated,  moR  eapedally  in
thou  which  were  bfongbt  before  the  court  upon  an
linrfytWit,  it  waa  unal  to  appoint  pnblic  advo-
catea  (called  nwtTopoi,  rMuat,  at  nwrlr/tfoi)  to
manage  the  proaacntion.  Thna,  Poidea  waa  ap-
pnnled,  not  at  hia  own  detire,  to  aiaiat  in  the  im-
peachment of  Oman.  {f\a1.  Ptrid.  10.)  Public
ptoaecntota  woe  cboaen  by  the  people  to  bring  to


.  AriitogitoD,  and  other*  chaived
with  having  nceived  bribea  &iim  Harpalna.  (Di-
naich.  e.  Otmotk.  SO,  96,  ed.  Steph.)  In  ordinary
caaea  however  the  accnaer  or  proaecntor  (i«crth»(wi)
waa  a  diadnct  penou  from  the  evrftyepet,  who  acU
ed  uily  aa  aiuiliai7  to  him. It  might  be,  indeed.


part  at  the  trial,  aa  Anytoa  and  Ljoon  an  aa

t —  1 1_  ^_.  ..o 'creinMi

hapetfonned


,  .  naking  oi^  a  ahat  meeeh  ia
anpport  of  the  pfoaecntioD,  Uke  iboae  of  Lyaiaa
a^mat  Epieiatea,  Ergodea,  and  Philooatoi,  which
are  called  irikcrrti.  Bat  howercr  thie  might  be,
be  waa  in  point  of  law  an  aoiiliat?  only,  ud  waa
neither  entitled  to  a  abare  of  the  reward  (if  any)
given  t^  the  law  to  a  aacceaafiil  aecnaer,  nor  liable,
on  the  other  hand,  to  a  penalty  of  a  thonnnd
drachma,  or  the  ^i#fcia  anueqoent  npcm  a  flulnre
to  get  a  fifth  part  of  the  nlea.  Here  we  mnat  dla-
tingaiah  between  an  advocate  and  a  Joint  proaecn-
Mr.  The  latter  itood  prectaely  in  the  aame  aitns-
tioQ  ai  hia  collogue,  jnit  aa  a  co-plaintiff  in  a  civil
action.  The  namea  of  both  would  appear  m  the
bill  (fjnAqru),  both  woold  attend  tlw  iMbptna


md  Tgbld  in  ibort  bsT*  the  Mine  rigbtt  >iid  liabi-
litkt ;  llw  dder  ottha  (wo  only  baTing  priority  in
eettain  natlcn  of  fimd,  nch  u  the  rpirroAayia.
(Anum.  Or.  Dtm.  t.  Andrtt.  A93.)  In  the  pn-
oeeuDg  igBuut  the  lav  of  Leptine*  then  woe  two
pnaacatoi,  Aphcpnon  md  Ctent^nu  ths  Mm  of
Chabriu  i  Moh  addiMMd  tho  cooit,  Aphepdoa
fint,  a  being  the  tUer  ;  each  hid  Ui  adiotfU,
tiia  <ne  Phomio,  the  other  DemeMhoDe*,  who  telli
Bi  in  the  eienUaDi  that  be  had  nndenaken  to
neek,  pert];  from  a  coBTictian  of  ttw  uiinlicj  of
tta  kw,  end  paitlj  to  oUiga  the  khi  of  Chefanai,
who  woDld  hale  been  deprircd  of  certain  pririleget
inherited  from  hii  &(her,  if  the  law  had  taken  ef'
fact.  (See  Argnm.  Ui.)
■  Thue  Menu  to  haTa  been  no  la*  which  Ihniled
the  nmnber  of  penoni  who  might  appear  ai  advo-
cates, oither  in  public  or  private  ovuci.  Then
w«  howern  thu  ptactial  limitation,  that  ■«  tho
tODB  allowed  for  apeakii^  to  eithfs  per^  wai  tdc&-
•uwl  bjr  the  depaTdfB,  if  nther  ehofo  to  em-
plo;  ■  fciend  la  ^eak  for  him,  he  iDbtncted  lo
much  team  the  leostli  of  hii  own  ipeech  aa  he
meant  to  leave  tot  that  of  hii  friend,  and  the  whole
time  allowed  «aa  {EeciKl;  the  aBme,  whatever  the
Biimbat  of  pmaaoa  who  ipoke  on  one  aide.  Both
pactiea  vera  oaaallj  allowed  to  make  two  tpeechea,
the  plaiDtiff  beoinninfc  the  deliuidaiit  fcJlowing,
then  the  plaintiff  rapljiog,  and  katl;  the  dafeodant
again.  Tbaae  ace  often  called  Xi^w  wp^repM  and
tmtfM  itapaetivcly,  bat  an  not  to  ba  omfounded
wilhthe  mmiTapiai  or  ((vr(^a\ir)jai,irtuch  might,
and  oauallr  did,  immadiatclj  follow  the  apoau  of
Ae  par^  in  whoae  Givoar  ibe;  wore  madt^  though
aiamatter  sf  anragement  it  might  be  eonvMoent
•mnetiinca  to  raaarva  the  apeoeh  dtha  advocate  Icr
the  replj,  in  whioh  caaa  tin  avwirytfiiAt  Xirym  and
the0^ep«t\J7aiwinldb«tbeaaiae.  (SebOnnim,
AO.  Proe.  pp.  707—712,  71J1 ;  Platner.i'mt  md
Xlna.  voL  L  p.  91.)

With  nepeet  to  the  eoBtoni  of  producing  frienda
to  apeak  in  mitigation  of  damasea  or  pimithacnt,
aee  Timika.  Ai  to  the  paUic  advoeatea  tq>-
pointed  to  defend  the  old  lawa  befora  the  Coart  of
Heliaata,  aaa  Stndicub,  NoHorBaraa.

The  fea  of  a  drachm  (rb  irvnr/opijiifr)  noitioiied
b;  AriatopbaiKa  (Fupos,  S91)  wai  pmbabl;  tha
■am  pud  to  the  public  adrocata  whenever  he  waa
omployed  on  bebalF  of  the  itate.  It  baa  bea
clearly  by  Sebftjiann,  that  Petit  waa  wrong


in  auppoainj,
•poke  in  tha  aiaembly  are  called  avw^jopei.  They
an  alwayi  diatinsuidied  by  the  title  Of  ^4rap«  or
tmtffytpti,  or  if  ihqr  poaieamd  mnch  influeoca  with
tho  paopla^  tiiMIWYoI:  and  it  ia  not  to  ba  nt|^
poatd  that  thar  eanatitatad  ■  diatioet  daaa  of
ptraont,  inannnch  as  any  Athmiao  dliEen  waa  at
liban-  W  address  the  iMembly  when  be  pleased  ;
thoogb,  as  it  waa  foand  ia  praatia  that  the  poeee»-
^on  of  the  ^fia  wie  confined  to  a  few  pcraona  who
were  beat  fitted  for  it  by  their  talent  and  elperi-
ence,  eaeb  peraons  acquired  ths  title  of  ^^opfr,  &&
(Da  Comit.  pp.  107—109,  210.)  There  fffn
however  ta  hare  been  (at  kaat  at  oaw  penod)  a
tegnlar  appointment  of  aurfrfp't,  tan  in  munboT,
with  whom  the  Sclwliait  on  Ariataphanea  (£.  e.)
cmianndad  tha  ^tft  or  ontora.  For  what  par-
poaa  nch  tan  nririff'  wen  appointed,  ii  a  matter
sbont  which  w*  have  no  cartain  ioibrmation.  Some
think  Ih^  wan  elEcaR  connected  with  the  boerd


STiniRAFHK
Aiiilotla  (PhBLyi.S)  mp  the
mngiitnuei  rendared  thtir  aeeainia  wne  called  in
some  of  theOreckaWaeMviusinothcnAaTarr^
in  othats  inu4f<V"  "  '{"'■"^t  ■■■d  tbe  asthcr
of  the  Leiicon  Rhatoricmn,  paUiahed  by  BAktr
[Aimed.  L  801),  aays  that  the  Syncgeri  were
6fX9""  iiXvpirrel  d1  Maifimir  tou  tuyirrmt
r^t  tIli  titiwai.  Bnt  what  »rl  of  ^iitanoe  did
they  render  ?  Is  it  not  probable  that  tk^  fa-
fbrmed  the  dn^  which  their  name  impivta^  vis,
that  nf  pmemtnig  mch  magiiQatea  ai,  m  the  api-


■Minn  A  maciiliBte  when  the

ig  hia  aaount  had  arrived  ; but  ll

cation ^  a  iru'4T*p>t  would  b« an a _

fnceediig,  soeh  aa  tho  Logiatae  were  boond  to

matiCnto,  if  they  had  any  rcaaon  to  lUipcct  the

If  this  conjrctim  bo  well-.fDiBded,  it  ii
■onable  to  nppiaa  that  these  ten  n>r . .  .
no  other  than  the  pnUic  advocates  who  wen

aiiyed  to  ccndnct  smCe  |wosFcn(ion  of  a  diflmst
□d.  The;  might  be  ^pointed  annnallj,  cither
by  lot  or  by  eleetioB  (according  to  Harpoauiai,
(.  K  aw^Yofvi).  Their  duties  wodd  be  uoly
oeODonal,  and  they  would  receive  a  dndsa  as
their  fee  whenever  th^  wse  employed.  BUckh^
ccajoctnre,  that  they  received  a  diachm  a  day  Aw
eveiy  day  of  bmincaa,  a  withoaC  mndi  famidB-
don.  [CR.S.]

aVNOENEIA  (<ivr>^i<<). [HBaBB,p.&95,

8YN0RAPHE  (rwn7»f4),iignifieiawiittea
contract ;  whereaa  ovr^^jri)  and  ffy^d^aiaw  do  aot
DBceaiarily  import  that  tlie  cootmet  ii  in  writing ;
and  iiict^eyia  ia,  strictly  apcaking,  a  verbal  igire-
ment.  Pollux  exriaina  tbo  word,  eaet^M  ^Y-
ypn^or,  ifiMayla  fyTpafei  (viii.  140),

At  Athou  inportaot  ontnets  were  nsnallv  re-
duced (o  writing  g  tnch  ai  leaiea  (furtirta),  iimim
of  money,  and  all  exaeshny  agreemeBlB,  lAere  cer-
tain cocditiona  were  to  be  pnfeimed.  The  rent,
the  inte  of  interat,  with  odwr  ccndiiiona,  and  abii
the  pfoalties  fbi  breo^  of  contract  ( Jvirif  ri  At
TfiffVTTpii^')  werepkrticularly  moiiiuted.  Ths
munea  of  the  witnoae*  and  tht  inretiea  (if  aay)
were  specified.  The  whole  was  ccalaiDad  ia  >
little  taUstofwu  or  wood  (A*%Jar  or  TWWwr,
■ometinea  doable,  Itwrvx'r),  whidi  wm  andtd,
and  deposited  with  ecme  tbird  persoB,  laalaaUy
aqieed  on  betwesi  tha  parlie*.  (Iseoic.  TV^ct.
363,  ed.  Sleph. )  Demoa  c  Jp^  983,  XM,  a.
Dionym/d.  128i.)  An  ennqJe  cf  a  coMnct  im  a
boKcanry  loon  (rwrnc^  owiTffj)  will  be  fsoad
in  Demofth.  e.  LatrU.  KS,  when  tha  to^  lie
carefully  drawn  np,  and  then  ■  a  dadanlan  at
the  end,  avpairapor  U  wifl  nimr  iAAt  ^^ttr
•liw  rjt  wfiP^h  "  which  agfniaaM  stall  ba
validv  anjtfamg  la  the  cennary  BotwitbataBdng."

Anything  might  (ana  the  tal^iect  ef  ■  wiiiua
omtract  —  n  rrlfatr  (fl^nrir),  i  aitlliMinl  \t  di»
ptttn  (lidAuffir),  the  giring  up  of  >  alava  to  ba  ti-
■mined  by  torture,  or  any  oths  accepted  ihalbus
(irpdiiXi|»u)  J  in  short,  any  vaxax  wbctea  tha
contracting  |Brtica  thooghl  jt  tafer  to  have  dacn-
mentary  endmica  of  tha  tcnaa*  "£<  '  '  '
tflorra  nTi  OTrny^n  is,  to  give  an
the  making  of  a  itatoe  of  ccrtaiD  "


t. (Otm^rf


sVnoikia.

^Uticohr  fan  of  wurda  wn  ntattarj  to  makg  th«
mitrument  tmlid  in  point  of  1ii«,  iba  nl<  obJKt
being  to  fumiib  good  etidenea  of  the  [wtieB'  in-
loition.  Tba  igreemmt  itMlf  «u  nlid  wilhoal
KOj  vriting  ;  sad  would  fonii  the  gnand  of  an  ic-
tion  (gwiut  die  party  vbo  broke  it,  if  it  could  be
(offidaillj  proTcd.  Hence  it  wn  the  piactin  to
bmre  witnow*  to  >  pinJ  mEiefloenL  The  l*w  d*-
clind  mflat  tlrai  riit  *|)it  iM^Aoiri  6/ia\oy(ai,
Bu  h*  irarriui  iia^rtfuii  verfmrrai.  (Demottb.  e.
Piaadi^  1042,0. 2h«v.MilfH,  1163,  c  Dimf.
l2S3,<i.0Hfer.e«9.)  IlteemttbUfnlfwrnuii-
tenuMg  of  ui  ^nfuA  Nxi  it  wu  Btwiwar  to  )>*Te
K  written  ODumcL (DenMHh.  e.  ZanA.  88Z)

fiuiksn  wen  penoni  of  •xtendni  ctedi^  ud
hid  peculiu  confidenca  repo«d  in  ibem.  Thej
were  often  choKn  u  the  depontuiee  of  igne-
menta  and  othn  docrunmt*.  Hon^  wu  pot  into
their  band)  without  inj  acbiowfednMnt,  and
often  without  wiCnesKL  They  entcnd  th«M  and
hIb  the  l«ni  made  b;  themulTCi  to  othen  in
their  boohi,  mekinr  memorandii  (An/ir^/wra)  of
any  inpotlmt  particniut.  Such  entrin  wen  tB-
gnrded  u  itjong  oTidenca  ia  courts  of  jii»ticB>
Sontiei  wne  oimll  j  required  by  them  on  raakinf
louB.  (Iioa.  Trr^a.  SG9,  od.  Strph. ;  Denioith.
c  AfOL  S9t,  fn  Ptorm.  960,  9£S,  e.  Hmod.
II8S,  c.  Plarm.  903,;  i6Ah,  FiM.  Eeoa.  rf
^£l«u,p.lS8,  2ded.)

SvyT^aft  dcoota  an  iutrament  (iiDed  by  both
or  all  the  eraitncting  parties Xtifiyfti^  ii  a

reacknowkdgnwntbjoiwpBrty,  ivyypHaatw
*  itf^jcilr  it  to  dnw  Dp  the  eoDlncl,

t]  it,  dnupiiV  to  canoe),  IhAMoi
it  up  from  the  pemm  with  whom  it  wai
depoailcd,  for  the  paipoaa  of  taocelling',  when  it
wu  no  loR^pv  of  any  nu.  Twnlitir,  to  break
the  HSi  eluideiticely  for  WDM  bondulent  pnipoae,
>■  to  alter  the  leinu  of  tba  initimncnt,  or  enwe  or
deatiDf  loDia  mateiial  part,  or  CTea  tbo  wholes
thereof  {jtrTvni^iraita^lfnw).  [Stmbo-
tAION.]  [C.R.K.]

SYNOI'EIA  (nmliCB  or  nrrowfoia},  ■  fee-
tiTal  celebnted  erery  year  at  Athein  on  the  I  Sth
of  Heeuonbaeon  in  hononi  of  Athena.  It  «»
beliered  to  bate  been  inilitnted  by  Theaeni  to
conmiemaTate  the  aoncentiation  of  the  gDvemmntl
of  the  Tarioo)  lowni  pf  Attics  and  Atbmt.
(Tbocyd.  iii  15  ;  Slepli.  Bji.  «.  v.  "AW"".)
AecDiding  to  the  Scholiail  on  Aiittophanes  (.Pax,
9E2)  an  nnbloodj  BOifics  waa  on  tbia  day  odered
to  the  ffoddeo  ofpMce  (tiftirri).  Thii  fntiTsl,
which  Plntnh  (Thea.  24)  catli  fitralKia,  ig  men-
tioned  both  by  him  and  by  Thncydidea  ai  itiU  held
in  their  dayi.  (Compare  Hays',  d»  Boh.  daimat.
B.  120.)  [L.  a.]

SYNOI'EIA  (avroicCa)  AiSetM  bma  »I»ri  in
tbii :  thai  the  latter  ia  a  dweHing-houae  for  a
lingle  family :  the  fonntr  adapted  to  holdaaToial
familiea,  a  lodging-hoUK,  intmla,  aa  the  Romaiia
would  lay.  The  diatinctim  ia  thoa  eipreaaad  by
Aeachina  (e.  TmarA  17,  ed.  Steph.):  twoo /lir
yiip  voAAot  /utf0«aY^unvi  /dap  dUcifViy  BifX^fumj
fxovtn,  ffwoucW  KdAntfier,  iwtv  ST  tfj  ^vouni^

Then  wu  a  fieat  deal  of  apecnlation  in  the
bnilding  and  tatting  of  home*  at  Athena.  <Xa-
Dopb.  OacsK.  HL  1.)  The  lodging-honiea  were  let
iQoiBtlj  to  foreignera  who  ^one  to  Atheni  on  bnai^
BeM,  and  eapecially  to  the  utrQiicv,  whom  tba  law
Ad  Bol  allow  to  Mqolre  red  pfopefty,  lad  who


STNTHESIS.  1087

tharafm  oould  not  pnrcbaia  hooaei  bf  their  ovii.
(DemoatlLpni  Pharm,  946.)  Ai  they,  with  tbeit
hmiliea,  finmed  a  population  of  about  46,000,  tbo
number  of  nnviKfai  nntt  haia  been  coniiderable.
Paiion,  the  biuiker,  had  a  kdging-hcaue  rained  at
100  minaa.  Xenophon  reconuntoided  that  tha
Ittraaat  ahonld  be  eaommged  to  inveat  their
money  in  honaea,  and  that  leave  ahonld  ba  granted
to  the  moat  reapectable  to  build  and  beeona  booae-
pRipriaton  ioutiioiaittqiinHS  ^■urrqirAu,  de
VitUg.  ii.  6.)  The  inraAaii  iaboimd  tmder  M
aucii  diMbili^ ;  liii  Lyaiaa  and  hit  brolbei  fole-


rbei


ban  TBiiad  ■""■'"^  la  the  aiie,  tba  Inuld,  ths

TalwUat^n  Iboaa  in
or  tba  coontry,  owlarit  paHtsa.  Two  aanntiBg*
hogaea  are  iDeDtioDed  by  laaana  (dt  Htym.  htr.
SS,  ed.  Stepb.)  la  yialding  a  retora  of  rattier  agon
than  0}  per  caL  intareat  on  the  pnrchaae  moaay.
Bnt  thii  pmbahlj  waa  mnch  hdow  the  areiaM,
The  dmunei  huoh  waa  tbe  tmirt  profiuble  fix
the  letting  of  iuraao,  when  nenbaala  and  otber
TiaitDTB  flocked  to  Athena.  The  rent  wat  eom-
mcnly  paid  by  the  moaitli,  Lodging-hooaa  vera
frequently  taken  on  apecnlation  by  peiaona  called
mimXiifoi  or  arat^iauxw,  who  made  «,  profit  by
nnderietling  tbam,  and  aomotimea  for  not  TOy
reputable  pnipoaaa.  (Inena,  da  PMtoct  her.  M,
ai  Staph.)  Ha^diasazplainalbfwoldmiiiAv-
fat,  i  fDHHcfai  tftmit :  leo  alac  Hupooation,
a.fi.  Soma  dnire  the  word  fron  rola  :  tnit  it  ia
noT*  piubaUe  thM  il  waa  giTcn  «a  a  nrt  of  nick-
name to  the  claai,  when  they  Slat  qrang  op,  (Saa
Stephan.  Tkanr.  6608  ;  Reiake,  ImUm  n  Or.
AtLt-ti.  atvoucJa  :  Bttckh,  FtU.  Earn.  qfAOof,
pp.  66,  141,  2d  ed.)  [CR.K.]

SYNTAGMA  (,aimr/itay. iExatcnvt,  f.
488,  a.]
SYNTAXBIS  (nnrdfaif). [Svhbdil}
8YNTELE1A  (rantoaui). [TwaKABCHU.]
SYNTHE'CE{n*«l«.r). [Svmbolaton.]
SyNTHESIS,  a  gannani  frequently  worn  at

il  waa  inconrament  to  wear  the  tona  at  table  on
account  (d  ita-many  Iblda,  it  waa  enttamary  to  hare
dnuei  etpadally  appropriated  to  tbii  purpoee,
called  vaUt  mmatori^,oi  (wxitona  (MarLx.  B7.
13,  xn.  tS6  i  Pelr.  31),  acr^Hloria  (Pelr.  80),  or
Synaetn.  The  Syntheaia  ia  comniiHily  explained
to  be  a  loeae  kind  of  robe,  like  the  Pallium ;  but
Beekec  (GoIImm,  toL  L  p.  37)  anppoaea  faun  a  coni-
pariion  of  a  puaage  of  Dim  Caaalaa  (liiiL  13)
withoneofSoet  '  '"  *"  '  ■.-..,.
of  Nem.  that  it
ndummtHm  rather  than  an  amietmt.  [Amcrua.]
That  it  waa,  howcTer,  an  may  and  comfortable  kind
of  draa,  at  we  ahonld  aay,  aeenu  to  be  evident
fiMn  ita  nae  at  tabte  aboTv  mentioned,  and  atao
from  ita  being  wmi  by  all  cbuMi  at  the  Satiw-
NALU,  a  aeaion  of  unireraal  relaxation  and  enjoy-
ment. (MartiiT.  1,  141,  ii.  24.)  More  than
thia  reapecting  ita  fona  wa  cannot  ny :  it  waa
naually  dyed  with  nme  colmr  (Mart  ii.  4(^  i.
29),  u)d  wat  not  white  like  the  iapL

The  wnrd  Syntheaia  ia  atao  aji^ied  to  a  tat  af
wearing  apparel  ora  craipleta  wardrobe.  (Dig.  34,
tit  3.  a  SB.)  Thia  nae  of  the  wotd  ^^reea  betUr
'*  'ta  etymology  {aMfva,  mrrrlfiifu)  than  ttw
-' idabara.  (Bedca^io.)


loss  SYRINX.

SYRINX  (iripiyt),  iha  Pan'i  Pipe,  or  Pindeui
Pipe,  wa«  the  appropriate  muiical  initniineni  of
tbe  Aiaiita  and  other  Onciui  ahepherdi,  and  wu
leguded  bf  them  u  the  iaieDtion  of  Pan,  their


;  Loi^m,  i-


s  lieaxd  playing  Dpdo
Theaciit.i.  S.  14,  16;  SchaL
27),  u  the;  imigined,  on  moiui
TiiL  36.  %  £.)  It  w«  of  coune  altribuud  to  Fau-
noi,  who  wu  the  nine  with  Pun.  {Hor.aini.L
17.  10.)  Wheu  the  Romas  poeti  had  ocouion  to
mention  it,  they  called  itjWWa  (Virg.  Bac  ii.  36,
iii  32,  2S  i  Hot.  Carm.  ir.  12.  10  ;  Orid.  Met
TiiL  192,  xiii.  784  ;  Mart.  li*.  63  ;  TibuU.  L  5.
20.)  It  mu  alio  varioiuly  daiominated  aoconliiig
to  ihe  mateiiali  of  vtuch  it  waa  coiutrneted,
whether  of  ome  (tawn  arwJiiM,  V'ag.  Bac  ri.  8  ;
Horn. //yMa.iai'aiu.IGiiriHfunylgnUi,  Branch,
AnaL  i  4S9),  ned  (cabmo.  Tag.  Bae.  L  10,  ii.
S4,  T.  3  ;  KiUa^T,  Thracrit.  TiiL  34  ;  Longni,
i.  4),  or  hemlock  (cwwM,  Virg.  Ban.  r.  e£).  In
gen«al  leTeii  hollow  itema  of  theia  planU  wen
filled  together  h;  mcaiu  of  wax,  haTii^  been  pre-
Tiomlj  cnt  to  tbe  proper  lengtfai,  and  vljnited  so
ai  to  fonn  an  octaie  (Virg.  Buc.  ii.  S2,  36);  but
aometimei  nine  were  admitted,  giving  ui  equal
number  of  notefc  (Theflcrit.  Tiii.  1 8— 23.)  Another
refinement  in  the  conilmctjon  of  tliii  inatnuneni,
which,  faoireTer,  waa  rarely  practiied,  wu  to  ar-
range the  pipei  in  a  curre  lo  ai  to  fit  the  form  of
the  lip,  inaUad  of  amnging  them  in  »  plane.
(TheocriL  i.  129.)  A  Byrini  of  eight  reedi  ii
ahown  in  tbe  gam  figured  on  paige  646.  The  an-
nexed woodcut  ii  tiiken  &iHn  a  bu-relief  in  the
collection  at  Applednnximbe  in  tbe  lale  of  WighL
(jlfaa.  Woribyaavm,  pL  9.)  It  repreaenB  Pan
.  leclining  at  the  entrance  of  tbe  cave,  wbicb  waa
dedicated  to  him  in  the  Aeropolii  at  Atbeni.  He
hotdi  in  hii  right  hand  a  drinking-horn  [Rbtton]
and  in  hii  left  a  lyrinz,  which  ii  atrengthened  by


/


The  ancienta  alwaya  conaidered  Ihe  PanV  Pipe
■1  a  nmic  imlivment,  chiefly  uaad  by  thoaa  who
tended  flocka  and  bcnla  (Horn.  JL  XTiii.  S36  ;
ApolL  Rhod.  L  £77 ;  Dionya.  Perieg.  996 ;  Longut,
L  2,  L  14—16,  iL  24—36)  ;  hut  alao  admitted  to
.regulate  the  dance.  <Hta.&^S78.)  The  Ly-
diana,  wboae  tnrapa  marched  to  militaiy  moiic,
employed  tbia  together  with  other  inatnunoiCa  for
tbe  purpoae.  (Herod.  L  17.)  Tbia  inalnmait  wat
tbe  origin  of  Uie  organ  [HvnaAULAj.

Tbe  term  aiperi  ™a  aUo  ^plied  to  loTela,  or
namw rabtmaneau imwagea,  mad*  either  in


8TSSITIA.

tbe  aiege  of  a

lyftcn.  T.  17),  or  in  forming  calacomba  Us

tneatna.  (Aeiian,H,.^.Ti.43,iTi.lS.) [J.  Y.)

SYKMA  {oipfia),  which  pit>perly  meana  that

which  ia  drawn  or  drugged  (from  ffipte\  ia  applied

lo  a  drea  with  a  train. Tbe  long  Peploi  worn  hj

what  of  thia  kind.  (7i:Ti.t42.)  The Synna,  how
erer,  waa  more  eapeciall;  the  name  of  the  dma
worn  by  tbe  tragic  acton,  which  bad  a  tain  to  it
tmiliiiK  upon  tbe  ground  ;  whence  the  word  ia  ex-
plajaed  by  Pollux  (*ii.  67),  aa  a  Tparfinift  ^ift^ia
trtmipiiiinir,  and  ia  alluded  to  b;  Hoiaee  {At.
/■Daf.  215),  in  the  wosdi.


il^ihorically  for  tragedy  itaelC (Jnr.  i
30  ;  Mart.  It.  49.)

SYSSITIA  (irwTirfTu).  Tbe  csatam  of  taking
the  prirKipal  meal  of  Ihe  day  in  pnblic  prerailed
eitenaiyely  anumgat  Ihe  Oreeka  from  Tery  euly
agcA  It  eiiatad  not  only  with  the  Spartaoa  and
Crelana,  amoi^t  both  of  whom  it  waa  kept  up  till
GOmpaiatiTely  reoeut  timei,  bnl  alao  at  M^ara  in
the  age  of  Tbeognii  (>.  30£),  and  at  Corinth  in
the  time  of  Periander,  who  it  aeemi  aboliabed  the
practice  as  being  faTourabte  to  ariiUoacy.  ( Ariit.
i^<.9.g3.)  Nor  waa  it  confined  to  Ihe  HeUenic
nation  ;  for  according  to  Ariatotle  {PoL  to.  9),  it
preTsiled  a^ll  earlier  amongst  the  OenobiaiiB  ia
Ihe  aoulh  of  Italy,  and  alao  at  Caithage,  the  po-
litical and  social  inatintiDna  of  which  stale  crsem-
bled  those  of  Spaita  and  Crete.  (Poi  ii.  8.)  The
origin  of  tbe  usage  cannot  be  hiatori^ly  estab-
lished ;  but  it  seems  reoaonable  lo  refer  it  to  in&at
or  patriarchal  communitiea,  the  memben  of  which
being  intimately  connected  by  the  lie*  of  a  cloig
poliucal  union  and  kindnd,  may  naturally  be  snp-
poaed  to  have  lired  together  abnoit  oa  memben  of
Ihe  aame  &mi]y.  But  bowercr  and  whennr  it
originated,  the  natural  tendency  of  such  a  pnctica
waa  to  bind  tbe  utiiem  of  a  atate  in  the  ckaeat
union ;  and  accoidingl;  we  find  that  at  Spaita,
LyeurguB  aiailed  himaelf  of  it  (or  this  pnrpoae,
though  we  onnol  determine  with  any  ceilain^
whether  he  introduced  it  then,  or  tn^dr  perpe-
tuated and  regulated  an  Inatitutiori,  whiu  the
Spartana  brought  with  them  from  their  mother-
country  and  retained  at  Sparta  aa  being  sunble  to
their  position  and  agreeable  to  their  natiooal  habin.
The  latterscppositian  is  perhaps  tbe  more  ptetabla.
The  Cretan  unge  Aristotle  (/W.  TiL  9)  attributes
to  Minoi;  this,  howsTer,  may  be  considered  lalhs
"  the  pbiioaopher'B  opinion  than  as  an  his  lis  ii  il
tradition  :  "  but  the  inaticntiDn  waa  cooleaaedly  of
so  high  antiquity,  thai  the  PeUfKHUteeian  colimsta
may  well  be  suppoaed  to  haTe  fcnmd  it  already
existing  in  Crete,  cTen  if  there  had  been  no  Dorian
selllen  in  the  island  before  them.  (Thiilvall,
Hilt.  qfGntai,  Tol.  L  p.  287.)

The  Cretan  name  for  Ihe  Syssitia  was  'ArtftTt
(Arist.  FoL  ii.  7),  tbe  singubu  of  which  ia  naed  to
denote  the  building  or  public  hall  where  they  wtn
giTca.  This  title  aSbids  of  iudf  a  soSdenI  indi-
cation that  they  were  confined  lo  men  and  ycolha
only:  a  conclusion  justified  and  aomorted  by  all
tbe  authoritiea  on  the  subject.  (Plat.  Lt^  n.  m,
780,  d.)  Il  is  not  howerei  improbable,  as  Uortk
(OvAi,  ToL  iiL  p.  133}  anggeila,  that  in  some  af
tha  Dorian  aadea  there  were  ajnitia  of  tha  yttof


SYSSITIA.

!d  wonwii  M  v^  u  of  tha  man.  (Coinp-
Viaiai,  PfU.  ii.  18.)  AU  the  adnll  citiHoi
pBrtwk  of  Iha  poblk  msali  ■mungK  ths  Cnuuii,
and  wen  dividBil  inla  eompanis  oi  **  mfuet,"
called  'Eroipiu,  or  KimttimM  irtpita.  (Athen.  it.
p.  143.)  Thoe  difuiona  wen  perhapa  or^iiullr
cohSdhI  to  penoD*  of  tha  auna  hoOK  and  kiudnd,
but  aflerwirdi  naj  Taoaneiaa  ]n  them  wen  filled
npat  tha  diacntion  of  the  memben.  (Hoeck,  toI.
iiL  p.  126.)  Tha  divinity  woiahipped  under  tha
name  of  Z«ii  "EToiptwi  (HeajtL  »,  tp.)  wM  conai-
dend  lo  pretide  o'er  them.

According  to  Doiiadai,  who  wnte  a  hiilorr  of
Cnte  (Athen.  L  t),  there  wen  in  eTOrj  town  of
the  iiiuid(varra;i:oC)  two  public  bnildisg^  one  for
the  lodginu  of  ilranRera  {tcoitarHpta-),  the  other
a  commoii  hall  {iriptioy)  for  the  ciliieni.  In  [he
latter  of  theae  the  ayiailia  wen  given,  and  in  tha
appti  part  of  il  were  pbiud  two  tablea  /«'  the  en-
tcnaiuinent  of  foreign  guaiU  (ttcnal  ■rpi-wtC"),
a  circumitanea  dewring  of  notice,  ■>  indicating
the  extent  to  wbich  the  Dorjani  of  Cnte  encou-
taged  mnnal  tatercMiraa  and  boapitalit;.  Then
cann  the  Ubiea  of  the  dtiiani.  But  beiideitheie
then  wai  alao  a  ihiid  table  on  tha  right  of  the  en-


Ttie  Syaaitia  of  tha  Cretana  ware  diatingniihed
far  aioiplicitj  and  temperance.  They  alwaf  ■  ut  al
their  tabtea,  eien  [o  hilei  limea,  when  the  cnatom
of  reclining  had  been  introduced  at  Sparta.  (Cic
pn  M<ar.  SS.)  The  enlerlauunent  began  with
prajer  to  the  godi  and  libetioui.  (Athen.  ir.  p.
1*3,  e.)  Each  of  the  adult  citiiana  neaiTed  an
equal  portion  of  fan,  with  tha  exception  of  the
"  Anbon,"  or  "  Maater  of  the  Tablea,"  who  wai
perhapa  in  andent  timn  one  of  the  K^fUH,  and
miBV  ncenll;  a  member  of  the  ypHrla  or  counciL
Tbia  magiMiale  receired  a  fonrfold  portion  ;  **  one
aa  a  eranmon  citiiea,  a  lecond  ai  Preiident,  a  third
fur  the  hoDM  or  building,  a  fourth  for  the  fiicni-
bire  -  (tw  »fiwy,  Heradid.  Pont.  iiL) :  an  ex-
preaaion  from  which  it  would  aeem  that  the  care
of  the  building  and  tha  pnTision  of  the  ueceuary
utenaili  and  furniture  devolred  upon  him.  The
monagannit  of  all  the  tablet  waa  under  the  nper-
intendence  of  a  female  of  free  birth  (4  tpotimiiivia
■nit  mfffftriai  ytirii),  who  openly  took  the  beat
&n  and  pnaented  it  to  the  dtiaen  who  waa  moat
eminml  in  eotmcil  or  the  field.  Bha  had  three  or
JbuT  male  aaiitanta  under  hei,  each  of  whom  again
na  piOTided  with  two  menial  aerranta  (mA^i^-
poi,  or  wood-cairien).  Strangera  wen  aerred
before  the  ritiiena,  and  eyen  befim  the  Accbon  or
Preaidenl.  (HenuL  Ponl.  I.  a.)  On  each  of  the
tablea  waa  placed  a  cap  of  mixed  wine,  from  which
tha  meaamatea  of  the  lame  company  drank.  At
the  doae  of  the  repaal  thia  wai  repleniahed,  but  all
tnlemperauca  waa  itrictly  farbidden  b;  a  ipecial
Uw. (Phit  Afiwoi,  p.  26fi.)

Till  tbey  had  leactwd  their  eighteenth  year,  when
tfaej  wen  claited  in  the  iyi\ai,  the  youthi  accom-
panied their  flithen  lo  the  lyitttia  ^ng  with  the
oiphana  of  llie  deceaaed.  (Hoeck,  tdI.  iiL  p.  185.)
Id  aome  pUcea  the  joungeat  of  the  orphan!  wailed


a  by  al


boya. (Ephor.  ap.  Slrai,  x.  p  483.) When  not
tbua  engaged,  they  were  aeatcd  near  to  the  men
on  a  lower  bench,  and  receiied  only  a  half  parti
of  mot ;  the  aUett  of  the  aiphani  appear  to  have


SYSSITIA.  1089

TKeiTed  tha  aune  quantity  aa  the  nan,  bat  of  a
plainer  deacription  of  hre.  (AtheiL  it.  p.  143()
The  boyt  like  the  men  had  alaa  a  cup  of  mixed
■■  ■ >■ rople-


h hoWCTU


liTened  and  kept  np  by  muaje  and  finging.  (Ale-
man,  ap.  Slnit.  Le.)  It  waa  followed  by  couTena-
tion,  which  waa  fiiit  directed  to  the  publis  affiura
of  the  atate,  and  afterwarda  toraed  on  valiant  deeda
in  war  and  tha  exploiti  of  iUnatriona  men,  whoea
ptaiaea  might  animate  the  yoangar  haarcfa  to  an
honounUe  anmbitioiL  WI^  liataning  to  tbia  eoo-
Tcnatioo,  the  yootha  aeem  to  have  been  ananged
in  claaici  {Mptia),  each  of  which  waa  placed
under  the  auperintendenca  of  an  officer  (imturiim)
eapeeially  appointed  for  thia  paT«ae  ;  n  that  the
tyaaiba  were  tbua  made  to  terro  nnporlant  political
uid  edncattonal  enda.

In  moat  of  the  Cretan  citiea,  tb«  aipcoiea  of  the
ayaaitia  wtn  defrayed  out  of  the  nnaiaea  of  tha
poblio  landi  and  ue  tribute  paid  by  the  Perioeci,
the  money  aiiaing  from  which  waa  applied  partly
to  the  aerrico  of  the  goda,  and  parti;  to  tha  main-
tenance of  all  tha  ciliieai  both  mala  and  female.
(Ariit.  PcL  ii.  7.  4)  ;  ao  that  m  thii  rewect  there
might  be  no  difiornice  between  tha  rich  and  the
poor.  Fnun  the  atatament  of  Ariitotle  conpared
■rilh  Dotiudaa  (Athen.  L  a.),  it  appean  [subable
that  each  indiTidual  mceiTed  bia  aepaiate  iliBre  of
the  public  rcrenuea,  out  of  which  he  paid  hii  quota
to  the  public  Uble,  and  proTided  with  tha  Rat  for
the  support  of  the  femalea  of  bia  family.  Thia
practice  hoWETcr  doei  not  appear  to  ban  prevailed
eiduaiTely  at  all  tunea  and  in  all  the  cjiiea  of
Cnle.  In  Lyctua,  for  jnitance,  a  colon;  from
Sparta,  the  cnilom  waa  different ;  the  dtiiena  of
that  town  contribated  to  their  napeetire  tablea  ■
tenth  of  the  produce  of  their  eatala  ;  a  practice
whicb  ma;  be  nippoaed  to  have  obtained  in  other
eitiea,  where  the  public  domaina  were  not  aulScient
to  defray  the  ehaigta  of  the  ayaaitia.  But  both  at
Lyctua  and  elaewhere,  the  poonr  dtiaena  were  in
all  probability  inpported  at  tha  pablic  coat

ilh  the  Bcconnta  giren  b;  tha


ancient  authon  nipecting  the  Cretan  ayaaitia  there
ariaet  n  qneation  of  nma  difficulty,  Tia.  how  could
one  building  acconunodate  the  adnlt  dtiiena  and
youlha  of  inch  towni  ai  Lyctua  and  Gortyna?
The  qnetlion  admita  of  only  two  tolutiona ;  we  are
either  mlainfbrmed  with  reapecl  to  there  being  onl;
one  building  in  each  town  oaed  aa  a  commoo  hall,
or  tha  number  of  Dorian  dtiiena  in  each  town
muat  baTe  been  compaistiirely  very  amall.

The  Spartan  Syaaicia  were  in  the  main  ao  aimilar
to  thoae  of  Cnta  that  one  waa  laid  to  be  borrowed
from  the  other.  (AiiiL  PoL  iL  7.)  In  later  timca
they  woe  called  ^iSlrio,  «  the  **  apan  meali,'*  a
term  which  ia  probably  a  corruption  of  fiAino,  the
loTa-feaata,  a  word  conetpouding  lo  the  Cretan
iTBipiia.  (GottiiDg,  ad  Arul-Oeam.  p.  \90i  til-
ler. Dor.  IT.  1  9  3.)  Anciently  they  were  tailed
iWptia,  aa  in  Crete,  (Pint.  Lmr.  13.)  They
differed  from  the  Cnlan  in  the  following  reipecta.
Instead  of  the  expenaea  of  the  tablea  being  defrayed
out  of  the  public  reienuea,  erery  bead  of  a  family
wai  obliged  to  eontribule  a  certain  portion  at  hia
own  coat  and  charge  ;  thoae  who  wen  n|t  able  to
do  ao  were  excluded  from  the  public  tablei.  (Ariat.
PoL  ii.  7.  4.)  The  gneita  wen  diiided  into  com-
paniaa  geneiall;  id  Sflean  pctaoot  each,  aod  all


■i-A


'  O"


1090


STSSITIA.
ra  filled  up  hj  )i«Uot,iD  vhich  nc


moDi  comtnt  wsi  ioditpeDnblc  far  election.  Ni
pNWHit,  Dot  tren  the  king*,  wen  ■Hawed  what  wai
nlled  u  ifUiToi  V^  (Heijch.!.  r.)  or  eicueil
from  attendance  at  the  public  tahlei,  except  for  huh
■Uefactoiy  rokhi,  aa  when  eoga^  in  a  Mcrifce,
«  a  chaia,  in  which  latter  OM  tbe  indiridual  waa
nqnind  to  laid  a  pceieDt  to  hit  table.  {Fine  L .
Agit,  c  1 0.)  Eaca  penon  wu  (applied  with
cup  of  mixed  wine,  which  vu  filled  again  whe
requited  ;  but  dhnking-to  uoen  waa  prohibited  i
Spatia  ai  well  ai  in  Crete.  The  npMt  wai_  of
plain  and  lunple  chancleT,  and  tlie  eontrihatioi]  c
each  member  of  a  men  «  ^iSinit  wai  tattled  bjr
law.  (Wachnnulh,  tdL  it.  pt.  iL  p.  24,  IK  ed. ;
Plat  L  0.)  The  principal  diih  mu  the  liikai
iuiiit  or  black  bnth,  with  poric  (Athen.  ir.  p.
141.)  The  JidlnXw  or  aftaniieal  (from  the  Doric
CHAu,  a  meal)  wat  howeTcr  more  mied,  and
riehlj  nip^ied  b;  preienti  oT  game,  poultiy,  fruit,
Ac,  and  other  delicaeiea  which  no  one  wai  allowed


enlivened  by  cheerful  umfenatjon,  though  m
public  malten.  (Xen.  Rtp.  Loam.  T,  6.)  Sing-
iDg  al»  wai  fi«qaen(lj  IntrDduced,  ai  we  learn
finn  Alcman  (Aa^  31),  that  "  at  the  beuqueti
■ad  drinking  antotunment*  of  tbe  men  it  waa  fit
far  the  gnetta  to  aing  the  paeu.~  The  amuse-
aenta  were  ander  the  laperintendeace  of  Us
Polemircbi.

The  OH  and  pnipoaei  of  the  inMitntioni  da-
•eribed  abora  are  raiy  manifeit.  They  nnjted
the  citiaens  by  the  cloeeat  tiee  of  intimacj  and
union,  making  them  cnutder  themaelTei  aa  mem-
ben  of  one  fiunily,  and  cbildran  of  ous  and  the
Mma  mother,  the  itate.  They  mamtained  a  etrict
■nd  perfect  ujatatiMi  between  the  higher  and  the
•abject  clatiet  both  at  ^arta  and  in  Crete,  and
kepi  up  in  the  fanner  a  conecionmeu  of  their  lu-
perioT  VDith  and  itatiim,  together  with  a  atrong
leeling  of  nationality.  At  Spaita  alio  they  were
eminently  ueful  in  a  military  point  of  view,  fi^
the  memben  of  the  lyuitia  were  Ibrmed  into  cor-
reaponding  military  diiiiiDDi,  and  fought  together
in  the  6e1d,  ai  they  had  lived  together  at  home.


ce  comrades  ( Herod,  i.  65.)  Moreover  "  they
gave  an  efGcscj  to  tbe  power  of  public  opinioD
which  mnet  have  nearly  lupeiaeded  the  neoeatitT
of  penal  lawi.-  CThiilwall,  voL  i.  p.  2a9.)  With
reluct  lo  the  political  tandeuciea,  they  were  de-
cidedly arranged  upon  ariilocralical  piinaples,
though  no  individual  of  a  company  or  meai  wai
looked  apon  ai  luperior  to  hia  fetlowi.  Plutarch
(Quaa.  Smipot.  ni.  p.  332)  aocordingly  calla  them


The  (impUdty  and  lobrietj,  which  were  in  eariy
timet  the  eharacterittie  botii  of  the  Spartan  and
Cretan  Syuitia,  were  afterwardi  in  Sparta  at  leail
aapplanted  by  luxury  and  efieminats  indulgence.
The  change  wat  probably  giadnal,  hut  the  kingi
Areui  and  Acrolatut  (B.  c.  SOO)  are  recorded'at
baviag  been  mainly  inttnunental  in  accelerating  iL
The  reformer  Agii  endeavoured  bnt  in  vain  to  re-
atore  th^old  aider  of  thingi,  and  periihed  in  the
attempt  In  hie  dayi  Bparla  contained  i&OO
familtei,  DBl  of  which  he  propoied  to  make  fifteen

^ttiti^  whmce  MliUer  idnn  that  loraieriy,  wbcn  {


TABELLA.
the  mmibec  of  flmiliea  wai  9000,  tlis  iramWr  tl
lyHitia  wai  thirty  )  and  coueqaentl]'  that  Hao-
dotoB,  when  he  ipakecf  Lycvrgni  having  inititiited
the  "  Bynitia  "  for  war,  aUnded  to  the  Uiga  divi-
ticna  and  not  the  lingle  banqueting  companiea  ;  a
coodutian  juatified  t^  the  oonlazt.  Mfuler  nuce-
oTs  tiqipoiei,  that  in  thi*  ttoae  the  Sywtia  at
Sparta  eam^onded  to  the  diriaiant  of  the  Male
oilled  obae,  and  iemetiatei  ^furptai,  which  were
aim  thirty  in  nomber.  (Deriamt,  iiL  fi.  S  6,  and
12.  S  4.)

(Hoeck,  Onto,  toL  iiL  pp.  120—139;  HiUllaaa^
A*/-digi,  S 133  ;  Thirlwall,  ItiiL  o/Gnaat,  toI  l
pp.  2S8,  331  ;  Hennann,  Leiriaei  der  Gricti
Stoift.  H22,2e.)  [RW.J

srSTY'LOS. [Tbmplvm.]


TABELLA,  dim.  of  TABULA,  a  InDet  or
tablet,  with  which  each  dtiien  and  judex  veted  in
the  comitia  and  courtt  of  juitica.  In  tbe  fnnitit,
if  iha  bttdneii  wai  the  pauing  of  a  law,  each  do-
len  wai  piovided  with  two  Tabellaa,  one  iniaibrd
V.  R.  i.  a.  Ua  Ihgat,  "  I  vola  for  the  law,~  the
other  inicrilied  A.  i.  a.  Amtiqro,  "  I  am  Iw  the  oU
law."  (Compare  Cica>i^U.L  14.)  If  the  bui-
DOM  wai  the  dectioo  of  a  nugiitiau,  each  dtina
wu  iupplied  with  only  one  taUet,  on  whidi  the
oHiiet  of  the  caodidalei  wen  writloa,  or  the  iit-
tiati  of  their  namea,  ai  ume  nppoH  btm  tin  ent-
tion  pn  Doma,  c  43 ;  the  voter  then  phced  a  naik
(fwcdim)  ■gainil  the  one  lot  wham  be  voted,
ce  fiaiela  are  qtoken  of  in  the  aenia  of  ntea
pn>  PlaiK,  22.)  For  further  partiakn  n-
tHCting  the  voting  in  conilia,  tea  DuuaiToaxi,
Ci8T.i,  SiTiu.^  and  SurFBAOICH.

Thejodiceiwen  provided  with  three  TaUlK:
one  of  whidi  wai  marked  with  A.  lc  AUaha,
"I  acquit  i"  the  lecond  with  &  i.  a.  Ovien,
"  I  condemn  i"  and  the  third  with  K.  L.  t,  «.  Aew
Liquet,  "  It  i<  not  clear  to  me."  The  Gnt  ofthfaa
nai  called  TatiOa  abmlalona  and  the  taamd  7a-
Mla  daaaiaitirit  (Sael.  Oeton.  33),  mi  ham
Csetn(i>ro  Mil  6)nI1t  the  former liisa  a^fen^
and  the  latter  tOera  lr«(u;  It  wooU  teeta  tW  in
ime  triali  the  TabeUaa  wen  marked  with  the  let-
n  L.andD,  mpectively,  ue.  mwc  and  g— .
nee  we  find  on  a  denarini  oE  the  Caeiiau  grna  a
Taballana^ed  with  the  leiierm  L.  Dl  ;  and  aa  *■
know  that  the  vote  by  ballet  in  caMt  of  Pecdatllio
wai  fint  introduced  by  C.  Caeliua  Celdoi  [Tabbi.-
LARUi  LioaeJ,  the  Tabella  on  the  cod  aDdaalil-
edly  lafen  to  that  ennL  There  ii  ilaa  ■  paaac*
*  C»nai(_B.a  iiL  S3},  which  aaeaa  M  intnate
It  theie  initial  letter*  were  tcmetimaa  marked
the tabellaa : **  Unam  fore  tabetlaa,  ^oi  Uer-


TABEHNA.

Th*  pnoediDg  col  conUiui  a  copy  of  ■  ioId  oF  the
Cunim  gcni.  in  which  ■  man  wearing  B  tags  it  re-
pRienLHl  in  the  met  o[  placing  ■  UbelU,  maitied
with  tha  iellar  A,  (i  e.  ohohxi},  in  ths  ciaU.  Tha
latter  cm  the  tabella  ii  aridenll;  inleDdad  for  A.

For  the  other  meuiiiigi  of  Taballa  asa  TiBtiL*.

TABELLA'RIAB  LEGES,  Ibe  lawa  bywhich
tta  hallot  WBi  Introduced  in  iDling  in  the  comitta.
At  to  the  ancient  mnde  of  Toiing  at  Rotno,  Me
UurrKAOiLiK.  Then  wen  fDoreiuKDoenu  known
by  the  name  of  TabeUariae  Legae,  ii4iich  are  oia-
iHimted  by  Cicero  {dt  Ltg.  iiu  16).  They  an
moitianed  below  aocording  to  the  order  of  tuoa  io
which  thaj  won  paaaad.

I.  Qabihu  Lbx,  propoeed  by  tha  ttibone  Ga-
bisioa  B.C.  139,  introduced  the  ballot  in  the  elec-
tion of  iii>giitnlea<Cic.  i.e.) ;  whence  Cicero  {Agr,
ii.  2)  caila  the  tabeUa  ■■  lindez  tadtae  liberutu."

3.  Cassia  Lik,  propoeed  by  the  tribune  L.  Ci*-
naa  Longisui  B.  c.  137,  introduced  the  ballot  in
the  "  Jndicinn  Popoti,"  with  the  exception  of  cue*
of  Perdoellio.  The  "Judicium  Popnli"  nndoubt-
edly  appUet  to  caaee  tried  in  the  comitia  by  the
vhols  body  ot  the  people  [JvDiz,  p.  849],  al-
thoDnh  Enieati  (/adu  Lug.)  wiihee  to  give  a  dif-
tarnx  iDterptetatioD  to  the  word).  Thii  law  wai
aippocted  by  Sciplo  A&icanui  the  younger,  kx
which  he  wai  cenaond  by  the  ariitociatical  party.
(Cic  <<■  Z^.  iii.  l6,SnX.2£,  Sr,/>rv5u(>a,  IS  ;
AaoHL  ta  ComL  p.  78,  ed.  OrvilL)

3.  Pafiria  Lix,  pnpoied  hj  the  ttiboua  C
PapiriaaCarbaB.C.  131,intrDdDcadtheballaliu  tha
BDactmetil  and  repeal  of  bwi. (Cic.de  £9.  iii.  IS.)

t.  Cailia  Lix,  ptopOKd  by  C.  Caeliiu  Caldoi
B.  c.  1 07,  inlTodaeed  the  ballot  in  auu  sf  Pndoel-
!io,  which  had  been  excepted  in  the  Caaiaii  law.
(Cic  L  «.)

There  wai  alio  a  law  kmEhl  fbnnrd  by  Martm
B.  c  119,  which  waa  inteoded  to  aeenn  fteedom
and  order  tn  Totii^  (Cic  di  Leg,  iii,  17  ;  PIdL
Mar.  t.)

TABELLA'RIUS.  a  letta»»irier.  Ai  the
Romaiu  had  no  puUic  poat,  they  vera  obliged  to
employ  apedal  moMengera,  who  were  called  Tdnt-
lan,  ta  eoDTey  their  leltera  (faUUat,  fifarw),  when


(Cic  i


r.22.)


;  Cu.  ad  J^ivB.  X


TABK'LLICaaotiij.  (Sii:daa.t.«.)  Under
the  empin  the  Tabailime*  uccecded  to  the  bnai-
iieaa  of  the  6ctibaa  in  the  tiraei  of  the  npnbUc
[ScBiiAi.]  They  were  chiefly  employed  in  diaw-
ing  Dp  legal  docomenti,  and  for  thii  pmpoae  niu-
all*  took  their  lUtiooa  in  tha  nia^et-placei  of
towita.  (Cod.  i.  tit.  21.  a  17  ;  NoreiL  73.  c  5,
Ae.)  They  foRoed  a  ipecial  order  in  the  tiate.
(Ootbofr.  ad  Cod.  Tluod.  13.  tit,  1. 1.  S.)

TABERNA  ie  defined  by  Ulpian  ai  uiy  kind
of  building  fit  to  dwell  in  ■*  nempe  ex  eo,  quod
(iiisUtclaiulitur''<Dig.60.tit.l0.f  183),  oraccord-
imr  to  the  mart  probable  etymolagy  of  Featna,  bo-
•  made  of  plaulu.  (Peatiu,  e.  c.  CaUa-
iiitnaaJa.)  Featua  (>.  e.  AdlAtnuilu)
I  that  thia  wai  the  moel  ancient  kind  oiF
■.bode  naed  among  the  Remans,  and  that  it  was
from  the  early  me  of  mch  dwcHlnga  that  thaworda
taberma  and  laientaailiim  wen  applied  to  miiitaiy
tmts,  thoagb  the  latter  wen  conitmcted  of  ikini.
We  km>w  lery  little  of  the  form  and  maleriali  of
the  andent  tcDta  ;  but  we  may  infer  from  the  no-
ticn  we  hare  of  them  that  they  were  genamllj


TABULAE,
eompoacd  1^  a  coTcrnng  of  akina  pi ,

propa,  and  partly  Btretched  OD  ropes.

ectinly  of  planki ;  and  lonie-
timei,  in  cases  of  emergency,  garments  and  rushes
wen  spread  orer  any  support  that  conld  be  ob-
tained. (LIpeius,  dt  MilU.  Roman,  in  Optr.  toI.
ijL  T^.  154^1^5.)  From  iabtrna^  when  used  in
thia  lenH,  an  derived  labenaeufKa^  the  moR  cont-
mon  name  of  a  tent,  and  ContubiknaLIS.

The  usual  meaning  of  taberma  ia  a  aAop.  Ori-
ginally the  ahops  were  stalla  ot  bootha  in  or  niind
the  marketplace  [Aaoa^  ;  Forcm]  ;  afterwards
(hey  were  permanently  establiahed  both  on  tha
■idea  of  the  raa^t-place,  and  in  other  parts  of  tha
dty.  Neither  the  ancient  authors  nor  the  remaina
of  Pompeii  lead  as  to  aappoae  that  tradesmen  often
had  their  ahops  fbruiing  part  of  their  honies,  as
with  us.  A  few  bsnsea  are  indeed  fbnnd  in  Pom-
peii entirely  deroled  to  tbe  purpoaea  of  tnde,  coD-
■iitinff,  that  ia,  of  tha  shop  and  the  ioobb  oocii|ded
by  the  tmdeemanand  hisbnuly.  Host  connMBly,
howerer,  the  shops  fumed  a  part  of  a  large  honae,
to  the  Qwiuc  of  which  they  beletqied,  and  wen  by
him  let  ont  to  tndfnnen.  [VoMva,  f.  430.]
Some  of  the  abopa  round  a  house  wen  retained  by
tbe  owner  for  the  lale  of  the  (mduce  of  hit  estates.
Thia  arrangement  of  the  shops  was  probably  an  im-
provement OD  an  older  plan  of  placing  then  against
the  walla  of  houses.  Eien  under  tbe  empenn  we
find  that  ahopa  were  Inult  out  so  far  ioto  the  alreet
as  to  Dbstmct  the  thoroughfare.  Uartial  (rii.  61)
mvitinis  an  edict  of  Domittan  by  which  thia  prac-
lica  was  put  down,  and  tbe  abops  wen  confioed
within  the  areas  of  tbe  houses.

The  following  an  the  moat  remarkable  rltiaiea
of  shims  of  which  we  haie  noticea  or  remains.

1 .  Shops  for  the  sale  of  trine,  hot  drinks,  and
rttdy-diewd  meaL [Cai7K1HA.]

3.  Baken'  ^opa.  Of  these  aerasl  hare  been
bund  at  Pompeii,  containing  the  mill  as  well  as
the  other  implements  for  making  brauL [Uola  ;

PiSTOB.]

3.  Bookiellen'  ahops. [Liaaa.]

4.  Barben'  and  Haitdiewais'  abopa. [BAaBA-T

[P.S.]
TABERNA'CULUM.  (Tabibna  ;TB>rLO>.}
TABMNUH.  [DoMus.  p.  43E>.  a.]
TA'BULAE.  Tbii  word  properly  maana  pjanka
or  boarda,  whence  it  it  applied  to  toTenl  objects,
asg[imin^«bles(JaT.L»0>,piclnras(Ciai'*  Pirn.
T.  1  ;  Propert.  i.  3.  23),  but  more  eipecialiy  to
lablete  ui«]  for  writing,  of  which  alona  we  hare  to
ipeak  here.  The  wmd  Tabniaa  waa  ^plied  10
any  flat  aobatanca  uaed  for  writing  upon,  wbether
atone  or  meBl,  or  wood  eoreied  with  wax.  IJry
(i  24)  indeed  distingni^ea  between  Tat^at  and
Otra,  by  the  fbnner  of  which  he  seema  to  mean
tableti  of  stone  or  metal ;  but  Tabmiae  and  Tabelbt
more  frequently  ugnify  waien  tableta  {laimlaa
cBTiiae),  which  were  thin  pieces  of  wood  uiuatlr
of  an  obloug  tbape,  coiered  over  with  wi  '
Thewi" 5""


I  of  the  ■


[Stilus.]  These  tabiUae  were  v
of  iTory  and  citron-wood  (Mart  liT.  3.  5),  but
generally  of  a  wood  of  a  mon  eoamon  tree,  at
tbe  beech,  fir,  &c  Tbe  outer  aidei  of  the  laUeta
coniiated  menty  of  tbe  wood  ;  it  was  only  the
inner  aides  that  were  ooiered  over  with  wax.
They  were  bitened  together  at  the  bad:  by  meant
«i  wires,  whkh  Mttwued  the  porpoaa  of  UngM^  so
4a3'  --• •  O"


1092  TABULAE.

tlinl  ibsj  opened  and  ihut  liks  one  bo«ki ;  did
to  preTenI  tha  wax  of  dub  tablet  rubbing  igunit
tba  n-ai  of  the  Dlher,  thete  «u  ■  niiisd  margin
■TMiud  each,  lu  »  dearly  •e«D  in  the  woodcDt  under
Stiliiii.  There  went  umetimei  ttto,  thne,  finii
fire,  HI  OTon  mon,  tablet*  fiulened  together  in  the
■boTo-mentiDned  maniMT. Two  *uch  taUete


we  have  imMfrlw,  or  with  the  t  omiltod,  ti
The  Latin  word  ptiffilLirea^  which  ii  the  nan
qnently  giyen  to  tableta  coTored  with  wai  (Mart.
3iT.  3  ;  OelL  iriL  9  ;  Piin.  Ep.  L  6),  maj  v  '
be  connected  with  the  Hine  coot,  ihongl
niually  deriTsd  ricm  paffU/m,  becULU  the;  were
nnall  enough  to  be  held  in  the  hand.  Such  tabteu
an  mentioned  ai  cailjr  at  the  time  of  Homer,  who
ipedu  of  ft  «!«£  imwnft.  (/i  «.  169.)  Three
tnbleta  laatentd  toftethei  wen  calied  Triptsda
(TplTTUX')>  which  Martial  (air.  6)  ttandatei  bj
tiipliea  { eavt)  ;  in  the  lame  way  we  alio  read  ^
./'nite^i^ynhi  (nmbrvxc)  caUed  by  Martial  (liT.  4  }
Qtinhipliea  laenu),  and  of  Polyplyda  {roXiwrvxa)
or  MnltiplioM  (ceRH).  The  pagei  of  tbeie  taUeti
wen  freqnently  called  by  the  name  of  osmi  alone  ;
thua  wereadof  ^»rt'jiu«ni,ai^eracera,**£nt  page,^'
■'  lecond  pi^."  (Compare  SueC  IVer.  1 7.)  In  ta-
blet* containing  important  legal  doeuDieati,  espe-
cially wiUi,  the  outer  edge*  were  pierced  through
with  hiriei  (/aranMa),  through  which  a  trifjc
thread  (fnml  wal  paued,  and  npon  which  a  leal
wu  then  traced.  Thit  wu  intended  to  gnsrd
agunit  forgery,  and  if  it  wu  not  done  tuch  docu-
Dienli  were  nnll  and  Toid.  (Suet  JVer.  17  ;  Panlua,
SttH.  Ree,  T.  2fi.  3  6  ;  TiffrAMiNTUif.)

Waieo  tablet*  were  ued  among  the  Roman*
for  almoit  every  *pecio*  of  writing,  whore  great
iHiglh  wai  not  nquired.  Thut  letMn  were  fre-
quently written  upon  diem,  which  were  lecured
by  being  bitensd  together  with  paekthnad  and
•eatsd  with  wu.  Accordingly  we  read  in  Plaatn*
(AKeUt  iT.  4.  64)  when  a  letter  i*  to  be  written,
"  Efior  dto  itilmn,  ceram,  et  tabellaa,  et  linnm."
The  lealJDgii  TDentioaed  ■itarwardi  (L9fi).  {Com-
pare Cic.  in  Oi(^.iii.S.)  Tabulae  and  tsbellae  an
therefore  need  in  ths  )eni*  of  letter*.  (Ovid.  lUtl.
ii.  522.)  LoTe-letten  were  written  on  very  imall
tablet!  caUed  VileSiam  (Mart.  lir.  3,  9),  of  which
word  howerer  we  do  not  know  the  origin.  Ta-
blet* of  thi*  kind  are  prcseDled  by  Amor  to  Poly-
phemui  on  an  ancient  paiotiDg.  (Mat.  Botiim.
ToL  i.  tav.  3.)

Legal  decumenti,  and  eipeciaUy  willt,  were  al-
moit alwaya  written  on  waxen  laUet*,  at  men-
tioned aboTe.  Such  tablet*  were  ai*o  lued  for
acooonti,  in  which  a  penon  entered  what  be  n-
ceived  ajid  expended  (TalaJaa  or  GxUr  aacfpli  et
txpemiii  Cic.  pro  Rao.  Coau  2),  whence  AutKU
TiJiulat  mean  an  abolition  of  debti  either  wholly
or  in  part.  (Suet.  J^U.  43  :  Cic.  <iiQf.  ii.  23.)
The  sbora  are  merely  initancea  of  the  eitentife

■me  of  waien  tableli  j  f"  ' '

the  uibiect  further.

Two  ancient  waieD  i
in  a  periect  ilale  of  preaemtion,  one  in  a  gold
mine  four  or  fire  mile*  from  the  village  of  Abrud-
biny&  in  TlaoajlTania,  And  the  other  in  a  gold
mine  in  the  tillage  itielf.  Of  thii  intereiting  dii<
eoTery  an  account  hat  been  pnbliihed  by  Mnnmann
in  ft  work  inlillad  "  LibeUui  Anraritu,  tire  Tabulae


TABULARllTU.
Centae,  el  antiqiuituiiae  el  nnice  Hanmiai  in
Fodina  Anniria  apnd  Abmdbanyim,  oppidnlmn
TiBuaylnDom,  nuper  repeilae,"  Upeke  (lUI).
An  accDonl  of  thne  tablet^  takm  ftnoi  Maicnani^
deecription,  will  KTro  a*  a  commentary  on  what
hu  been  laid  aboie.  Both  the  tabulae  at*  tri-
ptycba,  that  it,  conniting  of  thiee  tablet*  each.
One  it  mode  oi  Br  wood,  the  other  of  beecb-woed.
and  each  ia  about  the  u»  of  what  we  call  a  eoulj
ocIaTO.  The  cuter  part  of  the  two  onliide  tahlrti
of  each  eihihil*  the  plain  aui&ce  of  the  wood,  the
inner  part  i*  corered  with  wsi,  which  ie  Dor  il-
moit  of  a  black  cuIodt,  and  ii  turronnded  with  i
raited  margin.  The  middle  tablet  hat  nx  si
bath  tide*  with  a  margin  annnd  eieb  ;  to  thit
each  of  the  two  tabulae  contain*  four  aida  or  four
p*gea  covered  with  wax.  The  edge*  aie  pitned
Ibrongb,  that  they  might  be  fattened  together  by
mean*  of  a  thread  paaaed  ihroogfa  tfacm.  Tba  wax
ia  not  thick  in  either ;  it  i>  thinner  «o  the  beecbea
tabulae,  in  which  the  atUai  of  the  writer  hat  leBe-
timea  cut  through  the  wax  into  the  wood-  Then
are  lettera  on  both  of  ihsn,  bnt  on  the  beechen  to-
bulae  they  are  few  and  indistinct ;  the  beginnii^
of  the  £nt  ublet  omtaina  ume  Omk  leitni,  but
they  are  auccnded  by  a  long  tet  of  letter*  in  un-
knowTi  cbaracten.  The  writing  on  the  tabnke
made  of  fii^woad  ia  both  gtealei  in  quantity  and  in
a  much  better  alate  of  prcBamtion.  It  i*  wiitiia
in  Latin,  and  it  a  copy  of  a  dacmnent  nlalin|>  tn
■ome  buainet*  connected  with  a  collegium.  Ths
name  of  the  conault  it  given,  which  detenuinca  itt
date  to  be  A.  D.  169.  One  of  the  moat  cnrvxdi-
naiy  thing*  connected  with  it  ii,  that  it  it  wriucn
from  right  to  lefL  The  writing  begin*  on  what  we
ahouU  call  the  Utt  or  fourth  page,  and  endi  at  the
bottom  of  the  third  [  and  by  huh  atrange  g«*d
fortune  it  hat  happened  thai  the  lanM  daesmrnt
i*  written  over  again,  beginciag  on  the  ammd
page  and  ending  at  the  bottom  of  the  fint ;  lo  that
when  the  writing  it  cffiued  or  doubllnl  in  the  oait
it  it  niually  auppUed  or  explained  by  the  other.

Waxen  tabk-tt  continued  to  be  nted  in  Eotepe
for  the  purpoaei  of  writing  in  the  middle  agei ;  bot
the  oldett  of  theia  with  which  we  ar«  tTqufiTrtrd
belong!  to  the  year  1301  ^i>.,aul  it  pmemd  in
the  Flareatioe  Mnteum.

The  tsblela  naed  in  voting  in  the  canitiaand
the  courta  of  juatica  were  alto  called  tabub*  at
well  01  Ubellae.  [Tabillae.]

TA'BULAE  PU'BLICAE [TABCuatm.1

TABULA'RII  were  nolarie*  or  acenniantt,
who  are  fint  mentioned  under  thia  ntae  in  the
time  of  the  empire,  (San.  Ep.  S8  ;  Dig.  11.  ttL  i.
a.  7  ;  GO.  tit.  13. 1.  1.  S  S.)  Pnhlic  notuiea.  who
had  the  charge  of  pnblie  document*,  wvn  also
called  tabukrii  (Dig.  43.  til.  i.  a  3),  and  thne
teem  to  have  diBered  Etom  the  tabelliane*  in  ih<
ciTcnmilanoe  that  the  latter  bad  nothing  to  di
with  the  cnitody  of  Uie  public  rrgiilcn.  Pablx
labularii  were  fint  ealahliihed  by  M.  Antoniuia
in  the  province*,  who  ordained  that  the  birtha  of
all  children  wen  to  be  announced  ta  the  tabukni
within  thirty  dava  from  the  birth.  (CapitaL  ,U.
Aaia*.  9.)  Reipecting  the  other  dniica  of  tbt
public  labularii,  tee  C^  Thood.  &  tit.  %  aaj
Gothofr.  ad  toe.

TABULA'RIUM,  a  phce  when  the  pabSc
recoida  {labalat  paUioH)  were  hepL  (Cic;  pr*  C.
Robir^  3,  pro  jrvi.  4.)  Theae  neoffd*  wm  tf
nrioH*  kindt,  at  in  iutttnea  SwataMwnlla,  Ia-


TAG  us.
Inlaa  Cennriw,  rtgiitcn  of  birtht,  dcothi,  of  tha
DAiDM  of  thoM  who  uniDiid  the  togs  Ttiilit,  Ac
(Sra  Abnun.  od  CSa.  Mil.  27.)  Then  ireranrioiii
tkbularui  nt  Home,  kQ  of  wbich  were  in  Umplee  ;
v«  find  m^ntioa  nude  i^  tabalBru  in  the  teniplei
of  the  Nymphi  (Cie.  F"  Mk.  27),  of  Lucina,  of
Juvenlni,  of  Ljbitim,  of  Cem,  lud  more  opeciall j
in  th>L  of  Sslatn,  viieb  mu  ilto  the  pnblio  tna-
Mfjr.  (Serrini,  a<J  Virg.  O*org.  il  602  ;  Capitol.
AT.  Amltm.  PUL  9.)  [Auuhiuk.]

A  tabnlariuni  wu  >l>o  nlled  bj  other  nvoei.  u
Orammatafliy^aiim,  AnUmm,  m  Arckintiii.  (Uig.
4a  tit.  19.  t.  S.^  In  •  jKinte  haiue  the  name  of
TuA/wHH  w  giT«i  to  the  piece  when  tfae  &niilj
recordi  end  wduTei  wete  kept.  [DoHUIi,  p.
428...]

TAEDA  ts  TEDA  (taft,  AtL  t^t,  dim.  tfSfw),
■  light  of  firwood,  called  oa  thii  account  paua
latda.  (CalolL  lii.  15  ;  Oiid.  Fat  a.  iSB.)  Be-
fore lbs  adoption  of  tbe  mors  ailificial  modei  of
obtaining  ligbt,  deicribed  under  CANnuA,  Kaz,
FuNALa,  and  LijccbKa,  tbe  inhabitant!  of  Ureece
and  Ana  Minor  practiied  the  foUowing  method,
which  ttiU  prevaUi  in  thoae  conntiiee,  and  to  a
eertain  extent  in  Scotland  and  Ireland,  ai  weli  at
in  other  parti  of  Enrope,  which  eboued  in  forati
of  piriet  (Frilowi,  £k  w  Jna  JMiaor,  pp.  no,
333—335.)  A  Iiea  hayiog  been  leleeted  of  the
■pecie*  Piniu  Harilima,  £<)«.,  which  wai  called
rtimi  br  the  andent  Oreehi  from  the  time  of
Homer  (iL  iL  494,  iiiii.  326),  and  which  retain!
thie  name,  with  a  tlight  change  in  iu  teiminalion,
(o  the  prtient  day,  a  huge  inciuon  waa  made  near
it*  root,  ouuing  the  turpentine  to  flow  lo  aa  to  ac-
cnnmlate  in  it*  ndnity.  Thi*  highly  rennona
wood  wni  called  Mi,  i.  e.  toioh-wood  ;  ■  tree  »
treUed  waa  tailed  MfSoi,  the  pioeeia  itielf  /rSf-
ttvr  or  S^oopytir^  and  the  workmen  employed  in
the  manntactore,  iifSavirfol.  After  the  lapee  of
twelve  nlontht  the  portion  thni  impngnaled  waa
ent  oat  and  diiided  into  nutable  leiiglha.  Thii
wa*  repeated  for  three  luctCHiTe  yean,  and  then,
aa  the  ten  began  to  dctay,  the  heart  of  the  tmuk
waa  eitrwted,  and  the  root)  were  dug  Dp  for  the
•ama  porpoie.  (Theophiaat.  H.  F.  L  6.  §  J,  iiL
9.  g  S.  £,  IT.  16.  S  I,  I.  2.  §  2,  S :  Athen.  xT.
700,  t)  Theie  itiipa  of  reeinona  pinewood  ere
DOW  called  SqSla  by  the  Qieeka  of  Mount  Ida.
(Hunt  and  Sibthorp,  a>  Wa^a'i  Mm.  pp.  120,
2M.>

When  peneni  went  ont  at  night,  they  took  Ifaeee
lighta  in  their  handi  (Ariitanh.  Ecdii.  SSS,  910),
man  pattimlHrl;  in  a  nuptial  prweiaion.  (Horn.  ft.
zTiii.  492  ;  Hea.  Scat.  275  ;  Ariitoph.  Pai,  1317  ;
Orid.  Met.  iw.  326  ;  Feit.  vi.  223.)  Hence  loedoe
fiiiat  liguified  **a  happy  marriage"  (Catull.  61.
29;  compaie  PmdenL  o.  Sjrmm,  ii.  165);  and
tbeee  lighti,  na  leai  than  proper  torchei,  an  at-
tribated  to  Love  and  Hymen,  (Orid.  MtL  ir.
7Ba.)  [J.  Y.]

TAB-NIA. [VrtT*  j  Stbophiub.]

TAGUS  (tb^i),  a  leader  or  general,  waa  mon
eniecially  the  name  of  the  military  leader  of  Che
Thnnnliiini  Under  thia  head  it  ii  propoeed  to
gire  a  ifaort  accoqnt  of  the  Theaialiau  coniCitn.

The  Theaaaliani  wen  ■  Theepntian  tribe  (Hend.
TiL  176  :  VelL  Pat.  L  3),  and  originally  came
from  the  Theepntian  Ephyra.  Under  the  gnid-
anee  of  leaden,  who  aniaid  to  hate  been  descend-
ant! of  Haientea,  they  invaded  the  weitetD  port


TAQUS.


1093


of  the  eonntry  aflervarda  called  Theiaaly,  and
droTe  out  or  reduced  to  the  condition  of  P«ie(tae
or  bundimcn  the  ancient  Aeolian  inhabitanta  (rV
r6rt  iiir  AIo\lEa  rvr  Si  SrrraXiar  taXilviitrtir,
Diod.  It.  57).  The  Theataliana  aflerwarda  ipread
oier  the  other  part*  of  Ibe  country,  and  took  poi-
•euion  of  the  moat  fertile  diitricta,  and  compelled
the  Penubi,  Magnelea,  AiJiaean  Phthiotae,  and
other  neighbouring  people  to  aubmit  to  their  aatho-
ritj  aad  to  pay, them  Cribnta.  (Thueyd.  ii.  101,
tT.  78,  viii.  3  ;  Ariitot.  Pol.  iL  6.)  The  popula-
tion of  Tbuuly  therefon  contiited,  like  that  of
LacoBicB,of  thin  diiluKt  claiaea.  1.  The  Penei.
tae,  whoM  condition  wat  nearly  the  aanw  ai  that
of  the  Helot*.  [PsNisTAa.]  2.  The  lubject
people,  who  inhabited  the  diitiicta  which  were  uot
occupied  by  the  Theiaaliui  Inmdcia.  They  paid
tribute,  aa  atated  abore,  but  wtn  penonally  fi«e,
though  they  hod  no  ahan  in  the  gOTenmcnt.
They  correaponded  to  the  Perioeci  of  Laconica,  by
wbich  name  tbey  an  called  by  Xenophgn.  {HiiU.
n.  1.  %  19.)  [PiEUOBCi.]  3.  The  TheiHllan
coui^aeron,  who  alone  had  any  ihare  in  the  public
adminiitntion,  and  whoae  landa  wen  cultivated
by  the  Peueitae.

For  lome  time  after  the  conqueat  Theaaaly  aeema
to  have  been  governed  by  kingi  of  the  race  of  Hei>
culei,  who  may  howerer  have  bcea  only  the  heada
of  the  great  arlatocratical  familiet,  inveited  with
the  auprenie  power  tor  a  certain  time.  Under  one
of  Iheie  prinoea,  named  Alena*,  the  country  waa
divided  into  four  dialiicti,  Phthiotil,  Hiatiaeoti*,
Theaaaliotia,  and  Pelaagiotia.  (Ariitot.  op.  Harpo-
crat.  I.B.  TaTpivx'«:  Sliab.  ii.  p.  4S0.)  Thia
diviaion  continued  till  the  lateat  time*  of  Theaialian
hiatory,  and  we  mny  therefore  conclude  that  it  waa
Each  diatrict  may  pe>


meat  of  each  wa  an  ahnoit  entirely  in  the  duk.
(Thirlwall,  HiH.  o/Grtta,  vol.  L  p.  437.)

When  occasion  required,  e  chief  magiatrale  waa
elected  nnder  the  name  of  Tagua  (r^i),  whoie

Auda  wen  obeyed  by  all  the  four  diatricta.

.  aometmea  called  king  (Aun^iui,  Hrtod.  v.
63),  and  aometimea  ipx^t.  (Dlonya.  v.  71.)  Hi*
command  wai  of  a  military  rather  than  of  a  civil
nature,  and  he  aeema  only  to  bavs  been  appointed
when  there  waa  a  war  or  one  waa  appnbended.
Pollux  (i.  12B)  accordingly  in  hi*  Hit  of  military
detigimtiona  cUuea  tt^ther  the  Boeotanha  of  (ha
Thebani,  the  King  of  the  Lacedaemoniana,  the
PotsiMTch  of  the  Atheniaiu  (In  refennce  lo  hia
original  dutiea),  and  the  Togua  of  (ha  Theiaaliana.
We  do  not  know  tlie  extent  of  the  power  which
the  Tagna  poaieued  conatitutionally,  nor  the  time
for  which  he  held  the  oflics  ;  pnbaUy  neither  wai
precisely  fixed,  and  depended  on  the  eircamatancea
of  the  limes  and  the  character  of  the  individunL
(ThirlwBlUvaLi.  p.  4SG.)  He  levied  loldien  from
the  alatea  in  cech  diatiict,  and  aeema  to  have  fjied
the  amount  of  tnbute  to  be  paid  by  the  alliaa.
(Xenoph.  HeU.  vi.  1.  §  19.)  When  Jaaon  waa
tagna  ha  had  an  army  of  more  tban  6000  cavalry
and  not  leia  than  2U,000  hoplites  (Xenoph.  L  c),
and  Jaaon  himself  aayi  that  when  Theaaaly  ia
under  a  tagna,  than  ia  an  army  of  6000  cavalry  and
10,000  hoplitea.  {Id.  tL  I.  g  8.)  The  tribute
which  Jaion  levied  from  the  tubjeet  lovni  waa
the  aame  aa  had  been  pnviond;  paid  by  one  of
tiu  Soopodae,  whom  Boltmaim  luppoaM  to  be  the


lOM  TAGUS.

nme  Scoptu  M  Ihs  one  mentioDcd  b;  Aellui  (  V.  H.
xii.  1)  M  ■  contemponr;  of  Cynu  Ibe  joonger.
When  Thesndj  vaa  net  unilsd  niidei  the  goyem-
ment  of  t.  tagiti  the  subject  toana  poaaeued  Diore
indep«id*nee.  {Xenoph.  HitS.  fi,  1.  J  9.)  In  hiter
titnei  wnnB  itiilei  called  their  ordinary  miigiitratei
TOTof  (Btfckh,  Offp.  /.w.  n.  1770),  which  maj
hue  been  dons  howeicr,  u  Heimum  tnggetta,
only  ont  of  afiectatioD.

ThHUly  howcTer  wu  hardly  em  nnited  nnder
one  gDvemmenl.  The  diSeicnt  citiei  adauDJitpred
tbeir  oim  tSat%  indepcadent  of  one  another,
thongh  tha  amallei  towni  wem  to  ha?e  frcqneatly
been  under  the  influence  of  the  more  iniportsnt
line*  (Tiii'  i^  iixiy  Ijir  ♦apooXlui')  TJfmj/iJnrt'
tikwir,  Xenoph.  HtU.  tL  1.  g  B).  In  almoal  al!
the  citiei  the  fonn  of  KoTemment  wa*  ariitocratica)

al  «,im\il,  Thncjd.  ir.  76),  and  it  «M  chieBf
in  the  handi  of  a  feir  great  fiuniliea,  who  were
dncended  fnm  the  ancient  kinga.  Thua  Laiiua
mu  inbject  lo  the  Aleuadae,  whence  Hvodslua
(Tji.  6)  milt  them  kingi  of  TbeHaly;  Cranon  or
Crannon  to  the  Scopadae,  and  Phanalua  to  the
CnondMi.  (Compan  Theocr.  i>i.  34,  Ac.)  Theae
noblea  had  raat  eltatel  cultivated  b;  the  Peneatae;
A^  were  eelebiated  Ibr  their  h»pilalil;  and  lived
in  a  pirtrcely  manner  (fiXi(niit  ra  anl  fi<7B\ri-
wptrilt rif  9rrTiAuiir TfiiTtar,  Xenoph.  HtlLii. !.
I  S),  and  they  altnuted  la  their  court*  many  of
the  poeti  and  attijta  of  aoothem  Greece.  The
Theualiin  conunonally  did  not  bowerer  aubmit
qnietly  to  tha  eicltulie  mla  of  the  noblea.  Con-
teali  between  the  two  claaaei  taein  lo  bare  aiiaen
eariy,  and  the  conjecture  of  ThiHw^l  (toI.  i.  p.
436),  that  Ibe  election  of  a  tagua,  like  that  of  a  die-
tktcf  at  Bome,  wai  lanieliinei  used  aa  an  expedient
fbr  kee|Hng  the  commonalty  under,  appear*  Tery
probable.  At  Lariwa  tlie  Aleuadaa  made  noms  eon-
cmnoot  to  the  popular  party.  Arototle  (Pal.  t.  6)
■peaka,  though  we  do  not  know  at  what  time  he
rmera  lo,  of  certain  ma^tntea  at  lanaaa,  who
bore  the  name  of  roXiTO^XsattSf  who  exerciaed  a
auporintendence  over  the  admiaaiou  of  freemen,
and  were  elected  IhemaelTe*  oat  of  the  body  of  the
people,  whence  they  were  led  to  court  the  people
in  a  wny  DnEivDUtnbte  lo  the  intereau  oC  the  aria-
tocrncy.  Then  were  alio  other  nugiatcalet  at
liOriua  of  a  democratiail  kind,  called  AapiavaimDl.
(Aritlol.  PaL  iii.  1.)  Beiidet  the  contetu  between
the  olignrehical  and  democnitical  partiea,  there
were  feiida  among  the  oligarcha  themaelvea  ;  and
aueh  waa  the  itate  of  partiea  at  Idiiaaa  under  the
of  the  Aleuadae


premment  of
fore  the  Peraiai


niagiitr


lachoH


by  mutual  conaent,  perhaps  from  the  commonalty,
to  mediate  between  the  partie*  [tpx"'  ^kbISioi,
Ariatol.  PoL  t.  5).  At  Pharaalna  too  at  the  cloee
of  the  Peloponneaian  war  the  atnte  waa  torn  aeu»-
der  by  inteitine  csmmotiona,  and  tor  th«  aake  of
qniet  and  lecurity  the  ciliieni  entnialed  the  acn>-

Polydamai,  who  diKharged  his  truat  with  the
aliicteat  integrity.  (Xeno^.  NtiO.  ii.  1.  g  3,  3.)

The  power  of  the  ariitocratica]  funillet  howefei
Kemi  to  have  eontinoed  with  little  diminution  till
toward*  the  cloae  of  the  PeloponDeaian  war,  when
dadded  democretical  moTemenU  tini  brgin  to  ap-
pear. At  this  time  the  Alenadae  and  the  Scopadae
hadhist  mnch  of  their  ancient  inauence.  Pheiae
and  PhMMloa  then  became  the  two  leadlug  alatea


TALARIA.

InThauilf. At  Pheiae  a  tyranny,  pnliBblj  •!

who  opposed  tl
uraed  at  the  it
HtU.  iL  3.  S  4  ;  Diod.  lir.  92.)  The  iatler  ob-
ject was  BccompUahed  bj  Jason,  the  lueecBaat  aid
pntbably  the  son  of  Ljcopbron,  who  eSectcd  SB
alliance  with  Polydsmaa  of  Phamlna,  aiul  caased
hiniMlFtobeelected  tnfcaiabont  B.c3;4.  WUk
he  lived  the  whole  of  Thessaly  vrai  united  as  ooe
political  power,  bat  after  bis  murder  in  kc  370
his  limilj'  wa*  lorn  aannder  b;  inteatiue  dnconls
and  did  not  long  maintain  iu  dominieo.  The
office  of  tagna  became  a  tyranny  under  hia  anccej.
tots,  Psljdoiua,  Polyphron,  Aleiander,  Titiphnna,
and  Lycophion ;  till  at  length  the  old  aiistosadtal
Eamilie*  colled  in  the  aauitUKe  of  PhiHp  df  Mkc-
donia,  who  deprived  Lyeophnm  of  hia  po«*r  fai
B.  c  353,  and  reatortd  the  ancient  goTemwait  is
the  different  town*.  At  Pbeiae  lie  i*  said  (o  ban
rettored  popnlar  or  at  leaat  republican  gorensest.
(Diod-ivi.  SB.)  The  country  howeTOT  mly  d»Bfid
maaten)  for  a  few  yean  later  {b.c;  U4)benadB
it  Gomplelaly  subject  to  Mseedonia  l;^  plajciag  at
the  bead  of  the  four  divisions  of  the  csnntiy,  ts-
tranbiea  or  tetiadarcbiea,  whidi  be  iii  lalaUiihiil.
governors  delated  la  hii  inteieaU  and  pnbablT
member*  of  the  ancient  noble  bmiliea.  who  had
now  beoome  little  better  than  hi*  TB»ial*.  (Deob
PMip.  iL  p.  71.  iii.  p.  117;  Harpwrat.  t.  t.)
Theaaaly  fnnn  thia  time  remained  in  a  state  tf  de-
pendence on  die  Macedonian  kings  (Poljb.  it.  76).
^11  theyictory  of  T.Flamininsal  "  ' '


:xl97a(


under  the  protsctien  of  the  1
Si.  niir.  61,  Polyb.  iviii.  ao.)

(Buttmann,  AfyUiJagia,  No.  xiii.
OmAUcU  der  Aleiaibmf  Voemel,  d
tMolu  amU^  FtankL  IB29;  Bom,  ds  T
Maetikmiaii  iaperia  nijKfa,  Oryphiite,  1839  j
Tittmann.  ^Jortte/biv  dl  (MeoL  5l<KCtn«r^  ^713,
&.e. ;  Schomann,  Aai^.  Jwrii  pM,  Oraec  p.  401,

TALAIIIA.  amaU  wings,  find  to  the  anclea
of  Mercury  and  reckoned  amoag  hia  altribdin.
(tAiAu,  Athen.  iii.  p.  S37,  t  ■,  rr«n*niA*i,  Opb.
Hp^  xiriL  ^  ;  Ovid.  Mtt.  iL  736 ;  Falgeait.
MylM.  I.)  In  many  worits  of  aoeient  ait  they
are  represented  growing  from  hia  aDdo,  a*  if  tbej
were  a  pan  of  his  bodily  frame  -,  bnt  mon  bi-
quently  they  are  attached  to  hin  aa  a  put  tt  his
dress,  agreeably  Co  the  description  of  ibe  poc*a
(Horn.  A  xiiv.  540,  Oi.  T.  44  ;  Viij.  An.  i..
339)  ;  and  this  is  commonly  done  by  repmentiBg
him  with  sandals,  which  have  winga  bstenod  la
ihem  OD  each  dde  over  the  node*.  Bat  than  is  a
most  beautiful  brousa  statue  of  thia  dirinity  i>  tha


TALU&

mnmm  at  Kipln,  in  which  ths  utiit,  initod  of
thfl  »le  of  a  Hndal,  hu  mada  tha  Miapi  uaite  in  ■
mctM  under  the  middle  ol  the  toot  (see  (ho  wood-
mi),  eridenllj  iaUDding  bj  tliii  el^«nt  deiiea  lo
npiBMnt  ths  mnKOgsr  of  tha  gwli  u  bonie
through  *p<K«  without  toaching  tha  gronnd.

Bcaidc*  Merctu;  tha  utiit*  of  uitiquilj  alio
raprmntad  Panem  m  waaring  ninged  undiili
l/Ucm.  MoUL  iij.  26 ;  Inghiraroi,  Vad  Fithli,  L
•■(.  70.  IT.  Ut.  ]fi6)  ;  brcauw  )ia  put  on  ihiw
of  Hercnrj,  when  ha  want  on  hit  aarial  voyage
(0  tha  reaoie  of  Androiceda.  (Ovid.  MH.  i>.
665—677  I  Hei.  SaL  316—220  ;  Eraloath.  CatatL
a  ;  Hjgiu.  Pat.  Aitroit.  ii.  12.)  Tha  uma  ip-
pendaga  wu  asribed  to  Ninerri,  accoiding  to
DM  TJew  of  hci  OT%in,  tii.  u  the  daughter  of
Palhu.  (Cic^A'al.iJaor.  iiL23iT»tiei,&iM.
H  i>zpL  3S5.)  [J,  Y,]

TALARU3(T<Uapo.).  [CiHTHUg.]
TALA'SSIO. tMATKiuoNiuu,  p.  743.  b.]
TALENTUU. [Libra,  2d  art. ;  Pomdkka  ;


Nui


-a.]


TA'LIO,  Crom  Talli,  (ignilie*  an  eqaiTslent,  bat
it  i*  uied  oul;  in  the  kdh  of  a  puniihment  or
pcnaltj  tha  Mme  in  kiod  and  degree  ai  the  mi*-
chief  which  tha  guilty  penon  bai  dona  to  the  bod;
of  anolber.  A  proriuoQ  u  to  TaUa  occnned  in
the  Twrln  Tahiti:  Si  menibnun  nipit  ni  cum  eo
put  tdio  eito^  (FcWu,i.e.  Tbiiosu.)  Thi>  paa-
Bge  doee  not  lUie  what  Talio  ii.  Cata  ii  qnoted
bj  Friaciin  (ri,  p.  710,  Put«h)  layi:  Si  quia
Dumbrom  nipit  ant  oa  btgit,  talione  prtiiiniui
Cdgnatui  tddicalar.  ThelawofTalio  waa  probably
enforced  by  tha  indiiidiial  or  hi*  friendi:  it  ia  not
probable  that  tha  penally  waa  inflicted  under  a
drciiioD  of  a  mnrt  of  jnitice.  It  •eeina  likely  that
it  bora  Maie  analogy  to  the  penaiiiim  to  kill  an
•dnllerer  and  adnlUeai  in  certain  taaei,  which  the
Julia  Lex  CDofinaed  ;  and  if  lo,  tha  law  would

penoD  or  hi*  eognati  might  take  ihit  lalio.  The
pnni*hnHint  of  death  for  death  wat  talio  )  but  il  i>
not  nid  that  tba  eognati  could  inflict  death  for
death.  Talio,  ai  a  pnniahment,  wu  a  pan  of  the
Moaaic  law  i  "  breach  for  breach,  eya  for  eye,
tooth  for  loolh :  a*  ha  hath  ciuied  a  blemiih  in  a
man,  ao  (bail  it  be  done  to  him  again."  [LtvU.
xii(.  30  ;  Klin,  Dot  Oriminalncil  dm-  Rimir,  pp.
37.  S4S,8I6,  9IG.)  {Q.  L].

TALUS  {itrpttyaSti),  a  huckle-bone.  Tha
huckle-bonei  of  abeep  and  goal*  have  often  been
found  in  Greek  and  Roman  tomU,  both  real,  and
imitatad  in  irory,  bronie,  glaai,  and  agate.  Thota
of  the  aulelcpe  (topiMiuii)  ware  uu^t  aa  object!
of  elegance  and  corioaity.  (Theopb.  Ciar.  6. ;
AthcD-T.  p.  193,  C)  They  were  ueed  to  play  wilh
bum  the  earlieit  timei,  princlpoU;  by  women  and
chiUren  (PInL  Aldi.  p.  350),  occationally  by  old
men.  (Cic  de  Sonet.  16.)  A  painting  by  Alei-
andai  of  Atheni,  found  at  Reeina,  repretenta  two
women  occupied  with  thi*  game*  One  of  them,
hanng  thrown  the  bonea  upward*  into  the  air.  haa
canghtthreeofthenonthebackof  herhand.  (Aiil.
d'Erc  i.  tav.  1.)  See  the  following  woodcut,  and
compare  the  account  of  the  game  in  Pollux  (ix.  c  7)-
Polygnotoj  executed  a  liniilar  work  at  Delphi,  re-
preaenting  (he  two  daughlen  of  Pandanu  tha*  em-
ployed (mifcHKrat  ieTparfiXait,  PaiUL  i.  30.  §  1).
lint  a  much  more  celebtated  prodnction  waa  the
proap  of  two  naked  boyt,  executed  in  bronie  by
PeljwtM,  and  called  tha  Aitr^tJumta, (Plin.


H.  A',  aiiir.  8.  a  19.)  A  fractured  marble  group
of  (he  tame  kind,  preHirved  in  the  British  Muieun^
exhibit)  one  of  the  two  boyg  in  the  act  of  biting
the  am  of  hie  pUy-fellow  u  aa  to  pteaent  a  litely
iltiulnttioa  of  the  account  in  Homer  of  (he  blal
quarrel  of  PalrDcliu.  {IL  uiii.  87,  68.)  To  pla*
■t  thi*  game  wa»  jometiraei  called  Tunai^a'J^ur,
becania  five  bonea  or  other  objecU  of  a  umilar  kind
were  employed  (Pollux,  Lc);  and  thi.  number  ii

Whiltl  the  tali  wen  without  artiliciBl  marka,  Iha
game  waa  entirely  one  of  tkill ;  and  in  ancient  no
leu  than  in  modem  time*,  it  can>i*ied  not  merelj
in  catching  tha  fin  bonei  on  tha  back  of  the  hand
a*  «hown  in  the  wood-cut,  but  in  a  great  Tarietyof
exereiiee  requiring  quickneu.  agilily,  and  accuracy
of  light  When  the  ude*  of  the  bone  vera
markei]  with  different  laluei,  the  nme  became
one  of  chance.  [Alia  ;  Tissira.)  The  two  end*
were  left  blank,  becauia  the  bone  conld  not  leit
upon  either  of  them  on  account  of  it*  curvatura.
The  four  remaining  aides  were  marked  wilh  iha
umbera  1,  3,  4,  6  ;  1  and  6  being  on  two  oppo-
ite  udei,  and  3  and  4  on  the  other  two  oppoilta
idea.  The  Oreek  and  Latin  namei  of  the  num-
«ri  were  aa  follow.  (Pollux,  Lc;  EuiUth.
I  Horn.  II.  iiiiL  88  ;  Sueton.  Augail.  71  ;  Mart,
iii.  1.6):— 1.  Mo«li,  .&,  nittio,  Xwi  (tJranck,
Avd.!.  35,  2*2)  i  Ion.  Ofni:  Uaia,  Vullarvu,
a-,u  (Propert.  iy.  9.  17;  Ovid.  Art.  Amal.  ii.
205, /'oil.  ii.  473):  3.  Iftif:  Tirmio  ;  i.Tirpdi:
Qualtmio  ;  6.  'Efis, iil-n,s,  K^o, :  Saio.

Aa  the  bone  ii  broader  in  one  direction  than  in

the  other,  il  _wai  mid  to  fall npright  or prone

(Jjiflit  fl  wfntrijs,  ndia  aatpnmui),  according  aa  it

rolled  on  the  narrow  or  the broad aide. (Pint.

wtpet.  Pnk  p.  1209,  ed.  Stepb. ;  Cic.  da  Fm.

.  16.)

Two  peraon*  played  together  at  ihia  game,  aabg
foiir  bonea,  which  they  threw  up  into  the  air,  at
emptied  out  of  a  diw-box  [Fbitillub],  and  ob-
leriing  the  numbera  on  the  nppermoit  aide*.  Tha
number*  on  the  four  ude*  of  the  four  bonei  admitted
of  thirty-fliedifierent  combinatiani.  The  loweit
throwot  all  waafouracet(>Kt(  voilorai  qualnor,
Phmt.  Cun.  iL  3.  78).  But  the  value  of  a  throw
{ffa>^i,  jadm,)  waa  not  in  all  caiea  the  aum  of
the  four  numben  turned  up.  The  higheit  in  value
wa*  that  called  rejmi,  or  Jacba  Ffstnia  (Plant,
AtBi.  T.  2.  55  ;  Cic  de  Din.  iL  59  ;  Sueton.  L  c.),
in  which  the  numben  caat  up  were  all  different  '
(Mart,  xiT.  14),  the  aum  of  them  being  only  foor-
tecD. It  wa*  by  obtaining  thi*  throw  that  tba  king


lose  TAMIAS.

of  the  feul  wu  ■ppalntsd  amDiig  llis  RoinkTii
(Hor.  Cb™.  L  4.  18,  ii.  7. 25)  [SvupositTM].  uid
lunce  il  wu  alto  callid  SonZtcni.  (PlaaL  CbrK  iL
3.  80.)  Certnin  other  ihnni  Ten  called  b;  pu-
tjcokc  DODiei,  taken  from  godi,  illuitnoua  men  nnd
Komen,  and  beroei.  Thiu  the  thnv,  eontining
□r  liTo  atxt  and  two  tisyi,  mnkiug  eight,  vu  de-
UDDiinaMd  SItiiciorut,  Wben  the  object  w»
■implj  to  throw  the  highsU  nambcn,  the  gamt
wu  odled  iA.iffTrfo\[rta.  (PoUar,  viL  206,  it
95,110,  117.)  Before  a  penoD  threw  (he  tult,  he
often  invoked  either  a  god  orbit  miitreia.  (Pliut.
On*-  i-  1.  B.  Cun-  ii.  8.  77—79.)  The«  bonei,
marked  and  thrown  n  above  deKiibed,  were  alio
UKd  in  dirination.  (Soeton.  Tiber.  U.) [J.  Y.]

TA'MIAS  (tb^m).  wu  ft  name  giien  to  an;
penon  who  hod  lb«  care,  managing,  ai  diipenung
of  DtoDe]r,  ilock,  or  properly  of  any  dMcriplion,
conAdedtahin  ;  a>a  itoHard,  bntirr,  honMlceeper,
atorehoniekeeper,  or  treaaurer.  And  the  word  U
applied  metaphorically  in  a  varietj  of  way".


article,

■ot  dutiet  by  the  Athen:

etpecially the  tnaiuran


II  M  nnder


in  thil


'ith  unpo^^
of  the  templea  and  the


In  andent  timet  eierj  temple  of  any  importance
had  property  belonging  to  it,  beiidea  ita  furniture
and  omamenta  ;  and  a  treaaury  where  inch  pn>-
pcrt;  wu  kept.  I^nda  were  attached  to  the
temple,  from  which  cent!  accrued  ;  linei  were  made
payable  to  the  god  ;  trophiei  and  otbet  valuablci
wen  dedicated  to  him  by  the  public  ;  and  varioug
•acred  oficringi  were  made  by  tndiTiduxli.  There
ytti  t,Taiilai  lifiar  xP'lt^'i'i'i',  who,  together  with
iruniriu  and  Upatoiai,  had  tbe  cutiody  and
management  of  thete  fund).  The  wealthleat  of  all
the  temple)  at  Athens  waa  that  of  Athena  in  the
AcropoUa,  in  wticb  were  kept  the  apoil)  taken
fcom  the  Periian)  (t1  ipiirrtm  t^i  rtAeuiJ,  be-
iidea magnificent  itatnea,  painting,  and  other
work)  of  an.  (Demoith.  c  nnuer.  Jil.)  To  the
Cfoddeu  large  finei  were  ipecially  appropriated  by
the  lav  or  given  by  decree  of  the  courts  or  the
Biiembly  ;  and  besidnthii  ibe  received  a  tenth  of
all  the  tinn  that  went  to  the  itate,  a  tenth  of  all
eonfiecationa  and  priiei  taken  in  war.  Her  trea-
inreri  were  called  rajiloj  Tni  SnoO,  or  rUt  rflt
ftfoE,  or  TUfiSai  UpSw  xfV^'""'  ^'  fttoG,  and
•ometiDin  umply  to^bi.  (DemMIh.  c.  Attdnt
BIS.)  They  appeal  to  have  eiiited  from  an  early
period.  Herodotna  (viii.  61,  53)  relatea  that  the
To^ifiu  ToG  J*po6  with  a  few  other  meo  awaited  the
attack  of  Xereea  npon  the  Acropolii,  aid  periahed
in  ita  defence.  They  were  ten  in  number,  choaen
annnail;  by  lot  from  tbe  claa*  of  Pentacoiiomc-
dimni,  and  afterwardi  wben  the  diatincliou  of
clanet  had  ceaied  to  eiiit,  from  among  the  wealth-
ieat  of  Athenian  dliieni.  (Harpocr.  and  &iiid.(.n
Tofiloj.)  The  Ueanuei*  of  the  other  goda  were
choaen  in  like  maineT ;  but  they,  about  the  90lh
Olympiad,  where  all  united  into  one  board,  while
thoie  of  Pallsa  remained  diatinct.  {Demoath.  e.
Tlmoer.  7'13.)  Their  ireaaury,  howerer,  wu  tratii-
ferred  to  the  txme  place  u  that  of  Athena,  via.  to
the  Opiathodomui  of  the  Parthenon,  where  were
kept  not  only  all  the  treaanrei  belonging  to  the
tamploa,  but  al»  tbe  tlata  treuure  (lo-ia  x/r^iuna,
at  cootia-diitiDgaiihed  fnmi  Itpd),  under  the  care
of  tiie  tnunran  of  Pallat.  (Aiiitoph.  Plal.  1 194.)
AH  thefhodirfth*  itaM  were CDondend M  being,


other  hand  the  people  merred  to  themaelTea  the
right  of  making  uie  of  the  lacred  monn.  u  wdl
u  the  other  pmperty  of  the  temple),  if  the  liiety
oF  the  aUle  should  requu:*  it.  (Tfaocjd.  iL  IS.)
Pajmenti  made  to  the  tem[Je*  were  noeind  by
the  treuunn  in  the  pmence  of  aome  membets  of
the  aenate,  juat  u  public  raoniea  wen  by  Ibe
Apodeclae  ;  and  then  the  treaaorers  hetsaaa  n-
aponsible  for  their  aafe  enHtodr.  Aa  to  fines  aee
EfibolK,  Phjctohis,  and  on  the  vhide  itf  this
aabjrct,  Bdckh,  PaU.  Eerm.  of  Alien,  pp.  ISO
—16*.

IttXtt^i  rill  KoirffT  'wpooiZoti,  wu  a  more  import-


Lt  personage  t


oned. He  i


rrceiver,  like  the  Apodeclae  ;  but  a  general  pay-
muter,  who  received  Ihroai;h  the  Apodeclae  all
money  which  wu  to  be  disboned  for  the  puipoaea
of  the  adminiitralion  (except  the  pnpeny-taiea
which  were  paid  Iota  the  war-office,  and  the  tti-
biite  from  the  olliea,  which  <ra)  at  Gnt  faid  to  tbe
Hellenotamiae,  and  afterwarda  to  other  penoni
herenfter  men^oned),  and  then  dUtnbuted  it  in
aueh  uiannei  u  he  wu  required  to  do  by  the  law  i
the  autplua  (if  any)  ha  paid  into  the  war-olGc*  or
the  Theoric  fiind.  A  i  this  penon  knew  all  the  dian-
nela  in  which  the  public  money  had  to  Bow,  aad
CTerciaed  a  general  superintendence  over  the  ea-
penditore,  he  wu  competent  to  gire  adrice  to  the
people  npon  financiai  meaaures,  with  a  view  te  in-
'^  1e,  introduce  economy,  and  pfevmB

mietimei  called  ■raiaat  riji  Siwiif-
njl  tiotriatm,  aud  may  be  re-
garded u  a  sort  of  minister  of  finance.  To  bin
Arigtopbine*  referi  in  £^sit  947.  Ha  wu
elected  by  x"P"'"^  ■■"d  hdd  hia  ofBee  fbr  Ibiir
year),  but  wiu  capable  of  being  reelected. A  bw.


ring  Oie


Lycnrgu),  prohibiting  le-eleetion  ;  »  that  LycSf
gus,  who  i)  reported  to  have  continued  in  office
for  twelve yean,  mnat  have  held  it  fur  the  last

lis  officer  wu  by  no  means  free  from  control  ;
laamuch  a)  any  individual  wu  at  liberty  to  pro-
pose finanoal  meaiore*,  or  iDStitnta  crimiBal  pnt-
ceedizigt  fb[  malvenatioi  or  waate  of  the  paUic
fundi;  and  tbera  <na  an  ivtiyfmptit  t^i  Iia«4-
irim  appointed  to  chedc  lbs  attwuti  of  hia  lape-
rior.  Annenlly  then  wen  pcTMio*  caUed  Ibfurtiif
who  appear  to  Iwra  auiited  the  TSfiloi  in  some  part
of  their  dnliea.  (Bikkh,  id.  166)  [Poun-AL]
The  money  diahnraed  by  the  trraniter  of  the
venua  wu  aometimei  paid  directly  to  the  Tariooa
peraona  in  the  employ  of  tbe  goverruM^t,  aoiae-
tbnnigh  lubordinate  pay  i^cea.  Many  pub-
nctionariei  had  their  own  pnymaHeti,  who


the  Tpirfporoief,  Tf<;foiro<Dl,  dfteraiof,  r

iKifTii  naiptiii',  wbo  reoei*ed  thrmgh  ibeir
ra^iu  auch  inma  (4  Ihej  required  frno  time
to  time  for  the  prosecution  of  their  watka.  The  pay
. .  .  of  the  judioal  feet  wu  made  by  the  CelacietM
(mXarp^ai),  which,  and  the  pnrridinfi  for  tha
meala  in  the  Piytaneum,  were  the  only  dutiea  thai
aTlrr  the  eatablishmmt  of  the
ithenei.  (
724.) The'  T(vf<ti  of  tlw  t


TAPES.'
nofikiHi  ud  T^i  ta^aiuriai,  acM  Dot  only  u
tnunren,  bnt  u  tiunuchi }  ths  aipmin  (■nwimt-
ing  for  tha  Ito  ihipi  togethsl'  lo  tbont  uitHD
talBDti)  being  prorided  hj  the  >t&le.  They  ir^re
deetsd  b;  x"?"^^  (Demoath.  e.  Mid,  S70 ;
PoUbi,  Tiii.  116.) Other  trieiudi*  bul  their  own

C'nte raiila,  fis  the  keeiniig  of  mccaonU  ud
.ter  diipttch  of  bnriiwM. <BS>Ah,  Id.  p.  171.
&c;  achSmma,  AnL  Jar. pubL  Or.  pf.'iha,SlZ)
The  dutiei  of  the  'EltXiiwvraitiiu  an  apoken  of


1.  [Hi


The  wufoud  et  Alheni  (independently  of  (he
Iribnte)  m*  prayided  feom  two  •ouicei,  lit,  the
properlf-Iax  [EitrHOHA],  and  2dl7,  the  iDiplD*
of  the  jearlj  nrenne,  which  nmained  after  dft-
frajiog  the  expenaei  of  the  diil  adminiitiation,
ri-rifoirta  xfiifuira  Tqi  Jmiicijanir.  Of  the  ten
XT^OTtrrgl,  who  were  anniallj  elected  to  pMaide
orer  the  wai  depanmeat,  one  wai  tolled  vrpvnrrii
t  tui  T^i  tiaur/itita,  to  whom  the  managemeDl
of  the  war  fund  wtu  entnuted.  Ha  had  under
bim  a  tnamrer,  called  laiiiai  nfr  orfHTuiTurw,
who  giTe  oat  tha  pay  of  the  tnupi,  and  defiavad
all  other  expaiuei  mddent  to  uie  MrricA  De-
noatbenet,  puhapt  on  accoont  of  aoiiie  abneea
had  nmng  vp^  recomniended  that  the
;■  ihoold  haT«  nothing  to  do  with  tfa«  mili-


■hoold  be  accountable  Ibr  it*  pr^r  ^plication
Tir  lib  ™»  xPViidttiw  Ai^iii'  rapi  raina
^afitirtirf  rin  ti  thjt  tpyttr  mpd  tdv  ffrpttrtfyov.
(i>»CteK«.  101.)  The  paange  juat  died  coo-
finai  the  opinion  of  thota  who  think  that  in  Da-
moeth.  dt  Oortm,  238,  26S,  the  worda  d  trl  t^i
IwuciiirftH  nfcT  to  a  Brpanrfit  to  deugnated.
and  not  to  the  raiiias  r^t  wporAiav^  (Schomiian,
Ami.  Jwr.  pail.  Gr.  p.  252,  n.  7  ;  Kickh,  Id.  p.
168  1  Ueiei,  Alt.  Prac.  f.  105.)

So  much  of  the  inipliu  reTenne,  ai  waa  not  re-
qaired  lor  the  pnipoaei  of  war,  waa  to  be  paid  by
the  tnaanrec  of  the  rereniie  into  the  Theorjc  fond ;
of  which,  after  (he  Arcbonihip  of  Euclidea,  special


[Tua


□A.]


demi,  Siffiw  TE^idu,  and  thoM  of  (he  tribea,  ^oXir
T^iloj,  who  bad  tha  caie  of  the  fimda  belonging  to
their  reapectiTo  communitiea,  and  perfanned  duties
amalo^Ui  la  thoee  of  the  itata  tceaniren.  The
demi,  ai  well  ai  the  tiibei,  bad  their  common
landa,  which  wen  uinally  let  to  farm.  The  renll
of  theae  fotmed  the  principel  put  of  their  leTenue.
Wai^im,  t^iiOpXBi,  and  other  local  fonetionariea
weie  ^pointed  for  rariou*  ptupom;  bat  with  re-
apeet  to  their  internal  economy  *e  han  but  icaaty
infbimation.  (Sehiiniann,  iJe  aM»l.pp.371~S7S,
Anl.  Jar.  paiL  Gr.  pp.  203,  204.) [C.  R.  K.J

TAPES  wTAPETE  (Nan.  ManeU.  p.  22S,
ed.  Meneti),  rdnii,  tiItii,  oi  liwis,dai.  imlSuir,
a  piece  of  tapatiy,  a  caqiet.

The  Dae  at  tapeitry  wu  in  rery  ancient  timaa
cbancteriitic  of  Orients  lather  than  of  Eoropean
habiU  (Athen.  iL  p.  iS,  a.) ;  we  find  that  the
Aatalica,  incloding  the  Egjptiani  and  aiao  the
CartbagiDiani,  who  were  of  Aiiatic  origin,  excelled
in  the  manoficture  of  caipeta,  ditphyed  them  on
featiTal*  and  other  pablic  occaiiona,  and  gaie  them
MM  pmenla  to  their  friendik  (Xen.  AaoA.  rii.  3.
S  ID,  27-)  They  were  nevertheleM  uied  by  the
Oleeka  aa  eariy  ai  the  age  of  Homer  (H  Iti.  224,
znt.  2ia,  615,  Od.  ir.  298,  tu.  337),  and  by


Oomea.  (Sidon.  Apoll.  Carm.  niii.  427.)  Ths
plaeei  moit  renowned  for  the  manubcluie  wens
Babylon  (Arrian,  Erjitd.  Aiac  -n.  p.  43S,  ed.
Blanc ;  Sidon.  ApolL  Spilt,  ii.  13),  Tyre  and
Sidon  (Keliodor.  t.  p.  252,  ed.  Commelin.),
Saidea  (Athen.  ii.  p.  40,  b.,  vi.  p.  255,  e,  xii.
p.  5)4,  c  ;  Non.  MarcelL  p.  542),  Uiletua  (Aria-
toph.  Aia.  549),  Alexandria  (PllDt.  Ptad.  i.  2.
13),  Carthage  (Athen.  L  p.  28,  n),  and  Corinth.
{Athen.  L  p.  27,  d.)  In  teleience  to  the  leitnrt,
theae  artidea  wen  dittingniahed  into  thoae  which
were  light  and  thin  with  but  lilde  nap,  chiefly
made  at  Saide*  and  tailed  i^iAsTdritti  (Athen.  vi.
p.  2S6.e.,iii.  p.514,c;  Diog.  lAKct.T.72),  and
thoae  in  which  the  nap  (^loAAef)  waa  mon  abund-
ant,aiid  which  wen  loft  and  woolly  {iXXm,  Horn.
A  in.  224  ;  f«i\«oii  ^W,  Od.  JT.  124).  The
thicker  and  more  eipeniire  kinda  (fuAAoriBl)  rft-
•embled  our  boiae  or  drugget,  or  even  our  aoCl  and
warm  bUnketo,  and  were  of  two  aorta,  ria.  thoae
which  had  tha  nap  on  one  aide  only  (jTfpd^iaAAu),
and  thoae  which  had  it  on  both  Mdea,  called
d^Tsni  (Atfaea  T.  p.  197,  b.,  tL  p.  255,  e. )  Ding.
\ala\.  T.  72,  73),  awphiofai  (Non.  ManelL  p.
540;  Lmdl.  jbl.ip.  188,ed.  Bip.},ord>ifiT^]nrr4r
(Eaalatb.»/roiL/Lii,2D0),and  alu  d/i^W^'>o<
<a  ampliimaaa.  (Plin./T.JV.  TiiL  48.  i.  73.)  In-
alead  of  bung  alwaya  nied,  like  blanket!,  in  single
[rieoea  aa  they  came  from  the  loom  [Palliuk],
caipeta  woe  often  aawed  together.  (Plant.  Slidt.
■a.  3.  £4.)  Tbey  were  beiuently  of  aplendid
eidoara,  beii^  dyed  dlher  with  the  kerniea  ( Hot.
Sat.  ii.  6. 1 02 — lOS)  or  with  the  murai  (tUnipTKi,
hyimaf^Hfai),  and  haTing  figuna,  e^wcially  bant-
ing-[Hacet,  woren  into  Uiem.  (Sidon.  ApolL/.c;
Plant,  fwwf.  i  2.  14.)  Theae  fine  ipecimena  of
tapeatjy  wen  ipread  upon  tbronei  or  chairs,  and
upon  benchea,  couchei,  or  aofas,  at  entertainmenta
(Horn.  J^ ix. 200,  Od.ix.l50;  Virg..JiR.  i.  639,
697—700  ;  Orid.  MA.  liii.  638  ;  Cic  Tate.  i.  21),
more  eapecially  at  the  nuptiala  of  persona  of  dii-
tinetion.  CatuUtia  (Argtm.  47—220)  repreaenu
one  to  bare  been  so  employed,  which  exhibited  the
whole  story  of  Theaena  and  Ariadne.  They  were
eien  Died  to  aleep  upon  (Hom.  lU  i.  156  ;  Anac
riii.  1,  S  i  Thescrit.  x>.  125  ;  AristopL  Plai.  540 ;
Virg.  Am.  ix.  325,  358),  and  lor  the  clothing  of
horKa.  (.^en.  vii.  277.)  The  tapestry  nsed  to
decorate  the  bier  and  cat^que  at  the  AFOruaosn
of  a  Roman  Emperor  waa  interwoven  with  gold.
{Herodian,  it.  2,  p.  82,  ed.  Bekker.)  The  orieutali
upon  oecaaiaiia  of  slata  and  ceremony  aptaad
carpets  both  orer  their  Boora  and  apon  the  ground.
(Aeeehyl.  Agam.  879— 93fi  ;  Athen.  it.  p.  131,  b.,
xiLp.5l4,c.)

Beeidea  the  terms  which  htTo  now  been  explained,
the  aame  aitidei  of  domeilic  fuinitun  bad  deno-
minationa  uiung  from  the  mode  of  naing  them,
either  in  the  TaicLiHiux  (Iritfyaana  Babgionia,
PUn,  H.  N.  Tiii.  46.  t  74)  or  in  the  Cdek^uiUk
(cabiealaria  po/jmtifa.  Hart.  iit.  150),  and  enpo-
dally  from  the  constant  prnclica  of  spreading  them
out  (Uirtile  tlragalam,  Cic  Tuie.  t.  21  ;  ilraliim,
C.  Nepoa,  Ago.  Tiii.  2  j  vettii  tinupda,  LIt.  xxxIt.
7  ;  Hot.  Sat.  iL  3.  118  ;  vrfo^unl.  Pint.  Imiry.
p.  SB,  ed.  Stcpb. ;  Athen.  it.  p.  142,  a.,  orfi^una,
ii.  p.  43,  d.).  The  Greek  terra  periMtroma,  which
was  traniferred  into  the  latin  (Diog.  Laert.  Le.i
Plant.  Sti^  ii.  2.  54  i  Cio.  PUL  ill  37),  had  m


TEGULA.

Is  u  lain  u  to  huw  round  thn  lidM  of  the

bedorcoDcE.  [J.Y.]

TAPHUS  (nIfM). [FuNus,  pt  £56.  a.]

TARENTI-Nl  LUDI.  [Litdi  SiWDtiMS.]

TARRHU8  (Tii^dO- (N*v[s,p.7B8,t]

TAURII  LUDI. [Ldqi  S*«cuLiRH.]

TAXIARCHI(Ta{iat>x«}.iTereiiulilarfDfficen

at  Athem,  *ha  wrn  neil  in  rank  to  tfac  Sinlcgi.

[Stratuhs,]  Thej  wen  ton  b  Dombar  like  tte

Knlegi,  ons  fur  each  tribe,  end  irere  elected  in  the

•UDe  way,  nemel j  bj  x*  Ve*^ (D«ei.  Fkilip.  i.

p.  «7  1  PoUui,  Till  67.) In  war  Mcb  commanded

the  inhntiy  of  hit  awn  tribe  (Dvn.  •*■  Soeol.  p.

999  ;  Aeach.  da  Fait.  Ltg.  p.  333),  and  the;  wen

fivquanllf  called  to  aoiit  the  Stmlegi  with  their

Rdyiea  at  tba  wocooncil. (ThTKjd.  rii.  GO.) In

peww  they  aiiiited  the  Stiategi  in  lerjing  and

cnliiting  loldien,  ai  ii  itated  nndei  Stbatuum,

and  tbef  wan  to  have  al«a  Muated  the  latter  in

the  diichane  of  many  of  their  other  dnijee.

The  Tuiaieha  were  ao  called  from  their  eom-
manding  rdfiii,  wbich  wen  the  princifal  ditiiioDi
of  the  hoplitce  in  tbo  Athenian  army.  Each  tribe
(fuAil}  fonnsd  a  "rHa,  whence  we  find  ^^if  <ued
M  lytMOTinoni  with  rdfiL  (L^i.  ia  Amrn),.  pp.
49S,  601.)  Ai  then  wen  ten  tribes,  there  wsrs
oHueqaently  in  a  complsla  Athenian  uray  ten
T^tiT,  but  the  number  of  msn  toatained  in  each
would  of  ccnru  -nxy  iccordiog  to  the  impoitaDce
of  the  war.  Among  the  ether  Greek*  the  t^u
was  the  name  of  ■  mock  nnaller  diTiaion  of  Wxym.
The  \dxoi  among  the  Athenian!  wai  a  enbdiiiiiDn
of  the  Til{u,  and  the  hox<r)v[  were  probably  ap-
pointed by  the  taiianba.  (Scbomann,  At^  Jar.
oAL  Orate,  p.  25S,  Ac)
TAXIS  (Td{u).  [Taxiarchl]
TECTOR,  TECTO'RIUM  OPUS.  [PiaiM,
p.  870,  a.]

TE'GULA  (n^p^w,  dim.  Ktpaidt,  Xen.  /Ufn.
tI  a.  §  9),  a  roafing-tile.  RooBng-tilei  were  origi-
nally mads,  Uks  bncki,  of  baked  elaj  (i-jt  irrijt),
Byiei  of  NaiM  Rnt  introdueed  tiiea  of  marble
abont  the  year  620  B.  c.  (Pane.  t.  10.  §  2.)  Be-
■idei  the  auperioT  beanly  and  darabilily  of  ths
materiel,  thets  tilat  could  be  made  ot  a  much
larger  liie  than  thoes  of  clay.  CoMcqiuntly,  whsn
they  were  employed  in  the  congtraetion  of  ths
gteateet  tem^et,  inch  aa  that  at  Jupiter  at  Olympia
(Pans,  I.e.),  the  Parthenon  at  Athene,  and  die
Sempeiom  at  Pateoli,  their  dimeniiona  wen  in
exact  prapcrtion  to  tbo  other  part*  of  the  building  ;
and  the  effect  of  the  parallel  rows  of  joint-tiki
deicending  from  the  ridge  to  the  tavet,  and  termi-
nated by  ornamental  Erontoni,  with  which  the  Ijona'-
head«  (capita  iHmiaa,  VilniT.  iii.  6.%  IB;  xbA'jhi,
HorapolL/fiir.  121)  over  the  cornice  alternated,
waa  sxeeedingly  giaad  and  beautifnl.  Haw  highly
thia  inrsntion  waa  prized  by  the  aneienti  ii  pnTcd
by  the  attempt  of  the  Roman  censor  Q.  Fnlriu
Flacou  to  deipul  ths  tonpls  of  the  Laciniau  Juno
of  leme  of  its  maible  tilei  {Itgulae  nonnonoe),  in
order  to  adorn  another  temple  which  hs  had  TOwed
to  erect  in  Rome,  (Li>.  ilii.  4  ;  VaL  Max.  i.  1.
i  SO.)  A  still  men  expennie  and  loagnilicent
method  of  roofing  conuMed  in  tbe  nie  of  tiles
made  of  bronas  and  gilL (Plin.  H.  JV.  xxxiu.  3.

Ill)

At  Rome  the  honaes  were  originally  roofed  with
ahinglea,  and  oontinned  to  be  io  down  to  ths  lime
oTIMtiaririih  Pjnku,  irkeo  tOee  begM  to  •lIpe^


TEOULA.
(ede  tbs  old  roofing  materiil.  (Plin.  ff. /T.  in.  10k
■.  36  ;  Niebnhr,  HiiL  of  Roiae,  toL  iiL  p.  BiS.)

Tiles  wen  originally  mads  perfectly  flal.Da'  witk
nothing  mors  than  the  hook  or  noale  nmderustb
the  upper  border,  which  CulEUad  ths  foifot  of
filing  them  upon  the  raften.  They  i
wards  formed  with  a  raised  borda  on  a
unaxed  woodeut  repm


In  Older  that  the  bwer  edge  ef  any  tils  migtl
oretlap  the  upper  edge  of  that  whidi  easM  aeat
below  it,  its  two  sidca  ware  made  to  uaiiog*
downward*.  See  the  neit  voodent  rqTienting
a  tiled  rmf,  from  apart  of  which  the  jnnt-tilea  an
remored  in  order  to  ibov  the  onrlanpiBg  aad  iba
eonrergaitee  of  the  ndea.  It  «aa  andcnlly  >acc*-
aary  to  ursr  ths  lines  of  jnnedoa  hatwan  the
rowi  of  Sat  tilea,  and  thia  was  dons  by  tka  ose  ef
lemicylindrical  tilea  callad  amineat-  The  ahra
woodcat  showi  the  eection  of  three  imbrioe*  tomt
at  Pompeii,  and  indicates  their  poulisii  idatirdy
to  the  flat  tilea.  Thia  ia  alao  ahawn  in  the  not
aroodenb The  roo^  by  tbe  exact  — <T'-ti— i  (f


the  broad  bgnla*  and  the  nanvw  iisinoa  Ihm^
out  it*  ^^  extent,  became  like  ow  eslid  sad
compact  feame-woik.  (Xen.  Vest,  iii  1-97:  (■•-
Jm^  legJat  inMimjmt,  Plant  Mad.  L  2.  -JS  t
Plin.//.Ar.  iiiri.22.a4t.)  The  iws  etjoiat-
tiks  divided  the  toot  into  an  eqoal  nnmber  J
channBlt,  down  which  the  water  dracendrd  lats
the  gutter  {etanlii)  to  be  discharged  thnngk  ■;*■■
inga  made  in  the  UonaVheadi,  lbs  poatiea  aad  tf-
pearance  of  which  an  ahowa  in  tbe  woodcML
The  rowB  of  flit  tiki  termiiated  in  a  larisnaly
ornamented  Snat,  which  rose  immsdiatdy  abwe
the  eotnios,  and  af  whiob  bnr  spscimiiDS  are  shsw«
in  the  firat  woodcoL  Tbe  fintand  fonrtb  paltroia
an  dnwn  bum  tika  fbnnd  at  Pooped,  and  dta


Thtin
u  McKbed  to  DibuUilei


TKUL
HaMmn  tai  ^nght  thither  beta  Athmu.  Tlie
linu'-he*dt  npoD  Ih*  third  imd  tbaith  u*  per-
fBEMed.  [AMTBrixA.j  Tha  fiaiitoai,  which
wsTB  nngsd  afamg  ths  axniea  at  th»  tcmiiuuion
of  tha  nwi  of  j^l-tiln,  vara  aithar  punted  <it
•enlptnnd  u  u  to  tapmant  leans,  Bplnitrii
[ArLomu],  or  muka.  Tha  fint  vnodEat  ihon
thna  snmplM  of  nth  Ermitinii,  which  baloug
to  ths  Elgin  collacliaD  in  tha  Biitiih  MuMom.
Thsj  an  dnvn  on  >  much  higa  Ksla  than  the
other  objectj  in  tha  nune '  ■« i

of  these  enoeful  omameDI
ofCotinfli. (Plin.HlA'.

Olh«  hight;  cnrioiu  dslula  upon  tha  tiled  tiM&
•f  Onak  templM  may  ba  wan  in  tha  ITiHiJitaJ
AntiqiHliil  ^  AtHea,  Loo.  U

Tu  Mm  imngain"
tnmd  a  teanla  wm  ■!
which  ma  famed  wi.
HeDca  anj  panon  whe  deacended  from  tba  roof
inM  the  apan  court  or  inptnTimn  of  a  boue,  ma
wd  to  pua  "  thmogh  tha  tile*  "  (par  ttguloM,  Ter.
Smt,  iii.  6.  *0  ;  eompare  Oellioa,  x.  IS  ;  lul  raf
KtpaiiMr,  St.  Luke,  t.  IS).

Plin7  menlioiu  ■  kind  of  tiling  imdar  tha  name
moaaemm  (H.  N.  iixri.  23.  c  41),  la  caUed  pro-
W>l7  beanae  the  tilei  ware  lemidnnilar  at  their
lowet  edn,  and  OTeriapped  one  another  like  At
feathei*  b  the  tmin  of  a  peacock.  Anciant  te-
polotTat  and  ami,  made  in  the  (bnaofuDail  templet
[Puhdb],  often  rapraaact  rtn  axaotljr  tha  ap-
peamiea  of  >  roof  with  the  uora-maDtioaed  t*-
rieliea  in  tha  foRn  of  the  lilea.  (J.  Y.]

TEICHOPOEUS  (T«x"'«'')-  Among  tha
Twiooa  peiuna  to  whom  waa  antnuted  the  ma-
■ageiBant  of  pahlio  voikt  at  Athena  (JnimfTai
itlfiorinw  fpfwr),  were  thota  whoM  bnniieu  it  waa
to  bnild  and  keep  in  npair  the  public  walla.  It  it
twedleea  to  obaetre  haw  important  to  the  cilj  of
Athena  wen  her  walla  and  fbrtificationa,  Dora
eipeciallf  the  long  walla,  which  eoonected  tha
nppeicitj  with  the  Peiraeeu),  and  which  gaTeitthe
■dnnBgca  of  an  ialand.  Thete  wen  m^ntained
>t  eonaiderahle  axpsnw.  Tha  rtiX"""!  appear
to  have  been  elected  bf  x"P"'"^  °ne  from  each
tribe,  and  Bnhably  for  a  year.  They  were  con-
udend  to  hold  a  magiftarial  office  (ipx^),  and
in  that  capacity  bad  an  i^i^iorla  JunHmtpIov.
Aeadunea  otUi  them  4wundrai  toS  itryLnea  -rm
tfiy*.  Fandi  were  pot  at  their  diipoial,  far  which
they  had  their  treaaorer  (rniiiia),  dependent  on
the  treanirer  of  Ibe  rcTcnae.  They  were  liable  to
imdoc  an  aceotml  (^tHirii)  of  their  management  of
theee  fnndt,  and  aleo  of  their  general  conduct,  like
other  msgiitntea.  The  office  of  T%ixP"^'  ^  been
inveatod  with  peculiar  intereit  in  modem  timet,  on
account  of  iti  hanng  been  held  by  Demoithenei,
and  ita  haying  giren  oecaiion  to  the  fiunon*  proee-
cnlion  of  CiPHpum,  who  propoaed  that  DamotUienM
thould  receiTe  ths  honoor  of  a  crown  before  he  had
rendered  hii  acconnt  according  to  law.  At  to  the
nalore  of  the  office,  and  the  !aw>  Eherato  relating,
wa  may  probably  rely  upon  the  acconnt  giTen  by
Aoachfaua.  (Aeuh.  c  doipL  G5 — 57,  ad.  Staph. ;
BSckh,  PabLEam.  of  AOum,  pp.  170,  2U3,  2d
ed.)  [C.  R.  K.]

TELA  (I«TJt),  a  loom.  Althongh  wearing  waa
■BHmgtt  the  Oreeka  and  Ronuuii  a  diitinct  trade
carried  an  by  a  teparate  data  of  peiaoni  (il^dnai,
Urkra  and  ttttricf,  laltnitt),  who  more  partico-
larlj  nipplied  tha  inhabilanti  of  tha  towna  with


TELA.  1099

tha  pmdnctumt  of  thai  ikiU  (Cato,  d*  Ae  RiaL
185),  yet  eiery  conudeiabla  domeitie  ettahliih-
ment,  tapecially  in  the  connCry,  coDtained  a  loom
(Cato,  <ja  A(  Aw^  10,11)  together  with  the  whole
apparanu  necetatry  for  the  woiking  of  wool  (&»»-
fidmm,  ToAaafa,  raiMTUvpyUt).  (Henod,  Op.  tl
Mb,  779  ;Vi^(?Mrjf.  1.285,291.)  [CAI.A'rBD».]
Tbeie  occnpationt  were  all  Hippoaed  lo  ba  carried
on  ondec  the  proteetiDn  of  Minemiipedallydena-
mmated  'E^wVi  who  wu  alwaya  regarded  in  thia
character  a>  the  friend  and  paCroneat  of  induilry,
aobriety,  and  female  decorum. (Serr.  h  Virg.  EbL

Whan  the  bim  or  the  palace  waa  infflciently
large  to  admit  of  it,  ■  portion  of  it  called  the  irtSf
{hiibm»i,Vem,dtReRmt.i.  2)  or  taatruuit,  waa
derated  to  thia  pnrpoaa.  (Cic  Var.  n.  26.)  The
woric  ma  there  principally  carried  on  by  fsniale
alavea  (fnuiUanae,  ol  tixin,  TbeocriL  it.  BO ;
Horn.  Oil  L  356—360,  Tii.  235,  ixi.  B50)  nndei
(he  lapennlendence  of  the  miilmia  of  ihe  home,
who  hentlf  alto  together  with  her  daughten  took
part  in  the  labour,  both  by  initmcting  beginneia
and  by  finithinft  the  mora  taatelnl  and  onumental
parte.  {Vitrar .  »L  7.  p.  1 61,  ed.  Schneider  j  Syra-
machnt,  EpitL  xi.  10.)  Bal  althongh  wauTing  waa
employed  in  providing  the  ordinary  articlea  of
clothing  ammg  tba  (^«aki  and  Romana  from  the
eaiiieil  timea,  yet  ai  an  inTontiire  and  dseontlTO
art,  nbaarTiaut  to  luiory  and  re6nement,  It  wai


in  the  mannfactuia  of  acarfa,  ibawlt,  ca
Upeitry.  {Cbi.aht8,Pallii;ii,Pbfi,um,Tafis.J

Among  the  pecaliaritiea  of  Egyptian  mannera
Hendotut  (ii.  3£ ;  compare  Athan.  il  p.  18.  b)  men-
tion* that  weaTing  wai  in  that  country  the  employ-
ment of  the  mala  tax.  Thii  cnitom  itill  continnea
among  lania  Arab  and  negro  tribaa.  (Welitad,
TtomU,  toL  L  p.  123  j  Frichaid,  RaeanieM,  ToU
iL  p.  GO,  3d  edit.)  Throughoal  Europe,  on  the
other  band,  wearing  wa*  in  the  earlieit  agea  the
talk  of  women  only.  The  matron,  aaiiited  by  bar
daughtsia,  wore  clothing  for  the  fantband  and  the
■oni.  {Colnm.  di  Rt  Awl.  xii.  Prw/l  ;  Plin.  H.  N.
TiiL  la  a.  71  ;  Herod,  iz.  109.)  Thii  domeitia
cnitom  gicei  occaaion  in  tha  watki  of  tha  epic  and
tragic  poeti  to  Mme  Tery  interetting  dbiointia  and
erpreuions  of  afiection  between  near  ralationi.  In-
deed the  lecognittoD,  or  '^rririptta,  n  Arittolle
calli  it  (i&  ^rt.  FoeL  6.  g  IS,  11.  g  21),  oftan
depend!  on  thii  drcumitanca.  Thni  Creuu  proTea
henelf  to  be  tha  mother  of  Ion  (Eurip. /as,  141S,
1117)  by  deacribing  the  pattern  of  a  ihawl  whtdi
she  had  made  in  her  yonth,  and  in  which  tha  had
wrapped  her  inbnt  ion.  Iphigenia  ncogniiea  her
brolhsr  Oicstei  on  one  occaaion  (Eorip.  Ifk,  ^
Trmr.  614—817),  and  Eleetia  recogniist  him  on
another  (AetchyL  (Satpk.  225)  by  the  ^nred
clothing  which  he  wors,  and  wUch  they  had  lonf
befon  WDTsn  for  him.

Betidea  the  ihawli  which  were  frequently  girea
to  the  templet  by  priiate  penoni,  or  obtained  I7
commene  with  fnrign  nationt,  companie*  or  CM-
lagaoffamalet  were  attached  to  the  mora  opulent
tempba  lor  the  porpoee  of  Fbmiihing  a  regular  tap-
ply.  Thnithe  aiztean  women,  who  liTed  tf^her
in  a  building  dettined  to  their  uia  at  Olympia,
wOYe  a  new  ihawl  erery  fi*s  jean  to  ba  diiplayad
at  the  garnet  which  war*  llm  celebnled  in  hoiuMr


1100  TELA.

of  Hen,  and  to  be  praerrcd  in  tier  ttmple.  ( Pans.
T.  16.  §  B— 4,  yL24.  S  a.)  [HsBiKA.]  A  similar
college  at  Sparta  was  devoted  to  the  parpoH  of
weaving  a  tunic  every  year  for  the  aitting  ilatue
Dfthe  Amjdeui  ApoUo,  which  wu  thirty  cubit*
bigb.  (Paul.  iii.  16.  g  2, 39.  £  S.)  At  Athfco*
tbe  company  of  lirgini  called  ipyairr^rai  or  Ipyirei,
and  (ijJ^t)f>/f»i,  who  were  pwtly  of  Auatic  eitnic-
lion,  wove  the  ibawl  which  wai  caiiied  in  the  Pa-
nathenaic  proceiaion  and  which  reprciented  the
battle  between  the  godi  and  the  gianti.  (Euiip.
Hee.tei— i69;Virif.  OHm,  21— iS.)  [Arrri-
raoRiA  I  PANiTaKK.kiA.]  A  timilai  occupation
wat  utigncd  to  joung  femalei  of  the  hiftheit  rank
atArgoa.  (Eurip. /pi.  «■  Tour.  213— 215.)  In
the  fourth  century  the  tatk  of  weaving  began  to
he  traaeferTed  in  Europe  from  vomen  to  the  other
aei,  a  change  which  Sl  Chryioitom  deplorei  ai  a
■ign  of  pnvailing  alolh  and  effeminacy.  {OroL  &i.
vol.  iiL  p.  170,  ed.  SariUe.)  \egttiut  (d*  Ri  Mil.
i.  7),  who  wrot«  about  the  aame  time,  mention*
Imltaitt,  or  th»  manufartnreri  of  linen  cloth,  in  the
number  ofthoie  who  were  ineligible  a*  aoldien.

Every  thing  woven  coniiit*  oftwoeiiential  parti,
the  warp  and  the  woof;  called  in  I^Iin  SKmn  and
Subtf^piiat,  SuUeiaea,  or  TVanui  (Viliuv.  i.  1  ;
Ovid.  Mel.  iv.  397  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iL  24.  a.  38  ;
Pert  Sal.  vL  731,  in  Greek  imf/iw  and  itfxurn.
(PUto,  PaliL  pp.297,  301,  302,  ed.  Bekker  i
Aelian,  H.  A.  iz.  17  :  PluL  dc  It.  it  Oiir.  p.
672.)  Inilead  of  K|»>i^  PUto  (C^.  v.  p,  386,
ed.  Bekker)  aomelime*  uaei  '^^  and  in  the
patiagtt  nferred  to  be  mention!  one  of  the  moat
important  difierencet  between  the  waip  and  the
' ■ • ■ ■ EBdiofthefo


lilted  i


■pinning,  whilit  thoae  of  the  latter  are  compare
lively  (oCt  and  yielding.  Tbia  i>  in  &ct  the  diffe-
rence which  in  the  modem  lilk  manabcture  di>-
tingniihe*  orpamiiu  from  tram,  and  in  the  cotton
mauuJBctun  (loul  from  tcrfl.  Another  name  for
the  woof  or  tram  wat  ^oJi'm.  (Horn.  Bair.  IHl  ;
Euitalh.  n  Horn.  IL  iiiil  762,  Od.  v.  121.)

The  warp  wai  called  ibniun  in  Latin  (<rom
alan)  on  account  of  it*  erect  poiture  in  the  loom.
<VarTo,£.  i.  V.  113.ed.  Muller.)  The  correipond-
ing  Oreek  term  ariiuir  and  likewiie  lardi  hare
evidently  the  lame  derivatioo.  For  the  aaiiie  rea-
*on  the  very  flnl  operation  in  veavuig  wa*  to  aei
np  the  loom,  lorov  tn^auBm  (Hom.  Od.  iL  94;
llniiod.  Op.  It  Diet,  779) ;  and  the  web  or  cloth,
before  it  wa*  eat  dotm  or  "  detcendtd  "  &om  the
loom  [ttmiia  i^'  larS,  Theocrit,  ir,  35),  wa*
called  "Yotie  pendeni,"  or  "ptndula  tela"  (Ovid,
Attt.  W.  395,  Epitt.  i.  10),  became  it  hung  from
the  Iraniverae  beam  oi  Juguu.  Theie  parlicnlaiB
are  all  dearly  eihibited  in  the  picture  of  Circe'i


TELA,
cut,  and  compare  Aai.  vil  1 4 :  apud  mn/ont  ifattn
leHbant,  Serviu  I'a  toe.;  Horn.  Od.  i.  223.)  M-
IhoDgh  the  uptight  loom  hen  exhibited  wi*  in
common  uie,  and  emplejed  for  all  ordioary  piu-
poio,  the  practice,  now  generally  adopted,  of
placing  the  warp  in  an  horiiontal  poiition  wa*  oc-
caiionally  revirted  to  in  ancient  time*  ;  f«  lbs
nprigbl  loom  (ila»  lila,  Ifrii  llftuit),tiit  manage-
ment of  which  required  the  feinala  lo  ttuid  ud
move  about,  ii  oppoied  to  another  kind  at  whick
■he  Ht. (Artemidoc.  iiL  36  ;  Servina,  Lc)

We  oUerve  in  the  preceding  woodent  about  tke
middle  of  the  apparatut  a  tianivene  rod  paisiH
through  the  warp.  A  itraight  cane  wai  weU
adapted  to  be  ao  naed,  and  it*  application  ia  clearly
eipreued  by  Ovid  in  the  word*  **  Itamen  leceniit
anindo."  (Afel.  vi.  S5.)  In  plain  weaving  it  wai
inaetted  between  the  Ihreadi  of  the  warp  *o  a*  to
diride  them  into  two  portion*,  the  thread*  on  one
■ide  of  the  rod  alternating  with  thoie  on  the  other
aide  throngboul  the  whole  breadth  of  the  warp.
The  two  aprighE  beami  mpportjng  the  jognm,  or
tnnivene  beam,  from  which  the  warp  depsida,
were  ailed  ti^tiirrn  (Theocrit.  zviiL  S4),  and
firrfooid,  literally,  "  the  l»i  of  tlte  loom.*'  (£a>-
talh.  n  i/bn.  Od,  liiL  [07.)

Whilat  the  improvemenla  in  machitHCj  hate  to
a  great  extent  tuperaeded  the  nag  of  the  nprigbt
loom  in  all  other  porta  of  Eorope.  it  nmaini  absMt
in  it*  primitive  itate  in  Iceland,  The  fbllaving
woodcut  ia  reduced  from  an  engraving  of  the  Ice-
landic loom  in  Olaf  Olafaen'*  Beatomte  Totr  in
that  iiland,  pnbliihed  in  Danish  at  Copenhagen,
A.  n.  1730.  We  obierve  underoeath  the  jngmn  a
roller  (owioi',  Pollux,  vii.  x.  |  36  ;  Enatath.  m
Horn.  Od.  liiL  107)  which  ii  tuned  by  a  bandla,
and  on  which  the  web  i>  wound  a*  the  work  ad-
vance!. The  thread*  of  the  warp,  beude*  being
leparated  by  a  trantvene  rod  or  plank,  are  divided
into  thirty  or  fortv  parcel*,  to  each  of  which  a
atone  ii  itupended  for  the  purpoae  of  keeping  the
warp  in  a  perpendiculai  poiition  and  allowing  the
neceiiBry  play  lo  the  itrokea  of  ihe  ipatha,  wbidt
ii  drawn  at  the  lide  of  the  loom.  The  myatkal
ode  written  about  the  eloTanth  century  of  our  e^^


byGooglc


with  whidi  0ns  W  nude  m  EiiniilmT  in  Iii>  Inn*-
laticin,  and  vhieh  dacribat  the  loam  of"  the  Fatal
SuUn,"  Tepmenla  wartion'  ikuUi  bi  luppljiog
the  plwe  of  thme  round  «lon»  (pmrftra,  Sen.
Epitl-3\  ;  P\in. If. N.Le.).  The  knotted  bundle*
of  thmdi,  to  which  the  itonei  were  sttaclied,  often
lemained  after  the  web  wai  Sniahed  in  the  form  of
afrinjte. [FlKBKiiS.]

WhiUt  the  compuatiTely  eouw,  itrong,  and
ttioch'tvittcd  thread  deiigned  for  the  warp  waa
lhn>  arranged  in  panllel  linei,  the  wooT  remained
tipon  the  .pindle  (FudUEtJ,  forming  a  ipoo/,  6Mi»,
or  pn,  (T^nr,  dint.  Wn"'.  Ham.  II.  iiiiL  762  ;
Eurip.  it/t.  166).  Thii  wu  either  conTeyed
throsgh  the  warp  without  mj  additional  eon-
tiiv.ince.  ■■  ii  itiU  the  cow  in  Iceland,  or  it  wu
made  to  niolre  in  ■  ihnttle  (vanfXjcoi,  H«jch.
M.V.  nifnov:  nvJiut,  LuenL  t.  13fi2}.  Thii  woa
mode  of  box  bronght  from  the  >bare<  of  the  Eniine,
■nd  WM  pointed  at  iti  eztnmitiei,  [hat  it  might
«aailr  force  iu  waj  throat[h  tho  warp.  (Virg.  Aat.
ix.  476  ;  OTid.  A/rt  i..  275,  ri,  B6,  133,  Fad.
iii  879.)  The  annexed  woodcut  ihowi  the  form
in  which  it  ii  illll  uisd  in  ume  retired  put*  of  our
ialond  for  cammQn  domestic  purpoeet,  and  which
nuj  be  ngarded  ■■  a  form  oF  great  antiquitj.
An  oblonir  eaiity  ii  (een  in  it>  npper  inrfaee,
which


:a  call  a  gttili^  and  which


i>  lurronnded  by  the  woof.  Thii  ia  drawn  tbroogh
a  round  hoia  in  tho  front  of  the  thullle,  and,
whenever  the  abnttle  ia  thrown,  the  bobbin  re-
Tolrea  and  deliTen  the  woof  through  thii  hole.
Tlia  proceu  of  winding  the  yun  lo  ai  to  moke
It  into  a  bobbin  or  pen.  wat  called  wTirliiiaiu
(TheocriL  iiiii.  32)  or  inamrittaBat.  (Arietou
77.  A.  T.  19.)  The  rerene  proceu  by  which  it
wa*  deliTered  Ihrongh  the  hole  in  front  of  the
■holtle  (lee  the  lait  woodcut)  wai  mlied  i/tmirl-
{irtai.  Hence  the  phraee  iKwnyitlriu  railTo  mean*
*^  he  ihall  disgorge  theie  things"  (Ariitoph.  Ran,
&86  ;  Scholia  laa.)

All  that  ii  eSected  by  the  ibuttle  i>  the  con-
vcyanoe  of  the  woof  acrou  the  woip.  To  keep
CT«ry  thread  of  the  woof  in  ile  proprr  place  it  ii
arrniiry  that  the  threadi  of  the  warp  ihould  be
decOMated.  Thii  wae  done  by  the  leaihee,  called
b  Ulin  lieia,  in  Greek  /^ro.  (.Jroi,  Hom.  II.
xiiii.  762).  By  a  leoih  we  ore  to  nndentand  a
thread  having  at  one  end  a  loop,  thmngb  which  a
thread  of  tbe  warp  woi  poued.  the  other  end  being
faacened  to  a  atraight  rod  called  £ic«atoru(iH,  and  in
Greek  iwiifr.  (Ariitoph.rtan.B29.)  The  waip,
baling  been  divided  by  the  aiuodo,  ai  already
mentioned,  into  two  leti  of  ihreadi,  oil  thoie  of  the
Mine  let  were  paHed  through  the  loopi  of  the  cor-
leaponding  let  of  leoahee,  and  all  theie  leoihee
were  fattened  at  their  other  end  to  the  lame  irooden
rod.  At  leait  one  wt  of  leaahei  wot  neceimrj  to
decnnale  the  warp,  even  in  the  plaineit  and  urn-
[iletl  WMTing. The  number  of  MU  wa*  increMed


I  the  I


TELA.  1101

imptexit;  of  the  pattern,  which


called  bilir  or  triiix  (Marl.  xiT.'U3],  SI
rpliurai  (Cmt.  Jon,  Pmff.  p.  103,  od.  Runkel),or
T0Ai!«mii  (Ptr.  Afar.  JEryl*.  pp.  Hi,  170,  173,
ed.  Blaneardi),  according  ai  the  nnmbei  wu  two,
three,  or  more.

Tho  piwew  of  anneiiug  the  lesihet  to  the  waip
Wla  called  ordm  Uam  (Plin.  H.  N.  li.  24.  •.  23),
aleo  fins  telat  addm,  or  adHitlen,  ( Virg.  Gnarg.  L
285  ;  TibulL  i.  6.  78.)  It  occupied  two  women  at
the  nme  time,  one  of  whom  took  in  legnlai  luecet-
lion  each  eepaiate  thread  of  the  warp  and  handed
it  oTOt  to  the  other  ;  thii  part  of  the  proceu  wa*
called  wtpa^piir,  npcMitm,  or  wpofoptjaeai.
(SchoL  M  Jnalopl..Je.4  iSuid[u,Heqrchiui,j.D.)
The  other  woman,  at  the  received  each  thread,
paued  it  through  the  loop  in  proper  order,  and  thii
act,  which  we  call  "  anlering,"  wa*  called  in  Oreek
iidfirrta. (SchoL  m  tfun.  Od.  vii.  107.)

Snppoaing  the  warp  to  have  been  Ihui  adjuiCed,


bydra'


gfor-


wardi  the  proper  rod,  lo  a*  to  carry  one  k
thread)  of  tbe  warp  acroti  tho  rttt,i^W  which  the
woof  wa*  (hot  back  again,  and  by  the  continual  re-
petition of  thia  proceu  the  warp  and  woof  wore
interlaced.  (Plutarch,  vIL  lap.  oaan.  p.  592,  ed.
Reiike  (  Hom.  II.  xiiiL  760—761)  In  the  pre-
ceding figure  of  the  Icelandic  loom  we  obeerve  two
itaiei,  which  are  occauonally  uied  to  fix  tbe  rod*

the  weaver  in  drawing  her  woof  acrou  her  waip.
After  the  woof  had  been  eonyeyed  by  the  ihutlle
through  the  warp,  it  wni  driven  umetimei  down-
ward*, ai  ii  repn'iented  in  the  firtt  woodcut,  bnt
more  commonly  upwaidi  ai  in  the  eecoiid.  (laid.
Orig.  lii.  22  ;  Hemd.  ii.  3S.)  Two  diffiirenl  in-
itrmnenli  were  nied  in  thii  part  of  the  proceu.
The  aimpleit  and  probably  the  moit  ancient  wsi  in
the  form  of  a  large  wooden  aword  {tpatiit,  irwdBiit
dim.  mriBior,  Brunck,  Atat.  i.  222;  Plato.  Ljiit,
p.  MB;  Ae«:h.  CAoepA.  226].  From  the  verb
mSiti,  to  beat  with  the  spaiha,  cloth  rendered
dote  and  compact  by  thii  proeeii  woe  (Ailed  rxo.
»i|ril[. (Atlien.  xii.  p.  £25,  d.) Thii  initrumenC

timea,  and  a  figure  of  it  copied  from  Olafien,  ii
given  in  the  lecond  woodcnL

The  ipath*  vai,  however,  in  a  great  degree
■uperieded  by  the  comb  (pertoi,  Hfwit),  the  teeth
of  which  were  iiuerted  between  the  ihrcada  of  the
warp,  and  (hut  made  by  a  forcible  impulw  to  drive
the  threodiofthewoof  ciowlogether.  {Omi.Fait,
iii.  BBO,  M»t.  vi.  fiB ;  Juv.  ii.  26 ;  Virg.  Ar«.
viL  14;llam./;.xxil44B;  Ariitopb.  .Jnn,  832  ;
Eurip.  /oa,  509,  760.  14IH,  1491)  It  it  probable
that  the  teeth  were  lomelimei  made  of  metal  (Hom.
Od.  V.  62)  I  and  they  were  accommodated  to  the
pnrpoie  intended  by  being  cnrved  {paiiita  and,
Claudian.  h  EiUrop.  ii.  382),  u  it  itill  the  cue  in
the  comb*  which  are  uied  in  tbe  tame  manner  by
the  Hindooa.  Among  ut  the  oBica  of  the  comb  la
executed  wiUi  greater  eaie  and  efiect  by  the  ntd,
lof.  or  batttm.

The  lyre  [Lvni],  the  &rourite  nniical  initni-
ment  of  the  Qreeki,  wo*  only  known  to  tbe  Ro.
mani  at  a  foreign  invention.  Hence  they  appear
■0  have  deicribed  iti  jnU  by  a  compariion  with
the  loom,  with  which  Ihoy  were  familiar.  The
term*  juffum  and  ilamma  were  touiiferred  by  an
obvioBi  membkuce  from  the  latter  to  the  finmer


1 102  TELA,

object :  nnd,  alllioiigb  they  adopted  into  (beir  own
Untpuje  the  Greek  word  pUctrvm  (OTid.  MH.  il
167— 170),  thojuwd  the  Latin  Pbctbn  to  denote
the  Hms  thing,  cot  becauae  the  inBtrnineiit  lued
in  itriking  the  lyre  ivu  si  all  like  ■  comb  in  ihaiia
and  ippennuice,  but  bc«uH  it  wsi  held  in  the
right  band  ond  iruertad  between  the  nuaina  of  the

lootD.  (Virg.  ^a^  Ti.  6*7i  Jut.  Ti.  290— 29S;
Pen.  Ti.  2,)

After  en  umeiBting  tboie  pnrtaorthe  iMm  irhieh
were  neceuuy  to  produce  eren  the  ploinflBt  piece
o(  elath,  it  remain*  to  deecribe  the  method!  of  pro-
dticing  it!  yarieliea,  and  more  oipeciBlly  of  adding
to  ita  value  bj  making  it  either  warmer  and  lofter,
DC  more  rich  and  ornamental.  If  the  object  wai  to
produce  a  checked  pattern  {taOtdit  dHnder*,  Plin.
H.  AT.  fiiL  ia  a.  7«  I  Jo*.  iL  97),  or  to  wcbtb
what  we  thould  call  a  Scotch  pUud,  the  thrcBdi  of
the  warp  were  arranged  dtematcly  Uack  and
while,  or  of  different  cotoun  in  a  certain  leriei
according  to  the  pattern  which  waa  to  be  exhibit-
ed. On  the  other  hand,  a  aliiped  pattern  (^otSB-
rit,  Diod.  Sic.  T.  SO  1  argala  nguia,  Virg.  .Im.
liiL  660}  ws)  produced  by  naing  a  warp  of  one
Golaiir  only,  but  changing  at  regular  interrali  the
coIdu  of  the  woDt  Of  thii  kind  of  cloth  the  Re-
man Irahia  (Vii^.  Aem.  tH.  168)  wat  an  example.
Checked  and  itriped  goodi  were,  no  donbt,  in  the
firat  inilance,  produced  by  comlnrung  the  natural
nrietiei  of  weal,  white,  Uack,  brown,  Ac  [PlL-
LKV.]  The  woof  alio  wai  tile  medium,  through
which  almoit  every  other  diiernty  of  appearance
and  quality  waa  effected.  The  warp  at  mentioned
atwie  wai  generally  more  twitted,  and  contequently
itronger  and  Rtmec  than  the  woof:  and  with  a
Tiew  to  the  lame  object  di^ienl  kindi  of  wool
were  tpun  for  the  warp  and  for  die  woct  The
conwquence  waa,  that  after  the  piece  wa>  woven,
tbe  liiller  dcew  out  ita  nap  by  carding,  to  ai  to
nuke  it  like  a  soft  blanket  (Plato,  Polil.  p.  SOS)
[FuLLO]  ;  and,  when  the  intentioa  waa  to  guard
againit  the  di,  the  warp  waa  diminiihed  and  the
woof  or  nap  iirpii,  Kpim}  made  more  abundant
in  proportion.  THeaiod.  Op.  tt  Din,  SS7  ;  Proclua
ad  loB.)  In  tliia  manner  they  made  the  toft
X'^aira  or  Liiha  [Palliuh].  On  the  other
band  a  woof  of  finely  twitted  thread  (Ifrpmr)  pro-
doeed  a  thin  kind  of  cloth,  which  reienibled  our
buntine  llaamae  atflua  aUmiiinna  taiuilale  par'
Jhbila.  Amm.  Marcell.  iit.  6).  When  any  kind
of  cloth  wai  enriched  by  the  admixture  of  different
matetialt,  tbe  richer  and  more  beautiful  aubatance
■Iwaya  fbmied  part  of  the  woof.  Thui  the  talit
Mulieriea,  or  InmoanruTi,  had  the  tram  of  lilk.
[S»IUCI,M.J  In  other  caaea  it  wa.  of  gold  (Virg.
^n.  iii.  4as ;  Serriui  tii  loe.) ;  of  wool  dyed  with
Tyrian  pnrple  (Ovid.  Mel.  vi,  678;  Tj/rio  n£A^
nar,Tibull.  re.  1.  1 22 ;  ;ii(«]  nfifi^mtiK,  Vat.  FUcc.
li.  23li);  or  of  bf-aven'-wool  (csfCi  jUn'iKt,  laid.
Ong.  lii.  22).  Hence  the  epithet)  ^inicJicpDnit,
"  having  a  purple  woof  (Find.  OL  vi.  39,  ed.
BiSckh ;  SchoL  IB  lae.),  drSoxpixot,  '  producing  a
flowery  woof"  (F.urip.  Wm.  466),  xC'runnW™'.
"made  from  bobbina  or  pern  of  gold  thread"
(Eurip.  OraL  829),  tt>ini»t,  '■made  with  good
bobbiiit"  (Eurip.  rpi.iH  Tair.  814, 146S),  ictpKlSi
TOixitAouira, "  variegating  with  the  comb  "  (Earip.
Iph.in  Tbn-.^lfi),  &e.

But  beiidea  the  variety  of  materiala  conatitnting
the  WDO^  an  eudleu  divcrxity  wat  effected  by  the


TELONBS.

Tting  them  into
terma  biiiM  and  itfuroj,  the  origm  of  w

been  ex[dained,  probably  denoted  wbat  i .

dimitif  or  tweeiad  cloth,  and  the  Qernuma  aniS^k,
The  poeta  apply  triia^  which  in  Qerman  haa  be-
come driUi^  to  a  kind  of  armour,  perbapa  chaii»-
nuiil,  no  doubt  reaembling  the  paUem  of  doth,
•^'  ' - denoted by  the  Bme term. (Viis^


L  467, V.  259, Til  639.  x


.  376;


Flaccos,  iii.  199.)  In  the  preceding  figure  of  the
Icelandic  loom  the  three  nil  with  Ibeit  kaabea
indicate  the  airangement  neceatary  fu  tin*  textnra.
All  kind!  of  damaak  were  produced  by  k  Tct;
complicated  apparatua  of  the  ome  kind  (plarimii
lidit),  and  were  therefiHe  called  Palfmtia,  (Ptin.
H.  JV.  Tiii.  48,  a.  74i  Mart.  liv.  ISO.)

The  apriga  or  other  omamenti  ptndneed  id  tba
teilura  at  regular  intervale  wen  called  Bowcn
(SrH,  Fhiloitr. /any.  iL  28;  SfiM,  Ham.  A  xiO.
440)  or  feathen  [;)^»hm).  Another  ten,  a^ted
with  reference  to  the  aaiue  maebinety,  waa  ^•fl^-
rar  or  i^i/utor,  denoting  ndnt.  bi  tbe  nuddk
agn  it  became  fifuror,  aod  thai  piednced  Ike
Qerman  tamneL

The  Falea  are  nnut


of  "the  Fatal  Siitera"  above  reCecred  to^  (Z>n
lororva  licia.  Slat.  JciiU.  L  520  ;  /otoraa  wt-
IriadaHiiT  contorla  tiaa,  ApoL  MbL  a.)

As  br  ai  we  can  foim  a  judgment  from  the  hm-
guage  and  deecdptioni  of  ancient  autboia,  the  pn-
dnctiont  of  the  loom  appear  to  have  fallen  in  an-
cient time*  very  little,  if  at  all,  below  the  beanty
and  Tariely  of  the  damaiki,  ahawla,  and  tapatij
of  the  preaent  age,  and  to  have  vied  with  tbe
worka  of  the  moat  celebrated  pointera,  icfnacmtiDg
firat  mythslDgical,  and  afterwarda  acriptnial  mb-
jecta.  In  addition  to  the  naticea  of  partimlar
worka  of  thii  claaa,  contained  in  the  paaiage*  and
article*  which  have  been  already  referred  to,  tbe
T.be™  -'■ ■'

-.Antbtt-Mir.AfaU.
99;  Athen.  iii.  p.  541  ;  Aatecii, /fania  A  On
tt  Lax.;  Theod.  Prndmm.  Riad.  M  Dim.  Amer.  >i
fin. ;  Virg.  .4ea.  v.  250—357,  dr.  SI— U ;  OU.
M^  vi.  61-128  ;  Stat  Tlub,  vL  64,  fi40_ai7:
Anaou.  Epig.  SS  ;  Idmprid.  Ht&ig.  28;  Ch^ka,
de  VI.  Oku.  Homer.  561—577,  n  SUioL  ii.  530—
365.  [S.  Y.]

TELAMO'NES.  [Am-AKna.]
TE'LETAE  (TtAfral).  [Mtstdia.]
TELO'NES  (TtAdnii).  Mint  of  Iha  taiM  at
Athena  were  fumed  b;  private  penoBa,  who  uA
upon  themaelve*  tbe  tuk  of  odUcling,  and  Bad*
periodical  paymenta  in  reaped  thereof  to  tbe  Matih
They  were  oiled  1^  thegenenl  name  of  rtAitoai,
while  the  brmen  of  any  partknlar  tax  wen  ealiel
elimrriMi,  ■'•rTV)Wirni\e>oi,  &e.,aa  the  caae  laight
be.  The  dntie*  were  let  by  aoctioa  to  the  UglHtt
bidder.  Campania*  often  look  them  in  lbs  laMe
of  one  perMn,  who  waa  ailed  ifx^'V  er  t«Aa#.
ipXtU  *°d  *■*  their  rejneeentative  to  tbe  alUa.
Suretiet  were  required  of  the  &tmcr  lor  the  fay<
ment  of  hia  due*.  The  office  va*  fieqnenily  mmr-
taken  by  re*ident  aliena,  dtiiana  not  liking  it,  m
account  of  the  ToxatiDiu  proceedinga  to  wUd  it
often  led.  The  taimer  WM  anted  with  miiri
demble  powen ;  he  nrried  with  him  hie  boek^
aearded  for  contraband  or  uncuatooted  |*od^
watched  tbe  bartnor,  oaAjOa  aad  olhai  fl«ai^  M


pnrtDt  nmwsliiiSi  of  unlawful  rad  clmdeitina
uIm  ;  biwglit  >  fxlni  i»  other  t>g»l  proceu
<d  of  detnudiDg  th«


bcforv  Ui«  bugialii


Miioni,  ud  took  thi

etmblB  him  to  petform  tbeM  duliM,  he  «u  >i-
ctnptcd  from  mililarj  uniee.  Co}I*cton  (to«7f7i)
wen  unwiime*  cmployrd  bj  tha  fiumen ;  bat
frequeall;  the  ftnart  and  the  collector  wars  the
■una  pcnon.  [Bockh,  FiiL  Earn.  ^  AtlUmi,  p.
334.  iic,  2d  ed.)

The  tiuea  wen  let  b;  the
tinder  the  aothoiil;  of  the  SenUa.


The  pi


I  tJaoui)  w


a  italed  Prjlaneiat
konaa.  Then  wai  nnull;  one  payTnent  made  in
MlTBSce,  ■paftoTaffA^^  mud  one  or  more  after  vardi,
called  nfioataTitKriim.  Vpoa  Uij  deliDlt  of  pay-
tdenc,  the  bnnet  becaraa  iJitm,  if  a  dliteo,  and
he  wu  liable  to  b«  impriuned  at  the  diKcetieii  of
the  court,  upon  an  infonnation  laid  againat  him.
If  the  debt  waa  not  paid  b;  the  eipintion  of  the
ninth  Prftaneia,  it  waa  doubled  ;  and  if  not  then
paid,  hi*  inpertj'  became  forieiled  to  the  atato,
and  proceedinita  to  eon£ication  migbt  be  taken
forthwith.  Upon  ihia  nbject  lbs  reader  thoold
coouh  the  qieech  of  Demotlhanee  aguntt  Timo-
cnteL  (Sctaaaaim,  At.  Jm.  pM.  Gr.  p.
317.)  [C.R.K.]

TELOS  (jihn),  a  tax.  The  taiei  impoaed  bj
the  Atheuiaiia  and  collected  at  home  were  either  or-
dinary or  utiaordinaiy.  The  former  conilituted  a
ngular  or  permanent  udrh  of  income  ;  the  latter
were  only  raited  in  time  of  war  or  other  emer-
gency. The  ordinary  laiei  were  laid  moitly  upon
proptrig,  and  npon  dliien*  buincl/y  in  the  ah^pe
of  loll  or  cnelomi ;  though  the  reodenl  alieni  paid
a  poll-tax,  called  )i*rabuow,  for  the  liberty  of  re-
aiding  at  Athena  under  protection  of  the  itale^
{Hcroici.]  Ai  to  the  cuitoma  and  harbour  doea,
•ea  Pbhticocti.  An  axcin  waa  paid  on  all  aalea
in  the  aiaiket,  tailed  twwria,  though  we  know  not
what  the  unoant  wai.  (Harpoc.  a  e,  'Emfo.)
And  a  duty  waa  imposed  on  alieni  for  peimiiiioa
to  aell  their  goodi  th«e.  Slaie-ownen  paid  a
dnty  of  three  obolt  tor  eiery  ilave  they  kept ;  and
alaret  who  had  been  emaotipated  paid  the  nme.
Thia  wat  a  Tary  prodoctire  tax  bffore  the  fortifi-
cation  of  Deeeleia  by  the  Laeedaemoniana  (Xe-
mtfh.  i*  Veatig. 'n.2b.)  There  waa  alao a Topvuc^
riKtt,  and  aome  ethert  of  minor  importance,  aa  to
which  the  reader  ii  refened  to  B&kh  {PM.  Eem.
t^  Athaa,  p.  3S3,  2d  ed.).  The  juttica  iMi
(npvroMAa,  na^Hlffrcunr,  Ac.)  were  a  Incratzte  tax
in  lime  of  peace.  (Thucyd.  vi.  91 ;  B«tkh,  Id.  p.
MS,  Ac)

The  eitraDrdinary  taiee  wers  the  propern  tax
(tiafafd),  and  the  compuliory  Mrricea  called  Am-
rouprliu.  Some  of  theae  latt  were  regular,  and
TMUiTcd  annually  :  the  moat


id  perfarmed  at  occai
Ba  wen  all  performed,


tbeym


a;  L]


*■]
The  tribute  (4^|»i)  paid  by  the  allied  itatet  to
the  Athenian  Kinned,  in  the  flourithiog  period  of
tha  republic,  a  regular  and  moit  important
of  revenue.  In  B.  c.  415  the  Atbaniaii
■titaled  for  the  Oibuto  a  duly  of  file  per  cent
( ebairnf)  OB  all MDumditieaeipoted  ec importad


A  dnty  of  ten
iaa  paiaing  into
itabLahed  for  a


per  cent.  Ifitmini)  on  merdian-
- '  '- ■' " ■  le  S««  waa


thns  by  Aldbiadea  and
.  [DicuMAK.]  Tbit  may  be
ngardad  aa  an  iaolaled  caae.  In  ganer^  vbera
aie  mentioned  among  the  Oreeka,  they
the  tithea  of  land  ;  luch  ai  the  Fenian
eoUeded  tram  conqnered  conntiiea,  or  loeh
aa  tyrant*  exacted  of  thnr  lubjacta  for  the  uaa  ef
land  hdd  midcr  them  ai  lord*  of^lhe  whole  conn  try.
atn*  look  a  lithe  of  thii  kind,
by  hi*  ion*  to  a  twentieth.
The  atato  of  Athena  held  the  tithe  of  ainne  land* ;
:her  tithe*  were  aaaigtied  to  the  tem^Jat  or  atrriea
f  the  Qoda,  hxTing  beat  dedicated  by  [oooa  indi-
iduali,  or  by  rvaaon  of  tome  eonqneit  or  tow,
ich  Bi  that  recorded  by  Herodotoi  (tii.  132).
Other  •oorcea  of  rerenna  ware  detired  by  tha
Athenian*  from  their  mine*  and  poUie  hmda,
nee,  md  conliacatiana  The  puUic  demeuw  land*,
rhelher  pasture  or  aiabte,  hooiaa  or  other  buildinga,
(era  nnially  let  by  anciion  to  prirate  peraona.
The  condilionB  of  tha  leaae  were  engiaven  on  itoae.
'aa  payable  by  Prjtaneiaa  If  not  paid
at  the  tlipubled  time,  the  leaaee,  if  a  eiliaen,  be-
came iEr^wi,  and  lubjecl  to  tha  HiBe  conaeqnence*
aa  anr  other  itaM  debtor.  A*  to  fioei  and  confia-
calioni,  leo  Tihbma.

Tbeae  Tarioua  louren  of  rerenoe  produced,  a«-
cording  to  Aiulophanea,  an  armual  income  of  two
thoniand  talenti  in  the  moat  fiouriahing  period  of  tha
Athenian  empin.  {  Yap.  B60.)  See  the  caknta-
tioni  of  BOckL,  Id.  p.  433,  Ac.

TtXiu'  ifgaiGei  "to  •ettla,  complete,  or  perfect,"
and  hence  "  to  lettle  an  account,"  and  generally
"  to  pay."  Thui  TiAai  tomei  to  mean  any  pay-
ment in  tha  nauin  of  a  tax  or  daly.  The  wordt
are  connected  with  iuA/«  in  German,  and  the  old
(rnu  of  taU  in  Engliah.  and  the  modem  word  VM.
(Arnold,  ad  ThM.  i.  £8.}  Thongh  Waoi  may
■ignify  any  payment  in  the  nature  of  a  MX  or
duty,  it  ii  more  commonly  Deed  of  the  ordinary
laxei,  aa  cuitomi,  Ac  TAof,  raAtw  ia  uaed  with
leFcnnce  to  the  property-tax,  in  the  nnae  of  bang
Toad  n  a  orrtin  froporHon,  or,  which  ia  the  lame
thing,  MoajB^  to  a  partieaiar  daa  of  ral^paytn,
Thu*  India  or  Wwt*it  rtXtv,  or  iCi  ;inr^Sa
ft\fai,  mean*,  to  belong  to  the  claia  of  knight*.
And  the  lanie  eipreaaion  i>  died  metapborualiy,
wilhsut  any  immediato  reference  to  Ihe  payment
of  a  tax.  Thua  tCi  di'Sfwi  TtAtir,  i*  to  be  da*ud
amoDg  adultt.  Bo  Ji  Bowroff  ■nhhv,  Herad.  tL
108:  '^alrtiK«a  lignihet  the  right  of  being  taxed
on  the  tame  fooling,  and  baring  other  pririlegea,
Ihe  lame  aa  the  eitiieiu ;  a  light  •oaetimea  giuied
to  reaident  alien*.  {Mktobcl]  'At^iu  ogoifie*
an  exemption  from  laie*,  or  other  dntiet  and
•erricea ;  an  hoiuur  Tery  rarely  gianlsd  by  tho
Atheniana  [Atklu^}  Ab  to  the  hrming  of
the  tuet,  aee  TiLONm.  For  an  epitome  of  the
whole  ■ubjec^  aea  Sch<inlalu^  ^aC  Jmt.  jkU.  Gr.
p.  3H,&c.  [aR.K.J

TE'UKNOS  (W»Mroi>,a  pwce  of  land  cut  or
marked  o(f  from  Eithar  land.  The  name  waa  parti-
colariy  applied  to  a  piece  of  land  cnt  off  from  the
loblie  luid  and  appropriated  i '  '


pobue  land  and  approprial
kiag  in  the  heroic  age  (Hi
zx.  IBi,  Oi:  Ti.  29i,  li.  18S),  and  likewia*  to


813,


1104  TEMPLUM,

I  of  land,  cut  off  from  cmmnon


c&tsdtD


inbls  qua


(rifitr)]),  nhich  w«ie  let  eut  b;  the  atate  to  fana  .
and  ihe  incatUD  anting  from  thcto  waj  appropnatod
Id  the  inpport  of  the  lenipln,  and  th«  nuiuteniuioa
of  public  woiihip.  (Xen.  Veoti!/,  iv.  19  j  Haipocrat.
I.  V.  drd  HurSuriitTH* ;  fidckh, /W.  fiion.  q^^Mou,
p.  M3.  3d  ed.)

TEMO. fAniTituM  j  CoBam.,]

TEMPLUM  ii  the  ume  vord  u  the  Qntk
rfiuvoi,  fnim  Tj^im  to  cut  off,  far  fantfifin,
cording  to  Servim  ^ad  Am.  L  446),  «nu  in;  pUo
which  wot  ciicumtcribed  and  leparated  by  ihe  an-
(can  from  the  nwt  of  the  land  by  a  (Mrtain  lolemii
formnla.  Th«  tecbnital  t«rma  for  tbii  act  of  tht
augun  are  lihemn  and  Q^^in,  and  hunce  a  temj^um
ilielf  ii  a  toaa  iSnrabu  H  ^btm.  A  place  thai
tel  apart  and  ballowed  b;  tiie  augnti  woi  alwiyt
inlendtd  to  aerra  reli^oiu  purpom,  but  chiefif  for
taking  (he  aa^iirHi.  ('■  Taaplum  loau  MigHrii  oul
aufpidi  caaa  gailnailiat  eonMptit  terlai  fiailKt,"
Vutn,  de  Lhg.  Lot.  vi. -p.  81,  Bif.)  When  Vam
(de  Ling.  laL  T.  p.  65,  Dip.)  uji  thai  a  Uiau  tf-
jalia  wHtdwaftonUidethecily.ireniiiitTcininiiber
(hat  (hit  onlj  mtani  ouUida  ths  pomenriaiK,  for
the  whole  tpaoa  indnded  within  the  poiKBaiam
was  iuelf  a  ttmplum,  >.  d.  a  place  in  which  autpicn
cnnld  be  taken  [PoHoBniuu]  ;  hot  when  the;
were  to  be  taken  in  any  place  oaltide  the  poauv-
nan,  it  wai  alwayi  necetaary  for  (uch  a  plau
to  be  fint  drcunucribed  and  tanctified  by  the
■nftiir  (£J6eran>  et  ^ari).  The  place  in  the  heaTeni
within  which  the  obaerrationi  were  to  bs  made
was  likewiae  eslled  ttrnpimn,  aa  it  wai  marked  onE
and  leparated  from  the  reel  b;  the  itaff  of  the
augni.  When  the  angui  had  defined  the  Itmplam
within  which  he  intended  to  make  hia  obaerra-
tiona,  he  fixed  hit  tent  in  it  {laienuKulvm  t)apere\
and  thit  tent  wai  likewiie  called  ttmplaiiL,  or  mon
accunlely,  teniftmt  nuiu.  To  thia  niasl  ton-
fi/uM  we  muat  refer  what  Servina  (<uf  .In.  ir.  200)
and  FeiluB  (k  c.  miasm  ttmjia)  ilalc,  that  a  Itm-
pism  wBi  encloted  with  ptanki,  cnrtaini,  Sa.,  at-
tached 10  potti  lixed  in  the  ground,  and  that  it
bad  only  one  door  (oritu).  The  place  ehoten  for
a  temp/vJA  woe  generally  an  eminence,  and  in  the
city  it  waa  the  arj:,  when  the  living  of  a  tent  doea
not  appear  to  hare  been  neeeuary,  becaute  here  a
place  oiled  augutacuimit  wa*  once  far  all  conae-
crated  far  this  purpoae.  (Paul  Diac  J.  tL,i4iijMni-
calua ;  comp.  Ur.  i.  18,  it,  18  ;  CK-daQf.  iiL
IG.)


s  sacred  precinct  within  which  a
temple  wat  bnilt,  waa  always  a  focuf  liberritiu
tl  fjiittt  by  the  aiiK<"a,  that  ia,  a  Itrnplum  or  a
/iHan  (Lir.  x.  37  ;  Varro,  de  Lliig.  ImL  t.  p.  65,
Bip.) ;  the  coDKcralion  waa  completed  by  the
pontiff  and  not  until  inauguration  and  eontecra-
tion  had  taken  place,  cantd  lacra  be  performed  or
moelinga  oF  the  tenale  be  held  in  it.  (Serr.  aJ  Aen.
i.  446.)  It  waa  necenary  then  for  a  temple  to  be
•anrtioned  by  the  goda.  whoie  will  wai  nicertnined
by  the  angnra,  and  to  beconaecmled  or  dedicated  by
the  will  of  man  (the  ponlifia).  Where  the  nnction
ef  the  goda  had  not  been  obtained,  and  where  the
mere  act  of  man  had  canaecral»d  a  place  to  the
goda,  lUch  a  place  iroi  only  a  menm,  nerarium,


TEMPLVlf.

I  or  KaxJlam.  [Saobabium  j  Samudk,]  Vairo
(ap.  GelL  UT.  7-  g  7)  jnatly  omuden  1^  crbbodj
performed  by  the  augnn  *a  eiaential  lt>  a  |mpli%
as  the  conaecration  by  the  pantib  took  plaa  aho
in  other  sanctnariea  which  were  not  tsHph,  bat
mere  mera  or  atda  uurm.  TTius  the  aaoctnary
of  Veata  waa  not  a  ImpiMm  bat  an  aeda  bob,
and  the  Tanoni  curiae  (Hoitilia,  Potapeia,  Jnlu)
required  to  be  made  laitpla  by  the  at^on  hefan

manner  a  ianptiaa  difieied  {com  a  tUnirws  ii  more

dem  writen  agree  in  their  definiLtonai  Some  bb-
denti  belioTed  thai  dtlabnua  wai  atigtnali;  tba
name  given  tn  a  place  befon  or  at  the  entraDce  of
a  temple,  which  contained  a  font  «-  a  reuel  witk
water,  by  which  penont,  before  entering  the  temple,
performed  a  tymbolic  parilicatiaD  (Serr.  mf  .ita.
'""22!  ;  Com.  Fronts,  quoted  bj  SKier  oa
.  ZMiiina) ;  other*  stale  th^  dtlmttmrn
waa  originally  the  name  for  a  woodea  lepnaenta-
tioa  of  a  god  {^ianw}^  which  derived  its  pane
from  lAnm  (the  bark  of  a  tne),  which  wai  taken
off  [dti&rare)  before  the  tree  waa  woriud  inls
an  image  of  the  god,  and  that  hence  ddmlrwm  waa
applied  to  the  place  wharv  thia  image  waa  erected.
(Feat.  t.  V.  DeMram  ,-  HaMut.  &b.  i^  Sbt.
ad  Atn.  iL  2S5.)  Hartmig  (Dis  SeL,  d.  Sim.  i.
p.  143,  &c)  derive*  the  word  detabrMm  from  LUt
(anciently  lubtr),  and  think*  that  it  originally
neant  a  fonii  fiAanttw,  or  a  place  (Siuated  by  tlw
lugnr  Erhu  the  [Hohne  land,  in  which  an  image  of
>  god  might  be  arected,  and  sacred  rite*  be  pu-
formed.  A  ddubnat  would  therefore  be  a  Tanrfnary
whose  chief  chancleriitic  wai  ita  bung  si^ianlid
from  the  pro&ne  land.  Bnt  nothing  certain  can  ba
id  on  the  subject.  (Comp.  Macrob.  Sat,  ni.  4.)
After  these  pieliminaiy  nmariu,  we  ihall  pto-
ceed  to  jpve  a  brief  account  of  ths  ancient  t-mplfi,
their  property,  and  their  miniaten,  both  in  Oncea
and  Rome.  We  moat,  however,  nfer  onr  iiaihis
for  a  more  detailed  deacription  of  the  arcUWctaal
ilructnre  of  ancient  temple*  to  other  wnika,  aneh  a*
Stieghti,  Artiaolnsie  dar  Bambmd,  and  olben,
ipecially  aa  the  atructnre  of  tha  lemplea  varied
xDiding  to  the  divinilie*  to  wboa  thej  wsr*
dedicated,  and  other  eircumalancn.

Temples  n  Creeos. — Temple*  vpear  to  ian
itted  in  Onecs  from  the  enriieat  tEoea.  Tliey
were  aepatated  from  the  prrduie  land  annnd  tlteB
[rimt  eUnXoi.oi  ri  0itTi\a.),  becanaa  every  ooe
waa  allowed  to  walk  in  the  latter.  (SchoLml&^
Oed.  CoL  10.)  Thii  tepaiatiDn  wai  in  earij  limea
'ndicated  by  very  umple  meana,  auch  aa  a  atring  ot
I  rope.  (Paui.  viii.  !0.§2.)  Subseigaeatly,  how
'Ver,  they  wcrs  surrounded  by  more  cedent  fences,
ir  even  by  a  wall  (Jfwoi,  irpiStt^,  Herod,  vi
M  ;  Pollux,  i.  10  (  Pan*,  poann),  Ibe  enlianca
0  which  waa  deconiled,  aa  architnturo  advamd,
with  magniAcent  Propylaea  [Pboptlaxa],  Tba
whole  apace  encleaed  in  snch  a  wipMoAai  waa  called
ri^vos,  or  aometimea  M'  (aerod.  it.  86,  vi.  IS,
with  Valckenaer'i  note ;  Thncjd.  V.  IS);  aadcao-
lained,  bcaidea  ths  temple  itself^  olhet  aacrad
"dinn,  and  tacied  ground  planted  with  graven
Within  the  precincta  of  tha  sacrsd  enelanra
dead  wen  generally  allowed  to  be  buried,
thoDgh  there  wen  some  eiceptiana  W  this  tmfn,
and  we  have  initance*  of  person*  being  baried  ia
near  certain  toiple*.  Tba  ral^ioa*
laws  of  the  island  of  Drloa  did  not  alia*  igg


TEMPLUM.

aarpMi  to  bs' buried  irithin  ihr  who!*  eitont  of
Ih*  Wsnd  (Thucyd.  iii.  104  :  «mp.  Herod,  i.  64),
and  whan  ihii  law  bad  bnn  vioUlid,  a  put  of  the
uland  wu  lint  puiifusd  bf  Ptiiiilniiuk  and  inbie-
qnenllf  tbs  vhole  itiand  bj  tlie  AlhcnUn  people.

Tbo  temple  iUnlf  mi  ailed  twi,  uid  ni  iu  en-
Inna  IodU  (ni>i|l^>mf^)  were  genenilj  placed,
that  IhoM  who  anlered  the  lancluarf  to  pnj  ar  to
oSkr  ncrifices  might  tini  pariCj  iheniKlTeL  (Pot-
Inx.  I.  to  ;  Herod,  i.  51.)  In  l)i<  nilieit  tinei
Uw  Qrerk  templet  wen  either  putlT  or  wbolly
Bade  of  wood  (PauL  t.SO.  3  3  ;  IS.  g  1,  tIIL  10.
9  3),  and  the  liinpleit  of  all  appear  to  hare  been
Ibe  fftini^  which  were  probably  nothing  but  holtov
tr««  in  which  the  image  of  a  god  or  a  hen>  wu
idaMd  w  in  a  niche  (Hetiod. /'ruirui.  G4,  ed.  atiit-
ling i  Schol.  ad  &^  rmeA.  IIHS);  for  a  temple
irai  originally  not  intended  ai  a  receptacle  for  wor-
(faippere,  but  limply  ai  an  habitation  for  the  deity.

4edkBled  to  a  god,  wa>  called  tSpuBn.  The  cha-
neter  of  the  earl;  Gtwk  templei  wat  dark  and
myiterioni,  for  ihey  bad  no  wiadowi,  and  they
ReciTed  light  thnugh  the  door,  which  wa*  tery
large,  or  fnm  lampi  burning  in  them.  Vitmnw
(if.  S)  ttat«  that  the  cnttance  of  Greek  tamplei
wa*  atmyi  lowardi  the  weit,  but  moit  of  the
templet  itill  eilant  in  Atiici,  Ionia,  and  Sicily
bare  their  entrance  towardi  the  eaiL  Archilectare,
howeTer,  in  the  conitiuction  of  magnificent  templei,
made  great  progreii  even  at  an  earlier  lime  than
Fither  pointing  or  itatuaij,  and  long  before  the
Fenian  wan  we  hear  of  temple*  of  extraordinary
giandeur  and  beauty.  All  templei  were  buill
either  in  an  oblong  or  round  form,  and  wen  moatly
adorned  with  columna,  Ttioie  of  an  oblong  form
had  eolatnnt  tilha  Id  the  front  ahme,  in  the  fan
and  back  froDti,  or  on  aD  tbe  four  tide*.  K«-
Bpecting  the  original  uw  of  ibete  por^eon  tee
PonTici'e.  The  clauiBca^on  of  templei,  aocording
imber  and  arrangement  of  their  celumnt.


*iUbi


ivith  VI


The frie;


culptur,


eipenie  wu  ipared  in  embelliihing  the  abodei  of
tb*  godi.  The  light  which  waa  formerly  let  in  at
the  door,  waa  now  frequently  let  in  from  above
Ihroiuh  an  opening  in  the  middle,  wbich  waa
called  JiniBper,  and  a  temple  thu*  coiialrucMd  waa
colkl  haiepoi.  (Vitniv.  ie.)  Many  of  the  great
templea  contiited  of  three  pirta ;  1.  the  aiiiinut  or
wpjjoruii,  tbe  veatibule  ;  2.  the  ocUi  (nj<,in)iij<)i
and  S.  the  irurSiioiiOt. The  cella  wm  the  inoit


del,  ai  in  the  Erechtheum  at  Alheni  the  itatuei  of
Poaeidon,  Hepbaealui,  and  Bulaa  The  alaluel
Alwayi  faced  the  entrance,  which  wa*  in  the  centre
of  the  pn»(j'/w,  or  front  portico.  Tbe  place  where  the
■tatue  ilood  wu  called  Hai,  and  wat  aurmunded  by
a  iBlBtlrade  or  lailingi  {lipuL,  Jptt^aTo,  Paui.  t.  1 1 .
g  2).  Some  templei  alio  had  moro  than  one  cella,  in
which  caia  the  onem*  genrrally  behind  the  other,  aa
in  tbe  temple  of  Athena  Poliu  at  Athena.  In  tem-
plea where  oraclea  were  given,  or  where  the  wonhip
yriu  conoecled  with  myateciea,  the  cella  wai  called
SSwTt»^  fiiyapBy^  or  d^fjirTopor,  and  to  it  only  the
prieau  and  the  initiated  had  accew.  (Pollux,  i.  9  ;
paua.  ii.  8.  S  I.  tHL  62  i  37.  8  S  ;  Herod,  viii.
S3, 'a.  95;  KuL  Nwm.  13 ;  Caea.  J»  BdL  Cio.


TEMPLDK.  llOfi

iiL  IDS.)  In  aoroe  caaca  the  cella  wai  not  am*-
■ibie  to  any  human  being,  and  vatioua  atoriea  wen
related  of  the  calamitiai  that  had  befallen  peraoni
who  had  ventured  to  crou  the  threihold.  (Paul,
(iii.  fi2.  g  3  i  10.  B  2  1  38.  §  2  ;  SopL  OhL  CoL
SI.)  The  iwta»aoia,  wai  a  clianibei  which  had
itieotranee  in  the  hack  front  of  a  temple,  and  lerved
ai  a  place  in  which  the  treaautei  of  the  tempi*
were  kept,  and  Ibnt  aupplied  the  phce  of  the
dirirwipol  which  wen  attached  to  ioidb  temple*,
"ompare Muller, ArcliSat. d. K*nl, 3 388;

ieglita, Ar^aoL  der  BatJaanti, toL  iL $  1  ;

irt,  Ldm  dtr  Gtiiiiidt,  g  1  ;  Bdckh,  ad  Carji.

mripL  pp.  264,  la.)

We  now  proceed  to  deicribe  tbe  clauilicatioa
of  templck  both  Greek  and  Roman,  the  hitter  being


chiedy  iit

itflted  from  the  former.  They  were  either

quadiang

ukr  or  circular.

e«dn

ingular  Ttivfia  were  de

cribed  by  the

following

lermi,  according  to  the

umbei  and  at-

rangemcL

t  of  the  column!  on  tbe  f

onti  and  lide*.

1.  'AffTiiAut,  aitglt,  without  any

□lurana.  (Leo-

nidaiTui

-ent.mBiunck,.daal.TDl.

.  p.  237  i  Plin.

H.  N.  IX

xiv.  e.)

2.  'E*

xttfavriai,  a  ohHm,  with

:wo  column*  in

.  *AM^trp6ffTi/\otf aapkiproatj/le^ with fouf


6.  Almpoi,({^i<n-af,  with  two  rangnorcDlnmna
{intpi)  ail  round,  the  one  within  the  other.

7.  Vi(i>iitfTT(|»j,piBiidij(JijD<a-a4  with  oue  rang*
only,  but  at  the  nme  diataiice  from  the  walli  of
the  cdla  ai  the  outer  lange  of  a  Slimpai.

To  theta  mutt  be  added  a  aort  of  thorn  inrented
by  the  Roman  architectt,  namely :

6.  Vfu0oir«f)'rrfpdT,  jdAtdiapenptera/  (VitruT.iT,
1\  when  the  tidet  had  only  hutf-columna  (at  the
angles  three-quarter  colnniiit),  atlacheil  10  the  walla
oftheM^o,  the  object  beinj;  to  hive  the  w//<i  large
without  enlar)(ing  the  whole  building,  aiid  yet  to
keep  up  aomelhing  of  the  tplendour  of  a  peripteral


Nam


,mplei.a.


.■ell


porticoe*  themaelvei
number  of  column*  iu  the  portico  at  either  end
of  the  temple  ;  namely,  Ttr/xirmABt,  tetraitylt,
when  there  wen  /our  columnt  in  front,  liiimiKot,
htxalgll,  when  there  were  tut,  iini<ni,\ot,  acta-
tiyte,  when  there  were.ci^A/,  SdJCLEcrTv^a1,  lUcattyUt
when  tbere  were  fen.  There  were  never  more
than  ten  columnt  in  tbe  end  portico  of  a  tem^jle  ;
and  when  there  were  only  two,  they  were  alwHV*
onanged  In  that  peculiar  form  called  n  rHlu(/r
Ttapamiai).  The  number  of  column)  in  the  end
porlicort  wai  never  uneven,  but  the  number  along
the  aidei  of  a  temple  wai  generally  uneven.  The
number  of  the  tide  columna  varied :  where  the
end  portico  wu  letrulyle,  then  ware  never  any
columnt  at  tbe  ndet,  except  falta  onei,  attached  to
the  walli,  u  in  the  temple  of  ^'orfaao  Virilit  at
Rome,  which  hu  atetraityle  ponico,  withacolumn
behind  each  coruar  column,  and  then  five  falaa
columnt  along  each  tide  of  tbe  ce^ ;  where  it  waa
heiaatyle  or  oclaityle,  tbere  wen  generally  1 3  or  1 7
columnt  ot' "  -■.. ..  ■-.i.  ...


Inn


TEMPLUM.

B  m]a  Adopted  bj  tha  Koman


Hniltfd
vhitecU,


TBUPLUIL


who toanted  bj

belweEn  tli«  calnmni),  uid  whoa

taict  at  ntnny  taftJVoiimmaUora

Ms  ImiUag  HI  ta  /riml ;  anothi

rulo  II  fumiBhed  by  tht  nhovt-mt

of  Fortuni  VMit,  which  hu  t>iv  <

and,  altogFlhei,  Hten  on  each  tide. Th«  Omsk

■rehttecU,  an  the  conttu;, caantad  bj  col

and  their  rule  waj  to  hare  tauv  aa  mattj/  et

along  tie  rida  at  infronU  otidtMt  mffn*,  counting


ever,  they  lolloWBd  the  other  rule,  u  in
at  Mylsn,  whers  then  an  aii:  colun
and  eleven  it  och  aide.  Annther  k
applied  to  templet  and  ether  building!
ticoei,  u  well  u  to  the  porticoei  then
derived  fnm  the  diitancei  between  the
coDipared  with  the  lower  diameUn  of  the  column*.
They  wen  the  fallow

1.  IIuicfifimiAer,  pjvaMffifa,  the  diitance  be-
tween the  colomiit  a  diaineter  of  a  eoluma  and
half  n  diameter.

2.  3irTa\ii],  if^i,  the  dietanca  between  the
columns  two  diametere  of  a  column.

3.  ZSirTutiOt,  ma^U,  the  dietance  between  t

'  ■ "  idbu^  ofthe'  '


Lion(™<


»)  w


diamelen; called

adapted  both  for  beauty  and  conTinience.

i.  Ai^rruXai,  diEufj/e,the  intercDlnmniation.
diitanea  between  the  columni,  thna  dianieten.


"J.


will  Hid  the  r
tcrmt  deecriplii
of  the  eolumna.  They  an  taken  ftnm  the  platai
to  Hirt'i  Caxsiliabt  do-  Biimhatl;  and  altfaougb,
for  the  uke  of  greater  cleameu  tmd  cotmnience,
they  are  not  all  taken  from  actual  baildini^  but
am  general  reprcHntationi  of  each  fonn,  yet  they
are  not  merely  iioaginaryf  for  they  are  founded  ati
a  canful  compariHn  of  eiiiling  remaini  with  the
dncriptioni  oF  Vitmnui.

Ad  mgntTiog  of  a  temple  of  liiia  fbnn  hw  been
given  nndai  Ahtab.


*  The  Roman  n


I  mi^t  al»  be  itatad  aceord-


MOHjr  eoboHH  lUDmg  tti  tiia  u  iafitmt,  aad  a


TEHPLUM.
III.  AMMUPMWrrLK, TnunvLi.


(thaOmk
two  klada ;
k  nil  of  tha
M  ^Dwn  ia  the  Egni^


The  BboTe  plu  ia  that  of  ■  Roman  Peripttrot.-
I  npment  the  Qnciui  Pfnptmt  two  cohmma
•honld  be  added  to  isch  nde,  and  tfae  length  ihui
gKined  thrown  into  the  opiMtiadoBua,  In  Ihu  Tonn
■here  were  two  edanui>  between  the  lutiM  termi-
naling  the  prDJecling  walli ;  and  (he  three  iotn-
jDmniatiDDi  thut  (iumed  wen  fenced  with  nurble
iilinp  (fltiti,  ViliuT.  jr.  <),  with  gatai  in  them
Ting  Bcceu  to  the  pmUmm,  ai  uiowii  bj  tli«
2t%  in  the  Jignre.

Thi*  ipeciea  of  temple  wu  not  only  mora  apian-
d  than  the  fonne i,  bat  alio  more  fully  idt^ltd  Ibr
the  perfanuance  of  gnnd  nligioui  ceramoniat,  aa
Ihs  coDtiniiona  portico  all  lound  it  would  gira  ifael'
tar  and  puttm  to  a  luge  DDinber  of  people.  Ae-
cordin^y  we  find  that  agieiai  of  the  moit  oelebnted
Greek  tamplea  an  at  tlua  foim  ;  luch  ai  that  of
Zeni  Nomaiu  betwaen  Aigoa  and  Corinth,  of  Con-
ooid  at  Agrigcninni,  of  Thanoa  at  Atheni,  wtiich
haa  DO  ptibii  batwsoi  the  obAm  «l  thr  pe^imm.


lloe  TEMPLUK.

V. Vtmt-JtL Uld PSKUDODIFTailAL, 0(TA>  ]

»TVLK,ortbc  Ionic  order.  To  nn  ifacetthe  ■
lid*  of  ths  cut  reprNenl*  half  ef  the  JiptenI  ti
pie,  the  other  nde  hiU  of  the  pMadodiplenl.


■  ■  a  H  I  a  ■  ■  ■

■  ■  ■  ■  ■

■  ■  ■  ■  ■

■  ■  a  ■  ■

■  ■  ■

■  ■  ■

■  ■  ■

■  ■  ■

■  ■  ■  ■  B

a  ■  ■  ■ m

s  ■  H  B  s

1  a  ■  ■  ■  ■  ■  ■


The  Dipttna  tamy  be  eoniidend  oi  a  ftnytoroe,
incnued  in  iice  uid  nugnilinDce  bj  the  addidoD
of  uiolher  raw  of  piltui  along  each  ude  ;  the
PttadodipUrot  M  a  PiripltTm  milh  the  aide  co-
tnmni  moTed  onlmrdi  over  the  >p*ce  of  one  eolnmn
■ndintemluDinialion.toasta  allnw of  eight cotuniDs
in  front.  VitniTini,  who  deicrihet  the  Utter  fint,
uaignail*  inieniton  to  the  irchiteet  Henrn^nea.
From  the  eipenw  of  nch  edi6cei,  there  were  na-
tunllj  nrj  (ew  eiainplei  ot  tbem.  The  br-bmed
teiDpi*  of  Artemii  at  Epheiaa,  and  (bat  of  Qnirinoa
at  Hame,  vera  diptecaL  That  of  Anemia  at  Mag-
iwHa,baill  by  " '  "  — '


Etmj  deciatyle  temple


te  wu  tin  hTpaetlinl,  bnt
le  Uld  e?en  hemlj-U  bj-


paethnl  templet.

A  qneition  hoi  Utel;  been  riiwd  vbetbet  then
sTer  wen  anj  hrpulhnl  tenplea.  Tba  tws  Hdee
of  the  qneition  will  be  fband  diacBiard  in  tb*  6t(-
woTkt-.  Ron.  X«H  Hgpml.


pp.  1—39.  Halle,  lU«,«bL.
ud B«ltkha,  Der  HtpHHnHtrnptl,  mrf  Qnai*

■ ,.  , jiiiiiiii,  gtfn  Pnf.  D.  L  RmiL,

1U7,  4U.


TEHPLUU.
Vlt  PraDi>orntrTuu,IInuaTvu,of  tbs

[ank  Older.


Thos  wen  tlie  cbi«f  normal  fbnni  of  qnadnn-
gular  templH.  Ths  luiitiDiii  raide  npon  them,
e*p«ial]j  bf  tha  uiion  aC  two  or  mora  templH  in
ona  building,  waia  Tcrj  numeroiu.  (3a«  Hirt,
Stiegliu,  uid  the  other  ■ntharilieiL)  One  fona
ileierTE*  paniciilir  notice,  inurauch  u  it  vtt
certsinlj  Ter;  tuKient,  imd  Hnne  writrn  bivs
tnppoaed  that  il  coaMiaed  tha  germi  of  all  the
other  romu ;  Ifaii  wa«  whit  VilniTiu  oiled  tha
T^acam  Jitqilt.  (VitlUT.  IT.  7.) Tb«  puMg*  d


TEHPLUM.  notf

VitniTiiu  it  Terj  diffieiilt,  ud  ti*i  baeo  diflenDtlr
eipluned.  (Camp.  StiegUtx  uid  Hirt)  The  kL
lowing  engnTing  ii  lo  conitrucled  M  to  omtBiii  m
npiwnUtioo  o{  Ibe  Cfann  diief  fono^  nal  or  Kip-
pued,  of  the  ToKwi  tanfJe.


-rr

^

•  •

^

M

•

a

!

1

>

i

1 •

m <

»

J

> •

The  aboTe  plan  »  divided  bj  tbe  linei  a,  i,  into
three  piiniDD«,bireonipletinge«ch  of  which.we  b«TB
three  different  plana,  lima,  if  the  middle  portion
be  retained  ai  it  ii,  and  the  part  to  the  right  ef  ft
be  made  like  that  to  the  left  of  a,  we  hare  one  of
the  luppoied  fomiL  Again,  if  the  middle  portion
be  letained,  and  the  two  lidei completed  on  Che  alms
plan,  namelj,  like  the  portion  to  tha  tefl  of  a,  bat
without  the  prDJeciingaidewtll,  and  with  around
colnmn  in  place  of  the  aqnara  pillar  which  termi-
Datea  it,  we  hava  what  othera  Rppoaa  to  hare  bean
tbe  true  original  form  of  the  Tnacau  temple.  In
either  caaa,  iha  characteriatic  fmtnre  it  tha  anion
of  three  allot  in  one  temple,  dedicated  to  three
auociated  deitiea.  the  middle  aUa,  which  (aa
ihown  in  the  figure)  wai  larger  than  the  other  two,
being  anigned  to  the  chief  of  the  tfatce  dinsitiet ;
a*  in  the  great  temple  on  the  Capital,  the  middle
aUa  of  which  wai  dedicated  lo  Ju[nter,  the  aOa  on
the  right  eide  oC  the  middle  one  tu  Hinerra,  and
'  ig«/Jd  to  Juno. Ida%,  a  later  Taria-


I  of  the  '


1  loal.


onlrth


1110  tehplum:

ilong  eMh  iU«  of  it,  u  nprawnMd  in  thelighl-

hind  diTiuoii  of  th«  plui  uid  elantion.

Oirtmlar  Timpla,  properlj-  to  called,  wero  pn>-
bablj  not  Died  bf  tha  Oreaki  in  auljr  limea.  Ths
ronnd  building!  of  whkh  wb  ha™  noticw  won
either  (io/i  or  mere  mvnumenUl  edificei.  Sersnl
nand  bnildingi  of  thii  kind  art  mmtianed  _bv
Paquniai ;  luch  u  itie  dolw  at  Atheiu,  in  vhidt
then  ven  wrenl  imsll  nlier  mtoei  i  when  tbs
Prjtanei.  ncrificed  (PbiU.  i.  6),  and  where,  ac-
cording to  Pollni  (viiL  l£fi)  thej  aUo  Inoqaetted.
There  wBi  RDother  fWu  ai  Epidftonit,  in  the  •■■
ired  gio'e  of  Atclepioi,  wl


with  paintinp  by  Paniia*.  (Pant  u.  27.)  (See
Stieglili,  ToL  Li.  pp.  SB,  foL)  VilruTiu.  (it.  7)
howe-er  recogniie*  two  regnlar  fornn  of  tmnlu
templH,  to  which  ft  third  miut  be  added.

I.  TheMoNOPTiROBConiiited  otaungledrcle
of  ndumne,  itanding  on  a  plalfonn  ((rihi-iO,  lh«
oDter  wall  of  which  toimti  a  Hfliibatt  «  coDti-
nuoa*  pedeilil  Ear  the  eolnmni,  and  nmaoonled  by
a  dome  i  bnt  withont  any  cella.  For  the  propn^
tioiu  ue  Vitruviut.  The  remain!  of  nuh  a  temple
hare  been  found  at  the  luini  of  Pateoli.


TGHPLUH.
II.  The  PiurTMKoa  bad  •  <ircDlar  oA  ma-

-ounded  bj  a  tingle  periMyle  of  cohnuDi,  etanJiag
m  time  ilep',  and  the  whole  nnnounted  bf  a
dome.  Sptcimeni  an  prenrred  in  the  HytaDed
temple*  of  VeaUi  at  Rome  (we  wood.eiit  on  p.  299}

.ndatTiTolL


The  proportioni  of  the  templea  of  tbi*  bim  w«*
•nrj  cacefollj  ngnlated.  The  exiiiinf  ■pedmmi
agree  in  moit  particDlan  with  the  rnW  laid  down
bj  Vitniiiu.  accoTding  to  whan  the  diitancc  of
the  wall  of  the  oUn  6ian  the  edge  of  the  ■ahetmo'
Uon  «u  one-fifth  of  the  whole  diameter  of  the  eab.
itmctien  i  and  conieqnentl j  the  diuBeter  of  dM  eMa
(including  iu  walli)  wu  thne-fifthi  ef  the  wbok ;
the  internal  diameter  of  the  a/la  wu  equal  ta  the
height  of  the  colnmnt ;  the  height  of  the  dimt  waa
eqnal  to  a  femi-diameter  of  the  whole  huildiBg:

Cyiamid  (or  rane),  toiopport  anonumwnt  eqml  a
eight  to  the  rapitali  of  the  colnnini.  ( For  a  fnU
diicuauoB  of  the  pau^e,  le*  Hirt,  Ldn  J.  Or-
tStuii.  pp.  29,  SO.)

Both  (peciei  of  iDond  temple*  are  mealioiDeJ  hj
Serriai  (ad  At*,  ii.  108),  who  hti  tiiat  the;  ■«(•
peculiar  lo  Veata.  Diana,  Hernlea,  and  Mereniy  i
and  he  diitingniihea  the  Momepltroi  br  lb«  fbOew-
ing  descriptioD  :  —  tetai  •■•  pahelim  aWa—Ji


TKUPLUM.
■  IIL  Anolbac  fan,  of  wbkh  v*  bm  the  4u«f
■nmpl*  ID  tlw  F«nll»B,  begido  ■am*  nnllet
^MiiMO*  (wa  Uitt,  I  IB),  uuuU  of  >  dicnkr
«U«  Hnaoaiited  bf  ■  doBO,  without  ■  poiMjIo,
bat  wilh  in  kdmuad  pordoo.  Tbt  Mlowing  «>■
gnring  npnwDt*  tBcli  ■  l*ni>l*>  with  ■  pnxtjla
lolnttjlo  partico,  of  two  lUflbUj  difleiODt  kind*
(coopu*  tk*  Mi  and  right  odH  al  tba  portico  in
tlw  plu)  I  Uw  niehw  an  for  iho  hmom  of  thm
aaaaOBtcd  deitiBi,  aach  a*  Apoiko,  Kaua,  and
Latona ;  and  cha*  thb  C>m  of  toaple  ma]P  be  n-
gaidHi,  in  ila  nligioo*  teigii,  aa  a  Tiriation  of  the


eb


TEHPLUM.  ItU

„  ■  no*  ninnla  detaili  of  th«  «n<
templet  of  both  aoita,  which  oar  ^mtt
permit  lu  to  enter  into,  the  reader  ii  re-
fensd  to  the  worlu  of  Hirt  and  Stwf|Uta,at  quoted
abon  t  and  liili  and  hrief  diacriplioni  ef  (he  chief
Omk  and  Roman  tamplet,  with  refeieiieai  to  the
■orki  in  vhicb  the;  are  mora  full;  deembod,  wiU
be  fennd  in  Miiller'a  Hamlliiitk  dtr  Arduiiogii  dtr
Kwat,  nnder  the  heade  of  the  re*pecliTa  paoodi  in
'"^e  hiitor;  oF  the  art.

fieaidei  the  tenni  which  hare  Daw. been  <(-
plaioed,  lemplea  were  deaignaled  b;  the  namei  of
the  deitiei  to  wham  thej  wan  dedicated,  aa  the
'OAufinugr  or  tampla  of  Ztia  Olympau ;  the  nap-
temple  of  AOiaia  Pariiimiii,  Ac. ;  and
I  a  name  wia  gi*en  according  to  eome
peculiar  bstora  of  the  itructnTe,  ai  in  the  caee  of
-'  "  '  1  at  Athena,  which  waa  called  Him-
ania  ite  bant  waa  exactly  100  bet

Illy  of  the  immenia  treaenrea  con-
ly  of  the  Gnek  templea,  which  were
either  nleniili  or  ornameote.  and  cf  the  tilhee  of
•poili,  &e.  (Ueiod.  lii.  132  i  Diodor.  li.  3;  Potyb.
iT.S3),thepniperty  ariei>iplei,rram  which  theydo-
-'  *  iwUar  iocsme,  contiilsd  of  hind*  (rt^nr),
Aeidi,  pailore*,  or  foretla. ' '  "'


find  that  a


icftbe


a  tannle  might  be  bexa-


pnicaiar  temple :  that  the  Peii
poeteaeed  the  Uod*  belonging  lo  the  Thneam :
'  I  what  their  right  coniiiled  ii  not  known  ;  hut  of
'baterer  kind  it  may  ban  been,  the  nvenuea
Ecrning  [nun  euch  propertf  were  gi>en  to  the
tempLee,  and  eerved  to  deEray  the  expuneee  for
■crificei,  the  maintenance  of  the  bnildinge,  &c.
For  thii  purpoefl  all  temple- property  wai  generally
farm,  unlcH  it  waa,  by  aoma  cune  which
lay  on  it,  prevented  from  being  laken  into  culU-
fation,  (HarpocraL  t.r.'KrA  fuaOm/tArmr :  comp.
IbocibL  .^rwp.  11.)  The  rent  for  inch  aacnd
domaina  waa,  according  to  Demoithenet  {m  Eih
6aW.p.l3ie),raceired  by  the  demaich,  probdilr
the  domtrch  of  the  demoa  by  which  the  lacred
domain  waa  occtipied  ;  Eiir  in  other  caMt  wa  find
that  the  rente  were  paid  to  the  authoritiea  en-
tmated  with  the  adminiitiatiDii  of  the  lemplea.
(BHchh,  AooCai.  L  p.  337,  ftc,  il  p.  339.)  The
■Bprente  control  orer  all  property  of  icoiplei  be-
longed to  the  popular  aMembly.  (Demotth.  m
JVscur.  P.13S0.)

Reapecling  the  pereona  entnited  with  the
tuperinteodcDM,  keeping,  cleaning,  etc,  of  templea^
we  eearcely  poMew  any  information.  [Aanrrui.]
We  bare  mention  of  peraoni  called  ni-uStixti,
KXjiSoOxotf  ifto^Aaaai,  who  moat  hare  been  em-
ployed ai  guaidi  nnd  porten  (AeachyL  SajijiL
294).  although  it  ii  not  certain  whether  thou
runctioni  were  Dot  pcrfarmed  by  prieiU  who  wen
occaaionally  called  by  namea  deriTed  from  eome
pailiculai  functioD.  At  Oljmpia  faJSpirrai  wet*
appointed  who  belonged  to  the  family  oFPheiJiaa,
and  had  to  keep  clean  the  atalue  of  the  Olympian
Zeui. (Pant.  >.  It.  3^')

Trmpiaai  Rom: — In  tba  earlieat  timet  thera
appear  to  haia  been  Teiy  few  templee  at  Bom^
and  in  many  ipott  Ihe  wonhip  of  a  certain  dirinilr
had  been  eitabliihcd  from  time  immemorial,  whifa
we  h«i  dE  the  building  ef  a  temple  tor  the  Mma
diiiniiy  Bl  a  comparatively  late  period.  Thui  the
foundation  of  a  temple  to  the  old  Italian  diTiniir
the  capilollne.  did  not  take  place  Ull
4b  4


SaWmna,  de


ma  tERMINAClA.

ISS  a  c.  (Lir.  iL  21 ;  DinnjL  tL  1 ;  Pint.  FiiU.
12.)  In  the  nme  muinecQuiiimu  and  Man  hud
tetnplpi  bniA  ti  th«in  It  R  late  period.  Jnpilir
aim  bad  no  temple  till  the  time  of  Anciu  Mailiaa,
aiid  (he  one  then  built  ws»  wrtainly  Tory  iniig-
nificwit.  (DionT».  iu  34  ;  Lit.  i.  33.)  We  amj
thf  Kfon  Hippow  that  (he  placea  of  wonhip  among
the  (uliMt  ElomaiK  were  in  mut  cate>  iimpfg
altan  or  ucella.  The  Roman  templet  of  later
tim«  ven  eonitnicled  in  the  Onelc  itjle. The


ten,  the  i


of  (he  temple  which  contained  the  itatue  or
of  the  |[oda,  and  an  altar  befon  each  itatue.
(Vilnn.  iy.  fi.)  The  roof  which  eoTered  the  cells
i>  called  tndiiJa,  but  it  waa  in  moat  ciuei  not
wholly  cOTPted,  in  order  to  let  the  light  in  from
nboie.  (Vairo,  op.  Sen.  ad  Aen.  i.  SOo.)  The
entrance  of  a  Koman  temple  waa,  according  to
VitruTlui,  if  pouible,  alwayi  towardi  the  weit,
which  ilde  wai  at  the  uaie  lime  fhceU  by  the
image  of  the  divinity,  to  (ha(  penont  ofTering
praven  or  lacrtficei  at  the  tliai  looked  towards
the'  eait  (Comp.  Iiidor.  »t.  4,  7  ;  Hygin.  de
LimiL  p.  153,  ed.  Goei.)  If  it  waa  aot  pcac-
ticahle  to  build  a  temple  in  inch  a  poiiiion,  it  wa*
placed  in  luch  a  manner  that  the  grenier  part  of
the  city  could  be  seen  from  it ;  and  when  a  temple
wa)  erected  by  the  lide  of  a  ilreet  or  road,  ii
wa«  alwajt  an  eitnated  that  thou  who  pmcd  by
eould  look  into  it,  and  offer  (heir  aaluutioni  to
the  deity.

A»  rejordi  ihe  property  of  temples,  it  ii  ilated
that  in  early  timet  landa  were  auigned  to  ench
temple,  but  theae  landi  weiv  probably  intended  for
the  inninlenanu  of  the  prieiti  alone.  [SiislllDoa.]
The  xacra  pabliea  were  performed  at  the  expense
of  the  treaiury,  and  in  tike  manner  we  muat  iup-
pDie,  that  whenever  the  nguUr  incame  of  a
temple,  oriiing  from  feei  and  fines,  wai  not  tuffi-
cient  tii  keep  a  temple  in  repair,  the  ilale  Mpplied
the  deficiency,  unleu  an  individual  volunteered  to
dOM.

The  lupreme  luperintendence  of  the  templet  of
Kome,  and  of  all  things  connected  with  them,
belonged  to  the  college  of  pontifh.  Thou  persons
nho  hod  the  immediate  can  of  the  temples  were
theAK.iTDL  [L.S.]and[P.  S.]

TEMPOBA'LIS  ACTIO. [Actio.1

TE'MPORISPRAESCRrPTIO.EPwMCBiP-

TtO.]

TENSAE. [Thsns*«.]

TEPIDA'RIU-M. [BALNiAi,p.  ISO,  a.]

TERMINA'LIA,  a  festival  in  liDnour  of  the
god  Teiminus,  who  preiided  over  boundsrie*.  His
tlatnt  nai  merely  a  ttone  or  pott  tiuck  in  Ihe
ground  to  dislinguitb  brtwtea  properties.  Oa  the
festivnl  the  (wo  owners  ofadjacent  property  crowned
Ihe  statue  with  garlands  and  nised  a  rude  altar,  on
which  they  offered  up  some  corn,  honeycombs,  and
vine,  and  tacriliced  a  lamb  (Har.  Epod.  iL  £9)  or
a  sucking  pig.  Thej  concluded  with  singing  the
piaiKs  of  the  god.  (Olid,  FtaL  il.  639,  &c)
The  public  festival  in  honour  of  thit  god  wat  cele-
brated at  the  sixth  miteatone  on  the  road  toward*
Laurentum  (fd.  6S2),  doubtleu  because  this  waa
originally  the  eitent  of  the  Roman  territory  in  that
diireUon.

The  feitival  of  the  Tenninalia  was  celebrated
a.  d.  VII.  KaL  Mart.,  or  the  'i3i  of  February  on
the  day  before  the  Regifngium.  The  Temiinslia
' n  tilt  kul  da;  of  the  old  Romu ,


year,  wliepce  lome  derive  itanamft.  WalamwAul
February  was  the  last  month  of  Ihe  Romaa  yeui
ami  that  when  the  intercalary  month  Hareedanim
waa  added,  the  last  five  daya  of  Febmaty  woe
added  to  (he  inleicalaiy  month,  imiking  the  23rl
of  February  the  last  day  of  the  jimi.  (  Vam,  JL  L.
vl  13,  ed.  Miilter;  Macrob.  SaL  i.  13.)  Wbea
Cicero  in  a  letter  to  Aiticu  (n.  I)  aaya,  Aeafi
iaat  liOerat  a.  d.  V.  rerauntu  (>.  e.  Fab.  19),  be
uses  this  strange  mode  of  defining  a  date,  fcecaaae
being  then  in  Cilieia  he  did  not  know  wbedHrany
iutercatalion  had  been  iosertad  that  jeu.  LC^LKN-
DiRiuu,  pp.  2-29.  h.230,  B.J .

TERD'NCIUS. [Aa,  p.  141,  a,]

TE'SSER.\,./in.TESSE'RULAandTBS5EL-
LA  (iniSok],  a  iqiiare  or  cube  ;  a  die  ;  a  token.

The  use  of  small  cubes  of  marble,  ewibai-
ware,  glasa,  precious  stones,  and  mother  of- peail

fata.  Suelon.  Jid.  46)  is  noticed  imder  ltoMU^
p.  431  and  PtCTUR^  p.  Slfi.

The  dice  used  in  gamca  sf  chance  [ALU]  had
the  same  form,  and  were  commonly  made  of  ivery,
bone,  or  some  cloaa-grained  wood,  espeoallT  privet
(tigiatra  itnerit  aUiitiitita,  Plin.  H.  N.  ivi.  18.
&  SI].  They  were  nnmbered  on  all  the  aii  ^dea
like  the  dice  atill  in  use  (Ovid.  TVut  iL  473) ;  and
In  this  respect  as  well  aa  in  iheir  fgrm  they  differed
from  the  (ofi,  which  are  often  diitingnitfaed  fnai
tesKtae  by  clasaical  writers-  ((jellin*,  xviiL  13;
ac.iia:Sni.]S.)  [Talus.]  Whilat  four  tali  mn
uied  in  playing,  only  thr«  teuecae  wcr«  aucieailT
employed. Hence  arose  the  provetb,  i|  t|i1i  ;(.♦

leaning,  all  or  none  (Plat.  Lig.  lii.  a<<,il^  ;  SdioL
in  loc-  i  Phereemtes,  p.  49,  ed.  Runkel)  ;  for  titat

nK*  ml  T^TTOfH,  i.e.  1.1.4,— 6.(EupoJis,  p.  174,
ed.  Runkel ;  Aiistoph.  Raa.  1447  ;  SehoL  w  La.)
Three  aiaes  is  mentioned  as  the  highest  threw  ni
the  Agamemnon  of  Aeachvlut  {32).  Aa  euir  m
the  time  of  Eualathiai  («  Od.  I  107)  we  find  that
the  modem  practice  of  uung  two  djce  instead  sf
three  had  been  esublithed.

The  andents  tometimet  jdayed  wilb  d'n  wAew-
ToCoAlrlB  [Taluh],  when  the  object  waa  sia^J
to  throw  the  highest  numbers  At  oiber  timet
they  played  alto  with  two  tela  of  LATauKtuLi  ar
draughtsmen,  having  fifteen  men  on  cadi  tide.
The  board  ( j/«u  failing  Plin.  H.  ft.  xxavii  3.
t.  6  i  a/«Dfw,  OelliDi,  L  211,  xiv.  1)  wa*  divided
by  iwrive  tine^  to  thnt  the  gam*  muat  have  baen
neatly  or  altogether  the  ume  with  trie-mc  at
backgammon.  (Brunck.  Jnal.  iiL  60  ;  Jacoha,  at
ioc.) Perhaps  ihe  daodieim  Kripla  of  (ha  H


ne.  [Aba


s-J


Objects  of  the  same  materials  witb  diee,  aal
ither  formed  like  them  or  of  an  oblong  ahapt^
'ere  UMd  at  tokens  for  different  pnrpoae*.  TIm
■sera  liotpUala  wai  the  token  of  mutual  boapt-
tlity.  and  it  ipoken  of  nader  H(H)Finuii.p.CI9,a.
'hii  token  was  probably  in  many  caaea  of  earthoi-
id  of  Jupiter  Hospitaliti

" '.  US;  ±  ar— 9>.)

Roman  m^iiatimiti

I  the  poor,  in  exchange  for  which  they  nwved  ■
led  amount  of  corn  or  money.  (SoeloB.  Ji^  40,
■2,  iVepo.ll.)  [FRUJtiWTAEUjaLMaa.]  Simikc


.TBSTAMEKTDJL
-IIm  Bnnuu  lant  to  glia  the  Cuthiglnaiii  Ihcir
choice  sf  pma  or  war,  thsj  Mnt  tvo  Ummu,  out

matked  with  a  ipeir,  ths  othar  with  a  Caducbub,
Rqnnting  them  to  take  eitkei  th«  od*  ot  the
other. (Gelliu,  i.  37.)

Fjvm  the  apf^icalioa  of  tfaii  term  to  takmu  of
TahDna  kiDcti,  it  waa  tnDtfured  to  tiaword  naad


Tbii


■  the  fa


miUlara,  the  tirSiiua  of  the  Gi
ing  hattJe  it  iraa  giren  out  and  paned  through  the
ranka  ai  a  malhod  bj  which  the  loldien  might  be
able  ts  diatiDpiiah  fnendi  frooi  foea.  Thai  at  the
battle  of  Ctmau  Iha  word  va*  "  Zeiu  the  SaTiour
and  VicWiy,"  and  on  a  )DbMqiieiit  angageDwnt  bf
the  MiDe  tnapa  "  Zeiu  the  E^Tiaor,  UhbcIm  the
Leadei."(Xei>..4»>A.i.  S.  gl6,  T>.  a.g3£.)  The
aoldien  of  XeoopbDa  Died  a  rerba]  mgn  for  the
»aiDe  purpoae  when  tbej  were  encamped  bj  night
(TiL3.gU>.  Ae«aiTactieiu(e.34)giTei_nri«ii
dinctiona  neccaiary  to  be  obaefTad  iMpeedng  the
word.  Rupscting  the  teoera  or  watchword  in  the
Jl(nancamp,aeeCiSTiiA,p.2£l,a. [J.Y.]

TESTA. [FicTiLm.]

TEST  AMENTUM  ii  •*  mentia  nortcae  jnita
coDtealatio  in  id  aolemnLts  beta  nt  poit  mortem
noatnm  TstnL"  {V[B.Fnig.  tit.  20  ;  comp.  Ulp.
Dig.  38.  tlL  1.  a.  1,  where  ha  hu  **  juata  tenten-
lia.")  In  thii  paaMge  the  word  JoUa  mnni
"  jure  facta,"  "  a>  teqoired  by  l»w."  The  word
Contcatatic  '


which  ii


make  a


fcfied  to"Te«lari,"  which  lignifiea  "
•olemn  declaialion  of  ooe^  will."  Oellhii  (ii.  li)
properij  fiadi  halt  with  Serrini  Sulpieioa  Sot
laying  diat  the  word  ii  cemponnded  ~  a  mentii
eonteilBttoDe.''  The  peraon  who  made  a  TeitB-
mentam  waa  Tntator.  <SuetaiL  JVor.  17;  Dig.
28.  tit.  3. 1.17.)

In  Oder  to  be  able  to  make  a  Talid  Roman  will,
the  Teatator  mnat  have  the  TtatameDtiGictJa  (Cic
ad  fbm.  TiL  21),  whieh  torn  eipraww  the  legal
tfadtf  to  make  a  nlid  will :  the  word  bai  aljo
another  ugiiUeation.  [HskM,  p.  S9S,  h.]  The
lenti&ctio  waa  the  privilege  oniy  of  Roman
ere  polrca&miliu.  The  folio  wing
entlj  had  not  the  teatamentifoctio  ;
in  the  Polealaa  or  Haniu  of  an'
f  ancipii  cania,  a>  aooi  and  danghieri,
m  and  ilatea  ;  but  with  retpecl  to  hit
m  Pecnlinm  [PiTRiA  PoTiSTis]  a  Elint-
familiBB  had  the  priiilwe  of  teatamenlaiy  diipo-
aiticHi :  Latiui  Jvaiaiu,  Dedl^cii :  Peregrini  coold
not  diapoee  of  their  propertj'  aonrding  to  the
ibnn  of  ■  Roman  will :  ■  perHn  who  waa  doabtfol
aa  to  hit  itatna,  aa  for  iattance  if  hii  fadier  had
died  atvoad  and  the  bet  wai  not  aacerained,
coold  not  make  a  teilament;  an  Impubea  could
not  diipoae  of  hii  jHopertj  by  will  even  with  the
conaent  of  hia  Tutor  ;  when  a  male  wu  fourteen
fean  of  age,  heobtaioed  the  loatanwDiiGtctia,  and
a  female  obtuned  the  power,  tnbject  to  certain
reatiaiuta,  on  the  complalioa  of  her  twelfth  year;
mati,  aardi,  forioii,  and  prodigi  "  quibui  lege
booia  interdictum  eat"  had  not  the  teatamenli-


whytb


i  mode  of  dedneing  legal  coodutioni  Irom
geneial principle*: — the Motui had no' ''"
Teatamentifaetio,  became  he  coold  not  atCe
-wnda of  NoDcnpatio  ;  the Surdua,  becaui


TESTAMENTOM.  Ills

IhB  Furioam,  became  he  had  not  intetteetual  capa-
city to  declare  hia  will  (fotori)  about  hii  property;
and  the  Prodigua,  becauie  he  wu  nndec  a  legal

aeqoently  could  not  eiereiae  the  fonnal  act  of  the
&mDiaa  mancipalio.  (Ulp. /Vt^.  tiL  20.  l  IS;
CDRATna;  Imfubir.)  Ai  to  the  teetament  which
nun  haa  made  before  he  becomea  Furioaoa,  aea


originally  n


Dig.  28.  ti

Women  had  »  ,  ,
when  they  did  acquire  the  power,  they  could  nuly
aierciie  it  with  tbeanctorilaaofaTntor.  Ofconraa
the  power  ef  her  &th(^,  wbetheriha
d  or  married,  and  a  wife  in  mann
oould  nerer  make  a  will.  The  ralre  therefore  aa
to  a  woman't  capacity  to  make  a  will,  eould  apply
only  to  unmarried  women  after  the  death  of  their
&tber  and  to  widowt  who  were  not  in  the  power
of  a  father. Thit  lubjcct  requirea  explanation.

Cicero  (Thp.  i)  abienrea  "  if  a  woman  haa  mads
a  will,  and  hai  nerer  undergone  acapitiidiminntio,
it  doea  not  appear  that  the  Bonornm  PoeaeMto  can
be  granted  in  pnnuBjKe  of  inch  will  according  to
the  Piaetor'i  Edict ;  for  if  ilcould,  the  Edict  muit

S«e  the  Poaaeaiio  in  reipect  of  the  willa  of  Serii,
tuiea,  and  Pneri."  Cicero  meani  to  nj  that  if
tg  nzfltained  a
cspitil  dimiliDlio,  the  will  could  bu\e  no  eflectat
all :  and  he  deriiet  hia  argument  "  ab  adjunctii,"
for  if  luch  a  wilt  eonld  have  any  effect,  then  the
wiila  of  other  peraona,  who  had  not  the  tcitamenti-
bctio,  might  be  e^ctnal  ao  &r  aa  to  give  the
Bonorum  Poaacaiio.  It  ii  not  a  logifal  inference
fhan  the  langnage  of  Cicero  that  a  woman  who
tad  lUitaioed  a  npitiB  diminutio  conid  make  a
will ;  but  thii  ti  the  ordinary  meaning  of  inch
langnage  and  it  appeen  to  be  hia.  Cmiiiitendy
with  thi),  Ulpian  aayi  (Frag.  tit.  20.  a.  Ij),  "  wo-
men aAer  their  twelfth  year  can  make  a  will  wiih
the  Buetoritaa  of  a  Tutor,  lo  long  aa  they  are  in
tutela  i "  and  the  comment  of  Bo£tbiiu  on  the  pBai
BBge  of  the  Topicft  dearly  ihows  that  he  nnderatood
it  in  thi>  way,  A  woman  then  could  make  a  will
with  the  auctoritai  of  -her  Tnlor  and  not  without.
Now  it  a  woman  waa  in  Tutela  Legitima,  it  mijcht
be  cixrectly  laid  that  ahe  could  not  make  a  will  ;
fiir,  if  (he  waa  Ingenua,  the  tutela  belonged  of
ri^ht  to  the  Agnoli  and  Gentilea,  and  if  ahe  waa  a
Liberia,  it  belonged  to  the  patron.  In  thete  casei
a  woman  could  indeed  make  a  valid  will  with  Che
eonient  of  her  Tntorea,  but  aa  her  Tntnei  were
her  heira  in  caae  of  inleilacy,  lUch  conaent  woLild
aeldom  be  given,  and  thongh  a  woman  under  auch
ciicumatancea  might  be  allowed  to  make  a  wilt,  it
may  be  aaaumed  that  it  waa  a  ciccumgtance  alto-
gether unuiual,  and  tbui  the  mle  aa  to  a  woman
ID  Tntela  Legitime,  aa  above  ataled,  might  be
hud  down  aa  generally  true.  Tlie  paiaage  of
Cicero  therefore  doea  not  amly  to  the  Tutela
Legitima,  but  to  Ktmcthing  elie.  Since  the  dia-
covery  of  the  Inatitutea  of  Ouua  the  difficulty  ha*
been  cleared  up,  though  it  had  been  aolved  in  a
latiafiutOTy  manner  by  Savigny  before  the  pab-
llnlion  of  Gain).  [Bafirag  aar  Oadi^U  dtr
GfeUtehiiUltl,  Zeitachrift,  toL  iii.  p.  328.)

A  woman  could  make  a  "  coemptie  Gduciu
tauB,"  in  order  to  qaaliff  hcraelf  lo  make  a  will ;
for  **  at  that  time  women  had  not  the  power  of
making  a  will,  except  cwtain  peraoni,  unieaa  th^
made  a  co-emptio  and  were  remanciisted  and
■  ...  ... ^  H^


TESTAMENT  UM.
■  made  the  cenminf  of  ee


111*
driu  tba

oniMCMiuj  for  thii  parpHs."  (Gkiiu,  116,  4.)
TIm  coemptiD  ma  ucomponied  with  ■  mpilii
dimiDatia,  uid  tliii  i>  whuCicato  lUudei  to  io  the
pMngeof  thaTopka.  [Matbikonidk  (Ro««n>.]
A  wamui  who  cune  ia  nuaum  riri  lutd  •attained  a
c^itii  diminDtio,  hut  it  mutt  not  ba  infnnd  fnna
ibis  that  if  the  hecame  a  ifidow  the  caold  make  a
will  The  Capitii  diniiDDdD  of  Ciosro  meaoi  that
the  will  miut  be  made  with  the  anctrailu  of  a
tutor.  Now  if  the  hiuband  died,  whoi  the  wiis
had  bam  in  oMua,  tod  he  qipointed  no  tutor  fv
bitr,  the  vat  in  the  legitima  talela  of  hir  naaiaK
•giiMi,  who  woold  ba  her  own  ehildien  and  itap-
ehildran,  if  ths  had  an;.  Bat  the  MIela  lagitima  in
inch  a  ca«a  would  tttxa  tODiethiiig  nnnaMral,  and
aocoidinglj  the  magiatntoa  would  gin  a  tntor  to

bn  (torn  making  a .  „ .

bit  will  giie  the  wile  a  powts  lo  cbooae  a  Tatar
(tatorit  oplio),  and  lueh  a  Tutts  aould  not  nfiua
bit  cDDiant  to  tha  woman  making  a  will }  fix  iu-
itead  of  the  voDum  being  in  the  potealaa  of  tha
tutor,  be  wBt  in  the  potattai  of  the  woman,  to  far
•i  b>  be  boiwd  to  ancot  to  bar  laatamentary  dii-
poaitiont.  (Compara  Hi,  ixiiz.  19  g  Cic  pn
AfHTM.  c  17  ;  Oaiui,  i  ISO.)

The  caia  of  Silhu  (Cie.  adFaai.  tiL  21>  ma;
he  a  cate  of  a  woman't  making  a  will,  widuut  the
ancloritat  of  a  tolor,  foT  it  appcan  tbat  a  woman
(Tuipilia)  had  ditpoaed  of  ptopertf  br  will,  lad
Serriu*  Sulpicint  wai  of  opmion  that  ibit  wu  not
a  valid  will,  bacante  the  will-maker  bad  not  tba
teitamentibctia.  Thara  ma;  howaiti  bare  beto
Dtfaer  naioDi  wb;  tha  viU-makn  bad  not  the
talanwntifiKtio,  than  the  want  of  a  capibi  di-
niinutio  (in  tha  lenia  of  Cic.  Tifi.  4),  and  Eon-
tequantl^  the  opinion  of  thoae  critica  who  refer
the  caia  menliiHied  in  thii  letter  to  the  principle
of  tha  Capitii  diminatio  ia  not  a  certain  truth,

Tha  following  lelenncea  ma;  be  eonnlted  ai  to
thit  maltar:  Cibpn  Cback.  6.2S,pni  Piaee.  35.
pnt  Marm.  1 2,  oif  ^O.  liL  8  j  Lit.  zziiz.  19  {
Oaiot,  i  IfiD,  &a.

Libcrtaa  ooold  not  make  a  tattamcot  witbaat  tba
aacloctlaa  of  their  pMronna,  tieejA  to  Sv  a*  thii
rule  wBi  altered  b;  eradBwntt ;  for  the;  waa  in
the  legitima  tutela  of  tbaii  patronna.  Libeitae,
who  bad  a  certain  nnmhar  of  children,  conld  make
a  will  witbont  the  auctoriUa  of  their  patronna.
[Patron  DI,]

T^e  Veital  ViiKina  bad  no  tutor,  and  yet  the;
could  make  a  TsQunent.  The  Twelte  Tahlaaro-
leaied  them  from  all  tulsla  "  in  boaonai  ncer-
dotii." (Cicde  A}>.iii.  10  j  Oaiut,  i.  145.)

In  order  to  conatilote  a  lalid  will,  it  in*  necea-
mry  that  a  beret  ihould  be  inalitated,  which  might
be  done  iDnch  taimi  aa  follow:  —  Titina  berea


N-)l


[Hn


t(Ra


11  who  bad  the
heisdea  i  tlarei  alto  and  othert  who  ware  not  ani
ioiia  conld  ba  made  heredea,  bat  thay  ooold  not
tnke  for  chemaaUsi.  [Ilutca  ;  Suvtis,  p.  1037.]
But  there  were  man;  elawta  of  penont  who  could
not  be  heredea ;  Pertgiini,  who  had  not  recaiTed
the  coDnnndum :  penoni  who  wen  impeifectlj
deeeribed;  Juriatical  poirait  or  BCiTenitatei,  ex-
cept hj  tbeir  liberti,  a  |n>il^  granted  bj  a
SaaatuMMwnlBuit  Ooda,  v  (bt  tHnplH  <i  Quit,


TTSSTAUENTDIL
axopt  ioeb  at  wan  axemlcd  bj  a  Sea
tnltimi  and  Impaial  Ceamlntioaa,  ndi  ai
TnpuDi,  ApoUo  Dili  J  nil  III. lUn a
Hiacrra  llicniit,  Hacobi  OadilBina,  and  othaa
eniunerated  b;  Ulpian  {f^'og.  lit,  3£  a.  6):
Poatmnut  aliomt  conld  not  ha  made  i '  '

tion  whetbor,  aceuding  t(
could  ba  made  heiedea ;  but  the  qi
onlj  tboaa  who  were  ani  jnria,  aa
taona  no  anffidoit  rMWO  iriij  tba;  eaald  not  ba
mada  bcndeaj  tba  m^idtf  J  iiiiaii  ii  ts  take
andar  a  will  iraa  limilad  b;  tba  Lbx  Voooma :
panena  md  HnoDi  wbo  bad  ito  duUnn
lad  aa  to  tbev  capaajt;  M  take  ndcr  a
win  1^  the  Pa^  Poppan  Lax. [Luc  Jolu  at

PlPIl  POPPAU.]

Thefiratqneatioaiai  totbanBditjcfBwiD  waa
lbecBsacit;d'tha  teatatoi:  ihii  imil  ipanliiM  wai
aa  to  lb*  pupa  ofanrraaee  of  tba  fiwna  i«qacd
b;  lav,  "  axent  in  the  eaaa  of  aaUiara,  wbo,  ia
coniideiBdoD  oi  their  Ihlla  atqwntaDce  mtb  taA
niUtari,  were  allowed  to  laake  tbeir  wiBt  aa  tbe;
pleated  tiaa  Aereoald."  (Oaiiii,u.ll4.)  Tim
remark  of  Oaiai  taemi  to  reier  to  tb*  i— [a^jit

Aa  to  tba  Fam  of  willt,  Gain  (ii.  101)  nl
Ulpian  (/Vi^  tit  zi.)  are  naw  tbe  beat  anlboritica.

Origioall;  then  wen  two  modea  of  luakbm
w3li ;  far  peoda  made  their  willa  eitho-  at  Caiata
Comitia,  whicli  were  appointed  twice  a  yvar  (br
the  making  of  willt ;  m  tbe;  mada  wUla  oi  pn~
amct»,  that  it,  when  tike;  wcta  going  la  bMda ;  km
an  arm;  in  moTeotent  and  andeT  aimt  it  riwiiiilia
A  third  mode  of  making  willt  waa  imndaced,
wUcbwai  tStcMpirsmtt  Onm,  wbaea  dw
name  of  TeMameotaiD  per  ae*  et  Kbcan.  Ifaaaa
bad  iKitber  made  bit  will  atCabUaCooiliaiHrla
pndacta,  and  wm  in  imniiiient  dangv  tt  death,
lHWo<ddDiancipBla(BMc9»rfa6i^  bit  Paaitk,
that  it,  hit  Patrimimiam  to  a  biend  and  waoU  tall
kim  what  ha  wiibad  to  bt  pien  to  mA  afts  Ua
death.  Tbe  old  fotin  cf  inakin(  a  will  m  an  t(
lihiam  WM  thii.  Tba  PimiliaeMntot,  ibalB  tba
panon  who  receiTsd  tbe  Paoilia  by  macifati^
filled  the  phce  of  boe^  and  accar^n^  tha  iniaiiv
iaitnetea  bin  irtiat  he  wiihad  tobagtrtatv^iA
after  hit  death.  In  the  time  of  Qaiaa  Ike  nctiaa
waa  differoit.  On*  paaon  wai  iaitiwtel  bsaa
(iara  tuiajwaafo  tartntWrj.whn  waa  tbargai  with
the  payment  of  the  legaeiei,  oi;  aa  it  s  expMaad
in  the  phmiealag;  of  the  Hcdba  l^w,  **  a  qaa

wat  fatiMl  at  fcmiliaa  taUat  ban  a  ragard  ta  tba
old  legal  foTB.  Tba  mode  «f  ftacaadmgwa*  |U&
Tba  IMMar,  aftti  bating  wiittan  Ut  wttl  (itUa
ln^iBrfi),c«BedteitberlTaiiitnw,wbewi
BnaBt  citiKBl  and  p^n^  and  a  Ubafpwa,  ai


fima  («EU  Mats).  Tba  w«di  tl  tba  ]
^Mr  (Oaina,  ii.  104)  abow  dead;  tbe
pataraaf tbetnnta  ' ""

limiiiiailii  iiMiilali
redpio  aaqaa  qaeta  jore  tai


tags,  ate  Paehia,  /atf.  iiL  |  S< .
Entti  tbea  itmditbatcalatiritbBpiacaaf  mHrj
wbieb  ha  nre  to  tbe  Icalalar  at  tba  fan  W  tba
~ "'  Klakii^tbBwaiBUi


Mnrelo
^ 7bMilb


TESTAUENTUH.
bukd  Mid  I  **  Hue  its  nt  in  hii  tabnlii  ccritqut
(or  ceriire)  •cripU  wnt  ita  da  ita  l«ga  it«  tenor
it*qiu  T«  Quiritei  teatunaniiim  mibi  p«rhibetat£."
Thu  na  aiUed  tha  NimcnpatiD  or  pufaliiluDg  of
the  vili ;  m  otber  wwdi  tha  laatAtor^i  f^ananl  am-
fimation  of  all  that  bs  bad  oiittan  in  hi*  wilL

At  tbe  Familitti  onli*  wm  nipiNiied  lo  be  ■  ml
tnnnctMO  betwaan  tha  Emtar  ud  TaiMer,  the

aud  copieqDenttjr  a  penoo  irho  mi  in  the  power
of  the  FuniLiaa  Emtor,  or  ia  the  power  of  the
TotBlor  Eonld  not  be  m  witnsM.  If  ■  man  who
VBB  in  the  power  of  anotlier  wu  the  fa"""!"**
antsr,  it  followed  Ihnt  hie  &ths  could  not  be  >
wimeu,  nor  hii  bntbei,  if  tha  tnthv  wu  hi  tha

Swo  of  the  &thar.  A  fjlini&miliu  who  after  hit
i«io  dimoetd  of  hii  Caitretue  peeulimu  by  Icfta-
niaat,  could  not  have  hii  bthar  at  witncai  nor  any
one  who  wu  in  the  power  of  hit  &tbei.  Tha  hdw
mice  i^iliad  ta  the  libriptni,  for  be  wu  a  witnea.
A  penoD  who  wu  in  Iw  power  of  tbe  beiea  or  of
a  legatee  oc  in  wboee  psnr  tha  httei  or  legatee
wai,  or  who  wai  in  the  power  of  the  nnu  pcnn
aa  the  hers*  or  ■  l^atae,  and  alio  the  bane  or  a
kgatee  contd  all  be  witocH  ;  for  aa  Ulpiaa  ob-
aerrea,  there  ii  do  objection  to  anj  number  of  wit-
neaiea  inaa  the  lama  fomilj.  But  Oaiui  obaeno
that  thii  ought  not  lo  be  eraidderet^  ai  law  with
reapect  to  the  heret,  and  him  who  ie  in  the  power
of  the  hem  and  him  in  vhoee  power  the  hem  ia.
According  u  Oeioi,  willa  were  originally  made
only  at  CalMa  Comitia,  and  In  Pncinota.  Tha
Comilia  were  held  twice  a  year  liir  the  poipoaa  of
making  wUla^  and  a  wiii  not  made  there  wai  in-


TE8TAMENTUM.  1115

DOT  {i  it  probable  that  willi  were  written  :  ft  doea
not  appear  that  a  written  will  waa  era  nqniicd
by  lav. The  taatatm^  di^odtion  of  hia  property


a  that  tha  Oante*  misht  conaent
ry  di^oaitioi,  in  which  it  ia  im-


tD  the  . ,

plied  that  they  nught  lafiue  Uiaii
then  ia  no  direct  evideooa  fin  thii  opmiui,  ana  n
deriTca  no  lONiort  from  a  oniidaation  ot  the
mode  of  diapoeing  of  proper^  per  ae*  et  libiam.
The  fbna  per  aet  et  lilnan  waa  a  fom  intn>dimd
in  caaei  when  the  will  had  not  been  oiada  at  the
Calata  Comitia  nor  In  Piwincta.  It  had  aftct
becauae  it  waa  an  alienation  of  piaperty  intec  TiToa
wilboDtlhaconienl  of  any  parliei  eic^thebajtr
and  aeller,  which  alienatiaa  mutt  be  aMomed  to
liBie  been  a  legal  tnmaetion  at  the  time  when  thi*
new  (cum  of  will  wai  mtrodnead. Thii  new  fom

tiuat )  h»  membled  tbe  herea  fidotiarini  of  latu


the  Inut,  bat  opinion  would  be  a  lufflcient  gua-
IBDtee  that  tbe  tealator'i  will  would  be  obeerre^
and  thna  would  aiiae  one  of  tboae  porta  of  Idi
whidi  bad  it!  aoutce  in  Moa.  Now  when  Ih
RoBiana  introduced  imw  legal  locma,  they  alwiyt
aaiimilaled  tham  to  old  forma,  whence  we  hiTV  a
IKohahla  eonelniion  that  the  form  of  mancipatio  wu
•lao  obaerrod  at  the  Calata  Comitia ;  and  if  ao,  the
aMutnt  of  the  Ocotea  wu  not  nrneiwry,  nnleaa  it
waa  neceanry  to  ereiy  alieoation  of  ptqierty,  which
in  the  abieiice  of  endence  mnit  not  be  awDmed,
though  inch  pay  hare  been  tbe  &et.  The  dif-
fercDoe  then  between  the  will  made  at  tha  Calata
Comitia  and  the  wilt  per  aea  et  libtam,  coniiited
in  tiie  gnater  aideainity  and  notMie^  rf  the
fiimer,  and  the  conaequent  greater  lecuri^  that  tha
tc*talar*a  intention!  would  be  obMrred.  Written
viUaanontafokaiDf  with  raference  to  thii  tim^


origin,  we  cannot  determine  with

aertainty  nub  qneatiani  M  thoH  reapeeting  teita-

ntiou,  but  it  ia  of  iraie  importance

3Jactnrea  which  aia  deroid  of  all  eri-

(£laa  Bam.  FrraOnM,  n.  373,  note)

caiaad  thit  lobject :  he  baa  adopted  the  opinion  ot
Niebnhr,  »"™*'"g  to  vhieh  "  u  the  property  of
an  extinct  boDW  eatheated  to  Ae  any,  tut  of  aa
eztiact  cnty  to  the  poUieom  of  the  citiieoi  at  hig^
the  rcnuntoftliewhole popalne wu  nqniaite ; uul
thii  ii  the  origin  of  the  inla  that  taataoMati  wen
'~  be  made  in  tbeiire«noe  of  the  pontiff  and  tha
riee."  (/fut:^ADMe,ToLii.  p.  SS8.)  Bot  there
DO  oTidenceof  thaaaaertioDoonBined  inthefint
pajt  of  tbii  paiaage  ;  and  if  thia  rule  aa  to  eacheat
'  admitted  to  be  a  &ct,  the  rale  that  tectamenti
nat  be  confirmed  by  tha  pontiff  and  cmiea  ia  no
neeeaMrr  coneluian.  Niebohi  further  obeerrei
that  "  the  ptebeaan  booiei  were  not  lo  comieeled  ;
bat  the  whole  oidcc  had  a  public  eoffeT  in  the
npl*  of  Cem  i  and  when  the  amy,  being  aa-
ambled  in  ccntnriea,  either  on  the  Geld  of  Man,
;  before  a  battle,  paaeed  the  laal  will  of  a  aoldiec
ito  a  law,  it  tboiby  rciigiied  tbe  claimt  of  the
bole  body  to  the  property."  Thia  aaaertiflo  alio
'  not  aoppceted  by  oTidencc,  and  ia  therefore  a
lece  comnMra  a^inat  the  prohabili^  of  whidt
there  an  (uffldam  reaaiaa.

in  piDcinctn  ii,  for  anythii^

we  know  to  the  contraiy,  u  dd  u  the  tcetament

at  the  Calata  Conitla. In  thia  caae  the  fonna  of

the  Calata  Comitia  were  of  neceaaity  diapenaed

Lth,  or  the  aoldiei  would  often  haTe  died  intee-


Teatamantum  in  procineta  could

'  ef  the  wlude  popalaa,  in
Set  tha  imliiie  of  the


particular


of  diipealtion  In  PioeinetD,  a  eireumHanoe  which
lead*  to  the  probable  eondunon  that  the  will  made
at  the  Calata  Comitia  differed  only  fiom  the  other
'"  'n  ita  formiandnot  in  ita  nibatanoe.  Some
n  UMrt  that  tbe  Tdtamentmn  in  Pncinctn
coold  ooly  be  made  afUr  the  an^icea  were  taken,
which  gBTc  the  teiianent  the  nligiona  Boction,
and  that  when  tha  aupice*  ceaaed  to  be  taken  in
the  field,  thii  kindof  teatamanteeaied  to  be  made;
and  that  the  nulitary  U
tbe  litta  pKt  of  the  re
QalL  i.  39  ;  VelL  Pat.  iL  0,  &c')w<
kind  of  teatimcnti,  but  purely  military  teatanianti
made  without  any  fonn,  which  in  the  Impeiial
period  became  in  common  ma  and  of  whiefa  Julio*
Caeaar  probably  introdooed  the  pnctica.  (Dig.  29.
lit.  1.  Oi  TUoauato  MiJttu.)  Cicen  howerer
neiJu  of  tha  will  In  pndneta  (dt  Or.  L  6S)  u
thai  in  ue,  and  tie  deicnbei  it  u  made  "  line
libra  et  tabnli^"  that  ia,  withont  tha  forma  which
wan  Med  after  tbe  inBodaetimtdha  iwammmi*


II  Iff  testamentum;

fUToaet  liliram.  Thai  tlia  Ti
cinctu  alwuyi  nuuned  it)  chanclirUtie  of  being
exempled  &om  legal  farmt,  but  u  to  the  aopocifji
of  the  Tntntuc  it  wu  slwaji  tnbjeet  to  the  nme
rule*  of  law  u  other  wilii,  •)  &r  «  we  know.

The  form  of  Muicipatio  awed  iti  origin  to  pon<
tiTB  enactmentB  :  it  wai  a  form  of  oliflDAtion  ac-
oompBaisd  with  certain  public  cecemonin,  thejire-
■umed  object  of  which  wu  la  leetm  ETidenca  of^tbe
tnntfei.  The  fonn  of  Mancipitio  at  afplied  to  a
will  wa«  eiBcllT  the  lame  fbnc  ai  Manapatio  ap-
plied to  an;  other  puipoM :  it  wai  in  uiaution
of  the  propeftf,  and  aocording  to  Rrict  [dndplet
it  miut  haig  been  imTocaHo.  It  may  be  con-
eluded  then  that  Roman  willi  were  originalij  iire-
tocable. It  i*  HmetinuH  auomsd  that  th^  Gto


If  thii  ii  tras  (which  it


M  of  Sarriiu


only.  Dot  a*  panoni  wlio  gave  theic  conient  ta
tka  acL  Engribadi  itatei:  "Mancipation  wu
originalEj  a  fiirmal  hIo  in  which  the  puhlicneu  of
the  tiaiuaetioD  eonititated  the  ewential  charactfr-
ittie.  When  the  •ell«r  had  tiuiremd  to  the
buyer  the  ownenhip  of  a  thing  before  the  five
repreMntatirei  of  the  five  rlniira  of  the  Roman
People,  thii  wBi  ai  Talid  ai  any  other  Lei  which
wai  brooght  befon  the  uaembl  j  of  the  People  and
paned  into  a  Lax."  (JJAtrii*  JJaaa/fummtrZ^
derZm^Taf^  p.  SO.)  The  whole  meaning  of
thit  ig  Dot  clear,  but  M  hi  ••  thii  it  ii  clear  and
(nie  :  the  Te*taineatum  per  aa  ei  librun  diffand
in  DD  reapect*  aa  to  tbe  o^iacitj  of  the  alienor,  ftom
any  other  Mancipation.  Now  we  moat  either  aap-
pose  that  the  aaanmed  content  of  the  populua  to  the
TeatamenEary  diipoaition  at  the  G^(a  Comitia,
waa  eTpnaaed  bj  a  ipecial  enac^ent  which  ihould
tianifer  the  pn^ierty  according  to  the  Teatatw^

giren  to  the  ttaneler,  and  the  tranifer  mtut  hare
been  made  in  the  aiDal  wa; :  the  latter  ii  (he  only
conceiyable  caie  of  the  two.  In  awnning  thii
ociftinal  neceenty  of  eonaent  on  the  pan  ot  the
populoa  tn  the  tcttamenlary  diepoiition,  we  ai-
ttime  that  Roman  property  wu  originally  inalien-
able at  the  will  of  the  owner. Thii  may  be  true.

The  TwelTB  Table*  recofpiae  a  manV  power  to
diapnae  of  bia  proper^  by  will  aa  be  picaaed;  "Uti
tegaaiit  wper  pecnnia  tutelave  nae  rei  ita  jna  eato."
(Ulp.  /Vi^.tiL  iL  14.)  It  iagneially  admitted,
and  the  extant  paiaogea  are  conaiateDt  with  the
opinion,  that  the  new  teitamentary  form  per  aeg
et  libnuu  eiiited  while  the  two  oiiginal  fbrnu  were
I  iCiU  in  UN.  Now  in  the  teatameDliun  per  aea  et
libram  there  ii  no  pretence  f«  laying  that  any
conient  waa  required  except  that  of  the  bayer  and
■eller ;  and  the  TwoItb  Tablea  recogmiie  ilie  tala-
tor*i  power  of  diapoaitioo.  If  then  the  Ibnn  of
teatoment  at  Comilia  Calala  lubaiited  after  the
Twelie  Tabiei,  wa  ham,  according  lo  the  riawi  of
■ome  writen,  a  fbnn  of  teatamentmn  to  which  the
conaant  af  the  testator  wai  aofGcient  and  another

thoae  who  lapport  thii  opinton,  the  power  of  aaying
that  the  conient  of  the  aoTereign  people  had  become
a  form,  and  therefore  it  waa  jndi^lerent,  ao  bi  aa

al  the  Comilia  where  it  wnitd  be  fully  wittt

er  per  an  et  liloam  where  it  wonid  tte  iritnewad


»KSTAMENTUM.

by  the  fire  repreeentatifei. Snt  it  ii  eaaj  (o  ng-
geit  poeiibilitiee  ;  le«  eaif  to  wngh  eridenee  ae-
lately  and  lo  deduce  ita  legitimate  anucqasieea.
Aa  already  obaerred,  there  leemi  to  have  beoi
no  mle  of  law  that  a  teilament  mnit  be  writlm.
ntancipatio  required  no  writing,  nor  did  the  lo-
tion of  a  herea,  and  the  number  of  witncsae*
probably  required  in  order  to  iccnre  eridriic*
le  totatn'i  intentieoa.  ThaBitiaiBid(I>ig.2S.
I.  I.  31)  that  the  herea  might  either  be  made
by  oral  declaration (^taatarpa^o)  or  by  writing.
Written  wiUi however were  the  csmmon flno
oong  the  Romani  at  leaat  in  the  latei  Rpuhiicao
id  in  the  impeiiaJ  periodi. They  were  writloi
1  tableta  of  wood  or wax,  whoiee the wai4
Cera"  ii  often  uaed  aa  equivalent  lo  "tabdla;"
id  the  axpreadom  jvima,  aecanda  cera  are  equi-
valent to  prima,  Mcunda  pagina.  The  will  migbt  be
itten  either  by  the  lealntor  or  any  otha  pmna
irith  hia  conient,  and  lomeliniei  it  waa  made  witb
the  advice  of  a  lawyer. Itwaiwritlecin  the  Latia
language,  until  ^  n.  439  when  it  wa*  enacted  that
Willi  might  be  in  Greek. (Cod.  6.  tiL  23.  i.  '21.)
By  the  old  biw  a  legacy  could  not  be  givtn  in  the
Greek  language,  though  a  fideicommittom  cmld  be
•a  Eiven. It  doei  not  uipear  that  there  wai  origi-
nally any  lignature  by  the  wilneaaea.  The  win  war
led,  but  thia  might  be  done  by  the  ttatalo-  in

ihould  know  the  eontenti  of  the  will ;  they  wen'
witneaaea  to  the  formal  act  of  mancipatio,  aod  la
the  teatator^  declaration  that  the  tabulae  which  he
hdd  in  hia  hand  contained  hia  lait  wilL  It  mmt
however  have  been  in  lome  way  «o  marked  aa  to
be  reeegniied,  and  the  |Bacdce  of  the  witaeaiea
(Aatei)  iiwling  and  ligning  the  will  Iwcame  oommeo.
(Ai  to  the  wiU  of  Claadioa,  lee  Sueloaina,  Cbadu,
44.)  It  waa  neceaBty  foe  the  vricneiM  both  in
lea]  (ffMore),  that  ia,  to  male  a  mark  with  a  ring
(oanifw)  or  aomething  elae  on  the  wax  and  to  add
their  namea  (arf(Gni6ere),  The  five  witneawa  atgned
'  etr  namei  with  their  own  hand,  and  their  ad-
■iption  alio  declared  whoae  will  it  waa  that  liMj*
lied.  (Dig.  2S.  tiL  I.  a  SO.)  The  ae^  aod
adacriptioni  vm  both  on  the  ontiida.  A  Senataa-
iltnm,  which  applied  to  willa  among  oihev  in-
lenta,  enacted  tut  they  ihinld  be  ■  ituLiiiI
and  lignedai  followi:  they  were  lo  belied  with*
triple  thread  (fuaua)  en  the  upper  part  <d  tb«
mugin  which  wai  to  be  perfotated  at  the  middia
part,  and  the  wax  wai  to  be  put  over  the  thread
and  lealed.  Tabulae  which  were  produced  in  any-
other  way  had  as  validi^.  (Cranpare  Paoha,
S.  R.  V.  tit.  25.  I.  6,  where  imponue  H«nia  to  be
the  Due  reading,  with  SueIon.JVcr.  17.)  A  nn>
migbt  make  aevenl  copin  of  hia  will,  wbidi  w*t
often  done  (at  crigo  fieri  mbl.  Dig.  31.  dL  I.
a.  47 ;  a  caae  put  to  Procolua)  fir  the  nke  of
cantion.  Both  Anguatui  aod  Tiberitia  made  two
rapieaottheirwilla.  (Sueton.  ^19.  lot,  Tiber.  7&)
When  waled,  it  waa  depoaited  with  aoioe  friend,  er
in  a  temple,  or  with  the  Vealal  Virgini;  and  afW  [be
tnlatar'i  death  it  waa  opened  {miffman)  in  dM
form.  The  witnenei  er  the  major  part  were  [nMot,
and  after  they  had  acknowledged  their  iiali.  tb«
thread  (Utwa)  wai  broken  and  the  will  wai  opened
and  read,  and  a  copy  wai  made  ;  the  n^tinaJ  wae
Ihen  Haled  with  the  public  *eal  and  dIbhI  m  ibe
arehium,  whence  a  ftiak  copy  migbl  be  got,  if  tba
finl  Dopj  ibonld  eva>  be  leat.  (Plulni,ir.  G.)  Thia
piaetiee  daicrifaad  }tj  P»>daajattj  hna  beta  tf


TESTAUSNTDH.
■  utjqiitjr. Tbc vill  of  Angnitoi
which  had  b«cn  deposited  with  the  Vealal  Virgin)
vu  bcoQght into tho 9aiBt« mtia hii death

■dmitted  aiccpt  tboas  oE  8«D>t(nau  nnk  ;
rst  of  tha  witatwei  ailiMwbdged  their  of
VOf  oobdda  el  tha  Cmii.  (Snelim.  TB.  S3.)
A  punga  in  x  Noral  ol  Thmdouni  IL  (a
439,  Dt  Ttttammtu')  rtatea  tha  old  pnetice  u
thengBttunaftb*  witMMS.  "  In  ancient  tii
'It  (bowed  (q^lrriot)  hii  wriHen  teituii


U  the  will  tad  »  been  ihown  to  ihein  (ii6&iAin(ia


the  wotda  of  OaJna,  The  Nord  gun  on  to  tMe
that  tha  ignonuK  pmnnifition  of  ^tcrit;  had
changed  tha  eantioui  rnla  of  the  ancient  1 —  — '
the  witnenea  wm  recoiled  to  know  the
of  the  will ;  the  conKqnence  of  which  wai  that
man;  panmu  prefemd  dying  inleatate  to  leUinv
tha  Dontenta  of  their  will*  be  known.  Tha  Nore!
enacted  what  we  ntif  pnmins  to  hare  been  the
old  nMge,  that  the  teiuior  might  prodace  hia  will
•(•led,  or  tied  no,  or  only  dated,  and  offu  it  to
Mien  wktmaiii,  Roman  eitiuni  and  pabena,  for


a^wd  it  in  th«r  pceNDCC,  and  then  the  witneaaei
■nied  their  lala  and  lignatuiei  at  the  lame  time
•Jao.  ValcDtiaianlll.aUKledthatifaTeatamentDni
WM  bdognphmu,  whoeaae*  were  dM  neceuaiy,

A  Eraginent  id  a  Roman  wilt,  bdonging  to  the
time  of  Tiajui,  m*  pnblithed  by  Puggtf  in  the
RktiuitAn  M%muH,  toL  L  p.  249,  &«.  ;  and  it  i)
eipluned  by  Rndoref  (Dot  TtHammt  dai  Ai-
jajiMai,  Zntidkrift,  Ac  lol.  lii.  p.  301).

The  penaltiea  agakit  fraud  in  tbo  on  of  will*
and  other  initntmenEa  weio  filed  by  the  Lex
Cornelia. [FlLSUH.]

Tha  Edict  eitabliihed  a  leu  fbmiil  kind  of  will,
aince  it  acknowledged  the  Talidityof  awiittmwill
when  then  had  been  no  mincipatiii,  {oovided  there
were  •eren  witncMea  and  icTaa  k*\m,  and  the  lea-
lator  bad  tha  teataoMDti&etio  U  the  time  of  making
tbo  will  and  at  tba  time  of  hia  death.  (Oaiu,  il
li7.)  Tha  tennaot  the  Edict  an  ginn  by  Cicero
dm  Vmr.  L  I,  M.)  Tb*  Edict  only  gave  the  Bo-
noma  Ponewio  which  if  the  aenw  of  heieditai  in
the  paiwgeofCicenngftrTed  to,a«w«Il»ainOaiiu
(iLl)9).  Tbi*  a»«aUed  Pnetorion  Teatamenl  ei-
iated  in  tbe  Republican  period,  and  for  a  long  time
after.  Thai  ■  nan  had  hia  choice  between  two
fbnu  of  making  hit  will ;  the  Ciiil  form  b;  Man-
dpatio,  and  the  Pnetorian  with  aeiea  acal*  and
~  witneaaei,  and  withnit  Hancipatio.  (Sarign j,


Sqtnuzw-OtaaiuiUaiteJiom.  TWoat.,  Zntnlrirl,
TOLL  p.  78.)

Tbo  Piaetonao  Teatament  prepared  the  way  for
the  abolition  of  Mancipatio,  tbe  eaaen^  chaiacter
of  a  will  made  according  to  the  Jna  Civile,  and  in
the  Legiilation  of  Jiutinian  the  fbnu  of  Baking  a
teUament  wai  umplihed.  It  reqaiied  M*en  male
wilneaaea  ti  compeloit  age  and  legal  capacilj,  and
the  act  mnat  he  dona  in  the  pnaence  of  all,  at  tbe
•una  place,  and  at  tha  aana  time,  that  ia,  it  mnit
he  aaolinaoita.  Tbe  teatator  nigbt  declare  hia  kit
will  onlly  (n>  taiftii)  before  aeren


. Ifilw


mwill,


TEST  AMENTUM,
theit  leala. Tha  leaUtot  might  wi
hare  it  written  by  anolber  penoD,  bat  i
penon  conid  derira  ■ ■


[S».


•t)


which  ■  will  ma  not  Talid,  becaoaa
tha  beredea  lai  weic  not  eipraaaly  eihetedaled,  am
atated  m  Huh  < Rohan).

A  lealament  which  waa  invalid  from  tha  lint  was
Injnatom  and  neier  could  become  ralid :  it  waa
Non  jnre  fiutom,  when  the  pnper  fmna  had  not
been  obaened  ;  it  wai  NaUioi  Homailt,  aa  in  tba
cue  of  a  Glinafunilia*  who  ia  "  ptaeterita*."  A
Teatamenlum  Joatmn  might  beeoma  cither  Rnptum
or  Irrilum  in  cooKquenca  of  (ubaeqneul  eventa.
(Dig.  28.  tit  3.  1. 1.)

A  teatamenl  became  Rnptum,  if  the  teitator  mads
a  lutaequent  tettamrat  in  due  form  aa  required
b;  law :  and  it  made  do  matter,  whether  or  not
there  tuned  out  to  be  a  berta  under  the  aecond
will ;  the  only  qaealion  waa  whether  iheie  could
have  been  one.  If  then  the  herea  named  in  the
■econd  will  lefuaed  the  haraditai,  or  died  either
in  the  lifetime  of  tbe  teatator,  or  after  hia  death,
and  before  the  cietio,  or  &iled  to  oomply  with  die
conditioni  ti  tba  will,  or  loit  the  heieditaa  under
the  Lei  Julia  et  Pafna  Poppaea — ia  all  theae  caaea
the  pater&niiliaa  died  inteatata.

The  teatator  meat  have  a  cqnein'  to  make  a
wiU  and  continDe  to  have  tha  capacity  until  hia
death  ',  but  thia  principle  doea  not  apply  to  mental
•anity,  for  the  will  waa  nlid  if  the  teatator  became
insane.  But  tha  will  beauna  Initma  if  the  tea-
tator iuitained  acapitia  diminitlio  after  tha  dale  of
the  will ;  or^if  ilfiiiledof  efieetbecauae  there  waa

by  a  anhaequeut  will  w
no  here*  under  the  anbaeqnen
Itritun,
If  a  ma
r  by  the  enemy,  hia  will  w
-■-  ■"—  rotnmedhomcj  ift

aa  talid  by  the  Lex  Cornelia  ai
nau  not  oeen  a  captive.

Though  a  will  might  be  Ruptum  or  TrriEum  by
the  Jul  Civile,  it  waa  not  alwaya  vitbcul  eflect  ;
for  the  Bouorum  Piwciaio  lecundnm  tabulaa  m^ht
be  had  by  the  icriptni  harei,  if  the  will  waa  wit-
neaaed  by  Kven  iiiliieiaei,  and  if  the  teatator  had
the  teitainentibctio.  The  diatinction  between  the
cue  of  a  will  which  waa  invalid  Jure  Civlli  for
want  of  due  Ibraii,  and  one  which  waa  invalid  for
want  of  l^sl  capaci^  to  diapoae  of  property  by
will  waa  well  rccogniied  in  the  time  <rf  Cicero.
(7'of\Il.>  A  wiUalao became  Ruptum  by  adgnatio)
that  ii,  if  a  luna  herei  waa  bom  after  the  making
of  the  will  who  irai  not  either  inatitnted  hetea  or
eiheredated,  aa  the  law  lequind.  A  qoati  adgnatio
alao  ame  by  adoption,  or  by  tha  in  nunum  con-
to  the  place  of  a  luoa  hena,
a  grandjoa  becoming  a  auua
>f  the  death  or  the  emancipa.
of  a  ion  ;  a  will  alao  bacame  luplDm  by  tba
niaaion  of  a  aon,  that  ia,  where  the  km  after
:  and  aecond  mancipation  returned  into  tba
ofbiabther. (BwiN '


le  in  legal  fonn,  "aed  non  ex  officio  [Hetatia,"
inttauce,  if  a  man  bad  exberedaled  hii  own
dren,  oi  paoed  over  hia  parenia,  or  bnthen  or
na,  tha  will  waa  in  fbrm  a  good  will,  but  if
»  waa  po  aaflificnt  waatai  fig  ^lia  eihetedwiog


IIIB  TKSTAMENTUM.

at  pruteritian,  ths  penou  ■ggriaTtd  misbt
An Inofficioit  qaerela* The  ground  of  tJiB
plunt  wu  the  oUeeUion that  ths tcstsloi wu
"noD  nine  mentu," K  ai  to  tuTs  aiftdty
maks  a  wilL II  wai  not  ■llegiod  tbM  b«  i
Furicxai  or  Dainnii,  for  theie  wen  technical  wordi
which  imjdied  complete  legal  incapacity. The  dii-
tinc^on  mi  a  fine  one,  and  vorthy  of  the  mhtletj
of  tha  Jaruta,  to  whom  it  may  be  prenimed  to
owe  it!  origin. By  the  legialation  of  Jnatinian
no  peraon  conld  majalain  a  Qnerelaiooffidod  bayond
the  degree  of  hrothen  and  liitan  ;  and  bnlbeia
and  iiatcn  could  only  maintain  their  claim  againit
"  (eripti  heredea  "  who  wen  "  tmpea  pemmae.''
The  complunt  alao  could  only  he  maintained  ii
caaei  wh«  the  oomplaiiung  partiei  had  no  olhei
ri^t  or  meani  of  ndreaa. If  any  portion,  bow-
sT«  mall,  wa*  left  by  the  will  to  the  oomplaiuins
party,  ha  esald  Dot  ■"'-""'  a  Qoenla  indBdogi,
and  he  waa  mly  tntitled  lo  lo  miuh  ai  would  make


only  ha

inititution  the  Jndaz  had  pmuHmced*
'be  portkai  of  an  hervditai  which  might  be  claimed
y  tbe  Querela  inoffldoai  wai  ena-foiirth,  vbieh
^aa  diridad  among  the  claimaiiti  pn  rata.  (Plin.
■ " - '8  i  Dig.  5.  dL  S,  De


Ths  Qoerela  Inoffidcii  it  ezphuud  by  Ba^ny
with  hia  uana]  pmpienity  (^a^ni,  du.  tdL  ii.  p.
137).  When  a  tertatec  paiasd  DTer  in  hi*  will
an;  of  hii  nsanit  kinilblka,  who  in  the  cms  af
inteata^  woald  be  hia  harads^  thii  gaTB  nae

tha  opinion  that  tha  '* ' *

mariled  this  mark  of
If  thia  ofnuioo  waa  tmfbonded,  Iba  testator  I
an  unmeritad  iojnry  to  lbs  pBtaon,  and  bi>  nmeaj
was  by  getting  the  will  let  aaide,  ai  made  nndtt
the  inflgsnoe  fffpaaiuL  If  ths  will  wa«  set  ando,
the  teitatoi  wat  tbenhy  dc«Iar«d  to  havs  disd  in-
testate, and  ths  ecmi^nant  obtained  ths  beteditai
which  was  ths  iminediata  object  of  tha  Qosnla,  or
hii  aban  of  it.  But  tha  oitiniBta  object  of  the
Qnereta  wai  the  pntilic  re-establiihrnoit  of  tha  in-
jured honour  af  the  complahiant,  who  in  thii  aetian
appeand  in  a  hoatila  position  with  raBsct  to  the
Teatauririio  had  broDght  hia  character  m  qpattien.
Couaqnenlly  thia  actisn  had  foe  its  iilliiiialii  object
Vindieta,  and  ths  pecaliaii^  of  tha  action  eonnitad
in  ths  diSlKeaae  botween  this  ahiDiato  olgeM  of
the  action  and  tha  immcdiota  object  of  it  (pro-
perty), which  «aa  nMiriy  a  meant  ts  the  nltinyUa

object. [ViMDICTA.]

Than  ia  no  eridenes  to  show  whan  the  Qnacla
InoScJod  wBi  introdncsd  aa  a  mods  of  aetting  aaide
a  wiU.  The  jduaie  TeatamenCDin  Inofficioanm
1  in  Cieen^  and  in Qnintilian (/«(. Or,

a  an  informal  will:  ^lay  may  be
nennaa  lo  be  a  lattammtBrr  dtipoaition  of  anch  a
kind  which  doea  not  allow  any  direct  mdranBl
tuccassioD,  and,  ccnsoqnent^,  naitber  the  direct
appointment  nor  oitieredBtion  of  a  harea,  even
thoogh  the  codiciUi  are  confirmsd  by  a  testa-
mont )  hut  lia  who  waa  appobted  heiea  1^  a
taatamant,  might  ha  nqnnlad  by  codidlli  Id  pn
tha  btcadilaa  lo  another  altogether  c>  in  put,  oTen
thoogh  dk*  codidlli  were  not  ecnfinnad  l>y  a  Teata>
wat. AlcgacreraUM  ba^nnbrMAUUi.


xa).

Codicilli  «


TESTUDO.
unleai  the  eodicilli  wen  coniinned  by  a  will ;  and
thii  muit  be  the  case  to  which  Pliny  rrien  (^
ii.  16).  AcUianni  had  made  Pliny  "berta  ex
parte,"  birt  he  had  ejao  made  codidlli  in  hii  own
handwriting,  which  ai  Pliny  allegea  wen  foid
{pro  MOH  tcriptiM  Aohairfi),  hamue  they  wcrv  naC
confitmed  by  the  will  Now,  ii  alieadj  obaemd,
il  ^ipean  &an  Oniui  (iL  373),  that  a  pom  who
was  ^ipointed  berai  1^  a  will,  might  be  required
by  codidlli  to  giie  the  whole  hereditai  ir  ■  pan  to
aootbar,  aren  thongh  the  codicilli  wen  not  coo-
firmod  by  a  wilL  Bat  Pliny  it  «[— ^"-g  of  aodidlli
which  wen  Toid  for  want  of  a  teatanantaiy  ov
firmation  ;  and  thii,  aa  we  leam  &am  OahB,  ii  tha
legacy  giren  by  codicilli  whkh  han  nat
■byawilL Thiaco'

mriL,  id  nttam  b(,  Oahi^  iL'370  )  jmai  m
>a>ra^Dig.99.  tit.7.  a.8). This  pan^s  sf  Pliny
'~  to  tba  confitmation  of  cwlieilli  bj  ater


in  Oaiui :  the  fint  two  are  coDtaiDcd  in
the  worda  abois  quoted,  5i  in  teatameoto,  die  :  tha
third  i*  the  caie  of  the  herea  institacaa  being  n-
quired  to  giTe  the  herediiai  to  another  poiea  by
codicilli  non  confiimati  i  and  the  fourth  it  the  eaaa
giiai  by  oodieilli  of  a


waa  a  nils  of  hiw  that  codidlli,  when  dnlj  nmili.
wen  to  ba  conitdand  (exce^  in  a  bw  eaata)  aa
mconnnted  in  the  will  at  lbs  time  whn  tha  w3l
was  snde,  a  piineiple  wbicb  led  U  miioaa  Itaal
conelaaions,  which  UwBamaniaiata  deduced  wNh
their  nnal  preduDD. (Dig.  27.  til.  7.  a.  2.)

Original^  Hmm  was  HiAahlT  no  pvtKnlar  ftra
nqniiad  ftar  eodidUi  ]  Dot  lh«  most  have  beca
OTidaoea  af  their  ceolakiig  ths  testaw^  ialnttiia.


wan  soflcieat  ftt  codidlli  mada  in  writiqi,
if  the  witnenaa  eubaslbad  thor  nanwa  to  thaeodi-
dlli.  (Cod.  6.  tit  SG.)  But  a  man  (odd  with-
out writing  and  in  the  pnaenee  of  five  ■ilaissia
impose  a  fideiftirnnriBam  on  hii  berco.  A  testa-
ment which  waa  deftetiTe  *i  loch,  might  he  ef-
feetoal  a*  eodldllL  The  power  to  make  oedidlli
WBi  the  aame  as  the  powar  to  make  a  teataneBl.
(Dig.i9.t^J.DtJmaidioairum;  InatZlit.

as.)

The  inlgiet  of  Bonun  Taatauania  can  (oty  ba
otisEKtvily  expaonded  in  a  large  trsatbn,  and  it
would  nquite  to  be  treated  biatoiically.  The  pre-
ceding iketch  may  he  useful,  and  gflneral^  traev
and  it  afieeta  to  ba  nothing  mon.  (Oaiai,  n.  101
— I0B|Ulp.AiV;n.;Inat.S.tit.iO,ftc:  Dk.
38.  til.  1 ;  Cod.  G.  tit.  33  j  Vugnw,  niiiliKia,
*o.  ii.  1427,  *c.)  laL,]

TESTIS,  a  witneiL  1.  OasBK.  [J1a><
Tvnu.] X  BoMxn. [JuajDBAHDuir.]

TESTU'DO  (x>^<W),a  totoiae,  waathe  Hon
ginn  to  aaracal  o^«  obfactak

1.  To  tha  Lyra,bacanH  it  wai  laoMtimM  aada
of  a  timo»»abelL [Lraa.]

2.  To  an  arched  <r  Taolted  root  (Tbc.  Am.  i
«0S;  Cicfin«.23.)  [TurttrM,  p.  llia,a,l
Thai  in  a  Boaiaa  bo«B>i*beH  tba  Catmn  Aatbaa


TESTODO.
plgTinm  in  tha  centre,  Hn  Canm  Aedinm  v»
caUrd  TMMdo. (V«r.l»£.  t.  ISI.cd.  MUllcr.)
[DDif[;i,p.437,b.]

3.  To  a  mQltvy  ^w^^-^fc^-M*  moving  itpaa  nbfleli
and  iDofed  ortt,  ucd  in  bMiafing  dLiei,  niidiir
which  th«  iDldien  worked  in  nndennining  the
watU  ox  otlunriH  dcMnjing  tb«m.  (CaM.  B.  O.
T,  43,  *X  B.C.  ii.  a.)  It  WW  nwaUy  connd
with  nw  hida  or  atli«r  nattriali  which  could
twt  ouily  bo  aM  CO  fin.  Ths  faattaring-ram
[Ajuu]  wai  fceqiuBtlr  placed  nndai  a  tMlado  of
thii  kind,  which  waa  tbco  called  TMido  Aritaria,
<VitniT.  I.  19.  |i.S33,Bi|k)  Vitrariiu  alM  men-
ticoa  and  enluu  the  cSHtraetioo  cf  wraml  otlier
DiUluy  nacliiDW  fa)  which  iba  name  of  TeModinH
WM  giroi  (e.  30,  21 1  compare  Paljb.ii.  41).

4.  TkaMuneof  TeaudowK  aba  applied  (0  tha
eoTcring  mada  Vj  a  dcae  bodj  of  toldian  who
placed  tbaij  thieldf  orer  their  haada  to  aaenn
tbamaalrn  agaiul  the  dirto  of  the  anemj.  Ths
ahieldi  fitted  to  cloielj  together  as  to  preient  wie
Bnbnken  nTbce  wilhont  any  inlentkca  between
then,  and  were  ako  K  Gnu  that  men  could  walk
Bpen  tlwDi,  and  eren  hone*  and  ebaiiota  be  driTen
OTs  them.  (Dion  Qua  ilii.  30.)  A  teatodo  was
famed  (fdmUKm/biien)  eitbac  in  battle  to  ward
ofFtha  anowi  and  other  miaailca  of  the  eoamj,  or,
which  waa  more  (requently  the  cue,  to  ferm  a  pro-
tectioD  to  Iha  ioldjoi  when  the;  adiancad  to  the
walla  or  galea  of  a  town  for  the  poip^aa  i^  attuk-
iiVthom.  (I>ionCBM.I.a.,-  Li*.i.43i  CaacA
O.  ii.  G ;  galL  Jag.  S4  ;  lae  cot  annazed,  takn


TBALAMITAK.  lllS

tomad  to  Ibim  thia  kind  of  totodo,  aa  an  axeidie,
'-.  the  gamea  of  the  Cinnu.  (Lit.  iUt.  9  ;  Polyb.
ITiii.  13.)

TKTRADBACHMON.  [DBiCHKi.]
TETRAHCHA  or  TETRARCHE3  {rrrpip.
jat).  Thii  word  wu  ociginallj  ntad,  acoording  to
ha  Myntological  oieaning,  to  tignl^  tba  goTemoc  of
tha  fourth  part  of  a  coontij  (rtrpqixU  or  ttTfa-
Bapxi*).  We  have  on  eumpU  in  the  aneienC  di-
TiiiMi  of  ThcaMlf  into  finr  tetrarchica,  which  waa
reriied  b;  Philip.  (Haipoemt.  k  e.  Trrpcyx'" :
Stnbo,  ix.  p^  430  ;  Bemoath.  i'U%i.  ii.  p.  M7;
Eorip,  AtmL  IU4  ;  Thirlwall'i  Onwa,  ri.  pp.  13,
14.)  [TAOna.]  EKfa  of  tha  three  Oailii:  Hibaa
which  ietlled  in  Oalatia  waa  diiided  into  fbor  te.
trarchica,  each  ruled  bj  a  tetranh.  (Strabo,  liu
PP.H6,  667i  Plin./f.A:T.43.)  Tbia  airangi^
meat  aobaiatad  till  tha  latter  tiniai  of  the  Roma
lepnblio  <Ap|nan.  MiOrU.  4G,  j^.  AD,  BalL  Ch.
'-  °"),  bat  at  laal  tha  twelre  tetiarcht  of  Oallo-
a  were  ndoced  to  one,  namely  Deiotania.
Bpit.  iciT. ;  Cic  pro  DaoL  15  ;  Hirtiiu,
(f>  BeS.  AUa.  67.)  Some  of  the  tribea  of  Sfiia
wen  ruled  by  latnrcha,  aad  aaveral  of  the  princea
of  the  houa  of  Herod  ruled  in  Palcatine  with  Ibi*
title.  (Flin.  H.  Mt.  16,  19  ;  Joaeph.  AnHq.  lir.
IS.  I  1,  XTiL8.Sl,  il4.  I  18,  iTil  11.  f  1,
iL  £  g  1,  VU.  11.)  Niebahr  (HiH  o^-floiM,  iu
p.  1 3A)  ramorka  that  the  tBttatthe  in  Syria  wet*
'  idon,  who  occnpiDd  tha  tank  of  ao


ri^ti


from  ths  Antcnins  eohmni.)  Seinetiniea  the  ehielda
wcra  dianaed  in  nch  a  way  ei  to  make  the  testudo
~  M>  The  Boldiert  in  the  fim  line  itood  up-
Jia  aeecnd  itocfied  a  lild(,aiid  each
y  wai  a  littta  lower  than  tha  pro-
mling  down  to  the  lait,  when  the  aoldiui  reatcd
on  one  knee.  Sach  a  diipoaitioo  of  ths  ahidda
waa  ailed  Fn^gr^  Tataie,  on  account  of  their
*lo|Hiig  like  the  roof  of  a  baildinf^  The  adTan.
tana  of  thia  plan  were  obnout :  the  ttonee  and
miT-"**  thnwn  upon  the  ihielda  rolled  off  them
Uks  water  froni  a  roof  ;  beaidea  which,  alha-  lot-
4i«a  frequently  adnoced  npon  than  to  attack  Iha
aai«i7  apon  the  walla. Ths  Sonuui  wtn  i


r  Lord  Comwalli*  ia  getting  themielTes  re-


pnatim  of  th

In  the  later  period  of  the  tepablic  and  under  the
i]dre,  tha  Romana  aaem  to  lune  naad  the  dtia


<»  «


of  M


dgoale  tboaa  tributary  prinota  who  were  not  of
■nmcisDt  importance  to  be  called  kinga.  (Com-
pare Lncan.  TiL  237  ;  SaUuit,  CatO,  20  ;  Cic.  pro
MO.  is,  in  FottL  12  ;  HotaL  &A  L  3. 12  ;  VelL
Paterc  li.  SI ;  Tadt  AmnL  n.  36.) [P.  S,1

TETRASTY'Loa [TanrLux.]

TETRO'BOLUa [DaAcHXA.]

TETTARACONTA,  HOI  (el  rrrr^idiiarra),
tta  ^ortjr,  were  certain  offlcen  eboacn  by  kt,  who
made  rcgalar  drcuiti  dinngh  the  deini  of  Attio,
whoite  they  are  eallsd  tucoOYol  aari  H/itvt,  to
dedds  all  otaaa  of  akla  and  ri  wipl  rir  $iaim;
and  alao  all  other  prirate  anaes,  when  the  matter
in  di^tswaaDolabara  the  nine  <rf  ten  dnehmae,
Tbdl  nomber  waa  criginally  thirty,  but  waa  in-
craaaed  to  far^  'after  Uie  azpulihn  of  the  thir^
tyrant^  and  the  reatoratioo  of  the  demooan  t^
Thnaybnlna,  in  eoiueqnence,  it  ia  lud,  of  ilia
hatred  of  the  Atbeniana  to  the  niunber  crT  thirty.
They  differed  frnd  other  VurBOTo^  iruumuch  a^
they  acted  ea  •tsWTwytTi,  aa  well  aa  decided  canaaa  ;
that  11,  they  recoiled  the  accoaation,  drew  np  tha


etood  in  Athenian  law  by  the  4?'f4erla  rn  I(icair>
niflaii.  They  conieqnently  may  be  claieed  among
the  rwular  magiitratee  of  ths  state.  (Pollui,  viii.
40 ;  Harpocrat.  t.  v.  Kari  ti/imi  Jworrlii :
Rhetor.  Lei.  SIO.  91  ;  Demoatk.  c  Tfiucr.  p.  735.
11,  e.  PmHam.  p.  976.  10  ;  Schnbert,  D*  Aedil.
pp.  96—98  i  Meiec,^(t  Proc  pp.  77—83  ;  Schu-
mann, AmL  At.  PmbL  Orate,  p.  367.  10.)

TBXTOR.TEXTBINUM.  [TxtA,  p.  1099.1
THALAHITAB,  THALA'HII  (aalofuVai,
AaMfW'}. lNAVu,p.7e8,a.]


1130  . THAROELIA^

THALLOTHORI (»iiAA<.^pw>. [P*Ni-

.THINAE4,n.857,&.]

TUALY'SIA  i&cASvia),  b  (eitiTsI  celeluMed
in  honoar  of  Dionjriut  and  Stmetei  (Hcnand.

BfaEt.  qnoMd  bj  Heuniu>)i  or  aecardinfi  to  othen
of  Dfmeter  vlone,  u  it  )■  deicribed  by  ThvocHtui
in  hii  MTentb  idjil,  uid  hj  ths  gmmnatiaut  who
vrotd  Iha  ujumenla  to  Ibe  •ama.  It  wu  h<ld  in
aatomn,  ftftei  ihe  harrnt,  to  tbmk  tbe  gadi  fur
tfae  bsnefili  tbe;  bad  coDfeired  apon  mciL  (Spui-
beim  ad  CaSinaeL  t^Tiui.  in  0»r.  20  uti  137  i
Wtiitemann  ad  Thtocrii.  IdgO.  viL  B.) [L.  &]

THAROE'LIA  (^ofry^AoX  >  f«tlnl  «1e-
biBted  at  Atheni  on  the  Glh  ud  7ch  of  Tbu^lion
in  hoDDuc  of  Apollo  and  Artemii  (EljmoL  M. ;
Suidu,  I.  c.  BofTfitfiUi),  or  uxacding  to  tb«  Scho-
liut  Da  AriitophuiN  (.EijiBi.  14(Mi)  in  bononr  of
HeliM  ud  tb«  Uoru  :  tho  Utter  lUtement  ha<F
erer  ia  in  aubatance  Uw  nme  u  the  former.  Thi
Apollo  wbo  wBi  honoured  b;  Ihii  fstiral  ma  thi
Delian  Apollo. (Alhen.  i.  n.  *24.)

Ths  real  ftativaUor  the  Tnu^ia  ta  a  nanovu
*enje  of  the  wocd,  appean  to  have  taken  place
on  the  7th,  and  on  the  preceding  daj  the  city
of  Athena  or  rathrr  iU  inhabilanta  wet«  puiiEcd.
(Plut  Srmp.  liii.  1  i  Diw.  LaiM.  iL  i*  ;  Hun-
ciat  t.  e.  *af/aacii.)  The  muiner  in  which  thia
pnriGcatioa  waa  effected  ia  very  extrundinafy  lad
certainly  a  remnut  of  very  ancient  ritfa,  for  two
penona  wen  pat  to  death  on  that  da;,  and  the
one  died  on  behalf  of  the  men  and  the  other  on  be-
half of  the  women  of  Athena.  The  name  by  which
tbcM  victima  were  deiignated  va*  ^aptioKal :  ac-
cording to  aome  accfmnCa  both  of  them  were  meOf
bat  according  to  otheia  the  one  dying  on  behalf  of
the  women  waa  a  woman  and  the  other  a  man.
(Heaych.  i.e.  tapiiami)  On  the  day  when  the
lacrifice  wai  to  be  performed  the  lictinu  were  led
out  of  the  city  to  a  place  near  the  aea,  with  the
anompaniment  of  a  peculiar  melody,  called  cpoSliii
riMSi,  played  on  the  Sute.  (Hetych.  i.  v.)  The
neck  of  the  one  who  died  for  the  men  wai  lur-
ronnded  with  a  garland  of  black  figa,  that  of  the
other  with  a  garland  of  white  onet  f  and  while
they  were  proceeding  to  the  place  of  their  dea^y


they  were  beaten  with  roda  of  fig-wood,  and  figi
and  other  thinga  were  thrown  at  them.  Cheeae,
£ga,  and  cake  wen  put  into  their  handi  that  they
might  eat  ihem.  They  wen  at  laat  burnt  on  a
funefal  pile  made  of  wild  fig-wood,  and  their  aahea
were  thrown  into  the  aea  and  acanered  to  the
windi.  (Tutzea,  (Sil.  T.  25.)  S«ue  n-rilen  mwn-
tain  from  a  paisage  of  Ammoniui  (de  Diffimit.
Vaeai.  p.  U2,  ed.  Valck.)  that  the;  were  thromi
into  the  tea  alive,  hnt  thia  panage  leaTea  the
matter  nnccrtaiii.  We  are  Dot  informed  whether
thia  expiaUiry  and  purifying  aacrifice  waa  offered
regularly  every  year,  but  fimn  tho  name  of  the
liclima  {^tffuuti^)  aa  veil  at  tvm  the  whole  ac-
count of  Tictiei,  which  is  founded  en  good  au-
tboritiet,  it  appear*  highly  piobable  that  thia  aa-
crifice  only  took  place  in  caae  of  a  heavy  calamity
having  belallcn  the  dty  (nmoimii  t^i  wJXtaij,
aucb  aa  the  plague,  a  bmine,  &c. What  penona

nsnlioned,  and  we  only  learn  from  Suidaa  (i.e.
tafiiatvt)  that  they  were  kept  at  the  public  ex-
penae  (Biifumlf  rpt^iimi).  But  they  were  in
all  {vobability  criming  lenteneed  to  death,  and
who  were  kept  by  the  atate  from  the  time  of  their
condemnation  to  be  l*cn£ced  at  the  Tbar^io. Ja


.THEATRUM.

the  eariier  time*  howerer  they  were
but  either  cripplea  (Tietaee,  JLc;  Sc
lepli.  Raa.  733),  or  peraona  who  o
voluntarily  for  the  good  of  their  cotrai
iz.  p.  370  ;  Suidaa,  i.e.  nopWHi.)

Tbeaecond  day  of  the  Thaigelia  wi
with  a  proceaiion  and  an  agon  which  countM  ot
a  cyclic  choruB  perfamed  by  m«i  at  tbe  eqieaK
of  a  ehnragni.  (Lyaiaa,  de  Afmer.  aeaj4.  p.355(
Anliphon,  dt  Ckoriat  ell;  Ddfloath.  ia  .vU.  f.
6 1 7.)  The  priie  of  the  victor  in  tbia  agoD  waa  ■
tripod  which  he  had  to  dedicate  in  the  temple  of
ApoUo  which  had  been  built  by  Peia*  -  '
daa,  a  r.  niSiot.)  On  thia  day  it
for  pertoni  who  were  adopted  into
solemn!;  fm>*l(<^  xid  received  1
and  tbe  pbntria  of  the  adoptive  i
aolemnity  wu  the  aame  aa  that  of  Ki^
own  children  at  the  apaturia.  (I«aeua,ib.^JMtfs^
imd.  clB.  dt  AHilarcL  ieni.  c  S.J  [AiMir-
Tio  (GaiiK).]

Respeetuig  the  orfgin  of  the  Thargelia  thin  ■»
two  aoiManM.  According  to  latrua  (^.  PJal.  Jjw.
p.  i67  i  EtymoL  M.,and  UarpocraL  an.  *apttBci%)
the  ^ufiianol  derived  their  name  from  one  Phar*
macoa,  who  having  atolen  ths  sactTd  pfaiaU  of
Apollo  and  being  canght  in  the  act  b;  the  men  <t
Achillea,  waa  atoned  to  death,  and  thia  event  waa
oammenuuated  by  the  awful  sacrifice  at  the  Thar-
gelia.  Helladiiit  (p.  £34.  3),  on  the  other  hand,
alatea  that  at  Gral  these  expiatory  sacrifioea  wen
oSered  for  tbe  purpose  of  puri^ing  the  dty  of  «■!•
tagiona  diaeaaea,  aa  the  Atheniana  after  the  death
of  ths  Cretan  Andngeoa  were  viaited  by  tha
plague,  A  aimDor  featival,  probably  an  itaitatifltt
of  ihs  Thaigelia,  was  celebrated  at  MaMilia.
(Petmn.  141.)  (See  HeoiBDa,  Oraeda  Anida,
1. «.  aa(iy4\ia :  Boie,  Gad.  der  bfriidt.  Diiitt^^
dtr  Hdlat.  L  p.  173,  &C.,  where  an  aaaxmi  is  also
given  of  the  irfnilfqr  riiioi ;  K.  F.  Hemiaoat,
Haa&.  da-  OaUad.  AUtrtk.  $  60.  n.  t.  &c)  [US.J
THEATRUM  (SAn-poi-).  The  AtheDlana  be-
re  the  time  of  Aetcbylua  had  only  a  wooden
abiding  on  which  their  dramaa  were  perfbrroe^
ich  a  wooden  theatre  waa  only  erected  fer  tbe
ne  of  the  Dionysiac  festivala,  and  waa  aftcrwarda

CUed down. The fint  drama that  Aeachylui
Jiuht  upon  the  itage  vru  perfonned  upon  sack  a
wooden  toflbld,  and  it  it  recorded  aa  a  "~ '


(,500  b.


tcallblding  broke  down. To  prv-

actidenl  tbe  hoild-

ing  of  a  atone  theatre  waa  forthwith  commenced  eta

the  touth-eaaUm  descent  of  the  acropolis,  is  i3k

Lenaea ;  for  it  ahouid  be  observed  that  thriojihant

Orecce  theatres  were  almtp  bailt  upoa  eaoiBnicn,

>n  the  tloping  aide  of  a  hill. The  new  Atheniaa

itre  wu  built  on  a  very  large  scale,  and  aK"*!*

lave  been  conitructed  with  great  skill  in  regaid

its  acooatic  and  perapcctive  arm^onaita,  bat

name  of  the  architect  it  not  knowii. It  ■•

highly  prDbable  that  dramas were  prHbtmed  ia

thia  new  theatre  as  toon  at  it  was  practkahie,  aal

belbn  it  wat  completely  finiihed,  which  did  oiit

take  place  till  about  b.c  340,  unleaa  we  adopt  iIm

that  the  comploliui  of  tha

Attic  theatre  at  thia  time  refeia  Co  a  second  ihcatfa.

(Pane. L2S.  316;  PluL  FiLX.Ont.  |^B4l.e,

052,  c). During  this  liaig  iuterral  of  ftttv  OI;i>-

piadi  theatres  woe  erected  in  all  porta  it  Oirct*

and  Asia  Minor,  although  ^ibcM  waa  tba  caati^


THEATRUM.

diK«d  gnat  muMrwoT
libntture.  It  tbould  ili
tbfatra  m  mcntioDrd  in  Kienl  puti  gf  Greece
when  tha  wonhip  of  Dionjiua  and  tfae  dnrniB
omiwcled  with  it  did  not  exitt,  w  that  thne  bnild-
ingi  wen  derottd  to  other  paUic  exhibition*.
Thui  M  Alheiu  itself  then  were  in  l&ter  times,
btudea  the  thenCn  in  the  Lenui,  two  othen,  vii.
the  'Ayplmmr  >nd  the  M  'Ptd^AAi?  Sictrpar,
irhich  ven  not  destined  for  dnnutic  performBnce*,
bnt  were  onlr  pUces  in  which  the  Kphiite  de-
livered Uieir  decluDBtioni.  Ac  Sparta  there  wu
a  theatre  of  white  marble  (Pani.  jiL  U.  g  1)  in
which  inemblid  of  the  people  were  held,  chnral
daace*  perfonned,  and  the  like  (Athen.  iT.  p.  139,
xiv.  f.  631),  for  the  TettiTe  joy  of  Dionjnu  sod
the  regular  drama  were  foreign  to  the  SpBTtani.
All  the  theatre*  bewerer  which  were  conitrncled
m  Greece  were  probably  built  after  the  model  of
Ihat  of  Atheni,  and  with  ilight  deTiationi  and
modiGcationi  ihey  all  retembled  one  another  in  the
inain  pointi,  a*  ii  leen  in  the  nnmeroui  mini  of
theatre)  in  Turioni  parta  of  Greece,  Asia  Minor,
and  Sicily.  Some  of  them  were  of  prodigioos  di-
meoiiont.  The  theatre  at  Epidanmi  in  ihe  grove
of  AsclepioJ,  of  which  considerable  mini  are  itQl
extant,  excelled  iu  heautj  the  Roman  th^alra
(Paul.  iL  27.  S  £)■  "nd  in  liie  even  that  of  Mega-


1121

oned  the  largeil  theatre  in
i.  §  1.) The  giB


THEATRUM.

lopolis,  which  WIS  reckoned  the  la

Greece. (Patu.  vi

ber  of  niins  of  theatres  may  enable  ni  b

an  idea  of  the  partiality  of  the  Greeks  for  snch

msgnifcenl  buDdings,  and  of  their  gigantic  dimsn-

■ions. The  raina  of  the  theatre  at  Argoa  eneloio

B  snce  of  450  leet  in  diameter ;  tha  theatre  ef

Ephems is  eren  660  feet id diameter. Upon

these ruins  sea tha works  of  Clarke,  Dodwell,

Leake,  Hughes,  Amndell,  and  the  Supplement  M

Sluan^  Aaliqtdtia  i^AAaa.

Tha  tonatnctioD  of  the  Greek  theatres  has  been
the  iub^  of  much  diaaosioi  and  dispute  in  mo-
dem times,  and  although  alt  the  b«t  writers  agree
on  the  great  dirisions  rf  which  a  theatre  consisted,
the  details  ai«  in  many  cases  mere  mallen  of  con-
jecture. The  Attic  theatre  was,  like  all  the  Greek
theatres,  placed  in  such  a  manner  that  tha  place
for  tha  ipectaloti  fiirmed  the  upper  or  north-
western, aad  the  stage  with  all  that  belonged  to  it
the  south-eastern  part,  and  between  these  two
part)  lay  the  orchestra.  We  shall  cotisider  each  of
these  three  dinsians  sepaiaCel]',  together  with  its
parts  and  subdiiisiona,  refioTing  the  reader  to  the
annexed  jJan  which  has  been  made  from  the  re-
mains of  Greek  theatre*  still  extant,  and  bom  a
careful  examination  of  the  passages  In  ancient
nriteii  which  describe  the  wfa<4e  or  parts  of  a
theatre,  especially  in  Vitmnns  and  Pollux.


word  call

for  the  tpectaton,  which  wen  in  most  cases  cut
into  the  rock,  ccousted  of  lowi  of  benches  rising
one  above  another  ;  the  rows  themielTei  (a)  formed
parts  (nearly  three-fourths)  of  concealric  circlet,
and  were  at  iuteiral*  divided  into  com^Brtznent*
by  oneo'  more  broad  pAss^ea(b)  nmning  between
them  and  parallel  with  the  bcnchei.  These  pas-
sage* were  called  Biafii>uira,  or  mnanifial,  \M.
jrraeeiiKtiaint  (VitmT.  v.  3  and  7  i  Bekker,  ^aea-


M.  p.  270 ;  PoUni,  iv.  123  ;  Haipoemt  and  Suld.
I.  V.  Km-m-o^A),  and  when  the  concourse  of  peopts
was  very  great  in  a  theatre,  many  persons  might
stand  in  them.  One  tide  of  such  a  passage  formed
towards  the  upper  rows  of  benches  a  wall,  in  which
in  some  theatres,  though  perhaps  not  ul  Athens,
niches  wtre  excavated  which  contained  metal  ves-
•*!■  (^X»">)  to  inwease  the  sounds  coming  from  the
stage  and  orchestra.  (Vitruv.  i  1.  fi  9,  T.  i  ;
Sliegliti,  AroliuJlitn- Auitani^&cii.  l.p.  ISO.)
Across  the  raws  of  benches  ran  alui^  bj  which


1122  THEATRUM.

pemuu  miglit  Hcend  frum  the  lowst  to  tlie  high-
«t.  But  LbfiBB  Btain  zbq  in  vtnught  \met  oulj
frvm  i>ne  pnpcinctio  to  another ;  and  tho  itain  in
the  neit  ■eriea  of  rowi  wen  itui  belwom  the  two
■Uin  of  the  lower  leiioi  of  bencheg.  Bf  thii
couiH  of  the  inun  the  M«t>  were  diirided  into  ■
nombec  of  campnrtmeDtt  leaarobling  conei  from
which  the  tope  ui  cut  off  j  hence  the;  were  tinned
Kt|Ui(S(i,  and  in  Luin  nmoi*.  The  whide  of  the
place  for  the  ipectMx*  (S^crpav)  wu  loinetiiiMi
deiigtuited  by  the  name  icaiXiir,  I^Iin  ohhi,  it
baiog  in  moat  cue*  &  real  eiontion  of  the  nick.
Above  the  highe*t  row  of  benchei  there  com  a  co-
Tcrnd  portico  (o),  which  of  coiina  &r  exceeded  in
height  the  oppoiite  buildingi  h;  which  the  Mege
wu  lurroiuided,  imd  appean  to  hiTO  aUo  coatri-
buled  to  incrtaie  the  acomitic  efiect.  (ApoL  MeL
iiL  p.  49,  Bip.)  The  entnncv  to  ths  aeali  of  the
■pectaton  were  partly  imdecgTonDd,  knd  led  to  the


Athen.


nible  from  BboTS.  (Pollux,  IT.  123)


2.  The  orcheitn  [ifx^l"'''!''^)  ''u  i-  drculu  level
■pace  extending  in  front  of  the  (pectftton,  ud
■onwwhitt  below  the  loweit  row  of  benchei.  But
it  wu  not  B.  complete  circle,  one  lament  of  it
being  appropriated  lo  the  ttage.  The  orchatn  wu
the  place  for  the  choiuo,  when  it  performed  iti
evolnliou  and  doncei,  ioC  which  pnipOM  it  wu
corered  with  boardi.  As  the  chorut  woe  the  ele.
ment  out  of  which  the  drama  uoae,  »  the  or-
cheatra  vaa  originally  the  moat  important  part  of  a
theatre  ;  it  formed  the  centre  nionnd  which  all  the
other  furta  of  the  building  were  grooped.  In  the
eentni  of  the  circle  of  the  oichntra  waa  the  du^^it,
that  in,  the  altar  of  Dlonyiui  (d),  which  woi  of
coune  nearer  to  the  >t«ge  than  lo  the  a«ta  of  the
■peetators,  the  diitance  from  which  wu  preciiely
Ina  length  of  a  radiua  of  the  circle.  In  a  wider
kuw  the  onheatra  also  compriied  the  broad  pa»-
■Bgea  (rapoBoi,  e)  on  each  aide  between  the  pro-
jecting winga  of  the  itage  and  the  MSta  of  the
■pectaton,  throngh  which  the  ehon*  entered  the
onheatiB.  The  choma  generally  arranged  itielf  in
the  apace  between  the  thymele  and  the  alaga.  The
thymele  itaelf  waa  of  a  aquare  form,  and  wu  uaed
for  various  porpoaea,  according  to  the  nature  of  the
different  playa,  anch  u  a  funeral  monimient,  an
■Itar,  Ac;  It  wu  made  of  boardi  and  lurrounded
on  all  aidea  with  alepa  It  thna  Mood  npm  a
tailed  ptaCfbrm,  which  wu  lonietiaiei  occnpied  by
the  leader  of  ^e  choma,  the  Sut«-player,  and  the
ihabdophori.  (MUUer,  DimrL  oh  Oe  Eiaum.  of
AttdyL  p.  2i9,  &e.  tranel.)  The  flnte-player  u
well  u  the  prompter  (iinrfoXtii,  moaSor)  were
generally  placed  behind  the  thymele,  lO  u  to  &ce
die  itage  and  not  to  be  seen  by  the  ipeclgton.
(PUit  Rti  pi^  gerettd.  prtito.  p.  813,e. ;  Ath.  lir,
p.  G3I.)  The  orrheatta  u  well  u  the  aJarpoi'  lay
under  the  open  iky  ;  a  roof  ii  nowhere  mentioned.

3.  The  atigK  Steps  led  from  neb  aide  of  the
orebenra  to  the  atase,  and  by  them  the  choma
probably  aacended  Uie  itaga  whenever  it  took  a
teal  port  in  the  action  ilaeli:  The  back  aide  of  the
■Isge  wu  doled  by  a  wall  called  the  ainirli  or
joeu,  from  which  on  each  aide  a  wing  projected
which  wu  colled  the  wopaim^Roi.  The  whole
depth  of  the  stage  vaa  not  very  great,  u  it  only
coinpriaed  a  segment  of  the  circle  of  the  orcheetnw


Thei


»  prosceuinm  (trpM-K^ruw),  and  wu


THEATRDAL

what  we  ihould  call  the  real  stage.  That  pmn  of
it  which  wu  nearest  ta  the  orcneatia,  and  whera
the  actora  stood  when  they  spoke  waa  the  Xiryttbr^
also  called  ^$at  or  ittfiBarrn,  in  I^tin  pt^itmai,
which  wu  of  course  laiaed  aboTO  the  acbeota
and  probably  on  a  level  with  the  thymele.  What
the  vawrfrftrjav  waa  ia  not  clear  ;  aono  think  thai
it  wu  a  place  to  which  the  actora  withdrew  whfs
they  had  acted  their  parts,  other*  think  that  it  wu
the  Hme  aa  the  (wior^  (SaidAa,i.e.Xinir4)  ;  bat
u  it  ia  stated  that  the  Inoaititnia'  was  adined
with  statnea,  it  aeema  more  probable  that  it  ma
the  wall  onder  the  Xirftlar  which  &ced  the  ordhes-
tra  and  the  inectaton.  The  nKvi  «-  scoaa  waa,
u  we  have  almdy  stated,  the  wall  whieh  claaed
the  stage  (proKmim  and  logaan)  from  bafaiod.
It  i«preaaited  aiuitable  badt^nnnd  or  tbskcalily
in  which  the  action  waa  going  on.  Befbia  the  play
began,  it  wu  covered  with  a  curtain  (»iym  t\  agfi^
Tpoctliyun/^  atX^Uoi^  I^tin  amlaea  <tf  Bparii^  /
EtymoL  M.  >.  t.  AC\Jt :  Athen.  liiL  p.  587  ;  Pol.
lui,  iv.  123.)  When  the  plaj:  began  thia  cdMaia
was  let  down  and  wu  tolled  npm  a  roUer  mida>>
nealh  the  stage.  The  proaceniam  and  legemi  ifaai
were  aever  coocealed  irom  the  apectatoia.  A*  re-
gards the  scenery  r^reamted  on  the  ffinii^  it  waa
dilferent  for  tragedy,  comedy,  and  Ibe  latyric
drama,  and  Ibc  each  of  thee*  kinds  of  poetiy  the
scenery  muit  have  been  capable  of  vaiiou  modifi-
cationa  according  to  the  character  of  eacb  indivi-
dual play  ;  at  least  that  tbiawu  the  case  witb  the
variou  tragediea,  is  evident  from  the  acne*  de-
scribed in  Ue  tragedies  atill  eilonL  In  (he  latm
however  the  back-groond  {trmirii)  in  moot  caaca
repreaenled  the  front  of  a  palace  with  a  door  ia  the
centre  <i}  which  wu  called  the  rofol  door.  Tha
palace  generally  consieted  of  two  atories  (Swi-rjla,
Pollux,  iv.  129),  and  upcn  iu  flat  R»f  then  tf-
pean  to  have  lometimei  bem  sooe  elevated  place
from  which  penooa  might  obaen«  what  waa  geiif
on  at  a  distance.  (Bnrib  Ptonw  88,  &c)  Tba
palace  pmanted  on  eaefa  dde  a  projecting  wb^
each  of  which  had  its  separate  enttauce.  These
winga  generally  repreaent«d  the  habilatieGB  af
gneata  and  viaitora.  All  the  three  doora  TDHt  have
beai  visible  to  the  apectaton.  (Vitrnv.  v.  T.)
The  protagooistes  always  entered  the  ita^  thcDogti
the  middle  or  royal  door,  the  dentsagiEiiates  uid
tritagonlstet  thrmtgh  those  on  the  right  and  ItS
wkigs.  In  tragedies  like  the  Pmnetheoa,  the
Feraiana,  Philoctetea,  Oedipos  in  Cokama,  and
other*  the  hnck-gnund  did  not  rcpreaenl  a  palace.
There  are  other  piece*  a^ain  in  whiA  tba  aceaa
moat  have  been  changed  m  the  coarae  of  the  per^
formance,  u  in  the  EDmenidta  of  AcaehyhM  an)
the  AJBx  of  Sophoclea  The  dramas  of  Baiipdes
required  a  gnat  variety  of  accneiy  ;  and  if  ia  ad-
dition to  this  we  tecollect  tlMl  aeTeral  pieeea  wot
pUyed  in  one  day,  it  ia  manifiat  IbM  tlw  nexkaai-
ca]  parta  of  alags  periormance,  at  least  in  the  d^i
of  Enripidea,  mual  have  been  Imnght  le  great  per-
fec^on.  The  acena  in  the  Salyiic  diaiaa  appcan
la  have  always  reinvented  a  woody  diiDict  with
hilla  and  grottoes  ;  in  comedy  the  acerta  represvied,
at  leut  in  iatei  times,  the  fronts  of  private  dwell-
inga  or  the  habitatiaat  of  slaves.  (Vilrav.  v.  8. 1 1
"" ■ 125.) ■" —  -'

des,  although  Ariatotle  (Fott.  ii
introduction  lo  him. [PmoKA,  p.  908,  b.]
The  nachiiMi  h)  theOndi  lhab«  na


THEATBUM.

trmel?  manaoiii,  bnt  we  in  in  man;  cair*  usable
to  Uma  an  exact  idea  of  their  nulun  and  their
effein*. We  ihall  ddI;  meutioa  the  raoit  itDportant
amnug  them. 1.  The  rtplami  (tn)  itoiti
tke  two  lide  entnuKCt  of  the  iccna ;  their
wu  that  of  a  priama,  and  bj  ■  liogte  lum
produced  a  cbwige  in  the  Kcneiy.  (Vitniv.  ^
PdUox,  iv.  126.) 2.  The  xo^tm  r\IfKWi
the  Chamaian  ilqa,  by  which  the  ihadeg  aice
fram  the  lower  world  apon  the  ilifle. (PoUox,  ir.
1 32.) 3.  The  MIXaH,  op^  er  iiffipa,  a  machine
by  which  goda  or  heioei  wete  rqnoenlcd  pauing
Uinnigh  or  Sooting  in  the  air :  lience  the  proverb,
dau  u  madama. (Polinz,  it.  12G,  I3S,  131  i
SniAai,(.<>.'E^I»U<a-.  He*]^:h.  i. «.  KpiUq.)  4.  The
Jiiarpt  or Jm^kAit/ul [Exoariu.J fi.  The
dfoAPYfior,  aL  eepecial  elevated  place  above  the
■ccna  far  the  Olympian  goda  when  the;  had  to  ap-
pear in  their  fuU  majeit;. (Polki,  iv.  130  ;  PhoL
Lai.  p.  AST.) 6.  The^pwTtuf.amachingfDrimt-
(aling  thonder. It  appean  tn  luiTe  been  placed
nndemcath  the  Hage,  and to  hare coniiated  ol
large  bnien  Teneli  in  which  atonei  nere  rolled.
(Pdloi,  ir.  130  1  Suidaa,  a  c.  Bparr^  :  Vitiuv.  t.
7.) Rnpecting  Hieral  other  mochinea  of  lea  im-
{lorlance,  an  Pollni,  ir.  wpl  lUfw  itiriim.

It  It  impoeaible  to  enter  here  upm  the  diffeie ncea,
which  are  preasited  b;  man;  mini  of  thealrei  adll
extant,  from  the  deact^on  we  ha*s  giren  aboTc.
It  iaoDl;  neceuar;  to  mention,  that  in  thetheatm
of  the  great  citic*  of  the  Macedonian  time  theipace
Iwlweeii  the  thymele  and  the  lugeum  wa«  converted
into  a  towel  ttage,  npon  which  mimea,  mniicioni,
and  danora  played,  while  the  ancient  ita^  (proa-
ccniom  and  logeom)  remained  deatined,  u  bi^ore,
for  the  acton  in  the  regular  drama.  Thii  lower
■lage  waa  lometimei  called  thymele  or  onheitin.
(MaKia,HiitqrOn:ttLU.Lf.299;  DonaldKin,
7%I  r^airfnr  oflU  Ortela.)

TIk  Ronuna  mnat  have  become  acquainted  with
tin  theatrea  of  the  Italian  Oreeki  at  an  early
period,  whence  the;  erected  their  own  theotrea  in
■imilar  poaitioiu  apon  the  (idea  of  hilla.  Thii  ii
atill  clear  bam  the  ruini  of  very  andent  tlicain*  at
Tmcnlum  and  Faeanlae.  (Niebuhr,  HU.  of  Rome,
iiL  f.  364,  du.)  The  Romam  tbemielTea  however
did  not  poaaeai  a  regular  atone  thcatn  until  a  very
late  period,  and  ^though  dramatic  reprcaentationi
were  Terr  popular  in  earlier  time*,  il  appean  that
a  wDodcD  il^  wai  erected  when  neceanr;,  and
waa  afterward!  palled  down  agun,  and  the  playa
of  Flaatoa  and  Terrace  were  perftmed  on  luch
tempcnuy  acaflbldingi.  Id  the  meanwhile  many  of
the  neighbaoring  tovni  abont  Ronie  bad  thoritofw
tbeatrta,  ae  the  inlndnction  of  Greek  cniHom*  and
mannen  waa  leu  itrongl;  oppoaed  in  them  than
in  the  dty  of  Rome  itael£  Wooden  theatre*,
sdoned  with  the  moat  pnfaie  munificence,  were
erected  at  Rjune  ereii  during  the  lut  period  of  the
rcpahtic  The  firat  attempt  to buildaatone  theatre
vaa  made  a  abort  time  before  the  conanl^bip  of
P.  Comelini  Sctpio  Nanai.  It  waa  HnelioneJ  by
the  ceniora,  and  waa  advancing  towarda  ita  com-
pletioo,  when  Scipio,  in  155  &&,  penoaded  the
aepBlB  lo  command  the  bnilding  to  be  pulled  down
0  public  morality.  (Lir.  EpU.  48.)
le  magnifteent  wooden  thcatn  which
Id.  Aemihiit  Scannii  built  in  hia  aedileahip,  £S  a.c,
aec  Pliny, /r.  W.  zxxvi  24.  S  7.  ItaaoenacoDaiated
at  three  iloriea,  and  the  loweit  of  then  waa  made
of  whila  mnbi*,  the  middla  me  of  gleM,  and  the


THEATRUH.  1123

upper  one  of  gilt  wood.  The  carta  eontuned
80,000  apeclalort  (Comp,  P\m.H.N.  xxxiv.  17.)
In  Si  a.  c  Cn.  Pompey  bnilt  the  firat  alone  theatre
at  Rome  near  the  Campna  Martiua,  It  wai  oF
great  beauty,  and  ii  laid  to  have  been  buiU  afLer
the  model  of  that  of  Mylilene  ;  it  contained
40,000  ipcctators.  (FHn.  H.  N.  xixi'i.  24.  S  7;
compare  Drumam,  GJuok/JOmi.  ir.  p.  520,  &c)
C.  Curio  built  in  50  B.  c  two  magnificent  wooden
theotrei  dnee  by  one  another,  which  might  be
changed  into  one  amphitheatre.  fPlin.  H.  JV.
xixvL  24.  g  8.)  After  the  lime  of  Pompey,  how-
ever, other  itcoie  tbeatiea  were  erected,  aa  tha
theatre  of  Maicellua,  which  waa  built  b;  AtlguBtus
and  called  after  hia  nephew  Maicetiui  (Uon  Caia.
xliii.  49)  Plin.  H.N.  xxivi.  12)  ;  and  that  of
Balbut  (PliiLLc),  whence  Suetoniua  (^a^.  44)
uaea  the  exprewion  per  trina  lABolra.

The  coottinction  of  s  Ramaa  theatre  reaembled,
on  the  whole,  that  of  a  Oreek  one.  The  principal
diSerencea  are,  that  the  aeati  of  the  ipectaton.


which  re


circle  ;  and  that  (he  whole  of  the  orcheiCta  like-
wiie  formed  only  a  eemicirde,  tha  diameter  of
which  formed  tile  boat  lina  i^  the  atage.  The
Roman  orcbeitrs  contained  no  thymele,  and  waa
not  deitined  for  a  chomi,  but  co '

aa  fbrei„

aubafrlliomm  ordo."  In  the  yenr  68  B.C  i«  tri-
bune L.  Roidiu  Otho  carried  a  law  which  regn-
lated  the  plaeea  in  the  theatre  to  be  occupied  by  the
dilferent  ciaaBCi  of  Roman  citiieni :  il  enacted  that
fourteen  ordinea  of  benchei  were  to  be  aaaigned  aa
Bcau  to  the  equitea.  (  Lir.  EpiL  99  r  A»on.  ad
CoTTuL  p.  78,  ed.  Oretti.)  Hence  IheM  quataor-
decim  ordinea  are  tomelimei  mentioned  withoot
any  further  addition  aa  the  honorary  aeata  of  the
equilea.  They  were  undoubledl;  dose  behind  the
aeata  of  the  aenatora  and  mngiitratet,  and  thua
eoniiated  of  the  nwi  of  benchea  tmmedialrly  be-
hind tbe  onheMra.  Velleiui  (il  32)  and  Cicero
(pro  Mvm.  19)  apeak  of  tbia  law  in  a  manner  to
lead  na  to  infer  that  it  only  reatored  to  the  eqnile*
a  right  which  they  had  poiKased  befiire.  Another
part  of  thia  law  wu  that  ipendlhrifti  and  peraoni
reduced  in  their  eircumxtancea  (deoKforef),  whether
through  their  own  fanlt  or  no^  and  whethM'  they
bdonged  to  the  aenatoriao  or  equettrian  order,
ihould  no  longer  occnpy  tha  aeata  aaaigned  to  their
order,  but  occupy  a  Mpanlo  pbce  aet  apart  for
than.  (Cic  i'A^^iL  18.1  In  the  reign  of  Au-
EUitua  the  aenate  mode  a  decree,  that  foreign  ant-
baaaadoia  abould  no  longer  enjoy  the  privilege
mentioned  above,  aa  it  had  aometimet  happened
ibat  freedmen  wen  aent  lo  Rome  aa  aDibauadora.
The  aoldien  aZan  were  aepaiated  from  the  people
by  the  aame  decree  ;  ^  aame  waa  the  caae  with
women,  praeteitat)  and  paedogogi.  (Suet  ^i^.  44.)
Thii  aeparation  eomiated  probably  in  one  or  more
:i  being  aaaigned  to  a  particular  claat  of  per-
The  woodcut  on  the  following  page  cmtaina
, nbaUe  repteaentation  of  tbe  plui  of  a  HoBao

fuller  aecDont  of  tbe  conatrnction  of
Oreek  and  Rnmon  theatre*  aee  the  commenlalon
on  Vilniviua  (/.  e.),  J.  Chr.  Gonelli,  dtuTiala-im
AlitH,  AoHieif/U  at/  JnHttctwr,  Sctatrie  ami
DatHeBuitffi  Kaitt  iibtria^*,  Berlin,  1818,  8to^  ;
O.  C.  W.  Schntider,  Da4  Aa'  '  —
*<)3


~  O"


THEATRUM.


THEATRUH.


nun  ixtem  Fanleim  dtr  GrinA.  Dramalihr;
Stiegliti,  Ardanlogu  der  Batilauol  dir  Grieeh.
tad  Roner  ;  PemrK,  Storia  t  daor^-  dt*  princip-
teotri  aM.  e  ntoderm,  HLluo,  1830  ;  ths  gup-
|)leraent  to  Sturfi  Aaliq.  of  AAmt.  A  geatnl
oulliDc  ii  alu  given,  bj  Mliller,  HiiL  of  Or.  IM.
I.  p.  299,  &c  ;  and  b;  Bode,  Gadi.  dtr  dramat.
DicUiaitl  d.  Httim.  L  p.  156,  &c

It  renutiDi  to  ifttk  of  b  few  point!  reipecUng
He  attendance  in  the  OrteV  theatm.  Thouri<^
rcpre»ent«tioni  at  Atheni  begaji  eulj  in  the  morn-
ing, or  after  bieakfut  (AeKhin.  cdaipL  p.  466;
Athen.  li.  p.  46i}  ;  and  when  the  concoune  of
people  wBi  expected  to  be  great,  perxmi  would  enn
go  to  Dccup;  their  u«ta  in  Iho  night.  The  tun
oould  not  be  very  troubleume  to  the  actors,  aa
thej  were  in  a  great  meaaure  protected  by  the
buildingfl  iomunding  the  ita^,  and  the  ipectaton
protected  thenuelTH  Bgaiiut  it  b;  hata  with  broad
brinii.  (Suidai,  t,  n,  niriuroi  and  Apttjnar.)
When  the  veathec  iru  fine,  eipecially  at  the
Dionyiiao  feativals  in  tpring,  the  people  appeared
witb  gaikndt  on  th*li  headi ;  when  it  wai  cold,
ai  at  the  Leoaca  in  January,  they  ---*-- —


(Sui^


^i6


When  a  itom  or  a  •
denly,  the  ipectaton  took  refuge  in  the  porticoes
behind  the  itage,  or  in  choie  above  the  Dppemioit
nw  of  benchca.  Thoto  who  wiihed  to  lit  com-
fortably brought  cuiMeni  with  them.  (Aeachin.
e.  Claiph.  Lc. ;  Theophr.  Chir.  2.)  Ai  it  wa>  not
uuMual  for  the  theatncal  peiformancel  to  lait  from
tea  to  twelve  houn,  the  ipectaton  required  re-
freahmenti,  and  we  ^nd  that  in  the  interval)  be-
tween the  HTeial  playi,  they  used  to  take  wine
and  takea.  (Athen.  iL  p.  164  ;  AriMot.  BUt.
NiaJ.  I.  5.)

The  whole  of  the  tSTei  in  the  Attic  theatn
nnuthaTecaatainedaboutfO.OOOtpectaloR.  The
flux*  for  genefali,  lheaRheni,prieite,tbreigDani-
haiaadon,  and  otha  dlatinguithed  pertoni,  were
in  the  lowett  rowi  of  benehea,  and  nearest  to  the
•tehcatim  (PoUn^  ir.  121,  Tiii.  1S3;  SchoL  ad


ArutapL  EqmL  £72),  and  they  appear  to  hare
been  tometimei  coveted  with  a  tort  of  canopy.
(AeKhin.  1.  IX)  The  lows  of  bcnchec  above  thr«e
were  occupied  by  the  tenate  of  £00,  lho«  next  ia
■Dcceuion  by  the  epbebi,  and  the  reit  by  the
people  of  Athena  Bot  it  would  teem  tbat  they
did  not  lit  indiacriminalely,  but  that  the  beiler
placet  were  let  at  a  higher  price  thaD  the  othrr^
and  that  no  one  had  a  right  to  take  a  plan  lor
which  ho  had  not  paid.  (Plat.  Apalafi.  p.  26 ;
Aelian.  V.H.  iL  13  i  Demoith.  n  Af ^  p.  5:3.>
The  queatioD,  whether  in  Greece,  and  m«xe  etpeci-


X  of  tiagediei,  ii  oi


:  of  thoH


which  have


«b.(l


p.272),«

/urduAUaii.  1H37.  □- 29),  have  placed  it afawM
beyond  a  doubt,  from  the  varioai  aUoiioni  made  by
ancient  writen,  that  women  were  allowed  la  U
preeent  during  the  perfrnmance  of  tn^;ediea.  This
opinion  it  now  perfectly  ti»fiio»d  by  a  puBge  m
Athenaeui  (lii.  p.  S34),  which  baa  been  quoted
by  Becker  (OariUtt,  il  p.  fiGD),  in  cvnbotatioa
of  the  conduiion  to  which  the  abore  mokUecied
writen  had  coma.  In  thii  paiaage  we  Sod  that  at
Athena,  and  at  the  tuns  of  the  Peloponaaian  war,
the  ipectaton  in  the  theatre  contiated  of  men  aad
women. We  have,  hawever,  on  the  olhet  band.


9 ;  I•aeu^  dt  Gnm.  ImrvL  p.  206  ;  Arittopk
N<ih.  5S7,  &c  ;  Luciao,  ib  Qy<mad.  22.)  The
leati  which  women  accn;ued  in  the  Greek  thntna
appeal  to  have  been  aepaiated  from  thoae  of  iba
men.  (Odttling,  in  the  Ritmiitk.  Mm.  1334,
p.  103,  Ac)

For  die  puipoae  of  muDtaioing  oJct  aad  pn-
Tenting  exceMe*,tbe  andentihad  a  aortof  '
police:  *^*  pcnoni  who  hdd  tUi  oScs  w«


■ertitioD  of  Backer,  ii


THENSAE.

faSlaixiii,  md  at  Rune
(SchoL  ad  AritoplL.  Par,  713.)
'  W  the  >ncndui«  at  tha  Onck  tbeolre*,
'  ct  af  tbe  MapU,  lee  &  tuj  good  dii-
r,  in  taliQtonUn,  iL  pp.  349—
278.  [L.a]

TUEN8AE  or  TENSAB  (br  Iba  imhognph;
and  etynolagy  of  the  word  ire  alike  doabtfbl,  ol-
thongh  tbc  oldcat  MSS.  gaiuralty  omit  the  aiptnta)
mn  highlj  ornamoited  ncred  lahiclet,  which,  in
the  »lemii  pomp  of  the  CirMouui  gamet,  convejed
the  lanm  or  ccTtaiii  deitiu  with  all  their  decora-
tioni  to  tbe  polTinaHa,  and  after  the  sporU  wera
enr  bora  them  back  to  their  ihrinei.  (Cic  ta  Cnr.
iL  I,  S9.  and  oou  of  PHmdo-Awun.  iiL  17,  t.  72  ;
Sen.  ad  Yiwg.  Am.  L  21  ;  Peitiu,  i-v.;  Diomf dea,
i  p.  372,  td.  Putach.  i  Dion  Cau.  ilrii.  40  ;
TertaU.  it  jJieA  7.)  We  ace  ignorant  of  their
prectie  fbnn ;  foe  althongh  we  find  Kreral  re-
pceaenlatioai  npcm  ancient  mcdati  and  other  worki
of  actiOfgodiaeated  in  caca,  and  eapeciaU;  of  the
■UD-cbariot  of  EUgabalot  (Heroduui.  t.  6  i  ice
VaJlknt,A'iiiiwiiaAi/s;i.  ToLiL  p.  269;  Oinnot,
Di»  Wimt  wti  FaitrmHa,  Slo.  tab.  llii.  fif.  6)  ;
yet  we  ha*e  no  meain  of  deciding  which,  if  anj,
of  tbeae  ara  teniae.  Wa  know  that  they  were
dnwn  by  horaai  <PluL  Cbnobn.  3i,  who  calli
tbcm  M^aaj),  and  eacorted  {dtdran)  by  the
chief  •eulon  in  rob«a  of  lUte,  who,  along  with
paeri  patrimi  [PATKnfi],  laid  hold  of  the  bridln
and  tiacei,  or  perhapa  auUted  to  dng  the  carriags
(for  dmmn  it  uaed  ai  well  oi  daiiiart,  LIt.  t.  4l),
by  mcaju  of  thongi  attached  for  the  purpose  (and
hraxe  the  propoied  deriration  fhna  lendo).  So
ncred  wn  thu  duty  coniidered,  that  Anguitui,
when  labourite  under  lickneai,  deemed  it  necea-
luy  10  accoiopany  the  tenMe  ia  a  litter.  If  one
of  the  boraea  knocked  up  or  the  dhTcr  took  the
rein*  in  hi*  left  hand,  it  wu  neecanty  to  recom-
menca  lb*  pnceatiai,  and  for  one  of  the  attendant
boyi  to  let  go  the  thong  or  to  atomble  waa  prob-
nation.  (Lit.  t.  41  ;  Plat  L  n.j  Aecon.  L  e.;
Aroob.  ado.  geaL  it.  31  ;  compared  with  the  ora-
tioo  de  Hanop.  nip.  1 1  ;  Tenull.  dt  tor.  mU.  13,
and  de  Speetae.  7  ;  Snet  Odat.  43.)

The  only  godi  diitincliy  named  aa  carried  in
tenaae  an  Jupiter  and  Hinerra  (SueL  Vt^na.  S  ;
Dim  Caa.  ilTii.  40,  L  B,  livl  1),  to  which
number  Han  ii  oiually  added  on  the  autho-
rity of  Dion  Caauui  (InriiL  3),  bat,  in  the  pai-
M)!e  refemd  to,  he  UMroly  itatea,  that  at  the  Cir-
ceniian  nmea  celebrated  A.  D.  216,  the  atalae  of
Mara,  which  wai  in  the  proceaion  (mfirtuir),  fell
down,  and  it  ia  very  remarkable  that  Dionyiiui
<Til  72),  in  hii  minute  dcKription  of  the  Pampa
Circenaia,  lakea  no  notice  whaUiei  of  Ibe  Teniae,
but  repreaente  the  atatoei  of  tbe  godg  aa  carried  on
men'a  ihooldera,  i.  a.  on  farcula.  That  a  conaider-
sble  number  of  deitie*  howeiei  KceiTed  thia
faoDcur  aeenu  probable  from  the  expreaaion  of
Cicero,  in  hia  aolemn  t^ppaX  at  the  ebae  of  the
laat  Vetrine  oration,  **  omneaqne  dii,  qui  Tehiculii
teoaaiiun  aolemnea  coctua  Indorum  initii ; "  thoojih
we  cannot  determine  who  theie  godi  wete.  We
frequently  hear  indeed  of  the  chariot  of  Juno
iViif-Omy.  iil  S31},  of  Cybele  (.da.  Ti.  784),
and  many  other*,  but  ai  theie  are  not  mentianed
ID  eanneiion  with  the  Pompa  Cinsenaii,  there  i>
■  .1  ihey  »


THEOItl.  ll2Jt

of  tbe  goda  to  the  eirco*  in  a  comtJete  ehiriot
(SpiAn  lAgv,  that  ii,  a  tenia,  in  oppoajtion  to  a  men
firaUHm),  and  that  thii  chariot  ahonld  itand  in  the
Capital  immediately  oppoaite  to  ^t  of  Jupiter.
<Dicm  Caaa.  xliiL  15,  21,  46,  xlir.  fi.)

Similar  homage  waa  paid  upon  high  feitlTala  to
the  imagea  of  their  goda  hy  otber  ancient  nationi.
Thua,  in  the  corioua  ceiemonisa  performed  at
P^iremia  connected  with  the  woiahip  of  the
E^^tian  deity,  whom  Hendotua  (iL  63)  imagined
to  bo  identical  with  Area,  the  atatne,  eiubrined  in
a  chapel  made  of  gilded  wood,  wa*  dogged  in  ■
four-wheeled  car  by  a  body  of  ptieata.  So  alio,
in  the  aceonnt  giTen  by  Atheuaeni  (t.  e.  27,  AcX
after  Calliienea  of  Rhodea,  of  tbe  aorgeoui  pageant
at  Alexandria,  during  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  PhiW
delphuB,  we  read  of  a  or  of  Bacchut  of  prodigioo*
UK,  molt  cH^y  materiali,  azuj  moat  elaborate
woAmanibip,  which  wa*  drugged  hy  160  men,
and  to  lucb  cnitom*  wa  may  And  a  parallel  in
modon  timaa  in  the  naagea  which  preniil  at  the
featiTal  of  3.  Agatha  at  Catania,  and  S.  Roaolia  at
Palermo.

(ScbeSer  d*  He  vMndari,  c.  24  ;  Oinint,  Dit
Wdgm  and  f^iirmria  dtr  Oruelitm  urnl  Aimer,
c  £5  ;  bnt  the  latter  anther,  both  here  and  elie-
where,  allowi  bia  imagination  to  carry  him  brlhu
than  bia  anthoritiea  wamnL)  [W.  R.]

THEODOSIA'KUS  CODEX,  [CodhTuko-

THEOPHA'NIA  (aiefdna),  a  feitiTal  eele-
bnted  at  Delphi,  on  the  occaaiou  of  which  the
Delfdiiana  filled  the  huge  ailTer  crater  which  had
been  preeented  to  tbe  Delphic  god  by  Croeaua.
(Herod.  L  51.)  Valckenaer  on  Hendotua  (Lo.)
thought  that  the  readmg  wa*  corrupt,  and  that
6«a{(ria  ahoold  be  read,  a*  Ihi*  feitind  ia  well
known  to  have  been  celebrated  by  the  Delphiani.
(Pint,  dt  hit  OH  Hn>  a  nn.  pun.  p.  657,  t;  Polo-
mon,  t^  AAmt.  ii.  p.  372.)  But  both  fealiiala
an  mentioned  ti^etber  by  Pollux  (i.  34),  and
PhiloatrUua  (Vtt  AptJlom.  ir.  31).  The  Thw-
phania  were  intended  ai  a  celebration  of  the  re-
turn of  Apollo  to  Delphi  bma  which  he  waa  be-
lieved to  be  abient  during  the  winter  month*.  An
agon  called  theoienia  waa  alio  celebrated  at  Pellene
inAchaiain  honour  of  Hermea  and  Apollo.  (Schol.
od />nd.  OJ:  rii.  156,  ii.  146.)  But  no  particulan
of  any  of  theae  {ettiTala  are  known.  [L-S]

TUEO'RI  (d«vol),  were  peraona  aent  on  spe-
cial miaiion*  (deoplw)  to  perform  aome  tdigiooi
dnly,  a*  to  conault  an  oncio,  or  to  afier  a  aacrifice,
on  behalf  of  the  >tale. It  ia  thua  explained  by  the
grummariani !  Sitoiip6w^  ^  61  dfiS^nu,  9i  of  ^por-
Ti'fortit  xtpl  Ti  btiv  dI  iJi  Ainrliu'  Tf^ixi^tnw  lol
Jojuil  (ai  Tartiyipiii  Kol  XCJ<"^P«-  (Harpocr.
Suidai  and  Heajch,  t,  v.  Onipof ;  compaze  Pollni,
".66;  SDphocl.O><iip.7>r.  114.) There  were  in
one  of  the  Dorian  itatei,  a*  tbe  Aeginetana,  Troe-
^niani.  Meiieniana,and  Uantinconi,  official  prieata
died  Sf  Bpei,  whoae  duty  it  wai  to  coniolt  onciea,
Lterprst  the  reiponiei,  tuL,  aa  among  the  Spartana
there  were  men  called  Pythii,  chosen  by  tbe  king*
coninh  the  oracle  at  Delphi. (ScbBinann,  Jal.
ir.pi^.Gr.pp.  130,395.)  At  Athena  Ibera  were
official  penoni  called  dfupo^  but  the  name  waa
pen  to  tioaa  citiaen*  who  were  appointed  from


Pythian,  Nemean, and Itlhniin.  ffaM,jt


1138  THESMOPHORTA.

from  Egypt  b;  Ills  daiigiiten  of  Duum,  «Iioiiud«
the  Pclaigiui  women  of  PelopoDnesna  ooquftinted
with  th<  mcBterin,  tbat  afler  lb«  Dorian  cooqntM
they  fell  into  dinue,  and  ■wen


the  I


nlheir


ancient  leata.  Thna  much  appean  certiui
the  naiDC  of  the  feaCirsl  iUelf;  thai  it  na  in
to  commemDiale  the  introduction  of  the  [ai
regulation!  of  civiliaed  life,  irilich  wai  univenally
ascTihcd  to  Demeter  {Diodor-  Y.  fi.)  tRe^iectuig
the  dumtion  of  the  Attic  Thnmophona,
opiilioni  are  entertained  both  by  ancient  and  tno-
dem  wrileti.  Aecording  to  Heiychiui  (i.  v.  Tpl-r^
^vtut^afimr)  it  luted  four  dayi :  it  hu  been  in-
ierred  from  Ariitophanei  {Tiamojih.  80)  that  it
laited  for  fire  daji.  Soch  diacrapaneiei  hare  un-
doubtedly uiMn  fram  the  circnmMun  that  the
women  ipent  Mvenl  daja  bdbce  the  eonunence-
pwnt  of  the  real  fcatinl  in  ynpunHaa*  and  pori-
ficstioni,  during  which  they  were  eapociallr  bonnd
to  ahitain  from  lerual  intercoune,  and  for  thi>  par-
poK  they  alept  and  lat  upon  pafticalar  kindj  of
nerbe  which  were  baliered  to  haTo  a  purifying  ef-
'fecC.  (Hetych.  •.(>.  Krtmpor:  Etymol.  H.  (,D.
Siciipoaer:  Aelian.  NaL  An.  is.  28;  ScboL  ad
HkxtfO.  iT.  25  i  DioHnrid.  i.  13S  ;  PUn.  B.  M
xiir.  19  ;  Stephau.  Byci.ti.  MlMroi.)  During
thii  time  the  women  of  each  demoi  appointed  two
married  women  fitim  among  thenuelrei  to  con-
duct  the  prtlimimrf  lolemnitiei  (Kf>X*<''  <J>  ''^
Bur/ioipipia,  Ineua,  dt  Oirom,  imd.  p.  208,  ed.
Keidc.},  and  their  hntbandi  who  had  recnied  a
dowry  amounting  to  three  talsnti,  had  to  pay  the
eipenKi  fortbe  eolenuiity  in  the  form  of  a  liturgy.
(Iiaena,  dt  JPyrrk.  iend.  p.  66.)  Th*  fettival
itael^  which  according  to  the  moet  probable  tup-
purition,  d1»  adopted  by  Wellaner  (dt  Thtima-
piami,  p.  6),  laited  only  for  three  daya,  began  on
the  iJth  of  PyanDption,  which  day  wot  called
SvDJrii  or  mUnSiu  (Heiych.  i.  d.  'KtOai)  from  the

the  women  with  aproceaiion  from  Atheni  to  Bleniia
In  thii  procetuon  they  cairied  on  their  headi  Bcied
lawa  (Anquii  pig^M  or  3«>uil),  the  intcodnction  of
which  wu  ucribed  to  Demetcr  eM^io^poi,  and
other  lymboli  of  civitiwd  life.  <SchoI.  ad  TtttacriL
ziT.  23.)  The  women  ipent  the  night  st  Eleuili  in
eetcbiating  the  myiteriei  of  the  goddeu.  (Aeu.
TacL  PoUorc.  1,)

The  Hcood  day,  called  iniirTfui  (Athen.  lil
p.  307),  wai  a  day  of  monming,  during  which  the
wonken  nt  on  the  ground  around  the  ttatue  of
Demeter,  and  took  no  other  food  than  cakei  made
of  levune  and  honey  (<rT|iiivuvi,  Aciitoph.  no-
tmA.  &i5.  Par,  620).  On  thii  day  no  meetingi
either  of  the  isnate  or  the  people  were  held.
(Ariitoph.  noTH.  79.)  It  wai  probably  in  the
I  of  thie  day  that  the  womra  held  a  pio-
at  Alheni,  in  which  they  walked  barefooted
oenina  a  waggon,  npon  which  boiketi  with  my>-
tical  lymboli  were  conTeyed  to  the  Theanophoiion.
(AriitopL  Tlon.  276,  ^.)  The  third  day,  called
iraAAiyinia  from  the  circnmitance  thai  Dcmeter
wu  invoked  under  thii  name  (Ariitoph.  TVim.
2SS),  wai  a  day  of  merriment  and  railloiy  among
the  women  thenuelTU,  incammemoraliouof  lambe
who  wu  nid  to  hare  made  the  goddeu  anile
during  her  grieC  (Ariitoph.  TAoni.  792,A(a.  390  ;
Heiych.  I.  e.  iT^na  :  Phot. /.u.  p.397i  Apollod.
L  £.  g  1.)  Heaycbiui  mentiou  a  lacrifica  called
(nda,  which  wu  cfiered  to  ttu  g«dde«  m  u


THOLUS.
any  eicen  or  enor  which  nught
have  been  committed  during  the  voed  daja,  and
thii  ncrifics  wai  prohahly  oSered  at  tb*  doae  of
the  third  day.

There  are  MvenJ  other  puticulan  mcntiaaed
by  ancient  writan  ai  fitrming  part  of  ths  Thesmo-
phoria,  but  we  are  Dot  able  to  aicertain  in  what
manner  they  were  eoniwcted  with  the  feathal,  iff
oo  what  day  they  took  place.

Theimophnria  were  alio  celebrated  in  mnj  ottief
parta  of  (Greece,  ai  ilated  abore.  The  pnnBpd
placea  where  they  are  mentioned  hy  ancieat  aothon
are  the  following^ — Spaita,  where  the  feetiial  laMad
fu  three  dayi  (Heiych.  a.  e.  Tpi^/wpai) ;  fiij  iiiaM
in  Fhocii  (Paul.  £.  33.  9  6  ;  Steph.  Bya.  «.>.
Apv^)  1  Thebei  in  Boeotia  (PluL  Pibp.  p.  3B0 ;
Xenoph./fdUn.T.3.§29):  Hiletui(StniL  Bji.
I.e.  HlA^oi;  Diog.  La£rt.  ix.  |  13),  SynCMB
(Athen.  xir.  p.  647),  Ereliia  in  Enboea  (Plai.
QkuH.  Or.  p.  296,  b.  &c),  Ddoa  (Athna.  ui.
p.  109),  Bphetui  (Stiab.  lir.  p.  633  ;  Herod.  Ti.
16),  Agrigentum  (Polyaen.  t.  L 1),  and  oditr

Kal. But  of  their  celehiation  in  thew  (bwih  wb
w  no  more  than  a  few  iuhUed  paitienUii  which
are  mentioned  in  the  paasigea  referred  to.

(Msuniui,  Grwda  ftriala,  ld.  eev^w^wa:
Wellauei,  de  TiameploTiU,  WialiilBTiae  1830,
8m.  ;  Creuiel,  SgrnboL  iy.  p.  440,  Ac  ;  PreUcr  a
ZimMtrmaia.'i  Z^iMirifi,  I83i,  n.  S8  ;  and  i>
general  Wachunnlh,  AiAoi.  ^tt;  iL  p.  374,  2d  ed.
dtc;  K.  F.  Hermann,  Hmdi.  d*r  OMmd.  AlUrih.
§SG.  D.  ti,icc)  [L.&]

'THESMOPHY'LACES


[Ha*


^1


"■]


[A»-


THESSA  (d^ffa).  rHiais,p.  J97,b.]
THETES  (3^ti).  In  cariier  timei  thii  nuD*
denoted  any  freemen  who  walked  for  hire  (sf
ti'»aTfio^lSau\<&)rrti,Photiui,(.D.}  JKaitfirr
Iroiia  tii  «r[v  At'  ipyiipUf  tooAivrfrTHr,  Pallai.
ilL  33).  Hornet  (Od.  ii.  644.  xriiL  356)  ^Mki
of  b^  ti  T(  tfiAii  Ti,  the  latter  properly  vgni^-
ing  thoie  who  became  ilava  by  captirity.  They
are  to  be  diilingoiihed  not  only  Inm  all  "■"— -^
(lavei,  but  alio  from  thoae  penoni  who  wen  in  the
condition  of  the  Peneilae  or  Helati.  (Wachmath,
WelL  AU-jal  i.  pt.  L  pp.  233,  255,  332,  IM  cd.;
Schamaiin,J«l.,/iir.pii6.Cr.p.70.)  The  petBiM
bctt  known  by  the  name  of  ft^tiarethe  Benbcn
of  the  fourth  or  loweit  claii  at  Athen*,  aotordiqg
to  the  political  diviiion  of  Solon.  They  arc  nokcn
of  under  Cadsus.  IC.  R.  K.]

THIASOS  (_dlam). [Duntsia,  p.411,a;
£R^Hi,p.473,b.]

THOLLA  (doAla).  [UmbhuuLDm.]
TH0LU3  (drlAsi,  1  and  ^  alio  called  nub)
ia  a  name  which  wai  giren  to  any  nnmd  buiidiaf
which  terminated  at  the  top  in  a  point,  wbaU*eT
might  be  the  putpoae  for  which  it  wu  ued.
(Haych.  and  Suidai.  i.  s.  MXat :  (M.  xxii.  44:>.
459,  466.)  At  Alheni  the  na
ipplied  to  the  new  round  f
enate-houie,  which  ihould  not  bocMifiMmded  with
the  old  prylineum  at  the  foot  of  the  acn^nlia.
(Paui.L  5.  %  1,  lU.  gl3.)  It  wai  ihenlor*  tha
place  in  which  the  prytane*  took  their  cwmw
'  andoSiired  theiriKrificcL  It  wu  vl(uw4
■omeimail  lilTcr  itataei  (Pollux,  nii.  155  t
Dsmorib.  <k  Faii.  Ug.  p.  419J,  aad  mm  k  uaod


the  ten  itatDH  of  ths  Attic  tt^rviiei.  [Epanrifi,
PsrrANiiuM.]
Oth«  Onck  Mtt  had  likaviia  thetr  public


VM  AdoniBd  with  puntingi  bj  PuiiiBB.  ll  woi
origiD&llj  lurrDaiided  by  colonm*,  of  wbich  in  Ihft
daji  of  Puiianiai  liz  onlj  mn  (tanding,  and
npon  theK  were  inicribad  Ine  minei  of  lach  per-
aoiia  Bi  bad  b«a  cored  of  tame  diHiM  by  Aicl»-
piiu,  togclhei  with  the  noiaii  of  the  diieiM  itaelf
wid  ths  ounner  in  which  thiy  bad  obtained  tbeii
movery. (PaatiL  17.  g  3.)  [L.S.J

THORAX.  [Lome*.]
THRACES.  [aLADiiTonu,  p.676,  a.]
THRANl'TAEtSpai-rTiii),  IN*vi8,p.788,a.]
THRONUS.th«  Greek  ftpJ™.,  for  which  the
proper  l^in  term  ii  aoiium ;  a  throne.  Thi«  did
not  diSer  from  a  cbaii  (jlaS^ifKi)  [Cathbdka  ;
SiLLi]  eicqil  in  being  higher,  larger,  and  in  all
fnpecti  mora  magniGceuL  (Atheu.  i.  p.  192,  e.)
On  acuant  of  its  elcTatioo  it  waa  alwayi  necet-
■arily  accompanied  by  a  fbot-itool  (mWtfww,
fonmltuH',  AU.  bpiriay.IiM.  ftpfnii.  Ham.  IL  xn.
240,  Od.  I  ISl,  T.  SIA).  Bendei  a  Taiielj  of
onumenta,  eipe«ialty  nail*  or  itndi  of  lilrer,  be-
Mowed  npon  the  throne  itielf;  it  wm  often  covered
with  heantiful  and  iplendid  drapery.  (Horn.  Od.
3X.  IJO.)  [Tapis.]  The  accompany  woodcut
ahowi  IwD  gilded  ihtonei  with  coahiant  and  drs-
perr  repRienled  on  painting!  fonnd  at  Reiina.
lAiU.  iTEn.  ml.L  lav.  29.)  Theie  were  intended
to  be  the  throne*  of  Man  and  Venua,  which  ii
expreued  by  the  helmet  on  the  one  and  the  doie
on  the  other.


AUthef


Tied. Thia


repreeented


n  of  the


prac-


tice adopted  by  mortala,  and  more  particularly
Alia,  M  in  the  cbk  of  Xeii«  (FhilDitr.  Imap.  ii.
31),  and  of  the  PaKbians.  (Claud.  I'a  IV.  Com.
Huar.  SI4.) When  the  uttinit  statue  of  the  god

portion,  and  coniequent^y  preientcd  a  Tery  eligible
field  for  the  diipUy  of  iculptnre  and  fainting.  At
tariy  aa  the  eiith  century  before  Chriil  Bathyclei
of  Hagneiia  thni  decorated  the  throne  nf  the
Amyclaean  Apoilo.  (DicLof  Biag.*a.  Bathyria.)
The  throne  of  the  Olympian  Zeua,  the  work  of
Pbddioa,  wu  conitmcted  and  ornamented  in  a
{Diet,  of  Bag.  arL  fieiJiai,


Tld.iii.


■S.) As  s  chair  for


II  (Horn.  R  ii


ropei
424.  Od.  iTiL  330)  and  a  throne  ihared  by  twi
polenlalei  (Sf^por,  Dnria,  a;i.  Jliai.  i.  p.  17,t>,io
two  divinitiei  were  aometimea  luppoacd  to  occupy
the  Hune  throne.  (Pam.  riiL  37.  g :!.)  Beaidn  those
belonging  to  the  •latue*  of  the  gods,  the  thtones  of


THYBSU9.  lias

monaichi  were  soraetimei  deposited  in  the  temples
ai  DONAHIA. (Paul.  ii.  IS.  H.  '•  1^  §  3.)

The  following  woodcut,  taken  tmm  a  fictile  tbss
in  the  MuKo  Borbonico  at  Naples,  repments  Juno
srated  on  a  iplendid  throne,  which  is  eleTated,like
those  already  described,  on  a  basement.  She  holds
in  her  left  hand  a  sc^^tre,  and  in  her  right  the
apple,  which  Mercury  ie  about  to  coniey  to  Paris
with  a  view  to  the  ceUbrated  contest  for  beanly
on  Mount  Ida.  Mercury  is  distinguished  by  his
Talaria,  hia  CAnvctvh,  and  hii  petasua  thrown
behind  hii  back  and  hanging  by  its  atring.  On
the  right  side  of  the  thnme  is  the  K  ' *

a  tigress  or  panther.


The  elerated  seat  naed  by  a  aehoolmaster  was
called  his  throne.  (Bnuick,  ^na/.  iL  417.)  [J.Y.J
THY'MELE  {^t\Ti).  {Thiatruh,  p.  1122.]
THYRSUS  (Siip«t),  a  pcle  carried  by  Diony-
s,  and  by  Satyrs,  Maenades,  and  other*  who
en^iged  in  Bacchic  festiTitiea  and  ritea.  (Athen.
lii.  p.  631,  a.  1  Veil.  PaL  iL  82.)  [Dionvsia,
p.  411,  a.]  It  was  aomelimca  lemiinated  by  the
a^it  of  the  pine,  or  fir-cone  (mnv^por.  Brunch,
'  '.  L  421),  that  tree  (n£i«|)  being  dedicated
ianysna  in  consequence  of  the  use  of  the  tur-
pentine which  flowed  Irom  it,  and  alio  of  its  cones,
in  making  wine.  (Walpole,  Afen.  <m  Eur.  ouf  A:
rm-by,  p.  235.)  The  monumenta  of  ancient  art,
howerer,  moat  commonly  exhibit  instead  of  the
pine-apple  a  bunch  of  line  or  iTjleaTca  {Ovid.
Ma.  zi.  2?.  2S;  Propeit.  iii.  3.  35)  with  giapea  or
berries,  imnged  into  the  fonn  of  a  cone.  The
following  woodcut,  token  from  a  morbte  omamcnt
(Afon.  Matti.  ii.  tab.  86),  shows  the  head  of  a
tfayiiDs  annposed  of  the  leavei  and  berries  of  the
ivy,  and  surrounded  by  acanthus  leaies.  Vei7
Irequently  also  a  white  fillet  ws*  Ued  lo  the  pole
juat  below  the  head,  in  the  manner  represented  in
the  wDodcot  on  p.  136,  b.,  where  each  of  tho  figures
boida  a  tbyiini  in  her  hand.  See  also  the  wood-
cnttoFuNAMBULUsandVANKUB.  (Slatiui,  rAsi.
lii.  6S4.)  [IK9TITA.]  The  6ihnloua  hialory  of
Bacchus  relates  that  he  converted  the  thyisi  car-
ried by  himaelf  and  hia  fallswen  into  dangerous

of  leaves.  (Diod.  iii.  64,  iv.  1 ;  Macrob.  Sat.  i.
19.)  Hence  his  thynus  is  called  "a  apear  en-
TelopediiiTine-leaT«t"(Oiid.JI£rt.iii  ^67J,aDd


it!  nunt  wu  thoaglit  to  incite  to  madnau.  (Hor.
a.™.  iL  19.  e  J  Orid.  ^i«>r.  uL  1.23,  iiL  16.  17,
TWrt.  iT.  I.  43  ;  Bnmck,  Anal  iii.  SO)  ;  Orph.
Ngmi.  liT.  B,  1.  8.)  [J.  Y.]

TIA'RA  or  TIA'RAS  (ruipa  or  tii(^  :  AU.
•cvptoffUt,  Mocrii,  (.«. ;  Herod,  t.  49,  Tit.  G4  ;
AriiKqib.  .^ru,  487),  &  h>I  vith  ■  Urge  high
croniL  Tfai>  wu  tha  hsd-dnH  which  chancter-
iscd  the  north- vettem  AaiAticA,  ud  more  speciElly
the  Armeniuii  (Xcn.  <>.  1.  g  13;  Soeton.  t^m,
13),  the  ParthiBni,  sod  the  Peniuu  (Herod.  iiL
13  ;  Philoil.  Sen.  Imag.  a.  31  ;  FUnt.  P»n.  it.
2.  2),  fu  diitinguiihcd  from  the  Oneki  and  Ro-
ituuu,  whoK  hati  fitted  the  head  or  had  aalj  a
lo*  crown.  The  Myiian  hat,  or  "  Phrygiim  hon-
BBt,"  »  it  it  now,  called  [PiLMits,  p.  919,  b.],  wu
■  kind  of  tiant  (Virg.  Aen.  til  247;  Semoi,  i.  bx.;
Sen.  Tifft.  It.  1.  40,  41  ;  Phlloiti.  Juzu  Imag.
fl),  formed  with  l^ipeti  to  be  tied  under  the  chin
(Jut.  Ti.  SIG;  VbI.  Flacc  n.  700),  ud  d;ed
purple. lOyid-MiLil  181.)

The  kmg  of  Penii  woie  m  erect  tiaia,  whikt
theia  of  hii  labjetti  were  uft  and  flexible,  foiling
on  DOS  lide.  (Heiod.  vii.  61  i  Xen.  Aaab,  iL  S.
e  S3,  Cfnp.  viiL  3.  9  1 3  ;  SehoL  u  AriilopL  L  e.)
He  wae  olu  diitinguiehed  bj  the  iplendid  colour*
of  hii  tian  (ThemiiL  Orat.  2.  p.  36,  c,  24.  p.
3UG,  c),  and  bj  a  Diadsha,  which  encircled  it.


TIBIA.

and  which  wai  Tariegated  with  white  ^nla  npoa
n  blue  ground.  The  Penian  name  for  this  repl
head-dreu  wai  cidaru.  (Cnit.  iil  B  ;  lUofHi  or
i.lT^£t,  Strabo,  xL  IB.  j  9  ;  Pollui,  TiL  g  S«.>
The  preoeding  woodcut  ahowi  the  cidaria  a*  ivpre-
lented  on  ■  gsm  in  the  Rojal  Cabinet  at  Para,
■nd  nippaKd  ij  Cajlni  to  be  worn  bj  a  aoveirigi
of  Annenia.  {Stimiil  ifAwL  iL  p.  124.)  Fnn
a  Terr  nmote  period  (AeKhfL  Ptn.  SSS)  dnwm
to  the  pmenl  ibj  the  tiant  of  the  king  of  Pefna
hai  bna  commeDlj  adomed  with  gold  and  jewd-
ler7.  [J.  Y.J

TI'BIA  (iii\Ji),a|Npe,theeommoa«tmiiBcal
initrunient  of  the  Qreekt  and  Romana.  It  ww
rery  frequenOj  a  hollow  cane  peifiiiated  with
hole*  in  the  proper  placea.  <Pliii.  H.  K.  irL  36.
a.  G6  ;  Athen.  It.  p.  182.)  In  other  inMancea  ii
waa  made  of  nme  kind  of  wood,  e^Moall)'  box,
and  wai  bored  with  a  giinbkt  (tentroM  t— ,
Olid. /'(ul.Ti  697).  The  PbooiiciaD*  natd  a  me,
called  gagna,  tr  aikis  -rryyp^trti,  which  did  net
exeeed  a  ipan  in  length,  and  wu  made  of  a  Kaall
reed  or  atraw.  {Athm.  it.  p.  1 74,  f ;  Feetna,  t.  c
Oagriata-.y  The  nae  of  the  lame  rarietT  in  Eg7p>
ia  proved  hj  epecimeiu  in  the  Britiah  Mnieam,
which  were  diacoTered  in  an  Ef^jptian  tomlL

When  a  inigle  pipe  wai  naed  W  itielf,  the  po^

called  mmaalat.  (Hart.  xi*.  64  ;  )ii)hiAm,
Bnmck,  AmJ.  L  4B4.)  Thu  iiaed,  it  waa  ^mA
infiuhioQ  at  Alexandria.  (Athen.  it.  p.  174,  k)
When  it<  aiae  became  conaidsable,  and  it  vaa
both  itrengthened  and  adorned  bj  the  additiaa  «f
metallic  or  iT«;  ringi  (Hot.  At*.  PoeL  203—205;
Propert.  It.  G.  S),  it  muil  hare  been  eompmUa
to  the  flageclcL,  or  efen  to  the  dariooet  of  Boderm
timei.  Amonff  the  imietiei  of  the  aingle  pp*  the
nuMl  remaii^able  were  the  bag-pipe,  the  peribcBm
on  which  wsi  csIIhI  wtriciUariia  (Soetcn.  A'em,
£4)  or  dimai'Aitr  {Onomait.)  ;  and  the  ailif
nKirjioi  or  TXari(m>ja  (Theoeiit  JX.  29 ;  Lcofpia,
L  a  )  Heliodor.  Aeliiop.  t.  ;  Aelian,  H.  ^.  li.  I»  ;
Euiialh.  in  Horn.  11.  iriii.  495),  which,  ai  iti
name  impliea,  had  a  mouth-piece  inaerled  inlp  it
at  right  anglei.  Ita  form  ii  ihnwn  in  a  reaiered
terminal  ilalue  of  Pan  in  the  Townltj  nUenieo
of  the  Briliah  Moaeam.  Pan  w»  the  lepated
inTcntor  of  thii  kind  of  tibia  (Bion,  iii.  7)  u  wetl
aa  alAcfiii'Ja  or  Sthii<x.

"  '  amnng  the  Orecki  and  RoDiaiia  it  wu  aiDtk


that  the  two  pipei  wen  pcrfeni*  diUiBct,  ai

connected,  u  vime  haTe  uippiieed,  bT  a  co

mouth-pieoe. We  ieo  Ihit  more  eapmallr  i

bflantifnl  paintinf^  which  were  found  at

and  CiTiti  Vecchia,  and  which  irpreamt  1

teaching  the  ^oung  Olympua  to

pipe. {Aid.  (T  £lTToitmOt  i  tl

eompaie  Pana.  x.  SO.  g  £.) 1

the  Britiah  Moaenm,  which  were  fiMnd  w

in  a  tfflnb  at  Athena,  apprar  to  be  i  '

length  ii  nbnut  IE  inchra. Each

aeparale  mouth-plea  (yXitwu),  I

hole  at  the  end  it  baa  fire  halea  al

one  nndenieatL The  dMOMMcS  <f  ttaa'tt


TIBI^

nutnunoiti  }itaig  found  togtllicl,
with  tki  fiut,  thu  th«7  are  vo;  comnuiDlj  mai-
tionnl  tugetlur  b;  UKient  iinihon  (Pind.  OL  iii.
S,  a.  97,  98,  /Ki.  IT.  30.  ed.  BSckh  ;  I  Oir.  ut.
7)  ;  Bad  tfaa  ttamm  of  thu  mi,  that  perfbmBnen
OD  Iha  doubla  pipt  w«re  reiy  fnqMStlf  hcohd-
pmi«d  bj  (b«  miuie  «f  tlu  Ijn.  (Hot.  Epod.  ii.
Jl.)  The  moalli-pitca  of  tlu  (wo  pipw  oilm  pawed
tlvDugh  K  CAruTHVii. (Bea  wnodsnl,  p.  553.)

Thraa  difianni  kind*  af  pipaa  mM  originall;
liaed  to  pn>ducB  nuiic  Id  tna  Draiaii,  Phiygian,
and  Lfdiao  modia.  [MuiiCA,  p.  777.]  Aboat
llie  thiid  cantui;  B.  c,  ProDomiu,  th<  Thsban,  in-
Tented  adjutmoili  {hfiiaAai}  bjr  which  (he  ame
act  of  pipea  might  be  filled  to  all  the  modo.  (Paut.
ii.  IZ  j^l;  Athen.  liv.  p.  631,  a)  In  what
Iheae  adjuatmcnta  coniiitad  we  are  not  clcaily  in-
formed. Piobably  alopplei  or  plug!  (1 V)  wen
iiaed  Ibr  thia  purpoaa.  It  ^ipean  alio,  that  to
prodace  tha  Phcjgian  mode  the  pipe  had  oulj  two
bolea  abore  (i/oru,  Virg.  Jo.  ix.  617— G30),
asd  that  it  (enninated  in  a  h(«n  bending  upwania.
(TibulL  ii  1.  S6  ;  Ovid.  MH.  liL  £33.)  It  thu
appnached  to  the  natuie  of  a  tmnpet,  and  pro-
duod  iIdw,  grave,  and  lolemD  tunea.  The  Ljdian
mode  wai  ranch  qoiclicr,  and  men  Tariad  and
animating.  Hoiace  meotiona  "  Ljdian  pipca  "  ai
a  poper  accompaniment,  when  he  ia  celabiating
the  praiH  of  aneienl  henMa  (Own.  ir.  13.  30).
The  Ljdiani  themaeliea  uaed  (fai>  initrument  in
Imding  their  tnxipa  to  battle  ;  and  the  pipea,  em-
ployed for  the  porpoae,  are  dietioguiahed  1^  Hero-
dotni  (L  17)  M  "male  and  female,"  %.*.  probably
bau  and  treble,  cofreapanding  ta  the  ordinary
aeiuol  difference  in  the  human  xoice.  The  corre-
flponding  lAtin  tcrnii  aie  tibia  dea^ra  and  nmutra
ilaeta,  Plin.  i ' '


called,  bi


e  the  fbr-


, , ,  in  the  right  hand  and

the  latter  in  the  left.  The  "tibia  ilmrtni  "  wai
UBcd  to  lead  ot  commence  a  piece  of  moaic,  and
the  "  luiiatia  "  foliowed  it  a*  an  acwmpaniment.
Hence  the  fcnner  wm  called  uHMliHi,  the  latter
MiowiOai.  (Vairo.rf*AeAai<.  L  3.)  Thecomediei
of  Terence  baring  been  accompanied  by  the  pipe,
tbe  following  noticea  are  prefixed  to  explain  the
kind  of  mniie  apptopriata  to  each:  liiiit  parilmt,
i.  e.  with  pipea  in  the  nme  mode  ;  (ii.  impaniat,
pipea  in  different  model ;  til/,  rfmiw  dtairii,  two
pipea  of  h>w  pitch ;  Hb,  par,  dtilrit  al  Mitfnt,
pipea  in  the  nne  mode  and  of  both  low  and  high

The  toe  of  the  pipe  among  the  Oteeki  and  Ro-
laam  waa  threefold,  ^h.  at  acHGcea  (tifiiaa  lacri-
Seal),  entcrtainmenti  (WiiTiu,  Plin.  J.  c;  woodcut,
P^  308),  and  fiinenli.  (Orid./'u'.Ti.  657.)  1.  A
aacrifice  wiu  conunonlj  attended  by  a  piper  {lUieeiL,
VaiTO,  de  Re  RuM.  iii.  17;  woodcut,  p.  104i,  b),
-who  partook  of  the  food  offered,  lo  tbat  '^  to  lire
like  a  piper  **  became  a  proTerb  applied  to  thoae
who  maintained  theDueliea  at  the  expenae  of  other
people.  (Suidai,  a.  E.  AiAiHli:  Arlilopfa.  Pof,
»S2.)  The  wonhippen  of  Dacchni  (Virg.  Aai.  xl
737),  and  idll  more  of  Cjbele,  "  tbe  Boei^nthia
DiBter  "  (Hot.  Carm.  ir.  1.  23).  ued  tbe  Phrygian
pipe,  the  mutic  of  which  wai  on  thia  Recount  ie-
nominaled  rb  HirrpMH' oDA^Hh  (Pauax.  30.  g£.)


-n  to  theil  feel  (Grid.  FaO.  vL
(i8G),ai  iieienpliGed  in  one  of  the  wood cnti  under
TvKiM. In  coulirmiqr  with  the  me  of  tbii  kind


TIUEUA.  1 131

of  mnnc  at  public  iatiTala,  a  band  of  tibirinea

preceded  a  Roman  genend  when  ha  trinoiphed.
(tlurui,  iL  e.)  a  The  giaiily  and  lolemnity  <^
the  Phrygian  pipea,  which  adapted  them  lo  the
wonhip  of  Cjbde,  aUo  cansed  them  to  be  need  at
funenla  (Satiui,  TM.  vi.  120  ;  compare  JoKpb.
B.  J.  ilL  a  fi  ;  Matt.  ii.  23.)  The  pipe  wat  the
initiunenl  principnil;  uaed  to  regulate  the  dance
[SiLT*Tio],  whether  al  mrificei,  fettivali,  or
piirale  Dccaainu  in  domeilic  life  (fleiod.n.  129);

trireme, (Hai.Tyr.  33.)

Notwithilanding  the  eatablitbed  uee  of  the  pipe
for  theae  important  purpoiea,  it  wai  regarded,  more
eapedalty  by  the  Athoiiana,  ai  an  inelegant  in-
■trament,  gnatly  inferior  to  the  lyn.  (Plut  Alab,
p.  351  ;  Oelliui,MA.iT.  17;  Ariitot.  PoU.  Till
6.)  HiHBce,  howeTer,  repreienta  Clio  ai  pecfeim-
ing  according  to  eircnnutanca*  either  on  the  lyie
or  the  ^pe  (Oinii.  L  13.  S  ;  compare  Philal.  Sen.
Imag.  ii.  5) ;  and  it  ii  certain  that  the  pipe  wu  by
no  meana  confined  luicientlf,  ai  it  ii  with  na,  to
the  male  lei,  but  thai  otAirrpUit,  or  female  ^bi-
dnea,  were  Tcry  common.  (Xea.,^7np.  iL  1;  Hor.
Epitt.  i.  U.  2fi.)  Tbe  Thebani  alwayi  ealeemed
thit  ioitrument,  and  excelled  greatly  in  the  oh  of
'- [AntlKj.  ed.  Jacoba.  iL  633.)  [J.  Y.]

TIBI'CEN. [TiBii.]

TIONI  IMMITTENDI  SERVITUS. [Sia-

TUTaa,  p.  1031,  b,]

TIHE'UA  (Tl^iifia). The  penalty  imposed  in

court  of  criminal  jnitice  at  Atnent,  and  alio  the
damagea  awarded  in  a  dril  action,  receired  the
name  of  TImti^  becauae  they  were  uHmaled  or
antned  according  to  the  injury  which  the  public
or  the  indiTidual  might  reipeclively  have  nulained.
The  penal^  wai  either  fixed  by  the  judge,  or
merely  decland  by  him  according  lo  arane  ettimala
made  bcfon  the  canie  came  into  court.  In  the
fint  caia  the  trial  wai  called  irfiiy  itinftbt,  in  the
•acond  caae  irfiiy  dTlfiirroi,  a  diitinclion  which
appliei  to  ciril  aa  well  ru  to  criminal  Crlali.

It  ii  obiioni  that  on  a  oiminal  charge  two
inquiriei  hare  lo  be  made  ;  fint.  whether  the  de-
fendant ii  guilty,  Mcondly,  if  he  be  found  guilty,
what  puniihrneat  ought  to  be  inflicted  upon  him.
It  may  bo  adriiable  to  leaie  the  puniihment  to  the
diacTEtion  of  the  judge,  or  it  may  noL  In  arane
caaea  the  Athenian  law-givei  thought  thai  the
judge  ought  to  haTe  no  diicretkni.  Tfaua,  in  caaei
of  murder  and  high  trcuon  lentcjice  of  death  wai
Lmpoeed  by  the  law  and  only  pmnonnced  hy  the
judge  [Phonos  ;  Pbodobu],  and  in  many  atb«
oue*  the  puniihment  wai  likewiia  fixed  In  the
law.  But  where  the  exact  nature  of  the  oSence
cmld  not  be  {breieen  by  the  lawgiver,  or  it  mi^t
■0  iEi  Tary  in  iu  cbaiucter  and  circunutancea  ai  to
admit  of  many  degreei  of  culpability,  it  might  be
dcairable  ot  even  neceaiary  to  leave  the  puniih-
ment to  the  diicrction  of  the  jodgs.  The  Uw  then
directed  that  the  came  court  nhich  paiied  i^itence
on  the  culprit  ahould  forthwith  impoae  the  penal^
which  hii  crime  deaerred.  Thui  in  the  i^fiat
Stpft  (Demonh.  c.  Mid.  529)  it  ii  enacted:
Stcii  ir  KttTirfr^  if  ^Aiola,  Ti>idm  wipl  nirrw
Ttfaxfiita,  Jj-ou  tr  ti(,p  j£{ui  ilni  niltir  4
iroTurai,  whoe  iworuru  relen  lo  pecnaiaiy  pe-
naltiei,  ToBilr  to  any  ether  lort  i^  penal^,  ai
death,  impriionment,  Jcc Sometime!  a  Ipeciai

in  the  Uw  laat  cited,  and  abo


1133  TIHEHA.

n  tlic  Um  in  Demiuth.  c.  Tama:  733,  it


cknd,  that  if  ■  line  be  impoied,  ths  party  ih&ll
be  impriiDued  nn^l  it  ii  psicL

In  ciiil  aiiKt  the  wnunce  b;  which  the  Court
awttrded  redreM  to  the  injured  party  would  wry
■wording  to  the  nature  of  hii  complainL  Where
he  sought  to  lecoTer  an  eitate  iu  Uud,  or  a  faoue,
or  any  specific  thing,  aa  a  riug,  a  hone,  n  ilave,
nothing  further  wu  required,  than  In  dclennine  to
vhom  the  estate,  the  house,  or  the  thing  demanded,
of  right  belonged.  [HiRia  (Omiit)  ;  Oieiae
DiKK.]  The  umD  would  be  the  caie  in  as  action
of  debt,  xf^i  'if'"),  where  a  turn  certain  was  de-
mandrd  ;  as  Tor  instance,  where  the  {JaintifF  had
lent  a  mm  of  money  to  the  defendant,  and  al  the
trial  no  qaettien  was  mode  as  to  the  amount,  but
the  dispute  vsi,  whether  it  was  a  loon  or  a  gift,
or  whether  it  had  been  paid  or  DDL  So,  in  aa
■f  tion  for  breach  of  contiact,  if  by  the  terms  of  the
contmct  a  certain  penalty  had  bran  attached  to  iu
Tiolation,  it  would  be  unneoemry  to  have  an  in-
qniry  of  damagea,  they  being  already  ^TiuriateiJ  by
the  act  of  the  panies  themselret.  (Demoath.  a.
Diaifi.  1291,  1396,  et  argum.)  In  these  and
many  other  limilor  case*  the  trial  was  ItI^ijtdi.
On  thr  ether  hand,  whrnver  the  damages  were  in
their  nature  ladiquidaied,  and  no  proTJsien  bad
been  made  concemiog  thetu  either  by  the  law  or
by  the  agreement  of  the  parties,  tbey  were  to  be

The  following  was  the  coarae  of  proceeding  in
the  TifiijTol  iytMr.
Let  us  suppose  that


lo  tay,  what  punis
on  him,  and  wh
ipoiL The  bill  of  ind


neul  he  proposed
:  he  had  lo  lay  there-
upoiL  The  bill  of  indictment  (fy'^Otui)  wu
always  tuperscribed  with  ■«ne  penal^  by  the
person  who  preferred  iL  He  wa»  said  ireypi.
^atat  riia^ia,  and  the  penalty  proposed  is  called
iwiypofi^a.  (Demosth.  c.  Namm.  995.)  We
find  also  the  expressions  iriyfai  rffiiiiui,  Tifiwrftu
T^  iptOyo^TL,  T^TTCTjr  roififfSoi,  When  a  charge
was  brought  not  by  a  priiate  indiiidual,  but  by  a
magistrate  ei  oHiclo,  the  law  required  him  in  like

thought  the  case  merited.  (Demosth.  e.  Macart.
1076.)  The  piuscculer  was  now  called  upon  to
support  the  allegation  in  the  indictment,  and  for
that  purpose  to  mount  the  platform  and  addRis
the  dicasts  (araSaSrtir  tii  Tf^ijfui).

Here  he  said  whatever  occurred  to  him  oa  likely
to  aggravate  the  charge,  or  increase  the  dicatts
aRainst  bis  opponents.  He  was  not  bound,  how-
ever, to  abide  by  the  proposal  mods  in  the  biil,  but
might,  if  ho  pltascd  {wilb  the  consent  of  the  court)
aslc  for  a  lower  penalty  than  he  bad  demanded
before.  This  waa  often  done  at  the  reqnr'  -'  •■"
defendant  himself,  or  of  his  friends


St  of  the


of  bun


pmdentis

If  the

ised  sub-

Diitted  to  the  puninhmen

proposed

he  other

aide,  there  was  no  furthe

th

thought

»  serere,  he  made  i


"  P™P™'


Sthe  penal^  (commonly  some  pecuniary  fine)
ich  he  considcted  would  satisfy  Ibe  demands  of
Justice.  He  was  then  said  iFTiTijiSffflai,  or  larrf
Ti^iSfffcu.  (Demosth.  c.  T^nocr.  713,  e.  Nicolr.
12S2  ;  Aeach.  dt  Fall.  Leg.  S9,  ed.  Steph.)  Ha
wa«  allowed  to  address  die  ooort  in  mitigatjop  of


TIUEM.\.

■ay  what  he  ciwld  in  extmnatiiB
01  nia  onence,  or  to  ^>peal  to  the  mercy  of  fait
judges.  This  waa  fiequenll;  done  for  him  by  hit
relations  and  friends  ;  and  it  was  not  DDuna]  fbr
a  man,  who  thought  bintietf  in  peril  of  life  or  bee-
dom,  to  produce  his  wife  and  chUdtm  in  cavn,
to  eidte  compassion.  (Demoslb.  e.  Mid.  £73.  Sii,
c.  Anther.  793,  de  Fait.  Leg.  431,  434,  c  Oottv.
878,  e.  Aflub.  8S4  j  Arisloph.  Cesp.  i6a)  Afta
both  parties  had  been  heard,  the  diouta  were  called
upon  to  gire  their  mdicL

Here  occurs  a  gueatiou,  about  vhicb  then  has
been  much  diBerence  of  opinion,  and  which  it  is
impossible  lo  determine  with  any  attainly  ;  ra.
whether  the  dicasto,  in  giving  this  verdict,  were
confined  to  a  choice  between  the  estimates  of  the
oppoeing  pnrtiea,  or  whether  they  had  a  dismrtisa
to  award  what  punishment  they  pleased.  With-
out entering  upon  any  ooDlnjTenisl  discosaiaB,  the
fbllowing  appear*  to  the  writaf  the  tooat  piolialile
view  of  the  matter.

The  dicnsis  had  no  power  of  discuannf  aaaig

themsetTes,  or  agreeing  npoa  the  Gae  or  pnially  to

be  awarded. Such  power  waa  incmiTMiUe  with

their  mode  of  rating  by  ballot [fsBTHin.] Al

the  same  time  it  would  be  abaurd  to  sappow  tbat

the  Athenian  coort  had  »o  DMaas  of  cmttaUiag  the

portie*  in  the  exercise  of  that  prixilegB  srluch  the

law  save  ihem,  or  that  it  wns  Uw  amumn  ptaetiee

for  the  parties  to  submit  widely  diAnnt  estiasalM

to  the  dicasts,  and  leave  them  i»  altenntiTe  tat

the  eiIiEn»  of  severity  on  the  oBe  aide,  asd  the

extreme  of  mercy  ou  the  otbet. Many  pissige*

in  the  oratota  an  oppoaed  lo  raeh  a  view,  aad

especially  the  words  ef  DemoathcDe*.  c  TEaacr.

737.

The  cmirae  of  proceeding  Kerns  to  ham  bea  as

Hows. The  prosecutor  mnally  superscribed  his

dictment  with  the  highest  penally  which  the  law

the  nature  of  the  esse  would  admit  a£ In  the

arse  of  Ihe  trial  there  might  be  Tsrioas  indiea-

>ns  on  the  part  of  the  dicasts  of  a  dispoaitton  la

rour  one  side  or  the  other.  They  often  eibib<l«<

eir  feelings  bj  vehement  gestureia,  ciamevr,  in-

leiTUpticn, and queitiouing of  the parties. It

was  not  unniual  for  the  tpeakert  to  make  allosina

a  the  punishment  before  the  tint  verdict  Ind  bca

pven. (Aesch.  e.  Tlnonil.  12,  dt  FDit.  Len.  48.

'A.  Steph.  ;  Demoath. t.  Mid.  fi33,  c  Awt  dt

dot  1032,  1024,  cJ4wrf.l033,  c.  Mbewt. lOM,

e.SUpk.  1123; Flamer,  Prve.  mtd  /Otg.  voL  L

p.  384.) Alt  this  enabled  both  panie*  to  fM  itt

pulse  of  the  court  before  the  time  had  VTtTed  lie

the  second  verdict. If  the  pmsecutor  saw  that  lh«

dicasts  were  greatly  incensed  against  his  opjuoen^

'  I  himself  was  not  meiuilallj  iaclnied,  W

persist  in  ashing  for  the  h%h««t  penally.

WAS  himself  disposed  to  be  merafbl, tt

thought  that  the  dicasts  wcic,  he  wntid  relax  n

'' lemand. Similar  views  would  prevent  tbe  do-

uil  from  asking  fbr too  small  a  penalty,  tt

d  induce  him  lo  effect  a  compromiae  (if  pea-

)  with  his  opponent. Wo  n

litigate  hit  d
magistrate  called  on  the  dicasts  lo  divide  ;  hat  wot
after,  without  the  cansmt  i^  the  coott.  (DrmcMk.
e.  Ifkotrat.  1353,  13M,  e.  T^kcnrat.  1343.  a
[featr.  1347.)  If  the  putiea  wt»  sudeareiif  iin
an  amngcroent,  the  court  would  fji-n
Hmable  time  fiir  that  pnipaae  ;  and  tlwtw


TIHEMA.
ii  iiMiii  to  b«Ii«ni,  that  tfaii  petitioiii  addntnd
bj  tl»  defendBnt  «  hi*  frimdi  to  th«  pcowcutor
«tn  made  *linid  in  (he  hairing  of  the  dicult.
Ai  to  the  iDggated  expUnatica  of  Ti/ifr  tV
tutufar,  Ke  Pbkphui.

Wa  ounot  doubt  that  {d  cho  of  hainodi  of-
fomi,  or  thoH  which  innpediately  cmcenied  the
ilatP,  the  tmut  mmld  Dot  permit  of  a  compinmiM
between  Che  oppMing  putiee ;  hot  in  otdinarjr
cuea,  a  public  proKcntoc  wu  looked  oa  bjr  the
Alheniuu  mach  in  the  light  of  a  ^adf^  ef-
pecbll;  where  hii  object  mi  to  obtain  lonM
penaltj  RiTon  by  the  law  ta  an  in&nnei.  When
the  partiet  oinld  not  conie  to  tcnai,  the  ditjiaU,
aftfr  hearing  whnt  each  of  ikem  bad  to  laj,  di-
TJdtd  on  their  reipectire  propotitiona,  and  the  ma-
ioril J  of  TolH  delennined  the  penalty,  (Plainer,
Procwtd  King,  nil  pp.  198—202;  If  eier,  ^tf.
Pnc.  pp.  178—182)

The  conTH  thai  pnmed  at  Athena  mtul  hato


niunbet  of  judget.  Ariitotle  tdia  ni,  that  Hippct-
damuA  of  Hiletni  (who,  no  doabt,  peiroiTod  the
erili  of  thi*  ayitem)  pnpoKd  that  the  lerdict
ahoold  not  be  giyen  by  ballot  (lii  ifi^^o^oplai),
bat  that  each  judge  ihoidd  bring  in  a  tablet  widi
a  epecid  itatement  of  hii  opinion  ;  Dpmi  which
pcopoeal  AriilDtle  remariu,  that  it)  eflect  would  be

object  with  mon  of  the  aadent  iawgiTera,  that  the
judga  ahould  not  amfer  with  each  other  {munt.
kOTwrroi),  and  then  he  ramraent)  on  the  confiiiion
that  would  aiiK,  if  die  jodge  were  allowed  to
pnpoae  a  penalty  different  fnm  that  mbmitled
to  hhn  by  the  partie*.  (AriM.  PolU.  U.  5.  gj  S,
8,9.)

Aa  a  genenl  rule,  only  one  penalty  eonld  be  im-
poaed  by  the  court,  thoogh  the  law  •ometimei  pre
more  than  one.  (Demonh.  e.  LtpL  Wi,  e,  f/taer.
13S3.)  Sometiioca  the  lav  enreuly  empowered
the  JDiy  to  impoae  an  additional  penalty  {rfoari-
ttiifia)  beeidea  the  ordinsry  one.  Hen  tha  pro-
poaition  emanated  from  the  jury  tbemidvea,  any
one  of  whom  might  move  that  the  pnniihmeat  al  ■
lowed  by  the  law  ahoold  be  awarded.  He  wai
aaid  'fwrn/ifirAu,  and  the  whole  dicaila,  if  (opon
a  diTiaion)  diey  adapted  hii  piopoaal,  were  nid
wpoiTTififi'.  (DenuHth.  e.  TVouer.  733  ;  Meier,
Aa.  Fne.  pp.  183,  72S.)  We  may  oboerri!,  that
the  {oepotitum  >fi^>  in  the  lerb  upoarifiar  doea
not  alwaja  imply  that  a  meomd  jjnwUy  lA  impoaed,
but  ii  lometimee  nied  with  nference  to  other  mat-
teia,  aa  in  Demoath.  b.  Ariibig.  790.

In  piirata  actiona  the  conne  of  proceeding  with
reipect  to  the  aaieaament  of  damagea  wi*  mooh  the
aame  Aa  deacribed  abOTO.  In  aome  caiet,  where
the  ptaintiEfa  denuud  wu  made  up  of  eeTenl
chargca,  or  anae  out  of  rariooa  mattera,  he  would
site  in  hia  bill  of  phunt  a  detailed  account,  apedfy-
ing  the  itenu,  Ac,  inatead  of  ioclading  the—  ="


ThUae


^dend  the  &irer  method,  and  may  be  compared
to  our  bilt  <f  parliaiiart,  which  the  plaintiff  de-
liver! to  the  defendant.  (Demntli.  c^pibi.  3S3.)
Tbeliabilityof  IheplainliS'to  the  JvnffiAlo,  which
waa  calculated  upon  the  lUm  demanded,  opciated
a*  a  check  upon  exorbitant  demanda,  in  addition
to  that  whicD  we  have  ainsdy  Dotieed.

The  wporrl/aicii  rarely  occurred  in  priiato  ae-
tioni,  cac^  in  ihoaa  when  Ibo  wtUDgful  act


TINTINNABULUM.


the  amount  of  rereune  derired  by  tha
nuieuiaua  from  public  fiuea,  lae  Blkkh,  PM.
Sam.  o/AOau,  p.  375,  &t  8d  ed.

Aa  to  Ti^i^fia  m  the  aenae  of  tHe  rataiUr  nib*
of  property  with  reference  to  the  Athenian  pro-
perty lax,  aae  Eibphora.  [C.  R  K,]

TIMOCRATIA. [OLioiUCHi*.]

TINTINNA'BULUH  (aiU«r),B  bdL  Belli
wne  naed  (or  a  prat  niiely  of  pnrpoaei  antong  the
Orselu  and  Romana,  which  it  ii  nnneeeiaarr  ta
patticulariia  here.  One  nee,  howeT«,  of  them,
lot  the  porpoae  of  keeping  watch  and  ward  in  tha
fbttiGed  ciDea  of  Greece,  deaerrca  mention.  (Tha-
cyd.  ir.  135  ;  Ariit«A.  Joo,  843,  ltS9  ;  ScboL
n  loc)  A  goatd  ($Ma{)  being  sta^oned  in  ereiy
lower,  a  wipJiroAM  (aee  p.  463,  a)  walked  to  and
fro  on  the  portion  of  the  wall  between  two  lowen.
It  wu  hii  dulytotarry  the  bell,  which  heroceited
from  the  gnan)  at  one  tower,  to  deliver  it  to  iho
guard  al  the  next  lower,  and  then  to  return,  w  that
the  bell  by  paiaing  from  hand  to  hand  made  the
circnit  of  the  dty.  By  thia  amngemenl  it  wai
diacorend  if  any  gnard  waa  abaent  fnnn  hU  put,
or  did  not  anawer  to  the  bell  in  conieqnenco  of
being  aileep.  Hence  to  prove  or  try  a  penen  wu
called  iM*w(C«i*(Aelian,  H.A.  in.  26)  j  to  per-
form the  office  of  patrole  waa  Kuiuta^optir,

The  fonni  of  belli  were  Tarioita  in  proportion  to
the  multiplicity  of  their  application.  In  the  Mn-
aeum  at  Naplet  are  lome  of  the  form  which  we
tall  bell-ih^ed  ;  othen  are  mora  like  a  Chineaa


gong.  The  bell,  fig.  1  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  it
a  limple  dtak  of  bell-melal ;  it  ii  repreaented  in  ■
puuting  ai  hanging  Irom  the  branch  of  a  trea.
[BBrto1l,S7.  .dat.  13.)  Figure  2  rvpmenta  a  bell
of  the  larne  form,  bnt  with  a  circular  hole  in  the
centre,  end  a  clapper  attached  to  it  by  a  chain.
Thii  ii  in  the  Huiemn  at  Naplei,  ai  well  ai  tha
bell,  fig.  9,  which  m  form  ia  exactly  like  thoae  uiU
commonly  uaed  in  Italy  to  be  attached  to  the  necki
of  iheept  goal*)  *lid  oxen. Tig.  4


IIM  TITHENIDIA.

on  one  ot  Sti  W.  HMiillon'i  vawa  (i.  43)
ried  by  a  nun  in  the  gwb  of  Pan,  and  probalilr
far  the  parpoH  of  liutfHtion,  (ThBDcrit.  ii.  5F
SchoL  n  loc)  Fig.  5  ii  a  bell,  oi  mher  ■  coUe
tioa  of  twdie  b«ll>  nuptadtd  in  s  fnme,  which
tmteiTod  ia  tb<  Antiqisiium  at  Munich.  Th
jingling  initmmcnl,  u  well  m  that  lepraented  t,
fig.  6  (from  Bartoli.  lac  S^.  il  23),  mitj  haTC
been  uKd  at  aacriiicea,  in  Bacchanalian  procenifir
or  fbrlnatTHtion.  Fig.  7  ii  a  fragment  of  ancie
■cuiptnre,  nprOHatmg  the  manner  in  which  tn
wen  attactied  to  the  coUaia  of  chaiiol.h(«w
(Oinmt,  iiier  Waffew,  iL  pL  i7.)  [J.  Y.]

TIRO  wu  the  name  given  b;  the  Romaiu  is
newly  enlitted  aoldier,  u  opposed  to  vetframu,  a
who  had  had  eiperienca  in  war.  (Caeaar,  BtlL  Ow.
iii.  28.) The  mode  of  leirying  tnmpi  ii  deicribed
under ExiKcrrus,  pp.  496, 499. The
which  the  liability  to  miliuiT  lei
w«17.

From  their  lint  enrolment  the  Soman  aoldien,
when  not  actually  terring  againat  an  enemy,  wen
perpetually  occupied  in  military  eieniwa.  They
were  eierciaed  eyery  day  (Veget  L  1),  the  tironea
twice,  in  the  morning  and  afternoon,  and  the  rete-
nuii  once.  The  eierciaea  included  not  only  the
UH  of  their  wesponi  aud  tactici  prapeilj  n  railed,
but  alM  whateiet  could  lend  to  iocreaag  their
Rtrengtb  and  activity,  and  eepedally  carrying  hur-
theui  and  enduring  toil.  Vegetiiu  (L  9 — 37)  enn-
meialei  among  the  eierciiM  of  the  tinmei  march-
ing, running,  leaping,  iwimming,  carrying  the
ahield,  fighting  at  a  pat  [Palub],  thiuating  with
the  iword  in  preference  to  linking,  Uling  their
armour,  horling  ipean  and  javelliu,  ehDoting  ar-
lowi,  throwing  itonei  and  leaden  bullets,  leaping
on  and  off  their  honea,  carrying  weighti,  fcni^^g
the  camp,  and  fbrming  the  line  of  battle.

Vegetiua  alio  girei  rule*  for  chooeing  tironei  ac-
cording to  their  country,  their  being  ruatici  or
towniznen,  their  age,  eUtnT«,  penonal  appearance,
nndpreriona  oonipation  {i.  2 — 8).  But  thele  rulei
lefer  almoil  eicIuirelT  to  Iha  ilate  of  thing!  under
the  empenn,  when  the  army  naa  no  longer  re-
eiujied  from  the  citiieni  <£  Rome,  bat  fi^  the
inhabitants  of  the  proTinces.

At  this  period,  the  tiro,  when  approved  as  fit  lot


(Liptins,  di  Mint.  Ronvm.  in  Op*r.  vol.  iiL
pii.32,33,184, 193— 197.)

In  civil  life  the  terms  tin  and  tinaxitai  were
applied  to  the  asaumption  of  the  toga  virilii,  which
wai  called  tmcaimfm  [TooiJ,  and  to  the  first


(Senec/>r«in.L2.);e


aphtaieas  Ii

of  a  ship. (,?\m.H.N.x

TTROCI'NIUM. [Tib


mhave


bnted  at  Sparta

of  the  male  chiidr«i  of  the

casion  the  nurm  (titSo/)  carried  the  lillle  boys

out  of  the  city  to  the  temple  of  Artemis  lumamed

Corythallia,  which  was  situated  on  the  bank  of

the  sttcam  Tiassos  in  tin  district  of  Clettk Here


TOGA.
the  Dunea  nerificed  ncking  pigs  on  behalf  of  t^

children,  and  then  had  a  feut,  pnbahiy  of  the  neat
of  the  victims,  with  which  they  ate  l»e*d  baked
in  an  oven  (ItWtbt  Iprsvi,  A  then.  It.  p.l3»;
comp.  Plul.  Sympoi.  iii.  9,  QhbI.  Gt.  viL  p.  211,
Wjttenb.  iHeiych.>.e.i«pi-AL\Af<rTf«u.)  [L.&J
TITIES  or  TITIENSES-  [PiTaicu.]
TITU  SODA'LES,  a  •odaliu*  or  cdlrge  of
priests  at  Rome,  who  represealed  the  tecoiMl  Irjbs
of  the  Remans,  or  the  Titiea,  that  is,  the  Sabinci,
who  afler  their  union  with  the  Ramnes  at  Imcom
Sabuw


is  said  to  have  mstituted  the  Tilii  lodalea.
Amai  i.  £4.)  In  another  passage  {Hat.  iL  9&}
Tacitus  deacribca  this  sacerdotiDm  in  a  wHnewhat
different  manner,  iunimuch  ai  he  saya  that  it  tn*
inslitnted  by  Romulns  in  honour  of  king  TatiB%
who  afler  hie  death  wia  wonhipped  aa  a  god.  Bat
this  account  seems  only  to  mean  that  Romolui  alter
the  death  of  Tatius  saoctioDed  the  inititulua  of
his  late  eoltague  and  made  the  worship  of  Taiiiis
a  part  of  the  Sabine  sacra.  From  Vatio  <de  Ling.
Zdt  V.  85,  ed.  Uiiller),  who  derive*  the  huh
Sodalea  Tilii  &om  Titiaa  avea,  which  were  olaemd
by  these  priests  in  certain  aiuuriea,  it  appears  that
these  priests  also  pmerred  ue  ancient  Satnne  an-
buries diitiuct  frtsn  those  of  th<  other  tribea.  Dnr-
mg  the  time  of  the  republic  the  Titii  sodalea  are
no  longer  mentioned,  as  the  wanhips  of  ihe  Hare
tribes  became  gradually  united  into  one  wmifc*
religion.  (Ambriwh,$liiiJtaiiL.^aiJ«if.p.l92,du.)
Under  the  empire  we  again  meet  with  a  cotl^e  t£
prieds  bearing  ihename  oFSodaleiTidiocTitMHcs,
or  SacBrdoles  Titiale*  Flaviale* ;  but  they  had  no-
thing to  do  with  the  sacra  of  ^e  ■neient  tribe  of
the  Titice,  but  were  priests  inatitated  to  coDdnct
the  wnnhip  of  an  empeni,  like  the  AngnilabB.
(Oruter,  laurift.  lii.  4,  ccciv.  9,  occicvi.  1 ;  In-
script  ap^  Muiat  299.  S:  camp.  Lutan.  Phan.  L
602.) (AuousTiLia.]  [L.S.]

TOCOS  (Tim). [FiHKB.]

TOCULLIONES. [FiNUi.]

TOGA  {Tij«.n«t),  a  gown,  the  name  »f  ths
prineipal  outer  ganneal  wwn  by  the  BooaM,  is
derived  by  Vano  bom  Ugtn,  betauae  it  eorend
the  whole  bo^  (*.  144,  ed.  Miillo).  Odlins
(\-ii.  12)  stales  that  at  Erst  it  was  irani  ahne,
without  the  tunic,  [Tu?4ica.J  Whaienf  my
hare  been  the  first  u^gin  of  this  dres,  which  no*
refer  to  the  Lydians,  il  aeenu  to  hav«  been  »-
ceived  by  the  lUimans  from  the  Etmaona,  for  it  is
sen  on  Etruscan  works  of  art  as  the  only  CDvaiig
if  the  body,  and  the  taga  jiratliaia  is  expieisly
aid  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Etrnxaaa.
Liv.  L  6  1  Flin.  H,  N.  viii.  4S.  s.  74  ;  UtiOei,
Etmbr,  voL  L  p.  263.)

The  toga  was  the  peculiar  distinction  of  the  Ro-

uis,  who  were  thence  called  logati  or  gimi  togati.
(VIrg.  Aat.  L  282  ) HaniaL  liv.  124.) Ii  m

iginally  worn  only  in  Rome  ilaet^  and  the  nsc  ^

was  forbidden  alike  to  eailea  and  to  foreigncAi
(Plin..£>utiT.  II  iSuetOowf.  Ii.)  OBdually.
however,  it  west  out  of  common  use,  and  was  sop-
planted  by  the  Palliuh  and  laoema,  or  die  it  ns
worn  in  public  under  the  Iieena.  (SiicL  A  tig.  4lk>
[LacUini.]  But  it  was  still  used  by  the  Vffrt
:lBues,  whe  regarded  it  as  an  h<noiusble  distnsc-
lion  (Cic  FhS^.  iL  30),  in  the  couna  of  Janice^
by  clients  when  they  recciied  tb«  SmKn;i_i
(Martial  liv.  135),  and  in  the  Ihtaln  «  M  th*


TOGA.
gnata,  IX  lout  wLen  the  anporai
(Suet.  OamL  6  ;  Lunprid.  GaMuf.  16.)  Under
Alcnndsr  Sermu  gnati  at  the  cmpenr^  ttble
wen  expected  to  appfi  in  tba  tog&.  (LuDpcid.
Saer.l.)

The  finn  of  the  tega,  ud  the  louiner  of  wtar-
n  ohich  *re  much  diiputed,  uid


which  indeed  ii


Hib!^


IT  preaent  mformetun,  te  BinTfl  At  certBinty.
The  ronn  wu,  undDubtrdlf,  in  ume  aenie  rowj
(QointiL  iL  3.  g  137  ;  Ilid.  Oriff.  lie  24),  nu-
drtalar  eesirding  to  DioDjiiiu  (iiL  61 ),  who  calli
it  utpiti\aiar  ^luniiAJai'.  It  taemi,  howeTar,
impoMible,  firom  the  wkf  in  which  it  wh  wnn,
that  it  ceiUd  htre  been  ti  waf)  *  •emidide.  Such
aaj  perh^K  hue  bean  ita  form  u  worn  in  the
moet  ancient  tiinea,  when  it  had  no  great  folneaa  i
bat  to  tceooBl  for  the  numeniiii  foldi  ui  which  it
ma  afterwarda  worn,  we  tnnat  uppoM  it  to  hare
bad  a  gitalcc  hnadth  tu  proportion  to  iti  length,
thai  ia,  to  baTs  been  a  mailer  aegment  thw  a
Bcmiciiele.  Prohabtj  the  aiae  of  the  aegment  which
the  toga  formed  (on  which  iti  lutneaa  depended)
waa  determined  by  the  &ahion  of  the  lime  or  the
taala  of  the  wearer.  Thia  appesn  to  be  the  true
oxplanation  of  Quintilian'i  word*  (iL  3.  S  139),


which  could  have  ni


ling  if  nt


,iiired  than  to  gire  the  garment  the  rery  almpla
m  of  a  aimicircle^  The  only  other  point  to  be
Doiiced  reapecttng  the  form  of  the  toga,  ia  the
qaaatioa  whelha,  when  it  tame  to  he  worn  in
DuinT  complicated  feldi,  the  art  of  the  tailor  may
not  haie  been  employed  to  keep  tbeae  fold*  in
their  poaitton.  Thit  quntion,  however,  belonga
more  propaly  to  the  mole  of  wearing  the  toga.

On  thia  lubject  our  principal  informatioD  ia  de-
rived from  Quintilian  (li.  3.  8|  1 37,  &c.)  and  Ter-
tuliian  (ifa  J*!!^),  whoae  atatemanta,  howerer,  refer
to  the  later  and  more  compliraled  mod;
ut,  and  from  i  ' "

t^DC

-11.  U_ _  ,

n  front  of  the  body,  I
will  be  more  fidly  exiJaiiwd  prtaently.

We  muat  make  a  clau  dittinctwn  between  the
more  ancient  and  simpler  mode  of  wearing  the

a -a,  and  the  full  form,  with  many  eomplicaled
da,  in  which  it  wai  worn  at  a  later  period.

Quintiliaa  <iL  3.  |  137)  ay*  dial  the  andenta
had  no  ■"■■!,  and  that  afterwarda  the  ainnaea  were
reiy  abort  The  paaiage  in  Liry  (nL  18,  »■  «■
fosra  /luia,  iltruM  anni  ajFitat))  aeema  to  rdei
not  Is  lia  ainoa,  lecbnicalty  an  tailed,  but  a  ainaa
which  Fabiua  made  at  the  moment  by  gathering
Dp  aome  part  of  hia  toga.

The  ancioDl  mode  of  wtarinR  the  toga  ia  ahown


Let  tbe  toga,  which  in  thia  caae  waa  probAbty
not  ftl  (ma  an  exact  aemicircle,  be  held  behind
the  figure,  with  Ihs  corred  edge  downwarda.  Fiiat,
one  comer  ia  thrown  orer  the  left  aboolder  ;  then


riKhl  aide  np  to  the  neck.
the  front  of  the  body,  leaiing  Tory  little  of  the  cheat
ancoTstd,  and  rtacbujg  downwiid*  nearly  to  the
feet  (in  the  figure,  quite  to  one  ol  them). The


tbe  left  ahoulder,  in  auch  a  manner  aa  to  cover  tbe
gteata  part  of  the  arm.  By  thia  arrangement  (he
"^ght  arm  ia  coTered  by  the  garment,  a  drcumatance
iDticed  by  Qoinlilian  (§  138)  ;  but  it  wai  occs-
lionalJy  releaaed  by  throwing  the  toga  off  the  tight
ihonlder,  and  leaiuig  it  to  be  aapporled  on  the  left
done.  Thii  arrangement  ia  leeQ  in  many  ancient
itatuea  ;  an  eiample  !■  ibown  in  the  fbllowing  cut,
■hich  repmenta  the  celebrated  atatue  of  Aulua  Me-
tellua  (commonly  called  the  Etruacan  orator)  in  the
Florence  Gallery.  (MUller,  Daihniiler,  toI.  i.  pL
Iriii.  No.  389.) The  portion  of  the  tcga  which,  in


B  next  cut  itprteenti  the  later  mode  of  wear-
ing the  toga,  and  ii  taken  &om  an  engraTing  is
the  Mam  aoriaiko  (toL  li.  Ut.  il>  of  a  atatne
bond  at  Helcnlaaenm.


By


■  with  ti


deacription  of  Quintilian,  we  may  conclude  that  tbe
mode  of  waving  the  toga  waa  aomething  like  tbe
ibllowing :  —

Firtt,  ai  aboTe  remarked,  the  fbtm  ui  thia  laao
waa  a  aegment  lew  than  it  ■oaicircla. Aa  before,
the  currnl  aide  waa  the  lower,  and  toe  and  of  tha
■ ,■■■ , --■ -  J_^--


e  left  ihonlder,  and

:h  lower  Ibui  in  the
bo  ths  port  which
Quiniiliao  (§  139)  uji  ihould  nnch  down  half-
way between  the  knee  and  the  ankle.  In  our
figure  it  rcochea  to  Ihe  feet,  and  [n  wme  ittuaei  it
il  eien  Ken  lying  on  the  ground.  The  gannenl
waa  then  plarad  oirr  the  back,  ai  in  the  oldei
node  of  wearing  it,  but,  initead  of  rorering  the
right  ghsuldei,  it  wai  bnughl  TDnnd  uadtr  the
right  arm  to  the  &Dnt  of  the  body.  ThU  ii  the
m«t  difticolt  port  of  the  drrai  to  explain.  Qnln-
tilian  laji  (j  140): — "  Slnui  decentiiuinni,  li
aliqaanto  mpra  imam  togam  fiierit,  aunquam  certa
litinferior.  Ille,  qui  nib  hnmem  deitni  ad  linii-
tTTun  oblique  ducitur  relut  halteai,  nee  atnngulel
nee  fluat."  Becker'i  explanation  of  Ihie  nuitl«
aeemi  perfectly  laut&ctor;.  He  auppoaea  that  the
toga,  when  carried  under  Ihe  right  arm,  wai  then
fnlded  into  two  porU  ;  one  edge  <namely,  the
■ower  or  roond  edge)  waa  then  brought almoit  cloae
under  the  arm,  and  drawn,  but  not  tightly,  acroaa
the  cheat  to  the  left  ihoulder,  fenning  the  ed^
haUau  of  Qnintilian,  while  the  other  part  waa  al-
lowed to  fell  gracefully  orer  the  lower  part  of  the
body,  forming  the  imu,  and  then  the  remaining  end
of  the  garment  waa  thrown  over  the  left  ahoiUder,
and  hung  down  nearly  ai  low  ai  the  other  end,
which  waa  £nt  pot  on.  Il  ii  to  thia  part  that
Qnintilian  >e«mi  to  refer  when  he  nyi  (8  ItO)  :  —
"  Paia  togae,  quae  poatea  imponitur,  ait  inferior :
naio  ita  et  acdet  mdiua,  el  continetur  ; "  but  the
true  application  of  theae  worda  ia  lery  donhtfiiL
By  the  bottom  of  the  toga  (imon  luffam}  in  the
■bore  quotation,  he  acenu  to  mean  the  end  of  the
toga  lirat  put  on.  The  part  but  thrown  oier  the
left  ahouldec,  aa  veil  a>  the  end  fint  put  on,  eo-
Tered  the  arm,  aa  in  the  older  mode  of  wearing  the
garment.  The  outer  edge  (ntrtma  onx)  of  thii
pan  ought  not,  layi  Qumtilian  (%  140),  to  be
thrownback. Headdi  (g  141),  "Soperquodfi.  a.

Mdeat,"  by  which  he  probably  meoni  that  the  edn
itf  thia  portion  ahould  coincide  with  the  edge  of  the
end  which  waa  fint  thrown  orer  the  left  ahoulder,
and  which  ia  of  couras  covered  by  thia  portion  of
thegarmcnt.  He  aaya  (f  141)  ^  the  ahoaldet
and  the  whole  of  the  tiiroBt  ought  not  to  b«  eo-
vered,  olbetwia*  the  dtMi  will  bacrau  nanov  and


TOGA.
that  dignity  which  cooaiau  in  width  of  cheat  nil  be
hiat. Thia  direction  appean  to  mean  that  the  part
brought  octoaa  the  cheat  (oaU  iaUnu)  ahmld  not
be  drawn  too  tight.

Taaiela  or  balli  are  aeen  Bttwhed  K>  the  coda  of
the  toga,  which  may  hare  aBrsd  to  keep  it  in  ila
placs  by  their  wnght,  at  nay  haTC  been  menJy

There  ia  one  point  which  atitl  ranaini  lo  be  «-
phtined.  Id  the  figure  a  maaa  of  folda  ia  aeen  ia
the  middle  of  the  pert  of  the  toga  drawn  aovsa  the
cheat  (os/U  ioQeu).  Thia  ia  the  luiAo  menliaied
by  Tertullian  (di  Palia,  5),  and  used  br  Pcniua
for  the  toga  itaclf  {SaL  r.  33).  It  wai  either  a
portion  of  the  batitm  itaelC  formed  by  allowing  thia
part  of  (he  garment  to  hang  looat  (which  perh^a
it  muit  have  done,  aa  it  ia  the  curred,  and  tboe-
forelongeredge  that  iithua  drawn  aanai  the  cheat),
~~  '  'hen  gathering  it  up  in  tblda  and  tacking  theoe
in,  aa  in  the  figure,  or  elae  the  tblda  which
oaed  it  were  drawn  out  Erhu  the  naa,  and
■  by  themaelvei,  or  with  the  looae  folda  of  the
Ea'lau,  formed  the  nUio.  It  aeenia  to  have  been
aecured  by  psuing  the  end  of  it  under  the  girdle
if  the  tunic  ;  and  perhapi  thia  ii  what  Qnbitiliaa
oeanabythe  wordi  (§  140),  "Subducenda  etkia
para  aliqua  tunicae,  ne  ad  locertum  in  acta  redeat."
The  back  of  Ihe  figure,  which  n  not  aeen  in  onr
engraiinga,  waa  aimply  coTeied  with  the  port  of
ament  which  waa  drawn  acroti  it,  and  which,
'.  ancient  mode  of  wearing  it,  readied  down  iv
the  heeU  (QuintiL  SI43).  Quintilian  atala  how
'  '',  waa  worn  in  hia  tune,  but  the  meamlng  if
orda  ia  Terr  ohacure  (g  139;  "para  ejoa
prior  mediia  crunbua  optime  terminator,  poatfiritf
eadem  portione  alliua  qua  cinctoia."  See  ainre).

A  garment  of  the  anppoeed  shape  of  the  toga,
put  on  according  to  the  above  deecripoon,  haa
vn  foimd  by  the  writer  of  thii  aittde  to  |aia«t
I  appearance  exactly  like  that  of  the  tofa  aa  an
1  Btatnea,and  Becks  atatea  that  he  hai  made  HBii-
t  eiperimenta  with  equally  HtiBbetiiiy  reaalti.
Tertullian  {dt  Pallio,  S)  coutnata  the  aim[4kily
of  the  Pallium  with  the  com^icstion  of  Ihe  Ic^
and  hit  renwrka  apply  lery  well  to  the  abore  de-
Bcription.  1 1  appeari  hy  hia  aamat  that  the  fbldi
(  the  aiH&i  were  arranged  beine  tlte  dno*  mi
<nt  on,  and  fixed  in  their  places  by  pioa  er  b«kl ;
lot  generally  speaking  it  doea  not  aeeni  thai  the
Dga  waa  held  on  by  any  fiialeaing:  indeed  the
ontrary  may  be  infened  fram  Qnintilian'^  direc-
tiona  to  an  orator  for  the  managemeat  of  hia  laga
-^'[e  awaking  (§§  144—149).

Luother  mode  of  wearing  the  tegK  waa  the
tuM  Qabivu^  It  cunaiatad  in  formnig  a  port  of
toga  itaelf  inin  a  girdle,  hy  drawing  in  oatcf
edge  round  the  body  and  tying  it  in  a  knot  in
front,  and  at  the  aame  time  coTering  the  head  with
another  portion  of  the  garment,  it  waa  wen  by
penona  offering  aacxiScea  (Liv.  t.  4G  ;  Locan.  i.
596),  by  the  coniol  when  he  declared  war  t  Vn.
j<R.  rii.  612),  and  by  detoled  penooa,  as  in  iha
caas  of  Decins.  (Lit.  t.  46.)  Ita  txifcn  »M
EiruKsn,  sa  ita  name  impliea  (Senioa  •■  Vir^  L  c;
MUUcr.  &mtar,  toI.  l  p.  265)  Tbierach  ta  AimaL
A/ad.  Bam.  vol.  L  p.  39,  quoted  by  Milllcr,  Atmtt.
«i  FeiA<m  p.  31U).  Vealoa  (J.c)  sp«ka  of  an  amy
about  to  fight  being  girt  with  tlie  ciDctoa  Oabnia.
Persooi  wtaring  thu  dnw  were  nid  to  be  fifnimti
(or  utaitcli)  aadM  C  or  rila)  Gablm.
The  oDkar  of  th*  toga  wom by  mca  {fagm


TOOA.
■Mtu)  «■■  gncnll;  white,  that  is,  tlw  tMatl
cdIddt  of  vtiita  wool.  Hence  it  wu  otUcd  pura  or
RotiimfiiM  punui,  in  oppoaiiion  to  lb*  jmatada
mcintianed  b«lov.  A  brighter  whita  «»  ftiien
to  the  toga  of  ouididate)  fot  i^cee  (fmadujad'  Ihnn
their  toga  caitdidd)  by  ruhhii^  it  with  chalk.
Then  u  an  alltvion  to  tbii  cutam  in  the  phnie
cntHa  amiitio.  (Pen.  t.  177.)  White  tc«u  an
oAeD  mentioned  ai  worn  at  CBttiva]*,  which  doei
not  implj  that  thej  were  not  vorit  commanl]',  bnt
that  new  or  beih  cleaned  togai  were  fint  pat  on
at  leMiTa]!.  (See  Lipaiiu,  Elect.  L  1 3,  in  Optr.  toL
i.  PP.25S,  257-}  The  taga  wai  kept  white  and
dean  b;  the  fillei  [Fullo].  When  tbi>  wai
neglected,  the  toga  wa<  called  aordida,  and  Ihoae
wbi>  wore  mcb  gaimenta  mtrdidati.  Tbii  dreu
(with  diaanaoged  bair  and  other  matki  oT  dia-
ordet  about  the  penon),  wai  worn  by  aecoied  per-
aon),  aa  in  the  caM  of  Cicero.  (Plut.  Cie.  30,  31  ;
Dion  Can.  xxxviil  IG  ;  Liv.  ti.  SO.)  The  taga
paOa,  which  wat  of  the  natonl  coIdut  of  black
wool,  wa<  worn  in  private  monming,  and  Bome-
timn  alw  hjr  artl£eera  and  olhcn  of  the  lover
orden.  (See  the  paangct  in  Forccllini, «.  ve,  Pidlta,
P^ahu.)  Theff^pvAi,  which  wai  ornamented
with  Phrygian  embroidery,  wat  worn  by  generali
in  triomphi  [Tkiumfuuh],  nnd  under  the  em-
penai  by  the  coniult,  and  by  the  piaeton  when
th«J  eelebiated  the  gnmei.  It  wai  aim  called
G^iitolma.  (LampriiL  Alta.  Settr.  c  40.)  The
toga  palmaia  wai  a  kind  of  toga  picta.  The
tega  prwlala  bad  a  broad  purple  boiler.  It  wai
w«n  with  the  Bulla,  by  children  of  both  leiei.
It  wai  alto  worn  by  magiitiatca,  both  those  of
Rome,  and  thue  of  the  colonieiand  municipia,  b;
the  •acerdoto,  and  by  penoni  engaged  in  lacred
ritat  or  paying  tawt.  (Lir.  iiiii.  7  ;  Feitui,  i.  s.
PratlitUt  palia.)  Among  thoM  who  pounied  the
jut  tagae  profkiiae  kaUndae,  the  following  may
be  more  particalarly  mentioned :  the  dictator,  the
coniula,  the  praeton  (who  laid  aiide  the  prseteita
when  about  to  condemn  a  Roman  ciliten  to  death),
the  aogon  (who,  howerer,  are  snppoted  by  lome
to  hate  wont  the  tiabea),  the  decemTui  vtcrii
Eacinndii  [Dicimvisi],  the  aedilei,  the  triumviri
vpulopta,  the  leiiitan  on  feitital  daya  (Cic.  PtiL
iL  43),  the  magiitri  collcgii,  and  the  magtitri
Tieonun  when  cetebtalin)(  gamei.  [Maoistir.]
In  the  cate  of  the  Iribnni  plebia,  cdiHti.  and
qnaeaton  there  it  ume  doubt  upon  the  inbject.
The  pnitiata  palla  might  only  be  wom  at  the
celebiatjon  of  a  funeral  ( Fettiu.  L  e.)

The  toga  piaeteita,  ai  hat  been  abore  remariied,
ia  laid  to  hare  been  derived  from  the  Klnacani.
It  n  nid  to  faaie  been  finl  adopted,  with  the  lalut
clanu  [Clavub  Latus],  by  Tullni  Hmtilini  ai
the  royal  ro1>e,  whence  iti  uk  by  the  magiatrata
in  the  republic.  (Plin. // A",  ix.  39.  i.  63.)  Ac-
cording to  Maciobiiu  {Sat.  i  6)  the  toga  intro-
duced by  Hoitiliiu  wu  not  only  pratlcifa,  but  alio
pieta,  Pllniil«lei{/f.;^.YiiL4e.  ^74)  thalthe
toga  rtgia  mdulaia  (that  ii,  apparently,  embroi-
dcR-d  with  waving  linei  or  bandi)  whicb  had  been
vom  by  Serrini  Tulliui  nu  pniervcd  iu  the  tem-
ple of  Fortune.  The  toga  praelexta  and  the  bulla
wire*  were  Gist  given  to  boyi  in  the  cue  of  the
aon  of  Tarquinini  Pritcui,  who  at  the  age  of  four-
teen, in  the  Sabine  war,  ilew  an  enemy  with  hi>
own  hand.  (Macrob.  I.  c ,  where  other  [oitimlari
xMpecting  the  me  of  the  toga  pmeteila  may  be
fiHuid.) Reqwcticg  iba  hsaving  off  of  tho  toga


TORCULUJC


1137


praeleilaBnd  the  aaamptEoD  of  the  tog*  viiilti,  m
IiiruBXa,BuLLA,CLAvmLATiia.  The  oeeaiioD
wu  eolelHated  with  great  teiDidngi  by  the  friendi
of  the  ysoth,  who  atteaded  him  in  a  Hlemn  pro.
eeanon  to  the  Fonm  and  Capitol  (Vater.  Max.  v.
4.  §  4.)  Thii  amimption  of  the  toga  Tirilii  wai
called  ftncBu'im  fori,  ai  bemg  the  young  inau'i
intradnction  to  publio  life,  and  the  loleainitiei  at-
tending it  are  called  by  Pliny  (^lut  L  9)  i^chm
li^ae  arilit,  and  by  Tertullian  (dt  IdiJoL  c.  16)
tokmnilaUi  logoA,  The  pablic  camnoniea,  con-
nected with  tho  aenunption  of  the  tma  mriiii  by
the  aoni  of  the  emperon,  are  refrared  to  by  Sue-
tonini  «W.  26,  Ttt.  S4,  Oalig.  16,  JVw.  7).  Tho
toga  Tirilii  ii  called  libtra  by  Ovid  {Faiti,  iiL  771).
Girli  won  the  praetexta  till  their  marriage^

The  Iniiai  wii  a  ton  oniamented  with  pmpta
boriaontal  itripea.  Semni  (od  Jol  vii.613)  men-
tioni  three  kindi  of  tiabea  ;  one  wholly  of  porplo,
which  wai  laoed  to  the  godi,  another  of  purple
and  white,  and  another  of  purple  and  nffiron,  which
belonged  to  angun.  The  purple  and  while  Oabea
was  a  royal  robe,  and  it  auigaed  to  the  I^tin  and
early  Roman  kingi,  eipecially  to  Romului.  (Plin.
H.  N.  lilL  49,  ii.  39  ;  Virg.  A«^.  vii.  137,  xi.  334;
Ovid.  Fait  iL  £04.)  It  waa  worn  by  the  couinti
in  public  lolemnitiea,  nch  at  opening  the  temple
ofJanua  (Viig.^«.Tii.  613;  Claudian.  i.  A.;!..

in  other  public  ulemniliei.  (Valer.  Mai.  iL  2  ;
Tacit.  Anrn.  iii.  2.)  Hence  the  trniea  ii  mentioned
ai  the  badge  of  the  equntriin  order.  Lastly,  the
toga  worn  by  the  Roman  emperon  wai  wholly  of
purple.  It  appcan  to  have  been  firtt  anumed  by
Julini  Caeaar. (Cic  PUiip.  iL  34.)

The  material  of  which  the  toga  wu  commonly
made  wai  wool  It  wai  lometimei  thick  and
■ometimei  thin.  The  former  wa>  the  liga  deiua,
pagait,  01  iirla.  (Suet..ili«.  82;  QuintiL liL  1 0.)
A  now  toga,  with  the  nap  neither  worn  off  nor  cot
dole,  waa  called  /leia,  to  whicb  it  oppoaed  the  trita
or  Rw,  whicb  wai  uicd  as  a  Bummer  dreu.  (Mar-
tial, ii.  85.)  On  the  nae  of  ailk  fot  logat  lee
SuuctiH.

It  only  temuni  to  ipeak  of  the  genetnl  nae  of
the  too.  It  wu  originally  won  by  both  leics  g
but  when  the  atola  came  to  be  worn  by  matrana,
the  toga  wu  only  worn  by  the  merelric*i  and  by
women  who  had  been  divorced  on  account  of  adul-
leiy.  [Stola.]  Before  the  use  of  the  toga  be-
came almost  restricted  to  the  upper  cUsiea,  their
toga  wu  only  diitingniihed  Item  that  of  the  lower
flaiara  by  being  fuller  and  more  eipenuve.  In
war  it  was  laid  ailde  and  rephtced  by  the  Palti-
DAMINTDH  and  Saoch.  Hence  itgaiiu  ii  op-
posed tn  mUa.  The  toga  wai,  however,  aometimet
naed  by  uldiem,  hot  not  m  battle  not  ai  their
ordbiiry  dreia  ;  but  lather  u  a  clnik  or  blanket.
It  wai  chiefiy  worn  in  Rone,  and  hence  logatiu  ii
opposed  to  natiaa.  The  toga  wu  often  nied  ai  a
covering  in  ilee[HDg  ;  and  laatly,  ai  a  ihroud  for
the  corpse.

(Becker,  OoI/m,  vol  ii.  pp.  78—88;  Femriu,  dt
Re  VuUaria;  RubeninI,  ill  As  Feit) [P.&]

T0N5OR. [Barba.]

TOPIA'RIDS. [HoRTUB.]

TORA'LIA. [Toaue.]

TO'RCULUM  or  TO'RCULAR  (Xi|Wt),  a
presi  Ha  making  wine  and  oil. When  the  graiiei


1138  TORCULUM.

dry  or  ratten  wen  cnrsrullj  icmond  (Gtopon.  \i,
1 1)  [FoRFEi:],  sod  the  rcit  carii«l  from  the  vine-
joid  in  deep  t«iketi  (qwiii,  Virg.  Gemy.  iL  241  :
ToAdpoi,  Het.  Scat.  S9G  ;  i^A'^^*"!  Longiu,  iL  I  ;
KBplroi,  Geofum.  I.e.)  to  b«  poured  into  s  ihnllow
tbL  In  lhi«  they  were  inunedialslj-  tmdden  by
ineD,  who  had  the  lower  part  of  their  bodiet  nsked
(Virg.  Gaorg.  ii.  7),  except  that  Ihey  wore  drawen
[SirBLISjtcULVu].  At  leail  two  penoni  uiually
trod  the  grape*  together.  To  "  tread  the  wine-
prew  alone "  indicated  deflation  and  diitreu.
{li.  Uiil  3.)  The  Egyptian  paintingt  (Wilkinion,
JHaii.BitdOH<,ToI.ii.m.lS2— lS7)eihibitiumanj
u  Hvcn  treading  in  the  iBme  vat,  and  ■upponing
thenuelTei  by  taking  hold  of  ropci  or  polei  placed
■hore  (heir  heada.  From  the  oiie  of  the  Oi«ek
and  Romoti  vata  there  am  be  na  dmibt  that  the
company  of  (readers  waa  often  alill  more  numennu.

labour  the;  moved  in  time  or  danced,  ai  ii  teen  in
the  ancient  moiaiu  of  the  church  of  St.  Congtantia
at  Rome.tonietiinet  alio  leaning  apon  one  another.
The  preceding  circumilancei  are  llluitisted  in  the
following  woodcut,  taken  from  a  ba«-relie£  (Moa.
Maah.  iii.  tab.  45.)  An  onteliia  in  the  Britith
Hlueum  (Combe,  Amc  Ttrra-BoWa,  No.  69)  thowg
a  penon  by  the  aide  of  the  vat  performing  daring
thit  act  an  the  tcaieliMm  and  tSiiai  para,  for  the
purpoie  of  aiding  and  regulating  the  movementi  of


thoae  in  iL  Deiidea  thi»  inxmmental  miuic  they
were  cheered  with  a  long,  called  iitxot  ^iX^ior
(A(hen.  T.  p^  199,8.)  or  B/in>t '«iA4Rai,ipeciment
of  which  may  be  teen  in  AnncRon  (Od.  xvii.  1  and
lii.iandBnUKk..H]«iLii.239.  See Jncobt, otf foc.,-
compare  Thcocrit.  lii.  25).  Af(er  the  grapo  had
been  trodden  lufficienlly,  they  were  lubjected  to
the  mote  powerfiil  pretsure  of  a  thick  and  heavy
beam  [pBKi,ini]  for  the  purpoae  of  oblai


thei


;e  yet  n


(Vitr


w  [Coc


ti] .


lued  (or  thf  _____

H.  N.  XTiil  31.  1.  74.)  A  itrainer  or  colander
[CoLDh]  wai  employed  to  dear  the  muit  from
aolid  pnrticlea,  u  it  flowed  from  the  vat.

The  preceding  woudcnt  ihowi  the  aperture*  at
the  botlnm  of  the  vat,  by  which  the  mu)(  (mMten,
7At£iicof)  wai  diKharged,  and  Ihe  method  of  re-
ceiving it,  when  thi


when  full  nn


L 1. 2).


TORMENTUM.
and  the  vat  large  in  proportion,  the  nnut  flow(4
into  another  vat  of  corrciponding  iixe,  which  wB
■nnk  bckw  the  level  of  the  ground,  and  ibcrdin
colled  iioA^rwr  (Marie, liL  ] ;  Ca^ai.  li.!.  11),
In  LntinJa»t.(Ovid.Fruf.  T.  SB8;  Pita.  ^ntf.  ii.
20;  Colum.  dt  Ht  StI.  liL  16.)

Fnm  \itris  Boccho*  waa  oUed  Lmatm*  (A*-
'Rifiit).  The  feitival  of  the  Lataea  wh  cijehnli^
on  the  apot  where  the  firat  Attic  wine-preaa  m
aaid  to  have  been  cnnatniclcd. [Dia!(vua.J

Olive)  aa  well  aa  grapea  were  tnbjccted  lo  the
/nWm  for  Ihe  aake  of  (heir  luL [OtKA,  p.  82&)

The  building  erected  lo  contain  all  the  rewlt
and  other  implementa  (tornZn  vw,  Vaim,  di  Ai
RtaL  iii.  2)  for  obtaining  both  wine  aod  oQ  wia
called  AmwiiruM  {Cato,  da  R»  RaO.  12,  13.  IB;
Cal  d»  Rt  Ran.  xil  IS)  and  Aqnir  {Getrvm.  vi.
1).  It  waa  aituated  near  the  kitcbcD  and  the
wine-cellar. <Vitru..  vi.  6.)  [J.  Y.]

TOREUTICE. ICAiLATnBi.]

TOKMENTUH  [ipirifiar  Ifranr),  n  BtiE-
lary  engine.  Att  the  miuilea  wed  in  war,  except
thMe  thrown  from  ihe  aling  [Pumda],  are  jm-
jected  either  by  the  hand  alone  or  with  tbe  aid  of
ehiatic  gnhatancea.  Of  claatic  inatnunenti  ibe  bow
[Ancua]  ia  Rill  oied  by  many  nationa.  Bat  the
lormeUum,  ao  called  from  Ihe  twiating  Cfiii  ^^iii^ii)
of  bain,  Ihongi  and  v^lable  fibn  (Polyb.  tv.  56),
liaa  iallen  into  diiuae  throngh  ibe  diicoreiy  tt  gut-
powder.  The  vmi  lomaifn  ia  often  naed  by
itulf  lo  denote  enginea  of  vaiioiu  kindi.  (Cie.  ait
Faia.  IV.  4;  Oie*.  D.C.iu.  44,45,  B.Ala.  10;
Lir.  II.  II  ;  VelL  PaL  ii  82;  Cart  it.  9.  1G  )
Often  al»  thete  engine*  are  ipeeified  trparat->ly
under  the  nanea  of  Baliilat  and  Calt^mJ/at,  which
namea  however  moat  commonly  occor  logeihet  ia
the  aocounta  of  aiegeaand  othermililary  ofieTaiiiiiii,
became  the  two  kinds  cf  enginei  dcnat«l  by  then
were  almoat  alwaya  uied  in  canjuoction.  [ff  iLa-
POLts,]  The  balialB  (rtrpoCilAot)  waa  used  u
ihool  stones  (Ovid.  TKit  i.  2.  48  ;  Lucan,  ri.  19«;
Kon.  Marc.  p.  S5S,  td.  Merccri).  the  atapohi
(KaraWAnii,  Korartk-rucii)  to  pn^ect  darti,  espe-
cially the  Falarica  [Harta],  and  ■  kind  of  nii-
sile,  H  feet  long,  called  IHfiu.  (Fettuo,  (.t.)
WhilK  in  beaieglng  a  dty  the  tarn  [Aaiia}  ns
employed  in  dealroying  the  lower  part  of  (he  wall,
(he  balialB  was  used  to  overthrow  the  battleneoia
{propugiHKida,  FhitiL  Bacck.  It.  4,  58 — 61 ;  JnX-
{>tij,  and  the  catapult  to  ahoot  any  of  the  besiefrd
who  appeared  between  them.  (Died.  iviL  42,  ti,
n.  48,  88.)  The  forms  of  thHO  machine*  bdnf
adapted  to  the  objedi  which  they  were  inteoiled
to  Ihrow,  the  catapult  was  long,  the  balisa  aeariy
aquare,  which  eipUioi  the  foDowing  hiUH>Di«
enumeration  by  Plaatiu  {Copt  iv.  2.  1 G)  of  the
three  ^tixovbI,  the  applialioo  of  whidi  haa  ju>
been  eipinined.
"  Meua  est  baliata  pugnn*,  mbitqa  at^aha  est

Hometua  arie*.**

In  the  same  annamenl  (be  nnmberof  catapalta  vai
commonly  much  greater  than  (he  nam  bet  of  balntae.
(Non.  More  p.  S52,  ed.  Memri  ;  Liv.  xtrl  47.)
Alao  theM  two  clanea  of  machinea  were  bath  of
them  diitinguithed  into  the  grratcr  and  Ihe  kt>,
Ihe  number  of  "the  leas"  bring  much  moir  t«i-
siderabie  than  the  numberof  "  thegimter.'  Wlim
Carthago  Nova,  wbi[:h  had  aerred  the  CatthuiBiani
for  an  maepal,  va*  taken  b;  the  Ruuni,  ue  Ibl-


TORMENTUM.
nrkg  mn  finiiid  id  it:  130  lu^  >nd  SBl  mull
itspdl*  ;  23  luga  mod  52  (null  bttliilBB. (Lit.
c.) Three ' -  ■ ■ -


hutot


which  IhrcT  atoati  weighing
{hf  {TpioKiimvmlwi  MBout,


<.ij(ht


Poljb.  iz.  34),  &  whole  faniidnd-wraght  (AofiiAi
OMteHTM,  Ndd.  Man.  I.  s.;  AjS«t^at  TaMrriaJoi,
Polyb.  Jl&,'  Diod.  n.  86),  and  three  hnndi«d-
weight  (riTfBS6>tBt  iprriAarrnt,  Diod.  u.  46).
Boidn  th<«,  Vilraviui  (i.  11)  meationt  many
other  tiK*,  CTen  dowo  to  the  b^iita  which  thnw
s  ttmie  of  caAy  two  poundi  weight.  In  like  manner
catapult!  were  denoininaled  according  to  the  length
of  the  amvi  emitted  from  ihcm.  (Vitni*.  i.  10  ;
Schneider,  oJ  bx.)  Aeeordisg  to  Joaephiu,  who
gim  MHae  remaikabte  inataocei  of  the  detmictire
force  of  the  baliita,  it  threw  nonea  to  the  di)lsace
of  a  qnaiter  of  a  mile.  [B.J.  jii.  7.  g  19,  23;
eomp.  Pnicop.A£.0]M.  121,23.)  Neitherfrom
the  deacriptioaa  of  authort  nor  from  the  figura  on
the  eoluDD  at  Trajan  (Baitoli,  OaL  Tny.  tab.  46—
47)  an  we  able  to  form  anj  exact  idea  of  th«
coiatTUCtion  of  then  eagioea.  Sltll  IcM  are  we
informed  on  the  lubject  of  the  Sarjiit  at  Onager,
which  «a*  alao  a  tonnentom.  (VilniT.  x.  lOj  Lit.
IiTi.G,47{  Amm.  Uan«lL  ZX.7,  xiiii.4.)  Even
the  tanni  baliita  and  ealt^xiiia  are  confoniided  by
writsi  nfaKquent  to  JnliiH  Cuau',  and  Diodonii
Sieulu  otloi  niea  JiBTairJA-nii  to  snclode  both  ha-
liilae  and  catapnlta,  diitinguiihing  them  by  the
rpillirtiTtrpvCJAoiond  ^i^tA^ii  (xiii.  51, 11.48,
83, 86,  XXL  4).

The  variona  kindi  of  torments  appnr  to  hare
been  inrented  ihortly  b^ro  the  time  of  Alexander
the  Orrat.  When  hone-hair  and  other  msterialt
foiled,  the  womni  in  Kveral  inttonco  cnt  ofT  their
own  hair  and  (wUled  it  into  repea  for  the  enginea,
(Cos.  B.a  iiL  5;  Veget  dt  Bt  Mil  it.  9.)
Theae  mochinea,  with  thaw  who  had  the  manage-
ment of  them,  and  who  were  oslled  baiiKi^i  and
A^eTal(Palyb.iT.fi6),weTedmwnupin  the  rear
of  an  adrancing  arm  J,  aoafl  to  throw  orer  the  heads
•f  the  front  rankle  In  order  to  attack  a  maritime
eitj,  they  were  rained  on  the  decka  of  Teneli
eonitiiieted  for  the  puipoee.  (Diod.  ii.  83 — 86  ;
Tacit.  Amm.  iL  8.)

The  meaning  of  tontuniuHt  ai  ap{Jied  to  the
•vda^  of  ihipi  ii  explained  on  p.  790,a. [J.Y.]

TOKMENTUH  (fidimwO,  tortme.  I.Oribk.
Bj  a  decree  of  Scamondrina  it  wai  ordained  that
no  free  Athenian  conld  be  put  to  the  tjjriare  (An-
Otx-dilUjnl.  22  J  eomiare  Ly«.  "(J  rpiuiii.  177,
o.  Afforat.  4S2) ;  and  thii  appean  to  hare  been  the
f^ennal  ptactlce,  notwilhitanding  the  aatertion  of
Cicero  (Pari.  Oral.  c.  34)  to  the  conlraiy  (dt  fs-
MiliHa  AAaiHiuitm,  R/uxHontm  —  ajmilipioi  Ubtri
draqmt  terqaarlur).  The  only  two  apparent  ei-
ceptiooa  to  thii  practice  an  mentioned  by  Antiphon
(■<■  JItrtKt.  ami.  729)  and  Lytiat  {c  Sinum.  ISS).
Bat,  in  the  caae  mentioned  by  Antiphon,  BJtckh
haa  ahown  thai  the  tattnm  wb«  not  applied  at
.Athena,  but  in  a  foieign  eonnCry;  and  in  Lyiioi,
aa  it  ii  a  Pktaean  boy  that  ii  ipoken  of,  we  haTe
no  occaaion  to  conclude  that  he  wai  aa  Athenian
ciliaen,  linee  we  iearn  from  Deaoathenea  (c
l>!«aer.  1S31)  that  att  Plataeani  were  not  necei-
■■rily  Athenian  citiicni.  It  mnit,  howcTei,  be
obMTTod  that  the  decree  of  Seamandrini  doea  not
appear  to  hare  interdicted  the  nH  of  larturc  aa  a
■Dfana  of  execution,  lince  we  find  Demosthenei  [it
tJor,  271)  lemindii^  the  judge*  that  they  had  pnt


TOBMENTUM.  11S9

Antiphon  to  death  by  the  isck  (inftKKisiiirtts).
Compare  Plut  PImc.  c.  35.

The  evidence  of  bIutci  wa«,  howeTcr,  always
taken  with  tortnre,  and  their  teatimony  wai  not
otherwiae  reoeired.  (Antiph.  TitraL  i,  p.  633.)
From  thii  circnmatance  their  teatimuny  appean  lo
have  been  eoniidered  of  mere  Talue  than  that  of
freemen.  Thni  Iraena  (Oe  Gran.  Htrtd.  202)
aaya,  "  When  alaTei  and  freemen  are  at  hand,
yon  do  not  make  nae  of  the  teatunony  of  freemen;
but,  putting  ilavea  to  the  torture.  Ton  thna  en-
d«Tour  (0  lind  out  the  tmth  of  what  haa  been
done."  Nnmrrana  paauge*  of  a  limilar  nature
might  eotily  be  produced  from  the  oratota.  ((^)mp.
Demoath.  «.  Omtor.  i  n  874  ;  Antiphon,  fti
Cllon»(.  77BiLycuiy.  o.Zaw,  159— 1B2.)  Any
person  might  o^r  hia  or™  -^"—  •-  **-  -«.~:--J


Fl»i8d((B»w. If  the  opponen  ...„._ _^

hit  ilare  to  be  tbui  examined,  inch  a  rcfusil  woi
looked  Dina  aa  a  itrong  preaumption  agninit  him.
The  *fiitKrtiin  ^ipean  to  haTB  been  genemlly
made  in  writing  {Dcmoith.  e.  Paalaa,.  978),  and
to  hare  been  delivered  lo  the  opponent  in  the
pretence  of  witneaaca  in  the  moil  freqoented  put  of
the  Agora  (Demosth.  e.  Aphob.  iiL  846)  ;  and  aa
there  were  •eTeial  modea  of  torture,  the  particular
one  lo  he  employed  woa  niually  ipecified  (Ue-
moath.  a  Stijih.  i.  1120).  Smnetiinci,  when  a
person  olWcd  his  slave  for  torture,  he  gave  his
opponent  the  liberty  of  adopting  any  mode  of  tor-
lure  which  the  latter  pleased.  {Antiph.  De  Clio-
nat.  777.)  The  parties  inlereited  either  super-
intended the  tortuTQ  themselves,  or  chote  certain
persona  for  this  purpose,  hence  called  Bairarunal,
who  took  the  evidence  of  the  ilsTei  (t;U>ifrai
fiaaaiiaT^t,  kinirHiaafitv  tls  t&  'a^xurrtior,  Isocr.
Tn^.  c.  g  ;  compare  Demoath.  e,  Paalaen.  978,
979  ;  Antiph.  Kvrirropfa  *ap/uui.  G09).  In
aome  csaes,  howcTer,  we  find  a  public  aiavo  at-
tached to  the  court,  who  administered  the  torture
{wapiarai  Btftit  i  Sti/dot,  Hal  Auroi'KT  irairrlar
ifiir,  Aeach.  Da  Lfff.  284,  ed.  Tayl.)  ;  hut  thia
appean  only  to  have  taken  p1ac«  when  the  tortnre
was  admmistered  in  the  court,  in  presence  of  the
judges.  ^Aesch.  L  c  ;  Demoath.  c  Eaerg.  1114.)
This  particular  mode  of  admiuiatering  the  torture
was,  howcTer,  certainly  contrary  to  the  usual  piactica
(3oirwlf<u>  oil  loTi*  iyurrior  J/iSx,  Demosth.  c.
StijA,  L  1106).  The  |[eneral  practice  was  to  read
at  the  trial  the  depositions  of  the  ilaves,  which
were  called  0iuranl(Haipocr.Suid.  (.v.;  Demosth.
<•,  Nicodrat.  1254),  and  to  confirm  them  by  the
leatimony  of  those  who  were  present  at  the  ad-

p.  680,  ftc.)

2.  Roman. During  the  time  of  the  republic,
freemen  were  never  put  to  the  tortnre,  and  staves
only  were  eipoeed  to  this  pnniahment.
moreover,  could  not  be  tortored  t(

which  waa  a  crime  against  the  godi,  or  unleat  the
tenate  made  an  exception  in  aome  special  instance,  us
was  done  in  the  Calilinaiiun  conapiiocy,  (Cic.  pro
Mil.  22,pn)  tieiet.  1,  Part.  Oral.  34  ;  Dion  Com.
Iv.  5  1  TaciM,  ii.  SO,  iil  67 1  Dig.  48.  tit  JB,
a.  I.  §  18.)  At  a  later  time  slaves  might  be  tor-
tured to  bear  wimesa  ogoinat  their  masters  in  case*
of  mnjealas  (Cod.  9.  tit.  B.  ss.  6,  7)  and  adultery.
:  (Dig.  48.  tit  la  s.  17  i  Cod.  S.  tit  9.  it.  3,  8,


«  proTo  the  guilt


lUO  TORQUES.

32.)  Under  the  empemn  ma  bte  ptnoiii  wen
put  to  ihetutuie  to  erlnct  eiidence  from  them  in
oue*  of  DUJeMu ;  and  althoogh  thii  iudigailj  wtu
conflDcd  for  the  inon  put  to  penoni  in  btunblc
eitcumgtuice*,  we  read  of  chum  in  which  tnn
Jtomui  •euton  and  eqaitei  weie  eTpouid  to  it.
(Dion  Cau.  li.  Ifi;  Suet  7^.  SB;  Dig.  48.  tit,  16.
*.  10.  g  1.)  For  further  infoniutian  Ke  Dig.  48.
tit  IS,  Di  QhooMowAik,-  Walter,  GoMtiU  da
£oiiH»lfliA««U>,[^875,  876,  lated-i  Rein,  An
CrimimalTtiM  dir  Itontr,  p.  Si2.

TORQUES  or  T0RQUI3  (arpurrit),  an  o^
nament  of  gold,  tvUted  ^irally  and  hent  into  a
cinolar  frani.  which  wae  trom  nund  liia  neck  fay
men  of  diilinction  among  the  Peniaiu  <Cuit.  iii.  S  ;
Themiit  Oni.  24,  p.  306,  c),  the  Oauli  (Flonu,
i.  13,  it  4),  and  other  Aiiitle  and  northern  na-
tioDL  (iMi  Orig.  di.  30.)  Tun  w«  the  nune  of
it  among  the  Britou  and  ancient  Jriah.  Virgil
(An.  V.  fiSa,  i59)  thni  dcKtibw  it  ai  ^rt  of  l£e
•ttire  of  the  Trojan  jonlhi  i

Fleiilii  obtoni  per  cotlnm  ciicnini  ann."
Omamenti  of  thl>  Itind  hare  been  frequently
{ound  both  in  France  and  in  man;  pert*  of  Qrsal
Britain  and  Ireland  (Petrie,  Tnau.  if  R.  IriA
Acad.  yol.  ITM.;  .^Mig.pp^  lal~-lBl),t'Bi7ing  in
aiieand  weight,  but  alnieat  alwaji  of  the  Emm  ex-
hibiled  in  the  annexed  woodcut,  which  rtpreienti
ator<jui*  fbund  in  Brecknockihiie,  and  now  pre-
•erred  in  the  Briliih  MuKom.  The  nme  wood-
cut coiilami  a  lection  of  thii  torqait  of  the  aiie  of
the  DciginaL  It  thowa,  ai  Mr.  Petrie  obaerrei  con>
eemingiome  found  In  tho  comity  of  Heath,  "  foar
equidistant  radiations  from  a  common  centre.**  The
torquii  in  the  Briliih  Mueeotn  ii  four  feet  and  a
Iialf  in  length.  Itt  hooke  corropond  well  to  the
following  deicriptionof  thefall  of  a  Celtic  watrior:
"  Torquii  ah  inciia  decidit  mua  guU."  (Propert
IT.  10.  44.)  A  tonjuia,  which  initead  of  baing
bent  into  a  citcnlar  fonn  wu  tumed  into  a  ipinu,
become  a  bracelet,  ai  is  ihown  in  the  loweel  figure
of  the  weodcnt  to  Armilla.  A  torqnia  coDtnved
to  aniwer  thii  purpose,  ii  called  lonpiii  hnuAialu.
(Vopisc  AxM.  7.)  Such  bracelete  and  torques
are  often  fmmd  together,  having  been  woni  bj  the
»nie  people.


The  bead  in  the  preceding  woodcot  ia  that  of  a
Persian  wBrrior  in  the  mouie  of  the  battle  of  luoa,
mentioned  in  p.  431.  It  illnstratea  the  mode  of
wearing  the  toiqai^  wUcb  in  thia  inatanoe  lor-


TRAOOEDIA.
mbiatei  in  two'aerpeati'  heade  instead  of  hoela.  It

was  by  taking  thia  odlar  fmn  a  Gallic  warrior  tWt
T.  Muilint  obtained  the  cognomen  of  T\it  i^mfai.
(Cic  dt  Fi».u.^AQf.'m.3,li  OcUina,  ix.  13;
Non.  Mart  pp.  227,  228,  ed.  Uswi.)

Terqnea,  whether  in  the  fonn  of  coUan  or  boce-
leta,  no  doubt  fbimed  a  ouiaidBimUa  jpart  id  tin
wealth  of  titoae  who  wore  tbcm.  Heaea  tbey
were  an  tmpartant  portiai  of  the  ipml,  wIm<i  aay
Celtic  or  Otimt^  army  wai  ccoqaerad,  asd  ibey
were  among  the  rewirda  of  ?ahnr  bcatowed  after
an  engagement  upcsi  Ihna  who  had  moat  diatia-
guithcd  thenueWea.  (Jut.  itI  60  ;  nbl.  B.  .V.
iiiiil  2.  B.  1 0  1  Sidon.  ApoUin.  Cant.  "■"■  434.)

leldien  and  to  enanetate  the  boooan  wUdi  ibey
had  obtained,  eftoi  mentico  the  mmbc*  of  tonnea
confened  npoD  them.  (HaSti,  Jfaa.  Fvna.  p.  218.)
[Pbakr*.]  [J.  T.J

TORUS,  a  bed;  originally  made  af  atow
(Plin.  H.N.  Tiii.4S.  B.7S),  hay,  kana,  wadT
plants  (Hart  iIt.  160,  163),  BeB.WMd  (A  mJ-
Ubn  mkiU,  OTid.  HeL  TiiL  656),  alaa  ataflU  with
wool,  and  afterwards  with  feathen  (li  SllX  «
•wani-dowD  (Marl  ut.  161),  aoM  to  beaa  Ench
raited  and  ai  soft  as  poatible. (Viig.  Am.  n.  SOI;

with  the  hide  of  a  quadruped  (Viig.  ja.  nu.  177),
but  more  commonly  with  iboet*  or  blaiikecs,^lei]
Toralia.  (Hot.  Sai.ii.  4.84,  .^>u<.L  5.21.)  Tbo
torus  may  b«  obasTTed  en  tin  lopha  in  tha  fiiat
woodcut,  p.  308  ;  and  its  anieaianca  tben  aaef
tnffice  to  explain  the  tnnahtokoe  t£  tta  Dane  ta
the  larger  semi-dnsdar  mouldinga  ia  tba  bnaa  of
columnt. [ATTicuRaBS;  Sfiu.] [J.T.]

TO'XOTAE  {TciiTM). [Obmoul]

TRA'BEA [TooA.]

TRADl'TIO. [DouiHiox.]

TRAOOE'DIA  (TpinvUa),  tragedy.  I. OBBac
The  eagedy  of  the  anacot  Oreeka  «a  well  aa  tkK
comedy  confewedly  originaled  in  the  wmkip  if
the  god  Dionysus.  It  ia  propoaedin  thiaaitid((l)
to  eiplam  (iiun  what  element  of  that  wmkip
Tragedy  took  iu  rise,  and  (2)  to  trace  the  eoarw
of  its  dcvelopement,  till  it  reached  it*  perfect  hm
and  character  in  the  drama  of  tho  Attic  liagi  ilhin.
Aeechylaa,  Sophodea,  and  Ear^odea.

The  pecnliatity  which  meat  atrikis^  dJMi*-
gniihes  the  Greek  tragedy  from  that  at  aoden
timea,  it  the  lyrical  ot  choral  part.  TUa  waa  %ht
offipring  of  the  dithyraolnc  and  dMnl  odea  fna
which,  *•  ^plied  to  the  volahip  <f  Dicayw^
Oreek  tragedy  took  it*  hae.  Thi*  worah^  w«
may  obaare,  was  i£  a  twitfold  ehaiactec,  care>
spimding  to  the  difismt  ctmceptuna  which  wtfa
anciently  entertained  of  Dionysus  aa  the  dajwe*
able  Qod  ot  Souriahii^  decsjiag^  tw  teno*a(ed
natare,  and  the  Tarioos  (brtmwa  to  which  in  that
ebaractar  be  waa  comtdered  to  be  nbjact  at  tha
different  Maaon*  of  the  yotr.  Heoo*  MOller  ab-
terrea  (Ut  9^  On«e,  p.  288),  "tba  fatiTabaf
Dionyaos  at  Athens  and  elsewhefa  war  all  iilrir
niied  in  tha  months  neanat  to  (he  ahDrtort  day,
ouBcidently  with  tha  chauftca  goinc  asi  in  tta
eoorte  <^  natir^  and  by  which  hia  wwahippxa
coneeiTed  the  god  hinuelf  to  be  aSeded."  Hb
monmflil  or  joyon*  fbttuM*  (wM^X  hia  Bnlnl
drath,  *ymboliaing  tha  death  of  all  TrgiWIiuM  ia
winter,  and  his  birth  (Plat  <4s  Lig.  iii  Pl  700  ;
Proelus Hs OnybRTf  HaiiiKM. p.  3SS), iodi-

cating  the  ntKintiMt  ef  all  aUnn  ta  tha  ^iiig.


TRAQOEDIA.
~  1  is  njung  6
at  au\j  nprei


■a  to  Uaej  U

DToiti  u  Uw  nd  h
■  Id  idsitilT  themic


a  idsitilj  £aiiicl>a


vilh  him  and  hii
BT  of  the  rabordiiiate
diviDJIiea,  the  Satyn,  Njinpiii,  aad  P*nu  (A'jnn-
pLnmqmi  lemi  aH»Sa^rit  dorfj,  >r)lo  formed  the
mjttaohigical  tnin  of  tbe  god.  Hence,  u  ii  ex-
pUiocd  ondcr  Dionvui  (p.  410,  b),  uow  the
cuMom  of  tha  diigniH  of  9ujn  being  Uken  by  lbs
wonhippen  Bt  the  latinlj  of  IKgnjiu,  from  tliB
tbani  longi  ind  dueei  of  whom  the  Oncisn  tn-
gidj  originaled,  "  being  fcom  iU  coDuncacemeDt
comBcted  with  the  public  njoiciiigi  and  cenrno-
niefl  of  DioDjioa  m  eitiB,  while  aituedy  mm  men
« ipctt  and  marimenl  of  tho  cooutrj  {eeliTali."  In
ikcttbfl  laj  iuiii*ofTngedy<T|>icn>lia),  &r  from
aignilyiiig  viTtbifig  DHmrBfiil  or  patbotie,  it  moet
probablf  dennd  Ihm  the  goulike  appcaimnco  of
tlie  Solyti  who  nog  ot  acted  with  numelie  gnticola-
tion  (ipxifiru)  tiie  oM  Bacchic  *uigi,  with  SUenu,
the  cdulut  «iHiiii«iiioa  irf  Diooynu,  ft?  ttnr  leader.
(Bode,  OtKi.  d.  Hdlm.  DiMmM,  toI.  iil  )>.  SI.}
Fkvn  their  iMembluteaindnuwulMtiiuitoginK,
Iher  wen  tomettanee  eaDed  Tpir«,  <u>d  iboi  Mug
wpaytfUa,  Thai  Aeichfliu  in  ■  fr^meat  of  the
ProDWtheiu  nvf^ifet  calla  *  Saljr  Tfiitfat,  ud
the  Sctjrio  choriu  in  the  Cjdopi  of  fiunpida
<I  SO)  appnn  in  the  ihin  of  k  goet  {xKaaa
rpdejou).  The  word  Jdriipat  aW  ii  apparent];
the  Mine  u  Tlrvfni,  &  kind  of  goat  (Phot.  La.
t.  n.)  According  to  anodcr  opinian,  the  **  word
Traged;  wai  fint  coined  &mn  the  goat  that  wi>
the  prise  of  it,  which  priie  wii  fint  conititatcd  in
Theapii'  time."  (Bentle;,  Pialar.  p.  349.)  Thi>
dednUion,  howerer,  ai  well  u  anolJier,  connecting
it  with  t)w  g«t  oS^ied  on  the  altar  of  Bacchui
<Maller,  LtteTDl.q/'OMM,  p.231),  around  which
tiie  ehorna  mag,  it  not  eqnaUy  inpnrted  either  bj
ths  etymologicni  phndpiea  of  the  langiiage,  or  the
analogout  inilaase  of  iiiifivSfa,  the  **  nTel-»ng."
<£:ynoiJV<^.  p.T64;Enrip.fiainLlBl;Aaliiiit,
F.  H.  iiL  40.)

Bat  the  Dionjiiin  dithymmbi  were  net  alwaji
of  a  ga;  and  jnyoni  characlei ;  the;  wete  o^iatje
of  eiprexing  the  eitiemn  of  n^iea  and  wild
lamentatiun  *•  w^  u  the  entfaniium  of  jo;  ;  and
it  wae  from  the  Dithjiambic  loi^  of  a  moomfnl
mat,  pnlsblj  iong  Dnginally  in  the  winter  monthi,
that  the  natelj  and  lolemn  tracedy  of  the  Qicelu
arua.  That  there  were  Ditbyramba  of  fneh  a
chancter,  expreuiTe  of  the  anSmng)  of  Dionjnu
(ri  Tail  AiwAtw  wdAr),  appeara  from  the  itate-
ment  in  HerodalUf  (t.  67),  that  at  Sicyaa  in  the
lime  of  CItKhenea  (a.  a.  600)  it  wai  coatomary  to
eelebnte  {-rifaiptir)  the  lofiiitmgi  of  that  god  with
**  logic  chonKa."  Bnl  it  maat  be  remariied  that
ID  thi  moat  ancient  timea  the  Ditbyiainbic  aong
w>*  not  eiecnted  by  a  regular  chonu.  Thui
Anhilochua  gaya  in  Trochaic  rene,  "  I  itnow  how
when  my  mind  ia  inflamed  with  wine  to  lead  off
the  Dithynmb,  the  beantiful  aong  of  Dionyana,"
whence  we  tmiy  infer  that  in  bia  time  (n.  c.  700)
tlM  Dithyramb  waa  (img  by  a  band  of  reiellen  led
bjr  a  flute-player.  Lyric&l  cbornaea,  indeed,  had
been  cien  uien  eilabliihed,  eepeemlly  in  the  Dorian
Mate*  ot  Greece,  in  connection  with  the  wonhip  of
Afali(^tliedthamoT^>uT{  boing  die  iutrumait


TRAQOEDIi.  lUl
to  which  the  cborentae  lang  and  danced.  (MQIler,
LUtnL  o/  Oramie,  p.  304  ;  Doriaia,  ir.  7.  g  a)
In  fiKt  the  connection  of  the  Derian  chonl  poetry
with  the  wortbip  of  Apollo,  the  direct  oppoaite  to
that  of  Dionyana,  and  it*  contequent  lubjectioD  to
eatabliahed  niles  and  forma,  admitting  too,  fronl
the  Dorian  chancier  but  little  innovation,  affonU
the  moat  obvioua  explanation  of  the  atriliing  cii^
cnnatance  that  nothing  decidedly  dramatie  aprang;
from  it,  a*  from  tbe  dithyramhic  perfbnaancea*
(Bode,  p.  16.)  Still  there  were  lome  poinM  in
which  the  Dorini  wonhip  of  Apollo  reaembled
that  of  Dionyana,  t.g.  the  dancea  with  which  the
former  god  waa  hoooured,  and  the  kind  of  mimicry
which  characteriaed  them.  Other  circumatanoi
alio,  cm  which  we  cannot  here  dwell,  would  pri>-
bably  (adlilate  the  introdnclion  of  the  Dionyiian
Dithyramb  amongat  the  Dtsian  atatea,  eapecially
after  the  impraremeala  made  in  it  by  Arioa  (a  ts.
600),  which  were  lo  great,  that  eren  the  inTenlioa
of  that  apeciee  of  poetry  ia  aaeiibed  to  li'ni,  (hoagh
it  had  been  known  in  Greece  for  a  century  be^«
hi*  time.  The  wocahip  of  Dionyana  waa  celebrated
at  bii  natire  flace,  Metbymnae  in  I^boa,  with
mnslc  and  orguatic  ritee  ;  and  aa  Arion  traTelled
eiten^Tely  in  ths  Dorian  atatei  of  Heilaa,  he  had
ample  a)^mrtnnitiea  of  obaerving  the  Tarietie*  of
oboral  wonhip,  and  of  introdnc^ag  any  improre-
menli  which  he  might  wjah  to  make  in'it.  (Bode,
p.  33.)  He  ia  Bid  to  hare  been  the  inreulor  of
the  "  tragic  turn  "  {ifVfaai  Tfiwao),  a  phrase  of
doabtlhl  aignilication,  bat  which  aeemt  to  mean,  that
be  waa  the  imentor  of  a  graie  and  aolrom  ityle  of
mniic,  to  which  hia  Dilhytamb*  were  danced  and
*ung.  (Henaana,  OpxK.  voLrii.  it.S16.)  Suidai
((.t'.)Bddiafbim,A^T"'ajKiilspin'oixopS«aT^a'iu,
ical  iiDAfK^iCor  f  rai  iccil  in^utffoi  rt  ^lurat  bni
Toii  X'lpB^i  "^  Sarifem  tltfrrfna'  tmarpa  Xt-
■yorra!.  From  tbe  lint  ctaose,  in  connection  with
other  BUthoritiea  (Schel.  m  ArittopA.  Avei,  140.1),
we  leam  that  he  introduced  the  cyclic  chonia  (a
bet  mytbotogically  eipreued  by  nu>king  him  the
aon  of  CyfcM) ;  i.  e.  the  Dithyramb,  malead  ot
being  anng  aa  before  his  time  in  a  wild  irregular
danced  by  a  eborua  of  fifty  men
-'-■!  altar;  whence  in  tbe  time  of
ithynunbic  poet  And  a  Ifscher  of
eyclian  chomaea  were  nearly  aynonymoui.  (MUller,
p.  304.)  A*  the  alteration  waa  made  at  Corinth,
--  - -—  -■-- -  - of  the


Dithyiambic  waa  aaabniiated  in  some
that  of  the  Dorian  choral  odea.  The  i
effect  that  Arion  introdncsd  Salyra,  i.  e.  ■'pifoif
^caking  in  vene  (Jrootoie),  i*  by  some  thought
another  expression  for  the  invention  of  the  *^tr^
gic  style-"  A  aimpler  interpretatioa  ia,  that  he
introduced  tbe  Satyrs  aa  an  addition  and  contrast
to  the  dance  and  aong  of  the  cyclic  chorus  of  tbe
Dithyramb,  thua  preserring  to  it  ita  old  character
aa  a  pert  of  the  wonhip  of  Bacchus.  The  phrase
ironiaiu  (compare  Herod,  i.  23)  allude*  Is  the
different  titles  given  by  him  tn  hii  di&reni  Dithy-
rambs according  to  their  subjects,  for  we  need  not
auppoae  tliat  they  all  related  directly  to  BacchuB.
(Welcker,  A'ocifrt^.  p.  333.)  As  be  waa  tbe  firtt
cithara  player  of  his  age  (Herod,  i.  S3),  it  it  pro-
bable thai  he  made  the  lyre  the  princi]wl  inatni>


From  the  more  solemn  Dithyrambs  then,  aa  inh
prored  by  Arion,  with  the  company  of  Salyra,  who
probably  kept  tip  a  joking  dialoga^  Bltimately

■ ■  ■ «  D  »  ■  ■ ■ O  ■  ~


II W  TBAGOEDIA.

■pnuijt  the  dranwtic  tragedy  of  Atlieiif,  loim
iu  tha  foltoning  manner.  The  chorain  irhich
ropreienled  them  were  under  Ihe  direction  of  a
leader  or  eiarehus,  who,  it  may  be  nippoied,  came
fbrivnrd  aepnrately,  and  whoae  part  vaa  unietimai
taken  by  tlie  poet  bimielf.  (Plato,  Rep.  iii.  p.  39i,
c.)  We  may  alio  conjectute  that  the  exarchua  in
each  caie  led  off  by  linging  oc  rcsiting  hit  part  in
a  aalo,  and  that  the  chonu  dancing  round  the  altar
then  eipneied  their  feelingi  of  joy  or  urrow  at
hl>  ■lat7,  Kpretenting  the  perila  and  auAennge
of  Dionyiai,  oc  •ome  hero,  as  it  might  be.  Ac-
cordingly wme  Kholan  hare  recogniKd  in  uch
choral  longi,  or  in  a  praiimate  deviation  Irom
them,  what  hiu  been  called  a  "  lyrical  tiasedy,"
pcrfurmed  without  acton  dittinct  from  the  ^onu,
and  conceived  to  be  a  traniition  atep  between  the
Dithyramb  and  the  dnunatic  Trendy.  The  titli
however,  doci  not  occur  in  ancient  wrilen,  an
therefore,  if  it  mrana  anything,  can  only  refer  to  n
preaenuiiona  of  the  ebanctec  we  hare  jiut  aacrihe
lo  the  Dithyrambi  of  Arion,  modified  from  time  t
time,  accoiding  to  circumatance*  or  the  fancy  of
the  writer.  That  the  namea  Tftrytfita  and  t^kIt^
Sat  are  applied,  indeed,  to  worka  and  writeca  before
the  time  of  Theapi^  and  that  the  "  tragedy  "  of
entirely  choral,  without  any  regular


t dial*


igue, 1


.  .  Thai  Atlienaena  (dy.  p.  630.  c),  ub-
■ervei  that  the  whole  BtyTical  poetty  formerly
conaiited  of  chonuei,  >a  did  the  "  tragedy  "  of  old
^mes  (A  ''i"  -rinfifila).  Again,  Diogene*  LaEr-
tittt  (iii.  56)  alatea  that  formerly  the  chorui  alon«
acted  (Siiiipiwurrlftv)  cr  performed  a  drama,  on
which  Hermann  {Ojmte,  vii.  S18)  obeerrei,  "  atler
the  Dithyiamb  waa  aong,  tome  of  the  chonu  in
the  guiu  of  Satyra  oune  forward  and  impro-
Tiiol  gcnne  ludicimia  alorirt ;  but  in  eihibitiona
of  thia  aort,"  he  adda,  "  we  lee  rather  dnmaticae
trngotfdtae  initia,  quam  uUum  lyrici  cnjuadam
generis  reatigiiim."  Lyric  pocta  also  leem  to  hare
been  apoken  of  aa  Tn^diani  ;  thua  according  to
SuidaB  (i.e.)  Pindar  wrote  17  tpiturta  Tfnyucrf
(-  but  not  lyrical  tragediea,"  Hermann,  L  e.\  and
Siinonidea  of  Ceoa  wrote  tn^ediei,  or  a  tragedy,
aa  Bome  mamucripta  have  it.  But  whatever  may
be  n/eTKJ  Erom  thia,  it  only  prota  that  Dithy-
nunbic  pacta  were  also  called  Tragcdiajii,  juat  as
in  the  Scholia  on  Anilophaneif/>M.  290)  a  writer
ia  described  aa  tiQupafiSiritoihs  q  TporT^ScbraoApt,
For  the  argamenta  on  both  lidea  aee  Hermann,
Le.;  andBiiekh  on  the  OreliDmenian  InacriptioDB.
(fintk  TSccKft-,  p.Sa.)

The  choral  DithyrambicBangi,BccompAnied  with
mimetic  acdon  (the  lyrical  tragedy  ?),  prevailed  to
aome  extent,  ai  all  choral  poetry  did,  amongst  the
I>ariBnB  of  the  Peloponnetua  (Miiller,  Dorwu,  iL
10.  g  6)  ;  whence  their  dericotire,  the  choral  ele-
ment of  the  Attic  tragedy,  waa  alwaya  written  in
the  Dorian  dialect,  thua  showing  its  origin.  The
lyrical  poetry  was,  howcTer,  especially  popular  at
Sicyou  and  in  Corinth.  In  the  latter  city  Arion
made  his  improvementa  j  in  the  former  "tragic
choruees,'*  i.  a.  dithyrambs  of  a  sad  and  plaintive
character,  were  veiy  ancient  (Herod,  t.  67 ;
Welcker,  Naeilrag,  p.  336),  and  the  Sicyoniana
are  alio  said  to  have  been  the  inventora  of  the
Tpar/iftla  (Tpoy^itdit  tifirai  fiir  Zmxinai,  Tf.
A(ffKiti|>ydl  ii  'Arruicil  aiiiifTaf,  Thcmlat.  zxriL
p.  406,  Dindoif ) ;  but  of  eourae  tUa  can  mly
maan,  that  the  drnmalic  tragedy  waa  a  deriTatira,


TRAGOEDIA.
ibroogk  many  changea,  of  the  old  aatyrical  tfr/r-

the  goatlike  Satyrs,  or  aa  others  woe
the  altar,  on  which  lay  the  burnt
goat.  It  appran  then  that  then  i«  a  gooa  ana  in-
telligible foundation  for  the  daima  which,  aenad-
ing  to  Aristotle  (PoA  iiL  3),  wen  made  by  Ike
Pelaponnesiani,  and  especially  by  the  Sii^imiaiii,
to  the  InTention  of  **  tragedy,"  undaatandtng  by  it
a  choral  performance,  such  as  baa  been  dooibed
above.  Now  the  snbjecta  of  tfaii  Dithjianbic
tragedy  were  not  always,  eten  in  andeot  tiaie^
confined  to  Dionysus.  Even  Arion  wrote  Dhln-
lamba,  relating  to  different  lieroet  (Hemd.  i.  23),
a  practice  in  which  be  waa  followed  by  ammilu^
poets,  who  wrote  Dithyramb- like  odea  (vkoDce
tbty  were  datsed  amongst  tbe  rpoTinl  ww^mi),
which  they  called  Centanra,  Ajaces,  or  Mfimw,
as  it  might  be.  (Zenob.  v.  40.)  Thna,  Efigata
the  Sicyonian  is  said  to  hava  vrittoi  a  tr^cdy,
I.  e,  a  piece  of  dithyiambic  poetry  on  a  aabject  an-
connecled  with  Dionyios,  which  was  aUBraeiidy
received  with  the  cry  of  o&Mr  rp^  rbw  Aunvsv,
or  "  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  Baeckns^*
(ApoatoliuB,  IV.  13.)  If  thia  anecdote  ba  Ime,
and  Epigenea  preceded  Arion,  tbe  intzudoctieai  of
the  Satyra  into  the  Dithyiambic  dams  l^  lite
latter,  may  possibly  have  haen  meant  to  mlidj  tkc
wishes  of  the  people ;  but  whethn  it  waa  id  *
not,  there  ii  scaicejy  any  donbt  that  tkoB  ibt  tine
of  ArioD,  the  ti^iic  dithyiunb  giadnaUir  hi  a  laaa
less  satyrical  and  apaRife  in  ill  chancter,  till  tke
creation  of  the  independent  Satyric  drama  tai  tbe
Attic  dramatic  tragedy.  (Bode,  p.  33.)

Aa  to  the  ittft  by  whkih  this  was  effected
Aristotle  (Pael.iT.  U)  says,  "TruedTWaa  ai  t^
lint  an  extempoianeoaB  eSuaioi  («*  ifX^t  anrs.
cxitiiiimiii),  and  was  derived  bth  tw  Iffifx^
TOW  riv  AiBAp^ifiav,  L>i.&Dm  the  lotdai  «  tbe
chief  singers  of  the  Dithyramb,  who  probably  Bag
or  ledtad  their  parts  in  the  trochaic  metre,  while
tbe  main  bod;  of  the  ode  was  written  in  ine^Hhi


ihether  learnt  by  heart  beforehand,  oi


the


of  the


[Cd<


-«.]


also  possible,  if  not  probable,  that  it  was  a^-
gested  by  the  rhapsodical  ledlalienB  of  the  epic
and  gnomic  poets  fbraierly  ptevaloit  in  QreeO' :
the  gnomic  poetry  being  genenUy  written  m
Iambic  verse,  the  metre  of  the  Attic  dialogue,  and
which  Aristotle  IPOil.  4)  aaya  waa  used  by  Uaam
in  hia  Uargites,  though  its  inrentian  ia  oCBUDnaly
ascribed  to  Archilochus.  In  bet  the  rtiapaodisU
themaelTea  are  sometimea  spoken  of  aa  nctaim
(hroKpiinl)  of  the  pieces  thoy  recited,  which  the;
are  also  aid  to  let  {iwrKptriftn,  Atben.  xir.  &
629,  i  ;  MUller,  LUmdan,  Ac,  p.  34)-  Birt  if
two  or  nuwa  rbafiBOdea  w«b  c^ed  sipoa  to  go
thnugh  u  epiaoda  of  a  poem,  a  RgalalsDB  wU^
obtained  at  the  Ptaathenata.  tad  attribated  <■
Solm  01  HipFWchna  (Wol^  PrvUg.  p.  97  t  Plak^
Hippar.  p.  32S),  it  IS  dear  that  tbqt  wmld  jn-
sent  much  of  a  dramatic  dialogne.  In  bet  (Bode,
p.  6)  the  principal  aeenea  of  tbe  whob  Iliad
might  in  this  way  hare  been  refrescnled  ai
parts  of  a  drama.  These  ndtalioiis  then  bta«  s*
common,  it  was  natotal  to  aoBba*  wiib  tha  n-


TRAOOEOIA.

of  the  Dilhynmb,  iUelf  ■  mixture  of
reciiauTe  ind  chon]  ung,  Uie  additkmal  element
of  the  dialogue,  written  ia  Iambic  Tene,  o  meaiure
■uggntfld  pef hapi  hj  the  gnomic  poetry,  mod  iiied
hf  Solon  about  iho  time  of  tbe  otigin  of  ttie  dia-
k^ue  (SoloD,  Fhtg,  S6,  Ouiford),  mon  eipcciall;
■■  it  ia  the  mutt  collDqnial  of  all  Omk  metro
fXMTutbr]  and  iliat  into  which  common  conTem-
tioa  moat  nadily  fitUi.  It  ii  indeed  onlj  a.  con-
jectun  that  the  dialogue  or  the  laniaa  element  of
Attio  tiagedy  waa  connected  vith  the  rbapaodicHl
redtatiDna,  bat  it  ii  confinned  by  the  iact  that
Homeric  rhlpaodei  wen  common  at  Sic  jon  (Uerod.
T.  67),  the  cndle  of  the  Dorian  tngedy,  and  4lio
mt  Bcuinn  in  Attiot,  where  the  wonhip  of  Dionj-
■oa  eiiated  fnm  aadeiit  time*.  (Heiych.  t.  e.
B^supwrlDii.)  This  howei^i  ii  certain,  that  the
union  of  the  Iambic  dialogue  with  the  Ijrical
chonu  tookplaceat  Athent  nnder  Peisiitiatiu,  and
that  it  waa  attribnled  to  Theipia,  a  natire  of
Icuni,  one  of  the  comitry  demea  or  pariahea  of
Atti^  where  the  wonhip  of  Dionyaoa  had  long
preniled.  The  intnducuon  of  Ihia  wonhip  into
Attka,  with  ita  appropriate  chomaea,  wema  to  haTe
Iwen  partly  owing  to  the  commanda  of  the  Dorian
oncta  (Dem.  c.  Mid.  p.  G31),  in  Tery  early  timea.
ThDaitia>toted(l'U(o,MiiK>i,p.3Sl  ;  PlnL&f.
29),  that  liagedy  (i.  a;  the  old  Dithyiambic  and
Satyrical  tragedy}  waa  Tery  ancient  in  Attica,  and
did  not  originate  with  Theapia  or  hia  coltmpora-
riea.  Thia  alleialion  made  by  him,  and  which
gBTe  to  the  old  tragedy  {iflxoiUmr  riy  v«pl
Otrwir  liSri  T>ir  Tpnyfi')'"  Kirau')  a  new  and  dn-
matic  chuactsr  (making  it  an  ^i>ot«H  Itagieat
gaiiu,  Hor.  Art  Fot.  275),  wai  very  simple  bnt
Tery  importanL  He  introdnced  an  actor,  sa  it  ii
recDTded,  for  the  take  of  giTing  reat  to  the  chorut
(Uios.  Lafrt.  iiL  60)  and  independent  of  it,  in
which  capad^  ho  probably  appeared  bimaelf  (PluL
tiot.  29),  taking  tarioua  paita  in  the  same  piece,

LB  disguises,  which  be  waa  enabled  to


I  of  the  1


,_ . U  attributed  to  him. Now  aa  a  chores,

by  meaiia  of  its  leader,  could  maiotaiD  a  dialr^a
with  the  actor,  it  ia  eaaj^  to  aee  how  with  one
actor  only  **  a  dramatic  action  might  be  introduced,
eon^ued,  and  concluded,  by  the  apeecbes  between
the  choral  aonga  eipRaaive  of  the  joy  or  sorrow  of
the  chonia  at  the  Tarwns  OTenla  of  the  drama."
Thui  MUUer  ohcare*  thM  in  the  play  of  Pentheus,
' ' ' n  composed  by  Theapia,  "  a


aiDgle  actor  mi^(»I.
Pentheua,  a  measeDger,  AgaTo


rely  sa  Dior


nothcr  of  Fen-
EBs  designs  aud
intcDtioiis,  or  reUte  eventa  which  could  not  be  re-
[ncaenled,  ai  the  murder  of  Fenlheua  by  bis
mother :  by  which  means  be  would  represent  the
■nbatance  of  the  fable  us  it  appears  in  the  Bocebae
of  Euripides."  (MUller,  p.  29  ;  Bode,  p.  57.)
Willi  respect  to  the  character  of  the  drama  c^
Thaspis  lliere  baa  been  imich  doubt :  some  writets,
■Dd  eapeciBlly  Bentle;  (i'ioter.  p.  SIS),  hsTe
niainlBined  that  Iiia  plays  were  ail  satyrical  and
Indicmoi,  >. «.  the  plot  of  them  was  aome  atory  of
Bacchus,  the  chorus  consisted  principally  of  satyrs,
BUd  the  argument  was  merry  —  an  opinion  indeed
which  is  inpforted  by  the  fact  that  in  the  early
part  of  hia  tune,  the  satyric  drama  had  not  ac-
quired a  distinctiTe  character.  It  may  also  appear
to  ba  oooGrmed  by  the  atatement  (Arislot  Poet.  4)
tiiBl  ■(  first  the  Tmgediaiu  made  uaa  of  tha  tro-


TRAOOEDIA  lUS

chaio  talmmeter,  aa  being  better  suited  to  tba
satyrical  and  saltatorial  nature  of  their  pieces;
"  '  perhaps  the  truth  is  that  in  the  early  part  of
areer  Theipis  retained  the  totyiioil  character
le  older  ingedy,  but  alterwords  inclined  to
I  serious  compositions,  which  would  almost
oblige  him  to  discard  the  Satyrs  &am  his  choruses.
That  he  did  write  aerious  dramas  ia  intimated  hy
the  titles  of  the  playa  aacribed  to  him,  aa  well  a*
by  the  character  of  the  fragmenta  of  Iambic  rens
quoted  hy  Plutarch  as  hia  (Bentley,  Ptalar.  p.
SU),  and  which  eren  if  they  are  for)[cTiea  of
HemcUdes  PoBticUB,  at  least  prere  what  wni  the
opinion  of  a  scholar  of  Aristotle  on  the  subject.
Beside*  the  assertioa  that  Sophocles  (Suidaa,  w
vil.y  wrote  against  the  ehorua  of  Theapia  aeems  to
show  that  there  was  some  similarity  of  character
between  the  productions  of  the  two  poets,  (Bode,
p.  47.)  A  lunuoary  of  the  arguments  in  bvoui
if  the  serious  chamcler  of  the  tragedy  of  Thespia
a  given  by  Welckcr  (Nadtrag,  pp.  267—276),
[he  intention  of  the  prologua  and  rhesis  of  tragedy
(an  expression  deaiiy  in  anme  measure  identic^
with  the  introduction  of  an  actor)  is  also  aaoibed
to  Thespia  by  Aristotle.  (TitmitL  p.  3B2,  cd.
Dind.)  By  the  former  word  is  meant  the  first
speech  of  the  actor  (AratoL  Potl.  12),  or  the
prooemium  with  which  he  opened  the  piece ;  the
ehorua  then  song  the  £r>t  ode  or  sii|ielai,  after
which  mme  the  ^<rii  or  dialogue  between  ths
actor  and  the  principal  choreotae.  The  inTealion
of  this  dialogue  ia  alao  alluded  to  in  the  phiaae
A^Mi  S)  ytnuinti.  {Id.  4.)  It  ia  OTident  that
the  introduction  cS  Iha  diali^e  must  alio  have
caused  an  ahenition  in  the  arrangement  of  the
choms,  which  could  not  remain  cyclic  or  diculsr,
hut  must  have  been  dnwn  up  in  a  rectangular
form  aboot  the  tbymele  or  altar  of  Bacchua  in
front  of  the  actor,  who  was  eleiated  on  a  platfurm
or  table  {iKiit),  the  fiimunuer  of  the  singe.  The
atatement  in  Polhix  (ir.  123),  that  this  wot  tho
case  belbre  Thetpit  seems  incoTTecC  (Welcker,
Naeitraff,  p.  26S.)  If  we  are  right  in  our  notion
of  the  general  chancter  of  the  Theapian  drama,
the  phraae  oiStr  vpir  Aiiirvirsr,  which  was  cer-
tainly nsed  in  his  time,  was  fint  apjdied  to  his
plays  at  Athens,  as  being  uncoimected  with  tha
forumes  of  Dimysns,  and  as  deviations  irom  the
lutpol  ^8bi  cal  A^ii  yiAola  of  his  predecGsaors.
Plutarch  however  {Syiap.  i.  5)  supposes  that  ita
fint  application  was  later :  he  says  "  when  Phrysi-
chus  and  Aeschylus  continued  to  elevate  tragedy
to  legends  and  tales  of  sufferings  (<Ii  /luSour  xal
tiSjl  TfaFfitTQn),  the  people  misting  and  regret.
ling  the  old  Satyric  chorus,  Hid,  "  What  is  this  to
Bacchus  F  "  Hence  the  expreasion  waa  used  to  sig-
nify what  waa  mal-k-propoa,  or  beside  the  quea-

The  reader  may  hare  observed  that  we  haTe  not
noticed  the  line*  of  Horaos  {At.  PikL  27<j)  :
"  DiciCor  et  plauatria  vexisse  poemata  Thespis,
Quae  canercnt  agorentque  peruucti  faecibua  ool"
The  &ct  ia  that  thuy  are  founded  on  a  miaconcep-
tion  of  the  origin  of  the  Attic  tragedy,  and  that  the
tale  about  the  wagons  of  Tfaespia  probably  aroaa  out
ofaconfusiim  of  the  wagon  of  the  comedian  Suaariui
with  the  pbii/ortt  of  the  Thes|Haa  actor. The  first
representation  of  Thetpis  waa  in  B.  c  636. His
immediate  auccesaors  were  the  Athenian  Cboerilu*
and  Fbryiucbui,  tho  ibnner  of  whian  repreaented
"-' ,y~


im  TRAQOlfDIA.

plBjt  u  carif  u  B.  c.  £34. Ks  ii  nid  hj  Snidu

to  hnve  written  150  piecei :  fnna  ihe  title  of  one
of  them,  the  "  Alope,"  iu  ntbject  teeou  to  h»vi
been  >  legimd  of  Attic  origin.  (Ptna.  i.  U.  §  3
Bode,  l^  60.)  Thai  ho  eicelled  in  the  Satyrical
diwoA  iDTcntcd  by  Pntiou,  a  indicated  by  ''
line  of  an  unluiowii  author,

'Hrljta  filv  $airiXtit  j)v  XoipUei  Ir  icrripoi
vii  If  h«  wrote  anything  like  the  nnmber  of  dn-
mai  ateribed  to  him,  it  ii  al»  evident  that  the
cuitom  of  contending  with  Telialogiei  mut  fanre
been  of  eaily  ortgui,  for  there  wen  only  two  dn-
matic  latiTdi  dorii^  the  year.

Phrjnichui  wai  a  pupil  of  Thelpii,  and  gained
Ml  Gnt  victory  in  the  dramatic  contati  B.  c  £  11 .
In  hit  worki,  the  lyric  or  chrral  element  Hill  pra-
dominated  oier  tho  dramatic,  aad  he  waa  diitm-


?>pular  with  the  admiren  of  the  old  atyle  of  muiic.
he  esteem  in  which  hii  **  ambroflial  unga  "  were
then  held  ia  ebown  in  KvenJ  panagei  of  Aiiato-
phanei  (Ava,  74S,  Hmm.  1S4),  and  in  the  Ime
(Fop-  SI9)  where  the  dicaati  an  made  to  chauut
tlie  old  Sidoniao  iweet  longi  af  Phiyniehiu,
Eol  iunipl(iimt  niKll

"  Sidonian  "  being  an  altuion  to  the  play  which  he
wrote  called  Che  Fhoeninae.  The  fint  ub  of
female  maaki  ia  alao  attributed  to  him  (Soidaa,  in
vtf.),  and  he  BO  ^  deflated  from  the  general  prac-
tice of  the  Attic  tragedian!  ai  to  write  a  drama
on  a  lubject  of  eolemporary  hiitory,  tbe  capture
of  HilatiiB  by  the  Peniani,  B.  c  494.  (Herod.  vL
31-)

We  now  coma  to  tbe  fint  writer  of  Salyrical
dramai,  Fratinai  of  Phliut,  a  town  not  for  from
Bicyon,  sad  which  laid  claim  to  the  inrention  of
tragedy  ai  well  n  comedy.  (Bode,  p.  3£.}  For
•ome  Ume  previotuly  to  thit  poet,  and  prahnbly  aa
early  aa  Theipu,  tragedy  had  been  gradually  de-
t^rting  more  and  more  htim  ita  old  oKancteriatici,
and  inclining  to  heroic  fablea,  to  which  the  chonia
of  Satyra  wna  not  a  iit  accompaniment.  But  the
fun  and  merriment  cauaed  by  them  were  too  good
to  be  loet, «  diiplactd  by  the  aevere  dignity  of
the  Aeachylean  drama.  Accordingly  the  Satyrical
dnma,  diatinct  from  the  rvcent  and  dramatic  tra-
gedy, but  anggeited  by  the  Bportire  element  of  the
old  Dithyramb,  wa>  founded  by  Pratinai,  who
however  Rppeara  to  have  been  inr]»ued  in  hia  own
invention  by  Chocdlua.  It  waa  alwsyi  written  bv
tiagediuu,  and  generally  three  tnigedi
Balyrical  piece  were  repreaented  togeth(


called  a


It  formed  a


ecled  whoti


1  tetralogy  (rtTpa^Ia).  The  Satyrical
piece  wa«  acted  lail,  ao  that  the  mind*  of  the
apectaton  were  agiveably  relieved  by  a  merry
after-piece  at  the  cloac  of  an  eamcBt  and  engrouing
tragedy.  The  diatingulahing  feature  of  thit  drama
waa  the  chonu  cf  Satyn,  in  appropriate  drcsBea
and  maika,  and  ita  aubjecla  aeem  to  have  been
taken  from  the  aome  clan  of  the  odvanlnm  of
Bacehui  and  of  the  henxa  aa  thoM  of  tragedy  ;
bat  of  eonne  they  were  so  treated  and  aelected,
that  the  preeence  of  maUc  ntyn  woold  aeem  ap-
propriate. In  their  jokes  and  drollery  and  naivety
coniiated  the  merriment  of  the  piece  ;  for  the  kings
aai  hetoet  wIls  wan  iaindoced  into  tlieir  coa-


•TBAGOtolA.

pai^  weM  not  of  neceavly  thereby  diraled  ot
their  epic  and  legendary  character  (Uccaec,  At.
Poet.  2S3,  apeaka  of  the  "  incolnmi  gnvilate'^,
though  they  were  obliged  to  conibrm  to  their  siti-
oticn  and  lufier  aome  diminution  of  dignity,  fnm
their  position.  Henee  Weleker  (A'aaUr^,  'p.  331)
obserrea,  the  Satirical  drama,  which,  ao  to  ipeak.


aa a "playful  trigedy" (njfoiwo T^efjtU),
being  both  in  fiirm  and  materiola  tho  aame  aa  tra-
gedy. Thn*  alao  Horate  {Ar.  Pott  231)  nya:
EiTutJre  leves  indigna  Tragoedia  veratu
Inltrerit  Salyrij  paulnm  pudibimda  pmterriai
alluding  ui  the  firtt  line  to  the  mythic  or  rpn  ele-
ment of  the  Satyric  drama,  which  be  ctlli  Ttagoe-
dia,  and  in  the  (eoind  representing  it  aa beii^
rather  ashamed  of  it*  company. The  scene  was  of
course  laid  in  the  lupposed  Imnnta  of  the  Satrn,
ea  wo  learn  tarn  Vitmriua  (t.  8):  "Satmeie

acreatibtu  rrbns,"  all  in  keeping  with  the  incidenta
of  the  piecea,  and  reminding  the  spectaten  af  the
old  Dithyramb  and  the  god  Dionysas,  ia  whMr
honour  the  dramatie  contesta  were  or^uially  hdd.
We  most  however  observe  that  there  were  aosne
characters  and  legends,  which  aa  not  pnaentiDE
any  seriont  or  pauetic  aspects,  were  not  ad^ited
for  tragedy,  and  therefore  were  naturally  apfm-
priated  to  the  Salyric  drama.  Soch  were  Siaj^
phus,  Autolycnt,  Cirte,  CalUsto,  Midai,  Ompha^
and  the  robber  Skiion.  Hercnle*  aba,  M  M  u
poara  in  Arialophane*  {Ramae)  and  the  AlcMM
of  Euripides,  was  a  hvourile  subject  of  thit  dtaiaa,
aa  being  no  unfit  companion  (or  a  dninkm  Siienna
and  hia  etow.  (MUller,  295.)  The  Odyaaee  aba,
sayi  Lesiing  (Liten  da  Soplada,  §  1  IS),  was  ia
teneial  a  nch  statrhouae  of  the  Satyrical  pUya  ;
mt  though  the  Cyclops  of  Eiripideo,  the  aoly
lalyrical  play  eitsnt,  waa  taken  friim  it,  the  lict
if  Salyric  piecea  given  by  Weleker  {Naiiibvf,f,
164 — 322)  hardly  eonfitma  this  asacrtion.

tragedy  by  Aeaehylna,  of  which  Aristotle  (ftjet
''.  S  16)  lhuispeaki:~*'llefintaddeda>n«iitl
^toT  and  diminished  the  parts  of  the  ehonu,  and
lade  the  dialogue  the  principal  pact  of  the  action  **
tbr  \iyor  TptrtryttnFiiir  tafrviciiaai}.  Ha
alio  availed  himself  of  the  aid  of  AgnthaRho),  the
ene-painter,  and  imprwfd  the  costnme  of  hia
:ton  by  giving  them  tfaick-aoled  boots  (^pCdrai),
I  well  aa  the  tnaskt,  which  he  made  more  eit*u-
ve  and  cbarectefiitic  Horace  {Ar.  Poet,  -J7S)
lOs  alludei  to  bii  improvements :  --^

"  pcrsonne  pallaei^ae  repertor  honeitae
Aeacbjlui,  el  modicis  initravit  polpita


le  loqui,  niuqiis  cotkon


The  custom  of  contending  with  trilcgiea  (rpiKrjIm),
ir  with  three  playi  at  a  time,  ia  aaid  to  have  beeii
dan  introduced  by  binv  In  fact  he  did  so  muek  ta
Lragedy,  and  ao  completely  bnilt  it  up  to  ita'^tower^
ing  height,''ihat  he  wna  considered  the  Euber  of  it.
The  aubjecti  of  this  drama,  aa  we  have  brtiR  mtk
mated  from  Plutarch,  .were  not  oonneeled  with  lb*
lip  of  Dionyaua  ;  but  rather  with  the  gmt
of  Hellenic  legenda  and  some  of  the  nyiha
<i  the  Homeric  Epoa.  Aocordinglr  ha  nid  of  bin-
aelf  (Athen.  TiiL  p.  347,  e)  that  hi)  drama*  were
bill  wcoft  uid  liq(innt>  {ram  the  gitat  (Mad  of


TRAOOEDIA.
Haner.  Aootlwr  IiutauK*  of  hii  dspultin  torn
the  qorit  ind  fbnn  of  tha  old  tngedf ,  u  einiDeeted
with  DionTnii,  ii  (hown  in  kii  tnatmant  of  tha
IMlhjnmfaic  choim  of  6ttj  men,  which  in  hii  tri-
1m7  of  iha  OnMua  ba  did  not  bring  on  the  liage
■ITm  oate,  hot  diridtd  it  into  lepuBta  puta  mu-
i)^  K  difioent  Nt  of  cbonntMi  for  «ch  of  the  Ihree
pieceiiL  (HDUet,  Smmtmid.)  In  ths  [iltar  put  of
Ilia  lift  Aochjlm  nude  aw  of  one  of  the  impmre-
inente  of  Sopboclei,  namely  the  fptraytn'tirr^Sf  or
third  letor.  Thii  wu  tha  finiiliiag  ilnke  to  tha
dtamatie  element  of  Attio  tragedr,  which  Sophe-
cle*  ii  iud  to  hne  natuied  by  fuither  improTa-

tngtif  appeal*  with  leta  of  anblimily  and  ilem-
neM  tun  in  the  lundfl  of  Aeechylne,  bat  with
more  of  cabn  gnndenr  and  qniet  dignity  and  toach<
ing  incident  Hia  laller  playi  at«  the  perfection
of  the  Greciui  ttagie  dnma,  ■>  >  vi^lc  of  art  utd
poetic  Bompcdtioa  in  ■  thaioDghly  chiiteaed  and
daiaic  alyle,  writUm  whcD  ai  ha  Mtyi  of  hinuelf  he
had  pat  away  Iha  boriah  pomp  of  Aaachylni  (t&t
A}cx^*-"  iiimnuXM  fy(M')i  and  (be  hanh  ob-
■cnrity  of  hia  owD  loo  gnat  refiDcmenta.  and  at-
tained to  ibal  ttyls  which  he  thought  llie  best,
and  moat  luiled  ha  portraying  the  chaiacten  of
men.  (PlaL  ib  Pn.  V.S.  p.79,  b.)  The  intra-
duetioa  of  (be  third  actor  enabled  him  to  do  thii
tbe  more  eflntnally,  by  thowtng  the  principal  cha-
racter OD  diffenrnt  wdea  and  onder  different  dr-
cnmataneei,  both  aa  excited  by  ihe  oppoailion  of
one  and  drawn  out  by  the  i<rm{atbiea  of  uiathET.
[HisTiio,  p.  GIL]  Hence  thongh  the  plaja  of
Sophodca  are  longer  tbao  ihoae  of  Aeachylui,  atill
there  ia  mt  a  eorreapniidii^  incnaae  of  action,  but
a  more  perfect  delineation  of  cbaiactai.  Creon  for
inMance  m  ibe  Anlwime,  and  Ajax  are  more  per-
iM  and  minately  uawB  cbaiacten  than  ray  in
Aeacbylm.  Tbe  part  of  the  chaoa  ia,  on  tha  other
band,  oonaidembty  diminiahed  in  hia  plan.  Ano-
tb<a  diatingaiahinE  ieatnre  in  them  ia  their  moral
wgniScance  and  ethical  teaching.  Though  the  cha-
lactera  in  them  are  taken  &am  the  old  inbjecta  of
■atioiul  intereat,  atill  Ihey  do  not  alwaya  aopear
•a  beroea,  or  aboTa  the  leiel  of  commtm  hi


TRAGOEDIA.


la  and  under  tha  ii


Uvea,  paaaiona,  ai


jB  aa  fiU  to  Ihe
lot  of
aigniae  in  them  aome  likeneaa  of  himaelE."

£d  the  handa  of  Euripidca  Ir^edy  deleriitfated
Dot  only  in  dignity,  but  alao  in  ita  moral  and  reli-
giona  aJgnifcance.  He  introdncea  hia  heroes  in
rag*  and  lattenf  and  boiiee  them  with  petty  a&in,
and  makes  ihem  apeak  the  langnnffe  of  eiety-day
life.  Aa  Sophocles  aud  of  him  <Ariit.  Ptwf.  2S),
he  rapreaented  men  not  aa  they  ought  to  be,  but  m
tbey  are,  without  any  ideal  greatneta  or  poetic
chuacter  —  thoronghly  proiuc  peraonagea.  Hi)
dlalognea  loo  were  little  elae  tban  Ihe  rhetorical
and  forenaic  language  of  hia  day  elereriy  put  into
vene;  full  of  aophiatry  and  qnibhling  distiDctioni.
One  of  the  peculiaritiea  of  hia  tragediea  waa  the
wpi^ryoi,  an  iDtroducloiy  monologue,  with  which
•ome  hen  or  god  opena  ihe  pky.  Idling  who  be
ia,  what  ii  the  atate  of  aflaira,  and  what  hat  hi^>-
pened  up  to  the  time  of  hii  addreai,  io  at  to  pvt
the  audioiGe  in  poaaeeiion  of  erery  lact  which  it
might  be  neccsaary  for  them  to  know:  a  rery
busiDeaa-like  proceeding  no  doubt,  but  a  poor  niake-
ahift  for  artlatical  akilL  The  "  Deus  ei  machina,"
iHto,  ibough  nU  ilwayi^  in  a  "  Dodai^  tali  visdica


no  hmger  diacfaarged  it


11<5
by  Suripidea  tc


jndiced  obaerrera,  or,  "aa  one  of  the  acton,  and  a
part  of  the  whale,"  joining  in  the  dcietopment  of
the  piec&  Many  of  hia  choral  odea  in  fact  are
bnl  remotely  connected  in  anbject  with  the  sctiuo
of  the  play.  Another  novelly  of  Euripides  waa  tb*
use  cf  the  "  mouodies  "  or  lyrical  aonga,  in  which
not  the  ehoniB,  but  the  i^cipel  peraong  of  the
drama,  declare  their  emotiona  and  aufieringt.  They
were  amongst  the  moal  brilliant  parte  of  bis  pieces,
and  being  aong  by  peraona  on  the  alage,  are  aome-
described  aa  tfik^  ^'  irinp^t.  (Phot.  Ler,
Ariatophanea  often  parodied  (hem,  and
nukea  Enripidea  ny  of  hinuelf  (Araac,  914),  that
he  "  nurtured  tragedy  with  monodiei,  inlrodudng
Cepbiaopbon  **  hia  cluef  actor,  ti>  aing  them.
ETt'  inirpt^tir  ^un^Iut,  Kli^iSQf&rra  luyris.

Enripidea  waa  alao  the  inTentor  of  tragi-comedy,
which  not  improbably  suggested,  aa  it  certainly
reaemUed,  the  'Ujiporpcrnijui  of  the  Alexandrian
age,  the  latter  being  a  half-tiagie,  half-comic  drama,

rather  a  parody  or  travesty  of  tragical  aubjecta.

apeamen  of  the  Eoripidean  tragi-comedy  i*  aliU

tant  in  the  Alcettii,  acted  b.  c.  43S,  aa  the  last
of  four  piecea,  and  therefore  at  a  aubatitute  for  a
Satyrioil  drama.  Thongh  tragic  in  ita  form  and
some  of  ita  acenes,  it  haa  a  mixture  of  comic  and
aatyrio  chaiacten  (a.  g,  Hereulea)  and  condndea


hwpily.


make  araae  remad:a  on  tha  oatura
and  abject  of  Greek  tragedy  in  general,  and  on
the  puta  into  which  il  <rai  diiidcd.  According
Plato  {Lig.  Tii.  p.  817)  the  tmett  tragedy  ia  aa
itation  of  the  noblcat  and  beat  liFe :  iiiiaura
V  aUivTov  (bI  ^liTTou  ^Du.  Ariatolle'a  de>
fiuition  il  more  camprebeniiTe  and  perhaps  perfect.
"  Tn^y  il  an  imilatirai  of  ra  action  that  is  im-
ponant  (nrsvSoiai),  and  entire,  and  of  a  proper
magnitnde,  in  pleaaunble  language,  by  nusna  of
Bctian,  not  of  narration,  and  eating  through  ttr-
mr  and  ;Hty  the  rehnement  and  correction  of  such
paauons '^  (tI^i' TDioiW'ivv  vo^^Tvr  tr^apcrjr).  Ha
then  adds.  Tragedy  coiitaina  aii  parte :  the  story,
'  '  the  combiiistion  of  incidents  or  plot,  manners,
expresiion,  lentiment,  decoration,  and  muaic  (^vftii
jnl  tfirt,  Kol  A^>i,  lol  tiinia,  Hal  i^n,  Kol  fu\»-
»oitii).  Of  thwo  the  aloiy  is  the  principd  part,
developing  the  character  of  agents,  and  being  in
£ul  tha  very  loul  of  tragedy.  Tbe  manneia  coma
next,  and  manifest  the  disposition  of  tho  spcaken.
The  aentimenta  take  the  third  place,  and  compre-
hend whateier  ia  ttud,  whether  proring  uylhing^
or  eipreaaing  aome  general  reflection.  Aftfl-warda
he  adda,  Fableg  are  of  two  aorta,  simple  and  com-
plicated (d1  >i)v  kwKu.  ol  It  M\ry«iJn>Oi  the
cataatcophe  of  tbe  former  pnduced  without  a  reio-
InUoa  or  discoTcry,  of  the  latter  with  one  or  both.
Now  a  rerolulian  (irtpiT^sia)  ia  a  change  to  tbe
rererae  of  what  is  expected  bam  tbe  cireumalances
of  tbe  action:  adiicoverj  (itntynifiKrii)  is  n  change
&am  known  or  unkmtwn,  happening  between  cha-
iacten whoae  bappinen  or  nnhappineu  forms  the
cBOatropha  of  tbe  dnima.  The  best  sort  of  dis-
covery is  accompanied  by  a  lerolution,  as  in  Iha
Oedipus.  Aristotle  next  enumeinlet  the  parts  of
ipuaiitil  (sotJi  t^  vixrbt)  or  diiision  in  tragedy :
these  wtt,  tha  ptolone,  epiMde,  axoda^  and  choral


lUG  TRAQOEDIA.

■ongi ;  tba  lut  diiided  inU  the  psnide  Mid  (tui-
mm.  The  wfiXirtm  ii  ill  that  part  of  m  tngedj
irbich  precede!  (he  pBTodoi  of  lbs  dwrui,  l  a.  the
fint  act.  The  iw*uri6ar  ia  nil  tbe  port  between
wtiole  choni  ode*.  The  (fotai  that  put  which
bai  no  chomi  eda  after  it  Of  the  eheial  part  the
wdpstoi  ii  tbe  firet  >pe«cb  of  the  whole  chonii  (not
bralcen  np  into  pait*):  the  (tuimon  ii  irithont
anapaeiU  and  trochee*.  Theaa  two  diiitioni  were
■ung  b;  all  the  eboreutae  [khoA  knimai),  bnt
the  "  »ngi  on  Ihe  tOm  "  and  the  ximiai  bj  a
part  only  (Ria  S)  ri  iri  Wti  aKitrtis  (al  kJfi^i}.
The  eommui,  wbich  prapeilj  meaiu  a  wuling  tbr
the  dead,  wai  genetallf  naed  to  exprea  Btcong


etpedall]'  by  Aeechy


..(TO


derivative  m^i^iorurd  it  need  to  dcaignatc
broken  uid  inteirnptad  taogi  aong  eilhei  by  indi-
vidual cbonutae  or  diiiiiona  of  the  chonu.  (MUl-
ler,  Emaiat.  p.  84.)  Again  the  rtipalcK  wai  lo
uraed  ai  being  the  paMage.«ing  of  the  choiui
iung  while  it  wu  advancing  to  ita  proper  place  in
the  oicheatn,  and  therefore  in  aaapaeatic  oc  manb-
ing  vene :  the  vriai^r,  ai  being  chaimted  b;  the
chorni  when  Mandh^  ilill  in  iti  pnper  pouCiDn.
{Smd.  and  Etfm.  Mag%.)

With  nepect  to  the  endi  or  ptupaeei  of  Tragedy,
Ariitotle  obeervea  that  thev  ara  beet  effected  bj
the  repreeentaticm  of  a  cbanga  of  fortune  from
pnxpenty  to  advetntf,  hqipening  to  a  penon
neither  eminently  virtnoiu  nor  juit,  nor  yet  in-
volved in  miifortune  by  deliberale  vine  or  yillany,
but  by  »me  error  of  homan  Irailty,  and  that  be
ihonld  tiio  be  a  penon  of  high  fame  and  emkent
proiperily,  like  Oedipns  or  Thyeatei.  Hence,  be
addi,  Euripidee  ii  net  cenmrable,  u  ii  generally
BUppoeed  ;  for  tragediee  with  an  unhappy  termina-
tion like  his,  have  alwaya  the  iiiiiit  tiK^  effect ;
and  Euripidei  ia  the  nuul  Uagic  of  all  poete,  i.  e.
niccced)  beiC  in  producing  pity :  an  oiprenkm
stpecially  true  of  nme  Kenea  in  the  Hedea.  In
A«chylui,  the  feeluig*  of  pity  and  melancholy
intereit  are  generally  excited  by  the  relatian  in
which  bit  beroet  itand  to  deatiny.  He  moilly
repreienM  them  at  vainly  itruggling  against  a
blind  but  irreeifttible  &1e,  to  whoee  power  (ac-
cording to  the  old  Homeric  notion)  even  the  father
of  god*  and  Dien  is  Ibiced  to  yield,  and  it  ii  only
occaiionally,  a*  in  the  aplendid  chomt  of  (he  Eume-
nidea  (£S3),  thai  we  trace  in  him  any  intimationi
of  a  moml  and  retributive  government  of  thoworid.
Hence  there  i*  a  want  of  moral  lenona  in  hu
worlu.  In  Sophodea,  on  tbe  contraiy,  we  see
indications  of  a  different  tone  of  thought,  and  the
■operintendence  of  a  directing  and  eontrolUng
power  ii  distinctly  recognized :  "  the  grF«t  Zeus
In  heaven,  whoBupermlends  and  direct*  all  things,"
{Blatr.  174;TbirlWBll,PjU[.  AfM.  vol.iLp.492.)

The  material)  of  Oreek  tngedy  were  the  national
mythology,

"  Preaenting  Thebes,  or  Pelope*  line,
Or  the  tale  of  Troy  divine."
The  exceptims  to  Ihia  were  tbe  two  hiatorieal
tragediei,  the  "  Capture  of  Miietos,"  by  Phryni-
ehna,  and  the  "  Peniana  "  of  Aeschyloj ;  but  they
belong  to  an  eariy  period  of  the  art.  Hence  the
plot  and  story  of  the  Orecian  tragedy  were  of
vae^MuXj  koown  to  tbe  ipecttlco,  a  diconjtaDce


TRAOOEDIA.
which  itnmriy  diitingniahes  tbe  andent  tiagedy
from  tbe  mcdem,  and  to  which  ii  owing  in  aene
meaaure  the  practical  and  quiet  irony  ia  the  hand-
ling of  a  tnbject,  dewribed  by  Thirlwall  {PUL
Mat.  ii.  p.  483,  Ac}  aa  a  chaiacleii*tk  of  ib
tra^y  of  Sf^hoclea.

The  innclton*  of  the  Chams  m  Qreek  Tngedy
were  very  important,  at  dsaoibed  by  Huboo  (Jr.
Pixt.  13S),


Dnat  conceive  of  it,  ^t  A.  W.  Sdtlcgd,  a«
the  penonification  of  the  thought  inq^zed  by  tW
repjesested  action  ;  in  other  wnds,  it  ohea  ex-
preoet  the  reflections  of  a  diapaasioDate  and  right-
minded  apectator,  and  incnlcalea  the  leatons  of  loo-
rality  and  resignatloD  to  the  will  of  hearoi,  taught
by  the  oecurreDca  of  the  piece  in  which  it  is  en-
gaged. Beaide*  this,  the  chonu  enabled  a  poet  to
prwlntB  an  inuqe  of  the  "  council  of  cJdees,"  whicfc
exiited  under  Ihe  heroic  goremmenta,  aod  imdtr

I  advice  and  tn  whoao  pretrace  the  andent
Kineet  of  the  Greek  tragedy  genendly  acted.
Thi*  inuge  wa*  the  more  striking  aad  vivid,  ime

as  the  chonu  was  taken  fiina  the  I>e<fle  al
]*ijie,  and  did  not  at  all  difla  ban  the  a|>p«amBcc
i  itature  of  ordinary  men  ;  ao  that  tbe  coHnrt
relation  between  them  and  the  acton  waa  the
tame  aa  that  of  the  HDmeric  Aoni  and  ltnicT*i.
Lutly,  the  choral  aong*  produced  an  agreezblc
pauee  in  the  action,  breaking  the  piece  into  parts,
while they  pretented to (he tpeetata-  a  lyrical

suggeated  to  him  lofty  thoi^ts  and  great  aigu-
menti.  As  Schlegel  Hya,  the  ehonia  waa  tba
tpedator  idealised.  With  reaped  to  the  Ertuaber
of  the  chorus,  MUller  (Zi'l.  ijf  Gmee,  300)  thinks
ml  of  the  dithyrambic  chorus  of  fiO  a  qoad-
nmgular  chorus  of  4B  penoiia  was  firtt  fbnDed,
and  that  tbit  wa*  divided  into  aed  of  12,  osw  for
each  play  of  a  tetrakM  ;  but  in  the  time  of  So-
phodet,  the  tragic  chorus  aioonaled  to  15,  ■
number  which  the  ancient  grammariaiis  atwara
presuppose  in  apeaking  of  its  anangeiiKDtB,  though
it  might  be  that  the  form  of  the  Aeacbylcaa  tra-
gedy afterwards  became  obaolete.
The  preceding  account  thoflld  be  nad  in  cctmev-
n  Willi  the  article*  Chorc^  Diontbu,  Higtro^
and  TniATntrK.

e  eiplanalion  of  the  fellowiag  phnaM  nay
bo  uteful.

IIafMXDf4TV)u:  thi*  word  was  oted  in  caaeef
I  fourth  actor  appearing  oo  the  itage  ;  probaUy
lecauBo  the  choragu*  wat  required  lo  ba  at  aa
ttra  f  iperue  in  lupplying  him  with  natmne,  ftc.;
ometimes  acton  so  called  apoke,  aa  the  ehaiacCer
if  Pyladet  dola  (AoKrh.  Ou)^  900—902);
lometime*  they  were  muteL

TlapoBrilruH' :  this  phnae  wa*  vtti  when  one
of  the  choreutae  sp<^  in  aong,  inattwl  of  a  fboith
actor,  probably  near  or  behind  the  aidn  a<iiaa
llBfiirysfi^pira  were  (oicea  off  the  stage,  and  Ml
teen,  aa  the  froga  in  the  Ranaa.  (PoUoz,  iv.  109 ;
Scbo].  ut  ArU^  Paa  113.)

Ili^xixopt^i'i'a,  parton*  who  came  fcrward  bat
once,  aomething  like  the  rp6tnr*u  ayararendl,  cr
introdaetory  peraoru  wbo  open  a  drama  and  arrtr
Appear  again ;  aa  the  watchman  In  tin  Aftanif
Don,  and  Pelydonu  in  the  Uecaba.  Taaoca  alaa
■ ,■■■ . , --- -  ^^--


TRAOOEDIA.

■  the  penonit  prottUioi.  {Dmut.
Te^.  Pnltg.  ad  Aimir.)

Tbe  (ix'f''  *>■  *  donUe  chonu,  fonnnl  of  thi
chontM*  <^  two  Kpanle  f1>T*  '  ^i"  ■'  tbe  md
of  ths  EonMoidti  of  AckBjIiu  the  Foriei  of  one
play  and  the  IciIbI  tnin  of  another  come  on  the
■tif^  together.  (UUIler,  ItUraL  ic.  p.  300.)

The  principal  modem  vriten  oa  the  Greek
Tngedj  are  men^oned  in  the  emote  of  the  article.
The  nder  mBj-  alio  ammlt  Wachmiuth,  vol,  ii.
pLiLpp.467, 121;  Qtuf^AriadiK,Diil\'agiiclia
Xmul  itr  AienUa  n  iimr  EtOaihtbrng  ud  in


1B3<;  Afsnm  CViriMm,  toL  ii.  p.  G9,  &c  i  Cop-
.ieoe;  Schneider,  Ut^fT
in  eiceedingi  J  nlnafala


2.  Roxan.  Tlie  tragedy  of  the  Romiai  waa,
ibr  the  nunt  put,  an  imitation  of;  at  rather  a  bat-
rowing  from,  the  Greek,  the  more  imperfect  and
mna^nJ,  m  the  conibuction  of  the  RoDum
theatre  aSoided  no  appropriate  place  for  tbe
chonu,  which  waa  tberefDie  obliged  to  appear  on
tbe  ati^  initead  of  in  the  orchestra.  Tbe  fint
tiagicpoetB]idacloratRome(Oe!liD>,ixi.  17)  wsi
Iiiiiiu  Andnmicu,  a  Greek  b;  birth,  who  began
to  eibihil  in  &  a  240,  From  the  acconnt  in
llrj  (tIL  2),  it  would  aaem  that  in  bit  monodiei
(or  the  ijrical  parta  long,  not  \rj  a  eboms,  but  bj
one  penon),  il  mu  etutomarj  to  lepamte  the  ling-
iiw  from  the  mimttie  dancing,  leaTing  the  latter
ODljr  to  the  actor,  white  the  linging  wai  performed
by  a  boj  placed  near  the  fiutc-player  (oate  (ilt-
CIMm)  i  n  that  the  diah)gue  only  ((fteeriia)  wai
left  to  ba  ipoken  by  tbe  actoia.  One  of  the  plavi
written  by  him  wu  an  "Andromeda  ;"  and  he
alao  made  a  Latin  praxi  tranalalion  of  the  Odywee.
Tbe  next  tragic  poet  at  Rome  wai  Naeriug,  wbo
boweim  a;^cart  to  ha™  wtillin  comcdifi  ai  well
■■  tngpdiei  (Hinon.  n  EtuA.  &ymp,  U4.  3),
and  a  hittoiy  of  the  fint  Punic  war :  io  that  the
writing  of  tnigediea  wai  not  a  diitinet  [sofeMion
■t  Bmne,  aa  at  Athena.  An  "  Alcealii  "  Menu  to
haTC  been  written  by  bim.  To  the  nme  ^och  ai
Liiiiu  Andrcnicna,  and  Nacriiu,  belong!  Ennina,
who  reaambled  the  tatter  in  being  an  epic  poet  u
well  aa  a  tiagedian.  Amonnt  the  playi  Yfrilten
by  him  an  mentioned,  a  Medea,  an  Ajai,  a
PhoenliBe,  an  Iphigenia,  an  Andromache,  and  a
Hecuba.  The  metre  med  by  him  and  Naeiiiu
wai  iambic  or  Irocbtdo  in  tbe  dialogne,  and  ana-
paeatic  (or  the  Ijrical  parti.  (OeUiu*,ii  4.)  Tbe
next  diitingvithcd  tiagedian  waa  PacuTioi,  a
nephew  uf  JKnnina,  and  a  painlei  alio.  Hii  ityle
wsi  mote  tomaiknhle  for  ipiiil  and  yigoor  of  ei-
pnMi<^  than  poliib  or  refinement,  a  defjciency
attributable  to  hii  ago  and  provincial  origin,  a>  be
waa  bora  at  Bnindiiium.  Among  hi>  plap  occtu
an  Aniiope,  a  Chryiei.  and  a  Dulortitei  (Qaintil.
X-  1  ;  Cicero,  Otii.  iiL  39),  and  hia  ttagtdiei
fbnnd  admiren  eroi  in  tbe  time  of  Pcrnni  (i.
77).  Cicen  (1.  e.)  qootn  from  bim  a  apiritad
tianalation  of  tbe  concluding  linei  of  tho  Ftome-
theui  Vinctnt  of  Aetehylui.  Altina  or  Aedua
the  younger  waj  junior  to  PrcutIui  by  about  fifty
yeaia.  Hii  earlier  playe  were,  ■■  he  himtelf  ad-
mitted, hanh  and  obtcure  (GeUiui,  xiiL  3) ;  bnt
hia  (lyle  probably  altered  nntb  increaaing  yean.
Many  fiagmcnti  of  hia  playa  occur  in  Cicero  and
the  Lalin  granunariona,  Diomcdea,  Noniu,  and
Vaira lie  wai  alao  a  miter  of  aDnali  in  \


TRAOOEDIA.  1H7

meterirette*.  (Macreb. .Sat L 7.)  TheGnpoefi
mentimed  abora  belong  to  tbe  earlier  epocb  of
Reman  tragedy,  in  which  little  wai  written  but
tranilaliona  and  imitationi  of  the  Qieeh,  with  oo-
eaaional  inieitioni  of  original  nutter.  How  they
imitated  the  attoctare  of  the  choral  odei  is  daubt-
fal,  perhi^  tbey  nercr  attempted  it.  Ennina,
PscuTina,  and  Accina  are  contruted  by  Cicera
{d»  Orat.  iiL  7),  with  AeKbyiua,  Sophoclei,  and
Euripide* ;  and  of  tbe  two  lut  Qointilian  (i.  1.
g  97)  laya,  "  Virinm  Actio  pin.  tribnitnr  ;  Paeu-
vimn  Tideri  doetiorem,  qui  eiae  docti  affectant.

In  the  age  oF  Auguitni  tbe  writing  of  Itagedie^
whether  origiiiBt  or  imitaliona,  aeenu  to  baTc  been
qnite  a  bibionable  occupation.  The  emperor  him-
Hir  attempted  an  Ajai,  bat  did  not  lueoeed  }  and
when  hia  ftienda  naked  him,  ^  Qnidnam  Ajai
agctet  ?"  hii  reply  wai"  Ajacemaunm  in  ipongiam
incubnitte."  (3neL  Atg.  Sfi.)  One  of  the  prin-
cipal tiagediani  of  Ihii  epoch  waa  Aiiniui  Pollio,
to  whom  tbe  line  (Virg.  Edog.  riiL  10)

Sola  Sophocleo  toa  caimina  digna  cothurTia,"
nppoied  to  apply:  he  alio  excelled  in  other
literaryacGompliibmcnti.  <H0r.aim.ii.l.)  Ovid
(Jritt.  ii.  £56)  alao  wiola  a  trwedr,  ef  which
Quintilian  (i.  I.  g  9B)  lajt,  "Ondii  Medea  ri-
detor  mibi  oatendere,  qmmtum  ille  *ir  praeilnra
potuerit  ai  inoenio  bud  lempenre  qnam  indulgcra

liii.)  between  Ajai  and  Ulyiiei,  an  which  Pacu-
Tina  and  Acciui  alio  wrote  dramai,  ptoyei  that
be  might  baTe  rivalled  Euripidei  in  rhetorical
ikill.  Qaintilian  alio  hji  of  Variui,  who  waa
diitingniihed  in  epic  ai  well  ai  tragic  poetry  (Hor.
Carm.  i.  6,  At.  PoeL  SB ;  Tadt.  DtoL  liL  1),  that
bii  Tbyolei  might  be  compared  with  any  of  the
Orcck  nagediei.  Some  fregmenta  of  this  Thyatci
are  extant,  bot  we  bare  no  other  remuna  of  the
tragedy  of  tbe  Augustan  age.  The  lou  perhapa  ti
not  gtL-at ;  for  tho  want  of  a  national  and  mdi-
genoua  mythology  mnit  have  diiabled  the  Koman^
poeta  from  producing  any  original  counlerparta  of
the  Greek  tragedy ;  beiidei  whicb,  in  the  Liter
daya  of  the  republic,  and  under  the  empire,  the
Roman  people  were  too  fond  of  gladiatorid  ihowi,
and  bcaat.ngbta,  and  gorgeoua  tpectaclei,  to  en-
coDrago  tbe  drama.  Moreover,  it  ii  alio  manifcit
that  a  tragedy  like  Ibat  of  the  Greeks  could  not
haTo  Eouriibed  under  a  detpotiim.

Tbe  only  complete  Roman  tnigediea  that  have
come  down  to  n*  are  the  ten  attributed  to  the
philowpher  Seneea.  But  whether  he  wrote  any
of  them  or  not  ii  a  diipnted  point.  It  ia  agreed
that  they  ara  not  all  from  the  larao  hand,  and  it
ti  doubtful  whether  they  ore  all  of  the  aame  age
even.  In  one  of  them,  tbe  Medea,  tbe  aulbCT
made  hii  heroine  kill  her  children  on  tbe  itage,
"  coram  popolo,"  in  a[Hte  of  the  precept  of  Horace.
Schl^  (Lect.  viii.)  thoa  tpakt  of  them:  "To
whatever  age  tbey  belong,  tbey  are  beyond  if-
■cription  bombaatic  and  frigid,  utterly  unnatural  in
charaeter  and  action,  and  full  of  the  moit  revolting
vtolnticmi  of  propriety,  and  barren  of  all  (beatrioJ
Wilb  the  old  Grecian  tr " ' '


effect With  the  old  Grecian  tragediea  they  have

form,  and  the  matter.  Their  peraoni  are  neither
idea]  nor  real  men,  but  miubapcn  gianta  of  pup-
pela,  and  the  wire  that  morei  them  ii  at  one  lime
«o  oimalnnU  bMOt|Hii,..at  aiio^tr,  n.^awsi  nUk«


me  TBIBULA.

imiuttnn],  wbich  no  atrocitj  of  gailt  taa  4ppal."
Slill  they  hnva  bad  adniirari ;  Heiiuini  ealli  the
Hippolytui  "  divine,"  uiil  prcfei*  the  Tiwidee  lo
the  Hecuba  of  Earipidea :  eren  RBciiie  hu  bar-
roved  from  tlie  HippoljtDi  ia  hia  PhrdiE.

Ronuji  ti^ediaiu  Bomelimet  wrote  tngedie*
en  Kibjecta  taken  from  their  nUional  hiatoiy.
Pacnviui,  e.  g.  wrote  >  PaJia,  L.  Acciui  ■  findu
and  ■  Deal.  (Cie.  dtDn.l  32.)  CnriMini  Mi-
temiu,  bIh)  b  dininnuahed  ontor  in  the  reign  of
Domitiui,  wiDte  a  Domitina  end  a  Cato,  the  l&tter
of  whicii  gaie  oileius  to  the  mien  of  the  itale
(poAnft'an  iHMKlt  i^imdii,  TaciL  Dud.  2  ;  Lug.
FmJ.  Tng.  Rimaa.  p.  It).  The  (isgmenti  of  tha
Thyeatei  of  Variu*  an  gixen  by  Bothiiu,  Pott
SoBi.  LoL  Frag.  p.  273.  [R-  W.]

TRA'OULA. [HiSTi,  p.  S89,  ■.]
TRANSA'CTIO  IN  VIA. [Actio,  p.  1 1,  a.]
TRA'NSFUGA. fDiButron.]
TRANSTRA. [N*vis,  p.7a8,«.J
TRANSVE'CTIO  E'QUITUM. [EamTia.]
TRAUMATOS  EK  PR0N01A8  GRAPHE
(Tpai/«trw  iK  upanlia  fpi^). Our  principal
infonnitioQ  mpecting  thii  action  ti  dcriTed  fram
two  (peechea  of  Ljaiat,  namely,  spkt  SlfuiH  uid
npl  Tfaiiumt  it  wponlot,  ihongh  they  do  not
npplf  ua  with  many  panicnlara. It  app«rt,
IioweTer,  that  thii  action  could  not  be  bronght  by
amf  peraon  who  had  been  wounded  or  naaolled
br  another,  bnt  that  it  w>*  neceasuy  to  prore  that
tnen  had  been  an  intention  to  mnrder  the  parion
who  had  been  wonoded  ;  conteqoently  the  rpirota
coDiiited  in  aoch  an  intautiDn. Caaea  of  iLia  kind
were  bnmght  befbra  the  Aieiopagiu :  if  the  ac-
cuaed  waa  found  gnilty,  he  waa  exiled  from  the
■tate  and  hia  pniprTty  conGicaled.  (Compare  Dem.
c  Ariitoa:  627,  22,  a.  BotoL  lOlB.  9,  Aewh.  da
Fall.  leg.  270,  0.  Oat.  <40,  608  ;  Lyi.  <i.  Andoc
p.  212  ; Lmdan, Timai,  46  t PoUnz,  viii. 10  ;
Keia,  Att.  PTve.f.Z\i.)
TRESSISl [Afl,p.  Ul,«.]
TRESVIRI. [Tbiukvibi.]
TRIA'RIL [ExBitciTUB,pp.49£-497,  £01,
v.]

TRl'BULA  or  TRI'BULUM  (TpiWXot),  a
eorn-dras,  conaiating  of  a  thick  md  poDdemu
wooden  board,  wtaich  waa  aimed  nndemeath  with
jnecei  of  iron  or  ihaip  flinla  and  diawn  otct  the
com  by  a  yoke  of  oxen,  either  the  driver  or  a  heavy
weight  being  placed  upon  it,  for  the  pnipoae  of  ae-
pnrB^ng  the  gmin  and  cutting  the  atcaw.  (Tairo,
d*  Re  Rnt.  i.  62;  Ovid.  Met.  liii.  S03  ;  Flin.  H.
N.  iviii.  30  1  Longna,  iii.  32  ;  Bnmck,  Awd.  ii.
215  ;  Amoi,  I  B.)  Together  with  the  fKMa  an-
other kind  of  dra!^,  called  tralia,  waa  alto  anne-
timea  used,  which  it  ia  piobabie  waa  either  entirely
of  atone  or  made  of  the  trunk  of  a  tree.  (Virg.
Georg-l  164  ;  Serrina,  ad  Zo«.  ;  CcA.  dt  Re  Ruit.
il21.)  Theaoinitmmenta  are  (till  need  in  Oince,
Aaia  Minor,  Georgia,  and  Syria,  and  are  deacribed
by  variona  tiatellen  in  thoae  comilriea,  bat  more
eapecially  by  Panl  Lnou  (rpyi^a,  vol.  L  p.183).
Sir  B.  K.  Porter  (7Vat>Bb,va1.i  p.  lGa),JickaOD
iJoams  firm  ImO^i,  p.  249),  and  C.  FeUoin,
(./<wnHl,tffi.T0,333).  The  com  ia  thceihed  upon
a  circular  door  (am,  I\tir),  either  paved,  made
of  hardened  day,  or  of  the  natural  rock.  Iciafinl
biaped  in  the  centre,  and  a  penon  ia  conalantly
occupied  In  throwing  the  iheavea  nnder  the  drag
aa  the  oxen  draw  it  round.  Lucaa  and  Fellowa
hare  given  pnnli  lapnKDting  the  tribnla  at  now


TRIBUmTS.
theEait Tha>nb(riUarr(0*to,AA
RtaL  23) ,  and  the  verbal  nonn  triMatia  woe  ap-
plied in  a  aecondaiy  ienae  to  denote  affliojon  in
generaL  [  J- ^  I

TRt'BULUS  (rpffoiUii),  a  callnp,  als>  ailed
»n  (VaLMax.iiL7.  g3;  Cnit  iv.  1 1  5  36.)
When  a  place  waa  beael  with  tr


endeavoored  to  impede  the  cavalry  ef  the  other
party  either  by  throwing  before  tlisn  taloifia,
whicli  Tiarreearilj  lay  widi  one  of  their  four  ahaip
point!  turned  npwiirda,  or  by  boiyiiu  tbe  ol-
UDpa  with  one  point  at  the  tni^oe  i  the  gnaad.
(Vfget.  lie  Aa  itr^  iii.  24;  Jnl.AMe.  69,  i^l  FA


MatL  Gnm.  p.  311.)  The  annexed  wh^cuI  ii
taken  from  a  bnnio  caltrop  figured  by  Caylaa
(ffeewtf,  iv.  pL  98).  [J.  T.J

TRIBU'NAL  (iSqiw),  a  railed  platfinm,  or,  ta
nia  the  term  adopted  bwx  the  French,  tnbiine,  en
which  tbe  praetor  and  jndicca  aat  in  the  BauISea.
It  ia  deacribed  under  Basilica  (p.  199).

There  ma  a  tribunal  in  the  camp,  which  wa*
geneislly  formed  tt  tur^  bnt  •ometimei,  in  a  ata-
tionaiy  camp,  of  itcse,  finm  which  the  gncral
addieaaed  the  aoldiera,  and  wfaer^  the  coD^nl  and
tribnnea  of  the  aoldien  adminifltered  juatice.
When  the  general  addreeaed  the  army  from  the


;ofit.


tribuiul,  the  ataudaida  irere  planted  in  frnot  of
and  the  anny  placed  round  it  in  order. The  ■
dreaaitaelf  wa*  oiled  .lOonCia.  (Pint.  Aui^  41;
LipuDi,  da  AfUil.  Aoat.  iv.  9  ;  Castiu.)

A  trilranal  waa  iconetiinei  erected  in  hooanr  of  a

deocaaed  iraperator,  ai,  for  example,  the  one  lued

to  tbe  memory  of  Germanicua.  (TaeiL^iDnl.ii.83.)

Pliny  (H.  N.  xn.  1)  appliei  the  term  to  no-

bankmenta  againat  the  aea.  (f-B-J

TRIBUlfUS,  Thia  wwd  aeemi  originally  ta
have  indicated  an  officer  connected  with  a  tribe
(IrSmi),  or  who  reuteaented  a  tribe  for  certain  pur-
poaea ;  and  thii  u  indeed  the  character  of  lb*
officen  who  were  designated  by  it  m  ibe  cariiraC
timea  of  Rome,  and  may  be  traced  also  in  the  later
officers  of  thia  nanw.  We  nibjoin  an  accnial  at
att  the  Roman  officer)  known  midcr  thii  Bane.

1.  TntBrms  ar  THa  TBKBi  ANcnnr  ntnxs.
At  the  time  when  all  the  Rotaaa  eitiKni  wen
contained  in  the  three  tribe*  of  the  Ramnea,  Titin,
and  Lnceiei,  each  of  them  wa*  beaded  by  a  tribane
(^ii^^Bi,  Dionyi.  ii.  7;  Dig.  1.  tit.  3. 1.2.  {SO;
ScfT.  ad  Av^  T.  560),  and  theae  three  tribrnxa
repreaenled  their  napeclire  tribca  in  all  civil,  irli-
gicaia,  and  militniy  aSkin  i  that  ii  ta  tay,  ilwy


TRIBUNUSL
wm  in  t1ie  citytbe  DMgUtntaarthdTtnbti,  md

pTrfnrmed  the  laen  on  Uieir  b«lial^  and  in  timet
of  war  thej  were  their  milituy  wmmanden-  {lAf.
i.  JI9;  DionjL  il  Bt ;  Vam,  dt  Lag.  Lai.  T.  al.)
Ntebnhr  {Hi^  cf  Rom,  L  p.  831)  lanpoKS  that
the  (nhuiu  ederum  wu  tlia  tribmu  oF  the  Ramnei,
the  otdnt  mid  noble«  amonf;  the  three  tribe*,  and
in  Ihii  opinion  he  Si  followed  by  Oiniling  (CoeL
d.  Kim.  Slaalmrf,  p.  US),  thengh  it  ia  in  direct
rontradiction  to  Dionyiiut  (il  13)  and  Poniponiu*
{dd  OHg.  Jrr.  Dig.  1.  ciE.  i.t.2.  i  15),  arceiding
le  whom  the  tribnnni  celenun  wai  the  eammander
af  the  ctlmi,  the  kin|;'i  bodv-guard,  a  itatement
which  u  rejected  hj  Niebuhi  vithont  hii  heing
nippoited  hy  anj  ancient  anthorily,  except  that
Diooyiini  in  one  paHBge  (iL  61)  Tavuelj  ipcaki
«f  tiibuni  cslctnm  in  the  plural.  Thai  hovever
(be  trihanni  c«lemm  wai  really  diatinci  frein  the
three  tribnnn  of  the  tribei,  ii  aeknowled^  hy
Niebuhr  bImMlf  in  a  aabaequent  part  of  hii  vo^
(iiL  p.  41).  In  what  maruier  the  tribanni  celenun
WW  appointed  ia  nneertain,  bal  notwilhtlandii^
the  itatement  of  Dianyiiu,  thai  Tarqmuiiu  Sa-
perbna  gave  thia  office  la  L.  Janiiu  Brutoi,  it  ii
mnch  more  probable  thai  ho  *aa  elected  by  ibe
Iribet  or  curiae ;  for  ve  find  that  when  the  im-
perium  wai  to  ha  confened  apan  the  king,  the
comitia  wm  held  under  the  prnJdency  of  the  tri-
bunui  celenun,  and  in  d>a  abeence  of  the  king,  to
whom  thia  officer  waa  neit  in  rank,  he  conidted
tha  comilia :  it  vat  in  an  aaiembly  of  thii  kind
that  Bninu  propoaed  to  depriie  Tarqniniui  of  the
impcrinm.  U-it.  i.  £9.)  A  law  paHed  andei  the
preiideney  i^  the  Iribuuoi  celenim  waa  called  a
tc*  Jnfaniiaa,  to  diilinguiih  it  from  ene  paieed
under  the  pnsidency  of  the  king.  [Lbx  Rioia.]
The  trihunea  of  the  three  ancitnt  tribea  eeaaed  to


li  bodiei,  and  when  the  patiiciaua
became  incorporated  in  the  local  tribea  t^  Serrini
Tullina. [Trtbds  (Roh.ih).]

S.  THiBiiNBg  or  ma  SanViAN  tribm.  When
Servioa  TuUioi  diiidMl  the  conunonalty  into  thirty
local  tribea,  we  again  find  that  at  the  head  of  each
of  iheee  tribea  there  waaa  tribune,  whom  Dionyaini
oalli  ^itiOpxBs,  like  thoee  of  the  patrician  tribea.
{Dianya.iT.  U.)  He mentiona ihcm only  in  connec-
tion with  the  city  tribci,  but  there  out  be  no  doubt
that  each  of  the  ruatic  tribea  waa  likewiae  headed
by  a  trihnns.  The  dutiea  of  thtae  trihunis,  who
were  withoat  doubt  the  moat  dialinguiahed  per-
anu  in  their  reipectiTa  diitrieta,  appear  to  hare
:_<_j  ^*  c.**  ,jj  keeping  '*  — -:-»—  »'  »i—  i-*-


fi»  the  anniea.  When  nbaequently  tht
people  became  eiempled  from  taiei.  tia  main  |iait
of  thdr  bnaineii  wai  taken  from  them,  but  they
Mill  inntinued  to  eiiiL  Niebnhr  (I  p.  431)  aup-
poaea  that  the  tritmii  arrarii,  who  occur  down  to
the  end  of  the  republic,  were  only  the  incceiaon  of
the  trihunea  of  the  tribea.  Vam  (dt  Ling.  Lai.
TL  86)  apeaka  of  eumfom  omnium  tnbwm,  a  name
bj  wbieli  ho  probably  meana  the  Iribunci  of  the
tribea.  When  in  the  y«r  406  B.C.  the  ctutom
nf  cinng  pay  {itiptadiitBi)  lo  the  aoldiert  wu  in-
trodncedt  each  of  the  tribuni  acrarii  had  to  collect
the  tributom  in  hii  own  tribe,  and  with  it  to  pay
the  aoldieia  (Vam.  ds  Ling.  Lot.  T.  IBl ),  and  in
caae  they  did  not  folfil  thia  duly,  the  nldien  had
tfca  right  ef  pgaatit  c^o  agnmat  than, (Cat^


TRIBUNUS:  1141

op.  GeB.  nL  10.)  In  Ular  tinM  thdr  dntiee  ap>
pear  to  hare  been  confined  to  eollectin(  the  tribu-
tun,  which  they  made  otct  to  the  militaiy  quae*.
ton  who  paid  the  aoldiera.  [QuAioTOitl]  Th»
lei  Amelia  (70  u.  c.)  nlled  the  ■ribuni  aerarii  to
the  eierciaa  of  judicial  hinctioni,  almg  with  the
•enaton  and  eqnitea,  aa  theae  tribunei  repreaented
the  body  of  the  moat  ieq«etable  dtiiaoL  (Oretii,
OiKm.  TuU.  iii.  p.  142  ;  Apptan,  dt  BeO.  Cie.  iiL
23.)  But  of  thii  dUtincUon  they  wen  aubaa-
qucntly  depriied  by  Jnliiu  Casaar. (Suet.  Om.

3.  TkiBUMi  plbbii.  The  ancient  tiibnon  of
the  plebeian  tribea  had  nndDubtedly  the  right  of
cmTokinglhemeetinga  of  their  triba,  and  of  main-
taining the  priritegea  granted  (o  them  hy  king
Serrini  and  laliHqnently  by  the  Valerian  lawa.
But  thii  pntedion  waa  Tery  inadequate  againat
the  inMtiable  ambition  and  nauipatisDa  i^  the

Caiciana.  When  the  plebeiani,  impovcriahed  by
ig  wara  and  ouelly  opprened  by  Che  paCriciana,
at  lait  Kceded  in  the  year  494  a  c,  to  the  Mona
Socet,  the  patriciana  were  obliged  to  grant  to  the
plebeiana  the  right  of  appointing  trihunea  {tribaid
pUUt)  with  more  efllcient  powen  la  protect  their
own  order  than  tlioae  which  wen  poHeaied  by  tha
hcada  of  the  tribea.  The  potpoee  for  which  they
were  appointed  wai  only  to  aflbrd  prolection  ^ainat
any  abuae  on  the  part  of  the  patrician  magiiUatei ;
and  that  they  might  be  able  to  aflbrd  luch  protec-
tion, their  peraoni  were  declared  aacred  and  inrio-
lable,  and  it  wat  agreed  that  wboerei  acted  againat
Ihia  inTiolabilityahonld  be  an  ontlaw,  and  that  hia
(Toperty  ihonld  be  forfeited  to  the  temple  of  Cema.
(LiT.iL  33  ;  Dionya-vi.  89.)  Thii  decree  leema
to  contain  evidence  that  the  head*  of  the  tribea  in
their  attempta  to  protect  membei*  of  their  own
order  had  been  aubjed  themaelrei  to  inanlt  and
nuttieatment;  and  thntaimilarthingi  occunedeven
after  the  lanctily  ef  the  tribnnea  waa  caMbliihcd  by
trtaty,  may  bo  inferred  from  the  bet,  that,  aome  time
after  the  triboncihip  wai  inititnted,  heavy  pnnlah-
menta  wse  again  enacted  againitthoie,  whoahould
ventnre  lo  annoy  ■  tribune  when  he  wa*  making  a
Dmporilion  to  the  aaaembty  of  tha  tribe*.  The  lav
by  which  the**  panlifamenl*  were  enacted  ordained
that  no  one  ahoild  eppoae  or  intemipt  a  tribona
while  addreaaing  the  people,  and  that  whoerei
ahonld  act  contrary  to  thia  ordinance  ahould  give
bail  to  tha  tribnnei  fa-  the  payment  of  whalerer
fine  they  ahould  aSi  to  hii  offmco  in  anaigniag
him  before  the  eommonalty :  if  he  refuaed  to  giv*
bail,  hli  life  and  property  were  forfeited.  (Dionya.
viL  17.)  Il  ibauldbDWeTer  be  obaerved  that  thia
law  belongi  to  a  latn  date  than  that  auigned  to  it
by  Dionyiiui,  ai  hai  been  ahowu  by  Niebuhr  (iL
p.  SB) ;  il  wai  in  all  probability  made  only  a  abort
time  before  iti  fint  applintion  in  461  b.  c  in  dw
caae  of  Cacao  Quincliui.  (Ut.  UL  13.)  The  tri<
bunea  wen  thna  enabled  to  afford  protectioi  lo  any
one  who  ^ipcaled  to  the  aiHmbly  of  the  eommon-
ally,  or  required  any  olfaet  aadilaiiee.  They  wen
eiientially  the  repmenlativea  and  the  organi  of
the  plebeian  order,  and  their  iphere  of  action  wa*
the  eomltia  trihuto.  With  the  patriciana  and  theit
comitia  tbcT  had  nothing  to  do.  The  tribune*
themaelnt  howen


nsO  TRIBDNUS.

tie  plebi,  bat  in  the  oonno  of  lima  lh«ir  power
incrcOKd  to  loeh  B  degree  tfait  it  lurpancd  thit
of  nil  other  magifltimtei,  end  ihe  tfibunes  then,
u  Niebnhr  (L  p.  6U)  lemu-lu,  became  a  ms-
giatnuy  for  the  whole  RamaD  people  iu  oppotiCiiKi
to  the  leiiBte  and  the  oligarchical  element)  in
general,  allhoiigh  the;  had  nothing  to  do  with
(he  ixdminiitratioQ  or  the  garemment.  Daring
the  latter  period  of  the  republic  the;  bccan*  true
tyranti,  and  Niebabr  juitiy  campaiei  their  college,
luch  ai  it  vaa  in  later  timet,  to  the  uationaL  con-
Tentinn  of  Fnnce  during  the  tint  rcTolutioa  But
notwitbalBnding  the  grcai  aad  nameroui  abiuei
vhicb  were  mule  of  Ue  tribunitian  power  by  in-
diTiduBli,  tho  gnnleat  hiatotiani  and  atatennen
eonfeu  that  the  greatneit  of  Rome  and  ili  Img
duntion  ii  in  a  great  meature  atuibulable  to  the
initilDtioD  of  thu  olEee.

Ai  remu-d*  the  number  of  tho  Iribonei  of  the
people,  ail  the  ancient  wriCen  agree  (lee  the  pel-
tagei  in  Niebuhr,  i  n.  UJ6),  that  at  fint  Uie;
were  only  two,  thoush  the  aceoanti  diller  at  to  the
naraca  of  the  tint  tnbunea.  Shod  alWwardi,  how-
erer,  tho  nuraber  of  tribnoei  was  increased  to  fiTC,
one  beiiig  taken  btaa  each  of  the  G>e  cIbim*.  (A>-
coauCtB.  D>nLp.  66,  ed.Oi«lIi;Zoaar.  iii.lS.)
When  Ihii  increaie  took  place  la  qtiile  imcertua.
According  to  Dionjiiui  (vi.  39}  three  new  tribunea
were  added  immediatel;  after  the  appointment  of
the  fint  two.  Cicero  (Fragm.  ContL  P- *51,
Orclli)  alalea,  t}iat  the  year  after  the  initilation  of
the  iribnne*  their  number  waa  incnoied  to  ten  j
according  to  Lity  (ii.  33)  the  fint  two  tribane*
immediately  after  their  ^ipointment  elected  them-
lelra  thrL'e  new  colteoguei ;  according  to  Pito  {ap.
Zto.  ii.  fix)  there  were  only  two  tribonci  down  to
the  time  of  the  Publilian  lawi.  It  would  be  hope-
lea  to  allempl  to  aiccnaia  what  wai  really  the
cBic  ;  tliui  much  only  ia  certain,  that  the  number
wai  not  increued  to  ten  till  the  ycei  4£7  b.  c,
and  that  then  t^M  were  taken  ttrna  each  of  the
fire  elaaMa.  (Lit.  HI  30  ;  DionyL  i.  30.)  Thii
number  appeara  to  bait  remained  unaltered  down
to  the  end  of  the  empire.

The  time  when  the  tribonu  were  elected  wai,
according  to  Uiany>liu(Ti.  89),  alwayioD  the  lOlh
of  December,  althoagb  it  li  evident  from  Cicero
(ad  Alt.  L  1)  that  in  hi>  lime  at  Icaat  the  clectioti
took  place  a.  d.  XVL  KaL  Scitil.  (17lh  of  July.)
It  ii  atmott  luperfluDua  to  ilale  that  none  but  ple-
bciuni  were  eligible  to  the  olSce  of  tribune ;  hence
when  towaida  the  end  of  the  republic  polricioni
wlibed  to  obtain  the  office,  they  were  obliged  Krat
to  renounce  their  own  order  and  to  become  ple-
beians [VatbiciI,  p.  S76J  i  hence  alio  under  the
empire  it  waa  thought  chat  the  princept  ihoald  not
be  tribune  becauje  he  woi  a  patrician.  (Dion
Cata.  liii.  17,  32.)  But  the  inauenee  which  be-
longed to  tbii  ofllce  wui  too  great  for  the  emperora
not  to  coret  iL  Hence  Anoxiilua  received  the  tri-
hunilta  poteilaa  for  life.  (Suet.  Aug.  'i7  ;  Tadt.
.laiu/.  L  2 1  compare  Suet  TUrr.  9, 23, 1'oT).  1 2,  7U.
6.)  During  the  republic,  however,  the  old  i^ula-
tion  rendined  in  force  even  after  the  tribunea  hod
ceaied  to  be  the  preteelora  of  the  pleba  alone.  The
only  initance  In  which  paEriciani  were  elected  to
the  tribnneahip  ia  Imenlioned  by  Livy  (iiL  65),
and  ihli  wui  probably  the  conieqnence  of  an
attempt  to divide the tiibiuieihip  between  the


TRIBUNU8.
have  been  elected  by  that  body  of  the  Roman  citi'
leni  which  they  tepieaented,  yet  the  aal^ect  ia  in-
Tolred  in  comiderable  obicnrity.  CieerB  {Fr^m,
OanaL  La.)  aCates  that  they  were  elected  by  iha
oomitia  of  the  curiea  ;  the  moa  ii  implied  in  ^a
account*  of  Dioayiina  (t  e.)  and  Uiy  (iL  66),  ac-
cnrding  to  whom  the  comitia  of  the  tribes  did  not
obtain  thii  rwbt  till  the  Lex  Publilia  (473  b.c;
LIv.  ii.  56  }  Dicaiyo.  1. 11).  Niebufar  thioka  (i.
p.  616)  that  down  to  the  Poblilian  lav  they  wen
dected  by  the  centuiiei,  the  dauei  of  which  they
repteiented  in  their  nDmbo-,  and  that  the  curiea.  aa
Dionyaiua  himidf  mentkini  in  another  place  (<1
90),  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  election  eicept  ta
aonction  it.  The  election  in  the  ncoitia  of  the
cBituriea  howerer  doea  not  ranova  the  diSraltita,
whence  Oiitlling  (p.  289)  u  inclined  to  think  dial
the  tribnnefl  before  the  e^fdntion  of  their  eSce
appointed  their  auceeaaoia,  after  a  prerioaa  eon-
lullation  with  the  plobeiani.  The  necesnty  ef  the
aanctiea  by  the  curiec  oonot  be  docbtel,  bot  it
appeara  to  have  ceoicd  even  aome  time  bcAwe  the
Publillan  law.  (Niebuhr,  ii  p.  190.)  After  thii
lime  it  ia  never  heard  of  again,  and  the  dection  of
the  thbimei  wai  left  entirely  to  the  eonitia  tribata,
which  woe  convoked  and  held  for  thii  pnrpoae  b;
IheoldtribnaetpievioQilT  to  the  eipiiation  of  tkcir
office.  (Liv.  il  66,  kc;  Dionyi.  ii.  43,  49.)  One
of  the  old  tribune*  va*  appomled  by  lot  to  pieaide
at  the  election.  (Hi.  ha.  6*;  Af^tt^ie  BilL  Oe.
i.  14.)  A*  the  meeting  eculd  not  be  prohnged  after
nmieC,  and  tim  buiineia  waa  to  be  ean^eted  ia
one  day,  it  lomelimei  happened  that  it  «a*  obliged
to  break  up  before  the  electian  wai  coaapleled,  and
that  tbcwi  who  were  elected  filled  up  the  kgitinau
number  of  the  college  by  cDoptatio.  <LdT.l.c)  Bat
in  order  to  prevent  Ihii  irregularity  the  tribane
L.  Treboniui  in  44B  B.  c  goE  on  ocdlnance  puard,
accorduig  to  which  the  college  of  the  tribraea
ahonld  neter  be  tompleted  by  cooplatia,  bat  the
election*  ahonld  be  continued  on  (lie  ■eeond  day,
if  they  were  not  completed  isa  the  fint,  tin  Ik*
number  ten  wai  made  up^  (lit.  Hi.  64,  SS,  t.  10;
comp.  Niebuhr,  ii.  p.S83.)  The  place  whtte  tlw
election  of  the  tribunes  waa  held  wsi  ongina%
and  lawfully  the  Forum,  afterwarda  tlaa  tl^
Campni  Martini,  and  aometimo  the  area  of  ika

We  now  proceed  to  trace  the  gradoal  gnwth  of
the  tribunitian  power.  Altho<^  in  engine  oh^
ractcr  wai  merely  aoiilium  or  0e4f«n  agaiut  {>-
trician  magiatratee,  the  plebeiin*  appear  ouly  ta
have  regarded  their  tribnnei  aim  aa  mediatan  a*
arbitraton  in  nutttera  amcag  themielvei.  Thia
atatement  of  Lydni  (d»  M-^i^  L  38,  44;  Dianya.
vii.  68)  haibeeo  pointed  out  by  WailiH(Gte^  A
Rau.  RaAlt,  p.  Sj).  The  whida  power  poMw4
by  the  college  of  tribunea  woi  deaigttated  by  Ik*
name  IriUmkia  polatat,  and  extended  at  no  tima
further  than  one  mile  beyond  tbe  gate*  of  the  city;
at  a  greater  diitance  than  thii  uey  ame  nnder
tbe  imperium  of  the  magisttalei,  like  evcrr  Mhtt
eitiaen.  (Liv.  iii.  30;  Dionya.  viiL  87.)  A»  tbrf
were  tbe  public  gnardiam,  it  wai  iiiiiiawij  that
every  one  ibould  have  aeceee  to  them  and  at  bdj
time  ;  hence  the  doort  of  their  houee*  wne  cpa
day  tad  night  (or  all  who  were  in  iK«d  sf  kelp  and


allowod  tobeahaaitlnm  theti^iixaarkokdq'.


TMBUNUS.

S  daring  the  Feriu  lAtioar,  tIhh  tho  vtioU
wu  aneiDblcd  on  tha  Alban  HomL  (Ha-
■ot  L  3.)
In  the  jtai  iSS  b.  c  tba  tribimei,  in  opjioiitian
to  tha  caninli,  ununed  the  rigbt  to  coaTaks  tbe
MnMe,  in  aider  to  Ibj  befors  it  a  rogitiou  and  di>-
cuM  the  lUM  <Dion]F*.  i.  31,  32)  ;  for  miUl  tluil
time  the  conmli  alone  hod  had  tha  rigbt  of  layii^
plebiacia  befan  the  lenate  for  ap]»obation.  Some
j-ean  afiar,  4S2  B.  c^  Ibe  Iribiine  dnnanded  of  the
couoli  to  nqnaat  tha  Knatf  to  make  a  tenatiu-
eonaultUB  tat  tin  appointment  of  peraoni  to  frame

■  nenr  legulatiaD  ;  and  during  the  diacnuioni  on
thit  nibjtct  iha  tribuna  tbenueWei  ware  preaent
in  the  lenatc.  (Dionja.  x.  50,  62.)  The  vriltcn
ksiilalioQ  vhicb  the  tribunei  then  viihed  can
oiilj  have  related  ta  their  own  order  ;  but  u  nch

■  legiilation  wonld  onlir  hare  widened  the  breach
n  the  two  orden,  they  sftetwarda  gave  way
'-he  mtriciani,8nd  the  now

leguuuon  wat  to  emDrace  both  oiden.  (LIt.  Hi.
31  ;  Zddbi.  vii.  IB.)  From  tha  lecond  decemTi-
rata  tha  tribaneiblp  wai  m^ieaded,  but  wat  te-
atored  after  tbe  legiilation  wu  completed,  and  now
asmmed  a  diSerent  character  from  the  change  that
had  takeaplacaiattictribei.  (Tribus  (Rohih.}]
The  tribune*  now  had  iho  right  to  be  preieni  at
the  deliberatiooa  of  the  tenate  {Li<.  iii.  69,  ir.  1);
bnt  the;  did  not  lit  among  the  aenaton  thcauelTci,
but  upon  bencbet  before  the  opened  doon  of  the
aenale-booK.  (Val.  Hai.  ii.  2.  g  7  ;  F.  Hofmann,
Da-  Bim.  Soot,  p.  lOS,  &c)  Tha  ii.viaiabilit]'
of  the  tribonea,  which  had  before  onlj  reated  upon


to  the  lemom


TRIBUKUa.  1151

action  wbich  *  magiatiHte  might  imdertako  dniiag
the  time  of  bii  office,  and  ttiii  even  without  girinv
any  teaion  for  it.  (Appian,  dt  BtU.  Civ.  L  S3.)
Thai  wa  tind  a  tribime  preventing  a  conml  eon-
Tokii^  the  ienala  (Polyb.  n.  IS),  preTenting  tha
propOMl  of  new  Uwa  or  electifHu  in  the  cotniiia
(LiT.  ri.  35,  liL  17,  i.  9,  Tivii,  6)  i  and  they
interceded  againat  the  official  fiinctiona  of  the
LiT.  iliii.  IS)  J
d  by  the  praelor.
;  Oell.  iii.  19.)  In  the  wne
manner  a  tHbone  might  place  hii  veto  upon  an
ordinance  of  tbe  Hnate  (Polyb.  iL  J6  ;  Dion  Cau,
xli.  2)  ;  and  thu>  either  compel  tbe  aenate  to  lub-
mit  the  aubject  in  qoeation  to  a  freih  coniideistion,
or  to  ia»e  tha  uwion.  (Caea.  Ai  BM.  CiB.i.2;
Appian,  dt  BcIL  CSb,  L  SU.) In  order  to  propoie

been  convoked  by  a  counil  they  might  make  their
propoial  eren  in  oppoaition  to  tha  conaol,  u  right
which  no  otba  mogiitiata  had  in  the  preience  of
the  coniuli, Tbe  lenate,  on  tbe  other  Band,  had

Thiu,  in  iSl  B.  c  it  leqneated  tha  tribunei  to
uimpel  tha  connli  to  appoint  a  dictator,  in  com-
pliance with  a  decite  of  tbe  lenatc,  and  the  tri-
bune! coDipelled  the  coniuli,  by  threatening  them
with  impiiioiinwnt,  to  appoint  A.  Poetumiiu
Tulwrtu.  dictator.  (Lit.  ir.  30.)  From  thit  time
forward  we  meet  wilh  (eveial  inttancea  in  which
tha  tribnnea  compelled  the  cooauU  to  comply  with


1  betwt


ithetT


tieued  and  coDfinued  by  a  law  of  M.  Hotatiui.
(LiT.  iiL  55.)  Aa  the  tribei  now  alio  ioclnded
tbe  palriciani  and  their  dienU,  tbe  tribiinea  might
nataralty  be  aiked  to  inlerpoie  on  behidf  of  any
ciliaen,  whether  patrician  or  plebeian.  Hence  the
patrician  ex-decemTir,  Appiui  Claudini,  implored
tbe  protection  of  the  tribuna.  (Lit.  iiL  56  ;
eomp,  aiwi  TiiL  33,  34  ;  Niebvhr,  il  p.  374.)
Abont  thii  time  the  tiibaneB  alto  acquired  the
right  to  take  the  antpicei  in  the  aiHmbliei  of  the
tribci.  (Zonarai,  vii.  19.)  They  al»  aiinmed
u;ain  the  tight  which  they  had  eierdisd  before
the  lime  of  the  decemvirate,  to  bring  patricioni
who  bad  i tolated  the  righti  of  the  plebeian!  before
the  comiiia  of  the  tiibeo,  aa  ia  clear  from  teietal
inatancea.  ILIt.  iil  56,  &c  ir.  44,  >.  11,  &c.)
Seipecting  the  authority  which  a  plebiidnin  pro-


college  liaa  gained  outwardly  new  strength  every
day,  a  change  look  place  in  iti  internal  orgoiiim-
tion,  which  lo  acme  extent  paralyEed  ita  powen.
Before  tba  yev  391  B.  c.  ereiy  thing  had  been
decided  in  the  college  b;  a  majority  (LIt.  ii.  43,
44  ;  Dionyi.  ii.  1,  2,  41,  X.  31)  ;  but  about  ihit
time,  we  do  not  know  how,  a  change  woi  intro-
dnoed,  which  made  the  oppoaitioo  (inienxiHi)  of
am  tribune  lufficient  U  ri'nder  a  reaolution  of  hia
colleiagDe!  void.  (Zonor.  rii.  IS.)  Thii  new  re-
gulation doea  not  appoir  in  operation  till  394
■nd  393  a  c.  (LIt.  t.  2S,  29)  ;  the  old  one  wu
■tiU  applied  in  B.  C  421  and  4IG.  <LiT.  It.  42,
49  i  comp.Niabuhr,  ii.  p.  438.) From  their  right


Uied<


»  of  the  I
nd  toeic
15.) In  their  telalion


by  Tirtue  of  hi*
olSee,  ahonid  be  a  aenator.  (Oellius,  lir.  8  ;  Zonnr.
rii.  16.)  When  thii  plebiacitum  wu  made  i*  un-
certain j  but  vt  know  that  in  170  b.  c  it  was  not
yet  in  mention.  (Lit.  xIt.  16.)  It  probably
originated  wilh  C  Atinhu,  who  wa*  tnbune  in
B.  c  132, (Li..  EpU.  69  ;  Plin.  II.  N.  t


the  qu


t  leni


WO!  tbe  office
the  tribnneship,  and  u  tha  quaeitonhip  itaolf  con-
ferred upon  a  pcnon  the  tight  of  being  present  and
eipreuing  hii  opinion  in  the  icnate,  Iho  law  of
Atiniui  wu  in  mott  caaci  luperfluoui.

In  their  rehttion  to  other  niBgiglrHte*  we  may
obaerre,  that  the  right  of  interceuia  wo*  not  con-
fined to  iloppins  a  magiatrote  in  hU  proceeding^
but they might even command their vialMva

priaon  him,  or  to  throw  him  from  tbe  Tarpeian
rock.  (LiT.  ii.  66,  i..  26,  t.  9,  it  34,  £)>*  48,
55,  59  i  Cic  dt  Lrg.  iiu  9,  ia  ValiK.  9 ;  Dioa
Caia.  zxxtIL  50.)  It  ii  mentioned  by  lAbeo  and
Varni  {op.  OiU,  im.  12)  that  Iha  tribunal,  when
they  hroughc  on  accualiou  againat  any  one  before
tbe  people,  hod  tha  right  of  pr^it/uio,  but  not
tbe  right  of  BDoorio,  that  ia,  they  might  command  a
penon  to  be  dragged  by  their  Tiatore*  biJore  the
comitia,  but  could  not  lummon  him.  An  attempt  to
account  for  thi*  aingularity  ia  made  by  Oelliaa
(/.  c).  They  tnight,  aa  in  earlier  tunea,  propoae  a
Ane  to  be  inflicted  upon  the  penon  accuied  beForo
the  comitia,  bnt  ui  aome  caie*  they  drojKied  thi!
pnpotol  and  treated  the  caae  u  a  capital  one.
(Liv.  Tui.  33,  XXT.  4,  xxvL  3.)  Tha  colli^  of
tribonc*  had  alao  tha  power  <^  making  adicio,  oi


1152  TRIBUNUS.

that  menlioned  by  Ck«n>  (in  Vtrr.  n.  41  ;  eomp.

OeSl  iv.  U  j  LW.  xxxviii.  63). In  taaei  in  which


in  whioh  t  precedenC  ma  given  for  propowng  to
tba  people  (hu  a  tribnne  obitinnlely  peniiting  in
hii  veto  ihouldbe  depriTcdof  hii  office.  (Appisn,
A  BtS.  Ch.  i.  13;  PIdL  TSi.Grvai.  11,12,16;
dc  dt  Lig.  Hi.  10;  DionCaiLiuvLlS.}

From  tbe  time  of  tke  HaitHuiiin  law  tbe  ponr
oF  the  tribunet  h&d  beer,  gradually  riling  to  nieh  ■
height  that  there  wse  no  other  in  the  atsts  to  equal
it,  whence  Velleiua  (ii.  2}  even  ipeaki  of  the  im-
perium  of  tribunet.  They  had  acqnind  the  right
ofprapoeing  bo  the  eoinitia  tributA  or  the  lenate
meaanrei  on  netirly  all  the  impoctHnl  sRiBin  of  the
itUe,  and  it  would  be  rndleu  to  enumerate  the
cBKi  in  which  theirpower  wai  manifeilcd.  Their
propoialt  were  indeed  niually  made  ex  auctoritate
ienalua,  or  had  been  cnmniuniated  to  and  ap-
proTCd  by  it  (Li>.  xlii.  21) ;  bntcam  in  which  tbe
people  iticlf  had  a  direct  interett,  iuch  u  a  gene-
ral legal  i^gulation  (LiT.  iii.  63,  xxiif.  1),  Ihe
granting  of  tba  fianchiae  (Lir.  itiTiiL  36),  the
alteration  o(  Ihe  sttribntet  of  a  magiitrate  (Lif.
iiii.  35,  &c),  and  olhen,  might  be  brought  before
the  people,  without  their  haring  previouily  been
communicated  to  the  lenate,  thongh  there  are  aleo
inatancu  of  the  contrary.  (Lir,  iirT.  7.  iivii.
5-)  Subjects  belonging  to  the  adminiitraCion
eonld  not  be  brought  before  tbe  tiibei  without  tba
tiibunei  having  previouily  received  through  the
eonanla  the  auctoritaa  of  the  lenate.  Thii  how-
ever wai  done  very  frequently,  and  hence  we  have
mention  of  a  namber  of  jJcbiicita  on  matteri  of
■dm  in  titration.  (See  a  liit  of  them  in  Walter,
p.  !3'2,  n.  11.)  It  (ometimei  even  occun  thai  the
tribune)  brought  t)ie  (jueation  concerning  the  con-
ciniion  of  a  peace  liefore  the  tribe«,  and  then  eom>
pelled  the  lenate  to  ratify  the  cetolntion  aa  ex-
pressing  tbe  with  of  the  whole  people  (Liv.  xxx.
43,  iiiiiL  2i.)  Snlla,  in  hia  reform  of  the  con.
atitution  on  the  early  arintocratic  principlea,  left  to
the  tribunea  only  the  jui  auiiliandi,  but  de-
prived them  of  tbe  right  of  malting  legiilative  or
other  propoaalt,  eitbet  to  the  lennle  or  the  comi-
tia,  without  baring  prevjonaly  obtained  the  tunc-
tion  of  the  aenate.  [Thibus  (Roman).]  But
thii  arrangement  did  not  lait,  for  Pompey  mtored
to  them  their  former  righta.  (Zachariae,  L.  Com.
Sulla,  ait  Ordaer  da  Kin.  Fnittaata,  iL  p.  13,
&«.  and  p.  99,  &c)

During  the  lallet  period  of  tbe  republic,  when
the  ofRee  of  qnaettor  wB*  in  mod  caaea  held  im-
mediately before  that  of  tribune,  the  tribunea  were
generally  elected  from  among  the  aenaton,  and
thia  continued  to  be  the  aame  tmd«  the  empire.
(Appian.  di  BeO.  Civ.  L  100.)  Sometlmei,  how.
ever,  eqnitei  alao  obtained  the  office,  and  thereby
bcoune  membert  of  the  aenate  (Snet  Amg.  10,  fO),
vhen  they  were  coniidered  of  equal  rank  with
the  quaeiton.  (Veil.  Pal.  iL  1 1 1 .)  Tribunea  of
the  people  eontinaed  to  eiiit  down  to  tbe  fifth
eentury  of  our  aera,  though  their  powen  beame
luturatly  much  limited,  eapeciaily  in  the  reign  of
Nero.  (Tacit.  AiaaL  ill  SS.^  They  tonticned
however  to  have  the  ri*^*  "^  «.i-w«tMi.


TRIBtrS.
It.  9  :  Plin.'.Qiti^  L  23,  ii.  13  ;  eomp.  BcAar,
Haadb.  der  Rom.  AUarik.  vol  iL  pt.  iL  p.  347,  Ac)

mrs.  When  in  445  b.  c  the  tribune  C.  CaoK-
leiua  brought  forward  the  rogation  that  the  comol-
ahip  ibotdd  not  be  confined  to  either  order  (Liv.  iv.
1  ;  Dionya,  li.  £2),  tbe  patrieiana  evaded  the  afc
tempt  by  a  change  in  the  conatitution  ;  '^
which  had  hitherto  been  miited  in  the
were  now  divided  between  two


the  eenaon.  Couequently,  in  444  B.C.  thne  ni-
litary  tribune*,  with  conanlar  power,  were  appointed,
and  to  thii  offiee  the  plebeiani  wen  t»  be  eqmOy

eligible  with  the  patrieiana.  (Li*,  iv.  7  ;  Dtoaya.
iL  60,  dtc)  For  the  ymn  following  ho wew,
the  people  were  to  beat  liberty,  on  tbepropoaal  li
the  aenate,  to  decide  whether  conanlt  were  to  be
elected  according  to  tbe  old  cnatom,  or  ccaualaT
tribunea.  Ueneefbrth,  for  nun;  jfit,  ■ametinwa
onauli  and  tometima  cooiuiar  tribunea  were  ap-
pointed, nnd  tbe  number  of  the  latter  varied  fraa
three  to  four,  unU!  in  40£  b.  c  it  waa  incnaaed  ta

bnnea.  (Liv.  iv.  61,  v.  1  ;  Diodor.  xr.  50  ;  Liv.
vi.  37  ;  Diodor.  xr.  51  ;  Liv.  vL  30.)  At  teat.
however,  in  367  B.  c  the  office  of  thtae  tribuM
waa  aboltibed  by  the  Lionlan  law,  and  the  coomI-
■hip  waa  rettored.  Tba  eonauiar  tribune*  wen
elected  in  the  eamitia  of  the  centuriei,  and  m-
doubtcdly  with  leaa  aolemn  aoapioea  than  the  cw-
■ula  Concening  the  irregnlarity  of  their  mmibfT,
■ee  Niebuhr,  iL  p.  325,  &c  p.  389,  &c  ;  eo^
Guttling,  p.  326,  &c  ;  Becker,  HamdL  da-  l&m.
Alttrik.  vol  ii.  pL  iL  p.  136,  &c

£.  Tbibuni  MiutahU.  [ExnoTDt^  pp,
503,  504.]

6.  TniBUNt/sToLiTPTATtJM,  waamoScsr  wbe
doea  not  ocmr  till  after  tha  time  at  Diocletan,
and  who  had  the  anpcrinlendeiwa  of  all  fiblic
nmuaementa,  eipeeialiy  of  theatrical  peifetnaDc^
(CaMJodor.  Fariar.  viL  10.)  [L.  S.]

TRIBUS  (fdKar,  pM)-  1.  Gemk.  In  the
earlieit  timet  of  Greek  hialory  mentian  ia  made  <J
peiipic  being  divided  into  triliea  and  clana. Honur

ply  that  they  were  elementi  that  enteted  into  the
onnpaulion  of  everj  eoomnmity. Neator  adviaea


fpfrpBv,  io  that  aaeb  nuy  be  a „ ,
preaanee  of  iti  neighlKKiii. (A  ii.  363.) A  pac-

arai  not  included  io  any  clan  (*jiftrai|p),  ma  n-
gardedaaa  vagrant  or  outlaw.  ULa.63.)  Theaa
diviajona  were  latbsr  natnnl  uan  pc^itioal,  it-
pending  on  &nuly  connectim,  and  ariaing  tmt  af
thoie  tuuet,  when  each  head  of  a  &oiily  exerriaed
a  patriarchal  awi^  orer  it*  memheia.  Tbe  ^odI
waa  cemented  by  nljgiotu  a


litical  tocJety.  (Ariatot.  PaLl  I.  !  7-)  In  the  ^aa
aucceoding  tbe  heroic  tribea  and  dana  ceaitinDcd  to
eiiit,  thongh  in  the  pnigrcM  of  eiviliatieai  Atj
became  mote  extended,  and  amiaed  a  taaritmial
or  political,  rather  than  a  fnMrnal  ehanntet.  Tba
tribea  irera  not  in  gencnl  dialinctiMta  between
noblca  and  eonnMua,  imlaaa  the  pe«^  were  of
different  racea,  or  onlna  there  had  been  aa  a«ca-


TRIBUS.  ^

Origiiud  inliabilMitl),  It  i>  tma,  thil  in  Ibe  Cam-
motx  CDUT*B  of  thingl,  oohlea,  or  priTileged  cIbiha,
ipmv  up  in  vmiiDui  coonliia,  bj  reason  either  of
wealu,  or  of  psRotia]  meiil,  or  of  ducent  ftmo  the
andent  kiiiRi ;  and  that  in  mdk  cwet  all  the  land
WM  pooaued  by  them,  m  b;  the  Qiunori  of  Sjn-
ciue  (Henid.  tiL  ]ifi)  ;  »0[nHiiaBi  their  property
wu  inaliBishle,  u  nnder  our  Eeodal  Ltw  (AriiL
J'aL  ii.  4.  g  4)  ;  uid  the  Buchiadaa  are  u  in-
nance  ol  a  noble  family,  vho  intermarried  only
among  thuaKivea.  (Herod,  t.  S2.)  Still,  hov-
eier,  at  a  noeral  rale,  itiere  waa  no  decided  upo-


moftnbe,murh  le«


I  of  caate,  beti
ne  race.  Nor  waa  there
any  tuch  dittinctioa  of  a  tactrdolal  order.  The
prieitly  function  wa>  ia  early  timei  uiuted  to  tbsl
of  the  king  (AriM.  Pot.  iii.  9.  3  7)  ;  oAerwardi
the  prieitfaood  of  pacticnlar  deitiei  beome  here-
ditsiy  in  certain  bmilie*,  owing  either  to  a  tup-
Toaed  transmUaion  of  prophetic  pover,  aa  in  the
aae  of  the  Enmolpidae,  Brauchidae,  lamidas  ;  or
to  BccideDlal  circonutancea,  ai  in  the  caae  of  Telinu
of  Qel*  (Herod.  TiL  153}  }  bat  the  prieiU  wen
Dot  KpaiatHi,  ai  an  order,  fiom  the  rot  of  the
people.  (Wacbimath,  HtU.  AU.  Tol.  j.  pt  L  pp.
76,149.  III.  ed.;  SchiSmann,  .4<((.>>r.  p^.<?r.  p.
79.)  The  moat  imponant  diatinctioni  of  a  dau-
like  nature,  betwean  people  liiing  under  the  aame
gDvemment,  aroae  in  thoM  coontriea  that  were  cod-
quered  by  the  migratory  hordea  of  Theaaaliaua,
Bueotiana,  and  Doriana,  in  the  century  aubaequent
to  the  heroic  age.  The  itToluIioDa  which  they
effected,  though  nuying  in  diSerest  placet  accord-
ing Id  cinmraatancee,  had  in  many  retpectl  a  uni-
funn  character.  The  conquering  body  took  poa-
aeaaion  of  the  coutilry,,aad  beoaiae  its  lordt ;  the
original  iohabituutt,  reduced  to  aubjection,  and
tumetimca  Xe  complete  Taaaalsge  or  tcrritude,  le-
mained  a  distinct  people  or  tribe  from  the  conqueioia.
The  former  built  citiea,  uinally  at  the  foot  of  aome
citadel  that  had  belonged  to  the  ancient  princea,
where  they  reiidcd,  retaining  their  mitit^  dia-
cipline  and  martial  habita  ;  while  a  rural  pupniatlaD,
consisting  principally  of  the  farmer  nativei,  but
parti;  alio  of  the  IcB  woilike  of  tho  inTadera,  and
partly  of  frcah  emigranta  inrited  or  permitted  by
them  to  aetlle,  dwelt  in  the  lunuundtng  nllagea,
and  received  the  name  of  Ilfpioucsi.  The  condition
of  tbe  LaccdBemoniaa  viplamai  it  apoken  of  mider
PiRiOKCL  A  aimilar  clais  amae  in  moat  of  the
countrtea  ao  caloniaed,  aa  in  Argca,  Corinth,  KJia,
Crete,  &c  (Herod.  riiL  73  ;  Thucyd.  iL  35  ;
Xeni^h.  fldL  iiL  2.  §  23,  30  ;  Paoaan.  iii  S.  S  3,
TiiL  27.  §  I  ;  Arkk  Pot  iL  6.  §  I,  t.  2. 1  a)  But
thinr  condition  varied  according  to  the  maimer  in
which  the  ioTaden  effected  their  lettlement,  and


....,,]«.


ic  npiHi  more  equitable
tenna,  ao  mat  a  imion  oi  dtiunship  would  take
place  between  them  and  the  original  inhabitanta.
Thu  waa  the  caae  in  Elit,  Meiaenia,  Phlina,  Tme-
HO.  (PauBUL  iL  13.  g  1,  >.  4.  g  1  ;  Thirlwull,
HiiL  q^  Crme,  tdI.  L  p.  342.)  So  the  Cretaaa,
wbo  iniadad  Milecna,  mingled  with  the  andeat
Cotiana,  and  the  loniana  with  the  Cretana  and
Cariana  of  Colophon.  (Pauan.  iii.  2.  S  £>  "i.  3.
8  1.)  In  Megarn,  the  ruling  daai,  after  a  Upae  of
aome  time,  amalgamated  with  the  lower.  (Thirl-
-waU,  ToL  i.  p.  430.)  In  other  placea  the  npIoKoi
wen  more  degnded. Thus,  in  Sicyoa  they  weie


TRIBUS.  1153

'ear  theep-akini,  and  called  KaTor-
ni^poi  (Athenaeua  vL  271)  ;  in  Epideunu
they  were  atyled  KarlwoSts,  diaty-fieied,  a  name
which  denoted  their  agricultuial  occnpation,  but
vat  meant  aa  a  mark  of  contempL  (MUl)er,  Dor.
iii.  4.  g  2.)  But  in  general  the;  formed  a  tort
of  middle  order  between  the  ruling  people  and  the
aerf  or  alave.  Thua,  in  Ar);oi,  there  wot  a  daoa  of
pervona  called  Chpiaaii  or  Gymnala,  correapoitding
to  tho  Helota.  [OvHNisii.]  So  in  Theisal;,
in  the  diatrictt  not  immediately  occupied  by  the
TheaialiaD  invadera,  there  dnelt  a  popuktion  of
ancient  Aaoliant,  who  were  not  terfa,  like  the  Pe-
neitae  [PaN«sT*«],  but  only  tributar;  luhjecti,
who  retained  their  personal  liber^,  though  not  ad-
mitted to  the  rank  of  dtiieni.  (Thirlwall,  vol  L
p.  438  ;  Schtimann,  Id.  p.  401.)  So  alio  in  Crete,
there  were  the  Dorian  freemen,  the  irapIoiiKu,  or  old
inhabitanta,  timiUr  to  the  LacedaemojiLBiiB,and  the
alBTH.  [CoSML]  We  may  obaerre  that  the  term
rfploum  ia  aometimn  naed  in  rather  a  different


ipiansiw


n  Xenophon  giye


aa  the  Acbaeana  w

4.  g46.) In  aome

dition  of  the  mbject  daaiet  naa  aomewfaal  different ;

they  were  auffered  to  reiide  more  in  the  town  ',  u

in  Corinth,  where  they  were  artiama,  at  Tarentom,

where  they  were  fiaheimen. (Wachamuth,  yol,  L

pt.Lp.162i  SchBmann,  H.  jq).  80,  107.)

Tha  ruling  people,  thua  remaining  diatinct  from
the  nat,  were  thenueliea  divided  into  tribet  aad
other  iccliona.  Df  the  Dorian  race  there  were
originally  three  tribea,  traces  of  which  are  found  in
all  the  CDUntiiet  which  the;  colonircd.  Hence  they
are  culled  by  Homer  Aopi^ai  rpixilxtt.  (Od.
xiz.  177.)  Theae  tribet  were  the  TAAiii,  Ild^
f  ii\iK,  and  Au^ioriTBi  or  AufJint.  The  fint  de-
nied tbeir  name  from  Hyllut,  aon  of  Hemdet,  the
two  lott  from  Paraphylu*  and  Dymas,  who  are  said
to  haie  fallen  in  the  hiat  expedition  when  tho
Dorians  took  poiseaiion  of  the  Pelcponneaai.  The
Hyllean  tribe  waa  perhapt  the  one  of  higheit  dig-
nit;  ;  but  at  Sparta  there  doei  not  appear  to  have
been  much  dittinction,  for  all  the  freemen  Lhi^re
were  by  the  conatitntion  of  Lycurgua  on  a  fooling
of  equality.  To  theae  three  tribea  other*  were
added  in  different  placet,  either  when  the  Doriana
were  joined  by  other  foreign  alliea,  or  when  aome
of  the  old  inhabitanta  were  admitted  to  the  Rmk  of
dtiienthip  or  equal  pririlegea.  Thua  the  Cadmean
Aegaida  are  laid  by  Herodotua  to  have  been  a
great  tribe  at  Sparta,  descended  (as  he  tays)  tram
Aegens,  grandsan  of  Theras  (Herod,  iv.  149),
thoSgh  olteri  have  thought  thej  were  incorporated
with  the  three  Doric  tribea.  (Thirlwall,  vol.  L  pp.
2fi7,  26S,  314.)  AtArgna,  Aegina,andEpidBurua
there  waa  an  Hymethian  tribe  besides  the  three
Doric.  (MUller.  Aegin.  p.  140.)  In  Sicyon  Cleia-
tbenea  having  changed  tha  namea  of  the  Done
tribes,  to  degiude  and  insult  their  mcmben,  and
given  to  a  fourth  tribe,  to  which  he  himaelf  be-
longed, the  name  of  Archelai,  nit;  years  after  his
death  the  Doric  namea  were  restored,  and  a  fourth
tribe  added,  called  Alrjm^tis,  from  Aetnaleot,  sou
of  the  Argive  hero  Adiattus.  (Herod,  v.  68.)
Eight  tribet  are  mentioned  in  Corinth  (Suidas,  t.  c
lUrni  tlirrw),  four  in  Tegea.  (Pausan.  viii.  53-
g  e.)  In  Elia  there  were  twelve  tribea,  that  were
afterwarda  reduced  to  eight  by  a  irar  with  tha  At-
cadiuu  (Pans.  v.  9.  g  6),  from  which  ^ey  appeal


115*  TRIBUS.

to  hsro  been  geogrvpIuaJ  diTuicmi,  (WoclunnKli,
»oL  ii,  pt  i-  p-  l(-)  Somelimw  wb  find  mention
of  oalj'  ana  of  the  Done  Itibei,  at  of  the  HjUoiu
in  CydoDiB  (Hei;ch.  t.  v.  'TAhiTi),  the  lOJnuuio
in  Halicarnauui ;  vhich  probtblj  nmt  bom  oo-
loniei  baving  becD  rounded  bj  the  raemben  of  one
tribe  only. (WKhsinuth,  toL  iL  pL  L  p.  Ii.)

Of  (It  the  Dorian  people  tbs  Sputuii  kept
IhemielTea  the  longeat  unmixed  with  foreign  blood.
So  jealoui  vera  the;  to  maintain  their  exclnitTe
pririlegca,  that  tliej  had  only  admitted  tva  meo
into  ^eit  bod;  Mlwe  the  time  of  Herodotoi.
(Herod,  ix.  33,  Sfi.)  Afterwardi  theii  cnmben
were  occuionally  reemitsd  by  llie  admiiaion of


done  very  apanuglji  ontil  Ue  time  of  A^  and
Cleomenea,  who  created  large  ninbcn  of  citiieni.
Bat  we  cannot  farther  purine  thii  tubject.  (SchS-
IDBim,  Id.  p.  114.)

The  nibdinuon  of  trifaei  into  ^forfiai  or  riTpei,
•jiyih  TjilTTtiti,  Ac  sppeaia  to  have  prevailed  in
Tarioui  plaeei.  (Wadiimuth,  toL  iL  pL  L  p.  18.)
A  Sparta  each  tribe  contained  ten  jidii,  a  word,
lilcD  Ktifuu^  <lenoting  a  local  dirieion  or  diitrict ;
each  obe  oonlained  teii  rpuuiiStt,  conununitie*  con-
taining thirty  buniliei.  Bui  very  little  ai^iean  to
ba  knawn  of  th«e  diviaioni,  how  bi  they  wen
local,  or  how  &r  genealogical.  Afiar  the  time  of
Cleoinenei  the  old  lyatam  of  tribea  wai  changed  }
new  onea  weie  created  coireapoDding  to  the  different
qnacten  of  the  town,  and  aeem  to  have  been  fire
in  number.  (Schibnann,  Aal.  Jur.  Ftit.  p.  llfi  ;
Mliller,  An-,  iii.  6.)

The  four  Ionian  tnbea,  Teleontaa  or  Qeleonlct,
Hopletca, Ai^adenaea, Aegicorenaea, who are

Soken  of  below  in  reference  to  Attica,  wen  found
w  in  Cyticum.  In  Samoa  a  ^Ai)  AlTXfuiarhi  it
mentiDned  by  Herodotui  (iii.  S6),  which  wai  pm-
bablr  a  Canan  race  that  mingled  with  the  louiani.
In  Epbetui  6n  tiibea  are  mentioned,  of  dificnnt
ncea.  With  reaped  to  thcae  the  reads  ii  referred
to  Wuhamnth,  voL  iL  pt.  L  p.  16.

The  firat  Attic  Iribei  that  we  read  c£  are  laid
to  have  eiiated  in  the  reign,  or  toon  alter  the  leini,
of  Cccro)ia,  and  were  called  Cicropu  (Kficparh),
AabxAtia,  (kbrixe-').  Aetata  ('Acrala),  and
Paniia  (tlafiaMa),  In  the  nign  of  a  aubteqaent
king,  CranuDi,  ihete  naniei  wei«  changed  to
Oman  <Kjnniti),  Al&i>  ('AtBIi),  Mcugata  (H(-
aii-ia>a\  and  Diaera  (Auutplt),  Afterward!  we
find  a  new  let  of  naniei ;  Dim  ( Aiiii),  Atimmt
('A^niti),  Poiidomiai  {Utrtiitiyiii),  and  If apiiui-
(ua  ('H^oiirTuii)  ;  eridentiy  derived  from  the
deitiea  who  were  vonhipped  in  the  nmntry.
<Compare  Polloi,  viil  109.)  Some  of  Ihoae
aecoodl;  mentiooed,  if  not  all  of  them,  mmdi  to
have  been  geographic^  diviaiona  ;  and  it  is  not
improbable  that,  if  not  independent  cammnnitiea,
they  were  at  leaat  connected  by  a  very  weak  bond
of  nnisn.  But  all  theae  tribe*  were  auperaeded  by
four  olheia,  which  were  probably  founded  astm
after  the  Ionic  letllement  in  Attiia,  and  aeem  (at
before  obaoied)  to  have  been  adopted  by  other
Ionic  cotooicB  out  of  Greece.  The  namea  CUaoatai
(rrtAiTT.t),  Hof^rta  (*OwXi7Tn),  Argadtt  ("A^
7<U«0,  AtgiamM  (Afyuco;»7i),  are  aaid  by  llero-
dotut  (v.  6G)  ta  have  been  derived  from  the  aoni
oflon,  ion  of  Xuthim.  (Compare  Eurip.  Ian,  159fi,
&c  ;  Pollux,  L  c)  Upon  thii,  however,  many
doubta  have  been  thrown  by  modern  writ^  who


TRIBU&
or  leaa  ingtnioni,  to  which  refenmea  will  ba  fimnd
in  the  booka  cited  below.  It  ia  impoeaiUe  wiihiu
our  limite  lo  diacnai  the  qntation  at  anj  leogih.
The  etymology  of  the  three  hut  namee  wonld  aenc
to  anggeat,  that  the  tribea  were  io  calied  lam  the
occnpatiima  which  their  re^>ectiTe  TBefnbn  U-
lowed  i  the  Hopletea  being  the  armed  mm,  or
warriota  ;  the  Argadca,  labwirera  or  ktabaodsin;  {
the  Aegicorai,  goalherda  or  ahc^herda.  It  it  diffi-
cult, howaret,  to  diacorer  in  the  firat  name  anr  ndi
meuing,  unleu  TiA^ami,  and  not  reX^rr'ii,  be
the  true  reading,  in  which  cue  it  haa  been  a^
poaed  that  thia  tribe  might  be  a  aaocfdoUl  aeder^
mmi  TiAfv,  naed  ia  ila  leligioua  aeoae  :  or  a
peaaontry  who  paid  rent  to  the  lord*  of  the  nil,
from  T(A(ir,  in  the  aenae  of  to  pajf.  Againat  the
former  of  Iheae  intsrprttationi  it  may^  be  obi«trd,
that  no  trace  of  a  prieatly  crdei  ia  to  be  fonnd  in
later  tiroee  of  Attic  biitory  ;  and  agaiott  tbe  laCtir,
that  the  Argadea  and  the  Teieontei  wodd  dcnota
a  aimilar  eloia  of  people,  onloa  we  rtaort  to  another
interprctaticm  of  the  word  Argadea,  via.  ortEiau,
who  vivuld  hardly  conatiaite  a  diatinct  tribe  in  h
eaiiy  a  period  of  aociely.  It  may  be  ohoerved,
however,  that  Arvadea  and  Aegicorea  may  be  taken
to  aignify  a  load  diatribatioii  of  iulialiitanta,  the
former  being  the  tillera  of  the  gnmid,  dirdling  in
the  plain,  the  Utter  mountaineera  ;  and  thia  agics
very  well,  not  only  with  tlie  known  cbaracur  of
the  countTT  of  Attica,  but  alM  with  the  diviaien
having  eiialed  in  tbe  raga  of


re  difGcnlty  u


ne  caae  than  io  the  ulbiT,
^. „  if  the  tribea  were  deoonii-

nnted  fnim  their  localiliea  at  occqialiaiia,  while
olhen  owed  their  namea  to  other  drenmatanxi.
Aigadn  and  Aegicorea  might  be  the  old  tnlobii-
anta,  according  lo  their  nenooi  diriuaD  ;  while  tha
other  two  tribea  might  ba  the  Iodic  aetilen,
Hopletea  the  moot  waiitke  portian  of  tbeia,  Grle-
ontea  the  great  body,  ao  eaUed  fran  a  ion  of  loo.
Or  tha  laat  might,  at  SchOmaiin  thinka,  be  abe  bb-
cienl  nobiiitj,  at  dittisguiahad  ftaa  the  tooie
aettlera.  Wbatenr  be  ute  tmth  with  ic^hi  to
the  migin  of  thete  tribea,  one  thing  ia  mure  certain.
that,  befcire  the  ttma  of  Theaeqa,  whom  hinariaiii
agree  in  repreaenting  aa  the  grvat  founder  of  the
Altic  commonwealtli,  the  variooi  people  who  iit-
hubited  the  country  continued  tc


Theaeua  in  tome  mmauie  i^aaged  tbe  idalim
of  the  triboa  to  each  other,  by  iatrodaong  a
gradation  of  lanki  in  each  ;  dividiag  tha  pnpl*
mio  Lbwarpltai,  r«>fidpai,and  A  viwipVM,  cf  wbtan
the  Snt  woe  ooblea,  the  Mcend  agrioiItBricn  er
yeomen,  the  tkird  laboorera ' ' '


aeat  of  gorenunent,  encouraged  the  nsblea  to  leaide
there,  and  luirendered  a  part  of  the  laral  nro-
gativa  in  their  &v(«ii.  The  Tribea  ar  PhyW
were  divided,  either  in  the  age  of  Tbenna  or  bdib
after,  each  into  three  ^parfiai  (a  Ibid  eqaivaleBl
to  fratemitiea,  and  analf^oua  in  ita  political  rdalwa
to  the  Boman  Curiae),  and  each  fforfim  iou
thirty  yimt  (equivalent  to  the  Bfaoan  CaalaaX  tie
memben  of  a  yirtr  being  (sUad  ypw^rm  at
iiurraxirrti.  Btsb  yiroi  wii  tiaringiiiihi  A  b*  a
particiilar  name  of  a  pMnmymiG  (ana,  wLith  waa
derived  finm  aome  lun  B  iB|tk)a  MwaWir. W*


Ifam  from  PoIIdi  (liii.  Ill)  tlut  then  diTiuou*,
Ihoogh  the  Dunc*  Kcm  to  inipon  funilT  coimeelion,
wen  ID  bet  Brtifidal ;  vbich  ibovi  that  (rme  od-
tann  bad  now  been  made  towardi  the  etablUh-
nent  ef  a  cloaer  political  nnion.  The  memben  of
the  ^porploi  and  7^  had  theii  nipectJTe  leligioug
ritet  and  fealinit,  which  were  pieterred  long  tlW
theia  coouniuiitiet  had  lost  their  poULical  import-
ance, and  perhapA  prerentad  tJi«m  horn  boiog  aLt<h
gether diiiolTed.  (CompBNNiahahi,£fu(.^AnM,
TDl.i.p.31t,&e.)

The  relation  hetwecD  the  fbni  Ionic  trihea  and
the  three  claiHi,  into  whieh  TheMot  divided  the
nation,  ii  a  diScalt  and  peiplexii^  qualion.  It
would  appear  from  the  itatementi  of  ancient  writeti
on  the  nibject  that  anal  at  the  four  tribca  wu
divided  into  Enfatridae,  Oeomori,  and  Demiiugi  1
which  ii  confiimed  b;  the  fact  that  the  four
^hoCarUfii,  who  wen  the  aueuon  of  the  (o-
vereign,  wen  all  taken  bom  the  Enpatiidae,  bnt
at  the  lanM  time  one  from  ouh  tribe.  [PuiLO-
BASlLiiB.]  Thii,  u  ThiilwsU  (Zfttf.  a/Gnm,
ToL  ii.  p.  10)  hu  remarked,  am  onlj  be  conceived
poaaiUe  on  the  tnppotition,  that  the  diitinctioni
which  origuiaUf  eepanted  the  tribei  had  become
ineiely  nominal  ;  but  Maiden  {Hiit.  if  Botn,  p.
IID),  who  njecli  the  notion  that  the  four  Ionic
tribea  were  caatei  deriving  their  name  btaa  their
employment,  enppoee*  that  the  Tribea  or  Phyloe
ccsulited  of  the  Eupalridae  alone,  and  that  the  latter
were  dirided  into  four  Phylae  like  the  patrician*
at  Rome  into  three.  The  Gconiori  and  Demiuigi
had  therefore,  according  to  hi*  atippoaitioo,  nothing
to  do  with  the  tribea.  This  view  of  the  nibject
would  remove  maaj  difficultie*  ud  ii  moit  in  ac-
eotdanee  with  the  lubtcquEiit  liiitar;  and  politiol
analogie*  in  nthet  data,  but  leemi  haidlj  inp-
pocted  b;  luSdent  evidence  to  wairent  (u  in  re-
ceiving it.

After  tiie  age  of  Theaeui,  the  mmanhy  having
been  fliM  limited  and  aflerwardi  aboliihed,  the
whole  power  of  tbe  Mate  fell  into  the  hendi  of  the
Eiipalriiaa  or  noblea,  who  held  all  civil  officea,  and
bad  beiidea  tha  management  of  leligioiu  aSuti,  and
the  inte^tetttion  in  the  lawi.  Atlica  became
agitated  by  fradi,  umI  we  find  the  pei^e,  ihoctly
belim  the  kgiilation  cJ  Solon,  divided  into  three
poniea,  Iltiliaiw  or  bwlanden,  AiiUpiot  oi  high-
landeia,  and  ndpaAni  or  people  of  the  •»  coaat.


TBIBU3.  115S

noTAttio,  and  named  them  aJUt  ten  of  the  an-

mt  heroei :  ErnAStmi,  A^eit,  PaadkmU,  Leontit,

AcamaMit,  Otfoit,  Ctompu,  HtppotioaiUi;  Aeam-

TheM  tribet  were  divided  each  into

I  number  of  which  wai  aftarwaida  in-

ibdiviiion  ;  but  the  ar


The  I


a  fint  remind  n


ndDia.


and  the  three  par.
It  the  claaiei


eelabliibed  fa;  Thenna :  tbe  Gnl  i
vhoaa  prapeitj  lajr  in  the  champaign  and  moat
iistile  part  of  the  coimtrri  the  teomd,  the  amaller
landownera  and  ehepherda  ;  the  third,  the  trading
and  mining  chtas,  who  had  b;  thii  time  riaen  in
wealth  and  importance.  To  appeate  their  diicordi.
Salon  wu  applied  to  ;  and  thenupoo  fimmed  fail
celebrated  cnnatitution  and  code  of  laws.  Here
wfl  have  onlf  to  notice,  that  he  retained  the  Sovi
teibeaaibe  found  them,  but  aboliBhed  the  exiating
diitinctiona  of  runt,  or  at  all  event!  gresllj  di-
miniihed  theit  importance,  b;  introducing  bit  pro-
perty qualificatioa,  or  diriuDn  of  the  people  into
nirraicDiriofi^itpiVi,  'InrtTi,  ZtirfrTu,  and  @irrit.
The  enacmienu  of  Solon  continued  to  be  the  /nc
At  Athena,  though  in  great  meaaun  impended  bj
tbe  tyranny,  until  the  dcmoaatic  nfotm  effected  by
"  -  -^  -.  He  abolithed  the  old  tribea,  and  cn-
w  ODBt,  aeeording  to  a  geogi^hical  divi-


to  made,  that  tevetai  ijittot  not  cnntigaoue  or
to  one  another  were  joined  to  make  up  a  tnoe.
[DxMut.]  The  object  of  thii  arrangement  wai,
that  by  the  breaking  of  old  auoclalioni  a  perfect
and  luting  niolution  might  be  efiected,  in  the
habit!  and  feeling!,  aa  well  u  the  political  uga-
niiation  of  the  people.  He  allowed  tbe  ancient
^poTploj  to  exiit,  but  Ihey  were  deprived  of  ail
political  itnponance.  All  fcHeigneia  admitted  to
tbe  citiaenihip  were  regiiteied  in  a  Phyle  and
Demiu,  hat  not  in  a  Pbralria  ai  Oenoi ;  wbenca
Ariatophanei  (Awh,  419,  Ava,  76S)  laja,  ai  ■
taunting  mode  of  detignMiog  new  citiinu,  that
Ihey  have  no  phrolor!,  or  only  baibaroui  onea
' iladbyNiehnhr,ToI.Lp.313). The  function*


that  of  the  forty-eight  yaunpoptat
into  wnicn  tne  old  tribea  had  been  divided  Sir  the
purpoie  of  taxation,  but  which  now  bccwne  uekai,
the  luiea  being  collected  onadifiercntiyitem.  Tht
reformi  of  Cleiithenei  wen  deitined  to  be  perma-
nent. They  continued  tobein  force  (withaomefew
intennptioni)  until  the  downial  of  Athenian  inde-
pendence. The  ten  tribe!  were  blended  with  the
whole  uiBchineiyoftbeconttitntion.  OftheSenale
of  five  hundred,  fifty  wen  choien  ftam  each  trili&
The  allotment  of  iuiaa-rai  waa  according  to  tiibei;
and  the  nme  ayitem  of  election  may  he  obaerved
in  mott  of  the  ptincipai  officea  of  itate,  judicial  and
magiMerial,  civil  and  miliiaiy  ;  ai  that  of  tbetiai.
nrral,  tjrfiaral,  Tit\rtiai,  Tt/iiai,  Ttixcowl,  ^i.
XapxDS  oTpaTtryoi,  Ac  In  B.C  307  Demetrini
Polioroetea  incnaeed  the  nnmbec  of  tiibei  to  Iwelio
by  creating  two  new  onea,  namely  Antigimiai  and
Dtmtbvu,  which  aftervaciU  received  the  name*
of  Ploltwiau  and  AUalu:  and  a  thirteenth  wa*
■ubaeqaentiy  added  by  Hadrian,  bearing  hia  own
name.  (PIuLAmKt.  lOi  Pati*.i  G.  g  5;  Pollux,
yiilUO.)

The  preceding  account  it  only  intended  ai  a
brief  iketch  of  the  inbject,  lince  it  i*  treated  of
under  Kveral  other  article*,  which  ihould  be  read

DbMUS; PaVLASCHI; PBTLOBABUIia,  Ale]

(See  Wachimnlh,  voL  i.  pL  L  pp.  224—340,-
Hennann,£etr4KAil.Grieat.Jliia«.  S§  24,  93,94,
11],  175, 176;  Schiimann,  AiU.Jiir.piib.  pp.  165,
178,  200,  39£  ;  ThiriwaU,TeL  iL  pp.  1—14,82,
73.)  [GH.K.]

2.  Roman.  Tbe  three  ancient  Ronalian  tribes
the  Rcmnea,  Titiea,  and  Lnceraa,  or  the  Ram-
nente^  Titienaea,  and  LucennMi,  to  which  the
fatriciani  alone  belonged,  muat  be  diatlnguiihed
from  tbe  thirty  plebeian  tiibei  of  Servina  TuUhu,
which  wen  en^rely  local,  four  for  the  city,  and
twenty-iii  for  the  connny  around  Rome.  The
hiitcry  end  organiiatioD  of  tbe  three  ancient  tribe*
i*  ipaken  of  under  Patkicu.  They  contmoed  of
pobtical  importance  almoit  down  to  the  time  ef  the
decemvinl  Imitation  ;  but  after  thii  time  they  i»
longer  occST  in  the  hiiloty  of  RcDe,  except  ai  an
obaolcta  intdtatim.

The  inttiCution  and  orgamiatlon  of  the  thirty
plebetan  tribe*,  and  theii  iubsequent  itdnctioo  to


1IG6


TRIBUS.


twentj  by  Ae  cmiqiiMta  at  Ponemut,  itt  ipoki
of  onder  Pubxs.  Ths  fonr  city  tribw  were
e^l«d  bj  the  nrae  name  u  the  Tegioni  which
they  ocmpied,  vii.  5iihinmii,  Etjuilina,  Obllma,
nDAPalahiia.  iVam,De Lin^.  LtO.  r.  SS.  ;  FalDi,
I.  V.  Uriatat  Iribai.')  The  taaua  of  ihe  aiiteeD
CDuntrr  tribei  which  continued  to  bdoDg  to  Kome
after  the  comgncat  of  Ponemui,  tn  in  their  alpha-
betical order  u  fslloir:  Amilia,  Cmiilia,  Cor-
ndia^  FtAia^  Qaleria^  Horatia^  Lemoma,  Metuma,

Fapiria,  Paaia  (which  Niebuhr,  i.  n.  f

to  be  the  uune  as  the  Poblilia,  whicb
tuted  at  a  Uur  &iat),  Papnia,  Papiitia,  Jtonalia,
Serpia,  I'tturia,  and  VolttMia,  (Compare  OSttling,
CeiA.  d.  R6ta.  Saatin.  p.  23S.)  At  Rome  gn,-
dnally  acquired  poweuion  of  more  of  the  mr-
rounding  ■emtoiy,  the  nnmbei  of  tribea  alio  wai
gradually  increaied.  When  Appiui  Claadiiu,
with  hia  nmncnnu  train  of  elienti,  emigrated  to
Rome,  landi  were  auirned  to  them  in  the  diitrict
where  the  Anio  flom  into  the  Tiber,  and  a  new
tribe,  the  tribni  Clandia,  woa  fonned.  Thii  tribe,
which  Livy  (ti.  1 6,  if  tbe  reading  i>  correct)  catti
twAu  Oaiidio  iriiiu,  waa  tnbteqnenlly  enlaiged,
and  wai  then  deaifrnaled  by  the  name  Ovrt
nt  Clutumima.  (Niebahr,  i.n.  1236.)  This
ii  the  lint  iustance  of  a  coonliT  tribe  being  r
after  a  place,  for  the  aiiteen  older  tmei  ^1  derived
their  nsmea  from  pertoni  or  hercea  who  were  in  the
•une  relation  to  them,  aa  the  Attic  benei  called
iriniun  were  to  the  Attic  phylae.  In  B.  c  S87,
the  tnimbcr  of  tribei  was  incinaed  to  twen^-fiTe
by  thp  addition  of  four  new  onei,  rii.  the  St^a-
rina,  Tramtiititta,  SiJiatiita,  and  Armam.  (Lit.
Ti.  S  ;  Niebuhr,  it  p.  575.)  In  BS8  b.  d  two
more,  the  Prmptina  and  PtJiHHa,  were  filmed
of  VolBciani.  (Lir.  viL  li.)  In  B.  C.  3S2,  the
Ceninn  (j.  Publiliua  Phila  and  Sp.  Poatumini
incrcaaf  d  Ihe  numbfr  of  tribea  to  twenty-nine,  br
the  addition  of  the  Maeda  and  Satptia.  (LiT.TJjL
17.)  In  B.  c  316  the  Ufentaa  and^o&nuwere
added.  (Lir.  ix.  20.)  In  b.c  299  two  otheia,  thf
Aniaua  and  Tan:a6ma  were  added  by  the  cenion
(Lir.  T.  9),  and  at  laat,  m  B.C  Sil,  thenombetor
tribea  wai  augmented  to  thirty-fire,  by  the  addition
of  iheQu'riitaand  TeUu.  Tbii  number  wai  never
afterwarda  increaaed,  aa  none  of  tbe  conquered
cntiDui  were  after  ihia  incorporated  with  the  ao-
Tereign  Roman  iiaw.  (Liv.  £>«<.  19,  i.  43-)  When
the  tribea,  in  their  anembliei,  triunacted  any  buai-
neu,  B  certain  order  (onfo  tf^nmn)  wai  olnerTed,
in  which  they  were  ailed  npon  to  give  iheit  lotei.
The  fint  in  the  order  of  aucceaaion  wia  the  Snbo-
lana,  and  the  latt  the  Amicnaia.  (Cic.  de  Lig.  Aj/r.
ii.  29.)  Any  peraon  belonging  to  ■  tribe  had  in
important  documeati  to  add  to  iiiiown  name  that  of
hii  tribe,  in  the  abla^ve  cue.  (NouiN,  p.  802,  h.
Compare  Becker,  Aosffi.  da-  Sm.  AUerli.  tdI.  ii.


Whetha


it)


t'^ether  the  local  tribu,  ai  they  were  edabliaEied
by  the  conetitatian  of  Serrini  Tulliui,  eonluned
only  the  plebeian!,  or  indndei  the  patriciana  alw,
i<  a  point  m  which  the  opiniona  of  modem  icbolan
an  diiided.  Niebuhr,  Waller,  and  othen,  think
that  the  patriciana  were  excluded,  ai  they  had  al-
ready arcgular  organiiation  of  their  own;  Wacht-
mnth,  Qerlacb,  Bein,  Becker,  and  othen,  on  the
centriiy,  m^tain  tlat  the  paniciani  alio  were  io-
eorpotated  in  the  Sarriio  tribe*  ;  but  they  allow,  at
the  MBK  time,  tlwt  by  fi«  the  majori^  of  the  people
■D  the  anambliat  of  th*  tribea  wcca  ^ebeiani,  and


TRIBUTUM.

Ihathaiee  the  chaiacter  of  tbeae  ■MCnUiea  wai  <■•
■cntially  plebeian  ;  eipecially  a*  tbe  patriciana,  iMng
H  few  in  nnmhen.  and  each  of  thern  havii^  do  BMre
infiuencs  in  them  than  a  pldieiaii,  aeldoan  atteided
the  meetinga  of  the  tribe*.  Tbepaangcs,  bowerer,
which  are  qooted  in  anppon  ot  thia  <qiiniai,  are
partly  inauffidenl  to  prove  the  point  (aa  Lir.  iL  S^
60  ;  Dionya.  ii-  41),  and  paidy  beka^  to  a  hta
period,  when  it  oertainly  cannot  be  donbted  Ikal
the  patridana  belong  to  the  tribea-  We  BiBB
therefore  inppoae,  with  Niebuhr,  that  down  ta  ibe
decemvinJ  tejiilation  the  tribe*  and  their  aaaeoi-
blie*  were  entirely  plebeian.

The  auemblie*  of  the  tribe*  (oMutttMMa),  ii
long  aa  they  were  confined  to  the  pJebnan^  eaa
scarcely  have  had  any  influence  apoo  tbe  aftin  t4
the  itate ;  all  they  had  U  do  wai  to  rmiie  tbe  lli-
hunim,  to  hold  the  tciiea  for  the  armiei,  and  to
manage  their  own  local  end  religioni  aiBuia.  [Tai-
BUNiia;  pLSBia.] (Fcit  (.m.  Jwigaria,  PMica
nou,  Sabrimn  ;  Varro,  dt  Lutg.  Lot.  vi.  34  ;  Gc
pro  Ann.  28; Macrob.  5U.  L  4.  16.) lluir
meeting*  were  held  in  the  forvra,  and  tbeir  t^ttat
of  action  wai  not  extended  by  the  fstaUiihiBeBt  of
tbe  npnblic The  ficit  gnat  point  thc^  |niwd
wai  tfatrm^  the  lex  Valeria,  pa»ed  by  Valeria*
Pnblicola. fLiGii  Valibiab.] Bat  tbe  time
from  which  Ihe  incieaae  of  the  power  of  tbe  ca-
mitia  of  the  tribe*  mntt  be  dated,  i*  that  in  whiA
the  tribuni plelrii wen instituted (494 b.  c).
During  the  time  of  the  decenviial  legi^atiia  tie
comitia  were fcr  a  ahcst  lime  deprived  ef  their
infinenee,  bat  we  hate  enry  reann  to  belieTe  tkit
immediately  after,  probably  by  thii  legiahtiia  ic-
tiAt,  the  eonitda  trilKita,  inatoid  of  ■  raeidy  pie-
betas,  became  a  nalioiial  anembly,  inaamiicb  at
benceforth  patridana  and  fraehiBn  dienta  wen  n-
corpoiBted  in  the  tribet,  and thna obtained  the
rigat  of  laking  part  in  their  aamnbliea- (Liv.  iv,
V. 30,  Ti. IS, iiii. 37-) Thii  iww  cM-
ioB  of  the  tribe*  alio  explain*  the  otberne
nnntable  phenomena  mentioaed  in  the  artide
TbibdnuS,  that  pBtriciani  tooghl  die  protectim  of
the  tribnnei,  and  thai  on  one  oceatita  evsi  two  ef
'  e  trihunea  wen  patriciana. From  the  latter  bet
bai  been  infernd,  with  grfat  piiababilitT,  that
about  that  time  attempti  wue  made  by  the  patri-
ciana to  ahare  the  triboneahip  with  the  pleboani.
"it  notwithalanding  the  tzicoipiintim  tt  the  palii-
ini  in  the  tribes,  the  comitia  tribnta  remained
lentially  plebeian,  at  tlie  taoM  anae*,  wbieh
luld  have  acted,  had  the  patrician*  betn  incbidcd
tbe  tribet  by  Serriui  Tnilhta,  were  itiH  in  i^ie-

mber  than  two  centoriea  beliire. HeDca  tbe  old

me  of  plebiadtnm,  which  meant  or^pnaJly  a  re-

•olution  of  Ihe  ptebe*  only,  althoagh  in  ■  *triet

■enie  ti  the  word  do  luigtr  appKcahla,  w**  nil)

rttaioed,  ai  a  naolniian  of  lb*  eomida  tribota  vat

practically  a  retolation  of  the  nlebea,  wbU  tbe

patrician^  even  if  they  had  vated  again*  it  nsBBi-

mooily, could  not bare prevenlad. Ifoenir,

thii,  the  patridam  [aohably  allimtnl  th*

ribnta  Ttry  leldom. For  a  bioc*  ill  lali  J

account  o(  the  comitia  trihcla,  mt  CoMtna  tbi-

B'-iT*-  [L.  aj

TRIBUTA  COMFTIA  [COMlna.]

TRIBOTC/RIA  AtTIO.  [SuiYTFa,  p.  10S7.J

TRIBDTUM  i*  a  tax  wbicb.  ■*  Nietehr  (Ate.

of  Rome,  L  p.  468)  iBpfaaeaiWa*  Bt  Sntpnl  gslf


TRIBUTUIL
Ihs  mcieiitt  in  TOUwetion  with  the  Stnim  tribe*  g
for  Tana  (•!(  Umg.  LaL  T.  181)  nri 'tribatiun
dictmn  ■  lr)bnboi."  uid  Utj  (i.  48)  **  tpibn«  »p-
pellllu  « tribnlo."  Bol  Ihii  wani  to  be  only  fai^
lull;  eomet,  m  Utt  (St.  60}  upnulj  itatei  tint
tfaa  palm  alio  paid  tlw  nme  lax.  It  ia  iudsed
true,  that  the  r"™***"'  had  Utile  teal  landed  pre-
pertj,  aad  that  theii  chief  poenMMBa  belonsed  to
the  eger  pabticai,  which  wa*  not  accomted  m  the
cennu  a*  Teal  pnptftf.  and  of  irhicfa  only  the
tithee  had  to  be  paid,  nntjl  at  a  hta  period  an  al-
tentioo  ■«  attODptad  by  the  Ia  Thoria.  (Apinan,
dt  BtlL  CW.  i.  27.)  ^t  then  ii  do  reaaon  fbi
aoppoaing  that  the  patricUoi  did  not  pay  the  Iri-
bstniB  upon  their  teal  piopettj,  allhoogh  Iba
neater  put  of  it  nataiallir  (all  npon  tho  plebaiaiu.
[LiT.  if.  60,  t.  10.)  the  impoit  ilaelf  Tariod  ao-
cCFiding  to  the  eiigendoi  of  the  iCata,  and  «ai
partly  applied  to  corei  tho  oTpaniei  of  war,  and
partly  thoH  of  the  fintifieatiani  of  the  dty.  (Ur.
vL  S%)  The  nmal  anuont  at  the  tax  waa  one  fbc
eTery  IhoBOuid  of  a  manli  loTtima  (Ut.  hit.  IS,
xixix.  7,  44),  thouh  in  the  time  of  Calo  il  wai
nuaed  to  ihrte  in  a  thouand.  The  tfibatmi  w«i
not  a  pnpertj  lax  in  the  itriet  aenie  of  the  word,
for  the  Bccoimti  mpeetiiig  the  plebeian  debloia
eleariy  imply,  that  the  debce  were  not  dedneted  in
the  TalDBtini  af  a  penoa'i  property,  lo  that  he  had
to  pay  the  tribntttm  upon  property  which  waa  not
hia  own,  hat  which  ha  owed,  and  for  which  he  had
ooniequBntly  to  pay  the  intemi  aa  well.  Il  wee
a  dii«t  tax  npon  object!  wilhont  any  regard  to


npon  obji
c,  tike  a  la


o  han  made  il


581.)  Tbol
oppreaure,  wu  lu  connaiu  nucmatjon,  ji  wa>
railed  unrding  to  the  regioni  or  tribea  inititnled
by  Snriui  Tnlliui,  and  by  the  tribnite*  of  iheae
uibet  mbKqoenlly  called  tribani  aomiii  (Dionya-
IT.  14,  !5.)  Dianyua*,in  another  pauage  (ir.  19)
■tatri  that  it  wai  impowd  upon  the  cenlurie*  ac-
cording to  their  ceniiu,biit  thii  leemi  to  be  a  mia-
take,  a«  the  eenwriee  contained  a  nmnber  of  ja-
Diorea  who  were  jet  in  their  bthera'  power,  and
eoDteqnently  could  not  pay  the  Iributam.  It  WM
not  like  the  other  branchea  of  the  pobHo  ie*enue  let
oat  to  &rm.  but  being  fixed  in  money  it  waa
ruaed  by  the  trihnnei,  imleM  (u  wae  the  ouo
after  tha  cutoin  of  EiTing  pay  to  the  aoldiara  wa*
inliadDced)  the  aotdien,  like  the  equilea,  de-
manded it  from  the  penoni  ihemirlTe*  who  wen
bonnd  to  pay  it.  [Ana  iquaTBa  and  aoajiB-
ABIUM.]  When  thii  tar  wm  to  he  paid,  what
•om  wai  to  be  ruied,  and  what  portion  of  eiery
thouiaodawea  of  the  cemui,  were  inatten  npon
which  the  tenaU  alone  had  to  decide.  But  when
il  wa*  decreed,  tha  people  might  refuie  to  pay  it
when  they  thongfat  it  too  heavy,  or  Dn&irly  di»-
tributed,  or  hoped  to  Rain  eome  other  adTintage  by
the  nrfiiiaL  (Ut.  t.  12.)  In  later  timet  the
aenate  lometimea  Mi  it*  regulation  to  the  ceniora,
who  eltan  fixed  it  very  irtjitiarily.  No  dliiea
«a*  exempt  from  it,  but  we  find  thai  the  prieata,
angnra,  and  ponli{E>  made  attenipta  to  get  lid  of '
but  thii  wai  only  an  abuia  which  did  not  hi
(LJT.  iiiiil  42.)  In  caaa  of  great  diatren,  whan
the  tribntnm  wa*  not  tailed  according  to  the
esnaai,  but  to  npply  the  monennry  want*  of
tba  repnbtio,  it  wu  deunated  by  the  nama  of
TrOlam  Temtraraaa.  (Fo*t  ».  v.  TrtbulonHm  cat-
falKBKM.) Afiw  tha  wai  with  Maoadimia  (b.


TRICLINIUM.  1IS7

147),  when  the  Rmnau  tieaiury  wa*  filled  with  tha
nrenuea  accming  Iroai  conqueit*  and  firom  tha
prstincei,  the  Roman  citiient  becanM  exempted
from  paying  the  lribotBm<Cie.  dt  Qf.  ii.  32  i  P!in,
/f.  N.  xniii.  17),  and  thii  lUte  of  thing*  Utted
down  to  ibo  coatulthip  of  Hiitiui  ind  Pania  (4S
B.  c. ;  PIbL  Aem.  PamL  38),  when  the  tributnm
wai  again  levied  on  account  of  the  exhnoited  itale
of  the  aenriuni.  (Camp.  Cic  ad  Pom.  lii.  30,
PUIip.  ii.  87.)  Afler  thii  time  it  wa*  impoead
aMording  to  the  diieretion  of  the  emperor*.

Reapecting  the  tributnm  pud  by  conqnered
omntrie*  and  citie*,  aee  Vsctioil[L  Camp.
HegewiHib.  Fernet  Wtrdk  aSia.  Fiiuaaai,  Al-
ton* 1804;  Boue,  OrwKiii^  de> /^snuuHsai
nffiiei.  J(aal;BiBiinEhweigl803. [L.  S.]

TRICLI'NIUM,thedining-niom  of  a  Ronun
booie,  the  pootioD  of  which,  nlatiTelyto  the  other
part*  of  the  hmiee,  i*  explained  in  p.  438.  It  waa
of  an  oblong  ehape,  and  according  to  VitruTiai  (vi.
3.  §  B)  ought  to  be  twite  a*  long  a*  it  wai  bread.
The  lame  author  (g  10)  deieribe*  triclinia,  evi-
dently intended  to  be  uied  in  inmmer,  which  were
open  towatdi  the  north,  and  had  on  each  ude  a
window  iKtkinginto  a  garden.  The  ■'bouieofihe
Tragic  Poet"  at  Pompeii,  and  alio  that  of  Actaeon,
appear  to  have  had  lummer  dining-rocmi  aprning
to  the  viridarium.  The  woodcut  at  p.  562  ihowi
the  arrangement  of  the  three  coacha  {itcti,  hAiku),
from  which  the  trielinimn  derived  ill  name.  They
bIk  remain  in  the  "  Hdum  of  Actaeon,"  being  built

The  aiticlei  Lacrua,  Tor u* and Pcl Vina H,  eon-
■ ■ " ■ re  u*ed  to  adapt  the«


tofre.


during  the  meal. When

tertainment  they  were  ailed  (nicfina  tirala  (Cue*.
B.  C.  iii.  92  ;  comp.  Alhen.  ii.  pp.  47,  48),  and
they  were  made  to  conetpond  with  one  ano^ier  in
eubUancc,  in  dimemion*.  and  in  ihape.  {Vorro,
L.  L.  ix.  47,  ed.  M'liller.)  Ai  each  gueit  leaned
during  a  great  port  of  the  entertainmeciC  upon  hi*
left  elbow,  »  ai  to  leave  the  right  anu  at  liberty,
and  aa  two  or  mora  lay  on  the  Bme  couch,  the
head  of  one  man  wa*  near  the  brcaat  of  the  man
who  lay  behind  him,  and  be  wo*  therefore  aid  to
lie  in  tliE  boKun  of  the  other.  (Plin.  fjmf.  iv.  2-2.)
Among  the  Bomana,  the  uual  number  of  perun*
occupying  each  couch  wa*  three,  so  that  the  threo
conclie*  of  a  triclinium  afiiirded  accommodation  for
a  nrty  of  nine.  It  waa  the  mle  of  Varro  (Oelliua
liiL  11),  that  the  number  of  gneit*  ought  not  to
belnathan  thatof  the  Oiacei,  not  to  excsed  that
ofthaHuiei.  Sometime!  howerei,  aa  many  a*
four  lay  on  each  of  the  conehee.  (Hor.  Sat.  i.  4.
86.)  Among  the  Greek*  it  wa*  ninal  lor  only
two  penon*  to  recline  on  tach  coach.  (CoKN*,
p.  SOS,  a.]

Inioch  worki  of  ancientaitai  repreienl  a  lym-
poaium,  or  dtinking-party,  we  alwayi  obaerve  that
the  coochea  ais  elevated  above  the  level  of  the
table.  Thii  cireuvitance  throw*  >ome  light  npon
Plntarch'i  mode  of  ulving  the  problem  retpecting
the  increaae  of  room  for  die  gueit*  a*  they  pro-
ce<ded  with  theirmeaL  {Sgmot.  v.  6.)  Each  man
in  order  to  feed  himaelf  lay  Bat  upon  hi*  breaat  or
nearly  ■»,  and  itzvtehed  out  hia  hand  towardi  tho
table  ;  but  aftemidi,  when  hi*  hunger  waa  aatii-
fied,  he  tnnied  upon  hia  left  aide,  liiining  on  hia
elbow.  To  thi*  Horace  allndei  in  deacribing  a
penoD  Bled  with  a  particnkr  diah,  and  turning
41  3


11GS  TRICLINIUM.

ia  ndfr  ta  npowt  npon  hit  ellwv. (jSai,  iL  1.

».)

We  find  tkfl  TBlatiTQ  povtiani  of  two^pflnoni
irtio  i^J  next  to  one  uiothef,  commonly  expmied
bj  thfl  prepnitioni  tiqjer  or  opra  kod  im/ra.  A
pUMga  d[  Litj  (xxiiz.  43),  in  wbich  he  relitei
th*  enui  conduct  of  tba  ooaral  L.  Qaintiug  Plami-
Qiniu,  ihowi  (hit  tiffin  aHqmm  adar*  wu  the
num  ■•  wwni  (ibii|)eit  wian,  uid  toDwqnentljr


■ill

•ummiu
mediui
imiu

7 3
B 2
» 1

Intni
mediui

- nmmi


whow  hxMt  111*  own  bead  ^tpraached.  On  tfaie
principle  we  are  enabled  to  explain  tlie  denomin*-
tiou  both  of  the  three  canchei,  and  of  the  thrae


Snppoung  the  anneied  urangement  to  repnemt
tbeplanotaTiidiniiun,  it  ii  evident  that,  ai  each
gueit  reclined  on  hll  left  ude,the  countenance!  oF
all  when  in  thii  pooition  wen  directed,  fint,  from
No  1  toward!  No  3,  then  fraia  No.  4  towacdi  No.
e,  and  laitlj.  from  No  7  toward!  No.  9  ;  that  the

rat  No.  I  lay,  in  tho  tenu  explained,  aiain  No.
.  No.  S  iBt-M  No.  2,  and  W)  of  the  mt ;  and  that,
gmng  ia  the  nine  direction,  the  couch  to  the  right
band  wai  oiotie  the  olhen,  and  the  couch  to  the
left  hand  bdow  the  olhen,  Acconiingly  the  fol-
lowing fragment of  Salluit  (op. Sen.  u Fir;.

conchei  ai  ihown  on  the  plan  :  "  Igitor  diicn-
buere:  SerioHii>  (>:<i.  A'o.  G)  inferior  in  medio;
inper  eum  L.  Fabiui  Hiipanien^ienator  ex  pro-
■chptii(  A^o.  5) :  in  tnmmo  Antonioi  (Nn.  1)  ;  et
infia  tcriba  Serlorii  VerNU  (^o.  2) :  et  altar  icri-
ba  Haecenai  (,Nb,  S)  in  imo,  mediui  inter  Tarqai-
ninm  (JVo.  7)  et  dominnm  Perpemam  (Mi.  S)."
On  the  nme  principle.  No.  I  wa«  the  higheit  place
llMOU  nfliniu)  on  the  higheit  couch  i  No.  3  wai
Locui  imui  in  leclo  lununo  ;  No.  2  Locui  mediua
in  lecto  lummo  ;  and  >a  on.  Ilwill  be  found  that
in  (he  folloa-ing  pauoge  (Hor.  Sal.  11.  8,  30—23}
the  gueita  an  enumerated  in  the  order  of  theii  ac-
cnbatlon — an  order  exhibited  in  the  annexed  dia-
gram.


.3 3

isl

Popcini

ffAfanoLj

Varioi

Vii™

Fundaniui

Fnndaniui,  one  of  tbe  gutita.  who  wai  at  the  top
relatitel;  lo  all  the  olfaen,  taji,

■■  Smnmui  egOi,  et  pnpe  me  Viacna  Thnrinna,  et
infim.

Si  ranaiai,  Varina :  enm  Serrilio  Baktrona

Vibidiui,  quoi  Maecena*  addniarat  umbrai.

NomeDtaoui  irat  mper  ipanm,  Porciiu  infra."


TRIEKARCHIA.
It  ii  pouibla  that  Maecenaa  onght  to  be  ia  the

place  No.  4  initead  of  No  S.  lincc  the  entertain-
ment WBi  given  men  eapecialljin  honeor  of  hiii,
and  No.  4  waa  an  hmooimble  place.  The  ban
himecl^  NaHdienu!,  oecupiei  the  place  No.  8,
wbicli  wai  DBuailj  taken  b;  the  maitrr  of  the  (att,
and  waaa  conTonicnt  litaatian  for  giving  dineiiwa
and  niperintanding  the  ontertaiDnient.  llnlaa
there  be  an  exception  in  the  inalanee  of  No.  4,  it  it
lo  be  obeerved  that  at  each  table  the  moat  banoop-
iddle  place.  (Viijt.  ^n.  i  698.)


The.


soft)


called  In-

deiiania,  wha,throaghtheiDttni[DenlBltljofoLkH
•iavei  of  inferioi  lanli,  took  care  that  everj  thing
wM  kept  and  proceeded  in  popet  order.  [J.  Y.l

TRIDSNS. [FuacoA.]

TRIENS. [Ai.]

TRIERA'RCHIA  (rpntpan'-)-  TUi  wu
one  of  tbe  axtiaoidinaij  wat  lervNc*  at  litnipM
[LBtnmou]  at  Atbeui,  (be  ofcicet  of  wUek  wu


who  bonlh*  M
iitad  bum  verj  cvif  timea  in  oonnectioD  wilb  tbe
forty-eight  nancrarie)  oF  Bdan,  and  the  Gfl;  id
Cleiitfaeiiei :  each  of  which  coipoEatian*  ^MUi
to  bave  been  obliged  to  eqoip  and  man  m  Tn«l.
(Camp.NaucuBiA:  La  Sid.  p.  283.)  Undfi
the  conditntion  <if  Cluilhenei  tbe  ten  tnbea  wtia
at  tint  •eterally  diaigeA  with  five  VEiaila.  Ttaii
charge  wai  of  coune  lopeneded  bj  the  kur
fbrmi  of  the  Tiiorarchf ,  axpfauoed  in  the  caniae  af
thii  article,

I,  Til  rnnieet  b  iMii  tig  TVwwrati  Ben  OMi.
What  theie  were  pnviooilj  ta  SiB  b.  c  there  eu
be  no  doabt ;  tbe  veaael  wat  fimitbed  by  tbe  itale,
though  loaietimea  a  wealthy  and  pMiiotie  indivi-
daalienedin  faiaownihipL  deintu.  br  ioitase^
did  10  at  Attemiiitim  (Hand.  viiL  IT),  bvl  ai  itit
particolaily  recorded  that  tbii  ihip  wai  hia  own,
we  may  infer,  (hat  be  mpplied  at  hia  own  eoM
what  tbe  itate  waa  bound  to  provide.  Tbe  nm
cnilora  prevailed  during  the  Pelopoaneaian  wat
alio,  llie  1(H)  ihip*  pnpared  and  reacrred  ai  tbe
beginning  of  the  war,  for  an;  critical  ma  mim.i.
were  lupplied  by  the  itate.  (Thucjd,  il  24,)  Id
the  expedition  againil  Sidlj  (id.  vL  31)  the  itatc
fnmiihed  the  hull  of  the  vend  (Hwr  aapdeX  and
the  pay  of  the  crewt,  a  drachma  per  day  fu  tadi
man :  but  the  eqnipmcot  of  the  diipa  ina  at  ibo
coat  of  the  TrienRha,  wbo  abo  gna  jwifi^al
(Pollux,  iii.  94),  or  additioudpay  to  aacoie  tbe
belt  men.  The  lanM  cooduaiona  aie  ^le  dednd-
bio  tkooi  tbe  credit  wbichaTtiaiBrcb  nktatahiB-
lelf  for  nving  hi*  vmei,  when  the  ciij  loat  brt
■hipa  at  Aegotpolaim  (Iiao'.  e.  Caliim,  3G2):
and  from  the  fnnher  itatement  that  bo  paU
the  BJIon  out  of  hU  own  poekM.  From  tbi
threat  of  Cleon  (Ariiti^  Bjmil.  916)  that  he
would  (ni  tTprrirrii)  make  an  adrenaiy  a  Trier
Bich,  and  give  bim  an  old  *hip  with  a  retiea
{larlar  varpir),  i|  appean  that  the  ilaU
lied  tha  hull  and  mait  alio,  bat  that  the  Triei^
mi  bound  to  ke^  and  ntam  them  in  gond
repair :  an  obllalioii  eipreeied  in  tbe  inKripuoe*
qnoled  by  BSckh  jUrtatim  Sir  An  Avwn—  ^
'-'  imahata,  p.  iSIJk  bj  Ika  pblMe,  M  vi.-


TRIEKARCHIA.
r^»  Mcifor  ral  im\ii  wofaStBm.  Cotm-
qntnll;  ths  itatemeiit  in  tba  ontiini  (glSiul  Hi-
diu  (|k  fi64.  32)  that  wheo  DeaxxIliniM  ni  qnita
joong  (B.C.S64)  Uw  Triervcb*  paidtU  the  ei-
paoM*  thcniwim  (id  jMiXil^iaTa  Is  rmr  BEwr)
«nl7  lmpli«  tint  Ihej  ditnycd  Ihi  simdhi  wbich
wcra  coitomiirT  atthmt  lin,  and  whkti  mraaftat*
wudi  dimini^Fd  bf  ths  ngnktion  of  the  tym-
moiiac  ;  but  nol  that  thty  nipplied  Ihe  ibip,  oi
pBj  and  protinons  for  th*  craw.  Tha  wbola  ax-
pcDditDM,  MT*  BSckb,  ineuit  nothing  mora  tluu
the  (qnipmant  oftheTe««1,thak«ipingitin  npair,
and  tha  prDairing  tha  oaw  which  wai  atlandad
with  much  troDbla  and  aipoiH,  ai  tha  Triannhi
wera  WHnatiniai  obliged  ta  gire  boimtiat  in  ordu  to
induce  p«ioDi  to  aerra,  foreign  tailon  not  being
•dmiaaible.  From  tha  ontion  of  DemulhaDei
■gaiaat  Polfde*  (b.  c.  361),  wehuntha  following
narticnlan  about  tha  Triaiarcfaj  of  that  limo^
Tba  TrMiardu  wara  obliged  >  lanndi  their  ihip  ;
tiie  ailoT*  wera  lappliad  turn  particnlu  sariibe*
((4f«H}i  thnagb  tba  agancj  of  tbe  daaMcbi  t  b«t
thoaa  aopfdied  to  ApoUodona  tbe  diaot  of  Demoa-
lb«K«  warn  but  faw  and  inaffiEiaBt,  uniaqnenlhr
ha  mangaged  hi*  aetata  (linMitu  t^  eMar),
ud  hind  tha  beat  men  he  eoald  get,  giving  great
bountiee  and  preminmi  (apMam).  He  alao
•quipped  the  thhI  with  bie  own  tackle  and  fbmi-
tnra,  taking  uotfaing  ftrmi  the  public  atoi«i  (Jk  twi
BtUiaiibir  aitir  Ikegar.  Compu*  tha  Speech  on
tha  Crown  of  tha  Trierareh}-,  p.  1229).  MoreoTer
in  conteqiKiKa  of  hit  aulim  deaarting  when  be
■wn  ontat  an,  he  wm  put  to  additional  and  hesTy
vrpmaea  in  hiring  men  at  different  porta.  Tha
pcOTiaion  monej  far  the  aailon  (crrTripJffig*)  wai
prOTided  b;  the  itate.  and  paid


file  nontfaa  mote  than  hi*  time,  (frotn  the  it\Kj  of
kit  iiceeaMr  elaM,)  ba  wai  obliged  to  advance  it
hinndf  for  fifteernBonlhi,  with  but  an  uncertain
pnapact  of  repajioent.  Other  cirennntancM  are
mentioned  whidi  made  bil  TrieraichT  very  erpeo'
VTBf  and  tba  whole  apaech  ii  worth  reading,  aa
ahowing  tha  DnUraeB  and  bardihjp  to  wbich  a  rich
nun  wai  aometimea  iDbjeetad  aa  a  Triennh.  Tbe
ebaerration  that  ha  took  no  fnTniCnre  from  tbe  public
alorea,  prorea  that  at  that  time  (B.  c  361),  tbe
triremea  vera  fitted  out  and  Minipped  from  ifae
public  •loRB,  and  coniequentiy  by  ths  itata  ;  but
na  we  leant  from  other  paiiogei  in  Demodbenei.
and  the  intcripticni  in  Dikkh  ( Utlamdn,  No.  iii.),
tba  Trieiarchi  were  obliged  to  reinrn  in  piod  con-
dition anj  article*  wbicli  Ihej  took ;  in  de&nit  of
doing  B  they  were  considered  deblon  to  tbe  atate.
That  the  ibip'a  funiton  wa>  either  whollT  or  in
jmiX  npplied  b;  Ihe  atate,  alto  appear*  from  an-
other ipeech  (e.  Baerg.  H  JUraii.  1146):  bat
Trieraidii  did  not  alvija  anil  tberaaelTo*  of  Ibeir
priTilege  in  tbia  leipect,  that  Ibey  might  haye  no
tioabla  in  aettling  with  the  atate.  Il  ii  aTident
then,  thai  at  tha  lime  referred  to  (about  B.C  360),
Ihe  onlj  eipenaet  binding  npon  the  Trienuchi  were
tboae  of  keeping  in  repair  the  (hip  and  the  ahip'i
fnrntCnre ;  but  eTan  tbeae  might  be  very  coniido
able,  eapeciatly  if  the  thip  were  old.  or  eipoaed  to
bard  aerriee  and  rough  weather.  MoieoTor,  aome
Trieraicha,  whethci  from  ambilioui  or  patriotic
laotitea,  put  themaelvea  to  unncceaaarf  eiDenae  in
fitting  out  and  ligging  ttmr  ahipa,  boa  wbkh  the


TRIERAKCBIA.  IIUI

Arta  deiind  an  adTantage.'  Smatimaa,  on  the
other  hand,  the  atate  lufiered,  bj  the  Trieiaidii
pcrfotming  their  dutiea  at  the  leaat  poaaible  ei-
petiae,  or  letting  oot  their  TrienRh;  (luoMirat
Titr  AerTevp^kr)  to  the  contractor  who  offered  tba
loweat  tender.  {Dem.  dt  Oonm.  TViemr.  1230.)
One  eoaaaquanca  of  thia  waa,  that  the  dutiea  war*
intdeqnawjr  paifonnad ;  but  Ihera  wa*  a  giealei
eril  eoDnacWd  with  it,  nameljr,  that  ths  contoclora
repaid  themaalTea  hj  priTalearing  en  theit  own
acBKmt,  which  led  to  rapiiali  and  letter*  of  maiqoa
being  granted  againit  the  atale.  (Stlaii  Deal.
Id.  1231.)  It  aaem*  Mnnge  that  tba  Atbeniau
tolerated  thii,  eipedallf  u  thej  were  aoDHlimai
iDConiiNant  enough  to  puniih  tbe  Trierarehi  who
bad  1*1  ODt  tbeit  Ttieranhjt  ooDiidering  it  aa  a
deaertjon  of  poet  (Aiirvrdfier,  U.  1230).

We  may  hen  ebaena,  that  tha  aipreaaion  in
iHon*  (lii  ApoU.  HtmL  R7),  that  ■  Trierucb
**  had  hi*  ihip  made  liimaelf "  (n)*  miii  weniixffie-
ror),  deaa  not  mean  that  be  wu  at  the  coat  of
building  it  jwimyytUiwe),  but  only  of  fitting
it  up  and  getting  it  mdy  for  an.  That  the  ahipa
aliraja  bdonged  ta  tbo  (talc^  ia  further  erident
from  tba  bet  that  tbe  aaDala  wu  intraited  with
the  iiupeetion  of  the  ihip-bniMing  [Dtm.  t,  Amdrcl.
BS9.  13)  ;  and  it  placed  beyond  all  donbt  bj  tha
"  Athenian  Navy  Liu"  of  the  inacriptiDn*  m
Btidcb.  { Urhmdm,  du.)  Some  of  tbe  ihipa  llicn
manlioDcd  an  called  dnrutXiffwrei,  wbenoa  it  ap-
pear* that  the  public  Teaaela  wen  aaaigned  by  lot
to  tbo  reipactiTe  Trierareh*.  A  rpti^t  jviloirl-
M»  wa*  a  *hip  pre*ented  to  the  •late  a*  a  tmt  pl^
'joat  aa  Tpnffni  HAoSrat  meani  to  preieni  the  ttata
with  a  trireme  (Dem.  a.  Mid.  S66,  568).  Tha
dnration  of  a  Trieiatthy  waa  a  year,  and  if  any
Trierareh  aerred  longer  than  hi*  ]«al  time,  ba
could  charge  the  eitm  eipenaei  (tJ  iweiftiipdp-
XQUa)  ta  hii  aneceaaw.  To  reeoTer  theaa  eipenaaa
an  action  l^iwtrfti^pafxtiMnt  Kuif)  might  ba
bronghl  agiinat  tbe  mecaaaar,  of  whicb  we  have
an  example  in  tbe  *[ia>eh  of  ApeOodora*  againit
Poircle*,  compcaad  by  DnmathaBaa  lor  the  loniier.

II.  0»  tin  *7«aa  o/  da  TVisnirsly.  Ths»
trould  of  nniae  depend  upon  drcomitancea ;  but
eieept  in  aitraordinaiy  eaaea,  they  were  imt  mora
than  60.  nor  teaa  than  40  minae :  the  average  was
abontfO.  Thna  abont  tbe  year  s.  c.  360,  a  whole
Trieraiehy  wu  let  out  for  40  minaa ;  in  later
time*  lb*  general  amonnt  of  a  contnut  was  SO.
(Dem.  e.  Mid.  S39,  £64.  30,  lU  Certm.  360,  261^)

IIL  Oa  fla  dt^^renl  fima  if  &*  Tf^rar^.
In  ancient  limca  one  penon  bora  the  whole  charge,
afterward*  it  wu  caitomary  lor  two  peraoni  to
than  it,  who  were  then  called  Syntrierarcha  (n*-
Tpnlpiipxc).  When  ihi*  practice  wu  firat  intro-
dnced  i*  not  known,  but  Biickh  conjectniea  that  it
wu  about  the  year  412  b.  c,  afiei  the  defeat  of

peraona  for  the  Choregia  wa*  firit  permitted.  Tba
meat  ancieut  account  of  a  ij  ntiierarehy  ia  later
than  410  (Lyt.  o.  Dio^  907,  M9),  and  wa  meet
with  one  to  iaie  aa  B.  c  358,  the  year  of  tha  Atbe>
nian  expedition  into  Euboea.  (Dem.  e.  Mid.  566.
24.)  Tbe  ayntrierarchy  to  which  we  allude  waa
indeed  a  lolnntary  aerviea  {iwOaait),  but  Ibeie
can  be  little  donbt  that  it  wM  snggMled  by  tha
ordinary  practica  of  that  time ;  and  even  nnder  tha
next  form  of  the  aervice,  two  Trienich*  wala
aometimea  employed  for  the  iianirfiafa  direction  of
ths  Trieianb;. The  •yntrienraby,  howsrar,  did


1160  TRIERAHCHIA.

not  entiRlj  inpencdfl  the  oldflT  mnd  tiDgla  form,
being  only  meant  ai  a  nVitl  in  cue  of  emetgencj,
when  there  t,-u  not  a  luflideat  unmbei  of  wealthy
ciliTcng  to  bear  the  «ip«tu«  lingly.  NnineroBi
initancee  Id  laet  occoF  of  tingle  Trieiarchiea,  he-
tnceo  110  and  35B  h.  c,  and  in  tve  panagee  oi
Iweiu  (ife  Diaaag.  Her.  S«,  lU  ApclL  67),  refct-
ring  to  thii  period,  the  lingle  and  double  Trietar-
chy  are  mentioned  ai  cotempanneoUL  ApoUl
donu  bIh  wai  Kile  Trierareb  (Dem.  e.  f-olyd.)  t
late  ai  B.  c  361.  In  the  cue  of  ■  tyntrienuchy
the  two  Trierarchi  ooniDUUided  theji  Tneel  in  turn,
lii  month!  each  (Id.  IS19),  itccording  u  they
agreed  between  themialTea,

The  third  form  oC  the  Triemrehy  wu  connectad
with,  or  inggeited  by,  the  aynttienKhy.  lu  a.  c.
3511,  the  Athenian!  were  miible  to  procnn  >  *ufB-
cienl  number  of  Iqilly  appointed  Triermrcha,  and

the  actual  eyitfm  wu  not  adequate  to  the  public
ininta.  they  determiued  to  mana^  the  Trieiaichy
iomewhat  in  the  lame  way  u  the  properly  Uiei
[EjsrHonAl,  namely,  by  claim  or  lymmoriae,
according  to  the  law  of  Periander  puaed,ai  Bdckh
■hovi,  in  the  yeai  358,  and  which  wu  the  pri-
mary and  origiiuJ  enactment  on  the  labject.  With
thii  riew  1200  wrnXui,  or  partnen  (Dem.  c.
Afid.  664}  wett  appointed,  who  wen  probably  the
WHilthieit  indiTidaaU  of  the  iiale,  acconling  to  the
ceniui  or  Talnation.  Theee  were  dirided  into  20
cv^i^plcu,  or  clflsaee  ;  out  of  which  a  number  of

ther  the  maintenance  and  management  of  a  ehip,
under  the  title  of  a  <riM-T/Atia  (llarpocr.  (.  n.J  or
naioa  Sometimei,  perhapa,  by  ipecial  enactment,
when  a  grenl  number  of^  ehipt  wu  required,  >
eynteleia  of  ihii  kind  contiited  of  four  ac  Htb
wealthy  inditiduale,  who  bore  jointly  the  ei-
pentcs  of  one  tiiremn  {Harpocr.  j.  v.  ivfitJopia)  ;
but  generally  to  every  (hip  there  wu  aaugned  a
lynirleia  of  fifucii  peruni  of  diRerenl  degreei  of
wealth,  u  we  may  nippoie,  eo  that  four  only  were
provided  for  by  each  lymmoria  of  (iity  penona.

Tbeu  lynteleiae  of  flfieen  penoni  each  aeem  to
hare  been  alio  called  tymmoriae  by  Hyperidea.
(Harpoer.  t.  v. ,-  conipue  Dem.  d*  ^mnor.  183.)
It  appcora, baw«Ter, that  before Demoitbi


if  the  Trie


.nbjecl  (B.


.  340),  i


had  been  cmtomiiy  for  luiten  perwQt  le
a  lynteleitt  or  company  for  a  ihip  (Dem.  pr
Car.  £6 1  >.  who  bore  the  burden  in  equal  tharei
Thii  being  the  ' ""  ' ' '


I  of  the  ■


nuKd  from  1300  to  1280,  or  that  Hme  alterationi
had  taken  place  in  their  internal  amngementa,  of
which  DO  account  horn  coma  down  to  ua.  (Bdckh,
Z/nbuBfci.,  ta.p.lBl,)  From  the  phraie  Jii  T-r  ir
ToTt  Xixmi  aurriKiiir,  oteA  in  the  mniXiryii!  {Je
Cor.  2G I ),  it  would  aUo  teem  that  the  word  Aix«
wu  uaed  of  dvil  u  well  u  military  lU'iuona,  and,
in  thii  initance,  of  the  iymmortae.  The  auperin-
tendence  of  the  whole  lyitem  waa  in  the  hnnda  of
the  300  wealtbietc  memben,  who  were  theiefbre
called  the  *■  leaden  of  the  tymmoriae  "  (^tftjiw
nf  iFvfVH'P'ai'),  on  whom  the  burdena  of  the  trier-
nrchy  chiefly  fell,  or  rather  ought  to  hare  fallen.
(Dem.  pra  Oar.  329,  e.  Entry.  e(  AfaaiL  lUS.)
The  Hivtca  peifonned  by  inditiduale  under  thii
■yilem  appeoi  to  have  bean  the  nme  ai  before:
the  atate  itlll  pnmded  the  aliip'e  Vltic  (i.  t,  the


TRIERARCHIA.
iUna  ral  ordnria  hb!  rx"*^''  ■'I'l  Mber  tUng)),
and  aome  itringent  enaetmenta  ireie  maile  to  eto-
pel  the  Trienuchi  to  delirei  it  np  aaording  Id  the

the  aymmoriaa.  Thii  conelauon,  that  the  nHcl
wu  eqiipped  by  ibe  itate,  ia  confirmed  by  De-
-  -^  -  •d»%mmr.laKn),mi  in  ike  en-
.  Hidnu  (L  o.)  be  my*,  isfaniog  to  tba
'■'  - — mviaB,  thai  the  atate  pnnidad
fbraitDifl.  The  only  dm;  (bca
ler  thii  lyilem  wu  te  keep
uieiE  TcvBBia  ID  UK  Mma  zepAir  aod  order  aa  they
rtcaiTed  theoL  BdI  eren  bom  tbia  they  mamged
to  eacape :  for  tba  wealthiett  membsa,  who  had  U
aaTTa  for  their  lyntcleia,  let  out  their  TrienRhie*
for  >  talent,  and  reoeired  that  amount  from  tbeir
psitnen  {nmtMi),  lo  that  in  reality  tbej  paid
nest  to  nothing,  or,  at  any  rate,  mt  whM  tbry
ought  to  have  done,  eoniidf  ring  that  the  TrieraitbT
wai  a  ground  of  exemption  from  other  lilui;gic^  It
doe*  not  appear  from  the  onton  how  the  different
aynteleiaa  appointed  the  TtieiaRhi  who  w«e  ta
take  charge  of  their  Teneli ;  but  it  waa  probttUy
'  'ft  to  themielvei  without  bein^  regulated  hr  any
'gal  enactment.  The  etib  and  inefrulariliei  of
10  •ynuDEH'aie  an  that  (rhetoricaUy  perhapt)
deacribed  by  DemoatheDet:  "  I  m«  your  nair
going  to  luin,  and  the  lich  eaeaping  with  little
ht,  and  penona  of  moderate  income  lakiit|r  their
property,  and  the  city  loaing  the  opportuDiEJea  ti
action,  and  the  trinmea  not  being  equipped  in
auiEcient  time  lo  meet  an  emeraency,  and  tlicredar
I  propoeed  a  law,  dte."  The  cbangea  he  meant  ta
effect  by  it  are  related  in  bii  ontion  coneening
oriae  (b.  c.  364),  and  aie  aa  f^ow  :  be
0  add  800  to  the  1 200  irwT4A«i,  makiif
2000,  BO  that,  Bubtnctiog  all  tbou  wbe

hen  might  alwayi  remain  1200  penoni  (#«^iisvm)
0  lerie.  Thete  wen  to  be  diiided  into  30  aym-
tsriae  of  60  each,  u  under  the  old  lyuem :  euh
f  theH  wu  lo  be  lobdiyided  into  fire  diTiikiDi  cC
2  penoni  each,  one-half  rich  and  the  other  pour
(irraiawk^pSr),  as  a*  to  form  altogether  100
■mailer  lyTnnuiiae.  The  nomber  of  irireae*,  ae-
ording  to  thii  icheme,  wu  to  be  300,  daued  in
:0  diriiiona  (rf  15  ahipa;  each  of  theae  diviaiaoa
ru  to  be  Buigned  to  one  of  the  20  l>i]Rr  >yn-
loiiae,  10  that  each  of  the  unaller  would  teniiv
' ;  and  in  caae  of  300  ihipa  being  requind,  faor
'rienrchi  would  be  appointed  to  each. Mof>-

he  lame  amount  of  the  public  itorea  for  equip-

lent.  in  order  that  they  might  apportiaB  it  to  IM

mailer  dauea. With  a  TiewtolaTyiog  the  cnin,

and  for  other  purpoaea,  the  generala  ven  to  diiide

dockyardi  into  ten  parte  for  30  ehipa'  itatJMH

t^oJKw)  adjacent  te  each  other  i  and  te  aaiagn

b  of  theae  parti  to  a  tribe,  or  two  lai^  r/m-

luoriae  of  30  ihipi. Tbeae  ten  porti  were  to  be

(ubdirided  into  thirdi,  each  of  which  waa  n  be

third  part  {TpirrSi)  of  tba  tribe  I>

whom  the  whole  waa  allotted,  h  that  each  third

would  recciia  ten  ahipa. Whether  tbii  acibcaa

to  piutica  doea  ml  af^iear,  but  it  areas

not,  for  the  mimanagement  of  the  Triei-


d  hii  taw  I


carried  hii  taw  about  the  "  Triennhj  aceerding  to
the  ValnatioD.B  Ooa  of  lbs  chief  erila  csnnctted
Ith  it  wall  that  the  ttiNDieawen  iwraafa^fad


TRIEBARCHU.

In  timai  uid  m  DgncwtliciiM  (/%L5D)  eampluni
nt  thii,  in  B.  c  55%  m  may  ermclnds  that  hit
propoal  fell  W  the  groimd.  But  tb«a  Iiili  w«re
too  Hiiou*  to  nnmiu  wittont  A  nmedy  i  tnd
Iherefora  whi '


«  Jnirnwiit  toS


riM  of  th«  pw^iBtty  lazM,
M  tar  iTCTj  ten  talenU  o(


■Itering  and  impraving  Iba  lyit^  of  tba  i?iDD»-
liaa  tod  fmrjimiitii  lb*  nanbui  of  'riuch  IM
loi^  oiUed  thamwlTM  TrisntRba,  bnt  paMMn
(mrriXiii)  (Id.  dt  Oar.  360),  tlienbr  mtndDdag
tht'-Ztwrtt/amrftbeTiienvchj."  Tha  pnviuoni
oif  tlw  Ut  wen  w  foUoT. Tha  nnl  ■errieM  n-

mnd  1m  propoitioiiiil  to  hii  pniparM',  m
Ui  tuabk  cuHtal  (tI^iwhi,  im  £im
ngiUend  for  tba  ■;
tba  latt  being  ona
taxaUa  capital,  up
Itaij  Tcuel  (i)wi||»iriiw)  for  tha  laqeat  propartie* ;
i  a.  no  penon,  haweier  rich,  eonld  ba  required
to  fnmiib  man.  Thow  who  had  not  tan  talent*
in  tuable  capind  were  to  dnb  together  in  ijnta-
Ifina  till  the;  had  mada  ap  that  amount}  and  if
tbanlualionorthaTmrof  Naiuiniciu(&c379)
wai  itill  in  force,  tha  taxable  cafutal  (fa  the  high-
«tclau)«aa  one-fifth  of  thsvhola.  Bjthiilair
great  ctunga  orare  efleeted.  All  penoni  pajing
taiei  wen  rated  in  proportion  to  their  ptoper^,
ao  Ihat  the  poor  were  benefitted  tn  it,  and  the
aUlelikewiH:  for,  ai  DnnMlheiMi  (ifa  CV.  261)
aaja,  thoie  who  had  fbmwrlf  contribotad  one-
niteeotli  to  the  Trienrchy  of  one  ibip  wen  now
Trierarcha  of  two,  in  which  taaa  they  muat  ntbar
bate  lened  bj  proxy,  or  done  duty  in  iiuxeiaiia
yean.  Ua  adda  that  tba  cooiequence*  wen  highly
beneficial.  During  tha  whole  war,  carried  on  after
titt  taw  waa  in  fan*,  no  Triennb  imptond  the  aid
of  the  people  (fmnipiarlAiiH),  -  '  •
•  lonplF,  o
«ho«  duty

Aa«),  nor  na*  any  mrane  n»i  n  eaa,  gr  ijiag
idle  in  the  docka  for  want  of  atom  and  tackle,  a>
mdat  tha  old  •yitem,  when  the  aerrice  (ri  Aii-
Tou^fv)  fell  on  the  poor.  The  datiei  and  aerricei
to  which  tha  Trieiarcba  wen  anbjeet  nnder  the
new  law  were  pnbably  the  lame  at  nnder  the
third  form  of  the  Trienichy,  tha  tynmuinae.

On  the  ntation  which,  in  ihia  ayitem,  the  coat
of  a  Trienreby  bore  to  the  property  of  a  Trienrch
Doekh  makei  the  following  rema^a,  which  may
be  Terified  by  a  raferance  to  Ergpnoiu.  **  If  we
reekoD  that,  aa  fonDeriy,  it  coat  aboot  a  talent,  the
total  eipenaa  of  the  Triennbi,  Ibr  100, 2IHI,  or  SOO
trinmei  amoonted  to  an  equal  number  of  talenta,
ar  a  liitiath,  a  thirtieth,  and  a  twentieth  of  tbe
nJaalion  of  Attica :  i.  e.  for  (lie  fint  dau  one-third,
two-thicda,  and  one  par  cent,  of  their  property.
for  the  poonr  a  jvoportionally  ieai  amount:  and  of
the  annaal  incomei,  taken  aa  a  tenth  part  of  the
pmpetty,  3^  G},  and  10  per  cenL  for  the  moat
wealthy.  But  we  may  reckon  that  Athene  at  that
tima  had  not  mon  than  100  or  SOO  trtnme*  at
aea,  Tary  aeldom  300  ;  h  that  thi*  war-lax  did  not
foi  the  richeat  elaai  amonnl  on  an  aTarage  to  mon
ttwn  ooe-thiid,  and  two-thirda  pec  cent,  of  their
'  imperty."

Thli  anangement  of  DemDtthenci  wai  calculated
(or  300  tritemet,  for  which  nmnber  SOO  peraona
aerriDg  in  penon  wonld  be  oeceaiaiy  ;  ao  thai  tbe
chiaf  bnrdsn  moit  hare  Men  npoa  the  kadan  of


TRIKRABCHIA.  IISI

Ae  fbnnn  aymmeriae.  Tbe  year  of  paaaang  thia
lawBSckh6xeaatB.c  34DDrSSS.  Uow  loi^  it
remained  in  force  ia  uncertain.  In  the  epeech  foe
the  crewn  (a  e.  3S0),  when  much  i*  isid  on  tha
•nbject  of  tbe  Triecarchy,  it  it  neither  mentioned
that  the  law  waa  in  oiittance,  nor  that  it  wa*
repealed  ;  but  Damoitbenai  (p.  S29)  aayi  that
Aaachiim  bad  been  bribed  by  tha  laadan  of  tha

It  appaaii  than  that  the  Trieraicby,  though  tha
moat  •xpendTa  of  tha  litnrgiea,  waa  not  of  neoaa-
aity  oppreadTe,  if  &iriy  and  economically  maoagod,
tboDgh  thia,  aa  baa  been  befbn  obaarred,  waa  not
alway*  tha  caw. (Damoath.  c.  i>o{^)

With  reapect  to  tha  amonnt  of  property  which
mtdeted  ■  man  liable  to  M>CTa  a  Thetuchy  or  ayn-
tciemdiy,  Si>ckh  obaeirea,  "  I  am  awan  of  no
JnttaDce  of  liabiltty  ariiing  horn  a  property  of  lata
nfaia  than  600  minae,  and  aa  an  eatala  <^  one  or
two  talenta  nefer  obliged  the  pOHeaaor  to  the  par-
fimianca  of  any  liturgy  (Dim.  e.  Apiai.  p.  S33),
the  aaaartian  of  iMeni  (dt  Dkatao.  Htmi.  p.  £4}
that  many  had  aorad  tha  offlca  of  Tiianich  whoa*
property  waa  not  mon  than  80  minaa^  obligei  na
(iftma)  to  loppota  Ihat  pabln->]nri(ed  indifidnala
wen  Bometime*  fonnd  to  contribnta  to  a  Ttieiarchy
(rather  perhapi  to  a  lyntrierarchy)  out  of  a  very
■malt  property.**

The  diBdvantage*  which  in  Inter  timet  retailed
&om  the  Tiiannbi  not  being  nady  for  aea  by  tha
time  for  niling,  wen  in  eariy  timet  pnrented  by
their  appointmcnta  being  made  bcforeband  ;  aa  waa
tha  caia  with  tbe  Triennbt  appointed  to  the  100
thipt  whicb  were  reaerred  at  the  beginning  of  tba
Peloponnetian  war  againit  an  attack  cpon  Athena

The  appirintment  to  aerre  nnder  the  Grtt  and
■econd  fonni  of  the  Tiierarchy  waa  made  by  the
tUatcgi  (Demoeth.  e.  Laer.  940.  16),  and  in  oaia
any  penon  wai  appointed  to  aerfe  a  Trierarchy,
and  IhsDghl  Ihat  any  one  elie  (not  called  upon)
—  better  able  to  bear  it  than  hinuelE,  he  o^red
change  of  hit  property  [Ahtidosis]


m  of  tbe '


■a[^ianta  to  the  people,  oi  fled  to  the  altar  of
Artemit  at  Munycbia.  If  not  ready  in  time,  they
wen  tometimet  llabla  to  impriaonmenl  (Iroxoi  Skt-
f4f,  Dem.  dt  Cor.  2G2.  Ifi).  That  on  one  oocaiion
(Dam.  da  Cor.  TrUr.  1239. 6),  the  Ttierarehi  were
by  s  ipedal  decree  mbjected  to  impciionnient.  it
tbey  wen  not  off  the  pier  (x*f")  by  the  end  of
the  month  ;  on  the  coDlrary,  whosTer  gat  hU  ihip
nady  £nt,  wa>  to  be  rewaided  with  tha  "  crown
of  the  Triecarchy  ;"  ao  that  in  Ihii  way  conai-
derable  emnlation  and  competitiaii  wen  prodnced-
MonoTBT.  the  Triennha  wan  ^iu6lv«,  or  liable
to  be  imlied  la  account  ibr  their  eipenditun  g
though  theT  applied  their  own  properly  to  the
KTvice  of  Ihe  itala.  (Dem.  o.  falge.  12a2.  11  j
AsKhin.  e.  Clai]A.  £6.}  But  they  alio  receiced
money  out  of  the  treaaury  for  Tarioui  ditbune-
menta,  aa  tbe  pay  of  the  toldien  and  lailan,  and
the  aiCn  handt  (livijpflffia)  ;  thna,  on  one  occaiion,
each  Tiiennh  it  atated  to  hare  recaired  3D  minaa,
(UHaKnar.  (Dem.  (i»  Cta-.  r™r.  1231.  U.)  The
Tiienrcha  may  alio  baie  been  coniideied  ilwaMu-
Ni,  from  bung  tequind  to  ibow  that  they  had
peifbcmed  thnr  dutiea  propetlv.  The  Sacred  Tri-
ramea,  tba  Pantlot  and  the  Salamia,  bad  ipedal
[TahubJ  afpointed  to  them  (Pollu,


•  o'^


ltE3


TRIERARCHIA.


Tiii.  116);  and,  on  the  aathoritT  of  Ulpiin  {ad'
Drm.  c.  Mid.  686),  it  hu  b«n  belieTcd  Ihat  the
■tute  acttd  u  Trienmh  far  rtck  n(  tbno  ;  but  in
the  inwriplianB  quoted  b;  BSckh  {Urbi*dm,  &c^
p.  169),  no  diflwenee  ii  made  between  the  Trier-
arcbi  of  the  Pjimlni  And  ether  Teeaeli,  uid  there-
fore it  voald  Hem  that  the  ilata  mppointed  Trier-
■rchi  for  them  u  well  u  for  other  Teaeli,  and
prorided  out  of  the  public  fundi  (or  thoaa  eipeiue*
only  which  were  peculiar  to  them.

IV.  Os  Ot  anmplioni  from  lit  TVtsnvni;.  —
Br  an  aneiaat  U«,  in  fores  b.  c  3iS  (Dem. «.
ZejiL),  no  p«r*on  (bat  minan  or  ftmalei}  could
claim  siemption  from  the  Trierarehy,  who  were  of
iuffident  wealth  to  perfonn  it,  not  eren  the  de-
■cendanli  of  Hsimodini  and  Ariitogiton.  Bat
from  IiaeDi  {Dt  ApolL  Hmd.  67)  it  appean
that  la  the  time  of  tha  liufle  Trierareh;  no  penon
could  ba  compglled  to  Mrva  a  woond  lima  within
two  yeara  after  a  former  iMTice  {HatnitiaijxAi).
The  nine  arehont  alio  were  eieinpC,  and  the  Trier
archy  wu  a  ground  of  exemption  from  the  other
liturgiea,  any  of  which,  indeed,  gaTe  an  exemption
from  all  tb*  reat  during  the  year  next  fallowii^
that  of  it!  lerrin. (Dem.  e.  Lepl.  4119,  t6V)

But  all  property  wai  not  nbject  to  the  aerrice,
ai  we  learn  fnmi  Demoithenaa  (Dt  Stpmm.  163.
It),  who  tall*  ai  that  a  penoa  waa  exempt,  if
cOhaarat,  oi  unable  to  terre  from  poverty  ;  >o
alio  were  "  wardi,  heireaaei,  orpbana,  claiuehi,  and
corporate  bodiei.**  Of  conne  an  beireia  could  «ily
claim  exemption  while  nnmairiad.  Wardi  aiu
were  &ee  from  all  Uturgia^  during  their  minority,
and  for  a  year  after  their  SoKifiaflo.  (Lyiiaa,  e.
Diogit.  90B.)  By  icAi|pei!x°<i  *ra  ntsnt  ooliHiitta,
who,  while  aUsnt  by  the  command  of  ths  itate,
enuld  not  perfonn  a  Trierarehy.  The  ti  miHriiri
admit)  of  a  doubt,  bnt  it  probably  meant  the  pro-

Eerty  of  joint  tenanti,  at  hrothen  or  coheirs,  which
ad  not  yet  been  apportioned  to  them  (Pollux,

partnenhi;^  Ucreorer,  though  the  proper  duration
of  a  Trierarehy  wai  a  year,  it  wai  legally  diualred
if  the  general  fomiihed  no  pay  to  the  uldien,
or  if  the  ihip  pnt  into  the  Peineeua,  it  being  then
impouible  to  keep  tb*  Milora  together.  (Dem.  e.
PotM.  1S09.)

V.  On  Ue  Ug(d  praetadagt  Domaitei  uttt  tie
TtirrarOy. — Theie  were  either  bet  ween  individut
Trierimhi,  or  between  Trieiaichi  and  the  itate,
and  therefore  in  the  form  of  a  UiADTC.tBU.  They
generally  aroie  in  coniequence  of  a  Trienrch  not
delivering  op  hit  ihip  and  her  rigfiing  in  proper
order,  either  to  hit  (uccvuor  or  to  the  aiate.  If  ha
alleged  that  the  low  or  damage  of  either  happened
from  a  ttoito,  be  waa  said  o'lcijifcbrtfoj  lomi  x*'^>^
AroKbikiyat,  and  if  hii  plea  vera  labitanDaCed,
tSoffr  If  Tf  SiicatfTDpfti  a.  t,  A.  Veweli  or  furni-
ture on  which  a  trial  of  ihii  kind  had  been  bald,
^ere  aaid  to  be  ii^ttusatfiir^

The  pniidency  of  the  courta  wbieh  tried  maltere
of  thi)  aort  wai  Tnted  in  the  (Irategi.  and  aome-
timei  in  the  anperintendenta  of  the  dockyard,
in  eonjnnction  with  thi '  -  - —.


to  have  bad  a  jodkial  p


the  phraoo  oHe  Tar  Tfiofx^w,  Ir  JUi
fftiMl  n)>>  Tpi^po.  BSckh  conjcctuici  that  tbe
Trierarchi  of  whom  (hia  ii  laid  had  returned  their
ahlni  in  luch  a  condition,  that  the  atale  m^tat  luiTe
odkd  upon  them  to  put  thorn  iii  Iborough  repair,  or


TRIPOS.
to  Kbnild  them,  at  a  coat  fiir  an  ordinary  biRBeef
5000  drachmae.  Suppoung  that  they  wan  dm  re-
leased btm  thi)  liability  by  any  decree  of  a  onrt
of  jnatice,  and  that  the  rebnilding  waa  mt  oaa-
pleted,  ha  conceiTae  that  it  nnut  haro  been  ceo-
petent  (in  a  dear  and  flagtant  caae)  tar  iho  aenala
to  have  infllEted  tipon  them  the  pMiahy  of  twiio
iOOO  dnehma^  tha  tachnieal  phnaa  for  which  waa
"doobUngdia  ttirama^"  ((Trimtdtm,  Sx.  p.  338.)

The  phnaa  ifya^ayiitir  tfitfji  imHf  dwaiitoaa,
which  oecnr*  in  inaeriptioDi,  doaa  not  apf4j  ta  aa
nndotakiog  for  ginng  a  new  triraoe,  bnt  mocly
for  patting  one  in  a  complato  aCato  of  repur.

The  pl^  ^wJnir  rKntr  (Dem.  a.  lair.  941),
to  lay  an  infiumation  againat  a  Teiael,  ia  oaed  via
of  a  public  ihip,  bat  of  a  priTala  Teiatl,  ea|B^^
perhap)  in  tmtig^g  or  ptitalsaring.  ( BCiUu  PM.
Bam.  ^AOao.  pp.  Sil— S76,  9d  ad.) [R.W.]

TRIEROPOII  (T)>qponHaI>  [N.aTB^  ^
785.  a.]

TRIQON. [PiLi.]

TRILIX. [Tela,  p.  1102,b.)

TRINU'NDINUH. [NoNDnu.!

TRIO'BOLON. (Dkabtb^  p.  «2.  b.]

TRIO'BOLUS. [Dn^anHUL]

TRlPLICATia [Actio,  p.  13,  a.]

TRIPOS  (Tfihren),  a  tripod,  i.  e.  aoyBtnidl
or  article  of  fnmitara  anpponod  apom  tluae  lecC
Hon  eapedally

L  A  three-li^ged  taUe.  [HaHaA.]  The  £m
woodcut,  at  p.  30S,  ahowi  nch  a  table  in  Ma.
Ita  three  tnpporta  an  richly  and  taatiAilly  omt-
mented.  Varicni  aiogla  kegi  {IrapiofAon,  Ck.
ad  Film.  HI  33),  wningfat  in  the  maa  atria  eat
of  whita  marble,  red  porphyry,  or  other  TahiaU*
maleriaU.  and  contiating  ti  a  lion'a-hiBd  or  aon*
aimilar  object  at  the  top,  and  a  foot  of  the  hb*
aaiznal  at  the  hottom,  nailed  by  intcrrening  Mkge^
are  preaerred  in  the  Bricith  Moieian  (Coabeb
Aiaim>  Martlet.  L  3.  i.  1 S,  iiL  38)  and  in  alhet
collection*  of  antiquities  The  tripod  oed  at  <d-
tertainmenCt  to  hold  the  Ckatsr  had  ahait  ftet,
■o  that  it  wa«  not  noch  derated.  Theaa  taUai
wen  probably  Knaetinin  mads  to  >Mi>«  apga
caatoia. (Hem.  A  xriiL  375).

II.  A  pot  or  caUron,  naed  far  bmliiiy  Mat.
and  either  laiied  upon  a  thraa-lefged  ataad  •{
bronte,  at  ia  npreaented  in  the  woodoit.  p.  837,
or  made  with  ita  three  feat  ia  the  lame  piece.
Such  a  utenul  wai  of  gnat  tahie,  ami  wia  •oae-
tiniea  oifiBRd  at  a  priu  in  the  public  ganea  [xiaL
264,  702,  703),

III.  A  bronia  altar,  not  diffinii^  pialiafaly  in
it!  original  form  ^xnn  the  tall  tiipod  caldias  alinif
deecribed.  In  thia  ferra,  but  with  addttjaoal  or-
niunent,  we  aee  it  in  the  annexed  woodcst,  *hkk
repnicDU  a  tripod  fonnd  at  Fnjaa.  (Spea,  JiJM,
Er*d.AwL-f.  118.)  That  tbii  waa  intoided  la  U
uted  in  ucrilic*  may  be  infemd  fnm  the  baU't-
head  with  a  fillet  tird  rtmtd  tb*  bona,  which  w«
aee  at  the  top  r£  each  leg.

All  the  moat  andeot  npmentatwu  e(  tba
lacrificial  tripod  exhibit  it  of  the  laiBO  gokenl
ihape,  together  with  three  ring!  at  tb*  top  to  aarra
aa  bandlee  ((Wo,  Horn.  IL  xriii.  378).  Sinoe  it
hai  thii  form  on  ail  the  eoini  and  other  anatat
RDiaini,  which  ha<e  any  nfcnnoe  to  the  IMpkic
oiacl*,  it  ha*  been  with  anfBdent  reaaon  sBcladed
that  the  Iripad,  {ran  which  the  Pythian  ^ieMea

CrMpomea,  wh  of  thia  hind. The  light-
figuT*  in  tb*  woodcut  ia  eopiad  fan  (o*


TRIPOS.

piibli>li«d  by  K.  a  Hnllet  (BOttlgcr'a  AmaltiM,
i,  f.  119),  fbundsd  upon  Domennu  uideni


thciritiMi  and  dnignHl  to  ihow  tlii
of  thfl  oTBcuUr  tripod  it  Delphi.  Beud«  ue
pATti  alrchdy  mmtioDed,  vil  the  Chree  le^  the
Ibna  huidlei,  and  lh<  leuel  oT  caldioii,  U  ihoiri
■  fiat,  rouod  plate,  called  S^fitt,  oa  which  (he
Pjlhia  f«ted  htnelf  in  order  to  giva  reiponw*,
and  on  which  lay  a  laurel  wmih  at  other  timtt.
Thi*  figan  alao  ibovi  the  poeitioa  of  the  CoaTiMA,
Which,  aa  well  aa  the  caldron,  waa  made  of  Toy
^{p  bronae,  and  waa  luppoeed  to  incnaae  the
prophetic  Hnndi  vhich  came  from  imdenwaih  the
<»th. {Virg.^™.ui.  92.)

The  celebrity  of  thi*  tripod  produced  iDnn-
merable  imitation!  of  It  (Uiod.  ivi.  26),  tailed
"Delphic  trjpodi."  (Athen.  v.  p.  199.)  They
wen  nuide  to  be  uaed  in  ucrifice,  and  (till  mare
Arequenlly  to  bo  preiented  to  the  treaaury  both
ijt  that  and  in  many  other  Oieek  templei.  (Athen.
Ti  pp.  -231,  t— -232,  d.  1  Paul  ir.  32.  §  1.)
[DoNa&ia.]  Tripodi  wera  chiefly  dedicated  to
Apollo(Paui.iiL  lS.§fi)(uidto  Bacchiu.  Partly
in  alluiiOD  to  the  hble  of  the  rape  of  a  tripod  frooi
Apollo  by  Herculea,  and  the  recorery  of  it  by  the
fonner  (Paoa.  iii.  21.  9  7,  i.  13.  §  4),  the  tripod
ma  one  of  hii  miia]  altribntea,  and  therefore
ocema  continually  on  coini  and  ancient  mirblea
which  hare  a  rFlalion  to  him.  Of  thia  «e  havn  an
example  in  the  baa-relief  engraved  on  p.  117,  which
>lao  eihibita  tiro  more  of  hi(  altribDlea,  tha  Ijra
and  the  lerpent.  la  confbimity  with  the  lama
idcaa  it  wag  giien  a>  a  prJia  to  the  conqucron  at
tba  Pythian  and  other  gunea,  which  were  tcle-
biBted  in  honour  of  Apollo.  (Herod,  i.  U4.)  Oa
the  other  hand,  the  theatre  at  Atheni  being  con-
ndered  aacred  to  Bacchus,  the  aacceuful  Cbo-
nfnia  receired  a  bronie  tripod  aa  the  Bpprophale
prii&  The  choragic  monimieDli  of  Thnuyiluiand
Lyaicralet,  the  ornamental  &BgmcQti  of  which  are
now  in  the  Briliib  Muieum,  wen  erected  by  them
lo  preMTTa  and  display  the  tripodi  awarded  to
them  on  luch  ocouioni.  We  find  alio  that  a
tripod  wa*  tometimea  consecrated  to  the  Muaea
(Hea.  Op.  tt  Dia,  £63)  and  to  Herculei.  (Paiu.
«.  7.  g  3.)

A  tripod,  Bcaroaly  leaa  muatkabla  than  that
from  vhich  the  Pyihia  deliTered  oiacle*,  and  con-
aecmlod  to  Apollo  in  the  lame  temple  at  Delphi,
waa  tliBt  made  (ram  the  epoili  of  the  Petuan  army


THIUMPHUS.  11S3

after  the  battle  of  Flataeae.  It  conaiited  of  a
golden  bowU  lupporled  by  a  three-headed  bronia
•erpenL  (Herod,  ii.  8]  ;  Thucfd.  i.  133  ;  SchoL
n  la:. ;  Pbdl  i.  1 3.  g  5 ;  OylUus,  Top.  CimM.  ii.  1 3  i
Banduri,  Itnp.  Oriad.  v  ii,  p.  6U.)  The  golden
bowl  having  been  remoTad,  the  bronte  ierpent  waa
taken  to  CcnilanlinDple,  and  it  pntsblj  the  Hune
which  wBi  teen  there  by  Spon  and  Wheler  in
1675.  The  £rtt  figure  in  the  annexed  wood-cut
i>  copied  from  Wheler't  engmTing  of  it.  (Jattnity
laio  tr'reace,  p,  185.)  He  laja  it  waa  about  four-
teen  or  fifteen  feat  high.


t  nia  of  bronu  tripodi  ai  altara  eridently
in  a  great  degree  from  their  luitableneaa  to
be  rcmOTed  from  place  to  place.  We  hare  an  ex-
ipla  of  thia  mode  of  employing  them  in  the  Kens
which  it  repteiented  in  the  woodcut  on  p.  1045.
~'a  accommodate  them  at  much  aa  pouihle  to  thit
urpoK,  they  are  umeiimei  made  to  fold  together

9  undentood  from  an  inipection  of  the  preceding
woodcuL  The  light-hand  figure  repretenta  a  tripod
in  the  Britiih  MuKum.  A  patera,  or  a  pUun  me-
tallic dialc,  waa  laid  db  the  top,  when  there  waa
occaaion  to  offer  incente.  Many  of  theae  movable
folding  tripodi  nuy  be  teen  in  Nuteumi,  proiing

mother  tpecici  of  tripodi  denning  of  notice
thoie  made  of  marble  or  hard  atone. One
diKOiered  in  the  villa  of  Hadrian,  live  feet
high,  and  therefore  uouiilablo  to  be  uaed  in  ucri-
fico. It  it  very  much  onianiented,  and  waa  pro-
bably intended  merely  to  be  diiplayed  aa  a  work
it  art (Caylu.,  flwMi/,  ii.  pi.  S3.) [J.  Y.]
TBIPU'DlUM.  [Augur,  pp.  175,  b,  176,8.]
TRIRE'MIS. [NiVH.]
TRlTAfiONISTES. [HiffTRio.]
TRITTYA(Tp.TTi!=),  [Sacbipiciu>(,p.1000.1
TRITTVS  (Tp,TTiii). [TaiBva,  p.  1154.]
TRIUMPHUS,  a  ulemn  proceuion  in  which
1  iHctoriooa  genenl  entered  the  ciiy  in  a  cbahot
drawn  by  four  honei. He  waa  preceded  by  tha
'  et  and  ipoili  taken  in  war,  wii  followed  by
Mpi,  and  after  pauing  in  ilate  ilong  the  Via
Sana,  ucended  the  Capitol  to  offer  lacrihce  in  the
temple  of  Jupiter.

, --- -  ^^--


116*  TR1UMTHU8.

Sneb  diipUyi  Iuts  bwn  w  muTanil  wnonj  *I1
mrlikg  tribei  from  (lie  nrliut  tinwi,  and  m  u
imnudUtelr  connecled  with  hhiib  of  iht  itniDgeit
puiiDiu  of  th«  hunuui  heart,  th&t  it  vonld  he  u
neeleu  u  it  ii  jmpouible  to  trace  their  origin
toricollf.  It  ii  Kueeljr  Deceiiar;  to  adiert '
Cmdea  of  Ihoie  ancient  irriten,  irha  lebr  their  lint
inatitutioH  to  the  mythic  eonquem  of  Bsocbui  i
the  But  (Diodor.  iy.  6  j  Plin.  ff.  N.  TJi.  57),  nc
need  ve  attach  much  importance  to  the  connecdo
betHeen  trimapha  and  AplafiSos,  accoRiing  to  th
elyinolDg;  doubtmglf  pnpsaed  l^  Varro  (£.  £.  t
68,  ei.  Milller).  Rejoidngi  after  a  Tictoty,  at
companied  b;  proceuioni  of  the  uldieir  vith  theii
plunder,  mutt  have  been  coeval  with  (he  eiitlence
of  tha  Komaiu  aa  ■  nstios,  and  aecocdingl]'  the
retoni  of  Reraului  with  •polia  opicaa  alter  be  had
defeated  the  CaaniDeuMB  and  tlain  Aero  their  king,
ii  deimbed  bj  Dionjritni  (ii.  34  ;  lompaie  Prop.
IT.  1.  32)  with  all  the  attribute!  of  a  regular
triumph.  PlDtanh  (Acni,  16)  admita  that  thii
event  wai  the  origin  of  aad  fiiit  itep  towardi  the
triumph  of  after  time*,  hut  ceninret  Dionjiina  (br
the  itatement  that  Romuiua  made  hii  enttaace  in
ft  quadriga,  which  he  coniiden  diaproved  hj  the
bict  that  all  the  triumphal  (Tpmua^fUvi)  itatuel
of  that  king,  aa  wen  id  hia  da;,  repreaeuted  him  en
foot.  He  addi  that  Tarqninio*  Priutit,  accardjug
to  Mme,  or  Foplicola,  accDTding  to  oihen,  fint
triumphed  inacharial ;  and  in  combomtion  of  thia
we  find  that  the  fint  triumph  recorded  by  Livy
(L  3Si  compare  Flor.i.G;  Eutnip.  i.  6)  ii  that  over
(he  Babinei  by  Tai^uiniua.  who  according  to  Ver-
riua  (Plin.  H.  N.  zniii.  19)  wore  upon  thii  oc-
caiion  a  rob*  ef  cloth  or  gold.  Whatevei  eouclusiou
we  may  form  npon  theea  poluta,  it  it  cettaia  that
from  the  tint  dawn  of  authentic  hiiteiy  down  to
the  eitipction  of  liberty  a  regular  triumph  (jWidu
triamp/uii)  wa>  lecogniud  aa  the  eanunit  of  military
glory,  and  waa  the  cheriihed  object  of  ambition  to
every  Roman  genenL  A  triumph  might  be  granted
for  aucceiaful  acbievementa  either  by  land  or  aea,
but  the  latter  were  comparatively  ao  nu«  that  we
•hall  (br  the  preaenl  def^  the  conuderalion  of  the
natal  triumph.

After  any  decinte  battle  had  been  von,  or  a
provinca  lubdned  by  a  aeriea  of  aucoeaeful  opera-
tioni,  the  ImparatOT  (orwarded  to  the  eenale  a
laurel-wreathea  deapateh  (MtonM  launatae,  Zonai.
TiL  21  !  L\i.  ilvi.  I  ;  Plin.  ff.N.  iv.  40)  eon-
taining  an  account  of  bit  exploiu.  If  the  intelli-
gence proved  latiifactory  the  aenata  decreed  a  public
thankigiving.  [Sufplicitio.]  Thii  lupplicalion
wiu  ao  fiequently  the  forerunner  of  a  triumph,  that
Cato  thinki  it  neceiaary  to  remind  Cicen  that  it
wu  not  invariably  10.  (CicadFam.  xv.i.)  After
the  war  waa  concluded  the  genenl  iiilh  bit  army
repairsd  to  Roma,  or  ordered  hit  army  to  meet  him
there  on  a  given  day,  bnt  did  not  enter  the  dty.
A  meeting  of  the  tenate  waa  held  without  the
vallt,  ntually  in  the  temple  of  Bellona  (e.  g.  Liv.
jivi  21,  iCTvi.  89)  or  Apollo  (Liv.  «iix.  i),
that  he  might  have  an  opportunity  of  urging  hit

tiniead  and  diacuued  wiib  the  molt  jtaleut  cara.
The  following  ndea  and  reitrielioni  were  for  tha
mut  part  rigidly  enfotnd,  although  the  aenate
aaiomed  the  diacrationary  power  of  relaxing  them

I .  That  no  one  conld  be  permitted  to  triumph
■nleti  he  had  beld  the  office  of  difiCitor,  ot  TriBfn\i


TRIUMPHUa.
n  of  ]netar. (Lit.  uriiL  38,  iixL  3<L) Ham
a  triumph  waa  not  allowed  to  P.  Sdpio  after  be
had  expelled  the  Cartbaginiana  &om  Spain,  be^ue


magiitntu."  (VaL  Max.  iL  S.  g  5  ;  Liv.  Lt.)
The  bononn  granted  to  Pompey,  who  triamphnl
in  bit  S4th  year  (b.c  SI),  before  he  had  beld
any  of  the  great  o^ce*  of  itate,  and  again  toi
yeen  afterward!,  while  ttSl  a  aimpla  eqaea,  wen
allogathec  nnprecedentcd.  (Liv.  i^A  89  ;  Gc
pn  Lig.  Mam.  11  ;  Ve^  Pat  IL  30  ;  VaL  Max.
TiiL  IS.  g  S  i  Pint.  Potif.  12,  23  ; Dial  Cut.

2.  That  the  magiitnte  ahonld  have  been  actaaOy
in  office  both  when  the  victory  weiB  gained  and
when  the  triomph  wat  to  be  oaVelnlad.  Thii  re-
gulation WM  iniulad  upon  only  during  the  eailitr
Bgei  of  the  cammmwMltb.  Ila  lidatian  ow-
DMDced  withQ.  PnUilin*  Phila,  the  fint  pcnea  ta
whom  the  aenate  ever  granted  a  **  pnmfKtiD  in.
peril  *^  after  the  termination  of  a  magitba^  (Liv,
viiL  26),  and  thenceforward  pmconnli  and  pn^

fraetora  were  permitted  to  triumph  withoot  qneetiim
Liv.  iixix.  45,  xL  2£,  34),  althongh  bt  a  amo-
unt long  held,  howevET,  that  it  waa  necaaaiy  for
the  **  pnitgatio  imperii "  to  follow  imncdiatdy
upon  the  termination  of  the  magiatracy,  fur  a
triumph  wet  refilled  to  L.  Lentoloi,  who  nweeeded
P.  Sapio  in  Spain,  on  the  groond  that,  althn^h
ha  had  been  fbcmeriy  praetor,  hit  imperiBn  kad
not  been  continued  uninterruptedly  baa  tb«  petiod
when  the  command  expired,  bnt  had  been  renewed
"extra  ordinem"  after  a  l^iee  of  aome  yean.
(Liv.  ixii.  20.)  Bnt  towardi  tha  doae  of  the
republic  thit  principle  wai  entirely  abandoned.
Connilt  uid  praelon  leldom  quitted  the  city  uniil
their  term  of  office  had  tcated,  and  when  at  any
lubaeqnent  period  they  enttnd  npoa  the  goms-
ment  of  a  province,  either  in  regular  rotatioD  ar
"  exba  ordinem,"  they  enjoyed  the  fall  atktaa  and
all  tha  privilegea  of  ploconiula  and  proplaMaa^
Tha  poution  of  Pompey  when  aent  agauat  ^
pirate*  and  afterirardi  agaimt  Hithiidatea,  and  ft
Cicero  when  be  want  to  Cilida,  will  be  nffident
to  tllnitrate  thii  without  multiplying  cxsn^ilea.
S.  That  the  war  tfaould  have  beai  prcMcated
the  battle  fongfat  under  tha  aui)acee  and  in  the
orince  and  iriui  the  tniopa  of  tha  gmeral  leelt-
g  the  triumph  (Liv-  xxii.  48,  xcdv.  10  ;  VaL
Max.  ii.  8.  g  2),  and  hence  the  trimnph  of  tk«
pnetor  Foriui  (Liv.  xxxi.  49)  waa  cuuidend  ir-
regular and  imperfect.  Thna  if  a  vicloiy  wat
gained  by  the  legatna  of  a  general  wba  waa  abacvt
from  the  army,  the  hononr  of  it  did  not  behng  ta
the  fbimer,  tnit  to  the  latter,  "■-— ■— h  at  hehad
tha  aiiapieet.

4.  ThM  at  Itatt  GOOO  of  the  anemy  ahnld  have
en  (lain  in  a  un^  batO*  ( VaL  Max.  iL  8.  j  l\
at  tha  adrantago  tbonld  have  been  potitivB  anil
it  menly  a  compen^Jion  for  aotoe  pravioai  di^
ter  (Oroi.  v.  4),  and  that  the  toes  on  the  |Ht  tt
9  Romana  ahontd  have  been  email  eeopand  with
atofth^advaianM.  (liv.  xxiiilaa.)  By*
law  if  tha  tribonct  L.  llariat  and  U.  Cat*  pead-
'en  mpoaed  upon  all  Inpetatorea  who  ^oalt
md  guuly  of  having  made  fhlaa  iBtant  la  the
>,  and  it  wit  otdaioed  that  k>  aoon  aa  ihtf
returned  to  tha  dly  they  iboald  be  nqnind  ta
tha  oorrectneea  tS  aoch  docnmenta  npai  <■)■
btfore  the  dty  qoMMot; (VaLMaz-ic.) Ita


TRIUUFHUS.


t.  Timt

eontnt  «8>iiiM  paUie  fw*  OMi)  jUtaOtMiM  Wlii^
Oc  pro  DtiaL  6),  and  Dol  a  dril  Matnt Henco
CUalu  ccMmml  no  uiampli  otn  Lcpidiu,
AnhnuDi  enr  CatUtm,  Dor  Cuuu  ind  Muhu  i
thair  uiMgnniiu  of  tlie  SnUao  panri  dot  Ciaiu


and  whsn  ti


«,u.


, _U  Tirtmy  OTBT  the  xnu  of  Ponpey

it  orawd  nnirunl  diigoiL Hmca  the  lint  in
Liumn  (i.  12)  ■.

**  Bella  geri  plaeuit  Dolloa  habitan  triniD^ioi.''
<Sn  VaL  Max.  iL  8.  |  7  i  Dion  CaM.  ztiiL  i3  ;
PloL  Cam.  BB.)  (OTiiro.]

4.  That  tbs  daaiaisD  at  the  itala  ifaqnld  ban
bMB  aitanded  and  not  swrdr  aoinethiiig  pnTiaoily
loat  ngainoL  Henca  Fnrriu,  who  mm  back
Capua  after  iti  rarolt  to  Hannibal,  did  not  racaJTa
a  triumpb.  (VaL  Max.  L  c  ;  cempan  Lit.  xxii.  B,
zxxti.  1.)  Til*  abaolnta  acqniaitian  of  teiriloij
doea  not  appear  to  liaT*  bean  Mumtiiil, (Dakar,


<</».  I


iS.)


7.  That  Iha  warahooU  bare  bam  bnnght  to
oudBiion  and  tfaa  praTince  ndooed  to  a  inla  of
peace  ao  ai  to  paimit  of  the  anny  bung  withdmrn,
the  pmenee  of  tha  Tietoriaiu  »ldian  b«ng  coiui-
dared  indiapenubla  in  a  trinmph.  In  coueqiunce
of  thia  condition  not  hang  fdlnlled  an  oTatun  onlj
waa  gnntod  to  MarcaUua  after  the  captun  of  Sjla-
cnie  (Lit.  itvl  21.  compaie  xxriiL  39,  iiz.  48)
and  to  L,  If  aiilioi  npoo  hia  leturn  from  Bpaic
(Lit.  znix.  S9.)  We  find  an  axeaptum  in  Lit.
zu..  48,  49,  but  ibia  and  aimilar  caaaa  Bvat  ba
ngarded  aa  examplaa  of  pnaliar  &Tonr.  (Sea  abo
Tacit.  Aim.  i.  5S,  conpaied  with  iL  IL)

The  aenata  ckiinad  Iba  exduiTe  right  of  deliba-
laling  upon  all  tbeaa  pointa  and  giiing  or  with-
holding the  honou  aoogbt  (Lit.  iii.  6S  ;  Polyb.
tL  13),  and  tlier  loi  the  moat  part  exodwd  tha
ptiri]ef»  vithoot  qneadon,  aictpl  in  ttmei  of  giaal
political  eicitentent.  Tho  aorareignty  of  the  peo-
ple. howoTer,  in  thi*  matter  waa  aiaarted  at  a  Teij
early  date,  and  a  trinmph  i*  Mud  to  hare  been
voted  by  the  Ribe*  to  Valerina  and  Horacjna,  the
conanli  of  a.  c  445,  in  direct  appoation  to  tha  re-
•ahidon  of  the  bthon  (Lit.  iiL  SS ;  Dionya.  xi.
60),  and  in  a  rimikr  manner  to  C.  Manana  Bntilna
the  fiiat  plebeian  dictator  (Lir.  til  17).  while  L.
PoatBrniaa  Hagellao,  eauol  &  c.  394,  cdebnled  a
toioaub,  alAovgh  ndated  by  tbe  aeoate  and  iOTai
mt  of  the  ten  trlbonea.  (Ut.  x.  S7.)  Nay  moia,
wa  lead  of  a  certain  A^u  Clandina,  ooonl  ■.  c
143,  who  baring  peraialedin  eetebntincatrionph
in  defiance  of  both  tba  acoate  and  people,  waa  ae-
cvmpanied  by  hia  daogbleT  (or  aiilff )  Claudia,  a
Tcral  Tirgin,  and  by  h«t  inlnpod^on  aarad  trim
being  dragged  &om  hii  charioB  by  a  tribone.  (Oroa.
T.  4  t  Cic  rn.  CW.  14  i  TaL  Max.  T.  4.  g  6  ;  Soot.
Tib.  2.)  A  diaiqunnled  genual,  hanTarar,  leldoDi
Tantared  to  teaoit  to  nich  Ti<deot  maaaaiee,  but
atiafied  hinuelf  with  going  Ihroogh  the  fonni  on
tha  Aiban  Honnt,  a  practice  firat  introdocad  by
C>  Papirina  Maao,  and  tbu  notiiad  in  the  Capita-
line  Faiti:  C  PAtiMtvt  Mam  cot,  di-  Cohbw


TRIOMPEUS.  lltS

ntiKus  IN  MDim  Alhano  III.  Nona*  Hakt.
AN.  DXXIL  (Plio-^.A^.  IT.  88.)  Hit  example
waa  followed  by  MaraelitH  (Li*,  zx-ri.  21  ;  Pint.
Mare.  33),  by  Q.  Minndni  (Ur.  xiiiJL  33),  and
by  many  othMa,  »  that  Liry  (ilii.  SI)  after  men-
tfaming  that  the  aanate  had  refiued  a  Iriomph  to
pjijjj^^j_.. ,,.. ... ...  . .,


(See


:  173)  a,


iIt.  M.)


■  Maiiu^  tfinapbaTif


gara  tbdr  conaent  tbnr  at  tba
KiH  ume  TDien  a  Run  of  money  towafda  defraying

the  nfmnaiy  aipenjea  (Polyb.  n.  13),  and  om
of  the  tribnnaa  ~ex  anctoritata  •anatiu*'  applied
for  a  {dabiadtum  to  permit  the  Impentor  to  retun
hia  imperinm  on  tba  day  when  he  entered  tha  dty.
(Lit.  xIt.  35,  ixtL  31.)  Thii  laat  fram  coold
not  be  diapenaed  with  eithw  in  an  ontion  or  a
tiinmph,  becaue  the  imperinm  eonfamd  by  tba
oomitia  cnriata  did  not  indnda  the  dty  itael^  and
whan  a  general  had  once  gone  forth  "*  palud^oa  **
hia  military  power  oaaaed  aa  aoon  ai  he  i»-entend
''^  ~  galea,  nnleia  the  general  law  had  been  pie-

--' ended  by  a  ipedal  enactment ;  and  in

the  neolotion  of  the  aenala  waa,  ai  it
i  bythe  pleba. [Iupuiuk  ;  Pald-

.  the  gneation
doing  he  woold  ipao  lacta
haTB  fbifeiled  all  dum.  We  haTO  a  remaikahia
example  of  thii  in  the  oee  of  Cicero,  who  after  hia
retORi  from  Cilioia  lingeied  in  the  Tidnity  of  Roma
day  after  dqr,  and  draggad  abont  fail  lictora  ftom
one  pbca  to  anotbai,  without  entering  the  dty,  in
the  Tain  hope  of  a  trinmph.

Socb  were  the  preiiminariea,  and  it  only  now
nmuna  (0  deacribe  tha  order  of  the  proceuion.
Thia  in  aneiant  dayi  mi  aiiffidandy  limpie.  The
ieadera  of  the  enemy  and  the  other  priionera  wera
lad  alaog  in  adTaoc*  of  the  genand'a  ohariot,  tha
military  (tandard*  wera  amed  bafinv  the  troopa
who  Mlowed  laden  with  plonder,  banqnela  were
wfami  in  front  of  every  door,  and  the  pepnlaee
bnnght  np  the  nar  in  ■  joyou  band,  filled  with
good  cbeo.  dmnting  aonga  at  victory,  jeering  and
bantering  aa  they  went  dang  with  the  plesnntriea
cnatomary  on  nieh  occaaioni.  (Lit.  iii.  2S.)  Bnt
in  later  time*  theac  pageantt  were  manhalled  with
eitnordinary  pomp  and  tplcndonr,  and  ptsienlad
a  m«t  goigeoni  ipectacle.  Minute  detaili  would
neceaarily  be  diSiemit  according  to  drcumitaDcei,
but  the  general  anangementa  were  aa  fc^w.  When
the  day  appointed  had  aniTod  the  whole  populatian
ponied  forth  from  their  abodea  in  holiday  attire,
acme  itationad  themadiaa  on  tha  Mapi  of  the  pub-
lic boildiiiga  in  the  fbram  and  along  the  Via  Sacn,
whileolMra  moontad  acaffiddiua  eteded  faKths
nntndiag*  view  of  the  ahow.  The
. .  all  thrown  open,  nrlanda  of  Bowera
daearaled  eTOiy  ahtina  and  miage,  and  incanae
amdiod  ea  avery  allar.  (PluL  AenU.  FiaL  32  ;
Dion  Can.  Ixiir.  1.)  Ueanwhile  tha  Impeimlor
"  ' ~  ibty  of  hia uldlera.  detiiand  an

their  Tslour,  and  concluded  by
to  the  mod  diitingnithad  and
nun  of  money  to  each  indindnal,  the  amonnt  da-
ending  on  tha  Talne  of  the  ipoili. He  then  aa>
tnded  hia  iriomphal  car  and  adTaocad  to  tha
Porta  Trinmphalia  (where  thia  g^  waa  ii  ■  qne»>

23 :  SnaL  Odav.  101  ;  Joaephna,'  B.J.1U.  31),
mat  by  tba  wbda  body  of  tba  >anaM


1166  TBIUMPHUS.

liMid«d  b;  thg  iiuginnt«. Th«  proctuioD  then

delilcd  in  the  hUowing  order.

1.  The  ScDBlB  headed  b<rlhamii«»tnt«.  (Dion
CuL  li.  31  ;  Serr.  ad  Viy.  At^  £43.)  2.  A  bod;
of  Irumpeten.  3.  A  train  ol  caniH^i  lod  frames
(Jwphus,  B.  J.  *iL  34)  laden  with  •pailt,  tfaoH
article*  which  vera  npeciilly  remaikible  eithet  ou
(CCQimt  of  their  beauty  or  laiily  being  diipOMd  in
inch  a  maaner  u  to  be  Hen  diitinctlj  bj  the
crowd.  (Suet.  Jui.  37.)  Boardi  were  borne  aloft
on  fercula,  on  which  wen  painted  in  laqe  lellen


ivory  01


(Qoinctil.  ri.  31  of  the  ciliei  and  forte  oiptured
(Plin.  T.  fi),  and  pictuiH  of  the  mountain!,  ciTen,
and  other  great  oatnnl  feature*  of  the  iDbjugnled
legion,  with  apprapriaM  inicriptiani.  Oold  and
lilier  in  coin  or  bullion,  anni,  wrapona,  and  hone
fumiltira  of  eiery  deMiipiian,  tlatnet,  pictotei,
Taiei,  and  other  worlu  of  art,  predsot  ttonea,
elaborately  wrougbl  and  richly  embraiderad  >tu&,
and  oTory  abject  which  could  be  regarded  at  valu-
able or  curioua.  1.  A  body  of  flule-piayar*.  5.  The
white  bnlla  or  oxen  deitined  for  HCtifioa,  with
gilded  boma,  decorated  with  infnlae  and  lerta,  at-
tended by  the  ilaughtering  prieita  with  thair  int-
plemenlt,  and  followed  by  the  f^imilli  bearing  in
their  bandi  palene  and  other  holy  reaael)  and  in-
atrmnenti.  6.  Elephant)  or  any  other  itnnge
aDimaii,  natketoftha  conquarad  diatricta.  7.  The
anna  and  intignia  of  the  leaden  of  the  foe.  8.
The  leadera  thFrnaeliet,  and  anch  of  their  kindred
aa  had  been  taken  prieonera,  followed  bythewhola
band  of  inferior  captiTei  in  fetterL  9.  The  coronaa
and  other  tribntea  of  reipect  and  gratitude  be-
atowed  on  the  Imperator  bT  allied  itingi  and  •talea.

10.  Thalictoraofthe  Impenlor  in  lingle  file,  their
fhacei  wreathed  with  Uurel. (Plin.  H.  N.  t.  40.)

1 1.  The  Impentor  bimaelf  in  a  circular  chariot  of


a  peculiar  form  (Zonar.  rn.  31)  drawn  by  fom
horKi,  which  were  lonietiniea,  though  nrdy,  white.
(PluU  a<»ti«.  7  ;  Stn.Le.;  Dion  Caat-iliiL  U.)
The  circular  form  of  the  chariot  ii  aaen  in  the  pre-
ceding cut,  copied  from  a  mubia  formerly  in  the
pogaeMioD  of  the  Duke  d'Alcala  at  Senile  (Mmt-
taucOD,  Ant.  Erp.  ToL  It.  pi.  er.),  and  alao  in  the
fpllawing  cut,  which  repreienti  the  rereiw  of  on*
Of  die  coina  of  the  Antontnea.  Ha  wai  attind  in
a  gold  embroidered  robe  {Uiga  pida)  and  flowered
tunic  (liaka  palmala),  he  bore  in  bia  right  hand  a
lanrel  bongh  (Pht.  Paall.  S2),  and  in  hit  left  a
Keptie  (Dionyi.  t.  <7  ;  Val  Hai.  ir.  4.  g  £),  hii


TRIUMPHUa.

browi  wars  encircled  with  a  wreath  of  Delphic  lannl
(Plin.  H.  N.  K.  36,  39),  in  addiiias  (a  which,  in
ancient  time*,  hit  body  waa  painted  bright  nd.
(Plin. H.  jV.  xiiiL  36.) He waa accompuied


{Ur.  zIt.  40  :  Tac  Am*,  ii.  41),  and  tiai»iiii>«
by  <ery  dear  or  highly  honoured  &ienda  (Dion
Catt.  IL  16,  LdiLSO),  while  behind  him  acood  a
public  tiara  holding  over  hit  head  a  Roldoi  Etma-
can  crown  ornamented  with  jewelt.  (Plin.  U.  If.
xixiii.  4,  ziiriii,  7 ;  Zonar.  rn.  21.)  The  pre-
tence of  a  thtTe  in  tnch  a  place  at  audi  a  nmt
tesnt  to  hare  been  intended  to  aiert  **  inndia '
and  the  influence  of  the  eril  eye,  and  for  tfaa  maia
purpoie  a  faacinum,  a  little  bell,  and  a  mcaal^
wen  attached  to  the  Tahide.  (Plin.  /f.  N.  zxiiii.
7  ;  Zonnr.  tIL  21.)  Tertdlian  [ApoL  33)tella  at,
that  the  ilaie  aver  and  anon  whupend  in  the  ear
of  the  Impeiator  the  warning  wordt  "BeafHce  po«
te,  hoDuuem  narmeDto  te,"  and  thja  elalanent  it
copied  by  Zonarat  (^  c),  but  it
anycBrlior  writer.  laidonii  (iTiii.  2),  n
ttandiug  Pliny  (ixriii.  7),  imaginea  that  the  tlai*
in  quetiion  waa  a  eosunon  eiecDtiouer.  12.  Be-
hind the  chanot  or  on  the  honet  which  drew  it
(Zonar.  L  e.)  mie  the  inwn-np  *>ma  of  the  Im-
pentor, together  with  Ue  iega^  the  trjbimi  ( Cic
IS  1^.  35),  and  the  eqoitet,  all  on  honebKk.
1 3.  The  lear  waa  brought  up  by  the  wholo  body
of  the  inbniry  in  mtrdung  order,  their  apcan
adorned  with  laurel  (Plin.  it.  40),  aome  ^osiiBf
lo  Triumphe  (Varro.  £.  i.  t.  7,  ed.  Hilkr  ;  Hor.
Carm.  ii.  Q.  49  ;  TibnU.  iL  6.  131X  and  ai:«i^
hymni  to  the  goda,  while  othtra  pnickitocd  iba
praiiea  of  their  leader  or  indulged  in  keen  taroumi
and  coane  ribaldry  at  hit  ezpenta,  for  the  neat
perfect  fieedom  of  qieoch  wat  granted  and  uer-
dted.  (LiT.  It.  £3,  t.  49,  ili.  38,  Dionya.  Tit.  Tj;
Suet.  JmL  49,  5)  ;  Hart  i.  S.  3.)

The  Bjimgement  of  the  proceisioD  aa  giTca
above  it  taken,  with  tome  changea,  from  the  tzraliaa
of  Onopbriui  Pani-iniui  De  Triorapho  in  the  »tk
Tolume  oF  the  Thetaurut  of  Oraenua.  Tbe  dif-
fannl  porticultn  ate  all  collected  from  the  accoonti
trantmitted  to  lu  of  the  moit  celebtaled  trininpta,
inch  aa  that  of  Pompey  in  Appian  (A^  ATM.
116,  117),Df  AamilintPanllnitiiiPlotudil/l^t.
32)  and  in  Liry  (iIt.  40),  of  Veapitian  and  Titn
in  Jowphna  {&  J.  Til  S.  i  4, 1,  6).  and  </  Camil-
Int  in  Zonaiaa  (Tii.  3l),logatlia  with  the  inaai>i
ofDionynni{ii.34,T.47),SerTiat(ad  r,ty.  Am.
IT.  343),  and  JuTBnal  {SoL  x.  38 — IS).

Juit  aa  the  pomp  wat  aacending  ths  i^TitTlit
hill  tome  of  the  koitile  diieft  ware  led  mid*  iaw
the  adjoining  priaon  and  pat  to  diAth,  a  rBHira  te
bariannu  that  wa  eookl  tcweely  b^ivT*  ikat  it
axiiled  in  a  driiiMd  age  wen  it  dm  uta««d  ^


TBIDMPHTJ3.

iDES.  (Cic  A)  Vtrr,
T,3V;  tiiT.  zxji,  ini  JsHpli.  Tii.  S4.)  pom-
psj,  indBed,  nfninad  &nm  popatntiiig  Ihii  Un-
dtj  in  fail  third  triompb  (AppUo,  BtlL  MiO.
117).*iidAnnliwira  liktooauion  ipuvd  Zenobis,
but  thew  ue  quoted  m  cxcaptiaiu  to  the  geocral
nils.  When  it  vu  vuionDccd  thai  thcM  murden
had  bsm  complated  ( JoKph  L  o.)  ihe  victiou  vera
tfan  ueri&cad,  on  oSuiiig  from  the  ipoil*  wu
pRMuled  to  Jupita,  the  laurel  wreath  vu  de-
pniled  in  ths  lip  of  tha  god  (Senec  CcmaL  ad
lldv.  10  i  PUb.  H.  JV.  xi.  40  ;  Plin.  Paug.  8  ;
Stat.^ci.iir.1.41),  thB  ImpcnlormieDtertaineit
at  a  public  feut  aleng  with  his  friendi  in  (he  tem-
ple, and  Rtnnied  home  in  the  eveuing  prereddi
bj  tonhea  and  pipe*,  and  oKorted  bj  a  crowd  of
dliaena.  (Flor.  ii.  1.)  Plutarch  (Q.  R.  77)  and
Valerina  Maiimo*  (ii.  S.  M)  uy  that  it  wai  the
pnctite  (o  inviie  tha  cooniU  to  ^ii  hanqoat,  and
tkm  to  lend  ft  mauage  requeatiog  them  Dot  to
cnma,iD  order,  donbtleia,  that  the  Inipento:
ba  tha  moflt  ditlinguiihed  peraon  to  toe  con  _

Ths  whole  of  the  proceedings,  gnunllj  ipeik-
ing,  were  brought  to  a  clOH  in  one  da;,  but  when
the  quanlilj  ojf  plnndei  wu  Tec;  great,  and  the
UDOfia  TCr;  nomentua,  >  loogtii  period  wia  re-
hired for  tha  exliibitioD,  and  Siui  the  trinmph  at
Fhrninm*  cmtinued  for  three  daji  in  Hicceaiiou.
(U>.  xutx.  52 ;  Pint.  Aeail.  foMlL  32.)

But  the  glariea  of  tha  Impentor  did  not  end
«ith  the  tbow  nor  aren  vi^  hii  liCe,  It  wa*
euitotnaij  (we  know  not  if  the  practice  wae  in-
TariaUe)  to  prando  hira  at  the  public  eipeuM
with  a  site  for  a  home,  nich  nuuuions  being  itylcd
triHmpiala  damMi.  (Plin.  iiivi.  2-1.  g  6.)  Afier
dwh  hi*  kindred  were  pennitted  to  depotil  his
••be*  within  the  wslli  (lueh,  at  least,  is  the  ei-
slanalion  giren  to  the  wordi  of  Plntarch,  Q.  R.
78^  and  lauiel-wnathed  statoei  itandtng  erect
{n  (rinmphal  can,  displayed  in  the  mtihulnm  of


toiity.

A  Tbiuhfbiji  NataLU  appon  to  hara  dif-
fered in  DO  rtapMt  bom  an  crdinaiy  trinmph
except  that  it  moit  baTs  been  npon  a  imdler  sole,
'and  would  be  characterised  bj  the  eihibition  of
beaks  of  ships  and  other  nautical  tnpbiei.  The
ewiiast  upon  record  was  granted  to  C.  Duiliui,
who  laid  the  foundation  of  the  supremacy  of  Rome
by  tea  in  the  first  Punic  war  (Lit.  EpiL  ifii. ;
Fast.  CapiL)  I  sad  u  elated  was  he  by  his  tacceis,
that  during  the  rest  of  bii  life,  whenever  he  re-
turned home  at  night  &am  Hipper,  be  caused  flatei
to  sound  and  torches  to  be  borne  bt^orehioL  (Flor.
ii.  1  ;  Cic  Cfat.  M<^}.  13.)  A  Mcond  naval  tri-
omph  WM  celebrated  by  Lutatius  Catului  for  his
Tietoiy  off  the  Ininlae  Aegstes,  b-c  ^11  (VaL
Mai:  iL  8.  g  2  1  Fast  CapiL) ;  a  third  by  Q.
Fabins  Labeo,  B.C  1S9,  orei  the  Cietsns  (Liv.
xiivii.  60),  and  a  fourth  by  C  Oclaiiui  oret
King  Peraeai  (Liv.  ilv.  42)  without  captirej  aikd

TKrtTUPHUB  CASTRiNaui  was  a  prooenion  of
Ae  sohliers  thnitigh  the  camp  in  honaoc  of  a  Iri-
bunut  or  some  officer,  inferior  to  the  general,  who
bad  petfonned  a  briJliant  exploit-  (Liv.  ilL  35.)

Aft^r  the  eitinctian  of  freedom  the  Emperor
being  conudered  u  the  commander-in-chief  of  all
tha  amiJM  of  the  state,  aviry  military  achievement
wu  nndentood  to  be  perfoinied  under  hi*  anspicei,
ad  baan,  iccoidisg  to  the  (onu  of  *t*d  tha


TRIUMVIRI.  IWT

andsnt  ecmiUtntiou, he alone  had  ■  legilimala

triumph. This  principle  was  soon  fully

recognised  and  acted  npon,  for  although  Aulonin*

had  granted  triumphs  to  hi*  legati  (Dion  Case.  ilii.

13),  and  his  aiample  had  been  Jrveiy  followed  by-

Augustas  (Suet.  Octav.  S8  \  Dion  Cass.  liv.  1 1, 12)

in  the  early  part  af  his  career,  yet  after  the  year

B.C  U  (Dion  Cass.  liv.  34),  he  entirely  discon-

>ned  the  practice,  and  from  that  time  forward

nmphs  were  rarely,  if  ever,  oonceded  to any

cept  memben  of  the  imperial  bmily. But  to

npensate  in some  degree  for  what  wia  then

taken  away,  the  custom  was  inCrodueed  of  hestow-

it  vera letnied  Triatnpkalia  OnuBuala,

pemuuien  to  receive  the  titles  bestowed

d  to  appear  in  public  with  the  lobea  worn

by  the  Imperatoras  of  the  commonwealth  when

they  triumphed,  and  to  bequeath  to  their  deuand-

anta  triumphal  sUtuea. These  fninpUw  onuf

naUa  an  said  to  have  been  first  bestowed  upon

Agrippa  (Dion  Cass,  f.c.)  or  upon  Tiberius  (Siut.

Odav.  9),  and  ever  after  were  a  conimon  mark  of

the  &TDur  of  the  prince.  (Tarit.  Am.  i.  72,  iL  S2,

iii.  72,  Ac,  Hin.  L  79,  11  78,  &c.)

The  hut  triumph  ever  celebrated  was  that  of
Beliwrius,  who  entered  Constanlinople  in  a  quad-
riga, Bccording  to  the  &^ion  of  the  olden  lime,
Lhe  recovery  of  Afrioi  bom  tbe  Vandala,
tal  number  of  triumphs  npon  record  down
period  has  been  calculated  as  amounting  to
Orastus  (viL  9)  nckoas  320  from  Ramuln*
spasisn,  and  Pitiicut  (_LtBc  Ailiq.  f.  v.
latt*  th*  unmbei  from  Vespasian
Densanus  ii  jO.  (W.  R.]

THIU'MVIBI  or  TKE-SVIRI,  were  either  o>
dinary  magistrate*  or  officers,  or  else  extraordinary
commissionen,  who  were  frequently  appointed  at
Rome  to  eiecuts  any  public  offlCB.  The  following
ia  a  list  of  tha  most  important  of  both  dawes,  ar-
ranged in  alphabetical  order.

1.  TbIUMVIIU  AoRO  DiTlDUHDO. [TRIUMVIHI

Colon  ua  DzouciNnAi.]

2.  TatuMviBi  CarrraLBi  were  regnlar  m^s-
Entea  first  appointed  about  B.a.  292.  (Lir.  Kpii.
1 1  ;  Dig.  1.  tit.  2.  a  2.  I  30.)  The  institution  of
their  office  is  aid  to  have  been  proposed  by  L.
Pspirius,  whom  Feslns  (s.  e.  Satramaitiua)  call*
tribune  oC  the  pleba,  but  whom  Niebuhr  [Hiit.  of'
Rornt,  vol  iii.  pp.  4U7,  ion)  supposes  to  be  L.
Pqiirius  Cursor,  who  was  piaaur  in  B.  c  292,
Tbey  were  elected  by  the  people,  the  comitia  being
held  by  the  praetor.  (Festus,  Lc)  They  succeeded
to  many  of  the  functions  of  the  Qunestoiee  Fsrti-
ddii.  (VurD,Z,.£.T.e],ed.Milller;QuaB«TaiL)
It  was  their  duty  to  inquire  into  all  capital  crimes,
and  to  receive  infonnationi  respecting  such  (  Vam^
Lc;  PlauL  Jjia.  1.2.5,  ^■/■J.  ilL  2.  2  i  Cic  f-m
CIiHni.  13),  and  conseqiently  they  apprehended
and  committed  to  prison  all  criminals  whom  they
detected.  (Liv.  iiiii.  17  ;  Val.  Hai.  vi.  1.  g  10  ;
Cic.  iic)  In  conjunction  with  the  Aedilee,  thej
had  to  presecre  the  public  peace,  to  loevent  all  nn-
lawful  anemUies,  &c  (Liv.  nr.  I,  xulx.  U.)
Tbey  enforced  the  payment  of  fine*  due  to  tb*  stale
(Fest.  L  c)  Tbey  had  the  care  of  public  prison*.
and  carried  into  effect  the  sentezkce  of  the  law
upon  criminals.  (Liv.  luii.  26  ;  VaL  Msi.  r.
4.  S7.  viii.  4.  g3;  Sell.  Oil.  SSj  Tadl.  J«.  v
9;)  la  these  points  they  resembled  the  magistracy
of  the  Eleven  at  Athena.  [UsNnacx.]  They  bad
tha  power  of  inflicting  si


liee  TRIUMVIRI.

(IiTM  wnd puuni  of  Ion


■ppettn  to  han  beeo  Dear  tbe  MKcnUn  column.
(Feilui,  iL  c ;  GilL  iii.  3  ;  FlauC  ^ntpUb-.  L  1
3  ;  Cic.  p™  C7i»ii(.  13,)  NLebuhr  ((.  e.),  who  ii
ToUowtd  by  Ainold  {Hitl.  of  Roue,  roL  ii.  p.
3A9>,  tnppow*  t)iat  tba;  migbt  inSict  nuiiiiiuj
puuUhraent  on  all  offniden  Hgiinit  tbfl  public
peua  vbo  migbt  ba  Uken  in  Uie  bet ;  but  ttie
puuge  of  Fntui,  wbicb  Niebuhr  qoot?*,  doet  not
proTe  thii,  ud  it  ii  improbable  that  the;  ahonld
LaTs  had  power  gifen  tbem  of  inflicting  aununarj
piiniibmsat  npon  a  Roman  dtinn,  eipecially  liocc
we  have  no  inatance  ncorded  of  Ibcii  exerciiing
■uch  ■  power.  (Waller,  GaA.  d.  Ram.  RieUt,
pp.  165,  86S,  lit  ed. ;  Gtittliog,  OacA.  d.  Rom.
SlaatfB.  p.  37S.]

3.  Triumviri  Coldhiab  DmuciNDia  were
penona  appointed  to  raperiDlend  tbe  fonnation  of
a  cDloRj.  They  aro  ipoken  of  under  Colonu,
p-  315,  b.  Since  they  had  beiidea  to  iuperintfiod
the  ditlribntion  of  the  land  to  the
them  alto  called  Trimnniri  GiIb
Agnnfiu  Diadando  (Li".  TiiL  16),  and  umetunei
•iinplT  TWannri  Affro  Dando  (I.ir.  ill.  I ).

«.  Trujiivihi  Epulon«s. [Erutowas.]

5.  Triumviri  Eqditum  TraKia  RicooNoa-
•:kmdi,  or  LaaiNUia  EquiruH  Dkubus,  were
magiitialee  fint  appointed  by  Anguito*  to  reriie

the  order.  Thii  waa  fonnerly  part  of  the  dutie*
of  the  cenaon.  (SoeL  Anp.  37  ;  TaeiC.  Aim.
iii.  30.)

6.  TamMViKi  Hinbarii. [MlNMIUt.]

7.  TRlUHVlRlMONiriLIS. [MONIT,!.]

B.  Triumviri Nocturni, were magiitralea
elected  annually,  whow  chief  duty  it  wai  lo  pre-
Tenl  Grei  by  night ;  and  for  tbi*  purpoia  they  bad
Dund  the  city  duripg the  night (agilioM


of  the  pleba. (Val.  Mix.  "tiii.  I.  §S,  G.)

The  time  at  which  Ibii  oHice  «u  inslitnted  ii  on-
Itnown,  bot  it  muit  ha™  been  pievioutly  to  the
yeu  B.C.  304.  (Li>.  ii.  i6.)  Augiutui  Icaniremd
their  dutieilo  the  PnefTCtuiVigilurn.  (Dig.  1.  tiL
IS.  a  1.) [PBiiFBcrUi  Vioilum.]

9.  Triumviri  RiricuNDis  AiniBus,  extiaor-
dinaiy  cflicert  elected  in  the  Comitia  Tribnta  in  tbe
time  of  the  lecond  Punic  war,  were  appiuntad  for
the  pnipote  of  repairing  and  rebuilding  ceroia


(LiT.


..7.)


Ki  RiiFUBLiCAi  CoNnrruaNnAX,
Niebuhr  (HM.  o/  Ramt,  ToL  iii.  p.  43)  luppoKi
that  magiitiatea  under  Ihi)  title  wen  appointed  aa
early  aa  the  time  of  the  Licinian  Rogationi,  in
order  to  reitore  peace  to  the  ilate  after  tbe  com-
motioni  coUKquent  npon  tboH  Rogationi.  (Lydua,
de  Mag.  L  33.)  Niebubr  alto  thinki  that  theia
were  ^e  niagiitralee  intended  by  Varro,  who  men-
tioni  among  the  eitraoidinary  magiitntet,  that
bad  the  right  of  lummDniug  the  lenale,  TriumTin
for  the  T^ulation  of  the  republic,  along  with  the
DecemTin  and  Coniular  I^bunei.  (Oell.  liv,
7.)  Wo  hare  not,  however,  any  certain  mention
of  offlcera  or  ma|(iitratei  nnder  ihi*  name,  till  to-
ward! the  dole  af  the  republic,  when  tbe  upmne
power  ni  ehared  between  Caeaar  {Octanaooi),
AnlODiiu,Ri>d  Lepidu>,whoadnuuiiteredtheaffiun
dI  the  itate  under  the  title  of  TVtwann'  RapMiea*
OmttUitatdat.  TUa  office  waa  oonfened  upoD
tlun  in  B.C  43  fiv  five  ynn  (Uv.  ^U  120 ;


-  38,  •.

upon  Ihem  again,  in  R.  c  37,  for  five  yran  norr.
(Appian.  B,  C.  v.  95  ;  Dion  Caia.  xl,al  54.)  The
coalition  between  Juliue  Caeiar,  Pocnpeioa,  awl
Crauui,  in  B.  CL  60  (VelL  Pat  iL  44  ;  L>>.  ^»t.
103}  ii  unmlly  culled  the  fint  triumTiraU,  aod
that  between  Oclavianua,  Antony,  and  Lrpidiu,
the  MGond  ;  but  it  mn)t  be  bonie  in  mind  that  the
former  neror  bore  thi  title  of  tiinmriri,  nor  wne
inieited  with  any  office  nnder  that  name,  wherea*
the  latter  were  reccgniaod  aa  regular  atagiatiatea
nnder  tbe  aboTe-mentiened  title.

11.  Triumviri  Sicrib  CoNqniKBHiin  Donn-
auB  PiRSiONiNDis,  eitiaordinary  officer*  elected
in  tbe  Coraitia  Tributa  in  the  time  of  tbe  teooDd
Pnnic  war,  Mem  to  have  had  to  take  care  that  all
property  given  or  conKcrated  to  tbe  gnda  waa  ap-
plied to  that  purpoae. (Liv.  xxt.  7.)

12.  Tmumvuu  SiHfviie  LaoiNDi  wen  mafia-
tratei  appointed  by  Angnitni  to  admit  pecioni  inla
the  aenate.  Thia  waa  prcvioualy  the  duty  of  the
cenaon. (Snot  Aug.  3T.)

TRO'CHILUS. [Sriai.]

TROCHUS  (r^x").  >  hoop-  The  Greek
boy>  uaed  to  ezerciie  themielie*  like  oiin  with
trundling  a  hoop.  It  waa  a  bcome  ring,  and  had
■ometimei  bella  attached  to  it.  (Man.  li.  33.  2,
liv.  168,  16"' '  - "  .  .

iiL  12),  and  /Mrrin.  Fmn  '
cnalom  paaied  to  tbe  Romana,  i
adopted  the  Oreek  term.  (Hor.  Oiraa.  iiL  24.  &;.']
The  hoop  waa  uaed  at  the  Gvmhikium  (Pnpst.
I.  e. ;  Ovid.  Triii.  ii.  4R5)  ;  and.  thetefore.  on  one
of  the  genu  in  the  StfMch  tallrclion  at  Beibn,
which  ii  engraved  in  the  annexed  woadcnt,  it  ia
accompanied  by  the  jar  of  oil  uid  the  laurel  bnnci,
the  aigna  of  effiirt  and  of  victory.  On  encb  lida  if
thia  we  have  tvpreaented  another  gem  from  the
■ame  coltoction.  Both  of  theie  eihibit  rakri
youtha  trundling  tbe  hoop  by  means  of  the  book
or  key.  Theie  ahow  the  liae  of  tbe  hoop,  which
in  the  middle  figure  haa  alao  ihtre  unall  rinp  ar
bella  on  iti  circumference.  ( Winckelmaiin,  One
da  Pierm  Ormta,  pp.  452—^55.)


In  a  totally  diBnmt  manner  boopa  were  uacd
in  the  perfbrmaucea  of  lumbleia  and  daucen.
Xenophon  deaoibe*  a  femalo  dancer  who  nnivea
twelve  boopa  in  ancceaaioD,  ihrowti^  ifann  into  the

regulated  by  another  fanwie  playing  on  tbe  pipe.

(Symp».  ii.  7,  a)

Un  the  UH  of  rfaxis,  to  dmota  the  potttt^

wheel,  lee  FlCTILa.  [J.  Y-)

TROJAH  LUDUS. [C[Rci;e,  p.  288.  b.]
TROPAEUM  (vfrfnuar.  Att.  v^vra^,  Sebcd.

od  Aratopk.  BUL  453),  a  trophy,  a  aign  ant  b-
'  I  of  viclMy,  which  waa  «t*<Md  as  the  fiall


TROPAEUJL

of  battU  when  cbs  enemy  hiul  turned  (rpiwrn, j


luf  be  added  <l>i  or  nari
firwtKi^r. (Wol(;o<i£WiB.uiZ^.  p,3»6.)

When  the  baole  ni  not  deciiiie,  or  each  parlf
eonudered  it  hid  uine  cUimi  lo  the  Tictory,  bolh
■rectad  trophiin.  (Thucyd.  L  54,  105,  il  92.)
Traphiei  DHully  anuiited  of  the  (11111,  thielda,
hclmtt*.  lie,  of  the  eneaiy  thai  wen  defeated  ;
and  fram  the  deicriptigna  of  Virgil  and
Roman  poeu,  which  have  nfenncs  to  the  Oreek
nther  than  to  the  Rnmaa  cutlom,  it  appeiti
the  ipiHli  ud  umi  of  the  ranquiihed  irete  pi
«D  the  tnmk  af  a  tree,  which  waa  fixed  01
•leialion.  (Virg.  An.  li.  5  j  San.  o^  foe. ;  SlM.
TMAiilOl  ;  Jut.  I.  133.)  It  wai  coDKcrated
to  •onia  dirinity  with  an  inicripUon  {iwlypaiiiia),
lecordii^  the  namei  oflhs  tictore  and  of  the  ds-
fi-nted  ptuty  ( Bnrip.  Platm.  633  ;  SchoL  ad  loc. ;
Paoi.  ..  27.  §  7  ;  Virg.  Aa.  iiL  288  1  Ovid.  At.
Am.  ii.  741  ;  Tidb  Am.  iu  32)  ;  whenco  trophiei
were  regarded  at  inviolable,  which  erea  the  enemy
were  not  pemilted  to  remoTe.  (Dion  Cau.  iliL
58.)  Soneiimea,  howeTec,  a  people  deitrojed  a
trophy, if  they  coniidered  thnt the  enemy  hod


'ectedit


le  Mile


did  vilh  ■  tmphy  of  the  Athenian!.  (Thucyd.  1
24.)  Thnt  rankling  and  hoitile  feelingn  niif^ht
be  perpetoalsd  by  the  continuiuice  of  n  trophy
teemi  to  have  been  ori|)iiially  part  of  Greek  ini
national  law  that  tnphietihould  b«  nude  only  of


■hoald  not


when  decayed.  (PluL
;  DiKl.  liii.  24.)  He
are  told  that  the  Lacedaemoniana  accused  the  The-
bana  before  the  Amphictyoni&council,  becai
lailer  hod  erected  a  melal  trophy.  (Cic  dt.
ii.  23.)  It  wat  not  however  uncommon  t
Hch  traphiea.  Plutarch  {Aldb.  39.  p.  207,  iL)
DKntioDi  one  raiied  in  the  time  of  Aicibiulee,  and
Psuaaniaa  (ii.  21.  §  9,  iii.  14.  8  ".  "■  27.  §  7)
ipe;dtiofMveralwhiehhesawinOte«e.  (Wach.
ninth,  i/e/t  AU.  Tol.  ii.  pL  i.  p.  424,  tit  ed,
r.  1'^M.  Gnec  p.  370.)


the  Inn  tower*  of  while  Mone,  npon  which  tro-
phiei were  placed  adoiaed  with  the  ipmla  of  the
enemy.  (Florui,  t.  t.;  Sttabo,  iv.  p.  IS5.)
Pampey  alu  niwid  trophiei  on  the  Pyreneei  ifiei
hia  victoriei  in  Spain  (Strabo,  iii.  p.  156  ;  Plin.
H.tf.m.Z\  Dion  Caaa.  ili.  24. ;  Sail.  ap.  Sen.  im
Virg.  Aai.  iL  6)  ;  Juliui  Caeiar  did  the  urns
tisu  Ziela,  after  hii  victory  over  Phamacei  (Dion
Cau.  ilii.  48),  and  Dniiui,  near  tlie  Elbe,  to  com-
memorata  hia  victory  over  the  Germani.  (Dion
Caaa.  IL  1  ;  Fiomi,  iv.  12.)  Still,  however,  it  waa
irial  of  the  victory


le  field  of


Thel


Thel


ectedto


ere  usually  omimienled  with  the  beaki  or
Bcroteria  of  ihipa  [AcHOTIKliriil  ;  KoaTBl]  ;  and
were  generally  conieciBted  to  PoMidonor  Neplnne.
Sometime!  a  whole  ahip  wat  placed  a*  n  trophy.
(Thucyd.  ii.  84, 92.)

The  following  woodcut  taken  from  a  paintbig
fonnd  at  Pompeii  (jifiu.  Borias.  vol  vii.  t.  7)  cou.
taint  a  very  good  repretentatioD  of  a  tnpaeum,
which  Victory  ii  engs^ed  in  erecting.  The  con-
queror ilandi  on  the  other  lida  of  the  trophy  with
his  browa  endrcted  with  laureL

The  Macedonian  kings  never  erected  trophiei,  Cn
the  noion  given  by  Pauioniai  (ix.  40.  g  4),  and
hence  the  same  writer  oUerrel  that  Alexander
raisednatiophieiafier  hie  victoriei  over Dareiui  and
in  India.  The  Romani  too,  in  early  times,  never
erected  any  trophies  00  the  field  of  battle  (Flonii,
ilk  2),  but  carried  home  the  spoila  token  in  battle,
with  which  they  decoraled  the  public  building!,  and
nlso  the  private  houiei  of  individual!.  [SroLU.]
Subaeqnently,  however,  the  Romoni  adopted  the
Ureek  practice  of  tailing  trophies  on  the  field  of
battle ;  the  first  trophiei  of  Ihii  kind  were  erected
by  Domitiu*  Ahenobaibni  and  Fabius  Moiimui  in


railed  by  Marias  tc
over  Jogurtha  and  the  Cimbri  and  Teutoni,  which
were  cait  down  by  Sulla  and  restored  by  Juiioa
CseHr,mtwt  have  been  in  the  city.  (Suet.  ./af.  11.)
la  the  later  timei  of  the  republic  and  under  ihs
empire,  the  erection  of  triumphal  anhei  was  the
most  common  way  of  commemorating  a  victory,
many  of  which  nmitin  to  the  present  day.
[AhcDs.]  We  find  trophiei  on  the  Roman  coini
of  levend  bmilic!.  The  annexed  coin  of  M.
Furiua  Pbilni  ii  an  example  ;  on  the  reverse,  Vic-
toiy  or  Rome  ii  leprcMnled  ctowoing  a  trophy.


TROSSULI.  (Eqditm,  p.  473,  a.]
TRUA,  dim.  TRULLA  (vo^n,),  derived
from  Tfniu,  T jpB,  ftc,  to  perforate;  a  large  and
flat  ipooa  or  htdlo  pierced  with  holes  ;  a  trowel.
The  anueied  woodcut  represent!  inch  a  ladle,
adapted  to  itir  vegetables  or  other  natten  in  th*  -
pot  (SchoL  iiiAritlopi.Aii.7B),Ui  actaa  aitiunei


Iiro  TRUTINA.

vhPB  they  wore  teksu  nut  of  th*  vato'.  or  to  du-
p«l  the  fnih  rrom  iti  BU&e«. (Non.  Mutall
19, ed. Merceri.) The  ladle  tun  drawn
found  in  tha  kitcben  of"  liie  Iiddh  of  Psnu,'


ThB  tnlla  inaria  (Vun,  £. L.  t.  113,  ed.

Miillcr)  tMUiu  to  hiTa  been  >  •padM  of  eoluider
[COLUU],  uwd  H  a  wioe-atraiiMr.  (Cic  Vtrr.
it.  2t  ;  Hor.  &K.  il  S.  U4.)  Though  genenU;
applied  10  thcH  domalic  ud  culinary  puipoKt
(Eupolii,  p.  171.  ed.  RiuIhI)  the  Irulla  wu
found  to  be  conienieal  for  palling  beei  into  i  hiTc
{Col  d»  Rt  Riut.  ix.  \2.)  It  WM  iIm  commeolj
DHd  to  plastor  wallt  (falUd.  da  St  RutL  I  IS,
'" and tfaiu  ga*a riw  lo tha ~


[P*.


«.]


Fellow.  {So.  in  Alia

Mi»«.  V.  1

3)  eipUin.

the  Eutam  malhod  of  niing  a  hind  o!

colander  ii

wuhing  the  hude. It  it  plsced  us  •

the  jai [Oll*].  which

Thi. maj thettfora  bo

Ihe  IruUtmm

which  th(

■  nci<nt.uKd.lof)atherw

:h  the  buin

[J.  Y.]


m  inctoding
I  iteclTard.


TRUBLION. fCoTVLA.]

TRUTINA  {T(>UTibTi).a  gtnr
both  LiHHA,  a  balance,  and  (to
(Non.  Marc  p.  180.)  Pajmcn
made  bj  weighing,  not  by  eoanttng.  itenea  ft
balance  (IrUtwi)  wui  [tteKrv«t  in  tiie  temple  of
SalnmatRome.  (\ano,L.L.  *.  IHS.ed.  MUller.)
The  balance  vai  much  mora  sncieni  than  the  Meel-
yaid,  which  according  to  laidora  of  Berilte  {Orig.
xvi.  31)  wai  inrented  In  Cnnipania,  and  therefere
entled  by  way  of  dittinetion  IVufina  Cbin^niu.
Coniiitently  irittl  tbi*  remark,  iteelyordi  haTs
been  found  ia  great  nambeci  among  the  mine  of
HarcBlflnenm  and  Pompeii.  Tbe  constnction  of
aomo  of  them  u  mora  elaborate  Md  complicated
tlioD  that  of  modem  ileelyardt,  and  they  are  in
iome  coiei  much  ornamented.  The  annexed  wood-
cut repmente  a  remoriiably  besotifbl  (tatera  whfoh
i)  pieaerred  in  the  HuKUn  af  tha  Capitol  at  Rome.
It>  mppert  ii  tha  tnmk  of  a  tne,  round  whieh  a
aeipent  ii  entwined. The  equipolM  i*  ■  huid  of


TDBA.
Minem. Three  othn  weighta  lie  im  the  bat  r{
the  atand,  deoignad  to  he  hung  upon  the  book  wbe t
occaiion  required.  {Mit.  CapiL  toL  iL  p.  313.)

VitniTiui  (i.  3. 0.  8.  §  t)  apkin  «lie  pradrli

of  Ihe  ataalyard,  and  mentioni  tbe  UloviBg  eoa-

itiloenl  puiti  of  it :  Ihe  ocale  {kstaia]  depeadkf

the  head  {aapvt},  new  wbkfa  b  the  poiiii  oT


heaat  {teafmi)  villi  the  vaight  ar  eqttjpaiie  [■ifi
poardam),  whuh  ii  mode  to  nun  along  the  pooiti
( ptr  fnaula)  azpiening  tha  waiglil*  af  tbe  4iC9»i
objaetitfaatanpatiBlothaaialB.  [J.  Y.)

TUBA (iniXvrrCI,  a  brenu  tramps  diMia-
gniihMl  fiwn  tk  earum  by  bebg  rtnigbl  sUe  tbe
latter  waa  cnrrod :  thai  0*id  (MU.  L  S8)
"  Nou  taba  diieMi  nan  aeria  ooniiu  flciL~


aon  (a  v.  Tiiia)  it  mittakan  in  uppoiiBg  that
AdIbi  OeUivi  (t.  8)  and  Maonbiu  {SaL  tL  8),
who  copiea  him.  iotand  to  affiivi  that  the  tuba  ni
emoked.  Tbe  wordi  of  tb*  fbtnet  da  not  ataa
that  bolb  the  litou  and  the  tuba  were  ctwked,
but  tlwt  both  that  kind  of  tnunpat  which  wu
called  a  litnni  and  aln  theMaffof  ik  ai^c  wire
Kked,  and  that  it  waa  doubtful  which  of  the
'o  had  lent  iti  name  to  the  otfaec  [Ijtdc<  |
The  tuba  wai  emirioyed  in  war  f)c  nfi^i  of
every  dew^tiption  (TadC.  HitL  ii.  29  ;  Cmiw.  B.  C
ill.  46  r  ilirt.  B,  a.  liii.  SO  ;  Lir.  ixrai.  2Tk,al
the  gunea  and  pnUie  FMtirali  (Jut.  n.  ^49,  z.
aUj  Virg.  jlMtT.  USi  0-ni.FaH-i.  7IG>,alH
at  the  hut  litn  la  tha  diad  {kiitc  lmia,ea*diiai.
Pen.  iiL  IDS;  Viig.  Jtm.  li.  191  ;  Oxid.  HenM.
zii.  140,  .4«or.  ii.  6.6),  and  Aalni  Oelliiii(ii.
2)  tell)  ui  from  Atteiua  Capita  that  thoae  wbo
'  ^hi  tnmpat  at  fnoerale  were  tenaed
id  uied  an  inatnunant  of  a  peculiar  fena.
of  the  tuba  an  repnaentsd  u  of  a  bank
and  feni^inijuiing  character  (friuta  Kmitma  fWkt-
nuii,  Virg.  Gearg.  it.  72  ;  lernbilam  aeairaat  ofn
fonoro,  Am.  ix.  £03},  which  Ennin*  (Sert.  ^
yiiy.  Aem.  ix.  SD3, ;  Priacjan  riu.  18.  103.  ed.
Knbl)  endeaTonred  to  imitate  in  tb«  Iim

"  At  tnbft  terrilnii  eonita  taratamkBV  dixit"


e  inTratian  of  the  taba  ii  inially  aecribed  by

at  writento  the  KtnucaM  (Aiheoaeot.  ii.  c
82  1  FoUui,  it.  ea,  87  I  Diodor.  y.  40  ;  Scrr.  ad
Viry.  Atn.  TiiL  £16  ;  ClaoL.  Alas.  Stm.  i.  p.
30G),aod  the  epithet  AiKn-oovAv(7irTaJ(ir,  lal^Mr'
tnunpeteca,  Pholiu  and  Hasych.  *,  e,  and  PoUui.
L  a)  would  Of  em  lo  iudiata  that  they  baj  made  it
famooa  Iqr  |ta«r  piiaaaa.  It  has  been  remaikad
that  Htnec  nanf  iatradneet  tha  v^nrt  in  hie
BimtiTa  b«t  ia  coBtarieuu  only  {IL  zriiL  i '.  ^,
IIL  3S8  i  EutatLud  Sctxd.),  which  ioda  n  i>


baao  bat  rtosntly  inlndaead  into  Qnaee,  mi  itn
Mttain  tkal  mtwilhnuduig  it*  emiDaotlj  matt^
dMnctet.it  wMoataatilalata  panod  oaed  in  the
■naieaof  tbelaadii«Uate»  By  the  tnpdina  ii*
Tsma  origin  wu  ItOy  taeagwMd :  AthMB  ■  A(»
okylut  Mdet*  tk«  daap-Moad  pJamag  Tynbaaiin
tnunpat  ta  MVBd  (jSWimk  567),  UlyaM  in  Sopb*-
cU  ( Jjl  1 7 )  dtdwM  (bat  the  HCMUi  aC  Ua  befeveJ
goddaoa  fell  upon  hii  wn  like  tb*  toMt  ef  tbe
braaen-noQthtd  TyRbenian  ball  (riflin  1 1,  i.  a.  tba
baU-ih^ed  apannn  af  tbe  Dwi^),  mi  mbuLu
efiihitau*  a«pU*4  ky  Euiridaa  (Pi^mm.  13:«


TUBA.
UeraJid.  ttSO),  and  otbci  Onck  (Agclor.  Hkt.
988  ;  Bnmck,  A<m1.  torn.  ii.  p.  143)  fmd  Romin
writcn  (7>rtiiB.«  eUmgor,  Virg.  ^m.  Tiii,  528  ;
Sot.  7M.  iil  650  -,  Tyrrlmat  cUagon  (nioe,
SDiu,u.  19).  Attordinfr  W  one  iiccount  il  wat
Cnt  bbricated  for  tha  T;nTt»niiina  by  Alhena,
who  in  conieijuFnce  mu  wonliipped  by  lh«  Ar-
gic«  under  thg  tills  oT  ZiXiiTf  (Scbol.  od  Han.
IL  iTin.219,  «.  cod.  Viet;  Psnan.  ii.  2l.f  S);
irhila  It  Roma  tfaa  ttAStatrixiti,  or  purification  of
Mcrrd  InuDpelt,  «M  per(arni«d  on  tha  Isil  day  of
the  QniiMiiatni*.  [Quinqditrux.]  la  onotbar
l^nd  tba  diKOverr  ia  attribulad  to  a  mytbical
king  of  tba  Tjrrhaniani.  Malaui,  ion  of  Uatnilr*
and  Onpbala  (Laat.  ad  StaL  TM.  ir.  S24,  tL
404  i  H^giD.  Fab.  S74  ;  Schol,  ad  Hon.  L  c),  in
■  third  (o  PiuRU  tha  TiirhaDiMi  (Plin.  H.  N.
TiL  57  ;  Phntiui,  t.  v.),  and  SUini  hu  prcKirad  a
tnditicD  ("iil  490),  acrording  to  which  tha  origin
of  ihii  initmncnt  ii  tnced  to  VetnloniL  (MiiUer,
Dit  Etnaitr,  it.  1,  3,  4,  £.)

Than  appaan  to  ban  baen  mawaDtial  dlBar-
«nce  in  fonn  batwacn  dia  Greek  and  Bomui  or
Tjnhcniui  tniinpati.  Both  wan  long,  (tndght,
hronia  iDbei  giadually  Incnuing  in  diameter,  and
teimiuating  in  a  ball-ihaped  apertnn. Thijr  pro-


is^


■ant  praciiatj  Iba  mna  ^jpaaianCA  on  i
of  THj  diSareiit  dnle*.  u  mij  be  teen  mm  ui<
cuti  annaied,  the  fonnar  of  which  i>  fism  Trajao'i
cnlumn,  and  the  latter  froin  In  ancient  fictila  vue
(Hope,a«(iii«f  D/(ia.JlKHI■t^pL  166.)


Tha  KkDliut  on  the  Tliad  (L  e.)  nckonj  «i  n-
ristioi  of  trimpeu  ;  (be  lint  ha  calli  the  OrKian
a^wiyt  "rtiidi  Athena  diicotared  (be  tha  Tynhe-
niaiia,  and  tba  liith,  lermed  by  him  ■bt'  'E^x^r,
tb<  Ttpnimat  aiXmyi,  he  dMcribea  ai  bent  at  the
eitrenity  («tihrr«  mtXairiidiioii  Ixaiiaa.)  ;  bnt  bj
tkia  wB  muM  amjiieatioDibly  nndenland  the  ucnd
tmnpet  ([•AtTiic^  vi\wiyi,  Lydm,  de  A/au.  ir.  6),
tba  SNoa  ■Iteady  noticed  at  the  lie^nning  of  thii
aitide^ (Compin  Lwaa,  i.  431.) [W.  R.]


TUNICA.  iiri

TUBltU'STRlUM. IQnmuoArMHW.]
TUBUS,  TUBULUS. [Fwtul*.]

tullia'Num: [Carcbk.]

TUMULTUATin. [Tuhultus.]
TUMULTUS  wBi  tha  name  given  to  a  ndden
or  dangeraai  war  in  Italy  or  Ciialpina  Gaul,  and
the  word  wu  (uppoKd  bj  lEie  aneienti  to  be  a
cantroclion  of  Uetor  miJtia. (Cic PkiL  nii.  1  ;
(amtt/dif  dietiu,  onan  timor  ow/lut,  Serr.  ad  Virg.
AcH.  ii. 486,  viii.  I  ;  Featni,  t.  r.  TVna/lwrH.)
It  wai  haweTer  aometiinei  applied  to  a  tuddan  oi
dangerom  war  eliewhere  (Lix.  iiiy.  1,  x\l  S  (
Cic  PAH.  T.  12);  but  thii  doe*  not  appear  to  have
been  a  conect  uie  of  the  word. Cicero  (nil.  TJiL
I)  lart  that  there  might  be  a  war  without  a  tn-
jltni,  but  not  a  tumullo*  without  a  war  ;  but  it
lilt  be  raccllected  that  the  wold  wai  alio  appUed
any  indden  alimn  reiwcting  a  war  ;  whence  we
id  a  tumultui  often  ipoken  of  a>  of  leu  impoitance
an  a  war  (e.  g.  Lir.  iL  26>,  becaiue  the  niults
tn  of  leu  coneequence,  though  the  fear  might
TO  been  much  greater  than  in  a  irgular  war.
In  the  csH  of  a  tumultui  there  wai  a  ceualion
from  all  buiineu  (jHsiiliura),  and  all  ritiiena  were
ibliged  to  enliit  nttboul  regard  being  bad  to  (he
iiemptiont  (vaeiMma)  Stoai  military  lerTiee,  which
were  enjoyed  at  other  timet. ( Cic.  IL  cc ;  Lit.
rii.  9,  II,  28,  Till  20,  iuiv.  GG.) A>  there
■rat  not  time  to  enliit  the  uldien  in  tha  reguht
manner,  the  magiitrate  appointed  to  cotnmand  the
array  diaplayed two  buineri  (cenlfa)  from the
— '■-'.onered,  to  lununon  tha  infanlij,  and  tha
;reen,  la lunimon tha  canlry,  md taid,
rempublicara niTam  Tnlt, me ■equatui."
that  anenibled  took  tba  military  oath  to-
gether, inatead  of  one  by  one,  at  wai  the  luuil
practice,  whence  they  were called  coiffanili,  and
their  lervice  co^yuraiio. (Serr.  ad  Virg.  Aaa.  TiiL
1.) Soldien  enliited in thii  way wen  cdled
T-nOtaarU  or  Sabitarii, (Fertua,  >.  *. ;  Ut.  iiL
SO,  I.  21,  iL  28.)

TU'NICA  [xT*!r,  dim.  x-^'lmt,  x'Tc^riu),
the  under-gmnent  of  tha  Gieekt  and  Romani.

1.  Obikk.  The  Chiton  wa*  Ifaa  only  kind  of
hivtM,  or  undergarment  worn  by  the  Oreekt.  Of
tbii  then  were  two  kindi,  the  Dorian  and  Ionian.
Tha  Dorian  Chiton,  ai  worn  by  malee,  wai  a  ihort
woollen  tbirt,  without  ileeTei ;  tha  Ionian  wai  ■
long  linen  garment,  with  ileeiei.  Tha  under-
garment, af^rwardi  diitinguiihed  ai  tha  Dorian,
~  to  have  been  originally  worn  in  the  whole  of
I.  Thucydidei  (L  6)  ipeaki  ai  if  the  long
iinan  gaiment  worn  at  Athani  a  little  before  bij
time  wai  the  moet  anciant  kind,  linca  ha  ittributet
the  adoptlod  of  a  limpler  mode  of  dreu  to  the
Lacedaemonian!,  bnt  we  know  with  lolenble  cer-
tainty chat  thia  drew  wai  broueht  OTer  to  Aibeni
by  tha  loniana  of  Aaia.  (MiiUer,*  AfUwra  Po-
lutdt,  p.41,  ZlDT.  ir.  2.  |  4.)  It  wu  commonly
worn  at  Alheni  during  tha  Penian  wan,  but  ap-
pear! to  have  entirely  gone  out  af  faihion  about
tha  time  of  Peiiclei,  from  which  time  the  Dorian
Chiton  wnt  the  under-gannant  nrnTerully  adopted
by  men  through  the  whole  of  Greece.  (Alhen.
xiLp.312,  e;  Euatalb.p.  964.47;  Thucjd.I.c;
Ariiioph.  B/all.  1330.)

The  ditanction  between  tha  Doric  and  Ionia
Chiton  atitl  continued  in  the  dreu  of  women.  Tba
Spartan  virgina  only  wore  thia  one  goimeat,  and
bad  no  upper  kind  of  clothing,  whence  it  it  lome-
[PaiuumJ  t*  mil  u  CU-


eacalfed/iu


IvS


•  o"


1172  TUNICA.

tim, (Compiin  Herod,  t.  67  ;  SchoL  ml  Eurip.
IfiKtJi.  93Z.) EuripidM llftcut.  Li '
598)  incorrcctlT  calli  thii  Doric  dreu
■peski  of  ■  Done  virpn  u  i^tinwXot.

tha  SoBrmn  vitgim  were  lilled  Tunml  (Plut  Lye.
14)  [NuDUs!,  and  bIm  iu.nxlrtim.  (Schol.  ad
Eurip.  I,  e. ;  Athen.  liiLp.  589,  f.)  ThejappHred
in  Lhfl  compuiy  of  men  without  anj  further  cover-
ing ;  but  ^0  muried  vomen  nerer  did  »  without
wearing  an  upper  garme


TUNICA.

with  the  hackle*  or  dupe  of  their  dre nea,  the  snfle
Athenian  who  had  returned  alire  (jom  the  expfdi<
tioa  flgaintt  Argina,  bvcauie  there  were  no  bucklra
or  dupa  reqoired  ia  the  Ionic  drei*.  The  Hutea
are  generally  repreaented  with  thi>  Chiton. The

Britiah  Muaeoni,  npnneiiti  the  Uuae  ThaUa  wev
ing  an  Ionic  Chiton.  The  Peplnm  haa  bllen  off  ba
ahoiilden,  and  ii  held  op  h;  the  left  hand.  Tb*
right  arm  holding  a  Pedum  ii  a  modem  re  '


of 1


vai  without  ileeTea,  and  wai  faatened  ofer
ihoulden  b;  ciaapa  or  bucklet  (tipwai,  mp
which  were  often  of  coDaiderabie  ku. (Ii
BchoL  ad  Eurip.  U.  a.) It  wa*  frequenl
■hort  u  not  to  reach  the  knee  [Clem.  Aler.  Patd.
ii.  10,  p.  S5S),  a*  i>  ihawn  in  the  figure  of  Diana,
on  p.  276,  vhn  ia  repreKnted  a>  equipped  for  '
chaie. It  waa  only  joined  together  on  one  i
and  on  the  other  waa  left  panlj  open  at  (111
{•iX"rr6s  jt''"'.  Poll",  'ii-  S5}.  to  allow  a
motion  of  the  limbi: the  two  akiita  (vT^ptryii)
thua  frequentlj  flew  open,  whence the Spartan
-viigina  were  aometimea  cslled  fcuro/iDpUif  {Pollux,
la),  and  Enripidei  {Andmni,  I,  c.)  tpeaka  of  the

ybfiroun  fiTjpdis  ml  rhXois  avwitUfois.
Kiamplea  of  thii  r^iirTdt  j^Ituv  an  frequently
Been  in  worki  of  art;  the  foltowing  cut  ia  taken
from  a  baa-relief  in  the  Britiih  Muaeum,  whii
pretenta  an  Amazon  with  a  Chiton  of  thia  1
aome  parta  of  the  figure  appear  incomplete,  at  the
original  ia  mutilated. (See  alao  Mat.  Borban,  Tol.
if.  t.31.)


Both  kinda  of  dreu  vera  batened  mmd  the

middle  with  a  girdle  [Zona],  and  n  the  Ifoie
Chiton  was  naually  longer  than  the  bod;,  pan  of
it  wa*  drawn  up  u  that  the  diEM  might  'not  read
fiuthet  than  the  fi:et,  and  the  part  which  vaa  to
drawn  up  overhung  or  oreriapped  the  girdle,  and
waa  called  KJAi-oi.

There  waa  a  peculiar  kind  of  dreaa,  which  am  ma
to  hare  been  a  apeciei  of  double  Chiton,  called  tt-
vKotu  SjirXotftmr',  and  it^ia-Aa&iap.  Sonw  vhlen
auppoae  (hat  it  wot  a  kind  of  little  cloak  tbnwB

Amiclu*,  and  could  not  be  regarded  a*  a  Ctius  ;
but  Becker  and  other*  maintain  that  ii  wa*  not  a

part  of  die  cloth  forming  the  Chiton,  which  wa*
larger  than  waa  required  for  the  ordinary  Chilsa.
and  waa  tbeiefoie  thrown  onr  the  frant  and  back.
The  folkwing  cute  (  Mh.  Sortoa.  toL  iL  t.  4,  6)  wilt
gire  a  clearer  idea  of  the  fans  of  thii  games!  than
anj  deacriptim.


The  Ionic  Chiton,  on  the  contnuy,  wa*  a  long
and  looae  garment,  reaching  to  the  feet  (inj^fnii),
with  wide  alecTe*  (icdpoi),  and  waa  generally  made
of  linen.  The  aleerea,  howeTcr,  appear  uaua."
hare  covered  onl;  the  upper  part  of  the  arai .
in  ancient  worka  of  art  ws  Kldom  find  the  altcrea
extending  further  than  the  elbow,  and  aomelimi
not  10  far.  The  ileerei  were  lometime*  aiit  i;
and  faatened  together  with  an  elegant  row  <
bioochet  (Aelian,  V.  H.  L  IS),  and  it  ia  to  Ih
kind  of  garmenl  thai  Battiger  (f  lUae  Sdirifl.  toL  ii
p.  £6)  incorrectly  give*  the  name  of  ax""^'  X'''"
The  Ionic  Chiton,  according  to  Uetodolu*  (•.  87,
88),  wai  originally  a  Carian  dreii,  and  paaaed  oitc
tn  Athena  from  Ionia.  The  women  at  Athena  ori-
girally  wore  the  Doric  Chiton,  bat  were  compelled
to  chai^  it  for  the  Ionic  after  they  bad  killed,


.byGoogIc


TUNICA.

^tomiiM  with  certainty
whethsr  th«  DiiJoiilion  faniicd  ptrt  of  the  Chiton,
or  wu  ■  Mpante  pieca  of  dim*. ThoM  writen

^tute  proTed  bj  the  left-hand  figure  in  the  pA<
ceding  cut  j  bat  thij  ie  not  emcluiTe  evidence,
(luce  the  Chiton  mif  hare  tatmiiutod  at  the  waitt.
In  the  light-btnd  figure  we  m«  thil  the  CbitoD  ii
girded  nniod  tlie  midilla  of  the  Iwdy,  m  deiciibed
kbore,  uid  that  the  fold  which  oTerhimgi  (nifAioi)
funu,  with  the  end  of  the  Diploidior


Thil  II  al»

n  the  woodcnt  b>  the  article  Umbki-
ice  the  Diploidion  wa«  Auleoed  otci
the  (houldeti  by  mouii  of  bocklt*  oi  cbup*,  it  vm
ailed  hrwui!,  which  MUller  (AniiioL  d.  JTiaK,
S  339-  4)  fttippowt  from  Eurip-  Heaab.  553,  uid
Athen.  liii.  p.6D8,h,  to  hare  been  only  the  end  of
the  gument  &ilened  on  the  thoalder ;  but  theea
UHBgei  do  not  neceiuiily  prove  ihii,  and  PdIIoz
(•ii.  49)  evidently  nndenlanda  the  word  at  meui-
iag  a  gament  iladf.

Beudei  the  woid  x"^'-  **  ■'■o  t»s^  *<th  the
diminnliiM  x<Ti>rfiri»t  and  xTitfur,  the  tnimer  of
which  i>  genemlly  applied  (o  a  garment  worn  by
Den,  and  the  latter  to  one  worn  by  wamen,  thoogh
thil  dii^nctiDU  ii  not  alwaji  prtierred.  A  qnei-
tion  aiiiei  whether  ihcM  two  wordi  relate  to  a  dif-
ferent gannent  fnnn  the  Chiton,  or  mean  merely  a
amallei  one.  Many  modem  wrilen  thinli  that  the
Chiton  me  not  worn  immediately  m


illhen


rt(x'T.


■Wf )  or  chemiM  (xnihuii).  In  lh(
however,  thii  doe*  not  apptar  to  have  been  the
oue  i  lince  we  find  X'^'"''^'^"  frequently  uied  ai
identical  with  x"<^>  '"^  ipoken  sf  ai  the  only
ludei  garment  worn  by  individuali.  (Td  liiirior  unl
Tdr  xrrwlffcor.  Plat  Hif^.  Mm.  p.  36B  i  Dent,  n
Hid.  f.  683.21  i  Aeich.  a  Tim.  p.  113  ;  Athen.
xiL  p.  646,  a.)  It  appean,  on  the  contrarj,  that
female*  were  accoitonied  to  wear  a  chenilte  [X"'^
nor)  Doder  their  Chitcoi,  and  a  repreKntation  of
Bteh  an  one  ii  given  in  p.  185.  (Compare  Athen.
liiL  p.  590,  t ;  ArUtoph.  Lyiitr.  43,  1 50.)

It  wai  the  niuat  practice  among  the  Gneki  (o
wear  an  Himatinn,  or  outer  gannent,  over  the
Chiton,  but  frequently  the  ChiloD  wai  worn  alone.
A  pereon  who  wore  only  a  Chiton  wag  called  fiovo-
Xirar  (olaxfTw  in  Homer,  Od.  liv.  48S),  an
epithet  given  to  the  Spartan  virgina,  ai  ecplained
above.  In  the  lame  way,  a  penon  who  wore  only
■n  Himation,  or  outer  gatment,  waa  called  Ix'v"'.
(Xeu.  Mim.  16.  g  2  ;  Aelian,  K  H.  viL  13 ;
IKod.  Sic  li.  36.)  The  Athenian  yonthi,  in  the
eatiiei  timea,  wore  only  the  Chiton,  and  when  it
became  the  faibion,  in  the  Peloponnaias  war,  to
wear  an  outer  garment  over  it,  it  naa  ngaided  at
■  mark  of  efleminacy.  (AriitopL  Ntt.  964,  com-
pared with  987.)


a  few  U


which  a


plied  to  the  diScient  kindi  of  Chi
time*,  the  Chiton  worn  by  men

the  ^i»ifirtg^aAoi  and  ibx  ir

ftmner  (he  dnea  of  freemen,  the  latter  that  of  ilavei.
(Pollux,  TIL  47.)  The  i^iiiaxa^t  apptan  to
have  iignified  not  only  a  gatment  which  had  two
•leevea,  but  alio  one  which  had  opening!  for  both
anna  ;  while  the  ^ipofiifffxaXor,  on  the  contrary,
hnd  only  a  ileeve,  or  lather  an  opening  for  the
left  ain,kBTisg  the  light,  with  the  ihooUet  lod  •


TUNICA.  1173

Cof  the  breait  nncoverad,  whence  it  ii  eaUed
ii,atepreaentation  of  which  ii  given  mp  613.
When  the  ileevei  of  the  Chiton  reached  down  to
the  handt,  it  teem)  to  have  been  properly  called
Xifttrrit  (Oell.  vij.  12,  lee  woodcut,  p.  S29),
though  ihii  word  leemi  to  have  been  frequently
lued  ai  equivalent  to  iii^iiii»x^Aoi,  (Heijch.LeL
■A/i0i/«l<rx«*ot.)

A  x'^'^  SpeoarittiH  wai  one  which  waa  not
fartened  round  the  body  with  agirdle  (PoUui,  vU.
48  ;  Phot.  Lt».  p.  B46,  Pora) :  a  x"^  imiAitif.
rit  ieemi  to  have  had  a  kind  nf  Sonnce  at  the
bottom.  (Pollui  vii**  i  Xenoph.  Qrrw  tL  4.
§3.)

On  the  aubject  of  the  Greek  Chiton  in  genetal,
lee  Mullet,  Doriaiu,  iv.  3.  |  S,  4,  Ardiiiiihiffii  Jer
KuKMl,  I  337,  B39 ;  Becker,  CWititt,  Tol.  ii.
p.  309,  4c.

2.  Human.  The  TVatso  of  the  Romana,  like
the  Greek  Chiton,  waa  a  woollen  under  niment,
over  which  the  Toga  wat  woiil  It  *ai  At  Indw-
aumltm  or  /w/alM,  at  oppnted  (o  the  .ilaienii,  the
gcDeral  teem  for  the  toga,  r*"'""*!  >'  *"'!  other
outer  gannint.  [AHicrua.]  The  Romani  are
•aid  to  have  had  no  other  clothing  originally  bat
the  toga  ;  and  when  the  Tunic  ma  fitit  intndncrd,
it  waa  merely  a  ihort  garment  without  ileevea.  and
wat  called  Calobitm.  (Qell.  vii.  12 ;  Serv.  ad  Yirg.
Aat.  ii.  616.)  It  wai  coniidered  a  mark  ef  effe-
minacy for  men  to  wear  Tunica  with  Ions  ileevea
(jtanicatae)  and  itachtng  to  the  feet  \taiara).
(Cic.  au.  a.  10.)  Jnliua  Caetar  wat  accutloined
to  wear  one  which  had  tleevei,  with  fringe*  at  the
writt  {ad  naaut  Jimbriaia,  Suet  Jul.  45),  and  la
the  later  timei  of  the  empire,  tunici  with  aleevee.

The  Tunic  wat  girded  (cmcAi)  with  a  belt  or
girdle  around  the  wuiit,  but  wai  uaually  worn
looae,  without  being  girded,  when  a  perton  wat  at
home,  or  wlahed  to  be  at  bia  eaie.  (Hor.  SaL  iu
I.  73 ;  Ovid,  Am.  I  9.  41.)  Hence  we  find  the
lermi  ciutiu.  pratdaetiit,  and  neeHtaai,  applied,
like  the  Greek  titans,  to  an  active  and  diligent
penon,  and  ditdnetiu  to  one  who  waa  idle  or  diaao-
lule.  {Hor.  Sat.  i.  i.  6,  ii.  6.  107,  Bpod.  i.  34.)

The  form  aC  the  Tunic,  at  worn  by  men,  la  re-
preienled  in  many  woodcuti  in  thii  work.  Id
workt  of  art  it  uaually  terminate!  a  little  above  the

part  of  the  arm,  and  ii  girded  at  the  waiit  (tea
cnl*,  pp.  90,  HDH):  the  ileevea  lametimel,  though
leu  ^quently,  eileud  to  the  hand!  (cut,  p.  141).
Both  leiei  niually  wore  two  bmict,  an  outer
and  an  under,  the  hitter  of  which  wu  worn  next
the  ikin,  and  coireipondt  to  onr  ahirt  and  chB>
miae.  VaiTO  (op.  ,V«i.  liv.  36]  •ay^  that  when
the  Roman*  b^an  to  wear  two  tunica,  they  called
them  SiJmaUa  and  /whiwia,  the  fotmer  of  which
fiuttiger  [SaUuia,  vol.  iL  p.  1 1 3)  anppoaei  to  be  the
name  of  the  under  tunic  of  the  men,  and  the  latter
of  that  of  the  women.  But  it  would  appear  from
another  pawage  oF  Vam  (A  L.  v.  131,  ed.  Hiiller)
referred  to  by  Becker  ( Oalla.  vol  iL  p.  89),  at  if
Vairo  had  meant  to  give  the  name  of  Stlmcula  to
the  under  tunic,  and  that  of  Indutitm  or  Inbuiwn
to  the  outer,  though  the  panage  ii  not  without  dif-
ficultJMi  It  appean,  hoivevar,  that  SalmaUa  waa
chiefly  naed  to  detignate  the  under  Innlc  of  men.
(Suet.  Jtg.  82  )  Hor.  EpItL  L  t.  96.)  The  word
lateraZa  wat  of  later  origin,  and  aeemi  to  have  ap-
plied equally  la  the  under  tniuc  id  both  aexet.


117*  TUNICA.

(Apol.  morid.  ii.  p.  32  ;  Mdam.  tliL  p.  G33,  ed.
Ond.  1  Voj)iK;,  Prai.  i.)  Th«  Supparju  or  Sup-
porunisuid  b)'  Featoa  (i.v.)  to  bate  b«eQ  b  linen
TCit,  and  to  have  beta  the  ume  B>  the  i^xlmeu^;
but  Vano  (t.  131),  on  the  contraiy,  ipcaii  of  il
sa  a  kiod  oF  oittpr  gnrmeDt^  and  contiuta  it  with
Subttoila^  vhich  he  derivei  from  auiiut^  while  ivp-
parttt  he  deriveB  frotn  tupra,  Th«  paaia^  of  Lucan
(iL  361)  in  which  it  ia  mealioued  doea  not  enable
ua  to  decide  whelher  it  wat  an  outer  or  under  gat-
ment,  but  would  nther  lead  ui  to  luppoie  that  it
waa  the  fonoer.  Penona  lonietiRiea  wore  HTeial
tunica,  aa  *  protf  ction  again^  cold  :  Auguatu*  wore
foul  in  the  winter,  beiidei  t.  Subucula.  (SueL
A-g.  «a.)

A4  the  drtu  of  a  man  tunatljr  eonaitUd  of  an
under  tunic,  an  outer  tunic,  and  the  toga,  to  that
of  ■  woman,  in  like  manner,  conaiated  of  an  under
tunic  (Tuniai  atima,  GelL  i.  IS),  an  outer  tunic,
and  the  palls.  The  outer  tunic  of  the  Roman
matron  waa  proper]]'  called  Stola  [Stoli],  and  ii
nprewnled  in  the  woodcut  on  p.  1073  ;  but  the
anncicd  woodcut,  which  repretenta  a  Roman  em-
preaa  in  the  tharacler  of  Concordia,  or  Abundjmtia,
givea  a  better  idea  of  iu  form.  (Viaconti,  Ato-
nwnaU  GabmU  n-  34  ;  Bitligcr,  Salma,  taT.  i.)
Over  the  Tunic  or  Stola  tha  Pall*  ii  thrown  in
inan;r  lolda,  but  tha  ahape  of  Ihe  fbrmer  ia  atill
diatinctlf  ahown.


The  tDuica  o£  vomerx  were  larger  and  longer
than  th«a  of  men,  and  alwmya  had  ileeiei ;  but  in
ancient  puntiuga  aiid  atatuea  we  aeldom  £nd  the
aleerea  covoring  man  than  the  upper  part  of  the
arm.  An  example  cf  the  contrary  it  aeen  in  the
Murno  SorA»iH»,  ToL  Tii.  tar.  3.  Sometimea  the
tunica  wets  adorned  with  golden  omamenta  called
Leria.  (Fealua,»,«. ;  Or-Anpol,  Heaych.  Suid.  i.  ir.)


tog".


eople.w


ould  a<


alone,  whence  we  find the
ion  people  called  TumaUi. (Cic.  tn  RhIL  ii.

;  Hoc,  EpiH.  i.  7.  65.) Penona "'-  '-

ide  the  toga  i  thna,  in  the  woodcul


It  work  laid


enlly


Reapecting  Ihe  ClnTUa  Latot  and  the  CUmi
Angnalus,  worn  on  the  tunica  of  the  Senataia  and
E^uilca  raipeeUTelj,  aee  Clavu*.


TURRia.

When  a  (rinmph  woa  celebrated,  the  eonqnnor
wore,  logptlier  with  an  embroidered  toga  (T<ya
picta),  a  lowered  tunic  {Ttaica  paimala),  alio
called  Timriia  JociM,  beouM  it  wiii  taken  fmn  the
temple  of  Jupiler  Capitoliuua.  (Liv.  X.  7  ;  Man.
viL  1 ;  Jut.  i.  3B,)  [TniuiirHus,  p.  1  !66,a,]  Tunica
of  thia  kind  were  aent  aa  preaent)  to  forugn  kinga
by  Ihe  aenate. (Ut.  IXI-  15,  iiiL  II.)

TURl'BULUM  (SujuoTlipwi'),  a  censer.  The
Greeki  and  Romana,  when  Uiej  aacrificed,  com-
monly took  a  Utile  ^kincenie  out  cf  Ihe  Acaaai
and  lei  it  fall  upon  the  flaming  aliar.  [Ani.]  More
rarely  they  uaed  a  ccnier,  by  meani  of  which  they
burnt  ihc  iacenao  in  greater  profuiion,  and  which
waa  in  fiict  a  imoll  moTcable  grate  or  Focl'li'i.
<AeHan.  V.  H  liL  51.)  The  anneied  woodcut,
taken  tram  an  ancient  pOiiatiog,  ahowa  the  prr-
fomiancc  of  both  of  iheie  acta  at  the  tame  t^cne.
Winckelmann  (M«.  Imtd.  177)  auppowi  it  to  rc-
preient  Liria,  the  wile,  and  Octavin,  the  aiatrr  of
Auguatua,  aacrificing  to  Mara  in  gratitude  (or  hia
•afe  return  bam  Spain.  <Hoi.  Carm.  iu.  U.  5.)
The  eenaer  here  lepreaented  hai  two  bandlc*  br
the  punnae  of  tanyiog  il  bvnt  place  lo  p]ac«,  and
it  Btanda  upon  feet  ao  that  the  air  might  be  ad-
mitted nodenieath,  and  pui  upwaida  l^sogh  the


Aa  the  ceDtcr  waa  deitined  for  the  voahip  of
the  goda,  it  wu  often  made  of  gold  nr  ailvcr  (Jiji.
ad  HA.  a.  4  ;  Ttncyd.  tL  46)  and  enriched  wsh
atonea  and  gema.  (Herod,  ir.  \^l  \  Cic.  rcrr.  ir.
21-24.) We  find  a  >ilTeT  censer  in  the  official

ihenan  at  Athena :  ila  bara  (ti^fu/uxra)  were  of
bronie.  (BBckh,CS>iy./«*cn>,  tdI.  I  pp.  138,  233.
238.)  [J,  Y.]

TURMA.  [ElEaaTL'a.  p.  497,  b.]
TURRlS(iriip7oi),aIower.  The  word  tipffu,
from  which  comet  the  Idtin  hirru,  aigoiGcd  u>
cording  to  Dionytiua  (!■  26)  any  atroi^  buili^ag
aurrounded  b;  walla  ;  and  il  waa  {nun  tha  fact  <k
the  Pelaagiani  in  Iinl;  dwelling  in  nch  placet
thai  the  tame  writer  inppoara  tbem  to  hare  beea
called  Tyrteniant  or  Tyrrhenian),  that  ia,  the  in-
habilanta  of  lownt  or  cattlea.  Tkrni  ia  the  old
Latin  language  aeetna  to  have  been  equivalent  lo
■ria.  (Potyb.  IicL  4  ;  Qattling,  Gtuk.  d.  Rim.
Staatn.f.V-)  The  uas  of  towen  by  the  Creckj
and  Romana  wat  variout.

I.  Stationary  Towtrt. 1.  Buildion  of  thia  ferm
are  frequently  mentioned  by
fbrming  by  themaelTca pli
dcfbnce. Thii  uae  of  lowi
Africa. (Diod.  Sic.  iii.  4!
with  Weateling'a  notea.)
the  lower  of  Hannibal  •
AchoUa  and  Thapaoa  (Ui


yfftaalJvfiiamfStlintLJtig.  103 ),  tba  tonr  of
I  priTmte  citiioi  williaut  da  nlla  of  Cuthofie,  bj


tbs  Rimui  oupin.  {  Ami  jn  IfireelL  xxviiL  3. )
3.  Thty  wen  BieeMd  within  dtiM,  IKitlT  to
fenn  ■  1«M  ntnat  in  on  111*  city  ihonld  w  turn,
•nd  panly  to  oTcnva  tfae  iababilwiti.  In  Bllinit
■11  Onrk  dtjei,  which  woe  niuallT  built  npco  >
hill,  ntk,  «  Bnia  nUonl  rianlion,  Ihoa  wu  ■
kind  of  lower,  ■  owtla.  n  ■  dtwlc],  built  upon  the
hJRheit  put  of  the  nx^  «  hill,  to  which  As  DBDa
»(  AavpoHt  wH  giTSi,  ■>  It  Atbeni,  Corintfa,
Argn,  M^i^Bl^  and  muif  other  plicci.  Ths
Caplloliui  It  Roait  aniwcnd  the  nme  patpoie
M  the  AcrapoHi  ni  the  Oceek  eitlM  ;  and  of  the
Mme  kind  wen  the  tower  oF  Agkdncki  at  Utie*
(AppiuL  Ptm.  14),  md  tbM  of  AnbniBi  at  Jera-
lalnn.  (JoMph.  Bitt.  JmL  T.  A.  1 8,  ^A  ApaHoL
«i  31.)


■nd  tha  nlliiin  of  the  latter ;  ud  a  limilar  ui


drawn  nund  a  beaieged  town.  [Valluu.]  The;
wtn  gonerallj  tued  at  the  gatei  of  towna  and  ol
•tatife  camp*.  [Porta,]  The  uae  of  tanprasiy
toweci  on  walli  to  rapel  an  attack  will  be  noticed

II.  MoBtatU  nam.  Theie  were  among  the
nut  important  engine!  ufad  in  itonning  ■  IbiUfied
place.  The;  wen  of  two  kinda.  Some  were
mads  H  thai  tbef  could  be  taken  to  piece*  and
cniried  lo  the  Kene  of  opentioni:  Uine  wen
cal  led  (bldi  ng  towsn  {wifrfot  wt  ^di  or  irrvfiiirot,
(■rTM;i{icii<ii!ef,  or  portable  lower*,  fopiTTalwvpTDl).
The  oilier  tort  were  oniatitieted  on  wheek,  u  at
to  be  driven  up  to  tha  wall* ;  and  hence  they  were
oiled  litnft  aajmbuoriat  or  ubnlatae.  Bnt  tha
titrmt  piieaHJa  were  generally  made  with  whetrla,
•o  th^t  they  were  alio  am£tiZaiorua

The  iint  iuTention  or  impniement  of  nich
iDwen  u  neribcd  by  Atbenaeui  the  mechanician
(quoted  by  Lipiini,  Optr.  tdI.  ill  p.  297)  to  the
On-ekt  of  Sicily  in  the  lime  of  Dionyiina  I.  (b.c
405.)  DiDdDnii;<iiT.Sl)nienlionatowen  on  wheel*
■I  uitd  by  Dinnjiiu  at  tbe  siega  of  Moiya.  He
had  befm  (xiii.  S4)  ramtioned  tower*  a*  uaed  at
tha  *iega  of  Seriniu  (b.  c  409),  but  he  doe*  not
aay  that  they  wore  on  wheel*.  Anording  to  other*,
thay  were  inTented  by  the  engiaeen  in  the  lervice
of  Philip  and  Aleiander,  the  moat  bmoni  of  wham
were  Polyidua,  ■  Theeulian,  who  aoiited  Philip  at
the  tiege  of  Bjwrtium,  and  hit  pnpil*  Chaerca*
■ad  Diadea.  (VimiT.x.  19.  *.  13.)  Heron  (c  13)
■scribe*  their  inientioa  to  Uiade*  and  Chaeieai,
VitniTiiit  (l-e.)  to  Diade*  alone,  and  Atbenaeui
{L  e.)  **y*  that  they  wen  impnTed  in  tbe  time  of
Philip  at  the  liege  of  Bynotium.  Vltmntuitatei
that  the  tower*  of  Diade*  wen  carried  about  by
the  amy  in  leparals  piccet.  ReepecCing  tbe
tnwen  used  by  Denielriut  PolwcMMa  at  tha  *iege
of  Rbodta,  tee  HiLiroLi*.

ApiHBn  nMnlient  tbe  (nrru  pSaatOa  {BilL  Cn.
V.  3C,  37).  and  tiatai  that  at  tbe  *ie^  of  Rhodei
Cniaiai  took  tnch  towar*  with  htm  in  hit  (hip*,
and  IbiI  them  ist  np  on  the  ipot. (/dl  it.  7S.)

Bwidea  the  fivqaent  aUuiiona  in  aaeieiit  wiitan


TURMS.  1175

to  tbe  aoTa^e  towen  (term  wetibB,  Ejr.  zxi
11),  we  haie  pwtkolar  deacriptjana  of  them  by


eipoied  (0  the  besieged,  with  ina,  not  aaly  for
protection,  but  alio,  acEofding  to  Joatphit*,  to  io-
crean  thcdr  wei^  and  thai  make  tb«in  tteadier.
They  were  alto  corKsd  with  raw  hide*  and  qoilta,


Ibem  Irnm  Gn.  The  ate  of  ahun  ibt  i)i  _  ,_^
appeal*  to  haTa  originated  with  Salla  at  tb*  ii.„-
of  Athm*.  (Anus.  Uaia.  n.  and  Claud.  Qtadrig.
ap.  Lipi.  p.  300.)  Their  hnght  WW  loch  a*  to
orertop  the  walla,  towera,  and  all  other  IbHificB-
tiont  of  the  besieged  {dace.  (Lii.  izi.  11.)  Vim-
vtni  (Lb),  fbllowiig  Diadea,  mentiont  two  ■!«*
of  lawn*.  The  onaUeat  ought  not,  ha  myi,  to  bs  ,
less  than  60  cnbitt  high,  17  wide,  and  one-fifth
imaller  at  the  top  ;  and  tbe  gnater  120  eubiti  high
and  23}  wide.  Hnon  (c  19},  who  also  loQowa
Diade*,  agieea  with  VitmTioa  n  far,  hot  add*  an
intermediate  eiie,  half-Way  between  the  two,  SO
cubiti  high.  V^etlu*  mmtion*  towen  of  30,  40,
and  &0  het  aquan.  They  wue  dirided  into  ito-
ries  (toMoto  or  late),  and  hence  thej  an  called
temif  csateMoteL  (Li>.  xxl.  34.)  Towen  of
the  three  liie*  jnit  mentioned  con*i*ted  reepec-
lirely  of  ID,  \B,  and  SO  itorieL  The  itoriet  de-
creased in  height  from  the  bottom  to  the  lop.
Diades  and  Chaereaa,  ■ecording  to  Henn,  made
the  lowest  itory  7  cubit*  and  IS  digits,  thoseabont
the  middle  S  cnbil^  and  the  upper  4  eobils  and
oDs-thitd  of  a  cubit.

The  tide*  of  ths  towen  wen  pierced  with  win-
dow*, of  which  there  wen  tereial  lo  eub  (toy.

These  rules  wen  not  strictly  ■dhend  to  ia  pno-


lite. Tow


and  even


<Diod.KiT.  £1.)  Those  of  10  It
Tery  common  (Hirt  BtU.  Gatt.  ni.  41 ;  SiL  luL
riy.  300),  but  towen  of  20  Morie*  are  haidlr,  if
ever,  mentioned.  Plutalrb  (XhhU.  10)  ipeakt  of
one  of  1 00  cubits  high  uied  by  Hilhridate*  at  the
liege  of  Cjiicu*.

The  use  of  the  *teris  wa*  to  reaaira  the  enginei
of  war  [Tobminta],  and  ilingen  and  anhert
wen  (tationcd  in  them  aad  on  the  top*  of  the
towen.  (Li>.  xxL  II.)  In  the  lowest  iti^
wa*  a  batteriog-iam  [Auxa]  ;  and  in  the  middle
one  or  mon  bridges  (poKla)  made  of  boun*  and
pbmka,  and  protected  at  tbe  ndes  by-  hnrdlea.
Scaling-ladder*  (icalat)  wen  also  airied  in  tha
towen,  and  when  the  miieile*  had  cleand  the
wall*,  these  bridge*  and  ladden  enabled  the  b»-
tiegen  to  mh  apon  them.

Tha  towen  wen  {Jaeed  upoi  wheel*  (genenlly
6  or  8),  Ibut  they  might  be  bnsght  up  to  the
walls.  These  wheelt  wen  pkead  for  security  in-
side of  tbe  tower.

Tbe  towrr  wa*  built  to  hi  from  the  besieged
phce  as  to  be  out  of  the  vatmj't  reach,  and  then
pushed  up  lo  the  wall*  by  men  atalioned  inside  of
and  behind  iL  (Caenr,  B.  O.  ii.  30.  31  i  Q.  Curt.
Tiii.  10.)  The  attempt  to  draw  them  tarward  b;
beattt  of  burthen  was  aoraetimes  made,  bnt  wai
eaiily  deftoted  by  tfaoatkg  the  beasts.  (Pncop.
Bdi.  CMk.  i.  op.  Lip*,  p.  293.)  They  were  gene-
rally brought  np  upon  the  Aoom  (Hirtiia,  L  e.\
and  itnot  unbequently  baffwned  thatatawurstnck
bt  or  fell  oTcr  on  account  of  the  ioftncaa  of  the
17:Q.  Cun.iT.6.89.)  The^


*  jr  *


•  o"


L  22.) When  Ihe


J176  TUTOR.

wen  placed  on  the  aggei  before  it  mi  completed,

to  protect  the  soldier  '  ' ■•"■'•

JagmriL  76  ;  Caeur,

tower  wu  brooghc  ap lo me  iv&iu  wiinc

agffer,  the  groimd  wu  levelled  before  it  hy

DftheMUBCTILUB.

Tbeie  towen  were  iccouted  moit  fonnidaUe
engine!  of  sttack. They  were  oppoied
laaing  wnyt.

1 .  They  were  ut  od  fire,  either  by  nlliei  of  the
beiifged,  or  by  mieiile*  eanyiDg  burning  — ■-
or  by  letting  men  down  from  the  walli  b
cine  to  the  towen,  while  the  beiiegen  ilepl.
(Vegel.  W.  IS  ;  Sil.  ltd.  liT.  305.)

3.  By  uadernuning  the  gnnmd  otoc  which  the
tower  had  to  pau,  u  a>  to  ovenet  it.  (Vt^t  It.
BO.)

3.  By  puahing  it  off  by  main  lone  by  iRin-ihod
beasu,  otters  or  fmi*), (Veget.  I,  c.)

4.  By  breJting  or  overtnrning  it  with  itonei
thrown  (roni  catapult*,  when  it  wai  at  a  diiUmce,
or,  wheD  it  came  cloie  to  the  wall,  by  itriking  it
with  an  inai'ihod  beam  hung  (him  a  mait  on  the
wall,  and  thiu  membliDg  aa  Ariel.

a.  By  iDcreuing  the  height  of  the  wall ;  lint
with  maiotiry,  and  afterwiudt  with  beami  and
planka,  and  alio  by  the  erection  of  teropoiary
wooden  towert  on  the  wall*.  (Caewr,  B.G.  vii.
23  J  Vwet.  if.  19.) Thi. mode  of  defence  wa.

the  agger  on  which  the  tower  itood  woi  railed,  aa
by  Cnoar  at  the  liege  of  Avaricum  (II.  O.  L  c),  or
a  Hnaller  lower  waa  conilmcted  witKin  the  upper

rof  the  tower,  and  when  completed  wiu  niiied
tcrewi  and  ropee.  <Vegul.  I.  c)  On  theee
towers  in  general  «ee  Lipiiiu,  /Wwrert.  in  Oper.
voLiii.  pp.  296— 3S6.

III.  Caetai  (A.  C.  a.  8—9)  deKribn  a  pecnliai

Mauilia,  and  called  titrrU  iaUHcia,  or  laieraJutn.
It  partook  umewhat  of  the  character  both  of  a
filed  and  of  a  baieging  tower.  It  wai  built  ol
maionry  near  the  w^  of  the  town  to  ofiiird  the
besicgen  a  retreat  from  the  nidden  lalllea  of  the
enemy;  the  buildeti  werepcotected  byamoTeahla
cover ;  and  the  tower  waa  pierced  with  windowi

IV.  Towen  in  every  reelect  limilar  to  thehirrat
amtmlaioriaa  (excepting  of  coune  the  wheels)  were
confltructed  on  ihipa,  for  the  attack  of  fortified
placei  by  tea.  <Caei.  SdL  Civ.  iii.  10,  where,
respecting  the  term  ad  Hbram,  see  the  commenta-

liT.  31;  Appian.  Miti.  73,  iWt  Oiv.


r.  ID6;  Aram.  Marc  i:
nail  ti


,  13.)


were  placed
(Liv.  until  *v.)

VI.  The  word!  iri)F>oi  and  (nrrtt  are  applied  to
ananny  drawnnp  in  a  deep  oblongcolumiL  (Qell.
1.9!  Calo,  dsJfe  JWaa.  op. /iMti.  r.  Ssmipfw-
Imri,  p.  314,  ed.  Milller ;  Eiulath.  ad  Horn.  IL

iii.13.)  [P.  a]

TUTE'LA. [TBTrjB.]

TUTE'LAE  ACTIO. tTuroR.]

TUTOR.  The  ditlereDce  between  a  Tutor  and
Tntela,  and  Curator  and  Curatio  or  Can,  it  ei-
plained  in  the  article  CuRATOB.  '  '  ~
syttem  there  might  be  persona  wl
potettat,  and  had  property  of  their  own,  nui  uy
Touon  of  their  age  or  sei  required  protection  for
Ibor  own  iiilaeM,iiid  foe  tbs  inlcnMof  those  who


TUTOB.

might  be  their  heredei. This  pnteeticn  wu  gitm
by  the  tntela  to  Imniben*  and  women.

A  Tutor  derived  bii  name  ■  "  tnendo  "  baa  pn-
tecting  another  (guati  TUtor).  Uii  power  and  tt-
fice  were  "  Tntela,"  which  is  thus  defined  by  Serria
SulpiduB  (Dig.  2fi.  tit.  1.  a.  1):  "  Tntela  otTk
ac  potcstas  in  capita  libem  ad  tnendum  earn  qii
propter  aetalem  toun  (im)  aponte  s«  defeadcn
neqnit  jsra  cifiti  data  ac  pcrmiua."  Aft«  ihe
wiod  "*  luam  "  it  hai  been  niggeiled  by  Radnrff
that  aomething  like  what  follow!  baa  been  omitWd
by  the  copyists ;  "  eamve  quae  prmiler  ■exam,"  a
eanjecture  which  seeras  very  prabahle.  Taida  ei-
prewei  both  the  itataa  of  the  Tutor  and  that  of  the
person  who  waa  In  Tntela.  The  toleU  of  Im-
puberet  was  a  kind  of  Pototai,  according  lo  the
old  law :  that  of  Mulierea  was  merely  a  Jua.

As  to  Che  claaiification  of  the  difiercnt  kinds
(^neni)  of  Tutela,  the  jurists  diflered.  Seaa
made  fiio  genera,  ai  Qnintni  Mucins;  otben  there,
as  SerriUB  Sulpiciu ;  and  others  two,  aa  I^itn,
The  most  convenient  division  is  into  two  geocfa,
the  tntela  of  lurnBiBis  (pi^nUi,  p^be),  and
~  e  tutela  of  Women.  The  pupillui  or  the  papilla
tho  male  or  the  female  who  is  under  Tutela.
Every  paterfamiliai  had  power  to  apfuini  I7
itoment  a  Tutor  for  hit  children  who  wtte  in  hij
wer:  if  they  were  males,  only  in  case  they  wen
Impuberei ;  if  they  were  females,  also  in  cue  tber
were  marriageable  (saii/ej),  ihat  is  alxm  twdie
yean  of  age.  Therefore  if  a  tntor  waa  aftpainlfj
male,  he  was  released  from  the  Totela  bi  it-
ig  puberty  {fourteen  yean  of  a^\  but  the
female  itill  con^nned  in  tatela,  nnleu  she  wm  re-
leased from  it  by  the  Jus  Libercvnm  under  the
Lei  Julia  et  Papia  Poppaea.  A  man  could  odr
his  grandchildren,  in  c»e  tber
would  not  upon  his  death  come  into  the  paw^  of
their  father.  A  father  could  appoint  a  tutec  lor
Postumi,  provided  they  would  nave  been  in  kit
power,  if  they  had  been  bom  in  hia  life.tiiae.  A
nan  could  appoint  a  tutor  fi»  his  wife  in  raaiu;.
md  for  his  daughlet-in-law  (unu)  who  waa  Li
he  manos  of  his  stiil.  The  usual  fium  of  a|^»ini-
ng  a  Tutor  was  (his:  "  Lucinm  Titium  Liberal
neis  tutorem  do."  A  man  could  also  give  hia  nte
a  mann  the  power  of  choosing  a  tutor  (Moni
optib}  I  and  tbe  optio  might  be  either  plena  n
Biigusla.  She  who  had  the  plena  optin  mijiht
chooso  (and  conaequently  change)  her  tutnr  ai.y
■amber  of  times ;  she  who  had  the  angusta  opuo
vas  limited  in  her  choice  to  the  number  of  tiam
which  the  testator  had  Gied.  [Tkstaubkti'h.)
The  power  to  ^>point  a  tntor  by  will  was  eitbiT
ven  or  conlirmed  by  the  Twelve  Table*. Th;

Ihat  of  Tai^uinius  Priscus  being  appointed  by
'" " "" which  mar  be  alcoi


re  nndern


the  willof  Ancua(Liv.


tbo  powe


by  will  waa  eonaidered  by  tit

Komaos  as  one  of  their  oldm  le^  inMitniiooa.

kimmcn  were  nsoally  appointed  Tn-

torei,  and  if  a  lettator  passed  over  such,  it  waa  ■

-ifiection  on  their  characlet  (Cic;m  /*.  J^Otia,  £3\

ut  it,  we  must  suppose,  if  the  tettator  hbaielf

at  a  man  in  good  reptile. Pertotit  named  asd

appointed  Tntoret  by  a  will  were  Tntom  Datiri :

taoie  who  were  choaeo  under  the  power  given  by

will  were  Tutors  Oplivi. (Oaioi,  L  lit.)

If  the  tealatar  aj^inted  no  tuuw  by  fail  wiO.

B  tuda  WM  given  by  tke  Twelve  Tabic*  la  tb*


TUTOB.
ManM  Agiwti,  Bud  nch  Tutom  wen  cilled  L^-
timi.  The»BRit  Agnsti  were  tilio  tha  ii«red«  in
ea*e  of  the  immediBte  bendet  of  (he  TeiMtnr  d  jing
inlctute  and  vilhoat  iuae,  tuid  the  tuteit  wu
thenfon  ■  light  which  the;  claimed  u  well  u  a
iatj  inipoied  on  them.  Penina  (ti.  12)  slludu  to
the  dun  of  the  Tutor  M  bom  to  bii  pupilliu.  A
■on  who  wu  pubo,  wu  the  legitiniui  tatoc  of  a
■oil  whawuimpabes  i  uid  if  then  wu  no  eon  who
waspubet,  theson  whavuimpnbeihadbiifiither^
brainrc  (jatma)  fwhia  luloi.  The  nme  nite  ap-
plied to  femaln  alao,  till  it  wai  altered  by  a  Lex
Clandia.  If  thtre  were  leraral  agnati  in  theeime
degree,  thej  were  all  latDTCi.  If  there  were  no
Agnnti.  the  talela  belonged  to  the  Oentil«,>a  long
aa  the  Joi  Oentiliciani  wai  in  farte.  (Oaiua,  iii.
17,  and  i.  164.)  The  tuteU  in  which  a  (reedman
wan  with  reipwt  to  hi«  Palronui  wu  alio  Legitima;
rot  lh«t  it  wu  eipreiilj  given  by  the  word*  (fcjr)
el  the  Twelve  Tablei,  but  it  flowed  &«n  the  lei
MA  a  conaequenee  (per  eoiueqiuMtiam,  Ulp.  Frap.
tiL  11)  ;  for  u  the  heceditatei  of  inleitata  libciti
and  libertae  beloaged  to  the  patmnui,  it  wu  u-
■umed  that  the  tutela  belonged  to  him  alao,  lince
the  TwelTe  Tablea  allowed  the  aame  pengoa  to  be
tuton  in  the  caae  of  (id  ingennua,  to  whom  the;
gnve  the  hereditaa  in  caae  tbeie  munonmi  hen*.
(.Oaini,  i.  1G5.)

a  had  been  muicipiited  to  another
arcnt  or  eoemptionator,  and  auch
nmnitted  the  free  penon,  he  he-
luciarina  by  analog;  to  the  can  of
freedman  and  patron.  (Compare  Oniua^i.  166  with
ivll...S.)[E! ----- '


If  a  free  pern
either  by  the  f

ifl  hia  tuu>


Ulp.p™r.ii
Ifai ■


Lrgitimua,  he  bad  one  given  to  him,  in  Home,  un-
der the  pmiaiona  of  Ibc  Lei  Atilia  by  the  Pniclor
Utbanoi  and  the  major  pert  of  the  Tribuni  Piebia;
iu  the  pctmincei  in  auch  caiea  a  tutor  wu  apnoiDted
by  the  Prsiaidea  under  the  pro'iiiona  of  the  Lex
Julia  et  Titia.  [Lai  Jdli*  «■  Tm*.]  If  a
tutor  wu  apptHuted  by  teatamcnt  cither  aub  condi-
eione  or  ex  die  certo,  a  tutor  might  be  given  under
theae  Legea  ao  long  u  the  condilioD  bad  not  taken
effect  01  the  day  had  not  arriied :  and  even  when
a  tutor  had  been  appointed  abenlutely  (purr),  a
tutor  might  be  given  under  these  I<eget  ao  long  u
there  wat  no  herei  j  but  the  power  of  auch  tutor
ceased  u  aoon  u  there  wu  a  tutor  under  the  tea-
uunent,  that  it,  u  lODii  u  there  wu  a  here)  ti>
take  the  hereditu.  If  a  tnlor  wu  captured  by
the  enemy,  a  tutor  wu  alao  given  under  Iheae
Leges,  but  such  tutor  ceaacd  to  be  tutor,  u  soon  u
the  original  tutor  returned  from  ^pCivitj',  for  he
recovered  hia  tntela  Jure  Posllimiuii.

Before  the  paaiing  of  the  Lea  Alilia  tutora  were
given  by  the  praetor  in  other  cases,  u  for  instance,
when  the  li'gis  actionea  were  in  use,  the  Praetor
appointed  a  tntor  if  there  wu  any  action  between
a  iBtor  and  a  woman  or  ward,  for  the  tutor  could
give  the  neceasary  authority  (aitcloritaM)  to


I  of  thoai


in  which  a


tutor  wujp
11.


Other


Uipiaa.

Ulpian*!  division  of  Tutorea  is  into  Legitimi,
Senatusconaoltia  eonatituti,  Horibui  iDtroducti,
His  legitimi  tuloies  comprehend  all  those  who  be-
come tutores  by  virtue  of  any  Lex,  and  specially
by  the  Twelve  Tables :  accordingly  tl  comprises
talon*  in  tb«  am  of  intestacy,  nuoci  a^Mniited


TOTOR.  1177

by  testament,  for  they  were  emifinned  by  tba
Twelve  Tables,  and  tutores  appointed  under  any
other  Lei  u  the  Atilia. Various  Senalusconaulla
ight  be  appointed  j
ihui  the  Lei  Julia  de  marilandia  ordinibus  (Papia
et  Poppaea)  enacted  that  the  Praetor  ahould  ap-
point a  tutor  for  a  woman  or  a  virgin,  who  wu  re-
quired to  marry  by  Ihia  law,  "  ad  dotem  dandam,
''  endan,  promittendamve,"  if  her  Legitimua  tutor
a  himself  a  Pupillui:  a  Seuatosconsullum  ex-
uded the  proviiion  to  the  provinces,  and  enacted
It  in  auch  case  the  praetidet  sboold  appoint  a
or;  and  alao  that  ifatutorwumitusorfbriosos,
another  should  be  appointed  for  the  purposes  of  the
'ei. The  case  above  mentioned  of  a  tutor  being

E'ven  in  the  case  of  anaction  between  a  tutor  and
t  ward,  is  a  ease  of  a  tutor  Moribns  datus. In
the  Imperial  period  baa  the  time  of  Clandina  tu-
'~  oidinem  were  appointed  by  the  conauli

' ' ~  re  sui  juris,

n  ■  Testa-
ment, unless  he  had  the  Testamenlibctio  with  the
Testator,  a  rule  which  eicluded  auch  persona  as
Peregrini.  The  latini  Juniani  were  excluded  by
the  Lex  Jnnia.  (Oaiua,  i.  23.)  Women  could
not  be  Tutores.  Hany  penons  who  were  com-
petent to  be  Tutores,  might  eicuae  themselves
from  taking  the  office :  these  groonda  of  eicuae
(fiwiwiA'oKei)  were,  among  others,  age,  abaence,
the  being  already  Tutor  in  other  rases,  the  holding
of  particular  offices  and  other  grounds  which  are
enumemted  in  the  Fragmenta  Vaticana  (123—
247).  In  the  avatem  of  Juatinian  the  tuteU  is
viewed  u  a  Publicum  munua

The  power  of  the  Tutor  waa  with  respect  to  the
property  and  pecuniary  interests,  not  the  person  of
the  Pupillus,  and  the  passage  of  the  Twelve  Tables
which  gives  or  cnniirms  to  a  testator  the  power  of  dia-
posing  of  his  property,  uses  the  phiase,  Uti  legaasit
super  pccunia  tutelave  tnae  rei,  thai  is  the  Tuteh
of  the  property.  It  wu  not  abaolutely  eoenlial
to  the  nation  of  Tutela  that  the  Tutor  thould  have
the  adrainiatralion  of  property ;  and  be  bad  it  not
in  the  case  of  Mnlierea.  It  might  happen  that  the
Tulorei  from  their  nearness  of  blood  and  other
causea  might  have  the  guardianahip  of  the  Im-
pubes  ;  but  then  the  protection  of  the  property  of
the  Impnbes  wu  the  special  office  of  the  Tutor,
and  the  care  of  the  infant  belonged  to  the  mother,
if  she  aarvived  (cualodia  fnafrwn,  Hor.  Ep.  i.  L
2'2),  In  a  case  mentioned  by  Livy  (iv.  9),  where
the  mother  and  the  Tutores  could  not  agree  about
the  marriage  of  the  mother's  daughter,  the  ma-
gialtatua  decided  in  &Tour  of  the  molher'a  power
(»ci«iJiiiii  paring  arUtriim),  As  to  the  later
law,  ace  Dig.  27.  tit.  2.  >.  1.  9  B.

A  puplUua  could  do  no  act  by  which  ho  dimi-
niabed  his  pmperty,  hut  any  act  to  which  he  waa
a  party  wu  valid,  ao  br  u  concerned  the  pupiltus,
if  it  wu for hia advanliq^. Conaeqnently  a

Spillu  could  contiaet  obi  igati  ones,  which  wen  for
L  advantage,  without  hia  Tntor.  (Oaiua,  iiL  107.)
The  Tutor's  office  vai  "  negotia  gereie  et  auclori-
tatcm  inleiponere."  Thus  the  natural  act  of  tha
pnpillns  became  by  auctoritalia  inteipaaitio  of  tha
Tutor,  a  l^tal  act ;  and  ihu  the  pupillua  and  hii
Tutor  formed  one  cranplela  penon,  as  to  legal  ca-
pacity to  act  No  paiticiilar  lum  waa  requited
for  the  expnssion  of  the  tutor's  anctoritai,  and  bis
pteience,  wbai  the  act  wu  done  by  Iha  pnpillas.


1178


TUTOR.


«*■  anoDgh,  if  he  mads  no  oppMilioD  to  it.  (Ulp.
Fry.  tit  11.  1.25.)  The  Nggotiarum  OMIio  i
whicli  the  Tulur  acted  alone  leak  place  when  lli
Pairilliu  mu  an  Inbni,  <ir  abiwiil,  err  Furiotui
it  wu  bit  dutf  to  preseire  ud  imfvore  tbe
pnpeitj  and  to  do  sJl  Deceuaiy  scti  for  tfaU  pui-

Ce. When  the  Pepillni  wu  ho  longer  Inhiu,
could  do  nnona  adi  with  the  Anetorite*  of  Ui

to  the  act  of  the  Pnpilliu,  which  wM ~

ordec  M  cendcr  it  a  legjal  uL  Thui  it  wai  a  i
of  law  tiiaC  neither  a  woman  nor  a  pni^iu  to
alienaM  ■  Rm  mancipi  wiltoM  the  auctorilaa  o
Tulot ;  a  woman  ooiud  alienau  a  Re*  nee  nuneipi
without  luch  eoTiKDt,  but  a  pupilloi  could  nc'
(Oaiui,  iL  SOl)  The  ino^neitr  of  the  pupillo*
be*t  thown  b;  the  fbllcwiag  inilaiice  :  ifhiidebt
paid  a  debt  to  the  pupillu,  the  monev  became  the
fnfetty  of  the  pu^ua,  bat  the  debtor  wai  not
leliMued,  beciuiM  a  pupillui  could  not  relaM  anj
duty  that  wae  due  io  humelf  wiEhoattheaaetorilai
of  hii  T^Jtts,  for  be  could  alienate  nothiag  without
■uch  aucloriEai,  and  to  releue  hii  debtni'  wm  equi-
valent lo  parting  with  a  right.  Still  if  the  money
nallj  became  apart  of  tho  propectj  of  the  pupillui,
or,  ae  it  was  eipreuad  accscding  to  the  phnueology
of  the  Roman  Law,  li  wen  peciM»a/aci9^rAbryii«(u
Bt,  and  he  efMrwarda  luod  fat  it,  the  debtor  might
amwer  bU  demand  by  an  Eiceptio  doU  mail.
(Gaiuiiii.  84;  Cic  Top.  Il.>  The  lubject  of  the
incapacitj  of  Impuberu  and  tbe  oonaequene  ne-
couil;  of  the  aoctoiitai  of  a  Tntor  ii  further  ex-
plained in  the  articlee  lupuBia  and  Ikfans.

The  tnlela  wai  tetminsted  by  tie  death  or
capitli  deminutio  maiiou  nail  media  of  the  Tutor.
The  due  of  a  Tutor  being  taken  priioou  by  the
enemy  has  bMO  itated.  (Qaiui,  i.  1S7.)  A  1^-
timia  Tutor  became  ditqualilied  to  be  Tutor  legiti-
mui  if  he  auBtaioed  a  capitia  deminutio  minima,
which  vaa  the  oiae  if  be  allowed  hinuelf  to  be
adopled(6aiu>,i.  195  1  Ulp-^Vu^.  tiL  II.  a.  13);
but  thii  wai  not  tho  caie  with  a  teatanieatary
Talor.  The  lutela  ceaHd  by  ihe  death  o£  the
pupillui  or  pupilla,  or  by  a  capitis  deminutio,  ai  for
inatancs  the  papilla  coming  in  manum  vin.  It
bIh  ceaaed  whon  the  pupillua  or  pupilla  attained
the  ago  of  Puberty,  wh'  ' ■ '


id  in  the  f


e.[Ij.i


The  mtcla

mciiuuy  Tutor,  that  i*,  when  ho  declared  "  nolle
■e  tutorem  eHe."  The  Tutor  leg itimui  could  only
gel  rid  of  the  Tutela,  in  luch  caue  ai  ha  could  get
tid  of  it,  by  In  jure  ceaiio,  a  ptiiilage  which  tne
Tetlamentaiy  tutor  had  noL  The  person  to  whom
the  tutalft  was  Ihoi  iranileiTed  waa  called  Ceaiiciiia
Tutor.  If  the  Ceiiiclua  Tutor  died,  or  mtatiMd  a
Capitis  deiDinutia,  or  traxtfeired  the  tutela  to
nnathor  by  the  In  jure  ocaaio,  ^  tutda  »Terted
to  the  legitimuB  tntor.  If  the  legitimus  tutor  died,
or  sustained  a  capitia  deminutio,  the  conicia  be-
tnme  eitinguiihed.  Ulpian  addi  (J'rag.  tit.  iL
B.  H) :  "  at  to  what  cmccma  adgnati,  there  is  now
no  ceuicia  tutela,  for  it  was  only  permitted  to
transfer  by  the  In  jure  cessio  the  tutela  of  fetmJea,
and  the  legitima  tutela  of  femalea  was  doao  away
with  by  a  Lex  Claudia,  except  the  tutek  patio-

tramler  tbe  tutela,  is  explained  when  we  consider
what  waa  bia  nlatimi  to  the  femalo. [Tmta-


TlMtl


"■]


c  wimld  be  neceamy.


of  theaa  caaei,  a  nav  b
(Oiuu>,ila2.)

The  tntor,  aa  alnvdy  abaerred,  might  be  »■
moTed  from  bia  offite,  if  he  va*  miiiimilail«n
himielf ;  this  waa  effected  by  At  Accnsatio  iB-
pecti,  which  is  mmtioead  m  the  TvbIh  TUdea.
(Gaina,  i.  1S3  ;  Daktaa,  UdniA,  *o.dtr  XmH/
Ti^iim,  69»— SOi.)

The  Twelre  Tabia  alM  gaia  the  popiUun
aclisn  agnjnat  the  Tutor  in  n^KCt  of  ai^  aua-
manaffemoit  ot  his  pnrperty,  sad  if  he  made
out  his  ase,  be  wh  entitled  to  double  Ik*  aaaiiat
Thia^ipwn
„Ert  ia  called
Rationibu  diBtrahcndia,  fbc  the  setticniait  of  all
Bccounta  betweeai  the  Tutor  and  his  PiqH[la&
There  was  also  the  Jndidnm  tutcbe,  whii^  bob-
prehended  the  Actio  Intdae  directa  and  CcunrB,
and  like  the  Actio  distiahandia  ratiaoibua  nnld
only  be  brought  when  the  Tutela  was  (aided.  T^
Actio  tntalae  dircda  waa  lor  a  gencnl  accoDnt  of
the  pnpaity  managed  by  tbe  Tntor,  aod  fir  ita
'  ilivery  to  the  pDpilla*  now  baaane  Pubei.  The
Ltor  was  anavBiable  not  only  fis  loaa  throsgb
ilus  malua,  but  &r  loss  occasimed  by  want  of
propel  care.  This  waa  an  action  Bmae  fidei  and
anseqnently  In  inoertum  (Qaios,  ir.  62).  If  tb
tutor  wag  condemned  in  such  a  judicinia,  the  cat-
sequence  was  lobmia.  [iNrAMu.]  Tha  tab*
waa  intitled  to  all  proper  allowoneca  In  itape<,t  af
what  he  bad  expended  or  dime  durii^  hit  miaag^

of  the  property  of  the  pnpillna. Tba  TuHr

he  Actio  tntelae  contraria  against  the  pai^llat
for  all  hia  proper  costs  and  aipensei ; aad  be
ave  also  a  Calomniae  judicium,  in  eaat  be
could  show  that  the  pupilliu  had  broug4it  an  atfkn


^uratione,  the  tractor  lequiied  the  Tatar  <z  Crna-

~  I  give  security  ;  but  DO  tecority  wat  Taquirsd

Tettamentary  Tntiaca,  bMauta  they  bad  becB

selected  by  the  taatator  ;  DOii  geDually,  fioai  Ca-

ralorce  appointed  by  a  Gamut,  Pnetor  or  Piatao,

for  they  ware  appointed aa being fit p— r-ia

(Gains,  i.  199.)

Tho  Talela  of  women  who  an  pabena,  nqniiea

aepaiato  canaidamion. If  they  wera  ma  n

Poteslaa  or  In  Mann,  jet'  thay  were  note  a

Tutela.

It  wu  an  old  nile  of  Roman  Iaw  that  a  aiaa»i
could  do  nothing  "  aiot  aoctors,"  that  ia  witboat  ■
to  her  acts  a  ooB^ete  legal  duiacur.
.  2,  the  ^weoh  of  Cats  [or  tba  I«z
bppia.)  The  teatons  for  this  rule  are  gins  hf
"icen  (pro  Mareaa,  c  13),  b«  Ulpian  (^V^.  tiL
I.  s.  1)  and  by  Oahia  (L  ISO)  ;  bat  Oaiua  eoa-
iden  the  usual  rcasona  at  to  the  rule  bei^  fcwDdcd
on  tho  inferiority  of  tbe  tei,  ai  nnaatiafaete*;;  te
women  who  are  pubere*  (fin/MM  ih<Mu)  nwiiga
their  own  aSaJrs,  and  in  tcne  catet  a  latoc  Bmat
Interpote  hia  aoctaiilaa  (diait  taaia),  and  fienaa>lly
he  ia  compelled  to  gire  bis  aocleritat  by  tba  Piaaatr.
(Oaiua,  L  ISO.)  Ulfdan  aha  obamea  (Ai^.  til.
25) :  **  in  the  case  of  pn|Hlli


h  manage  their  al


poniml);  but  the  tntens  of  womeo  (muliena,  that
IS  iMman  wha  an  pnbacet]  ol;  gin  Ibik  aaiai


TUTOH.
titu."  Tbtre  Here  other  aun  *lu  b  which  the
capaeitj  at  a  Muliu  wu  gnaier  than  that  uf  ■
PupiUui  Di  Papilla.  The  objoct  of  thii  rule  mkidi
to  hare  bwo  the  auu  u  the  reitriclion  an  the
TritBEienUirr  power  of  womeD,  fbr  her  Agmtti
who  wen;  a  wonuin'i  Legilimi  Totore*  wore  in-
terated  in  pieTeuliiig  the  alienatioa  of  hei  pn>-

A  Holier  might  hare  a  Tntar  appnoted  by  her
bther'i  TeitiineDt )  or  by  the  Teitameut  of  her
hutband  in  whoH  band  ihe  waa  (tiit«  datiTu).
She  might  alio  receiie  from  hei  haabmd'a  will  the
Tutorii  Optio  (tator  optima^.  Womeo  who  had
DO  lettamenlaiy  Tutor,  were  m  the  tatela  of  their
Afpiati,  ontil  thia  rule  of  law  wa*  lepraled  by  a
hfi  Claudia,  which  Oaiua  (L  157)  Ulnitiatea  ai
followB ;  "  a  mucului  impabea  haa  hia  bater
piibea  or  hi*  pitraiu  fbi  his  tnlor ;  but  vomen
(/aemimu)  cannot  haTs  auch  a  taEor."  Thia  old
tuteU  of  (be  TwelTe  Tablea  (ligilinia  Mala)  and
that  of  manumiafiorea  {patronomm  tutelo)  could  be
traRireired  by  the  Id  juTB  teaaio,  while  that  of
pupitii  could  not,  **  being,"  a*  Oaioi  oburrc*,
"  not  oneconi,  for  it  teimiimtcd  with  the  period  of
pubnly."  But,  la  alrc«d;  euggeited,  there  were
other  reaaona  why  the  Agiutti  could  part  vilh  the
totela,  which  in  the  csae  of  Pstroni  are  obvioua.
The  tulcla  of  Patnni  waa  not  included  within  (he
Lex  CUudia.  The  Tutela  fiduciaria  wa*  ap-
parently a  device  of  the  lawyer)  for  rdeuing  a
wonum  from  the  tutela  Icgitioia  (Qia.  pro  3/ amo,
c  12)  ;  though  it  aeema  to  haia  been  retained,
after  the  paaiing  of  the  Lex  Claudia,  which  took
■wnj  the  tulcla  of  Agnati  oier  women,  aa  a  general
mode  by  which  a  wiiman  changed  hei  Tutor.
(Guna,  1.  IIE.)  To  effei^C  tliii,  the  woman  made
a  "  coemptia  fidaciae  cauiB  1 "  aha  waa  then  le-
mancipalsl  by  the  coemp^onator  to  aome  peraon
of  her  own  choice :  thia  peraon  monumilted  her  by
Vindlcta,  and  thus  became  hei  Tutor  fiduciariua.
Thua  the  woman  paaoed  from  her  own  tuuilia  to
anutber,  and  her  Agnati  loat  all  dainu  upon  her
property,  and  her  Tutor  fiducioriui  might  be  com-
pelled by  the  Piaclor  to  give  bii  aucloritaj  to  her
acta. (QaiDa,  i.  19D,  ii.  12'2.)

A  tutor  datirui  waa  ^ven  to  women  under  the
Lex  Ataia,  when  there  wu  no  tutor  j  and  in  other
caaea  which  havebeenalreadymenlioned.  (Oaiua,
i.  173, 4ci  Ulp.  Prog.  til.  11.)  The  Vestal  Viigina
were  exempt  frnia  tutela  ;  and  both  Ingcnuae  and
Libertinae  were  exempted  from  tutela  by  the  Jua
Liberorrun.  (Goiui,  L  145,  I9t.)  OcBvia,  the
iiiler  of  Coeaai  Oclarianua,  and  hia  wife  Livio,
were  releaied  bom  Tutela  by  a  tpecial  enactment.
(Dion  Caaa  ilix.  B8.)  The  tutela  of  feminoe
waa  determined  by  the  death  of  the  Tutor,  or  that
of  the  woman  i  and  by  her  acquiring  the  Jua
Liberonun,  either  by  bearing  children,  or  from  the
Imperial  brour. The  abdicalio  of  the  Tutor,


n  jnn


io<ao


erely  effeelcd  a  change  of  Tutor.

fiered  from  pupilli  and  pupilloe  in
having  a  capacity  to  manage  their  afbira,  and  only
requiring  in  certain  catea  the  Auctoritai  of  a  Tutor.
If  the  woman  wai  in  the  legitima  tnleb  of  patroni
or  parentea,  the  Tutnree  could  not  be  compelled,
except  in  certain  Tery  ipecial  eaiea,  to  give  their
anctorilaa  to  acta  which  tended  to  deprire  them  of
(he  woman*!  property,  «'  to  diminiah  it  befon  it
might  come  to  their  handi.  <Gaiua,]92.)  Other
Tntorei  ceold  be  compelled  to  p^  >!>*'<' ■t^c'vrila*-


TUTOR.  llJff

The  apeciol  aw*  in  vbich  the  aodoritaa  of  a  Tntor
wai  required  were,  if  the  woman  hod  to  lue  ^  lege,"
or  in  a  legitim urn  judicium,  if  ihe  was  going  to  bind
henelf  by  a  contract,  if  ihe  waa  doiog  any  Civil
act,  or  pcrmllling  her  freed  woman  to  be  in  contu-
beiiiium  nith  the  ahive  of  another  peraon,  or  alien-
ating a  Re>  MancipL  Anionj[  Civil  Acta  (nci/u
ai^lotia)  WM  the  making  of  a  Teataznent,  the  rolea
■  to  which  ore  atated  in  the  article  Txsta-
EXnTUM.  Idbertae  coidd  not  make  a  will  with-
ut  the  conaent  of  their  Patroni,  fbr  the  will  wai
□  act  which  deprived  the  Patron  of  hia  rights
Qoiui,  iil  43)  aa  being  a  Legilimua  tutor.  Ooioa
lentiona  a  Aucript  of  Antonimu,  by  which  thoee
'ho  claimed  the  bocorum  poaieuia  lecundum  ta-
bulai  nan  jure  factat,  could  maintain  their  right
againat  thoae  vrho  claimed  it  ab  inteitatn.  Heoddi,
thia  Beidipt  certainty  t^iplica  to  the  will*  of  nialea,
and  alao  of  feminae  who  had  not  performed  the
ceremony  of  Mancipotio  or  Nuncopatio  ;  but  he
doea  not  decide  whether  it  appliea  to  the  tetla-
meuta  of  women  made  without  the  auctoritaa  of  a
tutor  ;  and  by  tutor  he  mcana  not  thoie  who  ex-
eniaed  the  legitima  tutela  of  parenta  or  Patroni ;
but  Tutora  of  the  other  kind  ialUriia  generii,  com-
pare iL  132  and  L  19-i,  195)  who  could  be  com-
pelled to  give  their  aucioritai.  It  would  be  a  bir
inclniion,  howeier,  that  a  woman'!  will  made
ithout  the  auctoritaa  of  mch  tutorei,  ought  to  be
valid  under  the  Keaoipt.

A  payment  made  to  a  molier  wai  a  releaie  to
the  debtor,  fbr  a  woman  could  part  with  JUi  luo
Moncipi  without  the  auctoritaa  of  a  Tutor:  i^
howevei,  ahe  did  not  receive  the  money,  but  af-
fected to  release  the  debtor  byacceptilatia,thiawaa
not  a  valid  releate  to  him.  (Cic  Top.  11  ;  Oaiua,
ii.  83,  35,  UL  171.)  She  could  not  manumit  ,
without  the  aucioritai  of  a  tutor.  (Ulp. /"raj.  tit  i.
1. 17;  compare  Cic  pro  M.  CotL  c.  23.)  Gaiui  (ii.
47)  atalei  that  no  ajienation  of  a  Rea  MiDcipi
by  a  mulicr  in  agnatonmi  tutela  waa  valid  unleai
it  wag  delivered  with  the  ancloritHa  of  a  Tutor,
which  he  cxprcaies  by  aaying  that  hei  Rea  Man-
cipi  could  not  oiherwiiebe  the  object  of  Uiucapion,
and  that  thia  wna  a  proviiion  of  the  Twelve  Tobloi
(iL  47).  In  other  caaea,  if  a  Rea  Maneipi  wai
tnuiaferred  by  tradition,  the  purchoaer  acquired  the
Quirilaiian  ownenhip  by  Usucapion  [Ugucapio];
but  ia  the  caK  of  a  womon'i  Ites  Hancipi,  the
auctoritai  of  the  Tutor  waa  required  in  order  that
Uiucapinn  might  be  elfected.  In  another  pauige
(!L  DO)  Oaiua  observci  that  a  woman  cannot
alienate  her  Rei  Maneipi  without  the  auctoiitoi  of


h  meant  that  the  fan


of


ithout  hit  auctoritaa  ;  and  au
act  could  not  operate  u  a  treditlo  for  want  of  hia
auctoritaa  a*  apj^ara  from  the  other  paiange  (ii.  17).
The  paaioga  of  Cicero  (pro  Fliicai,  c.  31)  ii  in  oc-
cordaneewith  Oaiuai  but  another  (orf  .^0.  i.  5)  ia
cipresied  >d  vaguely,  that  though  the  explanation
it  generally  luppoacd  to  be  dear,  it  leema  ex-
ceedingly doubtful,  if  it  can  be  tightly  nndentood.
Tlie  possibility  of  Uuiucopion,  when  there  wai  the
auctoritai  of  the  Tutor,  appear!  from  Oaiua  ;  but
it  doea  not  appear  why  Cicero  should  deny,  geno'
rally,  the  poaaibility  of  Uiucapioa  of  a  womon'a
proper^,  when  aha  waa  in  Legitima  Tutela.  The
paaaigc,  however,  ia  perfectly  inleltigiblc  on  the
Buppoaition  of  there  having  been  a  transfer  without
the  auctoritaa  of  a  Tutor,  nnd  on  the  further  aiip-
;poution  ofCiceiD  thinking


•  O"


TYMPANUM.


adAU.1  B.)

The auctmlBi  of  ■  Tutor
the  raie  of  any  Obligatio  b;  which  ihe  womim'B

cBici  when  (he  womio  bcome  boiuid.  (Oaiiu,  L
]92,  iii.  109;  V]p.l^tig.  tit.  I  [.u  27;  Ck.  pro
Cotan.  25.)  IF  thg  wonun  wuhed  lo  promiw  b
Dos,  the  anctoriCu  of  ■  Tutor  wu  neceiui?.
(Cic  pro  Flaec.  36.)  B;  lh»  Lei  Jnlio,  if  >
VDmon  wat  m  the  legitima  lutela  of  a  pupilliu,
*he  miffht  apply  to  the  Praetor  Urboimi  for  a
Tutor  who  ihnuld  give  the  neceuaij  luctoritAi  io
the  COM  of  a  Doa  conititoenda.  (Oaiot,  i.  178  ;
Ulp.  Prag.  11.  tit.  20.)  At  a  woman  could  alienate
Re>  nee  raancipi  without  the  conKnt  of  a  Tutor,
■he  could  coaDuct  an  obligalion  bj-  lendiog  money,
for  bj-  deliveij  the  money  became  the  property  of
ttiB  receiYcr.  A  •enaluaconinltum  allowed  b  wo-
man to  apjdy  for  a  Tutor  in  the  abience  of  het
Tutor.  unltM  the  Tutor  wbi  a  Palronui ;  if  he  wu
a  PatTonot,  the  woman  could  only  apply  for  a
Tutor  in  order  to  hare  bii  auctoiiD*  lor  Ukjng
poBseation  of  an  hereditaa  (o^  hendilattn  adetm^
dam)  or  contracling  a  marriage.

The  Tut«la  of  a  woman  wia  terminaltd  by  the
death  of  the  Tutw  or  that  of  the  wonuui ;  by  a
marriage  by  which  >he  come  in  iDanum  tin  ;  by
the  privilege  of  children  (jut  lAenmni)  ;  by  abdi-
catio,  and  alio  by  the  in  jure  ccuio,  ao  long  ai  the
Agnstorum  tutela  waa  in  uae :  hut  in  theie  two  lait
taw)  there  wat  only  a  change  of  Tutor.

A  woman  had  no  right  of  action  against  her
Tutor  in  reipect  of  hi«  Tutela,  for  he  had  not  the
Negotlorum  gMlio,  or  adminiatralion  of  her  pro-
perty, but  only  interpoKd  hi)  Auctotilaa.  (OaJus,
[  Ifll.)

Tbc  tutela  muliemm  eiisted  at  tout  at  late  ai
Diocletian,  a.  d.293  (IV.  Frog.  §  325).  Thcr^
ii  no  trace  of  it  in  the  Code  of  Theodniui,  or  in
the  legialation  ol  Juitinian.

(Tho  mwt  recent  and  the  moat  complete  work  on
the  Roman  Tutela  ii  laid  to  be  by  Rudorff  (Dai
IMUder  Varmimdieia/i,  1832— 18.'!1),  the  iub-
■tance  of  which  appean  to  be  given  by  Rein,  D*u
ffdfli.  JVi'eohw)!,  p.  239.  &c;  Guiu,i.  142— 200i
Ulp.  Frag.  a.  lii.;  Injt.  1.  XiL  13—26  ;  Dig.  26
and  27;  Cod.  6.  lit  28—75.)  [G.  I..]

TU'TULUS  wai  the  name  gixen  lo  a  pile  of
hair  on  a  woman'a  head.  Oreat  paini  were  taken
by  (he  Roman  ladiei  to  have  thii  part  of  the  hair
dreaied  in  the  prevailing  fiuhion,  whence  we  read
in  an  uucription  of  an  cnatrix  a  tutuio.  (Oruter,
G79.  3.)  Sometime)  the  hair  wu  piled  up  to  an
enorraoui  height.  (Lucan.  ii.  35B  ;  Jut.  vi  £03  ;
SUt.  Silv.  I  2.  1 1 4.)  The  Tutaliu  Kemi  lo  have
reiembled  vei;  much  the  Omk  K^fiCot,  of  which
a  repreaentalion  ia  girea  id  the  fiiit  woodcut  on
p.  329.  a.

The  Flaminica  alwayi  wore  a  Tutulni,  which
wu  formed  by  having  the  hair  plaited  up  with  a
purple  band  in  a  eonioil  fenn. (Feitui,  t.  n.)

TY'MPANUM  (ri^nnw),  a  imaU  dram  car-
ried in  the  hand.  Of  theie.iome  reiembled  in  all
leipecu  a  modem  tambourine  with  belli.  Otheri
preiented  a  flat  drcular  diik  on  tbe  upper  lur&ce
and  iwelled  oat  beneath  like  a  kettledrum,  a  ihape
which  appean  to  he  indicated  by  Pliny  when  he
de«rib«  a  particular  dan  of  peorli  in  tlie  follow-
ing teniu :  "  Quibvi  mta  tanttun  eit  fiiciM,  at  ah


itur."  (H.  N.  ix.  64.) Both  fatu  are  ref»e-

lented  in  the  culi  below. That  upon  the  left  u

n  a  painting  found  at  Pompeii  (3/iu,  Borici.

.  vii.  tat.  37),  that  on  the  right  frmn  a  ficLle

;  {Millin.  Prwtimi  c£a Poiei  .4  afijaei,  pL  3«'\

ana  here  the  conveiiiy  on  the  ludet  lide  it  i-t-

tindly  aeeiL Tympana  vera  coTctad  with  the


bidet  of  oxen  (Ovid.  FatL  ir.  341 ;  Stat.  TTitL  iL
78)  or  of  anei  (Phaedr.  ill.  BO.  4),  wrre  heUm
(SueL  Jiig.  68)  with  a  ttick  (Phaedr.  L  t.)  or
with  the  hand  (Ovid.  lUtt.  if.  30  ;  tee  cut*),  and
were  much  employed  in  alt  wild  rDlhniiutic  reli-
gioui  ritei  (Aiiilnph.  Lgiiar.  i.  387),  ejpeeiallT
'e  oigiei  of  Bacchul  and  of  Cjbele  (Catul
LV.  262i  Claud,  rfe  Cbu  SlifuL  iii.  366;  Locrrt.
618  ;  (^tulL  liiii.  8;  Vlrg.  .4n.ii.  619;  Claod.
EiUrop.  \. 278  ;  compare  l<ob«k,  Ayhn^Aatva,


),  652),  a


lePUnU


am."  According  lo  Juitin  (ill.  2)  ~thcj  werr
uaed  by  the  Parthiani  in  wu  to  give  the  lignal  ijt
thaontet.

2.  A  lolid  wheel  withont  tpoket  fw  havr
waggoni  (Virg.  Gmrg.  iv.  444),  luch  at  it  ihon
in  the  cut  on  page  923.  Thtie  are  to  thii  dar
common  in  the  rude  carta  of  aaulhem  Italy  tod
Greece,  and  Sir  C.  FeUowi  (Ckhwhi  »  .Id.i
Miwr,  p.  72),  from  whoae  work  the  figote  bdow
it  copied,  found  tbem  attached  to  tbe  t^nn  vehidn
of  Myiia.  "The  wheeli  are  of  tolid  hlodu  <^f
wood,  or  thick  planka,  generally  thm>,  held  L>-
gether  by  an  iron  hoop  or  tire  ;  a  load  treeing
noiae  ii  made  by  the  frictioa  of  the  galled  ule."
a  ntiiJactDry  commentary  on  the  "atiidcDtia
plaaitra  "  of  Virgil  (Ceoig.  iii.  536).


for  drawing  watfr  (Vitruv.  i.  14),  a  tolid  tootbrd
wheel  forming  (art  of  the  machineiT  of  ■  laill
(Vitmv.  I.  9,  10),  and  the  Uke.

4,  An  ancient  name  (or  round  platca  or  chargHt,
were  afterwardi  callad  taaca  and  iMna.


(Plin.


f.JV.  X


i2.)


I.  An  architectural  term  tignilying  the  Bat  ■
or  tpaca  within  a  pedunenl,  aiid  alia
te  panel  of  a  door.  (Vitmr.  iiL  3,  it.  6.)


TTRANNUS.

6.  A  waodm  cudgel  (or  bntiDg  nuldkelon,  uid
alto  ■  healing  p«t  to  which  Ihej  wen  tied  when
flojigd  !  hence  the  Greek  yerbe  TBinrwiiio'  and
irVTaiiwayiCiii'  ue  fcrmed.  (Sehol.  ad  ArHlopi.
/Vid.476;  St.Paal,Ep.  to  Hiirtiot,xL  35;  Pol-
lia,TiiL70.)  [W.R.]

TYPUS  (tAtoi),  which  properly  meu»  a  Uoa,
■nd  bEiice  tta  fifiici  0/  a  bbnr,  mnd  ipecifiiallj  m
■Mmt  or  inprm  inwte  bj  m  blow,  ii  applied  in  the
artf  to  ftuj  die  oi  mould,  and  to  any  fiffoiv  formed
br  nriking  from  ■  die,  or  by  cuting  in  a  mould,
or  BTen  by  cnHing,  ■■  a  camoo  or  iatagiio,  and,
mon  gennally,  to  any  figure  whateTer,  ai  being
the  Ijpt  orJammiU  of  the  thing  repntentcd  by  it
(See  the  Uiieona)  By  Iha  ^pi  which  Cicero
iad  AU.  i.  10)  comminiani  Atticoi  lo  abtain  for
him  to  work  into  ihe  plutcring  of  hii  atrium,  he
probably  meini  ralieh  of  any  Kit  The  different
■pccific  meaning!  ioclnded  in  the  word  are  more
uartly  eiprewed  by  certain  eompoiuidt,
irrlnmt,  the  eopjr  or  imprtu  of  a  -rirBt,
Pvtuid  ;  frrvroi  and  ^rr^v^io,  a  vahat  ptaum  or
iirt^,- (ktvidi,  a  «Bt/of  any  kind,  cipecially  a
ntnuD,  and,  men  tpecificolly,  a  Ugi-rtii^,  aa  op-
poeed  to  tpimnt,  a  lev-nlie/,)  Comp.  Fictili,
p.  S33,  a  :  F0RH4,  [P.  S.J

TYRANNUS  (rtpamt).  In  the  heroic  age
all  the  garemnenli  in  Qnece  wen  monaichiaU,
tbe  king  uniting  in  liimielf  the  function*  of  ths
prieaC,  the  judge,  and  military  chief.  Theu  were
the  TOTpuciil^iAtTBiDf  Thucydidea.  (i.  13.)  1°
the  fint  two  or  three  csntuiic*  following  the  Trojan


abolition,  or  at  leai


powe


Emigiationa,  ei


lothalii


'ork,  which  led  tc
nitation,  of  the  kingly
ioni  of  &mi1iea,  diiaa'
nay  be  reckoned


among  theie  cauaca.  Henditaiy
came  electire  ;  the  dlfFennt  functioni  of  tbe  king
were  diitributed ;  he  waa  ^led  ipxt'",  v^^r,
or  wp^wit,  inttotd  of  BairAtit,  and  hii  character
waA  changed  no  lew  tlum  hii  name.  Noble  and
wealthy  &ini1in  b^an  to  ha  coniidcred  on  a  foot-
ing of  cqoali^  with  royalty  ;  and  thna  in  proccu
of  time  iprang  up  olignrchia  or  ariMociaciea,  which
moat  of  the  goremmenti  that  tucceeded  tbe  ancicDt
monarchiet  were  in  point  of  &ct,  though  not  aa
yet  called  by  inch  namea.  Theae  oligarchieg  did
not  poaaeia  the  elementa  of  aocial  happineaa  or  ata-
bility.  The  principal  familiea  contended  with  each
other  for  the  greateat  ahara  of  power,  and  were
only  unsnimoni  in  dian^ardiDg  the  righta  of  thote
wheat  itation  wai  beneath  thrir  own.  The  people,
opiaeaaed  by  the  pnTilegcd  dauea,  began  to  regret
the  loH  of  ^eir  old  palcnial  form  of  goTeinment ;
'  and  were  nady  to  aiaiat  any  one  who  would  at-
tempt to  reilore  it  Thna  were  oppoitunitiea  af-
forded to  ambitiouA  and  designing  men  to  raiie
themielica,  by  darting  np  aa  the  championa  of
popular  right.  Diacontented  noblea  were  ioon
found  to  pnaeeute  achemei  of  thia  aort,  and  they
had  a  grcBlei  chance  of  lucceia,  if  deaccnded  from
the  ancient  royal  fiunily.  PeiaiatnCua  i>  an  ex-
ample ;  he  waa  the  more  acceptable  to  the  people
of  Athou,  aa  being  a  defendant  of  the  bmily  of
Codni.  (Herod.  T.  65.)  Thna  in  many  citiea
aroie  that  apeeiea  of  monanhy  which  the  (Ireeki
called  THporrlt,  which  meant  only
imaponaible  dominion  of  one  ma:  .
frequently  wai  nothii^  m>n  than  a  renvoi  of  the
ancient  gorenment,  and,  though  unaccompanied
with  any  reeognind  bendilaly  title,  or  tbe  n


lehed  to  old  Dame  and  long  preacription,
d  by  tbe  lower  orden  of  pw[Ae  aa  a  good


■reign  ly;


TYRANNUS.

nnce  attached  tc
hailed  b; "
:hange,  after  auffering  nndec  the  dominatioi  —
the  oliganhy. All  lyramtiea,  howerer,  wen  not
w  acceptable  to  the  majority  ;  and  •ometimei  we
find  the  neblei  concurring  in  the  eteratioa  of  a
deapot,  to  further  ibcir  own  intereiU. Thiu  the
Syracnain  Gaimri,  who  had  been  expelled  by  the
populace,  on receiring  the pntection  of  Qelon,
aoienign  of  Oela  and  Camarlna,  enabled  him  to
' poaaeaaion  of  Syncote,  and  eitabliaii  hia  king-
then. (Herod.  tU. 154,  1S5.) Somelimea
the  conSicting  partiea  in  the  ilate,  by  mutual  con-
-•.at,  choae  loma  eminent  man,  in  wW  they  hod
mAdence,  to  nconcile  their  diaaenaiona  ]  inveating
im  with  a  aort  of  dictatorial  power  for  that  pui-
poae, either for  a  limited period  at  otherwie&
Such  a  penm  they  called  aSrvfuriins. [Akbtm-

A  aimilar  authority  waa  eonleired  upon  Solon,
wben  Albena  wai  torn  by  the  contending  lactiona
of  the  Atdijipiot,  neSiaToi,  and  It^fpoAoi,  and  he
waa  leijnetted  to  act  aa  mediator  between  them.
Solon  waa  descended  from  Codrui,  and  aome  of
bia  friendi  wished  him  to  ataume  the  ao'ere
thia  ha  nfuaed  to  do,  bnt,  taking  the  co
tlonal  title  of  Aichon,  framed  hia  celebrated  form
of  polity  and  code  of  laws.  (Herod.  L  29  1  PluL
Solan.  t.lZ,&e.i  Schumann,  J«(ij.  Jar.  jMiN.  Cr.
p.  173.)  The  lcgi»lati»e  powers  confared  upon
Draco,  ZaleucuB,  and  Chatondaa.  were  of  a  aimilu
kind,  investing  them  with  a  lemporaiy  dictator-

The  ripami  mnat  be  diitinguiahed,  on  the  one
hand,  from  the  ^flim/cr^TiTi,  Inaamuch  as  he  waa
not  elected  by  general  conient,  but  commonly  owed
hia  elevation  Id  tome  coi^  d'ttat,  aoms  violent
movement  or  stratagem,  such  aa  the  creation  of  a
body-guard  for  him  by  the  people,  n-  the  acisure
of  the  citadel  (Herod,  i,  59  ;  Thucyd.  i.  126)  j
and  on  the  other  hand,  from  the  ancient  king,
whose  right  depended,  not  on  usurpation,  but  on
inheritance  and  traditionary  acknowledgment.  The
power  of  a  king  might  be  more  abaolule  than  that
of  a  Ijrmiil;  ai  Phcidon  of  Argoa  is  aaid  to  ha'e
made  the  royal  pierogatite  greater  than  it  waa
under  hia  predeceaaora  i  jet  he  waa  alill  ngnrded
as  a  king  ;  for  the  diiHerencc  between  the  two
names  depended  on  title  and  origin,  and  not  on
the  manner  in  which  the  power  was  exercised.
(Ariatot.  PoliL  t.  6.)  Tbe  name  of  tyrant  waa
originally  aa  br  from  denoting  a  person  who  abuaod
his  power,  or  treated  hia  nibjeeu  witb  cruelty,
that  Peliislialua  is  praised  by  Tfaucydidea  (vi.  S4)
for  the  moderation  of  hia  government ;  and  He-
rodotus saya,  he  governed  o^e  ri/ukr  t&t  ioA^jat
(nm-opiifai,  oKra  Aie/ua  nrraMJiai,  M  it  ra!ai
nartoTtiai  tniu  TJ)r  wifur  noafUm  iiaAfir  rt
tai  d.  (L  59.)  Thentbre  we  find  the  weeds
$aaAitii  and  ripamt  uiied  pronuKuoualy  by  the
Attic  tngediani  paatn  (aee  the  ArgumtrU  Of  the
Oedipna  Tjisnnuj)  ;  and  eren  by  proae  authc«i.
Thoi  HeiDdatni  calls  the  Lydian  Candanle*  t^
ponvi  (i.  7),  the  kingdom  of  Hacedmia  nyarvft
(viil  137),  and  Periander  of  Corinth  fiari\tii,
(iii.  S3  ;  compon  t.  37,  92.)  Aflerwaids,  when
IjrraiitM  themselves  had  become  odious,  the  name
also  grew  to  he  a  word  of  le^macb,  just  aa  rtx
did  among  the  Bomani;  (Wachranuth,  /Men.  AU.
tol.  i.  pt.  I  pp.  27»~2S3,  Itt  ed. ;  ThirlwaU,  Hut.
o/Grta,  voL  i.  pp.  401,  404.)


TYRANNUa.
Amonj  tha  eiiJy  ^rmtft  of  Greees  tIio»e  n


gnndfatfao


n  are  :  —  Cleiilhene*  of  Siryon,
BT  ot  tie  Athenian  CleUthenei,  in  whoie
th«  goTeramsnl  conlinDed  fat  ■  ceDluij
I  eitabllihmeDt  by  OrthegoiBi,  about  B.  c
672  (Herod,  r.  67,  69)  ;  CypKlua  of  Corinth,  who
ripelled  the  Bacchiajae,  B.  c  G5G,  and  hii  ton
Periander,  both  remubble  for  Iheii  cruelty  ;  their
dynaity  lluted  hetwcen  aeienly  and  eighty  yean
(flerod.  V.  92}  ;  Piocle)  of  Epidanrui  (Herod,  iii.
SO,  £2}  (  Pastaleon  of  Piia,  who  celebialrd  the
thirtji-IboKh  Olympiad,  de[SiTing  tha  Eleuit  of
the  pmidcnejr  (Pauun.  rl  SI,  22)  ;  Theagenei
of  Megara,  &lh«-iii-la'ir  to  Cyloo  tha  Atheaiaa
(Thucrd.  L  136)  :  Peiiiitratui,  who»  »mu  were
the  lut  of  the  early  tyranii  oa  tlie  Grtcjan  conli-

In  Sicily,  where  tframig  mM  flonriihed,  the
priocinaJ  wets  Phalaji»  ot  Agrigentuin,  who  et-
tsbliihed  hii  power  in  a.  C  568,  conccmiog  whow

Theron  of  Agrigentum  ;  Oelon,  already  meatianed,
who,  in  corjunelion  with  Theron,  defeated  Hamil-
car  the  Carthaginian,  on  the  sune  day  on  which
the  battle  of  Salamii  wai  fonght ;  and  Hiero,  hit
brother:  the Iiatthreecelehratod  by  Pindar.  (See
Herod.  riL  lS6,  165,  166.)  In  Orecun  Italy  we
may  mention  Anliflant  of  Rhegium,  who  reigned
B.C  496  (Herod.  t1.  S.1,  m'L  165);  Oeiniai  of
Crolon,  who  TDM  after  the  diuolation  of  the  Py-
thagorean league  ;  (ai  to  which  lee  Poly^  ii.  39 ;
Athen.  rii.  p.  522,  lii.  p.  623 ;  Tliirlwsll,  fd.
ToL  ii.  p.  I5i.)  The  fallawing  alio  are  worthy
of  notice :  Polyimtei  of  Samoi  (Herod.  iiL  39,
56,  120,  125;  Thttcyd.  i.  13)  ;  Lygiunii  nf
Naioa  (Herod.  L  61,  64)  i  Kiitiacua  and  Ari*-
tagoraj  of  Miletut  (Herod,  it.  137.  r.  23,  30,  37,
tI.  29.)  Perhapa  the  last  mentioned  can  hardly
be  etaued  among  the  Grt^  lifranti,  ni  they  were
connected  with  the  Penian  monarchy.  (Wacha-
mnlh.  Id.  idL  L  pL  i.  p.  274.)

The  general  characteriaticg  of  a  igraniiji  were,
that  it  waa  bound  by  no  lawi,  and  had  no  Kcog-

be  restrained  in  practice  by  the  good  ^spoiition  of
the  lyronl  bimielf,  or  by  f^,  or  by  the  spirit  of  the
age.  It  waa  commonly  moat  odiout  to  the  waallbv
and  noble,  whom  the  tjrranl  Irmked  upon  with
jealoniy  at  a  check  upon  hit  pover,  and  whom  he
often  ionght  to  got  rid  of  by  Bending  them  into
exile  or  putting  them  to  death.  The  advice  giicn
by  Thraaybulut  of  Miletui  to  Pcriander  atTordt  an
apt  itIuitratiDn  of  thii.  (Herod,  t.  92.)  The  g/ratU
niually  kept  a  body-gnard  of  foreign  mercenariei,
by  aid  of  whom  he  controUed  the  people  at  home  ;
but  he  teldom  ventured  to  make  war,  for  fear  of
miinjt  an opportnnity  to  hit luhjectl to  revolt.

ohterratirai.  (Tb'icyd.  i,  17.)  Ha  wai  aveno  to  n
largo  congn^tion  of  men  in  the  town,  and  en-
deavoured to  find  raitic  employments  for  tho  popu-
lace ;  but  wai  not  unwilling  to  indulge  them  with
ihowt  and  umutcmenta.  A  few  of  ths  belter  tort
eultiTaled  literature  and  the  arti,  adomad  their
city  with  handiome  huildinga,  and  even  pasted  good
lawt  Thnt,  Peitiitratut  commenced  building  the
iplendid  temple  of  Jupiter  Olympui,  laid  out  the
garden  of  the  Lyceuin,  coltccted  the  Homeric
ppemi,and  it  taid  to  have  written  poetiy  hjmtelf.
Tribute  waa  impoacd  on  the  people,  to  raiie  a
reranuc  for  the  qf«Bt(, ' — ' '" "  '


TYRANNID09  GRAPHE.

maintain  his  alate. Peiiittratni  had  the  tithe  el
land,  which hit toot  reduced  to  ilie  tveniictL


[Til


which  led  to  the  decline  of  ^nnin
atnon^  the  Gfeeki  wen  partly  the  degeneracy  ^!
the  ^rmfj  themielTt*,  corrupted  by  power,  bdo-
lenc«,  flattery,  and  bad  eduathni ;  lot  em  where
the  &(her  tot  a  good  example,  it  waa  teldom  fal-
lowed by  the  ion  ;  partlythecmelliuBBdeicetM
of  particular  mm,  which  brought  them  all  iniu
diirepUte  ;  and  puily  the  growing  tpitit  of  mquiiy
among  the  Greek  people,  who  b^ao  to  ap«u!iM
upon  pnlitJcat  theotiea,  and  toon  beeame  divoc'
tented  with  a  form  of  government,  which  had  no-
thing in  theory,  and  litUe  in  practice,  to  mwrnwid
it  Few  dynattiea  lasted  beyond  the  third  gene-
ntion.  Halt  of  the  tynuiuic*,  which  flonriihed
before  the  Partian  war,  ars  said  to  ha»c  been  ova-
thrown  by  the  exertiont  of  Sparta,  jealocfl  probablT
of  any  innovation  upon  the  old  Doric  cetutilulton,
especially  of  any  tendency  to  ameliojale  the  eon-
ditian  of  the  Perioeci,  and  anlions  Co  eitend  her
own  influence  over  the  tlatei  of  Greee?  bj  ntani
of  the  bencSta  which  the  conloTed.  (Thocyd.  L
18.)  Upon  the  lall  of  tyramiy,  the  varioDt  repnb-
lioDi  formt  of  goremment  were  eitabliihed,  the
Dorian  itatei  generally  bvouring  oligarchy,  lh>
Ionian  democrary.  (WUhimuth,  toL  L  pt.  i  p,
3S9;  Scbomann, /<{.  pp.  S4,  88—91.)

Ai  nc  cannot  in  this  article  punue  any  hiitorial
narrative,  we  will  shortly  reftr  to  tie  retiral  rf
tynunif  in  some  of  the  Grecian  Malea  after  the  end
of  the  Poloponnesian  war.  In  Thetaaly  Jajon  of
Pherae  raited  hiouet^  under  the  title  of  Ta>J<,B.c
374,  to  the  virtual  tovereigiity  of  hii  native  cilv,

ths  Theatalian  itatei,  hut  Ihia  powa  crowd  with
Lycophron,  at  153.  [TiOfs.]  In  Sicily,  the
coiTuption  of  the  Syracntant,  their  intHtine  dii-
corda,  and  the  fear  of  the  Carlhagtniaii  rnvailcTt,
led  to  the  appointment  of  DionTsina  to  tk  chaf
military  command,  with  tinlimited  povoa ;  by
meant  of  which  he  raited  himself  to  the  ihran,
B.  c.  406,  and  reigned  for  38  yeara,  ItSTing  hit  kd
to  ■ucceod  iiim.  The  younger  Dionyaiua,  br  in-
ftrior  in  every  reapect  to  lit  lather,  wo*  expelird
by  DioD,  aftem-ardt  regained  the  throne,  and  ni
again  expelled  by  Timateon,  who  mtored  liberty
to  the  variout  itatei  of  Sicily,  (For  theii-  hiMarr
the  reader  ii  referred  to  Xenopl.  /fetf.  iL  ■>.  §  34';
ffiod.  Kiv.  7,  46,  6^  72,  109,  xv.  73,  74,  ivi  4,
16,  36,  68,  69,  &G.  ;  PluL  ZUm.  and  TimcL  !
Wachimuth,  voL  i.  pv  ii.  pp.  316—326.)  With
reipect  to  the  djnatty  of  the  Areha^uctidae  in
the  Cimmerian  Boapomi,  and  tome  of  the  towns
OB  the  catt  of  the  Euiine,  tee  Wachmuth,  t^  L
pt  ii.  p.  329.  I^itly,  we  may  aottce  Evagnoi
of  Cypmt,  w^o  k  pancgyriaed  by  laocntpi ;  Pln-
tarch  of  Eretria,  Colliai  and  TaonicthetHa  ot
Chalcii,  who  were  partiiana  of  Philip  ^^nn  the
Athenians.  (Pint  Ploc  12  ;  luxr.Et^.;  Wacha-
muth,  vol.  i.  pt  iL  p.  330.)  The  petnoi  com-
monly called  Hi  BUrlf  tyrami,  at  Athena,  who  ob-
tnined  the  lupceme  power  at  the  date  of  ibe  Prio-
ponneiian  war,  do  not  liill  within  the  teope  of  tbe
preicnt  subject  With  respect  to  the  Aihniia3
lawi  againit  tymiain,  and  the  gciMral  feclin;^  >.f
the  people,  tee  Phoposil  (C  R.  K.J

TTRANNIDOS  OR-VPHE  (tt-pbot**!  ■».■.

pfl). [PRODOSU.]


U.  V.

VACA'NTIA  PONA. [Borii  ViCAHru.)
VACATIO. [En«:irTO,p.4990
VADIMO'NIUH. (Actio,  p.11  ;  pRun.]

VAGI'NA. [OlADIDB.]

VALLUM,  k  una  applied  atkor  to  tha  wbolc
oT  ■  portion  of  the  fratifiatiaDt  of  ■  Raaan  amp.
n  i>  dehTod  from  voJUt  (a  >>'1^0>  ""^  properiy
mtana  the  jnliude  which  no  abng  the  ontet  edge
of  the  top  of  the  igger,  bot  it  very  freqneotl]'  in-
ctudci  the  agger  ftlio.  The  oaUam,  in  tbe  Uttar
■enie,  together  with  At  fiun  or  ditch  which  tai-
rounded  the  ump  ouUide  of  the  mj^ua,  fomiad  ~
tompltte  fbrtificBtian. [Aooa«.]

The  mUi  (x<tpa<r*T)i  of  which  the  foUm,  in  the
former  and  mere  limited  aenae,  waa  compoaed,  are
deacribed  bj  Poljhini  (xriii.  L  1,  EmpL  Aiitig.
xriL  U)  4od  Liir  (iniii.  fi),  who  make  a  com-
paneen  bclweea  the  va/Um  of  the  Oreeki  and  that
of  the  Ronuuii,  lery  much  to  the  adnntige  of  the
latter.  Both  uird  fbi  ralii  jonng  tn«  or  armi  of
larger  treei,  with  the  lide  biaochei  on  them  ;  but
the  rtiUi  of  the  Oieeki  were  mach  larger  and  had
more  bnuchee  ihim  thoae  of  the  Romuu,  which
had  eilhei  two  or  three,  or  at  the  moat  fonr
bnnchec,  and  theia  generalljr  on  the  nme  aide.
The  Oreekt  pinced  their  nlli  in  the  anec  at  cod-
aidersble  interrals,  the  tpuei  between  them  being
filled  up  by  the  bmnchea  ;  the  Romsni  fiied  theira
cloee  togeiher,  and  made  the  branchei  interlace,
and  eba^iened  their  pointa  tarffnllj.  Hence  tha
Greek  rallni  could  eaiily  be  taken  hold  of  bj  iti
lar^  branchei  and  pulled  from  iti  place,  and  when
it  waa  remoTed  a  large  opening  waa  left  in  the
Tslluin.  Tbe  Roman  rallui,  on  the  conlnuy,  pre-
■ented  no  eaoTenient  handle,  reqoired  lery  great
force  to  pull  it  doA-n,  and  eren  if  removed  li^ft  a
very  mall  opening.  Tbe  Greek  ralli  were  cnt  on
the  apol  ;  the  ttomana  prepared  thein  boforehand,
and  each  loldier  carried  three  or  four  of  them  when
on  a  march.  (Poljb.  I.e.;  Viig.  Gtary.  iii.  S4e,
3-17  ;  Cic  Ttuc.  ii.  16.)  They  were  iwide  of  any
etmng  wood,  bnt  oak  waa  praferred.

The  word  Boliai  im  lometiiiiei  lued  la  eqniialent
to  vallum.  (CaeHIr,  Bdi.  Civ.  it!.  63.)

A  fbnificBlion  like  the  Roman  vaUnin  waa  naed
by  the  Greek!  at  a  laj  euly  period.  (Horn.  IL
ll.  349,  3S0.)

Varm^  etymology  of  the  wotd  ii  Dot  worth
much  (L.L.  J.  117,  ed.  MUller).

In  the  opentiona  of  ■  tiege,  wheD  tke  plao*
conld  not  be  token  by  itoim,  iai  it  beoDD*  nreea'
•ary  to  eatahliah  a  blockade,  thii  waa  done  by
drawing  defence*  rimilaj  to  thoae  of  ■  oonp  lonnd
the  town,  which  wu  then  aaid  to  be  eiirmimiallti-
turn.  Sach  a  ciccnmtalUtion,  beaidet  calting  off
bU  communication  bttween  the  town  and  tha  wui-
roondinK  coantrr,  fiinned  a  defence  againat  tha
Mlliet  of  tbe  betiegwL  There  waa  often  a  doable
line  •>{  fortiEcatioM,  the  inner  againil  the  town,
and  the  outer  againit  a  fbcee  that  might  tttanpt  to

camped  between  the  two  linei  of  woAa.

'Hii*  kind  of  dreamTalUtion,  which  the  Oneki
called  inBTti^uTiiii  and  wtptTtixw^r,  wai  em-
ployed by  tte  PcloponneiiaDi  in  the  aiege  i^  Pla-
iseoe.  Cniucyd.  iL  78,  iil  20—23.)  Their  linei
eonaiated  of  two  walli  (appvently  of  tnrf  )  at  the
diftaoce  of  IG  ieet,  whkh  ininnuided  tbe  dty  in


VAS.  II 83

Ihe  ttrm  of  a  circle.  Belwean  tbe  wall*  wtre  the
buta  of  the  betiegira.  The  wtlb  had  hottleaienli
( JwdAfdi).  and  at  tiaj  tenth  tattlonait  waa  ■
tower,  filiing  up  by  iu  depth  the  whole  ipaoe  be-
tween the  walk.  There  waa  a  paiNge  for  the  be-
Megen  through  the  middle  of  each  tower.  On  the
ouliide  of  each  wall  wai  a  ditch  (ji^foi).  Thia
deictiptton  would  almoat  exactly  anawer  for  tha
Roman  mode  of  circuuiTaliatioti,  of  which  lome  of
tha  beet  eiamplet  are  that  of  Carthage  by  Scipio
(Appian. /^ei'c  119,  &c.),  that  of  Numanlia  by
Scipio  (Appian,  Hiipim.  90),  and  that  of  A)e^
by  CaoMi  {Btli.  OM.  Tii.  72,  7S).  The  towen  in
aadi  line*  wen  limilar  to  thoao  wed  in  attackiog
foRified  place*,  but  not  m  high,  and  of  comae  aot
moTcable. [Tuiiait.]

(Lipaio),  dt  MUit  Ran.  T.  A,  in  Optr.  iiL  ddl
1£6,  \B1 ;  PUKn.  Ii  i,  in  Oper.  iiL  SSL)  [P.&]

VALLUa  [V*Li,DH.]

VALVAR.  [Jamb*,  p.e2J,b.I

VANNU3  (\iicfuJi,  Alnvr),  a  winDowing-&n,
i.*.  n  broad  baakat,  into  which  the  com  mixed
with  chaff  (oOH,  ttxi^)  waa  received  after  thmih-
ing,  and  waa  then  thrown  in  the  direction  of  the
wind.  (Col.  da  Rt  Ruit,  iL  31  i  Virg,  Gtarg.  iii.
I S4.)  it  Ihui  perfoimed  with  greater  effect  and
conTcnienca  the  office  of  the  po/o  Ugma,  or  win-
nowinR-ihoTcL  [Pala.]  Virgil  (Ciof^.  L  I6G)
dignifioa  thii  aimple  implement  by  ealliog  it  B^atica
BDoou  laeeM.  Tha  rite*  of  fiwxhns,  aa  well  u
thoie  of  Cere*,  having  a  continual  reference  to  the
occupationa  of  rural  life,  the  vannna  waa  borne  in
the  procuaioni  celebtated  in  honour  of  both  theae
difinitiea.  Hence  AwriTqi  (Heiych.  a  e.)  waa
one  of  the  epilheti  of  Bacehni.  In  an  Antifixa
in  the  Briliah  Muienm  (aee  the  annexed  woodcut)
the  inHuit  Bacihua  ii  carried  in  ■  vannna  by  two
dancing  bacchantei  clothed  in  akina,  the  one  male
and  carrying  a  Thvrsus,  the  other  female  and
aurying  ■  tonh  [Fax]. Other  divinitiei  wets


_ _  IS  1  Schol.  1

Horn.  a.  ia  Mere.  2M.)  The  vanDia  w
saed  in  tha  proceaaioia  lo  nny  the  hutma
•acrifice  and  the  firat  ftuiti  oi  other  oflaringa,
tboao  who  bore  them  being  called  tk*  tJKn^i6pou
(Callim-Cfcr.  127.)  [J.  Y.]

VAPPA. [ViWDM.]

VAS. [Actio,  p.  11  ;  Pkaib.]

VAS  (pL  eon),  a  gCTMial  term  for  ain  kiod  of
Tea«t!, Thni  we  read  of  nu  aiariim  (Cic.  Terr.

72),  foni  CbrMMi  tt  Dtliaca  (cic  pra  SoK.  Am.


net


VECTIGALIA.


46),  WM  Samia,  Oat  u,  made  of  Suniui  euthen-
wtn  <Cie.  pro  Mar.  96),  Ruo  Mim-iaa  (PUn.
ff.JV.,^ii.2.i.7).  [MmmHiNiVis*.]  The
word  coi  wu  u*ed  in  *■  itill  wider  ligniticstiDn,
(uid  n>  Applied  to  nny  kiod  of  at^ouil  UKd  in  the
kitcheii,sgrictdtQre,&c.  Thiu  PUuttu nyi (JaUl
1117):  —

"  Cultiuin,  Kcurun,  piilQlimi,  mortuinin,
Qnaa  utend*  nn  Kmpet  vUini  ngant,
Furea  veniuR,  atqui  abituliue  dicito."
(Cnnp.  Dig.  33.  lit.  7.  i.  B  ;  31.  tit.  2.  i.  20). Tha
utcniili  of  the  nldien  wen  called  ruo,  lud  lience
nun  mJligen  uid  nun  eanelatium  ligaiT;  to  pack
np  tbe  hsgnce,  to  give  the  ligua!  fcr  departure
(Cic  Verr.  1..  19  ;  Ui.  ui.  *7,  xivH.  *7i  Cae».
B.C.  i.  66,iii.  37).

UDO,a*Mkc>f  goats-h^orMt  (HarLxiT.
1(0.)  ^euoA  (Op.tl  l^a,6*i)  ^iiytf  mtojttrj-
men  to  wtar  bragw*  {ptnmt,  KOftrtirat)  made
of  ox-hide,  with  aocki  of  the  abore  deicriptian
within  them.  Socki  of  a  fiaer  fclt  were  eonietiniei
worn  by  the  Atheniani.  (Cntinua,  p.  39,  ed.
Runkel.)  [J.Y.]

VECTIOA'LIA,  the  fteneral  term  lor  all  the
regular  revenun  of  the  Boman  itate.  (Cic  pn
Leg.  Mima.  6.)  The  word  i>  deriTed  froco  oaio,
and  19  geDerall;  bttieved  to  hare  originallj  ligni-
fied  the  doIicB  paid  uprai  things  imported  and  oi-
psrted  {jaat  vtkihaiitiir).  If  thii  wen  (rue,  it
would  neceuarilf  implj  that  theie  dutiei  wen
either  tha  mott  ancient  or  the  moat  importaal
branch  of  the  Roman  nrenuo,  and  that  foe  either
of  thete  reaaiHU  the  name  wai  labaequently  Died
to  detignate  all  the  regular  revenoea  in  general.
But  neither  point  ii  bame  out  by  the  hiitorj  of
Home,  and  it  aeemi  more  probable  that  vectigal
meani  anything  which  ia  brought  {viiatur)  into
the  public  treaniry,  like  the  Greek  ^poi.  Tbe
'  income  of  the  ttale  wai  in  all  pro-
,iaid  for  the  uie  of  the  public
and  and  pastuRi.  Thii  reieoue  waa  ailed  puicua,
a  name  which  wai  Died  u  late  at  the  time  of
Pliny  {//.TV.!


■nriieit  regular  incoi
lability  tbe  rent  p


Tiii.  3).  in
all  the  r


authority  in  all  |
I  of  finance,  but  ni  tbe  atate  ilielf  did  not  j
occupy  ilielf  with  collecting  the  taiei,  dutiei,  and  i
tribulen,  the  cenion  wen  entruated  with  the  actual
buiineu.  Thcie  offieera,  who  in  thia  reapect  n>ay
not  nnjoitly  be  compared  to  modem  miniiten  of
finance,  uied  to  let  the  TBiioni  hianchet  of  the  re-
venue to  tha  pnblicani  for  a  fiied  lum,  and  for  a
certain  number  of  year*.  [Cbnror  j  PfaLiciNi.]
Ai  moat  of  the  bianchei  of  the  public  revenuei
o(  Borne  are  treated  of  in  aeparate  articlei,  it  ia
only  neceuary  to  giye  a  liit  of  them  hen,  and  to
eTplain  thoao  which  have  not  been  treated  of  aepa-
lately.

1.  The  tithei  paid  to  the  ttate  by  IhoM  who  oc-
cupied the  ager  pablicui.  [OlcliHAB  ;  AeBlRUt

2.  The  iama  paid  by  thoae  who  xepl  their  ca^
tie  on  the  public  paatum. [ScRlFTURa.]

3.  The  harbour  dutiei  railed  upon  iiupivted  and
eiported  commoditiei. [PonTORiuu.]

i.  Tbe  rerenua deriTcd.  &otu the lall-worki.


VECTIGALTA.
been  rely  prodactiFe  until  the  Rmuans  had  be-
eome  maiten  of  fnreign  countliea.  UutH  that
time  tbe  minei  of  Italy  agipear  to  haie  bna
worked,  but  tluB  WM  forbidden  by  the  acnale  afiu
the  conqtieat  of  fimign  landi.  (PIiD./r.A'.  xniii.
4,  xxxriL  13.)  The  minei  of  conquored  eaoBWa
were  treated  like  the  laliiiH,  that  ia.  tWy  wm
partly  left  to  indiTidnala,  companiea,  or  tavru  en
conditicm  of  a  certain  rent  being  paid  (Plin.  H.,V'
iniT.  1  ;  Cic.  PUlip.  ii.  1 9),  or  they  wm  wAri
for  tha  direct  account  of  the  atale,  or  wne  Earmtd
by  tha  pnblicani.  In  the  lait  case,  howerer.  it
appeal!  alwayi  to  ham  been  fixed  by  the  lex  «»-
aotia  how  many  labovrera  or  darea  tbe  pnblkani
thould  be  allowed  to  emphiy  in  a  paiticqiar  mine,
aa  otherwiic  they  would  bare  been  able  to  derin
the  moat  enermou*  prafiti.  (Plin.  H.  ff.  xiiiiL  4.)
Among  the  moat  pnductiie  minea  bdnoping  to
the  republic  we  may  mention  the  rich  gold-minci
near  Aquileia  (Poljb.  nxir.  10),  tbe  gdd-minti
of  Ictimnli  near  Vendli,  in  which  25,000  laen
were  conitanltj  employed  (Plin.  H.  \.  xriiiL  4  ;
Strab.  T.  p.  151),  and  laitly  the  ailier'mion  b
Spain  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Carthago  Nora,
which  yielded  every  day  25,000  dracbmai  to  tbe
Reman  aenrium.  (Palyb.  xiiit.  9  ;  coanp.  Ijt.
xiiiT.  21.)  Macedonia,  Thiacr,  Dlyricum,  Africa
Sardinia,  and  other  plaeea  alao  cBDUuned  nrr
producIiTe  mine*,  fnm  which  Rome  dented  nc-
aiderable  income.

6.  The  hundredth  part  of  tbe  ralue  of  all  thinn
which  were  laid  (ceatennu  ntrvB  ttMilimm}.  Thia
tax  waa  not  inttitnted  at  Rome  nntil  the  lime  <f
the  civil  wari ;  the  peraona  who  collected  it  wen
called  eoaetorei.  (Cic.  Ep. ad  Bna.  I  la,pniRai.
PoiL  11.)  Tiberiui  reduced  thia  tax  to  a  two-
hundredth  (dtueatttima),  and  Caligula  aboliahed  it
for  luly  altogether,  whence  npcm  icvetal  coioi  gf
thii  empeior  we  read  B.  c  c,  that  ia,  Amuaa
Ductnlaima.  (Tacit.  Avuol.  i.  "8,  iL  42 ;  Soe*.
Odig.  16.)  According  to  Dion  Canini  (kiii-  H,
'ii.  9)  TiberiiB  reitored  the  centeiima,  which  waa
iftenvarda  aboliihed  by  Caligula.  (Camp.  Dig.  5<L
iL  IB.  L  17.  §  1.)  Respecting  the  lai  railed
ipon  the  ulc  of  ilaia  lee  QuiHttcjGBSiita.


[Vici


A.]


tSAL


*«■]


8.  The  tribute  impoaed  upon  foni)^  coanlriai
wat  by  far  the  moit  important  branch  of  ibe  pablic
revenue  during  (he  time  of  Rome'i  greatntaa. II

initalmeuti,  and  unietimea  changed  iolo  ■  poll-tax,
which  wai  in  many  caic*  t^mated  acovding  to
the  cenmi.  (Cic  a.  Vrrr.  il  £3,  £5,  ftc  ;  Pana.  til
16.)  In  re^vd  to  Cilicia  and  Syria  we  koow  that
thia  tax  ammnted  to  cue  per  cenL  of  a  p«tioa't
ceniut,  to  which  a  tax  upon  booaei  and  tlaie*  ww
added.  (Cic  of  Fanutii.  %adAILT.\6  ;  Appwi,
dt  RA.  Sgr.  5D.)  In  vme  tatm  tbe  tribute  wh
not  {aid  according  to  the  eoiana,  but  conufted  in
a  lajid.tax.  (Ap^uan,  d^  BtiL  OmL  t.  4  ;  ctm^
Walter,  OoA.  d/a  RSm.  AeaUl,  p.  234.  Ac)

9.  A  tax  upm  lachelon. [Au  Vxobidm.]

10.  A  doorlai. [OsTiaiiii.-H.]

11.  The  o^an*.  In  the  time  of  Canar  aD
liberti  living  in  Italy  and  poaaeiuug  pnrperty  e(
200  aeitertia,  and  above  it,  had  to  pay  a  tax  can-

of  the  eighth  [art  of  their  pnpcrtj. (Dino


VEHES

from  th«tc  uid  other  >our«t  j  but  anr  vant  ot  ib-
foniixiui  renden  it  impowble.  We  hsTs  only
the  gcnrral  >uieiD«nl  tKat  previomlj  to  ths  time
of  Pumpej  the  uinTuI  revenue  tniounted  lo  fiflj
intllioiu  of  drwhmu,  and  thit  it  wu  incnued  bj
him  to  eightj-iiTe  millioni.  (Plui  Poap.  *S.)
Rtwpectiag  the  nuu  coalained  it  different  tim«
in  the  kenrhun  at  Rome,  lee  Pliny,  H.N.  miiL

ir.


Malle,  Etomom*  PoHtiqm  dtt  Somaaa,  Peril,  3
ToU.  B™.)  [L.  S.]

VEHES  (txviui),  >  I«d  of  lu7,  rouuR,  or
anything  irfaicb  vm  nanally  conTejed  in  a  cart
[pLAUBTRUii.]  Plinyipeoktof  "alurgeleadof
hay "  (ivAsii  fiari  biryi  onuilam,  Plin.  H.  N.
xuTi.  IS.  I,  24),  which  ihowi  that  thii
not  alwayi  densta  a  fixed  quantity.
RoDDUu,  homrer,  a*  vilh  lu,  the  load  wat  like-
wiae  naed  ai  a  mtuHre,  a  load  of  manure  being
equal  to  eighty  modiL,  which  wai  aboat  twenty
buihek  (Col.  rfa  B»  ffnif.  iL  U,  1 6,  iL  2.)  The
tmnk  of  a  tree,  when  •quared,  wai  alw  reckoned
a  leu),  the  length  Tarying  according  to  the  kind  oF
timber,  tii.  20  feet  of  oak,  Sfi  of  fir,  &c  (Col.  I.a)
A  load  wu  alu  called  Cahpintuu. [J.  Y.]

VELA'RIUM. [Vklum.]

VELA'TI  WW  a  name  given  to  the  Aomi
the  Roman  amy,  who  were  only  Bupemameraj
aoldiera  ready  to  eupp^  any  vacanciei  in  the
legion.  [Accinbl]  They  were  called  Velali,
becauM  tbey  wen  only  clothed  (niaii)  with  '
Biga,  and  were  not  [egalarly  armed.  (Fntna,  i
Fglati,  AdKnptiea.)

VE'LITES. [EziiiciTDB,pp.£03,a,£06,h.]

VELUM  (slAolo,  TheophraiL  Otor.  S  ;  Alhen.
T.  p.  196,  c;  Pollui,  i».  122  i  rapiarttaafM,
Plato,  PoUl.  p.  394,  ed.  Bekker  ;  Synca.  Epitt.  4  ;
-*rmr^  MattxxriL  61),aciirtaiin  (IitIof),


VELUM.  ■  JIBS

neied  woodcut  ii  fnao  a  bai-retief  rcpreeenling
two  female4  engaffed  in  aupplicalion  and  aacrilica
beforetheitatneofagoddeu.  Thealtariaidomed
for  the  occuion  [Sirtum],  and  the  cunun  ii
drawn  aiide  and  lappotted  by  a  lerminiu.  (Onat-
tani.  Mom.  Imei.  per  1786,  Hor.T,  iiL)


nil.


fam^  ai  coTeringi  oTer  doon  (Sueton.  Gaud.  10),
or  tbey  aened  in  the  interior  of  the  bouee  ai  aub-
atinila  for  doon.  (Sen.  EpiMt.  81.)  [JaNDi.]
In  the  palace  of  the  Roman  emperor  a  ilave,  called
vdariut,  wat  ilalioned  at  each  of  the  principal
doon  to  laiie  the  curtain  when  any  one  paued
through.  (Inicript.  171.  Piffnor,  de  Sireit,  p.  470.)
Window-curtaiiii  wereuied  in  addition  to  window-
abaiten.  (Jnf .  tz,  60.)  Curtaini  someliinee  formed
partition)  in  the  roomt  (Plin.  £jiiii.  it.  19),  and,
when  drawn  seide,  they  were  kept  in  place  by  the
u»  of  large  brwchea  {fibula*).  Iron  curtaiD-rod*
haie  been  fennd  eitenking  from  ^lar  to  pillar  in
a  bailding  at  Hertulaneum.  (Oell,  i'onvetoita,
ToL  i.  p.  160,  Lon.  1S32.)

In  templea  coitaini  lerred  more  apeciallj  to
leil  the  italae  of  the  diiinily.  They  were  diawa
atide  occarionally  lo  ai  to  diKover  the  abject  of
wonbip  to  the  deiouL  (Apnleina,  MeL  li.  p.  127,
ed.  AldL)  [PaBTorHORLTS.]  Antiochui  pTHcnted
to  the  temple  of  Jupilei  at  Olympia  a  woollen  cur-
tain of  Aetyrtan  manubctute,  dyed  with  the  Tjrian
porple  and  inlfrwoien  with  Ggurei.  When  the
■latue  wai  diiplayed,  thii  cnrtaia  lay  upon  the
{{round,  and  it  wai  afterward)  drawn  up  by  mean)
of  coidi  ;  whereaa  in  the  temple  of  Diana  at
Rphenu  the  coireiponding  curtain  or  veil  waa  at-
tached to  the  criliug,  and  aai  let  down  in  order  to
conceal  the  itatoe. (Paiu.  t.  12.  g  2.) The  an-


hanginff  curtaina  to
.  .,  rg.  iii.  2i  ■  Prepert.
.y.  I.  IS.)  The  SiPiHirx  wu  eitended  in  a
wooden  frame.  The  mforfiiiR  wai  nn  awnins
eirttcbed  over  the  whole  of  the  a
the  ipecnton  from  the  gun  and  min
Sueton.  Chiig.  2S.)  Theie  awningi  were  in  general
either  woollen  or  linen  ;  cotton  wa)  uied  for  (hii
purpoee  a  little  before  the  timo  of  Juliu)  Cflctar.
(Plin,  ff.Af.  rii.  1,  i.  6  ;  Dion  Cu).  iliii.  24  ■
■ucretvL  108.)  Thi)  Tojt  eitent  of  canTBM  wo.
ipported  by  maati  (maii,  Lucrel.  £b.)  filed  into
le  outer  wall  The  anneied  woodcut  )how.  the
rm  and  potilion  of  the  great  ringfltfut  out  of
va,  which  remain  on  the  iniide  of  the  wall  of
the  Great  Theatre  at  Pompeii  near  the  top,  and
which  are  placed  at  regular  diatancei,  and  one  of
them  aboie  another,  10  that  each  niul  wai  fixed
---  -  -  ring). Each  ring  n  of  one  piaca  with


the  Coluedm  ;  but  the  maMi
initance  ranged  on  the  outtide  of
the  wall,  and  reited  on  240  coniolf^  ftoin  Fiiich


)IW  VENABULUM.

(hey  KKe  n  ai  to  pan  ihrooffh  holei  cut  in  tin
cornice.  The  bnlei  (or  the  man*  are  nl»  ie«i  m
the  Roman  theatm  at  Orange  and  other  plaeei.

Fdim,  and  much  more  commonly  iti  deiivalive
•Kbmtn,  denoted  the  veil  worn  bj-  women.  (Pru-
dent t  ^mm.  ii.  1*7.)  That  worn  by  i  bride
vai  apecifically  called  ^fonimflPK  [MiTAiRfONiUH,
p.  743,  ■] :  uiDtber  ipecial  tenn  wai  Rka.  Greek
iTomen,  when  thej  went  abroad,  often  covered
tbeir  headi  with  the  ihawl  [PifluM],  thui  mak-
ing it  aerve  the  purpoae  o(  a  veiL  But  they  iIh
OKd  a  proper  head-droi,  called  KnXirrpa  (Apol-
Iod.iL  6.  |6i  Aelian.r.ff.TiLS),  whiehbHids


iTeiltl


wheneri


ifl  graceful  and  omamenlal,  and  waa
wereton  aiiribuled  to  Veaoa  (Paui.  iii.  16.  %8  ;
Bnmek,  AmU.  iL  4S9}  and  Pandora  (Hei.  liiKs.
S7S).  The  veil  of  Itione,  the  eldctt  danghter  of
Priun,  waa  one  of  the  teren  ohjecta  preierved  at
Ronw  Bi  pledgai  of  the  pemunenij  c^  iti  power.
(Serf.  H  Viry.  Am.  Til  I8S.)

Vtlam  alao  meut  a  lail  {Ivrian,  Nattb,  p.
790,  a  ;  )ia?^,  Callim.  Epig.  t.  4  ;  Eiirip,  /fee
109}.  SaU-cbth  waa  commonly  linen,  and  waa
obtained  in  great  qoantitiei  from  £gypt ;  but  it
wai  alio  woven  at  other  plare*,  nuh  aa  Tarquinii
in  Etmria.  (Lit.  xxriiL  45.)  Bui  cntton  aul-
cloUi  (oarfoKi)  waa  alto  uaed,  aa  it  it  ilill  in  the
Mediteironaan.  The  lepante  piccea  (tinlea)  were
taken  a*  thej  came  bom  the  loom,  and  were  aewed
together.  Thii  ia  thovrn  in  ancient  painlinga  of
ahipa,  in  which  tba  awtni  ie  repieaented  at  dta-
tinct  and  regular.  [J.  Y.]

VENA-BULUM,  a  hunting-ipear.  Thia  may
have  been  diatinguithed  from  the  ipeara  nted  in
wariare  by  being  barbed ;  at  leatt  it  is  often  to
fbnned  in  ancient  vorki  of  an  cepnaenting  the
atory  of  Hetenger  (Baitoli,  Adair.  84)  and  other
hunting  teenea.  It  waa  aeldom,  if  ever,  thrown,
but  held  to  at  to  ibmt  downwarda  and  to  receive
the  attack!  of  the  wild  bout  and  other  beeila  of
ebnce.  (Virg.  ^aa.  iv.  131,  ix.  £53  ;  Van.  L.L.
Tiii.  S3,  ed.  MllUei;  ApoLAfM.  Tiii.  pp.'iS,83,
«d.Aldi;  Plm.^.  i.  6.)  £J.  Y.]

VENALICIA'RII. [SbuVuB,  p.  1040,  a.]

VRNATIO, hunting, waa the  name given


lofwildb.


beaata,  whii


which  fonght  with  one  another  and
Theie  eihibitiona  originally  (bnned  pan  of  the
ganiea  of  the  Circna.  Juiiua  Cacaar  nnt  buHt  a
wooden  amphitbealie  for  the  exhibition  of  wild
ii  called  by  Dion  Caatiol  (iliii.  2'2)
irtmSr,  and  the  tome  name  ie  given
iiult  by  StstUini  Taunii  (Id.
IL  -^S),  ana  aiao  lo  (he  celebrated  one  of  Tttui  (Id.
liTL  34)  I  bat  even  after  the  erection  of  the  latter
we  frequently  read  of  Venalionei  in  the  Circui.
(Spart.  Hadr.  19  ;  Vopiac.  Pnb.  IS.)  The  per-
aona  who  fought  with  the  bcatU  were  either  con-
demned ccinunsla  or  captivea,  or  indiTiduala  who
did  BO  for  the  take  of  pay  and  wen  trained  Soc  the
porpoae. [Bwriuui-j

The  Koiaant  were  aa  paiaiooately  fimd  of  thii
eotertainment  aa  of  the  eihibitiooa  of  gladiatoti,
and  during  the  latter  dayi  of  the  republic  and
under  the  empin  an  immento  variety  of  animali
waa  eoIleRed  from  all  parti  of  the  Roman  worid  fijr
the  giatificKlioB  of  the  people,  and  many  ihontandi
vera  {nqoently  liain  at  one  time.  We  do  not
know  on  what  occaaion  a  venatio  waa  Grat  eihibited
•t  Roma  I  but  the  tint  mention  wa  Gnd  of  any


TBNATIO.
tlung  et  the  kind  ia  in  the  jeai  B.  c  351,  whea
L.  Melellna eibibiled in the Cimia 142  <le.

Ehanta,  which  he  had  bnraght  from  Sicily  ijtet
ia  Tictoiy  ovei'  the  Canbaginiaot,  and  which  wse
killed  in  the  Circna  actsrding  la  Venioa,  thoo^
Dthsr  wtitaa  do  not  ueak  of  their  alaoghta.
(Plbi.  H.K.  viiL  6.)  But  thia  on  acandy  he
regarded  at  an  inttanoa  of  a  Ten
derttood  in  later  timea,  tince
taid  to  have  btai  only  killed  b
did  not  know  what  to  do  with  them,  and  not  l>
the  amnaanent  of  the  people. There  waa,  imm-

B.  c  18G,  in  the  gamea  cdetnled  by  M.  Pnliina
in  fulfilment  of  the  vOw  which  be  bad  Biade  ■  the
Aetolian  war  ;  in  thcae  ^mea  liona  and  panthna

at  a  proof  of  the  growing  iiwgnffieeite«  of  the  an
that  m  the  Ladi  Circenaea,  eihilnlad  by  tbe  orak
aedilet  P.  Comeliiia  Scipio  Natia  and  P.  Leobihii
B.  c  16a,  thae  were  63  African  purtba*  and  40
bean  and  clephanta.  (Liv.  iliv.  18.)  Fnamaboot
thia  time  comhati  with  wild  bcaata  pnihably  finned
a  regnlar  part  of  the  Lndi  Cilemaea,  aad  manr  tt
the  comle  aedilea  made  great  eflbfta  to  obtain  rve

vicea  of  their  friendi.  (Compare  Otdioa'a  letCei  la
Cieera,  ad  Fam.  viil  9.)  blrpbanta  are  Bid  to
hars  fini  fbnghl  in  the  Ciicnt  in  the  eunla  aadile'
abip  of  Clandiui  Pulchn,  a  c  99,  and  xw^xj
yean  afterwardi,  in  the  curate  aaUnbip  «f  the
two  Lncnlli,  they  fonght  againil  bolla.  (  nm.  H.S.
viii.  7.)  A  hnndred  liona  wen  eibibiled  I?  Sl^
in  hia  praetonhip,  which  were  deatroyed  by  janlnH
men  aenr  by  king  Boochng  ibr  the  porpoae.  Thii
waa  the  lint  time  that  liona  wen  allairad  to  ba
looee  in  the  Citeut ;  they  were  pteiioualy  alwaji
tiedap.  (Sense  di  flrvn  F^.  1 3.)  The  gavs
however,  in  the  cnmle  aedilethip  <tf  SiaauM  a  C
£8  tnrpeaied  anythmg  Che  Romana  had  enr  taoi ;
among  other  noveltiet  he  fiiat  ezhibit«d  an  hippo>
potamra  and  five  oocodilea  in  a  tempararr  anal
or  trench  (atn>w,  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  40).  At  the
Tsnatio  given  by  Pomper  in  hia  aeeond  w— iih^
B.  c  6S,  npoo  the  dedicatioa  of  iha  tcn]4e  M
Venui  Victiii,  and  at  wliich  Cieao  w«a  preant
(Cie.  ad  FiM.  TiL  1),  ther*  wai  aa  imawnaa  dcb.
her  of  animait  alanghtered,  anraig  which  we  flad
mention  of  600  liona,  and  18  or  JMdcphanto:  tba
latter  loaght  with  Gaetoliana,  who  hntlad  dart*
againit  them,  and  they  attampted  to  break  tbimph
therailingi  (dodn)  hy  which  Ibey  were  aepanttd
from  the  ipactatoia.  (Sene&Z.«.;  Flint  viiL  7.:2<lt)
To  guard  againat  thit  danger  Jolini  Caaai  aar-
roanded  the  anna  of  the  amphilbeatn  wiib
trenchea  (evr^').

In  the  game*  eihibited  by  J.  Caeaar  in  bit  third
conaulahip,  B,  c  45,  the  Toialio  laated  for  five
dayi  and  waa  conducted  with  eitnoidinary  t|Ji  n
dour.  Camelopaida  or  giraSea  wne  then  tat  tbo
fint  time  teen  in  Italy.  (Dicu  Caa.  lUii.  S3  ,-
Suet  J<iL  39  ;  PUn.  H.  N.  viii.  7  ;  AKwa,  B.  C.
iL  lOS  ;  VelL  PaL  iL  S6.)  Jnliai  Cbcwrabo  in-
trodnced  bull-Gghta,  in  which  Thrawlitn  Uoomk

Sirauad  the  built  mmd  the  arena,  and  when  tW
Iter  were  tired  on^  teiied  them  by  the  boma  and
killed  them.  Thia  aeemt  to  haTC  bato  a  hvowite
ipcdade  ;  it  waa  reprated  by  daodioa  and  Nmu.
(Plin.^.Ar.TiiL70iSi>et.awA31;  DiwCaaa.
liL  9.)  In  th«  ganea  cddnted  by  Ai^aaUM,
K  c  39,  the  h^pp^oMma  »eA  d«  li^H9tt»  ««•


TENATia
flnt  eiUbitedi  aucinliiig  to  Dion  Cuuui  (IL  33),
bot  tlifl  hippopotanm  ii  Bpffkim  of  bj  Plin^t  "
mcntiaied  oboTS,  in  the  gim«t  myta  by  Scaunu.
Augiutai  aljo  eihibilsd  s  nutkc  GO  cnbit*  in
Inngtli  (Soot.  Aug.  43),  ind  thirtj-ui  cncodilei,
obtch  ue  Mldom  mmtioned  in  ibt  ipectulei  of
bin  tiDMi. (Dion  Cul  It.  10.)

bibitad  ban  bran  mddentally  neationed  iboTt.
They  Mvi  to  h>n  baan  fint  confined  to  the  Ludi
firrmirn.  but  during  the  ItUt  Umei  of  the  n-
pnblie,  and  ander  the  (m|Hie,  they  wan  feeqoantly
eihibited  on  tlu  celebntim  of  tciomplu,  nnd  on
many  other  oecauou,  with  the  Tiev  of  pleaiing
the  people. The  paeuoo  f<a  Iheea  ibowa

btauU  1


unjnpe.


ind  the


mberof


m  of  tliB  gnat  amphitheatre


dibla.  Attbai
of  Titu,  fiOH

wm  kiUed  (Saat.  Tit.  7  i  Dion  Cu*.  lii.  2A),
and  in  the  game!  celebrated  by  Tiajan,  aftn  hu
Tictoriel  orer  the  Daeiana,  then  an  uid  to  hare
Ijeoi  H  many  ■■  1 1,000  animali  ilaughlered.
(Dion  Cbb.  liriiL  1£.)  Under  the  emperon  we
R«d  of  a  particolar  kind  of  Venalio,  in  which  the
111  Mil  I  van  not  killed  tiy  beetiuii,  bat  were  giien
np  to  the  pe<^e,  who  were  allowed  to  nub  into
the  ana  of  the  cinna  and  oury  away  what  they
pleaaed.  On  inch  occuiou  a  nomber  of  Luge
tnca,  which  had  been  torn  np  by  the  note,  waa
tdanted  in  the  dreu,  which  thai  leHmbled  a
fbnat,  and  none  of  the  more  m,ng»  animali  were
■dnitted  into  it  A  Venotio  of  thli  kind  wu
exhibited  by  the  elder  Goidian  in  hia  udileahip,
and  a  pamting  of  the  fonat  with  the  animali  in  it
ii  deecribed  by  Juliu  Cnitolinn*.  (Qordiait,  3.)
One  of  the  moit  eitraordiaary  tenalionei  of  Ihi*
kind  wu  that  giren  by  Pnbni,  m  which  then
WHS  1000  oetiichc*,  1000  ilag*,  1000  boon,
1000  deer,  and  niunben  of  wild  goati,  wild  ifaeep,
and  oiha  animali  of  the  nme  kind.  (VopiK.
J'nt.  19.)  The  more  vnge  animali  were  lUiD
Iij  tin  beidarii  in  the  amphitheatre,  and  not  in
the  cimii.  Thai,  in  the  d^  moeeeding  the  le-
natio  of  Pnboi  jiat  mentJODed,  then  wete  ilun
in  the  aoipliitbeatn  100  lioni,  and  the  ame
nnmba  of  UmiMii.  100  Ut^an  and  100  Syrian
leoputb,  and  900  bean.  (Vopiie.  i.  e.)  It'
III  iiwiij  to  moltiply  examplei, ai  the  abe'


TENATIO.

0  giie  an  idea  of  the  i


1167


popolai


variety  of  animali  at  time  qwctadei ;  bat  the
lilt  of  bcuti  which  wen  colleMed  by  the  younger
Qordian  for  hii  triuinph,  and  were  exhibited  by
bii  laReiK)!  Philip  at  the  Secnlar  Oamei,  de-
■ene  mention  on  iccoont  of  their  Tuiety  and  the
rarity  of  lenie  of  them.  Among  then  we  God
mention  of  S2  elepbanla,  10  elki,  10  tigen  (which
Hem  to  have  been  very  leldom  eihibited),  60
tame  lioni,  30  tame  leopudi,  1 0  byaenai,  an  hip-

*imoa  and  ihinoeeroe,  10  archoleonta  (it  ii

iwn  what  they  ware),  10  camelopardi,  20
aumgii  (wild  Hiea,  at  perhapi  ubras),  40  wild
honei,  and  m  imntenie  number  of  limilar  »"!■"»*■
(Vopiu  Oordiat,  33.)

How  long  theie  ^ectnclei  continued  it  oncer-
tain,  but  they  were  exhibited  aflsi  the  abolition
of  the  ihowi  of  gladialian.  There  ii  a  law  of
HanDriu  and  Theodouni,  praiidiog  ior  the  lafe
convoy  of  besiti  mtended  for  the  ipectadei,  and
inflicting  a  penalty  of  Gre  ponndi  of  gold  npon  any
one  who  injured  them.  (Cod.  11.  tit.  44.)  They
wen  axhibiled  at  thii  period  at  the  praetorian,
gamei,  ai  we  learn  from  Symmachni.  (EpitL  ii.
70,  71,  136,  &c)  Wild  beaiti  continued  to  be
exhibited  in  the  gamei  at  Conitantioople  u  Lite
ai  thetimeaf  JnMiniui.  (Procop.ifu^,  Arc  c.  9.)

Combati  of  wild  beaiti  are  nmetimes  repre-
■ented  on  the  coin!  of  Roman  familia,  ai  on  the
annexed  coin  of  M.  Lirioeiui  Hefcolus,  which  prO'
bably  rekn  to  the  (enatio  of  Joliui  Caevr  men-
tioned abora.


woodcnti  fiom  Maioii  (Piaip.  I  pL  3S,  33).  On
the  nnie  tomb  gUdiUotial  oombati  an  npn-
aented,  which  ne  BgmA  «n  p.  £76  of  the  pi


1  a  panther. Penoni  ir


Mcond  ent  we  aee  a  limilar  penon  againtt  wbom  a  I  the  nme  nlief  there  ii  a  wolf  running  at  full  ipeed,
wild  boar  ii  nuhing,  and  who  appean  to  be  pre-  and  alio  a  itag  with  a  rope  tied  to  hit  homi  who
paring  for  a  ipring  to  eaope  ftom  the  animal. In  |  ha*  been  polled  down  by  two  woErea  or  dcgi. T^e


VENEFICICM.


veneficiCtm.


tlitrd  relief  ii  inppoed  by
tnuning  of  ■  be»tiariiu.  The  Istler  hu  i.  iptti  in
escb  hkni  ;  hi>  lefl  [eg  ii  pntocted  bv  gnuTet,
■nd  he  ii  in  the  act  al  aUacVieg  a  pmther,  whoae
moTementa  are  homprred  by  a  rope,  ^ich  futens
faim  to  the  bull  behind  him,  end  vhich  ucordinglf
placet  tbs  batiariui  in  a  leu  dugerou  pontion,
though  more  cMtion  and  acUTityue  reqnittd  than
if  the  beut  wen  Gied  to  a  lingle  point.  Behind
the  hnll  another  man  lUftdi  «ilh  a  iprar,  vho
■eema  to  be  nipng  on  tlie  animal.  The  fbnrth
woodcut  repmeati  a  man  equipped  in  the  nine
may  ai  the  maladoi  in  the  Spaniih  bull-fighti  in
the  proMDt  day,  namely,  with  a  awotd  in  one  hand
and  a  Toil  in  the  olber. The  Yeil  waa  fint  em-


ployed ID  the  arena  in  the  time  of.  the  emperor
Claudiut (Plin.  H.  W.  viii.  21.)

VENEFI'CIUM. Che  crime  of  poiKming, i«
frnjoently  mentioned  in  Romin  hiiiory. Womea

probable  riiat  thia  charge  waa  frequently  hrongbl
Bgainit  female*  without  nifficlent  eridenca  of  their
gailt,  l^e  that  of  witchcraft  in  Europe,  in  the
middle  ages.  We  End  (tmalea  condemned  to
death  for  thia  crime  in  Kaaoni  of  peatilence,  when
the  popular  mind  ia  alwayi  in  an  eidted  atate
and  leadf  to  attribute  thg  calamitita  under  which
they  iufler  to  the  ait*  of  eril^diiHaed  pertim*.
Thoi  the  Athenian*,  when  the  pcatileneo  raged  in
their  city  during  the  Peloponneiian  war,  aappowd
the  well*  to  hare  been  poiwined  by  the  PelopoD-
neeian*  (Thucyd.  ii.  48),  and  limilBr  iuatancei
occur  in  the  hialoiy  of  almnt  all  etatet  .  Still
howoTer  the  crime of  poiioning  *eem» to hare

modem  timca  ;  and  thi*  circumstance  would  lead


a. Raapecttng  the  enm
Phakhjicon  OaAFRI


K*l  ground  for  the  nupici

of  poiioning  at  Athena,  ic

The  fint  iotance  of  ii


Claudiua  M»rcJlni  and  C.  Valcriua,  i
when  the  city  waa  Tiiited  by  a  peatilenca.  After
many  of  theleadingmenoftheitate  had  died  by
the  Hune  kind  of  diieaie,  a  alaTe-girl  gare  infotma-
tion  to  the  cnrule  aedjlsa  that  it  waa  owing  to
poiaona  prepared  by  the  Honum  matrona  Follow-
rag  her  in&nnation  tbev  lurpriaed  aboat  twenty
matroni,  among  whom  were  Cornelia  and  Setgia,
both  belonging  lo  Patrician  familiee,  in  the  act  of
preparing  certiun  dnigi  orer  a  fire  ;  and  being
oompeUod  by  the  magiiliate*  to  drink  thcee  in  the
foram,  aince  they  amerted  Ihsl  they  were  not
poiionoua,  they  peii»hcd  by  their  o»ni  wicfcedneea.
Upon  thi*  furthei  inlbmulioDi  were  laid,  and  aa


many  ai  a  hnndied  and  terenty  matiaia  were  e*a-
demned.  (Li<r.  TiiL  1 8  ;  compare  VaL  Uai.  iL  B.
gSi  ADguitZ>*ar.£in,i!i.l7.)  WenextRadef
paiaoning  being  carried  ea  upon  an  eitcmiTe  Kile
aa  one  of  the  eonieqneneca  of  the  intiodBCtioB  of  the
wonbipofBacihna.  (Ut,  iiEii.8.)  tI>toltTaiJi,p.
41S.]  InB.iLlH4,thepnetoi,Q.NaeTniMaib^
wa*  commanded  by  iIm  H


in  the  inieitintioii,  which  wat  prinei|mBy  a
on  in  the  mnnici^  and  coodliabula,  and,  aceeedin;
to  Valerina  of  Antinm,  he  condemned  SOM
penona.  (Lit.  Tirii.  3S.  41.)  Wa  again  fiad
mention  of  a  pnUic  inTeati^rtion  into  cuca  of
poinning  by  order  of  the  senate,  in  b.  c  160,
when  a  peatilence  laged  at  Rome,  axbd  many
of  the  magittiatei  and  other  ponu  of  higb  laok
had  perished.  The  m*eitigation  waa  aatdnctrd
in  the  city  and  within  ten  inilea  of  it  by  the
praetor  C.  Ctandius,  and  beymd  the  toi  mSa
by  the  piaetor  C  Maenius.  HoMilia,  tke  widow
of  the  consul  C.  Calpimint,  who  bad  died  m  Om
year,  was  accnied  of  having  paisaned  htr  hnahand,
and  condemned  on  what  ajqieat*  to  ha<«  beea  mete
aotpicion.  (Lii.  iL  37.)  Caaea  of  what  ^v  be
called  private  paiaoning,  in  oppoaitiDo  to  {batii
mentioned  above,  frequently  occurred.  Tb*  speed)
of  Cicero  in  behalf  of  auentiua  aopplie*  at  <mh
several  particnlart  on  this  aabject.  Under  tbg
Roman  emperm  it  was  carried  on  to  a  great  ex-
tent, and  soma  females,  who  eicelled  m  (he  art,
were  in  great  request  One  of  the  most  cdebtaSMl
of  these  was  Loensta,  who  poitooed  ClaudiBs  at
the  command  of  Agrippina,  and  Britaanicot  at  that
of  Nere,  the  latter  of  whom  even  placed  persaaa


The  firtt  le^slatiTe  enactment  eapendly  dinned
against  poiictnng  was  a  law  of  the  dictator  Salla  —
Lei  Cornelia  de  Sicariit  et  Venefieis  —  imased  ai
B.  c  S2,  which  continued  in  ftiroe,  with  tone
alteration*,  lo  the  latest  timet.  It  contakied  p»-
viuons  against  all  who  made,  booght,  told,  poa-
lesied,  or  gave  poison  for  the  purpnae  of  paitDiiing.


Inst.


property  ;  but  it
was  mora  probably  the  inlerdictio  aqvae  el  ignii.
since  the  deportatiD  under  the  empmrs  took  ik;
^acB  of  the  inlerdictio,  and  the  eipnanon  in  the
Digest  was  luited  to  the  time  of  the  wriien  «
compiler*,  [Lax  CoaNU.iji,  p.  687.]  By  a  sr-
nattiiconinllum  passed  lubseqnentty,  a  femala,  who
gave  drug*  or  poison  for  the  porpoae  of  prodoci^
cancrption  eien  without  any  evU  intent,  was  bn-
ished  {rrJigahH),  if  the  person  lo  whooi  tHe  irf-
miniitered  them  died  in  csnaeqnence.  By  aiuiber
senatusccnsultum  all  druggists  [I'ji'i  tfiii  if],  who
administered  poisons  carelessly  "  pargatianis  msa,'*
were  liable  lo  the  penalties  of  this  lair.  Id  tha
time  of  Marcian  (that  of  Aleiu^trSencta}  thM


VESTALEa
ci{tM  WH  pnniibed  afiully  in  Ih*  caw  of  pumu
of  lower  rank  (tmiiiom),  who  wen  enowd  to
wild  beud,  but  pemm  of  hightr  nu)k  (altion$)
wen  cxmdenmcd  to  tha  deportuia  in  JTunUm,
(.Dig.l.c)

Ths  word  Vawfiuum  wu  tlio  applied  to  potioni,
incuitatioiu,  &c  (Cic  AK.  60  ;  FetroD.  118)  ;
whcDcs  we  find  Veaefieiu  *nd  Ftaiflea  lued  in  die

VEK  SACRUM  (IrDtMr).  Itwuacutloin
among  tha  eari;  Italivi  Dation*,  aipcciallf  among
the  Sabinei,  in  limea  of  great  danger  and  dirtieu,
(OTon  to  the  deity  the  lacrificeof  eierj  thing  Irani
in  the  next  iftiag,  that  i*  between  tha  fint  of
March  and  the  laiit  day  of  April,  if  tha  alamilj
under  which  they  were  laboutins  ahoiild  be  la-
QWied.  (Fiat.  ».  V.  Var  runm;  liy.  xiij.  9, 10,
zxiiT.  44  ;  Stiab.  T.  p.  173  ;  Siiemiafv.  \im.  xii.
IB  I  Serx.adAai.'ni.lSe.)  Thii  lacrifice  in  the
rarly  timea  eompiehended  botb  men  and  domtatic
animala,  and  tbeie  ii  little  doubt  that  in  many
cam  the  tow  waa  really  canied  into  eSect.  But
in  later  timea  it  wai  Ihongbt  cruel  to  ncrifiee  to
many  innocent  ia&nta,  and  accordb^ly  the  fbllow-
ins  eipedient  wai  adopted.  The  children  were
allowed  U  grow  up,  and  in  tha  ipring  tS  their
twentieth  or  tventy-fint  year  Ihey  were  with
corered  Cue*  driven  acroM  the  finntiei  of  their
natiTe  eounlry,  whereupon  they  went  whitherao-
STer  fortune  at  the  deity  might  lead  them.  Many
a  colony  had  been  foimded  by  penoni  driven  ont

were  ths  deacendanta  of  nich  devoted  nnoni.
(Feat.  L  e.  and  i.  s.  Mamertim  !  eompan  Dionya.
L  16  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  18  ;  Juitin.  xiiv.  4  ;  Ut.


i.44.}

Id  tha  tw.

Romani  Towad

hattia  of  lake  Ti

aecond  Pnnio  a


hiatorical  Inatancea  in  which  the
a  Ter  Bcitmi,  that  ii,  after  the
imenua  and  at  tha  eloaa  of  (he


u  wai  aipreuly  itated  in  tha  tow.
(LiT.  1.  e.  1  PluL  Fab.  Man.  1.)  [U  S-l

VERBK'NA. [Sabvina.]
VERBEKA'RIUS. [FaruLia.]
VERNA. [Saavuisn^  1038,1040.]
VERSO  IN  REM  ACTIO.  [Smvua,  p.  1038.]
VERSU'RA. [FaNus,  p.  537,  a.]
VERU,  VERU'TUM. JHasta.  p.  S88,  b.]
VESPAE, VESPILLO'NES. [FuNoa,  p.
US,  a.]

VESTAl-ES,  tha  rirgin  prietlaiaei  of  VeMa
who  miniitered  in  her  temple  and  Tiatched  tbe
eternal  fin.  Their  eiiitence  at  Alba  Longa  ii
connected  with  Ifaa  earliett  Roman  tiadilioni,  for
SilTiB  the  mother  of  Romuhu  wat  a  member  of  tbe
Buterhood  (Lii.  L  20  ;  Dionyi.  L  76) ;  thetr  cita-
bliibment  in  the  dty,  in  common  with  alnuxt  all
other  nuittert  eonneeled  with  itata  religion,  ii  ge-
nenily  aacnbed  to  Numa  (Dionja.  iL  65  ;  Pint.
iVaai.  10),  who  aelected  four  (their  namea  are
giieu  in  Plutarch),  two  from  the  Titienaea  and
two  bvBi  the  RanuiH  (Dinnja.  ii,  67  -,  Featna,  i.  n.
iSbt  Valat),  and  two  more  wets  aabaequenlly
added  jrom  the  Lucerea,  bf  Tarqiiiniut  Friacu*  ac-
cording to  one  authority  (Plat.  A'an.  I  e.\  by
Serriut  Tnlliua  ucotdingU  another.  (Dlonyt.  iii.
67.)  Thii  nnmber  of  tix  renuioed  unchanged  at
the  time  when  Plutarch  wrote,  and  the  idea  that
it  waa  afterwarda  increaied  to  aeTon  reata
Tery  unaatiifaGtory  eTidence.  (See  Mtntat
{'Aeadtmi*  da  ImteripL.  ToL  it.  p.  1 67 ;  Ambna.


VraXALES.  II  SB

E^M.l.i\,«.^fntmaA.iiA  tha  remaAa of  LIp>

They  wen  originally  choatD  (n^ari  ia  the  teeh-
nicBl  word)  by  the  king  (Liy.  \.  3.  20  ;  Dionyi,
U.  ec)  and  during  tha  repnblio  and  empire  by  Uie
Poatifei  Maximna.  It  waa  necaoary  that  thn
maiden  ihoiild  not  be  nuder  aii  nor  aboie  ten
yean  of  age,  perfect  in  all  her  limba,  in  tha  fiill
enjoyment  of  all  her  wnaea,  patrima  et  nutrima
[  Patrimi],  the  danghta  of  bee  and  freebom  pa-
rent) who  had  neier  been  in  alxeiy,  who  followed
no  dtthonouiable  occupation,  and  whoae  home  waa
in  Italy.  (Gell.  i.  12.)  The  lex  Papia  ordained
that  when  a  Tacancy  occnrred  the  Pontifei  Maxk
mua  ihould  name  at  hia  diacretion  twenty  qualified
damieli,  one  of  whom  waa  publidy  (a  amdau'f
fixed  upon  by  lot,  an  exemption  being  gnnled  in.
%Toui  of  anch  a>  had  a  aiiter  already  a  Teatal  and.
>f  the  daughter!  of  certain  prieita  of  a  high  ctau.
(Qell.  I  e.)  The  above  law  appean  to  hare  been
enacted  in  coaaequence  of  the  nnwillingneu  of
&lhen  to  reaign  all  tontivl  OTer  a  child,  and  thin
tlnctanee  waa  manifetted  ao  itrongly  in  later  times
nat  in  the  aga  of  Angtutui  liiaiaut*  were  declared
•■^'-•- '" c^  It.  M; SaM.  Oiior.  31.)


»  of  lot.


been  pnctued  if  any  reapeetable  perton  came  fiir-
ward  Tolnntarily  and  offered  a  daughter  who  fiil-
Glied  the  neeewary  conditiooa.  Aa  aoon  aa  tha
electJcai  waa  concluded  the  Pontifei  Haiimna  look
tha  girl  by  the  hand  and  addnaaed  her  in  a  aolemn
Ibrm  preaerred  by  AtJn*  Qelliui  from  Fahina  Pictor.
SAcaRnoTiM.VaiTALaii.QDAi.  Sacra.  Facut.

Qt;AE. Iocs. SlKT. SaCBBDOTIM. VBBTAtlH.

FAcaaa.  Pno.  Populo.  Rohano.  (JutainDii.
Utki,  Quac  Optim*,  Liqi.  FoTiT.  It*.  Tt
Amata.  Cafid.  where  the  title  Ahata  aetma
limply  to  aignify  "  beloTed  one,""  and  not  to  refer
aa  Oelliui  nip|nea  to  the  name  of  one  of  tbe  ori-
giaal  Vettala,  at  leaat  no  anch  name  ii  to  be  found
in  the  lilt  of  Plutanb  alluded  to  abore.  After
theee  worda  were  jxoiumnced  ahe  waa  led  away  to
tbe  atrium  of  Veao,  and  lived  theocefbrwaid  with-
in the  aacred  precincta  under  the  apecial  iupeiin<
tendenea  and  control  of  the  pontifical  college.
(Dionyi.  iL  67  ;  Lii.  it.  44,  viii.  IS  ;  Plin.  Bp.
IT.  II  1  SoeL  OctoB.  31  I  Cell.  L  13.)

Tbe  period  of  aerrice  laated  for  Ihir^  yeaia.
During  the  £iBt  ten  tbe  prieateaa  waa  engajjed  in
learning  her  myaterioua  dutiei,  being  termed  diid-
M>  (Val.  Max.  J.  1.  §  7),  during  &e  next  ten  in
pertbiming  them,  during  the  lait  ten  in  giving  in-
atmctioni  to  the  novicea  (Dinnyt.  L  c. ;  Pint.  Let
Senec  di  oil.  Uat.  39),  and  lo  long  aa  aha  waa
thui  employed  ah*  wat  bound  by  a  aolemn  vow  of
chatlity.  But  after  the  time  ipeeilied  wai  com-
pleted ahe  might,  if  ahe  thonght  fit,  throw  off  the
-  ■ -  e  (Dionyi  I.  e.),  n>


OelL vL 7),  retoni  t


hetKif  (

world  and  e  ^

(Pint  L  e.)  Few  however  availed  themielvet  of
theae  privileget ;  tbeaa  who  did  were  taid  to  have
lived  intomw  and  nnorae  (aa  might  indeed  hava
been  eipacted  from  tha  hsbitt  tb^  had  fiained)  :
hmc«  iueh  a  [cooeediiw  wat  ooniidered  ominou,
and  the  prietteetel  fra  tbe  nwtt  part  died  ai  they
had  lived  in  the  aervioe  of  tha  goddeM.  (Tacit.
Ann.  iL  G6  ;  Inacrip,  quoted  by  Qionov.  ail  Tiiiil,
■ i  64.)


1190

S3,  Doml.  S ; Orell.  Inicryil.  n.  3333,  &c  ;  f)

■wpinltiovva,  Dion  Con.  Ht.  S4  ;  4  l|9X"|><iB,
liiii.  9),  uid  ve  find  ■In  the  expretnoni  FmIo-
£i'iin  vOKitunmaai  (T»dt  .<•«.  xL  32)  and  tm
naxaa*. (Sen.  od  Virg.  Ed.  mi.  82.)

Thftir  ch]«f  offica  wu  ta  wmtch  fay  turn*,  nigfat
and  daj,  th«  eTerl&iting  fin  whicfa  blued  upon
theBltu  of  Vati  (VraeiNESQUB  Vistalu  in


TUNHH,  Cic  ^  L^.  JL  6.  12  ;  Lit,  htjiL  11  ;
V>LHu.LI,§6:  SenacdsPniB,  6),itieitiiie-
lion  being  coBudemd  at  the  most  fearful  of  all  pn>-
digiea,  and  osblanatiii  of  the  eztiitctioti  of  the
■tata.  (DioDji.  iL  67  i  Li<.  xxri.  1.)  If  ncli
BUifoctmw  b^ell  aod  waa  cauaed  bjr  the  carelag-
nan  of  the  ^uten  on  duty,  abe  wu  dripped  and
BCDDTgod  by  the  Pontifbr  MarimaA,  in  the  AbA
and  with  ■  acieen  interpoted,  and  he  lekindled  the
flame  by  the  friction  of  two  pieeai  Df  vood  from  a
^im  arior.  (DiiHiyL,  Pint,  VaL  Mai.  U.  cc  ;  Fei-
toi,  1.  V.  Iffiiit.)  Their  other  ordmiry  datiei  eon-
aiated  in  preienting  oB^ringi  to  the  goddeii  at
(tatsd  liaiBt,  and  in  tjoinkllng  and  ponfying  the
ahrine  each  morning  with  water,  which  accoi^ing
n  ^  Nama  wai  to  be  diawn  fnm


r  from  a  living


liAnd  lawful  to  amploj  any
■pciu  or  nmaing;  atnam,  but  nt
panM  through  pipci.  Wbcn  oied  loi  tacrificial
poipoM*  it  waa  mixed  with  marin,  tliat  ii,  ait
which  had  been  potmded  in  a  mortar,  thtown  into
an  eanhen  jar  and  baked  in  an  oien.  (Orid.  Fiai.
ill  11  !  Propert.  if.  4.  IS  ;  Pint  Niaa.  IB  ;  Fett
1.  B.  ilfaniu.) They  aHJited  nioreaTer  at  all  gnat

Rblie  holy  ritea,  iiKh  aa  the  fealivila  of  the  Bona
a  (Dion  Caia.  mrii  15)  and  the  amaeciatian
of  templea  (TadL  Hiil.  ir.  53),  they  were  inTited
to  prieatly  banqneta  (Macroh.  ii.  9  ;  Dion  Caaa.
xliiL  19),  and  we  are  told  that  they  were  preiant
at  the  aolemn  appeal  to  tlM  godj  made  by  Cican
dnring  the  oonniraey  of  Catiline.  (Diim  Caia.
XKmi.  SS.)  The;  dio  gnaided  the  aacred  rellci
which  lirnied  ibe  fiiab  pigmu  ia^mii,  the  pledge
granted  iiy  hie  for  the  pemuneney  of  tlie  Homan
away,  depoailed  in  the  inmoal  adytnm  (ponu  Vet-
lot,  aee  Fetlna,  a.  v.)  which  no  one  waa  pennilled
to  enter  aara  the  riigina  and  the  chief  pontifei.
What  thia  object  waa  no  cue  knew,  aome  auppoied
tliat  it  waa  the  Palladium,  othen  the  Samothracian
sodi  auried  by  Dardanua  to  Tray  and  traiapocted
from  tlience  (o  Italy  by  Aeneaa,  but  all  agreed  in
beliering  tbal  aomtthing  of  awlnl  tanetity  waa
here  preaerred,  caotained,  it  wu  aud,  ia  a  amall
eanhen  jar  doaely  acaled,  while  another  eiaetly
aimilai  in  form,  but  empty,  atood  by  ita  aide.
{Dimya.  L  69,  il  SG  ;  Plot.  CamOl.  30  ;  Lit,
xitL  37  ;  Uniprid.  Elagai,  6  ;  Oiid.  Fad.  tL
BS£  ;  Lucan,  ii.  S9i.)

We  bave  aeen  abore  that  mprema  importance
waa  attached  to  tbe  parity  of  the  Vettala,  and  a
terrible  pnniahment  awaited  her  who  TMdated  the
TOW  of  cnuttty.  According  to  the  law  of  Numa
ahe  waa  aimply  to  be  atmed  to  death  (Cedrenua,
Hilt  Coop.  p.  148,  or  p.  259,  ed.  Bekker),  but  a
more  cruet  torture  waa  deriaed  by  Tarquiniut
Friacna  (Dionya.  iiL  67  ;  Zonaiaa,  Tii,  8)  and  in-
flicted fiom  that  time  forward.  When  cimdainned
by  tbe  college  of  ponliiicea,  ahe  waa  atripped  of  ter
Tittae  and  other  badgea  of  office,  waa  accorded
(Dionn.  ix.  40),  waa  attired  like  ■  coipae,  placed
inaeuaa  Uttor  and  boma  throi^  theliHvia  M-


ViSTALEi
tended  by  her  weqiing  kindred,  with  all  llw  eete-
monie*  i^  a  real  funeral,  to  a  riaiag  gTocmd  <alM
the  Cbhjuu  Sttltralia,  jnat  within  tha  city  waUa,
doae  to  the  CoUine  gale.  There  a  bbbU  mil
undergToond  had  been  |H<eTioDa]y  pvfAred,  cea-
taining  a  couch,  a  lamp,  and  a  (able  with  a  tittle
food.  The  Ponlifex  Maximna,  having  lifted  up  hia
handi  to  heaTen  and  nttend  aaeaetpnya-japaied
the  litta,  led  forth  the  cnlprit,  and  plaong  ber  a
the  atepa  of  the  ladder  whtdi  gave  an  iM  to  the
aubtenaaeau  cell,  dalircnd  htr  marts  the  eeaiiBiai
exeenliaier  and  hia  aaaittBDta,  who  conducted  ha
down,  dicw  up  the  ladder,  aikd  haTing  fiSed  the
pit  with  earth  imtQ  the  tBrbce  waa  te^  widi  the
aDrronnding  grotmd,  left  her  to  pniah  denirad  ef
"  the  tritmlet  of  reapect  nmalty  paid  la  the  qarila


a.  S  ;  Dion  CaaL  IxTiL  3,  IiitiL


But  if  the  laboDta  of  the  Vcftek  ware  we-

mitting  and  the  rules  of  tha  order  rigidly  and
picileaaty  enfioced,  ao  the  boiuran  they  eajayed
were  anch  aa  in  a  great  measuc  to  eanpokaate  fcr
their  priration.  They  weie  majnlamed  at  the
pnblie  coat  and  fnm  kdu  of  money  and  land  be-


(Suet.  Odm.  31,  TO.  76; SicnL  FWc'sS,  ed.

they  beanie  aa  it  wen  the  laupeH)  oT  the  goddnt
alone,  and  were  completely  releaaed  6w  all
[■rental  away  wilhont  going  through  tbe  form  tf
tmaaeipatio  or  loflieting  any  eapifu  drmlmmlla.  (GeU.
III.)  They  had  a  right  to  make  a  will,  aad  la
gire  etidenee  in  a  eoort  of  jaitioe  witbcat  lakiag
an  arth  (OdL  i.  IS),  diatineliaait  flnt  cnMcded  bf
an  Hnatiaa  law  to  a  cartain  Caia  Tamtia  w
Faleda,andafterwud«commmiialedla«IL  (OdL
L  13  ;  Oaina,  i  146  ;  compare  Plin.  H.N.  xxxti.
11.)  Froni  the  time  of  the  tiramTiri  eadi  wa*
preceded  by  a  lictor  when  aba  went  abnad  (Dioa
Caaa.  iliii.  19),  conida  and  pnteton  made  wny  far
ihem,  and  lowend  their  baaaa  (Sraite.  Oia^^ama.
iL8  ;  compare  Phit.  712.  OraaA.  iS),  eroi  tha
tribnnea  of  the  plebt  rapedad  their  holy  characur
(Oroa.  T.  4  ;  Suet  Tib.  S  ;  compare  Cic  ^r«  QkL
14  1  VaL  Max.  t.  4.  g  6),  and  if  any  oaie  paaaed
under  their  titter  he  waa  put  lo  death.  <Pliit.  Xmm.
1 0.)  Augnatua  granted  to  Ihem  all  the  ri^B  at
ntatnoa  wbo  bad  bcme  three  cluldien  (Dion  Cna.
In.  10  ;  Plot. ',  e.),  and  aiBgned  than  a  eanica-
ona  place  in  the  theatn  (Suet.  OiJae.  44  ;  TaciL
Aitn.  It.  16),  a  priTikve  which  thor  had  ojayrj
bdon  at  the  gladialorU  diawi.  (Cib  pnr  Man.
S5.)  Great  weufat  waa  attadied  to  Ibrb  iatenxa-
don  on  behalf  efUnae  in  danger  and  diAedly,  tl
which  ve  haie  a  remarkable  example  in  Iha  to-
trcatiea  which  they  addnaaed  U  Ssfla  sa  behalf  «l
Jnliua  Caeaar  (SoeL  JuL  1 ;  eompars  Cic  pn  /bnL
17  ;  Bntt.  yiUL  IB,  Dion  Caaa.  Ut.  18  ;  TadL
Am.  iil  69,  xi.  92,  Hit  iii.  81),  and  if  tber
chanced  to  meet  a  criminal  aa  he  waa  led  ts  pcn-
iitunent  they  had  a  right  to  demand  hia  rfleaae,
proTided  it  could  be  panTtd  that  the  eBconalcc  waa
accidental  Willa,  ei«g  theae  cf  tbe  enposia,
were  committed  to  their  chatga  (SoeL  JaL  S3,
Odm.  101  1  Tadu  Jaa.  i  8),  ftt  nhm  ia  mmk


VESTALES.
[  IliFj  vcre  conndeied  iaTioUbls (Pint.


■  SS)i


I  like  n


very  >


tmUici,  luch  u  that  of  the  tniunTin  with  ScTtog
PoDipadni,  wen  pUced  ia  Oieit  handi.  (Appiui,
B.  C.  T.  73  ;  Dias  Can.  iliiii.  37  uid  46  ;  com-
fit  ilTiii.  IS.)  That  Ihey  might  be  tumoand  in
death  u  in  life,  their  uhc*  wen  intemd  within
the  unuieriinu. (Sen.  ad  Firff.  Atm.  jL  306.)

The;  wen  attind  ia  ■  itob  orn  which  vu  u
tippei  Teetment  made  of  linen  (Val.  Max.  L  I.S  7;
Dian]^iL66;  Flin.  ^.  i<r.  11),  and  in  addition
ta  the  Infula  and  white  woollen  Viita  the;  won
when  Mcrilleing  a  peculiar  head^dmi  called  ng^-
imiioLt  conaiating  of  a  piece  of  white  cloth  bordered
with  imrple,  oblong  in  thape,  and  aecured  b;  a
clup.  (Feitoa,  i.e.  Siigiliiiliim.)  In  dreu  aud
Itpnen]  deportment  they  wen  required  to  obterfo
the  utmoat  timplicily  and  dcmrum,  an;  bncitnl
omamenta  in  the  one  or  levit;  in  the  other  being
slwajri  regarded  with  ditguit  and  iiupicion.  (Lii.
IT.  44,  riii.  15  ;  Plin.  Ep.  W.  II  ;  Ovid.  FmL  ir.
285.)  We  infer  from  a  paiage  in  Plio;  (//.  W.
iTi.  85)  that  their  hair  wu  cut  off,  jsabably  at  the
period  of  their  coniecntion  ;  whether  thii  wal  n-
peated  &nm  time  to  ^me  doea  not  appear,  but  they
are  nerer  Rpreieatcd  with  Bowing  loclti.  The
fint  of  the  following  cntt,  copied  from  a  gem
(Uont&ocon,  A*t,  Exp.  L  pi.  ixviii.,  Suf^iltm.  L
pL  uiiu),  reprtaenti  (he  Veita]  Tuccia  who  when
irronKfully  accused  appealed  to  the  goddev  to  vin-
dicata  her  honour,  and  had  power  given  her  to
can;  a  liete  fnll  of  water  from  the  Tiber  to  the
Icmjde.  (Val.  Mai.  viiL  1.  f  6  ,  Plin.  H.  N.
zzviIL  %) Tha  lonn  of  the  upper  garment  ia


liera  wcD  kol  The  aecond  ii  frnn  ■  deDarini  of
the  Oeu  Qodia,  reprcaeuting  upon  thi  icrene  a
feniala  jriealea  with  a  limpoiium  in  her  band,
and  bearing  the  legmd  tk0TAL18  \  on  the  ob-
TCna  ii  a  bead  of  Flora  with  the  wordi  c
CLODivi  0.  r.  Two  VeMal*  bdonging  to  Ifaii
g«u  wen  celebiated  in  the  Homan  Annila.  (See
Ond.  Fail.  \j.  279 ;  Suet.  TA.  2 ;  Augnitin.  dt
CVr.i>n,z.l6;  HerDdimi.1  11.)  [Tbidhfhub,
p.  1165,  a.]  The  coin  aeema  to  have  been  itniek  to
cMnmemonle  the  iplendonr  of  the  Floralia  at  ex-
faihited  during  (he  famoua  aedileahip  of  C.  Clodina
P.Jehera.0.  99.  (Cic.  de  {tfl  ii.  1 6,  c.  F«rr.  iv.
2  ;  Plin.  ff.  N.  x«t.  4.)

(l^saiot,  da Yala  et  VMilAu  Sf^logia,  and

VoAim,  "  On  IIm  wonbip  of  V«u,  &&  O**-


aical  Joonwl,  toI.  it.  123,  toL  zn.  821,"  hare
collected  mott  of  the  antbiHiliei  im  thii  anhject ;
OtilUing,  GfMMe  dtr  AmmmL  StaaUMHiutwig,
p.  189.)  (W.R.]

VESTI'BULUM.  [Doi(ii8,p.  427,ai  JaHVa.
p.  627,  b.]
VESTICEPS. [Ihi-dbu,  6S1,a.]
VETERATJUi [EiaRcirua,  p  499,  b.]
VEXILLA'RII.  [EiiBcrrua,  p.  507,  b.]
VEXILLUM. [EiBRCiTtis,p.sa7,b;SiaNi

MlLITAHU.]

VIAE.  Three  worda  an  emptoyedb;  the  Ro-
man jnriita  to  denols  a  nad,  or  a  right  of  road,
tier,  AeKu,  Via.  The  difiennl  meanmga  of  Iheao
three  worda  aregiToi  nnder  Sihvitutis,  p  1032.

We  nnt  find  Viat  dirided  into  jinialat  or
agrariat  and  paUiau,  the  former  being  IhoH  tha
■ue  of  which  waa  free  while  the  aoil  itaelf  remained
priiate  pnperl;,  the  latter  thoac  of  which  Uie  use,
the  management,  and  the  aoil  were  alike  Tested  in
the  itate.  Vina  VicimUtt  (ipaa  M  nait  mat  vd
quat  ui  vieot  duaad),  being  eountry  crosB-roadj
merging  in  the  great  linea,  or  at  ^1  eTenI*  not
leading  to  any  important  terminna,  might  be  either
pnUtnu  or  pritaia»  accordii^  aa  they  wen  fonncd
and  maintained  at  the  coat  of  the  state  or  b;  tha
contribulioDt  of  priiate  individuala.  (Dig.  43.  tit.
8.t.2.§Sl,32i  tit.7.a.3;  SicnL  FUcc  d«  Cbwd:
Apr.  p.  9,  ed.  Ooea.)  The  rioa  paUitat  of  lb*
higfacat  daaa  were  distingnished  by  the  epitheli


tenna  Mn  $an\aui  amaig  the  Ore^  ^d  lu^
tJ^tBiy  among  ouraelTea.

That  pnbUe  niadi  of  snme  kind  must  lutT*
existed  from  the  rer;  foundation  of  the  dt;  ia
manifest,  but  as  Tery  little  friendly  intetconiw  ai.
isled  with  the  nnghbouring  states  for  an;  length
of  time  vrithout  intemption,  the;  would  ij


Indu  used  by  ths  peaaanti  in  theii  jonmen  to
and  from  market.  It  waa  not  until  the  penod  of
tha  long  [ootntetad  Samnita  wars  that  the  naoea-
sit;  was  Btrongl;  felt  of  lecnring  an  easy,  regular,
and  safe  comraunication  between  the  cil;  and  the
legions,  and  then  for  the  first  time  we  hear  of  ifaoao
famous  fttved  roads,  which,  in  after  ages,  keeping
pace  with  the  progress  of  the  Roman  arms,  con-
neclcd  Rome  with  bar  most  distant  prorineei,  con-
atituting  iMt  mt;  the  moat  useful,  but  the  moat
Uatingofall  her  worka.  (Slmbo,T.  |x235.)  Tha
eicellence  of  the  principlea  upon  which  the;  wen
constructed  ia  inlGciently  alteated  by  their  citra-
ordinar;  durability,  many  specimena  beiug  fbond
[n  the  connti;  around  Rome  which  hiTs  been  naed
without  being  npaired  for  mon  than  a  thousand
;ear*,  and  an  atiU  in  a  high  state  of  preserration.
The  Ramans  an  said  to  have  adopted  their  first
ideaa  npon  this  subject  bom  the  Carthaginians
(Iiidor.  IT.  1 6.  %  6),  and  it  ia  extremel;  ptobabla
that  the  latter  people  ma;,  from  their  commercial
•etirity,  and  tba  aand;  naton^  tlwir  ^  hara-


■IIM  VIAE

been  nHDpeQcd  to  turn  their  attCDtion  to  the  best
mmng  of  facilitHting  iho  conveyance  of  merchan-
dize to  diiferenl  parli  of  their  lerritorr.  Jl  inuit
not  lu;  imigined,  however,  that  the  BoniaJH  era-
plojed  fmm  ihe  tlTit  the  elaborate  proeeai  which
we  are  about  to  de«<^be.  The  fint  itep  would  be
from  the  Via  Ttrreaa  (Dig.  43.  tit.  11.  i.  2\  the
mere  track  worn  by  the  feet  of  men  and  beaatt
and  the  wheels  of  waggoni  acroH  the  fieldf,  to  the
Fia  Glarraia,  wben  the  BUi&ce  waa  hardened  hy
giavel  ;  and  even  after  paTeinenl  mu  introduced
the  blockt  wem  originally  to  have  reaied  merely
on  a  bed  of  tmall  tlODea.  (Lit.  lU.  37;  compare
LiT.  X.  23.  i1.)

Li>y  ha*  recorded  (ir.  29)  that  the  cenionhip
of  Appiua  Cmcm  (b.C.  312)  wai  rendered  lelc-
brttted  in  after  agea  t™a  hit  having  birtught  water

ti  ofBOfB  n  urbm  ptrdmil),  the  renowned  Via
Jtppia,  which  extended  in  the  fint  inttance  from
Rflmo  to  Capua,  altbongh  wo  can  acarcely  tuppoie
that  it  wa>  carried  bo  great  a  diitoncs  in  a  aingle
liutrum.  {Niebuhr,  Kim.a*td>.  iii.  p.  358.)  We
undoabtedly  hear  long  before  Ihii  period  of  the
Via  Latina  (Lit.  iL  39),  the  Via  GaUna  {Ur.  ii,
1 1,  ill.  6,  T.  49),  and  the  Via  Solaria  (Lir.  xii,  9),
&e.j  but  even  if  we  allow  thai  Livy  doea  not  em-
ploy theienameB  by  a  tort  of  pn>lepiii,  in  order  to
JnilicaLA  conveniently  a  particular  direction  (and
that  he  doei  ipetk  by  anticipation  when  he  refen
to  mileitooet  in  toaie  of  the  above  pauagei  it  cer-
tain), yet  wo  hara  no  proof  whatever  that  they
.were  laid  down  according  to  the  method  aRer-
wardi  adopted  with  lo  much  inccen.  (Compare
J.iv.  liL  39.)

Vitruviua  enten  into  no  detaili  with  regard  to
toad-making,  but  he  givei  moat  minute  direetioni
fat  pavementi,  and  the  fragment!  of  ancient  pave-
ment* (till  eiiMingaodanawering  tohii  deacHptiDn
coiretpond  io  exactly  with  the  remaini  of  the  mili-
tary roadi,  that  we  cannot  doubt  that  the  proceaies
followed  in  each  cnae  were  identical,  and  thui
Vitruviua  (vii.  1),  combined  with  the  poem  of
Statiut  (Silv.  iv.  3),  on  the  Via  Domitiama,  will
aupply  all  the  technical  terma.

In  the  fint  place,  two  ahallow  trenchei  (mlei)
were  du([  parallel  to  each  other,  markingtbe  breadth
of  die  propoied  road  ;  this  in  the  great  Unci,  luch
ai  the  Via  Appia,  the  Via  Flaminia,  the  Via
Valeria,  Bit.,  ii  found  to  have  been  fmm  1 3  lo  1 5
feet,  the  Via  Tutculana  ii  II,  while  thoM  of  leu
importance,  from  not  being  great  thoninghbrea,
aoch  as  the  Via  which  leadi  up  to  the  temple  of
Jupiter  Laluilis,  on  Ihe  summit  of  the  Alban
MouDt,  and  which  is  to  this  day  siDguIaily  per-
fect, seem  to  have  been  exactly  8  feet  wide.  The
loose  earth  between  the  Sulci  waa  then  removed,
and  the  excavation  continued  until  a  solid  founda.
tion  (ffrentisnt)  waa  reached,  upon  which  the  mv
tcrials  of  the  road  might  £rmly  rest ;  if  this  could
not  be  attained,  in  contequence  of  the  swampy
nature  of  the  ground  or  inim  any  pecidiaiity  in  the
■oil,  a  baiis  waa  formed  artificially  by  driving  pL'si
(jfjiiioaiionttiu).  Above  the  jremium  werelbnrdis-

Gonsiating  of  stones  not  smaller  than  the  hand  could
juatgraapi  above  the  slatumen  was  the  mdut,  a  mass
of  broken  stones  cemented  with  lime,  (what  maaona
call  TiUJe-aork,)  rammed  down  bard  and  nine
inchet  thick  ;  above  the  ndug  came  the  imcjcu,
compoaed  of  ftngmenla  of  bricks  and  pottery,  the


VIAE,
pieces  being  ampler  than  in  the  mdna,  conaitri
with  lime  and  aix  inchca  thick.  Uppermott  was
the  pavimenium^  huge  polTgonal  blocks  cf  the
hardest  stone  (b/«),  usually,  at  least  in  the  •icioity
of  itome,  basaltic  lava,  irregular  in  farm  but  fitted
and  jointed  with  the  greatest  nicety  {apla  jumffitur
arit  tilrt,  TibulL  i.  7.  GO)  so  as  (o  present  a  pa>.
fectiy  even  aurlace,  aa  free  fmm  gnpa  or  irr^i)-
larities  as  if  the  whole  had  been  one  solid  mass,
and  presenting  much  the  same  external  appeaianee
as  the  most  carefully  built  polygonal  wall*  of  like
old  Pelasgian  towns.  The  genetal  aspert  wilt  be
underalood  from  the  cut  givei ' '  -


lofPon
La  Rtamn  de  PornpH,  toL  I  pL  i


ipeu. {>
nviL)


the  tertos  offffSF  vi<
Marcelliu.  lix.  11


Itboush  bt4k


e  of  the  way  waa  a  little  elevated  n
er  to  mn  off  easily,  and  hem
(Isidor.  XT.  16.S  7;Animiao.
;  compue  Virg.  At».  ..  273i  :
ana  nmmim  aormii  (SlaL  L  c),  altboi^
may  be  i^ied  to  the  wl  '
menlum. Octaaionally,  a  .  _^  _____

gutar  slabs  of  sot^  stone  were  employeid  ioitt^
of  the  irregular  polygons  of  silei,  as  we  pereeiva
to  have  been  the  case  in  the  fonun  of  Tnjan,
which  was  paved  with  travertins,  and  in  part  of
the  great  forum  under  Ihe  column  of  Phocms.  and
hence  the  distinction  between the phraeea  aIu

xli.  27.)  It  mutt  be  ohierred,  dnt  while  on  the
one  hand  recourse  was  had  to  pilin^c,  when  a  solid
foundation  could  not  otherwise  be  obtained,  so,  on
the  other  hand,  when  Ihe  md  was  carried  ora
rock,  the  statumen  and  the  rudus  were  diapoiird
with  altogether,  and  the  nucleus  was  ipnad  ias.
lediaiely  on  the  siony  iut&m  previonsly  ■Dootfaed


Thia  is  seen


e  prevuasly  hbooi
o^ve  beea  the  (


led  by  local  antiqaariea,  on  the  Via
Appia,  below  Albano,  where  it  waa  cot  ihnagh  a
moss  of  volcanic  peperiiio.

Nor  was  this  all  Regular  liiol-paths  (Maryina,
Liv.  xli.  27,  cnpidina,  Petron.  9  ;  Orellt,  Irnnm.
n.  3844  ;  umlKines,  Slat.  Sihj.  iv.  3.  47)  wm
railed  upon  each  side  and  strewed  with  gravrl.  Ihe
dilferent  ports  were  strengthened  and  boond  ti^
geihcr  with  gon^  or  stone  wedgn  (Stat  I.  e.\
nodcnleaucmla


•  o"


nod  stoue  blocks  n


viae:

on  the  ude  of  iha  fbot-pitbi,  in  order  QitX  tnnl-
l«n  on  honeback  might  be  ^ble  to  mannt  without
the  aid  of  mn  iraMi\m  U  tioiit  them  Dp.  (Pint
C.  Crnff*.  7.) [Stuatorm.]

PiiKlly,  C.  OiBcctmi  (PluL  L  e.)  crecMd  mile-
itDHi  along  the  whole  extent  of  the  gnat  bi^h-
wsye,  maiking  the  dietuiccs  from  Rome,  which
appear  to  haie  been  counted  from  the  gUe  at
which  each  road  iuued  forth.  The  patMage  of
Philaith,  howeTer,  Diaj  onlj  mean  that  OnMhui
erected  mileitonei  on  the  roadi  which  ba  made
•c  repiired  ;  for  it  ii  probable  that  miletlonei
•xhted  much  Fsrlier.  [Milliiri.]  Augnatai,
when  appointed  inipector  of  the  viae  (loiind  the
ciiT,  envied  in  the  forum  a  gildod  caliunn  (xfmroDi'
fdkitt — xf"""  "'<"•  "lUluiriat  aflrem,  Dion
Cbk  Ht.  U  I  Flin.  H.  N.  iiL  S  ;  SneL  OO.  6  j
Tacit  /fal.  I  37),  on  which  were  iucribed  the
dintancei  of  the  principal  pointi  to  which  the
Tiae  conducted.  Some  have  imagined,  from  a
punge  in  PlnMrch  (Cutt.  24),  that  the  dlitantei
weie  calcnlated  fnm  the  milliarium  aureom,  but
thi)  aeemi  to  be  diiprored  both  br  the  bet  that
the  rcadi  were  all  di'idfd  into  mile*  by  C.  Otacchni
nearly  two  centoriei  before,  and  alw  by  the  poii-
tion  of  rarioni  ancient  mileitonn  diaeovered  in
modem  time*.  (See  Holiten.  Jt  Miiliario  Anno
in  OraeT.  TTiet.  Antiq.  Ron.  to).  It.  and  Fabreni
d*  Aquit  tt  Aqumdiirtu,  Dm.  ill  n.  35.)

It  ii  certain  that  during  the  earlier  aget  of  the
rcpablie the conitruclion and  general fuperin-
tenleDcs  of  the  toodi without,  and  the  iireet*
within,  the  city,  were  committed like  all  other
important  worki  ta  the  cenaore. Thi)  ii  pored
by  the  law  qBolod  in  Cicero  (de  Lig.  iu.  S),  and  by
Tariooa  paaiagei  in  which  then  magiitnte*  an
repreaenled  at  having  Snt  formed  and  given
~  aamea  to  great  linea,  nich  M  the  Via  Appi
the  Via  Flaminia,  or  aj  having  executed  important
improTemenU  and  rcpain. (Liv.  iz.  29,43,  Epii.
20,  xiik  1!,  ilL  27  !  AoreL  Vict  d*  Virit  UlHi.
e.  73  i  LiiM.  Eiicm  ad  TacAiii.  iiL  i\.) Theae
dutiea,  when  no  canam  were  in  office,  devolved
npon  the  coniuli,  and  in  their  abai
Praetor  Urbanoi,  the  Aedilea,  or  locI
the  •enala  thought  fit  to  appoint (
2  ;  Cic.  a  Verr.  i  48,  60,  S9.) But
laat  century  of  the  commonwealth  the
tioo  of  the  roada,  u  well  ai  of  every  other  depart-
fneot  of  public  bnaineaa,  afforded  the  tribune!  a
pteteit  fia  popniar  agitation. C.  Oraeebua,  in
what  capacicy  wo  know  not,  ii  nid  to  have  ei-
Mted  himadf  in  making  gr»t  iropmvemenla,  both
fiwn  a  coovictioD  of  their  utility  and  with  a  view
to  Iha  aoiDirement  of  popularity  (Plut  C.  GrucA  7),
■ad  Curio,  when  tribune,  intndDced  a  La  Fiaria
far  the  conatmcUon  and  reiloralion  of  many  raadi
tnd  the  appointment  of  hlmaelf  to  the  office  of
■peetof  (triminii)  for  Eve  yean.  {Appian.  B.
iL  26  ; Cic  od  I'am.  viiL  6.) We learn  fr
Ciccm  {ad  AU.  L  1),  that  Tbermoa,  in  the  year
K  c  65,  wai  Curator  of  the  Flaminian  Way,  and
from  Plutarch  (Oiei.  fi),  that  Jnliui  Caciai  held
tha  nme  office  (twiiuKtirll')  with  regmd  to  the
App»a  Way,  and  laid  out  great  luma  of  lii  own
money  upon  it,  but  by  whom  these  appoLntmenta
wen  conferred  we  cannot  tell. During  the  lint
yean  of  Auguatoi,  Agrip|»,  being  aedilc,  repaired
all  roadi  at  hi>  own  proper  eipenu  ;  iubwqnently
the  oapaior,  finding  that  the  ruada  had  fallen  into
Jkrtfir  thrngh  Degled,  took  agoa  hinuclf  the.


VIAE.  1193

rertoratiou  of  the  Via  Flaminia  ai  bt  ai  Ariminum,
and  diitributed  the


le(tria»


'i'\i


ptved  out  of  the  money  obtained  from  apoili

'  aatwMali  ptcaaia  iltntatdai.  Suet  Oetav.  90  ;

in  Cau.  iiiL  22). In  the  reiffn  of  Claudiua  w«

i  that  thii  charge  had  foUen  upon  the  quaeilon,

i  that  they  were  relieved  of  it  by  him,  allhauBh

Mme  give  a  different  interpreUtion  to  the  wordi.

(Suet  OiBid.  24.) Generally  (peaking,  however,

under  the  empire,  the  poit of  inipector-in-chiet

((vrojor), — and  each  great  line  appears  to  have

had  a  eeparatc  officer  with  thii  appellation, —  wai

miidered  a  high  dignity  (Plin.  Ep.  v.  IS),  inao-

Luch  that  the  title  waa  frequently  auumed  by  the

nperon  Ihomaelvei,  and  a  great  number  of  in-

Tiptiooa  *ie  extant,  bearing  the  name*  of  upward*

of  twen^  pinee*  ftomAaguatD*  to  Conilantine,

LOtating their  ciertiona  in making  and

ublic  waya. (Oniter,  Corp.  Inerip.

Ill diz.)

Theta  candorai  were  at  fint,  It  would  appaar,
appointed  upon  ipedal  ooaticni,  and  at  all  timea
must  have  been  regarded  ai  honorary  fiznctionariea
rather  than  practical  men  of  buiineis.  But  from
the  beginning  of  the  liith  cuitory  of  the  city  then
eiietcd  regular  commiHionen,  whoM  aole  duty
appoira  to  hare  beeu  the  aae  of  the  wayi,  four
(qaaluorviri  maraia)  nperinten^ng  the  ilreeli
within  thewal]i,and  tiro  tha  road*  without  (Dig.
I.  tit  2.  a.  2.  §30.  compand  with  Dion  Cau.  liv.
36.)  When  Auguitui  remodelled  the  infrrior  ma-
giitraciei  he  included  the  former  in  the  vigintivirate,
and  abolished  the  latter  ;  but  when  he  underUuk
(he  ears  of  the  vine  around  the  ciw,  be  appointed
under  himielf  two  rooi^giateri  (iSoroutn,  Diori
Caia.  iiv.  8),  petiona  of  praetorian  rank,  to  whom
he  auigned  two  licton.  These  wen  probably  in-
cluded io  the  number  of  the  new  •uperintcndeni*
of  public  worke  inetituted  by  him  (Suet  Ofltno.  37),
and  would  Cfffitinue  from  that  time  forward  to  dis..
charge  their  dutiea,  subject  to  the  supervision  and
control  of  the  cunUonu  or  inapecton-generaL

Even  the  conlracton  employed  {mmc^ia.  Tacit
Aita.  iL  SI)  were  prond  u  auaciate  theii  samea
with  tbeee  Yaat  undertakings,  and  an  inscription  hai
been  preserved  (OrelL  ttacrip.  n.  32-31)  in  which
a  wife,  in  paying  the  last  tribute  to  her  husband,
inscribes  upon  hii  tomb  Mancipi  Vua  ApFMIt
The  funds  required  were  of  coarse  derived,  under
ordinary  circumstances,  from  the  public  treasury
(Dion  CasB.  liii.  22  ;  SicuL  Fiacc  dt  and.  agr.  p.
9,  ed.  Goes.),  but  individuals  also  were  not  onfre-
qnently  found  willing  to  devote  their  own  nrivala
means  to  these  great  national  enterprises.  This,  aa
we  have  already  seen,  was  the  caee  with  Catm  and
AgripfB,  and  we  learn  from  inscriptions  that  tha

(e.r/.  Gruter.cliLD.Iiuid2.)  The  ViatVieaala
the  hands  of  the  rural  authorities  {magairi
pagortan),  and  seem  to  have  been  maintained  by
voluntary  contribution  or  assessment,  like  out
[srish  roods  (Sicnl,  Place,  p.  9),  while  the  itreeU
within  the  city  were  kept  in  repair  by  Uie  inhabit-
anta,  each  person  being  aniwerable  for  the  portion
oppotile  to  his  own  house.  (Dig.  43.  tit  10.  a.  3.)
Our  limits  preclude  us  from  entering  npon  so
large  a  subject  oa  the  history  of  the  numerous  mili-
tary roads  which  inlenectpd  the  Roman  dominions.
We  shall  content  onraelvri  with  simply  mentioning
tfaosa  which  iisne4  biKa  Rome,  together  with  their


IIM  VIAK

it  impMtmt  branehet  within  tba  Ixmndt  of


lulj.n;


ir  all  the  delaili  ind
anuiecled  wilh  iheii  oHgio,  gradual
i  chuigea,  (be  varicHu  Blstioiu  upon
•  diitium,  and  limiki  lapio,  ve  tuuit
refer  to  the  ItcaUMi  enumerated  at  the  clou  of
thii  ankle,  and  to  the  reMarchu  of  the  lacal
quaiiea,  the  moet  important  of  whom,  in  lo  &r  aa
the  aontliem  di«tricli  are  conMmed,  u  Kamaoelli.

Beginning  nni  drcuiE  of  the  walli  at  tie  Porta
Capena,  the  Ent  in  order,  a>  in  dignity,  ia,

I.  The  Vu  Afpia,  the  Oivit  Soali  Road.  It
wai  cmnmenced,  ai  we  hare  ainad;  alaled,  by
Appiiu  Clandiui  Caecu^  when  cenaOT,  and  has
alwajn  been  the  moit  celebiated  of  tha  Boman
Wajra.  It  iraa  the  fint  erer  laid  down  npon  a
grand  Kale  and  opoD  KientiGc  principlea,  the  na-
tural obilaclea  which  it  waa  ncceanry  to  oiercome
were  of  the  mott  fomidahle  nature,  and  when  eom-
plcted  it  well  deferred  the  title  of  Qwm  afRoadt
(r^md  ewniM,  Stat  SUs.  il  S,  1 2).  We  know
that  it  vat  in  perfect  repair  when  Procopiui  wrote
(B^  GoO.  L  U),  long  after  the  devatlating  in-
roads of  ihe  northern  barhariani  j  and  even  to  thit
day  the  cutting!  throosh  hilla  and  manei  of  eolid
fock,  the  filling  i^  of  nollowi,  the  bridging  of  la-
vinea,  the  lubitmctioDi  to  leaaen  the  lapiditj  of
at«ep  deacenta,  and  the  embonknieota  oTeriwampi,
demontnate  the  Tait  lama  and  the  prodigiooi  la-
bour that  mUBt  have  been  lariihed  on  iti  conitrue-
tion.  It  iuued  Irom  the  Porta  Captaa,  and  paaa-
ing  through  A  rieia,  JWi  Taiemat,  Afpii  Fanin,
liaraeiaa,  Fiadi,  ^rnuaii,  Mintaraaa,  Simiata,
•nd  Caiiliiinit,  terminated  at  Capua,  but  wu  eren-
tonll;  extended  through  Calatia  and  Oiw'iiin  to
"^  and  finally  from  thence  through  Vmtt-

R,  and  Uria^  to  Bnindmtiwm.
imifiationa  of  the  Via  Appia  moat  worthy
of  notice,  are.

(1.)  The  Vu  Siting  which  connected  it  with
Sitia.  Originally  it  would  appear  that  the  Via
Appia  paued  iBnmgh  V^itra»  and  Satia,  aroiding
the  Durahei  altogether,  and  baielleri,  in  eaeape
thit  circuit,  emlwrked  npon  the  canal,  which  in  the
daja  of  Horace  timTened  a  person  of  the  awampi.

(2.)  TheVu  DauiTUHAitnick  offatSuaem,
and  keeping  do*e  to  the  ihore  paiacd  through
IMtrwan^  Gtmat,  Puieoii,  NtapoUt,  Htrtmlamemtn,
Oplaiti,  Pompai,  and  Slabiaa  to  AtrnHtm,  mak-
ing the  eoinplela  drcnit  of  the  ba,j  of  Naples.

(3.)  The  Via  Cahpana  or  Conhulaiui  from
Q^ma  to  Cumat  Moding  off  a  branch  to  Pvltoli
and  another  through  Atdia  to  JVaopofit

<4.)  The  Via  Ac)uili.ia  began  at  Capwi  and  nn
lonth  through  Nda  and  Nuiaria  to  SiUnamL,  from
thenc^  afler  lendinff  off  a  branch  to  PaattaOf  it
took  a  wide  iweep  inlnnd  through  Ehiri  and  the
region  of  the  ilons  .^^niiu  \ip  the  folley  of  the
T\aiager;  il  then  atruck  eouth  through  the  ler;
heart  of  Lvcania  and  BrnHivm,  and  paiung  JVera-
Ami,  Initramnia  and  Gxextio,  relumed  to  the  lea
at  Viio,  and  thence  through  Ma/aa  to  /Utgiiai.
Thii  road  lent  olf  a  branch  mar  the  Kinrcei  of  the
TatiOffer,  which  ran  down  to  the  lea  at  Blauda  on
the  Law  Sijua  and  then  contuined  along  the  whole
line  of  the  Bnittian  coait  throngli  Lata  and  Ttraa
to  VAo,  where  il  Joined  the  main  item.

(G.)  The  Via  £o^ATlA  began  at  BtnntKttm,
atnick  Dortii  thnragb  the  coDnti;  of  the  Hir|aiu  lo


a  Ibllowinv
It  it  pawi


TIAB.
EqiubiSBtm,  mleied  Apulia  at  Jeaa>,aDl  paaoag
Ihroogh  UerdoaixM,  Oaaaii— ,  and  Riii,  reached
the  Adria^  at  Barium  and  followed  tha  ouait
thmjgh  Eguatia  to  flnwrfmi'aai.  Thia  waa  the
nmM  Mowed  by  Horace.  It  ia  doablfnl  wlietheT
it  bore  the  name  given  abote  in  the  lady  put  <C

(6.)  Tha  Via  Trajana  b^an  at  Fenwi  aid
ran  in  neaHy  a  etnight  Hne  aeroaa  Locania  ta
Htradea  co  the  Simt  Tarmtiit
uulhwanb  the  line  of  the  (
thtongh  Iliirii,  Oofo,  ai  ~  _
pleted  the  circuit  of  Bntitaan  bj  meetiag  the  Fia
AjioBia  at  Ritgiam.

(7.)  A  Via  Hinin:ia  k  mtDtkned  by  Gem
(_<id  AtL  iz.  6),  and  a  Via  Nuhicia  by  Hoiwa
{EpiiL  L  IS.  30),  both  of  which  aeem  to  ban
paued  through  Suonium  from  nutth  to  aomh,  ob-
□ecting  the  Valerian  andAqnilUan  and  enUingthe
Appian  and  Latin  wayi.  Theircnnraeia  nnknewn.
"  me  beliera  them  to  he  one  and  the  aama.

Retnmii^  to  Home,  we  God  ieaniag  bm  ibe
porta  Copena,  or  a  gale  in  ita  immediate  rieinity

II,  The  Via  Latina,  another  great  line  leading

Benevenlum,  hut  keepmg  a  conrae  fartLa  iolaDd
than  the  Via  Appia.  Soon  after  leaiii^  the  chy
it  >ent  off  a  ihart  branch  (VtA  TtJWULAHA)  to
rnciiJi»t,  and  paHing  throofh  CompHaim  jiaajwi
mm,  FtTsntimin,  Fniaao,  Fngdiat,  ^Unrftno,
AijUimmi,  Guum,  Vtiia/rtm,  TVonoa,  AB^at,
and  J'ofena,  joined  the  Via  Appia  at  BcMMmInt

A  crou-nod  called  the  Via  IlAnBiAKA,riuiBng
bota  AfMhmKW  thiongh  Sat—a  Aanaca  to  Tt^
'Fia  Appia witb the )^^


III.  From  the  Porta  EtjaOiM  imatA  tha  Vu
Labicana,  which  paaii^:  I^bienm  UJ  intft  the
Tu  £a(iM  at  the  itaUai  ad  ^Haot  30  mba  fha

IV.  The  Via  pBAui>anNA,origiittnrtheVu
Oabina,  iunod  fam  the  nme  gate  with  tha  llr.

Paaiing thnngh Gaiii  and AhbmI^  it
joined  the  Via  halaia  jmt  below faiij^ii

V.  Paaitog  orer  Ihe  Vu  Collatiha  aaiflittlt
impratance,  va  find  the  Vu  TiBuaTWA,  whiA

ed  from  the  Porta  "Dxataia,  and  [aimmlin

I,  to  JSmr,  a  diilanea  of  abont  20  ailn,  wm

inued  irom  thence,  in  the  moe  dine&B,  tmds

name  of  Ihe  Vu  VALiBiA,and  tnTaniif  iha

iCry  of  the  Sahinei  paiaed  Ibrou^  Oa  emfi  aad

Gn^Snina  lo  Attrvan  on  the  Adriatic^  th<Bee  a»

Adria,  and  lo  along  tha  eoaat  to  Cten^  TVaiB-

lunrm,  when  il  fdl  into  the  }!»  SaUria.

A  branch  of  the  Fia  FaUria  led  to  Satl^amm,

id  wni  called  Vu  SuBLACiNSia.  ABOtharhniKh

[tended  from  ^i^rio  altmg  the  ceait  nalhwaidi

through  the  eonntiy  cf  Fnailani  Id  T  ei  >— .  being

called,  ai  aome  purpoae,  Vu  FaaiiTAMA  Appci.a.

VL  The  Via  NoNaMrAKA,  andeotly  pKti^

NiNEia,  ran  from  the  porta  OoUima,  onaeed  tha

Amo  to  Nammdam,  and  a  little  beyond  Ul  HM

the  Via  Sdaria  at  Eretaai.

VII.  The  Vu  Salakia,  alaa  &vn  the  porf

ilBia  (paaaing  FSdmae  and  na^iiiiMial  ■■■

n«lh  and  taat  thtough  Satunan  and I


VIAK.

tt  ianuj  from  tie  Porta  Plamhia  md  pncnM
iwailf  north  to  Osneabn  ud  JVorKia  in  Umbria.
Hfn  I  bianch  nrndc  aS,  nakiiig  t.  ivKp  t
rut  thnngb  InUnuna  Bod  ^'''''''■'''i  "^  '■U
Ag^  Into  the  jnmin  trunk  (which  poHcd  tfarongh
Mnamia)  U  Afpuo.  It  eontiiiBwl  tium^h  Fa-
am  /%nnMi  and  Nuctria,  wb«i«  H  agam  diiided,
one  line  nnming  uaailj  Hnight  to  Fanim  Rirtiaaa
on  the  Adri^  while  the  other  dinerging  to  '
coiu  eonlinned  Ann  thenca  along  the  coait  to
AM  /Jxtnu*,  whoa  the  two  bnnchee  nil'
puwd  on  to  Arimima»  through  Pimtnm.  From
thenci  the  Via  FlamMa  vae  extended  nndec  the
saineof  theViAAuflLLland  tnTcrwd  the  bout
ofCiMt|HneOaDlthniaghAiiiaiHa,Jlfiitua,/'aniia,
Phtailui  (when  ituotied  the  Po)  to  Mediolamim.
From  thii  point  bnnchea  were  sent  off  thmugh
Berg»mmm,Braia,  raroao,  Fieaiiia,  Fatavmm  tad
At/tiUia  10  Tergeiti  on  tbe  eut,  lud  thtongh  No-
varia^  Fn-uJ/t,  Epondia  and  Avputta  Prattoria
to  the  Alpii  Graia  on  the  welt,  beiidei  mother
bmnch  in  tbe  nme  direction  through  TVeniiuK  and
Jidmitria  to  Aiiff<ula  Tbin'nonin.  Nor  mnit  we
omit  the  Vu  Postithia,  which  itruek  from  Firrma
right  down  acrou  the  Appeninea  to  Oamt,  puting
thnmgb  Afoataa  and  (Wnoiu,  croeeing  the  Fa  at
Plaoalia  and  lo  through  Iria,  DtrUMa  and  Li-
bana,  Rodiag  off  a  branch  from  Dertom  to  j1  ita.

Of  the  roadi  ttriking  ont  of  Ihe  Via  Ftamiaia  in
the  immediate  vicinity  of  Roma  the  most  important
fa  the  Via  Cakua,  which  direrging  near  the  Pomt
Makiiu  and  paiting  not  far  from  Veii  tniened
Etraria  through  SacnuKH,  jWn'iiM,  Fulimii,  da-
u'urn,  Amtiam,  tfomlia,  Puioria,  and  Lata,
joining  the  Via  Aimlia  at  Liaia.

(a)  The  Tii  Auirina  br(^e  off  from  the  Via
OuBs  near  Baaxaaa,  and  held  north  through
Faltrii,  Ttdtr,  and  Pmtin,  le-onitiDg  itwlf  vrith
the  Via  Omki  at  Omtiim.

O)  Not  &i  from  the  Pom  Jtfahtaj  the  Vu
ClodU  (epanted  from  the  Via  Guita,  and  pro-
ceeding to  Sab^  aa  Ihs  Coott  StbaHKa  there
diridM  into  two.  the  [ffincipal  branch  pauing
through  cpntral  Etmria  to  RuMut  and  thenee  dne
north  to  Floraitia,  the  other  pneaing  throogh  Tar-
gmiii  and  then  bUing  into  the  Via  Aartlia,

(r)  Bejond  £(ia»iH»  the  Vt'CtuiNA  branched
otl^  crowing  the  Mau  Ciminiii  and  tejoinlng  tbe
Via  Cauia  near  FiBnin  Veliaiaae.

IX.  The  Vu  AuRiLii,  the  Gnal  Coan  Road,
lamed  originally  from  the  Porta  t/ancujnw  and
aobeequcDtly  from  the  Porta  Avdia.  It  reached
the  eoan  at  Allium  and  followed  the  ihoie  of  the
kwer  m  along  Etruria  and  Lignria  by  Gmoa  ai
he  ai  Forum  Juiii  in  OanL  In  the  fiiM  initanea
it  extended  no  farther  dun  Pita.

X.  The  Via  FoiiTriNH«  kept  the  right  bank
of  the  Tiber  to  Partut  Augaiti-

XI.  The  Via  0*t»nhir  originally  paiied
through  the  Porta  TWiieMiaa,  aflerwardi  through
the  Porta  OiHauit,  and  kept  the  left  bank  of  the
Tiber  to  (Mm.  From  thenoe  it  ww  continued
nnder  the  name  of  Via  SiviriaNa  along  the  out
•onthward  through  LaareUiai,  Aulium,  and  QV-
eoH,  till  it  Johied  the  Via  Ajfia  at  Tarraana.
The  Via  Laurxntika,  leading  direct  to  Laartmr
lam,  leemi  lo bare branched  off  &om  the Fia


XII.  Laitly,  the  Via  Ahdiatiha  from  Rome
to  ArJea.  According  to  lotDe  thit  bnnehed  off
Cnm  the  Via  Ajfia,


VIATOR.  1I9JI

A^iialitliml  TaiU  ofllu  Viat  dtteriUd  abot*.


™xl


K. n TUKulana  II.


DonlUau  ■','  (a.)
U. „ KnaUa  1.  (tj


into  Latin  in  the  tenth  Tolume  of  the  Theaaume  of
QiaeTiua^and  with  the  noleeof  Henninjna  oecupief
more  than  800  folio  pagee.  In  tha  £rat  part  of
the  above  article  the  eiiay  of  Nibhy,  iMla  Vit
dipli  AtUieii  diatrAuiMe,  appended  to  tbe  fourth
Tolonw  of  the  fourth  Roman  edition  of  Nardini,
haa  bean  ctoiely  followed.  Coneideiabia  caution,
howe«er,  ii  neceasarr  In  uiing  tbe  work!  of  thll
anlhor,  who  although  a  profound  local  aatiquanr,

knowledge  of  that  portion  of  the  nibject  eo  hghtly
tODched  upon  at  tbe  cIom  of  tha  article,  it  ii  necea-
■aiy  to  coniult  the  Tariout  commenlariei  upon  Ihe
Tabula  Fautingeriana  and  tha  differsit  ancient
[ariea,  together  with  tbe  geographioal  worki
of  CoUarioi.  CluTBriua,  and  D'Antillo.  [W.  R.]
VIA'TICUM  (i^i.o»)  ii,  properly  ipeaking,
every  thing  neceamy  fm  a  penon  aetting  ont  oo  a
journey,  and  tbui  cmpmhendi  money,  proiiMoni,
dreiaee,  teatele,  Ac  (Plant  Bftd.  t.  1.  S  i  Plin.
^«f.  •iL13;Cicde&8«<.ie.)  When  a  Ramaa
nwgittrate,  praetor,  pieoonml,  or  quaHtor  went  ta
hie  pronnce,  the  itata  proiided  him  with  all  thai
wai  neceaary  for  hie  jonmej.  But  ai  the  ataW  ia
thii  ai  in  moat  other  caiei  of  expeoiditiira  prafared
paying  a  mm  at  onia  lo  having  any  part  in  the
actual  buiinon,  the  ilau  engaged  connaclora
(ndrmplort*),  who  for  a  ttipnlated  Nun  had  to  pro-
vide the  nwgiitratea  with  the  viaticum,  the  ptjacipal
parti  of  which  appear  lo  have  been  beaate  of  burden
and  tenl*(n>iUef  taieraaeafa).  Jnluii  Caeiar  in-
troduced aome  modification  ot  tfaii  lyilem,  by  hii
Lei  De  Repetandii  [RapiruNDAi]  landAaguitna
Tor  all  filed  a  certain  ium  to  be  given  to  tbe
ptwDoiuli  (protably  to  other  proiiDciarnBigiitnte*
aba)  on  letting  oot  la  their  province*,  M  that  tha
redemploRi  had  no  more  lo  do  with  it.  (Cic  ad
Pom.  lii.  3  ;  Suet.  Jag.  30  ;  GelliDi,  xvii.  2,  13  ■
conip.  Sigoniue,  de  Aaiiq.  Jan  Provime.  iiL  II  ;
Caiaabonoif  Tio^miK.  11.}  [L.S.]

VIA'TOR waa  a  eervant  who  attended  upon
id  eieculed  the  command!  of  certain  Roman  nu^
^  itntee.  to  whom  he  bore  the  wno  relation  u  tha
lictor  did  to  olhar  migiitntee. The  name  euforet
derived  from  tha  circnnutance  of  their  being
chiefly  employed  on  meiiagH  either  to  call  upon
in  to  attend  the  meeting  of  the  tenate,  ot
nmon  tbe  peoi^B  to  the  eomitia.  Ac (Ck.  dt
i  16.) In  the  earlier  timea  of  the  republic


1196  VICU3.

11;  comp.Plin.ff.A'.  iTi!L*;l4F.TOLlB).
UMr  tinm  homTcr  Tiatoni  jue  only  mcnlioned
with  nicb  iDBjrutnlei  u  had  onlj  potestu  nnd  not
imperiimi,  lucii  u  ths  liibflnei  of  the  people,  the
ceoion,  and  the  aedilei.  The;  were,  in  ahort,  the
attenduiU  of  all  msgiitratea  nhobdd  tkn  jui  pmt-
dadi.  (Oell.  liii,  12  ;  Lit.  iL  S6,  xxr.  39,  niii.
34  i  Lydm,  d»  MagiA  i.  M.)  How  many  Tia-
torei  attended  each  of  theae  m^itriLtei  ia  not
known  ;  one  of  them  i>  isid  to  hare  had  tbe  right
at  the  command  of  hii  nagiBtiele  to  bind  petion*
(ligare),  whence  he  wni  called  lictor.  (OelL  lii.  3.)
It  ii  not  improhable  that  the  ancient  writen  eamt-
tinin  confound  'litlorea  and  liclorea  (Sip>niu>,  da
All.  Jar.  Civ.  Homa'KTam.ii.  IS  ;  Becker,  Haadh.
rfn-  fii'm.  AlUrtk.  ToL  ii.  pt  iL  p.  879.)  {I-  S-]
VICA'RUSERVL  (Smvus,  p.  1037,b.]
VICA'RIUS.  [ElMcmri,  p.  604.  a-l
VICE'SIMA,  ■  lai  of  five  per  cenL  Erery
Dornan,  when  ha  manamiltrd  a  ilavc,  bad  to  pay
to  the  atate  a  tax  of  ono-twentietli  of  hit  value,

Tbii  lax  appeaii  to  hare  been  leiied  bam  the
cerlieit  timea,  and  wu  not  aboliabed  when  all
other  impoita  were  done  away  with  in  Rom*  and
Italy.  (Li<.  viLI6,  TXTiL  10  ;  Cic  .ddJIt  iL  16.)
Camcalla  raiaed  thii  tai  to  a  drama,  that  ia,  ten
per  cent.,  but  Macrinm  agun  reduced  it  to  the  old
atuidard.  (Dion.  Cau.  liivii.  9,  liiiiiu  12.] The


iDtrodoecd  b;  AugoitD)  (Z«  ./hJu  Vinaimaria):  it
coniiited  of  five  p«i  eeoX.  which  every  Raman  ritiien
bad  to  pay  to  the  aenrium  militan,  npon  any  in-
heritsncB  or  legacy  laft  to  him,  with  the  eiception

laBTei,  and  inch  aa  did  not  amount  to  above  a  cei-
Uin  aum.  <Dion  CaiL  It.  25,  In.  23  \  Plio.  Pang.
37,  Af.;  Capitol.  Af.^Rbmn.  11.)  Peiegriai  and
Laltni  who  had  become  Roman  citiien*  had,  in  a
legal  aenie,  no  rela^ie,  and  vera  thcreton  obliged
in  all  caaea  to  pay  the  vioetima  beredilatiam.  (Plin.
Pamg.  1.0.)  Aa  only  citiient  had  to  pay  thia  tax,
Camcalla,  in  ordei  to  make  it  more  productive
granted  the  ftsnchiie  to  all  the  auhjecU  of  Ibe  em-

((fMn'mo),  but  Ma>


(Dion


1-2),  .


wat  aballtbed  entirely.  It  wai  levied  in  Italy  and
the  provincea  by  prDnuatorea  appointed  for  lbs
purpoae,  and  who  are  mentioned  in  nuny  intcrip-


HRiiiDiT.  But  theae  offlcera
gqnerally  gold  il  Ibc  a  round  aum  to  the  puhlicani,
which  the  Utter  had  to  pay  in  to  the  piaefeeti  of
the  aerarimn  mililare.  (Plin.  EfiA  vii.  14,  Pamg.
37.)  [U  S.]

VICOMAOISTBI. [Vicufl.]

Vl'CTlMA. [SACBinciuM.]

VICTORIATUS. [DiNAHlua.]

VICUS  ia  Ibe  name  of  (ha  aubdiTiaioui  into
which  the  fonr  region*  occupied  by  the  four  dty
tribei  of  Serviua  TulliDi  were  divided,  while  Ihe
country  legiont,  according  to  an  inititution  aicribed
to  Numa,  were  aubdivided  into  PngL  (Dionya.  iL
76.) Tbit  diiiiion,  together  with  that  of  Ihe  four

the  time  of  Aiguatnt,  who  made  the  vid  anbdivi-
aiotu  of  Ihe  fourtwD  legiona  iota  which  ha  divided  \


VILLA.
(he  dty. (SueL  Ai^.  30.) In  tbii  dividon  e*A

amaller  by-itreeU  ;  their  number  va*  434,  »d
each  waa  aupcrintended  by  four  officera,  called  tko-
magisiri,  who  bad  a  aort  of  loal  police,  and  who.
•oeording  to  the  Rgulation  of  Augiutaa,  wen
every  year  choaen  by  lot  ftota  amoDK  the  pei^
*hD  lived  in  the  vieni.  (Suet  it. ;  Dion  Cna.  It.
8.)  On  certain  davi,  pnAably  at  the  oelebfatiB
of  the  compitalia,  they  wore  the  pnelaila,  and
each  of  them  waa  accompanied  by  twn  liclon.
(Dion  Caai.  I.  e. ;  Aieon.  adCicm  fun.  p.  7.  ed.
Or«llL)  The»  officen,  hawever,  were  not  a  nrw
ioitilution  of  Aueaatui,  for  they  had  eiiiied  during
Ihe  time  of  the  republic,  and  had  had  the  ame
fonctiona  ai  a  police  for  the  lici  of  the  Serrian
diviaion  of  Ibe  dty.  (Liv.  xuHv.  7  ;  Fcatna,  a  c
Moffutrnrt ;  comp.  Seitua  Rnfna,  flu  i  iiniiia  rfg
Sisim&ia  Urbii  Romae;  and  P.  Vktor,  de  A^n-
idina  Uriii  Homae.)  [L.  S.]

VICUSl (Univxrbitu,  p.  1216,  ■.]
VI'GILES. [ExiRcn'u&,  p.  510.  b.J
VIOI'LIAE. [CiHTBA,  p.  250,  L]
VIQINTISEXVIRI  were twentj-ui  nagi*-
tialua minorea,  among  wbom  ir


iL  29,  with  Lipaica'


».  the
ri  viamm  curandarum  (or  the  dlj,  the  two
viaram  for  Ihe  nsdi  onliide  thr  dty.  the
decemviri  litibua  (itlitilMt)  judiandii,  and  the  four
praefecl*  who  wen  aent  into  Campania  for  lb*
pnrpsae  of  adminiatering  juuiee  there.  An|;a<m
reduced  the  number  of  <^cert  of  thia  cdU^  la
twenty  (v^niinui),  aa  the  two  curatona  viana
far  the  roada  ouUide  the  city  and  the  fciir  Camp*-
nian  pnel^cta  were  aboliihed.  (Dion  Caea.  liv.  -26.]
Down  to  Ibe  time  of  Auguitu  the  tana  of  aenaton
bad  generally  aought  and  obtained  a  nUce  in  the
college  of  the  vigintiKiviii,  it  being  the  Gnt  <Mp
towarda  ihe  higher  ofiicea  of  the  republic  -.  bat  ia
A.  D.  13  a  aenatuaconaultum  wa*  pawd  ordaining
that  only  equltet  ahoald  be  riigible  to  the  coUep
of  the  vigintiviri.  The  caaieqaencc  ef  tbia  waa
that  the  vigintiriri  had  no  >eat*  in  ths  eenaw,
nnleaa  ihey  had  hnld  aoma  other  ma^atnej  which
conferred  thia  right  upon  theni.  (Dion  C«a.  f.e.)
The  age  at  which  a  penon  might  becane  a  Tigin-
tivir  appean  to  have  been  twenty.  (Ccapare  Dien
Cau.  li.  Si  Tacit.  AtaaL  iiL ""  '  '  ■■  '  •
note  :  Spart.  Did.  JvHaa.  I.)
magiatialei  forming  thia  college  baa  been  (tiven  in
Mparate  artielra.  [C  S.]

VIGINTIVIRI.  [ViQiMTism-iTniL]
VILLA,  a  farm  or  country-hooaev  Tbe  Rman
writer*  mention  two  kinda  of  villa,  tbe  tilU  rmtin
or  fann-houie,  and  tbe  villa  niaiM  or  farmdv
uriana,  a  reaidence  in  the  eoantiy  or  in  tbe  aalmila
of  a  toim.  When  both  of  tbeie  were  auKhed  ta
an  estate,  they  were  generally  united  in  the  ajDiu>
range  of  huildinga,  but  aoraelimea  they  w«»  ^uai
at  difierent  parta  of  the  eatate.  The  pirt  of  lb*
viUa  rmtica,  in  which  the  produce  of  tiie  &ni  wv
Ifcpl,  i>  ditlinguitbed  by  ColonMlU  by  ■  anpanw
Dwne,  viOa  frulaaria.

1.  The  ^a  nu«i«  ii  deaaibed  ly  Vmio  (ft  R.
in,  13),  Vltniviu.  (yi.  9),  and  CdoDdh  (i.  4.

§i)-

The  villa,  which  mnat  be  of  aiaa  euneejimdin;
to  that  of  tbe  farm,  ia  beat  placed  at  the  liiat  af  a
wooded  mouniain,  in  a  ipot  anpplied  witli  rsnoing
water,  and  not  eipoaed  to  aevers  wind)  uar  >B  tbe
efflnvia  of  Banbet,  not  (by  b^ig  don  m  a  (aUk
. ,. . , ... ,  ^.^.^


Mad)  to  a  too  G
MMdwdtoala


VILLA. ■

nmt  ioflux  of  liutan.  Tha  Till*
■  large  ium  bad  tiro  eoflrta  (eoiorta^
ttanu,  etrta,  Vam,  I  13).  At  tba  cnttance  t«
die  oater  coort  Taa  tfag  abodt  of  the  nttiow ,  that
Ita  might  nbaerTe  who  mnt  in  and  out,  and  over
Iha  door  mi  the  loom  of  tb*  jmieamliir.  {_  Vam,
Le, ;  Coliun.  L  6.^  Near  thii,  in  ai  wann  a  ipot
aa  poHJblc,  wu  the  kitchm,  which,  bandei  being
naed  fi>T  tlie  pi^Miation  of  food,  waa  the  place
*fa«n  ths  ilttm  {fiadliai)  auanbled  aftet  the
Uwnn  of  th«  day,  and  when  thej  parfonned
cvrtain  in-door  worii.  VitniTini  (dac»  near  tha
kitchen  the  balha  and  tha  pceia  ((ona/or)  foi  wina
and  oil,  hat  the  kttar,  accoiding  to  ColiuoeUa,
though  it  leqniraa  the  warmth  of  the  mn,  thould
not  bo  «apo«d  la  artificial  heat.  In  tha  ooter
court  wan  abo  tha  crilan  tra  wina  and  oil  (oe^^
aimriiii  <t  altariai),  which  ware  placed  on  tha
lard  glaand,  asd  tha  gnuuiiaii  which  wen  in  the
nppir  (tone*  of  the  fium-buildinga,  and  carcfull;
plotaated  frou  damp,  heat,  and  inaecta.  Theae
atora-rooma  foim  the  lepaiate  nffa  fracbiana  of
Colnmella  ;  Vam  placea  tham  in  the  «{&>  ratfifO,
bat  ViKnTiiu  ncommendi  that  all  pnidooe  which
ooold  be  injured  b;  fin  ■hanld  be  aland  without
(herilla.

Id  both  confti  wen  the  chamben  ((kUm)  of  tha
ilarai,  fnnting  the  (oath  ;  bat  ths  mattulMKi  for
thoaa  who  wen  kept  in  ehiiai  (vtneti)  wu  nnder-
gioand,  bciog  lighted  hj  wranu  high  and  namw

Tha  innei  conit  wai  occnpied  chieflT  b;  the
hociav  cattle,  aud  other  Ut*  itock,  and  hen  van
the  Mablat  and  ilalli  (MtUi,  tquSia,  tnilia).

A  merroir  of  water  wo*  made  in  the  ndddle  of
each  coort,  that  in  the  onter  court  for  eoaking  pulea
and  other  vegeUbla  produce,  and  that  in  the  inner,
whidi  wat  luj^lied  with  &«h  water  by  a  ipring,
for  tha  nae  of  the  cattle  and  ponltiy.

2.Thenf^arfuaaaip«ii<o-aiiai«iwu»called
beeasH  iti  interior  anangemant*  soiruponded  for
tbamoat  part  to  thaaeofalown-hoiiH.  [Honaa.]
VilrnTiai  (li.  8)  merely  ttatea  that  tba  deacription
of  the  latla  will  apply  to  the  f«mer  al»,  eicept
that  ID  the  town  the  atrium  ii  placed  cloae  to  the
door,  hnt  in  the  country  tha  periityla  camea  fint,
ai>d  afterward*  the  atriom,  mmHinded  by  [btmI
[lortkoe*,  looking  upon  the  paleiln  and  smbalatio.

Out  chief  •onrcea  of  infbimalion  an  tbia  inhJMt
are  two  lettara  of  Pliny,  in  one  of  which  (ii.  IT)
be  deaeribea  hi>  lAurantise  rilla,  in  the  other  (t.  G)
hia  TuKan,  with  a  few  aUaiiaiii  in  one  of  Cicero'i
letten  {ad  tjfiiiit.  iii  1 },  and,  a>  a  m«l  impraiant
illnitration  of  theaa  deacription*,  the  mnaini  of  a
nborbao  riUa  at  PompeiL  {Pompai,  ii.  e.  1 1,  Lend.
183-2.)

The  deareat  acconnt  it  that  ^iTen  by  Pliny  in
the  Gnt  of  the  two  letten  nMotioned  aboTs.  from
which,  thenfon,  the  following  datoiption  ii  for
the  moat  part  taken.

The  Tina  waa  approached  by  an  aTenne  of  plane
treea  leading  to  a  portico,  in  front  of  which  wa*  a


grawy
with  box-Creei  cut  into  (he  figure*

d  tilHt.wai  lo«t 'in  ^e plain,
which  wae  eorered  with  acanthoL (Plin.  (.  £  '
Next  to  the  portico  wat  an  atrinm,  analler  ai
plainer  thaa the  coneapondin^  apartment in
tDWO-bouib Id  thia  tc^ocl  Pluiy'i  deectiption


VILLICUS.  jisr

at  Tirianca  with  the  rale  of  Vitnnna ;  and  ths

Till*  at  Pompeii  alao  baa  no  atrium.  It  wDidd
appeanftom  Cicero  {Lb.)  that  both  aitangenienta
wen  eomnian.  Next  to  the  atrium  in  PlinyV
Lanrentina  lilla  wa*  a  muill  elliptic  prriatyla
(fvrtieia  M  O  fifatita  mMtudi»tm  an»maetM,
where,  bowerer.  the  md>Dg>  D  and  A  are  alio
given  initewl  of  O).  The  ioterrali  between  ths
column*  of  thi*  perittyle  wan  doaed  with  talo
window!  (^acabrihit,  lae  DgKifg,  p.  132),  and
the  nof  projected  coniidenbly,  lo  that  it  '


nnfan


. Tha


pen  (pace  in  the  centn  of  thii  periiljle  i
flan  to  have  beoi  eorered  with  mot*  and  oma-
lented  with  a  fountain.  Oppoiila  to  the  middle
of  thi*  peristyle  wt*  a  plcaaant  oaraediiuK,  and
beyond  it  an  elegant  tridininm,  itanding  out  from
the  other  bnildinn,  with  window*  or  gleied  doon
in  the  front  and  *idea,  which  thua  cooinuuided
a  *iew  of  the  ginondi  and  of  the  lunoundinK
country,  while  behind  then  wa*  an  nniniernipicd
view  tbnagh  the  caTaedium,  pariitylp,  atrium,
and  portico  into  the  lyitua  and  the  open  couutry

3pch  waa  the  prindpal  euite  of  apartment*  in
Pliny**  Lannntine  liila.  In  the  villa  al  Pomp«i
the  arrangemsnt  i*  tomewhat  diflerent.  The  eu-
trancs  i*  in  the  *tr*et  of  the  tomb*.  The  portico
lead*  tbrongii  a  *mall  vetlibule  into  a  large  tquan
periityle  paved  with  opm  ngmntim,  and  having  an
impluvium  io  ths  centre  of  it*  uncaiend  area.
Beyond  thi*  i*  an  open  hall,  membling  in  form
and  podtion  the  labliiaim  in  a  lown-houM.  Next
i*  a  long  gallon  extending  almoit  acmu  ths  whole
width  of  the  house,  azid  beyond  it  i*  *  large  cyai-*
c«ns  oecuB,  comeponding  to  the  large  tridinium  in
PHny**  villa.  Thii  room  look*  ont  upon  a  ■pacion*
court,  which  wa*  no  donbt  a  lyitni  or  garden,  and
which  ii  aumunded  on  all  *ide*  by  a  colonnada
eompoud  of  sqnan  pillan,  the  top  of  which  form*
a  tcmoe.  In  the  iartheat  tide  tf  thii  conrt  it  a
gate  teadtng  ont  to  the  open  country.  A*  tha
ground  dope*  downward  conaiderably  from  the
fnnt  to  the  back  of  the  villa,  the  terrace  jnit
ipoken  of  i*  on  a  ievd  with  the  cyaicene  oecD*,  ths
windows  of  whidi  opened  upon  it ;  and  beoealh
the  oecu*  itself  i*  a  nam  of  apartmenta  on  ths
level  of  the  la^e  court,  which  were  piobably  uted
in  aummer,  on  account  af  their  coolneit.

The  other  room*  were  h  arranged  ai  to  take
Bdvantage  of  the  diffennt  leasons  and  of  the  mr-
rounding  loeDery.  Of  these,  however,  there  is  only
one  which  rcquirea  porticuUr  notice,  namely,  A
itata  bed-chamber,  projecting  from  the  otiicr  build-
ing! in  an  elliptic  or  •emidrcular  firm,  *o  a>  to
adjnit  the  nm  daring  ila  whde  conru.  Thi*
apartment  is  mentioned  by  Pliny,  and  I*  aim  found
in  the  Pompeian  viIIl  In  Pliny'i  Lanrentina
vilU  it*  will  was  fitted  up  a*  a  libiuy.

The  villa  contained  a  set  of  hatha,  the  genenl
arrangement  of  which  wa*  timiiar  to  that  of  tha
public  bath*. [Balni:Ii.]

Attached  to  it  wan  a  gvden,  /btMoHo,  galatia,
UppodTOPaa,  tpliarruttriiBH,  and  in  shori  all  necsa-
■ary  ursngemenl*  for  enjajing  dilferent  kinds  of
eiercise. [Hobtvs  ;  OiiK^iavii.]

(B«ker,  aidla.  voL  i.  p,  358  ;  Schneider'*  note*
on  Colnmella  and  Yam,  and  Oierig'*  on  Pliny,
conlun  many  u*eftil  remariia)  [P.  S.]

Vl'LLICUS  (hlrpsni  in  Greek  writen,  Ptut.
Crau.  i),  a  elave  who  had  the  mperiateodauca


llsa  VTNDICATIO.

of  llta  tiUa  naSm,  and  of  ill  iBa  InuiM
the  bim,  «xcept  tlie  ealtia,  whkh  mm  onder  tlra
can  of  tha  magiiltr  paorit.  (Vairo,  R.R.  i.  2.)
Th«  dntiai  of  tha  riUicui  wara  to  obey  hit  nuuler
implicitlj,  mi  to  gonm  tha  othar  daTw  witb
nmditntioii,  name  to  Igtia  tha  villa  «cept  to  go  la
ma^st,  to  haTB  no  btanetiTM  with  uothiBjan,
to  taka  «n  of  tha  cattle  and  tha  im]ilamcDt>  of
faiubamliy,  isd  to  managt  all  dig  opentian)  of  the
fum.  (Caui,  R.  B.  6.  U3.)  Hii  dudai  an  de-
■cribed  at  gnat  length  by  Colmnena  (xj.  1.
L  8),  and  Uoae  of  lua  wife  {aUica)  bj  tha  nme
wiilar  (xii.  1),  and  b;  Calo  (a  U3).

Tha  void  waa  alu  laad  to  deaoibe  a  poMO  to
whom  tha  Duuiagaaent  of  tnj  boaiiMei  waa  en-
tnuted.  (See  lEe  paawe  qnoled  in  FotmIHiu'i
Lerian.)  IP-  8-]

VINAXIA.  Tliaii  woe  two  feitinli  of  thia
■una  nlsbntiid  faj  tbi  Romaiu:  the  Ftaatia
mrbam  or  prioriot  tni  tbt  Fimilu  rn^Hn  or  altera.
The  Tinalia  nrfaua  wen  cetebated  on  tha  23nl  of
April  (ix.  Oalaid.  Mai).  Thii  feitinl  aniwared
to  the  Qeeak  siftn-rin,  a>  on  tfaii  occaiion  tha  wine
euki  which  had  been  filled  the  pnceding  aatiunn
were  opened  foi  the  fint  time,  and  the  wins  tailed.
(Plin.  H,  N.  iniL  6S.  §  9.)  Bat  bddie  men  «-
Mallj  tarted  the  new  wine,  a  libkUon  wai  obnd
to  Jupilet  (Feet,  a  e.  Vniaiia)t  whicb  waa  oiled
calpu. {fax.  i.t.  Oiipar.)

Tbe  ruaiic  Tinalla,  which  faU  on  tha  lath  of
Angnil  (iir.  CUnd.  SipL)  and  wai  calabnted
t^  the  tnhabitanta  of  all  I^nm,  wai  tha  day  on
which  the  nalage  wu  opened.  On  thia  occMion
tha  Simen  dialu  offend  lamba  to  Juplet,  and
wbile  the  fleib  of  the  Tictinu  la;  on  the  attar,  ha
broke  with  hii  own  faondi  ■  bunch  of  gi*pe<  tram
a  Tina,  and  by  this  act  be,  aa  it  wen,  opened  the
vintage  [tiiidaiiaam  anyteari ,-  VaiTO,  Ja  Ling.  Lot
*L  SO),  and  no  moat  waa  allowed  to  be  oinnyed
into  the  dxj  nntii  thia  aoleinnity  wu  perfianned.
(Plin.  H.  ff.  nuL  69.  S  4.)  Thia  day  wai
ncted  to  Japlter,  and  Venna  ton  appaan  to  haje
had  a  ihan  m  it.  (Vam,  l.e.;iURt  JimiL  L  1  ;
Jttenib.aaL  L  *;  Grid,  fntf.  ir.  BS7,  &c)  An
■ceotut  of  the  (torj  whieh  waa  beliered  to  have
giTen  nee  to  the  eelebimtioa  of  thii  featiral  ia  giren
byFpmu  (i.b.  Awtua  mmJia)  and  Ofid  {Fait,
it.  863,  ftc  ;  Gonpan  AnnL  Viet.  d»  Orig.  Gad.
AoklIS).  [L.S.]

VIN'DEMIA'LIS  FE'RIA.  [Fikui,  p.
£30,  a.]

VINDBX.  [AtTTto,  pk n,  Bi HiMm IN-

VINDICATIO.  ActioM.  In  Ran  wen  called
Vindicationei ;  Aetionei  in  Penonam,  *'  qnibot
daii  fieri  oportere  IntendiniBa,''  wen  called  Con-
dictioneb  (Oaiui,  i*.  3.)  Vindicationei  thenfon
wan  aotiana  about  the  title  to  na  Corponlei,
and  to  Jon  in  n. {Oaioa,  it.  5.) The  dittinctian


mVin<


aaMnlial  diitinction  which  wu  not  aSectsd  by
the  change  in  the  form  of  procedon  liom  the
Legii  Actionei  to  that  of  the  Fonnulaa.  The
Lc^  Actianea  fell  into  dinue  (Oaitu,  \i.  31)
eioept  in  the  caae  of  Damnom  Infaetiun  and  a
Jodiciun  CentonTinle,  and  fram  thii  lime  both
VindicatioDei  and  Coodictionei  wen  pneecnted
by  the  Foimolaa.  [Actio.]  Tha  peculiar  proceu
of  the  Vindicatia  belonged  to  the  period  when  tha

«  of  proceeding  Lege  (Oaiu^  if.


«  Action
Tba  fin  a


VINDICATIO.
;  PerJDdieiipo

[P»« Jddku
TioHiH  g  Pan  CoNDiCTKipiui ; Hufci  Inibb-

TlOi Put PiaNOBB CafukuI.]

A  man  niighl  prooacd  SacranMinl*  either  m  d*
caaa  of  m  Actio  in  penman  or  an  Actio  in  na.

Theputoftheprooeai  whidci


the  iono  of  ■  aaitfic  te

tbii  fbfin  of  aetiDn  ita  peculiar  i  liaiw  !■  ^^oi  Aa
partinwoi  in  jndicio^thaT  briefly Mntadthoreun

Miecally,  which  wu  tailed riiijialiii If  it

wu  an  Actio  in  iwn,  that  ii  a  VindiDUia,  MeiuUa
ibtnga  and  aoiing  thinga  (■etilib  M  aaov^ia)
wbicbcoDid  bebcnghtbMbn  tbePliM>(BJui
_,.-__.  ..,___ ... ,  (^  jm,fm*m.


'  daiaanl  (aJrinriiit)  did  nnd  isid  the  ai
daimngofa  thuigu]n7eity  bj  tayicsdM
npon  it,  wai  "  in  jnn  Bunnm  csnaKcre,"  a
phneeaa  old  aa  tha  XII  Tabka. (OdL  vr.  I«.)
The  Praetor  than  lud :  "  Uittile  ambo  hooiufn,'
and  the  chumanla  obeyed.  Than  he  who  had  aada
the  fiiat  Tindkatio  thni  addwid  hii  oppaiirBl :
"PoMnla  aone  dicaa  qoa  ex  canea  'rindicamii.'*
The  opponent  replied :  "  Tni  pnngi  iWnl  ^ladii  !»■
ipoani." Than  he  ^M>  had  Bade  tha  fint  eindi-
' pnceeded  to  that  put  of  (he  pnoMa  called  tha
mantum,  which  wu  in  the  fbfoi  of  a  wayr
iheHight;  he  uid:  "QqaodtttBi^jwianD-
dieaTiiti  D  Aeiii  laaaniaita  ta  pniiaaa.'' TW
opponent  npUad  by  ginng  tha  Similiter ;  "  Sioa-
liter  ego  te."

Tha  proceN  of  tha  Sacnmestan,  m  alnady
ihierTed,  wu  applicable  to  an  actio  in  |iii»iinia ;
but  u  that  wu  founded  on  an  obUgaCia,  then  waa
'  coona  DO  qwdfic  object  ta  tlaiai.  Id  the  eaaa  s£
Vindiolio  the  Praetor  dechued  the  Viodkiaa
iftTogrofoneof  thepaitie»,Ibat  i%in  the  aeaa*
maheaitahlirfiedoBeot  thepartJMuPnTiiir,
Un  ta  gJTB  iHiuily  ta  Ua  offoumi


dan  litii  etra

TbePnetoc  took  aaenrity  ftotn  bilh  fee  tha

loont  of  tha  Suraoentun;  far  tha  pv^  wha

iled  paid  tha  unonnt  of  the  Swwealaa  aa  a

penalty  (ponoi  whuh)  which  panail;  beknged

U  the  Mats  (n  paUicsB  oiUirf). Tha  «uaa  U

nuney  wen  originally  depoiited  ia  laiiii the


y  h«lL,  J


■1  nm  wu  Bud  iMlB  tha
(VaRO,d(£.A180,  ISJ^i  Featoa,
e.  aaminawfaiM.)
The  Poena  of  the  Saoraeato

I  di^nle  wu  of  the  Talaa  of  B !


uningnariB,
o  the  fiupiatj


•  o"


VIKDICATIO.


npwaidi ;  maim  matt  tittmXlttnia»\ii>uUtf
aoH.  Thii  mi  a  prarinim  of  ihi  XII.  TbUh  ;
bat  if  a  mm'i  findiim  (UvAh)  wai  m  iHii«,  the
pma  m*  aolj  Gft  j  auei.

It  th*  jnftnj  daimad  wa>  a  piaoe  at  land,  tin
dainaoU  qipMnd  la  jnn  and  ehaUsngcd  each
otlwr  la  go  on  ttia  land  io  (ho  pnamc*  of  wiUwnM
(MfunMa,  FwtDi,fc  v.;  Cie.m  Murma,  13),
vhoa  cacb  inada  hi*  daio.  In  th*  tiiM  of  tha
Tw*lTa  TiUa*  my  OdUm  (xi.  10)  tho  Uagi*-
tfatol  who  pcnidad  io  tfao  cemt  BeGompuisd  tha
paitiii  Id  tha  land  in  dtdd  to  paifoct  tha  pnceM
mJuB  I  bat  thia  moda  of  pnc8diin,whi(ifa  might
da  in  mj  aailjr  thaat  and  within  a  naall  lanitoi;,
■oil  han  baenna  iDCODianieot.  Aocofdioglj  it
liiiiaiaii  &»  pnctica  fin  <hm  if  ik*  daJBanti  Io  go
IhnBgh  Ih*  ibni  af  ejictbig  tha  othai  fron  t£a
laDd,  which  wh  talUd  th*  Via  CiTili*.  (Con-
pan  Oalliaa,  xx.  10  i  Qb  pn  Chwiaa,  1,  7.  32,
;ipa  7idSp,W.)  In  coon*  of  tima  it  tMcama
the  piactio*  to  bring  into  canit  a  olod  of  cartb,  or
a  bit  of  a  ootDms,  ai  a  dsn  of  ths  thing  ;  and
BT*a  in  tha  ouo  tj  mortabU  objKti,  a  fait


wholo


and  the  Viidieatia  wai  mado  ai  if  the  whuie  thing
wai  tlten.  It  •earn*  that  tfaa  pnoeM  might  alio
Iw  bcgnn  ij  the  partie*  perfoiming  tha  eeranooy
of  the  Dedoetia  on  the  gnnutd  babra  they  tame  In
ju,  when  however  tbar  perfimnad  tho  fiction  of

pUthac

ted  to  tho  phiBla  "  <«  Jot*  B


{HUtie*,  be  aa;*,  then  vent  loggthu
diipntOi  and  bronght  a  elod  of  tarth  from  it,  "  in
ju  in  nrbem  ad  Piaetotem  ;"  and  ih*  clod  of  eaith
wu  Tiawad  ai  the  wholi  "  agar."

When  tha  Legi*  Actjonea  fall  into  dinua,  tha
pneau  of  the  Vindicatio  wai  altered  and  beiame
that  of  the  Sponiio.  The  tann  Sponiio  ii  beat  ex-
plained bj  giring  the  labatanca  of  a  pateige  in
Gaia*(iT.  SI,  &a.>  In  thaoaatrfanactio  inion,
•  Dan  nughl  pnwMd  aitlnr  Per  ionankm  petito-
nam,  in  which  lb*  Inlantio  of  the  plaintiff  wai,
thala  certain  thing  wa*  hi*  pmat^)  «h*  might
proceed  Pk  •pontionam  whidi  did  not  contain
audi  an  InlentiOL  The  dehndani  wai  diBlleng«d
to  a  SpoDiie  in  mch  teimi  ai  theie :  "  Si  bomo
qno  d*  igitDi  1  jar*  Qniiithmi  meoi  cat  M*tenioi
xiT.  Namnoadaie  ipmdca?"  The  Intentio  in
ths  farmnla  wai  that  if  the  ilaTa  belonged  to  the
plaintiK  the  mm  of  moBej  eonlained  in  tha  Span-
do  ou^t  to  be  [aid  to  the  plaintiff  ((pouBw
nmiBaB  adori  dari  diiert).  The  Sponiio  eri-
dentij'  took  ita  name  from  the  TOib  Spondee.  If
(ha  plaintiff  prored  the  iIbto  to  be  hii  pnpertr,  he
waa  intilinl  10  a  judgmenU  Yet  the  mm  of  mo-
neif  «■•  not  paid,  though  it  wa*  the  object  of  the
Intenlio,  for,  tKjt  Oaini,  "  it  ii  not  poenili*,  bat
piBojadieiBiia,  and  the  apondo  i>  introduced  menlf
a*  ■  mrani  of  ujriDg  the  right  Io  the  property,  and
thia  ai^na  whj  tha  defendant  hu  no  mtipula-
tin."  The  ipcaino  wai  lud  to  be  "nn  praede
IJti*  at  lindicianui,*'  beooie  it  took  the  place  of
the  ptaedium,  which  wben  the  Lcgii  aclione*  were
in  DK,  wu  giTen^pni  bte  et  Tiodiciii,''  that  ia,

**pcar>et  fnictibaa>'b7lhepoBe*n

ti£ [PBAtKTDICIUll  i  Fkam.]


VINDICATIO.


good  nUQo  fbr  lb*  pnetice.  It  might
be  coDJeeuied  that  it  wa*  intmdiced  in  order  to
obriate  the  cronblB  and  difficult  attendant  on  th*


oldpi


H  of  the  Vindiatio.


thara  wu  al*o  a  Sponeio  Poenalii,  that  ii  both  the
ddendant  made  a  iponiio  and  the  plwntiff  made  a
tntipnktio.  Thn*  in  the  caie  of  "  oeita  pecnnia
mdita,"  the  defendanf*  ipoodo  wai  made  at  the
tiik  of  loung  the  Mnn,  if  ne  csnld  not  Hutain  hia
denial  of  th*  plaintiffs  claim  ;  and  (he  plaintiff^
laitipalatia  wa*  mad*  at  the  like  litk  if  he  could
not  foptiort  hi*  obio.  Tbe  poena  of  th*  Sponiio
and  na^nlatio  beknged  to  the  luocenful  part;,
{Oaiu,  iT.  13.)  Than  wa*  alio  a  Poanalii  iponiio
in  th*  ea**  e( Inteidiet*  (Oaini,  iT.  Ul,  166, &c),
and  PeconiB  Coutilnta.  In  the  cue  of  Certa
Pecnnia  the  iponuo  wai  to  tbe  amoont  of  one-thiid
of  Ih*  mm  demanded,  which  wa*  oiled  legicima
pan.  (Cic.  pn  Rota.  Com,  4,  i.)  In  the  cnia  of
Conatituta  Pecnnia  the  iponBo  wa*  to  the  amount
of  nnfrball  (Gain*,  U.  171.)  Theie  itipDlatione*
were  Gied  b;  Uw  :  in  oUiercaae*  thev  were  fixed
bf  tha  Edict.


to  the  part;  who  nlti-
.  br  olberwiae  then  do
in  the  Reman  law  to  be  snj  direct  pro-
THHB*  aa  to  the  coata  of  ioili.  Thai  Oahu  (ir.
174)  enomelBlca  fbni  nodea  in  which  the  Aetoria
ahmnia  it  checked  ]  the  Calumniae  judidnm,
CoDttniiBmjiididnm,Jaijaiandimi,  andtheResti-
pnhlig.  Ttaa  Reatipalatia,  be  laTa,  "  ii  dlowed
in  certain  caae*  ;  and  ai  in  the  Coutiarinm  jndidnm
the  plaintiff  hu  in  aU  taaei  judgment  ogainit  him,
if  be  cannot  nutain  hii  eaae,  and  it  nattati  not
whether  or  not  he  know*  that  hit  daim  wu  not
good,  B  in  d)  (am  tbe  plaintiff  (that  it  if  he  can-
not nut^  hii  caai)  i*  condemned  in  the  penalt;
of  tha  letlipdlatia."

At  to  tbe  fiirm  of  the  Bpcoiio  the  pauige  of
Cbunt  already  rafaned  to  ia  an  '""pi-  j  and  then
i*  anoth»  m  tbe  orattou  of  Cicero,  pro  P.  Qa^
(io  <8.  27).  The  lUB  of  the  word  Si  oi  Ni  in  tb*
Spondo  would  depend  on  the  h  '  ' '  '
firmed  or  nther  oi  the  mode  i


The  Diber  nwda  of  pi


I.  23)  *J


Eedan  in  the  eaae  of  Vin*
aftei  the  Legit  Aetionet
fell  into  dime  wa*.  Per  Formnhm  Petitoriam,  in
which  the  plaintiff  {actor)  daimad  the  tbing  u  hit
property  (MtwiU  rem  moia  sh).  In  thii  form  <^
proceeding  there  wu  the  Stipolatio  ailed  Jndioi-
lum  toWi,  by  which  the  deiendant  eogagad  to  obey
the  decneof  the  Jodei.  (Gain*,  It.  91.)  Thii
fitrmub  wii  adapted  alto  to  tbe  eaiei  of  Praetwian
ownenbip  and  tbe  Actio  Pnblidana.  (OaiDi,  ir.
34,36.)  In  cwBawhkhwaehnivhtbelamtb*
Contumnri,  it  wn  the  praetiee,  at  leaat  in  lb*
Imperial  period,  to  coma  fint  bebn  tbe  Piwtor
Urfaanni  or  Peregrinui  in  order  that  the  matter
might  be  put  in  the  old  finm  of  tbe  Saciamentam,
(Own*,  It.  SI,  9G  ;  QelL  u.  10.)
An  beredilu  wu  mcd  for  like  any  other  tbing
, --- -  ^^--


1200  VINDICTA.

•either  hj  tfw  SHnunentam,  w  lon^  u  it  wu  in

UK, « ths SponuD,  m tile  Pctitotia  Fonnnli.

<aBiui,iT. U,  31  i Walter.  OadaaiU  da  Rim.

Stdm  !  Pueht«,  liuL  il  %  161.)  (0.  L.]

VINDI'CIAE. IViNDiciTio.]

VINDICTA. [Manumiwco  ; Vi!iric*Tn>.]

VJNDICTA. A  clua  of  «tion)  in  the  Roman

Liw  hare  reference to  Vindicla  u their  object,

which  it  thiu  expnued ; ad  ultionem  pertinet.  in

(Dig.  47.  tiL  12.  1.  6.  10  ;  29.  tit.  2.  a.  20.  g  6.)
Some  of  theee  actioni  bad  flic  their  object  aimplf
compeniationf  aa  the  .^ctio  doll.  Othen  had  for
theii  object  to  gin  the  complainaDt  Kiaiethiiig  more
(  pocKi}  than  the  amonat  of  liii  injiuf,  u  in  the
Futti  actio,  and  lomBtinit*  in  addilii>n  to  thii  com-
penution  sIm  u  in  the  Vi  Bonamm  raptomm  actio.
A  third  clau  of  actioni  had  for  it>  immediate  object
money  or  property,  but  Ihii  wai  not  the  nltimate
object  M  in  the  ouei  alnady  mentioned,  but
■nerelj  a  meane  ;  the  real  object  wai  Vindicta.
Thii  Vindicta  coniiiti  in  the  n-«tabliihmsnt  of  a
tight  which  haa  been  violated  in  the  penon  •>(  the
complaixLant,  in  which  caae  die  individual  diichargei
the  office  which  the  Slate  diichargea  Renerallj  in
matten  of  Crime.  Thoaaactioni  o[  which  Vindicta
ii  the  object,  are  diitingnithcd  btim  other  sctiona
b;  fonning  eiceptioni  to  the  general  rule)  a>  (o  the
legal  capacity  of  tfaoM  who  may  intlitate  them,
(Uch  ai  a  Eliuilkaiiliu  and  one  who  haa  luitained
a  eapjtit  demiautio.

The  fbllawing  ara  action*  of  thii  kind : —
1.  Actio  iDJurianun.  When  a  filini&miliai  wu
injured,  a  wrong  wii  done  both  to  him  and  to  his
father.  The  injury  done  to  the  ion  ii  the  only
one  that  belongi  to  the  head  of  Vindicta.  The
fiilhec  genenlly  bnnight  the  actiui,  for  ha  could
acquire  through  hie  hd  all  lighta  of  action.  But
the  ton  could  bring  an  action  in  hit  own  name  with
thepeimtuionof  the  Piaeur,  if  the  father  waiab-
aent,  or  wai  in  any  wayprevenled  &am  bringing  the
action  ;  and  in  lome  caiei,  if  the  hlher  leiuied  to
bring  the  acIioD.  The  pecuniary  damage*  which
were  the  immediate  object  of  the  action  belonged
to  the  father,  bd  that  the  un  appeared  in  the
double  capacity  of  luing  in  hi*  own  name  in  re-
>pcct  of  the  Vindicta,  and  aa  the  lepreKntatiie  of
his  £atbeF  in  reipect  of  the  damagea  If  the  ion
va*  emancipated,  the  right  of  action  paued  to  him
and  WBiDot  dettrored  fay  the  capitii  deminutio.

2.  Actio  wpaicn  vioiati,  whicheouid  he  bnmght
by  the  childien  of  the  deceaHid.  even  if  tfaey
teFuHd  the  heredita^  or  by  the  heredee.  The
object  wu  Vindicta,  which  wu  effected  by  giring
the  pliintiff  damaga  to  ths  amnunt  of  ths  wrong
(quoHlioif  earn  rem  anpatmvuiebiturt  ^v.  Dig.  47.
tit.  12.  L  S).  The  action  wai  conesqaently  in
bonnm  et  aeqnnm  concepta,  and  the  right  wai  not
B%cted  by  a  cnpitit  deminutio.  If  thoie  who  bad
a  right  to  hring  the  action  neglected  to  do  (o,  any
penon  might  being  tiie  action  ;  but  in  that  case
the  dama^mere  limited  to  100  auiei  by  the  Edict

3.  Actio  de  effuiii.  When  a  fne  penon  wai
injured  by  anything  being  poored  or  thrown  from
a  houia,  he  had  an  actio  in  bonnm  et  aeqnum  con-
c^ta,  tlie  ultimata  object  oF  which  wa*  Vindicta.

4.  An  action  for  miichief  done  to  a  man  by  any
dangeroua  animal  belonging  to  another,  when  it
happened  through  the  want  of  pnpet  caution  on
the  fut  of  the  owner.  (Dii.  21.  tit.  1.  a  40—13.)

&  luteidictum  quod  ti  aut  dam. Thii  ii  a


VINEA.*
nUnt  which  cnnld  be  inftitnlad  by  ai
at  hii  own  name,  becwiw  the  object  waa  Vindicta.
The  ground  of  thii  capacity  of  a  filiuirfimiliaa  waa
an  injury  done  to  him  personally  by  npezvRi  lAv
acted  in  oppoilIiDn  to  hit  nmonitnince.  If  for  ia-
ilance  the  ion  inhabited  a  home  belonging  M  hk
father  or  one  hired  &om  a  itcanger,  and  wu  dti-
lurbed  in  hii  enjoyment  by  mow  act  of  hiiiMigb-
boor,  the  Gliui&miliai  might  bare  aa  actian  te
ihe  aroDunt  of  the  damage,  bat  tba  pecmiaiy
latisfactiou  would  belong  la  the  &lhei  aa  is  tlv
me  of  the  Acuo  Injurianim.  Bat  tba  actiea  '^
not  in  bonnm  et  aequum  coneepta,  iinc«  it  hod  a
definite  object,  whidi  waa  either  the  mtonlioa  af
Lhings  to  their  former  condition,  whidi  might  be
immediately  lor  the  bensSl  of  the  fiUoAiiuliBa.  sr
Lo  aicertain  the  Talne  of  the  wning  dc»  ijmoi

6.  The  action  agunit  ■  Libertoi  in  raspeet  ef  an
In  Jul  vocalio.  [Patkonus.]  If  the  Libota
had  proceeded  igainit  the  ion  of  hit  patno.  and
the  father  wai  abieaC,  the  Km  amid  imtitnie  tlit

ithimieli;ag  in  the  cue  of  the  Actio  Injuriaioa.

7.  Querela  Inofficioii '~


which  the  plaintiff  clairai  i

Bi  a  prints  indiTidnal : I

kind of  repreientBtiTe  of

iplained  of  be  inch  ai  a


jnng 1


uefin-


efereuce  to  any  other  per*on  a
it  purely  popular :  to  tbii  daai  belong  nek  ae-
mi  11  the  Actio  aepulcri  TiolatL  Bat  if  then
eno  penona  who  are  indiiidnally  intsmtrd  ia
e  matter  compluned  of,  or  none  each  bring  aa
tion,  any  penon  {  mmii  ex  pcfwb)  miiy  btuq;  the
tion  ai  the  Procuntor  of  the  Stala,  and  be  ii
it  bonnd  to  giro  the  eecnrity  which  aa  otdiaaiy
ocumtor  mutt  give.  A  filiut&niiitu  can  briai
ch  action. By  lirlue  of  the  Litii «


ibligatio,  and  Ihja  right  of  action  aa  wiil  aa
the  money  which  may  ariie  fron  it  ia  acqaiied  by
the  liliiufamiliai  for  bis  father.  Tb««*  aclNacs
being  for  fixed  nms  of  money  are  not  io  booma  et

H  may  be  daated  ai


beloni


:ind.  the  1


Popularia,  and  that  Not  ,
ii  for  the  pmteetion  of  Publicum  Ja*  ;  with  ibii
diitinctiDn,  that  the  proceeding!  bare  oM  fbr  ibeir
object  the  recorery  of  a  anm  of  money.  Bat  ia
the  gsneial  capacitT  of  all  penoni  to  biinf  atKb
action!,  independent  of  the  umal  lulea  ai  n  legal
capacitr,  all  these  mode*  of  procesding  agree.

(SaTigny,  ^titm  da  hat.  Aoa.  Kmif,  VL
131.)  [G.  L.]

VIIIEA,  in  it!  lileial  gignificatiim,  ii  a  bower
formed  of  the  bmnehei  of  Tinei,  and  fitoi  tbe  pta-
teetion  which  inch  a  leafy  n»f  affiifda,  the  oaae
wa>  applied  by  the  Romana  to  a  nVC  noder  which
the  beiiegetaof  a  town  pntected  theauelTSsagaiail
darti,  Monei,  fire,  and  the  like,  which  WM*  throws
by  the  beticged  upon  the  aaMilaoti.  Tba  docna-
lion  which  Vegelini  (rJe  Ra  Mil,  ir.  Ih)  pn%  if
each  a  machine  perfectiy  igtoc*  with  what  we  kuew
of  it  from  the  inddeuBl  mention  of  other  wriufa.
The  whole  machine  fsimad  a  r«oC  realing  irpia
poiti  eight  feet  in  beigbL  ^le  Tsot  itadf  waa  |tc-
neially  uiteen  Feet  long  and  loTen  bread.  Tb*
wooden  frame  was  in  most  caie*  light,  aa  thai  it


VINUM.
csdM  be  nrried  by  ths  loUiin  t  tomelimea,  lov-
eTer,  vhcn  ths  parjme  which  iC  wai  to  wrn  n-
quind  gmt  itnngtb,  it  wm  hcBTj  afid  then  ths
whole  fabric  prolibly  wm  moTBd  hj  wheeli  it-
tnchid  to  tha  poiU.  The  n»rwBi  formed  of  plunk*
and  wicker-work,  and  the  Dppennoit  Infer  or  layen
caniialed  of  raw  hidei  or  wel  doth  ni  >  pratec^on
■gsinit  tire,  bj  which  the  bni*g«d  trrquentlf  de-
Btrojed  the  Tiixne.  (Li*.ii  17,  t.  7,  »i-  6\.)
The  lidee  of  ■  linta  were  likewiw  protected  b;
wicker-work.  Snch  in*chinei  were  coottnicted  in
a  afo  pbufl  M  lODie  diiUnce  from  the  beaded
towQ,  ud  then  carried  or  wheeled  (^wre)  dOH  ta
its  walk.  Here  KrerBl  of  them  wen  frequently
Joined  together.  »  that  1  great  itamber  of  aildien
mighl  be  emplojed  under  them.  When  Tineae
had  taken  their  place  doea  to  the  wallt  the  lol-
dien  befian  iheir  operatioiu,  dther  b;  nndetmining
the  wall*,  and  (hni  opeiuDg  ■  b«eh,  or  by  em-
ploying tha  b)tttering.ram  (orwe,  Lir.  iiL  7.  8).
In  tha  time  of  Vegetioi  the  loldien  uied  te  call

did":™ '" ™™' ' ' " [[-  8-]  "

VINCM  (s^i).  The  general  term  for  tha
fermented  joice  of  the  gtape.

The  nitiie  country  of  the  tine  wm  long  a  vei-
ata  qnaeitia  among  botanitli,  but.  altboogn  many
point*  itiil  remBin  open  fiir  debate,  it  wema  now  to
be  generally  aduiowledged  that  it  is  indigenou*
throughaal  the  whole  of  that  Taat  tract  which
alretches  Miuthward  from  the  woody  raoontaina  of
Maaanderln  on  the  Cai|Haii  to  the  shotee  of  the
Fenian  Onlf  and  the  Indian  sea,  and  caitward
through  KhiHBsan  and  Cabul  to  tha  base  of  the
Itimiitsca, — tbe  region  to  which  history  and  phi-
lalogy  alike  point  as  the  cradle  of  the  human  race.
Hence,  when  we  consider  the  rxtrame  bcilily  of
the  pnwsu  in  its  moM  simple  form,  we  need  little
wonder  that  the  art  of  making  wine  sboold  hate
been  diseoTered  at  ■  Tcry  remote  epoch.

In  the  earliest  of  profajie  writers  tbe  coltiTation
of  the  gr^ie  is  represented  as  faniliarlo  the  Heroic
Oreek*,  some  of  bis  most  beautiful  and  lind  pic-
tun*  of  rural  life  being  doaely  connected  with  tha
loili  of  the  Tineyard.  It  is  worth  nmarking  that
the  only  wins  upon  wboae  excellence  Hotner  Elates
in  a  tone  approaching  to  hyperbde  i*  represented
OS  haTing  been  prodnced  on  the  coaM  of  Thisca,  the
region  from  which  poetry  and  dTitiutioii  tpread
into  Hellas,  and  tha  scene  of  seieral  of  the  mora
remarkable  exploits  of  BaccbD*.  Hence  wa  might
infer  that  the  Pelasgiani  introdnced  theeultnm  of
" ■  LO  when  they  »r '  - "■ ' -■--


Hellespont,  and  that  in  like  n

unner  it  wi

IS  eon-

Yeved  to  tbe  Ttilay  of  tha  Po,

when  at  a

aubse-

quent  period  they  made  tfaeir  way  round  Ih

ehead

dT  the  Adriatic. It  seems  certa

n  from  the

legends  that  wine  was  both  rar

e  and  coMly

in  tha

earlier  ages  of  Italian  and  Roman  history.

Thus,

a  trwlition  preserred by  Varro  (op.  J-im

H.N.

xiT.  M)  told  that  when  Meiei

titl.  agreed

to  aid

the  Ruliliani  be  itipulalad  that

Ihepmduce

of  the

lAtian  Tinayards  should
mulua  i*  laid  to  fasTe  used  milk  only  in  his  oSer-
ings  to  the  godi  (Plin,  Lc)  :  Noma,  to  check  ax-
traTagance.  prohibited  the  iprinkliDg  of  wine  upon
the  funetal  pyre,  and,  to  stimulate  the  energies
of  the  nutjc  population,  he  ordained  that  it
abould  be  held  impion*  to  offer  a  libation  to  the
l^a  of  wine  which  bad  flowed  from  an  unpruned


TIMniL  1301

tbst  Papiciiis  tha  diolator,  when  about  to  jmn  in
battle  with  the  Sannites.  rowed  to  Jupiter  a  amoll
cupful  (tot  poeillutt)  if  ha  tbonld  gain  the  viciorr.
That  wine  was  racked  ofF  into  amphotne  wi
stored  up  in  regular  cellars  as  earty  u  the  eru
of  the  Oracchi  Pliny  considers  proved  by  tha
enitence  in  hi*  own  day  of  the  Vnaim  OpauaxMm,
detcribed  hereafter.  But  vtea  then  no  specific  ap-
pellation was  given  to  the  produce  of  different  lo-
calities, and  the  jar  wm  marked  with  the  name  of
the  consul  alone.  For  many  years  after  thi>  foreign
growtha.


andu


intage.  .


in  tbe  times  of  Marius  and  Sulla  that  a  single
draught  only  was  oBered  to  the  guests  at  a  bui-
qnet.  The  rapidity  with  which  luxury  spread  in
this  matter  is  well  illostrsted  by  the  saTing  of
H.  Varro,  that  Lucullus  when  a  boy  never  saw  an
entertainment  in  his  father's  bouae,  however  sfden-
did,  at  which  Greek  wine  was  handed  round  more
than  once,  but  wiien  in  manhood  he  returned  from
his  Asiatic  conquests  he  be«towed  on  the  people  a
largess  of  more  than  a  hundred  thousand  cadi-
Four  diffiirent  kinds  o' '  '. . ■


e  first  ti


1  by


iTulius  Caesar  in  his  third  c<  , ,

these  b«ng  Falemian,  Chian.  Lesbian,  and  Msmei^
Una,  and  not  nnul  after  this  date  vera  the  mrrita
of  die  nnmennu  Tariaties,  fiireign  and  domestic,
accurately  known  and  fully  appreciated,
during  the  reign  of  AuguttL  '  '  '
successor*  the  study  of  wine*  Became  a  passion,  ana
tbe  moat  scrupulous  care  was  bestowed  upon  every
process  connected  with  their  production  and  pre-
Kmiion.  (Plin.  //.  N.  liv.  28.)  Pliny  alculatea
that  the  number  of  wines  in  the  wbole  world  d»-
accounted  of  high  quality  {inAUia)
eighty,  of  which  hii  own  country
could  claim  two-third*  (xiv.  13)  \  and  in  uioihe'r
paaaege  (xir.  29)  be  aaserts  ^t  195  distinct  kind*
might  be  redoned  Dp,  and  that  if  all  the  raheliH
of  these  were  to  be  indaded  in  the  computation,
the  sum  wouhl  be  almost  doubled.  (Plin.  H.  N.
xii.  6.  39.)

The  pcoceas  followed  in  wine-making  was  e*-
aenCially  the  same  among  both  the  Greeks  and
the  Romans.  After  the  grapes  bsd  been  gathered,
they  were  Urst  trodden  srith  tbe  feet  and  after-
ward* mbmitted  to  the  action  of  the  prea*.  This
part  of  the  process  of  wine-making  is  described  in
the  article  Tohculum.

The  sweet  unfemented  juice  of  tbe  grape  wu
termed  ^AtEfTos  by  the  Oreek*  and  mutlitm  bv  the
Homans,  the  latter  word  being  |soperiy  an  ad-
jective signifying  new  at/'rttk.  Of  this  there  were
sereral  kind*  diilinguithed  acccording  to  the  man-
ner in  which  each  wu  originally  obtained  and  (ub-
saquently  treated.  That  which  flowed  from  the
clusters,  in  consequence  merely  of  their  prcaiure
upon  each  other  before  any  force  wa*  applied,  waa
known  M  rpdxaiui  (Oaopon.  vL  16)  oi pnlropm
(PUn.tf.JV.  lii.  11},  and  was  resorted  foe  mano-
bcturing  a  particular  tpocies  of  rich  wine  described
by  Pliny  {.L  e.)  to  wbict  the  inhabitants  of  Uytilene
garo  ths  name  of  w/iW^jiBi  or  irporpoimi.  (Athen-
l  p.  30,  b,  ii.  p.  i5,  e.}  That  which  ww  obUined
ne^  before  the  grapes  had  been  fully  trodden,  waa
the  vaahan  biiwm,  and  wai  considered  best  for
keeping.  (Geopon.  iL  16  ;  Colum.  xiL  11.)  After
the  grape*  bad  bean  fully  trodden  and  praise  i,  the
man  wu  taken  out,  tbe  edge*  of  tha  hnaka  cut.


IWi  VINUll.

>nd  ths  *liota  igiin  rabjadad  to  iLa  prui
remit  wm  tbe  atuMum  lortintai  or  crrcunKi
(Cito,  mt.  23  ;  V«rr.  L  64  i  Colum.  lii.  ,,
which  wu  Ht  tjnrt  and  n»ed  foe  infarior  purpoiM.
A  portion  of  the  iniiit  wu  Died  at  once,  baiog
drunk  fmh  mfter  it  had  bent  claritied  with  Tinegar.
(Oeopan.  ti.  IS.)  When  it  nt  dsiited  to  pnKne
a  quiintil;  in  the  iwect  ilalc,  on  uupbon  wa*
taken  and  coated  with  pitch  within  and  withoac  ;
it  wu  fillad  with  tnsMum  lurniiim,  and  corktd  »
■*  to  be  perfsctlf  aii-tighL  It  vai  than  immened
in  a  tank  of  cold  fTnh  water  or  buried  iu  wet
and  allowod  lo  remain  for  lix  week*  or  two  immtha.
The  oiint«iiM  after  tbit  procaaa  were  fboiid  to  n-
main  oncbanged  lora  jc«r,  and  henee  the  lumi
dfl  7Ac(KeT,  LB.  tsmpar  mu'ttiB.  (Oeopon.  vi.  16  ;
Pint.  Q.  M  26  j  Cats,  R.  S.  130  ;  Colum.  lil  29  :
Plin.  If.  ff.  liT.  1 1.)  A  eoniideiable  quantity  of
mnit  fmni  the  but  and  ddeit  tihi  waa  inipiiiated
by  boiling,  bcii^  then  diilinguithed  by  the  Oreeka
under  the  geneml  nanwt  oE  I^iua  or  yAdfti  (Atben.
i.  31.  e.),  while  the  Laltn  wiiuta  bava  ti  '
tenni  accordiog  to  tbo  extent  to  which  tbe  «
ration  wai  carried.  Thai,  when  tbe  mini  <n
ducnd  to  two-third)  a(  it*  arigiDal  lohnna  it  b<
cunnam  (Pallad.  Octobr.  tit.  rriti.),  whm  owhalf
hadeTaponiled,ii«/V»(i.i«(Plin.«.itf,iiT,S),  '
two-thirdi,  aopa  (known  alu  by  the  Qreek  i
nnina  and  iepiema,  Plin.  L  c),  bat  theK  wiada
are  frequently  interchanged.  (S«  Van.  ap.  Asa.  c
17,  n,  U  ;  Colnm.  liL  19.)  Similar  pnpaiBtioaa
uie  at  the  preeeut  time  cal^  in  Italy  mufo  coUo
and  Ji^ia,  and  in  Fmace  mil.  The  pniceu  waa
cairied  on  inlargvealdnniof  laid(RUa<'r)4iUana),
inn  or  bronie  being  auppowd  In  caramunieate  a
d  rugreeable  flarooT,  over  a  alow  lire  of  chipa,  on  a
night  when  there  wm  no  moon  (Plin.  rvui.  74),


Xing


kiefiiUy I


(Plin.  Lc;  Viig.  Giorg.  i.  369, It.  396),  and  the
liquid  coniCantlj  itiired  topnfent  it  Erom  burning.
(Plin.  uiii.  3  ;  Cato,  A  R.  105  ;  Colnm.  lii.  19,
30,  31  ;  PaUad.  d.  IS  ;  Dioacoiid.  v.  9.)  Theie
grape-jelliei.  for  they  wen  nothing  elae,  wei«  ued
eitpniiiely  for  giving  body  to  poor  winea  and  mak-
ing them  keep,  and  entered  at  ingtodieat)  into
many  drinki,  tilth  at  the  burraiiica  paHe,  ao  called
from  iu  red  celoitr.  which  wai  farmed  by  niiiing
tapa  with  milk  (Feitna,>.e.  finmmiAi ,■  oompan
Olid.  Fail.  JT.  7S2},  and  olhara  deicribed  hem-

The  whole  of  the  mnitnm  not  employed  foriomo
of  the  above  pnipoiea  waa  conveyed  from  tbe  ^nciM
to  the  oatfa  vmaria  (virteirri,  irrfwr,  OeopOD.  n.
2.  i  2},  an  apartment  on  the  gnmnd-Hoor  or  a  little
below  the  lurfaee,  placed  in  anch  a  utoatioD  aa
to  Ktan  a  moderate  and  equable  temperature,
and  at  a  diHance  from  dnnghilU  or  other  object*
emitting  a  itnng  odour.  (Vano,  H.  R.  i.  13;
Ueopon.  /.  «.)  Here  were  the  dalia  (•rWo.),  othef
wi&e  called  aerne  or  oiipae,  long  bell-mouthad
veneli  of  earthenware  (hooped  tuba  of  wood  being
employed  in  cold  climate*  only,  Plin.  liv.  31)  teiy
carefully  formed  of  the  beat  day  and  lined  with  ■
coating  of  pilch  f_wmmSim,  ptiaia),  the  operation
(irfirnHrii,  pkaHo)  being  amally  pairform^  while
they  were  bot  fram  the  fomaee.  They  were
ntually  nnk  Ijleprtfa,  i^mta,  dnuria)  one-half
or  two-thirdi  in  the  ground  ;  lo  the  tbrmer  depth  if
the  wine  to  be  contained  waa  likely  to  prove  atning,
to  the  latter  if  weak,  and  attention  wu  paid  thct
they  ahonld  repoee  apon  a  dij  bad. They  wen


It  iptinklad  wi
c  idanta  and


d  with  ti


gallic,  cbeeae,  and  the  like,  being  roDovad,  isat^Mj'
ahoBld  impoM  a  laini  to  the  win*.  (QeopoD.  (i.  3;
3,4  1  Calo,  iiC.A.23i Vam,  L  13  [  Cohwi.  ^L

I8,26i  ENg.  S3.tiL  6.  1,3.)  In  these  daU>  the
preceu  of  fermentation  took  place.  They  wen  not
filled  quite  full,  in  order  that  the  aomi  laly  might
boil  oier,  and  thii  waa  alto  cleared  off  at  ngalv


had  beeome  uiaao!,  the  dolia  wa«  doady  Eoraed,
tbe  upper  portioi  of  tbdr  iBterior  aorlaca  a*  wdl
aa  the  lida  (opBrcaia  iJafunHi)  haviiig  been  pn-
vieeely  well  robbed  ovei  with  a  compcond  of  de-
frntam,  n&in,  old  pitch,  maatic,  and  fir^oDia.
(Oaopen.  vi.  13  \  Cats,  A.  A.  107  ;  Vam.  L  U  ;
Colum.  xii.  2£,  80.)  The  i^mnmLa  wen  lakoi  off
aboDt  onoa  everj  tlurt]F«i  daya,  and  oncnef  in  bei
weather,  in  oidai  u  cool  and  givaairta  tba  CDDtnli,
lo  add  any  praparaUon  leqnind  to  praaarv  ih^
■onnd,  and  to  ramina  any  impvritiaa  thU  might  be
thrown  up.  Particular  attention  waa  paid  u  iha
peculiu  light  acum,  the  Krfaf  sIhv  (Jtom  «■}.
which  frequently  appeared  on  the  aiuface  after  a
certain  time,  unee  it  wu  ■appoead  la  aBbid  indi-

of  the  wine,  Und  (w<>f>«if>Ij'o>),  brewi.  and  kA,
it  waa  a  lignthat  the  wine  wu  Hand  ;  if  gUniiMii*,
it  wai  a  bad  lymptom  ;  if  black  or  yellow,  it  de-
noted want  of  body  ;  if  lehile,  it  wu  a  proof  thai
the  vrioe  would  keep  well  (fJnfur).  bch  tine
that  the  Dpercula  were  replaced  they  wen  weQ
rubbed  Willi  arwMnea.  (Oeopon.  viL  15  ;  Cdmo.
liL  38.) [THTHaoa.]

The  ewuBimer  eorU  of  wine  wan  dmnk  dkert

from the  dolium, and hence  dnogbl  wine  na

called  etasn  iaHan  oi  einai  d*  eopa  (Dig.  1&  lit.

l.S4;VaR.(9i.A'oa.ca.n.ll8),lmttheEner

ii.  Inch  u  wen  yielded  by  sboicB  t— *!■■■—
and  poemied  •affiaeut  body  to  bear  ke^fong,  wen
drawn  off  i_i^imiim,fmrrt^*i.*)  laU  aii^linii
or  JdjHHH,  many  &ncifid  pncautiona  being  ok-
■erved  in  UanifCTSg  iheo  fnm  the  lorgez  la  tbe

Ua  TeaaeL (Oe^Km.  viL  S,  6  ;  eoapon  Plia.
37.) Theaa  o^ionw  were  m^ia  <^  eanhn-

e,  and  in  latar  timae  ooiaaionally  af  ^oea  ;  ibey

9  aloppand  tight  by  a  plag  irf  wood  at  cut
(oortB,  laiar),  which  waa  rendend  impatnaaa  laair
by  being  amund  over  with  {Htdi,  diy,  or  gjiuaa
On  tba  oouide  iba  title  of  tha  wina  waa  pawttd,
tba  data  of  tlw  nnlaga  bei^  mariiad  by  Ik  Mmea
of  tba  eonaUa  ihmi  in  nffiee,  ei  whan  Ifea  jofi  ««*
of  ^BM,Iittbtiokala  (paBaefa,  tmtnt)  waw  am-
Haded  from  them  mdiiatinj  ikaaa  paiiiialaii
(PelniL  S4.)  lb  amplNna  waM  ibaa  Momi  ap
in  lepoaitoriM  (opgttaoae,  Colnm.  L  6  ;  Plin.J&i.B.
17:  WnB,a((iecJ^ll£;  latalata.  Cal—.  ail.


niually  plaoed  in  the  nppa  aloiy  of  ibc  biiaa
-1,  bate.  Hoc.  Gira.  iiL  31.  7  ;
iiL38.  7)  im  amaam  axpkinad


if  wa  may  nae  tbe  phiaee,  in  tbe  m


VINDM.
af  wi<  tluiH  of  iHgMiu  b^E  unudtnd  moit  ip-
pnpmU  tqr  the  Eutidioui  (Usr.  Sat  iL  4.  SI),  or
wilh  the  while*  whipped  up  witb  ult  (Geopon.
TJi.  23),  bat  nan  canunonly  by  limplj  ilniniDg
throogfa  imtll  oop-liki  nleniili  of  uliec  ar  tmnn
peitbralHl  wilb  nuniiwu  mull  holei,  and  diitiii-

Siihsd  by  thB  tkioiu  nunea  liAiffnift  Tpwroixoi,
M4i,aoJn(»arwii.  (QMpoii.ni.37.)  [CoLDU.]
Oocuioiumy  B  piece  of  linon  doth  (rims,  laaau)
WW  plued  ont  the  ipiyvarti  01  aJmai  (PoUqi,  vi.
19*  X.  75)  and  the  wiii«(ffaitfrfaT,«aeflafu)  filtered
tbNagb.  (Muti>l,Tiij.  46.)  Tlw  uh  of  the  Hoau
aru  eODiidend  ohjactionible  for  all  deiiciu  winei,
(iDCe  it  -m  beliered  U  injure  (Hor.  &il  ii  4.  61)
if  not  entinty  to  deitioy  their  flitvoDr,  tni  in
ovary  iuiUncs  to  dimioiili  the  itren^h  of  Ilie
liqiinr.  For  ihii  niuoa  it  wm  employod  by  tbe
diiiipetod  in  order  that  tlie^  might  be  able  to
iwallow  agnalOT  qoantity  without  becoming  ia-
toiioled.  (Plin.  iJT.  22,  compue  xiiii.  1,  24,
xii.  4.  1 9  ;  Gcad  Fam.  iL  8.)  The  double  pur-
poM  of  cooling  ud  weekeaing  wm  eSectuaJly  no
complidiod  by  placing  ice  or  niow  in  ihe  filler,
which  under  lucb  ciicunuMneei  beeuno  ■  coluti

The  wine  proaorod  froni  the  niiHriin  lortnmn,
which  WM  ilwayi  kept  by  itielf,  mint  hare  been
thin  uid  poor  enough,  but  a  itill  inferior  bevengo
WM  made  by  pounng  waler  upon  tbo  hoiki  and
' '.bey  had  been  fully  pn»«d,  allowing


them


ating


11  obtained.  Thit,  which
lainunii  in  winter  initead  of  wine,  wai  the  S<W>
or  iiurifuu  ot  the  Oroeki,  the  lora  or  vimm  ope-
niriiioi  of  the  Botouu,  and  according  to  Vairo  (op.
fifom.  xiil  13)  wu,  along  with  lapa,  defrulum,
uid  paunni,  the  drink  of  elderly  women.  {See
Athen.  i.  p.  440.)  The  Oreekt  added  the
waler  in  the  proportion  of  J  of  tbo  matt  pre-
THHuly  dnwn  M,  and  then  boiled  down  the
mixture  until  \  btd  eraporated  ;  tbe  Italiani
added  the  water  in  the  proportion  of  ^  of  the
mnaC,  and  threw  in  the  ikimmingi  of  the  defru-
tumand  tbo  dreg*  at  the  lacui.  Another  drink  of
tbe  nmo  character  wa*  the  fiecatim  from  wine-
leeo,  and  wo  hearalu  otvinumpnuligaiiaai  giren
to  the  Tintagen,  which  appear*  to  hare  been  manu-
foctuied  from  inferior  and  half-ripe  fruit  gathered
before  the  regular  period.  (Oeopon.  vi.  3  ;  C*to.
A  AS3,A7,  lG3i  VarTa,lS4;  Colmn.  liL  40  i
Plin.  liv.  12.)  We  find  in  analogy  to  the  above
prooeoM*  in  tbo  manufacture  of  cider,  the  beet
being  obUined  bnmthefintiqneeijngoftbe  applei
sod  the  wont  &om  the  pulp  and  ikina  Duceralcd

In  all  the  be>t  winei  hitherto  deicribed  the
giapea  are  Hippooed  tu  bavo  been  gathered  aa  loon
M  they  were  fbUy  ripe  and  fermentation  to  have
run  it*  full  courae.  But  a  gnat  variety  of  iwetl
wipe*  were  manufactured  hy  checking  tbo  fermen-
tation, or  by  partially  drying  the  giapea,  or  by
conTertiuE  them  completely  into  raiaina.  The
•yA^KOt  o&n  of  the  Qcoponic  writer*  (til.  19)  be-
long* to  the  fint  clat*.  Muat  obtained  in  the  or-
dimry  manner  wm  thrown  into  the  dolia,  which
remained  open  for  three  day*  only  and  were  then
partiallr  covered  for  two  more  j  a  tmall  aperture
WM  left  nnlil  the  leventh  day,  when  they  were
luted  np.  If  the  wine  wm  wiihed  to  be  atill
tweeter,  tbe  dotia  were  left  open  Tor  five  daya  and


VINPM.  120S

then  tt  once  ckwed.  Tbe  &re  admiiaian  of  air
being  necewuy  for  briak  fennentation,  nod  ibia
uiually  cDniinning  for  nine  day*,  it  i>  evident  that
it  would  proeoed  weaklv  and  imperfectly  under  the
above  circumaancn.  '  For  the  Vaim  Dula  of
CoiunHlla  (lii.  27)  the  grape*  were  to  be  dried  in
the  lun  Ibr  three  day*  after  they  were  gathered,
and  trodden  on  the  iourth  during  the  full  fervour
of  the  mid-day  heat.  The  mutBin  laieiiia  alone
wu  to  be  need,  and  after  the  fermentation  wai
iiniihed  an  ounce  of  well-kneaded  irii-ioot  wu
added  to  c«h  GO  aextarii  i  the  wine  wu  racked  oS
fnnn  the  lee*,  and  wu  found  to  be  iweet,  aonnd,
and  whoteeomei  {Colum.  l.  c)  For  the  Fniiin
Diadtjilinit,  more  loiciou*  atill,  the  grapea  were  ex-
poaed  to  the  ana  for  MTcn  daya  upon  hurdlea-
(Plin.tf.A'.  liv.  11.)

grapea  d'ried  in  Ihe  ann  until  they  had  lott  half  their
weight,  or  they  wereplunged  into  boiling  oil,  which
pndnced  a  atrailar  cfFect,  or  the  buncbea  after  the;
were  ripe  were  allowed  to  hang  for  aome  week*
upon  the  vine,  the  atalki  being  twiated  or  an  inci-
aion  made  into  the  pith  of  the  bearing  ihoot  ao  u
to  put  a  atop  to  vegetation.  The  alalka  and  atone*
were  nmoved,  the  ruaina  were  aleeped  in  mnit  or
good  wine,  and  then  trodden  or  aubjecled  to  the
gentle  action  of  the  pica*.  The  quantity  of  juice
which  flowed  forth  wu  meaiored,  and  an  equal
ijuantity  ot  water  added  to  the  pulpy  reaiduum,
which  wu  again  pn*»ed  and  the  product  employed
for  an  inferior  jtoMrmm  called  ascanddriiini,  an  oe-
ptaiaion  exactly  analogou*  to  the  leinipioi  mention-
ed above.  The  petium  of  Crete  wu  moit  prized
(Mart.  lui.  106;  Juv.iiv.  27U),  andneitinmnk
vera  thoie  ofCilicla,  AFrica,  Italy,  and  the  neigh-
bouring provincea.  The  kinda  known  u  f  lyliiiun
tmd  Meiamjjtytkiam  poaaeaaed  the  peculifLr  Dnvour
of  the  grape  and  not  that  of  wine,  the  Scsiilliirt
bom  Qatalia  and  tbe  Haiimtum  from  Sicily  in  like
manner  tMIed  like  mutt.  T)ie  grapei  moat  auitabte
for  paiaum  were  tboie  which  ripened  eariy,  eipe-
cially  the  varlatiea  Jfiaa  (tailed  by  the  Greek*
Sticha),  Sdrpida  and  Piitlaa.  (Geopon.  vii.  Id;
Colum.  xiL  39;  Plin.  ff.  A-,  xiv.  11 ;  Virg.  Ceo™,
ii.  93.)

The  Greek*  reeogniied  three  colouri  in  winea:
nd  (^Au),  vAite,  i.e,  pule,  •tmw-colmir  (Afiwili),
and  brown  or  amber  coloured  (ci^t).  (Alhen.  i.
p.  32,  c.)  Pliny  diitinguiihea  four:  alba  anawe>
ing  to  AnWiJi.yK/twj  to  K.fptt,  while  lU/iat  it  lub-
divided  into  aamguineht  and  fuger,  tbe  former
being  doubtle»  applied  to  bright  glowing  wiue*
like  Tent  and  Burgundy,  while  the  Kiger  or  iiirr
(Pluut.  MevwA  T.  6.  17)  would  reiemble  Port.
In  the  ordinary  Greek  author*  the  epithet  ipuBpis
ii  u  common  u  >ifhai,  and will  repnaent  the


We  have  leen  that  wine  intended  for  keeping
wu  racked  off  from  the  doli*  into  amphuiae.
When  it  wu  neeeiaary  in  the  linl  initanca  to
tntnaport  il  from  one  place  to  aiiother,  or  when
carried  by  tiavellera  on  a  joomay,  it  wu  contained
in bog* made of  goat-ikin  (do-noI,  alrei)  weU

tighL  The  cut  below,  from  a  bronie  ^nd  at
Hercnlaneiun  (itfat.  Boriom.  voL  iii.  tav.  SB],
eihibiu  a  Silenua  utride  upon  one  of  them.
When  the  quantity  wu  large  a  number  of  hidea
were  aewed  together,  and  the  leathem  tun  thu*
conaUDcted  earned  from  place  lo  place  in  a  cart,  u
it  9 - • •  o"


VINUM.
n  tlte  iUuitntion  oa  page  90. (C«Dipara


Anion;  ths  iQcienta  reconne  wu  bad  to  n-
lioai  d«»ic«  ftr  preventing  or  coneeting  icidity,
hfightening  t!i«  flavDur,  and  incraung  (he  dura-
bility dT  ths  inrerior  kindi  of  wine.  Thii  >ubi«t
wsa  reduced  to  a  regular  ayitem  by  the  Greeki ;

mal  treatuea,  ud  the  authon  of  the  Geoponic  col-
lection, together  inA  Cato,  Vun,  and  Coluinella,
■upply  ■  mullitude  of  precepti  upon  the  •ame
topic.  The  object  ID  liew  wat  accomplighed  tome-
time*  by  merely  miiing  dilierenl  kindi  of  wine
together,  but  more  frequently  by  throwing  into
the  dolia  or  unphoroe  varioua  condimenti,  or  lea-
aeningt  [ipTuVtttfSudieamina^corHiiluroi).  When
two  wuiei  vere  mired  together  thoie  vere  selected
which  poueiKd  oppoute  good  gnalillei  and  defecU.
(Alhen.  L  p.  5i  6.)

The  principal  autntancn  employed  ai  oandtdtrae
were,  1.  lea-waleri  2.  turpentine,  either  pure,  or
in  the  foim  of  pitch  (fu),  tar  [pix  ligaida),  or

liuinl  marble,  or  calcined  ihelli.  t.  Inspiiiated
muit.  B.  Aromatic  heibi,  ipicei,  and  gnmi ;  and
theas  were  naed  eithei  ungly,  or  cooked  up  into  a
great  Tiriety  of  complicat*d  confeciioni.

We  haw  already  »een  that  it  wa»  cuitomaiy  to
line  the  interioj  of  both  the  dolia  and  the  amphorae
with  a  coating  of  pilch  i  but  beiidei  thi»  it  weu
common  to  add  thit  lubttance,  or  reiin,  in  powder,
to  the  muBt  during  the  fermentation,  from  a  coo-
viction  that  it  not  only  tendered  the  wine  more
full-bodied,  but  alio  communicated  as  agreeable
bouquet,  together  with  a  certain  degree  of  lacineu
or  piquancy.  (Plin.  N.  H.  lii.  2£;  PlntanJ^
S^mp.  T.  S.)  Wine  of  thit  tort,  however,  when
new  (Mnfnin  nannifKa)  wa>  accounted  Dnwhole-
aome  and  apt  to  iiidnee  headach  and  giddinew.
From  thit  ctrcumttance  it  wat  denominated  crapirfa,
and  wai  itself  found  tc  be  lerviceable  in  checking


«...


-)..


word  ligtiratiirly  br  a


becocne*  perfectly
mupiu,  !□  irfaich  form  it  wai  odled  anm  br  ilie
Homana,  who  nied  tl
wortbleM  blockhead.

Now  the  gteat  majority  of  inferior  winei,  beng
thin  and  watery,  and  containing  littla  alc^o^
are  conttantly  liable  to  nndel^  tbew  cdiaiige%
and  hence  the  diipoution  to  aceacencg  waa  dnaely
watched  and  combated  at  br  aa  poraUe, With


dolia,  which  it  wai  known  would  nesualiae  any
acid  which  might  be  famed,  inch  oa  wgetiUe
aihea,  which  contain  an  alkali,  gypnim,  and  pare
lime,  beiidei  which  wn  find  a  long  list  of  articl»,
which mutt  be i^«rded aa  preteotiTc* nikn


if  tuipentine  already  noticed,  alnonda,  laiiini
iteeped  in  muit,  parched  lalt,  goata*  milk,  eedar-
anei,  gall-nuta,  blaiing  pine-torcbea,  or  led-bot
ireni  quenched  in  the  liquid,  and  a  mnliitnde  of
sihere. (Geopon- riL  12,  IS,  ir -■-•-■


which  a


all  h


tome  Incei  of  the  oie  of  the  highly  paaononi
lalli  of  lead  for  the  tame  purpoae  (QtopoD.  riL  1 S),
a  practice  which  prodnod  the  moat  fiibd  cone-
qucncet  in  the  middle  aget,  and  waa  prabibtled  by

Beckmann'i  HiOory  (f  /niBdibaf,  toL  l  pv  S96,
Trant.)

Drfni'm  alto  wni  employed  to  a  gnat  extrat :
but  being  ittelf  liable  to  torn  kot,  it  wai  not  uwj
until  iti  loondneu  had  been  teited  by  keeping  ii
for  a  year.  It  wai  then  introduced,  either  in  in
limpte  ttnte,  in  the  praportion  of  a  leitariu*  is  ih*
amphora,  that  ji,  of  I  to  4  B,  or  it  waa  csmluiird
with  a  great  Tariety  of  aromatici,  irCtntding  Is  a
preacriplion  fumithed  by  Columella  (xiL  20).  In
thii  receipt,  and  othera  of  tho  awN  kind,  the
Tarioua  herba  were  intended  to  give  addiiiana]
elScacy  to  the  nonriihing  pow«a  of  tho  dcfratun,
and  great  paini  were  taken  to  picTent  tbea  frwi
afiecting  the  taate  of  the  wine.  Bat  fnm  a  tst
early  period  it  wai  cuitotnary  to  flavonr  wiaq
hijfhiy  by  a  large  admixture  of  perfnmea,  planta.
and  tpicet.  We  find  a  ipiced  drink  (<(  ip^^iitim
«aTEur«(ua^i{fK»t]  noticed  under  the  name  of
Tplfi/ia  by  Athenaeut  and  the  writen  of  the  new
comedy  (Atheo.  i.  pL  31,  e. ;  Poliaz,  tL  18).  wd
for  the  whole  clan  Pliny  hai  the  genend  lem
aromalila  (lir.  19.  |  5).

There  wat  another  and  tut  uiuiiaiiaa  fiimily
of  winei,  entitled  Jm  iyitifA,  into  wUiA  drvft
were  introduced  to  produce  medicinal  cfiixta.  Sock
were  Fnam  mamini  (horehound)  for  cennfaa,  tlw
tcSlita  (iqu ill- wine),  to  aniit  digenion,  pcomoie
eipeeloiation,  and  act  at  a  general  tonic,  iJmmAila
(wine  of  wormwood),  correaponding  to  the  modem
vermuOt,  and  abOTe  all  the  myrtOa  (myrOe-brrTT-
wine),  which  pseieiaed  innumerable  Tiitoea.  (LV
Imnell  32,  39  i  GeopoD.  viiL  1,  &c)

Pliny,  under  the  head  of  cna  jti^tTM,  isdndea
not  only  the  oliw  j^euvt,  but  a  Tait  nuaber  i4'
othen  healing  a  itnmg  analogy  to  oar  Britiib
home-made  winea,  anch  aa  eowalip,  ginger,  eldrp-
berry,  and  the  like ;  and  aa  w«  manniKtuiv
Chaznpngne  ojt  of  goaaeberriea,  as  the  IbHaiia
had  theic  imitationa  of  the  dwtlj  rint^ca  tt  the
moit  bioored  Aaiatlc  iilMi^  .TV**  wa  jik^.W


TIHUIl.

M  mif  ba  imigiiMd,  afaiMit  Rniiitleii,  sruy
y  of  fniil,  flower,  T^et»ble,  »hnih,  ind  per-
bein^f  put  in  nqiuiition ;  figi,  Cornell,  median,

upangui.  panls;,  tadiihei,  launlh  juuipen,
,cioDiiinBa,H£«i,  unl.  m^bilhram.  *fioid
1  inu^  Mmp1«. It  muM  b«  nmuirked,  that

VI*  on*  DuUrul  difleraoca  betwam  the
id  folloired  faf  (he  Oraaki  mi  tlut  adopted
M  Romani  in  cooking  thna  potion*.  Tha
r  included  the  drag,  or  whaterei  it  might  bei


and  alioved  to  tcmain  u  long  u  wu  thought
neeatauy  ;  tba  latter  niiad  Uie  flaionring  in-
gndient  with  tha  iireat  mnit,  and  feitnrated  them
togethac,  thna  obtaining  a  mocb  moia  powerful
eitncl ;  and  thj)  i*  >hs  plan  pnmwd  fur  Briuih
winn,  except  Ibat  we  are  obligad  to  *ubilitiile
ngBT  BDd  water  for  grapa-joicc,  (Geopon.  riii.
3-i,  33,  34  ;  Plin.  H.  y.  iIt.  19  ;  Colum.  IL  Be ;

Cato,  s.  a.  lu,  us.)

But  not  Dnl;  were  iincei,  fngrant  rooti,  leave*,
and  gnnii,  ileeped  in  wine  or  incarpoialed  daring
femientation,  bnt  even  the  pnciaiu  perfumed
euentiil  oil*  (ai^iinto)  were  mixed  with  it  befbra
it  wa«  drank.  Tlie  Oraek*  were  ex««diDglj  par-
tial to  ihii  kind  of  drink.  (Aelian,  K  Jf.  xii.  31.)
We  b1k>  lean)  from Aeiian  (J.  <t)  that  ilwai  named
ftvfi^yiTTit,  which  aeem*  to  be  the  nine  with  the
fu#fr<|T  of  Foaeidippui  (Alhen.  i.  p.  32,  b.],  the
fiK^^  of  Heijebiu^  tha  i/ufims  of  Pollux  (tL  2),
and  the  nimUia  of  Plautui  {FtadaL  il  4.  SO;
Gompan  mardiid  ampluram,  Miia  GL  iii.  2.  1 1  j
Feitai,  1.  b;  Mumtta  polio  and  Mttrriaa).  The
Bonani  were  not  alow  to  foUov  the  example  (el
them,  TaluiOK  bitletneH  (o  bighlf,  aaja  Pliny  {H.
"li.  5),  that  thej  were  reaalved  to  enjoy  coillj


JuTeDal(vL303}.

In  a  mora  primitJTe  age  we  detect  tha  tame
fbndneia  for  the  admiitnre  of  aomething  eitraneouk
IleoBwda,  when  preparing  a  diBught  for  Nealoc,
blla  hia  cup  with  Piamnian  wine,  over  which  >he
grate*  goal-milk  cbeeH  and  aprinklei  the  whide
with  flour  {IL  li.  696),  the  latter  being  a  common
addiliou  at  a  much  later  epoch.  (Athen.  x.  p.  43S.)
So  alao  the  draught  adminitteied  bj-  Cine  con-
aiated  of  vine,  chc«*e,  and  honey  ;  and  accnnling
to  TheopbraitU)  (Alhen.  L  p.  32,  a.)  the  wine
drunk  in  the  prjrianeam  of  the  Tbiotani  «a*  ren-
dered deliciou*  b;  their  thnwiog  into  tba  jar
which  contained  it  a  cake  of  wheaten  floui  knaded
Dp  with  honey. (Compare  Plat.  Sipiip.  i.  1.  4.)

Thi*  lead*  ut  on  to  notice  the  meat  geneiall;
popular  of  all  thcia  campound  beverage*,  the  olr^fitXt
of  the  Greek*,  the  taa/nn  of  the  Knmiini.  Thi>
«a*  of  two  kind* ;  in  the  one  bonej  wa*  mixed
with  wine,  in  tha  other  with  muit.  Tha  former
wa*  laid  to  have  been  invented  b;  the  legendary
hera  Ariataeiia,  the  fint  cnllivalor  of  bee*  (Plin.
xiv.  4),  and  waa  conaidered  molt  perfect  and
palatable  when  made  of  aome  old  rough  (aaiteram)
wine,  inch  aa  Hoaiis  ar  Falernian  (ilibough
Homca  object*  to  the  latter  (or  thi*  purpo*c.  Sat.
iL  4.  24),  and  new  Atlic  honey.  (MarL  iv.  13,
liil.  108;  DioMXW,  v.  16;  Macrob.  Sit  rlL  13.)
The  importiona  a*  *laled  in  the  Oeoponio  collec-
tion were  four,  by  meawire.  of  wins  to  one  of
honey,  and  variou*


TTNUM.  1205

pq>per,  might  be  added. Tha  aeeond  kind,  Ih*

onKnne/iun  of  Itidonu  I.Ong.  ix.  3.  %  11),  accord-
ing to  the  Ortck  authoriliee  (Geopon.  viii.  26),  waa
made  of  muit  evaporated  lo  one  half  of  iu  original
bulk,  Attic  honey  being  added  in  tha  proportion  of
one  to  tea.  Thi*,  therefore,  wa*  merely  a  very
rich  (cnil  aynp  in  no  way  allied  to  wine.  Tba
virtue*  of  imteuii  are  detailed  by  Pliny  {/T.  If.
uii.  4  ;  compare  Oeopon.  J.  c)  i  it  waa  coniidered
the  m«l  appropriate  draught  upon  an  empty
itomach,  and  waa  therefora  awallowcd  immediately
before  the  regular  buiine**  of  a  repatt  began  (Hor.
5W.  iL  4.  26;  Senec  ^  122),  and  Eenca  the.
whet  (^MibUta)  coming  before  the  cup  of  mnUnm
wa*  called  the  promdm.  (Cic  ad.  Fa».  ii.  16
uid  20.)  We  infer  from  Plautu*  {BaccL  iv.  S.
149;  compare  Liv.  iiiiiii.  hS)  that  Budlam  waa
given  at  a  triumph  by  the  Impeistor  to  hi*  aohlien.
Afn/fin*  (*c.  cnuM)  or  ii\ri)u\i  i*  perfectly  dl>-
linct  from  imda  (ac.  aipia).  The  latter,  or  tntad,
being  made  of  honey  and  water  mixed  and  fer-
mented, i>  the  iu\iitpinav  or  itpiiit\%  of  the
Greek!  (Geopon.  viii.  2B;  Dioicarid.  i.  9;  liidor.
Oris-  ax.  3.  S  1 0 :  Plin.  H.  N.  liv.  201,  although
Pollux  confouad((Ti.  2)  laKlKfviiai  with  stni)wAi.
Again,  liipo^iiXov  (Qeopon.viii.27)  or  j^ronu/am
(Iiidor.  Orig.  ii.  3.  |  11)  wa*  cider;  JfiifU'^
(Plin.  H.  N.  liv.  2D)  wa*  a  compound  of  vinegar,
honey,  aalt,  and  pure  water,  boDed  togetiier  and
kept  for  a  long  time ;  piAiiii\t  wa*  a  mere  confee-
dC  eipreued  juice  of  roae-laaiea  and  honey.


and  perfume*,  inch  u


(Qeoi


iL  29.)


I  vholeeimiB
L  p.  36,


it*  conudered  old  wine  ni
grateful  to  the  palate  but  alio  mon
and  invigoratina  (Athen.  i.  p.  26,  a. ;
e.),  and  curioualy  enough,  Fliuy  auppoae
grevr  more  ttrong  and  fiery  by  age  in  conaeqnence
of  the  diuipation  of  the  watery  puticle*  (H.N.
vii.SJ. Generally  apeaking  tha  Ore<'


long  ti


the  Odynee,  indeed,  drink*  -
year*  old  (ilL  391),  and  wine  kept  for  tixteen
yean  i*  incidentally  mentioned  by  Athenaeu*  (xiii.
p.  fi84,  b) ;  but  the  connoiaieura  under  the  Empire
pronounced  that  all  tnnamarine  wine*  arrived  it  a
moderate  degree  Dfmatuxity(a^o«4ai£atBmna^»)
in  iix  or  aeven.  (Plin.  xiv.  10.)  Many  of  the
Italian  tarietie*,  however,  a*  we  ibali  tee  below,
required  to  be  kept  for  twenty  or  twenty-five  yean
before  they  were  drinkable  (which  i*  now  conii-
dered ample  for  our  itrongeit  porta),  and  even  the
bumble  growth*  of  Sabinum  wen  itored  np  for
^m  four  to  6i^en.  {Hor.  Cana.  i.  9.  7  ;  Athen.
L  p.  S76.)  Uence  it  became  a  matter  of  import-
ance to  haaten,  if  pouible,  the  natural  procta*,
Thii  wa*  attempted  in  Tarioot  way*,  tometime*  by
eliborala  condiment*  (Geopon.  riL  34],  eometimei
by  linking  leeiel*  containing  the  muit  in  the  aea,
by  which  an  artificial  mdlownea*  wa*  induced
(prnectv  vttMiias),  and  the  wine  in  conaequenca
termed  DuJoMrila  (Plin.  H.  N.  lir.  10) ;  but  mora
uiually  by  the  application  of  heat.  (PluL  Sgmp.  t.
3.)  Tbu*  it  wa*  caitomanr  to  eipoae  the  am-
phorae for  tome  yean  to  the  full  fervour  of  the
lun'i  layt,  or  to  conatrnct  the  apiAtaa  in  iDch  a
manner  a*  to  be  eipoied  to  the  hot  air  and  imoke
of  the  Uth-fumace*{Colum.L6),  and  hence  the
name  Jirmaria  applied  to  auch  apartment*,  and  the
phraae*  funomv,  Jivnum  fiiAerv,  Jidigiue  ttttat  in
ref^ience  to  the  wine).  (TibuU.  iL  1.  26  ;  Hor.
Cant,  ill  S.  9  i  Jnv.  r.  35.)  If  tba  inemliaa  waa
4b  3  O'^


1206  VINUM.

not  conducted  viik  oat.  Bod  At  unphone  not
itoppered  dowu  pvrf«llj  tight,  a  diBognable
effect  would  be  prodoced  an  tbe  conteuli,  and  it  it
in  conuquence  of  tnch  canlewneu  tbiit  MutiaJ
ponn  forlb  hii  maledictiDoi  on  tb<  futuTia  of
Mnneillei  (x.  36,  iiL  81,  lil  laS).

The  Tcai  b.  c  121  i>  nid  to  hare  been  a  kuod
un^Uriy  bvoQT&tile  to  aJI  the  prodoetioni  ai  tbe
Hirth  ;  from  the  ^reat  beat  of  the  autmnn  the  vine
wu  of  an  nnprecedenled  quality,  and  remained
long  celebrated  ai  tbe  yiaum  OpimianKm.  fnm
L.  Opimiui  the  conlul  of  that  Jear,  who  (lev
C.  OmccbuL  A  great  quantil;  had  been
■ Kduloutly  '  '' "


n  the  d.


elder  Plinj,  nettij  two  hundred  jean  aftemrdi.
It  wai  reduced,  be  lajt,  to  tbe  conuitence  of
rough  honej,  and,  Uke  oiher  Tery  old  winea,  »
•tning  and  hanh  *nd  bitter  ai  to  be  undrinkable
nniil  largely  dUuted  with  vater.  Such  winei,
howFTfr.  be  addi,  wen  iiieful  for  flaTouring  othen
when  mixed  in  ima]t  quadtitiea.

Our  moit  direct  informalioa  with  regiird  to  the
price  of  common  wine  ia  Italy  it  derived  from
Colomella  (iiL  3.  B  IS),  who  reckon!  that  the
loweil  market  price  of  the  mutt  ordinary  quality
vni  300  Kitereei  for  40  umse,  that  ii  15  teilercet
for  tbe  amphora,  or  6d,  a  gallon  nearly.  At  a
maeh  earlier  date,  the  triumph  of  L.  Metelln*
" ■ J  the  finl  Ptuiie  war  (a  e.  2S0), '


ioldat

J-lin.  ir.  N.  1


lof  D


™phora(Var,


■  Crauui  and  L.  Juliui  Caeur
iuued  a  proclamation  that  no  one  ihould  kU
Greek  and  Aminean  wine  at  »  high  a  lale  aa  8
awes  the  amphora ;  but  thii  wa>  probably  intended
ai  a  probibilicn  to  their  being  aold  at  all,  in  order
lo  check  the  tatte  then  beginning  to  diiplay  it*elf
for  foreign  Irnnriea,  for  wo  Snd  that  at  tbe  nune
time  they  poaitirely  forbade  tbe  nie  of  diotie
ungnenu.  (Plln.//.  A'.  lir.  16,  liiL  S.)

The  price  of  native  wine  at  Atheni  was  four
dntchnuu  for  the  metretei,  that  ii  nbont  4jd.  the
gallon,  when  neceuariea  wete  dear,  and  BSckb  can-
>ider>  that  ne  may  auume  one  half  of  tbii  torn  ai
the  average  of  cheaper  tlmei.  In  hct,  we  find  in
an  agreement  in  Demoithenea  (/n  iJuirU.  p.  938)
SOD  catk)  {Kipd/jjaf  <if  Mendaean  wine,  which  we

entertainment!  (Atben.  iv.  p.  129,  d.\  valued  at
eOO  dmchmai,  which  givei  two  drachmai  for  the
Dietrelet,  or  lillle  more  than  id.  a  gallon  ;  but  ilill
more  aitoni>hii]g  ii  the  marvelloui  cheipneu  of
Luaitanian  wine,  of  which  more  than  ten  gallont
irere  (old  for  3d.  On  tbe  other  band  high  pricai
were  given  freely  for  the  varietiei  held  in  eiteem,
lince,  ai  early  u  the  time  of  Socratee,  a  metrttei
of  Chian  lold  for  a  mina.  (Pint,  dt  Aniin.  TVtut
gaSl.  10  ;  BHckh,  Pabi.  EcoH.  p/Aliau,  Tol.  L  p.
133,  Itted.)

With  mpect  to  the  my  in  which  wins  wat
drunk,  and  the  ciutomt  obKrred  by  the  Greeki
and  Romang  at  their  drinking  tntertiinmeuU,  the
reader  ii  referred  to  the  article  Stupobiitii.

It  now  remaint  for  ui  to  name  the  moit  nteemed

matt  celebrated. Ai  fiir  a>  thoM  of  Greece  are


VINOM.
utnalty  atanding  alma  wilhavt  anj  diiBngalAfaf
epithet.  The  win*  of  moM  eariy  ceMnilj  was
that  wbich  the  miniMeT  of  Apollo,  Mno,  wk
dwelt  upon  tha  ikirta  of  Thndui  IaBai«a,gne  w
Ulyuee.  It  wm  red  (tputfir),  and  haotj-twtt
{tithaiHa),  w  predona,  that  it  waa  anknowa  la  all
in  tbe  moniion,  we  the  wife  of  tbe  priest  and  en
truity  bonaekeeper  ;  io  atrvng,  that  a  am^a  o^
waa  mingled  with  twsity  of  wmter ;  eo  fragtant,
that  even  when  thoi  dilutsd  it  diHined  a  diviw
and  matt  tempting  perfume.  (Od.  ii.  203.)  Pliny
(H.ff.  xiv.  6}  iHerU  thai  wine  teidowed  wiA
aimilar  noble  propeniat  waa  prodnoed  in  the  Hue
region  in  hia  own  day.  Uanermesitjoiia  alao  nm
than  once  [A.  li  638,  fU.  x.  334)  Prammiam  nc
(nlror  Upwinici),  an  epithet  wbich  ia  ncisml;
interpreted  by  certain  difleient  writoa.  (Atbeti.  i.
p.  2a,  t>  In  after  timei  a  wine  bruiag  tka  nat
tuune  waa  produced  in  the  ialand  of  Icaria,  aroQIid
the  hill  village  of  latona,  in  the  Ticinity  of  E^be-
ava,  in  the  nei^bourhood  of  SmyriK  near  ike
ahrine  of  Cybele,  and  in  Leibaa.  (Athen.L  p.  30,c
Ac  i  Plin.  iiT.  6.)  The  Pramnian  of  Icaiia  ia
characterized  by  Ejartbidea  ai  dry  (va^af^),
hanh  (ai)mrpi(t),aatringent  and  nsiaikably  (<r«^
qnalitiei  which,  according  to  AriatophaDea.  i^
dered  it  parttenlatly  mipalJUable  to  tha  AthBuan.
<Athen.ip.30,c)

But  the  winet  of  gnateat  ranown  dniiag  tke
brilliant  period  of  Grecian  hiitory  and  afts-  the
Roman  conqueit  wen  grown  in  the  ialand*  ef
Thaaoi,  Lesboa,  Chiot  and  Coa,  and  in  a  lew  i>-
TDUred  apoti  on  the  oppoiileceait  of  Aaia  (Sdaba,
li*.  p.  637),  aaeb  a>  the  alopea  of  Hoont  Tnaloa,
the  ridge  which  aepaiatn  tbe  valley  of  the  Honsi
from  that  of  the  Cafiter(Plin.  t.SS  ;  Virf^  Caon/.
ii.  97  ;  Ovid.  Mit.  vL  16),  Hoant  Meaaogia.  whkb
dividei  the  tributoriea  of  liie  Cafiler  fian  ihcoe  at
the  Mieandec  (Strabo,  liv.  p.  6&0),  the  TcJcanio
region  of  the  CatacecsunKna  (Vitrni.  iii.  3)  vhiil
■till  retaiat  ila  fiune  (Kcppell^  Tratxlt,  ii.  p.  SUl,
tbe  environa  of  Gpheaui  (Dioecwid.  t.  12),  <tf  Cai-
dua  (Athen.  L  p.29,  a.},  of  Milelna  (Atben.  Lc),
and  of  Qaiomenae.  (Pltn.  xiv.  S.)  Anaag  tb(M
tbe  firat  place  teema  lo  have  been  bj  geuaaid  nn-
MUt  conceded  to  the  CUaa,  of  which  ihc  ai«t  de-
licioua  varjetiea  wm  hn>ltght  irom  Iha  beighta  (f
Ariuunm,  in  the  central  parte  (Virg.  Eel.  v.  71 ;
Plin.  fT.  AT.  liv.  7  ;  Slina,  tii.  210).  and  ftntbe
promontory  of  Pbanaa  at  die  aoathern  extiaiaity  W
the  iiland.  (Virg.  Gttrg.  a  S7.)  The  Tloa^aaaad
Letbian  occupied  the  aerand  place,  and  the  Cbmm  dift-
pnted  the  palm  with  them.  (Alhsi.i.pp.3a,29.&e.)
In  Leiboi  the  moM  highly  priaed  lineyuda  wen
around  Mytilene  (Athen.  i.  p.  30,  b.,  iii.  pL  86,  t. ;
p.B2,d.),andMeth;iiiDa.  (AthnLviiL  p.  S63,fa. ;
PauBan.i.19;  Virg.  OnmiLSS;  Ovid.^r.  ^s.
L  S7.]  Pliny  (nv.  9],  wio  givea  the  picfenu*
over  all  othen  to  tbe  naimmaiiia.  aaya  that  tbe
Leabian  had  lUtutall;  a  taste  of  mlt  water,  while
the  epithet  "  innocetu,"  applied  by  Uencn,  ■  iiaa
to  point  out  that  it  wai  light  and  wloleaoana.

It  may  here  be  obaerred  that  there  ia  do  fatn-
dation  whatever  tin  the  i»iark  that  the  6aeM
Greek  winea,  eqiecially  the  pradocta  irf  tha  ialaada
bekn^ni be  the


It  part


0  the  luaeioua  ai


Tha  T


I,  and  ike  Hke,  applied  ta  a  gnat  ma-
le T^wrfi  and  TXniiitW  an  dedgsainaa
lively  rare,  oicift  in  tht  TigM  liin^aajti


tmvu.

Mj«  Pliar  {H.  y.  liT.  1 1 ),  uid  tb«  w
pnr  to  bin  baen  fully  Mniible  Ifaat  >ir
could  not  be  •mdlowad  cither  with  pi
nfatj,  «Tcept  b  imall  quintttist.  Tbi
h*K  uiten  fitnn  i»(  psnuTiiig  tlul  tiis  w
.  (jni  ^Hrfi  and  olrM  i|U  -  ■-  -
cetnmlj  ■jnoDjsuiiia. Thi


dkatiog  DOthiug  mon  thm  umiid  leiui

It  ii  wall  known  tbM  all  ttw  mmt  noble  Italiui
viiKi,  witli  1  rtrj  few  giccptioiu,  wers  derired
fnat  Latlnm  and  Campania,  and  for  [b«  moat  part
grew  within  a  (hort  dlatance  of  tb«  ■>■  "  The
whola  of  thtn  placn."  tMjt  Btnbo  (t.  p.  254),
wbcn  draciiblDg  thi*  cmat,  "  yield  sicsllent  wine  ;
among  tha  nwat  celebrated  an  the  Cieenban,  the
Fandanian,  Ibe  SetJnian,  and  lo  alto  an  the  Fa-
lenuan,  the  Alban,  and  the  Statinian."  But  the
claHiGcation  adopted  by  Pliny  (m.  6)  will  pro**
oni  bert  guide,  and  thi*  we  ihali  fidlow  to  a  certain

Id  the  iint  rank,  then,  we  oinat  ^aca  the  S»-
fmn  which  ftiiW  deaerrea  tlw  title  of  Japarial,
aince  it  wai  the  dioeen  berenge  of  Aiigmtni  and
moat  of  hit  eonrtian.  It  new  npon  the  billi  of
SetiiL,  above  Ponun  Appi,  looking  down  npon  the
Poniptine  marthc*.  (/"oufnb  Pomptinoi  quae  ipec-
tat  Selia  ampsa.  Mart.  liii.  112;  He  alio  vL  66,
it  8,  i:  74,  liii.  1 13 ;  Ja».  t.  SI ;  Silina,  tiii.
37B  ;  ?]iii.  H.  y.  L  a)  Befen  tbe  nga  of  Angnitaa
the  denisM  woi  the  moat  piiied  dalL  It  grew
in  the  poplar  awiunpt  bordering  on  the  gulf  of
AmydacdoHto  Fundi.  (Mart.iiii.  115.)  Inthe
time  of  Pliny  iti  nputation  wai  entirely  gone,
partly  in  conB«iaenea  of  the  earelauneu  of  the
coltiiaton,  and  partly  &am  iu  pnper  aoil,  origin-
ally a  Tery  limiied  (pace,  hanng  been  cut  up  by
the  canal  of  Nera  extending  from  Baiae  to  Oitia.
Gaien  (Atheo.  L  p.  27,  a.)  repreaenti  it  ai  gene-
toui,  fhll  bodied  and  heady,  not  aniiing  at  maturity
until  it  had  been  kept  for  many  yeara.  CPlil^  L  a
Slr^»,  t.  p.  231 ;  Mart  liiL  llfi;  Hot,  Cbrm.
SO.  9,  iiL  33.  2.  Ac)

The  Hcond  nnk  was  occupied  by  the  Faltmaii,
of  which  the  FantiamaM  wai  the  moat  ehoic
riety,  haTing  nined  its  character  from  the
•nd  (kill  eierciaed  in  the  onltintion  of  the  i
bot  when  Pliny  wrote,  it  wni  beginning  to  1
pohlic  eatimation,  in  conae^uence  of  the  giowera
being  mon  (olidtous  about  quantity  than  quulity,
jnit  aa  was  the  caae  with  Madeira  a  few  yean
■go.  The  P/Jtma  offtr,  CDoceniing  the  predee
limita  of  which  there  bare  been  many  contra-  -
■iea,  comiTienced  at  the  Pom  CampanoA,  on
left  hand  of  thoae  ioomeying  towarde  (he  Urbana
Colonia  of  Soils,  the  Faiuliimut  ago-  at  a  i
■bout  ail  milei  fcota  Sinneaia,  ao  that  the  -
diatiiet  in  quealioa  may  be  r^aided  aa  atntchmg
fnm  die  MaHic  hilla  to  the  riTer  Vultnmue.  Fa-
lemian  became  fit  tor  drinking  in  ten  yean,  and
might  be  uied  when  twenty  year*  old,  bni  '
kept  longer  gave  beadacha,  and  prored  inji
to  the  nerrona  ayatem.  Pliny  diatingoiihea
kind,  the  roogh  (ontenuii),  the  aweet  ididct),  and
the  thin  (tow).  Oalen  {ap.  Attnt.  L  p.  26,  c.)
two  only,  the  reogh  {aieriifij)  and  the  aweetiah
(7liMaifa«<),  Wben  the  Muth  wind  pierailed
dnrina  the  teaaon  of  the  vintage  the  wine  was
■areeiiafa  and  daiker  in  calm  (/wAin-apai),  bat  if


VINDM.  1207

the  gnpai  were  gathered  during  weallui  of  ■  dt&
ferent  deaeription,  it  waa  rtragh  and  tawny  or
ambep-cotonred  {ni^it).  The  oidinary  appear-
if  Falenian,  which  haa  been  made  a  theme
iiidenble  diacoaaion,  seems  to  be  detennined
by  a  paaiage  in  Pliny  [H.  N.  xxxriL  12),  in  wbieh
we  are  informed  that  ^a  fineat  amber  was  named
fiibneo.  Otheri  arranged  the  Tarietiea  difln-
ently ;  that  which  grew  upon  the  hill  topa  they
called  CbwBtan,  that  on  the  middle  alopei  J^aaa
Hamm,  that  on  the  plain  F<dermm.  (Plin.  /.  c.
and  niiL  21 ;  Athen.  i.  p.  26,  e. ;  Hor.  Carm.
i.  20.  10 ;  Prop.  it.  6  ;  Martial,  ii.  95 ;  Siliui,  <rii.

lis.)

In  the  third  rank  was  tbe  A&anm,  inm  the
Moni  Altwiui  {Mxm  Julna,  Mart.  liii.  109),  of
tfarioua  kinda,  very  eweet  (prtHdalct),  aweetiih
(YAiintt'M'),  rongh  (Plin.  zxiiL  21),  and  abarp
lili^cudat) ;  it  waa  inTigonting  (wmt  n^),  and

perfection  after  being  kept  far  fifteen years,

lin.Ua.1  Mart.  liii.  IDS;  Hoc.&AiLa.  14;

r.  T.  33 ;  Athen.  1  p,  26,  d.)  Here  too  we  place
the  ^arraafwwn,  &nm  the  promontory  fbming  the
southen  horn  of  the  bay  of  Naptei,  which  was

'  drinkable  nn^  it  had  been  kept  for  Gre-nnd-
nty  yean,  for  being  deatilote  of  richneaa  (dXi-
Tili)  and  Tery  dry  l^ia^Bpis),  It  required  a  long
time  to  ripen,  bnt  was  anongly  recommended  to
conTaleacenta,  on  account  of  iti  ihinneu  and  whole-
aomeneaa.  Oalen,  bowerer,  waa  of  opinion  that
it  agreed  with  thoae  only  who  were  accvutomed  to
use  it  conitantlr  ;  Tiberini  waa  wont  to  ny  that
the  phyiiciona  had  conapiied  to  dignify  what  was
onlrsBiwroinOBiaiwr,-  while hiiaucea8aor,CalignU,
styled  it  mobilii  tappa.  (Plin.  U.  ee.;  Athen.  L  e.)
Of  equal  reputation  were  the  AfoaneKin,  fmm  the
hille  which  formed  the  boundary  between  Latium
and  Campania,  although  lomewhat  honb,  aa  would
asem,  from  the  precaulioni  recommended  by  the
epicnre  in  Horace  (Sat.  ii.  4.  51  :  compnn  Carni.i
I.  19,  i.  7.  21,  iji.  21  ;  Mart.  liii.  Ill  j  Silius,
TIL  207),  ond  the  Ganraaum,  from  the  ridge  above
Baiae  and  Puteoli,  produced  in  tmall  quantity,  bnt
of  leiy  high  quality,  full  bodied  (tfrgrei)  and
thick  (■dxi'i).  (Alfaea.  1. 1.  j  Plin.  H.  X.  tii,  G  ;
Flot.  iii.  G.)  In  the  same  cloia  an  to  be  induded
the  Calnmm  from  Calet,  and  the  Fambaum  from
Fundi.  Both  bod  formerly  held  a  higher  place,
"but  Tineyarda,"  moralises  Pliny,  '"aa  well  as
Btalea,  hare  their  perioda  of  riae,  of  glory,  and  of
&11."  The  Oatoaim  waa  light  (Kowpa),  and  bet-
ter for  the  itomach  than  Falemion  i  the  Fuitda-
mim  waa  full  bodied  (rfrt«,i)  and  nmiriihirg,  but
apt  to  attack  both  elomach  and  head  ;  therefore
little  longht  after  at  banqneta.  (Strabo,  t.  p.  231 ;
Athen.  1.  p.  27,  a. ;  Hor.  Cana.  I.  31.  9  ;  Jur.  i.
69  ;  Man.  i.  35,  xui.  113.)  Thii  liat  ia  cloud
by  the  VeiitenBnaa,  /Vifernatfrwai,  and  SKmumn,
from  Veliiraa,  PriTcmum,  and  Eignio,  towna  on
the  Volacian  hilli ;  the  fint  waa  a  aound  wine,
but  had  thii  peculiarity,  that  it  alwaya  tailed  a*  if
mixed  with  some  fonign  aubatance  ;  the  tecond
wot  thin  and  pleasant ;  tha  lait  waa  looked  upon
only  in  the  light  of  a  medicine,  raluabie  for  ita
aitringent  quahties.  (Athen.ip.27,  b.  i  PliiL Le.;
Mart.  liii.  116.}  We  may  safely  bring  in  one
more,  the  Fomiiiaimi,  from  the  gnlf  of  Caieia
(Laatiygana  Baecbu  im  ampiora,  Hor.  Carm.  iiL
16.  341  aaiodated  by  Horace  with  the  Qtecuban,
Falemnn,  and  Calenion  (Hor.  Ob-m.  i.  20,  iii.
16),  and  compared  bv  Odea  (i^.  Attm.  L  p.  S0,


1208  VINUSt

a.)  to  the  PriTntiatinam  and  RhfginDin,  but  richer

(AnrofMn-Jpot),  uid  ripening  quidil;.

Hie  fdurth  rBnk  contained  the  Jlfoner^iMiii.
Irsm  the  neighbourhood  of  McMUU,  fine  brought
into  fuhion  by  JuHui  Ciaur.  The  fineaC,  called
PotiJiBuim  ^ImnSlni,  Athro.  i.  p.  11,  d.),  from
Che  field!  neareU  to  the  nuin  hind,  wu  Kund
liHtdi),  lighl,  aud  at  the  luce  line  not  without
body.  The  ranromiiifaiiiiw  wu  frequealli  lub-
•tiiuted  fmudulenllj  for  the  Mamertinuoi,  wf  '
rcHmhled. (Athen.  i.  p.  ST.  d. ;  Plin.  t.  e.)

or  Ihe  irinei  in  Southern  Qiul,  that  of  B
rat  alone  ban  ■  high  chanclei.  The  leii
looked  upon  with  luipicioD.  in  coniequeltce  of  the
notorioo)  (rauda  of  the  dealen  in  the  Provmce,  who
carried  ou  the  huiineu  of  adulteratioD  to  a  great

noximia  dr\igi.  Among  other  lhing^itwa•know□
that  they  purchaaed  aloea.  to  heighten  the  fiarour
and  improve  the  colour  of  their  merchandiae,  and
conducted  the  proceaa  of  artificial  ripeaing  ao  un-
•kilfully,  aa  to  impart  a  toate  of  amoke,  which
called  forth,  4)  wa  hare  leea  aboire,  the  nudedie-
tion  of  Martial  on  the  fjumria  of  Maraeillea.  (Plio.
//.  N.  xii.  8.  §  6.)

The  produce  of  the  Balearie  i>l«  vai  compared
to  the  fint  growtha  of  Italy,  and  the  aame  praiie
vBi  ihared  by  the  Tineyarda  of  Tamco  and  £aa-
roH,  while  thoK  of  the  LaJebun  were  not  Bo  much
bxoti  for  (he  quality  u  fur  the  abundance  of  their
aupply.  (PllD.  «.  M  liT.  8,  8  6  i  Mart  liiL  118  ;
Siliua.  )iL3rO.)

Returning  to  the  Eait,  eeveral  dialricta  of  Poa-
tua,  Paphlagonia,  and  Bithynia,  Idmpiacni  on  the
Ilelleapout,  Telmeaiua  in  Caria,  Cyprus  Ttipolia.
Berytui.  and  Tyre,  oil  claimed  ditlinction,  and
aboTF  all  the  Ckalj/baniiim,  orij^nally  trotn  Beroea,
but  afurwarda  grown  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Ba-
maicuB  alto,  waa  the  choien  and  only  drink  of  the
Great  King  (Plin.  H.  N.  li'.  S  ;  GeopoD,  v.  2  i
Athen.  i.  p.  2B,  d.),  to  which  we  may  join  liie
Aii^RUUB,  called  nectar  by  Chaereui  (Atben.  i.
p.  29,  f.).  and  the  BtttMroi  from  Phoenicia,  which
filund  many  admirtn.  (Athen.  i.  p.  29,  b.)  The
laat  ia  apohen  of  elaewhere  a>  Tbradau,  or  Grecian,
cr  Sicilian,  which  may  hare  ariaen  fram  the  lame
grape  having  been  diuemlnated  through  thete
counliiea.  (Compare  Herod,  ii.  35  ;  Atfaen.  i  p.
31,  a.)

~ ■  ,  in  the  laat  place,  to  Egypt,  where,


xording


lleil


coiered,  the  Mc
DUinda  our  atlentioa.  It  ia  highly  eiuUed  by
Athcnaeui,  being  white,  aweet,  fragiut,  light
(AtTTilt),  circulating  quickty  through  the  frame,
■nd  not  flying  to  iha  head  ;  but  luperior  even  to
thii  waa  dia  Taaaotiaini,  io  named  from  a  long
narrow  aandy  ridge  (raivla)  near  the  wntern  ex-
tremity of  the  Delta; il  wu aromatic,  alightly


■ppenre


: beaidei


Antylla,  a  town  no

t^rg;

m  Alexandria. Ad-

Tunring  up  the  lall

y.  thcM

rine  of  the  Thcbala,

and  eapecially  of  C

ptoswa.

■0  thin  and  eaaily

thrown  offthat  it  CO

Idbegi

en  without  ininrv  lo

iBTer  patienti ;  and

amending  through  Nubii,  to

Nile  .

th  the  Aatapua,  we

reach  AftroS,  whoae

J  been  immortalized

br  Lucan.  (Athen.  i
Hn.Carm.la7.10

"."3,  f.

;3tnib.ivii.  i).799i

i  Virg.  (.'eoiy.  ii.  91  i'Lucan,

VINUM.
.  161  ;  Flin.  H.  N.  iit.  9.) Martial  appara  to


VVe  read  of  •ereial  wiuea  whidi  recand  tbdr
deaignation,  not  fiom  the  region  to  whkli  tbej  ba-
longed,  but  &am  the  particular  kind  of  grape  Iron

connected  with  their  hiatory  or  qnalitiea. Name*

belonging  lo  the  former  daaa  were  lu  all  likeliboad
beatowed  before  the  moat  &nnired  diatikia  wen
gcnerallj  known,  and  before  the  eSecu  pndontl
upon  the  Tine,  by  change  of  aoil  and  dimabr,  had
been  accurately  obaerTed  and  itudied. After  (ikeee

tile  utage  would  lend  to  perpetuate  the  auoaii
appelUtion.  Thnt.  down  to  a  lata  period,  we  hear
of  the  Aninnrn  ('A^i-aibs  obu,  Heeych.),  Inm
the  Amnaa  VltU,  which  held  the  fiiat  place  anuBg
linea,  and  embraced  many  rarietiea,  carefnily  dir
criminated  and  cultivated  according  to  difirnnt
melhoda  ( Plin.  If.  N.  nv.  4.  g  1 ;  Cato^  S.  R.
6  and  7  ;  Colum.  iii.  2.  S  7  i  9.  S  S.)  It  waa  af
Grecian  origin,  haiing  been  conveyed  by  a  Tbn-
laliaa  tribe  to  Italy  (a  alory  which  would  eesa
to  reler  to  aome  Pelaigiau  migralion),  and  naied
chiefly  ia  Campania  around  Naploi,  and  in  the
FalemuB  ager.  Ita  charaeteriatic  eicellenee  waa
the  great  body  and  conaequent  durafailicj  of  ita
wine.  IPiraiMania  earn,  Virg.  Gaory.  iL  S7  ;  Galea,
Mtlh.  mtd.  liL  i  ;  Oeopoc  riii.  22  ;  Cela.  It.  i  ;
Macrob.  ii.  16  ;  Auiod.  ^  inii.  32;  Srren.
Samm.  xiii.  £44.)  So,  in  like  mannrr,  the  iliUm
••t-Bt  (Athen.  i.  p.  26,  f.),  from  the  {nBla  ^'.Aoi
CColum.iiL2.  §24),  which  Virgil  tell)  na  {Gtary.
iL  93)  waa  porticulBrly  auitnble  for  pattumt,  and
the  mrriiit  famoke-wine)  of  Phito  the  comic  poet
(Athen.  i.  p.  31,  e.),  prepared  in  grealrjt  pcrfec-
"  from  the  joaxreaT  ^^mAet,

:nce of  the  duatera bddg
ik,  but  of  an  intennediaia
darty  or  raoky  hue, (Theophr,  H.  P.  ii.  4,  a  P.
3  ;  AriitoL  dt  Gmr.  it.  4  ;  Plin,  H.  N.  liv.  1.
7  ;  compare  iiivL  36,  on  the  gem  Cajmiaa.]
On  the  other  hand,  the  Zavploi.  oo  whose  di-
ine  fragrunce  Hennippua  deacanta  in  auch  flow-
ig  language  (Athen.  L  p.  29,  e.),  ia  umply  KHne
ch  wine  of  great  a^  **  UnUileaa,  and  arrc,  ami
□ndroua  old."  (d&inat  du>  ix>»,  49l  inwpii. . .
flpKr  ft  taifiavim,  Athen.  i. p.  441,  d.  ;  <h
" ,talh.  ad  lIoM.  Od.  ii.  340  ;  CoHub.  ad  Alirn.
I.  29.) The  origin  of  the  title  tli^oafJu  iaaome-
Lt  more  doubtful ;  aome  will  have  it  to  denote
wine  fromaaweet-amelling  apot  (Suid.  a.


nably  refer


ilaelf  (Ueaych.  j,  v.) ;  according  u  Phania*  of
a,  in  one  paauge,  it  waa  a  compound,  fonurd
ding  one  part  of  tea-water  to  lifty  of  nuu,

although,  in  another  pkce,  he  aeema  to  nay,  tlkat  it
Hne  obtained  from  gtapei  gathered  before  they
ripe,  in  which  cate  it  might  reacsibte  Chao-

pagne.  (Athen.  i.  p.  3'2,  a. ;  compare  p.  46'2,  e.)
""  lae  who  deiire  more  miiiute  drtaila  upoD  ikia

Collection,  hooka  iiL  lo  viiL  incluaive ;  the  wlude
of  Ihe  14tb  book  of  Pliny'a  Natural  Hiaiary.  Is-
gether  with  the  firtl  thirty  ebapteia  of  the  '2U  ;
the  12ih  book  of  Colomella,  with  the  mmpientaiy
,f  Schneider  and  othcn  ;  the  2d  book  of  Vitgil'a
Seor^.'iiM,  with  the  renurka  of  Heyne,  Voia,  aifd
he  uld gmnuuariani  j Ualcn,  L  !^  md  lii  4  ;


via

PoUiu,  tL  folL  :  Athcnaeni,  lib.  i.  and  lib.  x. ;
b«id«  which  there  an  a  mtiilitade  of  pUMgu
in  alher  parti  or  the  abaie  authon,  in  Cato,  Vmtd,
and  in  the  cUnin  geneislljr,  whicii  boi  nint  or
leu  upon  thcM  topic*.

Of  modem  wriien  we  maj  nolico  pwtimlarly,
Prefer  Reodella,  Tradatta  dt  Vimea,  FmdniHa  et
I'mo,  VeneL  IG'29  ;  Oalealiiu  Laodrinu*,  QxMrfia
dt  Matiimt  Vin  H  Aquae,  Ftmi.  1593  ;  An-
drea* Bacciiu,  dt  Naitiniii  Faionat  HitlBna,  dx^
Rom.  1  j96,  da  Cpavinii  ^nAfnonim,  itcL,  OrnnoT.
Thd.  Ones.  Antiq.  ;  Sir  Edwud  Ban;,  Obtena-
liimom  lit  Wimit  ojf  tit  Aadeaii,  Load.  1 77fi  ;
Hendenon,  HUtwf  i/A»aiad  atd  modam  Wirni,
Load.  1S24.  Some  of  the  moit  importaiit  bcti
Bie  preaented  in  a  coodeojed  form  in  Becker^
GaUat,  ToL  a.  pp.  163—176,  and  ^f.  338—341,
and  CktriUet,  tdL  L  p.  ij6,  toll.  [W.  R.]

VIOCURI. [QuATUOHVuu  VuLEa.]

VlRaA,dim.  VIROULA  {^lot),  a  rod  or
wand.  Thia  wu  in  many  ouei  the  emblem  of  a
e«naiii  nmk  or  office  ;  being  carried,  fee  example,
by  ihe  Salii,  by  a  judge  or  eiTil  officer  (lee  wood-
cut, p.  9S),  a  henid  [Caqucsub]  (Non.  Hare.  p.
fi-JS  ;  Ovid.  Mtl.  L  716),  and  hj  (he  Trviaaania
[TaicLiHiUN],  «  any  other  pcrwm  who  had  lo
eicRiK  uHhoiitj  oTer  ilatei.  (Sentc  EpiiL  47.)
The  UK  of  the  rod  i^Hti;  AeU,  iti.  33)  in
the  nunlahmenl  of  Roman  citiient  wu  abolithed
by  the  La  Ponit  (p.  696,  a).  In  the  F>sc(8  a
nuoibci  of  rodi  wrie  bound  together.

The  wand  wa*  atu  the  cammon  inalinment  of
magical  diapUy.  aa  in  the  hand  of  Ciice  (Horn.  Od.
I.  23)1,293,  31S,  389),  and  of  MinrrTa(iTi.  173).
To  do  any  thing  vir^paia  diviaa  wal  to  do  it  £^
moflio.  (Cie.  Att.  i.  44.)  The  mipH  of  cloth  were
called  <!i>in<,  {Ovid..ar.^i».  iii.269,)  [Pal-
MUH  ; T<L*.]  [J.  Y.l

VTROINESVESTA'LES.  [Vistalks  Vib-

OINM.)

VIKIDA'RIUH. [HoKTtis.]

VIS.  Leges  were  paiaed  at  Rome  for  tbe  pur-
pa»  of  preTcnting  acta  of  violence.  The  Lex
Platia  or  Flautia  waa  enacted  againd  Ihoae  who
occupied  public  placei  and  carried  ama  (Cic.  ad
Alt  ii.  24,  dt  Ilaruip.  Rapau.  8  ;  the  Diiaerta-
tioo  of  Waechter,iVaicj  Arckiv.dttCTimiwilTeciU^
ToL  liii  n^iinled  in  Onllii  Onomaaticon).  The  Lei
propoted  by  dte  counl  Q.  Catului  on  thia  lubject,
H'ilh  the  aaaiilancs  of  Plautiiu  tbe  tribunua,  ap.
pmr*  to  be  Iho  Lex  PlotU.  (Cic  t^  OatL  23  ;
Salloat.  H  Cic  Daelawt.)  Then  va>  a  Lei
Julia  of  the  dictator  Caenr  on  thia  aubject,  which
impoaed  the  penalty  of  aquae  et  ignia  iuteidictio.
{C'le.  fiilip.  i.  S.)  TwoJutioeLi^eiwenpaaHd
ae  to  thii  matter  in  the  time  of  Augoatna,  which
were  mpectively  entitled  De  Vi  Publica,  and  dl
Vi  Prirala.  (Dig.  43.  tit  6,  7.)  The  Lox  de  Vi
Publica  did  not  apply,  as  the  tide  might  teem  to
import,  eicloii  <e1y  to  acta  agslola  the  public  peace,
and  it  is  not  poasible  lo  describe  it  rery  accniately
except  by  eoumerating  its  chief  proiiuona.  The
collecting  of  arma  (onu,  Ida)  in  a  hntae  (domiu\
or  in  a  villa  (agropg  in  in£ia),  except  for  the  pur-
poae  at  hunting,  or  going  ■  joumey  or  a  Toyi^


VITBUM.


1209


violation  of  the  Le
Uon  of  the  word  tela  in  this  L
uive.  The  punishment  for  the  liolalion
!i  waa  aqnae  et  ignii  inlcrdictio,  except
w  of  attacking  and  plondering


The  >%niE-


was  death  ;  and  lie  penalty  waa  the  aanw  for  catiy-
ing  off  a  woman,  married  or  unmarried.  The  casea
eDumenled  in  the  Digest,  aa  falling  within  the
penalties  of  the  Lei  Julia  de  Vi  Privata,  arecaaei
where  the  act  was  of  less  atrocity  i  for  itutance,  if
a  man  got  a  number  of  men  together  for  a  rutt,
which  ended  in  the  beating  of  a  person,  but  uot
in  hia  death,  he  oune  within  tbe  penalties  of  the
Lei  de  Vi  FrirBta.  It  vraa  also  a  case  of  Vis
PriiBIa,  when  persons  combined  to  prevent  anotbtr
beii^  bivnght  before  the  praetor.  The  SenaCut-
coosulcmn  Volnsianum  ailended  the  penaltiea  of
iho  Lex  to  those  who  maintained  another  in  hia
suit,  with  the  view  of  sharing  any  advantage  that
might  result  from  it.  The  penalties  of  this  Lex
wen  tbe  toss  of  a  third  part  of  the  offender^  pro-
perty :  and  he  waa  also  declared  to  be  incapable  of
being  a  Senator  or  Deeurio,  or  a  Jodei :  by  a  5a-
TUttusconsnltum,  the  name  of  which  is  not  given,
he  was  inapacilated  from  enjoying  any  honour,
quasi  inJamia  (This  matter  is  discuiaed  at
length  by  Rein,  Dot  Oruam^mit  d*t  ifdmer,
p.  732.)  [O.  L.]

VIS  et  VIS  ARMATA.  There  was  an  inter-
dict De  Vi  el  Vi  ArmaM,  which  applied  to  the
case  of  a  man  who  waa  fordbly  ejected  from  the
possession  of  a  piece  of  gnmnd  or  edifice  (tpd  vi  dt-
jecttuat).  The  objectof  theinterdici  wattoteston
the  party  ejected  to  possession. (Dig.43.  tit.  16  ;

1NT«DKTU».>  la  U]

VISCEHATIO. [FuNus,  p.  S62,  a.)

VITELLIA'NI. [TABiii4B,p.l092,a.]

VITIS. [EiiKciTUa,  p.  B04,  b]

VITRUM  (PoAoi),  glass.  A  singular  amount
of  ignoiance  and  scepticism  long  proiailed  with
regard  to  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the  anuent*
in  the  art  of  glasa.niaking.  Some  asserted  that  it
wni  to  bo  regarded  aa  eiclosiicly  a  modern  inven-
tion, while  others,  unable  altogether  to  reaist  the
mau  of  evidence  to  the  contrary,  contented  them-
selves with  believing  that  the  substance  was  known
only  in  its  cosraeit  and  rudest  form.  It  is  now
clearly  demonstnted  to  have  been  in  commm  use
at  a  veiy  remote  epoch.  Various  ipectmcni  a^ll  in
eiistence  prove  that  the  mann&cture  had  in  some
blanches  reached  a  point  of  pnfedion  to  which
recent  skill  has  not  yet  been  able  to  attain  ;  and
although  WD  may  not  feel  disposed  to  go  so  hr  as
Winckelmaon  (L  c  3.  i  20),  who  contends  that  it
was  used  more  genorally  and  for  a  greater  variety
of  purposes  in  the  old  woiU  than  among  oonclves,
yet  when  we  eiamine  tbe  nuraeroos  coUeetion*
arranged  in  all  great  public  museums,  we  must  feel
convinced  that  it  was  employed  aa  an  ordinary
material  iiir  all  manner  of  domestic  ntensils  by  the
EgyjHUuis,  Oreeka,  and  Romans,

We  find  the  procesa  of  glaaa-blowing  distinctly
represented  in  tba  pamtingt  of  Beni  Haaian,  which
if  any  faith  on  be  reposed  in  the  interpretation  of
hieroglyphics  aceording  to  tho  phonetic  system,  were
executed  during  the  reigns  of  Osirtasen  the  First,
tho  contemporary  of  Joseph,  and  his  immediate
successrav  while  a  glass  bead  has  been  liiund  at
Thebes  bearing  tbi  name  of  a  monarch  who  lived
33011  years  ago,  about  the  lime  of  the  Jewish
Eiodus.  Vases  also,  wine-bottles,  drinking- cupa,
bu^es,  and  a  multitude  of  other  objects  have  been
discovered  in  sepulchres  and  attached  to  mummies
both  in  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  and  although  in
most  cnsei  no  precise  date  can  be  affiled  to  these
lelin,  many  of  tliem  are  referred  by  the  most  con-


1210  VlrRHM.

latent  JvdgN  to  B  Tcrf  earij  period. (WDkinion,

A<ieimi  EgjftiiBU,  toL  iii.  p.  SS,  &c.)

A  itoiy  hu  1je«i  prHemid  by  PJinj  (/f.  N.
XiiTL  B5),  thit  glin  mi  finrt  dnconicd  leci-
deDtill;  bj  umc  mercbuti  who  lumug  luiil«d  on
the  Sfrian  c«it  at  the  moutb  of  the  riTtr  B«hi(,
uid  being  mmble  to  find  tusna  ta  aupport  their
cooking-pota,  fetched  for  Hut  pnrpou  fnmi  their
ehip  aonw  of  lbs  lumpa  of  niOv  irhicb  eompoeed
the  aifo.  Tbii  being  fued  b;  tbe  heat  of  the
fire,  nniled  Titb  the  mid  upon  which  it  teeted
uid  formed  ■  ttreun  of  Tltrifled  mcttei.  No  taor
diuion  can  be  diavn  fitim  tbif  tale,  ctoi  if  tnie,
in  CDiJwqaence  of  itt  TSgaetiea  ;  bat  it  probably
originsted  in  the  dwt  recorded  bj  3li«bo  (iri.
p.  7£6)  and  Jowphni  {B.J.  ii-  9),  that  the  nmd
of  the  diitiict  in  qnecUon  wai  esteemed  peenliarlT'
■nitable  for  glBM-malrtog,  and  eiponed  in  gnat
qnanlitiea  to  tbe  woikihopa  of  Sidon  and  Alexan-
dria, long  the  moat  ftmoua  in  tbe  ancient  vorld.
(See  HambeigH  and  Hiehaelia  on  Che  Olui  of
the  Uebnm  and  Phocnieiane,  Cottmaitar,  San.
GoU.  ttl  i>.  i  Heeten,  Idtin,  i.  2.  p.  91.)  Alei-
andria  inglained  iti  lepntation  for  man;  centnriea  ;
Rome  derlTed  a  great  portion  of  ita  luppliei  &am
tbii  unree,  and  u  late  ai  the  reign  oFADnlian
we  find  the  numulacture  itill  flomiihins.  (Cic.  pro
Babir.  PrM.  14  ;  Stiabo,  I  e.;  MartiiE,  iL  H.
lii.  74,  li'.  115  J  VopiHx  Aunl.  45  ;  Bondet.Sn'
rArU  dt  la  Vemris  ni  «  EgSpU;  Darr^fiUm  it
rEmfta,nLix.  p.  21S.)

There  i*  acme  difflcnlty  in  deciding  by  what
Greek  aullm  glau  ia  fint  mentioned,  becaufe  the
term  floAii,  Wc»  the  Hebrew  word  nied  is  the
book  of  Job  (ixTiiL  17)  and  ttanilated  in  tbe
LXX.  b;  laXei,  unqnettionabtf  denotea  not  mly
ortiflual  gUsi  bnt  rock^oTilal,  ot  indeed  an;
tnnapareut  atone  or  atone-like  lubatance.  (Schol.
ad  Ariitopk.  Nab.  737.)  Thoa  the  EtAoi  of
Herodntiu  (iiL  34),  ia  whieh  the  Elhiopiani
encaied  the  bodiea  of  their  dead,  cannot  be
gtaia,  although  nndentood  in  thia  aenae  by  Cleaiaa
and  Diodonu  (iL  15},  fei  we  are  eijHOtly  told
that  it  wai  dug  in  abnndanee  out  of  tbe  earth  ;
and  hence  commtotaton  bare  conjectnred  that
rock-cryatol  or  roek-ialt,  or  amber,  or  oriental
alaboi^,  er  eDme  bitmainooa  or  gnmm;  product
might  be  indicated.  Bat  when  (he  «me  hi>-
lorian  in  hii  account  of  Meted  ciModilet  (iL  69)
(talea  that  they  vera  decanted  with  eu-rinp
made  of  melted  alone  (V'^WtiI  rt  aUus  ^vrJ
mil  xcJo*"  '»  Ti  Jra  ir^irra),  we  may  aafely
oooclDde  that  he  intendi  to  dcaciibe  lome  Titnona
ornament  for  whicb  be  knew  no  a^propriale  name.
Tbe  npprfli  ikAln)  and  rpfiirfSit  ioKira  of  an
Athenian  inacription  refened  to  B.  c  S98  (BHckh,
Corp.  Itucrgi.  n.  IfiO.  %  50),  together  with  the
paaiBg*  in  Ariitophanei  (Jotdn.  74)  where  the
enny  boaau  that  he  had  been  drinking  with  the
gnal  king  "  i^  doxlntr  imiiintr"  decide  no-
thing^ eaJMctally  uno*  b  another  comedy  (^aL
737)  Strepaiadea  deacribea  a  loXot,  or  bnrning-
glaia,  aa  a  tmnvparent  itona  lold  in  tbe  abopo  of
apoCbecaiiea,  and  we  know  that  any  aolld  dla-
phaninu  aubitance  ground  bto  tbe  fenn  of  a  lena
would  produce  the  ellect.  Setting  aaide  the  tifo
prablenu  with  legaid  to  giaia,  attiibaled  to  Ari-
aCoile,  aa  confeiaedly  ipuriom,  we  at  length  find  a
aa^i&ctory  teatimooy  in  the  woiki  of  hie  pupil  and
anccewor,  Theophiaalna,  who  noticea  the  eircom-
•ttDc*  alludad  lo  abore,  of  the  fiOieia  «f  (he  wnd


ofgla^

Among  the  I^lin  wtitera  lAoetiuB  appeal  a  to
be  the  firtt  in  whom  tbe  wnd  vUnm  ocmi*  (ir.
604,  Ti.  991)  i  bat  it  muit  haje  be«n  wdl  knowi
to  hit  cmmtiynKn  long  befere,  tat  Ckc<»  noBca  it,
alrag  with  papa  and  lnc%  aa  ■  tOTBMP  aitirte  of
aerohaiidiae  bnmght  baa  Egyp*  ipnr  Aofc  F»M.
14). Scaanu,  m  hii  aedfleah^  (b.  c  M>,  ode

-  "lajrfit  inch ■- . .

ir-tunea ;  ht  tl
waa  dirided  hita  three  tien,  of
portion  waa  of  maibte,  the  upper  at  gilded  wood,
and  themiddlecompartmentdf  ^aiB.  (Plin.ZT.JV.
ixiTi,94.  g7.)  In  tbe  poeta  of  tbe  AngnffaB  aje
it  ia  conatanlly  introduced,  both  directly  Bad  n
aimilea,  and  in  lueb  teimi  aa  to  pniTa  that  it  wm
an  otyect  with  which  ereiy  due  muat  be  faaiifin'
(e.  g.  Virg.  Oeory.  It.  350,  Aai.  lii.  759 ;  OnL
Amor.  L  6.  55  1  Prop.  ii.  8.  S7  ;  Hoc.  Oum.  iii
13.  1).  Sttabo  declarca  that  in  hi*  day  a  aaall
drlnking-enp  of  gtiaa  mighl  be  pnrchaaed  at  Bsbh
fbr  half  an  •>  (iri.  p.  76S ;  empue  Mankl,  ix.
60),  and  lo  ccrmmon  waa  it  in  tbe  time  of  Jqimal
and  Martial,  that  old  men  and  women  made  a
lirelihood  by  trucking  aolphor  malehea  fba-  bnken
fiagmenla.  (Jut.  t.  4!l ;  Martial,  L  42,  a.  St
Stat  S^v.  L  6.  73  i  compare  Dion  Can.  In.  ]7.)
When  Pliny  imrta  mann&ctoriea  had  been  eau..
btiahed  not  only  in  Italy,  but  in  Spain  and  Oaa.
alio,  and  glaaa  drinktng-cnpa  had  entirdy  aaper.
■eded  tlioae  of  gold  and  siW  (H.N.  xnyi.  66,
67),  and  in  tbe  reign  of  Alexander  Serena  we  find
vUnarii  ranked  along  with  cuttiera,  oiackniBkMl
goldamithi,  liWeramitba,  and  other  ordinaiy  arti-
fioen  whom  the  empeior  taied  la  niaa  maiwy  fa:
hia  thermae. (L^mprid.  Alet.  An.  34.)

The  numcroua  epecimena  tranamitted  ts  na  {(Via
that  the  ancienta  were  well  aeqaainled  witfc  tin
art  of  imparting  b  great  niie^  of  eoloota  te  Acir
glait ;  they  woe  pcobBbly  tea  ancceafbl  in  thdr
altempta  to  rendtr  it  puftedy  pore  and  fraa  faaaa
all  colour,  lince  we  are  told  by  Pliny  tbat  it  waa
conaidered  moil  nlnahle  in  thia  atala.  It  waa
wrought  according  to  the  diflianit  metbada  imr
practiied,  being  bihioDed  into  tbe  leqnired  ihaipa
by  the  Uowpipe,  out,  aa  ««  term  it,  altbongb
gttmmd  ilirttrr)  ia  a  more  acenimte  (duaaa,  apai  a
wheel,  and  engraved  with  a  aharp  tool,  like  ailnt'
("  aliud  ilatu  GguiBtnr,  aliud  ton»  tecjior,  aliad
argenli  mode  codatur," Plin.  /f.N.  ixiTi.  SS).


ha<e  the  moat  poaitire  eridenee  that  the  diaiaaad
(adamtu)  waa  employed  by  engnm*  of  getaa
(Plin.  H.N.  xnrii.  15;  Solin.  S3 ;  laider.  ni.
1 3,  3),  and  might  thenlbn  haTe  been  appliad  iritb
atill  gnater  bicilitj  la  atfalchiog  tie  tatfaet  at
glaaa,  there  ia  no  naceaiity  {•»  anpniaing  tbat  niay
waa  not  himaelf  awar*  of  whM  b*  naoii  B  aay,
nor  tor  twiiting  hia  waeda  into  im  anlBga  wbieh
they  cannot  legitimate];  umtan,  eapteiJlj  i
bierogtyphict  andtaiM"
be  Been  on  Egyptian  va
been  engraTed  by  aora<

ToL  iii.  p.  105.) The  dii^r^  of  MaRjal  (zii
were  ^aaa  cnpa  cut  or  aanand  i
u  other  of  the  abore  meUoda. '
difficult, and acddenta  eccaned t»  freajneBdy
<MarLxiT.115)thatthaiii' - ' '"


■daatwui


~  O"


VITRUM.

tb«  mrianan  iMcaina  liable  for  At  nine  of  tba
tmmI  dettnyrd.  (Dig.  9.  tiL  3.  i.  S7.  S  39  ;  M«
Saliniuiiu  oil  Fopue.  SabiTw.  c  8.)  The  ut  of
elching  upon  glui,  now  n  conunon,  ni  enlirelj
nnluwini,  (ioce  it  dqwndi  opon  the  prapulin
of  fluoric  add,  >  chenucal  diieoTETf  of  tbe  lut


Wo  msT  DOW  brilflr  oramenta  the  cbief  una
to  which  bIh*  mi  applied.

I.  Dottlo,  TaiM,  cnpa,  and  dneiarf  unu.  A
^nat  niimbei  of  tlwae  mwj  b«  uea  in  the  firitiili
Slnimm  and  all  the  prind|iBl  contiDental  cabinet!,
but  eepeciallT  in  the  Mucd  Borbonico  at  Naplea,
—'■--'■  — • — ■ the  (poila  of  HenDUnmm  and


laboun ;  tnuiy  which  hare  been  ahaped  by  the
blowpipe  only,  are  rema^ble  for  their  grueM
fijUD  and  brilliant  colonn,  while  othen  are  t£  tha
men  delicate  and  ciim[Jicated  wrakmanahip.  A
Tcrj  remarkable  objert  belonging  to  the  laat  claa,
the  property  oF  the  Trirnlti  fomily,  ii  deacribad  in
the  noU«  to  Wiackahnann  {L  c.  3.  S  21}  and  figmed


here.  It  ii  a  glaai  cap  contained  within  a  aort
of  network,  alu  of  glaia,  to  which  it  ia  attached
by  a  leriet  of  ibort  and  very  fine  slaM  propa  placed
at  equal  dittancea  froDi  each  outer.  Round  the
rim  an  Kreral  letlen  conaected  with  the  cup  in
the  aame  manner  aa  the  network,  and  f«ming  the
worda  BiBi  vivts  iiuLToa  ANMoa,  The  cha-
racten  of  the  imcriptiou  are  green,  the  network  ii
blue,  the  cop  itielf  naemblea  opal,  ihadea  of  red,
white,  yellow  and  blue  predominating  in  tnm  ac-
cording to  the  angle  at  which  the  light  blla  upon
it  1 1  wai  at  Gnt  belieied  that  thia  effect  wat
the  r«nlt  of  long  inteimoit  beneath  the  gronnd  ;
but  it  ia  much  more  likely  to  haTC  been  [nodueed
by  the  ortiit,  for  it  corretpond)  preciiely  to  the
account  given  of  two  prectou)  cup*  preaenled  by  an
Kgyptian  priut  to  the  emperor  Adrian,  and  cha-
mcieriied  ai  caliai  allioKmlti  rrTiimlora.  (VopiK.
Saltn.  c  S.)  Neither  the  letlcrt  nor  the  network
hove  been  lotdered  lo  the  cap,  but  the  whole  hai
been  cut  of  a  lolld  maia,  af^r  the  manner  of  a
cameo,  the  marki  of  the  wheel  being  itill  riiible
on  the  little  prop*,  which  ore  more  or  leai  angular
according  as  the  initrument  was  able  to  reach  them
completely  or  not  Bat  the  great  Iriumph  of  an-
cient gtnina  in  thia  depattment  ii  the  celebrated


VlTRUll.  1211

Portland  Vaae,  Ibrmeriy  known  ai  the  BBrberini

Vaae,  which  it  now  in  the  Bciliih  HuHom.  It  waa
found  about  three  hmidrsd  yeata  agc^  at  a  abort
diatancs  from  Rome,  in  a  marble  c^n  within  a
aepolchnl  Tanlt,  pronounced  upon  very  imperfect
eridence  lo  haie  been  the  tomb  of  Aleiander  Se-
reruL  The  eitnme  beauty  of  thia  am  led  Mont-
faneon  and  other  antiquanea  to  miatake  it  for  a
real  aardonyx.  Upon  roon  accurate  examination  it
waa  aacertained  to  be  eompoaed  of  dork  blue  gloaa,
of  a  Tery  rich  tint,  on  the  aurtace  of  which  are  de-
lineated hi  lelief  acTeral  minute  and  elab«ately
wrooght  Sgutea  of  opaque  while  enamel  It  hai
been  determined  by  penoni  of  the  greateal  practi-
cal experience,  that  Iheie  liguree  mutt  hare  been
moulded  aeparately,  and  aRetwardi  filed  to  the
bine  aur6u»  by  a  partiaJ  foaion  ;  but  the  union  haa
been  effected  with  tuch  eitrai)rdinary  care  and
dexterity,  that  no  trace  of  the  junction  can  be  oh-
•erred,  nor  haie  the  moot  delicate  lines  received
the  tlighteat  injury.  With  anch  nmplea  before  ut,
we  need  not  wonder  that  in  the  time  of  Nero  a
pair  of  modcrate-tiaed  glaia  cnpt  with  handlea
Xflenti)  tometimei  coat  fifty  pmndt  (HS.  aa>
■uliiSM,  Plin.  H.  N.  mxtL  66).  For  a  fiiU  do-
acriptioo  of  the  Portland  Vaae,  tee  the  eighth
TOlume  of  the  Archaeologi^

2.  Glaaa  Pattea  preaenting  bc-aimilaa,  either  in
relief  or  intaglio,  of  engraTed  precioua  alonea.  In
thia  way  hare  been  pieaerfed  exact  cam»  of  many
beantifnl  gemi,  of  which  the  originda  no  longer
eiiat,  aa  maybe  teen  Iran  thecalalogaaaof  StotcU
of  'Duaie,  of  the  Oriaaoa  eoUectim,  and  ftvm  aimilar
pablicationi.  Thete  wen  in  demand  li>r  the  ringa  of
anch  penont  at  wen  not  wealthy  enough  to  porchaae
real  tlonea,  aa  we  perceiie  Irom  thephrate'*ri(nw
gemma  ea  mUgi  aimJiir  (Plin. /f.A'.ixxr.  30.)
Large  medallioni  alto  of  Ihia  kind  are  itilt  pre-
serred,  and  baa-relieft  of  conaidoable  magnitude.
(See  Winckdnuiau,  L  c.  2.  |  27.)

3.  Clotcly  allied  to  the  preceding  were  imintinnt
of  coloured  precioua  alraws,  anch  at  the  (arbunde,
the  lapphire,  the  amethyat,and  abore  all,  the  eme-
rald. Thcae  counlarfeita  were  executed  with  tuch
fidelity,  that  detection  wat  eitremelT  dilBcolt,  and
great  profiu  were  realiied  by  dithoneit  dcolert
who  entrapped  the  unwary.  (Plin.  R.  N.  xxiiii,
75.)  That  lueh  frouda  were  procliaed  even  upon
the  moat  exalted  m  station  it  aeen  from  the  anec-
dote given  by  Tnbelliua  Pollio  of  the  whimtiral
rengeance  taken  by  Oallienut  (GalL  c  12)  on  a
rogue  who  bad  cheated  him  in  thii  way,  and  col-
lecliona  ore  to  be  teen  at  Rome  of  piecea  of  coloured

from  which  they  cannot  )»  diatinguiihed  by  (he
eye.  (Plin.  «■.  AT.  xxxrii.  28.  SS.  76;  Senec.  ijfc
SO  i  Itidor.  Ong.  xrl.  1  fi.  1 27 ;  Beckmann,  Hilorf
of  IntnlUmt,  vol  i.  p.  199.  Eng.  Trant.  3d  edit)

A.  One  Tery  el<^ant  ^ication  of  glaaa  deaenea
to  be  partieutariy  noticed.  A  number  of  fine  atalka
of  glaaa  of  diffennt  coloun  wen  placed  vertically,

the  upper  turfrce  tome  figure  or  nattom,  upon  Ibi
principle  of  a  minute  moaoic.  The  tilamenU  thnt
combined  ware  then  aubjeeted  to  inch  a  degree  trf
heat  aa  would  auflice  to  aoften  without  melting
them,  and  were  thut  cemented  together  into  a
lolid  maai.  It  ia  evident  that  the  jHctnn  brought
out  upon  the  upper  surface  would  extend  down
through  tha  whole  of  the  little  cotomn  thua  formed,
and  henca  if  it  was  cut  into  thin  tlicea  at  right


1512  VIITA.

nngln  to  the  dincUon  of  the  flbra,  aA  of  tbcie
■Mtiom  would  upon  boih  lidei  cepreHnt  ths  d«-
■ign  vhich  would  be  miiliiplifd  u  in  eitent  in
proportiorx  to  thfl  toUl  length  of  the  glau  threads.
Two  besotiful  fragmenU  endently  conHraitcd  in
thil  KMJ  are  McniBtslj  commented  apoa  bj
Wlnekelmuin  (L  c.  3.  §  22,  23,  24),  aud  uigthei
recently  biougbt  from  E^ypt  ii  ihown  on  the  fron-
liipiece  to  the  third  loluma  of  WilkioMo'i  voik.
Man;  manic  pavemenM  ud  pictiuet  lopui  au-
limm)  belnog  10  thit  bnd,  linee  the  cubea  were
frequently  composed  of  opaqne  glu>  oi  well  u
marble,  bat  thete  hire  been  aliudj  diicuiHd  in
p.  9I£  of  thia  work.

5.  Thick  iheela  of  gltB  of  nrion*  caloun  sppor
to  hsTe  been  laid  down  for  paving  Soon,  and  to
have  been  attached  u  a  lining  to  the  walla  and
ceilinga  of  apartmenla  in  dwelling  houtei,  jniC  at
BOgliunla  i)  frequenUy  employed  in  Italy,  and  oc-
caaiiinally  in  our  own  country  alto.  Roami  filled
up  in  Iliii  way  were  al!ed  mlrea»  ewnenie,  and  the
paneli  vitnal  gmufrufiiru.  Such  WBi  the  kind
of  deconlkn  introduced  by  Scnunu  for  the  icene
of  hit  theatre,  not  coiumni  nor  pillan  of  ^an  ai
Boma,  nor  bat-reliefa  ai  othcn  hsTe  imagined.
(Plin.  H.  f^.  xiXTL  64 ;  Stat  SgL  i.  5.  42  ;  Senec
Ep.  76;  Vopitc  Firm,  c  3;  Winckelmann,  i.
t.2.  3  21;  Paveii,  iMetrnat  FitHUt,  p.  67.  Mb.
Ir.i.)

6.  The  queition  whether  glaM  windawa  wen
known  to  the  ancient!  bai,  after  much  diKnauon,
been  lel  at  ml  by  the  Biea'atiani  at  Pompeii,  (or
not  only  have  many  fragmentt  of  flat  glaii  been
ditinterred  fnnn  time  to  time,  but  in  the  tegridariimi
of  the  public  batht  a  bronie  lattice  come  to  light
with  aome  of  the  panei  tlill  imerled  in  tha  frame,
■0  at  to  determine  at  once  not  only  their  enatenee,
but  the  mode  in  which  they  were  aecured  and  ar-
ranged. (Maioii,  Fabiit  de  Scamrvt,  o.  viii.  p.  97  ;
JliiiMt  de  Pompii,  lol.  iiL  p.  77  i  Beckei,  GaUut,
vol.  iL  p.  20.) [DoMUB,  p.  *32.]

7.  From  the  time  that  pure  glait  became  known,
it  muil  hare  been  remarked  that  when  darkened
iTpon  one  aide.  It  pMtetaed  the  praperty  of  reflect-
ing imago.  We  are  certain  thai  an  attempt  wu
made  by  the  Sideniana  to  make  looking-glatiee
(HUd.  H.  tf.  Ji«Yi.  66),  and  equally  certain  that
it  mutt  hale  failed,  for  the  ute  of  r


all,  1.
require  conttaot  care,  and  a


;r  the  Empire.
Heipecting  ancient  mirren,  tee  Sfeculum.

a.  A  imzigo  itory  with  re^d  to  an  alleged  in-
vention of  malleable  glaat  ia  found  in  Petroniui
( c  D  ] ),  i>  told  (till  mare  circumitantiaily  by  Dion
Caulua  (Irii.  21 ),  and  it  alluded  to  by  Pliny  {H.  N.
iiivi.  66),  with  an  eipretiion  of  doubt,  however,
as  to  itt  tnith.  An  artitt  appeared  before  Tiberiu*
with  a  cup  of  glan.  Thu  he  daihed  violently
upon  the  ground.  When  taken  np  it  wai  neither
broken  nor  cracked,  but  dinled  like  ■  piece  of
metal.  The  man  then  produced  a  mallet,  and  ham-
mered it  back  into  iti  original  ihape.  The  emperor
inquired  whether  any  one  nai  acquainted  with  the
Kcret,  and  waa  anawered  in  the  negattve,  upon
which  the  order  wai  given  that  he  thould  be  in-
tianlly  beheaded,  leit  the  pcedeui  metali  might
loH  their  value,  ibould  tuch  a  compoaidon  become
generally  known.  [W.  R.]

VITTA.  or  plurs]  VITTAE,  >  ribbcm  or  fillet,
■  ■  "  ' " ' " n  ordinary  ptHtion  of


VITTA.
female  dma. II.  At  a  deeontioa  of  aaocd  per-
aoiH  and  mend  tbingi.

1.  Whoi  ccauidusd  ai  an  otdbaiy  portion  of
female  dreia,  it  wu  aimply  a  band  encirding  ib*
head,  and  leriing  to  conbw  the  treaea  (crimiUt
viUaa)  the  enda,  when  long  (latgae  laemia  nO^),
hanging  down  behind.  (Virg,  Ahl  tH.  351,  403;
Ovid.  Mel.  ILIIS,  iv.  6;  laidor.  xiiL  31.  g  6.)
It  waa  wont  (1.)  by  maident  (Viig.  Atm.  ii.  168;
Prep.  iv.  II.  U;  VaL  Flacc  TiiL  G;  Serr.  ad
Yirg.  Am.  ii.  133) ;  (2.)  by  muried  waneii  alio,
the  villa  aanuned  on  the  nuptial  day  being  of  a
dibreot  form  tnm  thu  need  by  Tirvine.  (I^op.  iv.
3.  15,  i>.  11.31;  Plaat.A(>L<H.iu.l.I94;VaL
Mai.  V.  2.  g  1.)

The  Villa  waa  aot  worn  by  libertiiiae  errB  i£
fair  chancter  (TibuU.  L  S.  67),  mneh  leaa  by  me-
retricea ;  hence  it  waa  looked  upon  aa  an  iiaigat
padarit,  and,  together  with  the  dols  and  u^ilB,
aerved  ID  point  out  at  Gnt  tight  the  trcebom  na-
Inn.  (Ovid.  A.  A.  i.  31,  R,  A.  386,  TruL  ii
247,  Ep.  ■*  Pad.  iiL  3.  51.)

The  eoloor  wu  probably  a  mattar  of  dioic^
white  and  purple  ar*  both  neotioDed.  (Ovid.  1/tt.
ii.413,  aril,  SU;  Stat.  Ar^L  i.  611.)  One
of  thoie  rporeiented  in  the  entt  briow  i*  vu-
raented  with  embroidery,  and  they  wise  in  ase
catet  ael  with  pearit  (nUoe  flHTTyan^arua,  D^  34*
til.  2.  a.  25.  3  3).

The  fallowing  woodcuta  repreaenl  back  and  boat
viewi  of  the  headi  of  atatoet  from  UuailaiieinB,
on  which  we  perceive  the  vitla.  ifinmxi  rf'Srev-
laao,  ToL  iL  tov.  72,  7S.)


II.  When  employed  for  nured  pnrpaata,  rt  waa
utually  twitted  round  the  infula  [Infvla],  and
held  together  the  looaeflocki  of  wooL  (Virg.CAiinL
iii.  187,  AfH.  X.  537 ;  Itidu.  liz.  30.  3  4  ;  Sen.
ad  Virg.  Jn.  i.  538  ;  the  eiprenion  of  Local  t.
U2,&cia  obtcure.)  Under  thil  foon  it  waa  em-
ployed at  an  omamenl  for  (1.)  Pricttt,  and  thsH
who  offered  aachfice.  (Virg.  An.  iu  221,  vi.  637.
i.537i  Tacit  Ain.LSr.)  (2.)  Prienettra,  cape-
cially  thcee  of  Vetta,  and  hence  aUaia  tnaribw
for  ■  Vetta;  i»t'  Hixn'.  (Virg.  .Jea.  vii.  1 1 S :
Ovid.  FaiL  iil  30,  vL  li7  ;  Jov.  iv.  9,  vi.  iO.)
(3.)  Propheta  and  poett,  who  may  be  regarded  m
prittia,  and  in  thit  cate  the  Vitlae  were  freqnsilly
inlertwincd  with  chapleta  of  olire  sc  lanr*L  (Viig.
Aa.  iiL  81,  vL  665  ;  Stat  Sih.  it  1.  SG,  Adult.
I  11,  Hub.  iiL  466).  (1.)  Statue*  of  dcitieb
(Viig.Am.  u.  16it,  29fii  Jut.  vL  M;  ompue
Stat  jth.  lit  3.  S.)  (i.)  Vietimt  decked  far  aa-
criAce.  (Virg.  G^o)?.  iiL  187,  .Jot.  iL  133,  15(s
V.  366 ;  Ovid.  ^.  ai  J^oaC.  iiL  2.  71,  Scat  doUJ.
iL  301.)  (6.)  Allata.  (Virg.  EtL  TiiL  fi4.  An.
iiL  61.)  (7.)  Templet.  (Pnp.  ir.  9.  27  ;  cniw*
Taut  HiM.  iv.  53.1  (B.)  Tb*  Inr^pui  of  uunlt-
ante.  (Virg.  Am.  tu.  237,  viii.  128.)


tJMBRACULUM.

Tb(  nered  itKae,  u  well  a*  tbe  infnloe,  were
m>da  of  wool,  and  heim  the  rpitbeli  laaia  (Ovid.
Fail.  iiL  80)  and  eurfK*  (Virg.  Ed.  Tui.  6*.)
They  were  white  (moat,  Virg.  Camj.  iii.  487 ;
Ovid.  3M:  liii.  643 ;  St&L  TIci.  iii.  466),  or  pur-
ple (pHUHUf,  Prop.  IT.  9. 27),  or  anire  {eaenleae)
wben  wmthcd  round  u  allar  to  tha  mauea.  (Virg.
Jem.  iii.  64.)

Vilta  ii  dio  aaed  in  Iha  graeni  aenM  of  a  nring
for  tyirg  up  fiartandi  (Plin. //■  JV.  iriii.  2}  laidor.
xix.  31.6),  andmOoa  foma  for  the  teatheni  itnpa
or  bnce*  by  whicb  amachina  wai  woilced.  (Plin.
H.  N.  iTiiL  SI.)  [W.  R.]

ULNA  (iktrifl,  properly  the  tore-ann  bum
ths  ibouldcr  to  the  vrin,  ii  alio  tued  for  the
whole  arm,  and  eren  for  ibt  wbole  (pan  of  both
anni  i  and  bcnce,  aa  a  meaiure  of  length,  it  ap-
pean  to  be  niad  with  different  ■ignificalioni.  In
the  chief  paaugei  in  which  it  Msun  {Viiv.  Bme,
iii.  105,  Otors,  iii.  SBB  ;  Oiii.  MHam.  Tiii.  7G0  ;
Hor.  Epod.  ii.  6)  there  i*  noUiing  to  detonuDe  iti
length,  ereept,  peibapa,  in  the  lut  quoted  puaage,
where,  howerer,  we  may  eaaily  luppoie  the  eng-
geralion  of  oiHc&tnre.  Serriaa,  bowerer,  in  bu
note  on  the  fint  of  theie  pauagefl,  layl  that  it  wai
the  ipace  between  the  oatitKtched  hatidi,  that  ii,
the  Huneai  the  Oreek  ipYiita  of  lii  feet ;  and  thit
ii  efidently  ita  meaning  in  Pliny  {H.N.  xii.  40.
I.  76,  32.  >.  GT),  where  it  it  important  to  obKrre
that  enoBtwdo  refen  to  the  canMrnfrrtiu*  of  the
tmnk,  not  to  its  diameter.  lAter  writen  nie  it
ai  equJTBlent  to  the  oAil  or  a  modificatiDn  of  it,
and  hence  tbe  madem  ell.  (Pollux,  iL  140  ;  Solin.
il.)  (P.  S.]

ULTROTRIBUTA. [CINBOI^  p.  265,  ».J

VMBELLA. [Umbbacdlum.]

UMBI'LICUS. [LiBma.]

UMBO. [Clipbub;  Tooa,  p.  1136,  b.1

UMBRATULUM,  UMBELLA  {aniituor.
ocuilliw,  mtiailaint)  a  [MTUol,  wa*  nied  by  Greek
and  Raman  ladiea  ai  a  proteetion  againit  the  lun.


They  leem  not  to  hare  been  curied  generally  by
the  ladiea  themielTei,  but  by  female  iLiTei  who
heM  than  over  their  miftmiei. The  daughter!


ONCIA.  1218

of  the  nlieni  (fi/nuirru)  at  Athena  had  to  cnny
puaiola  after  the  Athenian  tnaideni  at  tbe  Pana-
thenaea,  at  ij  mentjcmed  imder  Hvdsiaphohia.
The  parajoli  of  the  ancients  Kern  to  hare  been
exactly  like  our  own  punsali  or  umbrellai  in
form,  and  could  be  ihut  np  and  opened  like  oun.
(Ariitoph.  £>[(.  1348;  Schol.  od  Joe. ;  Oiid.  Ar.
An.  iL  209.)  They  are  often  repreunted  in  paint-
taken  froni  Millin'l  PtMam  da  Vatei  AnHgnet,
lol.  L  pL  70.  The  female  i*  clothed  in  a  long
Chiton  or  Diploidion  [TuNICi,  p.  1 1 72,  b.],  and
haa  a  imnll  Himation,  which  leema  to  have  &llen
oS  her  ihouldera.

It  waa  eoniidered  a  mark  of  elTeminacy  for  men
to  make  me  of  paraioli.  (Anacreon,  ap.  Aliat.  >ii.
p.  534,  a.)  The  Roman  ladie*  uied  them  in  the
amphitheatre  to  defend  IhemaelTea  from  the  tun
or  aome  putbg  ihower  (Mart.  lif.  28),  when  the


larium  to  be  extended.  To  hold  a  paniol  oier  a
lady  waa  one  of  the  common  attentumi  of  loien
(Mart.  li.  73  ;  Qtid.  I.  c),  and  it  teem*  to  have
been  lay  common  to  giro  paiwoli  at  pteeenta.
(Jur.  U.  60.)

Initead  of  paraaola  the  Greek  women  in  later
timea  wore  a  kind  of  atraw  bat  or  bonnet,
called  ftiMio.  (Pollni,  viL  174;  compare  x.  127;
Theocr.  xv.  39.)  The  Romaui  also  wore  a  hat  with
a  broad  brim  (petanu)  aa  a  protectim  againatthe
■un.  (Suet.  ^Bj.  82 ;  Dion  Caaa.  lii.  7.)  See  Paci-
Bndi,rfe  ifi«Jit;/ae5e.(o<K«,Rom.  17S2i  BeckiT,
dariUa,  Tol.  il  p.  73.

UNCIA  (AjkU,  ofrriflu,  oiyyia),  the  twelfth
part  of  the  Aa  or  LiHiii,is  detiTed  by  Varm  from
tana,  aa  being  the  unit  of  the  diiiaioni  of  the  aa
(C,£.T.  ]71,HU11er). It  waa  ai


p*la,  and  144  it
and  its  lubdiTi


»,24«
The  valnes  of  the  (/neia


I  of  01


:  own  weigh  la,


'ill  be  found  in  the  Tablet

In  connecting  the  Roman  ayalem  of  weight)  and
money  with  the  0  nek,  another  diriiion  of  theuncia
waa  uaed.  When  the  draduita  was  introduced
into  the  Roman  lyitem  aa  eqniralent  to  tbe  dsu-
nw  of  96  to  the  pound  [Dihariub  ;  Drachma]
the  aam  contained  8  liraaljiua,  the  drachma  ^
Kmpiila,  the  tcrnjmbim  2  oboU  (lince  6  nioli  made
up  the  dradniu),  and  tbe  oioloi  S  Bliqaae  ((ifHria).
Therefore  the  uncia  ffai  dirided  into  8  drac/mae,
24  Krapiila,  48  alioli,  1 14  tilipiat.  In  tbii  division
igin  of  the  modem  Italian  ayatem,
'iviiled  into  12  ouncra,  the
ounce  into  S  drama,  the  dram  into  3  scmplea,  and
tbe  MTUplB  into  6  caiata.  In  each  of  these  ayitems
1 738  Hiparia,  aifigaoa,  oi  enrol)  make  np  the  pound.

The  uncial  lyatem  was  adopted  by  the  Greeks
of  Sicily,  who  called  their  obol  Airpa  (the  Roman
libra),  and  ditided  it  into  twelve  parts,  each  of
which  they  called  iyiila  or  av7(Ia  (the  Roman
mtaa).  In  this  system  the  iyxia  waa  reckoned
equal  to  the  x»*«"'''-  [LiTEA  j  NuHMULpp.
813,  814.]

Hliiler  considers  that  the  Greeki  of  Sicily,  and
alio  the  Romans  tbemtelires,  obtained  the  uncial
ayatem  from  the  Etnisr«n».  (itnuier,  I  p.  309.)

The  Romana  applied  the  nncJat  diriiion  to  all
kinds  of  magnllude.  [Aa.]  In  length  the  uncia
was  the  twelfth  of  a  foot,  whence  the  word  i'jkA,
in  area  the  twelfth  of  a  jugerum,  in  content  tbe
twelfth  of  a  •exlanns,  in  time  ttw  twelfl)i  of  an


12U  UNGOENXA.

faonr. [As,  tab  fi».} Rnpecting  the  Umaa  »  ■

coin  tea  Aa,  p.  14),  a.

(SSeV.il,  Mitnliig.  tAfemoi.  pp.  lfi6,lG0, 165,

293  i  Warm,  dt  Ptmd,  &c  pp.  6,  9,  63,  67,  1 18,

138.)  [P.  8.]

UNCIA'RIUM  FENUi  IF»«D»,p,  fi27,bL]
TJNCTO'RES. [Bitm**,  p.  190,  b,]
UNCTUA'KIUM, rBAmiAK,p.  190,  h,]
UNQUEMTA,DintmeaU,oik,ornlTW. The

ing  and  ilia  athlstic  eonUiM  of  the  andanu  ii
■tUed  under  Balniak,  Athlctai,  Ste.  But
klthoogh  their  original  abjuct  wu  nmplj  to  ^n-
lOTt  tne  holth  and  elaaticit j*  of  the  hnnuui  fnune,
thef  vera  in  later  timea  nied  m  articlea  of  luioiy.
Ther  wen  then  not  onl;  empliiyed  to  impati  to
the  body  or  hair  a  pvticulai  colnor,  bat  aim  to

£'  re  to  them  the  OHNt  beaatifal  bagrance  psiuble  ;
ey  ven,  nonorer,  mot  mersly  ^plied  after  a
batti,  bnt  atujlime,  to  tender  Due^  appauBDceor
pnaoica  more  pleesmt  than  vaaL  In  ihort  tiwy
tnrt  DMd  then  >•  oili  and  pomaMmi  are  at  preienL

The  nomeniu  kindj  of  oili,  eoa]
and  other  peifmnej  with  wbkh  '


pearl,  more  Ibc  the  poipow  of  paintuig  the  hur
than  for  douiiiig  it.  (Plin.  ff.  W  xriiL  12,  51  ;
Man.  TiiL  23.  20,  ii<.  26,  27.)  For  the  ame
pupate  tbey  alio  Died  certain  harbi.  (Orid.  Ar.
^ffloCiii.  leSi^mor.  L  14.)

Amimg  the  virion*  and  coetly  oili  vhich  were
partly  Died  for  the  ikin  and  partly  for  the  hhii,  the
ibllowing  may  be  mentioned  n  ewnplee :  menda-
limn,  megaltaiom.  melopinm,  amaiadniuD,  Cypri-

roeaeeiun,  and  crocne-oi!,  which  wai  coniidered  the
meet  OMtly.  (Becker,  Oaflw,  iL  p.  27.)  In  ad-
dition to  theie  oil*  the  UHacmEt  oIki  uied  Tuioos
kind*  of  powda  >•  petftamei,  which  by  a  general
name  are  called  ZNopaanata.  To  what  aitent
the  luxury  of  uiing  fragnnt  oil*  and  the  lika  wa*
carried  on,  maybemieired  bom  Senaca  (^u(.86),
who  «y*  that  people  anointed  themielTe*  twioe  or
even  three  tims  a  day,  in  order  that  the  ddioiooi
fmgnoce  might  never  diminuh.  At  Rome,  how-
ever, thete  Inxnriei  did  not  becune  my  general
till  lowarde  the  and  of  the  npablie  (QeU.  ni.  12),
while  the  Gieeki  fiffz  to  hare  been  bmiliBr  with
them  from  early  time*.  The  wealthy  Oie^u  and
Bomana  carried  their  ointment*  and  perAune*  with
them,  eipecially  when  they  bathed,  in  email  boiea
of  cottly  niiteiiila  and  beautiful  workmaiuhip,
which  were  called  A^orftAU.  (BtlItiger,&iiuH,  L
p.  52.)  The  traffic  which  wm  ctiried  on  in  thew
ointmenB  and  perfame*  in  (enral  town*  of  Qreece
and  »uthem  Italy  wai  vary  coniideiable.  The
penooi  engaged  in  menubetaringtbem  were  called
by  the  Bomang  Vnguatarii  (Cie.  di  Q^  i.  13  ;
Uorat.  SaL  ii.  3.  328),  or  *■  diey  frequently  were
■ -■■  L  fl.  A".  Tiii.  6),  and


the  wealthy  and  effeminate  city  of  Cuma  there
wai  one  peM  atreet  called  the  Seplaua,  which
coniiited  entirely  of  (hop*  in  which  ointment*  and
peifumea  ware  lold.

A  few  word*  are  neceuaiy  on  the  cnatom  of  the
ancient*  in  pointing  (heir  face*.  In  Greece  thi*
practice  appeaii  to  have  been  very  common  among
the  ladies  though  men  alto  had  eomctima*  re-
csurte  to  it,  a*  for  exam^e,  Demetiiu*  Phalmiu.


UN1VERSITA8.
(Athen.  liL  p.  6(2.)  But  a*  nigvd*  tba  wqixd,
it  appeal*  that  their  retired  mode  of  living,  and
their  eitting  moetly  in  their  own  aportiiKnta,  de-
prived them  of  a  great  port  of  their  nemral  freol^
no**  and  bean^,  for  which,  of  comae,  they  wen
anxiou*  to  nudlenp  byorulicial  meaUL  (XenoplL
Ohob.  10.  J  10  i  Slabaeui,iiLp.87,ed.aaiifbni;
(smptie  BpAio,  Oaridtt,  ii.  p.  232.)  Thi*  mod*
of  enbdlialiiDg  themielve*  wa*  pmbably  i^qilied
only  an  eertun  oeeaekm*,  each  a*  when  they  weol
out,  or  wtihed  to  appear  mere  charming.  (Lyaiat,
<U  and.  £n)A»U.  p.  15 )  Aiiitoph.  i^nKr.  149,
Eedf.  878,  P/at  1064  ; Plut  Al ' '"  - ■"


{oerMo)  and  red  (*«■"«"  or  Syxai^nt,  nM^mt,
Bwnlfuror,  or  ^vHM,  XenopL  Oacem.  10.  |  2  ;
Aiittoph.  LgtiMT.  48,  Ecda.  929  (  Alczie,  af.
Alim.  ziiL  p.  £68,  compare  £57  ;  ElymoL  M^.
I.  o.  'Ei^ifyu>Sivir1lai)i  The  eyetnwa  wax  tn-
qnemtly  painted  block  (fiAar,  ioXoXoi,  <■  irriittiit,
Alaii*,  <9L  Atiim.  xiii  p.  £68  ;  Follu,  t.  IOI).
Ths  immar  in  which  thi*  opecatifla  of  painting
wai  perfbnnad,  ii  itill  aeon  in  *ome  auxnt  w«b
of  art  i^iraianting  ladiea  in  the  act  of  punting
tbeDMlrea.  Sometimea  they  are  aeen  painting
theninlvat  with  a  bnuh  and  lometinua  with  theit
fingen.  (BIf(tiget,5aAaH,ii.  lab.ii.aadLtab.ii.)
The  Boman*,  toward*  the  end  of  tlte  repnUic
md  nuder  the  empire,  WBO  no  lei*  fend  of  paJntiw
themedve*  than  the  Oraeka.  (Horat.  Sfiid.  xii.
1 0  1  Ovid.  Ar.AM.  iii.  199  ;  Plin.  H.  ff.  nriU.  8.)
The  red  ooLrar  wat  at  Rome,  a*  in  many  part*  it
Greece,  prepared  from  *  kind  of  moM  which  tba
Romana  called  focoi  (the  nceila  of  Linnaeo*),  and
from  which  afterweid*  all  kind*  of  paint  wa«
called  /iiiiiu.  Another  general  tenn  fbi  paini  i*
ertb.  For  embelliehing  and  clcaitiiig  tba  c*a-
pleiion  the  Oreek*  a*  well  a*  the  RoiDBni  u*ed  a
(ub*tance  called  oeiipm  (aee  the  cDiaiBeat.  at
Suida*,  I.  V.  CAn^),  which  wa*  prepared  of  the
waA  taken  lh>m  thcae  partt  of  tlie  body  of  a  ibeep
in  which  ll  pen[4red  moat. Anolha  ronedy  oAen


of  tbe  Egyptian  crocodilea. (HoraL

and  Plin.  I.  o.)

RsRiecliag the  mbjecti ben mentinwd  aad
eveiything  cooneded  with  tb*  Kiilat  of  the  ao-


avoU  EI.S.]

UNGOENTA'BII.  [UnsuufTi.]
UNIVEOISITAS.  The  phlloiepbial  div^don
of  tbinp  (Bee)  in  the  widett  leua  of  the  tetm,  ia
into  thmg*  CoipoKii  (R«*  Corpotale*},  object*  of
■an*e,  and  thing*  IlKoipaceal  (Ret  Ineoqicaalaa),
objecta  of  InteUeet  •xily  (Cic.  Tbp  5.) ;  and  thi*
diviuon  wa*  applied  by  the  RooMoJuiatt  la  thingi
ta  the  object*  of  Bicblt.  Wboi  ■  man  aatd  af  a
thing  "  memn  eat,"  it  ni^t  be  cither  a  Cacpinal
thing,  aa  a  piece  of  land  oi  an  animal ;  er  ilniglrt
be  an  Incorpcitail  tUng,  a*  a  Jui  a


thin^ Bat  diit  i*  not  a  diviuoai  of  thinga,  ae
limited  tenae,  £>r  thing*  in  that  •


corporeal ;  it


a  diviiioa  irf  thing*  ii


In  a  thing  cctporeal  we  mq' conndeT  that  tbtt*
are  part*,  in  refitenee  to  which  die  whole  b  a  Uni-
veniu*  or  lunit.  If  then  the  diviaicn  intD  pern
i*  made  with  refereniie  (o  the  nibjectka  of  ■  pan
to  a  penooi  will,  (be  part  ia  viewed  aa  a  ^iole.


UNITERSITA&

M  ft  m^  in  i(Hli(  tkt  ii,  the  whole  It  newed
[codiTin  t  (bi  diTuion  in  thixMs  ii  the  am*  ii
nuking taaaj  wbolce


}t  bmSwh


itwliol*. It  i


liiible ;  u  a  pieoe  of  land  which  ii  enable  of
beiiig  dindfd  iota  ;art«.

^t  then  we  puti  of  thing!  coipami  which
■raeHeoliil  tothnuoMitD^cogftha  whole,  m  that
the  wb^e  caonet  b*  dirided  iuu  paitt  wiUunI
the  deitriKtian  of  it*  oMwe  ;  «  a  iiring  animal

BeudM  the  cnpraal  Farti  into  which  a  (egr-
pcreal)  thing  it  diniible,  we  maj  MFP^ee  iontpo-
nal,  ideal  pact*  of  a  coiponal  thing  (big.  46.  tit.
3. 1.B).  Theto  pacta  ace  aaaomed  bKtiaiii  of  a
whi4^  not  coiponal  pacta.  U  mch  a  pact  b  the
object  of  thought,  the  whole  cmpond  thing  ii
viewed  pro  indinio :  the  cocporeel  abject  of  the  will
ic  the  thing,  and  the  limitation  of  the  will  to  a
pact,  ii  mece^  inlellectoat.  Thiu  Miacal  ptrtoo*
maf  b«  joint  ownen  of  a  (dece  of  undindad  land,
bat  DO  one  can  ny  that  an;  paiticnlar  pact  beloDgl
tohim.  The  oueioMpiit  it  thatof  aeorponal
wbde  and  idal  jmrtM.  Bat  the  whole  »ay
be  ideal  and  the  pacta  aocpocfl;  ae  when  thei*
ii  a  nomber  of  indBpendont  coiponal  thiDgi,  not
mateciallT  coaneclcd,  bat  thej  are  intellectuallj
caauected  n  M  to  fonn  in  idea  a  whole  i  thai  a
flock  of  (beep  ie  an  ideal  whole,  and  the  UTenl
■heep  are  the  iodependent  coraontl  thingi.  Tlie
ideal  whole  ii  not  compoied  of  the  MTCial  corpncea!
Ihiigi,  for  an  ideal  whole  cannot  be  eompoeed  of
anporeal  pacli ;  bnt  the  ideal  whole  ii  ■  notion
which  ie  fenued  with  cefeceoee  to  aame  particnlac
pnipoae.  It  ii  neeewary  that  the  pnxpoee  of  the
aereral  thingi  ahall  not  be  diSeient  from  and  mde-
pendent  of  the  genecal  pncpoee  fat  which  tho  notion
u  fbnnad,  bnt  nbaerriaat  to  it.  Thna  ai  a^aiale
corpncal  thinge  my  be  often  materuUly  umlad  to
form  a  new  carpoi ;  ao  the  MTaial  independent
Ibingi  which  en  Dot  o^«bls  of  mch  matnial
nnion,  ma;  be  Tiaved  ta  an  ideal  union  or  aa  a
a  noivanitai  for  Mme  pnipoae  ;  the  flock  of  iheep
may  be  viewed  ai  a  whole,  ao  ■  niuTenitaa,  foi
the  poipoee  of  ownenhip.  Soch  a  uniTetiitoa,  ai
already  obeerred,  ii  indniendeut  of  the  Mvecal  cor-
poreal ihinn :  it  atill  aiiili  if  they  an  all  changed.
Thu*  in  a  flock  of  iheep  wc  haie  a  fictitiova,  a
jmietical  whole  or  thing,  and  in  the  notion  of
a  DniTenitaa  of  penoD)  we  have  a  Bditione  or  ju-
rtatical  peceon,  which  it  itili  the  aame  pmoB
though  all  the  inditidoalt  are  changed.  At  a
Dumber  of  ahcepmnathaTB  a  Dan]e,a  flock,  in  order
to  be  canpnheaded  in  <■»  noticai,  to  a  jurittical
poBon  muit  havB  a  name,  at  the  nnivenitat  of
Fabii,  K  the  ci^  of  Rcoie.

The  lens  nniTBiailat  then  may  have  vi
aenaea,  1.  Both  the  iini*«nitai  and  the  parte  may
be  coiponal  (Dig.  50.  tit  16.  t.  339.  S  0)  :  teni-
ti»inm  eat  muienint  igrcnun  intra  finea  cuju-
qna  dritatia.  S.  The  aniTenilat  may  l>e  corpo-
real, and  the  pacta  iococponal,  at  wtien  we  im
fiactionalpacuofathing.  S.  The  uniTanitai
be  incorpveal,  and  the  paita  coiponal,  at  a  flock
of  iheep.  4.  The  uniienilaa  and  the  pacta  may
both  be  iocaiponaL

The  fiwrth  it  the  late  when  the  natiai


imaginanpi
thefictitwot


BNIVERSITA&  1215

malttial  thinga  which  form  the  ideal  imit  of  hit

pfopei^.


in  of  ■  muTeoitai  of  independent  material
thinga  ii  the  notion  of  a  Getitiont  thing,  imagined
'  -Lin  parpoeea

igle  pern  only  can  piapecl;  be  viewed  at
,eet  bI  right!  and  dnlie*  ;  bnt  the  notion  of
legal  c^iacitymay  by  a  Sctioa  be  extended  to  an
.  nnivenitat  penonanun,  bnt
I  not  a  nnit  eompoeed  of  the
nam*  in  which  the  aercral
penona  or  a  majority  may  act  Ibc  certain  peimanent
pnrpoaet.  The  pucpota  iltelf  It  aonetimea  the
Sctitiooi  pemn,  at  when  prcnec^  ia  given  for
the  eccvic*  of  leli^on,  wheUur  it  ia  adminietered
by  one  penon  cr  ttveial  penoia.  Such  inriitical
peieoot  have  certain  legal  capaeitiM  at  mdividnala
lave ; bnt  their  legal npadtiet  an  limited to

-- their  object. It  it  tcne  that  the  Ro-

conaideied  penoni  aiBColIectivB  unity,
,  ,  Mue  they  all  eierdied  the  tune
fanctjona:  thut  they  apeak  of  the  Collwiani
of  the  eonrali  [CoLLiomn],  and  of  the  Tnbuni
Plebit.  In  like  manna  they  My  that  the  Duum-
viri of  a  mnnicipnm  an  to  be  viewed  at  ime  penon.
(Dig.  £0.  tiL  I.  I.  Sfl).  But  theae  fic^tioni
onitieB  have  laily  nferenee  to  Jot  Publicum,  and
they  have  no  neceHary  comiectiim  with  juciilical


1  with  1UCI
.... t  which  ii. .__
padty  to  have  and  acquire  pnpecty  by  tome

Jucittieal  penona  conld  be  anbjeett  of  owner-
ihip,  Jnm  Sit  n,  obligationea,  and  hereditat :
they  could  own  ilavee  and  have  the  Patronatui ;
'  itall  theceJationtof  Pamilit,aathe  Patria  Po-

ataa  and  otben  of  a  like  kmd,  wete  fonign  to  the

ition.  Bat  tbongh  the  capacity  to  havepnperty
the  diitingniihing  chtracterittic  of  Joriatical
_  nana  viewed  with  nlation  to  Jni  Privatnm,  the
object!  (be  which  the  property  ii  had  and  applied
may  he  any ;  and  tha  capacity  to  have  property
imptiet  a  pnipoae  for  which  it  it  hod,  which  ii
often  much  mue  important  than  thit  men  capacity.
hich  Joiittical  peiaont  have
pRiperty  are  qnite  diadnct from  their  capacity  to

>va  iL Thii  will  affcar  fiam  ali  ei  any  of  tha

amplet  heceinafler  given.

The  following  an  JnriatimI  pefeoni:  (I)  Ciri-
taa;  (2)  Mnnicipei;  thia  teim  it  tnoie  common
than  Hnnidpuun,  and  compnhendt  both  ritiieni
of  a  Mnnicipiiim  and  a  Colony ;  it  ia  alto  uted
whoi  the  object  ia  to  expicet  the  Hnnid|Hnm  at
•  whole  o^oied  to  the  individual  nwmben  of  it.
(3}  Reapnblica.  In  the  repnUican  period,  when
uted  without  an  adjunct,  Reipuhlica  aipreaied
Rone,  but  in  the  old  juriata  it  lignifiet  a  Ciritaa
dependent  on  Roma.  (1)  Reapnblia  Gvitatit  or
Hunicipii  :  (S)  Cnomnne,  Commmutaa.  Betidtt
the  Ciritatea,  component  paiti  of  the  Ciritatea  are
alao  Joriatical  peraoni :  (1)  Curiae  or  Decuiiraiee  ;
the  wofd  Decufiene!  often  denctea  the  individnale
ctrinpoeing  the  body  of  Decurionet  at  oppoaed  to
the  Civitai  (hlunicipea),  which  appean  from  a
peteue  in  the  Di^ett  <4.  tit  3,  a,  IB),  where  it  it
itatea  that  ao  actuin  for  Dolnt  vriU  not  lie  J^aintf
the  Hunicipea,  ibr  a  fictitioua  peraon  cannot  be
euil^  of  Dune,  but  mch  action  will  lie  tgainat  the
utdividual  Decniionea  who  adnuniitec  the  affiun


1216  tMVERSITAS.

of  the  Munlcipei. Sometime*  the  word  Cona  u


used  u  equivajeai


Decurioni

which  hiu  property  u  inch.  (2)  Viti  j  'which
have  no  politicnl  ulf-exiBtence,  hat  are  otUcbed
to  lonie  Ropuhlica  ;  jet  they  are  joriitiail  per-
■oDKp  can  hold  property,  and  oiaintain
Fora,  Condlii  ■  ■  "  ■■  -
bolneen  CWi
portasce ;  thef  belonged  to  a  Reipublica,  bat  bad
the  ligbti  of  jarittical  pertoia:  they  are  not  men-
tioned in  the  tegiBlationof  jBitiniaii,butthename(
occur  in  the  Tablet  of  Hiraclea,  in  the  Lex  Oalliae
Ciulpinac,  and  in  Paalua  (&  R.  i>.  tit.  6.  a  2.)
In  the  later  period  of  the  Empire,  Proiineei  were
viewed  MJoriitical  pertonl.

In  the  wrilingi  of  the  AnimenKint,  comma-
niliea,aiid,paiIicDlarIy,col<Hiiea  (09An>),tn  deaig-
nated  by  the  appropriali  Dams  of  Pnblicae  Pbt-
■onae,  and  property  ie  ipoken  of  a>  belonging  to
the  Coioni,  that  ia,  the  Colonta,  Coloni  b«iig  nied
here  in  the  nme  kqh  in  which  Msnicipa  wh
UMd  u  abeve  explained.

Other  jurittiad  peruna  were  (1)  Religimi
bodiea,  u  Collegia  of  Prieiti,  and  of  the  Veatal
Virgin),  which  could  bold  prapeny  and  take  by
leitainent  (3}  AHocialious  of  official  perxRii,
BDch  ai  Ihoae  who  were  employed  in  adminittra-
tion :  the  body  of  Scribaa  became  one  of  the  moK
numeroui  and  important,  u  tbey  wen  employed  in
all  branchei  of  adminitlration  ;  the  general  name
wag  Scribae,  a  term  which  indndea  the  particular
name)  of  libnuii,  fiacalea  and  otfaen  ;  they  were
dirided  into  aubdiiiiisna  called  Decuriae,  a  term
which  even  under  the  Bepublio  and  alio  niider
the  Empire  denoted  the  corparalloni  of  Scribae  ;
the  individual  memben  were  called  decnriali,  and
mhieqnently  decurialea  ;  the  decnriali  had  great
priviiegei  in  Homo  and  lubie^neQlly  in  Conatanti-
nople.  (Cicin  Verr.iu.  79,  ad  Quir-L  Fr-xL  il.  3 ;
Tacit.  .«».  liii.  27  i  SaetaD.Ayg.57,aaud.  1.)
(3)  Auociationi  for  trade  and  eommeice,  u  Fabri,
Fiilotet,  Naiicolarii,  the  indiridnali  of  which  had
B  eomiuon  ptofessioB,  on  which  the  notion  of  their
vnion  was  founded  ;  but  each  man  worked  on  hii
iwunt. AModationi  properly  included


»[Socia


.fl]:i


>nldba


ing  Minei,  Salinae,  and  farming  the  Portoria  were
corporate  bodiei,  though  they  had  the  name  of  Socie-
tatea.  (4)  AaaaciatioDS,calledSo<[alilal«i,SodaIitiit,
Collegia  Sodalilia,  which  reaembted  modem  clubi.
In  their  origin  they  were  friendly  anociationi  for
feaatJng  together  ;  in  coune  of  time  many  of  them
became  polttiod  aaaociationa,  but  from  thii  we  muat
not  conclude  that  their  true  nature  really  Tsried  ;
they  were  aaaodationi  not  included  in  any  other
clau  that  haa  been  enomeraled,  but  they  differed
in  their  charact«r  according  to  the  timea.  In
periada  of  commotion  they  became  the  centra]
pointi  of  politiol  (actianj,and  new  aaaociationa,  it
may  be  reaionably  mppoeed,  would  be  formed  ex-
preuly  for  political  piirpoee*.  Sometime*  the
public  placet  were  crowded  by  the  Sodalilia  and
Deeuriati  (Cie.  ad  Quut.  FraL  ii.  3),  and  the
at  at  laat  compelled  to  propoae  a  lex  which
ibjed  to  the  penaltiei  ot  Via  tboas  who
t  diiperae.  Thia  waa  followed  by  a  gene-
ral  diaaolution  of  collegia  according  to  'Aaraniui


DNlVKaSITAS.

the diodotiiai  onlj  m


CoUwiate
bnt  they  i


lafely  inferred  from  the  natar«  of  the  e
even  the  wimii  of  Aaconitu,  if  ewefuUy  e:
ate  not  iuconiiatent  with  thia  ooDdoaioii.  in
the  Digeel  (i7.  tiL  2-2.  a.  1,  2,  3)  we  fnd  tlie  t^
that  no  collegium  could  be  formed  witboat  the
permiaiion  of  a  SenatwcanialtDm  or  the  Caeaar ;
and  peracma  who  anodated  unlawfiillj  wen  gni}ly
of  an  eilnuirdinariam  crimen.  Ths  rals  e(  law
mean*  that  no  nnion  of  peraona  ctnld  form  a
juiiiticBl  penon  without  the  cement  rt  the  pn>per
anlhorily ;  and  tbii  ia  quite  ^tiiiet  fnaa  the
other  JROTiaion  conlained  in  the  laiDe  rale,  whkt
pimiihed  aaociatiimi  of  poaoni  who  acted  ■■  eca^
porationi,  for  thia  part  of  the  role  relatea  oidy  ta
inch  aaaiciatioaa  aa  wet«  dangerona,  er  of  >r>  mide-
fined  character.

There  wera  alto  in  the  Imperial  pcfiod  the

"  [ia  toiDianni,  or  aaaociationa  of  pooa'  peifile,
ley  won  allowed  to  meet  only  oawe  a  nuiA
ano  ihey  paid  monthly  eontributjona.  (Di|[.  4f .
tiL  32.  a.  1,  3.)  A  man  could  only  belong  u  one
of  them.  Slave!  could  belong  to  anch  a  coUegioB,
with  the  permiiBion  of  their  ni«tt«n.

Commnaitic*  of  citiee  aitd  towna  bare  ■  kind  of
natural  or  neceaaary  eiiitenoe  ;  and  otha  bodits,
ceJled  eorporattona,  hare  been  bibtoned  by  a  kind
of  anali^y  to  them,  and  like  them  ^la  have  jso-
perty,  bzmI  be  repr«Baited  like  tfaem  by  an  a^enl,
wherein  coniiali  the  naence  of  a  jnriatical  pcmn.
Some  of  theae  eorporations,  like  commmiidn  of
eitiei  and  towna,  were  of  a  permaitent  character,
u  Collegea  of  Prieiti,  Decnriae,  arul  CropasKa
of  artiiana  ;  othen  had  a  temporary  character,
aj  Societatea  and  Sodalilate*. All  theie  rorpo-

iona  are  deaignated  by  the  name  either  of  CoJ-
„imn  or  Corpus,  between  which  there  ii  no  le^
du^nction  j  for  it  appeaia  that  one  eorpoialHm
wu  called  a  CoUeginm  and  another  a  Corpiu,  ai  il
might  happen.  But  both  of  theae  tenna  denote  a
Coiporation,  a>  above  ezphiiiied,  aa  ennaed  to  a
"'  ''  ReipublicB. The  memben  of  aoch  ew-

poratioui  were  Collegae  and  Sodalea,  whick  ii  a
mon  general  and  ut  older  term  than  Sodalitai.
Altogether  tbey  were  called  Coll^li  and  Caqia-
nti:  the  mcmbera  ofpartJcular  kind*  of  earparv
tiona  were  Decnriali,  Deeurialta,  SociL  The  am-
ion  name  which  includea  all  Corpotatiaita  and
ivitatea  ia  UniTcnilai,  aa  ot^naed  to  which  any
idividual  ia  lingularis  ponona.

The  notion  of  indiTiduaJ  pnjMTty  u  •  tmtty  it
foonded  do  the  Dation  of  the  nnity  of  the  aner.
But  thia  noticai  of  nnity,  when  once ealaUiahrd,

?  for  certain  pnrpoaei  be  arbitrarily  aaaamed.
accordingly  il  ia  applied  to  the  caae  of  Peenti-
Dm,  Dm,  and  Ilereditaa,  and  modem  writsa  hare
deaignated  thtae  aa  caiea  of  a  Unintiilaa  Jarii.
The  name  UnivenilBa  Jutii  doei  not  occar  in  the
Roman  law.  On  thia  nbject  tee  Pachta,  Tmd.
IL  %  223.  Tbe  nature  of  Sncctaaion  ia  c^jained
uider  Suociaaio.

The  tens  Univenitaa  waa  adi^ited  in  the  middle
igea  to  draole  certain  great  acboola,  bnt  not  a«
Schoola :  tbe  tenn  denotad  theae  plana  aa  eorpcca-
' ' I  of  indiridnali. TIm

1  Bologna,  the  eiptettioii  Univertilu  Scbokriaa
nmoHSi  nie  i  in  Paria,  Univenitaa  Matit-
The  Schnd  h  aach  waa  called  Scka*,


UBNA.

■ltd  bam  lb«  lUrteoilli  mibUT,  meat  ootoniiinlj

Studinm  ;  aiid  if  il  mi  a  dittinguuhei]  Kbaol,  it
WM  called  Sludiiim  Oenenle.  Tb<  Gnl  occaiiDn
OD  wbkh  the  lem  Univenilu  wu  applied  U  a
gnal  Khaol  unid  to  be  in  a  Decretal  of  iDOocoit
111^  of  tlMi  beginning  of  tbe  tbiiteentfi  centtuy,
■ddraaed  ScholaribDa  Paiiiieniibui.

(SaTignj,  fatten  da  HmUgtn  Rem.  Jhdtt,  i.
S7S,  ii.  -^35,  iiL  6  ;  Satigny.  OcnUdUa  iJm  Awn.
Aaebi  H>  MHUtalltr,  Tol.  iiL  316,  360  ;  PacliU,
/ari.  iL  §  3-23.}  [0.  L.]

VOCATIO  IN  JUS,  [Actio,  p.  10.  b.J
VOLCNES  il  lyDonymoni  with  VoUnbmi
(from  Mb),  and  nughl  hence  be  applied  to  all
tlboae  who  rolnnteered  to  lerre  in  the  Roman
■nniei  without  then  being  anj  obligation  to  do  h.
But  it  «u  applied  more  eipeciallj  to  ilairei,  when

fight  in  the  Roman  anniei.  Ttiui  wlien  duting
the  lecond  Funic  war  afker  the  battle  of  Cannae
there  waa  not  a  nSdoit  nnmber  of  freemen  to
complete  the  anay,  about  SOOO  young  and  able-
bodied  alavca  offered  to  went.  Tbeii  propoial  wu
accepted  ;  thejr  iKciTed  timoar  at  tbe  public  ex-
pen*e,  and  aa  thej  diitinguiibei]  tbenuelrea  they
were  bonound  with  the  franebiia.  (Ljr.  irii.  57,
xiiiL  S£  ;  Maciob.  ,Saf.  L  11  ;  Feet.  kc.  Voiaat.)
In  after  time*  the  name  Tolonca  waa  retained  when-
erei  ilaTCi  choee  or  ware  allowed  to  take  np  armi
io  defaica  of  their  maitera,  which  they  wera  the
mace  willing  to  do,  aa  they  wen  generally  re-
«Md«d  with  the  CtancfaiH.  (Lit.  hIt.  11,  U,
&0,  xxTiL  SS.  iiriil  16  ;  J.C^tolin.  M.Anlo-
n-.  PjWoi.  21.)  [L.S.]

VOLU'HEN. [LiBuu]
VOLONTA'RU, [VoLOHBa.]
VOMITO'RIA. [AMFHrTHiiTKDii,p.B4.]
URAOUS. (Exmcrrus,  p.  606.  a.]
UBBA'NAE  COUORTES. [Exucirua,  p.
510,  a-I

U'RCEUS,  a  pitcher,  at  water-pot,  gmetally
swde  of  earthenware.  (Dig.  S3,  tit  7. 1. 18  ;  Mor.
Ar.  Po&.  22.)  It  wai  uted  by  the  pricati  at
Borne  in  the  naificei,  and  thui  appean  with  other


USUCAPIO.


121  r


Roman  gentea.  The  annexed  coin  of  the  Pranpeii
gens  haa  on  the  obTene  a  litnna  befiire  the  beac
of  Pampeini,  the  tcinmni,  and  an  nrceni  b»
hind  it.


URNA,  BO  nni,  a  Roman  meanm  of  tspadly
for  fluid*,  equal  to  balf  an  Akpbora.  (Hor.  Sat.
i.  1.  £4.) Thii  lue  of  the  term  waa  probably

note  a  reeael  for  hdding  water,  or  any  other  lub-
■tancc,  either  fluid  or  »1id.  (Plant.  Piaui.  L  '2.
24  ;  Mor.  Sal.  i.  6.  91,  ii.  6.  10 ;  Olid.  MtL  iii.
172.)

All  mn  wu  naed  to  ncnre  the  nantea  of  the
jodgM  (Jiaiiett)  in  order  that  the  pnetor  might
draur  out  of  it  a  laffldml  number  to  detennuw
cauM  (HDC.GirM.iii.  1. 16  ;  Vicg.  At».  n  432i


Plin.  Bpul.  X.  S  ;  Jut.  itiL  4)  :  alto  to  ceceire  tbe
aibeaDftbedead.  [FtiND«,  p.SGO,  a.]  Forthii
poipoie  omi  were  made  of  marble,  poiphyry,
baited  clay,  bronie,  or  glau,  of  all  fornu  and  aizea,
•ome  quite  limf^e,  and  othera  Knlptnced  In  baa-
relief  or  otnameuted  in  an  andlcn  Tariety  of
waya  [J.Y.]

URPEX. [IliPli.]

USTRl'NA,  USTRI'NUM.  IFiiHua,  p.
559,  b.J

USUCA'PIO.  Tbe  biatoi?  of  Uiocaplo  it  an
important  but  in  the  biiloij  of  Rrauan  Juria-
ptndoice.  Uiucapio  it  the  acqtuiiUon  of  Quiri-
larian  ownenhip  by  continooiu  posKuion  ;  couee-
quently,  it  ii  not  powible  in  the  <aae  of  a  Pub-
grinui  nor  is  it  applirahle  to  proTincial  land.

aaini  (iL  40—42)  ilatea  that  there  wai  orlgi-
Dftlly  in  Rome  only  one  kind  of  ownenhip ;  a  pei^
•on  wai  either  owner  of  a  thing  Ei  jure  Quirilium,
or  he  wai  notowner  at  all.  But afterwardi  owner,
(hip  wai  divided,  k  that  one  man  might  be  owner
Ex  jnn  Qniritium,  and  another  might  have  the
•ame  thing  la  bonii,  that  ii,  have  the  right  to  the
eidniiTe  enjoyment  of  iL  Ue  then  goei  on  to
give  an  inilance  of  the  mode  in  which  ue  diiided
ownenhip  might  arito  by  Teference  to  the  tcanifec
of  a  Ra  Mancipi ;  if  inch  a  thing  wai  trmnifeired
by  ban  tjadition,  and  there  waa  neither  Mancipatio
nor  Injure  cenio,  the  new  owner  only  acquind  the
natural  ownenhip,  ai  Hme  would  call  it,  or  only
had  il  In  bonii,  and  the  original  owner  retained  the
Qniritarian  ownenhip  until  the  purchajcr  acquired
the  Quiritarian  ownenhip  by  Uiutapio  (potivltmio
umaqiial)  j  for  when  the  Uiucauo  wu  completed,
the  eSect  wu  the  lame  u  if  the  thing  had  been
originally  Diancipated  or  tianilerred  by  the  In
jure  ceiHo.  Oaiui  addi,  **  in  (he  oue  of  moveable
tbinga  the  Uinrspio  ii  completed  in  a  year,  bnt  in
the  caie  of  a  tiindui  or  aedei  two  yean  are  re-
quired ;  and  lo  it  il  prorided  by  tbe  TwcItb
Tabid."

In  thii  paoage  he  ii  evidently  ipeaking  of  Re>
Mancipi  only,  and  of  (hem  only  when  (raniterred
to  the  purchaier  by  (he  owner  without  the  foinii
of  Mancipatio  or  in  Jar*  Ceuio.  From  thii  then
it  might  be  ufely  concluded  that  the  TweUe
Tablia  provided  a  remedy  for  defectire  modei  of
conveyance  of  Rei  Mancipi  from  tbe  owner ;  and
thii  il  all  (bat  could  be  concluded  from  thii  pai-
nge.  But  a  paaiage  which  immediately  followa
ihowi  that  Ibii  wai  all  (hat  (he  Twelve  Tablei
did  I  for  Gain*  (iL  43)  proceedi  (o  By,  "But
(fiilenaH)  then  may  be  Uioopio  even  in  tbe  cbm
of  thoea  thingi  which  have  come  (o  ni  by  tradition
from  a  penoo  who  wu  not  (be  ovnec,  whetbec
they  an  Rea  Mancipi  or  not,  provided  we  hate
received  them  bona  fide,  belioTtng  that  he  who  de>
livered  (qui  tradidtrU)  them  to  ui  wu  tbe  owner.
And  (hii  rule  of  law  leenu  to  have  been  dtabliihed^
in  ordec  that  the  ownenhip  of  thingt  might  not
be  long  in  nncertaintyt  lecing  that  one  or  two
yean  would  be  quite  lufflcient  far  the  owner  to
look  after  hi)  property,  that  being  the  (ime  al-
lowed (o  (he  PoucHor  for  Uiucapio."

The  reaion  for  limiting  tbe  owner  lo  one  or  two
yean  baa  little  force  in  it  and  pouibly  no  hii-
(orical  truth  ;  but  it  i>  dear  from  thii  pauege  that
thii  application  of  the  rale  of  Uiucapio  wu  formed
^om  anali^  to  tbe  rule  of  the  Twelie  Tabln,
and  (bat  it  wu  not  contained  in  them.  Tbe
limitatiDn  of  tba  time  of  Uino^  ia  deari  j  doe  to


1218  DSUCAPIO.

the  Twelre  T^We*,  and  the  time  spplieJ  onlj  to
porchue*  of  Re>  Muicipi  fmn  the  ovncr,  when
tbe  legs]  fbmift  of  conreyuice  hod  been  o^lected.
B«l tin origia of  Uiucnpia  yrta  ptobaUj  itill

Whan  Qahu  MUa  IhU  time  vu  urigmallf
only  one  kind  of  ownenhip  at  Rome,  and  that
aftCTWudi  omienhip  waa  dirided,  be  immtdiateir
iliowi  how  thii  aroM  by  taking  (he  ca»  of  a  Ret
ItancipL  Thia  divUion  of  ownenfaip  rented  on  tl:
diTiiion  of  Ihingi  into  Re*  Mancipl  and  Bea  Ni
Hanctpi,  a  diitinctiop  that  had  reference  tc  nothin
eUe  than  the  mode  of  tranifeiring  the  property  of
them.  Thing!  were  merely  caJled  Rei  Maicipi,
becouie  Ihs  ownenhip  of  tbem  could
ferred  without  Mancipotio.  Thing!  '
Mincipi,  the  alienation  of  which  could  be  eflected
without  HaocipBtio.  There  could  be  no  diiiiic
*f  ^ingi  into  Manchri  and  Nee  mancipi,  except

whatuiingi  ' ■■■ " --

mcipi  an  dalen  „ .  .

■n  all  thing!  that  an  not  Rea  Mancipi. But  the


ra  datenmnsd  Mgatively  :  the;


u^tiT*  detenmnation  pre-nppoKi  the  poeitiTC.
Therefore  Ret  Mandpi  were  determined  befbro
Rei  nee  Hancipi  could  be  determined  ;  and  before
the  Re!  Mancipi  were  determined,  there  wag  no
distinction  of  thing!  into  Ree  Mancipi  and  Ree
Peo  MancipL  Bnt  thii  dittinction,  a  Boch,  only
afiected  the  condition  of  thoae  ihingi  to  which  it
had  a  diiect  application :  conaequenti;  all  other
Ihingi  remained  ai  they  were  befiue.  The  condu-
aion  then  it  certuo,  that  Ae  Rea  Mancipi  aa  a
daii  of  thiiui  were  poiterior  in  order  of  time  to
the  clan  of  Rat  nee  Mancipi,  which  comprebended


at  Roma  oonld  be  alienated  by  Indition,  at  Bat

nee  Mancipi  could  be  alienated  by  tiadition  after
the  cUu  of  Rea  Manripi  waa  conitituted.

The  lime  when  the  daat  of  Rea  Mandpi  waa
formed  it  not  known  ;  but  it  it  moit  coniiitent
with  all  that  we  linow  to  luppoae  that  il  eiitled
Ufbie  the  Twelie  Tablet.  If  we  coniider  the
ibnnt  of  Mancipatio  [Mancipitio],  we  cannot
believe  that  Ihey  aroee  in  an;  other  way  than  by

C'  iTo  enactment  At  toon  aa  the  forma  of
eipitio  and  of  the  In  jure  ccatio  {which  from
its  chamcter  muat  be  poaterior  to  Mancipatio)
were  eitabliihed,  it  fbllcwed  that  mere  tnuUtion  of
a  thingtoaparchoKr  and  payment  of  the  purchaac
money,  could  not  tmnifer  the  ownenhip  of  a  R«
HfuicipL  The  liaiurer  gave  the  pnnhuer  maccly
a  Poateatio,  and  the  original  owner  retained  the
pnperty.  In  courte  of  time  the  purchaser  ob-
tained the  Publiciana  actio,  and  Irom  thia  time  it
might  be  taid  that  a  double  ownerthip  eiiated  in
the  tame  thing.

The  iDlrodaction  of  Mancipatio,  which  gave  rite
to  the  double  ownerthip,  waa  alao  followed  by
the  introduction  of  UaOca[Ho.  The  bona  6ie
Poaieiaor  of  a  Rei  Mancipi  which  had  not  been
tnnaferrtd  by  Mancipatio,  had  no  Iqal  defence
aigainat  the  owner  who  claimed  the  thing.  But  he
had  the  eiceplio  doli,  and  tabtequenUy  the  Ei-
ceptio  rei  lendilae  et  Usdilaa  by  which  he  could
pntect  himtelf  againat  the  owner  ;  and  aa  Patiateor
limply  he  had  the  protection  of  the  Interdict
agmnit  third  penoni.  He  had  the  frill  enjoyment
itf  the  thing,  and  he  could  tnuiafer  the  poiiettio,
but  he  could  do  no  act  with  reipect  to  it  Kir  which
QeiFitalian  ownerthip  wat  neccalai?  j  canMqnently


tJSDCAPIO.
ba  conld  nsl  alienate  it  by
Cenio,  nnd  it  wai  a  ner naary  eonaegaence  that  he
could  not  diipoie  of  it  by  T -  -  - -'


of  by  Tetlament  The  iii  nifilj  fo  aocb  a  rue  aa
that  of  Uiaeapio  waa  eridenl,  bat  it  emld  ante
in  no  other  w»  than  by  poiiliTe  (OBctBMot,  fw  iB
effect  waa  to  be  the  nune  ai  thM  of  MTeipatia
The  TwelTo  TUlea  fixed  the  tena  ctf  Uanea^
hut  we  do  not  know  whether  the<r  fixed  «  Bwdy
confirmed  the  rule  of  law  aa  to  Uauc^Ch

It  it  a  miitahe  to  luppme  that  traditia  or  de-
lirary  waa  a  pan  of  MandpatiD  aa  ntdi.  Manci-
patio V1U  menly  a  form  of  trana&mng  owmcnh^
which  wat  fixed  by  law,  and  the  chaiacleriatit  of
which  WM piiblicity ;  adeliTOryof  the  tUngwsaU
of  court*  generally  fbllow,  but  it  wis  m  part  of
the  tranifer  of  ownEnhip.  Land  (proadia)  fie
inatance  could  be  maneipated  withont  ddiney
(u  attaOia  mmdpari  uiaU,  UIp.  Pr^,  tiL  IS  ;
Qaina,  i.  ISl.)  In  the  cata  of  monabla  tU^a,
il  waa  neceiauy  that  they  aboold  be  tiWiaant.  mt
for  the  pnrpoae of  deliTcn,  but  that  the  tUag


ipated  might  be  idntiftsd by  afftAeomB.
'he  tranafer  of  ownintim  ia  all
naent  of  two  parataa,  mo  hara
legal  capui^  to  content,  the  aeller  and  the  bner.
Au  the  teat  ii  form  that  maybe  Taried  iD&ul(ly:


Trttn

form  of  tnmtfer  waa  undoubtedly  the  old  Ribh
fbnn,  and  content  alone  wet  tut  int.  ■»■( ,  ^nd  it
may  be  admitted  that  maaint  al(»M  waa  new  ^fi-
cient  for  the  tnnafiir  of  ownenihip  wilhent  ■^Vt™g
the  piindide  laid  down  that  anuent  alaa*  it  •■-
toitial  in  the  banafer  of  owntnhip. TUt  af(B-


I  origin  to  a  time  wl


rent  ineuugtuity  la  ingamo
phUnedin  Ibeallairingmi

minda  Pbyucal  ownoihip,  tr  the
things  Eroin  Legal  "■■■—■'"p  At
a  man  an  ooly  oJl  a  Urd  in  the  «ir  or  •  wild
animal  in  the  fatert  hit  own  when  he  ha  eaagfat
it ;  to  men  thought  that  tndi^oo  man  be  added  Id
contract  in  order  to  enable  a  man  to  dain  the
thing  at  hit  own."  (Engelbaeh,  Uiiir  Jm  {Aaea-
piat,  dec  p.  60.)

Beaidea  the  caaa  of  property  thcfv  Bugfct  ha
Uaucapio  in  the  cata  of  Sefrintta,  Mti  i  iagi  i,  and
Hercditaa.  But  at  Setritntet  maediemm  laaliiiaam
conld  only  be  the  ohjeclt  of  Mantfeotio  aad  eeaU
only  be  eatabliahed  by  the  mnn)  Mnn  by  whi^
ownenhip  of  Rea  Mancipi  waa  traodetrad,  aa  ac-
cording to  the  old  law,  Iheae  Ssrilale*  alon  cdald
be  the  object  of  Uiucapio  ;  and,  ai  it '


eatabliahed  by  cmtiact  and  toold  be  folly  aeqairad
by  Uaueapio.  In  the  later  ReoBn  law,  *ha>  the
form  of  Mancipatio  waa  rephtced  by  men  naditiiB,
aenitulet  oonld  be  eetablithed  per  pacta  et  ttipa-
lationet  only.  In  the  caie  of  a  BCarriaoe  Odc^-
tione,  the  form  of  Mancipatio  waa  nacd,  ^id  the
effect  WM  that  the  woman  nme  tnta  the  hud  at


tbe  woman  lived  with  her  hniband  ■  nar,  the
puied  into  hit  Familia  by  Unc^uo  (taM  ana
poaeBiau  maKX^iietatmr) :  and  acenrdini^y  it  wat
pnnded  by  the  law*  af  the  Twelra  TbUm,  Ihu  if


USUCAPIO.
the  dU  Dot  wiah  thm  to  come  iota  het  halbmi't
lund,  ahc  moft  in  erny  jeai  mboent  benelf  ficm
bim  fbi  tbiea  nighli  in  mia  to  intenapl  tlis  TUOh.
(Oalu,  i  )I0.)  Tku  Unicapio  added  to  Utu>
pndaeed  tha  tffiset  oC  CoempCio.  la  tlie  out  of
the  IlMcditM,wlunlbe  teftMorhsd  theWanwDti
futin,  and  bad  di^Kned  of  hi>  propeitj  wilhcmt
obamving  tba  ibniu  of  MvudpotiD  and  Nmunpatia,
thepenoD  vbon  b«  had  named  hi*  heict,  could  oth
twn  the  legal  ownenhip  of  Ihe  henditai  br  Uni-
capio. ((Hiii*,ii  54.)  In  all  IhcM  cuei  then  the
old  lav  ■*  to  UnuBpb  wu  ihii :  whoi  the  potitiTe
law  had  leqnind  the  fixnii  of  Mandpatio  in  order
that  a  certain  endaboald  be  efiected,  UiueapioiDp-
plied  the  defect  of  fbnn,  bj  conTerting  a  puueuio
(eubeequentl]'  called  In  banii)  into  Damminm  ei
jura  Quiritinin.  Uracnpio  then  ni  not  oriKiiiallf  a
nude  of  acqniiition,  but  it  tu  a  mode  b^  which
■  dtdeet  in  the  mode  of  aeqaiiitioii  ma  aupplied,
and  thii  defect  waa  (applied  bf  the  nee  of  the
thiqi,  or  the  exeidee  of  the  light  The  tnd  of
Ueocapio  wai  to  ambine  the  bawGciil  with  the
QoiritariiB  awnenhip  of  ■  thing.  Accordingly  the
nrigiBal  nanw  foe  Uiacapio  wai  Urn  Auctoritai,
tfaa  anctoritai  of  mm  or  Chat  which  girea  to  Uiui
ita  Metej  and  completeneai,  a  loue  of  Anctoritaa
wUeb  ia  conunm  in  the  Riniau  Law.  Some  taj
that  nnu  aactorilai  ii  Ddu  et  aitctoritaa.  iC\e.  Pro
Omm.19.)  [AucraRTTAl ;  Tdtsla.]  ButUioi
■lone  nerei  lignifiea  Unicapio  (  and  eoniiitentlj
with  thii,  in  thoae  caiee  where  tiiere  conld  be  no
UmeaiHo,  the  Roinui  writen  apeak  of  Uuia  only.
Feaeatio  ii  the  Um  of  a  piece  of  noond  ai  op-
poaad  to  the  ownenhip  of  it ;  and  tbe  tenii  Unie
wai  a^ipUed  to  the  enjoyment  of  land  of  which  a
maa  eraio  had  mt  the  ownenhip  oc  ef  which  he
coald  not  bare  the  owoenhip,  ai  Uie  Agei  pablicni.
In  the  Utec  taw,  ae  it  ia  kaown  to  ni  in  the  Pan-
dect, Uiseuiio  wai  a  node  of  aeqniiii^  ownenhip,
the  tenn  Unii  Anctoritai  wm  rephuied  by  the
pbinie  Un  Capete,  and  in  the  place  of  Uiocapio
aometimea  the  phiiue  "pooeeiione  or  longa  poi-
aeuiene  capere  **  ocean  ;  bnt  Poeeeuio  alone  aever
ii  Dted  lor  Unicspie.  In  order  to  eilabliih  the
title  by  Umcapio,  the  PeeeeuiDn  molt  be  eoatinaaaa
or  aninterrupted  during  the  whole  Unici^ioD.  If
there  wai  an  isterniptim  of  the  PaeKuioo  (mur-
patio),  and  the  PoMeaiion  wu  acquired  a^ain,  thii

poaaeaeioD  mait  alio  have  a  legal  Cffigin,  without
which  the  poneieioa  would  bare  no  tSect.  The
pneieienr  mnit  be  able  to  ihow  an  origin  of  hia


ownenhip :  thii  wa*  called  joii


It  appcan  from  a  pauage  of  Oaioi  olnady
quoted,  that  in  hii  time  Uiacapio  wai  a  regular
mode  of  acqniiitioD,  which  wu  applicable  to  uingi
wliich  had  come  to  a  oiaa  by  tradition  from
who  wai  not  the  owner,  and  wu  applicable  I
to  Ree  Mancipi  and  Nee  Mancipi,  if  the  pom
acquired  the  pneaeiiiDn  of  theia  bona  £de.  that  ii,
for  imlance,  if  he  believed  that  ha  bronght  then)
from  the  owner. There  were  however  lonw  ei
ceptioaa  to  thia  mle :  a  man  could  noTer  acqnii
the  ownenhip  of  a  itolen  thing  by  Uiac^io,  f(
the  Twelve  Tabln  preveated  it,  and  the  Lei  Joli
et  Planlia  pterenled  Uiocf^  in  the  sue  of
thing  Vi  poiieHB. The  meaning  of  the  law  wae
lut  Uia(  the  thief  cr  the  lobber  could  not  acquire


USUCAPIO.  1219

the  ownenhip  by  Uiucepio,  for  Ibe  mala  Sdei  in
''  '.  their  poneaion  originated  wai  ao  obitecls
B  Unuapio,  bnt  no  penon  who  bona  fide
bought  the  thing  that  wu  itolen  ot  ii  poeseua,
mid  acquire  the  ownenhip  by  Uincapio.  (Qaiui,
,  4fi.)  According  to  other  aatboritiei  the  rule  as
I  a  itideii  thing  wu  eitabliibed  by  the  Lex
Atinla.  Pnrincial  landi  alio  were  not  objecti  of
Uiucaino.

If  a  womau  wu  in  the  tnlela  ef  hHignati,  her
Re*  Mancipi  conld  not  be  objeeti  of  Uincapio^
nnlew  they  had  been  receired  from  her  by  tnditia
with  the  anctoritai  of  her  tutor  ;  and  thii  wu  B
pmiiioD  of  the  Twelre  Tablei. The  legal  incapa-
eily  of  the  wmnan  to  trraafer  ownenhip  by  Han-
eipatio  mnat  be  the  origin  of  thii  rule. The
propnty  of  a  wonian  who  wu  in  Tut^  legitinm
"  not  he  an  object  of  Unc^o,  ai  Cicero  ex-
to  Atticm  (de  Mela  tegiiima  nOiit  mtieapt
pout,  ad  AtL  L  6). The  fenndation  of  Ihii  rule,
cording  to  lome,  wu  the  legal  incapacity  of  a
iman  who  wai  in  the  tntela  of  her  Agnati,  to
ikeawilL  [TiSTAHiNTUif  ;  bntieeTcTiLi.]
In  older  to  acquire  by  nmcapio,  a  penon  muit
lie  Ihe  capacity  of  Ronan  ownenhip ;  eonie-
qaenlly  all  penou  were  eidnded  from  acquiring
by  Uiucapio  who  had  not  the  HJommerriDm. The
punge  quoted  by  Ciceio  (da  Qffk.  i.  13)  from  the
Twelie Tablca, "adiemnn hoitem  (i.e. pere-
giinum)  aetema  anetoritav"  ii  alleged  in  loppoit
of  thii  Tula  of  Uw ;  that  ia,  a  Peregrinua  may  baie
the  me  ot  a  Rei  Mracipi  which  hai  been  trai»-
ferred  by  tiadilio,  bnt  he  can  nerer  acquire  any-
thing men  by  Uiucapiu

Thing)  conld  not  be  objecit  of  Untoqiic^  which
were  not  ol^}ecti  of  Canmtndum.  Acoc«dingIy  all
Rea  diiini  jnrii,  inch  ai  templea  and  landi  dedi-
cated to  the  godi,  and  Ru  commnnei  conld  not  be
objecti  of  UnuafHo.  The  Limiti  or  bonndi  by
which  the  Romanni  Agar  wu  marked  out  were
conieqnently  not  objeeti  of  Uiucapio,  u  to  which
there  wu  a  proiinon  in  the  Twelie  Tablei.  (Cic.
di  Leg.i.21,  "QoDDiamuncapionem  intnqninqDe
pedee  ewe  nolaerunt.")  The  Quinque  pedei  are  the
limitH  lineuii,  the  breadth  <^  which  wu  fixed  at
file  feet  by  a  Lex  Mamilia.  The  appnwch  to  a
•epulchie  wu  alio  not  an  object  of  Uiaci[do.
FreemaicoaldnotlMobjecliof UmoipiD.  (QeiuL
iL«.)

In  thetimeof  OaiaiCii.61)  amanm^httake
pmifiiion  of  another  person^  land,  pronded  he
need  no  force  («(),  the  poneuion  of  which  wu


became  the  owner  had  died  without  a  Suceema
[SuccBSBio),  or  had  been  long  abamt ;  and  if  he
tmnifeiTed  the  field  to  a  biHia  fide  purchuer,  the
purcbiiec  could  acquire  the  ownenhip  by  Uiuo-
pio,  eien  though  Ihe  seller  knew  that  the  field  wai
not  hii  own.  This  rule  wai  eitabliihed  againit
the  opinioi  of  thoie  who  contended  that  a  FoDdta
could  be  Fnitimi  or  in  abject  of  tho^  But  a
ight  in  lOmo  csaei  accuire  by  Uiocapio  the
""' '  "  "'"ing  which  be  fcl " ' - -  '^■


ownenhip  of  a  thing  w


longing  to  the  here^tai,  of  which  the  herei  had
neier  acquired  the  poweuion,  proiided  it  wu  a
thing  that  could  he  an  object  of  Uiucapio.  Thii
ipeciei  of  poHeuio  and  uiucapio  wu  called  Pro
beiede:  and  eien  things  immoiabte  (}«ae  wb
oDntnater)  could  be  thai  acquired  hy  one  yenr^
uiuQ^o, Thereaioawu  thill  the  Twelie  Tablet


1220  USUCAPIO.

dcdand  tluit  tb«  ownenliip  of  m  vdi  could  be
■cquiied  by  unics^  in  two  yent,  and  all  other
thiiigi  in  one  jen:  now  u  the  hcieditHi  wu  not
A  n*  foli  it  miut  be  included  in  tbe  "  other  thingi,^'
and  it  wv  fijrthef  determined  that  the  Hvend
thing!  which  mule  up  the  heceditai  muit  fiillaw
the  rule  u  to  the  heredilai ;  (uid  though  the  rule
u  to  the  heteditu  w«i  changed,  it  continued  u  to
all  the  thing!  compriied  In  it.  (Seneca,  Dt  Batf.
tL  b.)  The  leuon  of  thii "  improba  pouauio  el  niu-
capio,"  nyt  Gaiui,  wu  that  the  harei  might  be  in-
duced the  looner  to  take  poueHion  ofthe  aereditoi,
and  that  there  might  be  lemebodj  to  diochorge  the
■BctB,  which  in  ancient  time*  (if{u  UnporUiiu)  were
vei7  ilrictl;  obierred  ;  and  alio  that  there  might
be  HiDfbodj  ogBJuit  whom  the  crediton  might
make  their  demand*.  Thii  kbd  of  PoMeatio  and
Utucapia  wai  called  Lucratin.  In  the  time  of
Gaitu  It  had  ceaied  toeiiitiforaSenatuicaniultum
of  Hadrian'!  time  enabled  the  heree  to  recorcr  that
which  had  been  acquired  bj  Uiiuapio,  just  ai  if
there  had  been  do  Utuc^s  ;  bat  in  the  cou  of  a
herei  neceiBariuR,  the  old  rule  atill  remained.
(Oaiua,  iL  £2-^3  t  Cic  7\^.  6  ;  Plin.  Ep.  v.  I.)

Oaiut  mention*  a  mode  of  acquiiition  nndec  the
name  of  Uinreceplio.  If  a  man  mandpated  a
thing  to  a  fHend  or  lianileiTed  it  by  the  In  Jure
Ccuio,  limply  in  order  that  the  thing  miftht  be  in
hii  biend*!  Mfe  keeping  {fiditciae  oama;  good
iatait  nottrae  ra  i^Hid  atm  tual),  he  had  alwayi
a  capadtj  Sot  lecorering  it.  In  order  to  recover
immedialcl;  the  Quiritarian  ownanhip  of  the  thing,
Bemancipatio  wae  neeewarr  ;  but  if  the  thing  warn
nanifencd  to  him  by  traditio,  the  Hemandpatia
VM  completed  hj  Unii^io,  or  aa  it  i>  hero  colled
hj  Uinreceptjo  ;  for  Uniroceptio  dilTera  in  no  re-
ipect  &om  Umcapio,  except  that  the  peraon  who
acquire!  the  Quiritarion  ownenhip  h;  Uiui,  in  the
one  caM  ocqauei  (sopit),  in  the  other  re^ocquires
(nsopil}  the  thing.  In  the  caH  of  a  pignomted
thing,  Uia  debtor'!  capacity  to  recover  by  Unire-
cepuo  wai  the  eame  aa  in  the  caie  of  Fiducia  aa
■oon  ai  he  bad  pud  hii  debt  to  die  creditor  :  and
oven  if  he  had  not  paid  the  mooej  and  had  ob-
tained poaaeiiion  of  the  thing  neither  by  hiring  it
bom  the  creditor,  nor  precario,  he  had  a  lucrmtiva
uancBpio,  which  wae  a  uaureceptio  and  waa  pn^
bably  formed  baa  analogy  to  the  lucra^iB  om-
etfio  pro  hereda.

Scrritutea  piaedionmi  nuUaximi  wera  eMab-
liahed,  at  leaat  accrading  to  the  old  law,  by  Man-
cipatio :  the  eight  to  the  Servicnte*  could  only  be
properly  extinguiahed  by  a  Remandpatia.  If  the
Serritni  wai  eitingniibed  by  mere  agreement,
there  muat  be  a  uiureceptio  on  the  part  of  the
owner  of  the  lerrient  tenement  in  order  to  com-
plete it!  lego]  releaie  from  the  Serritua.  In  order
that  the  n^ieuion  of  the  libeiiai  of  the  leciient
land  might  be  enjoyed  uninterruptedly  for  two
yean,  thera  moil  be  for  the  lome  time  a  tolol  ab-
atinenoe  from  all  eierdae  of  the  right  on  the  pan
of  him  who  had  the  aerrilna.  Subaequently,  il
WB*  coaaiderad  mfficient  if  the  pecaoo  entitled  to
the  Serritni  did  Dot  eiaiciae  hii  right  fin  two
jeart.

When  umcapio  wu  eatabliihed  aa  a  meana  of
girlng  the  Qnintarian  ownuahip  to  him  who  had
acquired  a  thing  In  bonii,  the  form  of  mancipatia
muit  hare  gradnally  loM  ita  importance,  and  Uiu-
(*pio  came  to  be  yiewed  aa  a  mode  of  ocquiaitiou.
Accordingly,  it  hat  been  already  obiervad,  it  be-


usucAPia

came  applicable  to  all  caae*  of  bona  lide  poMtaMB,
whether  the  thing  wa*  a  Ret  Macdpi  or  boL
Formerly  if  a  will  had  been  made  in  due  fc«n  ci-
cept  01  to  MoocipBtioD  and  NoncapatMU,  ibe  hers
acquired  the  hereditaa  hy  Uaocapia  ;  bot  with  the
iiitrodaction  of  the  Praetorian  Teatament  [Tm-A-
hentlih]  and  the  Bonorum  Poa*aaia,tlw  BowniB
Pataeurar  obtained  the  right  to  actionea  ftctitae  ■
utile*  in  all  ouet  where  the  deceaied  had  ■  light
of  action,  and  be  acquired  by  Uamapio  the  Qtui.
tarian  owneiahip  of  the  acTcnt  thinga  which  mie
included  in  the  hereditaa.  IncviUKoftiiiHiiltani
to  be  cDUiidetedbytlie  juriatiaaanilecrf'lawl^
there  could  be  no  Umapb  of  an  hereditaa.  (Gaiat,
il  Si.)  In  like  manner  in  the  eaae  of  Serriialei
etiabliihed  by  coatiact,  the  introdnctiaa  of  the
Actio  Publiciiina  rendered  the  doctrine  rf  Umcapio
urmecenary,  and  a  SoiboiUB  Lex  is  nunliaiKd
which  repoJed  all  Uaiuapio  of  Serritntca.  (Dijc.
41.  tit.  S.  !.  4.  §  29.)  Bnt  thii  Lu  only  apiilied
to  the  eatabliihment  of  aertitatea  ;  it  did  not  afini
that  Uiucapio  by  which  the  freedom  of  a  acrrieat
piece  of  loud  waa  effected.  It  became  a  laaiin  tt
law  :  (ecvitutci  piaediomm  rDatiooinm  uon  atcoda
amiituntur,  whicb,  liewed  with  renaet  to  the  aer-
vieol  land,  waa  a  tianreceptia.  la  thii  (oae
"  u!urpata  recipitui "  leemi  to  be  Died  in  B  IHiaue
of  Panlua  {S.8.L  tit  17.  >.  S).  **  Uimpari "  ii
commiHily  need  in  the  aenie  of "  oti,'*  and  ia  tUi
paange  of  Paulut  "uinipata  radptiir'*  imia
equJTBlent  to  "  uiu  lecipitui ; "  Ihoagh  thii  ia  Mt
the  meaning  that  baa  naoally  been  giroi  to  tUi
paaaage.

In  the  caie  of  mitnigQ  alio  Uncapio  fell  mM
diinie  (Qaiul,  I  111).

Bat  m  other  reaped!  niocapio  anbaateJ.  H(
who  had  acquired  a  Rea  Mand^  by  tradiliao,  had
now  a  Praetorian  owaenhip,  and  he  had  a  r^it  of
action  in  respect  of  thia  owcenhip,  whidi  waa
aoalogou!  to  the  Bei  Vindicatio.  But  Vtaofit
waa  atill  neceaiaiy  lo  gire  him  Quiritariaa  owncr-
ihip  and  ita  coneeqneat  odvantagea.  The  diitiBc-
tion  between  Bea  Mancipi  and  Nee  M?T-i[ri  ex-
isted, and  a*  a  conaeqnenee  the  Teibmcnttmi  pa-
ees  et  libram  (obaiited  at  the  aama  tiaw  with  the
Praetorian  TettamenL

When  finally  all  diatinctjiai  waa  aboliabed  be-
' ~ Rea  Moncip and  Nee  Maudpi,  and the


by  which  a  thing  In  bonis  h
Jure  Qniritium.  All  Uiucapw  was  now  the  miar,
and  ita  general  definitioa  became  "adjeetia  do-
miuii  per  eontinuationem  poaieaiania  tenpaiia  kg*
definili."  (Dig.  41.  tit.  3.  a.  2,  i)*  UmrftHimiai
et  Unoapioiiiiv.)  By  a  cmatilntidn  ^  JoMiniaa
(Inat  2.  lit.  6,  De  Unicapionibm  et  kmgi  tanperit
poaaeaaionibua)  it  waa  enacted  that  theta  ni^l  be
uiucapion  of  Rea  Mobiles  in  thrai  jtmrt,mnit£
Res  Immobilee  ^pcr  loogi  tampona  poHea^flBnk,"
which  il  eiplained  to  be  ton  ycara  "inter  taar.
■entea,*^  and  twenty  yean  **  inter  absentee  i  ^  vid
thii  applied  to  the  whole  Roman  Empire,  lo  thai
ownerthip  of  all  thingi  could  be  acquired  on  thne
teim*  within  the  whole  Roman  ampin ;  bet  tba
eondjlioo  of  "  juatua  titnlus,"  "bona  fidea,"  and
the  capability  of  the  thing  to  be  an  object  aJT  ant-
capion  wereitill  required.  The  absence  of  a  jdstas
lituluB  or  the  fact  of  the  ihii^  being  DM  capabls
of  nsucaiHon,  did  not  deprive  the  paaaaaiir  o(  tlie
a/tknty,  i*


USU8FRUCTUS.
in  uaat  cawi,  tatty  jeaa  wu  nquired.  Prom
thii  time  ths  Mmu  Uncspia  md  LdDgi  tBmpMJi
[auicripti<s  wtn  atai  mdmatatij,  u  aame  wntcn
lappote,  IboDRti  on  ttiii  point  (hen  ii  not  imi£:raiil;
of  apinicm.

(Eiwetbuh,  Uttrr  dit  Una^/tim  tur  leit  itr
Zinlf  Tafibi,  Marburg  ltl2S;  MUhlenbnich,
Dodrin.  Paadtei.  |  261,  &c  ;  Uiitr  die  Utaeopio,
pro  itreda  TOD  Anidli,  /(im.  Mat.  fir  Jtavpnt-
<iau. ToL  iL  p.l2£  !  PucliU, /nif.  a  9  339.)  [a.  L.]

usuRAE. [^'■Nu^  p.  ise,  b.]

USURPATTO.  Odb  miik  of  thu  word  u
"  UnuapionU  intimiptia,''  (Oig.41.  tiL  3.  t.%)
Appin*  Claodiiu,  not  the  DecemTJr,  liat  ha  who
made  the  AppiaVi&uidbTDDght  (he  AquaClaodia
to  Rome,  wiota  a  book  Dc  UiiupBtionibui,  whicb
WM  not  OEtant  in  tho  time  of  PamponiiU.  (Dig.  1 .
tit  2,  i;  86.)  Id  wine  cawi  "  lunrpalio  "  mean!
the  pnMTvalion  of  a  right  by  tbe  eierciM  of  it,  at
**  jut  nnupatam,^  in  tha  caae  of  a  Serritiu  aquao
docendas  ;  and  thii  neui;  agree*  with  that  aenae
of  Uanrpare  which  ia  eqoiiaient  to  U^  [Usv-
CAFK).]  Ai  to  the  pauage  in  Getlioi,  iii.  2,  tsa
SsTigny,  SsttBi,  &e.  ir.  365.  IG.  L.]

U3US. [MiTKIlIONIDM,  p.  741.]

U8US. [UBUBPRCCTDfcJ

U3U3FRUCTUS  and  USU3  ve«  Panonal
Serritnle*.  [SMTrrnrra.]  (Dig.  fl.  tit.  1.  ».  1.)
UiDifmctiu  ii  defined  to  be  "jui  alieaie  rebm
utesdi  fruendi  nlva  renm  fubxantia."  (Dig.  7.
til.  1.  L  1.)  According);  Unufractui  comprehended
the"jiii  ntendi"  and  tha  "jm  fhiendL"  Utui
eomprehendod  only  ilia  "joi  utendi."  The  com-
plete diilinction  between  Unufmctua  and  Uaua
will  only  appear  from  a  ilatement  of  what  each  il

A  nanifnictua  wai  the  right  to  the  enjoyment  of
tho  irnila  of  a  thing  by  one  perion,  while  the
ownerahip  (proprietai)  belonged  to  another.  It
coold  be  eilabliihed  by  Teitament,  which  wgj  Ihe
cammoD  caie,  ai  when  the  Here*  waa  reqaired  to
gire  to  another  the  nnufructna  of  a  thing  ;  and  it
coold  alao  be  eitablilhed  by  contract  between  the
owner  of  a  thing  and  him  who  contracted  fw  the
UnuCnictiu.  Me  who  had  the  Uiuifrncta*  waa
UBna&netnarina  or  Fmctuarioi,  and  the  object  of
tho  Uinefhiitna  waa  Rei  Fnictoaria.  The  utmoet
limit  of  Uaiufrnctui  and  Ubu  wai  the  life  of  the
peraon  who  had  the  right.  Thni  the  Uiutfhietni
and  Utoa  were  generally  life  eitatea  ;  but  not  more.
(Dig.  46.  tit  1.  a.  88.  9  13.)

There  might  be  Uanifraetna  both  in  Praedia
Rnalica  and  Urbana,  in  alaToa,  beaati  of  harden
and  other  thinga  ;  and  a  Uniifrnclua  of  a  whole
property  (onmimn  bononun)  might  be  gTTen  ;  or
of  lomo  aliqnot  pvt.  (Dig.  32.  tit  3.  a.  37,  43.)

If  the  UnttfiuctDi  of  n  thing  wat  beqaeathad  (o
a  peraon,  all  the  "  frnctna  "  of  the  thing  belonged
to  tha  Fmctnarioi  daring  the  time  of  hia  enjoy-
ment Conaequently  if  the  Unufractn*  of  a  piece
of  land  waa  giren  lo  him,  he  wai  intitled  to  collect
and  hare  for  hia  awn  all  the  fructni  that  were  al-
ready DO  the  land,  and  all  that  were  produced  on
it  duibg  the  time  of  hii  enjoymenC.  Bat  H  ha
only  acquired  the  ownerahip  of  the  fruetut  by  col-
lecting them  (petceptio),  he  waa  not  intilted  to
ftuctui,  whicb  flitted  on  the  land  at  the  ^me
when  hit  right  ended,  and  which  he  had  not  col-
lected :  qnidqnid  in  fundo  nsacitur,  Tel  qiudqaid
inde  percipilur,  ad  fhictuarinm  pectinet  (Dig.  7.
tit  l.a;fi9.91  i  tlL4.a.l3.)

Ho  waa  bound  not  to  injme  tha  land,  and  he


usuSFBUCTua,  lasi

«>i  bnmd  to  caltifate  it  properly.  At  lo  quarriei
and  minei,  he  could  wrai  then  for  hia  benefit,  if  ha
worked  them  pnperly  (fHti  bmu  ftitifamiiia*).
If  after  llie  bequett  of  the  nantiraetBa,  mioerala
were  found  on  tho  land,  he  eoatd  work  diem.  Ho
could  be  compelled  to  plant  new  treet  in  Ihe  plac*
of  thoae  which  died,  and  generally  to  keep  the  land
in  good  condilioD.  If  llie  unufractaa  waa  of  aedea,
the  frnctoarina  wai  intided  to  aU  the  rente  and
proGU  which  ha  receiTed  daring  the  time  of  hii
enjoyment  He  eonld  be  compelled  to  keep  a
honia  in  npur,  bnt  it  aeemi  to  ha  donbtflil  how
b  ha  waa  boond  to  lebuild  the  hooae  if  it  fall
down  fiom  decay :  at  any  rale  he  waa  liable  for  all
moderate  and  reaaonable  eipenaea  which  were  na-
cceaary  for  the  maintenance  of  the  property.

The  FmctoariDa  coold  not  a1ienat«  the  right  to
the  nana&nctiu,  thoi^h  he  might  gi*e  to  another
the  naut  of  hia  right ;  and  he  might  tuirender  the
right  to  the  Ueoi&iclai  to  the  owner  of  the  thing.
He  conld  not  inbjcct  the  thing  to  aervitnte*  ;  nor
could  Ihe  owner  do  thii  eren  with  the  content  of
the  fructuarina.  The  P^etnahui  could  make  auch
ehangea  or  altentiona  in  the  thing  aa  would  im-
proTB  it,  hut  not  auch  aa  woald  in  any  way  dele-
ricsata  Ihe  thing,  or  even  render  the  maintenanca
of  it  a  greater  burden.  Conaequently  he  had
greater  power  otct  cultJTated  land  than  over  faoniei
or  pleaaUR-gromida,  for  a  put  of  Ibe  lalue  of
houaet  or  pleaiuie-gronndi  and  thiogt  of  the  like
kind  eoniiatt  In  opinion,  and  moat  be  nnatured  by
tha  rank,  wealth,  and  peculiar  diqioution  of  the

The  fractnarina  conld  maintaia  or  detokd  hia
righta  by  action  and  by  interdicta.  On  the  com-
pletion of  the  time  of  the  Utuaftaetaa,  the  thing
iraa  to  be  rettored  to  the  owner,  who  couid  gene-
rally reqnire  aeenritiea  from  the  fnictaarina  both
fur  the  proper  nae  of  the  thing  and  for  ita  rettora-


Thiaae
wirti  by  poaitii


Ktmentt,  and  in
(oold  not  be  dit-
pented  with  by  teitament

Originally  there  could  be  no  Uaatfrnctna  in
thingi  uuleae  they  were  thinga  corporeal  and  aneh
nt  could  be  reatored  entire,  when  Ihe  time  of
Uenatruetna  had  expired.  But  by  a  Senatotcon-
tnltom  of  uncertain  date,  there  might  be  quaai
uauafntctua  of  thingt  which  were  ecnaumed  in  the
uae,  and  in  thia  caae  Ihe  &uctuahnt  in  fact  became
the  owner  of  the  things,  but  waa  bound  tf


onld  either  :
badie


MTod,  or  the  Ti


of  the  thinga  in  money.  (Dig.  7.  t
compare  Randall  v.  Ruaieil,  3  Mer.  190.)  'it  ii
generally  aeppoaed  that  thia  SenatiBconinltnni  waa
paiaed  in  the  time  of  Augnatut,  aad  a  paaaage  of
Cicero  {Top.  3)  ia  alleged  to  thow  that  it  did  not
eiiit  in  Ihetimeof  Cicero:  "  Non  debet  ea mnlier,
cui  nr  bonorum  euorum  uiuminetum  legavit,  cellia
vinarlia  et  oleariit  plenii  relictia,  putare  id  ad  te
pertinere.  Uini  enim  non  abntna  legatur."  The
only  difflcolty  ia  in  the  wordt  "  id  ad  te  per^nde,"
which  are  nanally  tranalated  "  theae  thinga,  (the
cellae  Tinariae,  &c )  are  not  objecta  af  Uauafnictue,"
from  which  it  it  infened  that  there  waa  at  that
time  no  Uaaafrnctui  in  thingi  which  were  coo-
aumcd  in  Ihe  Uae.  Bnt  if  tiiii  ia  tha  aenae,  the
wordt  whkh  fallow,  *>  for  the  ntua,  not  the  abnaua
(power  to  eoniume)  it  the  object  of  the  legacy,"
hare  no  dear  meaning.  Theae  wordi  ump^  ug-
.  ,... 4l  5., ,  ,^.^


1222  USU8FRUCTUS.

ni%  th&t  a  Ubu  u  giTcn,  not  bd  Abnsui;  but
this  doa  not  pivre  thai  aa  sbniua  eonld  Dot  b«
fpTGD.  Pucbta  >faawithal  the  phrue  "  rei  pertmcl
ad  untnictnarinm,''  which  exactly  comapoDdi  to
the  phraM  in  Cicero,  doei  not  moui  "  that  the
thbg  it  an  object  of  uiualhiGtiu,''  hut  that  "  it  be-
long! (0  the  fnictnului."  In  the  Digut  (7.  tit  I.
1.  68)  the  question  i»,  whether  the  yonng  child  of
a  temale  elave  belongs  to  Che  frnctuaiios  (an  paitos
ad  &uctaariiun  pertuiBat),  and  it  is  answered  in
the  ni^tiie,  witii  the  foIlDwing  ci
' " ■ tractdarius  hal


re  not  giTcn  to  her
s  of  hii  pmerty,
fbr  it  ia  nsiu,  that  is,  the  enjoyment  of  the  ntnre
ftoits,  which  is  given,  snd  not  "abnins  "  or  the
power  to  coiwune  fnits  which  already  eiisL  In
other  words  the  testator  gives  the  woman  a  Usus-
fhictns  in  all  his  pnpeRy,  that  is  a  right  to  gather
tbe  fruits,  hut  he  does  not  give  the  wine  aud  oil,
s  fruits  already  gathered,


"abniui"  does  not  necessarily  signify  that  there
could  ba  "  ahusus "  only in  the  case  of  things

place  of  wine  and  oil  CiceiD  might  hare  giren  the
young  of  animals,  as  an  example  without  aJleting
nil  eipieasion.  If  this  interpretation  it  cotiect,
Pnchta  ermtends  that  the  Senaiuacoasultum  at
to  Quasi  Dtutfructni  ia  cdder  than  tbe  time  of

UiDs  is  defined (Dig'  7-  tiL  8.  t.  3)  hy  the
n^arion  of  "frui;  **  "cui  usus relictus  eat,  uti

Slett,  fhu  Ten  non  poleat"  The  title  of  the
igeit  above  referred  to  it  "De  Uia  et  habilalione,"
and  the  inttance*  gi>en  under  that  title  mainly
rdei  to  the  ute  of  a  house  or  part  of  a  house.  Ac-
cordingly the  una  of  a  house  might  be  bequeathed
without  tbe  frnctut  (Dig.  7.  tit  6.  1. 16)  ;  it  haa
been  alrouly  explained  what  it  the  extent  of  the
meaning  of  Usnt&nctns  of  a  house.  Tbe  unit  of
a  thing  implin  the  power  of  uting  it  either  for  ne-
cessary puipiiaei  or  pnrpowi  of  pleunre.  The  man
who  was  intitled  to  the  usus  could  not  gi  re  the  thing
to  another  to  use,  though  a  man  who  bad  tbe  usus
of  a  house  eonld  allow  another  to  lodge  with  him.
A  man  who  had  tbe  ami  of  an  etlats  could  take
wood  fbr  duly  nte,  and  could  enjoy  the  orchard,
the  fniit,  flowert  and  water,  prorided  he  naed  tfaam
in  modeiBtion,  or  at  it  is  eipreaied  "non  nsqne  ad
compendium,  sed  ad
If  then ' ■ ■


E  of  cattle  (pacait)  was  left,  the  usuarins
wai  mnued  to  a  modeiate  allowauce  of  milk.  If
the  utua  of  a  herd  of  oxen  was  bequeathed  to  a
nuui,  he  could  use  the  oien  <«  ploughing  and  fra'
all  purposes  for  which  oien  are  adapted.  If  the
utua  wa*  of  things  which  were  caniumed  in  the
nse,  then  the  ntoi  wai  the  tune  ai  Uiuifriictni.
(Dig.7.  tit.5.  t.£.  3!!l  1. 10,  g  1.)  Utoswatin
its  nature  indititible,  and  sccocdingly  port  of  a
Usui  could  not  be  giren  ss  a  legacy,  though  pei-
lons  might  hare  the  fructus  of  a  thing  in  common.
(Dig.  7.  tit  a.  s.  19.)  At  to  hit  duties  the  usu-
ariut  was  in  most  retpeds  like  the  frucluarius.  In
aome  catei  Uius  is  equiialtat  to  Uiuslrnctus,  as
where  there  can  be  no  utut  of  a  thing  without  a
taking  of  the  Fnictui.  At  to  Utoi  in  the  Engiith
tyttem,  see  Slanning  t.  Style,  3  P.  Wma  p.  S33,
and  Hyde  t.  Fanati,  1  P.  Wms.  p.  I.


XENELASIA.

antt  3.  dt  4  ;  D^.  7.  tit.  1,  Ac. !  FJ^.  Vat
dt  Vnfimcbi;  MDhlenlauch,  Dod.  PaadtcL  g  S8t.
&c  ;  Uff-r  dot  <tUer  da  gtiiiimai/i.rrai.  Tea
Pochla,  Afan.  JIfMMM /fir  ywifiniisic  vdiiL
p.  B2.)  (G.  L.]

UTERINI. [CoaKATLl

UTI  POSSIDETIS. [luTDDioTOM.]

UTILI3  ACTIO. [A(7rio,|i.lO,a.]

UTRES. [ViNC>i,p.]2{)3,h.]

UTRICULATIIUS. [Ttni*.]

UTRUBI. [ItfTiiinicTuM.]  ■

VULCANA'LIA,  a  feitiTsl  celebrated  at  Roh
in  hi»oar  of  Vulcan,  on  the  23d  of  August  (x.
Caitiid.  Sfl^  with  games  in  the  circus  PtuiiniBa,
where  the  god  had  a  temple.  (Intcript  ap.  OtwUt.
IiL  3,  ciiiiT.  ;  PnbL  Vict  d*  nffum^  ark.  Ra-
noe,  9.)  The  nerifice  on  thit  occaaion  consiMed  '
of  fishes  which  the  penje  threw  into  the  En.
(Vano,  da  Iji^.  laL  ti.30.)  It  was  also  <n-
tomary  on  this  day  to  commence  working  by  candle-
light, which  was  probably  considered  aa  an  aiia|u-
eiont  beginning  of  the  use  of  fiie,  u  the  day  was
sacred  to  the  ged  of  thit  element.  (Flin.  ^M.
iii.  B.)  It  was  on  the  day  of  this  featiTsl  tbal  tbe
consul  Q.  Fuliius  Nohilior  recuTed  a  leTen  de-
feat from  the  Celtiberisoa,  B.  c  IA3.  It  beeuM
an  ater  die*  in  conseqneDce.  (Amhn,  Him,
«.)  tUS.]

VULGATIKS. [SMTir^p.lO«,h.]

UXOR. [MiTRmoNluic.  p.  740,  b.]

UXOOtlUM. [Am  UmwtrM.3


XENA'OI  ({mysQ.  The  Spartana,  ■■  bebg
the  head  of  that  Pelopanneuin  and  Dotiaa  Itamr,
which  was  fiirmed  to  lecnre  the  indepaideace  ^ifae
Oreek  stales,  had  the  sole  command  of  tbe  ooa-
fedetate  tnopa  in  time  of  war,  ordoed  Aa  qaotaa
which  etch  stato  was  to  fnniitb,  and  ^fwoted
otBcert  of  their  own  to  command  them.  Sudi
officers  were  called  (atryvl.  The  geoeralt  wboB
the  allies  sent  with  their  troops  were  lobetdinaia
to  Iheae  Spartan  itrayat,  though  they  attended  the
council  of  war,  at  lejaeaentstiTea  6C  their  rcfpee-
tive  countries.  (Thncyd.  ii.  7,  10,  75,  t.  54:
Xenoph.  HelL  ii!.  fi.  |  7,  Ageia.  ii.  10.)  After
the  peace  of  Antalddas,  the  league  was  rtiQ  nm
firmly  established,  though  Argot  refused  to  Job
it ;  and  the  Spartaos  ware  rigorous  m  *rmnmig  i^
reqnired  military  sertice,  demanding  leiiea  by  tba
o'KUTifAi),  and  sending  out  itney^  to  eoDect  tbrm.
(Xenoph.  //ett  *.  S.  S|  7,  37,  ri.  8.  §7;  Watl^
muth,  adl.  .ilcera.  toL  L  pt  iL  pp.  1 14,  341,  1st
ed.;  Sch(lmann,,^iX.>r./mfiV'.p.426.)  FCR.E.]

XENELA'SIA  HtwuXaaU).  The  Luedae-
monians  sppeer  in  lery  early  tlmea,  bef«e  the
Initiation  of  Lycuigus,  to  have  been  annp  to  in-
tercourse with  foteigneis  ({/rsiai  dr^Jr/umu,
Herod.  I  65).  This  ditpoaition  irat  aicaniBged
by  the  lawgiver,  who  made  an  ordinance  fcirbidi^i(
lUangen  to  reside  at  Sparta,  without  special  ftf
mission,  and  empowering  the  magistiate  to  ei^
from  the  eily  any  stranger  who  misCDndocled  hua-
ael^  or  set  an  eianiple  injuriout  M  public  taoialtk
Sniji  jurisdiction  wat  exeictied  by  tbe  Eplwri,
Thueydidet  (iL  39}  makes  Perictt*  lurowsb  tbe
Lacedaemoniani  with  this  practice,  as  if  Hs  object
were  lo  [reioit  foreiguas  from  beanning  acqnvntfd
withiuehinttitationtaiid  means  rfdefiaeeM  would


XEKIAS  OBAPHE.
b«  dugUMii  fittueiwtaf  takaaw.  Tbatntantion


twi  rtw  [<iw  ^^Aaim.  (D*  AqD.  Loaaf.  xir.
4  ;  compua  Plot.  Zfcw^.  27.)  With  tt»  nme
TJew  tbe  Spaituu  wen  IhemHlTH  Ibrbiddui  to
go  abnad  vithoat  lean  sf  Ihe  nugiitnte.  Both
the«c  mla,  u  well  u  the  leeliup  of  the  people
Bi  tb*  labject,  were  much  nlued  in  Uter  tune*
when  fonign  inl«  and  nipremMT  b««ne  the  ob-
ject of  SpftrUui  unbitioo.  iiita  u  an  nrlicc
period  wa  find  that  the  Sputwti  knew  how  to  ob-
■nre  the  taw*  of  houitalitj  upon  fit  ud  proper
Dccauam,  nch  M  public  feitinli,  the  noption
of  (mlaMdoii,  &c.  (Xenoph,  Mim.  i.  2.  g  61.)
Thej  wonhipped  ■  Zfk  Urul  ud  'AfcrS  {erfa.
(PaoHn.  ill  1.  I  111.)  The  oonnecti^  nlled
iij  the  Qieeki  wpat'rla,  wai  coltiTated  at  Sparta
both  by  the  nata  and  b;  indiTiduali ;  of  which
theii  coniMction  with  the  PeiaiMnlidae  ia  an  ez>
ample ;  and  alw  that  of  a  SpaRaa  [aoi\j  with
the  fiuuily  of  Alcibiada.  (Tbucyd.  t.  43,  tL  69,
Tul  6  i  Uend.  T,  SI  ;  compare  n,  S7.)  [Hoari-
Ticir.]  MaDj  illuathouj  meo  are  reported  to
kare  tended  at  Sparta  with  honour,  at  Teipander,
Theognii,  and  othen.  (SchHmanD,  AnLjmr.  FtbL
Or.  p.  11!!.)  Xenophon  wai  highly  cateemed  bj
tht  nalioD,  and  made  SpaRaa  Tpjfinj.  (S«a
further  «a  the  lubjed  of  the  {tntAoiria,  Thucyd.  i.
144,  with  Oocller'i  Dotca  i  Ariitoph.  .dnu,  1013;
Haipocr.  ).  e.  Kol  7^  rb  lafibia.)  [C  R  S.]

XE'NIAS  OHAPHE  (E»[ai  tf>1^).  Thii
waaa  pneeenlionatAtbaiafiiTmilawfulty  untpiiig
the  righta  of  cttiienabip.  Ai  no  maa  could  be  an
Athenian  citixen,  except  b;"  birth  oc  cnatian
iyir*t  or  iroi^rfO,  if  ™*,  having  neither  of  thoM
titles  aitniand  to  ad  ai  a  eitixan,  either  b;  taking
part  in  the  potnlar  aattmblj,  or  b;  Mffring  anj
office,  jBdkial  or  manterial,  or  b;  attending  cer-
tain mtinla,  or  douig  anr  other  act  which
I ,.. .^r__.j. ^T,i,B,^'=-'

^ '  (Oemotlhl  a.  TWwO.  ISOt.) Or

he  might  be  praceeded  againat  by  tlar/ytKla,
(Schttmana,  da  ComH.  p.  1S7-)  If  ccodemned,
nil  laoparty  and  penm  were  forfeited  to  the  itote,
and  he  wai  forthwith  to  be  told  tor  a  ilave.  (Ds-
meitlu  BpiM.  L  1481.)  The  judgmeul  howeTet
wae  Bireated,  if  he  bnmght  a  Slini  jfniS«|uifrrvpiH>
againit  the  witncMat  who  had  procund  hie  eoarie-
tion,  and  coDiictad  them  of  ginng  blia  teadmonT.
Dunng  nch  {coceeding  be  wu  kepi  in  nfe  cnatody
to  abide  the  event  [MiRTrnu.]  WbeDapcnoD
tried  on  thic  charge  wu  acquitted  by  meant  of
finudolent  colluaioa  with  the  pnaecutor  or  wit-
Frtiw,  or  by  any  ipeciea  of  bribery,  be  waa  liable
to  be  indiiied  afreah  by  a  "fpo^  lo^tvlai,  the
pmceediop  in  which,  uid  the  penalty,  were  the
aame  aa  in  the  yfa^  {wfos.  Tba  Juriadictiim  in
theaa  mattaia  belonged, !d  the  time oiDemoalhenFa,
to  the  Theamothetaa,  bat  anciently,  at  lout  in  the
time  of  Lyaiaa,  to  the  Nantodicae.  (Harpoer.  a.  e.
^oipoftrlo,  Hapdrroirii,  NovTsBlni ;  Heaych,  and
Sdidia,  I.  B.  Swloi  aiini,  NoirrotUai ;  Pollux,  liiL
40.  126;  Meier,  ^«.  Pnc  pp.  83,  M7,761.)
n  otdei  to  prercnt  franduleat  eniDlment  in  the
■- ' -SeSVoiiOr  Aiifii^utJrTCWurrtui',


rKialarol
vrnich  wt


fiVi^ai  (henueliret  were  at  liberty  to  re


■  agatnat
[aii.E


XESTES.  132S

lagialer,  and  expunge  the  namaa  of  tbota  who  bad
been  impteperij  admitted.  From  their  deciaion
then  waa  an  appeal  to  a  coort  of  jnatice,  upon
which  tba  qoeatioa  to  be  tried  waa  much  the  lama
aa  in  the  7paf>4  {aWai,  and  the  appellant,  if  ha
obtained  a  Terdict,  waa  nalored  to  the  regiater  [
hot  if  judgment  waa  girm  againat  him,  waa  aold
forailave.  [DaitV!.]  (Harpoer.  a.  a.  Aiinf'^ia'ii :
Schthnann.  dt  CoaA.  p.  381.)  For  an  example  of
thia  aee  the  apeech  ef  Doneethenei  a(-'  '  "
bnlidea.  ■''

XENI  ({6>o<),  mero

XENUS,  XENIA ({Awt,  {«r(a). [Hoifi-

XESTES  ({Jrnii),a  areekmcaaiin  of  capacity,

both  floid  and  aolid,  which  cratained  12  cyalhi  at
2  eotjlas,  and  waa  equal  to  l-6th  of  Ilie  x^v^
l-48th  of  the  Roman  usipioni  gtadnmbil,  and
l-72nd  of  the  Attic  tm^hora  n£trtla  ;  or,  viawiitf
it  aa  a  dry  mcaame,  it  waa  half  the  daatu  ud
l-9tlth  of  the  neduamt.  II  contained  Teiy  nearly
a  pint  Engliah.

It  ia  thought  deaiiabia  to  add  here  a  faw  wordi
to  the  ronarka  made  under  MiHauka,  Ponniiu,
and  QCADBANTAL,  reapectlng  the  connection  be-
tween the  Oreek  and  Roman  mounrea  of  weight
and  capacity,  according  to  the  Tiewi  of  Bddch.

At  Ail  point  the  Roman  and  Attic  ayatoma  ti
mtaanrea  coincide  ;  for,  thoogh  the  {^oTqi  may
perhapa  haie  Taried  in  diEFercnl  itatea  i£  Greece^
there  ia  no  doubt  that  the  Attic  ilmit  waa  iden-
tical, both  in  name  and  in  value,  with  the  Romaa
aaatarwa :  in  bet  the  woid  iiar^i  aeema  to  be
only  an  Hellenic  form  of  autariai.  Alto  the  Attic
Xoi"  waa  eqnal  to  the  Roman  esii^uit,  for  the
{^irn|i  waa  the  aixth  of  the  fanner,  and  the  aei-
tariua  the  lixth  of  the  Utter.  Further,  the  Attio
mitrtitt  or  aapkora  contained  12  x>'>t  and  the  Ro-
man aiii;uicini  contained  S  rmyii;  giviog  for  the
ratio  of  the  former  to  the  latter  3  :  2  or  If  :  1.
Again,  the  Attic  medimnni  vai  the  double  of  the
Roman  amphora,  and  waa  to  the  metretea  in  the
ratio  of  4  :  3  :  and  the  Roman  madaa  wai  the
lizth  of  the  Attic  mtdiama,  and  the  third  of  the
Roman  ampioTa.  Hence  the  two  lyaleuu  an
connected by the  numban S and  3  and  thaii

How  and  when  did  thii  lelolion  ariae  ?  It  can-
not be  accidental,  nor  can  we  Bn^ioae  that  the
Oreek  aytlem  waa  modelled  upon  the  Soman,
vnce  the  Ibnner  eiitted  long  before  the  Roman
conqueit  of  Greece.  We  mnat  therefore  nppoH
that  the  Roman  ijatem  waa  in  aoma  way  adaptod
to  the  Oreek.  It  ia  a  remarkable  circumatance
that  the  uncial  lyatem  of  diriaion,  which  cliaiacter-
iacd  the  Roman  weighta  and  neaiurea  [Aa  ;  Un-
cia],  ia  not  found  in  the  genuine  Roman  mcsauies
of  capacity  (for  the  nae  id  the  cj/aHaa  aa  the  was
of  the  wctornw  appeara  to  have  originatod  with
the  Greek  phyiiciatu  in  later  timei) :  and  this  ia
the  more  remarkable,  aa  it  i>  adopted  in  the  Greek
lylMm  ;  the  Greek  latpkora  being  divided  into  12
Xitii,  and  the  Romon  into  8  eoa^',  initaad  of  12.
In  the  Roman  foot  again,  beaidea  the  nneial  divi-
lion,  wa  have  the  diviaion  into  4  pJmi  end  16
dig^  wltich  leema  deari^  to  hate  been  borrowed
from  the  Greek  diviaion  utto  4  vaXoMTol  and  16
Sd#[Tv\oL  It  aeemi  therefore  highly  probable  that
the  Greek  ayitam  of  meanirea  had  a  contiderable
influence  on  that  of  the  Romani.

To  find  the  origin  of  thia  connection,  we  mnat
4i  4

, --- -  ^^--


1221  ZETETAE.

look  fTDm  the  meuara  (o  thg  wcigbtc,  for  bolll
■jalem*  vera  imdoabledly  bimded  on  Height.
The  Rficuui  unphom  or  quidmital  omtiuned  BO
pouodi  (whether  of  wine  or  water  does  not  malEer
here),  ujd  the  congnu  10  poandL  Alu  the  Attic
talent  wm  mkon«l  eqn^  to  SO  Romui  poondi,
and  contained  eO  minu.  Tbenfiira  the  AuiE
mina  had  to  the  Raman  pound  the  ntio  of  BO  i  GO

Now  if  we  look  at  tba  nbject  hiatocicaltj,
find  al!  the  piindpal  fcanma  of  the  Roman  lyilem
in  eiiitcnoe  a*  eariy  a>  Hie  time  oCSei;iu>  Tulliu.
We  mutt  therefon  «eel[  for  the  intioductioii  of
the  Greek  element  betoK  that  time.  At  that  earl;
period  Atheni  doei  not  amear  to  haie  had  anj
eoniideiabla  commercial  intercoiine  with  Italy,
bat  other  areciBii  itatei  had,  thnngh  the  cotoniei
of  Uigna  Oraecin.  The  Phoeaeani  at  a  very  earl?
period  had  a  traffic  with  the  Tyrrheniana,  the
Amnetani  had  a  colony  in  Umbria,  and  Corinth
and  her  coloniea  wen  in  interconrK  with  the
people  of  Central  Italy,  beflidea  the  tmcea  of  Corin-
thian influence  upon  Rome,  which  are  preaerred  in
the  legend  of  the  TarquiniL  It  ii  therefon  to  the
Aegiaetico-CDriDthitui  ■yitem  of  weighta  asd  mea-
inrea  that  we  moat  look  fat  the  origin  of  Grecian
inflaenee  an  the  Roman  aytlem.  Now  the  half  of
the  Aeginetan  mina  had  to  the  Ronian  pound  the
nttio  of  10  :  9  j  and  since  the  Aeginetan  mina  wai
to  the  Attic  aa  5  :  3,  we  get  from  the  compariaon
of  theaa  ratioi  the  Attic  mina  to  the  Roman  ponnd
aa  4  :  3,  Bi  alnTe.

(BOckh, MMralcgiiiia Uiitmdmgm,  xi. S
10.)  [P.  S.]

XYSTARCHUS. [OrHNiaiDM,  p.  581,  b.]

XYSTUS. [Gtmnisidk,  p.  680,  b. ;  Hos-


ZACOBI {&im')- [Amitdi.]

ZBTE'TAE  (Cirrtrrol)  Immdalon,  were  extra-
ordinal;  officen,  ^ipoinled  bj  the  Athcniani  to
diacorer  the  an^on  of  tome  crime  againit  the
atate,  and  bring  Uiem  to  juttica.  Public  odvocatei,
myfrrBpoi  or  Koriiyeptii,  ware  lometimei  directed
to  auiat  them  in  thii  duty.  Frequently  tlio  court
of  Areopogufl  performed  the  office  of  int^uititora  for
the  itale,  and  indeed  it  wag  tho  duly  of  every  ma-
giBtrate  to  oaaiat  in  pmcuriag  information  against
ollendera.  ( Andoc.  dt  M}/it.  S,  5,  6  ;  Dinarch.  e.
2)«u<M.pp.90,97,  ed.Slepb.)  ZigrtiTaJweramore
frequently  appoiotcd  to  acarch  fpr  confiBcated  pro-
perty, the  goode  of  condemned  mminaU  and  itate
deblon  ;  to  receive  and  giTo  infonnBtion  againat
any  penoni  who  concealed,  or  aaaiated  in  conceal-
ing taem,  and  to  deliver  an  inventory  of  all  anch
gooda  (hmaypi^ny)  to  the  proper  authoritie*.  The
delinquent  waa  then  pniaeculed,  either  befbra  the
■rfoSmoi,  or  jt  might  bo  before  the  ^ifrnTai  thcm-
aelves,  if  their  eommiuion  extended  to  the  holding
of  an  vytlfria  tiKoimipioii.  Any  peraon,  how-
aver,  who  thought  himielf  entitled  to  the  goodo,
which  were  the  aubject  of  anch  information,  or  to
any  part  of  them,  might  prefer  a  complaint  againat
the  inquiaitoT  or  informer,  and  petition  to  bare  the
gooda  or  the  pan  to  which  he  waa  entitled,  or  their
procecda,  reatorrd  to  him.  This  proceeding  waa
called  inrwimcniiiuL.  [gTHnid  ;  PaitacjtTA-
BOLi.] Inquiaitora  were alw  called  Horr^fxt.


ZONA.

colled  mX^ntis,  were  appointod,  to  diacom  the
property  of  the  oligardi^  who  were  concerned  in
overtuming  the  democracy.  (Hoipo^.  1. 1.  Zirn^
Hit:  BSckh,  PmU.  Boom.  ^  Atitmi,  p.  158,  3d
ed. ;  Meier,  AO.  Prot.  pp.  1 10, 1 13,  S6&)  Sec
aloo  the  ipeeche*  of  Lyaiat  dt  PmtL  Bom.  and  A
AriHoplt.  Bon.  [C.  R.  K.]

ZEUGI'TAE  (ffifywai).  [Cisbub-J
ZONA,  dim.  ZCNULA,  alao  called  CITflGU-
LUM  (C<£n|,  {S^  C^rr^  Herod,  i  2\i,  n.
9  ;  idrpa),  a  girdle  or  aoDr,  worn  about  the  loaa
by  both  Kiea  Ai  in  the  ease  of  some  othet  arti-
cl«  of  dreiB,  the  diatinctioa  between  the  mole  aod
female  girdle  wat  denoted  by  the  uae  of  a  dimina-
tive,  iirti  or  ("Trqc  being  more  prtipcrlT  >  naa%
C^ruir  a  woman'B  ^rdle.  (Moo^  Att  *.'  i^)  Tlie
liner  kindt  of  girdlea  were  made  br  nvttiiig.
whence  the  nunnfaetarei  of  ihem  waj  e^led  faana-
wAititDt.  (Th.  Uagiiter,  p.  413,  ed.  Ondeujorp  ;
Zonariia.)

The  chief  uae  of  thia  article  of  dreaa  waa  to
hold  up  the  tnnic  (ftimvfai,  Callim.ZfuB.  12),
which  BOa  more  eipecially  requisite  to  be  dote
when  pcnona  wen  at  woric,  on  a  joomey,  s  oi-
goged  in  hunting.  Hence  we  aeo  the  loina  girded
in  the  woodeuta  of  the  boatman  at  p.  5IS,  of  tlie
■bipbuildert  at  pp.  93,  141,  of  the  (roat-bsii  at
p.  eB6,  of  the  huntera  al  ^  989,  and  of  Diana  al  p.
276.  The  iirji  or  fiuim^p  ia  alw  repnaetiled  in
many  ancient  atatnea  and  [»cturea  oF  meo  inannmit
aa  worn  round  the  cniraaa,  Amoi^  the  Roraani
the  Magiater  Equitom  wore  a  girdle  of  red  leubcr,
embroidered  with  needlework,  and  having  ica  two
eitremitiea  joinedby  a  verraplendid  ondeiabeiBU
goldhuekte.  [Fibula.]  (Lydoa,  ob  jVi^.  iL  13,)
The  girdle,  mentioned  by  Hraner  {IL  it.  195,  t.
539,  I.  77,  iL  336X  acema  to  have  been  a  «at.
atiCnent  pnit  of  tho  cuinua,  enving  to  biten  it  by
moani  of  a  bnckle,  and  alto  aiiording  an  additioml
protection  to  the  body,  and  having  a  abort  kiod  al
pet^coat  attached  to  it.  aa  ia  ahcwn  in  the  fignn
of  the  Greek  wairior  in  p.  712.  In  contequenCB
of  the  uae  of  the  girdle  in  fhitening  on  the  wiagDr,
idimrtai  or  fiiinurftv  meant  to  arm  amt'i-telf
(Horn.  H  XL  16).  and  fiDm  thia  circamataiKa
Athene  waa  worabipped  under  the  chaiscter  Zm-
•mipla.  (Paua.  ix.  17.  %2.)  The  woodcnta  at
pp.  713,  854  ahow  that  tho  andisl  cninwi  did  not
deacend  low  enough  to  secure  that  pan  of  ihe
bod;,  which  waa  covered  by  the  t  '  ~  '


aap]Jy  thia  d


sign  of  the  nalru  dnirpii),  a  brazen  belt  lined  pro-
babl;  on  the  iniide  with  leather  and  atnflvd  with
wool,  which  waa  wont  next  to  the  bod;  (Hen.
n.  it.  137,  187,  V.  707,  857  ;  SeboL  »  IL  ir.
187),  ao  u  to  eover  the  lower  pan  of  the  abdo-
men. The  annexed  woodcut  tnowi  the  outaide
and  inaide  of  the  bronae  plate  of  a  mitn,  one
foot  long,  which  waa  obtained  by  bCodded
(Brwaa  ijfSini,  p.  43)  in  the  island  of  Enbcca,
and  ii  now  preserved  in  the  Royal  Libnrr  at
Parii.  We  obacrve  at  one  end  two  boles  for  &st-
ening  the  atiap  which  vctit  behind  the  body,
and  at  the  other  end  a  hook  fitted  pmhably  to  a
ring,  which  waa  attached  to  the  atrsp.  A  peniaa
of  a  similar  bronae  plate  ia  engrared  bv  Cavloa
(fla?.  d'^n/.T.  pi.  96.  fig.  1),

Men  naed  their  girdle*  to  hold  money  iikslrad
of  a  poree.  (Plant.  Mm.  v.  3.  84;  Odlioa,  i*
12;  Soeton.  ViMIL  IC.) The  wallet  [Pua]  waa

, --- -  ^^--


0!  O  OOs^

I ;o  o  o 0

^'l  !  O  O  O  !  "


fiutcned  la  At  giidla  ;  ind  Mill  mora  freqnnitly
the  fold  of  the  tniue,  fbrnied  bj  lacking  il
and  oiled  limMt,  wm  iu«d  M  a  pocket  to  0117
vhntcTec  vai  neceuuy.

Aa  the  girdle  wu  wom  to  hold  up  the  gar-
menu  for  the  nke  of  btuinen  or  of  work  requiriii|[
dnpateh,  Ao  il  wu  looKn^d  and  the  tunic  woa
BJloved  to  bi]  doini  to  the  feet  to  indic&te  the
oppoaits  amdilimt,  and  more  eipemllv  in  preparing
to  perionn  a  ucrihce  (ve4t  rtcoKla,  Virg.  Aim.  it.
5 1 8 1  Ovid,  Mti.  Tii.  182),  or  funeral  ril«  (diteimcti,
Sueton.  Amg.  100;  Hd'xcfaa,  Tibnll.  iii  2.  13).

A  girdle  wna  worn  by  young  women,  eren  when
their  tnnit  waa  not  girt  up,  and  renioTed  on  the
djiy  of  maTTiH^,  and  therefbre  called  {tirjt  waptt-
riiri.  (Jacoba,  AnllaL  ii.  p.  873  ;  'oftiway  idrfmr,
Brnnck,  Anal.  iiL  299;  Sen.  Oed.  iL  3.  17;  Horn.
Od.  T.  231  1  Longui,  L  2  1  Grid.  EjiitL  Her.  ii.
116,  ii.  66,  Pcabu,  t-cO^am:  CaXaXX.  ii.  13,
liiv.  38.) The  Finn  in  the  miueDm  at  N^a


A hone'i  girth,  need  to  laiten  on  the  laddla

IpBiFPiitu],  wai  called  by  the  aame  namu,  and

11  umelimea  made  of  rich  mateiiali,  and  em-

braidersd  in  the  moat  elabonla  manner. (Oiid.

Asm.  Am.  S36 ;  Claud.  Epig.  34, 36.) Theao

temia,  ama  and  dmgidiim,  were  alta  need  to  lig-

nify  Ihe  fiTe  lODct  u  undentood  by  geographrra

id  aationomen,  (Virg.  G»7y.  i.  2S3j  Pliii.H..V.

6S  J  Macrob.  Som.  Sap.  ii.)  [J.  Y.]

ZO'PHORUS  {it^fot  or  >uiC"fu).  the  frieia

of  an  FJiIabUtars. (Elee  Columha,  p.  324,  a,  and

the  WDodcuta.)  [P.  S.]


-(2)1


A  Ilinc


TABLES  OF  GREEK  AND  ROMAN  HEA8URES,  WEIGHTS,  AND  MONEY.

1.  Oreeh  Meunree  of  LengtL

(1 )  Smaller  Meuurei.

II.  Roman  Meaaurea  of  Length.

(I)  Smaller  Meaenrei.

[.  Greek  MeaiDRi  of  Length.


IV.  Roman  Memnret  of  Length.

(2)  L«ad  and  Itineraiy.

V.  Greek  Mouona  of  Snrbce.

VI.  Ronian  Heuorea  of  Snrtua.

VII.  Greek  Meanmi  of  Cqndtjr.

<1)  Liqotd  Mewnret
VIII.  Roman  Meanrei  of  Copadty.

(1)  Liquid  HeaanreL
IX.  Qnsck  Mooinree  of  Capacity.

(2)  Dry  Ueaaurea.

X.  Roman  Muunrea  of  Capacity.

(3)  Diy  Meaaolea.
XL  Greek  Weights.

XII.  Omck  Money.
XUL  Roman  Weighta.

(1)  The  Ai  and  iU  Undal  DiTJuoD*.
XIV. Roman  Weighta.

(3)  Subdlriiioni  of  the  Unci*.
XV.  Roman  Money. (1)  Before  Augiutn*.
XVL  Bonan  Hooey. (2)  After  Angiulua.


if  then  Tablta,  the  uma
■nthoritiet  hare  been  naed  at  Uiote  referred  to  io
the  arliclea  in  the  body  of  the  work.  Particn'
lai  acknowledgment  ia  due  of  the  aiaistancs  which
baa  been  derived  from  the  Tablet  of  Huiaey  and
Wuim.  The  lait  two  Tablet  (of  Oreek  and  Roman
money)  have  been  taken  without  alteration  from
Mr.  HuateyX  becante  they  were  thon^bt  incapahla
of  improTement,  except  one  addition  in  the  Table
of  Attic  money.  All  the  calculationi,  however,
bare  been  made  de  aooo,  even  where  the  molla
are  ^e  lame  ai  m  Mr.  Uoucy^  Tablea.

Th«  Table!  an  ao  amnged  oa  to  exhibit  ths
eoireipondiug  Greek  and  Romaa  lueainna  in  direct
ipariaonwith  each  other.  In  tome  of  the  Tablet
value*  are  given,  not  only  io  our  leveral  mea-
iures,  but  alio  in  deeimalt  of  a  primary  nnit,  for
if  fBcilitating  calculationa.  In  olhera,
that  ia,  valuea  which
•ome  tmall  fraction,
cilj,  will  perhapt  ba
lomui  lar  moie  ntefiil  for  ordinary  purpotea  than
the  preciw  qiuuititiet,  while  the  error,  in  each  caae,
cna  eaiily  be  eofrected.  Fuller  information  will
be  (oond  nndec  Mihbvb^  Nvhuub,  Pondiha,
and  iba  tpedfic  namet.  [P.  S.]


differ  &om  the  true  onea  b;  h
and  which,  Ihjm  their  limplicil


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  HEASUBEa


so O) 6


a


*


I  ■"  I "
t  J


i  i\


n  s


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASUREa


? f


S  £  S


^ s s g s

<p ? 5 5 ?


■It


i


■^1
si

til

ri -it
S "2*

■Hi!
110

III


I!

5 S

III

19


fit


III


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  HEASURE&


"kfl

1

2 1

e s

s

),

= = ;

00 —

oi to

to

1^

1

• -

=  =

=

= .

«  =

=

i

1  £-

s s

2

^

lis

3 S

SI s

^

§ s ? s

¥ ¥

¥ ¥

¥

9 9

*

5 1 1 1

'

■ '

' •

1 • 1

3 E 1  ,-=-

■

• ■

2 '

<1

•

J "^^

„-l2

3

.^

-!.

<
a

•

> ■

t 1

J

&

^

- 1-

0.

s-

-  '  i

Z

1

2 J

»,

,

■o

s  i

e

Q

1

^

=.

*

»

s

s §

Q

■<
1

i

1

g

»

2

a

s

s

i

i

»*i

O

g

s

s

i

§

S

o

o

8

i

i

s  \s

1"

_

P

wt*

o

»

g

g

^

1

i

1

a:

■J

■„

k

?r

'

a

$

1

1

1

i

i

1

s

5

2*

•]•

s-

?

i

1

g

i

i

1

1

1

p

-

•-■*

!M

1

^

S'

»

o

8

s

1

1

i

1

1

§  !i

TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEA8UBES.  I9fl»

U


M


i S


t  p3 I


ll


-il


ll

J  HI

m

•?;

r!

:;  J

im

1  1

m

;=i

-^i

t\u

Is

|-5>:a

r  '

m

sd

mi

■l|:i

^■.-s

mi

S'S*"

h'1

isii

•"=1

TABLES  OF  WEIOHTS  AND  MEASDBKS.


I

I

i


TABLES  OP  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


s  s


S ft


S ^ s
s  £■  J


s  p


11


TABLES OP  WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.


•

1

s

•1 ■« -6 -B -p H.

-.  *  .  » = =

= = = = = =

E e G s to c»

1

1 5 ? ? 1 2

5 ? * £ i s

g

jS

C t E K e B

c c K : « oo

(9

-— H  H

■ • • • 111

g  3  <a

■  1 1  '^^

i-

s ^

i

.

3

d M

s

a

E^-

g

<o

*

*^

1

M

2

S

5

s

3

i

1

=,

■*

3

g

i

•<

. N ^

L4

"

^

iS

MS

fe

S"

r>

«

a

B

§

i

S

1

«

„

«

s

s

J

g

g

1

=,

•S'

»

a

:;

s

i

i

1

1

i

H*

sr

K3

»-

v»

S

3

1

i

i

s

w

e?

«»

o

!2

s

3

s

g

1

TABLES OF  WEIGHTS AND  HEASUREa


-e  -c  *  *  ^


? ? 9


TABLES OF  WEIGHTS  AND HEASURE&


j

1

-g

*  -  *

_ 3J

fi £ S

i

. ,

_

~  «  s

J

1

i

? 3 ?

*  S

S g 2

1

=

=  . . .

' ^

. - =

1i

' ■a .•"

s

r  s

3

, 1

(O

t>4

1

1

^

«.

i

5

^

<»

s

J

1 • !!

a

^

^

g

M

»

£

• 1

M

-

-

tD

s

§

J

1

'$

**>

«

2

S

§

g

-

v>

2

^

s

s

s

o

2

s

s

i

i

1

g

,glc


TABLES  OP  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASUREft


•<

1

•h:

-^

* H.

*

-

C £

1

'

s

fi R

c

s

- tt

1

?

?

? 5

?

$

I 1

1

: s

■

'

. -

• •

•

1

• .

1

•

•s

<D

^

1

^

1

g

J

' S

i

. 1

,

•rf

■

^

e

1

{Z

.

2

■u

.1

1

A

**

s

^

1

I

§

a

04

■V

B

3

1

"

■f

«

3

§

*

,

to

3

%

S

_

■^

to

s

3;

?

1

TABLES OF WEIGHTS AND MEASUREa


TASX.B XI.

GRECIAN  WEIGHTS.


AegineWn :  Eiibait « old  AHic -" - - - '
Acgiiietan;Solonianot  liter  Attic- - . - .
Euboic :  Soloniiui

-  :: 6 : S

-  :: S : 3

or:: 25 : 18

Euboic „ =  5000 „ =  6000 „
Solomui* „ ==  3fi00 .„ . =  «20 „

= 10,000  Solonna

= 8333i „
= 6000 ,

E«A-

A>.rr^'".\

lb.

«.

k™.

lb.

«.

m.

Obnl (

oeoxsi)

SS

9

18-472}
110-831

U5'S31-t

100

i

■Jv

6

eiHi

s<jm

.,■(.("> 1 lill 1  Tsli-nt  (TiAB^To,.)

_i,

*  1»  tbi!  nnd  the  other  tabica  the  Eiigliih  weighti  tuod  are  tboie  of  tbc  axHidopDU  Kale  u  tiitd
■tniutc  ;  iiamelj',  Ibe  gain  —  the  1'roy  gaia,  tbs  ouncs  =  437^  gninii  the  pound  =  16  ooncti  c
00  grains.  '  '  tOrlofuioc


S. Bb

i;™rt.

lb.

n«.

•r*.

lb.

„,.„!

Ob..l -

Dmcbma

l,i» lMi„» ....

79

2

15-393H

4B'61H
2!>l-S3^

80

?'

b'

;i[i.iioo

''- 1 '^"■ITHl-t . - -

£»W.

..^w.|

lb.U| g,.

lb.

«.

ei»-

1  Mitu  =  150  Dmchroaa  <>il<er)
S  Mi™  =  6  Minae  (commeraal)
1  Tnl™i  ^  6S  Miiw  (cnranicrcml)

1 j 6
+  7  1  14

350

291-6i
115-0^

•>

-

B.  Attle  SIlTM-  WelEbM.

fturf.

Arpr^...  I

lb.

nt.

OL

CTX

Obnl

Dtncbmft . . . : .

i  ."t

15

ii-omi

66-6  •
87-5t

I

;

':

100 |Mm>

36.II0U

*  This  >-aJnc  i^  if  any  thing,


TABLES  OF WEIGHTS AND  MEASURES.-'


■*■


Jiji

lift


lie


-I

P Q


a  15


1^


1937


S'  S  S  s  X  *

I  I'^i

s ►■•sss

i  ■rl§

mil

^^  S  2  „3

* ^ » MS o

^■S  1 1  e  •  rf


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  ASD  UBASUREa


■"*"

^

^■^

•

*

« 3-

8 _,.

» * S

*

*

1

1

i 1

S g

s  s  i  s  s

i

g

§

i

I

i

«

- -

=" "

-fl «3 (0 »- <0

0)

o

n

■<

i

O)

s  s

6 S

S 2 s a c

s

^

s

■s

!

1

1  i

•3005
■3607
•4208
-4809
■5410

1

i

H

i

ri  ^

■

•

J

i

M  !^

■a

n  1*

d

g

ri  K

^

rf

ij

<  s

S

n

-^:

1 1

1

^

i

J

:*

S

■ '

-*.

^

-♦•.

•"

"*

-^

1

i

S '
•g

1 1

1

:t

*

2-

sr

■ s

1

;+■

■*•

2-

2-

2-

i 1

^  ^

*

s-

ar

«

g

a

1

(S

:?

2*

s*

M

ar

ar

s

S'

«(•

«

ar

ST

ar

BO

S

l  ^

§

#

»

=^

S'

3'

OB

s-

s

^

J

*

«

^

«

*

'

*■

■o

S'

w>

J

^

=•

S

*

^

"

*

»

;?

-

00

1=^

c

.

'

U3

<0

»-

.

,

O

=

2

TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEA8UBE&


,1


TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS  AND  MEASURES.


tlO

'

S

1 1 1  §

^ -H N

««

■■

li

-d =

I

K S S -.

<M ^ 00

co»

-

■1

d E

=

= = S =

« K S

00

^ s

'

= = ! 5

5 S =

=-

«

■ „

1

8

. . 1

1

C4

9

1 ^

s

1'

■

■

1

M

■*

U

CD

s

1 '

■ • 1

■*

oo

to

1
1

cj

1

i-»

1

1

M

'

CO

g

f

,

,

«

*

«>

s

S

1

o

o
2

H

If

■  -S
•S.9

i

CO

■1

■

1

1

.

■*

1

=,

,

.

o

n

•

■9

C*

'

"

(0

ii

1

1

, I

«.

f

.

to

s

1

^

;+•

«

fO

s

s

?

■<

v

_

N

^

CD

to

s

s

1

<y

to

1

a

.

m

«

2

s

$

s

TABLES  OF  WEIGHTS AND  MEASURE&


1  i


I B


I  I  ,

«« w ^
% 1 ^^


I I


INDEX.


iZi  iadicaU  At  pagu,  owl  lh<  Ittttn  •  md  b  tlufint  and  M


'AUi,  1,  •  ;  904,  «.
'A>aA/ui.l060,si  1062,  b.
'ArofiJw  ivw^,  735,  b.
*A-)««MfP7oI,  28,  b.
*A77<^la,  94,  b.
"Aniv"!.  94,  b.
'ATy»**in),  633,  b.
'AT^hoam,  38,  b.
'A.yt*ir»i,  28,  b.
'At^,  38,  b.
•Atw^  29, 1.
•A-MfT*!,  243, ..
•ArfW"',  242,  t,
'KYvrifia.  343,  t.

'Arirarp,  103,  ■.

'kimira,  790,  b.
*ArKlhq,  366, 1  i  6B8,  b.
'Kfiitfa,  791,  B.
'AToti^I,  613,  b.
'A>ii|h1,33.».

„ TimuiMlii,  35, 1.

„ *AA«oiKra,36,b;304,ai
408,  b,
'Ayepari/iti,  18,  > ;  36,  b.
'Aydjut  >Ai|Mpi|,  36,  b,
'A7«pa«Tit,  36,  ■-
'A-ffo^ilM  yfoiH.  30.  b.
'A-yfoi^  rijai,  804,  b.
'A-hkI^  llrriiOM  ffu^,  37,  >.
'A^Hdnaf,  224,  a.
'Ay firm,  73, 1.
'ATfNiaiDi,  892,  L
'A'yiHwJfuu,  73,  b  i  S23,  b.
'h-tforipia  dviia,  73,  b.
'ATWot.  326,  ■.
'Ayvp^,  453,  b.
'Ay^iirai,  73.  4.
'Ayxfrr^  S94,  k }  09S,  b.
'ATwr^X».  32,  a.
'ATdMf,  32  a  ;  402,  b.

„ dn-Wnt.  1131,  b.

„ 'r[^«,399,b;1131,b.
'ATHnvTol,  167,  >.


'Aiuwru,  22,  a.
'Aflcrmii,  970,  a.
'Au^iryCa,  129,  a.
'Atrit,  149,  b  ;  033,  b.
'AJnifu,  633,  b.
'ASAnToI,  166,  b.
*A«,I)T%HI,  166,  b.
'ASAgMrw,  32,  a ;  BSe,  *.
AUnw.  IB,  a.
AtfiaJjit.  1153,  b.
Atfaapat,  1164,  a.
Atfinrnif  ia^,  30,  a.
A>^X».  20,  b.
A>T<i,  20,  b.

AVa'fwt,  69,  a  i  151.  b.
AlBaKra,  73,  b.
Alida,  100,  a.
Alcfof  Nm,  73,  a.
AlriT/ia,  23,  a  ;  1034,  *.
tJanKit,  326,  a.
AI{,  149,  a.


AJ«i*,  587,  a.
Ujoai^ifai,  687,  b.
'Amin,  'Amlni,  3,  b.
'Anrfirj)  lumlxn,  903,


'AUi{, 'AMc{u,  14,  a.
'At«a,14,  a;79,a.
'AttA^doSi,  695,  b.
'AAt\pit,  696.  b.
'AtAmru,  692,  a. ;  706,  a
'Mirmi,  17,  b.
'AMno,  14,  b.


'Ani^  Ituftniftir,  93,  b.
'Amml,  832.  a.
'AuiiTur,  589,  a.
■An»Turfuii,  689,  b.
'Ak/m,  139,  1.
'AjcprfruTfio,  304,  a.
'Axpaainiw,  433,  a.
'hicpBKipaM,  789,  b.
'Aji^im,  433,  a.
'Ai()>^Ah,  461,  b ;  1063,  a.
'Ai(j»inlAn  4y7«7pqii^iui,  ^,

37,  a.
'Aiv^nAu,  6,  b  I  117S,  a.
'AitfQiniXM,  7B6,  •■
'Ajcpan-^f,  643,  k
'AufKi^iiamy,  643,  b.
'Aiiipiix<>p'ci,  683,  a.
'AjuwrnpIoCoi',  7,  a ;  995,  b.
'■  - 6,  b.


AXrfiVxv,  74,  i^
'AAdtavTpw,  74,  a.
'AAAwTiMf ,  74,  a.
'AAatf  firTm,  463,  Ik
'AW,  1003,  b.
'AAcua,  74.  *.
'AAoUcofiMH,  234,  B.
'AAJou,  75.  b.
'AAtlrrw,  75,  b.
'AXttrtifior,  76,  a;  190,  ■■
'AAirru.  22,  b.
'AAio,  32,  b.

'AA(>«DVtt,  683,  a  ;  714,  «.
'AAmftw,  74,  b,
'AU(0«^  72S,  b.
•AA*n{,  or'AAAif,  74,  b.
'AA/w,  883,  b.
■AA^,  1004,  a.
'AAartw  -wxirt,  76,  b.
'AAo^Iw  tftif^,  76.  b.
'AAni^rv,  1003,  b.
'AAtw«.  685,  a.
'AXwrliiv,  367,  a.
'AA&riM<,  367,  a.
'A*uff«,  257,  a.
'AaAtbi,  831,  a.
AlMTifXV,  B31,  a.
'Aa^hUwbi,  436,  a.
'AAao,  76,  b.
AAfio,  76,  b.
'AA«4,  cr  'AAw^,  S3,  «.
*AAon,  53,  *.

•A^a,147,b;  S8S,b;  Jtt
'A/H{Jwiii»f  I,  687,  b ;  933,  ■
'A^uvMui,  76,  b.
'Afu^ifina,  76,  b.
'AfiUui^vnur,  3,  b.
'AfiSAiimu  -nn^,  1,  b.
'A^iC^Mm,  3.  a.
•AfiMfaala,  78,  b.
"Awio,  79,  a.
'Afotivrltt,  79,  ■■
'A/idpTV,  825.  k
•Afowx^  79, «.
'A/Brfm^t,S9I,b.
'A/imcT^,  91,  a.
'A«ini{,91.a.
'A/i^up^B,  79,  a.
'AiiititK^infr,  989,  b.
'AfifUoXH,  79I,a.
'Afi^iUai,  136,  a.
'A^t^OnXiii,  1034,  bt
■Afi^d«>4i<a,  S3,  b.
■Aji»iM>«>iiu,  435,  b.
'A/ifiliw,  1106,  h.


•/t^^ucTiam,  79,  *.

- ' ^ea.b.

**t,  1105,  b.
.  . . r,  696,  b.
'V^dmfui,  791,  k.
'Afif<faprit,  90,  t.
'A/i#tf>E>-nr,  769,  b ;  976,  •■
'A«*i>Mfa,90,  ■;  971.  ■.

fUTfirHit,  763,  •■


*" "  " i(.4M,l>.

^,  1074,  b.

r,  240.  b.
'Anrrmrfpia,  168,  m,
■AMi«««r<>.  168,  m.
'AriyAom,  92,  m.
'ArirA»^  92,  a.
'Aivrr<^if,1146,b.


'AhM^ww,  432,  b ;  1063,  >.
'AmniAvrH)p«,  738,  ■.
'AfiJma,  92,  L
'AMHifiira,  432,  b.
'Ar^Hor,  92,  a.


'Awmmfi^rifa,  92,  b.
'AncAiivnUtr,  857,  b.
'Ar^EXiprpor,  673,  b.
'AfJic^u,92,b;  122,  b.
'Ar^«^w>,  1I05,«.
■AjJAw.^94,m.
'Ani{.990,a.
'Arat«)'dp<ia,  94,  a,
'Anfiiiiitn,  213,  •.

'Juanimui,  4B4,  b.
■A>4/Wu,  101,  b.
'AvJiri/Mt,  890,  b.
'AjwraAli,  155,  b.
'AramiaxUr  tmH,  94,  a.
'Arifaptr,  143,  a.
'Artpuo,  1088,  b.
'ArSpuii.  1063,  a.
•A^VFt^rf™,  94,  b.
'ArSpoXiffla,  94,  b.
'ArtfMX4<|w,  94,  b
'AiVfMii,  149,  b.
'tu^fihtt.  425,  •.
'ArSfwrtni,  433,  b.
'AnMimi,  478,  b.
'Anfirf>Sl.{»&,b.
'AM<Mf ,  G9S,  b.
'Ai«fa,  98,  b.
'Ar««T«pu,  411,  b.
'/krtttTvi*r,  323,  a;  324,  a
'Ar««r^^  98,  b.


'AHribl,  1138,B.
'Am^,  135,  a.
*Anwi,  335,  a.
'Arrif^Hu,  99,  a.
'Arrrffa^a,  678,  a.
'Amypa^,  93,  a;  99,1
'A>Tl>«rii,  98,  b.
'ArrtXnia,  399,  a.
■Arrarttm,  100,  •.
'AFTiiVffwra,  690,  b.
'ArrtT^iru,  266,  b.


INDEX.

'Arrirvan,  1181,  a.
'Amfapla,  773,  b.
•ArrUa,  100,  a.
'Arnf,  I01,a;297,b.
'Am^uvla,  92,  b ;  99,  b.
'Anvoh^t,  221,  a.
•Aft,,  lOU.  a.
'Afwfi,  183,  a.
'Afw,  378,  a.
'Amp,  577,  a.
'Air^TiAM,  28,  b.
'AnTwy4,  460,  a.


'AnAtvfqiia,  705,  a.
■AnX«M«pai,  704,  a.
'AnUs,  678,  s.
'AnAXuii,  333,  a;234


'A««<U|«,9t
'Awnfiinii,  394,  b.
Arayaniiii,  336,  a.
' 103,a


'Anrypdfw,  103,  b.
'An8JlITa^  1047,  k
'AtO^im,  764,  b  i  1075,  a.
'Awnftronla,  76,  a.
'An#4n|,  618,  a.
'Awowla,  313,  b.
'AnwH,  313,  b.


KwinKirnt,  37,  b.
'AnXti^i  llini,  41B,  •■
'AvoU^io,  104,  a.
'Ami>i«T«a?Jai,  MS,  b.
'Amiiittmi  Uni,  418,  a.
'A*^tt,  918,  b.
'A*if^tr».  104,  b.
*A»VTav(*i>  llai,  104,  b.
'AnvToAA,  104,  b.
'AnrnxuriUt,  1183, ».
•AmrrtwAiHTutiJ.,  144,  b.
'Anrrviiir,  436,  b.
■Anrr^uiru, 436, b; 470,  i

614,  b.
'AnTifarnC,  764,  a.
'A>Jf<uvit,  104,  a.
■AT^u,99,B;100,ail38,>
'Areipofd,  104,  a.
■An^fi  ifjpai,  104,  b.
'Anx<v«™^^>  123,  b  i  271,  i
'A'rtxofvranitL,  37J,  a.
'AvpHTTwln  Tpo^, 106, •

133,  b.
'AntjuH-Co,  513,  a.
'AfiuittnXn,  1106,  a.
'ApdTfu,  117,a.
'AftiKi,,  869,  b.
'ApfvAft,  889,  b.
•Art«B«»,  1154,  b.
'AfT)^  7(H^,  133,  a.
„ nJfuH,  133,  a.
'A^jipua,  80B,  b.
'AfrjvpCw  Jfici),  133,  b.
'A^YvpTriT  tS,  132,  b.
'ApTiTHXDnMr,  133,  b.
'Air)Tif»i,  132.

'Ap7vp4niTM,  1034,  b.


'Afr}4,  163,  a.
'AfiMW,  655,  a.
'AfMrw,  666,  a.
'ApS»»4f«,  1001,  ■.
'ApSir,  1001,  a.
'Aftat,  225,  a.

„ ntysi,  136,  b.
'Apwmt,  346,  b.
'Apiitrtia,  133,  b.
'ApiffT<p(w*rctnu,  280,  a.
'AftnUSnr,  137,  a.
'Apiamtfrnria,  134,  t.
'Apn-ila,  314,  a.
'Apmdtcr,  314,  a.
'AfwrriHrBu,  214.  •.
'AJumi,  314,  a.
'tipKrn  ii*yi>i3i,  147,  a.

„ luMfd,  147,  a.
AfcrMjpu,  148,  a.
'ApKT«ii>^,  148,  a.
'Apn>,  989,  b.

'Afvu,  378,  a;  686,  b;  763,  b.
'Afninaia,  686,  b.
'Apfuryi,  910,  a.
'AJyuwIo,  778,  b.
'Aptaructl,  773,  a.
'AfRwIi,  883,  a.
'hprrpot,  117,  b.
'ApsBpa,  138,  a;  763,  b.
'A/nwri,  586,  b.
'Apwertr  Tpa^.  586,  a.
'Aft^rir,  686,  b.
'Afini,  618,  a.

137,  b.


1100,  a.
'AfmUi),  137,  b.
'Afn-Ofthui,  334,  a.
'Afn'(;lla'H^  138,  a.
'Afrtti^uii, 223, a; 324,  I

326,  a.
'Atm/MUir,  334,  a;  225,  a.
'Af««  <)  Tt^TTi  nj^*!)',  863,  i
'A^iifdr,  863,  a.
'Apriofffi^,  863,  a.
'A^miJi,  921,  a.
: 'Af>r*raiAi,306,  b;921,  b.
'A^mJAAt,  305,  b.
'Afiritfiii,  1204,  a.


I,  186,  b
, 'AfxaipMlw,  271,

•a«.S».,  119,  a.

'Afxi,  124,  a.
, 'Afxvyirtil,  470,  b.

'AfixWai,  11 9,  a.
; 'AfxHfii,  167,  a  ;  235,  i

'ApX<M*^>,389,lill3(

'AfXfiera/lM,  133, «.

'A^x>"*TM«4,  130,  a.

'A^X«^nw,1126,a.

'A^miUnri,  973,  a.

'Afixw,  12I,b;124,a.
„ ^rJvufui,  133,  a.

■Af;^i,8e4,b;  1103,1

'AinVodct,  183,  b.

'Awfifru  i^o^,  143,  k.

'ArlUa,  142,  b.

'AmMirrqt,  674,  a.

'Amn&kilt,  1130,  b.

'AnA9r<r'«m  141,  U

'Anuf,  1303,  b. oc


443,  b.


1244

INDEX.

•ACKMXUVIli,,  141,  b.

B«rlAt«,  19S,  a.

rtUarw.  1164,b,

BoffiAfii,  123.a;990.  i.

'A<r.iglff«j,  787,  a.

B*riAi™,  123,  a.

•Anrli,  297,  b.

BooUioi,  226,  a.

rnw.r,  196,  b.

■Anurrei,  135,  a.

B«Ui<ririi,  123.a;412,a.

riWffia,  658,  a.

B<wiKu.(«,  521,  b.

rfrwii,  ,44.b.

B<f<r(a»[  i^oA^,  521,  b.

rmS™,  290,a;  1154,  b.

Bonip,  1055,  b.

rfr».  290.a;  1154.  h.

„ .K<mMl,  144.  b.

T.«^  412.  a.
ri«».  624,  a.

■/LtrpitTh  464,  a.

a.Ai«,,  13,  b.

■JurtfiyiiXat,  143.  bj  1095,  >.

BfAorlt.  13.  b.

•Aarpartlai  Tpaft,  144,  i.

B..*8a«.j,  225,  a.

rw«'.4l2,».

■AffrpM-.  ri,  152,  b.

rtfitTM.  223,  >.

'Aon-Ao.,  1105.  b.

B.p«to,iflArT(«x«,  15*.«.

r(poMls377.bi  570.1.

■AbtuwW,  166, ».

.. irAdn^i.  154.  a.

r^J^  674,  a.

■AotiXii.  165.  1.

BiiJulr,  624,  b.

r«^  672.  a.
r^.  936,  b.

-AniA»,  166.  t.

Bnfu,  440,  b)  577,  ■;  751,  b

■ATM«u,166,>;1103,b.

1148,  b.

r*pvii*>'.  454.  a.

•At-Mo.  168.  a.

BuiU»S(ini.203,a.

r.*.^^.  464.1

-At^w»,  168,  b.

BlSair.,,  1O06,  a.

r«v.^670,bi  11Mb.

B.<A<,>04«1,  202,  a.

r(y)'A.*»i.240,a.

'ArXiimf.  170,  t.

BifAfw,  703,  b.

^^«it,  812.  b.

'ATfHumii,  665,  a.

BiSuH.  303,  b.

rA(A«»,  isoi.  b.

A»w<i:<».  225.  a.

BS™,.  203,  a.

rA*J«,  1202,  *.

AiMhs.  183,  a.

B^i,  126,  a.

rXAnw,  I130,b.

Aiw-.  lies,  a.

Btfi^,,  203,  b.

rnffsAor,  673,  b.

AeA«o,W^425.a.

BA,J^,W«,,203.b;513.a.

r«i*«S..  551.  b.

AiA^.  426,  •-

BAaiiT,.  1007,h.

n*.i«,  I4.b.

AiKvrpOn,  1131.  b.

BAairxa,  1007.  b.

r«(^.6l5.a;806,a;930.a.

Alh<Jt,TTg,a:1130,b.

BooS^f,  224,  a.

ropyifo.  240.  a.

AiA^t,.,  977,  a.

ropraS..,  225.  a.

B«»ft.I,  868,  a.

.. CrxrJr.  892.  a.

B..«.Tifxn'.  -Of.  204,  a.

„ AK«Jr»..  B92.  a.

Mrii^^i.  1B3,  a.

BoAft.  256,  b.

., g:»T»ilF.  891,  a.

B^w^(.  239.  b.

,. ol™v^.892,..

A6™^ia,  454,  a.

fparpuOr,  15.  a.

•A*wu,  610,  «.  loss,  b.

rpciw«Ttii.6,b;211,b;57J,b.

■A*-T<.I.593,i;705.i;1139.

. Bauai,  29,  a.

rpatUii,  1055.  b.

■A*^T^ipior^l7a«'^113a.  b.

BomitTKi,  224.  a.

r^a^T  *A,  ni(,ir,  682,  a.

■A*».tb.  V^.  1090,  a.

Bo.W.f«>.  -..  59,  a.

rpo^li.  678.  a;  899.  b.

•A^pi-m  106a.  b.

BouAt^wi  7P<>4^ ,  2  L  3,  a;  972,  a.

Tt^pk  iwJ~,  735.  b.

,. An»f  f«.  36,  b.

'Atofoi,  160.  a.

B«A*.  309.  b.

■a^WiSi  Ilm,,  102,  b.

Boil.  812.  b.

,. 4A,yi».  76,  b.

'A«p««",  ™5i,  784,  b.

Bouriwti,  410,  a.

'A*prfi™,  102,  b.

B«.fK>rla.  410.  a.

.. a™wi«.H«.

Bov^imit.  410.  1.

'Axii«I.  6.  a.

B»».,  209,  ■.

123.  b.

•Axlmr,  1173.  a.

B«*ni..l48,»

„ Vri«.  133.*-

-A,Hf™.  95.  a.

Bprfr«,  32,  a.

„ V«)^-  586.  a.

'Ai^If,  loa.  a.

Bfof fimU,  32,  a.

„ «nMcu,  141.

Bpa<r»»>,  213,  b.

B.

Bp»p^r»,  214.  a.

„ oinfwAfu.  183.  a.

Bpow^Ay,  1183,«.

B«Wp«.M4.

B<Wa«,  703,  a.

" 971.a. ■

Ba«TwJ^lB3.b;4M,b.

Buxlni,  215,  a.

„ s«Ai»,  3se,  b.

BoJrxurf.  1004,  h.

BiiffBi,  234,  a.

„ S«B»M.  385.  h.

BoVu^po,  943.  b.

B«rffii,  216,  a.

„ Hj-rfo,  402.  b.

BibUxn^er.  183,  b.

B../B1,.  llB,a.

BoWnli,  lB4,b.

,. Impof-^mt.  1223,  a.

r.

„ »,ifmw,  385,  b.

.. .If^y^i.  690,  >.

BaA^mr,  732,  b.

rJWM-N',  98^  b.

,. fnT^HJ  t.  470,  a.

Ba«(..435,a;1066,b.

riiun,  38,  b.

Baww^f,  B63.  a.

rap)Ai>.  667.  a.

„ Wa,402.b.

aWp".  196.  b.

rwHiAi*..  233,  a.

BVr^;.^.721,a.

rVpoi,  670,  b.

r*ia.,  736,  b.

„ »»A.1,F«R tW ft^l,^

BJnM^  1139,  a.

nuAdi,  318, 1.

^^V  ,  Ac

rp>M  «eT«™«t?t.  357, 1.

AiyuaEpToi,  390,  b.

Aiif^,  1075,a;  1335,  b.

„ «*«fit,  300,  a.

Ao,i(wk,384,a;  485.bi  929,a

Aiofid^iaTa,  1131,  a.

„ AMSKWrfoii.  679,  n.

Aa«i«,,  384,  ..

A(iuT«,  395,  b.

„ Mttoarim-im,  679,  a.

AuHTTTTof,  396,  b.

iT,p6wXmy,  525,  b.

Ai«mrruc«,  3S5,  b.

AJt,.,674,.;  1097,..

A«i<^«,  1155,..

„ ^x'i^.  IS.  b.

A,V.«i.,  384,  b.

AmAOprvpla.  93.  b.

^ii,  1093,  a.

ABMrnn-l-)™"'.  399,  b.

A.<i^Tpo.(TaK892.b.

„ {«t«,  1223,1.

AiOTu^  388,  a.

Adb-io,  400,  b.

AtOi),,  408,  b.

4..AI«  -WW**.  388,  b.

AlmAK,  1055,  b.

*#««.»,  303.  »  ;  304,  b.

A«^x»poro^«,27i.i.

„ .<V.«nrp»*^r,  80B,  ^

Acdjffwro.  hBlpa.  892,  b.

„ irBpaTE»y,(oi.  958,  h.

A«4*»"'t.  400.  a.

At«aS<>£x<".  385,  b.

ilticapx'»,3a5,b.

A.™rw(t,77,.i  385,  b.

AB«^150.b.

„ ipaitatrat i* rponiat

At^ifTvA.!,  1105,  b.

AoAKiwrlrSairiJftw,  682,  a.

1148.  a.

A.jitcn-ri.w,214,a.

A^M,  43S,b.

„ TV|M...llei.  962,  fc

Ainu  f»i/itlRH,  458,  a.

„ «p«,.62a,a.

AuwiKta.  410.  >.

„ 4rofo;^5,,  623,  b.

A..Kl7T,,388,ii800,b;1103,b

Ai«n)A«,  410,  a.

A«i.ntX*r".3B7,b.

AunUT^I,  401,  b;  805.  a.

.. -peopi, tS,  i;^™«^

A.Jl™tiSf,  149,  b.

AtK«n«6v,  403,  b.

898,  a. ^^

AtA^Jr,  149,  b.

AfnAAo.  707,  b.

„ 4K<rou,  B97,  a.

A.X*(r«.  389.  b.

Afioi,  402,  b. ,

.. +.i.B.TW.^.,971,b.

Art«l™i,  223,a.

„ oiicfat,  100,  a.

„ ^ti^oiiATirdai,  973,  t.

AfA^i,  149,  b;  389,  b.

., inryoofli,  93,  a.

rptpa^.  899,  b.

Aiwu",  673,  b.

„ iiiXatt,!.  106,  b.

rw^..  903,  a.

A.f«.BT*r=i,  280,  a.

ro:^!,  12.  a  ;  989,  b;  1034,  a.

A/p^,  883,  a.

„ 4.c«i^«i,  4la,  a.

Tp^^Mxo-.  588,  b.

Aif^is,  383,  b.

„ 4To^Mlou,104,b;  133,

rf*.#«,  see,  b.

AfojMf  iAomi,  693.  a.

„ i.-^  ,n^Sih«y,  1081.  a.

rti,j,  117,  b.

A(ff>««^(»o.'.240.b.

„ iipAr^Ar-oi.  403.  a.

T«,»^^xnt.  S81.  ..

AKr™7«™STai,592,a;  705,  a.

„ iTpc<rrpolc-.  123.  b.

rii,«Mrta(iX«,  SBl,  a.

., ipyuplo".  133.  b.

IViru.*.  579,  a.

/Uurfy,^,,  1203,  a.

„ atrwA*!,  404,  b.

rufUMToI,  581,b;  S8S,b.

AiuT*(»irirnoi,  657,  *.

AT/fia,  54B,  a.

„ Afoi^tBi,  201,  a.

r.»<»«™,  135.  a.

A«A,«,3e9..i  863.  t

„ &oIb*,  202,a-,  479,  b.

rvfu^M.  135.a.;  584,  a.

Anyajirrol.  1086.  a.

„ flAiiftli. 93,  b; 203,  1

r..,«^(.  135.  a.

S13.  a.

tV^ToiSfa,  584,  a.

AWX"'.  389,  b.

„ *ry^t,  461,a.

r.7"^.,8oe.b.

A,,^fr,.po<.  1086.  a.

„ ii-oalw.  461.  a.

r>>F««inl<r^,  564,  b.

A:„..,t;,(^  390,  a.

„ /{OTwyflj,  479,  a.

rwoiinwrf^,,  584,  b.

AWt^T^.^,  335,  a.

rv™ic«-7T«,  423,  b.

„ ifoW.,..  456,  a.

IW,  X.rrur«,  893,  b.

Aii^5,>>m,5,bj314,ai390,b

„ i»«p«iw*:*Mr<»,1159.

„ «»*:,,  892,  b.

670.  a;  1164.  b.

,. ifoyuci,  475,  b.

TwfVT6t,  nG,h.

Allwoi,  593.  «i  1139.  b..

„ a*ft<^(r»i.  578.  b.

„ ««.nV«.  317,  a.

„ MBTwK  317.  a.

„ iHWi>Ao>(ai,217,  a.

A^„p7"t-,  1093.  a.

AiifiJoia  ypiwioTo,  8.  a.

„ «Jp™,243,ai  461,1.

AVM*"":  391.  b.

A^DXO",  453,  b.

Afl^H»'.33.a;  119.  a.

" A..«MV™pW,  93.  b;

AolSniUi.  382.  a.

Awi^iot.S93.a.

513..  a.

aaM\,a.  382,  >.

A.,M*r«,  392.  b.

„ )u»8opJ<M.  317, 1.

Aoti,  1093.  a.

aiae«n(pi»,  395,1.

„ ,«<.«<*.  764, 1.

Aolimu,  235,  a.

A«*W„i,  283,  a.

„ ^«rtAr«.  rfk™,  764.  s.

AbtM  410.  a.

AKO-wri,  449,  b.

„ okfai  823.  b.

A<iKTA>joi,9S.a.

„ o^fur,  461.1.

AiaS.™r(=, 395.  b  ; 596,  b

AilHvAot,  333.  b;  383,  b.

897,  b.

A>£xuf .  224.  a.

.. «A*/««,  15,  a.

„ »j.««Ji,  437,  «i  1048,  a

„ Tflt*w«AV».467,  b.

,, <r[r«t>.l048,>.

A«SA««,  400.  a;  il36.,b.

„ Inpta.  1013, ..

Ai^X",  410,  ■;  4BS,  b.
a;iiitdi,  1101.  b;  1102,  b.
Au>ijc4«.t,  S  Jxt,  1096,  b.
A>rf\i<a,  410,  b.
^lerieia,  410,  b.

412,  b.
„ ■wr'  Vy^  « l««lK
411,  k


Ami,  324,  ■ ;  235,  «.
A««iuiMi,  417,  b.
AiArhvt,  323,  a.
AuxrciiJiiHa,  414,  b.
AmricaVui,  226,  m.
Al>\iit,  161,  L
Aw^oBiw,  1173,  b.
A«rAc>tt,8A3.  >;  1173,  b.
Air6X.iia,  410,  s.

A(-TtpM,  1105,  b.

Mimrxa.  1092,  •.

Af<r«i,  415,  ■.

Alfmrupo.  415,  a.


JlfTOI


',  773,  h


>  704,  ■


Aifpn,  379,  b.
Aixiltrmt,  233,  a.
Aixap^B,  1147,*.
AwCiAio,  1126,  b.
AMifiwIn.  419,  b  ;  463,  >
AoXixUfiiaL,  105S,  b.
AriAjx<".  1056,  b.
AAuw,  430,  b.
Aopd,  882,  ■.
Ao^ur,  667,  ■.
&iiparo91iini,  687,  b.
AiipKtUrrH,  1034,  a.
A<Ipnui,  101,b.
Aopi-fa,  101,  b.
Ai^n,  303,  b.
A^,  687,  >.
Aapu^i,  687,  b.
Aifvo,  124,  >.
AvuJioi,  1034,  4.
Ai>x^,751.b.
Apiiiwr,  148,  ».
A/«x^4, 438,  ■ ;  931,  b.
bprrirri,  &ptraTar,  516,
Ape?™.  655,  b.
Ap<i^>,  1066,  b.
Au^iontTCu,  1 163,  b.
Auftarli,  1153,  b.
Avn-TTflo,  365,  b.
Aiirraot,  226,  ■.
Aw^ia,  425,  «.
A^,  433,  b.


'Sap.  163,  b.
'»17Afc460,b.
•Eyywiaini.  633.  b.
"Eri^t  Mc,  461,  *.
'Eyyrfi^i,,  737,  ^
■ETMimiftAwi,  459,  b.
'EyKtrrpit,  220,  b.
"EyitXiWio,  403,  «.
-Ei«Tij;w,  459,  b.
'ETimjiru,  469,  b.
'ETKDjTutifr,  392,  b ;  469,  b,
'SyxnptSiM,  875,  l
'Eyx",  587,  ^
'L-rxocrpCCfii/,  828,  ■.
'E7;[ii*Ti)toTjiuii,  828,  a.
•am,  436,  ■.
*ESot,  1106,  a.
'Elhi\ia,  788,  *.
"Eflra,  436,  a.
'E9«Aoifp.SJtKW,  620,  a.
Xlinl,  223,  b.
Eticdnt,  1063,  a.
EIhiwuc^i,  892,  a.
ElncrH,  446,b;  1103,  a.
EUevTiMyti,  446,  b.
ET\»tii,  691,a.
K,iar,  226,  a.
EVivwu  "Tpo^,  590,  a.
tiptetAr,,,  976,  b ;  1000,  ■.
EIpu^,  446,  b.
Elsii^u',  447,  a.
jaairnthSa,  447,  ■ ;  468,  b
Ei(rir)wy*''>  446,  b.
^veripia,  448,  b,
Elnwiurta,  14,  b.
t^ffwahiaii,  14,  b.
EJl'm^rdl,  14,  b,
EifTf^fwir,  449,  a.
ECirWil,  448.b.
'Enrjfiftiu,  593,  b,
'EiEitT^f4<auit,  3S6,  a.
"KiKcra/ifiufo,  223,  a.
"EmmviC.^,  333,  a.
t^anviMl.  593,  b ;  999,  b.


•Ojoif,  I16B,  b.
'EXa^iXm,  460,  •.
'EAofnTlMiiir,  223,  a.
'EAa^ot,  450,  a.
'EA««(|9w,  454,  b.
'E\R<irbia,  463,  b.
'E\nHriruit,  323,  a.
'E\^i,  451,  a.
"Vd^,  147,  a.
•e\i{.  590,b.

"EAnHrrMa  Wfca',  583,  ■.
'EUumllw,  690,  b ;  B30,  k
'EAAqnTO/uu.  690.  b.
'EAAMwr,  632,  a.
"E^XitTia,  or  "KUuIth,  465,  a.

'E^Hru^  in,  b.

"Eftfcti.  466,  a.
'Efifwu,  184,  a.
■EfitaT-ila,  450,  a.
"E^iAinii,  764,  b.
'iliSK'iiiia,  456,  b.
"E/iSaA^,  133,  b.
•TtMXsfus,  333,  >.
■EiiSo^Di',  786.  b.


"Ef^ukit,  773,  a.

"En/airai  SEui,  458,  «.
^^uraiiTfia,  456,  b.
"Efirurfrwia.  632,  ■.
t.iaipiBt,  469,  a.
^ wi,  469,  a.


"Ektii™,  595,  b,
"Eiduni,  444,  a.
•EjrSiHrir,  525,  b.
'baxiiflit,  607,  a.
■bMAqiria,  439,  b ;  673,  b.

„ »pla,  440,  a.

„ rifuiua,  440,  a.

„ riynKiiTia,  439,  b
*EciE\tr«,  443,  b.
IxKaiiHi,  665,  a.
'ZiariiiXviu:,  1123,  a.
'EcXoTttr,  449.  b,
'Cittiayf7ar,  306,  b.
'EKiiapnifla,  93,  b.  444,  a.
"Enniv,  14,  b.
'E'CTOHiMai,  14,  b.
'Ennis,  'Exm,  689.  b.
'Ecrq^uH,  690,  a.
"ETnmi,  481 ,  a.
"EK^op^  656,  a.
'Ec^Uo^opIa,  515,  a.
'EWo,  'Vtaur,  823,  b.
~'  ■ ',  192,b.


r,  823, 1


'^■^tHTu.  458,  a.
•Erorfir/ia™,  577,  b,
•E™™,  577,  b.
'ErlfSoi,  1093,  a.
"Erlflair,  1093,  a,
''Ei««tiT,459,  b;  463,  a.

'Ertoini,  635,  a.
"ErSpo/ili,  460,  a.
'Krfvfui,  79,  a.

■Erfirfainui^  863,  a  j  1084,  b.
■Er«ni,63I,b.
'Er<xu|H.460,ai  625,  b.
•Ewm-a,  557,  b.
"Emdnfeurtt,  lOB,  b.
"EnwT^I,  333,  b.
IMhw,  989.  b.

„ iVftDkw,  417,  a.
■Eivwbif  Mh),  461,  a.
^mrTptv,  1053,  ft.
"Ema.lSS.a.
'Envni,  llSl,i.
"Ett^VV,  1181,  «.
'Entnav,  633,  a.
■Et»y^,456,«.
'Efarvn'  S^.  479,  •.
■Kfjfinm.t  ttim,  479,  •■
"EfiVfiw,  1102.  b.
"EfiiffnAgt,  1105,  b.

"EtttJrnttt,  484,  b.
■Etmi<n«[,478,  b)  Sll,b.
1*rw«(.  480,  a,
'E{<^,  786,  b.

■Efmipia,  613,  a.

'E{Am,  512,  a.

ttotu,  1146,  k  ,

—^-S^^


lyDEX.

I34T

•Bf-a-n  >fai,  toe.  ■.

T#.#fpb.79,t.

•E(.«Jl,6l3,b;  im,b.

•EriTpmnw,  469,  b;  1197,  b.

1:**r«,  463,  ..

•Et-^to,  613.  b.

i -E^^Wo,  918,  b.

•Efrf^Tji^  ai3,  ■.

443,  m.

V^.(«,  46S.  b.

•BF(x«ru,  380.  b.  .

■£*.*«(,  918.  b.

■B^toA-riOBO;*.

'E™<cJ.,313,b.

"EW«<.».  463,  b.

•E-4*{«i,iie3.b.

t™™..  313,  b.

■B^+W™.  460,  a.

•E.j^462.>.

•e«3*-;738...

■ExIiTcii.  4S3,  b.

•S-WTfJa,  453,  b.

■B«t«-,  612,  i

'EnrftXio,  470,  a.

■E<-fW,  119S,h.

•E-*™-^2lJ^t

•E«^..  1173, 1.

-B*^.,  464,  b.

'Enwlii.  1103.a.

-lW«.4a3,b.

twMtim,  9aa,b.

■Ev^invui,  470,  b.

■E*»«,iiob,..

t^Mn..  466,  b.

„ -rw  «>J«>dr.  470,  bL

•EX'^JL,.  117,b.

"EnfSa,  103.1.

., 1*-  fMl»,  47ft  b.

■ExS-»,93.b;  336, a.

■e»«*w«,79,.;  674. «.

'EwrOtt,  787,  ■.

•Kt,^  1303,  a.

"EnfJiljiio*,  TS.a;  674.*.
1;»rfrt*,  467,  *.

Ws-iK-

■EJpw«,1123,lu

TvcTvlo.  389.  ■;  620,  b.

•K^rww.iisa.'.

-EJKiw Xi(r.w,  ar Murmr,

2.

476,  b.

'EwA.ip»,4S*,».

., -A,p<A.,  47S,  b.

ziW«.».>-

■EnUrniw,  387.  b.

„ ffuM.^T'"-.  «5.  b.

Zfc,OTZ«Ia.64,b;66,b.

'V««>t.304.b;476...

•k-.W««,  46«, ..

>««».  'Aq>«4>,  476,  b.

•£»(*»«.  658,  b.

■En-A*.,  1100,  >.

ZtvTXu.  739.  a.

•EwU\v>"'  WT,  b.

VyvT'ini,  856,  b ;  1100,  a.

"X^yora,  628,  a.

Zwil-.1128,a.

■KWimrM,  918.  b.

">♦«»,  149,  a.

ZirnraJ.  1234,  a.

•E-kn^.  768. 1.

>«J,603,fc

Z;T«l.788.a.

■EiU^TW,  1086.  b.

•Ew««,  604,  a.

z.ii™,7ea.a.

'Epfui^t,  334,1;  3S6,  a.

Z-rJra..  788,  a.

., ™/^Tv(»,3e,bi

■EpfuiHia,.  891,  b.

Z«T<»',380.>;«63.a;7Sl,b;

468,  >.

i,&npo,.  891,  b.

1007.  b.

„ »^«u^iirpo»JI«,

Ziyef.  662.  a;  lOOT,  b.

46B,i;  1096,  b.

Zr»M,  268,  b.

„ Tfir  fu.p.fii' 'U»Ar,

Zw).po*i»,  900,  b.

468.  >.

Z«W«*J<.,  899,  b.

„ T^ll«mBJ-.468,

, -EpHrTSp,,.  692,  ..

7m^»,  1225,  b.

b.

1:<*o..  336.  a.

ZkhIim^Aju,  1090,a.

Tfi»  MnpW,  468.  b.  'ZnwTpa;  1052,  t.

ZJ«1, 136.«;  1334,  b.

„ tA«  fuX5.,  468.  b.

Xrrk,  643.  a.

afoar.  1244,  b.

IwMXlA",  765.  t

•Omfiru.  604,  b.

Z-nwAAc...  1224,  b.

■Eirwd,**.,.  380.  *.

•EffT-dTufi,  604,  b.

ZwrrV,  1224.  b.

'E»;{^116.a;643,a.

Z.^f»T.  1226,  b.

•E^X-PI..  642.  a.

'Et.^.  604.  b.

., *x.^89a..'.

H.

rrpmi^f  892,  a.

•ET«p^310.bT475,h.

■E.ln««,  638. ».

'E™p(W,  892,  b.

1-(<n»«.»,  638.  •.

•e™p«'.  488,  a.

•Ennciprruw  ,h  'AptiW  -ttyw.

693...

129.  t ^

'H7./1W,  891.  b.

•ZwmvwK,  468,  b.

EB»,  846,  m.

,. a.pirw,  892,  >.

'Eit(ffiru^i,OI8,  b.

iWrrilMt,  335.  a.

'Hrm.pf..,  928,  b.

■EnmiLnuftu.  636,  L

EW4..  846.  a.

'HM'.333,bi  1203,  ft.

rtyWta,  289.  h.
Et^oni,  1173,  b.

■HA««ln|,668,a.
•HXmctp«-b»,  450,a.

484,  b.

EMi>a«la,93.  bi  404,  •;  864, b.

„ Tarfatf^Iwfnw,

EiW^.  478.  a.

•Hw»ri«*»',«e,b.

460,  ■.

E«i™.  478.  a.

., /Jtw,  408,  b.

„ 'rw»fnir,469,t.

EifioXnOu.  477.  a.

'H/^.n^T.C.'.W.Ha,

EM.  673.  a;  791.  a.

„ ^408.b.

Ei™-pa«,477.  b;  1154,  b.

■H^p*  &rofp<0...  104.  b.

■Zrtwr^.  387,  b.

EBmiADi,  1106,  a.

^Tiiwy^M,  488. «.

EftfTtfMJr..  417,  a.

•YtlA^r-OfilM.  692,  b.

■E«fr./i«t.  613,  b.

Et^ntfJ..  417,  a.

'H,«&-\elfc«.1172,b.

•E«m»A«,  155.  b.

■H/uWT<Jr.  689,  b.

•E-fTo™,  673.  b  i  790,  b.

■E^«,  463.  a.

•aiutrrof,  689.  b.

■E^u,  lOe,  a.

ia4B

INDEX.

'H^,«,or*H,J™,3e7,iiS92,b

1»T«X&,  2B9,b.

■nrfa.S85.a.

e<lp«,  624,  b.

'I^[<«',790.aill8e.m.

•H^Xi".  l'<9.  ■ ;  379,  b.

„ diAtuu,  135.  a.

■I<m>(<>^,  I17,b.

■Hpaa..224,ai3a6.a.

„ -TnJ",  425,b.

•hrrinStl.  1100.  b.

-HpiExAtioi,  334,  >;  33S,  a.

'IiTT^f,  789,  a;10g9,>.

■Hpi>.«,  233,  a.

„ )i(nu\ni,  435,  a.

•Inrd.,  435,  h;  1099,  h.

■Hp^w,  557,  a.

9«ff6t.  1012,  b.

Itw,  397,  b;  378,  h.

'H<>t,  40B,  b, '

©iprrpo^  635,  b.

txMff,  151,  b.

».p««,  426,  «.

nx»,,*rwi«tiayms,isa.}^

eVo'.  1129,  b.

S.

e.vS'.  425,  ..

K.

ea^ifi,  241,  a.

0iV<^T,  436,  a;  637.  b.

eiWrw,  637.  a.

ein^lNw,  116.m;  163,  b.

Krffe™,  971,  ».

WK.711.*.

KilSei,  KdStot,  21B,  li  971,  a.

K«9«pl».  '81.  b.

ftL\ArB,76,b;  1120,1.

KiAwuf,  781,  h.

ed*m.,  1203,  ^

I.

KaAviTi,,  719,  a.

ei.T.iF,  555,  b.

1«X«.  4S3,  b.

KitaoSoi,  1128,  1.
K-fct^*.  Mi.^  57B.  b.

«/irrp.»,  1120,  a.

1«paA<«TiS..  76,  •;  638,  a.

1«r,««.  745,  b.

Kii<nr¥cf;^Hinr.2IT,  tu

9«Tpi^,,  1136,  a.

1"-p^.747...

K«nn™plmJin,,217,«.

etAoM«..  224,  a.

Ra»Aoy(iu3[ini.217,a.

eiM^,  in.  b.

nT*i.'lT9,»,  768,  h.

KMOTtimw  Mini,  217,  b.

e«WTKi.,  226,  a.

lairfn,!,  994,  b.

Kda^u,  317, 1.

eMA=7.-Li,i..  1123,a.

•Upwrw,  1105.  a.

K<U«0i>T,23O,ai3S6,  b.

eB£.»U,1135,  b.

•l.piU<«,  98.  b,

„ nfMuT,  4«3.  k

9»J.'«oj,  224,  a.

■l.p.iw.998,b.

9«^««'a,ll25,  b.

ICii\<^i,  220,  a;  753,  b.

e*pair.I.,  738,  b.

KaW«T;««,ll28,».

etpniirriKof.  BET,  b.

e-fKi™,  691,  b.

■Upoiuu^ila,  417,  a.

K«AA<»T.i«,  334.  ».

„ ^iiiB,,fl92.a.

■Upo^Vi^,  607.  a.

KtArfrfrni.  553,  b.

„ T«T^,  892,  a.

'I(f<V«^fui»t,  80.  b;  138,  b

Kii^w.  783,  b;790,  ».

e/^t,  163,  b.

1.pJy,  1104,b.

e^ffii,  14,  b.

1*p»ra™.  167.  a.

Itforaim,  607,  b.

K=A4«-p«.  1186.«,

8«rwi[,  804,  b.

K<i\«,  996.  a.

B4M.  587,  b.

e,.,^iA„„,  593,  a.

Kofi^  134,  b.

eMo.\o,K*™i,8B3,a.

■l«.*<iAA«.411,a.

Kttfiwa,,  646.  a.

6.TD1,  14,  b.

•Urrwio.  142,  a.

KfVTnSp,  1055,  bL

e«>E<£o-»i,  224,  a.

Ikp^,  784,  b.

Kibnftii,  or  KtiweM,  335.  b.

S.-PK  389.  a  ;  1125,  b.

IjKTTMt,  154.  >.

KiraBfo,.  335.  b.

■lAaS»,  224.  a.

K!(y?«,  237,  a.

e«v.l.,389,aie65,a.

•Vjfm.  608,  a.

K-b-MF.  237,  b.

e«,poi,389,a;  1125.  b.

eii««.'5&6,  ^

V«rT«.369,a;  790,  b.

857,1.

«*n7,  197,  h.

K«Bfc,39a.ai985.biU0J,a

eww/uixo'.sos,..

Iiaritan,  850,  b.

K<»iA.V,  358.  a.

enpfw.  153.  b.

1^T,«.,  850,  b.

l£<(xV^,a58,b;459,^

■l«ia,699.a.

»i,«ii.,  1127,  b.

■Wi.  1001,8.

KoTHi/wrTtla,  417,  a.

eSir«,  597,  b.

■IwSJuoi.  225.  t.

K<v««r(^,  889,  b.

e^«,366,B;  116e,a;  na8,b

1"ifi.  669,  a.

KopclMt,  150,  b.

ei<.ffot,411,a;  475,  b.

eou^  To»«^,  737,  b.

•Imrapx".  5,  b  ;  487,  a.

K=pr,S^  241,  h.

©DAla,  1313.  b.

'I)r«ri,  266,  a  ;  1156,fc

Ko^ait,  223,  a  i  224,  a.

afABi.  1128,  b.

'I»«™'»,60B,  a;  1056,  b.

Kafmi^  1005,  b.

eiwcM.  33,  b.

■iwntMa.  608, ..

Kdp«BU«,,a43.a.

SfxCrio.',  1 139.  a.

•iTiroJpiwwi,  224,  a.

Kv*^  3«.  b.

BpaFfTB,  788.  ..

limJSfWWii.  283,bi  608,  b.

K=pwTlf.u',2«.b.

epi.c,.  588.  a.

•linroi,  149,  b.

8(»ti^l,  565.  b.

•l^m,wp„,^i,,l4a.\>.

OpJmi,  1139,  a.

"Ipijr,  446,  b.

KoriCiVM.  790.  h.

etTwV  595.a.

Ifffl^o,  645,  b.

e.->aTpAri«,  896,  b.

la^pMTtk,  289,  b.

e«/UX,,  1133,  a.

•Ijerto.™,  289,  b.

K*rtrfx».,nii,b.

Xmpijf,  197,  a.

Ka>V«iTtt.  101,b.

KXwef.  595,  b.

Kflipi^i  ™^"".  891,  ■.

KXw«xt.,318,b;314.a.

K«-p(.,  197.b.

KA-BwOx*.. 313, bi  314, b

; lUfiwir,  358,  a.

KariAryiit,  2fi6.  1.

1163,  a.

K>xXi4>u>',  301.  a.

KanAHa-m  tdG  Sta«>v ffo^

, KXTTtiStfT,  93.  b.

KoxXiat.  300,b.

256,  ■.

K*iff%Ht,  294,  b.

KfKtfforst,  674,  a.

KBTiXwrii, 258. a; 619, b

J K**r.p...  294,  b.

Kpdhi,  1133.a.

729,  ».

BUSo™.,  546,  «.

K^twJ^r,  1120.fc

KX^ua.  296.  b.

Kpii»t,  665.  b.

KonnriXTJi.,  113B,  b.

KommXTuni,  1138.  b.

KxWt.  975,  a;1009,  b.

Kfxinitu.  665,  b.

Ka™rfr<ur;«,  1185,B.

KXlm,  671,b;673,  a.

Kf»nb>,  153,  b;  367,  b.

KBT(i,))Wimj..  256,  b.

KX»«iw.671,b.

Konnn^t  7p»M,  257,  i.

KA«r(M,  625,  b.

KXwflilin,,  300,*.

Kra^tft,  SSI.b.

Kpwt^Aqf,  T23,a.

K«.x«<»rwla,  271,1.

KW«oXw.673,b.

KM<^,  548,  b.

Knax^/un-o,  1036,  i.

Kr«^  378,  b.

K,»prfi.  368.  b.

K«Tri7™.<03,b;  460,1).

KrW..  822,  •.

KfacurT,U,  417.  a.

KimjTVf-,  578,  a.

KM.  454.  a.

K^..  627,  a.

KiT+wM,  1085.  b.

Kim.  3*8. ..

KpJ.,  133.bi  149,  b.

USgproi,  366,  a.

Kp^«J.  369,  b.

Kmv*™".  S5.^.  ''■

KolXi-F,  1122,..

Kp««,  1000.  a.

Karox*^,  S26,  b.

K(™™t&  -i..  370,  a.

Kirpu«r,118,>i9e4,b.

Kp^«,  370,  a.

Kiri.  rpixUa,  892.  a.

KiHot,  892. 1.

K(«ffff.(.  537,  a.

,. Twpix-M^mi,  892,  a.

KoAfii.  677,  ■.

KpfrnXw,  370.  a.

KoTwdB,,  882.  b.

KsXArfumd,  270.  b.

itfKrfw.ea?.^

KiXXvtot,  270,  b.

KfoS^  381.  b.

IC>E<ru,904,a.

K«J«wffJ..  322,  fc

Kp«>ir«!a,381,b.
KfWTiio,  371,  1.

KJX™,  322,b;  1203,  a.

K«Uu,  260,  t.

Kp™TlS,37l...

KtifilB.  673,  b.

Ki^,  328,  b.

Kp«Tl«.  371.  a.

Kwvulrur.  344,  b.

Kp««(.  372.  a.

K^4x,t,3aB,b.

KoHM^,  1146.  a.

KtiIi,  881,  a.

KAi|t.387,bi6IO,&.

IU^IbXm,  752,  «.

Kritfiara  469.  b.

K^rrwfM,  153,  b.

K«<lAh,  380.  b.

K>rn»aSai,  410,  a.
K.p*«,  789,  b.

K«i^.,  57,  a.

Kwrit,  357,b;  789,  a.

K'potTii,  S9, 1.

KvgurrHpn,  1006,  b; 1006,  a.

X>p<u»«t,  5.12,  b.

Kmrti,  622.  >.

Kitoi,  373.  b;  1112,  b.

Ktfi^ar.  532.  b.

K<fm«,  627,  b.

K«»npoSI«„,  888.  a.

K/fxvwf.  210. «;  532,  b ;  1098, 1.

, Kipat.627,..

KditXa,  378.  a.

K^fKU.  126.  ■;7Bg,b.

lUplht.  280.  a  ;  344,  b.

KwXii.  381.  a.

Kiparfcv,  1213.  b.

K4ni,S91,a;  892.  b.

K>p«IIft,  112S,  a.

KiWx.>.3S,a;298,a;1034,U

Kipnt.  1000,  b.

Sapa^^Kta,.  606,  a.

Kfa«w,  714,  a.

K.P..SXO.,  790.  b.

KS^.  331.  a.

K.^-*^.  133.  b.

KofivfaiTixl.  364.  a.

KiIm*«x«.  381.  a.

Kqn/o»«|>a,42S.b.

Ko^arTiffwfi.  364,  a.

KMl.  381.  a.

K^gt,  618,  ■.

Ki^fiSsi,  328.  b.

Kwiu.  665,  b.

Kipoypa+k  903.  h,

KDP.W.  881.b.

Kdpvi.  566,  b.

K^pO««.M,21B.a.

Ko,n>^a.  548,  a.

K^or.  152.  a.

Kopiw,,  126.  a;  637...

Ki^JftBTla.  920,ai  1130.  a.

KvP'i',  148. ..

Kafwrli.325.  a;  363.  a.

K.:p«(u.  183.  a.

K.'9>v».  720.  h.

K«r;«rH)>, 365.  a; S81,  b;

Kupffl,  ft.  399.  a.

K.eaf^^  977.  a.

624.  a.

K*,M,.  10l,b.

KlfHiCoi,  335,  b.

K«r>»f,  365,  a.

I«p«i,213,ai377,b.

Klonr,  656.  b.

K«rf«M'iM>Xo<,  382,  a.

Kiw,  152,  b.

KlsTT,.  S8B,  a.

KiJt<m»,  831,  b.

KJiiw,  673,  b.

K..rTo4"Jf»f ,  288,  b.

KMTo«.wr,  366,  a.

Bifcw.  1133,b.

Ki«y,  323,  a.

KBTTitfio^  366,  a.

KAo,  673.  b.

KAopir™.  366.  a.

K*rrB«M,  366.  b.

Kihrmi,  367,  a.

k£»u».  377,  bj  379,a.

KAiiapo'.  636.  b.

Klrr^l.^,  367.B;  381,  b,

K\,h.  637,  ■.

KoT^ia.  367,  a.

RiWBW,  593.  a. 1  c

KA.t«K  eis.  •■

K«^,32e,b.

1260

INDEX.

KA,tv,239.Ri  m.t.

AoT«T«'.  36.  b.

M.W,  101,  b.

K«n4,384.b,

A-Tiffnipiw,  479, ».

M/*iw,  170,  b.

AoTWT^j,  222,  a  ;  478,  b.

Kip«oi,  195.  b.

Aa7a7/>^,710.  b;  1085,  ^

Mtxia,  587,  b.

KSl,  260.  a.

AoTMBiof.  7iO,  b;  1086  •.

Ahx^,  6B7,  b  ;  588,  a.

MtAiTToSra,  656,  a.

Airrxo^P".  687,  b.

K,^X,itnp^,  446,  b.

AorrpA-,  183.  b.

AoiCai,  1000,  ■-

H»<A<1.».  749,  a.

AM,,  239.  a.

ABOofUa  Sl^.  217,  >.

Mtpei-.  750.  b.

AwrV,  IB5,..

MtTB^Aun  Uipo,  425,  a.

Aoyoxli,  A<r>iii.  153.  b.

H^nuXst  diipo.  425.  «.

Ao:^,  1166.  a.

Awr/Ktr.  183,  b  ;  189,  b.

SSsi3."^%.

Anvrpo^ipc,,  IBS,  b.

„ ixfleai.  a.

x-ax^a^

Ai9o,.  566,  a.

H«n.Ai.(ur.  858,  a.

Aflx-Ti^,  483,.;  1098,1.

AJxoi,  483,  a  i  486,  b ;  1098,  a. Mfinf™x«i,  869,  b.

Ai^TaJoSxo.  t/J».  666,  ..

„ Jlp«t>i,  186,  a.

Jteraein,,,  394,  b.

Ao^wJ,,  666,  ^

Aiicaui,  720.  a.

Mn-«7t(T>«,  759,  ■.

Aao81«««,  225. 1.

Aixo.,  686,  b.

MfraXVir,  759,  a.

Aifvut,,  5S5,  b.

Atip<i,14B,  bi720,a.

Mmwurrpl..  306,a.

Aarar.?™.,  366,  b.

AJx«>,  713.  a.

AiTof .  366,  b.

MrTi,x»i.  226,  a.

Mn-doTKrit,  280.  ».

AiT^.i,  BB3,  a.

A«.,  225.  ..

A^.  710,  b.

Mtravkm  aW  425,  >.

Ad*p",  667,  b.

AiSru,,  710,  b.

A«^.,  827, ..

Aft™,  710,  b.

KmLHw,  166,  a;  761,  b

Afnro/uipTupiou  tin),  513,  a.

MfrouHN,  761,  a.

AfiTOKiwIau  7(>ii^,  679,  L

Mrntini,  323,  ».

AtaroaTparloa  yeapi,,  679,  L.

HrrJnpor,  164,  a.

M.

AdTMtpTta,  679,  ■.

M*™™-,  786,  a.

A«<fn,,366.bi872,b.

Miyrf,.,  779,  ..

MifAn,  274,  b.

A<iafa.w,  872.  b.

M=T.vf«,  35,  a.

Mil*,  228,  a.

Aferpw.  673.  b.

MiT.v»'.  305,  b.

„ W«.,223.b.

Mdf,.,305,b;745,b;870,b.

AiwiJ™,  397,  b.

MoifBJCT.^,.  223,  a.

„ WS/m,223.  b.

Male-w.  893,  b.

„ fimVuHW,  323.  a.

AfirjTi,  681, «.

Mit.\Aa.  707,  b  j  848,  b.

„ «&i«.2I2,h.

Afunii  <Mp,  890,  b.

MwpJ*,  344,b.

„ A*,.^,233,b.

A<A»fu,  903,  a.

Micrpa,  1,  a.

„ /c«ftr.aa3,t

A.y^«.  693,  b.
A.xo.,673,  »ie73.  b.

M»Wu)t,  1097,  b.

., mi>iftfn»,  333.  b.

MirtiAo,.  626,  b.

„ rtVn».222,b.

A^'.  150,  b.

U<u4Ait,  66S,  a.

„ f«™F,323.a.

A)|I<^«iv,  853,  ■.

Mart*,,  666,  a.

M^nwB,  443,  a.

Apft...  853.  ..

Ki^,  366.  b.

Mvrp.,V-  73.  a.

AijiTor.  970,  b.

Horrtur,  836,  b.

MtppiwvM,.  313.  b.

A*™fl<.t,192,b;555,«;668,t

I H<in'(u,  416,  a.

Mifrw",  llS.a-

675,  a.

HarrciDi,  415,  b.

MTrp*oi.  223.  a.

A*™a.  411,  b.

Min,.,  732,  a.
Hrf^ir,  732,  a.

Kvx»«l.  722.  a.

A^™».,  22S,  a.

M,;(„^,  1123.a.

AWw.  324,>>^S,«.

K7p»,.  763.  a.

Aflwi.  655.  b.

Murf^psi,  758,  a.

AWi.  1137,  b.

MioAril  3£irq,  764.  ».

Aufir^X"'.  «!.»■

H«rT^«6^i,  735,  a.

Hwfcrrol.  7Sa,a.

A7i{«,  403,  ».

M«rTO»*^i,  736,  a.

Hfr«.  llOl.a.

Aw"!,  708, ».

HJoTif,  649,  b.

MIt^  764.  b.

„ «i«fuK^,  615,  a.

BUrp,.  136.  a.

MmtJot,  903,  b.

HrS,  931,  b.

Hixavo,  ie7.bi  373,bi975,a

M.j:«W'.976,..

A.ftv«b-,  786, «.

Mrw-Ia.  656,  a.

A<fcT«;a»,  671.  ».

Maxolpii,  197,  b.

M»(<.,  366.  a.

A«;»f>.  1163,  b.

M*T<v«,  1105,a.

M««.386.a.

Alic«w.4ll,»;ll83,b.

Mrt,^...,  748.  b.

Mi»«>t.  290.b;Ge3.k

Mt«iimi<r«».513,  b.

MM»nT.290,  b;!»3.b.

A(Tp.,709..!  8U..i  1313,

1.  ]ii(«v»r<ii,  ioi,b.

M«x.J«7P-rt.  16,U

A.xT.  763,  .,

H,0^  436,  ..

HgAvCBCSM.  654,  a. ,.
tIcluMiuarTatL,  417,  it

AoTfSw,  1122,  b.

UtMx",  269,  a.

INDEX.

1351

OlnxiBi.  1083,  a.

OSrnf,,  149,  b;  1001,  t.

803,  b, ""^'™ "~^

OWiffTof.  174.  b.

MwBxf-ijBn.'.  900,  b.

NwoWmi.  133,  b  ;  805,  a.

OlmnniKi.  471.  t

Mipm4B3.«;768,fc

Wf»i,  803,  b.

Mivi".  "a.  «■

„ Kpoiiiit,  1 120,  ..

M»„fix'".  769.  a.

„ wieiMi.  977.  a.

CUcpIftuTtJ,  im,  b.

•Oi.f«»t,  902,  b; 1122,  b.

Mai««,  773,  b.

W«wl»,  223.  a.

•O-rriTTBAor,  1105,  b.

MMxn^,  772.  b.

MoBwu...  B14,  a.

OA47VX'o.  134,  b  i  826.  h.

M<ww4,  773,  b.

OKi,a.i,  786,  a.

M«X>A,  636,  b.

OAW,7B5.  a.

H»nH)«i,7l3.a.

N.!»»a,  610,  b.

-OA^t,  768,  b.

H^t,  765,  >.

*OV",  1163,  a.

Mitoi,  713,  ..

OABm«-.i.  999.  b.

M.^,7B0.b.

B.

Kip^,,.  269, 1.

OXi^».  828,  ..

Rorfiniff.  335.a.

0A»^F«1.,  883, ..

Hu|j,»n.,  35,  ■.

B»«i  iMp,  890,  b.

0\Bpa.  66,  b.

Barlir.p<i,  i^,  890,  b.

O/uTJAmcTK,  290, 1  i  1154,  b.

HiSo-u,  TGO,  b.

Biwyia,  488,  a.

0/UIH.291,  >;  613,  a.

Minriowviii,  4ii3,  ■ ;  477,  ■.

BowyiJ,  1333,  b.

MwTw,  453,  a.

MwTof,  780,  a.

Hfri«,619.a;  620,  a.

Ou-piXc  398,  ■  1  488,  *.

M«r.V«i.78!.i.

H«tei  TP«f>4. 1223,  fc

1h'n»«A.fa,  417.  b.

HivtUd,  305,  a.

Bwunf,  761,  b.

Oi'D^uL,  BOO,  a.

HiVrp«r,  805,  a  :  783,  i.

8»w)«  rttot,  36.  b.

0™r,  765, 1.

Mhrnoi,  305,  >.

SAwt,  619,  b;  758.  a.

0{I>,  4,  a.

Mipwrrlf.*,  220,  b.

Ho*Ht.  435,  b  ;  620.  a.

OfBi,  1204,  b.

MM.  320,  b.

HtortlJ, 979, b; 1043. b;

Ot»«<l#o»,  4,  a.

1223.  b.

OfMo^r.  4,  aiSSl,  b.

S.

Hlfaf,  677.  a.

0(«yp<Lpc<.  806.  b.

Biatw,  1069.  a.

■OiiWA',  1205.  b.

N,d!™,  656.  b.

Onf,  761.  b.

N«i.,97,a; 1105,1.

Buplot  infp,  890,  b.

Oxire^lhi/ui.  1105,  b.

SJpi,.  197,  b.

0<r\a,  135,  a.

Na*vX«.  '82,  b.

B«rri,x«'.  681,  b.
SwrS.  98*,  b.

OrA^Tif,  llS4.a.

NuiiAv*^  I0B7.  b.

0»X/™,  135,  a.

H»Ti,.  680,  b.

Oriipii,  163,  b.  ■

UitTpa.  186,  a.

0,»y««^.  723.  t

NoBj,  783. ..

OpT'o,  781.  a.

On^ui,751,  b;  845.  a.

NoiiTwJ  TA(oi,  625,  b.

O.

Op.ixo^p,,  845.  b.

Nxmicif.  525,  b.

OfBitiipw,  761,  b.

NovroUm,  793.  a.

•Ottnit,  816.  b.

0,w«w,  661.  b.

Nxvfo'irM  inUJi,  892,  L

'OAiA<{>,  831,b;  931,  b.

Opicif,  659,  b.

„ iUXm,  892, 1.

■0)*Biw,  1127,  b.

Ow"».  767,  b;  1006,  a.

„ t»«i,  B90,  b.

■Ol-«Ia,  or  ObyKSa,  1213.  b.

0pm,  149,  ..

„ oJXoi,  BM,b;893.a

'OyKoi.  890,  b.

.. sbAoT,  149,  a.

H **rxirvrrin.  890,  b.

■Oiowirpa,  275,  a.

Op«.,99,a;614,  b.

„ inlpot^B..  890.  b.

Op^^  196,  b.

„ ir*w»»t.  890.  b.

'0&rr(i.>f.  613,  a; 1193,  b.

Op**.,  162,  a.

„ ir««f»(.,  890.  b.

•Oeirti,  851,  b.

Opxvrt,  1004,  b.

„ i-fpoTWi,  890,  b.

'oojnw,  esi.b.

Opx^pa,  1122.  a.

„ ixp6^.  890,  b.

OlKirvs.  1034,  b.

Opxvrri,,  1004,  b.

ar,«,  837,  b.

Ol«*«™,  ■125,  a.

Ormnip,  837.  b.

Ol.la.  423,  b.

OffTp^r,  633,  h  ,  555,  a.

NflcAiTi^  5S3.  «.

QIkI«  Kb,,  823,  b.

N«<tffi<ir,g26,  a.

0(««mf,,  313,  b.

0<np«»,  532.  b.

Nviu,  794,  b.

OI.B.,  425,  a.

Wiua,  794,  b.

06f«.  423,  b.

OTxofipot,  845.  b.

Ntfula,  794,  b.

Ol«A7iT«,  441, 1.

OSa.,  533,  ■•

Vf>atM<t,,S9i,t;  705,1.

Otumpteoioj,  1034,  b.

Otyrta,  1213,  b.

N.W"!''",  223.  a.

OWrp^,  1034.  h.

OiyxUi,  1213,  b.

OSfc.,  634,  b.

IfnwffN,  30,  1)  795,  b.

Ol^mifpui.  338,  b.

Ofr)«#«(.  483.  b.

N«ip»,  7B2,  a.

OWf-tM,  1205,  a.

o;Aat,»<f>((»r,  692,  a.

N..i.,  1106.  ..

OI«j,  130i,a.

OfrJjfx"™.  999,  b.

Nuiooutsi,  783,  a.

OW^opc^,  823,  b.

OC*i.xi«".  999,  1).

Nifimla,  ll28,a.

OiMxte.  1092,  b.

04p«7rf.,4B4.D;48a,ai497,a.

1263

INDEX.

OCpwJo.  918,  b.

Oi,Hix<'t,587.b.

nhT,a>^,.  883,  a.

Oi»(«  tlMJi,  461.  8.

n<v«Wpa,  625.  b.

n^naSAor,  883.  a.

'0«.«,  136,  b.

■0^»Sx.i,  149.  «-

1165,  a.

'OfM,  148,  »;  149.  b.

403.  b;  863...

n.™Aj«f.„,  1095,  b.

'Oxiinj.  398,  b.

UiwrihOar,  582,  >.

•Oxfaw.  298.  b.

nHiJuuxB,  1092,  a.

'Oxnw.  11B5,  fc

Uofo^iytirtai,  197.  b.

nnr^icA-Topot,  785,  a.

■oxA«i»f(<.,39i.bi  aai.b.

lUp^n-K,  865,  a.

ntrmnHrrt,  884,  a.

't4«w'636,  b.

nipa>u>,.6G&,i;  1155,  a.

n«.npt«rT*p,4«3,a.

■aK,873,..

ndpoAoi,  865,  a.

ntmnHxrnAJrm.  884,  a.

'Of™,  835,  b.

nofKifuinii  iftrrvUt.  95,  b.

n(m)«Hrr^,  483,  a.

Ut^ila,  yp«H,  865,  a.

ntFrttptu,  786.  b.

n^Xsi,  884.  b.

•O^-o-i^iJ,  722,  >.

ntpui'rrM,  1133,  a.

nfpiucToi,  887,  a.

'(y(t<Hp<r,U,  836,  a.

n,piaw-.  91.  b.

'0+«^yot,  836.  a.

n.,rf«rw,  91,  b.

'Ofoimt,  836,  a.

n,pll\iua.  79,  a.

nvrf.Ua«r,  79.  «.

napafpiiiara,  790.  b.

ntpff  >Adi,  996,  b.

n.

nBpiwJrw,  866,  b.

n,p,Hu,t,  325,  a.

n..7«(KB-«aW.8S7,b.

nf^f.^  1075.  a.

nipiwn|nor,n22,  a:  1146, b.

n.p«,Jx*»*,  300.  b.

TUrrxtfimn,  892.  «.

na«iF.  846.  h.

nopwrii,  97,  1);  425,  b.

n.p(«r.  788,  b.

n«).7wrf'.  847,  ».

na<Kirraai.i,,UOb,h.

ntpi'<HnH,290.bia87,a.

na<J<v«i«t.3e,i.

HopiiaTuu,  403,  b  1  867,  b.

n,pa*r,a,  1145.  b.

naiJiffMSw,  605,  a.

nopoffTj™,  593,  »i  789,  a.

n^ir.ib«>.  639,  a.

lioAa^i,  848, ».

n-w"f-,  "3,  b.

ntpfrtXiit,  463,a;486.b.

n«AiT^«=j,  sai.b.

nB(»X'V*TIMa.  1146,  h.

n<plimpM,  IIOS,  b.

niaSoTjwifJi.,  738,  b.

napJ»»'f"'.891,a.

ntnrrHnrtu',  484,  b.

n.Vx'lTfl*.  185,  b.

i;;S:*»iJ:'S--

nontM',  846,  b.

n««x-f4T1M<,  lH6,b.

naiM-,  846.  b.

U^f^HP-^'-.  892,  b.

nv''rr«.,44l,b

ILiXour^  713'.  b.

na,»apS  B68,  a.

n^purrlivx"!.  441,b.

n^pMriXur,  425,  a  i  aS3.  b.

TltAaari.3Tl,hi  751,  b.

n<v.«r»»*J,  868,  a.

nalidvT^,  849,  a.

n<v«io7fki^t  y(»i*.f.  868,  a.

HvItbi,  225.  a.

nam"p4«™,  1146,  b.

n^pdni,  531,  b.

UiM.  713.  b.

Uoffiar.  548,  a.

n.f«r>rrfJi,  531,  a.

naXfTie«Tit\Bt,  258.  b.

nap*,pot.  378,  b.

Ilcpi>rli,531.b.

naWioinf,  349,  «;  892,  b.

n.p<r<ii.  149.  a.

naWuait.  349,  a.

n.V*"'".  871,1.

n«rgi>;  670.  b.

ni^TiJ*.  587,  R.

rL^WwH.  871.(1.

nrraXuiiiis,  515,  a.

nofSims,  150,  b.

nmtirwr,  920,  a.

n%u.xii<,  857,  b.

ndpo&i.,  1123,«.

n^nvM,  93(1,  a.

n4^/^  737.^

n*™^.  7*8.  M.

niira^c,  223, a;  224,  a;  325,1

n*r»p«,  748.  a.

lUrSiii,a61,a.

nii;*^,707,b.

UtrpotihM.  1138,  b.

iZri,.  871. ..

nnUAiar,  788,  b.

nw.\Aii™,  B6l.b.

najTO^^HW,  871,  b.

n^A-rf.  565.  b.

nn^oniru.  889,  b.

atrame.,  639,  a.

nV>.,110I,a.

nB««AJii,  136.  a.

n<,x.«7(»B'.893,b.

n.H«*.330.a.

nrf»S«,  1165,a.

ItW.5e5,b;1101,a.

nii»»M,  892,  a.

nOAw,  320.  b.

nfr.,886.a.

„ Jr.p»t,  891,  b.

ntf«roiT»Tot,603,a.

n^<,I36,a}73l,b;  751

„ irpiTot,  89],b.

n.f*Tai<».,  488.  b.

880,  b.

nttauu,  840,  b.

nlBM,  1203,*.

napa«iXKi»,  106.  b;  863,  a.

n.*if.u,  882,  a.

n.«.r/Ia.  413,  >.

ni^iWoAsr,  106,  b  ;  863,  a.

nfAifnii.  295,  a.

nkivio,  930,  a.

n<ipii7«8«".  666.  a.

IttMlotti,  840,b.

nlM»,  930,  a.

mxoi.  930.  ■.

, n<ATWTaJ,135,b;487,bie8

,  nuu>Tir.  919.  b.

b.

n»«»«.  144,  b.

ntxm,  883,  b.

n(»t.l093,a.

nofarHv.  864,  a.

nwArr*,  883,  b.

„ Aw*»fB«T«<f,  392,

nlrnca,  1202,
nWirwr,  4es,  a.
Utjurirrm,  922, 1.
lUorv^iw  iaripn,  922,  i.
IlAiWTuc^.  1059, 1.
IIAirrdYA,  381,  b.
maTB}^wr,  381,  b.
nAi»f>sr,  753,  b>92e,  ■.
nXtiVTotsAlrlB.  Ills,  b.
lUifMraroI,  3SS,  ■.
TUi^wrpa*,  T21,b.
lU^/mr,  37  B,  b.
TlkiiiiBxiBi,  454,  a.
lUq/ux^,  4S4,  ■.
IUi»«ur,  485,1  i  663,1.
tlAwA'f,  668,  a.
IUiv«»>,6G8,  a;923, 1.
[U«2»',  185,  ••
lUnvuylM,  B6I,  a.
TlXvrripn,  923,  b.
Tli^Yn,  344,  b.
niri;.  440,  b.
nfl«,7B3,b;790.b.
no&wdnnt,  340,  b.
I]«(v,  14,  b.
noiiHrScu,  14,  b.
n«liK»,  14,  b.
noiqrit,  14,  b,
IIik«At4i,  BSl,  a.
n«ril>29,a.
nsrrpAriai,  224,  >.
HsA^^i^iXaf, 123, a;  483, i

929.  a.
DoXii  KtaiMtiui,  890,  b.
nsArrafs,  3SB,  b.
nsXinii.  289,  a.
naAirof£Xu«,  1094,  a.
IUAat,61.S,Bi929,  b.
noAffuTM,  1101.  b;  1103,  b.
noAiimxa.  1092,  a.

nofini,  931,  a.

n^ot.  226,  a.

Uofumi,  942,  b.

nopfusr,  60S,  a.

n^.  604.  b.

nopncl*  T>\<«,  60S,  b.

Tlorntanml,  605,  a.

HopHfiwiiA,  891,  b.

nopnTpaf '<^  912,  a.

HapiwriAwai,  GOS,  b.

nipwai.  393,  b.

nW?.  63i.b.

nVniMo.  533,  a.

nixr»a«ir, 233, a; 334. I

325.  a.
ILwnWno,  945,  b.
niwilaiir,  225,  «.
nmallit,  152.  b.
lUrot,  1083,  a.
nsn,  751.  b;e93,a.
UfixTtftt,  951,  a.
TiptiltfyOai,  928,  b.
IVadM>  Aie«.  1034,  b ;  1205,  b.
nptcfiinii,  391.  b.
II,7q<rr%«',  543,  b.
Hp^imf.  151,  a.
npUr,  1039.  a.
n^ttrwusir,  453.  a.
rifwoiwytlai  7P>**.  9SB,  b.
UfotoKh,  426.  a  ;  953,  b.
Upatoit^lia.il^,  b;  306.  a.


UiDEK,

npttaiXaiita  Iwtruar,  311,  k

npJCmAii,  960,  a.

IIpnTi^u.  137,  a.

npaacairia,  897,  b.

IlpdSsfuii.  1 105,  a.

ni»ll«rla,961,  a.

n,»S«rla(  7pi>#.  962,  a.

npApofut,  425.  b.

npiM^tevira  ^iA4,  313,  b.

n,»t^(a,  646,  a.

npMfi«,210,  b;212,a.

lipatia^vfi,  449,  a.

Ufmuriftim  8(in).  963,  b.

Ilfm^fBAli,  787,  a.

npoiipotfCa,  or  Tlpinipcwfw,  963,

Uf6e»tra,  555.  a.

nf«hafila,460.«;9G4,  a.

Ilfnfta'/iliu  rd>ui.  964.  a.

nptfupn.  434.  U

nfKlAnMv.  627.  a.

npowSi  3Uii.  1048,  a.

llfwTf,  436.  a.

XlfaiiSafsa,  453,  a.

TtfiMoX.tltiv,  398,  a.

njuxBToAiAi),  1103,  a.

nlidvATpnt, 398, a; 403,
404,  a;  733,  a.

IVoMirlav.  423,  b.

nputiWr,  153.  b.

npikryn,  1146.  a.

HJw/uvTifa.  837,  a.
) ripiiiami,  839.  a.

npsfi^iia.  963.  b.

npa/u-^BTfuoi.  736.  b.

Tlpaiurvrtfatt,  736,  b.

ni>Jnuj.  1106,  a.

IIpe{<^619.B;630,a.

rif^tns,  630,  a.

np^TOi,  790,  b.

npovMwa,  963,  a.

ntifh"'.  897,  a.

nj>««nn^(\i|fi>>,  1103,  a.

Bforitf^iiap,  555,  a;  673.

Xlfomtiniof,  1123,  a.

IVA«(\)?ffii.  403,  a  i  733,  a.

jipooKi/nfau,  16.  a.

UpdinXar  ypofwrftu.  311,  a,

UptoTis,  435,  b.

nparTOT^puT.  324,  a.

UparriniJ,  295,  1.

Tw  S4ftfv,  964,  a.

npooTifiw,  1133,  a.

tlfUcm^uiffAii,  1133.  a.
1 I^w^rffHifui,  1133,  a.

TifavTiar,  425.  a.

npAmA«t.  1105,  b.

nfaJoTtTa.  457,  a,

Hpjinvirai.  1181,  a.

Dpimn'ar,  889,  b.

npJownv.  889,  b.

npoTiAtia  T^iw.  737,  a.

I^sTSfi^,  133,  b.

IVh^drii.  7B3.  a;790,  b.

TipoTfiym,  964.  b.

I^Hi^vni,  36.  a.

tlfwMnii.  453,  a.

npoi^u.  837,  a.

TlptXtifimria,  211.

ninlxufo.  1201.  b.

IlfMu^irfa.  92,  b.

Hjii'M'd.  27B,  b)  1005.1.


lM^<t.  373.  b  i  1005,11.

Ilp^FUn),  7B7,  a.

tVimuvfo,  310.  b.

npVTimHi,  103,  b  ;  970,  b,

nfiotmla*,  970,  a.

npi/r<i»;^.210,  b;970.  b.

njwt.  408.  b.

Ufifa,  786,  a.

nptiTaTiij'uriiii.  611,  b.

TtpiniKtiar,  433.  a.

njHrnKTTitrqf,  484.  a.

nTUKTior,  1092,  (.

VlTitr,  848,  b.

ntoriV'ia,  976.  a.
b, Ilinn^v.  223,  a.

Uxrnaxia,  974.  b.

nvyid,,  762,  a ;  914.  b.

flvyiiairiini,  974.  b.

TlvyiT,  752.  a.

aotKBi,  185.  a  1  555,  b.

nvMimt,  978,  1.

nM«.  976,  b.

HMuTDi  r^f,  977,  I.

nMioi,  918,  b.

IIi^jtyilirrRi,  480,  b.
a; IlMcrJirnrAai,  1106,  B.

n^oi,  814,  b.


rrlor,


J,  BO,  b


TlvKiia,  80,  b

ntoil,  943.  a.

nuATi,  943,  a.

nv\£r,  43S,  ■i943,  b.

n^,  914,  b.

UvUiita.  918,  b.

nvt£or,  171,  a;216,  a.

nfi£u.  978,  b,

H^oi.  316,  a.

Hupdypo,  645.  a.

n.^,  65S,  b,

n«|rrai,4Bl.b;916,b;  1774.  b.

n»pk,  185,  a.

■  n^  IBS,  a.
' 417,  a.


'PnCaordpH,  32,  a.
TilOfr,  402.  bil309,  a.
'Pa<t»£x<><,  32,  a ;  1125,  a.


'Puffrfiof,  326.  a.
'FwirTV,  726.  a.
■Pfl^lt.  13.  b.
'P*T.«,  673,  a.
'PfitIhi  (fx"<"I.  903.  b.
•PTiTDpurfl  ipo^.  463,  a ;  994,  U
'P*Tpa,e04,  a;994,  b.
-p^/i,  994.  b;  1086,*.
'pimfAii.943.  a.

'Ptirft,  539,  a.
tfwarrlip,  539.  a.
'Po«f«i,  1100,  a.
■PsMuAi.  1205.  b-.r,

^  -4-1,3  yi*-


1364

INDEX.

'P6wTpor,  637, ».

XmAi  rt<iml,  788,  1.

Irpari,,  481.  1.
XrvnTcli,  1140,  a.

■PwHtrn,  996,  «.

■P(W».  18S,  b.

at-i^f.im,..

SrpoTTiAcu,  764.  ■ ;  786,  1.

■Pi;»^i,  117,  bi378,b.

aT(»*rii,  341,  a.

T«™p.OVW^  913.  a-

2«fl.v^r,  1011,  a.

2T,4«*rt.  341.  B.

■Viam,  1061,  a.

2<f<>,  900,  b.

St^™,  477,  B.

TwA-,  995,  a.

STiiXi.1,333.  a; 1071,  a.

1>fuu»,  335, 1.

XmpiUur.  587,  b.

a»<il<w»,  1213,  a.

Xrt^,  687.  b.

3,«A#<Vto,623.t

I

Xuatiw,  1313,a.

Xc«M.«i„l2l3,a.

3J«»«r,e61,b

3(.Jft»",  615.  a.

Xa«wn,  1007,  ».

a««ii,944,a;ll38,  b.

2iST«MrT0i  /«Avrf^  439,  b.

X(W»t,  674,a.

a-ri«,,  989,  b.'

a««fiTip,  1079,  b.

ai;.,,.7io.iu

*«A«,  653,  ..

3»nf«rrCu  7)H4^,  lOW.  •.

a««Uf,  1303,  B.

•Uil^t^.  370,  b.

3E**.  1080,  iT

SAcw.,  339,  b;  996,  b.

Znpffgi, 151,  a.

a=WBT,«.  lOBO.b; 1224.  b.

3i«»,  135,  t.

Z<[iS«<u,391,  b.

3>>^i(Au«r,  loeo,  h.

a<vpfaUin),  1013,  a.

a^vnUn,  1013,  a.

tOBO.  b.

siUwrrt,  ino.b.

aMSvw57,b.

S.-p*A«.  304.  b.

a<M*i«T|,  1007, «.

StJ\^,274,bi430,..

lo^tAoF.  403,bi 1081.1.

a,urf„,  984,  b.

a.T.4^w  ioi  «.<«.  loeo.  a.

*irM\«w,  1007,  b.

X^Aoi,  415,  b.

aWrfoXw,  1007,  b.

%>fKil.  565.  b.

3i»V«X",  1080,1.

Sorli,  625,  b.

3i<l»i|,llB,b;577,aill01,b

Znarrrol.  1101.  b.

3=(Ai»,  989,  m.

a«M*of«ii,  486.bi  929,1,

Si^^a, or *lf.«r«, 483,

S-in^wia.  778,  b.

see, «.

2r(r«,  1053,  a.

XriTUIHt, 1141,  B.

3».i)«  P...IB-,  369. ..

a™u>uo'f«.  1080,  b.

a.<-p«TV.  587,  b.

S'Vor,  853,  a.

aWm.,  1084.  ..

2<ffium(t.  335.  u.

Inlpw,  853,  a.

2wJ^,.<.  144.  b.

S(V"-«,  379.  b.

3iri^i  373.  bi  751,  b)  1053,b

Xi^Ofua,  1084.  b.

tr^U^  905.  a.

2ilrrfp«,  1084.  b.

3.(p«...  153.  b.

SwrnBoi,  306,  a  ;  100,  a.

2»nry8(«*,  1086,  i.

Iw*T-,».,  134,  a  i  476,  b  J

a.IjT«c  1046, ..
3i!KpJ,  142,  a.

3x!>4»A«.971.a.

1084,1.

i™aiB^*«...  1065,  b.

ly^^l.  1080.  b.

aWi.260,b;1105,n.

3Tia,«.,  1055.  a.

2.1^=.,  1044,  b.

Tniiu,,.  1055.  a.

1080,  b.

Xff^m^  5S6.  B.

3™fl,«I.93l.a.

2.WAu«i.1113,a.

3T^^i,634,b;706.as7!»,a

»!«•..,  357,  b.

I^M'il"',  638,  b;  1044,  b.

aW^ui,  1071,  B.

^Tia,fj>,.  1146,  a.

S«««(«,  1087, 1.

ZJtiAofuuTffa,  417,  a.

3t.H|^  1056.  b.

2«™7[a.357,  b.

ZToupdi,  370,  b.

3il«Trw«.  488, 1.

1(«<».«.  380,  t

3w^...,  1084.  b.

Z.rMr,  851,  b.

3t/»«.  1029.  b.

a*^<.{u,  446,  b.

Z.ripa.  882.  ..

3T>4><Ln)w\Jir<H,  1029.  b.

SvrrtetH,  1160,1.

luri,™.  882,  B.

STf^OI'MAj'CW,  1030,  B.

SvntX'?!,  1160.1.

2iTivnfi,  530,  a.

ZTt^wsrA^.,  1039,  b.

3-Tp,««VX«.1169,b.

XiT^pfeiBf,  487.  i;  1048.1.

2TJ4WV1.  148,  b;  369.1.

a— p(.,378.b.

ZiTonXoi,  104T,  b.

3V^,  10B8.  a.

XJroi,  1047,  *.

arSXai,  650.  b.

a%-^  1088.  b.

2lTD«  Jrrfl,  1048.  a.

:iT4tpm,  1100,  a.

3fi,Tn,>«.  357.  a.

2t(x«i.  380,  a.

2TAn7'i>  186,1;  339,  a.

2«i«.,  1047,  b.

iTod,  944,  a.

aAmAdt,  llOS,  a.

a««*j£a.  53,  a.

Srg?xe>,  230,  >.

S*«?(»,  373,  b.

3.BMt,  1008,  R.

3T<JA«,  786,  a.

!♦«*«.  918,1.

»«rtM,  787,  b.

2i^W*,  648,1.

3*a!jB<,  369.1

Zooir^,  848,  b.

Inxtuv,  616. 1.

3WA.  918,  h.
Xio^i^f ,  583, 1.

2«nr.«,»,  582. ..

3tp^««,  336,1.

S«fcW,366,b;78«,«.

3*«iP»T*«.,  582.  . ; 918.

a«*f«.,  848.  b.

3Ti«nrTd>,5,b;37,b;  1073,1. b.

Xiriircvrar.  14l.b.

6 M Jmik^w

S^f-rrunf,  918.  b.

aiK*F|  Kftimrti,  789,  b.

1097,  B,

„ Jta«i,7e8,a.

a^rSr^,  96,  b;  339,1  >  553,  t

1056,  a.
XfwSanfra^  553,  b.
S^ftmr^Tw,  890,b;  8H,  ■.
390"cnjp,  136,  L
3fIS»,  731,  b.
a«Wl'.  96.  »■
3M«,  726. ».
X^tipfor,  726,  t.
■3xM«,  783,  >  1  936,  b.
3xw«  Trrp*ymiHKr,  603, 1.
3x"»*a,  790.
3x«»(^>,  553, 1.
3xii»f,  1011,  b.
loX^r.  53B.  b.
SMTTfB,  1035.  b.
aaffncMmlpuw,  340,  b.


Tayii.  1093,  i.
Twrb,6ai.i)  1075,1.
TwrOwr,  1075,  i.
TlUvn,  706,  k.
TiUarrw,  810,«i  931, b.
TtU^Mt,  230,  b.
ToAoffu,  1099,  b.
TnAamwprfa.  1099,  b.
TofJat,  1096,  a.
TtVui's,  738,  b.
Titflapxo'.  1098,  >.
Ta^u,  486,  b ;  488, 1.
Tilmt,  1097,  >.
Tinf,  1097,  ■.
Tof^tdi,  788,  a.
Tipim,  368,  b.
Twpfir,  334.  *.
Tavpoi,  ISO,  >.


Ti^Mt,  1183,  b.
TaxvTpiipiH,  806,  b.
■tiBprwmt.  379,  b.
Txxlw.  B68.  >.
Ttix"*"^',  1099,  ».
Tir^ot.  769,b,
TfAi^uiv,  196.  B.
T^Aiiov  iT<upM6t,  893,  b.
TtAin.',  781,  B.
TVXdi,  48B,  ■;  1103,  a.
TtAnnlpxm.  884.bi  1103,  b,
TtAifriTi.  BB4.  b ;  1103,  b.
Tiium,  1103,b;  1104,  a.
TrrpdJpax/uf,  43B.  b.
TtTfWXir/Ia,  1144,1.
Trrpnfla.  379,  b.
TrrptlROIi,1119,b.
T<Tp<vx(a.48B,>i 1119,  b.
TrrpdimiAai.  1105,  b.
TtTf^tt,  786,  b.
TtrpatQ^ty,  438.  b.
TrT-ra|idmmi,  e).  1119,  b.
TiiXf,  136,  a.
Titfinvf,  1134,  b.
T4T<aw*.  1008,  a.
T^Mt,  59,  >.
Tu^  1130.  B.
Tu^,  1130,  a.
TiC^wi,  335,  a.


INDEX.
Ti$tirltia,  1 134,  a.
; Tlf»t^266,aj  467,ai  469,  b

1131,  b.
Ti^iT'K  260,  b.
Ti^irnft,  260,  b.
TifUWiMTfci,  637.  a.
TJ^m,  56,  b.
Totxei,  868,  a.
To.x-filx",593.».
TDCovMi^.  G2S,  a.
T^«  frT««,  534,  b.

., fm«,  524.  b.

„ wnn-uwl,  S25,  b.
TJ»i,  G34.  b.
TiAOni.  565,  a.
TJ^u^,  840,  b.
T^m,  673,  b.
TiJ«ii.  773.
Tii<vx«.  391,  b.
Tdfivw,  1001,1.
Toitunif,  Toftvnff,  151,  i.
TotsAfm.  136,  b.
Tdtw,  136,1;  149,bi  151,  a
Tafirm,  391,  b,
Tavfia,  790,  a.
Topnrric^,  318,  b.
Tsfi^,  1169,  b.
Tpirai,  1141,  a.
TpoT^fa,  1140,  b.
TpiwCa,  749,  b.
TfNtv.f<u,  473,  a ;  474.  b ;  556,  b.
„ tauTipiu,  305,  b ;  750. a.
„ Vfwrn,  305.b;  750,1.
Tpmri^Tm,  130,  a.
T|Nen(ut^t,  305,  b.
TfBw^mtij,  305,  b.

1148,1.
TpAwe.  787,  b.
TfBxiia  JCim.  1013,1.
Tpiartnit,  883.  fa.
TplojH,  564,  b.
IpmaiS,,,  557,  fa;  1154,*.
Ipuuiii,  323.  a.
Tpumvio^iAlifin}!,  366,  a.
T^cCiJAdf,  1148.
TpfSw,  653,  a.
Tfititaii,


Tfiynwos,  1303,  a.
Tpi77lla,411.b.
T)>u7^)i«,  4 1 1 ,  b.
TpmitTi,  1 170,  a.


TuA.w  .

TiAi),  673,  b.

Tu^Ccf,  556,  a.

TilMwar,  1180,  a.

Ti:»i,  532.  b ;  545,  b  i  1181.  a

TufKuffiH  rpa^.  9S3, 1.

Tufwrli.  liei.a.

Tifxanat,  1181,  a.


TbjiWb,  631.  b.
Tocfteuf,  334,  a.
T«\<.t.  1309,  b.
T^fmu  Tpof^,  73,  a; 134,  d
633,  a.

'TJoTHX^It,  151,  b.

"ttftrfarfla,  108,  a.

Tip«y*n,t,  766,  b.

"r^Hn^i.  453,  a.

'TipaJAtit,  633,  b.

'rSpauXaiiii  ipyircr,  633,  b.
I,  'TSfiBiAii,  632,  b.
u  TJpi,,  148,  *;  153,  b.
u 'Tifila.  104B,b.

'T^ia^pla,  623,  a.

T8;K(»iiAi,  1205,  b.

■ripoii^r,  1305,  b.

"ripot,  153,  1),

*T8/»xifot.  151,  b.

■Ti-p,  151.  b,

'TAijofuI,  623,  a.

TAHTTiip,  1303,  a,

Taam.  573;  1153,  b.


Tpiywar,  149,  b;  1007,  a.
TpurV.  233,  b.
Tpiiipa^ixiii.  1158,  b.
TpiipafiXai,  1158,  b.
Tp^HU,  784.  a.
Tpaipawaiai,  785.  a.
Tfii/urat.  llOt.bj  1103.1.
Tptfiiia.  1082.  b; 1304,  b.
TpfnoM,  ll63.b.
Tpimixa,  1093,  a.
Tpira,  557,  b.
TfNTiryvrfoT^f,  61 1,  b.
TptTTuo,  1000.  a.
Tpirrii,  1 154.  a.
TpixoAnS'i.  275.  a.
Tfii+K,  fl  irapBOTfUTutii,  76,  a
Tpiii«oAw,  403.  b.
Tfrnimiar.  1168,  b.
Twfn^efauit,  168,  a.
Tpix-^i",  1053,  b.
T)raxiJs,37B,n;533,bj  1168
TpvlXttr,  367,  a.


•Tiipoi,  783,  b :  790,  o.
•TrtpltptTiaat.  225,  a.
•Vwipttprre,,  236, 1.
■■tl^•p^,^pal,^56,^li  460,1.
'rnpor,  768.  b.
Tir./^*.  423,  b;  425.  b.
TrtiWiinii,  123,  a;  478,  b.
Tir*7|,  196,  b;  780.  b.
"Trriptala,  623,  b.
'Tiniirfnji,  633,  b.
•TinWAfl^ui,  790,  b.
TaoioA.ili,  1133.  a.
'TitoSoASi  7(>«rt.  623.  b.
"Triyuar,  556,  b.
"riri(7tio>',  656,  b.
*Tire7/iiiwuiT«ij,  577,  b.
Tmypaiplt,  903.  a.
TnSewio.  220,  b  ;  1007,  b.
TiofifioTa.  789,  b.
'TwnBtiini,  525,  b.
■TTOKitAxuv.  380,  a.
I. 'TwaKBOtiiral,  624,  a.

•rriHcptrit,sil,t.,\,-.

^ -4t4,sl'-


■T-»X*™,1138,b.

♦»A^',485.b;  1152,  b.

X«i,  412,  a.

Xatit,  280.  b.

■rxo^tUm.iSl.n;  613,  B.

*>,\tta4rAi7,,  478.  a;  899,  a.

'T«l*o^..374,t;467,^

*i!Aar,  ll52,b.

T-mlW,  1129.  ».

tiotu.  543,  b.

Xni^,  276.  b.

1P«iw,^624,«.

*<i0»r,  B51,b,

X»i(>£™,971.  a.

1f-««^«r,  1122,b.

♦.^ay-rfa,  454,  a.

•T«.x<A»^S6.,  548,  ■.

Xufnn^SjF.  277,  a.
X>vTrl«.  276.  6.

Ti«[„.  989.  b.

•nruufii,.  858,  ».

X.

XapifvSi.  276.  b.

T-c.juHrla,  93,  b ;  399, » ;  403,  b.

TirrAnf.  BSS.i;  1055,  b.

XBAirJi,548,  a;  790,  b.

XupJi,  277,  a;  584.  ^

Tffffi.,  see,  b.

., inJ«A«M,  279.  a.

Yi7Tf(>irw(«i,  657,  a.

X.Sr,  2B0,  b.

Tpdrri,  1099.  a.

Xpiovj  iUn.  280,  b.

X^,™™,  808,  b.

XoA«ilt.  25.  a.

X^ffM416,..

*.

X^>u(AirT«,  416.  b.

♦.uSptf™,,  nil.  b.

X(K».oA,r/fa,  280.  b.

taolrb,  918,  b.

X;(p«».  1183,a.

Xpurdi,  130.  b.

*df^rrr-t.  894.  ..

XopiiKst  cAi^uiTft,  1 123,  a.

X,»ffiiS[,  1056,  b.

♦oAiiTWx'-.  48B,  ■.

X(v«,  Xti^iJ*,  163.  b.

:^iw<inri<i..  366.  a  ;  1034.  b.

«iA>7{,  4Bl.b;  48U,  >.

Xf<f>tic>u>tur,  729,  b.

X/>^tir,  900.  b.

*d\,.p„,,  894.  IL

X.vii«iiX"T*'.  1173.  b.

Xtrpa,  827, 1 ;  1000.  b.

*i*j,i,  566, 1.

X.if-iT-p*^»,  271,b;  1087.  a.

X^p<u,35.,.

*u.tt.  534,  ai  669,1.

Xvrpb.  827,  a.

*«f.irp,,  B94,  b.

XiipcKlrrf^r.  729,  b.

X^p<i<,412,a.

*-PP«.&..  ypa^l,.  895.  a.

Xtiporwfv,  271,  a.

X^psi,  827,  a.

•apt««r«-p(B,,  895,  a.

X£»u.  31,a  556.  a.

X<u»T»fa,271,a.
Xilpw,  1S3,  b.

X0flt  tlKoSn-tt,  70S,  a.

•««««»(,  1 110,  ».

XtXMnu,  271,  a.

*£p<».  850.  b.

XtAitwurraJ,  271.  b.

*<l«Wi,  895.  >.

X^Aur.  148,  b;  730,  b.

tiayant 611,  a.

X.AiH,,720,b;  UlB,b.

TdXior,  136,  a;  548,  a.

♦A^A.,,  895,  b.
*ia,7.  895.  b.
tiitiTqi,  1090,  a.
*<.SiT,a.  I0B9,  b.
*.«(«,,  330,  a.
♦.,1^,  486.  a.

XW™,  67,  a.

X4*'«w,  729,  b-
X^.^.303,  b;  729,  b.
XqW.  151,  a.
Xw.^.  271,  b.
X^rlowi,  786,  b.

T«*ii,  645,  a.

Tft»»,  or  T^Wuw,  136,  a.

^;r"l.^'  •■

VtuStK6fv,  392,  b.

♦ftV«t,17.a.

„ i£,r  JAtvfc'fW,  898,  b.
♦iJAfl,  871,  b.
♦iM^.,  548.  b.
♦Autricn,  223,  a.

XWrui,  2e2,a.
XiXapxi'.  488,  a.
Xmi^  U7i,  b.

„ 4;;*W^.\«,  1173,  a.

„ *t.w^KbAoi,  1173,a.

T*t»^2ll,a;442.b;805.b.
Tif*M,  95.  a  ;  670,  b  i  971,  a.

*oe,la.  238.  «.

„ V*"'U"'i.  1173.  b.

♦otfl^t.  147.  b.
*6yo,,  896,  b.
♦.i™.  SU„.  897,  a.

„ oToA^SBTiJr,  1173.  b.

T«mift  970.  b.

Xw^««.275.  a.

♦i.p.S»,  671,  b.

XmfaiW.  ini.b;  1173,  a.

«PW{.  720.  b.

a.

*(.*<«(.,  1047.  b.

XAmn,  665,  b  i  673.  a  ;  674,  a.

*poit,  104,  b ;  898.  b.

XXainai,  851.  a.

'Q^iIm'.  163,  a.

*«pTr)*l.  785.  a.

TOa^it,  275,  a.

'aftil,573.ai  1154,  a.

*>PT«i.  785.  a.

XAa^MfW,  275, «.

'ASuv,  B23.  b.

*paTf.U,290,a;  572,a ;  llS4,b

XAarUiw,  B5I,a.

•OXAni,  1313.  a

XAwli,  85I,a.

'O/u^iyla.  413,  a.

♦■0*,  513,  a.

'Of^cr,  618.  a.

f  £»>,  651,  a.

XXiSdr,  136.  a.

•  V,  153.  a.

»>iA«tZw,  250,  a.

XAitia,376,b.

*<1A«M,  868,  a.

XAoui,  567,  b.

•DfCBKint,  144.  b.

tuXaJcr^pUH',  91,  b.

Xoal,  557,  b.

'fli,  533.  a.

•Avx«,4fl7,aiB99...

X«^  769,  b.

•arxo?^  84ft,  b.

byGooglc


LATIN INDEX.


A.

At>tuiiu,7,b:  8,b.

Actio,  9,  >  i  G42,  •.

794.  a.

Ab«tDi  Tcntet,  a,  >.

■Ibi  corropti.  74,  b.

» noialU.  10.  b.

AlwmlDj.3,4.

^u^ pluTlw  irceod^

„ onUnaHa,  10.  a.

Ab«iii,I..;  904,  Jt

115,b.

„ d>  paupcrie,  880,  b.

AbdUMtio.  728,  fc

•Pbitcwui,  10,  m.

. de  p«ulio,  1037,  b.

AbuniU,  SlOi  >.

„ perpetua,  10,  b

AUtU,  310,  a.

564,  b.

euct(iTiutii,173,b.

„ iDpcrMiuzn,?,!.

AbBTUl,  310,  1.

«l  b<HU  fide,  10,  a.

„ pigno™Ucia,9t7,  b.

Ablegmiiu,  lOOOt  ■.

bODU  fidd,  10,  ».

„ potnall^  10,  a.

booonnn ti rvptoruni.

„ populariM200,b.

AbMpiH,  3!ft  m.

564.  •.

Abnqitii,  31ft  fc

ceiti  iDCCTti,  S68,  b.

„ pnetoria,  10, «.

Abnotmii,  S06,  >.

enUxt,  10.  &.

„ priTala,  10,  b.

Abolla,  a,  m.

Abortio,  3.  ».

„ Public!.™  ta  rem,  974,  a.

„ quanli  miooti'v  982,  a.

Abortt».2,».

„ ration  ibus distraliendiik

b.

1178.b.

Abnigw  legaiD,  68%  b.

duDDi  ^uH>  (Uti,  383,

„ de  recepto,  984,  b.

AbKDtia,  SS8,  ».

b.

„ redhibltoria,  985.  a.

Ahwlutio,  647,  b.

dejeeti  eflTuUTC,  388,  ■.

„ rei uioriae. or dotli.

dfpedd.  640k  k

438,  a.

Abusu*. S7T, ■; ISSl, b;

depodti.  394,  b.

„ in  nm,  9.  a.

1SS3,  a.

directa,  10,  *.

„ deiDremirerjo,1038,a.

AeoMiii,S,  b;  495,  b;  502,  b.

de  dolo  Dulo.  373,  l

de  Bffini».  IBOOi  «.

emti  et  Tenditi,  459,  a.

eiercitoria,  4B0,  b.

„ upulchri  tiolali,  562,  a  i

orftfre.S,«.

1200,  a.

„ Seniana,  918,  a.

Aecema,  3,  i.

ia&ctuni,  10,  b.

„ pro  KKio,  1049,  b.

A«l«dMio.  3.  b.

bmilue  erciscuDdu,  520,

„ MrictijuriMO.*.

AceubiulU,  S,  b.

fictit!^  10,  ..

„ detignoiunno,  564.b.

fiducUril^  S36,  b.

„ tributoria,l037,  b.

AccuBlio,  368,  b.

„ tuteUe,  1178,  b.

AecuMtor,  13,  ■;  G4S,  b.

b.

„ utilii.iaa.

A«rTB,3.b.

fiirtE,  5S3,  b.

AEtiaaamdaicll,  >.

eden^Il.a.

Acetum,  I904,b.

Actor,  13,  a  1  48,  a.

Achueum  fodiu,  4, «.

„ publiena,  13,  a.

Ai^  587,  b.

Adlia  lei,  986,  b.

uiuiU.10,>.

Actuara,  7,  b; 8,  b;  13.bj

AdlU  CilpunU  tei,  77,  b.

udmiitum,  699,.!  1200,

807,  a.

AcinUH,  6,  M.

ioNihiiu,  639,  K

Actus,  13,  bj  753,  a

AciMuJui,  141,  b.

„ iiimimu.,.l3,b.

Aclu,  589.  ■.

rautilU,  10,  «.

„ quadralu.,13,b;46,bj

Acna,  Acnua,6,  b;  46,  b.

ji>d><»ti,651.b.

753,  b.

iojudidftlft..

„ wrrittu,  103%  a.

in  jure,  10,  a.

„ aimplei,  13.  b.

AeTotmM,6,h.

mjus.iab.

Acut,  13,  b  J  57,  a.

Acrapolii,  6.  b  1 1175,  «.

quod  juuu,  663,  K

Adama.,  759.  b.

AcroMrium,  e,  b.

legU,  or  Ipgiliroa.  9,  ^

AcU,  7, «.

le^  Aquiliae,  3SS,  b.

Addieo,  17S,»;  655,  b.

„ dlurna,?,  1.

locati  et  conductL,  7 1 0,  a.

Addictl,796,  B!  797,  b.

„ fbreMU,7,iu

nandati.  728,  b.

Addicdo,  655,  b.

„ jur.™  in,  7,  b.

miit«.9.b;  ifta.

.. iuUtui>,7,b.

mului.  780.  b.

equi,  864,  b.

» prtfom.7.b.

neguiva,  350.  a.

Adfloei,  38,  a.

„ MUtU^T.b.

"

DCgatoria,3SO,ail033,«.

"""'-■  "•',.;!€

1S5S

AdgDsti,  309,  *.

Adgoalio,  309,  >.

Aditio  faereditidi,  SOI,  L.

Adjudicitia,  13,  b.

Adiecti,  14,  *.

Adlector,  14,  b.

Adnusiionalea,  14,  b.

Admurionu  primacy  iteandBe,

&e.,  amiei,  14,  b.
Admuuonum  praxlmui,  14,  b.
AdneptH,  310,  m,
AdoepCii,  910,  a.
Adobruere,  53,  *.
Adolncentei,  63$,  a.
Adoratio,  16,  ■■
Adrogatio,  15,  b.
Adacripti  glebae.  1O40,  4.
Adseriptores,  338,  b.
AdBriplilil,9,b;  Sll,  b.
AdacripCiii,  S,  fa.
Adtertor,  143,  a.
AdMtiar.  143,  a.
Aditipulalia,  818,  a.
Adnipulator,  640,  b  ;  B18,  a.
Advenaria,  IT,  b.
Adveruriiu,  13,  i.
Adu1l«iium  (Greet),  IG,  b.
Adulterium  (Roman),  IT,  a.
Adulti,  6S6,  a.
AdvocMiu,  IT,  b.


INDEX.
Aes  Corinthiaouni,  25,b.
„ Deliacum,  95,  b.
„ equeatre,  SB,  a.
„ gnrt,  HO,  a.
„ bordeviuin, or hordia-


.  26,  b.
„ nilitan,  S6,  a.
., radc,  140,  a.


Adytui:


.  18,  a.


684,  a.
Aede«,554,a;  1104,  b.

„ ncra,  1104,b.
Aediculae,  18,  a.
Aedilea,  18,  a.

„ cerealei,  19,  a.
Aeditimi,  30,  *.
Aeditui,  SO,  a.
Aeditumi,  SO,  a.
AegLs,  20,  b.
Aeliii  Ui,  634,  a.

n Sentia lei, 6S4,  a  ;

8T8,a.
Aemilialei,  694,b.

„ Baebia  Ui,  688,  b.
„ Lep'idi  lei,  IDTT,  b.


Aera,  281,  b.
Aeiarll,  2E,  b.

„ Praeftcti,  S4,  a.

„ Praetoreo,  24,  b,

„ Qkuestoresi  24,  b.

„ Tribuai,2S,b;114
Aerarium,  S3,  a.


AectiToe  feriae,  5SD,  a.
Aetolicuin  concilium,  3T,  b.

„  foediu,  27,  a.

Affines,  28,  a.
Affinitai.  2a,  &.
Agaw,  28.  b.
Agema,  485,  b.
Agendi  Knitutea,  1033,  a.
Ager,  89.  a  ;  38,  b ;  554,  a.

„ areiflnalii.  29,  a ;  38,  b.

„ aroifijiiiu,  29.  a  ;  3(^  a.

„ auigoalui,  39,  b;  39,  b.


„ efialui,  930,  b.

n cmpliytemu,  43,  a.

n emptayteuticariut,  43.  i


maitg


'.  24,  a.


„ Practore*  ad,  34.  b.
„ sanctiu),  S3,  b.
„ sancEum,  S3,  b.
Aerii  numnii,  36,  a.

Aei  (nUHie;),  SS,  a.
„ Aeginetimm,  35,  b.
,. alienuni,  26,  l
„ cueumGnaiicuin,  36,  ■■


„ publiciu,  29.  a  i  949,  a.

H qnantoriui,  29.  b;  39, b.

„ ledditiu,  29,  a.

„ religionu,  ST,  b.

„ renibilii, 51,  a;  57,  a;
60,  b  1  61,  a.

, BBcer,  37,  bL

„ nuictiu,  31,  a.

» toriptuarina,  1019,  b.

„ veetigatii,43,  a)  45B,a.
A^er.  31,  a;  937,  a.
AgiUtOT,  287,  a.
Agmeu,  498,  a.

„ pitatum,  498,  b.
„ quadraliun,  498,  b.
Agnsti,  309,  b.
Agnatix^  309,  b.
Agnomen,  SOS,  b.
AgDoalea,  1003,  b.
AgODalia,  31,  b.
Agoneaiin,  1009,  b.

Agonium  Martiala,  31,  b>
Agoranomi,  36.  b.
Agraiiae  legei,  37,  &


r,  74,  a.
AlabaMritet,  74,  a.
Alabaatrum,  74,  a.
Alarca,  73,  b.
Alarii,  73,  b.
Alauda,  74,  a.

„ le^o,  74,  a.
Albarium  opm,  B7<^  a.
AlbogaWiis,  lOS,  b.
Album,  T4,  bi  171,  L

„ decurioDUm,  74,  b.

. judioum,74,  b;  G49,K

„ aeoatonim,  74,  b.
Alea,  74,  b.
Alcator,  74,  b.
Alet,  I49,a; 175,  b.
Allia,  SS,  fa.
Alicula,  75,  b.
Alimentaiii  pneii  et  pudla^

75,  b.
Alipilm,  T5,  b.
AlipUe,  T5,  b.
Allurio,  T6,  a.
Altaic,  116,  b.
Aldus  Don  toUeniB  aeTritDi,

1031,  k
Aluta.  229,  a.
AmaDuetuii.  76.  b.
Ambarralia,  7B,  b ;  138,  b.
Ambilio,  77,  a.
Ambilui,  T6,  b.
Ambroaia,  TS,  b.
Ambubaiae,  7B,  b.
Ambulatianea,61e,b.
Ambuibiale,  78,  b.
Amburbium.  78,  b.
Amentum,  58B,  a.

Amictoiiun^  78,  b.
Amiclus,  T8,  b.
Amiculum,  T8,  b.
Amita,  310,  a.
Ampbictyones,  79,  ••
Amphimalla,  1097,  b.
Ampliitapae,  1097,  b.
AmphitheatTuin,  82,  It-


1203,  b-
Ampliatio,  647,  a.
Ampulla,  91,  a; 19S,
Ampiillaiiu^  91 ,  a.
Amuletum,  91,  b.
Amuiea,  BS5,  b.
Amiuaia.  or  Amimiii
Anagnostae,  92,  a.
Anatodnnui,  Sil,  a.
Ancilla,  63T,  a.
Anconea,  989,  a.
Andabatae,  575,  a.


Agiaulia,4.._
AgriciUlura,  44,  a.
AgrimeiiBarei,  71,  it.
Agnmomi,  72,  b.
Abenatorea,  32,  a.
Ahenum,  S3,  a.
Ala,  79,  b.
Ala^4!S,B;  507,  a  i  509,  a.


Angaria,  94,  b.

Angarionim  eihibitio,  or  prac-

Etatio,  »4,  b.
Angipornu, or Angiportum,

Anguifer,  149.  a.
Anguu,I48,a;  I49,b;  153,  k
ADguitcntnt,  149,  a.


INDEX.

IS59

Aquaplmia,  115,  b.

Aoi0DOT«U,lll,».

Aromadte^  1904,  b.

„ T«I*1H\«.

„ Tepul.,llftb.

Arquitet.  1002,  a.

„ T™i«»,lll,b.

Arra,  Anabo,  w  Arrfaa,  Ar-

Anulu  lex,  19,  b.

„ Virgo,  110,  b.

tbabo,  137,  lu

Aquae  ductui.  108,  a.

„ ciTio,  SOO.  b.

„ ductuiunitiu,  1039,a.

ArUba,lS7,  b.

AnuoUtio.  351,  b.

„ amuio.  151,  b.

Arlopta,  921.  a.

ADi>ulUurtijt>i,95,b.

Anopticii,  921.  a.

„ «tigi>i.iiitcrdi«io,51G.

Arralea  Fratrea,  138,  a.

Annuliu,95,a;  385,  ■.

b.

Arundo,  1001,  h.

Addoi  RWgiiuj,  S9S,b  ;  SST.a.

„ pluviae  amndaa  aetio.

Anin.  138,  a.

Terteni,  E96,  ib

115,  b.

Anqul™,  790.  b.

Aqoarii,  116,  a.

AnquUitio,  e49,  ■.

An,  139,  a.

Adm,  533,  >.

Aquilui,  151,  b.

A.,  139,  a;  706,  a.

Anta*,  9T,  >.

Aquil.,  149,  b  ; 1044,  h.

AiUbialia,139,  b.

Aquilia  lei,  383,  b.

Aquilib,  505.  a.

Awsia,  141,  b.

b.

Ara,116,.;  153,  b.

Aratio,  49,  a.

A.»,]91.b.

Antecoena,  SOT,  a.

Antrum,  IIT,  b.

Antecunorci.  97,  b.

Aratram  niritum,  49,  b.

Aanriua,  141.  a.

AotaSia,  97,  h.

Arbiter,  10,  b.

Arbiter  bibindi,  1088,  b.

AaKTg.iilcati,S19,  a.

Arbitrui.  Ktio,  IS},  m.

n lecticarii,  672,  a.

Antnuia,  789,  b.

Arbitria,  558,  b.

Aauttor,  143,  a.

Aaertui,  143,  a.

AntepiUni,  495,  a.

Aiiteugiuuii,50S,a^  lOU,  b.

Arc.,119,ai  559,  li

Aiddui.  710.  a.

AnteMri.ll,..

Aroa,ei,U9,.; 131,  t.

Aniduilai.  77,  a.

Antia  In,  lOTT.  b.

Arcapuldie.,S4,b)  119,  a.

ArtroToip,  144,  b.

A[cer..ll9.a.

Antkum,  624.  b.

Archiater,  1 19,  a.

ADtiooiu,  14%  b.

ArGhi».gin>^  307,  h.

Antiqi«rii.TOe,bL

Atcbimimua,  559,  a  g  763,  b.

Aitronomia,  145.  *.

A-111..1001..

Arehllectura,  ISO,  a.

Aijlijui,  165,  a.

ADtooiM  kga,  685,  a.

Archiuni,  1093,  a.

Aijlum,  165,  a.

Apaturia,  101,  a.

Arcbinim,  1093,  a.

AtaYia,  310,  a.

Ap«t.n.ri..7B4,b.

Arebon,  121,  b.

AUt™,  aio,  a.

Ap«x.  109,  a.

Atelluiae  F.bulae,  347,  a.

ApicuU,  lOS,  a.

Arcitenem,  151,  a.

Ateroia  TarpeU  In,  685,  a.

Apluitre,  TST,  a.

ArotophjUi,  148,  a.
AtoUm  Ljeaoiaa,  147,  b.

Athletae,  166,  b.

„ Parrbawi,  147,  b.

AtU  lei,  685,  a.

Atcturui,  148,  a  ; 159,  a.

Atilia  lex,  685,  a.

Apophotcta,  104,  b.

Aretus  tn^or,  147,  it

Atinia  Iw,  685,  a.

Apotheca.  105,  a.

„ minor,  147.  b.

Ati.nto.170,  a.

Apath«<Bii,I05,a.

ATCDt,124,  b; 126,  a;  151,  a.

. Atlantide.,I50,b.

Atnqioi,  310,  *.

AppariioTO,  106,  a.

AUttptit,  310,  a.

„ Druti,  125,  b.

(Romar),  106.a.

, Gallieui.  126.  a.

Atrlum,171,b;  I88,bi4S7,b.

„ SeptimiiSeTeii,12G,..

Attin.rgea.l71,  bL

Aprili.,  232.

„ Titi.  125,  h.

Aurtio,  172,  a.

Apulei>Ui,641,  a;  685,  a.

Area,  53,  a;  171,  bj  554,  a.

Auetor,  179,  b. ■

„ agnt'iA  Iti,  685,  m.

Auctorei  fieri.  172,  b.

Arena,  86,  a  i  88,  b  ;  286,  a.

AretaloRi,  129,  b.

Aqua,  151,  U

Argri,  129,  b.

Auctorit...  173,  hi  1093,  b.

ArgentKii,  130,  m.

■enatna,  1093.  b.

„ Algentia,  111,  b.

Argennim,  132,  .,

. Argo,153,a.

Auditorium,  174,  a  ;  969,  b.

111,*.

ArgjrMpidM,133,b.

AtiSdU  lei,  78.  a.

„ Appia,  109,  b.

Aria,  1 33,  b; 149,  b.

Augur,  174,..

, eaduca,lIS,a.

Arinea,  56,  b.

, Claudia,  111,..

Augumle,  176,  a;  233,..

„ Crabra,IIt,b.

AnnKium,l36.ai  203,  a.

Auguratorium,  253,  a.

» Julia,  1 10,  b.

Annatur.  leTis,  506,  b.

Augoriura,  174,  a  ;  417.  a.

. Mania,  llftt.

Annilla.  136.  a.

Augu>tale(,179,bt  18ft  a.

AugustalUi  1T9>  b.
Augustus,  180,  b.
A«i>,  Sla  a.
Anuia,  66,  s;  66,  b.
Avis,  149,  >.
Aulanim,  lOiS,  ■.
Aurelia  lex,  650,  ■.
Aurei,  110,  a.

Aureus  cummuB,  ISS,  a;  935, i
AunchalcuiD,  95,  a;  845,  b.
Auriga,  149,  a;  381,  a.
Aurigae  ounus,  149,  a.
Aurigator,  149,  a.
Aurum,  isa  h.

„ eofonarium,  18a,  b.

„ lustrale,  IBS,  b.
Auipei,  174,  a.
Au*pii3Um,  IT4.  a.

Authepu,  183,  a.
Autonomi,  183,  a.
AtuIuo,  35a  b.
Avuncului,  31C^  a.
Avut,  310,  a.
Auxilia,  lOSI,  a.
Auiiliara,  1051,  a.
Auiiliarii,  1051.  a.
Aiamenla,  1003,  i.
Alicia,  197,  b.
Alls,  378,  a.


Bacchanalia,  413,  a.
Baebia  lei,  fiSS,  a.

„ Aemilialei,  GS8,  a.
Balatro,  183,  b.


Boliieae,  183,  b.
Balnearium,  183,  b.
Balncator, 186, b; 189, a

195,  a.
Balnenm,  183,  bi  19(X  b.
Bnluarius,  196,  b.
Balteus, or Baltea, 196,  a

1136,  b.
Baltetta,  196,  b.
Baptiaterium,  189.  b.
Barathrum,  1 96,  b.
Barba,  196,  b.
Barbatib*ne,  197,  a.
Barbaluli,  197,  a.
Bardocucullus,  372,  b.
Basoaudo,  198,  a.
Baiulioa  (building),  198,  a.

„ (legal  work),  SOO,  a.
Butema,  90O,  b.
Baia,  or  Baiea,  200,  b.
Brilaria,  SOT,  b,
Bellicrepa  saltatio,  1O06,  b.
BeneGoiarius,  £01,  b.
BeneGciiuii,  201,  b.

n  abstiatudi,  S98, 1

Bcniguitai,  77,  ■■


INDEX.

Berenices  coma,  o>  eriois,  154,  a.
Bet,  140,  b.
Besus,  140,  b.
BeiLii,  153,  b.
Beatiarii,  202,  a.
Bibaiis,  1006,  a.
Bibliopala,  704,  b.
Bibliolheea,  302,  a.
. Bidens,  98,  a.  b;  791,  a.
Bideatal,  203,  a.
Bidiaei,  203,  b.
Biga.  or  Bigae.  379,  a.
Billii,I101,  b;  1102,  b.
Bipalium,  849,  a.
Bipennim  1014,  a.
Biremis,  784,  a.
Bimu,  303,  b.
Biaellium,  1015,  a.
Bisseitilia  annua,  333,  a.
Binextum,  333,  a.
Biraextui,  333,  a.
Bombjciuiimi  1028,  a*
Bombjri,  lOSB,  a.
Bona,  305,  a.

„ caduca,  30S,  b.

„ fida,  20T,  a.

„ rapta,  564,  a.

- "~nlia,  207,  b.
ECBBO,  307,  b.


emtio,  et  emtor,  ff


Bootes,  148,  a.
Bore*  Icarii,  148,  b.
Braoae,  or  Braecae,  313,  a.
Branchidae,  839,  b.
Braiium,  287,  b.
Breriarium,  314,  h.

„ Alariciaoum,  314,b.
Bnittlani.  315,  a.
Buccina,  315.  a.
Buccinator,  32,  a;  315,  a.
Bucco,  347,  a.
Bucculae.  566,  a.
Bulla,  215,  b.
Bum,  or  Buris,  I17,b.
Bustuarii,  560,  a.
Bustum,  559,  b.
Buium,  216,  a.
ByisuB,  316,  a.


Caoabus,  22,  a.
Caduceotor.  318,  a.
Caduceut,  218,  a.
Caducum,  206,  b.
Csdus,  318,  a.

Caecilia lei de cenuribui.
685,  b.

„ lei de tectigalibua,
685,  b.

„ Didia  lex,  SSS,  b.
Caelatura,218,  b.
Caelebs,  692.  a.
Cadis  Igi,  1091,*.


._vM^692,  a.

CaerimoDia,  996.  b.
Caerieum  tabulae,  2S,  b.
Caesar.  930,  a.
Caetra,  269,  b.
CalamistralBs,  220,  a.
Calamiitnim,  SBO.  ■■
Caiamiis,  320,  a.
Calantioa,  399,  b.
CalaihiKiua,  SSO,  a.
Calathus,  320,  a.

Calcar,  33<^  b.
Calceamen,  330,  b.
Cale^ainentuiii,  990^  b.
Calceus,  920,  b.
Calculator,  333,  a.
Calculi,  222,  a.
Calda,  239,  a.

„ laTaJio,  190^  b.
CaldBrium.  190,  b.
Calendie,  331,  b.

Calendarium,  299,  a;  599,  b.
Calida,  333,  a.
Cal  lend  runt,  333,  b.
C^allga,  233,  b.
Calii,  115.  b;  334,  b.
Callii,  334>  a.
Calonea,  234,  b.
CWIpumialei  deamfaitu,  TT.b.
Cilpuroia  lex de rqwlundii,

648,  b;  649,  b)  9B6,  a.
Calratica,  399,  b.
Caluninia.  334,  b.
Calumniae  Judicium.  835,  a.

n  ]  ualuraoduiD,  935,  &

Call,  286,  a.
Caniara,  335,  a.
Camera,  335,  a.

CamiUi^  Canulli,  335,  b;  743,6,
Caminu^  439,  b,
Campagua,  335,  b.
Campeatn,  335,  b.
Campidoctorei,  235,  b.
CanalieuliuK  235,  b.
Canalii,  235,  b.
Caocelli,  336,  a;  336,  b.
Cancer,  150,  b.
Candela,  236,  a.
Candelabrum,  236.  a,
Candidiiii,  921,  a.
Candidati  prioeifna,  961,  la,
CaDdidatut,77,  a;  1197,a.
Canephorut.  237,  b ;  857.  a.
Cania,  or  Canli  Siiio^  159,  bt
"--" ~ '^---■- 152, bi


Canlstrum,  937,  b.
CanUbmm,  3S7,  b.
Canterii.  93T,  b.
Canthalui,  937,  b.
Canlhua,  37B,  b.
Cantieam,  238,  a;  346,  a.
Canuleia  lei,  685,  K
CatwUa,  149,  a.
Caper,  15t,bL
Capia,  179,  a.
" ■ * 53,  U

8^v  -jIc


INDEX

IfiSI

Cspite  cenii,  2S9,  ».

Caulio.  259,  «.

Chorobatea,  277,  a.

,. Mueiuia.  3S9,  b.

Chorus,  300,  a;  977,  a.

, Cavum  iiedium,  437,  a.

U

CelerM.  260,  a.

„ minutio,  S39,  b.

Celeruin  tribunus,  471,  a.

Cibaria  •erTOmoi,  48,  b.

Capitolini,  7IS,  «.

Cella,97,  a;  260,  a;  1105,  a.

„ ludl,  715. ..

„ caldaria,  190,  b.

CidRria.1130,  b.

Opiliura,  23S,  b.

Callariiu,  2SD,  b.

Ciliria.  63,  b.

Caprs,  149.  ■■

Celto^  420,  a.

Cilicium,  283.  b.

Ceootaphium,  360,  b.

Cilliba,  749.  b.

C>pu,18S,a:33B.  b.

Ceraere,  262,  b.

Cspwrii.  189,  «;a39,  «.

Cen.iti,all.b.

b.

C.psut«.  S3B,  b.

Ceiwtorea.  265,  b.

Cinotua.  1IT3,  b.

Cptio,  940, ..

CenKir,  260,  b.

„ Gabinus.6e5,bill36.

C.pulum,67l.b,

Ceiuoria  nola,  863,  b ;  635,  b.

b.

Cipolu)^  1 1 8,  b  1  £39,  ■ ;  559,  ■■

Censuale^7.b;965.  b.

Cinerarius,  330,  a.

C^ut.  S39.  ..

Censura,  26a  b.

Cinpilum.  1234.  b.

„ eitorum,  940,  a.

CeD!iu^36ab;262.  ai365,  b,

. Ciniflo,  MO.  a.

CaracmlU,  540,  a.

CMitui(Greeli),  2G6,  a.

Oppua,  282.  b.

Career,  Zia  a.

CeDUurua,  15S,  b.

Cireaoae.  ludi,  S86.  b.

C.™™,  285.  ■■,  336,  b.

Circinus,  383.  a.

„ rerun. Troallun.,

Circuitorea,115,  b.

CardcsS41,a.

24.  a.

Circulio.  48,  b.

Cardo,S9,b.

Centenmac  aiurae,  526,  b.

arcumlitio,  906.  a.

Cirenum,  ISOS.  a.

CiraumluTlo.  76,  b.

Cento,  48,  b.

Circus,  283,  b.

Centumviri,  367,  a.

„ agonenda.  38.  a.

CBriiIr«,  349,  ■.

Cenluria.30,  ai46.b;501,  aj

, CisiEum,  288,  a.

653.  a;  753,  t

Cista,  288.  a.

Crptor,  307,  U

CenturiaU  eomitia,  333.  a.

Carragn,  249.  a.

CoUuriD, 494, bi 497, a;

Cilhara,  7S0,  b.

Carruca,  843.  a.

504,  b.

Ciiiea  corona,  359,  b.

Cartiu,  or  Cmim,  243,  a.

n primuf,  505,  a.

Ci.ileju^  10,  a;  656,  a.

Caryatid  fi43,  b.

„ primipili,  SOS,  a.

Civilisaetio,  10.a.

Caaia  lei,  685,  I..

CertuHi.,  HI,  a.

Civis,  291,  b.

K „ Bgnria,  685.  b.

Cepbeii,  149,  b.

CiTitas(  Greek),  288,  b.

„ tabellnria,  685,  b.

Cepheiu,  148,  a.

K (Itoman),  291,  a.

Cera,  368,  a;  SI 8,  a;  109S,  a;

r!a,  695,  b.

Clarigalio,  530,  a.

C™opria,or  Cauiepeia,  149,

Cerae,  1092,  a.

CUri-imi.  638,  a.

Ceratae  tabulae,  1091,  k

Clanicd  eorooa,  36ft  a.

CiiMi«.S6S,  bi989,  b.

Cerealta,  368,  a.

Claasici,  509,  b.

C«lellariL,  115,  b.

Claulcum,  359,  b.

Caslcirum  aquae.  IH,  a.

Clathri,  432,  a.

Ciiura,344,  ii;729.  b.

Ceroma,  268,  h.

Claudia  lex.  686.  a.

„ Matin,  243,  a.

CUtLcuU,  353,  a.

Cmtrenie  peculium,  874,  b.

Certi,  incerti  actio,  268,  b.

CUfla,  1168,b.

Canlrcnna  corona,  360,  b.

Ceruchi,  790,  b.

Clavola,  824.  b.

Caiagrapha.  902,  b.

Cerroli,  353,  a.

Oauatra.  686,  b.

Calaphracli,  256,  a.

CJavuB  anguMiu,  893,  b. '

CeKiolnjure,65.f,a.

„ annalia,  893,  b.

Caiaracta,  256,  b.

Ceitiui  pons,  937,  b.

„ latua,  293,  b.

Cataita,  104a  a.

Ceitrum,  903,  a ;  905,  a.

Clepsjdra,  615,  a.

Caleia,  257,  a;  599,  a.

Ceitui.  369,  a.

Clihuiarii,  £56,  b.

CaieiU,  357,  «.

Cetra,  369,  b.

Cliens,  294.  b.

Catena,  257,  ■.

Clientela.  395.  a.

Calerrarii,  575,  a.

Chaldaei,  144,  b.

Clima,  753.  b.

Cathedra,  357,  b.

Chariitia,  270,  b.

Clipeul,  397,  a.

Catillum.  or  Catillus,  257,  b.

Charta,  703,  b.

Clilellae,  399,  a.

Catilliu,  765,  a.

Cbelrotvomia,271,a:383,a.

Cloaca,  299,  a.

Cetlnum,  or  Catintu,  257,  b.

Chelae,  1 51,  a.

Cloacae  serritui,  1032.  a.

Cavaedlum,  427,  b.

Cheni«n«.  786,  b.

Cav«.87,  bjS83,  bj  1122,  a.

Chiraroaiium,  S71,  b.

Cloaearum  euratorei,  300,  ■.

CsTer*,  859,  a.

Chiridota,  1173,  b.

aodiaa  leges,  549,  b;  686,  a.

CaTi  meiuei.  326,  a;  S2T,  b.

Chirograph  urn,  271,  b.

Coa  veatis,  300,  b.

Caupo,  257.  b.

Chiron,  153,  b.

CoactoT,  300,  bj  1184,  b.

Caupona,  25S,  a.

Chirurgia,  273,  a.

Cochlea,  900,  b.

Causae  probatio,  874,  b.

Chlamys,  37a,  a.

Cochlear,  30 1,  a.

Cau«a,  259,  a.

Choregia,  276,  b.

Cochlis,  301,  a.

Cautiw,  1201,  a.

Cbor^ua,  376,  b.

Codlei,  131^^,1  Spl.aL^

1S6S

INDEX.

Codei GregoriMiu* et  Her-

Con«ntn>.3S7,bi  965,  U

mDg;>Ilu^  301,  b.

CoDTi.

mm.  637,  h.

Coromodatam,  341,  a.

Conriiii  magiiter.  108S,  h.

«..  1082.  b.

Codi<!illi,301.b-,lllB,t

341,  a.

CmIU,  or  Caelia.  Ut,  1091,  ».

Comoedia.  341.

Cophii

10%.  358,  a.

Coemptio,  741,  a.

CompeOBtio,  347,  b.

Coibie

ula,  358,  a.

Coena,  303,  a.

CoAi.,  358,  a.

Corbitae,  358,  b.

Coenatio,  30e,  >.

Competitor,  77,  a.

Cotbula,  358.  a.

Couutotu,  307,  b;  1087,  b.

Cornel

ia  lei  agraria,  666,  b.

CogMti,  309,  ■.

„ deal...  75,..

Cognatio,  309,  ■.

Con,plu.Lum,427,b.

„ defcl.i..5|-,l>.

CogDitor,  la,  >.
Cognitoria  eiceptio,  1 1,  b.
Cognomen,  70S,  a.

-

Cooeeptiw  fariaa,  528,  b.

„

„ de  injuriii,  638,  a.

O>hBr«,S98.a;60],b.

Concha,  348,  l

Cobore.'taa,  b;507,  a.

„ in  pUno.  66.  a.

ConoilUrii,  143.  b.

„ de  noiis t^MUi^

Concilium,  348,  a.

688,  a.

Concio.  347.  b.

„ nummajia.5IT,bL

„ -igilum,  510,  a.

Conoubina(Gre«k),349,a.

urbanae,51C^>.

. (Roman),  34ft  h.

Coltio,  77.  b.

Collatio  bonorum,  SOB,  a.

«t pRHcripti^

Collegaa,  310.  b.

Condictio,  9,  a  i  10.  a;  564,  b.

963.  b.

Collegatarii,  675.  a.

Collegiati,  iel6,  b.

986,  a.

Collegium,  310,  b.

Conditurae,  1204,a.

Colobium,  1173.b.

Conduclio.  710,  B.

b.

Colon«tu«,3ll.  b.

„ de&niiiaeinne-

Coloni,31I,  b!7iaa.

Condni,  S60,  b.

fida,670,bj68T,

a; 1188,  h.

Cokmis,  313,  b.

Colonu),  49.  b.

Confurfo,  350,  a.

641,  a.

Colorei,  380,  a.

Coiigiu»,35l,a.

b.

ConJurati.  1171,  b.

ColosLu,  3ii,  a.

Conjuratio.1171,  b.

517,  b.

Colum.  332,  b;  1303,  a.

Com^Kum,  351,  a.

„ de tI publn.

561.  a.

1209,  a.

Columen,  328,  a.

„ unciaria.  687,  b.

Columna,  323,  a.

Comcripti,  1016.  b.

Comtlia BaebU lea. 77.  b:

„ cochlis,  32B,  «.

688,  a.-

„ ictrtta,  327,  b.

ConienfflM,  82i^  a.

CacciUa  lei.  £49,  h.

Conoliarii,  353,  a.

etCae<»Ualei,68i;,a.

Coli«,  565,  a.

Coniiliom,  358,  a

Comidnei,  22,  a.

Comii,  32B,  b.

Cornu,

126,  a;  358,  b.

Comai,  143,  bi3.mai969.  a.

Comui

i.7Sl.b:  704...

CommenUrii  icnBtiu.  7,  h.

CoDaobrmu.,310,  a.

Corona,  148,  b  ;  325,  a ;  359.  a.

Comm'iuallo,  330,  b) 1082,  a.

Comporaor,  6ia  b.

Ariadnei.  148,  b.

Comitia,  330,  b.

„ <:a)ata,33I,atU14,bi

ciriea,  S59,  b.

1115.  a.

Contualia.  351,  b.

eta,.ica.  360^  a.

„ centuriaU.  333,  a.

Coniul,  352,  a.

eoGTiTiali^  36?,  b.

„ eur>>ta.311.b.

Con.ulares.  9fi9.  a.

Etnu«^36S.h.

„ tHbuta,  1156,  b.

CoMulaiii,  367,  a.

ftioriwi^  963. «.

Coniulti,  653,  b.

gcanuMS.  S59w  m.

lemiiiH»ta,S63,..

536.  a.

Contettari,  708,  h.

tonga,  36S,  b.

Mii».  148,  b.
maraliik  360,  h.

natalitia.  36S,  b.

natali*.  360,  >.

1037,  a.

Dnptialia.  36%  b.

Commiworia  lei,  340,  b.

Contua,35T.  b;T8»,a.

Consentio  in  mumm,  740,  b[

ohigUa.36l.b.

Comroiitto,  350.  a.

742,  a.

«nli^36I,m.

Commodam,  S41,  a.

CoDTOMiooBs  8sa  b.

r^.«^,tc

Culioa,  49B,  b.

, pleclilU.363,..

Culleui,  373,  a.

Decemriri,  386,  a.

„ ndiit>,3G3,  ■-

Culpa.  373,  a.

„ rortnU,  MO,  ■.

„ lata,  373,  a.

„ l«u-in»,373.b.

litibuis or  Mlitibus,

„ le»ia,373.b.

„ ^™.362.^

Culler,  lia.b;  373,  b.

„ luaiii,  363,  ..

Cultrariiu,  ST3,  b.

fJ^ik'^STX"

„ ton«.  363.  ■.

Cumatiimi,  381,  a.

^ toniilii,  363,  a.

Cunabula,  634,  a.

387,  a.

„ tort.,363,..

Cun«ii.8a,bi 1133,  a.

Deevuwlia,oT  Decomia,  387,  a.

„ lriumph.lU,3ei,«.

Cuniculua,  374,  a.

Dedmanu.,  S9,  b.

„ nlkrii,  360.  b.

Cupa,S74,  a; I9Q!2,  a.

Coronarii,  -at.  1099,  b.

Cura  bonorum,  376,  a.

Coronii,  335,  a  ;  363^

„ bononua  abaenlii,  37S,  &.

Dwdiuatlo.  296,  b.

Coronix,  363,  «.

DecTetuiii,387.  bj  1034,  a.

Corporati,  alO,  b; lai6,  b.

„ here<litalu,37e,a.

Deoumae,  SB7,  b.

Deeumaui,  99,  b.

Coipiu.  310,  b.

De€uria«,10i2.ai  19ie,«.

„ jurii  dvilU,  S63.  ..

Curatela,  37S,  a.

„ Judimm,  650,  U

Curator,  SIS,  b;  374,  b.

CoTmu,830,».

Curatorea,  376,  b.

Decuriati,iail.

Cortei.  57,  a.

Decurialio,  77,  b.

Cortina,  364,  i.

376.b. "^

Cnnui,  153,  bi  364,  b.

' „ aDDonae,  376,  b.

497,  bi 1017.  b. ' '

CorjrraeanmSS,  bi  580,  a.

aquanim, 115, bj

Decumre,  5a9,b.

376,  b.

CoT-bB.  126,  b.

kalendarii.  376,  b.

Decuatia.  141,  a.

Comnetae,  364.  b.

ludorum,  376.  b.

Dedieare,  433,  a.

Coiniela,  365,  a; 5SI, b;

Dedicatio,6SI,*.

624,  a.

376,  b.

Deditini.  388,  a.

Deditio,  988,  a.

CoHni,3ei,a.

„ rehgumum,  376,  U

Cotharaua,  366.  a.

Tlarum.  377,  a.

Colfia,  367,  a.

CuTia,aiS,  a;  377,  b.

Defrutum,  1309,  a.

CoTinarli,  367.  b.

Cutiaa,Sl8,ai377,b.

IVfMti  eflbHTe  actio,  388,  a.

Covioui.  367,  b.

Curiale%  918,  ■.

Delator.  388,  b.

Crapula.  1204,  a.

Delectna,  499,  a.

Ciatec,  Ciaten,  1 53,  b  i  367,  b.

Curio,  377.  b.

Delia,  389,  a.

Cnt«,  36H,  b.

DeUetnm,  369,  a.

Creditor,  81 9,  b.

Delpbin,oTDdphinu%H9,b.

Creditum,  131,  b.

Cumusl47,  b;  378,  a.

Crepi.  718,  b.

Cunorei,  380,  b.

Delphiaia.  389.  b.

Crepida,  368,  U

Curna,  287.  a.

Delubrum,  1104.  b.

Crepidata  Ingoedia,  346,  b.

Cunileg  magUtntua,  T34,  a.

Deniarcbi,  389,  b.

Crepidino,  IISS,  b.

CuTul»Klla,10I4,b.

Demeoi,  376.  a.

Creppi,  718,  b.

Cuapii,  587,  a.

Creia,S86,ai  1914,  b.

DcTnemia,  376,  a.

Cuito.  urbii.  9S3,  a  i  993,  a.

Demetiia,  390,  a.

Crimen,  36S,  b.

Cyathua,  380,  b  ;  97B,  a.

D«nii.utio  e^iti..  939,  b.

Crcl.i,3BI,a.

Demiurgi,  390,  b.

Criati,  566,  a.

Cjmui,  149,  a.

Crocola.  369.  b.

Cynia,381,a.

Demua.  390,  a.

Cjm.tium,S81,a.

Denarius,  393,  a.

Crotalum.  370.  a.

Cjmba,  381,  a.

„ aureua.lS2,a;394,«.

Cruna.2B2,a;  4J6,  b.

Cymbalum,  381,  a.

Denicale.  fcriae,  598,  b.

Crui,  370,  b.

Crooaura,  147,  b.

Dewor  Deatale,117,b.

Crjpla.  371,  a.

Depenii  artio,  640,  a.

Claibu>aiiuu!hina,100,b.

D.

DepoDcna.  394,  a.

Cubicularii,  372,  a.

DactjUotheca,  382,  a.

ini>uulam,516,a.

428,  a.

Damai  injurU  actio,  3B3,  b.

Cubitoria,  SOT,  b.

Damnum,  38S,  a.

Culritu«,372,a!  751, b.

in&clnm,  SBS,  a.

Depoiiti  actio.  394,  b.

Cubiu.  373,  b.

Depotitor,  394,  a.

CueuUua,  373,  b.

Dare  BCtionem,  1 1 ,  a.

Cudo,  or  Cudoo,  373,  b.

Daricui,  S84,  b.

Derogare  legem.  6B9,  b.

Culdta,  674,  b.

Debitor,  819.  b.

£uleu%  373,  a.

December.  326,  a;  331,939.

DetisDator,  5S«,  b.

]se4

Desultor.  394,  b.
Del««UCio  Bacrorum,  5
DerergenlU,  396,  b.


INDEX.
Donnria,  453.  b.


Diieri


\  358, b


Dcunx,  140,  b.
Dciun),  HO,  b.
Diailenia,  395,  ■-
Di>ea,308,  m;  4°9,  ■-
Duetetics,  395,  b.
Dialii  flamsn,  510,  b.
Divinir,  1041,  b.
DIatreM,  IZ10,b.
Dlcere,  405,  b.
DicUtOT,  404,  b.
Didia  lei,  tOT7,  b.
Diem  dieere,  649,  a.
Die>,  408,  L

„ eomitiglcs,  409.  b.

„ nompcrenditii,  409,  b.

„ Guti,409,  a.

„ feriali,  533,  a.

„ teai,  409,  b.

„ n^ti,  409,  b.

„ proeliales,  410.  a.

„ profeiti,  40V,  b.

„ Knwntuia,  530,  a.

„ lUti,  409,  b.
Diflkrasatio,  419,  a.
Dignta,  B5S,  a.
DigiUlia,  739,  a.
Digitus,  383,  a.
DiUtoris  eicepria,  1 1 ,  b.
Diligentiii,  373.  a.
Dlin«chae.4!0,a.
Dimioheri.  575,  a.
Dimenaum,  1011,  b.
Diminutio  CHpili),  339,  h.
Dionjiii,  410.  b.
Diploma,  414.  b.
Diplfcba,  1 093.  a.
Directs  actio.  10.  a,
Diriliitores.  S36.  b  ;  414,  b.
Diwesuo,  1019,  b.
DiKinctui,  1173,  b.
Diuipola,  1189,  b.
Discus,  415,  a.
Diipeoutor,  333.  a.
DiTcnorium,  35 B,  b.
Dividieulum,  114.  a.
Ditinatio,415.bi  417,  b.

„  (law  term),  417,  b.

DiTisorea,  77.  a.
DiTortium,  418.  a.
Dodrans.  140.  bi  751,  b.
Dogmatiei,  746,  b.
Dalabella,  130,  a.
Dolabra,  430,  a.
Dolium,  1303.  a.
Dala,  130.  b.

De  dolo  malo  actio,  373,  a.
Dolut  malus,  373,  a.
Domieilium,  130,  b.
Dominium,  421,  a.
Domlnui,  433,  a ;  574,  a.
„ -  funerifi,  558,  b.
Domitla  lei,  940.  b.
Domo,  de,  1 31,  a.
Domiu,  [44,  b;  1S3,  b.
Dona,  433,  b.


p  ropte  r  n  uptias,43  5.  i
35,  b.


DonatiTum,  351,  I
Domiitoria,  438,  a.
Da  (Greek),  436,  a.

„ (Roman),  437.  a.

,. adientitia,  437.  a.

„ profectilia,  437,  a.

„ leceptitia,  437,  a.
Dotia  acLio,  498,  a.
Drachma,  43S,  a  ;  1913,  b.
Draco,  14§,  a;  1044,  b.
Dracouriui,  1044,  b.
Duoenarii,  439,  a.
Duoenteuma,  1184,  b,
Duella,  1SI9,  b.
Duillia  lex.  ess,  a.

„ Maenia  Ici,  638.  a,
Duleiarii,  931,  i.


EmphirteiuU,  158,  a.
Emph  jteuta,  158,  a.
EmphjtHutiear^iu  ager,  458,
Empirici,  74<>,  b.
Emporium,  459k  a.
Emti  et  TeniUti  actio,  459,  x
Emtio  boDorum,  SO&  a.
a et  leoditio,  45ft  a.


Ecleclin,  746,  bu
Eculeiu,  475,  a.
Edere  actionem,  11,  a.
Edietom,  444,  a.^

„ aedilidum,  44^  a.

„ DOTum,  444,  b.

„ perpetuum,  444,  b.
445,  b,

„ provinciale,  445,  a.

„ repeDliDUiD,  444,  b.

„ Tbeodoriel.  44S  a.

„ tralatitinm,  44^  b.

„ letui,  441,  U

„ urbamuD,  445,  a.
Editor,  574,  a.

Elaeotheuum,  190,  b;  530,  b,
Electrum,  4Sa  a.
Eleiuinia,  45S,  b.
Ellfchnium  713,  a.
Emancipatio,  455,  a.


Endro'


Duodecim  acripta,  670,  a.
Dnplarii,  439,  b.
Duplicarii,  439,  b  ;  509,  a.
Du^icatio,  13,  a.
Dupondium,  893,  b.
Dnpondiiuk  HI,  a.
Duw*,  111,  a.
Duumriri,  439,  b.

„ juii  dieundo,  3IB,  a.

„ naTales,  439,  b.

„ pcrduellioni^  S8S,  b.

„ quinijuetinilei,  499,  b.

„ aaeri,  139,  b.

„ nororum,  439,  b.


a.  460,  a.

DDaiin,  I4S,li.
Eiuia,  5T7,  a.
Entaiia,  461,  b.
Ephebeum.  580,  a.
Ephabia,  195,  b.
Epbippium,  464,  a.
Ephori,  464,  b.
Epibatae,  466,  b.
Epidcminrgi,  390,  bt
Epipedonici,  30,  b.
Epirbedium,  994,  b.
Epiitola,  35t,  a;  843,  b.
Epistomium,  457,  b.
Epiitylium,  469,  a.
Epitaph  ium,  560,  a.
Epilbalamium,  513,  b  i  744,  a.
Epulonel,  470,  b
Epulum  JoTis,  470,  b ;  673.  a.
Equettrii  ordo,  B45>  a.
Equiria,  47 1,  a.
£quila,47l,Bi  575,  bL

„ liogulares  impaato-

ris,508,  b.

1  tianiTectio,  473,  a.


Eqauleus,  475,  a.

Equui.  149,  b.

„ October.  850.  a.

Eraattnlum,  476,  a.

Enciua,  476,  a.

Eridanui,  158,  b.

Eiigone,  150.  b.

Erogatio.  114,  a. -

Errilia,  59,  a.

Emim,  59,  a.

Eiaeda,  476,  a,

Etsedarii,  476,  b ;  575;  h.

Eaiedum,  476,  a.

Eferriator,  563,  a.

Encxio,  476,  b.

Eiocati,  508,  a.

Euripui,  88,  b ;  386,  a.

Ex-arebiatri,  1 1 9,  h.

Ei-ardiiatrii,  119,  b.

EiaugnntM^  47%  b.

Eiccllmtimmi,  6SS,  ■.

Eiccptio,  11,  b;  956,  a.
„ oogoitaiia.  1 1 ,  bu
„ dUatofia,  1 1,  b.
„ litia  diiiduaav  1 1  >  b.
„ peremptoria,  1 1,  h,
„ ret  renduBc,  1 1,  b.

Eieeptorts,  807,  a.

Eionbiae,  350.

Eieubilorei,  4B0,  a.

£xedTa,195,ai19B.a;  4Saa.

Eierdtor  MTia,  480i  b.

Eicmtoria  actio,  480k  b-

Ei«f«tu%4ai,  a.


Eihibcndum  Bctio,  ad,  511 ,  b.

Futl^um,  113,  b;  593,  b.

Kicsali.  praetor,  538,  a.

EiDdia.919,  >.

Fallen,  42S,  i.

Fueua,  537,  b.

ElMtlV,  519,  B.

Favcte  linguis,  4 1 7.  a.

Futuea,  53S,  a.

Fal.  53'Ca.

Futucatio,  1193,  a.

EiKquine,  SSB,  b.

Februaic.  718,  a.

FirtuU,  538,  b  ;  1088,  a.

E.uUuai,5l3,^

Febniariu*.  SSB  j  718,  >.

FlabeJIiferae.  539,  b.

liberum,  515,  b.

Februum,  718,  ».

Flabellum,  539,  a.

Eiral,  ilS,b.

F«bniua,71B.a.

Flagellom,  339,  b.

Exterere,  53,  a.

Fecialei,  530,  b.

Flagrio,  54(^  ^

E.ti.pio«,  587.  fc

Femiiul,  1179,  a.

Flagnim,  589,  b.

Eitiqtioiuiii,  5S7,  «.

Feminalu,  534,  b.

Fkmen,540,a.

Feaolra,  433,  a.

Feniu,  535.  b.

„ CuriaK  377,  a.

EiTtrree,  56S.  >.

„ uuticum.  538,  a.

» Dialia,  540,  b.

ExTenutar,  5GS,  i.

Ferae  nugoa  minoiqin,  147,  b.

EiuTO^  1053,  b.

Faialia,  562,  b.

Fereulum,  S£8.  a.

Flammia  Ui,  69(^  a.

FereDlarii,  503,  b.

F.

Feniliutn,  SJ9.a;  671,  b.

Fmae,  528,  a.

Fla»i»  agraria  )ei,  690,  a.

Faba,57,a.

„ aeMiTae,  590,  a.

Fleiuminea,  473,  a.

Floralia.  541.  b.

F«b«i.,  S7,  b.

tae.  533,  b.

Flo«  (ailigini.},  SS,  b.

F»bi»lM,  Ml.b.

„ deniaOes,  5SS.  b.

Flumeo,  1031.  b.

F.bri.  517,  >.

„ impeiBliTae,  528,  b.

FabuU  pilliBta,  946,  b.

„ Latinae,  529,  b.

teodi  aenitui,  lOSl,  b.

„ praecidaneu.  530,  a.

Focal^  542,  a.

„ t(«Bts,  346.  b.

„ privatae,  523,  a.

PoculiB,  543,  a.

„ UbemvU.  S46.  b.

„ publioe,  52S,  b.

Focu^  542,  a.

Fabulu  Alellanu.  94-,  «.

„ atatitae,  538,  b.

Foedersti.  543,  b.

Foedus,  542,  b  ; 1051,  a.

F*ctu(,  856,  b.

Ferre  logcm,  682,  b.

Poeniiicia.  60,  a.

r»]M.  984,  b.

F*rcennlna.  530.  ^

Foenum  Graeeum,  59,  a.

PalwiiM,  SH9,  ■■

Fesli  dies,  409,  b.

„ cordum.  60.  B.  -

Falcidis  Ul,  S76,  b.

FMluca,  730.  a.

Fowiua,  595,  b.

Falcul*.  518,  L

Fetlal™,  530,  b.

F>l«rii,5t8,  ■.

FLbuU,59l,b.

Falliculiu,57,  a;  543,  a.

Falnim.  517.  b.

Fictile,  533,  b.

F<Jlia,543,ai 1022,  a.

F.l».  Jia.  >.

Fieti,^  534,  b.

Foi«,  5*3,  b.

F»mili.,5l9,»;574,b;  104!,«.

Forceps,  545,  a.

FuQiliu  emptor,  1144,  b.

536,  a.

Fore),  427.  b.

Forfti,  197,  b;  545,  a.

iso.^

Forfieula,  545.  a.

Fami1urii,519,  b.

FLdejussoi,  640.  b.

Fori,  283,  b;  788,  a.

F.m«iUballi,703,bi  725.  b.

FotIb,  625,  b.

F.mu!i..,519,..

Fidel,  148,  b;  7«),  a.

Forma,  592,  b;  545.  b.

Fiinni.  Ui,  1077,  b.

Fldicula,  148,  b  J  536,  b.

Formwrii.  47.  a.

Fanum,  1 104,  t,

Fidla,  148,  b.

Formella,  545.  b.

Far  C!ii.inuin,  54,  i.

Fiducia,  536,  b.

Formido,  989,  a.

„  Tenuciilunirutilum,J4, «.

FiduciarU  aclio.  536,  b.

Formula,  11,  a;  545,  b.

Figlinae,  533.  b.

Fonualia,  545,  b.

Farrago.  «9,  a.

Kgulina  ara,  593.  b.

Foraaeatorca.  199,  b.

Farreom,  741,  >.

Flguliu,  533,  b.

Fomacula,  546.  a.

Fartor.  520,  ■.

FilamcD,  540,  b.

Foroai,  546,  a.

Fa%531,b.

Filia,  310,  a.

Fonui,546.  b.

FaKH,  Sm,  b.

FiliaAimiliBa.  873,  b.

Foro  oedere,  or  abire,  139,  a.

Fascia,  531,  a.

Filiua,  310,  a.

„ metgi,  193,  a.

Filiiu&iniliaa, 10,  b;  873,  b;

Fonili,  203,  a;  983,  K

FaxiQla,  531,  ■.

874,  a.

Forum,  957,  bi  546,  b.

Futi,  5S1,  b.

FJum,  540,  b.

Foisa,31,b; S53,  a.

„ anualca,  5ZS.  a.

Fimbriae,  597.  a.

„ <>aee>,46,b.

F1d«  eBxd,  930,  b.

Framea,  589,  a.

„ Cqntoliiu,  533,  b.

F!iiii,Sg,b;  1032,  a.

FraUr,  310;  a.

FiDitoTei,71,b.

Fntras  arrales,  138.  a.

„ di«,  5!8,  a.

Frau«,999.a.

„ hiitoriei,  533.  a.

557.  b.

Frenum,  548,  a. ',.

„ ««ri.532,..'

Fucale.,  575,  U

Frigidarium,I89,  aj  t^  b.

1S«6

Fnlilloi,  243,  b.
FronUle,  91.  a.
FiuetuiTU  res,  1S31,  >.
Fructuuiiu,  ISSl,  a.
Fruetiu,  491,  b.


Fri


lena.  Mi,  b.


Prumento  •cnwido,  d«,  53,  b.
Fucu>,55I,a; 1214,  b.
Fugn  lata,  515,  b.

„ libera,  515,  b.
Fugalia,  9H5,  b.
FugitiTuii,  10)8,  a.
Fugitirtu,  1038,  a.
Fulcra,  674,  b.
Fulcniiii,118,b.
Fullo,  551,  b.
Fulloaiea,  S5S,  b.
Fullooicum,  559,  b.
FulloniuiD,  5SS,  a.
Funiarium.  I  SOS.  b.
Fumi immitlendi Hrrituis

1033,  a.
Funalc,  553,  i.
Funalii  nuui,  379,  b.
Funambulus,  553,  a.
FuDiriiu,  379,  b.
Funda.  553,  bi  989,  b.
FuDdani,  543,  a.
Funditorei,  553,  b.
Fundui,  554,  a.
Fune«,  790,  a.
Funut,  554,  b.

„ indictiTum,  558,  h.

„ plebeiuin,  558,  b.

„ publicum,  55S,  b.

„ taciturn,  558,  b.

H traiulatiliam,  558,  b.
Furca,  569,  b.
Fureifer,  563,  a.
Furfurea,  55,  b.
Furia,  or FiuU  Caniuia  lax

690va;  731,  a.
Furlonu,  376,  a;  1113,  b.
FumuB,  199,  b;  54«,  a.
Furor,  376,  a.
Furti  actio,  563,  b.
Furtum,  669,  a.


„ oblstum,  563,  b.
Fmcina,  SS4,  b.
Fuatium  aninudTeraLo,  S€S,
Fastuarium,  564,  b.
Fuius,  565,  a.


INDEX.

OaUi,566,b:5T5,  b.
Gasea,  959,  a.
Gauiapa,  567,  a.
Gauupa,  567,  a.
Gaiuapum,  567,  ■.
Gemini,  150,  b.
Gener,  98,  b.
Ceuethliu:!,  144,  b.
Geoieulatua,  148,  b.
Genitun,  1 44,  b.
Gsni,  567,  b.
GcDtilei,  5G7,  b.
Grntilitu,  568,  a.
GcDtilitii  aacra,  568,  b.
Gentilitium  jut,  563,  *.
German  i,  309,  b.
GerrM,  574,  a.
GeMa,?,  a.
Geatatio,  619,  a.
GingTua,  1130,  b.
Gladiatoret,  574,  a.
Gladiatorium,  574,  b.
Gladiiu,  574,  a.
Glandet.  554,  a.
Glrin,  1029,  a.
Glomuv  565,  a.
Gioa,  28,  b.


Glun


1,57,  a


1199,  b.


Gomphi.

„ cogiuitionii,  3I(^  a.
Graecoataaia,  579,  b.
Gnmmalopbylacium,  1093,
Granea,  55,  b.
Graphiarium,  1071,  a.
Giaautores,  670.  b.
Gregmianui  Codei,  301,  b.
Gremium,  9O0,  «i  1192,  a.
Grama,  951,  b.
Gubernaculum,  7S8,  b.
GiuUtio,  307.  a.
Cuttua,  199,  b  ;  579,  a.
. Gjmoauum,  579,  a.


H.

Habenae,  585,  a.
HabiUtio,  I03I,  a.
H*cre!i,594,  a;  598,  a.
Halicaitrum,  £4,  a.
Haltercs,  535,  a,
Humamsia,  5S5,  b.
HarmcHCae,  586,  a.
Harpaginetuti,  5B6,  a.
HarpagD,  586,  b.
Harpaitum,  586,  b.
Haniga,  537,  a.
Haruipicei,  586,  b.
HanHpicinaara.417,  ■)  S
Haruipicium,  417,  a.
Haita,  S67,  bi  587,  a.
' 589,  a.


Hdiocamiaus,  433,  b.


Helix,  590;  b.

HdlanocUeac,  590,  b;  BSOt  b-

HelleuoUmiae,  5SO,  b.

Hetolei,591,a.

Hemina,  351, >;  367,  a;  599,b

979,  a.
HemlDarium,  151,  a.
Hemislrigium,  254,  a.
HepatiKW,  95,  b.
Heraea,  573,  b.
Herculan^  167,  a.
Herculei,  1 48,  b.
HeredEu*,  598,  a.
Hetedium,  653,  a ;  753,  a.
Herea  (Gnek),  594,  a.

„ (  Roman),  598,  a.
Hertnae,  609.  a.
Hermaea,  604,  a.
Hermanubii,  603,  h.
Hermarea,  603,  b.
Hermilhena,  603,  b,
HemiEraelc*,  603,  b.
Hernii^niBiius  codes.  301,  u.
Hermuli,  609,  a.
HerOD«,  604,  b.
Heiaphoii,  894,  a.
Heuphortm.  679,  b.
Heiem,  785,  b.
HieroDica  lex.  69a  b;  965,  a


167,  a
Hilaria,  608,  a.

Tlippodromiu,  606,  b;  619,  a
Mtppoperae.  61 1,  a.
Hirpei,  645,  b.
HUter,  6I2.a.
Hiitrio,  611,  a.
Hoedi,  149,  a.
HokxericB,  1098,  b.
Hoooraiia  actio,  10;  a;  858,  a
Honmvrii  ludi,  716,  a.
Honocutum,  18,  a;  686,  a.

u  ju(,10,a;444,l

IlatKms,  613,  b.
Iloplomuhi,  575.  b.
Hora,  614,  (l


ii47I,  b


^  144, 1

Hardeariumaa.9(

Hordeum,  55,  b.

„ canthoinuio.  56,  a
„  Galatieum,  or  dja

ticbuDi,  ie,  a.


.«,a.

Horologiuni,  61 5,  ■.
Horreaiii,  6 1 8,  a.
Horreum,  61 8.  a.
Honeiuia  lei,  689,  a ;  69CX  b

696,  b  1  998,  a.
Hortui.  613,  a.
Hoapo.  621,  a.
Hoqiilalia,  69C^  a.
Hoapitium.  619,  ■  -,  SSO,  a.
Hotlia,  999,  b.
Honih6l9,b;  9SOt^
HoMui,  826,  b.
Humare,  560,  b.
JlfidnUiia,  681,  b.
Hjradn,  150,  a;  I6a,h
Hydra.  Hjdroa,  153,  b.
Hydrsub,  es%  b.


IlydronKlum.  1305,  b.
Hypmclbne,  195,  a.
Uyponiutum,  193,  b.
Hvpogtum,  556,  b.
IlfpalhrcB,  91fi,  >.
IlvpothecarU  actio,  91,  b.
Hypotnchelium,  395,  *.


I J.

JbcuIbIwh,  503,  a ;  S»9,  a.
Jaculum,  SS9,  ■  ;  989,  b
Janitor,  4ST,  b;  6ST,  b.
Janiia,4StT,  b;634,b.
Jaaiuriu),  SSI,  333.
lattalipta,  638,  a.
lalnlipticc,  638,  a.
lalioiophiMa,  6^8,  a.
Icoaieae  ilatuae,  1063,  a.
Idui,  331,  b.
Jejunum  solum.  45,  b.
Jentaeulum,  306,  a.
]  licet,  56a  b.
Uliutm,  6'i8,  a.
lloUe,  59[.  a.
linaginei,  638,  b.
Imbricea,  1098,  b.
Imniuniuu^  638,  b.
Impcndiom,  535,  b,
ImperatiTBe  friiac,  5E8,  b.
Jmpcntor,  630,  a.
Imperium,  638,  b;  993,  b.
Impluiiam,  427,  b.
Impubet,  630,  a ;  636,  a.
la  bonii,  305,  b.
Inauguratio,  631,  b.

„  regis,  993,  a.

InauTii.  63S,  a.
Incendium,  632,  b.
Inceruui.  339,  b;  363,  a.
IncvcameDta  oaf  ium,  903,  b.


INDEX.
Inofflcios!  querela,  1 1  IB,  a.
laofflciosum tcstamcnlum,

1117,  b.
InquUini,  311,  b.
iDquilinui,  516,  b;  710,  a.
Insania,  376,  a.
InuniM,  3T6,  a.
Inscripta,  945,  a.
Insigne,  638,  a.


Jnari,  10,  b ;  646,  b;  96S,  a.
„ ordinarins, 968, a;


Ineltnatio,  396.  b.
Ineorporalei  ret,  431,  b.
Incubatio,  'tSS,  b.
iDconabula,  634,  a.
Incut,  634,  a.
Jodci,  704,  b.
Jndigitanienta,  941,  a.
Induere,  78,  b.
InduiDCntum,  1173,  b,
iDdmium,  1173,  b.
Indutua,7B,bi  1173,  b.
Inbmia,  634,  b.
InGini,  636,  a.
Inraatia,  636,  a.
iDfcriae,  563,  b.
Infula,  637.  a.
iDgeoiculatua,  148,  b.
Ingeuicolul,  148,  b.
Ingmui,  637,  a.
Ingenuitas,  697,  a.
Ingnlua,  8TS,  a.
Injuria,  637,  b.
lidutiarum  aclio,  699  a)  1


InstituMiia  actio,  641,  b.
loiula,  430.  a.
JutegTum,  restitutio  in.


987,


Inlentio,  12,  b.
Intarcapedo,  191,  a.
Intercmio,  640,  b;  641,  b.
Intemsi  die*,  409,  b.
Inlerdiclio  aquae  <t  ignis,  516,


„ qnantiania,  648,  b.
Juttieati  actio,  65 1 ,  b.
Judios  edili,  64B,  b.

„ ediiitii,  77.  b;  648,  b.
Judina  duplicia,  590,  a.

„ eitraordinaria,  709,  a.
„ legitima,  629,  a.
„ quae  imperio,  698,  b.
Judicium,  646,  b.

album,  649.  b.
ei  lege,  639.  a.
„ populi,  648,  a.
B priiatum,  648,  a.
„ publicum,  64S,  a.
„ tutelae,  ]t78,b.
Jugarii,  48,  a.
JugenuD,  G51,  b.
Jugum,651,b;  652, a)  753,  a.
,  624,  b.


ie  pracario,  643,b.
prohibiloriunh

643,  a.
quorum  bonorum.


Jidiie  l^H,  690,  b.

Julia  lei  de  adulteriia,  17,  a.

n agraria,  690,  b.

„ de  ambilu,  77,  b.

„ de  annona,  690,  b.

n de  bonis  cedendii,
690,  b.


restilutarium,643.
retinendae  pones

SaWianum,643,>.

sectocium,  643,  a ;
1013,  b.
n  simplieium,644,a.

„  iitip<uiidetia,643,

n  utrubi,  643,  a.

InlergeriDtu,  869,  b.
Inte^eiiiug,  869,  b.
Internundinum,  816,  b.
Interpm,  77,  a;  131,  bi  644,b.
Intenegaum,  644,  b.
Interrei,  644,  b.
InterviUum,  348,  a.
Interuls,  'll73,  b.
Inteatabilig,  S45,  b.
lD(estato,henditatiBab,598,  a.
InUiUtus,  598,  a.
Inteslinum  opus,  645,  b.
Intimam  solidum,  57,  a,
Indusium,  1173,  b.
InTSiiIaiium,  601,  b.

Irpei,  646,  b.
Iselattlci  ludi,  167,  b.
Italia,  318,  a;  964,  b.
), Iter,  937,  a.
lUrare,  49,  b.
Jtineria  KrTitui,  1032,  a.
Jubere,  I03S,  a.


Judieiaria,  691,  a.

de liberis  legationi-
bu%  679,  a.

majeatati).  691,  a.

municipalis,  69],  a.

et Papia Poppaea
691.  b.

peeulatus,  881,  b.
„ et  Plautia.  693,  b.
M de  pronnejii,  693.  b.
„ npetundarum, 986,

„  de  residuia,  881,  b.
n  de  sacerdotiia,  693,  a.
n de  saciil^gis,  881,  b;

1001,  b.
„ lumptuiria,  693,  a;

1078,  a.
„ theatralie,  693,  a.
„ et  Titia,  693,  a.
„ de  Ti  publica  et  pri-

«ta,lS09,a.
p vtsetimaiia,  1196,  a.
Julius,  332.

Junea,  or  Junia,  Norbana  lex,
670,a;  693,a;  705,bi  731, a.
Junia  lex  repetundarum,  986,  a,
Juniores.  333,  b.
Junius,  389,  bi  333.


JureeoDsuIti,  6Si,  b.
Jurgium,  BS3,  ■.
Juridici,  653,  b.
Juris  ■uetom,  173,  b;  Ej3,  b
654,  b.


>iiiu1li,  6


S.b.


Jurisdictio,  357,  b.
Juiuperiti,  653,  b.
JurisprudcDtn,  653,  b.
Jurii  iiudioti,  143,  b.
Iia.  655.  b.

„ aquae  impetntae.  1 1 5|  •.

„ Aeliinum,  659,  ••
;i.  95,  b.


nnulor


I,  S5,  b.


„ applicitionii,  S95,  *.

„ aogurlutn, or auguruin,

179,*.
„ ciTtle,  10,  >;  656,  a.
„ „ FlaiianuiD,  659,b.

„ Fapirianuin,orPa-
pisiaDum,  659,  bL
„ clTltatii,  291,  b.
„ eoniTDercii,391,bi  SlT.b.
„ connubii,  S91,  b.
„ edleendi,  444,  ■.
n euodi,  1033,  a.
„ fbtide,  656,  b.
„ gentililium,  orgentilititu^


„ honarum,  991.  b.

„ Itallcum,  317,  a.

„ L*til,391,b;  669,  b.

„ liberomm,  699,  b.

„ naturale,  65S,  a.

„ nonicriptum,  657,b.

„ Poatifloium,  656,b;  911,
b.

„ pounMDnii,946.ai  948,a,

„ portUminii,  949,  b.

„ praedialorium,  955,  a.

„ prxtorium,  444,  b ;  657,  a.

„ priiatum,  39 1 ,  b  I  657,  bL

. publice  epulaadi,  I0S3,  b.

„ publuum,  291, b;  6S7,  b.

„ Quiritium,  391 ,  b ;  65B  a.

„ relationis,  1091,  a.

„ respondendi,  654,  a.

„ lacrutn,  656,  b.

„ icriptuin,  657,  b.

„ •cnatui,  1018,  b.

„ n)9ngiorum,  991,  b.

„ (uperflciarium,  lOlS,  b.

„ Tocatio,  in,  10,  b.
Ju^uraadum,  659,  b.

„  ca1iImnUe,!39,*.

Jiutafunera,558,b.
Ju<tiniaTi«iioodei,301,b.
Juititium,  663,  b.
JuHu  quod  actio,  663,  b.
JuMum,  659.  >.
Juicnalia,  or  JuTriulct ludi,
663,  b.


Labarum,  1045.  a.
Labnim,  191,  a; 19
Labyrinthiu,  664,  a.
Laetrna,  665,  a.
Liciniae,  665,  a.
IdMOoicum, 164,  b; 190,  b;

191. b.
Lacunar,  439,  a.
Lacui,  IH,  b.
Laena,  665,  b.
Laesa  m^'eatai,  734,  b.
LageDKE,  1903,  b.

Lanoula,  667,  a ;  11 70,  b.


1.  b.


Lani,  667,  a.
Lapiddinae,  G7I,  a.
Idpi>  ipeculBrii,  433,  a.

LaquHlarea,  575,  b.
I^uviH,  667,  b.
Lararium,  667,  b.
LatentaJia,  666,  a.
I^renlinalia,  668,  a.
Largitio,  77,  a.
LaiTa,  8S9,  b.
LaU  fuga,  515,  b.
Later,  666,  a.
IjiUreului,  66R,  a.
Lalenui,  669,  a.
LatidiTiiu,  S94,  a.
Latii  jui,  669,  b.
Lalinae  feriae,  529,  b.
Latini  Juniani,  705,  b.
LatiiiiCas,  669,  b.
Latinuv  291,  b.
Latium,  669,  b.

Latrina.  188.  b.
LatrociniuTn,  670,  a.
Latronei,  670,  a.
Lstruneuli,  670,  b.
Lalumiae,  671,  a.
Latui  claiua,  893,  b.
LamiocUda,  190,  b;  191
Laudatio  fuitebns,  559,  a,
Laurcntalia,  66S,  a.
Lautia,  677,  h.


Ltgca  ceoturialae,  682,  ■■
. curialae.33S,b;«82,a.
„ Juliae,  690,  b.

Le^49aa;59T,b.

L^ia  actionea,  9,  a.

„ Aquiliae  aotiot  9SS,  b.

Legitiioa hereditaa,  598, a:
600,  a.

Le^limuia  ipatium,  1033,  b.

L^timua  miidiu,  1033,  b.

L^umina,  57,  a.

Lembus,  630,  a.

LeiDDiacui,  68a  a.

Lemuralia,  660;  b>

Lamuria,  680,  b.

Lenaea,  41),  b.

Leno,  680,  b.

Lenoeiniuoi,  6S(^  b.

Leo,  15a  b.

Leporaria,  69,  b.

Lepta,37ab.

Lepna,  152,  b.

Lena,  TOR,  a.

I«Tna«a,  68 1 ,  a.

Lenu*.  559,  a.

Leoca,  S93,  b.

Lmga,  893,  b.

LcTir,  2S,  b.

Lex,  657,  ai  658,  bs  «S1,  b.

„ Acilia,  986,  k

„ Acilia  Calpuraia,  77,  h.

„ Aebutia,  9, a; 967,  a;
6S4,a.

„ Aclia,G84.a.

„ Aelia Sentia, 684. a;
878.  a.

n Aemilia,  684,  b.


LaulDi


e,  671,1


Lectica,  6TI,  b.
Leeticarii,  671,  b;  67!,  a.
Leoticulo,  671,  bi  67it,  h.
LccCiMemium,  6T3,  a.
Lectom,  92,  a.
Leetui,  673,  a.

„ funebrii,  671,  b.
Lcgataiiua,  675,  a.
LegBtiolib«ia,67B,b.
Legatum,  675,  a.
Lcialua,  677,  b;  967,  b.
Lege*,  683,  a.

365,  a.


634,  b.
Aemitia  BKbia,  688.  a.
Aemilia  Lepidi,  1077.  b.
Aemilia  Scauri,  731,  b;

I077,  b.
agwia,  37,  a;  6S5,  a.


annua,  444,  b.
Antia,  1077,  h.
Anlonia,  685.  a.
Apuleia,641,  a;  6S5,  a.
. agiaiia,6S5,B.


J48,  a:  6S5.  a.

H majeataUt,  7X5.  a.
Aquilia,  383,  h.
Alernia  TtzpoM.  GS5.  a.
Atia  de  (■cenlotiia,685>a.
Aliiia.  685.  a; 693,  a;

1177,  a.
Atinia.  685.  a.
AuGdia,  78,  a.
Auiella,  65a  a.
Baebia,  685,  a.

,, Aemilia,  68A.  a-
Cascilia  de  Ccnaonbuv  <ir
n Ce(Bsri^6s5
h.


INDEX.

196V

*I

Lei  Marcia,  695.  a.

685,  b.

688.  a.

„ DidU,  fiBS,  b.

FabUdepl>pa,9Ql,b.

MemmU. or Remmia,

„ tabelUri^  1091,

Falddia.  676,  b.

S34,  b.

Fannia,  1077.  b.

MBn.ia,  695.  a.

DUpurnia  de  mbitu,  77,

Flaminia,  69a  a.

Mioucia,  695,  a.

b.

PUtU  agraria,  690,  a.

OctaTia,  S49,  a.

Ogulnia,  695,  ..

GIB.  b;  649,

FuBade  rBliKionc,  690,a.

Oppia,  1077,  a.

b ;  986,  >.

„ JudiciarU,  650.  a.

Ordli4,1077.  a.

Cuuleu,  685,  b.

Furia  or  Furia  Caninia,

Orini.,695,  a; 1018,  a.

Cuik,  685.  b.

690,  ai  731,  a.

Papia  de  peregcinti,  695,

„ .gnri.,  68S,  b.

„ de  ipoMu.  64I,a;

a.

79!,  a.

„ Poppaea, 306,  bj

1091,  ■.

418.bi  691, b;

„ TerenCia  frunient».

Uria,  676,  b.

878,bj  879, b.

ri..  685,  b.

Papiria.  or  Julia  PapirU

CiwU,  685,  b.

de  mulcUrum  aeitima-

atudiM,  686.  *.

G»blniae.78,  a;  69a  a.

tione,  695,  ..

Clodiu,  549,  b;  686,*.

GellLa  Cornelia.  690,  b.

Fipiiia,  695,  a.

Co«liaoiCJwlU,l091,k.

Geniida,  690.  b.

„ Plautia,  695,  b.

ComdU  agruu,  666.  b.

Hieroiuca.690.b;965,a.

Poetelia,  896.  a.

„ A,  ciTiutc  686,

Horatia,  690.  b.

„ tabellarii,  1091,

b.

a.

„ de  flil*>>,  517,  b.

68S,ai690,bie96,b(

Pedia,  695,  b.

„ fruiMnttrU,549,

928...

Pcduca«.695,bL

Hoatilia  de  ftttii.  690,  b.

Feiuiania,  695,  b.

„ i,  iqjuriii,  638,

I«Uia,  69a  b.

Petreia.  695,  b.

Jndiearia C Gracchi,

Fetronia,  695,  b.

1017.  b.

Pin.ri.,e95,b.

PlaetoriB,374,bi  409,a.

686,  b.

419,  a;  68a  b.

Plautia,  or  Plotia  dc  vi.

„ mii«M.ti^78S,t

„ de  ambitu.  77.  b.

1209,0.

„ dc  ao«»  tobelli^

„ deemui.,  919.  bi

» or  Plotia  judU

688,  a.

ciarla,65aBi

695,  b.

„ de  pmiddio.

691.  a.

„ Papiria,  393,  a  ;

687,  ■.

695,  1i.

„ deTl,6S3.  a.

PDete1ia,77,b;  696...

}alUe.69abi  691,692.

P«piril^696,ai

963,  b.

693.  a.

797,  a.

Pompeia,  696,  a.

986.  t.

„ Lieiaia,  693,  b.

„ dc  ambitu,  77,

„ NoibaDa, 67a a;

b; 650,  a;

997,  b.

693..! 70S,bj

696,  a.

„ dc  •ioriis  et  *e-

791,  a.

neai:i),670,b;

687..; IlflB.

„ dej'uremagi.-

b.

„ Velleis  693,  n.

tr.tuuiii,69e.

„ de  spoiuoribus,

Laetoria,  693.  b.

641,  t

Liem[ade»d>Iitiu,77,b.

„ Junia,  693,  b.

687.1.

b.

„ Muci.  de  ciTibQ.

regundis,e93.b.

517,  b.

de-ri.  633,  a;

„ d<  ii  puUlea.

b.

65a  a  J  696,

isog,..

» 1209,..

b.

PompeUe,  696,  *

.. uDciark,  687.  b.

Li*iae,  549.a;  694,  a.

Popilia.  695,  a.

„ Baeb'i.,  77.  b.

Lutatiade  vi.  1209.  a.

„ CKcilia,  549,  h.

Maenia,  694.  b.

„ «t  CaecilU.  688,

Porti.deproTindi»,e96,

H«i>Ui.dea>loDii.,G94,

CurUu  de  imperio,  ITS,

b.

Publlcia,  696,  a.

bt  333,  •.

Publilia,  696,  a.

Didia.  10TT,  b.

rum,  694,  b.

de  alea,  75,  a.

mancipii,  798,  n.

940,  b.

MaoilU,  694,  b.

641,.;73S,a.

Dnilli.  688.  a.

PubUliae.696,b(9aB,a.

•

„ mMmk,  688,  a.

b;73i,b.

•.

PnpU,697,  a.

„  ngiae,  339,  ■.

„  Tepetuivkrum,  9S6,  <u

„  dere»idiU,88I,  b.

,  Rhodia,  697,  •.

„  Ro«ia  theUnlis,  69T,  b ;

1133,  b.

„  RubrU,  fi97,  b.

„  RupillM,  698,  a ;  964,  b.


INDEX.
Ijbanlu  ludi,  414,  b.
LibenlU,  414,  l
Librralii  caiua,  143,  ■.

H manua,  143,  a.
Liberal! til,  TT,  ■■
Liberi,  637,  »-,  705,*.
Liberlu,  7<H,  b.
Libertiu  (Greek),  705,  4.

„ {Rom*n),7ft5.^
I.ibeitinus,  637,  «.
Libituurii,  558,  «.


^  683,  ■) 1008,  b.


, ScriboDU,  698,  b.

, Sempronia de fbenore,

699,  ■.
, SemproDise,  698,  b.
, ServUU  agnrU,  699,  >.

„ CHpioiiii,649,U
,  „ GUueia  de  ciyU

Ute,  986,  b.
,  „ Clancia  de  repe-

luadis,649,b;

9BG,  b.
,  „ judiciaria, 649,

,  Silia,  699.  a.

,  SiUaniptCarbonii,69J,b.

,  Sulpicia  Sempronia,  699,

b.

,  Sulpiciae,  699,  b.

,  Sumptuariae,  1077,  a.

,  TabelUrue,  1091,  a.

,  TupeU  Aternls,  685,  a.

,  TereotU  Qmia,  S49,  a.

,  Ttreniilia,  699,  a.

,  T«Umenuriae.  699,  b.

,  Thoria,  699,  b,

,  TlU«,700,  b,

„ de  tulaiibui,  TOO^


Tullia  de  ambilu,  TT,  b.

ben,  6T9,  a.
Valeria,  dc  proicriptione,
963,  b.
, Valeriae,  TOO,  b.

„ « Horatlae,

700,  b; 988,


„ Ticeuioiria,  1196,  a.

„ VillUan^ali^701,b.

„ Visellia,  96,  a ;  TOl,  b.

„ Voconia,  696,  b;  701,  b.
Libttio,  1000,  a.
Libells,  703,  b ;  70C,  i.
Libellui,T92.b;  843,  b.
Libar,  637,  a ;  703,  b ;  704,  b.
i,  730,  h


151,  ■


Librai

Libramentum,  113.  b.

Libnria  Ubeina,  T04,  b.

libtiirii,  570,  b  i  704,  b ;  70^  b,

Libiariiu  leKionis,  7,  b.

Liblator,  707,  a.

Libripens,7ST,b.

Liburoa,  786,  a.

Liburnica,  786,  a.

Lieeii,  172,  a.

Licia,  1101,  a.

LiciatoruD),  1101,  a.

Licinia  lei  de  Kxialiuis,  77,  h.

„ Junia  lex,  693,  b.

_ Mucia  ler,  693,  b.


LonTU,54at  a.

Loflea,71l,a.

Lucar,  613,  a.

Lnceteneet,  875,  b ;  1155,  b.

Luoerei,  875,  b ;  II5S,  b.

Irfioenia,  713,  >.

),  Tisi  h.


Aptdlinares,  TIS,  *•
Augiutalo,  179,  b.
CapitollDi,TI5,a.
araaiw,Sa6,b:7I4,b

T15,  b.
Compitalilii,  194T,b.
Consualo,  9B£,  b.
Floralee,  548,  ■.
(uiiebra9,T15,bL
haoorarii,  T16,  a>
liberale(,4l4,b.
nugni,  715,  b.
Martialsi,  716,  a.
Megalenso,  749,  a.
natalilii,  716,  a.
PBlatiin,716,  a.


Licitari,  172,  a,

Ligo,  707,  b.

Ligula,  707,  b  i  979,  ■.

Lima,  TOT,  b.

Limbui,  707,  b.

Limcn,  624,  b(  949.  b.

Limea,  1(9,  b.

Limiulio,  89,  b.

Limm,  1075,  a.

Lioearii,  29,  b.

LiDtearoen,  SSI,  b.

limeones,  1099.  a.

LiDteum,  674,  b.

Linum,  1092,  a.

Lirare,  49,  b.

Literae,  8t3,  b.

Literanim  obligatio,  SIS,  a.

Literati,  1041,  b.

LiLhtMtrotum,  431,  a.

Litit  coDteitatio,  708,  a ;  8 1 9,  a.

Lilui  dividuu  eiceptio,  II,  b.

Lituua,  709,  b.

Liiis,  834,  b.

Loeare  agrum,  43,  a;  4S,  b.

Loearii,  88,  b.

Loeaci  et  conducti  actio,  710,  a.

„ fruclua,  43,  a.
Locator,  710,  a.
Loculamentum,  303,  a.
Loculua,  55  9,  b.
Locnples,  7I<^  a.
Lociuliberatuieteffiitiu,  1104,

LodicuU,  710,  a.


„  quaeibirii,  T16,b.

„  quiitquninalcs,  9,  ■■

„  Hamani,  T16,  b.

„  ■uculaiH.Tie.b.

„  loenioi,  714,  b;  74%  a.

„  Tarentini,  TIS.  b.

„  Taurii,  716,  h,
Ijudiu,  ST4. 1:


671,

„ latnmcijdoruin,  670,  b.

„ Trojae,  888,  a.
Lumen,  115.  a;  538,  b.
Luminum  territui,  1031,  b.
Lupanar,  858,  b.
Lupalum,  548,  a.
XiUpercalia,  T 1 8,  l
Lupcrci,  7 IS,  a.
Lapui  ferreiu,  7 1 9,  a.
Luilralio,  719.  a.
Liutrum,  259,  a ;  719.  b.
LjcbDuehua,
Ljn,  148,  b;  TSO^  a.


M.

Maeehiu,  347.  a.
MaoedoDianam
lum,  1026.  a.
MaoelUHiu,  738,  a.
Maoellum,  788,  a.
Maoeria,  769,  b.


.793,  a.
Macrum  nlum,  45,  b.

Haenia  lex,  694,  b.

86.bi  8a.a;73S,


■».fag^SlS,K


a,  T9S,  *.
■uetioDO,  90B,  b.

„ oonTirii,  loes.  b.

„ eputoUrum,  733,  i.

„ «]uituiii,  107,  b.

„ libeUomiD,  733,  ■.

„ mnnoriu,  793,  a.

„ militiun,  TSS.  a.

„ m*ii,  480,  b.

n offieiorum,  793,  ■.

„ populi,  405,  ■■

„ (criniorum,  793,  b.

„ BcicUtu,  793,  b.

„ ncoTum,  783,  b.
Mtgittritiu,  793,  b.
MagDi6ci,  698,  a.
M'iiu,  ass,  a.
MajcMaa,  794,  b.
U^t-m,  636,  b.
HaUaoIut,  796,  a.
Mallcui,  796,  ■.
Malluiium,  799,  b.
Haliu,  789,  a.


Haliu


i>l».


«l,b.


Minmuwiuii,  75,  b.
Manecpf,  965.  ■  ;  796,  b.
Mincipatia,  T9T,  b  ;  1116,  a.
Mancipi  en,  49],bi 19ia,>.
Mancipii,  79B,  a.

causa,  796,  b.
Hanclpium,  797,  a.
Muidata  principum,  79S,  b.
niuiditariui,  798,  b.
udati  actio,  798,  b.


INDEX.
MaatUhe,  903,  b.
MaUn,  589,  a.
Mater,  310,  a.

Muei&miliis,5I9,  b;  710,1
MatbuU,  144,  b.
Matnlia,  735,  «.
Matrimoniuin,  735,  b.
Mltrona,  741,  a.
Matrooalca  ki'ar,  744,  a.
Matraoalia,  744,  a.
Maiuolcum,  561,  ai  744,  a.
Maunomtu,  745,  b.
Mediutini,  48,  a ;  745,  b.
MedieamiiiB,  1904,  a.
Iil«licina,  745,  b.
Medictu,  747,  a.
Medimaiu,  74  s,  b.
Meditiinilia,  748,  b.
Medii  tuticua,  748,  b.
Medulla  nudata,  55,  b.
Mt^leme*  ludi,  749,  a.
Megilsmia,  149,  a.
McfpOena,  749,  a.
Mdligo,  7a  b.
Menibmia,  703,  b,
MemmU  lei,  934,  b.
Mtnsa,  749,  b.

„ de,  131,  a.
Menne  Dvlphicae,  2,  a.


1971
Hodius,  764,  b.
Moduliu,  764,  b.

„ Bcceptotiua,  115,  a.

„ erogatoriua,  11 5,  a.
Modua  legitimua,  1033,  b.
HocDia,  769,  bL
Mola,  765,  a.

„ aalia,  743,  a  ;  99A  b.
Monarchia,  766,  «.
Monauloi,  1 130,  b.
Morrta,  766,  a  i  808,  b.
MoDetaIn  tTiumiiri,  766,  a
HoneUrii,  T67,  a.
MoDlle,  767,  b.
Monitor,  1 199,  a.
Mouopodium,  758,  a.
Monoijrlon,  783,  a;  875,  b.
Moiulrum,  9i~  ~


1,  561,  ■


Mantam
Menia


riptu.


i,  750i  a


131,  I


r,  131,


Maodatum,  798,  b.
Maodrae,  67 1,  a.
Mane,  409,  a.
'" iDei,IO40.B.

a,  799.  a.


Manilla  lei,  694.  b.
MaDipularns  500,  b.
Manipularii,  50O,  b.
Hanipului,  494, ■ ; 497, a

500,  b.
Maii]Ulax,?31,b.
Maoaio,  799,  a.
Maniionanui,  799,  b.
Maoiioon,  799,  b;  S8C\  b.
Mantels,  799,  b.
Manuarium  aea,  96,  b.
Manubiae,  951,  b;  1053,  b.
Manum,  eoiTentia  io,  740,  bj

749,  a.
Manumiauo,  730,  a.
Mauumisaor,  730,  b.
Manui,  96,  b.

n ferro,  586,  b.
n injection  731,  b.
Mappa,  799,  bL
Marcia  lex,  695,  a.
Margine*,  1199,  b.
Maria  lei,  695,  a.
Maraitpiom,  739,  b.
Martialii  flamcn,  504,  a.
Martialea  ludi,  716,  *.
Martiui,  933.
Hastigia,  540,  a.


Meniularii,  750,  a.
Ueniia  1»,  695,  a.
Menaii,  S3  8,  a.
MenK>iea,71,  b;  750,  b.
Menitnium,  1041,  b.
Urruura,  750,  a.
Msreenaiii,  758,  a.
Mercenarioi,  48,  a.
Mnenda,  306,  b.
Meridisni,  575,  b.
Meridiea,  409,  a.
Meuia,  53,  b.
Metae,  984,  a.
Metallum,  759,  a.
Metbodiei,  746,  b.
Melr«tei,763,  aj 1993,  b.
Metronoini,  769,  b.
Milium,  56,  a.
Mills  pasiuum,  769,  b.
Milllare,  769,  b.
HilliariuiD,  769,  b.

„ aureum,  763,  a.
Milviu,  154,  a.
Mimui,  763,  a.

Minorca,  374,  b ;  63«,  b.
Minucialei,  695.  a.
Minutio  capitia,  939,  b.
Minnillotiea,  575,  b.
Miwa,499,  bi  575,  a.


.;  613,  b


Hitn,  339,  b; 1994,  b.
Mixta  action  10,  a.
Modiolua,  378,  b ;  764,  b.


Moralor,  987,  a.

Morbus  comitialii,  936,  b.
Mortaiium,  768,  b.


„ -lribu,2

Muriana  caiitio,  359,  b.
. Mulier,  1179,  a.
Mulleua,  999.  a.
MuliB,  ]  905,  b.
Uulium,  1905,  a.
Multa,  999,  a.
Munentor,  574,  a.
Municept,  318,  b.
Municipea,  318.  b.
Muoicipium.  318,  b.
Munil^,  909,  a.

MuDUB,  574,  L,

Munjchia,  769,  a.
Munlis  corona,  360,  b.
Muriea,  1190,  a.
Muma  Taaa,  769,  b.
MurAina  laia,  769,  b.
Idunu,T69,  b.
Muacaiium,  539,  b.
Uuaculua,  778,  a.
Muaeum,  7  79,  b.
Muiica  muta,  B69,  a.
Muuvarii,  915,  b.
MusiTuiiiopus,43I,a;  9t5,a.
Miutaccum,  743,  a.
Miutum,  1901,  b.
Mutariono,  729,  b.
Mutui  actio,  7S0,  b.
„ datio,  780,  b.
Mutnii,  395,  a.
MutU),8I8,a; in9,a.
Mutuum,  780,  b.
Mjiteria,  781,  a.
Mjitrum,  789,  a.

N,
Naeca,  551,  b.
Naeaia,  559,  a.
Narthecia,  1914,  a.
Natalltii  ludi,  TI6,  a.

titutio,  637,  b.


1873

INDEX.

Nahitio,  189,  b;  195,  ■.

Niinnniuaure>u.lBS,  a.

Oppia  lei,  1077,  a.

Nafailotiuro,  1S9,  b.

Oppidum,  285,  a.

Nmtunki,  879,  b.

Opwoator,  836,  (l

N>*>1U,  78Q.  ■.

Opaoniuto.  835,  b.

N>Talis  corona,  360,' ■.

NuntUtio,  176,b;  835,  b.

Optio,  497,  506,  a.

„ tetibi.  1013,  t.

NuptUe,  735,  b.

Optimatea,  799,  b.

N«*»™hu«,  783,  b.

Nu™,  38,  b.

N«i«,  783, «.

265,  b.

„ ipertt.  784.  b.

„ noTum,  835.  a.

O.

Oraculum,  836,  b.

Naumxcbliru,  792,  b.

Oiarium,  843,  a.

Nauu,  480,  b.

Oarion, or (Won, 152,  a;

Oratio,  16,  b.

NebrU,  793,  b.

161,  hL

Nweswrli  hered™,  S98,  b.

Obaralor.  53,  a.

Orator,  843,  b.

Neb&ti  dl«,  409,  b.

Obelittua,  BI6,  b.

Oitni,  533,  b.

NegatiTi  ■ctia,  350,  a.

Obicaa,  636,  b.

Orbui,  692,  b.

NwitorU  actio,  350,  ■!  I033,>,

Obligalio,8I7.a.

Orca,  1048,  h.

Obligation™.  817,  a.

Orrfieatra,  1133,  a.

Negoil-torra,  794,  b.

Obnuntiatio,  176,  b.

Otchia  l»,  107T,  a.

Kegoliorum gotonuD utio

Obol<u,9Sl,b;931,b;1213,b

794. «.

•enalor,  730.b;

Nenk,  SS9,  b.

1017,  a.

N^K>%310,«.

ObaoDlum,  835,  b.

Neptii,  310,  ■.

Occanu,  155.

„ terri,  104I,  a.

0<!catio,52,  a;  984,  b.

Ordinariiu  judex,  9G8,a;  969,  a.

Netoniuu.  983,  ■.

Oecupatio,  831,  h.

Ordiuum duetorea, 497, a;

Neium,  795,  b.

Ocinum,  or  Ocjmum,  59,  b.

.TO4,h.

Seim.  796,  >.

Ocrea,  833,  a.

Ordo,318,ai  50l.b;  «76;b:

Nidui,  303,  4.

OcUvae,  1184,  b.

845,81.

NUui,t>rNiiiu,148,b.

Octavla  le*.  549,  «.

„ decurionum. 31S, a;

Mobiles  798,  b.

Octobei,  S33.

845,  a.

Nobiliuu.  798,  b.

„ eiiuui,880,a.

„ eque.tria,473,hj  MS.  a.

Nodu.,  800.  ..

Ortophoran,673,b.

No>i»n,5a7,  a;  800,*.

Oeous,  438,  b.

Oreae,  548,  a.

Organum,  723,  a.

„ Latioum,  1050.  a.

Orichaleum,  35,  a;  845,  h.

„ (Greek).  aoo.i

Oe.ipum,  1214,  b.

Origioarli,  311,  b. '

„ (RoniMi).  800,  b.

Offendii.  lOS,  a.

Officialea,  508.  b.

Nanu,  S3],  b.

Omeatae,  888,  b.

Norm.,  806,  B.

Offringere,  49.  b.

Now,  806. ».

Oguloia  le>,  695,  a.

Ortua,  155.  b.

„ CMi>ori«,S63,  b;  635,  b.

Olea,  B23,  b.

0«iii«a,!7S.b.

Not>rii,8,  b|  3SS,  ■;  806,  a

Oleneina  corona.  361,  b.

OhoIIudi.  846,  *.

Olenie,  149,  a.

Oitentum,  961.  a.

Notatio  cCDJoria,  363,  b.

Oleoium  artniin, or pecu>,

Ostiarium,  846,  a.

149,  a.

Novale,  60.  b.

Oletum,  833,  b.

Ostium,  437,  a;  684,  a.

No«Hi>,  60i  b.

Oleum,  823.  b.

Dr.,  284,  a.

NoTstio,  819,  a.

OUia,  823,  b.

Oratii  corona,  SCI,  a.

NovelUe,  807,  a.

01i»«tuni,  823.  b.

0*atio,  846,  a.

OUa,56l,b;  827,a.

Orile,  336,  b.

Norember,  93S.

Olor,  149,  a.

OTinial«,1018,».

Oljmpia,9,.;  SB8,  a.

Onager,  1189,*.

NoTi  hominei,  799,  a.

Oaenriae  naves,  358,  b.

P.

OneriiferendiKnitua,10Sl,b.

Nctta,808,ai  929,  a.

Onri.  alabacter,  74,  a.

Pabula,5S,b.

NoMli.  actio,  807,  b.

OpaIiB,S35,ai 1009,  b.

Pactio,  830.  b.

Noiia,  808, ».

Operae,  878,  b.

Pacn™.  831,  a.

NulnUrium,  53,  a.

„ serTonim at anin--

Paean,  846.  b.

Nuclnu.  1 192,  a.

Luiu,]OSl,a.

Paedagogia.  847,  b.

Operaiii,  8,  bi  47,  b.

Nirfu^  808,  b.

OpeHs  noTi  nuntiatio,  835,  a.

Nmnerado,  1019,  b.

Opifera,  790.  b.

Paenula,  848,  a.

Opima  ipolia,  1054,  a.

PaganJia,  848,  h.

Pagani.  848,  h.

NumuUrii,  750,  a.

Faeaiiica,9l9.a.

Nut>imu.,otNumu^S08,b.

Fkgi,S4R,b.

,,  Cookie

P*I«,  S6,  b ;  848,  b.

PdwUra,  849,  >.

PabngM,  8M,  ■.

Piluia.  854,  h.

PaUtini  ludi,  TIG,  ■.

Pd<»,5T,  a.

Falilia,  0*9.  b.

^lillcium,  or  Fuilkium  ndui,

150,1.
Palimpnttui,  704,  a
PtlU,  850,  b.
Pdliau  bbuU,  316,  b.
Pallului,  853,  bv
Pallialuin,  850,  Ik
Pallinm,  850,  b.
Pdmipu,  853,  b.
Pilmus,  75.  b ;  375,  b ;  853,  b.
PBludunentuDi,  853,  b.
PduiUtui,  853,  b.
Palum  851,  b.
Pirutheruea,  855,  a.
FanenliHUe,  857,  b.
Pinaratium,  857,  •.
PandecUe,  858,  a.
Pancf^ris,  861,  b.
FaDieum,  5S,  *.
Panii  gnailU,  550,  b.
PantomiiDUS,  8GS,  a.
Pa[na  lei  de  pcngrinii,  695,  ■■
., Poppua Isi, 306, b;
118,  bi 691,  b; 8TB, b;
879,  b,
Fapiria  lei,  695,  ■■

„ Plautia  le>,  695,  b.

„ Poetelia  lei,  696,  a.

„ tabdlaria  lax,  1091,  a.
Papyrui,  703,  b.
Pur  impar  ludere,  863,  a.
Pandinu,  863,  b.
Paragauda,  8S4,  a.
Parapbema,  437,  a.
Panuiti,  867,  a.
Parentalia,  563,  b.
Farias,  868,  a.
Parilia,  849,  b.
Parma.  196,  b ;  870,  a.
Parmula,  870,  a,
I^mwhi,  870,  b.
Fttropsis,  870,  b,
Parriada,  687,  b.
ParriindiuiP,  6BT,  a.
Partiaiiua,  48,  b.
Paacendi  ■crritiu,  103S,  a.
Paseua,  1184,  a.

„ publica,  1013,  ■■
Pauum,  IfiOS,  b.
Paanit,7Sl.bi  871,  a.
Paitio,61.  a.

» agreitia,  61,  a.

„ Tillatiea,  66,  a.
Paxtophoroi,  871,  a.
Patella,  871,  b.
Pater,  810,  a.

n bmlliai,  51S,  b; 8 74,  a.
n patratut,  531,  a.
PaMra  871,  b.
Pathologia,
PaObuluro,  563,  a.
I^na,  87S,  b.


Patria  potecUS,  873,  a.

Fatricii,  875,  a.

Fatriim  ct  matrimi,  or  Patri-

Falrimiii,  8'
Patrona,  878,  a.
Patronomi,  877,  b.
Patromu,  878,  a.
Palruui,  310.  a.
PaTiiiiBitum,431,a;  1I9S,  b.
PavonaeeuTD,  1099,  a.
FWiperie,  actio  de,  880^  b.
Fauparie^  880,  b.
PauMvii,  880^  b>
PecUD,  881,11  1101,  b.
Pemarii,  881,  a.
PecuUtor,  881,  a.
Peculatua,  881,  a.
Peculio,  actio  de,  1037,  b.
Peeulium,  869,  b  ;  1037,  b.

Peeuiua,  808,  b.
„ crrta,  8  IS,  a.

Pecuniae  repetundae,  986,  a.
Fecui,  S8I,a.

„ birtuid,  61,  b.

„ Tarentinum,oi  Graccum,
6J,b.
Pedaneul  Judex,  851,  a.
Pedarii aenatorea, 851,  a;

101 S,  a.


Penoribere,  ISI,  a.
Fcraeriptio,  131,  a.
Penae,  1 49,  b.
Peneua,  1 49,  a,
Penila,  886,  a.
Proaecatotia  actio,  1(^  a.
PenoDa,  889,  b.
Fertica.  893,  a.
Pea,  751,  b;  89S,  a.
„ Druitanui,  893,  b.

Pemlus,  6  EG,  b.
Paulani  lei,  G9S.  b.
Fcuuiu,  9S0,  a  I  ISlS.b.
PeUuriatae,  894,  a.
Pelaururo,  893,  b.


Pclitc


,  13,  a;  77,  a


Petomtum,  894,  a.
Petnna  lei,  G95,  b.
Fetronia  lei,  695,  b.
Fbaloe,  384,  b.
Phalangae,  H94,  a.


Phali


i,  894,  a.


B1,b.


Pedueaea,  In,  695,  b.
Pedum,  S8t,  b.
P^anu,  149,  b.
Fegma,  883,  a.
P^marei,  88S,  a.
Fellei,  349,  b.
Fallii,  883,  a.
PklEa,  888,  b.
Penicillu!  -urn.  903,  a.
Pentacotiomedimiu, 366,  i

1155,  a.
Fentalbli,  383,  a.
Fenlsthlon,  8S3,  a.
Peplum,  884,  b.
Per  CDDdictionem,  885,  b.
Per Judioi poatulatiopcm.


a,  8S5,  b.
Pera,  886,  a.
Perduelliu,  735,  a.
PeiduellionisdiiumTiH,886,b.
Peregriau),  S91,  b.
Peremptoria  eicep^o,  1 1,  b.
Perfeire  legem.  683,  b.
Pergula.  SS6,  b.
Periscelia,  889,  a.
Peristiarchua,  441,  b.
Perigtnmia,  674,  b;  I0T9,  b.
Periatylium,  4ES,  a  ;  1S8,  a ;

889,  b.
Peritiaret,  653,  b.
PermuMtio,  I30,b.
Pera,  889,  b.
Peipetuaactio,  8,  a;  10, b.


Phalani,  481,  b;  488,  bi

488,  a.
PhaUriea,  589,  a.
Phalera,  894,  a.
PbBUus,4|],ai  531, b.
Pharetra,  894,  b,
Pharoa,  or  Phaim,  895,  a.
Pba»lui,  895,  b.
Fbengites,  1052,  b.
Philyra,  703,  b.
Phijgio.  851,  a.
Picatio,  1303,  a.
Picture,  899,  b.
I^gnoTaticiH  actio,  9IT,  b.
Fignolia  capio,  916,  b.
Pignui,  915.  b.
Pil^  768,  b;  918,  a.

„ tiigoaaliB,  919,  a.
Klani,  501,  b.
Pilentum,  919,  a.


FUeui,  919,  b.

Klierepiu,  918,  b.

Kluin,497,a;  588,8;  768, b.

Pinacotbeea,  931,  a.

Finaria  In,  695,  b.

Piniere,  54,  b.

Piacatorii  ludi,  716,  a.

Pisco,  151,  b.

I^scii,  153,  b.

PiH:ina,70,  a;  114,a:  lS9,b;

191, b;  ig5,ai  931,  a.
Pistil]  um,  76S,  b.
PutDT,  931,  a.
Piitrinum,  765,  b  i  768,  b,
Piauis,  or  Piitrii,  153,  a.
Fittacium,  533,  b.
Plaetorialei,  374,b;  409,  a.
Flaga,  989,  b.
Plagiariui.  931,  b.
Plagium,  9SI,  b.
Planetae,  933,  a.
Plauetani.  144,  b.
Plaiutrum,  or  Ploatnim,  147,


U74

INDEX.

FluilU,  or  Plotia In  de  ti, FotcIoc  lege*.  696,  *.

Praa,  9S4,  b.

1209,  ».

Porta,  943,  a.

Praracriptio,  12,  a;  3SS,t.

„ judicUri«,6S0.a!6aS

b.

Prwaidia.  S50,  b.

Plebeil.  923,  b.

„ pompae,  285,  b.

PraeaUtiD,  955,  b.

„ ludi,716,fc

PldKl,  9S3.  b.

□aria.  849,  a;  351, b

Piaetaritii  Knatona.  S64,  bt

1018,  a.

PJete,  923,  b.

„ quae.u.ria,  249,  a.

Praeteita,1137,  a.

Plectrum,  721.  b.

Pneteitata  EkbuU,  346,  h.

Pleni  meiues,  226,  ■  i  S3T,  b.

PleUdH,  ISO.  .1 157.  b.

Porticua,  944,  a.

Praetor,  956,  a.

Pleatici,  30,  b.

PortiHiulus,  944,  b.

„ pen^rini*  956.  b.

PoTlitorM,  945,  a ;  973,  b.

„ urbanui,  956.  h.

Plumsrii,  92S,  a.

Portorium,  944.  b.

Pluteui,  674,  b  ;  938,  b.

„ cohon,  9J7,  >.

PiieumXlci,  746,  b.

Portunalia.  945.  b.

Fraetoriaru,  957,  a.

Pny.,  440,  b.

Posea,  945,  b.

Praetorii  Uteia,  251,  b :  268.

Poculum,  923,  b.

Po»es>io,38.a;945,b;  949,1. a.

Podium,  B6,  b ;  B8,  ■  ;  3!S,  b

bonae  fidn,  492,  b.

929.  t

„ bonorum,  SOS,  b.

353,  as  958,  a.

Poeoile.  944.  •.

Praerariauio,  10S7.  b.

Poen.,  9B9,  «.

Poa«a»r,  946,  bi  949,  a.

Pragmatid,  844,  ..

PoeCeUk  PapirU  lei, 696, •

Poitei,  634.  b.

Prandium,  306,  a.

797.1

Poideum,  694,  b.

Precarium,  39,  b  i  MS,  h.

Politer,  48,  b.

Frehen»io.n51,b.

Pollen.  55,  b.

Prelum,  or  Praelum,  MS,  ■.

Pollen,  372,bi  751, b;  893, b.

Pren«,do,77,«. ^

Pollicvii.  893,  b.

Fo>tula^cii,5T5,b.

PolliciUtio,  821.  t

Fmtumui,  601,  a.

PolUnctore*,  SS8,  ■.

Polesia^  873,  ».

Primipili*  505,  a.

Polu!,615.ai  999,  b.

FraeddUneae  Ibriae,  530.  a.

PraecinstLo. 87, a; 8S, b ;

„ ien»iua,10iT.  b.

Polymita,  llOS,  b.

Pnecone»,951.b;  IISS,  a.

Fi4ncipea,  494,  b ;  496,  b.

Pompa,931,».

Praeconlum,  951,  b.

PriDcipia,  502,  a.

„ CircenBii,  28T,  a.

Praeda,950,bj  951, bi  1053. b.

„ »ia,  248,  *.

PompeiM  leges.  696,  a.

Praedia.  954,  b  j  9S5.  a.

PriocipiuiD,  332,  a.

Pondera,  931,  a.

Praediator,  954,  b.

Friratae  feriw,  528,  a.

Pondo,  706,  a.

Priratum  Jui,  291,  b ;  657.  b.

Poiii,336,b;  936,  b.

„ Aeliut,  938,  b.

1033,  a.

683,  b;  805,  h

„ Aemiliui,  937,  b.

Praediura,  952.  a.

Pri»igDa,  28,  h.

„ CeiLius,  93T,  b.

Pracfccti  sociorum.  497,  b.

PriTignua.  38,  b.

Praefectu-s  967,  b.

Proamita,310,a.

„ aetatil.  34,  a.

Proa'ia,  310,  a.

„ MiWius  938,  a.

„ Palatious,  937,  b.

ProaTua,  310,  a.

„ Subliciui,  937,  a.

953,  a.

„ .uffragiorum,  939.  b.

„ aqiurum.  115,  b.

Proconnil,  960^  h  ;  967,  h.

caatroniin,  953,  b.

Pontif^T,  938,  b.

„ oUana,  953,  b.

PentiHealei  libri.  941,  a.

hbtim,  517,  b.

Procurator, 12,  a;  47,  a;  48.

„ ludi.7IS,b.

„ ji.ridl™odo,Sie.b.

a;99S,«;961..,

praetorio.  953,  b.

96T,  b.

PontifioiiUbri,  941,  a.

., Tipluro,  510,  a.

uriii,953,a;993,a.

„ p«ni.  S60,  b.

Popa,  353,  b )  373,  b  j  1000,  a.

Praef«:tiira.S18.  b(  319,  a.

Prooyon,  193,  b.

Popilia  lei.  693,  a.

FraeBcae,  553,  b.

Popioa,  258,  b.

Prodig™.lll3.h.

Poplifiigis,  942,  b.

ProelialB  diea.  41ft  a.

Popularea,  799,  b.

Praeiusio.  575.  a.

Pnfati  diea,  409,  b.

„ actionem  1300>  b.

Praeoomen.  801,  b.

Progeoor,  28.  h.

Popularia.  88.  b.

Praepetea,  175,  b.

Projidendi  Saritua,  lOSl,  h,

Populi  •cituiD,  6BS,  b.

Popullfugia, or Poplifpg!-,

942.  b.

tribua, 338, b;

Promiaw,  741.  h.

Populu^  88.  h.

339.  b.

Pfomiswr,  817,  b.

Pot,  1039,  b.

PromuU*307,»i  t»a;  U

IHDEX.

IS73

Promui,  960,  b.

ftthi..8S7,..

Qnodjonu,  actio.  663,  b.

I^tbo,  SS6,  ■.

Pronepg.,  310, «.

PyliduU,  978^  b.

turn.  988,  b.

ProneptU,  Slt^  •.

Pjxi^978,b.

PronubM,  744, ».

Ptonubi,  743.  U

R.

Q.

Propitniui,  310,  (.

Hadlua,  378,  b.

Prop««,79ab.

Qu*d[BDt>l.  979,  •.

Rapina,  58,  b.

Propreetor,  967,  k.

QiudrmUrii,  915,  b.

,. orrapiabaiia,S64.  a.

ProprUta^  4B2,  il

Qiudrig.,  379.  b.

lUllum,  984.  U

Pron^  786,  •.

ftuadfiienwi.  785.  b.

Rallus.  984,  b.

ProKtQium,  1133,1.

Qudnipe.,  B80.  b.

BaHteliui,  984,  b.

ProKindere,  49,  b.

QiudruplfltorCT,  980.  a.

Raaitare.  197,  b.

RaitCT.  984,  b.

JUitnim,  984,  b.

Qiuedtor,  648.  b.

TUta,  783.  a.

PrawcU,  1000,  fc

QiwMionei,  648,  b.

Rationes,  131,  a.

ProiicUe,  1000,  >.

ProNwnu,  38,  b.

ftiiaertOT.S80.fc

1178,  b.

Propactiu  Mrtitiu,  1031,  b.

Recepta; da ncepto, actio.

b.

984,  b.

Protinci..  964,  U

clAHcL, 9S1, >;

Recinium,  995,  a.

980,  b.

Reciaui,  995,  a.

ProitMatoro,  ST5,  b.

pwricidii,  648.  b.
„ pecuoiae  alimanta-
riae,  75,  b.

Kector,  969,  a.
Red.,  994,  b.

„ iufkotiae.  637,  a.

648,  b.

985.  a.

Puben»,374.  b;  636,  b.

■acripalalii,983.».

Redhibitoria  acdo.  98.5,  a.

Pub™,  631,  »;  837...

uTbani,  981.  b.

PublicM  ftrme,  528,  b.

Qua«toriiludJ,716,  b.

Refriva,  57,  b.

Pub]ic«Di,  9TS,  b.

Quaestotium,  249,  a;  S53,  b.

R^ia,  198,  a.

Publicigeryi, 1039,  a; I04I,

., Ui.1149,  a.

RcgifugLum,  985,  b.

PublMH.lei,696,^

ftualui,  220,  K

Hagioa  »crorum.  99i,  a.

Quanti  mLnoris  actio,  982,  a.

Regula.  985,  b.

■.

Raire«duaeeieeplio,ll,  b.

Publicum,  S3, hi  40,  ■!  97S,b.

Quasillaiiac.  2ao,  b;  1099.  b.

., uioriae, or dotia aeao.

jiu,  391,  b  ;  657,  b.

438,  a.

Publicui  iger,  89,  a;  94ft  ■.

ReUtio,  I019,bilOSI,  a.

PublilU  lei.  696,  a.

b.

Pubiilue  \fga,  696,  b.

•.iMium cunnda-

Ralegatiu,  515,  b.

Puer.  1039,  b.

rum,n93,b.

RabgioHi.,  563.  a.

PugJ.tum  974,  b.

PugilM,  974,  b.

Ills,  a.

Remmia  lei,  334,  b.

PugilUiea,  1092,  ■.

QulDari<u,393,b.

Ptwio,  97S, ..
Puilsriu^  176,*.

RemurU.  680.  b.

QuincuDi,  140,  b.

Remus,  788.  a.

PulUti,  88.  b.

Repagula.  636.  b.

b.

Repantor.  49,  b.

Pulpitiim,  1  laS,  b.

Pult  EibaU,  57,  b.

mJDom ot mi-

Replioatio,  13.  a.

PuWinu,  286,  b;97S,b.

nuMulac,  983.  a.

Repolire,  53,  b.

PuWioiu,  975,  b.

Puoetaa,  1 15,  ■■

Repotia,  744,  a.

PupU  Ux,  697,  ..

Repudium,  419,  a.

Pupilliu,  3,  «;  630,  «i  636,  b  1

I177.b.

Ra,  421,  b.

men«rii.  750,ai

Puppl^  787,  ■.

983,..

Put«>a.  976,  a.

QniiiUna,248,».

„ di.ini Juria, 431, b;

Puteu«,113,«il89,b.

Quinlia  l«i,  697,  a.

657,  a.

ftiuifatilia,  333,  a.

Puticuli,560.t

,, bereditaiiae.  4SI,  b.

Pjn,  559,  b.

Quirinalia  flamen,  54(^  a.

,. humaDi JDiii^ 431,  b

IVgui>MB,b.

Qliiritiumjni,291,b;  658,  a.

657,  a.

1276

INDEX.

Ra immobi1n,4Sl,b.

Bunraa.  996,  «.

Sartago,  1008,  a.

Rupiliw  legs.

Satia,  51,  a.

„ n»noipi,431.b;I£18,ii.

RustLei,311,b.

„ mobile*,  4SI,  b.

„ Deo  mancipi,  432,  1318

„ trirOBtrli,51,aj5^a.

Rulilluu  Ktio,  996,  ■.

Satira,  1009,  a.

„ DuUiiu,  431,  b.

Rutruni,  996,  >.

„ pri*«Ue,  421,  b.

Satura,  lOOB,  a.

„ publiue,  421.  b.

„ lex,  683,  ■(  1008,  b.

„ religiosw,  131,  b.

S.

Saturnalia.  1009,  a.

„ U<!C<K,4SI,b.

„ «D0ti«,421,b.

S<ibBDUin,S5l,b.

ScabiUum.  381,  b.

„ .ingulM,  431,  b.

S«atu>.  1903.  >.

Scalae,  7B9,  a;  1009,  b.

Siocu.,  996,  bi  1208,  a.

, Gemoniae,  Q40,  b.

„ ulorim,  437,  it

SweUum,  996,  b.

Sealmi,  787,  b.

Sueiu,  430,  b.

Scalpellum.  374,  b.

8a«r,  563,  >.

SuETftoe,  996,  b.

Sea!ptut.tum,431,a.

Bopondere,  107,  b.

Scamnum,  953,  386,  b;  101 1 ,  a.

R«q>onu,  653.  b.

Sacn,  998,  a.

Scantinia  lei,  698,  b.

„ gentiUtia,  56B,  b.

Scapha,  786.  ..

„ municipalia.  998,  b.

&«pus,57,  ai  1170.  h.

„ prixata,  998,  a.

Seena,  1 122,  a.

Rcte.  98B,  b.

„ publico  998.  ^

Sc«iiciludi.7l4,  bs749,  a.

HetentiodMi^41B,b.

SceptruDi,10ll,a.

Retentu™,  351,  b;  353,  b.

Scbeda,  703.  b.

RetUrii,  57S,  b.

Sacntw  leges,  G9S,  i.

Scbola,  189,  b.

Saerifloium,  998,  b.

., labrorain,  191,  a.

R«t«,  988,  b.

Samlegium,  1000,  b.

Scholae,  953.  b.

BeiM,  la,  819,  ■.

Sacnlegiu.  1000,  b.

.. aurtorea,  173,  h.

Rei,  990,  a.

SdolhMicum,  616,  b.

„ eonviril,  1083,  b.

Sciplo,  toil.  a.

„ Boriiiciiliu,  994, 1.

Scire,  1033.  a.

8MCul«[eiliidi,716,b.

Scinor,  307,  b.

„ susrorum,  994,  *.

Saeculum,  1000,  b.

Scilumpopilli.e82.a.

Rhed..  994,  b.

S.garii,  1001, 1.

Scorpio,  151.a;S40,  a;  n39,a.

Rtaodu  lex,  697,  b.

SagitU,  149.  bi  1001,  a.

Scorpiiu.  151,  a.

Rica,  541,  >.

Sagittarii,  tool.  a.

Scortea,  848.  b.

Scribae.  7,  b;  1012,  a.

Robigili.,  995,  b.

SagiCtifer,  I51,a.

Scribere.  131,  a.

Robur,  341,  4.

Sagittipirteni.  151,  a.

Scribcmia  lei,  698,  b.

Hohia,  54,  ..

Sagmina,  1002,  a.

Rog.fe  legem,  63B.  b.

Sagulum.  1002,  b.

Scriplum,  1012,  b.

Sagum,  1002,  a.

Soripta,  945,  a.

Salarium,  1002,  b.

Salii,  1003,  a.

Rog.tor,338,  bf  10T7,«,

Salillum,  1004,  a.

Scriplu™Tii,10l2,b.

Rogus,  559.  b.

Salinae,  1003,  b.

Scripuluin,  46,  bj  10I2,K

Roman»,  850,  b.

Salinator,  1004,  a.

Serobea,116,  b

RomphM,  689,  «.

Salinum,  I0O4,  a.

Scnipulum, 18S, a; 659. a;

Ror«ril,  495,  b  i  SOS,  b.

Salsilago,  1004,  a.

753,  b;  1012,  hi  1913,  h.

RoMift  thestnlis  le^  697,  b

Salsum,  1004,  a.

1123,  b.

SaIUUo,8G2,  a;  1004,  b.

Sciilpi.n™,4H,  b.

Rost™,  995.  b.

S«ltu«,  46,bs  652,  a;  753,  a

Scutiea,  S39,  b.

Scuttii11,496,  b;  101%  h.

„ GOTotu,  360,  a.

ScyUle,  1013,  a.

Roatrum,  786,  b.

SalutaloKi,  1006,  b.

Secale^56,a.

Eotm37B,«;S32,  b.

Sambuca,  10O7,  a.

Seeeapiti.  1013.  b.

Bubila  lei,  697,  b.

Rubriei,  171,  ■.

Sectalores.  77,  a.

Rudou.  996,  *■

S.pt,lSOS,a.

Seetio,95l,bi  10l3,h

Rudiuii,  575,  ■.
Itudit,  574,  b.

Sector,  951,  b;  JOIS,  b.

SiTculuni,  59.a;  1008.  a.

1013,  b.

Rudi»,ll»9,i.

Sardiasa.  715,  b.

Securimla.  I0I4,  a.

RuaUi,  996,  •.

SariKa,4aa,  a;5a9,a.

Securia,  1014.  a.

Rumpin,  589,  •.

Sarracmn.  1008,  a.

Seoitore*.  576,  a.

Runc.ti<>.5a,^

Sarritlo,  52,  a.

Sega,  61... .

Segolra,  6T1,  h.
Sdiquulrum,  1015,  tk
Sella,  957,  b;  lOH,  b.
Scmbella,  70S,  b.
Semni  ■doreum,  £4,  ■■
„ liiinHtrB,  51,  >■
Scincotiiia  die*,  530^  ■.
Scmcatine  feriae,  530,  a.
Sanimins,  566,  b.
Semu,  Scmutii,  140.b;  IBS,  b.
ScmpTontM  leget,  690.  b.
Sempioni>  lai  da  focnete,  699,

Setnuiwii,  1219.  b.
Semuneiuium  teailt,  5ST,  b.
Serutor,  1016,  >.
SenBLOKi  Oruoi,  1017,  >.
„ peduii,  IDIB,  ■-
Snuiln  motio,  ot  ^ieetio  e,

364,  t,
Snitui,  1016,  >.
Seiuiu*  ■uctoriUt,  10S3,  b.
SnutuKoniultum,  lOSit,  b.

„ AproniBnuB,  1024,  a.

„ Aniculeunum,  tOS4,  b.

„ d(  B«eebui>libu*,4]'l,a;
1034,  b.

„ Calvitianum, 699, b ;
10S4,  b.

„ Claudimlum,  1094,  b.

„ DinimiaDuin,  1035,  b.

„ Hadriani,  1035,  b.

„ Juncianum,  1036,  a.


INDEX.

8«puldui  Tinlati  aetto,  568,  a.

SqiulobnuD,  560,  b.

Scquotre^  TT,  a.

Sen,  636,  b.

Seriae,  1303,  a.

Seiieum,  1038,  a.

Seti>eiu,14S,  a;  149,  k

SeipenUriui,  149,  a.

Seira,  1099,  a.

Serrati,  k.  nummi,  394,  a.

Sanula,  1039,  b.

Serta,  1039,  b.

Serrara  ds  eoelo,  176,  b.

Seiiiana  actio,  9IB,  a.

Serrilla  ajmria  lei.  699,  a.
„  Glaucia  lei,  9BG,  b.
„ Judieiaria  lei,  699,  a.

Senitua,  1030,  b ;  1036,  b.

Sciviiuin,  9,  b;  1030,  b.

ScTTUi  (Greek),  1031,  a.
„ (Roman),48,a;  1036,b,
„ ad  minum,  76,  b.


. Juni


1,  lo:


, D,102G,a.

Largianum,  10S6,  a.
, IJboiuanum,  109C,  a.

Macedoniaaum,  1036,  a
. Manluium,  1034,  b.
, Hemmianum,  102G,  a

Orphitianum,  lOi^G,  b.
, PeKBiinum, 535, b;

536,  b  ;  1036,  b.
,  Penicianum,  1036,  b.
,  Piaonianum,  1036,  ■.
,  Plinciaiiiiiii,  1036,  b.
,  PlautioBum,  1037,  a.
,  Rubrianum,  1037,  a.
, Sabinianum,  1037,  a.


„ Tertullianum,  1037,  a.

„ Trebtllianum,  535,  a  ;
1037,  b.

„ Turpilianum,  1037,  b.

„ Velleianum,  1037,  b.

„ Vitnuaaum,  1097,  b.

„ Voluiianuni,  lOST,  b.
Seoatut  Jim,  1018,  b>
Seniorca,  333,  b.
Sepclin,  560,  b.
Sepimentum.  47,  a.


Septam  Trionei,  147,  b.
Septemiiri  Epulonca,  470,  b.
Seplimainu,  982,  b.
SeptuDOntium,  1098,  a.
StptDin,  336,  b.
"  E,  140,  b.


5iiiui,159,bi  160^*.
^tnun,  1046,  a.
Silella,  1048,  b.
Sitie'iDea,  558,  b.
SiUjbw,  704,  b.
Silula,  1048,  b.
SobriDa,3]0,a.
Sobiiniu,  310,  a.
Socculut,  1048,  b.
Soccus,  104B,I>.
Socer,  98,  b.

„ magnus,  S8,  b.
Societas,  1049,  a.
S<Mii,549,b(  1049.B1  105
Socio  pro,  actio,  1049,  b.


■ magna,  38,  b.
8>>dale%  310,  b.

., Auipiiules,  180,  a.

„ Titli,  1134,  b.
Sudalitium,  77,  b.
Solarium, 499, b) 616,  bt

1078,  b.
Solea,  1051,  b.
Solidanim  veiiditio,  131,  b>
SoUdui.  189,  b.


Socuni,  140,  b.
SeaquipJata, or Seiquiplati]

509,  a,
Soterlium,  943,  b ; 1043,  b.


Se*ir  turmae  equilum,  475,  a. Soltere  in  area,  119,  a.


Solus


,  430,b.


Seitani,  140,  b.
SeiUrius,  979,  a  i  1043,  b.
Seitillt,  939.

Seilula,  1313,  b; 1043,  b.
Sibioa,  589,  a.
Sibflliai  Ubri,  1043,  b.
Siea,  1044,  b.

Slcila,  1044,  b.
Keiliciu.  IIS,  b;  1213,  b.
Sicilire  pratum,  60,  a.
Sidui  natalilium,  114,  b.
SigUlarla,  1009,  b.
Sljcma,  750,  a.
SigBM,  253,  b.

„ militaria.  1044,  b.
Sigaifei,  1045,  b.
Signinum  opua,  431,  a.
Signum,  501 ,  a.
Silentiarii,  954,  b.
^enUum,  176,  b.
Slia  lei,  G99,  a.
Siliearil.  115,  b.
^iecTDlam,  569,  a.
Siligo,  54,  a ;  55,  b.
ffimila,  or  Kmilago,  55,  b.
Siliqua,  1213,  b
KlTae,  1019,  a.
iSlTaui  et  Carbonii  lei,  69

U
Smpulum, or Simpuiiui

1046,  a.
Kodon,  851,  b.
Kogularei,  50B,  b.
Knui,  1135,  a.

104^  «.


Solutio,  S19,  b.
Sopipeaalet,  149,  b.
Sophronistae,  581,  b.
Sordiditi,  I1S7,  a.
SoTor,  310,  a,
Sortes,  S43,  a;  1051,  b.
Sonilegi,  1053,  a.
Spadones,  691,  b.
Spanu,  5S8,  b.
Spatiuoi,  986,  a.

„ legitLmum,  1033,  b.
Spccillum,  374,  b.
Spectabilei,  698,  a.
Spectio,  176,  bi  177,  b.
^eculana,  433,  b.
Specularii  lapis,  4SS,  a.
Speculalorea,  508,  b.
Speculum,  1053,  a.
Speeua,  113,  a.

Sphaeruterium,  1 95,  b ;  583,  a,
Spica  mutica,  57,  a.
Sp>culuni,587,a;  589,  a.
Spina,  284,  b.

SpiDter,  or  ^intber,  1 3(t,  a.
Spin,  1053,  a.
Spirula,  1053,  a.
SfmlU,  1053,  b.
Spoliatorium,  189,  a.
Sponda,  674,  b.
SfMudeo,  SlT,  b.
Spoogia,  905,  a.
Sponsa.  741,  b.
Sponaalia,  741,  b.
Spofuio,  640,  b;  1199,  a.
Sponaor,  640,  b.
^niiu,  74 1,  b.
^TtuU,  1054,  bL
Subolarins  984,  ^  I


1S78

INDEX.

Sudlunl,  loss,  a.

SuccinBtas,n73,b.

T\«otiiu  ladi,  716,  b.

Sul^mia,  632,  ^

SucraUre.  672,  b.

Tarpeia  Atetnia  ler.  685,  a.

Sumen,  1100,  ».

Tauril  ludi,  716,  b.

Suur,  1056,  b.

Sudslorium,  190,  b.

Taurun  150,  a.

Sutera,  1 170,  ■-

SufRbulum.  1191,..

Tector,  8Tft  •.

Suti  dies,  409,  b.

Suffltio,  562,  a.

Tectores,  1 15,  b.

Slationa,  £50,  b.

Suffragia  s»,  472.  b.

Tectorium  opus,  870,  a.

„ fiKi,  lOSB,  t

Suffrsgium,  1076.  b.

Ted..  1093.  a.

.. mumcipiorum,  577,  b

Sugtcestus. 88, a; 995, b;

T^a,1098,a.

Stat!* u  feriae,  528,  b.

1077,  a.

Tela,  1099,  a.

Sutor,  105«,  a.

Sui  hCTcdes.  598,  b.

Telunones,  I  TO.  a.

SUtoreo,  508,  b.

Temo.  117,  b;  378,  b.

Sutu  liber,  730,  b.

Sulci,  1192,  a.

TBniplunwl76.a;995,b;  1104.

Statuae  Persicae,  BB9,  b.

Sulcus,  58,  a  ;  59,  a.

Suipiciac  leges,  699,  b.

Temporalii  actio.  lOt  b.

Suiumm,  IISS,*.

Sumtuariae  leges.  1077,  a.  -

Tenase,  1 1^5,  a.

„ emntet,  9SS,  a.

Superficies,  1073.  «.

Terentilia  l«,  69A  a.

Stercoratio,  50,  «.

Terentiniludi,  716,b-

Stetculiui.  SO.  a.

Supparam,  790,  ai  1174,  a.

Te^Di^«!ia,1112.a.

Supparui,  1174,  a.

Termioi,  30,  b  j  603,  b.

Suppliealio,  1079.  «.

Terra.  £9.  aj 13H,  h.

„ c»rio,a,49,b.

Sdllicidii  Rrnlus,  1031,  b.

,. testibilis,  60^  h.

Stillieidium,  1031,  b.

Surdus,  8iB,ai 1113,  a.

Tertiare.  49,  b.

Stilus,  1071, ».

Suseeptore^  SSS,  a.

Terandus,  141.1; 708,  h.

Stipindiaria,  37,  b.

Tcseum,  176,  a.

Sjiuposium,  1082,  a.

Tenella,  915,  h.

TeiKllarii,  915,  b.

Stipes,  854,  b.

Syngrspha,  271,  b.

Te)sen,lIlS,b.

Stipulatio.  S17.  b.

Sjnthcsis.  1009,  a; 1087,  b.

Stipulator.  S17,b.

Sfrini,  1088,  a.

laria,  550,  a.

Sli.a,117.bj  118,a.

Syssiua,  1088,  b.

Tesserula,  1119,  b.

StiAa,  1073,  a.

Testa,  534,  h.

Stratores,  1074,  b.

T.

Stretia,  1075,  a.

arise,  324,  a.

Tabella,  1090.  b.

Testator,  1119,..

Striga,  JS3.b(  354.  a.

Tabclianac  legos,  1091,  a.

Testis,  1118.  b.

Slrigil,185,ai  I9a,a.

Tabellatius,  1091,  t

Testudo, 7£C^  bi IlIS,  ■:

Slrophium,  1075,  s.

Tabellio,  1091,  a.

1118.  b.

Struetor,  307,  b.

Taberna,  S85.  b; 1091,  a.

Tetraphori,  894,  a.

Studlou  juris.  143,  b.

Tctrarcha,  1119,  b.

Stultatum  feriae,  MS.  b.

„ libraria.  704,  k

Telrarchcs,  1119.  b.

Slupruin,  17.  a;  349..  j  633.  b.

Teitores,  1099,  a.

Slylui,107I,  a.

Tsl«tn«ria  febula,  346,  b.

Teitriccs,  1099.  a.

Sussor,  173,  a.

TsbUnum,  42B,  a.

Teifrinum,  1099,  b.

Subuenlurio,  506,  a.

Tabulae,  ISl.ai 1091. b.

Thargelia.  1  ISO,  a.

Siibltarii,  II71,b.

„ ceusoriae,  263,  >.

Thestrum.  1 130,  b.

TheiB.e,1125.a.

" publiflae,  7,'a;  8,  a.

„ -.otiose,  433,  b.

Thermae,  183,  b  i 193,  b.

Tabulam,  sdcsse  ad,  172,  a.

Tabularii,  1099,  b.

caiuoTia,  £63,  b ;

Tabulaiium,  1092,  b.

Thoiai,  711,  a.

635,  b.

Tabularius.  7,  b.

Thoria  lei.  699,  U

SubwcivB,  30,  a  ;  4%  a.

Tsbulinum,  253,  b.

Thrace^  576.  «.

Taeda,  1093,  a.

Threes  576.  a,

Subserica.  1098.  b.

Taenia,  1B12,  b.

ThT™us,lI29,  a.

Subutpitnus,  50%  b.

Talaria,  1094,  b.

Thynui,  1 1S9.  b.

TalaMus,  743.  b.

Tiara,  11 30.  a.

TslasMo,  743.  b.

Tiaras,  llSOifc

aibl.gmen,1100i..

Taira,  S94,  b.

Tibia,  1130k  b.

Talentum,  931,  b.

Tibio«n,ll3l,a.

Talio,  109A  a.

Ubiciaium,  1 130^  b.

SuGC«s«o,  1075.  b.

Talus,  109S,  a.

■Hgni imnrittteadi wentlaa.

Successor,  1076,  b.

Tapes,  1097.  ■.

1031,  b.

Tapete,  1097,  a.

TigBo  juDeU,  «tl<»  <fe..^M4,  b

1, 1133,  b.
Ticoeinium,  1134,  •.
Tiro,  1134,  ■.
TiHa  In,  TOO,  a.
TitienM*.  8T5,  b  (  1 15S,  tk
Titiei,  875,  b ; 1155,  b.
TiluSoddo,  IIS4,b.
TitaI<u,SSS,  ■i5«0,m;TO4.b.
TocuUionet,  525,  >.
Toga,  1 134,  b.

„ oandidi,  1 137,  a.

„ pdmau,  1137,  a.

„ pracletta,  1137,  a.

„ pulla,  Il37,a.

„ pura,  1137,1.

„ nnlida,  1137,  a.

„ Tjrili^  631,  a; 1137,  b.
Togata  fUiula,  346,  b.
Togatul,  853.  b  1  1137,  b.
Tonior,  197,  a.
Topiaria  an,  618,  b.
Topiariui,  619.  a.
Toralia,  674,  b.
Tomilar,  958,a; 1137,b.
Toiculuni,  113T,  b.
Xonneatum,  790,  a ;  I13B,b;

1139,  a.
Torquei,  1140,1.
TorquU,  1140,1.
Tanii,674,b;  1140,  b.
Tciiieum.  1001,  b,
Trabta,  993,  b  I  1137,  b.
Trabeata  fkbuU,  346,  b.
Tradilio,  831,  a.
Tragocdii,  1 140,  b.

„ enpidata,  346,  b.
Traguli,  589,  a ;  989,  b.
Tragum,  989,  b.
Traha,  53,  a  ; 1148,  a.
Trahea,  53,  «.
Trami.  1100,0.
Tnnunerica,  1088,  b,
TiaoMclio  in  tU,  11,  a.
TTaniTuga,  394,  b.
TnTutUluin,  731,  h
Transtra,  788,  a.
TransTeclio  equitum,  437,  a;

474,  b.
TrelKinia  lei,  700,  b.

Trenis,  J41,  a.
Tre*»iri,  1167,  b.
Triarii,  495,  ai  496,  a;  501, b.
Tribula.  53, 1 ; 1148,1.
Tribuluia.53,  i;  1148,  a.
Tribuliu,  1148,  b.
Tribunal,  3S3,  1 ; 1148,  b.
Tribuni  cohorLium,  504,  i.

„ iniUlum,4g5,b;  503,  i.
Tribunicia  Jei,  1149,  a.

„ poteatu,  1150,  b.
Tiibuuiu,  1H8.  b.

„  ccUrum, 993, a;

n49,a.
Tribut  (Greek),  U53.  b.
„ (Ronun),  1155,  b
Tribula  eooiitia,  115G,  b.
TiibuUria,  37.  b.
Tribuurii,31I,b.


INDEX.

T^butoria  actio,  1037,  h.
Tributum,  1156,  b.
Trieliniarehia,  U58,  b.
rmliniuin,  1157,  b.
Trideiu,  564,  b
Triens,  140,  b.
Tri&i,  ll38,b.
Triga,  378,  b.
Trigon,  919,  a.
TrigODum,  1007,  a.
Trilii,1101,bi  lt0S,b.
Trinwstria  bba,  57,  a,
Trinepoa,  310,  a.
TrineptU,  3la  a.
Trinum  DinnJinnm,  816,  b.
TiiauDdiDum,SI6,  U
Triplicttio,  IS,*.
TriptH,  1 163,  b.
Tiipudium,  175,  b.
Trinma,  785,  i.
TiitaTta,slO,«.

Tiitieuoii  54,  a.

„ ipelta,  54,  b.


Tritura,


TuUianum,  E40,  b ;  546,  b.
TuDiultuaHi,  1171,  b.
TumullUB,  IITl,  b.
Tunica,  57.  a;  1171,  b.
Tunicati,  1 174  a.
Turibolum,  1174,  b.
Tunni,47J,>;  497,  b.
Turriexila,  548,  b.
TuitIi,  IIT4.  b.
Tutela,  1176,  b.
Tutelaa  actio,  1 178,  b.

„ judicium,  1178,  b.
Tutor.  1176,  a.
Tutului,  1180,  a.
Tjmpanum,  100,  b;  S83,  b;
933,  b;  ll«0,a.


V. V.

Vaouitia  bona,  SOT,  b.
Vadarireum,  11,  b.
Vadea  dare.  1 1 ,  bL
Vadinii>Diu[n,Va^ll,b;  964,b.

Vagina,  577,  a.
Valeriae  legei,  700  h.
, Valeriae et Hoiatiae legei,
700,bi  938,  a.


Valer


VaJtaris  corona,  360,  b.
Villijin,,'H,bi253,a;  1183,*.
Vallus,  1183,  a.
Valva,  625,  b.
Vinnus,  1183,  b.
Vappi,  1204,  b.

coloaiaededueendae, Varia  lei,  735.  a.

llG8,a.  Vai,954,b; llS3,b.

epuJonea,  470,  b.  „ leve,  or  purum,  133,  a.

Vatioialei,  701,  a.

Udo,  1184,  a.

VecUgal  rerum  Tenilinm,  S67,


cagtrnuii,  1 167,
navalU,  1167,  a.
ri,  1167,  b.

igro dividuodo,

1 167,  b.
capitalis,  1167,  b.


'  ccndl.


legendjs nji
decuriis,  II68,  a.

monetales,  766,  a.

noctumi,  tl68,  a.

nficiendis ledibui,
1I6F


Vectigilii,  1 184,  a.
Vectigalii  iger,  43.  a  ;  458,  a.
Vehes,  1 185,  i.


Velariua,  1185,  a.


I penig- Veliles,496,  b;  503,1


a  HDatusconfluUum,


1168,b.
Trochui,  1168,  b.
TloJM  ludua,  388,  a.
Tiopienm,  116S,  b.
Troasuli,  473,  a.
Trua,  1169,  b.
Trulla,  1169,  b.
Trulleum,  1170,  a.
Trullissatio,  870,  a.
Trunctu,  824,  b.
Trutina,  1170.1.
Tuba,  1170,  b.
Tubicea,  33,  a.


1037,  b.
Velum,  790,  a;  1185,  a
Venabulum,  I1B6,  a.
Venaliciaiii,  1040,  a.
Veuatio,  1186,  a
Vmdilio,  459,  a.
Venefica,  1 189,  b.
Venelicium,  1188,  a.
Veueficui,  1189,  b.
Veoereut  jactus,  1095, 1
Vealer,  113,  b.
Venlilabrum,  849,  a.


Vcrgiliae,  150,  a.  ^^  I  -,


Ve^UiaDDD)  ildui,  ISO,  a.
Venu,  loss,  b;  1040,  b.
VcrriculuTn,  9B9,  b.
Verso  in  rem  mctio,  1038,  a.
Vertura,  SO,  ■  ;  SST,  a.
Veniu,  50,  a ;  753,  a,

^ quadrmtus,  47,  a.
Veru,  S8S,  b.
Verraetor,  49,  b.
VetTaetum,  49,  b.
Venitum,  S&S,  b.
Vetpme,  559,  a,
VeapiHonea,  559,  a.
Veualia,  1189,  a.

„ maiima,  1 1 89,  b.
Ve«ibuluni,  487,  a.
Vettie^Hj  631,  a.
Veteraniu,  4S9,  b.
Veleratora,  1040,  b.
VeUtetum,  5T>  a.
Veiillarii,  494.  b  i  SOT,  b.
VeiUlum,  507,  bi 1045,  b.
Via  lagulaiii,  S5S,  a.
Viae,  1 )  91,  b.


S53,  a.
Viarialei,  701,  a  j II 93.  a.
Viaticum.  1195,  b.
Viator,  1195,  b.
Vicarii  aerii,  1037,  b.
Victima,  499,  b.

„ beccditatDin et li


Victoriatui,  3S3,  b.
Vigilei,  510,  a.
Vigiliae,  350,  a.
VigiDliacTTiri,  1196,  Ik
ViglaliTiri,119e,  b.
Villa,S54,ai  1196,  b.

„ publics,  S63,  a.

„ nutica,  47,  a.
ViUia  BDOalia  lax,  TOI ,  b.
Vimca,48,a.


INDEX.

Til]icu5,48,ai  llj.b;  I196,bl
„ amphitbestii,  8S,  b.

VinaUa.  1198,  a.

Viudemialii  feria,  S30,  a.

ViDdei,  11,  a;  733.  a.

Vmdicatio, 9, a; 564, b;
1198,  a.
„  libcrtalia,  1033,  a.

» Mnitutia,  1033,  b.

Tmdiinae,  1 198.  b.

ViadicU,  73a  a;  1304  a.

Vinea,  1300,  b.

Knum,  ISOl.a.

Virga,  1309,  a.

Virgina  Vatalea.  1 189,  a.

Virgo.  1 50,  b.
„ maxitoa,  1169,  b.

VirguU,  IS09,  a,

Viiidarium,  61 9,  a.

Virilia  pan,  880,  a.

„ toga,  631,  a; 1 137,  a.

Via.  1S09.  a.
, etTUanuato,  1309,  b.

ViKcratio,  563,  a.

ViacellialM,  96,a;  701.  b.

Vitelliaai,  I09S,  a.

Vitia,  504,  b.

Vitiam,  176,  b.

Vitrearii,  1310,  b.

Titrioui,  38,  b.

Titrum,  1SQ9,  b.

Vitta,  Vittac,  1313,  a.

VitUta  Bscerdiu,  1213,  b.
. Vivaria,  69,  b.
: Uliginosui  eampui,  49,  b.

Ubu,  1313,  a.
, Ulpiani  pueri  puellaeque,  75,b.

Ullrotributa,  365,  a.

Umbella,  1313,  a.

Umbilicus.  704,  a.

Umbo,  398,  a;  1136,  b;  1193,

Uinbraculum,  IS  13,  a.
Uncis,  140,  b; I31S,  b.
UnciarutQ  fenui,  516,  b.
Unctore*,  76,  a.
Unctuarium,  76,  a;  190,  b
Unguaiita,  1314,  a.
tJnguentaria,  1914,  a.
Unguntariae,  1314,  a.
Uoguentarii,  lSI4,a.
UmTeialtaa,  1314.  b.
UaiTwiuiii,  1076,  a.


Voeatio  in  Jus,  I(^  b.

Voeonia  lei.  676,  b :  701.  b.

V<riaii«t,499.  ■;  1317,  a.

VoUellac,  197,  bi  975,  a.

Voluerii,  149,  a.

Volumen,  704.  a.

ValuDtani,  1217,  a.

Volutae.  S9Q,  b.

Vomiloria.  87,  b.

Urceus,  1917,  a.

Uma,  560.  a;  979,  a; IMS.

b;  1917.  a.
Urpel,  645.  b.
Una  WMJOT,  147,  a.

„ minor,  147,  b,

H Moenalis,  147,  b.
Ustrioa,  559,  b.
UstriouiD,  559,  b.
Utuea)HO.  IBIT,  b.
Utune,  535,  b.
Uiureceplio,  1990.  a.
Usurpalio,  1331,  a.
Uiiu,I319,b;  1391,  a;  1£3>,

„ aucLoritat,  1319,  a.

„ fructuariui.  13S1,  >.
UnulTuctui,  1991,  a.
Uterini,  309,  h.
Uti  posaedetii,  643,  a,
Utilii  actio,  10,  a.
Utrti,  1303,  b.
Utricularius,  lisab.
Utrubi.  643,  a.
Vuteanalis.  I»a.  b.
Vulgars.  1041,  b.
Uxor,  740,  b.
Uiorium.  96,  bL


KTatarehua,  5S1,  b.
Xji^i,  167,  a.
X;rtus,5S0tbi  61S,b.


Zooa,  1394,  b.
Zoatila.  1394,  k
Zopboru^  915,  ■;


.byGoogIc


ENGLISH  INDEX.


Acton  (Grwk)  611,  a.

„ (Roiiun),GlS,  a.
Adoptioo  (Greek),  14,  b.
. (Ronuui),  15,  b.
Adiockte,  1084, 1,
Adw,141,b.
AtUr,  116,  *;I53,  b.
AmbMndur^  677.  b.
Anchor,  791,  >.
AoTil,  634,  •.
Aqueduct,  108,  a.
Arbitrator,  396,  k
Arch,  194,  b;  546,  b.
Archer,  the,  151,  a.
Arebert,  lOOS,  a.
Armour,  1S5,  a,
Arna,  135,  a.
ATm7(Oreek),181,  a.

„ (Rohud},  4B9,  a.
Arrow,  the,  149,  h.
Arron,100l,a.
Aaxmnamy,  145,  a,
Auction  (ula),  ITS,  a,
Aie,  1014,  a.
Axle,  ST8,  a.


Bna,S5,>.
BTSiier,  549,  a.
Break&M,  904,  a.
Bribery  (Greek).  385.  b.

n  (  HomaD),  77,  a.
Brick^  663,  a.
Bridge,  936,  b.
Bridle,  548,  a.
Bronie,  £5,  a.
Brooch,  531.  b.
Bull,  tbt,  150,  a.
Burial  (Greek),  555,  b.

„ (Romao),  560,  b.


Bail  (Greek),  460.  b.
„ (Roman),  11,  b.
Bakera,»3I,a.
Balance,  the,  151,  a.
Baldric,  I»6,  a.
Ball,  game  at,  543,  a ;  918,  a.
Bankera,  1 30,  a.
BaiiiihnwDt  (Gieak),  513.  a.
.  (Roman),  515,  b.

Bartier,  197,  a.
Badcet,  198,  a.
Batha  (OreekX  1S4,  a.

„ (Roman),  185,  b.
B«ir,  tbe  fcreat,  147,  a.

_ ibe  leaaer  or  little,  147,
b.
Bcar-mrden,  the,  148,  a.
Beard,  196,  b.
Bed«,673,ai  1144  b
Beer,  368,  h.
Bell,  1 133.  b.
Bellow*,  543,  a.
Belt,  196,  a.

Berenice,  the  hair  of,  154,  t.
Bit  (of  honca),  548,  a.
Boeotian  conMilution,  304,  a.
Book>,703,b.
BookMller,  T04,  b.
Boot*,  366,  a.

r,  sas,  b.


Calendar  (Greek).  S32,  a.

„  (Roman),  aS6,  a.
Cameoa,  1010,  b;  I]81,a,
Camp,  844,  a.

„ breaking  up  of,  851,  a;
S56,a.

„ dioice  of  ground  for,
946,  a.

„ cooBlmetion  of,  946,  a.

„ of  Hjginui,95I,  a

„ ofPoljbiua,  945,  b.
Camp-oatta,  the,  949,  b.
Candle,  936,  a.
Candlestick,  836,  a.
Canvaning,  76,  b.
Capital  (urcolunuu),  394,  a.
Carpet*.  1097,  a.
Cart,  993,  a.
Caiijue,  565,  b.


Comedy  (Orad),  Ml,  b.

„ (Roman),  345,  b.
Compan,  983,  *.
ConMellations,  145,  b.
Coi^305,  K
Cordaga,  T90.
Cora  eropi,  54,  a.

a praerratiaD  d^  63,  b.
Coucbea,  67 1,  b.
Cowl,  379.  b.
Crab,  the,  154  k
Cretan  cooatltutica,  365,  a.
Criera,  951,  b.
Crook,  88],  b.
Cropa,53.
Croaa,  374  b.
Cnnr,  the,  153,b.
C^owI^  359,  a.

„ the  Doctbarn,  148,  b
163,  a.

, theaoiitben,  153,  b.
CnidGxuHi,  974  k
Cnbil,  751,  b.
: Cup,  the,  153,  b.

CTmbal,  374  ai  381,  *.


Ceilingi,  433,  a.
Celt.  490,  a.
Cenaer,  1174,  b.
CtnUur,  the,  153,  b,
CbuD,  957,  a.
Chariot,  378,  a:  476,  a.
Charioteer,  Ibe,  H9,  a.
Cbimoef  •.  496,  a ;  439,  h.
Chiael,  494  a.
Cider,  1905,  b.
Circumnllation,  1183,  a.
Citiienihip  (  Greek),  988,  b.
(Roman),  991.  a.
Claw^  Cbe,  151,  a.
Clerki (Athenian), 311, b;
577.  b.

„ (Roman),  IS,  b.
aocka.  615,  a.
Coffins,  555.  b;  559,  k
Colon;  (Greek),  313,  b.

„ (Roman),  315,  <.
Column,  393,  a.
Cambi,88l,a.


D.

Dagger^  975,  a  1  1044,  b.
Dance,  the  I^rrhic,  978,  b.
Dancing,  1004,  b.
Daf.  406,  a.
Dice,  lU9,b.
Uee-boz.  548,  b.
IXnner.  306,  b.
Diih,  957,  b.
Dirtaff,  565,  a.
Dithjrramb,  1141,  a.
DlTorea  (Greek),  418.  a.

„ (Roman),  418.  a.
Dog,  the  great,  159,  b.
„ the  little,  159,  b.
Dolphin,  the,  149,  b.
Door,  694,  b.
Dowfj  (Greek),  436,  a.

„ (Roman),  437,  a.
Dngon,  Ibe,  148,  a.
Draina.  46,  b.
Dtaughta,  gama  of,  674  k

Drum,  1180,  a.
DjnHtf,  138,  a.


Eagle,  Aa,  149,  k
Ear-ring,  633,  a,
Eartbenwar*,  5SS,  a. .[,-,
Ekran,  tb^  593,  a. s'^v


Eniigiu^  miliMTj,  1044,  b.
En,  SSI,  b.
Erilejc,  jSl.b.
ExecutioEKT,  34S,  *.


F«n,  539,  ■-

Fel^ng,  919,  b.

Fedch,  47,  M.

Fiie-plooe,  .949,  ■■

Fisb,  the  Muthein,  153,  b.

Fuhecthe,  151,  b.

Floon  of  boiues,  430,  b.

Foot (meuun of length),

7.S1,  b.
FrcKD,  904,  ■.
Fringe.  537, ..
Fuller,  551,  b.
FimeiBli  (Creek),  554,  b.

(Ronua),  SSa,  a.
Funuea,  193,  bi  54«,  >.

G.

Gambler,  Guniog,  74,  b,
Gurdeo,  618,  *.
Gales  of  cities,  943,  a.
Girdle,  1284.  b.
Gladiiton,  574,  a.
Glass,  I  SOS,  b.
Goat,  the.  151,  b.
Gold,  ISO,  b.
Orauacj,  6  IB,  a.
Graaies,  832,  &


I. J.

ImpriioDiiwnt,  SIO,  a.
In^nner,  388,  b.
Inheritanee  (Greek),  594,  a.
„  (Ronum),  598,  a.

Ink,  170,  b.
Inn  (Greek),  ass,  a.
„ (RoDun),  858,  b.
Intaglios.  1010,  b;  IlSI.b.
latercalar; monlh, 827, b ;

228,  b ;  SS9.
Interest of money (Gretk),
5S4,  b.
„ (Roman),  A26,  b.
Iitbmiin  games,  645,  b.
Italy,  3 IS,  a.

Judges  (Greek),  3S9,  b  ;  401,

b;  4S3,  a.

n (Roman),  646,  b.


Kids,  the,  149,  a;  163,  ■.
Kiln,  546,  *.
King  (Greek),  990,  a.
„ (Roman),  991,  a.
Kitchen,  498,  b.
Kite,  tbe,  154,  a.
Knife,  373,  b.

Knights  (  Athenian),  966,  a.
„ (Roman),  471,  a.
Knockera^  627,  a.


Heals  (Roman),  90S,  «.
Measure,  75a  b.
Mesaures  if  land,  46,  k
Medicine.  745,  b.
Mercenary soldia^ 7fB>  a;

1993,  b.
Mile,  762,  b.

Mile-MotMo,  763,  b ;  119%^
HilU,765,a.
Mines,  1184,0.
Hint,  7S6,  a.
Minor,  loss,  a.
Money,  omned,  808.  b^

„ (Greek),  gold,  181.  a.

Month  (Greek),  2S3.

„ (Roman),  SS6,  987.
Moriars,  768,  b.
Mosaics.  431,  a;  9]5,a.
Mourning  for  the  deaij^  SSI,

b  I  562,  b.
MoustBcbe^  780,  a.
Mnsio  (Greek),  778,  b.

„ (Ronun),  779,  b.


N.

Names  (Greek),  800,  a.
„ (Romsn),  800^  h.

Ifeckloces,  767,  b,
Nemeon  gome^  794,  b.
Nets,  9SS,  b,
Notary,  I09I,  a;  109^  b.


H.

Hur  (GTedk>  338,  b.
„ (Roman),  329,  b.

Hare,  the,  ISS,  b.
Harp,  lOOT,  a.
Harrowing.  52,  a.
Hatchet,  1014,  a.
Health,  549,  a.
Heir  (Greek).  694,  a.

„ (Roman),  59B,  a.
Heli«»l  rising.  155,  a.

„ setting,  155,  b.
Helmet,  565,  b.
Hemlock,  593,  a.
Heraelean  tablet,  691,  a.
Hinge,  S41,  a.
Hoe,  984.  bi  1008,  a.
Hoeing,  52,  a.
Holidays,  52 S,  a.
Homicide,  896,  b.
Hoop,  116S,  h.
Horse,  the  little.  149,  b.
Hotpitalily,  619,  a.
Hour,  614,  a.
House  (Greek),  4S3,b.

„ (Roman),  496,  b.
Hunting,  1 186,  a.
Hunting-spear,  II86,  a.
Hnrdla,  368,  b.


Lanterns,  669,  a.
Law,  681,  b;  SOS,  b.
Legacy,  G7S,  a.
Legion,  49a  a.
L^uminous  crops,  57,  a.
Letter-carrier,  1091,  a.
Leiy,  499,  a.
Library,  202,  a.
Xdght-hoose,  895,  a.
Link,  553,  a.
Uon,  150,  b.
Litlen,  671,  b.
Licureiei,  679,  a.  ,
Looking-glass.  105S,  a.
Loom,  1099.  a.
Lots,  1051,  b.
Iioncheon,  906,  a.
Lyre,  the,  148,  b;  156,  b.


Mamertine,  940,  b.
Manuring,  50,  a.
Marriage  (Greek),  735,  b.
„ (Roman),  740;  a.
Masks,  889,  b.
Mssts,  1789,  a.
Meals  (Greak),  303,  a.


Oars,  783,  a.

Oath  (Greek),  659,  bu

„ (Roman),  661,  b.
Obelisks,  616,  b.
October-bone,  B80,  a.
Officers,  duty  of,  949,  h.

„ parade  aC,  SSO,  a.
Olympiad,  883,  a.
Olympic  game*,  898,  a.
Oiadea,  836,  b.
Orders  of  archilecttur^  s:

3S6,  b{  927,  b.
Organ,  629,  b.
Organist,  629,  b.
Ostradsm,  514,  a.
Oven,  546,  a.
Ounce,  1213,  b.


Faulting,  B99,  bL
Paper,  703,  b.
Parasol.  1913,  a.
Parebmeot,  703,  b.
Fartnenhip,  10»4,  n.
Pay  of  soldMn^  1071,  h.


7.  a.


FbtlgM,  915,  b.
Plauib,]17,b|  147,  a.
Floughing,  49,  >.
Ft>iM>nii>A895,ai  1188,  a.
FdIo,  18»,  ■■
Pnrtoallii,  356,  b.
PotMrjr.  59S.  b.
Priat<,996,b.
PriwD,  MO,  ■.
Prodigiai,  961,  >.
Pmpmtj-t»i  (Greek),  448,  b.
(Raiiuii),115T,a.
Froctituto,  604,  b.
Fnnr,  786,  ■■
PunfieatioD,  719,  a,
Fiina,73S,b.
FTTTbie  dance,  lOOS,  a.
Pfthiaa  gama^  9T6,  b.


INDEX.
Shiddt,  997,  a;  STO,ai  888,

b)  101S,b.
Sfaipi,  783,  a.
Shoe,  990^  b  ;  456,  a
Sbopi,  1091,  b.
Bibrl,  1043,  h.
Biokls,  5j  S,  a  i  1044,  b.
Sign*,  DOitbcni,  147,  a.

„ of  the  Zodiao,  149,  b.
Siik,  loss,*.
Eilm,  1S3,  a,
SUtm  (Greek),  1034,  a.

„ (Roaiaii),10Se,  b.
Sleere,  739,  a.
Sling,  553,  b.
Slingon,  553,  b.
Snake,  the,  149,  a.
Sowing,  51,  a.
Spade,  848,  b.
^ian,751,b; 1053,  b.
" ■  570,  a.


Haeet,  S87,  a.
Rake,  984,  b.
Bam,  the,  149,  b
RaTCD,  the,  153,  b.
Rawtr,  197,  b.
Reaping,  5S,  b.
King!,  95,  a.
Road,  1191,  b.
Rope-danceta,  559,  a.
Rope*,  996,  a.
RmiiuU,  950,  b.
Rudder,  788,  b.


Sacrifieo,  998,  b.

Saddlei,  464,  a.

8BiLi,79AB.

SelvT,  1009,  b.

Salt,  1003,  iL

Sall-eellaT,  1004,  b.

Salt-wotka,  1003,  b.

Sandal,  80C\bi  lOSl,  b.

Sair,  1039,  a.

Scde^706,B.

Scorpion,  ^le,  151,  &

Screw,  300,  b.

SiTthe,  518,  a.

Senate  C  Greek  ),  809,  b  1  578, 1

„ (Roman),  lOIS,  a.
Senlineli,  85C^  a.
SerpcDt-bolder,  tbe,  149,  a.
Shawl,  884,  b.
8hew^5tJ^a.


^Indle,  565,  a.

Sponge,  905.  a.

Standard!,  militaij,  104^  b,

Stan,  fixed,  154,  b.

Statuarr,  1058,  a.

Step,  577,  a.

Stem,  787,  a.

StoTce,  439,  b.

SuD-dial,  615,  a.

Surgery,  S79,a.

Swan,  the,  149,  a.

Sword,  577,  a.


Tapeatry,  1097,  a.
TaHl,  537,  a.

l^ea(Oreek>448,bi  1103,B
„ (RomaD),1156,b;  1184

Temple,  1104,  a.
Tenament,  1113,  a.
Theatre,  11 3(^  b.
Tbeft,S00,a;  568,  a.
Tbemliin  conititutiaii,l  09S,a
Thraabing,  53,  a.
Thrediald,  624,  b.
Throne,  1139,  a.
ThnuD,  537,  a.
Tile*,  roofing,  1098,  a.
Tomb^  556,  a  t  557,  b  j  561.
Tooth-powder,  39^  a.
Torch,  594,  a.
Torture,  1139.
Toww,  1174,  b.


Traged;  (Greek),  1  I40l  U
„ (Roman),  1147, «.
Tieatf ,  549,  b.
TViongle,  the,  I49,b.
Ttibf  (Greek),  1158,  b.
. „ (Roman),  115&b.
Tribune*,  1148,  b.
Trident,  564,  b.
Tripod,  1168,  b.
Trapbj,  1163,  b.
Trooaei*,  813,  a.

,916,ai70^b|llTa


Tumbler^  1005.
Twelie  Tablet,  688,  a.
Twin*,  the,  150,  b.

U. V.

Vase-punting,  906,  U
VtH,  1136,  a.
Vinegar,  1905,  b.
Vi^in,  the,  150,  b.
Umpire^  391,  b.
Voting(Greek),  91T,ai  9T1,a,
„ (Raman), 336,  a;  1076,

Uiuisr^  535,  a.


Waggon,  933,  a.

„ the,  147,  b.
Waggoner,  ibe,  148,  a.
Wain,  Charlea'i,  147,  a.
Wall,  431,  b;  968,  a.
Waterman,  the,  151,  b.
Watennaka,  the,  153,  b.
Watetitteam,  the,  151,  b.
Wearing,  1099,  a.
Weeding,  53,  a.
Whale,  the,  153,  a.
Wheal, 378,  a;  533,b;  1180, b.
Whip,  539,  b.
Wilto,1113,a.
Window,  4S6>ai  493,  a.
Wine,  1801,  a.
Winnowing,  58,  &
WitneaM*  (Greek),  733,  b.

„ (Roman),  659,  b.
Wol^  tbe,  153,  b.
Wreitling,  713,  h.


T*rd*  <rf  a  aul,  789,  b.

Year  (Greek),  838,  a.
„  (Roman),  886,  &
„ dirinon  o^  168,  b.

Yoke,  658,  s.


4.«^ ■


CLASSIFIED  INDEX.


(MiltF  Met  luad  Ou  mama  ^l»»  artitUt  an  gin*  m  tflUc\  At  n^ti*  <•  u


OuHlii.
CuiittiL
Chaloidiinim.
AoucuLTui^L  iNrLumm.  Oichlis.

Columhuia,  3.
Columan.
Columna.
Coronii.

Ctu.
Bputjllum.


HMDUDum.  Vaubalum.

Metopa.  AwjHiLm  aks  CoomoA
Hodulm.  Agon.

Vdief,  P«rUt7liDiii.  Amphiatjanei.

Amruntnm  um  FLtrtaaiat.  FUothui.  Areiopagos.

Abaeui,  B.  Podium.  Boule.


TMtudo,9.
Tboloi.


Caleull


Tiochiui  Areiu.

ABOcnomu.  Arm*.

AbMiK  1, 9.  T,  S.  Annatura.

Accotariam.  Ctpuliu.

- -  C>tei>.

Cttn.

Dolo.


INDEX.

AltKmomy  —  eonAuHd  CIuks  of  Citisra*,  tm. — cmt. Dm^  &e.  — >  (mMm*!

Fluwtw.  Palrimi  et  D^urimL  Bou.

Poliu.  Pacnuii.  Bimv.

CAMn  AHD  Fan*.  Feriocn.  Bnueae.

Acrapnlu.  Flebw.  Bulk.

Aggsr.  QuEdrapUlorci.  "  '

Atx.  Saluuton*.  (.aucm.

Cungo.  CoLonu  avd  Motbib  Couh-  CalicDdnnii.


Clcnidiwe.  CwiifTi,

Colooii.  Cipitium.

Tuirii,  1.  Metnipalii.  CaneaUi.

Vallum.  Cmmo.  Caleia.

CH&BiTin  AMD  DoKulD>&  Aborlio.  Caona,

Adimati.  Adaltainm.  Ccitm,  3.

AlimentariL  Ambitni.  CbUmjt.

Cauguria.  Calurania.  CUnu  latua.

Dianomw.  FbIriih. n aiigmtai.

SoDaria.  Furtum.  Coma.

FnunoUariaa  LegM.  iDoendiinii.  Cotbuinua,

Streoa.  Injuria.  Cnpida.

Cnn.  PuinsRianna.  I^traeiiiiuni.  Cnxota.

Area,  4.  !■%«  Corneliae  M  JuUac  Cueullna.

Banthroo,  or  Ongma.  L^o,  LaDoeiniam.  Cndo.

Canar.  M^jcstat.  Cji^**.

Caadas.  Fkninidinni.  DaetjUodnoa,

Crui.  Pwjurium.  DeDlnftdnm.

Eqnulnui  FboDOi^  Diadcdia,

Enartulmn.  Planum.  Dipbtban.

Fi£enla.  Bapnu.  Embai.

Saerile^DiiL  Emblona.


Uabena^  5.  StDpnim.  Exomii.


Plabcllum.
FocaU

Oalann.


Dsa>u>  Dkxiunc  Evna-  Inounabolb


DeditieiL

CoDXMdia.

Inatita.

Delator.

Eiodk.

Lwcnia.

Ex«ii*

Laoiniaa.

DenwT

Hrporobente.

Lama.

Eiren.

Mi^Di.

Emphruri.

Limbn

Fviactoa.

Lgp*

Ephabua.

Paiwiia,  I.  Tragic

Uaoiaa.

EquiU..

„ ftCwSic

Hanida.

StpariuBL

Gwmiori.

Tbeatmm.

Mitra.

Tngoadia.

MoDila.

Hctaena.

Vd^.

Muitai.

NebriiL

Hou^m.

TOILR.

Xodna.

Libarttu.

AboDa.

Nudui,

Alicula.

OrMiucL

BfoMd.

Amietorium.

Paaoola.

Naueraria.

Amictua.

Pallium.

NobUta.

Ampji.

Faragvid

Oido.

Anoutui.

I^iadtl

Ap«.

Pdlia.

ParUHmiaa.

ATmiUa.

Peplum.

Fktrimi.

Bartx.

P«-^

1986

INDEX.

Di«M,&o.  — emtouMi:

P«*tinla,  fa— M^t.a>fc

P«ri»Mdl>.

F»tL

l-.llJTt^,,

Pero.

„ Bcri,  or  bdoxUra.

CanneDtaKa.

Phd>r>.

„ ■nD.lct.  or  historicL

CaroaU.

rUeat.

Feriie.

Ctt..

Bodimieulun.

Hor«.

Cercalia.

Batisuliun.

Chateda.

Li»trui».

awnu.

CharirtU.

SmdiliuM.

Olympic.

CtaelidoDiL

Snti.

Oiitonia.

Soecui.

ElBKCItU.

Choo..

Sola.

ChthonU.

Stola.

Cercnna.

Cmiu.

Couiulia.

Cotjitifc

rium.

D»alt,».

DawWfc

STDth.!..

DUciu.

Hua.

Gran»i™.

Togfc

HilUca.

DelU.

ar

Ddphinia.
Ifeietri,.

TUuliM.

Diuia.

Udo,

Pilurtn.

Dictymua.

VBhnn.

PJui.

Dupcleia.

Vitta.!.

Dloclcda.

Putuhlon.

DioayiU.

Unguenta.

DiowuriL

Z^

HU.

ElaphdKdia.

£Kain.»«a.

Pugiktui.

EleuNoia.

Sdtatiii.

Eleutberia.

CboiobMo.

FuTiTtu,  G*in«,  un>  Suowi.

Ellotla.

Gou..

Aetla.

EEdwria.

Crjpta.a.

Adonia.

Equina.

Enjtia.

I'litull.

Aeginetajum  leria<L

Flordia.

FODI.

Fomaoalia.

U«ro>>«a.

A^^^

LibrMoraqnu.

Agonea.

Muru>,m(»u>.

Ajraulia.

N»idi>.

Agiioma.

FbniM.

Ag™j™*™a.

Hilaria.

Fiseiiu.

HTurintliuu

Pool

W

PotU.

Al«  or  haloa.

Irthnua.

Syrinx.

EKauTiHa  AVD  CBAUxa.

Ambroda.

CuUtun.

Laphria.

Lunfli..

CbI'uIl

iXT

LeotiateRiiiiin.
LRQiualia.

CercTiB-.

Coena.

Lemea.

ComuuMtio.

ADth.<plH>ri..

LudL

EodL

Pwopd*

AfHturia.

ooI/ut^tilaBrMuuI

Po«..

Luparalia.

SportuU.

AiiadDda.

Ltc«>.

Matnlia.

Sy-ritia.

Matrmalia.

MeditriHlia.

EracHB AKD DiTuion or

MagalgnU.

Tun.

AuRuitilea.

M^dacia.

CilemUrium.  1.  Greek.

8.  Kama.

MMjrtua.

BoreannuB.

Huada.

CUTU.UUUU..

Braddria.

HH^

INo.

Hilaria.

„ fiutictDetuti.

Cabairia.

N—".,-,

.,Gooi^lc


INDEX.

1387

Tmli^»iM.Scc^  «>»ti»ied.

Greek  U»-o«h.»u£

Neptun>li>.

TtaronuiL

EDdeiiis,  ephegci..

Toru5.

E«ebna.

Oljmpi«.

Engye.

OpdU.

Tripoli.

EDoikioDdik*.

Gun  Law.

E|>.mgeti..

PdUU.

AdeiL

Epibole.

PuQboeoti..

Adoptio,  1.

Epiden...

Adulterium.  1.

Puidu.

Agraphiou  gnphe.

Epobdia.

FumUhiU.

Airnphoa nietallau

Eutbyne,

PlyntoU.

P-pbe.

Eiagoge.  dike.

PopHfugU.

AikiBdilm.

Eiaireseot  dike.

PomimntlU.

Alogiou  snphe.

Eiciooxia.

Ampbiorkia,  or  mnpbo-

Eiulium,  1.

Penus  1.

Gamelii.

Grapbe.

Pjthi*

Harpagcg-ph,.

Hdrgmou  grapbe.

Herea,!.

Hieromeaia.

Apograpb,.

Hiero>yliaa  grapbe.

Apokeruib.

HotL

Seplimontium.

A^ada.

Hybreo.  grapbe.

Stfaenis.

AporrhetK.

Hypoboka  grapba

Synolkia.

TenniulU.

ThJy.i..

PraJoria.

IWgeU-.

Argiai  graph  p.

Arguriou  dike.

Proatatea  tan  demon.

Thtteia.

AubcLa.  grapbe.

Protheamia.

AitraLeiaa  grapbe.

Paephm

Tithenidu.

Ateteia.

Vioilis.

Atimia.

Vulcu»li>.

Rbetoriee  gnphe.

Aionea.

Rhetrae.

Scyria  dike.

BUiou  dike.

BUbaadike.

Sitou  dike.

Sycophanlea.
Sylae.

Cakagoriaa  dik«.

Famaji.ia.

Cakosu.

Symbolaeon.

Are*.  9.

Sjmbolon,  dikae  apo.

Carpou  dikg.

Syndicua.

CippM,  1.

Cataliueos ton demou

Columbarium,  1.

gtaphe.

CTTpta,!

CataKiopea  giaphe.

Furuj,  1.  Grwk.

Chreoui  dike.

Tormentuca,  1.

„ 9.  RoraML

CiTitai,  poUteia.

Clvtem.

grapbe.

Urm.

Clap«adik&

Xenia.  graphs

CtHKublDa.

Al»c<«,6.

Curiui.

Calcar,

AocubiU.

Deeumut.

Area,!.

Ftenum.

Anntrium.

DIaetMae.

Hnbenae,  1.

BalnoL

Hippoperae.

Cathedra.

Imcomi,  Pdblic  tiro  Futati.

Dicaitaa.

Aet  uioriuni.

Corti™,3.

Dika.

Apophen.

Incites..

DiToitium.

Area.!.

LMiu.

Dokimaata.

AuTum  lintnle.

HeoB.

Doa,I.

Cening.

Pluten*,  S,  4.

Cente^ma.

PulTiuT.

Eisangelia.

Columaarium.

IBS  INDEX.

come,  &e.  —  amHmiid.  Hushines,  &t.  —  antluiitd.
Eiiphora.  Tintinnkbulum,

EpidOMil.  Torculum.

Final.  Tnitiiuu

OttlniDi!^  HAOun^m  add  Bolkm.
PanlMOitiL  Acta,  1.  f.

Phorm.  AdlectL


Quinquigeuma.  AUwrofaM.

Saluium.  AmphictjonM.


Areiopofpu.  TapH,  tapeca.

BidiuL  Vitnim.

Bneuichci.  MAiiiriu  iVD  CtnniMi.


Tcctinlk.
TiM&a,


_.. ..  DeodudiL „ ^

Oaubnua.  Decarebu.  Coroiu  eoOTinalu.

FucCB.  Daoemnri  l^bna  leiiben- ■ DuptUii.

ImigDiai  di*. „ na^litU.

TTw  III  mill  n litibiu  Judion- » longa.

Tdb4a.  du. n EtnuM.

TbjTMiA  „ ncritficiuddii. „ padilii.

Virga.  ■• >gri> diriduD- h touUk.

LiAODB.  dii. n pampioM.

Achuoiun  Pocdiu.  DemarchL  Crrploa.

Aetolicum  Foediu.  Demiuigi,  IKploou.

SomL  Dictator.  Hnpitium.

Limtamu.  Duumiriri.  Hjdriaphona.


Feaeumiiia.  Ephetaa.  Jwiamiduai,  I.  Gtnk.

LogognphU  EphorL  .  S,  RamMk

Paean.  Epimeletaa.  Ldtuigia.

Satura.  Eponjinui.  HatrimoniinB,  I.  Gnak.

icHiNu  AMD  Co)nuT«Hcit.  Gefouiia.  „  9.  HoMa

Antlia.  OjnaeeoDomL  Nonim.

Cardo.  IIanTiiMta&  Nodui.

Catena.  Hendeka,  hoi.  Proanriptia.

Clitellae.  HitronuwaioiMi.  Prrtaoeiiiiii.

Cocblea,  Illiutces.  SuBVa^um.

Columbariiiidi  3.  IntetTex.  STDoikia.

Ephippiuoi.  Magiitraliu.  I^itia.

Eioitn.  Madii  tutieu*.  Tabella.

Fareulnm.  Nomophjlacca.  Tribui,  1.  Greek.

FSatula.  Paedonomiu.  „ S.  Raman.

Follia.  Patronomi.  T^iararaliia.

Fonna.  Perdnellionia  duunTirL  Tcnatia.

Fornax.  PhjlarebL  Viaticum.

Bdii,  9.  PhjIobadleiL  Xenela^

Jugum,  S.  Polanurctiiii.  MAairim  ArPAUs.

libra,  Xibclla.  Polelae.  Camara,  9.

Macfainae  PoriaUb  Canbeamn,  s.

Mola,  I.  Iiand  null.  Fiaetor.  Catapbraeli,  &

„ 9.  eattle  mill.  FrobouK.  CoriHta^

H 3.  water  mill.  ProconiuL  Cjrmba.

_ 4.  aoating  milL  Rei,  1.  Greek.  Ddphit

„ >.  aawmflU  - "  "  ' "


6.  pepper  mill.


3.  Roman.  Dolo,  S.


Tetrarchea.  EpiMoUiB.

Tribani  plcbia.  UarpagOL

Tribunal.  HjperaCaa.

Triumvili  Iniipua,  S.
TnaDnua.
Vigintiaai  nrL


.,,  Cookie


Maritime  AffiOn—  nmtb«ad.

Meanina,&c.— CB-ln

Sfitarius.

N«™.

Spithame.

Stadium,  S.

Fu.IuL

Ulna.

PblMllU.

UdcU.

Una.

X»tM.

Btmulcum.

MmiciKi

Rudeni.

ArehiateT.

Hauet..

Agon.

IK^!^

D«giiu.

latnJipta.

Foruin.

Medidna.

Hxdlum.

Medicu..

nUiBnunuL  GioaurBT.

MniL..

Clinw.

An.

Awm..

Aurum.

El«trum.

Achuw.

MetaUum.

Acu,MA«mM.

Orichalcm.

Actiu.

MlLIUkT  ConoHi.

Addii.

Abolta.

Amma.

AmpboTik

Baltoia.

ArWb..

Built

Arar*

CJiga.

Am.

Chems,

S.g»m.

Cbocaii.

Hiura»  Exaunu.

Chm»

Ariea.

CooebL

Cauprft*

ar

Oitanela.
Comx.

Cubitui.

CoTinui.

Cubui.

Cratei.

Culetu.

Cuniculiu.

Cjtlhu^

Ericiu*

D«t,l«..

Halqioli..

D«™p«i..

Gndui.

Fluleua,S.

Hecte,!.

ScaUt.

Hernina.

8ljlui,3.

Hippi««.

T«tudo.3.

JugCTum.

Tormentum.

Libr.,«.

Tribulu*

LiguU.

Tuma,9.

Lit».

Vinea.

Maru.

MlUTAKT  EimoHi.

Sigu.  Militaria.

Mewin.

MiuTAiT  Lmo.

Hctrctc*.

CaUlogD..

HiUiait.

Ifodioa.

Knipbnin.

MtWiudi.

EparitL

Oboliu.

Tumult™.

OqprU.

HiLn.>T  BfamiirTu

P^p».

Cunaiia.

Palmu..

Forfcx.

Parmangfc

Teatudo.

Pa»u.

MiuiABT Pat  a  ho

Fertka.

Pea.

Acta.

PleUircm.

AflicquMtn.

Pondera.

QaadranuL

„ Ddlitare.

SebotDiu.

Praeda.

Spdiwn.

MUitai^  Pay,  IM.  —

StipcDffium.
STlUTAaT  PimiHMI

Decimatio.

Deiliaa  gnphc

DeMrtor.

Fuituariunk
MiUTAiT  RiWAain


Corana  obaidionalia.
„ owtrtnni,  vaUarij.


Triumphua


Anrum,
Ctalem.
Ciitopbonu,


Teatudo,!.
Tibia.


IS90

INDEX.

Mu«cto.-™«f««t

PjEtirg  — «»fl««t

FriiM*  BuUding.  — amHH

TympMiuni.

Domui  coeOKnlL

Ornciu  AND  SoLDixu.

. di^f.

Ac«n«1,9.

„ (olari..

,. rubiu  ndii.

EiedTM.

ir-"^

B«d: ciniulMrii.

„ Iodic

Fociu.
ForMx.

Ai«id..

, minium.

Fomii.

„ Tubriu.

Argjprupidfi.

„ ei«Tcidum.

Cunpidocton*.

IniigaU,  4.

O^OgUL

UniimD.

Wbitoi  mdinum.

LatB.

0-lei«.

Puictentitin.

„ creMuultriiL

„ faroMMta.

» lateritiiM.

IWu*.

Ydknri^T""

„ ■tiuctnim  miq

D«q>l*riL

Pkum  4ira  Pbiirlt  Orricn.

„ «upl«ton.^

EpTHL

A^tuL

„ •  l^id.  qu^dn

Etoo.il

AgyrtUL

Perguk.

AmlalMns.

PluUmi,].

Augur,  autpei.

PuloL

AuiuM-lci.

S»lM.

SjDoiki..

Curio.

Tabon..

Fbjiucfai.

Tegul*

TrieUnimD.

pneuno.

Ei»eU&

TilU.

PnrtOT.

FeUalcn.

FrutorUnL

Fbmcn.

Aerwium.

RiiftdL

cm.

Stnugw.

H«ii^>i«

Archeioo.

T-gM.

Hicrti.  ton  MtetOD.

TbknhL

LuporcL

ArfjroeopdoD.

Tin.

NmcoiI

VeUtL

TolooM.

P«mriL

BalDCM.

Xemgi

Pontife..

OkICUS tHD DiTUIAnOK.

BibliothMS.

awerdn.

Ciuiwr,  3.

Capnt  eitorum.

Sdil

OncululD,l.orA|wUD.

Theori.

Ciicuu

„ 3.orZeui.

Titii  wdilo.

C0C1.1-.S.

S.  of  othtr

VetUla.

CoHl

gods.

Fonim.

„ 4.  of  heme*.

Aitboun.

S.  ofthedeuL

6.  Italiui.

Atrimn.

Lrtjtinthm.

SoTtei.

Bibliotbeot.

LMitumiu.

FjUKTDia.

Ciupona.

Lcnhe.

Colore

Cell!.

Uonet*.

„ <lcphuit>niu>i.

Domui,  1.  OrMk.

Obdiwoi,

„ trrgiiium.

„ 9.KOII1U1.

OdnoL

PuMikui.

Brown:  ocfara  uibu  „  bneea.  SuggntuA

Greani  ohryiooallL  „  pcr^itjluoi,  Tabularium.

n MiDgo.  n  vutoDiiU,  Tbcnunu.

„ Koleeia.  „  (lietinw.  Tiibaiul.

, Thmdotion.  .  «eoL  Fdiuc  Omcn&


glc


IVDEX.

191

PnbUo  OOowi— MallMMl.

Fnblio  OOeen  —  ontmiMiI.

B0ID«IlL»r.«..«H«d.

AdiMtLS.

Stistoret.

Coloidm.9.

AdltOlOT.

SjllogcU

Comimnori.  lei.

T^tiu

CommiMnnL

A«d>l«i.

TtbukiiL

nmiu.

ConnnuoidiTidundoaati.

AgonoomL

Theori.

Ag«»«,m.

Tritrwcbia.

CoDfiuio.

Triumriri.

Apo«t<^u.

Corpn.JuriioiTilu.

Zetatu.

Crinraa,  deliotum.

BoAU  AMD  Stum.

Culp^  dolu  nulw

ArtynomL

Angiportu*

Curmtor.

B«H»B.

caut.

DusDum.

Muiuo.

„ !idWt«m.

Ctmifti.

^ iojum  drtom.

Cbor^Cu..

Vieiu.

Demlom.

CoMl^r.

BoMtH L*w.

D«diddL

Omiei.

Dejeoti  cffimn  Htio.

AeotiDO.

CritM.

ActmS.

CnnloTM.

Actio.

r Actor.

cwuterw  It  ftxa.]  Adoptio,  S

DuetMae.  Adulteriam,  I.

Diribitona.  Adroeatiu.

Dueauiii,  1,  S.  ^  Aed'ilei.

Ecdieui.  AfflnitH.


Album.
Eothjui.  Allurio.

ESBtMlaat  Ambitoi,

Appellor  Emph^leuai.

Aquae pluriaa  atMndat  Emptui  et  vaiditkh

HiarapoiL  agtio.  Erietio.

HodopoM,  An*.  AiHuu  Eiareitoria  aetio.

Hjlon.  Anaiioi  Airlnbot  Eihibendnm,  aetio  ad.

Hyparato.  Aneitor.  Exdiiam,  S.

Luataa,  AnesWT.  FaUym.

Lattugia.  Anetio.  Familia.

LietoT.  Anetor,  Atutorita*.  ^miltaeereboniiidaMKtio.

Hagiater.  BuSlicai

[Ja  a^JubUiMl  EH  of  »  -"^

miqiiiM  It  jTtMa.]


Foederataa  dTitata.

IfotaTu.  BoDorum  eamo,  Fnimentariaa  l^aa.

Opioatore*.  „ eoUatia  Fondiu.

ParedtL  „ emptio.  Furtiun.

FancliL  K poaania.  Oon.

Fnctona.  Breriariam  Alaiiejaniiia.  Herea,  S.

Pneeanei.  Caliunnia.  Hooona.


inquetiii


ProouiatOT.  Chirogrqibiim.  InEua.

logaiuL

Inatitoria  ai


ty

INDEX.

SlaTca, &<.— cMriMi^ M

RuaumLiw  — «»t.-H«i.

Jud..  Pedaiieiu.

JudicUi  ictia

dictum

AquariL

RecepM,  de  neepto  actio.

Bitti^u.

Julfdid.

Caloaea.

RcpFtundu  pecuniae.

ar

JuiiwouniltL

JurUirtio.

RutiliuwKtia

Connetae.

8«tio.

CutaeulariL

CunoiH.

„ CiTlle  FliyUnum.

Demodi

. CLvUe  Fapiiwnuni.

Fartor.

Ju^unndum.  a

JuRU  quod,  motio.

Socicta..

Hdola.

LMlnilir^

Sucoeaio.

loodulL

I*g.tum.

LibrariL

Lei.

Mediaatbu.

[Vmdir  Mm  Haad  m  a-

TdJCllariM  kso.

NotariL

p/udKtKot  Utt  Iff  at

T^lio. ^

P.ada«OK»

Pediacqui.

UbelU  >ecuHtonm>.

Fcnestae.

Tutor.

Servos  1.  Gnak.

I4b^.  Libertu.

Vindimdo.

„ 3.Il«n«L

Libcrtus,S.

Vindkla.

TW^lUrioa.

Vit

Thela.

LoCTlio,  conduetio.

UniTcnitaL

HigiHittut.

Unttaplo.

STATtrakT.

U^Mu.

Unrpatia

AcrolilhL

C^nabna.

C«7>tidM.

M«.d.tum.

Rini.

Coloaua.

Aoerra.

Dacdala.

MuiuibiK^.

Mon.

Anakleteria.

Hutuuni.

Autigoncia.

P«m

ApotheoMfc

Sculptm..

NegotwniiD geMorum

Are.

Statoarisaia.

•otio.

AaUiM.

l>pu*

NeiuiD.

Amalenim.

Noialii  actio.

„ tutUii.

ObligMioDO.

„ ndiata.

A-rdogia.

OceupUio.

Cortioa,  S.

FatdDum.

Diabatcria.

OadllDia.

FrodiginiD.

Or«tOT.

Eisitoia.

SoTtM.

PuidwUe  or  Dig«U.

Eleudoia.

TnOlM  iM.H0I.TPl.MWL

P«rl.pot«M.

Acdicohe.

P»tronu».

Eiilnia,  or  EpdodU.

Acgd.

P.upertt^

ssi^

FeeuLtu..

Lituu^  1.

Loitnitio.

Donna.

Luatnuo.

S3^

P.r  pigoori.  cpioneoL

PTX>«ro.i..

Egniuu

S«».

Plfgium.

Tamplom.

Sagraiua.

Vdmn.

Porna.

Secapila.

Tmn.

Poaenlo.

CaMai.

Praediuni.

Thenna.

Tripo.,9.

Aens.

Pnn.

Amoi^

ApM.

Praetor.

A^iilui.

Aalla.

Prouriptio.

Circinua.

PronriDu.

Aliptac

Colo.

Publicum  in  ran  actio.

CODtUB.

",Gooi^lc


INDEX.

ToiJk,la.—aMbHud.

ViBiCLM  Ain>  tana  »■»

UUDdb  — CD-(inr«r.

DoUbn.  DoUbaUa.

Antji.

CortiiM,l,2.

Fall.

Arcen.

CrMM.

Krtuoi

Butcnu.

Cup*

FoDU.

C™thron.

Cradiui.

F<a«pfc

CpUtrum.

Fii.

Forfex.

Cupentum.

Fereiilum.

Ftawdu.

Carnio.

Fuiulc:

Funti.

OuttUL

Hupv)-

Cuhim.

Lull,  Lramli.

iBCliT

CoTiniu.

UUtm.

Jugum.5.

Cur™,big«.

Lecythu*

LiBo.

« tdgM.

Lueer7».

Linx.

EmU.

Hudiolui.

Nonai.

HeguU.

HuDciu.

Jugum,  7.

OlKwJfc

S«»»U

L^tio^

F-ten,  P.t<ll>.

Stm.

PMiiu.

Pilentua.

P«ulum.

RhnU

Pf7Ctcr.

ArgenfriL

8eU>,3.

PyxiM.

AthleUt

Unauu,

RhTtoO.

B>klca

B.lL>un..

Buber,  tODmr.

Amutn.

Sarfgo.

BoturiL

Alabutnim.

SituU,  Siull..

Amphon.

TirU.

CUenUtciT.

AmpulU.

Tripoli

C«.pa

An-iglrph..

TVai,  TnilUu

FabrL

Auth.ptt.

Tu.

Fullo.

BucJdZ

Urc«iu.

BiDC«.

Wiiima  m  Wkimr

CtAm.

CtUOlMM.

Admwk.

Hirtrio.  1.  Ondt

Cdii.

AOmm.

n a-Baatn

Onddi.

Intopn^

OmiMmaa.

Buium.

!«».

CutbiJiu.

Caknnu.

C.P-.

Codci.

UbdlBI.

Caiimu.

„ numni.

Notarii.

Liba.

FeUtw.

cui

Not*.

I^ttor.

Codiltmr.

Regain

Flimiuu.

Colam.

S^

RadmiUr.

^.i™. . „ ,. ,

3l)rlDj,l.

Corbie  Cmbiili,  CorUenliL


byGooglc


Nm-wmt-Squn.


byGooglc


byGooglc


byGooglc


byGooglc


byGooglc


byGooglc


byGooglc


byGooglc


b>  Google


byGooglc


byGooglc
