Doctrine and Covenants of the Church of the Latter Day Saints (1835)
Joseph Smith, Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon, Frederick G. Williams (1835)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The 1835 Kirtland first edition of the Doctrine and Covenants (F. G. Williams & Co.), containing the Lectures on Faith and the revelations to 1835. Public domain.

========================================================================

DOCTRINE  AND  COVENANTS


OP

THE  CHDRCII  OF  THE


LATTER  DAY  SAINTS:

CAHETUSAV  SELECTED

FROM  THE  REVELATIONS  OF  GOD,

ARD  COMPILED  BY

JOSEPH  SMITH  Junior.  '

OLIVER  COWDERY,

SIDNEY  RIGDON,

'  FREDERICK  G.  WILLIAMS,

[Presiding  Elders  of  said  Church.]
PROPRIETORS .

KIBTLANO,  OHIO.

PRINTED  BY  F.  G.  WILLIAMS  &  CO.

FOR  THE

PROPRIETORS.


.1835.


M,  mr>  M-°

;  COPY  RIGHT  81iC«RE»  .iOCOllfliMlI  TfO  UW.


PREFACE.


To  the  members  of  the  church  of  the  Latter  pay
Saints —

Dear  Brethren:

We  deem,  it  to  be  unnecessary
to .  entertain  you  with  a  lengthy  prefabe  jtp  the  follow-  . i
mg  volume,  but  merely  tosay,  that  it  contains  in  short,
the  leading  items  of  the  religion  whicli  we  have  pro¬
fessed  to  believe.

Tlie  first  part  of  the  book  will  be  found  to  contain  a
series  of  Lectures  as  delivered  before  a  Theological
elass  in  this  place,  and  in  consequence  of  their  etnbra*
eir.g  the  important  doctrine  of  salvation,  we  have  ar¬
ranged  them  into  the  following  work:

The  second  part  contains  items  or  principles  for  the
regulation  of  the  church,  as  taken  from  the  revelations
which  have  been,  given  since  its  organization,  as  well
as  from  former  ones.

There  may  be  an  aversion  in  the  minds  of  ‘sortie
against  receiving  any  thing  purporting  to  be  articles
of  religious  faith,  in  consequence  of  there  being  so
many  now  extant;  but  if  men  believe  a  system,  and
profess  that  it  was  given  by  inspiration,  certainly,  the
more  intelligibly  they  can  present  it,  the  better.  It
does  not  make  a  principle  untrue  to  print  it,  neither
does  it  make  it  true  not  to  print  it.

The  church  viewing  this  subject  to  be  of  importance,
appointed,  through  their  servants  and  delegates  the
High  Council,  your  servants  to  select  and  compile  this
work.  Several  reasons  might  be  adduced  in  favor  of
this  move  of  the  Council,  but  we  only  add  a  few  words.
They  knew  that  the  church  was  evil  spoken  of  in  ma¬
ny  placos — its  faith  and  belief  misrepresented,  and  the


iv


way  of  truth  thus  subverted.  By  some  it  was  repre¬
sented  as  disbelieving  the  bible,  by  .others  as  being  an
enemy  to  all  good  order  and;  uprightness,  and  by  oth¬
ers  as  being  injurious  to  tire  peace  of  all  governments
civil  and  political.  ~~  --  -  -

,We  have,  therefore,  endeavored  to  present,  though
in  few  Words,  our  belief,  and  when  we  say  this,  hum¬
bly  trust,  the  faith  and  principles  of  tins  society  as  a
body.

‘We  do  not  present  this  little  vplume  with  any  other
expectation  than  that  we  are  to  bri  called  to  answer  to
every  'principle  advanced,  in  that  driy  yhen  tlhe  se¬
crets  of  all  hearts  will  be  revealed,  'arid  the  reward  of
every  man’s  labor  be  given  him. .

"  With  sentiments  of'cstechi

arid  sincere  respect,  wri  subscribe

drirselves  your  brethren  in  the  bonds  of
'  '  the  gospel  of  our  Lord’ Jesus  Christ.

JOSEPH  SMITH jr.
OLIVER  COWDERY.

■;JV  '  SIDNEY  RIGDON.

P.  G.  WILLIAMS.

Kiriland,  Ohio,  February  17,  1885.


THE#LOftY.

LSCTvjHE  first

Ox  THE  HOCTRINE  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  THE

Latter  Day  SaInts.

Of  Faith.

,  SECTION  I,  ;  ‘

1  Faith  being  the‘fir*t  pfinciple  irirevealed  religion,

and ‘the  foundation  of  all  righteousness,  necessarily
claims  the  first  place  in  a  course  !of  lectures  which  are
designed  to  unfold  to  the  understanding  the  doctrine
of  Jesus  Christ.  0  '

2  In  presenting  the  subjectof  faith,  we  shall  observe
the  following  order:

3  Firstj  Faith  itself — whhtit  'i's:  :

4  Secondly, 1  The  objdiit  on  which- -it 'rests;  and

5  Thirdly,  The  eflccts  which  flow  from  it.

6  Agreeably  to  this  ordei  we  have  first  to  show  what
faith  is.

7  This  author  of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  in  the
eleventh  chapter  of  that  epi;stles  Hhcl  first’ vexfce,  gives
the  following  definition  of  the  wbrd  fdith :

8  Now  faith  ia  the  Substance  [asSurahce]  of  things
hoped  fot,  the  evidence  of  things  hot  seen.

9  From  this  we  learn,  that  faith  is  fhe  assurance
which  men  have  of  the  existence  of  things  which  they
have  not  seen  f  and  the  principle  of  action  in  all  intelli¬
gent  beings.

10  If  men  were  duly  to  consider  themselves,  and
turn  their  thoughts  ancf  reflections  to  the  operations  of

lA


fi


their  own  minds,  they  would  readily  discover  that  it
is  faith,  and  faith  only,  which  is  the  moving  cause  of
all  action,  m  them;  that  without  it,  both  mind  and
liody  would  be.  in  a  state  of  inactivity,  and  all  their
exertions  would  cfeffse,  both"  physical  and  mentaL
11  VVere  this  class  to  go  back  and  reflect  upon  the
history  of  their  lives,  from  the  period  of  their  first  reo-
ollection,  and  ask.themselyes,  what  principle  excited
them  to  action,  or  what  gave  them  energy  and  activi¬
ty,  m  all  their  lawful  avocations,  callings  a  ad
pursuits,  what  would  be  the  answer?  Would  it  not
be  that  it  was  the  assurance  which  we  had  of  the  ex-

i  hence  of  things  which  we  had  not  seen,  as  yet? _

wpt  thp  hop$  which  you  had,  in  consequence  ef
.your  belief  in  the  existence  of  unseen  things,  which
stimulated  yon.  to  action  and  exertion,  in  order,  to  ob-
tain  them?  Are  you  not  dependant  on  your  faith,  or
lie  lief,  for  the  acquisition  of  all  knowledge,  wisdom
a,jd  intelligence?  Would  you  exert  yourselves  to  obtain
wisdom  and  intelligence,  unless  you  did  believe  that,
vou  could  obtain  them?  Would  you  have  ever  sown

ll  you  had  not  believed  that  you  would  reap?  Would

you  have  e  ver  planted  if ,  you  had  not  believed  that  y^u
Would, you  have  ever  asked  unless  you
had  believed  that  you  would  receive?  Would  you  havo
UViPr^ought  unless  you  had  believed  that  you  would  have
toimd?  ,  Qp  would  you  havq  ever  knocked  unless  you
had  beueved  tlu$  it  would  have  been  opened  unto  you?
In  a  word,  is  there. any  tiling  that  you  would  have
done,  either  physical  or  mental,  if  you  had  notprevi-
o^isJy  believed?,  Are  not  all  your  exertions,  of  eve
•f?rP.b^tioniyour  faith?  '  O^'may  wc  nofmsjL
or  what  do  you  possess,  which  vou
have  not  obtained  by  reason  of  your  faith?  Your,
nui...;nt  your  lodgings,  arc  .they  not  all  by
’  R yjn  °1  >our  faith?  Reflect,  and  ask  y-urselvGe,
if  thaso  tilings  arc  not  sq.  Turn  your  thoughts  on


vour  own  minds,  and  see' if  faith  is;  not  the  moving
cause  of  all  action  in  yourselves:  and  if  the  moving
.  cause  in  you,  is  it. not  in  all  other  intelligent  beings*

12  And*  as  faith  is  the, moving  cause  of  all  action. in
temporal  concerns,  soitis  in  spiritual;  for  the  Savior
has  said,  and  that  truly,  that  he  that  hcUeveth  and
is  baptized,  shall  be  saved.  Mark  16:16.

13  As  we  receive  by  faith,  all  temporal  blessings  that
we  do  receive,  so  we,  in  like  manner,  receive. by  faith
all  spiritual  blessings,  that  we  do  receive.  But  faith
is  not  only  the  principle  of  action,  but  of  power,- .rikso,
in  ail  intelligent  beings,  whether  in  heaven,  dr  on

•  earth.  Thus  says  the  author  of  the  epistle  to -the,  He¬
brews;  11:3:

14  Through  faith  wc  understand  that  the  worlds  were
framed  by  the  word  of  God:  so  that  things  which  ale
seen  were  not  made  of  things  which  do  appear.  •

15  By  this  we  understand  that  the  principle  ofipoiwer,
which  existed  in  the  bosom  :  of  God,  by  1  which)* ho
worlds  were  framed,  was  faith;  and  that  it  is  by  rea¬
son  of  this  principle  of  powgr,  existing  in  the  .Deity,
that  all  created  things  exist— -so  that  all  things: ih  heav¬
en,  on  earth,  or  under  the  earth,  exist  bv  reason: of
-  faith,  as  it  existed  in,  him.

.  16  Had  it  not  been  for  thei  ,  principle  ;  of  faith  ithe
worlds  would  never  have  been  , framed,  neither  would
man  have  been,  formed  of  the  dust— -it  is  the  principle
by  which  Jehovah  works, <snd  tlu'ough  .which  he  fexor-
eisea  power  over  all  temporal,  as  well  ' as  eternal
tilings.  Take  this  principle  lor  attribute,  (for  it  is  an
attribute)  from  the  Deity  and  he  -would  cease,  to  ex¬
ist.

17  Who  cannot  see,  that  if  God  framed  the  wovldehy
.faith,  that  it  is  by  faith-  that  he; exercises  powdrover
„  them,  arid  that  faith;  is.  the  principle  iof/  powfcr#  And
that  if  ,  the  principle  of  power,  it  must  bo /so  in  mat
as  well  as-ia'tliejDeity?  This  is  the  testimony  of  all


8


:the  sacred  writers,  and  the  lesson  which  they -have
been  endeavoring  to  teach  to  man.  >  •

18  The  Savior  says,  Matthew  17:19,20,  in  explaining
the  reason  why  the  disciples  could  not  cast  but;' the
devil,  that  it  was  because  of  their  unbelief:  “For  ve¬
rily,  I  say  unto  you,’5  said  he,  “if  ye  have  faith  as  a
grain  of  mustard-seed,  ye  shall  say  unto  this  mountain,
Remove  hence  to  yonder  place!  and  it  shall  remdve:
.and  nothing  shall  be  impossible  unto  you.”

■  19  Moroni,  while  abridging  and  compiling  the  record

■  of  his  fathers,  has  given  us  the  following  account  of
■faith  as  the  principle  of  power:  He  says,  page  563,
that  it  was  the  faith  of  Alma  and  Amulek  which  caus¬
ed  the  walls  of  the  prison  to  be  wrent,  as  recorded  on
the  264th  page;  that  it  was  the  faith  of  Nephi  and  Le-
hi  which  caused  a  change  to  be  wrought  upon  the
hearts  of  the  Lamanites,  when  they  were  immersed
with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  with  fire,  as  seen  on  the  421st
page,  and  that  it  was  by  faith  that  the  mountain  Ze-
rin  was  removed,  when  the  brother  of  Jared  spake  in
the  name  of  the  Lord.  ,  See  also  565th  page.

20  In  addition  to  this  we  are  told  in  Hebrews,  11:32,
33,34,35,  that  Gideon,  Barak,  Samson,  .  Jephthah,
David,  Samuel,  and  the  prophets,  through  faith  subdu¬
ed  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness,  obtained  prom¬
ises,  stopped  the  mouths  of  lions,  quenched  the  vio¬
lence,  of  fire,  escaped  the  edge  of  the  sword,  out  of
weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight,
turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens;  and  that  wo¬
men  received  their  dead  raised  to  life  again,  &c,  &c.

21  Also;  Joshua,  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel,  bade  the
sun  and  moon  to  stand  still,  and  it  was  done.  Josh.  10:12.

22  We  here  understand,  that  the  sacred  writers
say, that  all  these  things  were  done  by  faith — It  was  by
faith  that  the  worlds  were  framed- — God  spake,  chaos
heard,  and  Worlds  came  into  order,  by  reason  of  the
faith  there  was  ia  him.  So  with  man  also — he  spake


by  faith  hr1  the1  name 'of  Gdd,  nnd  the  sun  stood  still,
tl.id  rti&hi  prisons'ifety,

nons’  mouths  tverd  clo'secl,  the  human  jieart,  lost,  its  e$-
jnity,  fire  its  violence,  atmies  their  power,  the  sword
its  terror,  and  death  its  dominion;  and  all  this  by  rea¬
son  of  the  faith"  which  "was  in  them.

23  Had  it  not  been  for  the  /faith  which  \ya§  i|i
-man,  they  might  have  spoken  to  the  sun,  the  moon,
the  mountain--,  prisons,  iions,  the-humart  heart,  fire,
'armies,1  th"  sword,  or  to  dehth  in  vain!

24  Faith,  i iien,  is  the  first  great  governing  principle
•which  has  cower,  dominion,  and  authority  over  all
things:  by  >t-they  exist,  by  it  they  are  Upheld,  by  it
Hhey  ana  changed,  di’  hy  it  they  remain, ' agreeably  t;>
‘the  wili  of  (led;  .  Without  it,  there  is  no  power,
and  without  power  there  could  be  no  creation,  nor
osistonce!

OF  THEOLOGY.


Question,— What  is  .theology? /  "  •’

Answer. — l!  is  that  revealed  science  which  treats  of  the  t*-
injjf '  arid,  a  (tribute?  tit  God— his  relations  to  us— the  dispensa¬
tions  of  iiis  providence — his  will  with  respect  to  our  actions—
and  his  purposes  with  respect  to  our  end.  [Buck’s  Theologi¬
cal  ri'clion  -  s-y,  page  58*2. j

C],  -Who  t  is  the  first  principle  in'this  revealed  science!?

A.  Faith.  [«  i.  IF  1.]

Q.  Why  is  failhthe  first  principlein  this  revetted  science?

A.  ^  Because  it  is  the  foundation  of  all  righteousness.  Hch
J  1:6.  "Without  faith  it  is.impossible  to,  please  God.  1st.  John,
3:7.  Little  "children,  let-  no  man  deceive  yon:  he  that  doeth
righteousness,  is  righteous,  even  as  he  [God]  is  righteous.  l.

IT  1]

Q.  What  arrangement  should  be  followed  in  presenting  the
Wubject  of  Faith?

A.  i  First,  Should  be  shown  what  faith  is:  [$  i.  3.]

Secondly,  The  object  upon  which  it  rests:  and  [4  I  ?  4.]

Thirdly,’  The  effects  which  flow  from  it.  [§  r.  9  5.]

Q.  What  is  faith?

A.  "It  is  the  assurance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  sf
things  not  seen:  Heb.  11:1.  That  is,  gt.  is  the  assurance  we
have  of  the  existence  of  unseen  things.  Aod  being  the  assn-


10


r  arise  which,  we  have  of  the  existence  of  unseen  things,  most
be  the  principle  of  actionin  all  intelligent  beings.  Heb.  11:3.
through  faith  we  understand  the  worlds  were  framed  bv  the
word  of  God.  [$  i.  4T  8,0.]

i  Q.  How  do  you  prove  that  faith  is  the  principle  of  action  ha
.all  intelligent  beings!

A.  First,  By  duly,  considering  the  operations  of  my  'own
mind;  and  secondly,  by  the  direct  declaration  of  scripture. —
Heb.  11:7.  By  faitli  IVoah,  being  warned  of  things  not  seen
as  yet,  moved  with  fear,  prepared  an  ark  to  the  saving. of  hi*
.house;  by  the  which  he  condemned  the  world,  and  became
heir  of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith.  Heb.  11:8.  By
faitli  Abraham,  when  he  was  called  to  go  out  into  a  place
which  he  should  after  receive  for  an  inheritance,  obeyed;  and
Use  went  out  not  knowing  whither  he  w  ent.  Heb.  11:9.  By
faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land#  promise,  as  in  a  strange  cq#i-
try;  dwelling  in  tabernacles  .with  Isaac  and  Jacob,  the  heirs
with  him  of  the  same  promise,  lleb.  1 ?  :27,  By  faith  Moses
•forsook  F.gypt,  not  Fearing  the  wrath  of  the  king:  for  he  'eii-
dured  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible,  [ft.  If  10, 11.]

Q.  Is  not  faith  the  principle  of  action  in  spiritual  things
as  well  as  in  "temporal!

A.  It  is.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A,  Heb.  11:6.  .  Without,  faith  it  is  impossible  to.pleaw
Marjyl6:lfi.  He  that  believptht  and  is  baptized,  shall
lie  saved.  Horn.  4:16.  Therefore^  it  is  of  faith,  that  it  mjghi
be  by  grace;  to  the  end  the  promise  might  be.surp  Jo  all  fjk>
seed:  not  to  that  only  which  is  of  the  law,  hut  to  that  also
which  is  of  the.  faith  of  Abraham,  who  is  the  father  of  usaU. —
C>i.  IT  12,13.]

Q.  Is  faith  any  tiling  else  beside  the  principle  of  aetio»;

A.  It  is.

Q.  What  is  it!

A.  It  is  the  principle  of  power,  also.  [Jr.  If  13.j

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A.  First,  It  is  the  principle  of  power  in  the  Deity,  as,  welt
«»  in  Heb.  11:3.,  .Through  faith  we  understand  that,

the  worlds  wbre  framed  by  the  word  of  Godj  so  that  things
which  are  seen  were  not  made  .of, things  which  do  appear. —
.[**■  1  14,1,5,10..]  ,  ,  T  '

Secondly^  ft  is  theppnpiplp  of.ppwer.jn.nian.also.  Book  of
Mormon,  page  264.  Alma  and  A;  nick  .i^re  delivered  ffom
prison.  Do.  page  421.  .  Neplf.  •rvl^W,  .with  : :  ?  Lamanites,
arc  imo  -.rsed  with  the Sjpirit.  Do.  page  566. ..  .bemountajp
by  t#e  faith  of  tl^e  brother,  of  Jared,  .is  grooved.  Joftu


11


. cnrooai  BBurt> .  .s

10:12.  Tl'.en  spake  Joshua  to  the  Lord  in  the  day  when  the
fx>rd  delivered  up  the  AmoriWs-befttfp  the  children  of  Israel,
and  he  said  in  the  sight  of  Israel,  Sun,  stand  thou  still  upon
Gibeon,  and  thou  Moon,  in  tjie  valley  of  Ajalon.  Josh.  10:13.
And  the  sun  stood  still/  and  Ulfc  moon  stayed,  until  the  peopi*
had  avenged  themselves  of  their  enemies.  Is  not  this  written
in  the  book  of  Jasher?  ,.go  the  sun, stood  still  in  the  midst  of
heaven,  and  hasted  not  to  go  down  about  a  whole  day.  Mar.
17:19.  Then  came  tlie  disciplek  to  J’esus  apart,  and  said,
Wiiy  could  not  we  cast  him  out?  Mat.  I T:20.  And  Jesu*
said  unto  them,  Because  of  your  unbelief:  tor  verily  I  say  un¬
to  you,  if  ye  have  faith  us  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  ye  shall
say  unto  this,  mountain,  lie-move  hence  to  yonder  place;  and
it  shall  remove;  and  nothing  shall  lie  impossible  onto  you.—
Heb.  <11:32.  And'  what  shall'  I  say  more?  for  the  time
would  fail  me  to  tell  of  Gideon*  and  of  Barak,  and  of  Samson,
ahd.of  Jephtliah,’  of  David  also,  aud  Samuel,  and  of  the  proph-
ots.  Ileb.  11:33.  -Who  through  faith  subdubd  kingdoms,
ivrohgHt  Righteousness,  obtained  promises,  stopped  the  mouths
of  lions,  lleb.  11:34.  Quenched  the  violence  of  fire,  escaped
the  edge,  of  the  sword,  out;  of  weakness  were- made  strong,
waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens.
Hefa.  11:35.  Women  received  fh<?jr  dead  raised  to- life  again--
and  others  were' tortured,  nut  aeceptingMeliverahcc;  fhatlhey
might  obtain  a  better  resurrection.  EG  i;  ?  16;17, 18.19,20(21.

sa-3

Q.  How  would  ynp  define, faith  iuijts  most  mjlimitad sensed

A.  It  isthe'flfEt  grc-aiignvernirigpriucipie,  w-hich  has  pow¬
er,  dAmiuion  -dSS Authority  o^eiHill  things.  [6  r.  ^  24.]

Q.  How  do  you  convey  to  the  understanding  more  clearly,
tliatTaith , is  the  first  great  goyeruing  principle,  which  has  pow¬
er,  .dominion,  and,  authority  pyw, all, things?

A.  By  it,  thfey  exist,  by  it  they  are  upheld,  by  it  they  are
changed,  or  by  it  they  remain,  agreeably  to  the  will  of  God;
and  without  it  there  ia  .no  powcVf  and' without  power  there
could  be  no  .creation,  nor  existoneel-  ;[$  I.  *4.]


iil  tnin  T>.i  spilin'  <f  ft  aril  >o3


Z.2CTURB  SECOND.

Or  Faith.

:  SECTION  II.  .

1  Having  shown'  iii  oUr  previous  lecture  “faith  its¬
elf — what  it  is,”  vie  shall  proceed  to  show  secondly
ihe  object  on  which  it  rests.

2  Wd  here  observe  that  God  is  the  only  supreme
governor,  and  independent  being,  in  whom  all  fulness
and  perfection  dwells;' who  is  omnipotent,  omnipres-
ont,  and  omnicient;,  without  beginning  of  days,  or  end
of  life;  and  that  in  him  every  good  gift,  and  every
good  principle .  dwells;  and  that  he  is  the  Father  of
lights:  In  him  the,,  principle  of  faith  dwells  indepen¬
dently;  and  he  is  thei  object  in  whom  the  faith  of  all
other  rational  and  accountable  beings  centers,  for  life
and  salvation.

3  In  order  to  pfeiCijt.this  part  of  the  subject  in  a
clear  and  conspicuous  point  of  light,  it  is  necessary
to  go  back  and  show  the  evidences  which  mankind
have  had,  and  the;  foundation  on  which  these  eviden¬
ces  are,  or  were  bascjfl,  since  the  creation,  to  believe
in  the  existence  of  a,  God,

4  We  do  not  mean; those  evidences  which  are  man¬
ifested  by  the  works  . of  creation,  which  we  daily  be¬
hold  with  our  natural  eyes:,  we  are  sensible,  that  af¬
ter  a  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  works  of  creation,
throughout  their  vast  forms  and  varieties,  dearly  ex¬
hibit  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead.  Romans  1 :20.
For  the  invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation,  of
the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the
things  that  are  made:  even  his  eternal  power  and
Godhead.  But  we  mean  those  evidences  by  which
the  first  thoughts  were  suggested  to  the  minds  of  men
that  there  was  a  God  who  created  all  things.

5  We  shall  now  proceed  to  examine  the  situation  of


manat. his  finest  creation..  Moses,, ttoj^iistoriail,  has
given  us  the  following  dim  in  the  fijst.

cha,pt.  of  the  book  of  Genesis,  Jjegipning  with,  the  20th,
verse,  and  closing  with  the  OOtfij,;,  We, copy  from  the
New  Translation:  ,  ,  .

6,  And  the  Lor^d,  God  said  ujato 'thp  Gnly,  Begotten,
who  was  with  him  from  the  -  beginning,  Let  us' make
man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness:  and  it  was
done.

,7  .And  the  Lord  God  said,  Iiet  thehjfhaye  dominion
over  the  fish  of  .the  sea,,  and  b\jer;  the  jfbwl  of  the  air,
and  over  the  .cattle^  and  dver0a}^the earth,  and  over
pvery  creeping  thing  that  e'reaps.jdpon,  the  earth.

8,  Sp  God  created' man  in  His  o.wnknage,  in  the  im-'
age  of  the 'Only,  Begotten  emoted,  he  him;  male  'and
female  created  hie  them.  And  GocT  blessed  them,  and
G,od  sgid  unto  them.  Be  fruitful,'  ,  and  multiply,  and
replenish  the  earth,”  and  subauo”  ft: 1  and  have  domin¬
ion oyer  tjje  fish  of  the  sea.  and  over  the  fowl  of  the
air,  and .pyer  every  living  .thing 'that  moves  upon  the
earth.

9  And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  man,  Behold,  I  have

given  you  every  herb  bearing  seed,  which  is  upon
the  ,fac^,gf  aB  the  earth,,'  and  evp^y  tree  in  the  which
is  the  fruit  of  a  tree  yielding  f'eeS;  to  you  if  shall  be
for  meat,  ,  ,  .

10  A^in,  Genesis  2  19,20:  AridtheLprd

God  tooty  the  fhan,  and  .  put' hi^’ into  the  garden,  of
Eden,  to  dress  it  and  $  kejep  it.i  And  the  Lord  God
commanded  the  man,, saving; ';6f!'evexy 1  tree  of  the
garden  you  may  free]|- eat: J  but  of  the  tree  of  tlie
knowledge  or  good  ana  evif, you  shall  riot  eat  of  it,
neither  shall  you  touch' if; ''nevertheless,1  you  may
choose  for  yourself,  for  it  is  given  unto  you;  but  re¬
member  that  I  forbid  tit:  .for  in^he  day  that  you’ eat
t^reoryori.shad'surery  diei  •  '  ’


14


11  And  out  bfj’fije  ground  the  Lord  God  formed  ev-
fH-j  beast  of  the1  field,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air,  and
(Commanded  that' they  should  be, brought  unto  Adam,
»  geo  what  lie  whuld  call  them.  *  *  *  And  what¬
ever  Adam  cujlpd  ©very  living  creature,  that  was  the
name  thereof.  And  Adam  gave  names  to  all  cattle,
and  to  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  to  every  beast  of  th*
field.

12  From  the  foregoing  wo  learn  man’s  situation  at

h.is  first  creation;  ,tho  knowledge  with  which  he  wa*
endowed,  and  the  high  and  exalted  station  in  which
ho  was  placed — lord,  or  governor  of  all  things  on
earth,  and  at  the  sdiiie  time  enjoying  communion  and
intercourse  with  his  Maker,  without  a  vail  to  separate
between.  We  shall  next  proceed  to  examine  the  ac¬
count  given  of  his  fall,  and  of  his  being  driven  out  of
the  garden  of  Eddn,  and'  from  the  presence  of  the
IiOrd.  1  '

13  Moses  proceeds:  And  they  [Adam  and  Eve]
heard  tho  voice  of  the  Lord  God  as  they  were  walk¬
ing  in  the  garden  in  tho  cool  of  the  day,  and  Adam
and  his  wife  hid  themselves  from  the  presence  of  tho
Lord  God  among  the  trees  of  the  garden.  And  the
Lord  God  called  linto  Adam,  and  said  unto  him,
Where  are  you  g6ing?  And  ho  said,  I  heard  your
voice  in  the  garden,  and  I  was  afraid,  because  I  be¬
held  that  I  Was  naked,  and  Thid  myself.

14  And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  Adam,  Who  told
vou  that  you  were  narked?  Have  you  eaten  of  the  tree
whereof  1  told  you  that  you  should  noteat?  If  so,
you  should  surely  die?  And  the  man  said,  The  wo¬
man  whom  you  gave  me,  and  commanded  that  she
should  remain  with  me,  gave  me  of  tho  fruit  of  tho
tree,  and  I  did  eat,

15  And  the  Lord  Gbd  said  unto  the  woman,  What
is  this  which  you  have  done?  And  the  woman  said,
Tho  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  I  did  eat.


16  And  &gain:,  the  Lord  said  unto  the  woman,  |
greatly  multiply  your  sorrow,  and  youf  cohbepfWhi  :1

in  sorrow*  you  "shall  bring  forth  children;  and  your
desire  shall  be  to  yotir  husband,  and  he  shall  .rUkr'
over  you.

IT  And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  Adam,  because'
you  have  hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  your  wife,  arid
have  eaten  of  the  fruit  of  the  tree  of  which  I  conn
mnnded  you,  saying,  You  shall  not  eat  of  it!  cutset!
shall  be  the  ground  for  your  sake  :  in  sorrow  you  shall
eat  of  it  all  the  days  of  your  life.  Thorns  also,,  and
thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  to  you:  and  you  shall  oaf
the  herb  of  the  field.  By  the  sweat  of  your  face  shad'
you  cat  bread,  until  vou  shall  return  unto  the  ground
—for  You  shall  surely  die — for  out  of  it  you  were  ta¬
ken;  tor  dust  you  were,  and  unto  dust  you  shall' re¬
turn.  This  was  immediately  followed  by  the  fulfill¬
ment  of  what  we  previously  said:  Man  was  driven,  or
sent  out  of  Kden.

IS  Two  important  items  are  shown  from  the  for¬
mer  quotations:  First,  After  man  was  created,  he.
was  not  left  without  intelligence,  or  understanding,  do'
wander  in  darkness,  and  spend  an  existence  in  ignor¬
ance  and  doubt — on  the  great  and  important  point
which  edectod  his  happiness, — as  to  the  real  fact  bv"
whom  he  was  created,  or  unto  whom  he  was  amcha-'
.Wo  for  his  conduct  God  conversed  with  him  fac^tn :
faCe :  in  his  presence  he  was  permitted  to  stand,  and
from  his  own  mouth  he  was  permitted  to  .receive  ii>-  !
sfruction— he  heard  his  voice,  walked  before  him,  antlj
gazed  upon  his  glory — while  intelligence  burst  upbrf
his  understanding,  and  enabled  him  to  give  nairas, to1
the  vast  assemblage  of  his  Maker’s  works.

19  Secondly,  we  have  seen,  that,  though  mart  did;
transgress,  his  transgression  did  not  deprive  him  of
the  previous  knowledge  with  which  he  was  cnduifed.
relative  to  the  existence  and  glory  of  his  Creator;


for  ,n.o  sooner  did  he  hepi;hjs,  voice,  than  he, .sought
to  hide  himself  from  hisjpcqsgnpe.  ,  ,

20  .Haying  shown,  then,  in  the  first  instaneej  tha^
God  began  to  converse  with  imp,  immediately  after
he  “breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  lire,”  and
that  . he  did  not  cease, to  manifest;  ihimself  to;  hiip,  even
after  his  fall,  we  shall  next  pjopeed  to  show,  that,
though  he.was  cast,  out  fi;om  the  garden  of  Eden,  his
knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God  .was  not  lost,  .nei¬
ther;  did  Goa  cease  to  manifest  his  will,  unto  him..

21  We  next  proceed- to  presept  the  accopnt  of  the
direet  revelation  which  man  received,  after  he  was
cast  out  of  Eden,  and  further  copy,  from- the.. New.
Translation:

.22  After  Adam  had  been  driven  qpt  of  .the  .gardpp,
lip  began  to  till  the  earth,  apd  to  have  dominion  over
all  the  beasts  of  the  field,; and  to  eat  his.  oread  by  the
s>yeat  of  his  brow.,  as  the  Lord  had  commanded  him:
and  he  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  ,  apd  so  did
Eyo  his  ,wifp,also.  And  they  heap-ci  j|i'e  voice,  of  the
Lord  from  the  way  toward  the  garden  of  Eden,  speak:
ing  unto  tjiern;  '  pud  they  saw  him  not,  for  they  were
shpt  out  from  jus  presence:  but.he.gave.iiiitothem  copi-
mpndinepts  that  thpy'.  should  wopjiip'fthe  Lord  their.
Gpil,  and,  should  offer  the  firstlings  of,  their  flocks  for,
an.  offering  unto  the  Lord,  AncfAdam  was  obedient
unto  the  commandment.

23  And' after  mapy  days  an  angel  of  the  Lord  ap¬
plied  unto,  Adam,  saying,  why  do,,  you  offer  sacri¬
fices  unto  the  Lord?  And  Adam  said  unto  him,  1
know  not;  but  the  Lord  commanded  me  to  offer,  sac¬
rifices.

24  And  the' angel  said  unto  him,  This  thing  is  a
sjpailitude  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  ,  Only  Begotten  of  the
Bather,  who'  is  full'  ,of  grace  and  truth.  '  AnoTyou
stiali;do  all" that  you  do  in  .the  nanie  of*  the  Son :  and
you  shall  repent  and  call  upon  God  in  his  name  for-


ever.  In  that  day  the  Holy  Spirit  fell  upon  Adam,
and  bore  record  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.

25  This  last  quotation,  or  summary,  shows  this  im¬
portant  fact,  that  though  our  first  parents  were  driven
out  of  the  garden  of  Eden,  and  were  even  separated
from  the  presence  of  God,  by  a  vail,  they  still  retain¬
ed  a  knowledge  of  his  existence,  and  that  sufficiently
to  move  them  to  call  upon  him.  And  further,  that  no
sooner  was  the  plan  of  redemption  revealed  to  man,
and  he  began  to  call  upon  God,  than  the  Holy  Spirit
was  given,  bearing  record  of  the  Father  and  Son.

26  Moses  also  gives  us  an  account,  in  tfie  4th  of
Genesis,  of  the  transgression  of  Cain,  and  the  right¬
eousness  of  Abel,  and  of  the  revelations  of  God  to
them.  He  says:  In  process  of  time  Cain  brought  of
the  fruit  of  the  ground,  an  offering  unto  the  Lord. —
And  Abel  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock,
and  of  the  fat  thereof.  And  the  Lord  had  respect
unto  Abel,  and  to  his  offering:  but  unto  Cain  and  to
his  offering  he  had  riot  respect.  New  satan  knew
this,  and  it  pleased  him.  And  Cain  was  very  angry,
and  his  countenance  fell.  And  the  Lord  said  unto
Cain,  Why  are  you  angry?  why  is  your  countenance
fallen?  If  you  do  well,  will  you  not  be  accepted? —
And  if  you  do  not  well,  sin  lies  atthe  door,  and  satas
desires  to  have  you;  and  except  you  shall  hearken
unto  my  commandments,  I  will  deliver  you  up:  and
it  shall  be  unto  you  according  to  his  desire.  .

27  And  Cain  went  into  the  field  and  talked  with  his
brother  Abel.  And  while  they  were  in  the  field,
Cain  rose  up  against  his  brother  Abel,  and  slew  him.
And  Cain  gloried  in  what  he  had  done,  saying,  I  am
free!  surely  the  flocks  of  my  brother  will  now  fall  in¬
to  my  hands.

28  But  the  Lord  said  unto  Cain,  Where  is  Abel,
your  brother?  And  he  said,  I  know  not:  am  I  my


brother’s  keeper?  And  the  Lord  said,  What  have
yon  done?  the  voice  of  your  brother’s  blood  cries  un¬
to  me  from  the  ground.  And  now,  you  shall  be  curs¬
ed  fromt  the  earth  which  has  opened  her  mouth  to  re¬
ceive  your  brother’s  blood,  from  your  hand.  When,
you  till  the  ground,  she  shall  not  henceforth  yield  un¬
to  you  her  strength.  A  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  also,,
you  shall;  be  in  the  earth.

29  And;  Cain  said  unto  the  Lord,  Satan  tempted  me.
because-jof  my  brother’s  flocks.  And  I  was  also  an¬
gry:  for  liis offering  was  accepted,  and  mine  was  not:

’  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear.  Behold,
you  have  driven  me  out  this  day  from  the  face  of
men,  and  from  your  face  shall  I  be  hid  also;  and  J
shall  be  a  fugitive  and  a  vagabond  in  the  earth;  and
it.  shall  come  to  pass,  every  one  that  finds  me  will
slay  me,  because  of  my  oath;  for  these  things  are
not  hid  from  the  Lord,  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,.
Therefore,  whoever  slays  Cain,  vengeance  shall  be
taken  on  him  seven  fold.  And  the  Lord  set  a  mark
upon  Cain,  lest  any  finding  him  should  kill  him.

30  The  object  of  the  foregoing  quotations  is  to  show
to  this  class  the  way  by  which  mankind  were  first
made  acquainted  with  the  existence  of  a  God:  that  it
was  by  a  manifestation  of  God  to  man,  and  that  God
continued,  after  man’s  transgression  to  manifest  him¬
self  to  him  and  his  posterity:  and  notwithstanding  they
were  separated  from  his  immediate  presence,  that,
they  could  not  see  his  face,  they  continued  to  hear  his
voice.

31  Adam  thus  being  made  acquainted  with  God,
communicated  the  knowledge  which  he  had  unto  his
posterity;  and  it  was  through  this  means  that  the
thought  was  first  suggested  to  their  minds  that  there
was  a  God.  Which  laid  the  foundation  for  the  exer¬
cise  of  their  faith,  through  which  they  could  obtain  a.
knowledge  of  his  character  and  also  of  his  glory..


32  Not  only  was  there  a  manifestation  made  unto
Adam  of  the  existence  of  a  God,  but  Moses  informs
us,  as  before  quoted,  that  God  condescended  to  talk
with  Cain  after  his  great  transgression,  in  slaying  his
brother,  and  that  Cain  knew  that  it  was  the  Lord  that
was  talking  with  him:  so  that  when  he  was  driven
out  from  the  presence  of  his  brethren,  he  carried  with
him  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  a  God:  and
through  this  means,  doubtless  his  posterity  became  ac¬
quainted  with  the  fact  that  such  a  being  existed.

33  From  this  we  can  see  that  the  whole  human  fam¬
ily,  in  the  early  age  of  their  existence,  in  all  their
different  branches,  had  this  knowledge  disseminated
among  them;  so  that  the  existence  of  God  became  an
object  of  faith,  in  the  early  age  of  the  world.  And
the  evidences  which  these  men  had  of  the  existence
of  a  God,  was  the  testimony  of  their  fathers  in  the-
first  instance.

34  The  reason  why  we  have  been  thus  particular  o»
this  part  of  our  subject,  is,  that  this  class  may  see  by
what  means  it  was  that  God  became  an  object  of  faith
among  men  after  the  fall;  and  what  it  was  that  stir¬
red  up  the  faith  of  multitudes  to  feel  after  him;  to
search  after  a  knowledge  of  his  character,  perfections
and  attributes,  until  they  became  extensively  acquain¬
ted  with  him;  and  not  only  commune  with  him,  and
behold  his  glory,  but  be  partakers  of  his  power,  and
stand  in  his  presence.

35  Let  this  class  mark  particularly  that  the  testimo¬
ny  which  these  men  had  of  the  existence  of  a  God,
was  the  testimony  of  man;  for  previous  to  the  time
that  any  of  Adam’s  posterity  had  obtained  a  manifes¬
tation  of  God  to  themselves,  Adam  their  common  far¬
ther  had  testified  unto  them  of  the  existence  of  God,
and  of  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead.

36  For  instance,  Abel,  before  he  received  the  assu-

2*


ranee,  from  heaven  that  his  offerings  were  acceptable
unto  God,  had  received  the  important  information  of
his  father,  that  such  a  being  did  exist,  who  had  crea¬
ted,  and  who  did  uphold  all  things.  Neither  can
there  be  a  doubt  existing  on  the  mind  of  any  person,
that  Adam  was  the  first  who  did  communicate  the
knowledge  of  the  existence  of  a  God,  tohis  posterity;
and  that  the  whole  faith  of  the  world,,  from  that  timo
down  to  the  present,  is  in  a  certain  degree,  dependent
on  the  know’ ledge 'first  communicated  to  them  by  their
common  progenitor;  and  it  has  been  handed  down  to
the  day  and  generation  in  which  we  live,  as  we  shall
show  from  the  face  of  the  sacred  records.

37  First,  Adam  was  130  years  old  wheii  Seth  was
born.  Gen.  5:3.  And  the  days  of  Adam,  after  he
had  begotten  Seth,  were  800  years;  making  him
930  years  old  when  he  died.,  Gen.  5:4,5.  Seth  was
105  wheh  Enos  was  born.  5:6.  Elios  was  90  when
Cainan  was  born.  5:9.  Cainan  was  70  when  Mahala-
leel  was  born.  5:12.  Mahalaleel  was  65  when  Jared
was  born.  5:15:  Jared  Was  162  when  Enoch  was
born.  5:18.  Enoch  was  65  when  Mcthusaleh  was
born.  5:21.  Methusaleh  was  187  when  Lamech  was
born.  5:25.  Lamech  was  182  when  Noah  was  bam.
5:28.

38  From  this  account  it  appears  that  Lamech,  the
9th  from  Adam,  and  the  father  of  Noah,  was  56  years
old  when  Adam  died;  Methuseleh,  243;  Enoch,  308;
Jared  470;  Mahalaleel,  535;  Cainan,  605;  Enos,  695;
and  Seth,  800.

39  So  that  Lamech,  the  father  of  Noah;  Methusa¬
leh,  Enoch,  Jared,  Mahalaleel,  Cainan,  Enos,  Seth,
and  Adam,  were  all  living  at  the  same  time,  and  be¬
yond  all  controversy,  were  all  preachers  of  righteous¬
ness.

40  Moses  further  informs  us,  that  Seth  lived,  after
he  begat  Enos,  807  years;  making  him  912 years  old


21


at  his  death.  Gen.  5:7,8.  And  Enos  lived,  after  ho
begat  Cainan,  815  years:  making  him  905  years  old
when  he  died.  5:10,11.  And  Cainan  lived,  after  he
begat  Mahalaleel,  810  years:  making  him  910  years
old  at  his  death.  5:13,14.  And  Mahalaleel  lived,  af¬
ter  he  begat  Jared,  830  years:  making  him895  years
old  when  he  died.  .5:16,17;  And  Jared  lived,  after  he
begat  Enoch,  800  years:  making  him  962  y  ears  old
at  his  death.  5:19,20.  And  Enoch  walked  with  God,
after  he  begat  Methuseleh  3 00  years:  making  him

865  years  old  when  he  was  translated.  5:22,23.  And
Methuseleh  lived,  after  he  begat  Lamcch,  782  years:
making  him  969  years  old  when  ,  he  died.  5:26,27.
Lamech  lived,  after  he  begat  Noah,  595  years:  ma¬
king  him  777  years,  old  when  he  died.  5:30,31..

41  Agreeably  to  this  account,  Adam  died  in  the
930th  year  of  the  world,  Enoch  was  translated  in  the
987th,  Seth  died  in  the  1042nd,  Erios  in  the  1140th,
Cainan  in  the  1235th,  Mahalaleel  in  the  1290th,  Ja¬
red  in  the  1422nd,  Lamech  in  the  1651st»  and  Me-
thusaleh  in  the  1656th,  it  being  the  same  year  in
which  the  flood  came.

42  So  that  Noah  was  84  years  old  when  Enos  died,
176  when  Cainan  died,  234  when  Mahalaleel  died,

866  when  Jared  died,  593  when  Lamech  died,  and
600  when  Mcthusaleh  died.

43  We  can  see  from  this  that  Enos,  Cainan,  Maha¬
laleel,  Jared,  Mcthusaleh,  Lumach,  and  Noah  all  liv¬
ed  on  the  earth  at  the  shfne  time.  And  that  Enos,
Cainan,  Mahalaleel,  Jared  Methimlch,  and  Lamech,
were  all  acquainted  with  both  Alans  anl  Noih.

44  From  the  foreg  nag  it  is  easily  lobe  seen,  not
only  how  the  knowledge  of  Gol  came  into  the  world,
but  upon  what  principle  it  was  preserved:  that  from
the  time  it  was  first  communicated,  it  was  retained
in  the  minds  of  righteous  then,  who  taught,  not  only
their  own  posterity,  but  the  world :  so  that  there  was


no  need  of  a  new  revelation  to  man,  after  Adam’s  cre¬
ation,  to  Noah,  to  give  them  the  first  idea,  or  notion
of  the  existence  of  a  God:  and  not  only  of  a  God,  but
of  the  true  and  living  God.

45  Having  traced  the  chronology  of  the  world  from
Adam  to  Noah,  we  will  now  trace  it  from  Noah  to
Abraham.  Noah  was  502  years  old  when  Shem  was
born:  98  years  afterward  the  flood  came,  being  the
600th  year  of  Noah’s  age.  And  Moses  informs  us
that  Noah  lived  after  the  flood,  350  years:  making
him  950  years  old  when  he  died.  Gen.  9:28,29.

46  Shem  was  100  years  old  when  Arphaxed  was
born.  Gen.  11:10,  Arphaxed  was  35  when  Salah
was  born  11 :12.  Salah  was  30  when  Eber  was  born.
11:14.  Eber  was  34  when  Peleg  was  born:  in  whose
days  the  earth  was-  divided.  11:16.  Peleg  was  30
when  Reu  was  born.  11:18.  Reu  was  32  when  Se-
rug  was  born.  11:20.  Serug  was  30  when  Nahor
was  born.  11:22.  Nahor  was  29  when  Terah  was
born.  11:24.  Terah  was  70  when  Haran  and  Abra¬
ham  were  born.  11:26.

47  There  is  some  difficulty  in  the  account  given  by
Moses,  of  Abraham’s  birth.  Some  have  supposed,
that  Abraham  was  not  born  until  Terah  was  130
years  old.  This  conclusion  is  drawn  from  a  variety
of  scriptures,  which  are  not  to  our  purpose  at  present
to  quote.  Neither  is  it  a  matter  of  any  consequence
to  us,  whether  Abraham  was  born  when  Terah  was
70  years  old,  or  130.  But  in  order  that  there  may
no  doubt  exist  upon  any  mind,  in  relation  to  the  object
lying  immediately  before  us,  in  presenting  the  pres¬
ent  chronology,  we  will  date  the  birth  of  Abraham  at
the  latest  period:  that  is,  when  Terah  was  130  years
old.  It  appears  from  this* account,  that  from  the  flood
to  the  birth  of  Abraham  was  352  years.

48  Moses  informs  us  that  Shem  lived,  after  he  begat
Arphaxed,  500,  Gen.  11:11,  This  added  to  10a


years,  which  was  his  age  when  Arphaved  was  horn,
makes  him  600  years  old  when  he  died.  Arphaxed
lived,  after  he  begat  Salah,  403  years.  11:13.  This
added  to  35  years,  which  was  his  age  when  Salah  was
born,  makes  him  43S  years  old  when  he  died.  Sa¬
lah  lived,  after  he  begat  Eber,  403  years.  11:15. —
This  added  to  30  years,  which  was  his  age  when  Eber
was  born,  makes  him  433  years  old  when  he  died. —
Eber  lived,  after  he  begat  Peleg,  430  years.  11:17.
This  added  to  34  years,  which  was  his  age  when  Pe¬
leg  was  born,  makes  him  464  years  old.  Peleg  liv¬
ed,  after  he  begat  Reu,  209  years.  11:19.  This  ad¬
ded  to  30  years,  which  was  his  age  when  Reu  was
bom,  makes  him  239  years  old  when  he  died.  Reu
lived,  after  he  begat  Serug,  207  years.  Gen.  11:21.
This  added  to  32  years,  which  was  his  age  when  Se¬
rug  was  born,  makes  him  239  years  old  when  he  died.
Serug  lived,  after  he  begat  Nahor,  200  years.  Gen.
11:23.  This  added  to  30  years,  which  was  his  age
when  Nahor  was  born,  makes  him  230  years  old
when  he  died.  Nahor  lived,  after  he  begat  Terah,
119  years.  Gen.  11:25.  This  added  to  29  years,
which  was  his  age  when  Terah  was  born,  makes  him
148  years  old  when  he  died.  Terah  was  130  years
old  when  Abraham  was  born,  and  is  supposed  to  have
lived  75  years  after  his  birth:  making  him  205  years
old  when  he  died.

49  Agreeably  to  this  last  account,  Peleg  died  in  the
1996th  year  of  the  world,  Nahor  in  the  l'997th,  and
Noah  in  the  2006th.  So  that  Peleg,  ia  whose  days
the  earth  was  divided,  and  Nahor,  the  grand-father  of
Abraham,  both  died  before  Noah:  the  former  being
239  years  old,  and  the  latter  148.  And  who  cannot
but  see,  that  they  must  have  had  a  long  and  intimate
acquaintance  with  Noah?

50  Reu  died  in  the  2026th  year  of  the  world,  Serug
in  2049th,  Terah  ia  the  2083rd,  Arphaxed  in  th«


24


2096th,  Selah  in  the  2126th,  Shem  in  the  2158th,
Abraham  in  the  2183rd,  and  Eber  in  the  2187th:
which  was  4  years  after  Abraham’s  death.  And
Eber  was  the  fourth  from  Noah.

51  Nahor,  Abraham’s  brother,  was  58  years  old
when  Noah  died,  Terah  128,  Scrug  187,  Reu  219,
Eber  28.3,  Salah  313,  Arphaxed  344,  and  Shem  448.

52  It  appears  from  this  account,  that  Nahor,  broth¬
er  of  Abraham,  Terah,  Nahor,  Serug,  Reu,  Peleg,
Eber,  Salah,  Arphaxed,  Shem,  and  Noah,  all  lived
on  the  earth  at  the  same  time.  And  that  Abraham
was  18  years  old  when  Reu  died,  41  when  Serug  and
his  brother  Nahor  died,  75  when  Terah  died,  88
when  Arphaxed  died,  118  when  Salah  died,  150  when
Shem  died,  and  that  Eber  lived  4  years  after  Abra¬
ham’s  death.  And  that  Shem,  Arphaxed,  Salah,
Eber,  Reu,  Serug,  Terah,  and  Nahor,  the  brother  of
Abraham,  and  Abraham,  lived  at  the  same  time.-1-
And  that  Nahor,  brother  of  Abraham,  Terah,  Serug,
Reu,  Eber,  Salah,  Arphaxed,  and  Shem,  were  all
acquainted  with  both  Noah  and  Abraham.

53  We  have  now  traced  the  chronology  of  the
world,  agreeably  to  the  account  given  in  our  present
bible,  from  Adam  to  Abraham,  and  have  clearly  deter¬
mined,  beyond  the  power  of  controversy,  that  there  was
no  difficulty  in  preserving  the  knowledge  of  God  in
the  world,  from  the  creation  of  Adam,  and  the  man¬
ifestation  made  to  his  immediate  descendants,  as  set
forth  in  the  former  part  of  this  lecture,  so  that  the
students,  in  this  class  need  not  have  any  dubiety  res¬
ting  on  their  minds,  on  this  subject;  for  they  can
easily  see,  that  it  is  impossible  for  it  to  be  otherwise;
but  that  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  a  God,
must  have  continued  from  father  to  son,  as  a  matter
of  tradition,  at  least.  For  we  cannot  suppose,  that  a
knowledge  of  this  important  fact,  could  have  existed
in  the  mind  of  any  of  the  before  mentioned  individ-


25

uals,  without  their  having  made  it  known  to  their
posterity.

54  Wc  have  now  shown  how  it  was  that  the  first
thought  ever  existed  in  the  mind  of  any  individual?
that  there  was  such  a  being  as  a  God,  who  had  crea¬
ted  and  did  upheld  all  things:  that  it  was  by  reason  of
the  manifestation  which  he  first  made  to  our  father
Adam,  when  he  stood  in  his  presence,  and  conversed
with  him  face  to  face,  at  the  time  of  his  creation.

55  Let  us  here  observe,  that  after  any  portion  of  the
human  family  are  made  acquainted  with  the  impor¬
tant  fact  that  there  is  a  God  who  has  created  and  does
uphold  all  things,  the  extent  of  their  knowledge,  re¬
specting  his  character  and  glory,  will  depend  upon
their  diligence  and  faithfulness  in  Seeking  after  him,
until  like  Enoch  the  brother  of  Jared,  and  Moses,  they
shall  obtain  faith  in  God,  and  power  with  him  to  be¬
hold  him  face  to  face.

56  We  have  now  clearly  set  forth  how  it  is,  and
how  it  was,  that  God  became  an  object  of  faith  for
rational  beings;  and  also,  upon  what  foundation  the
testimony  was  based,  which  excited  the  enquiry  and
diligent  search  of  the  ancient  saints,  to  seek  after  and
obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God:  and  we  have
seen  that  it  was  human  testimony,  and  human  testi¬
mony  only,  that  excited  this  enquiry,  in  the  first  in¬
stance  in  their  minds — it  was  the  credence  they  gave

•  to  the  testimony  of  their  fathers — this  testimony  hav¬
ing  aroused  their  minds  to  enquire  after  the  knowl¬
edge  ot  God,  the  enquiry  frequently  terminated,  in¬
deed,  always  terminated,  when  rightly  persued,  in
the  most  glorious  discoveries,  and  eternal  certainty.


Question. — Is  there  a  being  who  has  faith  in  himself  indepen-
entlyt

Answer. — There  is.  Q.  Who  is  itt  A.  It  is  God.


S6


Q.  How  do  you  prove  tliat  God  has  Faith  in  himself  inde¬
pendently?

A.  Because  he  is  omnipotent,  omnipresent,  and  omnicient;
without  beginning  of  days  or  end  of  life,  and  in  him  all  fulness
dwells.  Eph.  1:23.  Which  is  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him
that  filleth  all  in  all.  Col.  1:19.  For  it  pleased  the  Father,
that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell.  [§'u.  2.]

Q.  Is  he  the  object  in  whom  the  faith  of  all  other  rational
and  accountable  beings  centers,  for  life  and  salvation  1

A.  He  is.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A.  Isa.  45:22.  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends
of  the  earth:  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else.  Rom.  lit
34,35,36.  For  who  hath  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord?  or  who
hath  been  his  counsellor?  or  who  hath  first  given  to  him,  and
it  shall  be  recompensed  unto  him  again?  For  of  him,  and
.through  him,  and  to  him,  are  all  things:  to  whom  be  glory  for¬
ever.  Amen.  Isa.  40:  from  the  8th  to  the  18th.  O  Zion
that  bringest  good  tidings,  [Or,  O  tlipu  that  tellest  good  ti¬
dings  to  Zion.]  get  thee  up  into  the  high  mountain:  O  Jeru¬
salem,  that  bringest  good  tidings,  [Or,  O  thou  that  tellest  good
tidings  to  Jerusalem,]  lift  up  thy  voice  with  strength;  lilt  it  up,
be  not  afraid;  say  unto  the  cities  of  Judah,  Behold  your  Godt
Behold  the  Lord  your  God  will  come  with  strong  hand,  [Or,
against  the  strong.]  and  his  arm  shall  rule  for  him:  behold,  his
•reward  is  with  him,  and  his  work  beforeMm.  [Or,  recompense
for  his  work.]  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd:  he
•trail  gather  his  lambs  with  his  arms,  and  carry  them  in  his  bo¬
som,  and  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young.  Who
hath  measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  meted
out  heaven  with  the  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust  of  the
earth  in  a  measure,  weighed  the  mountains  in  scales,  and  th*
hills  in  a  ballance?  Who  hath  directed  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,
or  being  his  counsellor,  hath  taught  him?  With  whom  took  he
counsel,  and  who  instructed  him,  and  taught  him  in  the  path
of  judgment,  and  taught  him  knowledge,  and  shewed  to  him
the  way  of  understanding?  Behold,  the  nations  are  as  a  drop
of  a  bucket,  and  are  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  ballance:
behold  he  taketh  up  the  isles  as  a  very  little  thing.  And  Leba¬
non  is  not  sufficient  to  burn,  nor  the  beasts  thereof  sufficient
for  a  burnt  offering.  All  nations  are  before  him  as  nothing;
and  they  are  counted  to  him  less  than  nothing,  and  vanity?
Jer.  51:15,16.  He  [the  Lord]  hath  made  the  earth  by  hi*
power,  he  hath  established  -the  .world  by  his  wisdom,  and  hath
atreached  out  the  heaven  by  his  understanding.  When  he  ut-
tereth  his  voice  there  is  a  multitude  of  waters  in  the  heavens;


'27


■and  he  causeth  the  vapors  to  ascend  from  the  ends  of  the  earth:
he  maketh  lightnings  with  rain,  and  bringeth  forth  the  wind
oat  of  his  treasures.  1st  Cor.  8:6.  But  to  us  there  is  'but  one
God,  the  Father,  of  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  in  him;  and
one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  by  him.

[»  a-*  IT  2.]

Q.  How  did  men  first  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  existence
of  a  God,  so  as  to  exercise  faith  in  him?

A.  In  order  to  answer  this  question,  it  will  be  necessary  to
go  back  and  examine  man  at  his  creation;  the  circumstances  in
which  he  was  placed,  and  the  knowledge  which  he  had  of  God.
[$  ii.  3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11.]

First,  When  man  was  created  he  stood  in  the  presence  of
God.  Gen.  1:27,28.  From  this  we  learn  that  man,  at  his
creation,  stood  in  the  presence  of  his  God,  and  had  most  per-
feet  knowledge  of  his  existence.

Secondly,  God  conversed  with  him  after  Ids  transgression.
Gen.  3:  from  the  8th  to  the  22nd.  [$  u.  13,14,15,16,17.]
From  this  we  learn,  that,  though  man  did  transgress,  he  was
not  deprived  of  the  previous  knowledge  which  he  had  of  th*
existence  of  God.  [$  n.  IT  19.]

Tliirdly,  God  conversed  with  man  after  he  cast  him  out  of
the  garden.  [$  ii.  22,23,24,25.]

Fourthly,  God  also  conversed  with  Cain  after  he  had  slam
Abel.  Gen.  4:  from  the  4th  to  the  6th.  [$  n.  26,27,28,29.]
Q.  What  is  the  object  of  the  foregoing  quotation?

A.  It  is  that  it  may  be  clearly  seen  how  it  was  that  the  first
thoughts  were  suggested  to  the  minds  of  men,  of  the  existenoe
of  God,  and  how  extensively  this  knowledge  was  spread  among
the  immediate  descendants  of  Adam.  [$  n.  30,31,32,33.]
Q.  What  testimony  had  the  immediate  descendants  of  Adam,
in  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  God?

A.  The  testimony  of  their  father.  And  after  they  were  made
acquainted  with  his  existence,  by  the  testimony  of  their  father,
they  were  dependant  upon  the  exercise  of  their  own  faith,  for
a  knowledge  of  his  character,  perfections  and  attributes,  f  4  u.
IT  23,24, 2a, 26.]

Q.  Had  any  others  of  the  human  family,  beside  Adam,  a
knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God,  in  the  first  instance,  by
any  other  means  than  human  testimony?

A.  They  had  not  For  previous  to  the  time  that  they  could
have  power  to  obtain  a  manifestation  for  themselves,  the  all-
important  fact  had  been  communicated  to  them  by  their  com¬
mon  father:  and  so,  from  father  to  child,  the  knowledge  was
'communicated  as  extensively,  as  the  knowledge  of  his  exist¬
ence  was  known;  for  it  was  by  this  means,  in  the  first  instance,
*at  men  had  a  knowledge  of  his  existence.  [$  ii.  *f  35,36.]


38


Q.  How  do  you  know  that  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of
God  was  communicated  in  this  maaner,  throughout  the  differ¬
ent  ages  of  the  world?

A.  By  the  chronology  obtained  thro’  the  revelations  of  God.
Q.  How  would  you  divide  that  chronology  in  order  to  con¬
vey  it  to  the  Understanding  clearly?

A.  Into  twoparts:  Frst,  by  embracingthat  period  of  theworld
from  Adam  to  Noah;  and  secondly,  Irom  Noah  to  Abraham:
from  which  period  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God  has
been  so  general,  that  it  is  a  matter  of  no  dispute  in  what  man¬
ner  the  idea  of  his  existence  has  been  retained  in  the  world.

Q.  How  many  noted  righteous  men  lived  irom  AdamtoNooh?
A.  Nine;  which  includes  Abel,  who  was  slain  by  his  brother.
Q.  What  are  their  names?

A.  Abel,  Seth,  Enos,  Cainan,  Mahalaleel,  Jared,  Enoch,  Mo¬
th  usaleh,  and  Lamech.

Q.  How  old  was  Adam  when  Seth  was  born?

A.  One  hundred  and  thirty  years.  Gen.  5:3.

Q.  How  many  years  did  Adam  live  after  Seth  was  bom?

A.  Eight  hundred.  Gen.  5:4.

Q.  How  old  was  Adam  when  he  died?

A.  Nine  hundred  and  thirty  years.  Gen.  5:5.

Q.  How  old  was  Seth  when  Enos  was  born?

A.  One  hundred  and  five  yeaTs.  Gen.  6:6.  '

Q.  How  old  was  Enos  when  Cainan  was  born?

A.  Ninety  years.  Gen.  5:9.

Q.  How  old  was  Cainan  when  Mahalaleel  was  bom?

A.  Seventy  years.  Gen.  5:13.

Q.  How  old  was  Mahalaleel  when  Jared  was  born?

A.  Sixty  five  years.  Gen.  5:15.

Q.  How  old  was  Jared  when  Enoch  was  bom?

A.  One  hundred  and  sixty  two  years.  Gen.  5:18.

Q.  How  old  was  Enoch  when  Melhusaleh  was  boml
A.  Sixty  five.  Gen.  5:21.

Q.  How  old  was  Methnsaleh  when  Lamech  waB  bom?

A.  One  hundred  and  eighty  seven  years.  Gen.  5:25.

Q.  Ho  w  old  was  Lamech  when  Noah  was  bom?

A.  One  hunored  and  eig.  ty  two  years.  Gen.  5:28.

For  this  chronology  see  §  it.  *jl  37.

Q.  How  many  years,  according  to  this  account,  was  It  Stem
Adam  to  Noah?

A.  One  thousand  and  fifty  six  years.

Q.  How  old  was  Lamech  when  Adam  died?

A.  Lamech,  the  ninth  from  Adam,  (including  Abel,)  >■>?
fether  of  Noah,  was  fifty  sir  years  old  when  Adam  died.

Q,  How  old  was  Methusaleh?


29


A.  Two  hundred  and  forty  three  years.  Q.  How  old  wo*
Enoch?

A.  Three  hundred  nnd  eight  years.

Q.  How  old  was  Jared?

A.  Four  hundred  and  seventy  years.

Q.  How  old  was  Mahalaleel?

A.  Five  hundred  and  thirty  five.

Q.  How  old  was  Cainan?

A.  Six  hundred  and  five  years.

Q.  How  old  was  Enos?

A.  Six  hundred  and  ninety  five  years.

Q.  How  old  was  Seth?

A.  Eight  hundred.

For  this  item  of  the  account  see  section  second,  paragraph  38.
Q.  How  many  of  these  noted  men  were  cotemporary  with
Adam?

A.  Nine.

Q.  What  are  their  names?

A.  Abel,  Seth,  Enos,  Cainan,  Mahalaleel,  Jared,  Enoch,
Methusaleh,  and  Lamech.  [§  n.  39.]

Q.  How  long  did  Seth  live  after  Enos  was  born?

A.  Eight  hundred  and  seven  years.  Gen.  5:7.

Q.  What  was  Seth’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Nine  hundred  and  twelve  years-  Gen.  5:8.

Q.  How  long  did  Enos  live  after  Cainan  was  born?

A.  Eight  hundred  and  fifteen  years.  Gen.  5:10.

Q.  What  was  Enos’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Nine  hundred  and  five  years.  Gen.  5:11.

Q.  How  long  did  Cainan  live  after  Mahalaleel  was  bom?

A.  Eight  hundred  and  forty  years.  Gen.  5:13.

Q.  What  was  Cainan’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Nine  hundred  and  ten  years.  Gen.  5:14.

Q.  How  long  did  Mahaleel  live  after  Jared  was  bom?

A.  Eight  hundred  and  thirty  years.  Gen.  5:16.

Q.  What  was  Mahalaleel’ s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Eight  hundred  and  ninety  five  years.  Gen.  5:17.

Q-  How  long  did  Jared  live  after  Enoch  was  born?

A.  Eight  hundred  years.  Gen.  5:19.

Q.  What  was  Jared's  age  when  he  died?

A.  Nine  hundred  and  sixty  two  years.  Gen.  5:20.

Q.  How  long  did  Enoch  walk  with  God  after  Methusaleh
was  born?

A.  Three  hundred  years.  Gen.  5:22.

Q.  What  was  Enoch’s  age  when  he  was  translatedd?

A.  Three  hundred  and  sixty  five  years.  Gen.  5:23.

Q.  How  long  did  Methusaleh  live  after  Lamech  was  bom*


80


A.  Seven  hundred  and  eighty  two  years.  (Jen.  HM.

Q.  What  was  Methusaleh’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Nine  hundred  and  sixty  nine  years.  Gen.  5.27.

Q.  How  long  did  Lamech  live  after  Noah  was  born?  A.  Five
hundred  and  n  e  y  five  ye  irs.  Gen.  5:30.

Q.  What  was  Lamech’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Seven  hundred  and  seventy  seven  years.  Gen.  5:31.

For  the  account  of  the  last  item  see  [$  ii.  40.]

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Adam  die?

A.  In  the  nine  hundred  and  thirtieth-
Q.  In  what  year  was  Enoch  translated?

A.  In  the  nine  hundred  and  eighty  seventh.

Q.  In  what  year  did  Seth  die?

A.  In  the  one  thousand  and  forty  second.

Q.  In  what  year  did  Enos  die?

A.  In  the  eleven  hundred  and  fortieth.

Q.  In  what  year  did  Cainan  die?

A.  In  the  twelve  hundred  and  thirty  fifth.

Q.  In  what  year  did  Mahalaleel  die?

A.  In  the  twelve  hundred  and  ninetieth..

Q.  In  what  year  did  Jared  die?

A.  In  the  fourteen  hundred  and  twenty  second.

Q.  In  what  year  did  Lamech  die?

A.  In  the  sixteen  hundred  and  fifty  first.

Q.  In  what  year  did  Methusaleh  die?

A .  In  the  sixteen  hundred  and  fifty  sixth.

For  this  account  see  $  ii.  51. 41.

Q.  How  old  was  Noah  when  Enos  died?

A.  Eighty  four  years.

Q.  How  old  when  Cainan  died?

A.  One  hundred  and  seventy  nine  years.

Q.  Hour  old  when  Mahalaleel  died?

A.  Two  hundred  and  thirty  four  years.

Q.  How  old  when  Jared  died?

A.  Three  hundred  and  sixty  six  years..

Q.  How  old  when  Lamech  died?

A.  Five  hundred  and  ninety  five  years.

Q.  How  old  when  Methusaleh  died?

A.  Six  hundred  years.

See  §  ii.  5T  42,  for  the  last  item.

Q.  How  many  of  those  men  lived  in  the  days  of  Noah !

A.  Six.

Q.  What  are  their  names?

A.  Seth,  Enos,  Cainan,  Mahalaleel,  Jared,  Methusaleh,  andT
Lamech.  [$u.  51  43.

Q.  How  many  of  those  men  were  eotemporary  with  Adam


31


aud  Noah  both!  A.  Six.  Q.  What  are  their  names?
A.  Enos,  Cainan,  Mahalaleel,  Jared,  Methusaleh,  and  La-
mech.  [$ii.  If  43.]

Q,  According  to  the  foregoing  account,  how  was  the  knowl¬
edge  of  the  existence  of  God  first  suggested  to  the  minds  of
men!

A.  By  the  manifestation  made  to  our  father  Adam,  when  b«
was  in  the  presence  of  God,  both  before  and.  while  he  was  in.
Eden.  [§  11.  fl  44.]

Q.  How  was  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God  dissemi¬
nated  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  world?

A.  By  tradition  from  father  to  son.  [$  u.  If  44.]

Q.  How  old  was  Noah  when  Shem  was  born?

A.  Five  hundred  and  two  years.  Gen.  5:32.  11:10.

Q.  What  was  the  term  of  years  from  the  birth  of  Shem  to  th«
flood?

A.  Ninety  eight.

Q,  What  was  the  term  of  years  that  Noah  lived  after  the
flood?

A.  Three  hundred  and  fifty.  Gen.  9:28.

Q.  What  was  Noah’s  age  when  Tie  died?

A.  Nine  hundred  and  fifty  years.  Gen.  9:29.  [§  n.  45.];

Q.  What  was  Shem’s  age  when  Arpliaxed  was  born?

A.  One  hundred  years.  Gen.  11:10.

Q.  What  was  Arphaxed’s  age  when  Salah  was  born?

A.  Thirty  five  years.  Gen.  11:12.

Q.  What  was  Salah’s  age  when  Eber  was  born?

A.  Thirty.  Gen.  11:14.

Q.  What  was  Eber’s  age  when  Peleg  was  bom?

A.  Thirty  four  years.  Gen.  11:16.

Q.  What  was  Peleg’s  age  when  Reu  was  born?

A.  Thirty  years.  Gen.  11:18.

Q.  Wrhat  was  Reu’s  age  when  Serug  was  bom?

A.  Thirty  two  years.  Gen.  11:20.

Q.  What  was  Serug’s  -age  when  Nahor  was  bom?"

A.  Thirty  years.  Gen.  11:22.

Q.  What  was  Nahor’s  age  when  Terah  was  bom?

A.  Twenty  nine.  Gen.  11:24.

Q.  WThat  Was  Terah’s  age,  when  Nahor  the  father  of  Abra¬
ham  was  bom?

A.  Seventy  years.  Gen.  11:26.

Q.  What  was  Terah’s  age  when  Abraham'was  born?

A.  Some  suppose  one  hundred  and  thirty  years,  and  others'
seventy.  Gen.  12:4.  11:26.  [§  n.  If  46.]

Q.  What  was  the  number  of  years  from  the  flood  to  the  birth
of  Abraham?


A.  Supposing  Abraham  to  have  been  born  when  Terah  was
one  hundred  and  thirty  years  old,  it  was  three. hundred  and  fif¬
ty  two  years:  but  if  he  were  born  when  Terah  was  seventy
years  old,  it  was  two  hundred  and  ninety  two  years.  [§  n  47.]
Q.  How  long  did  Shem  live  after  Arphaxed  was  born?

A.  Five  hundred  years.  Gen.  11:11.

Q.  What  was  Shem’s  age  wheri  he  died?

A.  Six  hundred  years.  Gen.  11:11.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Arphaxed  live  after  Salali  was
oorn?

A.  Four  hundred  and  three  years.  Gen.  21:13.

Q.  What  was  Arphaxed’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Four  hundred  and  thirty  eight  years.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Salah  live  after  Eber  was  bom?
A.  Four  hundred  and  three  years.  Gen.  11:15.

Q.  What  was  Salah’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Four  hundred  and  thirty  three  years.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Eber  live  after  Peleg  was  bom?
A.  Four  hundred  and  thirty  years.  Gen.  11:17.

Q.  What  was  Eber’s  age  wjien  he  died?

A.  Four  hundred  and  sixty  four  years.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Peleg  live  after  Reu  was  bom?
A.  Two  hundred  and  nine  years.  Gen.  11:19.

Q.  What  was  Peleg’ s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Two  hundred  and  thirty  nine  years.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Reu  live  after  Serug  wt«Wn!
A.  Two  hundred  an J seven  years.  Gen.  11:21.

Q.  What  was  Reu’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Two  hundred  and  thirty  nine  years.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Serug  live  after  Nalior  was
born?

A.  Two  hundred  years.  Gen.' 11:23.

Q.  What  was  Serug’ s  age  when  he  died?

A.  Two  hundred  and  thirty  years.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Nahor  live  after  Terah  was
born?

A.  One  hundred  and  nineteen  years.  Gen.  11:25.

Q.  What  was  Nahor’s  age  when  he  died?

A.  One  hundred  and  forty  eight  years.

Q.  What  number  of  years  did  Terah  live  after  Abraham  was
born?

A.  Supposing  Terah  to  have  been  one  hundred  and  thirty
years  old  when  Abraham  was  born,  he  lived  seventy  five  years;
but  if  Abraham  was  born  when  Terah  was  seventy  years  old.
he  lived  one  hundred  and  thirty  five.

Q.  What  was  Terah’s  age  when  he  died?


33


A.  Two  hundred  and  five  years.  Gen.  11:32.

For  this  account  from  the  birth  of  Arphaxed,  to  the  death  of
Terah,  see  [$  n.  If  48.]

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Peleg  die?

A.  Agreeably  to  the  foregoing  chronology,  he  died  in  the
nineteen  hundred  and  ninety  sixth  year  of  the  world.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Nahor  die?

A.  In  the  nineteen  hundred  and  ninety  seventh.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Noah  die?

A.  In  the  two  thousand  and  sixth.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Reu  die?

A.  In  the  two  thousand  and  twenty. sixth.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Serug  die?

A.  In  the  two  thousand  and  forty  ninth.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Terah  die?

A.  In  the  two  thousand  apd  eighty  third.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Arphaxed  die?

A.  In  the  two  thousand  and  ninty  sixth.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Salah  die?

A.  In  the  twenty  one  hundred  and  twenty  sixth.

Q.  In  what  year  of  the  world  did  Abraham  die?

A.  In  the  twenty  one  hundred  and  eighty  third.

Q.  hi  what  year  of  the  world  did  Eber  die?

A.  In  the  twenty  one  hundred  aud  eighty  seventh.

■For  this  account  of  the  year  of  the  world  in  which  those  men
died,  see  [$n:  H  49,50.]

Q.  How  old  was  Nahor,  Abraham’s  brother,  when  Noah  died?
A.  Fifty  eight  years.

Q.  How  old  was  Terah?

A.  One  hundred  and  twenty  eight.

Q.  How  old  was  Serug?

A.  One  hundred  and  eighty  seven.

Q.  How  old  was  Reu?

A.  Two  hundred  and  nineteen.

Q.  How  old  was  Eber?

A.  Two  hundred  and  eighty  three.

Q.  How  old  was  Salah?

A.  Three  hundred  and  thirteen.

Q.  How  old  was  Arphaxed?

A.  Three  hundred  and  forty  eight.

Q.  How  old  was  Shem?

A.  Four  hundred  and  forty  eight.

For  the  last  account  see  [$  u.  51.]

Q.  How  old  was  Abraham  when  Reu  died?

A.  Eighteen  years,  if  he  were  born  when  Terah  was  one


hundred  and  thirty  years  old.  Q.  What  was  hi/  age  when  Se-
rug,  and  Nahor,  Abraham’s  brother  died?

A.  Forty  one  years.

Q.  What  was  his  age  when  Terah  diedt
A.  Seventy  five  years.

Q.  What  was  his  age  when  Arphaied  died?

A.  Eighty  eight.'  •  !  .

Q.  What  wa.s  his  age  when  Salah  died?

A.  One  hundred  and  eighteen  years.

Q.  What  was  liis  age  when  ‘Shem  died?  i  .

A.  One  hundred  arid  fifty  years.  •

For  this  see  [§  n.  IT  52. p  ■

Q.  How  many  noted  characters  lived  from  N oah  to  Abraham  *
A.  Ten.  '  ■  ■  Ti  ;i

Q.  What  are  their  names?

A.  Shem,  Arphaxedy  Salah,  Eber,  Peteg,  Reu,  Serug,  ISSa-
hor,  Terah,  and  Nahor,  Abraham’s  brother.  Hn,  If  52.]

Q.  How  many  of  these  wore  oa temporary  with  Noah?  1
A.  The  whole.  1  !,  n  ■

Q.  How  many  with  Abraham’.

A.  Eight.  ■  li’t.*  t*;sy  im  w  a!  ,

Q.  What  are  their  names?  t

A.  Nahor,  Abraham’s  brother,  Terah,  Serug,  Reu,  Eber,  Se-
lah,  Arphaxed,  and  Shem.  ffut.  ^  52.]  :

Q.  Howmany  were'eotempbrary  with  both  Noah  and  Abra¬
ham?  ’  [

A.  Eight.

Q.  What  are  thsir  names?

A.  Shem,  Arphaxed,  Salah,  Eber,  Reu,  Serug:  Terah,  and
Nalior,  Abraham’s  brother.  5T  52.]

Q.  Did  any  of  these  men  die  before  Noah?

A.  They  did.  ■  '

Q.  Who  were  they?

A.  Peleg,  in  whose  days  the  earth  w  as  divided,  and  Nabor
Abraham's  grand-father.  [§  ii.  If  49.]  ‘  u  I

Q.  Did  any  one  of  them  live  -longer  than  Abraham?

A.  There  was  one.  [$  ii.  fl.  50.]  !  W

Q.  Who  was  it?  •  '  .A

A.  Eber,  the  fourth  from  Noah.  [(  it.  If  60.]

Q.  In  whose  days  was  the  earth  divided  ?

A.  In  the  days  of  Peleg.

Q.  Where  have  we  the  account  given  that  the  eaTth  was  divi¬
ded  in  the  days  of  Peleg?

A.  Gen.  10:25.  H

Q.  Can  you  repeat  die  sentence?.

A.  Unto  Eber  were  bom  two  sons;  the  name  of  one  was  Pe¬
leg;  for  in  his  days  the  earth  was  divided.


85


Q..  What  testimony  have  men,  in  the  first  instance,  that
there  is  a  Godt

A.  Human  testimony,  and  human  testimony  only.  [<  n.
*56.]

Q.  What  excited  the  ancient  saints  to  seek  diligently  after  a
knowledge  of  the  gjlory  of  God,  his  perfections  and  attributes?

A.  The  credence  they  gave  to  the  testimony  of  their  fathers.
H  it.  H  56.]

Q.  IlOw  do  men  obtain  a  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God,  his
perfections  and  attributes?.

A.  By.  devoting  themselves  to  his  service,  through  prayer  and
supplication  incessantly,  strengthening  their  faith  in  him,  until
like  Enoch,  the  brother  of  Jared,  and  Moses,  they  obtain  a
manifestation  of  God  to  themselves.  [§  n.  *  55.]

Q.  Is  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God  a  matter  of  mere
tradition,  founded  upon  human  testimony  alone,  until  a  person
receives  a  manifestation  of  God  to  themselves?

A.  It  is.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A,  From  the  whole  pf  the  first  lecture  of  the  second  section.


LSCTUK3  THIRD.

Of  Faith.

SECTION  III.

1  In  the  second  lecture  it  was  shown,  how  it  was
that  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God,  came  in’
to  the  world,,  and  by  what  means  the  first  thoughts
Were  suggested  tq  the  minds  of  men,  that  such  a  be¬
ing  did  actually  exist;  and  that  it  was  by  reason  of
the  knowledge  of  liis  existence,  that  there  was  a  foun¬
dation  laid  for.  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him,  as  the  on¬
ly  being  in  whom  faith  could  center  for  life  and  sal¬
vation.  For  faith  could  not  center  in  a  being  of  whose
existence  we  had  no  idea;  because  the  idea
of  his  existence  in  the  first  instance,  is  essential
to  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him.  Rom.  10:14:  “How
3*


then  shall  they  call  on  him  in  whom  they  have  not
believed?  And  how  shall  they  believe  in  him  of  whom
they  have  not  heard?  And  how  shall  they  hear  with¬
out  a  preacher?”  (or  one  sent  to  tell  them?)  So  then
faith  comes  by  hearing  the  word  of  God. '  [New
Translation.]

2  Let  us  here  observe*  that  three  things  are  neces¬
sary,  in  order  that  any  rational  and  intelligent  being
may  exercise  faith  in  God  unto  life  and  salvation.

3  First,  The  idea  that  he  actually  exists.

4  Secondly,  A  correct  idea  of  his  character,  perfec¬
tions  and  attributes.

5  Thirdly,  An  actual  knowledge  that  the  course  of
life  which  he  is  pursuing,  is  according  to  his  will. —
For  without  an  acquaintance  with  these  three  impor¬
tant  facts,  the  faith  of  every  rational  being  must  bte
imperfect  and  unproductive;  but  with  this  understand¬
ing,  it  can  become  perfect  and  fruitful,  abounding  in
righteousness  unto  the  praise  and  glory  of  God  the
Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

6  Having  previously  been  made  acquainted  with  the
way  the  idea  of  his  existence  came  into  the  world,  as
well  as  the  fact  of  his  existence,  we  shall  proceed  to
examine  his  character,  perfections  and  attributes,  in
order  that  this  class  may  see,  not  only  the  just  grounds
which  they  have  for  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him,  for
life  and  salvation,  but  the  reasons  that  all  the  world,
also,  as  far  as  the  idea  of  his  existence  extends,  may
have  to  exercise  faith  in  him  the  Father  of  all  living.

7  As  we  have  been  indebted  to  a  revelation  which
God  made  of  himself  to  his  creatures  in  the  first  in¬
stance,  for  the  idea  of  his  existence,  so  in  like
manner  we  are  indebted  to  the  revelations  which  he
has  given  to  us,  for  a  correct  understanding  of  his  char¬
acter,  perfections  *and  attributes;  because  without  the
revelations  which  he  has  given  to  us,  no  man  by
searching  could  find  out  God.  Job  11:7,8,9.  First


37


Cor.  2:9,10,11:  “But  as  it  is  written,  eye  has  not
seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the
heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  has  prepared  for
them  that  love  him;  but  God  has  revealed  them  unto
us  by  his  Spirit:  for  the  Spirit  searches  all  things,
yea,  the  deep  things  of  God.  For  what  man  knows
the  things  of  a  man,  save  the  spirit  of  man  which  is
in  him?  Even  so,  the  things  of  God  no  man  knows
but  by  the  Spirit  of  God.”

8  Having  said  so  mych,  we  proceed  to  examine  the
character  which  the  revelations  have  given  of  God.

9  Moses  gives  us  the  following  account  in  Exodus,
34:6:  “And  the  Lord  passed  by  before  him,  and  pro¬
claimed,  The  Lord  God,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and
gracious,  long  suffering,  and  abundant  in  goodness
and  truth.”  Psalm  103:6,7,8:  “The  Lord  exe¬
cutes  righteousness  and  judgment  for  all  that  are  op¬
pressed.  He  made  known  his  ways  unto  Moses,  his
acts  unto  the  children  of  Israel.  The  Lord  is  merci-
iid  and  gracious,  slow  to  anger  and  plenteous  in  mer¬
cy:”  Psalm  103:17,18:  “But  the  mercy  of  the  Lord
is  from  everlasting-  to  everlasting  upon  them  that  fear
him,  and  his  righteousness  unto  children’s  children,
to  such  as  keep  his  covenant,  and  to  those  that  re¬
member  his  commandments  to  do  them;”  Psalm  90c
2:  “Before  the  mountains  were  brought  forth,  or  ev¬
er  you  had  formed  the  earth  and  the  world,  even;  from
.everlasting  to  everlasting,  you  are  Gad.”  Heb.  il:  10,
11,12:  “And  you,  Lord,  in  the  beginning  have  laid
the  foundation  of  t)ie  earth;  and  the  heavens  are  the
yerks  ofyonr  hands:  they  shall  perish,  but  you  shall
remain;  and.,they  shall  wax. old  as  a  garment;  and  as
a  vesture  shall  you  fold  them- up,  and  they  shall  be
changed :  but  you  are  the  same,  and  your  years  shall
not  fail.”  James  1:17:  “Every  good  gift,  and  eve¬
ry  perfect  gift,  is  from  above,  and  comes  down  from
the  Father  of.  lights j  wjth  whom  ia,>no  variableness,


38


neither  shadow  of  turning.”  Malachi  3:6.  “For  I
am  the  Lord,  I  change  not;  therefore  yd  sons  of  Ja¬
cob  are  not  consumed.”

10  Book  of  Commandments,  chapt  2nd,  commen¬
cing  in  the  third  line  of  the  first  paragraph:  “For.  God
does  not  walk  in  crooked  paths,  neither  does  he  turn
to  the  right  hand  or  the  left,  or  vary  from  that  which
he  has  said,  therefore  his  paths  are  strait,  and  hie
course  is  one  eternal  round:”  Book  of  Commandments,
chapt.  37:1.  “Listen  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your
God,  even  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the
end,  whose  course  is  one  eternal  round,  the  same  yes¬
terday  to-day  and  forever.  ”

11  Numbers,  23:19.  “God  is  not  a  man,  that  he
should  lie;  neither  the  son  of  man  that  he  should  re¬
pent.”  First  John,  4:8.  “He  that  loves  not,  know*
not  God;  for  God  is  love.”  Acts,  10:34:  “Then  Peter
opened  his  mouth  and  said,  Of  a  truth  I  perceive  that*
God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,  but  in  every  nation
he  that  fears  God  and  works  righteousness  is  accept*
ed  with  him.”

12  From  the  foregoing  testimonies,  we  learn  the*
following  things  respecting  the  character  of  God.

13  First,  That  he  was  God  before  the  world  was
created,  and  the  same  God  that  he  was,  after  it  was
created.

14  Secondly,  That  he  is  merciful,  and  gracious,  slow
to  anger,  abundant  in  goodness,  and  that  he  was  so
from  everlasting,  and  will  be  to  everlasting.

15  Thirdly,  That  he  changes  not,  neither  is  there
variableness  with  him;  but  that  he  is  the  same  from
everlasting  to  everlasting,  being  the  same  yesterday
to-day  and  forever;  and  that  his  course  is  one  eternal
round,  without  variation.

16  Fourthly,  That  he  is  a  God  of  truth  and  cannot
Ue.

17  Fifthly,  That  he  is  no  respecter  of  persona;  ,b*»t


in  otfWy  riation  he  that  fears  God  and  works  right¬
eousness  is  accepted  of  him.

18  Sixthly,  That  he  is  love.

19  An  acquaintance  with  these  attributes  in  the  divine
character,  is  essentially  necessary,  in  order  that  the
faith  of  any  rational  being  can  center  in  him  for  life
and  salvation.  For  if  he  did  not,  in  the  first  instance,
believe  hint  to  be  God,  that  is,  the  creator  and  upholder
of  all  things,  he  could  not  center  his  faith  in  him  for
life  and  salvation,  for  fear  there  should  be  a  greater
than  he,  who  would  thwart  all  his  plans,  and  he,  like
the  gods  of  the  heathen,  would  be  unable  to  fulfil  his
promises;  but  seeing  he  is  God  over  all,  from  everlas¬
ting  to  everlasting,  the  creator  and  upholder  of  all
things,  no  such  fear  can  exist  in  the  minds  of,  those
who  put  their  trust  in  him,  so  that  in  this  respect  their
faith  can  be  without  wavering.

20  But  secondly;  Unless  he  was  merciful,  and  gra¬
cious,  slow  to  anger,  long  suffering,  and  full  of  good¬
ness,  such  is  the  weakness  of  human  nature,  and  so
great  the  frailties  and  imperfections  of  men,  that  un¬
less  they  believed  that  these  excellencies  existed  in  the
divine  character,  the  laith  necessary  to  salvation
eould  not  exist;  for  doubt  would  take  the  place  of
faith,  and  those  who  know  their  weakness  and  lia¬
bility  to  sin,  would  be  in  constant  doubt  of  salvation,
if  it  were  not  for  the  idea  which  they  have  of  the  excel¬
lency  of  the  character  of  God,  that  he  is  slow  to  an¬
ger,  and  long  suffering,  and  of  a  forgiving  disposi¬
tion,  and  does  forgive  iniquity,  transgression  and  sin.
An  idea  of  these  facts  does  away  doubt,  and  makes
faith  exceedingly  stronig.

21  But  it  is  equally  as  necessary  that  men  should
have  the  idea  that  he  is  a  God  who  changes  not,  in  or-
•der  to  have  faith  in  him,  as  it  is  to  have  the  idea  that
he  is  gracious  and  long  suffering.  For  without  the
idea  of  unchangibleness  in  the  character  of  the  Deity,


idea  that  he  changes  not,  faith  lays  hold  upon  the  ex¬
cellencies  in  his  character  with  unshaken  confidence,
believing  he  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day  and  forev¬
er,  and  that  his  course  is  one  eternal  round.

22  And  again,  the  idea  that  he  is  a  God  of  truth  and
cannot  lie,  is  equally  as  necessary  to  the  exercise  of
faith  in  him,  as  the  idea  of  his  unchangeableness.  Fox
without  the  idea  that  he  was  a  God  of  truth  and  could-
not  lie,  the  confidence  necessary  to  he  placed  in  his
word  in  order  to  the  exercise  <?f  faith  in  him,  could
not  exist.  But  having  the  idea  that  he  is  not  man
that  he  can  lie,  it  gives  power  to  the  minds  of  men
to  exercise  faith  in  him.

23  But  it  is  also  necessary  that  men  should  have  an
idea  that  he  is  no  respecter  of  persons;  for  with  the
idea  of  all  the  other  excellencies  in  his  character,  and
this  one  wanting,  men  could  not  exercise  faith  in  him,
because  if  he  were  a  respecter  of  persons,  they-  could
not  tell  what  their  privileges  were,  nor  how  far  they
were  authorized  to  exercise  faith  in  him,  or  whether
they  were  authorized  to  do  it  at  all,  but  all  must  be
confusion;  but  no  sooner  are  the  minds  of  men  made
acquainted  with  the  truth  on  this  point,  that  he  is  ho
respecter  of  persons,  than  they  see  that  they  havq,  au¬
thority  by  faith  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life  the  richest
boon  of  heaven,  because  God  is  no  respepter  of  per¬
sons,  and  that  every  man  in  every  nation  has  an  equal
privilege.

24  And  lastly,  but  not  less  important  to  the  exercise
of  faith  in  God,  is  the  idea  that  he  is  love;  for  with  all
the  other  excellencies  in  his  character,  without  this
one  to  influence  them,  they  could  not  have  such  pow¬
erful  dominion  over  the  minds  of  men;  but  when  the
idea  is  planted  in  the  mind  that  he  is  love,  who  cannot
see  the  just  ground  .that  men  of  every  nation,  kindred.


41


and  tongue,  have  to  exercise  faith  in  God  so  as  to  ob¬
tain  eternal  life?

25  From  the  above  description  of  the  character  of
the  Deity  which  is  given  him  in  the  revelations,  to
men,  there  is  a  sure  foundation  for  the  exercise  of
faith  in  him  among  every  people,  nation  and  kindred,
from  age  to  age,  and  from  generation  to  generation,

26  Let  us  here  observe  that  the  foregoing  is  the  char¬
acter  which  ,is  given  of  God  in  his  revelations  to  the
Former  Day  Saints,  and  it  is  also  the  character  which
is  given  of  him  in  his  revelations  to  the  Latter  Day
Saints,  so  that  the  saints  of  former  days,  and  those
of  latter  days,  are  both  alike  in  this  respect;  the  “Lat¬
ter  Day  Saints”  having  as  good  grounds  to  exercise
faith  in  God,  as  the  former  day  saints  had;  because
the  same  character  is  given  of  him  to  both.


Q.  What  was  shown  in  the  second  lecture!

A.  It  was  shown  how  the  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  God
came  into  the  world— [§  m.  IT  l.j
Q.  What  is  the  effect  ofthe  idea  of  bis  existence  among  men?
A.  It  lays  the'  foundation  for  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him. —

tt.ni.  mo

Q.  Is  the  idea  of  his  existence,  in  the  first  instance,  necessary
in  order  for  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him?

A.  It  is.  [Jui.  If  L]

Q.  How  do  you  pro-ve  it?

A.  By  the  16  chapter  to  Romans  and  14  verse.  [$  m.  IT  1-J
Q.  How  many  things  are  necessary  for  us  to  understand,  res¬
pecting  the  Deity  and  our  relation  to  him,  in  order  that  w«
may  exercise  faith  in  him  for  life  and  salvation?

A.  Three.  [$  in.  If  2-]

Q.  What  are  they?

A.  First,  that  God  does  actually  exist:  Secondly,  correct
ideas  of  his  character,  his  perfections  and  attributes;  and
Thirdly,  that  the  course  which  we  pursue  is  according  to  his
mind  and  will.  [$i«.  If  3,4,5.]

Q.  Would  the  idea  of  any  one  or  two  of  the  above  mentioned
things,  enable  a  person  to  exercise  faith  in  God?


42


A.  It  svould  not,  for  without  the  idea  of  them  all,  faith  would
be  imperfect  and  unproductive.  [§  fix.  *f 5.]

Q.  Would  an  idea  of  these  three  things  lay  a  sure  foundation
for  the  exercise  of  faith  in  God,  so  as  to  obtain  life  and  salva¬
tion  f

A.  It  would;  for  by  the  idea  of  these  three  things,  faith
could  become  perfect,  and  fruitful,  abounding  in  righteousness
unto  the  praise  and  glory  of  God.  [§  in.  If  5.]

Q.  How  are  we  to  be  made  acquainted  with  the  before  men¬
tioned  things  respecting  the  Deity,  and  respecting  ourselves?

A.  By  revelation.  [$  in.  If  6.]

Q.  Could  these  things  be  found  out  by  any  other  means  than
by  revelation?

A.  They  could  not.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A.  By  the  scriptures:  Job  11:7,8:9.  1  Corinthians  2:9, K),

11.  [6  in.  1T7.]

Q.  What  things  do  we  learn  in  the  revelations  of  God  re¬
specting  his  character?

A.  We  learn  the  six  following  things.  First,  that  he  was
God  before  the  world  was  created,  and  the  same  God  that  he
was  after  it  was  created.  Secondly,  that  he  is  merciful  and
grtcious,  slow  to  anger,  abundant  in  goodness,  and  that  he  was
so  from  everlasting,  and  will  be  so  to  everlasting.  Thirdly,
that  he  changes  not,  neither  is  there  variableness  with  him.
and  that  his  course  is  one  eternal  round.  Fourthly,  that  he  is
a  God  of  truth  and  cannot  lie.  Fifthly,  that  he  is  no  respect¬
er  of  persons;  and  Sixthlv,  that  he  is  love.  [$  m.  If  12,13,
14,15,16,17,18.]

Q.  Where  do  you  find  the  revelations  which  give  ns  this  idea
of  the  character  of  the  Deity?

A.  In  the  bible  and  book  of  commandments,  and  they  are
quoted  in  the  third  lecture.  [$  iii.  ]f  9,10,11.]

Q.  What  effect  would  It  have  on  any  rational  being  not  t»
hare  an  idea  th&tthe  Lord,  was  God,  the  creator  and  upholder
of  all  things  ?

A.  It  would  prevent  him  from  exercising  faith  in  him  unto
Hie  and  salvation.

Q.  Why  would  it  prevent  him  from  exercising  faith  in  God?

A.  Because  he  would  be  as  the  heathen  not  knowing  but  there
anight  be  a  being  greater  and  more  powerful  than  he,  and  there¬
by  he  be  prevented  from  fulfilling  his  promises.  £$  hi.  V  19.]

Q.  Does  this  idea  prevent  tins  doubt7

A.  It  does;  for  persons  having  this  idea  arc  enabled  thereby
to  exercise  faith  without  this  doubt.  [$  m.  If  19:]

Q.  Is  it  not  also  necessary  to  have  the  idea  that  God  f»


merciful,  and  gracious,  long  suffering  and  full  of -goodness!

a.  it  is.  [§  in.  irm]

Q.  Why  is  it  necessary?

A.  Because  ofthe  weakness  and  imperfections  of  human  na¬
ture,  and  the  great  frailties  of  man;  for  such  is  the  weakness
of  man,  and  such  his  frailties,  that  he  is  liable  to  sin  contin¬
ually,  and  if  God  were  not  long  suffering,  and  full  of  compas¬
sion,  gracious  and  merciful  and  of  a  forgiving  disposition,
man  would  be  cut  off  from  before  him  in  consequence  of  which,
he  would  be  in  continual  doubt  and  could  net  exercise  faith:
for  where  doubt'is,  there  faith  has  no  power,  but  by  man’s  believ¬
ing  that  God  is  full  of  compassion  and  forgiveness,  long  suffer¬
ing  and  slow  to  anger,  he  can  exercise  faith  in  him  and  over¬
come  doubt,  so  as  to  be  exceedingly  strong.  [§  m.  4f  20.]

Q.  Is  it  not  equally  as  necessary  that  man  should  have  an
idea  that  God  changes  not,  neither  is  there  variableness  with
him,  in  order  to  exercise  faith  in  him  unto  life  and  salvation-!
A.  It  is;  because  without  this,  he  would  not  know  how  soon
the  mercy  of  God  might  change  into  cruelty,  his  long  suffer¬
ing  into  rashness,  his  love  into  hatred,  and  in  consequence  of
Which  doilbt,  man  Would  be  incapable  of  exercising  faith  in  him,
but  having  the  idea  that  he  is  unchangeable,  man  can  have  faith
in  him  continually,  believing  that  what  he  was  yesterday  he  W
today,  and  will b:  forever.  [§  ni.  If  21.]

Q.  L  it  not  necessary  also,  for  men  to  have  an  idea  that  God
is  a  being  of  truth,  before  they  can  have  perfect  faith,  in  him!

A.  It  is;  for  unless  men  have  this  idea  they  cannot  piaee
confidence  in  his  word,  and  not  being  able  to  place  confidence
in  Ms  word,  they  could  not  have  faith  in  him;  but  believing
that  he  is  a  God  of  truth,  and  that  his  word  cannot  fail,  their
faith  can  rest  in  him  without  doubt.  [$  m.  22.]

Q.  Could  man  exercise  faith  in  God  so  as  to  obtain  eternal
life  unless  he  believed  that  God  was  no  respecter  of  persons-!

A.  He  could  not;  because  without  this  idea  he  could  not
certainly  know  that  it  was  his  privilege  so  to  do,  and  in  con¬
sequence  of  this  doubt  his  faith  could  not  be  sufficiently  strong
to  save  him.  [$  ni.  If  23.]

Q.  Would  it  be  possible  for  a  man  to  exercise  faith  in  God,
so  as  to  be  saved,  unless  he  had  an  idea  that  God  was  love?

A.  He  could  not;  because  man  could  not  love  God,  unless  be
had  an  idea  that  God  was  love,  and  if  he  did  not  love  God,  he
could  not  have  faith  in  him;  [6  in.  •  24.]

Q.  What  is  the  description  which  the  sacred  writers  give  of
the  character  of  the  Deity  calculated  to  do!

A.  It  is  calculated  to  lay  a  foundation  for  the  exercise  of
faith  in  him,  as  far  as  the  knowledge  extends  among  all  people.


44


tongues,  languages,  kindreds,  and  nations  and  that  from  age
to  age,  and  from  generation  to  generation.  [§  ui.  H  25.]

Q.  Is  the  character  which  God  has  given  of  himself  uniform!
A.  It  is,  in  all  his  revelations  whether  to  the  Former  Day
Saints,  or  to  the  Latter  day  saints,  so  that  they  all  have  the  au¬
thority  to  exercise  faith  in  him,  and  to  expect  by  the  exer-
«ise  of  their  faith,  to  enjoy  the  same  blessings.  [$  m.  1126.]


LSCTUR3  FOURTH.

Of  Faith.

SECTION  IV.

1  Having  shown  in  the  third  lecture,  that  correct
ideas  of  the  character  of  God  are  necessary  in  order
to  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him  unto  life  and  salvation,
and  that  without  correct  ideas  of  his  character,  the
•minds  of  men  could  not  have  sufficient  power  with
God  to  the  exercise  of  faith  necessary  to  the  enjoy¬
ment  of  eternal  life,  and  that  correct  ideas  of  his  char¬
acter  fty  a  foundation  as  far  as  his  character  is  con¬
cerned,  for  the  exercise  of  faith,  so  as  to  enjoy  the
fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,
even  that  of  eternal  glory;  we  shall  now  proceed  to
show  the  connection  there  is  between  correct  ideas,  of
the  attributes  of  God,  and  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him
unto  eternal  life.

2  Let  us  here  observe,  that  the  real  design  which
the  God  of  heaven  had  in  view  in  making,  the  human
family,  acquainted  with  his  attributes,  was,  that  they
through  the  ideas  of  the  existence  of
his  attributes,. might  be  enabled  to  exercise  fiith  in
him,  and  through  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him,  might
obtain  eternal  life.  For  without  the  idea  of  the  ex¬
istence  of  the  attributes  which  belong  to  God,  the
minds  of  men  could  not  have  power  to  exercise  faith


46


on  him  so  as  to  lay  hold  upon  eternal  life.  The  God
of  heaven  understanding  most  perfectly  the  constitu¬
tion  of  human  nature,  and  the  weakness  of  man,  knew
what  was  necessary  to  be  revealed,  and  what  idea#
must  be  planted  in  their  minds  in  order  that  they
might  be  enabled  to  exercise  faith  in  him  unto  eternal
life.

3  Having  said  so  much  we  shall  proceed  to  examine
the  attributes  of  God,  as  set  forth  in  his  revelations
to1  the  human  family,  and  to  show  how  necessary  cor¬
rect  ideas  of  his  attributes  are,  to  enable  men  to  ex¬
ercise  faith  in  him.  For  without  these  ideas  being
planted  in  the  minds  of  men,  it  would  be  out  of  the
power  of  any  person  or  persons  to  exercise  faith  in
God  so  as  to  obtain  eternal  life.  So  that  the  divine
communications  made  to  man  in  the  first  instance,
were  designed  to  establish  in  their  minds  the  ideas  ne¬
cessary  to  enable  them  to  exercise  faith  in  God,  and
through  this  means  to  be  partakers  of  his  glory.

4  We  have,  in  the  revelations  which  he  has  given
to  the  human  family,  the  following  account  of  his  at¬
tributes.

5  First,  Knowledge.  Acts  15:18.  Known  unto
God  are  all  his  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.
Isaiah  46:9,10.  Remember  the  former  things  of  old;
for  I  am  God  and  there  is  none  else;  I  am  God,  and
there  is  ndie  like  me,  declaring  the  end  from  the  begin¬
ning,  and  from  ancient  time  the  things  that  are  not
yet  done,  saying.  My  counsel  shall  stand,  and  I  will
do  all  my  pleasure.

6  Secondly,  Faith,  or  power.  Heb.  11:3.  Through
faith  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed  by
the  word  of  God.  Gen.  1:1.  In  the  beginning  God
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth.  Isaiah  14:24,27.
The  Lord  of  hosts  has  sworn,  saying,  Surely  as  I
have  thought  so  shall  it  come  to  pass;  and  as  I  have
purposed,  so  shall  it  stand.  For  the  Lord  of  hosts


4<3


has  purposed,  and  who  shall  disannul  it? .  and  his
liand  is  stretched  out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back?

7  Thirdly,  Justice.  Ps.  89:14.  Justice  and  judg¬
ment  are  the  habitation  of  thy  throne.  Isaiah  45:21.
Toll  ye,  and  bring  them  near,'  yea,  let  them  take
council  together:  who  has  declared  this  from  the  an¬
cient  time?  Have  not  I  the  Lord?  and  there  is  no
God  else  beside  me;  a  just  God  and  a  Savior.  Zeph-
5:5.  The  just  Lord  is  in  the  midst  thereof.  Zech.
9:9.  Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion;  shout,  O
daughter  of  Jerusalem:  behold,  thy  King  comes  unto
thee:  he  is  just,  aiid  having  salvation.

8  Fourthly,  Judgment.  Ps.  89:14.  Justice  and
judgment  are  the  habitation  of  thy  throne.  Deut.  32.:
4.  He  is  the  Rock,  his  work  is  perfect;  for  all  his
ways  are  judgment:  a  God  of  truth,  and  without  in¬
iquity:  just  and  right  is  he.  Ps.  9:7.  But  the  Lord
shall  endure  forever:  he  has  prepared  his  throne  for
judgment.  Ps.  9:16.  The  Lord  is  known  by  the
judgment  which  he  executes.

9  Fifthly,  Merc)-.  Ps.  89:15.  Mercy  and  truth
shall  go  before  his  face.  Exodus  34:0.  And  the
Lord  passed  by  before  him,  and  proclaimed,  The  Lord,
the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious.  Neh.  9:17. —
But  thou  art  a  God  ready  to  pardon,  gracious  and
merciful.

10  And  Sixthly,  Truth.  Ps.  89:14.  Mercy  and
truth  shall  go  before  thy  face.  Exodus  34:6.  Long
suffering  and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth.  Deut.
82:4.  He  is  the  Rock,  his  work  is  perfect;  for  all
his  ways  are  judgment.  A  God  of  truth  and  without
iniquity:  just  and  right  is  he.  Ps.  31:5.  Into  thy
hand  1  commit  my  spirit:  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  O
Lord  God  of  truth.

11  By  a  little  reflection  it  will  be  seen,  that  the  idea
of  the  existence  of  these  attributes  in  the  Deity,  is  ne¬
cessary  to  enable  any  rational  being  to  exercise  faith


irt  him.  For  without  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  these
attributes  in  the  Doity,  men  could  not  exercise  faith  in
him  for  life  and  salvation;  seeing  that  without  the
knowledge  of  all  things,  God  would  not  be  able  to
save  any  portion  of  his  creatures;  for  it  is  by  reason
of  the  knowledge  which  he  has  of  all  things,  from  the
beginning  to  the  end,  that  enables  him  to  give  that
understanding  to  his  creatures,  by  which  they  are
made  partakers  of  eternal  life;  and  if  it  were  not  for
the  idea  existing  in  the  minds  of  men,  that  God  had
all  knowledge,  it  would  be  impossible  for  them  ft)  ex¬
orcise  faith  in  him.

12  .  And  it  is  not  less  necessary  that  men  should  have
the  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  attribute  power  in  the
Deity.  For,  unless  Grid  had  power  over  all  things,
and  was  able,  by  his  power,  to  control  all  things,  and
thereby  deliver  his  creatures  who  put  their  trust  ih
him,  from  the  power  of  ali  beings  that  rhight  seek
their  destruction,  whether  ih  heaven,  on  earth,  or  in
hell,  men  could  hot  be  saved;  but  with  the  idea  of  the
existence  of  this  attribute,  planted  in  the  mind,  men
feel  as  though  they  had  nothing  to  fear,  who  put  their
trust  in  God,  believing  that  he  has  power  to  save  all
who  come  to  him,  to  the  very  uttermost.

13  It  is  also  necessary,  in  order  to  the  exercise  of
faith  in  God,  unto  life  arid  salvation,  that  men  should
have  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  attribute  jus¬
tice,  in  him.  For  without  the  idea  of  the  existence
of  the  attribute  Justice,  in  the  Deity,  men  could  not
have  confidence  sufficiently  to  place  themselves  un¬
der  his  guidance  and  direction;  for  they  would  bo
filled  with  fear  and  doubt,  lest  the  Judge  of  all  the
earth  would  not  do  right;  and  thus  fear,  or  doubt,  exist¬
ing  in  the  mind,  would  preclude  the  possibility  of  the
exercise  of  faith  in  him  for  life  and  salvation.  But,
when  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  attribute  justice,
in  the  Deity,  is  fairly!planted  in  the  mind,  it  leaves


48

no  room  for  doubt  to  get  into  the  heart,  and  the  mind
is  enabled  to  cast  itself  upon  the  Almighty  without
fear  and  without  doubt,  and  with  most  unshaken  corn
fidence,  believing  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  wil!
do  right.

14  It  is  also  of  equal  importance  that  men  should
have  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  attribute  judg¬
ment,  in  God,  in  order  that  they  may  exercise  faith
in  him  for  lite  and  salvation;  for  without  the  idea  of
the  existence  of  this  attribute  in  the  Deity,  it  would
be  impossible  for  men  to  exercise  faith  in  him  for
life  and  salvation,  seeing  that  it  is  through  the  exer¬
cise  of  this  attribute  that  the  faithful  in  Christ  Jesus
are  delivered  out  of  the  hands  of  those  who  seek  their
destruction;  for  if  God  were  not  to  come  out  in  swift
judgment  against  the  workers  of  iniquity  and  the  pow¬
ers  of  darkness,  his  saints  could  not  be  saved;  for  it
is  by  judgment  that  the  Lord  delivers  his  saints  out
of  the  hands  of  all  their  enemies,  and  those  who  re¬
ject  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  no
sooner  is  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  this  attribute,
planted  in  the  minds  of  men,  than  it  gives  power  to
the  mind  for  the  exercise  of  faith  and  confidence  in
God,  and  they  are  enabled,  by  faith,  to  lay  hold  on
the  promises  which  are  set  before  them,  and  wade
through  all  the  tribulations  and  afflictions  to  which
they  are  subjected  by  reason  of  the  persecution  from
those  who  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  the  gospel  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  believing,  that  in  due  time  the
Lord  will  come  out  in  swift  judgment  against  their  en¬
emies,  and  they  shall  be  cut  off  from  before  him,  and
that  in  his  own  due  time  he  will  bear  them  off  con¬
querors  and  more  than  conquerors  in  all  things.

15  And  again,  it  is  equally  important  that  men  should
have  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  the  attribute  mercy,
in  the  Deity,  in  order  to  exercise  faith  in  him  for  life
Mid  salvation.  For,  without  the  idea  of  the  existence


49


this  attribute  in.  the  Deity,  the  spirits  of  the  saints
'would  faint  in  the  midst  of  the  tribulations,  afflictions
and  persecutions  which  they  have  to  endure  for  right-,
eousness’  sake;  but  when  the  idea  of  the  existence  of
this  attribute  is  once  established  in  the  mind  it  gives
life  and  energy  to  the  spirits  of  the  saints:  believing
that  the  mercy  of  God  will  be  poured  out  upon  them
in  the  midst  of  their  afflictions,  and  that  he  will  com¬
passionate  them  in  their  sufferings;  and  that  the  mer¬
cy  of  God  will  lay  hold  of  them  and  secure  them  in
the  arms  of  his  love,  so  that  they  will  receive  a  full
reward  for  all  their  sufferings.

16  And  lastly,  but  not  less  important  to  the  exer¬
cise  of  faith  in  God,  is  the  idea  of  the  existence  of
the  attribute  truth,  in  him.  For,  without  the  idea  of
the  existence  of  this  attribute  the  mind  :of  man  could
have  nothing  upon  which  it  could  rest  with  certainty :
ail  would  be  confusion  and  doubt;  but  with  the  idea
of  the  existence  of  this  attribute  in  the  Deity,  in  the
mind,  all  the  teachings,  instructions,  promises  and
blessings  become  realities,  and  the  mind  is  enabled  to
Jay  hold  of  them  with  certainty  and  confidence:  be¬
lieving  that  these  things,  and  all  that  the  Lord  has
said,  shall  be  fulfilled  in  their  time;  and  that  all  the
cursings,  denunciations  and  judgments,  pronounced
upon  the  heads  of  the  unrighteous  will  also  be  execu¬
ted  in  the  due  time  of  the  Lord:  and  by  reason  of  the
truth  and  veracity  of  him,  the  mind  beholds  its  deliv¬
erance  and  salvation  as  being  certain.

17  Let  the  mind  once  reflect  sincerely  and  candid¬
ly  upon  the  ideas  of  the  existence  of  the  before  men¬
tioned  attributes  in  the  Deity,  and  it  will  be  seen,
that  as  far  as  his  attributes  are  concerned,  there  is  a
sure  foundation  laid  for  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him
for  life  and  salvation.  For  in  as  much  as  God  pos¬
sesses  the  attribute  knowledge  he  can  make  all  things


.50'

known  to  his  saints  necessary  for  their  salvation;  ana  '
as  he  possesses  the  attribiite'  power  lie  is  able  there¬
by  to  deliver  them  from  the  power  of  all  enemies;
and  seeing  also,  that  justice  as;  an  attribute  of  the  De¬
ity,  he  will  deal  with  them  upon  the  principles  of
righteousness  and  equity,  and  a  just  reward  will  be
granted  unto  them  for  dll  their  afflictions  and  suffer¬
ings  for  the  truth's  sake.  And  as  judgment  is  an
attribute  of  the  Deity  also,  his  saints  can  have  the
most  unshaken  confidence,  that  they  will,  in  due  tim  e,
obtain  a  perfect  deliverance  out  of  the  hands  of  all
their  enemies,  and  a  complete  victory  over  all  those
who  have  sought  their  hurt  and  destruction.  And  as
mercy  is  also  an  attribute  of  the  Deity,  his  saints  can
have  confidence  that  it  will  be  exercised  toward  them:
and  through  the  exercise  :  of  that  attribute  toward
them,  comfort  and  consolation  will  be  administered
unto  them  abundantly,  amid  all  their  afflictions  and
tribulations.  Arid  lastly,  realizing  that  truth  is  an  at¬
tribute  of  the  Deity,  the  mind  is  led  to  rejoiae  amid
all.  its  trials  and  temptations,  in  hope  of  that  glory
which  is  to  be  brought  at  the  revelation  of  Jesus
Ohrist,  arid  in  view  of  that  crown  which  is  to  be  pla¬
ced  upon  the  heads  of  -the  saints  in  the- day  when  the
I/ord'  shall  distribute  rewards  unto  them,  and  in
prdspoct  of  that  eternal  Weight  of-  glory  which  the
Lord  hhs  promised  to  bestow  upon  Ih'em  when  he  shall '
bring  them  into  the  midst  of  his  throne  to  dwell  in -
his  presence  ctcrnaflly.

IS  In  view;,  then,  of  the  existence '  of  these  attrh
botes,  thb  faith  of  the  saints  Cart  become  exceedingly
strong:  abounding  in  righteousness1  unto  the  praise
arid  glory  of  God,  and  can  exert  its  mighty  influence
in  searching  after  wisdorii  and  understanding,  until  it
lias  obtained  a  knowledge  of  all  things  that 'pertain  to  •
life  and  salvatidn.

19  Such,  then,  is  the  foundation,  which  is  laid,


51'


tlirough  the  revelation  of  the  attributes  of  God,  for,
the  exercise  of  faith  in  him  for  life  and  salvation;
and  seeing  that  these  are  attributes  of  the  Deity,  they
are  unchangeable — being  the  same  yesterday  to  day
and  forever— which  gives  to  the  minds  of  the  Latter
Day  Saints  the  same  power  and  authority  to  exercise
faith  in  God,  which  the  Former  Day  Saints  had:  so
that  all  the  saints,  in  this  respect ‘have  been,  are  and
will  be  alike,  until  the  end  of  time;  for  God  never
changes*  therefore  his  attributes  and  character  remain
forever  the  same:  And  as  it  is  through  the  revela¬
tion  of  these  that  a  foundation  is  laid  for  the  exercise
of  faith  in  God  unto  life  and  salvation,  the  founda¬
tion,  therefore,  for  the  exercise  of  faith*  was,  is  and
ever  will  be  the-same.  So  that  all  men  have  had,  ,
and  will  havo  an  equal  privilege.


Question.  What  was  shown  in  the  third  lecture?

Answer.  It  was  shown  that  correct  ideas  of  the  character  of
God  are  necessary  in  order  to  exercise  faith  in  him  unto  life
and  salvation:  and  that  without  correct  ideas  of  his  character,
men  could  not  have  power  to  exercise  faith  in  him  unto  life  '
and  salvation,  but  that  correct  ideas  of  his  character,  as  far  as
his  character  is  concerned  in  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him,  lay.
a  sure  foundation  for  the  exercise  Of  it*>  [$  iv.  1.]

Q.  What  object  had  the  God  of  heaven  in  revealing  his  at-  -
tributes  to  men?

A.  That  through  an  acquaintance  with  his  attributes  they
might  be  enabled  to  exercise  faith  in  him  so  as  to  obtain  eter-
nallife.  [ur.  H  2.]

Q.  Could  men  exercise  faith  in  God  without  an  acquaintance
with  his  attributes,  so  as  to  be  enabled  to  lay  hold  of  eternal
life?

A.  They  could  not.  [§  ir.  H  2,3.],:

Q.  What  account  is  given  of  the  attributes  of  God  in  in  his
revelations?

A.  First,  Knowledge,  secondly,  Faith,  or  power,  thirdly.
Justice,  fourthly1.  Judgment,  fifthly,  Mercy,  and  sixthly  truth.
$tv.  K  4, 5, 6, 7, 8,9  and  10.]


52


Q.  Where  are  the  reyelationg  to  be  found  which  give  this
relation  Of  the  attributes  Of  God  ?

A.  In  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  and  they  are  quoted  in
the  fourth  lecture,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  ninth,  and
tenth  paragraphs.  *

Q.  Is  the  idea  of  the  existence  9f  those  attributes,  in  the  De¬
ity,  necessary  in  order  to  enable  any  rational  being  to  exer- !
c»e  faith  in  him  unto  life  and  salvation  ?

A.  It  is.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  It?

A.  By  the  eleventh,  twelfth,  thirteenth  fourteenth,  fifteenth
and  sixteenth  paragraphs  in  this  lecture.*

Q.  Does  the  idea  of  the  existence  of  these  attributes  in  the
Deity,  as  far  as  his  attributes  are  concerned,  enable  a  rational
being  to  exercise  faith  in  him  unto  life  and  .salvation?

A.  It  does.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A.  By  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  paragraphs.*

Q.  Have  the  Latter  Day  Baints  aa  much  authoity  given
them,  through  the  revelation  of  the  attributes  of  God,  to  ex¬
ercise  faith  in  him  as  the  Former  Day  Saints  had?

A.  They  have.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it  ?

A.  By  the  nineteenth  paragraph  of  this  lecture.*

Note.  Let  the  student  turn  and  commit  those  paragraph*
ito  memory.


X.SCTVBB  FIFTH.

Of  Faith.

SECTION  V.

1  In  our  former  lectures  we  treated  of  die  being,
character,  perfections  and  attributes  of  God.  What
we  mean  by  perfections,  is,  the  perfections  which
belong  to  all  the  attributes  of  his  nature.  We  shall,
in  this  lecture  speak  of  the  Godhead:  we  mean  the
Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit.

2  There  arc  two  personages  who  constitute  the
great,  matchless,  governing  and  supreme  power  over


all  things — by  whom  all  things  Were  created  and
made,  that  are  created  and  made,  Whether  visible  , or
invisible:  whether  in  heaven,  an  earth,  or  in  the  earth,
finder  the  earth,  or  throughout  the  immensity  of  space
— They  are  the  Father  and  the  Son:  The  Father  be¬
ing  a  personage  of  spirit,  glory  and  power:  possess¬
ing  alt  perfection  and  fulness:  The  Son,  who  was
in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  a  personage  of  tabernacle,
made,  or  fashioned  like  unto  man,  or  being  in  the
form  and  likeness  of  man,  or,  rather,  man  was  form¬
ed  after  his  likeness,  and  in  his  image;— he  is  also
the  express  ifrtage  and  likeness  of  the  personage  of
the  Father:  possessing  all  the  fulness  of  the  Father,
or,  the  same  fulness  with  the  Fathe;  being  begotten
of  him;  and  was  ordained  from  before  the  foundation
of  the  world  to  be  a  propitiation  for  die  sins  of  all
those  who  should  believe  on  his  name,  and  is  called
the  Son  because  of  the  '  flesh— and  descended  in  suf¬
fering  below  that  which  man  can  suffer,  or,  in  other
words,  suffered  greater  sufferings,  and  was  exposed
to  more  powerful  contradictions  than  any  man  can  be.
But  notwithstanding  all  this,  he  kept  the  law  of  God,
and  remained  without  sin:  Shpwing  thereby  that  it  is
in  the  power  of  man  to  keep  the  law  apd  remain  also
Without  sin.  And  also,  that  by  him  a  righteous  judg¬
ment  might  come  upon  all  flesh,  and  that  all  who  walk
not  in  the  law  of  God,  may  justly  be  condemned  by
the  law,  and  have  no  excuse  for  their  sins.  And  he'
being  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace
and  truth,  and  having  overcome,  received  a  fulness  of
the  glory  of  the  Father — possessing  the  same  mind
with  the  Father,  which  mind  is  the  Holy  Spirit,  that
bears  record  of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  these
three  are  one,  or  in  other  words,  these  three  constitute
the  great,  matchless,  governing  and  supreme  power
over  all  things:  by  whom  all  things  were  created  and
made,  that  were  created  and  made:  and  these  three


♦54


constitute  the  Godhead,  and  are  one  :  The  Father  and
the  Son  possessing  the  same  mind,  the  same  wisdom,
glory,  power  and  fulness:  Filling  all  in  all — the  Son
being  filled  with  the  fulness  of  the  Mind,  glory  and
power,  or,  in  other  words,  the  Spirit,  glory  and  pow¬
er  of  the  Father — possessing  all  knowledge  and  glory,
and  the  same  kingdom:  sitting  at  the  right  hand
of  power,  in  the  express  image  and  likeness  of  the
Tather — a  Mediator  for  man — being  filled  with  the  ful¬
ness  of  the  Mind  of  the  Father,  or,  in  other  words,
the  Spirit  of  the  Father:  which  Spirit  is  shed  forth
-upon  all  who  believe  on  his  name  and  keep  his
commandments:  and  all  those  who  keep  his  command¬
ments  shall  grow  up  from  grace  to  grace,  and  become
heirs  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  and  joint  heirs  with
Jesus  Christ;  possessing  the  same  mind,  being  trans¬
formed  into  the  same  image  or  likeness,  even  the
express  image  of  him  who  fills  all  in  all:  being  filled
with  the  fulness  of  his  glory,  and  become  one  in
.him,  even  as  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  are  one.

3  From  the  foregoing  account  of  the  Godhead,
which  is  given  in  his  revelations,  the  Saints  have  a
sure  foundation  laid  for  the  exercise  of  faith  unto  life
and  salvation,  through  the  atonement  and  mediation  of
Jesus  Christ,  by  whose  blood  they  have  a  forgiveness
of  sins,  and  also,  a  sure  reward  laid  up  for  them  in
heaven,  even  that  of  partaking  of  the  fulness  of  ihe
Father  and  the  Son,  through  the  Spirit  As  the  Son
partakes  of  the  fulness  of  the  Father  through  the  Spir¬
it,  so  the  saints  are,  by  the  same  Spirit,  to  be  parta¬
kers  of  the  same  fulness,  to  enjoy  the  same  glory;  for
as  the  Father  and  the  Son  are  one,  so  in  like  manner
the  saints  are  to  be  one  in  them,  through  the  love  of
the  Father,  the  mediation  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  gift
of  the  Holy  Spirit;  they  are  to  be  heirs  of  God  and
joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ.


•  Question.  Of  what  do  the  foregoing  lectures  treat  ?

.  Answer.  Of  the  being,  perfections  and  attributes  of  the
•  Deity.  [§5.  HI.]

Q.  What  are  we  to*  understand  by  the  perfections  of  the
Deity?

A.  The  perfections  which  belong  to  his  attributes.

Q.  How  many  personages  are  there  in  the  Godhead  ?

A.  Two:  the  Father  and  the  Son.  £-§5.  •  1U-]

Q.  How  do  you  prove  that  .there  ate  two  personages  in  the
Godhead?

A.  By  the  Scriptures.  Gen.  1:26.  Also  §2.  H6.  And  the
Lord  God  said  unto  the  Only  Begotten,  who  was  with  him
from  the  beginning,  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our
likeness: — and  it  was  done.  Gen.  3:2*2.  And  the  Lord  God
said  unto  the  Only  Begotten,  Behold,  the  man  is  become  as
one  of  us:  to  know  good  and  evil,  John,  17:  5.  And  now,
O  Father,  glorify  thou  me  with  thine  own  self’  with  the  glory
which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was  [$5.  H‘2.]  ,

Q.  What  is  the  Father  ?

A.  He  is  a  personage  of  glpry  and  of  power.  [$5.  *J,2.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  that  the  Father  is  a  personage  of
glory  and  of  power  ?

A.  Isaiah  60:  19.  The  Sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by
day,  neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon  give  light  unto  thee:
but  the  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and  thy
God  thy  glory.  1  Chron.  29:  11.  Thine,  O  Lord,  is  the
greatness,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory.  Ps.  29:  3.  The
voice  of  the  Lord  is  upon  the  waters:  the  God  of  glory  thun¬
ders.  Ps.  79:  9.  Help  us,  O  God  of  our  salvation,  for  the
glory  of  thy  name.  Romans  1:  23.  And  changed  the  glory
of  the  incorruptible  God  into  an  image  made  like  to  corrupti¬
ble  men.

Secondly,  of  power.  1  Chron.  29:  4.  Thine,  O  Lord,  is
the  greatness  and  the  power,  and  the  glory.  Jer.  32:  17.  Ah!
Lord  God,  behold  thou  hast  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens
by  thy  great  power,  and  stretched-out  arm;  and  there  is  noth¬
ing  too  hard  for  thee.  Deut  4:  37.  And  because  he  loved
thy  fathers  therefore  he  chose  their  seed  after  them,  and  bro’t
them  out  in  his  sight  with  his  mighty  power.  2.  Samuel  22:
33.  God  is  my  strength  and  power.  Job  26,  commenceing
with  the  7  verse,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter.  He  stretches  out
the  north  over  the  empty  place,  and  hangs  the  earth  upon  no¬
thing.  He  binds  up  the  waters  in  his  thick  clouds;  and  the
cloud  is  not  rent  under  them.  He  holds  back  the  fkce  of  his


56


end.  The  pillars  oflieaveir  tremble;  and  are  astonished  at  hi.*
reproof.  He  divides  the  sea  with  his  power,  and  by  his  un¬
derstanding  he  smites  through  the  proud.  By  his  Spirit  he
has  garnished  the  heavens;  his  hand  has  formed  the  crooked
serpent.  Lo,  tlxese  are  parts  of  his  ways:  but  how  little  a  por¬
tion  is  heard  of  him!  But  the  thunder  of  his  power  who  caa
understand1?

Q.  What  is  the  Son?

A.  First,  he  is  a  personage  of  tabernacle.  £$5.  5f2.]

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A.  John  14:  9,10,  11,.  Jesus  says  unto  him,  Have  I  been
so  long  time  with  you,  and  yet  have  you  not  known  me,  Phi¬
lip?  He  that  has  seen  me  has  seen  the  Father;  and  how  do  you
say  then,  Show  us  the  Father?  Do  you  not  believe,  that  I  am
in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  in  me?  The  words  that  I  speak
unto  you,  I  speak  not  of  myself :  but  the  Father  that  dwells  in
me,  he  does  the  works.  Believe  me  that  I  am  in  the  Father,
and  the  Father  in  me.

Secondly,  and  being  a  personage  of  tabernacle,  was  made  or
fashioned  like  unto  man,  or  being  in  the  form  and  likexxess  of
man.  [$5.  1 \2.J

Philip.  2.  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ
Jesus;  who  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to
be  equal  with  God;  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in  the
tikeness  of  man,  and,  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  hum¬
bled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death
of  the  cross.  Heb.  2:  14, 16.  Forasmuch  then  as  the  children
are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took
part  of  the  same.  For  verily  he  took  not  on  him  the  nature-
of  angels;  but  he  took  on  him  the  seed  of  Abraham.

Thirdly,  he  is  also  in  the  likeness  of  the  personage  of  the
Father.  [$5.  1T2-]

Heb.  1:  1,2,3.  Clod,  who  at  suudry  times,  and  in  divers  ,
manners,  spake  in  time  past  to  the  fathers,  hy  the  prophets,-.
has  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son,  whom  he
lids  appointed  heir  of  all  things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the
worlds;  who,  being  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  and  the  express-
image  of  his  person.  Again,  Philip.  2:  5,6.  Let  this  mind  be
in  you,  which  was  also  in  Clxrist  Jesus;  who  being  in  the  form
Of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God.

Q.  Was  it  by  the  Father  and  the  Son  that  all  things  Were
created  and  made,  that  were  created  and  made?

A.  It  was.  Col.  1:  15,  16,  17.  Who  is  the  image  of  the
invisible  God,  the  first  bom  of  every  creature;  for  byliim  were
ail  things  created  that  are  in  heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth.


&7.


visible  and  invisible,  whether  they  be  thrones  or  dominion*,
principalities  or  powers;  all  things  were  created  by  him  and
for  him;  and  he  is  before  all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  con¬
sist.  Gen.  1:1.  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens
and  the  earth.  Heb.  1:  2.  [God]  Has  in  these  last  days  spo¬
ken  unto  us  by  his  Son,  whom  he  has  appointed  heir  of  all.
things,  by  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds.

Q.  Does  he  possess  the  fulness  of  the  Father!

A.  He  does.  Col.  1 :  19.  2:  9.  For  it  pleased  the  Father
that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell.  For  in  him  dwells
all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  Eph.  1 :  23.  Which  is
his  [Christ’s]  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  fills  all  in  all.

Q.  Why  was  he  called  the  Son?

A-  Because  of  the  flesh.  Luke  1 :  33.  That  holy  thing
which  shall  be  born  of  thee,  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  God. —
Math.  3:  1C,  17.  And  Jesus,  when  he  was  baptized,  went  up
straitway  out  of  the  water:  and  lo,  the  heavens  were  opened
unto  him,  and  he  [John]  saw  the  Spirit  of  God  descending
like  a  dove  and  lighting  upon  him:  and  lo,  a  voice  from  heaven,
saying,  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased.

Q.  Was  he  ordained  of  the  Father,  from  before  the  founda¬
tion  of  the  world,  to  be  a  propitiation  for  the  sins,  of  all  those,
who  should  believe  on  his  name?

A.  He  was.  1  Peter,  T:  IS;  19;  20.  For.  as  much  as.  yon-;
know  that  you  were^not  redeemed  with  corruptible  things,  as*
silver  and  gold,  from  your  vain  conversation,  received  by  tra¬
dition  from  your  fathers;  but  with  the  precious  blood  ofChrist.,
as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and.  without  spot:  who  verily
was  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but  was
manifested  in  these  last  times  for  you.  Rev.  13:  8.  And  all
that  dwell  upon  the  earth  shall  worship  him,  [the  beast]  whose
names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of  life  of  the  Lamb  slain  from
the  foundation  of  the  world.  1  Corin.  2:  7.  But  we  speak  the
wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even  the  hidden  mystery,  which
God  ordained  before  the  world  unto  our  glory.

Q.  Do  the  Father  and  the  Son  possess  the  same  mind?

A.  They  do;.  John  5:  30.  I  [Christ]  can  of  my  own  self  do
nothing:  as  I  hear,  I  judge,  and  my  judgment  is  just;  because  I
seek  not  my  own  will,  but  the  will  of  the  Father  who  sent  me.
John  6:  38.  For  1  [Christ]  came  down  from  heaven,  not  to
do  my  own  will,  but  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me.  John  10:
30.  I  [Christ]  and  my  Father  are  one.

Q.  What  is  this  mind?

A.  The  Holy  Spirit.  John  15:  26.  But  when  the  Com¬
forter  is  come,  whom  I  will  send  unto  you  from  the  Father?
even  the  Spirit  of  truth,  whieh.proceeds  front  the  Father,  he


•58


■hall  testify  of  me.  [Christ.]  Gal.  1;  6.  And  because  you
are  sons,  God  has  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your
hearts.

Q.  Do  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  constitute  the
Godhead?

A.  They  do.  [$5.  f2.]

Let  the  student  commit  this  paragraph  to  memory.

Q.  Does  the  believer  in  Christ  Jesus,  through  the  gift  of
the  Spirit,  become  one  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  as  the
.Father  and  the  Son  are  one?

A.  They  do.  John  17:  20,  21.  Neither  pray  I  for  these
(the  apostles)  alone,  but  for  them  also  who  shall  believe  on  me
through  their  word;  that  they  all  may  be  one;  as  thou,  Father,
art  in  me,  and  1  in  thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us,  that
the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me.

Q.  Does  the  foregoing  account  of  the  Godhead  lay  -a  sure
foundation  for  the  exercise  of  faith  in  him  unto  life  and  salva¬
tion?

A.  It  does.

Q.  How  do  you  prove  it?

A.  By  the  third  paragraph  of  this  lecture.

•uLet  the  student  commit  this  also.


?  X.  E  G  T  IT  R  E'lS  ISTH.

Of  Faith.

SECTION  VI.

1  Having- treated,  in  the  preceding  lectures,  of  the
ideas  of  the  character,  perfections  and  attributes  of  Ged,
we  next  proceed  to  treat  of  the  knowledge  which  per¬
sons  must  have,  that  the  course  of  life  which  they  pur¬
sue  is  according  to  the  will  of  God,  in  order  that  they
muy  be  enabled  to  exercise  faith  in  him  unto  life
and  salvation.

2  This  knowledge  supplies  animportant  place  in  re¬
vealed  religion;  for  it  was  by  reason  of  it  that  the  an¬
cients  were  enabled  to  endure  as  seeing  him  who  is
invisible.  An  actual  knowledge  to  any  person  that


59

ahe  course  of  life  whioh  he  pursues  is  according  to
the  will  of  God,  is  essentially  necessary  to  enable
him  to  have  that  confidence  in  God,  without  which  no
person  can  obtain  eternal  life.  It  was  this  that  ena¬
bled  the  ancient  saints  to  endure  all  their  afflictions
and  persecutions,  aud.  to  take  joyfully  the  spoiling  of
their  goocls,  knowing,  (not  believing  merely,)  that  they
had  a  more  enduring  substance.  Heb.  10:34.

3  Having  the  assurance  that  they  were  pursuing  a
course  which  was  agreeable  to  the  wilt  of  God,  they
were  enabled  to  take,  not  only  the  spoiling  of  thoir
.goods,  and  the  wasting  of  their  substance,  joyfully,
but  also  to  suffer  death  in  its  most  horrid  forms;  know¬
ing, {not  merely  believing,)  that  when  this  earthly  house
of  their  tabernacle  was  dissolved,  they  had  a  budding
of  God,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the
heavens.  Sepqnd  Cor.  5:1.

4  Such  was  and  always  will  be  the  situation  of  the
saints  of  God,  that  unless  they  have  an  actual  knowl¬
edge  that  the  course  that  they  are  pursuing  is  accor¬
ding  to  the  will  of  God  they  will  grow  weary  in  their
uninds  and  faint;  for  such  has  been  and  always  will  he
the  opposition  in  the  hearts  of  unbelievers  and  those
that  know  not  God,  against  the  pure  and  unadulterated
religion  of  heaven,  (the  only  thing  which  ensures
eternal  life,)  that  they  will  persecute,  to  the  uttermost,
all  that  worship  God  according  to  his  revelations,  re¬
ceive  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it,  and  submit  themselves
to  be  guided  and  directed  by  his  will,  and  drive  them
to  such  extremities  that  nothing  short  of  an  actual
knowledge  of  their  being  the  favorites  of  heaven,  and
of  their  having  embraced  that  order  of  things  which
God  has  established  for  the  redemption  of  man,  .will
enable  them  to  exercise  that  confidence  in  him  neces¬
sary  for  them  to  overcome  the  world,  and  obtain  that
crown  of  glory  which  is  laid  up  for  them  that  fear


60


5  For  a  man  to  lay  down  his  all,  his  character  and
deputation,  his  honor  and  applause,  his  good  name
among  men,  his  houses,  his  lands,  his  brothers  and
sisters,  his  wife  aiid  children,  and  even  his  own  life
also,  counting  all  things  but  filth  and  dross  for  the
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  requires
more  than  mere  belief,  or  supposition  that  he  is  doing
the  will  of  God,  but  actual  knowledge:  realizing,  that
when  these  suflferipgs  are  ended  he  will  enter  into
eternal  rest;  and  be  a  partaker  of  the  glory  of  God

6  For  unless  a  person  does  know  that  he  is  walking'
according  to  the  will  of  God,  it  would  be  offering  an
insult  to  the  dignity  of  the  Creator,  were  he  to  say
that  lie  would  be  a  partaker  of  his  glory  when  he
should  be  done  with  the  things  of  this  life.  But  when
he  has  this  knowledge,  and  most  assuredly  knows
that  he  is  doing  the  will  of  God,  his  confidence  can
be  equally  strong  that  he  will  be  a  partaker  of  the
glory  of  God.

7  Let  us  here  observe,  that  a  religion  that  does  not
require  the  sacrifice  of  all  things,  never  has  power
sufficient  to  produce  the  faith  necessary  unto  life  and
salvation;  for  from  the  first  existence  of  man,  the
faith  necessary  unto  the  enjoyment  of  life  and  salva¬
tion  never  could  be  obtained  without  the  sacrifice  of
all  earthly  things:  it  was  through  this  sacrifice,  and
this  only,  that  God  has  ordained  that  men  should  en¬
joy  eternal  life;  and  it  is  through  the  medium  of  the
sacrifice  of  all  earthly  things,  that  men  do  actually
know  that  they  are  doing  the  things  that  are  weil
pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God.  When  a  man  has  of¬
fered  in  sacrifice  all  that  he  has,  for  the  truth’s  sake,
not  even  withholding  his  life,  and  believing  before
God  that  he  has  been  called  to  make  this  sacrifice,
because  he  seeks  to  do  his  will,  he  does  know  most
assuredly,  that  God  does  and  will  accept  his  sacrifice
&  offering,  &  that  he  pas  not  nor  will  not  seekhis  face  in


61


wain.  Under  these  circumstances,  then,  he  can  obtain
.the  faith  necessary  for  him  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life.
S  It  is  in  vain  for  persons  to  fancy  to  themselves
that  they  are  heirs  with  those,  or  can  be  heirs  with
them,  who  have  offered  their  all  in  sacrifice,  and  by
this  means  obtained  faith  in  God  and  favor  with  him
■so  as  to  obtain  eternal  life,  unless  they  in  like  man-
net  offer  unto  him  the  same  sacrifice,  and  through
that  offering  obtain  the  knowledge  that  they  are  ac¬
cepted  of  him.  .  ■

9  It  was  in  offering  sacrifices  that  Abel,  the  first
martyr,  obtained  knowledge  that  he  was  accepted  of
God.  And  from  the  days  of  righteous  Abel  to  the  pres¬
ent  time,  the  knowledge  that  men  have  that  they  are
accepted  in  the  sight  of  God,  is  obtained  by  offering
sacrifice :  and  in  the  last  days,  before  the  Lord  comes,
he  is  to  gather  together  his  saints  who  have  made  a
covenant  with  him  by  sacrifice.  Ps.  50:3,4,5.  Our
God  shall  come,  and  shall  not  keep  silence:  a  fire  shall
devour  before  him,  and  it  shall  be  very  tempestuous
round  about  him.  He  shall  call  to  the  heavens  from
.above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  he  may  judge  his  people-
'Gather  my  saints  together  unto  me;  those  that  have
made  a  covenant  unto  me  by  sacrifice.

10  Those,  then,  who  make  the  sacrifice  wifi  have
the  testimony  th^Jt  their  course  is  pleasing  in  the  sight
of  God,  and  those  who  have  this  testimony  will  have
faith  to  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  and  will  be  enabled,
through  faith,  to  endure  unto  the  end,  and  receive  the
crown  that  is  laid  up  for  them  that  love  the  appear¬
ing  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  those  who  do
not  make  the  sacrifice  cannot  enjoy  this  faith,  because
men  are  dependent  upon  this  sacrifice  in  order  to  ob¬
tain  this  faith;  therefore,  they  cannot  lay  hold  upon
eternal  life,  because  the  revelations  of  God  do  not
guarantee  unto  them  the  authority  so  to  do;  and  with¬
out  this  guarantee  faith  could  not  exist


62'


11  All  the  skints  of  whom  we  have  account  in  alt"
the  revelations  of  God  which  are  extant,  obtained  the
knowledge  which  they  had  of  their  acceptance  in  his
night,  through  the  sacrifice  which  they  offered  unto  ■
him:  and  through  the  knowledge  thus  obtained,  their
faith  became  sufficiently  strong  to  lay  hold  upon  the
promise  of  eternal  life,  and  to  endure  us  seeing  him
who  is  invisible;  and  were  enabled,  through  faith,  to
combat  the  powers  of  darkhess,  contend  agains*  the
wiles  of  the  adversary,  overcome  the  world,  and  ob¬
tain  the  end  of  their  faith,  even  the  salvation  of  their
souls.

12  But  those  who  have  not  made  this  sacrifice  to
God,  do  not  know  that  the  course  which  they  pursue  is
well  pleasing  in  his  sight;  for  whatever  may  be  their
belief  or  their  opinion,  it ’is  a  matter  of  doubt  and  un
certainty  in  their  mind;  and  where  doubt  and  uncer¬
tainty  is,  there  faith  is  not,  nor  can  it  be.  For  doubt
and  faith  do  not  exist  in  the  same  person  at  the  same
time.  So  that  persons  whose  minds’  are  under  doubts
and  fears  cannot  have  unshaken  confidence,  and
where  unshaken  confidence  is  not,  there  faith  is  weak;
and  where  faith' is  weak,  the  persons  will  not  be  able
to  contend  against  all  the  opposition,  tribulations  and
afflictions  which  they  will  have  to  encounter  in  order
to  be  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ  Jesus:
and  they  will  grow  weary  in  their  minds,  and  the  ad¬
versary  will  have  power  over  them  and  destroy  them.

Note.  This  lecture  is  so  plain,  and  the  facts  set'
forth  so  self-evident,  that  it  is  deemed  unnecessary  to
form  a  catechism  upon  it:  the  student  is  therefore  in*
stfucted  to  commit  the  whole  to  memory.


rsoTVzna  sbvbnth;.

Of  Faith.


SECTION  VII

L  .In  the  preceding  lectures,  we  treated  of  what  faith-*
was,  and  of  the  object  on  which  it  rested-  agreeably
ta  our  plan  we  now  proceed  to  speak  of  its  effects.

2  As  we  have  seen  in  our  former  lectures,  that  faith,
was  the  principle  of  action  and  of  power  in  all  intelli¬
gent  beings,  both  in  heaven  and  op  earth,  it  will  not
be  expected  that  we  will,  in  a  lecture  of.,  this  descrip-  •
Iron  attempt  to  unfold  all  its  effects;  neither  is  it  ne¬
cessary  to  our  purpose  so  to  do;  for  it  would  era-  -
brace  all  things  in  heaven  and. on  earth,  and  encom¬
pass  albthe  creations  of  God,,  with  all  their  endless
varieties:  for  no  world  has  yet  been  framed  that  was
not  framed  by  faith;  neither  lias  there-been  an  intel¬
ligent  being'  on  any  of  God’s  creations  who  did  not
get  there  by  reason  of  faith,  as  it  existed  in  himself
or  in  some  other  being;  nor  has  there  been  a  change
or  a  revolution  in  any  of  the  creations  of  God  but  it
has  been  effected  by  faith’:  neither  will  there  be  a.
change  or  a  revolution  unless.it  is  effected  in  the  same  ,
way,  in  any  of  the  vast  creations  of  the  Almighty; .
for  it  is  by  faith  that  the,  Deity  works.

3  Let  us  here  offer  some  explanation  in  relation  to
faith  that  our  meaning  may  be  clearly  comprehend¬
ed:  We  ask,  then,  what  arc  we  to  understand  by  a  i
man’s  working  by  faith?  We  answer:  We  under¬
stand  that  when  a  man  works  by  faith  he  works  by
mental  exertion  instead  of  physical  force:  it  is  by
words  instead  of  exerting  his  physical  powers,  with
which  every  being  works  when  he  works  by  faith. —


^64


God  said,  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light —
Joshua  spake  and  the  great  lights  which  God  had
created  stood  attiil— Elijah  commanded,  and  the  heav¬
ens  were  stayed  for  the  space  of  ihree  years  and  six
imonths,  so  that  it  did  not- rain:  He  again  commanded,
and  the  heavens  gave  iorth  rain, — all  this  was  done
by  faith;  and  the  Savior  says,  If  you  have  faith  as
a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  say  to  this  mountain,  re¬
move,  and  it  will  remove;  or  say  to  that  sycamine
tree,  Be  ye  plucked  up  and  planted  in  the  midst  of
the  sea,  and  it  shall  obey  you.  Faith,  then,  works  by
words;  and  with  these  its  mightiest  works  have  been,
and  will  be  performed.

4  It  surely  will  not  be  required  of  us  to  prove,  that
this  is  the  principle  upon  which  all  eternty  has  acted
and  will  act;  for  every  reflecting  mind  must  know,
that  it  is  by  reason  of  this  power  that  all  the  hosts  ©f
heaven  perform  their  works  of  wonder,  majesty  and
glory:  Angels  move  from  place  to  place  by  virtue  of
this  power — it  is  by  reason  of  it  that  they  are  enabled
to  descend  from  heaven  to  earth;  and  were  it  not  for
the  power  of  faith  they  never  could  be  ministering
spirits  to  them  who  should  be  heirs  of  salvation,  nei¬
ther  could  they  act  as  heavenly  messengers;  for  they
would  be  destitute  of  the  power  necessary  to  enable
them  to  do  the  will  of  God

5  It  is  only  necessary  for  us  to  say,  that  the  whole
visible  creation,  as  it  now  exists,  is  tne  effect  of  faith
— It  was  faith  by  which  it  was  framed,  and  it  is  by
the  power  of  faith  that  it  continues  in  its  organized
form,  and  by  which  the  planets  move  round  their  or¬
bits  and  sparkle  forth  their  glory:  So,  then,  faith  is
truly  the  first  principle  in  the  science  of  theology,
and  when  undrstood,  leads  the  mind  back  to  the  be¬
ginning  and  carries  it  forward  to  the  end;  or  in  other
•words,  from  eternity  to  eternity.

■6  As  faith,  then,  is  the  principle  by  which  the  heav-


65


only  hosts  perform  their  works,  and  by  which  they
enjoy  till  their  felicity,  we  might  expect  to  find  it  set
forth  in  a  revelation  from  God  as  the  principle  upon
which  his  creatines,  here  below,  must  act,  in  order,
to  obtain  the  felicities  enjoyed' by  the  saints  in  the
eternal  world,  and  that  when  God  would  nndeftako  to
raise  up  men  for  the  enjoyment  of  himself,  lie  Would
teaeii  thorn  the  necessity  of  living  by  faith,  and  the
impossibility  there  was  of  their  enjoying  the  blessed¬
ness  of  eternity  -  without  it.  seeing  that  all  the  bless¬
ings  of  eternity  are  the  efiects  of ’faith.

7  Therefore,  it  is  said,  and  appropriately  too,  that
without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  Godi  I  f  it  should
be  asked,  Why  is  it  impossible  to  please  God  without
faith?  the  answer  Would  be,  liccause,  without  faith  it
is  impossible  for  men  to  be  saved;  and  as  God  desires
the  salvation  of  man  he  must  of  course  desire  that
they  should  have  faith,  arid  he  could  not  be  pleased
unless  they  had,  or  else  he  could  be  pleased  with  their
destruction.

8  From  this  we  learn  that  the  many ''exhortations
which  have  been  given  by  inspired  men  to  those  who
had  received  the  word  of  the  Imrd,  to  have  faith  in
him,  were  not  mere- commOn-pItice  matters,  but  were
for  the  best  of  all  reasons,  and  that  was,  because,
without  it  there  was  no  salvation,  neither  in  this- World
nor  in  that  which  is  to  come.  When  men  begin  to
live  by  faith  they  begin  to  draw  near  to  God;  and
when  faith  is'  perfected  they  are  like  him;  and  be¬
cause  he  is  saved  they  are  saved  also;  for  they  will
be  in  the  same  situation  lie  is  in,  because  they  have
come  to  him;  and  when  he  appears  they  shall  be  like
him,  for  they  will-  see  him  as  he  is.

9  As  all  the  visible  creation  is  an  effect  of  faith,  so  is
salvation,  also.  (Wcraean  salvation  in  its  most  ex¬
tensive  latitude  of  interpretation,  whether  it  is  tempo-


66


val  or  spiritual.)  In  order  to  have  this  subject  clear¬
ly  set  before  the  mind,  let  us  ask  what  situation  must
a  person  be  in,  in  order  to  be  saved?  or  what  is  the
difference  between  a  saved  man  and  one  who  is  not
saved?  We  answer  from  what  we  have  before  seen
of  the  heavenly  worlds,  they  must  be  persons  who
can  work  by  faith,  and  who  are  able,  by  faith  to  be
ministering  spirits  to  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  sal¬
vation.  And  they  must  have  faith  to  enable  them  to
act  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  otherwise  they  can¬
not  be  saved.  And  what  constitutes  the  real  differ¬
ence  between  a  saved  person  and  one  not  saved,  is
the  difference  in  the  degree  of  their  faith:  one’s  faith
has  become  perfeet  enough  to  lay  hold  upon  eternal
life,  and  the  other’s  has  not.  But  to  be  a  little  more
particular,  let  us  ask,  where  shall  we  find  a  prototype
into  whose  likeness  we  may  be  assimulated,  in  order
that  we  may  be  made  partakers  of  life  and  salvation?
or  in  other  words,  where  shall  we  find  a  saved  being?
for  if  we  can  find  a  saved  being,  we  may  ascertain,
without  much  difficulty,  what  all  others  must  be,  in
order  to  be  saved —  they  must  be  like  that  individual
or  they  cannot  be  saved:  we  think,  that  it  will  not  be
a  matter  of  dispute,  that  two  beings,  who  are  unlike
each  other,  cannot  both  be  saved;  for  whatever  con¬
stitutes  the  salvation  of  one,  will  constitute  the  salva¬
tion  of  every  creature  which  will  be  saved:  and  if
we  find  one  saved  being  in  all  existance,  we  may  see
what  all  others  must  be,  or  else  not  be  saved.  We
ask,  then,  where  is  the  prototype?  or  where  is  the
saved  being?  We  conclude  as  to  the  answer  of  this
question  there  will  be  no  dispute  among  those  who  be¬
lieve  the  bible,  that  it  is  Christ:  all  will  agree  in  this
that  he  is  the  prototype  or  standard  of  salvation,  or
in  other  words,  that  he  is  a  saved  being.  And  if  we
should  continue  our  interogation,  and  ask  how  it  is
that  he  is  saved,  the  answer  would  be,  because  he  is


67


a  just  and  holy  being;  and  if  he  were  any  thing
different  from  what  he  is  he  would  not  be  saved;  for
his  salvation  depends  on  his  being  precisely  what  he
is  and  nothing  else;  for  if  it  were  possible  for  him
to  change  in  the  least  degree,  so  sure  he  would  tail
of  salvation  and  lose  all  his  dominion,  power,  author¬
ity  and  glory,  which  constitutes  salvation;  for  salva¬
tion  consists  in  the  glory,  authority,  majesty,  power
and  dominion  which  Jehovah  possesses,  and  in  no¬
thing  else;  and  no  being  can  possess  it  but  himself  or
one  like  him:  Thus  says  John,  in  his  first  epistle,  3:2
and  3:  Behold,  now  we  are  the  sons  of  God,  and  it
doth  not  appear  what  we  shall  be; but  we  know,  that
when  he  shall  appear  we  shall  belike  him;  for  we
shall  see  him  as  he  is.  And  any  man  that  has  this
hope  in  him  purifies  himself,  even  as  he  is  pure. —
Why  purify  himself  as  he  is  pure?  because,  if  they
do  not  they  cannot  be  like  him.

10  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Leviticus,  18:2: — '
Speak  unto  all  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Is¬
rael,  and  say  unto  them,  Ye  shall  be  holy:  for  I  the
Lord  your  God  am  holy.  And  Peter  says,  first  epis¬
tle,  1:15  and  16:  But  as  he  wbo  has  called  you  Is  ho¬
ly,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation;  be¬
cause  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy;  for  I  am  holy.  And
the  Savior  says,  Matthew,  15:48:  Be  ye  perfect,
even  as  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven  is  perfect.  If
any  should  ask,  why  all  these  sayings?  the  answer  is
to  be  found  from  what  is  before  quoted  from  John’s
epistle,  that  when  he  (the  Lord)  shall  appear,  the
saints  will  be  like  him:  and  if  they  are  not  holy,  as
he  is  holy,  and  perfect  as  he  is  perfect,  they  cannot
be  like  him;  for  no  being  can  enjoy  his  glory  without
possessing  his  perfections  and  holiness,  no  more  than
they  could  reign  in  his  kingdom  without  his  power.

11  This  clearly  sets  forth  the  propriety  of  the  Sav-


ip  essaying,  recorded  in  John's  testimony,  4:12:  Ver¬
ily,  verily  1  say  unto  you,  he  that  believeth  on  me,
thy  vvork'3-  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also;  and  greater
works  than  theao,  because.  I  go  unto  the  Father- —
Tins  taken  in  connection  with  .some  of.  the  sayings  in
the  Saviors  prayer,  recorded  in  the  17th  chapter,
gives  great  dearness  to  his  expressions:  He  says,  in
the  20,21,  22,23,  and  24:  Neither  pray  1  for  these
alone;  but  for  them  also  who  shall  believe  on  me
through  their  words;  that  they  all  may  be  one,  as
thou.  Father,  art  in  me, , and  I  in  theft;  that  they  also
may  he  one  iu  us:  that  the  world  may  believe  that
thou  hast  sent. me.:  And  the  glory  which  thou.gavest
me,  1  have  gtveil  them,  that  they  may  be  one,  even
as  wc  are  one;  I  in  them,  and  th  a:  in  me,- that  they
may  be  made  perfect  in  one;  and  that  the  world  may
know  that  thou  hart  sent  me,  and  hast  loved  them  as
thou  hast  loved  me.  Father,  I  will  that  they  also
whom  thou  hast  given  me  be  with  mo  where  1  am:
that  they  may  behold  my  glory  which  thou. hast  given
me;  for  thou  loved'est  me  before  the.  foundation  of  the
world.

J2  All  these  saying  pvt  together,  five  ascU-ar  an  ac¬
count-  of  the  stale  of  the  glorified-  faints  as  language
could  give — The i works  that  Jesus  done  they  were  to
do,  and  greater  works  titan  those  which  lie  done
among  them  should  vtbev  do,  and  that  because  he  went
fp:  tho  Father.  IJo  does  not  say  that  they  should- do
ihesp  works  id  time;  but; they  should  do. greater  works
boepuso  he  went  to  the*  Father.  lie  says,  in  t  he  24th
vopse:  Father,  I  will  that  they  also  whom  thou  hast
given  me,  be  with  me  whore  I- am;  that  they  may
Ixhold  my  glory.  These  sayings,  taken  in  connec¬
tion,  make  it  very  plain,  that  the  greater  works,  which
those  that  believed  on  his  name,  were  to  do,  were  to;
I*,  done  in  eternity,  where  lie  was  going,  and  where
they  should  behold  his  glory.  He  had  said,  in  an-


other  part  of  hid  prayer,  that  he  .desired  of  his  Fath¬
er,  that  those,  who  believed  on, him  should  be  one  in
him, .as, ho,  and  the  Father,  were. one  in  each  other;
Neither: pray  1  for  these  (the  apostles)  alone,  but  for
them  also  who  shall  believe  on  nle  through  their
words;  that  they  all  niay  bo  one:  that:  is,  they  who
behove  on  him  through  thoapogdes’  words,  as  well  as
the. apostles  themselves:  that  they: all  may  be  one* as
tliou,  Father,  art  hi  me  and  I  in  tlioe:  .that  they  .also
may  be  one  in  us.  .  .  .

13  What  language  can  be  plainer  than  this?  The
Savior  surely  intended  to  he  understood  by  his  dis¬
ciples:  and  ho  so  spake  that  .they  plight  understand
him;  for  he  declares  to-his  Father,  in  language  not
to-be  easily  mistaken,  that  he  wanted  his  discipjes,
even  all  of  them,  to, he  asdiimself  and  the  Father:  for
as. he  and  the  Father  wore  one,  so  they  might  beoue
with  them.  And  what  is  said  in  the  22nd  verse  is
calculated  to  morp  firmly  establish  this  belief,  if  it
needs  any  thing- to -establish  it.  He  says,  And  the
glory  .which, thou  gavest  me,  I  have  .given  them,  that;
they  may  be. one,  even  as  wo  are  one.  As  much  as
to  say,  that  unless  they  have  .the  glory  which  the
Father  had  given  him,  they  could  not  be  one  with
them:  For  lie  says  ho  had  given  them  the  glory  that
the  Father  had  given  him,  that  they  might  be  one;  or
in  other  wdrds,  to  make  them  one.

14  This  tills  up  tiro  measure  of  information  on  thi|
subject,  and  shows  most  clearly,  that  the  Savior  wish*
ed  his  disciples  to  understand,  that  they  were  to  b<)
partakers  with  him  in  all  things:  not  even  bis ,g!ot
ry  excepted.

15  It  is  scarcely  necessary  here  to  observe  what
have  previously  noticed:  That  the  glory  which  thd
Father  and  the  Son  have,  is  because  they  are  jus^
and  holy  beings;  and  that  if  they  were  lack'
>ng  in  one  attribute  or  perfection  which  they  hare*


70


the  glory  which  they  have,  never  could  be  enjoyed
by  them;  for  it  requires  them  to  be  precisely  what
they  are  in  order  to  enjoy  it:  and  if  the  Savior  gives
this  glory  to  any  others,  he  must  do  it  in  the  very
way  set  forth  in  his  prayer  to  his  Father:  by  making
them  one  with  him,  as  he  and  the  Father  are  one. —
In  so  doing  he  would  give  them  the  glory  which  the
Father  has  given  him;  and  when  his  disciples  are
made  one  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  as  the  Father
and  the  Son  are  one,  who  cannot  see  the  propriety  of
the  Savior’s  saying,  The  works  whichJI  do,  shall  they
do;  and  greater  works  than  these  shall  they  do,  be
cause  I  go  to  the  Father?

16  These  teachings  of  the  Savior  most  clearly  show
unto  us, the  nature  of  salvation;  and  what  he  propos¬
ed  unto  the  human  family  when  he  proposed  to  save
them — That  he  proposed  to  make  them  like  unto  him¬
self;  and  he  was  like  the  Father,  the  great  prototype
of  all  saved  beings:  And  for  any  portion  of  the  hu¬
man  family  to  be  assimulated  into  their  likeness  is  to
be  saved;  and  to  be  unlike  them  is  to  be  destroyed:
and  on  this  hinge  turns  the  door  of  salvation.

17  Who  cannot  see,  then,  that  salvation  is  the  ef¬
fect  of  faith?  for  as  we  have  previously  observed,  all
the  heavenly  beings  work  by  this  principle;  and  it  is
because  they  are  able  so  to.  do  that  they  are  saved:
for  nothing  but  this  could  save  them.  And  this  is  the
lesson  which  the  God  of  heaven,  by  the  mouth  of  all
his  holy  prophets,  has  been  endeavoring  to  teach  to
the  world.  Hence  we  arc  told,  that  without  faith  it
is  impossible  to  please  God;  and  that  salvation  is  of
faith,  that  it  might  be  by  grace  to  the  end,  the  prom¬
ise  might  be  sure  to  all  the  seed.  Romans  4:16. —
And  that  Israel,  who  followed  after  the  law  of  right¬
eousness,  has  not  attained  to  the  law  of  righteous¬
ness.  Wherefore?  because  they  sought  it  not  by
faith,  but  as  it  were  by  the  works  of  the  law;  for


71


they  stumbled  at  that  stumbling  stone.  Romans  9:32.
And  Jesus  said  unto  the  man  who  brought  his  son  to
him,  to  get  the  devil  who  tormented  him,  cast  out,  If
thou  canst  believe,  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that
belie veth.  Mark,  9:23.  These  with  a  multitude  of
other  scriptures,  which  might  be  quoted,  plainly  set
forth  the  light,  in  which  the  Savior,  as  well  as  the
Former  Day  Saints,  viewed  the  plan  of  salvation. —
That ,  it  was  a  system  of  failh — it  begins  with  faith,
and  continues  by  faith;  and  every  blessing  which  is
obtained,  in  relation  to  it,  is  the  effect  of  faith,  wheth¬
er  it  pertains  to  this  life  or  that  which  is  to  come. —
To  this,  all  the  revelations  of  God  bear  witness.  If
there  were  children  of  promise,  they  were  the  effects
of  faith:  not  even  the  Savior  of  the  world  excepted:
Blessed  is  she  that  believed,  said  Elizabeth  to  Mary,
when  she  went  to  visit  her; — for  there  shall  be  a  per¬
formance  of  the  things  which  were  told  her  of  the
Lord;  Luke,  1:45:  Nor  was  the  birth  of  John  the
baptist  the  less  a  matter  of  faith;  for  in  order  that  his
father  Zacharias  might  believe  he  was  struck  dumb.
And  through  the  whole  history  of  the  scheme  of  life
and  salvation,  it  is  a  matter  of  faith:  every  man  re¬
ceived  according  to  his  faith:  according  as  his  faith
was,  so  were  his  blessings  and  privileges;  and  no¬
thing  was  withheld  from  him  when  his  faith  was  suf¬
ficient  to  receive  it.  He  could  stop  the  mouths  of  li¬
ons,  quench  the  violence  of  fire,  escape  the  edge  of
the  sword,  wax  valiant  in  fight,  and  put  to  flight  the
armies  of  the  aliens;  women  could,  by  their  faith,
receive  the  dead  children  to  life  again:  in  a  word,
there  was  nothing  impossible  with  them  who  had
faith.  All  things  were  in  subjection  t©  the  Former
Day  Saints,  according  as  their  faith  was — By  their
faith  they  could  obtain  heavenly  visions,  the  minister¬
ing  of  angels,  have  knowledge  of  the  spirits  of  just
men  made  perfect,  of  the  general  assembly  and  church


72

of  the  Jirst  born,  whose  names  arc  written  in  heavcity
of  God  the  judge  of  all,  of  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the
new.cqveuant,  and  become  familiar  with  the  third
heavens^  see  and  hear,  things  which  were  not  only  un»
utto  fable,  but  were  unlawful  to  .utter.  Peter,  in  view  of
the  power  of  faith,  2nd  epistle,  1:1, 2. and  3  says,  to  the
Former  Day  .Saints:  grace  and  peace  l>e  multiplied
unto  you,,  through  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  Je¬
sus  our  Lord,  .according  as  his  divine  power  hatij
given  unto  us,  all  things  that  pertain  unto  life  and
godliness,  thrqugh  the  knowledge  of  him  that  has -call
cd  us  unto, glory  and  virtue,  in  the  first  epistle,  1:3,
1  and  5  he  says,  Blessed  .hp  the  God  and  Father  of
o.ur  Lord  Jesus  Cl,irist,  who  accor.ding.to  his  abundant
mercy,  has  begotten  u.s  again  unto  a  lively  hope  by
the  resurrection  of  Josus  Christ  from  the  dead,  to  an
inheritance  incorruptible  and  undefiled,  and  that
fadeth  not  away,  reserved  in  heaven  for  you,  who
are  kept  by  the.  power  of  God  through  faith  unto  sal*
vation,  ready  to, bp  revealed  in  the  last  time.

16  These  sayings  put  together,  show  the  Apostle’s
views,  most  clearly,  so  as  to  admit  of  no  mistake  on
the  mind  of  any  individual.  Lie  says  that  all  things
that  pertain  .to  life.and  godliness  were  given  unto  them
through  tire  knowledge  of  God  and  our  Savior  Jesus
Christ.  And  if  the  question  is  asked,  how  were  they
to  obtain  the  knowledge  of  God?  (for  there  is  a  great
difference  between  believing  in  God  and  knowing
him:  knowledge  implies  .more  than  faith.  And  no¬
tice,  that  all  things  that  pertain  to  life  and  godliness,
were  given  through  the  knowledge  of  God;)  the  an¬
swer  is  given,  through  laith  they  were  to  obtain  this
knowledge;  and  having  power  by  faith  to  obtain  thq
knowledge  of  God,  they  could  with  it  obtain  all  other
things  which  pertain  to  life  and  godliness.

17  By  these  sayings  of  the  Apostle  we  learn,  that  ifi
was  by  obtaining  a  knowledge  of  God,  that  men  go{


73


the  alt  tiling?  which  pertain  to  life  and  godliness;  and
this  •knowledge  was  the  effect  of  faith.  So  that  all
thing;  which  pertain  to  life  and  godliness  are  the  ef¬
fects  of  faith.

18  From  this  we  may  extend1  as  far  as  any  circum¬
stances  miy  require  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven,
and  \Vo  •will  find  it  the'  testimony  of  all  inspired  men,
or  heavenly  messengers,  that  all  things  that  pertain
to  life  and  godliness  are  the  effects  of  faith  and  no¬
thing  else:  all  learning,  wisdom,  and  prudence  fail,
and  every  thing  else  as  a  means  of  salvation  but  faith.
This  is  the  reason  that  the  fishermen  of  Gallilec  could
tench  the  world — because  they  sought  by  fuitji  and
by  faith  obtained.  And  this  is  the  reason  that  Paul
counted  all  things  but  filth  and  dross — what  he  for¬
merly  called  his  gain  ho  called  his  loss;  yea,  and  he
counted  all  tiling;  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesuj  the  Lord.  Philipians  3:
7,  8,  9  &  19.  Because,  to  obtain  the  faith  by  which
he  could  enjoy  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  the
Lord,  he  had  to  suffer  the  loss  of  all  things:  this  is
the  reason  that  the  Former  Day  Saints  knew  more,
and  understood  more  of  heaven,  and  of  heavenly  things
than  all  others  beside,  because  this  information  is
the  effect  of  faith — to  be  obtained  by  no  other  means.
And  this  is  the  reason,  that  men,  as  soon  as  they  lose
their  faith,  run  into  strifes,  contentions,  darkness  and
difficulties;  for  the  knowledge  which  tends  to  life  dis¬
appears  with  faith,  but  returns  when  faith  returns;
[or  when  faith  comes,  it  brings  its  train  of  attendants
vith  it — apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,  teach¬
ers,  gifts,  wisdom,  knowledge,  miracles,  healings,
iengues,  interpretation  of  tongues,  &c.  All  these  ap¬
pear  when  faith  appears  on  the  earth,  and  disappear
yhen  it  disappears  from  the  earth.  For  these  are  the
meets  of  faith  and  always  have,  and  always  will  at¬
tend  it.  For  where  faith  is,  there  will  the  knowledge


74


o T  God  bo  also,  with  all  things  which  pertain  thereto —
revelations,  visions,  and  dreams,  as  well  as  every  oth¬
er  necessary  thing  in  order  that  the  possessors  of  faith
may  be  perfected  and  obtain  salvation;  for  God  must
change,  otherwise  faith  will  prevail  with  him.  And
he  who  possesses  it  will,  through  it,  obtain  all  neces¬
sary  knowledge  and  wisdom,  until  he  shall  know  God,
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he  has  sent:  whom
to  know  is  eternal  life:  Amen.


PART  SECOND.

COVENANTS  AND  COMMANDMENTS

OF  THE  LORD,

to  liia  servants  of  the  church  of  the

LATTER  bAY  SAINTS.

SECTION  I.

1  Hearken,  O  ye  people  of  my  church,  saith  the  voice  of  him
Who  dwells  on  high,  and  whose  eyes  are  upon  all  men;  yea,  ve¬
rily  I  say,  hearken  ye  people  from  afar,  and  ye  that  are  upon
the  islands  of  the  sea,  listen  together;  for  verily  the  voice  of
the  Lord  is  unto  all  men,  and  there  is  none  to  escape,  and
there  is  no  eye  that  shall  not  see,  neither  ear  that  shall  not
hear,  neither  heart  that  shall  not  be  penetrated:  and  the  rebel¬
lious  shall  be  pierced  with  much  sorrow,  for  their  iniquities
shalljbe  spoken  upon  the  house-tops,  and  their  secret  acts  shall
be  revealed;  and  the  voice  of  warning  shall  be  unto  all  people,
by  the  mouths  of  my  disciples,  whom  I  have  chosen  in  these
last  days,  and  they  shall  go  forth  and  none  shall  stay  them,  for
I  the  Lord  have  commanded  them.

2  Behold,  this  is  mine  authority,  and  the  authority  of  my
servants,  and  my  preface  unto  the  book  of  my  commandments,,
which  I  have  given  them  to  publish  unto  you  O  inhabitants-  of
the  earth:  wherefore  fear  and  tremble,  O  ye  people,  for  what  I
the  Lord  have  decreed,  in  them,  shall  be  fulfilled.  And  verily,
I  say  unto  you,  that  they  who  go  forth,  bearing  these  tidings
unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  to  them  is  power  given  to
seal  both  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  the  unbelieving  and  rebel¬
lious;  yea,  verily,  to  seal  them  up  unto  the  day  when  the  wrath
of  God  shall  be  poured  out  upon  the  wicked  without  measure:
unto  the  day  when  the  Lord  shall  come  to  recompense  unto
every  man  according  to  his  work,  and  measure  to  every  man
according  to  the  measure  which  he  has  measured  to  his  fellow

•?  Wherefore  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  unto  the  ends  of  the
&rth,  that  all  that  will  hear  may  hear:  prepare  ye,  prepare  ye


76

for  that  which  is  to  com;,  for  the  Lord  is  nigh;  and  the  anger
of  the  Lord  is  kindled,  and  his  sword  is  bathed  in  heaven,  and
it  shall  fall  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth;  and  the  arm  of
the  Lord  shall  be  revqaled;  and  the  day  cometh,  that  they  who
will  not  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord/neither  the  voice  of  his  ser¬
vants,  neither  give  heed  to  the  words  of  the  prophets,  anil
apostles,  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  the  people:  for  they  have
strayed  from  mjnc  ordinances,  and  have  broken  mine  everlas¬
ting  covenant;  they  . seek  not  the  Lc rd  , to  establish  his  right¬
eousness,  but  every  mail  walkcth' in  hits  own  way,  and  alter
the  imago  of  his  own  god,  whose  image  is  in  the  likeness  of  the
world,  and  whose  substance  -is  that  of  an  idol,  which  waxeth
old  and  shall  perish  in  Babylon,  even  Babylon  the  great,  which
shall  fail:

4  Wherefore  I  the  Lord,  knowing  the  calamity  which  should
come  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  called  upon  my  servan;
Joseph  Smith  jr.  and  spake  unto  him  from  heaven,  anu  gav  .
him  commandments;  and  also  gave  eppimandments  to  others,
that  they  should  proclaim  these  things  unto  the  world;  and  ai*
this  that  it  might  bo  fuliille  l,  which  was  .written  by  the  propli;
•ets:  the  weak  things  cf  the  world  shall  gome  forth  a,nd  break
■dow-o  th  e  mighty  aud  strong  ones,  that  man  should  not ,'coun
sel  his  fellow  man,  neither  trust  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  but  tha*
every  man  might  speak  in  the  name  of  Gcd,  the  Lord,  even
the  Savior  of  the  world;,  that  ihith  also  might  increase  in  the
earth;  that  mine  everlasting  covenant  might  bo  established-
that  the  fulness  of  my  gospel  might  bo  proclaimed  by  the  weal!
and  the  simple,  unto  tho  ends  of  the  world,  and  before  king
and  rulers.

5  Behold  I  am  God  and  have  spoken  it:  .these  commandment:
are  of  me,  and  were  given  uni,3,my  servants  in  their  weakness,
after  the  manner  of  their  language,  that  they  might  come  to
understanding;  and  inasmuch  as  they  erred  it  might  be  mad  i
known:  an  1  inasmuch  a  s  they  sought  wisdom,  they  might  be
instructed:  and  inasmuch  as  they  sinned  they  might  be  chan*
teaeil,  that  they  might  repent;  and  inasmuch  as  they  were
humble,  they -might  be  mad  :  strong,  and  blessed  from  on  high,
and  receive  knowledge  from  time  to  time:  aud  after  having  re.
cerved  the  record  of  ihe  Nephites,.  yea,  even  my  servant  Joseph
Smith  jr.  might  have  power  to  translate  through  the  mercy  oj
God,  by  the  power  of  God,  the  hook  of  Mormon:  and  alsoj
those  to  whom  these  commandments  were  given,  might  hav.i
power  to  lay  the  foundation  of  this  church,  and  to  bring  it  fortil
out  of  obscurity,  and  out  of  darkness,  the  only  true  and  livini
church  upon  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  with  which  I  thff
Lord  am  well  pleased,  speaking  unto  the  church  collective*


77

and  not  individually;  for  I  the  .Lord  cannot  look  upon  sin  with
the  least  degree  of  allowance:  nevertheless,  he  that  repents
and  does  the  commandments  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  forgiven,
and  he  that  repents  .not,  front  him  shall  be',  taken  even  the  light
which  lie  has  received,  for  my  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive
with  iaan,.saitb  the  Lord  ofkosls.

G  And.ftg,ain,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  O  inhabitants  of  the
<*rth,  1  the  Lord  am  willing  to  make' lliesej.lhings  known  un¬
to  all, flesh,  for  I  am  no  respecter  of  persons,  end  willeth  that
all  men  shall  know  that  the  day  speedily  oomelk,  the  hour  is
npt  yet,  hut  is  nigh  at  hand,  when  peace  shall  be  taken  from
the  earth,  and  the  devil  shall  have  power  cvpr  his  own  domin¬
ion;  and  also,.  4he  Lord  stall  Lava  power  pyer  liis  saints,  and
shall  reign  in  their  midst,  and  shall  come  down  in  judgment
upon  Idumea,  or  the. world.  ,

7  Search  these  cornjnanflojents,  fer  they  are  true  and  faith¬
ful.  and  the  prophecies  and  promises  which  are  in  them  shall
nil  he  fulfilled.  *  '  ,  .  .  "

8 .  What  I. the  Lord  have  epolfen,.  I  have  sporea,  and  I  excuse
not  myself,  curd  though  the  heavens  end  the  earth  pass  away,
lay  word  shall  not, pars  away,  but.shall'all  be  fulfilled,  wheth¬
er  by  mine  own  voice,  or  by  the  voice  of  my  servants,  it  is  the
same:  for  heboid,  and  to,  the  Lord.is  God,  and  the  Spirit  bear*
eth.reqord;  and  the,  record  is.,tru?,.and  the  truth, abideth  forev¬
er  and  ever:  Amen..  ,

.  '  7  LCCTJGN  n.

/ \  The  rise  of  the  church  of  Christ  in  the.  c  last  days,  being
cn«  thou.-:  1  rig!.!  hundred  and  thirty  years  since  the  com¬
ing  of  our  lyord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ  in  the  flesh,  it  being
regularly  organised  and  established  agreeably  to  the  laws  of
our  country,  by  the  will  arid  commandments  of  God  in  the
fourth  month,  and  cn  the  sixth,  day  of  the  month  which  is
o  all  yd  April:  V which  commandments  were  given. to  Joseph
Smith  jr.  who*  was  called  of  Go!  and  ordained  an  apostle  of
Jesus  Christ,  to  bo  the  first  elder  of  this  church;  arid  to  Oliver
Cewiery,  who  was  also  called  cf  God  an  apostle  of  Jesus
Christ,  to  bo  the  second  elder  of  tliis  church,  and  ordained  un¬
der  his  hand:  and  this  according  to  the  grace  of  our  Lord  and
Savior  Jesas  Christ,  to  whom  be  all  glory  both  now  and  for¬
ever.  Amen.

2  After  it,  was  truly  manifested  unto  this  first  elder  that  lie
had  received  a  remission  of  his  tins  he  was  entangled  again  in
the  vanities  of  the  world:  but  alter  repenting,  and  humbling
himself,  sincerely,  through  faith  God  ministered  unto  him  by


78


an  holy  angel  whose  countenance  was  as  lightning,  and  whose
garments  were  pure  and  white  above  all  other  whiteness,  and
gave  unto  him  conmandments  which  inspired  him,  and  gave
him  power  from  on  high,  by  the  means  which  were  before  pre¬
pared,  to  translate  the  book  of  Mormon,  which  contains  a  rec¬
ord  of  a  fallen  people,  and  the  fulness  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus
Christ  to  the  Gentiles,  and  to  the  Jews  also,  which  was  given
by  inspiration,  and  is  confirmed  to  others  by  the  ministering
of  angels,  and  is  declared  unto,  the  world  by  them,  proving  to
the  world  that  the  holy  scriptures  are  true,  and  that  God  does
inspire  men  and  call  them  to  his  holy  work  in  this  age  and
generation,  as  well  as  in  generations  of  old,  thereby  showing
that  he  is  the  same  God  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever. —
Amen.

3  Therefore,  having  so  great  witnesses,  by  them  shall  the
world  be  judged,  even  as  many  as  shall  hereafter  come  to  a
knowledge  of  this  work;  and  those  who  receive  it  in  faith  and
work  righteousness,  shall  receive  a  crown  of  eternal  life;  but
those  who  harden  their  hearts  in  unbelief  and  reject  it,  it  shall
turn  to  their  own  condemnation,  for  the  Lord  God  has  spoken
it;  and  we,  the  elders  of  the  church,  have  heard  and  bear  wit¬
ness  to  the  words  of  the  glorious  Majesty  on  high,  to  whom  be
glory  forever  and  ever.  Amen.

4  By  these  things  we  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  heaven
who  is  infinite  and  eternal,  from  everlasting  to  everlasting  the
same  unchangeable  God,  the  frainer  of  heaven  and  earth  and  all
things  which  are  in  them,  and  that  he  created  man  male  and
female;  after  his  own  image  and  in  his  own  likeness  created,
he  them,  and  gave  unto  them  commandments  that  they  should  \
love  and  serve  him  the  only  living  and  true  God,  and  that  he
should  be  the  only  being  whom  they  should  worship.  But  by
the  transgression  of  these  holy  laws,  man  became  sensual  and
devilish,  and  became  fallen  man.

5  Wherefore  the  Almighty  God  gave  his  only  begotten  Son.
as  it  is  written  in  those  scriptures  which  have  Jjeen  given  of
him;  he  suffered  temptations  but  gave  no  heed  unto  them;  he
was  crucified,  died,  and  rose  again  the  third  day ;  and  ascend¬
ed  into  heaven  to  sit  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  to
reign  with  almighty  power  according  to  the  will  of  the  Father,
that  as  many  as  would  believe  and  be  baptized,  in  his  holy
name,  and  endure  in  faith  to  the  end  should  be  saved:  not  on¬
ly  those  who  believed  after  he  came  in  the  meridian  of  time  in
the  flesh,  but  all  those  from  the  beginning,  even  as  many  as
were  before  he  came,  who  believed  in  the  words  of  the  holy
prophets,  who  spake  as  they  were  inspired  by  the  gift  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  who  truly  testified  of  him  in  all  things,  should


have  eternal  life,  as  well  as  those  who  should  come  after,  who
should  believe  in  the  gifts  and  callings  of  God  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  beareth  record  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,
which  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  are  one  God,  infinite  and
eternal,  without  end.  Amen.

6  And  we  know  that  all  men  must  repent  and  believe  on  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ  and  worship  the  Father  in  his  name,  and
endure  in  faith  on  his  name  to  the  end,  or  they  cannot  be  sa¬
ved  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  we  know  that  justification
through  the  grace  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  is  just
and  true:  and  we  know,  also,  that  sanctification  through  the
grace  of  our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ,  is  just  and  true,  to
all  those  who  love  and  serve  God  with  all  their  mights,  minds,
and  strength;  but  there  is  a  possibility  that  man  may  fell  from
grace  and  depart  from  the  living  God.  Therefore  let  the  church
take  heed  and  pray  always,  lest  they  fell  into  temptations;
yea,  and  even  let  those  who  are  sanctified,  take  heed  also. —
And  we  know  that  these  things  are  true  and  according  to  the
revelations  of  John,  neither  adding  to,  nor  diminishing  from
the  prophecy  of  his  book,  the  holy  scriptures,  or  the  revelations
of  God  which  shall  come  hereafter  by  the  gill  and  power  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  voice  of  God,  or  the  ministering  of  an¬
gels:  and  the  Lord  God  has  spoken  it;  and  honor,  power,  and
glory,  be  rendered  to  his  holy  name,  both  now  and  ever. —

7  And  again  by  way  of  commandment  to  the  church  concerning
the  manner  of  baptism.

"jr-  All  those  who  humble  themselves  before  God  and  desire  to
be  baptized,  and  come  forth  with  broken  hearts  and  contrite-
spirits,  and  witness  before  the  church  that  they  have  truly  re¬
pented  of  all  their  sins  and  are  willing  to  take  upon  them  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ,  having  a  determination  to  serve  him  to
the  end,  and  truly  manifest  by  their  works  that  they  have  re¬
ceived  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ  unto  the  remission  of  their  sins,
shall  be  received  by  baptism  into  his  church,

8  The  duty  of  the  elders,  priests,  teachers,  deacons,  and  mem¬
bers  of  the  church  of  Christ.

An  apostle  is  an  elder,  and  it  is  his  calling  to  baptize,  and
to  ordain  other  elders,  priests,  teachers,  and  deacons,  and  to
administer  bread  and  wine — the  emblems  of  the  flesh  and  blood
of  Christ — and  to  confirm  those  who  are  baptized  into  the
church,  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  for  the  baptism  of  fire  and
the  Holy  Ghost,  according  to  the  scriptures;  and  to  teach,
expound  exhort,  baptize,  and  watch  over  the  church;  and  to
confirm  the  church  by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands,  and  the  giv¬
ing  of  the  Holy  Ghost — and  to  take  the  lead  of  all  meetings.


00


0  The  elders  are  to  conduct  the  westings  os  they  ere  I  d  by
the  Holy  Ghost,  according  to  the  commandments  and  revela¬
tions  of  God.

10  The  priests  duty  is  to  preach,  teach,  expound,  ejchorl,
vnd  baptize,  and  administer  the  sacrament,  and  visit  the  house
it  each  member,  and  exhort  them  to  pray  . vocally  and  in  se¬
cret,  and  attend  to  all  family  duties  and  he  may  also  ordain
ither  priests^  teachers,  and  deacons — and  he  is  to  take  the
iad  of  meetings  when  there  is  no  eider  present,  but  when
here  is  an  elder  present  he  is  only  to  preach,  teach,  expound,
ixhort,  and  baptize,  and  visit  the  houqe  of  each  member,  ex¬
horting  them  to  pray  vocally  and  in  secret,  and  attend  to  all
family  duties.  In  all  these  duties  the  priest  is  Ip,  assist  the  el¬
der  if  occasion  requires.

11  The  teacher’s  duty  is  to  watch  over .  the  church  always,
and  be  with,  and  strengthen  them,  and  see  that  there  is  no  in¬
iquity  in  the  church,  neither  hardness  with  each  other;  neith¬
er  lying,  backbiting,  nor  evil  speaking;  and  see  tkat  the
church  meet  together  often,  and  also  see  dial  all  the  members
do  their  duty — and  he  is  to  take  .the  lead  of  meetings  in  the
absence  cf  the  elder  or.  priest — and, is  t>  be  .assisted  alwsjs.
in  all  his  duties  in  the  church,  by  the  deacons,  if  occasion  re¬
quires;  but  neither  teasers  nor  deacons  have  authority  to
baptize,  administer  the  sacrament,  or  lay  on  hands;  they  are
however  to  warn,  expound,  exhort,  and  teach,  and  invite  ail
to  come  unto  Christ.

12  Every  elder,  priest,  teacher,  or  deacon,  is  to  be  erdained
according  to  the  gifts  and  callings  of  God  unto  him :  and  he  is
to  be  ordained  by  the, power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  in  the
one  who  ordains  him.

13  The  several  elders  composing  this  church  of  Christ  are  to
Kieet  in  conference  oijce  in  three  months,  or  from  time  to  time,
as  said  conferences  shall  direct  or  appoint:  and  said  conferen¬
ces  are  to  do  whatever  church  business  is  necessary  to  be  done
at  the  time.  Jr

14  The  elders  are  to  receive  their  licences  from  other  elders
by  vote  of  the  church  to  which  they  belong,  or  from  the  con¬
ferences.

15  Each  priest,  teacher,  or  deacon,  who  is  ordained  by  a
priest,  may  take  a  certificate  from  him  at  the  time,  which  cer¬
tificate  whan  presented  to  an  elder,  shall  entitle  Mm  to  a  li¬
cense,  whieh  shall  authorize  him  to  perform  the  duties  of  his
calling — or  he  may  receive  it  from  a  conference.

16  No  person  is  to  be  ordained  to  any  office  in  this  church,
where  there  is  a  regularly  organized  branch  of  the  same,  with¬
out  the  vote  of  that  church;  but  the  presiding  ciders,  travel-


ting  bishops,  high  counsellors,  high  priests,  and  elders,  mtfy
have  the  privilege  of  ordaining,  where  there  is  no  branch  of
the  churcl),  that  a  vote  may  be  called.

17  Every  president  of  the  high  priesthood,  (or  presiding  el-
der,)  bishop,  high  counsellor,  and  high  priest,  is  to  be  ordained
by  the  direction  of  a  high  counsel,  or  general  conference.

18  ,  The  duty  of  the  members  after  they  arc  received  by  baptism :

19  The  elders  or  priests  are  to  have  a  sufficient  time  to  ex¬
pound  all  things  concerning  the  church  of  Christ  to  their  un¬
derstanding,  previous  to  their  partaking  of  the  sacrament,  and
being  coniirmed  by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the  elders:
so  that  all  things  may  >be  done  in  order.  And  the  member:
shall  manifest  before  the  church  and  also  before  the  elders,  by
u  godly  walk  and  conversation,  that  they  are  worthy  of  it_-
that  there  may  be  works  and  faitli  agreeable  to  the  holy  scrip-
tyres — walking  in  holiness  before  the  Lord.

29  Every  member  of  the  church  of  Christ  having  children,  is
to  bring  them  unto  the  elders  before  the  church,  who  are  to
day  their  hands  upon  them  in  the  name  of  JesUs  Christ,  and
■bless  them  in  his  name.

>  21  No  one  can  be  received  into  the  church  of  Christ  unless  he
riias  arrived  unto  the  years  of  accountability  before  God,  and  is
capable  of  repentance.

22  Baptism  is  to  be  administered  in  "the  following  manner
tmto  all  those  who  repent:  The  person  who  is  called  of  God
and  has  authority  from  Jesus  Christ  to  baptize,  shall  go  down
into  the  water  with  the  person  who  has  presented  him  or  herself
fot, baptism,  and  shall  say,  calling  him  or  her  by  name:  Having
jbeen  commissioned  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  baptize  you  in  the  name
«f  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Amen.
Then  shall  he  immerse  him  or  her  in  the  water,  and  come  forth
again  out  of  the  water.

23  It  is  expedient  that  the  church  meet  together  often  to  par¬
take  of  bread  and  wine  in  remembrance  of  the  Lord  Jesus:  and
the  elder  or  priest  shall  administer  it:  and  after  this  manner
qhatl  he  administer  it:  he  shall  kneel  with  the  church  and  call
upon  the  Father  in  solemn  prayer,  saying,  O  God,  the  eternal
Father,  we  ask  thee  in  the  name  of  thy  Son  Jesu  Christ  t
bless  and  sanctify  this  bread  to  the  souls  of  all  those  who  par¬
take  of  it,  that  they  may  eat  in  remembrance  of  the  body  of
thy  Son,  and  witness  unto  thee  O  God,  the  eternal  Father,
that  they  are  willing  to  take  upon  them  the  nanje  of  thy  Son,
and  always  remember  him  and  keep  his  commandments  which
he  has  given  them,  that  they  may  always  have  his  Spirit  to  be
with  them.  Amen.


89


84  The  manner  of  administering  the  wine:  He  shail  take  thtf
Cup  also,  and  say,  O  God,  the  eternal  Father,  we  ask  thee  in  thd
name  of  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  to  bless  and  sanctify  this  wine
to  the  souls  of  all  those  who  drink  of  it,  that  they  may  do  it  in
remembrance  of  the  blood  of  thy  Son  which  was  shed  for  them,
that  they  may  witness  unto  thee,  O  God,  the  eternal  Father^
that  they  do  always  remember  him,  that  they  may  have  his
Spirit  to  be  with  them.  Amen.  >

25  Any  member  of  the  church  of  Christ  transgressing,  or  be¬
ing  overtaken  in  a  fault,  shall  be  dealt  with  as  the  scriptures
direct.

26  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  several  churches  composing  the
church  of  Christ,  to  send  one  or  more  of  their  teachers  to  at¬
tend  the  several  conferences,  held  by  the  elders  of  the  chnrch,
with  a  list  of  the  names  of  the  several  members  uniting  them¬
selves  with  the  church  since  the  last  conference,  or  send  by
the  hand  of  some  priest,  so  that  a  regular  list  of  all  the  names
of  the  whole  church  may  be  kept  in  a  book,  by  one  of  the  el¬
ders,  whoever  the  other  elders  shall  appoint  from  time  to  time:-—
and  also,  if  any  have  been  expelled  from  the  church;  so  that
their  names  may  be  blotted  out  of  the  general  church  record  of
names.

27  All  members  removing  from  the  church  where  they  reside,
if  going  to  a  church  where  they  are  not  known,  may  take  a
letter  certifying  that  they  are  regular  members  and  in  good
standing;  which  certificate  rnay  be  signed  by  any  elder  oir
priest,  if  the  member  receiving  the  letter  is  personally  acquaint¬
ed  with  the  elder  or  priest,  or  ; t  may  be  signed  by  the  teaches,
or  deacons  of  the  church.

SECTION  III.

ON  PRIESTHOOD.

1  There  are,  in  the  church,  two  priesthoods,  namely:  tSef
Melchizedek,  and  the  Aaronic,  including  the  Levitical  priest¬
hood.  Why  the  first  is  called  the  Melchizedek  priesthood,  r»
because  Melchizedek  was  such  a  great  high  priest:  before  hiw
day  it  was  called  the  holy  priesthood,  after  the  order  of  the  Son
of  God ;  bpt  opt  of  respect  or  reverence  to  the  name  of  the  Su¬
preme  Being,  to  avoid  the  too  frequent  repetition  of  his  name,
they,  the  clnjrch,  in  ancient  days,  called' that  priesthood  after
Melchizedek,  or  the  Melchizedek  priesthood.

2  All  other  authorities,  or  offices  in  the  church  are  appenda¬
ges  to  this  priesthood;  but  there  are  two  divisions,  or  grand
heads — one  is  the  Melchizedek  priesthood,  and  the  other  is  ther
Aaronic,  or  Levitical  priesthood.


3  Th?  office  of  an  elder  comes  under  the  priesthood  of  Mel-
chizedek.  The  Melchizedek  priesthood  holds  the  right  of*
presidency,  and  has  power  and  authority  over  all  the  offices  in
the  church,  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  to.  administer  in  spiritual
things.

4  The  presidency  of  the  high  priesthood,  after  the  order  of
Melchizedek,  have  a  right  to  officiate  in  all  the  offices  in  the
church.

5  High  priests,  after  the  order  of  the  Melchizedek  priesthood,
have  a  right  to  officiate  in  their  own  standing,  under  the  direc¬
tion  of  the  presidency,  in  administering  spiritual  things,  and
also  in  the  office  of  an  elder,  priest,  (of  the  Levitical  order,)
teacher,  deacon  and  member.

6  An  elder  has  a  right  to  officiate  in  his  stead  when  the  high
priest  is  not  present.

7  The  high  priest,  and  elder,  are  to  administer  in  spiritual
things,  agreeably  to  the  covenants  and  commandments  of  the
church ;  and  they  have  a  right  to  officiate  in  all  these  offices  of
the  church  when  there  are  no  higher  authorities  present.

8  The  second  priesthood  is  called  the  priesthood  of  Aaron,
because  it, was  conferred  upon  Aaron  and  his  seed,  throughout
all  their  generations.  Why  it  is  called  the  lesser  priesthood,
is  because  it  is  an  appendage  to  the  greater,  or  the  Melchize¬
dek  priesthood,  and  has  power  in  administering  outward  ordi¬
nances.  The  bishopric  is  the  presidency  of  this  priesthood
and  holds  the  keys,  or  authority  of  the  eame.  No  man  has  a
legal  right  to  this  office,  to  hold  the  keys  of  this  priesthood,
except  he  be  a  litteral  descendant  of  Aaron.  But  as  a  high
priest,  of  the  Melchizedek  priesthood,  has  authority  to  officiate
in  all  the  lesser  offices,  he  may  officiate  in  the  office  of  bishop
when  no  literal  descendant  of  Aaron  can  be  found;  provided
he  is  called  and  set  apart  and  ordained  unto  this  power  by  the
hands  ofthe  presidency  of  the  Melchizedek  priesthood.

9  The  power  and  authority  of  the  higher  or  Melchizedek
priesthood,  is  to  hold  the  keys  of  all  the  spiritual  blessings  ofthe
church — to  have  the  privilege  of  receiving  the  mysteries  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven — to  have  the  heavens  opened  unto  them —
to  commune  with  thejgeneral  assembly  and  church  of  the  first
bom,  and  to  enjoy  the  communion  and  presence  of  God  the
Father,  and  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant.

10  The  power  and  authority  of  the  lesser,  or  Aaronic  priest¬
hood,  is,  to  hold  the  keys  of  the  ministring  of  angels,  and  to
administer  in  outward  ordinances — the  letter  of  the  gospel —
the  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  sins,,  agreeably
to  the  covenants  and  commandments.


84


11  Of  necessity  there  are  presidents,  or  presiding,  offices
growing  out  of,  or  appointed  of,  or  from  among  those  who  are
ordained  to  the  several  offices  in  thess  two  priesthoods.  Of
the  Melchizedek  priesthood,  three  presiding  high  priests,  cho¬
sen  by  the  body,  appointed  and  ordained  to  that  office,  and  up-,
held  by  the  confidence,  faith  and  prayer  of  the  church,  form  a
quorum  of  the  presidency  of  the  church.  The  twelve  travel¬
ling  counsellors  are  called  to  be  the  twelve  apostles,  or  special
witnesses  of  the  name  of  Christ,  in  all  the  world:  thus  differ¬
ing  from  other  officers  in  the  church  in  tlie  duties  of  their  call  ¬
ing.  And  they  form  a  quorum  equal  in  authority  and  power
to  the  three  presidents,  previously  mentioned.  The  seventy
are  also  called  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  to  be  especial  witness  ■
es  unto  the  Gentiles  and  in  ail  the  world.  Thus  differing  fron[i
other  officers  ih  the  church  in  the  duties  of  their  calling:  and,
they  form  a  quorum  equal  in  authority  to  that  of  the  twelve
especial  witnesses  or  apostles,  just  named.  And  every  descis-
ion  made  by  either  of  these  quorums,  must  be  by  the  unanim¬
ous  voice  of  the  same;  that  is,  every  member  in  each  quorum
must  be  agreed  to  its  decisions  in  order  to  make  their  decis¬
ions  of  the  same  power  or  validity  one  with  the  other.  [A
majority  may  form  a  quorum  when  circumstances'  render  it
impossible  to  be  otherwise.]  Unless  this  is  the  case,  their  de-'
eisions  are  not  entitled  to  the  same  blessings  which  the  decis¬
ions  of  a  quorum  of  three  presidents  were  anciently,  who  were
ordained  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek,  and  were  righteous
and  holy  men.  The  decisions  of  these  quorums,  or  either  of
them  are  to  be  made  in  all  righteousness:  in  holiness  and  low¬
liness  of  heart;  meekness  and  long  suffering;  and  in  faith  and  vir¬
tue  and  knowledge;  temperance,  patience,  godliness  brot  mrly
kindness  and  charity,  because  the  promise  is,  if  these  things
abound  in  them,  they  shall  not  be  unfruitful  in  the  knowl¬
edge  of  the  Lord.  And  incase  that  any  decision,  of  these
quorums,  is  made  in  unrighteousness,  it  may  be  brought  be¬
fore  a  general  assembly  of  the  several  quorums  which  consti¬
tute  the  spiritual  authorities  of  the  church,  otherwise  there  can
be  no  appeal  from  their  decision.

12  The  tw'elve  are  a  travelling,  presiding  high  council,  to  of¬
ficiate  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  under  the  direction  of  the
presidency  of  the  church,  agreeably  to  the  institution  of  heav¬
en;  to  build  up  the  church,  and  regulate  all  the  affairs  of  the
same,  in  all  nations:  first  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  secondly  un¬
to  the  Jews.

13  The  seventy  are  to  act  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  under
the  direction  of  the  twelve,  or  the  travelling  high  council,  in
building  np  the  church  and  regulating  all  the  affairs  of  the


05


same,  in  all  nations:  first  unto  the  Gentiles  and  then  to  the
Jews: — the  twelve  being  sent  out,  holding  the  keys,  to  open
the  door  by  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ:
and  first  unto  the  Gentiles  and  then  unto  the  Jews.

14  The  standing  high  councils,  at  the  stakes  of  Zion,  form  a
quorum  equal  in  authority,  in  the  affairs  of  the  church,  in  all
their  decisions,  to  the  quorum  of  the  presidency,  or  to  the  trav-
elling  high  council.

15  The  high  council  in  Zion,  forms  a  quorum  equal  in'author-
ity,  in  the  affairs  of  the  church,  in  all  their  decisions,  to  the
councils  of  the  twelye  at  the  stakes  of  Zion.

16  It  is  the  duty  of  the  travelling  high  councilfto  cal!  upon  the
seventy,  when  they  need  assistance,  to  fill  the  several  calls  for
preaching  and  administering  the  gospel,  in  stead  ofany  others.

17  It  is  the  duty  of  the  twelve  in  all  large  branches  of  the
church,  to  ordain  evangelical  ministers,  as  they  shall  be  desig¬
nated  unto  them  by  revelation.

18  The  order  of  this  priesthood  was  confirmed  to  be  handed
down  from  father  to  son,  and  rightly  belongs  to  the  literal  de¬
scendants  of  the  chosen  seed,  to  whom  the  promises  were
made.  This  order  was  instituted  in  the  days  of  Adam,  and
came  down  by  lineage  in  the  following  manner:

19  From  Adam  to  Beth,  who  was  ordained  by  Adam  at  the
age  of  69  years,  and  was  blessed  by  him  three  years  previous
to  his  (Adam’s)  death,  and  received  the  promise  of  God  by  his
father,  that  his  posterity  should  be  the  chosen  of  the  Lord,
and  that  they  should  be  preserved  unto  the  end  of  the  earth,
because  he  [Seth]  was  a  perfect  man,  and  his  likeness  was  the
express  likeness  of  his  father’s,  insomuch  that  he  seemed  to  be
like  imto  his  father  in  all  things;  and  could  be  distinguished
Horn  him  only  by  his  age.

20  Enos  was  ordained  at  the  age  of  134  years,  and  fonr
months,  by  the  hand  of  Adam.

21  God  called  upon  Cainan  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  fortieth
year  of  his  age,  and  he  met  Adam  in  journeying  to  the  place
Shedolamak:  he  was  eighty  seven  years  old  when  he  received
his  ordination.

22  Mahalaleel  was  496  years  and  seven  days  old  when  he
was  ordained  by  the  hand  of  Adam,  who  also  blessed  him.

23  Jared  was  200  years  old  when  he  was  ordained  under  the
hand  of  Adam,  who  also  blessed  him.

24  Enoch,  was  25  years  old  when  he  was  ordained  under  the
hand  of  Adam,  and  he  was  65  and  Adam  blessed  him — and  he
saw  the  Lord:  and  he  walked  with  him,  and  was  before  his
face  continually:  and  he  walked  with  God  365  years:  making
him  430  years  old  when  he  was  translated.


25  Methuselah  was  100  years  old  when  he  was  ordained  un¬
der  the  hand  Of  Adam.

26  Lamech  was  32  years  old  when  he  was  ordained  under
the  hand  of  Seth.

27  Noah  was  1 0  years  old  when  he  was  ordained  under  the
hand  of  Methuselah.

28  Three  years  previous  to  the  death  of  Adam,  he  called
Seth,  Enos,  Cainan,  Mahalaleel,  Jared,  Enoch  and  Methuse¬
lah,  who  were  all  high  priests,  with  the  residue  of  his  posteri¬
ty,  who  were  righteous,  into  the  valley  of  Adam-ondi-ahman,
and  there  bestowed  upon  them  his  last  blessing.  And  the
Lord  appeared  unto  them*  and  they  rose  up  and  blessed  A^dam,
and  called  him  Michael,  the  Prince,  the  Arch  angel.  And
Hie  Lord  administered  comfort  ufito  Adam,  and  said  unto  him,
1  have  set  thee  to  be  at  the  head:  a  multitude  of  nations  shall
come  of  thee;  and  thou  art  a  prince  over  them  for  ever.

29  And  Adam  stood  up  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation,  and
notwithstanding  he  was  bowed  down  with  age,  being  full  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  predicted  whatsoever  should  befall  his  poster¬
ity  unto  the  latest  generation.  These  things  were  all  writ¬
ten  in  the  book  of  Enoch,  and  are  to  be  testified  of  in  due
time.

30  It  is  the  duty  of  the  twelve,  also,  to  ordain  and  set  in  or¬
der  all  the  other  officers  of  the  church,  agreeably  to  the  rev¬
elation  which,eays :

31  To  the  church  of  Christ  in  the  land  of  Zion,  in  addition
to  the  church  laws,  respecting  church  business:  Verily,  I  say
unto  you,  says  the  Lord  of  hosts,  There  must  needs  be  presi¬
ding  elders,  to  preside  over  those  who  are  of  the  office  of  an
elder;  and  also  priests,  to  preside  over  those  who  are  of  the
office  of  a  priest;  and  also  teachers  to  presjde  over  those  who
are  of  the  office  of  a  teacher,  in  like  manner;  and  also  the'
deacons:  wherefore,  from  deacon  to  teacher,  and  from  teacher
to  priest,  and  from  priest  to  elder,  severally  as  they  are  ap¬
pointed,  according  to  the  covenants  and  commandments  of  the
Church;  then  names  the  high  priesthood,  which  is  the  great¬
est  of  all.  Wherefore,  it  must  needs  be  that  one  be  appointed,
of  the  high  priesthood,  to  preside  over  the  priesthood;  arid  he
shall  be  called  president  of  the  high  priesthood  of  the  church,
or,  in  other  words,  the  presiding  high  priest  over  the  high
priesthood  of  the  church.  From  the  same  comes  the  adminis¬
tering  of  ordinances  and  blessings  upon  the  church,  by  the
Ikying  on  of  the  hands.

32  Wherefore  the  office  of  a  bishop  is  not  equal  unto  it;  for
the  office  of  a  bishop  is  in  administering  all  temporal  things:
nevertheless,  a  bishop  must  be  shosen  from  the  high  priest-


(hood;  unless  he  is  a  literal  cteeoendani  of  Aaron;  fbr  unless
he  is  a  literal  descendant  of  Aaron  he  cannot  hold  the  keys
of  that  priesthood.  Nevertheless,  a  high  priest,  that  is  after
the  order  of  Melchizedek,  may  be  set  apart  unto  the  minis¬
tering  of  temporal  thingB,  having  a  knowledge  of  them  by  the
Spirit  of  truth,  and  also  to  be  a  judge  in  Israel,  to  do  the  busi*
ness  of  the  church  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  transgressors,  upon
testimony,  as  it  shall  be  laid  before  him,  according  to  the  laws,
by  the  assistance  of  his  counsellors,  whom  he  has  choBen,
or  will  chose  among  the  elders  of  the  church.  This  Is  the
duty  of  a  bishop  who  is  not  a  literal  descendant  of  Aaron,
but’  has  been  ordained  to  the  high  priesthood  after  the  order  of
Melchizedek.

33  Thus  shall  he  be  a  judge,  even  a  common  judge  among  the
inhabitants  Uf  Zion,  or  in  a  stake  of  Zion,  or  in  any  branch  of
the  church  where  he  shall  be  set  apart  unto  this  ministry,  un¬
til  the  borders  of  Zion  are  enlarged,  and  ic  becomes  necessary
to  have  otlierbishops,  or  judges  in  Zion,  or  elsewhere:  and  ir>
asmuch  as  there  are  other  bishops  appointed  they  shall  act  in
the  same  office.

34  But  a  literal  descendant  of  Aaron  has  a  legal  right  to  the
presidency  of  this  priesthood,  to  the  keys  of  this  ministry,  to
dpt  in  the  office  of  bishop  independently#  without  counsellors,
except  in  a  case  where  a  president  of  the  high  priesthood,  after
the  order  of  Melchizedek,  is  tried;  to  sit  as  a  judge  in  Israel. —
And  the  decision  of  either  of  these  councils,  agreeably  to  the
commandment  which  says;

35  Again,  verily,  I  say  unto  you:  The  most  important  busi¬
ness  of  the  church,  and  the  most  difficult  cases  of  the  church,
inasmuch  as  there  is  not  satisfaction  upon  the  decision  of
the  bishop,  or  judges,  it  shall  be  handed  over  and  carried  up
unto  the  council  of  the  church,  before'  the  presidency  of  the
high  priesthood;  and  the  presidency  of  the  council  of  the
high  priesthood  shall  have  power  to  call  other  high  priests,
even  twelve,  to  assist  as  counsellors;  and  thus  the  presidency
of  the  high  priesthood,  and  its  counsellors  shall  have  power
to  decide  upon  testimony  according  to  the  laws  of  the  church.
And  after  this  decision  it  shall  be  had  in  remembrance  no
more  before  the  Lord;  for  this  is  the  highest  council  of  the
church  of  God,  and  a  final  decision  upon  controversies,  in
spiritual  matters.

36  There  is  not  any  person  belonging  to  the  church,  who  is
exempt  from  this  council  of  the  church.

37  And  in  as  much  as  a  president  of  the  high  priesthood
shall  transgress,  he  shall  be  had  in  remembrance  before  the
common  council  of  the  church,  who  shall  be  assisted  by  twelve


counsellor*  of  the  high  priesthood;  and  their decision  upon  hi*
head  shall  be  an  end  of  controversy  concerning  him.  Thu<t
none  shall  be  exempted  from  tlie  justice  and  the  laws  of  God;
that  all  things  may  be  done  in  order  and  in  solemnity,  before
him,  according  to  truth  and  righteousness.

38  And  again,  verilv  I  say  unto  you,  the  duty  of  ?a  presi¬
dent  over  the  office  of  a  deacon,  is  to  preside  over  twelve  dea¬
cons,  to  sit  in  council  with  them,  and  to  teach  them  their  du¬
ty — edifying  one  another,  as  it  is  given  according  to  the  cov¬
enants.

■V't  And  also  the  duty  of  the  president  over  the  office  of  title
teachers,  is  to  preside  over  twenty  tour  of  the  teachers,  and  to
sit  in  council  with  them — teaching  them  the  duties  of  their
office,  as  given  in  the  covenants.

40  Also  the  duty  of  the  president  over  the  priesthood  of  Aa¬
ron,  is  to  preside  over  lorty  eight  priests,  and  sit  in  council  with
them,  to  teach  them  the  duties  of  their  office,  as  is  given  in  the
.covenants.  This  president  is  to  be  a  bishop;  for  this  is  one
of  the  duties  of  this  priesthood.

41  Again,  the  duty  of  the  president  over  the  office  of  elderg
is  'o.  preside  over  ninety  six  elders,  and  to  sit  in  council  with
th,  ;.i,  and  to  teach  th tin  according  to  the  covenants.  This
presidency  is  a  distinct  one  from  that  of  the  seventy,  and  is
designed  for  those  who  do  not  travel  into  all  the  world.

42  And  again,  the  duty  of  the  president  of  the  office  of  the
high  priesthood  is  to  preside  over  the  whole  church,  and  to  be
like  unto  Moses.  Behold,  here  is  wisdom — yea,  to  be  a  seer,
a  rcvelator,  a  translator  and  a  prophet — having  all  the  gilts  of
God  wiiich  he  bestows  upon  the  head  of  the  church.

43  And  it  is  according  to  the  vision,  showing  the  order  of  the
seventy,  that  they  should  have  seven  presidents  to  preside
over  them,  chosen  out  of  the  number  of  the  seventy,  and  the
seventh  president  of  these  presidents  is  to  preside  over  the  six;
and  these  seven  presidents  are  to  choose  other  seventy  besides,
the  first  seventy,  to  whom  they  belong,  anil  are  to  preside  over
•them;  and  also  other  seventy  until  seven  times  seventy,  if  the
labor  in  the  vineyard  of  necessity  requires  it  And  these  sev¬
enty  are  to  be  travelling  ministers  unto  the  Gentiles,  first,
and  al  jo  unto  the  Jews,  whereas  other  offices  of  the  church
who  elong  not  unto  the  twelve  neither  to  the  seventy,  are
not  under  the  responsibility  to  travel  among  all  nations,  but
arc  to  travel  as  their  circumstances  shall  allow,  notwithstand¬
ing  they  may  hold  as  high  and  responsible  offices  in  the  church.

44  Wherefore,  now  let  every  man  learn  his  duty,  and  to  act
in  the  office  in  which  he  is  appointed,  in  all  diligence.  He
Uiat  is  slothfnl  shall  not  he  counted  worthy  to  stand,  and  he


that  learns  not  his  duty  and  shows  himselfnot  approved,  shall
snot  be  counted  worthy  to  stand;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  IV.

A  Revelation  given  the  22d  and  23 d  of  Sept.  1832.

025  PRIESTHOOD.

■^4.  1  A  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  his  servant  Joseph  Smith,
jr.  and  six  elders,  as  they  united  their  hearts  and  lifted  their
voices  on  high;  yea,  the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  his
ohurch,  established  in  the  last  days  for  the  restoration  of  his
people  as  he  has  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophets,  and  for
the  gathering  of  his  saints  to  stand  upon  mount  Zion,  which
shall  be  the  city  New  Jerusalem:  which  city  shall  be  built,
beginning  at  the  Temple  Lot,  which  is  appointed  by  the  fin¬
ger  of  the  Lord,  in  the  western  boundaries  of  the  state  of  Mis¬
souri,  and  dedicated  by  the  hand  of  Joseph  Smith  jr.  and
Others,  with  whom  the  Lord  was  well  pleased,  f—

2  Verily,  this  is  the  word  of  the  Lord,  that  the  city  New  Je¬
rusalem  shall  be  built  by  the  gathering  of  the  saints,  beginning
at  this  place,  even  the  place  of  the  temple,  which  temple  shall
be  reared  in  this  generation;  for  verily,  this  generation  shall
not  all  pass  away  until  an  house  shall  be  built  unto  the  Lord
and  a  cloud  shall  rest  upon  it,  which  cloud  shall  be  even  the
glory  of  the  Lord,  which  shall  fill  the  house.  And  the  sons
of  Moses,  according  to  the  holy  priesthood,  which  he  received
under  the  hand  of  his  father-in-law,  Jethro,  and  Jethro  received
it  under  the  hand  of  Caleb,  and  Caleb  received  it  under  the
hand  of  Elihu,  and  Elihu  under  the  hand  of  Jeremy,  and  Jer¬
emy  under  the  hand  of  Gad  and  Gad  under  the  hand  of  Esai-
as,  and  Esaias  received  it  under  the  hand  of  God;  Esaks  also
lived  in  the  days  of  Abraham  and  was  blessed  of  him,  which
Abraham  reserved  the  priesthood  from  Melchizedek,  who  re¬
ceived  it  through  the  lineage  of  his  fathers,  even  till  Noah:
and  from  Noah  till  Enoch,  through  the  lineage  of  their  fathers,
and  from  Enoch  to  Abel,  who  was  dlain  by  the  conspiracy  of
his  brother,  who  received  the  priesthood  by  the  command¬
ments  of  God  by  the  hand  of  his  father  Adam,  who  was  the
first  man;  whicfi  priesthood  continueth  in  the  church  of  God
in  all  generations,  and  is  without  beginning  of  days  or  end  of

3  And  the  Lord  confirmed  a  priesthood  also  upon* Aaron  apcf
his  seed  throughout  all  their  generations,  which  priesthood  al-
•to  continueth  and  abideth  forever,  with  the  priesthood  which


£0


is  after  the  holies  t  order  of  GoA-  And  this  greater  priesthood
administereth  the  gospel  and  holdeth  the  key  of  the  mysterie*
of  the  kingdom,  even  the  key  of  the  knowledge  of  God-—*
Therefore,  in  the  ordinances  thereof  the  power  of  godliness
is  manifest;  and  without  the  ordinances  thereof,  and  the  au¬
thority  of  the  priesthood,  the  power  of  godliness  ia  not  mani¬
fest  unto  men  in  the  flesh;  for  without  this  no  man  can  see  the
Clce  of  God,  even  the  Father,  and  live.

4  Now  this  Moses  plainly  taught  to  the  children  of  Israel,
in  the  wilderness,  and  sought  diligently  to  sanctify  his  people^
that  they  might  behold  the  face  of  God;  but  they  hardened
their  hearts  and  could  not  endure  his  presence,  therefore,  the
Lord,  in  his  wrath,  (for  his  anger  was  kindled  against  them,)
swore  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest,  while  in  the  wil¬
derness,  which  rest  is  the  fulness  of  his  glory.  Therefore  he
took  Moses  out  of  their  midst  and  the  holy  priesthood  also;
and  the  lesser  priesthood  continued,  which  priesthood  holdeth
the  , key  of  the  ministering  of  angels  and  the  preparatory  gospel,
which  gospel  is  the  gospel  of  repentanoe  and  of  baptism  and
the  remission-;  of  sins  and  the  law  of  carnal  commandments,
which  the  Lord,  in  his  wrath,  caused  to  continue  with  the
(house  of  Aaron  among  the  children  of  Israel  until  John,  whom
God  raised  up,  being  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost  from  his
«nother’s  womb:  for  he  was  baptized  while  he  was  yet  in  his
chidhood,  and  was  ordained  by  the  angel  of  God  at  the  time  he
was  eight  days  old  unto  this  power — to  overthrow  the  king¬
dom  of  the  Jews,  an  to  make  straight  the  way  of  the  Lord  be¬
fore  the  face  of  his  people,  to  prepare  them  tor  the  coming  of
the  Lord,  in.  whose  hand  is  given  all  power.

5  And  again,  the  office  of  elder  and  bishop  are  necessary  ap¬
pendages  belonging  unto  the  high  priesthood.  And  again,  the
offices  of  teachers  and  deacons  are  necessary  appendages  be¬
longing  to  the  lesser  priesthood,  which  priesthood  was  con¬
firmed  upon  Aaron  and  his  sons.

6  Therefore,  as  I  said  concerning  the  Sons  of  Moses — for  the
sons  of  Moses  and  also  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  offer  an  accept¬
able  offering  and  sacrifice  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  which  house
shall  be  built  unto  the  Lord  in  this  generation  upon  the  conse¬
crated  spot,  as  I  have  appointed — and  the  sons  of  Moses  and  of
Aaron  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord  upon  mount
Zion  in  the  Lord’s  house,  whose  sons  are  ye;  and  also  many
whom  I  have  called  and  sent  forth  to  build  up  my  church;  for
whoso  is  faithful  unto  the  obtaining  these  two  priesthoods  of
which  I  have  spoken,  &  the  magnifying  their,,  calling,  are  sanc-
tifyed  by  the  Spirit  unto  the  renewing  of  their  bodies:  they
become  the  sods  of  Moses  and  of  Aaron  and  the  seed  of  Abfa-


ham,  and  the  church  and  kingdom  and  the  elect  of  God;  and
also  all  they  who  receive  this  priesthood  receiveth  me,  saith
the  Lord,  for  he  that  receiveth  my  servants  receiveth  me,  and
he  that  receiveth  me  receiveth  my  Father,  and  he  that  receiv-
etb  my  Father  receiveth  my  Father’s  kingdom.  Therefore,  all
that  my  Fatlfer  hath  shall  be  given  unto  him;  and  this  is  ac¬
cording  to  the  oath  and  covenant  which  belongeth  to  the
priesthood.  Therefore,  all  those  who  receive  the  priesthood
receive  this  oath  and  covenant  of  my  Father  which  he  cannot
break,  neither  can  it  be  moved;  but  whoso  breaketh  this  cov¬
enant,  after  he  hatli  received  it,  and  altogether  turneth  there¬
from,  shall  not  have  forgiveness  of  sins  in  this  world  nor  in
the  world  to  come.  And  all  those  who  come  not  unto  this
priesthood,  which  ye  have  received,  which  I  now  confirm  up¬
on  you  who  are  present,  this  day,  by  mine  own  voice  out
of  the  heavens,  and  even  I  have  given  the  heavenly  hosts  and
mine  angels  charge  covoeming  you.

7  And  I  now  give  unto  you  a  commandment  to  beware  con¬
cerning  yourselves,  to  give  diligent  heed  to  the  words  of
eternal  life;  for  you  shall  five  by  every  word  that  proeeedeth
forth  from  the  mouth  of  God.  F or  the  word  of  the  Lord  is
truth,  and  whatsoever  is  truth  is  light,  and  whatsoever  is  light
is  Spinit,  even  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  the  Spirit  giveth
light  to  every  man  that  corneth  into  the  world:  and  the  Spirit
emighteneth  every  man  through  the  world,  that  hearkenetli
to  the  voice  of  the.  Spirit;  and  everyone  that  hearkeneth  to
'the  voice  of  the  Spirit,  corneth  unto  God,  even  the  Father;
and  the  Father  teacheth  him  of  the  covenant  which  he  has
renewed  and  confirmed  upon  you,  which  is  confirmed  upon
you  for  your  sakes,  and  not  for  your  sakes  only,  but  for  the
sake  of  the  whole  world:  and  the  whole  world  lieth  in  sin,  and
groaneth  under  darkness  and  under  the  bondage  of  sin;  and  by
this  you  may  know  they  are  under  the  bondage  of  sin,  be¬
cause  they  come  not  unto  me;  for  whoso- corneth  not  unto
me  is  under  the  bondage  of  sin;  and  whoso  receiveth  not  my
voice  is  not  acquainted  with  my  voice,  and  is  not  of  me:  and
by  this  you  may  know  the  righteous  from  the  wicked,  and
that  the  whole  world  groaneth  under  sin  and  darkness  even  now.

8  And  your  minds  in  times  past  have  been  darkened  because  of
unbelief,  and  because  you  have  treated  lightly  the  things  you
have  received,  which  vanity  and  unbelief  hath  brought  the  whole
church  under  condemnation.  And  this  condemnation  resteth
upon  the  children  of  Zion,  even  all;  and  they  shall  remain  un¬
der  this  condemnation  until  they  repent  and  remember  the
new  covenant,  even  the  book  of  Mormon  and  the  former  com¬
mandments  wHfch  I  have  given  them,  not  only  to  say,  but  to


do  according  to  that  vVhieli  I  have  written,  that  they  may
bring  forth  trait  meet  for  their  Father’s  kingdom,  otherwise
their  reinaineth  a  scourge  and  a  judgment  to  be  poured  out
upon  the  children  of  Zion:  for  shall  the  children  of  the  king¬
dom  pollute  my  holy  land?  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  Nay.

9  Verily,  verily,  I  say  you,  who  now  have  my  words,  which
is  my  voice,  blessed  are  ye  inasmuch  as  you  receive  these
things:  fori  will  forgive  you  of  your  sins  with  this  command¬
ment,  that  you  remain  steadfast  in  your  mipds  in  solemnity
and  the  spirit  of  prayer,  in  bearing  testimony  to  all  the  world
of  those  things  which  are  communicated  unto  you.

10  Therefore  go  ye  into  alltthe  world,  and  whatsoever  place
ye  cannot  go  into  ye  shall  send,  that  the  testimony  may  go
from  you  into  all  the  world,  unto  every  creature.  And  'as  I
said  unto  mine  apostles,  even  so  I  say  unto  you;  for  you  are
m:ne  apostles,  even  God’s  highpriests:  ye  are  they  whom  my
Father  hath  given  me:  ye  are  my  friends;  therefore,  as  I  said
unto  mine  apostles  I  say  unto  you  again,  that  every  soul  who
believeth  on  your  words,  and  is  baptized  by  water  for  the  re¬
mission  of  sins,  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  these  signs
shall  follow  them  that  believe:

.  11  In  my  name  they  shall  do  many  wonderful  works:  in  my
riame  they  shall  cast  out  devils:  in  my  name  they  shall  heal
the  sick:  in  my  name  they  shall  open  the  eys  of  the  blind,  and
unstop  the  ears  of  the  deaf;  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  shall
speak:  and  if  any  man  shall  administer  poison  unto  them  it
shall  not  hurt  them:  and  the  poison  of  a  serpent  shall  not
have  power  to  harm  them.  But  a  commandment  I  give  unto
them,  that  they  shall  not  boast  themselves  of  these  things,
neither  speak  them  before  the  world;  for  these  things  are  giv-
eu  .into  you  for  your  profit  and  for  salvation.

1  !  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  they  who  believe  not  on  your
words,  and  are  not  baptized  by  water,  in  my  name,  for  the  re¬
mission  of  their  sins,  that  they  may  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,
shall  be  damned,  and  shall  not  come  into  my  Father’s  king¬
dom,  where  my  Father  and  1  am.  And  this  revelation  unto
yon,  and  commandment,  is  in  force  from  this  very  hour  upon
all  t  he  world,  and  the  gospel  is  unto  all  who  have  not  received
it.  But  verily  I  say  unto  all  those  to  whom  the  kingdom  has
been  given,  from  you  it  must  be  preached  unto  them  that  they
shall  repent  of  their  former  evil  works;  for  they  are  to  be
upbraided  for  their  evil  hearts  of  unbelief:  and  your  brethren
in  Zion  for  their  rebellion  against  you  at  the  time  I  sent  you.

13  And  again,  I  say  unto  you  my  friends,  (for  from  hence¬
forth  I  shall  call  you  friends,)  it  is  expedient  lhat  I  give  unto
«rou  this  commandment,  that  ye  become  even  as  my  friends  in


83


days  when  I  was  with  them  travelling  to  preach  this  gospel
in  my  power;  for  I  suffered  them  not  to  have  purse  or  scrip,
neither  two  coats:  behold  I  send  you  out  tp  prove  the  world,*
and  the  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  And  any  man  that  shall
go  and  preach  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  and  tail  not  to  con¬
tinue  faithful  in  all  things,  shall  not  be  weary  in  mind,  neither
darkened,  neither  in  body,  limb  or  joint;  and  an  hair  of  his
head  shall  not  fall  to  the  ground  unnoticed.  And  they  shall
not  go  hungry,  neither  athirst.

14  Therefore,  take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,  for  what  ye
shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink,  or  wherewithal  ye  shall  be
clothed;  for  consider  the  lillies  of  the  field,  how  they-  grow,
they  toil  not,  neither  do  they  spin;  and  the  kingdoms  of  the
world,  in  all  their  glory,  are  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these;
for  your  Father  who  art  in  heaven,  knoweth  that  you  have
need  of  all ,  these  things.  Therefore,  let  the  morrow  take
thought  for  the  things  of  itself.  Neither  take  ye  thought  be¬
forehand  what  ye  shall  say,  but  treasure  up  in  your  minds  con¬
tinually  the  words  of  life,  and  it  shall  be  given  you  in  the  very
hour  that  portion  that  shall  be  meted  unto  every  man.

15  Therefore  let  no  man  among  you,  (.for  this  commandment
is  unto  all  the  faithful  who  are  called  of  God  in  the  church,
unto  the  ministry,)  from  this  hour,  take  purse  or  scrip,  that
goeth  forth  to  proclaim  this  gospel  of  the  kingdom.  Behold
1  send  you  oujs  to  reprove  the  world  of  all  thei;  unrighteous
deeds,  and  to  teach  them  of  a  judgment  which  is  to  oome. —
And  whoso  receiveth  you,  there  I  will  be  also:  for  I  will  go
before  your  face;  I  will  be  on  your  right  hand  and  on  your  left,
and  my  Spirit  shall  be  in  your  hearts,  and  mine  angels  round
about  you,  to  bear  you  up.

16  Wlioso  receiveth  you,  receiveth  me,  and  the  same  will
-feed  you,  and  clothe  you,  and  give  you  money.  And  he  who
feeds  you,  or  clothes  you,  or  gives  you  money,  shall  in  no  wise
lose  his  reward:  and  he  that  doeth  not  these  things  is  not  my
disciple:  by  this  you  may  know  my  disciples.  He  that  receiv¬
eth  you  not,  go  away  from  him  alone  by  yourselves,  and  cleanse
your  feet,  even  with  water,  pure  water,  whether  in  heat  or  in
cold,  and  bear  testimony  of  it  unto  your  Father  which  is  in
heaven,  and  return  not  again  unto  that  man.  And  in  whatso¬
ever  village  or  city  ye  enter,  do  likewise.  Nevertheless,  search
diligently  and  spare  not;  and  wo  unto  that  house,  or  that  vil¬
lage,  or  city,  that  rejecteth  you,  or  your  words,  or  testimony
concerning  me.  Wo,  I  say  again,  unto  that  house,  or  that
village,  or  city,  that  rejecteth  you,  or  your  words,  or  your  tes¬
timony  of  me;  for  I  the  Almighty,  have  laid  my  hands  upon
Ihe  nations  to  scourge  them  for  their  wickedness;  and  plagues


04


shall  go  forth,  &  they  shall  not  be  tide  an  from  the  kirth  until  1
have  completed  my  work  which  shall  be  cut  short  in  righteous¬
ness;  until  all  shall  know  ipe,  who  remain,  even  from  the  least
unto  the  greatest,  and  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the
Lord,  and  shall  see  eye  to  eye,  and  shall  lift  up  their  voice,
and  with  the  voice  together  sing  this  new  song,  saying,

17  The  Lord  hath  brought  again  Zion:

The  Lord  hath  redeemed  his  people,  Israel,

According  to  the  election  of  grace,

Which  was  brought  to  pass  by  the  faith.

And  covenant  of  their  fathers.

The  Lord  hath  redeemed  his  people,

And  satan  is  bound,  and  time  is  no  longer:

The  Lord  hath  gathered  all  things  in  one:

The  Lord  hath  brought  down  Zion  from  above:

The  Lord  hath  brought  up  Zion  from  beneath;

The  earth  hath  travailed  and  brought  forth  her  strength.;
And  truth  is  established  in  her  bowels;

And  the  heavens  have  smiled  upon  her;

And  she  is  clothed  with  the  glory  of  her  God:

For  he  stands  in  the  midst  of  his  people:

Glory,  and  honor,  and  power,  and  might,

Be  ascribed  to  our  God,  for  he  is  full  of  mercy,

Justice,  grace  and  truth,  and  peace,

For  ever  and  ever  Amen.

18  And  again,  verily,  verily  I  say  untp  you,  it  is  expedient,
that  every  man  who  goes  forth  to  proclaim  mine  everlasting
gospel,  that  inasmuch  as  they  have  families  and  receive  mon¬
eys  by  gift,  that  they  should  send  it  unto  them,  or  make  use
of  it  for  their  benefit,  as  the  Lord  shall  direct  them,  for  thus  it
seemeth  me  good.  And  let  all  those  who  have  not  families,
who  receive  moneys,  send  it  up  unto  the  bishop  in  Zion,  or
unto  the  bishop  in  Ohio,  that  it  may  be  consecrated  for  the
bringing  forth  of  the  revelations  and  the  printing  thereof,  and
for  establishing  Zion.

19  And  if  any  man  shall  give  unto  any  of  you  a  coat,  or  a
suit,  take  the  old  and  cast  it  unto  the  poor,  and  go  your  wpy
rejoieing.  And  if  any  man  among  you  be  strong  in  the  Spirit,
let  him  take  with  him  he  that  is  weak,  that  he  may  be  edified
in  all  meekness,  that  he  may  become  strong  also.

20  Therefore,  take  with  you  those  who  are  ordained  unto
the  lesser  priesthood,  and  send  them  before  you  to  make  ap¬
pointments,  and  to  prepare  the  way,  and  to  fill  appointments
that  you  yourselves  are  not  able  to  fill.  Behold  this  is  the
way  that  mine  apostles,  in  ancient  days,  built  up  my  church,
onto  me.


95


21  Therefore  let  every  man  stand  in  his  own  office,  and  labor
fa  his  own  calling:  and  let  not  the  head  say  unto  the  feet,  it
hath  no  need  of  the  feet,  for  without  the  feet  how  shall  the
body  be  able  to  stand?  also  the  body  hath  need  of  every  mem¬
ber,  that  all  may  be  edified  together,  that  the  system  may  be
'kept  perfect.

24  And  behold,  the  high  priests  should  travel,  and  also  the
elders,  and  also  the  lesser  priests;  but  the  deacons  and  teach¬
ers  should  be  appointed  to  watch  over  the  church,  to  be  stand¬
ing  ministers  unto  the  church.

22  And  the  bishop,  Newel  K.  Whitney,  also,  should  travel
round  about  and  among  all  the  churches,  searching  after  the
poor,  to  administer  to  their  wants  by  humbling  the  rich  and
the  proud:  he  should  also,  employ  an  agent  to  take  charge
and  to  do  his  secular  business,  as  he  shall  direct;  nevertheless,
let  the  bishop  go  unto  the  city  of  New  York,  and  also  to  the
city  of  Albany,  and  also  to  the  city  of  Boston,  and  warn  the
people  of  those  cities  with  the  sound  ofthe  gospel,  with  a  loud
voice,  of  the  desolation  and  utter  abolishment  which  awaits
them  if  they  do  reject  these  things;  for  if  they  do  reject  these
things  the  hour  of  their  judgment  is  nigh:  and  their  house
shall  be  left  unto  them  desolate.  Let  him  trust  in  me  and  he
shall  not  be  confounded;  and  an  hair  of  his  head  shall  not  fall
to  the  ground  unnoticed.

23  And  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  the  rest  of  my  servants,  go
ye  forth  as  your  circumstances  shall  permit,  in  your  several
callings,  unto  the  great  and  notable  cities  and  villages,  reprov¬
ing  the  world  in  righteousness  of  all  their  unrighteous  and  un¬
godly  deeds,  setting  forth  clearly  and  understandingly  the  des¬
olation  of  abomination  in  the  last  days;  for  with  you  saith  the
Lord  Almighty,  I  will  rehd  their  kingdoms,  I  will  not  only
shake  the  earth,  but  the  starry  heavens  shall  tremble:  for  I  the
Lord  have  put  forth  my  hand  to  exert  the  powers  of  heavens
ye  cannot  see  it  now,  yet  a  little  while  and  ye  shall  see  it,
and  know  that  I  am,  and  that  I  will  come  and  reign  with  my
people.  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  entfc
Amen.

SECTION  V.

Minutcs’of  the  organization  of  the  High  Council  of  the  church
of  Christ  of  Latter  Day  Saints,  Kirtland,  February  17,  1834.

1  This  day  a  general  counpil  of  twenty  four  high  priests  as¬
sembled  at  the  house  of  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  by  revelation,  and
proceeded  to  organize  the  high  council  of  the  church  of  Christ,
which  was  to  consist  of  twelve  high  priests,  and  one  or  three


96


presidents,  as  the  case  might  require.  This  high  council  \vjs
appointed  by  revelation  ior  the .  purpose  of  settling  important*
difficulties,  which  mjght  arise  in  the  church,  wliich  could  not
be  settled  by  the  church,  or  the  bishop’s  council,  to  the  satis-1
faction  of  the  parties.

2  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Frederick  G.  Williams,
were  acknowledged  presidents  by  tlie  voice  of  the  council;  and
Joseph  Smith,  sen.  John  Smith,  Joseph  Coe,  John  Johnson,
Martin  Harris,  John  S.  Carter,  Jared  Carter,  Oliver  Cowdery,
Samuel  H.  Smith,  Orson  Hyde,  Sylvester  Smith  and  Luke
Johnson,  high  priests,  were  chosen  to  be  a  standing  council  for
ffl*  church,  by  the  unanimous  voice  of  the  council.  The  above,
named  couns'ellors  were  then  asked  whether  they  aceeptedf
tneir  appointments,  and  whether  they  would  act  in  that  office,'
according  to,  the  law  of  heaven:  to  which  they  all  answered*
that  they  accepted  their  appointments,  and  would  fill  their  of¬
fices  according  to  the  grace  of  God  bestowed  upon  them.

3  The  number  composing  the  council,  who  voted  in  the  name
and  for  the  church  in  appointing  the  above  named  counsellors,
were  forty  three,  as  follows:  nine  high  priests,  seventeen  elders,
fpur  priests  and  thirteen  members.

4  Voted,  that  the  high  council  can  pot  have  power  to  act
without  seven  of  the  above  named  counsellors,  or  tboir  regu¬
larly  appointed  successors,  are  present.  These  seven  shall
have  power  to  appoint  other  high  priests,  whom  they  may
consider  worthy  and  capable,  to  act  in  the  place  of  absent  coun¬
sellors.

5  Voted,  that  whenever  any  vacancy  shall  occur  by  the
death,  removal  from  office  for  transgression,  or  removal  from
the  bounds  of  this  church  government,  of  any  one  of  the  above
named  counsellors,  it  shall  be  filled  by  the  nomination  of  the
president  or  presidents,  and  sanctioned  by  the  voice  of  a  gen¬
eral  council  of  high  priests,  convened  for  that  purpose,  .to  act
rn  the  name  of  the  church.

6  The  president  of  the  church,  who  is  also  the  president  of
the  council,  is  appointed  by  revelation,  and  acknowledged,  in
his  administration,  by  the  voice  of  the  church;  and  it  is  accor¬
ding  to  the  dignity  of  his  office,  that  he  should  preside  over
the  high  council  of  the  church;  and  it  is  his  privilege  to  be  as¬
sisted  by  two  other  presidents,'  appointed  after  the  same  man¬
ner,  that  he  himself  was  appointed;  and  in  case  of  the  absence
of  one  or  both  of  those  who  are  appointed  to  assist  him,  he  has
power  to  preside  over  the  council  without  an  assistant;  and  in
oase  that  he  himself  is  absent,  the  other  presidents  have  pow¬
er  to  preside  in  his  stead,  both  or  either  of  them.

7  Whenever  a  high  council  of  the  church  of  Christ  is  tegu-


97

Early  organized,  according  to  the  foregoing  pattern,  it  shall  be
the  duty  of  the  twelve  counsellors  to  cast  lots  by  numbers,  and
-thereby  ascertain  who,  of  ,the  twelve,  shall  speak  first,  com¬
mencing  with  number  1 ;  and  so  in  succession  to  number  12.

8  Whenever  this  council  convenes  to  act  upon  any  case,  the
twelve  counsellors  shall  consider  whether  it  is  a  difficult
tme  or  not;  if  it  is  not,  two  only  of  the  counsellors  shall  speak
upon  it,  according  to  the  form  above  written.  But  if  it  is
thought  to  be  difficult,  four  shall  be  appointed;  and  if  more
difficult,  six:  but  in  no  case  shall'  more  than  six  be  appointed
to  speak.  The  accused,  in  all  cases,  has  a  right  to  one  half  of
the  council,  to  prevent  insult  or  injustice;  and  the  coun¬
sellors  appointed  to  speak  before  the  council,  are  to  present
the  case,  after  the  evidence  is  examined,  in  its  true  light,  be¬
fore  the  council;  and  every  man  is  to  speak  according  to  equi¬
ty  and  justice.  Those  counsellors  who  draw  even  numbers,
that  is,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10  and  12,  are  the  individuals  who  are  to
stand  up  in  the  behalf  of  the  accused,  and  prevent  insult  or  in¬
justice.

9  In  all  cases  the  accuser  and  the  accused  shall  have  a  privi¬
lege  of  speaking  for  themselves,  before  the  council,  after  the
evidences  are  heard,  and  the  counsellors  who  are  appointed  to
speak  on  the  case,  have  finished  their  remarks.  After  the  ev¬
idences  are  heard,  the  counsellors,  accuser  and  accused  have
spoken,  the  president  shall  give  a  decision  according  to  the  un¬
derstanding  which  he  shall  have  Of  the  case,  and  call  upon  the
twelve  counsellors  to  sanction  the  same  by  their  vote.  But
should  the  remaining  counsellors,  who  have  not  spoken,  or
any  one  of  them,  after  hearing  the  evidences  and  pleadings  im¬
partially,  discover  an-  error  in  the  decision  of  the  president,
they  can  manifest  it,  and  the  case  shall  have  a  re-hearing;  and
if,  after  a  careful  re-hearing,  any  additional  light  is  shown
upon  the  case,  the  decision  shall  be  altered  accordingly:  but
in  case  no  additional  light  is  given,  the  first  decision  shall
Stand,  the  majority  of  the  council  having  power  to  determine
the  same.

10  In  cases  of  difficulty  respecting  doctrine,  or  principle,  (if
there  is  not  a  sufficiency  written  to  make  the  case  clear  to  the
minds  of  the  council,)  the  president  may  inquire  and  obtain
the  mind  of  the  Lord  by  revelation.

llJThe  high  priests,  when  abroad,  have  power  to  call  and
organize  a  council  after  the  manner  of  the  foregoing,  to  settle
■difficulties  when  the  parties,  or  either  ofthem,  shall  request  it:
and  the  said  council  of  high  priests  shall  have  power  to  ap¬
point  one  of  their  own  number,  to  preside  over  such  council


for  the  time  being.  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  said  council  t<>
transmit,  immediately,  a  copy  of  their  proceedings,  with  a  full
statement  of  the  testimony  accompanying  their  decision,  to
the  high  council  of  the  seat  of  the  tirst  presidency  of  the
church.  Should  the  parties,  or  either  of  them,  be  dissatisfied
with  the  decision  of  said  council,  they  may  appeal  to  the  high,
council  of  the  seat  of  the  first  presidency  of  the  church,  and
have  arc -hearing,  which  case  shall  there  be  conducted,  accor¬
ding  to  the  former  pattern  written,  as  though  no  such  decision
had  been  made.

12  This  council  of  high  priests  abroad,  is  only  to  be  called  on
the  most  difficult  cases  .of  church  matters':  and  no  common  or
ordinary  case  is  to  be  sufficient  to  call  such  council.  The
i  ravelling  or  located  high  priests  abroad,  have  power  to  sav
whether  it  is  necessary  to  call  such  a  council  or  not.

1  3  There  is  a  distinction  between  the  high  council  of  travel,
ling  high  priests  abroad,  and  the  travelling  high  council  compo¬
sed  of  the  twelve  apostles,  .in  their  decisions:  From  the  de  ¬
cision  of  the  former  there  can  be  an  appeal,  but  from  the  de¬
cision  of  the  latter  there  cannot.  The  latter  can  only  be  cal¬
led  in  question  by  the  general  authorities  of  the  church  in  case
of  transgression.

>4  Resolved  that  the  president,  or  presidents  of  the  seat  of
the  tirst  presidency  of  the  church,  shall  have  power  to  deter¬
mine  whether  any  such  case,  as  may  be  appealed,  is  justly  en¬
titled  to  a  re-hearing,  after  examining  the  appeal  and  the  ev¬
idences  and  statements  accompanying  it.

15  The  twelve  counsellors  then  proceeded  to  cast  lots,  cr
ballot,  to  ascertain  who  should  speak  first,  and  the  following
was  the  result:  namely: —


OLIVER  COWDERY,  No.  1  JOHN  JOHNSON  No.  7


JOSEPH  COE
SAMUEL  H.  SMITH


2  ORSON  HYDE

3  JARED  CARTER


8

3


LUKE  JOHNSON  “  4  JOSEPH  SMITH  sen. “  10

JOHN  S.  CARTER  “  5  JOHN  SMITH  “  1 1

SYLVESTER  SMITH  “  6  MARTIN  HARRIS  “  12.

After  prayer  the  conference  adjourned.


SECTION  VI.


Revelation  explaining  the  parable  of  the  reheat  and  the  tares ,
December  6,  le'32.

ON  FKSESTHOOD.

1  Verily  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  my  servants,  concern¬
ing  the  parable  of  the  wheat,  and  <tf’  the  tares:  behold,  verily

1  say,  that  the  field  was  the  worldtland  the  apostles  were  tla-
sowers  of  the  seed;  and  after  they  have  fallen  asleep,  the  great
persecutor  of  the  church,  the  apostate,  the  whore,  even  flab
ylon.  that  maketh  all  nations  to  drink  of  her  cup,  in  whose-
hearts  the  enemy,  even  Satan  sitteth  to  reign:  Behold  ho
soweth  the  tares;  wherefore  the  tares  choke  the  wheat  and
drive  the  church  into  the  wilderness.  J

2  But  behold,  in  the  last  days,  even  now  while  the  Lord  is
beginning  to’  bring  forth  the  word,  and  the  blade  is  springing
up  and  is  yet  tender,  behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  angels
are  crying  unto  the  Lord  day  and  night,  who  are  ready  and
waiting  to  be  sent  forth  to  reap  down  the  fields:  but  the  Lord
saith  jinto  them,  pluek  not  up  the  tares  while  the  blade  is  yet
tender:  (for  verily  your  faitii  is  weak,)  lest  you  destroy  the
wheat  also:  Therefore  let  the  wheat  and  the  tares  grow  to¬
gether  until  the  harvest  is  fully  ripe,  then  ye  shall  first  gath¬
er  out  the  wheat  from  among  the  tares,  and  after  the  gather¬
ing  of  the  wheat,  behold  and  lo!  the  tares  are  bound  in  bun¬
dles,  and  the  field  remaineth  to  be  burned.

.‘1  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  with  whom  the
priesthood  hath  continued  through  the  lineage  of  your  fathers,
for  ye  are  lawful  heirs  according  to  the  flesh,  and  have  been
hid  from  the  world  with  Christ  in  God:  therefore  your  life
and  the  priesthood  hath  remained,  and  must  needs  remain,
through  you  and  your  lineage,  until  the  restoration  of  all
things  spoken  by  the  mouths  of  all  the  holy  prophets  since
the  world  began.

4  Therefore,  blessed  are  ye  if  ye  continue  in  my  goodness,
a  light  uato  the  Gentiles,  and  through  this  priesthood,  a  sa¬
vor  unto  my  people  Israel;  The  Lord  hath  said  it:  Amen.


100


SECTION  VII.

Revelation  given  December  27,  1832.

1  Verily,  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  who  have  assembled
yourselves  together  to  receive  his  will  concerning  you.  Be¬
hold,  this  is  pleasing  unto  your  Lord,  and  the  angels  rejoice
over  you;  the  alms  of  your  prayers  have  come  up  into  the  ears
of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  and  are  recorded  in  the  book  of  the
names  of  the  sanctified:  even  them  of  the  celestial  world.—
Wherefore,  I  now  send  upcfei  you  another  comforter;  even  up¬
on  you  my  friends,  that  it  may  abide  in  your  hearts,  even  the
Holy  Spirit  of  promise;  which  other  comforter  is  the  same
that  I  promised  unto  my  disciples,  as  is  recorded  in  the  testi¬
mony  of  John.

2  This  comforter  is  the  promise  which  I  give  unto  you  of
eternal  life;  even  the  gloly  of  the  celestial  kingdom:  which
glory  is  that  of  the  churcn  of  the  first  born;  even  of  God  the
holiest  of  all,  through  Jesus  Christ  his  Son:  he  that  ascended
up  on  high;  as  also  he  descended  below  all  things;  in  that  he
comprehended  all  things,  that  he  might  be  in  all,  and  through
all  things;  the  light  of  truth;  which  truth  shineth.  This  is
the  light  of  Christ.  As  also  he  is  in  the  sun,  and  the  light  of  the
sun,  and  the  power  thereof  by  which  it  was  made.  As  also
he  is  in  the  moon,  and  is  the  light  of  the  moon,  and  the  pow¬
er  thereof  by  which  it  was  made.  As  also  the  light  of  the
stars,  and  the  power  thereof  by  which  they  were  made.  And
the  earth  also,  and  the  power  thereof;  even  the  earth  upon
which  you  stand.

3  And  the  light  which  now  shineth,  which  giveth  you  light,
is  through  him  who  enlighteneth  your  eyes,  which  is  the  same
light  that  quickeneth  your  understandings;  which  light  pro¬
ceeded  forth  from  the  presence  of  God,  to  fill  the  immensity
of  space.  The  light  which  is  in  all  things;  which  giveth  life
to  all  things;  which  is  the  law  by  which  all  things  are  govern¬
ed:  even  the  power  of  God,  who  sitteth  upon  his  throne,  who
is  in  the  bosom  of  eternity,  who  is  in  the  midst  of  all  things.

4  Now  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  through  the  redemption
which  is  made  for  you,  is  brought  to  pass  the  resurrection  from
the  dead.  And  the  spirit  and  the  body  is  the  soul  of  man.—
And  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  is  the  redemption  of  the
soul;  and  the  redemption  of  the  soul  is  through  him  who
quickeneth  all  things,  in  whose  bosom  it  is  decreed,  that  the
poor  and  the  meek  of  the  earth  shall  inherit  it.  Therefore,  it
must  needs  be  sanctified  from  all  unrighteousness,  that  it  may
be  prepared  for  the  celestial  glory;  for  after  it  hath  filled  the
measure  of  its  creation,  it  shall  be  crowned  with  glory,  even


101


with  the  presence  of  God  the  Father;  that  bodies  who  are  of
the  celestial  kingdom  may  possess  it  forever,  and  ever;  for,  for
this  intent  was  it  made,  and  created;  and  for  this  intent  are
they  sanctified.

5  And  they  who  are  not  sanctified  through  the  law  which  I
have  given  unto  you;  even  the  law  of  Christ,  must  inherit  an¬
other  kingdom,  even  that  of  a  terrestrial  kingdom,  or  that  of  a
telest ial  kingdom.  F or  he  who  is  not  able  to  abide  the  law
of  a  celestial  kingdom,  cannot  abide  a  celestial  glory:  and  he
who  cannot  abide  the  law  of  a  terrestrial  kingdom,  ainnot
abide  a  terrestrial  glory:  he  who  cannot  abide  the  law  or  a  te-
lestial  kingdom,  cannot  abide  a  telestial  glory:  therefore,  he  is
not  meet  for  a  kingdom  of  glory.  Therefore,  he  must  abide  a
kingdom  which  is  not  a  kingdom  of  glory.

6  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  earth  abideth  the  law
of  a  celestial  kingdom,  for  it  filleth  the  measure  of  its  creatio.n,
and  transgresseth  not  the  law.  Wherefore,  it  shall  be  sancti¬
fied;  yea,  notwithstanding  it  shall  die,  it  shall  be  quickened
again,  and  shall  abide  the  power  by  which  it  is  quickened,  and
the  righteous  shall  inherit  it:  for  notwithstanding  they  die,
they  also  shall  rise  again  a  spiritual  body:  they  who  are  of  a  ce¬
lestial  spirit,  shall  receive  the  same  body  which  was  a  natural
body;  even  ye  shall  receive  your  bodies,  and  your  glory  shall  be
that  glory  by  which  your  bodies  are  quickened.  Ye  who  are
quickened  by  a  portion  of  the  celestial  glory,  shall  then  receive
of  the  same,  even  a  fulness:  and  they  who  are  quickened  by  a
portion  of  the  terrestrial  glory,  shall  then  receive  of  the  same,
even  a  fulness:  and  also,  they  who  are  quickened  by  a  portion
of  the  telestial  glory,  shall  then  receive  of  the  same,  even  a  ful¬
ness:  and  they  who  remain,  shall  also  be  quickened;  neverthe¬
less,  they  shall  return  again  to  their  own  place,  to  enjoy  that
which  they  are  willing  to  receive,  because  they  were  not  wib
ling  to  enjoy  that  which  they  might  have  received.

7  For  what  doth  it  profit  a  man  if  a  gift  is  bestowed  upon
him,  and  he  receive  not  the  gift?  Behold  he  rejoices  not  in
that  which  is  given  unto  him,  neither  rejoices  in  him  who  is
the  giver  of  the  gift.

8  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  which  is  governed
by  law,  is  also  preserved  by  law,  and  perfected  and  sanctified
by  the  same:  that  which  breaketh  a  law,  and  abideth  not  by
law,  but  seeketh  to  become  a  law  unto  itself,  and  willeth  to
abide  in  sin,  andaltogether  abideth  in  sin,  cannot  be  sanctified
bv  law,  neither  by  mercy,  justice,  or  judgment.  Therefore,
they  must  remain  filthy  still.

9  All  kingdoms  have  a  law  given:  and  there  are  many  king¬
doms;  for  there  is  no  space  in  the  which  there  is  no  king


_


102


ilom;  arid  there  is  no  kingdom  in  which  there  is  no  space,
either  a  greater  or  lesser  kingdom.  And  unto  everyjkihgdom
is  given  a  law;  and  unto  every  law  there  are  certain  bounds*
also,  and  conditions.

10  AH  beings  who  abide  not  in  those  conditions,  are  not  jus-

•  tiiied;  for  intelligence  cleaveth  unto  intelligence;  wisdom  re*

ceiveth  wisdom;  truth  embrnceth  truth;  virtue  loveth  virtue;
light  cleaveth  unto  light;  mercy  hath  compassion  on  mercy,
and  claimeth  her  own;  justice  conlinustli  its  course,  and
claimeth  its  own;  judgment  goeth  before  the  face  of  him  wlio
sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  governeth  and  executeth  all
things;  he  compreliendeth  all  things,  and  all  things  are  before
him,  and  all  things  are  round  about  him;  and  he  is  above  all
things,  and  in  all  things,  and  is  through  all  things,  and  is  round
about  all  things:  and  all  things  are  by  him,  and  of  him;  even
God,  forever,  and  ever,

11  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  hath  given  a  law
unto  all  things  by  which  they  move  in  their  times,  and  their
seasons;  and  their  courses  are  fixed;  eveH  the  courses  of  the
heavens',  and  the  earth;  which  comprehend  the  earth  and  all
the  planets;  and  they  give  light  to  each  other  in  their  times,
and  in  their  seasons,  in  their  minutes,  in  their  hours,  in  their
days,  in  their  weeks,  in  their  months,  in  their  years:  all  these
are  one  year  with  God,  but  not  with  man.

12  The  earth  rolls  upon  her  wings;  and  the  sun  giveth  his
light  by  day,  and  the  moon  giveth  her  light  by  night;  and  the
stars  also  giveth  their  light,  as  they  roll'  upon  their  wings,  in
their  glory,  in  the  midst  of  the  power  of  God.  Unto  what
shall  I  liken  these  kingdoms,  that  ye  may  understand?  Behold,
all  these  are  kingdoms,  and  any  man  who  hath  seen  any  or
the  least  of  these,  hath  seen  God  moving  in  his  majesty  and
power.  I  say  unto  you,  he  hath  seen  him:  nevertheless,  he
who  came  unto  his  own  was  not  comprehended.  The  light
shineth  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness  compreliendeth  it  not;
nevertheless,  the  day  shall  come  when  you  shall  comprehend
even  God;  being  quickened  in  him,  and  by  him.  Then  shall
ye  know  that  ye  have  seen  me,  that  I  am,  and  that  I  am  the
true  light  that  is  in  you,  and  that  you  are  in  me,  otherwise  ye
could  not  abound.

1 3  Behold,  I  will  liken  these  kingdoms  unto  a  man  haying  a
field,  and  he  sent  forth  his  servants  into  the  field,  to  dig  in  the'
field ;  and  he  said  unto  the  first,  go  ye  and  labor  in  the  field,,
and  in  the  first  hour  I  will  come  unto  you  and  ye  shall  behold
the  joy  of  my  countenance:  and  he  said  unto  the  second,  go  ye
also  into  the  field,  and  in  the  second  hour  I  will  visit  you  with
the  joy  of  my  countenance:  and  also  unto  the  third,  saying,  I

_


103


•will  visit  yon;  and  unto  the  fourth,  and  so  on  unto  the  twelfth.

14  And  the  lord  of  the  field  went  unto  the  first  in  the  first
hour,  and  tarried  with  him  all  that  hour,  and  he  was  made  glad
with  the ‘light  of  the  countenance  of  his  lord;  and  then  he  with¬
drew  from  the  first  that  he  might  visit  the  second  also,  and
the  third,  and  the  fourth,  and  so  on  unto  the  twelfth;  and  thus
they'all  received  the  light  of  the  countenance  of  their  lord:  ev¬
ery  man  in  his  hour,  and  in  his  time,  and  in  his  season;  begin¬
ning  at  the  first,  and  so  on  unto  the  last,  and  from  the  last  un¬
to  the  first,  and  from  the  first  unto  the  last;  every  man  m  his
own  order,  until  his  hour  was  finished,  even  according  as  his
lord  had  commanded  him,  that  his  lord  might  be  glorified
in  him,  and  he  in  him,  that  they  all  might  be  glorified.

15  Therefore,  unto  this  parable  will  I  liken  all  these  king¬
doms,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof;  every  kingdom  in  its  hour,
and  in  its  time,  and  in  its  season;  even  according  to  the  decree
which  God  hath  made.

16  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  friends,  I  leave
these  sayings  with  you,  to  ponder  in  your  hearts  with  this  com¬
mandment  which  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  call  upon  me
while  I  am  near;  draw  near  unto  me,  and  I  will  draw  near  un¬
to  you;  seek  me  dilligently  and  ye  shall  find  me;  ask  and  ye
shall  receive;  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you:  whatso¬
ever  ye  ask  the  Father  in  my  name  it  shall  be  given  unto  you,
that  is  expedient  for  you;  and  if  ye  ask  any  tiling  that  is  not
expedient  for  you,  it  shall  turn  unto  your  condemnation.

17  Behold,  that  which  you  hear  is  as  the  voice  of  one  crying
in  the  wilderness;  in  the  wilderness,  because  you  cannot  see
him:  my  voice,  because  my  voice  is  spirit;  my  spirit  is  truth;
truth  abideth  and  hath  no  end;  and  if  it  be  in  you  it  shall
ahound.

18  And  if  your  eye  be  single  to  my  glory,  your  Whole  bodies
.shall  be  filled  with  light,  and  there  shall  be  no  darkness  in  you,
and  that  body  which  is  filled  with  light  comprehendeth  all
things.  Therefore,  sanctify  yourselves  that  your  minds  be¬
come  single  to  God,  and  the  days  will  come  that  you  shall  see
him:  [for  he  will  unveil  his  face  unto  you,  and  it  shall  be  in
his  own  time,  and  in  his  own  way,,  and  according  to  his  own
will.

19  Remember  the  great  and  last  promise  which  I  have  made
unto  you:  cast  away  your  idle  thoughts  and  your  excess  of
laughter  far  from  you;  tarry  ye,tanr  ye  in  this  place,  and  call
a  solemn  assembly,  even  of  those  who  are  the  first  laborers  in
this  last  kingdom;  and  let  those  whom  they  have  warned  in
their  travelling,  call  on  the  .Lord,  and  ponder  the  warning  in
their  hearts  which  they  have  received,  for  a  little  season.*—


104


Behold,  and  lo,  I  will  take  oare  of  your  flocks  and  will  raise  np
elders  and  send  unto  them.

20  Behold,  I  will  hasten  my  work  in  its  time;  and  I  give  un¬
to  you  who  are  the  first  laborers  in  this  last  kingdom,  a  com¬
mandment,  that  you  assemble  yourselves  together,  and  organ-
ize,yourselves,  and  prepare; yourselves;  and  sanetify  yourselves;
yea,  purity  your  hearts,  and  cleanse  your  hands  and  your  feet
before  me,  that  I  may  make  you  clean;  that  I  may  testify  unto
your  Father,  and  your  God,  and  my  God,  that  you  are  clean
from  the  blood  of  this  wicked  generation:  that  I  may  fulfil
this  promise,  this  great  and  last  promise  which  I  have  made
unto  you,  when  I  will.

21  Also,  I  give  unto  you  a  commandment,  that  ye  shall  con¬
tinue  in  prayer  and  fasting  from  this  time  forth.  And  I  give
unto  you  a  commandment,  that  you  shall  teach  one  another
the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom;  teach  ye  diligently  and  my  grace
shall  attend  you,  that  you  may  be  instructed  more  perfecUy  in
theory,  in  principle,  in  doctrine',  in  the  law  of  the  gospel,  in
all  things  that  pertain  unto  the  kingdom  of  God,  that  is  expe¬
dient  for  you  to  understand;  of  things  both  in  heaven,  and  in
the  earth,  and  under  the  earth;  things  which  have  been;  things
which  are;  things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass;  things
which  are  at  home;  things  which  are  abroad;  the  wars  and  the
perplexities  of  the  nations;  and  the  judgments  which  are  on
the  land;  and  a  knowledge  also  of  countries,  and  of  kingoms,
that  ye  may  be  prepared  in  all  things  when  I  shall  send  you .
again,  to  magnify  the  calling  whereunto  I  have  called  you,  ,
and  the  mission  with  which  I  have  commissioned  you.

22  Behold  I  sent  you  out  to  testify  and  warn  the  people,  and
it  becometh  every  man  who  hath  been  warned,  to  warn  his
neighbor.  Therefore,  they  are  left  without  excuse,  and  their
sins  are  upon  then;  own  heads.  He  that  seeketh  me  early
shall  find  me,  and  shall  not  be  forsaken.

23  Therefore,  tarry  ye,  and  labor  dilligently,  that  you  may
be  perfected  in  your  ministry,  to  go  forth  among  the  Gentiles,
for  the  last  time,  as  many  as  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  shall  name,
to  bind  up  the  law,  and  seal  up  the  testimony,  and  to  prepare
the  saints  for  the  hour  of  judgment  which  is  to  conie;  that
their  souls  may  escape  the  wrath  of  God,  the  desolation  of
abomination,  which  await  the  wicked,  both  in  this  world,  and  .
in  the  world  to  come.  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  let  those  who  arp..
not  the  first  elders,  continue  in  the  vineyard,  until  the  mouth,
of  the  Lord  shall  call  them,  for  their  time  is  not  yet  come;
their  garments  are  not  clean  from  the  blood  of  this  generation.

24  Abide  ye  in  the  liberty  wherewith  ye  are  made  free;  eajv
tangle  npt  yoursclvesin  si%but(let.  your  hands  b„e  cleanout**


105-


til  the  Lord  come,  for  not  many  days  hence  and  the  earth  shall
tremble,  and  reel  to  and  fro  as  a  drunken  man,  and  the  sun
shall  hide  his  face,  and  shall  refuse  to  give  light,  and  the  moon
shall  be  bathed  in  blood,  and  the  stars  shall  become  exceeding
angry,  and  shall  cast  themselves  down  as  a  %  that  falleth  from
off  a  fig-tree.

25  /»ad  after  your  testimony,  cometh  wrath  and  indignation
upon  the  people;  for  after  your  testimony  cometh  the  testimo¬
ny  of  earthquakes,  that  shall  cause  groanings  in  the  midst  of
her,  and  men  shall  fall  upon  the  ground,  and  shall  not  be  able
to  stand.  And  also  cometh  the  testimony  of  the  voice  of  thun-
drings,  and  the  voice  of  lightnings,  and  the  voice  of  tempests,
and  the  voice  of  the  waves  of  the  sea,  heaving  themselves  be¬
yond  their  bounds.  And  all  things  shall  be  in  commotion;
and  surely,  men’s  hearts  shall  tail  them;  for  fear  shall  come
upon  all  people;  and  angels  shall  fly  through  the  midst  of  heav¬
en,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  sounding  the  trump  of  God,  say¬
ing,  prepare  ye,  prepare  ye,  O  inhabitants  of  the  earth;  for
the  judgment  of  our  God  is  come:  behold,  and  lo,  the  Bride¬
groom  cometh,  go  ye  out  to  meet  him.

26  And  immediately  there  shall  appear  a  great  sign  in  heav¬
en,  and  all  people  shall  see  it  together.  And  another  angel
shall  sound  his  trump,  saying,  that  great  church,  the  mother
of  abominations,  that  made  all  nations  drink  of  the  wine  of  the
wrath  of  her  fornication,  that  persecuteth  the  saints  of  God,
that  shed  their  blood:  her  who  sitteth  upon  many  waters,  and
upon  the  islands  of  the  sea;  behold,  she  is  the  tares  of  the  earth,
she  is  bound  in  bundles,  her  bands  are  made  strong,  no  mail
can  loose  them;  therefore,  she  is  ready  to  be  burned.  And  he
shall  sound  his  trump  both  long  and  loud,  and  all  nations  shall
hear  it.

27  And  there  shall  be  silence  in  heaven  for  the  space  of  half
an  hour,  and  immediately  after  shall  the  curtain  of  heaven  be
unfolded,  as  a  scroll  is  unfolded  after  it  is  rolled  up,  and  the
fece  of  the  Lord  shall  be  unveiled;  and  the  saints  that  are  up-
up  the  earth,  who  are  alive,  shall  be  quickened,  and  be  caught
up  to  meet  him.  And  they  who  have  Slept  in  their  graves,
shall  come  forth;  for  their  graves  shall  be  opened,  and  they  ah
flo  shall  be  caught  up  to  meet  him  in  the  midst  of  the  pillar  of
heaven:  they  are  Christ’s,  the  first  fruits:  they  who  shall  de¬
scend  with  him  first,  and  they  who  are  on  the  earth  and  In
their  graves,  who  are  first  caught  up  to  meet  him :  and  all  this
by  the  voice  of  the  sounding  of  the  trump  of  the  angel  of

28  And  after  this  another  angel  shall  sound,  which  is  the
second  trump;  and  then  cometh  the  redemption  of  those  who


106


Sr  a  Christ’s  at  his  coming;  who  have  received  their  part  ill
that  prison  which  is  prepared  for  them,  that  they  might  re¬
ceive  the  gospel,  and  be  judged  according  to  men  in  the  flesh.

29  And  again,  another  trump  shall  sound,  which  is  the  third
^trump :  and  then  cometh  the  spirits  of  men  who  are  to  be  judg¬
ed,  and  are  found  under  condemnation;  and  these  are  the  rest
of  the  dead,  and  they  live  not  again  until  the  thousan*.  years
are  ended,  neither  again,  until  the  end  of  the  earth.

30  And  another  trump  shall  sound,  which  is  the  fourth  trump,
saying,  these  are  found  among  those  who  are  to  remain  until
that  great  and  last  day,  even  the  end,  who  shall  remain  filthy
still.

31  And  another  trump  shall  sound,  which  is  the  fifth  trump,
which  is  the  fifth  angel  who  committeth  the  everlasting  gos¬
pel,  flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven,  unto  all  nations,  kin¬
dreds,  tongues  and  people;  and  this  shall  be  the  sound  of  his
trump,  saying  to  all  people,  both  in  heaven,  and  in  earth,  and
that  are  under  the  earth;  for  every  ear  shall  hear  it,  and  every
linee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  shall  confess,  while  they
hear  the  sound  of  the  trump,  saying,  fear  God,  and  give  glo¬
ry  to  him  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  forever,  and  ever;  for
the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come.

32  And  again,  another  angel  shall  sound  his  trump,  which  is
the  sixth  angel,  saying,  she  is  fallen,  who  made  all  nations
■drink  of  the  wine  of  the  -wrath  of  her  fornication:  she  is  fallen  1
is  fallen!

33  And  again,  another  angel  shall  sound  his  trump,  which  js
the  seventh  angel,  saying,  it  is  finished!  it  is  finished!  tlvs
.Lamb  of  God  hath  overcome,  and  trodden  the  wine-press
alone;  even  the  wine-press  of  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath  of
Almighty  God:  and  then  shall  the  angels  be  crowned  with
the  glory  of  his  might,  and  the  saints  shall  be  filled  with  his
glory,  and  receive  their  inheritance  and  be  made  equal  with
him.


84  And  then  shall  the  first  angel  again  sound  his  trump  Ip
the  ears  of  all  living,  and  reveal  the  secret  acts  of  men,  and
the  mighty  works  of  God  in  the  first  thousandth  year.

3o  And  then  shall  the  second  angel  sound  his  trump,  and  re,
veal  the  secret  acts  of  men,  and  the  thoughts  and  intents  of
their  hearts,  and  the  mighty  works  of  God  in  the  second  thorn
sandth  year:  and  so  on,  until  the  seventh  angel  shall  sound
his  trump:  and  he  shall  stand  forth  upon  the  land  and  upop
the  sea,  and  swear  in  the  name  of  him  who  sitteth  upon  the
throne,  that  there  shall  be  time  no  longer,  and  satan  shall  be
bound,  that  old  serpent  who  is  called  the  devil,  and  shall  not
he  loosed  for  the  space  of  a  thousand  years.  And  then  he  shall


107


he  loosed  for  a  little  season,  that  he  may  gather  together  his
armies:  and  Michael  the  seventh  angel,  even  the  archangel,
shall  gather  together  his  armies,  even  the  hosts  of  heaven. —
And  the  devil  shall  gather  together  his  armies:  even  the  hosts
V)f  hell,  and  shall  come  lip  to  battle  against  Michael  and  his
armies:  and  then  cometh  the  battle  of  the  great  God!  and
the  devil  and  his  armies  shall  be  cast  away  into  their  own
place,  that  they  shall  not  have  power  over  the  saints  any  more
at  all;  for  Michael  shall  fight  their  battles,  and  shall  overcome
him  who  seeketh  the  throne  of  him  who  aitteth  upon  the
throne,  even  the  Lamb.  This  is  the  glory  of  God,  and  the
sanctified;  and  they  shall  not  any  more  see  death.

36  Therefore,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  friends,  call  your
solemn  assembly,  as  I  have  commanded  you;  and  as  all  have
not  faith;  seek  ye  diligently  and  teach  one  another  words  of
wisdom;  yea,  seek  ye  out  of  the  best  books  words  of  wisdom:
seek  learning  even  by  study,  and  also  by  faith.  Organize
yourselves;  prepare  every  needful  thing,  and  establish  a  house,
even  a  house  of  prayer,  a  house  of  fasting,  a  house  of  faith,  a
house  of  learning,  a  house  of  glory,  a  house  of  order,  a  house
of  God;  that  your  incomings  may  be  in  the  name  of  the  Lord;
that  your  outgoings  may  be  in  the  name  of  the  Lord;  that  all
your  salutations  may  be  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  with  uplift¬
ed  hands  unto  the  Most  High.

37  Therefore,  cease  from  all  your  light  speeches;  from  all
laughter;  from  all  your  lustful  desires:  from  all  your  pride
and  lightmindedness,  and  from  all  your  wicked  doings.  Ap¬
point  among  yourselves  a  teacher,  "and  let  not  all  be  spokes¬
men  at  once;  but  let  one  speak  at  a  time,  and  let  all  listen
unto  his  sayings,  that  when  all  have  spoken,  that  all  may  be
edified  of  all,  and  that  every  man  may  have  an  equal  privilege.

S3  See  that  ye  love  one  another;  cease  to  be  covetous,  learn
to  impart  one  to  another  as  the  gospel  requires;  cease  to  be  idle,
cease  t<5  be  unclean;  cease  to  find  fault  one  with  another;
cease  to  sleep  longer  than  is  needful;  retire  to  thy  bed  early,
that  ye  may  not  be  weary;  arise  early,  that  your  bodies  and
your  minds  maybe  invigorated:  and' above  all  things,  clothe
yourselves  with  the  bonds  of  charity,  as  with  a  mantle,  which
is  the  bond  of  perfectness  and  peace:  pray  always,  that  you
may  not  faint  until  I  come:  behold,  and  lo,  I  will  come  quick¬
ly,  and  receive  you  unto  myself:  Amen.

>•39  And  again,  the  order  of  the  house  prepared  for  the  pres¬
idency  of  the  school  of  the  prophets,  established  for  their  in-
Btruction  in  all  things  that  are  expedient  for  them,  even  for
all  the  officers  of  the  church,  or  in  other  words,  those  who
are  called  to  the  ministry  in  the  church,  beginning  at  the  high-


108


priests,  even  down  to  the  deacons:  and  this  shall  be  the  order
of  the  house  of  the  presidency  of  the  school:  He  that  is  ap¬
pointed  to  be  president,  or  teacher,  shall  be  found  standing
in  his  place,  in  the  house,  which  shall  be  prepared  for  him.
Therefore,  he  shall  be  first  in  the  house  of  God,  in  a  place
that  the  congregation  in  the  house  may  hear  his  words  care¬
fully  and  distinctly,  not  with  loud  speech.  And  when  Ire
cometh  into  the  house  of  God,  (for  he  should  be  first  in  the
house;  behold  this  is  beautiful,  that  he  may  be  an  example,)

40  Let  him  offer  himself  in  prayer  upon  his  knees  before  God,
in  token,  or  remembrance,  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  and
when  any  shall  come  in  afler  him  let  the  teacher  arise,  and
with  uplifted  hands  to  heaven;  yea,  even  directly,  salute  his
brother  or  brethren  with  these  words:

41  Art  thou  a  brother  or  brethren,  I  salute  you  in  the  name
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  token,  or  remembrance  of  the  ev¬
erlasting  covenant,  in  which  covenant  I  receive  you  to  fellow¬
ship^  a  determination  that  is  fixed,  immovable  and  unchang-
able,  to  be  your  friend  and  brother  through  the  grace  of  God,
in  the  bonds  of  love,  to  walk  in  all  the  commandments  of  God
blameless,  in  thanksgiving,  forever  and  ever.  Amen.

42  And  he  that  is  found  unworthy  of  this  salutation,  shall
not  have  place  among  you;  for  ye  shall  not  suffer  that  mine
house  shall  be  polluted  by  them.

43  And  he  that  cometh  in  and  is  faithful  before  me,  and  is  a
brother,  or  if  they  be  brethren,  they  shall  salute  the  president
or  teacher  with  uplifted  hands  to  heaven  with  this  same  pray¬
er  and  covenant,  or  by  saying,  Amen,  in  token  of  the  same.

44  Behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  this  is  a  sample  unto  you
lor  a  salutation  to  one  another  in  the  house  of  God,  in  the
school  of  the  prophets.  And  ye  are  called  to  do  this  by  pray¬
er'  and  thanksgiving  as  the  Spirit  shall  give  utterance,  in  all
your  doings  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  in  the  school  of  the
prophets,  that  it  may  become  a  sanctuary,  a  tabernacle?  of  the
Holy  Spirit  to  your  edification.

45  And  ye  shall  not  receive  any  among  you,  into  this  scliool
save  he  is  clean  from  the  blood  of  this  generation:  and  he  shall
be  received  by  the  ordinance  of  the  washing  of  feet;  for  unto
this  end  was  the  ordinance  of  the  washing  of  feet  instituted.

46  And  again,  the  ordinance  of  washing  feet  is  to  be  adminis¬
tered  by  the  president,  or  presiding  elder  of  the  church.  It  is
to  be  commenced  with  prayer:  and  after  partaking  of  bread
and  wine  he  is  to  gird  himself,  according  to  thejpattern  given
in  the  thirteenth  chapter  of  John’s  testimony  concerning  pie*.
Amen.


109


SECTION  VIII.

Revelation  given  April,  1829,  to  Oliver  Cotcdery,  and
Joseph  Smith  jr.

1  A  great  and  marvelous  work  is  about  to  come  forth  unto
the  children  of  men:  behold  I  am  God,  and  give  heed  unta
my  word,  whicli  is  quick  and  powerful,  sharper  than  a  two-
edged  sword,  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  both  joints  and  mas
tow:  Therefore  give  heed  unto  my  words.

2  Behold  the  field  is  white  already  to  harvest,  therefore
whoso  desireth  to  reap,  let  him  thrust  in  his  sickle  with  his
might  and  reap  while  the  day  lasts,  that  he  may  treasure  up
for  his  soul  everlasting  salvation  in  the  kingdom  of  God:  Yea,
whosoever  will  thrust  in  his  sickle  and  reap,  the  same  is  cal¬
led  of  God;  therefore,  if  you  will  ask  of  me  you  shall  receive;
if  you  will  knock  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.

3  Now  as  you  have  asked,  behold  I  say  unto  you,  keep  my
commandments,  and  seek  to  bring  forth  and  establish  the
cause  of  Zion:  seek  not  for  riches  but  for  wisdom,  and  behold
the  mysteries  of  God  shall  be  unfolded  unto  you,  and  then
shall  you  be  made  rich.  Behold  he  that  hath  eternal  life  is
rich.

4  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  even  as  you  desire  of  me,
so  shall  it  be  unto  you;  and  if  you  desire,  you  shall  be  the
means  of  doing  much  good  in  this  generation.  Say  nothing
but  rspentance  unto  this  generation:  keep  my  command¬
ments  and  assist  to  bring  forth  my  work  according  to  my  com¬
mandments,  and  you  shall  be  blessed.

5  Behold  thou  hast  a  gift,  and  blessed  art  thou  because  of
thy  gift.  Remember  it  is  sacred  and  cometh  from  above:  and
if  thou  wilt  inquire,  thou  shalt  know  mysteries  which  are
great  and  marvelous:  therefore  thou  shalt  exercise  thy  gift,
that  thou  rnayest  find  out  mysteries,  that  thou  mayest  bring
many  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth;  yea,  convince  them  of
the  error  of  their  ways.  Make  not  thy  gift  known  unto  any,
save  it  be  those  who  are  of  thy  faith.  Trifle  not  with  'sa’e-
red  things.  If  thou  wilt  do  good,  yea  and  hold  out  faithful  to
the  end,  thou  shalt  be  saved  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  is
the  greatest  of  all  the  gifts  of  God;  for  there  is  no  gift  greater
than  the  gift  of  salvation.

6  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  blessed  art  thou  for  what
thou  hast  done,  for  thou  hast  inquired  of  me,  and  behold  as  of¬
ten  as  thou  hast  inquired,  thou  hast  received  instruction  of  my
Spirit.  If  it  had  not  been  so,  thou  wouldst  not  have  come  to
the  place  where  thou  art  at  this  time.


110


7  Behold  thou  k  no  west  that  thou  hast  inquired  of  me,  and  I
did  enlighten  thy  mind;  and  now  I  tell  thee  these  things,  that
thou  mayest  know  that  thou  hast  been  enlightened  by  the
Spirit  of  truth;  yea,  I  tell  thee,  that  thou  mayest  know  that
there  is  none  else  save  God,  that  knowest  thy  thoughts  and
the  intents  of  thy  heart:  I  tell  thee  these  things  as  a  witness
unto  thee,  that  the  words  or  the  work  which  thou  hast  been
writing  is  true.

8  Therefore  be  diligent,  stand  by  my  servant  Joseph  faithfully
in  whatsoever  difficult  circumstances  he  may  be,  for  the  word’s
sake.  Admonish  him  in  his  faults  and  also  receive  admoni¬
tion  of  him.  Be  patient;  be  sober;  be  temperate:  have  patience,
faith,  hope  and  charity.

t)  Behold  thou  art  Oliver,  and  I  have  spoken  unto  thee  be¬
cause  of  thy  desires;  therefore,  treasure  up  these  words  in  thy
heart.  Be  faithful  and  diligent  in  keeping  the  commandments
of  God,  and  I  will  encircle  thee  in  the  arms  of  my  love.

10  Behold  I  am  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  I  am  the
same  that  came  unto  my  own  and  my  own  received  me  not. —
1  am  the  light  which  shine th  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness
eontprehendeth  it  not.

11  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  if  you  desire  a  further  wit¬
ness,  cast  your  mind  upon  the  night  that  you  cried  unto  me  in
your  heart,  that  you  might  know  concerning  the  truth  of  these
things;  did  I  not  speak  peace  to  your  mind  concerning  the
matter!  What  greater  witness  can  you  have  than  from  God!
And  now  behold,  you  have  received  a  witness,  for  if  I  have
told  you  things  which  no  man  knoweth,  have  you  not  received
a  witness!  And  behold  I  grant  unto  you  a  gift,  if  you  desire
of  me,  to  translate  even  as  my  servant  Joseph.

12  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  there  are  records  which
contain  much  of  my  gospel,  which  have  been  kept  back  be¬
cause  of  the  wickedness  of  the  people;  and  now  I  command
you,  that  if  you  have  good  desires,  a  desire  to  lay  up  treasures
for  yourself  in  heaven,  then  shall  you  assist  in  bringing  to
light,  with  your  gift,  those  ports  of  my  scrptures  which  have
been  hidden  because  of  iniquity.

IS  And  now,  behold  I  give  unto  you,  and,  also  unto  my  ser¬
vant  Joseph  the  keys  of  this  gift,  which  shall  bring  to  light
this  ministry;  and  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses,
shall  every  word  be  established.

14  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  if  they  reject  my  words,
and  this  part  of  my  gospel  and  mimstry,  blessed  are  ye,  fcr
they  can  do  no  more  unto  you  than  unto  me;  and  if  they  do
unto  you,  even  as  they  have  done  unto  me,  blessed  are  ye,  for
you  shall  dwell  with  me  in  glory: .  but  if  they  reject  not  my


Ill


words,  which  shall  be  established  by  the  testimony  which  shall
be  given,  blessed  are  they;  and  then  shall  ye  have  joy  in  the
fruit  of  your  labors.

15  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  as  I  said  unto  my  disciples,
where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  as
touching  one  thing,  behold  there  will  1  be  in  the  midst  of  them:
even  so  ani  I  in  tire  midst  of  you.  Fear  not  to  do  good  my
sons,  for  whatsoever  ye  sow,  that  shall  ye  also  reap:  therefore,
if  ye  sow  good,  ye  shall  also  reap  good  for  your  reward:

Ld  Therefore  fear  not  little  flock,  do  good,  let  earth  and  hell
combine  against  yori,  for  if  ye  rre  built  upon  my  Rock,  they
cannot  prevail.  Behold  I  do  not  condemn  you,  go  your  ways
and  sin  no  more:  perform  with  soberness  the  work  which  I
have  commanded  you;  look  unto  :nc  in  every  thought,  doubt
not,  fear  not:  behold  the  wounds  which  pierced  my  side,  and
also  the  prints  of  the  nails  in  my  hands  and  feet:  be  faithful;
keep  my  commandments,  and  ye  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of
iieuven:  Amen.

SECTION  IX.

Revelation  given  to  Joseph  Smith ,  jr.  and  Oliver  Cotedery,
July,  1830.

1  Behold  thou  wast  called  and  chosen  to  write  the  book  of
Mormon,  and  to  my  ministry;  and  I  have  lifted  thee  up  out  of
thy  afflictions,  and  have  counselled  theef  that  thou  hast  been
delivered  from  all  thine  enemies,  and  thou  hast  been  delivered,
from  the  powers  of  satan,  and  from  darkness!  Nevertheless,
thou  art  not  excusable  in  thy  transgressions;  nevertheless  go
.thy  way  and  sin  no  more.

3  Magnify  tliine  office;  and  after  thou  hast  sowed  thy  fields
and  secured  them,  go  speedily  unto  the  church  which  is  in
Coles ville,  Fayette  and  Manchester,  and  they  shall  support
thee:  and  I  will  bless  them  both  spiritually  and  temporally;
but  if  they  receive  thee  not,  I  will  send  upon  them  a  cursing
instead  of  a  blessing.

3  And  thou  shalt  continue  in  calling  upon  God  in  my  name,
and  writing  the  things  which  shall  be  given  thee  by  the  Com¬
forter,  and  expounding  all  scriptures  unto  the  church,  and  it
shall  be  given  thee  in  the  very  moment,  what  thou  shalt  speak
and  write;  and  they  shall  hear  it,  or  I  will  send  unto  them  a
cursing  instead  of  a  blessing:

4  For  thou  shalt  devote  all  thy  service  in  Zion.  And  in  this
thou  shalt  have  strength;  Be  patient  in  afflictions,  for  thou
shalt  have  many:  but  endure  them,  for  lo,  I  am  with  you,  even


112


unto  the  end  of  thy  days.  And  in  temporal  labors  thou  shall
hot  have  strength,  for  this  is  not  thy  calling.  Attend  to  thy
‘calling  and  thou  shalt  have  wherewith  to  magnify  thine  office,
and  to  expound  all  scriptures.  And  continue  in  laying  on  of
the  hands,  and  confirming  the  churches.

5  And  thy  brother  Oliver  shall  continue  in  bearing  my  name
before  the  world;  and  also  to  the  church.  And  he  shall  not
•aappose  that  he  can  say  enough  in  my  cause;  and  lo  I  am
with  him  to  the  end.  In  m^  he  shall  .have  glory,  and  not  of
•himself,  whether  in  weakness  or  in  strength,  whether  in  bonds
or  free:  And  at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  he  shall  open  his
mouth  and  declare  my  gospel  as  with  the  voice  of  a  trump,
both  day  and  night.  And  I  will  give  unto  him  strength  such
as  is  not  known  among  men.

6  Require  not  miracles,  except  I  shall  command  you;  except
casting  out  devils;  healing  the  sick;  and  against  poisonous
serpents;  and  against  deadly  poisons;  and  these  things  ye
shall  not  do,  except  it  be  required  of  you,  by  them  who  desire
it,  that  the  scriptures  might  be  fulfilled,  for  ye  shall  do  accor¬
ding  to  that  which  is  written.  And  in  whatsoever  place  ye
shall  enter,  and  they  receive  you  not,  in  my  name,  ye  shall
leave  a  curs'ng  instead  of  a  blessing,  by  casting  off  the  dust  of
your  feet  against  them  as  a  testimony,  and  cleansing  your  feet
by  the  wayside.

7  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  whosoever  shall  lay  their
hands  upon  you  by  violence,  ye  shall  command  to  be  smitten
in  my  name,  and  behold  I  will  smite  them  according  to  your
words,  in  mine  own  due  time.  And  whosoever  shall  go  to  law
with  thee  shall  be  cursed  by  the  law.  And  thou  shalt  take  no
purse,  nor  scrip,  neither  staves,  neither  two  coats,  for  the
church  shall  give  unto  thee  in  the  very  hour  what  thou  need-
est  for  food,  and  for  raiment,  and  for  shoes,  and  for  money,
and  for  scrip:  For  thou  art  called  to  prune  my  vineyard  with
a  mighty  pruning,  yea,  even  for  the  last  time.  Yea,  and  also,
all  those  whom  thou  hast  ordained.  And  they  shall  do  even
according  to  this  pattern.  Amen.

SECTION  X.

Revelation  given  in  the  presence  of  six  elders,  in  Fayette,

.  New-York,  September,  1830.

1  Listen  to  the  voice  of  Jesus  Christ,  your  Redeemer,  the
Great  I  AM,  whose  arm  of  mercy  hath  atoned  for  your  sins;
who  will  gather  his  people  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chick¬
ens  under  her  wings,  even  as  many  as  will  hearken  to  my


113

Voice,  and  bumble  themselves  before  me,  and  call  upon  mein
t  nighty  prayer.  Behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  at
t  his  time  your  6ins  are  forgiven  you,  therefore  ye  refeeive  these
tilings:  but  remember  to  sin  no  more,  lest  perils  shall  come
upon  you.

2  Verily  1  say  unto  you,  that  ye  are  chosen  out  of  the  world
to  declare' my  gospel  with  the  sound  of  rejoicing,  as  with  the
voice  of  a  trump:  lift  up  your  hearts  and  be  glad  for  I  am  in
your  midst,  and  am  your  advocate  with  the  Father;  and  it  is
his  good  will  to  give  you  the  kingdom;  and  as  it  is  written,
Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  faith,  being  united  in  prayer  ac¬
cording  to  my  command,  ye  shall  receive;  and  ye  are  called
to  bring  to  pass  the  gathering  of  mine  elect,  for  mine  elect
hear  my  voice  and  harden  not  their  hearts:  wherefore  the  de¬
cree  hath  gone  forth  from  the  Father,  that  they  shall  be  gath¬
ered  in  unto  one  place,  upon  the  face  of  this  land,  to  prepare
their  hearts,  and  be  prepared  in  all  things,  against  the  day
when  tribulation  and  desolation  are  sent  forth  upon  the  wicked:'
for  the  hour  is  nigh,  arid  the  day  soon  at  Stand,  when  the  earth
is  ripe:  and  all  the  proud,  and  they  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be
as  stubble,  and  T  will  bum  them  up,  saith  'the  Lord  of  hosts,
that  wickedness  shall  not  be  upon  the  earth:  for  the  hour  is
nigh,  and  that  which  was  spoken  by  mine  apostles  must  be
fulfilled;  for  as  they  spoke  so  shall  it  come  to  pass;  for  I  will
reveal  myself  from  heaven  with  power  and  great  glory,  with
all  the  hosts  thereof,  and  dwell  in  righteousness  with  men  on
earth  a  thousand  years,  and  the  wicked  Shall  not  stand.

And  again,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  and  it  hath  gone
forth  in  a  firm  decree,  by  the  will  of  the  Father,  that  mine
apostles,  ti.e  twelve  which  were  with  me  in  my  ministry  at
Jerusalem,  shall  stand  at  my  right  hand  at  the  day  of  my  com¬
ing  in  a  pillar  of  fire,  being  clothed  with  robes  of  righteousness,
with  crowns  upon  their  heads,  in  glory  even  as  I  am,  to  judge
(lie  whole  house  of  Israel,  oven  as  many  as  have  loved  me  and
kept  my  commandments,  and  none  else;  for  a  trump  shall
sound  both  long  and  loud,  even  as  upon  mount  Sinai,  and  all
the  earth  shall  quake,  and  they  shall  come  forth:  yea,  even
the  dead  which  died  in  me,  to  receive  a  crown  of  righteous¬
ness,  and  to  be  clothed  upon,  even  as  I  am,  to  be  with  me,  that
we  may  lie  one.

4  But  behold,  I  say  unto  you,  that  before  this  great  day  shall'
come,  the  sun  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  moon  shall  be  turned
into  blood,  and  the  stars  shall  fall  from  heaven:  and  there  shall
be  greater  signs  in  heaven  above,  and  in  the  earth  beneath;
and  there  shall  be  Weeping  and  wailing  among  the  hosts  of


114


men;  and  there  shall  he  a  great  hailstorm  seal  lortli  to  destroy
the  crops  of  the  earth:  and  it  shall  come  to  [kiss,  because  of
the  wickedness  of  the  world,  that  I  will  take  vengeance  upon,
the  wicked,  for  they  will  not  repent:  for  the  cup  of  mine  in¬
dignation  is  full:  for  behold,  my  blood  shall  not  cleanse  them
if  they  hear  rue  not.

5  Wherefore  I  the  Lord  God  will  send  forth  flies  Upon  the
face  of  the  earth,  which  shall  take  hold  of  the  inhaWtarJs  there¬
of,  and  shall  eat  their  flesh,  and  shall  cause  maggots *to  come  in
upon  then),  and  their  tongues  shall  be  stayed' that  they' shall
uot  utter  against  me,  and  their  flesh  shall  Tall  froin  olf  their
Ivones,  and  their  eyes  from  their  sockets:  and  it  shall  come  to
pass,  that  the  beasts  of  the  forests,  and  the  fowls  of  the  air,
shall  devour  them  up:  and  that  great  and  abominable  church,
which  is  the  whore  of  all  the  earth,  shall  be  cast,  down  by  de¬
vouring  fire,  according  as  it  is  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  Ezekiel
the  prophet,  which  spoke  of  these  things,  which  have  nol
come  to  pass,  btxt  surely  must,  as  I  live,  lor  abomination  shall
not  reign.

ti  And  again,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  when  the
thousand  years  are  ended,,  and  men  again  begin  to  deny  their
God,  then  will  I  spare  the  earth  but  fora  little  season;  and  the
end  shall  come,  and  the  heaven  and  the  earth  shdll  be  consum¬
ed,  and  pass  away,  and  there  shall  be  a  new  heaven  and  a
new  earth;  for  all  old  tilings  shall  pass  away,  and  all  things
shall  become  new,  even  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  all  the
fulness  thereof,  both  men  and  beasts:  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and
the  fishes  of  the  sea,  and  not  one  hair,  neither  mote,  shall  be,
lost,  for  it  is  the  workmanship  of  mine  hand.

7  But  behold,  verily  1  say  unto-  you,  before  the  earth  shall
pass  away,  Michael  mine  archangel,  shall  sound  his  trump,
and  then  shall  all  the  dead  awake,  for  their  graves  shall  be
opened,  and  they  shall  come  forth;  yea,  even  all;  and  the
righteous  shall  he  gathered  on  my  right  hand  nhto  eternal  life  i
awl  the  wicked  on  m3'  left  hand  will  I  be  ashamed  to  own  be¬
fore  the  Father:  wherefore  I  will  say  unto  them,  depart  from
tnc  ye  cursed  into  everlasting  Are,  prepared  for  the  devil  and
bis  angels.

8  And  now  behold  I  say  unto  you,  never  at  any  time,  have  I
declared  from  mine  own  mouth,  that  they  should  return,  for
where  I  am  they  cannot  come,  for  they  have  no  power;  but
remember,  that  all  my  judgments  are  nof  given  unto  men  j.
and  as  the  words  have  gone  forth  out  of  m3'  mou'h,  even  so,
shall  they  be  fulfilled,  that  the  first  shall  be  last,  and  that  the;
last  shall  be  first  in  all  things,  whatsoever  I  have  created  by
the  word  of  my  power,  which  is  the  power  of  my  Spirit;  for  _


iiy  the  power  of  my  Spirit,  created  I  them:  yea,  all  things
both  spiritual  and  temporal:  firstly  spiritual,  secondly  tem¬
poral,  which  is  the  beginning  of  my  work:  and  again,  firstly
temporal,  and  secondly  spiritual;  which  is  the  last  of  my
work:  speaking  unto  you.  that  you  may  naturally  understand,
hut  unto  myself  my  works  have 'no  end,  neither  beginning;  lint
i  i  is  given  unto  you,  that  ye  may  understand,  because  ye  have
asked  it  of  me  and  are  agreed.

!)  Wherefore,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  all  things  nnto  me
are  spiritual,  and  not  at  any  time  hate  I  given  unto  you  a
law  which  was  temporal,  neither  any  man,  nor  the  children
of  men:  neither  Adam  your  fathe",  whom  I  created:  behold
I  gave  unto  him  that  he  should  be  an  agent  unto  himself;  and
T  gave  unto  him  commandment,  but  no  temporal  command¬
ment  gave  I  unto  him;  for  my  commandments  are  spiritual:'
they  are  not  natural,  nor  temporal,  neither  carnal  nor  sensual;

10  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  Adam  being  tempted  of  the  de¬
vil,  for  behold  the  devil  was  before  Adam,  for  he  rebelled
against  me  saying,  Give  me  thine  honor,  which  is  my  power:
and  a:so  a  third  part  of  the  hosts  of  heaven  turned  he  away
from  me  because  of  their  agency:  and  they  were  thrust  down, .
and  thus  came  the  devil  and  his  angels;  and  behold,  there  is
a  place  prepared  for  them  from  the  beginning,  which  place  is
hell:  and  it  must  needs  be  that  the  devil  should  tempt  the
children  of  men,  or  they  could  not  be  agents  unto  themselves,
for  if  they  never  should  have  bitter,  they  could  not  know  the
sweet.

1 1  Wherefore,  it  came  to  pass,  that  the  devil  tempted  Adam
and  he  partook  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  transgressed  the  com¬
mandment,  wherein  he  became  subject  to  the  will  of  the  dev¬
il,  because  he  yielded  unto  temptation.  Wherefore,  I  the
Lord  God  caused  that  he  should  be  cast  out  from  th  garden
of  Eden,  from  my  presence,  because  of  his  transgression:
wherein  he  became  spiritually  drad:  which  is  the  first  death,
even  that  same  death,  which  is  the  last  death,  which  is  spirit¬
ual,  which  shall  be  pronounced  upon  the  wicked  when  I  shall
say,  Dejtert  ye  cursed.

12  But  behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  I  the  Lord  God  gave  un¬
to  Adam  and  unto  his  seed,  that  they  should  not  die  as  to  the
tomporal  death,  until  1  the  Lord  God  should  sen-,  f  rth  an,
gels  to  declare  unto  them  repentance  and  redemption,  through
faith  on  the  name  of  mine  only  begotten  Son:  and  thus  did
I  the  Lord  God  appoint  unto  nian  the  days  of  his  probation;
that  by  his  natural  death,  he  might  be  raised  in  immortality
unto  eternal  life,  even  as  many  as  would  believe,  and  they


116


that  belies  o  not,  unto  eleriidl  daniEatipii,  lor  they  cannot  be
redeemed  from  their  spiritual  fall,  because  they  repent  not,
for  they  will  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  und  their  deefls'
are  evil,  and  they  receive  their  wages  of  whom  they  list  to'
obey.

13  But  behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  little  children  are  re

eemed  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  tlirough  mine  Only

begotten:  Wherefore  they'  cannot  sin,  for  power  is  not  given
unto  satan  tp  tempt  little  children,  until  they  begin  to  become
accountable  before  me;  for  it  is  given  unto  them  even  ap  1
will,  according  to  mine  own  pleasure,  that  great  things  may
be  required  at  the  hancj  of  their  fathers.

14  And  again  I  say  unto  you,  that  whoso  having  knowledge,
have  I  not  commanded  to  repent?  and  he  that  hath  no  under¬
standing,  it  remaineth  in  me  to  do  according  ns  it  is  written,
And  now,  I  declare  no  more  unto  you  at.  this  lime.  Amen.

SECTION  XI.

Iiccdation  to  Joscjih  Smith  jr,  and  Sidney  Higdon,
December,  1830.

1  Listed  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  y  our  God,  even  Alpha,  and,
Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  whose  course  is  one  eter¬
nal  round,  the  same  to-day  as  yesterday  and  forever.  1  tun  Je¬
sus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  who  was  crucified  for  the  sins  ol
the  world,  even  as  many  as  will  believe  on  my  name,  that  they
may  become  the  sous  of  God,  even  .one  in  me  as  1  tun  in  the
Father,  as  the  Father  is  one  in  me,  that  we  may  be  cue.

2  Behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  my  servant  Sidney,  I  have
looked  upon  thee  and  thy  works.  1  hu,ve  heard  thy  prayers
and  prepared  thee  for  a  greater  work.  Thou  art  blessed,  for
thou  shalt  do  great  things.  Behold  thou  wast  sent  forth  even
as  John,  to  prepare  the  way  before  me,  and  before  Elijah  which
should  come,  and  thou  knew  it  not.  Thou  didst  baptize  bv
water  unto  repentance,  bat  they  received  not  the  Holy  Ghost;
but  now  I  give  unto  thee  a  commandment,  that  thou  shalt  bap¬
tize  by  water,  and  they  shall  receive  .the  Holy  Gl>ost  by  the
laying  on  of  the  hands,  even  as  the  apostles  of  old. ,

3  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  there  shall  be  a  great  work
in  the  land  even  among  the  Gentiles,  for  their  folly  and  their
abominations  shall  be  made  manifest,  in  the  eyes  ol'all  people:
for  I  am  God  and  mine  arm  is  not  shortened  and  I  will  show
miracles,  signs  and  wonders,  unto  all  those  who  believe  on  my
nutoe.  And  whoso  shall  ask  it  in  my  name,  in  faith,  they
shall  Cast  out  devils;  they  shall  heal  the  sick;  they  shall  cause


the  blind  to  receive’  their' sigh*,  And  'thi'dbaf'to  hear,1  and  the
dumb  to  speak,  awl  the  lame  to  walk:  and  the  time  speedify
cometh  that  great  things  are  to  be  shown  forth  unto  the  Chil¬
dren  of  men:  but  without  faith  shall  not  any  thing  be  shown
forth  except  desolations  upOii  Babylon,  the  same  which  ha:;
made  all  nations  drink  of  the  wins  of  the  wrath  of  her  forni-
oation.  And  there1  are  none  that  doethgood  dxeept  those  who
are  ready  to  receive  the  fulness  of  my  gospel,  which  I  .have
sent,  forth  to  this  generation:

4  Wherefore,  I  have'called  upon  the  wCak  things- of  the  world,
those  who  are  unlearned  and  despised,  to  thresh  the  nations
by  tl>-'  power  of  my  Spirit:  and  their  arm  shali  be  my  arm,  and
1  will  be  their  shield  and  their  buckler,  and  I  will  gird  up  their
loins,  and  they  shall  fight  manfully  for  me:  and  their  enemies
shall  be  wnder*heir  feet:  and  I  will  let  fell  the  sword  in  their
behdlf;  and  by  the  fire  of  mine  indignation  will!  preserve  them.
And  the  poor  and  the  -meek  shall  have  the  gospel  preached  un¬
to  them,  and  they  shall  be  looking  forth  for  the  time  of  my
coming,  for  it  is  nigh  at  hand:  and  they  shall  learn  the  para¬
ble  of  the  fig-tree:  for  even  now  already  summer  is  nigh,  and
I  have  sent  forth  the  fulness  of  my  gospel  by  the  hand  of  ray
servant  Joseph:  and  in  weakness  have  I  blessed  him,  and  I  bav;-

fiv-en  unto  him  the  keys  of  t-he  mystery  of  those  things  which
ave  been  sealed,  even  things  which  were  from  the  foundation
of  the  world,  and  the  things  which  shall  come  from  this  time
until  the  time  of  my  coming,  if  he  abide  in  me,  and  if  not,  an¬
other  will  I  plaut  in  his  stead.

5  Wherefore  watch  over  him  that  his  faith  fail  not,  and  i:
shall  be  given  by  the  Comforter,  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  know-
eth  all  things:  and  a  commandment  I  give  unto  thee,  that  thou
shalt  write  for  him:  and  the  scriptures  shall  be  given  even  as
they  are  in  mine  own  bosom,  to  the  salvation  of  mine  own
elect  :  for  they  will  hear  my  voice,  and  shall  see  me,  and  shall
not  be  asleep,  and  shall  abide  the  day  of  my  coming,  for  they
shall  be  purified  even  as  I  am  pure.  And  now  I  say  unto  you,
tarry  with  him  and-  he  shall  journey  with  you:  forsake  him  not
and  surely  these  things  shall  be  fulfilled.  And  inasmuch  as
ye  do  not  write,  behold  it  shall  be  given  unto  him  to  prophesy:
And  thou  shalt  preach  my  gospel,  and  call  op  the  holy  proph¬
ets  to  prove  his  words,  as  they  shall  be  giVen  hirn.

G  Keep  all  the  commandments  and  covenants  by  which  ye
are  bound,  and  I  will  cause  the  heavens  to  shake  for  your  good:
and  satan  shall  tremble;  and  Zion  shall  rejoice  upon  the  hills,
and  flourish:  and  Israel  shall  be  saved  in  mine  own  due  time.
And  by  the  keys  which  I  h%ve  given,  sftall  they  be  led  and  no
more  be  confounded  at  all.  l  ift  up  your  hearts  and  be  glad:


Alio


vour  redemption  drawetli  nigh.  Fear  not  little  flock,  the  king¬
dom  is  yours  u^til  I  come.  Behold  I  come  quickly;  even  so:

SECTION.  XII.

Revelation  given  January,  1631.

1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  your  God,  even  Jesus  Christ,  the
Great  I  AM,  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end.
the  same  which  looked  upon  the  wide  expanse  of  eternity,  and
all  the  seraphic  hosts  ol‘  heaven,  before  the  world  was  made-
the  same  which  knoweth  all  tilings,  for  all  things  are  present,
before  mine  eyes:  1  am  the  same  w'liich  spake  and  the  world
was  made,  and  all  things  came  by  me:  1  am  ilie  same  which
have  taken  the  Lion  of  Enoch  into  mine  own  bosom:  and  ver¬
ily  I  say,  even  as  many  as  have  believed  on  my  name,  for  I
am  Christ,  and  in  mine  own  name,  by  the  virtue  of  the  blood
which  I  have  spilt,  have  I  plead  before  the  Father  for  them:
But  behold  the  residue  of  the  wicked  have  I  kept  in  chains  of
darkness  until  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  which  shall  come
at  the  end  of  the  earth:  and  even  so  will  I  cause  the  wicked  to
be  kept,  that  will  not  hear  my  voice  but  harden  their  hearts,
and  vro,  w’o,  wo  is  their  doom.

2  But  behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  mine  eyes
are  upon  you;  I  am  in  your  midst  and  ye  cannot  see  me,  but
the  day  soon  cometh  that  ye  shall  see  me  and  know'  that  I  am:
for  the  vail  of  darkness  shall  soon  be  rent,  and  he  that  is  not
purified  shall  not  abide  the  day:  wherefore  gird  up  your  loins
and  be  prepared.  Behold  the  kingdom  is  yours  and  the  ene
my  shall  not  overcome.

3  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  ye  are  clean  but  not  all:  and  there  is
none  else  with  whom  I  am  well  pleased,  for  all  flesh  is  corrup¬
tible  before  me,  and  the  powers  of  darkness  prevail  upon  the
earth,  among  the  children  of  men,  in  the  presence  of  all  the
hosts  of  heaven,  which  causeth  silence  to  reign,  and  all  eterni¬
ty  is  pained,  and  the  angels  are  waiting  the  great  command  to
reap  down  the  earth,  to  gather  the  tares  that  they  may  be
burned:  and  behold  the  enemy  is  combined.

4  And  now  I  show  unto  you  a  mystery,  a  thing  which  is  had
in  secret  chambers,  to  bring  to  pass  even  your  destruction,  in
process  of  time,  and  ye  knew  it  not,  but  now  I  tell  it  unto
you,  and  ye  sue  blessed,  not  because  of  your  iniquity,  neither
your  heaits  of  unbelief,  for  verily  some  of  you  are  guilty  before
me;  but  I  will  be  merciful  unto  your  weakness.  Therefore,

he  ye  strong  from  henceforth;  fear  not  for  the  kingdom.  i»


j-ouis:  and  lor  jour.' salvation  1  give  unto  you  a  commandment,
idr  I  lihve  heard  your  prayers,  and  the  poor  have  complained
before  inn,  and  the  rich  have  I  made,  and  all  flesh  is  mine,  and
‘I  ain  no  respecter  of  persons.  And  I  have  made  the  earth  rich,
and  behold  it  is  my  footstool:  wherefore,  again  I  will  stand  up¬
on  it:  and  I  hold  forth  and  deign  to  give  unto  you  greater  rich¬
es,  even  a  land  of  promise;  a  land  flowing  with  nnlk  and  hon¬
ey,  upon  which  there  shall  be  no  cnrse  when  the  Lord  cometh:
and  I  will  give  it  unto  you  for  the  land  of  your  inheritance,  if
you  seek  it  with  all  your  hearts:  and  this  shall  be  my  covenant
with  you,  ye  shall  have  it  for  the  land  of  your  inheritance,  and
for  the  inheritance  of  your  children  forever,  while  the  earth
shall  stand,  and  ye  shall  possess  it  again  in  eternity,  no  more
to  pass  away.

5  But  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  in  time  ye  shall  have  no
king  nor  ruler,  for  I  will  be  your  king  and  watch  over  you —
Wherefore,  hear  my  voice  aud  follow  me,  and  you  shall  be  a
free  people,  and  ye  shall  have  no  laws  but  my  laws,  when  I
come,  for  I  am  your  Lawgiver,  and  what  can  stay  my  hand?
But  verily  I  say  unto  you.  teach  one  another  according  to  the
office  where  with  _  I  have  appointed  you,  and  let  every  man
esteem  his  brother  as  himself,  and  practice  virtue  and  holiness
before' me.  And  again  I  say  unto  you,  et  every  man  esteem
his  brother  as  himself:  for  what  man  among  you  having  twelve
sons,  and  is  no  respecter  to  them,  ahd  they  serve  him  obedient¬
ly,  and  he  saith  unto  the  one,  be  thou  clothed  in  robes  and  sit
thou  here;  and  to  the  other,  be  thou  clothed  in  rags  and  sit
thou  there,  and  looketh  upon  his  sons  and  saith  I  am  just.

6  Behold,  this  I  have  given  unto  you  a  parable,  and  it  is  even
as  I  am:  I  say  unto  you,  be  one;  and  if  ye  are  not  one,  ye  are
not  mine.  And  agam  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  enemy  in  the
secret  chambers  seeketh  your  lives:  Ye  hear  of  wars  in  far
countries,  and  you  say  that  there  will  soon  be  great  wars  in  far
countries,  bat  ye  know  not  the  hearts  of  them  in  your  own
land:  I  tell  you  these  things  because  of  your  prayers:  where¬
fore,  treasure  up  wisdom  in  your  bosoms,  lest  the  wickedness
of  men  reveal  these  things  unto  you,  by  their  wickedness,  in  a
manner  which  shall  speak  in  your  ears,  with  a  voice  louder
than  that  which  shall  shake  the  earth:  but  if  ye  are  prepared,
ye  shall  not  fear.

7  And  that  ye  might  escape  the  power  of  the  enemy,  and  be
"gathered  unto  me  a  righteous  people,  without  spot  and  blame-
'less:  wherefore,  for  this  cause  I  gave  unto  you  the  command.

•  meat,  that  ye  should  go  to  the  Ohio:  and  there  I  will  give  un¬
to  you  my  law :  and  there  you  shall  be  endowed  with  power

•  from  On  highland-  trod  thence,  whichsoever  I  will  shall  go


120


forth  among  all  nations,  apd  it  shall  be  told  them  what  they
shall  do:  for  I  have  a  great  work  laid  up  in  store:  for  Israel
shall  be  saved,  and  I  will  lead  them  whithcrspever  I  will,  and
no  power  shall  stay  my  hand.

8  And  now  I  give  unto  the  church  in  these  parts,  a  com¬
mandment,  that  certain  men  among  them  shall  be  appointed,
and  they  shall  be  appointed  by  the  voice  of  tjie  church;  and
they  shall  look  to  the  poor  and  the  needy,  and  administer  to
their  relief,  that  they  shall  not  suffer;  and  send  them  forth  to
the  place  which  I  have  commanded  them;  and  this  shall  be
their  work,  to  govern  the  affairs  of  the  property  of  this  church.
And  they  that  have  farms  that  cannot  be  sold,  let  them  be  left
or  rented  as  seemeth  them  good.  See  that  all  things  are  pre¬
served,  and  when  men  are  endowed  with  power  from  on  high,
and  sent  forth,  all  these  tilings  shall  be  gathered  unto  the  bo¬
som  of  the  church.

9  And  if  ye  seek  the  riches  which  it  is  the  will  of  the  Father
to  give  unto  you,  ye  shall  be  the  richest  of  all  people;  for  ye
shall  have  the  riches  of  eternity:  and  it  must  needs  be  that  the-
riches  of  the  earth  is  mine  to  give:  but  beware  of  pride,  lest
ye  become  as  the  N.ephites  of  old.  And  again  I  say  unto  you,
I  give  unto  you  a  commandment,  that  every  roan,  both  elder,
priest,  teacher  and  also  member,  go  to  with  his  might,  with
the  labor  of  his  hands,  to  prepare  and  accomplish  the  things
which  I  have  commanded.  And  let  your  preaching  be  tin-
warning  voice,  every  man  to  his  neighbor,  in  mildness  and  in
meekness.  And  go  ye  out  from  among  the  wicked.  Save
yourselves.  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,
even  so:  Amen.

SECTION  XIII.

Rcrclativn  given  February,  1831.

1  Hearken, ..  O  yo  elders  of  my  church  who  have  assembled
yourselves  together,  in  my  name,  even  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son
of  the  living  God,  the  Savior  of  the  world;  inasmuch  as  they
believe  on  my  name  and  keep  my  commandments;  again  I
say  unto  you,  hearken  and  hear  and  obey  the  law  which  I
shall  give  unto  you:  for  verily  I  say,  as  ye  have  assembled
yourselves  together  according  to  the  commandment  wherewith
1  commanded  you,  and  are  agreed  as  touching  this  one  thing,
and  Lave  asked  the  Father  in  my  name,  even  so  ye  shall  re-

2  Behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  give  unto  you  this  first
commandment,  that  ye  shall  go  forth  m  my  name,  every  hue-


121


ofyou,  excepting  my  servants  Joserh  Smite,  jr.  and  Sidney
Rigdon.  And  I  give  unto  them  ii' commandment  that  they
shall  go  forth  for  a  little  season;  and  it  shall  be  given  by  the
power  of  my  Spirit  when  they  shall  return:  an.ije  shall  go
forth  in  the  power  of  ray  Spirit,  preaching  my  gospel,  two  by-
two,  in  my  nanf,  lifting  iip  your  voices  as'with  the  voice  of  a.
trump,  declaring  my  word  like  unto  angels  of  God:  and  ye
shall  go  forth  baptizing  fvith  water,  saying,  Repent  ye,  repent
ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand.

'  3  And  from  this  place'  ye  shall  go  forth  into  the  regions
westward,  and  inasraucli  as  ye  shall  find  them  that  will  re¬
ceive  you,  ye  shall  build  up  my  church  in  every  region,  until
the  time  shall  come  when  it  shall  be  revealed  unto  you,  from
on  h;gh,  when  the  city  of  the  New  Jerusalem  shall  be  prepar¬
ed  that  ye  may  be  gathered  in  one,  that  ye  may  be  my  people
and  1  Will  be  your  God.  And  again.  I  say  unto  you,  that  my
servant  Edward  Partridge  shall  stand  in  the  office  wherewith  t
have  appointed  him.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  if  he
transgress  another  shall  be  appointed  in  his  stead;  even  so:

4  Again  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  shall  not  be  given  to  any
one  to  go  forth  to  preach  my  gospel,  or  to  build  up  ray  church,
except  he  be  ordained  by  some  One  who  has  authority,  and  it  is
known  to’tfte  church  that  he  has  authority,  and  has  been  reg¬
ularly  ordained  by  the  heads  of  the  church.

5  And  again,  the  elders,  priests  and  teachers  of  this  dhurch,
shall  teach  tiie  principles  of  Jby  gospel  which  are  in  the  bib!  •
and  the  book  of  Mormon,  in  the  which  is  the  fulness  of  the
gospel;  and  they'  shall  observe  the  covenants  and  'church  ar¬
ticles  to  do  them,  and  these  shall  be  tiieir  teachings,  as  they
shall  be  directed  by  the  Spirit;  and  the  Spirit  shall  be  given
unto  you  by  ibe  prayer  of  faith,  and  if  ye  receive  not  the  Spir¬
it,  ye  shall  not  teach.  And  all  this  ye  shall  observe  to  do  as  *
1  have  commanded,  concerning  your  teaching,  until  the  ful¬
ness  of  my  scriptures  are  given.  And  as  ye  shall  lift  up  yoUr
voices  by  the  Comforter,  ye  shall  speak  and  prophesy  as  seem  •
eth  me  goqd;  for  behold,- the  Comforter  knoweth  all  things,
and  beareth  record  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son.

6  And  now.  behold  I  speak  unto  the'  church:  Thou  shalt
not  kill;  and  he  that  kills  shall  not  have  forgiveness,  in  this  ’
world,  nor  in  the  world  to  come.

7  And  again,  I  say,  thou  shalt  not  kill:  but  to  thatjiilletii
shall  die.  Thou  shalt  not  steal;  and  he  that  stealeth  and  wi!)
not  repent,  shall  be  cast  out.  Thou  shalt  not  lie;  he  that
iieth  and  will  not  repent,  shall  be  cast  out.  'Thou  shalt  love
thy  wife  with  all  thy  heart,  anti  shall  cleave  unto  bet and  none


else;  and  he  thatlooketh  upon  a  woman  to  lust  alter  her,  shaft
deny  the  faith,  and  shall  not  have  the  Spirit,  and  if  he  repents
not  he  shall  be  cast  out.  Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery  ;
and  he  that  connnitteth  adultery  and  repeuteth  not,  shall  be
cast  out;  but  he  that  has  committed  adultery  and  repents  with
all  his  heart,  and  forsaketh  it,  and  doeth  it  no  more,  thou  shalt
forgive;  but  if  he  doeth  it  again,-  he  shall  not  be  forgiven,  but
shall  be  cast  out.  Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  thy 'neighbor,
nor  do  him  any  harm.  Thou  knojvest  my  laws  concerning
these  things  are  given  in  my  scriptures:  he  that  sinneth  and
repeuteth  not,  shall  be  cast  out.

8  If  thou  lovest  me  thou  shalt  serve  me  and  keep  all  my
commandments.  And  behold,  thou  wilt  remember  the  poor,
and  consecrate  of  thy  properties  lor  their  support,  that  w;hieh
thou  hast  to  impart  unto  them,  with  a  covenant  and  a  deed
which  cannot  be  broken— and  inasmuch  as  ye  impart  of,  your
substance  unto  the  poor,,  ye  Will  do  i.  unto  me — and  they  shall
be  laid  before  the  bishop  of  my  church  and  his  counsellors,  two
of  the  elders,  or  high  priests,  such  as  he  shall  or  has  appointed
and  set  apart  for  that  purpose.

9  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  after  they  are  laid  before
the  bishop  of  my  church,  and  alter  that  he  has  received  these
testimonies  concerning  the  consecration  of  the  properties  of
my  church,  that  they  cannct  be  taken  from  the  church,  agree¬
able  to  my  commandments,  every  man  shall  be  made  account¬
able  unto  me,  a  steward  over  his  own  property,  or  that  which
lie  has  received  by  consecration,  inasmuch  as  is  sufficient  for
himself  and  family.

10  And  again,  if  there  shall  be  properties  in  the  hands  of  the
church,  or  any  individuals  of  it,  more  than  is  necessary  far
their  support,  after  this  first  consecration,  which  is  a  residue,
to  be  consecrated  unto  the  bishop,  it  shall  be  kept  to  adminis¬
ter  to  those  who  have  'not,  from  time  to  time,  that  every  man
who  lias  need  may  be  amply  supplied,  and  receive  according
to  his  wants.  Therefore,  the  residue  shall  be  kept  in  my
store  house,  to  administer  to-  the  poor  and  the  needy,  as  shall
be  appointed  by  the  high  council  of  the  church,  and  the  bish¬
op  and  his  council,  and  for  the  purpose  of  purchasing  lands
for  the  public  benefit  of  the  church,  and  building  houses  of

'■  worship,  and  building  up  of  the  New  Jerusalem  which  is  here¬
after  to  be  revealed,  that  my  covenant  people  may  be  gathered
in  one  in  that  day  when  I  shall  come  to  my  temple.  And  this
I  do  for  the  Salvation  of  my  people.

11  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  he  that  sinneth  and  re-
t  twnteth  not,  shall  be  cast  out  of  the  church,  and  shall  not  re¬
ceive  again  that  which  he  has  consecrated  unto  the  poor  and


4ae

the 'needy  of  ray  church,  or  in  other  words,  unto  me,  for  inas-
much  as  yc  do  it  unto  the  least  of  -these  ye  do  it  unto  me— for
it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  which  I  spake  by  the  mouths  of  my
prophets,  shall  be  fulfilled;  for  1  will  consecrate  of  the  riches
of  those  who  embrace  my  gospel  among  the  Gentiles,  unto  the
poor  of  my  people  who  are  of  the  luflse  of  Israel.

12  And  again,  thou  shalt  not  be  proud  in  thy  heart,  let  all
thy  garments  be  plain,  and  their  beauty  the  beauty  of  the  work
of  thine  own  hands,  and  let  all  things  be  done  in  cleanliness
before  me.  Thou  shalt  not  be  idle;  Tor  lie  that  is  idle  shall
noteat  the  bread,  nor  wear  the  garments  of  the  laborer.  And
whosoever  among  you  are-  sick,  and  have  not  faith  to  be  heal¬
ed,  but  believe,  shall  be  nourished  with -all  tenderness  with
herbs  and  mild  food,  and  that  not  by  the  hand  of  an  enemy.
And  the  elders  of  the  church,  two  or  more,  shall  be  called,  and
shall  pray  for  and  lay  their  hands  upon  them  in  my  name,  and
if  they  die  they  shal’l  die  unto  me,  and  if  they  live  they  shall
live  unto  me.  Thou  shalt  live  togetl-er  in  love,  ir.scmuch
that  thou  shalt  weep  for  the  loss  of  them  that  d-e,  and  more
especially  for  those  that  have  not  hope  of  -  a  glorious  resurrec¬
tion.  And  it  shall  eome  to  pass,  that  those  that  die  in  me,
shall  not  taste  of  death,  for  it  shall  be  sweet  unto  them,  and
they  that  die  not  in  me,  wo  unto  them,  for  their  death  is  hitter!

13  And  again,  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  he  that  has  faith  in
me  to  be  healed,  and  is  not -appointed  unto  death,  shall  be
healed:  he  who  lias  faith  to  see  shall  see:  he  who  has  faith  to
hear  shall  hear:  the  lame  who  have’  faith  to  leap  shall  leap;

•  and  they  who  have  Hot  faith  to  do  these  things,  but  believe  in
me,  have  power  to  become  my  sonfc:  and  inasmuch  as  they

•  break not  my  laws,  thou  shalt  bear  their  infirmities.

14  Thou  shalt  stand  in  the  place  of  thy  stewardship:  thou
shalt  not  take  thy  brother’s  garment;  thou  shalt  pay  for  that
which  thou  shalt- receive  of  tiiv  brother;  and  if  thou  obtainest
more  than  that  whiclnVould' be  for  thy  support,  thou  shalt
give  it  into  my  store  house,  that  all  things  may  be  done  accor¬
ding  to  that  which  I  have  said.

15  Thou  shalt  ask,  and  my  scriptures  shall  be  given  as  I  have
-appointed,  and  they  shall  be  preserved  in  safety;  and  it  is  ex¬
pedient  that  thou  shouldst  hold  thy  peace  concerning  them,
and  not  teach  them  until  ye  have  received  them  in  full.  And  I
give  unto  you  a  commandment,  that  then  ye  shall  teach  them
unto  all  men;  for  they  shall  be  taught  unto  all  nations,  kind¬
reds,  tongues  and  people.

16  Thou  shalt  take  the  things  which  thou  hast  received,
which  have  been  given  unto  thee  in  niy  scriptures  for  a  law,
to  be  my  law,  to  govern  my  church;  and  lie  that  doeth  accov-


124

ding  to  theSethliigs',  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that,  doeth' them
not  shall  be  damned,  if  he  continues.

17  If  thou  shaft  ask.  thou  shift  receive  revelation  upon  re  Voli¬
tion;  knowledge  upon  knowledge,  that  thou  rnayest  knew  the
mysteries,  and  peaceabletfiings:  that  winch  brin goth  joy,  that,
which  bringeth  life  eternal.  Thou  shaft  ask,  and  it  shall  bo
revealed  unto  you  in  mane  own  due  time,  where  the  New  Je¬
rusalem  shall  be  built,

18  And  behold,  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  my  servants  shall
be  sent  forth  to  the  east,  and  to  the  west,  to  the  north,  and  to
the  south;  and  even  now,  let  him  that  goeth  t6  the  east.,  tc-ach
them  that  shall  be  converted  to  flee  to  the  west;  and  this  in
consequence  of  that  wiiich  is  coming  on  the  earth,  and  of  se¬
cret  combinations.  Behold  thou  shaft  observe  all  these  things .
and  great,  shall  be  thy  reward'  for  unto  you  it  is  given  to  know
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  but  unto  the  world  it  is  not  giv¬
en  to  know  them.  Ye  shall  observe  the  law's  which  ye  haw
received,  and  be  faithful.  And  ye  shall  hereafter  receiv-
churclr  covenants,  such  as  shall  be  sufficient  to  establish  you.
both  here,  and  in  the  New  Jerusalem.  Therefore,  he  that
lacketh  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  me,  and  I  will  give  him  liber¬
ally,  and  upbraid  him  not.  Lift  up  your  hearts  and  rejoice,
for  unto  you  the  kingdom,  or  in  other  words,  the  keys  of  the
church,  have  been  given:  even  so  Amen.

lit  The  priests  anti  teachers  shall  hive  their  stewardships,
even  as  the'  members,  ant!  the  eiders;  or  high  priests  who  are
appointed  to  assist  the  bishop  as  counsellors,  in  all  things  are
to  have  their  families  supported  out  of  the  properly  which  is
consecrated  to  the  bishop,  for  the  good  of  the  poor,  and  for
other  purposes,  as  before  mentioned;  or  they  are  to  receive  a
just  remuneration  for  all  their  services;  either  a  stewardship,
or  Qtherwise,  as  may  be  thought  best,  dr  decided  by  the  coun¬
sellors  and  bishop.  And  the  bishop  also;  shall  receive  his  sup¬
port,  or  a  just  remuneration  for  all  his  sendees,  in  the  church.

20  Behold,  verily  I  say  unto"  you,  that  whatever  persons
among  you  having  put  a, vay  their  companions  tor  the  caus<-
of  fornication,  or  in  other  words,  if  they  shall  testify  before
you  in  all  lovliness  of  heart  that  this  is  the  case,  ye  shall  not
cast  them  out  from  among'  you;  but  if  ye  shall  find  that  any
persons  have  left  their  companions  for  the  sake  of  adultery,
and  they  themselves  are  the  offenders,  and  their  companions
arc  living,  they  shall  be  cast  out  from  among  you.  And
again  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  be  watchful  and  careful,
wdth  all  inquiry,  that  ye  receive  none  such  among  you  if  they
are  married,  and  if  they  are  not  married,  they  shall  repent  of
all  their  sins,  or  ye  shall  not' receive  them.


VI  And  Ilgam,  e.very  person  who,  belougelh  to  this  church  of
« 'lirist  shall  observe  to  keep  all  the  commandments  and  cove¬
nants  of  the  church;  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  if  any  per¬
sons  among  you  shall  kill,  they  shall  be  delivered  up  and  dealt
with  according  to  the  laws  of  the  land;  For  remember,,  that  he
hath  no  forgiveness;  and  it  shall  be  proven  according  to  the
laws  of  the  land.

22  And  if  any  man  or  woman  shall  commit  adultery,  lie  cr
she  shall  be  tried  bpfore  two  elders  of  the  church  or  more,  and
every  word  shall  ba  established  against  him  or  her  by  two
witnesses  of  the  church,  and  not  of  the  enemy.  But  if  there
are  more  than  two  witnesses  it  is  better:  but  he  or  she  shall
be  condemned  by  the  month  of  two  witnesses,  and  the  elders
shall  lay  the  case  before  the,  church,  and  the  church  shall  lift
up  their  hands  against  him  or  her,  that  they  may  be  dealt
with  according  to  tire  law  of  God.  And  if  it  can  be,  it  is
necessary  tlia.t  the,  bishop  is  present  also.  And  thus  ye  shall
do  in  all  cases  which  shall  come  before  you.  And  if  a  manor
woman  shall  rob,  he  or  she  shall  he  delivered  up  unto  the  law
of  the.  land.  And  ifheorshe  shall  steal,  he  or  she  shall  be
delivered  up  unto  the  law  of  the  land.  And  if  he  or  she
shall  lie,  he  or  she  shall  be  delivered  up  unto  the  law  of  the
land.  Ifhe  or  she  do  any  manner  of  iniquity,  he  or  she  shall!
be  delivered  -up  unto  the  law,  even  that  of  God.

23  And  if  thy  brother  or  sister  offend  thee,  thou  shalt  take
him  or  her  between  him  or  her  .and  thee  alone;  and  if  he  of
she  confess,  thou  shalt  be  reconciled.  And  if  he  or  she  con-
less  not,  thou  shalt  deljver  him  or  her  up  unto  the  church,  not
to  the  members  but  to  tire  eklers.  And  it  shall  be  done  in  a
meeting,  and  that  not  before  the  world.  Apd  if  thy  brother
or  sister  offend  many,. lie  or  she  shall  be  chastened  before
many,  And  if  any  one  offend  openly,  he  or  she  shall  be  re,i
baked  openly,  that  he  or  she  may  be' ashamed.  And  if  ho  or
she  confess  not,  he  or  she  shall  be  delivered  up  unto  the  law
of  God.  .If  any  shall  offend  in  secret,  he  or  she  shall  be  re¬
buked  in  secret,  that  he  or  she  may  have  opportunity  to  con
iess  in  secret  to  him  or  her  whom,  he  or  she  has  offended,  and
to  God,  that  the  church  may  not  speak  reproachfully  of  him
or  her.  And  thus  shall  ye  coi:  duct  in  all  things.

SECTION  XIV.

4  Revelation  given  February,  1831.

1  O  hearken,  ye  elders  of  my  church,  and  give  car  to  the
words  which  I  shall  speak  unto  you:  for  behold,  verily,  verily


120


I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  have  received  a  commandment'  for  p.
law  unto  my  churcu,  through  him  whom  I  have  appointed  un¬
to  you,  to  receive  commandments  and  revelations  from  my-
hand.  And  this  ye  shall  know  assuredly,  that  there  is  none
other  appointed  unto  you  to  receive  commandments  and  rev¬
elations  until  he  be  taken,  if  he  abide  in  me.

2  But  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  none  else  shall  bt-
appointed  unto  this  gift  except  it  be  through  him,  ferdf  it  be
taken  from  him  he  shall  not  have  power,  except  to  appoint
another  in  his  stead:  and  this  shall  be  a  law  unto  you,  that  ye
receive  not  the  teachings  of  any  that  shall  come  before  you
as  revelations  or  commandments:  ,  and  this  I  give  unto  you,
that  you  may  not  be  .deceived:  that  you  may  know  they  are
not  of  me.  For  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  he  that  is  ordain¬
ed  of  me  shall  come  in  at  the  gate  and  be  ordained  as  I  have
told  you  before,  to  teach  those  revelations  which  you  have
received,  and  shall  receive  through  him  whom  I  have  appoint¬
ed.

3  And  now  behold  I  give  unto  you  a  commandment,  that
when  ye  ,are  assembled  together,  ye  shall  instruct  and  edify-
each  other,  that  ye  may  know  how  to  act  and  direct  un¬
church  how  to  act  upon  the  points  of  my  law  and  command-'
ments,  which  I  have  given:  and  thus  ye  shall  become  instruc¬
ted  in  the  law  of  my  church,  and  be  sanctified  by  that  which
ye  have  received,  and  ye  shall  bind  yourselves  to  act  in  all  ho¬
liness  before  me,  that  inasmuch  as  ye  do  this,  glory  shall
be  added  to  the  kingdom  which  ye  have  received.  Inasmuch1
as  ye  do  it  not,  it  shall  he  taken  even  that  which  ye  have  re¬
ceived.  Purge  yc  out  the  iniquity  which  is  among  you:  sanc¬
tify  yourselves  before  me  and  if  ye  desire  the  glories  of  the
kingdom,  appointive  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  uphold
him  before  me  by  the  prayer  of  faith.  And  again,  I  say  unto
you,  that  if  ye  desire  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  provide
for  him  food  and  raiment  and  whatsoever  thing  he  needeth  to
accomplish  the  work,  wherewith  I  have  commanded  him:  and
if  ye  do  it  not,  he  shall  remain  unto  them  that  have  received
him,  that  I  may  reserve  unto  myself  a  pure  people  before  me.

4  Again  I  say,  heurken  ye  elders  of  my  church,  whom  I  have
appointed:  ye  are  not  sent  forth  to  be  taught,  but  to  teach
the  children  of  men  the  tilings  which  I  have  put  into  your
hands  by  tiie  power  of  my  Spirit:  and  ye  are  to  be  taught
from  on  high.  Sanctity  yourselves  and  ye  shall  be  endowed
with  power,  that  ye  may  give  even  as  I  have  spoken.

5  Hearken  ye,  for  behold  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  is  nigh
at  hand.  For  the  day  cometh  that  the  Lord  shall  utter  his
voice  out  of  heaven;  the  heavens  shall  shake  and  the  earth


127


.ihiil  tremMe,  and  the  trump  of  God'shall  sound  both  long  and
!oud,  and  shall  say  to  the  sleeping  nations:  Yc  saints  arise
and  live:  Ye  sinners  stay  and  sleep  until  I  shall  call  ag»in:
wherefore  gird  up  your  loins,  least  ye  be  found  among  the
wicked.  Lilt  up  you-  voices  and  spare  not.  Cr.ll  upon  the.
nations  to  repent,  both  old  and  young,  both  bond  and  free:
saying,  Prepare  yourselves  for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord:  for
if  I,  who  am  a  man,  do  lift  up  my  voice  and  call  upon  you  to
repent,  and  ve  hate  me,  what  will  ye  say  when  the  day  com-
eth  when  the  thunders  shall  utter  their  voices  from  the  ends
of  the  earth,  speaking  to  the  ears  of  all  that  live,  saying:  Re¬
pent,  and  prepare  for  the  groat  day  of  the  Lord?  yea,  and
again,  when  the  lightnings  shall  streak  forth  from  the  east  un¬
to  the  west,  and  shall  utter  forth  their  voices  unto  all  that  live,
and  make  the  ears  of  all  tingle,  that  hear,  saying  these  words:
Repent  ye,  for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  is  come !

6  And  again,  the  Lord  shall  utter  his  Voice  out  of  heaven,
saying:  Hearken,  O  ye  nations  of  the  earth,  and  hear  tho
words  . of  that  God  who  made  you.  O  ye  nations  of  the  earth,
how  often  wou.hl  1  have  gathered  you  together  as  a  hen  gath-
ereth  her  chickens  undS-  her  wings,  but  ye  would  not?  How
oft  have  I  called  upon  you  by  the  mouth  of  my  servants;  and
by  the  ministering  of  angels;  and  by  mine  own  voice;  and
by  the  roioe  of  .  tliunderings;  and  by  the  voice  of  lightnings;
and  by  the  voice.  of  tempests;  and  by  the  voice  of  earth¬
quakes;  and  great  hailstorms;  and  by  the  voice  of  famines,
and  pestilences  of  every  kind:  ajid  by  the  great  sound  of  a
trump;  and  by  the  voice  of  judgment;  and  by  the  voice  of
mercy  al!  the  day  long;  and  by  the  voice  of  glory,  and  honor,
apd  the  riches  of  eternal  lift;  and  would  have  saved  you  with
an  everlasting  salvation,  but  ye  would  not?  Behold  the  day  l.as
come,  when -the  cup  of  the  wrath  of  mine  indignation  is  full.

7  Behold,  verily  I  say-unto  you,  that  these  are  the  words  of
the  Lord  vocr  God:  wherefore,  labor  ye,  labor  ye,  in  my  vine¬
yard  for  the  last  time:  lor  the  last  time  call  upon  the  inhabit¬
ants  of  the  earth,  for  in  mine  own  due  time  will  I  come  upon
the  earth  in  judgment:  and  my  people  shall  be  redeemed  and
shall  reign  with  me  on  earth:  for  the  great  Millennial,  which  f
have  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  my  servants,  shall  come:  for  sa-
tqn  shall  be.  bound;  and  when  lie  is  loosed  again,  he  shall  on¬
ly  reign  for  a  little  season,  and  then-cometh  the  end  of  the
earth;  and  he  that  liveth  in  righteousness,  shall  be  changed
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye;  and  tiie  earth  shall  pass  away  so
as  by  fire;  and  tho  wicked  shall  go  anav  into  unquenchable
fire;  and  their  end  no  man  knoweth  on  earth,  nef  ever  shall
know,  until  they  come  .before  ir,c  ia -judgment.


i28


8.  Hearken  ye  to  these  Words;  behold  I  am  Jesus  Christ
the  Savior  of  the  world.  Treasure  these  things  up  in  your
hearts,  and  let  the  solemnities  of  eternity  rest  upon  your
minds.  Be  sober.  Keep  all  my  commandments;  even  so:
Amen.

SECTION  XV.
llctclation  given  March  7,  1S31.

i.  Hearken,  O  ye  people  of  my  church  to  whom  the  kingdom
lias  been  given:  hearken  ye , and  give  car  to  him  who  laid  the
foundation  of  the  earth;  who  made  the  heavens  and.all  the
host  thereof,  and  by  whom  all  things  were  made  which  live
and  move  and  have  a  being.  And  again  I  say,  hearken  unto
mv  voice,  lest  death  shall  overtake  you:  in  an  hour  when  ye
think  not  the  su. inner  shall; be  past,  and  the  harvest' ended,
and  your  souls  not  saved.  Listen  to  him  who  is  the  Advo¬
cate  with  tire  Father,  who  is.  pleading  your  cause  before  him:
saying,  Father  behold  the  sufferings  anil  death  of  him  who  did
no  sin,  in  whom  thou  wast  well  pleased:  behold  tie  blood  of
thy  Son  which  waS.shed,  the  blood  of  him  whom  thou  gavest
that  thyself  might  be  glorified:  wherefore,  Father  spare  these
my  brethren  that  believe  on  my  name,  that  they  may  come  un¬
to  me  and  have  everlasting  life.

2  Hearken  O  ye  people  of  my  church,  and  ye  elders  listen  to-
-gether,  and  hear  my  voice  while  it  is  called  to-day  and  harden
uot  your  hearts:  for  verily  I  say  unto  you  that  1  am  Alpha
and  Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  light  and  the  life
of  the  world;  a  light  that  shineth  in  darkness  and  the  darkness
comprehended!  it  not:  I  came  unto  my  own  and  my  own  re¬
ceived  me  not;  but  unto  as  many  as  received  me  gave  1  power
to  do  many  miracles,  and  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  and  even
unto  them  that  believed  on  my  name,  gave  I  power  to  obtain
eternal  life.  And  even  so  I  have  sent  mine  everlasting  cove¬
nant  into  the  world;  to  be  a  light  to  die  world,  and  to  be  a  stan¬
dard  for  my  people  and  lor  the  Gentiles  to  seek. to  it;  and  to
be  a  messenger  before  my  face  to  prepare  the  way  before  me.
Wherefore  come  ye  unto  it,  and  with  him  that  cometh  I  will
reason  as  with  men  in  days  of  old,  and  I  will  show  unto  you
my  [strong  reasoning;  wherefore  hearken  ye  together  and  lei
me  show  it  unto  you,  even  mv  wisdom,  the  wisdom  of  him
whom  ye  say  is  the  God  of  Enoch,  and  his  brethren,  who
were  separated  from  the  earth,  and  were  received  unto  my¬
self — a  city  reserved  until  a  day  of  righteousness  shall  come—
o  day  which  was  sought  for  by  all  holy  men.  and  th<y  found


1'29


U  not  because  of  wickedness  and  abominations:  and  confessed
that  they  were  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth;  but  obtain¬
ed  a  promise  that  they  should  find  it,  and  see  it  in  their  flesh.
Wherefore  hearken  and  I  will  reason  with  you,  and  I  will
speak  unto  you  and  prophesy  as  unto  men  in  days  of  old  and
I  will  show  it  plainly  as  I  showed  it  unto  my  disciples,  as  I
stood  before  them  in  the  flesh,  and  spake  unto  them  saying:
As  ye  have  asked  of  me  concerning  the  signs  of  my  coming,
in  the  day  when  I  sh  ill  come  in  my  glory  in  the  clouds  o£
heaven,  to  fulfil  tho  promises  that  I  have  made  unto  your  la¬
thers:  for  as  ye  have  looked  upon  the  long  absence  of  your
spirits  from  your  bodies  to  be  a  bondage,  I  will  show  unto  you
how  the  day  of  redemption  shad  come,  and  also  the  restora¬
tion  of  the  scattered  Israel.

3  And  now  ye  behold. this  temple  which  is  in  Jerusalem,
which  ye  call  the  house  of  God,  and  your  enemies  say  that
this  house  shall  never  fall.  But  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that
desolation  shall  come  upon  this  generation  as  a  thief  in  the
sight,  and  this  people  shall  be  destroyed  and  scattered  among
all  nations.  And  this  temple  which  ye  now  see,  shall  be
thrown  down  that  there  shall  not  be  left  one  stone  upon  anoth¬
er.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  this  generation  of  Jews
shall  not  pass  away,  until  every  desolation  which  1  have  told
you  concerning  them,  shall  come  to  pass.  Ye  say  that  ye
know  that  the  end  of  the  world  cometh;  ye  say  also  that  ye
know  that  the  heavens  and  the  earth  shall  pass  away;  and  in
this  ye  say  truly,  for  so  it  is;  but  these  tilings  which  I  have
told  you,  shall  not  pass  away  until  all  shall  be  fulfilled.  And
tliis  I  have  told  you  concerning  Jerusalem,  and  when  that  day
.shall  come,  shall  a  remnant  be  scattered  among  all  nations,
but  they  shall  be  gathered  again:  but  they  shall  remain  until
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled.

4  And  in  that  day  shall  be  heard  of  wars  and  rumors  of  wars,
and  the  whole  earth  shall  be  in  commotion,  and  men’s  hearts
•shall  fail  them,  and  they  shall  say  that  Christ  delayeth  his
coming  until  the  end  of  the  earth.  And  the  love  of  men  shall
wax  cold,  and  iniquity  shall  abound;  and  when  the  time  of  the
Gentiles  is  come  in,  a  light  shall  break  forth  among  them  that
sit  in  darkness,  and  it  shall  be  the  fulness  of  my  gospel;  but
they  receive  it  not,  for  they  perceive  not  the  light,  and  they
turn  their  hearts  from  me  because  of  the  precepts  of  men ;  and
in  that  generation  shall  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled:
and  there  shall  be  men  standing  in  that  generation,-  that  shall
not  pass,  until  they  shall  see  an  overflowing  scourge;  for  a
desolating  sickness  shall  cover  the  land:  but  my  disciples  shall


130


stand  in  holy  places,  and  shall  not  be  moved;  but  among  the
wicked,  men  shall  lift  up  their  voices  and  curse  God  and  die.
And  there  shall  be  earthquakes,  also,  in  divers  places,  and
many  desolations,  yet  men  will  harden  their  hearts  against
me;  and  they  will  take  up  the  sword  one  against  another,  and
they  will  kill  one  another.

5  And  now,  when  I  the  Lord  had  spoken  these  words  unto
my  disciples,  they  were  troubled;  and  I  said  unto  them,  be
not  troubled,  for  when  all  these  things  shall  coniG  to  pass,  ye
may  know  that  the  promises  which  have  been  made  unto  you,
shall  be  fulfilled:  and  when  the  light  shall  begin  to  break  forth,
it  shall  be  with  them  like  unto  a  parable  which  I  will  show
you:  ve  look  and  behold  the  fig-trees,  and  ye  see  them  with
your  eyes,  and  ye  say  when  they  begin  to  shoot  forth  and  their
leaves  are  yet  tender,  that  summer  is  now  nigh  at
hand:  even  so  it  shall  be  in  that  day,  when  they  shall  see  all
these  things,  then  shall  they  know  that  tiie  hour  is  nigh.

C  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  he  that  feareth  me  shall  be
looking  forth  for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  to  come,  even  for
the  signs  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man;  and  they  shall  see
gigns  and  wonders,  for  they  shall  be  shown  forth  in  the  heavens
above,  and  in  the  earth  beneath;  and  they  shall  behold  blood
and  fire,  and  vapors  of  smoke;  and  before  the  day  of  the  Lord
shall  come,  the  sun  shall  be  darkened,  and  the  moon  be  turn¬
ed  into  blood,  and  stars  fall  from  heaven;  and  the  remnant
shall  be  gathered  unto  this  place;  and  then  they  shall  look  for
me,  and  behold  I  will  come:  and  they  shall  see  mein  the  clouds
of  heaven,  clothed  with  power  and  great  glory,  with  all  the
hbly  angels;  and  he  that  watches  not  for  me  shall  be  cut  off.

7  But  before  the  arm  of  the  Lord  shall  fall,  an  angel  shall
sound  his  trump,  and  the  saints  tjiat  have  slept,  shall  come
forth  to  meet  me  in  the  cloud.  Wherefore  if  ye  have  slept  in
peace,  blessed  are  you,  for  as  you  now'  behold  me  and  know
that  I  am,  even  so  shall  ye  come  unto  me  and  your  souls  shall
Jivs,  and  your  redemption  shall  be  perfected,  and  the  saints
phail  come  forth  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth.

8  Then  shall  the  arm  of  the  Lord  fall  upon  the  nations,  anil
then  shall  the  Lord  set  his  foot  upon  this  mount,  and  it  shall
cleave  in  twain,  and  the  earth  shall  tremble  and  reel  to  and
fro,  and  the  heavens  also  shall  shake,  and  the  Lord  shall  utter
his  voice  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  hear  it,  and  the
nations  of  the  earth  shall  mourn,  and  they  that  have  laughed
shall  see  their  folly,  and  calamity  shall  cover  the  mocker,  and
the  scorner  shall  be  consumed,  and  they  that  have  watched
for  iniquity,  shall  be  hewn  down  and  cast  into  the  fire.

9  And  tlien  shall  the  Jews  look  upon  me  and  say,  What  ate


131


these  wounds  in  thine  hands,  and  in  thy  feet?  Then  shall
they  know  that  I  am  the  Lord;  for  I  will  say  unto  them,  These
wounds  are  the  wounds  with  which  I  was  wounded  in  the
house  of  my  friends.  I  am  he  who  was  lifted  up.  I  am  Jesus
that  was  crucified.  I  am  the  Son  of  God.  And  then  shall
they  weep  because  of  their  iniquities;  then  shall  they  lament
because  they  persecuted  their  King.

10  And  then  shall  the  heathen  nations  be  redeemed,  and  they
that  knew  no  law  shall  have  partin  the  first  resurrection;
and  it  shall  be  tolerable  for  them:  and  satan  shall  be  bound
that  he  shall  have  no  place  in  the  hearts  of  the  children  of
men.  And  at  that  day  when  I  shall  come  in  my  glory,  shall
ths  parable  be  fulfilled  which  I  spake  concerning  the  ten  vir¬
gins:  for  they  that  are  wise  and  have  received  the  truth,  and
have  taken  the  Holy  Spirit  for  their  guide,  and  have  not  been
deceived,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  they  shall  not  be  hewn  down
and  cast  into  the  fire,  but  shall  abide  the  day,  and  the  earth
shall  be  given  unto  them  for  an  inheritance:  and  they  shall
multiply  and  wax  strong,  and  their  children  shall  grow  up
without  sin  unto  salvation,  for  the  Lord  shall  be  in  their  midst,
and  his  glory  shall  be  upon  them,  and  he  will  be  their  King
and  their  Lawgiver.

11  And  now,  behold  I  say  unto  you,  it  shall  not  be  given  un¬
to  you  to  know  any  farther  concerning  this  chapter,  until  the
new  testament  be  translated,  and  in  it  all  these  things  shall  be
made  known:wherefore  I  give  unto  you  that  ye  may  now  trans¬
late  it,  that  ye  may  be  prepared  for  the  things  to  come;  for
verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  great  things  await  you;  ye  hear  of
wars  in  foreign  lands,  but  behold  1  say  unto  you,  they  are  nigh
even  at  your  doors  and  not  many  years  hence  ye  shall  hear  of
wars  in  your  own  lands.

12  Wherefore  I  the  Lord  have  said  gather  ye  out  from  the
eastern  lands,  assemble  ye  yourselves  together  ye  elders  of  my
church;  go  ye  forth  into  the  western  countries,  call  upon  the
inhabitants  to  repent,  and  inasmuch  as  they  do  repent,  build
up  churches  unto  me;  and  with  one  heart  and  with  one  mind,
gather  up  your  riches  that  ye  may  purchase  an  inheritance
which  shall  hereafter  be  appointed  unto  you,  and  it  shall  be
called  the  New  Jerusalem,  a  land  of  peace,  a  city  of  refuge,  a
place  of  safety  for  the  saints  of  the  most  high  God;  and  the
glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  there,  and  the  terror  of  the  Lord  al¬
so  snail  be  there,  insomuch  that  the  wicked  will  not  come  un¬
to  it:  and  it  shall  be  called  Zion:

13  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  among  the  wicked,  that  every
man  that  will  not  take  his  sword  against  his  neighbor,  must

10*


132


needs  flee  unto  Zion  for  safety.  And  there  shall  be  gatlnsred’
unto  it  out  of  every  nation  under  heaven:  and  it-shall  be  the
only  people  that  shall  not  be  at  war  one  witli  another.  And
it  shall  be  said  among  the  wicked,  Let  us  not  go  up  to  battle
against  Zion,  for  the  inhabitants  of  Zion  are  terrible.  Where¬
fore  we  cannot  stand.

14  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  the  righteous  shall  be  gath¬
ered  out  from  among  all  nations,  and  shall  come  to  Zion  sing¬
ing,  with  songs  of  everlasting  joy.

15  And  now  I  say  unto  you,  keep  these  things  Irom  going
abroad  unto  the  world,  until  it  is  expedient  in  me,  that  ye  may
accomplish  this  work  in  the  eyes  of  the  people,  and  in  the
eyes  of  your  enemies,  that  they  inay  not  know  your  works  un¬
til  ye  have  accomplished  tl*e  thing  which  I  have  commanded
t'ou:  that  when  they  shall  know  it,  that  they  may  consider
these  things,  for  when  the  Lord  shall  appear  he  shall  be  terri¬
ble  unto  them,  that  fear  may  seize  upon  them,  and  they  shall
stand  war  off  and  tremble:  and  all  nations  shall  be  afraid  because
of  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  and  the  power  of  his  might;  even  so:
Amem

SECTION  XVI.

Revelation  given  March,  1631.

1  Hearken,  O  ye  people  of  my  church,  for  verily  I  say  unto
you,  that  these  things  were  spoken  unto  you  for  your  profit
and  learning;  but  notwithstanding  those  things  which  are
written,  it  always  has  been  given  to  the  elders  of  my  church;
from  the  beginning,  and  ever  shall  be,  to  conduct  all  meetings
as  they  are  directed  and  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit:  nevertlte-
less  ye  are  commanded  never  to  cast  any  one  out  from  your
public  meetings,  which  are  held  before  the  world:  ye  are  also
commanded  not  to  cast  any  one,  who  belongeth  to  the  church,
out  of  your  sacrament  meetings:  nevertheless,  if  any  have
trespassed,  let  him  not  partake  until  he  makes  reconciliation.

2  And  again  I  say  unto  you,  ye  shall  not  cast  any  one  out  of
your  sacrament,  meetings,  who  is  earnestly  seeking  the  king¬
dom:  I  speak  this  concerning  those  who  are  not  of  the  church.

3  And  again  I  say  unto  you,  concerning  your  confirmation
meetings,  that  if  there  be  any  that  is  not  of  the  church,  that
is  earnestly  seeking  after  the  kingdom,  ye  shall  not  cast  them
out;  but  ye  are  commanded  in  all  things  to  ask  of  God  who
giveth  liberally,  and  that  which  the  Sprit  testifies  unto  you,
even  so  I  would  that  ye  should  do  in  all  holiness  of  heart,
walking  uprightly  before  me,  considering  the  end  of  your  sal-


133


vation,  doing  all  tilings  with  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  that  ye
may  not  be  seduced  by  evil  spirits,  or  doctrines  of  devils,  or  the
commandments  of  men,  for  some  are  of  men,  and  others  of
devils.

4  Wherefore,  beware  lest  ye  are  deceived!  and  that  ye  may
not  be  deceived,  3eek  ye  earnestly  the  best  gifts,  always  re¬
membering  for  what  they  are  given ;  for  verily  I  say  unto  you,’
they  are  given  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  love  me  and  keep
all  my  commandments,  and  him  that  seeketh  so  to  do,  that  all
may  be  benefited,  that  seeketh  or  that  asketh  of  me,  that  ask-
eth  and  not  for  a  sign  that  he  may  consume  it  upon  his  lusts.

5  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  would  that  ye  should
always  remember,  and  always  retain  in  your  minds  what  those
gifts  are,  that  are  given  unto  the  church,  for  all  have  not  every
gift  given  unto  them:  for  there  are  many' gifts,  'and  to  every
man  is  given  a  gift  by  the  Spirit  of  God:  to  some  it  is  given
one,  and  to  some  is  given  another,  that  all  may  be  profited
thereby:  to  some  it  is  given  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  know  that
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  he  was  crucified  for
the  sins  of  the  world;  to  others  it  is  given  to  believe  on  their
words,  that  they  also  might  have  eternal  life,  -if  they  continue
faithful.

6  And  again,  to  some  it  i3  given  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  know
the  differences  of  administration,  as  it  will  be  pleasing  unto  the
same  Lord,  according  as  the  Lord  will,  suiting  his  mercies  ac¬
cording  to  the  conditions  of  the  children  of  men.  And  again
it  is  given  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  some  to  know  the  diversities
of  operations,  whether  it  be  of  God,  that  the  manifestations  of
the  Spirit  may  be  given  to  every  man  to  profit  withal.

7  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  to  some  it  is  given,  by
the  Spirit  of  God,  the  word  of  wisdom;  to  another  it  is  given
the  word  of  knowledge,  that  all  may  be  taught  to  be  wise  and
to  haye  knowledge.  And  again,  to  some  it  is  given  to  have
faith  to  be  healed,  and  to  others  it  is  given  to  have  faith  to
heal.  And  again,  to  some  it  is  given  the  working  of  miracles;
and  to  others  it  is  given  to  prophesy,  and  to  others  the  discern¬
ing  of  spirits.  And  again,  it  is  given  to  some  to  speak  with
tongues,  and  to  another  it  is  given  the  interpretation  of  tongues:
and  all  these  gifts  cometh  from  God,  for  the  benefit  of  the  chil¬
dren  of  God.  And  unto  the  bishop  of  the  church,  and  unto
such  as  God  shall  appoint  and  ordain  to  watch  over  the  church,
and  to  be  elders  unto  the  church,  are  to  have  it  given  unto
them  to  discern  all  those  gifts,  lest  there  shall  be  any  among
you  professing  and  yet  be  not  of  God.

8  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  he  that  asketh  in  spirit  shall
receive  in  spirit;  that  unto  some  it  rp.ay  be  given  to  have  all


134


those  gifts,  that  there  may  be  a  head,  in  order  that  every  mem¬
ber  may  be  profited  thereby:  he  that  asketh  in  the  spirit,  ask-
eth  according  to  the  will  of  God,  wherefore  it  is  done  even  as
lie  asketh.

9  And  again  I  say  unto  you,  all  things  must  be  done  in  the
name  of  Christ,  whatsoever  you  do  in  the  spirit;  and  ye  must
give  thanks  unto  God  in  the  spirit  for  whatsoever  blessing  ye
are  blessed  with:  and  ye  must  practice  virtue  and  holiness  be¬
fore  me  continually;  even  so:  Amen.

SECTION  XVII.

A  Revelation  given  May,  1831.

1  Hearken,  O  ye  elders  of  my  church,  and  give  ear  to  the
voice  of  the  living  God;  and  attend  to  the  words  of  wisdom
which  shall  be  given  unto  you,  according  as  ye  have  asked  and
are  agreed  as  touching  the  church,  and  the  spirits  which  have
gone  abroad  in  the  earth.  Behold  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that
there  are  many  spirits  which  are  false  spirits,  which  have  gone
forth  in  the  earth,  deceiving  the  world:  and  also  satan  hath
sought  to  deceive  you,  that  he  might  overthrow  you.

2  Behold  I  the  Lord  have  looked  upon  you,  and  have  seen
abominations  in  the  church,  that  profess  my  name;  but  bles¬
sed  are  they  who  are  faithfiil  and  endure,  whether  in  life  or
in  death,  for  they  shall  inherit  eternal  life.  But  wo  unto  them
that  are  deceivers,  and  hypocrites,  for  thus  saith  the  Lord,  1
will  bring  them  to  judgment.

3  Behold  verily  I  say  unto  you,  there  are  hypocrites  among
you,  and  have  deceived  some,  which  has  given  the  adversary
power,  but  behold  such  shall  be  reclaimed;  but  the  hypocrites
shall  be  detected  and  shall  be  cut  off,  either  in  life  or  in  death,
even  as  I  will,  and  wo  unto  them  who  are  cut  off  from  my
church,  for  the  same  are  overcome  of  the  world:  wherefore,
let  every  man  beware  lest  he  do  that  which  is  not  in  truth  and
righteousness  before  me.

$  And  now  come,  saith  the  Lord,  by  the  Spirit,  unto  the  eb
ders  of  his  church,  and  let  us  reason  together,  that  ye  may  un¬
derstand:  let  us  reason  even  as  a  man  reasoneth  one  with  ano¬
ther  face  to  face:  now  when  a  man  reasoneth,  he  is  understood
of  man,  because  he  reasoneth  as  a  man;  even  so  will  I  the
Lord  reason  with  you  that  you  may  understand:  wherefore  I
tiie  Lord  asketh  you  this  question,  unto  what  were  ye  ordaio
ed?  To  preach  my  gospel  by  the  Spirit,  even  the  Comforter
which  was  sent  forth  to  teach  the  truth;  and  then  received  y*
spirits  which  ye  could  not  understand,  and  received  them  to


135


be  of  God,  and  in  this  are  ye  justified?  Behold  ye  shall  an¬
swer  this  question  yourselves,  nevertheless  I  will  be  merciful
unto  you:  he  that  is  weak  among  you  hereafter  shall  be  made
strong.

5  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  that  is  ordained  of  me  and  sent
forth  to  preach  the  word  of  truth  by  the  Comforter,  in  the  spir¬
it  of  truth,  doth  he  preach  it  by  the  spirit  of  truth,  or  some  oth¬
er  way?  and  if  it  be  by  some  other  way,  it  be  not  of  God.  And
again,  he  that  receiveth  the  word  of  truth,  doth  he  receive  it
by  the  spirit  of  truth,  or  some  other  way  ?  if  it  be  some  other
way,  it  be  not  of  God:  therefore,  why  is  it  that  ye  cannot  un¬
derstand  and  know  that  he  that  receiveth  the  word  by  the  spir¬
it  of  truth,  receiveth  it  as  it  is  preached  by  the  spirit  of  truth?

6  Wherefore,  he  that  preacheth  and  he  that  receiveth,  un-
dsrstandeth  one  another,  and  both  are  edified  and  rejoice  to¬
gether;  and  that  which  doth  not  edify,  is  not  of  God,  and  is
darkness:  that  which  is  of  God  is  light,  and  he  that  receiveth
light  and  continueth  in  God,  receiveth  more  light,  and  that
light  groweth  brighter  and  brighter,  until  the  perfect  day.  And
again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  and  I  say  it  that  you  may  know
the  truth,  that  you  may  chase  darkness  from  among  you,  for
ha  that  is  ordained  of  God  and  sent  forth,  the  same  is  appoint¬
ed  to  be  the  greatest,  notwitlistanding  he  is  least,  and  the  ser¬
vant  of  all:  wherefore  he  is  possessor  of  all  things,  for  all
things  are  subject  unto  him,  both  in  heaven  and  on  the  earth,
the  life,  and  the  light,  the  spirit,  and  the  power,  sent  forth  by
the  will  of  the  Father,  through  Jesus  Christ,  his  Son;  but  no
man  is  possessor  of  all  things,  except  he  be  purified  and
cleansed  from  all  sin;  and  if  ye  are  purified  and  cleansed  from
all  sin,  ye  shall  ask  whatsoever  you  will  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
and  it  shall  be  done:  but  know  this,  it  shall  be  given  you  what
you  shall  ask,  and  as  ye  are  appointed  to  the  head,  the  spirits
Hhall  be  subject  unto  you:

7  Wherefore  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  if  you  behold  a  spirit
manifested  that  you  cannot  understand,  and  you  receive  not
that  spirit,  ye  shall  ask  of  the  Father  in  the  name  of  Jesus,
and  if  he  give  not  unto  you  that  spirit,  that  you  may  know
that  it  is  not  of  God:  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you  power  over
that  spirit,  and  you  shall  proclaim  against  that  spirit  with  a
loud  voice,  that  it  is  not  of  God;  not  with  railing  accusation,
that  ye  be  not  overcome;  neither  with  boasting,  nor  rejoicing,
lest  you  be  seized  therewith:  he  that  receiveth  of  God,  let  him
account  it  of  God,  and  let  him  rejoice  that  he  is  accounted  of
God  worthy  to  receive,  and  by  giving  heed  and  doing  these
things  which  ye  have  received,  and  which  ye  shall  hereafter
receive:  and  fhe  kingdom  is  given  you  of  the  Father,  and  pow-


136


er  to  overcome  all  things,'  which  is  not  ordained  of  him:  and'
behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  blessed  are  you  who  are  now
hearing  these  words  of  mine  from  the  mouth  of  my  servant,,
for  your  sins  are  forgiven  you.

8  Let  my  servant  Joseph  Wakefield,  in  whom  I  am  well
pleased,  and  my  servant  Parley  P.  Pratt,  go  forth  among  the
churches  and  strengthen  them  by  the  word  of  exhortation ;  and
also  my  servant  John  Corrill,  or  as  many  of  my  servants  as-
are  ordained  unto  this  office,  and  let  them  labor  in  the  vine¬
yard;  and  let  no  man  hinder  them  of  doing  that  which  I  have
appointed  unto  them:  wherefore  in  this  thing  my  servant  Ed¬
ward  Partridge,  is  not  justified,  nevertheless  let  him  repent
and  he  shall  be  foTgiven.  Behold  ye  are  little  children,  and
ye  cannot  bear  all  things  now;  ye  must  grow  in  grace  and  in.
the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Fear  not,  little  children,  for  you
are  mine,  and  I  have  overcome  the  world,  and  you  are  of  them
that  my  Father  hath  given  me;  and  none  of  them  that  my
Father  hath  given  me  shall  be  lost:  and  the  Father  and  I  are
one:  I  am  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  me:  and  inasmuch
as  ye  have  received  me,  ye  are  in  me,  and  I  in  you:  wherefore
I  am  in  your  midst;  and  I  am  the  good  Shepherd,  (and  the
stone  of  Israel:  He  that  buildeth  upon  this  rock  shall  never
fall.)  And  the  day  cometh  that  you  shall  hear  my  voice  and
see  me,  and  know  that  I  am.  Watch,  therefore,  that  ye  may
be  ready;  even  so:  Amen.

SECTION  XVIII.

Revelation  given  in  Zion,  August,  1831.

1  Hearken  O  ye  elders  of  my  church,  and  give  ear  to  my
word,  and  learn  of  me  what  I  will  concerning  you,  and  also
concerning  this  land  unto  which  I  have  sent  you:  for  verily  I
say  unto  you,  blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  my  commandments,
whether  inlife  or  in  death;  and  he  that  is  faithful  in  tribulation
the  reward  of  the  same  is  greater  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

2  Ye  cannot  behold  with  your  natural  eyes,  for  the  present
time,  the  design  of  your  God  concerning  those  things  which
shall  come  hereafter,  and  the  glory  which  shall  follow,  after
much  tribulation.  For  after  much  tribulation  cometh  the  bles¬
sings.  Wherefore,  the  day  cometh  that  ye  shall  be  crowned
with  much  glory,  the  hour  is  not  yet  but  is  nigh  at  hand.

.  3  Remember  this  which  I  tell  you  before,  that  you  may  lay
it  to  heart,  and  receive  that  which  shall  follow.  ‘Behold,  ver¬
ily  I  say  unto  [you,  for  this,  cause  I  have  sent  you  that  you
might  be  obedient,  and  that  your  hearts,  might  be  prepared  to


137


bear  testimony  of  tlie  things  which  are  to  come;  and  also  that
you  might  be  honored  of  laying  the  foundation,  and  of  bearing
record  of  the  land  upon  which  the  Zion  of  God  shall  stand;
and  also,  that  a  feast  of  fat  things  might  be  prepared  for  the
poor;  yea  a  feast  of  fat  things,  of  wine  on  the  lees  well  refined,
that  the  earth  may  know  that  the  mouths  of  the  prophets  shall
not  fail;  yea,  a  supper  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  well  prepared
unto  which  all  nations  shall  be  invited.  Firstly  the  rich,  and
the  learned,  the  wise  and  the  noble;  and  after  that  cometh  the  day
of  my  power:  then  shall  the  poor,  the  lame  and  the  blind,  and
the  deaf,  come  in  unto  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb,  and  partake
of  the  supper  of  the  Lord,  prepared  for  the  great  day  to  come.
Behold  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it.

4  And  that  the  testimony  might  go  forth  from  Zion;  yea
from  the  mouth  of  the  city  of  the  heritage  of  God:  yea;  for  this
cause  I  have  sent  you  hither;  and  have  selected  my  servant
Edward  Partridge  and  have  appointed  unto  him  his  mission  in
this  land:  but  if  he  repent  not  of  his  sins,  which  are  unbelief
and  blindness  of  heart,  let  him  take  heed  lest  he  fall.  Behold
his  mission  is  given  unto  him  and  it  shall  not  be  giyen  again.
And  whoso  standeth  in  this  mission,  is  appointed  to  be  a  judge
in  Israel,  like  as  it  was  in  ancient  days,  to  divide  the  lands  of
the  heritage  of  God  unto  his  children;  and  to  judge  his  people
by  the  testimony  of  the  just,  and  by  the  assistance  of  his  coun¬
sellors,  according  to  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  which  are  given
by  the  prophets  of  God:  for  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  laws
shall  be  kept  on  this  land.

5  Let  no  man  think  that  he  is  ruler,  but  let  God  rule  him
that  judgeth,  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  own  will:  or  in
other  words,  him  that  counselleth,  or  sitteth  upon  the  judgment
seat.  Let  no  man  break  the  laws  of  the  land,  for  he  that  keep-
eth  the  laws  of  God,  hath  no  need  to  break  the  laws  of  the
land:  wherefore  be  subject  to  the  powers  that  be,  until  He
reigns  whose  right  it  is  to  reign,  and  subdues  all  enemies  un¬
der  his  feet.  Behold  the  laws  which  ye  have  received  from
my  hand,  are  the  laws  of  the  church;  and  in  this  light  ye  shall
hold  them  forth.  Behold  here  is  wisdom.

6  And  now  as  I  spake  concerning  my  servant  Edward  Par¬
tridge:  this  land  is  the  land  of  his  residence,  and  those  whom
he  has  appointed  for  his  counsellors.  And  also  the  land  of  the
residence  of  him  whom  I  have  appointed  to  keep  my  stors-
house:  wherefore  let  them  bring  their  families  to  this  land,  as
they  shall  counsel  between  themselves  and  me:  for  behold  it
is  not  meet  that  I  should  command  in  all  things,  for  he  that
is  compelled  in  all  things,  the  same  is  a  slothful  and  not  a  wise
servant:  wherefore  he  receiveth  no  reward.  Verily  I  say,  men


133


should  be  anxiously  engaged  in  a  good  cause,  and  do  many
tilings  of  their  own  free  will,  and' bring  to  pass  much  righteous¬
ness:  for  the  power  is  in  them,  wherein  they  are  agents  unto
themselves.  And  inasmuch  as  men  do  good  they  shall  in  no
wise  lose  their  reward.  But  he  that  doeth  not  any  thing  un¬
til  he  is  commanded,  and  receiveth  a  commandment  with
doubtful  heart,  and  keepeth  it  with  slothfulness,  the  same  is
damned.  Who  am  I  that  made  man,  sailh  the  Lord,  that  will
hold  him  guiltless  that  obeys  not  my  commandments?  Who
am  I,  saith  the  Lord,  that  have  promised  and  have  not  fulfil¬
led?  I  command  and  a  man  obeys  not,  I  revoke  and  they  re¬
ceive  not  the  blessing:  then  they  say  in  their  hearts,  this  is
not  the  work  of  the  Lord,  for  his  promises  are  not  fulfilled. —
But  wo  unto  such,  for  their  reward  lurketh  beneath,  and  not
from  above.

7  And  now  I  give  unto  you  further  directions  concerning  this
land.  It  is  wisdom  in  me,  that  my  servant  Martin  Harris
should  be  an  example  unto  the  church,  in  laying  his  moneys
before  the  bishop  of  the  church.  And  also,  this  is  a  law  unto
every  man  that  cometh  unto  this  land,  to  receive  an  inheri¬
tance;  and  he  .shall  do  with  his  moneys  according  as  the  law
•directs.  And  it  is  wisdom  also,  that  there  should  be  lands
purchased  in  Independence,  for  the  place  of  the  storehouse:
and  also  for  the  house  of  the  printing.

8  And  other  directions,  concerning  my  servant  Martin  Harris,
shall  be  given  him  of  the  Spirit,  that  he  may  receive  his  inher¬
itance  as  seemeth  him  good.  And  let  him  repent  of  his  sins,
for  he  seekelh  the  praise  of  the  world.

3  And  also-  let  my  servant  William  W.  Phelps  stand  in  the
office  which  I  have  appointed  him,  and  receive  his  inheritance
in  the  land.  And  also,  he  hath  need  to  repent,  for  I  the  Lord
am  not  well  pleased  with  him,  for  he  seeketh  to  excel,  ami
he  is  not  sufficiently  meek  before  me.  Behold  he  who  lias
repented  of  his  sins  the  same  is  forgiven,  and  I  the  Lord  re-
membereth  them  no  more.  By  this  ye  may  know  if  a  man
repenteth  of  his  sing.  Behold  he  will  confess  them  and  fop-
soke  them.  And  now  verily  I  say,  concerning  the  residue  of
the  elders  of  my  church,  the  time  has  not  yet  come  for  many
years,  for  them  to  receive  their  inheritance  in  this  land;  ex¬
cept  they  desire  it  through  the  prayer  of  faith,  only  as  it  shall
be  appointed  unto  them  of  the  Lord.  For  behold  they  shall
push  the  people  together  from  the  ends  of  the  earth:  where¬
fore  assemble  yourselves  together,  and  they  who  are  not  ap¬
pointed  to  stay  in  this  land,  let  them  preach  the  gospel  in  the
regions  round  about;  and  after  that,  let  them  return  to  their
homes.  Let  them  preach  by  the  way,  and  bear  testimony  of


the  truth  in  all  places,  and  call  upon  the  rich,  the  high,  and
the  low,  and  the  poor,  to  repent;  and  let  them  build  up  church*
es  inasmuch  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  will  repent.

10  And  let  there  be  an  agent  appointed  by  the  voice  of  the
church,  unto  the  church  in  Ohio,  to  receive  moneys  to  pur¬
chase  lands  in  Zion.

11  And  I  give  unto  my  servant  Sidney  Rigdon,  a  command¬
ment,  that  he  shall  write  a  description  of  the  land  of  Zion,
and  a  statement  of  the  will  of  God,  as  it  shall  be  made  known
by  the  Spirit,  unto  him;  and  an  epistle  and  subscription,  to  be
presented  unto  all  the  churches,  to  obtain  moneys,  to  be
put  into  the  hands  of  the  bishop,  to  purchase  lands  for
an  inheritance  for  the  children  of  God,  of  himself  or  the
agent,  as  seemeth  him  good,  or  as  he  shall  direct.  For  be¬
hold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  Lord  willeth  that  the  disci-
plfes,  and  the  children  of  men,  should  open  their  heaTts  even
to  purchase  this  whole  region  of  country,  as  soon  as  time  will
permit.  Behold  here  is  wisdom;  let  them  do  this  lest  they
receive  none  inheritance,  save  it  be  by  the  shedding  of  blood.

12  And  again,  inasmuch  as  there  is  land  obtained,  let  these
be  workmen  sent  forth,  of  all  kinds,  unto  this  land,  to  labor
for  the  saints  of  God.  Let  all  these  things  be  done  in  order.
And  let  the  privileges  of  the  lands  be  made  known  from  time
to  time;  by  the  bishop,  or  the  agent  of  the  church.  And  let
the  work  of  the  gathering  be  not  in  haste,  nor  by  flight,  but
let  it  be  done  as  it  shall  be  counselled  by  the  elders  of  the
church  at  the  conferences,  according  to  the  knowledge  which
they  receive  from  time  to  time.

13  And  let  my  servant  Sidney  Rigdon  consecrate  and  dedi¬
cate  this  land,  and  the  spot  ofthe  temple,  unto  the  Lord.  And
let  a  conference  meeting  be  called,  and  after  that,  let  my  ses->
vant  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  return,  and  also
Oliver  Cowdery  with  them,  to  accomplish  the  residue  of  the
work,  which  I  have  appointed  unto  them  in  their  own  land:
and  the  residue  as  shall  be  ruled  by  the  conferences.

14  And  let  no  man  return  from  this  land,  except  he  bear  r»-
oord  by  the  way,  of  that  which  he  knows  and  most  assuredly
believes.  Let  that  which  has  been  bestowed  upon  Zita
Peterson,  be  taken  from  him:  and  let  him  stand  as  a  member
in  the  church,  and  labor  with  his  own  hands,  with  the  breth¬
ren,  until  he  is  sufficiently  chastened  for  all  his  sins,  for  he
oonfesseth  them  not,  and  he  thinketh  to  hide  them.

15  Let  the  residue  of  the  elders  of  this  church,  who  are  Do¬
ming  to  this  land,  some  of  whom  are  exceedingly  blessed  even
above  measure,  also,  hold  a  conference  upon  thus  land.  And
let  my  servant  Edward  Partridge  direct  the  conference,  which


140


shall  be  held  by  them.  And  let  them  also  return,  preaching  the
gospe1  by  the  way,  bearing  record  of  the  things  which  are  re¬
vealed  unto  them:  for  verily  the  sound  must  go  forth  from  this
place  into  all  the  world:  and  unto  the  uttermost  parts  of  the
earth,, the  gospel  must  be  preached  unto  every  creature,  with
signs  following  them  that  believe.  And  behold  the  Son  of
man  cometh:  Amen.  •

SECTION  XIX.

Revelation  given  in  Zion,  August,  1831.

1  Behold,  blessed,  saith  the  Lord,  are  they  who  have  come  up
unto  this  land  with  an  eye  single  to  my  glory,  according  to  my
commandments:  for  them  that  live  shall  inherit  the  earth,  and
them  that  die  shall  rest  from  all  their  labors,  and  their  works
shall  follow  them,  and  they  shall  receive  a  crown  in  the  man¬
sions  of  my-  Father,  which  I  have  prepared  for  them;  yea,
blessed  are  they  whose  feet  stand  upon  the  land  of  Zion,  who
have  obeyed  my  gospel,  for  they  shall  receive  for  their  reward
the  good  things  of  the  earth;  and  it  shall  bring  forth  in  its
strength:  and  they  shall  also  be  crowned  with  blessings  from
above;  yea  and  with  commandments  not  a  few;  and  with  rev¬
elations  in  their  time:  they  that  are  faithful  and  diligent  be¬
fore  me:

2  Wherefore  I  give  unto  them  a  commandment,  saying  thus:
Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord. thy  God,  with  all  thy  heart,  with  all
thy  might,  mind,  and  strength:  and  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ  thou  shalt  serve  him.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as
thyself.  Thou  shalt  not  steal.  Neither  commit  adultery,  nor
kill,  nor  do  any  thing  like  unto  it.  Thou  shalt  thank  the  Lord
thy  God  in  all  things.  Thou  shalt  offer  a  sacrifice  unto  tlie
Lord  thy  God  in  righteousness:  even  that  of  a  broken  heart
and  a  contrite  spirit.  And  that  thou  mayest  more  fully  keep
thyself  unspotted  from  the  world,  thou  shalt  go  to  the  house  of
prayer  and  offer  up  thy  sacraments  upon  my  holy  day;  for
verily  this  is  a  day  appointed  unto  you  to  rest  from  your  la¬
bors,  and  to  pay  thy  devotions  unto  the  Most  High;  neverthe¬
less  thy  vows  shall  be  offered  up  in  righteousness  on  all  days,
and  at  all  times;  but  remember  that  on  this,  the  Lord’s  day,
thou  shalt  offer  thine  oblations,  and  tliv  sacraments,  unto  the
Most  High,  confessing  thy  sins  unto  thy  brethren,  and  before
the  Lord.

3  And  on  this  day  thou  shalt  do  none  other  thing,  only  let
thy  food  be  prepared  with  singleness  of  heart,  that  thy  fasting
may  be  perfect,  or  in  other  words,  that  thy  joy  may  be  full. —


141


Verily  this  is  fasting  and  prayer;  or,  in  other  words,  rejoicing
and  prayer.

4  And  inasmuch  as  ye  do  these  things,  with  thanksgiving,
with  cheerful  hearts,  and  countenances;  not  with  much  laugh¬
ter,  for  this  is  sin,  but  with  a  glad  heart  and  a  cheerful  coun¬
tenance;  verily  I  say,  that  inasmuch  as  ye  do  this  the  fulness
of  the  earth  is  yours:  the  beasts  of  the  fields,  and  the  fowls
of  the  air,  and  that  which  climbeth  upon  the  trees,  and  walh-
eth  upon  the  earth:  yea,  and  the  herb,  and  the  good  things
which  cometh  of  the  earth,  whether  for  food  or  for  raiment,
or  for  houses  or  for  barns,  or  for  orchards,  or  for  gardens,  or
for  vineyards:  yea,  all  things  which  cometh  of  the  earth,  in  the
season  thereof,  is  made  for  the  benefit  and  the  use  of  man,
both  to  please  the  eye,  and  to  gladden  the  heart:  yea,  for  food
and  for  raiment,  for  taste,  and  for  smell,  to  strengthen  the  bo¬
dy,  and  to  enliven  the  soul.

5  And  it  pleaseth  God  that  he  hath  given  all  these  things  unto
man:  for  unto  this  end  were  they  made,  to  be  used  with  judg¬
ment,  not  to  excess,  neither  by  extortion:  and  in  nothing  doth
man  offend  God,  or  against  none  is  his  wrath  kindled,  save
those  who  confess  not  his  hand  in  all  things,  and  obey  not  his
commandments.  Behold  this  is  according  to  the  law  and  the
prophets:  wherefore  trouble  me  no  more  concerning  this  mat¬
ter,  but  learn  that  he  who  doeth  the  works  of  righteousness,
shall  receive  his  reward,  even  peace  in  this  world,  and  eternal
life  in  the  world  to  come.  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it  and  the
Spirit  beareth  record.  Amen.

SECTION  XX.

Revelation  given  in  Kirtland,  August,  1831.

1  Hearken,  O  ye  people,  and  open  your  hearts,  and  give  ear
from  afar:  md  listen,  you  that  call  yourselves  the  people  of
the  Lord,  and  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  his  will  con¬
cerning  you:  yea,  verily,  I  say,  hear  the  word  of  him  whose
anger  is  kindled  against  the  wicked,  and  rebellious;  who  wil-
leth  to  take  even  them  whom  he  will  take,  and  preserveth  in
life  them  whom  he  will  preserve:  who  buildeth  up  at  his  own
will  and  pleasure;  and  destroyeth  when  he  please;  and  is  able
to  cast  the  soul  down  to  hell.

2  Behold  I  the  Lord  utter  my  voice,  and  it  shall  be  obey¬
ed.  Wherefore  verily  I  say,  let  the  wicked  take  heed,  and  let
the  rebellious  fear,  and  tremble.  And  let  the  unbelieving  hold
their  lips,  for  the  day  of  wrath  shall  come  upon  them  as  a
whirlwind,  and  all  flesh  shall  know  that  I  am  God.  And  he
that  seeketh  signs  shall  see  signs,  but  not  unto  salvation.


142


3  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  there  are  those  among  you  who
seek  signs:  and  there  have  been  such  even  from  the  begin¬
ning.  Butbehold,  faith  cometh  not  by  signs,  but  signs  follow
those  that  believe.  Yea,  signs  cometh  by  faith,  not  by  the
will  of  men,  nor  as  they  please,  but  by  the  will  of  God.  Yea,
signs  cometh  by  faith,  unto  mighty  works,  for  without  faith,
no  man  pleaseth  God:  and  with  whom  God  is  angry,  he  is  not
well  pleased:  wherefore,  unto  such  he  showeth  no  signs,  only
in  wrath  unto  their  condemnation.

4  Wherefore  I  the  Lord  am  not  pleased  with  those  among
you,  who  have  sought  after  signs  and  wonders  for  faith,  and
not  for  the  good  of  men  unto  my  glory:  nevertheless,  I  gave
commandments  and  many  have  turned  away  from  my  com¬
mandments,  and  have  not  kept  them.  There  were  among  you
adulterers  and  adulteresses;  some  of  whom  have  turned  away
from  you,  and  others  remain  with  you:  that  hereafter  shall  be
revealed.  Let  such  beware  and  repent  speedily,  lest  judg¬
ments  shall  come  upon  them  as  a  snare,  and  their  folly  shall
be  made  manifest,  and  their  works  shall  follow  them  in  the
eyes  of  the  people.

5  And  verily  I  say  unto  you,  as  I  have  said  before,  he  that
looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  or  if  any  shall  commit
adultery  in  their  hearts,  they  shall  not  have  the  Spirit,  but
shall  deny  the  faith  and  shall  fear:  wherefore  I  the  Lord  have
said  that  the  fearful,  and  the  unbelieving,  and  all  liars,  and  who¬
soever  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie,  and  the  whoremonger,  and  the
sorcerer,  shall  have  their  part  in  that  lake  which  bumeth  with
fire  and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death.  Verily  I  say,
that  they  shall  not  have  part  in  the  first  resurrection.

C  And  now  behold,  I  the  Lord  saith  unto  you,  that  ye  are  not
justified  because  these  things  are  among  you,  nevertheless  he
that  endureth  in  faith  and  doeth  my  will,  the  same  shall  over¬
come,  and  shall  receive  an  inheritance  upon  the  earth,  when
the  day  of  transfiguration  shall  come;  when  the  earth  shall  be
transfigured,  even  according  to  the  pattern  which  was  shown
unto  mine  apostles  upon  the  mount:  of  which  account  the  ful¬
ness  ye  have  not  yet  received.

7  And  now,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  as  I  said  that  I  would
make  known  my  will  unto  you,  behold  1  will  make  it  known
unto  you,  not  by  the  way  of  commandment,  for  there  are  ma¬
ny  who  observe  not  to  keep  my  commandments,  but  unto  him
that  keepeth  my  commandments,  I  will  give  the  mysteries  of
ray  kingdom,  and  the  same  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  living  wa¬
ter,  springing  up  unto  everlasting  life.

8  And  now,  behold  this  is  the  will  of  the  Lord  your  God
concerning  his  saints,  that  they  should  assemble  themselves  to-


143


gether  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  not  in  haste,  lest  there  should
be  confusion,  which  bringeth  pestilence.  Behold  the  land  of
Zion,  I  the  Lord  holdeth  it  in  mine  own  hands:  nevertheless,

I  the  Lord  renderth  unto  Csesar  the  things  which  are  Ctesar’s:
wherefore  I  the  Lord  willeth,  that  you  should  purchase  the
lands,  that  you  may  have  advantage  of  the  world,  that  you
may  have  claim  on  the  world,  that  they  may  not  be  stirred  up
unto  anger:  for  satan  putteth  it  into  their  hearts  to  anger
against  you,  and  to  the  shedding  of  blood:  wherefore  the  land
of  Zion  shall  not  be  obtained  but  by  purchase,  or  by  blood,
otherwise  there  is  none  inheritance  for  you.  And  if  by  pur¬
chase  behold  you  are  blessed;  and  if  by  blood,  as  you  are  for¬
bidden  to  shed  blood,  lo,  your  enemies  are  upon  you,  and  ya
shall  be  scourged  from  city  to  city,  and  from  synagogue  to
synagogue,  and  but  few  shall  stand  to  receive  an  inheritance.

9  1  the  Lord  am  angry  with  the  wicked;  I  am  holding  my
Spirit  from  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  I  have  sworn  in  my
wrath  and  decreed  wars  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  the
wicked  shall  slay  the  wicked,  and  fear  shall  come  upon  every
man  and  the  saints  also  shall  hardly  escape:  nevertheless,  I
the  Lord  am  with  them,  and  will  come  down  in  heaven  iron}
the  presence  of  my  Father,  and  consume  the  wicked  with  un¬
quenchable  fire.  And  behold  this  is  not  yet,  but  by  and  by:
wherefore  seeing  that  I  the  Lord  have  decreed  all  these  things
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  I  willeth  that  my  saints  should  be
assembled  upon  the  land  of  Zion;  and  that  every  man  should
take  righteousness  in  his  hands,  and  faithfulness  upon  his  loins,
and  lift  a  warning  voice  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth;  and
declare  both  by  word  and  by  flight,  that  desolation  shall  come
upon  the  wicked.  Wherefore  let  my  disciples  in  Kirtland,  ar¬
range  their  temporal  concerns,  which  dwell  upon  this  farm.

10  Let  my  servant  Titus  Billings,  who  has  the  care  thereof  dis¬
pose  of  the  land,  that  he  may  be  prepared  in  the  coming  spring,
to  take  his  journey  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  with  those  that
dwell  upon  the  face  thereof,  excepting  those  whom  I  shall  re¬
serve  unto  myself,  that  shall  not  go  until  1  shall  command  them.
And  let  all  (die  moneys  which  can  be  spared,  it  matteretli  not
unto  me  whether  it  be  little  or  much,  sent  up  unto  the  land  of
Zion,  unto  them  whom  I  have  appointed  to  receive.

1 1  Behold  I  the  Lordjwill  give  unto  my  servants  3  oseph  Smith,
Jr.  power,  that  he  shall  be  enabled  to  discern  by  the  Spirit
those  who  shall  go  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  and'those  of  my
disciples  who  shall  tarry.

12  Let  my  servant  Newel  K.  Whitney  retain  his  store,  or  in
other  words,  the  store  yet  for  a  little  season.  Nevertheless  let
him  impart  all  the  money  which  he  can  impart,  to  be  sent  up  on-


144


to  the  land  of  Zion.  Behold  these  things  are  in  his  own  hands,
let  him  do  according  to  wisdom.  Verily  I  say,  let  him  be  or¬
dained  as  an  agent  unto  the  disciples  that  shall  tarry,  and  let  him
be  ordained  unto  this  power;  and  now  speedily  visit  the  church¬
es,  expounding  these  things  unto  them,  with  my  servant  Oliver
Cowdery.  Behold  this  is  my  will,  obtaining  moneys  even  as
I  have  directed.

13  He  that  is  faithful  and  endureth  shall  overcome  the  world.
He  that  sendeth  up  treasures  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  shall  re¬
ceive  an  inheritance  in  this  world,  and  his  works  -shall  ^follow
him;  and  also,  a  reward  in  the  world  to  come;  yea,  and  bles¬
sed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord  from  henceforth,  when
the  Lord  shall  come  and  old  things  shall  pass  away,  and  all
things  become  new,  they  shall  rise  from  the  dead  and  shall  not
die  after,  and  shall  receive  an  inheritance  before  the  Lord,  in
the  holy  city,  and  he  that  liveth  when  the  Lord  shall  come,
and  have  kept  the  faith,  blessed  is  he;  nevertheless  it  is  ap¬
pointed  to  him  to  die  at  the  age  of  man:  wherefore  children
shall  grow  up  until  they  become  old,  old  men  shall  die;  but
they  snail  not  sleep  in  the  dust,  but  they  shall  be  changed  in
tjie  twinkling  ot  an  eye:  wherefore,  for  this  cause  preached
the  apostles  unto  the  world,  the  resurrection  of  the  dead:  these
things  are  the  things  that  ye  must  look  for,  and  speaking  after
the  manner  of  the  Lord,  they  are  now  nigh  at  hand;  and  in  a
time  to  come,  even  in  the  day  of  the  coming  of  the  Son  of
man,  and  until  that  hour,  there  will  be  foolish  virgins  among
the  wise,  and  at  that  hour  cometh  an  entire  separation  of  the
righteous  and  the  wicked;  and  in  that  day  will  1  send  mine  an¬
gels,  to  pluck  out  the  wicked,  and  cast  them  into  unquencha¬
ble  fire.

14  And  now  behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  the  Lord  am
not  pleased  with  my  servant  Sidney  Rigdon,  he  exalted  him¬
self  in  his  heart,  and  received  not  counsel,  but  grieved  the
Spirit:  wherefore  his  writing  is  not  acceptable  unto  the  Lord,,
and  he  shall  make  another;  and  if  the  Lord  receive  it  not,  be¬
hold  he  standetli  no  longer  in  the  offico  which  I  have  appointed
him.

15  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  those  who  desire  in
their  hearts,  in  meekness,  to  warn  sinners  to  repentance,  let
them  be  ordained  unto  this  power:  for  this  is  a  day  of  warn¬
ing,  and  not  a  day  of  many  words.  For  I  the  Lord  am  not  to
be  mocked  in  the  last  days.  Behold  I  am  from  above,  and
my  power  lieth  beneath.  I  am  over  all,  and  in  all,  and
through  all,  and  searcheth  all  things:  and  the  day  cometh
that  all  things  shall  be  subject  unto  me.  Behold  I  am  Alpha
and  Omega,  even  Jesus  Christ.  Wherefore  let  all  men  be-


145


Ware,  how  they  take  my  dame  in  their  lips:  for  behold  verily  I
say,  that  many  there  be  who  are  under  this  condemnation;
who  useth  the  name  of  tire  Lord,  and  useth  it  in  vain,  having
not  authority.  Wherefore  let  the  church  repent  of  their  sins,
and  I  the  Lord  will  own  them,  otherwise  they  shall  be  cut  oft.

16  Remember,  that  that  which  cometh  from  above  is  sacred,
and  must  be  spoken  with  care,  and  by  constraint  of  the  Spirit,
and  in  this  there  is  no  condemnation;  and  ye  receive  the  Spir¬
it  through  prayer:  wherefore  without  this,  there  remaineth
condemnation:  Let  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney
Rigdon,  seek  them  a  home  as  they  are  taught  through  prayer,
by  the  Spirit.  These  things  remain  to  overcome,  through  pa¬
tience,  that  such  may  receive  a  more  exceeding  and  eternal
weight  of  glory;  otherwise,  a  greater  condemnation:  Amen.


SECTION  XXI.

A  Revelation  giren  in  Kirtland,  September,  1831.

1  Behold,  thus  saith  the  Lord  your  God  unto  you,  O  ye  elders
of  my  church,  hearken  ye,  and  hear,  and  receive  my  will  con¬
cerning  you:  for  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  will  that  ye  should
overcome  the  world:  wherefore  I  will  have  compassion  upon
you.  There  are  those  among  you  who  have  sinned;  but  verily
I  say,  for  this  once,  for  mine  own  glory,  and  for  the  salvation
of  souls,  I  have  forgiven  you  your  sins.

2  I  will  be  merciful  unto  you,  for  I  have  given  unto  you  the
kingdom:  and  the  keys  of  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom,  shall
not  be  taken  from  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  through  the
means  I  have  appointed,  while  he  liveth,  inasmuch  as  he
obeyeth  mine  ordinances.  There  are  those  who  have  sought
occasion  against  him  without  cause;  nevertheless  he  has  sin¬
ned,  but  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  the  Lord  forgiveth  sins  unto
those  who  confess  their  sins  before  me,  and  ask  forgiveness,
who  have  not  sinned  unto  death.  My  disciples,  in  days  of
old,  sought  occasion  against  one  another,  and  forgave  not  one
another  in  their  hearts,  and  for  this  evil  they  were  afflicted,
and  sorely  chastened:  wherefore  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  ought
to  forgive  one  another,  for  he  that  forgiveth  not  his  brother
his  trespasses,  standeth  condemned  before  the  Lord,  for  there
remaineth  in  him  the  greater  sin.  I  the  Lord  will  forgive
whom  I  will  forgive,  but  of  you  it  is  required  to  forgive  all
men;  and  ye  ought  to  say  in  your  hearts,  let  God  judge  be¬
tween  me  and  thee,  and  reward  thee  according  to  thy  deeds.
And  he  that  repentelh  not  of  his  sins,  and  confesseth  them


146


not,  then  ye  shall  bring  hinv  before  the  church,  and  do  with'
him  as  the  Scriptures  saith  onto  you.  either  by  commandment,
or  by  revelation.  And  this  ye  shall  do  that  God  might  be  glo¬
rified,  not  because  ye  forgive  not,  having  not  compassion,  but
that  ye  may  be  justified  in* the  eyes  of  the  law,  that  ye  may
not  offend  him  who  is  your  Lawgiver.

3  Verily  I  say,  for  this  cause  ye  shall  do  these  things.  Be¬
hold  I  the  Lord  was  angry  with  him  Who  was  my  servant  Ez¬
ra  Booth;  and  also,  my  servant  Isaac  Morley;  for  they  kept
not  the  law,  neither  the  commandment;  they  sought  evil  in
their  hearts,  and  I  the  Lord  withheld  my  Spirit.  They  con¬
demned  for  evil,  that  thing  in  which  there  was  no  evil;  never¬
theless  I  have  forgiven  my  servant  Isaac  Morley.  And  also
iny  servant  Edward  Partridge,  behold  he  hath  sinned,  and  sa-
tan  seeketh  to  destroy  his  soul;  but  when  these  things  are
made  known  unto  them,  they  repent  of  the  evil,  and  tl)ey
shall  be  forgiven.

4  And  now  verily  I  say,  that  it  is  expedient  in  me  that  my
servant  Sidney  Gilbert,  after  a  few  weeks,  should  return  up¬
on  his  business,  and  to  bis  agency  in  the  land  of  Z»&il;  and
that  which  he  hath. seen  and  heard  may  be  made  known  unto
my  disciples,  that  they  perish  not.  And  for  this  cause  havel
spoken  these  tilings.  And  again,  1  say  unto  you,  that  my
servant  Isaac  Morley  may  not  be  tempted  abcjve  that  which
he  is  able  to  bear,  and  counsel  wrongfully  to  your  hurt,  I  gave
commandment  that  this  farm  should  be  sold.  I  willeth  not
that  my  servant  Frederick  G.  Williams  should  sell  his  farm,
for  I  the  Lord  wllleth  to  retain  a  strong  hold  in  the  land  of
Kirtland,  for  the  space  of  five  years,  in  the  which  I  will  not
overthrow  the  wicked,  that  thereby  1  may  save  some;  and  af¬
ter  that  day,  I  the  Lord  will  not  hold  any  guilty,  that  shall  go,
with  an  open  heart,  up  to  the  land  of  Zion:  for  I  the  Lord  re-
quireth  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men.

5  Behold  noyv  it  is  called  to-day,  (until  the  coming  of  the
Son  of  man)  and  verily  it  is  sffday  of  sacrifice,  and  a  cay  for
the  tithing  of  my  people;  for  he  that  is  tithed  shall  not  be
burned  (at  his  coming;)  for  alter  to-day  cometh  the  burning;
this  is  speaking  after  the  manner  of  the  Lord;  for  verily  I  say,
to-morrow  all  the  proud  and  they  that  do  wickedly  shall  bo  as
stubble:  and  I  will  burn  them  up,  for  1  am  the  Lord  of  hosts;
and  I  will  not  spare  any  that  remaineth  in  Babylon.  Where¬
fore,  if  ye  believe  me,  ye  will  labor  while  it  is  called  to-day.—
And  it  is  not  meet  that  my  servants,  Newel  K.  Whitney  and;
Sidney  Gilbert  should  sell  their  store,  and  their  possessions
here,  for  this  is  not  wisdom  until  the  residue  ofthe  church,  which
remainethin  this  place,  shall  go  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion.


w

6  Behold  it  is  said  in  my  laws,  or  forbidden  to  get  in  debt  to
thine  enemies;  but  behold  it  is  not  said  at  any  time,  that  the
Lord  should  not  take  when  he  please,  and  pay  as  seemeth  him
good:  wherefore  as  ye  are  agents,  and  ye  are  on  the  Lord’s  er¬
rand;  and  whatever  ye  do  according  to  the  will  of  the  Lord,  is
the  Lord’s  business,  and  he  hath  set  you  to  p-ovide  for  his
saints  in  these  last  days,  that  they  may  obtain  an  inheritance
in  the  land  of  Zion;  and  behold  I  the  Lord  declare  unto  you,
and  my  words  are  sure  and  shall  not  fail,  that  they  shall  obtain
it;  but  all  things  must  come  to  pass  in  their  time;  wherefore  be
not  weary  in  well  doing,  for  ye  are  laying  the  foundation  of  a
great  work.  And  out  of  small  things  proceedeth  that  Which
is  great.

7  Behold  the  Lord  requireth  the  heart  and  a  willing  mind;
and  the  willing  and  obedient  shall  eat  the  good  of  the  land  of
Zion  in  these  last  days;  and  the  rebellious  shall  be  cut  off  out
of  thejand  of  Zion,  and  shall  be  sent  away  and  shall  not  in¬
herit  the  land:  for  verily  I  say  that  the  rebellious  are  not  of
the  blood  of  Ephraim,  wherefore  they  shall  be  plucked  out.
Behold  I  the  Lord  have  made  my  church  in  these  last  days,
like  unto  a  judge  sitting  on  an  hill,  or  in  an  high  placf,  to
judge  the  nations:  fpr  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  the  inhabi¬
tants  of  Zion  shall  judge  all  things  pertaining  to  Zion:  and
Bars,  and  hypocrites  shall  be  proved  by  them,  and  they  wiia
are  not  apostles  and  prophets  shall  be  known.

8  And  even  the  bishop,  who  is  a  judge,  and  his  counsellors,
if  they  are  not  faithful  in  their  stewardships,  shall  be  condem¬
ned,  and  others  shall  be  planted  in  their  stead:  for  behold  1
say  unto  you  that  Zion  shall  flourish,  and  the  glory  of  the
Lord  shall  be  upon  her,  and  she1  shall  be  an  ensign  unto  the
people:  and  there  shall  come  unto  her  out  of  every  nation  un¬
der  heaven.  And  the  day  shall  come,  when  the  nations  of  the
earth  shall  tremble  because  of  her,  and  shall  fear  because  of  her
terrible  ones:  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it:  Amen.  ,

SECTION  XXII.

A  Revelation,  given  November,  1831,  to  Orson  Hyde,  Luke  John¬
son,  Lyman  Johnson  and,  William  E.  McLcUin. '  The  mind
and  will  qf  the  Lord,  as  made  known  by  the  voice  of  the  Spir¬
it  to  a  conference  concerning  certain  ciders;  and  ulso  certain
'  items,  as  made  known,  in  addition  to  the  covenants  and  com¬
mandments.

My  servant,  Orson  Hyde,  was  called,  by  his  ordinance,  to
proclaim  the  everlasting  gospel,  by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,


148


from  people  to  people,  am  from  land  to  land,  in  the  congrega¬
tions  of  the  wicked,  in  th  hr  synagogues,  reasoning  with  and
expounding  all  .scriptures  unto  them:  and  behold  and  lo,  this
is  an  ensample  unto  all  those  who  were  ordained  unto  this
priesthood,  whose  mission  is  appointed  unto  them  to  go  iorthi
and  this  is  the  ensamp.  nto  them,  that  they  shall  speak  as
they  are  moved  upon  by  tin- Holy  Ghost;  and  whatsoever  they
shall  speak  when  moved  upon  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  shall  be
scripture;  shall  be  the  w  ,i  of  the  Lord;  shall  be  the  mind  of
the  Lord;  shall  be  the  word  of  the  Lord;  shall  be  the  voice  of
the  Lord,  and  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation;  behold  this
is  the  promise  of  the  Lord  unto  you,  O  ye  my  servants:  where¬
fore,  be  of  good  cheer,  and  do  not  fear,  ior  1  the  Lord  am  witli
you,  and  will  stand  by  you;  and  ye  shall  bear  record  of  me
even  Jssub  Christ,  tlia  i  am  the  Son  of  the  living  God;  that
I  was;  that  I  am;  and  l  I  am  to  come.  This  is  the  word  of
the  Lord  unto  you  ny.  servant,  Orson  Hyde;  and  also  unto
my  servant,  Luke  Johnson,  and  unto  my  servant,  Lyman
Johnson,  and  unto  my  servant,  William  E.  McLellin;  and  un¬
to  all  the  faithful  elders  of  my  church:  Go  ye  into  all  the
world;  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature;  acting  in  the  au¬
thority  which  I  have  given  you;  baptizing  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  he  that
beliereth,  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that  believeth
not  shall  be  damned;  and  be  that  believeth  shall  be  blessed
with  signs  following,  even  as  it  is  written:  and  unto  you  it,
shall  be  given  to  know  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  the  signs  of
the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man;  and  of  as  many  as  the  Father
shall  bear  record,  to  you  it  shall  be  given  power  to  seal  them
up  unto  eternal  life:  Amen.

2  And  now  concerning  the  items  in  addition  to  the  covenants
and  commandments,  they  are  these:  There  remaineth  hereafter
in  the  due  litpe  of  the  Lord,  other  bishops  to  be  set  apart  us.
to  the  church  to  minister  even  according  to  the  first:  where¬
fore  they  shall  be  high  priests  who  are  worthy,  and  they  studl
be  appeunted  by  the  first  presidency  of  the  Melnhizedek  priest¬
hood,  except  they  be  literal  descendants  of  Aaron;  and  if  they
be  literal  descendants  of  Aaron,  they  have  a  legal  right  to  tbs
bishopric,  if  they  are  the  first  born  among  the  sons  of  Aaron:
for  the  first  bom  holds  the  right  of  presidency  over  this  priest¬
hood,  and  the  keys  or  authority  of  the  same.  No  man  has  a
legal  right  to  this  office,  to  hold  the  keys  of  this  priesthood,
except  he  be  a  literal  descendant  and  the  first  born  of  Aaron-,
but  as  a  high  priest  of  the  Melchizedek  priesthood,  has  author¬
ity  to  officiate  in  all  the  lesser  offices,  he  may  officiate  in  tha
office  of  bishop  when  no  literal'  descendant  of  Aaron  can  be


149


fbund;  provided  he  is  called  and  set  apart,  and  ordained  unto
this  power  under  the  hands  of  the  first  presidency  of  the  Mel-
©hizedek  priesthood.  And  a  literal  descendant  of  Aaron,  al¬
so,  must  be  designated  by  this  presidency,  and  found  worthy,
and  anointed,  and  ordained  under  the  hands  of  this  presidency,
otherwise  they  are  not  legally  authorized  to  officiate  in  their
priesthood:  but  by  virtue  of  the  decree  concerning  their  right
of  the  priesthood  descending  from  father  to  son,  they  may
claim  their  annointing,  if  at  any  time  they  can  prove  their
lineage,  or  do  ascertain  it  by  re  vela  cion  from  the  Lord  under
the  hands  of  the  above  named  presidency.

3  And  again,  no  bishop  or  high  priest,  who  shall  be  set  apart
for  this  ministry,  shall  be  tried  or  condemned  for  any  crime
save  it  be  before  the  first  presidency  of  the  church;  and  inas¬
much  as  he  is  found  guilty  before  this  presidency,  by  testimo¬
ny  that  cannot  be  impeached,  he  shall  be  condemned,  and  if
Ue  repents  lie  shall  be  forgiven,  according  to  the  covenants
and  commandments  of  the  church.

4  And  again,  inasmuch  as  parents  have  children  irr  Zion,  or
in  any  of  her  stakes  which  are  orgr.  .zed,  that  teach  them  not
to  understand  the  doctrine  of  re  pen;  ance;  faith  in  Christ  the
Son  of  the  living  God;  and  of  baptise  d  and  the  gift  of  the  Ho¬
ly  Ghost  by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands,  when  eight  years  old,
the  sin  be  upon  the  head  of  the  parents,  for  this  shall  be  a  law
unto  the  inhabitants  of  Zion,  or  in  any  of  her  stakes  which
are  organized:  and  their  children,  shall  be  baptized  for  the  re¬
mission  of  their  sins  when  eight  j  ars  old,  and  receive  the
laying  on  of  the  hands:  and  they  shall  also  teach  their  children
to  pray,  and  to  walk  uprightly  before  the  Lord.  And  the  in¬
habitants  of  Zion  shall  also  observe  i  he  Sabbath  day  to  keep  it
holy.  And  the  inhabitants  of  Zion,  also,  shall  remember  their
labors,  inasmuch  as  they  are  appoint- d  to  labor,  in  all  faithful¬
ness,  for  the  idler  shall  be  had  in  rer  <-  mhrance  before  the  Lord.
Bow  I  the  Lord  am  not  well  pleased  t  th  the  inhabitants  of  Zion,
for  there  are  idlers  among  them;  a  ad  their  children  are  also
growing  up  in  wickedness;  They  also  seek  not  earnestly
the  riches  of  eternity,  but  their  eye  are  full  of  greediness.
These  tilings  ought  not  to  be,  and  must  be  done  away  from
among  them:  wherefore  let  my  servant  Oliver  Cowder-y,  carry
these  sayings  unto  the  land  of  Zion.  And  a  commandment
I  give  unto  them,  that  he  that  obs  rveth 'not  his  prayers  be¬
fore  the  Lord  in  the  season  thereof,  let  him  be  had  in  re¬
membrance  before  the  judge  of  my  people.  These  sayings
a.-e  true  and  faithful:  wherefore  n uisgress  them  not,  neither
take  therefrom.  Behold  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  and  I  corns
quickly:  Amen.


150


SECTION  XXIII.

Revelation  given  May,  1831.

1  Hearken  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  your  God,  and  I  will
speak  unto  my  servant  Edward  Partridge,  and  give  unto  him
directions:  for  it  must  needs  be  that  he  receive  directions  how
to  organize  this  people:  for  it  must  needs  be  that  they  are  op-
ganized  according  to  my  laws,  if  otherwise  they  will  be  cut
off:  wherefore  let  my  servant  Edward  Partridge,  and  those
whom  he  has  chosen,  in  whom  I  ain  well  pleased,  appoint  un
to  this  people  their  portion,  every  man  equal  according  to
their  families,  according  to  their  circumstances,  and  their
wants  and  needs;  and  let  my  servant  Edward  Partridge,  when
he  shall  appoint  a  man  his  portion,  give  unto  him  a  writing
that  shall  secure  unto  him  his  portion,  that  he  shall  hold  it,
even  this  right  and  this  inheritance  ip  the  church,  until  he
transgresses  and  is  not  accounted  worthy  by  the  voice  of  the
churcn,  according  to  the  laws  and  covenants  of  the  church,  to
belong  to  the  church:  and  if  he  shall  transgress,  and  is  not  ac¬
counted  worthy  to  belong  in  the  church,  he  shall  not  have
power  to  claim  that  portion  which  he  lias  consecrated  unto  tlue
bishop  for  the  poor  and  the  needy  of  my  church:  therefore,  hie
shall  not  retain  the  gift,  but  shall  only  have  claim  on  that  por¬
tion  that  is  deeded  unto  him.  And  thus,  all  things  shall  be
made  sure  according  to  the  laws  of  the  land.

2  And  let  that  which  belongs  to  this  people,  be  appointed
unto  this  people;  and  the  money  which  is  left  Unto  this  peo¬
ple,  let  there  be  an  agent  appointed  unto  this  people,  to  take
the  money  to  provide  food  and  raiment,  according  to  the  wants
of  this  people.  And  let  every  man  deal  honestly,  and  be  alike
among  this  people,  and  receive  alike,  that  ye  maybe  one,  even
as  I  have  commanded  you.

3  And  let  that  which  belongeth  to  this  people  not  be  taken
and  given  unto  that  of  another  church;  wherefore  if  another
church  would  receive  money  of  this  church,  let  them  pay  unto
this  church  again  according  as  they  shall  agree;  and  this  shall
be  done  through  the  bishop  or  the  agent,  which  shall  be  ap¬
pointed  by  the  voice  of  the  church.

4  And  again,  let  -the  bishop  appoint  a  storehouse  unto  this
church,  and  let  all  things,  both  in  money  and  in  meat,  which
is  more  than  is  needful  for  the  want  of  this  people,  be  kept  iu
the  hands  of  the  bishop.  And  let  him  also  reserve  unto  hi  m¬
self,  for  his  own  wants,  and  for  the'  wants  of  his  family,  as  he
shall  be  employed  in  doing  this  business.  And  thus  I  grant
unto  this  people  a  privilege  of  organizing  themselves  according


151


to  my  laws;  arid  I  consecrate  unto  them  this  land  for  a  little
season,  until  I  the  Lord  shall  provide  for  them  otherwise,  and
command  them  to  go  hence;  and  the  hour  and  the  day  is  not
given  u-ito  them:  wherefore  let  them  act  upon  this  land  as  for
years;  and  litis  shall  turn  unto  them  for  their  good.

5  Behold,  this  shall  be  an  example  unto  my  servant  Edward
Partridge,  in  other  places,  in  all  churches.  And  whoso  is  found
a  faithful,  a  just  and  a  wise  steward,  shall  enter  into  the  joy
of  his  Lord,  and  shall  inherit  eternal  life.  Verily  I  say  unto
you,  I  am  Jesus  Christ,  who  cometh  .quickly,  in  an  hour  you
think  not:  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  XXIV.

Revelation  mi  prayer,  giveti  October,  1831.

1  Hearken,  and  la,  a  voice  as  of  one  sent  down  from  on  high,
who  is  mighty  and  powerful,  whose  going,  forth  is  unto  the
ends  of  the  earth;  yea,  whose  voice  is  unto  men,  Prepare  ye
the  way  of  the  Lord  make  his  paths  straight.  The  keys  of
the  kingdom  of  God  are  committed  unto  man  on  the  earth,
and  from,  thence  shall  the  gospel  roll  forth  unto  the  ends  of
the  earth,  as  the  stone  which  is  cut  out  of  the  mountain  with¬
out  hands  shall  roll  forth,  until  it  has  filled  the  whole  earth;
yea,  a  voice  crying,  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  prepare
ye  the  supper  of  the  Lamb,  make  ready  for  the  bridegroom;
pray  unto  the  Lord;  call  upon  hi.-:  holy  name;  make  known  his
wonderful  works  among  the  people,  call  upon  the  Lord,  that
his  kingdom  may  go  forth  upon  the  earth;  that  the  inhabitants
thereof  may  receive  it,  and  be  prepared  for  the  days  to  come,
in  the  which  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  down  heaven,  clo¬
thed  in  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  to  meet  the  kingdom  of
God  which  is  set  up  on  the  earth:  wherefore,  may:  the  king¬
dom  of  God  go  forth,  that  the  kingdom,  of  heaven  may  come,
that  thou  O  God  may  be  glorified  in  heaven,  so  on  earth,  that
thy  enemies  may  be  subdued;  for  thine  is  the  honor,  power  and
glory,  forever  and  ever:  Amen.

SECTION  XXV.

Revelation  given  November,  1831.

1  Behold,  and  hearken,  O  ye  elders  of  my  church,  who  have
assembled  yourselves  together,  whose  prayers  I  have  heard,
and  whose  hearts  I  know,  and  Whose  desires  have  come  up  be¬
fore  me.  Behold  and  lo,  mine  eyes  are  upon  you;  and  t fee


152


heavens  and  the  earth  are  in -mine  hands,  and  the  riches  - of
eternity  are  mine  to  give.  Ye  endeavored  to  believe  that  ye
should  receive  the  blessing  which  was  offered  unto  you,  but
behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  there  were  tears  in  your  hearts;
and  verily  this  is  the  reason  that  ye  did  not  receive.

2  And  now  I  the  I  ord  give  unto  you  a  testimony  of  the  truth
of  these  commandments  which  are  lying  before  you:  youreyes
have  been  upon  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr. :  and  his- lan¬
guage  you  have  known;  and  his  imperfections  you  have  known;
and  you  have  sought  in.  your  hearts  knowledge,  that  you  might
express  beyond  his  language:  this  you  also  know-:  now-seek
ye  out  of  the  book  of  commandments,  even  the  least  that  is
among  them,  and  appoint  him  that  is  the  most  wise  among
you;  or  if  there  be  any  among  you,  that  shall  make  one  like
unto  it,  then  ye  are  justified  in  saying  that  ye  do  not  know
that  they  are  true:  but  if  ye  cannot  make  one  like  unto  it,  ye
are  under  condemnation  if  ye  do  not  bear  record  that  they  are
true:  for  ye  know  that  thereis  .no  unrighteousness  in  -them;
and  that  which  is  righteous  cometh  down  from  above,  from  the
Father  of  lights.

3  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  your  privilege,
and  a  promise  I  give  unto  you  that  have  been  ordained  unto
this  ministry,  that  inasmuch  as  you  strip  yourselves  from
jealousies  and  fears,  and  humble  yourselves  before  me,  for  ye
are  rot  sufficiently  humble,  the  vail  shall  be  rent  and  you  shall
see  me  and  know  that  I  am;  not  with  the  carnal,  neither  na¬
tural  mind,  but  with  the  spiritual;  for  no  man  has  seen  God
at  any  time  in  the  flesh,  except  quickened  by  the  Spirit  of
God:  neither  can  any  natural  man  abide  the  presence  of  God;
neither  after  the  carnal  mind;  ye  are  not  able  to  abide  the  pre¬
sence  of  God  now,  neither  the  ministering  of  angels:  where¬
fore  continue  in  patience  until  ye  are  perfected.

4  Let  not  your  minds  turn  back;  and  when  ye  are  worthy,
ia  mine  own  due  time,  ye  shall  see  and  know  that  which  was
eonferred  upon  you  by  the  hands  of  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,
jr.  Amen.

SECTION  XXVI.

Revelation  given  November,  1831.

1  Behold  and  hearken,  O  ye  inhabitants  of  Zion,  and  all  ye
people  of  my  church,  who  are  far  off,  and  hear  the  word  of  the
Lord  which  I  give  unto  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  ;  and
also  unto  my  servant  Martin  Harris;  and  also  unto  my  ser¬
vant  Oliver  Cowdery;  and  also  unto  my  servant  John  Whit-


133


mar;  and  also  unto  my  servant  Sidney  Rigdon;  and  also  unto
my  s'rvant  Win.  W.  Phelps:  by  the  way  of  commandment  un¬
to  them,  for-I  give  unto  •  them  a- commandment:  wherefore
hearken  and  hear,  for  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  them,  I  the
Lord  have  appointed  them,  and  ordained  them  to  be  stewards
over  the  revelations,  and  commandments  which  I  have  given
unto  them,  and  which  I  shall  hereafter  give  unto  them;  and
wiaccount  of  this  stewardship  will  I  require  of  them  in  ths
day  of  judgment:  wherefore  I  have  appointed  unto  .them,  and
this  is  . their  business  in  the  church  of  God,  to  manage  them
and  the  ■concerns  thereof,  yea,  the  benefits  thereof:

2  Wherefore  a  commandment  I  give  unto  them,  that  they
shall  not  give  these  things  unto  the  church,  neither  unto  the
world,  nevertheless,  inasmuch  as  they  receive  more  than  is
needfiil  for  their  necessities,  and  their  wants,  it  shall  be  giv¬
en  into  my  storehouse,  and.the  benefits  shall  be  consecrated
unto  the  inhabitants  of  Zion,  and  unto  their  generations,  inas¬
much  as  they  become  heirs  according  to  the  laws  of  the  king¬
dom.

S  Behold  this  is  what  the  Lord  requires  of  every  man  in  his
stewardship;  even  as  1  the  Lord  have  appointed,  or  shall  here¬
after  appoint  unto  any  man.  And  behold  none  are  exempt
from  this  law  who  belong  to  the  church  of  the  living  God;
yea,  neither,  the  bishop,  neither  the  agent,  who  keepeth  ths
Lord’s  storehouse;  neither  h  ■  who  is  appointed  in  a  steward'
ship  over  temporal  things:  lie  who  is  appointed  to  adminis¬
ter  spiritual  things,  the  same  is  worthy  of  his  hire,  even  as
those  who  are  appointed  to  a  stewardship,  to  administer  in
temporal  things;  yea,  even  more  abundantly,  which  abund¬
ance  is  multiplied  unto  them  through  the  manifestations  of
the  Spirit:  nevertheless,  in  your  temporal  things  you  shall  be
equal,  and  this  not  grudgingly,  otherwise  the  abundance  of  the
manifestations  of  the  Spirit,  shall  be  withheld.

4  Now  this-  commandment  I  give  unto  my  servants  for  their
benefit  while  they  remain,  for  a  manifestation  of  my  blessings
upon  their  heads,  and  fora  reward  of  their  diligence;  and  for
their  security  for  food  and  for  raiment,  for  an  inheritance;  for
houses  and  for  lands,  in  .whatsoever  circumstances  I  the  Lord
shall  place  them,  and  whithersoever  I  the  Lord  shall  send
them:  for  they  have  been  faithful  over  many  tilings,  and  have
done  well  inasmuch  as  they  have  not  sinned.  Behold  [  the
Lord  am  merciful  and  will  bless  them,  and  they  shall  enter  in¬
to  the  joy  of. these  things:  even  so.  Amen.


154


SECTION  XXVII.

,  Revelation  given  in  Zion,  July,  1831.

1  Hearken,  O  ye  elders  of  my  church,  saith  the  Lord  your
God,  who  have  assembled  yourselves  together,  according  to
my  commandments,  in  this  land  which  is  the  land  of  Missouri,
which  is  the  land  which  I  have  appointed  and  consecrated  for
the  gathering  of  the  saints:  wherefore  this  is  the  land  of  prom¬
ise,  and  the,  place  for  the  city  of  Zion.  And  thus  saith  the
Lord  your  God,  if  you  will  receive  wisdom  here  is  wisdom.—
Behold  the  place  which  is  now  called  Independence,  is  the
oenter  place,  and  the  spot  for  the  temple  is  lying  westward
upon  a  lot  which  is  not  far  Tom  the  court  house:  wherefore
it  is  wisdom  that  the  land  should  be  purchased  by  the  saints;
and  also  every  tract  lying  westward,  even  unto  the  line  run¬
ning  directly  between  J  ew  and  Gentile.  And  also  every  traet
bordering  by  the  prairies,  inasmuch  as  my  disciples  are  ena¬
bled  to  buy  lands.  Behold  this  is  wisdom,  that  they  may  ob¬
tain  it  for  an  everlasting  inheritance.

2  And  let  my  servant  Sidney  Gilbert,  stand  in  the  office
which  I  have  appointed  him,  to  receive  moneys,  to  be  an
agent  unto  the  cimrch,  to  buy  land  in  all  the  regions  round
about,  inasmuch  as  can  be  in  righteousness,  and  as  wisdom
ahall  direct.

3  And  let  my  servant.  Edward  Partridge,  stand  in  the  office
which  I  have  appointed  him,  to  divide  the  saints  their  inher¬
itance,  even  as  I  have  commanded:  and  also  those  whom  he
has  appointed  to  assist  him.

4  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  let  my  servant  Sidney
Gilbert  plant  himself  in  this  place,  and  establish  a  store,  that
he  may  sell  goods  without  fr.iud,  that  he  may  obtain  money
to  buy  lands  for  the  good  of  the  saints;  and  that  he  may  ob¬
tain  whatsoever  things  the  disciples  may  need  to  plant  them
in  their  inheritance.  And  also  let  my  servant  Sidney  Gilbert
■obtain  a  licence,  (behold  here  is  wisdom,  and  whoso  readeth
let  him  understand,)  that  he  may  send  goods  l  so  unto  the
people,  even  by  whom  he  will  as  clerks,  employed  in  his  ser¬
vice,  and  thus  provide  for  my  saints,  that  my  gospel  may  be
preached  unto  those  who  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  region  and
shadow  of  death.

5  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  let  my  servant  William
W.  Phelps  be  planted  in  this  place,  and  be  established  as  a
printer  unto  the  church:  and  lo,  if  the  world  receiveth  his  wri¬
tings,  (behold  here  is  wisdom,)  let  him  obtain  whatsoever  he
ean  obtain  in  righteousness,  for  the  good  of  the  saints.  An


155


let  my  servant  Oliver  Cowdery  assist  him,  even  as  I  hav*
•ommandcd,  in  whatsoever  place  I  shall  appoint  unto  him,  to
copy,  and  to  correct,  and  select,  that  all  things  may  be  right
before  me,  as  it  shall  be  proved  by  the  Spirit  through  him. —
And  thus  let  those  of  whom  I  have  spoken,  be  planted  in  the
land  of  Zion,  as  speedily  as  can  be,  with  their  families,  to  do
those  things  even  as  I  have  -  poker:.

6  And  now  concerning  the  gathering,  let  the  bishop  and  the
agent  make  preparations  for  those  families  which  have  been
commanded  to  come  to  this  land,  as  soon  as  possible,  and
plant  them  in  their  inheritance.  And  unto  the  residue  of
both  elders  and  members,  further  directions  shall  be  given
hereafter:  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  XXVIII.

Revelation  given  Novernier,  1831.

1  Hearken  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord  your  God,  for  my  servant
Oliver  CowderS^i  feke,  it  is  not  wisdom  in  me  that  lie  should
fee  entrusted  "wffti"  the  commandments  and  the  moneys  which
he  shall  carry  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  except  one  go  with  him
who  will  be  true  and  faithful:  wherefore  I  the  Lord  willeth
that  my  servant  John  Whitmer,  should  go  with  my  servant
Oliver  Cowdery.  And  also  that  he  shall  continue  in  writing
and  making  a  history  of  all  the  important  things  which  lie
shall  observe  and  know,  concerning  my  church,  and  also  that
lie  receive  counsel  and  assistance  from  my  servant  Oliver
Cowdery,  and  others.

2  And  also,  my  servants  who  are  abroad  in  the  earth,  should
send  forth  the  accounts  Of  their  stewardships  to  the  laud  of
Zion;  for  the  land  of  Zion  shall' be  a  s>at  and  a  place  to  re¬
ceive  and  do  all  these  things:  nevertheless,  let  my  servant
John  Whitmer  travel  many  times  from  place  to  place,  and
from  church  to  church,  that  he  may  the  more  easily  obtain
knowledge:  preaching  and  expounding,  writing,  copying,  se¬
lecting  and  obtaining  all  things  which  shall  be  for  the  good  of
the  chufch,  and  for  the  rising  generations,  that  shall  grow
«p  on  the  land  of  Zioh,  to  possess  it  from  generation  to  gen¬
eration,  forever  and  ever.  Amen.


15G


SECTION  XXIX.

A  Revelation  to  Joseph- Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  Janua¬
ry,  1832.  The  word  of  the  Lord  unto  them  concerning  the
Mere  of  the  church  of  the  living  God,  established  in  the  last
days,  making  known  the  will  of  the  Lord  unto  the  elders,  what
they  shall  do  until  conference.

1  For  verily  thus-  saith  the  Lord,  it  is  expedient  in  me,  that
they  should  continue  preaching  the  gospel,  and  in  exhortation
to  the  churches,  in  the  regions  round  about,  until  conlerence:
and  then  behold  it  shall  be  made  known  unto  them,  by  the
voice  of  the  conference,  their  several  missions.

2  Now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  servants  Joseph  Smith,  jr. .
and  Sidney  Rigdon,  saith  the  Lord,  it  is  expedient  to  translate
again,  and  inasmuch  as  it  is  practicable,  to  preach  in  the  re¬
gions  round  about  until  conference,  and  after  that  it  is  expedi¬
ent  to  continue  the  work  of  translation,  until  it  be  finished.
And  let  this  be  a  pattern  unto  the  elders  until  further  know¬
ledge,  even  as  it  is  written.  Now  I  give  no  fPipte  unto  you  at
this  time.  Gird  up  your  loins  and  be  sober:  even  so.  Amen.

omfuiesthoo®  am®  caixem®.,

SECTION  XXX.

Ravelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  given  July,  1828,  concerning  ear  -
tain-  manuscript son  the  firstpart  of  the  book  of  Mormon,  which
had  been  taken  from  the  possession  of  Martin  Harris.

1  The  works,  and  the  designs,  and  the  purposes  of  God,  cam
not  be  frustrated,  neither  can  they  come  to  nought,  for  God
doth  not  walk  in  crooked  paths;  neither  doth  he  turn  to  the
right  hand  nor  to  the  left;  neither  doth  he  vary  from  that
which  he  hath  said:  therefore  his  paths  are  strait  and  his  course
id  one  eternal  round.

2  Remember,  remember,  that  it  ismot  the  work  of  God  that
id  frustrated,  but  the  work  of  men:-  for  although  a  man  may
have  many  revelations,  and  have  power  to-  do  many  mighty
works,  yet,  if  he  boasts  in  his  own  strength,  and  sets  at  nought
the  counsels  of  God,  and  follows  after  the  dictates  of  his  own
will,  and  carnal  desires,  he  must  fall  and  incur  the  vengeance  •
of  ajust  God  upon  him.

8  Behold,  you  have  been  intrusted  with  these  things,  but  how
strict  were  your  commandments;  and  remember,  also,  the
prsmises  which  were  made  to  you,  if  you  did  not  transgress


Tthem;  and  behold,  how  oft  you  have  transgressed  the  command¬
ments  and  the  laws  of  God,  and  have  gone  on  in  the  persua¬
sions  of  men:  for  behold,  you  should  not  have  feared  man  mora
than  God,  although  men  set  at  nought  the  counsels  of  God,
and  despise  his  words,  yet  you  should  have  been  faithful  and
he  would  have  extended  his  arm,  and  supported  you  against
all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  adversary;  and  he  would  have  been
with  you  in  every  time  of  trouble.

4  Behold  thou  art  Joseph,  and  thou  wast  chosen  to  do  th»
work  of  the  Lord,  but  because  of  transgression,  if  thou  art  not
aware  thou  wilt  fall,  but  remember  God  is  merciful:  therefore,
repent  of  that  which  thou  hast  done,  which  is  contrary  to  the
■commandment  which  I  gave  you,  and  thou  art  still  chosen,
and  -art  again  ealled  to  the  work;  except  thou  do  this,  thou
slialt  be  delivered  up  and  become  as  other  men,  and  have  no
more  gift.

5  And  when  thou  deliveredst  up  that  which  God  had  given
thee  s  ght  and  power  to  translate,  thou  deliveredst  up  that
which  was  sacred,  into  the  hands  of  a  wicked  man,  who  has
set  at  nought  the  counsels  of  God,  and  has  broken  the  most
sacred  promises,  which  were  made  before  God,  and  has  depen¬
ded  upon  his  own  judgment,  and  boasted  in  his  own  wisdom,
and  this  is  the  reason  that  thou  hast  lost  thy  privileges  for  a
season,  for  thou  hast  suffered  the  counsel  of  thy  director  to  bo
Irampled  upon  from  the  beginning.

6  Nevertheless  my  work  shall  go  forth,  for,  inasmuch  as  th»
knowledge  of  a  Savior  has  come  unto  the  world,  through  the
testimony  of  the  Jews,  even  so  shall  the  knowledge  of  a  Sav¬
ior  come  unto  my  people;  and  to  the  Nephites,  and  the  Jacob¬
ites,  and  the  Josephites,  and  the  Zoramites,  through  the  tes¬
timony  of  their  fathers;  and  this  testimony  shall  come  to  the
knowledge  of  the  Lamanites,  and  the  Lemuelites,  and  the
Ishmaeliles,  who  dwindled  in  unbelief  because  of  the  iniquity
•f  their  fathers,  whom  the  Lord  has  suffered  to  destroy  their
brethren  the  Nephites,  because  of  their  iniquities  and  their
abominations:  and  for  this  very  purpose  are  these  plates  pre¬
served  which  contain  these  records,  that  the  promises  of  the
Lord  might  be  fulfilled,  which  he  made  to  his  people;  and  that
the  Lamanites  might  come  to  the  knowledge  of  their  fathers,
and  that  they  might  know  the  promises  of  the  Lord,  and  -that
they  may  believe  the  gospel  and  rely  upon  the  merits  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  be  glorified  through  faith  in  his  name;  and  that
through  their  repentance  they  might  be  saved:  Amen.


158


SECTION  XXXI.

Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  Sen.,  given  February,  1829.

1  Now,  behold,  a  marvellous  v  ork  is  about  to  come  forth
among  the  children  of  men,  therefore,  O  ye  that  embark  in
the  service  of  God,  see  that  ye  serve  him  with  all  your  hearty
might,  mind  and  strength,  that  ye  may  stand  blameless  before
God  at  the  last  day;  therefore,  ii' ye  have  desires  to  serve  God,
ye  are  called  to  the  work,  for  behold  the  field  is  white  already
to  harvest,  and  lo,  he  that  tlirusteth  in  his  sickle  with  his
might,  the  same  layeth  up  in  store  that  he  perish  not,  but
bringeth  salvation  to  his  soul,  and  faith,  hope,  charity,  and
love,  with  an  eye  single  to  the  glory  of  God,  qualifies  lnm  for
the  work.

2  Remember  faith,  virtue,  knowledge,  temperance,  patience,
brotherly  kindness,  godliness,  charity,  humility,  diligence.—
Ask  and  ye  shall  receive,  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto
you.  Amen.

SECTION  XXXII.

Revelation  given  March,  1829.

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  as  my  servant  Martin  Harris
has  desired  a  witness  at  my  hand,  that,  you,  my  servant  Joseph
Smith,  jr.  have  got  the  plates  of  which  you  have  testified  and
borne  record  that  you  have  received  of  me:  and  now  behold,
this  shall  you  say  unto  him,  He  who  spake  unto  you  said  unto
you,  I  the  Lord  am  God,  and  have  given  these  things  unto
you,  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  have  commanded  you
that  you  shall  stand  as  a  witness  of  these  things,  and  I  have
caused  you  that  you  should  enter  into  a  covenant  with  me
that  you  should  not  show  them  except  to  those  persons  to
whom  I  command  you;  and  you  have  no  power  over  them  ex¬
cept  I  grant  it  unto  you.  And  you  have  a  gift  to  translate  the
plates:  and  this  is  the  first  gift  that  1  bestowed  upon  you,  and
I  have  commanded  that  you  should  pretend  to  no  other  gift
until  my  purpose  is  fulfilled  in  this;  for  I  will  grant  unto  you
no  other  gift  until  it  is  finished.

2.  Y'erily  I  say  unto  you,  that  wo  shall  come  unto  the  inhab¬
itants  of  the  earth  if  they  will  not  hearken  unto  my  words:  for
hereafter  you  shall  be  ordained  and  go  forth  and  deliver  my
words  unto  the  children  of  men.  Behold  if  they  will  not  be¬
lieve  my  words,  they  would  not  believe  you,  my  servant  Jo¬
seph,  if  it  wrere  possible  that  you  could  show  them  all  these


159


things  winch  I  hare  committed  unto  you.  O  this  unbelieving
and  stiffnecked  generation,  mine  anger  is  kindled  against  them.

3  Behold  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  1  have  reserved  those  things
which  I  have  entrusted  unto  you,  my  servant  Joseph,  for  a
wise  purpose  in  me,  and  it  shall  be  made  known  unto  future
generations;  but  this  generation  shall  have  my  word  through
you;  and  in  addition  to  your  testimony  the  testimony  of  three
at  my  servants,  whom  1  shall  call  and  ordain,  unto  whom  I
will  show  these  things:  and  they  shall  go  forth  with  my  words
that  are  given  through  you,  yea,  they  shall  know  of  a  surety
that  these  things  are  true:  for  from  heaven  will  I  declare  it
nnto  them:  I  will  give  them  power  that  they  may  behold  and
view  these  things  as  they  are;  and  to  none  else  will  I  grant
this  power,  to  receive  this  same  testimony,  among  this  gener¬
ation,  in  this,  the  beginning  of  the  rising  up,  and  the  coming

forth  of  my  church  out  of  the  wilderness — clear  as  the  moon
and  fair  as  the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners.  And
the  testimony  of  three  witnesses  will  I  send  forth  of  iny  word;
and  behold  whosoever  believeth  on  my  words  them  will  I  visit
with  the  manifestation  of  my  Spirit  and  they  shall  be  born  of
me,  even  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit.  And  you  must  wait  yet
a  little  while;  for  ye  are  not  yet  ordained — and  their  testimo¬
ny  shall  also  go  forth  unto  the  condemnation  of  this  genera¬
tion  ifthcy  harden  their  hearts  against  them:  for  a  desolating
scourge  shall  go  forth  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and
shall  continue  to  be  poured  out,  from  time  to  time,  if  they  re¬
pent  not,  until  the  earth  is  empty,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof
are  consumed  away,  and  utterly  destroyed  by  the  brightness  of
my  coming.  Behold,  I  tell  you  these  things  even  as  I  also
told  the  people  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  my  word
•hall  be  verified  at  this  time  as  it  hath  hitherto  been  verified.

4  And  now  I  command  you,  my  servant  Joseph,  to  repent
and  walk  more  uprightly  before  me,  and  yield  to  the  persua¬
sions  of  men  no  more;  and  that  you  be  firm  in  keeping  the
commandments  wherewith  I  have  commanded  you,  and  if  you
do  this,  behold  I  grant  unto  you  eternal  life,  even  if  you  should
be  slain.

5  And  now  again  I  speak  unto  you,  iny  servant  Joseph,  con¬
cerning  the  man  that  desires  the  Witness:  Behold  I  say  unto
hint  he  exalts  himself  and  does  not  humble  himself  sufficiently
before  me:  hut  if  he  will  bow  down  before  me,  and  humble
himself  in  mighty  prayer  and  faith,  in  the  sincerity  of  his
heart,  then  will  I  grant  unto  him  a  view  of  the  things  which
he  desires  to  see.  And  then  he  shall  say  unto  the  people  of
this  generation,  behold  I  have  seen  the  things  which  the  Lord
has  shown  unto  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  I  know  of  a  surety  that


160


they  are  true,  fori  have  seen  them:  for  they  have  been  shown
unto  me  by  the  power  of  God  •’and  not  of  man.  And  I  the
Lord  command  him,  my  servant  Martin  Harris,  that  he  shall
aay  no  more  unto  them  concerning  these  things,  except  b«
shall  say  1  have  seen  them,  and  they  have  been  shown  unto
me  by  the  power  of  God:  ana  ;.:ese  are  the  words  which  he
shall  say.  But  if  he  deny  this  he  will  break  the  covenant
■Which  he  has  before  covenants- 1  with  me,  and  behold  he  it
condemned.  And  now  except  he  humble  himself  and  ac¬
knowledge  unto  me  the  things  tb;it  he  has  done  which  are
wrong,  and  covenant  with  me  that  lie  will  keep  nay  command¬
ments,  and  exercise  faith  in  mi-,  behold,  I  say  unto  him,  he
shall  have  no  such  view's;  for  I  wii!  grant  unto  him  no  view*
of  the  things  of  whichl  hav  spoken.  And  if  this  be  th*
easel  command  you,  my  ser.rnt  Joseph,  that  you  shall  sajr
unto  him,  that  he  shall  do  i  .  more,  nor  trouble  me  any  mar*
concerning  this  matter.

6  And  if  this  be  the  case,  behold  I  say  unto  tliee  Joseph,
when  thou  hast  translated  a  few  more  pages  thou  shalt  stop
.’for  a  season,  even  until  I  command  thee  again:  then  thou
mayest  translate  again.  And  except  thou  do  this,  behold
thou  shalt  have  no  more  gift,  and  I  will  take  away  the  thing*
whichl  have  intrusted  with  tliee.  And  now  because  1  foresee
the  lying  in  wait  to  destroy  thee:  yea,  I  foresee  that  if  my
•errant  Martin  Harris  humbleth  not  himself,  and  receive*
witness  from  my  hand,  that  he  will  fall  into. Iran sgression ;  and
there  are  many  that  lie  in  wait  to  destroy  thee  from  off  tbs
face  of  the  earth:  and  for  this  cause,  that  thy  days  may  b*
prolonged,  I  have  given  unto  thee  these  commandment*:
yea,  for  this  cause  I  have  said,  stop  and  stand  still  until  I
command  thee,  and  I  will  provide  means  whereby  thou  may-
ost  accomplish  the  thing  which  I  have  commanded  thee;  and
if  thou  art  faithful  in  keeping  my  commandments,  thou  *balt
be  lifted  up  at  the  last  day.  Amen,

SECTION  XXXIII.

A  Revelation  given  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Oliver  Coxed  cry,  in
Harmony,  Pennsylvania ,  April,  1829,  x alien  they  desired  to
knoxv  xvhethcr  John,  the  beloved  disciple,  tarried  on  earth.—
Translated  from  parchment,  xcritten  and  hid  up  by  himself.

1  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  John,  my  beloved,  what  de-
sirest  thou?  For  if  ye  shall  ask,  what  you  will,  it  shall  be
granted  unto  you.  And  I  said  unto  him,  Lord,  give  unto  ro*
power  over  death,  that  I  may  live  and  bring  souls  unto  thee-


161’


And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee',
because  thou  desiredst  this  thou  shnlt  tarry  until  1  come  in  my
glory,  and  shall  prophesy  before  nations,  kindreds,  tongues
and  people.

2  And  for  this  cause  the  Lord  said  unto  Peter,  If  I  will  that
he  tarry  till  I  come,  what  is  that  to  thee?  For  he  desiredst  of
me  that  he  might  bring  souls  unto  me;  but  thou  desiredst  that
thou  might  speedily  come  unto  me  in  my  kingdom.  I  say  up-
to  thee,  Peter,  this  was  a  good  desire,  but  my  beloved  has  de¬
sired  that  he  might  do  more,  or  a  greater  work,  yet  among
men  than  what  he  has  before  done;  yea,  he  has  undertaken  a
greater  work;  therefore,  I  will  make  him  as  flaming  fire  and  a
ministering  angel:  he  shall  minister  for  those  who  shall  be
heirs  of  salvation  who  dwell  on  the  earth;  and  I  will  make

'■thee  to  minister  for  him  and  for  thy  brother  James:  and  uiito
you  three  I  will  give  this  power  and  the  keys  of  this  ministry
until  I  come.

3  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  ye  shall  both  have  according  to  your
desires,  for  ye  both  joy  in  that  which  ye  have  desired.

SECTION  XXXIV.

Revelation  given  April,  1829.

1  Oliver  Cowdery,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  assu¬
redly  as  the  Lord  liveth,  who  is  your  God  and  your  Redeemer,
even  so  sure  shall  you  receive  a  knowledge  of  whatsoever
things  you  shall  ask  in  faith,  with  an  honest  heart,  believing
that  you  shall  receive  a  knowledge  concerning  the  engravings
of  old  records,  which  are  ancient,  which  contain  those  parts  of
my  scripture  of  which  have  been  spoken,  by  the  manifestation
of  my  Spirit;  yea,  .behold  I  will  tell  you  in  your  mind  and  in
your  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  shall  come  upon  you
and  which  shall  dwell  in  your  heart

■  2  Now,  behold  this  is  the  Spirit  of  Revelation:  behold  this
is  the  Spirit  by  which  Moses  brought  the  children  of  Israel
through  the  Red  sea  on  dry  ground:  therefore  this  is  thy  gift;
apply  unto  it  and  blessed  art  thou,  for  it  shall  deliver  .you  out
of  the  hands  of  your  enemies,  when,  if  it  were  not  so,  they
would  slay  you  and  bring  your  soul  to  destruction.

3  O  remember  these  words,  and  keep  my  commandments.—
Remember  this  is  your  gift.  Now  this  is  not  all  thy  gift;  for
you  have  another  gift,  which  is  the  gift  of  Aaron:  beaold  it
has  told  you  many  things:  behold  there  is  no  other  power  save
the  power  of  God  that  can  cause  this  gift  of  Aaron  to  be  will*

K


162


you;  therefore,  doubt  not,  for  it  is  the  gifl  of  God,  and  yo*
shall  hold  it  in  your  hands,  and  do  marvelous  works;  and  no
power  shall  be  able  to  take  it  away  out  of  your  hands;  for  it  is
the  work  of  God.  And  therefore,  whatsoever  you  shall  ask
me  to  tell  you  by  that  means,  that  will  I  grant  unto  you  and
you  shall  have  knowledge  concerning  it:  remember,  that  with¬
out  faith  you  can  do  nothing.  Therefore,  ask  in  faith.  Trifle
not  with  these  things:  do  not  ask  for  that  which  you  ought
not:  ask  that  you  may  know  the  mysteries  of  God,  and  that
you  may  translate  and  receive  knowledge  from  all  those  an¬
cient  records  which  have  been  hid  up,  that  are  sacred,  and  ac¬
cording  to  your  faith  shall  it  be  done  unto  you.  Behold,  it  is
I  that  have  spoken  it:  and  I  am  the  same  who  spake  unto  you
from  the  beginning.  Amen.

SECTION  XXXV.

Revelation  given  to  Oliver  Cotcdcry,  April,  1829.

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  my  son,  that  because  you  did  not
translate  according  to  that  which  you  desired  of  me,  and  did
commence  again  to  write  for  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.
even  so  I  would  that  you  should  continue  until  you  have  fin¬
ished  this  record,  which  I  have  intrusted  unto  him:  and  then
behold,  other  records  have  I,  that  I  will  give  unto  you  power
that  you  may  assist  to  translate.

2  Be  patient  my  son,  for  it  is  wisdom  in  me,  and  it  is  not
expedient  that  you  should  translate  at  this  present  time.  Be¬
hold  the  work  which  you  are  called  to  do,  is  to  write  lor  my
servant  Joseph;  and  behold  it  is  because  that  you  did  not  con¬
tinue  as  you  commenced,  when  you  began  to  translate,  that  I
have  taken  away  this  privilege  from  you.  Do  not  murmur  my
son,  for  it  is  wisdom  in  me  that  I  have  dealt  with  you  alter
this  manner.

3  Behold  you  have  not  understood,  you  have  supposed  that  I
would  give  it  unto  you,  when  you  took  no  thought,  save  it
was  to  ask  me;  but  behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  j ou  must  study
it  out  in  your  mind;  then  you  must  ask  me  if  it  be  right,  and
if  it  is  right,  I  will  cause  that  your  bosom  shall  burn  within
you:  therefore,  you  shall  feel  that  it  is  right;  but  if  it  be  not
right,  you  shall  have  no  such  feelings,  but  you  shall  have  a
stupor  of  thought,  that  shall  cause  you  to  forget  the  thing
which  is  wrong:  therefore,  you  cannot  write  that  which  is  sa¬
cred,  save  it  be  given  you  from  me.

4  Now  if  you  had  known  this,  you  could  have  translated  ;
nevertheless,  it  is  not  expedient  that  you  should  translate  now.


163


Behold  it  was  expedient  when  you  commenced,  but  you  feared
and  the  time  is  past,  and  it  is  not  expedient  now:  for,  do  you
not  behold  that  I  have  given  unto  my  servant  Joseph  sufficient
strength,  whereby  it  is  made  up?  and  neither  of  you  have  I
condemned.

5  Do  this  thing  which  I  have  commanded  you,  and  you  shall
prosper.  Be  faithful,  and  yield  to  no  temptation.  Stand  fast
in  the  work  wherewith  I  have  called  you,  and  a  hair  of  your
head  shall  not  be  lost,  and  you  shall  be  lifted  up  at  the  last
day-  Amen.

SECTION  XXXVI.

Revelation  given  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  May,  1829,  informing
him  of  the  alteration  if  the  Manuscript  of  the  fore  part  of  the
hook  of  Mormon.

1  Now,  behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  because  you  delivered  up
those  writings  which  you  had  power  given  onto  you  to  trans¬
late,  by  the  means  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  into  the  hands
of  a  wicked  man,  you  have  lost  them;  and  you  also  lost  your
gift  at  the  same  time,  and  your  mind  became  darkened;  never¬
theless,  it  is  now  restored  unto  you  again,  therefore  see  that
you  are  faithful  and  continue  on  unto  the  finishing  of  the  re¬
mainder  of  the  work  of  translation  as  you  have  begun:  do
not  run  faster,  or  labor  more  than  you  have  strength  and
means  provided  to  enable  you  to  translate;  but  be  diligent  un¬
to  the  end:  pray  always,  that  you  may  come  off  conqueror;
yea,  that  you  may  conquer  satan  and  that  you  may  escape  the
hands  of  the  servants  of  satan,  that  do  uphold  his  work.  Be¬
hold,  they  have  sought  to  destroy  you;  yea,  even  the  man  ill
whom  you  have  trusted,  has  sought  lo  destroy  you.  And  for
this  cause  I  said,  that  he  is  a  wicked  man,  for  he  has  sought
to  take  away  the  tilings  wherewith  you  have  been  intrusted;
and  he  has  also  sought  to  destroy  your  gift,  and  because  you
have  delivered  the  writings  into  his  hands,  behold  wicked  men
have  taken  them  from  you:  therefore,  you  have  delivered  them
up;  yea,  that  which  was  sacred  unto  wickedness.  And  behold
satan  has  put  it  into  their  hearts  to  alter  the  words  which  you
have  caused  to  be  written,  or  which  you  have  translated,
which  have  gone  out  of  your  bands;  and  behold  I  say  unto
you,  that  because  they  have  altered  the  words,  they  read  con¬
trary  from  that  which  you  translated  and  caused  to  be  written;
and  on  this  wise  the  devil  has  sought  to  lay  a  cunning  plan,
that  he  may  destroy  this  work;  for  he  has  put  it  into  their


164


hearts  to  do  this,  that  by  lying  they  may  say  they  have  caught'
you  in  the  tvords  which  you  liave  pretended  to  translate.

2  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  I  will  not  suffer  that  satan  shall
accomplish  his  evil  design  in  this  thing,  for  behold  he  has  put
it  into  their  hearts  to  get  thee  to  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God,  in
asking  to  translate  it  over  again;  and  then  behold  they  say
and  think  in  their  hearts,  we  will  see  if  God  has  given  him
power  to  translate,  if  so,  he  will  also  give  him  jr»  wer  again;
and  if  God  giveth  him  power  again,  or  if  he  translate  again,  or
in  other  words,  if  he  bringeth  forth  the  same  words,  behold  we
have  the  same  with  us,  and  we  have  altered  them:  therefore,
they  will  not  agree,  and  we  will  say  that  he  has  lied  in  his
words,  and  that  he  has  no  gift,  and  that  he  has  no  power:
therefore,  we  will  destroy  him,  and  also  the  work,  and  we  will
do  this  that  we  may  not  be  ashamed  in  the  end,  and  that  we
may  get  glory  of  the  world.

3  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  satan  has  great  hold
upon  their  hearts;  he  sjtirreth  them  up  to  iniquity  against  that
which  is  good,  and  their  hearts  are  corrupt,  and  full  of  wicked¬
ness  and  abominations,  and  they  love  darkness  rather  than
light,  because  their  deeds  are  evil;  therefore  they  will  not  ask
of  me.  Satan  stirreth  them  up,  that  he  may  lead  their  souls
to  destruction.  And  thus  he  has  laid  a  cunning  plan,  thinking
to  destroy  the  work  of  God,  but  I  will  require  this  at  their
hands,  and  it  shall  turn  to  their  shame  and  condemnation  in
the  day  of  judgment;  yea,  he  stirreth  up  their  hearts  to  anger
against  this  work;  yea,  he  saith  unto  them,  Deceive  and  lie  in
wait  to  catch,  that  ye  may  destroy:  behold  this  is  no  harm,
and  thus  he  flattereth  them  and  telleth  them  that  it  is  no  sin
to  lie,  that  they  may  catch  a  man  in  a  lie,  that  they  may-  de¬
stroy  him,  and  thus  he  flattereth  them,  and  leadeth  them  along
until  he  draggelh  their  souls  down  to  hell;  and  thus  he  causeth
them  to  catch  themselves  in  their  own  snare;  and  thus  he  go-
eth  up  and  down,  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  seeking  to  destroy
the  souls  of  men.

4  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  wo  be  unto  him  that  lieth  to
deceive,  because  he  supposes  that  another  lieth  to  deceive,  for
such  are  not  exempt  from  the  justice  of  God.

5  Now,  behold  they  have  altered  those  words,  because  satan
saith  unto  them,  He  hath  deceived  you:  and  thus  he  flattereth
them  away  to  do  iniquity,  to  get  thee  to  tempt  the  Lord  thy
God.

6  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  you  shall  not  translate  again
those  words  which  have  gone  forth  out  of  your  hands;  for  be¬
hold  they  shall  not  accomplish  their  evil  designs  in  lying
against  those  words.  For,  behold,  if  you  should  bring  forth


165


the  same  words  they  will  say  that  you  have  lied;  that  you  have
pretended  to  translate,  but  that  you  have  contradicted  your¬
self:  and  behold  they  will  publish  this,  and  satan  will  harden
the  hearts  of  the  people  to  stir  them  up  to  anger  against  you,
that  they  will  not  believe  my  words.  Thus  satan  thinketh  to
overpower  your  testimony  in  this  generation,  that  the  work
may  not  come  forth  in  this  generation:  but  behold  here  is  wis¬
dom,  and  because  I  show  unto  you  wisdom,  and  give  you  com¬
mandments  concerning  these  things,  what  you  shall  do,  show
it  not  unto  the  world  until  you  have  accomplished  the  work  of
translation.

7  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  you,  here  is  wisdom,  show  it
not  unto  the  world,  for  I  said,  show  it  not  unto  the  world,  that
you  may  be  preserved.  Behold  I  do  not  say  that  you  shall
not  show  it  unto  the  righteous;  but  as  you  cannot  always
judge  the  righteous,  or  as  you  cannot  always  tell  the  wicked
from  the  righteous:  therefore,  I  say  unto  you,  hold  your  peace
until  I  shall  see  fit  to  make  all  things  known  unto  the  world
concerning  the  matter.

8  And  now,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  an  account  of  those
things  that  you  have  written,  which  have  gone  out  of  your
hands,  are  engraven  upon  the  plates  of  Nephi;  yea,  and  you
remember,  it  was  said  in  those  writings,  that  a  more  particu¬
lar  account  was  given  of  these  things  upon  the  plates  of  Nephi.

9  And  now,  because  the  account  which  is  engraven  upon
the  plates  of  Nephi,  is  more  particular  concerning  the  things,
which  in  my  wisdom  I  would  bring  to  the  knowledge  of  the
people  in  this  account:  therefore,  you  shall  translate  the  en¬
gravings  which  are  on  the  plates  of  Nephi,  down  even  till  you
come  to  the  reign  of  king  Benjamin,  or  until  you  come  to  that
which  you  have  translated,  which  you  have  retained;  and  be¬
hold,  you  shall  publish  it  as  the  record  of  Nephi,  and  thus  I
will  confound  those  who  have  altered  my  words.  I  will  not
suffer  that  they  shall  destroy  my  work;  yea,  I  will  show  unto
them  that  my  wisdom  is  greater  than  the  cunning  of  the  devil.

10  Behold  they  have  only  got  a  part,  or  an  abridgment  of  the
account  ofNephi.  Behold  there  are  many  things  engraven
on  the  plates  of  Nephi,  which  do  throw  greater  views  upon  my
gospel:  therefore,  it  is  wisdom  in  me,  that  you  should  trans¬
late  this  first  part  of  the  engravings  of  Nephi,  and  send  forth
in  this  work.  And  behold,  all  the  remainder  of  this  work,
does  contain  all  those  parts  of  my  gospel  which  my  holy  pro¬
phets,  yea,  and  also  my  disciples  desired  in  their  prayers,
should  come  forth  unto  this  people.  And  I  said  unto  them,
that  it  should  be  granted  unto  .them  according  to  their  faith  in
their  prayers;  yea,  and  this  was  their  faith,  that  my  gospel


166


which  I  gave  unto  them,  that  they  might  preach  in  their  day?,
might  come  unto  their  brethren,  the  Lamanites,  and  also,  all
that  had  become  Lamanites,  because  of  their  dissensions.

11  Now  this  is  not  all,  their  faith  in  their  prayers  were,  that
this  gospel  should  be  made  known  also,  if  it  were  possible  that
other  nations  should  possess  this  land;  and  thus  they  did  leave
a  blessing  upon  this  land  in  their  prayers,  that  whosoever
should  believe  in  this  gospel,  in  this  land,  might  have  eternal
life;  yea,  that  it  might  be  free  unto  all  of  whatsoever  nation,
kindred,  tongue,  or  people,  they  may  be.

12  And  now,  behold,  according  to  their  faith  in  their  prayers,
will  I  bring  this  part  of  my  gospel  to  the  knowledge  of  my
people.  Behold,  I  do  not  bring  it  to  destroy  that  which  they
have  received,  but  to  build  it  up.

13  And  for  this  cause  have  1  said,  if  this  generation  harden
not  their  hearts,  I  will  establish  my  church  among  them.  Now
I  do  not  say  this  to  destroy  my  church,  but  1  say  this  to  build
up  my  church:  therefore,  whosoever  belongeth  to  my  church
need  not  fear,  for  such  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven:
hut  it  is  they  who  do  not  tear  me,  neither  keep  my  command¬
ments,  but  buildeth  up  churches  unto  themselves,  to  get  gain;
yea,  and  all  those  that.do  wickedly,  and  buildeth  up  the  king¬
dom  of  the  devil;  yea,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is
they  that  I  will  disturb,  and  cause  to  tremble  and  shake  to  the
centre.

14  Behold,  I  am  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God:  I  came  unto
my  own,  and  my  own  received  me  not.  I  am  the  light  which
fehineth  in  darkness,  and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not.
I  am  he  who  said  other  sheep  have  I  which  are  not  of  this  fold,
unto  my  disciples,  and  many  there  were  that  understood
me  not.

15  And  I  will  show  unto  this  people,  that  I  had  other  sheep,
and  that  they  were  a  branch  of  the  house  of  Jacob:  and  I  will
bring  to  light  their  marvelous  works,  which  they  did  in  my
name:  yea,  and  I  will  also  bring  to  light  my  gospel,  which
Was  ministered  unto  them,  and  behold  they  shall  not  deny  that
which  you  have  received,  but  they  shall  build  it  up,  and  shall
bring  to  light  the  true  points  of  my  doctrine:  yea,  and  (he  on¬
ly  doctrine  which  is  in  me;  and  this  1  do,  that  I  may  establish
my  gospel,  that  there  may  not  be  so  much  contention:  yea,
catan  doth  stir  up  the  hearts  of  the  people  to  contention,  con¬
cerning  the  points  of  my  doctrine;  and  in  these  things  they  do
err,  for  they  do  wrest  the  scriptures,  and  do  not  understand
them:  therefore,  I  will  unfold  unto  them  this  great  mystery,
for  behold,  I  will  gather  them  as  a  hen  gatheretn  her  chickens
tinder  her  wings,  if  they  will  not  harden  their  hearts:  yea,  if


167

they  will  com?,  they  may,  and  partake  of  the  waters  of  life
freely.

16  Behold  this  is  my  doctrine:  whosoever  repenteth  and
■eometli  unto  me,  the  same  is  my  church;  whosoever  declareth
more  or  less  than  this,  the' same  is  not  of  me,  but  is  against
me:  therefore,  he  is  not  of  my  church.

17  And  now,  behold  whosoever  is  of  my  church,  and  endu-
teth  of  my  church  to  the  end,  him  will  I  establish  upon
my  Rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  them.

18  And  now,  remember  the  words  of  him  who  is  the  life  and
the  light  of  the  world,  your  Redeemer,  your  Lord  and  your
God.  Amen.

SECTION  XXXVII.

Revelation  given  to  Hyrum  Smith,  May,  1829.

1  A  great  and  marvelous  work  is  about  to  come  forth  among
the  children  of  men:  behold  I  am  God  and  give  heed  to  my
word,  which  is  quick  and  powerful,  sharper  than  a  two-edged
■sword,  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  both  joints  and  marrow:
therefore,  give  heed  unto  my  word.

2  Behold  the  field  is  white  already  to  harvest,  therefore,  who¬
so  desireth  to  reap,  let  him  thrust  in  his  sickle  with  his  might,
■and  reap  while  the  day  lasts,  that  he  may  treasure  up  for  his
soul  everlasting  salvation  in  the  kingdom  of  God;  yea,  whoso¬
ever  will  thrust  in  his  sickle  and  reap,  the  same  is  called  of
God:  therefore,  if  you  will  ask  of  me,  you  shall  receive;  if  you
will  knock,  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.

3  Now  as  you  have  asked,  behold  I  say  unto  you,  keep  my
commandments,  and  seek  to  bring  forth  and  establish  the  cause
of  Zion.  Seek  not  for  riches  but  for  wisdom,  and  behold  the
mysteries  of  God  shall  be  unfolded  unto  you,  and  then  shall
you  be  made  rich;  behold  he  that  hath  eternal  life  is  rich.

4  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  even  as  you  desire  of  me,  so
shall  it  be  done  unto  you:  and,  if  you  desire  you  shall  be  the
means  of  doing  much  good  in  this  generation.  Say  nothing
hut  repentance  unto  this  generation.  Keep  my  commandments,
and  assist  to  bring  forth  my  work  according  to  my  command¬
ments,  and  you  shall  be  blessed.

5  Behold  thou  hast  a  gift,  or  thou  shalt  have  a  gift  if  thou
wilt  desire  of  me  in  faith,  with  an  honest  heart,  believing  in
the  power  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  in  my  power  which  speaketh
unto  thee:  for  behold  it  is  I  that  speaketh:  behold  I  am  the
light  which  shineth  in  darkness,  and  by  my  power  I  give  these
words  unto  thee.


168


6  And  now,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  put  your  trust  itt
that  Spirit  which  leadeth  to  do  good:  yea,  to  do  justly;  to  walk
humbly;  to  judge  righteously;  and  this  is  my  Spirit.

7  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  will  impart  unto  you  of
my  Spirit,  which  shall  enlighten  your  mind,  which  shall  fill
your  soul  with  joy,  and  then  shall  ye  know,  or  by  this  shall
you  know,  all  things  whatsoever  you  desire  of  me,  which  is
pertaining  unto  things  of  righteousness,  in  faith  believing  in
me  that  you  shall  receive.

8  Behold  I  command  you,  that  you  need  not  suppose  that
you  are  called  to  preach  until  you  are  called:  wait  a  little  lon¬
ger,  until  you  shall  have  my  word,  my  rock,  my  church,  and
my  gospel,  that  you  may  know  of  a  surety  my  doctrine;  and
then  behold,  according  to  your  desires,  yea,  even  according  to
your  faith,  shall  it  be  done  unto  you.

9  Keep  ray  commandments;  hold  your  peace;  appeal  unto
my  Spirit:  yea,  cleave  unto  me  with  all  your  heart,  that  you
may  assist  in  bringing  to  light  those  things  ot  which  have  been
spoken:  yea,  the  translation  of  my  work:  be  patient  until  you
shall  accomplish  it.

10.  Behold  this  is  your  work,  to  keep  my  commandments:
yea,  with  all  your  might,  mind,  and  strength:  seek  not  to  de¬
clare  my  word,  but  first  seek  to  obtain  my  word,  and  then  shall
your  tongue  be  loosed;  then,  if  you  desire,  you  shall  have  my
Spirit,  and  my  word:  yea,  the  power  of  God  unto  the  convin¬
cing  of  men:  but  no  w  hold  your  peace;  study  my  word  which
hath  gone  forth  among  the  children  of  men;  and  also  study
my  word  which  shall  come  forth  among  the  children  of  men;
or  that  which  is  now  translating:  yea,  until  you  have  obtain¬
ed  ail  which  1  shall  grant  unto  the  children  of  men  in  this
generation;  and  then  shall  all  things  be  added  thereunto.

11  Behold  thou  art  Hyruna,  my  son;  seek  the  kingdom  of
God  and  all  things  shall  be  added  according  to  that  which  is
just.  Build  upon  my  rock,  which  is  my  gospel;  deny  not  the
Spirit  of  revelation,  nor  the  Spirit  of  prophecy,  for  wo  unto
him  that  denieth  these  things:  therefore,  treasure  up  in  your
hearts  until  the  time  which  is  in  my  wisdom,  that  you  shall
go  forth:  behold  I  speak  unto  all  who  have  good  desires,  and
have  thrust  in  their  sickles  to  reap.

12  Behold  I  am  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God:  I  am  the  life
and  the  light  of  the:  world:  I  am  the  same  who  came  unto  my
own,  and  my  own  received  me  not:  but  verily,  verily  I  say  un¬
to  you,  that  as  many  as  receiveth.  me,  them  will  1  give  power
to  become  the  sons  of  God,  even  to  them  that  believe  on  my
name.  Amen.


SECTION  XXXVIIl

kcvelatton  given  to  Joseph  Knight,  Sen.  May,  1829.

1  A  great  and  marvelous  work  is  about  to  come  forth  among
the  children  of  men:  behold  I  am  God,  and  give  heed  to  my
word,  which  is ’quick  and  powerful,  sharper  than  a  two-edged
sword,  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  both  joints  and  marrow:
therefore,  give  heed  unto  my  word.

2  Behold  the  field  is  white  already  to  harvest,  therefore  who¬
so  desireth  to  reap,  let  him  thrust  in  his  sickft:  with  his  might,
and  reap  while  the  day  lasts,  that  he  may  treasure  up  for  his
soul  everlasting  salvation  in  the  kingdom  of  God:  yea,  whoso¬
ever  will  thrust  in  his  sickle  and  reap,  the  same  is  called  of
God:  therefore  if  you  will  ask  of  me  you  shall  receive;  if  you
will  knock  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.

3  Now  as  you  have  asked,  behold  I  say  unto  you,  keep  my
commandments,  and  seek  to  bring  forth  and  establish  the  cause
of  Zion.

4  Behold  I  speak  unto  you,  and  also  to  all  those  tvho  have
desires  to  bring  forth  and  establish  this  work,  and  no  one  can
assist  in  this  work,  except  he  shall  be  humble  and  full  of  love>
having  faith,  hope  and  charity,  being  temperate  in  all  things,
whatsoever  shall  be  intrusted  to  his  care.

5  Behold  I  am  the  light  and  the  life  of  the  world,  that  speak-
eth  these  words:  therefore,  give  heed  with  your  might,  and
then  you  are  called.  Amen.

SECTION  XXXIX.

Revelation  given  to  David  Whitmer,  June,  1829.

1  A  great  and  marvelous  work  is  about  to  come  forth  unto
the  children  of  men:  behold  I  am  God,  and  give  heed  to  my
word,  which  is  quick  and  powerful,  sharper  than  a  two-edged
sword,  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  both  joints  and  marrow:
therefore,  give  heed  unto  my  word.

2  Behold  the  field  is  white  already  to  harvest,  therefore,  who¬
so  desireth  to  reap,  let  him  thrust  in  his  sickle  with  his  might,
and  reap  while  the  day  lasts,  that  he  may  treasure  up  for  his
soul  everlasting  salvation  in  the  kingdom  of  God:  yea,  whoso¬
ever  will  thrust  in  his  sickle  and  reap,  the  same  is  called  of
God:  therefore,  if  you  will  ask  of  me  you  shall  receive;  if  you
Will  knock  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you.

3  Seek  to  bring  forth  and  establish  my  Zion.  Keep  my  com¬
mandments  in  all  things,  and  if  you  keep  my  commandment*


170


and  endure  to  the  end,  you  shall  have  eternal  life;  which  gift
is  the  greatest  of  all  the  gifts  of  God.

4  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  if  you  shall  ask  the  Father
in  my  name,  in  faith  believing,  you  shall  receive  the  Holy
Ghost,  which  giveth  utterance,  that  you  may  stand  as  a  wit¬
ness  of  the  things  of  which  you  shall  both  hear  and  see;  and
also,  that  you  may  declare  repentance  unto  this  generation.

5  Behold  I  am  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  the  living  God,  who
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth;  a  light  which  cannot  be  hid
in  darkness:  wherefore,  i  must  bring  forth  the  fulness  of  my
gospel  from  the  Gentiles  unto  the  house  of  Israel.  And  behold
thou  art  David,  and  thou  art  called  to  assist:  which  thing  if
ye  do,  and  are  faithful,  ye  shall  be  blessed  both  spiritually  and
temporally,  and  great  shall  be  your  reward.  Amen.

SECTION  XL.

Revelation  given  to  John  Whilmer,  jr.  June,  1829.

1  Hearken  my  servant  Johh,  and  listen  to  the  words  of  Jesus
Christ,  your  Lord  and  your  Redeemer,  for  behold  I  speak  un¬
to  you  with  sharpness  and  with  power,  for  mine  arm  is  over
all  the  earth,  and  I  will  tell  you  that  which  no  man  knoweth
save  me  and  thee  alone:  for  many  times  you  have  desired  of
me  to  know  that  which  would  be  of  the  most  worth  unto  you.

2  Behold,  blessed  are  you  for  this  thing,  and  for  speaking  my
words  which  I  have  given  you,  according  to  my  command¬
ments:

3  And  now  behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  thing  which  will
be  of  the  most  worth  unto  you,  will  be  to  declare  repentance
unto  this  people,  that  you  may  bring  souls  unto  me,  that  you
may  rest  with  them  in  the  kingdom  of  my  Father.  Amen.

SECTION  XLI.

Revelation  given  to  Peter  Wldtmer,  June,  1829.

1  Hearken  my  servant  Peter,  and  listen  to  the  words  of  Jesus
Christ,  your  Lord  and  your  Redeemer,  for  behold  I  speak  un¬
to  you  with  sharpness  and  with  power,  for  mine  arm  is  over
all  the  earth,  and  I  will  tell  you  that  which  no  man  knoweth
save  me  and  thee  alone:  for  many  times  you  have  desired  of
me  to  know  that  which  would  be  of  the  most  worth  unto  you.

2  Behold,  blessed  are  you  for  this  thing,  and  for  speaking  my
words  which  I  have  given  you  according  to  my  command¬
ments:


171


3  And  now  behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  thing  which  will
be  of  the  most  worth  unto  you,  will  be  to  declare  repentance
unto  this  people,  that  you  may  bring  souls  unto  me,  that  you
may  rest  with  them  in  the  kingdom  of  my  Father.  Amen.

SECTION  XUI.

Revelation  to  Oliver  Coiedery,  David  JVhilmer  and  Martin  Har¬
ris,  June,  1829,  given  previous  to  their  viewing  the  plates  con¬
taining  the  book  of  Mormon:

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  you  must  rely  upon  my  wordy
which  if  you  do,  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  you  shall  have  a
view  of  the  plates,  and  also  the  breastplate,  the  sword  of  La¬
ban,  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  which  were  given  to  the  brother
of  Jared  upon  the  mount,  when  he  talked  with  the  Lord  face  to
face,  and  the  miraculous  directors  which  were  given  to  Lehi
while  in  the  wilderness,  on  the  borders  of  the  red  sea;  and  it
is  by  your  faith  that  you  shall  obtain  a  view  of  them,  even  by
that  faith  which  was  had  by  the  prophets  of  old.

2  And  after  that  you  have  obtained  faith,  and  have  sees
them  with  your  eyes,  you  shall  testify  of  them,  by  the  power
of  God;  and  this  you  shall  do  that  my  servant  Joseph  Smith, .
jr.  may  not  be  destroyed,  that  I  may  bring  about  my  righteous
purposes  unto  the  children  of  men,  in  this  work.  And  ye
shall  testify  that  you  have  seen  them,  even  as  my  servant
Joseph  Smith,  jr.  has  seen  them,  for  it  is  by  my  power  that
he  has  seen  them,  and  it  is  because  he  had  faith:  and  he  has
translated  the  book,  even  that  part  which  I  have  commanded
him,  and  as  your  Lord  and  your  God  liveth  it  is  true.

3  Wherefore  you  have  received  the  same  power,  and  the
same  faith,  and  the  same  gift  like  unto  him;  and  if  you  do  these
last  commandments  of  mine,  which  I  have  given  you,  the

fates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  you;  for  my  grace  is  suf-
cient  for  you:  and  you  shall  be  lifted  up  at  the  last  day. —
And  I,  Jesus  Christ,  your  Lord  and  your  God,  have  spoken
it  unto  you,  that  I  might  bring  about  my  righteous  purposes
unto  the  children  of  men.  Amen.


i  n


SECTION  XLIII.

kevelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  Oliver  Coicdcry  and  Davit!
Whitmcr,  making  known  the  calling  of  twelve  apostles  in  these
last  days,  and  also,  instructions  relative  to.  building  up  the
church  of  Christ,  according  to  thefulness  of  the  gospel;  Given
m  Fayette,  New  York,  June,  1829.

1  Now  behold,  because  of  the  thing  which,  you,  my  servant  Ol¬
iver  Cowdery,  have  desired  to  know  of  me,  I  give  unto  you  these
words:  behold  1  have  manifested  unto  you,  by  my  Spirit  in
many  instances,  that  the  things  which  you  have  written  are
true:  wherefore  you  know  that  they  are  true;  and  ifyou  know
that  they  are  true,  behold  I  give  unto  you  a  commandment,
that  you  rely  upon  the  things  which  are  written;  for  in  them
are  all  things  written  concerning  the  foundation  of  my  church,
my  gospel. and  my  rock;  wherefore,  it  you  shall  build  up  my
church  upon  the  foundation  of  my  gospel  and  my  rock,  the
gates  ofhell  shall  not  prevail  against  vou.

2  Behold  the  world  is  ripening  in  iniquity,  and  it  must  needs
be,  that  the  children  of  men  are  stirred  up  unto  repentance,
both  the  Gentiles,  and  also  the  house  of  Israel:  wherefore  as
thou  hast  been  baptized  by  the  hand  of  my  servant,  Joseph
Smith,  jr.  according  to  that  which  I  have  commanded  him,
he  hath  fulfilled  the  thing  which  I  commanded  him.  And  now
marvel  not  that  I  have  called  him  unto  mine  own  purpose,
which  purpose  is  known  in  me:  wherefore  if  he  shall  be  dili¬
gent  in  keeping  my  commandments,  he  shall  be  blessed  unto
eternal  life,  and  his  name  is  Joseph.

3  And  now  Oliver  Cowdery,  I  speak  unto  you,  and  also  unto
David  Whitmer,  by  the  way  of  commandment:  for  behold  I
command  all  men  every  where  to  repent,  and  I  speak  unto
you,  even  as  unto  Paul  mine  apostle,  for  you  are  called  even
with  that  same  calling  with  which  he  was  called.  Remem¬
ber  the  worth  of  souls  is  great  in  the  sight  of  God:  for  behold
the  Lord  your  Redeemer  suffered  death  in  the  flesh:  wherefore
he  suffered  the  pain  of  all  men,  that  all  men  might  repent  and
come  unto  him.  And  he  hath  risen  again  from  the  dead,
that  he  might  bring  all  men  unto  him  on  conditions  of  repent¬
ance.  And  how  great  is  his  joy  in  the  soul  that  repenteth. —
Wherefore  you  are  called  to  cry  repentance  unto  this  people.
And  if  it  so  be  that  you  should  labor  all  your  days,  in  crying
repentance  unto  this  people,  and  bring  save  it  be  one  soul  unto
me,  how  great  shall  be  your  joy  with  him  in  the  kingdom  of
my  Father?

4  And  now  if  your  joy  will  be  great  with  cne  soul,  that  you


173


have  broagM  unto  me  into  the  kingdom  of  my  Father  how
great  will  be  yoUrjoy,  if  yon  should  bring  many  souls  unto me!
Ell,,  i/ave  mV  trospel  before  you,  and  my  rock,  and  my
Behold  vo a  havemj  “3 m„  n/me  in  faith  believing  that

fcSSS:  »d  .l,Sf  h“  «  .he  Ho!,  W*. thick
manifesteth  all  things,  which  is  expedient  unto  the  children  of
men  And  if  you  have  not  faith,  hope  and  charity,  you  can
do  nothing.  Contend  against  no  church,  save  it  be  ^  church
of  the  devil.  Take  upon  you  the  name  « TIHJf  a"d  speak
the  truth  in  soberness,  and  as  many  as  repent,  and  are  bap U
zed  in  my  name,  which  is  Jesus  Christ,  and  endure  to  the  end,
the  same  shall  be  saved.  Behold  Jesus  Christ,  is  the  name
Which  is  given  of  the  Father,  and  there  .noneote  *

given  whereby  man  can  be  saved:  whercforeallrnen  must

take  upon  them  the  name  which  is  given  of  the  Father,  tor  in
that  name  shall  they  be  called  at  the  last  day :  wherefore  if
they  know  not  the  name  by  which  they  are  called,  they  cannot
have  place  in  the  kingdom  of  my  Father.

5  And  now  behold,  there  are  others  who  are  called  to  de¬
clare  my  gospel,  both  unto  Gentile  and  unto  Jew:  yea,  even
twelve:  Ld  the  twelve  shall  be  my  disciples,  and  they
shall  take  upon  them  my  name:  and  the  twelve  are  they  who
shall  desire  to  take  upon  them  my  name,  with  full  purpose  of
heart:  and  if  they  desire  to  take  upon  tnem  my  name,  with
full  purpose  of  heart,  they  are  called  to  go  into raU l  the :  world  »
to  preach  my  gospel  unto  every  creature:  and  they  are  they
who  are  ordained ‘of  me  to  baptize  in  my  name  according  to
that  which  is  written;  and  you  have  that  which  is  written  be¬
fore  you:  wherefore  you  must  perform  it  according  to  the
words  which  are  written.  And  now  I  speak  -mto  the  t^lve
B-riiold  mv  o-race  is  sufficient  for  yon:  you  must  walk  uprightly
before  me  and  sin  not.  And  behold  you  are  they  who  are  or¬
dained  of  me  to  ordain  priests  and  teachers  to  declare  my  gos¬
pel,  according  to  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  is  m
you,  and  eccording  to  the  callings  and  gifts  of  God  unto  men.
and  I  Jesus  Christ,  your  Lord  and  your  God,  have  ^pokeuit.
These  words  are  not  of  men,  nor  of  man,  but  of  me.  there¬
fore  you  shall  testify  they  are  of  me,  and  not  of  man,  for  it  is
my  voice  which  speaketh  them  unto  you:  for  they  are  given
by  my  Spirit  unto  you:  and  by  my  power  you  can  read  them
one  to  another:  and  save  it  were  by  my  power,  you  could  not
have  them:  wherefore  you  can  testify  that  you  have  heard  my

voice,  and  know  my  words.  ,  ,

6  And  now  behold  I  give  unto  you,  Oliver  Cowderj ,  and  a.so
unto  David  Whitmer,  that  you  shall  search  out  the  twelve
who  shall  have  the  desires  of  which  I  have  spoken;  and  by


174


their  desires  and  their  works,  you  shallknow  them:  and  when
you  have  found  them  you  shall  show  these  things  unto  them.
And  you  shall  fall  down  and  worship  the  Father  in  my  name:
and  you  must  preach  unto  the  world,  saying,  you  must  repent
and  be  baptized  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ:  for  all  men  must
repent  and  be  baptized;  and  not  only  men,  but  women  and
children,  who  have  arriven  to  the  years  of  accountability.

7  And  now,  after  that  you  have  received  this,  you  must
keep  my  commandments  in  all  things:  and  by  your  hands  I
will  work  a  marvelous  work  among  the  children  of  men,  unto
the  convincing  of  many  of  their  sins,  that  they  may  come  unto
repentance;  and  that  they  may  come  unto  the  kingdom  of  my
Father:  wherefore  the  blessings  which  I  give  Unto  you,  are
above  all  thiilgs.  And  after  that  you  haye  received  this,  if
you  keep  not  my  commandments,  you  cannot  be  saved  in  the
kingdom  of  my  Father.  Behold  I  Jesus  Christ,  your  Lord  and
your  God,  and  your  Redeemer,  by  the  power  of  my  Spirit,
have  spoken  it.  Amen.

SECTION  XLIV.

A  commandment  of  God  and  not  of  man  to  Martin  Harris,  given
(Manchester,  New  York,  March.  1830, )  by  him  who  is  eternal:

1  I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,  Christ  the  Lord;  yea,  even  I  am
He,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  Redeemer  of  the  world:  I
having  accomplished  and  finished  the  will  of  him  whose  I  am,
even  the  Father  concerning  me:  having  done  this,  that  I
might  subdue  all  things  unto  myself:  retaining  all  power,  even
to  the  destroying  of  satan  and  his  works  at  the  end  of  the
world,  and  the  last  great  day  of  judgment,  which  I  shall  pass
upon  the  inhabitants  thereof,  judging  every  man  according  to
his  works,  and  the  deeds  which  he  hath  done.  And  surely
every  man  must  repent  or  suffer,  for  I  God  am  endless:  where¬
fore,  I  revoke  not  the  judgments  wliich  I  shall  pass,  but  woes
shall  go  forth,  weeping,  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth:  yea,  to
those  who  are  found  on  my  left  hand;  nevertheless  it  is  not
written,  that  there  shall  be  no  end  to  this  torment;  but  it  is
written  endless  torment.

2  Again,  it  is  written  eternal  damnation:  wherefore  it  is  more
express  than  other  scriptures,  that  it  might  work  upon  ti  e
hearts  of  the  children  of men,  allogether  for  my  name’s  glon  :
wherefore,  I  will  explain  unto  you,  this  mystery,  for  it  is  meet
unto  you,  to  know  even  as  mine  apostles.  I  speak  unto  you
that  are  chosen  in  this  thing,  even  as  one,  that  you  may  enter
into  my  rest.  For  behold,  the  mystery  of  Godliness,  how


175


great  is  it?  for  behold  I  am  endless,  and  the  punishment  which
is  given  from  my  hand,  is  endless  punishment,  for  endless  ia
my  name;  wherefore —

Eternal  punishment  )  Endless  punishment

is  God’s  punishment:  $ 's  God’s  punishment:
wherefore,  I  command  you  to  repent,  and  keep  the  command¬
ments  which  you  have  received  by  the  hand  of  my  servant
Joseph  Smith,  jr.  in  my  name:  and  it  is  by  my  almighty  pow¬
er  that  you  have  received  them:  therefore  I  command  you  to
repent,  repent,  lest  I  smite  you  by  the  rod  of  my  mouth,  and
by  my  wrath,  and  by  my  anger,  and  your  sufferings  be  sore:
how  sore  you  know  not  1  how  exquisite  you  know  notl  yea,
how  hard  to  bear  you  know  not!  For  behold,  I  God  have  suf¬
fered  these  things  for  all,  that  they  might  not  suffer,  if  they
would  repent,  but  if  they  would  not  repent,  they  must  suffer
even  as  I:  which  suffering  caused  myself,  even  God,  the  great¬
est  of  all  to  tremble  because  of  pain,  and  to  bleed  at  every  pore,
and  to  suffer  both  body  and  spirit:  and  would  that  I  might  not
drink  the  bitter  cup  and  shrink:  nevertheless,  glory  be  to  the
Father,  and  I  partook  and  finished  my  preparations  unto  the
children  of  men:  wherefore,  I  command  you  again  to  repent
lest  I  humble  you  by  my  almighty  power,  and  that  you  con¬
fess  your  sins  lest  you  suffer  these  punishments  of  which  I
have  spoken,  of  which  in  the  smallest,  yea,  even  in  the  least
degree  you  have  tasted  at  the  time  I  withdrew  my  Spirit.  And
I  command  you,  that  you  preach  nought  but  repentance;  and
show  not  these  things  unto  the  world  until  it  is  wisdom  in  me;
for  they  cannot  bear  meat  now,  but  milk  they  must  receive:
Wherefore,  they  must  not  know  these  things  lest  they  perish:
learn  of  me,  and  listen  to  my  words;  walk  in  the  meek¬
ness  of  my  Spirit  and  you  shall  have  peace  in  me:  I  am
Jesus  Christ:  I  came  by  the  will  of  the  Father,  and  I  do  his  wiP.

3  And  again:  I  command  thee,  that  thou  si.alt  not  covet  thy
neighbor’s  wife.  Nor  seek  thy  neighbor’s  life.  And  again:  I
command  thee,  that  thou  shalt  not  covet  thine  own  property,
but  impart  it  freely  to  the  printing  of  the  book  of  Mormon,
which  contains  the  truth  and  the  word  of  God,  which  is  my
word  to  the  Gentile,  that  soon  it  may  go  to  the  Jew,  of  whom
the  Lamanites  are  a  remnant:  that  they  may  believe  the  gos¬
pel,  and  look  not  for  a  Messiah  to  come  who  has  already
come.

4  And  again:  I  command  thee,  that  thou  shalt  pray  vocally
as  well  as  in  thy  heart:  yea,  before  the  world  as  well  as  in
secret;  in  public  as  well  as  in  private.  And  thou  shalt  declare
glad  tidings;  yea,  publish  it  upon  the  mountains,  and  upon
every  high  place,  and  among  every  people  that  thou  shalt


176


be  permitted  to  see.  And  thou  shalt  do  it  with  all  humility,
trusting  in  me,  reviling  not  against  ravilers.  And  of  tenets
thouslialt  not  talk,  but  thou  shalt  declare  repentance  and  faith
.  on  the  Savior,  and  remission  of  sins  by  baptism  and  by  fire;  yea,
even  the  Holy  Ghost.

5  Behold,  this  is  a  great,  and  the  last  commandment  which  1
shall  give  unto  you  concerning  this  matter:  for  this  shall  suf¬
fice  for  thy  daily  walk  even  unto  the  end  of  thy  life.  And
misery  thou  shalt  receive,  if  thou  wilt  slight  these  counsels;
yea,  even  destruction  of  thyself  and  property.  Impart  a  por¬
tion  of  thy  property;  yea,  even  part  of  thy  lands  and  all  save
the  support  of  thy  family.  Pay  the  debt  thou  hast  contracted
with  the  printer.  Release  thyself  from  bondage.  Leave  thy
house  and  home,  except  when  thou  shalt  desire  to  see  thy
family.  And  speak  freely  to  all:  yea,  preach,  exhort,  declare
the  truth,  even  with  a  loud  voice;  with  a  sound  of  rejoicing,
crying  hosanna!  hosanna!  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord
God.

6  Pray  always  and  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  you,  and
great  shall  be  your  blessing:  yea,  even  more  than  if  you  should
obtain  treasures  of  earth,  and  corruptibleness  to  the  extent
thereof.  Behold,  canst  thou  read  this  without  rejoicing  and
lifting  up  thy  heart  for  gladness;  or  canst  thou  run  about  lon¬
ger  as  a  blind  guide;  or  canst  thou  be  humble  and  meek  and
conduct  thyself  wisely  before  me:  yea,  come  uiito  me  thy  Sa¬
vior.  Amen.

SECTION  XLV.

Revelation  to  Oliver  Cowdery,  Hyrurn  Smith,  Samuel  H.  Smith,
Joseph  Smith  Sen.  anel  Joseph  Knight,  Sen.  given  April,  1830.

1  Behold  I  speak  unto  you,  Oliver,  a  few  words.  Behold
thou  art  blessed,  and  art  under  no  condemnation.  But  be
ware  of  pride,  lest  thou  shouldst  enter  into  temptation.  Make
known  thy  calling  unto  the  church,  and  also  before  the  world;
and  thy  heart  shall  be  opened  to  preach  the  truth  from  hence¬
forth  and  forever.  Amen.

2  Behold  I  speak  unto  you,  Hyrum,  a  few  words:  for  thou
also  art  under  no  condemnation,  and  thy  heart  is  opened,  and
thy  tongue  loosed;  and  thy  calling  is  to  exhortation,  and  to
strengthen  the  church  continually.  Wherefore  thy  duty  is
unto  the  church  forever;  and  this  because  of  thy  family.  Amen.

3  Behold  I  speak  a  few  words  unto  you,  Samuel:  for  thou
also  art  under  no  condemnation,  and  thy 'calling  is  to  exhorta¬
tion,  and  to  strengthen  the  church.  Alia  thou  art  not  as  yet
called  to  preach  before  the  world.  Amen#


4  Bfehold  I  speak  a  few  words  Unto  you,  Joseph:  for  thou  al¬
so  art  under  no  condemnation,  and  thy  calling  also  is  to  ex¬
hortation,  and  to  strengthen  the  church.  And  this  is  thy  du¬
ty  from  henceforth  and  forever.  Amen.


5  Behold  1  manifest  unto  you,  Joseph  Knight,  by  these
words,  that  ‘  you  must  take  up  your  cross,  in  the  which  you
must  pray  vocally  before  the  world,  as  well  as  in  secret,  and
in  your  family,  and  among  your  friends,  and  in  all  places. —
And  behold  it  is  your  duty  to  unite  with  the  true  church,  and
give  your  language  to  exhortation  continually,  that  you  may
meeive  the  reward  of  the  laborer.  Amen.


SECTION  XL VI.


Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  given  April  6,  1830.

1  Behold  there  shall  be  a  record  kept  among  you,  and  in
it  thou  shalt  be  called  a  seer,  a  translator,  a  prophet,  an  apos  •
tie  of  Jesus  Christ,  an  elder  of  the  church  through  the  will  of
God  the  Father,  and  the  grace  of  youT  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  being
inspired  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  lay  the  foundation  thereof,  and  to
build  it  up  unlo  the  most  holy  faith:  which  churchwas  organ¬
ized  and  established,  in  the  year  of  your  Lord  eighteen  hun¬
dred  and  thirty,  in  the  fourth  month,  and  on  the  sixth  day  of
the  month,  which  is  called  April.

2  Wherefore,  meaning  the  church,  thou  shalt  give  heed  unto
all  his  words,  and  commandments,  which  he  shall  give  unto
you,  as  he  receiveth  them,  walking  in  all  holiness  before  me:
for  his  word  ye  shall  receive,  as  if  from  mine  Own  mouth,  in
all  patience  and  faith;  for  by  doing  these  things,  the  gates  of
hell  shall  not  prevail  against  you:  yea,  and  the  Lord  God  will
disperse  the  powers  of  darkness  from  before  you;  and  cause
the  heavens  to  shake  for  your  good,  and  his  name’s  glory. —
For  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  him  have  I  inspired  to  move  the
cause  of  Zion  in  mighty  power  for  good;  and  his  diligence  I
know,  and  his  prayers  I  have  heard:  yea,  his  weeping  for  Zi¬
on  I  have  seen,  and  I  w'lll  cause  that  he  shall  mourn  for  her  no
longer,  for  his  days  of  rejoicing  are  come  unto  the  remission  of
his  sins,  and  the  manifestations  of  my  blessings  upon  his  works.

3  For  behold,  I  will  bless  all  those  who  labor  in  my  vineyard,
with  a  mighty  blessing,  and  they  shall  believe  on  his  words,
which  are  given  him  through  me,  by  the  Comforter,  which
manifesteth  that  Jesus  wTas  crucified  by  sinful  men  for  the  sins
of  the  world;  yea,  for  the  remission  of  sins  unlo  the  contrite
heart.  Wherefore,  it  behooveth  me,  that  he  should  be  ordain-


178


ed  by  you,  Oliver  Cowdery,  mine  apostle;  this  being  an  or¬
dinance  unto  you,  that  you  are  an  elder  under  his  hand,  he
being  the  first  unto  you,  that  you  might  be  an  elder  unto  this
church  of  Christ,  bearing  my  name;  and  the  first  preacher  of
this  church,  unto  the  church,  and  before  the  world;  yea,  be¬
fore  the  Gentiles:  yea,  and  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  lo,  lo,  to
the  Jews,  also.  Amen.

SECTION  XLVII.

Revelation  to  the  church  qf  Christ,  which  teas  established  in  these
last  days,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  eight  hundred
and  thirty:  Given  April,  1830,  in  consequence  of  some  desi¬
ring  to  unite  with  the  church  without  re-baptism,  who  had  pre¬
viously  been  baptized.

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  all  old  covenants  have  I  caused
to  be  done  away  in  this  thing,  and  this  is  a  new  and  an  ever¬
lasting  covenant;  even  that  which  was  from  the  beginning. _

Wherefore,  although  a  man  should  be  baptized  an  hundred
times,  it  availeth  him  nothing;  for  you  cannot  enter  in  at  the
straight  gate  by  the  law  of  Moses,  neither  by  your  dead  works;
for  it  is  because  of  your  dead  works,  that  1  have  caused  this
last  covenant,  and  this  church  to  be  built  up  unto  me;  even  as
in  days  of  old.  Wherefore  enter  ye  in  at  the  gate,  as  I  have
commanded,  and  seek  not  to  counsel  your  God.  Amen.

SECTION  XLVIII.

Revelation  given  July,  1830.

1  Hearken  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your  God,  while  I
speak  unto  you,  Emma  Smith,  iny  daughter,  for  verily  I  say
unto  you,  all  those  who  receive  my  gospel  are  sons  and  daugh¬
ters  in  my  kingdom.  A  revelation  I  give  unto  you  concerning
my  will,  and  if  thou  art  faithful  and  walk  in  the  paths  of  vir¬
tue  before  me,  I  will  preserve  thy  life,  and  thou  shalt  receive
an  inheritance  in  Zion.  Behold  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,
and  thou  art  an  elect  lady,  whom  I  have  called.  Murmur  not
because  of  the  things  which  thou  hast  not  seen,  for  they  are
withheld  from  thee,  and  from  the  world,  wliich  is  wisdom  in
me  in  a  time  to  come.

2  And  the  office  of  thy  calling  shall  be  for  a  comfort  unto  my
servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  thy  husband,  in  his  afflictions  with
consoling  words,  in  the  spirit  of  meekness.  And  thou  shalt  go
with  him  at  the  time  of  his  going,  and  be  unto  him  for  ascribe.


179


while  there  is  no  one  to  be  a  scribe  for  him,  that  I  may  send
my  servant  Oliver  Cowdery,  whithersoever  1  will.  And  thou
shalt  be  ordained  under  his  hand  to  expound  scriptures,  and  to
exhort  the  church,  according  as  it  shall  be  given  thee  by  my
Spirit:  for  he  shall  lay  his  hands  upon  thee,  and  thou  shalt  re¬
ceive  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  thy  time  shall  be  given  to  writing,
and  to  learning  much.  And  thou  needst  not  fear,  for  thy  hus¬
band  shall  support  thee  in  the  church:  for  unto  them  is  his
calling,  that  all  things  might  be  revealed  unto  them,  whatso¬
ever  1  will,  according  to  their  faith.

3  And  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  that  thou  shalt  lay  aside  the
things  of  this  world,  and  seek  for  the  things  of  a  better.  And
it  shall  be  given  thee,  also,  to  make  a  selection  of  sacred
Hymns,  as  it  shall  be  given  thee,  which  is  pleasing  unto  me,
to  be  had  in  my  church:  for  my  soul  delighteth  in  the  song  of
the  heart:  yea,  the  song  of  the  righteous  is  a  prayer  unto  me.
And  it  shall  be  answered  with  a  blessing  upon  tneir  heads. —
Wherefore  lift  up  thy  heart  and  rejoice,  and  cleave  unto  the
covenants  which  thou  hast  made.

4  Continue  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  and  beware  of  j>ride.
Let  thy  soul  delight  in  thy  husband,  and  the  glory  which  shall
come  upon  him.  Keep  my  commandments  continually,  and
a  crown  of  righteousness  thou  shalt  receive.  And  except  thou
do  this,  where  I  am  you  cannot  come.  And  verily,  verily  I
say  unto  you,  that  this  is  my  voice  unto  all.  Amen.

SECTION  XLIX.

Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  Oliver  Coicdery  and  John  lVhit-
mer,  given  July,  1830.

1  Behold,  I  say  unto  you,  that  you  shall  let  your  time  be  de¬
voted  to  the  studying  of  the  scriptures,  and  to  preaching,  and
to  confirming  the  church,  at  Colesville;  and  to  performing  your
labors  on  the  land,  such  as  is  required,  until  after  you  shall  go
to  the  west,  to  hold  the  next  conference;  and  then  it  shall  be
made  known  what  yOu  shall  do.  And  all  things  shall  be  done
by  common  consent  in  the  church,  by  much  prayer  and  faith,-
for  all  things  you  shall  receive  by  faith.  Amen.

SECTION  L.

Revelation  given  September,  1830.

1  Listen  to  the  voice  of  Jesus  Christ,  your  Lord,  your  God
and  your  Redeemer,  whose  word  is  quick  and  powerful.  For


180


behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  matteretli  not  what  ye  shall  eaf,
or  what  ye  shall  drink,  when  ye  partake  of  the  sacrament,  if  it
so  be  that  ye  do  it  with  an  eye  single  to  my  glory;  remember¬
ing  unto  the  Father  my  body  which  was  laid  down  for  you,
and  my  blood  which  was  shed  for  the  remission  of  your  sins:
wherefore  a  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  you  shall  not
purchase  wine,  neither  strong  drink  of  your  enemies:  where,
fore  you  shall  partake  of  none,  except  it  is  made  new  among
you,  yea,  in  this  my  Father’s  kingdom  which  shall  be  built  up
on  the  earth.

2  Behold  this  is  wisdom  in  me:  wherefore  marvel  not  for  the
hour  cometh  that  I  will  drink  of  the  fruit  of  the  vine  with  you
on  the  earth,  and  with  Moroni,  whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  to
reveal  the  book  of  Mormon,  containing  the  fulness  of  my  ever¬
lasting  gospel;  to  whom  I  have  committed  the  keys  of  the  rec¬
ord  of  the  stick  of  Ephraim;  and  also  with  Elias,  to  whom  I
have  committed  the  keys  of  bringing  to  pass  the  restoration
of  all  things,  or  the  restorer  of  all  things  spoken  by  the  mouth
of  all  the  holy  prophets  since  the  world  began,  concerning  the
last  days:  and  also  John  the  son  of  Zach  arias,,  which  Zacnari-
as  he  (Elias)  visited  and  gave  promise  that  he  should  have  a
son,  and  his  name  should  be  John,  and  he  should  be  filled  with
the  spirit  of  Elias;  which  John  I  have  sent  unto  you,  my  ser¬
vants,  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Oliver  Cowdery,  to  ordain  you
unto  this  first  priesthood  which  you  have  received,  that  you
plight  be  called  and  ordained  even  as  Aaron:  and  also  Elijah,
unto  whom  I  have  committed  the  keys  of  the  power  of  turn¬
ing  the  hearts  of  the  fa! hers  to  the  children  and  the  hearts  of
the  children  to  the  fathers,  that  the  whole  earth  may  not  be
smitten  with  a  curse:  and  also,  with  Joseph,  and  Jacob,  and
Isaac,  and  Abraham  your  fathers;  by  whom  the  promises  re¬
main;  and  also  with  Michael,  or  Adam,  the  father  of  all, 'the
prince  of  all,  the  ancient  of  days:

3  And  also  with  Peter,  and  James,  and  John,  whom  I  have
sent  unto  you,  by  whom  I  have  ordained  you  tmd  confirmed
you  to  be  apostles  and  especial  witnesses  of  my  name,  and  hear
the  keys  of  your  ministry:  and  of  the  same  things  which  I  re¬
vealed  unto  them:  unto  whom  I  have  committed  the  keys  of
pay  kingdom,  and  a  dispensation  of  the  gospel  for  the  last
times;  and  for  the  fulness  of  times,  in  the  which  I  will  gather
together  in  one  all  things  both  which  are  in  heaven  and  which
are  on  earth:  and  also  with  all  those  whom  my  Father  hath
given  me  out  of  the  world:  wherefore  lift  up  your  hearts  and
rejoice,  and  gird  up  your  loins,  and  take  upon  you  my  whole
armor,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  withstand  the  evil  day,  having
done  all  ye  may  be  able  to  stand.  Stand,  therefore,  having


181


your  loins  girt  about  with  truth;  having  on  the  breastplate  of
righteousness;  and  your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the
gospel  of  peace  which  I  have  sent  mine  angels  to  commit  un¬
to  you,  taking  the  shield  of  faith  wherewith  ye  shall  be  able
to  quench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked;  and  take  the  hel¬
met  of  salvation,  and  the  sword  of  my  Spirit,  which  1  will
pour  out  upon  you,  and  my  wprd  which  I  reveal  unto  you,
and  be  agreed  as  touching  all  things  whatsoever  ye  ask  of  me,
and  be  faithful  until  I  come,  and  ye  shall  be  caught  up  kthat
where  I  am  ye  shall  be  also.  Amen.

SECTION  LI.  ^

Revelation  given  to  Oliver  Cowdery,  September,  1830.

1  Behold  I  say  unto  thee,  Oliver,  that  it  shall  be  given  unto
thee,  that  thou  shalt  be  heard  by  the  church,  in  all  things
whatsoever  thou  shalt  teach  them  by  the  Comforter,  concern¬
ing  the  revelations  and  commandments  which  I  have  given.

'i  But  behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  thee,  no-one  shall.be
appointed  to  receive  commandments  and  revelations  in  this
church,  excepting  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  for  he  receiv-
eth  them  even  as  Moses;  and  thou  shalt  be  obedient  unto  the
things  which  I  shall  give  unto  him,  even  as  Aaron,  to  declare
faithfully  the  commandments  and  the  revelations,  with  power
and  authority  unto  the  church.  And  if  thou  art]led  at  any  time
by  the  Comforter  to  speak  or  teach,  or  at  all  times  by  the  way
of  commandment  unto' the  church,  thou  mayest  doit.  But
thou  shalt  not  write  by  way  of  commandment,  but  by  wisdom:
And  thou  shalt  not  command  him  who  is  at  thy  head,  and  at
the  head  of  the  church;  for  I  have  given  him  the  keys  of  the
mysteries  and  the  revelations  which  are  sealed,  until  I  shall
appoint  unto  them  another  in  his  stead.

3  And  now,  behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  you  shall  go  unto  the
Lamanites  and  preach  my  gospel  unto  them;  and  inasmuch
as  they  receive  thy  teachings,  thou  shalt  cause  my  church  to
be  established  among  them,  and  thou  shalt  have  revelations
but  write  them  not  by  way  of  commandment.  And  now  be¬
hold  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  not  revealed,  and  no  man  know-
eth  where  the  city  shall  be  built,  but  it  shall  be  given  hereaf¬
ter.  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  shall  be  on  the  borders  by
the  Lamanites.

4  Thou  shalt  not  leave  this  place  until  after  the  conference
and  my  servant  Joseph  shall  be  appointed  to  preside  over  the
conference  by  the  voice  of  it,  and  what  he  saith  to  thee  thou
shalt  tell.  And  again,  thou  shalt  take  thy  brother  Hiram


182


Page  between  him  and  thee  alone,  and  tell  him  that  those
things  which  he  hath  written  from  that  stone  are  not  of  me,
and  that  satan  deceiveth  him:  for  behold  these  things  have
not  been  appointed  unto  him:  neither  shall  any  thin;*  be  ap¬
pointed  unto  any  of  this  church  contrary  to  the  church  cov¬
enants,  for  all  things  must  be  done  in  order  and  by  common
Consent  in  the  church,  by  the  prayer  of  faith.

5  And  thou  shalt  assist  to  settle  all  these  things  according
to  the  covenants  of  the  church  before  thou  shalt  take  thy  jour¬
ney  among  the  Lamanites.  And  it  shall  be  given  thee  from
the  time  that  thou  shalt  go,  until  the  time  that  thou  shalt  re¬
turn,  what  thou  shalt  do.  And  thou  must  open  thy  mouth  at
all  times  declaring  my  gospel  with  the  sound  of  rejoicing. —

SECTION  LII.

Revelation  to  David  Whitmer,  Peter  Whitmer,  jr.  and  John
Whitmer,  given  September,  1830.

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  David,  that  you  have  feared  man
and  have  not  relied  on  me  for  strength,  as  you  ought:  but
tour  mind  has  been  on  the  things  of  the  earth  more  than  on
the  tilings  of  me,  your  Maker,  and  the  ministry  whereunto
vou  have  been  called;  and  you  have  not  given  heed  unto  my
Spirit,  and  to  those  who  were  set  over  you,  but  have  been  per¬
suaded  by  those  whom  I  have  not  commanded:  wherefore  you
are  left  to  inquire  for  yourself,  at  my  hand,  and  ponder  upon
the  things  which  you  have  received.  And  your  home  shall  be
at  your  father’s  house,  until  I  give  unto  you  further  command- '
ments.  And  you  shall  attend  to  the  ministry  in  the  church,
and  before  the  world,  and  in  the  regions  round  about.  Amen.

2  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  Peter,  that  you  shall  take  your
journey  with  your  brother  Oliver,  for  the  time  has  come,  that
it  is  expedient  in  me,  that  you  shall  open  your  mouth  to  de¬
clare  my  gospel:  therefore,  fear  not  but  give  heed  unto  the
words  and  advice  of  your  brother,  which  he  shall  give  you. —
And  be  you  afflicted  in  all  his  afflictions,  ever  lifting  up  your
heart  unto  me  in  prayer,  and  faith,  for  his  and  your  deliver¬
ance:  for  I  have  given  unto  him  power  to  build  up  my  church
among  the  Lamanites:  and  none  have  I  appointed  to  be  his
counsellor,  over  him,  in  the  church,  concerning  church  mat¬
ters,  except  it  is  liis  brother  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  Wherefore  give
heed  unto  these  things  and  be  diligent  in  keeping  my  com¬
mandments,  and  you  shall  be  blessed  unto  eternal  life.  Amen,

3  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  my  servant  John,  that  thou  shalt


185


commence  from  this  time  forth  to  proclaim  my  gospel,  as
with  the  voice  of  a  trump.  And  jrnur  labor  shall  &  at  your
brother  Philip  Burroughs’,  and  in  that  region  round  about:
yea,  wherever  you  can  be  heard,  until  I  command  yoa  to  go
.from  hence.  And  your  whole  labor  shall  be  in  Zion,  with  all
your  soul,  from  henceforth;  yea,  you  shall  ever  open  your
mouth  in  my  cause  not  fearing  what  man  can  do,  for  I  am
with  you.  Amen.

SECTION  LIII.

Revelation  to  Thomas  B.  Marsh,  given  September ,  1830.

1  Thomas,  my  son,  blessed  are  you  because  of  your  faith  in
my  work.  Behold  you  have  had  many  afflictions  because  of
your  family:  nevertheless  I  will  bless  you,  and  your  family:
yea,  your  little  ones,  and  the  day  cometh  that  they  will  believe
and  know  the  truth  and  be  one  with  you  in  my  church.

2  Lift  up  your  heart  and  rejoice  for  the  hour  of  your  mission
is  come;  and  your  tongue  shall  be  loosed;  and  you  shall  declare
glad  tidings  of  great  joy  unto  this  generation.  You  shall  de¬
clare  the  things  which  have  been  revealed  to  my  servant  Jo¬
seph  Smith,  jr.  You  shall  begin  to  preach  from  this  time  forth;
yea,  to  reap  in  the  field  which  is  white  already  to  be  burned:
therefore  thrust  in  your  sickle  with  all  your  soul;  and  your
■sins  are  forgiven  you;  and  you  shall  be  laden  with  sheaves  up¬
on  your  back,  for  the  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  Wherefore
your  family  shall  live.

3  Behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  go  from  them  only  for  a  lit¬
tle  time,  and  declare  my  word,  and  I  will  prepare  a  place  for
them ;  yea,  I  will  open  the  hearts  of  the  people  and  they  will
receive  you.  And  I  will  establish  a  church  by  your  hand;
and  you  shall  strengthen  them  and  prepare  them  against  the
time  when  they  shall  be  gathered.  Be*  patient  in  afflictions,
revile  not  against  those  that  revile.  Govern  your  house  in
meekness,  and  be  steadfast.

4  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  you  shall  be  a  physician  unto
the  church,  but  not  into  the  world,  for  they  will  not  receive
you.  Go  your  way  Whithersoever  I  will,  and  it  shall  be  giv¬
en  you  by  the  Comforter  what  you  shall  do,  and  whither  you
shall  go.  Pray  always,  lest  you  enter  into  temptation,  and
lose  your  reward.  Be  faithful  unto  the  end  and,  lo,  I  am  with
you.  These  words  are  not  of  man  nor  of  men,  but  of  me,
even  Jesus  Christ  your  Redeemer,  by  the  will  of  the  Father.
Amen.


SECTION  LIV.

Revelation  to  Parley  P .  Pratt  and  Zila  Peterson,  given  Octo¬
ber,  1830.

1  And  now  concerning  my  servant  Parley  P.  Pratt,  behold  I
say  unto  him,  that  as  I  live  I  will  that  he  shall  declare  my
gospel  and  learn  of  me,  and  be  meek  and  lowly  of  heart;  and
tiiat  which  I  have  appointed  unto  him,  is,  that  lie  shall  go  with
my  servants  Oliver  Cowdery  and  Peter  Whitmer,  jr.  into  the
wilderness,  among  the  Lamanites;  and  Ziba  Peterson,  also,
shall  go  with  them,  and  I  myself  will  go  with  them  and  be  in
their  midst:  and  1  am  their  Advocate  with  the  Father,  and  no¬
thing  shall  prevail.  And  they  shall  give  heed  to  that  which
is  written  and  pretend  to  no  other  revelation,  and  they  shall
pray  always  that  I  may  unfold  them  to  their  understanding;
and  they  shall  give  heed  unto  these  words  and  trifle  not,  and
I  will  bless  them.  Amen.

SECTION  LV.

Revelation  to  Ezra  Thayrc  and  Northrop  Sweet,  given  October
1830.

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  my  servants  Ezra  and  Northrop,
open  ye  your  ears  and  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  your
God,  whose  word  is  quick.’  and  powerful,  sharper  than  a  two
edged  sword,  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  the  joints  and  marrow,
soul  and  spirit:  and  is  a  discenaer  of  the  thoughts  and  intents
of  the  heart.  For  verily,  verily  1  say  unto  you,  that  ye  are
called  to  lift  up  your  voices  as' with  the  sound  of  a  trump,  to
declare  my  gospel  unto  a  < ;  coked  and  a  perverse  generation:
for  behold  the  field  is  white  already  to  harvest;  and  it  is  the
eleventh  hour,  and  for  the  last  time  that  I  shall  call  laborers
into  my  vineyard.  And  my  vineyard  has  become  corrupted
every  whit:  and  there  is  mine  which  doeth  good  save  it  be  a
few;  and  they  err  in  many  instances,  because  of  priestcrafts,
all  having  corrupt  minds.

2  And  verily,  verily  1  say  unio  you,  that  this  church  have  1
established  and  called  forth  out  of  the  wilderness:  and  even  so
will  I  gather  mine  elec  t  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  earth,
even  as  many  as  will  t  -heye  in  me,  and  hearken  unto  my
voice:  yea,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  field  is  white
already  to  harvest:  wl.  i  >  -i.re  thrust  in  your  ruckles,  and  reap
With  all  your  might,  iulnd  and  strength.  Open  your  mouths
and  they  shall  be  filleii;  am  y  ou  shall  become  even  as  Nephi


185


of  old,  who  journeyed  from  Jerusalem  in  the  wilderness:  yea,
open  your  mouths  and  spare  not,  and  you  shall  he  laden  with
sheaves  upon  your  backs,  for  lo  I  am  with  you:  yea,  open  your
mouths  and  they  shall  be  filled,  saying,  Repent,  repent  and
prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord,  and  make  his  paths  straight:
lor  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand:  yea,  repent  and  be  bap¬
tized  evGry  one  of  you;  for  a  remission  of  your  sips:  yea,  be
baptized  even  by  water,  and  then  cometli  the  baptism  of  fire
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

3  Behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  this  is  my  gospel,
and  remember  that  they  shall  have  faith  in  me,  or  they  can  in
no  wise  be  saved:  and  upon  this  Rock  I  will  build  my  church;
yea,  upon  this  rock  ye  are  built,  and  if  ye  continue,  the  gates
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  you;  and  ye  shall  remember
the  church  articles  and  covenants  to  keep  them:  and  whoso
having  faith  you  shall  confirm  in  my  church,  by  the  laying  on
of  the  hands,  and  I  will  bestow  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost
upon  them.  And  the  book  of  Mormon,  and  the  holy  scriptures,
are  given  of  me  for  your  instruction;  and  the  power  of  my
Spirit  quickeneth  all  things:  wherefore  be  faithful,  praying  al¬
ways,  having  your  lamps  trimmed  and  burning,  and  oil  with
you,  that  you  may  be  ready  at  the  coming  of  the  Bridegroom;
for  behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  I  come  quickly;
even  so:  Amen.

SECTION  LVI.

. "Revelation  to  Orson  Pratt,  given  November,  1830.

1  My  son  Orson,  hearken  and  hear  and  behold  what  I  the  Lord
God  shall  say  unto  you,  even  Jesus  Christ  your  Redeemer,
the  light  and  the  life  of  the  world:  a  light  which  shineth  in
darkness  and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not:  whoso  loved
the  world  that  he  gave  his  own  life,  that  as  many  as  would
believe  might  become  the  sons  of  God:  wherefore  you  are  my
son,  and  blessed  are  you  because  you  have  believed,  and  more
blessed  are  you  because  you  are  called  of  me  to  preach  my
gospel;  to  lift  up  your  voiefe  as  with  the  sound  of  a  trump,  both
"long  and  loud,  and  cry  repentance  unto  a  crooked  and  perverse
generation;  preparing  the  way  of  the  Lord  for  his  second  com¬
ing;  for  behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  time  is
soon  at  hand,  that  I  shall  come  in  a  cloud  with  power  and
great  glory,  and  it  shall  be  a  great  day  at  the  time  of  my  com?
mg,  for  all  nations  shall  tremble.

2  But  before  that  great  day  shall  come,  the  sun  shall  be
darkened,  and  the  moon  be  turned  into  blood,  and  the  stare


shall  refuse  their  shining,  and  some  shall  fall,  and  great  de¬
structions  await  the  wicked:  wherefore  lift  up  your  voice  and
spare  not,  for  the  Lord  God  hath  spoken.  Therefore  prophesy
and  it  shall  be  given  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  if
you  are  faithful  behold  I  am  with  you  until  I  come:  and  veri¬
ly,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  come  quickly.  I  am  your  Lord
and  your  Redeemer;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  JLVII.

Revelation  to  Edward  Partrige,  given  December ,  1830.

1  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  mighty  One  of  Israel,  behold
I  say  unto  you,  my  servant  Edward,  that  you  are  blessed,  and
your  sins  are  forgiven  you,  and  you  are  called  to  preach  my
gospel  as  with  the  voice  of  a  trump;  and  I  will  lay  my  hand
upon  you  by  the  hand  of  my  servant  Sidney  Rigdon,  and  you
shall  receive  my  Spirit,  the  Holy  Ghost,  even  the  Comforter,
which  shall  teach  you  the  peaceable  things  of  the  kingdom:
and  you  shall  declare  it  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  Hosanna,
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  most  high  God.

2  And  now  this  calling  and  commandment  give  I  unto  you
concerning  all  men,  that  as  many  as  shall  come  before  my  ser¬
vants  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  embracing  this
calling  and  commandment,  shall  be  ordained  and  sent  forth  to
preach  the  everlasting  gospel  among  the  nations,  crying  re¬
pentance,  saying,  Save  yourselves  from  this  untoward  gener¬
ation,  and  come  forth  out  of  the  fire,  hating  even  the  garments
spotted  with  the  flesh.

3  And  this  commandment  shall  be  given  unto  the  elders  of
my  church,  that  every  man  which  will  embrace  it  with  single,
ness  of  heart,  may  be  ordained  and  sent  forth,  even  as  I  have
spoken.  I  am  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God:  wherefore  gird
up  your  loins  and  I  will  suddenly  come  to  my  temple;  even
so.  Amen.

SECTION  LVlil.

Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith ,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  given
December,  1830.

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  not  expedient  in  me  that
ye  should  translate  any  more  until  ye  shall  go  to  the  Ohio;
and  this  because  of  the  enemy  and  for  your  sakes.  And  again,
I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  not  go  until  ye  have  preached
my  gospel  in  those  parts,  and  have  strengthened  up  the  church


187


whithersoever  it  is  found,  and  nlore  especially  in  Colesville:
for  behold  they  pray  unto  me  in  much  faith.

2  And  again  a  commandment  I  give  unto  the  church,  that
it  is  expedient  in  me  that  they  should  assemble  together  at  the
Ohio,  against  the  time  that  my  servant  Oliver  Cowdery  shall
return  unto  them.  Behold  here  is  wisdom,  and  let  every  man
choose  for  himself  until  I  come;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LIX.

.  Regulation  to  James  Covill,  given  January ,  1831.

1  Hearken  and  listen  to  the  voice  of  him  who  is  from  all
eternity  to  all  eternity,  the  Great  I  AM,  even  Jesus  Christ,
the  light  and  the  life  of  the  world;  a  light  which  shineth  in
darkness  and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not:  the  same
which  came  in  the  meridian  of  time  unto  my  own,  and  my
own  received  me  not;  but  to  as  many  as  received  me,  gave  I
power  to  become  my  sons,  and  even  so  will  I  givp  unto  as
many  as  will  receive  me',  power  to  become  my  sons.

2  And  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  he  that  receiveth  my
gospel,  receiveth  me;  and  he  that  receiveth  not  my  gospel,  re¬
ceiveth  not  me.  And  this  is  my  gospel:  repentance  and  bap¬
tism  by  water,  and  then  cometh  the  baptism  of  fire  and  the
Holy  Ghost,  even  the  Comforter,  which  showeth  all  things,
and  teacheth  the  peaceable  things  of  the  kingdom.

3  And  now  behold  I  say  unto  you,  my  servant  James,  I
have  looked  upon  thy  works  and  I  know  thee:  and  verily  I
say  unto  thee,  thine  heart  is  now  right  before  me  at  this  time,
and  behold  I  have  bestowed  great  blessings  upon  thy  head: —
nevertheless  thou  hast  seen  great  sorrow  for  thou  hast  rejected
me  many  times  because  of  pride,  and  the  cafes  of  the  world:
but  behold  the  days  of  thy  deliverance  are  come,  if  thou  wilt
hearken  to  my  voice,  which  saith  unto  thee,  Arise  and  be  bap¬
tized,  and  wash  away  your  sins,  calling  on  my  name  and  you
shall  receive  my  Spirit,  and  a  blessing  so  great  as  you  never
have  known.  And  if  thou  do  this,  I  have  prepared  thee  for  a
greater  work.  Thou  shalt  preach  the  fulness  of  my  gospel
which  I  have  sent  forth  in  these  last  days;  the  covenant  which
I  have  sent  forth  to  recover  my  people,  which  are  of  the  house
of  Israel.

4  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  power  shall  rest  upon  thee;
thou  shalt  have  great  faith  and  I  will  be  with  thee  and  go  be¬
fore  thy  face.  Thou  art  called  to  labor  in  my  vineyard,  and
to  build  up  my  church,  and  to  bring  forth  Zion,  that  it  may
rejoice  upon  the  hills  and  flourish.  Behold,  verily,  verily  I


188


say  unto  theer  thou  art  not  called  to  go  into  the  eastern  coun¬
tries,  but  thou  art  called  to  go  to  the  Ohio.  And  inasmuch
as  my  people  shall  assemble  themselves  to  the  Ohio,,  I  have
kept  in  store  a  blessing  such  as  is  not  known  among  the  chil¬
dren  of  men,  and  it  shall  be  poured  forth  upon  their  heads. —
And  from  thence  men  shall  go  forth  into  all  nations.

5  Behold,  verily, 'verily  Isay  unto  you,  that  the  people  in
Ohio  call  upon  me  in  much  faith,  thinking  I  will  stay  my  hand
in  judgment  upon  the  nations,  but  I ,  cannot  deny  my  word:
wherefore  lay  to  with  your  might  and  call  faithful  laborers  in¬
to  my  vineyard,  that  it  may  be  pruned  for  the  last  time.  And
inasmuch  as  they  do  repent  and  receive  the  fulness  of  my  gos¬
pel,  and  become  sanctified,  I  will  stay  mine  hand  in  judgment:
wherefore  go  forth,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  saying,  The
kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand  ;  crying  Hosanna!  blessed  be
the  name  of  the  most  high  God.  Go  forth  baptizing  with  wa¬
ter,  preparing  the  way  before  my  face,  for  the  time  of  my
coming;  for  the  time  is  at  hand:  the  day  nor  the  hour  no  man
knoweth,  but  it  surely  shall  come,  and  he  that  receiveth  these
things  receiveth  me;  and  they  shall  be  gathered  unto  mein
time  and  in  eternity.

6  And  again,  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  on  as  many  as  ye
shall  baptize  with  water,  ye  shall  lay  your  hands,  and  they
shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  shall  be  looking
forth  for  the  signs  of  my  coining,  and  shall  know  me.  Behold
I  come  quickly;  even  so.  Amen.


SECTION  LX.


Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  given  Jan¬
uary,  1831,  explaining  why  James  Govill,  obeyed  not  the  rev¬
elation  which  was  given  unto  him.

1  Behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  heart  of  my  ser¬
vant  James  Covill  was  right  before  me,  for  lie  covenanted
with  me,  that  he  would  obey  my  word.  And  he  received  the
word  with  gladness,  but  straightway  satan  tempted  him;  and
the  fear  of  persecution,  and  the  cares  of  the  world,  caused  him
to  reject  the  word;  wherefore  he  broke  my  covenant,  and  it
remamelh  in  me  to  do  with  him  as  seemeth  me  good.  Amen.


SECTION  LXI.


Revelation  given  February,  1831.


1  Hearken  and  hear,  O  ye  my  people,  saith  the  Lord  and
your  God,  ye  whom  I  delight  to  bless  with  the  greatest  bles-


189


sings!  ye  that  hear  me:  and  ye  that  hear  me  not  will  I  curse,
that  have  professed  my  name,  with  the  heaviest  of  all  cursings.
Hearken,  O  ye  elders  Of  my  church  whom  r  have  called:  be¬
hold  1  give  unto  you  a  commandment,  that  ye  shall  assemble
yourselves  together  to  agree  upon  my  word,  and  by  the  prayer
of  your  faith  ye  shall  receive  my  law,  that  ye  may  know  how
to  govern  my  church,  and  have  all  things  right  before  me,

‘<1  And  I  will  be  your  Ruler  when'  I  Come:  and  behold,  I  come
quickly:  and  ye  shall  see  that  my  law  is  kept.  Ho  that  re-
ceiveth  my  law  and  doeth  it  the  same. is  my  disciple;  and  ho
that  saith  he  receiveth  It  and  doeth  it  not,  the  same  is  not  my
disciple,  and  shall  be  cast  out  from  among  you:  for  it  is  not
meet  that  the  things  which  belong  to  the  children  of  the  king¬
dom,  should  be  given  to  them  that  are  not  worthy,  or  to  dogs,
or  the  pearls  to  be  cast  before  swine.

3  And  again,  it  is  meet  that  my  servant  Joseph  Smith;  jr.
should  have  a  house  built,  in  which  to  live  and  translate.  And
again  it  is  meet  that  my  servant  Sidney  Rigdon  should  live  as
seemeth  him  good,  inasmuch  as  he  keepeth  my  command¬
ments.  And  again,  I  have  called  my  servant  Edward  Par¬
tridge,  and  give  a  commandment,  that  he  should  be  appoin¬
ted  by  the  voice  of  the  church,  and  ordained  a  bishop  unto,
the  church,  to  leave  his  merchandise  and  to  spend  all  his  time
in  the  labors  of  the  church;  to  see  to  all  things  as  it  shall  be
appointed  unto  him,  in  my  laws  in  the  day  that  I  shall  give
them.  And  this  because  his  heart  is  pure  before  me,  for  he  is
like  unto  Nathaniel  of  Old,  in  whom  there  is  no  guile.  These
words  are  given  unto  you,  and  they  are  pure  before  me:  where¬
fore  beware  how  you  hold  them,  for  they  are  to  be  answered
upon  your  souls  in  the  day  of  judgment;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXII.

Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  given  Feb¬
ruary,  1831.

1  Behold  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you  my  servants,  it  is  ex¬
pedient  in  me  that  tire  elders  of  my  church  should  be  called  to¬
gether,  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  and  from  the  north
and  from  the  south,  by  letter  or  some  other  way.

2  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  inasmuch  as  they  are  faith¬
ful,  and  exercise  faith  in  me,  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon
them  in  the  day  that  they  assemble  themselves  together.  And
it  shall  come  to  pass  that  they  shall  go  forth  into  the  regions
round  about,  and  preach  repentance  unto  the  people;  and  ma¬
ny  shall  be  converted,  insomuch  that  ye  shall  obtain  power  to-


190


organize  yourselves,  according  to  the  laws  of  man;  that  you!
enemies  may  not  have  power  over  you,  that  you  may  be  pre¬
served  in  all  things;  that  you  may  be  enabled  to  keep  my  laws,
that  every  band  may  be  broken  wherewith  the  enemy  seeketh
to  destroy  my  people.

3  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  must  visit  the  poor  and  the
needy  and  administer  to  their  relief,  that  they  may  be  kept  un¬
til  aft  things  may  be  done  according  to  my  law  which  ye  have
received.  Amen.

SECTION  LXIII.

Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  John  Whitmer,  given  March,


1.  Behold  it  is  expedient  in  me  that  my  servant  John  should
write  and  keep  a  regular  history,  and  assist  you,  my  servant
Joseph,  in  transcribing  all  things  [which  shall  be  given  you,
until  he  is  called  to  further  duties.  Again,  verily  I  say  unto
you,  that  he  can  also  lift  up  his  voice  in  meetings,  whenever  it
shall  be  expedient.

2  And  again,  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  shall  be  appointed  unto
him  to  keep  the  church  record  and  history  continually,  for  Ol¬
iver  Cowdery  I  have  appointed  to  another  office.  Wherefore
it  shall  be  given  him,  inasmuch  as  he  is  faithful,  by  the  Com¬
forter,  to  write  these  things;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXIV.

Revelation  given  March,  1831.

1  It  is  necessary  that  ye  should  remain,  for  the  present  time,
in  your  places  of  abode,  as  it  shall  be  suitable  to  your  circum¬
stances;  and  inasmuch  as  ye  have  lands,  ye  shall  impart  to  the
eastern  brethren;  and  inasmuch  as  ye  have  not  lands,  let  them
buy  for  the  present  time  in  those  regions  round  p  bout  as  seem-
eth  them  good,  for  it  must  needs  be  necessary  that  they  have
places  to  live  for  the  present  time.

2  It  must  needs  be  necessary,  that  ye  save  all  the  money
that  ye  can,  and  that  ye  obtain  all  that  ye  can  in  righteous¬
ness,  that  in  time  ye  may  be  enabled  to  purchase  lands  for  an
inheritance,  even  the  city.  The  place  is  not  yet  to  be  reveal¬
ed,  but  after  your  brethren  come  from  the  east,  there  are  to  be
certain  men  appointed,  and  to  them  it  shall  be  given  to  know
the  place,  or  to  them  it  shall  be  revealed;  and  they  shall  be  ap¬
pointed  to  purchase  the  lands,  and  to  make  a  commencement,
to  lay  the  foundation  of  the  city;  and  then  ye  shall  begin  to  be


101


gathered  with  your  families,  every  man  according  to  his  fami¬
ly,  according  to  his  circumstances,  and  as  is  appointed  to  him
by  the  presidency  and  the  bishop  of  the  church,  according  to
the  laws  and  commandments,  which  ye  have  received,  and
which  ye  shall  hereafter  receive;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXV.  'f

Revelation  to  Sidney  Rigdon,  Parley  P.  Pratt,  and  Lemon  Cop¬
ley,  given  March,  1831.

1  Hearken  unto  my  word,  my  servant  Sidney,  and  Parley,
and  Lemon,  for  behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  I  give  un¬
to  you  a  commandment,  that  you  shall  go  and  preach  my  gos¬
pel,  whioh  ye  have  received,  even  as  ye  have  received  it,  unto
the  shakers.  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  that  they  desire  to  know
tlie  truth  in  part,  but  not  all,  fop  they  are  not  right  belore  me,
and  must  needs  repent:  wherefore  I  send  you,  my  servants
Sidney  and  Parley,  to  preach  the  gospel  unto  them;  and  my-
servant  Lemon  shall  be  ordained  unto  this  work,  that  he  may
reason  with  them,  not  according  to  that  which  he  has  received
of  them,  but  according  to  that  which  shall  be  taught  him  by
vou,  my  servants,  and  by  so  doing  I  will  bless  him,  otherwise
he  shall  not  prosper:  thus  saith  the  Lord,  for  I  am  ■  God  and
have  sent  mine  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  for  the  redemp¬
tion  of  the  world,  and  have  decreed  that  he  that  receiveth  him
shall  be  saved,  and  he  that  receiveth  him  not,  shall  be  damned;

2  And  they  have  done  unto  the  Son  of  man  even  as  they  lis¬
ted;  and  he  has  taken  Ids  power  on  the  right  hand  of  his  glo¬
ry,  and  now  reigneth  in  the  heavens,  and  will  reign  till  he  de¬
scends  on  the  earth  to  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet:  which
time  is  nigh  at  hand:  I  the  Lord  God  have  spoken  it:  but  the
lw>nr  and  the  day  no  man  knoweth,  neither  the  angels  in  heav¬
en,  nor  shall  they  know  until  he  comes:  wherefore  I  will  that
all  men  shall  repent,  for  all  are  under  sin,  except  them  which
I  have  reserved  unto  myself,  holy  men  that  ye  know  not  of:
wherefore  I  say  unto  you,  that  I  have  sent  unto  you  mine  ev¬
erlasting  covenant,  even  that  which  was  from  the  beginning,
and  that  which  I  have  promised  I  have  so  fulfilled,  and  the  na¬
tions  of  the  earth  shall  bow  to  it;  and,  if  not  of  themselves,
they  shall  come  down,  for  that  which  is  now  exalted  of  itself,
shall  be  laid  low  of  power:  wherefore  I  give  unto  you  a  com¬
mandment,  that  ye  go  among  this  people  and  say  unto  them,
like  unto  mine  apostle  of  old,  whose  name  was  Peter:  Believe
on  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  on  the  earth,  and  is
to  come,  the  beginning  and  the  end;  repent  and  be  baptized  in


192


the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  the  holy  command¬
ment,  for  the  remission  of  sins:  and  whoso  doeth  this,  shall  re¬
ceive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  laying  on  of  the
hands  of  the  elders  of  this  church.

3  And  again,  I  say  unto  you,  that  whoso  forbid deth  to  mar¬
ry,  is  apt  ordained  of  God,  for  marriage  is  ordained  of  God  un¬
to  man:  wherefore  it  is  lawful  that  ne  should  have  one  wife,
and  they  twain  shall  be  one  flesh,  and  all  this  that  the  earth
might  answer  the  end  of  its  creation;  and  that  it  might  be  fil¬
led  with  the  measure  of  man,  according  to  his  creation  before
the  world  was  made.  And  whoso  forbiddeth  to  abstain  from
meats,  that  man  should  not  eat  the  same,  is  not  ordained  of
God;  for  behold  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  the  fowls  of  the
air,  and  that  which  cometh  of  the  earth,  is  ordained  for  the
use  of  man,  for  food,  and  for  raiment,  and  that  lie  might  have
in  abundance,  but  it  is  not  given  that  one  man  should  possess
that  which  is  above  another:  wherefore  the  world  lieth  in  sin;
and  wo  be  unto  man  that  sheddeth  blood  or  that  wastetli  flesh
and  hath  no  need.

4  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  the  Son  of  man  com¬
oth  not  in  the  form  of  a  woman,  neither  of  a  man  travelling  on
the  earth:  wherefore  be  not  deceived,  but  continue  in  steadfest-
ness,  looking  forth  for  the  heavens  to  be  shaken;  and  the  earth
to  tremble,  and  to  reel  to  and  fro  as  a  drunken  man;  and  for
the  tvalleys  to  be  exalted;  and  for  the  mountains  to  be  made
low;  and  for  the  rough  places  to  become  smooth:  and  all  this
when  the  angel  shall  sound  his  trumpet.

">  But  before  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  shall  come,  Jacob  shall
flourish  in  the  wilderness;  and  the  Lamanites  shall  blossom  as
the  rose:  Zion  shall  flourish  upon  the  hills,  and  rejoice  upon
the  mountains,  and  shall  be  assembled  together  unto  the  place
which  I  have  appointed.  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  go  forth  as
1  have  feommanded  you;  repent  of  all  your  sins;  ask  and  ye
shall  receive;  knock  and  it  shall  be  opened  unto  you:  behold  I
will  go  before  you,  and  be  your  rereward;  and  I  will  be  in  your
midst,  and  you  shall  not  be  confounded:  behold  I  am  Jesus
Christ,  and  1  come  quickly;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXVI.

Revelation  given  June,  1831.

1  Behold,  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  the  elders  whom  he  hath
called  and  chosen,  in  these  last  days,  by  the  voice  of  his  Spirit,
saying,  I  the  Lord  will  make  known  unto  you  what  I  will  that
ye  shall  do  from  this  time  until  the  next  conference,  which


193


shall  be  held  in  Missouri,  upon  the  land  which  I  will  conse¬
crate  unto  my  people,  which  are  a  remnant  of  Jacob,  and  those
who  are  heirs  according  to  the  covenant.

2  Wherefore,  verily  1  say  unto  you,  let  my  servant  Joseph
Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon  take  their  journey  as  soon  as
preparations  cun  be  made  to  leave  their  homes,  and  journey  to
tire  land  of  Missouri.  And  inasmuch  as  they  are  faithful  unto
me,  it  shall  be  made  known  unto  them  what  they  shall  do:  and
it  shall  also,  inasmuch  as  they  are  faithful,  be  made  known  un¬
to  them  the  land  of  your  inheritance.  And  inasmuch  as  they
are  not  faithful,  they  shall  be  cut  off,  even  as  I  will,  as  seem-
eth  me  good.

3  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  let  my  servant  Lyman
Wight, and  my  servant  John  Corrill  take  their  journey  speedi¬
ly:  and  also  my  servant  John  Murdock,  and  my  servant  Hy-
rum  Smith,  take  their  journey  unto  the  same  place  by  the  way
of  Detroit.  And  let  them  joufney  from  thence  preaching  the
word, by  the  way,  saying  none  other  things  than  that  wjiich
the  prophets  and  apostles  have  written,  and  that  which  is
taught  them  by  the  Comforter,  through  the  prayer  of  faith. —
Let  them  go  two  by  two,  and  thus  let  them  preach  by  the  way
in  every  congregation,  baptizing  by  water,  and  the  laying  on
of  the  hands  by  tiie  water’s  side:  for  thussaith  the  Lord,  I  will
cut  my  work  short  in  righteousness:  for  the  days  cometh  that
I  will  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory.  And  let  my  servant
Lyman  Wight  beware,  for  satan  desireth  to  sift  him  as  chaff.

4  And  behold,  he  that  is  faithful  shall  be  made  ruler  over  ma¬
ny  things.  And  again,  I  will  give  unto  you  a  pattern  in  all
things,  that  ye  may  not  be  deceived,  for  satan  is  abroad  in  the
land,  and  he  goeth  forth  deceiving  the  nations:  wherefore  he
that  prayeth  whose  spirit  is  contrite,  the  same  is  accepted  of
me,  if  he  obey  mine  ordinances:  he  that  speaketh,  whose  spir¬
it  is  contrite,  whose  language  is  meek,  and  edifieth,  the  same
is  of  God,  if  lie  obey  mine  ordinances.  And  again,  he  that
trembleth  under  my  power,  shall  be  made  strong,  and  shall
bring  forth  fruits  of  praise,  and  wisdom,  according  to  the  rev1
eiations,  and  truths  which  I  have  given  you.

5  And  again,  he  that  is  overcome  and  bringeth  not  forth
fruits,  even  according  to  this  pattern,  is  not  of  me:  wherefore
by  this  pattern  ye  shall  know  the  spirits  in  all  cases,  under  the
whole  heavens.  And  the  days  have  come,  according  to  men’s
faith  it  shall  be  done  unto  them.  Behold  this  commandment
is  given  unto  all  the  elders  whom  I  have  chosen.  And  again,
verily  I  say  unto  you,  let  my  servant  Thomas  B.  Marsh,  and  my
servant  Ezra  Thayre,  take  their  journey  also,  preaching  the


194


word  by  the  way,  unto  this  same  land.  And  again,  let  my
servant  Isaac  Morley,  and  my  servant  Ezra  Booth,  take  their
journey,  also  preaching  the  word  by  the  way  unto  the  same
land.

6  And  again,  let  my  servants  Edward  Partridge  and  Martin
Harris,  take  their  journey  with  my  servants  Sidney  Rigdori
and  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  Let  my  servants  David  Whitmer  and
Harvy  Whitlock  also  take  their  journey,  and  t preach  by  the
way  unto  this  same  land.  Let  my  servants  Parley  P.  Pratt
and  Orson  Pratt  take  their  journey,  and  preach  by  the  way,
even  unto  this  same  land.  And  let  my  servants  Solomoh
Hancock  and  Simeon  Carter  also  take  their  journey  unto  this
same  land,  and  preach  by  the  way.  Let  my  servants  Edson
Fuller  and  Jacob  Scott  also  take  their  journey.  Let  my  ser¬
vants  Levi  Hancock  and  Zebedee  Coltrin  also  take  their  jour¬
ney.  Let  my  servants  Reynolds  Cahoon  and  Samuel  H.
Smith  also  take  their  journey.  Let  my  servants  Wheeler
Baldwin  and  William  Carter  also  take  their  journey.

7  And  let  my  servants  Newel  Knight  and  Selah  J.  Griffin,
both  be  ordained  and  also  take  their  journey:  yea,  verily  I  say,
let  all  these  take  their  journey  unto  one  place,  in  their  sever¬
al  courses,  and  one  man  shall  not  build  upon  another's  foun¬
dation,  neither  journey  in  another’s  track.  He  that  is  faith-
fill,  the  same  shall  be  kept  and  blessed  with  much  fruit.

8  And  again,  I  say  unto  you,  let  my  servants  Joseph  Wake¬
field  and  Solomon  Humphrey  take  their  journey  into  the  eas¬
tern  lands.  Let  them  labor  with  their  families,  declaring
none  other  things  than  the  prophets  and  apostles,  that  which
they  have  seen,  and  heard,  and  most  assuredly  believe,  that
the  prophecies  may  be  fulfilled.  In  consequence  of  transgres¬
sion,  let  that  which  was  bestowed  upon  Heman  Basset,  be  ta¬
ken  from  him,  and  placed  upon  the  head  of  Simonds  Rider.

9  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  let  Jared  Carter  be  or¬
dained  a  priest,  and  also  George  James  be  ordained  a  priest. —
Let  the  residue  of  the  elders  watch  over  the  churches,  and  de¬
clare  the  word  in  the  regions  among  them.  And  let  them  la¬
bor  with  their  own  hands,  that  there  be  no  idolatry  nor  wick¬
edness  practiced.  And  remember  in  all  things,  the  poor  and
the  needy,  the  sick  and  the  afflicted,  for  he  that  doeth  not
these  things,  the  same  is  not  my  disciple.  And  again,  let  my
servants  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Edward
Partridge,  take  with  them  a  recommend  from  the  church. —
And  let  there  be  one.  obtained  for  my  servant  Oliver  Cowdery
also:  and  thus,  even  as  I  have  said,  if  ye  are  faithful,  ye  shall
assemble  yourselves  together  to  rejoice  upon  the  land  of  Mis¬
souri,  which  ig  the  land  of  your  inheritance,  which  is  now  the-


195


land  of  your  enemies.  But  behold  I  the  Lord  will  hasten  the
city  in  its  time,  and  will  crown  the  faithful  with  joy  and  with
rejoicing.  Behold  I  am  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  and  I
will  lift  them  up  at  the  last  day;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXVI.

Revelation  to  Sidney  Gilbert,  given  June,  1831..

1  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  my  servant  Sidney  Gilbert,  that  I'
have  heard  your  prayers,  and  you  have  called  upon  me,  that  it
should  be  made  known  unto  you,  of  the  Lord  your  God,  con¬
cerning  your  calling,  and  election  in  this  church,  which  1  the
Lord  have  raised  up  in  these  last  days.

2  Behold  I  the  Lord,  who  was  crucified  for  the  sins  of  the
world,  giveth  unto  you  a  commandment,  that  you  shall  forsake
the  world.  Take  upon  you  mine  ordinances,  even  that  of  an
elder,  to  preach  faith  and  repentance,  and  remission  of  sihs,
according  to  my  word,  and  the  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by
the  laying  on  of  hands.  And  also  to  be  an  agent  unto  this
church  in  the  place  which  shall  be  appointed  by  the  bishop,
according  to  commandments  which  shall  be  given  hereafter.

3  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you.  you  shall  take  your  jour¬
ney  witli  my  servants  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon.
Behold  these  are  the  first  ordinances  which  you  shall  receive:
and  the  residue  shall  be  made  known  in.  a  time  to  come,  ac¬
cording  to  your  labor  in  my  vineyard.  And  again,  I  would
that  ye  should  learn  that  it  is  he  only  who  is  saved,  that  endu-‘
reth  unto  the  end;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXVII.

Revelation  to  Neioel  Knight,  given  June,  1831.

1  Behold,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  even  Alpha  and  Omega,  the
beginning  and  the  end,  even  he  who  was  crucified  for  tlie  sins
of  the  world.  Behold,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  ser¬
vant  Newel  Knight,  you  shall  stand  fast  in  the  office  where¬
with  I' have  appointed  you:  and  if  your  brethren  desire  to  es¬
cape  their  enemies  let  them  repent  of  all  their  sins;  and  be¬
come  truly  humble  before  me  and  contrite:  and  as  the  covenant
which  they  made  unto  me,  has  been  broken,  even  so  it  has  be¬
come  void  and  of  none  eflect;  and  wo  to  him  by  whom  this  of¬
fence  cometh,  for  it  had  been  better  for  him  that  he  had  been
drowned  in  the  depth  of  the  sea;  but  blessed  are  they  who  have


19G


kept  the  covenant,  and  observed  the  commandment,  for  they
shall  obtain  mercy.

2  Wherefore,  go  to  now  and  flee  the  land,  lest  your  enemies
come  upon  you:  and  take  your  journey,  and  appoint  whom  you
will  to  be  your  leader,  audio  pay  moneys  for  you.  And  thus
you  shall  take  your  journey  into  the  regions  westward,  unto  the
land  of  Missouri,  unto  the  borders  of  the  Lamanites.  And  af¬
ter  you  have  done  journeying,  behold  I  say  unto  you,  seek  ye
a  living  like  unto  men,  until  I  prepare  a  place  lor  you.
it  And  again,  be  patient  in  tribulation  until  1  come:  and  be¬
hold  I  come  quickly,  and  my  reward  is  with  the,  and  they  who
have  sought  me  early,  shall  find  fest  to  their  souls;  even  so.
Amen.

SECTION  LXVIII.

Revelation  to  William  IV.  Phelps,  given  June,  1831.

1  Behold  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  my  servant  William.'
yea,  eVen  the  Lord  of  the  whole  earth,  thou  art  called  and  cho¬
sen  and  after  thou  hast  been  baptized  by  water,  which  if  you
do  with  an  eye  single  to  my  glory,  you'sliall  have  a  remission
ofy'our  sins,  and  a  reception  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  laying
on  of  hands.  And  then  thou  shalt  be  ordained  by  the  hand  of
nty  Servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  to  be  an  elder  unto  this  church,
to  preach  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  by  way  of  baptism
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God;  and
on  whomsoever  you  shall  lay  your  hands,  if  they  are  contrite
before  me,  you  shall  have  power  to  give  the  Holy  Spirit.

2  And  again,  you  shall  be  ordained  to  assist  my  servant  Oli¬
ver  Cowdery  to  do  the  work  of  printing,  and  of  selecting,  and
writing  "books  for  schools,  in  this  church,  that  little  children
also  may  receive  instruction  before  me  as  is  pleasing  unto  me.
And  again  verily  I  say  unto  you,  for  this  cause  you  shall  take
your  journey  with  my  servants  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney
Rigdon,  that  you  may  be  planted  in  the  land  of  your  inherif-
ance,  to  do  this  work.

3  And  again  let  my  servant  Joseph  Coe  also  take  his  journey
with  them.  The  residue  shall  be  made  known  hcrc-after;  cTen
as  I  will.  Amen.


197


SECTION  LXIX.

Revelation  given  June,  1831.

1  Hearken  O  ye  people  who  profess  my  name,  saith  the
Lord  your  God,  for  behold  mine  anger  is  kindled  against  the
rebellious,  and  tiiey  shall  know  mine  arm  and  mine  indigna¬
tion  in  the  day  of  visitation  and  of  wrath  upon  the  nations. —
And  he  that  will  not  take  up  Ills  cross  and  follow  me,  and
keep  my  commandments,  the  same  shall  not  be  saved.

2  Behold  I  the  Lord  commandeth,  and  he  that  will  not  obey
shall  be  cut  off  in  mine  own  due  time:  and  after  that  I  have
commanded  and  the  commandment  is  broken,  wherefore  I  the
Lord  command  and  revoke,  as  it  seemeth  me  good;  and  all
this  to  be  answered  upon  the  heads  of  the  rebellious  saith  the
Lord:  wherefore  I  revoke  the  commandment  which  was  given
unto  my  servants  Thomas  B.  Marsh  and  Ezra  Thayre,  and
give  a  new  commandment  unto  my  servant  'ij'honias,  that  he
shall  take  up  his  journey  speedily  to  the  land  of  Missouri;

"and  my  servant  Selah  J.  Griffin  shall  also  go  with  him:  for
behold  I  revoke  the  commandment  which  was  given  unto  my
servants  Selah  J.  Griffin  and 'Newel  Knight,  in  consequence
of  the  stiffneckedness  of  my  people  which  are  in  Thompson;
and  their  rebellions:  wherefore  let  my  servant  Newel  Knight
remain  with  them,  and  as  many  as  will  go  may  go,  that  are
contrite  before  me,  and  be  led  by  him  to  the  land  which  I  have
appointed.

3  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  my  servant  Ezra
Thayre  must  repent  of  his  pride,  and  of  his  selfishness,  and
obey  the  farmer  commandment  which  I  have  given  him  con¬
cerning  the  place  upon  which  he  lives;  and  if  he  will  do  this,
as  there  shall  be  no  divisions  made  upon  the  land,  he  shall  be
appointed  still  to  go  to  the  land  of  Missouri;  otherwise  he  shall
receive  the  money  which  he  has  paid,  and  shall  leave  the
place,  and  shall  be  cut  off  out  of  my  church,  saith  the  Lord
God  of  hosts:  and  though  the  heaven  and  the  earth  pass  away,
these  words  shall  not  pass  away,  but  shall  be  fulfilled.

4  And  if  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  must  needs  pay  the
money,  behold  I  the  Lord  will  pay  it  unto  him  again  in  the
land  of  Missouri,  that  those  of  whom  he  shall  receive  may  be
rewarded  again,  according  to  that  which  they  do.  For  accor¬
ding  to  that  which  they  do,  they  shall  receive;  even  in  lands
for  their  inheritance.  Behold  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  my
•people,  you  have  many  things  to  do,  and  to  repent  of:  for  be¬
hold  your  sins  have  come  up  unto  me,  and  are  not  pardoned,
because  you  seek  to  counsel  in  your  own  ways.  And  your


hearts  are  not  satisfied.  And  ye  obey  not  the  truth,  but  have
pleasure  in  unrighteousness.

5  Wo  unto  you  rich  men,  that  will  not  give  your  substance
to  the  poor,  for  your  riches  will  canker  your  souls!  and  this
shall  be  your  lamentation  in  the  day  of  visitation,  and  of  judg¬
ment,  and  of  indignation:  The  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is
ended,  and  my  soul  is  not  saved!  Wo  unto  you  poor  men,
whose  hearts  are  not  broken,  whose  spirits  are  not  contrite,
and  whose  bellies  are  not  satisfied,  and  whose  hands  are  not
stayed  from  laying  hold  upon  other  men’s  goods,  whose  eyes
are  full  of  greediness,  who  will  not  labor  with  their  own
hands!

6  But  blessed  are  the  poor,  who  are  pure  in  heart,  whose
hearts  are  broken,  and  whose  spirits  are  contrite,  for  they  shall
see  the  kingdom  of  God  coming  in  power  and  great  glory  unto
their  deliverance:  for  the  fatness  of  the  earth  shall  be  theirs:
for  behold  the  Lord  shall  come,  and  his  recompense  shall  be
with  him,  and  he  shall  reward  every  man,  and  the  poor  shall
rejoice:  and  their  generations  shall  inherit  the  earth  from  gen¬
eration  to  generation,  forever  and  ever.  And  now  I  make  an
end  of  speaking  unto  you;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXX.

Revelation  given  August,  1831.

1  Behold,  thuB  saith  the  Lord  unto  the  elders  of  his  church,
who  are  to  return  speedily  to  the  land  from  whence  they  came.
Behold  it  pleaseth  me,  that  you  have  come  up  hither;  but  with
some  I  am  not  well  pleased,  for  they  will  not  open  their  mouths,
but  hide  the  talent  which  I  have  given  unto  them,  because  of
the  fear  of  man.  Wo  unto  such,  for  mine  anger  is  kindled
against  them.

2  And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  are  not  more  faithful  un¬
to  me,  it  shall  be  taken  away,  even  that  which  they  have,  for
I  the  Lord  ruleth  in  the  heavens  above,  and  among  the  armies
of  the  earth;  and  in  the  day  when  I  shall  make  up  my  jewels,
all  men  shall  know  what  it  is  that  bespeaketh  the  power  of
God.  But  verily  I  will  speak  unto  you  concerning  your  jour¬
ney  unto  the  land  from  whence  you  came.  Let  there  be  a
craft  made,  or  bought,  as  seemeth  you  good,  it  mattereth  not
unto  me,  and  take  your  journey  speedily  for  the  place  which
is  called  St.  Louis.  And  from  thence  let  my  servants  Sidney
Rigdon,  and  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Oliver  Cowdery,  take  their
journey  for  Cincinnati:  and  in  this  place  let  them  lift  up  their
voice,  and  declare  my  word  with  loud  voices,  without  wrath


•or  doubting,  lifting  up  holy  hands  upon  them.  For  I  am  able
to  make  you  holy,  and  your  sins  are  forgiven  you.

3  And  let  the  residue  take  their  journey  from  St.  Louis,  two
by  two,  and  preach  the  word,  not  in  haste,  among  the  congre¬
gations  of  the  wicked,  until  they  return  to  the  churches  from
whence  they  came.  And  all  this  for  the  good  of  the  churches;
for  this  intent  have  I  sent  them.  And  let  my  servant  Edward
Partridge  impart  of  the  money  which  I  have  given  him,  a  por¬
tion  unto  mine  elders,  who  are  commanded  to  return;  and  he
that  is  able,  let  him  return  it  by  the  way  of  the  agent,  and  he
that  is  not,  of  him  it  is  not  required.  And  now  I  speak  of  the
residue  who  are  to  come  unto  this  land.  Behold  they  have
been  sent  to  preach  my  gospel  among  the  congregations  of
the  wicked:  wherefore,  1  give  unto  them  a  commandment
thus:  Thou  shalt  not  idle  away  thy  time:  neither  shalt  thou
•bury  thy  taleut  that  it  may  not  be  known.

4  And  after  thou  hast  come  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  and
hast  proclaimed  my  word,  thou  shalt  speedily  return  proclaim¬
ing  my  word  among  the  congregations  of  the  wicked.  Not  in
haste,'* neither  in  wrath  nor  with  strife:  and  shake  off. the  dust
of  thy  feet  against  those  who  receive  thee  not,  not  in  their
presence,  lest  thou  provoke  them,  but  in  secret,  and  wash  thy
feet  as  a  'estimony  against  them  in  the  day  of  judgment. —
Behold  this  is  sufficient  for  you,  and  the  will  of  him  who  hath
sent  you.  And  by  the  mouth  of  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.
it  shall  be  made  known  concerning  Sidney  Rigdon  and  Oliver
Cowder/,  the  residue  hereafter;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXI.

Revelation  given  August,  1831.

1  Behold,  and  hearken  unto  the  voice  of  him  who  has  ail
power,  who  is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  even  Alpha  and
Omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end.  Behold,  verily  thus  saith
the  Lord  unto  you  O  ye  elders  of  my  church,  who  are  assem¬
bled  upon  this  soot,  whose  sins  are  now  forgiven  you,  for  I
the  Lord  forgiveth  sins,  and  am  merciful  unto  those  who  con¬
fess  their  sins  with  humble  hearts:  but  verily  I  say  unto  you,
that  it  is  not  needful  for  this  whole  company  of  mine  elders,
to  be  moving  swiftly  upon  the  waters,  whilst  the  inhabitants
on  either  side  are  perishing  in  unbelief:  nevertheless,  I  suffer¬
ed  it  that  ye  might  bear  record:  behold  there  are  many  dan¬
gers  upon  the  waters  and  more  especially  hereafter,  for  I  the
Lord  have  decreed,  in  mine  anger,  many  destructions  upon
the  waters;  yea,  and  especially  upon  these  waters;  neverthe-


200


leas,  all  flesh  is  in  mine  hand,  and  he  that  is  faithful  among  ’
you,  shall  not  perish  by  the  waters.

2  Wherefore  it  is  expedient  that  my  servant  Sidney  Gilbert,
and  my  servant  William  W.  Phelps,  be  in  haste  upon  their
errand  and  mission:  nevertheless  I  would  not  suffer  that  ye
should  part  until  you  are  chastened  for  all  your  sins,  that  you
might  be  one;  that  you  might  not  perish  in  wickedness;  but  now
verily  I  say,  itbehoveth  me  that  ye  should  part:  wherefore  let
my  servants  Sidney  Gilbert  and  William  W.  Phelps,  take
their  former  company,  and  let  them  take  their  journey  in  haste
that  they  may  fill  their  mission,  and  through  faith  they  shall
overcome;  and  inasmuch  as  they  are  faithful,  they  shall  be
preserved,  and  I  the  Lord  will  be  with  them.  And  let  the  res¬
idue  take  that  which  is  needful  for  clothing.  Let  my  servant
Sidney  Gilbert  take  that  which  is  not  needful  with  Him,  as
you  shall  agree.  And  now  behold,  for  your  good  I  gave  unto
you  a  commandment  concerning  these  things;  and  I  the  Lord
will  reason  with  you  as  with  men  in  days  of  old.

3  Behold  I  the  Lord  in  the  beginning,  blessed  the  waters,  but
in  the  last  days  by  the  mouth  of  my  servant  .lohn,  I  cursed
the  waters:  wherefore,  the  days  will  come  that  no  flesh  shall
be  safe  upon  the  waters,  and  it  shall  be  said  in  daj’s  to  come,
that  none  is  able  to  go  up  to  the  land  of  Zion,  upon  the  wa¬
ters,  but  he  that  is  upright  in  heart.  And,  as  I  the  Lord  in*
the  beginning  cursed  the  land,  even  so  in  the  last  days  have  I
blessed  it,  in  its  time,  for  the  use  of  my  saints,  that  they  may
partake  the  fatness  thereof.  And  now  I  give  unto  you  a  com¬
mandment,  and  what  I  say  unto  one  I  say  unto  all,  that  you
shall  forewarn  your  brethren  concerning  these  waters,  that
they  come  not  in  journeying  upon  them,  lest  their  faith  fail
and  they  are  caught  in  her  snares:  I  the  Lord  have  decreed,
and  the  destroyer  rideth  upon  the  face  thereof,  and  I  revoke
not  the  decree:  I  the  Lord  was  angry  with  you  yesterday,  but
to-day  mine  anger  is  turned  away.  Wherefore  let  those  con¬
cerning  whom  I  have  spoken,  that  should  take  their  journey
in  haste,  again  I  say  unto  you,  let  them  take  their  journey  in
haste,  and  it  mattereth  not  unto  me,  after  a  little,  if  it  so  be
that  they  fill  their  mission,  whether  they  go  by  water  or  by
land:  let  this  be  as  it  is  made  known  unto  them  according  to
their  judgments,  hereafter.

4  And  now,  concerning  my  servants  Sidney  Rigdon,  and
Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Oliver  Cowdery,  let  them  come  not
again  upon  the  waters,  save  it  be  upon  the  canal,  while  jour¬
neying  unto  their  homes,  or  in  other  words,  they  shall  not
come  upon  the  waters  to  journey,  save  upon  the  canal.  Be¬
hold  I  the  Lord  have  appointed  a  way  for  the  journeying  of


201


my  saints,  and  behold  this  is  the  way:  that  after  they  leave
the  canal,  they  shall  journey  by  land,  inasmuch  as  they  are
commanded  to  journey  and  go  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion;  and
they  shall  do  like  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  pitching  their
tents  by  the  way.

5  And  behold  this  commandment  you  shall  give  unto  all  your
brethren:  nevertheless  unto  whom  it  is  given  power  to  com¬
mand  the  waters,  unto  him  it  is  given  by  the  Spirit  to  kno  .v
all  his  ways:  wherefore  let  him  do  as  the  Spirit  of  the  living
God  commandeth  him,  whether  upon  the  land  or  upon  the
waters,  as  it  remaineth  with  me  to  do  hereaftei;  and  unto  you
it  is  given  the  course  for  the  saints,  or  the  way  for  the  saints
of  the  camp  of  the  Lord,  to  journey.  And  again,  verily  I  say
junto  you,  my  servants  Sidney  Rigdon,  and  Joseph  Smith,  jr.
and  Oliver  Cowdery,  shall  not  open  their  mouths  in  the  con¬
gregations  of  the  wicked,  until  they  arrive  at  Cincinnati;  and
m  that  place  they  shall  lift  up  their  voices  uuto  God  against
that  people:  yea,  unto  him  whose  anger  is  kindled  against
their  wickedness;  a  people  who  are  well  nigh  ripened  for  des¬
truction;  and  from  thence  let  them  journey  for  the  congrega¬
tions  of  their  brethren,  for  their  labors,  even  now,  are  wanted
more  abundantly  among  them,  than  among  the  congregations
of  the  wicked.

6  And  now  concerning  the  residue,  let  them  journey  and  de¬
clare  the  word  among  the  congregations-  of  the  wicked,  inas¬
much  as  it  is  given,  and  inasmuch  as  they  do  this  they  shall
rid  their  garments,  and  they  shall  be  spotless  before  me;  and
let  them  journey  together,"  or  two  by  two,  as  seemeth  them

•good,  only  let  my  servant  Reynolds  Gaboon,  and  my  servant
Samuel  H.  Smith,  with  whom  I  am  well  pleased,  bo  not  sep¬
arated  until  they  return  to  their  homes,  and  this  for  a  wise
purpose  in  me.  And  now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  and  what  I
say  unto  one  I  say  unto  all,  be  of  good  chedr  little  children,
for  I  am  in  your  midst,  and  I  have  not  forsaken  you,  and  in¬
asmuch  as  you  have  humbled  yourselves  beiore  me,  the  bles¬
sings  of  the  kingdom  are  yours.  Gird  up  your  loins  and  be
watchful,  and  be  sober,  looking  forth  for  the  coming  of  the
Son  of  man,  for  he  cometh  in  an  hour  you  think  not.  Pray
always  that  you  enter  not  into  temptation,  that  you  may  abide
the  day  of  his  coming,  whether  in  life  or  in  death;  even  so. —


202


SECTION  LXXII.

Revelation  given  August ,  1831.

1  Behold  and  hearken,  O  ye  elders  of  my  church,  saith  the
Lord  your  God;  even  Jesus  Christ,  your  advocate  who  know*
eth  the  weakness  of  man  and  how  to  succor  them  who  are
tempted:  and  verily  mine  eyes  are  upon  those  who  have  not
as  yet  gone  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion:  wherefore  your  mission
is  not  yet  full:  nevertheless  ye  are  blessed,  for  the  testimony
which  ye  have  borne  is  recorded  in  heaven  for  the  angels  to
look  upon,  and  they  rejoice  over  you;  and  your  sins  are  for¬
given  you.

2  And  now  continue  your  journey.  Assemble  yourselves  u]  -
on  the  land  of  Zion,  and  hold  a  meeting  and  rejoice  together,
and  offer  a  sacrament  unto  the  Most  High;  and  then  you  may
return  to  bear  record;  yea,  even  all  together,  or  two*  by  two,
as  seemeth  you  good;  it  mattereth  not  unto  me,  only  be  faith¬
ful,  and  declare  glad  tidings  unto  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
or  among  the  congregations  of  the  wicked.  Behold  I  the
Lord  have  brought  you  together  that  the  promise  might  be
fulfilled,  that  the  faithful  among  you  should  be  preserved  and
rejoice  together  in  the  land  of  Missouri.  I  the  Lord  promised
the  faithful  and  cannot  lie.

3  I  the  Lord  am  willing,  if  any  among  you  desireth  to  ride
upon  horses,  or  upon  mules,  or  in  chariots,  he  shall  receive
this  blessing,  if  he  receive  it  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  with
a  thankful  heart  in  all  things.  These  things  remain  with  you
to  do  according  to  judgment  and  the  directions  of  the  Spirit. —
Behold  the  kingdom  is  yours.  And  behold,  and  lo  I  am  with
the  faithful  always;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXIII.

An  explanation  of  the  epistle  to  the  first  Corinthians,  7th  chapter,

1  For  the  unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by  the  wife,  and
the  unbelieving  wife  is  sanctified  by  the  husband,  else  were
your  children  unclean,  but  now  are  they  holy.

'  2  Now  in  the  days  of  the  apostles  the  law  of  circumcision
was  had  among  all  the  Jews,  who  believed  not  the  gospel  of
Jesus  Christ.  And  it  carne  to  pass  that  there  arose  a  great
contention  among  the  people  concerning  the  law  of  circumci¬
sion,  for  the  unbelieving  husband  was  desirous  that  his  chil¬
dren  should  be  circumcised  and  become  subject  to  the  law  of
Moses,  which  law  was  fulfilled.


203


2  And  it  came  to  pass  that  the  children  being  brought  up  in
subjection  to  the  law  of  Moses,  and  give  heed  to  the  traditions
of  their  fathers,  and  believed  not  the  gospel  of  Chrst,  where¬
in  they  become  unholy:  wherefore,  for  this  cause  the  apostle
wrote  unto  the  church,  giving  unto  them  a  commandment,  not
of  the  Lord  but  of  himself,  that  a  believer  should  not  be  uni¬
ted  to  an  unbeliever  except  the  law  of  Moses  should  be  done
away  among  them,  that  their  children  might  remain  without
circumcision;  and  that  the  tradition  might  be  done  away,
which  saith,  that  little  children  are  unholy:  for  it  was  had
among  the  Jews:  but  little  children  are  holy  being  sanctified
through  the  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ:  and  this  is  what  the
scriptures  mean.

SECTION  LXXIV.

Revelation  given  October,  1830.

1  Behold,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  unto  you  my  servant,  William
E.  McLelin,  blessed  are  you,  inasmuch  as  you,  have  turned
away  from  your  iniquities,  and  have  received  my  truths,  saith
the  Lord  your  Redeemer,  the  Savior  of  the  world,  even  of  as
many  as  believe  on  my  name.  Verily  1  say  unto  you,  blessed
are  you  for  receiving  mine  everlasting  covenant,  even  the  ful¬
ness  of  my  gospel,  sent  forth  unto  the  children  of  men,  that
they  might  have  life,  and  be  made  partakers  of  the  glories,
which  are  to  be  revealed  in  the  last  days,  as  it  was  written  by
the  prophets  and  apostles  in  days  of  old.

2  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  servant  William,  thaf  you  arc
clean,  but  not  all;  repent  therefore  of  those  things  which  are
not  pleasing  in  my  sight,  saith  the  Lord,  for  the  Lord  will
show  them  unto  you.  And  now  verily  I  the  Lord  will  show
unto  you  what  I  will  concerning  you,  or  what  is  my  will  con¬
cerning  you,  behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  my  will
that  you  should  proclaim  my  gospel  from  land  to  land)  and
from  city  to  city,  yea,  in  those  regions  round  about  where  it
has  not  been  proclaimed.

3  Tarry  not  many  days  in  this  place:  go  not  up  unto  the  land
of  .Zion,  as  yet;  but  inasmuch  as  you  can  send,  send;  otherwise
think  not  of  thy  property.  Go  unto  the  eastern  lands;  bear
testimony  in  every  place,  unto  every  people,  and  in  their  syna¬
gogues;  reasoning  with  Ihe  people.

4  Let  my  servant,  Samuel  H.  Smith  go  with  you,  and  for¬
sake  him  not,  and  give  him  thine  instructions:  and  he  that  is
faithful  shall  be  Vnade  strong  in  every  place,  and  I  the  Lord
will  go  with  you.


204


5  Lay  your  hands  upon  the  sick  and  they  shall  recover.  Re¬
turn  not  till  I  the  Lord  shall  send  you.  Be  patient  in  afflic¬
tion.  Ask  and  ye  shall  receive.  Knock  and  it  shall  be  opened
unto  you.  Seek  not  to  be  cumbered.  Forsake  all  unright¬
eousness.  Commit  not  adultery,  a  temptation  with  which
thou  hast  been  troubled.  Keep  these  sayings  for  true  and  faithful,
and  thou  shalt  magnify  thine  office,  and  push  many  people  to
Zion,  with  songs  of  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads.  Con¬
tinue  in  these  things,  even  unto  the  end,  and  you  shall  have
a  crown  of  eternal  life  at  the  right  hand  of  my  Father,  who  is
full  of  grace  and  truth.  Verily  thus  saith  the  Lord  your  God,
your  Redeemer,  even  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXV.

Revelation  given  March,  1832.  The  order  given  of  the  Lord  to
Enoch,  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  poor.

1  The  Lord  spake  unto  Enoch,  saying,  Hearken  unto  me
saith  the  Lord  your  God,  who  are  ordained  unto  the  high
priesthood  of  my  church,  who  have  assembled  yourselves  to¬
gether,  and  listen  to  the  counsel  of  him  who  has  ordained  you
from  on  high,  who  shall  speak  in  your  ears  the  words  of  wis¬
dom,  that  salvation  may  be  unto  you  in  that  thing  which  you
have  presented  before  me,  saith  the  Lord  God:  for  verily  I  say
unto  you,  the  time  has  come,  and  is  now  at  hand,  and  behold,
and  lo,  it  must  needs  be  that  there  be  an  organization  of  my
people,  in  regulating  and  establishing  the  affairs  of  the  store¬
house  for  the  poor  of  my  people,  both  in  this  place  and  in  the
land  of  Zion,  or  in  other  words,  the  city  of  Enoch,  for  a  per¬
manent  and  everlasting  establishment  and  order  unto  my
church,  to  advance  the  cause  which  ye  have  espoused,  to  the
salvation  of  man,  and  to  the  glory  of  your  Father  who  is  in
heaven,  that  you  may  be  equal  in  the  bands  of  heavenly  things,
yea  and  earthly  things  also,  for  the  obtaining  of  heavenly
things;  for  if  ye  are  not  equal  in  earthly  things,  ye  cannot  be
equal  in  obtaining  heavenly  things:  for  if  you  will  that  I  give
unto  you  a  place  in  the  celestial  world,  you  must  prepare  your¬
selves  by  doing  the  things  which  I  have  commanded  you  and
required  of  you.

2  And  now,  verily  thus  saith  the  Lord,  it  is  expedient  that1
all  things  be  done  unto  my  glory,  that  ye  should,  who  are  join¬
ed  together  in  this  order;  or  in  other  words,  let  my  servant
Ahasdah,  and  my  servant  Gazelam,  or  Enoch,  and  my  servant
Pelagoram,  sit  in  council  with  the  saints  wjpeh  are  in  Zion;
otherwise  satau  seeketh  to  turn  their  hearts  away  from  the


205


truth,  that  they  become  blinded,  and  understand  not  the  things
which  are  prepared  for  them:  wherefore  a  commandment  I
give  unto  you,  to  prepare  and  organize  yourselves  by  a  bond
or  everlasting  covenant  that  cannot  be  broken.

3  And  he  who  breaketh  it  shall  lose  his  office  and  standing
in  the  church,  and  shall  be  delivered  over  to  the  buffetings  of
satan  until  the  day  of  redemption.  Behold  tliis  is  the  prepa¬
ration  wherewith  I  prepare  you,  and  the  foundation,  and  the
ensample,  which  I  give  unto  you  whereby  you  may  accom¬
plish  the  commandments  which  are  given  you,  that  through
my  providence,  notwithstanding  the  tribulation  which  shail
descend  upon  you,  that  the  church  may  stand  independent
above  all  other  creatures  beneath  the  celestial  world,  that  you
may  come  up  unto  the  crown  prepared  for  you,  and  be  made
rulers  over  many  kingdoms,  saith  the  Lord  God,  the  Holy  One
of  Zion,  who  hath  established  the  foundations  of  Adam-ondi-
Ahnian;  who  hath  appointed  Michael,  your  prince,  and  estab¬
lished  his  feet,  and  set  him  upon  high;  and  given  unto  him  the
keys  of  salvation  under  the  counsel  and  direction  of  the  Holy
One,  who  is  without  beginning  of  days  or  end  of  life.

4  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  ye  are  little  children,  and
ve  have  not  as  yet  understood  how  great  blessings  the  Father
has  in  his  own  hand?,  and  prepared  for  you;  and  ye  cannot
bear  all  tilings  now,  nevertheless  be  of  good  cheer,  for  1  will
lead  you  along:  the  kingdom  is  yours  and  the  blessings  there¬
of are  yours:  and  the  riches  of  eternity  are  yours:  and  he  who
receiveth  all  things,  with  thankfulness,  shall  be  made  glorious,
and  the  things  of  this  earth  shall  be  added  unto  him,  even  an
hundred  fold,  yea  more:  wherefore  do  the  things  which  I  have
commanded  you,  saith  your  Redeemer,  even  the  Son  Ahman,
who  prepareth  all  things  before  he  taketh  you;  for  ye  are  the
church  of  the  first  born,  and  he  will  take  you  up  in  the  cloud,
anil  appoint  every  man  his  portion.  And  lie  that  is  a  faithful
and  wise  steward  shall  inherit  all  things.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXVI.

Revelation  given  March,  1833.

1  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  my  will  that  my  servant
Jared  Carter  should  go  again  into  the  eastern  countries,  from
place  to  place,  and  from  city  to  city,  in  the  power  of  the  ordi¬
nation  wherewith  he  has  been  ordained,  proclaiming  glad  ti¬
dings  of  great  joy,  even  the  everlasting  gospel,  and  I  will  send
upon  him  the  Comforter  which  shall  teach  him  the  truth  and
the  way  whither  he  shall  go;  and  inasmuch  as  he  is  faithful  I


206


will  crown  him  again  with  sheaves:  wherefore  let  your  heart
be  glad  my  servant  Jared  Carter,  and  fear  not  saith  your  Lord,
even  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXVII.

Revelation  given  March,  1832.

1  Verily,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  unto  you  my  servant  Stephen
Burnett,  go  ye,  go  ye,  into  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel
to  every  creature  that  cometh  under  the  sound  of  your  voice,
and  inasmuch  as  you  desire  a  companion  I  will  give  unto  you
my  servant  Eden  Smith:  wherefore  go  ye  and  preach  my  gos¬
pel,  whether  to  the  north,  or  to  the  south;  to  the  east,  or  to
the  west,  it  mattereth  not,  for  ye  cannot  go  amiss:  therefore
declare  the  things  which  ye  have  heard  and  verily  believe,  and
know  to  be  true.  Behold  this  is  the  will  of  him  who  hath,
called  you,  your  Redeemer,  even  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXVIII.

Revelation  given  August,  1832.

1  Behold  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  my  servant  John  Murdock,
thou  art  called  to  go  into  the  eastern  countries  from  house  to
house,  from  village  to  village,  and  from  city  to  city,  to  pro¬
claim  mine  everlasting  gospel  unto  the  inhabitants  thereof,  in
the  midst  of  persecution  and  wickedness;  and  whoso  receiveth
you  receiveth  me,  and  you  shall  have  power  to  declare  my
word  in  the  demonstration  of  my  Holy  Spirit;  and  whoso  re¬
ceiveth  you  as  a  little  child,  receiveth  my  kingdom  and  bles¬
sed  are  they,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy;  and  whoso  rejecteth
you  shall  be  rejected  of  my  Father,  and  his  house:  and  you
shall  cleanse  your  feet  in  the  secret  places  by  the  way  for  a
testimony  against  them.

2  And  behold,  and  lo,  I  come  quickly  to  judgment,  to  con¬
vince  all  of  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they  have  committed
against  me,  as  it  is  written  of  me  in  the  volume  of  the  book. —
And  now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  not  expedient  that
you  should  go  until  your  children  are  provided  for,  and  kindly
gent  up  unto  the  bishop  in  Zion,  and  after  a  few  years,  if  thou
desirest  of  me  thou  mayest  go  up  also  unto  the  goodly  land,
to  possess  thine  inheritance;  otherwise  thou  shaft  continue
proclaiming  my  gospel  until  thou  be  taken.  Amen.


207


SECTION  LXXIX.

Revelation  given  March,  1832.

1  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  yoa  my  servant  Frederick  G.
Williams,  listen  to  the  voice  of  him  who  speaketh,  to  the
word  of  the  Lord  your  God,  and  hearken  to  the  calling  where¬
with  you  are  called,  even  to  be  a  high  priest  in  my  church,
and  a  counsellor  unto  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  unto  whom
I  have  given  the  keys  of  the  kingdom,  which  belongeth  always
unto  the  presidency  of  the  high  priesthood:  therefore,  verily  I
acknowledge  him  and  will  bless  him,  and  also  thee,  inasmuch
as  thou  art  faithful  in  council,  in  the  office  which  I  have  ap¬
pointed  unto  you,  in  prayer  always  vocally,  and  in  thy  heart,
in  public  and  in  private;  also  in  thy  ministry  in  proclaiming
the  gospel  in  the  land  of  the  living,  and  among  thy  brethren;
and  in  doing  these  things  thou  wilt  do  the  greatest  good  unto
thy  fellow-beings,  and  will  promote  the  glory  of  him  who  is
your  Lord:  wherefore,  be  faithful,  stand  in  the  office  which  I
have  appointed  unto  you,  succor  the  weak,  lift  up  the  hands
which  hang  down,  and  strengthen  the  feeble  knees:  and  if  thou
art  faithful  unto  the  end  thou  shalt  have  a  crown  of  immortal¬
ity  and  eternal  life'  in  the  mansions  which  I  have  prepared  in
the  house  of  my  Father.  Behold,  and  lo,  these  are  the  words
of  Alpha  and  Omega,  even  Jesus  Christ.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXX.

A  word  of  icisdomfor  the  benefit  of  the  council  of  high  priests,  as¬
sembled  in  Kirtland,  and  church;  and  also,  the  saints  in  Zion :
to  be  sent  greeting:  not  by  commandment,  or  constraint;  but-
by  revelation  and  the  word  of  toisdom:  showing forth  the  order
and  will  of  God  in  the  temporal  salvation  of  all  saints  in  the
last  days.  Given  for  a  principle  with  p  i  c  adapted  to  the  -
capacity  of  the  weak,  and  the  weakest  of  all  saints,  icho  are  or
can  be  called  saints.

1  Behold,  verily  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  in  conse¬
quence  ot  evils  and  designs  which  do,  and  will  exist  in  the
hearts  of  conspiring  men  in  the  last  days,  I  have  warned  you,
and  forewarn  you,  by  giving  unto  you  this  word  of  wisdom  by.
revelation,  that  inasmuch  as  any  man  drinketh  wine  or  strong,
drink  among  you,  behold  it  is  not  good,  neither  meet  in  the
sight  of  your  Father,  only  in  assembling  yourselves  together,
to  offer  up  your  sacraments  before  him.  And  behold,  this
should  be  wine,  yea,  pure  wine  of  the  grape  of  the  vine,  of.


your  own  make.  And  again,  strong  drinks  are  not  for  the
bellj',  but  for  the  washing  of  your  bodies.  And  again,  tobac¬
co  is  not  for  the' body,  neither  for  the  belly;  and  is  not  good
for  man;  but  is  an  in  rb  for  bruises,  and  all  sick  cattle,  to  be
used  with  judgmr nt  and  skill.  And  again,  hot  drinks  are  not
for  the  body,  or  belly.  1

■2  And  again,  veiily  (  say  unto  you,  all  wholesome  herbs  God'
hath  ordained  for  the  constitution,  nature,  and  use  of  man.—
Every  herb  in  the  season  thereof,  and  every  fruit  in  the  season
thereof.  All  these  to  be  used  with  prudence  and  thanksgiving.
Yea,  flesh  also  o1  beasts  and  of  the  fowls  of  the  air,  I  the  Lord
hath  ordained  for  the  use  of  man  with  thanksgiving.  Never¬
theless,  they  are  to  be  used  sparingly;  and  it  is  pleasing  unto
me,  that  they  should  not  be  used  only  in  times  of  winter  or  of
cold,  or  famine.  All  grain  is  ordained  forthe  use  of  man,  and
of  beasts,  to  be  the  staff  of  life,  not  only  for  man,  but  for  the
beasts  of  the  field,  and  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  all  wild  ani¬
mals  that  run  or  creep  on  the  earth;  and  these  hath  God  made
for  the  use  of  man  only  in  times  of  famine,  and  excess  of  hun¬
ger.

3  All  grain  is  good  for  the  food  of  man,  as  also  the  fruit  of
the  vine,  that  which  yield eth  fruit,  whether  in  the  ground  ot
aboye  the  ground.  Nevertheless  wheat  for  man,  and  corn  for
the  ox,  and  oats  for  the  horse,  and  rye  for  the  fowls,  and  for
swine,  and  for  all  beasts  of  the  field,  and  barley  for  all  useful
animals,  and  for  mild  drinks;  as  also  other  grain.  And  all
saints  wlpo  rememher  to  keep  and  do  these  sayings,  walking
in  obedience  to  the  commandments,  shall  receive  health  in
their  navel,  and  marrow  to  their  bones  and  shall  find  wisdom,
and  great  treasures  of  knowledge,  even  hidden  treasures;  and
shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  and  shall  walk  and  not  faint:  and
I  the  Lord  give  unto  them  a  promise,  that  the  destroying  angel
shall  pass  by  them,  as  the  children  of  Israel,  and  not  slay
them.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXI.

Revelation  given  August,  1833.

1  Verily  I  Say  unto  you  my  friends,  I  speak  unto  you  with
my  voice,  even  the  voice  of  iny  Spirit,  that  I  may  show  unto
you  my  will  concerning  your  brethren  in  the  land  of  Zion,
many  of  whom  are  truly  humble,  and  are  seeking  diligently  to
learn  wisdom  and  to  find  truth;  verily,  verily  I  say  urn  •  you,
blessed  are  all  such  fdr  they  shall  obtain,  for  I  the  Lord  snow-
«tb  mercy  unto  all  the  meek,  and  upon  all  whomsoever  I  will.


20&


that  I  may  he  justified,  when  I  shall  bring  them  into  judg*
ment.

2  Behold  I  say  unto  you,  concerning  the  school  in  Zion,  I
the  Lord  am  well  pleased  that  there  should  be  a  school  in  Zi¬
on:  and  also  with  my  servant  Parley  P.  Pratt,  for  he  abideth
in  me:  and  inasmuch  as  he  eontinueth  to  abide  in  me,  he  shall
continue  to  preside  over  the  school,  in  the  land  of  Zion,  until
1  shall  give  unto  him  other  commandments;  and  I  will  bless
him  with  a  multiplicity  of  blessings,  in  expounding  all  scrip¬
tures  and  mysteries  to  the  edification  of  the  school,  and  of  the
church  in  Zion:  and  to  the  residue  of  the  school,  I  the  Lord
am  wiMini*to  show  mercy,  nevertheless  there  are  those  that
must  ndd  fine  chastened,  and  their  works  shall  be  made  known:
The  axJPfejblaid  at  the  root  of  the  trees,  and  every  tree  that
bringeth  nbt  forth  good  fruit,  shall  be  hewn  down  and  cast  in¬
to  the  fire;  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,
all  among  them  who  know  theii  hearts  are  honest,  and  are
broken,  and  their  spirits  contrite,  and  are  willing  to  observe
their  covenants  by  sacrifice;  yea,  every  sacrifice  which  I  the
Lord  shall  command,  they  are  all  accepted  of  me,  for  I  the
Lord  will  cause  them  to  bring  forth  as  'a  very  fruitful  tree
which  is  planted  in  a  goodly  land,  by  a  pure  stream,  that
yieldeth  much  precious  fruit.

3  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  my  will  that  an  house
should  be  built  unto  me  in  the  land  of  Zion,  like  unto  the  pat¬
tern  whieh  I  have  given  you;  yea,  let  it  be  built  speedily  by
the  tithing  of  my  people:  behold  this  is  the  tithing  and  the
sacrifice  which  I  the  Lord  require  at  their  hands,  that  there
may  be  an  house  built  unto  me  for  the  salvation  of  Zion:  for
a  place  of  thanksgiving,  for  all  saints,  and  for  a  place  of  itl-
•struction  for  all  those  who  are  called  to  the  work  of  the  minis¬
try,  in  all  their  several  callings,  and  oiSces:  that  they  may  be
perfected  in  the  understanding  of  their  ministry:  in  theory}
in  principle,  and  in  doctrine,  in  all  things  pertaining  to  the
kingdom  of  God  on  the  earth,  the  keys  of  which  kingdom  have
been  conferred  upon  you.

4  And  inasmuch  as  my  people  buil  d  an  house  unto  me,  in 1
the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  do  not  suffer  any  unclean  thing  to
come  into  it,  that  it  be  not  defiled,  my  glory  shall  rest  upon  it?
yea,  and  my  presence  shall  be  there,  for  I  will  come  into  it?
and  all  the  pure  in  heart  that  shall  come  into  it,  shall  see  God:
•but  if  it  be  defiled  I  will  not  come  into  it,  and  my  glory  shall
not  be  there,  for  I  will  not  com#  into  unholy  temples.

5  And  now  behold  if  Zion  do  these  things,  she  shall  prosper
and  spread  herself  and  become  very  glorious,  very  great,  and


310


very  terrible;  and  the  nations  of  the  earth  Bha.ll  honor  her,  and-
shall  say,  surely  Zion  is  the  eiiy  of  our  God;  anil  surely  Zion
Cannot  tail,  neither  Jbc  moved  out  of  her  place,  tor  God  is  there,
and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  there,  and  he  hath  sworn  by  the
power  of  his  might  to  be  her  salvation,  and  her  high  tower:
therefore  verily  thus  saith  the  Lord  let  Zion  rejoice,  lor  this  is
Zion,  the  pure  iv  heart:  therefore  let  Zion  rejoice,  while  all
the  wicked  shall  mourn:  for  behold  and  lo,  vengeance  cometh
speed  ly  upon  the  ungodly,  ac  the  whirlwind,  and  who  shall
escape  it:  the  Lord’s  scourge  shall  pass  over  by  night  and  by
day:  and  the  report  thereof  shall  vex  all  people;  y  et,  it  shall
not  be  stayed  until  the  Lord  come:  lor  the  inoign*Uttft,of  the
Lord  is  kindled  against  their  abominations,  ami  ml  0  eii  wick¬
ed  works:  nevertheless  Zion  shall  escape  ifshe  , Observe  to  do
all  tilings  whatsoever  I  have  commanded  her,  but  if  she  ob¬
serve  not  to  do  whatsoever  1  have  commanded  her,  1  will  vis¬
it  her  according  to  all  be>.  works'  with  sore  idHiction;  with
pestilence;  with  plague;  with  sword;  with  vengeance,  with
devouring  lire:  nevertheless,  let  it  be  read  this  mice  in  their
ears,  that  I  the  Lord  have  accepted  of  their  offering;  and  ifshe
sin  no  more,  none  of  these  things  shall  cornu  upon  her,  and  i
will  bless  her  with  blessings,  and  multiply. a  multiplicity  of
blessings  upon  her,  and  upon  her  generations,  forever  and
ever,  saith  the  Lord  your  God.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXIL
Revelation  given  May,  1833.

1  Verily  thus  saith  the  Lord,  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  every
soul  who  forsaketh  their  sins  and  cometh  unto  me,  and  enlieth
on  my  name,  and  obeyeth  my  -  voice,  and  kcepetb  my  coin-
Itqandments,  shall  see  my  face,  and  know  that  1  am,  and  that  I
am  the  true  light  that  Iighteth  every  man  that  eometh  into  the
world:  and  that  1  am  in  the  Father  and  the  Father  in  me,  and
*he  Father  and  I  are  one:  the  Father  bouause  he  gave  me  of
'4iis  fulness;  and  the  Son  because  1  was  in  the  world  and  made
flesh  my  tabernacle,  and  dwell  among  the  sons  of  men:  I  was
Mi  the  world  and  received  of  my  Father,  and  the  works  of  him
were  plainly  manifest;  and  John  saw  and  bore  record  of  the
fulness  of  my  glory;  and  the  fulness  of  John’s  recoid  is  here¬
after  to  be  revealed:  And  he  bore  record,  saying,  I  saw’  his
glory  that  he  was  in  the  lieginning  before  the  world  wus:  there¬
fore,  in  the  beginning  the  Word  was;  for  he  was  the  Word,
even  the  messenger  ol  salvation,  the  light  and  the  Redeemer
of  the  world;  the  Spirit  of  truth,  who  came  into  the  world


211


because  tLe  worlt  was  made  by  him;  and  jut  him  was  the  life
of  men  a%i  the  light  at  men.  The  worlds  were  made  by  him.
lien  were  made  by  him.  All  things  were  made  by  him,  and
through  him,  and  of.him:  And  I  John  bare  record  that  I  be¬
held  hu  glory,  as  the.  glory  of  the  Only  Begotten  ofthe  Fath¬
er,  full  ut' grace  and  truth;  even  the  Spirit  of  truth  .which  came
and  dwelt  in  the  flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us.

2  And  1  John  saw  that  he  received  not  of  the  Fulness  at  the
first,  but, received  grace  lor  grace:  and  lie  received  not  of  the
fulness  at  first,  but  continued  Hour,  grace  to  grace,  until  he  re¬
ceived  a  fulness:  and  thus  he  was  called  the  Son  of  God,  be¬
cause  he  received  not  of  the  fulness  at  the  first.  And  1  John
bare  record,  audio,  the  ,  heavens  were  upened  and  the  Holy  t>
Ghost  descended  upon  him  in  .  the  form  of  a  dove,  and  sal  upon
him,  aud.  tflerd  came  a  voice  out  of  heaven  saying,  this  is  my
beloved  Son.  And  1  Jehu  bare  record  that  he  received,  a  ful¬
ness  of  the  glory  of  the  Father;  and  he  received  all  power,
both  iu  heaven  and  on  earth;  and  the  glory  of  the  Father  was
with  aim,  for  lie  dwelt. in  him.

3  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  if  you  are  faithful,  you  shall
receive  the  fulness  of  the  record  of  John.  I  give  unto  you
these  say iiyjs  that  you  inay  understand  and  know  how  to  wor¬
ship,  and  know  what  yon  worship,  that  you  may  conie  unto
the  Father  in  my  name,,  and  in  due  time  receive  of  his  fulness
for  if  yoii  keep  my  commandments  you  shall  receive  of  his  ful¬
ness  and  bo  glorified  in  ine  as  i  am  in  the  Father:  therefore,

I  say  unto,  you,  you  shall  receive  grace  for  grace.

4  And  now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  was  in  the  beginning  with
the  Father,  and  am  the  first  born;  and  all  those  who  are  be¬
gotten  through  me,  are  partakers  of  the  glory  of  the  same,  and
pre  thexhurch  of  the  first  born.  Ye  were  also  in  the  begin¬
ning  witii  the  Father :  that  which  is  Spirit,  even  the  Spirit
of  .'tr.uth;  and  truth  is,  knowledge  of  things  as  they  are,  and
as  they  were,  and  as  they  are  to  come;  and  whatsoever  is
more  or  less  than  tills,  is  the  spirit  of  that  wished  one,  who
was  a  liar  from  the  beginning.  The  Spirit  of  truth  is  of  God:

T  rm  the  Spirit  of  truth.  And  John  bore  record  of  me,  saying,
he  received  a. fulness  of  truth:  yea,  even  of  all  truth,  and  no
man  receiveth  a  fulness  unless  he  keepeth  his  commandments.

He  that  keepeth  his  commandments,  receiveth  truth  and  light,
until  he  is  glorified  in  truth,  and  knoweth  all  things.

5  Man  was  also  in  the  beginning  with  God.  Intelligence,
or  the  light  of  truth  was  not  created  or  made,  neither  indeed
can  be.  All  truth  is  independent  in  that  sphere  in  which  God
has  placed  it,  to  act  for  itself,  as  all  intelligence  also,  .other-


212


wise  there  is  no  existence.  Behold  here  is  the  agency  of  mi.«f
and  here  is  the  condemnation  of  man  because  that  which  was
from  the  beginning  is  plainly  manifest  Unto  them,  and  they  re¬
ceive  not  the  light.  And  every  man  whose  spirit  receiveth  not
the  light,  is  under  condemnation,  for  man  is  spirit.  The  ele¬
ments  are  eternal,  and  spirit  and  element,  inseparably  connect¬
ed,  receiveth  a  fulness  of  joy;  and  when  separated,  man  connot
receive  a  fulness  of  joy.  The  elements  are  the  tabernacle  of
God;  yea,  man  is  the  tabernacle  of  God,  even  temples;  and
whatsoever  temple  is  defiled,  God  shall  destroy  that  temple.

6  The  glory  of  God  is  intelligence,  or,  in  other  words,  light
and  truth:  light  and  truth  forsake th  that  evil  one.  Every

A  spirit  of  man  was  innocent  in  the  beginning,  and  God  having

*  redeemed  man  from  the  fall,  men  became  again  in  their  infant
state,  innocent  before  God.  And  that  wicked  one  cometh
and  taketh  away  light  and  truth,  through  disobedience,  from
the  children  of  men,  and  because  of  the  tradition  of  their  fa¬
thers.  But  I  have  commanded  you,  to  bring  up  your  children
in  light  and  truth:  but  verily  1  say  unto  you,  my  servant  Fred¬
erick  G.  Williams,  you  have  continued  under  this  condemna¬
tion;  you  have  not  taught  your  children  light  and  truth,  ac¬
cording  to  the  cbmiriandments,  and  that  wicked  one  hath  pow¬
er,  as  yet,  over  you,  and  this  is  the  cause  of  your  affliction. —
And  now  a  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  if  you  will  be  de¬
livered;  you  shall  set  in  order  your  own  house,  for  there  are
many  things  that  are  not  right  in  your  house.

7  Verily  I  say  unto  my  servant  Sidney  Rigdon,  that  in  some
things  he  hath  not  kept  the  commandments,  concerning  his
Children:  therefore,  firstly  set  in  order  thy  house.

8  Verily  I  say  unto  my  servant  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  or,  in  oth¬
er  words,  I  will  call  you  friends,  for  you  are  my  friends,  and
ye  shall  have  an  inheritance  with  me.  1  called  you  servants
for  ihe  world’s  sake,  and  ye  are  their  servants  for  my  sake,
and  now  verily  I  say  unto  Joseph  Smith  jr.  you  have  not
kept  the  'dommmandments,  and  must  needs  stand  rebuked  be¬
fore  the  Lord.  Your  family  must  needs  repent  and  forsake
feome  things,  and  give  more  earnest  heed  unto  your  sayings',
or  be  removed  out  of  their  place.  What  I  say  unto  one  I  say
unto  all:  pray  always  lest  that  wicked  one  have  power  in  you,
and  remove  you  out  of  your  place.

9  My  servant  Newel  K.  Whitney,  also  a  bishop  of  my  church,
hath  need  to  be  chastened  and  set  in  order  his  family,  and  see
that  they  are  more  diligent  and  concerned  at  home,  and  pray
always  or  they  shall  be  removed  out  of-their  place.

10  Now  I  say  unto  you,  my  friends,  let  my  servant  Sidney
Rigdon  go  his  journey,  and  make  haste,  and  also  proclaim  the


21S


acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,  and  the  gospel  of  salvation,  as  I
shall  give  him  utterance,  and  by  your  prayer  of  faith  with  one
consent,  I  will  uphold  him.

11  And  let  my  servants  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Frederick  G.
Williams,  make  haste  also,  and  it  shall  be  given  them  even
according  to  the  prayer  of  faith,  and  inasmuch  you  keep  my
sayings,  you  shall  not  be  confounded  in  this  world,  nor  in  the
world  to  come.

1 2  And  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  my  will  that  you  should
hasten  to  translate  my  scriptures,  and  to  obtain  a  knowledge
of  history,  and  of  countries,  and  of  kingdoms,  of  laws  of  God
and  man,  and  all  this  for  the  salvation  of  Zion.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXIII.

Revelation  given  same  date.

1  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  friends,  a  command¬
ment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  commence  a  work  of  lay¬
ing  out  and  preparing  a  beginning  and  foundation  of  the  city
of  the  stake  of  Zion,  here  in  the  land  of  Kirtland,  beginning
at  my  house:  and  behold  it  must  be  done  according  to  the  pat¬
tern  which  I  have  given  unto  you.  And  let  the  first  lot  on.  the
south,  be  consecrated  unto  me  for  the  building  of  an  house  for
the  presidency,  for  the  work  of  the  presidency,  in  obtaining
revelations;  and  for  the  work  of  the  ministry  of  the  presidency,
in  all  things  pertaining  to  the  church  and  kingdom.

2  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  shall  be  built  fifty-five  by
sixty-five  feet  in  the  width  thereof,  and  in  the  length  thereof,
in  the  inner  court;  and  there  shall  be  a  lower  court,  and  an
higher  court,  according  to  the  pattern  which  shall  be  given
unto  you  hereafter:  and  it  shall  be  dedicated  unto  the  Lord
from  the  foundation  thereof,  according  to  the  .order  of  the
priesthood,  according  to  the  pattern  which  shall  be  given  un¬
to  you  hereafter:  and  it  shall  be  wholly  dedicated  unto  the
Lord  for  the  work  of  the  presidency.  And  ye  shall  not  suffer
any  unclean  thing  to  come  in  unto  it;  and  my  glory  shall  be
there,  and  my  presence  shall  be  there:  but  if  there  shall  come
into  it  any  unclean  thing  my  glory  shall  not  be  there;  and  my
presence  shall  not  come  into  it.

3  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  second  lot  on  the
south  shall  be  dedicated  unto  me  for  the  buildii  g  of  an  house
unto  me,  for  the  work  of  the  printing  of  the  translation  of  my
scriptures,  and  all  things,  whatsoever  I  shall  command  you;
and  it  shall  be  fifty  five  by  sixty  five  feet  in  the  width  thereof,
and  the  length  thereof  in  the  inner  court;  and  there  shall  be


214


a.  lower  and  a  higher  court:  and  this  house  shall  be  wholly
dedicated  uiito  the  Lord  from  the  foundation  thereof,'  for  , the
wqrk  of  the  printing,  in  all  things  whatsoever  I  shall  com*
maud  you,  to  be  holy,  undsfiled,  according  to  the  pattern  in
all  things,  as  it  shall  be  given  unto  you.

4  And  on  the  third  lot  shall  niy  servant  Ilyrum  Smith  re¬
ceive  his  inheritance.  And  on  the  first  and  second  lots  on  the
north  shall  my  servants  Reynolds  Cahoon  and  Jared  Carter
receive  tlfpir  inheritance  that  they  may  do  the  work  which  I
have  appointed  unto  them,  to  be  a  committee  to  build  mine
houses,  according  to  the  commandment,  which  I  ti  e  Lord
God  have  given  unto  you.  These  two  houses  £)<■  not  to  be
built  until  I  give  unto  you  a  commandment  concerning  them.
6  And  now  1  give  unto  you  no  more  at  this  time.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXIV.

Revelation  to  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  given  March,  1833.

1  Thus  saiththe  Lord,  verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  sen,
thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,  according  to  thy  petition,  ior  thy
prayers  and  the  prayers  of  thy  brethren,  hjive  come  up  into
my  ears:  therefore  thou  art  blessed  from  henceforth  tl  at  bear
the  keys  of  the  kingdom  given  unto  you;  which  kingdom  is
Coming  forth  for  the  last  time.

2  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  keys  of  this  kingdom  shull  nev¬
er  be  taken  from  you,  while  thou  art  in  the  world,  neither  in
the  world  to  come:  nevertheless,  through  you  si  all  the  ora¬
cles  be  given  to  another;  yea,  even  unto  the  church.  And  al)
they  who  receive  the  oracles  of  God,  let  them  beware  how
they  hold  them,  lest  they  are  accounted  as  a  light  thing,  and
are  brought  under  condemnation  thereby,  and  stumble  and  fall,
when  tbe  storms  descend,  and  the  winds  blow,  and  the  rain*
descend,  and  brat  upon  their  house.

3  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  thy  brethren  Sidney  Ttigdon,
and  Frederick  G.  Williams,  their  sins  are  forgiven  them  also,
and  thpy  are  accounted  as  equal  with  thee  in  holding  the  keys
of  this  last  kingdom:  as  also  through  your  administration  the
Keys  of  the  school  of  the  prophets,  which  I  have  commanded
to  be  organized,  that  thereby  they  may  be  perfected  in  their
ministry  for  the  salvation  of  Lion,  and  of  the  nations  of  Israel,
and  of  the  Gentiles,  as  many  as  will  believe,  that  through  your
Administration,  they  may  receive  the  word,  and  through  their
administration,  the  word  may  go  forth  unto  the  ends  of  tha
earth,  unto  the  Gentiles  first,  and  then  behold,  and  lo,  they
■hall  turn  unto  the  Jews:  and  then  cometh  the  day  when  thi


2H

arm  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed  in  power  in  convincing  the
nations,  the  heathen  nations,  the  house  of  Joseph  of  the  gos¬
pel  of  their  salvation.

4  For  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day,  that  every  man  shall
hear  the  fulness  of  the  gospel  in  his  own  tongue,  and  in  his
own  language,  through  those  who  are  ordained  unto  this  pow¬
er,  by  tne  administration  of  the  Comforter,  shed  forth  upon
them,  for  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ.

5  And  now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  give  unto  you  a  com¬
mandment,  that  you  continue  in  the  ministry  and  presidency,
and  when  you  have  finished  the  translation  of  the  prophets,
you  shall  from  tltenceforth  preside  over  the  affairs  of  the  church
and  the  school;  and  from  time  to  time,  as  shall  be  manifest  by
the  Comforter,  receive  rev  Nations  to  unfold  the  mysteries  of
the  kingdom,  and  set  in  order  the  churches,  and  study  and
learn,  and  become  acquainted  with  all  good  books,  and  with
languages,  tongues  and  people.  And  this  shall  be  your  busi¬
ness  and  mission  in  all  your  lives  to  preside  in  counsel  and  set
in  order  all  the  affairs  of  this  church  and  kingdom.  Be  not
ashamed  neither  confounded;  but  be  admonished  in  all  your
highmindedness  and  pride,  for  it  bringetfa  a  snare  upon  youf
souls.  Set  in  order  your  houses;  keep  slothfulness  and  un¬
cleanness  far  from  you.

6  Now  verily,  1  say  unto  you,  let  there  be  a  place  provided
as  soon  as  it  is  possible,  for  the  family  of  thy  counsellor  and
scribe,  even  Frederick  G.  Williams:  and  let  mine  aged  servant
Joseph  Smith,  sen.  continue  with  his  family  upon  the  place
where  he  now  lives,  and  let  it  not  be  sold  until  the  mouth  Of
tha  Lord  shall  name.  And  let  thy  counsellor,  even  Sidney
Rigdon,  remain  where  he  now  resides,  until  the  mouth  of  the
Lord  shall  name.  And  let  the  bishop  search  diligently,  te  ob¬
tain  an  agent;  and  let  it  be  a  man  who  has  got  riches  in  store;
a  man  of  God  and  of  strong  faith;  that  thereby  he  may  be  e:>
abled  to  discharge  every  debt:  that  the  storehouse  of  the  Lord
may  not  be  brought  into  disrepute  before  the  eyes  of  the  peo¬
ple.  Search  diligently,  pray  always,  and  be  believing,  and  a'-'
things  shall  work  together  for  your  good,  if  ye  walk  uprightly*
and  remember  the  eovenant  wherewith  ye  have  covenanted
one  with  another.  Let  your  families  be  small,  especially  mice
aged  servant  Joseph  Smith,  sen.  as  pertaining  to  those  who
do  not  belong  to  your  families;  that  those  things  that  are  pc
Vided  for  you,  to  bring  to  pass  my  work,  are  not  taken  ircjJ
you  and  given  to  those  that  are  not  worthy,  and  thereby  you
are  hi  mired  in  accomplishing  those  things  which  I  have  com-
iShnded  you.

7  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  it  is  my  will  the,  r.ij


216


handmaid,  Vienna  Jaques,  should  receive  money  to  bear  he?
expenses,  and  go  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion;  and  the  residue  of
the  money  may  be  consecrated  unto  me,  and  she  be  rewarded
in  mine  own  due  time.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  meet
in  mine  eyes,  that  she  should  go  up  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  and
receive  an  inheritance  from  the  hand  of  the  bishop,  that  she
may  settle  down  in  peace  inasmuch  as  she  is  faithful,  and  not
be  idle  in  her  days  from  thenceforth.

6  And  behold,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  write  this
commandment,  and  say  unto  your  brethren  in  Zion,  in  love
greeting,  that  I  have  called  you  also  to  preside  over  Zion  in
mine  own  due  time:  therefore  let  them  cease  wearying  me
concerning  this  matter.  Behold,  I  say  unto  you,  that  your
brethren  in  Zion  begin  to  repent,  and  the  angels  rejoice  over
them:  nevertheless,  I  am  not  well  pleased  with  many  things:
and  I  am  not  well  pleased  with  ray  servant  William  E.  McLel-
in,  neither  withmy  servant  Sidney  Gilbert;  and  the  bishop  al¬
so;  and  others  have  many  things  to  repent  of:  but  verily  1  say
unto  you,  that  I  the  Lord  will  contend  with  Zion  and  plead
with  her  strong  ones,  and  chasten  her,  until  she  overcome®
and  is  clean  before  me:  for  she  shall  not  be  removed  out  of  her
place:  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXV.

Revelation  given  August,  1833.

1  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  friends,  fear  not,  let  your  hearts
be  comforted;  yea,  rejoice  evermore,  and  in  every  tiling  give
thanks,  waiting  patiently  on  the  Lord:  for  your  prayers  have
entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  and  are  record¬
ed  with  this  seal  and  testament:  the  Lord  hath  sworn  and
decreed  that  they  shall  be  granted:  therefore  he  giveth.this
promise  unto  you,  with  an  immutable  covenant,  that  they  shall
be  fulfilled,  and  all  things  wherewith  you  have  been  afflicted,
shall  work  together  for  your  good,  and  to  my  name’s  glory
saith  the  Lord.

2  And  now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  concerning  the  laws  of  the
land,  it  is  my  will  that  my  people  should  observe  to  do  all
things  whatsoever  I  command  them,  and  that  law  of  the
land,,  which  is  constitutional,  supporting  that  principle  of  free¬
dom,  .in  maintaining  rights  and  privileges  belongs  to  all  man¬
kind  and  is  justifiable  before  me:  therefore  I  the  Lord  jpatifi-
eth  you,  and  your  brethren  of  my  church,  in  befriending  that
law  which  is  the  constitutional  law  of  the  land:  and  as  per¬
taining  to  law  of  man,  whatsoever  is  more  or  less  than  these.


217


Cometh  of  evil.  I  the  Lord  God  maketh  you  free:  therefore
ye  are  free  indeed:  and  the  law  also  maketh  you  free:  never¬
theless  when  the  wicked  rule  the  people  mourn:  wherefore
honest  men  and  wise  men  should  be  sought  for,  diligently,
and  good  men  and  wise  men,  ye  should  observe  to  uphold;
olherwise  whatsoever  is  less  than  these,  cometh  of  evil.

3  And  I  give  unto  you  a  commandment,  that  ye  shall  forsake
all  evil  and  cleave  unto  all  good,  that  ye  shall  live  by  every
word  which  proceedeth  forth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God:  for  he
will  give  unto  the  faithful,  line  upon  line;  precept  upon  pre¬
cept:  and  I  will  try  you,  and  prove  you  herewith:  and  who¬
so  layeth  down  his  life  in  my  cause,  for  my  name’s  sake,  shall
find  it  again;  even  life  eternal:  therefore  be  not  afraid  of  your
enemies,  for  I  have  decreed  in  my  heart,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I
will  prove  you  in  all  things,  whether  you  will  abide  in  my  cov¬
enant,  even  unto  death,  that  you  may  be  found  worthy:  for
if  ye  will  not  abide  in  my  covenant,  ve  are  not  worthy  of  me:
therefore  renounce  war  and  proclaim  peace,  and  seek  diligent¬
ly  to  turn  the  hearts  of  their  children  to  their  fathers,  and  the
hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the  children.  And  again  the  hearts  of
the  Jews  unto  the  prophets;  and  the  prophets  unto  the  Jews,
lest  I  come  and  smite  the  whole  earth  with  a  curse,  and  all'
flesh  be  consumed  before  me.  Let  not  vour  hearts  be  troubled,
for  in  my  Father’s  house  are  many  mansions,  and  I  have  pre¬
pared  a  place  for  you,  and  where  my  Father  and  I  am,  there  ye
shall  be  also.

4  Behold  I  the  Lord  am  not  well  pleased  with  many  who
are  in  the  church  at  Kirtland,  for  they  do  not  forsake  their
sins,  and  their  wicked  ways,  the -pride  of  their  hearts,  and
their  covetousness,  and  all  their  detestable  things,  and  ob¬
serve  the  words  of  wisdom  and  eternal  life  which  I  have  given
unto  them.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  f  the  Lord  will  chas¬
ten  them  and  will  do  whatsoever  I  list,  if  they  do  not  repent
and  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  them. —
And  again  I  say  unto  you,  if  ye  observe  to  do  whatsoever  I
command  you,  I  the  Lord  will  turn  away  all  wrath  and  indig¬
nation  from  you,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against
you.

5  Now  I  speak  unto  you,  concerning  your  families:  if  men
will  smite  you,  or  your  families,  once  and  ye  bear  it  patient¬
ly  and  revile  not  against  them,  neither  seek  revenge,  ye  shall
be  rewarded;  but  if  ye  bear  it  not  patiently,  it  shall  be  accoun¬
ted  unto  you  as  being  meeted  out  a  just  measure  unto  you. —
And  again  if  your  enemy  shall  smite  vou  the  second  time,  and
you  revile  not  against  your  enemy,  and  bear  it  patiently,  your
reward  shall  be  an  hundred  fold.  And  again  if  he  shall  smite.


218,


you  the  third  tirue,  and  ye  bear  it  patiently,  your  reward  shall
be  doubled  unto  you  ibur  lold:  and  these  three  testimonies  shall
utand  against  your  enemy,  if  he  repent  not,  and  shall  not  be
blotted  out.  And  now  verily  J  say  unto  you  if  that  enemy
shall  escape  my  vengeance  that  lie  be  not  brought  into  judg¬
ment  before  me,  then  ye  shall  see  to  it,  that  ye  warn  linn  in
my  name  that  he  come  no  more  upon  you,  neither  upon  your
family,  even  your  children's  children  unto  the  third  and  lourth

feneration:  and  then  if  he  shall  come  upon  you,  or  your  cliil-
ren,  ir  your  children’s  chilurqn,  unto  the  third  and  fourth
generation:  I  have  delivered  Untie  enemy  into  thine  hands,  and
then  if  thou  wilt  spare  him  thou  shall  be  rewarded  lor  thy
righteousness:  and  a, so  thy  children  and  thy  children’s  chil¬
dren  unto  (he  third  and  fourth  generation:  nevertheless  thine
enemy  is  in  thine  hands,  and  if  iliou  reward  him  according  to
his  works,  thou  art  justified,  if  he  has  sought  tbyiiie,  and  thy
life  is  endangered  by  him;  thine  enemy  is  in  thine  hands,  and
thou  art  justified.

6  Behold  this  is  the  law  I  gave  unto  my  servant  Nephi;  and
thy  father  Joseph,  and  Jacob,  and  Isaac,  and  Abraham,  and
all  mine  ancient  prophets  and  apostles.  Aud  again  this  is  the
law  that  I  gave  unto  mine  ancients,  that  they  should  not  go
out  unto  battle  against  any  nation,  kindred,  t,.ngue,  or  peo¬
ple,  save  I  the  Lord  commanded  them.  And  if  any  nation,
tongue,  or  people  should  proclaim  War  against  them,  they
should  first  lift  a  standard  of  peace  unto  that  people,  nation,  or
tongue,  and  if  that  people  did  not  accept  the  offering  of  peace,
neither  the  second  nor  the  third  time,  they  should  urmg  these
.testimonies  before  the  Lord;  then  I  the  Lord  would  give  unto
•them  a  commandment,  andjustity  them  in  going  out  to  batUo
against  that  nation,  tongue,  or  people,  and  I  the  Lord  would
fight  their  battles,  and  their  children’s  battles  and  their  chil¬
dren’s. children  until  they  had  avenged  themselves  on  ail  their
enemies,  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation,  behold  this  is  an
ensample  unto  all  people,  sai'h  the  Lord  your  God,  for  justifi¬
cation  before  me.

7  And  again  verily  I  say  unto  you,  if,  after  thine  enemy  lias
come  upon  thee  the  first  time,  lie  repent  and  come  unto  thee
praying  thy  forgiveness  thou  shaft  forgive  him  and  shall  hold
it  no  more  as  a  testimony  against  thine  enemy,  and  so  on  unto
the  second  and  the  third  time;  and  as  oft  as  thine  enemy  re-
jpenteth  of  the  trespass  wherewith  he  has  trespassed  against
.thee,  thou  shaft  forgive  him,  until  seventy  times  seven;  andif
Jie  trespass  against  thee  and  repent  not  the  first  time,  never¬
theless  thou  shalt  forgive  him:  and- if  he  trespass  against  thee
the  second  time,  and  repent  not,  nevertheless  thou  shalt  for-


21#


give  him;  and  if  he  trespass  against  thee  the  third  time  and
repent  not  thou  shalt  also  forgive  him;  bat  if  he  trespass
against  thee  the  fourth  time,  thou  shalt  not  forgive  him  but
shall  bring  these  testimonies  before  the  Lord,  and  they  shall
not  be  blotted  out  until  he  repent  and  eward  the  four  fold  in
all  things  wherewith  he  has  tresspassed  against  you;  and  if  he
do  this  tlipu  sbalt  forgive  him  with  all  thine  heart,  and  if  he  do
not  this,  I  t  he  Lord  w  ill  avenge  thee  of  thine  enemy  and  hun¬
dred  fold;  and  upon  his  children,  and  upon  his  children's  chil¬
dren,  of  all  them  that  hale  me,  unto  the  third  and  fourth  gen¬
eration:  hut  if  the  children  shall  rpmit,  or  the  children’s  chil¬
dren  and  turn  unto  the  Lord  their  God  with  all  their  hearts,
and  with  all  their  might,  mind,  and  strength,  and  restore  four
fold  for  all  their  trespasses,  wherewith  they  have  trespassed,
or  wherewith  their  fathers  have  trespassed  or  their  father’s
fathers  then  thine  indignation  shall  be  turned  away  and  ven¬
geance  shall  no  mpre  come  upon  them,  sailh  the  Lord  your
God,  andtheir  trespasses  shall  never  be  brought  any  more  as  a
testimony  before  the  Lord  against  them.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXVI.

Revelation  given  April,  1832,  showing  the  order  given  to  Enoch-
and  the  citurch  in  his  day.

1  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  my  servants,  that  inasmuch,
as  you  have  forgiven  one  another  your  trespasses,  even  so  I
the  Lord  forgive  you;  nevertheless  there  are  those  among  you
who  have  sinned  exceedingly ;  yea,  even  all  of  you  have  sinned,
but  verily  I  say  unto  you,  beware  from  henceforth  and  refrain
from  sin  lest  sire  judgments  fall  upon  your  heads:  for  unto
whom  much  is  given  much  is  required;  and  he  who  sins
against  the  greaterflight  shall  receive  the  greater  condemna¬
tion.  Ye  call  upon/ tny  name  for  revelations,  and  I  give  them
unto  you;  and  inasmuch  as  ye  keep  not  my  sayings  which  I
give  unto  you,  ye  Become  transgressors,  and  justice  and  judg-
ment  is  the  penalty  which  is  affixed  unto  ray  law:  therefore,
what  I  say  unto  one  I  say  unlo  ail,  watch,  for  the  adversary
•weadeth  his  dominions  and  darkness  reigneth:  and  the  anger
-of  God  kindleth  against  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth;  and  none

•  doeth  good,  for  all  have  gone  out  of  the  way.

2  And  now  verily  I  soy  unto  you,  I  the  Lord  will  not  lay
any  sin  to  your  charge:  "go  your  ways  and  sin  no  more:  but
unto  that  soul  who  sinneth  shall  the  former  sins  return,  saith
*he  Lord  your  God.

3  and  again,  I  say  unto  you,  I  give  unto  you  a  new  com-


7


220

mandment,  that  you  may  understand  my  will  concerning  yon?;
or,  in  other  words,  I  give  unto  you  directions  how  you  may  act
before  me,  that  it  may  turn  to  you  for  your  salvation,  f  the
Lord  am  bound  when  ye  do  what  I  say,  but  when  ye  do  not
what  I  siy,  ye  have  no  promise.

4  Therefore,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  expedient  for
my  servant  Alam  and  Ahashdah,  Mahalaleel  and  Pelagoram,
and  my  servant  Gazelam,  and  Horah,  and  Olihah,  and  Shale-
manasseh,  and  Mehemson,  be '  bound  together  by  a  bond  and
covenant  that  cannot  be  broken  by  transgression  except  judg¬
ment  shall  immediately  follow,  in  your  several  stewardships,
to  manage  the  affairs  of  the  poor,  and  all  things  pertaining  to
the  bishopric  both  in  the  land  of  Zion,  and  in  the  land  of
Shinehah,  for  I  have  consecrated  the  land  of  Shinehah  in  mine
own  due  time  for  the  benefit  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,
and  for  a  stake  to  Zion:  for  Zion  must  increase  in  beauty,  and
in  holiness:  her  borders  must  be  enlarged;  her  stakes  must  be
strengthened:  yea,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  Zion  must  arise  and
put  on  her  beautiful  garments:  therefore  I  give  unto  you  this-
commandment,  that  ye  bind  yourselves  by  this  covenant,  and
it  shall  be  done  according  to  the  laws  of  the  Lord.  Behold
here  is  wisdom,  also,  in  me,  for  your  good.  And  you  are  to
be  equal,  or  in  other  words,  you  are  to  have  equal  claims  on
the  properties,  for  the  benefit  of  managing  the  concerns  of
your  stewardships,  every  man  according  to  his  wants  and  his
needs,  inasmuch  as  his  wants  are  just:  and  all  this  for  the
benefit  of  the  church  of  the  living  God,  that  every  man  may
improve  upon  hisnaleut,  that  every  man  may  gain  other  tal¬
ents;  yea,  even  an  hundred  fold,  to  be  cast  into  the  Lord’s
storehouse,  to  become  the  common  property  of  the  whole
church,  every  man  seeking  the  interest  of  his  neighbor,  and
doing  all  things  with  an  eye  single  to  the  glory  of  God.

5  This  order  I  have  appointed  to  be  an  everlasting  order  unt*
you  and  unto  your  successors,  inasmuch  as  you  sin  not:  and
the  soul  that  sins  against  this  covenant,  and  hardeneth  his
heart  against  it,  shall  be  dealt  with  according  to  the  laws  of
my  church,  and  shall  be  delivered  over  to  the  buffitings  of  sa-
tan  until  the  day  of  redemption.

6  And  now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  and  this  is  wisdom,  make
unto  yourselves  friends  with  the  mammon  of  unrighteousness,
and  they  will  not  destroy  you.  Leave  judgment  alone  with
me,  for  it  is  mine  and  I  will  repay.  Peace  be  with  you;  my
blessings  continue  with  you,  for  even  yet  the  kingdom  is  yours,
and  shall  be  forever  if  you  fall  not  from  your  steadfastness;
even  so.  Amen.


SECTION  LXXXVII.

Revelation  given  January,  1832.

1  Verily,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  who  speak  even  by  the
Voice  of  my  Spirit;  even  Alpha  and  Omega,  your  Lord  and
your  God:  hearken,  O  ye  who  have  given  your  names  to  go
forth  to  proclaim  my  gospel,  and  to  prune  my  vineyard.  Be¬
hold  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  my  will  that  you  should  go  forth
and  not  tarry,  neither  be  idle,  but  labor  with  your  mights
lifting  up  your  voices  as  with  the  sound  of  a  trump  proclaim¬
ing  the  truth  according  to  the  revelations  and  commandments
Which  I  have  given  you,  and  thus  if  ye  are  faithful  ye  shall  be
laden  with  many  sheaves,  and  crowned  with  honor,  and  glory,
and  immortality,  and  eternal  life.

2  Therefore  verily  I  say  unto  my  servant  William  E.  MeLeF-
in  T  revoke  the  commission  which  I  gave  unto  him,  to  go  un¬
to  the  eastern  countries,  and  I  give  unto  him  a  new  commis¬
sion  and  a  new  commandment,  in  the  which  I  the  Lord  chas-
teneth  him  for  the  murmurings  of  his  heart;  and  he  sinned,
nevertheless  I  forgive  him  and  say  unto  him  again,  go  ye  into
the  south  countries;  and  let  my  servant  Luke  Johnson  go
with  him  and  proclaim  the  things  which  I  have  commanded
them,  calling  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  for  the  comforter,  which
shall  teach  them  all  things  that  are  expedient  for  them,  praying
always  that  they  faint  not;  and  inasmuch  as  they'  do  this,  I
will  be  with  them  even  unto  the  end.  Behold  this  is  the  will
of  the  Lord  your  God  concerning  you;  even  so.  Amen.

3  And  again,  verily  thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  my  servant  Orson
Hyde  and  my  servant  Samuel  H.  Smith  take '  their  journey
into  the  eastern  countries,  and  proclaim  the  things  which  !
have  commanded  them:  and  inasmuch  as  they  are  faithful,  lo
L  will  be  with  them  even  unto  the  end.  And  again,  verily  I
say  unto  my  servant  Lyman  Johnson,  and  unto  my  servant
Orson  Pratt,  they  shall  also  take  their  journey  into  the  east¬
ern  countries:  and  behold  and  lo,  I  am  with  them  also  even
unto  the  end.  And  again  I  say  unto  my  servant  Asa  Dodds
and  unto  my  servant  Calves  Wilson,  that  they  also  shall  take
their  journey  unto  the  western  countries,  and  proclaim  my
gospel  even  as  I  have  commanded  them.  And  he  who  is  faith-
mi  shall  overcome  all  things,  and  shall  be  lifted  up  at  the  last
day.  And  again,  I  say  unto  my  servant  Major  N.  Ashley  and
my  servant  Burr  Riggs,  let  them  take  their  journey  also  unto
the  south  country:  yea,  let  all  those’  take  their  journey  as  I
have  commanded  them,  going  from  house  to  house,  and  from
village  to  village,  and  from  city  to  city;  and  in  whatsoever


422


house  ye  enter,  and  they  receive  you,  leave  your  blessings  up¬
on  thai  house;  and  in  whatsoever  house  ye  enter,  and  they  re¬
ceive  you  not,  ye  shall  depail  speedily  ironV  that  house,  and
shake  oT.  the  dust  of  your  feet  as  a  testimony  against  them;
and  you  shall  be  filled  with  joy  and  gladness  and  know  this,
that  in  the  day  of  judgement  you  shall  he  judges  of  that  house,
and  condemn  them;  and  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for  the  hea¬
then  in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  that  house:  therefore
gird  up  your  loins  and  be  faithful  and  ye  shall  overcome  all
things  and  bo  lifted  up  at  the  last  day;  even  so.  Amen.

4  And  again  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  O  ye  elders  ofmy
church,  wiio  have  given  your  names  that  you  might  know  his
will  concerning  you:  behold  I  say  unto  you'lhai  u  is  the  duty
of  the  church  to  assist  in  supporting  the  families  of  those,  and
also  to  supprt  the  families  of  those  who  are  called  and  must
needs  be,  sent  unto  the  world  to  prpciaimlhe  gospel  unto  the
world:  wherefore  I  the  Lord  give  unto  yon  this  eomrnandrapni,
that  ye  obtain  places  for  your  families,  inasmuch  us  your
brethren  are  willing  to  open  their  hearts:  and  let  all  such  as
can,  obtain  places  for  their  families,  and  support  of  tbo
Church  for  them,  not  fail  logo  into  thc.wcjfld;  wnether  to  the
east,  or  to  the  west,  or  to  the  north,  or  to  the  south,  let  them
ask  and  they  shall  receive;  knock  and  if  shall  he  opened  unto
them,  and  made  known  from  on  high,  even  by  the  Comforter,
whither  they  shall  go.

5  And  again  verily  I  say  unt6  you  that  every  man  who  is
obliged  to  provide  for  his  own  family,  let  him  provide  and  ha
shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  crown;  and  let  him  tabor  in  the  church.
Let  every  man  be  diligent  in  all  things.  And  the  idler  shall
not  have  place  in  the  church,  except  he  repents  and  mends  his
-ways.  Wherefore  let  my  servant  Simeon  Carter  and  my  ser¬
vant  Emer  Harris  be  united  in  the  ministry.  And  also  my
servant  Ezra  Tliayre  and  my  servant  Thomas  B.  Marsh.  Also
my  servant  Hyrurn  Smith  and  my.  servant  Reynolds  Cahoon;
and  also  my  servant  Daniel  Sianjon  and  my  servant  Seymour
Brunson;  and  also  my  servant  Silvester  Smith  and  my  servant
Gideon  Carter;  ami  also  my  servant  Ruggles  Lames  and  my
servant  Stephen  Burnett;  and  also  my  servant  Micah  B.  Wet-
ton  and  also  my  servant  Eden  Smith;  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXVIII.

Revelation  given  April ,  1832.

1  Verily  thus  saith  the  Lord,  in  addition  to  the  lav/s  of  tha
ahurch  concerning  women  and  children,  those  who  belong  to-


223


the  church,  who  have  lost  their  husbands  or  fathers:  women
have  claim  on  their  husbands  tor  their  mainlainance  until  their
husbands  are  taken:  and  if  the/  are  not  found  transgressors
they  shall  have  fellowship  in  tiie  church,  and  if  they  are  not
taitnful,  they  shall  not  have  fellowship  in  the  church ;  yet  they
may  remain  upon  their  inheritances  according  to  the  laws  of
the  land.

2  All  children  have  claim  upon  their  parents  for  tlioir  maim
tainaiiee  until  they  are  of  age;  and  after  that,  they  have  claim
opon  the  church;  or,  in  other  words  upon  the  Lord’s  store¬
house,  if  their  parents  have  not  wherewnh  to  give  them  inher¬
itances.  And  the  storehouse  shall  be  kept  by  the  consecra¬
tions  of  the  church,  that  widows  and  orphans shall  be  provided
for,  as  also  the  poor.  Amen.

SECTION  LXXXIX.

Regulation  given  December ,  1831.

1  Hearken  tiad  listen  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  O  ye  who  have
assembled  yourselves  together,  who  are  the  high  priests  of  my
church,  to  whom  the  kingdom  and  power  has  been  given.  For
verily  thus  sailli  the  Lord,  it  is  expedient  in  me,  for  a  bishop
to  be  appointed  unto  you,  or  of  you  unto  the  church  in  this
part  of  the  Lord’s  vineyard:  and  verily  in  this  tiling  ye  have
done  wisely,  for  it  is  required  of  the  Lord,  at  the  hand  of  ev¬
ery  steward,  to  render  aa  account  of  bis  stewardship,  both  in
time  and  in  eternity.  For  he  who  is  faithful  and  wise  in  time,
is  accounted  worthy  to  inherit  the  mansions  prepared  for  them
of  rcy  Father.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  the  elders  of  the  church
in  this  part  of  my  vineyard,  shall  render  an  account  of  their
stewardship,  unto  the  bishop  which  shail  be  appointed  of  me,
in  this  part  of  my  vineyard.  These  things  shall  be  had  on  re¬
cord  to  bo  handed  over  unto  the  bishop  in  Zion;  and  the  duty
of  the  bishop  shall  be  made  known  by  the  commandments
which  have  been  given,  and  the  voice  of  the  conference.

2  And  now,  verily  1  say  unto  you,  my  servant  Newel  K.
Whitney  is  the  man  who  shall  be  appointed,  and  ordained  un¬
to  this  power:  this  is  the  will  of  the  Lord  your  God,  your  Re¬
deemer;  even  so.  Amen.  .

3  The  word  of  the  Lord,  in  addition  to  the  law  which  has
been  given,  making  known  the  duty  of  the  bishop,  which  has
been  ordained  unto  the  church  in  this  part  of  the  vineyard:
which  is  verily  this:  to  keep  the  Lord’s  storehouse;  to  receiva
the  funds  of  the  church  in  this  part  of  the  vineyard;  to  take
■a  account  of  the  elders  as  before  has  been  commanded,  and


to  administer  to  their  wants,  who  shall  pay  for  that  which
they  receive,  inasmuch  as  they  have  wherewith  to  pay;  that
this  also  may  be  consecrated  to  the  good  of  the  church,  to  the
poor  and  needy:  and  he  who  hath  not  wherewith  to  pay,  ah
account  sjiall  be  taken  and  handed  over  to  the  bishop  of  Zion,
who  shall  pay  the  debt  out  of  that  which  the  Lord  shall  put
into  his  hands:  and  the  labors  of  the  faithful  who  labor  in
spiritual  things,  in  administering  the  gospel  and  the  things
of  the  kingdom,  unto  the  church,  and  unto  the  world,  shall
answer  the  debt  unto  the  bishop  in  Zion:  thus  it  cometh  out
of  the  church,  for  according  to  the  law  every  man  that  com¬
eth  up  to  Zion,  must  lay  all  things  before  the  bishop  in  Zion.

4  And  row,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  as  every  elder  in  this
part  of  the  vineyard,  must  give  an  account  of  his  stewardship
unto  the  bishop  in  this  part  of  the  vineyard,  a  certificate  from
the  judge  or  bisbop  in  this  part  of  the  vineyard,  unto  the  bishop
in  Zion,  rendereth  every  man  acceptable,  and  answereth  air
things,  for  an  inheritance,  and  to  be  received  as  a  wise  stew¬
ard,  and  as  a  faithful  laborer;  otherwise  he  shall  not  be  accept¬
ed  of  the  bishop  in  Zion.  And  now,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  let
every  elder  who  shall  give  an  account  unto  the  bishop  of  the
church,  in  this  part  of  the  vineyard,  be  recommended  by  the
church  or  churches,  in  which  he  labors,  that  he  may  render
himself  and  his  accounts  approved  in  all  tilings.  And  again,
let  my  servants  who  are  appointed  as  stewards  over  the  litera¬
ry  concerns  of  my  church,  have  claim  for  assistance  upon  the
bishop  or  bishops,  in  all  things,  that  the  revelations  may  be
published,  and  go  forth  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth,  that  they
also  may  obtain  funds  which  shall  benefit  the  church,  in  all
things;  that  they  also  may  render  themselves  approved  in  all
tilings  and  be  accounted  as  wise  stewards.  And  now,  behold
this  shall  be  an  ensample  for  all  the  extensive  branches  of  my
church,  in  whatsoever  land  they  shall  be  established.  And
now  I  make  an  end  of  my  sayings.  Amen.

5  A  few  words  in  addition  to  the  laws  of  the  kingdom,  re¬
specting  the  members  of  the  church;  they  that  are  appointed
by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  go  up  unto  Zion;  and  they  who  are  pri¬
vileged  to  go  up  unto  Zion.  Let  them  carry  up  unto  the  bishop
a  certificate  from  three  elders  of  the  church,  or  a  certificate
from  the  bishop,  otherwise  he  who  shall  go  up  unto  the  land
of  Zion,  shall  not  be  accounted  as  a  wise  steward.  This  is
also  an  ensample.  Amen.


'  SECTION  XC.

Revelation  gieen  December,  1831.

1  Behold,  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you  my  servants,  Joseph
Smith,  jr.  aad  Sidney  Rigdon,  that  the  time  has  verily  come,
that  it  is  necessary  and  expedient  in  me  that  you  should  open
your  mouths  in  proclaiming  my  gospel,  the  things  of  the  king¬
dom,  expounding  the  mysteries  thereof  out  of  the  scriptures,
according  to  that  portion  of  spirit  and  power,  which  shall  be
given  unto  you,  even  as  I  will.

2  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  proclaim  unto  the  world  in  the  re¬
gions  round  about,  and  in  the  church  also,  for  the  space  of  a
season,  even  until  it  shall  be  made  known  unto  you.  Verily
this  is  a  mission  for  a  season,  which  I  give  unto  you,  where¬
fore,  labor  ye  in  my  vineyard.  Call  upon  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  and  bear  record,  and  prepare  the  way  for  the  com¬
mandments  and  revelations  which  are  to  come.  Now,  behold
this  is  wisdom;  whoso  readeth  let  him  understand  and  receive
also;  for  unto  him  that  receiveth  it  shall  be  given  more  abun¬
dantly,  even  power:  wherefore,  confound  your  enemies;  call
upon  them  to  meet  you,  both  in  public  and  in  private;  and
inasmuch  as  ye  are  faithful  their  shame  shall  be  made  mani¬
fest.  Wherefore,  let  them  bring  forth  their  strong  reasons
against  the  Lord.  Verily  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  there
is  no  weapon  that  is  formed  against  you  shall  prosper;  and  if
any  man  lift  his  voice  against  you,  he  shall  be  confounded  in
mine  own  due  time:  wherefore,  keep  these  commandments:
they  are  true  and  faithful,  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  XCI.

A  1'ision.

1  Hear,  O  ye  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth,  and  rejoice  ye
inhabitants  thereof,  for  the  Lord  is  God,  and  beside  him  there
is  no  Savior;  great  is  his  wisdom;  marvellous  are  his  way§;
and  the  extent  of  his  doings,  none  can  find  out;  his  purpose*
fail  not,  neither  are  there  any  who  can  stay  his  hand:  from  ,
eternity  to  eternity,  he  is  the  same  and  his  years  never  fail.  -  '

2  For  thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  the  Lord  am  merciful  and  gra¬
cious  unto  those  who  fear  me,  and  delight  to  honor  those  who
serve  me  in  righteousness,  and  in  truth  unto  the  end;  great
shall  be  their  reward,  and  eternal  shall  be  their  glory;  and  to
them  will  I  reveal  all  mysteries;  yea,  all  the  hidden  mysteries


226


of  my  kingdom  from  day*  of  old;  and  for  ages  to  come  will  I
make  known  unto  them  the  good  pleasure  of  my  will  concern¬
ing  all  things  pertaining  to  my  kingdom;  yea,  even  the  won¬
ders  of  eternity  shall  they  know,  and  things  to  come  will  1
show  them,  even  the  things  of  many  generations;  their  wis¬
dom  shall  be  great,  and  their  understanding  reach  to  heaven:
and  before  them  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  shall  perish,  and  the
understanding  of  the  prudent  shall  come  to  nought;  for  by  my
Spirit  will  I  enlighten  them,  and  by  my  power  will  I  make
known  unto  them  the  secrets  of  my  will;  yea,  even  those
things  which  eye  has  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  yet  entered
into  the  heart  of  man.

3  We,  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  and  Sidney  Rigdon,  being  in  the
Spirit  on  the  sixteenth  of  February,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty  two,  by  the  power  of
the  Spirit  our  eyes  were  opened,  and  our  understandings  were
enlightened,  so  as  to  see  and  understand  the  things  of  God;
even  those  things  which  were  from  the  beginning  before  the
world  was,  which  were  ordained  of  the  Father,  through  hi*
only  begotten  Son,  who  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  even
from  the  beginning,  of  whom  we  bear  record,  and  the  record
which  we  bear  is  the  fblness  of  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,
who  is  the  Son,  whom  We  saw  and  with  whom  we  conversed
in  the  heavenly  vision;  for  while  we  were  doing  the  work  of
translation,  which  the  Lord  had  appointed,  unto  us,  we  came
to  the  twenty  ninth  verse  of  the  fifth  chapter  of  John,  which
was  given  unto  us  a*  follows: — speaking  of  the  resurrection
of  the  dead,  .  oncerning  those  who  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the
Son  of  man — and  shall  come  forth;  they  who  have  done  good
in  the  resurrection  of  the  just,  and  they  who  have  done  evil  in
the  resurrection  of  the  unjust.  Now  this  caused  us  to  marvel,
for  it  was  given  unto  us  of  the  Spirit:  and  while  we  meditated
upon  these  things,  the  Lord  touched  the  eyes  of  our  under¬
standings,  and  they  were  opened,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord
shone  round  about;  and  we  beheld  the  glory  of  the  Son,  on
the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  and  received  of  his  fulness;  and
saw  the  holy  angels,  and  they  who  are  sanctified  before  hi*
throne,  worshiping  God  and  the  Lamb,  who  worship  him  for¬
ever  and  ever.  And  now,  after  the  many  testimonies  which
have  been  given  of  him,  this  is  the  testimony,  lastofall,  which
we  give  of  him,  that  he  lives;  for  we  saw  him,  even  on  the-
right  hand  of  God;  aad  we  heard  the  voice  bearing  record  that
he  is  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father;  that  by  him,  and  through
him,  and  of  him,  the  worlds  are  and  were  created ;  and  the  in¬
habitants  thereof  are  begotten  sons  and  daughters  unto  God.
And  tliis  we  saw  also,  and.  bear  record,  that  an  angel  of  God,


227


who  was  in  authority  in  the  presence  of  God,  who  rebelled
against  the  only  begotten  Son — whom  the  Father  loved,  and
who  was  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father — and  was  thrust  down
from  the  presence  of  God  and  the  Son,  and  was  called  Perdi¬
tion;  for  the  heavens  wept  over  him;  hen  as  Lucifer,  a  son
of  the  morning;  and  we  beheld  and  lo,  he  is  fallen!  is  fallen!
even  a  son  of  the  morning.  And  while  we  were  yet  in  the
Spirit,  the  Lord  commanded  us  that  we  should  write  the  vis¬
ion;  for  we  beheld  satan,  that  old  serpent,  even  the  devil,  who
rebelled  against  God,  and  sought  to  take  the  kingdom  of  our
God,  and  his  Christ;  wherefore  he  maketh  war  with  the  saints
of  God,  and  encompasses  them  round  about.  And  we  saw  a
vision  of  the  sufferings  of  those  with  whom  he  made  war  and
overcame,  for  thus  came  the  voice  of  the  Lord  unto  us.

4  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  concerning  all  those  who  know  my
power,  and  have  been  made  partakers  thereof,  and  suffered
themselves,  through  the  power  of  the  devil,  to  be  overcome,
and  to  deny  the  truth,  and  defy  my  power:  they  are  they  who
are  the  sons  of  perdition,  of  whom*  I  say  it  had  been  better  for
them  never  to  have  been  born;  for  they  are  vessels  of  wrath
doomed  to  suffer  the  wrath  of  God,  with  the  devil  and  his  an¬
gels,  in  eternity:  concerning  whom  I  have  said  there  is  no  for¬
giveness  in  this  world  nor  in  the  world  to  come:  having  deni¬
ed  the  Holy  Spirit,  after  having  received  it,  and  having  denied
the  only  begotten  Son  of  the  Father,  having  crucified  him  un¬
to  themselves,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame:  these  are  they
who  shall  go  away  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  with
the  devil  and  his  angels,  aud  the  only  ones  on  whom  fhe  sec¬
ond  deatli  shall  have  any  power;  yea,  verily  the  only  ones  who
shall  not  be  redeemed  in  the  due  time  of  the  Lord,  after  the
sufferings  of  his  wrath;  for  all  the  rest  shall  be  brought  forth
by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  through  the  triumph  and  the
glory  of  the  Lamb,  who  was  slain,  who  was  in  the  bosom  of
the  Father  before  the  worlds  were  made.  And  this  is  the  gos¬
pel,  the  glad  tidings  tvhiqji  the  voice  out  of  the  heavens  bore
record  unto  us,  that  he  came  into  the  world,  even  Jesus  to  be
crucified  for  the  world,  and  to  bear  the  sins  of  the  world,  and
to  sanctify  the  world,  and  to  cleanse  it  from  all  unrighteous¬
ness;  that  through  him  all  might  be  saved,  whom  the  Father
had  put  into  his  power,  and  made  by  him;  who  glorifies  the
Father,  and  saves  all  the  works  of  his  hands,  except  those  sons
of  perdition,  who  deny  the  Son  after  the  Father  has  revealed
him:  wherefore  he  saves  all  except  them;  they  shall  go  away
into  everlasting  punishment,  which  is  endless  punishment,
which  is  eternal  punishment,  to  reign  with  the  devil  and  his
15*


228


angels  in  eternity,  where  their  worm  dieth  not  and  the  fire  i*
not  quenched,  which  is  their  torment.,  and  the  end  thereof,  nei¬
ther  the  place  thereof,  nor  their  torment,  no  man  knows,  nei¬
ther  was  it  revealed,  neither  is,  neither  will  be  revealed  unto
man,  except  to  them'  who  are  made  partakers  thereof:  never¬
theless  I  the  Lord  show  it  by  vision  unto  many,  but  straightway
shut  it  up  again:  wherefore  the  end,  the  width,  the  height,
the  depth,  and  the  misery  thereof,  they  understand  not,  nei¬
ther  any  man  except  them  who  are  ordained  unto  this  condem¬
nation.  And  we  heard  the  voice  saying,  Write  the  vision
for  lo!  this  is  the  end  of  the  vision  of  the  sufferings  of  the  un-


5  And  again,  we  bear  record  for  we  saw  and  heard,  and  lliis,
is  the  testimony  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  concerning  them  who
come  forth  in  the  resurrection  of  the  just:  they  are  they  who
received  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  and  believed  on  his  name,
and  were  baptized  after  the  manner  of  his  burial,  being  buried
in  the  water  in  his  name,  and  this  according  to  the  command¬
ment  which  he  has  given,  that,  by  keeping  the  commandments,
they  might  be  washed  and  cleansed  from  all  their  sins,  and  re¬
ceive  the  Holy  Spirit  by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  him  who
is  ordained  and  sealed,  unto  this  power;  and  who  overcome  by
faith,  and  are  sealed  by  that  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  the
Father  sheds  forth  upon  all  those  who  are  just  and  true:  they
are  they  who  are  the  church  of  the  first-born:  they  are  they
into  whose  hands  the  Father  has  given  all  things:  they  are
they  who  are  priests  and  kings,  who  have  received  of  his  ful¬
ness,  and  of  his  glory,  and  are  priests  of  the  Most  High  after
the  order  of  Melchizedek,  which  was  after  tbe  order  of  Enoch,
which  was  after  the  order  of  the  only  begotten  Son:  where¬
fore,  as  it  is  written,  they  are  gods,  even  the  sons  of  God:
wherefore  all  things  are  theirs,  whether  life  or  death,  or  things
present,  or  things  to  come,  all  are  theirs,  and  they  are  Christ’s,
and  Christ  is  God’s;  and  they  shall  overcome  all  things:  where¬
fore  let  no  man  glory  in  man,  but  rather  let  him  glory  in  God,
who  shall  subdue  all  enemies  under  his  feet:  these  shall  dwell
in  the  presence  of  God  and  his  Christ  forever  and  ever:  these
are  they  whom  he  shall  bring  with  him,  when  he  shall  come
in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  to  reign  on  the  earth  over  his  people:
these  are  they  who  shall  have  part  in  the  first  resurrection:
these  are  they  who  shall  come  forth  in  the  resurrection  of  the
just:  these  are  they  who  are  come  unto  mount  Zion,  and  unto
the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  place,  the  holiest  of
all:  these  are  they  who  have  come  to  an  innumerable  compa¬
ny  of  angels;  to  the  general  assembly  and  church  of  Enoch,
and  of  the  first  born:  these  are  they  whose  names  are  written


229


in  heaven,  where  God  and  Christ  are  the  judge  of  all:  these
are  they  who  are  just  men  made  perfect  through  Jesus  the  me¬
diator  of  the  new  covenant,  who  wrought  out  this  perfect
atonement  through  the  shedding  of  his  own  blood:  these  are
they  whose  bodies  are  celestial,  whose  glory  is  that  of  the  sun,
even  the  glory  of  God  the  highest  of  all;  whose  glory  the  sun
of  the  firmament  is  written  of  as  being  typical.

6  And  again,  we  saw  the  terrestrial  world,  and  behold  arid  lo!
these  are  they  who  are  of  the  terrestrial,  whose  glory  differs
from  that  of  the  church  of  the  first  born,  who  have  received
the  fulness  of  the  Father,  even  as  that  of  the  moon  differs
from  the  sun  of  the  firmament.  Behold,  these  are  they  who
died  without  law;  and  also  they  who  are  the  spirits  of  men
kept  in  prison,  whom  the  Son  visited,  and  preached  the  gos¬
pel  unto  them,  that  they  might  be  judged  according  to  men  in
the  flesh,  who  received  not  the  testimony  of  Jesus  in  the  flesh,
but  afterwards  received  it:  these  arc  they  who  are  honorable
men  of  the  earth,  who  were  blinded  by  the  craftiness  of  men:
these  are  they  who  receive  of  his  glory,  but  not  of  his  fulness;
these  are  they  who  receive  of  the  presence  of  the  Son,  but  not
of  the  fulness  of  the  Father:  wherefore  they  are  bodies  terres¬
trial,  and  not  bodies  celestial,  and  differ  in  glory  as  the  moon
differs  from  the  sun:  these  are  they  who  are  not  valiant  in  the
testimony  of  Jesus:  wherefore  they  obtained  not  the  crown
Over  the  kingdom  of  our  God.  And  now  this  is  the  end  of  the
vision  which  we  saw  of  the  terrestrial,  that  the  Lord  comman¬
ded  us  to  write  while  we  were  yet  in  the  Spirit.

7  And  again,  we  saw  the  glory  of  the  telestial,  which  glory
is  that  of  the  lesser,  even  as  the  glory  of  the  stars  differ  from
that  of  the  glory  of  the  moon  in  the  firmament;  these  are  they
who  received  not  the  gospel  of  Christ,  neither  the  testimony
of  Jesus:  these  are  they  who  deny  not  the  Holy  Spirit:  these
are  they  who  are  thrust  down  to  hell:  these  are  they  who  shall
not  be  redeemed  from  the  devil,  until  the  last  resurrection,  un¬
til  the  Lord,  even  Christ  the  Lamb,  shall  have  finished  his
work:  these  are  they  who  receive  not  of  his  fulness  in  the  eter¬
nal  world,  but  of  the  Holy  Spirit  through  the  ministration  of
the  terrestrial;  and  the  terrestrial  through  the  ministration  of
the  celestial;  and  also  the  telestial  receive  it  of  the  administer¬
ing  of  angels,  who  are  appointed  to  minister  for  them,  or  who
are  appointed  to  be  ministering  spirits  for  them,  for  they  shall
be  heirs  of  salvation.  And  thus  we  saw  in  the  heavenly  vis¬
ion,  the  glory  of  the  telestial  which  surpasses  all  understand¬
ing;  and  no  man  knows  it  except  him  to  whom  God  has  re¬
vealed  it.  And  thus  we  saw  the  glory  of  the  terrestrial,  which
excels  in  all  things  the  glory  of  the  telestial,  even  in  glory,


230


and  in  power,  and  in  might,  and  in  dominion.  And  thus  vre
saw  the  glory  of  the  celestial,  which  excels  in  all  things;
where  God,  even  the  Father,  reigns  upon  his  throne  forever
and  ever:  before  whose  throne  all  things  bow  in  humble  rever¬
ence  and  give  him  glory  forever  and  ever.  They  who  dwell
in  his  presence  are  the  church  of  the  first  bom;  and  they  see
as  they  are  seen,  and  know  as  they  are  known,  having  receiv¬
ed  of  his  fulness  and  of  his  grace;  and  he  makes  them  equal  in
power,  and  in  might,  and  in  dominion.  And  the  glory  of  the
celestial  is  one,  even  as  the  glory  of  the  sun  is  one.  And  the
glory  of  the  terrestrial  is  one,  even  as  the  glory  of  the  moon  is
one.  And  the  glory  of  the  telestial  is  one,  even  aB  the  glory
of  the  stars  is  one  for  as  one  star  differs  from  another  star  in
glory,  even  so  difiers  one  from  another  in  glory  in  the  teles¬
tial  world:  for  these  are  they  who  are  of  Paul,  and  of  Apollos,
and  of  Cephas:  these  are  they  who  say  they  are  some  of  one
and  some  of  another;  some  of  Christ;  and  some  of  John;  and
some  of  Moses;  and  some  of  Elias;  and  some  of  Esaias;  and
some  of  Isaiah;  and  some  of  Enoch,  but  received  not  the  gos¬
pel;  neither  the  testimony  of  Jesus;  neither  the  prophets:  nei¬
ther  the  everlasting  covenant;  last  of  all,  these  all  are  they
who  will  not  be  gathered  with  the  saints,  to  be  caught  up  un¬
to  the  church  of  the  first  born,  and  received  into  the  cloud:
these  are  they  who  are  liars,  and  sorcerers,  and  adulterers,  and
whoremongers,  and  whosoever  loves  and  makes  a  lie:  these  are
they  who  suffer  the  wrath  of  God  on  the  earth:  these  are  they
who  suffer  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire:  these  are  they  who
are  cast  down  to  heU  and  suffer  the  wrath  of  Almighty  God  until
the  fulness  of  times,  when  Christ  shall  have  subdued  all  ene¬
mies  under  his  feet,  and  shall  have  perfected  his  work,  when
he  shall  deliver  up  the  kingdom  and  present  it  unto  the  Father
spotless,  saying:  I  have  overcome  and  have  trodden  the  wine¬
press  alone,  even  the  wine-press  of  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath
of  Almighty  God:  then  shall  he  be  crowned  with  the  crown
of  his  glory,  to  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  power  to  reign  forever
and  ever.  But  behold  and  lo,  we  saw  the  glory  and  the  inhab¬
itants  of  the  telestial  world,  that  they  were  as  innumerable  as
the  stars  in  the  firmament  of  heaven,  or  as  the  sand  upon  the
sea  shore,  and  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  saying:  These  all
shall  bow  the  knee,  and  every  tongue  shall  confess  to  him  who
sits  upon  the  throne  forever  and  ever:  for  they  shall  be  judged
according  to  their  works;  and  every  man  shall  receive  accor¬
ding  to  his  own  works,  and  his  own  dominion,  in  the  mansions
which  are  prepared,  and  they  shall  be  servants  of  the  Most
High,  but  where  God  and  Christ  dwell  they  cannot  come,
worlds  without  end.  This  is  the  end  of  the  vision  which  we


231

saw,  which  we  were  commanded  to  write  while  we  were  yet
in  the  Spirit.

8  But  great  and  marvellous  are  the  works  of  the  Lord  and  the
mysteries  of  his  kingdom  which  he  showed  unto  us,  which
surpasses  all  understanding  in  glory,  and  in  might,  and  in  do¬
minion,  which  he  commanded  us  we  should  not  write,  while
we  were  yet  in  the  Spirit,  and  are  not  lawful  for  man  to  utter;
neither  is  man  capable  to  make  them  known,  for  they  are  only
to  be  seen  and  understood  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
which  God  bestows  on  those  who  love  him  and  purify  them¬
selves  before  him;  to  whom  he  grants  this  privilege  of  seeing
and  knowing  for  themselves;  that  through  the  power  and  man¬
ifestation  of  the  Spirit,  while  in  the  flesh,  they  may  be  able  to
bear  his  presence  in  the  world  of  glory.  And  to  God  and  the
Lamb  be  glory,  and  honor,  and  dominion  forever  and  ever. —
Amen.

SECTION.  XCII.

Revelation  given  March ,  1833.

1  Verily,  thus  sailh  the  Lord  unto  you,  concerning  the  Apoc¬
rypha,  there  are  many  things  contained  therein  that  are  true,
and  it  is  mostly  translated  correct:  there  are  many  things  con¬
tained  therein  that  are  not  true,  which  are  interpolations  by
the  hands  of  men.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  is  not  need¬
ful  that  the  Apocrypha  should  be  translated.  Therefore,
whoso  readeth  it  let  him  understand,  for  the  Spirit  manifesteth
truth;  and  whoso  is  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  shall  obtain  ben¬
efit  therefrom;  and  whoso  receiveth  not  by  the  Spirit,  cannot  be
benefitted:  therefore,  it  is  not  needful  that  it  should  be  trans¬
lated.  Amen.

section  xcm.

Revelation  to  Enoch,  on  the  order  of  the  Church  for  the  benefit  <f
the  poor ,  given  to  the  saints  in  Kirtland,  March,  1833.

1  Verily,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  I  give  unto  the  united  order,
organized  agreeable  to  the  commandment  previously  given,  a
revelation  and  commandment  concerning  my  servant  Snederla-
ornach,  that  ye  shall  receive  him  into  the  order.  What  I  say
unto  one  I  say  unto  all.

2  And  again,  I  say  unto  you,  my  servant  Shederlaomach,
you  shall  be  a  lively  member  in  this  order;  and  inasmuch  as
you  are  faithful  in  keeping  all  former  commandments,  yon
shall  be  blessed  forever.  Amen.


SECTION  ACIV.


Revelation  given  in  Perrysburgh,  N.  Y.  to  Joseph  Smith  jr.
and  Sidney  JRigdon,  October,  1833.

1  Verily,  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you  my  friends,  Sidney,
and  Joseph,  your  families  are  well:  they  are  in  mine  hands,
and  I  will  do  with  them  as  seemetli  me  good;  for  in  me  there
is  all  power:  therefore,  follow  me,  and  listen  to  the  council
which  I  shall  give  unto  you:  Behold,  and  lo,  I  have  much  peo¬
ple  in  this  place,  in  the  regions  round  about,  and  an'  effectual
door  shall  be  opened  in  the  regions  round  about  in  this  eastern
land:  Therefore,  I  the  Lord  have  suffered  you  .  to  come  unto
this  place:  for  thus  it  was  expedient  in  me  for  the  salvation  of
souls:  therefore,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  lift  up  your  voices  un¬
to  this  people;  speak  the  thoughts  that  I  shall  put  into  your
hearts,  and  ye  shall  not  be  confounded  before  men;  for  it  shall
be  given  you  in  the  very  hour,  yea,  in  the  very  moment,  what
ye  shall  say.

2  But  a  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  declare
whatsoever  things  ye  declare  in  mv  name,  in  solemnity  of
heart,  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,  in  all  things.  And  I  give  un¬
to  you  this  promise,  that  inasmuch  as  ye  do  this,  the  Holy
Ghost  shall  be  shed  forth  in  bearing  record  unto.all  things  what¬
soever  ye  shall  say.

3  And  it  is  expedient  in  me  that  you,  my  servant  Sidney,
should  be  a  spokesman  unto  this  people;  yea,  verily,  I  will
ordain  you  unto  this  calling,  even  to  be  a  spokesman  unto  my
servant  Joseph;  and  1  will  give  unto  him  power  to  be  mighty
in  testimony;  and  1  will  give  unto  thee  power  to  be  mighty  in
expounding  all  scriptures,  that  thou  mayest  be  a  spokesman
unto  him,  and  he  shall  be  a  revelator  unto  thee,  that  thou
mayest  know  the  certainty  of  all  things  pertaining  to  the  things
of  my  kingdom  on  the  earth.  Therefore,  continue  your  jour¬
ney  and  let  your  hearts  rejoice;  far,  behold,  and  lo,  I  am  with
you  even  unto  the  end.

4  And  now  I  give  unto  you  a  word  concerning  Zion:  Zion
shall  be  redeemed,  although  she  is  chastened  for  a  little  season.
Thy  brethren,  my  servants,  Orson  Hyde  and  John  Gould,  are
in  my  hands,  and  inasmuch  as  they  keep  my  commandments
they  shall  be  saved.  Therefore,  let  your  hearts  be  comforted,
for  all  things  shall  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  walk
uprightly,  and  to  the  sanctification  of  the  church;  for  I  will
raise  up  unto  my  self  a  pure  people,  that  will  serve  me  in  right¬
eousness;  and  all  that  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  and  keeft
his  commandments,  shall  be  saved;  even  so.  Amen.


238


SECTION  XCV.

Revelation  given  June,  1633.

1  Verily  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  you,  whom  I  love,  and
whom  1  love  I  also  chasten,  that  their  sins  may  be  forgiven,
for  with  the  chastisement  I  prepare  a  way  for  their  deliver¬
ance,  in  all  things  out  of  temptation:  and  I  have  loved  you:
Wherefore  ye  must  needs  be  chastened,  and  stand  rebuked  be¬
fore  my  face,  for  ye  have  sinned  against  me  a  very  grevious
sin,  in  that  ye  have  not  considered  the  great  commandment
in  all  things,  that  I  have  given  unto  you,  concerning  the  buil¬
ding  of  mine  house,  for  the  preparation  wherewith  I  design
to  prepare  mine  apostles  to  prune  my  vineyard  for  the  last
time,  that  I  may  bring  to  pass  my  strange  act,  that  I  may
pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh.  But  behold,  verily  I  say
unto  you,  there  are  many  who  have  been  ordained  among  you,
whom  I  have  called,  but  few  of  them  are  chosen:  they  who
are  not  chosen  have  sinned  a  very  grievious  sin,  in  that  they
are  walking  in  darkness  at  noon-day;  and  for  this  cause,  1
gave  unto  you  a  commandment,  that  you  should  call  your  sol¬
emn  assembly;  that  your  fastings  and  your  mourning  might
come  up  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  which  is,  by  in¬
terpretation,  the  Creator  of  the  first  day;  the  beginning  and
the  end.

2  Yea,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  gave  unto  you  a  command¬
ment,  that  you  should  build  an  house,  in  the  which  house  I
design  to  endow  those  whom  I  have  chosen  with  power  from
on  high:  for  this  is  the  promise  of  the  Father  unto  you:  there¬
fore  I  commanded  you.  to  tarry,  even  as  mine  apostles  at  Je¬
rusalem:  nevertheless  my  servants  sinned  a  very  grevious  sin;
and  contentions  arose  in  the  school  of  the  prophets,  which  was
very  grievious  unto  me,  saith  your  Lord:  therefore  I  sent  them
forth  to  be  chastened.

3  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  it  is  my  will  that  you  should  build
an  house:  if  you  keep  my  •  commandments,  you  shall  have
power  to  build  it;  if  you  keep  not  my  commandments  the  love
of  the  Father,  shall  not  continue  with  you:  therefore  you  shall
Walk  in  darkness.  Now  here  is  wisdom  and  the  mind  of  the
Lord:  let  the  house  be  built,  nbt  after  the  manner  of  the  world,
4r  I  give  not  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  live  after  the  manner  of
he  world:  therefore  let  it  be  built  after  the  manner  which  I
wall  show  unto  three  of  you,  whom  ye  shall  appoint  and  or-
d(in  unto  this  power.  And  the  size  thereof  shall  be  fifty  and
fire  feet  in  width,  and  let  it  be  sixty-five  feet  in  length,  m  the
user  court  thereof;  and  let  the  lower  part  of  the  inner  court


*234


he  dedicated  unto  me  for  your  sacrament  offering,  and  for  your
preaching:  and  your  fasting;  and  your  praying,  and  the  of¬
fering  up  your  most  holy  desires  unto  me,  saith  your  Lord. —
And  let  the  higher  part  of  the  inner  court,  be  dedicated  unto
me  for  the  school  of  mine  apostles,  saith  Son  Ahman;  or,  in
other  words,  Alphus;  or,  in  other  words,  Omegus;  even  Je¬
sus  Christ  your  Lord.  Amen.

SECTION  XCVI.

A  Revelation  to  Enoch,  showing  the  order  of  the  city  or  stake  of
Zion,  Skinehali,  given  for  a  sample  to  the  saints  in  Kirtland,
June,  1833.

1  Behold,  I  say  unto  you,  here  is  wisdom  whereby  ye  may
know  how  to  act  concerning  this  matter:  for  it  is  expedient  in
me  that  this  stake  that  I  have  set  for  the  strength  of  Zion,
should  be  made  strong:  therefore,  let  |my  servant  Ahashdah
take  charge  of  the  place  which  is  named  among  you,  upon
which  I  design  to  build  mine  holy  house:  and  again  let  it  be
divided  into  lots  according  to  wisdom,  for  the  benefit  of  those
who  seek  inheritances,  as  it  shall  be  determined  in  council
among  you.  Therefore,  take  heed  that  ye  see  to  this  matter,
and  that  portion  that  is  necessary  to  benefit  mine  order,  for
the  purpose  of  bringing  forth  my  word  to  the  children  of  men,
for  behold  verily  I  say  unto  you,  this  is  the  most  expedient  in
me,  that  my  word  should  go  forth  unto  the  children  of  men,
for  the  purpose  of  subduing  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men,
for  your  good;  even  so.  Amen.

2  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  it  is  wisdom  and  expedi¬
ent  in  me,  that  my  servant  Zombre,  whose  offering  I  have  ac¬
cepted,  and  whose  prayers  I  have  heard:  unto  whom  I  give  a
promise  of  eternal  life  inasmuch  as  he  keepeth  my  command,
ments  from  henceforth:  for  he  is  a  descendant  of  Seth,  and  a
partaker  of  the  blessings  of  the  promise  made  unto  his  fathers.
Verily  I  say  unto  you,  it  is  expedient  in  me  that  he  should
become  a  member  of  the  order,  that  he  may  assist  in  bringing
forth  my  word  unto  the  children  of  men:  therefore  ye  slial
ordain  him  unto  this  blessing:  and  he  shall  seek  diligently  t>
take  away  incumbrances,  that  are  upon  the  house  name!
among  you,  that  he  may  dwell  therein;  even  so.  Amen.


235

SECTION  XCVII.

Revelation  given  December,  1333.

1  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  concerning  your  brethren  who  havo
been  afflicted,  and  persecuted,  and  cast  out  from  the  land  of
their  inheritance,  I  the  Lord  have  suffered  the  affliction  to
come  upon  them,  wherewith  they  have  been  afflicted  in  con¬
sequence  of  their  transgressions;  yet,  I  will  own  them,  and
they  shall  be  mine  in  that  day  when  I  shall  come  to  make  up
my  jewels.

2  Therefore,  they  must  needs  be  chastened,  and  tried,  even
ns  Abraham,  who  was  commanded  to  offer  up  his  only  son;
for  all  those  who  will  not  endure  chastening,  but  deny  me,
cannot  be  sanctified.

3  Behold,  I  say  unto  you,  there  were  jarrings,  and  conten¬
tions,  and  envyings,  and  strifes,  and  lustful  and  covetous  de¬
sires  among  them;  therefore  by  these  things  they  polluted
their  inheritances.  They  were  slow  to  hearken  unto  the  voice
of  the  Lord  their  God;  therefore,  the  Lord  their  God  is  slow
to  hearken  unto  their  prayers,  to  answer  them  in  the  day  of
their  trouble.  In  the  day  of  their  peace  they  esteemed  light¬
ly  my  counsel;  but  in  the  day  of  their  trouble,  of  necessity
they  feel  after  me.

4  Verily,  I  say  unto  you,  notwithstanding  their  sins  my  bow¬
els  are  filled  with  compassion  toward  them:  I  will  not  utterly
cast  them  off;  and  in  the  day  of  wrath  I  will  remember  mercy.
I  have  sworn,  and  the  decree  hath  gone  forth  by  a  former  com¬
mandment  which  I  have  given  unto  you,  that  I  would  let  fall
the  sword  of  mine  indignation  in  the  behalf  of  my  people;  and
even  as  I  have  said,  it  shall  come  to  pass.  Mine  indignation
is  soon  to  be  poured  out  without  measure  upon  all  nations,
and  this  will  I  do  when  the  cup  of  their  iniquity  is  full.  And
in  that  day,  all  who  are  found  upon  the  watch  tower,  or  in
■other  words,  all  mine  Israel  shall  be  saved.  And  they  that
have  been  scattered  shall  be  gathered:  and  all  they  who  have
mourned  shall  be  comforted;  and  all  they  who  have  given
their  lives  for  my  name  shall  be  crowned.  Therefore,  let  you*
hearts  be  comforted  concerning  Zion;  for  all  flesh  is  in  mins
hands:  be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God.  Zion  shall  not  be
moved  out  of  her  place,  notwithstanding  her  children  are  scat¬
tered,  they  that  remain  and  are  pure  in  heart  shall  return  and
come  to  their  inheritances;  they  and  their  children,  with
songs  of  everlasting  joy;  to  build  up  the  waste  places  of  Zion.
And  all  these  things,  that  the  prophets  might  be  fulfilled. —
And  behold,  there  is  none  other  place  appointed  than  that


236


which  I  have  appointed;  neither  shall  there  be  any  other  place
appointed  than  that  which  I  have  appointed  for  the  work  of
the  gathering  of  my  saints,  until  the  day  cometh  when  there
is  found  no  more  room  for  them;  and  then  I  have  other  places
which  I  will  appoint  unto  them,  and  they  shall  be  called  stakes,
for  the  curtains,  or  the  strength  of  Zion.

5  Behold  it  is  my  will,  that  all  they  who  call  on  my  name,
and  worship  me  according  to  mine  everlasting  gospel,  should
gather  together  and  stand  in  holy  places,  and  prepare  for  the
revelation  which  is  to  come  when  the  veil  of  the  covering  of
my  temple,  in  my  tabernacle,  which  hideth  the  earth,  shall
be  taken  off,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  me  together.  And  every
ebrruptible  thing,  both  of  man,  or  of  the  beasts  of  the  field,  or
of  the  fowls  of  heaven,  or  of  the  fish  of  the  sea,  that  dwell  up¬
on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  shall  be  consumed;  and  also,  that
of  element  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat;  and  all  things  shall
become  new;  that  my  knowledge  and  glory  may  dwell  upon
all  the  earth.  And  in  that  day  the  enmity  of  man,  and  the
enmity  of  beasts;  yea,  the  enmity  of  all  flesh  shall  cease  from
before  my  face.  And  in  that  day  whatsoever  any  man  shall
aak  it  shall  be  given  unto  him.  And  in’  that  day  satan  shall
not  have  power  to  tempt  any  man.  And  there  shall  be  no
sorrow  because  there  is  no  death.  In  that  day  an  infant  shall
not  die  until  he  is  old,  and  his  life  shall  be  as  the  age  of  a  tree,
and  when  he  dies  he  shall  not  sleep,  (that  is  to  say  in  the
earth,)  but  shall  be  changed  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  and
shall  be  caught  up,  and  his' rest  shall  be  gloriohs.  Yea,  veri¬
ly  I  say  unto  you,  in  that  day  when  the  Lord  shall  come  he
shall  reveal  all  things;  things  which  have  passed,  and  hidden
things  which  no  man  knew;  things  of  the  earth  by  which  it
was  made,  and  the  purpose  and  the  end  thereof;  things  most
precious;  things  that  are  above,  and  things  that  are  beneath;
things  that  are  in  the  earth,  and  upon  the  earth,  and  in  heav¬
en.  And  all  they  who  suffer  persecution  for  my  name,  and
endure  in  faith,  though  they  are  called  to  lay  down  their  live*
for  my  sake,  yet  shall  thety  partake  of  all  this  glory.  Where¬
fore,  fear  not  even  unto  death;  for  in  this  world  your  joy  i*
not  full,  but  in  me  your  joy  is  full.  Therefore,  care  not  for
the  body,  neither  the  life  of  the  body;  but  care  for  the  soul,
and  for  the  life  of  the  soul:  and  seek  the  face  of  the  Lord  al¬
ways,  that  in  patience  ye  may  possess  your  souls,  and  ye  shall
have  eternal  life.  When  men  are  called  unto  mine  everlasting
gospel,  and  covenant  with  an  everlasting  covenant,  they  arc
accounted  as  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  the  savor  of  men.—
They  are  called  to  be  the  savor  of  men.  Therefore,  if  that
•alt  of  the  earth  lose  its  savor,  behold  it  is  thenceforth  good


237


for  nothing,  only  to  be  cast  out  and  trodden  under  the  feet  of
men.  Behold,  here  is  wisdom  concerning  .the  children  of  Zi¬
on:  even  many,  but  not  all:  they  were  found  transgressors,
therefore,  they  must  needs  be  chastened.  He  that  exalteth
himself  shall  be  abased,  and  he  that  abaseth  himself  shall  be
exalted.

(J  And  now,  I  will  show  unto  you  a  parable  that  you  may
know  my  will  concerning  the  redemption  of  Zion:  a  certain
nobleman  had  a  spot  of  land,  very  choice;  and  he  said  unto,
his  servants,  go  ye  into  my  vineyard,  even  upon  this  very
ehoice  piece  of  land,  and  plant  twelve  olive  trees;  and  set
watchmen  round  about  them  and  build  a  tower,  that  one  may
overlook  the  land  round  about,  to  be  a  watchman  upon  the
tower;  that  mine  olive  r trees  may  not  be  broken  down,  when
the  enemy  shall  come  to  spoil,  'and  take  unto  themselves  the
fruit  of  my  vineyard.  Now  the  servants  of  the  nobleman  went
and  did  as  their  lord  commanded  them;  and  planted  the  olive
trees,  and  built  a  hedge  round  about,  and  set  watchmen,  and
began  to  build  the  tower.  And  while  they  were  yet  laying
the  foundation  thereof,  they  began  to  say  among  themselves,
and  what  need  hath  my  lord  of  this  tower?  and  consulted  for
a  long  time,  saying  among  themselves,  what  need  hath  my
lord  of  this  tower,  seeing  this  is  a  time  of  peace?  Might  not
this  money  be  given  to  the  exchangers?  for  there  is  no  need
of  these  things!  Arid  while  they  were  at  variance  one  with
another,  they  became  very  slothful,  and  they  hearkened  not
unto  the  commandments  of  their  lord:  and  the  enemy  came  by
night,  and  broke  down  the  hedge,  and  the  servants  of  the  no¬
bleman  arose,  and  were  affrighted,  and  fled:  and  the  enemy
destroyed  their  works,  and  broke  down  the  olive  trees.

7  Now  behold,  the  nobleman,  the  lord  of  the  vineyard,  call¬
ed  upon  his  servants,  and  said  unto  them,  Why!  what  is  the
cause  of  this  great  evil?  ought  ye  not  to  have  done  even  as  1
commanded  you?  and  after  ye  had  planted  the  vineyard,  and
built  the  hedge  round  about,  and  set  watchmen  upon  the  walls
thereof,  built  the  tower  also,  and  set  a  watchman  upon  the
tower,  and  watched  for  my  vineyard,  and  not  have  fallen
asleep,  lest  the  enemy  should  come  upon  you?  and  behold,
the  watchman  upon  the  toyrer  would  have  seen  the  enemy
while  he  was  yet  afar  off:  and  then  ye  could  have  made  ready
and  kept  the  enemy  from  breaking  down  the  hedge  thereof
and  saved  my  vineyard  from  the  hands  of  the  destroyer.  And
the  lord  of  the  vineyard  said  unto  one  of  his  servants,  Go  and
gather  together  the  residue  of  my  servants;  and  take  all  the
strength  of  mine  house,  which  are  my  warriors,  my  young
men,  and  they  that  are  of  middle  age  also,  among  all  my  set-


vants,  wlio  are  the  strengtli  of  mine  house,-  save  those  only
whom  I  have  appohited  to  tarry;  and  go  ye  straightway  unto
the  land  of  my  vineyard,  and  redeem  my  vineyard,  for  it  i»
mine,  I  have  bought  it  witli  money.  Therefore  gel  ye  straight¬
way  unto  my  land;  breakdown  the  walls  of  mine  enemies;
throw  down  their  tower,  and  scatter  their  watchmen:  and  in¬
asmuch  ns  they  gather  together  against  you,  avenge  me  of
mine  enemies;  that  by  and  by,  I  may  come  with  the  residue
of  mine  house  and  possess  the  land.

8  And  the  servant  said  unto  his  lord,  when  shall  these  thing*
bet  And  he  said  unto  his  seivant,  when  I  will:  go  ye  straight-
way,  and  do  nil  things  whatsoever  1  have  commanded  you:
and  this  shall  be  my  seal  and  blessing  upon  you;  a  liiithful
and  wise  Btewnrd  in  the  midst  of  mine  house;  a  ruler  in  my
kingdom.  And  his  servant  went  straightway,  and  done  all
things  whatsoever  his  lord  commanded  him,  and  after  many
days  nil  things  were  fulfilled.

!)  Again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  will  show  unto  you  wisdom
in  me  concerning  all  the  churches,  inasmuch  aB  they  are  will¬
ing  to  be  guided  in  a  right  and  proper  way  for  their  salvation,
that  the  work  of  the  gathering  together  of  my  saints  may  con¬
tinue,  that  1  may  build  them  up  unto  my  name  upon  holy
places;  for  the  time  of  harvest  is  come,  and  my  word  must
needs  be  fulfilled.  Therefore,  I  must  gather  together  my  peo¬
ple  according  to  the  parable  of  the  wheat  and  the  lares,  tliut
the  wheat  may  be  secured  in  the  garners  to  possess  eternal
life,  and  be  crowned  with  celestial  glory  when  I  shall  come  in
the  kingdom  of  my  Father,  to  reward  every  man  according  a*
his  work  shall  be,  while  the  tares  shall  be  bound  in  bundles,
and  their  bands  made  strong,  that  they  may  be  burned  with  un¬
quenchable  fire.  Therefore,  a  commandment  I  give  unto  all
the  churches,  that  they  shall  continue  to  gather  together  unto
the  places  which  I  have  appointed;  nevertheless,  ns  1  have
said  unto  you  in  a  former  commandment,  let  not  your  gather¬
ing  be  in  haste,  nor  by  flight;  but  let  all  things,  he  prepared
before  you,  and  in  order  that  all  tilings  be  prepnred  before  you,
observe  the  commandments  which  i  have  given  concerning
these  things,  which  saitli,  or  teacheth,  to  purchase  all  the
lands  by  money,  which  can  he  mirchased  for  money,  in  the
region  roundabout  the  land  which  I  have  appointed  to  be  the
land  of  Zion,  for  the  beginning  of  the  gathering  of  my  saints;
all  the  land  which  can  be  purchased  in  Jackson  county,  and
the  counties  round  about,  and  leave  the  residue  in  mine  hand.

10  Now  verily  I  say  unto  you,  let  all  the  churches  gather
together  all  their  moneys;  let  these  things  he  done  in  their
tune,  be  not  in  haste;  and  observe  to  have  all  things  prepared


239


before  you.  And  let  honorable  men  be  appointed,  even  wise
men,  and  send  them  to  purchase  these  lands;  and  every
church  in  the  eastern  countries  when  they  are  built  up,  if  they
will  hearken  unto  this  counsel,  they  may  buy  lands  and  gather
together  upon  them,  and  in  this  way  they  may  establish  Zion.
There  is  even  now  already  in  store  a  sufficient;  yea,  even
abundance  to  redeem  Zion,  and  establish  her  waste  places  no
more  to  be  thrown  down,  were  the  churches,  who  call  them¬
selves  after  my  name  willing  to  hearken  to  my  voice.  And,
again  I  say  unto  you,  those  who  have  been  scattered  by  their
enemies,  it  is  my  will  that  they  should  continue  to  importune
for  redress,  and  redemption,  by  the  hands  of  those  who  are
placed  as  rulers,  and  are  in  authority  over  you,  according  to
the  laws  and  constitution  of  the  people  which  I  have  suffered
to  be  established,  and  should  be  maintained  for  the  rights  and
protection  of  all  flesh,  according  to  just  and  holy  principles,
that  every  man  may  act  in  doctrine,  and  principle  pertaining
to  futurity,  according  to  the  moral  agency  which  I  have  given
unto  them  that  every  man  may  be  accountable  for  his  own  sins
in  the  day  of  judgment.  Therefore  it  is  not  right  that  any
man  should  be  in  bondage  one  to  another.  And  for  this  pur¬
pose  have  I  established  the  Constitution  of  this  land,  by  the
hands  of  wise  men  whom  I  raised  up  unto  this  very  purpose,
and  redeemed  the  land  bv  thcshedding  of  blood.

11  Now,  unto  what  shall  I  liken  the  children  of  Zion?  I  will
liken  them  unto  the  parable  of  the  woman  and  the  unjust
judge,  (for  men  ought  always  to  pray  and  not  faint,)  which
saith,  There  was  in  a  city  a  judge  which  feared  not  God,  nei¬
ther  regarded  man.  And  there  was  a  widow  in  that  city,  and
she  came  unto  him,  saying,  avenge  me  of  mine  adversary. —
And  he  would  not  for  a  while,  but  afterward  he  said  within
himself,  though  I  fear  not  God,  nor  regard  man,  yet  because
this  widow  troubleth  me  I  will  avenge  her,  lest  by  her  contin¬
ual  coming,  she  weary  me.  Thus  will  I  liken  the  children
of  Zion.

12  Let  them  importune  at  the  feet  of  the  Judge;  and  if  he
heed  them  not,  let  them  importune  at  the  feet  of  the  governor;
and  if  the  governor  heed  them  not,  let  them  importune  at  the
feet  of  the  President;  and  if  the  President  heed  them  not,  then
will  the  Lord  arise  and  come  forth  out  of  his  hiding  place,  and
in  his  fury  vex  the  nation,  and  in  his  hot  displeasure,  and  in
his  fierce  anger,  in  his  time,  will  cut  off  these  wicked,  unfaith¬
ful,  and  unjust  stewards,  and  appoint  them  their  portion
among  hypocrites  and  unbelievers;  even  in  outer  darkness,
where  there  is  weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.. —
Pray  ye  therefore,  that  their  ears  may  he  opened  unto  your


■340


cries,  that  I  may  be  merciful  unto  them,  that  these  things  may
not  come  upon  them.  What  I  have  said  unto  you,  must  needs
be,  that  all  men  may  be  left  without  excuse;  that  wise  men
and  rulers  may  hear  and  know  that  which  they  have  never
considered;  that  I  may  proceed  tq  bring  to  pass  my  act,  my
strange  act,  an  d  perform  my  work,  my  strange  work.  That
men  may  discern  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  saith
your  God.

13  And,  again  Isay  unto  you,  it  is  contrary  to  my  command¬
ment,  and  my  will,  that  my  servant  Sidney  Gilbert  should  sell
my  store  house,  which  I  have  appointed  unto  my  people,  into
the  hands  of  mine  enemies.  Let  not  that  which  I  have  ap¬
pointed,  be  polluted  by  mine  enemies,  by  the  consent  of  those
who  call  themselves  after  my  name:  for  this  is  a  very  sore  and
grievous  sin  against  me,  and  against  my  people,  in  conse¬
quence  of  those  things  which  I  have  decreed,  and  are  soon  to
befall  the  nations.  Therefore,  it  is  my  will  that  my  people
should  claim,  and  hold  claim,  upon  that  which  I  have  appoint¬
ed  unto  them,  though  they  should  not  be  permitted  to  dwell
thereon;,  nevertheless,  I  do  not  say  they  shall  not  dwell  there¬
on;  for  inasmuch  as  they  bring  forth  fruit  and  works  meet  for
my  kingdom,  they  shall  dwell  thereon;  they  shall  build,  and
another  shall  not  inherit  it:  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and
they  shall  eat  the  fruit  thereof;  even  so.  Amen.

section  xcyin.  -

Rerdation  given  to  Enoch,  concerning  the  order  of  the  churckfior
the  benefit  of  the  poor.

1  Verily  I  say  unto  you  my  friends,  I  give  unto  you  coun¬
sel  and  a  commandment,  concerning  all  the  properties  which
belong  to  the  order,  Wfhich  I  commanded  to  be  organized  and
established,  to  be  an  united  order,  and  an  everlasting  order
for  the  benefit  of  my  church,  and  for  the  salvation  of  men  until
I  come,  with  promise  immutable  and  unchangeable,  that  inas¬
much  as  those  whom  I  commanded  were  faithful,  they  should
be  blessed  with  a  multiplicity  of  blessings;  but  inasmuch  as
they  were  not  faithful,  they  were  nigh  unto  cursing.  There¬
fore  inasmuch  as  some  of  my  servants  have  not  kept  the  com¬
mandment,  but  have  broken  the  covenant,  by  covetousness  and
with  feigned  words,  I  have  cursed  them  with  a  very  6ore  and
grievous  curse:  for  I  the  Lord  have  decreed  in  my  heart,  that
inasmuch  as  any  man,  belonging  to  the  order,  shall  be  found
a  transgressor;  or,  in  other  words,  shall  break  the  covenant
with  which  ye  are  bound,  he  shall  be  cursed  in  his  life,  . and


241


shall  be  trodden  down  by  whom  I  will,  for  I  the  Lord  am  not  to
be  mocked  in  these  things:  and  all  this  that  the  innocent  among
you,  may  not  be  condemned  with  the  unjust;  and  that  the
guilty  among  you  may  not  escape,  because  I  the  Lord  Lave
promised  unto  you  a  crown  of  glory  at  my  right  Land.  There¬
fore  inasmuch  as  you  are  found  transgressors,  ye  cannot  escape
my  wrath  in  your  lives:  inasmuch  as  ye  are  cut  off  by  trans¬
gression,  ye  cannot  escape  the  buffetings  of  satan  until  the
day  of  redemption.

'Z  And  I  now  give  unto  you  power  from  this  very  hour,  that
if  any  man  among  you,  of  the  order,  is  found  a  transgressor,
and  repenteth  not  of  the  evil,  that  ye  shall  deliver  him  over
unto  the  buffetings  of  satan;  and  he  shall  not  have  power  to
bring  evil  upon  you.  It  is  wisdom  in  me:  therefore  a  com¬
mandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  organize  yourselves,
and  appoint  every  man  his  stewardship,  that  every  man  may
give  an  account  unto  me  of  the  stewardship  which  is  appoint¬
ed  unto  him:  for  it  is  expedient  that  1  the  Lord  should  make
every  man  accountable,  as  stewards  over  eartlily  blessings,
whicii  I  have  made  and  prepared  for  my  creatures.  I  the  Lord
stretched  out  the  heavens,  and  builded  the  earth  as  a  very  han¬
dy  work;  and  all  things  therein  are  mine;  and  it  is  my  purpose
to  provide  for  my  saints,  for  all  things  are  mine:  but  it  must
needs  be  done  in  mine  own  way:  and  behold  this  is  the  way,
that  I  the  Lord  have  decreed  to  provide  for  my  saints:  that
the  poor  shall  be  exalted,  in  that  the  rich  are  made  low;  for
the  earth  is  full,  and  there  is  enough  and  to  spare,  yea,  I  pre¬
pared  all  things,  and  have  given  unto  the  children  of  men  to
be  agents  unto  themselves.  Therefore  if  any  man  shall  take
of  the  abundance  wliich  I  have  made,  and  impart  not  his  por¬
tion,  according  to  the  law  of  my  gospel,  unto  the  poor,  and
the  needy,  he  shall,  with  the  wicked,  lift  up  his  eyes  in  hell,
being  in  torment.

3  And  now,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  concerning  the  properties
of  the  order:  let  my  servant  Peiagoram  have  appointed  unto
him  the  place  where  he  now  resides,  and  the  lot  ofTahhanes,
for  his  stewardship,  for  his  support  while  he  is  laboring  in  my
vineyard,  even  a3  I  will  when  I  shall  command  him;  and  let
all  things  be  done  according  to  counsel  of  the  order,  and  uni¬
ted  consent,  or  voice  of  the  order  which  dwell  in  the  land  of
Shinehah.  And  this  stewardship  and  blessing,  I  the  Lord
confer  upon  my  servant  Peiagoram,  for  a  blessing  upon  him,
and  his  seed  after  him;  and  I  will  multiply  blessings  upon  him,
inasmuch  as  he  shall  be  humble  before  me.

4  And  again,  let  my  servant  Mahemson  have  appointed  unto


242


him,  for  Lis  stewardship,  the  lot  of  land  which  my  servant
Zombre  obtained  in  exchange  for  his  former  inheritance,  for
him  and  his  seed  after  him;  and  inasmuch  as  he  is  faithful  f
will  multiply  blessings  upon  him  and  his  seed  after  him.  And
let  my  servant  Mahemson  devote  his  moneys  for  the  proclaim¬
ing  of  my  words,  according  as  my  servant  Gazelam  shall  direct.

5  And  again,  let  my  servant  Shedcrlaomach  have  the  place
upon  which  he  now  dwells.  And  let  my  servant  Olihah  have
the  lot  which  is  set  off  joining  the  house  which  is  to  be  for  the
Laile-shine-house,  which  is  lot  number  one:  and  also  the  lot
upon  which  his  father  resides.  And  let  my  servant  Shederla-
omach  and  Olihah  have  the  Lane-sliine-house  and  all  things
that  pertain  unto  it;  and  this  shall  be  their  stewardship  which
shall  be  appointed  unto  them;  and  inasmuch  as  they  are  faith¬
ful,  behold  I  will  bless,  and  multiply  blessings  upon  them:  and
this  is  the  beginning  of  the  stewardship  which  I  have  appoint¬
ed  them,  for  them  and  their  seed  after  them;  and  inasmuch  as
they  are  faithful,  I  will  multiply  blessings  upon  them  and
their  seed  after  them;  even  a  multiplicity  of  blessings.

6  And  again,  let  my  servant  Zombre  have  the  house  in  which
he  lives,  arid  the  inheritance,  all  save  the  ground  which  has
been  reserved  for  the  building  of  my  houses,  which  pertains  to
that  inheritance;  and  those  lots  which  have  been  named  for
my  servant  Olihah.  And  inasmuch  as  he  is  faithful,  I  will
multiply  blessings  upon  him.  And  it  is  my  will  thathe  should
sell  the  lots  that  are  laid  off  for  the  building  up  of  the  city  of
my  saints,  inasmuch  as  it  shall  be  made  known  to  him  by  the
voice  of  the  Spirit,  and  according  to  the  counsel  of  the  order;
and  by  the  voice  of  the  order.  And  this  is  the  beginning  of
the  stewardship  which  I  have  appointed  unto  him,  for  a  bles¬
sing  unto  him,  and  his  seed  after  him;  and  inasmuch  as  he  is
faithful,  I  will  multiply  a  multiplicity  of  blessings  upon  him.

7  And  again,  let  my  servant  Ahashdah  have  appointed  unto
him,  the  houses  and  lot  where  he  now  resides,  and  the  lot  and
building  on  which  the  Ozondah  stands;  and  also  the  lot  which
is  on  the  corner  south  of  the  Ozondah;  and  also  the  lot  on
which  the  Shule  is  situated:  And  all  this  I  have  appointed  un¬
to  my  servant  Ahashdah,  for  his  stewardship,  for  a  blessing
upon  him  and  his  seed  after  him,  for  the  benefit  of  the  Ozon¬
dah  of  my  order,  which  I  have  established  for  my  stake  in  the
land  of  Shinehah;  yea,  verily  this  is  the  stewardship  which
I  have  appointed  unto  my  servant  Ahashdah;  even  this  whole
Ozondah  establishment,  him  and  his  agent,  and  his  seed  after
him,  and  inasmuch  as  he  is  faithful  in  keeping  my  command¬
ments  ,  which  I  have  given  unto  him,  I  will  multiply  blessings
upon  him,  and  his  seed  after  him,  even  a  multiplicity  of  blessings.


8  And  again,  let  my  servant  Gazelam  have  appointed  unto
him,  the  lot  which  is  laid  off  for  the  building  of  my  house,  which
is  forty  rods  long,  and  twelve  wide,  and  also  the  inheritance
upon  which  his  father  now  resides;  and  this  is  the  beginning  of
the  stewardship  which  I  have  appointed  unto  him,  tor  a  bles¬
sing  upon  him,  and  upon  his  father,  for  behold,  I  have  reserv¬
ed  an  inheritance  for  his  father,  for  his  support:  therefore  he
shall  be  reckoned  in  the  house  of  my  servant  Gazelam;  and  I
will  multiply  blessings  upon  the  house  of  my  servant  Gazelam,
inasmuch  as  he  is  faithful,  even  a  multiplicity  of  blessings.

9  And  now  a  commandment  I  give  unto  you  concerning  Zi¬
on,  that  you  shall  no  longer  be  bound  as  an  united  order  to
your  brethren  of  Zion,  only  on  this  wise:  after  you  are  organ¬
ized  you  shall  be  called  the  united  order  of  the  stake  of  Zion,
the  city  of  Shinehah.  And  your  brethren,  after  they  are  or¬
ganized,  shall  be  called  the  united  order  of  the  city  of  Zion:
and  they  shall  be  organized  in  their  own  names,  and  in  their
own  name;  and  they  shall  do  their  business  in  their  own  name,
and  in  their  own  names:  and  you  shall  do  your  business  in
your  own  name,  and  in  your  own  names.  And  this  I  have
commanded  to  be  done  for  your  salvation  and  also  for  their
salvation  in  consequence  of  their  being  driven  out  and  that
which  is  to  come.  The  covenants  being  broken  through  trans¬
gression,  by  covetousness  and  feigned  words:  therefore,  you
are  desolved  as  a  united  order  with  your  brethren,  that  you  are
not  bound  only  up  to  this  hour,  unto  them,  only  on  this  wise,
as  I  said,  by  loan,  as  shall  be  agreed  by  this  order,  in  council,
as  your  circumstances  will  admit,  and  the  voice  of  the  coun¬
oil  direct.

10  And  again,  a  commandment  I  give  unto  you  concerning
your  stewardship  which  I  have  appointed  unto  you:  behold  all
these  properties  are  mine,  or  else  your  faith  is  vain,  and  ye
are  found  hypocrites,  and  the  covenants  which  ye  have  made
unto  me  are  broken:  and  if  the  properties  are  mine  then  ye
are  stewards,  otherwise  ye  are  no  stewards.  But  verily  1  say
unto  you,  I  have  appointed  unto  you  to  be  stewards  over  mine
house,  even  stewards  indeed:  and  for  this  purpose  I  have  com¬
manded  you  to  organize  yourselves,  even  to  shinelah  my  words,
the  fulness  of  my  scriptures,  the  revelations  which  I  have  giv¬
en  unto  you,  and  which  I  shall  hereafter,  from  time  to  time,
give  unto  you,  for  the  purpose  of  building  up  my  church  and
kingdom  on  the  earth,  and  to  prepare  my  people  for  the  time
when  I  shall  dwell  with  them,  which  is  nigh  at  hand.

11  And  ye  shall  prepare  for  yourselves  a  place  for  a  treasury,
and  consecrate  it  unto  my  name;  and  ye  shall  appoint  one


244


among  you  to  keep  the  treasury,  arid  he  shall  bo  ordained  un¬
to  this  blessing;  and  there  shall  be  a  seal  upon  the  treasury,
and  all  the  savred  things  shall  !>■■>  delivered  into  the  treasury,
and  no  man  among  you  shall  call  it  his  own,  or  any  part  ofit,
for  it  shall  belong  to  you  all  with  one  accord;  and  1  give  it  un¬
to  you  from  this  very  hour:  an  I  row  see  to  it.  that  ye  go  to
and  make  use  of  the  stewardship  which  1  have  .;j  pointed  unto
you,  exclusive  of  the  sacred  things,  lor  the  pin |  <  so  ot  shine-
fane  these  sacr'd  things,  as  I  have  said:  an  :  the  ..vails  of  the
sacred  things  shall  ha  had  in  the  ir  -saury,  and  a  m >ul  shall  be
upon  it,  and  it  shall  not  be  used  or  taken  out  of  the  treasury
by  any  one,  n  .itlier  shall  the  seal  b  *  loosed  which  shall  be
placed  upon  it,  only  by  tlie  voice  of  the  order,  or  by  command¬
ment.  And  thus  shall  ye  preserve  all  the  avails  of  the  sacred
things  in  the  treasury,  lor  sacred  and  holy  purposes:  and  this
shall  he  called  the  sacred  treasury  of  the  Lord:  and  a  seal  shall
be  kept  upon  it  that  it  may  be  holy  and  consecrated  unto  the
Lord.

12  And  again,  there  shall  be  another  treasury  prepared  and  a
treasurer  appointed  to  keep  the  treasury,  and  a  seal  shall  be
placed  upon  it;  and  all  moneys  that  you  receive  in  your  stew¬
ardships,  by  improving  upon  the  properties  which  1  have  ap¬
pointed  unto  you,  in  houses  or  in  lands,  or  in  cattle,  or  in  all
things  save  it  be  the  holy  and  sacred  writings,  which  1  have
reserved  unto  myself  for  holy  and  sacred  purposes,  shall  bo
cast  into  the  treasury  as  fast  as  you  receive  moneys  by  hun¬
dreds  or  by  fifties,  or  by  twenties,  or  by  tens,  or  by  fives,  or  in
other  words,  if  any  man  among  you  obtain  five  talents  let  him
cast  them  into  the  treasury:  or  if  he  obtain  ten,  or  twenty,  or
fifty,  or  an  hundred,  let  him  do  likewise;  and  let  not  any  man
among  you  say  that  it  is  his  own,  for  it  shall  not  be  called  his,
nor  any  part  of  it;  and  there  shall  not  any  part  of  it  be  used,
or  taken  out  of  the  treasury,  only  by  the  voice  and  common
consent  of  the  order.  And  this  shall  be  the  voice  and  com¬
mon  consent  of  the  order:  that  any  man  among  you,  say  unto
•Jie  treasurer,  I  have  need  of  this  to  help  me  in  my  steward¬
ship.  if  it  be  five  lalente,  or  if  it  be  ten  talents,  or  twenty,  or
fifty,  or  an  hundred,  the  treasurer  shall  give  unto  him  the  sum
which  lie  requires,  to  help  him  in  his  stewardship,  until  lie  be
found  a  transgressor,  and  it  is  manifest  before  tiio  council  of
the  order  plainly,  that  lie  is  an  unfaithful,  and  an  unwise  stew¬
ard;  but  so  long  as  he  is  in  full  fellowship,  and  is  faithful,  and
wise  in  his  stewardship,  this  shall  be  his  token  unto  the  treas¬
urer  that  the  treasurer  shall  not  withhold.  Hut  in  case  of
transgression  the  treasurer  shall  be  suhj  'ct  unto  the  council
and  voice  of  the  order.  And  in  case  the  treasurer  is  found  aa


245


unfaithful,  and  an  unwise  steward,  he  shall  be  subject  to  the
counsel  and  voice  of  the  order,  and  shall  be  removed  out  of  his
place,  and  another  shall  lie  appointed  in  his  stead.

13  And  again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,  concerning  your  debts,
behold  it  is  my  will  Unit  you  should  pay  all  your  ut-bls;  and  it
is  my  will  that  you  should  humble  yourselvm  before  me,  and
obtain  this  blessing  by  your  diligence  and  humility,  and  the
prayer  of  faith :  and  inasmuch  as  you  are  diligent  and  humble,
and  exercise  the  prayer  of  faith,  behold  I  will  sullen  the  hearts
of  those  to  whom  you  are  in  debt,  until  I  shall  send  means  un¬
to  you  for  your  deliverance.  Therefore  write  speedily  unto
Cainhannoch,  and  write  according  to  that  which  shall  be  dic¬
tated  by  my  Spirit,  and  I  will  solten  the  hearts  of  those  to
whom  you  are  in  debt,  that  it  shall  be  taken  away  out  of  their
minds  to  bring  a'Hiction  upon  you.  And  inasmuch  as  ye  are
humble  and  faithful  and  call  on  my  name,  behold  I  will  give
you  the  victory:  I  give  unto  you  a  promise,  that  you  shall  be
delivered  this  once,  out  of  your  bondage:  inasmuch  as  you  ob¬
tain  a  chance  to  loan  money  by  hundreds,  or  thousands,  even
until  you  shall  loan  enough  to  deliver  yourselves  from  bondage,
it  is  your  privilege,  a*l  pledge  the  properties  which  I  have  put
into  your  hands,  this  once,  by  giving  your  names,  by  common
consent,  or  otherwise,  as  it  shall  seem  good  unto  you:  I  give
unto  y  u  this  privilege,  this  once,  and  b  -hold,  if  you  proceed
to  do  the  things  which  I  have  laid  before  you,  according  to
my  commandments,  all  these  things  are  mins,  and  ye  are  my
stewards,  and  the  master  will  not  suffer  his  bouse  lobe  broken
up:  even  so.  Amen.

SECTION  XCIX.

Revelation  given  November,  1834.

1  It  is  my  will  that  my  servant  Warren  A.  Cowdery  should
be  appointed  and  ordained  a  presiding  high  priest  over  my
church  in  the  land  of  Freedom  and  the  regions  round  about,
and  should  preach  my  everlasting  gospel  and  lift  up  his  voice
and  warn  the  people,  not  only  in  his  own  place,  but  in  (he  ad¬
joining  countries,  and  devote  his  whole  time  in  this  high  and
holy  calling  which  I  now  give  unto  him,  seeking  diligently  the
kingdom  of  heaven  and  its  righteousness,  and  all  things  ne¬
cessary  shall  he  added  thereunto;  for  the  laborer  is  worthy  of
his  hire.

2  And  again,  verily  T  say  unto  you,  the  coming  of  the  Lord
draweth  nigh,  an  '  it  nvertaketh  the  world  as  a  thief  in  the
night:  therefore,  gird  up  your  loins  that  you  may  be  the  chib


246


dren  of  the  light,  and  that  day  shall  not  overtake  you  as  a
thief.

3  And -again,  verily  I  say  unto  you,' there  was  joy  in  heaven
when  my  servant  Warren  bowed  to  my  scepter,  and  separated
himself  from  the  crafts  of  men:  therefore,  blessed  is  my  ser¬
vant  Warren,  for  I  will  have  mercy  on  him,  and  notwithstan¬
ding  the  vanity  of  his  heart  I  will  lift  him  up  inasmuch  as  he
will  humble  himself  before  me;  and  I  will  give  him  grace  and
assurance  wherewith  he  may  stand;  and  if  he  continues  to  be
a  faithful  witness  and  a  light  unto  the  church,  I  have  prepared
a  crown  for  him  in  the  mansions  of  my  Father:  even  so. —
Amen.


247

SECTION  C.

APPEK3SIX.

7  Hearken,  O  ye  people  of  my  church,  saith  the  Lord  your
God,  and  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  you;  the  Lord
who  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple:  the  Lord  who  shall
come  down  upon  the  world  with  a  curse  to  judgment;  yea,
upon  all  the  nations  that  forget  God,  and  upon  all  the  ungod¬
ly  among  you.  For  he  shall  make  bare  his  holy  arm  in  the
eyes  of  all  the  nations,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see
the  salvation  of  their  God.  Wherefore,  prepare  ye,  prepare
ye,  O  my  people;  sanctify  yourselves;  gather  ye  together,  O
3Te  people  of  my  church,  upon  the  land  of  Zion,  all  you  that
have  not  been  commanded  to  tarry.  Go  ye  out  from  Babylon.
Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord.  Call  your  sol¬
emn  assemblies,  and  speak  often  one  to  another.  And  let  ev¬
ery  man  call- upon  the  name  of  the  Lord;  yea,  verily  I  say  un¬
to  you,  again,  the  time  has  come  when  the  voice  of  the  Lord
is  unto  you,  Go  ye  out  of  Babylon;  gather  ye  out  from  among
the  nations,  from  the  four  winds,  from  one  end  of  heaven  to
the  other.

2  Send  forth  the  elders  of  my  church  unto  the  nations  which
are  afar  off;  unto  the  islands  of  the  sea;  send  forth  unto  for¬
eign  lands;  call  upon  all  nations;  firstly,  upon  the  Gentiles,
and  then  upon  the  Jews.  And  behold  and  lo,  this  shall  be
their  cry,  and  the  voice  of  the  Lord  unto  all  people:  Go  ye
forth  unto  the  land  of  Zion,  that  the  borders  of  my  people  may
be  enlarged,  and  that  her  stakes  may  be  strengthened,  and  that
Zion  may  go  forth  unto  the  regions  round  about:  yea,  let  the
cry  go  forth  among  all  people;  Awake  and  arise  and  go  forth
to  meet  the  Bridegroom:  behold  and  lo  the  Bridegroom  com-
eth,  go  ye  out  to  meet  him.  Prepare  yourselves  for  the  great
day  of  the  Lord.  Watch,  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the
day  nor  the  hour.  Let  them,  therefore,  who  are  among  the
Gentiles,  flee  unto  Zion.  And  let  them  who  be  of  Judah,  flee
unto  Jerusalem,  unto  the  mountains  of  the  Lord’s  house.  Go
ye  out  from  among  the  nations,  even  from  Babylon,  from  the
midst  of  wickedness,  which  is  spiritual  Babylon.  But  verily
thus  saith  the  Lord,  let  not  your  flight  be  in  haste,  but  let  all
things  be  prepared  before  you:  and  he  that  goeth,  let  him  not
look  back,  lest  sudden  destruction  shall  come  upon  him.

3  Hearken  and  hear  O  ye  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  Listen
ye  elders  of  my  church  together,  and  hear  the  voice  of  the
Lord,  for  he  calleth  upon  all  men  and  he  commandeth  all  men
ever y  where  to  repent:  for  behold  the  Lord  God  hath  sent


248


forth  the  angel,  crying  through  the  midst  of  heaven,  saying;
Prepare  ye  tne  way  of  the  Lord,  and  make  his  paths  strait,
for  the  hour  of  his  coining  is  nigh,  when  the  Lamb  shall  stand
upon  mount  Zion,  and  with  him  a  hundred  and  flirty  tour
thousand,  having  his  Father’s  name  written  in  their  foreheads:
wherefore,  prepare  ye  fur  the  coming  cf  the  Bridegroom:  go
ye,  go  ye  out  to  meet  him,  for  behold  he  shall  stand  upon  the
mount  of  Olivet,  and  upon  the  mighty  ocean,  even  the  great
deep,  and  upon  the  islands  of  the  sea,  and  upon  the  land  of
Zion;  and  he  shall  utter  his  voice  out  of  Zion,  and  he  shall
speak  from  Jerusalem,  and  his  voice  shall  be  heard  among  all
people,  and  it  shall  be  a  voice  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,
and  as  the  voice  of  a  great  thunder,  which  shall  break  down
the  mountains,  and  the  vallies  shall  not  be  found:  he  shall
command  the  great  deep  and  it  shall  be  driven  back  into  the
north  countri  s,  and  the  islands  shall  become  one  land,  and
the  land  of  Jerusalem  and  the  land  of  Zion,  shall  be  turned
back  into  their  own  place,  and  the  earth  shall  be  like  as  it  was
in  the  days  before  it  was  divided.  And  the  Lord  even  the  Sav¬
ior  shall  stand  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  and  shall  reign  over
all  flesh.  And  they  who  are  in  the  north  countries  shall  come
in  remembrance  betore  the  Lord,  and  their  prophets  shall  hear
his  voice,  and  shall  no  longer  stay  themselves,  and  they  shall
■mite  the  rocks,  and  the  ice  shall  flow  down  at  their  presence.
And  an  high  way  shall  be  cast  up  in  the  midst  of  the  great
deep.  Their  enemies  shall  become  a  prey  unto  them,  and  in
the  barren  deserts  there  shall  come  forth  pools  of  living  water;
and  the  parched  ground  shall  no  longer  be  a  thirsty  land. —
And  they  shall  bring  forth  their  rich  treasures  unto  the  chil¬
dren  of  Ep..raim  my  servants.  And  the  boundaries  of  the  ev¬
erlasting  hills  shall  tremble  at  their  presence.  And  then  shall
they  fall  down  and  be  crowned  with  glory,  even  in  Zion,  by
the  hands  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  even  the  children  of
Ephraim;  and  they  shall  be  filled  with  songs  of  everlasting  joy.
Behold  this  is  the  blessing  of  the  everlasting  God  upon  the
tribes  of  Israel,  and  the  richer  blessing  upon  the  head  of
Ephraim  and  his  fellows.  And  they  also  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,
after  their  pain,  shall  be  sanctified  in  holiness  before  the  Lord
to  dwell  in  his  presence  day  and  night  forever  and  ever.

4  And  now  verily  saith  the  Lord,  that  these  things  might  be
known  among  you,  O  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  1  have  sent
forth  mine  angel,  flying  through  the  midst  of  heaven,  having
the  everlasting  gospel,  who  hath  appeared  unto  some,  and
hath  committed  it  unto  man,  who  shall  appear  unto  many  that
dwell  on  the  earth.:  and  this  gospel  shall  be  preached  unto  eve¬
ry  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  the  so*-


249


rants  of  God  shall  go  forth,  saying,  with  a  loud  voice:  Fear
God  and  give  glory  to  him:  f  >r  the  hour  of  his  judgment  ia
come:  and  worship  him  that  made  heaven,  and  earth,  and  sea,
and  the  fountain  of  waters,  calling  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord
day  and  night,  saying:  O  that  thou  wouldst  rend  the  heavens,
that  tiioa  wouldst  come  down,  that  the  mountains  might  flow
down  at  thy  presence.  And  it  shall  be  answered  upon  their
heads,  for  the  presence  of  the  Lord  shall  be  as  the  melting  lire
that  burnetii,  and  as  the  fire  which  causeth  the  waters  to  boiL
O  Lord,  thou  shall  come  down  to  make  thy  name  known  to
thine  adversaries,  and  all  nations  shall  tremble  at  thy  presence.
When  thou  doetli  terrible  things,  tilings  they  look  not  for;
yea,  when  thou  comnst  down  and  the  mountains  flow  down  at
thy  presence,  thou  shalt  meet  him  who  rejoiceth  and  worketb
right  'ousness,  who  remember  thee  in  thy  ways:  for  since  the
beginning  of  the  world  have  not  men  heard  nor  perceived  by
the  ear,  neither  hath  any  eye  seen,  O  God,  besides  thee,  how
great  tilings  thou  hast  prepared  for  him  that  waiteldi  for  thee.
5  And  it  shall  be  said,  Who  is  this  that  cometh  down  from
God  in  heaven  width  died  garments:  yea,  from  the  region*
which  are  not  known,  clothed  in  his  glorious  apparel,  travel¬
ling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength?  And  he  shall  say  I  am.
lie  who  spake  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save.  And  the
Lord  shall  ba  rad  in  Iii3  apparel,  and  his  garments  like  him
that  treaddelh  in  the  wine  vat,  and  so  great  shall  be  the  glory
of  his  presence,  that  the  sun  shall  hide  his  face  in  shame;  and
the  moon  shall  withhold  its  light,  and  the  stars  shall  be  hurled
from  their  places:  and  his  voica  shall  be  heard,  I  have  trodden
the  wine-press  alone,  and  hava  brought  judgment  upon  all  peo¬
ple;  and  none  was  with  me;  and  I  have  trampled  them  in  my
fury,  and  I  did  tread  upon  them  in  mine  anger,  and  their  biood
hav:  I  sprinkled  upon  my  garments,  and  stained  all  uy  rai¬
ment:  for  this  was  the  day  of  vengeance  which  was  in  my
heart.  And  now  the  year  of  my  redeemed  is  come,  and  they
shall  mention  the  loving  kindness  of  their  Lord,  and  all  that
he  has  bestowed  upon  them,  according  to  his  goodness,  and
according  to  liis  loving  kindness,  forever  and  ever.  In  all  their
afflictions  he  was  afflicted.  And  the  angel  of  his  presence
saved  them:  and  in  his  love,  and  in  his  pity,  he  redeemed
them,  and  bare  them,  and  carried  them  all  the  days  of  old;
yea,  and  Enoch  also,  and  they  who  were  with  him;  the  proph¬
ets  wiiowiri  before  him,  and  Noah  also,  and  they  who  were
before  him.  an  J  Moses  also,  and  they  who  were  before  him,
and  from  Moses  to  Elijah,  and  (rom  Elijah  to  John,  who  were
with  Christ  in  his  resurrection,  and  the  holy  apostles,  with
Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob,  shall  be  in  the  presence  of  the


250


Lamb.  And  the  graves  of  the  saints  shall  be  opened,  and  they
shall  come  forth  and  stand  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Lamb,
when  he  shall  stand  upon  mount  Zion,  and  upon  the  holy  city,
the  New  Jerusalem,  and  they  shall  sing  the  song  of  the  Lamb
day  and  night  forever  and  ever.

(>  And  for  this  cause,  that  men  might  be  made  partakers  of
the  glories  which  were  to  be  revealed,  the  Lord  sent  forth  the
fulness  of  his  gospel,  his  everlasting  covenant,  reasoning  in
plainness,  and  simplicity,  to  prepare  the  weak  for  those  things
which  are  coming  on  the  earth;  and  for  the  Lord’s  errand  in
the  day  when  the  weak  should  confound  the  wise,  and  the  lit¬
tle  one  become  a  strong  nation,  and  two  should  put  their  tens
of  thousands  to  flight;  and  by  the  weak  things  of  the  earth,
the  Lord  should  thresh  the  nations  by  the  power  of  his  Spirit.
And  for  this  cause  these  commandments  were  given;  they  were
commanded  to  be  kept  from  the  world  in  the  day  that  they
were  given,  but  now  are  to  go  forth  unto  all  flesh.  And  this
according  to  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Lord,  who  ruleth  over
all  flesh;  and  unto  him  that  repenteth  and  sanctifieth  himself
before  the  Lord,  shall  be  given  eternal  life.  And  upon  them
that  hearken  not  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  shall  be  fulfilled
that  which  was  written  by  the  prophet  Moses,  that  they  should
be  cut  off  from  among  the  people.

7  And  also  that  which  was  written  by  the  prophet  Malachi:
For  behold  the  day  cometh  that  shall  burn  as  an  oven,  and  all
the  proud;  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  stubble:  and
the  day  that  cometh  shall  bum  them  up  saith  the  Lord  of
hosts,  that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor  branch.  Where¬
fore  this  shall  be  the  answer  of  the  Lord  unto  them:  In  that
day  when  I  came  unto  my  own,  no  man  among  you  received
me,  and  you  were  driven  out.  When  I  called  again,  there
was  none  of  you  to  answer,  yet  my  arm  was  not  shortened  nt-
all,  that  I  could  not  redeem,  neither  my  power  to  deliver. —
Behold  at  my  rebuke  I  dry  up  the  sea.  I  make  the  rivers  a
wilderness:  their  fish  stinketh,  and  dieth  for  thirst.  1  clothe
the  heavens  with  blackness,  and  make  sackcloth  their  covering.
And  this  shall  ye  have  of  my  hand,  ye  shall  lay  down  in  sor¬
row.

8  Behold  and  lo  there  are  none  to  deliver  you,  for  ye  obeyed
not  my  voice  when  I  called  to  you  out  of  the  heavens,  ye  be¬
lieved  not  my  servants;  and  when  they  were  sent  unto  you  ye
received  them  not:  wherefore  they  sealed  up  the  testimony
and  bound  up  the  law,  and  ye  were  delivered  over  unto  dark¬
ness:  these  shall  go  away  into  outer  darkness,  where  there  is
weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  Behold  the
Lord  your  God  hath  spoken  it.  Amen.


251


SECTION  Cl.

IIASBIAGE.

1  According  to  the  custom  of  all  civilized  nations,  marriage
is  regulated  by  laws  and  ceremonies:  therefore  we  believe,
that  all  marriages  in  this  church  of  Christ  of  Latter  Day  Saints,
should  be  solemnized  in  a  public  meeting,  or  feast,  prepared
for  that  purpose:  and  that  the  solemnization  should  be  perfor¬
med  by  a  presiding  high  priest,  high  priest,  bishop,  elder,  or
priest,  not  even  prohibiting  those  persons  who  are  desirous  to
get  married,  of  being  married  by  other  authority.  We  believe
that  it  is  not  right  to  prohibit  members  of  this  church  from
marrying  out  of  the  church,  if  it  be  their  determination  so  to
do,  but  such  persons  will  be  considered  weak  in  the  faith  of
our  Lord  and  Savior  Jesus  Christ.

2  Marriage  should  be  celebrated  with  prayer  and  thanksgiv¬
ing;  and  at  the  solemnization,  the  persons  to  be  married,  stand¬
ing  together,  the  man  on  the  right,  and  the  woman  on  the
left,  shall  be  addressed,  by  the  person  officiating,  as  he  shall  be
directed  by  the  holy  Spirit;  and  if  there  be  no  legal  objections,
he  shall  say,  calling  each  by  their  names:  “You  both  mutual¬
ly  agree  to  be  each  other’s  companion,  husband  and  wife,  ob¬
serving  the  legal  rights  belonging  to  this  condition;  that  is,
keeping  yourselves  wlfolly  for  each  other,  and  from  all  others,
during  your  lives.”  And  when  they  have  answered  “Yes,”
he  shall  pronounce  them  “husband  and  wife”  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  bjr  virtue  of  the  laws  of  the  coun¬
try  and  authority  vested  in  him:  “may  God  add  his  blessings
and  keep  you  to  fulfill  your  covenants  from  henceforth  and
forever.  Amen.”

3  The  clerk  of  every  church  should  keep  a  record  of  all  mar¬
riages,  solemnized  in  his  branch.

4  All  legal  contracts  of  marriage  made  before  a  person  is  bap¬
tized  into  this  church,  should  be  held  sacred  and  fulfilled.  In¬
asmuch  as  this  church  of  Christ  has  been  reproached  with
the  crime  of  fornication,  and  polygamy:  we  declare  that  we  be¬
lieve,  that  one  man  should  have  one  wife;  and  one  woman,
but  one  husband,  except  in  case  of  death,  when  either  is  at
liberty  to  marry  again.  It  is  not  right  to  persuade  a  woman
to  be  baptized  contrary  to  the  will  of  her  husband,  neither  is  it
lawful  to  influence  her  to  leave  her  husband.  All  children  are
bound  by  law  to  obey  their  parents;  and  to  influence  them  to
embrace  any  religious  faith,  or  be  baptized,  or  leave  their  pa¬
rents  without  their  consent,  is  unlawful  and  unjust.  We  be¬
lieve  that  all  persons  who  exercise  control  over  their  fellow


202


beings,  and  prevent  them  from  embracing  the  truth,  will  har*
to  answer  tor  that  sin.

SECTION  CII.

Of  Govohi  moists  and  laws  in  General

That  cur  belirf,  with  regard  to  earthly  governments  ar.d  laws  in
general ,  may  not  he  misinterpreted  nor  misunderstood ,  tee
have  thought  proper  to  pr  esent ,  at  the  close  of  this  relume,  our
opinion  cancer  mng  the  same.

1  We  believe  that  Governments  were  instituted  of  God  for
the  benefit  of  man,  and  that  he  holds  men  accountable  lor  their
acts  in  relation  to  them,  either  in  making  laws  or  administer*
ing  them,  for  the  good  and  safety  of  society.

2  We  believe  that  no  Government  can  exist,  in  peace,  ex¬
cept  such  laws  are  framed  and  held  inviolate  as  will  secure  to
each  individual  the  free  exercise  of  conciencc,  the  right  and
control  ot  property  and  the  protection  of  life.

3  We  believe  that  all  Governments  necessarily  require  civil
officers  and  magistrates  to  enfbrc;  the  laws  of  the  same,  and
that  sue!)  as  will  administer  the  law  in  equity  and  justice
should  be  sought  for  and  upheld  by  the  voice  of  the  people,
(if  a  Republic.)  or  the  will  of  the  Sovereign.

4  We  believe  that  religion  is  instituted  of  God,  and  that
men  are  amenable  to  him  and  to  him  only  for  the  exercise  of
it,  unless  their  religious  opinion  prompts  them  to  infringe  up¬
on  the  rights  and  liberties  of  others;  but  we  do  not  believe  that
human  law  has  a  right  to  interfere  in  prescribing  rules  of  wor¬
ship  to  bind  the  consciences  of  men,  nor  dictate  lornis  fer  pub¬
lic  or  private  devotion;  that  the  civil  magistrate  should  re¬
strain  crime,  but  never  control  conscience:  should  punish
guilt,  but  never  surpress  the  freedom  ofthesoul.

5  We  believe  that  all  men  are  bound  to  sustain  and  uphold
the  respective  Governments  in  which  they  reside,  while  pro¬
tected  in  their  inherent  and  inalienable  rights  by  the  laws  of
such  Governments,  and  that  sedition  and  rebellion  are  unbe¬
coming  every  citizen  thus  protected,  and  should  be  punished
accordingly;  and  that  all  Governments  have  a  right  to  enact
such  laws  'as  in  their  own  judgments  are  best  calculated  to  se¬
cure  the  public  interest,  at  the  same  time,  however,  holding  sac¬
red  the  freedom  of  conscience.

6  We  believe  that  every  man  should  be  honored  in  his  sta¬
tion;  rulers  and  magistrates  as  such — being  placed  for  the  pro¬
tection  of  the  innocent  and  the  punishment  of  the  guilly ;  and
that  to  the  laws  all  men  owe  respect  and  deference,  as  without


253


them  peace  and  harmony  would  be  supplanted  by  anarchy  and
terror:  human  laws  being  instituted  for  the  express  purpose  of
regulating  our  interests  as  individuals  and  nations,  between
man  and  man,  and  divine  laws,  given  of  heaven,  prescribing
rules  on  spiritual  concerns,  for  faith  and  worship,  both  to  be
answered  by  man  to  his  Maker.

7  We  believe  that  Rulers,  States  and  Governments  have  a
right,  and  are  bound  to  enact  laws  (or  the  protection  of  all
citizens  in  the  free  exercise  of  their  religious  belief;  but  we  do
not  believe  that  they  have  a  right,  injustice,  to  deprive  citizens
of  this  privilege,  or  proscribe  them  in  their  opinions,  so  long
as  a  regard  and  reverence  is  shown  to  the  law's,  and  such  re¬
ligious  opinions  do  not  justify  sedition  nor  conspiracy.

8  We  bdiove  that  the  commissiin  of  crime  should  be  punish¬
ed  according  to  the  nature  of  the  off  ' nee:  that  murder,  treason,
robbery,  theft  and  the  breach  of  the  general  peace,  in  all  re¬
spects,  should  be  punished  according  to  their  criminality  and
their  tendency  to  evil  among  men,  by  the  laws  of  that  Govern¬
ment  in  which  the  offence  is  committed:  and  for  the  public
peace  and  tranquility,  all  men  should  step  forward  and  use
their  ability  in  bringing  offenders,  against  good  laws,  to  pun¬
ishment.

9  We  do  not  believe  it  just  to  mingle  religious  influence
with  civil  Government,  whereby  one  religious  society  is  foster¬
ed  and  another  proscribed  in  its  spiritual  privileges,  and  the
individual  rights  of  its  members,  as  citizens,  denied.

10  We  believe  that  all  religious  societies  have  a  right  to
deal  with  their  members  for  disorderly  conduct  according  to
the  rules  and  regulations  of  such  societies,  provided  that  such
dealing  be  for  fellowship  and  good  standing:  but  we  do  not
believe  that  any  religious  society  has  authority  fo  try  men  on
the  right  of  property  or  life,  to  take  from  them  this  world’s
goods,  or  put  them  in  jeopardy  either  life  or  limb,  neither  to
inflict  any  physical  punishment  upon  them, — they  can  only
excommunicate  them  from  their  society  and  withdraw  from
their  fellowship.

11  We  believe  that  men  should  appeal  to  the  civil  law  for  re¬
dress  of  all  wrongs  and  grievances,  where  personal  abuse  is
inflicted,  or  the  right  of  property  or  character  infringed,  where
such  laws  exist  as  will  protect  the  same:  but  we  believe  that
all  men  are  justified  m  defending  themselves,  their  friends
and  property,  and  the  Government,  from  the  unlawful  assaults
and  encroachments  of  all  persons,  in  times  of  exigences,
where  immediate  appeal  cannot  be  made  to  the  laws,  and  re¬
lief  afforded.

12  We  believe  it  just  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  nations  of


254


the  earth,  and  warn  the  righteous  to  save  themselves  from  the
corruption  of  the  world;  but  we  do  not  believe  it  right  to  inter¬
fere  with  bond-servants,  neither  preach  the  gospel  to,  nor  bap¬
tize  them,  contrary  to  the  will  and  wish  of  their  masters,  nor
to  meddle  with,  or  influence  them  in  the  least  to  cause  them
to  be  dissatisfied  with  their  situations  in  this  life,  thereby  jeop¬
ardizing  the  lives  of  men:  such  interference  we  believe  to  be
unlawful  and  unjust,  and  dangerous  to  the  peace  of  every  Cor-
erument  allowing  human  beings  to  be  held  in  servitude.


255


GENERAL  ASSEMBLY.

At  a  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of  the  Latter  Day  Saints,
according  to  previous  notice,  held  on  the  17 th  of  August,  1835,
to  take  into  consideration  the  labors  of  a  certain  committee
rchich  had  been  appointed  by  a  General  Assembly  of  Septem¬
ber  24, 1834,  asjolloics:


“The  Assembly  being  duly  organized,  and  after  transacting
certain  business  of  the  church,  proceeded  to  appoint  a  commit¬
tee  to  arrange  the  items  of  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  the
government  of  his  church  of  the  Latter  Day  Saints,  which
church  was  organized  and  commenced  its  rise  on  the  6th  day
of  April,  1830.  These  items  are  to  be  taken  from  the  bible,
book  of  Mormon,  and  the  revelations  which  have  been  given
to  said  church  up  to  this  date,  or  shall  be  until  such  arrange¬
ment  is  made.

“Elder  Samuel  H.  Smith,  for  the  assembly,  moved  that  pre¬
siding  elders,  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  Oliver  Cowdery,  Sidney  Rig-
don  and  Frederick  G.  Williams  compose  said  committee.  The
nomination  was  seconded  by  elder  Hyrura  Smith,  whereupon
it  received  the  unanimous  vote  of  the  assembly.

(Signed.)  OLIVER  COWDERY,  ]

ORSON  HYDE.


S  Clerks.”


Wherefore  Presidents  O.  Cowdery  and  S.  Rigdon,  proceed¬
ed  and  organized  the  high  council  of  the  church  at  Kirtland,
and  Presidents  W.  W.  Phelp3  and  J.  Whitiner  proceeded  and
organized  the  high  council  of  the  church  in  Missouri.  Bishop
Newel  K.  Whitney  proceeded  and  organized  his  counsellors  of
the  church  in  Kirtland,  and  acting  Bishop  John  Corrill,  organi¬
zed  the  counsellors  of  the  church  in  Missouri:  and  also  Presidents
Leonard  Rich,  Levi  W.  Hancock,  Sylvester  Smith  and  Ly¬
man  Sherman,  organized  the  council  of  the  seventy;  and  also,
Elder  John  Gould,  acting  President,  organized  the  travelling
Elders;  and  also  Ira  Ames,  acting  President,  organized  the
Priests;  and  also  Erastus  Babbit,  acting  President,  organized
the  Teachers;  and  also  William  Burgess,  acting  President,  or¬
ganized  the  Deacons;  and  also  Thomas  Gates,  assisted  by
John  Young,  William  Cowdery,  Andrew  H.  Aldrich,  Job  L.
Lewis  and  Oliver  Higley,  as  Presidents  of  the  day,  organized
the  whole  assembly.  Elder  Levi  W.  Hancock  appointed  cho¬
rister:  a  hymn  was  then  sung  and  the  services  of  the  day  open¬
ed  by  the  prayer  of  President  O.  Cowdery,  and  the  solemni¬
ties  of  eternity  rested  upon  the  audience.  Another  hymn  w;a»
sung:  after  transacting  some  business  for  the  church  the  amB.
•nee  adjourned  for  one  hour.


256


Afternoon. — After  a  hymn  wii  sung,  President  Cow*
dery  arose  and  introduced  the  ‘-Book  ot'  doctrine  and  cove¬
nants  of  the  church  of  the  Latter  Day  Saints,”  in  bel.alf  of
the  committee:  he  was  followed  by  President  Rigdon,  who
explained  the  manner  by  which  they  intended  to  obtain  the
voice  of  the  assembly  for  or  against  said  book:  the  otbi  r  two
committee,  named  above,  Were  abs  rnt.  According  to  said  ar
rangement  W.  VV.  Phelps  bore  record  that  the  book  presented
to  the  assembly,  was  true.  President  John  Whitmer,  also
arose,  and  testified  ll  at  it  was  true.  Elder  John  Smith,
taking  the  lead  of  the  high  council  in  Ki  rlland,  bore  record
that  the  revelations  in  said  book  were  true,  and' that  the  lec¬
tures  were  judiciously  arranged  and  compiled,  and  were  profit¬
able  for  doctrine;  whereupon  the  high  council  of  Kirtland  ac¬
cepted  and  acknowledged  them  as  the  doctrine  and  covenant*
of  their  faith,  by  a  unanimous  vote.  Elder  Levi  Jackman,  ta¬
king  the  lead  of  the  high  council  of  the  church  in  Missouri,
bore  testimony  that  the  revelations  in  said  book  were  true,
and  the  said  high  council  of  Missouri  accepted  and  acknow¬
ledged  them  as  the  doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,  by  a
unanimous  vote.

President  W.  W.  Phelps  then  read  the  written  testimony  of
the  Twelve,  as  follows.  “The  testimony  of  the  witnesses  to
the  book  ofthe  Lord’s  commandments,  which  he  gave  to  his
church  through  Joseph  Smith,  jr.  who  was  appointed  by  the
voice  ofthe  church  forthis  purpose:  we  therefore  feel  willing
to  bear  testimony  to  all  the  world  of  mankind,  to  every  crea¬
ture  upon  the  face  of  all  the  earth,  and  upon  the  islands"  of  the
sea,  that  the  Lord  has  borne  record  to  our  souls,  through  the
Holy  Ghost  shed  forth  upon  us,  that  these  commandments  were
given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  are  profitable  for  all  men,
and  are  verily  true.  AVe  give  this  testimony  unto  the  world,
the  Lord  being  our  helper:  and  it  is  through  the  grace  of  God,
the  Father,  and  hi3  Son  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  are  permitted
to  have  this  privilege  ofbearing  this  testimony  unto  the  world,
in  the  which  we  rejoice  exceedingly,  praying  the  Lord  always,
that  the  children  of  men  may  he  profited  thereby.”  Elder
Leonard  Rich  bore  record  of  the  truth  of  the  book  and  the
council  of  the  Seventy  accepted  and  acknowledged  it  as  the
doctrine  an  J  covenants  of  their  faith,  by  a  unanimous  vote.

Bishop  N.  K.  Whitney  bore  record  of  the  Iruth  of  the  book,
and  with  his  counsellors,  accepted  and  acknowledged  it  as  tire
doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,  by  a  unanimous  vote.

Acting  Bishop,  John  Corrill,  bore  record  of  the  truth  of  tha
book,  and  with  his  counsellors,  accepted  and  acknowledged  it
w  tha  doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,  by  a  unanimous


257


vote.  Acting  President,  John  Gould,  gave  his  testimony  in
favor  ofthe  book,  and  with  the  travelling  Elders,  accepted  and
acknowledged  it  as  the  doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,
by  a  unanimous  vote.

Ira  Ames,  acting  President  of  the  Priests,  gave  his  testimo¬
ny  in  favor  of  the  book,  and  with  the  Priests,  accepted  and  ac¬
knowledged  it  as  the  doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,  by
a  unanimous  vote.

Erastus  Babbit,  acting  President  of  the  Teachers,  gave  his
testimony  in  favor  ofthe  book,  and  they  accepted  and  acknow¬
ledged  it  as  the  doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,  by  a
unanimous  vote.

Wm.  Burges  acting  President  of  the  Deacons,  bore  record
of  the  truth  of  the  book,  and  they  accepted  and  acknowledged
it  as  the  doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,  by  a  unanimous

The  venerable  President,  Thomas  Gates,  then  bore  record
of  the  truth  of  the  book,  and  with  his  five  silver-headed  as¬
sistants,  and  the  whole  congregation,  accepted  and  acknowl¬
edged  it  as  the  doctrine  and  covenants  of  their  faith,  by  a
unanimous  vote.  The  several  authorities,  and  the  general  as¬
sembly,  by  a  unanimous  vote,  accepted  of  the  labors  of  the
committee.

President  W.  W.  Phelps  then  read  an  article  on  Marriage,
which  was  accepted  and  adopted,  and  ordered  to  be  printed  in
said  book,  by  a  unanimous  vote.

President  O.  Cowderythen  read  an  article  on  “governments
and  laws  in  general,”  which  was  accepted  and  adopted,  and
ordered  to  be  printed  in  said  book,  by  a  unanimous  vote.

A  hymn  was  then  sung.  President  S.  Rigdon  returned
thanks,  after  which  the  assembly  was  blessed  by  the  Presiden¬
cy,  with  uplifted  hands,  and  dismissed.

*  THOMAS  BURDICK,  )

WARREN  PARRISH,  >  Clerks.
SYLVESTER  SMITH,  )

Q


Section


x  sr  i  i  x


Preface

1  of  faith

2  of  faith

3  of  faith

4  of  faith

5  of  faith

6  of  faith

7  of  faith

PART  SECOND.

Section

1  Preface  to  the  commandments

2  Articles  and  Covenants

3  Priesthood

4  Revelation  of  September  22-3,  1832

5  Minutes  of  the  High  Council

6  Parable  of  the  wheat  &c.

7  Revelation  called  the  “olive  leaf”

8  do  to  O.  Cowdery  &  J.  Smith  jr.

9  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  O.  Cowdery

10  do  to  six  elders,  September,  1830

11  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  Sidney  Rigdon

12  do  of  January,  1831

13  do  of  February — the  law

14  do  to  the  church,  February,  1831

15  do  prophecy  of  March,  1831

16  do  on  the  gifts,  March,  1831

17  do  on  the  Spirit  May  1831

18  do  on  the  foundation  of  Zion  August  1831

19  do  on  the  Sabbath  August  1831

20  do  to  the  church  August  1831

21  do  of  September  11,  1831

22  do  to  O.  Hyde,  L.  &  L.  Johnson,  Wm.  E.  McLel-
in  and  items  of  law

do  to  Edward  Partridge  May  183
do  on  prayer  October  1831
do  testimony  of  the  commandments  Nov.  1831
17*


Paf

5

12

35

44

52

58

63

•Sr

77

82

89

95

99

100

109

111

112

116

118

120

126

128

132

134

136

149

141

145

147

150

151

ib


26  do  on  stewardships  November  1831  It

27  do  of  Zion  July  1831  If

28  do  to  O.  Cowdery  &  J.  Whitmer  Nov.  1831  If

29  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  Sidney  Rigdon  Jan.  1832  If

30  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  July  1828

31  do  to  J.  Smith  Senior,  February,  1829  If

32  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  Martin  Harris,  March,  1829

33  do  whether  John  tarried  on  earth  April  1829  1

34  do  to  O.  Cowdery  April  1829  li

35  do  to  O.  Cowdery  April  1829  1

36  do  on  losing  some  of  the  book  of  Mormon  May  1829  1'

37  do  to  H.  Smith  May  1829  1

38  do  to  J.  Knight  Sen.  May  1829  1

39  do  to  D.  Whitmer  June  1829

40  do  to  J.  Whitmer  June  1829  1

41  do  to  Peter  Whitmer  jr.  1&29

42  do  to-O.  Cowdery,  D.  Whitmer  &  M.  Harris,

January  1829  1

43  do  to  choose  Twelve  June  1829  1

44  do  to  Martin  Harris  March  1830  1

45  do  to  O.  Cowdery,  H.  Smith,  S.  H.  Smith,  &c.

April  1829  1

46  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  April  6,  1830  1

47  do  on  re-baptism  April  1830  1

48  do  to  Emma  Smith  July  1830

49  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  O  Cowdery  &  J.  Whitmer

July  1830  1

50  do  on  sacrament  and  priesthood  Sept.  1830

51  do  to  O.  Cowdery  and  the  church  Sept.  1830  1

52  do  to  D.  Whitmer,  P.  Whitmer  jr.  &  J.  Whitmer,

September,  1830  1

63  do  to  T.  B.  Marsh  SeDtember  1830  1

54  do  to  P.  P.  Pratt,  &  Z.  Peterson  Oct.  1830  1

55  do  to  E.  Thayre  &  N.  Sweet  Oct.  1839

56  do  to  O.  Pratt  Nov.  1830  1

57  do  to  E.  Partridge,  Dec.  1830  1

58  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  S.  Rigdon,  Dec.  1830

59  do  to  J.  Covill,  January  1831  1

60  do  in  answer  to  the  above,  January  1831  1

61  do  appointing  E.  Partridge  bishop,  Feb.  1831

62  do  calling  the  elders  together,  Feb.  1831  1

63  uo  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  J.  Whitmer,  March  1831  1

64  do  to  settle  certain  families  for  the  present,

March  1831

65  do  to  S.  Rigdon,  P.  P.  Pratt  &  L.  Copley,

March  1831  1


66  do  for  certain  elders  to  go  to  Missouri,  June  1831

66  do  to  S.  Gilbert,  June  1831

67  do  to  N.  Knight,  June  1831

68  do  to  W.  W.  Phelps,  June  1831

69  do  to  T.  B.  Marsh,  E.  Thayre,  &c.  June  1831

70  do  to  certain  men  to  return  from  Mo.  Aug.  1831

71  do  upon  the  bank  of  the  Missouri,  Aug.  1831

72  do  to  certain  elders  do.  do.  Aug.  1831

73  do  explanation  on  Corinthians,

74  do  to  Wm.  E.  McLelin,  &c.  Oct.  1830

75  do  on  the  order  of  Enoch,  &c.  March  1832

76  do  to  J.  Carter,  March  1832

77  do  to  S.  Burnett,  March  1832

78  do  to  J.  Murdock,  March  1832

79  do  to  F.  G.  Williams,  March  1832

80  do  A  word  of  wisdom,

81  do  for  a  school  in  Zion,  Aug.  1833

82  do  John’s  record  of  Christ,  May  1833

83  do  on  building  the  Lord’s  House,  May  1833

84  do  concerning  the  keys  of  Kingdom,  March  1833

85  do  the  laws  of  the  ancients  Aug.  1833

86  do  on  the  order  of  Enoch  April,  1832

87  do  to  several  elders,  Jan.  1832

88  do  in  addition  to  the  law,  April  1832

89  do  appointing  a  bishop  in  Kirtland,  Dec.  1831

90  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  S.  Rigdon,  Dec.  1831

91  do  the  vision,

92  do  concerning  the  Apocrypha,  March  1833

93  do  on  the  order  of  Enoch,  &c.  March  1833

94  do  to  J.  Smith  jr.  &  S.  Rigdon,  Oct.  1833

95  do  chastening,  June  1833

96  do  showing  the  order  of  Enoch’s  stake,  June  1833

97  do  the  parable,  Dec.  1833

98  do  on  Enoch’s  order  for  the  poor,

99  do  to  W.  A.  Cowdery,  Nov.  1834

100  Appendix

101  Marriage,

102  Governments  and  laws  in  general,

General  Assembly,


192

195

ib

196

197

198

199

202

ib

203

204

205

206

ib

207

ib

208

210

213

214

216

219

221

222

223

225

ib

231

ib

232

233

1  234

235

340

245

247

251

252

255


1*1


'  *:  :  r

of»  •

Mt  :  .:•  .W  #U-

.  n  V>

h.t  ;  .  ,t  •  . .-ft!  -i  "■  .  •(*»•<*  >\  i  ■  -l

f.  • . r  t  i  -

-  vn-  ivs  v  .(•;»  •  oh '  '

I  -til  i


f»  *

1.


.  t  4««*M  •


I  •


•  *l  v>  <

■  h&T-u  .  on  4  H  i-  i  '■
W  /.-i.:*  1  t.vnxn  *'»  ;1<A  o  _■

88*1  vsb'.  «  :i ■'?'  ih!:r  >  :

■  .

:  ..  1  :o  :  •  i-i  it.)  ..!>

V.  i  i‘  l.;-'SV  ■  1  jt  i«S

£S$.f.  ;&  ■  *at  0.  *>  •  .

:  l  .o^-  ;


n«&.v:


4i


i&l


t>T  r'  '


'  >'•  .  •  c:>  l«.

>  '  >  '“II  yut'f  'if.t  ob  S<!  •’ '

.

*

■  UWO  |8'


CONTENTS.


[  The  arrangement  of  the  Lectures  supercedes  the  necessity  of
any  other  rfercnce  than  the  Index.]


PART  SECOND.

A  Sec.  Par.


Aaronic  or  lesser  priesthood  an  appendage,  &c.
Authority  of  the  standing  councils  at  the  stakes,

- of  the  standing  council  at  Zion

Adam  blessed  his  posterity  in  Adam-ondi-Ahman,
Adam  prophesied  concerning  his  posterity,
Authority  of  bishops,

Appeal  from  the  bishop’s  council  to  the  high  council,
Appendages  of  the  high  priesthood,

Appeal  to  the  seat  of  the  first  presidency,

Another  comforter,

All  things  of  God,

All  kingdoms  receive  of  the  Lord’s  presence,

Arm  of  mercy  atoned
Adam  transgressed,

Authority  necessary  to  preach,

Adulterers  cast  out,

Ask  God  for  wisdom,

All  gifts  to  some,

All  things  done  in  the  name  of  Christ,
Abominations  in  the  church,

Ask  the  Father,

After  much  tribulation  cometh  the  blessing,
Assemble  to  Zion,  &c.

Agent  unto  the  disciples,

An  ensample,  &c.

Assist  to  translate,

Altered  those  words,

Arise  and  be  baptized,

All  things  done  according  to  law,

- grain  for  man,


8

14

15


35

5

■1

10

14
1

11

4

7

15
"8

9

2

7

2


12


5

3

3

2


81


Axe  is  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree,
Agency  of  man,

Alam,  and  others,

Account  to  bishop  in  Zion,
Apocrypha  not  translated,

Angel  flying  through  heaven,


B


Baptism  necessary,

Bishop  to  sit  in  judgment,

Bishops  who  are  literal  descendants  of  Aaron  to
sit  in  judgment  in  certain  cases,

Be  faithful,

Bearing  my  name,

Baptize  by  water,

Bishop  received  consecrations,

Brother’s  garment,  &c.

Behold  ye  are  little  children,

Blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  my  commandments,
Bear  record  by  the  way,

Blessed  are  they,  &c.

By  blood,  law,  &c.

Blood  of  Ephraim,

Bishop  tried,  &c.

Bishop  appoint  a  storehouse,

Book  of  commandments,,

Buy  land,  in  all  the  regions,

Be  patient,

Bosom  shall  burn,

Be  faithful,

Blessing  upon  this  land,

Build  up  churches  to  get  gain,

- upon  my  rock,

Bring  forth  the  gospel  from  among  the  Gentiles,

- souls  unto  me,

Bearing  my  name,

Build  up  my  church,  & c.

Be  patient  in  afflictions,

Book  of  Mormon,  &c.

Baptism  of  fire,

Bring  forth  Zion,

Buy  lands  for  the  present,

Better  for  him  that  he  was  drowned.

Blessed  are  the  poor,


2

3


3


37

39

41


46

52

53
55


64

67

69


33


34

16

5

2

9

14

9


7

3

4
2


3

5

11

13

11

5

3

3

2

3

3

2


6


Be  of  good  cheer  little  children,  71

Bishop  search  diligently,  84

Brethren  in  Zion,  84

Beware  of  those  judgments,  86

Blessings  of  the  promise  made  to  the  fathers,  96
Builded  the  earth  as  a  handy  work,  98


c


Cammandments  given  to  proclaim  to  the  world,

- shall  all  be  fulfilled

Certificates  and  licences  for  priests,  teachers,  and
deacons,

Children  to  be  blest,

Certificates  to  be  given,

Cainan  Ordained  by  Adam,

Choosing  bishops,

Calling  and  authority  of  John,

Confirmation  of  the  high  priesthood,

Children  of  Zion  reproved,

- of  Zion  upbraided,

Cleansing  feet  with  water,

Council  abroad  called  only  on  difficult  matters,
Christ,  the  Light  of  the  world,

Come  unto  the  Lord,

Call  a  solemn  assembly,

Commandment  to  the  first  laborers,

Cease  to  do  evil,  &c.

Confirming  the  churches,

Commandments  are  spiritual,

Christ  the  Son  of  God,

Church  in  every  region,

Consecration  for  various  purposes,

Christ’s  words  to  his  ancient  apostles,
Confirmation  meetings,

Commandment  to  them,

Continue  the  work  of  translation,

Course  is  one  eternal  round,

Commandment  is  strict,

Children  of  men  stirred  up,  &c.

Contend  against  no  church  save  one,  &c.

Covet  not  thy  neighbor’s  wife;

Conduct  thyself  wisely,

Continue  in  the  spirit  of  meekness,

Confirm  the  church,  &c.

Call  faithful  laborers,


43

44
44

48

49
59


6

6

3

1

2

2


4

8


15

20


27

21

32

4

6


12

16

12

2

16

19


4


3

10

3


2

2

1

3

2


6

4

5


Till


Conference  next  held  in  Missouri,  66

Called  and  chosen,  68

Chastened  for  your  sins,  that  you  might  be  one,  71
Commit  not  adultery,  74

Committee  to  build  houses,  83

Consecrated  unto  me,

Constitutional  law,  &c.

Certificate  from  the  elders,

Call  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,

Chastisement  prepares  for  deliverance,

Claim  and  hold  claim,

City  of  the  saints,

Crowned  with  glory  in  Zion,


B


Ihity  of  apostles  and  elders,

Deacon’s  duty,

Directions  for  ordaining  presiding  elders,  bishops,
high  counsellors,  and  high  priests,

Daty  of  members  on  sacrament,

Dealing  with  transgressors,

Divisions  of  the  priesthood,

Duty  of  the  presiding  deacons,

Duty  of  the  presiding  teacher,

Duty  of  the  presiding  priest  of  the  priesthood  of
Aaron,

Duty  of  the  president  of  the  elders,

Duty  of  the  president  of  the  high  priesthood,
Distinction  of  the  righteous  and  wicked,
Directions  to  those  who  preach,

- - — -  and  promises  to  those  who  preach,

- to  the  elders,

- - —  to  the  strong,

— —  to  the  lesser  priesthood,

- for  the  high  priests,  elders,  and  lesser

priests,

Duties  of  deacons  and  teachers,

Duty  of  N.  K.  Whitney,

Duty  of  the  twelve  counsellors,

Destinction  between  high  council  and  travelling
high  council,

Do  no  more  to  you  than  to  me,

Dead  come  forth,

Devil  thrust  down  to  hell,


2

2

2

2

2

3

3

3


10

10


2

4


8

11


Desolations  upon  Babylon,  11

Dealing  with  adulterers  and  thieves  &c.  13

Dealings  according  to  offences,  13

Day  of  redemption,  15

Desolating  sickness  shall  cover  the  earth,  15

Diversities  of  operations,  16

Directions  to  Martin  Harris,  18

Dedicate  this  land,  18


Discern  by  the  Spirit,

Direction  to  organize  this  people,
Divide  the  saints  their  inheritance,
Director  trampled  on,

Desired  a  witness,

Do  good,

Drink  with  Moroni,  Elias,  John,  &c.
Delight  to  bless,

Declare  glad  tidings,

Destroying  angel,

Dedicated  unto  me,

Detestable  things,

Diligent  in  all  things,

Defending  themselves,

E


Everlasting  covenant  broken,  1

Elders  conferences  for  church  business  2

Evangelical  ministers  to  be  ordained  io  large

branches  of  the  church,  3

Enos  ordained  and  blessed  by  Adam,  3

Enoch  ordained  by  Adam — translated,  3

Every  man  to  learn  his  duty,  3

Elders  commanded  to  bear  testimony  to  the  world,  4

- called  as  the  ancient  apostles,  4

- called  friends,  4

Every  man  to  labor  in  his  own  calling,  4

Earth  crowned  with  the  celestial  glory,  7

Establish  an  house,  7

Eternal  life,  &c.  8

Enlightened  by  the  spirit  of  truth,  8

Expound  scriptures,  9

Eternal  damnation — fall,  &c.  10

Elect  hear  his  voice,  11

Eternity  is  pained,  12

Endowed  with  power,  12


Elders  to  go  forth,

- to  be  called,

Edify  each  other,

Everlasting  covenant  sent  into  the  world,

Earth  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Lord,

Elders  to  conduct  meetings  &c.

Every  man  take  righteousness,  &c.

• -  - - deal  honestly,

- in  his  stewardship,

Engravings  of  Nephi,

Establish  the  cause  of  Zion,

Eternal  damnation,

- punishment,

Expound  scriptures,

Elders  called  together,

Election  in  this  church,

Ezra  Thayre  must  repent,

Every  man  shall  hear  the  fulness  of  the  gospel,
Eastern  countries,

Expounding  scriptures,

End  of  the  vision,

Endow  those  whom  I  have  chosen,

Enmity  of  man  shall  cease,


13

13

14

15
15


36

37
44
44
48
62


91

95

97


F


Fulness  preached  by  the  weak  and  the  simple,
Fulness  of  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles  and  Jews,
Form  of  baptism,

- of  administering  bread,

- - - - wine

Further  duty  of  the  twelve,

Face  of  the  Lord  unveiled,

First  angel  again  sound  his  trump,

Faithful  salute
Field  is  white,

Faithful  and  diligent,

Fear  not  to  do  good,

Flies  sent  forth,

First  last,  &c.

Faith  to  be  healed  and  not  to  be  healed,
Fulness  of  the  scriptures  given,

Faith  comes  not  by  signs,

Forbidden  to  get  in  debt,

Faith,  virtue,  &c.


2

2

2

2

3

7

7

7

8


10

10

13

16


2

12

3

2

8

1

9

2

3

10

3

2

2

2


7

2


15

5
8

13

16
3

6
2


Fear  not  but  give  heed,  &c.
Field  ready  to  be  burned,

- -  is  white  for  harvest,

Father  and  I  are  one,
Family  must  needs  repent,
Forgiving  70  times  7
Feigned  words,

Flee  to  Zion,

- Jerusalem,

Free  exercise  of  conscience,


a


God  is  infinite  and  eternal,

Godly  walk  and  conversation  required,

Gathering  of  the  saints  to  the  place  of  the  city —
Zion,

God’s  servants  to  live  by  every  word  that  proceedeth
from  his  mouth,

Gifts  come  from  God,

God  is  light,

Go  with  my  servant,

God  is  merciful,

Gift  of  Aaron,

Give  heed,


2

2

4

11

16

17

28


- unto  all  his  words,

Go  unto  the  Lamanites,

- with  my  servant  Oliver,

Great  day  shall  come,

Go  to  the  Ohio,

Great  I  Am,

Gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,

Go  forth  and  preach,

Give  a  new  commandment  to  Thomas,
Go  to  certain  countries,

- ye,  g°  ye  into  the  world,

Glory  of  the  Father  was  with  him,
Grace  for  grace,

Go  to  battle,

Go  from  house  to  house,

Great  is  his  wisdom,

Glory  of  the  Moon,

Grants  this  privilege,

Go  and  gather  together,  &c.

Gird  up  your  loins,


46

61

54

56

58

50


2

2


8

7


2

2

2


7

8
7
2


■W


xii

Go  ye  out  of  Babylon,

Gentiles  and  Jews,

Go  forth  to  Zion,

Governments  instituted  of  God,

H

Holy  priesthood,

Highpriests  can  organize  counsels  abroad
Hearken,  4*c-
Hypocrites  among  you,

Honored  of  laying  the  foundation  of  Zion,
Heritage  of  God,

Herbs,  houses,  barns,  &c.

Hear  the  word,

Humble  yourselves,

He  must  fall,

Hope  and  charity,

Holy  men  that  ye  know  not  of,

- One  of  Zion,

- Ghost  shed  forth,  &c.

Husband  and  wife,


I

I  come  quickly,

Instruction  received  from  the  Spirit.
Instructions  to  the  elders,

I  am  from  above,

Inhabitants  of  Zion,

I  am  the  life,  &c.

I  am  Alpha  and  Omega,

Inheritance  in  Zion,

Innocent  from  the  beginning,

Inner  court,

Israel  shall  be  saved,

Importune  at  the  feet  of  the  Judge,  &c.  &c.
Inheritance  for  his  father,


J

Justification  and  sanctification  true,
Jared  ordained  by  Adam,

Jews  receive  their  king,


7

8
14
20
26
37
44


2

3

15


3

11

1

3
8

4


3
2

4
2
3
3


38

6

1

15

1

12


12

8


6

23

9


Joy  nlay  be  full,

(John)  tarry  till  I  come,

Joints  and  marrow,

John  should  keep  a  history

- keep  the  church  record,

Journey  to  the  land  of  Missouri,

- regions  westward,

Joseph  Coe  journey  with  them,
Journey  to  Cincinnati,

John  bear  record,

Judge  feared  not  God,

Joy  in  heaven,


Kingdom  likened  unto  a  field,

- parable,

Keys  of  gift,  &c.

Keep  my  commandments,

Keys  of  the  mysteries,  &c.
Knowledge  of  the  Savior,

King  Benjamin,

Keep  my  commandments,

Know  all  things,

Keep  my  commandments,

Kingdom  of  God,

- my  Father,

Keep  my  commandments,

Keys  of  your  ministry,

- the  mysteries,  &c.


Lord  no  respecter  of  persons,

Lord  is  God  and  the  spirit  beareth  record.
Licensing  elders,

List  of  members  to  be  sent  ta  the  conferences,
Literal  descendants  of  Aaron,  bishops  preside  0'
the  lesser  priesthood,

Lamech  ordained  by  Seth,

Lineage  of  the  priesthood,

Lots  cast  by  the  counsellors.


xiv


Lawful  heirs,

Light  to  the  Gentiles,

Laws  and  glory,

Law  breaker  remains  filthy  still,

Laws  given  to  all  things,

Light  shineth  in  darkness,

Lifted  out  of  afflictions,

Little  children  redeemed,

Land  of  promise,  &c.

Look  to  the  poor  and  needy,

Lord  utter  his  voice,

- shall  be  terrible,

Let  us  reason  saith  the  Lord,

Let  my  servants  Joseph  Wakefield,  John  Corrill,
Parley  P.  Pratt  and  Edward  Partridge,  &c.
Let  God  rule  the  Judge,

Let  the  wicked  take  heed,

Little  or  much,

Land  of  promise — Independence  centre
Light  which  shineth,

Listen  to  the  words  of  Jesus,

Last  commandments,

Listen  to  the  voice  of  Jesus  Christ,

Little  ones,  &c.

Leave  his  merchandize,

Let  servants  take  journey,  &c.

Learn  that  he  only  is  saved.

Lord  forgives  sins,

Lift  up  voices  unto  God,

Law  of  Moses,

Little  children  holy,

Lord  spake  unto  Enoch,

Learn  wisdom,  &c.

Lord  of  Sabaoth,

Live  by  every  word,

Laws  concerning  women  and  children,

Lift  up  your  voices,  £c.

Life  or  limb,

Leave  judgment  alone  with  me,


6

6

7

7

7

8
9

10

12

12

14

15
17

17

18
20


40

42

50


53

61

66

66

71

71


ia


Ministering  of  an  angel,  2

Men  may  fall  from  grace,  2

Manner  in  which  elders  are  to  conduct  meetings,  2


3

4

5
8

11

10


13

4


8

2

10

5

3


3

6-9

3


2


3

I


3CV


Manner  of  ordaining,

Melchizedek  priesthood  holds  the  keys  of  all  spir¬
itual  blessings,

Mahalaleel  ordained  by  Adam,

Methuselah  ordained  by  Adam,

Many  kingdoms  and  laws,

Michael  fights,  &c.

Miraculous  work  to  come  forth,

Magnify  office,

Miracles,  &c.

Michael’s  Trump,

Murderer  shall  not  have  forgiveness,

- shall  die,

- - dealt  with  according  to  law,  &c.

Millenial  shall  come,

Many  gifts,

Many  spirits  gone  forth,

Martin  example  to  the  church,

Mysteries  of  the  kingdom,

Melchizedek  priesthood,

Mine  eyes  are  upon  you,

Marvel  not,

My  gospel

- doctrine,

- church,

- —  word — rock — &c.

Make  known  thy  calling,

Move  the  cause  of  Zion,

My  son  Orson,

Mighty  One  of  Israel,

Marriage  ordained  of  God,

More  diligent,

Mammon  of  unrighteousness,

Many  sheaves,

Manner  of  building  the  house,

Mine  when  I  come  to  make  up  my  jewels,
Multiply  blessings  upon  them,

Marriages  in  this  church,

Man  and  man,


2

3

3

3

7

7

8
9
9

10

13

13

13

14
16

17

18


12

9

22

25

9

35

1

2


N

Noah  ordained  by  Methuselah,  3  27

No  member  exempt  &c.  from  the  high  council*  3  36


Number  that  voted.

New  heaven  and  earth,

No  knowledge  no  repentance,

New  Jerusalem  called  Zion,

Now  it  is  called  to-day,

Not  translated  again,

No  flesh  safe  upon  the  water,

New  commandment,

N.  K.  Whitney,  ordained  bishop.
Never  suppress  the  freedom  of  soul,
No  interference  with  bond  servants,


5


10

15

21


71

86


102  4

102  12


o


Office  of  elders.

Order  of  the  priesthood  by  lineage,
Other  seventies  to  be  chosen,
Organizing  the  high  council,

Order  of  counsellors  speaking  on  cases.
Order  of  the  house.

Ordinance  of  washing  feet,

Other  records,

One  appointed  to  receive  revelations.
Offend  God,

Old  records,

Other  sheep,

Oliver  Returns,

Oracles  of  God,

Open  hearts,

Overcome  by  denial,

Olihali  have  the  lot,

Ozondah  establishment,

Organize  yourselves,

One  wife  and  one  husband,

Officers  enforce  laws,

F


3

a

3

5

5

7

7


14

19


3

18

43

1

8

39

46

12

2

5

14


101  4

102  3


Preface  to  the  commandments,  1  2

Power  to  seal  on  earth  and  in  heaven,  1  2

Peace  shall  be  taken  from  the  earth,  1  6

Priests’  duty,  2  10

Power  of  the  Melchizedek  priesthood,  3  3

Power  of  the  lesser  priesthood  holds  the  keys  of  the

ministring  of  angels,  &c,  3  10


xrii


Presiding  elders,  priests,  teachers,  &,  deacons,

■  -  high  priests,

Place  of  the  temple  pointed  out,

Priesthood  of  Aaron,

Priesthood  from  Aaron  to  John,

Promises  to  those  sent  to  preach,

- to  the  faithful,

■Plagues  shall  go  forth,

Presidents  and  counsellors  chosen,

President  of  the  church  President  of  the  council,
his  duty,  &c.

Privilege  of  accuser  and  accused,  &c.

President  may  inquire  of  the  Lord,

Power  of  the  first  Presidents,

Power  of  God  governs  all  things,

Prepare  to  perfect  yourselves  in  the  ministry,

- O  inhabitants  of  the  earth,

Prune  my  vineyard,

Parable  of  the  twelve  sons,

Prophesy  by  the  Comforter,

Prepare  for  the  great  day  of  the  Lord,

Parable  of  the  fig  tree,

- of  the  ten  virgins  fulfilled,

Purchase  lands  in  Zion,

- whole  region  of  country.

Part  in  that  lake,  &c.

Pattern  given  to  the  apostles,

Proclaim  the  evelasting  gospel,

Parents  that  teach  not  their  children,  dec.

Pay  again,

Pray  unto  the  Lord,

Printer  unto  the  church,

Preaching  the  gospel,

Prayer  and  faith,

Power  over  death,

Power  to  translate,

Plates  of  Nephi,

Part  of  my  gospel,

Paul  mine  apostle,

Preach  unto  the  world,

Pray  vocally,

Physician  unto  the  church,

Preach  the  everlasting  gospel.

Place  not  yet  to  be  revealed,

Pattern  to  judge  spirits,


30

31
2


xvm


Printing  books  for  schools,  68

Pitching  their  tents  by  the  way,  71

Proclaim  my  gospel  from  land  to  land,  74

Persecution  and  wickedness,  78

Pure  in  heart,  81

Polluted  their  inheritances,

Parable  of  the  redemption  of  Zion,  97

Privilege  this  once,  98

Q

Quorum  of  the  presidency— the  twelve  and  the

seventy — their  powers,  &c.  3

R


Record  of  the  Nephites  given  and  translated  by  the
power  of  God,

Rise  of  the  church  of  Christ,

Restrictions  for  ordaining,

Record  to  be  kept,

Right  of  the  presidency  of  the  high  priesthood,

- of  a  high  priest,

- of  an  elder,

, - of  high  priest  and  elder,

Revelation  in  force,  &c.

Reprove  the  world,

Removal  from  office,  &c.

Resurrection  of  the  body,

Repentance  unto  this  generation,

Riches  of  eternity,

Remember  the  poor,

Revelation  upon  revelation,

Remuneration  for  services,

Righteous  gather  to  Zion,

Residue  of  the  elders,

Repent  speedily,

Reward  in  the  world  to  come,

Receive  my  will,

Retain  strong  hold,

Reward  of  diligence,

Reap  while  the  day  lasts,

Release  thyself  from  bondage.

Record  to  be  kept,

Receive  commandments  and  revelations.


1

2

2

2

3

3


4


5

7


12

13

13

13

15

18

20


21

21


39

44


51


2

4
2
1

5
3


13


5

1

16

26

4

5
B
7


23

5

6
4
9


5

1

2


xix


Reap  with  all  your  might,

Ruler  when  I  come,

Reason  with  them,

Recorded  in  heaven  for  the  angels  to  look  upon,
Ride  upon  Mules  or  in  chariots,

Restore  four  fold,

Render  account  of  stewardship,

Recommended  by  church,

Received  of  his  fulness,

Ruler  in  my  kingdom,

Red  in  his  apparel,

Record  all  marriages,

Religious  belief


s


Secret  things  shall  be  revealed,

Sword  of  the  Lord  bathed  in  heaven,

Spirit  will  not  always  strive  with  man,

Search  these  commandments,

Son  of  God  given,

Seventy  directed  by  the  twelve,

Seth  ordained  and  blessed  by  Adam,

Seven  Presidents  called  to  preside  of  the  number  of
seventy,

Sons  of  Moses  and  of  Aaron  to  offer  an  acceptable
sacrifice  in  this  generation,

Song  of  the  redeemed,

Seven  counsellors  necessary  for  a  council,

Sanctify  yourselves,

Seek  knowledge,

Signs  in  the  heavens,

Sounding  of  the  trump,

Second  angel  again  sound,  &c.

Satan  bound,

Salvation,  &c.

- a  sample  for,  &c.

Stand  faithfully,

Sinners  shall  be  cast  out,

Scriptures  for  church  government,

Sent  forth  to  teach,  &c.

Solemnities  of  eternity,

Signs  of  his  coming,

Sacrament  meetings,

Seek  the  best  gifts,

Sound  must  go  forth  from  this  place,


2

3

3


2

2


3

7
1

4
3

8

5
3
7


3

5

7

13

19

43


6

17
4

18
21


11

16

4


6

2

4

15


XX


Shall  make  another,

Spirit  received  through  prayer,

Sought  evil  in  their  hearts,

Sell  goods  without  fraud,

Stop  and  stand  still,

Spirit  by  which  Moses,  &c.

Satan  stirs  them  up,

Sharper  than  a  two-edged  sword,

Seek  to  bring  forth  Zion,

Shall  build  up,  &c.

Save  one  scul,

Straight  gate,  &c.

Selection  of  sacred  hymns,

Settle  all  things  according  to  the  covenants,
Singleness  of  heart,

Satan  tempted  him,

Shall  be  damned,

Son  of  man  comes  not  in  the  form  of  a  woman,
Satan  abroad  in  the  land,

Shake  off  the  dust  of  thy  feet,

Savior  of  the  world.

Saints  who  are  at  Zion,

Son  Ahman,

Salvation  of  Zion,

See  God,

Stake  of  Zion,

School  of  the  prophets.

Smite  you  or  your  families,

Sin  no  more,

Soul  that  sins,  &c.

Sons  of  perdition,

Suffering  of  the  ungodly,

Sun  of  the  firmament,  &c.

Shederlaomach  a  member,

Spokesman  unto  my  servant,

Strange  act,

Stake  set  for  the  strength  of  Zion,

Salt  of  the  earth,

See  the  salvation  of  God,

Sedition  and  rebellion,

Spiritual  privileges,


T


Two  first  elders,  9

Trmasgression  of  his  holy  laws,  8


XXI


Those  who  keep  his  commandments  sacred,
Teacher’s  duty,

The  two  priesthoods,  „  .  ,  ,

Twelve  directed  by  the  presidency  ofthe  church,
Twelve  to  call  upon  the  seventy,

Trial  ofthe  president  of  the  priesthood,

Tares  bound  in  bundles,

Truth  abideth,

Trump  second,

■  third,

- fourth,

' - fifth,

-  sixth,

- seventh,

Treasure  up  wisdom.

Testimony  relating  to  companions,

Trump  sound  before  he  comes,

This  land  his  residence,

Thou  slialt  love  the  Lord,

Thrust  in  the  sickle,


Testimony  of  three,

Translated  the  book,

The  twelve  shall  be  my  disciples,

Tongue  loosed,

Take  up  your  cross,

_ thy  brother  Hiram,  &c.

Things  that  the  apostles  and  prophets,  &c.
Take  upon  you  mine  ordinances,

_ up  his  cross  and  follow  me,

Thou  shall  not  idle  away  thy  time,

Tarry  not  many  days,

Truti.  is  knowledge,

Translation  of  the  prophets,

Third  and  fourth  generation,

Telestial  glory,

Tried  even  as  Abraham,

Tares  bound  in  bundles,

Taken  out  of  the  treasury,

Ten  talents,

Two  put  their  ten  thousands  to  flight,


2

3

3

3

3

6

7

7

9

7

3

3

3


31

32

33
6


7

6

2

1

2

3
2
5
2
5

4
3
2
1
3

3

4

5
5
7
2
9

11

12

«


u


Uplifted  hands,  &c.
Unworthy — no  place,


7  46

7  *8


xxii


Urim  Thummim,


United  order  of  Zion,

Use  their  ability,

V


Voice  of  the  Lord  is  unto  all  men,

Vale  of  darkness  soon  rent,

Volumn  of  the  book,

Valient  in  testimony,

Voice  of  the  order,

Vengeance  cometh  speedily  upon  the  ugodly,

w


1

2

2

K


98

81


World  judged  by  witnesses,

Words  of  the  majesty  on  high,

Wheat  and  tares,

Worlds  roll  in  the  midst  of  the  power  of  God,
Warn  his  neighbor,

Washing  feet  &c.

Witness  for  God,

Weeping  among  the  hosts  of  men,

Wicked  kept  in  chains,  i

Wars  are  nigh,

Word  received  by  the  Comforter,

Workmen  sent  forth,

Wo  unto  ye  rich  men,

- him  that  hides  his  talent.

Wife  is  sanctified,

Word  of  wisdom,

World  to  come,

What  I  say  unto  one  I  say  unto  all,

Waste  places  of  Zion,

Wise  men  sent  to  purchase  lands,

Worthy  of  his  hire,

Weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth.
Washing  feet,

War  in  far  countries,

Wars  in  your  own  lands,

Warriors,

Who  is  this  that  cometh  down  from  God,

We  believe,  &c.


xxm


Y

Years  of  accountability  before  baptism,

- the  redeemed  is  come,

You  were  driven  out,


z


Zion  shall  rejoice,

- a  place  of  safety,

- shall  flourish,

- •  shall  be  a  seat,

- - flourish  upon  the  hills,

- do  these  things,  shall  prosper,

- shall  be  redeemed,

- turned  back,  &c.


3  21
100  5

100  7


11

15

21


6

13


5

4

3


IXT


NOTES  TO  THE  READER.

Several  errors  have  escaped  the  eye  of  the  proof
reader:  They  will  be  carefully  sought,  and,  in  the
next  edition,  correc  Reddest,  however,  that  any  should
be  mislead,  the  last  paragraph  of  the  article  on  Mar¬
riage,  page  251,  should  read:  “We  believe  that  hus¬
bands,  parents  and  masters  who  exercise  control  over
their  wives,  children  and  servants,  and  prevent  them
from  embracing  the  truth,  will  have  to  answer  for
that  sin.”

In  the  proceedings  of  the  General  Assembly,  page
255,  it  should  read:  “Wherefore  O.  Cowdery  and  S.
Rigdon,  Presidents  of  the  first  presidency,  appointed
Thomas  Burdick,  Warren  Parrish  and  Silvester
Smith,  Clerks,  and  proceeded  to  organize  the  whole
assembly,  as  follows:  “They  organized,”  &c.  And
it  should  read  at  the  9th  line  from  the  bottom,  “And
they  also,  as  the  assembly  was  large,  appointed  Thom¬
as  Gates,  John  Young,  William  Cowdery,  Andrew
H.  Aldrich,  Job  S.  Lewis,  and  Oliver  Higley,  as  as¬
sistant  presidents  of  the  day,  to  assist  in  preserving
order,  &c.  in  the  whole  assembly.”  And  on  tho
257th  page,  5th  paragraph,  it  should  read:  “The  ven¬
erable  assistant  President,”  &c.  And  the  whole
proceedings  should  be  signed,


OLIVER  COWDERY,
SIDNEY  RIGDON,


■  Ni  •*./■  ,;?*«  i-v!> ...  ...wf  Mitfek  3>vw*  .•oilihaJxs.*

<l‘>  '-'-tl  ■  •■•'‘I  ill  ff  ..licaWoi  SC

•

KrtH*w>  n «»*'.»  w'  ./  ai'-teofii  b/-;  :..lt  •  «<•;

>  ;vii.  :r.  s  |  fai  ;  naa  •'«*  fl**J  ":<>  .r.sviv/  t

:  '»*  11  )).;r  ;  ,i  •  J.-i.i  rae'.t


HJU»  ii.ill


;  ?  •’.*  ■  r» »  A  <4-1  Jrt  4)  sift  "h  .viiv  .  sift  a\

•  Ufl  ■  •  I-J  ■  .O  .  ;i  ■  >7?  v.  Kh>  Ji

■-•i!'  :-  >  fvonol,  •  •  rtj  mil  .<wft  i,i  ;.<*•.'!  f,no^  y
•"  '•  *  rf»<v;  .  ’  ii«wW

•  •  •»*  •  i-  : ■>  ot  1  •••■••>  •  •  ;  '

f  -  .-’Vi  <\  v-j.dT*'  •■•«©),.>  tr.  i'.  •  :

■  ■  .  »:•>  f  »A.?  a

<>•  Mttfl  •  >Y,  -Sifrr  '  - .  ;.m-

v.  hii  '  .  .■•; ..-in  >  rf>  .  .j't  ntU'l  .  tO  »  .

vv:**  •  -  -  »viK  .

.


'■  Vii  I  i.f  A.  -.A: UT  !


.f.i.  •  h(,


h  ?.  'VhJ*  ic  s,  aibaoxn  5


A*1  34  A  Vi'
