================================================================================
TOWER OF BABEL LIBRARY
================================================================================
Title: Rabi'a the Mystic and Her Fellow-Saints in Islam
Creator: Margaret Smith
Edition: 1928 (Cambridge University Press)
Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/margart_smith_rabia)
Public domain: First published 1928; public domain.
Artifact ID: smith-rabia-the-mystic-1928
================================================================================

RABI‘A THE MYSTIC
e»
HER FELLOW-SAINTS IN ISLAM

Cambridge University Press
Fetter Lane, London
New York
Bombay, Calcutta, Madras
Toronto
Macmillan
Tokyo
Maruzen-Kabushiki-Kaisha

All rights reserved

RABI‘A THE MYSTIC
e
HER FELLOW-SAINTS IN ISLAM
Being the Life and Teachings of
Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya Al-Qaysiyya of Basra

together with some account of
the place of the women saints in Islam

BY

MARGARET SMITH, M.A., Pr.D.
Sometime Scholar of Girton College»
Cambridge»

CAMBRIDGE
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
1928

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN

In Memoriam,
A. A. S.

Digitized by Google

e3-/*-V*( sS

PREFACE

K of Basra, the subject of this memoir, has long
been known to students of Sūfism, and to a lesser
extent to those interested in Mysticism generally, as a
unique personality among the early Süfts, one who, in
spite of her early date—she died in A.D. 801—was a
true mystic. The material for this account of her life
and teachings is derived from one or two short bio-
graphical notices and from scattered references to be
found in Arab and Persian writers on Süfism and is
the first biography of this early Muslim saint to appear,
which aims at being complete, so far as the sources
at present available make this possible.

In the compiling of this biography, originally under-
taken for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the
University of London, I have been indebted for
valuable references to Professor L: Massignon, of the
Collége de France, and to Prof. Ritter of Constanti-
nople, and I take this opportunity of offering my thanks
to both of these distinguished scholars.

My grateful thanks are due also to Sir Thomas
Arnold, from whom I have had constant help and
advice in the writing of this memoir, and to Professor
Nicholson of Cambridge, whose writings first inspired
me to study Süfism, and whose unrivalled knowledge
of the subject has been most generously placed at my
disposal for the purposes of this book.

"MARGARET SMITH

London,
June 1928

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Survey of Sources : : s ‘ : f page xiii

PART ONE

Chapter I. The place of women among the Süfis. High
place given to Rabi‘a of Basra. Her birth and early
years. Period in slavery. Release and devotion to the
ascetic life. Legend of Rabi‘a and Ibrahim b. Adham I

\/ Chapter II. Offers of marriage. Choice of celibacy. Her
associates. Hasan of Basra. Rabah al-Qays. Sufyān

al-Thawrī. Dhū al-Nün. Women associates IO
Chapter III. Asceticism of Rabi‘a. Fasting. Dependence

on God. Renunciation. Resignation to the Will of God.

Prayer-life .. ; i . : A : ; 20

Chapter IV. The miracles of Muslim saints. Story of
a thief. Miracle of the twenty loaves. Miracle of the
bird and the onion. Rābiʻ2’s friendship with the wild
animals. Miraculous flight of locusts. Restoration of
a dead camel to life. Flying on a prayer-mat. Miraculous
provision of light. The pot that boiled without a fire . 31

V” Chapter V. Rabi‘a’s declining years. Her attitude to-
wards death. Rābi'a's last illness. Visits from her
friends. Her last moments. Appearance in visions
after her death ; i : : . : ; 39

x TABLE OF CONTENTS

PART TWO

Chapter VI. Estimate of Rabi‘a’s teaching by the Sifi
writers. Brief outline of Süfi doctrine. The Way and

its stages. The Goal . : . . A . Page 47

lāčus VII. Repentance. The Sifidoctrine. Rabi‘a’s
teaching. Anecdotes. of Ibn Mansūr and Sufyàn al-
Thawrī. Rābi'a's view of Sin. Patience. Al-Qushayri’s
and al-Ghazālī's view of Patience as essential to Faith.
Rabi‘a’s practice and teaching. Gratitude. Al-Qushayri’s
definition. Rābi'a's teaching. No Pantheism in her
views É . i i i ; A

Chapter VIII. Hope and Fear. Teaching of al-Hujwīrī
and al-Sarraj. Al-Qushayri’s definition of Hope. Eschato-
logical teaching of the Süfis. Rabi‘a’s loftier conception

J Chapter IX. Poverty. Sūfī estimation of the poor.
Comparison with Christian doctrine. Rābi'a and the
Poverty of the adept. Renunciation. Views of Süfi
writers. Merging of the personal will in the Will of
God. Dependence upon God. Rabi'a's teaching on
other-worldliness. Account of Rabi‘a’s vision ;

Chapter X. Love, including satisfaction, longing and
intimacy. Satisfaction, two-sided. Al-Hujwiri’s classi-
fication of the satisfied. Longing. Abū Sa‘id’s concep-
tion of longing. Intimacy. The Süficonception of Love.
Al-Hujwiri’s view. The effect of Love. The Vision
Beautiful. The attainment of Union. Rābi'a”s doctrine
of disinterested love. Her teaching on Satisfaction.
On Longing. Her verses on Intimacy. Various ac-
counts of her teaching on Love. Her verses on the two
loves. Abū Tālib's commentary on these verses. Al-
Ghazili’s explanation of the verses. Comparison of
the Sifi view of the Vision with that of Plotinus. Sum-
mary of Rabi‘a’s teaching on Love. The attainment of
the Goal .

53

65

74

88

TABLE OF CONTENTS xi

PART THREE

Chapter XI. The position of woman in Muslim lands
in pre-Islamic and early Islamic times. Principle of
female descent and the woman’s dominance in marriage.
Independent spirit of Bedouin women. Buhaysa bint
Aws b. Hāritha. Story of Salma bint ‘Amr. ‘A’isha
bint Yahya. ‘A’isha bint Talha. Degradation of women
under the Islamic régime. Better condition of Muslim
women where Muhammadan legislation has been
ignored. The * Atāyfa” of Arabia and Dongola. The
Berber women and the modern Tuaregs. Muslim views
of woman’s incapacity for religion. Admission by some
Muslim writers of woman’s right to spiritual blessings page 111

Chapter XII. The position of the woman saint. Umm
Haram of Cyprus. Rābi'a bint Isma‘il of Syria. Mu‘adha
al-Adawiyya of Basra. Sha*wana the Persian. The Lady
Nafisa. Ishi Nili of Nīshāpūr. The Shaykhas. Fatima,
daughter of Shah Jahan. ‘A’isha bint M. b. ‘Abd Allah
of Morocco. Sidqi the Turkish Süfi poetess. xd
al-‘Ayn the Babi martyr . i „137

Chapter XIII. Celibacy in Islam. Orthodox views. Süfi
preference for the celibate life. Celibacy and the mon-
astic life among women. Early convents for women in
Egypt. In Mecca and North Africa . . 165

Chapter XIV. The Communion of Saints in Islam.
Visions of Rabi‘a and Sha^wana after their death. Rever-
ence for the shrines of saints. The tombs of Fatima
and the women of the Prophet’s family. Shrines of
women saints in Syria. Tombs of Indian women
saints. Shrine of Lalla Imma Tifellūt and other Kabyle
tombs . $ : i : : : : . 176

SR b

xii TABLE OF CONTENTS

Chapter XV. The cult of the saints in modern Islam.
The Dervish orders. The Qadiriyya. The Rifa‘iyya.
The Khalwatiyya. The Suhrawardiyya. The Mev-
levis. Local orders. The Chishti of India. The Sanüssi.
Organisations of the orders. Women adherents of
Dervish orders. Dervish practices. The Dhikr. The
Mawlid. Mawlids of Sayyida Zaynab and Lalla Imma
Tifellàt. Modern shrines. The Magām. The Wali. The
Hawitha. Sacred trees associated with saint-worship.
Mysticism and the cult of the saints the most vital ele-
ments in Islam of to-day . page 190

205

List of Authors Quoted

Index .

210

SURVEY OF SOURCES

he sources from which information is to be derived about

the life and teachings of Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya al-Qaysiyya
give us evidence which at the best is fragmentary and in many
cases unreliable, chiefly because her biographers lived at a con-
siderable distance of time after her death, and legend has played
at least as great a part as history in the account given of the
story of her life. This, however, is no uncommon thing where
saints are concerned, be they Muslim or Christian, and the ac-
counts given shew us at least the estimation in which Rābi'a
was held by those who came after her, and are a clear indication
that she had a great reputation during her life-time. Belonging
to the sex to which Muslim theologians commonly attributed
little capacity for thought, and less for religion, only a woman
of outstanding character and gifts could have won a place among
the greatest of the Süfi teachers, renowned as much for her
teaching as for the blameless sanctity of her life.

A small point, but one of great significance, is that she is
constantly referred to by later writers as “Rabi‘a” pure and
simple, proving that both to the writers and to those for whom
they wrote, she was a personality too well known to need
further description.

The earliest writer who mentions her is a/-Japiz (the Goggle-
eyed) of Basra (0b. A.D. 869), a well-known thinker, who gave
his name to a sect of the Mu'tazilites. He wrote the Kstab
al-Hayawan ( = The Book of Animals) and the Kitāb a/-Bayan
wa al-Tabyin, a popular book on rhetoric. In both of these
he mentions Rābi'a al-Qaysiyya. His references to her are of the
first importance, because of his early date, and the fact that he
may have known Rābi'a in his early childhood and in any case
is likely to have known those who were personally acquainted
with her. As a native of Basra, her own city, he would be in
close touch with all types of religious thought and religious
thinkers in that place.

I See pp. 133 ff.

xiv RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Abi Nasr al-Sarraj (ob. A.D. 988), who was born at Tis, and
was surnamed the “Peacock of the Poor”,! mentions Rābi'a
once in his Kz/ab al-Luma‘, one of the earliest treatises on
Sūfism, which it was the author's intention to justify as being
in accordance with the Ourān and the Traditions, and as the
knowledge directly revealed by God to His saints.* Al-Sarrāj is
concerned to give the views of Sūfī thinkers, not his own
theories. He quotes from both books and oral traditions and
in most cases states his authorities. Because of his early date
and also because of his method of dealing with his subject,
al-Sarrāj's work is of great importance, though not so complete
or so clear a statement of Süfi doctrine as the Ost alQulub
of his contemporary Abū Talib, nor so concise and readable
as the Risā/a of al-Qushayri.3

Abū Talib al-Makki (ob. A.D. 996), an ascetic who lived and
taught in Mecca, Basra and Baghdad, was the author of the
Oūt al-Qulib ( = The Food of the Hearts), another very early
treatise on Süfism, and in it he mentions Rabi‘a al-Adawiyya
several times, giving incidents from her life, referring to her
associates and, most valuable of all, quoting her well-known
verses on the “two loves",* and giving his own comments on
these verses at considerable length. Abū Talib is a Safi author
of great authority, and he is also a careful writer, for we note
that he admits that different authors have been suggested for the
vetses above mentioned, but he himself believes that Rabi‘a was
responsible for them.

Another Süfi writer contemporary with these two was M. b. I.
al-Kalabadhi (ob. c. A.D. 1000), the author of the “Kitab al-
Ta‘arruf li-Madhab ahl al-Tasawwuf” ( = Book of Enquiry as
to the Religion of the Süfis) and the “‘ Ma‘ani al-Akhbar” ( = The
Hidden Meanings of the Traditions), which are to be found
only in MS. Both of these contain references to Rabi‘a, and the
former includes a version of her poem on Love, which gives
a slightly different reading from that of Abi Talib.

I Jami, NNafahāt al-Uns, p. 319. No reason is given for the
title.

2 Kitab al-Luma', p. 203.

3 See below, p. xv. 4 See p. 102.

SURVEY OF SOURCES XV

Al-Hamādhānī (ob. A.D. 1007), surnamed the “ Wonder of the
Age", a native of Ecbatāna, in his “Shakwa al-Gharib” ( = Com-
plaint of the Stranger), of which only MSS. are available, speaks
of Rābi'a's engagement to ‘Abd al-Wāhid b. Zayd, who was
her contemporary and one of the same school of thought.

Abū Nu'aym al-Isfahani (ob. A.D. 1038) was one of the earliest
to write a biography of the saints and his “Hilya al-Awliyā”,
known also as the “Hilya al-Abrar”, is an authority of the
greatest importance. There are several references to Rābiʻa in
Abū Nu‘aym’s accounts of other early Sūfīs and there is said to
be a complete biography of her in one of the MSS. of this work
in Constantinople, but I have not yet been able to obtain a copy
of it. If it could be found, it would probably throw much light
on Rabi‘a’s life and teachings, as being the earliest biography of
her available. |

A very important authority is Abū a/-Oāsim al-Qusbayri (ob.
A.D. 1074), who was born at Naysábür in A.H. 986. He made
a study of Islamic mysticism and was also a teacher of the
Traditions at Baghdad towards the end of his life. His Résd/a
( = Treatise) is one of the most valuable books of reference on
Süfism written in Arabic and that he is a conscientious and
reliable writer is proved by the fact that he is careful to quote
his authorities and in the case of a traditional statement to give
the chain of witnesses back to the original speaker. In the
Risāla he mentions Rābi'a frequently, quoting her teaching or
some anecdote illustrating her practice, in connection with most
of the stages of the mystic Way. As we have noted, she is
accepted by these leading writers as a Süfi teacher of recognised
authority.

Among the minor authorities who mention Rābi'a is a/-
Sarrāj al-Oārī (ob. A.D. 1106) of Baghdad, the writer of the
Masari‘ aL-Usbsbáq (= Poems about Lovers), including an
account of a dream of Rabi'a's not given by any earlier writer
and an anecdote found also in Abū Nu‘aym’s “ Hilya”’.

AI-Ghazali (ob. A.D. 1111), surnamed the “Proof of Islam”,
was born at Tüs in A.D. 1059 and is such an outstanding figure
in Islamic literature that his testimony to Rābi'a is of the greatest
value. He was a lecturer at Naysābūr and later a professor at
Baghdad. Having turned from orthodox Islam to the study of

xvi RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Süfism, which he made it his business to reconcile, so far as he
could, with the traditional faith, he went to live in Damascus,
and after visiting Jerusalem and Alexandria, returned to his
native town and died there. His greatest work is the I?yā ‘Uliim
al-Din ( = The Revivification of the Religious Sciences), in which
he sets forth the Süfi doctrine as he conceived it, quoting in
all cases the early Süfi teachers as his authorities. His work is
scholarly and critical in the highest degree and he is too careful
a writer for his conclusions not to be accepted as representing
all the sources and knowledge to be obtained in his time, while
his wide learning and also his extensive travels put a great deal
of material at his disposal. He refers to Rābi'a (without any
further distinguishing title) among the leading teachers of
Süfism and accepts her teaching and her views as of at least
equal authority with those of the great mystic shaykhs. He
quotes the verses already referred to,* and gives his own inter-
pretation of them. It is on the stage of Love (on the mystic Way)
that he considers her views as most important, and this is of
great interest as an indication of her special contribution to this
doctrine.3

The Persian writer M. b. al-Munawwar (ob. A.D. 1203) men-
tions Rābi'a in his Asrār al-Tawhid (= The Secrets of Unifica-
tion), which is an account of the life and sayings of his great-
grandfather, the mystic Abū Sa‘id b. Abi al-Khayr, a very well-
known Süfi teacher who died in A.D. 1049, and whose quatrains
represent some of the most exquisite Persian mystical poetry
that is known. The Asrār al-Tawbid sets forth very clearly the
mystical doctrines of the Süfis of this period, based open the
teaching of those earlier Süfis of Rabi‘a’s time.

I. A. A. b. Ghanim al-Maqdisi (ob. c. A.D. 1279) wrote a consider-
able number of works on Mysticism, amongst them the **Kashf
al-Asrar wa manāgib al Abrār” (= The Unveiling of Mysteries
and the Merits of the Righteous) in which he devotes a page to
Rābi'a, giving some verses of hers not found in any othre writer,
but found in a very corrupt form in a MS. without title or author,
under the heading “Tawba Rābi'a al-Adawiyya? ( = The Con-
version of Rābi'a al-‘Adawiyya).4 The lines as given by Maqdisi

I See above, p. xiii. 2 See above, p. xiv.
3 See Part 11, Chapter x. 4 Berlin, Bibl. Wetg stein, II, 230.

SURVEY OF SOURCES xvii

are quite characteristic of Rabi‘a and it seems probable that both
these and the whole poem quoted in a corrupt form by this
unnamed writer, are derived from some oldet source, now
missing. The “Kashf al-Asrar” and the “Tawba” are found
only in MS.

By far the most extensive and complete biography of Rabi‘a
extant is that of the Persian poet Farid al-Din ‘Attar (ob. A.D. =
1230), who was born near Nīshāpūr about A.D. 1120. He fol-
lowed the calling of a druggist when young, hence his surname
of ‘Attar, but later became a contemplative and gained a deep
knowledge of Süfism. His Tadbkirat al- Awliyā ( = The Memoirs
of the Saints) is the oldest book in Persian dealing exclusively
with the lives of the saints. He gives no precise indication of
the sources upon which he drew for his information, but no
doubt he used earlier biographies or treatises on Süfism available
to him, such as the *Hilyaal-Awliya" of Abū Nu‘aym and the
Risāla of al-Qushayri already referred to. He is at pains to make
his biographies as complete as possible, giving a full account not
only of the lives of his subjects, but of their reputed miracles
and their sayings and teachings, so that we may assume that he
searched all possible sources in pursuit of information and doubt-
less he had access to documents long since destroyed. Obviously,
legends had grown up around the memory of the saints he por-
trayed and he has not hesitated to insert them, and probably to
add considerably to them, along with what may well rest on
historical facts and, for the modern student of his work, it is no
easy task to disentangle the two. Yet by inference we may find
corroboration for many of his statements, apart from any docu-
mentary confirmation, e.g. he speaks of Rabi‘a as having been a
slave in her youth and gives a circumstantial account of the
events which led to her being sold into slavery and what brought
about her manumission. Other writers describe her as a freed
woman. Now, it is a curious fact that Rabi‘a, though given a
tribal surname, is never called by the name of her father, as
every unmarried Muslim woman is, to the present day. Her
namesake, Rabi‘a of Syria, who died fifty years before our
Rābi'a, is always called Rabi‘a bint Ismā'īl ( = daughter of

1 See pp. 140 ff.

xviii RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Ishmael) and details are given of her parentage. The fact that
Rābi'a has no patronymic and is called only by the name of her
tribe, is strong evidence of her having been a slave and there-
fore of no known parentage. The same would be the case to-day,
in countries where slavery is prevalent or has prevailed up to
recent years.

Again, a Muslim freewoman in practice is always under the
guardianship of a male relative, father, husband, brother or uncle,
and this guardian has the right to marry his ward to whom he
will, and though technically, according to Muslim law, her consent
is necessary, actually she will not be allowed to remain un-
married. There is no suggestion in any of the biographies that
Rabi‘a was under any such guardianship, and on the contrary
it is plain that she was free to refuse the offers of marriage made
to her,! and that she could—and did—live the celibate life is
again strong proof that she had no known relatives, in her
youth at least, to oblige her to follow the invariable custom for
Muslim womanhood. A freed slave would be able to choose for
herself and none would have the right to coerce her. So in this
respect *Attār's account is supported by other circumstances.

A Süfi writer of considerable importance was Shihab al-Din
‘Umar b. A. al-Subrawardi (ob. A.D. 1234), who studied Süfism
in Basra, and was later known as a preacher and teacher in
Baghdad. His best known work is the ‘Awarif al-Ma‘arif ( = The
Bounties of Knowledge) and in this he mentions Rabi‘a and
quotes her teaching several times. |

J. Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi (ob. A.D. 1257) was the author of the ** Mir’at
al-Zamān” (= The Mirror of the Age), containing a biography
of Rabi‘a of considerable length, which is of importance because
it is most probably derived from the “‘Safwa al-Safwa" ( = The
Cream of the Cream) by his grandfather Ibn al-Jawzi, which is
a résumé of the “Hilya” of Abū Nu'aym. No available MS. of
the “Safwa al-Safwa” contains the biography of Rabi‘a which
is known to form part of the complete work, and therefore this
account, though at second-hand, is of interest.

One of the most famous of Rabi‘a’s biographers is Ibn Khallikan
(ob. A.D. 1282), who was born at Arbela in A.D. 1211. After

1 See Part 1, Chapter 11.

SURVEY OF SOURCES xix

living for a time at Aleppo and Damascus, he went to Cairo
and there began his great biographical dictionary, the Wafayat
al-A‘ydn ( = Obituaries of Eminent Men). In his preface he
explains clearly his motive and his method. He says that he
adopted the alphabetical order, because he judged it to be more
convenient than the chronological (which is the order we usually
find employed by Oriental biographers). He says further:

I have spoken of all these whose names are familiar to the public
and about whom questions are frequently asked... .I have fixed,
with all possible exactness, the dates of their birth and death;
I have traced up their genealogy as high as I could. . .and I have
cited the traits which may best serve to characterize each indi-
vidual, such as noble actions, singular anecdotes, verses and
letters, so that the reader may derive amusement from my work.:
Unfortunately, in his account of Rabi‘a, he has confused her to
some extent with Rābi'a, sometimes spelt Rā iy‘a, bint Isma*il
of Syria: At the same time, his notice of her is very valuable,
because he gives his sources and it is possible therefore to fall
back on earlier authorities to supplement his statements. Ibn
Khallikān has put posterity under a great obligation to him for
his invaluable work.

A well-known chronicler who mentions Rābi'a is a/-Dhahabi
(ob. A.D. 1348), who in his Mizdn al-I‘tidal ( = The Balance of the
Equilibrium) quotes the opinion of her held by the traditionist
Abū Dawid (ob. A.D. 889).

The Sufi writer M. b. a/-H. b. Al al-Isnani Imad al-Din (ob.
A.D. 1363), who studied in Cairo and Damascus and was also for
some time a professor at Hamat, was the author of the Haya
al-Oulūb ( = The Life of the Hearts) in which Rābi'a's eschato-
logical teaching is referred to.

Another of these later Süfi writers was Yafi% al-Sbafi'i (ob.
A.D. 1367), who was born in Yemen and travelled to Jerusalem,
Damascus and Cairo, and died in Mecca. He wrote extensively
and in his Rawd a/-Riyabin fi bikāyāt al-Salibin (= The Garden of
the Perfumes in the Lives of the Virtuous”) he gives several
of Rabi‘a’s sayings.

Among the Persian biographers who mention Rābi'a is Aflākī,
contemporary with these two last mentioned. He was a Mevlevi

1 Ibn Khallikān, ed. de Slane, 1, p. 3.

XX RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

dervish, who wrote a history of Jalal al-Din Rimi and his suc-
cessors called *Manàqib al-‘Arifin” (= The Merits of the
Gnostics) which is not very exact chronologically, but contains
some interesting anecdotes, including one of Rabi‘a not found
elsewhere. Aflaki spent the years from A.D. 1310 tO A.D. 1353
in compiling this history, but though he claims to have obtained
his information from trustworthy witnesses, much of what he
writes is plainly incredible.

A writer who has a good deal to say of Rabi‘a and quotes as
hers verses not given elsewhere is a/-Hurayfish (ob. A.D. 1398),
an Egyptian. He wrote A/-Raw4 al-Fa’iq ( = The Super-Excel-
lent Garden), a collection of anecdotes about famous men and
women, and apart from his specific account of Rābi'a, his personal
opinion which prefaces it is interesting because in it he takes
pains to prove that God had bestowed His favours and promises
upon women, equally with men. He makes at least one mistake
in regard to Rābi'a, but there is little evidence for or against his
credibility as a whole.

A late writer Tagi al-Din al-Hisni (ob. A.D. 1426), of aus
has written a whole book on the virtuous women of Islām
called the **Siyar al-Salihat” (= Lives of Good Women),
which contains an account of Rābi'a, but not very much that is
otiginal. He has evidently derived his information from both
al-Jahiz and Ibn Khallikān, but his book is interesting because
he has thought it worth while to devote a whole volume to the
women saints and has found no lack of material.

The Persian ‘Abd al-Rabmdan, surnamed Jami from his birth-
place in Khorasan (ob. A.D. 1492), was a man of great learning
and a poet, and among his books wrote a history of famous
saints entitled Nafabat al-Uns ( = The Breaths of Fellowship)
which includes a section devoted to women, the first of whom
is Rabi‘a al-Adawiyya. This history is a recension of an earlier
work, the “'Tabaqat al-Süfiyya" (= The Classes of the Süfis) by
‘Abd Allah b. Muhammad al-Ansārī (0b. A.D. 1088) which Jami
originally intended to re-edit,! but actually he limits himself to
only the most prominent personalities among the Sifis. These
*'Tabaqat" exist in MS. in Calcutta, but there is no copy

1 Nafabat al-Uns, p. 2.

SURVEY OF SOURCES xxi

available in Europe. Another still earlier source, which he
mentions in connection with the women saints, is the “'Tabaqat
al-Sūfiyya ” of Abū ‘Abd al-Rahmaan al-Sulami (ob. A.D. 1021),
which is extant in MS. but not in a complete form. Jami also
made use of Yāfiī' and Hujwiri? and a number of other Süfi
authors, including Ibn al-‘Arabi.3 Jami is undoubtedly a reputable
authority and his wide learning and great ability would enable
him to make the fullest use of all sources available in his time.

A writer, who has been described as the “last great Muham-
madan theosophist", “Abd al-Wahhab al-Sha‘rani (ob. A.D. 1565),
though a weavet by trade, living in Old Cairo, yet became a man
of great learning.* He has devoted some space in his Lavāgib
al--Amvār (= The Manifestation of the Luminous Truths), other-
wise called the a/-Tabagāt al-Kubra ( = The Great Classes), to
women saints, including Rabi‘a, but he gives more details con-
cerning women of Egypt, which is natural enough, since he was
in a position to gain first-hand information about them, and their
shrines, in many cases, were still in existence and were places
of pilgrimage in his time. He derived some of his information
from the "Futūhāt al-Makkiyya” (= The Meccan Revelations)
of Ibn al-‘Arabi (ob. A.D. 1240).

Dawid al-Antaki (ob. A.D. 1599), a late writer, who was born
in Antioch and died at Mecca, wrote the Taz yin al- Aswvāg (= The
Adorning of the Markets) for which he made use of al-Sarraj’s
Masari‘ already mentioned,5 but obviously he had other sources
as well. He does not mention Rābi'a by name, but gives some
verses by an unnamed woman which he links up with Rabifa's
well-known lines on the “two loves”, attributing all to one
unnamed author. His testimony is therefore very uncertain and,
in the absence of confirmation from more reliable sources, cannot
be accepted without qualification.

An authority who is important, though so late as to be classed
among modern writers, is “Abd al-Ra’uf al-Mundwi (ob. A.D. 1622)
of Cairo, who was a iz: writer. Among his works is “ Al-

1 See above, Leet 2 See below, p. xxii.

3 For a complete list of Jami’s sources see W. Iranon, J.A.S.
Bengal, xviii, pp. 386 ff. ; XIX, pp. 298 ff.

4 Cf. R. A. Nicholson, Literary History of the Arabs, p. 464.
5 See above, p. xv.

xxii RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Kawākib al-Durriya” (= The Glittering Stars), in which he
gives an account at length of several women saints, including
Rābi'a al-‘Adawiyya. Munāvī is a careful writer, and takes pains
to avoid the confusion between the two Rabi'as, into which several
writers have fallen. He mentions Ibn al-Jawzi as a source for
Rabi‘a’s biography and has evidently consulted al-Jāhiz and
al-Qushayri; his account is valuable, including much that is not
found elsewhere, and it is probable that he had access to sources
now lost and unavailable. Since his method is definitely critical,
we may suppose that he took pains to consult sources which he
believed to be authentic.

The above represent the chief sources for Rabi‘a’s life and
teachings, and for the accounts of other women saints included
in this book. With regard to Süfi doctrine, in addition to the
works of Abū Talib, al-Kalābādhī, Abū Nu‘aym, al-Qushayri
and al-Ghazali and others already mentioned, another early
writer, who does not mention Rābi'a, is quoted, namely a/-
Hujwiri (ob. c. A.D. 1079). He was born at Ghazna and was
contemporary with al-Qushayri. He died at Lahore. In his great
work, the Kashf al-Mabjub (= The Unveiling of the Veiled),
his aim is not, like that of al-Sarraj in the Kitāb a/-Luma‘,' merely
to report the opinions of previous Süfi thinkers, but to set forth
an exhaustive treatise on Stfi doctrine, including his own per-
sonal views. He was already acquainted with the Kitab al-Luma‘
and he also quotes from the ** Tabagāt” of al-Sulami,? and the
Risāla of al-Qushayri. As the oldest treatise in Persian on
Sūfism the Kashf al-Mabjub is a work of the greatest value to all
interested in the early development of mysticism in Islam. 3

There are certain sources for the life and teachings of Rābi'a
which at present are unavailable and which might be of the
greatest value if they could be discovered.

The first of these is the ** Manāgib Rabi‘a” ( = Biography (lit.
Merits) of Rabi‘a), which has been heard of and presumably is
in existence, but so far has baffled all efforts for its discovery.

1 See above, p. xiv. 2 See below, p. xxiii.

3 For an account of al-Hujwiri and his writings see Kashf al-
Mabjūb, Translator’s Preface. This work is available in an English

translation by a master-hand, that of Professor R. A. Nicholson
of Cambridge.

SURVEY OF SOURCES xxiii

If this work is early or by a writer who has the critical faculty
and states the sources of his information, it is probable that it
would throw much light upon Rābi'a's personal history, for
which so little really authentic material is available at present.

Another missing authority which would undoubtedly be of
great value is the section on women devotees and gnostics at
the end of the " Tabaqat al-Süfiyya" of Abū ‘Abd al-Rahmān
al-Sulami, to which Jàmi refers! and to which there is also a
reference in al-Munawwar's book, especially referring to Rabi‘a.?
Al-Sulami was born in Naysābūr in A.D. 941 and died in A.D. 1021.
The MSS. of the “ Tabagāt” which ate extant do not appear to
include this section on the women saints, and as al-Sulami is
one of the earliest biographers of the Süfis, his account would
be of great interest. Yet another missing authority is the com-
plete MS. of the “Safwa al-Safwa”, already mentioned,3 of Ibn
al-Jawzi, who was born at Baghdad, and who died in A.D. 1200:
His book is derived from Abū Nu‘aym’s “Hilya” and con-
tains a biography of Rabi‘a to which Ibn Khallikan refers in his
Wafayāt al--A'yān + and to which al-Munāvi also refers.5

Fot the third part of this book, the sources above mentioned
have been used, and also some authorities dealing with History
and Geography and subjects of general interest, rather than with
Sūfīs and Süfism.

The “Chronicles of Mecca" are a collection of writings by
authors of the ninth and tenth centuries, the first of whom was
Al-Agragi (ob. A.D. 858). From these Chronicles information
has been derived concerning the convents of Muslim women.

All-Baladburi (ob. A.D. 892) was a Persian, but wrote in Arabic.
His Kstab al-Futab al-Buldān gives an account of the early Muham-
madan conquests and mentions the earliest Muslim saints, in-
cluding some women.

A source of much information concerning the women of
pre-Islamic and early Islamic times is the celebrated Kitab al-
Aghani (= The Book of Songs) of Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahani
(ob. A.D. 967), who was born at Isfahan. This work is a mine of

I Nafabat al-Uns, p. 716. 2 Asrār al-Tawhid, p. 410.
3 See above, p. xviii. 4 Vol. 1, p. 34, No. 230.
5 *Al-Kawākib al-Durriya", fol. 52 a.

XXIV RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

invaluable information on early Islamic times and the writer
frequently mentions the celebrated women of Islim. Though
his book is primarily a collection of songs, he introduces a great
many traditions and stories, and was near enough to the events
he describes to be able to obtain authentic information.

Al-Magqdisi, born in A.D. 946 at Jerusalem, was a great traveller
who set down an account of his travels in his “Ahsan ul-
Tagāsīm fi ma‘rifat al-Aqalim" ( = The Best of the Divisions in
Knowledge of the Climes), which is edited in the Bibliotheca
Geographorum Arabicorum.

Another famous geographer to whom reference is made is
Yāgūt (ob. A.D. 1229), who was by birth a Greek but was enslaved
and became a Muslim. He travelled a good deal and wrote the
Mu‘jam al-Buldan ( = Account of the Lands), a great geographical
dictionary, which is full of valuable information.

A theological writer to whom reference is made in this part
of the book is M. b. M. al-“Abdari (ob. A.D. 1336), who has some
strong comments to make on women in his Madkhal al-Sbari* al-
Sharif ( = Introduction to the Sacred Law), which he writes from
the point of view of an orthodox theologian.

A very celebrated traveller to whom several references are
made is Ibn Battita (ob. A.D. 1377), a native of Tangier, who
travelled in Europe, going as far as India and China, and also
to East Africa and the Sudan, and making copious notes of all
he observed, which he set down in his delightful and enter-
taining book of travels called Tubfa al-Nuzzar fi Ghar ib al-
amsar wa ‘aja’ ib al-asfar ( = Rarities seen among the curiosities
of cities and the marvels of travel), in which he notes especially
the position and customs of women in foreign countries.

Among the writers referred to is Ibn Khaldūn (ob. A.D. 1406),
described as “the greatest historical thinker of Islim”. He was
born at Tunis. The most famous of his writings is the Muqaddima
( = Prolegomena), which forms the first volume of a large
general history.!

A writer of considerable importance where places and shrines
are concerned is a/-Magrizi (ob. A.D. 1442), a native of Cairo,
who wrote a great work known as the Khitat ( = Sites), on

1 Cf. R. A. Nicholson, Literary History of tbe Arabs, pp. 437 f.

SURVEY OF SOURCES XXV

the topography and history of Egypt. Although his work is
incomplete and sometimes vague, he has preserved much valuable
information for generations to come and is usually accurate and
careful to use contemporary evidence when available.

A history arranged chronologically, which is of great use for
reference, is the Isaba fi tamyīz al-Sababa ( = Setting forth of the
Excellences of the Companions) of Ibn Hajar (ob. A.D. 1449),
a native of Ascalon. He traces his history from the time of the
Prophet, and includes the celebrated women of Islām in his
account. The above include all the important native authorities
used; some obscure and late writers have been omitted.

1 Cf. A. R. Guest, “ List of Writers, Books and other Authori-
ties mentioned by al-Maqrizi in his Khitat", J.R.A.S. 1902,
pp. 103 ff.

Digitized by Google

Part One

CHAPTER I

Rābi'a al-“Adawiyya. Her birth and early years.

E the history of Islam, the woman saint made her |

appearance at a very early period, and in the evolu-
tion of the cult of saints by Muslims, the PAN of
saintship was conferred on women as mi en.
As far as tánk

—— + ne —À DE

ong ai od Ihe pete of the Süfi's

quest was union with the Divine, and the Süfi seeker
after God, having renounced this world and its attrac-
tions, being purged of Self and its desires, inflamed
with a passion of love to God, journeyed ever onward,
looking towards his final purpose, through the life of
illumination, with its ecstasies and raptures, and the
higher life of contemplation, until at last he achieved
the heavenly gnosis and attained to the Vision of God,

"in which the lover might become one with the Beloved,

and abide in Him for ever.

Such a conception of the relations between the saint |
and his Lord om for the distinc Of se
In the spiritu eher male nor.
female". 2 All whom God had called to be saints could

1 Ta al-Hujwīrī: “You must know that the principle and
foundation of Süfism and knowledge of God rests on Saintship”
(Kashf al-Mabjab, p. 210).

2 Cf. Shabistarī: “In God there is no duality. In that Presence
q^ and ‘we’ and ‘thou’ do not exist, ‘I’ and ‘we’ and ‘thou’

and ‘he’ become one... .Since in Unity there is no distinction. .
The Quest and the Way and the Seeker become one” (Gulshan-i

Rz, p. 27,1. 448).

SR I

r

US

2 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

attain, by following the Path, to union with Himself,
and all who attained, would have their royal rank, as
spiritual beings, in the world to come.

‘Attar, to prove that saintship may be found in a
woman as naturally as in a man, says:

The holy prophets have laid it down that “God does not look
upon your outward forms”. It is not the outward form that
matters, but the inner purpose of the heart, as the Prophet said,
“The people are assembled (on the Day of Judgment) according
to the purposes_ es of their hearts”....So also ‘Abbas of Tūs said
that when on the Day of Reswésection the summons goes forth,
“O men”, the first person to set foot in that class of men (7.e. those
who are to enter Paradise) will be Mary,' upon whom be peace... .
The true explanation of this fact (that women count for as much
as men among the saints) is that wherever these people, the
Süfis, are, they have no separate existence in the Unity of God.
In the Unity, NB beian, of the dick er "1" or" thon?
So how can “man” or "woman" continue to be? So too,
Abū ‘Ali Farmadhi said, “Prophecy is the essence, the very being,
of power and sublimity. Superiority and inferiority do not exist
in it, Undoubtedly saintship is of the same type".?

So the title of saint was bestowed upon women
equally with men, and since Islàm has no order of
. priesthood and no priestly caste, there was nothing to
prevent a woman from teaching the-highest-religious
tan e hierarchy of Muslim saints. Some theo-
logians even name the Lady Fatima, daughter of the
Prophet, as the first Qutb or spiritual head of the
Safi fellowship.3 Below the Qutb were four ‘ Awtad’,
from whose ranks his successor was chosen, and below
them, in the next rank of the hierarchy, were forty
‘Abdal’ or Substitutes, who are described as being the
pivot of the world and the foundation and support of
the affairs of men.4 Jami relates how someone was

1 The Mother of Jesus. 2 Tadbkirat al-Awliya, 1, p. 59.

3 Goldziher, Muhamm. Studien, 11, p. 300.
4 Munawēvar, Asrar al-Tawhid, p. 129.

PART ONE, CHAPTER I 3

asked, “How many are the “‘Abdal’?” and he answered,
“Forty souls”, and when asked why he did not say
“Forty men”, his reply was, ** There have been women
among them”.' The biographies of the Muslim saints,
such as those compiled by Abū Nu'aym,* Farid al-Din
‘Attar,3 Ibn al-Jawzi,* Jamis and Ibn Khallikan® and
many others, are full of the mention of women Süfis,
their saintly lives, their good deeds, and their miracles.
The influence which these women saints exercised both
during their lives and after their deaths, is perhaps best
proved by the fact that Muslim theologians, opposed X
to the Süfi movement, denounce also these women
saints and the worship known to be given to them.7,
/ The high position attained by the women Safi
/ attested further by the fact that the Süfis viedā
give to a woman the first place among the earliest
Muhammadan mystics and have chosen her to be the
representative of the first development of mysticism j
Islam.
s was the saintly Rabi‘a, a freedwoman of the
Al-‘Atik,9 a tribe of Qays b. ‘Adi, from which she was
known as al-‘Adawiyya or al-Qaysiyya, and also as
al-Basriyya, from her birth-place: of whom a modern
writer says, *Rabi'a is the saint par excellence of the
Sunnite hagiography ".!? Her biographer ‘Attar speaks
of her as

„im

OE ete rat
T mh Ian tar rmn Pan ers M rr te AR

That one set apart in the seclusion of holiness, that woman
veiled with the veil of religious sincerity, that one on fire with
love and longing, that one enamoured of the desire to approach

1 Jami, Nafahāt al-Uns, p. 716. 2 “Hilya al-Awliya. 4
3 Tadhkirat al- Awliyā. * Safwa al-Safwa."
5 Nafabat al-Uns. 6 Wafayāt al-A‘yan.

7 Cf. Goldziher, op. cit. 11, p. 300.

8 Cf. Dozy, Hist. de V Islamisme, tr. Chauvin, pp. 318, 319,

9 Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, “ Mir'atal- Zaman”, fol. 256 a. Taghribardi,
al-Nujiim al-Zabira, 1, p. 365.

10 L. Massignon, Textes Inédits Relati ifs à la Mystique Musulmane.
(Proof kindly communicated to me by the author.) -

I-2

4 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

her Lord and be consumed in His glory, that woman who lost
herself in union with the Divine, that one accepted by men as.
a second spotless Mary—Rābi'a al-‘Adawiyya, may God have
mercy upon her. If anyone were to say, “Why have you made
mention of her in the class of men?” , I should say. . .““God does
not look upon the outward forms... .If it is allowable to accept
two thirds of our faith from ‘A’isha? the Trustworthy, it is also
allowable to accept religious benefit from one of her handmaids
[;.e. Rabi‘a]. When a woman walks in the way of God like a man,
she cannot be called a woman”.3

A later biographer, al-Munawi, says of her:

Rābi'a al-‘Adawiyya al-Qaysiyya of Basra, was at the head
of the women disciples and the chief of the women ascetics,
of those who observed the sacred law, who were God-fearing
and zealous...and she was one of those who were pre-eminent
and experienced in grace and goodness.

He gives the names of several well-known women
saints and goes on to say, **She was the most famous
among them, of great devotion and conspicuous in
worship, and of perfect purity and asceticism”.4
Unfortunately there is no writer very near her own
time to give us her biography, and for an account of
her early life we can find material only in the Memoir
of the Saints of ‘Attar, already mentioned, who lived

1 Cf. St John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, p. 69: “The soul
on fire with the love of God longs for the pd and con-
summation of its love, that it may be completely refreshed".

2 À large number of the Traditions concerning Muhammad,
on boom Muslims rely, were derived from his favourite wife
* A'isha.

3 “Attar, Tadbkirat al-Awliya, p. 59.

4 "Al-Kawākīb al-Durriya," fol. 50. Cf. Muhammad Zihnī:
“ Although she was a woman, in character she was so enlightened
of heart that she was manifestly superior to many men in the
matter of human perfection, and for this reason she was called
“The Crown of Men’. Her works of piety and asceticism were
so renowned that her praise was on everyone’s tongue, and her
exalted name became a kind of proverb for ascetic men and
women” (Meshābīr al-INisá, p. 225).

NG

\

PART ONE, CHAPTER I 5

mote than four hundred years after Rabi‘a. Much of
what he tells of her must be regarded as purely legendary.
Yet though the legends which surround R4bi‘a’s name
may not, and in many cases certainly do not, corre-
spond to historic facts, at least they give some idea of
her personality and shew the estimation in which she
was held by those who lived after her and had heard
of her fame.

She was born probably about A.H. 95 ot 99 (= A.D.
717)! in Basra, where she spent the greater part of her
life.

Born into the poorest of homes, according to ‘Attar
(though a modern writer says she belonged to one of
the noble families of Basra),* miraculous events were
reputed to have taken place even at the time of her
birth. ‘Attar tells us that on the night of her birth
there was no oil in the house, no lamp nor.swaddling
clothes in which to wrap the new-born child. Her
father already had three daughters, and so she was called
Rābi'a ( = the fourth). The mother asked her husband
to go and ask for oil for the lamp from a neighbour,
but he had made a vow that he would never ask any-
thing of a creature (7.e. as a true Süfi he would depend
only upon God to supply his needs),3 and so he came
back without it. Having fallen asleep in great distress
at the lack of provision for the child, he dreamt that
the Prophet Muhammad appeared to him in his slee
and said, “Do not be sorrowful, for this daughter who |
is born is a great saint, whose intercession will be;
desired by seventy thousand of my community”. The
Prophet said further:

To-morrow send a letter to ‘Isa Zādhān, Amir of Basra, re-
minding him that every night he is wont to pray one hundred
prayers to me and on Friday night four hundred, but this Friday

1 Cf. Massignon, Lexique Technique, p. 193, note 5.
2 M. Zihni, Meshabir al-Nisa, pr 225.
3 See Part r1, Chapter 1x.

6 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

night he has neglected me, and as a penance (tell him) that he
must give you four hundred dinars, lawfully acquired.

Rābi'a's father awoke, weeping; he rose up, wrote the
letter as directed and sent it to the Amir through the
latter’s chamberlain. The Amir, when he had read the
letter said:

Give two thousand dinars to the poor as a thank-offering, be-
cause the prophet had me in mind, and four hundred dinars to
that Shaykh and say to him that I desire that he should come before
me that I may see him, but it is not fitting that such a person as
he is should come to me, but I will come and rub my beard on
his threshold.”

But in spite of this event of good augury, ‘Attar
relates that misfortunes fell upon the family, and when
Rābi'a was a little older, her mother and father died
and she was left an orphan. A famine occurred in
Basra and the sisters were scattered. One day, when
, Rabia was walking abroad, an evil-minded man saw
her and seized upon her and sold her as a slave for
six dirhams and the man who bought her made her
work hard. One day a stranger (one who might not
look at her unveiled) approached her. Rabi‘a fled to
avoid him and slipped on the road and dislocated her
wrist. She bowed her face in the dust, and said, ““O
Lord, I am a stranger and without mother or father,
an orphan and a slave and I have fallen into bondage
and my wrist is injured, (yet) I am not grieved by this,
only (I desire) to satisfy Thee. I would fain know if
Thou art satisfied (with me) or not". She heard a voice
saying, “Be not sorrowful, for on the day of Resur-
rection thy rank shall be such that those who are
nearest to God in Heaven shall envy thee”.3

I The Süfis would not make use of money unless it had been
earned by means accounted lawful according to the sacred law
of Islam.

2 ‘Attar, op. cit. pp. 59 and 6o.

3 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, pp. Go and 61.

PART ONE, CHAPTER I 7

After this Rabi‘a returned to her master’s house and
continually fasted in the daytime and carried out her
appointed tasks and in the service of God she was
standing on her feet till the day. One night her master
awoke from sleep and looked down through a window
of the house and saw Rābi'a, whose head was bowed
in worship, and she was saying, “O my Lord, Thou
knowest that the desire of my heart is to obey Thee,
and that the light of my eye is in the service of Thy
court. If the matter rested with me, I should not cease
for one hour from Thy service, but Thou hast made
me subject to a creature”. While she was still praying,
. he saw a lamp above her head, suspended without a
chain, and the whole house was illuminated by the rays
from that light. This enveloping radiance or sakina
(derived from the Hebrew Shekina = the cloud of
glory indicating the presence of God) of the Muslim
saint, corresponding to the halo of the Christian saint,
is frequently mentioned in the biographies of the Süfis.!

Rābi'a”s master, when he saw that strange sight, was
afraid and rose up and returned to his own place and
sat pondering until day came. When the day a |
he called Rabi‘a and spoke kindly to her and set her
free. Rabi‘a asked for leave to go away; so he gave!
her leave, and she left that place and journeyed into,
the desert. Afterwards she left the desert and obtained |
for herself a cell and for a time was engaged in de- |
votional worship there.? According to one account, '
Rābi'a at first followed the calling of a flute player,
which would be consistent with a state of slavery. Then
she became converted and built a place of retreat,
where she occupied herself with works of piety.3

Among other stories related of this period of her

bom

1 Cf. Goldziher, “Le culte des saints chez les Musulmans ",
Revue de l'histoire des Religions, 1880, pp. 270, 271.

2 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 61.

3 ‘Attar, op. cit. Uyghur version, TI, p. 56.

8 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

life, is one telling how she purposed performing the
pilgrimage to Mecca and set her face towards the
desert; she had an ass with her to carry her baggage,
and in the heart of the desert the ass died. Some
people (in the caravan) said to her, “Let us carry thy
baggage". She said, “Go on your way, for I am not
dependent upon you (for help)", i.e. she placed her
trust in God and not in His creatures.

So the people went on and Rābi'a remained alone,
and bowing her head, she said, “O my God, do kings
deal thus with a woman, a stranger and weak? Thou
art calling me to Thine own house (the Ka'ba), but in
the midst of the way Thou hast suffered mine ass to
die and Thou hast left me alone in the desert".

She had hardly completed her prayer, when the ass
stirred and got up. Rābi'a put her baggage on it and
went on her way. The narrator of this story said that
some time afterwards he saw that same little ass being
sold in the bazaar." !

Another story tells us how she went into the desert
for a few days and prayed, "O my Lord, my heart is
perplexed, whither shall I go? I am but a clod of earth
and that house (the Ka‘ba) is only a stone to me. Shew
Thyself (to me) in this very place”. So she prayed until
God Most High, without any medium, spoke directly
within her heart, saying, "O Rābi'a...when Moses
desired to see My Face, I cast a few particles of My
Glory upon the mountain (Sinai) and it was rent into
forty pieces. Be content here with My Name"!

It is told how another time she was on her way to
Mecca, and when half-way there she saw the Ka‘ba
coming to meet her and she said, “‘It is the Lord of the
house whom I need, what have I to do with the house?
I need to meet with Him Who said, *Whoso approaches
Me by a span's length I will approach him by the length
of a cubit’. The Ka‘ba which I see has no power over

I ‘Attar, op. cif. 1, p. 61.

PART ONE, CHAPTER I 9

me; what joy does the beauty of the Ka‘ba bring to
me?”!

In connection with this legend, which indicates how
highly favoured by God R4bi‘a was, in the eyes of her
biographers, it is related that Ibrahim b. Adham? spent
fourteen years making his way to the Ka‘ba, because
in every place of prayer he performed two raka‘s, and
at last when he arrived at the Ka‘ba, he did not see it.

He said, “ Alas, what has happened? It may be that
some injury has overtaken my eyes”. An unseen voice
said, “No harm has befallen your eyes, but the Ka‘ba
has gone to meet a woman, who is approaching this
place”. Ibrahim was seized with jealousy, and said,
*O indeed, who is this?” He ran and saw Rābi'a
arriving and the Ka'ba was back in its own place.
When Ibrahim saw that, he said, "O Rābi'a, what is
this disturbance and trouble and burden which thou
hast brought into the world?" She said, “I have not
brought disturbance into the world, it is you who have |
disturbed the world, because you delayed fourteen
years in arriving at the Ka'ba”. He said, “Yes I have
spent fourteen years in crossing the desert (because
I was engaged) in prayer". Rabi'a said, “You traversed
it in ritual prayer (namaz) but I with personal supplica-
tion (nfyāzx)”.3 Then, having performed the pilgrimage,
she returned to Basra and occupied herself with works
of devotion. |

For these early years only legends ate available, but
they give us a clear idea of a woman renouncing this
wotld and its attractions and giving up her life to the
service of God, the first step on the mystic Way to b
trodden by the Süfi saint. i

1 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, pp. 61, 62.

2 Prince of Balkh, converted to Süfism by a heavenly voice
while out hunting, who lived in the second century of Islam.
Cf. al-Sulami, “ Tabaqàt al-Süftyya", fols. 3 b ff.

3 “Attar, op. cif. 1, p. 62.

CHAPTER II
Rabi‘a’s choice of celibacy. Her associates.

m al-Adawiyya received many offers of mar-
riage, but rejected them all, feeling that in the
celibate life only could she pursue her quest un-
hindered. Among those who sought her hand in
marriage was 'Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd, who was re-
nowned for his asceticism and the sanctity of his life,
a theologian and a preacher and an advocate of solitude
for those who sought the way to God; the reputed
writer of verses declaring that

The Ways are various, the Way to the Truth is one,
Those who travel on the way of Truth must keep
themselves apart.

He was the founder of one of the first monastic com-
munities near Basra, and died in A.D. 793. Rabi‘a did
not welcome his offer but shunned him with the greatest
loathing, and said to him, "O sensual one, seek another
sensual like thyself. Hast thou seen any sign of desire
in me?" | |

Another who sought her hand was Muhammad b.
Sulayman al-Hashimi, the ‘Abbasid Amir of Basra from
A.H. 145, Who died in A.H. 172.3 Heoffereda dowry ofa
hundred thousand dinars and wrote to Rābi'a that he
had an income of ten thousand dinérs a month and
that he would bestow it all on her, but she wrote back,
“It does not please me that you should be my slave
and that all you possess should be mine, or that you
should distract me from God for a single moment".

1 Abū Talib, Of al-Qulab, 1, p. 153.

2 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 57. Hamadhānī “Shakwa” MS.
Berlin, fol. 37 b. See L. Massignon, Textes Inédits. (Proof kindly

communicated by the author.)
3 Cf. L. Massignon, Lexique Technique, p. 195, note 5.

PART ONE, CHAPTER II II

. Another account of this offer says that the governor
wrote to the people of Basra asking them to find him
a wife, and they agreed upon R4bi‘a, and when he
wrote to her expressing his wishes, her reply was as
follows:

Renunciation of this world means peace, while desire for it
brings sorrow. Curb your desires and control yourself and do
not let others control you, but let them share your inheritance
and the anxiety of the age. As for youtself, give your mind to
the day of death; but as for me, God can give me all you offer
and even double it. It does not please me to be distracted from
Him for a single moment. So farewell.

Another story tells how Hasan of Basra,? with whom
the legends persistently associate her (though he died
more than seventy years before her death), and others
are also said to have come to Rābi'a, urging her to
take a husband, and to choose from among the Süfis
of Basra whom she would. She replied, ** Yes, willingly.
Who is the most learned of you, that I may marry
him?" They said, “Hasan of Basra”, so she said to
him, “If you can give me the answer to four questions,
I will be your wife". He said, “Ask, and if God permit,
I will answer you”.

She said then, “What will the Judge of the world
say when I die? That I have come out of the world
a Muslim ot an unbeliever?"

Hasan answered, ** This is among the hidden things,
which are known only to God Most High".

Then she said, ““When I am put in the grave and
Munkar and Nakir3 question me, shall I be able to
answer them (satisfactorily) or not?" He replied, “‘ This
also is hidden".

I Munáwi, * Al-Kawākib al-Durriya", fol. 510. Sibt Ibn al-
Jawzi, * Mir'at al-Zamān”, fol. 265 b.

2 Ob. A.D. 728.

5 The two angels of Death, who visit the dead Muslim i in the
juive and ask questions to test the faith of the deceased.

12 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

She said next, “When the people are assembled at
the Resurrection and the books? are distributed, and
some are given their book in the right hand and some
in the left, shall I be given mine in my right hand or
my left?" He could only say, ** This also is among the
hidden things".

Finally she asked, “When mankind is summoned
(on the Day of Judgment), some to Paradise and some
to Hell, in which of the two groups shall I be?” He
answered as before, “‘ This, too, is hidden, and none
knows what i is hidden save God, His is the glory and
majesty”.

Then she said to him, "Since ili is SO, and I have
these four guestions with which to concern myself,
how should I need a husband, with whom to be
occupied?”

She is said to have emphasised her refusal with the
following beautiful lines, but they cannot be attributed
to her with any certainty:

My peace, O my brothers, is in solitude,

And my Beloved is with me alway,

For His love I can find no substitute,

And His love is the test for me among mortal beings,

When-e’er His Beauty I may contemplate,

He is my “mihrab”, towards Him is my "gibla”

If I die of love, before completing satisfaction,

Alas, for my anxiety in the world, alas for my distress,

O Healer (of souls) the heart feeds upon its desire,

The striving after union with 'Thee has healed my soul,

O my Joy and my Life abidingly,

Thou wast the source of my life and from Thee also came my
ecstasy.

I have separated myself from all created beings,

My hope is for union with Thee, for that is the goal of my desire.”

I The record of each one's deeds, given into the right hand

of those who have done good and the left hand of those who
have done evil. 2 Al-Hurayfish, A/-Rawd a/-Fā'ig, p. 214.

*

PART ONE, CHAPTER II 13

This story is given in more than one account, and
though chronologically it is almost impossible that
Hasan of Basra should be the suitor in the case, it is
possible that it refers to some other offer of marriage.

Another legend also gives an account of an offer
said to have been made by Hasan of Basra, in which
the same feeling is evident in Rabi‘a’s answer. Hasan
is reputed to have said, “I desire that we should marry
and be betrothed”. Her reply was:

The contract of marriage is for those who have a phenomenal
existence (#.e. who are concerned with the affairs of this material
world). Here (j.e. in my case) existence has ceased, since I have
ceased to exist and have passed out of Self. My existence is in
Him, and I am altogether His. I am in the shadow of His
command. The marriage contract must be asked for from Him,
not from me.

So, like her Christian sisters in the life of sanctity,
Ràbi'a espoused a heavenly Bridegroom and turned her
back on earthly marriage even with one of her o
intimates and companions on the Way.

Rābi'a had many disciples and associates, who re-
sorted to her house day and night to seek her counsel
ot her prayers or to listen to her teaching. As already
stated, her biographers constantly associate her with
Hasan of Basra, whom they portray as her disciple and
follower, though he must have been so much her senior.
Either her name has been introduced into anecdotes
relating to Hasan, or else Hasan’s name has been sub-
stituted for that of one of her own contemporaries in
anecdotes which relate to her. Hasan of Basra was one
of the earliest Süfis, a saint who took the gloomies
view of life, both in this world and the next, and whose
faith was overshadowed by the fear of Hell to such an
extent that he even envied the man who would be
saved after a thousand years in Hell, and said, * Would

I ‘Attar, op. cif. 1, p. 66.

14 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

that I were like this man”.' Hasan was a learned man,
eloquent and a great preacher of sermons.* He was
strict in ritual observances and constantly under the
influence of godly sorrow.3 He was the author of a
number of works of a theological nature, and his
opinions on Süfi doctrine carried great weight with
those who came after him. He died in A.D. 728.4

‘Attar states that if Rabi‘a were not present in
Hasan’s assembly, he left the assembly at once.5

The same writer relates that Hasan of Basra said
about his relationship with Rābi'a, “I passed one whole
night and day with Rābi'a speaking of the Way and
the Truth, and it never passed through my mind that
I was a man nor did it occur to her that she was a
woman, and at the end when I looked at her, I saw
myself a bankrupt [ž.e. spiritually worth nothing], and
Rabi‘a as truly sincere". ®

Again, he tells a story of how once Rābi'a was
passing Hasan’s house and Hasan had his head out of
the window and was weeping; and his tears fell on to
Rabi'a's garment. She looked up, thinking it was not
rain, and when she was certain that it was Hasan’s
tears, she at once came to him, and said, "O teacher,
this weeping is from pride of self; rather weep tears
(as a result) of looking into your heart, that within thee
they may become a river such that within that river
you will not by searching find your heart again unless
you find it in the Lord of Might". Hasan, who had
a sufficient opinion of himself, found that a hard saying
and was silent.7

Another ascetic with whom she is associated, and in

1 Abū Talib, Ost a/-Oulūb, 1, p. 101.

2 Cf. al-Jāhiz, a/-Bayān, 111, p. 68.

3 Al-Jahiz, op. cit. 111, p. 86.

4 For an account of his life and influence see L. Massignon,
Lexique Technique, pp. 152-79.

5 ‘Attar, op. cit. I, p. 59. 6 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 65.

7 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, pp. 64 and 65.

PART ONE, CHAPTER II 15

this case with great probability, since he was both her
contemporary and also of the same school of thought,
is Rabah al-Qays of Basra, who died in A.D. 810.
A modern writer, associating him with Rābi'a, says,
“With these two ascetics, both of the school of Basra,
the quest of the ascetic life leads to mystic states already
differentiated and brings up delicate problems of
casuistry and dogma".! He introduced ideas of the
glorious light of God (¢aja//7), of the Divine friendship
(Khulla) and of the superiority of the saint over the
prophet. In the moral life, he advocated chastity,
repentance and acts of- piety.?

Abū Nuʻaym gives an anecdote which shews how her
associates depended upon Rābi'a's help when faced with
a difficult problem. He says that Rabah relates it thus:

I came to Abrad b. Dirār of the Bani Sa‘d and he said to me,
"Are the days and nights long to you?” and I said, “Why?”
He said, “Because of your desire to meet God". Rabah said,
“I was silent and said nothing until I came to Rābi'a and said,
* Veil yourself with your garment, for al-Abrad has asked me a
question and I could say nothing in answer to it'". She said,
* What did he ask you?" I said to her, “He said to me, ‘Are
the days and nights long to you from your desire to meet God???”
Rābi'a said to me, * And what did you say?" I said, “I did not
say ‘Yes’, lest I should tell a lie, and I did not say ‘No’, lest I
should debase his soul".

I heard the rending of her chemise under her cloak as she said,
* My answer is * Yes’”’.3

Abū Nu‘aym is also the source of a story related by
Abū Bakr al-Sarraj about Rabah and Rābi'a:

Abū Ma‘mur ‘Abdallah b. ‘Amr said: *Isaw Rābi'a with Rabah
al-Qays and he was kissing a boy belonging to his family and

1 L. ROD, Textes Inédits. (Proof kindly communicated
by the author.) -
2 Cf. L. Massignon, Lexique ME PP. 195-7.
= Hilya al-Abrar", Leyden MS. 1, fol. 26 b. al-Sarraj,
Magari, p. 181.

16 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

embracing him and she said, ‘Do you love him, O Rabah?’
He said, ‘ Yes’, and she said, ‘I did not suppose there was room
in your heart for loving any but God’. Rabah cried out and fell
in a swoon; when he recovered, he wiped the sweat from his
brow and said, ‘Compassion is from God Most High and He
has put it into the hearts of his servants towards little children" ".:

Sufyàn al-Thawti appears in all the biographies of
Rābi'a as a very intimate friend and a constant visitor
at her house, and much of the teaching attributed to
her was the result of his questions or of conversation
with him. He was born at Kūfa in A.H. 95 (= A.D.
713-14) and died in A.D. 778; he was therefore con-
temporary with Rābi'a and it is reasonable to suppose
that he would come into contact with her. He was
a great authority on the Traditions, and Rābi'a appears
to have taken him to task more than once for his
devotion to them. Abū Talib relates in this connection
that Rabi‘a al-Adawiyya used to say of al-Thawri,
“Yes, Sufyān would be a (good) man, if he did not
love the Traditions", and she used to say, “The
seductive power of the Traditions is stronger than the
enticement of property and children" (4.e. the study of
the Traditions distracted him from the life with God
even more than worldly possessions would have done),
and she said once, “If only Sufyān did not love this
world, that is to say the gathering of people round
him for (discourse on) the Traditions, what a good
thing it would be”’.?

The same writer relates how one day Sufyān al-
Thawri said in Rabi‘a’s presence, ““O God, mayst Thou
be satisfied with us!" and she said, "Are you not
ashamed before God to ask Him to be satisfied when
you are not satisfied with Him?”3 and he said, "I ask
forgiveness from God”’.4

1 Al-Sarrāj, Masari‘, p. 186. “Hilya”, Leyden MS. 1, fol. 27 a.
2 Out al-Oulūb, 1, pp. 156, 157.
3 See Part 11, Chapter x, pp. 88 ff. 4 Op. cit. 11, p. 40.

PART ONE, CHAPTER II 17

Again Sufyan, who seems to have been somewhat
of a poseur, or at least anxious to provoke Rābi'a to
retaliation, said to her, “Alas, for my sorrow! (for my
sins)", but she rejoined, “Do not lie, but say rather,
* Alas, for my lack of sorrow’, and if you were truly
sorrowful, life would have no delight for you”.'

That her intercession was valued even in her life-
time by her disciples, is proved by an account of a
man who said to Rabi‘a, “Pray for me”, and she said,
“Who am I? Obey your Lord and pray to Him, for
He will answer the suppliant when he prays”’.?

More than one episode, of doubtful authenticity,
connects Rabi‘a with the great Egyptian Sufi Dhū
al-Nün al-Misri,3 one of the chief exponents of the
Sufi doctrine and especially the doctrine of the heavenly
gnosis (wa‘rifa) derived from spiritual experience, not
from acquired learning. He elaborates the Sūfī con-
ception of Unification (= tawhid) and employs for the
love of God to the saint and the saint’s love to Him,
the term which Rābi'a also used (bb). He died in
A.D. 856 and therefore survived Rābi'a for nearly half
a century. It is quite possible, however, that he may
have met her in his early years.

There is a story connecting the two which has a good
deal of interest, related by Sa‘d b. *Uthmaàn, who says,

I was with Dhū al-Nün the Egyptian. ..and behold, someone
arrived and I said, "O teacher, someone has come”, and he said
to me, “See who it is, for no one sets foot in this place, except
my friends", and I looked and lo, it was a woman, and I said,
“It is a woman", and he said, “She is a friend, by the Lord
of the Ka'ba", then he ran up to her and greeted her...and
said, *I am your brother Dhü al-Nün and there is no one
present (i.e. no strangers)”, and she said, “May God welcome

1 Al-Qushayri, Risā/a, p. 86. Ibn al-Jawzi, “Ta’rikh al-
Muntazam”’, fol. 132.

2 Sibt Ibn al- Jawzi, op. cit. fol. 265 b.

3 Cf. ‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Sulami, op. cit. fol. 6 b,

SR 2

18 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

your soul in peace”. Then he said, “What led you to enter this
place?” and she said, “A verse from the book of God... .His
most exalted Word says, ‘Is not God’s earth wide? Therefore
wander about in it’”. Then he said to her: “Expound Love to
me”, and she said, “Praise be to God, for you speak with the
tongue of knowledge and (yet) you ask me about it". He said
to her, “The asker has a right to an answer".

Then she is said to have recited her famous verses on
the two types of love to God.

Another of her contemporaries and acquaintances
was "Abd al-‘Aziz b. Sulayman Abū al-Rasibi of Basra,
who died in A.H. 150 (— A.D. 767), an ascetic and devotee
whom Rābi'a called “The Chief of the Devotees”
(Sayyid al-‘Abadin).?

Others mentioned as visitors to her house who came
to discuss problems with her, were Salih b. ‘Abd
al-‘Aziz and Kilab b. Hari, the latter a Sūfī Shi‘ite.3
More than one story associates Rabi‘a with Malik b.
Dinar, a very well known ascetic, who was one of the
disciples of Hasan al-Basrī. As he died in A.H. 128
(= A.D. 745) Rabi‘a can have known him only in her
youth.4

It was chiefly among men that Rabi‘a found her
disciples and friends, we hear less of her association
with women. Among her companions who were
evidently of her own kinsfolk we hear of Mu‘adha
al-‘Adawiyya, a famous woman ascetic, and Layla al-
Qaysiyya.5 Rābi'a's name is often connected with that
of Umm al-Darda,® but the latter must have been con-

1 Al-Hurayfish, op. cit. p. 213.

2 Taghribardi, TS al-Zàbira, p. 406.

3 Al-Dhahabi says that Abü Dawid said about Malik b.
Dinar: * He and Abū Habib al-Harīrī and "aklu a are all four
zindigs” (= heretics). Mizān al-I‘ - P 306.

4 Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, op. cit. fol. 26

5 M. b. Hasan Ima al-Din, Hor al. Oulūb (on margin of
Qut al- -Oulūt), II, p. 196.

6 Al-Jāhiz, Kitāb Es: I, p. 78.

PART ONE, CHAPTER II 19

siderably older than Rabi‘a. We are given the names of
two of her servants, who were themselves pious
devout women. One of these was Mariam of Basra, ~~
a devotee and ascetic who loved Rābi'a greatly and
became her servant, and survived her for some time.
She used to listen to and take part in discussions on
Love and was so deeply moved thereby that she would
at times lose consciousness. On one occasion she was
in the assembly (of the Süfis) when they were speaking
of Love, and the effect on her was so great that she
yielded up her soul, there in the assembly. Among her
sayings was this, “I have not concerned myself with
my daily bread, nor wearied myself in seeking it since
I heard this verse from the Word of God, ‘In Heaven
is your provision and what has been promised to you” ".!
The other was ‘Abda bint Shuwal, who is described
as herself one of the virtuous handmaids of God Most
High, of whom several stories are told in connection
with her service to Rabi‘a and who was with Rābi'a at
the time of the latter’s death.

The anecdotes related in this chapter shew that Rabi‘a
al-‘Adawiyya associated on equal terms with the Sufi
leaders of her day, and her biographers, in despite of
the Oriental preference for the male sex and belief in
its essential superiority, are prepared to grant to Rabi‘a
a position of equality with, even of pre-eminence above
her contemporaries, including those who were ac-
cepted as leaders of thought and revered teachers of
the Sufi doctrine.

I Jami, op. cit. p. 717. Munawi, op. cit. fol. 83 a.

2-2

CHAPTER III
Rābi'a's asceticism. Her prayer-life.

o the Sufi, as to the Christian saint, the life of
Toa was the first stage towards the attain-
ment of the mystic’s goal, and asceticism was enjoined
on all who entered the novitiate. Only when the novice
had purged himself of the carnal Self and its desires,
could he hope to enter on the way which would lead
to Union with the Divine. Ascetic (25/2) was the most
common appellation of the Sufi, and even those who
had attained to sainthood, with few exceptions, prac-
tised asceticism to the end of their lives. As a Sufi
writer expresses it: “If you ask, Who is the traveller
on the road (the mystic Way)? It is one who is aware
of his own origin....He is the traveller who passes
on speedily; he has become pure from Self as flame
from smoke”.'

í 7 Ràbi'a al-‘Adawiyya was an ascetic who followed the

‘path of poverty and self-denial with unwavering steps
‘to the end. Again and again her friends would have
given her of their substance to alleviate her poverty
and discomfort, but she would have none of their
proffered gifts and looked only to the Lord she served,
to provide for the needs of His servant.

For some time after her release from slavery, ac-
cording to ‘Attar, she retired to the desert and there
lived the life of a recluse in a cell, and even after her
return to Basra she lived apart from the world, so far
as the constant visits of her disciples and other visitors
made it possible.

Al-Jahiz, our oldest authority, says that some of her
friends said to Rabi‘a al-Qaysiyya, “If we were to speak

1 Shabistarī, Gulshan-i Raz, p. 19, ll. 315, 315.

PART ONE, CHAPTER III 21

to the men of your kinsfolk, they would purchase a
servant for you, who would look after the needs of
your house”, but she said, “Verily, I should be
ashamed to ask for worldly things from Him to Whom
the world belongs, and how should I ask for them from
those to whom it does not belong?"

A similar story is told of a man who brought her
forty dinars and said to her, “Spend them on some-
thing that you need”, and she wept and lifted up her
head and said, ““God knows that I am ashamed to ask
Him for this world, though He rules it, and how shall
I take it from one who does not rule it?"?

‘Attar relates that some people came to see her and
she was tearing a piece of meat with her teeth, and they
said to her, “Have you no knife with which to cut
it?" She said, ““From fear of cutting off (separation
from God) I have never had a knife in my house, so
I have none”.3

He also tells a story of how Rābi'a learnt the lesson
of giving up all worldly desires in order that she might
setve God without distraction.

Once fot seven days and nights she had been fasting
and had eaten nothing, and during the night she had
not slept at all, but had spent every night in prayer.
When she was in extremity from hunger, someone
came into the house and brought her a cup of food.
Rābi'a took it and went to fetch a lamp. When she
returned, a cat had upset the cup. She said, “I will
go and fetch a jug and break my fast (on water)".
When she brought the jug, the lamp had gone out.
She intended to drink the water in the darkness, but
the jug fell from her hands and was smashed to pieces. .
Rābi'a broke into lamentations and heaved such a sigh
that it almost seemed as if the house would catch fire.

Al-Bayān wa al-Tabyin, 111, p. 66.
2 Munàwi, op. cit. fol. 51 a.
3 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 68.

22 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

She said, “O my Lord, what is this which Thou art
doing to wretched me?" She heard a voice saying,

Have a care, if you desire it, I will endow you with all the
pleasures of this world, but I shall take concern for Me out of
your heart, for such concern and the pleasures of this world
cannot dwell together in one heart. O Rābi'a, you have a desire
and I have a desire, I cannot combine my desire and your desire
in one heart.

She said,

When I heard this warning, then I separated my heart from
worldly things and so cut off my worldly hopes that for thirty
years every prayer which I have performed, I have prayed as if
it were my last, and I have cut myself off from the creatures so
that when day broke, from fear lest anyone should distract me
from Him, I have said, “O Lord, make me occupied with myself,
lest they should distract me from Thee":

The austerity of her views is shewn by a little anec-
dote which tells how Rabi‘a went out on a feast-day,
and when she returned she was asked, “What did you
think of the feast?" She said, "I saw how you went
out (nominally) to make the Sunna a living force and
to put a stop to heresy, but you displayed a love of
luxury and soft living and thereby you brought humilia-
tion upon the Muslims ".?

Illness and suffering Rabi‘a accepted as her Lord's
will for her, enduring them with fortitude, and she even
shewed herself oblivious to pain; more than one story
tells how she was unaware of injury until others re-
minded her of it. It is related that one day her head
was struck by some boughs and began to bleed, but
she paid no attention to it, and when someone said to
her, “Do you not feel the pain?" she said, “My con-
cern is to accommodate myself to His will; He has

.1 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, pp. 68 and 69.
2 Sibt Ibn al-Jawzī, op. cit. fol. 257a.

PART ONE, CHAPTER III 23

made me occupied with something other than the
tangible things which you see”.'

Another story to the same effect tells how one night
she was making supplication and the result was that
she fell asleep from the extremity of her absorption
and a blood-vessel in her eye broke, but when she
awoke, she was quite unaware of it.2 The capacity of
these ascetics for enduring physical pain and rising
above it is exemplified by the story of another woman,
of Rabi‘a’s time, named Batja, who followed the sect of
Qadiriyya al-Hururiyya. Zayd, Amir of Basra, when
he heard of this, took her and cut off her hands and
feet. The people came to visit her in her illness and
they said to her, "How do you feel, O Batja?" she
answered, ** Awe of the future has distracted me from
the cold of your iron”.3

On one occasion Rābi'a fell ill, and her sickness was
serious. Her friends came and asked her what was the
cause of her illness, and she said, “I looked towards
Paradise and my Lord has chastened me. At daybreak
my heart looked in the direction of Paradise (i.e. I
longed for its joys) and my Friend has reproached me.
This illness is a reproach from Him".4

Her unwillingness to depend on any save God is
shewn in another account by the same writer, who tells
how Hasan of Basra once came to visit her when she
was ill and said that on his way he saw one of the
merchants of Basra at the door of Rabi'a's cell, with
a purse of gold, weeping. Said Hasan, ““O merchant,
why are you weeping?” He said, “On account of this
ascetic of our time [Rabi'a], for if her blessings upon

1 Munāvī, op. cit. fol. 51 b. 2 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 63.

3 M. b. Hasan Imad al-Din, op. cit. 11, p. 196. Cf. also
the account of ‘Amra, wife of Habib, the devotee, whose eyes
wete diseased, and when someone said, “Why do you not put
medicine on them?” she replied, ““The pain of my heart has
distracted me from them”. Munawi, op. cit. fol. 70 a.

4 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 70.

Lv

24 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

mankind were to cease, mankind would perish”, and
he added, “I have brought somewhat as a recommenda-
tion to her, but I fear that she may refuse it. Do thou
intercede for me, that she may accept it”’.

Hasan went in and spoke about it to Rabi‘a, who
looked at him out of the corner of her eye and said:

Shall not He who provides for those who revile Him, provide for
those who love Him? He does not refuse sustenance to one who
speaks unworthily of Him, how then should He refuse sustenance
to one whose soul is overflowing with love to Him? Ever since
I have known Him, I have turned my back upon mankind. How
should I take the wealth of someone of whom I do not know
whether he acquired it lawfully or not?. . . Make my excuses to that
merchant, that my heart may not be in bondage (to a creature).

 Rábi'à made clear her attitude on the subject of
resignation and the renunciation of desire to certain
visitors who came to see her during one of her ill-
nesses. These were ‘Abd al-Wāhid ‘Amr, and her
constant visitor Sufyan. The former relates:

I and Sufyan Thawri visited Rabi‘a when she was sick, and from
awe I was not able to begin to speak, and I said to Sufyān, “Say
something”. He said (to Rābi'a), “If you would utter a prayer,

(God) would relieve your suffering". She turned her face to him

and said, “O Sufyān, do you not know Who it is that wills this
suffering for me, is it not God Who wills it?” He said, “ Yes". She
said, “When you know this, why do you bid me ask for what is
contrary to His will? It is not well to oppose one's Beloved".
Sufyan said then, "O Rābi'a, what is your desire?" She
replied, "O Sufyān, you are a learned man, how can you ask
me such a question as ‘What do I desire’? I swear by the glory
of God that for twelve years I have desired fresh dates, and you
know that in Basra dates are plentiful, and I have not yet tasted
them.” I am a servant and what has a servant to do with desire?
If I will (a thing) and my Lord does not will it, this would be

1 ‘Attar, op. cit. I, p. 7
2 Cf. D. S. Margoliouth, Early aid: Si of Mobammedanism,

P. 154.

PART ONE, CHAPTER III 25

unbelief. That should be willed which He wills, that you may
be His true servant. If He Himself gives anything, that would
be a different matter”. Sufyān was silenced and offered no more
on the subject.:

One of her acquaintances, Muhammad b. ‘Amr, says:

I went in to Rabi‘a, and she was a very old woman of eighty
years, as if she were a worn-out skin almost falling down, and
I saw in her house a reed-mat and a clothes-stand of Persian reed,
of the height of two cubits from the ground and upon it were
her shrouds and the curtain of the house was made of palm-
leaves, and perhaps there was a mat and an earthen jug and a
bed of felt, which was also her prayer-carpet.?

Another friend of hers, Malik Dinar,3 once found her
lying on an old rush mat, with a brick under her head
to serve as a pillow and drinking and making her
ablutions from a cracked jar and his heart was pained
at the sight and he said, *I have rich friends and if
you wish, I will take something from them for you".
She said, “O Malik, you have made a great mistake.
Is it not the same One Who gives daily bread to me
and to them?" Malik said, "It is”. She said, * Will
He forget the poor because of their poverty or re-
member the rich because of their riches?" He said,
“No”. Then she said, “Since He knows my state,
what have I to remind Him of? What He wills, we
should also will””.4

Rabi‘a’s devotion to the life of prayer is evident in

1 ‘Attar, op. cit. I, PP: 7o and 71. Cf. Ramón Lull, The Lover
and the Beloved, p. 70: “ The Beloved bought a slave that He might
_shew him His graces, and made him to suffer griefs and heavy
thoughts, sighs and tears. And He asked him: ‘What wilt thou
eat and drink?’ The slave replied: ‘What Thou wilt’. ‘But what
wilt thou?’ ‘My will is as Thine’. ‘Hast thou then no will?’
asked the Beloved. He answered: ‘A subject and a slave has
no other will than to obey his Lord and his Beloved’”.

2 Ibn al-Jawzi, “Ta’rikh al-Muntazam", fol. 132.

3 Malik b. Dinar died in A.H. 127 (= A.D. 744) and therefore
cannot have known her in her old age, to which stage of her
life this anecdote seems to belong. 4 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 71.

26 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

all the accounts given of her life, and her biographers
speak frequently of her custom of spending her nights
in prayer. As a modern authority on Süfism has written,
“In Mohammedan mysticism\it is Prayer that supplies
the best evidence of personality—not the ritual prayer
(salat) but the free prayer (dwd') and in particular the
loving converse with God (munajat) when the mystic
speaks out of the depths of his heart”,' and Rabi‘a’s
prayers reveal her personality more clearly perhaps
than anything else.)

It is told of her that at one time she was laid aside
by sickness and, in the weakness which followed it, she
gave up her night-prayers and slept instead and for
some days she recited her portion when the day had
risen, although it was the portion appointed for the
night-prayer. Then God restored her to health, but
for a time, through the languor produced by sickness,
she went on reciting the portion by day and neglected
rising at night. Then she says:

One night, while I was sleeping, it seemed to me in my sleep
as if I were lifted up to a green park containing palaces and
beautiful plants. While I was wandering about in it, astonished
at its beauty, I saw a green bird and a maiden pursuing it as if
she wished to take it, and her beauty distracted me from its
beauty, and I said, “ What do you want with it? Leave it alone,
for truly I have never seen a bird more beautiful than that".
Then she said, “Shall I show you something more beautiful
than that?” I said, “Yes, surely”. Then she took my hand and
led me round that garden until she brought me to the gate of a
palace and she sought to open it and it opened to her and from
the door were cast rays from a candlestick the light of which
shone before me and behind me, and she said to me, “Enter”,
and I entered the house, in which the sight was dazzled by the
beauty of it, I know nothing in the world like it and while we
were going round it, there appeared to us a door opening from
it on to a garden and she hastened towards it and I with her and

1 R. A. Nicholson, The Idea of Personality in Sufism, p. 36. |

PART ONE, CHAPTER III 27

there met us a band of servants, with faces like pearls, and in their
hands aloeswood, and she said to them, * What do you seek?”
and they said, * We seek such a one, who was drowned in the
sea, as a martyr”. She said, “ Will you not perfume this woman?”
They said, “She had her portion in that, and she left it”. Then
(Rābi'a said) she withdrew her hand from mine, and approached
me and said:
* Your prayers were light and your worship rest,
Your sleep was ever a foe to prayer,
Your life was an opportunity which you neglected, and a
preparation

It passes on and vanishes slowly and perishes”.
Then she vanished from before my eyes and I awoke as the dawn
appeared and verily I remembered it, and thought of it only as
confusion of my mind and a phantom of my soul.

When Rabi‘a had related her dream she fell uncon-
scious and her servant said that after this vision she
never slept at night, until her death.

It is related of her that at night she used to go up
on to her roof and pray thus:

O my Lord, the stars are shining and the eyes of men are
closed, and kings have shut their doors and every lover is alone
with his beloved, and here am I alone with Thee,

and then she began her prayers. When she saw the
dawn appearing, she would pray:

O God, the night has passed and the day has dawned. How
I long to know if Thou hast accepted (my prayers) or if Thou
hast rejected them. Therefore console me for it is Thine to
console this state of mine. Thou hast given me life and cared
for me and Thine is the glory. If Thou wert to drive me from
Thy door, yet would I not forsake it, for the love that I bear
in my heart towards Thee.?

I Al-Sarraj, A/-Masāri', p. 136. Sibt Ibn al-Jawzī, op. cit.
fols. 256 b, 257a.

2 This part of the story is attributed by al-Ghazālī to Habiba

* Adawiyya, Ihya, 1v, p. 353. Cf. al-Rūdhabāriī, “ Süfism is abiding
at the door of the "Beloved, even when driven away from it”

Al-Qushayri, op. cit. p. 149.

28 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Then she is said to have recited these verses:

O my Joy and my Desire and my Refuge,

My Friend and my Sustainer and my Goal,

Thou art my Intimate, and longing for Thee sustains me,

Were it not for Thee, O my Life and my Friend,

How I should have been distraught over the spaces of the
earth,

How many favours have been bestowed, and how much hast
Thou given me.

Of gifts and grace and assistance,

Thy love is now my desire and my bliss,

And has been revealed to the eye of my heart that was athirst,

I have none beside Thee, Who dost make the desert blossom,

Thou art my joy, firmly established within me,

If Thou art satisfied with me, then

O Desire of my heart, my happiness has appeared."

* Abda bint Shüwal, already mentioned in the last
chapter, says of her:

Ràbi'a used to pray all night, and when the day dawned she
allowed herself a light sleep in her place of prayer, until the
dawn tinged the sky with gold, and I used to hear her say, when
she sprang up in fear from that sleep, "O soul how long wilt
thou sleep and how often wilt thou wake? Soon wilt thou
sleep a sleep from which thou shalt not wake again until the
trumpet call of the Day of Resurrection ".?

A story is related of how Rabi'a visited Hayyūna,
an ascetic who practised the greatest austerity and who
used to pray, "O God, I would that the day were night
that I might enjoy Thy proximity". In the middle of
the night sleep overcame Rābi'a, and Hayyüna rose and
came to her and kicked her with her foot, and said,
“Rise up, the Bridegroom of the truly guided ones has
come. The adornments of the brides of night are
revealed by the light of the night-prayers”.3 This anec-

1 Al-Hurayfish, op. cit. p. 213.
2 Ibn Khallikan, Wafayā?, 1, p. 34, No. 230.
3 Abū al-Qasim al-Nisabüri, ‘Ugala’ al-Majanin, p. 128.

PART ONE, CHAPTER III 29

dote is remarkable in that it is the only passage I
have met with which makes a reference to the Spiritual
Marriage of lover and Beloved, in these terms, applied
to Sūfīs, and it appears also as if there might be a
reference to the parable of the Ten Virgins.

One of the biographers tells how she used to pray
a thousand raka*s in the day and night, and someone
said to her, ** What are you seeking (to gain) by this?”
and she replied, “I do not desire God's forgiveness
(by this), I do it only that the Apostle of God on the
Day of Resurrection may be able to say to the rest of
the Prophets, *Behold this woman of my community,
this is her work” ”.'

Her friend, Sufyān al-Thawri, relates:

I approached Rābi'a, and she was in the mihrab, where she was
praying till day, while I, in another corner, was praying until
the time of dawn and I said, * How shall we give thanks for His
grace given to us, whereby we spent the whole night in prayer?”

' She said, “By fasting to-morrow ”.*

Rābi'a for the most part was filled with a radiant
faith and joy in the service of God, which left little
room for the gloomy fears by which Hasan of Basra
was so constantly obsessed, but an old writer tells us
how once, overcome by a dread of judgment, she
prayed, “O my God, wilt Thou burn in Hell a heart
that loves Thee?" and she heard an unseen voice
speaking to her inner consciousness, "O Rābi'a,
We shall not do this. Do not think of Us an Evil
thought ".3

Among the prayers recorded by her biographer
“Attar are several beautiful examples, shewing how
prayer to her in truth was “loving converse” with her
Lord, not supplication on her own behalf or on behalf
of others but simply communion with the Divine

1 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 50 b. 2 ‘Attar, op. cit. I, p. 72.
3 Al-Qushayti, op. cit. p. 173. |

30 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Friend, and perfect satisfaction in His presence. Among
those quoted are the following:

O my Lord, whatever share of this world Thou dost bestow
on me, bestow it on Thine enemies, and whatever share of the
next world Thou dost give me, give it to Thy friends. Thou art
enough for me.!

One night Rabi‘a said, “My God, when I make my
prayer, take from my heart all Satanic suggestions, or
through Thy generosity, accept my prayer with these
suggestions ".?

Again she uséd to pray,

O my Lord, if I worship Thee from fear of Hell, burn me in
Hell, and if I worship Thee from hope of Paradise, exclude me
thence, but if I worship Thee for Thine own sake then withhold
not from me Thine Eternal Beauty.3

Yet another prayer was this: |
O my God, my concern and my desire in this world, is that
I should remember Thee above all the things of this world, and
in the next, that out of all who are in that world, I should meet
with Thee alone. This is what I would say, “Thy will be done”.

In the last sentence is fittingly summed up Rabi'a's
attitude to this life and to the Lord of life.

We are given yet another prayer with which this
chapter may close: |

O my God, the best of Thy gifts within my heart is the hope
of Thee and the sweetest word upon my tongue is Thy praise,
and the hours which I love best are those in which I meet with
Thee. O my God, I cannot endure without the remembrance of
Thee in this world and how shall I be able to endure without
the vision of Thee in the next world? O my Lord, my plaint to
Thee is that I am but a stranger in Thy country, and lonely
among Thy worshippers.5

1 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 73.

2 ‘Attar, op. cit. Uyghur version, p. 68.

3 ‘Attar, op. cif. 1, p. 75. 4 ‘Attar, op. cit., loc. cit.

5 Aba al-Qasim al-'Arif, “Qasd ila Allah". Extract kindly
communicated by Prof. Nicholson.

CHAPTER IV
The miracles of Muslim Saints. Rabi‘a’s miracles.

he saints of Islam, like the saints of Catholic

Christendom, were expected to work miracles, as
part of their claim to canonization, and their biographers
were not slow to attribute to them the power of per-
forming these karāmāt (lit. favours from God). It
is hardly necessary to say that most of these miracles
rest on no historic foundation and yet, like other legends
of the saints, they have their value in throwing light
upon the personality of the one to whom these won-
derful powers are ascribed and still more perhaps, in
shewing the high estimation in which such a saint was
held.

The Süfis themselves set little value upon the exer-
cise of such miraculous powers. We are told that Abū
Yazid al-Bistami! said:

The saints do not rejoice at the answers to prayers which are
the essence of miracles, such as walking on water, and moving
in the air and traversing the earth and riding on the heavens,
since the prayers of unbelievers receive an answer and the earth
contains both Satans and men, and the air is the abode of the
birds, and the water of the fish. Let not anyone who is perplexed
by such things, put any faith in this trickery.?

Of Abū Yazid it is also related that a man came to
him and said, “I heard that you could pass through
the air (fly)". He said, “And what is there wonderful
in this? A bird which eats the dead passes through

I Ob. A.D. 875 a native of Khurasān. For an account of his
life and teaching cf. L. Massignon, Lexique Technique, pp. 245-56.
2 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 123 a. For a full discussion, of the
miracles of Muslim saints cf. Goldziher, “Le culte des saints
chez les Musulmans”, Revue de Phistoire des Religions, 1880,

pp. 335 ff.

32 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

the air, and the believer is more honourable than a
bird”.

There is no lack of stories of miracles ascribed to
Rābi'a of Basra, and in any account of her life these
must find a place. Most of them tend to shew God's
care for His servant and her needs and to justify her
complete dependence upon Him. ‘Attar has collected
a number of these legendary stories, some of which are
also to be found in other writers.

He tells how one night a thief came into Rabi‘a’s
cell when she was asleep and took possession of her
veil (in another account? it is said that he tried to steal
all her clothes). Then he attempted to get away with
his booty, but could not find the way to the door. He
put down the veil, and found the way again, so he
seized the veil once more, but again failed to find the
way out. He repeated this seven times, then from a
corner of the cell came an unseen voice, saying, ““O man,
do not trouble thyself since for all these years she has
entrusted herself to Us and Satan has not had the
courage to go round about her3 and shall a thief have
courage to go round about her veil? Concern not thy-
self with her, O pickpocket, if one friend is asleep,
another friend is awake and keeping watch".* And
al-Munawi in his version of the story adds, "This is
true and certain, as God Most High has said: "There
shall be angels in front of him (é.e. God's servant), and
behind him’’’.5

There is an anecdote given of provision for her

1 Abū Nu‘aym, “ Hilya", Leyden MS. fol. 219 a.

2 Munàwi, op. cit. fol. 51a.

3 Cf. Job i. 7: “The Lord said unto Satan, Whence comest
thou? Then Satan answered the Lord and said, From going to
and fro in the earth, and from walking up and down in it”.

4 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 63.

5 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 51a. This is surely a re-echo of
Psalm xci. 11: “He shall give His angels charge over thee,
to keep thee in all thy ways".

PART ONE, CHAPTER IV 33

bodily needs, to indicate her faith in God’s promises,
which is much more entertaining to the reader than
her biographer can have intended it to be. |

He tells how two religious leaders came to visit
Rabi‘a. Both of them were hungry and said to one
another, * Perhaps she will give us something to eat,
because her food is always obtained from a lawful
source". When they sat down, a cloth containing two
loaves was set before them and they were pleased.
Before they had time to begin eating, a beggar came
in and Rabi‘a gave him both loaves. The two shaykhs
felt annoyed but said nothing. After a time a slave-
girl came in bearing a quantity of hot bread and said,
** My mistress has sent this”. Rābi'a counted the loaves
and found that there were eighteen and said, "I think
she has not sent me these”, and whatever the slave-
girl said was of no use. The slave-girl had brought all
except two loaves, which she had taken out for herself;
going away, she put the two loaves back in their place
and then returned. Rabi‘a counted the loaves again
and found there were twenty. She said, ** This is what
you were ordered to bring", and she set the loaves
before her guests and they ate. They were astonished
at the number of them and said, ** What is the secret
of this? We were wishing for your bread, before you
took it up and gave it to the beggar. Then of that
bread (which was sent you) you said that there were
eighteen loaves and that they did not belong to you.
When they became twenty, you took them". She
said:

When you came in I knew you were hungry and I said, “How
can I set two loaves before two honourable persons?” When
the beggar came in, I gave them to him and I prayed to God
Almighty, “O my Lord, Thou hast said that Thou wilt give
ten for one, and I am sure of this. Now I have given two loaves
for the sake of pleasing Thee in order that Thou mayest give
me back ten for each of them”. When the eighteen loaves came,

SR 3

34 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

I knew that either there was a deficiency due to misappropriation
or that they were not meant for me.!

Another story, told quite naively by “Attar, is equally
entertaining to the modern reader.

He relates how on one occasion Rabi‘a’s servant was
going to prepare wild onions, because for some days
they had not prepared any food, and she needed an
onion, so the servant said, “I will go and ask for one
from a neighbour", but Rabi‘a said, “Forty years ago
I made an oath with God that I would not ask for
anything except from Him. I can do without the
onion". Immediately after she had spoken a bird flying
in the air dropped an onion—ready skinned—into
Rabi‘a’s frying-pan. But she was still doubtful and
said, “I am not safe from a trick” (7.e. perhaps Satan
had sent the onion), so she left the fried onion alone
and ate bread without any seasoning.?

A much simpler and more probable account of this
event is given by an earlier writer, who tells us that
"Abd Allah b. "Īsā said, "Rābi'a was boiling some food
in a cooking pot and she needed an onion but had none,
and there appeared a bird with a wild onion in its beak
and threw it down to her”.3

There is an attractive story told of Rabi‘a, containing
an element of the miraculous, which seems as if it
might be drawn from Buddhist sources, and reminds
us of stories told of Prince Gautama. ‘Attar tells how
one day Rābi'a had gone to the mountains and there
a band of wild creatures gathered round her, deer and
gazelle and mountain goats and wild asses, who came
and looked at her and drew close to her. Suddenly
Hasan al-Basri appeared, and when he saw Rabi'a he
approached her, and those wild creatures, when they
saw Hasan, all fled away forthwith and Rabi‘a was left

I ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, Pp. ji 64.
2 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 6
3 Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, jj. cit. fol. 2 56 b.

PART ONE, CHAPTER IV 35

alone. Hasan was vexed when he saw that, he looked
at Rabi‘a and said, ““Why did they flee in terror from
me, while they were friendly with you?" Rābi'a said,
“What have you eaten to-day?" He said, “Some
onions (fried) in fat". She said, ““You eat of their fat,
how should they not flee from you?”1

Al-Munāwī says that among Rābi'a's kardmdt it
was related that she had sown corn and the locusts fell
upon it, and she prayed, "O my Lord, this is my
provision, upon which I have spent money, and if
Thou willest, I will give it as food to Thine enemies
or Thy friends". Then the locusts flew away as 1f they
had never existed.?

The same writer relates a miracle which is perhaps
a variant of a story told previously3 of how Rābi'a
went on pilgrimage, on a camel, and it died before she
teached her destination, and she asked God to restore
it to life. It recovered and she rode it until she reached
. the door of her own house.*

An amusing legend is told of how Hasan of Basra
tried to exploit Rabi‘a’s power of working miracles for
his own glory but only succeeded in reaping a rebuke
for his vanity.

One day he saw Rābi'a near the river-side, Hasan cast
his prayer-mat on to the surface of the water and said,
` “O Rābi'a, come and let us pray two raka*s together”,
evidently counting on her powers to keep the carpet
from sinking.5 Rabi‘a said, “O Hasan, was it necessary
to offer yourself in the bazaar of this world to the
people of the next? (4.e. was it needful to seek to win
worldly reputation by a spiritual gift?) This is neces-
sary for people of your kind, because of your weakness”.
Then Rabi‘a threw her prayer-mat into the air and flew

1 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 64. 2 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 51 b.
3 See above, p. 8. 4 Munawi, op. cit., loc. cit.
5 This appears to be a favourite type of miracle among the
Muslim claimants to sanctity.
3-3

[S

36 RĀBI A THE MYSTIC

up on to it and said, “O Hasan, come up here that
people may see us”. But that station was not for
Hasan and he was silent. Rabi‘a, wishing to gain his
heart (to comfort him), said, '*O Hasan, that which you
did, a fish can do just the same, and that which I did,
a fly can do. The real work (for the saints of God) lies
beyond both of these and it is necessary to occupy our-
selves with the real work".:

Another story tells of a miracle which has perhaps
a mystical significance. One night Hasan and two or
three friends are said to have come to R4bi‘a and she
had no lamp and she desired for them an illuminated
heart. Rabi‘a blew upon the tips of her fingers, and
throughout that night, until daylight came, her fingers
gave forth light like a lamp, and they sat until morning
in that illumination. Her biographer adds by way of
comment:

If anyone were to say, “How was this?” I should say it was
like the hand of Moses, and if it should be observed that he
was a prophet, I should say, “Whoever obeys a prophet may
obtain as his reward a share in the gift of prophecy”. So the
Prophet has said, “He who restores a small part of what was
obtained unlawfully, has obtained one degree of prophecy"!

Yet another legend, proving that God provided for
Rābi'a's needs when she herself was occupied in His
service, tells how Hasan went one day to Rabi‘a at
the time of the second prayer of the day, when she was
preparing to cook some meat in a pan and was putting
water into it. He goes onto say:

When she came to speak to me she said, “This discourse is
better than anything cooked in a pan”, so she went on talking
till we performed the evening prayer. She brought a piece of
dry bread and a jug of water that we might break our fast. Rabi‘a
then went to take off the pan and burnt her hand; we looked
and there was the pan boiling and bubbling over, by the power

I ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 65.

PART ONE, CHAPTER IV 37

of God Most High. She brought it and we ate of that meat
and the food composed of that meat was the pleasantest we had
ever tasted. Rābi'a said, “The food from that pan would have
been suitable for an invalid just convalescent”.

Rabi‘a herself disclaimed these miraculous powers
and was anxious to avoid a reputation for working
miracles. We are told of an interesting conversation
between her and Zulfa bint ‘Abd al-Wāhid, who ad-
dresses Rabi‘a as her aunt, while Rābi'a calls her her
brother’s daughter. If this represents a genuine rela-
tionship and not merely a term of affection, it is of great
interest, as Zulfa is the only one of Rabi‘a’s own family
who is mentioned by name by any of her biographers,
nor have we any mention elsewhere of a brother of
Rābi'a. But the terms "aunt” and “niece” are still
used in the East as terms of endearment without any
real relationship between the parties concerned.

Zulfa is reported to have said:

I said to Rabi‘a, “O my aunt, why do you not allow people
to visit you?"? Rābi'a replied, “I fear lest when I am dead,
people will relate of me what I did not say or do, what if I had
seen, I should have feared or mistrusted. I am told that they say
that I find money under my place of prayer, and that I cook
(food) in the pot without a fire”. I said to her, “They relate
of you that you find food and drink in your house”, and she
said, “O daughter of my brother, if I had found such things
in my house I would not have touched them, or laid hands upon
them, but I tell you that I buy my things and am blessed in
them”.3 :

‘These anecdotes of Rābi'a are trivial in themselves,
but they shew that her biographers believed that she
had the power to work miracles, attributed to all true

1 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, d 72.

2 Probably she refers here to people who wished to visit the
saint simply out of curiosity, not to the Sifis who sought counsel

and instruction.
3 Sibt Ibn al- Jawzi, op. cit. fol. 257 a.

38 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

saints of Islam, and moreover, that miracles were
wrought on her behalf, that God might justify his
servant in the eyes both of friends and enemies, and
as ‘Attar’s own comment shews,! these miracles,
wrought by, or for her, indicated to all who heard of
them that the grace of God was with her.

1 Quoted above, p. 36.

CHAPTER V
Rabi‘a’s declining years. Her illnesses and death.

K like so many of the saints, lived to a ripe

old age, and must have been nearly ninety when
she died. Some of the authorities guoted by her
biographers apparently knew lier only in her old age,
when she was feeble in body and yet so clear in mind
that she was still the guide and spiritual director of the
many souls who came to seek counsel of her.

The author of the “Siyar al-Salihat" says that when
she heard others speak of death she shivered and her
fingers trembled, and others say that if she heard the
mention of fire, or even the crackling of it, she became
unconscious.?

An overwhelming dread of judgment after death and

>the constant fear of Hell was characteristic of the early
Sūfīs, as we have already noted, and especially of the
school of Hasan al-Basri. The most that he felt could
be hoped for was an alleviation of the punishment for
the believer, in that the period of torment in Hell would
be shortened, and here seems to be in embryo the
doctrine of purgatory for those who were true Muslims,
and yet had fallen short and sinned.3 It is plain that
the early Süfis had a strong sense of the moral turpitude
of sin and the idea that it might mean separation from
God—for the Sifi the greatest of all deprivations—in
the next world. The Christian doctrine that sincere
repentance cannot fail to win forgiveness, together
with the Christian doctrines of Atonement and Re-
demption, had not entered into the Sūfī conception of
the relation between God and His servant. We are told

1 “Siyar al-$Sālihāt”, fol. 26 a.

2 Sha‘rini, Tabagāt, p. 86. Munawi, op. cit. fol. 51 a.
3 Cf. Shahrastānī, Kz/ab a/-Milal, pp. 31, 33.

40 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

of Sha‘wana the ascetic that she said at the time of her
death, “I cannot bear to meet with God”, and when
asked why, she said, *' Because of the multitude of my
sins".1 The same feeling led to a different result with
‘Ubayda bint Abi Kilāb,* who is said to have spent
forty years in weeping, until her sight was lost. She
was asked, ** What do you desire?" She said, “Death”,
and when those with her asked “Why?” she replied,
“ Because every new day that dawns I fear lest I should
commit some sin which would mean my loss on the
Day of Resurrection”.3 |

Yet to some of the Sūfīs the longing to be with their
Lord was stronger than their fear of judgment. Al-
Junayd was told that the Sūfī Abū Sa‘id al-Kharraz was
in great ecstasy at the time of his death. “Is it to be
wondered at?" said al-Junayd, “‘his soul has taken
flight full of longing (to see God)".4 Fatima, sister of
the Safi Abū ‘Ali al-Rūdhabārī, said that when her
brother was at the point of death he opened his eyes
and said, "Here are the gates of heaven opened and
here is Paradise adorned and here is one saying,
‘O Abi ‘Ali, thou hast reached the highest rank’’’.4

As we shall see from the account of her teaching, it
is hardly conceivable that Rabi‘a was amongst those
who were afraid of death, which to her represented
Union with her Beloved, above and beyond the tem-
porary experience of union which was all that could be
attained in this life. Her faith soared to heights above
those to which Hasan attained or al-Fudayl,5 of whom
it was said that “sadness left the world when al- Fudayl
left it”; hers was a confident and radiant faith founded
on her intimate knowledge of—and communion with
—her Lord. She would have said with ‘Abd al-‘Aziz,

1 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 58 b.

2 See pp. 177, 178.

3 Munàwi, op. cit. fol. 69 b.
4 Al-Ghazali, Ibya, 1v, p. 411.
5 Died two years after Rabi‘a.

PART ONE, CHAPTER V 41

“Death is a bridge whereby the lover is joined to the
Beloved":

As regards the effect upon her of the mention of
fire,? this element seems to have been chiefly associated
with Hell and with evil in the minds of the early
Sūfīs, and a later Safi, Rimi, contrasts Fire with Light,
as evil with good, the defiled with the pure, that which
perishes with that which is immortal.3 Al-Hujwiri also
contrasts the "fire of wrath” and the “light of mercy ”.4
On the other hand the Persian writers constantly speak
of the “fire” of love and its consuming power. “Attar
speaks of Rabi‘a as “that woman on fire with love”,
and in this sense fire is regarded as a pure and holy
element, causing suffering yet purging of dross. Al-
Kalābādhī, using the term in such a sense, says, "He
is burnt who feels the fire, but he who is fire, how
shall he be burnt?”5 7.e. he who is still under bondage
to self and his sins, must feel the wrath of God,
but he who is on fire with love to God, what fear has
he of judgment? Again al-Ghazali says of the longing
of the mystic that it is “the fire of God which He has
kindled in the hearts of His saints, that thereby may
be burned away what exists in them of vain fancies
and desires and purposes and needs". This is the sense
in which the Spanish mystic, St John of the Cross, says,
“Love has set the soul on fite and transmuted it into
love, has annihilated it and destroyed it as to all that
is not love”.7 |

Rābi'a, consumed by love and desire for God, might
be compared with St Catherine of Genoa, who felt the
consuming fire of her love to God so hot within her
that she was dried up by it and her body was burning

1 Abū Nu‘aym, * Hilya”, Leyden MS. fol. 210 b.

2 Cf. also the account of Barīra, Ibyā, 1v, p. 354.

3 Mathnani, 11, 1. 83. 4 Kas bf Bal jūtās ag , p. 177-

5 Al-Kalabadhi, “Ma ‘ani al-Akhbar", fol. 7o b

6 Al-Ghazālī, op. eit. Iv, p. 309.
7 Spiritual Canticle, p. 209.

4

ae

42 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

to the touch,‘ and fire for her had a significance equal
to that felt by Rabi‘a, who swooned from her strong
emotion at its mention. Yet this emotion was more
probably ecstasy than fear, to Rabi‘a her Lord was “‘the
One God Who is the Fire of Pain and the Light of
Joy to souls, according as they resist Him or will Him,
either here or hereafter”. In Rabi‘a "the fire of her
all-conquering love” demanded “eternal union with
an eternal flame”,3 and the mention of Death made her
tremble, not with apprehension, but with infinite joy.

In one respect, certainly, Rabi‘a was like her great
successor, in that her health was frail, perhaps as the
result of her ceaseless asceticisms, perhaps because of
the hardships of her youth. We hear constantly of her
illnesses and her sufferings from weakness. As with
St Catherine, too, her illness sometimes had its source
in spiritual rather than physical disturbance. Weare told
how one day she was suffering and lamenting and her
friends said to her, “O venerable one of this world,
we see no visible cause of illness and yet you are in
pain and crying out”. She said:

My sickness is from within my breast, so that all the physicians
in the world are powerless to cure it, and the plaster for my
wound is union with my Friend; (only so) shall I be soothed.
Not to-morrow (i.e. not yet) shall I attain my purpose. But since

pain is not affecting me, I appear to be in pain, I cannot do less
than this.

(I.e. the outward signs of my spiritual sickness should
not be less than the outward signs of physical illness.)4
So also the Christian mystic:

The soul that loves God lives more in the next life than in this,
because it lives rather where it loves than where it dwells, and

1 Von Hügel, Mystical Element in Religion, 1, p. 179; m,
pp. 215-18. 2 Von Hügel, op. cit. 11, p. 218.

3 John Cordelier, The Spiral Way, p. 158. For other examples
of the mystical use of fire-imagery cf. E. Underhill, Mysticism,
Pp. 503, 504. 4 ‘Attar, op. cit. p. 69.

PART ONE, CHAPTER V 43

therefore esteeming but lightly its present bodily life cries out:
** Behold, the malady of love is incurable, except in Thy presence
and before Thy face”. The reason why the malady of love admits
of no other remedy than the presence and countenance of the
Beloved is that the malady of love differs from every other sickness,
and therefore requires a different remedy. . .love is not cured but
by that which is in harmony with itself. . . . There is no remedy
for this pain except in the presence and vision of the Beloved.:

In what appears to have been her last illness, Rabi'a
was said to have been visited by three of her friends,
Hasan of Basra,? Malik Dinar and Shaqiq Balkhi, and
they, like the friends of Job, endeavoured to teach her
the duty of resignation.

Hasan said, “He is not sincere in his claim (to be
a true servant of God), who is not patient under the
chastisement of his Lord". Rābi'a said, “I smell
egotism in this speech". So Shaqiq took up the thread
and said, *He is not sincere in his claim who is not
thankful for the chastisement of his Lord". Rabi‘a
said, Something better than this is needed”. Then
Malik Dinar tried, “He is not sincere in his claim
who does not delight in the chastisement of his Lord".
Rabi‘a said, “Even this is not good enough”. They
said, “Do thou speak”, and she shewed her idea of
the true resignation in her reply, "He is not sincere
in his claim who does not forget the chastisement in
the contemplation of his Lord".

And ‘Attar commends her answer, saying, “It would
not be surprising, since the women of Egypt in their
contemplation of a creature were oblivious to the pain
of their wounds;3 and therefore if anyone in the con-

1 St John of the Cross, Spiritual Canticle, pp. 54, 84, 85.

2 On chronological grounds, it was impossible that Hasan
could have visited Rabi‘a when she had reached this age.

3 Referring to the story of “ Yusef and Zulaykha”, when the
women of Egypt, sitting at a repast, beheld Joseph and cut their
hands with their knives in amazement at his beauty. Qur'àn,
XII, 31.

44 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

templation of the Creator were in this state, it would
not be strange”.!

One writer says that her shroud was always before
her, in her place of worship.» When the time of her
departure from this world drew near, she called her
servant, fAbda bint Abi Shuwal, and said to her,
“O ‘Abda, do not inform anyone of my (approaching)
death, but shroud me in this gown of mine, of hair”.
So when she died, she was shrouded in that gown and
in a woollen scatf which she used to wear. ‘Abda
relates further how she saw Rābi'a in a dream, a year
or so after her death, and she was wearing a robe of
green silk embroidered with gold and a scarf of fine
green silk brocade and never had ‘Abda seen anything
in this world more beautiful, and she cried out, “O
Rābi'a, what have you done with the shroud in which
you were buried and the woollen scarf?" and Rabi‘a
answered her, “They were taken from me and I was
clothed with what you see upon me and what I wore
as a shroud was folded up and sealed and carried up
to the angels, so that my garments might be complete
on the Day of Resurrection". *Abda said to her, ** Were
you working for this, in your earthly days?" She said,
* What is this in comparison with the grace of God to
His saints?”3

Her Persian biographer gives the following account
of her death. He says:

At her last moments many pious folk were sitting around
her and she bade them, * Rise and go out; for a moment
leave the way free for the messengers of God Most High".
All rose and went out and when they had closed the
door, they heard the voice of Rābi'a making her profession

I “Attar, op. cit. p. 7
2 Sha‘rani, op. cit. D 86. Cf. also Ibn al-Jawzi, op. cit.
fol. 132.
; Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, op. cit. fol. 257a. Ibn Khallikàn, op. cit.
No. 230.

PART ONE, CHAPTER V 45

of faith and they heard a voice saying, ““O soul at rest,
return to thy Lord, satisfied with Him, giving satisfaction
to Him. So enter among My servants and enter into My
Paradise ".!

There was no further sound heatd, they returned and found
that her soul had departed. As soon as she had rendered up
her last breath, the doctors who were assembled had her body
washed, recited over it the prayers for the dead and placed it
in its last abode.?

The religious leaders said of her that Rabi‘a came
into this world and departed into the next and never
was she wanting in reverence to her Lord, and never
did she desire anything or say "Give me this or do
this for me", much less did she desire anything from
any of His creatures.

After her death, she was seen in a dream and
the dreamer said to her, “Tell us of your state and
how you escaped from Munkar and Nakir". She
said, ““Those beings came and said, ‘Who is your
Lord?’ I said, ‘Return and tell your Lord, Not-
withstanding the thousands and thousands of Thy
creatures, Thou hast not forgotten a weak old woman.
I, who have only Thee in all the world, have never
forgotten Thee, that Thou shouldest ask, Who 1s thy
Lord?'"3

Rabi‘a al-Adawiyya died in A.H. 185 (= A.D. 801)
and was buried at Basra.

It is said that Muhammad b. Aslam al-Tüsi and
Na‘mi Tartüsi both visited Rabi‘a’s grave, and said,
**O thou who didst boast that thou wouldst not bow
thy head for the two worlds, hast thou reached that

I Qur'àn, LXXXIX, 27-30. Cf. the Catholic commendation of
‘the departing soul, “Go forth Christian soul, from this world...
let thine habitation to-day be in peace....I commit thee to Him
whose creature thou art that thou mayst return unto thy Maker".
2 ‘Attar, op. cit. Uyghur version, I, p. 68.
3 “Attar, op. cit. p. 73.

46 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

exalted state?" and they heard a voice in reply, "I have
reached that which I saw”.1 |

She had attained the goal of her quest, she was
united at last and for ever, with her Friend, she beheld
the Everlasting Beauty, and so we leave her, with the
closing words of her faithful biographer, "May God
have mercy upon her".

I ‘Attar, op.cit., loc. cit. In the Uyghur version, rr, p. 68, her
reply is given as “ Ah, what I did was what needed to be done,
and it was the right Way that I discovered".

Part Two
RABI‘A’S TEACHING AND WRITINGS

CHAPTER VI
The Sati doctrine.

Ro teaching on mysticism and her contribution
to the development of Şūfism are of considerable
importance, and in dealing with her teaching we standon
surer ground than was possible in collecting material for
her biography. As a teacherand guide along the mystic
Way, Rabi‘a was greatly revered by the. $ūfīsand practi-
cally-all the gteat Süfr-writets sp speak. of her teaching,
and quote her sayings; as beitig C of the highest authority.
Abū ‘Talib: al-Makki, one of the. first.to write a
systematic treatise on Süfi doctrine, al-Qushayri, in
his Risā/a on the subj ect, the great Muslim theo-
logian al-Ghazali, of whose works frequent editions
have been brought out during the last century, and
whose teaching is widely accepted by Muslims up to
the present day, and al-Suhrawardi, also a well-known
writer on Sūfism, eet ibis ee on the
main ncoctrines of Puer These writers are chiefly ~
cónc with expositions, doctrinal and theological,
but Rābi'a”s biographers also make it plain that teaching
to others, what she herself had learned of the Way,
played an important part in her life. It is to be noted
that we do not hear of Rabi‘a herself learning from
any great shaykh or teacher.

“Attar says of Her, “‘Rabi‘a was unique, because in
her relations (with God) and her knowledge (of things
Divine) she had no equal; she was highly respected
by all the great (mystics) of her time and she was a
decisive proof, i.e. an unquestioned authority, to her

48 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

contemporaries".: A later writer, ‘Abd al-Ra'üf al-
Munawi, gives het equally high commendation when
he says that Rabi‘a was in the rank referred to by
‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani, when he said that there were
two classes of true believers. First, those who seek a
master in the Way that leads to the majesty of God,
who may act as an intermediary between them and
God, people who persuade themselves that there is no
way for them to God except by the Prophet, who was
the “chamberlain” (ze. the one who admitted them
into the presence of God), so they do not accept as
evidence of the right way, anything in which they do
not see the footsteps of the Prophet before them. The
second class are those who, when they seek to follow
the right Path, do not see before them the footprint
of any of God's creatures, for they have removed all
thought (of what He has created) from their hearts and
concern themselves solely with God. It is in this latter
class that Rabi‘a is placed. As al-Munawi writes: * This
state is the state of ‘Abd al-Qadir and Abū Sa'ūd b.
Shibli and Rabifa al-‘Adawiyya and whoso follows
where they lead, will attain his desire".?

Before continuing further, it is necessary to give
here a vety brief outline of the Süfi doctrine, in
otder to understand the extent and value of Rābi'a's
contribution to its development. The Sifi view was
that
man's business is to eliminate, so far as may be, the element
of Not-Being, and to attain to that union with God, that absorp-
tion into the Divine, which though to be fully achieved only
after the death of the body, is possible in a certain measure even
in this present life.

But how is one to overcome the element of Not-Being?

By conquering self... . And how is self to be conquered? By
Love. By Love and Love alone can the dark shadow of Not-

1 ‘Attar, op. cif. 1, p. 59.
2 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 51 b.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VI 49

Being be done away; by Love and by Love alone, can the soul of
man win back to its Divine source and find its ultimate goal in
re-union with the Truth.

The preparation, then, for those who sought to
follow the mystic Way of the Süfis, was the life of
Purgation, that is, a life of asceticism, through which
the carnal soul, the zafs, might be purified from its
sins, which ultimately had their source in the desires
of self, the shahawat. When cleansed from these
lusts of the flesh, the soul could enter on the Path
which was destined to lead it to Union with the Divine.
The Sūfīs often held that such asceticism was necessary
only at the beginning of the quest, as a preparatory
stage, and some, such as the famous Sufi Shaykh Abū
Sa‘id b. Abi al-Khayr,? felt no need of continuing their
ascetic practices when they had attained to a higher

degree of the spiritual life. Others, li ke. Rabi
have seen in the foregoing pages,-practised

to the end of their lives, and so came nearer.to. the-
fulfilment of the Christian idea of sainthood.3. |
The Way, upon which the soul, cleansed from its
sins, now entered, was made up of a number of stages,
in its passage through which the soul acquired certain
qualities, which enabled it to rise higher and higher,

1 E. J. W. Gibb, History of Ottoman Poetry, 1, p. 20.

2 Died at Mayhana, Khurāsān, A.D. 1049. For a full accoun:
of his life and writings cf. R. A. Nicholson, Studies in Islamic
Mysticism, Chapter I.

3 Cf. Francis Thompson: “Sanctity is genius in religion: the
saint lives for and in religion, as the man of genius lives for and
in his peculiar attainment. Nay, it might be said that sanctity
is the supreme form of genius. Both are the outcome of a man’s
inner and individual love and are characterised by an eminent
fervour, which is the note of love in action... .In like manner
does the Saint receive into himself and become one with divine
law, whereafter he no longer needs to follow where the flocks
have trodden, to keep the beaten track of rule, his will has
undergone the heavenly magnetization by which it points
always and unalterably towards God” (Health and Holiness, Works,
III, p. 260).

SR 4

jo RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

and to attain to more exalted stations, until at last,
partly through its own striving, partly through the
grace of God, it reached the heavenly gnosis (ma‘rifa).
Through this knowledge, based upon intuitions of the
truth (Khawatir al-yagīn) the mystic proceeded to the
final goal, the contemplation of God Himself, and the
abiding in union with Him for ever.?

As Abū Talib writes in the Qst a/-Qu/zb, to the
mystic who has attained, it is-said, ** Thou shalt worship
God as if thou sawest Him", and the same writer,
dealing with the derivation of this intuitive knowledge
of God, says:

The Gnostic is not one who commits to memory passages from
the Qur'àn, who if he forgets what he has learned, becomes
ignorant. He only is the Gnostic who takes his knowledge from
his Lord at all times, without having to learn it, and without
studying, and this (knowledge) lasts throughout his life-time, he
does not forget his knowledge, but he remembers it for ever.
He has no need of a book, and he is the (true) spiritual Gnostic.”

Abū Talib states that there are indeed myriad ways
to God and quotes a gnostic who said, “The ways to
God are as many as the believers", and another who held
that "the ways to God are as many as created things,
that is, that to the contemplative there is a way to
be found through every creature”,3 and this is in ac-
cordance with the later Sūfī view that the whole world
is the book of God Most High and that beneath the
veil of each atom is hidden the soul-ravishing beauty
of the Face of the Beloved.5

But in spite of these more pantheistic views, the
serious exponents of Süfism held that the mystic must
expect to pass through certain stages, as stated above,

I Abū Talib, Ost al-Oulab, 1, p. 120.

2 Abü Talib, op. cit. 1, E I21.

3 Abü Talib, op. cit. 1, p. 83.

4 Mahmüd Shabistari, Eulbani Rag, p. 13,1.

5 Shabistari, op. cit. p. 11, l. 165. Cf. also jal. ii Din Rimi,
Mathnani, 11, L IQI.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VI T

and in Abū Tālib's O#t a/-Quisb, al-Qushayri’s Risāla
and al-Ghazali's Ibya ‘Ulam al-Din, whole chapters
are devoted to these stages on the Way and the
qualities to be acquired by the mystic as he traverses
them. These degrees to be attained are given by the
Süfi writers, in varying order, as Penitence (tawba),
Patience (sabr), Gratitude (shukr), Hope (raja’), Holy
Fear (&bawf), voluntary Poverty (faqr), Asceticism
(zabd)—here considered as applied to the adept, in-
volving renunciation of all save God, not the mere
purification from sensual desires needed for the novice
—abnegation of the personal will in the Will of God
(tawhid), complete Dependence upon God (tawakkal),
and finally Love (wababba), including in this last,
passionate longing for God (shaq), intimacy with
Him (ams) and Satisfaction (rzd2") considered both ob-
jectively and subjectively, i.e. God's satisfaction in His
servant’s obedience and the servant’s satisfaction in
God’s service when he casts aside all that belongs to this
world and its desires and is content to “glorify God .
and to enjoy Him for ever”.' Other stages mentioned
by Safi writers are Sincerity, Contemplation, Self-ex-
amination and Meditation on death,” but the stage of
Love includes so much that in practice it is the final
stage.3
These stages passed,4 the Sufi attains to the true

1 Cf. Rabi‘a’s verses quoted above, p. 28 last two lines.

2 Cf. R. A. Nicholson, arts. on “Sifis” and *'Asceticism
(Muslim)” in Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics.

3 See above, pp. 48, 49. |

4 Compare the Christian mystic: “The Soul that would be
perfect begins to mortify its passions; and when ’tis advanced
in that exercise, it denies itself; then with the Divine Aid, it
passes to'the state of Nothing...from hence springs the dying
in itself and in its senses...insomuch that when the Soul is
once dead to its will and understanding, ’tis properly said to be
arrived at the perfect and happy state of Annihilation, which is
the last disposition for Transformation and Union.. .this
Annihilation, to make it perfect in the Soul, must be in a man's

4-2

$2 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Gnosis and the Beatific Vision, through which, be-
coming one with the Divine, he abides with and in
Him for ever.

Judgment, in his Will, in his Works, Inclinations, Desires,
Thoughts and in itself; so that the Soul must find itself dead
to its Will, Desire, Endeavour, Understanding and Thought;
willing, as if it did not will; desiring as if it did not desire;
understanding, as if it did not understand; thinking, as if it did
not think....O what a happy Soul is this, which is thus dead
and annihilated! It lives no longer in itself, because God lives
in it and now it may most truly be said of it, that. . .’tis changed,
spiritualised, transformed and deified” (Molinos, The Spiritual

uide, pp. 179 ff.).

CHAPTER VII
Repentance, Patience, Gratitude.

epentance (tawba) was the first stage on the Way
R to God. It found a place also in orthodox Muslim
doctrine. In the Qur'an punishment is laid down for
the sinner, * Except those who repent (after apostasy)
and amend, then surely Allah is forgiving, Merciful”.
Yet there may be repentance which is unacceptable,
“Surely those who disbelieve after their believing, then
increase in unbelief, their repentance shall not be ac-
cepted and these are they that go astray”.: “Repent”
(lit. to come back to) is used of the sinner, meaning
to return to God, to a state of obedience to Him, and
also of God Himself to express the Divine act of the
acceptance of repentance.

The same idea is expressed in the following Süra:
“Repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil
in ignorance, then turn soon, so these it is to whom
Allah turns, and Allah is ever-Knowing, Wise”. * And
repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds
until when Death comes to one of them he says,
‘Surely now I repent’, nor (for) those who die while
they are unbelievers."?

The Süfis made Repentance a much more essential
part of the life lived with God. Al-Hujwiri says, “There
is no right service without repentance. Repentance is
the first of the ‘stations’ in this Path”.3 He considers
that there are three things involved in Repentance:
(2) Remotse for disobedience, (7) Determination not to
sin again,(¢) Immediate abandonment of sin.4 This
corresponds to a later exposition of the Süfi doctrine

1 Al-Qur'àn, 111, 88, 89 (Woking Press Edition).
2 Al-Qur’an, Iv, 17, 18.
3 Kashf al-Mabjab, p. 79. 4 Op. cit. p. 294.

$4 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

of repentance, as involving first conviction of sin, then
contrition, which in its turn must lead to a purpose
to amend.!

* Some Sifis”’, says al-Hujwītī, “take the view that Repentance
consists in not forgetting sins, but always regretting them.
Junayd and others take the view that repentance consists in
forgetting the sin, for the penitent is a lover of God, and the
lover of God is in contemplation of God, and in contemplation
it is wrong to remember sin, since remembrance is a veil between
God and those who contemplate Him."

This is the repentance of the adept in the mystic life.?
Al-Hujwīrī regards Repentance as a Divine strength-
ening: "God hath said, And he turned towards him
(Adam), for He is the Disposer towards repentance,
the Merciful” (Al-Qur’an, n, 35 (37)). Repentance
may be from what is wrong to what is right—the
common kind, from what is right to what is more
right—that of the elect, and from selfhood to God,
which belongs to the degree of Divine love.3 Again,
he quotes Dhū al-Nün as saying that there is the _
Repentance of return (tawba a/-ināba), through fear of
the Divine punishment, and Repentance (tawba al-
istibya) through shame of Divine clemency. “The re-
pentance of fear is caused by revelation of God’s
majesty, the repentance of shame by the vision of
God's Beauty.”4

This is the repentance spoken of by Abū al-Husayn
al-Nūrī when he said, “‘ Repentance is repenting (turning
away) from all save God Most High" ,5 and the same
idea that the highest type of repentance is entirely dif-
ferent from the type normally practised is found in the .

1 Al-Ghazālī, 1552, 1v, p. 11. See also p. 14 for his definition
of Sin as all that is contrary to the law of God, whether by
omission or commission.

2 Al-Hujwīrī, op. cit. p. 296. Cf. also al-Sarraj, Kstab al-
Luma‘, p. 43.

3 Al-Hujwiri, op. cit. p. 297.

4 Al-Hujwiti, op. cit. p. 299. 5 Al-Sarraj, op. cit. p. 44.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VII — 55

statement that “The sins of those who are near (to
(God) are the good deeds of the righteous ".1

Rabi‘a, like all the great saints of God, had a deep
sense of the exceeding sinfulness of Sin and the need
for Repentance and Forgiveness, and the Sūfī writers,
in their chapters on the stage of ¢awba, more than
once mention her teaching on this subject. In a frag-
ment quoted by Hurayfish, which he appends to her
erses on the two loves, she prays thus:

O Beloved of hearts, I have none like unto Thee,

Therefore have pity this day on the sinner who comes to Thee.
O my Hope and my Rest and my Delight

The heart can love none other but Thee.’

And in one of her prayers quoted by the same writer
she speaks of God as a Comforter in sorrow, and as the
One Who can cleanse her from her sin.3

In verses already quoted,4 she addresses her Lord as
“Healer of Souls", and says that her soul has been
healed through Him.

That Rabi‘a sorrowed constantly for her sins is plain
froim-the frequent mention ii
is related that Rabi‘a was always weeping and it was

said to het, Why do you weep like this?’ She_said,.
"T fear that I ‘may be cut off from Him to Whom Iam..
accustomed, and that at the hour of death a voice may
say that Tam not worthy”. "Someone asked her, “If
a petšon commits many sins and repents, will (God)
accept him?" She replied, ““How can anyone repent
unless his Lord gives him repentance and accepts
him?” and she emphasised her conception of Repent-
ance as a “gift from God” in another saying of hers,
to the effect that “Seeking forgiveness with the tongue
is the sin of lying. If I seek repentance of myself, I
shall have need of repentance again”.5
1 Al-Sarrāj, op. cit., loc. cit. 2 Al-Rawd al-Fā'tg, p. 213.
3 Al-Hurayfish, op. cit. p. 212. 4 See above, p. 12.
5 ‘Attar, Tadhkirat 4L vii 74, I, p. dā

56 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Al-Qushayri, in dealing with the subject of “‘tawba’”’,
gives a similar account of Rabi‘a’s view when he says,
* A man said to Rābi'a, ‘I have sinned much and
rebelled (against God). If I repent, will He accept my
repentance?’ and she answered, ‘No, but if He turns
towards you, you will turn towards Him" ".1

In the “ Siyar al-Salihat’’, her biographer gives a vivid
picture of the impression made by her deep grief for
her sins, saying:

‘Abd Allah b. ‘Isa said, “I entered Rabi‘a’s presence and I saw
the light on her face, and she used to weep much, and a man
related of her that at every mention of fire (representing the
punishment of the unrepentant sinner), she swooned, and I heard
the falling of her tears on the ground like the sound of (water)
filling a vessel”,

and he reports that Ibn Mansür said:

I came into Rabi‘a’s presence and she was worshipping, and
when I reached my place, she raised her head, and lo, the place
of her worship was like a marsh from her tears and I saluted her.
Then she received me and said, “O my son, do you need any-
thing?” and I said, “I came to you to greet you”, and she wept
and said, “May God censure thee!” Then she rose up for (the
ritual) prayer and said, “I ask forgiveness of God for my lack
of sincerity when I say (those words) ‘I ask forgiveness of God" ",

and the writer adds in comment, "How God has
blessed her! God has illuminated her heart among
those who are dearest to Him”.2
Jami relates that Sufyān al-Thawri exclaimed once

in her hearing, “Alas for my sorrow”, and Rābi'a
rebuked him, saying, “Do not lie. If you were really
sorrowful, life would not be so pleasant to you".
Again she said, ““ My sorrow is not for the things which
make me grieve, but my sorrow is for the ne for
which I do not grieve”’.3

1 Risaja, p. 62. “Siyar al-Salihat", fol. 26a.

3 Jami, Nafahāt al-Uns, M 716. Cf. Romans vii. 15-23.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VII 57

Sha‘rani also tells how Rābiʻa wept and sorrowed
much, and of her emotion at the mention of fire (so
often synonymous with the torments of hell to the
Muslim), and how she used to say “Our asking fort-
giveness of God, itself needs forgiveness”, and he also
adds that her oratory was like a swamp of watert from
her tears.!

Rābi'a, then, felt and taught that Sin was hurtful in
the highest degree to the soul, since it was a cause of ' |
separation between the soul and its Beloved. This con- ;
viction of sin as a barrier between the servant and his ;
Lord? must lead to godly sorrow, contrition. This sor- [
row evinced itself in her case by the outward signs of (
grief, the constant weeping, which is recorded of her «
and of other saints as a mark of godliness, and also in
remorse for sins of commission and omission, and this N
burning grief left no place for taking pleasure in the |
transient delights of this world. Sin to Rabi'a was hate-
ful because it separated her from God, not because it `
involved punishment hereafter.

Rabi‘a’s teaching on Repentance, as we have seen,
includes the doctrine that “‘tawba”’ is the gift of God,
not something due to the effort of the sinner—“If God
turns towards thee, thou wilt turn to Him”—and this
is quite in accordance with her general view that "every
good gift and every perfect gift is from above”, and
that only God has the power so to touch the sinner's
heart that he will turn away from his wickedness and
repent. This is, of course, also the Christian view, set
forth by St Paul, “Despisest thou the riches of His
goodness and forbearance and longsuffering ; not know-
ing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repent-
ance?”3 ` |

I Sha'rani, A+ Tabagat al-Kubra, p. 86.

2 Cf. Romans vi. io * Know ye not, that to whom ye yield
yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye
obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteous-
ness?" 3 Romans ii. 4.

H
4

58 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

But for the sincere penitent forgiveness is sure, since
repentance is a sign of grace, and sin and grace are
incompatible in the same soul. As al-Ghazali expresses
it, "Darkness cannot dwell with light, nor filthiness
abide with the whiteness of the fuller's soap”.'

So if the Lord grants repentance, He will not with-
hold forgiveness, and since faith is the beginning,
justification will be the end.?

Patience (sabr) is dealt with at length by the Süfi
writers as an essential stage in the progress of the
spiritual life, or perhaps rather as an essential quality
to be acquired by the saint. Hujwiri quotes a saying
of Hasan al-Basri to the effect that Patience is of two
sotts, firstly, patience in misfortune and affliction, and
secondly, patience to refrain from the things which
God has commanded us to renounce and has forbidden
us to pursue.3

Abū Talib gives us the view of the Süfis that
Patience has three stages, first, to Jeave off complaining,
and this is the stage of the repentant; second, to be
satisfied with what is decreed, and this is the rank of
the ascetics; third, to Jove whatever his Lord does with
him, and this is the stage of the true friends of God.4
Al-Qushayri speaks of patience as being as necessary
to faith as the head to the body.5 Al-Ghazali, in deal-
ing with sabr, regards it as a necessity for the saint,
whose spiritual life must be a militant one, making
war upon the passions and seeking after victory. In
this world trials and misfortunes must come, losses,
pain, injury to feelings, and the saint may expect that
these wil come with greater force to him, since

I Aļ-Ghazālī, I5y2, 1v, 12. Cf. also Mal. iii. 2: “He is like
a refiner's fire and like fullers soap”.

2 “Now being made free from sin, and become servants to
God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting
life”, Romans vi. 22.

3 Al-Hujwiri, Kashf ai-Mabjūb, p. 86.

4 Qut al-Qulub, 1, p. 199. s Risāla, p. 111.

E
|

PART TWO, CHAPTER VII 59

“whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth and scourgeth
every son whom He receiveth”’, that through the fire
of affliction, the faith of the saint may shine more
brightly. By patient endurance the saint may cease to
feel the effects of adversity, and in the end, for his
patience, he will win the greater reward.
Rabi‘a’s life is her plainest teaching on this subject,
and many of the anecdotes related in her biography
witness to her practice of this virtue. In her early
yeats we note her.patience under the heavy affliction
of slavery,? and she met the trials and adversities of
life in the same spirit. The loss of her goods, the poverty -
and discomfort of her life, the sufferings of mind and
body she was called upon to endure, were all accepted
as part of the will of God for her and as a training of
her character.3 We have already seen how Rābi'a, when
in pain, reminded those who called her attention to )/
her injury, that her concern was to accommodate her- :
self to her Lord's will and to occupy herself with y
something better than physical affliction. The secret”
of her patience is to be found in her answer to Sufyān,
when he tempted her to seek what she desired from
God, and she said, “If I will a thing, and my Lord does
not will it, I shall be guilty of unbelief””,5 thereby con-
firming the view of both al-Qushayri and al-Ghazali
that Patience is an essential part of faith. The faithful
servant must accept in patience what is sent to him,
since if he doubts either his Lord’s wisdom or His
loving care for those who depend on Him, he commits
kufr, and Rabi‘a did not fail to teach this lesson both
by precept and example, as we have already seen.

I Iģyā, 1v, pp. 55 ff. Cf. al-Kalabadhi, “ Ma'ani al-Akhbār”,
fol. 169 b.
2 See above, p. 6.
3 See above, Part 1, ur MR III.
4 See above, P. 23 5 See above, pp. 24, 2

6 Cf. Heb. vi. 12: “ them who through faith and aeie
inherit the promises”.

6o RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Gratitude (shukr) is the complementary quality to

Patience, representing the same attitude towards God’s
benefits that Patience represents towards His chastise-
ments. Like the other qualities to be acquired at the
different stages on the mystic Way, gratitude contains
the elements of faith, feeling and action.! Faith must
accept the fact that all benefits come from God and are
His free gift, which He might have withheld, and that
He has not withheld them is due to His unfailing good-
ness towards His elect. This faith:that all good gifts
come from God must produce the feeling of joy for
the gift but humility before the Giver. Joy comes from
the sense of the graciousness which is the sign of God's
love for us, but also because the act of giving establishes
a relation between us, the beneficiaries, and the Lord
who bestows the benefit and to the Sūfī; this relation-
ship will mean ultimately union with the Giver.?
. These feelings of joy and humility and aspiration will
. lead to action—acts of gratitude, taking the form of
praise and thanksgiving to God for His beneficence3—
and the recipient of His bounty will seek to do all
things in accordance with His Will and to avoid all
that is contrary to it.4

Gratitude must extend to misfortunes as well as
blessings and here it joins forces with Patience, but
whereas the latter is but a passive form of the virtue,
the former is an activity arising from it. “Real resigna-
tion consists not in bowing down under the Will of
God, but in rising up into it”.

Even in adversity we can be thankful because our
misfortunes might always be greater than they actually

1 Al-Qushayri, op. cit. p. 105. Al-Ghazālī, op. cit. 1v, p. 71.

2 Cf. al-Qushayri, op. cit. p. 106. Al-Kalābādhī, “Ma ‘ani al-
Akhbar", fol. 50 b.

3 Cf. 2 Cor. ix. 11: “Being enriched in every thing to all
bountifulness, which causeth through us thanksgiving to
God".

4 Al-Qushayri, op. cit. p. 106. Al-Ghazali, op. cit. pp. 72, 73.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VII 61

are, our spiritual state might be wotse than it is; in any
case all temporal advetsity is less than we deserve for
our unworthiness, and finally, all comes from God
Himself and is the outcome of the Divine Volition.:

Al-Qushayri goes to the heart of the matter when
he says that “‘Gratitude is the vision of the Giver, not
of the Gift”,* and he goes on to say that “‘Gratitude
is a gift from God Himself”.3
 Ràbi'a both taught and practised this quality of
shukr. Much of her time was spent in praise to her
Lord for His goodness to her, and her prayers, already
quoted, are full of thanksgiving. She says in one,
“Thou hast given me life and hast provided for me,
and Thine is the glory", and again she says, "How
many favours hast Thou bestowed on me, gifts and `
grace and help ".4
ere is one story told of her, in which she made-
her teaching on Gratitude very plain. Her biographer
says:

It is related that at one time she saw someone who had a bandage
bound about his head. She said, “Why is this bandage bound
(round your head)?” He said, “‘ My head is paining me”. Rabi‘a
asked him how old he was. “Thirty years old”, he replied. She
asked him, “Were you in pain and trouble for the greater part
of your life?” “No”, he answered. Then she said, “For thirty
years (God) has kept your body fit and you have never bound
upon it the bandage of gratitude, but for one night of pain in
your head you bind it with the bandage of complaint”.5

I Al-Qushayri, op. cit. pp. 107, 108. Al-Ghazali, op. cit. 1v,

- 74:
E 2 Cf. Bishr-i-Yasin: “Certainly the Giver is better for you
than the gift. How should you want the gift, when you possess
the very Philosophers Stone?" (R. A. Nicholson, Studies in
Islamic Mysticism, p. 5). Cf. also Mme Guyon: |

«Tis the Giver, not the Gift
Whence the joys I feel proceed”

(Poems, tt. W. Cowper, p. 90).

3 Risāla, p. 106. 4 See above, p. 28.

5 ‘Attar, op. cit. p. 68.

62 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Another story shews how to her, too, Gratitude
meant the vision of the Giver rather than the gift, and
how she turned aside from the gifts in order to look
up and beyond to Him Who gave them.

Once in the spring, she was in the house, giving
praise to God, and her servant-maid came to her and
said, “O mistress, come out to behold the works (of
God)”, but Rabi‘a replied, “Come you inside that you
may behold their Maker. Contemplation of the Maker
has turned me aside from contemplating what He has
made”. In her disregard of the beautiful creations
of God, for the sake of their Creator, Rabi‘a’s attitude
is in contrast to that of the more pantheistic later Siifis,
who felt that God was to be seen (and could be wor-
shipped) in all His creation. The view of Mahmüd
Shabistarī that “‘Beneath the veil of each atom is
hidden the soul-ravishing beauty of the face of the
Beloved”, would have met with little response from
Rābi'a, and likewise the view of Jami, expressed in
Yusef u Zulaykha:

Each speck of matter did He constitute

A mirror, causing each one to reflect

The beauty of His visage. From the rose
Flashed forth His beauty and the nightingale
Beholding it, loved madly. From that fire

The candle drew the lustre which beguiles

The moth to immolation. On the sun

His beauty shone, and straightway from the wave
The lotus reared its head. Each shining lock

Of Layla's hair attracted Majnün's heart

Because some ray Divine reflected shone

In her fair face. "T'was He to Shirin’s lips

Who lent that sweetness, which had power to steal
The heart from Parriz and from Farhad life.

His Beauty everywhere doth show itself,

1 ‘Attar, op. cit., loc. cit.
2 Gulshan-i Raz, p. 11, l. 165.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VII 63

And through the forms of earthly beauties shines
Obscured as through a veil... .

Where’er thou seest a veil,
Beneath that veil He hides.

Rabi‘a, however, desired to look upon her Lord
unveiled, the beauties of His gifts were as nothing in
her eyes compared with the Beauty of the Giver, an
gratitude to Him outweighed the thought of the things
for which she was grateful.” |
In that degree of gratitude which can feel thankful-

ness for adversity as well as prosperity, Rabi‘a went
beyond the limits to which her friends among the
Süfis managed to attain. She attributed her sufferings
to the Will of God and said that she would not oppose
her Beloved in seeking to be rid of them.3 She speaks
with gratitude of “warnings” given to her by her
Lord, through suffering and affliction, that she might
turn wholly to Him and so win the great reward at
last.4 We are told by an old writer that Rābi'a or
another of the Süfis said, "If Thou hadst not set me
apart by affliction, I had not increased Thy lovers’’,5
z.e. my afflictions have led me to do Thy work and lead
others to love Thee.

. Rabia, then, had the faith which accepts all gifts as
from God the Giver and regards misfortune and ad-
versity in the same light as favour and happiness. Her

I Tr. E. G. Browne, Religious Systems of the World, p. 329.
Cf. also Plato's Symposium, ed. Jowett, pp. 581 ff.
2 Cf. the similar view taken by Mme Guyon, op. cit. pp. 3, 4:
* Far from enjoying what these scenes disclose,
* * * * *
Their form and beauty but augment my woe
I seek the Giver of those charms they show".

3 See above, p. 24. Cf. Mme Guyon, op. cit. p. 52.

4 See above, p. 22. Cf. St Paul's view: *I reckon that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us" (Rom. viii. 18).

5 Al-Kalabadhi, * Ma'ānī al-Akhbār”, fol. 2 b.

*

64 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

faith led her to joy in the chastening of the Lord as
being His goodness to her, and to a humble acceptance
of all that He might send, and thence to acts of praise
and thanksgiving, and an eager looking forward to the
great Gift, of which these gifts were but an earnest,
of Union, for ever, with the Giver. She might well
have identified herself with the words of a later Süfi,
Baba Kühl of Shiraz, who wrote:

In the market, in the cloister—only God I saw

In the valley and on the mountain,—only God I saw.

Him I have seen beside me oft in tribulation;

In favour and in fortune—only God I saw.

In prayer and fasting, in praise and contemplation,

In the religion of the Prophet—only God I saw.

Neither soul nor body, accident nor substance,

Qualities nor causes—only God I saw.

Like a candle I was melting in His fire

Amidst the flames outflashing—only God I saw.

Myself with mine own eyes I saw most clearly,

But when I looked with God’s eyes—only God I saw.

I passed away into nothingness, I vanished,

And lo, I was the All-living,—only God I saw.?

1 Ob. A.D. 1050.
2 Tr. R. A. Nicholson, Eastern Poetry and Prose, p. 101.

CHAPTER VIII
Hope and Fear.

T Sūfī writers have much to say on the stages of
Hope and Fear and are agreed that both have their
place in the progress of the saint towards the Goal.
Al-Hujwiri considers that right hope and right fear
are both necessary to man in this world, and regards
feat and hope as the two pillars of faith. Those who
fear, serve God through dread of separation from Him,
and those who hope, serve in the expectation of union
with Him.” It is interesting to note that this writer,
who maintains that every prophet has his special
“station”, says that to Jesus belonged the station of
Hope and to John the Baptist that of Fear.3 —
Al-Sarraj states that Hope and Fear are as two wings
without which the work of the saint cannot make
progtess4 and al-Qushayri, developing this simile, .
which he attributes to Abū ‘Ali al-Rūdhabārī, says that
Hope and Fear are like the two wings of a bird when
it is flying straight (to its destination); if one wing fails,
its flight fails, and if both fail, it dies.5 Both are con-
cerned with the future, Hope looks forward to what
is desired and Fear dreads what is hated.
Al-Kalabadhi, writing on Fear, says that when the
Safi, Abi ‘Abd Allah b. al-Jili, was asked about the
man who fears, he said, “He is the man who is made
to trust (in God) by those things which are rightly
feared, because he does not let fearful things disturb
his mind, being removed from them by his fear of God,
so that such things will be removed from him”.®
Kashf al-Mabjab, p. 112. 2 Op. cit. p. 122.
E Op. 2 p. RR & St Matt. iii and Iscdah xit

4 Kitab al-Luma‘, P 62. 5 Risāla, p. 82.
6 “Ma‘anial-Akhbar”, fol. 7ob. “Kitabal-Ta‘arruf”, fol. 26b.

SR 5

66 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Another Süfi, being asked about such a God-fearing
man, said, “He is the man who fears what is worthy
of fear, and being dominated by the fear of God, he
becomes all fear, and all things make him fear". Yet
this fear does not make him wretched, “He is burnt
who feels the fire, but he who is fire, how shall he be
burnt?": Abū ‘Amr al-Dimashqi is reported to have
said, “The man who fears rightly is he who fears his
carnal self more than his enemy ".?

Among the sayings of al-Fudayl, one of the earliest
of the Sūfīs, contemporary with Ràbi'a, is that

He who knows God by way of love without Fear perishes
through pleasure and ease. He who knows Him by way of Fear
(only) is separated from Him by the spirit of servitude and
avoidance, but he who loves Him, and is near to Him, and is
a matter of concern to Him, and has knowledge of Him, and he
who knows God in reality, is far from error, and he who gives
to death (j.e. the chief object of Fear) its true significance,
will not be unmindful of it.

I.e. he will always bear in mind that death must bring
him to the judgment of God and he will so live that
he need not feat it.

Like the other qualities to be attained by the Süfi
on the path of enlightenment, these two can be
analysed into the elements of faith, emotion and action.
In Hope there is faith in the thing desired, based upon
knowledge of God's mercy, upon the warm recollec-
tion of His favours teceived—through grace, not metit
—and upon the proofs of His love and forgiveness
towards His elect, and upon His promise of rewards
to His servants.4

This faith leads to joy in the prospect of God’s
future favour, and the practical results are that the soul

1 “Ma‘anial-Akhbar”, fol. 7ob. “Kitab al-Ta'arruf”,fol. 26b.

2 “Kitab al-Ta‘arruf”’, fol. 26 b.

3 Munāvī, op. cit. fol. 17 a.
4 Al-Sarraj, op. cit. p. 62. Al-Ghazili, op. cit. 1v, pp. 124-9.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VIII 67

strives to fight against all that may hinder it from
gaining these delights in the future and to develop
those virtues which may help towards their attain-
ment.

But Hope of such a kind is too much tinged with
self-interest to be a help along the mystic Way and it is
of such hope that al-Hujwiri says, “No one who has
imbibed the doctrine of hope can tread the way of
purgation, because it leads to indolence”?! and the
Sufi sets before himself a higher ideal of Hope. Al-
Qushayri, with his gift for going to the heart of the
matter, defines Hope as “the vision of God in His
perfect Beauty” and al-Sarraj says that the true servant’s
hope is in God alone, and he hopes for nothing from
God except God Himself. Such hope will lead the
saint onward and upward.

Fear, like Hope, is conditioned by faith and leads
through emotion to action calculated to ward off that
which is dreaded and hence it is salutary for the Sufi
if of the right type.

Al-Sarraj speaks of three kinds of Fear, the com-
monest being fear of punishment. Others fear being
cut off from God, or anything that might hinder their
attainment of gnosis. But there is a higher type of
Fear even than this and the holy fear of the elect is
the fear of God alone.3

Al-Qushayri calls Fear “the scourge of God" where-
with He corrects those who would flee from His door.
Terror of the common sort (rahba) makes a man run
away, but holy dread (Ahashya) brings him near to God.
Fear is as a lamp to the heart, making it see what is
good and what is evil; and godly fear leads a man to
turn his back on what is feared, because it is evil.
** He who truly fears a thing flees from it, but he who
truly fears God, flees unto Him."4

I Kashf ail-Mabjūb, p. 133. 2 Kitab al-Luma', p. 62.

3 Op. cit. p. 6o. 4 Risāla, pp. 78—80.

5-2

68 RĀBI' A THE MYSTIC

Al-Ghazālī also speaks of the fear of Hell as “a whip
to drive to Paradise’’.t

All the early Süfi writers are agreed that Fear is
superior to Hope in its influence on the will and its
effect on the life of devotion, and in freeing the soul
from deceptive confidence in itself or the future. It
may be interesting here to compare the Christian view
on this subject as set forth in the Franciscan doctrine
of the place of Holy Fear:

He that fears not, shews that he hath nought to lose. The holy :
fear of God orders, governs and rules the soul and maketh it
come to grace. If a man possesseth any grace or divine virtue,
it is holy fear that keepeth it safe. And whoso hath not yet
obtained virtue or grace, holy fear maketh him obtain it....But
this holy gift of fear is not given save unto the perfect, for the
more perfect a man is, the more doth he fear and humble him-
self....A man should have greater fear of his own wickedness
lest it overcome him and lead him astray, than of any other of
his enemies....Whoso hath not the fear of God, is in danger
of perishing and of being altogether lost.”

To the Sufi also, Fear is a gift from God, Who has
decreed that His servants should fear, and holy fear,
that dread which is salutary for the soul, is produced
by meditation on the Divine justice as evidenced in the
punishment of Iblis and of Adam, and on Death and
Judgment and Hell. Fear is a fire which burns away
the desires which hinder the soul. “The fear of the
Lord”, says a tradition, "is the chief part of wisdom”.3

Yet the conclusion of the matter, for the Süfi, as we
have said above, is that the most sublime form of Fear
is that which has for its object not chastisement, nor
even sin, but God Himself, fearing lest at the last the
soul should be deprived for ever of the vision of His
Everlasting Beauty.4

— 71 Ižyā, 1v, p. 130. 2 Little Flowers of St Francis, p. 266.

3 Cf. St Luke xii. 4, 5. 4 Ibyá, 1v, p. 135.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VIII 69

Al-Sarraj, summing up the Sūfī doctrine of these two
stages, says that Hope and Fear are two fetters of the
soul, hindering it from wandering from the straight
path and safety and from turning aside to despair and
separation (from God). Fear is like a state of darkness,
in which the soul wanders, bewildered, seeking always
to escape from it, and when Hope comes to lighten it,
the soul goes out to a place of refreshment and grace
prevails. The fairness of the day would not appear to
advantage except in contrast with the darkness of the
night. The best state (for the mystic) includes both,
and the heart is sometimes a slave in the darkness of
Fear and sometimes a prince in the brightness of Hope.
Love and Hope and Fear are bound up together. Love
is not perfect without fear, nor fear without hope, nor
hope without fear.! .

With this question of Hope and Fear is bound up
the eschatological teaching of the Süfis and their con-
ception of Paradise and Hell. For them Hell was not so
much a place of punishment as a means of separation
from the Presence of God, and Paradise to them was
not a place of sensual or even spiritual joys, but simply
the Vision of the Beloved and the state of abiding
Union with Him.

Of Rābi'a's teaching on these stages, we are told
that she was much subject to Fear and the effect upon
het of the mention of Hell fire, already referred to, was
due to her belief in the judgment that must be passed

upon the sinner, a judgment which, in her weaker
moments, she feared might be ordained for her, and
once she prayed that she might not be condemned to
Hell and was rebuked for thinking an evil thought.?

x Al-Sarrij, o. cit. p. 63. Cf. the et conception of St John:
<< There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear:
because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect
in love” (1 John iv. 18).

2 See above, p. 29.

70 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

One of her biographers says that she remained for
forty years without raising her head to heaven, out of
her reverence towards God, and she used to say,
* Whenever I have heard the call to prayer, I have
remembered the trumpet call of the Day of Resur-
rection, and whenever I have seen the snow I have
seen also the pages of the records? fluttering.” She was
once asked, “In what do you hope most of all?" and
she replied, “In my sorrow for most of my deeds”.3

But it is plain from teaching of hers already quoted
that she held the motive of fear of punishment or hope
of reward to be altogether unworthy of the saint of
God. In the incident related by Aflaki* she sought to
temove both these motives as being hindrances to the
attainment of the mystic goal. Again she thought that
it was but a poor servant who worshipped his Lord
either to escape punishment ot to win reward.5 To her
only God Himself was to be feared with the reverence
due to His awful holiness, and equally to her, hope was
only in God Himself, in the Vision of His Beauty.

Al-Munawi relates that she heard a reader read that
“the inhabitants of Paradise are occupied in enjoying
themselves" and she said, ** The inhabitants of Paradise
are unfortunate in their occupation and their com-
panions". Ibn ‘Arabi blamed her for this and said that
she did not know (what she was speaking of) and that
it was she who was unfortunate and that they were
occupied only with God and this was His will for
them.® She probably wished to make it clear that in
her view Paradise was not a place for sensual delights,

1 A reference to the records of their deeds which all were
required to take in their hands on the Day of Judgment, the
righteous being given their record in the right hand and the
wicked in the left. See above, p. 12.

2 Munāvī, op. cit. fol. 51 a.

3 M. b. Husayn, A/-Kashkal, p. 273.

4 See pp. 98, 99

: 5 See p. I00.
6 Munāvī, op. cit. fol. 51 b.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VIII 71

but rather a state of contemplation of the Face of
God.

When Rābi'a was asked what she had to say about
Paradise she said, “First the Neighbour, then the
house", and al-Ghazali, after quoting her statement,
goes on to say that she meant that in het heart was no
leaning towards Paradise, but to the Lord of Paradise,
and
...no one who does not know God in this world will see Him
in the next, and he who does not find the joy of gnosis in this
world will not find the joy of vision in the next, since none may
make appeal (to God) in the next world who has not sought
His friendship in this world and none may reap who has not
sown.! A man is raised up only in the state in which he has died,
and he dies only in the state in which he has lived and the only
gnosis he takes with him is that wherewith he was blessed in
himself, unless it is changed into the Vision (of God) by the
removal of the veil, when his joy in it is greatly increased just
as the joy of the lover is doubled if the imaginary picture of the
beloved is exchanged for the vision (.e. the reality) of the picture,
and that is the highest joy.

For the delights of Paradise are to each one there, only what
he desires, and to him who desires only to meet with God Him-
self there is no delight save in Him, indeed he may suffer thereby,
for since the delights of Paradise are only in proportion to (his)
love of God and his love of God is in proportion to his gnosis,
then the origin of (that spiritual) happiness is the gnosis which
has been revealed by God through faith, and if you say, “Then
the joy of the Vision, if it is in proportion to the joy of gnosis, in
this world is but weak”, verily it shall be increased to an almost

infinite degree of power, so that all the other joys of Paradise
shall be despised beside it.?
All this al-Ghazali reads into Rabi‘a’s teaching on the

true significance of Paradise, for the Sūfī. Another
writer, later than al-Ghazālī, also comments on this

1 Cf. with this his teaching on Hope (I?yā, 1v, p. 124).
2 Iya, iv, p. 269.

72 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

saying of Rabi‘a’s. He relates that Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya,
when the state of love was dominating her, was asked,
“Why do you not ask God for Paradise?" and she
replied, “The Neighbour before the house”. He com-
pares this with a story of Asiya,' daughter of Mazaham,
who said, *O Lord build for me a house with Thee in
Paradise"; thus she chose the neighbour before the
house. He also compares the saying of the Prophet,
“I ask Thee for Thine approval and for Paradise”,
as containing an indication of what Rābi'a said about
the neighbour before the house.?

It is plain that Rabi‘a’s teaching on Hope and Fear,
seen in an eschatological setting, is closely linked with
her teaching on the doctrine of disinterested love to
God,3 and since she appears to have been among the
first to bring this doctrine into prominence among the
Süfis and to lay particular stress upon it as the essential
element in the saint's relation to God, it is possible
that she was also one of the first to teach this exalted
ideal of Hope and Fear and to conceive of Paradise
as a spiritual state.

Ibrahim b. Adham, of Balkh, a contemporary of
Rābi'a's, is reputed to have said, "O God, Thou
knowest that in my eyes Paradise hath not the value
of a gnat, if Thou hast blessed me with Thy love”,4
and Abū Yazid al-Bistami, somewhat later than Rabia,
said that * Paradise is of no worth to those who love”,5
but these fall somewhat short of Rabi‘a’s conception
of life eternal as pure contemplation and adoration of
the Beloved.

Al-Qushayri, writing nearly three hundred years after

1 Cf. Qur’an, LXVI, 11. See also J. Walker, “ Asiya, the wife
of Pharaoh”, The Moslem World, Jan. 1928.

2 M. b. H. Imad al-Din, * Hayat al-Quisb" on margin of Out
al-Qulab, U, p. 193.

3 See Part 11, Chapter x.

4 Abū Nu'aym, “Hilya al-Awliya”, Leyden MS. fol. 200 a.

5 Abū Nu‘aym, op. cit. fol. 219a.

PART TWO, CHAPTER VIII 73

Rabi‘a’s death, includes her views as an accepted ele-
ment in the Süfi doctrine of Hope and Fear, and it may
well be, since al-Ghazālī, with so much material at his
disposal, gives her authority for this high conception
of the only worthy motive of Hope or Fear, that
Rabi‘a was largely responsible for this important de-
velopment in Sufi doctrine.

CHAPTER IX
Poverty, Renunciation, Unification, Dependence.

TE stages of Poverty, of Asceticism or Renuncia-
tion, of the merging of the individual will in the
Will of God, and of complete trust in and dependence
upon Him, can be considered together.

Poverty (faqr) is held in high estimation by the
Sufi writers, but it is only poverty for the sake of God,
which is metitorious. Those who are poor for His sake
are promised entrance into Paradise five hundred years
before the rich, even the virtuous rich.t Such teaching
of course is similar to that of the New Testament,
“How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the
kingdom of God".?

Again, al-Sarraj says that the poor are the richest
of God’s creation3—they dispense with the gift for
the sake of the Giver. Poverty he describes as:a sea
of tribulation, but all its tribulations mean glory.* There
are different grades of those who possess nothing and
do not desire outwardly or inwardly anything from
anyone (7.e. not only do they refrain from expressing
desire, but they do not even feel it) and they do not
expect anything from anyone, and if given anything,
they refuse to receive it; this station belongs to those
who are in proximity (to God).5 It is, indeed, the first
of the stages (zanzwil) of unification (tawhid). 6 Ina
like spirit, St Francis embraced the Lady Poverty as
his bride, for the love of God. Brother Giles gives an
account of the Franciscan doctrine of Holy Poverty as

..the immeasurable treasure of the most holy poverty, for it
is a treasure so high excelling and so divine that we be not
I Abū Talib, Qz/ al-Qulub, 1, p. 242. 2 St Mark x. 25-5.

3 Kitab al-Luma', p. 48. 4 Cf. again St Mark x. 29, 51.

5 Kštāb al-Luma', p. 221. 6 Op. cit. p. 48.

PART TWO, CHAPTER IX 7

worthy to lay it up in our vile vessels; since this is that celestial
virtue whereby all earthly things and fleeting are trodden under
foot, and whereby all hindrances are lifted from the soul, so that
freely she may join herself to God Eternal. And this is the virtue
that makes the soul, still tied to earth, hold converse with the
angels in heaven... which also in this life grants to the souls
that love it an easier flight to heaven; in that it guards the arms
of true humility and love;

and again St Francis speaks of the bread of poverty
as "this it is that I account vast treasure, wherein is
nothing at all prepared by human hands, but whatso-
ever we have is given by God's own providence”’.?

This was the spiritual poverty of the adept in Süfism,
for which Rābi'a craved, while she was yet a novice,
and incapable of understanding the depths of its
meaning.

‘Attar tells the story of how on one occasion, when
she was making the pilgrimage and had reached
“Arafat, she heard the voice of God saying to her,
**O you who invoke Me, what request have you to
make of Me? If it is Myself that you desire, then I will
shew you one flash of my glory (but in that) you will
be absorbed and melt away." She said then, "O Lord
of Glory, Rabi‘a has no means of attaining to that
degree, but I desire one particle of (spiritual) Poverty”.
The voice said:

O Rābi'a, Poverty is the scourge (lit. the drought or famine,
ž.e. that which withers up and destroys life) of Our wrath, which
we have placed in the way of men. When but a hair’s breadth
remains between them and Union with Us, everything is changed
and Union becomes separation. As for you, you are still within
seventy veils of self-existence; until you have come forth from
beneath those veils, and set forth on the way towards Us, and
passed the seventy stations, you will not be fit even to speak of

that Poverty.3

1 Little Flowers of St Francis, p. 38.
2 OP. cit. p. 37. 3 ‘Attar, op. cit. pp. 62, 63.

76 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Here Poverty (fagr) signifies the state of complete
self-loss, exceedingly hard to attain, and not leading to
Union, unless it is perfect, and even then the mystic
may, in the good pleasure of God, be subject to a Dark
Night of the Soul before attaining to Union. Such
poverty could be attained only by the adept, divested
of every attribute of “self”.

Renunciation, or asceticism (452), is to be con-
sidered side by side with this high conception of
Poverty. The first stage of kd, to the Sūfī, is
initiatory and represents the Purgative Life, through
which the novice must pass before setting foot on the
mystic Way. But when the soul has been purified
from all sensual desires, and the mystic **pure from
Self as flame from smoke” sets forth upon his journey
towards God,? then he passes beyond this early degree
of zuhd and aims at the last stage, renunciation of all
but God, attained only by the adept.

This question of zuhd is of the greatest importance
in the study of early Süfism, because at that stage
Süfism consisted of asceticism carried to the point of
quietism, rather than the acceptance of a theosophy or
a mystical doctrine as the term is generally understood.
The Way was the subject of study rather than the
Goal. So the Süfi writers have much to say concerning
zuhd. Al-Sarraj states that love of the world is the root
of all sin, and that renunciation of the world is the
root of all good and obedience (to God).3

Abū Talib says that the beginning of gwbd is con-
cern for the next world, in the soul, and then the
coming into existence of the sweetness of hope in God,
and concern for the next world does not enter in until
anxiety for this world goes out,* not does the sweetness
of hope enter in until the sweetness of desire has

I See above,

P. 49-
2 Mahmüd al- VIR Gulshan-i Raz, p. 19, l. 315.
3 Kitab al-Lumd', p. 46. 4 Cf. St Matt. vi. 24.

PART TWO, CHAPTER IX 77

departed. True zahd means the thrusting out from
the heart of all thought of worldly things and the
counting of them as vanity and only so will zuhd
become perfect.

Zuhd leads ultimately to intimacy with God. Piety
in the servants leads on to ebd and «bd to love of
God, and these two states are the aim of those who
seek to love God and to be intimate with Him and
he is not truly a gā?id who does not attain to the
station of love or the mystic state of intimacy (uns).2

Al-Qushayri, in dealing with this subject, defines
<uhd as leaving all that distracts the soul from God,
freeing the hand from wealth and the heart from
desire, and he quotes the misanthropic Hasan of Basra
as saying that “‘x#hd in this world is to hate its people
and all that is in it and to leave what is in this world
to those who dwell in it”.3

Ahmad b. Hanbal* distinguishes three kinds of
vubd; the renunciation of what is unlawful, which is
common enough; the renunciation of what is lawful,
which is a mote special type; and, finally, the renuncia-
tion of all, whatever it may be, that distracts the servant
from God Most High, and this is the 454 of the
gnostics.5 The gnostic seeks to cut himself off from
all else in order that, undistracted, he may obtain the
Beatific Vision, and therefore he counts even the de-
lights of Paradise as contemptible in comparison with
the Beauty of God. |

Renunciation involves unification (422). The doc-
trine of the Unity of God was from the first the central
‘doctrine of Islam, and to Muslims the unpardonable
sin was shirk, the admission by word or act that
1 Cēt al-Qulub, 1, pp. 248, 250.

2 Op. cit. 1, pp. 270, 271. 3 Risāla, p. 74.
4 See al-Hujwiti, Kashf, pp. 117, 118.
5 ri kj Risāla, pp. 74, 75. C£. also al-Sarraj, op. cit.

P- 46.
6 Al-Ghazālī, op. cit. Iv, p. 195.

78 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

anything or anyone was worthy to share that which was
due to God alone. Further, this doctrine meant that
within the Godhead itself no duality could be admitted.
God must be One in His Essence and One in His
activity, and therefore must be the sole Cause of all
that exists and all that comes to pass.

To the Safi, the doctrine of tawhid meant far mote
than the confession of God’s Unity; it was to him
the sinking of the Self and the abnegation of the
personal will, in the will of God. So the doctrine of
the Unity for the Sufi was developed into the doctrine
of Unification. This was expressed in the plainest
terms by the Persian mystic Abü Sa‘id b. Abi al-
Khayr, who lays it down that

...it is the vision of the heart that is of value, not the tongue’s
speech...the (true servant) is he who fears the majesty of God
and frees himself from carnal desires. Until you empty yourself
of Self, you will not be able to escape from it. It is not enough
for me to repeat, “There is no god but God", to become a
Muslim. (It is written) * Most of them have not believed in God,
but are polytheists”, that is, they have made profession of faith
with the tongue, but most of them in their hearts are polytheists.
God has said, “I do not pardon the polytheist”, that is, God will
not forgive one who gives Him a partner, but apart from that
He will forgive whom He will. All the members of thy body
are filled with doubt and polytheism. Thou must cast out this
polytheism from thy heart that thou mayst have peace...thou
canst not believe in God until thou dost deny thyself, that self
which keeps thee far from God Most High and which says,
* So and So has done thee an injury and such a one has treated
thee well". All this leads to dependence on creatures and all
this is polytheism. The creatures are nothing, the Friend is every-
thing. After this manner it must be known and declared and
having been declared, it is necessary to abide by it and in it.
And to abide by it means that when thou hast said, “One”, thou
must not again say “Two” and the creature and the Creator
are two. The right faith is to say God and therein to stand fast.

PART TWO, CHAPTER IX 79

And to stand fast means that when thou hast said, “ God”, thou
shouldst no more speak of the creatures nor think upon them
in thine heart, so that it is as if the creatures were not. Whatever
thou dost see or say, see and say from what is existent, which will
never cease to be. Love that One, Who, when thou shalt cease
to be, will not Himself cease to be, that thou, too, mayst become
one who will never cease to be.!

The older Siifi writers had expressed the same idea.
Al-Sarraj quotes a saying of Ruwaym b. Ahmad b.
Yezid al-Baghdadi that żawþīd is the effacement of
human nature, and keeping separate that which is
Divine, and explains the latter phrase as meaning the
separation of what is eternal from that which has been
brought into phenomenal existence and is therefore
evanescent.”

Al-Hujwiri also states that sharing in the Unity in-
volves cessation of human volition and affirmation of
the Divine Will so as to exclude all personal initiative.3

Al-Qushayri speaks of the servant being like a body
in the hands of God, plunged in the depths of the
ocean of His Unity, having passed away from his Self
and from the claims of created things, so that at
the last the servant returns to what he was at first,
before he had begun to be.4

So also writes the Christian mystic:

We ought to offer ourselves entirely to Him, studying only His
good pleasure, not our own...O complete submission of a
disinterested soul; most sweet and tender in that the soul’s whole
feeling is divine! To attain to this, is for the soul to be deified;

1 Munawwar, Asrar al-Tawhid, p. 371.

2 Kitab al-Luma', p. 31.

3 Kashf al-Mabjub, p. 252. Cf. E. Underhill’s description of
“the transformation of the individual outlook into the universal
outlook, the complete surrender of man’s personal striving to the
overruling Will of God, and thus the linking up of all the suc-
cessive acts of daily life with the Abiding” (Man and the Super-
natural, p. 246).

4 Risāla, p. 177.

80 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

as a small drop of water appears lost if mixed with wine, taking
its taste and colour; and as, when plunged into a furnace, a bar
of iron seems to lose its nature and assume that of fire; or as
the air filled with the sun’s beams seems rather to become light
than to be illuminated. So it is with the natural life of the Saints;
they seem to melt and pass away into the Will of God.:

Here is the doctrine of sawhid stated quite plainly, but
it is to be noted that it is only unification, not yet
union. The drop of water may appear to be absorbed
into the wine, yet the two are of different natures, the
iron may take on the heat and colour of the fire and
yet the two remain distinct substances, there is still
duality, still “Thou” and “I”. Not yet has the mystic
attained to complete union, when “Thou” and “I”
cease to exist, the union symbolised rather by the
drop of water merged in the ocean, the spark ab-
sorbed in the flame, when the part becomes one with
the whole, not losing its identity, but returning to its
source, the spirit of man made one with the Eternal
Spirit.

This stage involves also that of complete dependence
upon God and trust in Him (/awakku/) which is the
natural consequence of renunciation of this world and
the abnegation of the individual will.

Abū Talib says of the people of sawakkul that they
are the elect of God, whom He has chosen, and
these put their trust in Him, and are contented with
Him, and so they rest from the troubles of this world
and the next. The true dependent is the one who
knows that his Lord's provision for him is better than
his own for himself, and that his Lord can see him

I St Bernard on The Love of God, pp. 44 and 45. Cf. also
Grou, “The soul has reached the highest degree of sanctity
when having become perfectly simple, she sees God only in all
things, and has no interests but His interests” (cited by E.
Underhill, Man and the Supernatural, p. 245).

2 Out al-Qulab, 11, p. 5.

PART TWO, CHAPTER IX 81

(and know his needs) better than he can himself.
Then he ceases to think of what is, or to be concerned
with what shall be, and he takes no thought (for him-
self) for to God belong the results of our affairs, and in
all cases He is worthy of praise and thanks.?

Al-Sarraj gives a definition of the sawakkul of the
chosen of God, which he attributes to al-Shibli, to
the effect that “‘you should be to God as if you were
not and God should be to you as One Who was and
is and shall be to eternity,”’3 and elsewhere he says the
mutawakkil should put his trust in God as the birds
do.4

Abū Nu‘aym relates of Dhū al-Nün that he was
asked concerning sawakkul and he said that it meant
getting rid of earthly masters and the removal of
motives, 7.e. true dependence on God means that we
should no longet let earthly things or earthly influences
weigh with us, nor let our actions be the result of in-
terested motives, and he added that dependence meant
bringing the Self into obedience to God and withdraw-
ing it from the powet of controlling its own destiny.5

The same writer tells of a woman among the devotees
who said, “Verily God has bestowed on those who
long to meet Him a state, which if they lost they would
have lost eternal bliss". They said to her, “What is
that state?" She said, “Complete independence from
their carnal selves" (and consequent dependence upon
God), and those who heard were amazed at her, won-
dering how she had attained to such enlightenment. °

Al-Ghazali holds that sawakkul is a question of faith
in the Unity of God. Since God is the sole cause

1 Cf. Ps. xxxiii. 18, 19: “Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon
them that fear Him, upon them that hope in His mercy; To
deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine".

2 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 58.

3 Kitab al-Luma', p. 52. 4 Op. cit. p. 117.

s *Hilya", Leyden MS. fol. 203 b.

6 Op. cit. fol. 252 a.

SR 6

82 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

of all that exists or can exist, and all His acts are the
result of His perfect goodness and wisdom, and all
things depend on His power, then the servant can in
perfect trust give up his will to the Divine Will and
abandon himself to God, trusting in Him to pro-
vide for all needs.t To him žaivakku/ is practically
identical with the Sufi conception of 4zwbid.? As the
child knows only his mother’s breast, so the one
who trusts in God knows only his Lord’s care and in
His hands is as the dead body in the hands of those
who prepare it for burial.3 So we reach the doctrine
of quietism, very characteristic of the early Süfis, and
vety possibly founded on the teaching of the Christian
Gospel.4

Rabi‘a, who belonged to this early school, was an
ascetic of extreme other-worldliness, as we have already
noted in the account of her life and her relations with
* others. |

‘Attar relates of her that she was asked, “‘ Whence
have you come?" She said, “From that world”. They
"asked her, “Whither are you going?" She replied,
“To that world”. She was asked, ** What are you doing
in this world?" and she answered, "I am sortowing".
“In what way?” they asked, and she said, “I am eating
the bread of this world and doing the work of that
wotld". Then someone said, “One so persuasive in
speech is worthy to keep a rest-house", and she
responded, “I myself am keeping a rest-house, what-
ever is within, I do not allow it to go out and what-
ever is without, I do not allow it to come in. If anyone
comes in Or goes out, he does not concern me, for
I am contemplating my own heart, not mere clay”,5

I I?yā, 1v, p. 211. 2 See above, p. 77 ff.

3 Al-Qushayri, op. cit. p. 102 and p. 99.

4 Cf. St Matt. vi. 24-34.

5 ‘Attar, op. cit. p. 67. Cf. Ramón Lull: ***Say, O Fool, what
is this world?? He answered, *It is the prison-house of those
that love and serve my Beloved’. ‘And who is he that imprisons

PART TWO, CHAPTER IX 83

i.e. she was concetned only with what belonged to
God and was oblivious to all other thoughts and
interests. Others might come and go, but she was
occupied with the things of the spirit and was not to
be distracted by what belonged to the things of sense.

In this connection there is an interesting little anec-
dote related, so far as I know, only by Abū Talib,
since none of Rabi‘a’s biographers include it. He says:

They told us that Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya, may God Almighty have
mercy upon her, once said, “I praised God one night with the
praises of dawn, then I slept and I saw a bright green tree, in-
describable in its size and beauty, and lo, upon it were three kinds
of fruit, unknown to me among the fruits of this world, like
virgins’ breasts, white, red and yellow, and they shone like spheres
and suns in the green spaces of the tree, and I admired them and
said, ‘Whose is this?’ and one said to me, ‘This is yours, for
your praises aforetime’. Then I began to walk round it, and lo,
under it were eighteen fruits on the ground, of the colour of
gold, and I said, ‘If only these fruits were with the fruits on
the tree, it would surely be better”. That personage said to me:
‘They would have been there, but that you, when you offered
your praises, were thinking, **Is the dough leavened or not?" and
this fruit fell off’. This is a warning to those of insight and an
exhortation to those who are pious and worship God.

This feeling that even the most homely and necessary
things in life might be a cause of separation from God
was shewn ina story related of her by ‘Attar and already
quoted.? Abū Ja'far b. Sulayman relates how Sufyān
al-'Thawti once took him by the hand and said, “Come

them?” He answered: ‘Conscience, love, fear, renunciation and
contrition and the companionship of wilful men’. ‘And who
is he that frees them?’ ‘Mercy, pity and justice’. ‘And where
are they then sent?’ ‘To eternal bliss and the joyful company
of true lovers, where they shall laud, bless and glorify the
Beloved everlastingly, to whom be ever given praise, honour
and glory throughout all the world’” (The Lover and the Beloved,
. 106). | l
af I P^ al-Quisb, 1, p. 103. 2 See above, p. 21.
| 6-2

84 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

with us to that teacher, for I can find no refreshment
in any but her”. And when they came in Sufyān lifted
up his hands and said, “O God, I ask Thee for
freedom from this world (earthly things)", and Rābi'a
wept, and he said to her, ““Why do you weep?” and
she said, * You are the cause of my weeping”. He said,
“How. is that?" She said, “Do you not know that
freedom from this world comes only from renouncing
what is in it and how can that be when you are defiled
by it?’’* and she went on to say, “You have abundance
of days, and when a day has passed part of you has
passed away, and it must come to pass, when part has
gone, that the whole will go. You are a teacher, there-
fore learn”.2

Among Rabi'a's sayings it is reported that she said
to some devotees, “Despise the world, for it is the
pleasantest thing for you, when you look down upon
it^.3

Jami tells how Sufyān once asked her, “‘ What is the
best thing for the servant to do, who desires proximity
to his Lord?" She said, "That the servant should
possess nothing in this world or the next, save Him".4

In the same strain she once said, **If a man possessed
the whole world, he would not be wealthy thereby".
They said to her “Why?” She said, “‘Because it
perishes and passes away ".5 |

Here the Süfi view is in accordance with the Fran-
ciscan contempt of the world:

Many sorrows and many woes will that wretched man have,
who setteth his desire and his heart and his hope on earthly
things, for which he abandons and loses the things of heaven,
and at the last will also lose those things of earth. The eagle

I Sibt Ibn al-Jawzī, “Ta’rikh Mir'àt al-Zamān”, fol. 256 b.
2 Munāvī, op. cit. fol. 51 b.

3 M. b. H. Baha al-Din, A/-Kashkal, p. 134.

4 Nafabat al-Uns, p. 716.

5 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 51 a.

PART TWO, CHAPTER IX 85

flieth high; but if she had a weight tied to her wings, she could
no more fly high; so man for the weight of earthly things cannot
fly high, to wit cannot attain to perfection.

Al-Jahiz notes that Rābi'a feared even the possession
of the reputation of a saint, lest it should give her
satisfaction in something other than her Lord's setvice.
He says, “Rābiʻa al-Qaysiyya was asked, ‘Have you
done any work at all that you can shew (4.e. any miracle)
so that you may be accepted thereby (as a saint)?” and
she replied, *If there were anything, I should feat that
it might be a source of profit to me’”’.?

Among the sayings recorded of her is this to the
same effect, ““What appears of my (good) works, I
count as nothing at all",3 and among her counsels
to those who asked her advice was this, “Conceal
your good deeds as you conceal your evil deeds”,+
again with the desire to receive nothing, not even
commendation, at the hands of mankind.

The desire of these early Sūfīs to be free from all
that concerned the phenomenal world, in order to be
free for the world of spiritual things, is illustrated by
a quaint story which finds a place in ‘Attar’s biography
of Rabi‘a. He relates that one day she gave three silver
dirhams to a man to buy a garment (for her) because
she was in need of it, and after he had started out, he
turned back and said, "O lady, what colour shall I
buy?” Rābi'a said, “Since it is a question of colour
(Ze. something which belongs to this world of the
senses) give me the money back”, and she threw it
into the Tigris. That is to say, adds “Attar, that even a
garment should not bea cause of separation (from God).5

1 Littl Flowers of St Francis, p. 276.

2 A/-Bayān, 111, p. 85. Cf. also Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, * Mirāt
al-Zamān”, fol. 257 a.

3 AL Kaibkiil, p. 134. 4 Ibn Khallikān, 1, p. 34, No. 230.

5 ‘Attar, op. cif. p. 68; also Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, op. cit.
fol. 265 b.

86 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

She gave a shrewd rebuke to certain visitors for their
worldliness, according to a story which relates that
some eminent men of Basra came and sat by her pillow
(when she was ill) and reviled the things of this world—
no doubt with a desire to please the saint. But Rabi‘a,
with her usual ability to perceive insincerity, said to
them, “You must be very fond of this world: if you
were not fond of it, you would not say so much about
it. Who breaks the goods must have bought them.
If you wete detached from this world you would not
speak of it, either good or ill—remember that *whoso
loves a thing speaks much of it^":

A story is told of how one day a rich’ merchant,
having come to see Rābi'a, saw that her house was
falling into ruin. He gave her a thousand pieces of
gold, and made her a present of a house in good repair.
R4abi‘a came, ahd was no sooner installed than, seeing
the paintings on this house, she. became absorbed in
contemplating them. At once, returning to the mer-
chant the thousand pieces and the house, she said to
him: “I fear lest my heart should become attached to
this house, and it would be no longer possible to occupy
myself with the works of the other world. My only
desire is to consecrate myself to the service of the Most
High Lord”’.?

It was probably in this connection that, when asked
why she had parted with her house, Rabi‘a answered,
* In order to leave what did not concern me and find
fellowship with One who is Eternal”;3 that is, she
turned her back on the transient that her face might be
towards that which endures for ever. She might have
said, with St Paul, ““We look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the

I ‘Attar, op. cit. p. 72.

2 “Attar, op. cit. Uyghur version, Part 11, p. 66.

3 Abū Nu'aym, “ Hilya", Leyden MS. fol. 241 a. Al-Ghazāli,
Ihyà, 1v, p. 291.

PART TWO, CHAPTER IX 87

things which are seen are temporal, but the things
which are not seen are eternal".:

Many of the stories already quoted in the biographical
section shew plainly that Rabi‘a lived the life of the
true ascetic, embracing Poverty for the love of God,
choosing to live in a hut, provided only with the
barest necessities of life, though she had rich and
solicitous friends who would have surrounded her with
comfort. She attained as much by her practice as her
precepts to the Süfi ideal of the sincere gāŽid in turn-
ing aside from all things, lawful or unlawful, that
might distract her from the service due to God alone:
she indeed counted all things loss for the sake of her
Lord. In verses already quoted in full, she says, “I
have fled from the world and all that is within it. My
hope is for union with Thyself: for that is the Goal
of my desire”.3

As one of the “‘elect of the elect" among the muta-
wakkilin, she merges her will in the Divine Will and
leaves all her needs in the hands of God. For thirty
yeats, she says of herself, she had sought nothing save
from Him and He had never failed her.

From this stage, in which she casts behind all that
is of this world, she passes on to the last stage of the
mystic Way, that of Love with all that it includes,
which leads on to the final state which is the Goal
of the mystic's quest, contemplation of the Vision
of God, unveiled in all His Beauty, and the abiding
Union of the lover with the Beloved.

I 2 Cor. iv. 18.

2 See Part 1, Chapter 111 above.
3 Al-Hurayfish, op. cit. p. 214.

CHAPTER X
Love. Gnosis. The vision. Union.

T as we have already mentioned, some Sufi
writers give a place to the stages of Sincerity,
Contemplation, Self-examination and Meditation on
death, yet Love as conceived by the Süfis was so all-
embracing that we shall here consider it as the last and
highest stage to be attained by the adept, including
Satisfaction (rid@’), Longing (shawq) and Fellowship
(uns); rida’ representing, on one side, the acquies-
cence of the lover in the will of the Beloved, shawg
the longing of the lover to meet with the Beloved,
and ns the intimate relation which exists between the
lover and the Beloved. From Love the adept passes
directly to the true knowledge of the Divine mysteries
(ma ‘rifa), is enabled to see God unveiled in His Beauty
and becomes one with Him in mystic union—a union
obtained for brief moments only in this life, but for
ever in the life to come. :
Satisfaction (ridāž”) has two sides to it; it is both
subjective and objective; there is human satisfaction
with God and Divine satisfaction with man. Al-
Hujwīrī makes the distinction plain when he says:

Divine satisfaction really consists in God’s willing that man
should be recompensed and in His bestowing grace upon him.
Human satisfaction really consists in Man’s performing the com-

1 Cf. the saying attributed to Abū Sa‘id: “That man is a Süfi
who is satisfied with whatever God does so that God will be
satisfied with whatever he does" (Asrdar al-Tawhid, p. 381). CE.
also St John of the Cross: ** This is therefore a test to discern the
true lover of God. Is he satisfied with anything less than God?
Do I say satisfied? Yea, if a man possess all things, he cannot
be satisfied: the greater his possessions, the less will be his satis-
faction, for the satisfaction of the heart is not found in possessions
but in detachment from all things and in poverty. This being

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 89

mand of God and submitting to His decree. Accordingly the
satisfaction of God precedes that of Man...because Man’s
satisfaction is connected with God’s satisfaction and subsists
thereby. In short, human satisfaction is equanimity towards
Fate, whether it withholds or bestows, and spiritual steadfast-
ness in regarding events, whether they be the manifestation
of Divine Beauty or of Divine Majesty, so that it is all one to a
man whether he is consumed in the fire of wrath or illuminated
by the light of mercy, because both wrath and mercy are evi-
dences of God and whatever proceeds from God is good in His
eyes.!

Al-Qushayri quotes the sayings of a Sūfī: “If my
heart is satisfied with God Most High (é.e. acquiesces
in His Will) I know that He is satisfied with me".?
Ruwaym gives a striking illustration of his conception
of rida. "Satisfaction means that if God were to
put Hell on His right side, (the servant) should not
ask Him to change it to His left", and Ibn Khafīf
defines Satisfaction as “the acquiescence of the heart
in God's decisions and the agreement of the heart with
what He wills and chooses", and again “Satisfaction is
the acceptance of God's decisions with joy”.3 Al-
Qushayri gives as another example of the Satisfaction
of the true Süfi that *Atba al-Ghulàm spent the night
until dawn saying, “If Thou dost chastise me I will
love Thee (for it) and if Thou dost have compassion
on me, I will love Thee (for it)".* Al-Hujwiri speaks
of four classes of those who are satisfied: (1) those who
ate satisfied with God's gift, which is gnosis; (2) those
who are satisfied with happiness, which is this world;
(3) those who are satisfied with affliction, which con-
sists of diverse probations; and (4) those who are

so, the perfection of love in which we possess God, by a grace
most intimate and special, lives in the soul in this life when
it has reached it, with a certain satisfaction” (Spiritual Canticle,

p. 26).
1 Kashf al-Mabjab, p. 177. 2 Risája, p. 116.
3 Al-Qushayti, op. cit. p. 117. 4 Op. cit. p. 118.

90 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

satisfied with being chosen, which is love. Of the last
two classes he says:

He who is satisfied with the affliction that God sends is satisfied
because in the affliction he sees the Author thereof and can
endure.its pain by contemplating Him Who sent it; nay, he does
not count it painful, such is his joy in contemplating his Beloved.
Finally, those who are satisfied with being chosen by God are
His lovers, whose existence is an illusion alike in His anger, and
in His satisfaction: whose hearts dwell in the presence of Purity
and in the garden of Intimacy; who have no thought of created
things and have escaped from the bonds of “stations” and
* states? and have devoted themselves to the love of God. Their
satisfaction involves no loss, for satisfaction with God is a
manifest kingdom.!

So he finally identifies Satisfaction in its highest form,
with Love.

Another element in zababba is shawg, the passionate
yearning of the soul for God. A dervish once asked
Shaykh Abū Sa ‘id b. Abi al-Khayr, "What is this
tumult within our breasts?” The Shaykh replied:

This is the fire of supplication, and God Almighty has created
two fires, one unto life and one unto death. The living fire is
the fire of supplication which He has placed in the breasts of
His servants in this world, so that their carnal Self may be con-
sumed; that fire burns brightly and when the Self is consumed
away, suddenly that fire of supplication becomes the fire of longing
and that fire of longing will never die either in this world or the
next, and this is that flame of which the apostle of God spoke
when he said, “When God willed good to His servant He
kindled a light in his heart”. They asked the Apostle of God
what was the sign of that light, and he said, “Separation from
the abode of vanity and turning towards the abode of eternity,
and preparing for death, before the descent of death”.

The questioner asked the Shaykh, “When God
grants that fearful vision, does that fire of longing be-
come test?" The Shaykh said:

I Kashf al-Mabjub, pp. 178, 179.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 91

That vision increases thirst, it does not produce satiety...
everyone who sees it, sees it according to the measure of his
faith. That was the light of faith which came into the hearts
through sight, so that that light of faith sees (God’s) majesty
and beauty according to (the capacity of) the eye of faith.
Al-Sarraj also speaks of shawq as "the fire of God
Most High which He has kindled in the hearts of His
saints, so that it may burn up in their hearts all vain
desires and wishes and hindrances and needs”.2

Again he says that the highest degree of shawq is
attained by the one who beholds his Lord near at
hand, and sees that He is present and not absent, and
so his heart rejoices in His worship and says to itself
that longing is only for the absent, but He is present,
not absent, and so he, in his desire is without con-
sciousness of shawq and he is the true mushtaq without
shawq.?

Bound up with mababba too, is uns; where the
worshipper feels awe, the lover feels the sense of
intimacy. Al-Sarrāj describes it as the heart's joy in
the Beloved and he defines the highest degree of uns,
like that of shawg, as becoming unconscious of uns,
in the sense of reverence (in the Presence of God) and
proximity to Him, and of His greatness, all combined
with intimacy with Him.3 Al-Hujwiri shews the differ-
ence between the relation of the ordinary worshipper,
who fears God, and the mystic, who loves Him. He says:

When God manifests His glory to a man’s heart, so that His
Majesty predominates, he feels awe, but when God’s beauty
predominates he feels intimacy, those who feel awe are distressed,
while those who feel intimacy are rejoiced....A servant of God
seeing His favour, cannot fail to love Him, and when he has
loved, he will become intimate, because awe of one’s beloved
is estrangement, whereas intimacy is oneness.... The power of
awe is exerted upon the lower souls and its desires, and tends

1 Asrar al-Tawhid, pp. 388, 389. 2 Kitab al-Luma‘, p. 64.

3 Op. cit. p. 66. !

92 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

to annihilate human nature, while the power of uns is exerted
upon the heart and tends to foster gnosis in the heart. Therefore
God annihilates the souls of those who love Him by revealing
His Majesty and endows their hearts with everlasting life by
revealing His beauty.' |

Abū Talib, comparing shawq and uns, says that
shawg is a longing to see what is invisible and
hidden and this state causes sorrow, but uns is a
state of proximity through the unveiling of God's
presence, and in this station is joy. He quotes al-
Junayd as saying with regard to ams that the sign
of perfect love is the abiding remembrance of God in
the heart, in joy and delight and great longing for Him
and intimacy with Him.? Love includes all these
elements and transcends them. To the Sufi mystic the
servant was the lover and God the Beloved. Since the
origin of every action must be referred to God, He is
also the Giver of Love, and Abū Tālib writes that God's
love to His saints precedes their love to Him,3 but the
Sūfīs have little to say of the love of God to man, in
comparison with what they say of man's love to God.
The latter was incumbent upon the servant, the former
but an act of grace to which the servant had no claim.
The Süfis would not dream of attributing to God
feelings akin to their own, He was to them the unique
and incomparable object of adoration. Such a con-
ception as that of the Christian mystic who thought of
God's love as pursuing the soul,* a conception which
had reached its highest development in the Christian
doctrine of Redemption, was impossible to the Sūfīs;
hence they describe God as. the Beloved and throw all
the emphasis on the human side. Al-Hujwiri says that

God's love to Man is in His goodwill towards him and His
having mercy on him. Man's love to God is a quality which

1 Kashf al-Mabjab, pp. 376, 577. 2 Oūt ai-Oulūb, 1t, p. 64.

3 Op. cit. 11, p. 52. Cf. also Asrar al-Tawhid, p. 377.

4 Francis Thompson in The Hound of Heaven.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 93

manifests itself in the heart of the believer...so that he seeks
to satisfy his Beloved and becomes impatient and restless in his
desire for vision of Him and cannot rest with anyone except
Him and grows familiar with the remembrance of Him and
abjures the remembrance of everything besides.

He goes on to say that

Believers who love God are of two kinds: (1) those who regard
.the favourand beneficence of God towards them, and are led by that
regard to love the Benefactor ; (2) those who are so enraptured
by love that they reckon all favours as a veil (between them-
selves and God) and by regarding the Bence are led to His
favours."

To this latter class al-Sarraj refers when he says that
the love of the saints and the gnostics arises from their
vision and their knowledge of the eternal and causeless
love of God, therefore they also love Him without any
cause.”

. Al-Qushayri defines Love as the enduring inclina-
tion of the love-intoxicated heart, the preference of the
Beloved over all companions, harmony with the Be-
loved, whether present or absent, the effacement of the
lover's qualities and the establishment of the Beloved's
essence, and finally the agreement of the heart with the
Will of the Lord.3

Among the sayings of the Süfis which he quotes is
that of al-Junayd defining Love as “the entering in of
the qualities of the Beloved in place of the qualities
of the lover"—]being changed into the same Image till

1 Kashf al-Mabjab, pp. 307, 308.

2 Kitab al-Luma', p. 59.

3 Risāla, p. 188. Cf. also Ramón Lull: ***What meanest thou
by love?’ said the Beloved, and the lover answered, *It is to
bear on one's heart the sacred marks and the sweet words of
the Beloved... .It is to long for Him with desire and with tears.
It is boldness. It is fervour. It is fear. It is the desire for the
Beloved above all things. It is that which causes the lover to
grow faint when he hears the Beloved’s praises. It is that in
which I die daily and in which is all my will?” (Book of the
Lover and the Beloved, p. 59).

94 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

the two become one; that of Aba ‘Abd Allah al-
Qurashi to the effect that Love “means to give all that
thou hast to (Him) whom thou lovest, so that nothing
remains to thee of thine own”; and those of Shibli
when he says of Love that “‘it is called love, because
it obliterates from the heart all save the Beloved", and
again, "Love is a fire in the heart consuming all save
the Will of the Beloved".: Of the effect of this Love
upon the mystic it is related that Yahya b. Mu‘adh
wrote to Abū Yazīd: “What do you say of one who
drinks a single drop of the ocean of Love? and becomes
intoxicated?" Bāyazīd wrote in reply, “What do you
say of one who, if all the oceans in the world were
filled with the wine of Love, would drink them all and
still cry for more to slake his thirst?" and Hujwiti ex-
plains that this intoxication with the cup of Love arises
from regarding the Benefactor.3

Abū Talib also, speaking of the effect of Love T
that to which it brings the lover, says that Love leads
to knowledge of the Divine mysteries and those who
love abide in God and look to Him only and He is
nearer to them than all else, and to them is given the
vision of Him unveiled, and they see Him with the
eye of certainty.4

Thus, through the stage of Love, the mystic attains
to his goal, and having cast aside all the veils, which
hindered him from seeing God, he at last beholds the
Divine Beauty unveiled. So Plato also describes the
reward of Love:

He who has been instructed thus far in the things of Love, and
who has learned to see the beautiful in due order and succession,
when he comes toward the end will suddenly perceive a nature
of wondrous beauty—not growing and decaying, or waxing and
waning...but Beauty only, absolute, separate, simple and ever-
lasting. . .. He who under the influence of true love rising upward

I Risāla, pp. 189, 190. 2 See p. 100.
3 Kashf al-Mabjub, p. 187. 4 Cūt al-Oulūb, 11, p. 53.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 95

begins to see that Beauty, is not far from the end... . This. . .is
that life above all others which a man should live, in the con-
templation of Beauty absolute.... What if man had eyes to see
the true beauty—the Divine Beauty, pure and clear and un-
alloyed, not clogged with the pollutions of mortality and all
the colours and vanities of human life—thither looking, and
holding converse with the true Beauty—Divine and Simple?
Remember how in that communion only, beholding Beauty
with the eye of the mind, he will be enabled to bring forth, not.
images of beauty, but realities and...to become the friend of
God and be immortal, if mortal man may.:

So he makes Diotima of Mantineia set forth the doc-
trine of Love leading to the Beatific Vision, and fore-
shadow the ideals of the mystics of all creeds who were
to come after her, and who were to seek the way
to God through Love.

On the subject of the Vision of God which is the
reward of the mystic who, having passed through the
stages of the Path, reaches the knowledge which comes
to him directly from God, and from knowledge passes
to sight and from sight to Union, al-Junayd says that

God gives to the adept the sharp desire to behold His Essence,
then knowledge becomes vision, and vision revelation, and
revelation contemplation, and contemplation existence (with and
in God). Words are hushed to silence, life becomes death,
explanations (necessary for finite minds in this world) come to
an end, signs (a concession to those who are weak in faith) are
effaced, disputes are cleared up. Perishability ( fanā”) is ended and
subsistence (baqã’) is made perfect. Weariness and care cease,
the elements perish and there remains what will not cease, as
time that is time-less ceases not.’

1 Symposium, ed. Jowett, 1892, pp. 581 ff.

2 Asrar al-Tawbid, p. 378. Cf. John Cordelier: “Like some
homing star which has burned its way swifter and ever swifter
to the sphere that called it, purged and made shining by the
ardour of its flight, it rushes through the shrouding darkness

to its Origin. All its desire now is to be lost in Him...the
choice, the effort, the self-stripping, the purging and transmuting

96 = RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

So also writes the Christian mystic, John of Ruys-
broeck, of the attainment of Union through Love:

The spirit perceives that through love it has plunged itself
into the depth...and through this intimate feeling of union,
it feels itself to be melting into the Unity and, through dying to
all things, into the life of God. And there it feels itself to be
one life with God.:

The Godseeing man who has forsaken self and all things and
does not feel himself drawn away because he no longer possesses
anything as his own, but stands empty of all, he can always
enter, naked and unencumbered with images, into the inmost
part of his spirit. There he feels himself to be an eternal life
of love, which craves above all else to be one with God.

. ' In the transformation within the Unity, all spirits fail in their
own activity, and feel nothing else but a burning up of themselves
in the simple Unity of God.

Where the soul is burnt up. . .it feels nothing but unity. . .for
the flame of the Love of God consumes all that it can enfold
in itself....And in this Love we shall burn and be burnt up
without end, throughout eternity—for herein lies the blessedness
of all spirits.?

The Süfis, and chief among them Rabi'a, felt within
themselves, or at least sought diligently that they might
attain to “‘that eternal life of love, which craves
above all else, to be one with God". Though Rābi'a
was not the first among the Süfis to realise that the
way to God must be sought through love, she was
perhaps the fitst to lay stress upon the doctrine and
to combine with it the doctrine of Kas/f, the un-
veiling at the end of the Way, of the Beloved to His

fires...even the darkness, desolation and abandonment, the
bitterness of the spiritual death...were they not needed, the
soul had almost demanded them, that thus it might test for Him
its courage and its truth” (The Spiral Way, p. 113).

1 The Book of the Sparkling Stone, p. 184.

2 Op. cit. pp. 185, 186.

3 Notitself unknown toearlier Sifis. Cf.al-Sulami,*' Tabagāt ”,
fols. 6 b and 7 a on Dhū al-Nūn's view.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 97

lovers. ‘Attar speaks of her as "that woman on fire
with love and ardent desire...consumed with her
passion (for God)”, and a writer of the present day
says of her, “With Rabi‘a...Love, the unquenchable
flame smouldering i in the ashes of ceremonial religion
and kindling the torch of Mysticism through the
darkest ages began its conquest of Mohammedan
hearts ”’.?

She was one of the first to teach the doctrine of
isinterested love to God, a new conception to many ,
of her fellow-Sifis, who for the most part served God |
in hope of eternal reward or in fear of eternal punish-
ment. With regard to the element of rida’ in the
stage of Love Abū Talib relates that Sufyān al-Thawri
said one day in Rābi'a's presence, "O God, mayst
Thou be satisfied with us”, and she said, ** Are you
not ashamed before God to ask Him to be satisfied,
when you are not satisfied with Him?” (że. not ac-
quiescent in His Will for you) and Sufyān said, “I ask

forgiveness from God".

Ja‘far then said to her, “When is the servant satisfied
with God Most High?" and she said, “When his
pleasure in misfortune is equal to his pleasure in pros-
petity”.3

Some people were speaking in Rābi'a's presence of a devotee,
who was known to be holy and in the favour of God, and who
lived on what he collected from the refuse-heap of one of our
kings, and a man said in her hearing, “What harm would there
be in this, if he is in favour with God, that he should ask of Him
to provide him with food by some other means?” and Rābi'a
said to him, * Be silent, O worthless one; have you not realised
that the saints of God are satisfied with Him, that they accept
His Will even if He takes from them their means of livelihood, `
so long as it is He Who chooses this for them?”

1 ladbkirat al-Awliya, I, p. 59.

2 R. A. Nicholson, Selected Poems, Introd. p. xxvii.

3 Out al-Oulūb, 1t, p. 40. 4 Abū Talib, op. cit. p. 40.

SR y

[i

98 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Of shawq Rābi'a said, “The groaning and the
yearning of the lover of God will not be satisfied until
it is satisfied in the Beloved".: In verses quoted by
Al-Hujwiti, for which no author is assigned,” but attri-
buted to Rabi‘a by Suhrawardi, she says of the one
who claims to be a lover of God but does not accept
His Will unquestioningly, “You rebel against God,
yet appear to love Him. I swear by my faith, that this
is most strange. If your love were sincere, you would
have obeyed Him, since the lover obeys that one whom
he loves."3 She said further in regard to was, "Evety-
one who obeys (4.e. the true lover) seeks intimacy",
and then recited these lines:

I have made Thee the Companion of my heart,

But my body is available for those who desire its company,
And my body is friendly towards its guests,

But the Beloved of my heart is the guest of my soul.

There is an incident recorded by the Persian writer
Aflaki which shews how Rabi‘a sought to make her
contemporaries understand how the true Sufi must love
God for Himself alone.

One day a number of saints saw that Rabi‘a had
taken fire in one hand and water in the other and was
running with speed. They said to her, "O lady of the
next world, where are you going and what is the
meaning of this?” She said:

I am going to light fire in Paradise and to pour water on to Hell
so that both veils (4.e. hindrances to the true vision of God)

1 Suhrawardi, “‘Awarif al- Ma'arif ” , Ibya, 1v, p. 345, margin.
Cf. also “Kashf al-Astār”: “My cup and my wine and the
Beloved are three, And I, filled with the yearning of Love, am
the fourth" (Rābi a), fol. 12.

2 Kashf ai-Mabjūb, p. 58.

3 Op. cit. Ibya, 1v, p. 344, margin. Also *Hayāt ab. Uu
Out al-Oulūb, uī, p. 169, margin. Kalabadhi, “ Ma'ani al-Akhbār”
fol. 207 b.

4 Op. cit. Ihyā, 1v, p. 358, margin. Ibn Khallikan, Wafayār,
vol. 1, No. 230.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 99

may completely disappear from the pilgrims and their purpose
may be sure, and the servants of God may see Him, without
any object of hope or motive of fear( What if the hope of Paradise
and the fear of Hell did not exist? Not one would worship his
Lord or obey Him. `

Al-Ghazali, in dealing with the love of the servant
for his Lord, relates that Rabi‘a al-“Adawiyya said one
day when in the company of the Süfis, “Who shall
lead us to our Beloved?” and her servant (probably
that ‘Abda bint Shuwāl, who had learnt much from
her mistress)? answered, “Our Beloved is with us, but
this world cuts us off from Him”.3 Then someone
asked Rābi'a, “What is your love to the Apostle of
God like?" and she replied, “‘ Verily I love him greatly,
but love of the Creator has turned me aside from love
of His creatures’’.4

‘Attar also mentions among her sayings on this great
subject of all-absorbing love to God, that one day
Rabi‘a was asked, “Do you love the Lord of Glory?”
Perhaps her questioner thought it was impossible or
presumptuous for her to love One so far above her.
But she said, “I do". Then she was asked, “Do you
hold Satan as an enemy?” She replied, “No”, and the
other, astonished, asked, “How is that?" Rabia said,
* My love for God leaves no room for hating Satan",
and she went on to say, “I saw the Prophet in a dream,
and he said to me, ‘O Rābi'a, dost thou love me?”
I said, "O Prophet of God who is there who does not
love thee? But my love to God has so possessed me
that no place remains for loving or hating any save
Him.’ 22

Then someone said to her, * What is Love?” a
question no less searching than Pilates “What is

1 Aflaki, * Manāgib al-‘Arifin”, fol. 114 a.
2 See above, p. 19.
3 Cf. St James iv. 4: “The friendship of the world is enmity
with God". 4 Ibyá, 1v, p. 308.
7-2

100 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Truth?” She said, Love has come from Eternity and
passes into Eternity and none has been found in seventy
thousand worlds who drinks one drop of it until at
last he is absorbed in God, and from that comes the
saying “He loves them (His saints) and they love
Him’” (Ourān, v, 59).

“Attar gives another anecdote shewing how she
tried to emphasise her teaching of disinterested love
to God, in which he relates how a number of elders
came to Rabi‘a, and she asked one of them, “Why
do you worship God?" He said, “There are seven
degrees in Hell, which are a source of dread to me, and
everyone must pass by them, willy-nilly, in fear and
terror”. |

Another said, “The different spheres of Paradise are
places of rare delight, and much rest is promised".

Then Rabi‘a rejoined, “He is a bad servant who
worships God from fear and terror, or from the desire -
of rewatd—but there are many of these".? They asked
her, “Why do you worship God, have you no desire
for Paradise?” and she replied, “The Neighbour first,

and then the House. Is it not enough for me that Iam
o given leave to worship Him? Even if Heaven and
J Hell were not, does it not behove us to obey Him?
He is worthy of worship without any intermediary
(motive).”3

Al-Qushayri, in the chapter on Love in his Résd/a,
mentions Rabi‘a in connection with what is really the

I ‘Attar, op. cit. p. 67.

2 So also St Basil (0b. A.D. 389): ““We obey God...from
fear of punishment and in that case we take on the resemblance
of Slaves. Or we keep the precepts, because of the utility that
we desire from the recompense, thus resembling Mercenaries.
Or finally, from love of Him Who has given us the law, we obey
with joy at having been judged worthy of serving so great and
good a God and thus we imitate the affection of children towards
their parents” (Von Hügel, op. cit. p. 165).

3 ‘Attar, op. cit. p. 69.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X IOI

right conception by the servant of God’s love to him.
He says:

“It is related that Rabi‘a prayed once, ‘O my God,
wilt thou burn in Hell a heart which loves Thee?’ and
an unseen voice answered her, ‘We shall not do thus.
Do not think of Us an evil thought!’”’! which may be
considered as a rebuke to Rabi'a for lack of faith or
for having too low a conception of God’s love for His
saints, but her view is in accordance with the view of
the earlier Sūfīs, that it was incumbent on the servant
to love his Lord, but not incumbent on Him to return
that love.? It is told how someone blamed worldliness
in her presence, and Rabi‘a said, ** The Prophet of God
said, ‘If anyone loves anything more than the re-
membrance of God, then your remembrance of that
thing leads your heart astray, since you are a vessel
for something else that you are remembering besides
Him’ al:

Another story shewing how R4bi‘a felt that love to
God must be all absorbing and exclude all else but
Him is related by Abū Sa‘id b. Abi al-Khayr, who
says that he heard it from Abū ‘Ali the Jurist. Rābi'a
was asked by what means she had attained to such
pre-eminence in the spiritual life and she replied, ** By
constantly saying this, ‘I take refuge in Thee, from
everything which has distracted me from Thee, and
from every hindrance which has hindered me from
Thee'".4

Abū ‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Sulami in his “Tabaqat”’,
dealing with devout women,5 says that a group of them
were in his cell seeking a blessing, and they asked for
a benediction to be pronounced for them and Rābi'a

I Ri:sáje, p. 192. Cf. above, p. 29.

2 See Abū Tālib's commentary on Rābi'a's verses, p. 142.
3 Munàwi, * Al-Kawākib al-Durriya", fol. 51 a.

4 Asrar al-Tawhid, p. 345.

5 Now, unfortunately, unavailable.

102 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

gave them what they desired in quoting the words,
* God has separated from you every cause of separation
which has separated you from Him".: Sufyān al-
Thawti asked her once what was the basis of her faith,
and her answer revealed the secret of her whole life
and the essence of all her teaching, when she said,
“I have not served God from fear of Hell, for I should
be like a wretched hireling, if I did it from fear; nor
from love of Paradise, for I should be a bad setvant
if I served for the sake of what was given, but I have
served Him only for the love of Him and desire for
Him”.2

It was on this occasion that she is said to have recited
her famous verses on the two types of love, the type
which seeks its own ends, and that love which seeks
only the Beloved and His glory.3 Abū Tālib says that
these verses were attributed to Rabi‘a by the people of
Basra, and by others to either Ja‘far b. Sulayman al-
Duba'ī or Sufyān al-Thawrī or Hammad b. Zayd or
* Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd, but Abū Talib himself gives
them as Rabifa's own. They run thus:

I have loved Thee with two loves, a selfish love and a love that
is worthy (of Thee),

As for the love which is selfish, I occupy myself therein with
remembrance of Thee to the exclusion of all others,

As for that which is worthy of Thée, therein Thou raisest the
veil that I may see Thee.

1 Asrār al-Tawhid, p. 410.

2 Abū Talib, Ost al-Qulab, 11, p. 57. Cf. also Ghànim al-
Maqdisi, “Kashf al-Asrār”, fol. 12. Cf. also St Francis Xavier's
Hymn of Love:

“O Deus, ego amo Te
Nec amo Te ut salves me,
Aut quia non amantes Te
Aeterno punis igne”.

3 Cf., for the Christian doctrine of Pure Love, Von Hügel,
Mystical Element of Religion, 11, pp. 152 ff.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 103

Yet is there no praise to me in this or that,
But the praise is to Thee, whether in that or this.:

Abū Talib comments on these verses in detail and
says that in regard to her saying "The Selfish love”
and her saying “‘the love of which Thou art worthy”
and her distinction between the two loves, it is neces-
sary to make this distinction and he will explain her
meaning to those who do not understand these sayings
or the nature of the two loves. In the selfish love, she
has seen God and loved Him through contemplation,
which is the essence of certainty, not through mere
report and hearsay, but she has been given assurance
through God’s grace and kindness. Her love has come
by way of personal intercourse, and she has drawn near
to God and fled to Him (away from this world) and
occupied herself with Him, to the exclusion of all but
Him. Before this she had earthly desires, but when she
saw her Lord, she cast these away and He became all-
in-all to her heart and the sole object of her love.
God had freed her from all (objects of desire) save
Himself, and this although she was not worthy of that
love and was not fit to look upon Him at the last,
unveiled and manifest in the place of satisfaction. Her
love for God need not have been reciprocated by Him,
though it must needs be given by her to Him.? He
had shewn favour to her and He was worthy to bestow
favour, and He had shewn her His Face in His Presence
at the last (7.e. when the Vision was revealed to her),

1 Hurayfish adds another fragment to these verses:
“O beloved of hearts, I have none like unto Thee
Therefore have pity this day on the sinner who has come
to Thee,
O my Hope and my Rest and my Delight,
The heart can love none other but Thee".
Rand Al-F@’iq, p. 213.
For different readings, cf. al-Sarraj, Masāri', p. 180, and
Kalabadhi, “Kitab al-Ta‘arruf”, fol. 3o b. Cf. also al-Antaki,
Tazyin al- Aswāg, p. 55. 2 See above, p. 92.

104 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

as He had shewn it to her at this time in her presence
first. To God was due the praise for the grace He had
shewn in this world (2.e. while she was still traversing
the Way) and to Him was the praise for the grace He
had shewn in the next world (4.e. when the Goal was
attained and she saw Him unveiled and face to face),
and there was no praise due to her in this here, or in
that yonder, because it was God who had brought her
to both stages. So Abū Talib explains Rabi‘a’s words,
believing that she had reached the highest truth in
regard to Love.!

Al-Ghazālī also, in dealing with the Süfi doctrine of
Love, gives these verses of hers, and adds in his com-
mentary upon them, what he believed to be the inter-
pretation of them. He says:

She meant by the selfish love, the love of God for His favour
and grace bestowed and for temporary happiness, and by the
love worthy of Him the love of His Beauty which was revealed
to her, and this is the higher of the two loves and the finer of
them. The delight arising from the Beauty of the Lord is that
which the Prophet of God explained when he said, speaking
of his Lord Most High, “ I have prepared for my faithful servants
what eye hath not seen nor ear heard and what has not entered
into the heart of man,” * and some of these delights are given
beforehand in this world to the one who has wholly purified his
heart. Someone said, “If a man reaches this high knowledge,
he will be stoned,? because his words have passed beyond the
limits of their minds (the minds of those who lack enlightenment)
and they will consider his speech mad and unbelieving”. The
purpose of the gnostics is only to attain to this knowledge and
possess it, for it is a consolation unknown to the souls from
which it is hidden, and when it is attained it destroys all anxieties

I Qut al-Oulūb, 11, pp. 57, 58.

2 I Cot. ii. 9: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath pre-
pared for them that love Him".

3 Perhaps a reference to the fate of al-Hallàj, who revealed
his “high knowledge" and suffered martyrdom, A.D. 922.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 105

and sensual desires and the heart becomes filled with its grace.
Even if the gnostic were cast into the fire he would not feel it
because of his absorption and if the favours of Paradise were
spread out before him, he would not turn towards them because
of the perfection of the grace that is in him and his perfect
attainment, which is above all else that can be attained. How
can he who understands only the love of sensible things, believe
in the joy of looking upon the Face of God Most High? For
such a one there is no vision or form, and what meaning is there
for him in the promise of God Most High to His worshippers
and in His statement that He gives the greatest of all graces? But
he who knows God, knows that all joys (save only sensual desires)
are included in this joy.

With the Safi doctrine of the Beatific Vision, and
the joy of the mystic to whom it is granted at the end
of the path, we may compare the conception of Plotinus,
from whom indeed the Süfis have plainly derived
something of their own mystical doctrine.? Plotinus,
dealing with the Vision Beautiful, says:

Such vision is for those only who see with the Soul’s sight—
and at the vision, they will rejoice, and awe will fall upon them
and a trouble deeper than all the rest could ever stir, for now
. they are moving in the realm of Truth.

This is the spirit that Beauty must ever induce, wonderment
and a delicious trouble, longing and love and a trembling that
is all delight. For the unseen all this may be felt as for the seen:
and this the souls feel for it, every soul in some degree, but those
the more deeply that are the more truly apt to this higher love—
just as all take delight in the beauty of the body, but all are not
stung as sharply, and those only that feel the keener wound are
known as Lovers.3

Therefore we must ascend again towards the Good, desired
of every Soul. To attain it is for those that will take the upward

1 Al-Ghazālī, op. cit. 1v, p. 267.

2 Cf. E. G. Browne, Literary History of Persia, p. 420, and
R. A. Nicholson, Selected Poems, p. xxx.

3 Plotinus, 157 Ennead, vi, p. 82.

106 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

path, who will set all their forces towards it...until, passing,
on the upward way, all that is other than God, each in the solitude
of himself, shall behold that solitary dwelling Existence, the
Apart, the Unmingled, the Pure, that from Which all things
depend, for Which all look and live and act and know, the
Source of Life and of Intellectuation and of Being.

And one that shall know this vision—with what passion of
love shall he not be seized, with what pang of desire, what
longing to be molten into one with This, what wondering
delight! If he that has never seen this Being must hunger for It
as for all his welfare, he that has known must love and reverence
It as the very Beauty...he loves with a veritable love, with
sharp desire; all other loves than this he must despise, and disdain
all that once seemed fair.

What are we to think of one that contemplates Absolute
Beauty in Its essential integrity—so perfect Its purity, far above
all things?

Beholding this Being. . . resting, rapt, in the vision and pos-
session of so lofty a loveliness, growing to Its likeness, what
Beauty can the soul yet lack? For This, the Beauty supreme, the
absolute and the primal, fashions Its lovers to Beauty and makes
them also worthy of love.

And for This, the sternest and the uttermost combat is set
before the Souls: all our labour is for This, lest we be left without
part in this noblest vision, which to attain is to be blessed in the
blissful sight, which to fail of is to fail utterly.

Only he has failed, that has failed of only This, for Whose
winning he should renounce kingdoms and command over earth
and ocean and sky, if only, spurning the world of sense beneath
his feet, and straining to This, he may see.?

1 Plotinus, op. cit. pp. 85, 86. Cf. the Franciscan concept of
the Vision: “ That grade of contemplation is a heavenly fire and
a sweet devotion of the Holy Spirit, and a rapture and uplifting
of the mind intoxicated in the contemplation of the unspeakable
savour of the Divine sweetness, and a happy, peaceful and sweet
delight of the soul, that is rapt and uplifted in great marvel at
the glorious things of heaven above; and a burning sense within
of that celestial glory unspeakable” (Little Flowers of St Francis,

pp. 290, 291).

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 107

Al-Ghazali, turning aside from the distinction be-
tween the two loves in Rabi'a's verses, seems to con-
centrate on the Vision which is the object of the higher
love. He and Plotinus are at one in their conception
of “the delight arising from the Beauty of the Lord”;
in the course of his travels and of his studies of dif-
ferent schools of philosophical thought, it is not un-
likely that he had come across the ideas of Plotinus, who
may also have affected the earlier Sūfīs, if not directly
by his writings, at least indirectly by his influence.

A later Süfi, the greatest of all the Arabic mystic
poets, wrote in a like strain on this same theme:

With my Beloved I alone have been,
When secrets tenderer than evening airs
^ Passed, and the Vision blest
Was granted to my prayers,
That crowned me, else obscure, with endless fame,
The while amazed between -
His Beauty and His Majesty
I stood in silent ecstasy
Revealing that which o'er my spirit went and came.
Lo, in His face commingled
Is every charm and grace;
The whole of Beauty singled
Into a perfect face
Beholding Him would cty,
“There is no God but He, and He is the most High":

It is possible that Abü Talib and al-Ghazali read
more into Rabifa's verses than she herself meant to
express. She seems to have been chiefly concerned to
distinguish between the love towards God— which finds
a satisfaction for itself and seeks to gain something for
itself, out of loving Him, even though it loves Him
exclusively, and which is therefore only of the same
type as the human love of the lover for the beloved,
which includes its own satisfaction and enjoyment as

I Ibn al-Farid, Eastern Poetry and Prose, p. 142.

108 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

a result of loving'—and the love which seeks nothing
for itself, but only the glory of the beloved, a height
to which the love of one human being for another
rately attains. The former has always some taint of
selfishness, but in the second type the soul is content
to seek only the glory of God and to carry out the will
of the Beloved, even to its own hurt, and in beholding
the Vision of the Everlasting, is content.

So we read in The Dream of Gerontius of the eager
soul, after death, inspired by pure love and adoration,
escaping from the hold of its companion angel, darting
to the very Throne of God and there, scorched by the
Divine Fire of God’s perfect purity, lying in acquiescent
rapture, seeking only to carry out the will of God.?
Only this type of love is worthy of God.

To sum up Rābi'a's teaching on Love, that is the
love of the servant to his Lord: she teaches, first, that
this love must shut out all others than the Beloved,
that is, the saint must turn his back on the world and
all its attractions, he must cut himself off from the
creatures of God, lest they should distract him from
the Creator,3 he must even rise above the claims of the
senses and allow neither pleasure nor pain to disturb
his contemplation of the Divine. To Rabi‘a God seemed
to be a jealous God, Who will suffer none to share
with Him that Jove which is due to Him alone.4

I Cf. al-Hujwiri, Kashf a/-Mabjūb, p. 308.

2 Cf. also R. Browning, Johannes Agricola:

“I keep the broods of stars aloof
For I intend to get to God.
That’s why I haste to God so fast,
For in God’s Breast, my own abode,
Those shoals of dazzling glory past,
I lay my spirit down at last".
3 Cf. Browning's Saul:
* So shall crown thee the topmost, ineffablest, uttermost crown,
And thy love fill infinitude wholly, nor leave up nor down,
One spot for the creature to stand in!”

4 Cf. incident related on pp. 21, 22.

PART TWO, CHAPTER X 109

Then, secondly, she teaches that this love, directed
to God to the exclusion of all else, must be disinterested,
that it must look neither to hope of reward, nor to
relief from punishment, but seek only to do the Will
of God and to accomplish that which is pleasing to
Him, that He may be glorified. So will the love of the
servant be transmuted into that higher love, which is
truly worthy of the Beloved. Only to the servant who
loves thus, can God reveal Himself in His perfect
Beauty and only by treading this Way of self-renouncing
love, can the loving soul at last be united with its
Beloved and in His Will find its peace.:

By means then of Love and all the stages which have

assed before, the Süfi attains to the mystic gnosis and
*the heart becomes filled with its grace". That know-
ledge comes directly as a gift from the Lord and from
it the gnostic proceeds to contemplation of the un-
veiled Essence of God.? With the enlightened eye of
gnosis, the mystic gazes upon that Vision, and thus
beholding, is rapt up into union with the Divine, and
the final Goal of the Quest, the End of the Path, is
attained, not by annihilation, but by absorption and
transmutation, so that the soul transmuted into the
Divine Image, and become itself part of God, in Him
abides and lives for ever.3 As Suso, the Christian
mystic, describes it in his Book of Truth:

This highest state of union is an indescribable experience, in
which all idea of images and forms and differences has vanished.

1 Cf. E. Hamilton King, The Hospital:
* Measure thy life by loss instead of gain,
Not by the wine drunk, but by the wine poured forth,
For Love's strength standeth in Love's sacrifice,
And he who suffers most, has most to give".

2 Oat al-Qulab, 1, pp. 120, 121.

3 Cf. St John of the Cross: “Thus the soul, when it shall have
driven away from itself all that is contrary to the Divine Will,
becomes transformed in God in love...the soul then becomes
immediately enlightened by and transformed in God because He

IIO RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

All consciousness of self and of all things has gone, and the soul
is plunged into the abyss of the Godhead and the spirit has become
one with God....In this highest state God becomes the inner
essence, the life and activity within, so that whatever the person
does, it does as an instrument... . Like a being which loses itself
in an indescribable intoxication, the spirit ceases to be itself,
divests itself of itself, passes into God, and becomes wholly
one with Him, as a drop of water mingled with a cask of wine.
As the drop of water loses its identity and takes on the taste
and colour of the wine, so it is with those who are in the full
possession of bliss; human desires influence them no longer;
divested of self they are absorbed in the Divine Will, mingled
with the Divine Will and become one with it.

So Rabi‘a in one of her poems says, “‘ My hope is for
union with Thee, for that is the goal of my desire”’,?
and again she says, to Hasan of Basra, “I have ceased
to exist and have passed out of self. I am become one
with Him and am altogether His."3 Again she said in
a time of spiritual distress that the cure for her sickness
was Union with her Friend and in the next life she
would attain it. Rabi‘a, throughout her life, had her
eyes fixed upon that Goal, and when the end of life
came she might have said, with Jalal al-Din Rimi:

Up, O yelovers,andaway! "Tis time to leave the world for aye....
O heart, toward thy heart’s love wend, and O friend, fly toward
the Friend.5

She had looked upon the Vision and experienced
Union for brief moments in this life, and it was not
without reason that her Safi friends, after her death,
believed they heard her say, “I have attained to that
which I beheld”.

communicates His own supernatural being in such a way that
the soul seems to be God Himself and to possess the things of
God...the soul seems to be God rather than itself and indeed
is God by participation” (Ascent of Mount Carmel, pp. 77 ££).

1 Quoted by Rufus Jones, Studies in Mystical Religion, p. 290.

2 See above, p. 13. 3 ‘Attar, op. cif. 1, p. 66.

4 ‘Attar, op. cit. 1, p. 69. 5 Selected Poems, p. 140.

!

Patt Three

CHAPTER XI

The position of woman in Muslim lands in pre-Islamic
and early Islamic times.

I has been commonly held that Islàm has implied
the degradation of women and, therefore, in order
to ascertain to what extent the position of women was
affected, unfavourably, by the adoption of the new
faith, it is necessary to consider what was the position
of women in Arabia and other countries which ac-
cepted Islàm, before the time of the Prophet.

The lawlessness of the times in which the Arab tribes
were constantly at war with each other, naturally in-
volved hardship to the women and the fate of women
captured in war was pitiable in the extreme. The great
poverty of the wandering Arabs and the uncertainty
and scarcity of their food supply, were probably the
origin of the barbarous custom of female infanticide,
which was prevalent in primitive Arabia and was
rendered more cruel by the fact that such infants were
buried alive in order to avoid the necessity of shedding
the blood of kindred.

Yet with all this, there is little doubt that the free -

' Arab woman in pre- i ly Islamic

MEET Ls

her present degraded position is due to Islamic teaching

compléfe subordination to the male sex. / ;

“It seems plain that before the time of Muhammad
there was a family system, matriarchal in type, in which
kinship was reckoned through the female side. Under

112 RABI'A THE MYSTIC

this system, the wife received her husband into her
tent, the children belonged to her and were reckoned
as members of her tribe, while she had the right to
dismiss her husband at her pleasure. This is not to say
that the Arab woman was absolutely free, but control
was vested, not in the husband, but in her own male
relatives, and the head of the family was not the father,
but the mother's brother,? and it 1s reasonable to sup-
pose that such a system would give far more extensive
rights to the woman—since, in case of dispute, she
would be suppotted by her relations against her hus-
band—than the Islamic type of marriage. This state of
things was still in existence to some extent in Muham-
mad's time and such customs did not die out altogether
during the first two centuries after the rise of Islàm.
It would seem even to be possible that Muhammad’s
first marriage was more of this type. His wife was
older than himself, she was wealthy, and it is more than
likely that she proposed marriage to one who, though
of good family, was an orphan, poor, and actually in
her service. That a man of such strong passions, and
with such ideals of Paradise as he sets forth in the earlier
Sūras of the Meccan period,3 should have remained
content with one wife, no longer young, in a state of
society in which polygamy was rife, would have been
unlikely had he not been bound by economic limita-
tions and the dominant personality of his wife. When
her influence was removed, he was not slow to take
advantage of his freedom.

Abū al-Faraj (ob. A.D. 967) in his Kitab al-Aghani,
throws much light on the position and character of the
women of the period immediately preceding the rise
of Islam, and of the earliest period of the Muslim era,

1 Robertson Smith, Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia,

pp. 65, 172. l
2 Cf. Wellhausen, Die Ehe bei den Arabern, pp. 474 fi.
3 Sūra LXXVIII, 31-34; LXVI, 34—35; LII, 20; XXXVII, 40—47.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 113

and some of his stories shew a very chivalrous attitude
on the part of the pagan Arabs towards their women-
kind, and also make clear the independent character
of the women themselves.

There is the story of Durayd b. Simma, living in the
last century before Islam. Durayd b. Simma went out
with the horsemen of the Beni Jusham, and when they
reached the valley of the Beni Kunayna, which is called
al-Akhram, with the intention of raiding the Beni
Kunayna, he saw a man on the side of the valley and a
woman in a camel-litter with him, and when Durayd
beheld him, he said to one of his horsemen, “‘ Call out to
him to leave the woman in the litter and save himself",
for he did not know him. The man went up to the
stranger and delivered his message and refused to leave
him, whereupon the stranger threw down the reins of
the camel and said to the woman:

Go on at thy gentle pace, in safety,

The pace of a laden camel, walking quietly,

For to turn aside from a foeman who sought me would be base,
Test my gallantry and tell (others) of my achievement.

Then he attacked the horseman and flung him down
and took his horse and gave it to the woman. Durayd
sent another horseman to see what his companion was
doing; he found him prostrate and cried out to the
stranger, who appeared to be deaf; then, thinking that
he had not heard him, he approached him. This latter
threw down the reins once more and flung himself on
the horseman and knocked him down, bidding him:

Stand aside from the way of the free-born lady, she is well
protected,

For you meet in front of her Rabi‘a.

In his hand is that which defends from wrong,

Then take it, a swift thrust, for my thrust in war is swift.

When Durayd thought that a long time had passed,
he sent another horseman to see what the other two

SR 8

114 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

were doing; when he reached them, he found them
both stretched on the ground, and the horseman said
to Rabī'a, “Let go the woman in the litter". Then
Rabi‘a said to her, "Make your way to the encamp-
ment", and turning to the other, he said:

What do you seek from a grim-faced lion?
Do you not see horseman upon horseman?
The hand on the spear destroyed them both despairing.

Then he pierced him and slew him, breaking his own
spear.

po Durayd was puzzled and supposed that they
had taken the woman and slain the man, and he went
to meet them and found Rabi‘a without a spear. Mean-
while the tribesmen had come down and found those
who were slain. Durayd said to him:

O rider, one such as you should not be slain, and my horsemen
will be roused on account of their friends; I see no spear with
you and I see you are young. Take this spear (of mine) and I will
return to my friends and will keep them from you.

So Durayd came to his friends and said, “‘ The rider
with the woman has defended her and slain your horse-
men and taken my spear. Do not hope for anything
from him”, and the people went away, and Durayd said:

I have not seen ot heatd of one like him, as protector of his lady,
a cavalier not to be slain.

He slew horsemen, who were not an easy prey; then went his
way as if nought had happened;

Smiling in appearance, unlined was his face; like the sharp sword,
as the hands of the burnisher polished it;

He took his lady and trailed his spear; gazing to the right,
towards their abode..

Dost thou see the horsemen, from fear of his sword, like the
prey under the fierce swoop of the hawk?

Would that (I knew) who were his father and mother, O friend,
one like him cannot be unknown.t

I Kitab al-Aghani, XIV, p. 134.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 11

There is also a sequel to the story, in which the lady
shews no less chivalry than Durayd and Rabia had
done on this occasion.

Not long after, the Beni Malik b. Kunayna, the tribe
of Rabi‘a b. Mukaddam, raided the Beni Jusham, the
tribe of Durayd, and slew and captured and took booty,
and they took prisoner Durayd b. al-Simma and he
concealed his identity. While he was with them, there
came some women walking by him, and one of them
cried out and said, “Ye have slain and brought des-
truction. What have our people brought upon us?
Verily, this is he who gave Rabi'a his spear on the day
of the camel-litter”. Then she cast her robe over him
and said, “O people of Firas, I will protect him from
you, this is our friend of the day of the Valley". Then
they asked him who he was, and he said, “I am
Durayd b. al-Simma. What has happened to Rabī'a
b. Mukaddam?" They said, “The Beni Salim slew
him”. He said, “Who was the woman in the litter who
was with him?” She said, ““Rayta bint Judhal al-Ta‘an,
and I am she and I was his wife". The people kept
Durayd in prison and discussed with one another and
said, “We must not be ungrateful for Durayd's kind-
ness towards us", but someone said, “Certainly he
must not go out of out hands except with the consent
of al-Mukhariq who took him captive".

But the woman that night made an impassioned
appeal in verse for Durayd, and next morning the
people arose and helped one another and set him free,
and Rayta clothed him and gave him food and sent
him to his own people. And never again, up to his
death, did he make raids against the Beni Firas.:

There is yet another story told of Durayd in his old
age, and the poetess al-Khansa,* which shews the in-
dependent spirit of the latter.

I Op. cit., XIV, pp. 134, 155.

2 Her poems have been published as the Diwan of al-Khansa,

| 8-2

116 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Durayd one day passed by when al-Khansa, the
daughter of ‘Amr b. al-Shurayd, had been smearing a
camel with tar and was anxious to finish the task. When
she was bathing herself afterwards, Durayd b. Simma
saw her, though she was unaware of him, and she
struck him with astonishment and he composed an ode
on her. Next morning he went to her father and sought
her in marriage.

Her father said to him, "You are welcome, Abū
Qurra, you are noble, one whose merit is not questioned,
a chief not to be turned from his desire and a man of
energy not to be rebutted—but this woman has qualities
unlike any other, but I will mention you to her and
she will decide".

Then he went in to her and said to her, ““O Khansa,
the cavalier of Hawāzin has come to thee and the chief
of the Beni Jusham, Durayd b. al-Simma, seeking thee
in marriage, and he is such as thou knowest”, and
Durayd was listening to their talk.

She said, ““O my father, dost thou suppose that I
will leave my cousins who are like sharp-pointed spears
and marry an old man of the Beni Jusham, who will
be a corpse to-day or to-morrow?”

Her father went out to him and said, ““O Abt Qurra,
she has refused thee, but maybe she will give (another)
answer later”, but he said, “I heard what you were
saying", and so went away.!

A picture of the ideal woman of pagan Arabia is
drawn by the poet al-Shanfarā of Azd, whose de-
scription shews a much higher and more appreciative
conception of womanhood than is commonly found in
Islam:

Alas! Ummu ‘Amr set firm her face and has flitted and gone: she
bade no farewell to her neighbours what time she went away.

ed. L. Cheikko, Beyrout, 1895. For specimens translated into
English see R. À. Nicholson, Eastern Poetry and Prose, pp. 18, 19.
1 A/-Aghānī, IX, p. 11.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 117

She gave us no warning of what she purposed, but suddenly the
necks of her camels towered above us as forth they sped.

She dwelt in my eyes at even, at night and when morning dawned;
and now has she ended all things, and flitted and passed and
gone.

Alas my heart for Umaimah and all my longing for her! yea, she
was my life’s delight, and now all its joy is fled.

O thou sweet comrade! not one thou to start men’s evil tongues;
not thou, when thy name is mentioned, to draw a word of
reproach.

She dwells in a tent pitched high above all the slandering herd,
when many a tent stands where there gathers around it scorn.

She won me whereas, shamefaced, no maid to let fall her veil,
no wanton to glance behind, she walked forth with steady
tread.

Her eyes seek the ground, as though she looked for a thing lost
there, straight forward she goes: if thou speak to her, few
are her words and low.

At night after little sleep she rises to carry forth her supper to
wives who have need, when such gifts are few enow.

Not one is Umaimah for gossip to bring to her husband shame:

_ when mention is made of women, pure and unstained is she.

The day done, at eve glad comes he home to his eye’s Delight;
he needs not to ask of her—“ Say, where didst thou pass the
day?”

And slender is she where meet and full where it so beseems, and
tall, straight, a fairy shape, if such upon earth there be.
And nightlong as we sat there, methought that the tent was roofed

above us with basil sprays, all fragrant with evening’s dew—

Sweet basil from Halyah dale, its branches abloom and fresh, that
fills all around with balm, no starveling of droughty sands."

To the pagan period, too, belongs the story of
Buhaysa, daughter of Aws b. Haritha.

Al-Hārith b. ‘Awf, a famous Arab chieftain, was
minded to seek a wife of the daughters of Aws b.
Haritha, though warned that he might be rejected.

1 Al-Shanfarā of Azd, Mufaddalīyāt, 11, p. 69, tr. C. J. Lyall.

118 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

When he rode up to the dwelling of Aws, the latter
first bade him welcome, but when he understood that
he came as a suitor, he dismissed him curtly. The wife
of Aws inquired whom her husband had sent away so
summarily, and when she heard that it was the most
renowned of the Arab chiefs who had come as a suitor,
she rebuked him for rejecting such an alliance and bade
him ride after al-Harith and tell him that she had not
been consulted and did not approve the reply. So Aws
rode after the wooer and gave his wife's message and
brought al-Hārith back to partake of his hospitality.

Aws then went to his eldest daughter and asked her
if she would marry this chief of Arab chieftains, but
she refused, saying that she was not fair to look upon,
and that she had many faults, and that he was not
related to her, nor one who belonged to a neighbouring
tribe and that he might divorce her. Her father agreed
with her view and sought his second daughter, who
gave a like reply. So he went to his youngest daughter,
Buhaysa, who said, “‘I am fair of face, skilled in hand-
work, tall of stature, of noble lineage. If he divorces
me, God will requite it to him with evil". So the
marriage was arranged and the bridegroom thought he
had won his bride, but found himself mistaken: she
would not receive him there among her own people.
So they set off, and when they arrived at his abode the
bride demanded that the customary feast of slain camels
and sheep should be provided for the Arab guests.
When all was done as she wished, the bridegroom came
to his bride, but she said, “Is this a time for dallying
with your wife, while the Arabs are at war with each
other? Go, reconcile the tribes and then return to
your own people”’.

So al-Hārith went at her behest and reconciled the
warring tribes and paid the blood-money due, to the
amount of three thousand camels. Then he returned,
amid the plaudits of his people, and claimed the reward

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI II9

he had so hardly earned. His wife received him gladly,
and they were blessed with a goodly family.:

These free Bedouin women not only exercised a
good deal of freedom in the choice of a husband, but
constantly refused to marry a man who already had a
wife, and also freely exercised the right to leave their
husbands as they saw fit. This freedom prevailed during
the earliest period of Islam, before the legislation of the
Islamic theologians had produced the deadening effects
which we find later. Thus we are told of the wife of
“Abbas b. Mirdās, son of al-Khansa, the poetess already
mentioned,? who, on heating of the conversion of her
husband to Islam, struck her tent and returned to her
own people.3 Again, there was Umm Habtar, wife of
Abü Duwad, who took het husband to task for dissi-
pating his wealth by extravagance; he could not gain-
say her, and she parted from him.4

Again we are told of Salma bint ‘Amr, Umm ‘Abd
al-Muttalib, a noble woman, who would not marry a
man except on condition that she retained her own
freedom of action, and if she disliked anything in a
man, she left him. When she was married to Uhayha,
the latter planned a raid against her people. She was
with Uhayha in his fortress and with her was her son
‘Amr, then a baby. She tied the boy up so that he
cried all night and kept Uhayha awake, and then in
the morning she loosed the child and he slept, and
Uhayha, tired out by his wakeful night, slept also.
Salma tied a rope to the top of the fortress, let herself
down and went and warned her people. The raid took
place, but there was little bloodshed, as it was expected,
and her people named her the Mz/ada//Zyya because she
let herself down from the fortress.5

Of ‘A’isha bint Yahya we hear that she refused to

1 Al-Aghdani, IX, pp. 149-51. 2 See above, pp. 115 ff.
3 Op. cit. XIII, pp. 65, 66. 4 Op. cit. xv, p. 96.
5 Op. cit. XIII, p. 124.

120 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

marty her betrothed unless he left the Hijaz, where he
was living at the time, and came to live in Basra with
her, and she also demanded that she should be the only
wife. The fiancé was not willing, and her father said
to him: “She is a woman of excellent intelligence, and
I have not found her equal, but she is also a woman
of strong character and jealous. I have heard that you
have two wives and she will not endure being the
third". As the man would not put away his wives and
live with her in Basra, she refused to marry him.

The poets, too, had reason to complain that their
wives failed to treat them with the respect they ex-
pected. We are told that Miskin al-Darimi was reciting
a gasida and sang:

My fire and my neighbour’s fire are one,
The pot falls to him, before it falls to me.

His wife said to him:
I believe it; certainly your neighbour sits and cooks his pot,
and enjoys himself by the fire, then he takes it down and eats

and you take a share, like a dog, and when he is satisfied, you
eat, no doubt. Truly the pot falls to him before you.?

This does not suggest the submissive wife who was
the ideal of Islam, nor does the account given of a
woman of the early generations of Islam, who dis-
played a like spirit in her relations with her husband.
This was ‘A’isha, daughter of Talhaand Umm Kulthüm
and granddaughter of Abü Bakr. She refused to veil
her face from anyone, and when her husband, Mus'ab,
reproached her with it, she said, ““ Since God Almighty
has sealed me with the stamp of beauty, I desire that
men should behold it and recognise His grace towards
them, and I will not veil it. Verily, there is no defect
in me, that anyone should speak of it”.

Since her husband could not restrain his jealousy, she
btoke off all relations with him for a time, and was not

I AlAghani, XIV, p. 124. 2 Op. cit. XVIII, p. 72.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 121

reconciled with him until he returned victorious from
battle.

Other writers speak of heroic women of these early
days, who even went into battle with their menfolk.?
Such was the gallant Nusayba, daughter of Ka‘b, Umm
Habib, who lived in Muhammad’s time, who fought
on the day of Yamāma and returned wounded, and
also fought on the day of Uhud A.D. 625. One writer
says that in battle she lost a hand and sustained twelve
wounds. She was one of the two women who offered
allegiance on the day of *Aqaba.3 We are told, too, that
on the day of the Yarmūk, A.D. 634, certain Muslim
women fought zealously, among them Hind, daughter
of ‘Utba, Umm Mu‘wiya.4

We hear of another warrior woman of this period
who fought against Islam named Umm Qirfa Fatima,
daughter of Rabi‘a, and widow of Malik, son of
Hudhayfa. When Zayd, the adopted son of Muhammad,
was conducting a caravan on its way from Medina to
Syria he was attacked by the tribe of the Fezāra, acting
under the orders of Umm Qirfa; the caravan was
captured and Zayd was wounded. This woman lived
not far from the Wadi al-Kora, in a fortress well-
stocked with weapons of war, and had such a reputation
that the people of her time used to say proverbially,
“more unassailable than Umm Qirfa".

Zayd swote that he would be revenged on her, and
when he recovered from his wounds he invested her
fortress, surprised her troops, slew and scattered them
and put her to a cruel death.5

Yet another woman of the same martial spirit was
Sajah, daughter of al-Harith b. Suwayd b. "'Ugfān, who

I d cit. X, pp. 54ff. Taghribardi, a/-Nsj4m ai-Zabira, 1,
p. 3 2 Cf. R. Briffault, The Mothers, 1, p. 154.

x "Al-Balādhurī, Futil ai-Buldān, pp. 92, 93. Ibn Hajar, Isāba,

807.

IV, p.
d Al-Baladhuri, op. cit. y 35.
5 Caussin de Perceval, "Histoire des Arabes, 111, pp. 158, 159.

122 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

belonged to Mesopotamia, and was brought up among
the Beni Taghlib. She had been brought up as a
Christian, but after the death of Muhammad she pro-
claimed herself a prophetess.1 She advanced from Meso-
potamia with a large number of tribesmen into the
country of the Beni Tamim, announcing her intention
of attacking Abū Bakr. The Beni Tamim were divided,
some supporting the prophetess, while others fought
against her claims. Finally, she agreed to an exchange
of prisoners, to payment of blood-money for the slain,
and to leaving the country with her troops. She then
led her followers on to Yamāma, where the false
prophet Musaylima was established. He was in diffi-
culties from other directions and thought it wise to
treat with Sajah, who granted him a private interview.
The result was that they agreed to marry, and the
marriage took place immediately. Sajah agreed to
withdraw her army to Mesopotamia and Musaylima
to give her a year’s revenue from Yamāma. She took
half of the sum with her and left three of her generals
behind to receive the rest. She herself continued to
live in Mesopotamia as a nominal Christian, but in the
end accepted Islam. Later she went to live in Basra,
where she died.3 Such a type of woman-warrior had
little chance of survival in any country where Islamic
legislation was strictly enforced.

Again, the picture drawn by Jalal al-Din Rumi in the
Mathnawi of the Bedouin and his wife, shews plainly
that the Bedouin woman had a great reputation for in-
dependence of spirit and freedom of speech. He says:

If he [the husband] be Rustam, son of Zàl or greater than Hamza,

he is yet as a captive under the authority of his old woman.

Even though outwardly you dominate your wife, yet inwardly
you are dominated (by her).4

1 Al-Tabari, Annales,1, p. 1911. 2 Al-Tabari, op. cif. 1, p. 1912.

3 Al-Tabarī, op. cif. 1, pp. 1913 ff. Caussin de Perceval, op. cit.

II, p. 157. 4 Mathnani, 1, ll. 2427, 2431.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 123

Here the Sufi poet is speaking allegorically of the
domination of the carnal soul, but the choice of com-
parison which he makes suggests that the Bedouin
woman of his own time (Rimi died A.D. 1273) could
at least hold her own with her husband.:

Such women as these were not the product of a
community in which women were regarded as slaves,
or one in which they regarded themselves as on any-
thing but an equal footing with their menfolk. Not
only was this the case, but we find that the women of
these early days inspired much of the most beautiful
poetry of this period.

The chivalrous devotion that could be felt by the
Arabs of pre-Islamic times towards their women we
have already illustrated by the story of Rabi‘a and his
wife Rayta, and even in the beginning of Islam itself
we find traces of a tenderness and reverence which the
attitude towards women adopted by the theologians
after the second century or so was destined to destroy.

In the lament of Muwaylik al-Mazmüm, who wrote
probably about the beginning of the third century A.H.,
over his wife, we find a spirit of touching devotion
to both her and her motherless babe, though of the
sex later so despised:

Let us pass along by the grave wherein she lieth;
Umm al-"Alā, calling her, if haply she may hear!
Hast thou then come to dwell, thou who wast very fearful,
In a land where even the brave go on their way in fear?
May God bless and keep thee, O thou lamented one,
For that desolate, lonely place is not meet for thee.
Thou hast left behind for our pity thy little one;
She knows not why she should grieve for thee, and yet she
grieves,
She misses the sweetness of thy loving care for her.
1 See also the account of modern Bedouin women given by

Doughty, quoted here, p. 132.
2 Cf. R. A. Nicholson, jum History of the Arabs, pp. 87-91.

124 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

She keeps us wakeful at night, our soothing is in vain.

When I hear the sound of her wailing, throughout the night,

My thoughts are turned to thee, and mine eyes are filled
with tears.!

This is a cry from the heart of a man who loved
tenderly and deeply, and who mourned a companion,
not a slave.

The imposition of the veil was not known among
Arab women before Islam, and not only the story of
‘A’isha given above,* but other accounts by early
writers shew that the women resented this new restric-
tion which hindered free intercourse with men, to
which they had been accustomed.3

In the matter of religion, too, in the earliest days of
Islam, women exercised a freedom in worship which
in later days was withdrawn from them, though with-
out doubt they had exercised it in the days of Ignorance.
Among the traditions collected by Al-Suyüti we find
an account of the wife of “Umar, who used to be present
at the morning and evening prayers among the men
in the mosque. They said to her, “Why do you go
outside (of the house) when you know that ‘Umar hates
it and is jealous?” She said, ““What hinders him from
forbidding me to do it?” They replied, “He is hindered
by the saying of the Prophet, ‘Do not prevent the
handmaids of God from access to the places where He
is worshipped’”’.

Another woman, ‘Atika bint Zayd b. ‘Amr b.
Nufayl, the wife of ‘Umar b. al-Khitab, used to ask his
permission to go to the mosque and when he remained
silent, she said, “I shall go until you prevent me”.

Umm Safiyya Khawla bint Qays used to say, “In
the time of the Prophet and Abū Bakr, and at the
beginning of the Caliphate of ‘Umar, we used to be

x Abū Tammām, Diwan al-Hamasa, Cairo, 1913, p. 374.

2 See p. 120.
3 Cf. Kalabadhi, “Ma‘ani al-Akhbār”, fol. 172 b.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 125

in the mosque, and the women used to mix with the
men...and ‘Umar said, ‘I send you away, O free-
born women’, and he sent us away, but we used to be
present at the time of prayers".

Another tradition concerning the above-mentioned
wife of ‘Umar relates that when she went out to prayer
she was recognised, and they said to “Umar, “Why did
you not forbid her?" He said, “If I had not heard the
Apostle of God say, ‘Do not hinder the handmaids of
God from going to the places where God is wor-
shipped’, I should have done so".

Again it is related that the women used to pray with
the Apostle between daybreak and sunrise, then they
went out, wrapped up in their garments.:

There is ample evidence, then, that at the beginning
of the Islamic era women had much freedom in the
choice of their husbands, that marriage was in many
cases an equal partnership and that women could, and
did, assert their right to an independent life. Social
intercourse between women and men was not restricted
to close relatives, but women might meet with strangers
in society. They went about freely and had the right,
as we have seen, to go into the mosques at the time of
prayer, to worship in common with the men. Moreover,
those who were versed in jurisprudence expressly re-
cognised the right of a wife on marriage to make a
condition that there should be no second wife, nor
even a concubine, and this right, as we have seen above,
was frequently claimed. The woman, then, at the be-
ginning of the Islamic period, had a dignity and inde-
pendence not found later, and early Arabic literature
reveals a feeling even of chivalrous reverence for
"womanhood.3
1 Al-Suyüti, Kang al-“Ummail, p. 262.

2 Al-Aghdani, XIX, p. 161.
3 Cf. Lyall, Translations of Ancient Arabian Poetry, Introd.

pp. xxxi ff. and Von Kremer, Culturgeschichte des Orients, p. 102.
Cf. also R. Briffault, The Mothers, 1, p. 375.

126 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

From the third century A.H., this position of the
women deteriorated. Even before the time of Mubam-
mad, the marriage of captive women with their captors
and of female slaves with their masters, was in vogue,
and we are told that the Muslim men preferred slaves
as wives, because of the independent spirit of the free
Arab women. A slave-wife was the chattel of her
husband, who could therefore claim absolute authority
over her. This led to the institution of the ba'/
marriage or marriage of domination, clinched by the
payment of a dowry in the case of freeborn women.
The position of the wife approximated to that of a
slave, and her husband claimed authority over her,
an authority which became more and more despotic.
A tradition of the Prophet related that he said that if it
had been permissible for one human being to worship
another, he would have liked to order women to
-worship their husbands. Such a view of marriage,
ascribed to the founder of Islam, could not fail to have
its effect on his followers. The wife, in this type of
marriage, went to her husband, instead of her husband
coming to her, and the children were reckoned as be-
longing exclusively to him. “The effect of Muhammed's
legislation in favour of women was more than out-
weighed by the establishment of marriages of dominion
as the one legitimate type, and by the gradual loosening
of the principle that married women could count on
theirownkintostand by them against their husbands”.2
Temporary marriages were common,3 and men kept
female slaves in addition to their legal wives. Poly-
gamy, authorised by the Qur'an, with all its evil effects,
was general, and the Parizz-system, with its rigid seclu-
sion of all but women of the poorest classes, together
with the wearing of the veil, was sternly enforced.

| I Abū Dawid, Sunan, 1, p. 212.
2 W. Robertson Smith, Kinship and Marriage in Early. Arabia,
p. 104. 3 Ibn Khallikàn, op. cit. tr. de Slane, 11, p. 210.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 127

Muhammad’s legislation concerning women was
undoubtedly meant in the first place for their protec-
tion, e.g. his prohibition of female infanticide was an
act of humanity, and his laws concerning marriage and
seclusion may have tended towards ensuring the safety
of women in lawless times. His laws also secured to
women the right to property and inheritance, and he
made some attempt to improve the loose moral standard
prevailing among the Arabs of his time.

But when all this is admitted, the ultimate effect of
his legislation was the degradation and enslavement of
Muslim womanhood throughout the centuries up to
the present time, simply because enactments which may
have been suited to the times in which he lived, and
others which were promulgated to suit his own tem-
perament and his personal domestic circumstances,
were given the force of Divine Law and enshrined in
a sacred Book, believed to be uncreated, and fetters
which should have been shaken off with the progress of
time and civilisation were riveted on thenecks of Muslim
women, and have done more than anything else to
hamper the progress of countries under Muslim rule.!

That Islam is responsible for the degradation of
Muslim women is proved not only by the facts in
regard to pre-Islamic and early Islamic times men-
tioned above, but also by the fact that in countries
where, owing to natural circumstances or to the per-
sistence of early customs among the people, the Muslim
laws and customs regarding women have not been
strictly enforced, women have enjoyed a much greater
degree of freedom and respect than in more orthodox
Muslim lands. Ibn Battiita speaks with great indigna-
tion of the women of the Maldives, because they did
not cover their heads, not even their ruler, who was a
woman. They wore a robe, which left half the body
uncovered, and clad thus they went into the markets

1 Cf. Palmer, A/-Owr'ān, 1, p. xxv.

128 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

and elsewhere. Ibn Battüta, when appointed judge of
these islands, endeavoured to remedy this state of
things, but failed to get his way with the women. They
were in the habit, a strange thing in his eyes, of going
out to earn a living as servants, being engaged chiefly
in spinning. The women refused to leave their country,
and if a stranger married one of them he had to part
from her if he left the islands. They did not allow any
man to watch them eat.* Another strange thing to the
traveller was the fact that these islanders were ruled by
a woman, Khadija, daughter of the Sultan Jalal al-Din
‘Umar. She was mentioned by the preacher in the
mosque, in the Friday prayers and on other days in
these terms: "O Lord, look upon Thy handmaid,
whom Thou hast made pre-eminent in knowledge of
the two worlds, and hast made her a means of mercy
towards all the Muslims, that is, the Sultana Khadija,
daughter of the Sultan Jalal al-Din, son of the Sultan
Salah al-Din".? The writer was further scandalised by
finding that divorced women continued to live with
the husbands who had divorced them until they re-
martied.3 Obviously, these inhabitants of the Maldives
were bad Muslims, but their failure to observe the
laws of Islam reacted favourably on the position and
liberty of their women.

Ibn Battüta, reporting on his visit to the Western
Sudan, in regard to the district now inhabited by the
Tuaregs, expresses his astonishment at the customs and
mannets of the people. He noted that the women were
very beautiful and of more account than the men. The
men were not inclined to jealousy on account of their
wives. No man was called after his father, but counted
his family to be that of his maternal uncle. What a man
left at his death went to his sister’s sons, not to his own.

1 Ibn Battüta, Tuhfa al-Nuzzar, 1v, pp. 122 ff.

2 Ibn Battüta, op. cit. Iv, pp. 130 ff.
3 Ibn Battūta, op. cit. IV, p. 151.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 129

The writer notes that this custom prevailed elsewhere
only among the Hindus and in Malabar. He goes on
to say that the women of these Berber tribes felt no
bashfulness in the presence of men and did not veil
themselves, though they were zealous in the per-
formance of their prayers. They would not leave the
country with their husbands and even if they were
willing, their families would prevent it. The women
enjoyed friendship and companionship with men who
were strangers and not relatives, and the husbands saw -
no objection to it.:

Ibn Battüta went one day to visit a man named Abü
Muhammad Yandakān, whom he found seated on a
carpet, while near by was his wife seated on a divan,
conversing with a man who sat beside her. Ibn Battüta
said to his host, ““Who is this woman?" He replied
that she was his wife. Ibn Battüta then inquired who
was the man with her. He said, “A friend of hers".
The traveller, much scandalised, said to him, “And are
you content with this, you who have lived in our
country and are acquainted with the sacred law?” His
host rebuked him fittingly for his interference, in
saying, “‘The association of women with men among
us is a good custom and is carried on in a suitable
manner. It arouses no suspicion and our women are
not like those of your country." Ibn Battūta was
highly offended and never again visited this man.’

The historian Ibn Khaldün, in his account of these
Berber tribes of the Sahara, also gives a picture of the
high position held by the women of the tribes. He
says that, at the time of the Arab invasions, one of the
most powerful of the Berber chiefs was the Jewish
Kāhina, queen of Mount Auras, whose teal name was
Dihya, daughter of Tabeta, son of Tifan. When Hasan,
governor of Egypt, was ordered to march against the
Berbers, he was informed that the Kahina was the most

1 Ibn Battüta, op. cit. 1v, pp. 387 ff. 2 Op. cit. p. 390.

SR 9

130 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

powerful ruler among them and he marched against her.
She inflicted a signal defeat upon him and drove out
his troops from her territory in A.H. 69. Five years
later Hasan once more invaded North Africa and the
Kāhina thereupon destroyed all the towns and the
farms in the country from Tripoli to Tangiers. The
Berbers were indignant and submitted to Hasan, and
the gallant Kahina was slain at Mount Auras, at a
place called to this day Bir al-Kahina ( — the well of
the priestess), and her subjects embraced Islām.:

The Tuaregs of Ibn Battüta's account and of modern
times are the descendants of these Berbers, and the
high position maintained by their women undoubtedly
goes back to these pre-Islamic times. The modern
Tuaregs trace their descent from a woman named Tin
Hinane; inheritance is through the female line and the
status of a man is in accordance with the status of his
mother. The Tuareg woman displays her attractions in
a manner quite unusual in Muslim countries. Her face
is not veiled and she freely visits her relations. She
has insisted on monogamy and has male friends and
visitors. She exercises control over her own property
and her camels are branded with her own mark. She
does not follow her husband to his home on marriage,
but sets up her tent near her parents for a year after
marriage. She can divorce her husband at her will and
return to her own home. She is the undisputed mis-
tress of the household. She is better educated than
the men, she knows how to read and write and she is
the one to teach the children to read.? The right of
the žobo/,3 implying authority over the tribe, is trans-
mitted through the women. The woman presides at
the ahal, an assembly where gallantry is de rigueur

1 Ibn Khaldūn, Histoire des Berbéres, tr. de Slane, pp. 213, 214.

2 Benhazera, Six mois chez les Touareg du Ahaggar, pp. 11, 12.

3 Originally a tambourine by means of which the chief sum-
moned the tribesmen.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 131

and where men and women vie in wit and elegance.'
It is noteworthy that the writer adds that the Tuaregs
are not a religious people, and as they do not under-
stand Arabic, they do not observe the ordinances im-
posed by the Qur’an, e.g. Ramadan is not generally
observed.

In the Eastern Sudan also, in some respects, the
women hold a higher position than is usual among
Muslim women and no doubt the distinctive customs
of these tribes go back to the days before they were
converted to Islam. A modern writer—speaking of the
Rubātāb in particular, but dealing with customs which
he says are common to most of the tribes on the banks
of the Nile in the provinces of Khartoum, Berber and:
Dongola—notes that the women do not veil themselves
and that they enter one another’s houses without asking
permission. Both men and women pride themselves
on powers of endurance, bearing flogging and branding
with fire. They are fond of games and physical exercises
and most of the women can swim. In the household
the woman is supreme, its management is left entirely
in her hands and the husband must consult her before
disposing of any of his household goods. Further, he
is expected to bear with all her caprices, and if she
abuses him, he ought to laugh at it and will not be
despised for doing so, as he would be if he submitted
to abuse from a man. The husband is absolutely for-
bidden to use violence to his wife, whatever her
offence.? The consent of a girl’s mother is necessary
for her marriage to anyone but her uncle’s son. A man
must shew the utmost respect to his mother-in-law
and all his wife’s relatives.3

The tribesmen of the Shaigia, of Dongola, have long

1 Benhazera, op. cif. p. 51. See also R. Briffault, op. cit. 1,
p. 286.

2 J. W. Crowfoot, Sadan Notes and Records, pp. 120, 121.

3 J. W. Crowfoot, op. cit. pp. 124, 128.

9-2

132 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

had a custom of being led into battle by a maiden.
Azila, of the Amrab, led her tribe into battle about
1690 in the Shaigia war of independence. At the battle
of Korti, 1820, the Shaigia were led by a virgin named
Muhayra bint Abad of the Suareb, mounted in a litter
on a camel, and her tribesmen rallied round her as a
standard. A month later, at Jebel Dager, the Shaigia
were again led by a woman, Safia, daughter of Mek
Sabil.: |

Again, we find that primitive custom has been
stronger than Islamic legislation in some respects
among the Bedouin dwellers in the desert to-day.
Doughty speaks of the comparative freedom of the
Bedouin housewife and of how she may leave her
husband at will, and custom will not allow him to
prevent her from doing so.* He also speaks of a
custom similar to that we have mentioned as pre-
vailing in Dongola, by which, "tat any general battle
of the tribes, there is mounted some beautiful damsel
of the shaykh's daughters, whose generous loud Alle-
luias for her people, in presence of their enemies, in-
flame her young kinsmen's hearts to leap 1n that martial
dance to a multitude of deaths". “Such a maiden",
he says, “is called an ‘Atayfa’, and it would be in-
famous to kill such an one, but she may be in danger
in the course of the battle".3 Here we have a custom
in accordance with the heroic spirit of a Nusayba, and
it is evident that Islamic laws concerning the seclusion
and incompetency of woman have failed to prevail;
such martial training must produce a feminine type
very different from the feeble captive of the Jarim.

In all these cases we find that, though the country
is nominally Muslim, the non-observance of Muslim

1 A. E. Robinson, Journal of the African Society, Oct. 1925,

PP- 51, 55.

2 Travels in Arabia Deserta, p. 238. Cf. also C. R. Conder,
Palestine Exploration Fund, 1889, p. 324.

3 Doughty, op. cit. p. 61.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 133

laws and customs has enabled the women to retain
some, or perhaps all, of their primitive freedom, which,
in countries where Islamic ordinances have been rigidly
enforced, has been lost, with consequent degradation
to the womenkind of those countries. It is to be noted
that those Muslim countries which have determined to
bring their civilisations into line with those of the
modern West, have first of all found it necessary to
abrogate the Islamic legislation concerning women.

On the other hand, we find in the history of the early: i
centuries of Islam, in those countries where the new |
faith took firm root, (sometimes through an unduly |
harsh interpretation of the precepts of the Qur'àn, and |
still more through numerous traditions which were `
brought to bear on the subject, the Muslim woman ;
became more and more of a slave and chattel 1 and |
under the degrading and narrowing influence of the .
harim, she lost that dignity and independence of
character for which she had been noted in an earlier
age. In the matter of religion, seclusion and the limita- `
tion of their freedom certainly hindered women in the
exercise Of their religious duties, and the almost com-
plete lack of education which was the fate of most
Muslim women up to very recent years, with a few
notable exceptions, prevented them from having any |
intelligent conception of what was included in the
doctrines of Islam. E

Many Muslim writers speak. with contempt of
women’s incapacity for religion and of their lack of
intelligence and morals. An early writer says, "The
majority of women are lacking in religion and virtue
and that which prevails in them is ignorance and evil
desires ".r

Tradition states that the Prophet himself said, “
looked into Hell and I saw that the majority of its
inhabitants were women, and I looked into Paradise

1 Abū Talib, Ost a/-Oulūb, 11, p. 238.

134 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

and saw that but few of its inhabitants were women .1
Another tradition of the Prophet represents him as
saying: |

Many men have been perfected, but of women only four; and
the falling short of all other women was not due to their in-
herent nature, but because of their acquired qualities (/.e. that
for which they were themselves morally responsible). They are
to be described also as wanting in intelligence and religion, and
the explanation of their lack of religion is their neglect of prayer
and fasting due to pride. Their lack of religion is in truth nothing
but their neglect of prayer and fasting and the faith of Islām.
For the practice of Islàm and faith in it are one and the same
thing to the one who realises that good works come from faith.? `

Taqi al-Din al-Hisni (ob. A.D. 1426), writing with
great bitterness of the women of his time, says, “The
most double-faced (of mankind) are women, because
of the weakness of their intellect and their religion and
their convictions, and therefore their faith fails”,3

Such statements, to which many more could be
added, might well lead us to suppose that women
would not be conspicuous among the religious leaders
of Islàm and would play but a small part in the develop-
ment of Islàm on the religious side. Western opinion
has been liable to assume that woman, as such, was
shut out from religious privileges and religious ac-
countability and it has even been asserted that Islam
does not allow a woman the possession of a soul.
Dr Perron asserts that

The path of holiness inIslàm was seldom trodden by women and
we find but few women on the same. It is too difficult for them,
so at least think the men. These everywhere take the front place:
all glory, all advantage, all authority, is for the men. They have
made everything contribute to their advantage and pre-eminence;

1 Out al-Qulab, x1, p. 252.
2 Kalabadhi, “Kitab al-Ta'arruf”, fol. 20 a.
3 “Siyar al-Sālihāt”, fol. 67 b.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XI 135

they have appropriated everything, monopolised everything,
holiness and even Paradise, for themselves.:

Yet this does not give a complete picture of the real
state of affairs. Woman in Islām was degraded almost
as much by social tendencies as by the religious law,
and woman as such was not excluded from the spiritual
blessings which in Islam were intended to be available
for all human beings. The Qur'an itself makes this
plain:

And God Most High said that for the Muslim men and the
Muslim women (#.e. those who have surrendered themselves to
His Will) and the believers, men and women, and those who
pray, both men and women, and the sincere men and women and
the patient men and women and the humble men and women
and the charitable (who give the prescribed alms) and those who
fast, both men and women, and the chaste and those, both men
and women, who remember God often—God will recompense
them with forgiveness and a great reward.?

Shu‘ayb al-Hurayfish (ob. A.D. 1398) quotes these
verses and continues:

So God, Glory be to Him, joined the mention of pious women
with pious men, and in women are found the mystic states and
ascetic devotion and good works and piety, as in men; and to
women is given revelation, and for them are pilgrimages and the
unveiling (of the Vision of God) and other things of the special
favouts which God Most High has assigned to them; also some
of them are included in the first rank,...

and he gives the names of several famous women
saints.3

Also the writer already mentioned, Taqi al-Din al-
Hisni, bitter as were his denunciations of the women
of his own time, admitted that there had been many
good women, and set out to write a book dealing

1 Femmes arabes avant et depuis Vislamisme, p. 350.
2 The Ourān, xxxii, 35.
3 Rawd al-Fa’iq, p. 212.

136 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

entirely with the lives of women, holy and of irre-
proachable faith; in his introduction he says:

Praise be to God, Who created the earth and the heavens and
provided them with the things created and made that a sign of
His Unity—and gathered together the believers, men and women,
and established the sacred law, chosen for Himself, and sent His
Prophet and through him sent down His book of clear signs,
and the people of happiness obeyed Him and did His work,
from among the dutiful men and women...and when He
exhorted the creatures to be obedient, He did not single out the
men, but spoke of the Muslims, men and women, and the
believers of both sexes and those who observed the law, men
and women, and the verses dealing with this are many and are
not secret.!

So he justifies himself for choosing to write about
women and shews that to them also God has granted
the highest favours and has chosen some of them to
be saints and to receive His revelations.

We see, therefore, that in spite of some ecclesiastical
restrictions and in spite of the general contempt for
her sex, the Muslim woman was, theoretically at least,
On a spiritual equality with man and was held to be
of equal worth in the sight of God, and that, as a
matter of fact, no obstacle was erected great enough
to prevent her from rising to that full experience of
the inner spiritual life and to that devoted exercise of
faith, which was possible for the man and proved to
be equally possible for her.

I “Siyar al-Salihat”, fol. 1 b.

CHAPTER XII

The position attained by the woman saint.

^N have alteady noted: the high position attained
by the woman saint among the followers of
Islam, and we find that writers on religion hold up
the woman saint as an example not only to other

women, but to men as well. So al-Ghazali says by
——way of exhortation to his male readers:

Consider the state of the God-fearing women and say (to your
own soul), “O my soul, be not content to be less than a woman,
for a man is contemptible if he comes short of a woman, in
respect of her religion, and (her relation) to this world”. So we
will now mention something of the (spiritual) states of the women
who have devoted themselves to the service of God,*...

and he proceeds to hold up before his readers the
example of several well-known women saints and to
shew the degree in the spiritual life to which they

attained.
[Bits alsAdawiyya sas undoubuedly-he grates
thé women mystics of Islam. and. made the greatest
 contribütion of any "woman towards the > development
-of-$ re Were n tbet women of her.time,
and mafiy “after ‘her, who were revered. as saints and
had some contribution to make. Before Sūfism arose,
women were recognised as saints, such as Amina, the

mother of the Prophet, and Fitima, his danghtet- who
enjoy the veneration of all Muslims because of their.
relationship 16 Muhammad. Apar from these, the
earliest Muslim woman saint of whom we have a record

is Umm Haram, whose tomb is to be found near
Larnaka in Cyprus.3 This saint was a historic personage

1 Part 1, Chapter 1. 2 Ihyā, IV, p. 353.
3 See Part III, Chapter xtv, pp. 183, 184.

138 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

and is mentioned by several of the early Arab writers.
She was the daughter of Milhān, and of the kindred
of Muhammad. Her husband was ‘Ubayda b. al-
Samit. Her name is given variously as Rumaysa, Rawla
and Sahla, while others say that her own name was
unknown. A full account of her is given in a Turkish
manuscript dated about A.D. 1800 by Sh. Ibrahim b.
Mustafa, who had collected information from earlier
soutces.! This biographer writes in glowing terms of
the virtues of this lady, saying:

Lauds without number are most meet to be ascribed to the
Majesty of Him, the Self-Existent, Who, having distinguished
with perfect honour the noble companions and venerable female
friends of Muhammad. . .favoured them with perfect grace and
made them the source of many virtues....He (the Prophet)
especially delighted the taste and quickened the noble heart of
Umm Haram with the pleasing announcement, “Thou art of the
first ”.?

Again he speaks of

..that exalted lady, the intercessor interceded for, who
(through the mercy of the Lord of the worlds and the guidance
of the prince of the apostles) was made a manifestation of
wonders and of sanctity, a source of chastity and purity of life.3

Umm Haram, being anxious to take her share in the
holy war, after a dream by the Prophet, was declared
by him to be of the first of the troop which was to war
at sea, and was allowed to go. In A.H. 27 permission
was given by ‘Uthman to wage war by sea, and
‘Ubayda b. al-Samit, with his wife Umm Harim and
several of the Companions, started from Medina and
entered Damascus and then Jerusalem. By way of

1 Translated by C. D. Cobham in Excerpta Cypria, pp. 374 ff.
. Cf. also J.R.A.S. Jan. 1897, “Story of Umm Haram”.

2 Referring to her journey to Cyprus in the holy war and
her death there, whereby she was awarded the crown of martyr-
dom.

3 Excerpta Cypria, p. 374.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 139

Ramla they went to Tripoli in Syria and thence em-
barked for Cyprus." This was in the year A.H. 28 or 29.
When they landed, Umm Ķarām set out with her hus-
band, but was thrown by her mule and killed. Ac-
cotding to her biographer, “they were attacked by
Genoese infidels, and falling from her beast, she broke
her pellucid neck, and yielded up her victorious soul,
and in that fragrant spot was at once buried". Baladhuri
adds that her grave is called “The grave of the holy
woman".3 By her death while engaged in the holy
war, Umm Haram attained to martyrdom.* Like other
saints, she was credited with miracles. Her biography
includes, among the miracles of that exalted lady, this
story:

On her journey from Jerusalem to Ramla, she alighted on her
way as a guest at the house of a Christian monk. She beheld in
the house three huge stones like columns, and to shew a marvel
and display saintship, she desired to buy the said stones from
the monk. The monk, fully persuaded of the impossibility of
transporting the stones and carrying them away, gave them as
a present to the exalted lady. She accepted them, and said, "Let
them remain by way of trust; in due time they will be taken
away”, and departed. And on the evening of her burial the
said stones, by the might of the Lord of the worlds, moved from
their place and, walking in the sea—a wonderful sight—ap-
peared in this fragrant place; and one of them set itself at her
sacred head, one at her holy feet and the other stone, as though
suspended over them, rested there by the power of God. And
now, if we look to be instructed, the elevation and juxtaposition
with other stones of a stone so huge, must be deemed an im-
possibility. It is therefore clear and manifest that the stone is
suspended. These marvels are of the number of prodigies and
saintly works of that source of wonders, and of the signs of her
high rank. And even now many holy marvels of hers are seen,

1 Excerpta Cypria, PP; 375, 376.

2 Balādhurī, Kitab a/-Futūh, ed. de Goeje, p. 153.

3 Op. cit. p. 377.

4 Abū al-Mahasin, a/-Nujam al-Zahira, ed. Juynboll, 1, p. 95.

140 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

and those witnessed by pilgrims who seek her trustfully and by
the servants who live about her pleasant shrine, are such as none
may number and count. May God be pleased with her and
benefit us through her intercession. We pray Thee, O God, for
uprightness in her service and to exalt us under her banner,
through the favour of the chief of the apostles.:

Another early saint was Rabi‘a bint Isma‘il of Syria,
whose name is sometimes spelt Raiy‘a (with the yz
instead of ba) by some writers.* She was early con-
fused with her greater namesake, Rābi'a al-“Adawiyya,
but since she was a married woman and lived and died
in Syria, and also is said to have died fifty years before
Rabi‘a of Basra, her history is sufficiently distinctive to
have made confusion unnecessary.

The husband of Rābi'a of Syria was Ahmad b.
Abi al-Hawwari,3 himself a well-known ascetic and a
servant of Abū Sulayman, another ascetic. When he
became betrothed to Rabi‘a, then a widow, he told her
that he did not trouble himself about women, being
too much occupied with his own spiritual state, to
which she replied that she was more concerned with
her spiritual condition than he was with his, and that
she had no inclination towards men, but she had in-
herited from her late husband 300,000 dinars, lawfully
earned, and these she wished to bestow upon Ahmad
and his brothers, knowing them to be pious men, and
this money, she thought, might prove to be a way to
God Most High.4 |

Her betrothed sought out his master, Abū Sulayman,

I Excerpta Cypria, p. 377.

2 Yàafii, Rawd al-Riyabin, p. 140. Ibn al-Jawzī, **Safwa al-
Safwa", fol. 142 b.

3 Ahmad b. Abi al-Hawwārī was born in A.H. 164 and died in
A.H. 246, and could not therefore have been the husband of this
Rābi'a if she died in A.H. 135. But as he is stated by all the Safi
writers to have been her husband, it is possible that the date
of her death is incorrect.

4 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 247.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 141

and reported what Rābi'a had said (Abū Sulayman
having warned Ahmad, as a Süfi, against marriage,
saying: "Not one of our friends has married without
changing—for the worse", and he relates: * Abū Sulay-
màn put his head under his garment and was silent
for a while, then he lifted up his head and said, *O
Ahmad, marry her, for this woman is one of the saints
of God, and this is the speech of those who are sincere
(in their faith)'".: So Ahmad married her, but their
relations seem to have remained Platonic. We are told
elsewhere that she said to him, “I do not love thee
with the love of a wife, I love thee with the love of a
sister, and my desire towards thee is only to serve
thee”.? Certainly she acted generously towards him, for
he tells how he married three other wives (not having
taken to heart the advice of his master, it would seem)
and Rabi‘a used to cook good things for him and treat
him well and say, “Go with your food and your cheerful
company to your wives".3 At the time when she was
cooking the food, she would say to her husband, “‘ Eat
from this food, for none of it was cooked apart from
praise (Ze. I was praising God all the time I was
cooking)"4—a story which calls to mind Brother
Lawrence.

She was noted for her prayers and her fasts. She
used to spend the whole night in prayer, and wore
herself out with ascetic practices, so that her husband
and her friends were distressed at the effect upon her.5

Among the sayings attributed to her 1s one pointing
to the exclusive claim of God to the service of His :
chosen: "If the servant is obedient, God makes him
look beyond his work and he occupies himself with
Him to the exclusion of His creatures”.*

1 Abū Talib, op. cit., loc. cit. 2 “Siyar al-Salihat", fol. 39a.
3 Abū Talib, op. cst. p. 247. 4 Jami, Nafahāt al-Uns, p. 719.
5 Ibn al-Jawzi, op. cit. fol. 143 b.

6 Munawi, "Kawākib”, fol. 52.

142 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC \
She is reported to have said:

I never hear the call to prayer, without remembering the
trumpet-call of the Day of Resurrection, and I never see the
snow without remembering the fluttering of the records (ż.e. the
record of their deeds given into the hands of those who are
to be judged),! and I never see a swarm of locusts without
remembering the Assembly (for the Last Judgment).*

It is said that she used to see the Jinns and the houris
quite plainly, and she would say, “I saw the houris (the
heavenly spouses awarded to good Muslims in Para-
dise) and they used to veil themselves from me with
their garments ".3

She was famed for her attainment of the mystic
states (abwa/). Sometimes passionate desire and love
took possession of her, sometimes intimacy 4 (with the
Divine) and sometimes fear.

When the state of Love took possession of her, she
used to say:

My Beloved—there is none like unto Him, and none shares my
heart with Him,

My Beloved is absent from my sight and my person, but He is
not absent from my heart.

Her husband related that when she was under the
influence of Fear he heard her saying:

My provision is small, I do not see it to be sufficient for me,
But do I weep for that, or because Thou art so far from me?
Wilt Thou burn me with fire, O Goal of my desire?

This is my hope from Thee, this is what makes me fear.5

One day her husband called to her and she did not
answer him; then, after a while, she answered him and

1 See above, Part 1, Chapter 11, p. 12.

2 Sha‘rini, A/-Tabagāt al-Kubrd, p. 87. Attributed also to
Rābi'a of Basra.

3 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 52.

4 See above, Part 11, pp. 91 ff.

5 Jami, op. cit. p. 720.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 143

said, “What prevented me from answering you, was
that my heart was filled with joy in God, and I was
unable to answer you”.

Among her miracles, such as the majority of Muslim
saints are credited with, her husband relates that one
day there was a bowl before her and she said, '*'Take
away this basin, for I see written on it that the Com-
mander of the Faithful, Harün al-Rashid, is dead".
Inquiries were made; on that same day Harün al-
Rashid had died.?

Rabi‘a bint Ismā'īl was held in high respect among
the Süfis of her time and they used to consult her and
to seek information from her about the mystic states.3
She may claim to be one of the earliest of Muslim
mystics, since, as we have noted above,* asceticism
rather than mysticism was the characteristic of the
Sūfīs of this early period.

Rabi‘a of Syria is said to have died in A.H. 155, and
she was buried at the top of Mount Tor near Jerusalem.
It is said that she was the first to be buried there, and
Ibn Khallikān says that her tomb was an object of
pilgrimage in the Middle Ages.5

Of this Rabi‘a, Abū Talib says that her position
among the people of Syria was comparable to that of
Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya among the people of Basra.*

Another famous woman ascetic of the early period
was Mu'ādha al-Adawiyya, who was contemporary
„with Rābi'a al-“Adawiyya, and among her associates.
She was the daughter of ‘Abdallah al-“Adawi and was
surnamed Umm al-Sahba, and was among the devotees

1 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 52.

2 Jami, op. cit., loc. cit. As Hārūn reigned A.D. 786—809 this
would put the date of Rabi‘a bint Ismā'īl considerably later than
the one usually given, and make it possible for her to be the
wife of Ahmad.

3 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 247.

4 Part 11, p. 76. 5 Cf. later, p. 184.

6 Out a Oulab, II, p. 247.

144 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

of Basra. Jami says of her that, from humility, for
forty years she never lifted up her face to the sky. She
never ate anything by day, nor did she sleep by night.
Her friends said to her, **Will you not do much harm
to yourself?" But she said, “No harm will come to
me; I have transferred the sleep of the night to the
day, and eating from the day to the night”. It was
related of her by Muhammad b. Fudayl that when day
ger Mu'ādha used to say, ** This is the day in which

I shall die", and she did not sleep until evening, and
when night fell, she said, ** This is the night in which
I shall die" „and she did not sleep until morning came.
When the cold weather came, she used to dress in thin
garments so that the cold should prevent her from
sleeping. Her woman-servant related that Mu'adha
used to pass the night in prayer and if sleep overcame
her, she rose and walked about in her court-yard,
saying, ““O my soul, sleep is before thee. If thou hadst
died, how long would have been.thy sleep in the
tomb!” And she would be thus until the morning
came.

She used to pray six hundred raktas each day and
night and she used to say: “I wonder at the eye which
sleeps, knowing the length of the sleep in the grave".

Mu‘adha was no celibate, but had a son and a hus-
band, who both went out on a military expedition, and
the father said to his son, “O my son, go forward
and fight, that I may be content with thee", and he
flung himself on the unbelievers and fought until he
"was killed. Then his father advanced and did likewise.

The women came together to his wife Mu'adha (to
console her), and she said, “Welcome, if you have
come to congratulate me and if you have come with
any other purpose, you may return whence you came”’.?
From which we may gather that Mu‘adha was of the

1 Jami, op. cit. p. 718.
2 “Siyar al-Salibat", fol. 24.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 145

same Spartan type as the daughter of Abü Bakr, who
would not suffer her son ‘Abdallah to wear a shirt of
mail when fighting in the cause of righteousness.

Of Mu'ādha we are told that after her husband's
death she carried self-mortification so far that she never
rested her head upon a bed until the day of her death.:

Mu'adha is a faithful representative of the school of
Hasan al-Basri, concerned with asceticism rather than
mysticism, and believing that the mortifying of the
flesh in this world offered the greatest hope of salvation
in the next. Hers would seem to have been the same
grim faith as that of Hasan, living always under the
shadow of fear of the wrath to come, and her ac-
quaintance with Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya does not seem to
have led her to seek the way to God through Love,
ot to find that joy in the service of the Beloved charac-
teristic of both Rābi'a of Syria and Rābi'a of Basra.

An ascetic who was famed chiefly for her godly
sorrow was Sha^wana, of whom Jami writes:

She was a Persian and dwelt in Ubulla. She had a beautiful voice
and used to discourse in melodious tones, also she used to recite
many things to the ascetics and disciples and Süfis who came to
listen in her assembly (;.e. the gathering of the Sūfīs together
round a well-known pir or teacher, such as Sha‘wana evidently
was).

She was among the women zealous in service, who feared God,
who wept and made others to weep. Her friends used to say to
her, “We are afraid that you will lose the sight of your eyes
from much weeping”, but she said, “Verily to be blind in this
world through much weeping is better, to my mind, than to be
blind in the next through the fires of Hell ”.?

One of her associates, Yahya b. Bustam, says:

I used to be present at Sha^wàna's assembly and I used to see
what she did in the matter of lamentation and weeping, and I
said to a friend of mine, “Suppose we come to her when she

I Sha'rani, op. cit. p. 86.
2 Jami, op. cit. p. 718. Munāvi, op. cit. fol. 32 b.

SR ro

146 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

ceases and tell her to have pity on herself”, and he said, “You
are right”, and we came to her and said, “If only you would
have pity on yourself and abate this weeping somewhat, and then
you would have more strength to do what you want”. She wept,
then she said, “I would that I might weep till the fount of
my tears were dried up; then would I weep blood till there
should remain no drop of blood in my members. I must weep,
I must weep”, and she did not cease weeping until she lost
consciousness.

And he goes on to say, “We rose up and parted from
her and we left her in that state, and she was crying
out, *O ye dead, sons of the dead, and brethren of
the dead" ".1

She used to say, “Let the one who is not able to
weep pity those who weep, for the one who weeps,
weeps only because he knows himself and his sins and
that towards which he is going".

Again, she used to say that "the eyes which are
prevented from beholding the Beloved, and yet are
desirous of looking upon Him, cannot be fit (for that
Vision) without weeping", and her friends said that
this sorrow overcame her to such an extent that she
neglected prayer and wotship.

In a dream there appeared to her one who said:

Shed tears when you are sorrowful: for your sorrow will heal
those in grief. A

Be diligent and arise and fast continually, wasting away (with
emaciation),

For emaciation is one of the works of the obedient.

She returned to obedience and used to intone
these verses, weeping, and the women weeping with
her.? | |

Among her prayers is the following: ““O my God,
Thou knowest that the one thirsting for Thy love 1s

1 Al-Ghazāli, I5ya, Iv, p. 353. Munawi, op. cit. fol. 32 b.
2 Jami, op. cit. p. 718.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 147

never satisfied" ,: and al-Ghazālī tells how Sha'wāna in
her prayers used to say:

O my God, how great is my desire to meet with Thee and
how great is my hope of Thy reward. Thou art gracious, there
is no disappointment from Thee, the. Hope of all who hope;
there is no frustration with Thee, Thou Desire of all who yearn.
O my God, if I am unworthy of Thee and my works do not
bring me near unto Thee, yet my weakness has made confession
of my sins, and if Thou dost forgive—Who has more power
(to forgive) than Thyself, and if Thou dost punish—Who is
mote just to perform it than Thyself? O my Lord, my tears
have flowed for my soul in looking upon her, but there remains
for her the beauty of looking upon Thee, and woe be to my soul
if she rejoices not therein. O my God, let not faith fail me all
the days of my life, nor cut off from me Thy benevolence after
my death. I have hoped that He Whose goodness has followed
me all the days of my life will be near me with His pardon at the
hour of death. O my Lord, how should I despair of the beauty
of the Vision of Thyself after my death, when Thou hast be-
stowed upon me nought but good in my life-time? O God, if
my sins have made me afraid, verily my love to Thee has pro-
tected me (or brought me near unto Thee). O my Lord, if it
were not for the sins I have committed, I would not have feared
Thy chastisement, and if I had not known Thy grace, I should
not have hoped for Thy reward.’

One who served her said, “‘From the time my eyes
fell upon Sha‘wana, I never turned towards the world,
because of her blessed influence, and I never despised
one of the faithful”’.3

It is said that in her old age Fudayl b. 'Iyad used to
visit her and discuss with her, and once when he asked
for her prayers on his behalf, she said to him: “O
Fudayl, is there anything between you and God, so
that if I pray, that will be the cause of an answer?"
j.e. is there any hindrance to your approaching God
directly, that you ask for a mediator?

"1 Sha'rānī,op.cit.p.88. 2 Ibya,1v, p.355. 3 Sha‘rani, op.cit., loc. cit.
I0-2

148 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Fudayl, when he heard her reply, burst out sobbing
and then fainted away.

Sha^wana may certainly claim a place among the
mystics as well as among the ascetics, for her prayers
quoted above shew plainly that she followed the way
of Love, like Rabi‘a, and that her eyes were not only
blinded by tears of penitence, but dazzled by the radiant
glory of the Beloved, and that what she looked for
after this life was the Vision of her Lord in His perfect
Beauty. Her prayer shews also that in her life she was
in conscious communion with her Friend, feeling her-
self to be in His personal presence, a relationship to
which the Süfis of the earliest ascetic school hardly
dared to aspire.

It was undoubtedly the recognition that she was
possessed of the mystic gnosis, and truly walked with
God, that made her an acknowledged teacher and
spiritual guide to the Sufis of her day.

Another great saint, but of a different type from these
early mystics, was Nafisa, great-granddaughter of
Hasan, son of the Khalifa ‘Ali, who was born at Mecca
in the year A.H. 145 and brought up at Medina, to a
life spent in good works and the worship of God.
She married Ishaq, son of the Imam Ja‘far al-Sadiq,
and bore him two children, al-Qasim and Umm
Kulthüm.? After her marriage, she went to Egypt with
her cousin Sakina al-Madfüna, and settled down to live
not far from the Khalifa's palace in Cairo. Like the
other ascetics of Islam, she used to fast all day and
spend the night in prayer.

She was reputed to know the Qur'an and the com-
mentaries by heart and was so versed in religious
knowledge that even her great contemporary, the
Imam al-Shafi3, used to come and listen to her dis-
courses and enter into discussions with her; the degree
of his respect for the scholarship of this saintly woman

I Jami, op. cit. p. 718. 2 Sha‘rani, op. cit. p. 88.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 149

and for her sanctity also, may be judged from the fact
that he used to pray with her the special prayers for
Ramadan.:

She was famed throughout Egypt and wherever she
went her reputation followed her and she gained the
full approbation of all, both individuals and the people
generally, who revered her for her good works, her
frequent pilgrimages, her lengthy fasts and her nights
spent in prayer.? She died in Cairo in the month of
Ramadan, in the year A.H. 208.

One of her biographers relates that when she was
at the point of death, and, as usual, fasting, those with
her tried to compel her to break her fast, but she
refused, saying, “This would seem a strange thing to
me. For thirty years I have been asking God that I
should meet with Him when I was fasting, and shah
I break my fast now? This shall not be.” Then she
repeated the Sūra al-An‘am and when she reached the
part where God said, “For them is an abode of peace
with their Lord”,3 she passed away.4

The same writer tells us that during her life-time she
had dug her grave with her own hands and had de-
scended into it and prayed and there repeated the whole
Qur'àn six thousand times. When Nafisa died, the
people assembled from all the villages and towns in
the neighbourhood and lighted candles that night and
the sound of the wailing for the dead was heard from
every house in Cairo, and they prayed over her body,
while many bore witness that they had seen none like
her. Then she was buried in the grave which she had
dug in her own house. Up to the time of the writer,
and even to the present time, her shrine has been a
place of pilgrimage for travellers from afar.5 Her hus-
band, indeed, wished to convey her body to Medina,

1 Ibn Khallikān, p. 9o, No. 777. Sha‘rani, op. cit., loc. cit. —

2 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 136 b. 3 Sūra VI, 127.
4 Munawi, op. cit., loc. cit. 5 Munawi, op. cit. fol. 136.

150 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

for burial in the sacred city, but the people of Cairo
begged that she should be buried among them.

Many miracles, shewing her charity towards others,
were attributed to Nafisa. The story is told of how one
year the Nile failed to rise in flood at the usual time,
and the people were in great distress, fearing that for
lack of water for their crops they would perish from
famine, and in this extremity they came to the saint,
appealing for her help. She gave them her veil and
bade them cast it into the river, and when they had
done so, immediately the river rose in an unusually
high flood and the people were saved.

Another miraculous story related of the Lady Nafisa
tells how, in a neighbour’s house, there was a poor
Jewish girl, completely crippled by arthritis. One day
her parents, having to leave her to go to the market,
asked their saintly neighbour to take charge of the
invalid. Nafisa came and prayed beside her and through
the saint’s prayer the sick girl regained the use of her
limbs, and both she and her parents hastened to em-
brace the religion of their benefactress.

The biographer of Abū Sa‘id b. Abi al-Khayr gives
an account of a_woman saint contemporary with the
Shaykh, named Ishi Nili, who lived in Nishapür. He
, says: “She was very devout and an ascetic, and members
of the great families and the worthies of Nīshāpūr used
to come and visit her and to gain blessing from her.
For a period of forty years she had not gone out of her
house nor gone to the warm baths. She had a nurse who
always waited upon her and when Shaykh Abū Saad
came to Nīshāpūr, and the fame of him was spread about
the city, to the effect that a Shaykh had comefrom May-
hana, whose miracles were evident, who was speaking
in the assembly and who had an answer to give to any-
one amongst the congregation who had some problem

1 Maqrizi, A/-Khitat, p. 441. Taghribardi, a/-Nujiūm al-Zabira,
I, P. 599.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 151

on his mind, Ishi said one day to this nurse: ‘Rise up
and go to the assembly of the Shaykh and take note of
what he says, so that when you return, you may repeat
it to me’. The nurse came into the Shaykh’s congre-
gation while the Shaykh was preaching, and she could
not remember the words of his discourse, but the
Shaykh recited these verses:

I have a dang" and a half almost; I have bought two bottles (of
wine)—not quite full,

On my lute there remains neither treble string nor bass,

To whom (except me) should you talk of Kalandar-ship and
ecstasy?

«When the nurse returned, Ishi asked what the
Shaykh had said; she remembered only these verses
and repeated them. Ishi said, "Go and wash your
mouth (because you have told a lie). Are these words
of the kind that ascetics and wise men use?’ The nurse
went and washed her mouth.

* Now this Ishi was accustomed to make eye-salve for
the people and to give it away to them. That night,
while asleep, she saw something horrible in a dream; she
sprang up and both of her eyes felt painful, and although
she used salve, they did not recover. She had recourse
to all the physicians, but could find no cure. For twenty
days and nights she was complaining of this pain.

“One ‘night in a dream she saw (one who said), ‘If
you wish your eyes to be cured, go and seek to satisfy
the Shaykh of Mayhana and gain his precious favour’.
So the next day Ishi took a thousand dirhams and put
them in her purse and gave them to her nurse and said,
‘Go to the Shaykh and when he has finished his dis-
course, give them to him’.

“When the Shaykh was free, the nurse came to him
and greeted him, and placed the silver before him. It
was the custom of the Shaykh, when the assembly was

I A small silver coin, worth one-sixth of a dirham.

152 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

over, to have a novice bring him a piece of dry bread
and a toothpick. The Shaykh used to eat that bread
and use the toothpick. The Shaykh was using the
toothpick when the nurse gave him that money. When
she wished to return (to her mistress), the Shaykh said,
*O nurse, come hither and take this toothpick and give
it to your mistress and tell her to stir it in water and
wash her eyes with that water, so that her outward
eyes may be cured and tell her to put out of her heart
contempt and enmity towards this sect, so that her in-
ward eye may also be healed’. The nurse came and
told Ishi, who followed the advice of the Shaykh and
washed the toothpick in water and with that water
bathed her eyes and immediately they were cured.

“The next day she rose up and took all she possessed
in the way of jewels and ornaments and raiment and
came to the Shaykh and said, ‘O Shaykh, I have
repented, and cast out contempt and enmity from my
breast’. The Shaykh said, ‘May it be blessed (to you)’,
and bade them take her to the mother of Abū Tahir,
that she might be invested with the patched robe (of
the Dervishes) and the Shaykh bade her choose the
service of this order that she might be esteemed in this
world and the next. Ishi went to carry out the Shaykh’s
behest and donned the patched robe and occupied her-
self in the service of the devout women of that order
and all that she had—ornaments and property and all
else—she gave away and reached a high degree in the
Way and became a leader among the Süfis." :

Other saintly women there were, famous for their
good deeds and their charity, or for their wisdom or
their writings, some devoting themselves to religious
learning and known as Shaykhas.

Such was the famous Shuhda, daughter of Abü Nasr
Ahmad Ibn Al-Faraj b. ‘Umar al-Ibari, who is fre-
quently mentioned by biographers of the saints. Ibn

1 Asrar al-Tawhid, pp. 91, 92.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 153

Khallikan gives an account of her in his Biographical
Dictionary. Her family belonged to Dinawar in Persia,
but she herself was born and died in Baghdad. She
was surnamed Fakhr al-Nisa’ ( = the Glory of Women)
and al-Katiba (= the woman scribe). By her learning
she gained a great reputation and was considered one of
the first scholars of the age; she wrote a beautiful hand?
and gave instruction to large numbers of students in
the Traditions, which she herself had learned from the
highest authorities; thus she formed a link between the
traditionists of the rising generationand those of the past.

She died in 1178, aged upwards of ninety years, and
was buried outside the Abraz Gate of Baghdad.

Another of these Shaykhas, or religious teachers,
was Zaynab, daughter of Abū al-Oāsim ‘Abd al-
Rahman al-Shārī, the Safi. She was born at Naisapūr
in A.D. 1130 and died there in A.D. 1218—19. She was
esteemed as a woman of great learning who had
studied under the best scholars of her time and from
them she obtained certificates authorising her to teach
these subjects, especially the knowledge of the Tradi-
tions, which she had studied under their tuition. Among
these masters was Abū al-Qasim, the Qur'an reader, and
* Abd al-Mun‘im al-Qushayri. She was granted licences
to teach also from the Adz ‘Abd al-Ghafir al-Fārisī
and the commentator al-Zamakhshari (ob. 1143—4), the
learned author of the Kashshāf. In her turn she granted
licences to her pupils, among whom was her biographer,
Ibn Khallikan.3

Ibn Battüta gives several references to Shaykhas of
this type, who were accepted as teachers and whose
opinion was sought by the scholars of their time. When

I Tr. De Slane, 1, p. 625.

2 Arabic handwriting is a fine art, and to this day is taught
in schools by shaykhs, and even in girls’ schools the teaching
of it is rarely entrusted to a woman. A man who is highly

skilled in the art may become a Professor of Calligraphy.
3 Biographical Dictionary, tt. De Slane, 1, p. 551.

154 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

he was travelling in Syria, he was given a licence and
permission to teach in Damascus by the pious Shaykha,
Umm Muhammad ‘A’isha bint Muhammad b. Muslim
b. Salama al-Hawānī, and the virtuous Shaykha Ruhla
al-Dunya ( — the goal of everyone's journey), Zaynab
bint Kamal al-Din Ahmad b. ‘Abd al-Rahim b. ‘Abd
al-Wahid b. Ahmad, of Jerusalem. This was in A.D.
1326.1 In June of the following year, Ibn Battüta was
in Baghdad, where he listened to the Imam Siraj al-
Din, explaining the Musnad of Abū Muhammad ‘Abd
Allah b. ‘Abd al-Rahmān, and in his explanation the
Shaykh said, “We have been instructed in it by the
virtuous Shaykha, of recognised authority, the mistress
of kings, Fatima, daughter of the upright Taj al-Din,
Abi al-Hasan ‘Ali b. ‘Ali b. Abi al-Badr”. She related
the chain of witnesses through whom the tradition had
been transmitted.?

At a much later period, we find a very interesting
figure, among the women saints of Islam, of a type
distinct from those already mentioned, an Indian
princess who lived in the seventeenth century of our era.
This was Fatima, best known as Jahan-Ara,3 the
favourite daughter of the Mughal emperor Shah Jahan
and his empress Mumtaz Mahall (to whose memory
her devoted husband erected the famous Taj Mahall).
Her brother was Dara Shaküh (who wrote a biography
of the saints, called the Ship of the Saints) and the
two appear to have been bound together not only by
the tie of strong affection, but also by a common
seeking after God and a desire for union with Him.
Dara Shakūh became a novice in the Sufi Way under
the spiritual direction of the famous teacher and saint,

I Ibn Battüta, Tuhfa al-Nuggār, 1, È: 253.

2 Ibn Battüta, op. cit. 11, p. 110. Cf. Majdi Pasha, Bulletin de
I’ Institut Égyptien, sth Series, tome x, 1916, PP- 327-58, where
he gives an account of nineteen of these Muslim Shaykhas.

3 Dabistan, p. 529.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 155

Mulla Shāh, and impressed by her brother’s account
of him, the princess also desired to be admitted as a
novice. An account of Mulla Shah’s relations with the
` princess is given by his biographer, Tawakkul Beg,?
himself a disciple of the saint.

The princess wrote to the master several letters ex-
pressing her desire to renounce the world and enter
upon the mystic Way: he read them all, but left them
unanswered for a time. Being convinced at last that
she was sincere and determined, he decided to give
her his support and consented to her initiation, though
he had not even seen her.3 The princess herself wrote
an account of her initiation in a work entitled, “‘ Risāla-i
sāhibiyya”, from which Tawakkul Beg quotes. She
describes how she had offered her faith to Mulla Shah
and had begged him to be her spiritual guide, and how
he had consented to her initiation according to the rule
of his fraternity. She tells of the deep impression made
upon het by her first sight of the blessed form of the
master, from her hiding-place behind the pardah, when
Mulla Shah paid a visit to her father, then staying in
Kashmir. She says that her faith in him became a
thousand times more fervent than it had been, and
ecstasy filled her soul. The following day her brother,
- acting for the saint, initiated her into the Way, which
required the recital of the formula of the Qadir
dervishes and of the order of Mulla Shah. She goes
on to tell how afterwards she repaired to the chapel
of her palace and remained there until midnight
praying, and then went back to her apartments and
became absorbed in contemplation. There she had a
vision, as she believed, of the Prophet and the saints,
and, filled with gratitude at this sign of the Divine
favour, when she came to herself, she prostrated herself

I Died at Lahore, 1661. Cf. Latif, History of Labore, p. 59.
2 In the * Neskhah-i Ahwal Sha hī”.
3 Tawakkul Beg, op. cit. fols. 41 a, 41 b.

156 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

before the throne of Absolute Being. There she poured
out her soul in thankfulness to God for the "im-
measurable happiness” He had vouchsafed to a “‘ weak
and unworthy woman".1 She offers thanks for having
been allowed to conceive of the Absolute Being in the
way which she had always desired. Those who do not
attain to the knowledge of God are not worthy to rank
as human beings, they are still brutish. The one who
attains to this knowledge represents the perfection of
created things. His personal and individual existence
is absorbed into the absolute existence; he becomes as
a drop in the ocean, a mote in the sunbeams, a part
(swallowed up) in the whole.

The saint, raised to this state of exaltation, whether
man or woman, is always the most perfect of beings.
God can grant this grace to whom He will.

The princess became a true mystic and we are told
that she reached such a degree of perfection that she
attained to pure union with God and to the gnosis
which comes from the Vision of God.?

Mulla Shah had a great affection for all his pupils,
but he felt a special attachment to the princess and even
said that her degree of mystic knowledge was so great
that she would be worthy to act on his behalf as his
deputy.

We hear of a woman mystic of the same ecstatic
type, and of much the same period, who was well
known in Morocco, Umm ‘Abd Allah ‘A’isha bint
M. b. ‘Abd Allah, to whom the Divine revelation was
vouchsafed, through the guidance of her brother,
Sayyid Ahmad, in the year 1655-6. She was the first
of his followers to receive this blessing. She was
seized by an overwhelming illumination, and a mighty

I Tawakkul Beg, op. cit. fols. 42 a, 42 b.

2 Tawakkul Beg, op. cit. fol. 43 b. For a description of her
tomb, cf. Archaeological Survey of India (1862—5), vol. 1, pp. 230,
231, and A.S. (1902-3), p. 27.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 157

ecstasy took possession of her and deprived her of her
senses. It is said that she gave permission to her
husband to marry (another) and gave him the choice
between that or having patience with her present state,
and she begged him to excuse her (for this action).
She spent all her fortune and gave it as alms for the.
sake of God, and divided it all among her relatives,
until nothing remained. Her husband complained of
her action to the Sayyid Qasim and said to him:
“What am I to do with her? She is like one who is
on fire and the fire catches her garments and she begins
to throw them from her without discrimination.” He
wished to say that the fire of (the Divine) love had
consumed the ties which attached her to this world,
as the fire consumes the clothing which clings to the
body of the one it overtakes and he has to throw them
off and they are scattered without discrimination on his
art.

d She had an inclination towards solitude, and when
she sat among other women, God cast her into a
trance-like state so that she did not know what was
said. She had a strong affection for her brother, Sayyid
Ahmad, and was unable to refrain from looking at
him. Her husband, Abū ‘Abd Allah Sayyid M. ‘Asim al-
Andalusi, at first was unable to attain to the degree of
sanctity which he beheld in her, and the reserve she
shewed towards him as well as to the attractions of
the wotld, but one day an ecstasy seized him and he
grew faint andlost consciousness. He was carried away,
by the order of Sayyid Ahmad, and brought in to her,
and she thanked God fervently that he had attained to
the same state as herself, and so her mind was at rest
concerning him.

She died in 1660 and was buried the same day under
the dome of her father’s tomb.:

1 M. b.al-Tayyib al-Qadiri, Nashr al-Mathdni, Fez, A.H. 1310,
I, p. 227.

158 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

The Turks have produced several poetesses of note
and among them a Süfi poetess, Sidqi, daughter of
Qamr Muhammad, one of the learned men of Con-
stantinople in the reign of Sultan Muhammad IV.
Sidqi appears to have lived the celibate life; she died
in 1703 and is buried beside her father near the
Adrianople Gate, near the convent of Amir Bukhara.
Her poetry is full of mysticism and of the pantheism
of the later Sūfīs.: She wrote two mystical poems
called The Treasury of Lights and The Collection of
Information, and among her poems is the following
Gazel:

He who union with the Lord gains, more delight desireth not!

He who looks on charms of fair one, other sight desireth not.

Pang of love is lover’s solace, eagerly he seeks therefor,

Joys he in it, balm or salve for yonder blight, desireth not.

Paradise he longs not after, nor doth aught beside regard;

Bower and Garden, Mead, and Youth, and Hiri bright, desireth
not.

From the hand of Power Unbounded draineth he the Wine of
Life,

Aye inebriate with Knowledge, learning’s light, desireth not.

He who loves the Lord is monarch of an empire, such that he—

King of Inward Mysteties—Sulymān's might, desireth not.

Thou art Sultan of my heart, aye, Soul of my soul e’en art Thou;

Thou art Soul enow, and Sidqi other plight desireth not.”

Latest in point of time, but with an equal claim to a
place among the women saints of Islam, is Zarrīn-Tāj,
known as Qurrat al-“Ayn, the Babi teacher and poetess,
who was martyred in A.D. 1852. Though Babiism, in
its full development, diverged so widely from orthodox
Islam that its adherents could hardly be reckoned as
Muslims at all, yet it originated in the Shi'a quest for
the hidden Imàm, the Manifestation of God in the

I Garnett, Women of Turkey, p. 538. Gibb, Ottoman Poems,
. 212.

P
2 Tr. Gibb, op. cit. p. 111.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 159

flesh, whom Mirza Muhammad "Alī, the Bab, declared
himself to be, and the position of the Bab, before this
declaration, corresponded to that of the Sufi Shaykh
or Pir. With regard to the relationship between Babiism
and Süfism, it is stated by an authoritative writer that
“‘Sufis and mystics regard Babiism as a systematised
and organised Süflism, essential in its doctrines with
their own pantheistic beliefs; and consider its funda-
mental teaching to be the divine spark latent in man,
by the cultivation of which he can attain to the degree
of fana fi‘allah ot ‘Annihilation in God’, wherein he
may cry out, like Mansür-i-Hallaj, Ana*/-Hagg, ‘I am
the Truth’, or ‘I am God""1 |

In her fearless proclamation of her faith, as in the
heroic witness of her death, Qurrat al-‘Ayn shewed
herself a worthy successor of the great Safi martyr.
She was the daughter of Haji Mulla Salih, known as
the sage of Qazrin, the erudite doctor.

She, according to what is related, was skilled in diverse arts,
amazed the understandings and thoughts of the most eminent
masters by her eloquent dissertations on the exegesis and tradition
of the Perspicuous Book, and was a mighty sign in the doctrines
of the glorious Shaykh of Ahsa.* At the Supreme Shrines (ż.e.
Kerbela and Nejef), she borrowed light on matters divine from
the lamp of Kazim (że. Haji Sayyid Kazim of Resht, spiritual
director of the Bab) and freely sacrificed her life in the way of
the Bab. She discussed and disputed with the doctors and sages,
loosing her tongue to establish her doctrine. Such fame did she
acquire that most people who were scholars or mystics sought
to hear her speech and were eager to become acquainted with her
powers of speculation and deduction. She had a brain full of
tumultuous ideas, and thoughts vehement and restless. In many
places she triumphed over the contentious, expounding the most

I E. G. Browne, J.R.A.S. 1889, p. 504.

2 Founder of the Shaykhi school of theology, with which in
its origin the Babi movement was closely connected; its head-
quatters are at Kirman. |

160 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

subtle questions....In short, in elocution she was the calamity
of the age, and in ratiocination the trouble of the world. Of fear
or timidity there was no trace in her heart, nor had the admoni-
tions of the kindly-disposed any profit or fruit for her. Although
she was of (such as are) damsels (meet) for the bridal bower, yet
she wrested pre-eminence from stalwart men, and continued to
strain the feet of steadfastness until she yielded up her life at
the sentence of the mighty doctors in Teherān.!

During the life-time of Haji Sayyid Kazim of Resht
(mentioned above), Qurrat al-‘Ayn visited Kerbela,
where she became acquainted not only with Sayyid
Kazim himself, but with many of his chief followers,
including Mulla Husayn of Bushraweyh, and to him
she wrote begging that he would inform her if he
should succeed in finding the spiritual guide whom
they were expecting. Husayn, on his conversion to
Babiism, handed this letter to the Bab, who recognised -
the tare qualities of the writer and included her
among the eighteen Letters of the Living (Hurafat
bayy) who made up the “First Unity" of the Babi
hierarchy.

Qurrat al-‘Ayn continued for some time at Kerbela,
where, seated behind a curtain, a precaution made
desirable by her marvellous beauty, she used to lecture
and preach to the disciples of the late Sayyid Kazim.
The governor sought to arrest her, and she went to
Baghdad and there defended her creed and conduct
before the chief Mufti with great ability. The question
of whether she was to be allowed to continue her
teaching was submitted first to the Pasha of Baghdad
and then to the central Government, and she was
ordered to leave Turkish territory. On her journey
from Baghdad to Kirmanshah and Hamadān, she con-
tinued to preach and made several converts to Babiism.

I A Traveller's Narrative of the Episode of the Bab, tt. and ed.
by E. G. Browne, pp. 30-32.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 161

Some Bābīs disapproved and asked the Bab if it was
seemly for a woman to preach publicly to men. The
Bab not only sanctioned her preaching and applauded
her zeal, but gave her the title of Janab-i-Tahira, and
het high position in the Babi church became uncon-
tested.

She was present at the first assembly of the Babis as
a distinct party, held at Badasht, accompanied by a
bodyguard of disciples, the most zealous of all the
Babis present, over whom she exercised absolute
authority. She was given the task of encouraging the
faithful and stirring up the lukewarm, and preached
from an extempore pulpit, with her followers around
her. She declared that the time had come when the
doctrine of the Bab should cover the face of the earth,
and God should be worshipped in accordance with
this doctrine. A new light had arisen, a new law was
to be born, a new book was to replace the old. Such
great things could not be accomplished without suf-
fering and sacrifice on the part of the generation
charged with achievement, and it was not too much
that women themselves, sharing the labours of their
husbands and brothers, should accept all their perils.
It was no longer the time for them to be shut up in
the depth of the Jarzz and await passively what their
menfolk might be able to accomplish. Leaving on one
side social rules, the modesty of peaceful times, even
their duties, and their native weakness, and above all
the timidity so natural to their souls, they ought to
shew themselves, in the most absolute sense, the com-
panions of men, to follow them and fall with them on
the field of martyrdom.

Her hearers were moved to tears and cried out: “ Ay
jahān” (O my life), “Ay tāhira” (O pure one), in
beating their breasts. Orthodox Muslims who were
present, drawn by curiosity, became Babis. This dis-

I E. G. Browne, op. cit. pp. 310, 311.

SR II

162 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

coutse not only produced a great effect at the time,
but it was repeated and commented upon by all who
heard it and so reached others. At the time of the
Mazandaran insurrection in 1849, Qurrat al-"Ayn was
given up to the Government authorities and sent to
Teheran, where she was placed in custody and re-
mained a prisoner till her death. Her gaoler, Mahmūd
Khan, came completely under the power of her elo-
quence and zeal and, hoping to secure her release, he
begged her to deny her faith, but instead, she foretold
both his death and her own, saying:

Do not hope that I shall deny my faith, even in appearance for
one moment, for an aim so childish as that of conserving for a
few days more a transient form which has no value. No, if Iam
questioned, and I shall be, I shall have the happiness of giving
my life for God. Listen, Mahmüd Khan, now, to what I am going
to tell you, and to-morrow my death will serve as a sign that
I am not deceiving you. The master whom you serve will not
rewatd you for your zeal; on the contrary, you will perish cruelly,
by his order. Before you die, try to have raised your soul to the
knowledge of the truth.

This prophecy, the utterance of which is well
authenticated, was fulfilled 1n both cases. Qurrat al-
‘Ayn was asked, and refused to abjure her faith, and
met a cruel and lingering death with superhuman
fortitude.?

She was famed as a poetess, though little of her work
is surviving, at least under her own name, and Prof.
Browne asctibes this to the fact that she was too well
known as a Babi for her poems to bear her name,
though he was told that many verses written by her
wete actually among the favourite songs of the people.
A Ghazal which is definitely attributed to Qurrat al-

1 Gobineau, Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’ Asie Centrale,

pp. 180-4.
2 E.G. Browne, op. cit. pp. 310 ff. Gobineau, op. cit. pp. 293 ff.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XII 163

“Ayn, is written in the spirit of the Sifis who preceded
her. It runs as follows:

The thralls of yearning love constrain in the bands of pain and
calamity

These broken-hearted lovers of Thine to yield their lives in their
zeal for Thee.

Though with sword in hand my Darling stand with intent to
slay, though I sinless be,

If it pleases Him, this tyrant’s whim, I am well content with His
tyranny.

As in sleep I lay at the dawn of day that cruel Charmer came to me,

And in the grace of His form and face the dawn of the morn I
seemed to see.

The musk of Cathay might perfume gain from the scent those
fragrant tresses rain,

While his eyes demolish a faith in vain attacked by the pagans of
Tartary.

With you, who contemn both love and wine for the hermit’s
cell and the zealot’s shrine,

What can I do? For our faith divine you hold as a thing of
infamy.

The tangled curls of thy darling’s hair, and thy saddle and steed

_ are thine only care;

In thy heart the Infinite hath no share, nor the thought of the
poor man’s poverty.

Sikandar’s pomp and display be thine, the Kalendar’s habit and
way be mine;

That, if it please thee, I resign, while this, though bad, is enough
for me.

The country of “I” and “ We" forsake; thy home in Annihilation
make,

Since fearing not this step to take, thou shalt gain the highest
felicity.

Hete is the complete surrender of the lover to the
will of the Beloved, the renunciation of this world and

1 Translated from the Persian by E. G. Browne in A Persian
Anthology, pp. 7o, 71.

II-2

164 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

of the self, and finally the absorption in the Divine and
the abiding life in Him, characteristic of the teaching
of the Süfis from Rabifa onwards.

Such women as these whom we have mentioned,
who, by the holiness of their lives and their intimate
communion with the Divine, can rightly claim a place
among the saints, as well as those whose religious
enthusiasm took the form of studying and teaching the
sacred lore of Islam, must be reckoned among the
religious leaders of their time, and had their definite
contribution to make towards the development and
the vitality of the religion of Islam.

CHAPTER XIII
Celibacy and the monastic life.

T is probable that the example set by their Christian
sisters in the religious Jife first caused the women
saints of Islim to realise the value of celibacy and the
cloistered life for those who desired to follow the
mystic Way and aspired to the Sufi’s goal of union with
the Divine.

Thete was considerable opposition on the part of or-
thodox Islam to the idea] of asceticism and most of all to
the doctrine of celibacy. In the Ourān “monasticism”
is condemned as being an innovation introduced by
the Christians themselves, and not a Divine ordinancet,
and Abū Dawid, an uncompromising opponent of the
Sūfī teachings, says that the Prophet declared, ** There
is no celibacy in Islam".? In the well-known tradition
related of ‘Akkaf al-Hilali, who was asked by the
Prophet if he was married and said he was not, the
Prophet said to him, “Then you are one of the fol-
lowers of Satan, or one of the Christian monks. If so,
go to them, but if you are one of us, then do as we do,
for our Sunna includes marriage. The most wicked:
among you are your celibates and the most ignoble
among your dead are your celibates. Woe be to you,
* Akkaf, (I adjure you) marry ".3

In the same sense the Prophet is repotted to have
said, “The man who has no wife is very unfortunate",
and, **' The man who does not marry is none of mine”’.4

Another tradition of the Prophet relating to this

I Qur'an, Sūra LVII, 27.

2 Aba Dawid, A/-$wnan, 1, p. 173.

3 M. Al-Shaybānī, Usd a/-Ghāba, 1v, p. 3.
4, Ibn Hajar, Isāba, 1v, p. 370.

166 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

subject reports that he said, ““One ra£'a from a married
man is better than seventy from the celibate".:

Again, the Prophet is related to have said, "The
curse of God be upon those men who live in celibacy
and who say, ‘We will not marry’. The curse of God
be upon those women who remain unwed and say,
‘We will not marry" ”.2

Al-Dhahabi records a tradition dealing prophetically
with this subject, according to which Muhammad 1s
reputed to have said, ** When three hundred and eighty
years shall have passed over my community, then
celibacy and the monastic life upon the tops of the
mountains shall be lawful for them”.3 The Christian
monks appear to have had a distinct preference for lofty
situations for their monasteries, presumably because
this made for solitude, and to-day in Syria almost every
hill-top is occupied by a Dayr or convent. This
preference evidently goes back to the time of the
Prophet.4

A later Muslim writer, also opposed to asceticism,
accuses women of choosing the celibate life for their
own convenience and comfort, and being tempted
thereto by Satan, who says to the religious-minded
woman, *' You are a woman devout and occupied with
God, and if you do not marry you will be relieved from
the matter of children and (be free) to go abroad, and
your property will increase steadily, and your worship
will be your sustenance”, and the writer adds that such
a woman is helped by other devout worshippers of
God like herself, whom Satan has corrupted.5

On the other hand, Abii Talib mentions that celibacy

1 Suhrawardi, “Awdrif al-Ma‘arif, margin Ihya, 11, p. 177.

2 Abū Talib, Out 2/-Oulūb, tī, p. 243.

3 Al-Dhahabi, Migān al-I‘tidal, 1, p. 377.

4 Cf. the tradition that Mubammad visited the convent of
St Katharine in Sinai, built on a mountain peak (H. J. Beadnell,

The Wilderness of Sinai, p. 168).
5 Taqi al-Din al-Hisni, “ Siyar al-Salihat”’, fol. 6o.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIII 167

was favoured after the second century A.H., apparently
in order to avoid the responsibilities of marriage, for
he says:

Celibacy was approved and remaining unmarried was preferred
in this nation at the end of this period, and it is reported that
after A.H. 200, the one who had the least burden (the light-
backed) was he who had no wife or child. In another tradition
it is said that there came upon the people a petiod when a man
was ruined by the hands of his wife and parents and children,
who upbraided him with his poverty and put upon him what he
was not able to bear and (so) he had recourse to the places which
led him into debt and he was ruined.

The Sifis realised the advantage of celibacy for the
mystic, and the same writer, giving his own views on
celibacy and marriage, says:

The best thing for the novice [#.e. the one who aspires to saint-
hood] in such times as these of ours, is to renounce marriage,
in order to be safe against seduction, if he has been trained in
virtue and if his soul does not urge him on to disobedience, and
the desire for women does not take possession of his heart, so
as to distract his mind, or prevent him from continuous service,
through the wandering of his thoughts and the distraction of his
mind through the matter of women.?

Again, he expresses the view that if the disciple is
inclined towards celibacy and can be satisfied with soli-
tude, the peace which it brings is much to be desired,
but if the disciple craves for marriage and is not safe
from the claims of desire, then let him marry.3 The
Sūfī, Abū Sulayman al-Darani, expressed the same view _
when, in answer to an inquiry about the desirability of
marriage, he said, “To be able to do without them [ż.e.
women] is better than to bear with them, but to bear _
with them is better than to endure the fire of Hell’’.4

1 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 239.
2 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 238.
3 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 244.
4 Munàwi, “ Al-Kawā ib al-Durtiya", fol. 126 b.

168 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

This same Süfi teacher used to say that marriage was
good for those who had patience to surmount its diffi-
culties, but “‘the solitary one will find in the sweetness
of work and in freedom of mind, what the married
man does not find”. He said further, "I have not seen
one of our friends who married and remained in his
former rank (as a Sufi)”, and again, "There are three
things which indicate a longing for the world in the
man who seeks them: he who seeks a livelihood, he
who marries, and he who writes traditions”.

Al-Hujwiri holds that the Dervish (7.e. the Sufi) must
consider in his mind the respective evils of celibacy and
marriage, in order to choose the lesser evil for himself.
The evils of celibacy consist in neglecting the ordinance
of the Prophet and in the danger of falling into un-
lawful ways, while marriage involves the evils of the
distraction of the mind with other than God, and the
concern of the body with sensual pleasure. Marriage
therefore is best for the sociable, and celibacy for the
solitary.?

He states his own view that celibacy is the better
way, and concludes, “‘Sifism was founded on celibacy;
the introduction of marriage brought about a change"
(not for the better), and he says that desire can be
removed by self-restraint, but still better by the force
of a tival love (the love of God) which extends its
empire over the whole body and its senses. The
celibate must guard his eyes and his thoughts from
temptation and keep his heart from the distractions of
this material world—in short, he must guard himself
from the temptations of the world, the flesh and the
devil, and so “‘he will be approved in Sūfism”.3

Bishr al-Hafi (the Barefooted, who died A.D. 841-2),
used to say, ““He who has no need of women, relies

1 Abū Talib, op. cit. 11, p. 2
2 Al-Hujvwīrī, Kashf a Mabjab, tr. Nicholson, pp. 360, 361.
3 Al-Hujwiri, op. cit. pp. 364, 366.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIII 169

upon God Almighty”, and when he was asked why he
did not marry, in accordance with the Sunna, he re-
plied, “I am occupied with duties other than those of
the Law, that is, with the duty of keeping my soul
zealous and free from the evil in creation”.'

Malik b. Dinar is related to have said, “No man
attains to the degree of assured certainty (in the
heavenly gnosis) unless he leaves his wife as if she were
a widow ".?

Suhrawardi, discussing this subject, says that the
Süfi, if he marries, marries for God's sake, and equally,
if he remains solitary, it is for the sake of God. In
either case, his choice is deliberate and the sincere man
knows which to choose, for the natural desires (un-
governable in others) in the Sifi are bridled with the
bridle of knowledge. Whether or not celibacy seems
good to him, at least he will not let nature hurry him
into marriage, though he will not prefer celibacy to
marriage unless it seems good to him.3 A Dervish was
asked why he did not marry, and he replied, “A wife
is suitable for a man, and I have not yet attained to true
manhood, and how should I marry>”4

Another Dervish, when advised to marry, said, “I
have greater need of divorcing my Self than of marrying
a wife".5 A similar answer was given by Malik b.
Dinar, when he was asked, “Are you not going to
marty?” and he said, “If I could divorce my carnal
Self, I would have divorced her”,* i.e. ^I have more
need to get rid of the ties I have, than to make fresh
ones, to hinder me in my Quest".

Closely connected with the idea of celibacy is that
of retirement and solitude, to which the Sūfīs attached

1 Al-Sha'rani, A/-Tabagāt al-Kubrá, p. 96. Suhrawatdī,* Awārif
al-Ma‘arif, margin Ihya, 11, p. 167.

2 Abū Nu‘aym, “Hilya al-Abrar", Leyden MS.

3 Suhrawardi, op. cit. TI, pp. 161, 162.

4 Op. cit. tī, p. 165. 5 Op. cit. 11, p. 167.

6 Munāvī, op. cit. fol. 74 b.

170 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

great value,and much was written on separation (tajrid),
retreat (kha/wa) and isolation (#z/2). Al-Kalabadhi, a
very early writer on Sūfism,' writing on the subject,
says that the real meaning of * ‘separation’ is to be
separated outwardly from property and inwardly from
all that is unreal. Again, he says that isolation (dafrīd),
that is, setting oneself apart for God, means to get
away from the phenomenal world and be alone in the
mystic states, and that one’s actions should all be in
relation to God; there should be no vision of the self,
no pleasure in the creatures and no seeking after
rewards.”

Al-Qushayri also speaks of the value of retirement
and solitude for the seeker after God. To go into
retreat is fitting for God's elect and retirement is
essential for those who seek Union. It is also essential
for the novice at the beginning of the Way. He quotes
al-Junayd as saying, ““The man who seeks peace from
his religion must give rest to his body and heart and
withdraw from the society of men, and the wise man
is he who seeks solitude for himself”’.3

The celibate ideal and the life of retirement were then
realised as invaluable for all who sought to follow the
mystic Way, and what was an advantage to the man
Süfi, because it freed him from the distractions of this

world, was of still greater advantage, indeed almost a
necessity, for the "woman SUELI She Was to pursue hêt
seem, we uslim women recluses living the life

of retirement in much the same way as the Christian
nuns.

1 Ob. A.D. 990 ot 1000.

2 “Kitab al-Ta‘arruf”, fol. 31 a.

; Risāla, PP- 66, 67. Cf. Ramón Lull: **Say, O Fool, what
is solitude?” He answered, ‘It is solace and companionship
between lover and Beloved’. ‘And what are solace and com-
Tese ‘Solitude in the lover’s heart, when he remem- -

ers nought save his Beloved’” (op. cit. p. 76).

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIII 171

This desire to withdraw from the world naturally led
to the establishment of religious houses. These are
heard of very early in the history of Islam, and the
history of the earliest of such foundations proves inci-
dentally the prevalence of celibacy among certain of
the followers of the Prophet. Al-Tabarī refers to “the
house of Sa'd b. Khaythama, who was a celibate, with-
out family, and there were celibates among the fol-
lowets of the Apostle from among those who fled to
him and therefore this house of Sa“d b. Khaythama was
called the house of the celibates”.1

Ibn Battüta also says that “On the bank of the moat
dug by the Apostle of God, when he met with the
assembly of the confederates (not far from Medina) is
a ruined dwelling, known as the abode of the celibates,
and it is said that ‘Umar built it for the celibates of
Islām”.* As the Sufi doctrine spread and its adherents
increased, it became necessary to pro ies
for those Who wished to Iivecapart.—fHimit Says t that the
first. monastery (kbānagāb) for Süfis was the one built
at Ramla in Syria, and the cause of its being built was
that one day a Christian prince had gone out hunting
and on the road he saw two persons of this sect (the
Süfis) who had met together and were embracing one
another. They then sat down in that same spot, and,
spreading out what food they had, they ate together.
His business brought the Christian Amir there, and
their affection to one another pleased him, and he called
one of them and asked him who the other was. He
replied, “I do not know". The Amir said, “What
(relation) is he to you?" The man answered, “None
at all”. The Amir asked, “From what place has he
come?” He said, “I do not know". The prince said,
* Then whence came this affection which you showed to
one another?” The Dervish replied, “He belongs to my
Way”. The prince asked, “‘Have you any place where

I Annales, 1, p. 1243. 2 Ibn Battūta, op. cit. I, pp. 289, 290.

172 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

you meet together?” and when the man said they had
not, the Amir said, “I will build you a place where
you may meet together”, and so he built that monastery
in Ramla.:

Maqtizi, the historian, speaks of the word hā-
nagab as being Persian and adopted into Islam at the
end of the fourth century. He says that the rise of
Siifism made it necessary to have religious establish-
ments for the devotees and that the first to set aside
a house for devotion was Zayd b. Sawhān b. Sabra,
and his aim was to provide for the men of Basra who
had given themselves up to devotion and who had no
worldly occupation and no means, and therefore he
built them a house and established them in it and gave
them what their calling required in the way of food
and drink and clothing, and so on. One day he went
to visit them and found they had been invited to a feast
by ‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr, governor of Basta, who wished
to do them honour. But Zayd realised that his devotees
could not serve God and Mammon, nor be tempted by
the things of this world and give their full attention
to the affairs of the next, and he sent them back to their
monastery.”

The same writer speaks of the derivation of the
Arabic name for a monastery, ribāf, which he says
is “‘a place wherein dwell the people of the Way”. He
says that the name was originally taken from the tying
up of horses, each separately, but later became the name
of the religious house of the Siifis, who had one abode
common to all and in this respect were like the home-
less. The inhabitants of the riz? had one purpose and
aim and lived in the condition which befitted their
calling.3 Though the greater number of these monas-

I Jami, Nafabat al-Uns, p. 34.

2 Maqrizi, A/-Khitat, 11, p. 414, where he gives Abū Nu‘aym
as his authority.

3 Maqrizi, op. cit. p. 427.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIII 173

teries were for men, yet we find also convents for
women from-as-eanly period. Several convents for -
en existed in Mecca and are mentioned by the

writers ofthe Chronicles of Mecca. We are told of two
near a place called al-Durayba, one of them known
by the inhabitants as the convent of Ibn al-Sawda, and
“over the door”, says the historian, "is a stone with
an inscription stating that Umm Khalil Khadija and
Umm ‘Isa Mariam, the two daughters of the Qa'id
Abū Tamr al-Mubārak, that is ‘Abd Allah al-Qasimi,
founded it for women Siifis desiring to lead a celibate
ife, who belonged to the Shafi“ Tite, in the year A.H. 596; TIT
and it is also called the convent of the Hurrish".:

Another Meccan convent was known as the convent
of Bint al-Taj, and over the door was a stone stating
that it was founded for pious Safi women of that
neighbourhood about A.H. 619.7 Yet another convent {2 s
in Mecca was called the convent of Al-Dūrī for women,
and was in existence in the second half of the seventh
century A.H.3

Among the convents for women in Egypt the most
famous was the one known as the Hostel of the
Baghdādīs, which was at the entrance of the Asfar
road, leading into the lane of Baybars at the Place of
Sacrifice (in Cairo).4

This convent was built by the noble lady Sitt Jalila
Tadhhariya, daughter of the king Al-Zahir Baybars,5
in the year A.H. 684, for the holy Shaykha Zaynab, 30»
daughter of Abū'al-I-Barakāt, known as the daughter of
the Baghdadi, and the princess sent the Shaykha with
her pious women down to it, and this place was well
known up to the time of Magrīzī the historian, from

^ x (Chron. Mekka, 11, p. 115. 2 Op. cif. 11, p. 113.
3 Vox II, p. 114.
4 ‘Ali Basha al-Mubarak, A/-Khitat al- Jadida, vi, p. 53.
5 Reigned over Egypt A.D. 1260-77.
6 Magrīzī lived A.D. 1364—1442.

174 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

the reputation of the holy women who were its in-
habitants. Magrīzī writes of it thus:

They have always a Shaykha to advise the women and remind
them (of their religious duties) and instruct them in the science
of religion. The last (Superior) whom we know of (by name)
there, was the noble Shaykha, preeminent among the women
of her time, Umm Zaynab Fatima, daughter of ‘Abbas, a Bagh-
dādī, who died in the year A.H. 714, when she had exceeded the
age of eighty. She was acquainted with jurisprudence, of great
learning, an ascetic, content with little, God-fearing, exhorting
others, zealous in what was profitable, and in religious exercises
tending to salvation and holy fear. The place was ruled with
kindness, and many women of Damascus and Cairo profited by
her teaching, and she possessed outstanding ability, and power
to influence souls. After her time it came about that each woman
who assumed the headship of this convent was called "The
Baghdadi”, and we hear of another noble Shaykha, the Baghdadi,
who remained there for many years, living the holiest of lives,
e died in the year A.H. 796. We know that this house was
a place of reception fof who were divorced or deserted,
who could use it as a retreat until they re-married or returned to
their husbands; since there was strict discipline maintained in it
| and the greatest care and assiduity in religious observances, so
; ver broke a rule was punished.

Then when hard times came, through the events which oc-
curred after the year A.H. 806,! the affairs of the convent suffered,
and the proximity to it of a prison for women prevented it from
being used, but its good reputation has lasted. A Odd? of the
Hanifites had the supervision over it.? |

Maqrizi mentionsalsothe convent of Sitt Kalila Dawla,
daughter of ‘Abd Allahal-Tataniya and wife of “Amr Sayf
al-Din al-Barli, which she founded in A.H. 694.?

In addition to those in Egypt, there were also Muslim
nuns to be found in other parts of North Africa.3
i I ae disorders which followed the war with Timür (Tamer-
ane

2 Magrīzī, op. cit. I1, p. 428.
3 Yāgūt, Mu‘jam al-Buldzn, IV, p. 661.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIII 175
Women. appeat-also-te—have--been prominent as

founders of monasteries for men. One of these in

Mecca was called the monastery of The Lady (a/-

Khatén) and was founded in A.H. 577 for Süfi men, Pas
both Arab and Persian, by Fatima, daughter of the

Amir Abū Layla M. b. Anūshirwān.'

Another foundress of a monastery for Sūfīs was the
Lady Taghāyī al-Khanda al-Kubra; this was known
as the convent of Umm Anük and was outside the
Barqujya gate of Caito, in the desert. She was Turkish,
the wife of the sultan Malik al-Nāsīr M. b. Qalawün
and the mother of the Amir Anük. She was much
given to good works and charity and her monastery
was well endowed. On her death in A.H. 749 she was
buried within the precincts of the convent, which was
still in existence in Maatizi’s time.?

So we see that in spite of opposition the women

aints of Islam, by the sanctity of their lives, by their
religious zeal and by their learning, were able to reach
a high rank in the religious life, and thereby also to
improve their social status, while the adoption of the
celibate life gave them an independence and freedom
in the exercise of the religious life which was quite
alien to the ideal of orthodox Islam.3 ae

I 997. VLE

2 Magrīzī, ob 25 II, P. 425.

3 For the whole question of Asceticism and Monasticism in
Islam cf. R. A. Nicholson on “Asceticism (Muslim)” in the
Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics; also Goldziher, Revue de
l'histoire des Religions, XXXVII, pp. 3 314 ff.; and M. Horten,

* Mēnchtum und Ménchsleben in Islām” (Beitrāge eur Kenntnis
des Orients, x11, Bd. 1915).

CHAPTER XIV
The Communion of Saints.

I is cleat from the foregoing that women saints re-
ceived much veneration during their life-time, and
they shared the worship bestowed on Muslim saints
after their death. To them prayers were offered directly
and intercession was made to God in their name, while
their tombs and the shrines erected to their memory
were the object of pilgrimages from different parts,
whence came worshippers to seek a blessing through
their mediation with God. There is every evidence that
the cult of the Saints was accepted and developed by
the Muslim mystics, and not by the mystics only, with
as atdent a faith as by the Catholic Church itself, and
indeed the belief in the Communion of Saints and their
intercessory power may have been derived, like much
else in Islamic mysticism, from the early Christian
Church. It is noteworthy that the Sufi writers honour
Our Lady Mariam, the spotless Mother of Jesus, above
all women, above men too, and acknowledge that she
reached perfection. The Saints were God's chosen—
the elect of the elect—and therefore between them
existed a spiritual bond which could not be severed in
this life or the next. The author of the "Siyar al-
Salihat”’ tells of a woman saint who addressed Dhü al-
Nin al-Misri by name, and when he inquired how she
knew him, she said, “God created the spirits two
thousand years before their bodies, then He set them
around His throne. Those who recognised one another
became intimate and those who had nothing to do with

1 ‘Attar, Tadhkirat al-Awliyd, 1, p. 3$.
2 M. al-‘Abdari, Madkhal al-Sbart* al-Sharif, 11, p. 19.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIV 177

each other, did not become friends. My spirit recog-
nised your spirit in that beginning of things.”

Abi Sa‘id b. Abi al-Khayr also says that

God created the souls four thousand years before He created
their bodies and placed them near to Himself and there He shed
His light upon them. He knew how much each soul received as its
share from that light and He bestowed His favour on the souls in
proportion to the share received; so that they remained tranquil
in that light and became nourished thereby. Those who in this
world live in fellowship and agreement with one another must
have been on terms of intimacy there. Here they have friendship
with one another and are called the friends of God and they are
in that state because they love one another for the sake of
God....If one be in the East and one in the West, they find
fellowship and comfort in conversing with one another and
although one belong to an early age and another to a later, yet
(the latter) finds benefit and comfort only by the speech of the
former.?

This clearly involves the doctrine of immortality,
including the survival of personality, and the Com-
munion of Saints, who belong not only to the church
visible, but to the church invisible, and here again, of
coutse, there can be no distinction of sex. The saints
on earth are still in fellowship with those “whose course
is run". These appear in dreams and visions to their
brethren still in this world and relate their experiences
in that new life beyond the grave and give counsel and
reproof to those left behind.3

It is related that ‘Abda bint Abi Shuwal, the servant
of Rābi'a al-Adawiyya, a year or so after the saint's
death saw her in a dream and asked her concerning
the state in heaven of other saints, especially ‘Ubayda
bint Abi Kilab, described as one of the greatest and
noblest and most fearless of the saints, of whom ‘Abd

1 Taqi al-Din al-Hisni, “ Siyar al-Salihat”’, fol. 45.

2 AlMunawwat, Asrār al- 'awbid, p: 599. —

3 Cf. R. A. Nicholson, The Idea of Personality in Sufism, p. 72.

SR I2

178 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

al-Wahid b. Zayd! said: "I have seen saints old and
young, men and women, and I have seen neither woman
not man nobler or with better intellectual gifts than
her”. She said to Malik b. Dinar, whom we have
already mentioned as being one of Rābi'a's associates,
*O Abū Yahya, when will the God-fearing servant
reach the highest degree of all?" He replied, “‘Oh,
‘Ubayda, when the servant reaches that stage than which
there is none higher, there will be nothing to hinder
him from arriving at God Himself", and ‘Ubayda gave
a loud cry and fell down unconscious.* In the above-
mentioned vision, *Abda questioned Rābi'a about this
saint's station in heaven, and she replied, “Indeed, she
has gone beyond us to a high degree". *Abda said,
* Why is that, when you were esteemed among the
people (while on earth) more than she?” Rābi'a said,
** Because she paid no attention to any state, whether
it were morning in this world-or evening". Then
‘Abda asked concerning Abū Malik, another Süfi, and
Rābi'a said: "He visits God when he chooses". ‘Abda
asked, “What is Bashr b. Mansür doing?" Rabi‘a said,
* Oh, he was given more indeed than he asked for".

‘Abda then said, **Shew me a means by which I may
approach nearer to Almighty God”, and Rābi'a said,
“Think on Him often, and so you may speedily be
given that which shall bring you test”.3

Another story already related* shews that Rabi‘a’s
followers believed that her personality survived after
death and that she had passed into the heavens, and
there are countless similar stories of the saints, after
their deaths, appearing in dreams to those still in this
world and revealing to them something of the wonders
and the joys awaiting them there.

One of the Süfis relates: “I was invoking Rābi'a

I See above, p. 10. 2 Munāvi, “Kawakib”, fol. 69 b.

3 Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi, “ Mir'at al-Zaman", fol. 257a. See also
"bn Khallikan, tr. de Slane, p. 517. 4 See above, p. 45.

.PART THREE, CHAPTER XIV 179

al-‘Adawiyya in prayer, and I saw her in a vision, and
she said, ‘Your offerings are presented to us on trays
of light covered with veils of light’”’.:

Another story of a God-fearing woman tells how, in
her sleep, she entered Paradise and saw all the Blessed
standing at the gates of Paradise, and she asked, ** Why
are the people of Paradise waiting?" and she was told,
“They have come to behold this woman by whose ap-
proach Paradise itself is honoured", and the dreamer
asked, ** Who is this woman?” and she was told, “ Umm
Sawda, called Sha‘wana’’,? who was the woman's sister,
and the dreamer goes on:

While I was thus (astonished), behold she was taken by an
angelic being who flew with her into the air, and when I saw her, I
cried out, “O my sister, do you not see where I am, from where
you are? If it be allowed, let me join you”, then she smiled at
me and said, “You may not approach me now, but I bid you
remember two things, your need of sorrow in your heart and
your need to let the love of God conquer your desires so that
they may hurt you no more till death ".3

We find that the reverence felt for the saints of Islam
was extended, very eatly in its history, to their last
 resting-places, and, later, costly shrines were erected and
frequently mosques built to their memory. Naturally
the graves of the Prophet’s family were the first to b
so honoured. |

Chief among these was the reputed tomb of Fatima,
the Prophet's daughter, at Medina,‘ still visited by
Muslim pilgrims from all over the world, and Burton
relates that the following prayet is offered at her grave:

Peace be upon thee, daughter of the Apostle of Allah! Peace
be upon thee, daughter of the Prophet of Allah! Peace be upon

1 Al-Qushayri, Risāla, p. 234.

2 See above, p. 145. 3 Al-Ghazali, op. cit. Iv, p. 354.

4 It must be noted that the exact place of Fatima’s tomb is
doubtful. Maqdisi mentions two sites (Bib/. Geog. Arab. 111,
p. 46), and al- Tabari gives a site in the Buqi* (Annales, 111, p. 2436).

12-2

180 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

thee, thou daughter of Mustafa! Peace be upon thee, thou
mother of the Shurafā. Peace be upon thee, O Fifth of the
People, of the Garment.? Peace be upon thee, O Pure Virgin.
Peace be upon thee, O daughter of the Apostle. Peace be upon
thee, O spouse of our lord ‘Ali al-Mustaza. Peace be upon thee,
O mother of Hasan and Husayn, the two Moons, the two Lights,
the two Pearls, the two Princes of the Youth of Heaven and
Coolness of the Eyes (i.e. joy and gladness) of true Believers!
Peace be upon thee and upon thy sire, al-Mustafa, and thy
husband, our lord ‘Ali! Allah honour his face and thy face and
thy father's face in Paradise, and thy two sons, the Hasanayn!
And the mercy of Allah and His blessings !3

“Ali Mubarak gives an account of some of the shrines
of women accounted as saints, to be found in Cairo,
including that of Sayyida Ruqayya, presumably the
daughter of Muhammad, who married first “Utbal and
then *Uthman, of which he says:

The sanctuary of Sayyida Ruqayya is to be found near the gate-
way which leads to the shrine of the Lady Nafisa, near to the
mosque of Shajarat al-Durr (The Spray of Pearls)* on the right
of the road from the shrine of Sayyida Sakina,5 looking on to the
memorial of Nafisa. It contains a hostel for Süfis and a place
for prayer and taps of water and many trees and a number of
. graves, among them the tomb of Sayyida Ruqayya, and over this
is a canopy of wood, ornamented with ivory and mother-of-
pearl, and above it a dome has been built and every year a Mawlid®
is celebrated for her and visitors come every week and verses
are recited, telling of her fame. The yearly revenue of this shrine
is over thirteen thousand piastres.7

1 Descendants of the Prophet.

2 According to a tradition, Muhammad once threw his cloak
around Fatima, her husband ‘Ali and her two sons, and so made
of them a group apart.

3 R. F. Burton, A Pilgrimage to Mecca, 1, pp. 327, 328.

4 Queen of Egypt, A.D. 1250-7.

5 Ibn Battüta places Sakina’s tomb near to the tomb of Umm
Kulthüm, close to Damascus (op. cit. 1, p. 236).

6 A feast in celebration of the birthday of a saint.
7 ‘Ali Basha al-Mubārak, A/-Khitat al-Jadida, vi, p. 5.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIV 181

The tomb of Umm Kulthim, daughter of ‘Ali and
Fatima, is described by Ibn Battüta as being near
Damascus, and he says:

. It is said that her name was Zaynab and that the Prophet gave
her the name of Umm Kulthüm, because of her likeness to her
aunt, Umm Kulthüm, his own daughter. Near the tomb is a
noble mosque, around which are dwelling-houses, and it is en-
dowed and the people of Damascus call it the shrine of the Lady
Umm Kulthüm.:

Thesame writer, in describing his visitto Hebron, says:

Near the Mosque called Al-Masjid al-Yaqin, is a cave in which
is the tomb of Fatima, daughter of Husayn b. ‘Ali, and on the
upper part of the tomb and the lower, are two tablets of marble,
on one of which is written, engraved in excellent script, “In the
Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. To Him be
glory and everlasting (dominion). To Him belong what He has
created and produced. Upon His creatures He has imposed
mortality: in the Apostle of God is an exemplar. This is the tomb
of Umm Salma, Fatima, daughter of Husayn, son of “Ali.”

On the second tablet is inscribed: **M. b. Abi Sahl the
sculptor, in Cairo", and under that these verses:

*"Thou hast made to dwell the one, whose PES
was my heart,
In spite of me, between the earth and the stone,
O tomb of Fātima, daughtet of the son of Fātima,
Daughter of the Imāms, daughter of the glittering stars.
O tomb, how much lies within thee of religion and piety,
Of chastity, of reserve and of modesty.”*

The Lady Nafisa, already mentioned3 as famous for
her good works and her miracles, is one whose inter-
cession is much sought after. Her grave is one of the
privileged places where those who desire can go to
pray with the sure expectation of being heard: ** That
saintly woman, who, so long as she lived, never denied

1 Ibn Battüta, op. cit. 1, pp. 225, 226.
2 Ibn Battūta, op. cit. 1, pp. 118, 119. 3 See above, pp. 148 ff.

182 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

the exercise of her power before the Throne of God,
to the unfortunate and oppressed, does not refuse their
petitions, now that she has passed away, and God leaves
no request unheard, for the fulfilling of which the holy
Nafisa lends her intercession”. Her shrine is in Cairo
and is mentioned by Ibn Battüta, who says that in the
necropolis of Qarafa at Old Cairo is the mausoleum of
the Lady Nafisa, daughter of Zayd b. ‘Ali b. Husayn b.
* Ali,? one whose prayers were answered and who was
zealous in her devotion. This mausoleum is very well
built and brightly adorned. Near it is a monastery
much frequented.3

“Ali Bāshaal-Mubārakalso describes this sanctuary and
says that the memorial of the Lady Nafisa was originally
a school known as Umm al-Sultān, but it was destroyed
with everything around it. This destruction, and the
fact that Nafisa’s shrine was moved in consequence, is
mentioned also by Ibn Khallikan.* The first to build
over the grave of the Lady Nafisa was the Amir of
Egypt, ‘Ubayd Allah b. al-Sirri, and this was written
on the marble tablet over the gateway of her tomb.
The dome over the tomb was renewed by the Khalifa
al-Hafiz in A.H. 532 and he also gave orders for the
marble work in the zzibrab.5 About the year A.H. 1280
a building was erected there and dwellings built for
the dervishes, and there they had lived in the writer’s
time. This place had been planted out with 2 number
of trees and the cost of erecting the building had been
met by pious endowments (awgāf).7 Nafisa's shrine
is near the mosque of Ibn Tülün.? |

1 Magrizi, A/-Kbitat, 11, p. 441.

2 This ought to be, bint Hasan b. Zayd b. Hasan b. ‘Ali.

3 Ibn Battūta, op. cit. 1, p. 75. 4 Wafayāt al-A‘yan, No. 777.

; Maqrizi, op.cit.11,p.442. | 6 "Alī Mubarak, op. cit. VI, p. 5.

7 Ihe modern Government of Egypt includes a Ministry of
Wagfs to deal with pious foundations and their endowments.

8 Governor of Egypt A.D. 868 to A.D. 884. This mosque was
restored in the thirteenth century A.D.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIV 183

Other shrines sacred to women of the Prophet’s
family mentioned by ‘Ali Basha al-Mubārak are the
mosque of Sayyida Zaynab, daughter of the Imam
* Ali and granddaughter of the Prophet, after whom a
whole district in Cairo is named, and the shrines of
*A'isha, daughter of Ja'far al-Sadiq and of Umm
Kulthüm, his great-granddaughter. Another very
sacted mosque is that of the Lady Sakina, mentioned
above, who was the daughter of the Imām Husayn.

These women owed their reputation for sanctity, in
part at least, to their membership of the sacred family
of the Prophet, but the shrines of others were equally
venerated.

In connection with that early Muslim saint, Umm
Harām,' her biographer writes:

It is by the perfect Divine favour of the Giver of all gifts in the
other world that the beloved of God and the honoured Prophet
has given life to the hearts of the believers by saying: “If any
of the male companions or female disciples be buried in a holy
place, they will intercede for such dwellers in that place as are
worthy of their intercession”. So likewise in this life it is by the
grace of God that—as it is said by the Imam Munāvī in his
comment on Jami‘ al-Saghir—whenever the people of Damascus
are sorely tried by the droughts and other troubles, and with full
trust appeal to that honoured lady, asking from the Giver of all
good and munificence, rain and rest and deliverance from trouble
and attack—the Dispeller of all cares and sorrows, God Most
High, out of respect to that honoured lady, dispels their anxieties
and troubles and grants them His rain and grace. And especially
there is no doubt that for those who with earnest endeavour
and in full faith make the customary and acceptable visitation to
the honoured tomb and revered shrine which contain her sacred
body, the Giver of blessings in unequalled wisdom, satisfies all
their needs. It is the perfect favour and grace of God Most High,
that He has made the aunt of that most glorious of created beings,?

I See above, pp. 137 ff. Her tomb was in Cyprus.
2 Umm Haram was of the kindred of the Prophet.

184 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

an intercessor for the inhabitants of this island and the visitors
who earnestly appeal to her, so that when we confide in her
exalted person we attain all our desires and aims in this world
and the next.!

Ràbifa bint Ismā'īl* was buried outside Jerusalem,
to the east on the Mount of Tor, according to Ibn
Khallikan (who confuses her with Rabi‘a of Basra),
near the mosque of the Ascension. This is evidently
the same tomb as that mentioned by Ibn Battüta,
among shrines which he visited in Jerusalem, as being
that of Rabi‘a al-Badawiyya, belonging to the Bedouins,
who, he says, is not to be confused with the celebrated
Rābi'a al-Adawiyya, of Basra.3 This tomb was an
object of pilgrimage in the Middle Ages,* and is still
reverenced in the grotto sacred also to St Pelagia and
the prophetess Hulda.

Another interesting shrine in Syria is a wa/#5 near
Damascus, on an ancient platform surrounded by a
grove of oak trees, which is known as Umm Shagagīf
( = the Mother of Pieces). The saint in whose honour
the shrine is held sacred was one of four maidens each
under the protection of a particular saint. She was
called Fatima, according to one version of the legend,
and ‘Arja ( = the lame) according to another. She was
lame, blind in one eye, bald, poor and in rags. She
went with her companions to draw water at a spring,
at which the four patron saints were seated. The other
three girls drew their water and departed. *Arja, when
she drew up her jar, found only the handles, her saint
had shattered it. When urged to desert him, she re-
fused, and, touched by her devotion, he first restored
the jar, then, at her request, healed her lameness, cured

1 Sh. Ibrahim b. Mustafa, Excerpta Cypria, p. 377.

2 See above, pp. 140 ff. 3 Ibn Battūta, op. cit. 1, p. 124.

4 Ibn Khallikān, tr. de Slane, p. 516.

5 In Syria the word wał is commonly used for the shrine of
a saint.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIV 185

her blindness, gave her flowing hair, clothed her
decently and bestowed wealth upon her. So she returned
to her home, became an object of worship, and, when
she died, was buried on this spot. Such is the legend
connected with this shrine, which is still accounted a
place of blessing. The women of the neighbourhood
come and break jars in fulfilment of their vows, be-
cause ‘Arja’s jar was broken.!

The tomb of Rābi'a al-Adawiyya was at Basra and
is mentioned among the Sūfī shrines to be found there
by Maqdisi, who wrote in A.D. 985.? Her grave was
visited as a place of pilgrimage.3

An Indian shrine mentioned by Ibn Battüta is of
great interest, and, from the fact that it bestows sanctity
on those who visit it, we may assume that its inmate
was reckoned a saint after her death, if not before. This
is the tomb of Radiyya, daughter of the Sultan Shams
al-Din of Delhi. We are told by the historian Firishta
that
...this princess was adorned with every qualification required
in the ablest kings and the strictest scrutineers of her actions
could find in her no fault but that she was a woman. In the time
of her father, she entered deeply into the affairs of government,
which disposition he encouraged, finding she had a remarkable
talent in politics. In that year in which he took the fort of
Gwalior, he appointed her regent in his absence. When he was
asked by the Umard why he appointed his daughter to such an
office in preference to so many of his sons, he replied that he
saw his sons gave themselves up to wine, women, gaming and
the worship of the wind (flattery); that therefore he thought the
` government too weighty for their shoulders to bear and that
Radiyya, though a woman, had a man's head and heart and was
better than twenty such sons.

After her father's death, Radiyya denounced one
of her brothers, who had murdered another, and was

I S. I. Curtiss, Primitive Semitic Religion To-day, pp. 82, 83.
2 Bibl. Geog. Arab. 11, p. 130. 3 ‘Attar, op. cit. p. 73.

186 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

supported by the populace, who put the murderer to
death and accepted Radiyya as their Sultan in a.p. 1236.
Sultāna Radiyya, upon her accession, changing her ap-
parel, assumed the imperial robes, and every day gave
public audience from the throne, revising and con-
firming the laws of her father, which had been abto-
gated in the last reign, and distributing justice with
an equal hand. Ibn Battüta tells us that she ruled with
absolute authority for four years. She rode on horse-
back, armed, and after the manner of men, and never
veiled her face. Finally, she was overthrown in favour
of a younger brother, and married one of her relatives.
Radiyya and her husband took up arms against the new
Sultan, but were defeated, and Radiyya took to flight
and was murdered for the sake of her costly clothing.
She was buried in the marshes where she had been
murdered and over her tomb was built a dome. At
the time of Ibn Battüta's visit, her tomb was visited
and was a place where blessing could be gained. It was
on the bank of the great river known as al-Jown, at
a distance of three miles from Delhi.?

Other more modern shrines of women saints to be
found in India include that of Haro Ana, which is to
be found four miles from Chauter (Baluchistān). A few
flags and a wooden shed mark the place. She was a
Tehanri woman, famed for her virtue, who lived a
virgin all her life. In her life-time she was credited
with miraculous powers and given lands by the Wané-
chis.3 On her death-bed she told her relations to bury
her body on a spot by which the enemies of the
Wanéchis had to pass, assuring them that the enemies
would either not come that way ot, if they did, would
suffer for it. So she was buried at the west end of Wani,
since called the Haro Ana Pérai. When, in the nine-

1 History of Hindustan, tr. A. Dow, 1, p. 183.
2 Ibn Battūta, op. cit. IXI, Pp. 166-8.
3 A section of one of the Afghan tribes.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIV 187

teenth century, the Wanéchis were raided, they prayed
at Haro Ana’s shrine, recovered their cattle and de-
feated the enemy.

In the Punjab, in Multan, is to be found the tomb
of Mai Sapuran, a woman who was a Nunari by caste
and became one of the disciples of the saint ‘Abd
al-Hakim (who died in A.D. 1732). Her shrine is in
the village called by her name. She was reputed to be
able to spread out her prayer-carpet on the waters of
the Rārī and to kneel for prayer upon it,” and both she
and her descendants had the power to cure the bites of
mad dogs.3

Among these shrines also is that of Bibi Nahzan,
to be found near Kalat, who sank into the earth together
with her maid when they were persecuted by some
infidels, and this shrine also is visited by persons who
have been bitten by mad dogs, while those who pay
a fixed contribution to the shrine believe that they
secure immunity from cholera. Another shrine in Kalat
is that of Bibi Nani, who guards the water-supply and
who is said to have been a daughter of Ya ‘Ali. Pro-
bably she was originally a goddess of the old Persians
and Bachins.4

There is the tomb of a girl saint to be found at
Elbasan, in Central Albania, where both Christians and
Muslims worship at the shrine. This saint is supposed
to have come from Khorasan. Her father tried to
compel her to marry and betrothed her to a young man.
She lay down to sleep, died and was buried on the
spot. There is a wooden sarcophagus, with a stone
pillar at the head, but without any date or name. The
saint’s blessing is sought by the childless, and for the
sick, and an elaborate ritual is gone through. The water

I Baluchistan District Gazetteer, vol. 11, pp. 123, 124.
2 See above, pp. 35 ff.

3 Multan District Gazetteer, 1902, p. 122.

4 Baluchistan District Gazetteer, vol. 1v, p. 37.

188 RABIA THE MYSTIC

of a pitcher left in the tomb all night is drunk by those
who seek the saint's favour and hope for the blessing
of children. Candles are also brought to the tomb and
lighted on Thursday evenings.!

The shrine of a famous woman saint among the
Kabyles is that of Lalla Imma Tifellūt, in the moun-
tainous region inhabited by the Beni Salah.? The time
at which she lived is unknown, but details of her
history have been handed down. She was the most
beautiful maiden of the mountain, a model of purity
and chastity in her youth. When a too-ardent admirer
abducted her as she came down one evening to draw
water as usual, and carried her off upon his mule, at
the end of the journey, when he drew aside the curtains
of the palanquin, he found that a dove had taken the
place of his captive. Then this maiden, who had shewn
herself so averse to marriage and the attentions of men,
in later life became a kind of feminine demon, a Circe
whose love was said to mean death, so that her tribe
wete doubtful whether she was to be regarded as a
daughter of Satan or as an angel. But one day she
left her dwelling for the summit of the mountain and
there went into retreat. Clothed in wool, with a
hempen girdle, she spent her days and nights in prayer
and communion with God—a Magdalene reclaimed
from her sins. She took staff in hand and went among
the Kabyle tribes seeking to revive the Muslim faith
among the lukewarm, but with little success. At last
her asceticism and her constant prayers had their re-
ward and she received the gift of prophecy and the
power to work miracles, and she was now accepted
by all as a saint and all the good fortune which came
to the Beni Salah was attributed to her. When she died,
she was buried with great pomp at the foot of the
cedar where she had lived, in accordance with her own

1 From information supplied by Mrs Margaret Hasluck.
2 Near Blida.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XIV 189

wish. Her tomb was enclosed in a chapel of stone
and a small dome indicates the spot where her much
venerated remains rest. The shrine is surrounded by
cedar trees, which are accounted too sacred ever to be
cut down or damaged. Even the eggs and the nestlings
of the birds belonging to the grove enjoy the protec-
tion of the saint.!

Other shrines of women saints among the Kabyles
include that of an unknown saint whom the Beni
Salah call Lalla Tawrirt, the Lady of the Hill; the
hawitha® of Lalla Imma Mr‘ita, in the midst of a
cemetery; that of Lalla Imma Wachāa on the left side
of the valley of al-Guethran; and the oak shrine of
Lalla Imma Mimen, on the right side of the valley
Beni-Azza. All these saints, who were holy women
during their earthly existence and who died in the
odour of sanctity, have their day of pilgrimage and
their annual festival. They have also their religious
serviteurs, who are usually people of the same dis-
trict as those who erected either the chapel in which
repose the mortal remains of these saints, or the shrine
which recalls the place where they prayed or had their
dwelling-place.3

All these shrines of women saints have been vene-
rated by Muslims, in some cases for centuries past, and
ate still the object of veneration to-day. Of the festivals
held at the shrines of women saints, and the part which
these sanctuaries occupy in popular Islàm to-day, more
will be said in the next chapter.

I Trumelet, Les Saints de l'Islam, pp. 306-25.

2 A name used in N. Africa for a pyramid of stones, in the
form of a circle or horse-shoe, adorned with rags or frayed
scraps, which is erected over the tombs of marabouts, whose
reputation for sanctity is not great enough to justify their
devotees in going to the expense of erecting a cupola. Cf. also
T. Canaan, Mohammedan Saints and Sanctuaries in Palestine, pp. 60 ff.

3 Trumelet, op. cit. p. 308.

CHAPTER XV
The cult of women saints in modern Islam.

t remains to consider the effect of the development
I of a mystical faith and the cult of the saints upon
popular Islam to-day. Throughout the Muslim world,
the dervishes are the modern exponents of Islamic
mysticism, but while the Sifi, as we have seen in the
foregoing pages, developed a philosophic doctrine con-
cerning God and His relation to His saints, the dervish
is contented rather with a particular manner of life.

The foundation of religious orders goes back to a
very early date in the history of Islam, and some of
the early Sufi teachers were reputed to have been
responsible for the founding of such orders, but pro-
bably this was due to the desire of later Sūfīs to derive
their spiritual descent from such great teachers. Among
these was Ibrahim b. Adham, who died in A.H. 161
(= A.D. 777) and who was accepted by such great
leaders as ‘Abd al-Qadir and Sidi Sanüssi as their
spiritual ancestor. Another leader claimed as founder
of an order was the great Sifi teacher and poet Abū
Sa'īd b. Abi al-Khayr,? but there is no historic evidence
for the statement. The number of orders now in ex-
istence is very great and it is possible to mention only
a few of the most important here. |

The most widespread of all, with adherents over
almost the whole of the Islamic world, is that of the
Qadiriyya, founded by Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jilani,
who is considered the patron saint of Baghdad, where
he died in A.H. 561 (= A.D. 1166). He had forty-nine
sons, who carried on his work after his death. His
most devoted followers went so far as to ascribe to

1 L. Rinn, Marabouts et Khouan, p. 28.
2 L. Rinn, op. cit., loc. cit.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XV 191

him powers almost divine. This order has separate
zāvijas (cloisters), and a central institution in Baghdad.
These dervishes are known for their philanthropic `
principles and mystical exaltation, but, in spite of this,
the Mahdi and his troops belonged to this order.
The main order of the Qadiriyya has produced
many subsidiary branches and dervishes of this school
are to be found spread over Islam from Morocco to
Malaysia.!

Among the orders which, while not world-wide,
cover a considerable part of the Muslim world, is that
founded by Ahmad al-Rifa‘i, who lived near Basra and
died in A.H. 570 (= A.D. 1182). He carried asceticism
to an extreme degree and was a great lover of animal
life. He was said to have great power over venomous
snakes and his followers claim the same power. He
was noted for his humility and his love for his enemies.
He has been called the St Francis of the dervishes, and
by his followers he was made almost into an emanation
of the Divine.?

Members of this order are found throughout the
Arabic-speaking Near East, and in Turkey.

An order of considerable importance found mainly
in the east of the Islamic world is that of the Khal-
watiyya, who derive their name from their practice of
going into retreat. This practice was undoubtedly
derived from the Christian recluses, and was adopted
by the leaders of the mystic orders for themselves and
their disciples as being more adapted than any other
means for realising complete sanctification in this life,
. 1 Margoliouth, Encyclopaedia of Islam, Art. ""Abd al-Qadir”’,
Montet, Encyc. of Religion and Ethics, Art. “Religious Orders
(Muslim)”. Depont and Coppolani, Les Confréries Religieuses
Musulmanes, p. 154.

, 2 Cf. Le Chatelier, Les Confréries Musulmanes, p. 202. For
a further account of the Rifa'i ritual see J. P. Brown, The

Dervishes, pp. 113-24. Cf. T. Canaan, Mohammedan Saints and
Sanctuaries in Palestine, pp. 119 ff.

192 RĀBI'A THE MYSTIC

and the absorption of the individuality of man in the
Essence of God.! Junayd, who died at Baghdad in
A.H. 298 (= A.D. 910-11), is said to have founded an
order on these lines, but the real founder of the existent
order was one ‘Umar al-Khalwati, also a Persian, who
died A.H. 800 (= A.D. 1397). The adherents of this
order are ascetics and mystics, practising retreats and
great austerities. They have spread beyond Persia into
Asia Minor, European Turkey, the Hijaz and the
Indies.*

Another order, of limited extent, is that of the
Suhrawardiyya, founded by Shihab al-Din Suhrawardi,
a Persian by birth, and well known as a writer on
Sūfism, who died in A.H. 632 (= A.D. 1234-5). He
represents the Pantheistic development of Siifism, and
his teachings are purely mystical. The adherents of this
school are found chiefly in Persia and India.3

An order which had its origin in Asia Minor is that
of the Mevlevis, founded by the great Sufi poet Jalal
al-Din Rimi, born in Balkh, who died at Konia in
A.H. 672 (= A.D. 1273). They are known as the
“Brethren of Love”, because the whole principle of
the order has been the love of God.* The headship
of the Mevlevi Order is still in the family of Jalal
al-Din and it still has its headquarters at Konia.5

Certain orders have remained purely local. Such is
that founded by Sidi Ahmad al-Bedawi, who is said to
have been a wild youth, fond of horsemanship, and then
to have suddenly become a recluse. After visiting the
tombs of ‘Abd al-Qadir and 2]-Rifā'ī he went to Tanta
(Lower Egypt), where he died in A.H. 675 (= A.D.

1 Cf. Le Chatelier, op. cit. p. 48.
2 Cf. also Montet, op. RA * Religious Orders (Muslim) ”,
sect. Khalwatiyya, and Depont and Coppolani, op. cit. chap. Ix.
3 Cf. L. Rinn, op.cit. pp. 211 ff. Depontand Coppolani, op. cit.
at 166 ff.
4 Cf. J. P. Brown, The Dervishes, chap. x.
5 E. J. W. Gibb, History of Ottoman oetry, 1, p. 151, note 3.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XV 193

1276). His order was based originally on the union of
the true believers in the “holy war” against Louis XI.
His disciples are called Ahmadiyya locally, and are
found all over Egypt. To him especially was ascribed
the power of giving children to the barren and this
may account, to some extent, for the excesses which
mar the celebrations of the saint’s Mawlids around his
-tomb, but it is probable too that in him were crystal-
lised the old Egyptian beliefs in the sun-mysteries,
since the dates of his festivals appear to coincide with
the old feasts. The saint is widely venerated and prayers
are addressed to him all over the country, while there
are numbers of shrines bearing his name.

A Spanish Muslim, Abū Madian,? born in Seville,
was the first to bring the doctrines of Süfism into
Morocco and was responsible for their spread through-
out Algeria. He was a mystic of a high order and one
who practised great humility in his outward life. His
followers are called Madawiyya and they represent
tather a philosophic school of Süfism than the popular
religion of most of the modern orders, and they are
found only in small numbers. The characteristics of this
school are the constant invocation of God, renuncia-
tion of the world, vigorous piety, the practice of the
contemplative life and research into mysticism.3

An order limited to India is that of the Chishti,
founded by Mu‘in al-Din Chishti, who died at Ajmir
in A.D. 1236. It is a Safi brotherhood and is widely
disseminated in India.

A modern order, also local, but of great importance,
is that of the Sanüssi, founded in 1835 by Sidi Sanüssi.
Its adherents profess the Sufi doctrines and a return

1 Cf. Depont and Coppolani, op. cit. pp. 333, 334. Also
Vollers, Encyclopaedia of Islam, Art. T Abnad al-Badawī”.

2 Ob. A.H. 594 ( = A.D. 1197-8).

3 Cf. L. Rinn, op. cit. pp. 211 ff. Depont and Coppolani,
op. cit. pp. 166 ff.

SR 13

194 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

to the Qur'àn and the Sufism of the early centuries
of Islam. They maintain the necessity of the Imāmate,
and they uphold the superlative excellence of the
contemplative and devoted life. They are strongly
represented in Tripoli. Like the Wahhabites, though
primarily religious reformers, they have had a con-
siderable effect upon political events.

All of these orders have their si/si/a, or chain of
links, shewing how they were founded, and this chain
is of two kinds, one? shewing the series of saints from
whom the founder of the order received instruction,
and this chain usually claims to go back to Abü Bakr
or ‘Ali, this derivation being due to a desire to link
up extra-canonical foundations with orthodox Islam
and to give to associations which in many respects
resemble Trade Guilds, a definitely religious sanction.
'The other chain? shews the series of Shaykhs who have
held the headship of the order and through whom the
baraka or blessed influence, of the original founder,
has been passed on.

Each of these orders has at its head a Shaykh, under
whom are his Khalifas or Nā'ibs, and under these
again are those known variously as muqaddam in
Notth Africa, murshid in Persia, ‘am or shaykh in
Egypt, and in the Sudan simply shaykh. These
latter are the heads of the various local groups and
engage in the work of propaganda and management,
enrol new members and initiate them. The members
are known variously as AKbouān, fugard', ashab ot
dervishes. There are regular meetings at stated in-
tervals called Padres, and in some parts simply
dhikrs. From an early period the orders have estab-
lished convents for themselves, sometimes a rb,
for communal life, or the zamiya for the secluded
life; in Persia this is called a khanagah, and in
Turkey a fekye. It may be only a place of residence

I Silsilat al-ward. 2 Silsilat al-baraka.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XV 195

and a meeting-place for the order, but it sometimes
includes a mosque and not infrequently the tomb of a
saint.

Initiation is administered to the rid ot novice,
usually by the muqaddam, who has himself received
his investiture from the Shaykh. The orders have
their own special liturgies, and mysticism is an
essential part of the religious faith of the votaries.t

Among the dervishes are to be found “walis” or
saints, usually credited with miraculous powers, and
there are also wandering fagirs, like the friars of the
Middle Ages, who travel through the villages, preach-
ing the doctrine of repentance and urging their hearers
to renounce their sins.

In addition to the regular adherents there are ter-
tiaries or lay members, who continue to follow their.
trade and to lead a normal life as members of the com-
munity. The great mass of the peasants and artisans in
Islamic countries are members of one of the dervish
otders.

The Muslim child, taught in the dis school, most
probably receives his instruction from a dervish, who
first leads his pupils towards the Way. The apprentice
learns still more from the j journeyman in his trade, and
very often the head of a trade is the spiritual director
of those who wotk in it, while all may learn from the
travelling teachers already mentioned.

Most of what has been said applies to women as
well as men.

There are large numbers of women dervishes, the `

majority of whom are lay-members. These are some- _
times received into the order by the local leader, a .

man, but ate frequently instructed and trained by
women and almost always hold 4bi&rs by themselves.
These women dervishes in North Africa are called Khiwa

1 Montet, “Religious Orders (Muslim)”, Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics.

13-2

awe T

196 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

(= sisters) if they are adepts, accept the duties and
practices of the order and in some cases, though these
are rare, are present at gatherings with the men, keeping
themselves a little apart. The most intelligent among
them can attain to the degree of smugaddarna, and
in this case have the work of initiating the new women
adepts and presiding at their gatherings or assisting
the muqaddam, when he presides. If there is no
mugaddama, the muqaddam initiates the women who
ask for it in the presence of the other sisters, and,
mote rarely, in the gathering of the men.!

^ Among the orders which admit women are the
Qadiriyya, which has between two and three thousand
women members in Africa, the Rahmaniyya, with thir-
teen thousand women members, the Khalwatiyya, the
Tidjania, the Heddawa, and the A'īssawiyya.? A writer
on modern Turkey says that societies of pious women
affiliated to dervish orders are found, and that these
were called “Sisters of Rim” by Hajji Bektash.3 She
tells of the widow of a Shaykh of Cavalla, a woman
of great intelligence who, after her husband's death,

presided over a society of female devotees, holding
their meetings at her residence.

Another Turkish lady, who was also a poetess, was
known as the Dervish Hanum, but she proved un-
wiling to give information as to the Sisterhood of
Mystics of which she was a member. A number of
Turkish women of good education have entered on
the Mystic Path and such are distinguished by the title
of “‘Sufi Hanum".4

The practices of the dervishes include renunciation
of the world, the retreat or sometimes a solitary life,

I L. Rinn, Marabouts e? Khouan, p. 88.

2 Montet, op. cit., loc. cit. L. Rinn, op. cit., loc. cit.

3 Garnett, Mysticism and Magic in Turkey, p. 175; Women of
Turkey, p. 507. Cf. J. P. Brown, The Dervishes, p. 165.

4 Garnett, op. cif. pp. 176, 177.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XV 197

vigils, fasting and the dhikr, or remembrance of
God.:

The latter devotional exercise frequently consists
simply of the repetition of the sacred name "Allah,
Allah, Allah”, but whatever form it takes, its main |
purpose is to produce a state of mystic ecstasy. The
dervishes usually hold a dhikr, under their local
leader, once a week, and also on special occasions such
as marriages, births and circumcisions both of boys
and girls, and herein the women play their part. There
are also dhikrs at the Mawlids.

These Mawlids, held in honour of the birthday of a
saint, occur almost nightly in such a great Muslim city
as Cairo; they include the Mawlids of women saints
also. The most famous of these is the Mawlid of Say-
yida Zaynab, who is greatly revered in Cairo, and the
festival is celebrated near her mosque there. Women
visitors are allowed on this occasion into the enclosure
round the saint’s resting-place, and others may make
the circuit outside. There is music, reciting and dancing,
at all these Mawlids, and in Syria, under Turkish rule,
there was much firing of guns, with fatal results at
almost every festival. The chief ceremony, in the
mosque at such a Mawlid as that of Sayyida Zaynab,
is the performing of dhikrs by bands of dervishes.?

The Mawlid of Lalla Imma Tifellūt3 is celebrated in
the spring, when the whole tribe of the Beni Salah,
men, women and children, go in pilgrimage to the
saint’s tomb. Thirty or forty goats and a number of
calves are provided for the feast and what is not needed
is sold by auction, the proceeds of which go to the
guardian of the tomb. The poor of the district crowd
to these free feasts. Weekly visits are also paid to the
shrine by those who desire to pray there. The saint’s

I Qur'àn, Sūra XXIX, 44; XXXIII, 41; XVII, 28.
2 Cf. Lane, Modern Egyptians, 11, pp. 220-2.
3 See above, pp. 188, 189.

198 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

blessing upon her tribe is still to be had for those who
seek it. If a Kabyle loses a goat, he promises a kid
to the saint if she will restore it to him. When the goat
is found, the goat-herd selects a kid, rears it and when
it has become a buck, he presents it to the saint, or
rather to her Wakil, the guardian of the shrine. If the
owner of a herd of goats wishes to preserve them
against the attacks of jackals, he presents a he-goat to
the saint and for the next year his herd will be safe from
marauders. The Beni Salah relate that in 1840 when
the Amir ‘Abd al-Qadir was encamped with his troops
in their country, he went to pray at the tomb of Lalla
Imma Tifellüt, and there had a dream in which an angel
made known to him that it was the last time he would
pray in the country of the Beni Salah. “It is written”,
said the angel, “that the day of the French has come,
and God, Who gives the earth to whom He will, Who
sometimes bestows His gifts in unstinted measure
where He wills and sometimes limits them, God, I say,
has decided that they (the French) shall be masters of
the country”.

However that might be, it was as a matter of fact
the last time that the Amir made his appearance in the
country of the Beni Salah.:

We have dealt already, in the preceding section, with
the tombs of the great saints of the past, and have noted
the veneration accorded to them by all pious Muslims.
To these are added the shrines and tombs of modern
Walis and Waliyyas, which are to be found everywhere,
not only in the great cities, but in every village, and
all receive their tribute of respect and to all come
petitioners, seeking the intercession of the saint, man
or woman as it may be.

These shrines are of many types and are called by
different names, but the modern saints are not honoured
with the pretentious buildings and costly mausoleums

1 Trumelet, op. cit. pp. 326-8.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XV 199

dedicated to the greater saints, which are venerated all
over the land and visited by thousands at the annual
festivals. The modern tombs take the form of the
maqam, which is usually a square building with a
qubba ot dome, generally shaded by a tree, which is
itself sacred. In North Africa this title is given to a
heap of stones arranged in a pyramid or circle, com-
memorating the sojourn in that spot of some revered
marabout.? The z4/ is so called in Syria and repre-
sents a more sacred class of shrine, a spot where
miracles have been wrought, and this is usually under
the care of a Shaykh. Its area is considered holy and
may afford a refuge for those fleeing from the avenger
of blood.3 The fawitha, found in North Africa and
already described,* is often no more than a heap of
stones. The saints in whose honour such shrines are
erected are not canonised by any superior authority
of the Muslim community, their sanctity is rather the
result of the vox populi, which in its choice acts freely
and without constraint, hetīce the vast number and
popularity of such shrines.5 All of them shew visible
signs of the extent to which the aid of those they
commemorate is sought. Nails are hammered into
doors, with the prayer that the suffering to be relieved
may remain where the nail is; an extracted tooth is left
with the saint that the pain may not return to the owner.
A shrine may be seen surrounded by small sticks
thrust into the ground, to which are tied fluttering
bits of cloth, taken from the garments of those who
make their petition, or those on whose behalf the

I Ganneau identifies this with the makiém of Deuteronomy,
the “high places” against which the prophets preached in vain.
See Arabs in Palestine, p. 209. Cf. T. Canaan, Mohammedan Saints
and Sanctuaries in Palestine, pp. 47 ff.

2 Trumelet, op. cit. p. 159.

3 Masterman, “Saints and Martyrs (Syrian)", E. R. and E.

4 See above, p. 189.
5 Cf. Goldziher, Le culte des saints chez les Musulmans, p. 268.

200 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

petition is made, and the faith of the petitioner is the
same, whether she or he comes to the Bab al-Zuwayla
in Cairo—behind which it is believed that the Q5,
the spiritual head of all the saints, has his abode—or
whether it be to the tomb of the unknown saint who
lies buried in the desert near the great mosque of
Khartoum. From the Wali or the Waliyya, it would
seem that these humble seekers after favour have more
hope of response than from God Himself.”

Of the cult of the saints, women and men, in
Baluchistan to-day, a modern observer writes:

Saints or Pirs are invested with all the attributes of God. It is
the saint who can avert calamity, cure disease, procure children
for the childless, bless the efforts of the hunter or even improve
the circumstances of the dead. The underlying feeling seems to
be that man is too sinful to approach God direct, and therefore
the intervention of someone more worthy must be sought. Any-
one visiting a shrine will observe stones, carved pieces of wood,
bunches of hair tied to trees, remnants of clothes, horns of wild
animals, bells and various other articles of paltry value. They are
placed at the shrines by devotees in the performance of vows.
The mother who is blessed with a child will bring it to the shrine,
where she will shave it and offer the hair and the baby’s clothes in
performance of the vows made during the course of her pregnancy.
The object is that the local saint may be induced to interest him-
self or herself in the welfare of the little one. The hunter brings
the horns of the deer which he has slain, in the hope of further
good sport; whilst those who are suffering from disease pass the
stone or carved pieces of wood over the part affected, trusting
that by this means the ill from which they are suffering will be
removed.3

Not only the tombs of saints have this power, but
in many parts of the Muslim world there are trees
sacred to saints which have a similar virtue. This belief

I See above, p. 2.

2 Cf. T. Canaan, Mohammedan Saints and Sanctuaries in Palestine,
pp. 132, 263.

3 R. Hughes-Buller, Census of India, Baluchistan, 1901.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XV 201

in the sanctity of tree-shrines no doubt goes back to
primitive and animistic religion, in which a definite cult
of trees is found. M. Clermont Ganneau considers that
most of the popular Muslim shrines in Palestine, with
the trees near by, represent the hill sanctuaries and shady
groves of the Canaanites and that their pagan origin
has been concealed by placing them under the pro-
tection of Muslim saints, who are represented as giving
their own names to the place, this close connection of
names and places being characteristic of the Phoenician
and Canaanite mythology. The fact that so many
modern Muslim 4wbbas ate consecrated to women,
he thinks, is a remnant of the worship of female
divinities among the Canaanites. The modern Wali
is often venerated along with a Waliyya, who is
considered as his sister or daughter, the original con-
jugal relationship having been changed by the Muslims
into one of consanguinity.?

The Arabs also had sacred trees. Al-Tabari speaks
of the sacred date-palm at Najrin, which was wor-
shipped by the Arabs at an annual festival, and upon
which they hung beautiful garments offered as gifts,
and ornaments; then they used to go out and devote
themselves to it by day, and prayed to it.3 Yāgūt also
speaks of sacred trees, one near Mecca, and another at
Hudaybiyya, mentioned in the Qur'an,* to which many
people resorted and found a blessing thereby. Lest it
should become an object of worship like Al-Lāt and
"Uzza, it was cut down and destroyed, and when the
people arose in the morning, there was no trace of it.5

Still in popular Islam we find traces of this cult.
The favourite shrines of the Yunihs, of Asia Minor,

I Cf. Robertson Smith, Religion of the Semites, pp. 185-193.
2 Clermont Ganneau, The Arabs in Palestine, p. 209.

3 Al-Tabari, Annales, 1, p. 922, ed. de Goeje.

4 Sūra XLVIII, 18.

; Yāgūt, Mx'/jam al-Buldan, ed. Wistenfeld, 111, p. 261.

202 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

are sacred trees growing by the side of the mountain
paths, on which they hang as votive offerings bits of
coloured rag, wooden spoons and other small articles.

Formerly, it may be that the tree acquired sanctity
because the local god or spirits were supposed to |
dwell in it and give it of their life, now it is associated
with some Muslim saint.

At Ahmadabad, near the tomb of an Indian Muslim
saint—one Musa Suhag, who dressed in woman's
clothes as a symbol that he was devoted to God as a
wife to her husband, and whose followers still dress
like women and live as celibates—is a sacred tree, the
branches of which are covered with glass bangles,
thrown by persons who pay their vows to the saint;
if the bangles stay in the tree, they believe that their
petitions will be granted.?

In Syria, in the oak-groves above the village of
Bārūk, in the Lebanon mountains, can be found a
sacred tree named Sitt (Lady) Sara, owing its sanctity
to Sarah the wife of Abraham, whose footprint, that
of a veritable daughter of the giants, is still pointed
out on the rock below the tree.

To this shrine are brought rags torn from the
clothing of sick persons, which are tied on to the
branches of the tree, with a prayer to Sitt Sara for
healing, for it is only on behalf of the sick that her
mediation is sought. In the course of time these shreds
have accumulated to such an extent that they literally
hid the tree itself, and of recent years a daughter-tree
dedicated to Sitt Rufka (Rebecca) has been adopted
by those who desire favours for their sick ones, and
prayers are offered now to Sitt Rufka for the same
purpose, and the stream of worshippers never fails.
It is hardly necessary to state that Abraham and his
household are claimed by Muhammadans as good

I Garnett, Women of Turkey (Muslim), p. 212.
2 T. W. Arnold, “Saints and Martyrs (Indian)”, E. R. and E.

PART THREE, CHAPTER XV 203

Muslims, Abraham being known to them as Khalil,
the Friend of God, and his reputed tomb at Hebron
is a jealously guarded shrine. So, as to the women of
the Prophet's family, to the womenfolk of the “friend
of God” also, is given the dignity of sainthood.

As a modern writer on Islam says with truth,
“Practically, the conception of the mystical, saintly life
and the organization of dervish fraternities cover all
Islam, and are the stimulants and vehicles of Muslim
piety. The religious institutions tend to foster this.
Above all comes the pilgrimage to Mecca and the many
imitation pilgrimages all over the Muslim lands, to the
tombs of celebrated saints." He goes on to speak of
the tremendous effect of the pilgrimage ceremonial on
the pilgrim to Mecca and adds, “‘the same scenes are
being "pearen at Saintly . shrines over the Muslim
world”?,t

Ta « Conclusion bus Mysticismā; ‘together with the ^
= worship of the Saints, living and dead, is still a real
part, indeed the most real part, of religious life, to the
men and women of present-day Islam and in so far as
it leads the Muslim to seek for a direct experience of
God, to shake ‘off the formalism and traditionalism of
orthodox Islam, and to striveinstead after the deepening
of the spiritual life, and to seek to do the Will of God
in love to Him and service to His creatures, so far its
influence must be an inspiring and uplifting force. In
so far, too, as the worship of the saints leads modern
Muslims to look up to those who, like Rabi‘a of Basra,
were true saints of God, as their ideal and to seek
to follow in their steps, this must mean progress in
the religious life.

The women saints, a great host, out of whom it has
been possible to mention only a few of the most out-
standing in the foregoing pages, certainly represent the

1 D. B. Macdonald, The Religions Attitude and Life in Islam,
pp. 215, 218.

204 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

greatest height to which Muslim womanhood has at-
tained, and in the reverence accorded them by Muslim
men and the example which they offer to Muslim
women, lies a real hope for the attainment of a higher
standard, religious and social, for Muslim women of
to-day.

The Path of the saint, whether Christian or Muslim,
lies through renunciation of self and communion with
the Unseen, and the saint is impelled along the Way
by the consuming flame of his love to God. He holds
the faith that:

That which thou lovest, O man, that too become thou must,

7 God if t thou lovest God, dust if thou lovest dust— ^ — - Se

The modern 1 Muslim, woman even more than man,
is outgrowing orthodox Islam. The tendency is, on the
one hand, towards religious indifference, on the other `
towards mysticism, which offers a living religion. It
may be that the real grounds of hope for the future,
for those who are of the House of Islam, lie in this

latter tendency. a - m"

D dd

Mo em

LIST OF AUTHORS QUOTED

ARABIC AUTHORS

M. b. M. al-‘Abdari. Madkhal al-Shari* al-Sharif. Alexandria,
A.H. 1293.
Dawid al-Antākī. Tazyīn al-Aswāg. Bulaq, A.H. 1291.
M. b. Husayn Baha al-Din. A/-Kashka/. Bulaq, A.H. 1288.
A. b. Yahya al-Balādhurī. Kitab al-Futah al-Buldān. Leyden,
A.D. 1863-6.
Ibn Battüta. Twbfa al-Nwxxár. Paris, A.D. 1893; edited by C.
Defrémeny and B. R. Sanguinetti.
Dabistan-i-Mazahib. Bombay, A.D. 1846.
Abū Dāwūd. A/-$wnan. Cairo, A.H. 1280.
Al-Dhahabi. Mian a/-I'tidāl. Lucknow, A.D. 1884.
M. b. Ishāg al-Fakihi. „Akdbār Makka. Leipzig, A.D. 1858.
Abū al Faraj al-Isfahānī. Kitab a/-Aghānī. Bulaq, A.H. 1280.
M. b. M. al-Ghazali. Ibya "Ulšm al-Din. Cairo, A.H. 1272.
Ibn Hajar. Igāba fi tamyīz al-Sababa. Calcutta, A.D. 1873.
Tagi al-Din al-Hisni. “Siyar al-Salihat.” MS. Paris 2042.
Shu‘ayb b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz al-Hurayfish. A/-Rawd al-Fa’ig. Cairo,
A.H. 1279.
‘Ali b. Husam al-Din. Kang a/-"Ummāl (al-Suyuti's works).
Haidarabad, A.D. 1894-7.
M. b. Hasan Imād al-Din. * Hayat al-Quläb” (on margin of Qz
al-Oulūb). Cairo, A.H. 1310.
‘Amr b. Bahr al-Jahiz. Kitab a/-Hayawān. Cairo, A.H. 1324.
Bayan wa al-Tabyin. Cairo, A.H. 1332.
Jamāl al-Din b. ‘Ali al-Jawzi. “Safwa al-Safwa.” MS. Brit.
Museum. Or. 3048. |
Sibt Ibn al-Jawzi. “Ta’rikh Mirāt al-Zaman.” MS. Brit.
Museum. Add. 23,277.
M. b. I. b. I. al-Kalabadhi. “Kitab al-Ta‘arruf.” MS. Collection
Prof. Nicholson.
* Ma'ani al-Akhbar." MS. School
of Oriental Studies, No. 200.
Ibn Khaldün. Muqaddima. Beyrout, 1900.
Histoire des Berbéres, tr. de Slane. Paris, 1925.

206 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

Ibn Khallikan. Wafayāt al-A‘yan. Gottingen, A.D. 1835-50.
Biographical Dictionary, tr. de Slane. Paris, A.D. 1842.

Abū Talib al-Makki. Ost al-Qulab. Cairo, A.H. 1310.

Al-Maqdisi. See Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum, tom. 1m.

Leyden, A.D. 1906.

Ghānim al-Maqdisi. “Kashf al-Asrar.” MS. Berlin. We. 1653.

M. b. ‘Ali al-Maqrizi. A/-Kbitat. Cairo, A.D. 1922.

‘Ali Basha al-Mubarak. A/-Kbifat al-Tanfikiyya al-Jadida. Bulaq,

A.D. 1889.
Mufaddal b. M. al-Dabbi. Mufaddaliyat (ed. C. J. Lyall). Oxford, |
I918.

‘Abd al-Rā” if al-Munawi. "Al-Kawākib al-Durriya.” MS.
Brit. Museum. Add. 23,369.

Abū al-Oāsim al-Hasan b. M. al-Nisābūrī. ‘Ugala’ al-Majanin.
Cairo, A.D. 1924.

Abū al-Qasim al-Qushayri. Risā/a. Bulaq, A.D. 1867.

Ibn Sa'd. Kitab al-Tabagat al-Kabir. Leyden, A.D. 1904.

Abū Nasr al-Sarraj. Kitab al-Luma‘. London, A.D. 1914 (ed.
Nicholson, Gibb Series).

Al-Sarrāj al-Oārī. Masāri' al-Ushshag. Constantinople, A.H. 1301.

M. b. ‘Abd al-Kārim al-Shahrastani. Kižāb al-Milal wa al-Nibal.
London, A.D. 1842.

*Abdal-Wahhābal-Sha'rānī. A/-Tabagātal-Kubrā. Cairo, A.H. 1299.

M. b. al-Atir al-Shaybānī. Usd al-Ghaba fī ma‘rifa al-Sahāba.
Cairo, A.H. 1280.

Al-Suhrawardi. ***Awārif al-Ma'ārif” (on margin of al-Ghazali's
Ihyā). Cairo, A.H. 1272. |

‘Abd al-Rahmān al-Sulami. "Tabagāt al-Süfiyya." MS. Brit.
Mus. Add. 18,520. |

Abū Ja'far M. b. Jarir al-Tabari. Annales. Leyden, A.D. 1879.

Abū al-Mahasin b. Taghribardī. A/-Nujūm al-Zahira. Leyden,
A.D. 1855-61. |

Abū Tammām, Diwan al-Hamäsa, Cairo, 1913.

M. b. al-Tayyib al-Qadiri. Nashr al-mathani fi a‘yan al-qarn al-
thamani. Fez, A.H. 1310.

Wiistenfeld (editor). Die Chroniken der Stadt Mekka. Arabic
Text. Leipzig, A.D. 1858.

Yafiial-Sháfi. Rawd a/-Riyabin. Cairo, A.H. 1297.

Yāgūt b. ‘Abd Allah. Kstab Mu ‘jam al-Buldan. Leipzig, A.D. 1866.

LIST OF AUTHORS QUOTED 207

PERSIAN AUTHORS

Shams al-Din A. Aflaki. * Manaqib al-‘Arifin.” MS. India
‘Office. No. 1670.

Farid al-Din ‘Attar. Tadbkirat al-Awliyā. Ed. Nicholson.
London, A.D. 1905. Uyghur version, tr. de Courteille,
Paris, A.D. 1889. |

Firishta. History of Hindustan. Tr. A. Dow. London, A.D. 1768.

‘Alī b. "Uthmān al-Hujwiri. Kashf a/-Mabjūb. Tr. R. A. Nichol-
son. London, A.D. 1911.

‘Abd al-Rahmān b. al-Jami. Nafabdt aJ-Uns. Calcutta, A.D, 1859.

Al-Munaw war. Asrdr al-Tawhid. Petrograd, A.D. 1899.

Jalal al-Din Rimi. Mathnavi. Bks rand rt. Ed. R. A. Nicholson,
London, A.D. 1925. | :

Mahmūd Shabistarī. Gulsban-i Raz. Ed. Whinfield. London,
A.D. 1880.

Tawakkul Beg Kulālī. "Neskhah-i Ahwāl Shahi.” MS. Brit.
Mus. Or. 3203.

URDU AUTHOR '
M. ‘Abbas. Mashabir INiswan. Lahore, 1902,

TURKISH AUTHOR
M. Zihni. Meshabir al-Nisā. Constantinople.

EUROPEAN AUTHORS

T. W. Arnold. “Saints and Martyrs (Indian)”, Encyclopaedia of
Religion and Ethics. Edinburgh, 1908. |
H. J. Ll. Beadnell. The Wilderness of Sinai. London, 1927.
M. Benhazera. Six mois chez les Touareg du Abaggar. Alger, 1908,
St Bernard. The Love of God. Tr. M. C. and Coventry Patmore.
London, 1884.
R. Briffault. The Mothers. London, 1927.
J. P. Brown. The Dervishes. London, 1927.
E. G. Browne. **Süfism." Religions Systems of the World.
London, 1876. |
A Travellers Narrative of the Episode of the Bab.
Cambridge, 1891.
A Persian Anthology. London, 1927,

208 RABI‘A THE MYSTIC

R. Burton. Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage to Mecca. London, 1893.
T. Canaan. Mohammedan Saints and Sanctuaries in Palestine.
London, 1927.
Le Chatelier. Les Confréries Musulmanes. Paris, 1887.
C. D. Cobham. Excerpta Cypria. Nicosia, 1895.
John Cordelier. The Spiral Way. London, 1922.
S. I. Curtiss. Primitive Semitic Religion To-day. London, 1902.
O. Depont and Coppolani. Les Confréries Religieuses Musulmanes.
Alger, 1897.
R. Dozy. Histoire de l'Islamisme. Tr. Chauvin. Leyden, 1879.
C. Doughty. Travels in Arabia Deserta. London, 1926.
St Francis. Little Flowers of 5 t Francis. Tr. T. W. Arnold.
London, 1908.
Clermont Ganneau. Palestine Quarterly Survey. 1875.
L. M. J. Garnett. Mysticism and Magic in Turkey. London, 1912.
The Women of Turkey and Their Folk-lore.
London, 1891.
E. J. W. Gibb. Ottoman Poems. London, 1882.
History of Ottoman Poetry. London, 1900.
A. J. de Gobineau. Les Religions et les Philosophies dans V” Asie
Centrale. Paris, 1900.
I. Goldziher. Mubammedanische Studien. Halle, 1889.
“Culte des saints." Revue de l'histoire des Religions.
1880.
“De l'Ascétisme aux premiers temps de l'Islàm."
_ Revue de l'histoire des Religions. 1898.
Mme de la Motte Guyon. Poems. Tr. W. Cowper. London,
1811.
F. von Hügel. The Mystical Element of Religion. London, 1909.
R. Hughes-Buller, Census of India, Baluchistan, 1901.
St John of the Cross. Ascent of Mount Carmel. Tr. Lewis.
London, 1889.
Spiritual Canticle. Tr. Lewis. London,
1909.
Rufus Jones. Studies in Mystical Religion. London, 1909.
A. von Kremer. Culturgeschichte des Orients. Leipzig, 1873.
E. W. Lane. Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians.
London, 1836.
Ramon Lull. The Lover and the Beloved. London, 1923.

LIST OF AUTHORS QUOTED 209

C. J. Lyall. Translations of Ancient Arabian Poetry. London, 1885. /
D. B. Macdonald, The Religious Attitude and Life in Islam, ^
Chicago, 1909.
P. S. Margoliouth. The Early Development of Mobammedanism.
London, 1914.
L. Massignon. Lexigue Technique de la Mystique Musulmane.
Paris, 1922.
Textes Inédits Relatifs à la Mystique Musulmane
(in preparation).
M. de Molinos. The Spiritual Guide. England, 1688.
E. Montet. Le culte des saints musulmans dans Il’ Afrique du Nord.
Geneva, 1909.
R. A. Nicholson. Selected Poems from the Diwan-i Sbamsi Tabriz.
Cambridge, 1898.
Literary History of the Arabs. London, 1907.
Studies in Islamic Mysticism. Cambridge, 1921.
Translations of Eastern Poetry and Prose.
Cambridge, 1922.
The Idea of Personality in Sufism. Cambridge,
1923.
* Asceticism (Muslim)." Encyclopaedia of Re-
ligion and Ethics. Edinburgh, 1908.
E. H. Palmer. The Desert of the Exodus. Cambridge, 1871.
Caussin de Perceval. L’ Histoire des Arabes. Paris, 1902.
A. Perron. Femmes arabes avant et depuis l'islamisme. Paris, 1858.
Plotinus. Exneads. Tr. S. McKenna. London, 1917.
L. Rinn. Marabouts e? Khouan. Alger, 1884.
John of Ruysbroeck. Book of the Sparkling Stone. Tr. C. A.
Wynschenk Dom. London, 1916.
W. Robertson Smith. Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia.
Cambridge, 1885.
Religion of the Semites. London, 1894.
F. Thompson. Works of Francis Thompson. London, 1913.
C. Trumelet. Les Saints de Islam. Paris, 1881.
Evelyn Underhill. Mysticism. London, 1912.
Man and the Supernatural. London, 1927.
Carra de Vaux. Penseurs de l’Islam. Paris, 1923.
J. Wellhausen. Die Ebe bei den Arabern. Gottingen, 1893.

SR I4

Digitized by Google

INDEX I
Proper Names and Titles

(Titles of books, etc., in italics)

‘Abbas b. Mirdās, 119

‘Abbas of Tūs, 2

* Abda bint Abi Shuwal, 19, 23,
44, 99, 177, 178

*Abdàri, M., see Madkhal al-
Shari‘ al-S. harif

‘Abd Allah al-‘Adawi, 143

‘Abd Allah al-Oāsimī, 173

‘Abd Allah b. ‘Amr, 172

‘Abd Allah b. ‘Isa, 56

* Abd al-‘Aziz b. Sulayman, 18,

40
‘Abd al-Gháfir al-Fārisī, 15 3
* Abd al-Hakim, 187
‘Abd al-Qadir al-Jili (Jīlānī),
48, 190, 191, 192
ae al-Mun'im al-Qushayri,

‘Abd al-Wahid ‘Amr, 24

‘Abd al-Wahid b. Zayd, 10, 102,
178

Abū ‘Abd Allah b. al-Jīlī, 65

Abū ‘Abd Allah al-Qurashi, 94

Abū ‘Ali the Jurist, 101

Abia ‘Ali Farmadhi, 2

Abū ‘Amr al-Dimashqi, 66 :

Abū Bakr, 120, 122, 124

Abū Dawid, 18, 126, 165

Abū Duwād, 119

Abū al-Faraj al-Isfahani, 112

Abia Habib al-Hariri, 18

Abi al-Husayn al-Nūrī, 54

Abū Ja‘far b. Sulaymān, 83

Abū Madian, 193

Abū Mālik, 178

Abū Muhammad Yandakān,

129

Abū Nasr al-Sarrāj of Tūs, xiv,
$4» 55» 65, 66, 69, 74, 76, 77;
79, 81, 91, 93

Abū Nu‘aym, xviii, xxii, 5, 15,
78, 81, 86, 169

Abü al-Oāsim * Abd al-Rahmáàn,

153 E
Abū al-Qàsim al-'Arif,

see
Qasd ila Allah
Abū al-Qàsim al-Nisābūrī, see
"Ugalā' al-Majanin

Abia Sa‘id al-Kharraz, 40
Abi Sa‘id b. Abi al-Khayr, 49,
78, 88, 90, 101, 150 ff., 177,

190

Abū Sa'üd b. Shibli, 48.

Abū Sulayman al-Darānī, 140,
141, 167

Abū Tālib Y al-Makki, 10, 14, 16,
47, 50, 51, 58, 74, 76, 80, 81,
83, 92, 94, 97, IOI, 102, 103,
104, 107, 133, 140, 141, 143,
166, 167, 168

Abū Tammām, see Diwan al-
Hamāsa

Abū Yazīd al-Bistāmi, 31, 72,

94
Adam, 54, 68
Aflaki, 70, 98, 99
Ahmad al-Bedawi, 192
Ahmad al-Rifa‘i, 191, 192

Ahmad b. Abi al-Hawwārī,

140 ff.
Amal b. Hanbal, 77
‘Aisha, bint Abū Bakr, 4
‘Aisha bint Ja‘far al-Sàdiq, 155
* A'isha bint Talha, 120, 124

14-2

212

‘A’isha bint Yahya, 119 ff.

"Akhāf al-Hilālī, 165

Akhram, 113

er Basha al-Mubārak, see a/-

itat al-lawfikiyya al-Jadide

Al-Lat, 201 PROBES

Amir Bukhara, convent of, 158

‘Amra, wife of Habib, 23

-Antaki, D., xxi, 105

Annales, 122, 171

“Aqaba, 121

"Arjā, 184, 185

Arnold, T. W., 202

Asiya, daughter of Mazāham,
72

Asrar al-Tawhid, xvi, xxiii, 2,
79, 88, 91, 92, 95, 101, 102,
152, 177

"Atayfa, 132

"Atba al-Ghulām, 89

*Atika bint Zayd, 124

“Attar, Farid al-Din, xvii, xviii,
2, 3, 4, 6, 7» 8, 9, 13, 14,
21, 22, 25, 24, 25, 29, 50, 32,
34» 35» 37» 42, 44; 45, 46, 47,
48, 55, 61, 62, 75, 82, 85, 85,
86, 97, 99, 100, 110, 176, 185

‘Awarif al-Ma'ārif, 98, 169

Azila, of the Amrab, 132

Bāb al-Zuwayla, 200 `
Baba Kühi of Shiraz, 64
Baghdad, 153, 154, 160, 191,

192

-Baladhuri, see Kitab a/-Futūb
al-Buldan

Bashr b. Mansi, 178

Batja, 23

-Bayān, 14, 21, 85

Baybars, 173

Beadnell, H. J., 166

. Bedouin, women, 119, 122,
123, 132

Benhazera, M., 130, 131

Beni Firās, 115

Beni Jusham, 113

Beni Kunayna, 113, 115

4

INDEX I

Beni Salah, 188, 189, 197, 198

Beni Tamim, 122

Beni Taghlib, 122

Berbers, 129, 130

Bibi Nahzan, 187

Bibi Nani, 187

Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabi-
Corum, 179, 185

Bint al-Taj, 173

Bishr al-Hafi, 168

Bishr-i Yasin, 61

Briffault, R., 121, 125, 131

Brown, J. P., 191, 192, 196

Browne, E. G., 65, 105, 159,
160, 161, 162, 163

Browning, R., 108

Buhaysa, bint Aws b. Haritha,
117, 118

Burton, R., 179, 180

Canaan, T., 189, 191, 199, 200

Caussin de Perceval, 121, 122

Cheikko, L., 116

Chronicles of Mecca, 173, 175

Cobham, C. D., 138, 139, 140,
184

Conder, C. R., 132

Cordelier, John, 42, 95

Crowfoot, J. W., 131

Curtiss, S. I., 185

Dabistan, 154

Dara Shakih, 154

Depont and Coppolani, 191,
192, Pi

Diwan al-Hamāsa, 124

-Durayba, 173

Durayd b. Simma, 113 ff.

-Düri, 173

Elbasan, tomb at, 187

Fakhr al-Nisa’, see Shuhda
bint Abū Nasr ,

Fatima, see “Arja

Fatima bint Abū Layla, 175

Fatima bint Husayn b. ‘Ali, 181

INDEX I

Fátima, Jahan Ārā, 154 ff.

Fátima, daughter of the Pro-
phet, 2, 137, 179, 180

Fatima bint Taj al-Din, 154

Fezāta, 121

-Fudayl b. ‘Iyad, 40, 66, 147,
148

Ganneau, C., 199, 201

Garnett, L. M J., 196, 202

Gautama,

Ghinim b. Maddisi see Kashf
al- Asrār

-Ghazali, xv, xvi, 27, 40, 41, 47,
51, $4, 58, $9, 60, 61, 66, 68,
71, 73, 81, 99, 104, 105, 107,
137, 146, 147, 179

Gibb, E. J. W., 49, 192

Gobineau, A. J. de, 162

Goldziher, I., 2, 5, 7, 31, 175,

199
Grou, J. N., 80
Gulshan-i Raz, I, 20, 50, 62, 76
Guyon, Mme de la "Motte, 61,
65

Habiba ‘Adawiyya, 27

Haji Mulla Salih, 159

Haji Sayyid Kazim, 159, 160

-Hallāj, 104, 159

-Hamadhānī, 10

Ķammād b. Zayd, 102

Hamza, 122

-Hārith b. ‘Awf, 117, 118

Haro Ana, 186, 187

Hātūn al-Rashid, 143

Hasan of Basra, 11 ff., 23, 24,
35, 36, 39, 43, 145

Hasan, governor of Egypt,
129, 130

Hasluck, Mrs Margaret, 188

Hayat al-Oulūb, 18, 23, 72, 98 ©

Hayyüna, 28

Hilya al-Awliya, 3, 15, 16, 32,
41, 72, 81, 86, 169

Hind bint ‘Utba, Umm Mu-

. ‘wiya, 121

213

Horten, M., 175

Hiigel, F. von, 42, 100, 102

Hughes-Buller, R., 200

-Hujwiti, XXI, xxii, I, 41, 55, 54;
58, 65, 77, 79, 88, 91, 92, 94,
98, 108, 168

Hulda the prophetess, 184

-Hurayfish, xx, 12, 18, 28, 55,

87, 103, 135

Iblis, 68

Ibn ‘Arabi, 70

Ibn al-‘Arabi, 218

Ibn Battüta, 127, 128, 129, 130,
155, 154, 171, 180, 181, 182,
184, 185, 186

Ibn al-Farid, 107

Ibn Hajar, 121, 165

Ibn al-Jawzi, xviii, xxii, xxiii,

3, 17» 27, 44, 140, 141

Ibn Khafif, 89, 95

Ibn Khaldün, 129, 130

Ibn Khallikān, xviii, xix, 44,
85, 98, 126, 145, 149, 155,
182, 184

Ibn Mansür, 56

Ibn al-Sawda, 173

Ibn Tülün, 182

Ibrahim b. Adham, 9, 72, 190

Ibrahim b. Mustafa, 138

Ibyā "Ulūm al-Din, xvi, 27, 40,
41, 51, 54, 58, 59, 66, 68, 71,

_ 98, 99, 137, 146, 147

‘Isa Zàdhàn, Amir of Basra, 5, 6

Ishi Nili, 150 ff.

Ja‘far al-Sadiq, 148, 183

Ja‘far b. Sulayman, 97, 102

Jahān-Ārā, see Fatima

- Jahiz, 14, 18, 20

Jalila Tadhhariya, 173

Jami, xx, 2, 3, 19, 56, 62, 84,
141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146,
148, 171, 172

Jesus, 2, 65, 176

john the Baptist 65

" John of Ruysbroek, 96

214

Jones, Rufus, 110
-Junayd, 40, 54, 170, 192

Ka'ba, 8, 9, 17

Kabyles, 188, 189

Kāhina, Dihya, daughter of
Tabeta, 129, 130

-Kalabadhi, 41, 59, 60, 63, 65,
98, 103, 124, 134, 170

Kalila Dawla, 174

Kang al-“Ummal, 125

Kashf al-Asrar, 98, 102

Kashf al-Mabjub, xxii, 41, 55,
58, 65, 67, 77, 79, 89, 90, 92,
93, 94, 98, 108, 168

Kashshaf, 153

-Kawakib al-Durriya, 4, 11, 19,
21, 51, 55, 48, 66, 101, 141,
142, 145, 167, 178

Khadija bint Jalal al-Din, 128

-Khansa, 115, 119

-Kbitat, 150, 172, 173, 174, 175;
182

-Khitat al-Tawfikiyya al-Jadida,
173, 180, 182, 183

Kilab b. Hari, 18

King, E. Hamilton, 109

Kitab al- Aghdani, xxiii, xxiv, 112,
114, 116, 119, 120, 125

Kitab ai-Futūb al-Buldan, 139

Kitab al-Hayawan, 18

Kitab al-Luma‘, xiv, 54, 65, 67,
74, 76, 79, 81, 91, 93

Kitab al-Milal wa al-Nibal, 39

Kitab al-Ta‘arruf, 65, 66, 103,
134

Kremer, A. von, 125

Lalla Imma Mimen, 189
Lalla Imma Mr'ita, 189
Lalla Imma Tifellüt, 188, 189,

197
Lalla Imma Wachāa, 189
Lalla Tawrirt, 189
Lane, E. W., 197
Latif, 155
Layla al-Qaysiyya, 18

INDEX I

Le Chatelier, 191, 192

Little Flowers of St Francis, 68,
75, 85, 106

Lull, Ramón, 25, 82, 95, 170

Lyall, C. J., 117, 125

Ma‘ani al-Akhbar, 41, 59, Go,
65, 66, 98, 124

Macdonald, D. B., 203

Madkhal al-Shari‘ al-Sharif, 176

Mahmid Khān, 162

Mahmid Shabistari, 1, 20, 50,
62, 76

Mai Sapuran, 187

Majdi Pasha, 154

Malabar, 129 .

Maldives, 127, 128

Malik b. Dinar, 18, 25, 43, 169,

178
Manāgib al-‘ Ārifīn, 99
-Maqdisi (-Muqaddisi), 179, 185
Maarizi, see a/-Khitat
Margoliouth, D. S., 24, 192
Mariam of Basra, 19
Mary, the Mother of Jesus, 2,

6

17
Magari al-Ushshaq, 15, 16, 17,

103

-Masjid al-Yaqin, 181

Massignon, L., 5, 5, 10, 14, 15,
31

Masterman, 199

Mathnani, 41, 122

Mayhana, 49, 150, 151

Mecca, 8, 178

Medina, 121, 158, 149, 171, 179

Mesbabir al-Ntsā, 4, 5

Mir'āt al-Zamán, xviii, 3, 11, 17,
I8, 22, 27, 34, 37, 44, 84, 85,
178

Miskin al-Dārimī, 120

Migan al-I‘tidal, 18, 166

Molinos, M. de, 52

Montet, E., 192, 195, 196

Mount Auras, 129, 130

Mu'ādha al-‘Adawiyya,
145 ff.

18,

INDEX I

Mufaddalīyāt, 117

Muhammad the Prophet, 5,
III, 112, 121, 122, 126, 127,
137, 138, 166, 180
uhammad Zihni, see Mesha-
Bir al-Nisā

Muhammad b. ‘Amr, 25

Muhammad b. Aslam al-Tisi,

45
Muhammad b. Fudayl, 144
Muhammad b. Sulaymān al-

Hāshimī, 10
Muhammad b. al-Tayyib al-

Qadiri, see Nashr al-Mathani

Muhayra bint Abad, 132

Mu‘jam al-Buldan, 174, 201

Mulla Husayn, 160

Mulla Shah, 155, 156

Mumtaz Mahall, 154

-Munàwi, ‘Abd al-Rā'ūf, xxi,
xxii, 4, 23, 29, 32, 35, 39, 40,
48, 66, 70, 84, 101, 141, 142,
145, 145, 146, 149, 167, 169,
178

Munawi, Imam, 183

-Munawwar, xvi, 2, 79, 177

Munkar and Nakir, 11, 45

Mus‘ab, 120

Misa Suhāg, 202

Musaylima, 122

Muwaylik al-Mazmüm, 123

Nafabat al-Uns, xx, xxiii, 3, 19,
56, 84, 141, 142, 144, 146,
172

Nafisa, 148 ff., 180, 181, 182

Na‘mi Tartisi, 45

Nashr al-Mathani, 157

Neskhah-i Abwal Shahi, 155

Nicholson, R. A., 26, 49, 51,
61, 64, 97, 105, 116, 123, 175,
177

Nīshāpūr, 150

-Nujūm ai-Zābira, 3, 18, 121,
139, 150

Nusayba, Umm Habib,
132

I2I,

215

Palmer, E. H., 12
Perron, A., 134

Plato, 63, 94

Plotinus, 105, 106, 107

Qasd ila Allah, 30

-Qasim, 148

~Qur'an, 43, 45, 50, 53, $45 72,
100, 126, 127, 131, 133, 135,
148, 149, 165, 194, 197, 201,
211

Qurrat al-‘Ayn, 158 ff.

-Qushayri, 17, 27, 29, 47, 51,
56, 58, 59, Go, 61, 65, 67, 72,
77» 79, 82, 89, 93, 94, 100

Rabah al-Qays, 15, 16

Rabi‘a al-‘Adawiyya, 1—110. See
Index of Subjects

Rabi‘a bint Ismā'l,
tomb of, 184

Rabi‘a b. Mukaddam, 113, II$,
123

Radiyya, 185, 186

-Rawd al-Fa’iq, 18, 55, 87, 103,

140 ff.;

135

Rayta bint Judhal al-Ta‘an,
II$, 123

-Rifā'ī, 191, 192

Rinn, L. , 190, 192, 193, 196

-Risāla (of -Oushayrī), 17, 27,
29, 47, 51, 56, 58, 61, 65, 67,
77> 79. 82, 89, 93, 94, 101,
170

Risāla-i sabibiyya, 155

Robinson, A. E., 132

Rubātāb, 131

-Rudhabari, 27, 40, 65

Rufka (Rebecca), 202

Rimi, Jalal al-Din, 41, 50, 110,
122, 123, 192

Ruqayya, 180

Rustam, son of Zal, 122

Ruwaym b. Ahmad, 79, 89

Safia, daughter of Mek Sabil,
132

216

Safwa al-Safwa, 3, 140

Sa‘d b. Khaythama, 171
Sahara, 129

St Basil, 100

St Bernard, 80

St Catherine of Genoa, 41, 42
St Francis of Assisi, 74, 75,

191

St Francis Xavier, Hymna of
Love, 102

St John of the Cross, 4, 41, 43,
88, 109

St Pelagia, 184

Sajah the prophetess, 121, 122

Sakina bint Husayn, 180, 185

Sakina al-Madfüna, 148

Salih b. ‘Abd al-‘Aziz, 18

Salma, Umm ‘Abd al-Muttalib,
II

Sara, Sitt, 202, 203

-Sarraj, see Abū Nasr

-Sarrāj al-Qari, 15, 16, 27, 54,

103

Sayyid Ahmad, 156

Sayyid Qasim, 157

Sayyid M. *Asim al-Andalusi,

157

Shabistarī, see Mahmūd

-Shafi‘i, Imām, 148

Shajarat al-Durr, 180

Shahrastani, see Kitab al-Milal

„Shaigia, of Dongola, 131, 132

-Shanfara of ei 117

Shaqiq Balkhi, 45

Sha‘rani, 39, 44, 57, 142, 145,
147, 148, 149, 169

Sha'wana, 40, 145 ff., 179

-Shaybānī, M., see Usd al-
Ghāba

-Shiblī, 81, 94

Shuhda, bint Abū Nasr, 122

Sibt Ibn al-Jawzī, xviii, 3, 11,
17, 18, 22, 27, 34» 37» 44; 84,
85, 178

Sīdī Sanūssī, 190, 193

Sidgī, the poetess, 158

Siraj al-Din, 154

INDEX I

Siyar al-Salibat, 39, 56, 134, 136,
141, 144, 166, 176, 177

Smith, W. Robertson, 112, 126,
201

Sudan, 128, 131

Sufyan al-Thawri, 16, 17, 24,
29, 56, 85, 84, 97, 102

-Suhrawardi, 47, 98, 169, 192

-Sulami, * Abd al- Rabmaàn, xxiii,
9, 17, 96, 101, 219

Suso, the mystic, 109

-Suyuti, 124; see also Kang al-
'Ummál

-Tabari, 122, 171, 179, 201

-Tabagāt al-Kubrá, 39, 57, 142,
169

Tabaqat al-$ūfiyya, 9, 17, 96,
IOI

Tadbkirat al-/Awliya, xvii, xviii,
2, 5, 4, 6, 48, 97, 176

un al-Khanda al-Kubra,

Taghribardi, Abū al-Mahisin,
see a/-Nujūm al-Zábira

Taj Mahall, 154

Tagi al-Dīn al-Hisnī, 134, 135,
166, 177

is al-Muntazam, 17, 25,

Tawakkul Beg, 155, 156
Tazyīn al-Aswaqg, 105
Thompson, Francis, 49, 92
Tin Hinane, 130

Trumelet, C., 189, 198, 199
Tuaregs, 128, 130, 131

*Ubayd Allah b. al-Sirri, 182
‘Ubayda bint Abi Kilāb, 4o,

177 |

‘Ubayda b. al-Samit, 138

Uhayha, 119

Uhud, 121

“Umar the Caliph, 124, 125

“Umar al-Khalwati, 192 _

n ‘Abd Allah, * A'isha,
15

INDEX I

Umm al-‘Ala, 123

Umm Anik, 175 i

Umm al-Darda, 18 M

Umm Habtar, 119

Umm Haram, 137 ff., 183

Umm *Isa Mariam, 173

Umm Khalil Khadija, 173

Umm Kulthüm, wife of Talha,
120

Umm Kulthüm, daughter of
Nafisa, 148; tomb of, 180,
181

Umm Muhammad,
154 |

Umm Qirfa, Fatima, 121

Umm Safiyya Khawla, 124

Umm al-Sahba, see Mu'adha
al-Adawiyya

Umm Shaqaqif, 184

Umm Zaynab, Fatima, 174

Underhill, E., 42, 79, 80

, Ugalā” al-Majanin, 28

Usd al-Ghaba, 165

‘Uzza, 201

* A'isha,

217

Wafayāt al- A*yān, 3, 28, 98, 182
Wadi al-Kora, 121
Wanéchis, 186, 187 |

. Wellhausen, J., 112

Yāftī, 140

Yahya b. Bustam, 145
Yahya b. Mu‘adh, 94
Yamāma, 121, 122

Yāgūt, 174, 201

Yarmük, 121

Yusef wa Zulaykha, 43, 62

-Zamakhshari, 153

Zayd, adopted son of the
Prophet, I2I

Zayd, Amir of Basra, 23

Zayd b. Sawhan b. Sabra, 172

Zaynab bint Abi al-Barakat,
173

Zaynab bint Abi al-Oāsim, 153

Zaynab bint ‘Ali, 183, 197

Zaynab bint Kamal al-Din, 154

Zulfa bint ‘Abd al-Wahid, 37

INDEX II

Subjects

Annihilation, 51, 109, 163

Asceticism,.Sūfī, 4, 10, 20, 49,
51, 74, 76-87, 143, 145, 165,
175

Babi-ism, 158 ff.

Beauty, Divine, 12, 30, 46, 50,
54, 62, 63, 67, 68, 70, 77, 87,
88, 89, 91, 92, 94, 95, 104,
IO5, 106, 107, 109, 147, 148

Being, Absolute, 156

Contemplation (of God), 1, 12,

50, 51, 54, 62, 64, 71, 72, 87,
88, 103, 106, 108, 109

Death, 39-41, 42, 53, 68, 88, 9o,
176—178

Dervish, orders: foundation
and organisation of, 190 ff.;
patched robe of, 152. Ahma-
diyya, 193; A'īssawiyya, 196;
Chishti, 193; Heddāwa, 196;
Khalwatiyya, 161, 191; Ma-
dawiyya, 193; Mevlevis, 192;
Rahmaniyya, 196; Rifa'tyya,
191; Sanissi, 195; Suhrawar-
diyya, 192; Tidjania, 196

Devil, the, see Iblis (Index I)
and Satan

Dreams, 5; 27, 45, 151, 177-179

Duality, 1, 78, 8o

Ecstasy, 12, 157, 197
Eschatology, Süfi, 69, 72

Fire, symbolical use of, 39, 41,
42, 56, 57, 90, 91, 94, 97, 108,

157
Forgiveness, 39, 55 ff.

Gnosis, the heavenly, 1, 17, 50,
52, 67, 71, 89, 109, 148, 169

God, the Essence of, 78, 95,
109; the only Reality, 64,
106; the ways to, Io, 50

Hell, 15, 30, 39, 57, 68, 69, 89,
98, 99, IOO, IOI, 102, 133,
145, 167

Houris, 142, 158

Illumination, mystical, 1, 156;
see also žajallī (Index III)

Immortality, 177

Intoxication, mystic, 94

Jinn, 142

Judgment, the Day of, 2, 12, 68,
70, 142

Law, the Muslim religious, 6,
129, 169, see also sunna (Index
III

Love, Divine, 54, 60, 92, 95,

96, 146; doctrine of Pure or
Disinterested, xvi, 97, 100,
Io2, 109; towards God, 18,
19, 48, 49, 51, 66, 69, 87,
88 ff., 145, 148, 163, 192

Majesty, the Divine, 48, 54, 78,
89, 91, 92, 107

Marriage, among the Tuaregs,
130; in the E. Sudan, 131;
of domination, 126; pre-
ferred to celibacy in Islam,
165-169; pre-Islamic, 112,
125; Rabi‘a’s refusal of, 10-
13; temporary, 126; the
Spiritual, 29

INDEX II

Meditation, 51

Miracles, of the saints, 30 ff.,
139, 150

Mysticism, Islamic, xv, 1, 3, 26,
47, 97» 145, 145, 158, 176,
193, 203, 204

Paradise, 2, 23, 30, 45, 68, 69—
72, 77» 98, 99, 100, 102, 105,
112, 133, 135, 179

Personality, survival of, 177,
178

Pilgrimage, to Mecca, 8, 9; to
other shrines, see Saints

Polytheism, 78

Poverty, spiritual, 74-76, 87;
see also fagr (Index III)

Prayer, life of, 25; personal, 9,
26, 29; ritual, 9, 26

Prophecy, 2, 36

Purgation, life of, 20, 49, 67,

6

7
Purgatory, 39

Quietism, 82
Qutb, 2, 200

Rabia al-‘Adawiyya, 1-110;
associates, 10—20; asceticism,
20-25; birth and early years,
1-9; eschatological teaching,
69-73; last years, 39—46;
miracles, 3 1—3 8; other-world-
liness, 82-87; prayer-life, 25-
30; teaching on Gratitude,
61-64; teaching on Love and
the Vision, 96-110; teaching
on Patience, 59; teaching on
Repentance, 55—57

Redemption, Christian doc-
trine of, 39, 92

Repentance, see tavba (Index
III)

Resurrection, the Day of, 2, 6,

I2, 28, 29, 44, 70, 142

219

Saints, Muslim, divine powers
attributed to, 200; functions
of, 177; hierarchy of, 2;
identified with God, 176,
191; intercession of, 5, 138,
139, 176, 181, 182, 183; visits
to tombs of, 176, 181, 183—
189, 205; women, 155 ff., 203

Saintship, 1, 2

Satan, 31, 32, 34, 99, 165

Sin, 39 ff., 53 ff., 76

Soul, pre-existence of, 177; the
carnal, 123; see also nafs
(Index IIT)

States, mystic, 15, 142, 145, 170

Süfis, quest of, 1, 109; spiritual
affinity of, 176, 177; women,
3175 .

Süfism, basis of, 1, 48 ff.; de-
finition of, 27; derivation of,
105; pantheistic, 50, 62, 159,
192

Traditions, of the Prophet, xiv,
XV, 16, 124, 125, 133,134, 165
Trees, sacred, 200—202

Unification, 17, 78, 80, 213

Union (with God), 12, 20, 40,
42, 48, 49, 50, 51, 60, 64, 65,
69, 75, 76, 80, 87, 88, 109,
IIO, 158, 165, 170

Unity, of God, 2, 77-80, 81, 96;
see also /awbid (Index IIT)

Veil, imposition of the, 120,
124, 126 |

Vision, the Beatific, 1, 30, 43,
52, 67, 69, 70, 71, 77, 87, 91,
94, 95, 96, 103, 105—109, 135,
146, 147, 148, 156

Way, the Mystic, xv, xvi, 9, 10,
13, 14, 20, 46, 47, 48, 49, 51,
67, 76, 87, 104, 109, 152, 155,
I65, 170, 172, 195, 204

abdāl, 2, 3
ahal, 130
abwál, 142
“am, 194
ashab, 194
awģāf, 182
awtād, 2

ba‘l, 126
baq’, 95

dayr, 166
dhikr, 194 ft.
du'à', 26

fanā, 95, 159
fadir, 195
faqr, 51, 74, 76
fugarā”', 194

badra, 194
barīm, 132,
161
bawitha, 199
bubb, 17

133,

karāmāt, 31, 55

kashf, 96

khalwa, 170

khanagah, 171, 172,
194

khashya, 67

INDEX III

Technical Terms, ett.

khawatir al-yagīn, so rida’, 51, 88, 89, 97

khawf, 51
khiwāt, 195
kboudti, 194
kufr, 59

mababba, 51, 9o ff.
manaxil, 74
maqam, 199
magūm, 199
ma'rifa, 17, 50
mibrab, 12, 182
munājāt, 26
mugaddam, 194—196
mugaddama, 196
murīd, 195
murshid, 194
mutawakksl, 81, 87

nafs, 23, 49
namāz?, 9
niyaz, 9
pir, 145
purdah, 155

gibla, 12
qubba, 199, 201

raja’, 51
rahba, 67
ribat, 172, 194

Jabr, 51, 58

Jakina, 7

salat, 26

Shahawat, 49

Jbawq, 51, 88, 9o,
91, 98

Shaykh, 194

shirk, 77

shukr, 51, Go ff.

silsila, 194

sunna, 22, 165, 169

tafrid, 170

tajalli, 15

tajrid, 170

tawakkul, 51, 80 ff.

tawba, 55 fī.

tawhid, 17, 51, 74,
77 ff., 82

tekye, 194

fobal, 130

uns, 51, 77, 91 ff, 98
uzla, 170

vali, 184, 199
rabid, 20

zawiya, 191, 194
zuhd, 51, 76 ff.

CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY W. LEWIS, M.A., AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS


